THE

YOG-A-VASISHTHA-MAHARAkAYANA,

YOL. I.

PROSPECTUS

Plato advised the Athenians to betake themseh es 
to the study of Mathematics, in order to evade tht 
pestilence incident to the international war which 
was raging in Greece , so it is the intention of thfi 
publication, to exhort our countrymen to the 
investigation of Metaphysics, in order to escape the 
contagion of Politics and quasi politics, which ha: 
been spreading far and wide over this devotee 
land.

V, L. M.

THE

‘ -YOGA-YASISHTHA-MAHAEAMAYANA

OF

vatmiki

TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT

BY

VIKAEI-LALA MITRA

CONTAINING

THE VAIRAGYA, MUMUKSHU, PRAKARNAS AND 
THE UTPATTI ICHANDA TO CHAPTER L

YOJu I.

CALCUTTA

BONNERJEE AND CO.

’ 1891

[All Rights Reset ved ]

SAmMOOR PRESS 
BONERJEE & CO 
CAECUTTA,

PREFACE.

«

111 tliis age of the cultivation of universal learning 
and its investigation into the deep recesses of the 
dead languages of antiquity, when the literati of both 
continents are so sedulously employed in exploring 
Ibhe iich and almost inexhaustible mines of the ancient 
literature of this country, it has given an impetus to 
the philanthropy of our wise and benign Government 
to the institution of a searching enquiry into the sacred 
language of this land. And when the restoration 
bf the long lost works of its venerable sages and 
authors through the instrumentality of the greatest 
bibhomamac savants and linguists in the several Presi- 
dencies, has led the literary Asiatic Societies of the 
'East and West to the publication of the rarest and 
most valuable Sanskrit Manuscripts, it cannot be 
deemed preposterous in me to presume, to lay before 
the Public a work of no less merit and sanctity than 
any hitherto published

The Yoga Vasishtha is the earliest work on Yoga 
or Speculative and Abstruse philosophy delivered by 
the venerable Yedic sage Vasishtha to his royal 
pupib Rama, the victor of Ravana, and hero of the^ Di Efijondra Lala Mitia m Bengal, Benares and Orissa, Dr Buhlei 
in Guzrat, Di Keilhorn in tlie Cential Provinces, Di Burnell and other 
Collectors of Sanskrit manuscripts in the Piesidencies of Bonibaj, Madras and 
Oudh, vhose notices and catalogues lia^e highly contiihuted to bung th^ 
hidden ticasuies of the littiatme of this countiy to light

J oAOL I.

11

PT^ f<:FACE

first Epic KcUndyaiia, and written in the language of ' 
ViUmiki, the piime baid in pure Sanshiit, the autlpai 
of that popular Epic, and Homer of India. It eiU' '' 
bodies m itself the Loci Communes or common places 
relating to the science of Ontology, the knowledge of 
Sat Real Entity, and Asat Unreal Non-entity.; the 
principles of Psycliology or doetrmes of the Passions 
and Feelings , tlic speculations of Mctaxihysics in 
dwelling upon our cognition, volition and othci faculties 
of the Mind and the tenets,''

of Ethics and practical morality Besides

there are a gi eat many precepts on Thcoiogj’’, and the 
nature of the Divinity ('ylfjHi'UcH and discoiuscs

on Spirituality and Theosophy ; all

deli''''<»red in the fonn of Plato’s Dialogues between the' 
sages, and tending to the mam cnquiiy concerning the 
true felicity, final beatitude or Svmmvm honum {^<4^ 
of all true philosophy.

These topics have singly and jointly contiibuted to* 
the structure of seveial separate Systems of Science 
and Philosophy in succeeding ages, and have foimcd 
the subjects of study both with the juvenile and senile 
classes of people m foimer and present times, and I 
may say, almost among all nations in all countiies 
throughout the civilized world.

It is felt at present to be a matter of the highest 
importance by the native community at laige, to re- 
press the growing ardour of our youth in political 
polemics and practical tactics, that are equally jicrni- 
cious to and destructive of the fclictly of then tem-

PREF^ACE

111PREF^ACE

111

poral and future lives, by a revival of the humble 
instructions of their peaceful preceptors of old, and 
reclaiming them to the simple mode of life led by 
their forefathers, from the perverted course now gain- 
ing ground among them under the influence of Western 
refineihent Outward peace with internal tran- 
quility (niTi IS the teaching of oui%Sastras,

and these united with contentment i"^) and indilfer- 
enoe to worldly ^^leasures were believed

b-ccording to the tenets of Yoga doctrines, to form 
the perfect man, a character which the Aryans have 
invariabl}^ preserved amidst the revolutions of ages and 
empires It is the degeneracy of the rising generation, 
however, owing to their adoption of foreign habits and 
“manners from an utter ignorance of their own moral 
code, which the publication of the present work is 
intended to obviate.

From the description of the Hindu mind given by 
Max Muller in his Histoiy of the Ancient Literature 
of India (p 18 ) it will appear, that the esoteric faith 
of the Aiyan Indian is of that realistic cast as the 
Platonic, whose theory of ontology viewed all exis- 
tence, even that of the celestial bodies, with their 
movements among the jpreceiJta of sense, and marked 
them among the unreal phantoms ) or vain

mirage, ( ) as the Hindu calls them, that are

interesting in ajDpearaiice but useless to observe They 
may be the best of all jprecepta, but fall very short' of 
that perfection, which the mental eye contemplates in its 
meditation-yoga The Hindu Yogi views the visible^

world exactly in rdie same light as Plato has repre-

•\ ^

PR15FACE

ITworld exactly in rdie same light as Plato has repre-

•\ ^

PR15FACE

IT

sented it in the simile commencing the seventh hook^ 
of his Republic. He compares mankind to piisoiKivs 
in a cave, chained in one particular attitude, so as to ‘ 
behold only an evervarying multiplicity of shadows, 
projected through the opening of the cave upon the 
wall before them, by certain unseen realities bcliind 
The philosopher alone, who by tivaining or inspiration 
is enabled to turn his face fiom these visions, and 
contemplate with his mind, that can sec at-once the 
unchangeable reality amidst these tiansicnt shadows ' 
The first recoid that we have of Vasishtha is, iliat 
he was the author of the 7 th Maud ala of the Rig 
Veda (Ashtaka V 15-118) He is next mentioned as 
Purohita or joint minister with Yiswaraitra lo king 
Sudasa, and to have a violent contest with his rival* 
forthe{if(OfkTt 4 )or ministerial ofiice{Mull Hist. S. Lit 
page 486, Web Id. p 38) He is said to have accom- 
panied the army of Sudasa, when that Idng is skid to 
have conquered the ten invading chiefs who had cio.ssed' 
over the river Parushni (Hydroates or Ravi) to his 
dominions (Mull. Id. p 486). Vis wiimitra accompanied 
Suddsa himself bejmnd Vipdsa, Hjqihasis or Bcali 
and Satadru Hisaudras-Sutlej (Max Muller, Ancient 
Sanscrit literature page 486). These events aic re- 
corded to have occurred prior to Yasishtha’s composi- 
tion of the Mandala which passes under his name and 
in which they are recorded. (Mull. Id p 486)

The enmity and implacable hatred of the two families 
ofYasishthas and Yiswamitras for generations, form 
feubjects prominent throughout the Yedic antiquity, 
^and preserved in the tiadition of ages ‘(Mull. Id. p. 486,

REFACi:

VREFACi:

V

Web, Id p 37) Another cause of it was that, Haris- 
chg-ndra, TCing of Ayodhya, was cursed by Vasishtha, 
•v\diereupon he made Viswdmitra his priest to the 
annoyance of Vasishtha, although the , office of 
Brabmana was held by him ( Muller Id page 408 
Web p*jp 31-37). In the Bi^hmana period we find 
Vasishtha forming a family title for the whole 
Vasishtha race still continuing as a Gotra name, and 
that these Vasishthas continued as hereditary Gurus 
dnd ^UTolitias to the kings of the solar race from 
generation to generation under the same title The 
Vasishthas were always the Brahmanas or High 
priests in eveiy ceremoii}'', which could not be held by 
other Brahmanas according to the Sdta pathaBrdhmana 
{Mull Id page 92), and particularly the Indra ceremony 
had always to be performed by a Vasishtha, because it 
was revealed to their ancestor the sage Vasishtha only 
(Web* Ind Lit. p 123) , and as the Sdtwpatlia 
* Brdhmana-Taittiriya Sanlntd mentions it

“ The Bishis do not see Indra clearly, but Vasishtha 
saw him. Indra said, I will tell you, O Brdhman, so 
that all men who are born, will have a Vasishtha for 
. his Purohita” (Max Mull. Ans Sans Lit p. 92. 
Web Id p 123) This will show that the Sloka works, 
which are attributed to Vasishtha, Ydjnavalkya or 
any other Vedic Bishi, could not Jbe the composition 
of the old Bishis, but of some one of their posterity ? 
though they mi^ht have been propounded by the^

M

PREFACEM

PREFACE

eldest sages, and then put to writing by oral communi- 
cation or successive tradition by a distant descendant 
or desciple of the primitive Risbis Thus we see the 
Drdhydyana Sutras of the Sama Veda is also called 
the Vasisbtba Sutras from the author’s family name' 
ofYasisbtba(Web, Id p 79). The dsvaldyana Grihya 
Sutra assigns some other works to Vasisbtba, mz. , ^ 
the Vasisbtba pragdthd, probably Vasbisbtba Hymni 
of Bopp , the Pavamdnya, Ksliudra suJcta, Mahdsuhta 
&c written in the vedic style. There are two otbdr 
works attributed to Vasisbtba, the Vasisbtba Sanbitd 
on Astronomy (Web Id. p 258) and the Vasisbtba 
Smriti on Law (Web Id p 320), which from tbeir 
compositionsm Sanscrit siokas, could Aiot be the language 
or work of the Vedic Risbi, but of some one late member 
of that family. Thus our work of Y oga V asisbtba has no 
claim or pretension to its being the composition of the 
Vedic sage ; but as one propounded by the sa^e, and 
written by Vdlmiki in bis modern Sanscrit. Here the' 
question is whether Vasisbtba the preceptor of Rama, 
was the Vedic Vasisbtba or one of bis descendants, I 
must leave for others to determine

Again m the later Aranyaka period we have an 
account of a theologian Vasisbtba given in the Arshih- 
opanishad, as bolding a dialogue on the nature of dtmd 
or soul between the sages, Viswfimitra, Jamadagm, 
Bbaradwdja, Gautama and himself ; when Vasisbtba 
appealing to the opinion of Kapila obtained tbeir 
assent (Weber Id p.(162) This appears very probably 
to be the theological autlmr of our yoga, and eminent 
above bis contemporaries in bis kbowledge of the

PREFACE

ICapila yoga sastra winch was then current, from 
this sage’s having been a contemporary with king 
Sagara, a predecessor of Rama-

In the latest Siitra period we find a passage in the 
Crrihya-Siitra-parisishta, about the distinctive mark of 
the Vasishtha Family from those of the oi\\e;r parishads 
or classes of the priesthood. It says ;“The Vasishthas Avear a braid (lock of hair) on the 
right side, the Atreyas wear three braids, the Angiras 
have five braids, the Bhrigus are bald, and all others 
have a single crest” (Muller Id. p 53). The Karma 
pradipa says, “the Vasishthas exclude meat from then* 
sacrifice , 1 (Muller A.

S Lit. p. 54), and the colom’ of their dress was white 
(Id p. 483). Many Vasishthas are named in different 
works as , iT'=ti-

and some others,

bearing no other connection Avith our author, than 
that of their having been members of the same family 
(Muller’s A. S Lit. p. 44)

Without dilating any longer with further accounts 
relating to the sage Vasishtha of which many more 
' might be gathered from various sastras, I shall add in 
the conclusion the following notice which is taken of 
this work by Professor Momer Williams m his work 
on Indian Wisdom p 370. ^

“ There is” saA"s he, “ a remarkable work called 
Vasishtha Rdmay ana or Yoga Vdsishtha or Vasishtha ^

PBEFACS

vjii

Mahaiamayana in the form of an exhortation, ^\itb 
illustrative narratives addressed by Vasishtha to Ins 
pupil the youthful Rama, on the liost means of 
attaining true happiness, and considered to have been 
composed as an appendage to the Rdmayana by 
Vdlmild himself. There is another woik of the same 
nature called the Adhyatma Rdmdyana which is attii- 
buted to Vydsa, and treat of the moral and theological * 
subjects connected with the life and acts of that gieat 
hero of Indian history hlany other woiks arc extai^t 
in the vernacular dialects having the same theme for 
their subject which it is needless to notice in this place.”Vasishtha, known as the wisest of sages, like 
Solomon the wisest of men, and Am elms t]\e wisest 
of emperors, puts forth in the first part and in tlic 
mouth of Rdma the great question of the vanity of 
the world, which is shown syntheticaliy to a gieat 
length from the state of all living existences, the 
instinct, inclinations, and passions of men, the hatuio 
of their aims and objects, with some discussions about 
destiny, necessity, activity and the state of tlie soul 
and spiiit. The second pait embiaces various diiec- 
tions for the union of the individual with tlie univcisal 
Abstract Existence the Supieme Spirit the sub- 
jective and the objective truth and the common topics 
of all speculative philosophy

Thus says Milton , “ The end of learning is to Imow 
God”

So the Persian adage, “Akhiral ilm buad ilmi lOiodd ”

Such also the sanskiit, “ Sdvidyd tan matii yayd ”

^ And the sruti saj^s, Yad jndtwd ndpaian jnanam ”

r. e “ It IS that which being knowp, there is notliino 
telse requiied to be known

CON THANTS

OE

THE FIRST VOLUME.

PROLEGOMENA

The Yoga Philosophy 
The Om Tat Sat

PROIi,

»

1)

PAGE

1

34

VAIRAGYA KHANDA.

BOOK I. 
CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTION.

Divine Adoration

ariative of Sutfkshna

necdoto of KAninya .

;ory of Suruchi

■ccount of Arishtanemi 
y

SECTION I

SECTION II.

• «

SECTION III.

• •

SECTION IV

SECTION V »

y

>

>

]

PAGE

1

1

2

3

3 ^

>

CONTENTS OF

SECTION VI.

Histoiy of Kama ....

CHAPTEE II

Season of -writing tlie Edmayana

SECTION I

Persons entitled to its Perusal

SECTION II

Bialinid’s Behest ....

SECTION III

Inquiry of Bliaradwdja

CHAPTER III.

Vdlinllu’s Admonition . . . , .

SECTION I

On True Knowledge ....

SECTION II

Early History of Kdma

SECTION III

Edma’s Pilgrimage ....

CHAPTEE IV.

Eama's Eetuin from Pilgumage

CHAPTEE V

Of lldma’s Self-Dejection and its Cause .

chapter VI

Adi ent of Yiswamitra to the Eoyal Coui-t

• SECTION II

Address of King-Dasaratha ...

THE FIRST VOLUME

XICHAPTEE V

Of lldma’s Self-Dejection and its Cause .

chapter VI

Adi ent of Yiswamitra to the Eoyal Coui-t

• SECTION II

Address of King-Dasaratha ...

THE FIRST VOLUME

XI

CHAPTER VII.

■> Viswdmitra’s Request foi Rdma

CHAPTER VIII

Dasniatha’s Rejily to TiswAmitia

CHAPTER IX.

Vjsw.\milra’s Wrath and his Em aged Speech

Melancholy of Rdma

CHAPTER X.

CHAPTER XI.

Consolation of Rdma

CHAPTER XII

Rdtna’s Reply

« • • •

Vituperation of Riches

CHAPTER XIIT.

CHAPTER XIV

Depreciation of Human Life

Obloquy of Egoism

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XVI.

The Ungovernahlcness of the Mmd

CHAPTER XVII

On Cupidity

• • t

CHAPTER XVni.

Obloquy of the Body > .

* « ' ♦ •

C0NTE5JTS OF

Blemishes of Boj hood

Tihiporation of yowlli

Titiipeiation of Women

CHAPTEE XIX,

CHAPTER XX

CHAPTER XXI.

CHAPTER XXII

Ohloqviy of Old Ago

CHAPTER XXIII.

Ticissithdes of Times .

Eavagos of Time

Spoils of Death .

The Acts of Destiny

CHAPTER XXIY.

« » » «

CHAPTER XXY.

CHAPTER XXYI

/ 91

CHATER XXYII

Vamty of the Woild

CHAPTER XXYIII.

jMutohihty of the World . . , ,

CHAPTER XXIX.

Dnrohableness of Worldly Things .

^ chapter XXX.

Sell-Dispaiagementr . ‘ .

* V

, . 100

iiu

THE FIKST VOLUME

XTII

/CHAPTER

XXXI.

PAGE

^Queries of Kama . . . .

» • •

. . 115

CHAPTER XXXII

Praises of Kama’s Speech

• »

118

CHAPTER

XXXIII.

Association of Aeiial and Earthly Beings

•

121

BOOK II.

MUMUKSHU KHANDA.

CHAPTER I

Liberation of Sukadeva

• t • •

. 127

t

CHAPTER II.

Speech of Visw§.mitra

» • * * •

132

•

CHAPTER III.

On the Kepeated Creations of the World

1 ^

. . 135

CHAPTER IV.

Praise of Acts and Exertions ....

139

CHAPTER V.

Necessity of Activity

• • • « •

142

CHAPTER VI.

Kefutation of Fatalism

• • • • •

. . 145

CHAPTER VII,

On the Necessity of Activity ....

^ . . 150

•

CHAPTER Vlfl.

Invalidation of Destin^^ <

•

154

XIV

CONTENTS OF

CHAPTER IX.

Investigation of Acts

CHAPTER X.

Descension of Knowledge

CHAPTER XI.^ . . 150

•

CHAPTER Vlfl.

Invalidation of Destin^^ <

•

154

XIV

CONTENTS OF

CHAPTER IX.

Investigation of Acts

CHAPTER X.

Descension of Knowledge

CHAPTER XI.

0 1 the qualifications of the Inquuer and Lecturer

CHAPTER XII.

Gieatness of True Knov lodge

CHAPTER XIII.

On Peace and Tianquility of mind

CHAPTER XIY.

On the Asceitainment of an aigumcnt

CHAPTER XV.

On Contentment

• •

• •

• * » •

• •••••

PACl.

In'?

IGl

IGC

173

17G

18 /

‘ 189

CHAPTER XVI

On Good Conduct

« •

CHAPTER XVII.

On the Contents of the "Work

• •

CHAPTER XVIII.

Ascertainment of the Example or Major Projiosition

CHAPTER XIX.

AscertainmenKof True Evidence

CHAPTER XX.

On Good Conduc

• •

« «

• • •

191

105

201

208

212

THE FIRST YOLU:iIE

\\

BOOK III.

UTPATTl K HAND A.

Evolution oi the Would 
CHAPTER I 
Causes or Bondage to it

SECTION I rvor

ExoicTiura . . 215

t

SECTION II

Woilclly Bondage 21G

SECTION III

i

Phases o£ The Spirit . . . . . , . 21G

SECTION IV

Nature of Bondage 2lS

CHAPTER II.

DESCRIPTION OF THE FIRST CAUSE.

SECTION I

Naiiative of the Air-boin and Aeiifoim Biuhman . . £23

SECTION IT

Stale of the Soul . . . . . . . 221

»

CHAPTER HI.

Causes of Bondage in the Body . . . 229

CHAPTER IV.

SECT ION I ,

De'^ciiplion of the Night-Fall . . . 231

XM OONTEJTTS OE

SECTION II.

WOE.

Natuie of the Mind .....

f

237

e

SECTION III

Kairalya or Mental Abstraction

•

239

CHAPTER V.

On the Original Cause . ...

•

. . 243

CHAPTER VI.

Admonition for attempt of Libeiation

i

. . ‘ 240

CHAPTER VII

Eecognition of the Nihility of the Phenomenal World

. . 249

CHAPTER VIII.

Nature of good Sastras ....

*

. ^ . 255

CHAPTER IX.

On the Supreme cause of All ....

*

251

CHAPTER X.

Dcsciiption of the Chaotic State

•

266

&

CHAPTER XI.

Spiiitual View of Creation ....

»

273

CHAPTER XII.

The Idealistic Thoo-Cosmogony of Ved4nta

I..

•

277

CHAPTER XIII. 
On the :^oduction of the Self-Born

t

281

\ CHAPTER XIV.&

CHAPTER XI.

Spiiitual View of Creation ....

»

273

CHAPTER XII.

The Idealistic Thoo-Cosmogony of Ved4nta

I..

•

277

CHAPTER XIII. 
On the :^oduction of the Self-Born

t

281

\ CHAPTER XIV.

Estabhshmen of Brahma

. . 288

c CHAPTER XV.

^ Stoiy of the T niple and its Prince

c

&

. . 299

c

THE FIRST VOLUME

XVM

CHAPTER XVI.

Joy and Gnef of the Princess

CHAPTER XVII.

Story of'the Doubtful Realm or Reverie of Llld

SECTION I

Desciiption ofijlie Court House and the Cortes

CHAPTER XVIII.

Exposure of the Errors of this World .

CHAPTER XIX.

Story of a Former Vasishtha and his Wife

CHAPTER XX.

The Moral of the Tale of Lila . . .

SECTION II.

State of«The Human Soul after Death

CHAPTER XXI.

Guide to Peace

CHAPTER XXII.

Practice of Wisdom or Wisdom m Practice

SECTION I

Abandonment of Desires

SECTION II

On the Practice of Yoga ....

CHAPTER XXIII

The Aerial Journey of Spuitual Bodies

CHAPTER XXIV.

< *

The Aeiial Journey (contijmed)

PAGE

. 303

309

313

, 315

. 319

. 322

, 325

328

336

. 336

. 338

340

3

342 ,

xvm

CONTENTS OF

« •

• f « • •

• • • « •

SECTION IL

Description of the Heavens , , , ,

CHAPTER XXV.

Description of the Earth

CHAPTER XXVI,

Meeting the Siddhas

CHAPTER XXVII.

Past lives of Lfla

CHAPTER XXVIII.

SECTION I

Exposition of Ella’s Vision . . . . ,

SECTION II

Descuption of the Mountainous Habitation ,

CHAPTER XXIX.

Account of the Previous Life of Lfla

CHAPTER XXX.

Description of the Mundane Egg ....

CHAPTER XXXI.

SECTION I

Alighting of the Ladies on Earth .

• * B

SECTION II

Sight of a Battle An ay in Earth and Air, , ,

CHAPTER XXXII.

Onset of the War

( CHAPTER XXXIII.

Commingled Fighting

c

• «

• •

f *

^ 1 •

PACp,

343

349

353

359

365

C

360

372

378 ‘

• •

382

3S3

38G

389

THE FIRST VOLUME.

XIX

, CHAPTER XXXIV. PAGE.

Description of the Battle ..<«<< 392

CHAPTER XXXV.

Description of the Battle-field 398

CHAPTER XXXVI.

SECTION I378 ‘

• •

382

3S3

38G

389

THE FIRST VOLUME.

XIX

, CHAPTER XXXIV. PAGE.

Description of the Battle ..<«<< 392

CHAPTER XXXV.

Description of the Battle-field 398

CHAPTER XXXVI.

SECTION I

Colhsion of Equal Arms and Armigerents .... 401

SECTION II.

Catalogue of the Forces « 403

CHAPTER XXXVII.

Catalogue of the Forces (Contmued) ..... 408

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Cessation of the War . 414

• CHAPTER XXXIX.

Description of The Battle-Field Infested by

Nocturnal Fiends . ....... 420

CHAPTER XL.

Reflections on Human Life and Mind ..... 423

CHAPTER XLI.

Discrimination of Eiror 431

CHAPTER XLII.

Philosophy of Dreaming ....... 438

CHAPTER XLIII.

Burning of the Oity ........ 442

CHAPTER XLIV.

Bpintual Interpietation of the Vision ..... 448

c

c

CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME,

CHAPTER XLV.

Theism consisting in True Knowledge . . . <

CHAPTER XLVI.

Onslaught of Vidiiratha .....

CHAPTER XLVII,

Encounter of Sindhu and Viduratha . . . .

CHAPTER XLVIir.

Description of DaiVclstias or Supernatural Weapons ,

CHAPTER XLIX.

Description of other kinds of Weapons . , ,

CHAPTER L.

Death of Viduratha

Copclusion

PAGC,

454

457

m

J

405

473

I

477

. 483

/

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY.

IE YOGA or contemplative philosophy o£ the Hindus^ is 
iich, exuheientj grand and sublime, in as much as it compie- 
Is vutlun its ample spheie and deep recesses of meditation, all 
. IS of the gieatest value, best mteiest and highest impoitance 
iitiikind, as physical, moial, intellectual and spiiitual hein'gs 
Lowledge of the cosmos of the physical and intellectual 
[ds.; IS lich in the almost exhaustless treasiiie of works existing 
Lhe subject in the sacied and vernaculai languages of the 
itry both of ancient and modem times. It is exubeient in 
piofusion of eiudition and piolixity of ingenuit}'- displayed 
he Yoga philosophy of Patanjala, commensuiate with the 
aoidmaiy calibre of the author in his commentary of the 
idbhdshya on Pdnmi (MuUei-^s A. S. Lit p ^35) Its 
idem is exhibited in the abstract and abstruse leflections and 
stigations of philosopheis in the intellectual and spiritual 
Ids as fai as human penetiation has been able to leach And 
ubhmity is manifested in its aspuing disquisition into the 
Lie of the human and divine souls, which it aims to unite 
L the one seU-same and all peivadmg spint 
; has emiiloyed the minds of gods, sages, and saints, and 
L those of heioes and monaichs, to the exaltation of their 
lies above the lest of manland, and elevation of their dig- 
!S to the lank of gods, as nothing less than a godly natuie 
approach and appioximate that of the All-peifect Divinity, 
says Plato in his Phaedias , To contemjilate these things 
le privilege of the gods, and to do so is also the aspiiation 
he immoital soul of man geneially , though only iii a few 
s IS such aspiiation leahzed ” >

he pimcipal gods Biohma and Siva aie lepresented as YogiSj>

chief sages A^’yasa, A^lilmiki, A'asishtha and Yajnavalkya

1

VOL T.

)

B

2

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHYhe pimcipal gods Biohma and Siva aie lepresented as YogiSj>

chief sages A^’yasa, A^lilmiki, A'asishtha and Yajnavalkya

1

VOL T.

)

B

2

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

were proponncleis of Yoga systems , the saints one and all were 
adepts in Yoga , the heioes Rama and Krishna were initiated 
in itj and the kings Dasaiatha and Janalca and their fellow 
prince Buddha Were both practitioneis and preceptors of Yoga, 
Mahomed held his nightly communions with God and his angels^ 
and Jesus often went over the hills there to pray and contem- 
plate. Socrates had his demon to communicate with, and in 
fact every man has his genius with whom he communes on all ^ 
matters All this is Yoga, and so is all knowledge deiived by 
intuition, inspimtion and levelation, said to be the result of 
‘Yoga.

II, Sciences Connected with Yoga.

The yoga philosophy, while it treats of a variety of subjects,

IS necessarily a congeiies of many sciences in itself. It is the 
Hindu form of metaphysical argument for the existence of the 
^ One EtemaP the Platonic Reality.'’" It is ontdlogy in as 
much as it teaches 2 .pion the being of God. It is psychology 
in its treatment of the doctrine of feelings and passions, and 
it IS morality in teaching us to keep them under contiol as brutal 
propensities, foi the sake of secuimg our final emancipation and 
ultimate restoration into the spirit of spirits Thus it partakes 
of the natuie of many sciences in ti eating of the particular 
subject of divinity.The Yoga in its widest sense of the application of the mmd 
to any subject is both practical, called Inyd Yoga^ as also theore- 
tical, known as Indna Yoga , and includes in itself the two 
processes of synthesis and analysis alike, m its combmation 
(Yoga) of things together, and discnmination (VivelaJ of one 
fiom the other, in its mquiiy into the natuie of things (Vashi-^ 
mcMia), and investigation of their abstiact essence called 
Satgdmisariflhdnnd, It uses both the ag)')^07^ (pihvavaf) and a 
2)osteno7i (pamvat) aiguments to prove the existence of the 
world fiom its Makei and the vice versa, as indicated in the 
two aphoiisms of indjiction and deduction Yafovd imani and 
cJanmadgasya yatal S^^c It views both subjectively and objec- 
tively the one self in many and the many ik one unto which all

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

3

is to return^ by the two mystenous formulas of So ham and 
tat ttoam ^c.

It IS the leuinon of detached souls with the Supieme that 
2s the chief object of the Yoga philosophy to effect by the 
aforesaid processes and other means, which we propose fully to 
elucidate m the following pages , and there is no soul we think 
so veiy reprobate, that ^v^ll feel disinclined to take a deep interest 
in them, morder to effect its reunion with the main soui’ce of 
its being and the only fountain of all blessings. On the contrary 
we aie led to believe fiom the revival of the yoga-cult with the 
spiiitualists and theosophists of the present day under the 
teachings of Madame Blavatsky and the lectures of Col. Olcott, 
that the Indian public are beginning to appreciate the efficacy 
of Yoga meditation, and its practice gaming ground among the 
pious and educated men in this country.Notwithstanding the various significations of Yoga and the 
different lights m which it is viewed by several schools, as we 
,fhall see afterwards, it is most commonly undei stood m the 
sense of the esoteric faith of the Hindus, and the occult adoration 
of God by spiritual meditation. This is considered on all hands 
as the only means of one^s ultimate liberation from the general 
doom df birth and death and the miseries of this woild, and the 
surest way towards the final absorption of one^s-seif in the 
Supieme, the highest state of perfection and the S^mimnm honmi 
of the Hindu. The subject of Yoga Vasishtha is no other than 
the effecting of that union of the human with the Divine Soul, 
amidst all the trials and tiibulations of life.

III. The Yoga of English Writers.

The yoga considered merely as a mode or system of medita- 
tion is variously described by European authors, as we shall 
see below.

Moniere Williams says '^According to Patanj'ali the founder 
of the system, the word yoga is interpreted to mean the act of 
'^fixing or concentration of the mind in abstract meditation. 
Its aim is to teach the means by which the human soul may 
attain complete iiniop with the Supreme Soul, and of effecting

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

the complete fusion of the individual with the univeisal spiiit 
even in the hody^'’ Indian W isdom p 102

Wehei speaking of the yoga of the Athaivan Upanishads says j 
“ It IS the absortion m dimati, the stages of this ahsoiption ancl 
the external means of attaining it Again says he , The 
yoga in the sense of union with the Supicme Being, is ahsoiption 
therein by means of meditation It oeeuis first in the latter 
Ilpamshads, especially the tenth book of the Taittiiiya and the ^ 
Katha Upanishads, wheie the very doctiine is itself inunciated” 
Hist Ind Lit p 153-171.Mullins m his piize essay on Vedanta says, the Sankliya 'yoga 
is the union of the body and mind, p 183. In its Vedantic view, 
it is the joining of the individual with the Supieme Spirit by 
holy communion of the one unth the other thiough intei mediate 
grades, wheieby the limited soul may be led to appioach its 
unlimited fountain and lose itself in the same. •

IV. Yoga-Chabacteeistic of the Hindus. ^

Max Muller characterises the Hindu as natuially disposed to 
Yoga or a contemplative turn of his mind foi his final beati- 
tude m the next life, amidst all his caies, concerns and callings m 
this woild, which he looks upon ivith mdifperence as the tiansient 
shadows of passmg clouds, that seive but to dim foi a moment 
but never shut out from his view the full blaze of his luminous 
futuiity. This desciiption is so exactly giaphic of the Hindu 
mmd, that we can not with-hold givmg it entiie as a raiiioi of 
the Hmdu mmd to our leadeis on account of the scaicity of the 
work in this country.

The Hmdu says he ^^enters the woild as a strangei j all his 
thoughts are directed to another woild, he takes no pait even 
where he is diiven to act, and even when he saciifices his life, it 
is but to be delivered from it Again “They shut their eyes to 
this world of outward seeming activitjr, to open them full on the 
world of thought and rest Their life was a yarning for eteimiy ^ 
t eir activity was a struggle to return to that divine essence from 
t\rhich this life seemed to have seveied them» Behevmg as they

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

5

did 111 a really existing- and eternal Being- to ontos-onion they could 
not believe in the existence of this passing- ivorld^^.THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

5

did 111 a really existing- and eternal Being- to ontos-onion they could 
not believe in the existence of this passing- ivorld^^.

the one existed^ the othei could only seem to exist, 
if they lived in the one they could not live m the othei Then 
existence on eaith was to them a pioblem, then eternal life 
a ceitaiiity The highest object of then leligion was to 
restoie that bond by which then own self (atvian) was linked 
to the eternal self {pai avidtmari) , to lecovei that unity which 
had been clouded and obscured by the magical illusions of 
reality, by the so-called Maya, of eieation/^

scaicely entered then mnid to doubt or to affirm the 
immoitality of the soul {p efya-hhavd) Not only their religion 
and liteiatuie, but their very language reminded them daily of 
that lelation between the leal and seeimug woild ” (Hist A S. 
Lit p 18) In the view of Max Mullei as quoted above, the 
Hindu mind would seem to be of that realistic cast as the 
PhatomCj whose theory of Ontology viewed all existence as meie 
;^lantoms and poecepta of sense, and veiy shoit of that perfection, 
which the mind lealizes m its meditation oi Toga reveiies

The Hindu Yogi views the visible woild exactly in the same 
light as we have said befoie, that Plato has lepiesented it m the 
simile cbmmencing the seventh book of his Bepublie “He 
compaies mankind to piisoners m a cave, chained in one paiticular 
attitude, so as to behold only an evei-vaiying multiplicity of 
_^adows, piojected through the opening of the cave upon the 
w^ befoie them, by some unseen lealities behind. The philo- 
sopher alone, who by trainmg or inspuation, is enabled to turn 
his face fiom these visions, and contemplate with his mind, that 
can at once see the unchangeable reality amidst these tiansient 
shadows^-’ Baine on Bealism pp. 6 and 7.

V. Various Significations of Yoga.V. Various Significations of Yoga.

The Vachaspati lexicon gives us about fifLy diffeient mean- 
mgs of the woid Yoga, accoidmg to the seveial blanches of art 
or science to which it apjiei tains, and the multifarious affaiis of life 
in which the woid is used either singly or in composition with 
othei s. We shall g^ve some of them below, inorder to pi event

6

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

our im staking any one of these senses for the si^ecial signification 
which the teim is made to bear in our system of Yoga meditation

The word Yoga fiom the loot ‘‘ gung’’ (Lat) Jwigeie means the 
joming of any two things oi numbers together Amaia Kosha 
gives five (^iffoient meanings of it as, ‘^11^

, the other Koshas give five others, viz., -WM

1. In Arithmetic it is or addition, and ftniTT*

IS addition and subtraction. 2. In Astronomy tlic conjunction 
of planets and stais I 3. In Grammar it is

the joining of letteis and woids I I‘. In Ny^ya it

means the powei of the paits taken together ,

d=ft ^fM^l 1 b* In Mimdnsa it is defined to be the foice 
conveyed by the umted members of a sentence.

In contemplative philosophy it means j 1. According to Patan- 
jala, the suppression of mental functions "Gi-tigl-ti* 1

2 The Buddhists mean by it the abstraction of the mind fi op 
all objects. 1 3. The Vedanta

meaning of it is M *1) < * the umon of the

human soul with the Supieme spirit, d. Its meaning in the 
Yoga system is nearly the same, t. e , the joming of Che vital 
spirit with the soul 5 I 5. Eveiy

process of meditation is called also as Yoga. j

Others again use it m senses adapted to their own views and ‘ 
subjects , such as the Vaiseshika philosophy uses it to mean, the 
fixing of the attention to only one subject by abstracting it 
fiom all others qjua-u 4)n ^--qjld I 2 The

Bamanuja sect define it as the seekmg of one^s paidieular DeityBamanuja sect define it as the seekmg of one^s paidieular Deity

In this sense all sectarian cults are accounted as so many lands 
of Yogas by their respective votaiies. 3. According to some 
Buddhists it IS ^the seekmg of one's object of desiie

\ 4. And with others, it is a search 
^ after every desirable object 5. In Bhetoiic it means the union 
of lovers ^

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

7

111 Medicine it means the compoimding* of drugs under which 
head there are many works that are at first sight mistaken for Yoga 
philosophy. Again theie are many compound words ivith Yoga, 
which mean only a treatise^^ on those subjects, such as, woiks 
on wisdom, on Acts, on Faith &c , are called ^ 41 , ^4i,

Moreover the words Yoga and Viyoga are used to express the 
j two processes of synthesis and analysis both m the abstract and 
practical sciences for the combination and disjoining of ideas and 
things.

VI. The Diefehent Stages of Yoga»

The constituent parts and progressive steps of Yoga, are com- 
posed of a series of bodily, mental and spiritual practices, the 
proper exercise of which conduces to the making of a perfect 
' man, as a moral, intellectual and spiritual being, to be united 
to his Maker in the present and future worlds. These are called 
the eight stages of Yoga of which some are external

and others internal The external ones

are.

Is/ iTama (^ 44 ) , Forbearance or restraint of passions, 
feelings &c , including the best moral rules m aU religions.

2nd Niyama (r*i'i<4i) , Particular rules and vows for the 
observance of the Yogi,

Zrd. Asana ; sedate position of the body to help

deep meditation.

Mh. Prandyama ; Suppression and suspension

of breath.

hth Pratydhdra Restraint or control of senses

and organs.

Among the internal practices are reckoned the following ; viz j

&tli. I)7iydna jlrvwsird. contemplation and meditation,

1th. Dhdiand ("Eik*!!!) , Steadiness of the tmud m study,

8f^. Samddhi (4d44ilH), Trance the last'^stage of Yoga&tli. I)7iydna jlrvwsird. contemplation and meditation,

1th. Dhdiand ("Eik*!!!) , Steadiness of the tmud m study,

8f^. Samddhi (4d44ilH), Trance the last'^stage of Yoga

These again eompiife some othen acts under each of them, 
such as ,

8 THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY.

1 Yamth Ecstraini includes five acts undoi li ,

Is^ J/nnsd . Umveisal innocence or hmtin<r mi

animal cieatuie. ,

2ncl Asteyam Avoidance of tlieft oi stealth.

Sid. > OhsGi'vaneo of truth. ^

4itk Bi ahmacJiarymn ) > consisting in puiity a:|

chastity. I

hth. AiiangiaJta , Dismtercstcdness. ,

II. Nnjama M^^)> Moial lulcs consisting of fivc\^

fold acts. Viz ; ' S

Isf. SamJiam , Personal cleanliness. [

%nd. SmiiosJia > contentment.

Sid. Tapas , Devotion including self denial and self

mort '-'^ation.

4i'A. Sdd/igdga , Imowledgc of all natiinc.

6i/i Biamdhdm 'afh'gr*!*) Adoiation of God,

III. Amna (<:».( ; Dilfeient modes of postiiics, tianqiul

posture ) &c.

IV. Bidndydma, ; Kulcs of Rcspiiation, thicc

sorts, Diz ; (

Isf. Eecliala , Expiration or Exhalation.

%nd. Bmala (<^<^ 1 ) , Inspiration or Inhalation.

Srd. Kimhliala , Suppression of breathing,

eight ways.

V. Biafydlidm (yciJl^K: Ecslraining the

senses from then giatifications in many waj s

VI. Bhjdnd , Absiiact eontcmphition,

apait from the testimonies of ,

1. Piatyaxa (ndj-c^) , Peiccptions.

2 Piamdna , Appiehensions.

3 Anumd,na , Inference.

4. Sahda , Y^erbal testimony

VII Bhmand , Retentivoiiess

Y^III Samddh , Absoiplioiif in meditation, in two

ways ,

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

9

1. Savilalpa ; W ith retention of self volition

2 Niivihalpa , W'ltJi loss of volition

^The Up^yas , Or the means spoken of befoie are ,

1 Uj30shana tj*u) , Abstinence.

2. Mitdsana (tfIciT^«f) , Temperance.

^ 3 A's) ama {tdb< H;) , Sheltered abodes

4. Visidma, Rest and repose from labor

-> ti 5. Avaiodlia (^®i<lST*,) , Self confinement m closets 
P 6 Asanam ) Subsistence on light food^ 3 A's) ama {tdb< H;) , Sheltered abodes

4. Visidma, Rest and repose from labor

-> ti 5. Avaiodlia (^®i<lST*,) , Self confinement m closets 
P 6 Asanam ) Subsistence on light food

Beside these there aie many vices called Ajpdyas or dSshas 
(ty 1(^14 T ) which are obstacles to meditation, and which we 
omit on account of their prolixity.

VII Nature of the Soul.

Now as the end and aim of Yoga is the emancipation of the 
Soul, it IS necessary to give some account of the natme of the 
sojil (dtmatatioa) as far as it was known to the sages of India, 
and formed the primaiy subject of inquiiy with the wise men of 
eveiy eountiy accoidmg to the sayings , ‘‘Gnothe seautonf

‘'^Noseeteipsimf ^^Know thyselfi’"’ ‘^Khodia hedanf and Aiabic

“Taaldm Nafsalaf &c

‘'The woid Atma,nf says Max Muller, “which in the Veda 
occurs as often as “ fioanf meant life, particularly animal life 
> (Vide Rig Veda I 63, 8 ) Atnid in the sense of self occurs also in 
the Rig Veda (I 162 20), in the passage

It IS also found to be used in the higher sense of 
soul in the verse “The sun is the soul of

all that moves and lests (R VI 115 1). The highest soul 
is called gmiaindtman (m<+iT[^T) of which all other souls pai take, 
from which all reality in this created world emanates, and into 
which every thing will return ”

Atman ongmally meant air as the Gieek atmos, Gothic ahma, 
Timdtmdnam, Sansciit and 'sy Curufonn adam, Peisian 
dam, whence we deiive Sans Hindi Una and Piakrit 
tibi+l^and Bengali &c The Gieek and Latin ego

and Geiman ich aie all derived fiom the same source The

j

VOL I

10

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

Romance je and Hindi aie corruptions of Sanskiit ^<=1 mean- 
ing life and spiiit. Again the Piili and the Pi ahi it 
isfiomtlie Sansciit wliicli is in Hindis

Bengali and m Uiia &c. The Peisian is e\ideiitly

the Sdtnmn by elision of the imtial syllable.Bengali and m Uiia &c. The Peisian is e\ideiitly

the Sdtnmn by elision of the imtial syllable.

These meanings of d/wciu = the self and ego foim the basis of 
the laiowledge of the Divine soul both of the Hindu as of any 
othei people^ -who from the consciousness of their own selves rise' 
to that of the Supieme Thus saj^s hlax jMuller on the subject, 
Hindu speaking of himself spoke also, though un- 
consciously of the soul of the univeise and to Icnow'

himself, was to him to Icnow both his owm self and the Universal 
soul, or to Imow himself in the Divine self.^^

We give below the different lights in wdiich the Divine soul 
Was viewed by the diffeient schools of Hindu philosoplij’’ , and 
adopted a-'^coidingly in their respective modes of Yoga meditation. 
The Upamshads called it Biahma of eternal and infinite w'lsdpm

1

The Vedantists , A Being full of intelligence and blissfulness

f

TheSankaias, A continued consciousness of one self <wr»n.ijft

I The doctime of Descaites and jMale-

branche

^ The Materialists convert the soul to all mateiial foims 
yiaiciji: I

^ The Lokdryatas take the body with intelligence to be the soul ; 
Cl «i j r«i fiipz: IdiT I

The ehdrvd,kas call the organs and sensations as soul *

^ Do Anther ^sect take the cognitive faculties as such ' 
■U cl *1 1 »i 7 KjH c7 j M C Tt : I

Do Otheis undeifStand the mind as soul <i,ci j |

Do Others call the vital breath as soul y ^ |

Do Otheis understand the son as soul^

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

11

The Digambaias say, the complete human body is the soul

The Madhyamikas take the vacuum for their soul

I

The Yogachaiis undeistand the soul to be a tiansient flash 
of knowledge in the spmt in meditation 'g^if I

The S auti d,ntas call it a shoi t inf ei loi kn o wledge

’ 'i<3 r<ucti I

The Vaibhdshikas take it to be a momentary peiception iq (iucft

The Jamas take then* preceptor to be their soul mcn i

U I

The Logicians A boflil ess active and passive agency’ 'i<3 r<ucti I

The Vaibhdshikas take it to be a momentary peiception iq (iucft

The Jamas take then* preceptor to be their soul mcn i

U I

The Logicians A boflil ess active and passive agency

The Naiydyikas understand the spirit to be self manifest

The Sdnkbyas, call the spiiit to be passive, not active

The Y’ogis call Him a separate omnipotent Being "d S5 j|

r<Tn *:i<^9i;(^f<(d i

The Saivas, designate the spirit as knowledge itself

The Maydvadis, style Biabma as the soul Id

I

The Vaiseshikas, acknowledge two souls the Vital and 
Supreme <i.=« I

The Nyayd. says because the soul is immoital there is a future 
state «MicH r«id4cej I

And thus there aie many other theoiies about the nature 
of the soul.

3

The Atmavadis spiiitualists, consider the existence of the 
body as unnecessary tJ) the existence of the soul

c

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

VIII Final Emancipation ob Beatitude

The object of Yoga, as already said, bemg* the emancipation of 
the soul fiom the miseiies of the woild, and its attainment to 
a state of hig-hest felicity, it is to be seen what this state of felicity 
IS, which it is the eoncein of eveiy man to know, and which the 
Yogi takes so much pains to acquiie The Vedantic Yogi, as it 
IS well known, aims at nothing less than in his absoiTition in the 
Supieme Spirit and loosing himself in infinite bliss But it is not r 
so with otheis, who aie averse to loose the sense of their personal 
identity, and look foiwaid to a state of self existence eithei m 
this life or next, in which they shall he perfectly hapiiy ‘ The 
Yogis of India have various states of this bliss which they aim 
at accQiding to the faith to which they belong, as we shall show 
below.

The Vedantic Yogi has two states of bliss in new, viz j the 
one infei loi which is attained m this life by means of knowledge

and the other sugieiior, 
obtamable after many births of giadual advancement to perfec- 
tion \and the other sugieiior, 
obtamable after many births of giadual advancement to perfec- 
tion \

The Ch^ivdkas say, that it is eithei independence oi death 
that IS bliss I ^

The MMhyamikas say , it is extinction of self that is called 
liberation I

The Vijndni philosopheis have it to be clear and elevated 
undeistandiug \

The Arhatas have it in deliverance fiom all veil and covering

The M^ydvddis say, that it is lemoval of the erioi of one^s 
separate existence as a particle of the Supieme spint 
til 1-53 M I

The Rdmdnujas called it to be the knowledge of Vdsudeva as 
cause of all, I

The Madliyamte have it foi the perfect bliss enioyed by 
Vishnu r=ituji<i«\»^ I ’i j j

The Ballablns expect it in spoitmg with

Krishna in heaven

c

c

€

C

c

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

13

The Pasupatas and Mdheswaiaa place it in the possession of 
all dignity I

The Kapd,likas place it in the fond embiaces of Hara and 
Pflrga '^<'qT‘^ci 4 ircrt^«r I

The Piatyabhijndnis call it to be the perfection of the soul

The Raseswara Vddis have it m the health of body produced 
by meieury I

The Vaisesikas seek it in the extinction of all kinds of pain

The Mimdnsakas view their happiness in heavenly bliss

The Sarvajnas say that, it is the continued feeling of highest 
felicity [hrtt I

The P^nini philologeis find it in the powers of speech 
<=il4U4T I

The S^nkhyas find it in the union of force with matter 'Rsicfl

The Udasina Atheists have it as consisting m the ignoring of 
self identity CdstTi: I

The Patanjalas .view it in the unconnected umty of the soul

The Persian Sufis call it dzdchfft or unattachment of the soul 
to any worldly object.

IX. Origin of Yoga in the Vedas.

The oiigin of yoga meditation is placed at a period com- 
paratively less ancient than the eaihest Sanhita or hymnic 
Not in the Yedio peiiod of vedic history, when the Rishis follow- 
Penod ed the elementary worship of the physicalforces , or the Biahmanic age when they were employed m the 
ceremonial observances.

There aie however some traces of abstract contemplation 
“ dhy^na joga,” to be occasionally met with 
in the eaily Vedas, where the Rishis are men- 
tioned to have indulged themselves m such reveries Thus in

Some Traces of it

c

(

14

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY 
the Rig Veda 129 4-.

“ The poets discovered in their heait, thiough meditation, the 
bond o£ the existmg m the non-existing M. Muller A. S. 
Lit (p 19 )

We have it explicitly mentioned in the Gdyatri hymn of the 
Big Veda, which is daily lecited by every 
The Gayatri Me- gyajiman, and wherein its authoi Viswdmitrar 
meditated on the gloiy of the Loid foi the 
illummation of his undei standing ■” \ But this

bespeaks a development of intellectual meditation piana yoyi” 
omy, and not spiritual as there is no piayer for (“^rTh ) libeiation 
It \v :*7 in the tbiid or Aianyaka period, that the yoga came 
^ in vogue with the second class of the Atharva

Aranyaba Period , , , .

Upanishads, presenting certain phases in its 
successive stages, as we find ui the following analysis of them 
given by Professor Weber m Ins Histoiy of Ancient Sansloit 
Literatme. This class of woiks, he says, is chiefly made up Of 
subjects relating to yoga, as consisting in divine meditation and 
giving up all earthly connections (Ibid p 163).

To this class belong the Jdbdla, ICatha sniti, BhallQin, Sam- 
- vartasruti, Sannydsa, Hansa and Paiamhansa 
oga pan s a e Upanishads, Srimaddatta, the Mdndukya and

Tarkopamshads, and a few otheis, (Ibid p 1G4<) . It will exceed 
our bounds to give an account of the mode of yoga tieated in 
these treatises, which however may be easily gathered by the 
readei from a reference to the Fifty two Upamshads lately pub- 
lished in this city

Beside the above, we find mention of yoga and the vaiious

Tbeir different conducting it m some othei Upani-Beside the above, we find mention of yoga and the vaiious

Tbeir different conducting it m some othei Upani-

modes of yoga shads, as given below by the same authoi and 
analyst The Kathopanishad oi KathavalH 
of the Athaiva Veda, tieats of the first principles of Deistie 
Yoga Ibid p. 158

The Gaibhopanishad speaks of the S^nkhya and Pdtanjala 
yoga systems as the means of knowing N^i^dyana. (Ibid. p. 160 (

C

<

TJIE ‘YOGA PHILOSOPHY

15

The Biahmoponishad, says Weber, belongs more propeily to the 
yoga Upanishads spoken of before. (Ibid p. 161)

JThe Nu^lambopamshad e-srhibits essentially the yoga stand 
point accoiding to Dr. Bajendra Lala Mitra (Notices of S. 
Mss II 95 Weberns Id p 162). The yoga tatwa and yoga 
sikhd belong to yoga also, and depict the majesty of Atmd 
(Ibid p 165)

, Among the Sectarian Upanishads will be found the Ndiiyano- 
pamshad, which is of special significance in i elation to the 
Sankhya and Yoga doctrines (Ibid p 166)

It iS plain fiom the recurience of the woid Sdnkhya in the 
, later Upanishads of the Taittiiiya and Atharva

vedas and in the Niiukta and Bhagavad Git4, 
that the Sdnkhya Yoga was long known to 
the ancients, and the Pdtanjala was a further development of it 
(Ibid p 1§7)

Along with or prior to Pitanj’ala comes the Yoga Sdstra of 
Yogi Ydjnavalkya, the leading authority of 
the Sditapatha Biahmt.na, who is also regarded 
as a main originator of the yoga doctrine in his later writmgs. 
(Ibid p^237). Yd,jnavalkya speaks of his obtaimng the Yoga 
Sastra from the sun, I

“ He who ivishes to attain yoga must know the Aranyaka 
which I have received from the sun, and the Yoga sastra which 
I have taught

X Rise of the Heeitical Yogas

Toga Tajnavalkya

The Buddhist and 
Jam Yogas

Beside the Orthodox yoga systems of the Upanishads, we have 
the Hetiodox Yoga Sastias of the Buddhists 
and Jains completely concordant with those of 
Yajnavalkya in the Bnhad dianyaka and 
Atharvan Upanishads, (Webei^s Id p 285)The pomts of coincidence of the vedanta yoga with those of 
Budrl b ism and Jainism, ^consist in as much as 
both of them inculcate the doctrine of the 
interminable metempsychosis of the human

Their concordance 
With the Yedantic

16

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

soul^ as a consequence of bodily actSj jirevious to its state of final 
absorption or utter annihilation^ aecording to the difference in 
^eir respective views Oi to explain it more clearly they say 
that, “ Tbe state of humanity m its piesent, past and futuie 
lives, IS the necessary result of its owm acts “ Karma^-* in previous 
births

That miseiy or happiness in this life is the unavoidable sequence 
of conduct m former states of existence, andc

The weal or woe piesent actions vull determine our

of mankind ,, , ^

states to come , that is, their weal or woe de- 
pending solely on the merit or demerit of acts It is, therefore, 
one^s cessation fiom action by confimng himself to holy medita- 
tion, that secures to him his final absorption in the supreme 
according to the one , and by his nescience of himself that ensures 
his utter extinction accoidmg to the other

Tn the Purdmc period we get ample accounts of and yogis.

The Kurma puiana gives a stung of names of 
The Puranic yOoa teacheis The piactice of yoga is fi equentiy

alluded to in the Vana paiva of Mahd.bh^iata The obseivances 
of yoga are detailed at considerable length and strenuously 
enjoined in the Udyoga parva of the said epic Besides in modem 
times we have accounts of yogis m the Sakuntala of Kaliddsa 
(VII 175) and in the Mddhava M^lati of Bhava-bhuti (actv) 
The Ramayana gives an account of a Sudra yogi, and the 
Bhdgavat gita treats also of yoga as necessary to be parcticed 
(chap VI VThe Tantras or cabalistic works of modem times aie all and 
every one of them no othei than yoga sastias, 
containing diiections and formulas for the adora- 
tion of innumerable deities for the purpose of their votaries^ 
attamment of consummation ^^Joga Stcldht^’ thiough them It 
IS the Tdntrika yoga which is chiefly cuiient in Bengal, though

the old forms may be in use m other parts of the country It is 
reckoned with the heritical systems, because the processes and 
practices of its yoga aie mostly at vananee with the spiiitual 
yoga of old It has mventqd many m^adias or masonic signs 
monogiams and mysteiioiis symbols, which are wholly unintelligi-

The Tantnka yoga

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

17

The Sectarian 
yogas

l)le to tile yogis of tlie old scliool, and lias the carnal rites of the 
panclia-mal&i a for immediate consummation which a spiiitualist

will feel ashamed to leaiii. (See Wilson. H. Religion).

*

This system, which as its name implies consists of the forced

contoitions of the body inoider to subdue the 
The Hatha Yoga, i i i a

haidy boors to quiescence, isiathei a tiaimng ox

the bodys than a mental oi spmtual discipline of a moial and

intelligent being for the benefit of the lational soul The votaries

of this system aie mostly of a vagiant and mendicant older, and

subject to the slander of foreigneis, though they command

veneration over the ignorant multitude

The modern sectaiians in upper Hindustan, namely the fol- 
loweis of Ramdnuja, Goiakhndth, Nd.nah, Kabir 
and otheis, possess their respective modes of 
yoga, wiitten m the dialects of Hindi, foi their 
practice in ihe maths or monasteries peculiar to then diffeient 
oiders.Zux-ah-oiieiis. “Light fiom the east ” and India has given 
more light to the west than it has derived fiom 
that quaitei. We see India in Greece in many 
things, but not Gieece in India in any And 
when we see a coirespondence of the Asiatic with the European, 
we have moie leason to suppose its intioduction to the west by its 
travelleis to the east, since the days of Alexandei the Gieat, than 
the Indians^ importation of any thing fiom Euiope, by ciossmg 
tSe seas which they had neither the means noi piivelege to do by 
the laws of their country. Whatevei, theiefoie, the Indian has is 
the indigenous giowth of the land, or else they would be as refined 
as the pioductions of Euiope aie geneially found to be

Piofessor Monier Williams speaking of the yoga philosophy 
says ; “The votaiies of animal magnetism, 
clairvoyance and so called spiiitualism, will find 
most of their theories represented or far out- 
done by corresponding notions existing m the yoga system for 
more than two thousand years ago." In speaking of the Vedanta 
he declaies , “The phiioso phy of the Sufis, alleged to be developed

Yoga an indigene 
of India

Its European 
forms (to &c

c

Jg THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

out o£ the Koran, appeals to be a kind of pantheism veiy similar 
to that of the Vedanta He has next shewn the coiiespondence 
of its doetimes with those of Plato. Again he sa3^s about the 
S^nkh3’'a , “It may not be altogether unworthy of the attentfon 
of Daiwimans” {Ind Wisdom).

The Dialectic Ny^3''a in the opinion of Sii William Jones 
expressed in his Discouise on Hindu philosophy, 
The yoga &c m followers of Alexander and,The Dialectic Ny^3''a in the opinion of Sii William Jones 
expressed in his Discouise on Hindu philosophy, 
The yoga &c m followers of Alexander and,

communicated by them to Aiistottle * and that 
Pythagaias derived his doctiine of Metempsychosis fiom the 
Hinduyo^a in his travels through India His philosophj' wifs of a 
contemplative cast fiora the sensible to the immaterial Intelligibles 
Webei says , “The most flourishing epoch of the Sdnkliya-yoga, 
belongs most piobably to the fiist centuiies of 
The Gnostic yoga influence it exeieised upon the

development of gnosticism m Asia Mmoi being unjnistakable ; 
vdiile fuither both tbiougb that channel and afterwaids directly 
also, it had an impoitant influence upon the giowth of Soplfi- 
philosophy^^ (See Lassen I. A. K & Gieldmistei -Scrip Arab 
de Inde )

It was at the beginning of the lltli century that Albiruni 
translated Pdtan^alPs woik (Yoga-Sutra) into 
Aiabic, and it ivonld appear the Sdiildiya Sutias 
also , though the iiifomiation we have of the 
contents of these woiks, do not haimonize witli the sanskiit 
ongmals (Pemsand Journal Asiatique and H M Elliots Maho- 
medan Histoiy of India Wehei’s Ind Lit p 239 ).

The Gnostic doetimes deiived especially from Buddhistic mis-

Buaahasho Toga ®'^^^®^^^ough Persia and Punjab, weie spiead 
m Europe ^^lope, and embraced and cultivated parti-

culaily by Basiledes, Valentmian, and Baides- 
anes as well as Manes

It IS, however, a question as to the amount of influence to be

Manechiau Doc- Indian philosophy generally, in shap-

tnnes. Ibese gnostic doctrines of Manes m parti-

cular, was a most important one, as has been

Toga among 
Moslems

c

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

19

shown by Lassen III. 415. Beal I R A. S II. 424 Web 
Ind Lit. p. 309

• It must be remembered that Buddhism and its yoga are but 
Buddhist and offshoots o£ Saukhya yoga, and sprung fiom 
Sankhya yogas the same place the Kaj)ila VdsUi.

XII Diffehent Aspects oe Yoga• It must be remembered that Buddhism and its yoga are but 
Buddhist and offshoots o£ Saukhya yoga, and sprung fiom 
Sankhya yogas the same place the Kaj)ila VdsUi.

XII Diffehent Aspects oe Yoga

" The Yoga system %vill be found, what Monier Williams

says of Hinduism at laige, ^^to piesent its spiiitual and

^ ^ - mateiial aspects, its esotoiic and exoteiic, its

varieties of yoga ^

sub 3 ective and objective, its pure and impure 
sides to the observer 'Tt is,"*^ he says, ‘^at once vulgarly pan- 
theistic, severely monotheistic, grossly poljrfcheistic and coldly 
atheistic It has a side for the practical and another for the 
devotional and another for the speculative Again says he ;

“Those, *who rest in ceiemomal observances, find it all satisfy- 
ing , those, who deny the efficacy of woiks and make faith the one 
thing needful, need not wandei from its pale , those, who dehght 
in meditating on the nature of G-od and man, the relation of 
matter and spirit, the mystery of separate existence and the 
oiigm of eial, may here indulge then love of speculation (In- 
troduction to Indian Wisdom p xxvii )

We shall treat of these senahui, by way of notes to oi inter - 
pietation of the above, as apply mg to the different modes of yoga 
practised by these several orders of sectarians.

That the earliest form of yoga was purely spiritual, is evident 
from the Upanishads, the Veddiita doctrines of 
J Vyasa and all works on the knowledge of the

* sold (adhydtma Vidyd) ^^All the early Upani- 
shads”, says Weber, “teach the doctrine of a^rad-spnit, and the 
later ones deal with yoga meditation to attain complete union with 
dtnid 01 the Supreme Spirit” Web Ind Lit p 156. “The dtnid 
soul 01 self and the supreme spurt (paiamdtmd) of which all 
other souls partake, is the speiitual object ^f meditation (yoga) 
Max Mulleins A S pit p 20 Yajnavalkya says ,

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHYTHE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

“The Divine Spirit is to be seen, heard, perceived and meditated 
upon &c ” If we see, hear, perceive and know Him, then this 
whole universe is known to us. A S Lit p. S3. Agayi, 
“Whosoever looks foi Biahmahood elsewhere than in the Divine 
Spirit, should be abandoned Whosoever looks for KsJiaha power 
elsewhere than in the Divine Spirit, should be abandoned. This 
Biahmahood, this Kshatra power, this woild, these gods, these 
beings, this universe, all IS Divine Spirit” Ibid The meaning* 
of the last passage is evidently that, the spirit of God pervades 
the whole, and not that these are God , foi that would be pan- 
theism and materialism , whereas the Sruti says that, ‘^God is to 
be worshipped in spirit and not in any mateiial object.^^

The materialistic side of the yoga, or what is called the 
2 The Matena- yoga, was piopoundcd atfilst in the

listic yoga Sdnlhya yoga, system, and thence •taken up in

<^1 the Puidnas and Tantuis, which set up a pn- 
Hialdcti I meval matter as the basis of the universe, and 
pm usha or animal soul as evolved out of it, and subsisting in 
matter Weberns Tnd Lit p. 235.

Here, the avyalta matter is leckoned as prior to the pnrusJia

or animal soul, whereas in the Veddnta the 
Of Matter-Praknti , . , . , ,

purusha or primeval soul is consideied as piior

to the aryaX^a-matter The Sdnkhya, therefoie, recognizes the ,

adoration of matter as its yoga, and its founder Kapila was a

yogi of this kind Later materialists meditate on the mateiial

pnnciples and agencies as the causes of all, as in the Yidyanmoda

Taranginij I

These agencies were first viewed as concentrated in a male

Of Spirit Purusha

form, as in the persons of Buddha, Jina and 
Siva, as desciibed in the Kumdia Sambhava 
, and then m the female figuie of 
kriti or nature personified, otheiwise called Saltiiapd or the 
pemonification of energy, as m the Devi mdhdtm 3 ''a,&c They were after waids viewed in 
the five elements panchahliuta , which formed the elemental wor-

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

21

Nature worship m 
eight foims

sliip of the ancients^ eithei singly or conjointly as in the jpancTia- 
hhdutild njxisaiid, desciibed m the Sarva daisana sangiaJia 
The mateiialistic oi nature woiship was at last diversified into 
eight foims called asJita muiti, consisting of 
eaith, water, fire, an, sky, sun, moon, and the 
saciificial piiest, which weie beheved to be so 
many foims of God isa, and fonning the objects of his medita- 
tion also. The eight foims are summed up in the lines ,

1

, or as it IS moie commonly read in Bengal, crici«4i

1 1 That

they weie foims of Isa is thus expiessed by Kalidasa in the 
Eaghu-vansa, 4^i I 'Jl+t

, and that they were meditated upon by him as expressed 
by the same in his Kumdia Sambhava;

The prologue to the Sakuntald. uull at once prove this gieat poet 
to' have been a materialist of tins kind , thus j

^^\ -gci* m I

yeiicin,(d Mm y\<y=\ni; i

“Water the fiist work of the cieator, and Fire which receives 
‘ the oblations oidained by law &c &c May Isa, the God of 
Natuie, appaient in these foims, bless and sustain you ”

Besides all this the Sivites of the piesent day, aie found to be 
votaiies of this mateiialistic faith in their daily adoiation of the 
eight forms of Siva in the following formula of their iitual ,

X *14Ht I ^ ^*1*, I

u. ^>ji=tnw, +i.Tf^ «t«: I ^ *ih: I

> 5 ) +i-eK=<N W. I l.aLi*n^ II

Both the Sankhya and Saiva materiaksm are depricated in 
orthodox works as atheistic and heiitical, like the impious doctrines 
of the modem positivists and materialists of Europe, on account of

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY.

3 Tlio Esotono 
'‘Jnana yoga "

their disbelief in the existence of a peisonal and spiiitual God. 
Thus says, Kumdula;

(Max Muller’s A. S. Lit. p 7-^.)THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY.

3 Tlio Esotono 
'‘Jnana yoga "

their disbelief in the existence of a peisonal and spiiitual God. 
Thus says, Kumdula;

(Max Muller’s A. S. Lit. p 7-^.)

It IS the occult and inj'’stic meditation of the Bnimt), piac- 
tised by ichgious recluses after then letire- 
ment fiom the woild in the deep icccsses of 
foiests, accoiding to the teachings of the Aia- 
nyakas of the Yedas In this sense it is called “ oi*

recluse, as opposed to the or the popular foim. It i«s ns

well piacticable m domestic ciielcs by those that are cjtiaMif'd to 
piactisethe ^^Jntina yoga"' oi transcendental ‘.pec ul.it loii

at then leisuie Of the foimei kind ucre the Ilishis Siika dc\a, 
Yitjuavalkya and otheis, and of the lattei soit i\ ere the io\al 
peisonages Jauaka and other kings and the sages A'asi'-tha, 
Vyitsa and many moie of the ”

This is the ^^laulila" oi jiopulai form of devolibn piaclisod 
chiefly by the outwaid formulae luhuaaga’i of 
yoga, with obseiwance of the cii‘>toinar\ iites 
and duties of leligion. Tlie foimei kind called 
Vtdyd and the latter Avidyd are en-)oincd to be

peifoimed together in the Veda, which says , Src.

The Bhagavadgitd says to the same effect,

The yoga Vdsishtha inculcates the same doc- 
trine m coiifoimity with the Siuti which says, h

4 The Exoteric 
Raja yoga

The /lansa oi j^a) amaJiansa yoga is the sub-jective foim, uhich 
^ 1 ' consists in the peiception of one’s identity uith

m-Eanmyoga that ot the supieme being, wheieby men aie

“ elevated above life and death (Webei-’s Ind. 
Lit p 157 ) The foimula of meditation is ‘‘sohaoi^ hamald" 
I am He, .^^-70 A?, and the Aiabic “Anal llaq,

wheiem the Ego is identified unth the alsoluie.

^ The objective side of yoga is clearly seen in its foimula of

6 The objective ^^t He.” Here ^Thou” the

TToid Tattwamasi object of ^cognition a you ego, IS made the 
absolute subjective (Webei. Tnd Lit p. 162).”

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

286 The objective ^^t He.” Here ^Thou” the

TToid Tattwamasi object of ^cognition a you ego, IS made the 
absolute subjective (Webei. Tnd Lit p. 162).”

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

28

This formula is reduced to one woid taUoam (o^) denoting 
^^tiuth/'* which contained in viewing eveiy thing as Himself^ or 
having suboidmated all cosmical speculations to the objective 
method.

The puie Yoga has two meamngs viz , the holy and unmixed

7 Tho Pure yoga- foims of it The foimei was practised by the

Sucidha Brahma- celebate Biahmachdiis and Biahmachdriinis of 
charyam yoie, and IS now in piactice with the K,tnphutta

yogjs and yogims of Katiyawar in Guzeiat and Bombay Its nri- 
mixed foim is found among the and Vadims, vrluo

piactise’ the puie contemjilative yoga of Vedd.nta without any 
inteiniixtuie of sectaiian foims It eoiiesponds with the philo- 
sophical mj'sticism of saint Bemaid, and the mystic devotion of 
the Sufis of Peisia (See Sii AVm Jones. On the Mj’^stic 
Poetry of the Hindus, Peisians and Greeks )

The impure yoga m both its significations of unholiness and 
inteimixtuie, is now laigely in vogue with the

8 •The Impure or foUoweis of the i anti as, the woishippeis of

Shanda yoga , « •. i -i o -A

i Siva and Sakti, the modem Gosavis of Deccan,

the Bullabhd,ch^iis of Biindabuii, the Gosains, Bhaiiavis and 
Vaislinava sects in India, the Aghoiis of Hindustan, and the 
ICaitdbhajds and Neid-nciis of Bengal

Tins IS well known fiom the pantheistic doctiines of Veddnta, 
to consist 111 the meditation of eveiy thing in 
God and God in eveiy thing , ^‘SaivamU/alvt- 
daiii Biahama’^ ’^'^1 3

and that such contemplation alone leads to immoitalityand that such contemplation alone leads to immoitality

Hqf-d I It eoiiesponds 
witli the pantheism of Peisian Sufis and those of Spinoza and 
Tindal in the west Even Sadi says , ^‘Hamdn nestand nnclie 
hash tut,” theie is nothing else but thyself. So in Urdu, Jo 
hucJi hat oht hat nahin ani hucJih 
It consists in the meditation of the cieed Art 
10 ThoMonotlieis- of the Brahmans, like , the ‘'^Wahed Ho-*^ of 
tio or Adiuaita Brah- Moslems, and that God is one of umtarian

chii^ians The monotheistic yoga is embodied

‘ 9 Tho Pantheistic 
or Tibiatma yoga

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY.

m tlie Svetdswatara and other Upanishads (Weber p, ^5^ nV As 
foi seveie monotheism the Mosaic and Moslem leligions are 
unparalleled, whose tenet it is ‘Ha s/iau/. one without a

partner , and, “ Thou shalt have no other God but hle.''^

The dualistic yoga oiiginated with Palanjali, substituting his 
Isvata for the Pinusha of Sdnkhya, and talcing

11 Tho Dualistic P; rt/l/ i/i as liis associate ^‘Fioni the^^c,^'

or Dwatta yoga gays Web ei, “thcdoctiinc sccms to lest subS'- 
tantially upon a dualism of the Puutsha male and ai//a/Jn or 
Prakriti the female This has also given birth to the diiahstic 
faith of the anchogyne divinity-the Protogonus of the Greek 
mythology, the ai dhandiMoai a of hlanu, the unduidod 
Adam of the sciiptuies, the Haia-Gauii and Umamahcswara of 
the Hindu S^ktas. But theie is anothei dualism of two male 
duties joined in one poison of Hau-Ziata m Jlaia-han ) whose 
worshippeis are called diDaifa-vdfhs, and among whofii the famous 
grammaiian Vopadeva lanks the foiemost.

r

The doctrines of the Hindu trinity of Brahma, Yishnu and 
Siva, and that of the Platonic triad and chnslian

12 The Tnalistic Tiinity are well known to inculcate the

wmrship and meditation of the three per«-ons in 
one, so that in adoring one of them, a man unknowingly w orthips 
all the three together12 The Tnalistic Tiinity are well known to inculcate the

wmrship and meditation of the three per«-ons in 
one, so that in adoring one of them, a man unknowingly w orthips 
all the three together

This consists of the adoration of a plurality of deities in the' 
13 The Polytheis- mythology by eveiy Hindu, though every one 
tic yoga or Saim has a special divinity of wdiom he is the votary 
Devopdsana particular meditation The laler upani-

shads have promulgated the worship of seveial forms of Vishnu 
and Siva (Web. I Lit p 161) , and the Tnnivas haie given 
the d/tydnas or foims of meditation of a vast member of deities m 
their various forms and images (Ibid p 236)

The Atheistic yoga IS found in the mnsjoai a oi liylo-theistic 
14 The Atheistic Kapila, w^ho transmitted his faith

or NxHswara yoga Buddhists and J ains, W'ho

having no God to addre, w^orship themselves.

\

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

25

(Monier Williams^ Hindu.

16 The Tlieistic or 
A sttlya yoga

16 Tho Piactical 
Yoga Sdiliana

ni sedate and silent meditation 
Wisdom p 97j,

Theistic yoga system of Patanjala otlieiwise called tlie 
ses 2 oa}a yoga, -was ingiafted on the old atheistic 
S 3 ’-stem of Sdnkhya Avith a belief in the Iswaia 
It is this system to which the name yoga 
specially belongs. (Webei^s Ind Lit pp 238 and 252}

‘^^The yoga system/’’ says Webei, ^'developed itself in couise of 
time in outwaid piaetices of penance and moiti- 
fications, wheiehy ahsoiption in the Supieme 
Being was sought to he obtained We discover 
its eaily tiaces in the Epics and specially m the Athaiva upani- 
shads ” (Ind Lit p 239) The inactical yoga Sddhana is 
now piactised by evei}’’ devotee in the seivice of his respective 
divinity ^

The devotional side of the yoga is noticed in the instance of 
1? Tho dovofcioa- Janalm in the Mabd^bliaiata., and of Ydjnavalkya 
al 01 Sannyasa m the Bidiad^iyanyaka 111 the piactice of their 
y°3^ devotions in domestic life These examplesmay have given a powerful impetus to the jmgis in the suc- 
ceeding ages, to tlie piactice of secluded yoga in ascetism and 
abandonment of the woild, and its conceins called Sannyasa as in 
the case of Chaitaiiya and otheis

It had its use in the fiist oi eailiest class of Uiianishads, when 
the minds of the Rishis weie employed in

Specula gpeculations about then futuie state and im- 
tire Dnyana yoga ^

moitalit}^, and about the natuie and attributes 
of the Supreme Being

This commenced with the second class oi mideval upanishads, 
which gave the means and stages, wheieby 
men may even in this world attain complete 
union with the Atma (Web I Lit p 156). 
The yogdchaia of Mann relates to the, daily ceiemonies of 
house-keepeis, and the Kiiyd yoga of the Puianas treats about 
pilgrimages and pious diets of religion*

VOL I '

19 Tho Ooremo- 
nial or 2l> xyd yoga

t

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

Tlie pure yoga being pei verted by the mimiclccry o£ false 
pietendeis to sanctity and lioliness, liave as- 
20 The Pseudo degeneiatc foims wliicb aie

W BhdUayoga commonly to be seen in tlie mendicant Fakns, 
stiolling about witb mock shows to earn a liveliliood fiom tlie 
imposed vulgai These being the most conspicuous have infused 
a wrong notion of yoga into the minds of foieigiieis.

The Bhakti yoga fiist appeals in tlie swetaswataia Upanisbad.

wheie the Bhakti element of faith shoots foith 
to light. (Web Ind Lit pp ^52 and 238) 
It indicates acquaintance with the coi i espoiiding 
doctime of ehustiainty The Bhdgavad Gitd lays special slie^-s 
upon faith iii the Supieme Being It is the united opinion of 
the majoiity of Emopeaii scholais, that the Hindu BliaUi is 
deiived fiom the faith [jides) of elmstian Theology. It has 
taken the place of '31;^ i oi belief among all sects^ and has been 
intioduced of late m the Biahma Samdjas with othei Yaishnaia 
practices. *The other topics of Pi off Moniei Wdlinms being inelevant to 
oui subject, aie left out fiom being tieatcd in the inescnt 
desseitation.

XIII The Co^rsiDniATiON or Yoga (Siddiii )

The Yogi by continually meditating on the peifcctioiis of the 
All Perfect Being, becomes eventually a perfect being him- 
, self, just as a man that devotes his sole atten-

tion to the object acquisition of a paiticulai science,

attains in time not only to a peifectioii in it, but 
becomes as it weie identified with that science. Oi to use a natiiial 
phenomenon m the metamoijihoses of insects, the transfoiination 
of the coekioach to the conchfly, by its constant diead of the lattei 
when caught by it, and the eameleon’s changing its colour for 
those of the objects about it, seive well to elucidate the Biahma- 
hood of thg contemplative yogi

But to illustiate this point moie cleaily we will cite the argu- 
ment of Plotinus of the Neo-Platonic sdiiool, to piove the ele-

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY

27

vatiou o£ the meditative yogi to the peifection of the Being 
he meditates upon. He says, “ Man is a finite being, how can. 
he compiehend the Infinite^ But as soon as he compiehends the 
InWte, he is infinite himself that is to say ; he is no longei 
himself, no longei that finite being having a consciousness of 
his oivn sepal ate existence , but is lost m and becomes one with 
the Infinite ”

• Heie says Mi. Lewes, ^^If I attain to a knowledge of the 
Infinite, it is not by my reason which is finite, 
higher faculty which identifies 
itself with its object Hence the identity of 
subject and object, of the thought and the thing thought of 
( ) IS the only possible giound of knowledge. 
Knowledge and Being aie identical, and to know moie is to be 
moie” But saj'^s Plotinus, ^^If knowledge is the same as the 
thing knovfii, the finite as finite, can never Imow the Lifinite, 
because he cannot be Infinite Hist Phil. I p 391,Theiefoie the yogi takes himself as his pielmunaiy step, to 
the meditations of some paiticulai attribute or 
By meditation of perfection of the deitj'-, to which he is assimila-

ted 111 thought, which is called ms state of 
lowei peifection, until he is piepaied by his highest degiee of 
ecstacy to loose the sense of his oivn peisonahty, and become 
absorbed in tlie Infinite Intelligence called his ultimate con- 
summation 01 SainddJn^ which makes him one with the Lifimte, 
and unites the knowei and the known togethei ;

I

The peifection of the yogi beais a sti iking lesemblance with 
maaifal of the Sufis of Peisia, and it is des- 
ciibed at length by Al-Gazzali a famous sophist, 
of which Ave have an English tianslation given 
by G K Lewes m his Histoiy of Philosophy (Vol II p 65) 
‘'Tiom the veiy fiist tlie Sufis have such astonishing levelations, 
that they aie enabled, ivhile waking, to ^ see Ausions of angels 
and the souls of piojihets, they heai then voices and leceive 
then favouis ’’

Tlio Sufi Peifcc- 
tion

28

THE YOGA PHII.OBOPIIY

Afterwards a transport exalts tliem beyond tbc mere porceptron 
of forms, to a degree wbrclr exceeds all exjrres- 
Ultimato consmn coircerirmg rvlrich one cannot speak

wrtlioirt employrng a language that u ould sound 
blaspbemous In fact some liavc gone so far as to rmagnre Ihem- 
sehes amalgamated wrtlr God, otbers identified ^\ ith Him, and 
others to be associated with Him ” These states are called 
&c , in Hindu yoga as uc shall presently-

see.

XIV The DiirEiiENT Di^oiiims or Pnin i ctiox ,

“The supernatural faculties ‘?ays Wilson, “are acqiined in 
yaiious degiees according to the gi eater oi le«sei peifection 
The Eight poifec of the adejit II. llcl p. 131 The«:c perfec- 
tions tions are commonl}’- enumerated as eight in

I number and are said to'be acrpriicd

by the particular mode in which the devotee conccntiates himself 
in the Divine spirit oi contemplates it w itliin himselfI number and are said to'be acrpriicd

by the particular mode in which the devotee conccntiates himself 
in the Divine spirit oi contemplates it w itliin himself

The specific property of the minuteness of the soul orunucrsal 
spirit, that it is minuter than the minutest 
) By thinking himself as such, 
the yogi by a single expiiation of air, makes his 
whole body assume a lank and lean appeal ance, and penetiates 
his soul into all bodies

1 Microcosm or 
Anund

This also IS a special quality of the soul that it fills the body, 
and extends tliiough all space and encloses it 
within itself , hy thinking

the yogi by a meie respiration of air makes liis 
body lound and turgid as a fiog, and compiclieiids tlie universe 
m himself

2 Macrocosm or 
Mahxma

Piom thinking on the lightness of the soul, the ^rngi produces 
a diminution of his specific giavity by shallow- 
ing ^arge diaughts of an, and thereby keeps

himself in^an aeiial po'jture both on sea and 
This the Siuti says as

3 LightnoBB or 
Laghimd

land

THE YOGA. PHILOSOPHY

29

4 Gravity, or 
Gai 1*10

6 SuooesB or 
Prdpti

Tills piactice is opposed to the above, and it is by the same 
piocess of swallovang- gieat diaugbts of an, 
and compiessing them within the system, that 
the yogi acqvnies an ineiease of his specific 
giavity or ganmA, Kiishna is said to have assumed

his in this way, which prepondeiated all weights

in the opposite scalehis in this way, which prepondeiated all weights

in the opposite scale

, This IS the obtaining of desiied objects and supeinatuial poweis 
as by mspiiation fiom above The yogi in a 
state of tiance acqmies the powei of piedict- 
ing futuie events, of undeistandmg unknown 
languages, of cuiing diveis diseases, of heaiing distant sounds, of 
divining unexpiessed thoughts of otheis, of seeing distant objects, 
or smelling mystical fiagiant odouis, and of undeistandmg the 
language of beasts and buds Hence the pi ophets all dived into 
futuiity, the^oiaeles declaied futuie events, Jina undei stood 
bhdsJid, and Chiist healed diseases and mfiimities So also 
Sa^jaya saw the battles waged at Kuiukshetia fiom the palace 
of king Dluitaidshtia

Piakamya is obtaining moie than one^s expectations, and con- 
sists m the powei of casting the old skin and 
mamtaimng a youth-like appeal anee foi an 
unusual peiiod of time, as it is lecorded of king 
Yayditi (Japhet or Jydpati ) , and of Alcibiades who maintained an 
ninfadmg youth to his last By some wiiteis it is defined to be 
the piojDeity of enteimg into the system of another peison, as it 
IS related of Sankaidchaiya^s enteiing the dead body of piince 
Amaiu in the Saukaia Vijaya

This IS the power of taming living cieatuies and bunging them

undei contiol It is defined also to be the 
7 Subiectiou . j p i o

lestiaint of passions and emotions asTI^ilK 
1 asitwam ^ ^

and likewise the bunging of men and 
women undei subjection This made Oipheus tame the wild 
animals and stop the couise of iiveis by the music of his lyie, and 
gave Pythagoias (who deiived it fiom India? the powei of subdu- 
ing a fuiious beai by th^ influence of ^is will or woid, as also of 
preventing an ox fiom eating his beans, and stopping an eagle

6 Overgam-Pm 
Kdinya

30

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY.

8 Dominion or 
Ishxtioam6 Overgam-Pm 
Kdinya

30

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY.

8 Dominion or 
Ishxtioam

in its flight. It was by this that Piospeio subdued the elements 
and aenal sjnuts with his magic wand^ and Diaupadi and h'laliomed 
obtained the poweis of stopping the courses of the sun and moon 
The Magis of Peisia are said to have derived then magical poweis 
from the May is of India who Hist cultivated the magical ait

It IS the obtaining of nniveisal dominion eithei in this life or 
next by means of yoga, as it is recoided of 
Havana, Md.iidhdtd and otheis in the tiaditions 
It is also said to be the attainment of divine 
poweis, when the yogi finds himself in a blaze of light,

CHAPTEE XV,

Thesiaie of a Pcifed yogi^

When the mystic union is effected, he (the yogi) can make 
himself hghtei than the lightest substance, 
Ai^ority of H heaviei than the heaviest , can become as

vast 01 as minute as he pleases, can tiaveise 
all space, can animate any dead body by tiansfeiiing his spirit 
into it from his own fiame He can lendei himself invisible, can 
attain all objects, become equally acquainted uith the piesent, 
past and futuie, and is finally united unth Siva, and consequently 
exempted from being boin again upon eailh. (See IVikoiPs 
Hindu Keligion p 131).

We find the same doctiine in Plato’s Phaedius ulieie Sociales

Ditto of Plato <ieliveis a highly poetical effusion lespeeting' 
the paitial intei course of the human soul n ith 
eternal intellectual Realici. He saj's moieover that, all objects 
which aie invisible can be appiehended only by cogitation (j'oga) ; 
and that none but philosopheis (yogis), and a few of them can 
attain such mental eneigy dui mg this hfe , noi even

they fully and peifectly m the piesent state. But they mil attain 
it fully aftei death , if then lives have been passed m sohei philo- 
sophical tiammg And that all souls enjoj-ed it hefoiethey fully and peifectly m the piesent state. But they mil attain 
it fully aftei death , if then lives have been passed m sohei philo- 
sophical tiammg And that all souls enjoj-ed it hefoie

hnth, hefoie junction with the body, which are foi gotten dining 
childhood, hnt lecalled in the way of lemmiscenee hy association. 
The levival of the divine elements is an ipspnation of the natine 
of madness (tiance oi ecstacy of the yoga). The soul becoming

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY.

31

ffi

Antlioi xty of 
Plotinus

Disbelief in yoga

insensible to oidinaiy pm suits, contiacts a passionate tendency 
to the umveisal (Baine on Realism pp 6 and 7).

It IS ecstaey the faculty by which the soul divests itself of 
its jieisonality. In this state the soul becomes 
loosened fiom its mateiial prison, sepaiated 
from mdmduai consciousness, and becomes 
absorbed in the Infinite Intelligence fiom which it emanated In 
this ecstacj it contemplates leal existence , and identifies itself 
with that which it contemplates (Lewes Hist of Philosophy 
Vol I p 389;.

• CHAPTER XVI.

Of lUcism on yoga Pi achce.

Notwithstanding all that we have said and the authoiities 
we have cited in the piecedmg aitiele on the 
efficacy of yoga, we find some scholars m Europe 
and many educated men m this comitiy, aie disposed to disci edit 
th^ efficiency of yoga to effect supernatuial lesults oi to be good 
for any thing. We shall state some of these objections which 
will be found to beai their own refutation on the giounds of 
their misiepiesentation and self-contradiction.

Professor Monier Williams says that, “yoga system appears,

in fact, to be a meie contiivance of getting 
Its painful prao- thought, 01 at least of eoncentiatmgProfessor Monier Williams says that, “yoga system appears,

in fact, to be a meie contiivance of getting 
Its painful prao- thought, 01 at least of eoncentiatmg

the mind with the utmost intensity upon no- 
thing in paitieular. It is a strange compound of mental and 
bodily exeicises consistmg of unnatuial lestiaint, foiced and 
painful postmes, twistings and contoitions of the limbs, sup- 
pi ession of bieath and uttei absence of mind (Indian wisdom 
p 103) (so also Wilson-’s Hindu Religion p. 132.).

He then staits the question, How is it that faith in a false 
system can opeiate with sufficient foice upon

Its questionable Hindu, to impel him to submit volun-

Featuies

taiily to almost inciedible lestiaints, mortifi- 
cations of the flesh and physical toitures ^ How is it that an 
amount of physical enduiance may be exhibited by an appar- 
ently weakly and emaciaj:ed Asiatic, '.which would be impossible

tices

32

THE YCOA PHILOSOI’JIY

Thou IllogitimacA

to a JEiiiopean, the climate and diet in one case tending' to ilebi- 
litate and in the othei to invigoiatc (Ihid ]i iOJ).

Piofessoi Momci’s statement of the cvistcncc of (he afoie- 
said self nioililicalions and \o!unlai\ ennloi- 
tions of the Iiml)‘^ of the logis foi luo thou- 
sand years oi since tlie inv'ention of \og,i j)hiIo''0])ji\ , is ojien to 
refutation on the giound ol theic heing no mention of tlnm 
in the old systems of ^og.i inculcated cithci in tlic ^ cd/nita O’* 
Patanjalr’s pliilosophy, oi c\cn in the }oga ^ dsishth.i, it is c\i- 
dent fiom the jnactiees and jnocesses oi }Oga \\c have aiiiMtl} 
given hefoie Those processes aie seen to he simjdy inoial ics- 
tiaints, and no phvsical toitmc of .in\ Kind, and such moial ict,- 
tiaints must he aclviiou lodged on all hands, to he indisjxmsihjf to 
the concentiation of tlic mind on ani suhjeet of f.n Ic^s nnpoitain o 
than the contemplation of the insciutahle natiiic of tlic UiMintiThe abuses he speaks of must he those of the lydiious prac- 
tices of the Hatha logi, wliicli ha\c hcipm 
aoguc uitli pseudo logis of thclitoi tins 
fiom then supci&titious belief in ho(lil\ toitmis 
as then best penance and only means, (as the cuthoi him- 
self avows), '^of their fancied attainment of cxti.ioidinai v 
sanctity and supouiatuial ] 70 uei& ” (Ibid) But such jiiictius 
as have degeneiated to deceptuc tiicKs in this counliy, and 
aieeaiiied on by the cheating and cheated tools uiidei the false 
name of yoga, piesent then counteipaits also in the tiiekcnes' 
of the fanatics and fakiis undei e\eiv foim of faith on caith, 
without alfectmg the tiue leligion oi cicating aiu mis<oncep- 
tion of the yoga doctiine

In vindication of oui siniitual }oga uc haie to s.iv that 
it IS no exoteiie leligion, and lenuiies no bodilv

Sacrifice of the , „ n

spirit moitilicalion oi sacuiice in any shape u liatci er,

as it IS the usual piacticc of all forms of icli- 
gion among mankind The yoga is the speculatue training 
of the human soul, and concerns the castigation of the spint and 
not the moitification of flesh It has nothing to do uitli the

body which is of this eaitli, and which i^^e liave to leave here 
behind us

Abuses of natlm 
yoga

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY.

33body which is of this eaitli, and which i^^e liave to leave here 
behind us

Abuses of natlm 
yoga

THE YOGA PHILOSOPHY.

33

The universal doom of death pionounced on the original 
gmit of man, is not to be averted by physi- 
death or any deadly toituie of the body, 
as it IS commonly believed by the bulk of 
mankind, to consist in bodily moitifications and sacrifices , but m the 
eontiition and penitence of the spmt, and sacrifice of the soul as the 
only sm-offeiing foi the atonement of oui original and actual trans- 
^lessions The usha, meHlia saeiifice of the Veda which is mis- 
understood foi the offeiing of a male-iet7iff,a, man, ahoise, a bull 
or a he-goat oi male of any animal, meant originally the sacrifice 
of the hum an soul, oi self-immolation of ihepumslta oi embodied 
intelligence to the Supieme Spmt, by means of its concentiation 
into the same through the mstiumentality of yoga abstraction Di . 
K M Baneijisb^s mteipietation oi the lis/ia med/ia as typical 
of the ciucifixion of Chiist, is moie conformable with his chiistian 
view of the mysticism, than the spiritual sense of self-saoijice^ 
in which it is generally understood by the speculative Yogi and 
the philosophical Yedantist.

VOL. I

34

THE OJI TAT SAT.

Om tali sat

A FTJliR eonsideiation of Yoc;’*'' title of om aaoiIc, and all it*? 
eomjwnout paits tendin'^ to the (>\c‘k* 1‘’0 ol meditation, to- 
"othei mill an in\t’'' 1 i£'.ition into the naime of

O ^

111 ( 1)1 01 <?oul, .1*' the ai^ent of the net of incdi- 
tatiii”' and )n<)( m in*^'' it‘> sahation, \\e*aie led 
by a naUiial and eoheieiit tiain of thought to an in{[uiiy into 
the natme of that g-iand ol)]0(t of oui hoh and pioloiind medita- 
tion, Avhicli IS the only mean-? of om emanei|) ition, and wliuli is 
piesented at once to om mow in the evoidimn of the woik in the 
mystical chaiactem of Om Ta( S(ti=Oti J<1 /.*/ •

The AAoid 0)11 foiming; the initial of the ‘?aid ei)i‘>ni))h ‘Jtinding-The AAoid 0)11 foiming; the initial of the ‘?aid ei)i‘>ni))h ‘Jtinding-

piomincnt at the top of the openin'^* pa£»’e of

2 Ainbiguit} of fmd n^oio than a niultnu moiis

tho-aoidOai , , .

teiin and ambipruous in its aecept.it lon^-, iccpiires

to he ticatcd at ‘^oinc leng'th, in oidei to dl‘:co^el the hidden 
meaning* 1} mg' bmied undei thatnn^tie emblem of the gi.iiul 
aicanum of I3i.ihinanic.il and tJni\ei'-il leligion, from amidst a 
vaiiety of siginfications nliieh aie heajied njxrn it in the sjcied , 
writings and holy speculations of the e.iil\ s.ige=« of ]ndia.

The Sue 1 1 Saa*'

ning dd'4 I So S iiih the Holy sciip-

Om tme

In the beginning was the woid, the rmid was with God, 
and the vo)d was God All this was made bs him, and without 
him was not anything made, that was made and^^ St John 1 ]-.3 
And again says thf* Siuti ^Jlfd I

4 Om, the light . *1 s.

of the 11 01 hi I +tl'=n

THE OM TAT SAT

35

^‘"Tliat Om shone foifch as light, but they leceived it not, 
and hid it m dailmess So the Sciiptme

‘^That was the light of the world, and the light shone ujion 
the woild, hut the woild knew it not &c ” St John, Ch 1, 
V 5 9 10

Again says the Scriptuie, “ God sent one to hear witness of 
the light, that all men thiough him might

,5 Its Ec\ elation Id 1 7 So Bialimd the god levealed

to mankmcl °

its meaning to his fiist begotten son AiJiaivan, 
and atl^aivaii, the Fiajdpati, gave instruction on the subject to 
Ti2)j}aldda, Samfliimcii a and Augna^’ (Webei A S L, p 164; 
Again Angiias, uho communicated it to Saunala, ]xadi obtained it 
fiom Bhaiadidja Satj^avaha, and the lattei again ixova Angn a , 
the jiupil of AiJiaihan, to whom it was levealed by Bialmdj 
himself (Webei A. S L , p 158)

Hence it\s the AiJiana SiUtd B^xajiisZ/ad in winch the in-

, vestigation of the sacied woid Ofti is jnm-

Disquilnion cipally conducted apait fiom those of theHence it\s the AiJiana SiUtd B^xajiisZ/ad in winch the in-

, vestigation of the sacied woid Ofti is jnm-

Disquilnion cipally conducted apait fiom those of the

mdndulga, Maiin and Tdiala Ujianishads 
rV\^eb Id , p 164) These together with then Bhdsliyas by San- 
Jcaia, the Kdiikds of Gandajjdda, and the commentaiies of 
Anandagin on them, aie chiefly devoted to the sciutiny of the 
sacied sjdlable, beside the j^aitial disc|uisition of eveiy othei 
Upainshad and tlieological woik into the hidden sense of this 
mystic woicl 1^'ebei points out tlie Saunaka and Pianava 
IJpaiiishads among the iiumbei (A S L , p 165)

We shall pioeeed in tins piologomena fiist to investigate 
into the oithogiaphical chaiactei and stiuctuie 
Investigation^ Syllable, and then to inqtine into the

designations and etymological synonyms of the 
woid, with the lexical meanings that we can get of them, and 
lastly to ti eat of the many mystical intei pi etatious which this 
single woid is made to beai as a common emblem of them

6 IVorks on its 
Disquisition

7 Mode of oui 
Investigation

II. Orthogeaphy op Om.

»

Fiistly Om with lesjiect, to its name and uttciancc is called

3

36

THE OM TAT SAT

Onkcira^ that la, the nasal On in combination with the adjunct

1 Tlie letter jj^aia (signifying a sound) and meaning" the^letter

On Foi all sounds whethei vocal 
sonant nasal oi not-nasal

articulate or onomatopoeia aie deno- 
minated letteis, as the letteis &c l(^)aie called vowels^

the letters Ka &c consonants, so the nasals An, in

(3EJT?;") &c, as also the maiticulate ones &e , aie aU

letteis , but the Onkaia is the root of all , thus '3^=11(^511 i={i

I I Manu calls it a lettei in the

passage “ This one lettei is the emblem of the Most 'High ” 
II 83. YiHe Dr Mitia^s Ch^hand Up, p 4.

But here a question is raised as to whethei a conjunct vowel

2 A conjunct Let-passage “ This one lettei is the emblem of the Most 'High ” 
II 83. YiHe Dr Mitia^s Ch^hand Up, p 4.

But here a question is raised as to whethei a conjunct vowel

2 A conjunct Let-

or consonant may with piojniety be styled a 
single lettei oi not To this says Di B. L. 
Mitia in a foot-note to his tianslation of the

Ch^hdndog^a Upanishad that It is true that this emblem con- 
veys two sounds, that of 0 and m, neveitheless it is held to l)e 
one lettei in the above sense , and we meet with instances even 
in the ancient and modem languages of Europe that can justify 
such piivileges, such as cci and gm, leckoned single letteis in 
Gieek, and Q. W X in Enghsh and others ” (Ch 1 See 
1 p 4) So is Imidlif in Persian &c The Sanskiit conjunct 
hsha (^) IS consideied a single consonant, when they say, ^

It IS also like eveiy other single oi conjoint lettei of the

3 The Syllable =1^) teimed an alsJima

Om I or syllable, which forms either a woid

by itself when standing alone, or pait of a 
woid followed by an adjunct as 3^, 32 <:}ii< &c , wheie

the fiist IS a woid of one syllable oi monosyllabic term 
and the others as dissyllabic and tiisyllabic w’ords

accoidmg as they aie utteiedby the help of one or moie 
aiticulations of the voice Om ahhaia apait fiom its othei 
signification of the Impei isliaile and thejike, and its symbolism 
of the -Supieme Spmt, is also used in the sense of a syllable

(

t

C

THE OM TAT SAT

37

m tlie original wi’itmgs and tlieh tianslations Thus says the 
JCaf/iqpccms//arl , I

Mann says* ‘'^That which passeth not away is declaied to 
he the syllable om, thence called alshaia He calls it also a 
tiiliteial monosjdlable II SI* So says Mon Wm Om is 
amostsacied monosyllable significant o£ the Supieme Being 
(Indian "Wisdom p 103 note 1;.

0 nidi a likewise indicates the written chaiaeter Om, because

, , the suffix Kdia like Aldia is used to signify

The chaiacfcor ^

Om

its wutten foim 01 sign and in0 nidi a likewise indicates the written chaiaeter Om, because

, , the suffix Kdia like Aldia is used to signify

The chaiacfcor ^

Om

its wutten foim 01 sign and in

this sense the Bengali v2, coiiesponds with 
Gieek character w onipga the inverted 'S, or the Omilioii 
English O, and Oao Peisiaiij and likens to the Sanskiit bindu O, 
which IS butmnothei name of I^K*. But the

vs IS foinied by the union of two dots oi cypheis (O bindu) like 
Gieek Omega of two omicions and the English w of two iPs So 
says the G.-lyatii Tantia, I

And again rtil W'fT

It IS the union of two ciiclets; one being the symbol of 
one’s oivn divinity and the other tliat of Biahma ” This chaiacter 
by itself is legaided with high vcneiation as an emblem of the 
Infinite, mdependant of its meaning oi utteiance, and is maiked 
on the foiehead of eveiy devotee m the foim of a spot oi cieseent

The symbolical Om is lepicsented by four cyiiheis as placed 
ovei one another and each

5 Symbol designated by a dillcient name in the afoiesaid 
' 3 ^ I Tantia, and supposed to foim the cavities of the

heaitand mouth of Biahm, I

wr-ij'rT i s^x4^l5^^

I TisTl'tU'H ii

11 These s 01 cypheis aie diiieiently named in the 
'Veddnta, as we shall .shoitly come to see under the denomina- 
tions of onldia (No. IV)

) ?

f

38 THE OM TAT SAT.

The best repiesentatioii of Om is the image of the god 
JagaiimUha, winch is said to be an incaina-

6 Symbolized as mystic fej HaWo 01

^ ' made m the form of Ovi, and not in that of

Buddha^ as some of our antuj[uaiians liave eiioneously supposed 
it to be Theie is a leaincd disseitation on the subject of 
Jagamiatlia’s lepresenlation of Oiildict' to be found in one of 
the eaily ai tides of the Asiatic Society’s Ilcseaiches^ -wheic thq 
leadei will get much moie light on this m}stciious subject 
It Will fuithei be found on compaiison that heais not 
only a gieat lesemhlnnce to the GiVek on

7 Comparison of as S u itli the nasal above the 0^ but

om and on7 Comparison of as S u itli the nasal above the 0^ but

om and on

then j^cifect agiecment uith each otliei in 
sense ivill leave no ground of suspecting then identity with 
one another, at. it will be tully tieated of aileiwaids.

Ill Thl OiiinLop\ oil Axaiasis oi Om.

We have alieady seen that the cneulai foim of tlic letlei ,0 
^ ^ m Om, called a bnxht dot oi f\])hci, was

used like a geometiical point to denote a monad 
without paits, and lepiesent the Sujneme Being subsisting as 
the eential point of the gieat ciielc of Univcise, and filling the 
infinity of its eucumfeience with Ins onn life and light The 
Vedas and the eaily theology of the Uiiamdiads mvaiiablv 
undeistood the Om as sjuionymous with One, and expic^-cue < 
of the unity of the God-head , as m the motto 
W'lr I J of the Vedantists, coixesponding nith the

monotheistic eieed of Chustiaiis and iMahomedaiis ‘^God is one” 
and “without an equal” Waited llola 8hanl la/to’^ “The 
unity of the God-head is the dictum of the Koian and I'edanta ” 
^Mon. Wm’s, Hindu Wisd p XLI. 1)

The Manduka and similai Upanishads desciihe tlie majesty 
of the one (Wehei, p. 161) “That one bieathed bieatiiloss 
by itselP’ &c Max Mullei’s A. S, Lit p 560

Boiineiiy the lett6r 0 of om, on, and One nas consideied a

2 OmaDuaa to lop.o-

sent a monad or Unity, but in course of

C

THE OM TAT SAT

39

time and with the pi ogress of language it was found out 
to be a compound lettei foimed by the union of a-t-

11 = 0 + and two o^s in w omega or to in w (See S

G-i St Barneys grs) Then the iieifect figuie of the gieat circle was 
consideied to be composed of two semiciicles which the w was 
made to lepiesent This gave rise to the conception of a duality 
m the divine jieison^ and hence giew the theoiy of the male and 
female ysifd m the oiigmal andiogyne of the SanlJiya 
and Ila)a Gauii ( "irlCt and ) of the Tantia.

Hence it is said , IHence it is said , I

^^The syllable ov = on is a woid foi Bialuna (God), and the 
othei cjqihei lepiesents natuie (the woild) Theie is no Biahma, 
but ov = '3^ 01 I The dualism of Sanldiya yoga is too well 
known to lequiie an exjilanation

At a latei, peiiod and posterior to the duahstic doctnnes of 
the aforesaid Tantia and Pdtanjala yoga S 3 ’'S- 
3 ^ Om a Triad ^ ■(; 02 ns, the 0771 blanched out into a Triad by the

iimon of the nasal lettei m oi n ^vith the or w, and foiming the 
conjoined chaiaetei >3^ and nni in Sanskiitand Greek Hencefor- 
waid Onl6j7a is legaided as a triliteial woid composed of 
to rejiiesent a tiiplicate deity Thus says Momei William

^^0)71 IS supposed to be composed of tliiee lettei s A, JI, M, 
which foim a most sacied monosyllable ( significant of 
’the Supieme Being as developing himself m the Tiiad of gods, 
Bialimd, Vishnu and Siva^^ (Indian Wisdom ji. 103 note I) So 
we have m Manu II 83 and 8-1

^ TicTl fd 11

A

So also the Bhagavad Gitd YIII. 13

Here the two halves of the ciicle C3)mpiise Vishnu and 
Siva as joined m the bipaitite body of ]Ia7i Ha7a alias Plara 
Han, adoied by the duklists called , oi more full}’- as

c

40

'THE OM TAT SAT.

Bialima ilie god o£ I^Iann, J*? jdaccd ni Bie 
cadet above tbe gicat cade of las cieated woild We need but 
laiittooiu leadeis ai tbis place, to obseivc liow llic oiiginal 
woid Om 01 Ov and One devdo 2 ied itself into tbe CMstaig faitb 
oftiinity The Tdntiica Sivites however place then god Si\a 
in the npjiei semieii clet f 01 mod by TT = lu the initial of !Mahes\\aia

( 44 ), and say .

5i r=i uu ^ 11

sj ^

This IS moie leasonable to belieie fiom both the lettci 
and its god Siva’s amalgamation with the eaily Ai} an duality 
to foim the jiiesent faith of tiiahty at a much later pciiod.

We next see a fuither piogiess of Om in its dcvdojimcnt

fiom the tiiliteial to a qiiadnhteial foiin, by 
4 Om tho Tetrad , , » j i i r i i.

its assiimjitioii of a cic‘*eent qi Jiali ciiilctWe next see a fuither piogiess of Om in its dcvdojimcnt

fiom the tiiliteial to a qiiadnhteial foiin, by 
4 Om tho Tetrad , , » j i i r i i.

its assiimjitioii of a cic‘*eent qi Jiali ciiilct

( accoiding to the Tantia, oi a half 31dhd ( BU4\ )

of the Vedanta The Tantia says ‘STr^ir, I

The Maitn Upanishad mentions only of ilie thioc Mdlnh of Om

(Ch Sec 3).

“But the Mundak Upanishad” says Weber, “ refers to the half 
Mail'd, (moia), to which the woid Om hero appealing in its full 
gloiy, is entitled in addition to its thiee Mdlids (nioiae) a ii. m. 
This is evidently a latei addition by some one nho did not 
like to miss the mention of the subject m the Atharvana 
Upanishad in which it occuis ” ji ICO Again says he “Tlie 
M^ndukya Upanishad which tieats of the thioe and half Mdiid^ 
of the woid o«i, IS to be looked upon as the leal Mdndukya, all 
the lest IS the woik of the Gandajidda, ivhose pupil Goi inda uas 
theteachei of Sankaidchdiya about the seventh centuiy A U.”

We find next a quinquihteial figuie of Om i:i its component

5 OmtiiePr tad mdti’ds, m, and the hindu

01 the fifth.

And then again mth a sextuple or Hexaliteial Om composed

6 OmtheHexad member of AYtfZij (cii^) over and

above thb afoiesaid five'jiaits.

THE OM TAT SAT

41

The septuple Om is described m the Kamatdpaniya upanishad

7 Om tlie Heptad 
This consists

8 Om the Octad

as consisting of TT,

and «T?T 1 Weberns A S. Lit p 313 
of the aforesaid seven parts^ which together 
with S^nti called in Persian Sdkat complete 
the number, weber Id p. 315.

IV The Different Denominations of Om

)

The om is denominated the heading of the Veda ( )

1 The Initial of Gayatii hymn is termed to be its parent

theYeda ( ) It stands at the top ( )

of eveiy book ( ), chapter and

hymn ) of eveiy Veda eithei alone by itself or two oi three 
oms put together, as on %gnem aiede of the Rigveda, ■3^

I^^TTT On tiisejptem &c of the Atbarvan, again ^ ^ ^ 
^ on I salute thee O Rigveda &c.I^^TTT On tiisejptem &c of the Atbarvan, again ^ ^ ^ 
^ on I salute thee O Rigveda &c.

It is hence used at the head ( rafSfH) of every book on any 
blanch of knowledge ( ) "wbich is a paionym of and de- 
iived from the same root ( Video ) with Veda ( ) The

Tantra calls it as the heading of the Gdyatii vdiich begins with 
the syllable,

It IS called the sacred syllable because it is used m sacied 
2 The sacred writings and ill the sacied Vedic and Sanskrit 
SyHable ^ languages only, and never in the popular

I vernacular tongues, which are known as un-

sacied and impure ( "-it ) Moreover it is used m sacerdotal 
functions of the sacerdotal class (^'*shR^*^cilc«nt) oi legeneiate 
classes of men, and never by the impure ^udia on pain of 
damnation ( ), unless he is 
saciified by investiture of the sacied or sacrificial thread,

( ). Thus says the S^stia,

I 8 *# [

The sacredness of the word Ow, as the expression for the 
VOL. I. ^ a

J>

c

42

THE OM TAT SAl'

eternal position of tilings, is specially empliasised in the Katlia 
Upanishad (Weber, p. 158)

It IS held as the most holy syllable being an appcllatioij of 
the Most High, and must not bentlcicd in

3 The Holy Bjl even by the holy oidois of men

so says the Katha Up, ^‘This is the most holy 
syllable, this the supi erne syllable, ivhosoeiei knoneth this syllable 
gettetli whatevei he desiieth (Cowelks !Maitii Upainshad CIh 
VI S. 4) note

Tins IS styled the mystic S} liable because the most recondite 
and abstiuse doctiines of Biahmanical theism

4 Tho Mystic hidden undei its symbolical gaib, and foim

SyllaWe | foundation of those nondeilnl stiiictures of

the mystic poetiy and philosophy of nations, nhich have been 
beautifully illustiated by Sii W Jones in his “ jMj <?tic Poetiy of 
the Hindus, Peisians and Gieeks It nas this mytlicism nhich 
invited a Pythagoias of old to India Mann says, He knows 
the Veda, who distinctly knoAVS the mystic sense of this Avorcl.^^ 
Chap XI S66.These senses aie lecoramended to be deeply studied by the 
Upanishads themseh’-es, sajung, The ow is a subject of deep 
study^-’ (Web p 1G3), and foims of itself "as anothci tuple 
Veda ” (Manu XI 2G5 j It is enjoined to be caiefully kept m 
seciecy by the Tantias and Smiitis

lir-cd<i.T44cr I

Om again as a symbol of tho eternal position of things

6 The Mj-Sie™,.. piesonts to OS a mys-

syllable IT I, I teiious lound of the mystic dance of myiiads 
^ of spheies, emitting an inaudible sound leach-

ing beyond its utmost limit to the unknoAAm One A\ho sitteth 
above the ciicumfeience of its Ausible hoiizon , oi as the saeied 
mitei expresses it, " He that sitteth on the eiicle of the eaitli ""

Isaiah Chap X 1 The Tantia speaks of its encompassing 
^ewoild,

c

THE OM TAT SAT

■13

6 The sphere of 
Bound f

That om contains within it tlie Aihole spheie of sounds { ) 
IS heautifull}' illustiatcd in twenty slolcas or 
stanzas in an Upani‘?}iad of that name tlie 
I (Webci p 1G5) Itshons 
how the eternal sound om emitted by Bja/nn peivaded thiougli- 
out the UniveisCj and tlie uiannci m which all othci sounds aic 
piopelled b}'- continual \ibiations of an like cunes upon the 
sixiface of watei ( 41(^1 ci ) to the auditoiy of the other

The Vnidii is a Mudid, in Tantia 1

1 Conijiaie the Pythagoiean music of the 'jpheie'’. 
The '^'ejovindu Upanis/tad desciibes Ohi as the souicc and 
^ , focus of luyht m fouitcen slokas. and the ein-

lighfc-^< 3 i^ ♦ I pyiean above it as the abode of puie ineffable 
light ( TT^* ) of God that illumines the

other spheies (Web p 1G5) This light is viewed in the orb 
of the sun and iii hie by their woishijipeis Compaie Milton’s 
hymn to light ^ ^‘'Hail hoi}’- light &c

Again 0;;^ IS teimed the reseivou of immoitalitj* or cndlc'^s 
life ill the Aniiitavindii Upanishad which dts- 
mortaht ciibes it 111 thiity stanzas, to be the eteimd

q£ £]je infinity of lives tliat fills all 
^ animated iiatuie, and is diawii back to itq£ £]je infinity of lives tliat fills all 
^ animated iiatuie, and is diawii back to it

Its ciicunifeience extends to the legions of light and life, and 
beyond it is the legion ef death and daikness In this woid 
theie IS light and life’’ (John 1) I ciei ^18

see WebePs A S Lit pp G9, 15J, 1G5

Theiefoie Ow is called the centie of meditation in the B/ii/dva 
9 Tho centro of Uj)a?iis//ad oi tw'enty one staii/as, w Inch

Meditation 'Sjji.t the coiicenti atioii of oui thoughts to

I thatcentie foi theattainmeiitef peipetual light

and life wdiieh flow' fiom it CWebei ]) iG'i) 
The Tantra takes a -tisa oi Jt^d the Buddhist a clunk in 
the w^all to fix the sight iii medihition

And lastly 0/n is styled the leceptacle of the gieat God, who^c 
essence fills, jieivades, and encompasses Die 
whole oibit of tho Univeise, as it is di'-tnlvd

10 Tho Position 
of

in twbnt^ two slolco'- of the Brahma Vindii-

r

44

THE OM TAT SAT

1 Etymology of 
tlie Om ^

2 Its symbolism 
of B ra li m anism

I

A

Upamshad It is called Bialima MiidifL m the Tantia. (Weher, 
p p. 99, 158, 165).

V Etymology of the Wobd Om.

Having thus fai seen the m^’-steiious natiiie of the letter and 
syllable Om in its Oithogiajilty, we shall now 
eonsidei it as a woid, and see that not a loss 
but much gieatei mysteiy is attached to its 
etymology than has been hithoito thought of by any, and vhieh 
will be found upon examination to be moie insciuLible in its 
natuie than the m3’-sleiies of Eleusis and the inexplicable 
hieioglyphies of the Eg^qitian pncstsThese seciet and sacied tieasuies of Biahmanie enigmas and 
s^mibols, have been caiefull}’^ pieseived by the 
Biahmahood in then cabahstie uiitnigs of 
the Tantias, which sene to be a secuie safe- 
gaiaid of then lehgion amidst t))e lavagcs of 
foreigneis in their libeity and liteiatuio, and loquiie to bo dili- 
gently seal died into foi a thoiough mastei}’- of these mysticisms 
Om IS denommated a woid(;il,c.iJ in the Veda and othei sacied 
seiiptuies, and explained as a noun also (^*-53 1) 
in the Niiulcta and othoi lexicons It is 
deiived in the Koshas fioin the loot aha 01 aia 
to inotect, 01 save with the Uiiaih suffix an anoma- 
lous foimation into om to denote pi oteetion Dr Mitia too

deiives it fiom the ladioal ‘‘to pieseue^^ with the snffix 
to denote the Most High aceoiding to Manu and Gita 
(Tianslation of ChTidiidog3’’a Up p 4 )

Apait fiom the symbolical significations of Om (of vliich 
theie aie seveial as we shall come to notice 
afteiwaids), its piimaiy and hteial sense uould 
make us give diffeient mteipietations of it 
accoidiiig to the deiivation of the teim both 111 its veibal and 
nominal foims ^4=1 as a veib in the impeiative mood means 
“save^^ as ^ &e in the MugdJiahoclha, eoiies- 
ponding with the expiessions, salve salvatoi, salve

Deus, save 0 God &c . c

3 Its denvation

4 Its Prmiaiy 
sense ; |

c

c

(

THE OM TAT SAT

45

But ala to protect or pieseive gives us the nominal

foims of aba, dba, dbu, and dbuka 
6 Its N ominal „ ,

sense meaning a fatbei oi pieseivei

o - in the Prdkiit Speech of Sanskiit dramas, and

these are found to agree in both respects of sound and sense 
with the woids d>l, did, dlu, dluha, al% as dlula &c in 
Hebiew, Chaldee, Syiiac and Arabic languages This gives us

6 The word Om

the oiiginal meaning of of which >3^ is a derivative foim, and 
sliows the close ajSinity which the Aijan loot beais to the Semitic 
both in its sound and signification of “ Father ’’ ( md C and ftf^X ) 
applied to the G-ieat GodBut our question being Om and not the loot we ought 
to know to what pait of speech it belongs and 
what sense we aie to give of it here It is 
said to be a woid indicative of auspicious - 
ness when used at the beginning , ( ey >3^ Jit

) But whethei as a veib or noun oi any other

part of speech, we know nothing of, and we aie utteily at a

loss what woid to substitute for it in its tianslation This is the 
reason why the woid Om, is used by itself m the tianslations of 
Sanskiit woiks by Euiopians and oui eountiymen also for want 
of a propel term, as it is seen in the English versions of Vedas 
and Upamshads

0?7i IS enlisted as an indeclinable woid in giammai having no

5 inflection of its own in gendei, numbei, case

7 An aptot noun i n i

01 peison, and agieeing with all woids in

* its unchanged state, as in the examples.

It IS included in the ( ^<il^3T30r ) as an aptot noun, and with 
indeclinable pai tides ), as an adveib, conjunction and

interjection also with various significations

The anomalous and multmymous paiticle Om was fiist dis-

Mohun Boy to be no other 
noun on letng which as 
is to on ontos the Being 
of Beings A. S Lih pp 331 et g^assim The Latin ens

8 Tlie initial Om

coveied by Bam 
than the paiticipal 
hlax Mullei says

r

4G

THE 051 TAT SAT,

and tlie Fiencli on as i^on, bear close affinity to On and both 
in tbeir sound and sense

Bi Edjendia L^la jMitra bas in one of his woiks pointed out 
the Vedic Om, to coiiespond with the Hebiew 
9 The Fmai Om j^jneii/'’ and this will be found so tiue of the 
I Biahmanical piayeis^ that its coi-

responding* woid Amin invaiiabiy foims the last word of eveiy 
prayei iii Arabic, Peisian and all othei Mahomedan and Semitic 
languages Thus it is to be seen how intimately are both of 
these giand families of mankind connected with each othei in 
the main point of their diffeient cieeds

VI Lexical Meaxings of OmVI Lexical Meaxings of Om

After the etymological and philological mterpietations that we 
... 1 , havebeengivenof thewoidOo/^, itiswoithwhile

mgs attend to its meanings given fn the cm lent

I lexicons f 01 the mfoimation of the majoiity, 
* with whom the evidence of the histoiy of

philology IS of little weight and value Tdidiid.th-’s Sanslait

dictionaiy piesents us with folloiving adverbial

meanings of the woid

The Medimkosha says he, expounds it as an inchoative paiticle 
( ) to mean the beginning of

Parfcidr a thing ( ^MshJT ), and we find it accoidmgly.

1 used in the foim of a pioemial nionogiam at 
the exoidmm of a book oi Vedic hymn, sacred 
nte 01 lectuie, in the Sanhitas, Bi^hnianas and Upamshads 
accoiding to the passage quoted by Tci,ian^tha in his dictionaiy ,

11 It answeis the of the Pmanaand the 
11 Olds now and th^i in English as m the passage of the Katha-

It IS synonymous with hegiiiiiiiig m the Chffidndogya

Lpamshad, wheieupon the poet has well said

rvig-rm^r, i i

t

<

THE OM TAT SAT

47

ICiishna (unlei tli3 conception of tlie identity of his soul 
with that of the Divine), speaks of himself 
° Bhdgavadgitd that, he was the lettei

I o of the alphabet, and the Om of words

This IS shown

in the latest Eiig'hsh translation of the ivoik to be a doctiine 
derived fiom Chustiamty and coiiesponds with the passage 
I am Alpha &e in the book of Revelations (Ch I V, 8) Theie 
IS a similai passage in tlie Koian which saj'-s He (God) is the 
fiist, /lo al aid eoiicsponding with the Gieek” IZo esfeii aiche, 
and tins passage and sometimes its enitial (Gi ) and oui 
is used by ^Moslems at the top and commencement of then books 
and other wiitings. Again like Aljilia of the holy Sciiptme 
we find the use of Alif upon the head of all wiitings 
in UiJu, Pel Sian, Arabic and Ilebiew in daily practice 
Hence it is liaid to say who is the boiiowei, though every one 
will boast itself to be the lendei WebePs papei on the

Rdin Tap Up pp 276, and 360)Rdin Tap Up pp 276, and 360)

The Kosha adds the sense of auspieiousness and piospeiity 
( ^ above, and this as we have

Pflifcic^o aheady obseived foims like the names of gods,

the iintiatoi}’' vocable of meiitoiious under- 
takings

says the Cbfiidndogyd, ‘As also piospeiity ” (I, 8 ) To this the 
scholiast Sankara says, “the lettei Om is called piospeiity, 
because it is possessed of the piopeity and attribute of juosper- 
it}'’ The pi ospeious alone can 2 )ass the woid Ow” (Chh uji Ch 1,

p 8)

Its use IS not confined to the sacied and antiquated language 
of Vedic wilting and the lituigy, but is to be met with in the 
classic Sanskiit of ancient baids and modem jioets Thus 
we have m the Riimd, 3 ^ana of oui author ( <i44le)3!r

In this sense we discover a curious 
affinity of the Aiyan Om with the Semitic Amaii Amdn and 
Aman, as in the Persian phi ase Aimmi hidd coiiesponding with 
'3^ or I

48

cr; ‘”-« c*. '’- - ^:::. i-!

' “«aa„ee of ^ ‘ie d-o ®'«fe‘>ono , tie

of fie*^ Z*® “®o t(,r‘^^''^ ®J'ffaiJe"^S‘"“ P‘°»on,J°f^ oiid

‘ie Ppaniiad'"^ *“^o ^‘lrf>o«

fieteT"®o So„p. "5 "'ieje ,t ’ y

"ac^oLt^r-d V Jf.o.

. «.'Cr' > 5;.:; « 4*fc' i«,°: "-'

j a22(7 22 of /O ” ^®Ses o?)OY ' 2 D f 7 Hiesn

. , • "“•«.. f' '*»* c*-; « *«-

11 ®-^0O72Dn, P

c, Y mt/, J ^STT ^ '•’ " ^nt

^tk^rri) TVJ ^ ^ Pi <=^^'0272 t/j

--e Of ,i4-ioti, «-ooe o, / ,

" --a,;, . "'’^OYe,"

> 4 r ^ P^iiich.

P^a2se^ f ^^^iiava ^i7s

^^'?'» * qy ,-7 ^^ODi f7,. ^of.

^70, f,„77.e 5 ^^. « *4

t- ^ C^T^rf ‘^0 tie i/°'aod,

' a. Yo®,^''osfe, « »,„?®’^oa.

“f fie yea!‘‘l^> aad

THE OM TAT SAT

49

woiksj aifeciions 8cc^ and having the appellation of Pianava^'’ 
(see momei WilhanPs Wisdom of the Hindus p 103;^ so says 
Gauda 2 )dda in his K^iika In the foimei senscj Pianava cones- 
poncfs with hallehti/as and hosaimas of Chiistians^ and hmid 
0 Salant of Moslems^ which aie deemed sacied by then votaiies 
The Kdiika has the follomng stanzas on it

1111

It IS used in a 25ei missive sense both m Vedic and classic 
Sanskiit^ and ex 2 )iessed in English by the 
7 A Permissive wOlds “ on go on^^ and the like We

Pai tide

have an instance of it in the Mdgha K^vya^ m 
the 2iassage;, d) lirci^jTT'g d J-

“Veiily tins is an mjmictive term b signifying

mjiinetionj oider, and whatevei is enjoined,

^ Aranjunctive ultimately the lettei Om ’’ (Cldhandogya

^ Upamshadj The schohum (iWMj; exjilains

it by saying that, Whatevei is enjomed by the learned oi 
wealthy legaiding learning and wealth, it is done by saying 
« Om ” (Ibid I 8 p 8 )

It beais also the sense of assent and consent (

meaning '^aye” “yea” and

8 A Particle of «yeg«^and 111 Bengali and Veinaculais

and So says SankaidiChaij^a “What-

ever is assented to by the learned and wealthy, it is done by 
sajnng “ Thus in the Vedic tiadition, Yd,jnavalkya

having been asked by Sdkalyaas to how many gods theie weie, 
said , “ Thiity-thiee.” Sakalya assented by saying “ Om ” 
Among modem wiitmgs, the S^hitya Daipana cites the follow- 
ing instance of (9»i being used in this sense ^^tdi

^•Mdi ^wrfsT^i fh«id4qT Pal

It IS used as the mleijectional 2 >aiticle ex 2 nesRive of

VOL I II

f

THE OM TAT SAT

10 Do of Eatify-

lopGlIing* 01 (liivni^ off anotliei from oiio like Avannt 
111 Eiiglifeli meet with an instancG

9 A Particle of ^ the Vetala

. Panchavmsati of Lassen (VI.) Thus,

It occuis in the sense of confiiination at tlie end of hymns 
and inayeis in the Vedic wiiting:s, and coiies-

10 Do of Eatify. Amen ” and “Amin’/

I conclusion of Chiistian and Aloslem

sennons and piayers as we have said long before. We have a 
veise of Hafiz to this effect, where he says h'^hiow 0 hoffo

t e “ Hear and say amen There are many instances of it in 
the Upanishads, such as burr'd; ■srrf'Ti; ^ and

so in the Ga-yatii hymn which begins and ends with Om, agieeably 
to the precept which says , ^Rjini I

'Sr^T 1 c(*cJ* Ic

VII. The Nominal Meanings of 0 }/kso in the Ga-yatii hymn which begins and ends with Om, agieeably 
to the precept which says , ^Rjini I

'Sr^T 1 c(*cJ* Ic

VII. The Nominal Meanings of 0 }/k

Besides the meanings already given of Om as a paiticle, theie 
, ,, , ,, are many othei nominal significations attached

1 Nominal Mean- ... n ,

mgs of Om to it as 3 Significant noun or latlier symbol to

j express ceitain attiibutes belonging to the

natuie of the Deity, that beai little oi no con- 
nection Avith the etj'-mology of the woid

Om IS used to denote the creative powei of God in Sankaia's

2 Om the Creator This sense IS had fiom the inimordial

^ ^ "^^ei ed 
" by God m Ins creation of the woild, as we have

^ m sciiptuie And god said, Let there be and there was^^ 
Latin Fiat-ef-fif , and Aiabic Korn fa Kdna

Pdtaiijala takes it as denotative of God himself

3 OmisGod Vld^cn;, and otlieis as a denotation

I of j the Supieme God i

^ VX I Kidds':! dlAHW

I

1 Nominal Mean- 
ings of Om

^•5j\ 4: i

2 Om the Creator 
^ -1

3 Om IS God

I

c

THE OH TAT SAT

SI

4 Om 18 Bralim

5 Greatness of

Bialim

♦ ^

Om IS the veibal symbol of Bialim signifying the Univeisal 
spiiit <s^ 1

so says the Katha Upanishad spj'^ I

This meamng is obtained fiom ^=on signify- 
ing or existence, and refeiiing to the totality of existence 
expiessed by the woid Brahma (foimed of nmveisal

j)ei vasion.

^ Om IS used also to denote the vast magnitude of Biahm

} m the Maitii Upanishad, which says 
Om IS the greatness of Biahmaii, sa 3 '^s one who 
continually meditates theieon/^ (See CowelFs 
Tianslation of Id. IV- 4 p. 253). This idea 
IS natuially suggested by the infinity of the Universe peivaded 
and encompassed by the spiiit of God. «ci*

I ci*d* 1 The Ch^hdndogya Upanishad

speaks of th-e greatness and effects of Om (I 9) . To this the 
schohiim laises the question, what are its gieatness and effects ^ 
Then answeis it by saying , “ by the gieatness of Om is impliedspeaks of th-e greatness and effects of Om (I 9) . To this the 
schohiim laises the question, what are its gieatness and effects ^ 
Then answeis it by saying , “ by the gieatness of Om is implied

the existence of piiests, the institutions of saciifices &c. &c. 
Theiefoie is its gieatness.”

Om” says the IMandulcya Upanishad, “ is the means (symbol)

„ „ leading to Biahm,” as a heiioglvphic chaiac-

€ Omistlicway ^ r. / tt

to Brhama sigiiilicate Here says the commenta-

I tor Anandagiii (p 336 )

t It is known in all the Yedantas as the best means towards 
the accomplishment of oner’s adoiation ” (Chfii^-ndogya Upanishad 
p 5 note)

It IS immutable, undecayable, impeiishable, indestiuctible and 
immortal Thus m the Mandukya,

7 Imimitiabls & — c' * -c r* c . mi

W'tiR <r^d iHdJilR I The 
circle of O is consideied the most perfect of all 
geometrical figures, as it was held by the Pytha- 
goreans to be the best symbol to represent ^e perfections of the 
Supreme Being It is the sign of divine immutability from the fact 
of every olhei figure changing its shape by its constant lotation

Impeiishable

I

THE OiM TAT S VT.

OJ.

Om K.iow iblo

louud llio ccnlvc tmd becoming a s|Knoul nbiob no m.no mi- 
eoptvble of olwngo. Such is tlio change iblo mitnie of all tlmo;>^ 
until they boeomo one w ith the Du inity.

0/-V the svinbol of God is snd to be the knonahle, beenue 
eveiv put of its onomnfeionee eqnululani 
, fioin the cential olweivei {?o u God ^ud to

^ ^ be know-iible ( ) in Vo^ i philovo}>h\ for

his knowiiblenes^ to evevv one by luoui'^ of mediiilmn. llemv 
the Yoe,\ svsteni is eilled gnosticism eonti ii v to the nnknow ible- 
iies^ of ag noibiii

0//’ IS ciillod eternal ( )« beeinse its ciionlav loim m tlie

0 w lepiesentation of cteinitw huing neithei its

b Etoi J 1 * n

beginning nor end ) ''O it tiie

svmbol of inlinitv, the ciielc being' deseiibcd b\ an 11111111 to line. 
Thus Gaudap'ida, 1

1 I

Again Om is slid to be the fii^t and lisl of all thiinr''.beginning nor end ) ''O it tiie

svmbol of inlinitv, the ciielc being' deseiibcd b\ an 11111111 to line. 
Thus Gaudap'ida, 1

1 I

Again Om is slid to be the fii^t and lisl of all thiinr''.

because, says Tdidndtha. ever\ thing pioeeinD 
fioin its centie as itssoiiiee, and lotiinw to tint 
centi e as its 1 esei \ oir. t 1 T1 ^ ^ *-n

ci(S^ 1 -ijlfiTiTpf) , 01 that even* thing like the line of the

ciiele meets .it the sime point fiom wheie it is dmnn and sti etch- 
ed !Moieover Om as has been .iheidv siid. is med both as the 
initial .lud final ivoid of ^Maiituis and puiveis. so it is nndei-iood« 
to be the begnining and end of all motions and nttei ineo'? In 
these souses it misivei-s the A/j}/u7 and 0, ra of the Eeioluioo. 
aiivl the hiAmti andy< ;e, ; //o.?/ Iloa/ u j of the Ivoi.ui.

But 0/^ IS deekned .igiin to be the liist Int uid niuDt of

thing's, fi omits being utieied in the beginning. 
10 Tliorii-st L\st ,,, 3 1,' , , .

nudeivdst. middle and end ol pi.iyei'^ uid leeitoD of s-.o-

led hymns aeeoiding to the oidinanee wliuh

seys that 0/’ is to be lope.ited tliiiee n even*

1 coital ill the beguuuug, middle mid end t*ng*

oxT I rills rule is siid to beis.' reference to the tiiple

P Tko Fiivt A, id 
List

*i

<

THE OM TAT SAT

53

state of the pi egression of moital beings^ then evolution, 
sustentation and dissolution

I 11 The tuple uttei-

ance of Om has given use to the tiiplieate invocation of Haii,

jfl'M'H, and with what Milton has 
exjiiessed in his gloiious hymn in the Paiadise Lost 
Him fiist. Him last, Him midst, and Avithout end 
'’The leveiend Gaudajiada enjoins the same oidinanee in Ins vei- 
sified eommentaiy oi Kdiikd to the hldndukya Upamshad, Avheie 
he saj'^s (veise 37) wIt 1

VIII Application op Om in the Vedas and Vedanta

O veneiable, let me entei thee (viz the woid Om) the sheath 
of Biahma, swah^ O veneiable do thou entei 
me, swahti O veneiable, I shall be puiified 
by tliee (Taittiiiya Up IV 3)O veneiable, let me entei thee (viz the woid Om) the sheath 
of Biahma, swah^ O veneiable do thou entei 
me, swahti O veneiable, I shall be puiified 
by tliee (Taittiiiya Up IV 3)

Om, the hymns of the Sd-ma Sing, Om, Som, the hymns 
2 Tlie Burden of pioclaim

1 Pi anava= Ad- 
orable

ff I

song,

<c

4 Beginning

By Om, the Adhwaiju gives his leply By Om the Biahm^' 
3 Commanding Commands," By Om he gives his oideis for 
and assenting -(jPg burnt offeiing (Ibid VIII Anuvdk)

Om, says the Biahman, when he commen- 
ces to lead the Veda ’’ (Ibid)

“ Om IS Biahman, it is immoital, it is light, it is tiuthful, and

5 Om IS Multiny- a poitioil of holy light 
mous

It IS the sun, the tiuthful, the Yajus, devotion, fiie, wind and

It is the moon, stiength, immortality, and the means of 
attaining Biahma-’" (Maitii Upamshad VI 35) >3^51'^

I I

c

54

THE Oil TAT SAT

But apaifc fiom ali the paiticulai objects to wbic]i this woid 
IS seveially applied, Om is found fiom its 
6 It isaiisigm- g^nse of being at laige, to be

significant of “all things, as its aichitypo 
Biahruan is made to stand for univeisal existence both collective- 
ly as ivell as singly ( 2 ?^ pci stuff ii'lcitiiii), as it is said in the

Mandukya Upamshad,

rrt=tileildld ci<^Mi>'0,rT <L^\\

“ says the Siuti, “ is immoital Its explanation is ‘ this 
all ” , what was, what is, and what will be, all 
fcLn^r veiily the woid “Om”, and evciy thing

else which is beyond the thice fold time is also 
veiily the woid For this all (lepiesented by “Oni^^ is

Brahm, and Biahm is “alP^ (Mdndukya Upamshad Bhashya 
veise 1 and ^). I

Accoiding to Sankaia^s explanation the lendeung would be as 
follows this sound (or immoital) is this

“ All,^^ and its explanation is “ what w'as, what 
is, and 'ivill be, all is verily the woid “Om ” 
(Sankaia^s Bhashya of the above). Anandagii^s exiilanation is to 
the same puipoit, thus says he

VfdtrPd WW 11

8 Scholium on the 
aboveVfdtrPd WW 11

8 Scholium on the 
above

IX. TheologtY of Oji in the Monads of Monotheistic Cheeds.

We have seen that Om expresses all things (Saivamonkaia), by 
1 Monads or Fm- the wold like its kindled Uieek and

ties I ^taoii), signifying ‘‘a

being” by synecdoche (lavaud) of a iiait for 
the whole And this is done of all things whethei conciete or 
disci ete and taken eithei singly or by gioups of two 01 moie 
things togethei; a^ it is said Masadmsastiisas” %ce , t e. 
Siitffidattm, dmlitei , plni altfei &c We shall fiist come to see 
the monads expiessed by Qm and leave to the reader to discover

C

y

THE OM TAT SAT

55

2 Om IS speech or 
voice I

3 Oin IS sound and

TVOld

4 Om IS Brahm 
<3^ I*

tli8 1 elation wliich. the sigmfieates may bear to the symbol, oi 
lest satisfied with the idea of then being meaningless oi aibitary. 
Om, says the Siuti is Saivavak ^‘^all voice and speech and we 
shall come to see below that it is applied alike 
to denote both human and biute speech, 
and woids belonging to all the diffeient paits

of speech.

^^All things aie united with woids which expiess them, and all 
woids are contained in the mystical syllable 
Om, +11 Pi*) Om, peivades all

^ sounds, he uses above all objects which aie

expisssed by sounds, who lepeats this sound Om^^ ('ch'’hdndogya 
II 23 (Mai til 253)

Om IS Biahman called sound {sahcla) By means of Om 
using above all things, a man meiges m the 
Supieme called Paia Brahma Om is the 
emblem of the Most High ” fCVhd.ndogya p 4 
Manu IT 83 Bhagavad Gitd). So says the Maitii Upamshad 
(VI. 22) I I

“ Om was splendour and fire at fiist By this syllable Om the 
splendour germinates, it shoots upwaid, it

5 Om IS File and ^ ^ i i

lbs splendom expands, and becomes the vihicle or divine

woiship The splendom geiminates in the form

of the mystic syllable Om, as a seed geiminates,

2 <? It IS manifested as the pumival foim of the Veda, it next

shoots upwaid as the inteiiial sound Om itself fMaitri Up.of the mystic syllable Om, as a seed geiminates,

2 <? It IS manifested as the pumival foim of the Veda, it next

shoots upwaid as the inteiiial sound Om itself fMaitri Up.

VII. 11 cT^ I

I ^xr I Hue was the fiist object of adoration

of the Bigveda and of the file woishipjiers of India and Beisia

It is believed to be the a/c/i^e or beginning of all things accoidmg

to Heiaclitus

Om IS light and manifest as light, the sleepless, deathless 
„ „ , ,, and soiiowless light” Again, Om is light

^ which shines in yonder sunf and in the moon,

file, and lightning” (Maitri Upamshad VI. 
25 ) So says the Bh?lgavad Gitdi, • That splendom which

a JIK OM TA1 SVT

abuliiig’ 111 ilic Min illuininc? (lie mIioIo wliidi in tlic

moon and in fhc, lh.it spleiuhmi Know to licinine^^ (X\ Id ) 
Light was the hist work of cuMinm and llio "In-.! iron ” of 
Heaven God said Lux Jia( c( Im Jil "JjcI lliei.- ho')i-]d 
and thcie was Iig'lit.”

3T-=«2cflciH=? I im, I

^^The X^eda is called lightening, ‘^^U’(• the inornont ulnn it l-^ 
utteied (a^ Om), it enlightens {\et i, nwojjfMr’- 
/ OmibL^h^u being-, theiefoie b\ the s\ll,ible {)j h t .i

man adnie the infinite s[iIfndoui of JJt ibm ut 
(Maitii Upnishad \n 11 )

-dM 'QIU I

“The syllable Out is the Biahman light or pine intelhg. re •*,

% died behindthe lire and breath, ind ininift -!» I 
S Om 13 the t m»und G.

Brahmnn li"ht

ihns the Xlaitri Upinidiad 'IbK.t (VII 1!) 
“Om shines in the water-^” Afaitii rpinishad VI .Ti'.

9 Om IS Whaler q 1 <1^^ t

I l^jH7U^-3ilHnl';lUjP4qT^lM;|Tt"n

ci^'tir 1 Walei IS s.ud to be the fir-t woik ol Go I ( g 
1) “and the Sjinitof God fi()al(‘d i»n tin* suiKue of tie- 
w-ateis” hence called tGene-is and Xtanu) 'I’h ilt-. lotind

water to be the oiigin of all things

“Om IS 7?^sa, moistuie, fiavoni, tiste, i.dish and hne fXIaiiri

10 OmisFlavom ^ 1'he goodness of God Is {| i\ ou» . .i

haling attained fhumuj bennm*^ pu-- .-.^t.d 
^ ' of loy^^ (Taittirha Up IT 7) ^3^^ T^U'n^ I

<tc. 7T-4 q-./r, ^rnV-A'410 OmisFlavom ^ 1'he goodness of God Is {| i\ ou» . .i

haling attained fhumuj bennm*^ pu-- .-.^t.d 
^ ' of loy^^ (Taittirha Up IT 7) ^3^^ T^U'n^ I

<tc. 7T-4 q-./r, ^rnV-A'4

xmw\ I By flavoin i a <i<, iliey mean lo\ e .iKo and hn e is b, lu«% i d 
to be the foimativc pow ei- aecouling to Lmpodm les

t

THE OM TAT SAT

57

Orn IS ambrosia tlie food of gods (Gr He anibrosia est

11 Om IS Am- setos t/ieoii). It IS also boney and all sweet ”

brosia So the ^luti, ^cic=i id I Hcfl

12 Om Udgitha Om, this letter the Udgitlia^ should be

I adoied, Om IS cbaunted ” (Cb-’handogya I 1)

“TbeUdgitba of Sama Veda^ coiiesponds with ^ojoranava 
of the Big Veda (CoweFs Mait VI. 3)

“ The Udgltha is the piineiple part of the Sd,ma verse^ and 
sung by Udgatii piiests ”

“It IS ehaunted (Udglyateb and is theiefoie called Udgltha 
and is a Kai mdngdva^ava oi jiait of the liturgy ”

“ What is IJdgitha_, that is Om , what is Om, that is Udgltha 
IMaitil Ch’chd,ndogya).

13 Om IS breach Om called the Udgltha is breath/^ (Ch^hdn- 
'3^ ^ Wt I dogya Upamshad p 12).

u Omissun. “The suu IS Om, Om is Udgltha, the sun 
I is Udgltha, he is Om ” (Maitil IV 4)

“ The splendoui of Brahman is yondei sun, and it too is the 
splendour of Om"" (Ibid) I

^ Cs ^

^d ^t^^or';^l{^dj; I I

^ A

“ The soul is looked upon as Om "" (Ch"h^ndogya Upamshad.

p 12) “For this all lepiesented by Om is 
Biahma This soul is Biahma "" (Mandukya 
V 2). ^<=1 'AdcH

15 Om the soul

“ Om is the most appropiiate name for the Supieme Spirit 
16 Om the Sup- gmt amdtman” (Ch"h^ndogya I 1) .“ The

reme spirit Umveisal soul IS the totality of individual

'3^ M I souls "" ( mfz ) .

17 Om IS Mind Om IS mind manas, the self consciousness or

I a/rnnkaia oi the Sdnkhya"’’ (Ibid p 3).

18 Om 18 Body ^ , ,, ,

^ , “ Ow 3S coipoieal " ,(Ch h^ndogya p 3).

VOL I

58

THE OM TAT SAT

“The letter Om is eulogised for its adorahleiies'’^ and is 
19, Om 13 Ador- ail inducement to its woisliip (Cli'lidndogya 
ablo I I 9 p. S).VOL I

58

THE OM TAT SAT

“The letter Om is eulogised for its adorahleiies'’^ and is 
19, Om 13 Ador- ail inducement to its woisliip (Cli'lidndogya 
ablo I I 9 p. S).

20 Om a Vohiclo

I

Om IS a Raft

21

-'5',

22 Om an arron

^ ai<: I

23' Om a Bridge

I

“ Om IS the vehicle of the ivoiship and tciiow- 
ledge of the supeiior and infeiioi Biahma/^ 
(Maitii Uj) 2G0)

“ Om IS a laft of Biahman to cioss ovci the 
ton cuts of the uoild^^ (Swctitswataia 11. 
8 p 53;.

“The body is the bow, Om is the aiimv, uitli which ono 
picices the maik Biahnia thioiigh chukness 
-^KW fyi*sira

And so Om is used to lepicsent many other 
single objects, (hlaitii Up p 271)

It is represented as a budge in the Athaiva <Vcda (VI 10 
and VIII 4;

X. Duads or Duples op the Bipartite Om in Ulalistic

Theories.

“ Om unites couples togethei and giatifies the wish of the 
„ , „ adorei (Ch^lidiidogya I G) Again “ couples

I being incorpoiated witli the lettei Om, establish

the all-giatifj'ing powei and attiibute of Om ** 
(Sankaia^s Scliolium to Cli^httiidogya)

Om combines tlie Udgttha of the Sdma nith thcy;;rt?mm of 
^ ^ the Rig Veda, tlie hist coiijile, and theiefoic

UdgithaAPrnLr Uc:yi\x (pidna)thc soiiices

I Sdma, the second coujilc, and

lastly the said two Vedas themselves as the

third couple (Ch’hdiidogya I 1-8), and conscc]uently the Ilotii

and Udgatii jiiiests the fouith couple

Om IS the supeiioi and infciioi Biahma conjointly The

siipeiioi 01 Paia B'ialima is the one eternal 
2 Brahma and ti fi/.i tit p »

Para Brahma iiiniiite Uod, and the iniciioi or Kpaia

I BoaJimd is the liiiite God the demiuige of 
Plato, and the Binjdjmii and India of Vedanta

C

THE OM TAT SAT

59

tlieolog-j The Aitareya leclcons the iientad of the five element- 
aij'- boclies_, uiiclei the lattei categoiy (V 3). Kdhddsa speaks of 
this as the paiicha ynaha hhuia saniddhi iii the fiist book of his 
Rag-hu Vaiisa

3 The two pio Om IS pioiiounced as svaja/i m the Eigveda3 The two pio Om IS pioiiounced as svaja/i m the Eigveda

nunciationr. and Svaia ill the Yajiii Veda (Chfiicindogya

IV 4. Maim XI 265).

• Oni IS dtiiiaii oi soul Two souls aie said to eiitei the body,

4 The Human & the individual and the undivided oi univeisal

Divmc Souls goal ” (Alt III 1). '^Two biids (the supieme

and individual souls) dwell upon the same tree 
of the bod}'' (Sveldsvataia Upanishad).

Om IS both spiiit and mattei*,^^ viewed as the same thing

5 Tho Soul nud

Matter

111 the matei lalistie light of the Sankhya, and 
duahstic view of otheis Spinoza difines them 
both as the Snbsianita cogiians, et snhstanUa 
cxfeiisa, una cademqxie csi subsianiia, quae jam

sub Jioc, jam siih illo ait)ibuio (Ethics 1 Pr.

7 schol)

“ Om SiiijnmiXiQ divine male and female , the oiigmal an- 
diogjTie or bisex being combmd m the peison 
° human bemg, Biahm;^ oi Adam,

I called the Piahiit-jniiusha or piadhdna

&Cj in the Yoga and Puiamc Systems So 
says IManu also (I, 32) The powei became half male half 
female oi iiatuie active and passive, and divided itself in twain 
(Ibid).

7 Tlio cause and 
effect

The subtile

8 The Two Ele- 
ments

“ Om implies the two states of mundane 
existence, viz, the cause dynamic and the effect 
eneig}'' The effect also is two fold, the gioss 
.and subtile ” ( )

C\ ^

elements ( ) and the gioss elements

( <aU^ifl(d=ti ) forming the ^thula oi gioss body 
and the huga Saiiia oi subtile body, — the two 
compdnent paits of, all living bodies

60

THE OM TAT SAT

The two states of the soul, knowledge and ignorance

9 Knowledge ^ r=i J I ) and the two states of knowledge , name-

ignorance ly that which is known ), and ^ what

I IS unknown ( 'dylh -slid ), coi responding with 
two otheis the ( ) the manifest and unmanifest

Knowledge and action or Jndna and Karman, theory and 
piaetice, aie the two inseparable conditions of

10 The two states ^ leading to the other, which Ts

of Life c):^^ lesult of the former, and accoidmg to10 The two states ^ leading to the other, which Ts

of Life c):^^ lesult of the former, and accoidmg to

1 otheis its cause, in the celehiated dispute

'ot’ij between theoiists and prac-

titioneis

11 Other Pairs

12

Om

Geometry of

In this way many othei pans aie joined togethei forming as 
they weie the two halves of the gieat circle 
of Oni) and whether diametrically oi obversely 
opposed 01 attached to each other, they form togethei, the same 
circle of which each of them is but an imperfect part or 
half.

Hence we see the mystery of the cypher of Om to be no less 
wonderful and elRcacious in the investigation 
of theological truths, than the gieat instrument 
of Euclid'’s compass in the bisection and 
measuiement of geometrical dimensions And 
as the circle is latterly found to be made use 
of in the demonstration of propositions in 
Logic, how much must we wonder to reflect on the use and 
application of the saeied instrument of Om by the ancient 
Kishis of India, to all tlungs of the ph/sicul, intellectual 
and spiritual world {^Saivamonhaia eva) as then common 
measure

13 Logical Use 
of Om

Having thus observed the deficiency of dualities and theimpei- 
feetion of duahstic theories, by the instiument- 
14 Dualism over- akty of Oin, and the application of its cypher 
thrown ^g -^Lem, to make up that unity which

is essential to the tlue knowledge of God,

THE OM tat sat

61

whose nature is a perfect unity and without diAusibility 
(Ekaiuevd,dwitia)_, the sages next pioceeded to the investigation 
of tiialities and pluialities of tiiune doetiines and so foith, 
which had been gaining giound even in those eaily stages of 
society, by the application of the same test of the unity of Oni 
to them, tdl at last all these paititions aie lost in the cypher of 
One indivisible whole.„ Om in the sense of a compass oi nietiieal mstiaimeiit, is derived 
15 Tlio Metrical fiom O the cj^ihei, lettei oi eiicle, and ma to 
Sense of Om measure, meaning the ciicle of measuiement

XI. Triads oh, Triples or Tripartite Om in Trinitarian

Systems.

“ But ivhen considered as a tiiliteial ivoid consisting of a, u, m,

1 Triads or Tn- implies, the thiee Vedas, the

pies of Om states of luiraan natuie , the thiee divi-

sions of the Univeise , the three deities, 
agents of the thiee states of things the cieation, pieseivation 
and destiuctiou , or piopeily speaking, the thiee piinciple attii- 
butes of the Supierae Being. In tins sense it implies in fact the 
Univeise contioled by the Suineme Being ” Biim Mohuu Boy.

The idea of the tiiseetion of the ciicle of Om followed that of

its bisection, togetliei with that of the threefold 
2, Thoir External , „ „ i

Manifestations division ot Uivine iiatuie, much eailiei in the

j minds of the Aiyans of India, than the thiee

sectors of the ciicle iveie unfolded by Euclid, 
and the mysteiy of the tii-une natuie of the Divinity ivas dis- 
covered by the divine Plato, or that of the thiee jieisoiis in the 
God-head was revealed by the Gospel But not content iviththis 
discovery, the ancient sages applied tins tiiplicate division of Oni 
to many other things as the thiee fold manifestations of the 
One Deity lepresented by the tiiliteial and trilateral figure 
of Om, and fell to their adoiation, until they weie recalled to the 
worship of the invisible unity of Om by tlfe Veddiita doctunes 
We shall now see these tuples called the Vydlnitis }

or three fold manifestations in their mdei

62

THE OM TAT SAT

Om represents the three Vedas hy its three letter s, viX' , the 
Rik, Yajui and Saman, consisting of the

1 rnsveag Ceiemomes and Psalms The^ fiist

♦ |^ 2 ,g hymns of Hesiod and Oipheus, theOm represents the three Vedas hy its three letter s, viX' , the 
Rik, Yajui and Saman, consisting of the

1 rnsveag Ceiemomes and Psalms The^ fiist

♦ |^ 2 ,g hymns of Hesiod and Oipheus, the

second like the Levitiean laws, and the thud lesemhlmg the 
Psalms of David, all of which aie said to be of Divine oiigin 
These have no apposite teims m English, and are vaiiously ren-

2 The 3 States del ed to expiess the states of quietism, action and

>3^ passion or excess of a feeling, leading to eiioi

The eaith, sky and heavens, called the three gieat evolutions

3 The 3 Worlds ( ) of Om Put these wfire after-

^ wards subdivided into twenty one (3x7)

* ' each named as Om ( '8^ ffltiTf ) as in the

beginning of Athaiva Sanhita >3^ r(^«d vfF ^ i; “ The

Universe composed of thiice seven woilds

These are the cieation, pieseivation, and destruction of all 
things ( ', 01 as philosojihi-

4 The 3 states of^ cally called their evolution, sustentation and

toga and then

agents, Biahmd the creator, Vtsimii the pieseiver, and Siva the 
destioyei of each and all, coiresponding with Jupiter, Neptune

6 The 3 Agencies Pluto , and Osiiis, Holus and Typhon

Personified ( tJiTtiU,!;) But this tiimty IS lefuted by

^ * the Veddntic doctiine of unity, which lejiu-

diates a secondaiy cause ( 'ferf^T

) The Maitii Upamshad makes mention of many 
moie tiiads which weie gloiified with the aforesaid hallowed 
epithet Om (VI 6 ) Viz the following

0»2 composed of the thiee gendeis, mascuhne, feminine and

1. The TnsexDi- Veddnta lefutes

vinity geiieiic distinctions of the One unknown

The file, wind and sun, ), the thiee poweiful niani-

2 Tlio 3 Element f (dotations of the Deity each of which had its vota-

lies 111 the eaily fiie, wind and sun woishippeis 
of India . ‘

THB OM TAT SAT

63

Tlie cieatioiij preservation and destiuction o£ things m the 
3 Tlio 3 Agencies foinis Bialimd, Vishnu and Siva as said 
as above ahove.

4 Tlie 3 Flies

r. The 3 Yeilns

ITHB OM TAT SAT

63

Tlie cieatioiij preservation and destiuction o£ things m the 
3 Tlio 3 Agencies foinis Bialimd, Vishnu and Siva as said 
as above ahove.

4 Tlie 3 Flies

r. The 3 Yeilns

I

G The S Intelli- 
gences

Om the tlnee saciificial fiies called the 
and which weie

continually pieseived m families

Om the tuple learning contained in the Rik, 
Yajus and Sdnian, which weie identified with 
God foi then being his woids

The tlnee Intellectual faculties consisting of 
the Mind, Intellect oi Reason, and the cons- 
cious soul

7 The 3 Times Picscnt, past and futuie composing the 
fcictiivi I ciiclc of the cleinily of Om ( )

Food and watei and moon The u.itci and food aie eulogised

8 The 3 Alnnonls

1

as Om 111 Bhiigu Valli as and the

moon is leclconed as such for its containing 
the amlnosial bcveiagc of the gods

9 The rilcntal The tlnee intellectual faculties, the mind,

rm\oi 8 intellect and ooiiciousncss as .the spiiitual

I manifestations of the Invisible Spiiit

Tho<=e of rcspnation, ciiculation and secietion called mi *t

10 Tlio til re 0 the lespiiatoiy bicatli 01 an and otheis :

Vital Airs tlieic aie two otheis which with these thiee

I will be found among the pentads ( )

These aie the diffeient hypostases of God oi lathei of the

11 The tlnee feet 
of God fdMKi;!

Divine soul in its tlnee states of univeisality, 
individuality and external appeal ances, each 
of which IS subdivided into thiee states

The Sutidtma, Taijaiia and Ilnanyagaibha (uiiiveisal soul)

( et IcH I Jinf *.) , The tin ee emanations

The 3 Totals infinite Intelligence fiom the Unity of God.

The Visva, Taijasha, and Pia]nd (Indmdual Souls) ( 1 %’^ 
13 ThctlneeSpe- liWT ) The tliiec emanations of finite

cihIb souls tiom Divine Intelligence

' 64

THE OM TAT SAT

The Vaisw^iiara^ Visvaiupa and Viidt the three manifest and

14 The thiee ev- Visible foims j ft OH" ) Hcnce

ternals the natuie of God is a tiiplicate thieefold' 64

THE OM TAT SAT

The Vaisw^iiara^ Visvaiupa and Viidt the three manifest and

14 The thiee ev- Visible foims j ft OH" ) Hcnce

ternals the natuie of God is a tiiplicate thieefold

unity 01 the tliiice thiee liypostases of the One Being-.

The thiee foims of oui devotion and Cum- 
munion with God, that he is praised, woi ship- 
ped and asciibed with attiibutes

liis body the bow, Ins mind the arrov/, 
and his soul the aim (jSIdndnkya II 4 p 159).

Of waking, di earning and sound sleep of 
the soul \ )

The bile, phlegm and cholei oi flatulence 
( ^ici pieseivatives of the

body and life

The thiee mo7a or vowels, the long, short 
and piolated ( ¥cf fcfwlrti;;).

The acute, giave and ciicumflex.

15 The three 
Foi ms of Derotion

16 The Tuple 
man

17 The 3 States 
of the Soul

18 The 3 Hum- 
ours of the Body

19 Three Matras 
fcCftIcll I

't -1

Three

20

Ac-

cents

Human speech consisting of letters, words and 
sentences treated of m Orthogiaphy, Etymology 
and Syntax ( iTW+fl ^4=1^ )

Distinct, indistinct and half distinct (An- 
qiietil) . ( ^ -=>4 g )

The Swa7aH of Rik, the Swaia of Yajus, 
and Stodnvai'i of Sdraa ( )

Of Om VIZ a, u, m, agiee with the first, second 
and thud woid of eveiy tiiad, « e , each to each 
Of the meditation of the thiee letters of Om 
desciibed at length in the Upanishads.

XII The Tetrads or Odadruples op Om

We have next to considei the tetiads or quadiuple divinities

1 Tetrads of Om quadiants or foul fold divisions of the

ciiele of Om consisting of itsfoui letteis a, u, oi 
descent of Om, and the ciwclet of entiie Om styled Chandiavmdu

21 Thiee Utter- 
ances of speech

WTftri

22 Three Pronun- 
ciations I

23 Do of Three 
Vedas

24 The 3 Letters

25 The 3 Merits

I

THE OM TAT SAT

65

as given by Piofessor Monieie Williams fiom the Nirukta 
of yaska. (Indian Wisdom p 169)

1 The Om of oithogiaphers consisting 
II ia sciences stages of speech^ namely^

3TWHI and I65

as given by Piofessor Monieie Williams fiom the Nirukta 
of yaska. (Indian Wisdom p 169)

1 The Om of oithogiaphers consisting 
II ia sciences stages of speech^ namely^

3TWHI and I

3 Of Giammaiians , the foui paits of speech, nouns, veibs, 
j)ie230sitions and pai tides

j3 .Of Bituahsts , The hymns, htnigieal jirecepts, Bi^hmanas 
and oidmaiy language

4. Of philologeis or Sdbdikas , the S23eech of serpents, beasts, 
birds and! veinaeulais

5 Of Etymologists; The Rik, Yajur and Sd.ma Vedas and 
cm rent language

6 Of Spiritualists , The language of beasts, wild animals, 
musical instruments and soul

7. Of Majiu (IV. ia6). The Pranava and the thiee Vya- 
hrities. ( '32 -tsx.. )

8. Of Mann (IV 134) The Rik sacied to the gods, the 
Yajur relating to mankind and the Sdma concerning the manes, 
and its sound

9 Of Smditas, The fom.’ stages, of students, householders, 
mendicants and ascetics

10 Of Puianas. The four Ages, Satya, Tietd, Diodpata and 
Kah The foui castes &c

A for djiota or Vydpta peivadmg all woilds, 
ie 2 nesents the divine hypostasis of Viswa 
U foi Utlatshat, z. e , moie elevated than 
A j as the Tatjas than Vzsva )

M foi mAna oi nieasuie, as ihQjnajnA \ik.Qa astha measuies 
the above two ( )

III In Divinity

1 The 4 Condi- 
tions of Brahma

Om

e , the entiie and without parts, is the fouith and

peifect condition of Biahma ( )

2 The 4 states of A foi the waking ( J dgrat) state, when the 
the Soul soul IS sub 3 ect to gloss senses

JJ for the sioapna or di earning state, when the soul is with- 
diawn fiom visible objecfs. •>

VOL I

j

THE OM TAT SAT

M the ox soiiixd sleeping' state, in which the soul is

imcoii&cions of itself

0»i the absolute and pei'fect state of the soiil viewing ^all in 
itself

3 The 4 Manifes- A IS external manifestation of the Univer- 
tfttions of God sal soul 111 objects

U Internal manifestation peieeived in the operations of the

soul in dieam <

M uiinianifested existence ; or tlie self consciousness of theU Internal manifestation peieeived in the operations of the

soul in dieam <

M uiinianifested existence ; or tlie self consciousness of the

soul

Om Unmanifest state of the soul, unmodified and inactive 
state.

4 The 4 Titles of A 7'? 5100 01 Foom dim m wlio abides manifest

the soul in the u aking state

U Tatjnsa , abiding in dieams and knowing all ivitliont

objects r

M JPjajnd, the perfect wise abiding in deep sleep 
Om Absolute Biahma called Turij/a which is peifect and all 
knowing

The Four fold To- 
trads

II

A -A pi ah, peivadmg 
U Utkanha, Exalted 
M Mdna, Measuie 
Om Btahma, Absolute 
III

Jdf/rat, Waking 
Hwajma, Dreaming 
Snanph, Sleeping. 
Sfhin, Calm.

IV

A Vyalia, external state 
U Atifai, inteinal state 
M Avyalia, uumanifested 
Owi Anania, Infinity

Vmoa, the visible woild 
Tiajma, the thinking soul 
JPiagnd, Consciousness 
Ttoiija, Omniscience

XIII The Pentads &c , of Om.

The quintuples of om aie composed of five letters or divi-

The Pentads at Om stoamg ioT So

fnany different things each of which foims a 
part of the whole, and is called an Om The five paids aie, 
A, U, M, O and the the nasal Iialf encle above

C

THE OM TAT SAT

67

1 The Fire Vital 
Airs

5

2 The Fire Car- 
eras x|-^ ,

Respnatioiij flatuleuee, cuculatioii, pulsation 
and assimilation, commoiilj Iniown by tlie 
names of pi Ana, apdna, V^Ana, Uddiia and 
SamAna

PancJia Losh is oi slieatlis of the soul, folding one ovei the 
othei ^4ike the coats of an onion ^ 1 The

sheath of the intellect 2 The sheath of the 
mind 3 The sheath of bieathmg- 4 The 
subtle and coipoieal bodies 5 The sheath of Supieme bliss, 
not admitted by all 'snWH'iJ,

) I

3 The Five Intel- skin, iiose and tongue, of

ml organs, seases heaiiiig, Sight, feeling, Smell and taste

and their objects Then five objects souiid, coloul, touch, sav- 
oui and smell (

The voice, hands, feet, the oigans of geneiation and secietion

4 The Five ev- aie oigans of action MC;; Ml^i-

I iHt ^'rr< cjiThe voice, hands, feet, the oigans of geneiation and secietion

4 The Five ev- aie oigans of action MC;; Ml^i-

I iHt ^'rr< cji

fi^r^s^HnnT I

Eaitli, air, fiie, watei and etliei

1 Obscmity ( ), 2 Illusion (JTf'W)}

3 Extieme illusion ( ), 4 Gloom

( ), 5 Uttei gloom ( cidd^’, )

The sextuples of Om aie composed of a, ii, o, m, the Vtnchi 
cy 2 ?liei, and the nAda , and accoidmg to another 
account, the Aullia mAtiA of Om is the 
fouith and the Viiidii and nAda the fifth and 
sixth alsliauis (Webei’s Rdma Tapanfya ji p 
292, 312 Cowell’s Maitii Up p 271)

The five oigans of sense, viz the nose, tongue, the eye, ear, skin 
and the mind (Gotama Sutia I 1, 12) But 
accoidmg to othei s the mind is not leckoned 
an 01 gan

tcinal Do

5 Tlie Five Ele- 
ments

6 The Fire class, 
es of Ignorance

1 The SIX letters 
of Hexads or sextu- 
ples

2 The 6 Organs

68

THE OM TAT SAT

pies

Septuples

His liead

2 The 7 Paifcs of 
Vird] Body

The SIX seasons flavours

SIX musical modes the six Vedang'as,

3 other Sextu. j passage of then bemg

preceded by Om.

The Septuiiles aie foimed by a, u, o, m^ Ftncht, ndda and 
Sdnfd 01 ultimate silence, and these aie used 
1 The Heptads or symbolize the pantheistie form of the god 
Vud-jj m the following desciiption of him gi\Tn 
by Sankaia.

the heavens , his eye the sun , his bieath the 
wind, his centei— the ethei ; liis uiinc the 
watei , his feet the eaith , his mouth the 
file Anquetil gives the five senses, the 
mind and intellect as his seven membeis. (Webei-^s Indian 
Studien Vol II p 107 )Accoidmg to othei accounts there is a sevenfold septuples 
included m the figme Om compiising the Uni- 
veise The fiist insa^iiala oi tiiplex septuple 
comprises the seven spheies of heaven, the 
the seven pd,tdlas oi infernal legions, and the seven BIntianas 
of eaith The second fnsapfa consists of the sapfa chvtpas 
01 seven continents of the eaith, the seven oceans, and the 
seven planets , and lastly the sapia swma oi the seven notes 
emitted by the planetaiy motions

The oetuples consist of the afoiesaid seven parts and the sdltt 
01 woid namo added to them at the end, and 
aie used as symbols of Virdj foi the five 
vital aiis, 01 the fi\e oigans of action and those 
the mind, intellect and self consciousness or

3 The Other Hep- 
tads

The Octads or oc 
tuples

of intellect t 
clnita

The Nonads

These aie nine cavities of the body 
the abode of Biahm

These aie the ten internal and external oigans of the (

ThsB«c.<I. and of the body the

seats of Biahm t

THE OM TAT SAT

69

XIV. Philosophy op the Numerical Groups Contained 
Under the Mystic Syllable Om

Af^er the lengthy account we have given of the various

classes of words contained under the different 
1 Inquiry into the , ,, tit Pii

, numbeis and divisions and subdivisions or the

numerical groups

mysteiious letter Om, it must he asked by the 
inquisitive reader, what do these eliisteis of conciete and abs- 
tract teims which are numeiically jumbled togethei under the 
unintelligible chaiacter Om seive to mean, and of what use are 
they to the contemplative Yogi in his meditation on the attri- 
butes of his Maker by that symbol ^In answer to this queiy we are bound to repeat the 
2(a) Enlargement definition of yoga, that it IS the piocess of 
of the understand- joining the ideas in the mind, and piacticing 
the limited poweis of the understanding to use 
by degiees fiom their giasping the ideas of unities oi single 
objects at a time, to the compiehension of dualities andpluiahties 
foi the enlaigement of the intellect, till at last the mind is 
fiaught vnth a clear and distinct idea of eveiy thing m the univeise 
compiised under the several gioups oi geneiahzations of paiti- 
culais

2(b) Thoir Pan 
theistic viOTT.

And also as we have more than once mentioned in the preceding 
articles, that God is aJiam haJiushydm one in 
many, to on to pan of the Gieeks, oi the unity 
divided into and containing an Injinity of paits , 
50 His symbol the holy Om is one ciicle and emblem of infinity, 
which foi the sake of oui conception and convenience is viewed m 
its Finite parts of monads &c, and then ever inci easing multiples 
by all other nuhibeis But the monad like the piime numbei one 
whethei multiplied or divided by any numbei maiithmetic, lemains 
still the same simple one Thus (1 >< 2 = 2 x 1) , (and ^ = 1 — 2, 
01 2 = 1 X This IS the loot of the pantheistic doctiine of the 
Vedanta This One is and the whole

being taken fiom the whole the lemamder is whole

70

THE OM TA.T SAT

3 The Numerioal 
Philosophybeing taken fiom the whole the lemamder is whole

70

THE OM TA.T SAT

3 The Numerioal 
Philosophy

It was the oldest SdwUiya or numerical school of philosophy 
m India, like the ancient Ionian school of 
Grieece, that fiist made a classiftcation of all 
objects in natuie under ceitain co-oidinate 
gioups foi oul contemplation of them undei those classes, 
which its latei development of yoga system has conveited to 
the objects of oui meditation as same with or peivaded by the 
Deity, 01 in other woids, has lecommended the meditation of 
natuie^s God in natuie itself as iiiNatuial Theolog'y It was the 
Tantia woiship of latei ag'es that divided the symbol of unity 
and infinity of the divine om into a decad of paits, as ,it is the 
custom of mathematicians to divide the gieat ciicle of infinity 
into 360 degiees, though it might be divided into an infinity of 
paits

4 The Sankhya. 
and Pythagorean

The Sdukhya system of evolution which is closely allied 
to that of the Daiwmian, views the monad 
as the elementaiy piotozoa, which combined 
with othei monads make uji the duads, tiiads 
&c we have mentioned befoie, and all which aie lesolvable 
to the piimaiy monad Om is always ^one^ nothing

can destioy that numeiical existence, combine tlie thing in 
eveiy possible vaiiety of ways, and it still lemaiiis ‘one^ It 
cannot be less than one, it cannot be more As (2 = 1 + 1 = II & 
3 = 1 + 1 + 1 = 111) Resolve it into its minutest pai tides, and 
each paiticle is one As +, ^ &c) One is the only absolute

numbei , all otheis aie but lelations to it The Infinite theiefoie 
must be one, and if you take infinity and the infinitesimals fiom 
the infinite, theie lemains alsot he same infinity, accoidmg to 
the Vedanta paiadox I and

all modes of existence aie but finite aspects of the Infiniteall modes of existence aie but finite aspects of the Infinite

The soul being a self moved monad, is one, whethei it connect 
itself with two 01 with tliiee , in othei woids 
thfe essence lemains the same whatevei its 
manifestations may be The one soul may 
have two aspects. Intelligence and Passidii, as in biutes, oi it

5 Different as- 
pects of tbe soul

THE OM TAT SAT

71

may have thiee aspects, as in man &c Foi more of tins see 
Lewes^ Histoiy of Philosophy (Vol I p p 33 and 34)

Theie uses anothei question of some impoitance in this place 
6 Queiy concer- what has the Yogi 01 woisliqipci of God to

nmg Nature Wor- do With the objects presented to him in the 
diffeient groups undei the p'aititions of Om, 
when his business is solely to meditate on the nature and 
a^tiibutes of the Deity ^

To this it may be answered that, the Hindu Yogi oi medita- 
tive sage IS enjoined to meditate on the Sup- 
ehip reme Spiiit in Spiiit, “ ^tm6j &tmanyeva cliin-

iayeV^ He does not

adore any \asible object, but contemjilates his cieator with 
all his attiibutes as displayed in cieation, which he sums up 
abstiactedly in his own spiiit and mind Theie can be no 
contemplation of the msciutable and incompiehensible natuie of 
God apait fiom the light we deiive fiom the abstiact meditation 
of all sensible and intellectual natuies Obseive every thing 
m thyself and so shaltthou behold the Supieme/'’

The old lule of self knowledge BEiTcHcir=( or know thyself

which was believed to con- 
stitute highest wisdom, and which has given 
rise to different mteipietations in vaiious 
schools of philosophy, does not mean the knowledge of ones 
state and natuie to be sufficient foiJiim, but that of his soul 
which makes him tiuly gieat The wise Socrates looked in- 
waids, and theie discovered the moial and psychological tiuths 
the world has deiived fiom him His pupil the divine Plato 
looked within him, and theie found the eternal ideas of which 
sense awakened leminiscenceThe Hindu Yogi too looks inwaid and views within the circle 
of his cianium symbolized as Om, his soul 
9 Knowledge of jgy- fig-ijie of the Divinity,

the Soul ' Till 1 ^

and encompassed by the abstiact ideas of all

things whose impiessio^is he has leepived by sense and mind.

8 Self knon ledge 
What ?

72

THE OM TAT SAT.

He then learns to disting'uisli bj’’ bis disci iminative power called 
the dtmdndtmaviveha, the soul of the Umveise

fiom all the lejneselitations which it jnesents to his mind ^

The Platonic system had also a soit of classification in which

, the seaich foi One m Many and Many in One,

10 Of one in -with the detection of the One in the

Many 5*

Mail}'- was the constant aim, consult for 
fuithei mfoimation on this head in Lewes^ Histoiy of Philosophy. 
(Yol 1 p p 237 and 405;

XV. The Unitaman Poemula One TiiaT is

S. ^

Fiom all oui investigation into the oiigm, rise, and extent 
of meaning of thewoid Om in its oithogiaphy, 
1 Om the one etymology and theology, it is evident that the

Indo-Aij’-an mind was early infused with the idea of an absolute 
Om eoiiespondiiig with the Gieek Oji and W72, and AVi and also 
Aeo}i of the Gnostics, Latin Mis, TJnim and Entity, Romance 
On and nn, and one in English, whose unity was the soui ce of 
all diveisity in the plurality of cieation, agieeably to the text 
aham halm Sydm — Tdgo mnltns sim of the Sruii.

It was at first Icnorni as one and then as the self or soul by 
the silent and innate intuition of the intellect, 
as it IS declaied in the Manduka Upanishad 
II 2,5

2 The 'Dniversal 
Boul, =Vls'n atman2 The 'Dniversal 
Boul, =Vls'n atman

Max Muller says (A S Lit p. 23 and 322'). "The Atman 
was next conceived as the Spirit — air, dfmd and amma 
"That one bieathed bieathless bjMtself othei than it nothing 
since has been ” Thus says the Sruti (Mullei p 560) " This one 
Atman (atmos) fills, animates and peivades the nhole”, as the 
poet sings " spreads unspent ” throughout the infinity of woilds : 
Which " ar.e but parts of one undivided whole 
"Whose body nature is, and God the soul." (Pope).

THE OM TAT SAT

n

3 Called as Tat 
—that 3

The inherent one of all ones io on oniwn, ” the unit 
of unitiesj the Ens of entities, the soul of 
the woild “ Viswdtman was yet without a 
name, noi did they know how to call him, 
than by the designation of tat ^^that,^'' which the}'- say is 
expiessive of the idea of Biahma I

Because says Vdchaspati, the natuie of the one Om, was unknown 
ev§n to the learned *114H , and

theiefoie it was specified by the demonstiative pionoun that tat” 
which sometimes pieceded the as city'll &c (Gieek io oti) The 
necessity^ of pionouncmg’ Om vnth. tat sat in the beginning’ of 
eveiy Vedic iite, is stiictly enjoined m BhiCgavad-Gitd, '3^fTci<i

The woid tat” in the neutei geildei, was used for the one 
^ self, which as an element oi mateiial cause, had 
^ Impewonal things out of its immaterial essence,

and expiessed an impeisonal God, which the 
creed of the eaily philosophers had established m the Vedas 
It was at a much latei period that the belief of a personal 
God, IS said to have been introduced by the sage S^ndilya in the 
Ch-’hdndogya and Swetas vataia Upanishads, where the self 
is used in the masculine gender, and the masculine pionoun Sa 
and fa7n (Greek ‘‘ho and ton” Lat “is”), was substituted for tat 
(Greek to Lat id) in the subjective mantia but in

the objective mantra it is neutei as I

5 Of the Brhama 
Soma]a

The Bidhma Sam^j have preserved both the formula of the 
Impersonal God (G^ as then motto, asthe objective mantra it is neutei as I

5 Of the Brhama 
Soma]a

The Bidhma Sam^j have preserved both the formula of the 
Impersonal God (G^ as then motto, as

well as addressed then prayers -to the personal 
God by use of the masculine pionoun sa and 
tarn instead of tat Thus in the opening hymn of Ram Mohun 
Roy^s Prayer Book "SITTT

I c?44ch ^3i<1 I

So in Devendra Natha Thdkui^s hymn I

This IS in accordance to the creed of all civilized nations to 
VOL I K

74

THE OM TAT SAT

apply tlie masculine pionoun to tlie Deity. The Koian has 
“ho=he’^ in its foimulas o£ '^Jlo’lahacV^ ^c, and so

also the ho of the Bible Tai like 0)i is sometimes used alone and 
by itself foi Godj at the opening' of books and ehapteis^ and upon 
the tops of pages with the Sat following it as

6 Ditto in tlio 
Feminine Gondei

But those who have heard the pieachings of Keshub Cliundei 
Sen, ma}'’ veil lemembei his exclamations as 
■gtfT fMOi 44lcii, K^ilHj'in

imitation of the Roman idolatious plnloso- 
phei’s aeelamatioii to God, 'Ru jialei, tu niatci, tu mas, tu femme 
&c ill Cudwoith^s Intellectual S^'stem Theic is no ’masculine 
or feminine lepiesentative of the pionoun iai oi any otlici 
pionoun in the vcinaculais, wheie the}’’ aie all of the common 
gendei, hence fcif%, ^ &c, used foi iai by tlie Heathen

Hindus, aie applied alike to then gods and goddesses, uhile 
the Sanskiit M/^=ho in Gieek, Aiabie and Ilclxeu designates 
the masculine Deity oiil}’’ Mahomed says in tlie ICoian, ‘’^je aie 
ashamed of youi female childien, but not of assigning leniale 
attiibutes to the Deity

The following passages will seive to show the eaily ciccd of the 
impel sonal God, fiom the aiiplication of the 
neutei pionoun iat to him in the Manduka 
Upamsliad (11 2)

7 Ditto in 
Keuter Gendei

the

MHM¥tXGrt ^fbCT: I 
II

cld ci^ I

, d^J I II

Meaning ^^The sun, moon and stais what aie they ^ But a 
glimpse of light caught ftom That {Tafj ” &c

THE OM TAT SAT

75the

MHM¥tXGrt ^fbCT: I 
II

cld ci^ I

, d^J I II

Meaning ^^The sun, moon and stais what aie they ^ But a 
glimpse of light caught ftom That {Tafj ” &c

THE OM TAT SAT

75

XVI O^TTOLOGY OF THE SeLF ExISTENT Sat — BeING

1 Tlie last woid o£ tlie foimulai motto of Veddnta is s^tf,

^ winch deiived £iom the loot asa, Lat esse to

Philology of Sat , , . ,10,1

be^ makes the piesent paitieijiie oat and means

a being, like the Latin eiis and Grieek On, the paiticijnal noun of

ei??it meaning a being Thus the knowledge of sat which is

Satyani — lealitj, is the doctiine of On the leal being, which

as said befoie is to on ojifon the being of beings and piime

cause of all existences, and forms the mam subject of Ontology

This jnimaij'- and fundamental tiuth of the existence of a fiist

cause, led the Bishi a pnoi i to deduce all othei existences fiom it

by the text ^a- 4 jEffO %n nmltis et phinhns the one

m mail}'- 01 in othei woids, when the Bidhman believes m

but one leal being in the Univeise, he believes also that

this being constitutes the Universe {M W Indian Wisdom

p 36)

Z The noun Sat in its verbal form is equivalent to asfi, 
corresponding with Lat est, G-i esh, Teisic ast 
Sat and Bengali-^chhe, Una achchhe &c Eng

tSj Gei 1st and the like And tat sat together 
makes the Greek to eshn, Lat Id est French &c II est , Aiabic 
alasf Peisieo5^, and Hindi Ohihae The Oni Tat Sat is either an 
identic proposition, meaning the “ Being that is ” 01 a definitive 
one, expressing Om that (is) existent

3 The Chfiiandogya Uiiamshad saj’-s, ‘‘ In the beginning 
there was the mere state of sat being {to on) 
f Qj^ly ^vithout a second/' Some how-3 The Chfiiandogya Uiiamshad saj’-s, ‘‘ In the beginning 
there was the mere state of sat being {to on) 
f Qj^ly ^vithout a second/' Some how-

ever say that, “in the beginning ther e was a state 
of asni not being, {Lat non est, Gi to mi on), the one without a 
second Hence out of a state of non-being would proceed a state of 
being But how can this be How can being, proceed out of 
asat not being It is logically absurd by the well known maxim 
Lv mhilo mini fit of Lucretius “Hence in She beginning there

was a mere state of being (the oni). One only without a second 
( orn ela meid dvitiyeuii ) I He willed and

76

THE OJI TAT SAT

became many (CMnd VI 3 M W Incl AVisclom p. 41),

4' The Oiigmal text inns thus.

■^ciH^lst'ri^'tdjIlI^rcl I ^(ct 11

cT^^cf I

The above cited passage and iiumeions othei texts of the 
Veddnta such as the followings oicTl ^«-l\r»t 
5'»r '=HHirM I and '3I*ifiT^j?rj^^«cjqTd &c ^ unanimously 
piOYC a jn 10 ) i and hy dcductvvc icasonmg that Biahma is 
the piimaiy cause fiom Avhich all otheis aie deiived and de- 
duced by leason This is called the Pi'nva tni oi aji)uon icason- 
ing in the Nyaya philosophy, which is shewn to be the logical 
infeience of the effect fiom its cause

I 1 \ 1 \ 1 ^ I

5. The 1111011 infeience of a pie-existent cause is suppoited 
by many othei modes of leasoning as we shall

0 Evidences of g^^te below 1 B}’’ the Cosniological leasomng

tlie Fust cause ^

of Humboldt^ Leibnitz and othei it is CMdeiit

that some being was uncaused, oi was of itself mthout a cause 
Theiefoie God is the fiist cause of all things f Leibnitz). 2 By 
the Anthiopological leasoning founded on eeitain obseived faetsthat some being was uncaused, oi was of itself mthout a cause 
Theiefoie God is the fiist cause of all things f Leibnitz). 2 By 
the Anthiopological leasoning founded on eeitain obseived faets

01 phenomena of human consciousness, its Iciioivledge of the 
subjective effo and objective nou ego &:c 3 By the Ontological, 
we find the existence in the mind of a cleai and distinct idea of G od, 
as a peifect Being oi Ens oi entity (satj peifcctly eminent. 4. 
Psychological Intuitive leasonmg shoivsns cleaily that we may 
foim the idea of a supiemely iieifect being of whom we have 
a conscious pi oof And as in the exeicise of oui intellect ive 
become conscious of a subjective unity undeilying the external

diveisity, so by the unvaiying levelations of leasoii, ive aie led 
to lecognize the existence of a Deity who, amidst all the shifting 
jihenomcna of the univeisc lemains one and Immutable ^^ide 
Dwijcndia A^ath Tagoie'S Ontology p 14

THE OM TAT SAT

77

The Vedanta philosophy pursues also a course of inductive leason-

6 A Posfceiiori 
Aigumflnt

mg' in its aphoiism of i

using horn the cieation 
to its inakei This is the pioeess of

01 a]}oste)ion reasoning of the N3'^d3’’a philosophy^ m its infeience 
of the cause file fioni its effect the smoke

01 of the major teim ‘31 fiom the middle ^ I

TJiis IS the jihysical leasomng of modem inductive science^ which

infeis from the facts of existence an author of these facts The

Umveise exists, theiefoie it has a cause, which is piioi to all 
othei causes There aie some who attempt to prove the pos- 
teiioii "MActd argument of the Veda from a different constiuc- 
tion of the Gayatii hj^in, ascending from the Yydhihs or 
cication of the worlds ( ) to then cieator cid tjihdi ,

hut this mode of leasoning is not justified by others, by reason of 
the initial Orsj. = God

We shall now take notice of the other meanings which the

lexicons assign to mt, beside the being and

entityof God V’-e have so long dweltWe shall now take notice of the other meanings which the

lexicons assign to mt, beside the being and

entityof God V’-e have so long dwelt

tho -nova Sat t, ,1 i i n

upon It means the goodness and excellence

of a thing I II

Tu this sense the phrase Om tat sot would mean ‘‘ God

The Good which is quite collect on all hands In English the

etymology of God is good, and so the Sanskrit sat means both

God and good , thus also all systems of philosojihy predicate the

attribute of goodness of the nature of God The Persian term

Kliocla though so nearly allied to God and sat m sound, will be

found to bear no afiinity ^vith eithei , but to owe its deiivation

to the sankiit (fiom meaning self-pioduced ,s%oa

being invariably lendeied into Iha in Peisian, as sioato <s(ri Uiod,

sioasi i khwahii &c

S>a,t appeals moieovei in the sense of sitting in composition

8 Anotlior sense 
of Sat,

With an objective word preceding it, as 
-shad a clestical, sahhdsat a com tier It is from 
the lOot sad, Latin gedo to sit, with the suffix

78

THE OM TAT SAT

kwip Thus we have in the Kathd. ValH (V 2 )

TT^ri; I <=HS1\ ’1id'<JlT ^r<'®tl^d* "g-^T I \h I ^ I e

The Hansa, (God) sits above the heavens^ it dwells in the at- 
mospheie, as mvokeis it dwells in temples, and as guests it is 
not afai fiom us It dwells in man, m tiuth, m the ethei, in 
watei, mountains &c &e.”

c

XVII The Conclusive Lesson on the Phactice oe Yogac

XVII The Conclusive Lesson on the Phactice oe Yoga

Aftei oui long and lengthy discussion on the subject of Yoga, 
and the sacied and mysteiious woids wheiewith it is conducted, 
oui tieatise will be deemed incomplete until we set a foim or 
pi axis of the mannei in which it is to be conducted ,and pai- 
ticulaily by those who aie fully persuaded of its efficacy, and 
piepaied foi its piactice, but aie pi evented fiom it foi want of 
jiiopei guides to initiate them into it, oi deteiied by the aidu- 
ousness of the iites imiiosed upon them by false Yogis, as to give 
up the exeicise in disgust and hopelessness of then possibihty 
evei to mastei it

\Ye shall set to these a shoit lesson fiom the Upanishad with 
diiections from the Bhd,gavad Gita, woiks which aie believed 
to be of the highest authoiity and sanctity by eveiy Hindu, 
and V Inch can nevei be suspected of misleading any body, 
but on the othei hand univeisally acknowledged as the only 
luminaiies amidst the intellectual gloom of supeistition and 
ignoiance The Kathopanishad says that the light of tiuth 
IS to be gamed by yoga only and the Bhaga-

vad Gita declaies, that knowledge, faith and jiiactice aie the 
only means of its attainment ^ H ^

It diieets all men of competence to betake themselves to the 
acquisition of leaiunig, and the incompetent to the piactice of 
acts thus I

The Maitii Upanishad gives the following dnections foi the 
piactice of yoga In the same Avay (is declaied) the nile 
foi the exeicise of these . means tfoi the concentiation of the

THE Oil TAT SAT

79

mmd) This conceiitiatioii (yoga) has six paits lestiaint of 
the hieath ipidndi/dma), lestiamt of the senses {i^aiydhdui), 
meditation attention self examination ijaila),THE Oil TAT SAT

79

mmd) This conceiitiatioii (yoga) has six paits lestiaint of 
the hieath ipidndi/dma), lestiamt of the senses {i^aiydhdui), 
meditation attention self examination ijaila),

and absoiption {samdcUn) When beholding by this manner of 
contemplation^ he beholds the golden coloiiiedj the doei^ the loid, 
the spiiit, Biahman^ the cause , then the seei abandoning 
his meiits and sms, lediices eveiy thing to unity in the Supieme 
indesti uetible (soul) Thus says the Siuti , As beasts and 
buds appioaeh not a blazing mountain, so faults nevei aj)pioaeh 
those who know Biahmaii'’^ (18)

It hus been also said elsewheie when the saffe, conditioned 
asj)}d9ui, has obtained the mastei^’- ovei his mind, and lett outside 
all the objects of the senses, then let him lemain void of all 
volition Since the indnidiial soul called pidna spiings 
fiom the no)i-2))dna (Supieme Intelhgence) , hence let the 
(appaient) pidna fix itselt in the fouith stage (of puie intelli- 
gence) Thus saith the Siuti, ‘'That which is itself apait fiom 
intellect, uhicli yet abides m the midst of intellect, the incon- 
ceivable, the supiemcly seciet, on this let him fix his intellect 
{chiiia) , thus this subtil body ha^^ng no object,is meiged (in 
the Supieme; (19)“It hath also been said elsewheie, there is yet a higher 
excicise of attention {dhuiaud) for the sage, aftei jnessing 
the end of his tongue against his palate and lestiaimng his 
\oice, mind and bieatli, he beholds Biahman by contemplation 
When thus by the annihilation of the mind, he beholds the self 
manifesting soul, the less than the least, as indentified with 
the supieme soul, then having seen the soul thus identified, 
he becomes divested of self Being thus divested, he becomes 
unlimited, destitute of mateiial suppoit, onlj’- an object of 
puie thought This is the gieat seciet, final emancipation. 
Thus saith the Siuti , By the seiemty of the intellect he des 
tioys all action, good oi bad, with seiene soul, abiding in the 
Divine Soul, he enjoys undying bliss ” (20) j

“It hath been said also , the aiteiy, called sushmnd, which 
supplies the passage foi the vital an,? uses upwaid (fiom the

80

THE OM TAT SAT

heait) and is inteiiupted in tlie middle oP the palate By 
means of tins aiteiy, conjoined with the (hi ought under

subjection), the mind 'meiged hy contemplation into its object 
Biahman, and the repetition of the mystic syllable Om, let 
him use upwards turning the end of his tongue on the palate, 
and uniting the senses (with the prd.na and mind'. Let the 
absence of limitation contemplate itself (t. e. let him contem- 
plate on the unlimited Brahman) Then he attains freedom 
from all organs , and becomes no longer capable of pain or 
pleasure He gams absolute unity Thus saith the Siuti 
‘^'Fiist having mastered pidna, then having fixed it on the 
palate, having crossed the state of limitation, let him in the 
Clown of his head, merge (the soul; m the unlimited Biahman

(ai)

‘^^Thus he may contemplate 07ii as the sound and non-sound &c. 
(22 and 23). Then 0}ii as light, and all other signib cates of Om ” 
(24 &c )(ai)

‘^^Thus he may contemplate 07ii as the sound and non-sound &c. 
(22 and 23). Then 0}ii as light, and all other signib cates of Om ” 
(24 &c )

Those who may think the English veision of the lesson 
on Yoga as not veiy explicit, will do well to consult the subjoined 
text in the oiiginal

I

Symbolical Yoga Cult of jMudha or Chakra 
Diagrams

Om the object of Yoga meditation, being already described 
ill sections IX &:c of this article as symbolical of Divine na-

C

'TKE Oil TAT SAT

cure; and its difPeient divisions as emblematical of tbe eternal 
attiibutes oi liyj^ostases of tbe Self same Unity; ibey aie as 
sbowK befoiB; rejnesented by the component letters of that 
mystic syllable; and meditated upon by the mental aiithmetio 
■of the sj)eeulative theosophist; the vedantist and yogi, 
Eut as the majoiity of people of giossei understandings 
aie moie dependant on oeulai and sensible symbolism than 
abstiact idealism; the Tantias have puiposely eontiived many 
a figuie and diagiam {Muchas and CM has) foi their guidance, 
of which we will give a few below with then geometiical names 
and notations

It will appear from the diagiamsdesciibed heieaftei that Om the 
symbol of Biahman the Univeisal Sat oi existence; serves to show 
us as a chait of the woild; oi lepiesentation of the cianmm, 
everything coasting in the physical and intellectual woild, 
which IS expiessed by the woid Om ( ' 3 ^ inits diffei-ent divisions and paititions for oui meditation and 
contemplation The pious and leligious sjniitualist may employ 
them in Divine contemplation, but the majoiity aie at libeity to 
use them in the meditation of eveiy othei subject which comes to 
be comjnised within the compass of then thought, in the gioups 
of significations which the letters aie said to convey Hence the 
Yoga of old; meant only an intense aj)plication of the mind to all 
subjects of thought and knowledge Thus the end of oui Yoga 
philosophy IS not only the abstiuse meditation of Divine attiibutes, 
but the mental lef lection of eveiy thing besides.

XIX Mathematical Investigation Into the Diageams

OP Om

We hav'^e seen from the diagrams given in the following 
seetioii; that the Td^ntrika foimulists have 
Bmgiams spaied 110 paiiis to divide the gieat circle of

the Universe, filled by the omnipieseiice of 
Eiahma and lepiesented by the figuie om, into several jiaits for 
the purpose of meditating His differ ent hypostases, and con tern- 
VoL I.

L

82

THE OM TAT SAT

Illation of the vaiious oideis of eieation We aie now to in- 
quiie as to Avhetliei these seveial divisions of a matliematical 
ciicle of 360 degiees aie geometiieally eoiiect, oi ineie aihjlraiy 
paititions made by ignoiant piiests foi then ovn amusement 
and deception of then pioselytes

' Now for instance, the piohlem of insciihing a licptagon

or a nonagon in a cncle will at once staitle

The Heptagon and ^ student of Euclid as altogetliei impO':Slhl\?, 
Nonagon iii

and identical with that winch uas celebiated 
among Gieeh gcometiicians as the piohlcm of the tiiscction 
of the angle If tieated algehiaically, it leads to a cubic equation 
with tliiee leal loots, the aiithmatical value of which can he 
found only appioximatel}'’

The authoi of the Llldvati has solved the piohlems, hut given 
no account of the way in wdnch he got the

^The Liiavati s solu- stated bj’’ him, if they^had been ob-The authoi of the Llldvati has solved the piohlems, hut given 
no account of the way in wdnch he got the

^The Liiavati s solu- stated bj’’ him, if they^had been ob-

tained by solution of the above mentioned equa- 
tion, they w'ould piobabl}'- have been moie aeeinate than they 
aie He onlj'- lays down an aibitiaiy mle, that the side of the 
heptagon is -/tVoVo of the diametei, and that of the nonrgon 
of the same Neither of these is veiy fai fiom the

tiuth The accuiate value of the side of the Leiitagon lies

betw^een ^^d The side of the nonagon lies between

and

Among the commentatois on Lilavati, Ramalciishna, Gangd.- 
dhaia, and Bangandtha have not attempted any 
demonsti ation of the piohlems in question, and 
have contented themselves with meiely lepeat- 
ing the figuies contained in the text Ganesa confesses that the 
pi oof of the sides of the icgulai pentagon, heptagon and nona- 
gon cannot he shown in a iran.nci siirilai to that of the tiiangle, 
square and octagon

But this IS untrite of the pentagon, its side can begcomctiical- 
ly found as showm in Euclid Book IV Pi op 11, 
and the admission of Ganesa serves only to

1 s

Commentatois on 
Lilavati

The Pentagon

THE OM TAT SAT

83

piove, that he was unacquainted with the Saiiskiit tianslation of 
Euclid M' Inch contains a solution of this 211 oblem Gane&a cannot 
mean only that the side of the pentagon is incomn'ensuiable 
with the diaraeteij foi that is equally tiue of thetiiangle, squaie 
and octagon, insciibed 111 aciicle.

THE FIGURES.

Op Om (On oe, En) of Hindu Ontology

I Mudicl, Madawaij Sjiheieoi Sphaiia

Symbol of the Univeise and Univeisaha 
A System of the Univeisal Religion

II The cade O, An Emblem of infinity and Eternity 
A Type of the Catholic Theism of Hindus

i 't

III The convexity of O A Type of the Extiamuudane, 
Unknowable and Absolute Supieme Biahma 
Significant of Agnoism and Agnosticism

d '>

IV The concavity of O Emblem of Intiamundanei 't

III The convexity of O A Type of the Extiamuudane, 
Unknowable and Absolute Supieme Biahma 
Significant of Agnoism and Agnosticism

d '>

IV The concavity of O Emblem of Intiamundane

Immensit}'’ of knoivable Natuie and its God Biahma. 
And Indicative of Gnosticism and Pantheism

V The cade with the Cential point oi Monad

A S^anbol of the Definite and known woild and its God 
And signifying the Monotheism of all nations

r

0

1 The cade Avith the cential A, ^ Alif 01 Unit 
Emblematical of the unity of, a Peisonal God

THE OM TAT SAT

And the Piimaiy unity of all things in Natures 
And significant of unitaiiaiiity oi Adi'dtfn mciicuii-

4iCl'’5g I

2 The two Semiciicles of O Syrahoheal of Duad oi Duality, 
In the duahsm of Persons in the God'hoad as Dvaildvi 
And the Duads of Co-oidinatc Ptinciples in Natiiie ♦ 
And signif yiiig^ the Ditheism of all Diialistic ciceds

■§1141 if^ I

3. The Tiiseeted ciicle of Om A symbol of the Tnad or 
Tiimty

Indicative of a Tiiality of Pei sons in the God-head as 
Ti aitam ”

And the co-oidmate Tiqiles of the Pimcijiles in Natnie, 
And signifjang the Tiitheism of Tiimtaiianity

'=l44ir't I •=! clTlo'ij.H* 1

S (a) The Tnpaitite ciicle With the Insciibed Tiiangle 
Euclid (IV. 2),

A symbol of the Holy Timity {Tnvuhh on the thiee 
sides)

And the Triangiilai female emblem of God-mothei m 
the midst

And Indicating the Mateiialistic Tiinitaiiamsm of 
Hindus

^ ^ +lci I

4 The Poui'</Quadiants of the ciicle of Oni oi a sc[uare 
Emblematical of the Tetiad of the Dlvlnlt 3 ^

And the co-oidinate Quadiulples of Things

THE OM TAT SAT

85

And signifying the Q.uateimty of ceitain cieeds

=11 r

5 The Pentagon Inseiibed in the ciicle Denoting the 
Pentad

The AnguJai Points A B C D. & E Adeeting at the 
Gentle O (Euclid IV 11)

Indicative of the Quintuple Hyiiostases of the Deity 
The Quintessence and the Five fold co-oidinates of Ele- 
’ mentaiy bodies

IIndicative of the Quintuple Hyiiostases of the Deity 
The Quintessence and the Five fold co-oidinates of Ele- 
’ mentaiy bodies

I

0 The Hexagon in the Ciicle Significant of the Hexad 
The Angulai Points A B C D E F Aleeting at the cen- 
tie (Euclid IV 15)

Denotative of the sextujile Evolutions of the Monad O 
And Indicative of the Six Internal and External Oigans 
of sense

■!)'«<:( I

7 The Heptagon Inseiibed in the circle O. Indicates the 
Hejitad

The Angulai Points A. B C D E F. G-. Meeting at 
the eentie O

According to the Process of Lildvati mentioned below. 
Indicates the septuple Hypostases of Divine Essence,

VIZ ,

The Five External senses, mind and intellect (Anquetil). 
And the seven fold co-oidmate bodies in creation, vtz , 
the seven Worlds, seven Planets, seven Continents 
and Oceans j

I u I i

66

THE OiM a i r SAT

8. The Octagon (A J3 C 1)E F G II) In&ciibecl in the

ciicle 0,

By Bisection of the Quadiants (in Figuie i) ^ 
Indicative of the Octad oi Octujde states of Siniit and 
Body.

viZy the five Vital .ins oi the five external oi five 
Internal senses ivith the Mind, Tntelleetand con-^cions- 
nesb (Chittam) All foiins of the Spiiit 
And the eight inateiial foiins of Kiilh &c , tieated of in 
the Ashta MiSiti

9, The Nonagon A, B, C, D, E, F, G, II, I Inseiibed

in tlie ciicle O

By Tiiseetioii of the thico sections of aX'T^^Gite circle 
Sj-nibolical of a tioitad oi nine fold natuie of the 
Deity

And the nine doois oi oigans of Animal bodies.

I n??: -siTrni I

I ^-^y'=ld'=Tq; ! H-xJ! I

t/ I o I

I I

10 The Decagon in a Ciicle Emblematical of the Decad. 
The Decagon A B, C, D, E, P, G, H, I, J. By 
Bisection of the Pentagon

Significant of the Five Internal and five External 
Senses.

And the Ten Diiections of space. All filled by Divine 
Spiiit,

TPIE OM TAT SAT

87

i-^<lc^lT(lM=h 1

a '3^ 51 HV W,rbl*,f W* 1 'M'M r ?T, <•'', ° I

=11 W; ?T, (^, o, .l*^: ^T%:, lETf'ri:, -gnif^g: iTPIE OM TAT SAT

87

i-^<lc^lT(lM=h 1

a '3^ 51 HV W,rbl*,f W* 1 'M'M r ?T, <•'', ° I

=11 W; ?T, (^, o, .l*^: ^T%:, lETf'ri:, -gnif^g: i

These figuies might be multiplied achnfimfmm, as theie 
IS no limit of eieated things and the attiibutes of 
the Cieatoi , but as neitliei Infinity noi Immensity 
• IS comprehensible by the limited undei standing of

man, the Yogi takes some definite ideas and detei- 
minate objects foi his meditation, as he is diiected 
by the Natuial Religion of mankind

Note to Figoe 7

Solution of the Pioblem of insenbing a hejitagon in a ciiele, 
01 dmdiiig the ciicle into sereii equal paits Accoiding to 
Suij’addsa^s Ciimmentaiy on Lildvati ’^tTIuttcT

Foi the heptagon ti 4 Hc(i-g«ti <:i ; describe a eiicle, and

an equilateial heptagon iii it, then a line being diawn between 
the extiemities of any two sides at jileasuie, and

till ee lines fiom the centie of the ciicle to the

angles indicated by those extiemities an

unequal quadiilateial is foimed The gi eater

sides and the least diagonal si a theieof aie equal to the

semidiametei ^ I The xalue of the gieatei diagonal,

which IS assumed aibitiaiilj'-, is the choid of the aic -xifM+iJ 
encompassing the two sides Its aiiow being

deduced in the mannei befoie directed, is the side of a small 
1 ectangulai triangle t rti '"■d tJW 1

Thus the gieatei diagonal =1 being aibitiaiily as - 
sumed to be 93,804, is the choid sought its aiiow

found in the mannei diiected is 22,579 , this is the side, and 
half the base oi choid is the upiight 16,902 ,

then squaies aie 60971124d and 21997604 ^ the squaie rootof 
the sum of which is the side of the hejitagon oi 52,055

I

88

THE OM TAT SAT

These mimheis are given fiom tlic copy of Sui commen-

iaiy on the Lilavail in llie libraiy of Hie A-^ Sone<\ 
Tlieie aie iwo obvious eirois in ibcin, piobabl^'^ of ibc 
(vtfh'tK 22,579 slionld be 22 5SJ, and 2J997f50J' 
should be 2199797001.

Norr TO Fio 9

To insciibe a nonagon in a oiii'lc, i c,'loNorr TO Fio 9

To insciibe a nonagon in a oiii'lc, i c,'lo

divide it into nine pails ''A ciiclc being dosci ibed as befoie, 
insciibe a tiiaiigle ^Tf.mjrcT d. I’lius tlie cnele is di- 
vided into thico ]iails Tliice equal ehoids •gTij^jT being

diavn in each of Ihese poilions^ a nonagon is thus m'-eiibed 
in it 'm and Ihice oblongs

aic foimed M itliiii ihe same , of vbich Iho ba'-e is equal 1o the 
side of the (nisei ibcdj tnanglc I Odicii

tivo peipendienlais being diann iii'lhe oblong, it

IS divided into thicc poi lions, Iho fust and last of which me 
tiiaiiglos , and the inloi mediate one is a tclragon

TTViI 3X I The base in each of them is a thud pait of the

Bide of the insciibcd tiiangle It is the

upiight (of a lectangulai tnangle) s>nr4ir=^H‘5i^rc; the pcqien- 
dieulai IS its side, and the scjuaic loot of the sum of then s(ju- 
aies is the lypotheniise , and is the

Bide of the nonagon »i q ■h «!

To find the peipendiculai put an assiiniod choid H.fhMd^lJT 
equal to half the choid of the (insciibcd) tetiagon,

find its allow in the inannci afoicsaid, and siibtiact that fiom 
the allow of the choid ^"51^ j y pJC of the (insciibed) tnangle,

the lemaindei is the peipendiculai 1 Thus the pei-

pendiculai comes out21*,989 it isjUiC side of a lectaiigulai 
tnangle The thud pait of the insciibcd 
tnangle is 3i,Gl.l it is the upnght I The scpiaie loot

of the sum of then squaics qjr'qjji is 41,031 and is the 
side of the insciibed nonagon ” qTn 3 ^»lq^^^l* |

YOGA VAGISimiA:

BOOK I.

ON MORAL APATHY-

CHAPTEE I.

IlSrTRODXJOTlOlSr.

Sectioiv 1.

DIVINE ADOEATION.

® I

pail €|e eternal

O Mj salutation, to tke ^elf-same Reality, from whom all 
beings proceed, by whom they aie manifest, upon whom 
they depend, and in whom they become extinct (in the end).® I

pail €|e eternal

O Mj salutation, to tke ^elf-same Reality, from whom all 
beings proceed, by whom they aie manifest, upon whom 
they depend, and in whom they become extinct (in the end).

2 He is the knower, the knowledge and all that is to be 
known. He is the seei, the (act of) seeing, and all that is to 
be seen. He is the actor, the cause and the effect theiefore salu- 
tation to Hun (who IS all) knoivledge himself.

3. Salutation to Him (who is) supreme bliss itself, from 
whom flow the dews of delight (as water springs from a fountain) 
both in heaven and eaith, and who is the life of all.

SECTION II.

Naeeative of Suti'eshna.

4 .<. One S utikshna, a Br^hmana, whose mind was full of floubts, 
went to the hermitage of Agasti and asked ’the sage respect- 
fully

6 , Oh gieat sage ! that art infornied in all the ways and

2

YOGA Vi^SlsriTIIA

tiutlis of viitue, and knowcst witli ceiLiinly all the Sd&lias; I am 
111 a great doubt (about somctlung) winch I pi ay 3 ou w ill Icindly 
lemove

G Tell me wliethei a man’s acts 01 Ins knowledge oi both of 
tliesCj iSvin yoiu opinion, the cause of Ins emancipation

7 Agasti leplied

As the flight of buds in the an is efCecled bv means of both 
then ivings, so the highest state of cm mcipation is altanv^d 
thiough the mstiumentalit}’’ of both knowledge and acts

8 It IS neithci 0111 acts noi knowledge alone that pioduees 
emancipation, but both togcthci aie known as the means of it.

SECTION III 
AxrcDOTi: or K\'ju xy v.

9 . I will recite to 3’ou an instance on tins siibieet from 
the old tiaditions, lelating a Bidhman named Kai'an^a, who was 
leaincd in the Vedas in days of j'oie.

10 He w'as the son of Agnive^s} a and accomplished in the 
Vedas and all then blanches, and aftoi finishing his studies 
at the preceptoi’s, letuined to his owm abode10 He w'as the son of Agnive^s} a and accomplished in the 
Vedas and all then blanches, and aftoi finishing his studies 
at the preceptoi’s, letuined to his owm abode

11. lie lemained a sceptic at home, holding Ins laeituinity 
and meitness to acts wdicn his fathci Agmvcs^'.a saw his son so 
slack in his duties, he upbi aided him thus foi his good

lS- 13 . Agnives^'a said

Why my son do j’-ou not discharge your duties, tell me how'- 
can you succeed (111 anything) if jmu lemain inactive, and tell 
me also the leason of jmui cessation fiom acts.

14 KAiunya lephed

The offering of dail}’- oblations, and peifoimance of moiinng 
and evening devotions dining life, aie inculcated in the Veda and 
law as the active duties (of men)

, 15 But it IS neither by acts 01 riches, nor b^' means of 
progeny, that ono obtains his Iibeiation, it is solely by self- 
denial that Stoics taste the ambiosia (of emanciiiation )

. 16 . Tell me my fathfi > wdiich of these tw'’o oidmances is to be

vaieXgya khanda s

obseiveJ by me ^ Doubtful of this I have become indiffeient to 
acts

17. Agasti said

Heal memysoUj that K^iunyaaftei saying so held his silence^ 
when his fathei seeing him tlius^ lejoiiied his siieech.

18 Agnivesya said

Heal me i elate a naiiative (to ^''ou) my son^ and you having 
fully consideied its purpoit m your mmd^ may do as you may 
choose (best for you)

SECTION IV

• Stohy of Subuchi

19 Theie was a damsel named Suiuchi^ the best of the Apsaxii 
nymphs^ who was seated on the mountain peak of Himalaya^ 
beset by peacocks aiouiid,

20 Heie Kinnaias inflamed by love spoiled with then mates, - 
and the fall o:^heavenly sti earns (G-anga and Yamund.), seived to^ 
expuigate the giavest sms (of men)

31 Sha beheld a messengei of India making his way tJiiough 
the sky, and then this most fortunate and best of J.j}sa)dSf 
addiessed him thus

33 Suiuchi said ,

O thou heiald of gods, tell me kindly whence thou comest, 
and whithei ait thou destined at piesent.33 Suiuchi said ,

O thou heiald of gods, tell me kindly whence thou comest, 
and whithei ait thou destined at piesent.

SECTION V

Account of Aiiishtanejii

33 The divine Aiiel replied Well hast thou asked Oh pietty 
biowed maid, and I will tell thee ail as it is Know, Aiistanemi 
the royal sage, who has made ovei his lealm to his son

3d He has (now) with leligious indiffeience (to the woild), 
set out to the foiest foi (piaetice of) asceticism, and is peifoim- 
ing his austeiities on the Gaud ha Mad ana mountains

35 I am now letuining fiom theie after discharge of my 
enand, and lepaiimg to Sakia^s (jralace) to report the matter

36. Suiuchi said

Tell me, my Lord, rvliat matter has, taken jilace there. I am

4

YOGA VA'sISIITIIA.

with submission (much) inquisitive after itj nor sliouldest thou 
cause me (the pain of) anxiety.

27. The messeng-ei leplied .

Heal me gentle maid, i elate to thee in length (everything) 
as it has occiiired.

28. On healing that the king was piaetising the utmost 
rigois of asceticism iii that foiest, India, the loid of Gods, desiied 
me to take this heavenly car and lepaii at once to the spot

29. “ Take this cai,” said he, “ healing the (dancing) Jj}~ 
saids equipped with all then musical instiuments, and funiished 
with a band of Gandhaivas, Siddhas, Yakshas and Kinnaias ”

30. "Convey them,'’'’ said he, "with all then wiied instiu- 
ments, flutes and diums to the auspices of the Sylvan mount of 
Gand/ia Mddana.

31. " Theie having placed the Piinee Aiistanemi m the vehicle, 
bung him to the enjoyment of heavenly delight in this city 
of Amaidvait (the seat of immortals)"

32. The messenger added

Recemng this injunction of Indra and taking the car with 
all its eqmpments, I pioceeded to that mountain

33. Havmg ariivcd at the mountain and advancing to the 
heimitage of the kingj I delivered to him the oideis of the 
gieat India.33. Havmg ariivcd at the mountain and advancing to the 
heimitage of the kingj I delivered to him the oideis of the 
gieat India.

34 Heaimg my woids. Oh happy damsel • the king stroke 
to me with leluctance and said "I wish to ask thee something 
O messengei, which (I hope) thou %\alt deign to answei

35. "Tell me what good and what evils there aie in heaven, 
that knowing them (befoiehand), I may think of settluig theie 
as I may choose "

36 I answei ed, saying *

In heaven theie is ample lewaid foi meiit, confeinng perfect 
bliss (to all) , but it is the degiee of mentoiiousness that leads 
one to highei heavens.

37 Py modeiate -viitue, one is ceitamly entitled to a middle 
station, and virtue of aninfeiioi oidei, leads apeison to a lower 
position (mthe heavens).^

VAIRii^GYA KHANDA

5

38. But one^s virtue is destroyed by bis impatience at the 
excellence of bis betteiSj by bis baugbtmess to bis equals, and 
by bis joy at tbe mfeiioiity of otbeis

89 ' When one-’s viitue is thus destroyed, be must enter 
tbe abode of moitals. These and tbe like aie tbe effects of 
meiit and dement (witb us) in heaven.

40 Healing this, Ob good maiden, tbe king answeied and 
said I do not. Oh divine messengei • bke tbe heaven that is 
of such like conditions.

41 “I will henceforth piactise tbe most austeie foim 
of devotion, and abandon this my unhallowed human fiame 
111 the same way, as tbe snake abandons bis time-woin-skin 
(slough) .

42. '^Be thou pleased, Ob delegate of tbe Gods > to letuin 
with thy heavenly cai to tbe piesence of tbe gieat India whence 
thou comest, a.nd faie thee well."

43. Tbe celestial emissaiy resumed •

Thus being bid, I went Ob goodly dame to tbe piesence of 
Sakia to repoittbe matter. Who upon my lebeaisal of tbe 
mattei, was stiuck >vitb gieat wonder.

44 Then tbe gieat India again spoke to me with a sweet voice 
and said “ Go you my beiald again to that king, and take him 
to tbe hermitage of Vdlmlki44 Then tbe gieat India again spoke to me with a sweet voice 
and said “ Go you my beiald again to that king, and take him 
to tbe hermitage of Vdlmlki

45 “ He IS well acquainted with eveiy tiutli, tell him my 
eiiandfoi tbe mstiuction of tbe dispassionate pnnce, saying

46 “ Ob thou gieat sage* lemonstiate with this piince who 
is bumble and dispassionate, and dislikes tbe enjoyments of 
heaven.

47 "So that tins piince who is aggiieved at the miseiies of 
tbe woild, may giadually come to attain bis emancipation

48 I then went and explained my mission to tbe loyal 
beimit, took him to tbe sage Valmtki (who bad gi own amidst 
tbe ant-bills), and to whom I delivered gieatj Indid^s charge 'foi 
tbe king^s practice (of tbe means) foi bis final liberation

49. Then tbe sage (named after the ant-bill in which be

5 YOGA VASISHTHA'

had giown), welcomed the King with gentle inquiiies legard- 
111 g his welfaie

50 The pi nice leplied

‘^‘^Oh gieat seo , that ait informed m all the truths of leLgioUj 
and ait the gieatest of them that know the knouable, thy 
veiy sight has given me all that I desiiedj and theieiii is all 
my welfaie

51 " Grieat sire, I wish to learn fiom thee how I may esca^ie 
the miseiies which aiise fiom one^s connection with this woild^ 
and which (I hope) thou ivilt leveal to me without leseive

5'2,. Yalmiki said '

Heal me Oh king 1 I will relate to you tlie entiie Udmilyana, 
by the heaiing and understanding of which you 11111 be saved 
even while in this life.

SECTION VI

History of Kama. i

53. Hear me Oh great and intelhgent king, repeat to you the 
sacied conveisation which took place between Erma and Vasish- 
tha 1 elating the way to liberation, and which I well know fiom 
my knowledge (of human nature) .

54 The piince said

“ O thou best of sages, tell me precisely who and what this 
Rama was, what was his bondage and how he got fieed fiom it ”

55 Vdlmiki said54 The piince said

“ O thou best of sages, tell me precisely who and what this 
Rama was, what was his bondage and how he got fieed fiom it ”

55 Vdlmiki said

Hail was pioscnbed under an imjiiecation to take upon 
himself the foim of a piince, with an assumed ignoiance as 
that of a man of little understanding-

56 The piince said “Tell me who was the authoi of that im- 
pieeation, and how it could befal on Rdma, who was the iieisoni- 
fication of consciousness and felicity, and the veiy image of 
wisdom

57 Vdlmiki leplied Sanat-kumaia, who was devoid of 
de3ires,hAd been residing at the abode of Biahma, to which 
^hshuu, the Loid of the tliiee woilds, was a visitoi fiom Vaikuntha

58 The Loid God ,was welcomed by all the inhabitants

vaira'gya KHANDA 7

of the Buihnaldla as well as by Biahma himself, except by 
Sanat-kuraiia who was thus beheld and addiessed to by the 
god

59 ' Sanat-kum^r, it is ignorance that makes thee forsake 
thy desues foi fear of legeneiation (on eaithl, theiefoie must 
thou be boin under the name of Saia-janmd to be troubled 
with desires

60 Sanat-kunidia in letuin denounced Vishnu by saying 
'^Even all discerning as thou art, thou shalt have to saciifice 
thine omniscience foi some time, and pass as an ignorant mortal 
(on eaitb.)

61. Theie was another anathema pronounced upon Vishnu 
by the sage Bhiigu, who seeing his wife killed (by him), became 
incensed with anger and said. Vishnu thou shalt have also to 
be beieft of thy wife

6Z. He was again cursed by Vimcld to be depiived of his 
wife, on account of his beguiling her (m the foim of her 
husband)

63 Again when the pregnant wife of Deva-datta was killed 
(with feai) on seeing the man-lion figuie of Vishnu ;

64 The leonine Han was denounced by the husband, who 
was soiely afflicted at the loss of his consoit, to be thus separated 
fiom his wife also64 The leonine Han was denounced by the husband, who 
was soiely afflicted at the loss of his consoit, to be thus separated 
fiom his wife also

65. Thus denounced by Bhrigu, by Sanat-kumara, Deva-datta 
and Viinda, he was obliged (to be boin m this eaith) in the 
, figuie of a human being

66 I have thus explained to you the causes of all the im- 
pieeations (which weie passed on Vishnu), and will now relate to 
you all other things which you shall have carefully to attend to.

CHAPTEB II.

Ueason' of Wiutijtg the H'vm'ayaha.

SECTION I

Persons Entitled to its Perusal.

r

n ALUTATION to tlie Loid, the universal soul^ shining’ mani- 
u fest in heaven, eaifch and the sky, and both ivitliin and 
Without myself.

2. One convinced of his constraint (m this moital woild), 
and desiring his liheiation fiom it, and, uho is neitliei wholly 
igiioiant of, noi quite conveisant with divine Icnou ledge, is 
entitled to (the peiusal of) this woik

3 The wise man, who having well consideied the nariative 
(of Ild,ma) as the fiist step, comes afterwaids to think on the 
means of libeiation (as aie expounded herein), he shall verily 
be exempt fiom tiansmigration (of his soul)

4' Know, O destioyei of thy enemies * that I have first 
embodied the histoiy of Rama in this Riimdyana (as the prc- 
paratoiy step to salvation).

5 And I have given the same to my attentive pupil the obe- 
dient and intelligent Bhaiadw.ija, as the sea yields Ins gems 
to their seekei

6 These historical prepaiatories weie rehearsed by the learned 
Bharadwaja in the piesence of Brahmd, seated in a ceitain 
foiest of the Sumeru Mountain

7 Then the lord Biahmc4, the gieat giandfather of the 
inhabitants (of the thiee woilds), was so highly pleased with 
him that he addi eased him saying , "Oh my son I ask the best 
boon that thou ivishest foi ”8 Bhaiadw4]a said " Oh thou loid, that art master of the 
past and futme tinjes, giant me the desued boon of communi- 
cating to me the means whereby people are hberated fiom their 
iniseiies ”

vaiba'gya khanda

9

SECTION II 
Braiima^^s Behest

9 Brahma said “Go ask diligently of thy pi eceptor V dlmiki, 
to eomjilete the faultless R^mayana that he has undei taken (to 
wiite)

10 “By the heaimg of whieli men will get ovei then mani- 
fold eiiois^ in the same mannei as they pass over the sea by 
the budge built ovei it bj’’ the gieat llilmaj who was fiaught with 
all good qualities

11 Vdlmiki said Saying this to Bhaiadwaja^ the supieme 
maker of all beings (Biahnid) aecompanied him to my heimitage.

12- In light earnest was the god weleomed by me unth 
the and off ei mgs of watei and the like, when the loid

of tiutli spoke to me for the good of all eieatmes,

13 Biahma spake to me saying • “Do not Oh sage * give up 
your undei talcing until its final completion No pains ought 
to be spaied to make the histoiy of Rdma as faultless as it ought 
to be

14 “ By this woik of youis men will foithwith pass over 
this hazaidous woild, in the same mannei as one ciosses the 
sea in a vessel ’’

15 Again said the mcieate Biahmd to me “ I come to tell 
this veiy thing to you, that you complete the woik foi the 
benefit of mankind

16 Then Oh king, the God disa 2 ipeaied fiom my sacied 
heimitage in a moxuent, just as the wave subsides in the water 
no soonei it has heaved itself

17 1 was stuck with wondei at the disajipeaianee of that 
(deity), and then being comjiosed in my mind, I inquiied of 
Bhaiadwdja, saying

18. Tell me, Bhaiadwdja, what Biahmd sjioke (to me) in 
the heimitage, to which he answeied saying

19 “The God commanded jmu to complete the Bdmdyana 
for the good of men, and as a means of their crossing over the 
gulf of the woild ” ’

10 yOOA VA'SISllTIIA

SECTION III 
InQUIKY of BllAllADAUV'jA19 “The God commanded jmu to complete the Bdmdyana 
for the good of men, and as a means of their crossing over the 
gulf of the woild ” ’

10 yOOA VA'SISllTIIA

SECTION III 
InQUIKY of BllAllADAUV'jA

20. ‘^Now Sn” said Bliaiadwiljaj “ex'idam to me liow the 
gieat minded Rama and Bhaiata conducted themselves amidst 
the tionhles of this woild

21. ^^Tell me also how did Satiughna^ Lalcshmanaj and the 
renowned Slfcd, and all those who followed lldma^ as also the 
mmisteis and then highl}'’ intelligent sons, conduct themsel\6s 
(on eaith)

22 “Tell me cleail}'" how they escaped all its miseiies, that 
I may do tlie same with the lest of mankind , (foi onr 
salvation)

23 Being tlins lespectfiilly addicsscd by Bhaiadwdja, I 
was led, Oh gieat King > to cairy out the behest of mj’’ loid 
(Biahma), and to naiiate the Rdmdj’-ana to him, saj^ing

24 Hear my son Bhaiadw.tja, I will tell you all that you 
have asked, and by the lieaimg of whicli you shall be enabled 
to cast away the dioss of eiiois (undei which you labour).

25 You aie ivise and have to manage yourself m the mannei 
of the felicitous and lotus-ej'^ed Rama, with a mind fiee fiom 
(worldly) attachments.

26 (Know that) Lakshmana, Bhaiata, the gieat minded 
Satiughna, Kausalj'-a, Sita, Sumitiit as well as Dasai-atha,

27 With Kiitasbra and the two fiiends of Rdma, and Vas- 
ishbha and Vdmadeva, and the eight mmisteis of state as well as 
many otheis, had reached the summit of knowledge (by this 
means)

28 Then names are Bhnshta, Jayanta, Bhasa, Satya, Vijaya, 
Vibishanah, Sushena and Hanumdna And also Indiajfta (who 
had attained his hightest knowledge)

29 These were the eight mmisteis of Rdma, who aie said 
to have been equally dispassionate in then minds, and content 
with what was then lot They weie great souls, and fiee in then 
lives

VAIRAGYA KHANDA

11VAIRAGYA KHANDA

11

30 Well my soiij if you follow the mannei in which these 
men obseived saciifieial iifces, gave and leceived then offeimgs, 
and how they lived and thought, 3'-ou aie at once fieed fiom 
the tuimoils (of life)

31 One fallen iii this boundless ocean of the woild, may 
en] 03 '- (the bliss of) libeiatioii by the magnanimity of Ins soul 
He shall nob come acioss giief oi destitution, but lemam evei 
satisfied by being fieed fiom the fevei of anxiety

CHAPTER III 
Vv'lmi'kPs Adaionition

SECTION I 
0:n^ Tklk Kxoam.ldgl,

(

YjiHARADWAJA ‘^aicl, OBialiman* lelatc to me fiist about

^ Rama^ and then cnligliten me b^'’ degiecs with the conditions 
o£ attaiiung libeiation in this lifc^ that I ma}* be liappy loi ever,

2. Vdlmiki lejihed ^^ICnow, holy Saint* all woildly con-. 
ce])tions to be as eiioneous as the A'aiious hues that taint the 
deal fiimament It is bettei theiefoie to efface them oblivion, 
rathei than levive then leminiscence (in leiiealed slates of 
existence) . •

3 All visible objects aie absolute negation ; yye have no 
idea of them save fiom sensation Inquue into these appiehen-. 
sions, and j^u ivill nevei find them as leal

4 It IS 2ios3ible hoie Ion caith) to attain to this knowledge 'of 
WQildly vanities) which is fully expounded hcicin if you will listen 
to it attentively, you shall get at the tuilli and not olheiuise

5 The conception of this uoild is a mistake, and though no 
actually see it, it is nevei in existence It appeals in the same 
light, O sinless saint, as the vaiiagated colouis m the sky

6. The conviction of the non-existence of the objects of vi-. 
Sion, leads to efface then imjnessions fioin the mind Thus per- 
fected, theie sjnings in it the suju’eine and eternal bli':s of selfn 
extmeiaon

7. Otheiwise theie is no qiuetism to be had lieiein by men 
like you, i oiling in the dejiths of science foi thousands of yeaia 
and unacquainted W(’th the tine knowledge.7. Otheiwise theie is no qiuetism to be had lieiein by men 
like you, i oiling in the dejiths of science foi thousands of yeaia 
and unacquainted W(’th the tine knowledge.

8. Complete abandonment of desiies, styled as the best 
state of libeiation, is the only puie step toivards beatitude.

VAIEAGYA KHANDA

13

9 The absence of desiies leads to the extnietion of mental 
actions, in the same inannei as the absence of cold conduces to the 
dissolution of small pai tides of ice

10 Out desiies which iijihold oui living bodies tand minds), 
bind us fast as by stiings to oui bodily piison These being 
loosened, the inwaid soul is libeiated (as a bud fiom its cage)

11. Desiies aie of two kinds, pine and inipuie The im- 
puje ones aie the cause of tiansmigiation, while the ^Juie ones 
seiwe to destioy it.

12 An impuie dcsiie is of the foim of a mist of ignoiance, 
consisting m the feeling of an obdurate egoism This is said 
by the wise to be the cause of biith (ciansmigiation)

13 A puie desiie is like a paichcd seed incapable to bung 
foith the gcim of tiansmigiation, and only sujipoits the jiresent 
body (in its diy iigidity)

14 The iiure desiies which aie unattended with tiansmi- 
giation, leside in the bodies of living libeiated men, like un- 
moviiig wheels (unable to move them to action)

15 Those that have the pine desiies aie not liable to trans- 
migiation, and aie said to be knowing in all things that ought 
to be known These aie called the Ining — libeiated and aie 
of supcrioi intelligence

16 I will exiilain to you how the high minded Rama attain- 
ed the state of libeiation in life, lieai 3 mu this that old age and 
death ma}- not come ujion you

SECTION II 
Eahia IIistorv or Rama

17 Ileai Oh highly intelhgent Rliaiadawdja the auspicious

course and conduct of Rdnia^s life , w hereby jmu shall be enabled 
to undei stand everything at all times.17 Ileai Oh highly intelhgent Rliaiadawdja the auspicious

course and conduct of Rdnia^s life , w hereby jmu shall be enabled 
to undei stand everything at all times.

18 The lotus-eyed Ritina aftei coming^ out of Ins school, 
remained for many daj's at home in his diveisions, and without 
anything to fear.

14

YOGA VASlSIiTHA.

19 III the coiuse of time as lie took the lems of the Govein- 
meiit, (ill hi 3 haiidh his people en 303 ’^ed all the hliss that absence 
of guef and diseases could imjiart (to them).

20. Atone time RAma^s mind vntuous as he ^^as, became 
aiiKious to see the difleicnt places of pilgi image, the cities and 
hoi milages (that la}’’ about)

21 So Rdghava with this view, approached his father’s 
feet, he touched the iiaiU (of liis toes) as a swan lays hold 
on the buds of lotus

22 “Oh my fathei” he said, “my mind is dcsnoiis^to see llie 
dilfeient places of pilgi image, temiiles of gods, forests and abodes 
(of men).

23. “Giant me my loid this my petition, as thoic is no ])cti- 
tionci of thine on cai th whom didst tliou evei dislionoi ”

2d. Thus solicited (by llAma), tlie king consiiUcd until 
Vasishtha, and aftei much icflcction granted him the first icrpicst 
lie ever made

25 On a day of lucky stais llama set out (on his ■]Ouinc\) 
with his two biotheis (Lakshmana and Satiuglina), haiing his 
body adorned with auspicious maiks, and (leceiving the) benedic- 
tions which weie pionouuccd on him by the piicsts

26 Accompanied also by a body of learned BiAhmans whom 
Yasishtha had chosen on the occasion, and a select party of his 
associate piinces ,

27 He started fiom home towaids his pilgrimage after he 
received the benedictions and embiaces of his motheis

28 As he went out of his city, the citizens welcomed him with 
the sounds of ti limpets, while the bee-liko fickle eyes of the city 
ladies weie fixed upon his lotus like face28 As he went out of his city, the citizens welcomed him with 
the sounds of ti limpets, while the bee-liko fickle eyes of the city 
ladies weie fixed upon his lotus like face

29 He was hestiewn with handfuls of fiied paddy tin on n 
ovei his body by the beautiful hands of village-women, that made 
him appear like the HimAlaya covered over with snow

30 He dismissed the Biahmans with honoi, and went on

VAIEilGYA KH'ANUA

15

healing the benedictions of the people, and taking a full view o£ 
the landscape aiound him until he pioceeded towaids the foiest

31 He went on distiihutmg alms aftei making his holy 
ablutions and ^leifoiming his devotion and meditation, as he 
giadually passed the limits of Kosala after staitmg fiom his 
palace

SECTION III

-> Ra'ma^s Pilgrimage

32. He went about seeing the many i ivei s and then banks, visit- 
ing the shjines of gods, sacied foiests and deseits fai and i emote 
fiom the lesoits of men, as also the hills, seas and their shoies

33 He saw the Mandaluni blight as the moon, the KdUnchy 
deal as the lotus, and also the following iiveis, Sautsvah, Sataclui, 
Chanch abJidgd, and hdvaii

34 Also Vqm, K) islinavent, Ninnndl/gdfSamjn, ChatmaniaH, 
Vitasid, Vtpdsd and Bdlnidakd,

’ 35 He saiv also the (holy places of) Piagdga, the Nawmlta,

the JDItai nuiiangay Ggd, Vaidnasf, Sngin, Kedd)a and 
laia

36. He saw the Mdnasa and the northern Mansaiavaialakes,. 
and many fieiy lakes and spimgs, the Bdda, the Vindhya range 
and the sea.

37 He saw the fiery pool of Jwdlamukhi, the gieat shiine of 
Jaganndtha, the fountain of Indiadmnna and many othei lesei- 
voiis, iiveis and lakes

38. He visited the shiine of Kdihlega and the Gandak liver 
of Sdlaguwnas, and also the sixty foui shimes sacied to Han 
and Haia.

39 He saw vaiious wondeis, the coasts of the four seas, the 
Ttndhgd lange, the gioves of Haia, and the boundary hills and 
level lands

40 He visited the places of the gieat Bdja^ sJiis and the Bi aJi-40 He visited the places of the gieat Bdja^ sJiis and the Bi aJi-

maisJns, and went whei ever there was any auspicious sanctuary 
of the gods and Bidhmans »

16

YOGA VASISIITHA

4'! Thus they all honouring lldnia^ tiavelled fai and wide in 
company wuth Ins Uvo hiotheis, and iiavei'^ed all the foui quarteis 
on the suiface of the eaith.

43 Ilonouiedby the gods, Ktniiajas and hj’’ men, and ha\ing 
seen all the places on eaibh, the descendant of Raghu returned 
home, like Siva wdien he letuins to the Sivalo!>.a,

CHAPTER IV.

Ra'mA^S ReTUEN EEOM PiLGEIjMAGE.

K ama Stie\vii over with handfiill of floweis by the citizens 
(smioundnig him) enteied the palace, as when thebeautious 
J>ayanta (son of India) enteis his celestial abode

2 On his fiist aiiival he bent himself in leveience before his 
fathei, bffoie Vasishtha, befoiehis biotheis, his fiiends, the Bi^h- 
manas and the eldeily membeis of the family

3 Repeatedly embiaced as he was by fiiends, by his fathei^ 
motheis and by the Bi^hmanas, the son of Raghu bowed down 
his head to them mth ]oy

4i The assembled people aftei then familiai conversation with 
R^ma in the jialace, sti oiled about on all sides highly delighted 
With his speech, lesemblmg the music of a flute

5 Thus eight days weie passed in festive miith consequent 
to the aiiival of R^ma, and shouts of joy weie sent foith by the 
elated multitude

6 Theneefoith Rdghava continued to dwell happily at home, 
with 1 elating to his fi lends, the diffeient customs and manners of 
the countiies (he visited) on all sides.

7 Pie lose eaily in the morning and peifoimed his morning 
seivice aecoirlmg to law. He then visited his fathei seated as 
India in his Council

8 He next passed a foui fch pai 6 of the day in company with 
Vasishtha and othei sages, and was gieatly edified by then coii- 
veisations which weie full of instiuction8 He next passed a foui fch pai 6 of the day in company with 
Vasishtha and othei sages, and was gieatly edified by then coii- 
veisations which weie full of instiuction

9 He used also to go out foi spoit under oideis of his father, 
and suiiounded by a laige numbei of tioojis, to foiests full of 
(wild) boais and buffaloes ^

10 Then aftei letuimng home and peifoiming his bath and 
othei iites with his fiiends, he tookjbis meal with them, and 
VoL I. 3

18

YOGA VA'SISHTDA

jjagsed tlie uig-lit in company willi Ins beloved companion'?

11 In these and similar inaciiees did he pass his dajs with 
his biotheis at his fatheits house, aftei his return fiom the jiilgn- 
mage.

12. Oh sinless (Bhaiad\v.l]a), with his conduct becoming 
a pimce, Rdma passed his days w ith giving delight to tlic good 
men that suiioimded him, in the maniiei of the moon that glad- 
dens mankind with his soothing ambiossial beams. *

CHAPTER V

Of Eama^s self-dejection and its cause

V ALMIKI said

Affceiwaids Rdma attained tlie fifteenth year of his age, and 
so also Satiughiia and Lakshmana who followed Rdma (in bnth), 
a^itained also the same age

2 Ehaiata continued to dwell mth joy at the house of his 
mateinah giandfathei, and the king (Dasaiatha) luled the whole 
eaith as usual

3 The most wise king Dasaiatha (now) consulted his ministeis 
day aftei day about the maiiiage of his sons

4< But as Rdma lemamed at home since his leturn fiom pil- 
giimagCj he began to decay day by day as the tianslucent lake m 
autumn

5. His blooming face with its out-sti etched eyes, assumed by 
degrees a paleness like that of the witheimg petals of the white 
lotus beset by a swaim of bees

6 He sat silent and motionless in the postuie of his folded 
legs (Pachndsana), and lemained absoibed in thought with his 
palm placed undei his cheek and neck

7 Being emaciated in peison, and giowing thoughtful, sad 
and disti acted in his mind, he lemained speechless as a mule pic- 
ture in jiainting7 Being emaciated in peison, and giowing thoughtful, sad 
and disti acted in his mind, he lemained speechless as a mule pic- 
ture in jiainting

8 On being lepeatedly lequested by the anxious inmates of 
the family to jieifoim his daily rites, he dischaiged them with a 
melancholy countenance, (lileially-ivith his faded lotus-like face)

9 Seeing the accomplished lld,ma the mine of meiits in 
such a plight, all his brotheis lilcewise were leduced to the same 
condition with him

10 The king of the eaith obseiving all h\s tliiee sons thus 
dejected and lean, gave way to anxiety together with all his 
queens. >

20

YOGA VAtSiSHTnA

11 Dasaratlia asked Udma lei^eatcdly and in a g’cnile voice (lo 
teU Iiim) what Ins anxietj'" was, and what was the cause o£ liis 
thoughtfulness, but he letuined no answei to it.

12 Then being taken up m Ins fathei’s lap, the lotus-eyed 
Hima leplied, that he had no anxiety whatevei, and held his 
silence

13. Afteiwaids the king Dasaiatha asked Vasishtha, the 
best of speakeis and well mfoimed in all mattci», as to the cau^e 
why Rdma was so soiiowiul

14< The sage Vasishtha thought ovei the matter (foi a wliilc), 
and then said, thcic is Oh king l a cause of lldma^s sadness, bub 
you need not be anxious about it

15. “Wise men Oh king* never enteitam the fluctuations of 
angei oi giief, oi a leiigtliened deliglit fiom fiivolous causes, jii'^t 
as the gieat elements of the noild do not change then stales (of 
meitness) unless it weic foi the sake of (some new) inodiietion.

L

CHAPTER VI

Advent oe Vis-w^mitea to the Royal Couet

r E ''.IIE king was tliiown into soiiow and suspense at these woids 
-* of the pi nice of sages ( Vasishtha)^ but kept his silence foi 
sometimej and waited (that time might work a change)

^ (Meanwhile) the queens of the palace, kept themselves 
watchful of the movements of R^ma with anxious caiefulness

3 At .this very time the famous Viswdmitia, the gieat sage 
came to visit the king of men at Ayodhya3 At .this very time the famous Viswdmitia, the gieat sage 
came to visit the king of men at Ayodhya

4 The intelligent and wise seei had his saciificial iites dis- 
tuibed by the RdlsJiasas, who weie deceitfully poweiful and 
giddy with then stiength.

5 It was toi the seeuiity of his sacrifice that the sage waited 
on the king, because he was unable to accomplish it in peace (by 
himself)

6 It was also for the puipose of then destiuction, that the 
illustiious Viswdmitra, who was the gem of austeie devotion had 
come to the city of Ayodhyd

7 Desnous of seeing the king, he spoke to the guaids at the 
gate, to leport the aiiival of Kausika the son of Garlbi to the 
king mth desjiatch

8 On healing these woids, the guaids weie stiuek with fear 
111 then minds, and ran as they weie bid to the palace of the 
king.

9 Coming to the Royal abode, the dooi-keepeis infoimed the 
chief-wardei of the ai rival of Viswamitia the loyal sage

10 The staff-beaiei immediately proceeded to the piesence of 
the king, seated among the piinces and chiefs (undei him) in the 
Couit house, and gave his lepoit saying

11. ‘^Please youi majestic, theie is waiting at the door a 
jmghty personage of majestic ajipeaiance, biight as the moiiimg 
smi, with his pendant locks of ban (led and luddy) as sunbeams.

^2

yoga yasishtha

1:^ The biilliaiicy ot Ins i)cii, 0 Ji has brightened the place from 
tlie top-most flag down to the giouud, and made the hoises, men 
and armoiy shine as with a golden hue

13 No sooner had the ivaidei appealed (before the king), 
and with huiiied words announced the aiiival of the sage 
Viswd.mitia

14 Than the best of kings as he heaid the heiald say so, 
rose at once fiom Ins thione oi gold with all the ministcis and 
chiefs that suiiounded him

15. He walked immediately on foot with the slaS of rices 
and ehiefs by whom he was held in honour and regaid, and m 
company with ^^asislitha and ^^^^madeva15. He walked immediately on foot with the slaS of rices 
and ehiefs by whom he was held in honour and regaid, and m 
company with ^^asislitha and ^^^^madeva

16 lie went to the spot wheie the gicat sage as ailing, 
and saw Viswdmitia the chief of sages standing at the gatenay

17 His priestly piowess .pined with his militaiy valoui, 
made him appeal as the sun descended on earth onf some account

18 He was hoaiy with old age, lough-skmned by the piaotice 
of austeiities, and coveied down to his shoulders by red-biight* 
braids of ban, leserabling the evening clouds over to^iping a 
mountam brow

19 He was mild looking and engaging in his appearance, but 
at the some time as biilliant as the oib of the sun lie was 
neither assuming noi repulsive, but possessed of an ineffable gia- 
vity and ma 3 esty in his person

20 He was attractive yet foimidable (in his look), clear yet 
vast (in his mind), deep and full (m knowledge), and shining 
(\nth his inward light)

21 His life time had no limit, nor his mind any bound to it, 
noi had age impaiied his undeistamng He held the ascetics pot 
in one hand, that went (through life) as his only faithful com- 
panion.

22 The compassionateness of his mind, added to the sweet 
complacency of Ins ^speech and looks, pleased the people as if they 
were actually seived with nectar diops, or sprinkled ovei with 
ambiosial dews.

VAIRAQYA KHANDA

^3

23 His "body decorated by the sacied thiead, and his white 
prominent eyebrows^ made him appeal as a wondei to the eyes 
of his beholdeis

24' On seeing the sage, the lord of earth lowly bent himself 
at a distance, and then bowed down to him (so low), that the 
giound Avas decoiated by the gems pendant upon his crown

25 The sage also in his turn greeted the Lord of the earth 
on the spot with sweet and kind ivords, like the sun greeting the 
loid of the gods

26 Af^ei wards the assembled Brd,hmans (of the court) headed 
by Vasishtha, honouied him with their welcomes26 Af^ei wards the assembled Brd,hmans (of the court) headed 
by Vasishtha, honouied him with their welcomes

27 The king said “we are as highly favouied. Oh holy sage * 
by thine unexpected appeal anee and thy gloiious sight, as a bed of 
lotuses at the sight of the luminous sun

28 Oh sa»e, I have felt at thine appearance the happiness 
which knows no bounds, and ivliich has no diminution m it

. 29 This day we must be placed at the front rank of the 
f 01 fcunate, as we have become the object of thine advent

30 With these and similar conveisations that went on among 
the princes and the sages, they proceeded to the couit-hall 
wheie they took then lespective seats.

31. The king finding the best of sages (Viswamitia; so 
veiy piosperous in his devotion, felt some hesitation to offei him 
the arghya (honoiaiium) himself mth his cheerful countenance.

32 He (the sage) accepted the aighga offeied him by the 
king, and hailed him duimg his act of turning round (the sage), 
accoidmg to the rules of Sdstia ,

33. Thus honouied by the king, he with a eheeiful counten- 
anee asked the Lord of men about the good health (of himself and 
family), and the fulness of his finance

34 Then coming m contact Avith Vasishtha, the great sage 
saluted him as he deserved ivitli a smile, and asked him about his 
health (and of those in his heimitage).

35 After then inteiview and exchange of due court^es

24 YOGA VASISIITHA.

had lasted foi a while to the satisfaction of all in the i oyal as- 
sembly ,

36 They both took then lespective seats j when evciy one 
(m the couit) lespectfully gieeted the sage of exalted 2 ^iowess

37 Aftei the sapient sage (Viswd-mitia) was seated, they 
made vaiious offerings oipddj/a, Mghya andkine to hmi

38 Having honoui ed Viswiimitia in duo f oi ra, the loi d of men 
condescended to addiess him with agladest mind and in subdiis- 
sive teims, with his jialrns folded ovei each othei.

SECTION II

Address of King Dasaratha.SECTION II

Address of King Dasaratha.

39. He said, “ Sii, your coming heie is as giateful to me as 
the obtaining of nectai by one, as a ramfall aftei a di aught, and 
as the gammg of sight by the blind.

40 Again it is as delightful to me as the getting of a son 
by a childless man m his beloved wife, and coming in possession 
of a tieasuie iii a dieam

41 Youi advent is no less j>leasing to me than one’s meeting 
with the object of his wishes, the aiiival of a fiiend, and the le- 
eoveiy of thing that was given foi lost

4S It gives me the joy that is deiived fiom the sight of a 
deceased fiiend suddenly letuimng by the way of the sky It is 
thus Oh Bi4hman, I welcome yoiii visit to me

43 Who IS thei e that is not glad to live in the heaven (Bi ahma- 
loka) ? I feel myself as happy Oh sage * at your advent, and this 
I tell you tiuly

44 (Now tell me) what is youi best jileasuie, and what I may 
do foi you , O Vipia, that aie the best of the viituous, and most 
piopeily deserving of my services

45 Foimeily had you been famed under the title of Edjaishi 
<01 loyal sage) , but since, made glorious by dint of youi asceti- 
cism, you have been jiiomoted to the rank of a Biahmaishi (oi Biah- 
man sage] Wheiefoie you aie truly the object of my worship

46 I am so glad at your sight that it soothes my mmost

VAIEAGYA KHANDA 25

soulj m the same manner as an ablution in Gang^^s stieam cheers 
the mind.

47 Fiee as you are fiom fears and desires, from math and 
passions and the feelings of pleasure, pain and disease, it is very 
wonderful. Oh Bidihman, that you should have recourse to me 
(for anything)

48 I consider myself as situated at a holy sanetuaiy, and 
ab'jolved from all my sms, or as merged in the lunar sphere (by 
your presence). Oh * best of the learned in the truths of the Vedas.

49, I understand your appearance as that of Brahmd, himself 
befoie me,’ and I confess myself, O sage • to be purified and fa- 
voured by your advent.49, I understand your appearance as that of Brahmd, himself 
befoie me,’ and I confess myself, O sage • to be purified and fa- 
voured by your advent.

50 I am indeed so gratified at your arrival, that I deem my- 
self fortunate in this birth, and that I have not lived in vain but 
led a truly good life.

51 My heart cannot contain within itself, but overflows (with 
joy) like the sea at the sight of the moon, since I beheld your

person heie and made my respectful obeysance to you.

53. “Whatever is your commission, and whatsoever may be the 
object, O greatest of sages * which has brought you hither, know 
it as already granted (by me) ; for your commands are always to 
be obeyed by me.

53. You need not hesitate to communicate to me your hest,

0 progeny of Kusika, there is nothing, with me which is to be 
kept from you, if you should ask for it.

54 You need not dubitate about my performance of the act.

1 tell it solemnly that I will execute your behest to the last item, 
as I take you in the light of a superior divinity.

55. Upon hearing these sweet words (of the king), which 
weie pleasing to the ears, and delivered with a humility worthy 
of one knowing himself, the far famed and meiitoiious chief of 
the sages felt highly gratified in himself.

CHAPTER VII

, ViswAiMiTiiA** Request foii itAArA.

A fter the illustuous Viswdmitra Pad heaid tlie aforesaid 
unusually lengthy speech of the lion among kings, his hairs 
stood eieet with 3 oy, and he said (in icply)

2 This speech is woithy of thee, O best of kings on eaitli, 
and one descended from a loyal race, and guided by the sage

c

Vasishtha himself

3. Consider well O king about the performance of the act 
which I have in mind, and suppoit (the cause of)viitue

4- I am employed, O chief of men, in religious acts for attain- 
ment of my consummation, wheieto the honible Rdkshasas have 
become my gieat obstimctions4- I am employed, O chief of men, in religious acts for attain- 
ment of my consummation, wheieto the honible Rdkshasas have 
become my gieat obstimctions

5 Whenevei I betake myself to oHei saciilices (to the gods) 
at any place, instantly do these nocturnal demons appeal to des- 
tioy my saciificial iites

6 The chiefs of the Rdkshasas fling heaps of flesh and blood 
on the saciificial giound (befoie me), on veiy many occasions 
that I commence my ceiemonies

7 Being thus obstiucted in my sacrificial duties, I now come 
to thee fiom that spot and with a broken spirit, aftei having 
labouied m vain (foi completion of the rites)

8 I have no mind O king, to give vent to my angei by im- 
piecations, which have no loom in my conduct (of leligious life).

9 Such being the saciificial law, I expect to gain its gieat 
object in peace by thy favoi

10 Being thus oppiessed I have recourse to thy piotection, and 
thou shouldst piotect me (fiom wiongs), otheiwise it is an insult to 
solieitois to be put to disapjiointnient by the best of men (as 
thyself)

11 TLo 1 hast a son, the beautuous Rama, powerful as the

vaira'gya khanda

fipr(^q„tigeij^an(i stiong as the gieat India himself He it is who 
IS able to destory the Rdkshasas,

12 Now mayst thou deliver to me that Rdma thy eldest son, 
having his youthful locks of haii like the sable plumage of a 
ciow, but possessing the tiue valoui of a lieio

13 Protected undei my sacied authoiity, he will be able 
by his personal jnowess, to sevei the heads of the malicious 
R^kshasas.

14. I will do him an infinity of good services, wheieby he 
will in the end become adoied by the inhabitants of the three 
worlds.

15 The night-wandeiing Ild,kshasas cannot abide in the

field before Rama, but must fly like stags in the wilderness before 
the fill 10 us lion ’

16 No other man than Rama can make bold to fight with 
the Raskhasas, as no animal other than the furious lion caii 
stand to fight with the wild elephants16 No other man than Rama can make bold to fight with 
the Raskhasas, as no animal other than the furious lion caii 
stand to fight with the wild elephants

17. Elated with then strength these vicious beings have 
become (as deadly) as poisoned shafts m fighting, and being 
deligates of Khara and Hushana, they aie as furious as deatb 
itself

18 They cannot, Oh thou tiger among kings ’ be able to 
sustain the arrows of Rd,ma, but must set down like the flying 
dust undei the ceaseless showers of his arrows.

19. Let not paternal affection prevail over thee O king, (to 
withhold thy son), as theie is nothing in this world, which the 
high-minded will refuse to part with (to then suitoij

20 1 know it for ceitain, and so shouldst thou know also, 
that the Rakshasas must be destroyed by him , and (believe me; 
that wise men like ourselves will never undei take to engage m an 
uncei tamty

21 I well know the gicat soul of the lotu£>eyed Rama, and so 
does the illustiious Ya'^ishtha, and all other fai -seeing (sages and 
secis)

28

YOGA VASISHTHA

2Z. Should the sense of greatness, duty and "renown, have a 
seat m thy soul, thou shouldst delivei my desiied object thy son 
to me.

23. It will take me ten nights to perform the rites of my 
sacrifice, at which Rdma shall have to stay with me and kill the 
Bdkshasas, who are obnoxious to my rites and enemies of th 
sacrifice.

24. Let the mimsters, Oh Kilkutstha* headed by Vasishth 
jom to give their assent (to it), and delivei thy Rdma to me

25. Thou O son of Raghu, that knowest the times (of religi 
ous observances) must not allow my time to slip, so do as I ma; 
have E-dma Be blest and give not way to sorrow.

26. Even the smallest service appears to be much if done lu 
good time, and the best service is of no avail if done out of season.

27. The illustrious and holy chief of the sages Viswd- 
mitra, paused after saying these words fi aught mth a vutuous 
and useful intention.27. The illustrious and holy chief of the sages Viswd- 
mitra, paused after saying these words fi aught mth a vutuous 
and useful intention.

28. Hearmg these words of the gieat sage, the magnanimous 
king held his silence for some time, with a view to piepaie a fitting 
answer , because no man of sense is evei satisfied with talking un- 
reasonably either befoie others or to himself.

CHAPTER VIII.

Dasakatha^s Reply to Visw/mitra

V IALMIKI added On lieaiing these words of Viswamitia^

the tigei among kings remained speechless for a moment^ 
and then besought him in the lowliness of his spiiit.

^2. Rdma my lotus-eyed boy is only of fifteen yeais of age. ' 
I do not see he is a match for the Rdkshasas

3. Hore is a full alshanhtntlGgion of my soldiers ; of whom, 
Oh my Loid ! I am the sole commander, souiiounded by them 
I will offer battle to the Raskshasas cannibals.

4'. Here aie my brave generals who are well disciplined m war- 
fare , I will be their leader in the height of war with my bow 
111 hand.

5. Accompanied ivith these, I can offer fight to the enemies 
of the gods, and to the gieat India himself, in the same manner 
as the lion withstands the wild elephants.

6. Rdnia is but a boy who has no knowledge of the strength 
of our f 01 CCS, and whose experience has scarcely stretched to the 
battle field beyond the inner apartments (of the house).

7. He is not well trained in arms, nor is he skilled in war- 
fare He does not know to fight with a foe, arrayed m the ordei 
of battle.

8. He only knows how to walk about in the gardens of this 
city and amidst the arbours and pleasant groves.

9. He only knows how to play with his brother princes, in the 
floweiy paiks set apait foi his play within the piecincts of the 
palace.

10. Now a days. Oh Bidhman! he has become by a sad reverse 
of my foi tune, as lean and pale as the withenng lotus under the 
dews10. Now a days. Oh Bidhman! he has become by a sad reverse 
of my foi tune, as lean and pale as the withenng lotus under the 
dews

11. He has no taste for his food, nor can he walk from one 
room to another, but remains ever silent and slow blooding over 
111 *: inwaid giief and melancholy.

30

YOGA VASISHTHA

12 111 my gieat anxiety about him, O chief of sages, I have

been, with my family and dependants, deprived of the gist of 
our bodies, and become as empty clouds of autumn.

13. Can my boy, so young as he is, and thus subjected to dis- 
temper, be fit to fight at all, and again with those maraudeis who 
rove about at nights.

14. Oh thou high-minded sage * it is one's affection foi his son 
that affoids him fai greater jileasuie than his possession of a king- 
dom, 01 his connection with beauteous females, oi even his lelish 
foi the 3 mce of nectar

15 It IS fiom paternal affection that good people (engage to) 
pel foi m the haidest duties and austeiities of leligion, and any 
thing which is painfull m the three woilds,

16. Men aie even prepaied undei certain circumstances to 
saciifiee then own lives, riches and wives, but they can never 
saciifice their childien this is the nature with all hvmg beings.

17. The Rdkshasas aie very cruel in their actions and fight 
deceitful warfaies so that Rima should fight them, is an idea 
which IS veiy painful to me

18. I that have a desire to live, cannot daie to live foi a 
moment in separation fiom Rama, therefoie thou shouldst not 
take him away (fiom me)

19 I have O Kausika* passed nine thousand lams in my life- 
time, eie these four boys weie bom to me after much austeiity

20 The lotus-eyed Rdma is the eldest of these without whom 
the thiee otheis can haidly beai to live

21 This RAma is going to be conveyed by thee against the 
Rdkshasas, but when I am depiived of that son, know me cer- 
tainly foi dead.21 This RAma is going to be conveyed by thee against the 
Rdkshasas, but when I am depiived of that son, know me cer- 
tainly foi dead.

22 Of my foui sons he is the one in whom lests my gieatest 
love Theiefoie do not take aivay R^lma my eldest and most 
vntuous son fiom me

23 If thy intention Oh sage, is to destioy the force of night 
waiidcieis, take me theie accompanied by the foui kinds (ele- 
phants, hoi sc, chaiiots and foot soldieis) of mine aimy.

vaiea'gya khanda

31

Desciibe to me cleaily what these Rdkshasas ave^ how 
strong they aie, whose sons they be and what their size and figuie

25. Tell me the way in whieh the Rdkshasas aie to be des- 
troyed by Rdma or my boys oi by myself, when they aie known 
to be tieacheious m warfare.

26. Tell me all these, Oh great sage • that I can calculate the 
possibility of our making a stand against the fiercely disposed 
Rtikshasas in the open field, when they are ceitainly so very 
powerful

27. TJie Bdkshasa named Rdvana is heard as being very 
liowerful, he is brother of Kuveia himself, and is the son of the 
sage Visiavas.

28 If it IS he, the evil minded Rdvana, that stands in the way 
of thy iitcs, we are unable to contend with that pest.

29. Powe^; and prosperity in all then flourish come within the 
leach of the living at times, but they disappear at others.

80 Now a days we are no match for such foes as Rdvana and 
some otheis Such is the deciee of destiny.

31. Therefore, O thou, that art acquainted with law, do this 
favour to my son, (as not to take him away), unlucky as I am, 
it is thou that ait the arbiter of niy fate

32. The gods, and Asuras, the Gandhaivas and Yakshas, the 
huge beasts, buds and serpents are unable to fight with Rdvana: 
what aie we human beings in arms to him.

33. That Rdkshasa holds the prowess of the most powerful, 
we cannot alfoid to fight ivith him, noi even with his children.33. That Rdkshasa holds the prowess of the most powerful, 
we cannot alfoid to fight ivith him, noi even with his children.

3d. This is a peculiar age in which good people are made 
powerless, I am moi cover disabled by old age and want that 
spirit (that I was expected to possess) derived as I am from (the 
most powerful) race of the Raglius.

35. Tell me 0 Bidhmana* if it is Lavan the son of Madhu (the 
notoiious Asura) that disturbs the sacrificial rites, in that case 
also I will not part with my son.

30. If it bo the two sons of Sunda and Ujiasiinda teiiible as

32

YOGA VASISJdTHA

thej are like the sons of the sun, that disturb your saciifice, in 
that case also I will not give my son to thee.

37. But after all, O Br^haman, shouldest thou snatch him 
from me (by dint of the supernatural power that thou possessest), 
then I am also dead and g-one with him. I do not see any other 
chance of a lasting success of thy devotion (except by my death) 
38 Saying these gentle woids, the descendant of Baghu was 
dioivned m the sea of suspense with regaid to the demand of the 
sage, but being unable to arrive at a conclusion, the gieat king 
was earned away by the current of his thoughts as one by the 
high waves of the sea.

CHAPTER IX.

Visw/jiitra’s Wrath. And His Enraged speech.

ITA'LMIKI said On lieaimg this speech of the king with

» his pitious look and eyes full of teais, the son of ICusika 
bgcame highly incensed and rephed.

2 . Thou art about to break thy promise after pledging thyself 
to its perfoimance, and thus wishest to behave as a deer after 
hawing been a hon (before).

3. This is unbecoming of the race of Raghu, it is acting con- 
trary (to the rules) of this great family. Hot rays must not 
proceed from the cool beamed moon.

4. If thou^art so impotent Oh king ! let me return as I came. 
Thou promise-breaking Kdkustha live happily ivith thy fiiends.4. If thou^art so impotent Oh king ! let me return as I came. 
Thou promise-breaking Kdkustha live happily ivith thy fiiends.

5. As the high spiiited Viswdmitra now moved with iie, the 
earth trembled under him^ and the gods weie filled with fear.

6. Vasishtha the meek and wise and observant of his vows, 
peieeivmg the great sage and fnend of the woild thus influenced 
by ire, gave vent to his speech (as follows).

* 7. Oh king that art born of the race of the Ikshalcus, and art a 
form of virtue itself, and called Dasaiatha the fortunate, and 
ait adorned with all the good qualities known in the thiee worlds.

8. Being famed for thy meekness and stiictness to thy vows, 
and renoivned in all three woilds foi thy virtues and fame, thou 
canst not break thy plighted faith.

9. Preserve thy viitue and think not to break thy faith, com- 
ply with the request of the sage who is honouied in all the three 
worlds.

10. Saying, thou wilt do it, if thou retract thy promise, thou 
losest the object of thy yet unfulfilled desires. Therefore part 
with R4ma from thee.

11. Descended from the race of Ikshaku, and being Dasaratha

VOL. I.

5

3i

■^OGA VASISHTHA

thyself, if thou failesfc to peiform thy promise, who else on eaith 
will evei keep his word ^

13. It is in pursuance of the conduct of gi eat men like thee, that 
low poejile even do not dare to tiansgiess the bounds of their 
duty, how then dost thou wish to violate it thyself.

13 Guarded by this lion-like man (V iswdrmtra) m the manner 
of ambiosia by fiie, no Rakshasa will have powei to prevail ovei 
Rdma, whethei he be accoutered and aimed oi not.

14. Behold him here as the personification of vudue, the 
mightiest of the mighty, and supeiior to all in the world, in his in- 
telligence, and devotedness to asceticism.

15. He IS skilled in all waihke arms that are kno^vn in 
the thiee woilds, no othei man knows them so well noi shall 
ever be able to master them hke him.15. He IS skilled in all waihke arms that are kno^vn in 
the thiee woilds, no othei man knows them so well noi shall 
ever be able to master them hke him.

16. Among the Gods, the Sages, the Asui’as, the Rakshasas, 
the Nd,gas, the Yakshas and Gandhaivas, there is none equal to 
hup (m might).

17. In bygone days when this son of Kushika used to rule 
over his realm, he was furnished with all the arms by Kiisaswa, 
and which no enemy can baffle

18. These aims were the progeny of Krisdswa, and were 
eqally ladiant and powerful as the piogency of the Piajapati/ 
and followed him (m his tiain).

19 Now Daksha (the patriarch) had two beauteous daughters 
Jayd and Supiajd (alias Vijayd), who had a hundred offspnng (as 
persomfications of the imphments, that are mvincible m wai

30 Of these the favoured layA has given buth to fifty sons 
of old, who are implacable agents of the destruction of Asuia 
foices

31 In like mannei, Supiajd gave birth to fifty sons of very 
supeiioi qualities, who aie veiy powerful and teinble in their 
appearance, and indomitably aggiessive

33 Thus Ahswdmitia is strengthened and grown poweifull 
(by means of these). He is ^acknowledged as a sage in the thiee

VAIEA'an KHANDA. 35

■Nvorlds. Thou therefore must not think otheiwise than deliver 
Edma to him.

23. Tins mighty and viituous man and prince of sages being 
nighj any one even at the iiomt of deatli in his piesenccj is sure to 
attain his immoitality (on earth) . therefore be not disheaiteneJ 
like an insensible man.

CHAPTER X.

Melancholy of Rama.

ATjMIKI related , After V aslslitUa liad done saying in tins 
manner, Dasaratha was glad to send for Rdma with

Lahshmana, and said.

3, Go you chambeilain,"' and bring here quickly the truly 
mighty and long armed Rdma with Eakshmana, for the merito- 
rious purpose of removing the impediments (in the way of religi-

ous acts).

3. Thus sent by the king he went to the inner apaitmeni, and 
coming back in a moment informed the king.ous acts).

3. Thus sent by the king he went to the inner apaitmeni, and 
coming back in a moment informed the king.

4. Oh sire f Rdma, whose arms have crushed all his foes, re- 
mains rapt in thoughts m his room like tbe_^bee closed m the 
lotus at night.

5. He said, he is coming m a moment, but is so abstracted in 
his lonely meditation that he likes no body to bo near him.

6. Thus acquainted by the chamberlam, the kmg called one of 
the attendants of Rdma to him, and having given him every assu- 
rance, asked him to relate the particulars.

7. On bemg asked by the king how Rdma had come to that 
state, the attendant thus rephed to him m a sorrowful mood.

8. Sir, we have also become as lean as sticks in our persons, in 
sorrow for the fadmg away of your son Rdma in his body.

9. The lotus-eyed Rdma appears dejected ever since he has 
come back from his pilgrimage m company ivith the Bidhmanas.

10. When besought by us with impoitumty to perform bis 
daily ntes, he sometimes discharges them with a placid counten- 
ance, and wholly dispenses with them at others.

Q

11. He is averse, Oh Lord 1 to bathing, to worshipping the 
gods, to the distiibution of alms, and to his meals also ; and even 
when impoi tuned by us he does not take his food with a good relwh.

VAIRAGYA KHANDA

37

12 He no longer suffers himself to be rocked in the swing- 
ing cradles by the playful giils of the harem, nor does he diveit 
himself under the showering fountains like the clidfaka (m rain 
watei) .

13. No ornaments beset with the j bud-shaped rubies, no 
bracelets nor necklace. Oh king, can please him now, in the same 
manner as nothing in heaven can please its inhabitants who ex- 
pect then fall from it (aftei the expiiation of their terms).

14*. He IS sorrowful even while sitting in the arbours of cree- 
pers, legaled by flowery breezes, and amidst the looks of damsels 
playing aionnd him.14*. He IS sorrowful even while sitting in the arbours of cree- 
pers, legaled by flowery breezes, and amidst the looks of damsels 
playing aionnd him.

15. AVhatever thing Oh kmg I is good and sweet, elegant and 
pleasing, to the soul, he looks at them with sorrowful eyes, like 
one whose eyes are already satiate with viewing them heaped up in 
piles (before him).

' 16. He would speak ill of the guls that would dance meirily 
before him, and exclaim out saying, why should these ladies of 
the harem flutter about m this way causing giief m me ”

17. His doings are like those of a madman, who takes no 
delight at his food or rest, his vehicles oi seats, his baths and 
other pleasures, however excellent they be,

18. As regards prosperity or adversity, his habitation or any 
other desirable things, he says of them to be all unreal, and then 
holds his silence.

' 19. He cannot be excited to pleasantly nor tempted to taste 
of pleasures , he attends to no busmess, but remams m silence.

20. No woman with her loosened locks and tresses, and the 
negligent glances of her eyes, can please him any more than the 
playful faivu can please the tiees m the forest.

21. Like a man sold among savages, he takes delight in lonely 
places, in remotest sknts, in the banks (of rivers) and wild de- 
serts.

0

22. His aversion to clothing and conveyance, food and pre- 
sents, bespeaks O kmg ! that he is following the line of life led by 
wandeiing ascetics.

38

YOGA VASISHTHA.

23. He lives alone^ Oli loid of men ^ iii a lonely place, and 
neither laughs nor sings nor cues aloud fiom a sense of their 
indifference to hnuc

24 Seated in the posture of folded legs (Padmdsana), ho stays 
with a disti acted mind, leclming his cheek on his left palm.

25. He assumes no piide to himself nor uashes foi the dig- 
nity of soveieignity , he is neithei elated uath joy nor depiessed 
by giief 01 pam.25. He assumes no piide to himself nor uashes foi the dig- 
nity of soveieignity , he is neithei elated uath joy nor depiessed 
by giief 01 pam.

26. We do not know wheie he goes, u4iat he docs, wliat he 
desires, what he meditates upon, wlience and when he -comes and 
what he follows.

27. He IS getting lean every day, growing pale day b} day, 
and like a tiee at the end of autumn, he is becoming discolouicd 
day after day

28 Satiughna and Lakshmana are. Oh king * the followers 
of all Ins habits, and resemble his veiy shadows.

29. Being repeatedly asked by his seivants, his brothci-’ 
pimces and bis mothers, (as to the cause of his dementedness), he 
says he has none, and then lesumes his taciteniity and indiffeiencc.

30. He would lectuie his companions and fiiends' saying, "do 
not set youi mind to sensual enjoyments ivhicli aie only jileasing 
for the time bemg.”

81. He has no affection for the iichly adorned women of the 
harem, but lathei looks upon them as the cause of destruction 
presented before him.

32 He often chamits in plamtive notes, hoiv Ins life is being 
spent in vain caies, estianged fiom those of the easily attainable 
state of (heavenly bliss).

33 Should some dependant courtier speak of his being an 
emperor (one day), he smiles at him as upon a laving madman,' 
and then remains ^ilent as one distiacted in his mind

34. He does not pay heed to ivhat is said to him, nor does 
he look at any thing piesented befoi^ -him. He hates to look"

upon % ngs even the most chaiming (to sight)? - . _ '

VAIRAGYA KHANDA’

39

35. As it IS cliimeiical to suppose'tlic existence of an etlieiial 
lake, and lotus gioumng in the same, so it is false to believe the 
leality of the mmd and its conceptions. Saying so Rdma mai vels 
at Tiothmg.

36. Even when sitting amidst beauteous maids, the daits of 
ciipid fail to pieiee his impenetrable heait, as showers of laiii 
the (unimpiegnable) rock.36. Even when sitting amidst beauteous maids, the daits of 
ciipid fail to pieiee his impenetrable heait, as showers of laiii 
the (unimpiegnable) rock.

37. That “no sensible man should ever wish for nches which 
aie but the seats of dangeis’^, making this his motto, Rdma gives 
away all that he has to beggars.

38. He sings some veises to this effect that “it is an erior to 
call one thing as prosperity and the other adveisity, when they 
aie both but imaginations of the mind”.

39. He repeats some woids to this purpoid that, “though it is 
the geneial cry, “01 am gone, I am helpless grown,” yet it is a 
wonder, that no body should betake himself to utter indifference.^^

40 That Rdma, the destroyer of enemies, the gieat Sal a ^oak) 
that IS giown in the garden of Raghu, should get into such a 
state of mmd is what causes giief in us.

41. We do not know. Oh great armed and lotus-eyed king! 
what to do ivith him in this state of his mmd. We hope only 
111 thee.

43. He laughs to scorn the counsels of the princes and 
Bidhmans before him, and spurns them as if they were fools.

43. He remains inactive with the conviction, that the woild 
which appears to our view is a vanity, and the idea of self is also 
a vanity.

44. He has no respect for foes or fnends, for himself or his 
kingdom, mothei or riches, nor does he pay any regaid to 
piospeiity or adversity.

45. He IS altogether quiescent, mthout anj’- desire or effort, 
and devoid of a mainstay, he is neither captivated by any thing 
nor fieed fiom woildly thoughts. These aie the leasons which 
afflict us most.

40

YOGA visiSHTHA.

4'6. He says, “what have we to do with liches, with o\ir 
mother^, with this kingdom and all our activities/^ Under these 
impressions, he is about to give up his life.40

YOGA visiSHTHA.

4'6. He says, “what have we to do with liches, with o\ir 
mother^, with this kingdom and all our activities/^ Under these 
impressions, he is about to give up his life.

47. As the chdiala (swallow) grows restless at the ohsfr action 
of lains (by hurricanes;, so has Bdma become impatient (under the 
restiaint) of his father and mother, his friends and kingdom. Ins 
enjoyments and even his own life.

48. Now m compassion on thy son, incline to root out this 
chagrin which like a noxious creeper has been spreading its 
branches (in his mind).

49. Por notwithstanding Ins possession of all affluence, he 
looks upon the enjoyments of the w’orld as his poison under such 
a disposition of his mind.

50 Where is that potent person in this earth, -who can restore 
him to proper conduct (as by a potent medicine ^ ) .

51 Who is there, that like the sun removing the darkness 
of the woild by his rays, will lemove the errors that liave been 
the cause of giief m Rdma^s mind, andtheieby make his generosi- 
ty effectual m his case.

CHAPTER XI 
Consolation op Rama.

tTISWiiMITRA said If such is the case^, you who are 
V intelligent, may go at once, and persuade that progeny of 
lag’hu to come hither, as they do one deer by others (of the train)

2 This stupor of Rd,ma is not caused by any (external) accident 
»r (inward) affecion, it is I think the development of that supeiior 
ntellect which rises from the light reasoning of dispassionate 
nen.

3. Let Rdma come here for a while, and here shall we in a 
Qoment dispel the delusion (of his mind), as the wind drives away 
he clouds from the mountain-tops.

4. Aftei his hebitude is removed by my reasoning, he shall 
)e enabled to repose in that happy state of mind, to which we 
lave arrived.4. Aftei his hebitude is removed by my reasoning, he shall 
)e enabled to repose in that happy state of mind, to which we 
lave arrived.

6 He shall not only attain to pure truth and a clear nnder- 
tanding of uninterrupted tranquility, but secure to himself a 
•lumpness and beautiousness of his figure and complexion, as one 
[enves from a potion of ambiosia.

6. He will then attend with all his heart to the full discharge 
•f the proper course of his duties without remission, which will 
edound to his honour.

7. He will become strong with a knowledge of both worlds, 
md his exemption from the states of pleasure and pain, and then he 
'•ill look upon gold and stones with an indifferent eye

8. After the chief of the sages had spoken in this manner, 
he king resumed the firmness of his mind, and sent heralds after 
leralds to bring Rdma to him.

9. By this very time R^ma was preparing to rise from his 
eat ill the palace to come over to his father, in the manner that 
he sun rises from the mountain in the east.

10 Surrounded by a few of his servants, he came with his two 
VoL I - " a

42

YOGA VASISHTHA

biotiieis to tlie hallowed hall of lufc fathei; reeenihhng the 
lieaven of the king of gods

11 I-Iesawata distance his kingly sire seated amidst the 
assemblage of ininces^ as India siinoiinded by the gods

13 He was accompanied on eithei side by the sages Vasishtha 
and Viswd.initia, and lespectfully attended by his staff of 
ininisteiSj all well veised in the iteipielation of all Silsiras ^

13 He Mas fanned by chaiming damsels, saving the fine 
chaun flappeis iii then hands, and cijiialling in bcaiit} the god- 
desses piesiding ovei the cpiarteis of hca\eii

14 Vasishtha, Viswdmitra and the other sages, Mitli 
Dasaiatha and his chiefs, san llitma coming at a distance as 
beautiful as Skaiida himself14 Vasishtha, Viswdmitra and the other sages, Mitli 
Dasaiatha and his chiefs, san llitma coming at a distance as 
beautiful as Skaiida himself

lo He appealed by his cpialitics of mildness and gravity 
to lesemble the mount Himalaya (with his cooling frost and firm- 
ness), and was esteemed by all foi the depth and clearness (of his 
understanding)

16/, He ivas handsome and well piojioilioned (in Ins features), 
auspicious 111 his look, but humble and magiiammous in Ins mind. 
With loveliness- and mildness of his peison, he was possessed of 
all manly piowess

17 He was- developed to youth, } el he v\aB as majestic 
as ail eldeily man He was neither moiose nor merr}’^, but seemed 
to be fully satisfied wuth himself, as if he had obtained all the 
ob]ects of his desiie

18 He w^as argood judge of the world, and possessed of all 
holy virtues The piiiitj of Ins mind was the attraction for all 
the virtues wdiich met in him

19. Theiieeeptacle of his mind w'a': filled by his magnanimity and 
honourable viitues, and the candoiii of* his conduct showeds him 
m the. light of p&ifeetion (to even body

20 Endow'’ed with these v^aiions vntuos and decorated by his 
necklace and fine apparel,' Mma the support of Raghu^s race, 
approached (his fathei) with a smilnig countenance

VAIR^GYA ICHAN'D'A

43

21. He bowed Ills head to his fatlie'r 'with the spaiklihg 'gems 
trembling in his locks, and imparting to his head th6 'graceful 
appearance of the mountain Snnmit shaken by an ealth-quake

22. The lotus-eyed Rama came up to salute the feet of his 
father, when the lord of the sages \Vlsw4mitra) was speaking 
iidth himi

23. First of all Rdma sainted his father, and then the two 
honorable sages, he next saluted the Brd.hmanas, and then his 
relations, and lastly his elders and well wishing friends

24 He. then received and returned the salutations of the chiefs 
and princes, bowih^ to him with graceful motion of their heads 
and respectful addi esses24 He. then received and returned the salutations of the chiefs 
and princes, bowih^ to him with graceful motion of their heads 
and respectful addi esses

25 R^ma of god-like beauty and equanimity of mind, 
appioaehed the saeied presence of his father, with the blessings 
of the two sages'.

26. During the act of his saluting the feet of his father, tile 
iprd of the earth repeatedly kissed his head and face, and embraced 
him with fondness.

27. At the same time) he the destroyer of his enemies, 
embraced Lakshmana and SatiUghnaj with as mtense An affection 
as the swan embiacing the lotus flowers.

28. Be you seated my son upon my lap ”, said the king to 
Rama, who however, took his seat on a fine piece of cloth spread 
on the floor by his servants*

29. The king said O my son and receptacle of blessings, you 
have attained the age of disci etion, so put not yourself to that state 
of self-mortification, as the dull-headed do fiom their crazy under- 
standings.

30 Know that it is by following the couise of his elders, 
guides and BrAhmanas, that one attains to meiitoiiousness, and 
not by his persistence in erior

31. So long will the train of oui misfortunes ’lie at a distance, 
as we do not allow the seeds of eiror to have access to us

32 Vasishtha said,Oh stiong aimed pi nice' you are truly 
heioic to have conqueicd youi worldly appetites^ which are at

44

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

once as difficult to be iiradicated as they aie iieiee in then action.

33 Why do you allow yourself like the unleained, to be 
drowned in this lolling sea of eiiois, causing such dull inactivity 
in you ^

34 Viswd,mitra said “ why aic your eyes so unsteady 
(with doubts) as the tremulous clusters of blue lotuses. You 
ought to do away with this unsteadiness, and tell us what is 
that grief (which ranlcles) in youi mind.35. “What aie these thoughts, and what arc their names 
and natures, their number and causes, that infest yoi^r mind like 
its maladies (in the same manner ) as the mice undermine a fabric.^^

36 I am disposed to think, that you are not the person to be 
troubled with those evils and destempeis, to which the base and 
vile alone are sub3ect.

37 Tell me the craving of your heart, O sinless Rdma • and 
they will be requieted in a manner, as will prevent their recur- 
rence ta^you.

38, Rama the standard of Raghu's race having listened to 
the reasonable and graceful speech of the good-mteiitioncd sage, 
shook off his sorrowing, like the peacock at the roaring of a 
cloud, in the hope of gaming his object.

CHAPTER XII 
Ramans Reply

V ALMIKI related Being" thus asked with soothing- woids

by the chief of the sages, R^rna made his answei in a soft 
ajid graceful' speech leplete with good sense.

2. Rllma said. Oh veneiable sage ’ I will tell thee m truth, 
untutoied though I am, all the paiticulais as asked by thee, foi 
who would disobey the bidding of the wise ^

3. Since I was born in this mansion of my fathei I have all 
along remained, grown up and received my education (in this 
veiy place)^.

4. Then O leader of sages * being desiious to learn good 
usages (of mankind), I set out to travel to holy places all over this 
sea-girt earth.

5. It was by this time that there arose a train of reflections m 
my mind of the following nature which shook my confidence 
in wordly objects.

6. My mind was employed in the disci immation of the nature 
of things which led me gradually to discaid all thoughts of sensual 
enjoyments. '>

7 . What are these wordly pleasures good for, \ thought I), and 
what means the multiplication (of our species) on earth ? Men 
are born to die, and they die to be born again7 . What are these wordly pleasures good for, \ thought I), and 
what means the multiplication (of our species) on earth ? Men 
are born to die, and they die to be born again

8. There is no stability in the tendencies of beings whether 
movable or immovable. They all tend to vice, decay and danger , 
and all our possessions are the grounds of our penury

9. All objects fof sense) are detached from each other as iron 
lods or needles from one another, it is imagination alone which 
attaches them to our minds. ,

10 It is the mind that pictuies the existence of the world as 
a reality, but the deceptiveness of the mind (being known) we 
are safe flora such deception

46

YOGA VA.SISHTHA

11 If the ^^olld IS an unieaJity, it is pity that ignorant men 
should be allmed by it, like the deer tempted a distant mnage 
(appearing) as water

12 We are sold by none (to any one) and yet we remain as 
if enslaved to the world , and knowing this well, we are spell- 
bound to iiches, as it were by the magic wand of Sambaia

13. What aie the enjoyments in tins quintessence (of the 
world) but misery , and yet we aie foolishly caught in its 
thoughts, as if clogged in honey (like bees).

14 Ah f I perceive after long that we have insensibly fallen 
into eiiois, like senseless stags falling into caverns in the wildei- 
ness.

15. Of what use is royalty and these enjoyments to me ? 
What am I and whence aie all these things? They aie hut 
vanities, and let them continue as such without any good oi loss 
to any body.

16 Beasoning in this manner Oh Bidhmnn, I c.imc to be 
disgusted with the world, like a travellei in (his join ney thiougli) 
a desert.

17 Now tell me, O venerable sir! wdicther this world is 
advancing to its dissolution, or continued leproduction, or is it 
in course of its endless piogiessioii

18 If there is any piogiess heie, it is that of the appearance 
and disappearence of old age and decease, of prosperity and ad- 
versity by turns18 If there is any piogiess heie, it is that of the appearance 
and disappearence of old age and decease, of prosperity and ad- 
versity by turns

19 Behold how the vaiiety of om trifling enjoyments has- 
tens our decay, they aie like huiiicaiies shatteiing the mountain

' trees

t

5J0 Men continue in vain to breathe then vital breath as 
hollow-bamboo wind-pipes having no sense.

ai How IS (human) misery to be alleviated, is the (only) 
thought that consumes me like wild file in the hollow 'of a 
wuthered tree.

21 The weight of woildly misencs sits heavy on my hcait

VAIRA^GYA KHANDA 47

as a lock, and obstiucts my lungs to breathe out I have a mind 
to weep^ but am prevented from shedding my tears for fear of 
my peojile ^

23 My tearless weeping and speechless mouth, give no indi- 
cation of my inward sorrow to any body, except my conscious- 
ness the silent witness in my solitude.

24' I wait to think on the positive and negative states (of 
M^oidly bliss), as a mined man bewails to reflect on his former 
state of affluence (and present indigence)

25 I.take piosiieiity to be a seducing cheat, for its deluding 
the mind, impairing the good qualities (of men), and spieadiiig 
the net of oui misei les.

26 To me, like one fallen into great difficulties, no riches, 
offspring; consoits or home afford any delight, but they seem to 
be (so many souices of; misery.

27. I, like a wild elephant in chains, find no rest in my miind, 
. by reflecting on the vaiious evils of the world, and by thinking 
on the causes of oui fiailties

28. There aie wicked passions prying at all times, under the 
dark mist of the night of our ignorance, and there are hundieds 
of objects, which like so many cunning rogues, are about all men 
in broad ^day-light, and lurking on all sides to rob us of our 
reason What mighty champions can we delegate (now) to fight 
with these than our knowledge of truth ?

CHAPTER XIIl 
ViTUPEK^TioN OF Riches,CHAPTER XIIl 
ViTUPEK^TioN OF Riches,

K ama said it is opulence, Oh sage • that is reckoned a

blessing here , it is even she that is the cause of our trou- 
bles and eirors ‘

2 She beais away as a river in the rainy season, all high- 
spirited simpletons overpowered by its current. ^

3. Her daughters arA anxieties fostered by many a malprac- 
tice, like the waves of a stream raised by the winds

4' She can never stand steady on her legs any where, but 
like a wretched woman who has burnt her feet, she limps from 
one place to another.

5 Foitune like a lamp both burns and blackens its possessor, 
until it IS extinguished by its own mflamation.

6. She is' unapproachable as pnnces atid fools, and likewise 
as favourable as they to her adherents, without scanning their 
merits or faults.

7. She begets only evils in them by their various acts (of 
profligacy), as good milk given to serpents, selves but to increase 
the poignancy of their poison.

8. Men (by nature) are gentle and kind hearted to friends 
and strangers, until they are hardheartened by their riches, 
wlneli like blasts of wind, serves to stiffen (the liquid) frost.

9 As bnlhant gems are soiled by dust, so are the learned, 
the brave, the grateful, the mild and gentle, corrupted by riches.*

10. Riches do not conduce to one^s happiness, but redound 
to Ins woe and destruction, as the plant aconite when fostered, 
Indes in itself the fatal poison.

11 A rich man without blemish, a brave man devoid of vanity,

and a master wanting partiality, are the three rarities on earth 
12 The iich aie as inaccessible as the daik cavern of a

YjMHAGIU khanda

49

cliagOD; and as nnaj^jnoachable as tlie deej) wildeiness of the 
Vtnclh^d mountain inhabited b}’’ ficice elephantsYjMHAGIU khanda

49

cliagOD; and as nnaj^jnoachable as tlie deej) wildeiness of the 
Vtnclh^d mountain inhabited b}’’ ficice elephants

] 3 Bicheslike the shadow of night, oveieast thegood qualities 
of men, and like moon-beams bungs to bloom the buds of their 
misery They blow awa}’’ the biightness of a fan piospect as a 
huiiicane, and lesemble a sea with huge suiges (of disquiet)

14 They bung upon us a cloud of feai and eiioi, increase 
tlfe poison of dispondenee and legiet, and aie like the dieadful 
snakes in the field of oui choice

16. Foil^une is (as a killing) fiost to the bondsmen of asceti- 
cism, and as the night to the owls of libeitinism, she is an 
eclipse to the moonlight of leason, and as moonbeams to the 
bloom of the lilies of folly

1 6 She IS as tiaiisitoiy as the Ins, and alike pleasant to 
view by the play of hei eolouis , she is as fickle as the lightening, 
which vanishes no soonei it apjieais to sight Hence none but 
the ignoiaut have leliance in hei

17 She is as unsteady as a well boin damsel following a base- 
boin man to the woids , and like a (deceptive) miiage.that tempts 
the lun-aways to fall to it as the doe

18 Unsteady as the wave, she is nevei steady in any place, 
(but is ever waveimg to all sides) like the flickenng flame of a 
lamj) So hei leaning is known to nobody

19 She like the lioness is evei prompt in fighting, and like 
the leadei of elejihants favouiable to hei paitizans. She is as 
sharp as" the blade of a swoid (to cut off all obstacles), and is the 
jiationess of sharp-witted shaipeis

20 I see no felicity m uncivil prosj^eiity, which is full of 
tieacheiy, and lejilete with eveiy kind of danger and tiouble

21 It is pity that piospeiity, like a shameless wench will 
again lay hold on a man, aftei being abandoned by him in his 
association with hei iival) Poveity21 It is pity that piospeiity, like a shameless wench will 
again lay hold on a man, aftei being abandoned by him in his 
association with hei iival) Poveity

22 Wliat is she with all liei lovelinese and atti action of 
human hearts, but momentaiy thing obtained by .all manner 
of evil means, and lesembling at best a flowei sliiub, glowing out of 
a cave inhabited by a snake, and beset by leptiles all about its stem.

Yol. I

7

('IIAFIKR XIV

Uf.piiiciAiioN 01’’ Human Ltpe

I T UMAN life is as fia.l as a pciulaiii chop of Maici tiiplmg 
J -1 on the fip of a leaflet , and as iiiepie'^sible as a laA uig 
madman^ that Ineaks loose fiom its bodd} nnpi isonincnt out of 
its piopei seabon

2 Again the hies of those nhosc minds aie infected by the 
1101 son of noildly alfausj ..nd who aie incapable of judging foi 
thcmsches, aie fiaiilj) but causes ol then toimcnt

3 Those knowing the knonable^ and lesting in the all-

pervading spiiib and acquiescing alike to tl eii Mants and gams, 
enjoy livCb of peifcct tianquility /

4 'We that have eei tarn belief of oui being but limited beingCs,

can have no enjoyment in oui tiansiciit lives, vhicli aie but llaslii- 
cs of lightenings amidst the cloudy skj' of the woild I

5 It IS as impossible to keep the vii ds m (f ulIiicmoiit,f to

teal assundei the sky to pieces, and ivieathe thu naiestcVa 
chaplet, as to place any leliance in oiu h\ es /

6 Fast as the fleeting elonds in autumn, and shoi t as tllie 
light of an oilless lamp, oiii lives appeal to pass aivay as 
evanescent as the i oiling waves in the sea

7 Kathei attempt to lay hold on the shadow of the moon 
in the waves, the fleeting hghtenings in the skjq and the ideal 
lotus blossoms in the ethci, than evei place anp' lehance upon 
this unsteadj^ life

8 Men of lestless raind->, clesiiing to jiiolong then useless 
and toilsome lives, lesemble the she-mule conceiving by a hoisc 
(which causes hei.destiiiction aboition oi uiifinctiflcation)8 Men of lestless raind->, clesiiing to jiiolong then useless 
and toilsome lives, lesemble the she-mule conceiving by a hoisc 
(which causes hei.destiiiction aboition oi uiifinctiflcation)

9 This noild (Sansaia) is as a vhiilpool amidst the ocean 
of cieation, and eveiy individual body is as (evanescent) as a 
foam 01 fioth oi buble, which can give me no lelish in this hie

10 That IS called tine living- uhich^gains ulatis-noith

C

VA.IRA'GyA' KHANDA

51

gamings -wliicli lias no cause o£ soiiow oi lemorse, and which is 
a state of tiansceiideiital tiaiiqinhtj^

11. Theie is a vegitable life in j)laiits, and an animal life in 
Leasts, and buds man leads a thinking life, but tiue life is above 
(the succession of) thoughts

13 All those living beings aie said to have lived well in this 
eaith, who being once boin heiem have no moie to letuiii to it. 
The lest aie no bettei than old asses (of bin then)

13 Knowledge IS an encumbeience to the unthinking, and wis- 
dom IS ciimbeisome to the passionate, intellect is a lieavj'" load 
to the lestless, and the body is apondeious buidento one ignorant 
of his soul

11* A goodly pel son possessed of life, mind, intellect and 
selE-conciousness and its occujiations, is of no avail to the unwise, 
but seem to be his ovei -loadings as those upon a poitei.

15 The discontented mind is the gieat aiena of all evils, and 
the nestling place of diseases which alight upon it like buds of 
the an such a life is the abode of toil and misery

16 As a house is slowly delapidated by the mice continually 
buiiowing under it, so is the body of the living giadually 
coiioded by the (pernicious) teeth of time boimg within it.

17. Deadly diseases bied within the body, feed ujion our 
vital bieatli, as poisonous snakes bom in caves of the woods con- 
sume the meadow air

18. As the witheied tiee is peiioiated by minutest woims le- 
siding in them, so aie oui bodies continually wasted by many 
inborn diseases and noxious secietions18. As the witheied tiee is peiioiated by minutest woims le- 
siding in them, so aie oui bodies continually wasted by many 
inborn diseases and noxious secietions

19 Death is incessantly staling and giowling at oui face, as 
a cat looks and puns at the mouse in oidei to devoui it.

30 Old age wastes us as soon as a glutton digests his food ,

and it reduces one to weakness as an old hailot, by no other 
chaim than hei jiaint and perfumes ,

31 Youth forsakes us as soon, as a good man abandons his 
wicked friend m disgust, aftei his foibles come to be known to 
him in a few clays

52

YOGA VASISHTHA

Death the lover of destruction, and fiiend of old age anc 
rum, likes the sensual man, as a lecher likes a beauty.

23. Thus theie is nothing so woithless in the woild as tin 
life, which IS devoid of every good quality and ever subject t( 
death, unless it is attended by the peimanent felicity of email 
cipation.

CHAPTER XV 
Obloquy on Egoism.

/

|>AMA Continued*

■ ^ Egoism springs from false conceit, and it is vanity (or vain 
glory) which fosteis it, I am much afiaid of this baneful egotism 
which is an enemy (to human kind)

2 . It IS under the influence of egotism that all men in this 
diversifiecf woild, and even the veiy pooiest of them, fall into the 
dungeon of evils, and misdeeds.

3 All accidents, anxieties, tioubles and ivicked exeitions 
pioceed from egoism or self-confidence, hence I deem egoism as a 
disease.

4* Being subject to that eveilasting arch-enemy the cyme ego- 
ism, I have leframed fiom my food and dunk. What other 
enjoyment IS theie for me to partake of ^

5 This world lesembles a long continuous night, in which our 
egoism like a hunter, spieads the snare of affections (to entrap us 
in it)

6. All our gieat and intolerable miseries, growing as rank as 
the thorny plants of the catechu, aie but results of oui egoism.6. All our gieat and intolerable miseries, growing as rank as 
the thorny plants of the catechu, aie but results of oui egoism.

7. It overcasts the equanimity of mind as an eclipse over- 
shadows the moon, it destroys our virtues as afiost destroys the 
lotus flowers , it dispels the peace of men as the autumn drives 
away the clouds. I must therefore get nd of this egoistic 
feeling.

8 I am not Rama the prince, I have no desire nor should I 
wish for affluence , but I wish to have the peace of my mind and 
remain as the self-satisfied old sage Jina ^

9 All that I have eaten, done or offeied in saciifiee under 
the influence of egoism, have gone for nothing , it is the absence 
of egoism which { I call) to be ieal good

54

YOGA V.^SISIiriIA

10 So long, O Biillimatil as lliere is l the feeling of) 
egoism in one, he is subject to soiiow at his dilTieulties , but being 
devoid of it, he becomes happy , hence it is better to be 'Without 
it

11 I am free fiom anxiety, O sage’ ever since I have got 
the tiaiiquility of my mind aftei giving up my (sense of) 
egoism, and known the tiaiisitoiincss of all cnioyments.

12 As long, O Bidhmau’ as the cloud of egoism ovei- 
spieads (the legion of oui minds), so long oui dcsiics expand 
themselves like the buds of liuchi jilaiits (in the lains).

13 But -when the cloud of egoism is dispei sed, the lightning of 
aval ice vanishes away, just as the lamp being extinguished, its 
light immediately disappeai s

14' The mind vaunts with egoism, like a fiiiious elephant in 
the Vindhian hills, when it heais the thundei -claps in the clouds

15 Again egoism lesiding like a lion in the vast foiest of all 
human bodies, langos about at laigc thioughout the nhole extent 
of this eaitli

16 The self-conceited aie decoiatcd with a stung .of peails 
about then necks, of which avaiice foimsthethicad, and' repealed 
baths the peails16 The self-conceited aie decoiatcd with a stung .of peails 
about then necks, of which avaiice foimsthethicad, and' repealed 
baths the peails

17 Oui inveteiate enemy of egoism, has (like a magician) 
spiead about us the enchantments of oui Wl^es, fiiends and 
childien, whose spells it is haid to bieak.

18 As soon as the (impiession of the) woid (c( 7 o)is efPaced 
fiom the mind, all oui anxieties and tioubles aie wiped out of it.

19 The cloud of egoism being dispelled fiom the sk}-- of oui 
minds, the mist of ei 101 which it spieads to destioy oui peace, 
will be dispel sed also

20 I have given up my (sense of) egoism, yet is my mind 
stupified with soiiow by my ignoiance Tell me, O Biahmaii ' 
what thou thmkest light foi me undei these ciicumstances

21. I have "with much ado given up this egoism, and like no 
more to lesoit to this souice of all evils and peitiiibatioii. It

VAIEAGYA KHANDA

55

retains its seat in the bieast for our annoyance only, and witlioiit 
benefiting' us by any good quality of its own. Direct me iioiv, 
}ou men of gieat undei standings • (to what is iig'ht).

CHAPTER XVI

Tins Ul^GOVEElfABLElTESS OE THE MiND.

O UR minds ai'e infested by evil passions and faults, and fluc- 
tuate m their obseivaiice of duty and seivice to supeiiois, 
as the jilumes of a peacock flutteiing' at the hreeze»

2. They love about at random with aidoui and without ic&t 
fiom one place to anothei, like the poor village dog running

afar and wide in quest of food. '

3 It seldom finds any thing any where, and happening even

to get a good stoie some wheie, it is as little content with it as a 
wickei vessel filled with watei .

4- The vacant mind. Oh sage, ^ is ever entrapped in its evil 
desiies, and is never at rest with itself, but roves at laige as a 
stiay deei sepaiated fiom its hcid.4- The vacant mind. Oh sage, ^ is ever entrapped in its evil 
desiies, and is never at rest with itself, but roves at laige as a 
stiay deei sepaiated fiom its hcid.

5 Human mind is of the natuie of the unsteady wave, and 
as light as the minutest paiticle It can therefore have no lest in 
spite of (the fickleness and levity of) its nature.

6. Disturbed by its thoughts, the mind is tossed in all direc- 
tions, like the watei s of the milk-white ocean nhen churned by 
the mountain.

7 I can not cuib my mind, lesembling the vast ocean (nuts 
course), and lunning with its huge surges (of the passions), wuth 
Avhirlpools (of eiioi), and beset by the whales of delusion

8. ‘ Our minds lun afar, O Bidhman I after sensual enjoyments, 
like the deei running towards the tender blades of grass, and 
unmindful of falling into the pits i^hid under them).

9 The mind can never get iid of its waveiing state owing to 
the habitual fickleness of its natuie, lesembhng the lestlessness 
of the sea <

10. The mind with its natural fickleness and restless thought's, 
finds no lepose at any place, as a lion (has no rest; in his prison- 
house

(

VAIR^GYA KHANDA

5Y

11 The niincl seated m the eai of delusion^ absoihs the sweet, 
peaceful and undistuihed lest of the body, like the gandei suck- 
ing up puie milk fioin amidst the watei

12.. O chief of sages * I giieve much to find the faculties of 
the mind lying doimant upon the bed of imagineiy delights, 
fiom which it IS haid to waken them

13 I am caught, O Biahman * like a bud in the net by the 
Icnots (of my egoism), and held fast in it by the thread of my 
aval ice

14' I bum in my mind, O sage, like the dned hay on fiie, by 
the flame of my anxieties and under the spieadmg fumes of my 
impatience

15 I am devomed, O Bi4,hman • hke a clod of cold meat, by 
the ciuelty and gieediness of my heart, as a eaicase is swallowed 
by a hnugiy dog and its gieedy mate.15 I am devomed, O Bi4,hman • hke a clod of cold meat, by 
the ciuelty and gieediness of my heart, as a eaicase is swallowed 
by a hnugiy dog and its gieedy mate.

16. I am boine away, O sage • by the cmrent of my heait, 
as a tiee on the bank is earned away by the waters and waves 
beating upon it

17. I am led afai by my (gieedy) mmd, hke a straw cained 
ofi by the hmneane, either to flutter in the an oi fall upon 
the ground,

18 My earthly mmdedness has put a stop to my desiie of 
ciossmg over the ocean of the world, as an ernbanlcment stops 
the course of the waters (of a stream) .

19. I am lifted up and let down agam by the baseness of my 
heart, like a log of wood tied to a rope dragging it m and out of 
a well.

20 As a child is seized by the false apparition of a demon, so 
I find myself in the grasp of my wicked mmd, representing 
falsities as true.

21. It IS hard to iej)ress the mmd, which is hotter than fire, 
more inaccessible than a hill, and stronger than a thunder bolt

22 The mmd is attracted to its ob 3 ects as a bud to its piey, 
and has no respite foi a moment as a boy from his play.

VOL I. , 8

58

yuuA V Atiwai-tijn.

23 My mind resembling the sea boib in its dullness as well 
as restlessness^ in its extent and fulness witli wbiilpools and 
diagons, keeps me fai from advancing towaids it.

24 *. It IS more difficult to subdue tbe mind tbaii to drink olf 
tbe ocean, or to upset tbe Sumeiu mountain. It is evei hauler 
than the hardest thing.

25. The mind is the cause of all exertions, and the sensonum 
of the three worlds Its weakness weakens all woildliiiess, find 
requires to be cured with care

26 It IS the imnd from which arise our pains an/1 pleasuies 
by hundreds, as the woods growing in groups upon a hill , but no 
sooner is the scythe of reason applied to them, than they fall 
off one by one27. I am ready to subdue my mind which is my ginatest 
enemy in this world, for the purpose of mastering all the virtues, 
which the learned say dejiend upon it. My want of desiies has 
made me averse to wealth and the gross pleasuies it yields, which 
are as tints of clouds tainting the (clear disk of the) moon (of oiii 
mind) .

CHAPTER XVII 
Oir Cupidity.

I SEE our vices like a flock of owls flying about in the region 
■ of oui miuds, under the daikness of oui affections, and in 
the longsome night of oui avaiic.

I am paiched by my anxieties like the wet clay undei solar 
lays, infusing an inwaid heat in it by exti action of its soft 
moistuie. ,

3. My mind is like a vast and lonesome wilderness, coveied 
undei the mist of eiiors, and infested by the teiiible flend of 
desiie is continually flo undei mg about it

4 My wailings and teais serve only to expand and mature my 
anxiety, as the dews of night open and iipen the blossoms of 
beans and give them a blight golden hue

5 Aval ice by laismg expectations in men, serves only to 
whiil them about, as the vortex of the sea wallows the maiine 
animals in it.

6. The stieam of woildly avarice flows like a lapid cunent 
within the lock of my body, with piecipitate force (in my actions), 
and loud lesoundmg waves (of my sjieech)

7. Om* minds aie diiven by foul aval ice from one place to 
anothei, as the dust}’- diy hays are borne away by the winds, and 
as the Clidtalas aie impelled by tliiist to fly about (for dunk).

8. It IS avaiice which destioys all the good qualities and 
giace which we adopted to ourselves m good faith, just as the 
mischievous mouse seveis the wiies (of a musical mstiument)

9 We tuin about upon the wheel of our eaies, like witheied 
leaves (floating) upon the watei, and like dry glass uplifted by 
the wind, and as autumnal clouds (moving) in the sky9 We tuin about upon the wheel of our eaies, like witheied 
leaves (floating) upon the watei, and like dry glass uplifted by 
the wind, and as autumnal clouds (moving) in the sky

10. Being ovei poweied by avaiice, we aie disable to leaeh 
the goal (of peifection), as a bud entangled in the snaie, is kept 
fiom its flight

60 YOGA VASISHTEA

11 I am so gieatly burnt by tbe flame of avaiice^ that I 
doubt wbetliei tbis inflammation may be assuaged even by admi- 
iiistiation of nectai itself.

12 Avaiice like a beated-maie takes me fai and faitliei still 
fiom my jilace^ and bungs me back to it again and again 
Thus it bullies me up and down and to and fio in all diiections 
foi evei

13 We are pulled up and cast down again like a bucket.m 
tlie well, by tbe slung of avaiice (tied about oui necks)

14 Man is led about like a bullock of buitben by bis 
avaiice, ivliicb bends bis beait as fast as tbe stung does tbe beast, 
and wliicb it is baid foi biin to bieak.

15 As tbe buntiess spreads bei net to catcb buds in it, so 
does our affection foi our fiiends, wives and cbildien stietcb 
these snaies to entiaji us every day

16 Avarice like a dark nigbt tenifies even tbe wise, blind- 
folds tbe keen-sigbted, and depresses tbe spirit of tbe bajipiest of 
men.

17 Our appetite is as bemous as a seipent, soft to feel, but 
full of deadly poison, and bites us as soon as it is felt

18. It IS also like a black soiceiess that deludes men by ber 
magic, but ]iieices biin m bis bcait, and exposes bim to danger 
after waids

19 Tbis body of oms sbatteied bj’- om avaiice is bke a worn 
out lute, fastened by arteries lesemblmg tbe wires, but emitting 
no pleasing sound

20 Our avarice is like tbe long fiber ed, dark and 3 uicy 
poisonous creeper called Kaduka, that giows in tbe caverns of 
mountains, and maddens men by its flavour20 Our avarice is like tbe long fiber ed, dark and 3 uicy 
poisonous creeper called Kaduka, that giows in tbe caverns of 
mountains, and maddens men by its flavour

21 Avarice is as vain and inane, fruitless and aspiring, 
unpleasant and perilous, as tbe dry tmg of a tree, wliicb (bears 
no fruit or flower) but is buitful witb its prickly point

22 Venality is like a cbuilisb old woman, wbo from tbe in- 
continence of bei beait, courts tbe company of eveiy man, witb- 
out gaming tbe object of bei desire

VAIRAGYA KHANDA

61

23 Gieedmess as an old aetiess plays lier vaiions paits in the 
vast theatie of woild, m oidei to please the diffeient tastes of hei 
audiance

24j. Pasimouy is as a poisonous plant gi owing' in the wide 
wilderness of the woild, beaiing old age and infiimity as its 
floweis, and pioducing oui tioubles as its fiuits

25 Oui chuihshness'iesembles an aged actiess, attempting a

manly fete she has noFthe stiength to peifoim^ yet keeping up

the dance without 2 ileasiug (heiself oi any body)

/

26 Oui fleeting thoughts aie as flckle as ]iea-henSj soaiing 
ovei inaccessible heights undei the clouds (of ignoiance) , but 
ceasing to fly in the day light (of leason).

27 Aval ice is like a iivei m the laiiis^ rising for a time with 
its loUing waves, and afteiwaids Ijuug low in its empty bed. 
(Such aie the avaiicious by the flux and leflux of their foitunes)

28 Avaiice is as meonstant as a female bud, which changes 
hei mates at times, and quits the aiboi that no longei beais 
any fiuit.

29 The gieedy aie as unsteady as the flouncing monkey, 
which is nevei lestive at any place, but moves to jilaces imjiassa- 
able by otheis, and craving foi fiuits even when satiate

30 The acts of avaiice aie as inconstant as those of 
chance, both of which aie ever on the aleit, but nevei attended 
with then sequence30 The acts of avaiice aie as inconstant as those of 
chance, both of which aie ever on the aleit, but nevei attended 
with then sequence

31. Our venality is like a black-bee sitting upon the lotus of 
OUI heaits, and thence making its i ambles above, below and all 
about us in a moment

32 Of all woildly evils, avaiice is the source of the longest 
woe She exposes to peiil even the most secluded man

33 Avaiice like a gioup of clouds, is fi aught with a thick

mist of eiioi, obstiuctmg the light of heaven, and causing a dull 
insensibility (in its possessoi) ^

3d). Penuiy which seems to giid the bieasts of woildly people 
with chains of gems and jewels, binds them as beasts with hal- 
teis about the necks.

62

YOGA VASISHTHA

35. Covetousness sti etches itself long and wide and piesents 
to us a vaiiety of hues as the lainhow. It is equally unsubs- 
tantial and without any piopeity as the iiis, lesting in vapour 
and vacuum and being but a shadow itself.

36 It burns away our good qualities as electiic lire does the 
hay^ it numbs oui good sense as the fiost fieezes the lotus ^ it 
glows our evils as autumn does the glass, and it inci eases oui 
ignoiance as the wintei piolongs the night.

37 Gieedmess is as an aetiess in the stage of the woild, she 
is as a biid flying out of the nest of oui houses , as a deei 
lunniug about in the deseit of oui heaits, and as a lute making 
us smg and dance at its tune.

38 Oui desiies like billows toss us about in the ocean of our 
eaithly caies, they bind us fast to delusion as fetteis do the 
elephant Like ih&Jiciis tndicus they pioduce the lOots of our 
legeneiation, and like moon beams they put oui budding woes to 
bloom

39. Aval ice like (Pandoids) box is filled with miseiies, decie- 
pitude and death, and is full of disoidei and disasteis like a mad 
bacchanial.39. Aval ice like (Pandoids) box is filled with miseiies, decie- 
pitude and death, and is full of disoidei and disasteis like a mad 
bacchanial.

40 Our wishes aie sometimes as jnire as light and at otheis 
as foul as daikness j now they aie as clear as the milky way, and 
again as obscuie as thickest mists.

41. All OUI bodily troubles are avoided by oui abstaming 
fiom avaiiee, as we aie fieed fiom fear of night goblins at the 
dispeision of daikness.

4!^ So long do men reniam in then state of (dead like) dumb- 
ness and mental dehiium, as they aie subject to the poisonous 
cholic of aval ice.

43 Men may get iid of their miseiy by then being fieed 
fiom anxieties It is the abandonment of caies which is said 
to be the best lemedy of avaiice.

C

44 As the fishes in a pond fondly giasp the bait in expectation 
of a sop, so do the avaricious lay hold on any thing, be it wood 
01 stone 01 even a stiaw.

vaiea'gya khanda

63

45. Aval ice like an acute pain excites even tlie giavest of 
men to motion^ just as the lays of the sun laise the lotus blossoms 
(above the watei).

46. It IS compared with the bamboo in its length, hollowness, 
haid knots, and thorny prickles, and yet it is entei tamed m 
expectation of its yielding the manna and a peaily substance.

47. Yet it IS a wondei that high-minded men, have been 
able to cut off this almost unseveiable knot of aval ice, by the 
glitteimg swoid of leason *

48. Ag neither the edge of the swoid, noi the file of lighten- 
ing, noi the spaiks of the led-hot non, aie shaip enough to 
sever the keen avarice seated in oui heaits

49 It is like the flame of a lamp which is blight but blae- 
kemng and acutely buimng at its end. It is fed by the oily 
wicks (of years), is vivid in all, but never handled by any body.

50. Penuiy has the powei of bemeanmg the best of men to 
(the baseness of) stiaws in a moment, notwithstanding their wis- 
dom, heioism and giavity m other lespects.50. Penuiy has the powei of bemeanmg the best of men to 
(the baseness of) stiaws in a moment, notwithstanding their wis- 
dom, heioism and giavity m other lespects.

61. Aval ice is like the gieat valley of the Vmdhy.4 hills, that 
is beset with deserts and impenetiable foiests, is teiiihle and full 
of snaies laid by the hunteis, and filled with the dust and mist 
(of delusion).

52. One single avarice has every thing m the woild for its 
object, and though seated in the bieast, it is impeiceptible td all. 
It IS as the undulating Milky ocean in this fluctuating woild, 
sweeping all things yet regaling mankind with its odoious waves.

CHAPTER XVIII.

Obloquy op tub Body

r I '^HIS body of onis that stiuts about on eaitbj is but a mass of 
■ humid entiails and tendons, tending to decay and disease, 
and to oui toiraent alone

2-. It IS neitliei quiescent nor wholly sentient, neithei ignoiant 
noi quite intelligent Its inheient soul is a wonder, and it is 
leason (and its absence) that makes it gi aceful or othenvise.

3. The sceptic is doubtful of it ineitness and intellection and 
the unieasonable and ignoiant people aie evei subject to eiior 
and illusion.

4) The body is as easily giatified noth a little, as it is exhaus- 
ted in an instant, hence theie is nothing so pitiable, abject and 
worthless as our bodies.

5 The face is as fiail as a fading flower • now it shoots forth 
its teeth lilce filaments, and now it di esses itseR with blooming and 
blushing smiles as blossoms

6 The body is as a tiee, having its aims lesemblng the blan- 
ches, the shouldei -blades like stems, the teeth as lows of birds, 
the eye-holes like its hollows, and the head as a big fiuit.

7. The eais aie as two wood-peckeis, the fmgeis of both 
hands and feet as so many leaves of the branches, the diseases as 
(paiasite) plants, and the acts of the body aie as axes fellmg this 
tiee, which is the seat of the two buds the soul and intelhgence.8. This shady aiboi of the body, is but the temjioiaiy lesort 
of the passing soul, what then whether it be akin to or apait fiom 
anybody, or whethei one would lely in it or not.

9 What man is there, O veneaiable fathers I that would stoop 
to reflect withm ^himself, that this body is repeatedly assumed 
only to serve bim as a boat to pass over the sea of the woild.

10 Who can rely any confidence in his body, which is as a 
forest full of holes, and abounds in haiis lesembhng its tiees^

vaiea'gya kitanda

65

11. The body composed of flesh, iieives and bones, resembles 
a diuni without any musical sound, and yet I sit watching' it as 
a cat ( for the squeaking of mice) .

12 Oui bodies aie as tiees growing in the forest of the world, 
beaiing the floweis of anxiety, and peiforated by the worms of 
woe and miseiy, and mounted upon by the apish mind.

13 The body with its smiling face appears a goodly plant, 
healing the fiuits both of good and evil , but it has become the 
abode of the diagon of avaiiee, and a lookery of the lavens of 
angel ,

14 Oui arms aie as the boughs of trees, and oui open palms 
like beautiful clusters of floweis, the other limbs aie as twigs and 
leaves, and are continually shaken by the bieath of life

15. The two legs aie the eiect stems ( of the arboi of the 
body), and the oigans are the seats of the buds of sense Its 
its youthful bloom is a shade for the passmg tiaveller of love.

, 16 The hanging hairs of the head resemble the long grass 
growing on the tiee (of the body), and egoism like a vultuie (in 
hollow), cracks the eai with its hideous shiieks

17 Our various desiies like the pendant loots and fibres of 
the fig tiee, seem to suppoit its trunk of the body, though it is 
worn out by labour to unpleasantness.

18 The body is the big abode of its owner ^s egoism, and 
therefore it is of no interest to me wli ether it lasts oi falls (for 
egoism IS the bane of happiness)18 The body is the big abode of its owner ^s egoism, and 
therefore it is of no interest to me wli ether it lasts oi falls (for 
egoism IS the bane of happiness)

19 This body which is linked with its hmbs like beasts of 
burthen laboui, and is the abode of its mistress Avarice painted 
over by her taints of passions, affords me no delight whatever

20 This abode of the body which is built by the fiame-woik 
of the back-bone and iibs, and composed of cellular vessels, tied 
together by ropes of the entrails, is no way desiiqble to me.

21 This mansion of the body, which is tied unth strmgs of 
the tendons, and built with the clay of blood and moisture, and 
plastered white with old age, is no way suited to my liking.

VoL. I , 9

ee

YOGA VASISHTHA,

%% The mmd the luelntect and master of tins bodily 
dwelling, and 0111 activities aic its snjipoits and sen ants; it is 
tilled with eiiois and delusions yvliieh I do not like

23 I do not like this dwellinj? of the body wnih its bed of 
pleasnie on one side, and the cues of jiain as those of its clnldien 
on the othei, and wheie onr evil desiies aie at woilc like its baw- 
ling hand-niaids

24 1 cannot like this body, ivhieli like a pot of filth, is full of

the foulness of woildly affaiis, and nionldeiing under the lust of 
our ignoiaiice l

25 It is a hovel standing on the two pi ops of our heels, and 
suppoi ted by the tw'o posts of oui legs

26 It IS no lovely house wheie the external oigans are play- 
ing then paits, wdiilc its misti ess the nndeistanding sjts inside 
with her biood of anxieties

27 It IS a hut which is thatched ovei with the bans on the 
head, decoiated wnth the tiiiicts of the cais, and adorned with 
^ew'els on the crest, which I do not like

28 This house of the body is w ailed about by all its members, 
and beset by bans glowing like eais of com on it It lias an 
empty space of the belly wnthin (wbioli is never full), and which 
I do not like29 This body wntli its nails as those of spiders, and its 
entiails giowhng w^ithm like bailang dogs, and the internal wnnds 
emitting fearful sounds, is nevei delightsome to me

30 What IS this body but a passage foi tbe ceaseless in- 
haling and bieathing out of the vital an ^ Its eyes aie as two 
windows which aie eontinnally oped and closed by tbe eyelids 
I do not like such a mansion as this

31 This mansion of the bod}'^ wntb its formidable (wnde- 
open) door of Ihe month, and (evei -moving) bolt of the tongue 
and bars of the teeth, is not pleasant to me

82 This house of the body, having the wlnte-w'^ash of oint- 
ments on the outer skin, and the maehineiy of the hmbs in

VAIRAGYA KHANDA

67

eouthmed motion^ and the lestless mind bun owing ita base like 
the mischievous mouse^ is not liked by me

33. Sweet smiles like shining lamps, seive to lighten this 
house o£ the body foi a moinenfc, but it is soon daikened by a 
cloud of melancholy, wheietoie I cannot be pleased with it

34 This body which is the abode of diseases, and sub]ect to 
wi inkles and decay, and all kinds of pain, is a mansion where- 
with I am not pleased

35 I do not like this wilderness of the body, which is infest- 
ed b}'- the ]?eai3 of the senses It is empty and hollow ivithin, 
with daik gloves (of entiails) in the inside.

36 I am unable, O cliief of sages * to diag my domicile of the 
body, ]ust as a weak elephant is incapable to diaw out another 
immeiged m a muddy pit

37 Of what good is affluanee oi loyalty, this body and all 
its effoits to one, when the hand of time must destioy them all 
m a few days

38 Tell me, O sage I what is chaiming in this body, that is 
only a composition of flesh and blood both within and without 
it, and fiail in its nature

39 The body does not follow the soul upon death , tell me 
Sii, what leg aid should the learned have foi such an ungiateful 
thing as this39 The body does not follow the soul upon death , tell me 
Sii, what leg aid should the learned have foi such an ungiateful 
thing as this

40 It IS as unsteady as the eais of an mfuuate elephant, and 
as fickle as diop^ of watei that tiickle on then tips I should 
like theiefoie to abandon it, liefoie it comes to abandon me.

41 It is as ti emulous as the leaves of a tiee shaken by the 
breeze, and oppiessed by diseases and fluctuations of pleasuie 
and pain I have no lelish in its pungency and bitterness

4Z With all its food and dunk foi eveimoie, it is as tender as 
a leaflet, and is i educed to leanness m spite of all ours caies, and 
runs fast towaids its dissolution ’

43 It IS lepeatedly subjected to pleasure and jiaiii, and to the 
succession of affluence and destitution, without being ashamed of 
itself as the shameless vulgar herd (at their ups and downs).

68

■you A YA'SISIITJIA

44 Why nomi&li tins body any long’ci^ when jt, aequnes no 
excellence nor dmability of its ‘^tatc, aftoi its enif)\mcnt of pios- 
perity and excicisc of authority foi a lenglii of 1,nne,

4'5. The bodies of the iich as i\ell as tliose of tlie pool, '‘Jiie 
alike subject to decay and death at then a))])Oinied In'*

4G. The body lies as a loi loisc in the ea^e of amidst

the ocean of the M Olid It icmams theie in the mu ‘’5^ mute 
and toipid state, without an eiToit foi its libeiation.

47 Oui bodies floating as he.ips of nood on tht|^ uaies of

the woild, seive at last foi the fuel ol fnneial liie (oni the pile) , 
except a few of these which jiass foi human bodies iiiU the siglit 
of the wnse \

48 The wnse have little to do with this tree of tlUc body,

’which IS beset by eMls like noxious oichids about it, and ji'ioduccs ^ 
the flint of peidition \

49. The body like a fiog, lies meiged in the miic of /moita-/ 
lit}^, ^Yhele it polishes no soonci it is known to haie li^'cd ancl

gone.

I,49. The body like a fiog, lies meiged in the miic of /moita-/ 
lit}^, ^Yhele it polishes no soonci it is known to haie li^'cd ancl

gone.

I,

50 Our bodies aic as empty and fleeting as gusts c’f '"'m' d, 
passing ovci adust} gioiiiid, wdicic nobody Iniows whenC-C tYapy 
come, and wdiithei they go

51 We Iniow not the coiiise of oui bodies (their liansmij/ ^ra- 
tions), as we do not know' those of the winds, light and j our 
thoughts, they all come and go, but fiom wdieie and whithei,'(' we 
know nothing of

52 Fie and shame to them, that aie so giddy wnth the 
ebriety of then eiioi, as to lely on anv state oi dunibility of 
their bodies

53. They are the best of men, O sage ' whose minds are at lest 
with the thought, that then eyo does not subsist in then bodies, 
noi aie the bodies then’s at the end (of then lives)

54 Those miLtaken men that have a high sense of honoi and 
fear dishonoi, and take a pleasine in the excess of then gains, are 
venly the killeis both of then bodies and souls

-55 We are deceived by the delusion of egoism, wdnch like a

VATEA'GYA KHANDA 69

female fiend (soiceiess) lies hid within the cavity of the body 
with all hei soiceiy.

56 Om reason unaided (b}’- leligion) is kept in bondage like 
a female slave within the piison of om bodies, by the malicious 
fiend of false knowledge for sophistiy)

57 It IS ceitam that whatever we see here is unieal, and vet 
it IS a wondei, that the mass of men aie led to deception by the 
vile body, which has injuied the cause of the soul.

58 Oui bodies aie as fleeting as the diops of a watei-fall, 
and they fall off in a few days like the witheied leaves of tiees

59 They aie as quickly dissolved as bubbles in the ocean , 
it IS in vain theiefoie that it should hull about in the whiipool 
of business.

60 I have not a momenffs leliance in this body, which is 
evei hastemng to decay, and I legaid its changeful delusions as 
a state of di earning60 I have not a momenffs leliance in this body, which is 
evei hastemng to decay, and I legaid its changeful delusions as 
a state of di earning

61 Let those who have any faith in the stability of tlie 
lightmng, of the autumn clouds, and in glacial castles, place 
then reliance in this body

62. It has outdone all other things that aie doomed to des- 
tiuetion m its instability and peiishableness. It is moreover 
subject to veiy many evils, wherefoie I have set it at naught as 
a straw, and theieby obtained my repose.

CHAPTER XIX.

Blemishes oi Bomiooh

O NE I'eceiving' Ins butli in the unstable ocean o£ the woild, 
■which is distuibed by the billows o£ the bustle of business, 
has to pass his boyhood in suffenngs only

ij Want of stiengtli and sense, .and sub;]cetion to diseases and 
dangers, muteness and appetence, joined until longings and help- 
lessness, are the eoncomitants of iiifaney

3 Childhood is chained to fretting and ciylng, to lits of anger, 
craving and eveiy kind of incapacity, as an elephant ■\\hen tied to 
the post by its shackles

4 The vexations which tease the infant breast, aic far greater 
than those which tiouble us m youth and old age, oi disturb one 
in disease, dangei or at the appioach of death.

5 The acts of a boy aie as those of young animals, that aic 
always restless and snnbbe I by eveiy body Hence boyhood is 
moie intoleiable than death itself.

6 How can boyhood be pleasing to any body, u hen it is but 
a semblance of gross ignoiance, and full of whims and hobbies, 
and evei subject to miscaiiiages

7 It IS this silly boyhood which is in constant diead of 
dangeis aiising at eveiy step from fire, water and an, and which 
rarely betide us in other states of life

8 Boys aie liable to veiy many eiiois in then plays and 
wicked fiolics, and in all then wishes and attempts beyond their 
capacities hence boyhood is the most peiilous state (of life)8 Boys aie liable to veiy many eiiois in then plays and 
wicked fiolics, and in all then wishes and attempts beyond their 
capacities hence boyhood is the most peiilous state (of life)

9 Boys aie engaged in false pursuits and wicked spoits, and 
are sub]ect to all foolish pueiihties. Hence boyhood is fit foi the 
rod and not foi rest

10 All faults, misconduct, tiansgressions and heait-aches, lie 
hidden in boyhood like owls in hollow caves

11 Fie to those ignoiant and foolish people, who aic falsely 
led to imagine boyhood as the most pleasant peiiod of life

'yairagya KHANDA Vl

12 How can boyhood appear pleasing to any one, A^hen the 
mind swings like a ciadle towaids eveiy object of desiie, liowevei 
wiong it IS deemed to be in both woilds

13 The minds of all living beings aie evei lestless, but those 
of young people aie ten times moie at unrest

14 The mind is natuially unsteady, and so is boyhood also' 
Say what can save us fiom that state of life, when both these 
variant thing's combine to oui destiuction

15 The glances of women, the flashes of lightning, the 
flame of fire, and the evei-i oiling waves, have all imitated the 
fickleness of boyhood

16 Mmoiity seems to be a twin binthei to the mind, and 
resembles it m the unsteadiness and fiailtj'^ of all its jiuiposes

17 All kinds of miseiies, misdeeds and miseaiiiages await 
on bovhood, as all soits of men hang upon the rich (foi their 
Eupportance)

18 Boys aie fond of fiesh things at all time.s, and on their 
failing to get the same, thej’^ fall to a fainting fit, as if fiom the 
effect of poison

19 A boy like a dog, is as easily tamed as he is iintated at 
a little, and he is as glad to he in the dust, as to play with diit

20 A foolish fretful boy with his body daubed in miie Avith 
the teais in his eyes, appeals as a heap of diy clay soiled by a 
shower of ram.20 A foolish fretful boy with his body daubed in miie Avith 
the teais in his eyes, appeals as a heap of diy clay soiled by a 
shower of ram.

21 Boys aie subject to fear and voiacit}', they aie helpless 
but fond of every thing they have seen oi heaid, and equally 
fickle in their bodies and mind Hence boyhood is a souice of 
tioubles only.

22 The foolish and helpless child, becomes as sad and sour

when he fails to get the object of his fancy, as when he is thwart- 
ed from the thing desiied ’

23 Children have much difiiculty to get at the things they 
want, and which they can ask only by indistinct woids Hence 
mo one suffers so much as boys.

72

YOGA VA'.S1SIITHA.

24 A boy is as inueli iinlaied by the eageine&s of bis wliim- 
sical desiies, as a patch of gioiind m the dcseit is paiebed by 
the summei heat

25 A boy on eiitciing Ins school, is sub]ccied to collections, 
which aieas painful to him as the goading and fettcis to the ele- 
phant

26 A gieat many whims and hobbies, and a vaiiety of false 
fancies, tend contmnally to afllict bojdiood, which is ever fond of 
toys and tiifles

27 How can senseless childhood be said to bo a happy state of 
life, when the child is led by its ignoiance to swallow eveiything 
in the woild, and to wish to lay hold on the moon m the sk}'"

28 Saj'' great sage * what diffeience is theie between a child 
and a tiee, both of which have sensitiveness, but unable to de- 
fend themselves from heat and cold

29 Boys aie of the natme of buds, being both subiect to 
feai and hungei, and leady to fly about when impelled by them

30 Again boyhood is the abode of fear fiom all sides , such 
as fiom thetutoi, fathei, mothei, eldei biothei and eldeily bo}s, 
and from eveiy body bes.des

31 Hence the hopeles'? state of childhood, which is full of 
faults and enois, and addicted to spoits and thoughtlessness, 
cannot be satisfactoiy to any body

CHAPTER XX 
Vituperation of Youth.

H ama continuedCHAPTER XX 
Vituperation of Youth.

H ama continued

The hoy having passed his state of blemishes^ gladly steps 
to his youth with hopes of gaining his objects that tend only to 
his luin.

3. The insensible youth feels at this time the wanton incli- 
nations of his loose mind, and goes on falling fiom one tribulation 
to anothei

3. He IS overcome as one subdued by the power of delusive 
eupid, lying hidden m the cavity of the heait (hence called Monoja)

4 His ungorveined mind gives rise to loose thoughts like 
those of voluptuous women, and these seive to begmle him like 
the magic collyiium (m the hand) of boys (called Sidddn;^ana)

5 Vices of the most henious kind betake persons of such 
(peiveise) mmds in their youth, and lead them to then ruin

6 The paths of youth lead them to the gate of hell through 
a maze of eriors Those that have been left unconupt by their 
youth, aie not to be coiiupted by anything else.

7 Whoso has passed the dreadfully enchanted coast of youth, 
fraught with vaiious flavouis and wondeis, are said to be truly 
wise

8 I take no delight in oui unwelcome youth, which appeals 
to us in the foim of a momentaiy flash of lightning, and soon 
succeeded by the loud roaring of the clouds (of manhood) .

9 " Youth like rich wine is sweet and delicious (at fiist), but 
becomes bitter, insipid and noxious in a shoit time. Hence it 
is not delectable to me ,

10 Youth ajipeaiiiig (at fiist) as a reality, is found to be a 
false, tiansient thing, and as deceptive as a faiiy dieam by night 
Hence I like it not 
VoL I

3

10

72

YOGA VA'fcilSHTHA.

24> A boy is as mueli nutated by the eagerness of bis whim- 
sical desnes^ as a patch of giound in the deseit is paiched by 
' the suinmei heat

25 A boy on enteimg his school, is snb]ected to collections, 
which aieas painful to him as the goading and fetteis to the ele- 
phant25 A boy on enteimg his school, is snb]ected to collections, 
which aieas painful to him as the goading and fetteis to the ele- 
phant

26 A gieat many 'whims and hobbies, and a vaiiety of false 
fancies, tend continually to afflict boyhood, which is c\ei fond of 
toys and tildes

27 How can senseless childhood be said to be a happy state of 
life, when the child is led b}'- its ignoiaiice to swallow eveiy thing 
m the woild, and to wish to lay hold on the moon in the sky,

28 Sa)'^ gieat sage > what diffeienee is theie between a child 
and a tiee, both of which have sensitiveness, but unable to de- 
fend themselves from heat and cold.

29 Boys aie of the natuie of buds, being both sub-ject to 
feai and hunger, and leady to dy about when impelled by them

30 Again boyhood is the abode of feai fiom all sides , such 
as fiom thetutoi, fathei, mothei, eldei biothei and eldeily bo}s, 
and fiom eveiy body bes.des

31 Hence the hopeless state of childhood, which is full of 
faults and eiiois, and addicted to spoils and thoughtlessness, 
cannot be satisfactoiy to any body

CHAPTER XX 
Vituperation op Youth 
UAMA continued

* ^ The ^oy having passed his state of blemishes^ gladly steps 
to his youth with hopes of gaining his ob3ects that tend only to 
his luin

2. The insensible youth feels at this time the wanton incli- 
nations of his loose mindj and goes on falling from one tiibulation 
to anothei

3. He IS overcome as one subdued by the power of delusive 
cupid^ lying hidden m the cavity of the heait (hence called Monoja).

4 His ungorveined mind gives rise to loose thoughts like 
those of voluptuous womeUj and these seive to beguile him like 
the magic collyiium (in the hand) of boys (called Sidddnyana).

5 Vices of the most henious kind betake persons of such 
(peiveise) minds in then youth, and lead them to their luin5 Vices of the most henious kind betake persons of such 
(peiveise) minds in then youth, and lead them to their luin

6 The paths of youth lead them to the gate of hell through 
a maze of errois Those that have been left uncoil upt by their 
youth, aie not to be coiiupted by anything else.

7 Whoso has passed the dieadfully enchanted coast of youth, 
fi aught with vaiious flavouis and wondeis, aie said to be truly 
Avise

8 I take no delight in our unwelcome youth, which appeals 
to us in the foim of a momentaiy flash of lightning, and soon 
succeeded by the loud loaiing of the clouds (of manhood).

9 Youth like iich wine is sweet and delicious (at fiist), but

becomes bittei, insipid and noxious in a shoit time Hence it 
IS not delectable to me ,

10 Youth appealing (at fiist) as a leality, is found tp be a 
false, transient thing, and as deceptive as a faiiy dieam by night 
Hence I like it not

VoL I ^ ,10

9

YOGA yA''SISHa’HA

1i

11 It IS the most charming of all things to men^ but its 
ehaim IS soon lost and fled Theiefore tlie phantasinagona ol 
youth IS not pleasing to me

12. Youth as an aiioiv-sliot is pleasant to see, but painful to 
feel its smait Hence Ido not like 3muth that pioduccs blood- 
heat (in the veins)

13. Youth as a harlot is chaiming at fust sight, but tinning 
heartless soon aftei. Hence it is not to my liking

14. As the effoits of a dying man aie all foi Ins toimcnt, so 
the exeitions of the young aic portentous of his destiuction

15 Pubeity advances as adaik night spi ending the shadow of 
destiuction It daikens the heait and mind liv its hedious ap- 
peaianee, and intimidates even the god (Siva hiin^^clf)

16. Euois giowmg m jmuth, cause copious mistakes in life, 
by upsetting good sense and setting at naught the nppioved good 
manneis (of society)

17 The laging fiie m the heaits of llic young, caused liy 
sepaiation of then mates, bums them down like trees by a mid 
file17 The laging fiie m the heaits of llic young, caused liy 
sepaiation of then mates, bums them down like trees by a mid 
file

18 As a deal, sacied and ivide stieam, becomes muddi in ibe 
lains, so doth the mind of man howevei cleai, pme and expand- 
ed it may be, gets polluted in his youth

19. It IS possible for one to eioss ovei a liver made teinble by 
its waves, but no way possible to him to get over the boistcious 
expanse of his youthful desiies

20. O how (lamentably) iS one's j-outh worn out with tlie 
thoughts of his mistress, her swollen In easts, hei beautiful face 
and her sweet cai esses

21 The young man afflicted with the pam of soft desiie, 
IS regarded by the wise m no bettei light than a fiagment of 
(useless) stiaw <

22. Youth is the stake of haughty self-esteem, as the lack 
IS foi the immolation of the elephant giddy with itsfiontal 
pearl.

VAIRAGYA KHANDA 7")

23 Youth IS a lamentable foiest^ wheie the mind as the 
loot of all, gives gioivth to 3 ungles of (love sick) gioans and 
sighs, and teais of soiiow The vices of this time, aie as veno- 
mous snakes of the foiest

24 Know youthful bloom of the peison to lesemble the 
blooming lotus of the lake the one is full of affections, bad 
desiies and evil intents, as the othei is fi aught with bees, fila- 
ments, petals and leaves

25 The new bloom of youth is the lesoit of anxiety and 
disease, which like two buds with then fblack and white) plum- 
age of vice and vntue, fiequeiit the fountain of the young man’s 
lieait

26, Eaily youth lesembles a deep sea, distuibed by the waves 
of numbeiless amusements, tiansgiessmg all bounds, and legaid- 
less of death and disease

27 Youth IS like a fuiious gust of wind, ovei-loaded with 
the dust of piide and vanity, and sweeps away eveiy tiace of the 
good qualities (eaily aequiied by one)27 Youth IS like a fuiious gust of wind, ovei-loaded with 
the dust of piide and vanity, and sweeps away eveiy tiace of the 
good qualities (eaily aequiied by one)

28 The lude dust of the passions of youths, disfiguies then 
face, and the huiiicane of then sensualities covei then good 
qualities (as flying leaves oveispiead the giound)

29 Youthful vigoui awakens a senes of faults, and destioys a 
gioup of good qualities, by inci easing the vice of pleasures

30 Youthful bloom confines the fickle mind to some beauti- 
ous peison, as the blight moon-beams seive to shut the flitting 
bee m the dust of the closing lotus

31 Youth like a delightsome clustei of floweis, gi owing 
in the aiboui of human body, attracts the mind as the bee to 
it, and makes it giddy (with its sweets) .

32 The human mind anxious to deiive pleasure from the 
youthfulness of the body, falls into the cave oh sensuality, as a 
deei lunning aftei the mnage of desert heat, falls down into a 
pit

33 I take no delight m moony youth, which guilds the dark

76 YOGA VASISHTHA

body witb its beams^ and resembles tlie stern mane of the leonine 
mind. It IS a surge in tbe ocean of our lives (tliat 1 osscs us all 
about) .

34 There is no lehance in youth, winch fades away as soon as 
summei flowers in tins desert of the body

35 Youth IS as a bird, and as soon flies away fiom out bodily 
cage as the pbilosophei^s stone, which quickly disappeais fioin 
the hands of the unfortunate

36. As youth advances to its highest pitch, so the feveiish 
passions wax strongei foi oui destruction only ,

37 As long as the night (delusion) of youth does not come 
to its end, so long the fiends of our passion do not cease to 
rage in the desert of the body,

38. Pity me, O sage I in this state of youth, which is so full 
of purtuibations, as to have depiived me of the sight (light) 
of reason 0 pity me as thou wouldst for thy dying son.38. Pity me, O sage I in this state of youth, which is so full 
of purtuibations, as to have depiived me of the sight (light) 
of reason 0 pity me as thou wouldst for thy dying son.

39. The foolish man who ignoiantly icjoices at Ins tiansicnt 
youth, IS considered as a human beast.

40. The foolish fellow who is fond of his youth which is 
flushed with piide and fiaught ivith ciiois, comes to lepent (of 
his folly) in a shoittime.

41 Those gieat minded men are honoiiied on earth, who 
have safely passed ovei the penis of youth.

43. One crosses over with ease the wide ocean which is the 
horrible habitation of huge whales , but it is haid to pass ovei 
our youth, that is so full of vices and the billows (of oiii pas- 
sions)

43 It IS veiy raie to have that happy youth which is fiaught 
with humility, and spent in the company of lesjiectable men , 
which IS distinguished by feelings of sympathy, and is 3 oined with 
good qualities and viitues

CHAPTER XXI

VlTUPEEATION OF WOMEN

K ama added •

What beauty is theie m the person o£ a woman, composed 
of neives, bones and joints ^ She is a meie statue of flesh, and a 
flame of movingf machinery with her iibs and limbs

2 Can you find any thing beautiful m the female foim, se- 
jiarated £it)m its (component paits of the) flesh, skin, blood and 
watei, that is woith beholding ? Why then dote upon it ^

3. This faiiy frame consisting of bans in one jiait and blood 
in the other, cannot engage the attention of a high-minded man 
to its blemishes

4*. The bodies of females, that aie so covered with clothing 
and repeatedly besmeared with paints and pei fumes, aie (at last) 
devouied by carnivoious (beasts and woims)

5. The bieasts of women decorated with strings of peail, 
appear as charming as the pinnacles of Sumeiu, washed by the^ 
waters of Ganges falling upon them

6 Look at these very breasts of the woman becoming at last 
a lump of food, to be devouied by dogs m cemetiies and on the 
naked giound6 Look at these very breasts of the woman becoming at last 
a lump of food, to be devouied by dogs m cemetiies and on the 
naked giound

7 . There is no difference between a woman and a young 
elephant that lives in the j'ungle, both of them being made of 
blood, flesh and bones Then why hunt after hei .

8. A woman is charming only for a short time, and does not 
long last to be so I look upon her merely as a cause of delusion

9 There is no difference between wine and a women, both of 
them tending equally to produce high-flown miith and jollity, 
and ci eating revelry and lust. ,

10 Uxorious men aie like chained elephants among man- 
kind, that will never come to sense however goaded bj’- the hooks 
of reason

78 YOGA VASISFfTHA

11 ^Yoineii aie the flame? of vice^ then black-dyed eye and 
haiis aie as then smoke and soot They aie as intanirible as 
file, though pleasing to the sight They bum the man as file 
consumes the stiaw

la They bum fiom afai (moie than file), and aie as diy as 
bones (in then heaits), though appealing as soft and .iincy to 
sight They seive as fuel to the file of hell, and aie dangerous 
with then chaimingness

13 The woman lesembles a moon-light night, veiled ovei by 
hei loosened locks, and looking thiough hei staiiy eyes She 
shows hei moon-hke face amidst hei fioweij^ smiles

14 Hei soft dalliance destio 3 '-s all manly eiicig}’-, and hei 
caiesses oveipowei the good sense of men, as the shade of 
night does the sleeping (woild).

15 The woman is as lovely'’ as a cieepei in its flowemig time 
Hei jialm aie the leaves and hei eyes as the black-bees (on the 
flowei) Hei bi easts aie as the uplifted toiis of the jilant

16 The lovely damsel is like a poisonous cieepei, fan as the 
filament of a flowei but desti active of hie, by causing’ mebiia- 
tion and insensibility16 The lovely damsel is like a poisonous cieepei, fan as the 
filament of a flowei but desti active of hie, by causing’ mebiia- 
tion and insensibility

17 As the snake-catchei entices the snake by Ins bieath 
and bungs it out of its liole, so does the woman alluie the man 
by hei ofdcious civilities, and gets himiindei hei contiol

18 Concupiscence as a huntsman, has spiead his nets in the 
foims of women, foi the iiuipose of ensnaiing the peisons 
of deluded men like silly buds

19 The mind of man though as fieice that of a fuiious ele- 
phant, IS tied fast by the chain of love to the fuleium of

women, just as an elephant is fastened (by his leg) to the post, 
where he lemains dull and dumb foi evei ’

20 Human life is as a pool in which the mind moves about in 
its mud and miie (as a fish) Heie it is caught bv the bait of 
woman, and dragged along by thethiead of its impuie desnes

21 The beautious-eyed damsel is a bondage to man, as the

VAIRAGYA KHANDA 19

stable IS to the lioise, the fastening post to the elephant^ and as 
spells aie to the snakes

This wondeious woild, with all its delights and enjoy- 
ments; began with woman and depends on women foi its 
continuance

33 A woman is the casket of all gems of vice (Pandoia^s box), 
she IS the cause of the chain of oui evei lasting miseiy, and is of 
no use to me

34* What shall I do with her bieast; her eyes, hei loinS; hei 
ej’-ebiows; the substance of which is but flesh; and which there- 
foie IS altogethei unsubstantial

35 Heie and theiO; O Bidhraan; * hei flesh and blood and 
bones undeigo a change foi the woise in couise of a few days

3G. You see sir, those deaily beloved mistiesses; who aie so 
much fondled by foolish meii; lying at last in the cemetiy; and 
the membeis of then bodies all mangled and falling off fiom then 
places.37 0 Bidhman * those deai objects of lovet the faces of 
damsels; so fondly decoiated by then loveis Avith paints and 
pastes;aie at last to be singed on the piles (by those veiy hands)

38 Then biaided bans now hang as flappeis of chonn on the 
arbois of the cemetiy; and then whitened bones aiestiewn about 
as shining stais aftei a few days

39 Behold then blood sucked m by the dust of the eaith, 
voiacious beasts and woims feeding upon then flesh, jackals 
teaiing their skiU; and their Autal an wafted in the vacuum

30 This IS the state to which the membeis of the female 
body must shortly come to pasS; you say all existence to be 
delusion; tell me therefore Avhy do you allow yourselves to fall into 
eiioi ^

31 A woman is no other than a form composed of the five 
elements; then why should intelligent men be fondly attached to 
her (at the iisk of then nun) ^

33 Men’s longing foi women is likened to the creeper called

BO

YOGA VASISIITHA.

Sutaj winch strelelies its spngs to a gioat loiigtlij but beaii> 
plenty of hitlei and soui fi nits.

33 A man blnidecl by sivaiice (for the suppoil.iiu’c of bis 
male) IS as a sti ay deer fiom its lieid, and not hnouing wlncli 
way to gOj IS lost in the maze of illusion.

34. A3'’oungman nndei the contiol of a } oung uonian, is a*-’ 
much lamentable as an elephant fallen into a jiit of the Vindbj.i 
mountain in pin suit of his main.

35 He that has a wife, has an appetilofoi ciiio^menl on 
eaithj but one without hci has no object of de-^nc. Abandonment 
of the wife amounts to the abandoning of the uorld, and foiouk- 
ing the world is the path to line haiipmess.

36, I am not content; 0 Budhinan ! with thc»o unmanageable 
enjoyments which aie as llickeiing as the wings of hees; and aie 
as soon at an end as they arc bom (like the ephimeiede-> of a da};.

I long only for the state of snpi erne bliss, f i om inj feai of i ejie.ited- 
biithS; (tiansinigiession) decay and death.

CHAPTER XXIL

Obloquy of Old AgeI long only for the state of snpi erne bliss, f i om inj feai of i ejie.ited- 
biithS; (tiansinigiession) decay and death.

CHAPTER XXIL

Obloquy of Old Age

g BOYHOOD lias seaicely lost its bojishness when it is ovei- 
^ ^ taken by yontb, winch is soon followed bj'- a iiitliless old 
ag'Cj devouiing" the othei two.

3 Old acfe witheis the body like afiost fieezmg the lake of 
lilies It diives away the beauty of the j^eisoii as a stoim does 
the autumunal clouds , and it pulls down the bodj’-, as a cm lent 
Games awaj'’ a tree- on the bank.

3 The old man with his limbs slackened and worn out by 
age, and his body weakened by infirmity, is tieated by women 
as a useless beast

4 Old age diives a man’s good sense, as a good wife is dri- 
ven away by hei step dame

• 5 A man in his state of totteimg old age, is scoffed at as a 
dotaid by his own sons and seivants, and even by his wife, and 
all his fi lends and lelations

6 Insatiable avaiice like a gieedy vultuie alights on the 
heads of the aged, when then appeal ance grows uncouth, and 
then bodies become helpless, and devoid of all manly qualities and 
poweis

7 Appetite the constant companion of my youth, is thiiving 
along with my age, accompanied wth her evils of indigence, and 
heait-buinmg eaies and lestlessness

8 Ah me ! what must I do to lemove my piesent and futuie 
pains ? It IS this feai which mci eases with oldage, and finds no 
lemedy

9 What am I that am bi ought to this extiemity of senseless- 
ness, what can I do in this state I must lemam dumb and 
silent Undei these reflections there is an inci eased sense of 
helplessness in old age

10 How and when and what shall I eat, and what is sweet

VoL I ^ 11

82

YOGA VASiSHTirA

to taste ? These aie the thoughts which tiouble tlie mmd of one 
^vhen old age comes upon him.

11 Theie is an insatiable desire for enjoyments, but (ho 
powers to enjoy them aie lacking- It is the want of stiength 
which afflicts the heait m old age11 Theie is an insatiable desire for enjoyments, but (ho 
powers to enjoy them aie lacking- It is the want of stiength 
which afflicts the heait m old age

13 Iloaiy old age sits and shucks as a heion on the top of 
the tree of this body, which is infested within it by the seipcnts 
of sickness

13 As the giave owl thebiid of night, appeals unevpecfcdly 
to our sight soon as the eveniner shades co\ cr the landscape, so 
does the solemn appeal cncc of death ovei take us m the eve of 
our life

14 dailrness prevails ovei the wotld at the eve of the day, 
so doth death overtake the body at the eve of the life

15 Death ovei takes a man in his hoary old age, just as an 
ape alights on a tiee coiered vith pcail} floners

16. Even a deserted city, a leafless tieo and paiched up land 
may present a fair aspect, but never does the body look well that 
IS pulled down by hoary age

17. Old age with its hooping cough lays hold on a man, just 
as a vulture seizes its prey %Yith loud si neks in order to devoui 
it

18 As a girl eageily lays hold on a lotus flowei whenever 
she meets with one, and then plucks it fiom Us stalk and teais it 
to pieces, so does old age overtake the body of a person and break 
it down at last

19 As the chill blast of wintei shakes a tree and covers Us 
leaves with dust, so does old age seize the body %vUh a iiemor 
and fill all its limbs with the rust of diseases

30 The body overtaken by old age becomes as pale and 
batteied, as a lotus flower beaten by fiost becomes witbeied and 
shatteied

31 As moon-beams contnbute to the giowUli of Kwnvda 
flow ers on the top of mountains, so does old age produce gr^

VAIRA'GYA KHANDA 83

hairs resembling' casia, flowers on the heads of men (with inward 
phlegm and gout)

22 Death the lord of all beings, views the grey head of a man 
as a iipe pumpkin seasoned with the salt of old age, and devours 
it with zest22 Death the lord of all beings, views the grey head of a man 
as a iipe pumpkin seasoned with the salt of old age, and devours 
it with zest

23 As the Ganges upsets a neighbouring tree b}’’ its rapid course, 
so does old age destroy the body, as the current of oui life runs 
fast to decay

24 Old age which pieys on the flesh of the human body, 
takes as nruch delight in devouring its youthful bloom, as a cat 
does m feeding upon a mouse

25 Deciejntude laises its ominous hoarse sound of hiccough 
in the body, as the sliakal sends foitb her hideous cry amidst the 
forest

26 Dotage as an inwaid flame consumes the living body as a 
wet log of wood, which theienpon emits its hissing sounds of 
hiccough and haid bieathmg, and sends up the gloomy fumes of 
woe and sighs

27 The body like a flowering cieeper, bends down under the 
pressuie of age, turns to giey like the fading leaves of a plant, 
and becomes as lean and thin as a plant aftei its flowering time is 
over

28 As the infuiiate elephant upsets the white plantain tree 
in a moment, so does old age destioy the body that becomes as 
white as camjihoi all o-vei

29 Senelity, O sage ’ is as the standaid bearer of the king of 
death, flapping his cJtoun of grey hairs befoie him, and bunging 
in his train an aimy of diseases and tioubles

30 The monstei of old age, will even oveieome those that 
were nevei defeated in wais by their enemies, and those that 
hide themselves m the inaccessible caverns of mountains,

31 As infants cannot play in a room that has become cold with 
snow, so the senses can have no play in the bod}^ that is stiickeu 
with age

84 YOGA V^SISHTHA

32 Old age like a juggling gul, f,lniis on tlnee legs ai the 
sound of eougliiiig and wliifling, beating as a lynibal on botli 
sides

33 The tuft of gey bans on the bead of tlic aged body, 
repiesents a white flajijier {chonii) fastened to the top of a liandle 
of white sandal wood, to welcome the despot of doalii.33 The tuft of gey bans on the bead of tlic aged body, 
repiesents a white flajijier {chonii) fastened to the top of a liandle 
of white sandal wood, to welcome the despot of doalii.

84' As boaiy age makes bis adianee like mooii-hght on the 
site of the bodj’-, be calls foitb the bidden death to come out of 
it, as the moon-ligbt makes the mlvmhium to unfold its buds

35 Again as the white wash of old age wliiteiis tlie oulci 
body, so debility, diseases and dangeis become its inmates in the in- 
ner appaitment

36 It IS the extinction of being that is picccded b} old age , 
tbeiefoie 1 as a man of little undeistandmg, can ba\e no icliance 
m old age (though extolled by some)

47 What then is the good of this miserable life, u Inch lives 
uiidei the subjection of old age ? Senility is iiicsi&table m this 
woild, and defies all eflioits to avoid oi oveicome it.

* Cicoio “ Descncctiiic ”

CHAPTER XXIII,

'VicissiiuDEs OF Times

M en of little understanding’s are found to fall into grave 
eiiois in tins pit of the worldj bj then much idle talk^ 
evei doubting scepticism, and schisms fin leligion)

2 Good people can have no moie confidence in the net 
woik of their ribsj than little ehildien may have a liking for 
flints leflected in a mnioi

3. Time is a lat that cuts off thethieads of all thoughts (juos- 
pects), which men may entertain heie about the contem 2 )tible 
ideasuies of this woild.

4. Theie IS nothing m this woild which the alMevouimg time 
Will sjiaie He devouis all thmgs as the submaimefiie consumes

the ovei -flowing sea

«

5. Time IS the sovian loid of all, and equally teiiible to all 
things He is evei leady to devoui all visible beings

6 Time as master of all, spares not even the gieatest of u§ 
foi a moment He swallows the universe within himself, whence 
he IS known as the univeisal soul6 Time as master of all, spares not even the gieatest of u§ 
foi a moment He swallows the universe within himself, whence 
he IS known as the univeisal soul

7 Time pervades all thmgs, but has no peiceptible featuie 
of his own, except that he is imjierfectly known by the names of 
yeais, ages and lalpas (millenniums)

8 All that was fan and good, and as gieat as the mount of 
Meru, have gone down m the womb of eternity, as the snakes are 
gorged by the greedy Garuda

9 There was no one ever so unkind, haid-heaited, cruel, 
haish 01 miserly, whom time has not devoured

10 Time IS ever greedy although he should devour the moun- 
tains This great gourmand is not satiated with gorging eveiy 
thing in all the worlds

II. Time like an aetor plays many parts on the stage of the

86

YOGA VASISHTHA

world He abstracts and kills, produces and devours and at laaji 
destroys every thing

13 Time IS incesa intly picking up the seeds of all the four 
kinds of living beings fiom this unieal woild, as a parrot picks 
up the seeds fiom undei the ciacked shell of a pomegiauite. 
{Viz the ovipaiij vivipaii, Vegitables and the Ephimeredes),

13 Time like an wild elephant iipi oots all proud living beings 
in this woild, as the othei pulls up the tiees of the forest with 
then tusks

14 This creation ol! God is like a foiest, having Biahmd for 
its foundation and its tiees full of the gieatfiuits of gods Time 
commands it thionghout its length and bieadth

15 Time glides along incessantly as a eieeping plant, com- 
posed of yeais and ages as its paits, and the sable nights as black 
bees chasing aftei them

16 Time, O sage, is the subtlest of all things It is divided 
though indivisible it is consumed though incumbustible, it is 
perceived though irapeiceptible in its natuie

17 Time like the mind is stiong enough to cieate and demo- 
lish any thing in a tiice, and its province is equally extensive 
with it17 Time like the mind is stiong enough to cieate and demo- 
lish any thing in a tiice, and its province is equally extensive 
with it

18 Time is a whirlpool to men, and being accompanied with 
desiie his insatiable and ungovernable mistress and delighting in 
illicit enyoyments, he makes them do and undo the same thing 
ovei and again

19 Time is piompted by his lapacity to appiopiiate everj’- 
thing to himself, from the meanest straw, dust, leaves and woims, 
to the gieatest India and the mount Meiu itself

30 Time is the souiee of all malice and gieedmess, and the 
spiing of all misf 01 tunes, and mtoleiable fluctuations of our states

31 As boys with their balls play about then play-ground, so 
does time in his aiena of the sky, play with his two balls of the 
sun and moon

22 Time at the expiration of the lal^ya age, will dance about

87

VAIBAGYA KHANDA

With, a long chain of the bones of the dead hanging from his neck 
to the feet

23 The gale of desolation using from the body of this desola- 
tor of the woild at the end of a /calpa age, causes the fiagments 
of mount Meru to fly about in the air like the iinds of the hlioja^ 
peiera tree

24 Time then assumes his teriifie form of fire ( ), 
to dissolve the woild in empty space, when the gods Brahmd, and 
India and all otheis cease to exist

25 As> the sea shows himself in a continued senes of waves 
rising and falling one aftei another, so it is time that cieates and 
dissolves the woild, and appeals to use and fall in the lotation of 
days and nights

26 Time plucks the gods and demigods as iipe fnnts, fiom 
their gieat arbor of existence, at the end of the woild, (to make 
them his food)

. 27 Time legembles a laige fig tree fPicus religiosus), studded 
with all the woilds as its fruits, and resonant with the noise of 
living beings like the hissing of gnats about them. 27 Time legembles a laige fig tree fPicus religiosus), studded 
with all the woilds as its fruits, and resonant with the noise of 
living beings like the hissing of gnats about them

28 Time accompanied b}’" Action as his mate, legales himself 
in the garden of the woild, blossoming with the moon-beams of 
the Divine Spmt

29 As the high and huge lock siippoits its body upon the 
basis of the eai th, so does time rest itself in endless and inter- 
minable eternity

30 Tune assumes to himself vaiious hues of black, white 
and red (at night, day and midday) which seive foi his vestuies

31 As the eai th IS the gieat sujipoit of hills which aie fixed 
upon it, so is time the suppoit of all the innumeiable pondeious 
worlds that constitutte the univei&e

32 Hundieds of great lalpa ages (of the cieation and disso- 
lution of the world) may pass away, yet theie is nothing that can 
move eternity to pity oi concern, or stop oi expedite his course 
It neither sets noi uses (as time;

gg YOGA VASISHTHA

3‘3 Tune is nevei pioiid to tlnnlc, that it is lie wlio witlw 
out the least sense of pain and laboi, bungs this woild into pl.iy 
and makes it to exist

34. Time is like a reservoir in winch the nigflits aie as nind, 
the days as lotuses, and tlie clouds as bees.

35 As a covetous man, with woin out bioom sticks in hand, 
sweeps ovei a mountain to gathei the pai tides of gold stioun 
ovei it, so does time with his sweeping couise of dins and mghl^, 
collect m one mass of the dead all living beings in the uoild

36 As a miseily man turns and lights a lamp AMtl} his own 
fingeis, to look into lus stoies at each coiner of the loom, so 
does time light the lamps of the sun anl moon to look into the 
living beings in eveiy nook and coinei of the ivoild

37 As one iipens the law fiiiits in sun and fire inoidei to 
devoul them, so does time iipen men by then sun and file 
woiship, to bung them nndei his jaws at last37 As one iipens the law fiiiits in sun and fire inoidei to 
devoul them, so does time iipen men by then sun and file 
woiship, to bung them nndei his jaws at last

38. The wo lid is a delapidated cottage and men of pails aio 
laie gems m it Time hide> them in the ca,kcL of Ins belly, as a 
mtsei keeps his tieasuie in a colfei

39 Good men aie like a chaplet of gems, which time puls 
on his head foi a time with fondness, and then teais and tiamples 
it down (undei his feet)

40 Stiingsof days, nights and stais, lesembling beads and 
biaeelets of white and black lotuses, aie continually tnining 
lound the aim of time

41 Time (as a vultuie) looks upon the woild as (the eaicase 
of) a lam, with its mountains, seas, sky and eaitli as its foiii hoi ns, 
and the stais as its diops of blood which it dunks daj^ bj' day

42 Time destioys youth as the moon shuts the petals of the 
lotus It destioj^s life as the lion kills the elephant theie is 
nothing howevei insignificant that time steals not away

43 Time aftei spoiting foi a Kalpa peiiod in the act of

killing and ciushmg of all living beings, come to lose its own 
existence and become extinct m the eteinity of the Spiut of 
splits ^

V4IIIAGYA KHANDA

89

44 ) Time aftei a shoit lestand respite leappeais a& the cieatoi, 
pieseivei, destroy ei and lemembiancei of all He shows the 
shapes of all things whethei good or bad, keeping his own natuie 
beyond the knowledge of all Thus doth time expand and pie- 
seive and hnally dissolve all things by way of spoit

CHAPTER XXIV 
Ravages op Tjjie

|i AlHA rejoined Time is a seK-wiIled spoi isinaii as a pi i nc c, 
wlio IS inaccessible to dangers and whose poweis aic un- 
limited .

3. This woildis as it weie a forest and spoiUng^giound of 
time, wheiem the poor deluded woildhngs aie caught in his 
snare like a body of wounded stags.3. This woildis as it weie a forest and spoiUng^giound of 
time, wheiem the poor deluded woildhngs aie caught in his 
snare like a body of wounded stags.

3 The ocean of universal deluge is a plcasui e-pond of time, 
and the submarine fires bursting theiein as lotus lloweis (seivc 
to beautify that dismal scene) .

4'. Time makes his bieakfasb of this vapid and stale eaith, 
flavoured with the milk and ciiid of the se.os of those names

«

5 His wife Chandi (Hecate) withhci tiain of MtUus (fuiies), 
langes all about this wide woild as a feiocious tigiess (with 
hoi lid devastation)

6 The eaith with her waters is like a bowl of wine in the 
hand of time, dressed and flavoured with all soits of lilies and 
lotuses

7. The lion with his huge body and staitling mane, his loud 
roaring and tremendous groans, seems as a caged bud of spoit 
in the hand of time.

8. The Mahdkala like a playful young Kolila (cuckoo) , appeal s 
in the figure of the blue autumnal sky, and waibhiic: as sweet 
as the notes of a lute of gouid (m the music of the sphcies)

9 The restless bow of death is found flinging its woefol ar- 
rows (daits of death) with ceaseless thundei claps on all sides

10 This world IS like a forest, wheieiii soiiows aie langing 
about as playful apes, and time like a sportive piinec in tins forest, 
IS now roving, now walking, now playing and now kilhng his 
games

CHAPTER XXV.

Spouts of Death.

r MIME stands tlie foremost of all deceitful playeis in tins 
woild He acts tlie double parts of cieation and destiuc- 
tioUj and of action and fate (utility and futility)

2'. Time has no otbei ebaiactei but those of action and motion 
by which his existence is known to us, and which bind all beings 
(in the succession of thoughts and acts)

8 Eate is that which fiustiates (the necessary consequences 
of) the acts of all cieated beings, as the solar heat serves to dissolve 
the conglomeration of snows8 Eate is that which fiustiates (the necessary consequences 
of) the acts of all cieated beings, as the solar heat serves to dissolve 
the conglomeration of snows

4 This wide world is the stage wherein the giddy mob dance 
about (in then appointed times)

5 Time has a thud name of a teriifying nature known as 
KiUdntaJi (Pate), who in the form of a Kd.pd.lika (one holding 
human slcnlls m his hand), dances about in the world.

6. This dancing and loving Kiitd.ntah (Pate), is accompanied 
by his consort called Destiny to whom he is greatly attached (as 
his colleague).

7. Time (as Siva), wears on his bosom of the world, the 
triplicate white and holy thread composed of the serpent named 
Aiianta and the stream of Ganges, and the digit of the moon on 
his forehead (to measure his course) {Viz the Zodiacal belt, the 
milky way, and the lunar mansions).

8. The sun and the moon are the golden armlets of time, 
who holds m his palm the mundane world as the paltry play- ^ 
thing of a nosegay.

9. The firmament with its stars appears like a garment with 
coloured spots in it, the clouds called Pushhaia and Avaita are 
as the slaits of that garment, which are washed by Time in the 
waters of the universal deluge

10 Before him, dances his beloved Destiny with all her aits

93 YOGA VA'SrSHTIIA.

for ever, to beguile tbe living ibat aie fond oC worldly cnioy- 
meiits

11 People burry up and down to witness tlie dance of Des- 
tiny, wliose unrestrained motion keeps tlicm at work, and causes 
their repeated biiths and deaths^

12 The people of all the worlds arc studded about hei peison 
as her ornaments, and the sky stretching fiom the heaven of gods 
to the infernal regions, serves for the veil on her liead

13 Her feet are planted in the infernal legions, and the 
hell-pits ling at her feet like tiinkets, tied hy the stung of evil 
deeds, or sins (of men)13 Her feet are planted in the infernal legions, and the 
hell-pits ling at her feet like tiinkets, tied hy the stung of evil 
deeds, or sins (of men)

14' She is painted all over from head to foot h}^ the god 
Chitm Giip^'Cb With ornamental marks prepared hy her attendants 
(the deeds of men), and perfumed with the essence of those deeds

15 She dances and reels at the nod of her liiishand at the end 
of the KalpiSy and makes the mountains crack and ciash at her 
foot-falls.

16 Behind her danoe the peacocks of the god Kiimdra; and 
K4la the god of death staring with his three wide open eyes, 
ntteis his hedions cries (of destruction).

17 Death dances about in the form of the five headed Ilaia, 
with the loosened braids of hair upon him , while Destiny 
in the form of Graiuf, and her locks adorned with Manddra 
flowers keeps her pace with him.

18. This Destiny in her war-dance, bears a capacious goiiid 
representing hei big belly, and her body is adoincd with hundreds 
of hollow human skulls .imgling like the alms-pots of the KapAh 
mendicants

19 She has filled (reached) the sky with the emaciated skeleton 
of hei body, and gets teriified at her all destructive figure

30, The skulls of the dead of various shapes aborn her body 
like a beautiful garland of lotuses, which keep hanging to and 
fio dining hei dance at the end of a Kal^ia age

31 The horiible loaiiiig of the giddy clouds Pushkaia and 
Avaitaat the end of the Kalpa, serves to lepi'esent the heating

VAIRAGYA KHANDA 93

o£ her Ddmcini dram, and put to flight the heavenly choir of 
Tumhu! u

32 As death dances along, the moon appeals like his ear- 
ring, and the moon-beams and stars appear like his ciest made of 
peacocks^ feathers

23 The snow-capt Himalaya, appeals like a circlet of bones 
in the uppei loop of his right ear, and the mount 3£eric as a 
golden aieola in that of the left.23 The snow-capt Himalaya, appeals like a circlet of bones 
in the uppei loop of his right ear, and the mount 3£eric as a 
golden aieola in that of the left.

24 Under their lobes are suspended the moon and the sun, as 
pendant eai-iings glittering over his cheeks. The mountain 
ranges called the lol&loha are fastened like chains aiound his 
waist.

25. The lightnings are the bracelets and armlets of Destiny, 
which move to and fro as she dances along. The clouds aie hei 
wrappers that fly about hei in the an.

26 Death is furnished with many weapons, as clubs, axes, 
missiles, speais, shovels, mallets and shaip swords, all of which 
aie suie weapons of destruction

27 Mundane enyoyments aie no othei than long ropes 
dropped down by the hand of death, and keeping all mankind 
fast bound to the woild, while the gieat thiead of infinity 
{aiimta) is worn by him as his wieath of flowers

28 The belts of the seven oceans aie worn about the arms of 
Death as his bracelets resplendant with the living sea-animals, 
and the biight gems contained in their depths.

29. The great vortices of customs, the successions of joy and 
grief, the excess of pride and the daikness of passions, foim the 
stieaks of hair on his body.

30 After the end of the woild, he ceases to dance, and cieates 
anew all things from the lowest animal that lives in the eaith, to

the highest Biahmd and Siva (when he resumes his dance)

31 Destiny as an actiess, acts by turns hei; paits of cieation 
and desti notion, diveisified by scenes of old age, soiiow and 
misery

32 Time repeatedly creates the woilds and then woods, with

9i

YOGA TASISIITHA

the different abodes and localities teeming with population He 
forms the moveable and immovable substances^ establishes cus- 
toms and again dissolves them, as boys make their dolls of clay 
and bleak them soon afteiwaids

CHAPTER XXVI

The Acts op Destiny.CHAPTER XXVI

The Acts op Destiny.

|3j!^MA said Such being* the all destructive conduct of time 
■ ^ and others (as already described), what confidence, O gieat 
sage, can men like me, have upon them

3. We* all lemain heie, O sage * as slaves sold to Fate and Des- 
tiny, and aie deceived by their alluiements as beasts of the foiest.

3 This Fate whose conduct is so very inhuman, is always 
up to devour all beings, and is incessantly throwing men into the 
sea of tioubles.

4 He is led by his malicious attempts to inflame the mind 
with inoidmaiy desiies, as the fire laises its flames to bum down 
a habitation

5. Destiny the faithful and obedient wife of Fate, is natui- 
ally fickle on account of her being a female, and is always bent on 
mischief and destuibmg the patience (even of the wisest of men)

6 As the henious serpent feeds upon the air, so does ciuel 
Death ever swallow the living He iipens the body with old age 
to create his zest, and then devouis all animals warm with life

7 Death is called a lelentless tyrant, having no pity even foi 
the sick and week, noi any legaid for any one in any state of life.

8. Every one m this woild is fond of afliuence and pleasures, 
noblcnowing that these aie only calculated to lead him to his luin.

9 Life IS veiy unsteady Death is veiy ciuel Youth is veiy 
fiail and fickle, and boyhood is full of dullness and insensibi- 
hty.

10 Man IS defiled by his woildhness, his fiiends aie ties to

the world, his enyoyments aie the greatest of his diseases in life, 
and his avaiice and ambition are the mu age that always alluies 
him (to luin) ^

11 Oui veiy senses are our enemies, befoie which even tiuth

96 YOGA VASISHTHA

appears as falsehood, tlie mind is tlie enemy of the mind and selL 
IS the enemy of self (^ e\ they aie all deceptive)11 Oui veiy senses are our enemies, befoie which even tiuth

96 YOGA VASISHTHA

appears as falsehood, tlie mind is tlie enemy of the mind and selL 
IS the enemy of self (^ e\ they aie all deceptive)

la Self-esteem is stained (with the name of selfislinesst 
intelligence is blamed foi its fallaciousness, our actions aie attend- 
ed with bad lesultsj and oui pleasures tend only to effeminacy 
13. All oui desues aie diiected to enjoyments , om love of 
tiuth IS lost , our women aie the ensigns of vice, and all that 
weie once so sweet, have become tasteless and vapid

11< Things that aic not leal, aie believed as real, and have be- 
come the cause of our piide, b}’^ haidening us in iintiulh, and 
keeping us fiom the light of truth

15 My mind is at a loss to think what to do , it regicts at 
its inci eased appetite foi pleasiue, and foi want of that scll- 
deiiial (which I icquiie).

16. My sight is dimmed by the dust of sensuality the 
daikness of self-esteem prevails upon me : the puiity of niiiid is 
never reached to, and tiiith is fai off fiom me

17 Life is become uiicei tarn and deatli IS always advancing 
nigh , my patience is distiiibed, and there is an increased 
appetite for whatever is false

18. The mind is soiled by dullness, and the body is cloyed 
with suifeit and ready to fall , old age exults ovei the body, and 
sms are conspicuous at every step

19 Youth flies fast away with all our care to preserve it , 
the company of the good is at a distance , the light of ti nth 
shines fiom no where, and I can have recoiuse to nothing in 
this woild

aO The mind is stupifled within itself, and its contenimenl

lias fled fiom it . there is no use of enlightened santiments in

it, and meanness makes its advance to it from a distance 
<

2,1 Patience is converted into impatience , man is liable to 
the states of bnth and death , good company is lare, but bad 
company is evei within the leach of eveiy body2,1 Patience is converted into impatience , man is liable to 
the states of bnth and death , good company is lare, but bad 
company is evei within the leach of eveiy body

22 All individual existences aie liable to appeal and dis- 
appeai , all desues aie chains to the woild, and all woildly

97

. VAIEAGYA KHANDA.

beings are evei seen to be led away pei force wbeie no body can 
tell

33. What reliance can there be oir human Irfe^ wherr the pornts 
of the coni 2 )ass become rndrstrnct arrd undrscernrble , when the 
couutires and jilaces charrge therr posrtrons and names, and when 
rnourrtams everr are liable to be delapidated

34!. What reliance can there be on man, when the heavens 
are swallowed in infinity, when this world is absorbed m nothing- 
ness, and the very earth loses her stability?

35 What 1 elianee can thei e be on men like our selves, when the 
very seas are liable to be dried up, when the stars are doomed to 
fade away and disa^ipeai, and when the most perfect of beings 
are hable to dissolution ?

36 What reliance can there be on men like us, when even 
the demigods are liable to destruction, when the polar star is 
knoivn to change its jila-ce, and when the immortal gods are 
doomed to mortality ?

37. What reliance can there be on men like us, when India 
is doomed to be defeated by demons , when even death is hinder- 
ed from his aim, and when the current an ceases to breathe?

38 What reliance can there be on men like us, when the 
very moon is to vanish with the sky, when the very 
sun IS to be split into pieces, and when fire itself is to become 
frigid and cold?

39. What reliance can there be on men like us, when the 
very Han and Biahmd are to be absorbed into the Great One, 
and when Siva himself is to be no more

30 What reliance can there be on men like us, when the 
duration of time comes to be counted, when Destiny is destined 
to her final destiny, and when all vacuity loses itself in infinity ?30 What reliance can there be on men like us, when the 
duration of time comes to be counted, when Destiny is destined 
to her final destiny, and when all vacuity loses itself in infinity ?

31 That which is inaudible, unspeakable^ invisible, and 
unknownable in his real form, displays to us these wondious 
worlds by some fallacy (in oui conceptions)

33 No one conscious of himself (his egoism), can disown 
VoL I 13

93 YOGA TASISHTHA

Ills subjection to that Being-, that dwells in the hearts o£ every 
one.

33 This sun the loid o£ worlds, is impelled (by that power) 
to run ovei hills, rocks and fields, like an inert piece of stone, 
hulled down fiom a mountain and borne away by a curient 
stream

34. This globe of eai^h, the seat of all the Suias and Asm as, 
and suiiounded by the luminous spheie in the manner of a wal- 
nut covered by its hard crust, subsists under His command

35 The Gods in the heavens, the men on earth and the sei- 
pents in the nethei woild, aie bi ought into existence and led to 
decay by His will only.

36. Kama (Cupid) that is aibitrarily poweiful, and has 
forcibly overpowered on all the living woild, has derived his un- 
conqueiable might from the Lord of woilds.

37. As the heated elephant legales the an with his spiiituous 
exudation, so does the spiing peifume the air with his piofu- 
sion of floweis, unsettling the minds of men, (at the will of the 
Almighty)

38 So aie the loose glances of loving damsels diiected to inflict 
deep wounds in the heart of man, which his best leason is un- 
able to heal

89 One whose best endeavour is always to do good to others, 
and who feels foi otheis’ woes, is leally intelligent and ha 2 ipy 
under the influence of his cool judgment

40. AVho can count the numbei of beins-s resemblins* the 
_ 1 ^ ^ 
waves of the ocean, and on whom death has been dai ting the sub-

manne file of destmetion40. AVho can count the numbei of beins-s resemblins* the 
_ 1 ^ ^ 
waves of the ocean, and on whom death has been dai ting the sub-

manne file of destmetion

41 All mankind are deluded to entiaji themselves in the 
snaie of avarice^ and to be afflicted with all evds in life, as the 
deei entangled in the thickets of a jungle

42 The teim of human life m this woild, is dew eased in each 
geneiation m proportion to (the ineiease of then wicked acts) 
The desiie of fiuition is as vain as the expectation of reaping

VAIEAGYA KIIANDA

99

fruits froin a creepei giowmg iii the sky yet I know not why 
men of leasou Avould not umleistand this tiiith

43 This IS a day of festivity, a season of joy and a time of 
piocession. Heie aie our fiiends, heie the pleasuies and heie 
the vaiiety of our entei iainments. Thus do men of vacant 
minds amuse themselves with weaving the weh of then desires, 
until they become extinct

CHAPTEE XXVII

Va'N’ITY 01? THE WORLD

K ama said O sage • this seemingly pleasing but actually

unpleasant world, has nothing in it that is pioductive of 
such a thing as can affoid tianquility to the soul,

2. After the playful boyhood is ovei, the mind wastes itself 
in the society of women like the deer fallen in a cat^ern, then 
the body bends down under old age, and the man has only to 
grieve (for his folly).

3. As the body is stricken with the frost of old age, its beauty 
flies afar fiom it like the bloom of the fading lotus, and then 
the fountain of maAs woildliness is at once diied u}!.

4 As the body gets towaids its decline, so much doth death 
rejoice in it. The body giows lean with giey bans upon the 
head, just as a cieeper fades away with the flowers upon it

5 All living creatures are borne away by the stieam of 
avarice, which upsets the tiee of contentment gi owing on the 
bank and flows on for evei in this woild.5 All living creatures are borne away by the stieam of 
avarice, which upsets the tiee of contentment gi owing on the 
bank and flows on for evei in this woild.

6. Human body is like a vessel covered with skin, and glides 
ovei the ocean of the woild (without its helmsman of leason).

It IS tossed about by sensual pleasures, and goes down undei the 
watei by the piessure of its whale-hke passions

7 The world is a wilderness abounding in cieepeis of avaiice 
and tiees of sensuality, with hundieds of desiies as then blanches. ' 
Oui minds like monkies pass their time in lOving about this 
forest without getting the fiuits (they seek).

8. Those that do not yield to gnef in troubles, that aie not 
elated with prosperity, nor smitten at heart by women, are laie 
in this world.

6 Those who fight boldly in the battle fields and withstand 
the war-elephants, are not so'veiy biave in^'my opinion, as those

VAIRA'GYA KHANDA lOl

wlio witlibfcand the surges of the mmd amidst the sti earns of 
carnal apjietites.

10 I see no such deeds in the woild which endure to tlie 
last (or final emancijiation) of men Actions proceeding fiom a 
desiie of fruition in fools^ serve only for their restlessness on 
eaith.

11. Such men are rare in the worlds that have filled the 
coiners of the woild with then fame and valour^ who have 
filled then houses with true liehes acq^uired hy honest means and 
an unwaveiing patience.

12 Good and bad fortune always overtake a man, even if 
he weie living in an appeituie of the rock or withm the walls 
of mountains, or even if he were enclosed within an non built 
closet.

13. Our sons and riches are mere objects of delight to us. 
It IS as erioneous to suppose them to be of any good to us at 
ihe end, as to expect any benefit fiom the decoction of poison13. Our sons and riches are mere objects of delight to us. 
It IS as erioneous to suppose them to be of any good to us at 
ihe end, as to expect any benefit fiom the decoction of poison

14. Old people being i educed to calamitous encumstances at 
the pitiable state of the decay of then bodies and decline of life, 
have gieatly to be tormented at the thoughts of the impious 
deeds (of then past lives).

15 Men having passed their eaily days in the gratification 
of their desnes and other worldly pursuits at the expense of the 
acts of virtue and piety, aie as much troubled with anxieties at 
the end, that their minds aie seized with a tremoi hire that of 
the plumage of a peacock shaken by the bieeze. How then can 
a man attain to tianquility at any time ?

16 Wealth whether forthcoming or unattainable, whether

got by laboui or given by foitune, is all as deceitful to the 
worldly minded, as the high waters of iiveis (swelling only to 
subside). ,

17. That such and such desirable acts are to be done, aie the 
constant thoughts of men, who desiie to please then sons and 
wives, until they aie worn out with age and become crazy in 
their mmds. »

102 YOGA VASISHTHA

18 Like leaves on tiees that grow to fall^ and falling make 
loom foi otlieis to shoot foi til, aie those men who devoid of 
leason, die away daily to be boin again

19 Men having tiavelled here and theie and far and near, 
letuin to then homes at the end of the day , but none of them 
can have lest by day oi night, except the virtuous few that live 
by- honest dealings

ao After quelling his enemies and getting enough of riches 
m his clutches, the iieh man just sits down to enjoy his gams , 
when death comes upon him, and inteiiupts Ins joy

21 Seeing the vile tiash of woildly gams earned and accu- 
mulated by the basest means to be but transitory, the infatuated 
mob do not perceive then ajipioching dissolution.21 Seeing the vile tiash of woildly gams earned and accu- 
mulated by the basest means to be but transitory, the infatuated 
mob do not perceive then ajipioching dissolution.

22 Men loving then own lives, and making mouths at the 
demise of otheis, are like a heid of sheep bound to the stake, and 
staling at the slaughtei of then fellows, yet feeding them- 
selves to fall as fattened victims to death.

23 The multitude of people on earth, is evei seen to appear 
in and disappear fiom it as fast as the passing waves of the sea, 
but who can tell whence they come and whithei they letuin

24) Women aie as delicate as poisonous creepers, that mth 
then red petaled lips and garments, and then eyes as busy 
as fluttering bees, are killeis of mankind and stealers of then 
ravished hearts

25 Men are as passengers m a procession, lepamng from 
this side and that to join at the place of then meeting Such is 
the delusive union of oui wives and friends here (for oui meeting 
in the next world)

26 As the burning and extinguishing of the lamp depend 
on the wick and its moistening oil, so does our course in this 
transitory world ^depend on oui acts and affections only) No- 
body knows the true cause of this mysterious existence

27 The revolution of the world is comjiaiable with that of 
the potter s wheel and the floating bubbles of lam water , that 
appear to be lasting to the ignoiant observer <only.

VAIRAGY’A KHANDA. 103

US. The blooming beauty and giaces (of youth)^ aie destined 
to be snatclied aivay at the appioacb of old age The youth- 
ful hopes also of men fly at a distance like the bloom of lotus 
buds in winter.

39. The tree winch is oidained to be useful to mankind by the 
loads of fruits and floweis that it beais upon its body, is fated 
also to be hewn douni by the cruel axe at last How then can 
beneficient men expect to avoid the cniel hand of death.30 Society with lelatives is (of all otheis) as peiilous as that 
of a iioisojious plants it is pleasant for its domestic affections, 
winch aie in lealit}’’ but delusions of the soul.

31 What IS that thing in the woild, which has no fault in it, 
and what is that which does not afflict or giieve us, what 
being IS bom that is not subiected to death, and what are those 
acts that aie fice fiom deceit?

33, Those living a Kalpa age aie leckoned as shoit-lived, 
compaied with those living foi mzny Kal pas ^ and they again aie 
*so in lespcct to Biahmil Hence the paits of time being all 
finite, the ideas of then length oi shoitness are altogether false

33. Things that aie called mountains aie made of locks, 
those that aic called tiees aic made of wood, and those that aie 
made of flesh aie called animals, and man is the best of them 
But they aie all made of mattei, and doomed to death and decay

31' j\Iany things appear to be endued with intelligence, and 
the heavenly bodies seem to be full of water , but physicists have 
found out by analysis that, there is no other thing any wheie 
exeejit {inimiUcc of) mattei.

35 It IS nowondei that this (unieal world) should appear a

miiaculous (leality) to the wise, and seem maiveloiisly stiikin^ 
in the minds of mankind , since the visions m oui dieams also 
appeal so veiy fascinating to eveiy one in then state of di earn- 
ing '

36 Those that aie coiiupted in then gieedmess (after woild- 
ly enjoyments), will not even in then old age, receive the seimons 
on then eternal concerns, which they think to be false chimeias 
as those of a flowei *i a cieepei giownig in the sky

104

YOGA VASISHTHA

37 People are still deluded m tlieii mmds in wislimg to 
attain tlie state of tlien snpeiiois, but they fall down still 
lowei like beasts (g-oats) fiom the top of a hill, in wishing to lay 
hold on the fruits of a veidant cieeper out of then leach38 Young men spending then wealth in peisonal giatifica- 
tions, aie as useless as plants gi owing in the bowels of a deep and 
inaccessible cavern, which spiead then fiuits and floweis, leaves 
and blanches and then shades to the use of nobody.

39 Men aie found to resemble the black antelopes (in then 
wandeiings) some of them lOving about the sweety, soft and 
beautiful seeneiies of the countiy, and otheis loammg in steiile 
tiacts and paits of boundless foiests. (z e Some living in the 
society of men, and otheis as lecluses from it).

4<0 The daily and diveisified acts of natuie aie all peimeious 
in then nature, they appeal pleasant and lavishing to the heait 
foi a time, but aie attainded with pain in the end, and fill the 
mind of the wise with dismay.

4'1. Man is addicted to gieediness, and is pi one to a vaiiety 
of wicked shifts and plots , a good man is not now to be seen 
even in a dieam, andtheie is no act which is fiee fiomdifiiculty. 
I know not how to pass this state of human life.

CHAPTER XXVIII

MuTATtILITY OF THE WORLD

K ama said >

Whatever we see of all moveable oi immovable things in 
'this woild, they aie all as evanescent as things viewed in a 
dieam,

2. The >hoIlow deseit that appeals as the diied bed of a sea 
to-day, will be found to-moriow to be a lunning flood by the 
aecuTTiulation of rain-watei in it.

8. What is to-day a mountain reaching the sky and with 
extensive foifists on it, is in eouise of time levelled to the giound, 
and IS afterwaids dug into a pit

4' The body that is clothed to-day with garments of silk, 
and decoiated with gai lands and fiagianee, is to be cast away 
naked into a ditch to-morrow.

5 What IS seen to be a city to-day, and busy with the bustle 
of vaiioiis occupations, passes in couise of a few days into the 
condition of an uninhabited wilderness.

6 The man who is veiy poweiful to-day and piesides over 
piincipalities, is i educed m a few days to a heap of ashes.6 The man who is veiy poweiful to-day and piesides over 
piincipalities, is i educed m a few days to a heap of ashes.

7 The very foiest which is so foimidable to-day and appeals 
as blue as the azuie skies, turns to be a city in the couise of 
time, with its banneis hoisted in the air

8. What IS (to-day) a foimidable jungle of thick foiests, 
turns in time to be a table-land as on the mount Meiu

9. Watei becomes land and land becomes watei Thus the 
woild composed of wood, giass and water becomes othei- 
wise ivith all its contents in couise of time

10 Oui boyhood and youth, bodies and possessions aie all 
but tiansient things, and they change fiom one state to anothei, 
as the evei fluctuating Vaves of the ocean 
VOL I

14

icg yoga ya'sishtha

11 Our lives in tins (mortal) woildj are as unsteady as the 
flame of a lamp placed at the window, and the splendoni of all 
the objects in the thiee woilds, is as fiickeiing as the flashing of 
the lightning

la. As §, granary stoied with heaps of grains is exhausted 
by its continued waste, so is the stock of life spent away by its 
lepeated respiiations.

13 The mind of man is as fluctuating as a flag waving in the 
an and filled with the dust of sin, to indicate its wavering between 
the paths of heaven and hell

14;. The existence of this delusive world, is as the appearance 
of an actress on the stage, shuffling her vests as she tiudges along 
in her dancing

15 It^s scenes are as changeful and fascinating as "those of a 
magic city , and its dealings as bewitching and momentary as 
the glances of a juggling girl

16 The stage of the woild presents us a scene of continuQd 
dancing (of the sorceiess of deception), and the deceptive glances 
of her eyes resembling the fleeting flashes of lightning.

17 The days, the gieat men, their hey-days and deeds (that 
aie past and gone), aie now letamed in our memoiy only, and 
such must be our cases also in a shoit time17 The days, the gieat men, their hey-days and deeds (that 
aie past and gone), aie now letamed in our memoiy only, and 
such must be our cases also in a shoit time

18. Many things are going to decay and many coming anew 
day by day, and theie is yet no end of this accursed eouise of 
events in this ever-changeful world.

19. Men degenerate into lower animals, and those again use 
to humanity (by metempsychosis), gods become no-gods, and 
theie IS nothing that remains the same

20 The sun displays every thing to light by his lU/ys, and 
watches over the rotations of days and nights, to -witness like 
time the dissolution of all things.

21 The gods Biahmd., Vishnu and' Siva and all material 
productions, are reduced to nothingness, like the submaime fiie 
subsiding undei the waters of the deep

22 The heaven, the earth, the an, the sky, the iiiountaius.

VAIKAGYA KHANDA 107

tlie iiveiSj and all the qnaiteis of the globe, aie subject to 
destiuction like the diy fuel by the all-destioymg file of the last 
day

2^3 Riches and relatives, friends, seivants and affluence, aie 
of no jileasuie to him who is m constant diead of death.

24< All these aie so long delightful to a sensible man, as the 
monstei of death does not ajipear befoie the eye of his mind

25 We have piospeiity at one moment, succeeded by advei- 
sity at anothei , so we have health at one time, followed by sick- 
ness soon aftei

26 What intelligent being is there, that is not misled by 
these delusions of the woild, which lepiesent things otheiwise 
than what they aie, and seive to bewilder the mind?

27 (The woild is as vaijung) as the face of the skies , it is 
now as black as daik clay, and in the next moment biiglit with 
the golden hues of fair light

. 28 It IS now ovei-cast by azuie clouds resembling the blue 
lotuses of the lake, and loaiing loudly for a time and then being 
dumb and silent on a sudden. 28 It IS now ovei-cast by azuie clouds resembling the blue 
lotuses of the lake, and loaiing loudly for a time and then being 
dumb and silent on a sudden

29. Now studded with stais, and now glowing with the gloiy 
of the sun, then giaced by the pleasant moonbeams, and at last 
without any light at all

30. Who IS theie so sedate and him, that is not teiiified at 
these sudden appeal ances and then disappeaianee, and the 
momentaiy duiations and final dissolution of woildly things ^

31 What IS the natuie of this woild, wheie we aie ovei taken 
by adveisity at one moment, and elated by piospeiity at anothei, 
wheie one is boin at a time, and dies away at anothei ^

32 One that was something else befoie, is boin as a man 
m this life, and IS changed to anothei state in comse of a few 
days, thus theie is no being that lemains steadily m the same 
state

33 A pot IS made of clay, and cloth is made of cotton, and 
they aie still the same dull mateiials of which they aie comjiosed 
thus theie is nothing new in tins woild that was not seen or

108

YOGA VASISIITIIA

known before^ and that changes not its i’oiin (f ^ all is but a 
foimal and no matenal change).

34 The acts of ci cation and desti action, of diffusion, jnoduc- 
tion, and sustentation follow one anothci, as the icNolution oi 
day and night to man.

85 It hajiiiens sometimes, that an imiiotent man ‘'lays a heio, 
and that hundieds aic killed by one individn.il , so also a ('ommon- 
ei becomes a noble man, and thus eieiy thing is cliangcful in tins 
vaiying woild

36 These bodies of men that aic aln a} s ehaiigiiig then sl.itc", 
aie as bodies of wateis using and falling in na\cs by motion of 
the wnds

37 Boyhood lasts but a few days, and then it ts succeeded bj 
youth which is as quickly followed by old ago thus ihcie being 
no identity of the same jieison, how ean one lely on the iinifoi- 
mity of external objects ^38 The mind that gets delighted m a moment and Iiccomes 
dejected in the next, and assumes likewise its equanimity at 
anothei, is indeed as changeful as an actor.

39. The cieatoi who is evei tinning one thing into anothci 
in his woik of cieation, is like a child who makes and bieaks his 
doll without conceni.

40 The actions of pioducmg and collecting (of giains), of 
feeding (one's self) and destiojnng (otlieis), come by turns to man- 
kind like the rotation of day and night

41 Neithei adversity noi piospeiity is of long continuance in 
the case of worldly people, but they aie ever subject to appear ance 
and disappear ance by trims

42 Time is a skilful playei and plays many parts uitli ca‘;c, 
but he IS chiefly skilled in tiagedy, and often plays his tragic 
part in the affairs of men

43 All beihgs are produced as fruits in the great forest of 
the universe, by virtue of then good and bad acts (of past lives)

and hme like a gust of mnd blasts them day bj' day before 
then matui ity

ri

CHxiPTER XXIX

Uneeliableness oe woeldly things.

r 1 1HUS IS mjlieaifc consumed by the vvild-fiie of these gieat 
® woildly evils, and tbeie uses m me no desiie of enjoy- 
ing them, as theie uses no miiage from a lake.

3 My existence upon eaith gets bitter day by day, and 
though I have got some ex25eiience in it, yet its associations 
have made me as soui as the Nimba plant by its immeision in 
water.

3 I see wickedness on the increase, and iighteousness on 
the decline in the mind of man, which like the sour Kaianja 
(crab) flint, becomes sourer eveiy day.

4 I see honoui is eaten up every day by mutual altei cations 
of men, using haish woids to each othei as they ciack the nuts 
undei then teeth.

5 Too much eagerness foi royalty and woildly enjoyments, 
is equally piejudicial to oui welfare , as we loose oui futuie 
piospects by the former, and our piesent happiness by the 
latter5 Too much eagerness foi royalty and woildly enjoyments, 
is equally piejudicial to oui welfare , as we loose oui futuie 
piospects by the former, and our piesent happiness by the 
latter

6 1 take no delight in my gaidens nor have any pleasure 
in women, I feel no joy at the prospect of iiches, but enjoy 
my solace in my own heait and mind

7 Fiail are the pleasuies of the woild, and avaiice is al- 
togethei mtoleiable, the bustle of business has bioken down 
my heart, and (I know not) wheie to have my tianquihty

8 Neither do I hail death nor am I m love with my life ; 
but lemain as I do, devoid of all anxiety and eaie,

9. What have I to do with a kingdom, and with all its 
enjoyments ^ Of what avail aie iiches to me, and what is tlie 
end of all oui exeitions^ All these aie but lequiiements of 
self-love, fiom which 1 am entiiely fiee.

10 The chain ^of (lepeated) births is a bond that binds

1]0

YOGA VA'sISIITIIA

fast all men by its stiong knots o£ the senses, tbosc stivvvng 
to bleak loose fiom tins bontlane foi Ibeir libciation, avc 
(said to be; the best of men.

11 These haughty damsels wliom the god of love cmjiloys 
to lavage the hearts of men,, icsemble a gioup of elephants 
siibveiting' a lotus bed iindei then feet.

12 The tieatmciit of the mind with puic icasoii being 
neglected now (in youth), it is haid to heal it aftciwaids (lu 
age;, when it admits of no cine

13 It IS the woildliness of man that is his tipc poison, 
while leal poison is no poison to him. It is the poison of 
woildliness which destioys his fiitiiie life, while ical poison 
is only locally injuiious to him. (in his piescnt slate).

14 Neither pleasuie nor pain, noi fnends nor lolalives, 
noi even life and death, can enchain (affect) the mind tliat has 
leeeived the light of tiutli.14 Neither pleasuie nor pain, noi fnends nor lolalives, 
noi even life and death, can enchain (affect) the mind tliat has 
leeeived the light of tiutli.

15. Teach me, Oh Bidhman I that ait the best of the^ 
learned m the mystciies of the past and future, teach me so that 
I may soon become like one devoid of gucf and fc.u and worldly 
tioubles, and may have the light of tiuth beaming upon me

16 The foiest oC igiioiance is laid ovci with the ‘^naic of 
desiie, it IS full of the thoins of miseiy. and is the dieadCul scat 
of desti action and the danger (of lejicatcd hiilhs and deaths )

17. I can lather suffer myself to be put under the jaws 
of death with his lows of teeth like saws, but cannot hcai tlie 
dieadly pains of woildly caies and anxieties

18 It IS a gloomy euoi m this woild to think that I have 
this and have not the otliei , it selves to toss about oiii minds 
as a gust of wiud dispeises the dust of the eaith.

19 It IS the till cad of avaiice that links togcthci all living 
beings like a chaplet of peails, the mind seivcs to twiil about 
this chain, but puie consciousness sits quiet to ohseive its 
lotatioii

20. I who am devoid of desiies, would like to hieak this 
ornamental chain of woildliness, hanging abput me as a deadlj’’

VAIRAtJYA KHANDA 111

serjDentj in the same manner, as a lion bieaks asundei the net 
(which is laid to ensnaie him).

21 . Do you now, O most learned sage, scatter the mist 
which has oveisjnead the foiest of my heait, and the darkness 
which has oveicast my mind, by the light of time knowledge

22 . There aie no anxieties, O sage* which cannot be pit 
to an end by the society of good minded men , the daikness 
of night can be well lemoved by moon-beams22 . There aie no anxieties, O sage* which cannot be pit 
to an end by the society of good minded men , the daikness 
of night can be well lemoved by moon-beams

'23 Life IS as fickle as a diop of watei pending on a mass 
of clouds .blown away by the winds Our enjoyments are as 
unsteady as the lightning that flickeis in the midst of clouds. 
The pleasuies of youth aie as shppeiy as water With these 
reflections in my mind, I have subdued them all undei the 
piovmce of peace and tianqiiility

CIIAPTEE XXX.

S ELr-BISrAllAGMILNT.

OEEINGr the world thus ingiilphed amidst the ahyss of 
L> hundieds of using’ dangers .and difficulties, my mind is 
immeiged in the mire of anxieties.

2. My mind is w.andeiing every wheie and I am stiueh wiih 
fear at eveiy thing; my limbs aie shaking with fcai like the 
leaves of a witheied tiee.

3 My mind is bewildeicd by impatience for its want of 
true contentment, ]ust as a young woman is afiaid in a desert 
foi want of the company of liei stiong handed husband.

d. The thoughts of my mind aie entangled m my desiie for 
woildly en 3 oyments, as stags aie caught in the pit stiewn witli 
glass ovei it

5 The senses of an unieason.able man, evei mnasti.'iy to the 
wiong and nevei tuin to the light w.ay , so the eyes of a blind 
man lead him but to fall into the pit.

6 Human thoughts aie linked to the animal soul as eonsoits 
to their loids. They can ncithei sit idle noi ramble at Iibeity, 
but must lemain as wives uiidei the contiol of then husbands.

7. My patience is almost worn out, like that of a cieeper 
under the winter frost It is decayed, and neithei lives nor 
polishes at once.

8. Our minds aie partly settled m worldly things, and 
paitly fixed in their givei (the Supieme soul). This divided stale 
of the mind is termed its half waking condition.8. Our minds aie partly settled m worldly things, and 
paitly fixed in their givei (the Supieme soul). This divided stale 
of the mind is termed its half waking condition.

9 My mind is in a state of suspense, being unable to ascertain 
the real natuie of my soul. I am like one in the daik, who is 
deceived by the stlimp of a fallen tree at a distance, to think 
it a human figuie.

1 0 Our minds aie n.atuially fickle and wandering all about 
the eaith They cannot foisake then lestlessness, as Ihe vital 
aiis cannot subsist without then motion.

(

VAIRAtoA KHANDA

113

11 Tell me Oh sage, what is that state of life which is 
dignified above otheis, which is iiiiassociated with the troubles 
('iiicideiit to biith and death;, unqualified by the conditions of 
humanity, and ajiait fiom eiiois, and wheiein giiefs are un- 
known

12 (Tell me also) how Janaka and the othei good men, who 
aie cons2ncuous foi then eeiemonious acts, and distinguished foi 
then good conduct, have acquired then excellence (in holy 
knowledge)

13, (Tell me likewise) Oh source of my honor, how a man, 
who IS besmeared all over his body with the diit of woildlmess, 
may yet be cleansed and get iid of it

14' Tell me what IS that knowledge, by resorting to which, 
the sei^ients of woildlmess, may be freed from then worldly 
crookedness, and become straight in then conduct

15 Tell me how the foulness of my heart may regain its 
clearness, after it is so much soiled by eiiois and tainted with 
evils, like a lake distuibed by elejihants and iiolluted with diit

16 How IS it possible for one engaged m the affairs of the > 
world, to be untainted with its blemishes, and remain as pure 
and intact as a drop of water on the lotus leaf

17 How may one attain his excellence by dealing with others 
as with himself, and minding the goods of others as straws, and 
by remaining aloof from love17 How may one attain his excellence by dealing with others 
as with himself, and minding the goods of others as straws, and 
by remaining aloof from love

18 Who IS that great man that has got over the great 
ocean of the world, whose exemplary conduct (if followed) exempts 
one from misery.

19 What IS the best of things that ought to be pursued 
after, and what is that fruit which is worth obtaining ^ Which 
IS the best course of life in this inconsistent world

20 Tell me the mannei by which I may have^ a knowledge of 
the past and future events of the world, and the nature of the 
unsteady works of its cieatoi

21 Do so, that my mind which is as the mpon in the sky of 
my heart, may be deified of its imjnnities

Yoh I.

15

114

YOGA YASISHTHA

HZ Tell me N^hat thing is most cletectahle to the mind, and 
■s\hat most abominable to it, as also how this fickle and incons- 
tant iiTind may get its fixedness like that of a lock

23 Tell me what is that holy charm, which can lemove this 
cliohc pain of woildhness, that is attended with mimbeiless 
tioiibles

2-1. Tell me how can I entertain withili my heait, the 
blossoms of the aiboi of heavenly happiness, that sheds about it 
tlie coolness of the full moon beams

25 Oh ye good men * that aie present and learned in 
(111 me knowledge, teach me so that I may obtain the fullness of 
ray heaifc, and may not come to giief and soiiow any moie 
2G My mind is devoid of that tianqiiility which results 
chiefly fiom holy happiness, and is peiplexed with endless 
doubts, that distiuib my peace as the dogs molest smallei animals 
111 the deseit.

CHAPTER XXXI 
Queiuus of RaSia

H ama said . -I have no leliauce on the durability of life, 
which IS as tianscient as a diop of watei that stick -5 to the 
point of a shaking leaf on a lofty tiee, and as shoit as the cusp 
of the moon on Siva^s foiehead.3 I have no ciedit in the duiability of lifcj which is tiansci- 
ent as the’s welling that take jilace in the pouch of a fiog while 
it Cloaks in the meadow. Noi have I any tiust in the company 
of fiiendsj which aie as dangcious as the tieacheious siiaie x>f 
hunteis.

3 What can we do under the misty cloud of eiioi (over 
hanging oui minds), and laising oiii tempestuous desiies which 
flash foith in lightnings of ambition, and buist out in the thundei 
plajis of selfishness ^

4i How shall we save oui selves fiom the temptations of oui 
desiies dancing like peacocks (and displaying their gaudy tiaiii) 
aiouud us, and fiom the bustle of the woild bieakingiu upon us 
as thickly as the blossoms of the Kw chi plant.

5 How can we fly fiom the clutches of ciuel Fate, who like a cat 
kills thelmngas pool mice, and falls un weaned and unexpectedly 
upon his piey in the twinkling of an ejm

6. What expedient, what couise, what leflections, and what 
lefuge must we have lecouise to, inoidei to avoid the unknown 
tiacks of futuie lives ^

7 Theieis nothing so tiiflmg in this earth below, oi m the 
heavens above, which ye gifted men cannot raise to consequence.

8 How can this accuised, tioublesome and vapid woild, be 
lelished by one unless he is infatuated by ignoiaiice?

9 It IS the fusion of desiies, which produces the milky 
beveiage of conleiitnient, and fills the eaitli with delights as 
the spring adorns it uith flowers

116

YOGA VASISHTIIA

10 Tell me O sago, how the mist of om desiies, winch claik 
eiis the moon of oin intellects, is to be dispelled fiom oni minds, 
so as to make it shine foith in its full brightness.

11. How aie we to deal in this wilderness of the woild, 
knowing well that it is destructive both of oui present and futuie 
inteiest ?

12. What man is theic that moves about in this ocean of the 
earth, who has not to buffet in the waves of his passions and, 
diseases, and the cm rents of his enjoyments and piospeiity.12. What man is theic that moves about in this ocean of the 
earth, who has not to buffet in the waves of his passions and, 
diseases, and the cm rents of his enjoyments and piospeiity.

13. Tell me, O thou best of sages, how one may escape 
unbuint like meicuiy (in its ohemical process), when fallen upon 
the furnace of the earth.

14 (How can one get rid of the woild) when it is impossible 
foi him to avoid dealing in it, in tlie same manner as it is not 
possible foi aquatic animals to live without then native element

15. Oiii good deeds even aic not devoid (of then motives) of 
affection and hatied, plcasuic and pain, similaily as no flame of 
file IS unaccompanied by its power of binning.

IG. As it is not possible to restiain the mnwl fiom thin- 
king on woildly matters, without the piocess of light icasoning, 
deign to communicate to me theiefoie, the dictates of somid 
leason foi my guidance,

17 Give me the best instruction foi waidnig off the miseiics 
(of the woild), eithei by my dealing with or ieiiouncin<T (the 
affaiis of life)

18 Toll me of that man of enlmhtened understandmg, who 
had attained to the highest state of holiness andtianqiulity of his

mind of yoie, and the deeds and mannei by which he achieved 
the same

19. Tel! mo good sii, how thoeamts (of old) fled out of the 
leach of miseiy, that I may leain the same foi suppression of my 
eiioneous conce]!(tions.

so Oi if theie be no such piecept (as I am need of) iii cxis- 
■eme, 01 being IK CTse, It isuot to be icvoaled to me by any 
body , J ‘ J

VAIRAGYA KIIAKDA

21 And slionkl I fail of myself (by intuiiion) to attain t 
liiglie'^t state of tianquility, tlien I must lemaiii inactive (as I a: 
and avoid my sense of egoism altogethei,

22, I will lefiaiii fiom eating and drinking even of wai 
and fiom clothing mj’^self with appaiels , I will cease fiom all 
actions of bathing and making m^'- offeiiiigs, as also fiom 
diet and the like.23. I will attend to no duty, nor caie about piospeiity 
calamity. I ivill be fiee fiom all desiies except that of the ab 
donment of this body,

24 I Inust lemain aloof from all feais and S3^mpathies, fi 
selfish feelings and emulation, and continue to sit quietly a 
fig me in painting.

25 I will giaduall^'- do away with the inspiiation and lesj) 
tion of my bieatli and outwaid sensations , till I pait with 1 
tiifle the seat all of tioubles this the so called body

20 I do not belong to this bodjq noi does it belong to : 
iioi IS any thing else mine , I shall be null and void like the 
less lamp, and abandon eveiy thing' with this bod}-

27 Valmiki said Then llama who was as lovely as 
moon, and whose mind was well fiaught ivitli leasomiig, bec£ 
silent befoie the assemblage of the eminent men, as the peae 
ceases fiom liis sci earning befoie the gathciing clouds in awe

CHAPTER XXXII

Praises on Kama’s Speech

y ALlMIKI said When the puncc Kdma (liaving liis eyes 
lesemblmg the petals of a lotus), had concluded Ins speecli 
calculated to lemove all igiioiance fiom the mind ,

2 All the men m the assembly had then eyes beaming foiih 
with wondeij and the liaiis on their bodies stood eiect and jnciccd 
thiough then’ gaimeiits, as if wislnng to hcai the speoeh

3 The assembly seemed for a moment to have lost then 
woildly desiies m then eagerness aftei a stoic indifCeicncc, and to 
be lolhng in the sea of nectai

4 The audience lemained (motionless) as the figmes in a 
painting, being eniaptuied nith internal delight at healing the 
sweet woids of the foitiinate Kdma

5. There weie Vasishtha and Visndmitia with other sages, 
and the piime mniistei Jayanta and othei couiisellois (of the 
hing) then seated in that assembly

6 Theie weie also Icing Easaiatha and Ins snboidinatc 
rajas, with the citizens and foieigu deligates, the cliieftains and 
princes, togethei n ith Bidbmans and men learned in the Vedas 
and divine knowledge7 These accompanied by then fiicnds and alhc':, with the 
birds 111 the cages and the loyal antelopes and steeds of spoit 
(about the palace), listened to Kdma with fixed and mute attention.

8. Theie weie likewise the queen Kau&aljd and othei ladies 
acloi lied with then best jewels, and seated at tlic nindows, all 
mute and motionless

9 Besides these the buds on the faces and cicepcis of llie 
jniiieely pleasuie gaiden, weie listening to EAma without flut- 
teiing then wings oi making any motion oi sound

10 Theie weie the Siddhas and tciial beings, and the lubes 
of Gandhaivas and Kinnaia«, togcthei with Nauida, and

Pulapa the chiefs of sages (piesent at that place)

vaiea'gya kiianda

11 Theie weie also some of tlie gods and chiefs of go 
Vidyadliaias and the Ndigas, who heaid the speech of Rama wh; 
was full of meaning and cleainess

12* As Rama whose eyes weie beautiful as thelotuSj wh 
face was as lovel}'" as the moon^ and who likened the noetui 
luminary in the atmospheie of Raghu^s family, held Ins silen

13. Flo weis were cast upon him fiom heaven in showeis 
the hands of the divine peisonages with then loud cheeis i 
blessings.

14 The people in the assembly weie highly legaled with 
sweet scent and beauty of these fioweis of paradise fiaUght w 
humming bees in then cells

15 These floweis when blown in the an' by the breeze 
heaven, appealed as they weie clusteis of stais, which after tl 
fall biightenedthe giound with their beauty as with the beam: 
smiles of heavenly maids

, 16 They appealed in the foim of lain drops falling fiom 
clouds, and blazing by the light of mute hghteniiigs, and sc 
teiing about like balls of fiesh buttei

17 They leseiiibled also as pai tides of Snow-balls, or as 
glams of a necklace of peails oi as beams of moon-light, oi as 
little billows of the sea of milk, oi like diops of ice-cream,17 They leseiiibled also as pai tides of Snow-balls, or as 
glams of a necklace of peails oi as beams of moon-light, oi as 
little billows of the sea of milk, oi like diops of ice-cream,

18 There Avere also borne by the loose and sweet winds 
heaven, some lotuses with long filaments, and attended 
clustleis of bees humming and flying about them

19 Theie weie also to be seen heaps of lefali and Kan a 
Km da and blue lotus flowers, falling and sinning biigli 
among them

20 These flowers coveied the eouit hall and the loofs 
houses and then com t yards. The men and Avomen in the c 
laised then heads to behold them falling.

21 The sky was quite unclouded Avhen the floAA'eis 
incessently fiom above A sight like tins that was nevei s 
befoie stiuck the people with wondei

120

YOGA VASISHTHA

2,Zi 'The sliower of floweis fell foi qiiaiter of an lioui, but 
the Sidclhas fiom whose hands they fell were unseen all the while

23 The falling of the floweis having ceased aftei the 
assembly vas coveied with them, they heal d the following woids, 
coming to them fiom the divine personages in the sky.

24 “ "We have been tiavelling evei}'- wheie in whole bodies of 
the Siddhas fiom the beginning of cieation, but nevei have we 
lieaid any wheie so sweet a speech as this.

25 " Such a magnanimous speech of indiffeience as has been 
just now spoken by E/^ma the moon of Eaghu^s ,iace, was 
nevei heaid even by gods like oui selves.

2G "We account oinselves tiuly blessed to heai this highly 
ch aiming and wondeious speech fioin the month of Ed,ma 
himself to-day

27 " Indeed we aie awakened and edified by attending dili-

gently to this tiuly excellent speech, deliveied by Eiima on the 
ambiosial bliss of asceticism, and Lading to the highest felicity 
of meL^

(

(

CHAPTER XXXIII

Association of Aeuial and Earthly Beings

rij'^HE Siddlias said(

(

CHAPTER XXXIII

Association of Aeuial and Earthly Beings

rij'^HE Siddlias said

■ It behoves us to heai the decision of the great sages, in 
rej)ly to the holy seimon, alieady deliveied by the chief of 
Raghu^s lace

3 Come foiwaid you great chiefs of the sages, you Naiada, 
Yjisa,, PuMha and all ye gieat sages, and be leady (to heai)

3. Let us descend to the full open couit of Dasaiatha, 
which IS as blight as gold and fiee fiom stain, in the mamiei of 
bees ahghtmg on the auieate and immaculate lotus.

4. Vdlmlki said

So saying, the whole company of divine sages alighted them- 
selves in that court fiom then aeiial abode.

’5. There Naiada the chief of sages, sat foremost plapng on 
his lute, and m the midst was Vydsa, with his dark blue com- 
plexion lesemblmg a lainy cloud.

6. It was moie ovei adorned with the presence of the chief 
sages Bhrigii, Angiras, Pulastya and others, with Chyavana, 
Udddlaka, Usiia, Saialoman and many more about them.

7. Their garments of deer skins hang loosely down as they 
embraced one another Then beads of luclrdlska moved in 
one hand, and then water pots shook in the other.

8. Then bodies shed a lustre in the Couit-hall, resembling 
the yellow light of the stars in the sky, and like the beams of 
so many suns blazing upon one another.

9 They appeared asashower of moon beams orasa halo about 
the full moon, or as a circle about the oib of the sun out of its 
season

10 They looked like a circlet of gems of varied colors, or like 
a belt of pearls of gieat lustre

11 Vydsa appealed at the place wheie he sat, to be as a'

VoL I 16

122

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

daik could amidst the staas, and Ndiada was beheld upon his seat 
as the white oib of the moon amongst the staiiy gioup.

13 Heie Pulastya shone as India among the gods, and theie 
Align d. blazed as the sun amidst the heavenly bodies.

13 On seeing the body of Siddlias descending fiom the ^ky 
on eaith^ the whole couit of king Dasaiatha lose up (to gicet 
them) .13 On seeing the body of Siddlias descending fiom the ^ky 
on eaith^ the whole couit of king Dasaiatha lose up (to gicet 
them) .

14. There was a piomiseiious assemblage of the aciial and 
eaithly sages, whose commingled gloiy spicad a liisiie to the ten 
Szdes of the Couit

15 Some of them held bamboo sticks in then hands, and 
olliois had lotuses in theiis Some had put the sacicd glass in 
their eiests, while otheis had nisei ted some gems to the biaids 
ob then hair

* 16 Some had matted and tawny blown bans on then heads, 
and otheis woie garlands of floweis on theiis Some had sti mgs 
of beads foi their biacelets and otheis uoie wnstlets made of tile 
jasmine doweis

17 Some were clothed in tatteis, and otheis v,ore gaiments 
made of baik, while theie weie otheis who wmie lairacnts of silk 
Some weie gut with gudles of glass and skin about then waists, 
and otheis woie w^aist bands with pendant stiings of peail

18 Vasishtha and Viswdraitia lionouicd the aeiials one by 
one, with respectful offerings and watei and couiteous addiess

19 The great body of the etheiials also lionoied Vasistha 
and Viswdmitia in their tinn, with W’’ater and off ei mgs woithy 
of them and with polite speeches

30 The king also lionouied the gods and the body of the 
Siddhas, who in letuin gieetcdthe monaich with mquiiies about 
his welf ai e ^

31 Then the heavenly and eaithly saints mteichanged then 
iireetings with one auothei with coi dial welcomes and gestuies, and 
weie all seated afterw^aids on seats made of the hisa grass

33. They next honouied Edma, wdio lay bowing befoie them.

VAIRAGYA KHANDA 123

With gentle woicls and congiatulations accompanied with shed- 
ding of floweis

23 Theiewere seated in that assembly the sages Viswamitia,

Vasishtha^ Vdma Deva and the ministeis of state

24< There wele also Naiada^ the son of Biahma, Vyasa the 
greatest of sages, Maiiehi, Durv^sa and Angii^Vasishtha^ Vdma Deva and the ministeis of state

24< There wele also Naiada^ the son of Biahma, Vyasa the 
greatest of sages, Maiiehi, Durv^sa and Angii^

25 Theie weie Kiatu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Saialoma, the gieat 
sage Vats^yana, Bharadw^ja, Valmiki the great haid and 
sage.

26 Theie weie also Uddalaka, Richika, Saijati as well as 
Chyavana

27. These and many otheisveisedmthe Vedas and then blan- 
ches, and knowing all things woith knowmg, were the leading 
memheis (of the assembly) .

28 Then N4iada and otheis 3oined with Visw^mitia and 
Vasishtha in addeiessing Bdma, who was sitting silent with his 
face turned downwards , and said

29. We ad m lie the blest and gi aceful speech of the pi nice 
'which IS dignified with thespiiit of stoicism thatbieathes thiough 
the whole of it

30 It IS full of thought, peispicuous, elegant, clear, dignified, 
sweet and woithy of noble minded men, by its lucid style 
and wants of faults

31. Who IS theie that is not struck with admnation at the 
speech of Rama ^ It is well expressive of his thoughts, coiiect in 
its diction plain and sweet and agreeable to all

32. It IS lare to find one man among a hundred ivho is so 
eloquent as to combine dignity and force with a clearness and 
sweetness, that may command the admnation of all

33’ Who has such a clear head as our piince, a head which is 
as penetrating as the best pointed aiiow, and as fruitful and beau- 
teous as the creeping plant

34. He is tiuly a man whose intellectual light like that of

124 YOGA V/SISHTHA

burns as the flame of a lamp within himself and enlightnes 
all about him

35. Man^s blood, fleah, and bones with other fpaits of his 
body) serve as machines to supply him with sensations of extei- 
nal object , but there is no intelligence in them.

36. Life and death, old age and troubles, repeatedly overtake 
every man , but they are beasts who are so infatuated as never to 
think of these.36. Life and death, old age and troubles, repeatedly overtake 
every man , but they are beasts who are so infatuated as never to 
think of these.

37 There is scarcely any man to be seen, who is of so clear 
an understanding as Rdma (the destroyer of his enemies), who is 
able to judge of the future by the past.

38. Bdma is the most excellent, admirable, useful, and well 
shaped person amongst men, as is the mangoe tree (in the vege- 
table world)

39. It is only to-daj'^ that we see that a man of Bdma^s age

has acquiied so much experience of the world, and such extraordi- 
naiily mature an understanding.

40. There are many such trees found growing in every place 
as aie beautiful to see, easy of ascent, abundant m flowers and 
leaves ,* but there is no tree of paradise glowing on earth.

41. There may grow in every forest, trees with goodly flowers 
and leaves, but the extraordmaiy and fan clove tree is not 
always to be met with.

43. Edma has displayed the wonder of his knowledge, as the 
moon displays her cooling beams and good trees their clusters of 
blossoms, and as the flowers diffuse their fragrance all about.

43. It is very difficult to get the essence of true knowledge in 
this accuised woild, which is constructed by the ungovernable 
and dominant predestination (of our past acts for misleading us 
to erior and misery) .

44. Those only are reckoned the best of men, and leaders of 
the good, who try then* best to gam the essence of truth, and

-'Whose minds aie fixed on gloiy as their best treasuic.

46. We do not see any one in all this woiId, who is equal to

YAIRAGYA KHANDA

125

R^ma in discrimination and magnanimity , noi shall theie be 
one like him in future. This is our firm conviction.

46 If this speech of Rdma, which has filled eveiy one here 
with admiration, fail to get its reply to the satisfaction of Ramans 
mind, it IS ceitam that all of us here, must pass foi senseless 
sages (on eaitli)

YOGA VASISUTIIA.

T^OOK II.

MUMUKSHU KHANDAYOGA VASISUTIIA.

T^OOK II.

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

. OR

THE MEANS OF FINAL LIBERATION

CHAPTER I

«

A fter Rslmaliaclcleliveied Lis speech in an audible voice 
befoie tlie assenibl}'-, he was tendeily accosted by the sage 
Viswdmitia who sat before him , saying

2. R<£raa I that ait the best of the most intelligent^ and 
hast nothing moie to leain besides all that thou hast come to 
know by thy nice obseivation

3 Thou hast an undeistaiidiiig cleai as the miiioi b}'" its 
own natuie (leflecting eveiy image within itself), and yet thy 
queues about the same, seive as the cleansing of the reflector 
(in order to lefract its light to otheis).

4*. Thou hast a mind like that of Suka the son of the 
gieat Vydsa, who knowing the knowable by mtuition, was yet 
in need of some piecepts foi confiimation of his belief

5 R4ma said , How was it sii, that Suka the son of the 
great Vydsa ivho did not rest assured at first gf his knowledge 
of the knowable, came to be settled in his belief afteinaids

’ 6 Viswamitia aiisweied, "Heat me relate to thee R^ma, 
the naiiative of Sukadeva, whose case was exactly like thine.

128 YOGA VASISHTHA

and the nanation of which is a preventive of futuie biiths 
(in this world)

7 There is the great Vjdsa sitting on his seat of gold by 
thy father^s side^ swarthy in his complexion lihe a coal-black 
hilb but blazzmg as the burning sun (by his biilliancy),

8 His son was named Snka, a boy of gieat leaining and 
wisdom^ of a moon-like countenance, and a stature sedate as 
the sacrificial altar

9 He reflected in his mind the vanity of wordly affaiis 
like thyself, and became equally indifferent to all its concerns

10. It was then that this great minded youth was led by 
his own disci iminative understanding to a long mquiiy aftei 
what was true, which he found out at last by his own investi- 
gation

11. Having obtained the highest truth, he was still unsettled 
in his mind, and could not come to the belief of the ceitainty of 
his knowledge.11. Having obtained the highest truth, he was still unsettled 
in his mind, and could not come to the belief of the ceitainty of 
his knowledge.

13 His mind grew indiffeient to its percejitions of the tran- 
sitory enjo}Tnents of the world, and like the Chdtala thusted 
only after the dew drops of heavenly bliss

13. Once npon a time the clear sighted Suka finding his 
father the sage Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa, sitting quietly 
alone by himself, he asked him with reverence , saying

14 Tell me, O sage f whence this commotion of the world 
had its rise, and how it may subside What is its cause, how 
fai IS it to extend, and where is it to end ^

15 The sage Vydsa who knew the nature of the soul, being 
thus asked by his son, explained to him clearly all that was to be 
said (on the subject).

16 Suka thought that he already knew all this by his good 
understanding, and did not therefore think much of his fathei'^s 
instructions

1 7. Vyasa understanding the thoughts of his son, replied to

him saying that, he knew no better the true nature of these, 
things

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

129

18 But tliat tlieie was a pimee named Jaiiaka in tins land, 
wlio well knew tlie knowledge of tlie knowable, and fiom wkom 
Snka could leain eveij thing

19 Snka being thus diiected by his fathei, lepaiied to the 
cityofVideha at the foot of mount Sumeiu, which W 3 .s undei 
the lule of Janaka

20 The club-beaiei (dooi keepei) mfQirp.e4 the ]^igh minded 
Janaka of his coming, telling him thp-t Sp,ka the ^on of Vy^sa 
was waiting at the gate

21 Janaka ivho undei stood that Spka had epmp to leain 
fiom him, gave no heed to the lufqiniant, but held bis silence foi 
seven days afteiwaids

22 The pi nice then oideied him to be bi ought in the oufei 
compound, wheie he had to lemain in the vexation of his spiiit 
foi seven days moie as befoie,

23 Suka was then commanded to entei the innei apartment, 
wheie he continued a week moie without seeing the pi nice.23 Suka was then commanded to entei the innei apartment, 
wheie he continued a week moie without seeing the pi nice.

24) Heie Janaka eiitei tamed the moon-faced Suka with 
abundance of eatables, jieifumeiies and lusty damsels,

25 But neithei those vexations noi these entei tainments 
could affect the teiioi of Suka^s mind, whie}i iemp,med him as a 
lock at the blasts of wind.

26 He lemamed theie as the full moop (without any wane oi 
inciease), tianquil m his desiies, silent and contented m his mind

27 The piince Janaka having thus known the (unalteiable) 
disposition of Suka^s mind, had him intioduced to his piesence, 
wheie seeing the complacency of his soub he lose up and bowed 
down to him ,

28 Janaka said ^‘You have accomjdished to the full all 
youi duties in this woild, and obtained the object of youi health’s 
desiie to its utmost extent , what is it that you now desue foi 
which you aie welcome at mine

29 Suka said ‘'^Tell me my guide whence spiang all this 
bustle (of woidly life) , and tell me also how it may soon come 
to its subsidence >

VoL I. 17

130

YOGA VASISHTHA

30 Viswilmitia said , Being' thus asked by Siika^ Jaiiaka 
spoke to liim the same things which he had learned tioni hisgieat 
so tiled iathei Y

31 Siikathen said, '^All this I have come to know long 
befoie by my own intuition, and then fiom the speech of my 
fathei 111 ansAvei to my quei}'

32 ‘‘ You sii, who aie the most eloquent of all, have spoken 
to the same puipoit, and the same is found to be the tiue sense 
of the Sastias

33 That the vmild is a eieation of volition, and loses it- 
selE with the absence of oiii desiies and that it is an accuised 
and unsubstantial woild aftei all, is the eonclnsioii ai lived at by 
all sages

34' Now tell me ti lily you long aimed piince, what jmu 
think this woild to be (whethei a leality oi unieality), that my 
mind may be set at lest by you fiom its wandeimg all about the 
woild (in seal eh of tiuth)35 Janaka leplied, ^^Theie is nothing moie ceitain, O sage > 
than n hat you have known by youiself and heaid fiom yoiii 
father

36 ^^Theie is but one undivided intelligent spiiit known 
as the univeisal soul and nothing besides , it becomes confined by 
its desiies, and fieed b^’’ its want of them

37 You have ti Illy come to the knowledge of the knoiv- 
able, vheieby your gieat soul has desisted fi om its attachment 
to objects of enjoyment and vision

3S “ You must be a heio to have oveicome youi desiie in 
the lengthening chain of attiactive enjoj^ments fiom youi eaily 
voiitli Y liat moie do you want to heai ^

30 Even voiii fathei, with all his learning m eveiy science, 
and devofcednes^s to aiisteiities, has not aiiived to the state of pei- 
fection like you

40 am a pujnl of y3’^a3a, and j’^ou aie his son, but ^mu 
aie gieatei than both of us, b\’- j’-oui abandonment of the taste 
ioi the eiijoi monts of life «

MUMUKSIIU KHANDA

131

41. ^‘^You have obtained whatevei is obtainable by the 
conipiehensiveness of youi mind , and as you take no inteiest 
in the oiitei and visible woild, you aie libeiated fiom it, and 
have nothing to doubt of

42 Being thus advised by the magnanimous Janaka, Suka 
lemained silent with his mind fixed in the puiely supieme object

43 Then being devoid of soiiow and feai, and leleased fioni 
all efforts, exeitions and doubts, he lepaiied to a peaceful summit 
of the mount Meiu to obtain his final absorption

44 Theie he passed ten thousands of lains iii a state of 
iinalteiable meditation, till at last he bioke his moital coil, and 
was extinguished in the supieme soul like a lamp without oil

43 Thus purified fiom the stain of tiansmigiation by 
abstaining fiom eaitlily desiies, the gieat souled Suka sank into 
the holy state of the Supieme Spiiit, as a diop of watei mixes 
with the watei s oi meiges into the depth of the ocean.

CllArTKU It.

Sl'ncu or Vi^wuinrv. 
iTTSW.UnTlUMml:-CllArTKU It.

Sl'ncu or Vi^wuinrv. 
iTTSW.UnTlUMml:-

V luuuii ! it now beooiuoi? ou to Irno your pioinnly

puriliiHl Trom iti- (loub(^, Ub it wa:? ilouo in tlu' cMbO of (l\o '^ou oC

AVtisa.

%

S. You see. O i^-ioat b'l^vs ! how porlVody the kuouahlo w 
Icnouu to IvUiua. uhobO good uudoi-^laudju” Ita" lo’ont to fool 
a dibtubto for woildly oujoymeutb. ab if they woio dibOiM'b uuto 
him.

r>. You well know that the tiKod prluoiido iu tho uiiud of 
Olio kiiowiUii' tho kiiowahlo, ib to ha\o au a\oibiou to all tho ou- 
joi moiits! of hfo.

I ht is tho dosiio of fiuition that ohaius down a uiiiu 
f.ibtlv to tho o.nth , hut tho kuowlodgo of tho fi.iiltios horo !?or\0'< 
to di!?\iol hib daikiiOb^!.

0. Know llama that it li; tho oiuUiiliiui of dosiio-? uhioh 
tho wibO O'lll hboitv, and tho fabtoiiiiiu of our dobUO< to oarthlv 
obiooti?. lb what ib tormod our ooiitiuomout hoio.

0 Spuitiial kuowlodgo i'« oasdv vibt iiiiablo by most moii 
hoiw but a dibt.isto to tvlo.ibui.iblo) objootb ib hai\l to bo had, 
(liowo\or painful it ib to pi'oouio thorn).

7. Uo who fully oompiohoudb a thiuii, ib said to know it, 
and who bo kuowb what ib kuowablo. ib oallod a lo.uuod iiiaii ; no 
oaithly ouioMiioutb oaii bodolootablc to siudi high iiiiudod mou.

S ddio miiul that hab no '^■ost foi oaithly ploasurob, ovoopt 
tho glory of dibiutorobtod doodb, ib baid to bo liboi.itod o\oii iu 
tho pioboiit lifo .

tk Ab thoiv liivw b uo voiivt.iblo iu a btoi ilo boik <0 thoio oa'ow b

4 V. V ■**»

uo dibUiolmatlou to woildiiiobb. until ouo oomos to know' tho 
kuowablo iwihtv, [( t . to b.iy ; uoithor tho gvdly oaii bo woildly. 
uor tho woildly bo g\>dly)k

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

133

10 Hence know tins suppoitei o£ Raglni^s lacc to have 
veiily known the knowable, winch has made him disgusted with 
Ins piincely en 3 oyments

11 I tell you gi'eat sages that, whatever Rama has come to 
know bj'- his intuition, requnes to be confiimedby Vasishtha foi 
the ti anquility of his mind11 I tell you gi'eat sages that, whatever Rama has come to 
know bj'- his intuition, requnes to be confiimedby Vasishtha foi 
the ti anquility of his mind

12. It is only a leliancfe in the Unity, that R^ma now le- 
qunes foi Ins lepose, just as the beauty of autumn depends on 
the clearness of the fiimament

13 Let the veneiable Vasistha then leason with the high 
minded Rama, and lestoie the peace of Ins mind.

14'. Poz he iS the mastei and family pieeeptoi of the whole 
lace of the Raghus , besides he is all knowing and all seeing , and 
has a deal insight (into all things) of the thiee times (jiiesent, 
past and futuie)

15 Then addiessmg himself to Vasishtha he said, you 
luell 1 emeiiiie') sto , the instraction given ns of old, foi pacifying 
our mutual enmity, and piomoting the welfaie of the high min- 
ded sages

16 When our loid the lotus-boin Biahmd, seated on the 
table land of Nishadha mountain, and shaded by the Saiala tiees, 
deliveied Ins wise lectuies to us and the sages*

17 It IS by means of that knowledge of libeiation that 
0111 woildly desiies aie dispelled like the daikness of night by 
sun-beams.

18 Please now, O Biahman, to communicate that lational 
knowledge of the knowable to youi pupil Rama, wheieby he may 
gain the peace of his mind.

19. It will be no difficult task ft)i ybu to teach the spotless 
Rdma, whose miiroi-like mind is quite deal totaketheieflection

20 The wisdom of the holy, then leaimpg of the Sastias, 
and the scholaislnp of the learned, are then only piaisewoithy, 
when they aie communicated to a good student, and those who 
aie disgusted mtli the woild

21. But insti fiction given to one who is no student nor

134

YOGA VAblsflTHA

disgusted uitli the woild^ becomes as imlliited as milk 2 )ut in a 
hide vessel

21 , Again the mstuictioii impaitcd by one devoid of jias- 
sioiis and affections, ieai and angci, inide and sm, scivcb to iii- 
tiise tianquihty into the mind21 , Again the mstuictioii impaitcd by one devoid of jias- 
sioiis and affections, ieai and angci, inide and sm, scivcb to iii- 
tiise tianquihty into the mind

23 At these woids of Viswdmitia the son of Gadlii, the 
assembled sages Vyasa, Ndiada and othcis, honoiiicd his saying 
with the exclamation “biavo” ^^\vell said^^ &e

2-1* Then the veneiable Vasishtha biilliant as Biahmd his 
fathei, and seated b}'’ the side of the king, spoke in lejdy

25 O sage, I will jicifoim without fail, what 3011 ha\c com- 
manded me to do, foi nho, though might}", can lefiise to 2 )eifoim 
the behests of the good and wise^

26 I will destio}" the mental daikness of the 2 ^iiuoes llama 
and otheis by the light of knowledge, as ^^c diS 2 )el the gloom of 
night bj" the light of a lamp

27 I well lemembei the mstinctions which weic given of 
yoie by the lotiis-boin Bialimd on the Nishadha mountain, foi 
dispelling the eiiois of the wcild

28 Having said so, the high-minded A’asishtha made up 
his mind as one giids up his loins, to dehvei his lectuie to Kama 
foi dispelling his ignoiahce, and showing him the state ol su 2 nemo 
felicity

tu

the

9. .

t

no disinci.- 
knowable leai^ 
noi the woildly

CIIAPTEU III

On the urpEATHT) ciiEvnoNs or the wohtd

\TASTSHTHA saul

' ‘^1 will HOW cxpouHcI to yoH RAma f the knowledge that

was impaited of old by oni loid the lotiis-boin (Biahni^), aftei 
eieation of the Moild, foi the 2 ieaee of mankind

2/ Rclma said I know si^, yon will ex^ionnd to me the sub- 
ject of libeiatioii in full length, bgt lemove fiist my fallacy 
about the fiailty of this woild

3 And how it was that, the gieat sage Vj'dsa the father 
and guide of Siika, did not attain to disembodied emaneijiation 
(aftei his death) with all his omniscience, Avhile his son did so

4' Vasishtha said (Hcai me Rama), theie is no counting 
of the atoms piocecding fiom the sjniit and foiming the thiee 
woilds both befoie and aftei the bath of the gloiious sun4' Vasishtha said (Hcai me Rama), theie is no counting 
of the atoms piocecding fiom the sjniit and foiming the thiee 
woilds both befoie and aftei the bath of the gloiious sun

5 Theie is no body even who can count the milhops of oibs 
which at picsent foim the thiee woilds

G Noi can any one SQ,y by calculation, what numbeis of 
creation will use fioni the (unlimited) ocean of divine existence, 
like its inteiminable waves (foi cvei)

7 Rama said, It is needless to talk of worlds gone by or 
yet to come, say what you will of the jnesent (state of 
existence).

8 A^asishtha «:aid , This woild consists of biute, human 
and heavenly beings, whose lives when they aie said to peiish 
in any jiait of it aie leally existent in the same jiait

9 The mind is called to be evci -fluctuating, and gives use 
to (all things in) the thiee woilds m itself Itiesides in vacuity 
in the foim of the heait, and the incieate (God) also residing in 
the vacuous soul (gives the mind the powei to realize the latent 
ideas ot the soul_)

10 The millions of beings that aie dead, those that aie dying

13G

YOGA VA'SISHTIIA

and will die lieieafiei, aie all to be lebom bcie accoiding to the 
diffeient dcsiies in then minds

11 The external woil4 aiipcaiing’ as a icality, is in tinth but 
a cieation of oui desiies , it is ap ideal castle in the aiij and a 
magic view S 2 )iead befoie us

l‘Z It IS as false as an eaiihquake in a fit of dclninm, as a 
hobgoblin that is shewn to teiiify childieiij as a stiing ol jieails 
111 the cleai tiimamentj and as t}ic moving tices on the bank to a 
passengei in the boat.

13 It is an illusion as the j^hfintom of a city in a d;cam, and 
as untiue as the imagination of a /loner growing in the an. 
The nineality of the woild best apjieais to one at the point of 
and aftei Ins death14' But this knowledge of (the nnicahty of the woild) 
becomes daikened upon oiie^s being leboin on eaith, nheii the 
shadow of this woild falls again on the mnioi of liis sentient 
soul

15 Thus theie is a stiuggle foi lepcated biithsand deaths 
heie, and a fancy foi the next woild aftci onc^s death.

1 6 Aftei one^s shuffling oif Ins bodj’’, he assumes anothci and 
then anothei foim, and thus the woild is as unstable as a stool 
made of jilaiitam leaves and its coatings.

17 The dead have no sensation of the eaith and othei ele- 
mentaiy bodies, iioi of the couise of the woild, but they fall 
again to these eiiois ujion then being leboiii heie

18 Theie IS an inteiminable ignoiance lesembhng an 
immense iivei envelloping the face of cieation, and bi caking 
into sti camlets of unfoidable ignoiance

19 The Divinity like a sea shootsfoith m the vaiious ivaves

of eieation, which use incessantly and plentifully one aftei the 
othei f,

20 All beings heie aie but the waves of this sea, of which 
some aie alike to one anothei in then minds and iiatuies, while 
othei s aie half alike, and some quite diifeient fiom the lest

21 I leckon jondei sagely Vj'-asa as one of the tliiGy two of

MUMUKSHU KIIANDA

13 ^

these waves, on account oi his vast knowledge, and good looking 
appeal ance

22 Theie weie twelve o£ them possessed of a lessef under- 
standing, they weie the patiiaxchs of men, and endued with 
equal energy Ten of them weie men of subdued spirits, and 
the lest weie adepts in then family duties

23 There will be bom again other Vyasas and Vdlmikis, and 
likewise some other Bhiigus and Angirds, as well as othei Pulas- 
tyas and othei s in diffeient foims

24 Albothei men, Asuias and gods with all then hosts are 
repeatedly bom and destioyed eithei in their foimer oi different 
shapes24 Albothei men, Asuias and gods with all then hosts are 
repeatedly bom and destioyed eithei in their foimer oi different 
shapes

25 Like this theie aie seventy two Tietd cycles in a Kalpa 
age of Biahmd, some of which have passed by and others to 
follow Thus will theie be other people like those that have 
gone by, and as I uiideistand, anothei Rdma and Vasishtha like 
ourselves (by the eternal lotation of ideas in the Dmne mind)

26 There have been ten successive incarnations of this 
Vydsa, who has done such wondious acts, and is famed for his 
vast knowledge

27 Myself and Vdlmlki have been contemporaiies many a 
time, as also bom in diffeient ages and veiy many times

' ,-„28 We have been many times, and theie weie others also

' myself, and so was I bom also in many foims (in many

.xgCbj

29 This Vydsa will again be born eight times heieaftei, 
and again will he wiite his Mahdbhdiata and the Purdna 
histones

30. He having divided the Vedas and described the acts of 
Bhdrata^s race (in the Mahdbhdrata), and estabbshed the know- 
ledge of Biahm bn the Veddnta), is to attain to his disembodied 
libeiation (aftei his final termination).

31. This Vyasa who is devoid of fear and sorrow, and has 
become tianquil and , emancipate m himself, aftei subduing his

VoL I. 18

138

YOGA VASISHTHA

mind and discaidiug the woildly desires is said to be liberated 
even in Ins piesent life time.

3 1 The living emancipate may sometimes be associated by 
his lelatives and estates^ his acts and duties^ his knowledge and 
wisdom^ and all his exeitioiis like othei men^’s^ oi he may foisake 
them all at once

33 These beings are eithei reborn a himdied times in some 
age 01 never at all ^ (as in the case of divine incarnationsj, and 
depending on the inscintable will (Maya) of God.

3i Theie souls uiidei go the like changes by repetition, as 
a bushel of giain, which is collected to be sown repeatedly, and 
to lie leaped again and again (iii the same oi some other field)3i Theie souls uiidei go the like changes by repetition, as 
a bushel of giain, which is collected to be sown repeatedly, and 
to lie leaped again and again (iii the same oi some other field)

35 As the sea heaves its incessant suiges of diffeient shapes, 
so aie all beings bom incessantly in vaiious forms in the vast 
ocean of time

3G The wise man who is liberated in his life time, lives 
with Ins internal belief (of God) in a state of tranquility, 
without any doubt in his mmd, and quite content with the 
ambiosia of equanimity.

CHAPTER IV,

PnAiSE OF Acts and Exeutions.

\TASISHTHA said

V I know gentle Rd.nia tliat^ libciation of the soul, whethei 
in its embodied oi disembodied state is both alike, as the sea- 
watei and its waves aie the same liquid substance,

% The libeiation whethei of embodied oi disembodied spiiits, 
consists 111 then detachment fiom the objects of sense hence the 
soul unattached to sensual giatification, is (said to be) libeiated^ 
having no idea of sensible objects

3 An I though we see befoie us the living libeiated sage 
(Vydsa) as an embodied peison, yet we have no doubt of the de- 
tachment of Ills inward soul fiom the (moital coil of his) body.

4 The diffeience between the embodied and disembodied 
so.uls, when they aie equally enlightened and libeiated, is like 
that of the sea-watei in its calm and billowy states.

5 Theie is no moie diffeience between bodily and unembodi- 
cd libeiation than there is betwixt the an in motion and at 
lest

6. Liberation whethei with or without the body, is pioduc- 
tive of unselfishness^ we have lost our selfiishness evei since we 
have come to the knowledge of an undivided unity (of the soul)

7. Now theiefoie attend to the tiue doctiine that I am 
going to delivei to you, which will be a jewel to youi eais as 
it will dispel the daikness of ignoiance (fiom youi mind)7. Now theiefoie attend to the tiue doctiine that I am 
going to delivei to you, which will be a jewel to youi eais as 
it will dispel the daikness of ignoiance (fiom youi mind)

8. Know, O son of Raghu, that every thing in this woild 
IS obtainable by oui effoits being piopeily employed (to oui 
liuijioses).

9 This (knowledge of truth) uses as the moon (in the human 
mind;, and sheds its cooling and delightsome influence to the 
heait, that theie is no othei way to gain the flints of oui 
exertions but by oui efforts

140

YOGA VA'sISHTHA

10 We evidently see the lesults of the exeicise of our 
effoits^ and nothing coming out fiom what the dull and mistaken 
call as chance or fate

11 An effort when directed according to the counsel and con- 
duct of the good in the exeicise of the action of the body and 
mind, it IS attended with success, otherwise it is as vain as the 
fieak of a madman

13 Thus he who wishes to acquire riches, and perseveres m its 
acquisition, suiely succeeds m gaining them , or else he stops 
short in the midway

13 It was by means of the exertion of their efforts that, 
some particular persons have obtained the paramount dominion 
of Indra ovei the thiee worlds.

14 It is by the exertion of one’s efforts that he attains to 
the lank of the lotus-boin (Biahm/i) ; and some even gam the 
inwaid joy of the state of Biahm by it.

15 It was by virtue of his self-exertion that some body has 
become the best among men, even as he who bears the ensign of 
the eagle (Vishnu among the gods).

16. It was by the exeition of one’s efforts that some persons 
succeeded to obtain the form of Siva accompanied by his female 
power, and adorned by the semi-ciicle of the moon in his ciest.

17. Know oui actions to be of two kinds namely, those of 
foimer and present lives and that acts of the life generally 
superside those of the past17. Know oui actions to be of two kinds namely, those of 
foimer and present lives and that acts of the life generally 
superside those of the past

18. Know also that energy joined with constant practice, and 
supported by wisdom and some stimulating loice, is able to bieak 
down the moimt of Meiu, and the dements of acts in the foimer 
lives of men.

19. The exeitions of a man proceeding fiom his good effoits 
and countenanced by the law, lead to his success, oi else they 
either go for 'nothing or turn to his disadvantage.

20 So a man laid up in a state of disability, is unable to 
twist his figuies moidei to hold a little watei in the hollow of his 
palm for dunk while theie is another who ^(by his uell directed

MUMUKSHU KHAKDA

141

efforts gets the possession of seas and islands, mountains and cities 
for himself, supports all his dependants and relations, and does not 
think this eai th too great for him

CHAPTER V. 
Necessiti of AcTivm.

y ASISHTHA said.

It IS tlie will or mclmatlou that is the prime mstiiiment of 
all actions done even according to the iiilcs of law and sdsti.is, as 
it IS the lellection of light that gives vaiious hues to things.

Whoever wishes to do anything desnnhlc to him hy un- 
lawful acts, it becomes as iiuitless as the endeavouis of a mad-

man»

3 As you try so you get both of good and cmI : and foitiinc 
and exeition aie the joint causes of acts accoiding to fatalists

4. Human exeitions are eithei lawful oi unlawful , the foim- 
er leading to success; and the latter to dangeious consequences.

5. Eortune and exertions contend with each other like ti\o 
rams of unequal strength, wherein the mightiei ovei comes the 
other.

6 Therefore should man apply himself diligently (to liis 
duties), and employ his skill and piximptness after them in such 
a way, as his to-day may ovcicome the moiiow (i.c, do the 
woiks of to»moirow to-day),7 When two unequal foices (of two persons) contend iMtli 
one another like two rams, the stronger force whether of this or 
that men, overcomes the other.

8, When one incurs a failure or danger even by his lawful 
exertions, he should know it to be the result of Ins misapjilied 
exertions.

9 One by his utmost exeition in the light way, as by the 
gnashing of his teeth (and the like), can oveicome his misfoitunc 
and so does his bad luck sometimes baffle his exeitions.

10, When one finds himself to be led astiay by the demerit 
of his acts of a foimer state of existence, he must attempt to 
subdue the same by gi eater energy of his present state.

MUMUKSHU KH4NDA

143

11. So far should one delig^ently endeavoui to exeici33 his ex- 
eibions, as he may be able to beat down the evils lesulting fiom 
his bad f 01 tune (or piedestination)

12 The evils of bad foutune aie undoubtedly lemovel by tlie 
meiitoiious acts of the piesent life, as the bad consequsnce of an 
act of yesterday is aveited by its lemedy of today.

13. Having tiamjieled ovei an unfavoiable foitiine by one^s 
reliance on his continuous eneigj’’, he must attempt to secuie to 
himself eveiy good foi his well being m his piesent life

14. Know that tranquility is not to be found by the effoit- 
lessness of dull ass-like men, it is the lawful eneigyof men which 
IS said to secure his welfaie in both woilds

15. And that one should make his way out of the pit of this 
woild by foice of his energy and diligence, just as the lion bieaks 
out fiom his cage

IG. One must pondei in himself every day that his body is 
subject to coriuption, his beastly acts must be kept backward and 
man like acts put foiwaid.

17 It is our good exeitions that are attended by good results 
as the bal ones aie followed by bad consequences. Chance is a 
mere meaningless word.

18 Ho not make j'-our bloom of youth useless as ashes by 
sitting idly at home and enjoying the bliss of the haicm like a 
woim in the sore.18 Ho not make j'-our bloom of youth useless as ashes by 
sitting idly at home and enjoying the bliss of the haicm like a 
woim in the sore.

19 He who has no reliance on present objects, but depends 
upon suppositions of the past, is as a man flying for feai of his 
own hands supposing them as snakes

20 It IS a pleasure to men of pei verted understandings to 
think themselves guided by their foi tunes, piospeiity flie's away 
far off from such men who depend on their foi tunes

21. Therefore let a man diligently apply himself fiist to (the 
cultivation of) his leason, and then investigate mto the woiks of 
abstiuse spnitual knowledge

22 Those who do not set then lieaits to acts aecoi ding to the 
dictates of the s4stias, but exeit themselves otheiwise to gain 
(their ends), aie accarsed as mad men foi then vain attempts.

144

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

23 Thinking- there is no end of exertions one declines to take 
the pains (aftei anything), and says that, no pains can bring out 
a gem fiom a stone (or oil from watei)

24< Know that there is a limitation both of Kumaii lot and 
exeition, as of all othei things as a pot or picture having a 
(limited capacity and length).

25 And that it is by means of good conduct derived from 
best precepts and the company of the good, that one succeeds to 
his object, and a disposition that breaks loose of these (bounds), 
13 sure to fall to the contrary (extreme of) rum

26 Again any man ivho conducts himself in the right couise 
of action, never fails in his attempts at any time.

27 Some among the best of men, who had been reduced to 
misery by then poveity and helplessness, have again risen to the 
eminence of India by exertion of their manhood

28 By learning the Sdstras well fioin boyhood, by keeping 
company with the good, and by possession of good qualities, as 
also by diligent application, a man is siiie to gam his object28 By learning the Sdstras well fioin boyhood, by keeping 
company with the good, and by possession of good qualities, as 
also by diligent application, a man is siiie to gam his object

29 It has been seen, known, heard, and experienced (by us) 
that acts are rewarded with success, and they aie dull-headed 
who think of obtaining it fiom fortune or by chance.

30 Had theie not been the folly of idleness in this world, 
what man would fail either to be rich or learned? It is by 
reason of idleness that this eaith is filled to its utmost limit of 
the sea with indigent and beastly men

31 Let a man after passing his childhood, and getting rid 
of its false and idle playfulness and when he has attained the age 
of youthful vigour, apply himself diligently to the company of 
wise men, and to the cultivation of his understanding by a 
knowledge of the S^stras and their meanings, and by scanning 
well his own faults and qualities

32 VAlmiki said Aftei the sage had said these sayings, 
the day passed away, and the sages went to bathe aftei taking 
leave of the assembly, wheie they joined again with the rising 
beams of the sun dispelling the gloom of night.

CHAPTER VI

Reputation oe Fatalism.

y ASISHTHA lesumed saying

Now fate being no otliei than the result of our aetions of 
the foiniei state of oui existence, it is possible to leave it at a 
distance, and to extricate one’s self (fionl its fetteis) by betaking 
himself to good compaii}^ and study of morale Sdsti as

2 . Whatever one attempts to do, he leadily meets ^vlth its 
rewaid this being the effect of exeition. Fate is no other but 
the same thing

3 Men labeling haid, aie heaid to exclaim “O how painful 
it is” so men suffeimg under fate cry out “ O hard is fate • 
(so the one is as bad as the othei).

4 Thus then fate being no othei than a name foi oui past 
aetions, it is as easily overcome (by present acts) as a boy (is 
subdued) by an adult youth4 Thus then fate being no othei than a name foi oui past 
aetions, it is as easily overcome (by present acts) as a boy (is 
subdued) by an adult youth

5. As some bad conduct of yesterday is corrected by proper 
behavioui of the present day, so the anteiioi fate is removed by 
(poster 101 ) acts.

6. Those carnal minded libertines who do not try the means 
(of reforming then fate), but de^iend upon the favor of fortune, 
are perverted in then nature and marked foi misery

7 Thus if the acts of manlmess are capable of fore-fending 
ones misfortunes, it must be acknowledged that manliness which 
destroys the other, is the mightier of the two

8. As of two fruits growing on the same for e-stalk, the one 
is found to be empty ivithin and the other full of juice, so the 
fruit of fate is rendered abortive by that of manliness.

9. Seeing the decay of the best things in » the world, we 
must own the piedominent power of the cause of this decay 
10 Like two rams oui fate and exertions are fighting with 
one another, wherein the victory is always on the side of the 
stiongei.

VoL I.

19

146

YOGA VA'SISIITIIA.

11. In tlie case of the royal elephant's taking np a beggar 
boy foi being made the raler (of a coiintiy), its cause is to be 
attiibuted moie to the vote of the country-men and citizens (than 
to chance or foitune).

151. As a man takes lus food and guilds it iiiidei his teeth, so 
IS one (depending on fate) crushed by the strongei paity relying 
on his exeitions.

13. Infeiior servants are thus employed like clods of earth 
by then more active wasteis in any ivork they like.

14. Silly and impotent men seeing the stiong .thiiving by 
their exertions ndiether appaient or unseen, aie apt to attiibiite 
it to their good foitune (instead of then diligence),

15. The stiong cffoits of men trul 3 '- constitute their presiding 
fortune, and these two aie viewed alike by the wise,15. The stiong cffoits of men trul 3 '- constitute their presiding 
fortune, and these two aie viewed alike by the wise,

16. In the case of the (aforesaid) boggai boy's installation to 
the ruling and piotection of the peojile of a realm, the unanimous 
conciiiienee of the law and mimsteis, of the elephant and citizeps 
(is to be taken as the chief cause).

17. Should the beggar boy be ever elected for a niler by the 
royal elephant itself (without the assent of men), in that case 
it IS to be attiibuted to the boy's good foitune only (because 
theie was no sensible exeition on his side).

18 Piesent acts destioy those of the past life and so also the 
viee-veisa comes to pass, but the exeitions of a man aie un- 
doubtedly successful (at all times)

19 Of these two poweis that of the present state is mani- 
festly supeiior to the othei , hence it is as possible to overcome 
the past by the piesent, as to lick a boy by an adult.

20 As a hail shower lays waste the cultivation of a whole 
year, so also doth the piedominant fate sometimes oveipowei the 
attempts of this life

21 Howevei it does not behoove us to be soiiy at the loss 
of our long earned tieasuie (as of the haivest), foi what avails 
oil! soriow at what is beyond oui contiol

MUMUKSHU KHA.NDA

147

2r2 If I should soiiow foi what I have not the powei 1o 
pi event, I must then weep all the days of my life because I am 
not to be spared by death

23 All our acts aie subject to then pioper time and place, 
and to the modes of then ojieiation and combination accoidmg to 
the couise of natuie, hence it is that the moie diligent aie the 
most successful (eveiywheie)

24'. We ought theief 01 e to rely in oui exeitions and clearness 
of understanding by the help of Sastras and association with the 
wise, foi folding ovei the ocean of this woild24'. We ought theief 01 e to rely in oui exeitions and clearness 
of understanding by the help of Sastras and association with the 
wise, foi folding ovei the ocean of this woild

25. Actions of the past and piesent lives are the two fiuit 
tiees glowing in the gaiden of humanity , of which the one that 
IS cultivated best, thiives and fiuctifies the most

26. He who is unable to oveicome his false fate by his best 
exeitions (in this life), is no better than an ignoiaut beast that has 
no powei ovei ifcs pain or pleasme

27. He who thinks of going to heaven oi hell by the will of 
the’Makei, is also a slave to destiny and no better than a beast

28. The man of a noble mind and one employed m acts of 
goodness, breaks off fiom the eriois of the woild as a lion fiom 
his cage-

29. Those who vainly imagine themselves to be led about by 
some (supeinatuial powei), and so slight their necessary duties, 
are to be shunned at a distance as the mean and base

30 There aie thousands of acts that aie attended with gam 
or loss to their doeis , but it is the duty of man to do what is 
light whethei they aie pleasant oi painful

31 He who does not transgress the bounds of law, nor foi- 
sake the duties (of his lace), is attended by eveiy blessing abun- 
dant as the pearls in the sea.

32. Devoted diligence in acts leading to one^s object, is teim- 
ed to be his manlinees by the wise , and that being guided by 
the Sdstia leads to his success.

33 An act accompanied by exeition, is of itself the accom- 
plishei of one^s object,, and the company of the wise and study

148 YOGA V/SISHTIIA.

of good books serve to raise a man by biigbtening bis imder- 
standing.

34 The infinite happiness of a tianqui' spirit is known as the 
lonum by the wise , and those good woiks are fit foi 
study which lead to that state.

35. The acts of our former lives eonstitute what we call our 
destiny, and they letuin to us from the legion of the gods, for 
our good in both worlds.35. The acts of our former lives eonstitute what we call our 
destiny, and they letuin to us from the legion of the gods, for 
our good in both worlds.

36. We blame the fate which is a cieation of the fancy of 
the Ignorant, who by their adoiation of the same cqme to meet 
then destruction.

37. One benefits himself alwa3’'s by his activity in both 
worlds, as his good acts of to-day gives a grace to those of 
yesteida}’-

38 Whoso therefore applies himself with diligence to his 
acts, reaps their fiuits like that of an Amalali in his palm, which 
though it IS within his giasp, yet it could not be obtained with- 
out the cost of some laboui •

39. It IS the ignoiant only that depart fiom the beaten path, 
and fall into the eiioi of fatalism. Tlieiefoie give up that false 
faith in an unreal fate, which is a meic creation of the imagina- 
tion and devoid of any cause oi effect , and apply to jmur manly 
exertions.

4j 0. The fiuit of following the Sdstias and obseiving the good 
customs and local usages, is long Imown (to be wholesome), as 
exciting the heart and the exeition of the limbs to action. This 
it is what they called “manly activity

41. All wise men after discussion of the subject of fate 
and acts, have applied themselves to activity by utter rejection 
of fatality, and accomplished their ends by attendance on the 
good and wise.

42 Knowing the efficacy of activity, eveiy one should betake 
himself to his personal exertions, and attain to his highest 
perfection by attending to good Sastias and the wise counsels of

learned men.

I

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

149

43 And knowing the bondage o£ oiii births to he full of 
pain^ let people stiive foi the exeicise of then activities, and ob- 
tain the tiue and sweet blessing of tianquility by their attend- 
ance on the wise.

CHAPTER VII.

On the Necessity of Activity.CHAPTER VII.

On the Necessity of Activity.

n AVlNG obtained a liody fiec fiom disease and a mind free 
fiom tiouble, one should tiy to know the knowablc to 
pi event his fuither biith (in tins woild)

2. Whoso wishes to aveit his destiny by means of his acti- 
vity, obtains the acme of his wishes both in this woild as well as 
in the next

3 But whoevei is aveise to assiduity and lelies in his luck, 
he IS an enemy to his own soul, and saeiiftces all Ins viitucs, 
iiches and hopes (to his idleness)

4 It is the exeicise of our sensuous and menial faculties ns 
also of the membeis of the body, which aic the dilleient modes 
of 0111 exeitions, that leads us to success

r

5. Our perceptions aie the cause of our mental activity, 
and this actuates the body to action, whcieby we obtain the fiuits 
of our desire.

6 In whatever case there is some act (enjoined in the Sdslia), 
it points us to 0111 exeitions and never to destiny. Even childien 
aie well awaie of this

7. It was byt he exeicise of theii exertions that Divaspati 
(Jupiter) became the loid of gods, and Sukia obtained the 
pieceptoiship of demons

8 Theie have been many weak, pool and miserable men, who 
have by means of then manly exeitions become equal to India 
himself.

9 So also there have been many gieat men on eaith, who 
after enjoyment of a gieat many extiaoidinaiy things and 
luxuiies heie, have become guests in hell for want of the exer- 
cise of then manly viitues

10 Ell this inannei have all beings evaded the effects of then

MUMUKSHA KHANDA

1^1

vaiious states o£ want and opulence by means of tbeir own exei- 
tions (in the iigbt way).

11. Tlieie aie tbiee fold benefits deiived fiom tbe study of 
booksj fiom lectuies of a pieceptor, and fiom one^s own industry, 
all of wbich aie attendant on our exeitions and not destiny.

13. Tins IS tbe long and short of all the Silstias, that dili- 
gence pieseives our minds from all evils, by employing them to 
whatever is good and light.13. Tins IS tbe long and short of all the Silstias, that dili- 
gence pieseives our minds from all evils, by employing them to 
whatever is good and light.

13 To apjily with diligence to whatevei is excellent, not low 
or mean aiul not liable to loss or decay, is the precept of paients 
and pieceptois to then sons and pupils

14. I get the immediate fruit of my labour in pioportion to 
my exeition hence I say, I enjoy the fruit of my laboui and 
not of f 01 tune

15 Activity gives us success and it is this that elevates the 
intelligent But men of little undei standings rely only m

f 01 tune m then miseiable state

•

10 We have ocular evidence (of the efficacy) of activity 
e\eiy day, in the instances of men tiavelhngin distant countiies 
(foi the sake of gam).

17 He that eats becomes satiate and not who staives so 
he who walks is said to pioceed and not one who rests and in 
like mannei whoso speaks is called a speakei and not the silent 
man thus action makes the man

18 Wise men escape from gieat difficulties by means of 
then exeitions, but not so the mistaken fatalist by his fruitless 
meitness

19. Whoso acts in any manner, gets his lewaid accoidiiigly ; 
but the lestive man has nothing to expect anywheie.

30 By well diiected industiy a man leaps the best rewaid 
as he meets with its leveise by his misapplied ^laboui think 
upon this O llama f and do as you like

31 The lewaid of mdustiy which a man meets with soonei

01 latei at any time or place, the same is said by the wise to be 
his fortune. ,

152

YOGA V/SISHTHA

S2 No one can see his fortune, noi lias any body ever seen 
the same, noi is there such a thing to be found in any world ; 
it is but the meiit of our acts heie which they place in the othei 
woild.

2.3 A man is born on eaith to glow up and decay iii Ins 
time, and no destiny is seen theiein in the same way as his 
childhood, youth and old age.2.3 A man is born on eaith to glow up and decay iii Ins 
time, and no destiny is seen theiein in the same way as his 
childhood, youth and old age.

24 One^s application to diligence and action foi the attain- 
ment of an object, is known by the term exeition by the 
wise, wheieby all things aie accomplished, (and which is no 
destiny)

25 One’s going fiom one place to another. Ins holding a 
thing in the hand, and the movement of his limbs, aie all the 
acts of his exeition and not his destiny

26 Theie is another kind of propensity to acts productive 
of evil , this sort of action is likened to the attempt of a mad man 
which yields no good.

27 Men of acute understandings laise themselves to ele- 
vation, by then association with the vntuous, study of good 
woiks and active employment to duties tending to their own 
good

28 The boundless joy arising from equanimity, is said to 
constitute one’s Simmum hoimm (upon eaith) This blessing 
also lesults fiom a man’s diligent application to the Sdstias 
(and not fiom his destiny).

29 It is the understanding that leads to the knowledge of 
the Sdstias, as it is the othei that tends to oui light understanding 
of things Just so does the lotus seive to beautify a lake, as it is 
the lake which lends its giace to the lotus, {i, e. they serve 
mutually to assist each othei) .

30 It IS also by viitue of one’s deep study and good company 
in youth, that a man attains his desiiable objects aftei wards 
(which are the lesults of his exeitions).

31 It was by means of his activity that Vishnu had con- 
quered the demons, and established the otdei of the woild. It

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

153

was b};- tins that lie cieated the woilds none of whicli could be 
tbe Woik of fateMUMUKSHU KHANDA

153

was b};- tins that lie cieated the woilds none of whicli could be 
tbe Woik of fate

32 NoWj O loid of Ragbu^s race * employ your efforts to 
tlie exertion of youi manly activities in such a way in this earth, 
that you may live fiee fiom fear of being bitten by the seipentine 
people in this aiboi of the woild e. crush the mahce of your 
enemies)

CITAPTKll VIII

lN\AlJDATrON or Di:STlXTi

^TASISIITIIA ooniimied tliat *

V Wliai does desUny mean, winch has no foun, noi act, no 
motion nor might, hut i^ a false notion looted in the (minds) 
of the ignoiant

2 It IS a n'oid that has come into \ognc fiom the idea of 
the futuie letiihutioii of one^s past actions (oi ictiilmtivc 3iisticc) 
and the like, which is designated ‘^destiny’'’

3 Prom this the ignoiaiit aic led to believe that iheic is a 
thing as destiii}'- tlie insciutability of which has led them to the 
fallac}’’ as that of the suppo'siliou of a snake in a lopc

4 ' As a past misdeed of ycsieida}’’ is lectilicd h}' a good 
action of the following day, let this da}’- theiefoic '^uiieicedo 
the 2iast; and employ 3 ouisclf to-da}" to action

5 The pel veiled undeistanding that belicics in a doatiny 
giounded on its enoncoiis conception, ma3' wellcntci into the 
Ihe flora his conviction that it will not bum him unices it is so 
destined

6 If destin5’- is the sole cause of eveiv thing, wh}’’ then 
should a man betake himself to Ins actions of bathing and 
making his offeiings, sitting and walking, all of which ma3' be 
done b3’' his dest^n3^

7 What then is the necessity of one^s advising another to 
do a thing when destm3'' is the diiectoi of all ^ Let then all be 
silent and sa3'’ nothing to nobod3'-

8 Theie IS no one to be seen on eaitli that is motionless 
except the bodies of the dead , and if it is action that jn oduces 
anything, it is useless to believe in destm3’’8 Theie IS no one to be seen on eaitli that is motionless 
except the bodies of the dead , and if it is action that jn oduces 
anything, it is useless to believe in destm3’’

9 Noi IS theie any co-opeiative jiowei of the iimsible dcs- 
tmy perceptible in the actions of men, whence it is but a mean- 
ingless woid.

]\IUMUKSHU KHANDA

155

10 T\yo things as the implements and membeis of the body 
being joined togetheij have each, then seveial action , (as that of 
the pen and lazoi and the hand in wilting and shaving ) , but 
the hand being wanted, nothing can be done by destiny (with 
its having those tools)

11 Theie is no such cleai idea of a destiny like those of the 
mind and intellect, even in the (illiteiate) cow-heid oi in the 
(learned) pandit. Hence it is a meie non-entity

13 If the concept of destiny be othei (than that of an 
agent), it must mean something else , bi if it be the samethiug 
(with the agent) why then give it a diffeient name (as destiny)^ 
If it be pioved to be an imagmeiy teim, then why not imagine 
youi exeition to be agent (of jmui action) ^

18 The immateiial destiny like vacuity has no connection 
with the mateiial body If it had a foim oi Jfiguie it would be 
visible (to some one oi othei) , hence destiny is a nullity.

14* If destiny is the mam spimg of the movements of all 
beings in the thiee woilds, then let ad cieatures lest at ease 
(with the assuiance) that destiny will peifoim then paits

15 The belief that we aie guided by destiny and do as we 
aie led to do, is a deception and an allegation (of self excuse) ; 
in fact there is no such thing as destiny

16 It is the fool that fancies to himself a destiny and lelies 
on it to his own disadvantage, while the intelligent laise them- 
selves to bettei states by means of then exei tioii

17 Say who is theie among the mighty and biave, the 
intelligent and learned, that looks oi waits upon destiny in this 
woild ^17 Say who is theie among the mighty and biave, the 
intelligent and learned, that looks oi waits upon destiny in this 
woild ^

18 Destiny may be said good, if it can have the powei of 
saving a man fiom being beheaded, whom toitune-telleis had 
pionouneed by then calculation to be long lived >

19 Again, O Eaghava, should one who is foietold by his 
f 01 tuiie-tellei to become a learned man, aLtain his leaining 
without being taught in it, then may ue believe foitune to be 
tiue

156

YOGA VA'SISnTnA.

30 Mailc^ O Ed,ma> how the sage Viswdmitia lias ca'^t 
away his destiny at a distance, and attained to Biahmahood by 
his oivn exeitions.

31. Look at ns and others who have become sages, that it 
was by oui industiy we became aeionauts or wandcieis in the 
etheiial legxons

33 Remembei, O Rdma,, how the chiefs of the Ddnava lace, 
have established then empnes on eaith by thou piowess, and 
by discaidmg their destinies altogethci .

33 Look again liow the chiefs of gods have mested the 
extensive eaith fioni those demons by then val onions deeds of 
slaying and haiassmg them (in battle).

34'. See Rdma • how they make handsome wickei vessels 
(of bamboo woik) foi the holding of watei by tlicii own indnstiy, 
and without the aid of any destiny to the completion of the 
same

35 In all oui works of givmg and receiving, walking, 
resting and the like, we sec no causality of destiny in theji 
completion, as we see of medicines (m healing discase=:)

^ 36 Theiefoie O Edma, give up tins destiny of j’-oui mis- 
taken fancy , which is in leality devoid of its caiwc oi effect;, 
and IS a false and ideal nullity, and betake youi&elf to your 
best exeitions

CHAPTEE IX 
Investigation oe Acts

K ama asked

“Will you Sir, that art veised in all knowledge, kindly 
ex^ilain the tiue sense of destiny in populai use ”CHAPTEE IX 
Investigation oe Acts

K ama asked

“Will you Sir, that art veised in all knowledge, kindly 
ex^ilain the tiue sense of destiny in populai use ”

2 Vasistha leplied It is a man^s activity and no othei, 
O Raghava, that is the cause of all his actions, and the lecepient 
of then conaequenee, wheiein destiny has nothing to do

3 Destiny is a meie imaginaiy thing, which neithei exists 
noi acts noi feels (then effects) It is neither seen noi legaided 
(by any body)

4 The good oi bad result which pioceeds fiom the accom- 
plished acts of successful activity, is expressed by the woid 
destiny

5, The wished foi and unwished for consequences lesulting 
fiom the good and bad deeds of human activity, aie teimed 
the effects of destiny by people

6 Human activity which is the only cause of some unavoid- 
able futuie consequence, is called as destiny by the majoiity of 
mankind

7 Tiuly, O Rdghava* destiny though void as vacuity,, 
appeals as leal to some body, who thinks it to be an active agent, 
while otheis know it to be inactive

8 Again destiny is a meie saying utteied by men ujion the 
lesult of some good oi bad effect of then actual exeition, that 
“it IS this which has pioduced the othei

9 It IS my belief and I have known it for ceitain that, 
destiny is no moie than the woid utteied by penile upon their 
attainment of the object of their exeitions

10 Destiny is that woid of consolation which is uttered 
by men, as significant of the good oi evil which they meet 
with and which they ca'l to be the effect of the othei ,

158

YOGA VASISHTHA

11 E^ma asked How is it su^ that you who are all wise, 
do now contiadict youi own asseition that destiny is the lesult 
of the stock of oiu foimei acts (of past lifej ^

12 Vasishtha answeied saying Well said O Eama f you 
know eveiy thing, but heai me tell you the whole of it, 
wheieby you will have a fiim belief in the nullity of destiny12 Vasishtha answeied saying Well said O Eama f you 
know eveiy thing, but heai me tell you the whole of it, 
wheieby you will have a fiim belief in the nullity of destiny

13 All the various desiies which men may have entei tamed 
in then minds before, even those come to be accounted as his 
deeds Coi mental actions) at last

14' All animals are seen also to act according to then desires, 
and to do nothing to which an inclination was wailting in then 
natures

15. As the villager goes to his village and the townsman 
comes to the town so it is the nature of the desire that leads 
men to then particular acts

16 The keen and film lesolution with which an act was 
done 111 the foimei state of life, that verily is termed destiny in 
the successive bnths, oi geiieiations of living beings

17 Thus are the acts of all active beings conformable with 
then natuies, and the actions of men aie in aecoi dance to then 
desires, the desire is no other than the mind itself, and the mind 
IS self-same with the human soul

18 The mind is the soul and cause of all acts which they 
call the doings of destiny, certainly there is no other thing as 
destiny beside the mind

19 This mind is veiily the living soul, ivhicli acts as it 
desnes, and enjoys accordingly the fruits thereof, and is same 
with destiny

20 Know Rdma that the mind, the heart, desne, action 
and destiny are synonymous terms, and applied by the virtuous 
to the unascei tamable soul (evolved m these forms)

21 Now whatever the so named soul undei takes to do 
continually and with a fiiiii lesolution, it obtains the fruit theie- 
of accordingly

22 It IS by means of the activitj^ or exeitioii of this soul.

MUMUKSHU KPIA2\^DA

159

and by no other means, O snppoi.t of Raglin^s laee, that it 
obtains eveiything, and may it lead you to yom good only.

33. Kdma said Being caught in the net of my pie-existent 
desiie, I lemain a captive to them and do as they lead me to 
Say then, O sage what else I can do33. Kdma said Being caught in the net of my pie-existent 
desiie, I lemain a captive to them and do as they lead me to 
Say then, O sage what else I can do

24 Vasishlha leplied So then O Hama, 5 mn will be able 
to icaeh to jmui lasting good, if you mil but exeit youi 
activity foi it, without which theie is no othei way to it

25 These desiies aie of two kinds, some leading to good and 
otheis to ciiil Hence the desiie of one^s pnoi state must have 
been of one kind oi othei

2G If you will be guided now b}’- the puie desiies (of youi 
natuie), you mil be giadnallj’- led by means of youi good acts to 
attain the state of youi lasting welfaie

27 But if youi mong inclinations tend to lead you to diffi- 
culties, you must tiy youi best to overcome such piopensities

ce

28 You Rama aie wise and peifectly intelligent, and not 
composed of a dull (mateiial) body onl}’-, now if you should be 
in need of anothei^s guidance to waken your intellect, say wheie 
lies jmui own intelligence

29 If you would have one to enlighten youi undei standing, 
say wheic is that anothei to illumine him, and who is the other 
to illuminate him also Hence as no one is wholly devoid of 
undeistanding, let him impiove it himself

30 The cuiient of our desiies is flowing betwixt the two 
channels of good and evil, it must be by exeition of oui activity 
that we must tmn it to the light couise

31 You Avho aie the mightiest of the mighty, must exeit the 
foice of youi activity to turn youi mind to a piofitable couise 
from its diiection to the jiiofitless

32 By diiectmg the mind to the light way fiom the m’ong, 
it will take the light couise and so the vice veisa, But as human 
mind IS as (tender as) a child, it must not be emploj^ed by force 
(but gentle measures).'

ICO

l^-OaA VASISIITJIA,

33 The tiaiiung of the child like that of the mind, is efteeiect 
islo'wlj’’ hy gentleness and indulgence, and not hy foicc and hiiii3\ICO

l^-OaA VASISIITJIA,

33 The tiaiiung of the child like that of the mind, is efteeiect 
islo'wlj’’ hy gentleness and indulgence, and not hy foicc and hiiii3\

34 You have alieady hy 3’’Oiu eonstant inactice, got a 
mastciy ovei all 3’’Oui good and bad desiies , you ha^e hence foi- 
waid to diiect 3’’Oui tendeneies to good onl3'.

35 O vietoiious Rilma I When b3’- 3'olii inistinc habits 3'oii 
have an aptitude to do what is good, leain that it is the lesiilt of 
youi good natuie

36 O sinless Kdma, your desires aie at picsent b'lng doimant 
in 3’'0ui mind, and iccpiii'e some piactiee to be cmploved onl3' to 
the doing of good

37. If you will not exeit yourself at piesent to impiovc 3*0111 
doi mailt desiies by constant jnacticc, 3 ou can nevei expect to be 
happy

38 When it is doubtful (to know the natuie of the innate 
piopensity), do you incline to uhat is g'ood, and as 3*011 thiive 
m this, 3'ou shall have no evil to feai

69 Whatevoi one piacticcs, he becomes pcifect in that in 
time, as stud3ing iiom childhood makes the leained fice fiom 
eiioi.

4 ' "V^Tieii 3*011 have the good mil 111 3*011, 3*011 must accom- 
plish yoiii pill pose, b3* means of 3’'oui activit3* and subjection of 
the oigans of 3*0111 bod3*

4<1 So long as youi mind is impeifcct and unacquainted 
mth the state of divine tiiith, 3*ou must attend to 3*0111 teachei, 
books and leasomng, and act accoiding to then diiections (in the 
paths of tiuth)

42 - Having fiist finished 3*0111 acts and kuomi the truth, 
you must abandon even 3*0111 meiitoiious deeds, and all yoiii 
desiies with them

C

43 Having known by your good iiiidei standing, that the 
Viituous couise led by honoiable men is tiulj* good, give paiti- 
culai attention to know the natuie of God, then f 01 sake even 
that (enqiiiij*), and lemain (silent) as a saint (iniini).

CHAPTER X 
Dr'^CLNSION OP Knowlldge

y-

VSTSrj’- V lesumedCHAPTER X 
Dr'^CLNSION OP Knowlldge

y-

VSTSrj’- V lesumed

Tlus thniLj' called doslm}’’ is as tine as the reality of God 
It IS the cause of causes and effect of clTcts. (It is an attiibute 
of God)

2- Now attend to my ^^ouls and depend on yom excitioiiR, 
and intent It apply jourcyei contidant mind to the attainment 
of >0111 chief "ood

3. Tiy youi eveitions to turn to your subjection the mis- 
leading^ ‘'en«e> fiom jnii suing their objects

4 In ill non piopound to > on a code containing' of the essence 
of the bc<!l means of libeiatioii, n Inch n ill confei the fi nits of 
youi c\ci lions and lead >ou to youi nclfaic in both noilds

5. Let them that haic gicat minds, foi sake then woi Idly 
desires in ordei to avoid then futuic biiths, and attend to these 
lectuics with calm contentment (m then minds)

G. Weio:h well the mcaning^s of the antecedent and subse- 
quent ]no])osilionc, lejncss youi mind fiom its woildly caies, and 
dispose youi self to equanimity for its inquiiy aftei tiuth

7. Ileal me i elate to \ou IL'una, the v ay to emancipation, 
n Inch will iema\c youi feeling's of iiain and pleasuie, and be- 
come the sincst means to lead you to Mipieinc hajipiiiess

8. On healing this leetuic on libcial ion m the company of 
all these leasonable men, jou will know' that highest state W'hich 
IS free from pain, and of wdiieli theie is no teiminatioii

0. This w'as spoken of old in a foimci Kalpa age by Bialima 
abiding in the Supiemc spiiit It is the lemovei of all anxiety 
and giver of all comfoit to the soul

10 Rdma asked sajoiig Say O Bidhman that ait my 
guide, w'hat cause moved BiahiUti himself of old to levcal this 
knowledge, and in w'hat mannci was it obtained by you 
VoL I ’ 21

162

YOGA YAIJISHTIIA

11 Vasistlia Implied The supierae soul o£ infinite mani- 
festations exists by itself j it passes thioiigh and suppoitsthe 
Avliole 111 the foim of vaenity and undei standings and as light to 
all living beingsIJi Fiom him ivho lemains the same (unaltcied being) in his 
lest and motion, the gaeat Vishnn was bom, like a moving wai'e 
on the quiet wateis ol the sea

13. Then was Biahnict piodiiced fiom the lotus of his lieait, 
having the mount Mem foi its pei icaip, and the points of the 
compass foi its petals, and the stais foi its pistils

(

14 He being beset b}?- gods and sages acquainted Avith the 
Vedas and theiv significations, eieated all the ivoi Ids and the 
minds Avith then vanous thoughts

15 He then eieated the gioups of men in the Bhdiata 
division (India) in a cornei of Jambudnipa (Asm), and subjected 
them to all mannei of diseases and afilictions

16 They aic also tionbled with the possession and want of 
many things, and tlieii subjection to dangeis and diseases lime 
all species of eieated beings aie subjected to avaiiety of tiibiihi- 
tions and afflictions

17 The loid and cioatoi of woilds, seeing the miseiyof 
these people, felt compassion foi them, as a tathei does foi his 
chddien

18 He then pondcied within himself foi a moment with 
intensity of thought and foi the good of all eicatiiies, how to 
exteimmate the miseiy of these beings Avho weie subjected to 
death and despaii

19 With this thought the loid god (Bialimd), established 
himself the lules of ansteiity, piety, chanty, veiacity and 
jnlgi image

30 Having established these, the loid and cieatoi again 
thought uathin himself, how to make an end of the many 
miseiies of the men he had eieated

31 He thought upon self-extinction as the Supieme bliss, 
which was obtainable only thiough a knowledge of the Deity,

MUMUKSflU KHA.NDA

163

and wlieieby man might be exem 2 ited fiom repeated biiths 
and deaths

22 It was divine knowledg'e, he thought^ the only means of 
men'’s ciossmg ovei (the ocean) of this woild , but austeiity, 
ehaiity and pilgiimage weie no means to it (But meie piepaia- 
tives to knowledge)23 Upon this said he I will immediately make a new and 
sine budge £oi the salvation of men and foi then libeiation 
fiom pain

24 Having thought so, tholoid Biahmd sitting on the lotus, 
meditated in his mind, and pioduced me fiom himself

25 Being thus pioduced, I stood foithwith in the piesence 
of my jnogenitoi, as a wave using fiom the sea leans towaids it

26 I then bowed down to the god who held a watei-pot in 
one hand and a losaiy in the othei, with a pitchei and a bead of 
seeds in my eithei hand, and was thus addiessed by him

27 Come my son said he, and then holding me with his 
hand, made me sit on the noithein petal of his lotus of tiuth, 
which shone as blight as the moon amidst the silveiy clouds

28 Wealing the skin of an antelope, Biahmd, my fathei, 
spoke to me who was in the like habit, with the voice of a gandei 
addiessmg a stoik {i e. a talkative peison addiessing a mute 
one)

29. He said “1 will foi a moment oveipowei thy fickle- 
mindedness undei a mist of msensibilitj’’, as a daik cloud ovei- 
shadows the disk of the*moon

30. It was undei this' impiecation that I lost mj’" leason and 
foi got eveiy thing, even the cleai idea I had of God

31. I then became as helpless as one out of his wits, and came 
to be afflicted with distiess and soiiow like an indigent peison

32 Ah woeful is this woild > said I, and how came evil to 
dwell in it ^ With these thoughts I lemamed in silence (pondei- 
ing on the oiigiii of evil)

33 Then he my fathei sjioketo me saying , Ah my son nhy

164

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

aifc thou so afflicted ? Ask of me the lemedy for thy affliction, and 
thou fohalt become happy

3-1-, Then the loid cicatoi of all peoples was asked by me, 
seated as I had been on the gold-cohuied leaflet of the lotus, 
about the medicine of worldly woes.

35 flow came, said I, O my loid, this woild to be so full of 
misery, and how can people get iid of it, is what I ask of thee 
(to know).35 flow came, said I, O my loid, this woild to be so full of 
misery, and how can people get iid of it, is what I ask of thee 
(to know).

30. I then leaint the most holy 'misdom which Bidhman my 
father deliveied to me, and following his advice, I became 
cpute composed (in my mmd)

37 Then the cieatoi of the woild and revealei of all causes, 
seeing me knowing the knowable andiestoied to my own natural 
state said

38 I had tinned thee to insanity my son, by an illusion, 
111 Older to make thee an enquiiei into the essence of true 
knowledge for the welfaie of mankind,

39 Now ait thou released fiom the cnise of illusion, and 
arrived to thy highest state of understanding Thou hast become 
as one soul (with the Supieme), and ait as puie gold (after its 
purilication fiom dioss)

40 Now shut thy heart agamst the woild, and pioceed to 
the land of Bhaiata on the surface of the eaith for the good of 
mankind.

41 There employ thyself to ceremonial duties to the best 
of thy knowledge , and advise others to ritual acts in then 
propel Older (of exoteric faith).

4^. But such as are disgusted (with the world) in their 
heaits, and are rational with then elevated undei&fandings, are 
to be counseled to esoteiic knowledge which confeis tiue felicity 
(to man)

43 Being thus appointed by him who was boin m the lotus, 
I continue to abide heieiii throughout the succession of beings. 
(i. e, foi ages)

c

MUMUKSHU KHANDA.

165

4)4;. I have no duty to peifoim heie, but live while I have to 
live £iee fiom all caies. I do my acts always with as tianquil a 
mind as it weie in a state of sleep , I do my woiks with the 
body , but I do nothing heie with my soul (which is fixed in God) ,

CHAPTER XI.

On the Qualificatiojsts of the Iequiree and Lectueer. 
ft TASISHTHA continued

V I have thus i elated to you fully about the descent of 
knovdedge on eaith^ with the leason of my biith and the inten- 
tion of the lotus boin Biahmd, (m making me his ajiostle)V I have thus i elated to you fully about the descent of 
knovdedge on eaith^ with the leason of my biith and the inten- 
tion of the lotus boin Biahmd, (m making me his ajiostle)

% Now Rama, as you aie eager to leain the tianscendental 
knowledge, and feel so gieat an anxiety foi it in youi mind, it 
must be the effect of youi piistme meiit.

3 R^ma said How was it sii, that the Supreme loid felt 
a desiie to send down knowledge on eaith after his cieation 
of it (and not along with it

4 Vasistha leplied This Biabma is in his own natuie 
the same with the Supieme Biahm, and is bom in him, as a 
billow IS bom of the wateis of the deep (The co-etemal loffos)

5 This gieat loid saw the impeifection of his cieation, and 
saw its whole couise (at one view) in times past, present and 
futnie (The peiveision of mankind subsequent to then fall)

6 He saw the decay of ceiemonial iitesaftei the end of the 
Satya (golden) and othei aires, and eonsideimg the eiioi to which 
men weie to fall afteiwaid, he felt pityfoi then states (foi want 
of saciifies)

7 Then the Loid thought of endowing me 11001 tiue know- 
ledge, and sent me on the suifaee of the eaith foi dispelling the 
ignoiance of mankind

S Like me he has sent also some other gieat sages heie, as 
Sanat Kumdia, Naiada and many otheis also

9 He has^ sent them all foi the ledemption of mankind 
fiom the fetteis of then ignoiance by a senes of meiitoiious 
acts, and then jiiogiess in divine knowledge also

10 dhese gieat sagos seeing at the end of the past golden 
age, thcgiadual decay of the holy iitualistm iito-s on eaith

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

167

11 They cieated the luleis of eaith at diffeient divisions of 
the land, foi ie'>tilating’ the couise of duties, and ohseiving their 
piojiei limits (of action)

IS They have made many woiks on the tiaditional law and 
saciificial lilies to be obseived on eaith, and many appiopiiate 
pi o visions foi the accomplishment of religious and tempoial 
duties (in the smiitis)13 But in the i evolution of time, all these duties became 
slack in then couise, and men have no othei thought except that 
oi seeking then daily maintenance

14'. Eveiy day disputes aie using among the land-owneis 
on account of then estates and piopeities, and the people aie 
subjected to vaiious jienalties m laige numbeis

15 In such a state, it is not possible foi the lulers to lule 
ovei then states without fighting with one anothei, when they 
with then subjects aie inevitably i educed to wietchedness (by 
waifaie)

T6 In oidei to lemove the impotence (of such pimces), and 
to lead them to a eominehensive view of things, we have jnes- 
ciibed to them many excellent piecepts of knowledge

17 It was the spnitiial knowledge which had been at fiist 
piopounded to princes, but it came affceiwaids to be known 
iindei the title of loyal science (polity)

18 This loyal science is of a lecondite natuie, and is also the 
best kind of spnitual knowledge Many kings have been set be- 
yond the leacli of calamity by a knowledge of this science

19 It IS aftei many such fan -famed piinces that have gone 
by, that yoiii mighty self was begotten by the piesent king 
Dasaiatha

20 O slayei of yoiii enemies, I find a veiy agieeable and 
holy kind of apathy glowing spontaneously in youi most clear 
iindei standing

21 Theie is anothei kind of cold-heaitedness, O Rama, 
which IS caused (by some soiiow) in the minds of the viituous 
and lesonable men, that is styled then casual indiffeience

1G8

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

£3 But youi uiipiecedented and asionishiiig apathy, which 
IS pioduced without any cause and by youi icason only, is called 
leal stoicism by the wise

33 Seeing the obnoxiousness of woildly things, what man 
will not glow aveise to them? The best displacency to them, 
IS what uses in the mind of one fiom his own judgment.33 Seeing the obnoxiousness of woildly things, what man 
will not glow aveise to them? The best displacency to them, 
IS what uses in the mind of one fiom his own judgment.

34) They aie leckoned as gieat men and gieatly wise also, 
whose indifleience spimgs without any cause (of detestation to 
the woild), and whose minds aie cleai (of all gloomy thoughts)

35 One whose mind feels a disgust (to the woild) fiom its 
own judgment and nice disci imination (of things), is as giace- 
ful to see as the youthful biidegioom adorned with chaplets of 
floweis

36. They aie esteemed as the best of men, who betake them- 
selves to indifEeieiice aftei judicious considciation of the woidly 
tioubles

37 It must be by one^s lepeated and judicious examination 
of the luwaid and outwaid illusions (of this woild), that he should 
foieibly withdiaw himself from them

38 Who IS there that feels not an aveision to woildlmess at 
the doleful sight of a funeial event’ It is that aveision how- 
evei, which is bom of itself that is highly commendable

39 I see you aie sinceiely indiffeient, and leachmg the acme 
of tiue gieatiiGss. You aie woithy of the best knowledge as 
is the moist eaith of leceivmg the ‘’eeds

30 It IS by the giace of the Loid God and Supieme spiiit, 
that a lucky undeistandmg like youis, natuially inclines to 
reason

31 It is by peifoiinanee of ritual duties and observance of 
the piesciibed lules, that the dements of former biiths aie ex- 
punged. c

83 Upon expuigation of foimer dements, the nndeistand- 
ing turns of itself to take cognizance of spiritual matteis, like 
the simultaneous flight of the ciow towards the falling fiuit of 
the palm.

mu:mukshu khaxda

169

33 B it those that aie devoted only to iitual acts^ aie like 
peisons plunged m an eddy, wheiein they aie whirled up and 
down until they come to peiceive the state of supienie (felicity).169

33 B it those that aie devoted only to iitual acts^ aie like 
peisons plunged m an eddy, wheiein they aie whirled up and 
down until they come to peiceive the state of supienie (felicity).

34. Seeing this (illusoiy) state of the woild, a man must 
shake off the delusion of his woiidly-mindedness, 3 ust as the 
elephant hieaks loose fiom his fetteis

35. It IS too intricate, O Hama* to undeistand the course of 
this boundless woild, and not even the greatest of embodied 
beings (as man) can know it without tiue knowledge.

36 Know, O suppoit of Raghu^s race ' that men of gieat 
understandings have got ovei the unfordable ocean of the woild 
by means of the laft of their knowledge and leason

37 Now heal with attention and steadiness of your mind, this 
lational knowledge for youi deliveiance from the flood of this 
woild

38 The unceasing excitements of the senses and the feais 
and miseiies of the world, will continually distuib the mind, 
without the lemedy of light leason.

39 There is naught beside lational knowledge, that can 
enable holy men to endure the afflictions of the opposite exti ernes 
of heat and cold and wind and rain

40 The incessant caies and miseiies which befal to men at 
eveiy step, seive sometimes to torment the ignorant mind as a 
flame of fiie bums away the stiaw

41 But the troubles of this woild can not afflict the wise 
man, who knows the knowable, and discerns all things (in then 
tiue light) , 3 ust as it is impossible foi the flame of fiie to bum 
down a wood dienched by the lams

42 The man Icnowmg the tiuth lesembles the fiim aiboi of 
the oak (Kalpa), which no whiilwmd of disease oi distress, 
raised by the hot winds of this desert of the World, has the 
power to upset

43 The intelligent man who has a mind to know the

tiuth, must diligently serve his wise preceptor with loving 
regard ^ ,

22

VOL I

170

YOGA VASISHTIIA.43 The intelligent man who has a mind to know the

tiuth, must diligently serve his wise preceptor with loving 
regard ^ ,

22

VOL I

170

YOGA VASISHTIIA.

44' The sayings of the well-minded preceptoi who is asked 
about anything, must be caiefully pieseived in the mind, as a 
piece of fine muslin leceives the dye (with which it is dyed)

45 O best of the eloquent, you must not leeeive the instiuc- 
tion of one unacquainted with tiuth himself, whoevei asks him 
anything is the gieatest of fools.

46 Whoevei does not caiefully attend to the woids of the 
tiuth-telling' 2 ^i^ceptoi who is asked about anything, is the basest 
of men.

47. He is the best mquiiei who makes his enquiiy of one 
after ascei taming by his deeds wlieihei he knows the knowable 
01 not.

48. But he is leckoned a vile inquiier and ineapable of know- 
ing great things, who makes a bo^ isb queiy without aseei tam- 
ing the leetuiei’s ('qualifieations)

49. The wise man when asked, will ie 2 )ly to him who is able 
to eompiehend the antecedent and subsequent piopositions, qnd 
is possessed of a good undei standing, but he should make no 
answei to a vile biutish being.

50 The 2 neceptoi who gives bis lecture without examimng 
the capacity of the inquiier to giasp his meaning, is pionounced 
unwise b}'- the learned

51 O deliiiht of Itaghu's race * this our meeting is a very 
eongenial one and well adapted to each othei, wheiein jmn as in- 
quiiei aie an admirei of viitue, and I the speaker, am well ac- 
quainted (with the subject)

52 You that understand the meaning of woids, should ,v,eif

eonsidei all what I tell you, and take them to youi hee^ft'"

' ■*

53 You are tiuly gieat and disgusted^’fOithe woild, and

know the tri^tli among mankind, whafevei is spoken to you 
must be impressed in mmd as the red dye on muslin.

54 Yon by youi attention to what I say and diseiimination 
of spiritual matters, can make your undei standing receive my 
mstruction as the waters reflect the sun-light54 Yon by youi attention to what I say and diseiimination 
of spiritual matters, can make your undei standing receive my 
mstruction as the waters reflect the sun-light

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

171

55 Receive all that I say and stoie them diligently in youi 
mind , 01 else it is useless to aslc me anything

56. The mind, O Rama' is as fickle as an ape in the forest, 
collect it caiefiilly and attend to sj)iiitual ms ti action

57 Keep youiself always fiom the injudicious and ignoiant, 
and those addicted to the company of wicked people, and honoui 
the viituous

58, It IS by association with good people that we can gam 
wisdom, which lesembles a tiee yielding the fiuits both of en- 
joyment and libeiation \i, e , both of woildly and future good).

59 Theie aie four guards said to keep watch at the gate of 
Liberation, namely, peace, judgment, contentment and the 
society of the good

60 All these oi three or two of them are to be attended with 
care, because they shall open to you the door leading to the 
abode of liberation

.61 Oi at last one of them is to be resorted to with diligence 
and even at the expense of oner’s life , because by securing one of 
these a man can reconcile and gam all the foui (to his favour)

62 The wise man is the receptacle of all S6jst) as and Smtis, 
of all knowledge and austerity, and is a gem on earth, as the 
sun IS the receptacle of light \and gem of heaven),

63. The dull understanding of the senseless man becomes a*} 
stiff as a (motionless) block, and like the fiozen watei becoming 
as hard as stone

64. Youi good nature and good qualities, O Rama' and the

counsels of the learned m the Sdstuis, have made you sit heie

with a heart blooming like lotus at the using sun 
^ *

65 Youi lifted ears to hear these wise lectures, have enabled 
yoit^ to repress youi thoughts, as the music of 1,he lute attracts 
the iiiind of the deei65 Youi lifted ears to hear these wise lectures, have enabled 
yoit^ to repress youi thoughts, as the music of 1,he lute attracts 
the iiiind of the deei

66 Now secaie, O Puaraa ' the tieasuics of jieace and good 
natuie by youi practice of mdiffeience of which thcie is no 
decay

172

YOOA VANISH ril A.

67 Your knowledge oC the aUammeni of liberulion will be 
incicased by youi attending to the Sdstias and the feoeicty of 
good men, as also by youi piactice of austerity and self subjec- 
tion *

68. You must know that, it is the study of divmc knou ledge 
witli a cleai undei standing, that is a suie lemcdy against 
ignoianee .

69 Know this woild to be a poisonous plant and scat of 
dangeis. It infects the ignorant at all tunes, unless one will 
take the pains to dispel his daikness.

7 0 Avaiice accompanied by igiioiance moves within the hcai t 
in a seipentine couioe, and expands and contiacts it by tuins 
like the bellows of a blacksmith

71 The tiue light of things dawns only in the minds of the 
wise, as the gentle moon appeals to sight only in the cleai and 
cloudless sky.

72 He is truly called a man who can judge (the tnith) by the 
majoi and minoi piopositions, whose mind is expanded and 
fiaught with biilliant mgenuity.

73 Hama* the cleai wisdom of youi mind, makes j on shine 
as the full moon dispelling the daikncss of the cloudless sky by 
hei cooling and tianslucent beams

CHAPTER XII.

Gbeatness oe T»ue Knowledge.

V ASTSHTTIA said :

Rduia * I lioiioi* you as one of a peifect mind You 
Iviioiv wliat to ask, and undeistand wliat is spoken to you. I 
will Iheiefoie go on speaking respectfully to you.

2, Be still to attend to knowledge by keeping your mind 
fixed in yourself, and being heed horn piide and passions, incline 
^miiiselt to puie tiutli

3 You aie possessed of all Ibe qualities of an enquirer, and 
I those of the siieaker, in as much as theie aie gems m the 
ocean.3 You aie possessed of all Ibe qualities of an enquirer, and 
I those of the siieaker, in as much as theie aie gems m the 
ocean.

4 You have gained my son the nisoriciaiice which is cognate 
until loason, like the humidity of the moonstone beaiing its 
corielation until the gentle beams of the moon.

5. Rama I ^miii long and early piacticed pure vntues and 
good qualities, have laised your fame, as the long sketching 
white libeis of the stalk exalt the spotless lotus

6. Now hear the woids I tell you Rdma , foi you alone are 
fit to receive them, -as the moon only is able to open the Knmuda 
petals.

7 YHiatevei business or investigation is undei taken by any 
body, it must be bi ought to a happy close, tending to his peace 
and tranquility (oi to his rest and quiet)

8 Had not theie been the solace of philosophy for men of 
'^ood uiidei stall ding, what lational being could daie to bear the

nwciy biought on in this woikl by ignoiance

9 \ All the faculties of the mind aie absoibed iii the contem- 
plation of the Siqneme, like the dissolution of the locks of boun- 
daiy fountains by the solar heat at the end of the (Kaljra) 
woild

10. Rdma * the intoleiable cholic pain caused by this v^o

174

YOGA VA'SIHHYIIA.

mous woilcl, IS healed only 1>> yogci meditation^ as the poison of 
snake-biting is remoYcd hy Gant da incantations.

11 The capacity of yoga is oblaincd by discussion of tlio 
Sdstias in the company of good people, which alone can fimnsh 
ns with the gieat chaim of spiiitiial knowledge.

12. It must be owmed that we lessen our woes by acting 
with reason theiefoic leasonable men aie nevei to be looked 
upon with disiegaid

13. The reasoning man gets iclcascd fiom his woildly sick- 
ness, and quits his fiamc which is full of diseases, as .i sn.ikc- 
casts oh! his time w^oin slough , and looks wath a placid mind 
and calm composme upon the magic scenes of thew'orld. Ilcncc 
the fully ivisc man is not subject to the misery of the imperfect- 
ly wise.14' The rough and uneven pleasure of the w orld is but a 
disease to men, and stings them like a snake It cuts them 
as a swoid, and pierces them as aspcai. It binds them fast 
as by a lope, and bums them as with the fiie, and blindfidda 
then understanding as m the darkness of the night. It makes 
them as piostiate and dull as a slab of stone. It desiioj*, oneS 
piudeiice and low’cis his position It c.ists them into the pit of 
erroi, and torments them with aval ice Thus there is almost no 
kind of tiouble which docs not bctulc woildly minded men.

15 Woildliness is as dangeious a disease as cholera, wdiich 
unless it IS healed m time, is suie to tiouble its jiatient wuth the 
torments of hell .

16 Such as those caused by the e.atmg of stones, W'oiinds of 
swoids and speais , being pelted with stones, biiiiit by fiie, and 
numbed by frost, loosing of limbs, besmeaimg the body with blood 
as with sandal paste, by being boied by wmims as woim eat^n- 
tiees, and piicked in the body by pikes and bioomsticks, or piftoed 
hy the fieiy shafts and bolts continually falling in battle Jjy 
toiling and moiling in the sun and woiking in cold and lain as m. 
a summer fountain house , oi lemaining dumb and de«f nnd 
without lest or sleep, and finally by loosing the head (in w^q or 
penalty)

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

175

17 Undei thousands of such intolerable pang's of woildly 
life, no one should lemain negligent of his release from this state , 
but ought to think that it is his reflection m the Sd.stias only, 
that can pioduce his real good

18 Look here Hama ' on these gieat sages and Rishis, 
these Lrdhmans and piinees, who having fortified themselves by 
the aimom of wisdom, and being liable to no pain oi grief , have 
yet engaged themselves to the arduous affairs of this world with 
minds as placid as yours19 Moieovoi there are many of the best of men, who with 
then spiiitual light and jmie understandings, reside in this world 
as the gods Haii, Haia and Biahmd., who were above all concerns 
and fluctuating desnes of life

20 The journey of this woild is delightful to one, who after 
the removal of his errors and dispersion of the cloud of his 
Ignorance, has come to the knowledge of truth.

21. That the serenity of the mind and ealm repose of the 
heart being secured, all the senses are subjected to peace, and 
eveiy thing is viewed in an equal light , and this knowledge of 
the truth gives a delight to our journey in this world.

22. Know also that, this body of ours is the car, and these 
organs aie its horses, our breathings are the winds bloving upon 
it, and the mmd is the driver that feels the delight of driving , 
the atomic soul is the rider who is conscious of wandering about 
the world The knowledge of this truth makes oui earthly joui- 
nej’’ a pleasant one

CHAPTER xrrr.

O.V PeACK and TllVNQUrLITV OJ' MfVD.

I NTELLIG-ENT men tliai have seen the spml, fi\ tlioii smlil, 
upon li; and lovo about in ilic woild ns persons of g-Jcnl 
and elevated souls.

2 They (that arc libeiated in this life), ncitliei g-iuno noi 
wish nor ask for aught of good or evil (in this Moild) They 
do then woiks as if doing nothing (; c. with indiilci'enec)

3 Those that rely on then selves, lomain both qiiiellv, ns 
well as act then parts with a calm serenity (of Iheii mindA , 
and take no concern either for what is noxious or delccl.iblc to 
them

4' Then coming and not coming, going and not going, 
doing 01 not doing, and speaking oi no( s])caking aic alike 
indiffeient to them.

5 'Whatevei acts oi sigli(sm.i) apjieni ploas.mt oi di'-giisting 
to an}’' body, co.isc to alloet them in any way after they lia\o 
come to know their God (as the Aiithoi of all good)5 'Whatevei acts oi sigli(sm.i) apjieni ploas.mt oi di'-giisting 
to an}’' body, co.isc to alloet them in any way after they lia\o 
come to know their God (as the Aiithoi of all good)

0 The mind getting iid of its desnes feels a sweet coinposuie 
associated with a bliss as if descending fiom the llea^ only orb 
of the moon all about it.

7 By being unmindful of Moildly .ati.an-s .and icgiidh-^s of 
all its excitements, the soul is filled m ith a ftlicity lesembling 
the ambiosial wateis in the moon

8 He who ceases to act his magical parts (in this pla}- 
giound of the earth), and desists fiom lolloping his inclinations 
and childish pianks, shines foith in his spiiitu.al light

9 Such aie the powers gamed fiom sinntual knowledge, 
and by no other means whatevei .

10 Therefore should a man try to seek and know and adoic 
the Supreme soul, by means of his reasoning powers dining hie 
11 It is the concoi dance of one^s belief with the pioccpts

MITMUKSHU KHANDA

177

of tHe S.istia and Ins insfciuetoi, 30 iiied with Ins constant medi- 
tation^ that can give him a full' view of the Suineme spiiit

12 The fool slighting the Sdstia and its instiuctions^ and 
disiegaiding the counsels of gieat men, aie exposed to difficulties 
and dangeis fiom which they can have no lelease

13 Theie is no disease nor poison, nor tiouble noi affiiction, 
so painful to one in this eaith, as the ignoiance which is hied 
in himself

14 Those whose intellects aie a little puiified, will find this 
woik to he of greatei ‘efficacy to dispel then ignorance than any 
othei Sdstia,

15 This Sastia with its beautiful examples and pleasing 
lessons and want of diseoi dance, should be diligently attended 
to by eveiy body who is a fiiend to good sayings and then 
senses

16 Want of dignity, mextiicable difficulties, baseness and 
degeneiacy, aie all offspiings of ignoiance, as the thorns aie the 
o^shoots of the jnickly Ketah plant16 Want of dignity, mextiicable difficulties, baseness and 
degeneiacy, aie all offspiings of ignoiance, as the thorns aie the 
o^shoots of the jnickly Ketah plant

17 It IS fai bettei, O Ild-ma' to lOve about a begging with 
a pot in hand to the abodes of the vile Chandalas, than lead a 
life deadened by ignorance

18 Hather dwell in daik dismal cells oi diy dieaiy wells, 
and in the hollow of tiees, oi lemain as solitaiy blind woims 
(undei the giouiidj, than laboui undei the miseiies of ignoiance.

19 The man leceiving the light leading to his libeiation, 
will nevei fall into the daikness of eiioi oi gloom of death

20, So long will chill fiost of penuiy continue to contiactthe 
lotus of humanity, as the cleai light of leason does not shine, 
upon the mind like the sun

21 One must know the true natuie of the soul both from 
Ills pieceptoi and the evidence of the Sdstias, as alsofiom fi lends 
like ouiselvesj foi the sake of libeiating himself from the miseiy 
of the woild

22 Tiy 0 Eama I to imitate those that aie libeiated in their

VoL I. ’ 23

yoga VASISIITIIA.

life time, wlio aie free to loam ahoni lilccilic Ilaii, Ilaia, 
and otlieis, and as tlic lioly sagos among Biv'ilimans.

23. Ileic (on caitli) onr miseiic^ me as endlc'-s as atoms 
and onr liappmcss as little as adiop of nator on the stalk ot 
a stiaw^ tlieiofoic do not fix youi sight upon that little ha^ipi- 
ness which is beset by miseiy

24- Blit let the intelligent man diligently a])i)ly liim-'Olf 
to the attainment of that stale of endless hapjiinoss which is 
fiee fiom pain and eonstitutcs his highest consummation

25. They aic icckoncd the best of men and dcscismg of 
consummation, whose minds me fieed fiom the fcvci (of woildl}-’ 
cares), and attached to the tianscondcntal slate (of ultimate 
beatitude).25. They aic icckoncd the best of men and dcscismg of 
consummation, whose minds me fieed fiom the fcvci (of woildl}-’ 
cares), and attached to the tianscondcntal slate (of ultimate 
beatitude).

26 Those base minded moilals that me satisfied w’ltli then 
enjoyments, eating and drinking, and the ificasnres of thou 
woildly possessions, aic leckoned ns staik-blind fiogs (in a 
well),

27. All who aio attached to the company of imposteis and 
wicked men, as of those that me addicted to the piacticc of c\il 
deeds, and aie enemies in the gaib of fiicudship, and me given 
up to gluttony •

28 Such foohsli men of mistaken and stupid minds fall into 
the haidest of haidslnps, to the misery of miseries, and the 
hoiroi of hoiiois and the hell of hells.

29. Kappmess and miseiy destioy and succeed each other 
turns, and aie as fleeting as flashes of lightnings Hence it

IS impossible to be happy foi evei.

30. Those gieat souls who aie indilfeient and well judging 
•like youiself, aie known as the most honoiiiahle of men, and 
wmithy ahke both of temporal enjojunents and spnitual eman- 
cipation ^

31. By leliance upon light leasomng joined wnth a habit of 
dispassionateness, men aie enabled to get ovei the claik and 
dangerous toiients of this woild.

32. No man of leasou should alloiv himself to slcejr (in negh-

MUMUKSHU KHANDA.

179

gence) amidst tlie illusions of tlie woild^ well Ini owing tlieir 
noxious piopeitj to deiange tlie undei standing

33 Wlioso lemains neglectful in Ins woildlmess, lesembles 
a man sleeping negligent on a grassy bed when bis bouse is on 
file

34' Wbat being aiiived at, tbeie is no letuimng fiom it , and 
wbat being gained, tbeie is no cause of soiiowmg, that state is 
undoubtedly attainable by divine knowledge only, and is a eei- 
tain tiuth

35. Should tbeie be no such futuie state, yet tbeie is no 
baim to believe in it, but if tbeie be such a state^ its belief will 
save you fiom the (dieadful) ocean of this woild35. Should tbeie be no such futuie state, yet tbeie is no 
baim to believe in it, but if tbeie be such a state^ its belief will 
save you fiom the (dieadful) ocean of this woild

36 Wlienevei a man is inclined to think on the means of 
bis salvation, be is suie to be soon entitled to bis libeiation.

37. The undecaying, uneiimg and feailess state of tianqulity, 
is no wbeie to be bad m the tbiee woilds, without one^s union 
(with the Supreme)

38 Having gained that best of gams, no one is liable to the 
paiii fiom wlucb no wealth, fnend oi i elation can save any body.

39 Neitbei the actions of one’s bands and feet in bis offiei- 
uigs and pilgiimage to distant lands, noi the bodily pains of 
asceticism, noi bis lefuge in a holy place can serve bis salvation.

4<0 It is only by means of one’s best exeitions and the fixing 
of bis mind to one object, as also by the subjection of bis desues, 
that the ultimate state (of bliss) can be ai lived at

4'1 So it IS by means of disci immation, leasoning and ulti- 
mate asceitainment of tiutb, that a man may avoid the snaies 
of miseiy, and attain bis best state

42. One sitting at ease m bis seat and meditating witbin 
bimself (tbe natuie of the soul), attains tbe blissful state, wbicb 
IS flee fiom soiiow and future biitb ^

43 All boly men aie known to be situated beyond the bounds 
of tbe fiail pleasuies (of this life), then optimum quiescence is 
leckoiied tbe ultimate bliss

44 They have giv^n up all thoughts both of humanity and

180

YOGA YaIsISIITIIA

heaven {t e of both woilds); which aie devoid of line felicity 
as the milage is void of watei

4'5 Theiefoie should one think of subduing his mind, and 
lesoit to peace and contentment as the means (to happiness), 
these joined with an unbounded equanimity pioducc tine happi- 
ness4'5 Theiefoie should one think of subduing his mind, and 
lesoit to peace and contentment as the means (to happiness), 
these joined with an unbounded equanimity pioducc tine happi- 
ness

46 It IS not to be had by sitting (quietly at home), oi going 
up and down tfiom place to place) , and neithei by wandering 
(in pilgiimage), noi piostiating (beCoic the altai) It is not to 
be acquired by the lldkshasas, demons, deities oi ignoiant-men

VI That ultimate felicity is boin of and obtainable fiom the 
peace of mind it is the fiuit of the high aiboi of leason fiom 
its blossom of peace

48 Those that aie engaged in woildlmess but do not mix 
in it like the all-illuminmg sun, aie known as the best of men

49 The mind that is at peace and lest, that is clear and fiee 
fiom eiiois, and without any attempt oi desiie, doth neithei foi- 
sake noi wish for the woild

50 Heal me tell you of the waideis at the gate of salvation 
in then older, some one of which being secured, one may have 
his entiance into it

51 Thirst aftei pleasuie is a state of piotiacted disease, and 
this woild is full of milage (all parched and diy) It is equani- 
mity alone that can cool this diyness as the moistening beams of 
the moon

53 It IS quiescence which leads to all good and is leckoned 
the best state of being Quietism is felicity, it is peace and the 
pievcnkve of eiioi

53 The man who lives content with his quiet and a calm 
clearness of his soul, with a mind fraught with stoicism, makes 
friends of his enemies.

54 Those whose minds are adorned with the moon light of 
quietism, feel a flux of the beams of purity using in them like 
the hoaiy waves of the milky ocean,

55. Those holy men who have the lotys-like flowei of quiet-

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

181

ism glowing in the lotifoim leceptacle of then heaits, aie said 
to have a seconclaiy heait like the two pencauhwns of the god 
Hail (holding Biahniii in one of them)MUMUKSHU KHANDA

181

ism glowing in the lotifoim leceptacle of then heaits, aie said 
to have a seconclaiy heait like the two pencauhwns of the god 
Hail (holding Biahniii in one of them)

56 They whose untainted faces shine as the moon with the 
liistie of quiescence, aie to be honouied as the luminaiies of 
then families, and lavisheis of the senses of otheis by the 
chaiming beauty of then countenance

57 Whatevei is beautiful m the thiee worlds, and in the 
shape of impeiial piospeiity and giandeui, there is nothing in 
them that can affoid a happiness equal to that of quietism

58 Whatevei miseiy, anxiety and intoleiable difficulty (may 
oveitake a man), they aie lost in the tianquil mind like daikness 
in the sun

59 The mind of no living being is so delighted with moon ' 
beams, as that of the peaceful man fiom his heait-felt joy

60 The viituous man that is calm and quiet, and fiiendly to 
all liiung beings, feels the benign influence of highest tiuths 
appealing of themselves in his mind

61 As all childien whethei good or bad, have a strict faith 
in their mother, so all beings heie have a leliance on the man of 
an even disposition

62 Neithei does a cooling ambiosial diaught noi the kind 
embiace of piosperity, afford such giatification to the soul, as 
oner’s mwaid satisfaction of the mind

63 Whethei afflicted by diseases oi disasteis, oi diagged by 
the lope of avaiiee, do you beai up youiself, O Riima, by the 
equanimity of youi mind

64 Whatevei thou dost and eatest with the calm coolness of 
thy mind, all that is sweetei fai to the soul than anything sweet 
to taste

65 The mind that is oveipoweied by the ambiosial flavour 
of quietism and desists fiom activity, may have the body laeei- 
ated (foi a time), but it will be filled up shortly

66 Neithei imps noi goblins, demons oi enemies, noi tigeis 
noi snakes, evei annoj^ a peaceful man

182

TOGA VA'SISIITHA.66 Neithei imps noi goblins, demons oi enemies, noi tigeis 
noi snakes, evei annoj^ a peaceful man

182

TOGA VA'SISIITHA.

67 He wlio has his mind and body well guarded hy the invul- 
neiable aimoiir of meeknesSj can never be pieiced by the shafts 
of adveisity, but lemains as the thundei -stone im 2 :)enetiable by 
allows

68 The king seated in his palaee is not so gi aceful to sights 
as the quiet peaceful man is giaeed by his equnimity and cleai- 
ness of undei standing

69 No one is so delighted at seeing a thing deaiei than his 
life, as by the satisfaction which he feels at the sight of a con- 
tented and jieaceful man

70 He who lives a holy life with his gentle and jieaceful 
conduct, is said to be tiuly living in this woild and no other

71 The sobei minded, meek and honest man jjleases eveiy 
one by all that he does, and as it weie cajitivates all beings to 
himself.

73. He is called the meek who neithei feels pleasuie or pain 
at the sight, touch or heaimg and tasting of auythmg good qi 
bad (to the senses)

73 He who is ind iff eient to all objects, and neitliei leaves 
noi longs foi any thing , but keejis his senses and ajipetites 
undei subjection, is called a saint

74' Whoso knowing all things botli mtcinally as well as ex- 
ternally with a deal undei standing, attends and looks to his 
own eonceins, he is vaiily said to be a saint

75 He Avhose mind is as calm as moon beams both at the 
appioach of a feast oi fightmg, and even at the moment of death, 
is said to be a saint

76. Who though piesent at a jilace, neithei lejoices noi mui- 
muis at any thing, but lemains as if he weie absent fiom it, 
and conducts himself as quietly as if he weie fast asleep , such a 
one IS called a saint.

77 He whose comjilaisant look easts a gi aceful iiectaiious 
ladiance on all aioiind him, is said to be a saint

78 Who feels a cool calmness mthm himself, and is not dis-

MUMUKSHU KHAND4

18377 He whose comjilaisant look easts a gi aceful iiectaiious 
ladiance on all aioiind him, is said to be a saint

78 Who feels a cool calmness mthm himself, and is not dis-

MUMUKSHU KHAND4

183

till bed or immerged m any state of life, and wlio tbougb a lay- 
man IS not -woildly minded, such a man is teimed a saint

79 He wbo takes not to bis mind the tiibulations of this 
life, bowever long oi gieat they may be, noi tbmbs tbis base 
(bodily flame) to be bimself, is known to be a saint.

80. Tbe man of tbe woild wbo bas a mind cleai as tbe fiima- 
ment, and not tainted (by woildlmess}, is said to be a saint.

81. Tbe quiet Platonic sbmes foitb among sages and ascetics, 
among piiests and j)imces, and among tbe mighty and learned.

8^. Gieat and mentoiioiis men, whose minds are attached to 
quietism, feel a lest iismg in then souls like tbe cooling beams 
of tbe moon

83 Quietism is tbe utmost limit of tbe assemblage of vii- 
'tues, and tbe best decoration of manliness , it sbmes lesplen- 
dant in all dangeis and difficulties

84 Ho j'-oii now, O Rama * follow for youi* peifection in tbe 
way ill which bigb-mmded men have attained tbeir perfect state, 
by bolding fast on quietism as an impel isbable viitue, pieseived 
by tbe lespectable, and nevei to be lost oi stolen by any.

CHAPTER XIV.

On the Ascertainment of an Argument

T T must be tbe duty o£ one, whose undoistandino is cleaicd 
and puufied by a knowledge of the Sdstias, to aigue inces- 
santlf with a guide knowing hoiv to icason aught

2 The undei standing ivhen shaipened by leasoning, comes 
to view the tianscendent state It is loasomng which is the 
only best medicine for the chionic disease of ivoildliness

3 The woild is of the form of a wood of tiolibles, shoot- 
ing m spiouts of endless desiies which being once felled undei 
the saw of leason, will geimmate no moie3 The woild is of the form of a wood of tiolibles, shoot- 
ing m spiouts of endless desiies which being once felled undei 
the saw of leason, will geimmate no moie

4 O wise R^ma ' oui undei standings aie shrouded undei un- 
consciousness at the loss of oiii friends, at times of dangei, and 
even of quiet It is leason that is oiii only companion (at these 
times)

5 Theie is no expedient foi the learned and ivise except 
reason, it is by means of reason that the minds of good people 
can avoid evil and secuie then good

6 All our stieugth and undei stand mg, our valoui and le- 
nown, and the ends of oui actions, le^iilt fiom oiii icasoning 
Muth the intelligent

7 Reason is the lamp to show us the light and wiong, and 
the instiument foi accomplishment of oui desiies by leliance 
on right leason, one crosses ovei easily the wide ocean of the 
woild

8 Pure leasoning like a stiong lion, teais asundei the ele- 
phants of gieat eiioi, ivhich lavage the lotus beds of the mind 
(or mental faculties)

9 If ignoiant men have at any time attained a bettei state 
in life, it was all owing to the light of the lamp of their 
leasoning

10 Know O Rd/gahava that, dominion and fan piospeiity, 
togethei Math oui enjoyments and eternal salvation, aie all but 
fiuits of the celestial Kalj^a plant of leasonmg

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

185

11 The minds o£ great men_, which aie expanded by leason- 
ing heie, aie nevei liable to be immeiged undei the cuiients o£ 
calamity, (but float above them) hire goiiids upon watei

12 Those who conduct themselves with then intellects shin- 
ing foith with leason, become the lecipients of its most libeial 
gifts

13 Want of leason is like the thorny and soui plant of 
jS'oiuiyu sjiioiiting foith with blossoms of woe, and gi owing in 
the brakes of ignorant minds in order to shut out their hopes 
and prospect?13 Want of leason is like the thorny and soui plant of 
jS'oiuiyu sjiioiiting foith with blossoms of woe, and gi owing in 
the brakes of ignorant minds in order to shut out their hopes 
and prospect?

' 14. Do j’-ou, O R^ghava’ shake off the lethargy caused by 
youi neglect of reasoning This torpor darkens your vision as it 
were by the inkj'- jiowdei of coij’-iium, and maddens youi mind 
as it were, b}'- the ebiiety of wine

16. The man of right judgment is not liable to fall into the 
long and dangerous maze of eiioi (like others) , but remains as 
a blaze of light amidst the gloom (of ignoiance).

16 The reasoning faculties shine as a bed of lotuses in the lim- 
pid lake of the mind whoso has such a leasoning mind, exalts 
his head as high as the Himdlayan height

17 The man having a dull mind and incajiable of reasoning, 
(of reason) as a flash of lightening, and like boys, sees false appari- 
tions about him

18 Rdma, you must shun at a distance the base unreason- 
able man, who glows as plump as a Khanda cane to cause sorrow 
and resembles the spring season to grow fiesh weeds of evil

19 Whatevei misdeeds, misconducts and mischances present 
themselves to man, they are all the effeets of his want of the 
light of reason, and lay hold on him like ghosts apjieaiing 
in the dark.

20 O support of Raghu-’s lace, do you shun at a’distance the 
unieasonable man of the nature of a sohtaiy wild tree, which 
comes to no good use (to mankind)

21 The mind that is fraught with reason and devoid of the 
impatience attendant oi^ woildy desiies, feels the light of trans-

VoL I 24

186

yOOA yasisiitha

condent quieiibin sinning in the soul with the full Inslie of the 
moon.

Wlien the light of lea&on shines in nny poison, it im- 
paits the coolness and good giacc of mooii-hcams to all things 
aionnd himWlien the light of lea&on shines in nny poison, it im- 
paits the coolness and good giacc of mooii-hcams to all things 
aionnd him

2-3 The loasonuig powci of man necomjianied with the flag 
of divine knowdedge and the silveiy flappci of good iindcibtand- 
mg, shines as moon-light in the daikness of night

24' Men wnth the good gi ace of then lea'^on, thiow a indi- 
ance like that of the snn on all sides ahont them, and dispel the 
gloom of -sYoildlmess

25 E.easoning sei’vcs to dcstioj’- the false appaiitions of eiiois 
which piesent themselves to the minds of boys like ghosts in the 
sky at night

86 All things in the noild appeal as chaiming (as if they 
weie leahtics) , but they aic (in fact) but nnicalities, and liken 
the clods of eaith that aic bioken (to pieces) by the hammoiing 
stone of reason

27 Men aie then self toimentcis by the false imajrmatinn 
of then own minds, it is leason alone that can dine ana} this 
mveteiate spectie fiom the mind

28 Knoiv the fiint of the high aiboi of ioa«on, to bo the 
even, nnobstiucted, intcimmable and iiidepcndant happiness called 
Kail ah/ a

29 It is hy means of leason and its evident influence on the 
dexmvation of (physical; giatifications, that thcie uses an un- 
shaken and exalted disinteiestedncss ni the mind, like the cooling 
beams of the moon

30 H hen the saint has leached hib peifcction by means of

the elixii of judgment seated in his mind, he neithei desnes foi 
moie noi leaVes (what he has). >

31 The mind relj^ng on that state of ecpanimity and pei - 
ceivmg the cleai light (of tiiith ivithm itself), has neilliei its fall 
1101 elevation, but enjoys its inwaid expansion as that of vnenum

foi evei.

MUMUKSHU KHANDA.

187

3^ One uncoiiceined mth tlie woilcl;, neitliei gives noi le- 
ceives any things noi feels liimself elated or dej)iessed at any 
eventj but views every thing as an indiffeient spectatoi187

3^ One uncoiiceined mth tlie woilcl;, neitliei gives noi le- 
ceives any things noi feels liimself elated or dej)iessed at any 
eventj but views every thing as an indiffeient spectatoi

33. He IS neithei toipidly cold noi does he dwell on any- 
thing Intel naliy oi externally. He is neithei inactive noi meig- 
ed in activity.

31' He slights the loss of anything, and lives content with 
what he has, he is neithei depiessed noi elevated, but le- 
mains as full as the (tideless) sea

35 It is^in this mannei that the high-souled and high-aspii- 
ing To^/is conduct themselves in this woi Id, with then 'fullness 
(of joy) and living as they aie libeiated in this life

36 These saintly sages haAung lived as long as tliey like (in

this eaith), abandon it at last, and gain then eternal

unity ^(aftei death).

37. The sapient man should intently considei within himself, 
who and whose he is, what is his family and by whom he is sui- 
rounded, and think on the lemedy (of his woildliness)

38. It is the king, O Edma * who well knows the difficult 
and doubtful state of the business (befoie him) , and his success or 
failuie dejiends solely on his light judgment and on nothing else.

39 It IS the (hcfa and dafa established by the Veda and 
Veddnta that foim the giounds of oui evidence, and these aie to 
be ascei tamed by oui leason as by the help of a lamp in the 
gloom of night.

40 The blight eye-sight of leason, is neithei blinded by 
the daikness (of night), noi dimmed by the full blaze (of the 
day), even when it has to view things (situated) at a distance

41 He who IS blind to leason is as one boin blind, and a 
demented man is an object of univeisal pity, but the man with a 
leasonmg soul is said to be possessed of divine eye-sight, and

becomes victoiious in all th, "s (he undei takes)

42. The miiaculous power of leasoii is acknowledged to be a 
divine attiibiite and an mstiument to highest felicity , wheie- 
foie it IS not to be lost sight of foi a moment.42. The miiaculous power of leasoii is acknowledged to be a 
divine attiibiite and an mstiument to highest felicity , wheie- 
foie it IS not to be lost sight of foi a moment.

188

YOGA VA'STSHTIIA

43. The man giaced hy loason is loved CNon h\ Ihc as 
the delicious and iipc mango fiiiit is delect able to all

44 Men mth their minds illumed by the light ol leason, aic 
like tiavelleis acquainted with then way, and aie not h.vble to pit 
falls of incessant dangei and misciy

45 Neithei doth the siekman nor one he^-et hy a hundiod 
evils wails so hitteily, as the ignoiant man whose soul is dcpiiv- 
ed of reason

46 Uather leap as a fiog in the mud, oi ciccp as a norm in

the diit, lathei he as a snake in a daik cell oi ciawl on the 
giound, than walk as a man devoid of leason •

47 Therefoie get iid of unieasonahlcness ulnch is the abode 
of all youi dangei s, IS icpiobatcd by the imsc fas the bane of 
mankind), and is the tci minus of all 30111 calamities

48 Gieat men must always be in full possession of then 
leasomng, because those unsuppoitcd by then reason are liable to 
fall into the pits of daikness

49 Let cvei}' one keep his soul under the control (of his 
own leasoii), and h}’- this moans, deluci the faw n of his m'lnd 
from falling into the miiago of this uoild

50 It IS the pi 01 nice of icasoning to consider logicall} in 
one’s self, whence the evil, known as ivoi Millies':, had its ii':e

51 The thick mist of eiioi is only foi the continued misciy 
of man, and it pievails on the stony minds of those that aic de- 
mented bj:" the loss of reason

52 The wnse that hold fast on the tiuth and forsake all un- 
tiuth in this wmild, aie j^et unable to discern then line natuies 
ivithout the aid of leasoii

53 It is by means of leasoii that one comes to the knoiv- 
ledge of truth , and by means of ti nth that he gets the peace of

his mmd, and it is the tianquility oi the mind that dispels the 
miseiy of menhis mmd, and it is the tianquility oi the mind that dispels the 
miseiy of men

54 Now Rdma, do you take delight in such acts as mai' be 
productive of utility to the wmild, and ivheieb}’^ you may aiiive 
to peifection Weigh all things ivith the cleai e^^e of reason, 
ivhich will make you blessed for evei

CHAPTER XV 
On Contentment.

\ T ASISHTHA Continued Contentment is the chief good ,

T contentment is called the (tine) enjoyment ^ and the con- 
tented maii^ O thou destioyei of enemies, gets the best lepose

2 Those who aie happy with their piospeiity of eontentment, 
and possess the calm lepose of then souls, aie as holy saints, and 
thnilc a soveieignty no bettei than a bit of lotten stiaw

3 VTioever letains a contented mind amidst all the affaiis 
of the woild, he is nevei distuibed O R4ma, in adveise cireum- 
stances noi ever dejected (m his spiiit)

4. The saints that aie satisfied with the ambiosial diaught of 
eontentment, think the highest affluence and enjoyments (of the 
iich) but poison (to theu souls)

. 5 Even the waves of liquid nectai fail to affoid that plea- 
suie, which the sweetest taste of contentment- the healei of all 
evils , gives to its possessoi

6 Abandonment of unfiuitful desires and calmness in those 
that aieobtatmed, feeling no jiain at and having no sense of jileasuie 
(in any thing), constitute what is called contentment hei e below

7 Until the mind can enjoy the contentment using sjion- 
taneously in the soul of itself, so long will tioubles continue 
to glow in it as biiais and biambles in a bog

8 The mind cooled by calm contentment, and puiified by the 
light of philosophy, is always in its full bloom as the lotus under 
sun-beams

9 The ungoverned mind which is undei the subjection of 
desiies and devoid of contentment, does not lec^jve the light of 
knowledge, as a soiled miiioi takes no leflection of the face9 The ungoverned mind which is undei the subjection of 
desiies and devoid of contentment, does not lec^jve the light of 
knowledge, as a soiled miiioi takes no leflection of the face

10 The man whose mind is always blight with the sun- 
shine of contentment, does not shiivel itself like the lotus in the 
daik night of ignoiance (6i adveisity).

190

YOGA VA'SISIITIIA

11 A man tliougli pooi^ cnjO^s the happmcs'^ of f<o^elelgllty, 
who IS devoid of diseases and anxieties, and whose mind is 
contented

12 He IS called a contented man, n ho docs not long aftei 
what he is not possessed of, and enjoys what he has m its light 
mannei, and is always giaeeful m his manncis

13 Theie is a beauty shining m the face of one, whose mind 
has the satisfaction of contentment, the fnlnessof maonanimity 
and the pniity of tlnughts hlce that of the milky ocean in it

Id Let a man cnteitam his self-possession ^\ltlvn himself, 
and abandon his ciaving of all things, by leliance on his manly 
exeitions

15 He whose mind is full ivith the ambiosia of content- 
ment and a calm and cool undei standing, acquiics a peiiietnal 
composuie within himself, as it iveie by the cooling beams of the 
moon.

10 All gi eat foi tunes wait on him nliose mind is stiength- 
ened by- contentment, as if they ncie his scj Mints, and as llicy 
1 email! m attendance upon a king.

17 One lemaining content and composed m himself, quells 
all his anxieties and eaies, as the lains set down the dust of the 
eaith.

18 E,dma ' a man shines by the coulcntmcnt of his miiid and 
the piiiity of his conduct, as the cooling and spotless moon nlien 
she IS full

19 No one leceives so much delight fiom Ins accumulation 
of wealth, as he deiives fiom the sight of the beautiful placid 
countenance (of a contented poison)

20 Kiiow,0 thou delight of RagluPs 1 ace’ that the best of 
men who aie decoiated with giace of equanimity (the only quality

that adoins thVi wise), aie moie honouied both bj'- gods and saoes 
than anythat adoins thVi wise), aie moie honouied both bj'- gods and saoes 
than any

CHAPTER XVI 
On Good Conduct

y ASISHTHA resumed saying

KnoWj O liiglily intelligent Rama * tliat tlie eomj)any of 
tbe viitiious is eveiywlieie of llie gieatest benefit to men foi 
tlieii ciossinQ: ovei the ocean of the woild-

2 It IS the aihour of viitiious company that 2 noctuces the 
fiesli blossom of disciimination , which being cherished by high- 
souled nien^ yeilds to them its fiuits of piospeiity

3 Tlie society of the leained makes solitude appeal as com- 
pany, and the evil of death as good as a festivity , and com’^eits 
a difiieuhy to ease

4 It IS the society of the Mituous which waids off all disas- 
ter, that like the fiost, invade the lotus beds of oui heaits , and 
baffle the icy bieath of ignoiance (which deadens oui souls)

5 Know the society of tbe vntuous to be the best impiover 
of the undei standing, the destioyei of the tiee of ignoiance, 
and leniovei of all oui mental diseases

6 The society of the \nituous pioduces the light of leason, 
which IS as chaimingly fan as a clustei of floweis aftei its being 
washed by lain-watei.

7 It is the influence of vntuous company that teaches us the 
best mode of life, which is nevei impaned or obstiucted by 
anything, and is evei full in itself.

8 Let no man evei keep himself foom the association of the 
vntuous, though he is involved in utmost distiess, and east in 
iiiemediable cncumstances

»

9 The society of the vntuous, lends a light to the light path. 
It destioys the inteinal daikness of man, by the rays of the sun 
of knowledge

10. Whoever has bathed in the cold and cleai stieam of good

192

YOGA VA'SlSHTIlA

oonipauy IS not ill need o£ llie meiit derived fiom acts of ctniuiy^ 
pilg’i image;, austeiity and saciiftce.10. Whoever has bathed in the cold and cleai stieam of good

192

YOGA VA'SlSHTIlA

oonipauy IS not ill need o£ llie meiit derived fiom acts of ctniuiy^ 
pilg’i image;, austeiity and saciiftce.

11 Wiioevei has ilie society of virtuous incn, and wlioso livcfr 
aie fiee fiom passions and sins, and donhts and the Icnots (of 
seiuples in their heats), of what use is (the obseivance of) aus- 
teiity, 01 (peifoimance of) pilgimagc (to him) ?

12 Blessed aie the peaceful in then minds, \\ho aic viewed 
with as gieat an aidoui by people, as pool men fondly dote 
upon gems and jewels.

13. The intelhgcnt mind wntli its gi.accfulness deiivcd fiom 
good company, shines always as the godde‘=:s of iichcs in the 
eompanj’- of faiiy nymphs

Id Theicfoie that blessed man is lenowncd as having attain- 
ed the ciowni of a clear undei standing, who never ab'^tains him- 
self fiom the company of the holy

15 Hence all unsciuplous belicvcis, lioly men and those who 
aie leveled by people, aie to be seis'cd b} all means foi ciO'JMn" 
ovei the ocean of the world

16 Suiely do they seivc as diy fuel to hcll-firc, who neglect 
tilt company of the saints, wdiich is known as lain watci to 
extinguish the flames of hell

17 The medicine of holy association, senes to allay entiiely 
all the afflictions consequent to poveity and death and tiibula- 
tions of wmildl}'’ allaiis

18 Contentment, society of the viituous, i atiocmation and 
quietism, aie the seveial means for ciossing ovei the ocean of the 
wmild by mankind

19 Contentment is reckoned as the best gam, good company 
the light couise, reasoning the tine knowledge, and quietism 
the highest bliss (of man)

20 These aie the foui suiest means to bieak off the tiammels 
of the woild, and w'hoevei is piacticed in these, has surely passed 
ovei the eiioneous w^ateis of the teiiestial sea

21 Learn, O best of the intelligent ' that the piacticc of some

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

19321 Learn, O best of the intelligent ' that the piacticc of some

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

193

One of tliese puie virtues, leads to an assuetude of all the font 
(caidmal viitues)

22 Eveiy one of these sepaiately is a leadei to the otheis , 
wherefoie diligently apply youiself to one of these foi youi suc- 
cess in getting them alL

33 Association with the good, contentment, light leasomng, 
and good judgment, joined with peace and tianquihty, seive as 
cargo-ships in the ocean of the woild

24t All piosperity attends on him who is possessed of leason, 
contentment, quietism and the habit of keeinng good company, 
like the fiuits of the lalpa tiee (satisfying eveiy desiie)

25 The man possessed of reasoning, contentment, quietitude, 
and a pioclivity to keep good company, is attended by every 
grace, as all the digits unite in the full moon

26 The hajipy mind which is fiaught with contentment, 
quietness, reasoning powei, and a tendency to good company, 
meets with the piospenty and success, as they attend on kings 
(who aie) guided by (the counsels of) good ministers

S7 Therefoie, O delight of Eaghu^s lace l do you biavely 
govern youi mmd, and always piactise with diligence some one 
of these viitues (foi youi conduct in life)

38 Exeit your best manliness to subdue your elephantine 
mind, and know that until you have masteied one of these cai- 
dinal virtues, you can make no piogiess (in holiness)

39 It must be, O E^ma * that you shall have to set your 
heait to woik by the exeition of your manliness and the gnashing 
of youi teeth, foi youi success in meiitoiious deeds

30 For Avhether you be a god oi yalsha or a man or an 
aibor, you cannot, O long-aimed E^ma ’ have a bettei couise 
till then (« e befoie masteimg one of these qualities)

31 As soon as one of these viitues is stiengthenedand made 
fiuitful in you, it will seive to weaken the foi ce of the faults 
of youi ungovernable mmd.31 As soon as one of these viitues is stiengthenedand made 
fiuitful in you, it will seive to weaken the foi ce of the faults 
of youi ungovernable mmd.

33 The cultivation of virtues leads to their full giowth and 
sujipiession of vice, but the fosteiing of vice will (on the othei

VoL I

25

194 YOGA V/SISHTIIA

liaiid) conduce to tlie inciease of vices and suppression of good 
qualities

33 The mind is a wilderness of ciiors^ in wliicli the stieam 
of oui desiies is running ivitli full foicc, amidst its two banks of 
good and evil wheieon we hold our stand

34 It beais away and throws the man on that bank which 
he stiives to leach by his own exertion, theicfoie O Rdma, do as 
you like to leach to either shore

35 Now tiy by degrees with all the cxeitioii of your manly 
force, to turn the course of your desiies tow aids the happy shoic 
in the forest of yom mind , and know, 0 high-minded Ildina , 
that one^s own disposition is as a lajnd cuiicnt to him, which 
must not be permitted to bear him aw\ay (to the pcnloiis coa<t).

CHAPTER XVII

On The Contents of the Work. ,

r I 'll! US, O progeny of Raghu • it is the leasonmg soul that is 
■ woi thy of attending to the woids of wisdom, as a pi nice 
(is inclined to listen) to a discourse on polity

2. The deal and high-minded man, w'^ho has i enounced the 
company of stupid folks, is capable of fan leasomng, as the 
clear sk}’- has the eapacitj’- of receiving the moon-light

3 You w'’ho are leplete with the entiie giace of this quality, 
should now attend to the ivoids, that I say, to lemove the eiiois 
of jmur mind

4 He, the aihoui of whose meiits is bending down with the 
load of its flints, feels a desiie to heai thjse woids foi the sake 
of his salvation

’5 It is the noble minded only and not the base, that aie 
leceptacles of giand and holy seimons confeii mg the knowdedge 
of their future state’5 It is the noble minded only and not the base, that aie 
leceptacles of giand and holy seimons confeii mg the knowdedge 
of their future state

6 This collection consisting of thiity-two thousand stanzas, 
is deemed as contammg the essence of the means conducing 
to liheiation, and conferimg the final annihilation (of oui 
being;

7 As a lighted lamp pieseixts its light to eveiy waking man, 
so does this wmik effect the ultimate extinction of eveiy person 
whethei he would like it oi not

8 One^s knowledge of this wmik whethei by his own peiusal 
01 healing of it fiom the leheaisal of otheis, tends to the imme- 
diate obliteiation of his eiiois and augmentation of his delight, 
as it IS done by the holy iivei of heaven (Ganges),

9 As the fallacy of a snake in the lope is removed by 
examining it, so the fallacy of the leality of the woild is lemoved 
by peiusal of this woik, which gives peace to one who is vexed 
with and tiied of the ivoild

19a

YOGA VASISHTHA

10 It coutaius feix books all fiaiig-lit witli sentc'uccs full of 
leasoiij and each distinct fiom the othei m its imiioit It has 
many veises containing chosen examples on all subjects

11 The fiistbook tieats of Indiffeience^ and causes the giowth 
oi apathy (in the mind) like that of a iiee in the deseit soil

13 It contains one thousand and fi\c bundled stanzas, which 
being Avell consideied in the mmd, must imjiait a puiity to it 
like the lustie of a gem aftei its polish

13 The next book dwells on the conduct of one longing 
after his libeiation, and contains a thousand slokas aiianged in 
judicious oidei

la' It dosciibes the natuie of men desiiing their liboiation. 
Then follows the book on the eieation of the woild, and filled 
with naiiatives and examples (of vaiious kinds)

15 It has seven thousand stanzas teaching sound philosophy 
about the spcclatoi and sjiectaele of the woild in the foims of 
I and ihon, designated the ego and non-ego15 It has seven thousand stanzas teaching sound philosophy 
about the spcclatoi and sjiectaele of the woild in the foims of 
I and ihon, designated the ego and non-ego

10 It contains a desciiption of the pioduction of the voi'ld 
fioin its state of non-existence A dili'jent attention to this 
chaptei will convey a full knowledge of this woild into the mind 
of the heaiei

17 This eqo and non-ego, and this vast expanse uith all the 
worlds, space and mountains, aie (to be viewed) as having no 
foim noi ioundation, and as there aie no such things (in 
leality)

18 There aie no elements as the eaith and otlicis n Inch 
exist in oui fancy only, and aie like jihantoms appealing m a 
dieam, oi as aeiial castles and chimeras of the mind.

20 They resemble the moving hills on the shore to one pass- 
ing in a boat, without aiij’" actual movement in them , oi liken 
the hobgoblinc appearing to an unsound mind Such is the 
appearance of the world without any seed oi sorrice oi origin of 
its own

21 It IS as the impression of a tale in the mind, oi the sight 
of a chain of pearls in the sky, oi taking a bracelet foi its gold

MUMUKSflU KHA.NDA

197

01 a wave for the water (t e taking the appearance foi its 
cause, 01 the phenomena foi the noumena)

33. Oi as the blueness of the sky is always apparent to sight 
uithout its leality^ and evei charming to behold without the 
existence of any coloui in it.

33 Thus whatever unreal wonders always appear to us in our 
di earns or in the sky, they aie but the resemblances of a fiie 
in a pictuie, which seems to be burning without having any 
file in it

34 The woid ^^jagat or passing, is appropi lately applied to 
the tiansitory woild, which passes like the sea with its heaving 
waves, appealing as a chain of lotus floweis in dancing34 The woid ^^jagat or passing, is appropi lately applied to 
the tiansitory woild, which passes like the sea with its heaving 
waves, appealing as a chain of lotus floweis in dancing

35 It IS (as false) as one^s imagination of a body of waters 
at a sj)ot, fiom the sound of the luddy geese (that live by rivers) , 
and (as useless) as a witheied forest in autumn, when the leaves 
and fiuits fall off, and yeild neithei shade nor luscious nutiiment, 
(to the travellei)

36. It IS full with delirious ciavings as of men at the point 
of death, and as daik as caverns in the mountains. Hence the 
effoits of men aie but acts of then phiensy.

37 It IS bettei to dwell in the clear sky of the autumnal 
(atmospheie of) philosophy, after subsidence of the fiost of 
ignoiance, than to view at this woild, which is no moie than an 
image at a post oi a pictuie upon the wall

38. Know all sensible and msensible things to be made of 
dust (to be 1 educed to dust again) Next follows the book on 
Existence

39. It contains three thousand stanzas full of explanations 
and narratives, showing the existence of the woild to be a foim 
(oi development) of the essence of the Ego (in a subjective hght).

30 It tieats of the mannei in which the spectatoi ( Ego ) is 
manifest as the spectacle non-ego'), and how the ten-sided spheie 
of the aiboui of the ivoild is manifest both as the subjective and 
objective (at the same time)

31. It has thus anived at its development which is said to be

198 YOGA YASISHTHA

eveilasting Next follows tlie book on quietude consisting of 
five tfiousand stanzas

32 The fifth is styled the book on holiness^ containing a 
senes of excellent lectuies, and shewing the eiioneous conception 
of the woild^ as thou and he (as distinct existences )

33 It is the suppiession of this eiior, which foims the subject 
of this bookj and the heaiing of the chaptei on quietude, selves 
to put an end to oui tiansmigiation in this woild33 It is the suppiession of this eiior, which foims the subject 
of this bookj and the heaiing of the chaptei on quietude, selves 
to put an end to oui tiansmigiation in this woild

34 Aftei suppiession of the tiam of eiiois,theie still remain 
slight vestiges of it to a hundiedth pait, as the dispersed troops 
in a picture afford us some faint idea of them.

35 Aiming at the object of another person is as vain as look- 
ing at the beauty of an imaginary city, and sitting in expectation 
of an unattainable object It is as a noisy fighting foi something 
m sleep

36 It is as vain as a man of unsubdued desiies, biiistiiig into 
a loaimg like that of the loud and tiemendous thundei-cla.ps, 
and as the laismg of a city on the model of one’s effaced impies- 
sions in a dieam

SI It IS as vain as a would-be city, with its garden and 
flowers and fruits growing in it and as a sterile woman bragging 
of the valorous deeds of her unborn and would-be sons

38 Oi when a painter IS about to draw the pictuie of an 
imaginary city on the ground woik of a chart, by forgetting to 
sketch a plan of it beforehand

• 39 It IS as vain as to expect eveigieen herbage and fruitage 
of all seasons, and the bieeze of an uiigiown aiboui , oi to 
it 111 a futuie floweiy paitene, pleasant with the sweets of 
spring

40 Then ‘follows the sixth book entitled annihilation, which 
is as clear as the waters of a iivei aftei subsidence of its billows 
within itself

41 It contains the leniainmg iiumbei of slokas, [i.e 14500 
Stanzas of the aggiegate iiiimbet of 32000 Slokas composing

MUMUKSHF KIIANDA

109

tlie entire work) a knowledge of tliese is pregnant with great 
meanings^ and the iindei standing of them leads to the chief 
good of utter extinction and pacification of desiies,109

tlie entire work) a knowledge of tliese is pregnant with great 
meanings^ and the iindei standing of them leads to the chief 
good of utter extinction and pacification of desiies,

42 The intellect being absti acted fiom all its objects^ presents 
the manifestation of the soul, which is full of intelligence and 
fiee from all impurity It is enveloped in the sheath of infi- 
nite vacuity, and is wholly pure and devoid of woildly eiiois

43. Having finished its journey thiough the world and pei- 
foimed its duties here, the soul assumes a calmness as that of 
the adamantine column of the sky, leflecting the images of the 
tumultuous world (without changing itself)

44 It lejoices exceedingly at its being delivered fiom the in- 
numerble snares of the woild, and becomes as light as air by being 
fieed fiom its desire of looking aftei the endless objects (of its 
enjoyments)

46 The soul that takes no notice of the cause oi effect oi do- 
ing of any thing, as also of what is to be avoided or accepted (i e 
which lemaiiis totally indiffeient to eveiy thing), is said to be 
disembodied though encumbeied with a body, and to become un- 
woildly 111 its woildly state

46 The intelligent soul is compaied to a solid lock, compact 
and without any gap in it It is the sun of intelhgence which 
enlightens all people, and dispels the daikness of ignoiance

47 (This soul) though so veiy luminous, has become giossly 
daikened (m its nature), by being confined to the vile fooleiies 
of the woild, and wasted by the malady of its ciavmgs

48 When fieed fiom the chimeiaof its egoism, it becomes 
incoipoieal even in its embodied state, and beholds (the gloiy of) 
the whole woild as it was placed at the point of one of the 
myiiads of haiis (on its body), oi like a bee sitting on a flower 
upon the Sumeia mountain

49 The intelligent and vacuous soul contains and beholds 
in its sjiheie a thousand glories of the world, shining in each 
atom, as it was m a imiioi.

20049 The intelligent and vacuous soul contains and beholds 
in its sjiheie a thousand glories of the world, shining in each 
atom, as it was m a imiioi.

200

YOGA YA'SISHTHA

50 . It IS not even possible to thousands of Haris^ Haras and 
Biahmasj to equal the gieat minded sage in the extent of his 
compiehensive soul , because the liberated have then chief good 
(of mteinal joy) stietched to afai gieatei limit than any

CHAPTER XVIII

V ASISHTHA said

The seveial jiaits of this woik as ahead/ related^ gave 
rise to the iindei standing, as seeds sown in a good field nevei 
fail to pioduee good fiuitage

3. Even human eomiiositions aie aecejitahle when they are 
instinctive of good sense , othei wise the Vedas also aie to be le- 
nounced (as uniehable) , because men aie requiied always to 
abide by leasoii

3 Woids confoiniable with leason aie to be received even if 
spoken by bo 3 '’s, othei wise they aie to be lejectedas stiaws though 
pionounced by the lotus-boin (Brahmd himself).

4 Whoever dunks fiom a well by leasoii of its being dug 
by his ancestois, and lejects the holy watei of the Ganges even 
when jilaced befoie him, is an incorrigible simpleton.

5 As eaily dawn is mvaiiably accompanied by its tram of 
light, so IS good judgment an inevitable attendant on the perusal 
of this woik.

6 Whether these lessons are heaid fiom the mouth of the 
learned, oi well studied by one^s self, they will giadually make 
then impressions upon the mind by one^s constant reflection on 
then sense

7. They will first furnish (to the learnei) a variety of Sanskrit 
expressions, and then spread befoie him a senes of holy and judi- 
cious maxims, like so many ornamental creepers to decorate the 
hall

8. They will produce a cleverness joined with such qualifica- 
tions and greatness, as to engage the good grace of gods and 
kings.8. They will produce a cleverness joined with such qualifica- 
tions and greatness, as to engage the good grace of gods and 
kings.

9. They are called the intelligent who know the cause and 
effect of things, and are likened to a torch-bearer who is clear 
sighted 111 the dailniess»of the night. (Like ihestoa of the Stoics).

VoL. I. 26

202

YOGA VASISHTHA

10. All then eiioueous and covetous tliouglits Ijecoine 
Ly degiees^ as the legions of the sky aie cleaied of theii\his 
at the apjnoach of autumn »od

11 Youi thoughts lequiie only the guidance of leason 
the light), as eveiy action needs be duly peifoimed ^ 
successful

12 The intellect becomes (bycultuie) as clear as a g3 
in autumn, and it gets its calmness (by leason), like thaf\ 
sea aftei its churning by the Mandaia mountain

13 Like the flame of a ehandeliei cleansed of its sootmes 
dispelling the shioud of daikness, the lefined intellect shines 
infullbiightnessjand distinguishes (the diffeientnatuiesof) thl

14 The evils of penuiy and poveity cannot oveipowei^ 
them, whose stiong sight can discern the evils of then o]iq)os|ites 
(wealth and iiches) , as no dait can pieice the moital q)aitd of 
a soldiei clad in full armour

15 No woildly feais can daunt the heait of the wise man,

c

however iieaiest they may ajiinoach to him. Just as no aiiow 
can pieice thiough a huge solid stone

16 Such doubts as whethei it is destiny or our own ment 
that IS the cause of our biiths and actions,’’^ aie removed (by 
leainmg), as daikness is dispelled by day-light

17 There is a calm tranquility attending upon the wise at all

tunes and in all conditions (of life) , so also does th" light of 
reason like solar rays, follow the dark night of eiioi

18 The man of right 3 udgment has a soul as deej) as the 
ocean and as fiiin as a mountain, and a cool serenity always shines 
within him like that of moon-light18 The man of right 3 udgment has a soul as deej) as the 
ocean and as fiiin as a mountain, and a cool serenity always shines 
within him like that of moon-light

19 It IS he Avho ai lives slowly at what is called living - 
libeiation,^^ lyho remains calm amidst the endless turmoils (of the 
world), and is quite aloof fiom common talk (e e unnoticed by 
the world).

20 His mind is calm and cool at every thing , it is pure and 
full of heavenly light , shining serenely as the autumnal night 
with the ladiance of moon-beams. t

MUMUKSHU KIIANDA

203

21 When the smi o£ reason illumines the coulclless region of 
the mmclj no poi lentous comet of evil can make its appeal ance 
(within its spheie)

22 All desues aie at lest with the elevated , they aie pure 
with the steady, and indifPeient to the inert, like the body of 
light clouds 111 autumn.

23 The slanders of envious ill-ivisheis are put out of counten- 
ance (by the wuse), as the fiolics of goblins disappear at the 
approach of day

24< The mind that is fiKcd on the him basis of virtue, and 
placed under the burthen of paticucc, is not to be shaken by acci- 
dents, but remains as a plant iii a painting (unmoved by winds)

25 The knowing man does not fall into the pit-falls lying 
all about the affaiis of this world for who that knows the way 
will luii into the ditch ^

26 The minds of the wise arc as much delighted in acting 
conformably to the piecepts of good books and the examples of 
the ’viituous, as chaste women are fond of keeping themselves 
within the bounds of the inner appartments

27. Of the innumeiable millions of atoms which compose 
this umveise, every one of them is viewed in the light of a woild 
in the mind of the abstracted philosophei

28 The man whose mind is puiified by a knowledge of the 
piecepts of libeiatioii, neither icpmes nor lejoiccs at the loss or 
gam of the objects of enjojmicnt28 The man whose mind is puiified by a knowledge of the 
piecepts of libeiatioii, neither icpmes nor lejoiccs at the loss or 
gam of the objects of enjojmicnt

29 Men of unfettcied minds look upon the appearance and 
disappearance of evcij^ atomic uoild, ns the fluctuating wave of 
the sea.

30 They neither giieve at unwishcd-foi occuiiances noi juiie 
for then wishcd-foi chances , and knou ing well all accidents to 
be the consequence'^ of then actions, they lemain as unconscious 
as trees (totally insensible of them)

31. These (holy men') appeal as common people, and live upon 
what they get, whethei they meet with aught of welcome oi un- 
welcome to them, thci; minds lemam unconqucicd

201 YOGA VA'SKHTITA

32- They having nndeisiood the whole of this vSaslia; and 
having lead and consideied it' well, as well pondeicd (on its 
2 niipoit), hold theii~siience as m the case of a cnibC or blessing 
(which IS nevei utteied b}’- saints)

33 This Sdstia IS easy to be imdeistood, and is oinamentcd 
nith figiiies (of speech) It is a jiocra full of llavouis and em- 
bellished with beautiful similes

84. One may be self taught m it who has a slight hnou ledge 
of woids and their senses , but he vho does not understand the 
puipoit well, should leain it fiom a pandit

35 After hearing, thinlang and undeisianding tins uoilc, 
one has no moie need of pi*aciismg austciitics, oi of meditation 
and rejieating the Manilas and othci iitcs and a man rc- 
guiies nothing else m this world foi the attainment of his libera- 
tion.

36 By deej) stud}'- of this ivoik and its leiicated penisal, a 
man attains to an uncommon scholaiship next to the purification 
of his soul

37. The ego and the non-ego, that is, the iicnci and the iieir, 
are both but chmieias of the imagination, and it is then annihila- 
tion alone, that leads insensibly to the vision of the soul.37. The ego and the non-ego, that is, the iicnci and the iieir, 
are both but chmieias of the imagination, and it is then annihila- 
tion alone, that leads insensibly to the vision of the soul.

38 The eiioi of the reality of ego and the perceptible woild, 
will vanish away as visions in a dream , for who, that knon s the 
falsehood of dreams, will fall into the error (of taking them for 
truth ?)

39 As an imaginary palace gives no joy oi gnef to any body, 
so it IS in the ease of the enoneous conception of the woild.

40 As no body is afiaid of a serpent that he sees in jianit- 
ing, so the sight of a living serpent neithei teiiifies nor pleases 
one who knows it

41 And as it is our knowledge of the jiamted serpent that 
removes our fear of it as a serpent, so oui conviction of the un- 
leality of the world, must disperse oui mistake of its existence,

42 Even the plucking of a flower oi tearing of its (tender) 
lea^fletj is attended with a little excitron (of the nails and fingers).

mumukshu khanda

205

but no (bodily) exeition whatever is requiied to gam the blessed 
state (of Yoga meditation).

43 Theie is an action of the membeis of body, accompanied 
with the act of pluclang or pulling off a flower, but m the 
othei case (of Yoga), you have only to fix youi mind, and make 
no exeition of youi body.

44. It IS piacticable with ease by any one sitting on his easy 
seat and fed with his usual food, and not addicted to gioss plea- 
suies, noi tiespassmg the lules of good conduct

45 You can deiive hapf>iness at each place and time, fiom 
youi own observations, as alsofiom youi association with the good 
Avheievei it is available This is an optional lule

46. These aie the means of gaming a knowledge of the 
highest ivisdom, confeiimg jieace m this woild, and saving us 
fiom the pain of being leboin m the womb.46. These aie the means of gaming a knowledge of the 
highest ivisdom, confeiimg jieace m this woild, and saving us 
fiom the pain of being leboin m the womb.

47. But such as aie afiaid of this course, and aie addicted 
to the vicious pleasures of the woild, aie to be leckoned as too 
base, and no bettei than faeces and woims of their mothei^s 
bowels

48 Attend now, Rdma, to what I am going to say with le- 
gaid' to the advancement of knowledge, and impiovement of 
the undei standing m another way

49. Hear now the lecent method m which this Sastia is 
leaint (by people), and its tiue sense mtequeted to them by 
means of its Exposition

50 That thing which selves to explain the unappaient mean- 
mg (of a passage), by its illustiation by some thing that is well 
known, and which may be useful to help the undeistanding (of 
the passage) is called a simile oi Example

51. It IS haid to undei stand the meaning given befoie with- 
out an instance, 3ust as it is useless to have a lampstick at home 
without setting a lamp on it at night

52 Whatevei similes and examples I have used to make you 
undei stand (tlie pieceptsj, aie all deiived fiom some cause or 
othei, but they lead to the knowledge of the uncaused Biahma

YOGA VA^STSHTHA

53 Wlicievei the comparisons and compaieci objects aie 
used as expiessive of the cause and effect, they apply to all cases 
except Biahma (who is without a cause).

54 The examples that aie given to explain the natuic of 
Biahma, aie to be taken in then paitial (and notgeneial) sense

65 Wliatevei examples aie given hcie as explanatory of dc- 
vinc nature, they aie to be undeistood as appci taming to a ^\Olld 
seen in a dieam

56 In such cases, no coipoieal instance can apply to the in- 
coipoieal Biahma, noi optional and ambiguous cxpiessions give a 
definite idea of Him.

57 Those who find fault with instances of an impeifect oi 
contiadictory natuie, cannot blame oui compaiison of the appeal - 
ance of the woild to a vision in dieam.57 Those who find fault with instances of an impeifect oi 
contiadictory natuie, cannot blame oui compaiison of the appeal - 
ance of the woild to a vision in dieam.

58 A juioi and posteiioi non-entity isconsideied as existent 
at the piesent moment (as is the visible uoild winch was not, noi 
ivill be afteiwaids) So the waking and di earning states aie 
known to be alike fiom oui boyhood

59 The simile of the existence of the woild uith the di earn- 
ing state IS exact m all instance^, as oui desiies, thoughts^ our 
lileasuies and displeasiiies, and all other acts aie alike in both 
states

60 Both this woik and otlicis which have been composed by 
othei authois on the means of salvation, have all piiisued the 
same plan in then explanation of the knowable

61 The lesemblance of the uoild to a dieam is found also in 
the Siutis 01 Ved.mta It is not to be explained in a void, but 
lequiies a continued^couise of lectin es ( on the .subject)

62 The compaiison of the voild to an miageij' in the dieam 
01 an imaginaiy Utopia of tlie mind, is also adduced in examjiles 
of this kind in piefeienee to othcis

63 Whenevei a causality is shown by a simile of something

which is no cause, theie the simile is ajiplied in some paiticulai 
and not all its geneial attiibiitcs t

MUMUKSIIU KHANDA.

207 .

6-1' The jJfvrlial similitude of the comparison Avith some pio- 
peity of the compaied object, as unhesitatingly acknowledged by 
the learned mall their illustiations

65 The light of the sense (of some thing) is compared with 
a lamp in its biightness only, in disiegaid of its stand or stick, 
the oil 01 the wick

66 The compaied object’is to be uudeistood m its capacity 
of admitting a jiaitial comjJaiison ( of the piojieities) , as m the 
instance of sense and light, the simile consists in the biightness 
of both67 When the knowledge of the knowable thing is deiived 
fiom some paiticulai jiiopeity of the compaiison, it is gi anted 
as a suitable simile, in undei standing the sense of some gieat 
sajung (jiassage in the sciiptuies)

68 We must not oveishadow oui intellect by bad logic, nor 
set at naught oui common sense by an unholy scepticism

69 We have by our leasonmg well weighed the veibosity 
of our opmionative adveisaiies, and nevei set aside the holy 
sayings of the '\^eda&, even when they aie at vaiiance with the 
oxiinions of oui families

70. O E-dma ' we have stored in oui minds the truths le- 
sultmg from the unanimous voice of all the Sastias, wheieby it 
will be evident that we have attained the object of our belief, 
apait fiom the fabiicated systems of hentical Sdstias.

CHAPTER XIX,

Ascertainment of True Evidence

T T is tlie similanty o£ some paifciciilai piopcily (of one tiling- 
to that of anotlier) winch constitutes a simile, wlicicas a 
comiilete siiiiilitucle between the compaiison and compaied object, 
destioys then difference (and makes them the one and the .same 
thing)

Piom the knowledge of paiables follows the cognition 
of the one soul tieated of in the Sdstias (’^’'eddnta), and the peace 
which attends on the meditation of the Holy Woid, is styled 
Extinction.

3. It IS therefoie useless to talk of eithei (the complete or 
jiaitial) agieement (of the piopcities) of the example and the 
exemjilar , it is enough to the puipose to compiehend the pm- 
poit of the holy woid m some waj’’ or other

4. Know your peace to be the chief good, and be diligent 
to secuie the same. AVhen you have got the food foi j’-oui 
eating, it is useless to talk about how 5 ou came by it

5. A cause is compaied nith (01 shewn for its explication 
by) something which is no cause at all so is a compaiison given 
to expiess its paitial agieement in some lespect with the com- 
paied object6 We must not be so absoibed m the pleasuics of the 
woi Id as to be devoid of all sensibility, like some blind fiogs 
Avhich aie geneiated and giow fat amidst the stones

7. Be attentive to these paiables and leain your best state 
fiomthem, all leasonable men should abide by the lessons of 
leligious works foi their mteinal peace.

8 As also by the precepts of the Sdstias, by the lules of 
humanity, piudence and spintual knowledge , and also by the 
continued practice of the acts of lehgious meiit

9 Let the ivise continue then luquiiies until they can 
obtain theiiimternal peace, and until they may aiiive at the

MUiMUKSHU KHANDA.

}

20D

fourth stage (tuiya) o£ felicity known by the name of indes- 
ti uctible ti anquil ity

10 Whoso has gained this fouith state of tianquil fehcitj'', 
he has leally passed beyond the limits of the ocean of the woild, 
whethei he is alive oi not, oi a house-holdei oi an ascetic

Hi Such a man lemains steady at his place like the calm 
sea iindistuibed by the Mandara mountain, whethei he has pei- 
foimed his duties accoiding to the Siutis and Smiitis or not

12 When theie is a paitial agieement of the comjiaiison 
with the natuie of the compaied object, it is to be coiisideied 
matmely foi the well undei standing of the point in question, 
and not to be made a mattei of coiitioveisj’-

13 From every foim of argument you aie to understand 
the intelligible (that is explained to you) , but the confounded 
disputant is blind both to right and false reasoning

14 The notion of self (soul or God) being clear (self-evident)

111 the spheie of our consciousness within the mind Any one 
wb .0 prattles meaninglessly about this truth, is said to be defec- 
tive m his understanding (t e oui consciousness of self-existence 
according to the maxim swii q}i% cogzfo,” is an undeniable

truth)truth)

15 It IS partly by pride a,nd paitly b}^ their doubts, that the 
Ignorant are led to altercate about then cognitions, and thereby 
they obscure the region of then inward understanding, as the 
clouds overshadow the cleai firmament.

16 Of all sorts of proofs it is the evidence of iieiception 
which foims then fountain-head, as the sea is the mainspiing of 
all its waters It is this alone which is used in this place as you 
shall learn below.

17 The substance of all sensations is said to be tlie super- 
sensible apprehension (oi inwaid knowledge of tilings) by the 
wise , and it is veiily their light concept which is meant bj^ their 
peiception

18 Thus tlie notion, knowledge and ceitainty (of things) as 
derived fiom words, are styled the triplicate peiception as we 
have of the living sonj.

Von I

27

210 YOGA V/SISTITHA

19 Till'! soul IS consciousness find egoism^ and is of tlie 
masculine teiininatioii; and tlic cognition of tlie object wbcicby 
it IS inamfcsted to us, is_ called a categoiy. (A^iz , samvul, savi- 
viUi 2 a\^ paddHJia).

30. It becomes manifest in tlie form of tbe passing world 
by tbe multifaiious acts and shifts of its volition and ojition, as 
the water exhibits itself in the shape of its waves and bubbles

21. It was uncausal before, and then developed itself as 
the cause of all in its act of ci eating at the beginning of crea- 
tion, and became peieeptiblc bj’- itself.

33. The eausalitj’’ was a product of the disciimination of 
the living soul, that was in a state of inexistence (befoic) , un- 
til it became manifest as existent in thefoimof the mateiial 
woild.

23 Reason says, that the self-same being destioys the body 
which was pioduced of itself, and manifests itself in its tian- 
cendeiital magnitude (of intelligence).

34. When the reasoning man comes to know the soul!, he 
finds by his leason the presence of the indesciibable being, 
befoie him,34. When the reasoning man comes to know the soul!, he 
finds by his leason the presence of the indesciibable being, 
befoie him,

35 The mind being free fiom desire, the organs of sense 
aie lelieved fiom their action, the soul becomes devoid of the 
lesults of its past actions as of those it has left undone.

36 The mind being set at ease and fieed fiom its desiics, 
the organs of action aie lestiamed fiom then acts, as an engine 
when stopped m its motion.

37 It IS sensuousness which is leclconcd as the cause that puts 
the machineiy of the mind to wmik, just as the lopc tied to the 
log and fastened about the neck of a lam, piopels him to fighting

38. The sight of external objects and the pui poses of the 
internal mind, set all men at plaj’-, as the mwaid foice of the air 
puts the Avinds to motion

39 All spiiitual knowledge is holy wheicvci it is found 
111 any one it adds a lustie to the body and mind like that of 
the expanded legioii of the sliy ^

MUMUKSHU KHANDA

211

30. He sees tlie appeaiances of all visible objects, and 
maiiitams his own position among them He views the spiiit 
in the same light m which it presents itself in any place

81 Wheiever the univeisal soul appeals itself in any light, 
it lemains theie and then m the same foim in which it exhibits 
itself unto us.

32 The univeisal soul being alike in all, the looker and the 
object seen aie both the same being The lookei and the looked 
being one, then appeal ance as otheiwise is all unieal 
33. Hence the woild is without a cause (because it is an 
unieality and not caused by any one). All existence is evidently 
Biahma himself, the peiceptible cause of all Hence perception 
(pudyacca) is the basis of evidence, and iiifeienee and otheis os 
analogy and veibal testimony aie but paits of it {cmunid, upamd, 
sdbdali)34, ISTow let the worshippers of fate who apply the teim 
destiny to all then exeitions, cast of^ their false faith ; and let 
the biave exeit their manliness to attain then highest state.

35 Continue O Kdma, to considei the tiue and lucid doct- 
inies of the successive teacheis (of mankind), until you can aiiive 
to a clear conception of the infinitely Surpreme being in your own 
mind.

V.

CHAPTER XX 
On Good Conduct.

|T IS tlie society o£ the lesjiectable and leasoiiiDg* with them, 
“ that leads most efficiently to the impioveinent of the undei- 
standing, and next to the making of a gieat man, with all the 
chaiacteiistics of gieatness

3. Whatevei man excels m any quahty heie, he becomes 
distinguished by it , theiefore leain it fiom him, and improve 
your undei standing by the same.

3 Tiue greatness consists in quietness and other virtues, 
without a knowledge of which it is impossible, O Rdma ^ to be 
successful in anything

4 Learning pioduces quiet and othei qualities, and inci eases 
the vntues of good people j all which aie inaised by then good 
effects on the mind, as the lain is hailed for its gi owing the new 
sjiiouts of plants.

5 The qualities of qmetude and other vntues serve to m- 
ciease the best knowledge (of men) , as saciifice with iice serves 
to pioduce felicitous lains for the haivest

6 As learning pioduces the qualities of qmet and the lilce, 
so do these qualities give use to leaiming, thus they serve to 
glow each other, as the lake and lotuses contiibute to then 
mutual benefit (excellence)

7 Learning is pioduced by right conduct as good conduct 
results fiom learning, thus wisdom and moiality aie natmal 
heljis to one anothei

8 The mfelhgent man who is possessed of quietude, meek- 
ness and good conduct, should piactise wisdom, and follow the 
ways of good people

9 Unless one should bung to piactice his vusdom and good 
conduct in an equal degiee, he will nevei be successful in eithei 
of them

MUMUKSHU KPIANDA

2139 Unless one should bung to piactice his vusdom and good 
conduct in an equal degiee, he will nevei be successful in eithei 
of them

MUMUKSHU KPIANDA

213

10 Both of these should be conjoined tog'ethei like the song 
united Avith peicussioiij as it is done by the husbandman and his 
Tvile in sowing the seeds and driving away the (seed-piekiiig) buds 
fiom then fields of giaim

11 It IS by piactice of wisdom and light conduct (as causes 
of one anothei), that good joeople aie enabled to acquiie both 
of them in an equal degree

la Ihavealieady expounded to you, O Rdma, the lule of 
good conduct, and will now explain to you fully the way of gam- 
ing learning

13 Learning’ conduces to lenown, long life and to the ac- 
quisition of the object of youi exeition, theiefoie should the 
intelligent leain the good sciences fiom those who have studied 
and masteied them

14}. By healing (these lectuies) with a clear understanding, 
you will surely attain the state of peifection, as dirty watei is 
puiified by infusion ‘of the Kata, fiuits.

*15. The sage who has known the knowable, has his mind 
diawii insensibly to the blissful state ,* and that highest state of 
unbounded felicity being once known and felt (m the mind), it is 
haid to loose its impression at any time.

YOGA VAGIGIITIIA.

BOOK III.

UTPAl IPKHANDA.

T^^VOT.UTIOJSr OJb^ THE WORT.H

CHAPTER I.

CAUSES OF BONDAGE TO IT

SECTION I 
Exoudium (Bhu'mika' )

I T IS both by means of woids and lights ( Vdghhdbhs ^ e the 
“ woids of the sciipture and the lights of natuie and leason, 
that the kuowei of the Gieat God (Brahmavid), peiceives the 
spnit of Biahma appealing within himself as in a dieam. And he 
also knows him as such, who nndei stands him accoiding to the 
liuijioit of the holy text ^^What this is, that is the self ” e 
He IS all in all)3 This passage shows in shoit, the visible woild to reside in 
the vacuous bosom of Biahma at its cieation it is now to be 
known in length, what this creation is, whence it takes its use, 
and wheiein it becomes extinct at last

3 Hear me, O intelligent B^ma * now expound to you all 
things aceoidmg to my best knowledge of them, and agieeably to 
their natm-e and substance in the older of cieation

4 One conscious of himself as a spiiitual and intelligent 
being, views the jiassmg woild as a Sommm (swapnam) dieam 
and this dieaming simile of the passing woild, applies equallj^ to 
0111 knowledge of ego and ho oi non-ego (which is as false as 
0111 cognitions in a di^am)

21G

YOGA VASISIITITA

' 5 Ne^Uo iliG book clefecnbing’ ilie concluot, of llio -^cokois’ 
of hbeialiou {inumidsJiu-vt/avalidHt)^ ilien follows ibe book of 
evoluUon wlucli I am now going to propound to you

SECTION ir 
WoKimLY Bondage

6 Bondage cousisls in our belief of tlic leality of ibe \isibb' 
woikl (and oui iclation with its plicnomeiia Gloss), So oui lelease 
depends on tlie negation of pbenomenals Now licai me tell 
you how to get iid of the visible (fetteis of oui minds).

7 Whoever is boin in this woildj continues to ])io- 
giess, till at last he obtains his final libciatioiij (his iiKimmn and 
optimum perfection); oi uses towaids heaven oi falls into hell (iin- 
dei the subjection of his iighteoiisand uimghtcous actions (Gloss)

8. I shall theiefoie expound foi youi undcislanding every 
thing 1 elating to the pioduction and continuance of things^ and 
then pi 101 states as they weie.

9 Heal meUdma^ now give you an abstract of this book 
in biiefj and I will heie-aftei dilate upon it, as you may wish to 
know moie of this (theory of pioduction)

SECTION III.

Phases of the Spihit9 Heal meUdma^ now give you an abstract of this book 
in biiefj and I will heie-aftei dilate upon it, as you may wish to 
know moie of this (theory of pioduction)

SECTION III.

Phases of the Spihit

10 Whatevei appears either as moving oi uiimoviiig in this 
world, know them all as appeiances in a dieain m a state of 
sound sleep {susuph ) , which become extinct at the end of a 
‘’Kaljjci-affe (The events of a Katjya or day of Biahmd. aie as 
his day dieam)

11. Then there remains a nameless and undeveloped some- 
thing, in a state of deep, dark and dank ab 3 ’’ss, without any light 
01 thick-spread (nebulae) over it (The Teo and Beo of Moses, the 
'';;i«. = teom of Mann and Veda, and the Moistuie of Thales)

This gieat self-existence is aftei wards attributed wrth 
s of Reality {Rtia), self {Alma), Supreme {Paiam), 
Bia/tma) Tiuth [Safj/nm) and ^o foith by the wise.

UTPATTI KIIANDA

211

as expressions foi tlie Gieat Spirit foi popular use.

(Vide Grloss for definitions of these teims).

13 This self-same spiiit next shows itself in another formj 
which IS called the living soul (Jwdfmd), and comes afterwaids 
to he undeistood in the limited sense of life (Jiva^ Jiv^ 
Zeu 01 Zeus^ Ji and Jcln_, Zoa Piotozoa &c). (But it is the 
undivided and universal soul of which the divided^ individual and 
paifcicular souls aie but paits and particles Gloss).

144 This ineit living piinciple (Jiva-Life or the Piotozoa), 
becomes accoiding to its hteial signification the moving spiiit 
(dlwldtma), which afteiwaids with its powei of thinking (manana) 
becomes the Mind, and lastly the embodied soul (Bhutatmd.). 
(So says the tSiuti, JEtasmdt J'dyaie pdnah^ manah, sa7vendn- 
ydmcJta, K/iam, Vdyu^dp Prithivi {z, e. Piom Him the 
Spirit, IS deiived the life, mind and the oigans of sense or 
body, whence he is styled the Living, Thinking and All acting 
Deity).1.5 Thus the mind is produced and changed fioin the quies- 
cent nature of the Gieat Supieme Spiiit to a state of lestlessness 
(asthiidkdia) like that of a suige, heaving itself m the (Pacific) 
Ocean (^ e the lestful spiiit of God-Brahma is tiansfoimed to 
the lestless state of the Mind, peisonified as Biahmd or Heianya- 
gaibha, called the Atmabhu-the son of the spiiit of God or God 
the Son, Demmige)

16 The mind soon evolves itself as a self-volitive jiower which 
exercises its desiies at all times, whereby this extensive magic 
scene of the woild is displayed to our view This scene 
IS figuied as Vzidjmuih, or manifestation of the desires of 
the will of Divine mind, and repiesented as the offspring of 
Brahma in the Indian Theogony. {Vzde Manu on Genesis, chap I).

17. As the woid golden biacelet signifies no other thing than a 
biaeelet made of gold, so the meaning of the word’ world is not 
diffeient fiom its source the Divine will. (The difference 
IS foimal and not mateiial, and consists m form and not in the 
substance, the divine will being the substiatum of the formal 
woild).

VoL, I.

28

218

YO({V ^ AM Sin HA

18. Af'ani as the woid "iild hcaH (he idf.i of (Ik iih'k oi

Avhicli the Inacolel made, so tlm noid Jji.dun'i cfone}- 
the mcamii" of immciisily wlneli eontam^? (lie \vf)ild lu it , 
but the woid M'oild contains no idea ol Ib.ilima noi bi.ueb'l 
that of ffold The substance contains (bo foim as a stone dr)e~, the 
statue, but the foim does not contain the « ubstance, as the statue 
may be of caitli oi metal or of A\ood).

19. The unicality ol thcuoild n];peais ns a reahl}, juntas 
the heat of the suii picsenls thcnnieal mitnq:c in the inoviUL? 
sands of the dcseit as ical \\a\es of tlie sea (So the idMiitasm 
of the mind-13iahmd, plC:^cnls tlic pli.intasnia^oica of the v. oild 
(Yiswauqia) as a sobar icaliU).

20. It is this phantasy (of the le.ditj'of the unrcil u'oild),20. It is this phantasy (of the le.ditj'of the unrcil u'oild),

which the leal ned in all things, designate as ignoianre ainh/a, 
natuie— bondage bandha, illusion c\io\-;>’ob(r,

and dailviicss lamas (To denote oin mental delusion and decep- 
tion of senses. Gloss).

SECTION lY 
Nat MU OI IJoMiir.i

21. Nov. hear me lelate to -sou, 0 moon-faced lldma Mihnut 
the natuie of tins bondage, u lit icby ^ou u ill be .ilde to hnou 
the mode and mannei of our hbeiation fiom it (as the diag- 
nosis of a disease being known, it is not ditlicult to heal it)

22 The miimalo iclation of the spactator with the spectacle 
is called his bondage to tlio same, because the lookei’s muid is 
fast bound to the ob_]ect of his siglit. It is the absent e ot the 
visible objects, theiefoie, fiom the miiioi of the mind, wlndi is 
the only means of Ins libciation (So aho is the icmo\al of the 
objects of the othci senses fioin the mind)

23 The knowdedge of the woild, ego and (v (as separate ex- 
istences) IS said to be anciioncous aaew' of the soul (winch is one 
and the same in all) and thcie can be no libeiation of one, ,as 
long as be labonis nndci tins blunder of iJu(la~^ 7 idua oi know*- 
ledge of indnidiialiiies (Tins is called saxilal^ia-jnana oi cog-

UTPATTI KHA.NDA

219

mtion of biplicity, wliieli cannot lead to Kazvalj/a mulk oi Iht) 
felicity deiived fiom a knowledge of univeisal unity).

34' To say that the soul is neither this nor that {neclam- 
neclm}) is but false logomachy, which cannot come to an end. 
The discrimination of alternatives serves only to inciease the 
aidoui for the visibles (? e the aidoui of induction spieads the 
infection of mateiialism. The idle neh-neii and tanna-fanna of 
Vedanta Philosophy is meieamphiology and pievaiication of both, 
as idem ei non idem)35. It IS not to be obtained by sophists by the chopping of 
logic 01 by pilgi image oi cciemonial acts, any moie than by a 
belief in the leality of the phenomenal woild (All these aie 
obseivances of the exoteiic faith and blind pei sanation, but do 
not ap 2 iei tain to the science of esoteiic s^ni itualisni Gloss)

36. It IS hard to avoid the sight of the jihenomcnal woild, 
and to lejness one^s aidoui foi the same But it is ceitain that, 
the visibles can not lead us to the Reality, nor the Real mis- 
lead us to unreality («. e the sjniitual and jihysical knowledge 
aie mutually, repugnant to each othei).

37 W b ei ever the invisible, inconceivable and intelligent sjni it 
IS existent, there the beholder views the visible beauty of God 
shilling even in the midst of atoms («. e. every jiarticle of mattoi 
manifests the beauty of its makei ; unless theie be a dull 
material object to inteicept the sight of the intelligent soul).

38 The phenomenal woild has its use from Him, yet those 
ignoiant peo^ile thatdepait fiom Him to the adoration of others, 
lesemble fools, that forsake iice to feed upon gruel, [i, e they 
take the shadow foi the substance).

39 Although this visible woild is apparent to sight, yet O 
Rdma • it is but a shadow of that Being, who lesides alike in 
the smallest atom as in the muior of the •mind, that 
leceives the image of the largest as well as minutest 
things (Comj)are. As full andpeifect in a haii as heart Pope )

30 The sjurit is leflectcd in eveiy thing like a figuie in the 
mil 101 , and it shines equally in locks and seas, m the land and

220

YOGA YA'^SISHTIIA

watei, as li does in the mirioi of the mind (compaie^ Wherever 
I cast my eyes, thy beauty shines)

31 The visible woild is the scene of incessant woes, births, 
decay and death, and the states of waking, dieammg and sound 
sleep, aie presenting by turns the gross, subtile and evanescent 
foims of things for oui delusion.

82. Here I sit in my meditative mood having82. Here I sit in my meditative mood having

wiped off the impressions of the visibles fiom my mind, but my 
meditation is distuibed by the leeuncnce of my remembrance of 
the visibles and tins is the cause of the endless ti'ansmigrations 
of the soul. {i e. the reminiscence of the past is the cause of 
our everlasting bondage in life).

33 It IS haid to have a fixed {ntuid/ia) and unalterable 
{fwvzlalpa) meditation {sam&dhi), when the sight of the visible 
woild IS piesent before our bodily and mental vision. Even the 
fourth stage of insensible samdclhi called the tuo lya, in the state 
of sound sleep {mtsu^U), is soon succeeded by one’s self-conscious- 
ness and external intelhgence.

34. On using from this state of deep meditation, one finds 
himself as lOused fiom his sound sleep, in older to view the 
woild full of all its woes and impel fee tions opening wide before 
him. (Compaie, “ I wake to a sea of troubles, how happy they 
who wake no more. Young).

35. What then, O Rdma * is the good of this transient bliss 
which one attains by his tempoiary abstraction (Dhyana), when 
he has to fall again to his sense of the sufferings to which the 
world IS subject as a vale of teais (Compaie. " When the 
cock crew I wept &c” Young's Night Thoughts).

36 But if one can attain to a state of uiialteiablo abstiae- 
tioii of his thoughts fiom all woildly objects, as he has m his 
state of sound sleep {sjmiph), he is then said to have reached the 
highest pitch of his holiness on eaith (Poi it is the entire oh- 
livion of the world that is necessaiy foi our spnitual peifcc- 
tion, as it IS said, "‘foiget the piesent foi the futme”).

37. No body has evei earned aught of leality in the scene of 
unieal vanities , foi whenevei Ins thoughts come in contact

UTPATTI KHANDA

221

willi 'any outwaid thing’, he finds it insepaiable fiom the ble*- 
mishes of existence. (“Vanity of vanities, the woild is vanity 
Ecclesia-stes.^"’)UTPATTI KHANDA

221

willi 'any outwaid thing’, he finds it insepaiable fiom the ble*- 
mishes of existence. (“Vanity of vanities, the woild is vanity 
Ecclesia-stes.^"’)

38 Should any body (m the piactiee of the fixedness of his 
attention), fix his sight foi a while on a stone, by foicibly with- 
drawing it fiom visible objects, he is suie to be earned away 
afterwaids by the visibles pressing upon his sight.

89. It 18 well known to all that an unflinching meditation, 
having even the firmness of a rock, can have no duiablity, in the 
practice of the Yogi owing to his woi Idly propensities.

40. Even the mruclha or steadfast meditation which has 
attained the fixedness of a lock, cannot advance one step 
towards the attainment of that tranquillity which has no bounds 
to it («. e. the everlasting bliss of liberation oi mohha).

41. Thus the sight of phenomena being altogether irrepressi- 
ble, it IS a foolish sujiposition of its being suppressed by practices 
of Jajj-tap or prayers and austerities and the like acts of devotion.

43, The idea of the phenomena fclns^aclhj , is as mkoiQiii in 
the mind of the spectator of the visible world, as the seeds of the 
lotus flower are contained m the inner cells of the pericarp.

43. The ideal of the phenomenal world {ch isyadhi), lies as hid- 
den in the minds of the spectators of the outer woild, as are the 
in-boin flavour and moisture of fruits, the oil of sesamum seeds, 
and the innate sweet scent of flowers.

44 As the fragrance of camphor and other odoriferous sub- 
stances inheres in then nature, so the reflexion of the visible woild 
resides in the bosom of the intellect.

45 As your dreams and desiies use and subside of themselves 
under the province of your intellect, so the notions of things al- 
ways recur to your mind fiom the original ideas of. them impres- 
sed in the seat of the visibles (the mind)46 The mental apjiaiition of the visible ivoild, deludes its 
beholder m the same mannei, as the visual appearance of a spec- 
tre 01 hobgoblin, misleads a child (to its desliuction).

222

YOGA VAIsISHTHA,

" 47 The notion of the visible world giadiially exiiands itself^, 
as the geim of the seed shoots forth in time, and spieads itself 
afterwards in the foim of a plant

48. As the minute geims and animalcules, which are contain- 
ed within the bosoms of fruits and embryos of animals, expand 
themselves to wondei fully beautiousfoi ms afterwaids, so the seed 
of this woild (oiigmally) lying hid in the Divine hfind, unfolds 
itself in wondei ful foims of the visible j>henomena in natuie.

CHAPTER II

Descbiption of the Fibst Cause 
SECTION I

Nareative oe the aie-boen aed aerieoem Beahmaj?.

y ASISHTHA lesumed • Hear me R^ma, now relate to yon 
tlie narrative of one Ak^saja or an -born Bid-bmanj wbicli 
will be a 3ewel to your ears, and enable you the bettei to under- 
stand the diift of the book of Genesis

2. There lived a Brahman Ak^saja by name, who sat always 
reclined in his meditation, and was ever inclined to the doing of 
good to all creatuies.

3. Finding him long-lived, Heath thought within himself 
saying — It is I alone that am imperishable, and devour all things 
one by one.

4. How lb it that I cannot cram myself with this air-boin, 
wherein I find my teeth as blunt in him, as the edge of a 
swoid IS put to the bluff by the solid rock,

5 So saying, he proceeded to the abode of the Bi^hman, in- 
tent upon making an end of him , for who is of so dull a natuie 
as IS not aleit in his piactice.

6. But as he was about to enter the house, he was opposed by a 
gorgeous flame of file, like the conflagration of final destruction 
on the last day of the dissolution of the world.

7. He pierced the ambient flame and entered the dwelling, 
where seeing the Brahman before him, he stretched his hand to lay 
hold on him with all avidity

>7. He pierced the ambient flame and entered the dwelling, 
where seeing the Brahman before him, he stretched his hand to lay 
hold on him with all avidity

>

8 He was unable even with his hundred hands (i e with 
all his might) to grasp the Bid-hman, as it is impossible foi the 
strongest to withstand the resolute man m his wonted course 
9 He then had recourse to Yama his loid to clear his doubt, 
and to leain why he •could not devour the an -born (being)

224 YOGA VASL^IITHA.

<

10 Yama icplied saying Death, trust not too far thy owii 
might, t]iat makes thee mighty to destioy the living. It is the 
act of the dying person that is the chief cause of his death and 
naught othcnviso

11. Therefore do tliou he diligent to find out the acts of the 
peison thou intendest to kill , because it is by their assistance only 
that thou canst seize thy piey.

12 Heicupon Death betook himself gladly to wandci about 
ill all places undei the horizon, lie lOved ovci the habitable 
parts, as also tlnoughout the lacual and fiuvial disliicts.

13. He traversed the foiestsand jungles, maishy and locky 
giounds and maiitiine coasts, and passed to foieign lands and is- 
lands, and pried thiough their wildernesses, cities and towns.

14. He seal died through kindoms and countiies, villages and 
deseits ; and suiveyed the whole eaith to find out some act of the 
BiAliman in any pait of it.

15 At last Death with all Ins search and effoib, came to find 
the acts of theaii-bom BiAlimau, to he as as the offspimg of 
a barien woman ; and his mind as transfixed (m meditation) as 
if it were a lock

16. He then leturned fiom his leconnoitenng to his all-know- 
ing mastei Yama, and besought his advice, as seivants do in 
matteis of doubt and difficulty (how to proceed).

17 Death addiessed him saying • "Tell me my loid, whcie 
the acts of the An -bom BiAhman arc to be found to which 
Yama afiei a long head-woik, leplied as follow.s.

SECTION II.

State of the Soul.17 Death addiessed him saying • "Tell me my loid, whcie 
the acts of the An -bom BiAhman arc to be found to which 
Yama afiei a long head-woik, leplied as follow.s.

SECTION II.

State of the Soul.

18 Kiiqw, O Death ^ that this an -born seer has no acts what- 
evei , foi as he is born of empty an so his doings aie all null and 
void. (« e. the bodiless spmt oi mind is devoid of acts leguiiing 
physical means and aj)plianees).

19 Whoso is born of an, is as puie as airitself, and lias no 
combination of cause oi acts like all embodied (beings).

UTPATTI KHANDA

225

20 He lias noielation witli acts of liis prior exisieiice. He is 
)iil as the child of an unpiolific woman, and as one unborn, 
uiicieated and unbegotten.

21 Want of causes has made him a puie vacuous being, and 
the privation of prior acts has made him as ml as an etheiial arboi

22 His mind is not ruffled as those of otheis, by reason of 
the privation of his foimer acts, nor is there any such act of his 
picsent state, whereby ho may become a morsel to death

23 Such IS the soul seated in the sheath of vacuity, tind 
remaining foi evci as the simple form of its own causality 
ijid'i anadelia) , and not guided Iiy an}'- extraneous causation 
whatever

24<. It has no prior deed, noi does it do any thing at present, 
{i e. neither led by predestination, noi actuated by piesent efforts) ; 
but continues as somethmg m the shape of aeiifoim intelligence.

25. Oui infer encc of the actions of breathing and motion 
by the agency of the soul, is a mere supposition, because the 
soul IS devoid of every thought of or tendency to action.

26 It sits meditating on itself as inseparable from the 
Supreme Intelligence, just as the images (in painting and sta- 
tuaiy), aie msepaiable from the mind of the pamter and 
sculptor .

27. The seff-boin Brdhman is as intimately connected with 
the objects of his thought, as fluidity is associated with water 
and vacuity with the fiimament27. The seff-boin Brdhman is as intimately connected with 
the objects of his thought, as fluidity is associated with water 
and vacuity with the fiimament

28. His soul is as immanent in the supreme, as motion is in- 
heient in the winds. It has neither the accumulated acts of 
past lives, nor those of its piesent state. (^. e. It is neither a 
passive nor active agent of piior or present acts , but is an in- 
different witness of the acts of the body and mind)

29. It is produced without the co-operation of accompanying 
causes, and being free from inioi motives, it is not subjected to 
the vicissitudes concommittant with human life.

30 It IS found to be no othei than its own cause; and 
having no other cause for itself, it is said to be self-produced,

VoL I. 29

226

YOGA VA'SISHTnA

31 Say, how cai) yon lay hold on that being ihai, has done 
no act before, nor is in the act of doing any thing at picseiit? 
It IS then only subjected to thee when it thinks itself mortal 
(But he that knows his soul to be immortal is not subject to 
death)

32 Whoso believes his soul to be of this earth, and thinks 
himself to be an earthly being, he may be easily oveidaken by 
thee, (whose power extends ovci cartli-boin moitals only).

33 This Br^ihman is a foimless being, by reason of his dis- 
owning the mateiial body Hence it is as hard for thee to 
enthial him, as to entwine the air with a rope.

34. Death rejoined saying. Tell me my loid I how may the 
unborn Aja or the self-bom swayamhM) be pioduccd out of 
vacuum, and how can an caithly or other elemental body be 
and not be (at the same time)

35. Yama replied; This Brd,hman is neither born nor is ml 
at any time, but lemains for ever the same, as the light of intelli- 
gence of which theie is no decay.

36. There remains nothing at the event of the great Dooms- 
day, except the tianqml, impeiishable and infinite Brdhman 
himself in his spiritual foini.36. There remains nothing at the event of the great Dooms- 
day, except the tianqml, impeiishable and infinite Brdhman 
himself in his spiritual foini.

37. This is the natuie of the eveilasting vacuum, too subtile 
in its essence, and devoid of all attiibutes; but viewing pi csent 
befoie its mind, the stupendous cosmos in the foim of a huge 
mountain m the beginning ot recieation. (The mind is the nou 
menon-Biahma, and the phenomena of the woild is the gigantic 
macrocosm known as F'lidjmurh.

38 Being of the natuie of intelligence it is imperishable , 
but those who view the spirit m the form of any phenomenal 
body, aie liable to perish with it like all embodied beings

39 Thus this Bidhman lemained in the womb of vacuity in 
the beginning, in his state of unalterable, vacuous intelligence,

40 It IS puiely of the nature of the mane under standing, and 
of the form of a vast expanse of omniscience , having neither

UTPATTI KHANDA

227

body 1101 organism^ no acts noi agency, noi desiie of any kind 
in itself

41. That winch is simply of the foim"of vacuum and puie 
light, IS nevei beset by the snaie of piistine desires, as a cor- 
poiial being.

42. It has nothing to know oi see without itself (t e. beyond 
its self-consciousness) The only conception that we have of it, is 
what lesembles an extended intelligence, {t e an all-diffusive 
omniscience).

43 Under these encumstances, how is it susceptible of any 
eaithly or other external foim ? Theiefore O Death 1 desist fiom 
thy attempt to lay hold on the same.

44. Hearing these woids of Yama, Death thought upon the 
impracticability of laying hold on empty vacuity by any body, 
and sorrowfully letuiiied to his ownjabode.

45. R4ma said, you said sn, that Biahmd, is your great 
grand-sire , I think it is he that you mean to say as the unborn, 
aelf-boin, universal soul and intelligence.45. R4ma said, you said sn, that Biahmd, is your great 
grand-sire , I think it is he that you mean to say as the unborn, 
aelf-boin, universal soul and intelligence.

46. So IS this Biahmd., Bdrna* as I have spoken to you, 
and it was with regard to the same, that the aforesaid dis- 
cussion was held of yore between Death and Yama (Pluto).

47. Again when Death had made an end of all living beings 
at the interval of a mamomitm a, he thought himself strong 
enough to make an attempt to bear down upon the lotus-boin 
Brahm^ also.

48. It was then that he was admonished by Yama, saying

It IS your habit that makes you go on your wonted course of 
killing.

49. But the super-etherial form of Biahma too is beyond 
your reach ' it being simply of the natuie of the* mind having 
connection with its thoughts only, and no concern with the actual 
forms of things

50 It is of the f 01 m of the wondei fully vacuous intellect, 
having the faculty of cognition in it Thus the intellect being

228 YOGA VA'SISHTHA

fcut vaciiiunj Las neither any cause for noi au}'" effccl piotlucccl 
by it.

51. As the aeriform volitive jnmciple in men^ manifests 
itself without being’ connected with mateiial forms^ so is the 
self-born (Biahmd) manifest to all in Ins own immateiial nature

62 Like stiings of peail appearing to view m the clcai fii- 
mament, and forms of cities seen in a dieam, the self-boin 
(Biahmtl) is manifest of himself without i elation to ei.teinal 
objects.

53. As there is no beholdei noi any thing beholden of the 
solitary Supiemc spiiit which is the intellect itself , so is the 
mind manifest of itself (without its looking at oi being looked 
upon by any body) .

54 It IS the vohtive mind which is called Brahmd and 
volition being a spiiitual faculty, has no connection with any 
mateiial substance.

55 As the mind of the painter is fraught with images of 
vaiious things, so is the mind of Brahmd, full of figiiies of .all 
cieated beings55 As the mind of the painter is fraught with images of 
vaiious things, so is the mind of Brahmd, full of figiiies of .all 
cieated beings

56 The self-born Brahmd is manifest in his own mind 
as Brahma is manifested in the vacuous sphcic of his intellect 
He IS ivithout beginning, middle and end, and .appeals to have 
a figiue like that of a male being, uhilc in icalily he has no 
bodj^, as the offspiing of a barren woman

CHAPTER III.

Causes of Bondage in the Body.

■ JAMA said It is even so as you have said, that the mind is

■ ^ a puie essence, and has no connection with the eaith and 
other mateiial substances, and that it is veiily Biahm^ itself

2. Now tell me, O Bi^hman * Why the lemembiance of his 
foimer states (in the past and previous Kalpas) , is not (to be 
leckoned as) the cause of his biith, as it is in the case of mine 
and youis and of all other bemgs.

3, Vasishtha replied Whoevei had a formei body, accom- 
panied with the acts of his piior existence, retains of eouise its 
lemimscence, which is the cause of his being (reborn on eaith)

4 But when Brahmd, is known to have no piior acts, how is 
it possible for him to have his reminiscence of any thing ^

5. Theiefore he exists without any other cause except the 
causation of his own mind It is by his own causality that the 
Hivme spiiit is self-boin, and is himself his own sjmit.

6 He IS eveilasting, and his body is born of itself fiom 
the self-existent Biahma This unboin oi self-boin Biahm^has 
no mateiial body whatever, except his subtile dhvdhilca oi Unga 
de/m.

7 R4ma said • The eveilasting body is one thing (called the 
Sulshna sariia or subtile or imniateiial body), and the mortal 
body IS another (called the silmladeha oi the gioss and mateiial 
flame) Now tell me sir, whethei all created beings have a sub- 
tile body also as that of Brahmd. ^8. Vasishta peplied —All cieated bemgs that arepiodueed of 
a cause, have two bodies (the swicshma and the siMla oi the sub- 
tile and the gioss) But the unboin being which is without a 
cause, has one body onl}'- (which is called the dtwdhila oi the 
eveilasting spiiitual body).

230

YOGA V/SISHTHA^

t 9. The incieate Biahind is the cause of all cieated beiiig'Sj but 
the uucieated spirit having no cause for itself, has one body 
for it.

10 The piime lord of creatures has no material body , but 
manifests himself in the vacuous foim of his spiiitual body.

11 His body is composed of the mind alone, and has no 
connection with the eaith or any other material substance He 
is the fiist loid of cieatures, that stietched the creation fiom his 
vacuous body (or spiiitual essence) .

12 All these are but forms of the images oi ideas in his 
vacuous mind, and having no other patterns or oiiginals in 
then natuie And that every thing is of the same nature 
with its cause, is a tiuth well known to all (fiom the 
identity of the effect and its material cause)

13 He IS an inexistent being and of the manner of perfect 
intelligence He is purely of the foim of the mmd, and has an 
intellectual and no mateiial entity.

14. He IS piime (cause) of all material jinxi^ctions in the 1 
physical world, and is born of himself with his prime mobile^ 
force in the form of the mind. ^

15 It was by the first impulse given by the prime moving \ 
powei, that this expanse of cieation came to be spread in the 
same latio, as the currents of air and water (or the velocity of 
winds and tides), are in proportion to the impetus given 
to them

16 This creation shining so bright to oui sight, has caught

its light from the luminous mind of the formless Biahmd,, and 
appeals as leal to oui conceptions (as they aie ideal in the Divine 'j 
mind). \its light from the luminous mind of the formless Biahmd,, and 
appeals as leal to oui conceptions (as they aie ideal in the Divine 'j 
mind). \

17 Our vision in a dieam is the best illustiation of this (un- 
leahty of woiMly things) • as that of the enjoyment of connu- 
bial bliss in di earning It is then that an unreal object of desiie, 
presents itslf as an actual gain to oui fond and false imaerina- 
tion

18 The vacuous, immateiial and formless spirit, is now re-

UTPATTl KHANt)A.

23i

presented as the self-born and eorpoieal loid of creatuies in the 
form of the first male. (Protogonns oi the only begotton son of 
God).

19 He remains nndiscerned in his state of pure intelligence > 
but becomes manifest to all by the evolution of his volition He 
is mdisceiiiible in his absolute state (of inaction); but becomes 
conspicu<)us to us in the display of hig nature (m cieation).

20 Biahmd. is the divine power of volition (or the will of 
God). He IS personified as the fiist male agent of cieation, 
but devoid of a corporeal body. He is only of the spiiitual form 
of the mind, and the sole cause of the existence of the tuple 
woild.

21 It 18 hts volition that makes the self-born (BrahmA) to 
exert his energies, as human desnes im jiel all mankind to action ; 
and the vacuous mind manifests itself as a mountain of desiies.

22 It then forgets its everlasting and incorporeal nature, 
and, assumes to itself the solid material bodv, and shows itself 
in the shape of a delusive apparition (m his cieation).

23 But Brahma, who is of an unsullied undeistanding, is 
not involved in oblivion of himself, by the transfoimation of his 
unknowable natui’e to the known state of volition (or change of 
the imgitna to saguna).

J94<. Being unboin of material substance, he sees no appaiition 
like otheis, who are exposed by then ignoiance to the misleading 
euois of falsehood, appearing in the shape of a mnage befoie 
themJ94<. Being unboin of material substance, he sees no appaiition 
like otheis, who are exposed by then ignoiance to the misleading 
euois of falsehood, appearing in the shape of a mnage befoie 
them

25 As Brahmd. is merely of the form of the mind, and not

composed of any material substance, so the woild being the ino- 
duct of the eternal mind, is of the same natuie with its oiigmal 
aichetype. . ^

26 Again as the nucleated Brahmd is without any accom- 
paying causality with himself, so his cieation has no other cause 
beside himself (e e. Theie is no secondary cause of the univeise),

27. Hence there is,no diffeience in the product from its pio-

232

YOGA VA'^SISHTHA

clueei ^ because li is certaiiij that tbe woik must be as xierfect as 
its autlioij (so says tbe 81 uU , V 4 ^nat

28 But tbeie is iiotbmg as a cause and effect to be found in 
this eieation, because tbe three woilds are but tbe prototypes 
of tbe aicbety 2 ie of tbe divine mind.

29 The tvoild is stietcbed out m tbe model of tbe Divine 
mind, and not formed by any other holy sjiiiit. It is as imma- 
nent in the mind of God, as fluidity is iiibeient in water.

30 It is tbe mind which sjireads out this extended unreality 
of tbe woild like castles in tbe an, and builds Utopian cities (by 
its imagination only) .

31 There is no such thing as materiality, which is as false 
a conGe]ption as that of a snake in a rope. Hence it is no way 
jiossible foi Biabma and otbei beings to exist as individual bodies

32 Even siinitual bodies are mexistent to enlightened under- 
standings As for tbe mateiial body, it has no 100 m in existence. 
(Mattel 01 a corporeal substance 01 an unseen substiatum is a 
non-entity Berkeley)33 Man [manii] who derives bis name from bis mind (mam) 
IS a form of tbe volitive soul called VenncJn (Lat, tie?— 111 - 
cboaie tbe inchoative sjiiiit of Biabma), and has for bis dominion 
tbe mental or intellectual world mano-rajyam (Lat , mentis regio 
■vel legnum) where all things are situated in tbe foim of realities.

34! Tbe mind is tbe creative Biabma called Vennchttvas 
(Lat, Viimeboativus), by tbe exercise of its inherent sanlalpa 01 ' 
tbe volition of incejiience 01 creation sisriLsha, and displays itself 
in tbe foim of tbe visible universe by development of its own 
essence.

35 This Vtmnclii or tbe creative power is of tbe form of tbe 
mind manas^^s tbe mind itself is of tbe form of Vinncht also. 
It has no connection with any material substance, which is a 
meie creation of tbe imagination (Tliat is to say, matter is an 
imagmary substance oi substiatum of qualities only).

36 All visible things are contained in tbe bosom of tbe 
mind, as tbe lotus-bud and blossom reside in tbe seed of tbe lotus.

tJTPATTI KHANDA

233

•4

Hence tliere is no difference between the mental and visible 
appeal ances of things, nor has any one ever doubted of it any 
wheie.

37. Whatever things you see in a dream, whatever desires 
you have at heart and all tlie ideals of your fancy, together with 
your ideas, notions and impressions of the visibles, know your 
mind to be the leceptacle of them all.-

38 But the visible objects relating to the option of the mind 
(t e which aie desirable, to every one), are as baneful to their 
beholdei, as an appaiition is to a child. e. they are equally 
tempting and misleading to all) .

39 The ideal of the phenomenal dnsyadAt, developes itself 
as the geim contained in the seed and becomes in its proper time 
and place a laige tiee, (compareable with the gieat arbor of the 
woild known as sansdi amaM ruha or Vnksha)^40. If there is no rest with what is real, there can be no 
peace with the phenomenals which are full of troubles, and give 
no holace to the mind. It is impossible that the feeling of the 
peiception of visibles will be ever lost to their perceiver (obser- 
ver), though its subsidence only is said to constitute liberation.

VoL. 1.

SO

CHAPTER IV.

SECTION I

Description of tiir Night-fall.

Y ALMIKI related

While Vasistha— the leading sagc^ was thus going on with 
his lecture without interruption, the whole assembly was intent 
-upon listening to it with a fixed tone and tenor of their minds

2. The stung of bells (tied to the waists of wamors) ceased 
to Jingle, eveiy one was motionless, and even the pariots in the 
cages ceased to warble and flutter.

3. The ladies forgot then dalliance and were quietly attentive 
to the sermon and all in the royal hall, were fixed in attention, 
as they were paintings and statues.

4. There remained but an hour to the closing of the day,^and 
the sun-beams became agreeable to all. The busy bustle of 
the woild was dwindling away with the glimmering light of 
the setting sun.

5 The beds of full-blown lotuses exhaled theii- fiagrance 
all around, and soft Zephers weie playing about, as if to attend 
the audiance

6. The sun glided away fiomhis diuinal couise, and advanced 
to the top of his solitaiy setting mountain, as if ne meant to reflect 
on all that he had heaid.

7 The shades of night began to cover the landscape, and the 
fiost to overspiead the forest-lands , as if they were cooled 
by the cooling lectures on philosphy.

8. Now failed the concouise of the people in all directions, 
as if they had availed themselves of the instiuctions of the sage 
to abate the feivour of theii exeitions

9. All objects on eaith cast their lengthened shadows, as if 
they stretched their necks to heai the preaching of Vasishtha

UTPATTI KHANDA .

2359. All objects on eaith cast their lengthened shadows, as if 
they stretched their necks to heai the preaching of Vasishtha

UTPATTI KHANDA .

235

10. The charabeilam theh advanced Jowly to the monarch 
of the earth, and begged to inform, that the time foi evening 
ablution and service, was about to expire.

11 Upon this the sage Vasishtha, embed his sweet speech 
and said - Let thus far, mighty king * be your healing of this 
day, and I will resume my lecture, and speak of other things 
to-morrow.

12 Here the sage held his silence, when the king responded

Be it so as you will,’^ and lose fiom his seat

13. He honoured for his own good, that godly sage and the' 
olhei seeis and Bidhmans, with due respects and of^eiings of 
floweis, water, worthy hoiiororiums, fees, gifts and homage.

14 Then rose the whole assembly with the king and the 
assemblage of sages , and the gems and jewels that decked the 
pel sons of the princes and people, shed then lusties on the faces- 
of all.

],5. Theie was a commingled tinkling of the bracelets and 
armlets of the thiong caused by the collision of their bodies (in 
their egress), and mixed flashing of the necklaces and brocades 
that decoiated then' persons.

16. The jewels attached to the tufts and crests of hair-on the 
tops of their heads, emitted a jingling sound lesembling the 
humming of bees amidst then flowery biaids.

17. The face of the sky on all sides, that shone with a 
purple hue reflected by the golden ornaments on their persons, 
seemed as it was pleased with the wise sayings and sense of 
the sage.,

18. The aerial visitants vanished in the air, and the eaithly 
guests lepaiied to then lespective habitations on earth wheie 
they all performed then daily (evening) ^sei vices' in then own 
residences.

19. In the meantime sable night made her appeaiance on 
eaith, and like a bashful young lady, withdiew to the closet 
apait fiom the lest oj^ mankind.

236

YOGA VASISHTHA,19. In the meantime sable night made her appeaiance on 
eaith, and like a bashful young lady, withdiew to the closet 
apait fiom the lest oj^ mankind.

236

YOGA VASISHTHA,

20. The loid of the day passed to other lands to shine upon 
thenij foi verily it is the avowed duty of every good person to 
give the benefit of equal hght to all

21. The shade of evening veiled all sides, and uplifted the 
canopy of the starry sphere on high, which like the vernal 
atmosphere, was emblazoned with the starlike flowers of lijisula.

22. The birds of air took to their repose in the hollows of 
mango trees, or on the tops of Kddamba aibouis, as honest people 
of fair dealing, find their rest in the purity of their minds, and 
contiiteness of their inward hearts.

23. The skiits of the clouds tinged with red by the slanting 
beams of the settig sun, and with a shade of yellow hue upon 
them, decorated the western hills with vests of yellow garb while 
the sky crowned their heads with gemming wreaths of staiiy 
groups.

24. The Goddess of evening (Vespera), having departed after 
receiving her homage (by the vespeis of mankind), was followed 
by her tram of dark night shades, appearing as black-bodied 
fiends-Vethlas, (night roving nisdclmas of deserts).

25. A gentle and cooling breeze was blowing softend by the 
dew drops of night, and opening the petals of the Kumuda 
floweis (nylumbium), and beaiing their fiagiance all around.

2. A thick gloom covered the face of nature, and the stais 
were hid undei the mists of night, and all the quaiteis of the 
skies, seemed with their overhanging loose and haiiy mists, as 
the faces of widows shiouded by the daik dishevelled haii of 
mourning (for their depaited lord the sun).

27. Now appeared the moist oib of the moon in her ambiosial

foim in the milky ocean of the sky, to moisten the mundane

heat with hei milk-white beams (sudhd-subhia-dldhiti).

<27. Now appeared the moist oib of the moon in her ambiosial

foim in the milky ocean of the sky, to moisten the mundane

heat with hei milk-white beams (sudhd-subhia-dldhiti).

<

28 On hei using, the thick mists of daikness fled fiom the 
eastern hemisphere, and became invisible in the an , as 
the daikness of ignoiance is put to flight fiom the minds of 
nionaichs, by their attendance to the sayings of wisdom.

29 Then the sages and seers, the lulers and piiests of the

UTPATTI KHA.NDA

237

people, took their rest in their respective beds, as the words oi. 
Vasishtha which were full of meaning’, reposed m the recesses of 
their hearts.

”80. As the thick darkness of night, resembling the dark 
complexion of death, receded from the aiena of the skies, theie 
followed close on its foot-steps the dewy dawn of the day with 
her slow moving pace.

81. The twinkling stars now disappeared fiom the sky, as the 
flowers on the trees were blown away by the breeze, and strewn 
on the ground as the fallen stars of heaven.

82 The sun became visible to the eyes, which his rays had 
roused from their sleep, as the new-iising faculty of reason be- 
comes conspicuous in the minds of enlightened gieat souls.

33. Fiagments of clouds shining with solar gleams, spread a 
yellow mantle ovei the eastern hills, which weie still decorated 
with strings of stars, pendant on the ciests of their lofty heads 
(like strings of peails suspended to the eiowns of kings) .

84*. All the terestial and celestial congress assembled again 
at the royal hall, in the oidei and manner (of their meeting) of 
the day before, after the performance of their morning sei vices. 
{ongmuMypidfasiaiidk matins or matutinal ceremonies).

85 The whole assemblage took theii seats as on the previous 
day, and sat unmoved in their places, as a lotus-lake in its calm- 
ness after a storm.

SECTION II.

Nature of the Mind.85 The whole assemblage took theii seats as on the previous 
day, and sat unmoved in their places, as a lotus-lake in its calm- 
ness after a storm.

SECTION II.

Nature of the Mind.

36 Then Rama addressed the most eloquent of sages Vasi- 
shtha, with his mellefluent words legaiding the subject under 
investigation, (the nature of the mind).

37. He said Tell me plainly, O venerable sir * about the 
foim of the mind, which developed itself in all things of the 
universe, as they weie offshoots of it (or manifestations of the 
mind). . ,

238

YOGA VA''SISHTnA.

*• 88. Vasislitlia leplied — Rdma! there is no form whatever of 
the mind, that may be seen by any body. It has nothing sub- 
stantial besides its name as that of the foimless and irremovable 
vacuity . (witli which it is compared in its all-comprclicnsivc- 
ness, all-diffusiveness and all-pervasiveness) .

89. The mind as an cns oi entity (sat), is not situated in the 
outer body (oranypaitof it), noi is it confined in the cavity 
of the inwaid heait oi biain. But know it O Bdma, to be situa- 
ted everywhere, as the all encompassing vacuum. (Being all- 
peivading and all-diffusivc in its nature as vacuity itself)

40. Tins woild is produced from it, and likens to the wateis 
of the mirage. It manifests itself in the foims of its fleeting 
thoughts, which aie as false as the appeal ancc of secondary 
moons in the vapours

41. The thinking piinciple is geneially belicv'^cd as some- 
thing intermediate between the positive and negative, or leal and 
unreal, you must know it as such and no other (i e neither inai;C- 
rial as the bod}’', nor immateiial as the soul, but a faculty appeit- 
aimng to the natuie of both).

4a. That which is the representative of all objects is called 
the mind there is nothing besides to which the term mmd is 
apphcable.4a. That which is the representative of all objects is called 
the mind there is nothing besides to which the term mmd is 
apphcable.

43. Know volition to be the same as the mind, which is 
nothing different from the will, just as fluidity is the same with 
water, and as there is no diffeience between the air and its 
motion in the wind, (The inseparable pioperty answering for 
its substance).

44. Por wherever there is any will, theie is that attiibute of 
the mind also and nobody has ever taken the will and the mmd 
for diffeient thmgs.

45. The repiesentation of any object whether it is leal or 
unreal is mmd, and that is to be known as Brahma the gieat 
father of all.

46. The incoipoieal soul in the body is called the mind, as 
having the sensuous knowledge or cveilasting ideas of the

tJTPATTI KHANDA,

239

eoi'jjoreal woild m itself. («. <?. the sentient and thinking soul 
18 the same with mind).

47. The learned have given the several names of ignorance^ 
intellect, mind, bondage, sin and darkness, to the visible appear- 
ance of creation,

48. The mind has no other image than that (of a receptacle 
and reflector of the ideas) of the visible world, which, I repeat 
to say, IS no new cieation ; (but a reflexion of the mindj.

49. The visible world is situated in an atom of the great 
mind, in the same manner, as the germ of the lotus plant is 
contained within its seed.

50. The visible world is as innate in the all-knowing mind, 
as the light is inherent in the sun-beams, and velocity and 
fluidity are inborn in the winds and liquids.

51. But the visionary ideas of the visibles are as false and 
fleeting in the minds of their observers, as the form of a jewel m 
gold, and water m the mirage ; and as wrong as the foundation 
of a castle in the air, and the view of a city in a dream.

SECTION III.

KaI VALYA OR MeNTAL ABSTRACTION.SECTION III.

KaI VALYA OR MeNTAL ABSTRACTION.

52. But as the phenomenals appear as no other than leal to 
their obseiver, I will O Rama * cleanse them now from thy 
mind as they do the soil from a minor.

53. As the disappearance of an appearance makes the obseiwer 
no observer of it, know such to be the state of the abstrac- 
tion of the mind fiom whatevei is real or unreal in the world< 
(This IS called KcvaUbh&va or non-cJialance of all things).

64. This state being ai lived, all the passions of the soul, and 
the desires of the mind, will be at rest, as toiients of riveis at 
the calm ensuing upon the stillness of the wind

55. It IS impossible that things having the forms of space, 
earth and air (e e matenal objects) will piesent the same features 
in the clear light (of induction), as they do to our open sight.

240

YOQA VASmiiTBA.

66. Thus when the obseiver comes to know the unreality 
of the phenomena of the three woilds, as well as of his own entity, 
it 18 then that his pure soul attains to the knowledge of Imvalya 
01 foleity of divine existence.

67. It IS such a mind that reflects the image of God in itself 
as m a minor, while all others are as blocks of stone, and in- 
capable of receiving any reflexion at all.

58 After suppiession of the sense of effo and Ui (or both the 
subjective and objective knowledge), and the error of the reality 
of the outer world the beholder becomes absti acted and femams 
without vision of external things in his sitting posture.

59. Udma lejoincd . If the perception of entity is not to be 
put down, nor an entity become a non-cntity nor when I cannot 
view the visibles (which aic the causes of our erroi), as non- 
entities,

60. Then tell me 0 Bidhraan I how to uproot this disease 
of our eagerness for the visibles fiom the mind, which bewilders 
the understanding, and afflicts us with a train of troubles, '60. Then tell me 0 Bidhraan I how to uproot this disease 
of our eagerness for the visibles fiom the mind, which bewilders 
the understanding, and afflicts us with a train of troubles, '

61. Vasishtha leplied Now hear my advice, R'dma, for 
the suppiession of this phantom of phenomenon, wheieby it 
will surely die away and become utterly extinct.

62 Know Rama, that nothing that is, can ever be destroyed 
or become extinct , and though you lemovc it, yet it will leave 
its seed oi trace in the mind.

63 This seed is the memory of such things, which reopens 
the ideas of the visibles in the mmd, expanding themselves in 
the fallacious notions of the foims of big worlds and skies, 
mountains and oceans.

64- These (wiong notions) called doshas or faults and defects 
of undei standing, aie obstacles in the way to liberation j but 
they do not affect the sages who are found to be liberated.

65 Again if the world and all other things*^ aie real exist- 
ences (as the Sdnkhyas maintain) • yet they cannot confer liber- 
ation on any one , because the visibles, whethei they are situ- 
ated within or without us are perishable themselves.

UTPATTI KHANDA

241

6G. Learn therefoie this dreadful proposition (solemn truth), 
which will be fully explained to you m the subsequent parts of 
this woik. (Note .—Adieadful dogma it is to physicists and

ddivddts” 01 asseiteis of the encipientes mund'i or beginning of 
the woild) .

67. That all things appealing in the forms of vacuity, 
elementary bodies, the woild, and ego et tu, aie non-eii titles, 
and have no meanings in them.

68. Whatever is seen apparent before us, is no other but the

supreme Biahina himseT, and his undecaying and impeiishable 
essence. ,

69. The jilenitude of eieation is an expansion of his plenum, 
and the quiet of the umveise lests in his quietude It is his 
heom which is the substance of vacuum, and it is his immensity 
that IS the substratum of the immense cosmos.70. Nothing visible is real, and theie is neither any specta- 
tor noi spectacle heie. There is nothing as vacuity or solidity in 
nature, but all this is but a piece of extended Intelligence.

71. Ild,ma rejomed • The adages relating the gimding of 
stones by the son of a bairen woman, the horns of a haie, and 
the dancing of a hill with its extended arms ,

72. And the oozing of oil fiom sand, the leading (of books) 
by dolls of marble, and the loaimg of clouds in a painting, and 
such others, are applicable to your words (of the reality of an 
uni eal essence of God).

73. I see this world to be fuU of diseases, deaths and 
troubles, mountains, vacuities and other things, and how is it 
sir, that you tell me of their non-existence ^

74. Tell me Sii, how you call this world to be unsubstantial, 
unpioduced and inexistent, that I may be certain of this tiuth.

75 Vasishtha leplied - Know Rd,ma, that 1 am no incon- 
sistent speaker, and hear me explain to you how the unreality 
appears as leal, as the son of a bairen woman has come to 
lumour.

VoL I.

31

242

YOGA VA'STSIITIIA.

c

76. All this was nnpiocluced before, and did not exist in the 
beginning of cieation It conies to appeaianee fiom the mind 
like that of a city in a dream. (i. e, they are all but creations 
of the mind and fancy).

77. The mind also was not produced in the beginning of ci ca- 
tion and was an unreality itself. Hear me tell you thciefoie, how 
we come to a notion of it,

78 This unreal mind spieads by itself the false and chang- 
ing scenes of the visible woild, 3 ust as we dicam of change- 
ful uiiiealitics as tiue in a state of dieaming. (Hcie the 
di earning xihilosopher sees di earns m his dicam).

69. It then exeits its volition in the fabiication of the body 
and spreads far and wide the magic scene of the phenomiiial 
world.69. It then exeits its volition in the fabiication of the body 
and spreads far and wide the magic scene of the phenomiiial 
world.

80. The mind by its potentiality of vacillation has many 
actions of its own, as those of expansion, saltation, and motion, 
of craving, loving, divmg and seizing, and many othei voluntaiy 
effoits (the causes of physical opeiations).

CHAPTER V.

On the Original Cause. ( Mu"la-Karana) .

K i^MA said ; —Tell me, O chief of the sages * what cause is it 
that leads to our misconception of the mind, how it is 
pioduced and what is the souiee of its illusion.

Tell me sir, m brief of the fiist production (of the mind), 
and then, O best of the eloquent, you may tell the rest, that is 
to be said on the subject

3. Vasishtha leplied ' Incident to the umvei sal dissolution, 
when all things weie i educed to nothing, this infinity of visible 
objects lemained in a state of calm and quiet befoie their cieation.

4'. Theie was then the only great God in existence, who is 
incieate and undecaying, who is the cieator of all at all times, 
'who is all in all, and supieme soul of all, and lesembhng the sun 
that never sets.

5. He whom language fails to describe, and who is known to 
the libeiated alone, who is termed the soul by fiction only, and 
not by his real nature (which is unknowable).

6, Who is the pi ime Male of Sankhya philosophers and the 
Biahma of Vedanta followei’s, who is the Intelligence of gnostics 
and who is wholly puie and apait fiom all (personalities).

7. Who IS known as vacuum by vaeuists, who is the enli- 
ghtener of solai light, who is truth itself, and the power of speech 
and thought and vision, and all action and passion for evei ,

8 Who though ever existent eveiywheie appears as mex- 
istent to the woild, and though situated in all bodies, seems to be 
far fiom them. He is the enlightenei of oui understanding as 
the solar hght (of the world)9. From whom the gods Vishnu and others are pioduced as 
solai lays from the sun , and fiom whom infinite worlds have 
come into existence like bubbles of the sea

244

YOGA VXSISIITHA

' 10 Unto whom these multitudes of visible creations leturn 
as the wateis of the eaith to the sea^ and who like a lamp enli- 
ghtens the souls and bodies (of all immateiial and material beings).

11 Who IS present alike m heaven as in eaith and the nethei 
worlds j and who abides eq^ually in all bodies whether of the mi- 
neiab vegi table or animal cieation He lesides alike in each 
paiticle of dust as in the high and huge mountain ranges , and 
ndes as swift on the wings of winds, as he sleeps in the depths 
of the main.

13. He who appoints the eight internal and external organs 
(Paiyashtakas) of sense and action to then several functions, and 
who has made the dull and dumb creatures as ineit as stones, and 
as mute as they aie sitting in their meditative mood.

13. He who has filled the skies with vacuity and the locks 
with solidity j who has dissolved the wateis to fluidity, and con- 
centrated all light and heat m the sun.

14. He who has spread these wondeiful scenes of the woild, 
as the clouds sprinkle the charming showers of lam , both as end- 
less and incessant, as they aie chaimmg and dulceate to sight.

15. He who causes the appearance and disappear ance of worlds 
in the sphere of his infinity like waves in the ocean ; and in whom 
these phenomena use and set like the lunning sands in the desert

16. His spirit the indestructible soul, resides as the germ of 
decay and destiuction in the mteiior (vitals) of animals It is as 
minute as to he hid in the body, and as magnified as to fill all 
existence17. His nature (Piaknti) spreads herself like a magic creeper 
{inayd laid) all over the space of vacuity, and pioduces the fan 
fiuit in the foim of the mundane egg (Sia/imdnda), while the 
outivaid organs of bodies, resembling the branches of this plant, 
keep dancing about the stem (the intelligent soul), shaken by the 
breeze of life which is ever fleeting

18. Tt IS He, that shines as the gem of intelligence in the 
heal t of the human body , and it is he from whom, the luminous 
orbs constituting the universe, continually derive then lustre.

UTPATTI KHANDA

245

19. It IS that colossus of mtelligeneej which like a cloud sheds 
ambrosial draughts of delight to soothe our souls, and showeis 
foith iuuumeiable beings as lain drops on all sides. It buists 
into incessant flashes showing the piospects of lepeated cieations 
which are as (momentary as) flashes of lightenmgs.

20. It IS his wondrous light which displays the woilds to oui 
wondering sight , and it is from his entity that both what is real 
and unieal, have deiived their leality and unreality.

21. It IS the insensible and ungodly soul, that turns to the 
attractions of otheis against its puipose; while the tranquil soul 
rests in itself (as in the spirit of God).

22. He who tianscends all existences, and by whom all exis- 
tent beings are bound to their destined actions in then pioper 
tunes and places, and also to then free actions and motions and 
exertions of all kinds.

23. It is he who fiom his peisonality of pine consciousness, 
became of the foira of vacuum (peivading all natuie), and then 
by^ means of his vacuous mind and empty thoughts filled it with 
substances, wherein his soul was to leside, and wheieon his spiiit 
had to preside.24 Having thus made the mfinite hosts of woilds in the 
immense sphere of the universe, he is yet neither the agent of 
any action nor the author of any act in it , but lemains evei the 
same as the sole one alone, in Ins unchangeable and unimpanmg 
state of self-consciousness, and without any fluctuation, evolution 
or inhesion of himself, as he is quite unconcerned with the woild.

CHAPTER VI.

Adjiomiiun I oh Attempt to Libeiiation,

Mum ulsim Pi ayinojmdcsa,

%TASISHTIIA said •— It IS by tlie knowledge of this irans- 
V cendent suinemc spirit and God of gods, that one may be- 
come an adept (m divine sei vice), and not by the iigour of leli- 
gions austerities and practices. (Piofieiency by tbeoictic know- 
ledge).

а. Heie nothing is needed than the culture and piacticc of 
divine knowledge, and thereby the truth being known, one views 
the eiiois of the woild, as a satiate tiavellci loolcs at a mirage 
in a clear light

3. He (God) is not far from not too near ns, nor is he obtain- 
able by what he is not (as the adomtion of images and ceremonial 
acts). He is the image of light and felicity, and is pciccivable 
in oni selves

4. Here austerities and chanties, leligions vows and obsoi vari- 
ces, are of no good whatever. It is the calm quietude of once 
own natuie only that is serviceable to him in his services to God.

5. Fondness for the society of the righteous and devotedness 
to the study of good books, aie the best means of divine know- 
ledge; while iitiial services and practices, serve only to strength- 
en the snare of oui in-boin delusions, which true knowledge alone 
can sever.

б. No sooner one has known this inward light of his as the 
very God, than he gets iid of his miseries, and becomes liberated 
in this his living state.

7 Rdma said Having kiiomi the Self in himself, one is no 
more exposed to the evils of life and even to death itself.7 Rdma said Having kiiomi the Self in himself, one is no 
more exposed to the evils of life and even to death itself.

8 But say how is this great God of gods is to be attained 
from such great distance (as we are placed from him), and what 
iigoious austerities and amount of pains aic necessary foi it.

tJTPATTI KHAKlDA-

2i1

V

9. Vasislitlia replied . He is to be known by means of your 
inanly bxerfcions (in Imowledge and faitb), and by tbe aid of a 
clear understanding and light leasonmg, and never by the 
practice of austerities and ablutions, nor by acts attended with 
bodily pain of any kind. (Hence the mistake of Haiha^oga),

10. For know, O Rdma * all your austeiities and charities^ 
your painstaking and moitification aie of no efficacy, unless 
you wholly i enounce your passions and enmity, your angei and 
pride, your selfishness and youi envy and jealousy.

11. For whoever is liberal of any money which he has earned 
by def lauding otheis, and with a heart full of vile passions, the 
meiit of such hbeiahty acciues to the iightful owner of the pro- 
perty and not to its piofessed donor.

13. And whoever observes any vow oi iite with a mind 
actuated by passions, he passes for a hypocrite, and leaps no 
benefit of his acts.

13. Therefore try your manly exeitions in securing the best 
remedies of good piecepts and good company, for putting down 
the diseases and distuibances of the woild.

14. No other course of action except that of the exeition of 
one^s manliness, is conducive to the allaying of all the miseiies 
and troubles of this life.

15. Now learn the nature of this manliness for your attain- 
ment to wisdom, and annihilation of the maladies of passions and 
affections and animosity of your nature.

16. True manliness consists in your continuance m an honest 
calling eonfoimable with the law and good usage of youi coun- 
try ; and m a contented mind which shimks from smelling the 
enjoyments of life.17. It consists in the exeition of one^s energies to the utmost 
of his power, without beaiing any murmur oi giief in his soul, 
and in one^s devotedness to the society of the good and peiusal of 
good woiks and Sdstias.

18. He IS styled the truly brave who is quite content with 
what he gets, and ^spurns at what is unlawful foi him to take >

248 YOGA VA'SISHTHA.

wlio IS attached to good company, and rcadj'’ at the study of 
unblamable works.

19. And they who aie of gieat minds, and have known their 
own natuies and those of all otheis by their light leasoning, aie 
honouied by the gods Bialimd, Vishnu, India and Siva

8Q He who is called a iighteous man by the majority of the 
good people of the place, is to be resorted to with all diligence 
as the best and most upiight of men.

21. Those leligious works are said to compose the best 
Sdstia, which treat chiefly of Spiiitiial knowledge, and one who 
constantly meditates on them, is suiely liberated (fiom the bonds 
of this world) .

22. It IS by means of light diseiimination deiived from the 
keeping of good company and study of holy woiks, that oui 
understanding is cleared of its ignoiance, as duty water is 
purified by Kafa seeds, and as the minds of men aie expurgated 
by the Yoga philosophy.

CHAPTER VII

Recognition oe the Nihility of the Phenomenal Would.

(B) isydsaiid Bi ahj ndnam ) .

'|_3AMA said

K ^ TeU me^ O Brdliman f wlicie is this God situated and hour 
cau I know hirUj of whom you spoke all this, and whose know- 
ledge you said, leads to our libeiation

2. Vasishtha icplicd This God of whom I spoke, is not at 
a distance fiom us He is situated in these our bodies, and is 
known to be of the foira of meie Intellect {clmimdU a) to us. So 
says Fichte. The Infinite Reason (chit) alone exists in himself

the finite in him. Lewis vol II. p. 563.the finite in him. Lewis vol II. p. 563.

3. He is all m all, though all this world is not the omni- 
piesent Himself. He is one alone and is not termed the all 
that is visible (to us). So Fichte. God is infinite and embiaces 
the finite, but the finite can not encompass the Infinite. Lewis vol. 
11. p. 573.

4. It lb this Intellect which is in Siva, that weais the cusp 
of the moon m hi-^ crest , the same is in Vishnu that iides on his 
eagle Gaiuda, and in Brahma that is born of the lotus The sun 
also is a particle of this Intellect; (but they aie not the self-same 
Intellect themselves).

5. Rfima rejoined —So it is ; and even boys say this also, that 
if the whole woild is mere Intelligence {chef ana mdt') alatn)-, then 
why call it by anothei name (as the ivoild), and what is the use 
of giving admonition of it to any body, (when eyery one is full 
of intelligence)

6. Vasishtha leplied If you have known tho mere Intellect 
{Chinmdirani) , to be the same with the intelligent woild (clietana 
viswa), you have then known nothing for getting iid of this woild.

7. The woild is veiily intelligent, O Rama, (with the mun- 
dane soul), but the animal soul {Jiva) is oi biutish

Vol. I. 32

250

YOGA YA15ISIITIIA.

observer o£ tiling? pasyaii, on account o£ its looking after ?en?ua1 
gratifications only as brutes, and giving use only to the fears of 
disease, decay and death (from its love of itself, and care foi self- 
preservation).

8. The animal soul [Mva), tliougli an iiicoipoieal substance, 
is an ignoiant thing and subject to pain and soiiow. The mind

also, though it is capable of intelligence lias

become the loot of all evils (/ €. With its poiver of mtclleetion 
and nature of intelligence {ckclanam)^ it is yet evei mclined to 
the wiong side by itself).become the loot of all evils (/ €. With its poiver of mtclleetion 
and nature of intelligence {ckclanam)^ it is yet evei mclined to 
the wiong side by itself).

9. Intellectual liberation {cMt/a mull a) fiom thonghis of tbc 
woild, IS one state (of tbc soul), and nnmlelligont ga/ang {iiu~ 
MulJtald) at it, IS anotlier. He who knows the better of these 
two the states of the soul, has no cause of soiiow, {i.c. the lational 
fiom the iiiaiional soul).

10. He who has seen the all surpassing Supremo Being, has 
his heartstrings all cut asunder, and the doubts of lus mind all 
diiven away. The sequences of lus acts are washed away, (and 
leave no fear of his transmigration).

11. The longing after perceptiblos {Glielyai) does not cease, 
unless the peiception of the visibles is effaced from the mind.

12- . How then is this peiception to be effaced ? How is it pos- 
sible to have a longing after the unintelligible Intelligence, with- 
out suppiessioii of our longing for the visibles ^ It is only to be 
effected by avoiding the external peiceptions of the mind.

13- RAma said — Tell me sir, nheie and how is that vacuous 
soul called jmsff, by the knowledge of which no one can get iid 
of his tiansmigration (i. <?. the woishippeis of the jwcilmA 
or animal soul called jlvaiddis, aie not entitled to their final 
liberation mnl tij .

11* Tell me also, who is that man, who by his company with 
the good and study of good woiks, has gone over the ocean of 
the woild, and beholds the Supieme soul in himself.

15. Yasishtha leplied Whatever animal souls being cast 
m the wilderness of this life, long after this intelligent soul

UTPATTI KHANDA

251

{cJielandtman), they are truely wise, and know inm (in ilien?- 
selves).

16. Whoso believes the animal soul as the life of the woi Id 
(or mundane soul), and thinks (the knowledge of the) Intelligence 
to be attended with pam only, he can nevei know Him anywheie 
(in this world)17. If the Supreme soul be known to us, O R^ma * the string 
of our woes is put to an end, like the fatal cholera aftei termi- 
nation of its cholic jiain or extiaction of its poison.

18. Rdma said Tell me, O Bi^ihman l the tiue form of the 
Supreme soul, by light of which the mind may escape from all 
its eirois.

19. Vasishtha replied The Supieme soul is seen in the same 
way in ourselves and within our bodies, as we are conscious of our 
minds to be seated within us, after its flight to distant countries.

SO. Our notion of the Supieme spirit is often lost in the depth 
of oui’ minds, in the same way, as the existence of the outer 
world (ob 3 ective knowledge), becomes extinct in our consciousness 
in yoga meditation.

21. It is He m whose knowledge we lose our sense of the be- 
holder and visibles, and who is an invaeuous vacuum or a subs- 
tantive vacuity himself. e Who being known, we forget our 
knowledge both of the sub 3 eetive and ob 3 'ective, and view his unity 
as the only to 07iov substratum of all). So Fichte In thee, the 
Incomprehensible, does my own existence, and that of the world 
become comprehensible to me. Lewes. jPhil. vol. 11. P. 563.

22. He whose substance appears as the vacuum, and in

whom subsists the vacuous plenum of the universe , and whe 
appeals as vacuity itself, nothwithstandidg the plenitude of his 
creation subsisting in him, is veiily the form of the Supreme 
soul (that you want to know). '

23. "Who though full of intelligence, appears to stand as 
an unconscious huge lock before us, and who though quite subtile 
in his nature, seems as some gross body to oui conception such 
is the foim of the Supieme soul (that you want to know).

232 YOGA VX'siSIITnA.

•* 24. That wliicli encompasses tlie inside and outside of every 
tiling, and assumes tlie name and nature of the very thing 
to itself, IS veiil}^ the foim of the Supreme (that you want to 
hnow)•* 24. That wliicli encompasses tlie inside and outside of every 
tiling, and assumes tlie name and nature of the very thing 
to itself, IS veiil}^ the foim of the Supreme (that you want to 
hnow)

25 As light IS connected with sunshine and vacuity with 
the fiimament, and as Omnipresence is present with every thing 
and eveiy where such is the foim of the Supreme spiiit (that 
you want to know’-)

26 Edma asked But how are we to undeistand that He 
wdio bears the name and natuie of absolute and inliiiite reality, 
should yet be compressed within any thing visible in the world, 
which IS quite impossible to believe ^

27. Vasishtha replied The erroneous conception of the 
Cl cation of the world, resembles the false impression of colours 
111 the clear sky, wdieiefoic it is wuong, O Edma * to take a thing 
as leal, of wdiich there is an absolute privation in natuie,

28. It IS tliG knowdedge of Biahma that constitutes his form, 
01 else there is no act of his wheieby he may be known to us, (the 
urn verse being but a development of himself), He is entnely' 
devoid of any visible foim, and therefore there is no better course 
for anj’ one than to know him as truth.

29. Aftei an absolute negation of the visibles comes to be 
known, {z e. after disappeaianee of the traces of phenomenals 
from the mind), there remains a ]ire-emment object of conception, 
W'luch is inboin and manifest of itself.

30. This concept (of the Super-eminent) has oftentimes no 
reflexion, owing to its having no visible appearance j and at 
otlieis it IS not without its reflexion on the miror of the mind 
(which has received its image).

31. Ho body has evei conceived this transcendent verity in 
himself, who lias not at the same time been convinced of the 
impossibility of the existence of the visible wmild. (? e. Convic- 
tion of the nullity of the phenomenal alone, leads to the perception 
of the Eeahty)

42 Edma icjomcd Tell mo, O sage ' ^ how the existence of

UTPATTI KHA^NBA

25342 Edma icjomcd Tell mo, O sage ' ^ how the existence of

UTPATTI KHA^NBA

253

SO many extensive woilds composing the visible Universe^ can b^ 
thought of as unreal, or comprised in the clwimdtiam (or minu- 
tiae of the divine mind), as the mount Mei u m the sesamum 
seed.

S3. Vasishtha replied If you will but stay a few days in 
the company of holy men, and study the sacred Sdstras with a 
steady mind with me i

Sdi Then I will purge away this false view of the visibles fiom 
your understanding, like the delusive miiage fiom one’s sight. 
This absence of the view will extinguish your sense of being the 
viewer, and restore you to your intelligence alone.

35. When the viewer is united with the view, and the view 
with the viewei, theie then turns out an unity of the duality, 
and the duahty blends into an msepaiable unity.

36. AVithout union of the two theie is no success of either, 
and this union of both the viewer and the view having disap- 
peaicd at last, theie lemams an only one unity (which is indis- 
soluble).*

37. I will now cleanse away the dross of all your sense of 
egoism and tuism, with that of the world and all other things 
fiom the minor of your mind, by bunging you to your conscious- 
ness of seK, and total negation of eveiy thing besides

38. Fiom nothing never comes a something, noi fiom some- 
thing ever proceeds a nothing; and there is no difficulty what- 
ever in lemoving what does not exist in natuie. (e. e. That a ml is 
ml is self evident, and no argument is requiied to piove it so).

39. This world which appears so very vast and extensive, was 
not in being at the beginning. It resided in the pure spirit of 
Biahma, and was evolved from the mind {Chita) of Brahma.39. This world which appears so very vast and extensive, was 
not in being at the beginning. It resided in the pure spirit of 
Biahma, and was evolved from the mind {Chita) of Brahma.

*Kant says • — ‘Tho pure Ego as tlio condition of all consciousness, tlic condi- 
tion of tho sura total of oxporionco, consoqucntly tho Ego is tho somco fiom which 
the univeiso is to ho doducod ’ Again “ Tho thing pcise underlying all pheno- 
mena, IS ono and tho same substanco with Ego Wo know not whoicm the 
Ego IS diffoiont from it Tins identity of both us only an nffiimation of 
Monism, not of Idealism. Low os. Hist Phil Yol II. pp 35G 7 Fichto 
says — Tho Non-Ego is a pioduct of the Ego It is tho Ego winch tlms 
creates tho ncccssitj foi a Non-Ego and tho Sou Ego w anted. I bid p 558

254

YOGA YA'SISHTGA.

•* 40. The thing called the woild was never iirodueed^ nor is it 
in being nor in actual appearance. It is as the form of a bi ace- 
let m gold^ which it is not difficult to alter and i educe to its 
gloss metallic state.

4d. I will explain it fully by other leasons, wheieby this 
tiuth may appear of itself, and impress iriesistibly in your mind.

43. How can that be said to have its being, which was not- 
biought mto being befoie, and how can theie be a iivulet iji the 
milage, oi the img of an eclipse in the moon ^

43. As a bairen woman has no son nor a milage any walei 
in it, and as the fiimament has no plant growing in it, so 
there is no such thing which we eiioneously call the woild

44. Whatever you see, O Rama ! is the indestiuctible Biahma 
himself this I have many times shown you with good reasons, 
and not m meie woids (as my zjjse dixii only).

45. It is unieasonable, O mtelhgent Rdma I to disiegaid 
what a learned man speaks to you with good leasons, because 
the dull-headed fellow who neglects to listen to the woids -of 
leason and wisdom, is deemed as a fool, and is subject to all soits 
of difficulties.

CHAPTEE VIII.

NaTWiB of GoOP S ASTRAS.CHAPTEE VIII.

NaTWiB of GoOP S ASTRAS.

K ama asked How can it be leasonably sbewn and estab-

' Iisbed, tliat there is nothing to be known and seen in 
this woildj although we have evident notions of it suppoited by 
sense and right reasoning?

3. Vasishtha answered • It is from a long time, that this 
endemic of the fallacious knowledge (of the reahty of the w.oild), 
IS pievalent (among mankind ; , and it is by means of tiue know- 
ledge only that this wrong application of the woid woild, can 
be lemoved from the mind.

3, I will tell you a stoiy, Eitma ^ for your success in (the 
attainment of) this knowledge ; if you will but attend to it^ you 
will become both intelligent and emancipate.

4. 'But if fio'u the impatience of your natuie like that of 
brute cieatuies^ you get up and go away after hearing half of 
this (narrative), you shall then reap no benefit from it.

5, Whoever seeks some object and strives after it, he of 
course succeeds in getting the same , but if he become tiied of it 
he fails theiein.

6. If you will betake yourself, E^ma * to the company of 
the good and study of good Sdrstais, you will surely aiiive at 
your state of perfection in course of a few days or months, 
according to the degiee of your diligence,

7. E4ma said . O you, that are best acquainted with the 
Sclstias, tell me which is the best Sastia for the attainment of 
simitual knowledge, and a conveisancy with which ipay release 
us from the soriows of tins life.

8. Vasishtha replied Know, O high minded Edma* this 
work (the Vasishtha Sanhita) to be the best of all others on 
spiritual knowledge. It is the auspicious Great Ed,m4yaiia and 
the Sdstia of s^stias.

25G

YOGA VAblSlITUA

9 The Rcimclyana is the best of histones, aud scu’-es to 
eiiligliLeii the uiideisfcandmg. It is known as containing the 
essence of all histones.

10. But by healing these doctrines one easily finds his 
liberation coming of itself to him ; wheiefore it is reckoned as 
the most holy recoid.10. But by healing these doctrines one easily finds his 
liberation coming of itself to him ; wheiefore it is reckoned as 
the most holy recoid.

11. AU the existing scenes of the world will vanish away 
upon their mature consideiation ; as the thoughts occuiing in a 
dieam, aie dispeised upon the knowledge of the dieaming state 
after waking.

12. Whatever theie is in this woik, may be found in otheis 
also, but what is not found heie, cannot be found elsewhere 
(ill other works) , atid theieCoic the learned call it the thesaurus 
{miihtdb) or store-house (of philosophy).

13. Whoever attends to these lectures every day, shall have 
his excellent undeistanding undoubtedly stored with tianscendent 
knowledge of divinity day by day.

14. He who feels this Sdstra disagreeable to his vitiated 
taste, may take a fancy to the perusal of some other sdstra that 
IS more woidy and eloquent.

15. One feels himself libeiated in this life by the heaiing 
of these leetuies, just as one finds himself healed of a disease 
by a potion of some efficacious medicine.

16. The attentive hearer of these sermons, perceives their 
efficacy in himself, m the same way as one feels the effects of 
the enises or blessings pronounced upon him which never go 
foi nothing, (but have their full effects in time).

17. All woildly miseiies are at an end with him, wdio 
considers well these spiiitual lectures within himself, and which 
IS hs.id to be effected by chanties and austerities, or peifoi- 
manee of the acts oidained in the siauUh or ceiemoiiial vedas, 
01 by hundieds of practices in obedience to the oidinances ap- 
pointed by them.

CHAPTER IX

On the Supreme Cause of All (Parasea Karan a).

y ATSISHTHA continued

They are tiuly delighted and gi a tilled (in their souls), who 
are ever devoted with all their hearts and minds in holy con- 
versation among themselves.y ATSISHTHA continued

They are tiuly delighted and gi a tilled (in their souls), who 
are ever devoted with all their hearts and minds in holy con- 
versation among themselves.

2. Those that aie devoted to the acquisition of knowledge 
and investigation of spiritual science, enjoy the same hliss of 
libeiation in then living state, as it is said to attend on dis- 
embodied souls

3 Rdma said Tell me O Bidhman I the distinct natures 
of the living and disembodied libeiations, that I may try to 
leain the same, with an understanding enlightened by the light 
of Sdistras (hteially, having the eye-sight of Sdstras)

4 Vasishtha said Who ever lemains as he is, {i. e. without 
any ]peituibation m his woildly couise), and continues intact as 
vacuity amidst society such a one is called the living libeiated 
(divan mukta)

6 W ho so IS employed in his intellection only and seems to 
be sleeping in his waking state, though while conducting his 
woildly affaiis such a one is called the living libeiated.

6 Whose countenance is neithei flushed nor dejected in 
pleasure oi pain, (m joy or giief and such othei reveises), and 
who lemains contented with what he gets such a one is called 
libeiated while he is living

7 Whose waking is as a state of sound sleep, and who is not 
awake to the accidents of the waking state, and whose waking 
state IS insensible of the desiies incident to it such a one is 
called libeiated in his life •

8. Who though actuated by the feelings of affection, enmity, 
feai and the like, is at rest, and as clear and undistuibed as 
vacuity within himself such a one is called libeiated while 
he IS alive

VOL. I.

33

258

YOGA YASISIITHA

‘ 9. Who has not an air o£ jnide m him^ and is not conceited

(with a notion of his greatness) when he does or refrains to do 
anything such a one is called self-libeiated in his life time‘ 9. Who has not an air o£ jnide m him^ and is not conceited

(with a notion of his greatness) when he does or refrains to do 
anything such a one is called self-libeiated in his life time

10» Who at one glance or winking of his eye, has a full 
view of the whole cieation and final destiuction of the woild, like 
the Supieme self (to which he is assimilated) such a one is said to 
be liberated in his life time.

11 YTio evei is not feaiedb}’’ nor is afiaid of any body, and 
who IS fieed fiom the emotions of 3 oy, angci and fear such 
a one is libeiated in life.

12. Who IS quiet and quietly disposes his business of this 
woild, and who though he stands as an individual in the Sight 
of men, attaches no individuality to himself; and who thougli 
a sentient being, is insensible to all imjnessions . such is the 
living liberated soul.

13 Who being full of all possessions, and having every 
thing piesent before him, lemains cold and apathetic to them, as 
if they weie useless to him such a man is liberated m his life.

14. Now leaving the subject of ^Miving libeiation," I will 
tell you what they call the ^^disembodied libeiation,^^ which 
like a bieath of wind enteis into the soul, aftei it has fled 
fiom the mortal body,

15. The disembodied fiee spuit neithei uses nor sets (like the 
sun), nor is it subject to wane (like the moon) , it is neithei 
manifest nor hidden, ifc is not at a distance, iioi is it in me, 
thee or in any othei peison

16. It shines foith in the form of the sun, and preseives 
the woild in the mannei of Vishnu It creates the woild in the 
shape of the lotus-boin Biahm^, and destioys all as Rudia 
or Siva ^

17 It takes the form of the sky supported on the shouldeis 
of an, which suppoits all living beings, the gods, sages and demi- 
gods in the three worlds It takes the foim of boundary moun- 
tains and separates the different legions (of the eaitli and skies)

UTPATTI KHAKDA 259UTPATTI KHAKDA 259

18 It becomes tbe earth and supports these numerous sets ot 
beings^ it takes the foims of trees, plants and grass, and yields 
fruits and gi ains for supjioitanee (of all living cieatuies).

19 It takes the foims of fiie and water and bmms and melts 
111 them by itself. It sheds ambiosia m the foim of the moon, 
and causes death in the shape of poison

^0 It becomes light wherewith it fills the space of the 
firmament, and s^neads daikness in the form of Eiebus (tama o) 
Team) . It becomes vacuum {pyom or beom) to leave empty space for 
all, while in the foim of hills it obstiucts then fiee passage on 
eaith.

ai. In the foim of the fleet mind, it moves the self-moving 
animals, and in that of dull matter it settles the unmovmg im- 
movables. It gilds the earth by its form of the ocean, as a 
bracelet encircles the aim.

аа. The bodiless spirit takes upon it the great body of the 
sun, and illumes all the woilds with their minute particles, while 
it remiams quiet m itself.

as. Whatever is shining in this universe or ever was or is to 
be so, in any of the three past, present and future times, Imow 
them all O R^ma ’ as forms of the Divine /Spirit (which is free to 
take any shape it likes) .

a4 Rd-rna said —Tell me, O Ridhman ’ why this view of 
liberation, appears so very difficult to me, as to make me beheve 
it altogethei incomprehensible to and unattainable by any body

as. Vasistha replied This (disembodied) liberation is called, 
m) vam oi total extinction of self-consciousness, and is styled 
Brahma also (m whom the human soul is finally absorbed) , 
Attend now to the means of its attainment

аб. All such visible objects known as I, thou, this &c, beings 
unpiodueed {annfpanna) fiom the eternal sat or entity of God, 
it IS impossible to have any conception of them in our minds.* >.аб. All such visible objects known as I, thou, this &c, beings 
unpiodueed {annfpanna) fiom the eternal sat or entity of God, 
it IS impossible to have any conception of them in our minds.* >.

** Because the visible and destructible bodies could not proceed from the invisible 
and indestructible essence of God, noi the invisible and indestructible souls of 
persons, uhich are utpanna or produced fiom the essence of the eternal and infinite 
spnit, can have then extinction except m then maiusoiuce, when they become 
instinct in and identic with the supieme spiiit *

260

YOGA YA^SISIITIIA

ar Hama said Metliinks, O best o£ them that kiio^v the 
kiiowable ' that the bodiless souls of the libeiated, when they 
2iass through the bounds of the thiee woilds, have again to be 
bom accoidmg to the couise of nature,

as. Vasishtha reiolied —Those that retain the reminiscence of 
the thiee woilds have to move about in them, but such as have 
lost the idea of then existence, are absoibed in infinity

£9. Tor how can one deiive the knowledge of the unity of 
God from his belief in the duality of the sejiaiate existence of 
the world ^ Thciefore the figurative sense of cosmos as God 
{V^s^oa) can not give the spiritual and infinite idea of Biahma

30. He is no othei but himself, of the natuic of inirein- 
tellect, and of the foim of the clear and tianquil vacuum (that 
lieivades all things) Biahma is said to be the world, to signify 
his manifestation of its unieality as a leality unto us.

31. I have well considered about a golden biacelet, and found

nothing as a biacelet m it save its gold (The foim is change- 
able, but the substance is leal) ,

33. I observed the billows, and found nothing in them but 
water , and wheie theie was no water I saw no billow to use. 
(It is the substance and not its shape oi shadow that is to be 
looked into)33. I observed the billows, and found nothing in them but 
water , and wheie theie was no water I saw no billow to use. 
(It is the substance and not its shape oi shadow that is to be 
looked into)

33. I see no oscilation any where except in the winds, which 
aie no other than this force in motion, and moving all things m 
the woild. (Thus the spirit of God is the fountain or imnm mobile 
of all forces, which aie but foims of the mam foice).

34. As vacuity abides in an, and watei apjiears in the burning 
deseits, and as there is light sjiread overall cieation, so is the 
spu'it of Biahma manifest m the thiee worlds in the forms of 
the very worlds.

85. Rdma said . Tell me, Osage * the cause which makes 
this woild with its nature of absolute negation or non-existence, 
to exhibit such distinct apjieaiances in its jihenomena.

36. Tell me also, how the viewer and the view (of these 
worlds) being both extinct, (as they aic equally uiirGal m their

1

UTPj^TTI KHANDA

261

iiatuie), tlieic iGinains {hew imv etna oi absorption in tbe Deify 
without their peisonahties.

37. Again as it is impossible to conceive the existence of the 
visible objects^ say how is it possible to conceive the existence of 
the invisible Biahma in his own nature (of incomprehensibility)

38. Say by what mode of I'easonmg this tiuth may be known 
and ascertained, and this being accomplished, there remains 
nothing else to be inquired into.

39. Vasishtha replied • This false knowledge or piejudiee 
of the leality of the woild, has been long pievalenb like a 
chionic disease (among mankind) , and lequnes to be removed by 
the specific charm (mantra) of reasoning only.

40. It can not however be expelled quickly and in a minute, 
but lequiies length of time, like the ascent and descent of an even 
sided pieeipice.

4-1. Theiefoie heaiken to what I say, for dispelling your 
fallacy of the woild, by means of arguments, logical infeiences, 
and’habitual meditation (about the nature of God).4-1. Theiefoie heaiken to what I say, for dispelling your 
fallacy of the woild, by means of arguments, logical infeiences, 
and’habitual meditation (about the nature of God).

4'^. Attend now Ildma * to a tale that I am to tell you for 
your attainment of this knowledge, and by the hearing of which 
you will become intelligent, wise and liberated.

43 I will even now relate to you the sub3ect of the produc- 
tion of the world, in oider to show you, that all that is produced 
serves to bind oui souls to the earth, and that you may live quite 
free from the pamo,

4'4<. I will tell you at present under this topic of creation, 
that the erroneous conception of the woild is as unsubstantial 
as Vacuum itself, {i. e. all this is null and void).

45. Because this woild which appeals to contain these 
moving and unmoving beings, and abounds m vsiious races of 
gods. As lira giants and Kmnara jiigmios.

46. All these together with the Kudias and other demigods,

become invisible and loose themselves in nothing at the ultimate 
dissolution of the world (This final diappeaiance of

262

yoga vaIjisiitiia

all tlungSj proves tlicir piesenL appeal ance dvirMdva to be meic 
plianloms of oui biam. Gloss).

47. Then theie remains a moist and hollow deep, witliout 
light and thick spread with mist , all iindcfinable and nndevcloped, 
save something which is Real and lasts for ever.

48 There was no air noi form of any thing, no sight noi 
any thing to be seen. There ivere not these multitudes of created 
and mateiial beings, that appear to be endless and evei lasting to

view.

49 There was a nameless self, the fullest of the full in its 
foim, it was no ens nor nonens, no entity noi non- entity, no 
leality nor unieality neithei.

60. It was meie intellect without its intellection, infinite 
Avithout decay, auspicious and full of bliss. It was without its 
beginning, middle and end, eternal and imperishable60. It was meie intellect without its intellection, infinite 
Avithout decay, auspicious and full of bliss. It was without its 
beginning, middle and end, eternal and imperishable

61 In him this woild is manifest as a pearly goose in painting ; 
He IS and yet is not this (cieation), and is the soul of both 
what IS real as well as unreal. {Saclasaddtmmi).

52. He is without ears, tongue, nose, eyes and touch, yet' 
he hears, tastes, smells, sees and feels every thing in all places 
and at all times.

53. He IS also that (intellectual) light {cln(ldlolx.d), whereby

the form of that real as well as unreal ^ova^-sadasaddima is dis- 
cerned by us in his peispective of cieation, as one without begin- j 
mug 01 end, and presenting a lepresentation that is without^ 
any colour oi shade. \

^ 64. He IS that vacuous Soul who views the woilds as 
clearly, as the yogi beholds Him in the foim of ineffable light, 
with his half closed eyes, and fixing his sight to the midst of 
his eyebrows, (m his Khechmi miidtd or aenal mode of me- 
ditation ) j

* The Ihechail or aenal mode of meditation is said to confer liberation fiom 
sickness and acts and the grasp of death. Thus ,

Napidyate i ogena nacha lipyate Tvarmatia, Bddhyate sa na Tvdlcna, yo inudrdin- 
vetta Tchechaiim

The mode of conducting it is described as follows,

Kwpala hiihare jihvd, pmvesitd vipai/tagd, Bin uvot antai gatd drishiii , mudid- 
onavatiJchecTiml

UTPATTI KHAFDA.

2G3

55. He is tlie cause of all, and whose cause is as ml as 
the hoins of a haie , and whose woiks aie all these worlds, like 
so many waves of the sea.

56. His light is ever shining every where, and he has his 
seat in the human heart, and it is fiom the candle light of his 
intellect, that all the woilds derive then light

57. It IS He without whose light the sun would dwindle 
into darkness, and whose existence alone gives the Woild its 
appeal ance of a milage57. It IS He without whose light the sun would dwindle 
into darkness, and whose existence alone gives the Woild its 
appeal ance of a milage

58. It IS his pulsation that vibrates thioughout the uni- 
veise, and it is his meitia that stops the eouise of the whole,* 
it is on that pivot that the woild has its revolution, 3 ust as the 
turning lound of a file brand desciibes a ciicle.

59. His natuie is puie and unchangeable ; and the works 
of cieation and destruction, aie meie acts of his volition {Fildsa), 
in the peisons of Biahma and Haia.

60. It IS his tne^ha and foiee that gives rest and motion 
to all things, like the ubiquious course of the winds But this 
is the common behef that he moves, while in leality his natuie is 
free from all mutability (like the immovable loek).

61. He IS always awake in his ever sleeping state, and 
theiefoie can neither be said to be waking nor sleeping any where 
or at any time, but is both awake and asleep every where and at 
all times. *

62. His quiescence is attended with bliss and tranqmllity, 
and his agitation puts the woild in motion and in its eouise 
of action; which is said to remain unalteied in both states 
which unite in him

63. He is inheient in all things as fiagrance is innate in the 
flowei, and is indestructible as its odour at the destipction of the 
of the flower. He pei vades all things, and is yet as intangible 
as the whiteness of linen.

* This passage contradicts the belief of his rising and sleeping by turns at 
the end of each halpa of the creatioh and dissolution of the -woild, as -well 
ns the popular faith of Han’s, sayuna and Uttliana at the opposite tiopics,

2G4

YOGA VA'SISIITIIA.

**64<* Who though speechless, is the aiitlioi of all speech and 
sound, and who thoitgh he appeals to be as incogitant as a stone, 
is full of cogitation (being the intelleet itself) Who though 
fully satisfied with his bliss, enjoys all things^ although he lequircs 
nothino^ foi himself.65. Who though bodiless actuates all the membeis of the 
body, and is attiibuted with a thousand aims and eyes (in the 
Veda), and who having no snppit for himself, is yet the sujipoit 
of all, and peivades the whole without being seated any wheie.

66 Who having no oigans nor oiganic power, is the oigan 
of oigans, and pcifoims the functions of innumei able oigans, 
and who without a sensoiial mind, exhibits endless designs of 
his Divine mind in the infinity of creation

67. It IS foi want of our (knowledge) of him, that we aie 
in constant diead of this delusive woild as in that of a diagon oi 
hydia, but it is at his sight (oi by our knowledge of him), that all / 
0111 feais and desiies fly away afai fiom us.

68. It IS in the piesence of the cleai light of that God of 
Tiuth, that all the wishes of our minds have a better play, just 
as actois dance the best as long as they have the lights.

69. It IS by him that a bundled senes of visible objects ^as 
pots and ■^ 2 XQs>-gliata-imi 6 jcU) , use eveiy moment to oui view, like 
the ceaseless senes of waves, billows and suiges using on the 
■suifaceof the wateis.

?0 It IS he that exhibits himself otherwise than what he is, 
in huiidieds of difEeient shapes to our mistaken minds, as the 
■substance of gold is made to appear to oui view in the various 
forms of bracelets, airalets, and a hundred other sorts of trinkets

71 He who manifests himself as the soul, abiding in me, thee 
and in this or that peison, and is neither myself, thyself, himself 
noi itself, IS the Supieme soul oi Self, that is the same with 
and apart fiom all.

j 72 It IS he and the self-same being, whether you view him in 
one 01 more objects, as it is the same water that heaves itself 
111 this one oi the other wave. Thus all visible phenomena 
have then use from him

UTPATTI KHANDA

265UTPATTI KHANDA

265

73. He from wliom time lias its counting and the visibles* 
have then’ view, by whom the mind exercises its thinking poweis, 
and by whose light the world is enlightened , is the Supreme.

74*. AVhatevei forms, figures and their actions, whatsoever fla- 
vouis and odours, and what sounds, touch, feelings and percep- 
tions soever, you are sensible of, know them all and then cause 
also to be the Suxireme.

75. You will be able to know your soul, O good Rdma * if 
you will take it in the light of the sight or faculty of vision, 
that lies between the lookei and the object looked upon

7 6. Know it as mereateand indestructible, and without begin- 
nmg and end. It is the eternal and eveilastmg Biahma and 
bliss itself. It IS immaculate and infallible, highly adorable 
and unblamable in its natme. It is beyond all desciiption and a 
mere void in its foim It is the cause of causes and a notion of 
something that is unknowable. It is the understanding, and the 
inwaid faculty of the intellect or the mind. (z. e. It is a spni- 
tual. substance and must be known in the spirit).

VoL. I.

U

CHAPTER X.

DESCRIPTIOIir OF THE ChAOTTC StATE.

K ama said That wEicli lemams incident to tlie Univeisal

dissolution [maJid-pi ala^a)^ is commonly designated by 
tbe teim “formless void^^

2. How then said you^ tbeie was no void^ and bow could 
tbeie be no ligbt nor daikness neither ^

3 How could it be without the intellect and the living prmei- 
plcj and how could the entities of the mind and undeistandmg 
be wanting in it ^

4 How could there be nothing and not all things ^ Such like 
paiadoxical expiessions of yours, have cieated much confusion 
in me

5 » Vasishtha said * You have laised a difficult extra-question, 
Rdma * but I shall have no difficulty to solve it, as the sun is at 
no pains to dispel the nocturnal gloom.5 » Vasishtha said * You have laised a difficult extra-question, 
Rdma * but I shall have no difficulty to solve it, as the sun is at 
no pains to dispel the nocturnal gloom.

6. On the occasion oi the termination of a great halpa age, 
when theie remains That Entity (the Tat sat) of Grod, it cannot 
be said to be a void, as I will now explain to you Attend R^ma 
and heal.

7. Like images caiwed in bas-relief upon a pillar, was this 
woild situated m i ehevo of That Entity, and cannot be said to 
have been a void *

8 Again when there was the repiesentation of the plenitude 
under the appellation of the woild at any ji^^-ce, (in the essence of 
God), and be it leal oi unreal, it could not have been a void 
and vacmty.

9. As a pillar with carved or painted figuies, cannot be said to 
be devoid of them , so Biahma exhibiting the woilds contained 
in him, can not become a void (^ e As a pillar is not devoid

*■ The pre-eKistent substratum is the Noumenon underlying all phenomena 
It IS til 0 support of qiialities, and something lu which all accidents luheie 
Berko ly

UTPATTl KIIANDA

267

o£ iig’uics which has carved images on ifc ; so Brahma is not a *• 
void, having the woilds contained in him. This is a negative 
entliymem)

10. But the world contained m Biahma, becomes both a some- 
thing and notliing, as billows in calm watcis may either exist oi 
not exist. (So the appeal anee and disppearance of the woilds m 
Biahraa, like those of the little billows in a quiet lake, piove 
their existence and non-existcnec at the same time, as it is predi- 
cated of the Chaos oi the 2Iali6,p}alaya Gloss)

11. Again it happens that eeitain figures aie maiked on 
some insensible tiees in some places by the hand of time, which 
people mistake foi images , so it comes to pass that ceitain figuies 
of evanescent inattei, occur in the eternal mind, which men 
mistake for the leal woild.IS. This eompaijson of the figured pillar and tiee and the 
woild, is a partial and not complete simile, the similitude heie 
rcfeiriug only to the situation of the tiansient woild in the 
substance of the permanent Biahma, (like the appeaiauce of 
false figuies in the fiimly fixed pillar and on the standing tree).

13. But this appeaiance of the woild is not caused bj'’ 
another (as in the case of tlie pillar, figuies and pictuies caived 
and painted by the hands of the statuaiy and paintei). It uses, 
lasts and sets spoil taniously and of itself in the self-same essence of 
Biahma, (as the figuies m the tiee oi the waves of the Ocean). 
It is the piojieity of the divine soul and mind to laise and set 
such imageries in them by turns, like the ci cations of oui imagi- 
nation t

14 The meaning of the woid void (sunya) instead of no void 
{asunya) or existence, is a fiction as false as inanity is a nullity 
in natuie Something must come out of something, and nevei fiom 
a void nothing; and how can nothing be i educed to nothing in 
the Qi\A-ma1i&pmlaya, {sunyaid sinyaie laiham)"^ \B‘Ta mJiilo 
mini fii, ei in nihtlnm nihtl i evei h posse) .

It contiaclicts lIiG ■\\cll known axiom of Locko, that, “it is impossible 
foi tho same thing to bo and not bo at tlie same time "

t Tlio unknown substance is the kiioiiu cause, a spiiitual substance — Grod. 
JBeikcly

268

yoga v/sishtiia.

15. In answer to your second question it has been said ‘^there 
was darkness neither Beeause the divine light of Biahina 
(which existed before creation), was not like the light of a 
material lummaiy (which is followed by dailcuess). The ever- 
lasting light was not to be obscuied by darkness, like the 
sunshine, or moon-light or the blazing of lire or the twinkling 
of stais 01 our eyes.16. It is the absence of the light of the gieat celestial 
lummaiies, that is called darkness, and there being no mateiial 
In opeity in the immaterial essence of Grod, theie could be no 
such light or darkness with him befoie creation.

17. The light of the vacuous Brahma is an internal per- 
ception of the soul, and is only felt and pciceivcd within onc^s 
self, and never externally by any body , nor is this spiritual lighi} 
ever clouded by any mist or darkness of temporal objects.

18. The indestructible Brahma is beyond and fiee fiom ex- 
ternal and visible light and daikness , and is above the legion 
of vacuum which is contained, as it were, within his bosom, 
and contains the universe as sheathed within its hollow 
womb.

19 As there is no difference between the outside and 
inside of a fruit (both of which is the same thing) ; so thcie 
is no shade of diffeience betwixt Brahma and the universe (the 
one pervading and the othei peivaded by his spiiit).

20. As the billow is contained in and composed of the 
watei and the pot of the eaifch, so the world being contained 
in Biahma, it can not be said as null and void, but full of 
the spuit of God.

21. The compaiison of earth and water does not agree 
eorpoieally with the spiiitual essence of God, whose vacuous 
spiiit contains and comprises the whole {Vtsva) within 
itself, as those elements do their component parts and productions.

22. Now as the spheie of the intellect is clearer and brighter 
far than the spheres of air and empty space , so the sense and 
idea of the woid woild as situated in the divine mind, is

UTPATTI KHANDA

269

clearer in a far greater degree than this visible worM 
appeals to us.UTPATTI KHANDA

269

clearer in a far greater degree than this visible worM 
appeals to us.

33. (Tn answer to the third question with regaid to 
the want of mtelleei)^ it is said thus : As the pungency of pepper 
is perceived by one who tastes it, and not by him who has never 
tasted it j so the minutiae of the Intellect are known in the 
intellectual sphere by a cultivated intelligence^ and by none who is 
without it.

34' Thus the Intellect appears as no intellect to one who is 
devoid of intelligence in himself^ (i e. one having the Intellect, 
does not pel eeive it without a cultivated undeistandmg). So 
this woild is seen in the spiiit of Grod or otherwise, ac- 
cording as one has cultivated or neglected his spiritual 
knowledge.

35. The world as it is, is seen either in its outward figure 
or in a spintual light, as other than or the same with Biahma 
(by the mateiialist and spiritualist) , but the Yogi views it in its 
fourth {t4)ya) state of 3 usnj)ia or utter extinction in his 
Unconscious soul. h

36. Theiefoie the Yogi, though leading a secular life, 
remains somnolent (Sumpia) in his soul, and tranquil {Sdnfa) 
in his mmd. He hves like Brahma unknown to and unnoticed 
by others, and though knowing all and full of thoughts in 
himself, he is as a treasury of Knowledge, unknown to the rest of 
mankind.

37. (In answer to the question how corporeal beings

could proceed from the mcorpoieal Brahma). Vasishtha says , - 
As waves of various shapes rise and fall in the still and 
shapeless breast of the sea, so innumerable worlds of various 
foims, float about in the unaltered and formless vacuity of 
Brahmans bosom, ,

38. Fiom the fulness of the Divine soul proceeds

the fulness of the living soul which is foimless also

{niidlnti). This aspect of Biahma is said to be owing to 
the purpose of manifesting himself (as living in all living beings).

270

YOGA VA'SISHTHA{niidlnti). This aspect of Biahma is said to be owing to 
the purpose of manifesting himself (as living in all living beings).

270

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

c‘29 So tlie totality of worlds pioceedmg fiom the jilemim 
of Biahma^ theie lemaiiis the same sum total also as the pleni- 
tude of Biahma himself.

30 Consideiing tlie woild as synonymous with Biahma 
in our minds, we find their identity (in the same manner), 
as one finds by taste the pepper and its pungency to be the 
same thing

31 Such being the state of the unreality of the mind and 
its cognizables, then lefiexions upon each other it e of the mind 
upon the object and those of the object on the mindj, aie eq^ually 
untrue as the shadow of a shadow (Here is an utter nega- 
tion of perception and peiceptibles There being no material sub- 
tiatum, the shadowy scene of the world is a meie mental syn- 
thesis. Beikely). ^

32. Know Biahma to be smaller than the smallest atom, and 
minutest of minutest particles. He is puiei than aii, and more 
tianquil than the subtile ether which is embosomed in him.

33. Unbounded by space and time, his form is the most exten- 
sive of all. He IS without beginning and end, and an ineffable 
light without brightness in it. (He is the light of lights).

3d. He is of the fiom of intellect-c-^^^ and life eternal, without 
the conditions and accidents of vitality The Divine Mind 
has its will eternal, and is devoid of the desires of fimte minds- 
clnttafa.

35. "Without the lise of the intellect (^. its development), 
theie IS neither vitality nor undeistandmg, no intellection nor 
any organic action or sensation, and no mental desiie oi feeling 
whatever , (all of which aie but products of the intellect or 
Ego).

36. Hence the Being that is full of these powers (and with- 
out which no power has its display), and who is without decline 
01 decay, is see'n by us to be seated in his state of tranquil36. Hence the Being that is full of these powers (and with- 
out which no power has its display), and who is without decline 
01 decay, is see'n by us to be seated in his state of tranquil

^ The Teneiable Yasishtlia would not raise tlie questiou “ where is the 
shadow of a shadow fpraiivwihasiia prativaniiam 'Luta'L), had he knowh 
tho discoreiies of the modem science of Optics, aud the achievements of phto- 
giaphj and phonography, the lefiacUons of prismatic lens and the vibrations of 
pinsical lines

UTPATTI KHANDA

271

«

A

■vacuity, and is rarei than the raiified vacuum of the etheiial 
legions

37 . E/^ma said Tell me again and more piecisely of the 
foim of this transcendental Being, who is of thenatuie of infinite 
intelligence, and which may give moie light to my undei standing.'

38. Vasistliasaid • I have told you lepeatedly, that tlieie 
is one supieme Biahma, the cause of causes, who remains alone 
by himself, when the universe is finally dissolved oi ahsoibed in 
him. Heie me deseiibe Him fully to you

39. That which the Yogi sees within himself after foigettmg 
his peisonality, and repiessing the faculties and functions of his 
mind, in Kis Simddh meditation, is veiily the form of the 
unspeakable B eing

40 As the Yogi who is ahsoibed m his meditation in absence 
of the visible woild, and m piivation of the viewer and visibles, 
and sees the light shining in himself, even such is the foim of 
that Being.

' 4l. Who having foigotten the nature of the living soul- 
jwa, and his pioclivity towards the mtelligibles,iemains m the 
j>uie light and tranquil state of his intellect (as m Yoga), such 
IS the foim of the Supieme Spmt

43 He who has no feeling of thebieathmg of the winds, or 
of the touch or piessme of anything upon his body , but lives as 
a mass of intelligence in this life, is veiily the foim of the 
Supieme.43 He who has no feeling of thebieathmg of the winds, or 
of the touch or piessme of anything upon his body , but lives as 
a mass of intelligence in this life, is veiily the foim of the 
Supieme.

43 Again that state of the mind, which a man of sense enjoys 
in his long and sound sleep, that is undistuibed by di earns and 
gnats, IS veiily the foim of the Supieme

44 That which abides in the heaits of vacuum, an and stone, 
and IS the intellect of all inanimate beings, is the foim of the 
Supieme

45 Again whatever 11 rational and insensible beings live by, 
nature, as without the soul and mind (as vegitables and miueials), 
the tiaiiquil state of then existence is the natuie of the Supreme 
Soul,

YOGA YA^SISHTHA.

272

46. That which is seated in the midist of the intellectual light 
of the soul, and what is situated in the midst of the etherial light 
of the sun, and that which is m the midst of our visual light, 
is verily tlie from of the Supreme. (This passage admits of an 
occult interpretation in the Yoga system).

47. The soul which is the witness of our knowledge, of solar and 
visual lights and darkness, is without beginning and end, and 
IS the form of the Supreme.

43. He who mainfests this world to ns, and keeps himself 
hidden fiom view, be he the same with or distmct fiom the 
woild, IS the foim of the Supreme.

49. Who though full of activity, is sedate as a rock, and who 
though not a vacuum (being the plenum of all), appeals yet as an 
empty vacuity, such is''|he foim of the Supreme.

50. He who is the source and terminus of our triple conscious 
ness of the knower, kud^m and knowledge (i. e. from whom they 
rise and m whom they setyiy turns), is most difficult of attainment.

51. He forth with the lustie of the tuple

conditions of tl^^® e, knoWer and their knowledge, and 
shows them to usy” intee insensible mirror, is verily the foim 
of the Supreme, whxS^® represented not as the cause mmitfaj 
but as the source devjf •t]ie tuple category.52 The mind thatV berated fiom bodily activities (as in 
the waking Jagiat statQiy® ^m its dieammg (as in the swapna or 
sleeping state), and is con^htrated in the intellect (as m the state 
of snsiiph or sound sleep), and abides alike in all moving as 
well as unmovmg bodies (as in the or fourth state of the

souV, is said to remain in the end of our being.

53. The intelligent mind which is as fixed as an immovable 
body, and fi»3ed fiom the exeicise of its faculties, is comparable 
With the Divine Mmd.*

• L ^ Br^ma, Yislmu, Siva, Snn,|indra and all others, aie assimilated

into the Supi eme Spirit in their state of rest He is beyond all attiibute and 
out of the sphere of the universe, and isof theform of an immutable Intellect.

CHAPTER XI.

Spiritual View oe Creation.

1 >A.MA said — Tell me, O Brahman, wheiein this woild abides 
■ ^ at its last dissolution, when it does not retain its present 
foim, 1101 this lesplendant show (as we see m it now).

2 Vasishtha answered Tell me, Rdma, what is the form of 
the barien woman^s son, and wheiefrom becomes and wheie ho 
goes, tell me also fiom wheie comes the sky-aiboui (aerial castle), 
and where it remains.

3 Bdma replied There never was, nor is, nor evei will be 
the son of a barien woman oi an aiboui m the sky, why then 
ask about the foim and figure of what is nothing ^

4' Vasishtha said — As theie never was a bairen woman^s 
son 01 a foiest in the an, so theie existed no such scene as 
that, of the woild befoie.

5. That which has no existence at aU, could have neither 
its pi eduction befoie, nor can it have its dissolution afteiwaids.’ 
What shall I then tell you legarding its genesis oi exit

6 Bdma lejoined The son of a baiien woman and a 
foiest in the sky are meie fictions, but the visible world is 
not so, which has both its beginning and end6 Bdma lejoined The son of a baiien woman and a 
foiest in the sky are meie fictions, but the visible world is 
not so, which has both its beginning and end

7 Vasishtha leplied It is haid to have a compaiison 
of the compaied object, agieemg in all lespects with whah 
it IS compaied. The compaiison of the woild, is as a simile 
of those objects, which admit of no comparison (but with them- 
selves)

8 The appeal ance of the woild, is compaied with that of 
a biacelet, because the one is as false as the other, and neither of 
them is real

9 And as theie is nothing in the sky except a negative 
emptiness, so the existence of the world in Biahma, is but a 
negative idea

VoL. I.

35

274

YOGA YA'SISIITIIA

( 10 As the coljiium is no othei than blackness^ and as

there is no diffeienee between fiost and its coldness^ so the 
woild IS not othei wise than the g'leat Biahma himselE.

11 As coldness can not be negatived o^ the moon and 
frost; so eieation can not be negated of God (Liteiallj; 
cieation is no negative propcity of Biahma, but essential to Ins 
natuie)

12 As theie is no watei in a sea of the mb age, noi light in 
the new moon, so this woild, as it is, docs not abide in the 
puie spiiit of God (m its gioss state)

13 That which did not exist at fiiot owing to its want 
of a cause, has neither its existence at present, noi can it be 
destioyed (when it is a ntl itself)

14' How IS it possible foi a dull mateiial object to have 
any other cause but a material one, j'ust as it is not the 
light (but some solid substance), that is the cause of a 
diadow

15 But as none of these works, has come into exist’ence 
without some cause, that cause whatever it is, is situated in 
these pioductions of it {t e the author is displayed in his 
works)15 But as none of these works, has come into exist’ence 
without some cause, that cause whatever it is, is situated in 
these pioductions of it {t e the author is displayed in his 
works)

16 Whatever appears as ignorance or delusion (as this 
world), has some appearance of intelligence oi truth (of the 
Divinity) in it, as the delusion of the world seen in a dream, 
IS the effect of the intellect within us (Consciousness is 
awake in oui di earns also)

17 As the illusion of the world in a dieam, is not without 
our iiiwaid consciousness of it, in like manner Biahma was not 
uneoneious of the expansion of the world, at the beginning of 
creation

c

18 All this^Fhat we behold about us, is situated in the divine 
soul, (ill the same mannei as the visions in oui di earns, are 
but archetypes of oui souls) , there is no othei world that 
uses and sets (but what is imprinted in our minds)

UTPATTI KHANDA

2V5

19 As fluidity IS anotlier name foi* watei^ and fluctuation*, 
tlie same witli wind , and as sunsbune is no othei tlian lig'lit, 
so tlie woild IS naught but Biahma {displayed m natuie).

EO As the figure of a city, lesides in the inward intellect 
of oue, who 13 conscious of his dieaming, in the same manner 
this woild, IS displayed in the Supieme soul

2l. Eidma said — If it is so, then tell me, O Brdhman • 
whence is this our belief of its substantiality, and how this 
unteal and visionaiy ideal, presents its baneful visible aspect 
unto us.

33. For the view being in existence, there must be its 
viewer also, and when there is the viewer, there is the view 
likewise. As long as eithei of these is in existence, there is our 
bondage, and it is on the disappearance of both, that oui libera- 
tion chiefly depends ‘ (which can hardly take place).33 It IS entiiely impossible to be so, as long as oiii notion of 
the view, is not lost in our minds, foi unless the view is vanished 
both fiom the vision of the eyes and mind, no one can even 
foim an idea of liberation in his mmd

34 Again the lepiesentation of the view at first, and its 
obliteration afterwards, is not enough for oui liberation, because 
the remembrance of the view, is bondage of the soul

35 Moreover when the picture of the view, is settled in 
the soul, and reflected in the raiiioi of the mind, there is no 
necessity of its leeolleetion , (f 01 wh it IS deeply rooted in the 
soul, comes out of itself)

36 The intellect which was without the notion of the 
visibles at first, would be entitled to liberation, were it not 
owing to the natuie of the viewei, (to imbibe the ideas of 
visibles)

37. Now sir, please to remove by your leasonmg, my hope- 
lessness of liberation, which I ween, is unattainable by any.

38 Vasishtha said Hear me, Rama’ explain to you 
m length, how the unreal woild with all its contents, appears 
as leal to us

276

YOGA ^’•A''S^S1JT11A

. 29. Foi uiilesbitis explained to you by my leasoning; and tlic 
narratives and instances (of tbe piactice of otlicis), tins doubt 
•will not subside in your bieast, as diit sets down in the lake.

30. Then Rslmaj you will be able to conduct youibclf on cai tli, 
as one undei assuiance of tbe erioncoiis conception of the 
Cl cation and existence of the world.

31. You will then remain as a lock against the impiessions 
of affluence and wan tj and of gam and loss, and youi i elation 
with whatevei, is fleeting oi lasting and the like

32 Mind, that theie is that only one spiiit, which is sclf-exis- 
tent, and all besides is meie fiction I will now tell you, how the 
tuple woild was piodueed and foimed32 Mind, that theie is that only one spiiit, which is sclf-exis- 
tent, and all besides is meie fiction I will now tell you, how the 
tuple woild was piodueed and foimed

33 It was fiom Him, that all these beings have come to 
existence, while He of himself, is all andeveiy thing in it He 
likewise appeals to us and disappeais also, both as foims and then 
appeaiances, and as the mind and its faculties, and as figuies 
and then shapes, and as modes and motions of all things.

CHAPTER XII.

The Idealistic Theo-cosmogony of Vedanta.

Y ASISHTHA said

Eiom the state of peifeet quiescence and tianqmllity of 
the sujiremely Holy spiiit^ the univeise lose to being in the 
manneij which you must hear with youi best undeistanding and 
attention.

2 As sound sleep displays itself in visional y dreams^ so does 
Biahma mamfest huuself in the woiks of eieation^ of wJiich he is 
the soul and leceptacle ( z. e, who contains and foims and enlivens 
the whole)

3 The woildj which of its nature is continually piogressive in 
its couise, IS identic with the essence of that Bemg, whose foim 
is selfsame with the ineffable glory of his eternally gemming 
Intellect (clan-mam) ,

*4 This chit or Intellect^ then (z e. aftei its ineit quiescence), 
gets of itself an intellection (clzetya) in itself, before assuming to 
itself consciousness or the knowledge of egoism. (This is 
the fiist stage of the peicipient soul).

5 Then this thinking Intellect (clietya-clizt) , gets the notions 
{bocllias) of some faint images {^hzfa-ntpas), which aie purer and 
lighter than an, and which have received their names and forms 
aftei waids. (The innate ideas aie boin in it befoie the embryonic 
mind 01 soul).

6 Aftei wards this transcendent essence (Intellect), becomes 
an intelligent principle (saclzeta), and eager foi intelligence 
[chetand) It is now worthy of its name as Intellect or clizt, 
on account of its attaining to what is called intelligence.7 Lastly it takes the form of gross consciousness (gliana- 
samvedana), and receives the name of the livmg sovl-jzva. It- 
now loses its divine nature by leflectmg on itself . {z. e. its own 
peisonality).

278

YOGA VA'SISnTHA

8 This living' pimciplGj is then involved in thoughts i elating 
to* the woild onlj^ but depends by its natuie on the divine essence 
(as the fallacy of the snake^ depends on the substance of the lope)

9 Afterwards theie uses a void space into being, called Kham- 
vacuim (Aiabic Khdoi^etuii) ^ which is the seed oi source of tlie 
piopeity of sound, and which became expiessiVe of meaning after- 
waids (It IS called dldsa oi sky-light fiom Idsa to shine, as 
light was the first woik of God).

10 Kext ill ordei aie piodueed the elements of egoism and du- 
ration in the living soul, e the simultaneousness of the ideas of 
self entity and deration in the living piinciple). And these two 
teims, aie the loots of the subsistence of futuie worlds, {t. e The 
individuality and durability of things).

11 This ideal knowledge, of the unreal forms of the net- work 
of world, in divine Spurt, was made to appeal as a leahty by 
the Omnipotent power, {t e The ideal world ajipeared after- 
wards as real)

13. Thus the ideal self-eonseiousness became the seed (.or 
toot) of the tree of desues, which were vacilated by egoism in 
the form of air

13. The intellect in the form of the any ego, thinks on the 
element of sounds [sahcla tanvidUam), it becomes by degrees den- 
ser than the laiified an, and produces the element of mind

14 Sound is the seed (or root) of words, which were after- 
wards diversified in the forms of names oi nouns and signifieiant 
terms , and the assemblage of words, as shoots of trees, is varied 
m padas oi inflected words, vdkyas oi sentences, and the collec- 
tions of Tedas and Sastias.15 It is from this Supreme spirit, that all these woilds derived 
then beauty afterwards, and the multitude of words (which 
sprang from the sounds), and weie full of meaning, became 
widely spiead at last.

* The livmg soul is the creative spirit of God, represented by the divine lij' 
pOKtasiS of SxTUnyQ-gal inti or -Denuurgus, Wliicli is dependaiifc on the Supreme 
spirit

UTPITTI KHANDA

279

16 The Intellect having* such a family as its offspiing, is

expiessed by the ivoid or the living soul^ which be-

came afteiwaids the aibor (or source) of all foims of beings, 
known under a variety of expiessions and then significations (? e 
The living god Biahmd. became the cause of the foimal woild, 
fiom the taiima,t)a elements pioduced by Bialima).

17 The foui teen kinds of living beings, which fill the cells 
in the bowels of all woilds, spiang afteiwaids fiom this living 
soul (These include all vegitable and animal life, and all such 
as mciease in bulk and giowth)

18 It was then, that the Intellect by a motion and inflation 
of itself, and at an instantaneous thought, became the element 
f trnn U] a oi to\iG\x and feeling (the an'', which was yet without 
its name and action (The Sjniit bieathed bieathless Siiih) 
This breath caused an, which expanded itself and filled all bodies, 
which aie objects of touch and feeling

19 The ail, which is the seed (loot) of tlie tree of tangibles, 
then, developed itself into biauches, composed of the (49) vaiious 
kinds of winds, that aie the causes of the biea things and motions 
of all beings.

^0 Then the Intellect pioduced at pleasure and fiom its 
idea of light, the elemental essence of lustie, which leceived 
afteiwaids its diffeieut names (fiom the light of the sun and 
moon and the stais, as also fiom those of file and lightn- 
ing).21 Then thesun, fire, hghtnmgand otheis, which aie the seeds 
(or loots) of the tiee of light, caused the vaiious colouis of bodies 
that filled the woild (That, light is the cause of colour, was known 
to the ancient Rishi) .

22 It leflected on the want of fluidity, and pioduced the 
hquid body of waters, whose taste constitutes the element {tanmd- 
Ud) of flavour

23 The desire of the soul for diffeient flavoms {lasas), is the 
seed of the tiee of taste, and it is by the relish of a vaiiety of 
tastes, that the woild is to go on in its couise

280 YOGA V/SISHTHA

<

24 ) Then tlie self-willed Bialima, wisliing to produce tlie 
Visible eaifchj caused thepioperty ofsmell to appeitam to it fiom 
his own element of it

25 He made bis elementaiy solidity, the seed or souice of 
the tiee of foims (moipholog'y) , as he made his own element 
of lotundity the substiatum of the spheiieal woild

26. These elements being' all evolved fiom the Intellect, aie 
ao’ain involved of themselves in it, as the bubbles of watei use 
and subside in itself

27 In this mannei, all these beings remain in their combined 
states, until then final dissolution into their simple and sepaiate 
foims

28 All those things, which are but forms and formations of 
puie Intellect, lemain within the spheie of Divine Intelligence, 
as the gems of the big banian tiee, leside in the foims of i)ollen 
and the seed

29 These spiouted forth in time, and buist out into a hundied 
blanches and aftei having been concealed in an atom, became 
as big as they weie to last foi evei.

30 Such IS the giowth and multiplication of things by 
peivasion of the Intellect, until they aie put to a stop by its 
constiaction and when weakened in then bodies by its deseition, 
they dioop down in the end

31 Thus IS this class of elementaiy fanmcU7 as, pioduced in 
the Intellect out of its own volition, and aie manifested in the 
foim of foimless minutise to sight * (tiasaianus)31 Thus IS this class of elementaiy fanmcU7 as, pioduced in 
the Intellect out of its own volition, and aie manifested in the 
foim of foimless minutise to sight * (tiasaianus)

32 These five-fold elements aie veiily the only seeds of all 
things in the woild They aie the seeds of the piimaiy momen- 
tum that was given to them (in the beginning) In oui notions, 
they aie the seeds of elementaiy bodies, but in then leal natuie, 
they aie the' incieate ideal shapes of the Intellect leplemshing 
the woild

tat-matra Tniglit be rendered from its affinity as “tliat tnat- 
ter , but the idealistic theory of vedanta being opposed to that of the mate- 
iiahstic, it expresses only the idea and not mattei.

CHAPTEE XIII.

On the Phoduction op the Self-Born

kTASISHTHA said

V E4ma f When the Supieme Brahma remains in his res- 
plendent andtianquil state (befoie eieation\ there is no essence of 
etheiial light or heat or even darkness piodueed in the intellectual 
spiiit. (But they lie hidden there as if buried in oblivion)

The /y^Ji^-God has the attiibute of Chetya mtelleetuality 
at fiist^ and it is fiom the intellection {Chetana) of his intellee- 
tual pait {GIiefydnsa)y that the epithet of mind [Claita) is attri- 
buted to him The faculties of his intellect [Chit), are

called its intelligence [Chetand).

3. The Chit oi intellect has then the attribute of the Living 
soul [Jioa), from its intelligence [Chetand), and connection with 
the chefya oi intelligible objects in natuie It is next attiibuted 
\Vith the title of mdyd or illusion, fiom the subjection of its 
Chefya or cognizable objects only to itself Aham mdUa

4<. It has then the attiibute of undeistanding [hiddJii), fiom 
the excess of its egoism [ahantd), which is full with the purposes 
of its mind and the elements of sound &c {i e with a desiie 
for all sensible obj'ects) .5 This (living, deluded and self reflecting) ego, is puffed up 
with thoughts of (possessing) all things, and looks ujion the gieat 
aiboui of the visible woild, (as the gieat gaiden for its pleasuie 
and gam).

6 But the living souls, like so many evanescent objects seen 
in a dream, are made to use and fall one.aftei the othei, iii this 
great foiest of the world suiiounded by the skies ,

7. But the woild is (as continuous) as the giove of Kaiajna 
plants, glowing fiom unsown seeds, and its elementaiy bodies 
of the watei, file, eaith and an, have no legaid for any body , 
(that IS livuig 01 dead).

VoL I

36

262

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

' 8. The intellect which is the soul of the universe, creates

afteiwaids the eaith and all other things, as one lemetnbeiing 
the objects of his dieam, (lecalls them to his memoiy)

9 Wheieevei theie is the geim of the woild, it developes 
itself even at that place , the five elements aie the five fold seed 
of the woild, but the undecaymg intellect is the seed of the 
quintuple (pancha-hliuia)

10 As is the seed so is its fiuit , hence know the woild to 
be a foim and full of G-od, and the spacious fiimament to be the 
leseivoii of the quintuple elements in the beginning of cieation

11 The soul like the body, is composed of the poweis of the 
Intellect, and does not subsist of itself , but being inflated by the 
same, it extends its bulk

12 But the vacuous foim of the intellect, which is seated 
in the spiiitual body of the soul, cannot be composed of solid 
leality (as the piimaiy elements of mattei) This is not pos- 
sible , hence nothing can come out fiom an impossibility

13 Again that which is changeable in its foim, cannot 'have 
its sameness at all times hence if the essence of the quintuple 
elements, be attiibuted to Biahma, fiom the idea of their being 
the quintessence of his spiiit, theie can be no immatenal and 
immutable Biahma.14) Theiefoie know this quintuple to be the develdliied Biah- 
ma himself, as he evolved them in the beginning, and as h^is then 
producer for the creation of the woild \

I

15 Thus He being the piime cause of then production, /theie 
IS nothing that is pioduced (without) him, and the woild Vs no 
pioduct of itself. V -

16. The iinieal ajipeais as real as a city seen in a dieam,\and 
as a castle *built in an by our hopes so we place the living s(oul 
in ourselves, which has its foundation in the vacuous sinrit of 
God

17. Thus the biilliant spint, which is situated in the Divine 
Intelleet, being no eaithly oi anj’' othei mateiial substance, is

TJTPATTI KHANDA

283

styled the living sonh and lemains in vacmim as a luminous body^ 
1 ising in the sky

18. Hear now how this vacuous living soul, comes to be em- 
bodied in the human body, after its detachment as a spaik from 
the totality of vital spiiits, in the empty spheie of divine 
Intellect

19 Tlie soul thinks itself as a minute particle of light^^ at 
fiist, and then it consideis itself as gi owing in the spheie of its 
consciousness

20. The unieal appeal mg as real, pioves to be unieal at last, 
as the fictitious moon becomes a nullity afteiwaids, so the soul 
continues to view itself subjectively and objectively both as the 
viewei and the view

21. Thus the single self becomes double as one sees his own 
death in a dieam , and thus it waxes into bigness and thinks its 
vital spaik as a star (This is the foim of the Imgadeha oi senti- 
ent soul within the body)

22 As the soul goes on thinking itself the miciocosin of 
the woild [Visioaiupa), so it falsely thinks itself as such in leali- 
ty, as it IS expiessed by the dictum ‘‘ Sohand’ ^^so am I

23 By thinking himself as such, man comes to believe it as 
tiue, as one believes himself as a tiavellei in his dieam. So by 
thinking the soul as a stai, he views it so within himself23 By thinking himself as such, man comes to believe it as 
tiue, as one believes himself as a tiavellei in his dieam. So by 
thinking the soul as a stai, he views it so within himself

24 By continued meditation of his soul as such, he loses his 
external sensations, and views this stai in his ciamum.

25 He sees the soul within him though it be without him , 
just as the mmoi leflects the distant hill in itself, and the soul 
lemains cofined within him, as a body is confined in a well, and 
as a sound is shut up in the hollow of a cave

26 The consciousness of our di earns and desnes, is but a pai ti- 
de (attiibute) of the living soul, whose leal foim.is that of a 
stai waking (keeping watch' within us (Consciousness of extei- 
nal objects in oui dieam and desiie, is compaiecl to the lefleetion of 
outwaid images in a glass oi bubble of watei, and to the echo of a 
distant sound in a hollow cave)

284

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

; a7 Now tills vacuous life, winch is comiiosecl of the essences 
of the mmd, undeistanding and knowledge, resides in the hollow 
sheath of the star (The star is sujiposed to be the eye-sight and 
residence of life Gloss)

It appeals to me to take its flight to the sky, to see what 
IS passing theie (i e the maniiei in which the mental eye of the 
Yogi penetiates the legions of an). And then it enters the body 
by two holes, which have the names of the external oigans (of 
sight) given them afterwards (The whole spheie of air is 
thought to teem with life or living souls and spiiits, which rove 
fiee in the an, until they aie made to entei and pass out of 
the body by two unknown holes, whether of the nostrils or 
sockets 01 glottis, lemains undefined and undetermined).29 The oigans by which the embodied living soul, is to 
see (external objects), aie called the eyes-neij as {horn their 
leceiving {nay ana) the light of the sonlp That by which it 
is to feel, is styled the skin (f?oaX oi touch), and those wheieby 
it IS to heal, aie termed the eais (n idzs fiom S9 it to heai, coiies- 
poudiug wnth suna or sJninu in veinaculais and Peisian). ,

30 The oigan of smelling is the nose ghcina fiom its bear- 
ing the scent gludna to the soul , and that of taste is named as 
tongue 'lasand, toi its conducting the lasa taste or flavour to 
the spiiit

31. Then theie is the breathing air (the air of breath oi bieath 
of life), which actuates the eneigies of the oigans of action. 
It IS this an which is the cause — of vision, and mover of the 
internal organs of the mind and thought.

32 This (vital breath) suppoits the embodied and all suppoi- 
ting soul (cthm/nia-de/idfmd) in the vacuity of the body, and 
fills and kindles it as the air does a spaik of fire

33 The woid J^toa oi the living soul {zoa), is brought under 
a figurative, sense, To mean something leal m the unreal bodyh 
Hence Biabma is said to be the life and soul of the unreal 
woild

34' The gloss embodied soul, is of the foim of vacuum like 
■Tile mind, and yet it nnagines itself to lesidc m an aoiim in the

UTPATTI KHANDA.

285

body, as Bialimd, I'isujDposed to be seated in the mundane egg^ 
[t. e. The soul loses its light airy shape and fiee lange, by being 
confined in the body).

35. Some view the spirit of God as floating on the suiface of 
the (ante-mundane) wateis (in the foim of NOjidi/ana), and others 
view it in the peison of the Loid of eieatuies (Bialima), while theie

aie otheis, who look at it as infused thioughout the cieation in 
the figuie of These aie called the subtile and gross

bodies of the soul {silnila, and sicLsJtma saihas).aie otheis, who look at it as infused thioughout the cieation in 
the figuie of These aie called the subtile and gross

bodies of the soul {silnila, and sicLsJtma saihas).

36. The soul oi spiiit is the spacious womb of productions, 
and the means of executing its own purposes, and of know- 
ing the pi opei time and place, and the aiticle and the manner 
of action (modus 02 ierandi)

37 The mind is the inventor of woids, expiessive of ideas 
(m the soul), and subjects itself to the aibitaiy sounds of its own 
invention. Hence God is eiioneously said to be embodied m 
words isahda Bia/ma of Miminsa philosophy) in this woild of 
eiiors.

38. The unproduced and self-bom Biahm^, that has iisen 
of himself (and lepiesents the mind), is as unreal as the 
soaiing of a man in the sky m his dieam.

39. This all suppoi ting embodied soul, is the pnme Loid of 
creatuies, who is said to have foimed this illusoiy frame of thfr 
woild.

4<0. But there was nothing f 01 raed oi born in it (in reality); 
nor IS theie any substance to be found in the woild. It is the 
same vacuous f 01 m of Brahma still, whose essence is known to 
extend as the infinite space itself.

41. Things appealing as leal, are as unreal as an iraaginaiy 
city (Utopia), which piesents a variety (of forms and colours) to 
the fancy, witliout being built or painted by any . body. (The 
phenomenal appearance of the world, is likened to a pliantas- 
magoiia).

42 Nothing that is unmade or unthought of, can be leai 
(eithei in substance 01 idea), and the g ids Biahmd, and otheia.

286

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

l^feing fieed fiom tbeir avocations at the uni voi sal dissolution of 
existence, could neithei resume their functions nor have mateiials 
for the same.286

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

l^feing fieed fiom tbeir avocations at the uni voi sal dissolution of 
existence, could neithei resume their functions nor have mateiials 
for the same.

43, The self-boin Biahmd,, having then iieitliei Ins lemem- 
biauce of the past, nor any material appliance at hand, could 
neithei foim an ideal or material woild out of nothing Theie- 
foie pioduetion of Brahmd and formation of the univeise aie 
alike (chemeiiealj

44 The eaith and all other existences, aie but the eteinal 
ideas of the divine mind, and they appeal to us as objects of a 
dieam in oiii waking state (when they vanish into any nothing)

45 The divine spiiit is known to be vacuum only, and so 
also IS the woild evei known to be * (because the like pioduces 
the like) So all wateis aie alike liquid bodies, though they 
aie made to pass undei diffeient names

46 This cieation iseveiy wheiethe same in the Supieme Spiiit.

It IS but an evolution of the same (though presenting diffeient 
aspects to us) , and the cieatoi is always and eveiywheie immu- 
table in his natuie •

47 The vacuous univeise, undei the name of the mundane 
egg, shines as cleaily as the Divine S pint it is calm in its ap- 
peal ance, and becomes distuibed by causes boin in itself. 
(Natuie IS umfoim, but luffled by accidents)

48 It IS suppoibed by the suppoitless suppoitei of all, who 
is one and without a second, but devoid of unity in (the vaiiety 
of his) cieation All tins is boin m his consciousness, and theie- 
foie theie is nothing that is pioduced anew

49 He, who is of the foim of unlimited space, and without 
any vacuity in it, (because natuie abhois a vacuum) , who is 
tiauspaient yet teeming with abundance , who is the whole 
woild (God in natuie , without any woildliness in him, is veiily 
the substiatuin of all50 He, who is neither the contaiuei nor the contained, noi 
the view of the woild , who is neithei the woild noi its cieator 
(Biahmd), and about uhom theie can be no disunite nor dispu- 
tant , is veiily the unknown God

UTPAITI KIIAKDA

28 T

51 Hej who IS neither the passing noild nor any of lis 
passing things , who is quite at rest, yet situated in all things, 
(whether moving or quiescent) , is the only Biahma that shines 
of himself in himself, fas the soul of and all iii all).

52 As we form m oiu selves the image of a wliiilpool, by 
the idea of the fluidity of water in oui minds , so the sight of 
the world produces the false notion of its leality in the mmd

53. All unieahties become extinct at the end, as we see 
the death of oui fiail bodies in dieams So we find on the 
contiaiy the essential pait of oui soul, to be unscathed by its 
own nature of iiidusti uetibility, and lemaining in the foim of 
everlasting consciousness in the atmospheie of oui intellects

54;. Brahmd, the piime Lord of cieatures, is evei manifest by 
himself in the form of vacuity in the Supieme sjiiiit, and he 
being of a spiiitual form as the mmd, has no material body 
formed of earth as all other corporeal beings, and is theie- 
fore both real and uuboin (in his essence)

CHAPTER XIV. 
Establishment of Brahma.

% TASISHTHA added

V In tins manner the visible woild, myself, thyself and all 
other things aie nothing , all these being unmade and nnboi n 
aie inexistent it is the Supieme spiiit only that is existent of 
itself.

9 , The piimeval vacuous soul is aivalcend at fiist of itself, 
and by its own eneigy fiom its quietness, and begins to have a 
motion in itself like the tioubled wateis of the deep.

3. It then begins to reflect in itself, as in a dream or in 
imagination, without changing its vaeuous form, which is likened 
to a rock with the inward faculty of thought,3. It then begins to reflect in itself, as in a dream or in 
imagination, without changing its vaeuous form, which is likened 
to a rock with the inward faculty of thought,

4. The body of the G-ieat Viidja also, is devoid of any 
mateiial form, either of earthly or any other elemental sh/ipe, 
(as it IS viewed in the Vedas). It is puiely a spiiitual, in- 
tellectual and etherial form, and as tianspeient as the ether 
itself

6. It is undecaying and steady as a rock, and as any as a 
city seenm'a dieam. It is immovable as the line of a regiment 
lepiesented in a pictuie,

6 All othei souls are as pictures of dolls and puppets, 
painted and not engraven on the body of Viraj as upon a huge 
pillai , and he standing as an uncaived column in the empty 
spheie of Biahma, Fepiesents all souls (and not bodies) as they 
aie meie pictures on it

7 The piime Loid of cieatuies is said to be self-boin at fiist, 
and he is known as the mcreate (Brahma), for want of his 
piioi acts to cause his birth (He is coeternal with the eternal 
Biahma, and is theiefoie not subject to birth and death)

8. The piimeval patiiaichs, who obtain their ultimate 
liberation at the final dissolution of the woild, have no ante-

UTPATTI KHANDA

'289

celeiit cause to be leborn as miliberated moitals. (So the'* 
eniaiicipate souls of tbe living and dead, are freed fiom the doom 
of legeneiation )

9 Biahma, who is the reflector of all souls, is himself in- 
visible in the inWaid miiioi of other souls e he reflects all 
images in himself, but nevei casts his own reflexion ujion any) 
He IS neither the view noi the viewer, and neither the creation 
noi the cieatoi himself (These being the functions of the 
cieative and rejiiesentative powers of Biahmd and Virdj)^10 Though thus negated of all predicates, yet is Biahma 
the soul of all piedicables, that may be afllrmed oi denied of 
him , (since he is all in all) He is the source of these chains of 
living beings, as light is the cause of a line of lighted lamps 
in illuminations

11 The will of the gods (Biahmd and Vuaj), proceeding 
from the volition of Biahma, is of that spiritual nature as the 
other , just as one dream rising in another, is equally unsubs- 
tantial as the first (« e the products of spiritual causes, are also 
spiritual, by the rule of the homogeneity of the cause and effect).

12-. Hence all living souls, which are evolved fiom the 
breathing of the Supreme Spirit, are of the same nature as their 
origin for want of an anxiliaiy causality (Grod made man in 
his own image, and as perfect as himself and this man is manas 
the Biahm^,, oi as he is named Adam, corresponding with 
Aclima 01 Adyam pmusJiam the first male oi Piotogonus)

13 Want of a secondaiy agency, produces the equality of 
effects with then cause, (as the fruits and flowers of trees, are of the 
same land with the parent tree, unless there rises a diffeience 
ih them by cause of engiaftings) Hence the uniformity of 
created things, pioves the conception of their creation hy a 
seeondaiy cause, to be wholly eiioneous ,

Biahma himself is the prime soul of Viidj and self- 
same with him, and Viidj is the soul of creation and identical 
with it He IS the vacuous vitality of all, and it is fiom him 
that the unreal earth and other things have then rise. (Virdj is 
the spirit of God diffused m natuie)

VoL. I.

37

20a YOGA vasishthaVoL. I.

37

20a YOGA vasishtha

<' 15 Rdima said Tell me^ wlietliei the living soul, is a limited 
thing or an unlimited mass of life , oi does the unbounded spirit 
of God, exist in the shape of a mountanous heap of living souls; 
(;. e whether it is to be taken in a collective or integial sense, 
and whethei it foims a totality samasliH existent in the 
Divinity, of which all individual souls aie eithei as parts vya^hh 
or separate existences)

Id Aie these living souls like showers of lain-water falling 
fiom above, oi as the drizzling drops of waves in the vast 
ocean of cieation, oi as the spaiks of fiie stiuck out of a red-hot 
iron, and fiom whence they flow, and by whom they aie 
emitted

17^ Tell me sir, the truth concerning the profusion of living 
souls, and' though I have a partial knowledge of it, I lequne 
it to be more fully and cleaily explained by you.

18. Vasishtha replied There being but one living soul 
of the univeise, you can not call it a multitude. Your question 
therefore is quite out of place, as the query about the boms of 
haies, (which do not exist m nature).

19. ^ Theie aie no detached living souls, O Kama, ^or* are 
they to be found in multitudes any where, noi was theie a 
mountanous heap of souls known to have existed at any time.

20. Living soul is but a fictitious word, and it is heaped 
with, many fictions, all of winch, you must know foi certain, 
do not apply to the soul.

21. - Theie is but one pure and immaculate Brahma, who is 
mere Intellect (cJmmmt) am) and all pervasive He assumes to 
himself all attiibutes by his almighty powei. (Here Biahma 
IS repiesented not only as Omniscient and Omnipotent, but as 
lagtina also by his assumption of all attiibutes),.

22 The living soul is- viewed by many to evolve itself from' 
the intellect into many visible and invisible fioms (miii ia-mutar)!) , 
just as a plant is seen to develope itself into its fruits and' 
floweis.23. They add to their knowledge of the soul the attiibutes of

UTPATTl KHANDA.

291

llie living principle; undeisfcanding; actioii; motioii; mind and uniLjr 
and duality, as i£ tliese appeitam to its natuie

21'. But all tins is caused by ignoiance, while light 
undeistanding assigns them to Brahma The igiioiant aie be- 
•wildeied by these distinct views (of the soul), and will not be 
awakend to sense.

25. These different beheveis aie lost (m their various views), 
as the light is lost under daikness They Will nevei come 
to the knowledge of truth as it is the case with the ignorant.

26. Know Brahma himself as the living soul without any 
divisibility or distinction He is without begining oi end. 
He IS omnipotent; and is of the foim of the great Intellect 
which foims his essence,

27. His want of minuteness (e e, his fulness) in all places, 
precludes his distinctive appellations eveiy w’^here Whatever 
attributes are given him (by fiction), are all to be undei stood to 
mean Biahma himself,

28. Rama asked —How comes it, O Brdhman^ that the 
totality of the hving souls in the world, is guided by the will 
of one univeisal soul, which governs the whole, and to which 
all otheis aie suivject,

29. Vasishtha replied — Brahma the gieat living soul and 
Omnipotent power, remained fiom eternity with his volition 
{saiya sanJvalpa fixed determination) of cieation, without parti- 
tion 01 alteration of hi m self.

30 Whatever is wished by that great soul, comes to take 
place immediately The wish it formed m its unity at first, be- 
came a positive duality at last Then its wish ^^to be many’^ 
{Aham laJm syam), became the sejiaiate existenses after waids

31 All these dualities of his self-divided poweis (the differ- 
ent living souls); had then seveial routines of actioh allotted to 
them, as s is foi that^^, meaning '‘this being isfoi that duty, 
and such action is for such end^"’.32. Thus though theie can be no act without exeitioii, (by 
the general rule as m the case of mortals), yet the predominant

£512

YOGA VA'SISHTIIA

, will of Bialima, is always pievailing without; its exeition to action, 
(as m the ease of saints whose wills aie effective of then ends 
Tinthout the aid of action)

33 Though they that hear the name of living beings, effect 
then puiposes by exeition of then eneigies, yet they can effect 
nothing without acting accoiding to the law appointed by the 
piedominant power

34< If the law of the piedominant power, is effective of its 
end, (t e the law of action foi pioduction of acts), then the exei- 
tions of the suboidinate poweis (thejiviug souls), must also be 
attended with success {« e the_ attainment of the like result of 
tlie like action)

35 Thus Biahma alone is the gieat living soul that exists for 
evei and without end , and these millions of living beings aie no 
othei in the woild (than agents of the divine energies)

36 It IS with a conciousness of the intellectual soul, e 
the inwaid knowledge of the divinity within themselves), that all 
living souls aie bom in this woild , but losing that consciousness 
(then knowledge of God) afteiwaids, they became alienated fiom 
him

37. Hence men of infeiior souls, should pm sue the eouise of 
conduct led by the supeiioi souls, foi legaining then spiiitual life 
Aimajwaiwam, as the coppei becomes tiansfoimed into gold (by 
chemical piocess)

38. Thus the whole body of living beings, that had been as 
inoxisfcent as an before, come into existence, amd use lesjilendent 
with the woudeiful intellect

39. Whoso peiceives this wonderous intellect in his mind, 
and gets afteiwaids a body and the consciousness of his egoism, 
he is then said to be an embodied living souf.

40. The mind that is gratified with intellectual delights, be-> 
comes as expanded as the intellect itself, and thinks these plea- 
sines to constitute the sum total of woildly enjoyments.40. The mind that is gratified with intellectual delights, be-> 
comes as expanded as the intellect itself, and thinks these plea- 
sines to constitute the sum total of woildly enjoyments.

4-1 The Intellect is said to lemani unchanged in all its suc- 
eced’ug stages, and though it nevci changes fiom that state,

;i et it uake'^ (dcvelopc'^) by a powei intinisic m itself

20.3

jUTPATTI KHANDA.

•

The uninterrupted actwity o£ the Intelleoi, indulges 
itself in the amusement of manifesting the intelhgibles m the form

of the,woild. {i. e. Of evolving the knowahlesfi omits own know- 
ledge of them. Or it is the pleasure of the intellect to unfold 
the seciets of natuie to view)

43. The extent of the intellectual faculty, is wider and more 
raiified than the surrounding an, and yet it perceives its distinct 
egoism by itself and of its own nature (The subjective know- 
ledge of ego — self).

44 Its knowledge of self, springs of itself m itself like tbe 
water of a fountain , and it peieeives itself (its ego) to be but an 
atom amidst the endless woilds

45. It peieeives also in itself the beautiful and woiidious 
woild, which is amazing to the understanding, and which is there- 
aftei named the universe («. e. The one existing in the other and 
not without it meaning, the soul to be the seat of both the sub- 
jective and objective knowledge).

46. Now Rdma, our egoism being but a conception of the in- 
tellect, is a meie fiotion {Jcalpand'", and the elementary piinciples 
being but cieatures of egoism, they aie also fictions of the intellect.

47. Again the living soul being but a resultant of oiu acts 
and desnes, you have to renounce these causes, m oidei to get 
lid of your knowledge of ego and tn : (« e of the existence of 
yourself and that of others),* and then you attain to the knowledge 
of the true one, aftei discarding the fictions of the leal and unreal.48. As the sky looks as clear as ever, after the shadows of 
clouds are dispersed from it, so does the soul look as bright as 
it existed at fiist in the intellect, aftei its overshadowing fictions 
have been lemoved.

49 The universe is a vacuum, and the woild is a name for the 
field of oiu exertions. This vacuity is the abodo of the gods 
{7iS7oa and Yimf, both of whom aie formless). The wonderful

fxame of plastic natuie, is but a form of the formless intellect and 
no othei.

50. What is one^s nature never leaves him at any time ; 
how then can a form 01 figure be given to the formless Divinity?^

294

YOGA VASlSHTUA

« 51. Tlie divme intellect is exemi t^ from all the names and 
forms wliicli aie given to nnmlelligent worldly tilings^ it being 
tbe pervadei and enkvener, of all that sbmes in the world. (In- 
tellect is the power of iindei standing).

52 The mindj iindei standing and egoism, with the elements, 
the hills and skies, and all things that compose and support the 
woild, aie made of the essences pioccedmg fiom the intellect. 
(The intellect fioni inialegere contains all things).

53. Know the world to compose the mmdi-chitlcL of the in- 
tellect-c//ei5 of God, because the mind does not subsist without 
the woild. Want of the woild would piove the inexistence of 
the mind and intellect which consist of the woild (Hence the 
identity of the intelhgent woild with the mind and intellect of 
God).

54. The intellect like the pepper seed, is possest of an ex- 
quisite property within itself, and beais like the flavour of the 
othei, the element of the living soul, which is the element of 
animated natme

• «

65. As the mind exerts its power and assumes its sense of

■egoism, it derives the piinciple of the living soul from the In- 
tellect, which with its bieath of life and action, is called a Imng 
being afterwards. (The mmd is what thinks, moves and acts)

56 The intellect exhibiting itself as the mind56 The intellect exhibiting itself as the mind

{chiita), bears the name of the purpose it has to accomplish, 
which being temporary and changeable, is different from the 
cJitt and a nullity, (The mmd being the piinciple of volition, is 
applied also to the ob 3 ect of the will, as we say, I have a 
jnind to play , which is equal to the expression, 1 have a playful 
mmd . and this state of the mind being variable, is said to be 
mfll),

57. The .distinction of actor and act, does not consist in the 
intellect, it being eternal, is neither the author oi the work it- 
self But the living soul, which is active and productive of acts, 
IS called the ^musha or the embodied soul residmg m the body- 
gmmii-sete. Jtis action which makes the m&n-puutsJia, fiom 
which 18 deiived his manhood-;;^®?#? usMt

UTPATTI KIIAJ^DA.

29'5

' 68, Life witli the action of the mind constitutes the mind* 
of man. The mind talcing' a sensitive foim, emploj^s the 
oi’gans of sense to their different functions. (The sensivity 
of the mmd bears an active and not the passive sense of sensi-* 
tiveness or sensibility),

59. Ilcj the ladiance of the light of whose intellect, is the 
cause of infinite blessings to the world, is bnth its autlioi and 
woikmanship from all eternity, and theie is none beside him. 
(He is the F)afyagdjtm6j the all-peivading soul).

60. Hence the ego oi living soul is indivisible, uninflammable, 
unsellable and undriable in its essence ; it is everlasting and in-- 
finite (ubiquious), and as immovable as a mountain (The living 
soul IS viewed in the hght of the eternal soul).

61. There are many that dispute on this point, as they dispute 
on other matteis, in then eiioi, and mislead otheis into the same y 
but we are set fiee fiom all mistake. (The disputants aie the 
dualists, who make a distinction between the eternal and cieated 
souls. {Jivdiind-jiai amdtmd’-dvaiia-vdch s ) .62. The dualist relying on the phenomena, is deceived by 
their vai’jdng appearances ; but the believer in the formless 
unity, relies in the evei lasting blessed spmt , (which he views in 
his intellect)

63 (Fondness for intellectual cultuie, is attended with the' 
vernal blossoms of intellect, which are as white as the clear 
fiimament, and as numberless as the paits of time.

64' The intellect exhibits itself in the foim of the boundless 
and wondeiful mundane egg, and itbieathes out the bieath of its 
own spmt in the same egg. (The breathing soul is called the- 
suhdtmd one of the ten hypostases of Biahma, the vital air is th>e’ 
fiist of the elementary bodies, in the ordei of emanation aha^ 
creation).

65. It then showed itself in the wondious form of the 
antimundane waters, not as they use fiom spiings or fall into 
reseivoirs, as also in those of the substances constituting the' 
bodies of the best of beings.

296

YOGA YA'SISnTHA

• 6G. It next shone forth with its own intellectual lig'htj which 
shines as hiight as the humid beams of the full moon.

67 Then as the intellect rises in full light with its inteinal 
knowledge, iiiion disappeaiance of the visibles fiom sight, so also 
it is tiansfoimed to dullness by dwelling upon gioss objects, when 
it IS said to be lie dormant. In this state of the intellect, it is 
loweied to and confined in the earth.

68 The woild is in motion by the foice of the Intellect, 
in whose gieat vacuity it is settled , it is lighted by the light 
of that Intellect, and is theiefoie said to be both existent as 
well as inexistent by itself.

69. Like the vacuity of that Intellect, the woild is said noW 
to exist and now to be in existent, and like the light of that 
Intellect, it now appeals and now disappeais fiom view,69. Like the vacuity of that Intellect, the woild is said noW 
to exist and now to be in existent, and like the light of that 
Intellect, it now appeals and now disappeais fiom view,

70 Like the fleeting wind which is bieathed by that Intel- 
lect, the woild is now m existence and now inexistent, and like 
the cloudy and unclouded sjiheie of that Intellect, the woild is 
now in being and now a not being.

71. Like the bioad day light of that Intellect, the woild is 
now in existence, and hke the disappeaiance <>f that light, it. 
now becomes nothing, It is foiraed like colyiium fiom the 
pai tides of the oil of the lajas quality of the Intellect.

72 It IS the intellectual fire that gives wai mth to the woi Id, 
and it IS the alabaster (conch) of the intellect that causes its 
whiteness, the lock of intellect gives it haidness, and its water 
causes its fluidity.

73 The sweetness of the world, is derived fiom the sugai 
of the intellect, and its juiciness fiom the milk in the divine 
mind , its coldness is from the ice, and its heat fiom the file 
contained in the same. (t. e. The divine Intellect is the mateiial 
cause {ujmddna Icdiand) of the woild).

74 The woild is oily by the mustard seeds contained in the 
Intellect , and billowy in the sea of the divine mind It is 
dulciate by the honey and auieate by the gold contained in- 
the same.

UTPATTI KHANDA.

297

75. The world is a fruit of the tree of Intellectj and its 
fragrance is deiived from the flowers growing in the arbour of 
the mind. It is the ens of the Intellect, that gives the woild its 
entity, and it is the mould of the eternal mind, that gives its form.

76. The difEeience is, that this world is changeful, while 
the deal atmospheie of the Intellect has no change in it , and 
the unieal world becomes real, when it is seen as full of the 
Divine spiiit.77. The invariable self-sameness of the Divine spiiit, makes 
the entity and non-entity of the world alike , (because it has no 
existence of its own, but in the Supreme soul). And the woids 
^pait and whole^ aie wholly meaningless, because both of these 
are full with the divine spiiit.

78. Fie to them, that deride notions as false talk ; because the 
woild with its hills, and seas, earth and rivers, is all untiue 
without the notion of Grod’s piesence in it (The Buddhists are 
peiceptionalists, and have no faith in any thing beyond their 
sensible perceptions {piaijalsJia) , but the Vedantic spiiitualists, 
on . the central y, are abstract conceptionalists, and believe 
nothing to be true, of which they have no notion or inwaid 
conception).

79. The intellect being an unity, cannot be mistaken for 
a pait of any thing, and though it may become as solid as a 
stone, yet it shines biightly in the sphere of its vacuiiy. *

SO. It has a cleai vacuous space in its inside, as a tianspaient 
brystal, which reflects the images of all objects, though it is as 
clear as the sky.

81. As the lines on the leaves of trees, are neither the parts 
of the leaves nor distinct fiom them, so the woild situated in the 
Intellect, is no paifc of it nor sepaiate from it.

82. No detached soul is of heterogenous giowth, but retains 
in its natuie the natuie of the intellect, and Biahm^ is the 
primary cause of. causes (Hence called Hiranyagaibba )

* The conceptualisni o£ Europe, is a docfcrmo between Realism and Ifonn- 
nahsm and betwixt Idealism and Relationism The realist says, universal 
genera are real and independent existences , but the nominalist ( hie the Pratya 
kshdvddts) says that, things only exist, and univeisals are Plafus venti-pi alapa,

VOL I 38

298

YOGA VaIsISIITHAVOL I 38

298

YOGA VaIsISIITHA

^S 3 . Tlio miud is of its own nature a causal prineiple, by 
leasoiiof its notion of the Intellect ; but its existence is liaul 
to be piovedj wlicn it is insensible and unconscious of tlic intellect.

81'. Whaievei' IS III the root, comes out in tlic ticCj as we see 
the seed shoot forth in plants of its own species.

85. All the woilds arc as void as vacuity, and 3 'ct they 
appeal otheiwise, as the}’- aie situated in the Gicat Intellect. All 
this IS the seat of the Supreme, and you must know it by yoiu 
intellection.

86 . As the Muni spake these woids, the day declined to its 
evening twilight. The assembly biokc with miital salutations, f (0 
perform theii vespcial ablutions, and met again at the couit hall 
with the using sunbeams, after dispersion of the nocturnal gloom.

4

CHAPTER XV.

Story op the Temple and its Prince.

% TASISHTHA said. The world is a void and as null as the 
V peails in the sky, (seen by optical delusion). It is as 
unreal as the soul in the vacuity of the intellect.

2. All its objects appear^ as unengraven images on the column 
of the mind, which is without any engraving or engraver of it.

3 As the intermotion of the waters in the sea, causes the 
waves to use of themselves, so the visibles as they appear to us, 
are as waves in the calm spirit of the Supreme. (The vaiiety of 
the waves, with the pearls, shells and fioth they pour out, 
lesemble the multiformity of worldly pioductions).

4'. As sun-beams seen under the water, and as water appealing 
in the sands of the desert (milage) , so it is the fancy, that paints 
the world as true to us ; and its bulk is like that of an atom, 
appetirmg as a hill (when seen thiough the miseroscope).

5. The fancied world is no more than a facsimile of the 
mind of its Maker, just as the sun beams under the water, aie 
but reflexions of the light above; and no other than a negative 
notion (a false idea).6. The ideal woild is but an aerial castle, and this eaith 
(with its contents), is as unreal as a dream, and as false as the 
objects of our desire.

7. The eaith appearing as solid, is in the light of philosophy, 
no bettei than the liquid water of a iiver, in the mirage of a 
sandy deseit, and is nevei in existence.

8. The illusive foims of the visibles, in this supposed substan- 
tial foim of the woild, lesemble at least, but aeiial Castles and 
rivers in the miiage

9. The visionaiy scenes of the world being taken to the 
scales, will be found when weighed, to be light as an and 
as hollow as vacuum.

300

YOGA VA'SISIITIIA.

] 0 The ignoiaiii that are taken away by the sound of woids 
111 disie^aid of seuse^ will find when they eome to sensOj that 
theie is no difference between the woild and Brahma (the one 
being but the reflection of the othei)

11. The dull woild is the issue of the Intellect, like the beams 
of the sun in the sky. The light of the intellect, is as light as the 
laiified lays of the sun j but it raises like the othei, the huge 
clouds, to water the shooting seeds of plants.

13. As a city in a dieam, is finer than one seen in the waking 
state, so this visionary world is as subtile as an imaginary 
one.

13 Know theiefore the insensible woild to be the inverse of 
the sensible soul, and the substantive woild a> the leverse of tlip 
unsubstantial vacuum ; The woids plenum and vacuum aie both 
as inane as any bieath, because these opposites aie but diffeient 
yiews of the same Intellect.

14. Know therefoie this visible woild to be no production at 
all , it is as nameless as it is undeveloped, and as mexistent as 
its seeming existence.

15. The univeise is the spheie of the spiiit of God in the 
infinite space, it has no foundation elsewheie except in that 
Spiiit of which it IS but a paiticle, and filling a s^iace ecj^ual to 
a bit of infinity.16. It is as tiansparent as the sky, and without any solidity 
at all , it IS as empty as empty air, and as a city pictuied in im- 
agination.

17. Attend now to the stoiy of the Tomj)le which is pleasant 
to hear, and which will impiess this tiuth deeply in youi mind.

18. Rdhia said • — Tell me at once, O Bidhman, the long and 
shoit of the stoiy of the temple, which will help iny undeis- 
tanding of these things,

19. Vasishtha said -Theie lived of yoie a prince on the 
suiface of the eaith, whose name was !f*adma fiom his being

UTPATTI KHANDA.

301

like tlie blooming and fragrant lotus of his race , and who was 
equally blessed with wisdom, piospeiity and good childien.

^0. He observed the bounds of his duties, as the sea preserves 
the boundaiies ofcountiies, and destioyed the mist of his 
adversaries, as the sun dispels the daikness at night. He 
was as the moon to his lotus-like queen, and as binning fiie to the 
hay of evils and eiimes.

21. He was tlie asylum of the learned, as the mount Meru 
was the residence of the gods , he was the moon of fan fame iisen 
fiom the ocean of the earth , and was as a lake to the geese of 
good qualities , and lilre the sun to the lotuses of purity.

22. He was as a blast to the ereepeis of his antagonists in 
warfare ; and as a lion to the elephants of his mind (appetites). 
He was the favouiite of all learning, and a patron of the learned, 
and a mine of all admuable quaUties.

23. He stood fixed 'as the mount Manddia, after it had 
churned the ocean of the demons. He was as the vernal 
season to the blossoms of 3 oy, and as the god of the floial bow 
to the flowers of blooming prospeiity.

24. He was the gentle bieeze to the vacillation of the play- 
ful creepers, and as the god Haii in his valour and eneigy. He 
shone as the moon on the florets of good manners, and as wild- 
fire to the brambles of licentiousness.25. His consort was the happy Lila, playful as her name 
implied, and fraught with every grace, as if the goddess of 
prospeiity, had appeared m person upon earth.

26. She was gentle with her submissiveness to her lord, and 
was sweet in her speech without ait; she was always happy and 
slow in her movements, and ever smiling as the moon.

27. Her lovely lotus- white face was decorated >with painted 
spots, and her fair form which was as fresh as a new blown bud, 
appeared as a moving bed of lotuses.

28. She was buxom as a playful plant, and bright as a branch 
of Imda flowers, and full of glee and good humour. With her

302

yoga VA'SISnTlIA

palms led as corals^ and liei fingers wliitcas lilies^ she was m lici 
jierson a congeiies of venial beauties.

29 Her puie foim was sacred to touch, and conferred a hilaiity 
to the heait, as the holy stream of the Ganges, exhilarates the 
flock of swans floating uxioii it.

30. She was as a second Rati, bom to scive her loid, who was 
Kama inpeison on eaifli to give joy to all souls.

31. She was soiiy at his soiiow, and delighted to see him 
delightful , and was thoughtful to see him pensive Thus was 
she an exact pictuie of her loid, except that she was afiaid to 
find h’m angiy.

CHAPTER XVI

Joy and Gmef op the Princess.

|lHIS single wived husband, enjoyed the pleasure of an uH-* 
■ divided and unfeigned love, in eompany with his only consoit, 
as with an Apsmd (oi heavenly nymph) on eaith

(The Apsai as &\e Ahsat es of Ptolemy and Ahsai'ts of the

Persians a term applied to the faiiy lace in the wateiy valley 
of Cashmere, supposed to be the site of Paiadise-Eirdous, and the 
scene of innocent attachment)

%. The seats of them youthful spoits weie the gardens and 
groves, the aibours of shrubbeiies, and forests of Tamala trees. 
They spoited also in the pleasant arbouis of cieepeis and delight- 
ful alcoves of floweis3. They delighted themselves in the inner apartments, on beds 
decked with fragrant flowers, and on walks stiew^u over with 
fresh blossoms They amused in their swinging cradles in their 
pleasure gaidens in spimg, and in lowmg then tow-boats in 
summer heat

d. Hills oveigrown with sandal woods and shades of shady 
forests , the alcoves of Nipa and Kadamba trees, and coverts of 
thePdiibhadia or Devaddru-cedars, weie their favour ile resorts in 
summei

5. They sat besides the beds of and Manddia plants,

redolent with the fragrance of full-blown floweis , and strajmd 
about the vernal green-woods, resounding with the melody of 
loHlas’ notes,

6 The glossy beds of grassy tufts, the mossy seats of woods 
and lawns, and watei -falls flooding the level lands with showers 
of rain, (were also then favouiite lesoits)

7. Mountain layers overlaid with gems, minerals and iichest 
stones j the shrines of gods and saints, holy hermitages and places 
of pilgrimage, were oft visited by them

304

YOGA VASISHTHA.

8. Lakes of full-blown lotuses and lilies, smiling Kumuclas 
of vaiious hues, and wood-lands daikened by green foliage, 
01 oveibung with floweis and fiuitage, weie tbeir fiequent 
baunts.

9. They passed their time in the amorous dalliances of god- 
lilce youths , and then peisonal beauty, was giaced by the geneious 
pastimes, of their mutual fondness and affection.

10. They amused each other with bon-mots and witticisms 
and solution of iiddles, with stoiy telling and playing the tucks 
of hold-fists musJiU'hancllLcb {piiimuth)) and the vaiious games of 
chess and dice.

11. They diverted tliemselves with the reading of diamas 
and narratives, and inteipietation of stanzas difficult even to 
the learned. And sometimes they roamed about cities, towns 
and villages.

12. They deeoiated their persons with wi’eaths of flowers and 
ornaments of various kinds,* faied and feasted on a variety of 
flavours, and moved about with playful negligence.12. They deeoiated their persons with wi’eaths of flowers and 
ornaments of various kinds,* faied and feasted on a variety of 
flavours, and moved about with playful negligence.

13. They chewed betel leaves mixed with moistened mace and 
campher, and saffi on , and hid the love marks on then bodies, 
undei wreaths of flowers and corals, with which they were adorned.

14. They played the frolics of ^‘’hide and find'’^ (Beng. 
Inlachwi), tossing of wreaths and garlands, and swinging 
one another in cradles bestrewn with floweis,

15. They made their tups in pleasure-boats, and on yokes 
of elephants and tame camels, and spoited in then pleasuie- 
ponds by patteung water upon one another.

16. They had then manly and womanly dances, the sprightly 
tdmlava and the meiiy lasya , and songs of masculine and 
effeminate voices the Kald and glt>a. They had symphonious 
and euphoneous music, and played on the lute and taboi, 
(the wired and percussive instruments).

17. They passed in their flowery conveyances through gar- 
dens and paiteiies, by rivei sides and highways, and amidst their 
inner ajiaitments and royal palaces.

UTPATTI KHANDA.

305

18. The loving and beloved princess being thus brought up, 
in pleasure and indulgence^ thought at one time with a wistful 
heart within herself j

19. “ How will this my lord and ruler of earth, who is m the 
bloom of youth and prosperity, and who is dearer to me than my 
life, be free from old age and death.

20. And how wiU I enjoy his company on beds of flowefs 
in the palace, possessed of my youth and free-will, for the long 
long period of hundi’eds of years.

21. will therefore endeavour with all my vigilenee and 
prayers, and austeiities and endeavours, how this moon-faced 
prmce, may become freefiom death and decline.

22. “ I will ask the most knowing, and the most austere and 
very learned Brdhmans, how men may evade death.^^22. “ I will ask the most knowing, and the most austere and 
very learned Brdhmans, how men may evade death.^^

23. She accordingly mvited the Brdhmans and honoured 
them with presents, and asked them lowly, to tell her how men 
might become immortal on earth.

24. The Brdhmans rephed * ‘‘ Great queen I holy men may 
obtain success in every thing by their austerities, prayers and 
obseivance of religious rites, but no body can ever attain to 
immortahty here bellow.^^

25. Hearing this from the mouths of the Brdhmans, she 
thought again m her o^vn mmd, and with fear for the demise 
of her lovmg loid.

26. Should it happen, that 1 come to die before my lord, 
I shall then be released from all pain of separtion from him, and 
be quite at lest m myself.

27. But if my husband happen to die before me, even after 
a thousand years of our hves, I shall so manage it, that his soul 
(the immortal part of his body), may not depart from the 
confines of this mansion (the charnel-house).

28 ^^So that the spirit of my loid, will rove about the holy 
vault in the inner apartment, and I shall feel the satisfaction of- 
moving about in his piesence at all times.”

VOL. I

39

30G

Yoga v/sisiitiia

« ^9. I will commence even from tins io worship Sara-

swati -the goddess of Intelligence, and offer my piayers to her 
for this purpose, with observance of fasts and other iitcs to my 
hearths content."

30. Having determined so, she betook herself to observe 
the strict ceremonials of the Sdstia, and without the knowledge 
of her loid.

31. She kept her fasts, and broke them at the end of every 
third night; and then entertained the gods, Brdhmans, the 
priests and holy people, with feasts and due honours.

32. She was then employed in the pcifoimance of her daily 
ablutions, in her act of alms giving, in the obseivance of her 
nusteiities and in meditation; in all of which she was pains- 
taking, an observant of the rules of pious theism.33. She attended also to her incognnsant husband at stated 
times, and mmisteied unto him to the utmost, her duties as 
req^uired by law and usage.

34. Thus observant of Iier vows, the young pnneess passed 
a hundred of her tiinoctial ceremony, with resolute and persever- 
ing pams-taking and unfailing austerities.

35. The fair goddess of speech, was pleased at the completion 
of hei hundredth tiinoctial observance, in which she was honour- 
ed by hei, with all outwaid and spiiitual complaisance, and then 
bespoke to hei.

36. Saiasvati said * “I am pleased my child ! with thy con- 
tinued devotion to me, and thy constant devotedness to thy 
husband Now ask the boon that thou wouldest have of me.^^

37. The princess replied ^‘'Be victorious, O moon-biight 
goddess ’ that puttest to an end all the pams of our biith and 
death, and the troubles, afflictions and evils of this world , and 
that like the sun, puttest to flight the darlcness of our affections 
and afflictions m this life.

38 ^^Save me O goddess, and thou parent of the world, 
and have pity on this wretched devotee, and giant her these 
two boons, that she supplicates of thee.

TTTPATTI KHANDA

-307

39". “The one is^ that after my hnsbahd is dead, his soul 
may not go beyond the precincts of this shrine in the innei 
^apaitment.

40. ^^The second is, that thou shalt hear my prayer, and 
appear before me, whenever I raise my voice to thee, for having 
thy sight and blessing.”

41. Hearing this, the goddess said, “Be it so,” and im- 
mediately disappeaied in the air (whence she came) ; as the 
wave subsides m the sea whence it nses to view.

43. The princess being blessed by the piesence and good 
grace of the goddess, was as delighted as a doe at the hearmg 
of music.43. The princess being blessed by the piesence and good 
grace of the goddess, was as delighted as a doe at the hearmg 
of music.

43. The wheel of time lolled on its two seimcircles of 
the fort-nights. The spikes of months, the arcs of the seasons, 
the loops of days and mghts and the orbit of yeais. The 
axle composed of fleeting moments, giving incessant momentum 
to the wheel.

4'4. Th6 peiceptions of the prince, enteied into the inner man 
Avithin the body {Ungadelia), and he looked in a shoib time, as 
diy as a witheied leaf without its juicy gloss.

45. The dead body of the warlike prince, being laid over 
the sepulchie, in the inside of the palace, the piincess began to 
fade away at its sight, like a lotus flower without its natal 
water (of the lake).

46. Her lips giew pale by her hot and poisoned breath of 
soiiovv , and she was in the agony of death, as a doe pieiced by 
a dait (in hermoital pait).

47. Her eyes were covered in daikness at the death of

her loid, as a house becomes dark at the extinction of the 
light of its lamp. ,

48. She became leanei every moment, m her sad melancholy; 
and turned as a diied channel coveied with dirt in heu of 
its watei.

49. She moved one moment and was then mute as a statue.

SOS YOGA VA'SISHTni.

‘she was about to die of grief, as the ruddy goose at the se- 
peration of her mate.

50. Then the etheiial goddess Sarasvati, took pity on the 
excess of her grief, and showed as much compassion for her 
lelief, as the first shower of lam, docs to the dying fishes in a 
drying pond.

CHAPTER XVII.

Story op the Doubtful realm or Reverie op lila.

pi ARASVATI'^said * Remove my child, the dead body of 
k-) thy husband to yonder shrine, and strew those flowers over 
it, and thou shalt have thy husband again.pi ARASVATI'^said * Remove my child, the dead body of 
k-) thy husband to yonder shrine, and strew those flowers over 
it, and thou shalt have thy husband again.

2. Never will this body rot or fade as long as the flowers 
are fresh over it, and know thy husband will shortly return to 
life again. (The strewing of flowers over the dead body and the 
grave, is a pratiee common m many religions).

3. His living soul which is as pure as air, will never depart 
fiom this eemetry of thy inner apai’tment. (The departed soul 
IS believed to hover about the crypt or cairn until the day of 
aesurrection).

4. The black-eyed princess, with her eyebrows resembling 
a cluster of black-bees, heaid this consolatory speech of the god- 
dess, and was cheered m her spiiit, as the lotus-bed on return 
of the rains,

6, She placed the corpse of her husband there, and hid it 
under the flowers, and remained in expectation of its nsmg, as a 
poor man fosters the hope of finding a treasure.

6, It was at midnight of the very day, when all the membeis 
of the family had fallen fast asleep, that LiM repaired to the 
shrme in the inward apartment,

7. There she meditated on the goddess of knowledge, in the 
recess of her understanding, and called her in earnest in the sor- 
row of her heart, when she heard the divine voice thus addressing 
to her,

8, “ Why dost thou call me, child, and why’ art thou so 
sorrowful in thy countenance? The world is full of errors, 
glaring as false water in a mirage.”

9. “Lila answered : Tell me goddess, where my husband

resides at present, and what he has been doing now. Take me to

310 YOGA VA'SISHTIIA.

Ins presence, as I am unable to bear the load of my life without 
him/^resides at present, and what he has been doing now. Take me to

310 YOGA VA'SISHTIIA.

Ins presence, as I am unable to bear the load of my life without 
him/^

10. The goddess replied : " His spin t is now roving in the 
sky, of which there aie three kinds ‘—one the firmament or region 
of the sensible worlds , the other is the region of the mind, the 
seat of vohtion and creation; and third is the region of Intellect, 
which contains the two othcis.

11. Your husband^s soul is now in the sheath of the region 
of Intellect; (being withdiawn both fiom the legions of the 
visible world and sensuous mind). It is now by seeking in the 
region of the Intellect, that things which aie mcxistent here, 
aie to be found theic.

13. As in passing from one place to another, you are conscious 
of standing in the mid spot, (which is neither the one noi the 
othei); so you will arrive in an instant at the intermediate legion 
of the intellectual world, (lymg between this sensible and spiiitual 
worlds),

13. If you will abide in that intellectual woild, after .for- 
saking all your mental dcsiies, you will ceitainly come to the 
knowledge of that spuitual Being who compiehends all m himself.

14. " It is only by your knowledge of the negative existence 
of the woild, that you can come to know the positive existence 
of that Being, as you will now be able to do by my grace, and 
by no othei means whatevei.^’ (Forget the sensible to get to the 
Spiritual. Hafiz).

15. Vasishtha said : so saying, the goddess repaiied to her 
heavenly seat , and Lila sat gladly in her mood of steadfast me- 
ditation. (Platonism).

16. She quitted in a moment the piison house of her body, 
and her soul bioke out of its inner bound of the mind, to fly 
Lieely in the' an, like a bird freed from its cage : (so Plato compares 
the flight of thepaitmg soul with that of a bird fiom its cage).17. She ascended to the any legion of the Intellect, and 
saw (by her intellectual light her husband seated theie in his 
-seat,^ amidst a group of princes and lulers of the eaitli, ('who had

UTPATTI KHANDA.

311

.received various forms and states according to their acts and^ 
desires).

18. He was seated on a throne, and lauded with the .loud 
acclamations of “Long live the king,” and “Be he victorious.” 
His offieeis weie prompt in the discharge of their several duties

19. The royal palace and hall were decorated with rows of 
flags, and theie was an assemblage of unnumbered sages and 
saints, Bidhmans and Bishis at the eastern entrance of the hall.

20. Theie stood a levy of innumerable piinces and chiefs of 
men at the southern porch, and a bevy of young ladies stand- 
ing at the western door- way.

21. The noithern gateway was blocked by lines of horse, 
carriages and elephants ,* when a guaid advanced and informed 
the Inng of a warfare in Deccan.

22. He said that the chief of Karnatic, has made an attack 
on the eastern frontier; and that the chieftain of Surat, has 
brought to subjection the barbarous tribes on the north ; and 
that the ruler of Malwa, has beseiged the city of Tonkan on the 
wes’t.

23. Then there was the reception of the ambassadoi fiom 
Lankd, coming from the coast of the southern sea.

24. There appeared next the Siddhas, coming fiom the Maben- 
dra mountains boidermg the eastern mam, and traversing the 
numerous riveis of their fluvial districts , as also the ambassador 
of the G-uhyaka or Yaksha tubes, inhabiting the shoies of the 
northern sea.

25. There weie likewise the envoys, visiting the shores of 
the western mam, and relating the state of affairs of that terri- 
tory to the king. The whole courtyaid. was filled with lustre 
by the assemblage of unnumbered chieftains from all quaiters.26. The lecitals of Brdhmans on sacrificial altai^, died away 
under the sound of the timbrals ; and the loud shouts of pane- 
gyrists, were le-echoed by the uproar of elephants.

27 . The vault of heaven, resounding to the sound of the 
vocal and mstiuraental music, and the dust raised by the proces-

312

YOGA VA'SISIITIIA.

sion o£ elepliaiits and cliariois, and the iroiling of liorscs’ lioofs^ 
’obscured tbe face of the shy as by a cloud.

&8. The air was perfumed by the fragrance of flowers^ cam- 
phor and heaps of frankincense ; and the loyal hall was filled 
with piesents sent from dilfeicnt provinces.

29. His fail fame shone forth as a burning hdl of white 
camphor, and laiscd a column of splendour i caching to the sky, 
and casting into shade the solar light.

30. There were the ruleis of districts, who wore busily em- 
ployed in their grave and momentous duties, and the great 
architects who conducted the building of many cities.

31 Then the aident Lild enteied the court-hall of the ruler 
of men, and unseen by any, just as one void mixes with another 
void, and as an is lost in the air.

32. She wandered about without being seen bj’’ any body 
there , just as a fair figure, formed by false imagination of our 
fond desire, is not to be peiceived by any one without ouiselvcs.

33. In this manner she continued to walk about the palace 
unperceived by all, as the aireal castle built in one’s mind, is not 
perceived by another.

34. '. She beheld them all assembled in the royal court in 
their former forms, and saw all the cities of the princes, as concen- 
trated m that single city of her lord’s.

35. She viewed the same places, the same dealings, the 
same concourse of boys, and the same sorts of men and women, 
and the same mimqteis as before.

36. She saw the same rulers of eaith, and the veiy same Pandits 
as before , the identic comtieis and the self-same servants as 
evei.36. She saw the same rulers of eaith, and the veiy same Pandits 
as before , the identic comtieis and the self-same servants as 
evei.

37. There was the same assemblage of the learned men and 
friends as befoie, and the like thiong of citizens pursuing their 
former course of business.

38. She saw on a sudden, the flames of wild fiie spieadmg on 
all sides even in bioad midday light, and the sun and moon

UTPATTI KHANDA

313

appealing both at once in the sty, and the clouds i oaring with* 
a tiemendous noise, with the whistling of the winds

39 She saw the trees, the hills, the riveis and the cities 
flouiishing Avith population , and the many towns, and villages 
and foiests all about.

40 She beheld hei loyal consoit as a boy of ten yeais of 
age aftei shaking off his foimei fiame of old age, sitting amidst 
the hall with all his foimer ictinue, and all the inhabitants of his 
village.

SECTION I

Description oe the Court house and the Cortes

41. Lild having seen all these began to leflect within heiself, 
w^hether the inhabitants of tins place wcie living beings oi the 
ghosts of their foimei living souls

42. Then having leeoveied hei sense at the lemoval of 
hei tiance, she enteied into hei inner apaitment at midnight, 
and found the inmates fast bound in sleep

43 She laised one by one hei sleeping companions, and 
said she was anxious to visit the loyal hall

44 She wanted to be seated beside the thione of her loid, 
and to clear her doubt by seeing the courtieis all alive

45 The loj'-al menials lose up at her call, and obedient to 
her command they said Be it so,^^ and attended to then respec- 
tive duties.

46 A tram of club-beareis lan to all sides to call the 
couitieis fiom the city, and sweepeis came and swept the giound 
as clean as the sun had shed his lays upon it

47. A better set of seivants clean-’ed the couit-yard as 
clean, as autumn days clear the firmament of its lamy clouds47. A better set of seivants clean-’ed the couit-yard as 
clean, as autumn days clear the firmament of its lamy clouds

48 Rows of lights were placed about the court-yaid, which 
looked as beautiful as clusteis of stars in the clear sky

49 The giound of the couifc-yard was filled by thiongs of 
people, as the earth was covered of yoie by floods of the great 
deluge

VoL. I.

40

314

YOGA VASISUTHA.

t

» 50 The dignified mimsteis and chiefs aitendcd fit si and

took their respective seats, and appealed as a set of the newly 
created luleis of people of the world on all sides, or the icgents 
of the quai fceis of the sky.

51. The cooling and fragiant odour of thickly pasted eamphoi 
filled the palace, and the sweet-scented zephyrs breathed piofuse- 
ly the fiagiance of the lotus flowers, which they bore from all 
sides.

52. The chamberlains stood all around in their white garbs, 
and appeared as an assemblage of silveiy clouds, hanging over 
the burning hills undci the equator.

53. The ground was stiewnover by the morning breeze with 
heaps of floweis, blight as the beaming dawn dispelling the 
gloom of night, and etiolated as clusters of stais fallen iqxm the 
giound.

54j The palace was ciowdcd by the retinue of the chiefs of 
the land, and seemed as it was a lake full of full-blown lotuses, 
with the fan swimming swans lamblmg about them.

55. There Ltld took her seat on a golden seat by the side of 
the throne, and appeared as the beauteous Rati seated m the 
joyous heart of ICdraa, {i. e. as Venus sitting in the lap of aureate 
lighted Phoebus) .

56 She saw all the princes seated in their order as before, and 
the elders of the people and the nobles of men and all her friends 
and relatives, seated m their proper places.

57. She was highly delighted to behold them all in their 
former states, and shone forth as the moon with the brightness of 
her eoimtenance, to find them all alive again.

CHAPTER XVIII

Exposure of the Erroes op this WorldCHAPTER XVIII

Exposure of the Erroes op this World

n HE said, “ I have mucli consolation in you, and now will I 
kJ console my son owing heart ” So saying, she made a sign 
for the assembly to break, and rose fiom hei royal seat.

3. She entered the inner appaitment and sat by the side of 
the dead body of her loid, hidden under the heap of floweis, and 
thus began to reflect within herself.

3. She exclaimed O the wondious magic ! that presents 
these people of my place situated in the same manner without 
'myself, as they weie seen to be seated within me.

4. O how great is the extent of this delusion, as to contain 
the same high hills, and the same spacious foiests of palm and 
Hint^la tiees, both in the outside as well as they aie situated 
in tlie inside of myself.

5. As the minor shows the reflexion of the hills within 
itself as they aie without it, so the reflector of the intellect pre- 
sents the whole cieation inwaidly as it has outwards of itself.

6. "I must now invoke the goddess of wisdom to asceitain 
which of these is illusion, and which the sobei and ceitain reality

7. So saying, she woishipped and invoked the goddess, and 
beheld her immediately piesent before heiself, in the form of a 
viigin.

8. She made the goddess sit on the elevated seat, and having 
seated heiself low upon the ground befoie her, asked that divine 
power to tell hei the tiuth

9^ Lila said “ Vouchsafe, O goddess, and eleai this 
doubt of thy suppliant , foi it is thy tvisdom which has 
framed this beautiful system of the univeise at first and knows 
the tiuth (Divine wisdom is the piime cause of all).

10. ‘‘Tell me, O gieat goddess, about what I am gomg to

31G

YOGA VA'SISIITIIA,

5ay bel'oie thee at pieseiit^ I’oi it is by tby favour alone that 
I may be successful to know it.10. ‘‘Tell me, O gieat goddess, about what I am gomg to

31G

YOGA VA'SISIITIIA,

5ay bel'oie thee at pieseiit^ I’oi it is by tby favour alone that 
I may be successful to know it.

11. “I saw the pattern of this woild in the intellect, which is 
moio transpaient than the ethenal sphere, and as extensive as 
to coutain millions and millions of miles in a small space of it.

13 “Itis whatno definite woids can express, and whatis known 
as the calm, cool and inclTable light This is called the unintelli- 
gible intelligence, and is without any eover oi support {mnlva- 
oanci nnhhiiti),

13 “It exhibits the leflexions of space and the course of time, 
and those of the sky and its light, and the couiscof events con- 
centiatmg in itself

14 “Thus the images of the worlds, are to be seen both within 
and without the intellect, and it is haid to distinguish the real 
and unieal ones between them

15 The goddess asked “ Tell me fair lady, what is the 
natuie of the leal woild, and what you mean, by its unreality.

16. Lild, lejilied T know the natuie of the real to be such as 
I find myself to be sitting heie, and looking upon you as seated 
in this place

17 “And I mean that to be unieal, as the state in which I 
beheld my husband m the otheiial legion erewhile, beeause 
vacuity has no limit of time oi jilace in it.

18 The goddess lejoined The real cieation eannot pioduce 
an unieal figuie, noi a similai eause jnoduee a dissimilar effect.

19 hild leplied But we often see, O goddess * dissiimlai 
effeets to be jJioduced fiom sirnilai causes thus, the eaitli and 
eaithen pot though similai in then substance, yet the one is seen 
to melt in watei, and the othei to cany watei in it30 The goddess said Yes, when an aet is done by the aid 
of auxiliaiy means, theie the effect is found to be somewhat diff- 
eient fiom the piimaiy cause (Thus the eaitheii pot being 
pioduced by the auxiliary appliances of flie, the potter’s wheel 
and the like, diffeis m its quality fiom the oiiginal clay)

318

YOGA VXSISUTIIA.

' 31. The Meni (the polar axle or mountain) is its pillar, 
beset aiound by the legents of the ten Bides, as statues caivcd 
upon it The fourteen regions are as so many apartments of it, 
and the bollow concavity containing the three woilds, is lighted 
by the lamp of the luminous sun.

32. Its corners are inhabited by living creatines resembling 
ants and emmets, ivhich aie surioundcd by mountains appearing 
as ant-hills in the sight of Bralimd, the piimc lord of cicaturcs 
and the piimeval patiiaich of man} races of men

33. All animal beings aie as woims oonrined in the cucicoons 
(piison houses; of their own making. The a/cme skies above and 
below are as the soot of this house, beset by bodies of Siddhas 
(or departed spiiits), resembling gioups of gnats buzzing in the 
air.

3i< The fleeting clouds are the smoke of this house or as 
webs of spiders in its coi neis, and the hollow air is full of aerial 
spiiits, like holes of bamboos filled with flies

35. There are also the playful spiiits of gods and dcmigqds, 
hovering over human habitations, as swaiins of busy and buz- 
zing bees about vessels of honey.

36. Heie theie lay amidst the cavity of heaven, caith and 
the infernal regions, tracts of land well watered byiivers, lakes 
and the sea on all sides

37. In a corner of this land, there was situated a secluded 
piece of ground (a vale or village), shelteied by hills and ciaigs 
about it.37. In a corner of this land, there was situated a secluded 
piece of ground (a vale or village), shelteied by hills and ciaigs 
about it.

38. In this secluded spot thus sheltered by hills, rivers and 
-forests, theie lived a BiAhman with his wife and childien, free 
from disease and caie of gain and fear of a rulei, and passed 
his days in his fiie-woiship and hospitality, with the inoduce of 
his kme and lands.

CHAPTER XIX

Stoky of a former Vasishtha and his wife.

r I '^HIS Bi^hmanwas equal to his uamesalce the sage Vasishtha,

■ m his age and attre, in his learning and wealth, and in. all 
his actions and pui suits, except in his piofession ( The one 
being’ a secular man, and the other the priest o£ the royal 
family) .

2. His name was Vasishtha, and that of his wife Arun- 
dhatl, who was as fair as the moon, and as the star of the same 
name on earth.

3. She lesemhled her namesake the priestess of the solar 
race, in her virtues and parts and in all things, except m her 
soul and body.

4. She passed her time in tiue love and affection in his 
company, and was his all m the woild, with her sweet smiling 
face resembling the Kumuda flowei.

5. This Brahman had been sitting once under the shady 
sarala trees, on the table land of his native hill, when he saw the 
ruler of the land, passing with his gaudy tiain below.

6. He was accompanied by all the raerabeis of the royal 
family and his troops and soldiers, and was going to a chase, 
with a clamoui that resounded in the hills and forests.

7. The white flappers shed a stieam of moon light, and the 
lifted banneis appealed as a moving forest, and the white umbie-' 
lias made the sky a canopy to them.

8. The air was filled with dust laised by tne hoofs of hoises 
from the ground, and lines of elephants with their high hatulds, 
seemed as moving towers, to piotect them from the solar heat 
and sultry winds.9. The wild animals were running on all sides at the loud 
uproar of the party, resembling the roaring of a whiilpool, and

320

YOGA YA^SISIITIIA.

shining gems and jewels weie flashing all about on the persons 
of the party.

10. The Brahman saw the pioeession and said to himself, ^‘"O 
how charming is royalty, which is fraught with such splcndoui 
and prospeiity.

11 Ah 1 how shall I become the monaich of all the ten sides, 
and have such a retinue of horse and elephants and foot soldiers, 
with a similar tram of flags and flappers and blazing umbrellas

13 When will the bieeze waft the f lagiance of lu/ida flowei s, 
and the fauna of lotuses to my bed-ehambei, to lull me and my 
consorts to sleep.

13 When shall I adorn the countenances of my chambei mauls 
with camphor and sandal paste, and enlighten the faces of the 
four quaiteis with my fair fame, as the moon-beams dccoiate 
the night.

14. With these thoughts, the Bi^ihman was thencefoith 
detei mined to apply himself with vigilenee, to the iigid austei- 
ities of his leligion foi life ,

15 He was at last ovei taken by infiimities which shatteied 
his flame, as the sleets of snowfall, battei the blooming lotuses 
in the lake.

16. Seeing his approaching death, his faithful wife was fading 
away with fear, as a cieeper witheis at the depaituie of spiiiig, 
foi feai of the summei heat

17 Tins lady then began to woiship me (the peisonification 
of Wisdom) like thyself, foi obtaining the boon of immoitality 
which IS haid to be had.

18. She piayed saying Oidain, O goddess • that the spiiit 
of my loid may not depait fiom this sepulchie after his demise 
and I granted hei request

19 Aftei Sometime the BiAhman died, and his vacuous 
spiiit remained in the vacuity of that abode

30 This aeiifoim spiiit of the Brdhman, assumed the shape 
of a mighty man on eaith, by virtue of the excessive desiie and 
merit of acts in his foimei state of existence.

UTPATTI KHANDA

32130 This aeiifoim spiiit of the Brdhman, assumed the shape 
of a mighty man on eaith, by virtue of the excessive desiie and 
merit of acts in his foimei state of existence.

UTPATTI KHANDA

321

SI He became tbe victorious moiiaick of tbe thiee lealms^ * 
by subjugating tlie suifaee of the eaith by his mighty by lajaiig

hold on the high steejis (of the gods) by his valour; and his kind 
piotection of the nethei lands (wateiy regions) under his sway

SS. He was as a conflagiation to the foiest of his enemieS; 
and as the steadfast Meiu amidst the lushing winds of business 
on all sides. He was as the sun expanding the lotus-like hearts 
of the viituouS; and as the god of the malaia ensign (Kama 
or cupid) to the eyes of women

23 He was the model of all learning, and the all giving 
Kal^ya tiee to his suitois , he was the footstool of great Pandits, 
and as the full-moon shedding the ambiosial beams of polity 
all around

24 But after the Brdhman was dead, and his dead body 
had disappeared in the foims of elementary particles in an, and 
his any spirit had reposed in the aerial intellectual soul within 
the empty space of his house

25*. His Biahmanic widow (boin of the piiestly class), was 
pining away in her soiiow, and her heart was rent in twain 
as the diied pod of Smh.

26 She became a dead body like her husband, and her 
spirit by shuffling offi its mortal coil, resumed its subtile and 
immoital form, in which it met the departed ghost of hei hus- 
band.

27. She advanced to her lord, as lapidly as a iiver runs to 
meet the sea below its level ; and became as cheerful to join him, 
as a clustei of flowers to inhale the vernal an.

28. The houses, lands and all the immovable properties and 
movable riches of this Bid^hman, aie still existent in that loeky 
village, and it is only eight days past, that the souls of this 
loving pail, aie leunited in the hollow vault of then house

VoL I,

41

CHAPTER XX.

The Moral of the Tale of Ltla.VoL I,

41

CHAPTER XX.

The Moral of the Tale of Ltla.

T I iHB goddess said • That Bid.hraan whom I said hefore, had 
® become a monaich on eaith, is the same with thy husband^ 
and his wife AriindhUtij IS 110 othei than thyself— the best of 
women.

2. Yon two aie the same pan now icigning over this realm, 
and resembling’ a pan of doves in your nuptial love, and the 
deities Siva and Paivati in youi might.

3 I have thus i elated to you the state of your past lives, 
that 3 ’’ 0 u may know the living soul to be but air, and the know- 
ledge of its leality is but an eiior.

4 The erioiieous knowledge (derived fiom sense), easts its 
lefleetion m the mtellect, and causes its eri or also, (eiiors in 
the senses bleed eiiors in the mind), and this makes you doubt- 
ful of the tiuth and uiitiuth of the two states, (of the sensible 
and mtellectnal woilds) .

5. Theiefoie the question, Vhich is tnie and uhich is un- 
true,^ has no bettei solution than that all creations, (whether 
visible or invisible, mental oi ideal), are equally false and un- 
substantial

6 Vasishtha said Hearing these words of the goddess, 
LiM was confused in her mind, and with her eyes staring with 
wonder, she addiessed hei softly.

7 Lila said —How is it, O goddess ^ that youi woids are so 
mcoheient with truth, you make us the same, with the 
Brdhmanie pan, who are m then own house, and we are sitting 
here in oui palace

8 And how is it possible that the small space of the room 
in which my husband-’s body is lying, could contain those 
spacious lands and hills and the ten sides of the sky (as I alieady 
saw m my tia.nee-S(imd,d/iz)^

UTPATTI KHANDA

323

9 It is as impossible as to confine an elephant in a mustered , 
seed^ and as the figliting* of a gnat with a body of lions in a 
nut-shell.

10 It IS as incredible as to believe a lotus seed containing 
a hill in it^ and to be devoured by a little bee , oi that the 
peacocks are dancing on heaiing the i oaring of clouds in a 
dieam,10 It IS as incredible as to believe a lotus seed containing 
a hill in it^ and to be devoured by a little bee , oi that the 
peacocks are dancing on heaiing the i oaring of clouds in a 
dieam,

11 It IS equally inconsistent to say, O gieat goddess of 
gods* that this eaith with all its mountains and other things, 
aie contained within the small space of a sleeping room.

12 Deign theiefore, O goddess to explain this mystery 
cleaily unto me , because it is by thy favour only that the 
learned aie clearei of then doubts.

13. The goddess said Hear me fan lady * I do not tell thee 
a he , because transgiession of the law is a thing unknown to us. 
(The law is ndnntam vadeta-nev&i tell an uutiuth),

14. It IS I that establish the law when otliers are about to 
biealc it , if then I should slight the same, who else is theie who 
would observe it.

15. The living soul of the village Bi^hman, saw within it- 
self and in the veiy house, the image of this great kingdom, as 
his departed spirit now views the same in its empty vacuity, 
(Therefore both these states aie equally ideal).

16. But you have lost the remembrance of the states of your 
former lives after death, as they lose the lecollection of waking 
events in the dieaming state

17. As the appearance of the three worlds in dream, and 
their foimation in the imagination , or as the deseiiption of a 
warfare in an epic poem and water m the milage of a maut oi 
sandy desert (are all false) .

18 So weie the hills and habitations which were seen in the 
empty space of the Bi4liman^s house, whicn was no other than 
tiie capacity of his own mind to form the images of its fancy, 
and receive the external impressions like a lefiecting miiioi 
(all mere ideal).

324 YOGA VASISHTHA

/ 19 All tliese thoug-h unreal, yet they appear as real substances

on account of the leahty of the intellect, which is seated in the 
cavity of the inmost sheath of the body and leflectsthe images/ 19 All tliese thoug-h unreal, yet they appear as real substances

on account of the leahty of the intellect, which is seated in the 
cavity of the inmost sheath of the body and leflectsthe images

20. But these images, which aie deiived from the remembr- 
ance of umeal objects of the woiM, aie as unieal as those objeets 
which cast then leflexions m the intellect, just as the waves 
using in the iivei of a mu age, are as unreal as the mu age itself.

21 Know this seat (sadana) of youis, which is set in this 
closet {losim) of the house, as well as myself and thyself and all 
things about us, to be but the lefieetions of our intellect only, 
without which nothing would be peieeptible, as to one who is 
devoid of his mtelleet

22 Our dreams and fallacies, our desiies and fancies, as also 
oui notions and ideas, serve as the best evidences, that afford 
us then light foi the undei standing of this truth (that nothing is 
tiue beside the subjective mind, which cieates and forms, produces 
and presents all objects to our view

23 The spiiit of the Brahman resided in the vacuity of his 
house (the body), with the seas and forests and the earth e, 
their impressions) within itself, as the bee abides in the lotus

24i Thus the habitable globe with every thing it contains, is 
situated m a small cell in one coinei of the intellect, as a spot of 
flimsy cloud in the firmament

25 The House of the Bi4hman was situated in the same locality 
of the intellect, which contains all the woilds in one of its atomic 
pai tides

26 The intelligent soul contains in eveiy atom of it, un- 
numbered woilds within woilds, enough to lemove your doubt, 
of the Biahman^s viewing a whole lealm within the sjiace of his 
intellect

27 Lfld asked , How can the Brahmanic be ouiselves, 
when they aie dead only eight days befoie, and we have been 
leigning heie foi so many yeais ^27 Lfld asked , How can the Brahmanic be ouiselves, 
when they aie dead only eight days befoie, and we have been 
leigning heie foi so many yeais ^

28 The goddess refilled — Theie is neither any limit o^-jrgady 
01 dniation, noi any distance of place oi length of time ii

heai me now tell you the leason of it

UTPATTI KHANDA

325

JJ9. As the uiiiveiseis the reflexion of the divine mind, so ai^ 
nfinity and eternity but representations of himself.

30 Attend to what I tell you about the manner in which we 
foim the idea of time, and' its distinct parts of a moment and an 
age, m the same way as we make the distinction of individualities 
in me, thee and this oi that peison, (which aie essentially the same 
undivided spiiit and duiation) *

SECTION II

^tate of the Human soul after death.

31 . Hear now, that no soon^ does any one come to feel the in- 
sensibility consequent to his death, than he foigets his former 
natuieand thinks himself as another being

32. He then assumes an empty form in the womb of vacuity 
in the twinkhng of an eye, and being contained in that container, 
he thinks within himself m the same leeeptacle.

33 ^^This IS my body with its hands and feet ” Thus the body 
he thinks upon, he finds the same presented before him.

34 He then thinks m himself , “I am the son of this father 
'and am so many years old, these are my dear fiiends and this is my

pleasant abode.^^

35 “ I was boin and became a boy, and then giew up to this 
age Theie aie all my friends and m the same couise of their 
lives ”

36. Thus the compact density of the sphere of his soul, pre- 
sents him many other figures, which appeal to iise m it as 
in some part of the woild.

37. But they neither use nor remain in the soul itself, which 
IS as transpaient as the empty air, they appear to the intellect as 
a vision seen m a dream37. But they neither use nor remain in the soul itself, which 
IS as transpaient as the empty air, they appear to the intellect as 
a vision seen m a dream

38 As the view beheld in a di’eam, presents the sights of all 
things in one place, so does every thing appear to the eye of the 
.beholder of the othei world as m his dieam

jt9 It IS tli 0 niiTid that lengthens time by the quick succession of its 
(all irhts, and shoi tens it by its quiescence.

326

YOGA VA'SISIJTIJA

c 89. Again wliaiever is seen in ilie otlicr woild, tlic same oc- 
curs to men in tlieir piesciit states also ; whciel’oie the reality of 
this and unreality of the other woild, are both alike to a stale 
of di earning

40. And as there is no dillcience in the waves of the same sea- 
water^ so the jiroduecd visible ei cation is no other than the un- 
piodueed mtelleetual woild, both of which aie crpially indcstiu- 
ctible • (the one being but a copy of the othei).

41. But m leality the appeal ance is nothing hut a reflection 
of the intellect; and which apait fioin the iiitclhgible spiiit^ is 
meiely an empty vacuity. *

4S. The cieation though jncsided by the intelligible spirit, 
IS itself a meie void, its intelligible soul being the only substance 
of it as the watoi of the weaves

43. The waves though foiined of water, arc themselves as

false as the hoins of haies, and Ihoii appearance as natuial ob- 
jects IS altogether false (because they are the effects of the auxi- 
liaiy cause of the winds wdiich hav'e laised them), ,

44. Hence theie being no visible object in leality (except 
a false ajipeaiancc of such), how can the obsei vei have any idea of 
the visible, which loses its delusion at the moment of his death.

45. After disappeaiance of the vusible oiitei world fiom 
sight, the soul leflects on its leminiscence of the creation in its 
inner woild of the mind, accoiding to the inopei time and place 
of eveiy thing,46 It lemembeis its biith, its paients, its age and its residence, 
with its learning and all othei puisints in then exact manner and 
01 del.

47. It thmlrs of its fiiends and seivants, and of the success 
and failuie of its attem25ts Ana thus the incieate and incoipoieal 
soul, lummates on the events of its cieated and coipoieal state in 
its intellectual foim

48 It does not howevei lemam long m this state, but enteis 
a new body soon aftei its death, to which the jnopeities of the 
mind and senses, aie added aftei w^aids in then piopei times.

UTPATTI KHANDA

327

49 li then becomes a baby, and finds a new father and* 
mothei, and begins to glow Thus whether one may perceive it or 
not, it IS all the product of liis former reminiscece»

50. Then upon waking from this state of tiance, like a fruit 
fiom the cell of a flower, it comes to find that a single moment 
appealed to it as the peiiod of an age.

51. So King Haiish Chundra of yoie thought one night as ' 
a peiiod of twelve yeais, and so one day seems as long as a yeai 
to them that aie sepaiated from then beloved objects.

52 Again as the hath or deaih of one in his dieam, or his 
getting a begotten father in infancy, oi a hungry man^s farmg 
on dainty food in thought, is all false

53 So when a sated man says he is sataiving, or one deelaies 
he IS an eye witness of a thing he has not seen, or an empty 
space IS full of people, or that he has got a lost tieasure in his 
dieam, who is there to believe him ?

54. But this visible world rests in the invisible spiiit of God, 
as the piopeity of pungency, lesides m the particles, of the peppei 
seed, and as the painted pictures on a column. But where are 
the open and clear sighted eyes to perceive the same ?

Interpretation of Lila's Vision.Interpretation of Lila's Vision.

55. The vision of LiM, called sam4dhi in Yoga and clmr’^ 
voyance of spnitualism, was the abstiact meditation of her loid in 
her memory. Which piesented hei with a full view of eveiy 
thing impnnted in it The memoiy is taken for the whole in- 
tellect cldt^ which is identified wath God, in whose essence the 
images of all things, aie said to be eternally present.

CIIAPTEE XXI.

Guide to Peace.

(^OON after tlie insensibility occasioned by one’s death is ovci, 
kJ theie appeals to him (soul) the sight of the n oild, as he 
viewed it with his open eyes when he was living.

It presents befoie him the ciicle of the sky and its sides 
with the cycle of its seasons and‘ times, and shows him the deeds 
of his pious and secular acts, as they were to continue to eternity.

3. Objects never seen nor thought of before, also ofter them- 
selves to his view, as the sight of his own death in a dream, and 
as they were the punts in his memory.

4. But the infinity of objects, appearing in the empty sphere 
of the immateiial intellect, is mere illusion, and the baseless city 
of the world, like an aerial castle, is but the creation of im^-gi- 
nation.

5. It IS the remembiance of the past world, that makes it 
known to us, ^because it is impossible to lecognise any thing 
without a previous impression of its kind in the mind). Hence 
the length of a age and the shoitness of a moment, are 
but eiioneous impiessions pioceedmg fiom the rapidity and 
slowness of our thoughts.

6. Therefoie knowledge, based upon previous notions or

otherwise, is of two kinds, and things known ivithout their 
cause, aie attributed to Divine Intellegence ; (as the hidden cause 
of all). \

7. We aie conscious also of thoughts, unthought of before 
in our minds, as we often have in oui dreams , and think ot our 
parents after their demise by mistake of othei peisons as such7. We aie conscious also of thoughts, unthought of before 
in our minds, as we often have in oui dreams , and think ot our 
parents after their demise by mistake of othei peisons as such

8 Sometimes genius supercedes the piovinee of memory, 
as in the first cieation or discovery of a thing, which is after- 
wards continued by its remembiance.

UTPATTI KHANDA.

329

9. AccouHug to some, these visible woilds are said to have* 
icraainecl m theii ideal state in the Divine mind ; and 
accoiding to otheis, that there were no pie-cxistcnt notions o£ 
these in the mind oiC God

10. Accoiding to some othcis, the world manifested itself not 
fioni thcmemoiy, but by the powei and will of God, while otheis 
maintain it to be the pioduction of a fortuitous combination, of in- 
tolligence and atomic piiiiciples on a sudden {Kdlaidrij/a sanyoga),

11. It IS tlie cntiie forgetfulness of the woild, which is stjded 
liberation, and which can not be had from attachment to what is 
desuable or aveision of the uiideisirablc

IS. It IS difficult to effect an entire negation, both of one’s 
subjeetive as well as objective Icnowledgc of his self, and the 
existence of the outer world , and yet no body can be freed without 
obhteiation of both.

13. As the fallacy of talcing a lope foi a snalce, is not 
lemovcd until the meaning of the world snake, is known to be 
inapjdicablc to the rope; so no one can have rest and peace of 
his mind, unless he is convinced of the illusive natuie of the woild.

14'. One jiart}’^, who is at peace with himself (l>y his abandon- 
ment of the world), can not be wholly at lest without divine know- 
ledge , as the ghost of his inward ignorance, may overtake 
him after his getting iid of the devil of worldlmess.

15. The woild IS ccilainly a monster m itself without the 
knowledge of its Authoi ; buCthe difficulty of knowing the liist 
cause, has iciidcred it an impassable wilderness.15. The woild IS ccilainly a monster m itself without the 
knowledge of its Authoi ; buCthe difficulty of knowing the liist 
cause, has iciidcred it an impassable wilderness.

16. Lila said* If reminiscence be the cause of one’s ic- 
pioduction, then say, O goddess ! what were the causes of tlie 
biith of the Bi4hmanic pan, mthout the vestiges of then past 
lemembrance.

17. The goddess leplied • Know that Biahma the liist 
progenitor of mankind, who was absolute in himself, did not 
letam any vestige of his past lemembrance in him,

18. The fiist bom, who had nothing to leraember of a piior 
birth, was bom in the lotus with his oivn luicUigenee^c/^atanfya^ 
(and not because of his lemembrance).

VoL. I

4a

330

YOGA VASISHTHA

' 19 Tlie loid of creatures being thus born by chance of his 
own genius or creative power, and without any assignable cause 
01 design on his ^lart, lefleeted within himself "now I am be- 
come another and the source of cieation/^

20. VYhatever is thus bom of itself, is as it were nothing 
and never pioduced at all, but remained as the absolute intellect 
itself «« mihihus (chinnabhas)

21. It IS the Supreme being that IS the sole cause of both 
states of lemimscenee, (e. e the one caused by vestiges of piior 
impiessions, and the other produced by prioi desires), and both 
the conditions of cause and effect combine in Him in the spheie 
of his intellect.

22 Thus it IS the knowledge of the union of the cause and 
effect, and the auxiliary cause m Him, that gives us our tranqui- 
llity and naught otherwise

23 Causality and consequence are mere empty words of

no significance, since it is the recognition of .the uuiveisal intel- 
lect, which constitutes true wisdom. ,

24 Hence nothing is produced that is seen in the pheno- 
menal, or known in the noumenal or intellectual woild [Ghd~ 
jagat), but eveiy thing is situated within the space of the spheie 
of the intellect in one’s own soul25 Llld said O f wondeiful was the sight thou hast shown 
me, O goddess , it was a fair piospect of the woild as in its morn- 
ing hght, and as brilliant as in the glaie of a lightmug,

26. Now goddess! deign to satisfy my curiosity, until I 
become conveisant with it by my intense application and study.

27. Kindly take me to that dwelling where the Brdhman 
pail dwelt togethei, and show me that mountainous spot of 
their former residence

28. The goddess rephed . If you want to see that sight, 
you shall have to be immaculate, by forsaking the sense of your 
peisonality {mana or meuw)., and betaking youiself to the clair- 
voyance 01 deal sightedness of seeing the unintelligible Intellect 
{ac7iefga-c7nt) within the soul

UTPATTI KHANDA.

331

S9 You shall then find yourself in a vacuous ’atmosphere 
{v^omdtman), and situated in the sky {'iiahhas-iiultbtt/s) , lesemh- 
ling the piospects of eaithly men, and the apartments of the 
fiimament (e. e all ml and void) .

30. In this state we shall be able to see them with all their 
possesions without any obstruction, otheiwise this body is a 
gieat barriei in the way of spuitual vision.

31. Llld said Tell me kindly, O goddess 1 the leason, why 
do we not see the other woild with these eyes, nor go there with 
these bodies of ours.

32. The goddess replied * The reason is that you take the 
true futuiity for false, and believe the untrue present as tine. 
For these worlds which aie foimless, appeal as having forms to 
yoiu’ eyes, as you take the substance gold in its form of a iing.

33. Gold though fashioned as a ciielet, has no circulaiity in 
itj so the spiiit of God appealing in the form of the woild, is 
not the woild itself.

3*4. The woild is a vacuity full with the spirit of God ; 
and whatever else is visible in it, is as the dust appealing to fly 
over the sea (Hence called mdyd or illusion of vision, as specks 
peopling the summer skies).35. This illusoiy quintessence of the woild is all false, the 
tiue reality being the subjective Biahma alone,* and in support 
of this tiuth we have the evidence of our guides in Veddnta 
philosophy, and the conviction of our consciousness.

36. The Brdhma believei sees Biahma alone and no othei any- 
where, and he looks to Biahma through Biahma himself, as the 
cieator and pieseivei of all, and whose nature includes all other 
attiibutes in itself.

37. Brahma is not known only as the author of his work 
of the Cl cation of worlds, but as existent of himself without 
any causation or auxiliary causahty, {z e as neitlier the eieatoi or 
cieated, noi supporter of nor supported by anothei)

38 Until you are trained by your practice of Yoga, to rely

332

YOGA VA'SiSHTnii.

in one imity^ by discaidmg all duality and vaiieiym youv belief^

' so long you are barred fiom viewing Bialitna in bis true ligbt.

39 Being settled m tins belief of unit)’-, we find oiii selves by 
oui constant 2 n’actice of Yoga communion^ loicstin ibc Supicmc 
spirit.

40. We then find our bodies mixing with the aii as an 
aeiial substance^ and at last come to tbe sigbt of Biabma witb 
these our mortal frames

41. Being then endued with pure, enlightened and sjuritual 
frames^ like those of Biahmd, and the gods, the holy saints aic 
placed in some part of the divine essence.

42. Without 2 )i*actice of yoga, you can not approach God 
with your mortal frame The soul that is sullied by sense, 
can never see the image of God

43 It IS impossible for one to arrive at the aerial castle 
(objects of the wish) of another, when it is not possible foi him 
to come to the castle (wished for object), which he has himself 
built in an.

44. Boisake theiefore this gross body, and assume your 
light intellectual frame , then betake yourself to the practice 
of yoga, that you may see God face to face.44. Boisake theiefore this gross body, and assume your 
light intellectual frame , then betake yourself to the practice 
of yoga, that you may see God face to face.

45 . As it may be possible to realize an aerial castle by the labour 
of building it, so it is possible to behold God, either with this 
body or without it, by jnactice of yoga only and not otherwise.

46 And as the eironeous conception of the existence of the 
woild, has continued since its first creation (by the will of 
Brahma), so it has been ever since attiibuted to an eternal fate

nfyati (by fatalists), and to an illusory jiowci {m&ya saKi of 
Mdyd vachs).

47. LfU asked Thou saidst O goddess? that we shall go 
together to the abode of the Brahman pair, but I ask thee to tell me, 
how aie we to effect our journey theie?

48 As for me, I shall be able to go thei e with the jiurer pai t 
of my essence the sentient soul, (after leaving this my gross body 
heie). But tell me how wilt thou that ait pine intellect {cMas), 
go to that place ?

UTPiTTI KHANDA

333

49. The goddess readied I tell thee ladj, that the divine 
will IS an aeiial tree^ and its fruits aie as unsubstantial as aiij 
having no figure nor form nor substance in them.

50. And whatever is formed by the will of God from the i)ure 
essence of his intelligent nature^ is only a hkeness of himself, 
and beais little difference from its original.

51. This body of mine is of the like kmd, and I will not lay 
it aside, but find out that place by means of this as the bieeze 
finds the odouis.

52 And as water mixes with water, fire with fire and air 
with an, so does this spiiitual body easily 30 in with any 
mateiial form that it likes.

53. But a coi25oreal body cannot mix with an incorpoieal 
substnnee, nor a solid rock become the same with an ideal hill.

54'. And as your body, which is composed both of its spmtual 
andx .ental parts, has become corpoieal by its habitual tendency to 
corxjoieality.54'. And as your body, which is composed both of its spmtual 
andx .ental parts, has become corpoieal by its habitual tendency to 
corxjoieality.

55. So your mateiial body becomes spmtual {ahvdhila)^ by 
means of youi leaning to spiiituality, as m yom* sleep, in your pio- 
tiacted meditation, msensibility, fancies and reveries.

56. Your spiritual natuie will then letiirn to youi’i body,

when your earthly desires aie lessened and embed witKm the 
mind. /

57. LiM said Say goddess, what becomes of the sjiuitual

body after it has attained its compactness by constant practice 
of yoga; whether it becomes indestructible, oi peiishesuike all 
other finite bodies. \

58. The goddess leplicd • Any thing that exists is perfehable, 
and of comse liable to death, but how can that thing dielwhicli 
IS nothing, and is impeiishablem its nature ^ (Such is the liirit).

59. Again the fallacy of the snake in a rope being rer»ved,

the snake disappeais of itself, and no one doubts of i^,ny 
more. ■

60. Thus, as the true knowledge of the rope, removes^^be 
erroneous conception of the snake in it, so the lecognition of the 
spiritual body, dispels the misconception of its mateiiahty.

334

YOGA YA'SISHTHA

' 61. All imagery is at an end when there is no image at all^ 
as the art of statuaiy must cease for want of stones on earth. 
(Tims they attubute materiality to the immaterial spiiit from 
then familiaiity with matter).

62. We see clearly our bodies full of the spirit of God, 
which you can not perceive owing to your gioss understanding.

63 In the beginning when the intellect— is engiossed 
with the imagination of the mind eUtta, it loses thenceforth 
its sight of the only one object (the unity of God).

64) LIM asked But how can imagination have any room 
or trace out anything in that unity, wherein the divisions of 
time and space and all things, are lost in an undistinguishable 
nWss ?64) LIM asked But how can imagination have any room 
or trace out anything in that unity, wherein the divisions of 
time and space and all things, are lost in an undistinguishable 
nWss ?

65. The goddess replied • Like the bracelet in gold and 
m water, the show of truth in fllAnma anri

le-

yju. guuucss rtjjjimu • uiKe tue Draceiet in gold,

waves in water, the show of truth in di earns, and the 
semblance of aeiial castles

66l As all these vanish on the light apprehension of them, 
so % imaginary attributes of the unpiedicable God, are all 
noth&g whatever.

67. ' As tJ^^^gf^'fore «ross body- ab&uiiie vuur 
mg of aiiectuaiJuaGio dust in the sky, so there can be no ascrib-

indivisit attubute or partial property to God , whose nature is

quil andU^ ^^^jj^aginable, who is an unborn unity, tia 
>ll-peivading.

Whatever shines about us, is the pure 
Uo scatters his lustre like a traneceudeutal gem all

said- H It la ao at all times, ^ °

uiyati,, how we happened to fall into the eiror of atti Anting 
Mdi/d vor diversity to His nature.

47. The goddess replied- It was your want of reason that 
togeth%a you to erior so long; and it is the absence of ly^oning 
how aijg the iiatnial bane of mankind, and requires o e rem 
bv YOur attending to reason.

of mi], vYhen leason takes the place of the lYant o

' Xt lutroduces lu a momeut the light of knowledge lu the soul,

m heu of its foimer darkness.

being, 
aiound 
69.

no.,

XJTPATTI KHANDA

335

72. As reason advances, your want^of reason and Iciiowledge* 
and youi bondage to prejudice, are put to flight, and then you 
have an unobstructed liberation and pure understanding in 
this world.

73. As long as you bad remained without reasoning on this 
subject, so long were you either dormant or wandeimg in erioi.

74. You are awakened from this day both to your reason 
and liberation, ’and the seeds for the suppression of your desiies, 
aie sown in your heart.74. You are awakened from this day both to your reason 
and liberation, ’and the seeds for the suppression of your desiies, 
aie sown in your heart.

75. At first neither was this visible world presented to 
you nor you to it, how long will you therefore reside in it, 
and what other desires have you herein ? j

76 AVithdraw your mind from its thoughts of the visitor, 
visibles and vision of this world, and settle it in the idea of 
the entire negation of all existence, then fix your meditation 
solely in the supreme Being, and sit in a state of unalterable 
insensibihty (by forgetting yourself to a stone).

77% When the seed of inappetency has taken root in^ your 
heart, and begun to germinate in it, the sprouts of ' your 
affections and hatred (literally-pathos and apathy), will be 
destroyed of themselves.

78. Then the impiession of the world will be utterly

effaced from the mind, and an unshaken anasthesia will/ over- 
take you all at once. /

79. Remaining thus entranced in your abstract medilf;ation, 
you Will have in process of time a soul, as luminous as a^mi- 
nary in the clear fiimament of heaven, freed fiom the con-' 
catenation of all causes and their consec[uences for evermoie»\

I-USf i:

64<

01 trace o 
time and s 
ii!iacc ^

A

CHA1>TEJI XXII.

Practice op Wisdom or Wisdom in practice.

(ViJNA NA-BIIY ASA) .

SECTION I.

Abandonment of Desires 
JBdsand Tydga,

\ 
wave

sembl

eel \

SO il^e' 
nothing ^

67. 1 A 
ing of 
mdmsini , 
qnil )

, yi-

aiound. ,

^%-nL 'tilt

'^ralima);! The^ 
niyatij propei 
Mdgd i;iating to n

\oddess continued : <

s seen in a dieam, prove to be false as tbe 
loused fiom sleep and upon knowing them 
r^^ancy, so tbe belief in tbe reabty of tbe

unded upon dissolution of our desires.

^ j^g dieamt of disappears upon waking, so 
Wy disappear in sleep, when tbe dnsires

^bodies are awakened alter tbe states of our

^ An^so IS our spuitual body awakened after 
\ve \

\ corporeal states.^bodies are awakened alter tbe states of our

^ An^so IS our spuitual body awakened after 
\ve \

\ corporeal states.

^^^^^o«cceeds tbe dormancy wbicb is devoif 
ce\wG 3-1*6 nnconsciouB of tbe actions and 
^ does tbe tianquillity of liberationV 
I 6^6^ our waking bodies. \

•,joVA^®4-liberated men {j'Cvan-7)mlias), is \ 
all, since it is tbe j)uie desiie 
^nd happiness.

dl. 6. Tbe sleep in ^oVtke will and wish are dormant, is 
togetlcalled tbe sound sleep sidupta, but the dormancy of desiies in 
bow tbe waking state, is known as insensibility moJia or milrcJihA.

‘'■“''I by your sleep which is wholly devoid of desiie, is

^of mp^ >i/yjien rq^ie tmga or tbe fourth stage of yoga, and which 
it intioduces in «tate, is called samddln or union with Supreme, 
in beu of its former u vi^bose life is freed fiom all desires in

UTPATTI KHANDA.

337

this woililj IS called the living Y’ihoxsutQi^i-j'lhan-DiuLta , a state, 
which IS unknown to them that aie not libeiated {cimuJcta).

9 When the mind becomes a xmre essence (as m its 
samddlii), and its desiies aie weakened, it becomes spiiitualised 
{atihOjliild), and then it glows and flows, as the snow melts to 
watei by application of heat.

10. The sjiiiitualised mind, being awakened (as if it ufei’e 
fiom its diowsiness or lethaigy), mixes with the holy spiiits of 
depaited souls m the other world.

11. When your egoism is moderated by your practice of yoga, 
then the peiception of the invisible, will of itself use cleaily 
befoie youi mind

13. And when spiritual knowledge gams a firm footing in your 
mind, you will then behold the hallowed scenes of the othei 
woild more than youi expectation

13. Theiefoie O blameless lady • try your utmost to deaden 
your desiies, and when you have gained sufficient sbiength in 
that piactice, know youiself to be libeiated in this life

1-1 Until the moon of youi intellectual knowledge, comes to

shine forth fully with hei cooling beams, so long you shall have1-1 Until the moon of youi intellectual knowledge, comes to

shine forth fully with hei cooling beams, so long you shall have

to leave this body of yours heie, moider to have a view of the

other woild. 
e

15. This fleshy body of youis, can have no tangible connec- 
1 '/On with one which is without flesh, noi can the intellectual 
"''^Teha), peiform any action of the coipoieal system.

u. you all this according to my best knowledge, 
_ things as they aie and my sayings aie known 
V.VV. ^ ys, to be as efficacious as the curse or blessing of a 
deity.

17 . It is the habitual reliance of men m then gross bodies, and 
then fond attachment to them, that bind then souls down, and 
bung them back to the eaith j while the weakening of eaithly 
desiies seive to clothe them with spnitual bodies

18 No body believes in his having a spnitual body heie 
VoL I 43

338

YOGA VASISHTIIA

c even ai Ins deatli bed ^ bnt every one ibints the dying man to be 
dead mtli Ins body for ever.

19. This body however, neither dies, nor is it alive at any 
tune, for both life and death are mere resemblances of aerial 
dreams and desiies in all respects.

20 . The life and death of beings hero below, are as false as 
the apjiearances and disappcaraiice of persons in imagination, 
(or a man in the moon), or of dolls in play or puppet shows.

ai . LiU said . The puic knowledge, O goddess 1 that thou 
hast impaited to me, selves on its being instilled into my eais, 
as a healing balm to the pain caused by the phenomonals.

SECTION II.

On the Peactice of Yoga.

22 . Now tell me the name and natuie of the piactice, that 
may be of use to Spiiitualisra, how it is to be perfected and what 
IS the end of such peifection.

23. The goddess replied Whatever a man attempts to. do 
heie at any time, he can haidly over effect its completion, without 
his painful practice of it to the utmost of his powei.23. The goddess replied Whatever a man attempts to. do 
heie at any time, he can haidly over effect its completion, without 
his painful practice of it to the utmost of his powei.

24. Practice is said by the wise, to consist in the conference 
of the same thing with one anothei, in undeistandmg it 
thoroughly, and m devoting one^s self solely to his object.

25. And those great souls become successful in this woild, 
who aie disgusted with the woild, and aie moderate in their 
enj'oyments and desiies, and do not think on the attainment of 
what they are in want of.

26. And those great minds are said to be best trained, 
which aie giaced with libeial views, and are delighted with 
the lelish of uneonceinedness with the woild, and enraptuied 
with the sti earns of heavenly felicity.

27 Again they aie called the best piactised in dinne know- 
ledge, who are employed in preaching the absolute negation of 
the knower and knowables in this woild, by the light of leasoning 
and S^stias

UTPATTI KlIANDA

339

S8. Also tlie knowledge^ that there was irotlimg produced iii^ 
the beg'inrung, and that uothuig which is visible^ as this woild or 
oilers self, IS true at any time, is called to be practical know- 
ledge by some,

29. The strong tendency of the soul towards the spiiit of 
God, which lesults fiom a knowledge of the nihility of visibles, 
and subsidence of the passionsjis said to bo the effect of the 
jnactice of Yoga.

80. But mere knowledge of the inexistence of the woild, 
without subduing the passions, is known as knowledge without 
piactice, and is of no good to its possessor.

31. Consciousness of the inexiotence of the visible woild, 
constitutes the tine knowledge of the knowable. This habitude 
of the mind is called the practice of Yoga, and leads one to his 
final extmction-m? idna.82. The mind thus prepaied by practice of Yoga, awakens 
the intelligence which lay doimant in the daik night of this woild, 
and which now sheds its cooling showeis of icason, like dew 
diijps m the fiosty night of autumn,

33. As the sage was seimonizmg in this manner, the day 
departed as to its evening service, and led the assembled tram to 
then evening ablutions. They met again with then mutual 
gieetings at the rising beams of the sun aftei the daikness 
of night was dispelled.

CHAPTER XXIIT.

The Aerial Journey of Spiritual Bodies.

y ASISHTHA said

After this confcience between the goddess and tliat 
exeellent lady on that night, they found the inmates of the 
family fast asleep in the mnei apartment.

5i They enteied tbe cliavnel-liousc wliich was closely shut 
on all sides by latches fastened to the doors and windows, and 
wbicb was peifumed wifcb tbe fragrance of lieaps of flowers.

3. They sat beside the coipse decoiated with fresh floweis 
and garments, with their faces shining like the fan full-moon , 
and biightenmg the xilace.

4'. They then went to the cemetry and stood motionless 
on the spot, as if they weie sculptures engraven on maible 
columns, or as pictuies drawn upon the wall.

5. They shook off all their thoughts and caics, and be- 
came as conti acted as the faded blossoms of the lotus at the 
decline of the day, when their fragiance has fled from them.

0. They remained still, calm and quiet and without any 
motion of then limbs, like a sheet of clouds hanging on the 
mountain top in the calm of autumn.

7. They continued in fixed attention without any exteinal 
sensation, like some lonely creepeis shiivelled for want of the 
moisture of the season

8 They weie fully impressed with the disbelief of their own 
existence, and that of all othei things in the woild, and weie 
altogether absorbed in the thought of an absolute privation of 
eveiy thing at large9, They lost the remembianee of the phantom of the phe- 
nomenal world, which IS as unreal as the hoin of a haie.

10 What was a non ens at fiist, is even so a not-bemg at 
piesent, and what appeals as existent, is as inexistent as the 
water in a miiage.

UPPATTI KHANDA

341

11. Tlie two ladies tlien became as quiet as ineit nature > 
lieiself^ and as still as fiimament befoie the lumiuous bodies 
lolled about in its ample spbeie.

12. They then began to move with their own bodies, the 
goddess of wisdom in her form of intelligence, and the queen 
in her intellectual and meditative mood.

13. With their new bodies they lose as high as one span 
above the ground, then taking the foims of the empty intellect, 
they began to mount in the sky.

14 The two ladies then with their playful open eyes, as- 
cended to the higher region of the sky, by their natuie of 
intellectual knowledge.

15. Then they flew higher and higher by force of their 
inteUeetj and ariived at a region stretching millions of leagues 
in length.

16. Here the pair in their etheiial forms, looked about 
accoiding to their nature in seaich of some visible objects , but 
finding no other figure except their own, they became much 
more attached to each other by then mutual affection.

CHAPTER XXIV.

The Aeuial Jouhney.

^TASISHTHA Continued -

V Thus ascendiag higher and higher and leachmg by degrees 
the highest station, they went on viewing the heavens, with their 
hands clasped m each othei’s.

2. They saw a vast expanse as that of the wide extended 
nniveisal ocean, deep and tianslucent within , but soft "with 
etherial mddness, and a cooling bieeze infusing heavenly delighi.

3. All delightsome and pleasant was the vast Ocean of vacuity, 
into which they dived, and which affoided them a delight far 
greater in its purity, than what is derived fiom the company of 
the viituous.d. They wandered about all sides of heaven, under the beams 
of the full moon shining above them, and now halted upder 
the clear vault of the clouds, coveiing the mountain tops of 
Ilet Kj as if under the dome of a huge white washed edifi.ee.

6. And now they roved by the regions of Siddhas and Gan- 
dhaivas, breathing the chaiming fragrance of Ma7iddia chaplets, 
and now passing the lunar spheie, they inhaled the sweet scent 
exhaled by the breeze from that nectaiious oib {Sudhdlai a).

6. Now tiled and perspiiing profusely, they bathed in the 
lakes of showeiiiig clouds, fraught with the blushing lotuses 
of luiid lightnings flashing within them.

7. They promenaded at random of their free will on all 
sides, and now alighted like flutteiing bees on the tops of 
high mountains, appearing as filaments of thelotus-like eaith 
below.

8. They loved also under the vaults of some fiagments 
qf clouds, which weie scatteied by the winds, and laming like 
the cascade of Ganges, thinking them as shower-bath-houses 
m the an.

UTPATTI KHANDA,

343

9. Then failing m their strength, they halted in many places, • 
With tlioir slow and slackened steps, and beheld the vacuum 
full of gieat and wondrous woiks.

SECTION 11.

Desceiption op the Heaven.

10. They saw what they had never seen before, the tremen- 
dous depth of vacuity, which was not filled up by the myriads 
of woilds which keiit revolving in it.

11. Over and over and higher and higher, they saw the celes- 
tial spheies filled with luminous orbs adorned with their orna- 
mental stars, roving one above and around the other.

12. Huge mountainous bodies as the 3[en(> moved about in 
the vacuous space, and emitted a rubicund glaie, like a flame of 
fire fiom within their bowels on all sides.

13. There were beautiful table-lands, like those of the 
Himalayas, with their peaily peaks of snow, and also mountains 
of gold, spreading an aureate hue over the land.13. There were beautiful table-lands, like those of the 
Himalayas, with their peaily peaks of snow, and also mountains 
of gold, spreading an aureate hue over the land.

14. They saw in some place mountains of emerald, tinging 
the landscape with verdant green, as it were a bed of grass; 
and in others some dark cloud, dimming the sight of the 
spectatoi, and hiding the spectacle in dark blackness.

15. They beheld also tracts of blue saphire, with creepers 
of piiijdba flowers, blooming with then blossoms as banners 
in the azuie skies

IG They saw the flights of Siddhas (oi departed holy spirits), 
the flight of whose minds outstripped the swiftness of the 
winds, and heaid the vocal music of the songs of heavenly 
nymphs in then aeiial abodes.

17. All the great holies m the universe (the planetary sys- 
tem), wcie in continual motion, and the spirits of the gods and 
demigods, weie moving about unseen by one anothei.

18 Grioups of spiritual beings, as the Kushmiindas, Il4k- 
-^hasas and Pisachas, weie seated in aeiial circles at the borders.

344

YOGA VASISIITHA

raiidtlie winds and gales blowing wilb full force in ilieii elbeiial 
comse.

19. Loud loaungs of clouds, as those of the craclcling wheels 
of heavenly cars, were hoaid in some places ; and the noise of 
rapid stars, resembled the blowing of pneumatic engines.

20. Theio the half burnt Siddhas, wore Hying fiom their 
burning eais under the solai lays, by reason of then ncaincss to 
the Sun, andtliesolar embeis were ilungafai by thebiealh ol the 
nostiils of his horses. (It means the falling of the burning 
meteors and raeteoiolites from the sky).

21. In some places they beheld tlic iiilers of men, and tiains 
of Apsaias, huriying up and down tlie mi ; and in othcis, the 
goddesses loving amidst the smoky and liciy clouds in the 
fiimameut.21. In some places they beheld tlic iiilers of men, and tiains 
of Apsaias, huriying up and down tlie mi ; and in othcis, the 
goddesses loving amidst the smoky and liciy clouds in the 
fiimameut.

22. Here they saw some sparks of light, falling like the 
jewels of celestial nymphs, in their huined flight to their ics- 
jiective spheres ; and there they beheld the lightsome S 2 >iiiis of 
lesser Siddhas dwindling into daikness.

23. Flakes of mists wcic falling off from the clouds, as if by 
fiiction of the bodies of tuibuleut spirits, rushmg up and down 
the skies , and shiouding the sides of mountains as with sheets 
of cloth.

24<. Fragments of clouds, beset by groups in the shapes of 
ciows, owls and vultures, were flying about in the an , and there 
weie seen some monsters also, as Dilkims heaving their heads in 
the foims of huge suiges, m the cloudy ocean of the sky.

25. Theie weie bodies ofYogims too, with their faces le- 
semhling those of dog5, ravens, asses and camels, who weie tia- 
veismg the wide expanse of the heavens to no pin pose

26. Theie weie Siddhas and Grandhaivas, siioiting injiairs in 
the coverts of dark, smoky and ash colouied clouds, spread before 
the 1 agents of the four quaiteis of the skies.

27 They beheld the path of the planets (the zodiac), winch 
resounded loudly with the heavenly music of the spheres, and

UTPATTI KHANDA

345

tliat paili also (of -tlie lunar mansions) , ■winch incessantly maiked , 
the course of the two fortnights.

28 They saw the sons of gods moving about in the air, and 
■viewing With wonder the heavenly stream of Ganges (the milky 
way), which was studded with stais, and lolling with the rapi- 
dit}’^ of winds.

29. They saw the gods wielding then thunderbolts, discuses, 
tridents, swoids and missiles, and heard Ndiada and Tumburu 
singing m then aeiial abodes on high.29. They saw the gods wielding then thunderbolts, discuses, 
tridents, swoids and missiles, and heard Ndiada and Tumburu 
singing m then aeiial abodes on high.

30. They beheld the legion of the clouds, where there were 
huge bodies of them mute as paintings, and pouimg forth floods 
of ram as m the gieat deluge.

31. In some place they saw a dark cloud, as high as the 
mouiitain-kmg Himalaya, slowly moving m the an , and at 
others some of a golden hue as at the setting sun.

32. In some place there were flimsy sheets of clouds, as 
aie said to hover on the peaks of the Rishya range , and at 
anothei a cloud like the calm blue bed of the Sea, without any

ter in them.

S3. Theie were tufts of grass seen in some places, as if blown 
up by the winds and floating m the stream of air , and swarms 
of butterflies at others with their glossy coats and wings.

34. In some place, there was a cloud of dust raised by the 
wind, and appealing as a lake on the top of a mountain.

35. The Mdtris were seen, to be dancing naked in their 
giddy circles in someplace, and the great Yoginis sat at others, as 
if ever and anon giddy ivith intoxication.

36 Theie weie circles of holy men, sitting in their calm 
meditation in one place, and pious saints at others, who had 
cast away their woildly cares at a distance.

37. There was a conclave of celestial choiisters, composed of 
heavenly nymphs, Kmnaras and Gandharvas m one place , and

/«ome quiet towns and cities situated at othei s.

38. There were the cities of Brahma and Rudra full with 
their people, and the city of illusion (Mdyd) with its increasing 
population.

VoL. I

44

34G

YOGA VASJSTITJIA.

, 39, There were eiystal lahcs ni eome placcB niicl ‘^lagnaiit

pools at otlieis j and lakes with the Siddhas seated by them, and 
those emb osomed by the Jising moon,

40, They saw the sun using m one pait, and the darkness 
of night veiling the othem ,* the evening casting its shadow on one,40, They saw the sun using m one pait, and the darkness 
of night veiling the othem ,* the evening casting its shadow on one,

and the dusky mists of dusk obscniing »he other,

41, Theie veiethe lioaiy clouds of winter in some places, 
and those of the rains in others ; somewhere they appealed as 
tiaets of land and at anothei as a sheet of water,

42, Bodies of gods and demigods, were loving from one side 
to the othei , some fiom east to west, and otheis from noith to 
the south.

42. Theie w'eie mountains heaving their heads to thousands 
of miles in then height, and there were valleys and caves cover- 
ed in eternal daikness.

44 Theie was a vast inextinguishable fire, like that of the 
blazing sun in one place , and a thickly frost covering the moon- 
light in another (The burning heat of the tropics and tho 
cold of the fiigid zone).

45 Somewhere theie was a great city, flouiishing with 
gloves and aibouis , and at anothei big temples of gods, levelled 
to the ground by the might of demons.

46 In some place there was a stieak of light, described by a 
falling meteoi in the sky , in another the blaze of a comet with 
its thousand fieiy tails in the an.

47 In one place theie was a lucky planet, rising with its full 
oib to the view, in another there spiead the gloom of night, and 
full sunshine in anothei

48. Heie the clouds were roaring, and theie they were 
dumb and mute , heie were the high blasts driving the clouds 
in air, and theie the gentle bieeze diopping the clusters of 
flowers on the ground.

49. Sometimes thefiimament was clear and fair, and without 
an intercepting cloud in it, and as transparent as the soul of 
a wise man, delighted with the knowledge of tiuth.

TJTPATTI KHANDA

347

5t). Tlie vacuous legion of the celestial godsj was so full 
with the dewy beams (Inmdiisu) of the silvery oib of the moon 
(siveta-vdhcb) y that it appeal d as a shower of lam, and raised 
the loud croaking of the frogs below.51. There apjieared flocks of peacocks and goldfinches, to be 
fluttering about in some place, and vehicles of the goddesses and 
VidyMhaiis thronging at another.

62. Numbeis of Kai tikeya'’s peacocks weie seen dancing 
amidst the clouds, and a flight of gieenish pariots was seen in 
the sky appealing as a veidant plain.

53. Dwaifish clouds were moving like the stout buffaloes 
of Yama, and otheis in the foim of horses, weie giazing on the 
grassy meadows of clouds

54' Cities of the gods and demons, appeared with their 
tovveis on high , and distinct towns and hills, weie seen at 
distances, as if detached fiom one another by the diiving winds.

55. In some place, gigantic Bhairavas weie dancing with 
then, mountainous bodies , and great gai iiclas were flying at 
another, as winged mountains in the an

56 Huge mountains also, were tossed about by the bloiving 
of winds , and the castles of the Gandhaivas, were using and 
falling with the celestial nymphs in them

67 There weie some clouds using on high, and appearing as 
rolling mountains in the sky, crushing down the foiests below, and 
the sky appeared in some place, as a clear lake abounding in lotuses.

58. The moon-beams shone biightly in one spot, and sweet 
cooling breezes blew softly in another Hot sultiy winds weie 
blowing 111 some place, and singeing the foiest on the mountainous 
clouds.

69 There was a dead silence in one spot, caused by peifeet 
calmness of the breeze, while anothei spot piesented a scene of 
a hundred peaks, rising on a mountainlike cloud

60 In one place the raining clouds, were i oaring loudly in 
their fury , and in anothei a fuiious battle was waging between 
the gods and demons in the clouds.

348

YOGA VA'SISHTIIA

61. In some place tlie geese were seen gabbling in tlie loins 
^lake of the sky, and inviting the gandeis by their loud cack- 
ling ciies348

YOGA VA'SISHTIIA

61. In some place tlie geese were seen gabbling in tlie loins 
^lake of the sky, and inviting the gandeis by their loud cack- 
ling ciies

63 Forms of fisheSj crocodiles and alligatois, were seen flying in 
the an, as if they were tiansformcd to aerial beings, by the holy 
waters of their natal Granges.

63. They saw somewheie the eclipse of the moon, by tlie 
dark shadow of the earth, as the sun went down the horizon; 
and so they saw the eclipse of the sun by the shadow of the 
moon falling on his disk.

64. They saw a magical flower gai den, exhaling its fiagrance 
in the air , and stiewing the flooi of heaven, with profusion of 
flowers, scatteied by showeis of moinmg dews.

65. They beheld all the beings contained in the three woi]d«, 
to be flying in the air, like a swaim of gnats in the hollow ot a 
fig tree, and then the two excellent ladies stop 2 ied in their aerial 
jomney, intent upon revisiting the eaith

Note. Most part of tlio above doscnption of tbo lica\cnB, consists, tlio 
various appearances of the clouds, and bears resemblance to .Shclh ’s poetical 
description of them All this is expressed byono Moid in the Cloud-Mc'-sengcr 
O' Knliddsa, whoro tho cloud is said to bo "Edma ntpa" or assuming anj form, 
a. pleasure

CHAPTER XXV.

Desceiption of the Eaeth.

r slHESE ladies then aliglited fiom the shy in their forms of 
■ intelligence, and passing over the mountainous regions, 
saw the habitations of men on the surface of the eai th 
2 They saw the world situated as a lotus, m the heart of the 
first male Kara (Biahmd) , the eight sides foiming the petals of 
the flowei, the hills being its pistils, and the pericaip containing 
its sweet flavoui.

3. The riveis are the tubes of its filaments, which are 
covered with drops of snow resembling their dust. The days 
and nights rolling over it, like swarms of black-bees and butter- 
flies, and all its living beings appearing as gnats fluttering 
about it.4* , Its long stalks which are as white as the bright day 
light, are composed of fibres serving for food, and of tubes con- 
ducting the drink to living beings.

5 It is wet with moistuie, which is sucked by the sun, re- 
sembling the swan swimming about in the an. It folds it- 
self in sleep in the darkness of night in absence of the sun

6. The earth like a lotus is situated on the suifaee of the 
waters of the ocean, which make it shake at times, and cause the

earthquake by their motion It is supportedytjo'Q.'S 
Vdisuki serving for its understalk, and is giro al 
as its thorns and prickles. * / e seeds, and the ^

7 The mount Meru (and others) are its lar^^ daugbbeis of 
great hives of human population, yrhere the f^ then sweet em- 
the giant race, propagated (the race of men), bu 
brace (with the sons of God), t Ii

* This means the demons to have first peopled the horde'

- - - o 4 - inVe oi h-uman

earth See Hesiod Works and Days Book f V 200 ylk , race in

t That the Meru or Altain chain in Scythia, was the gre 
race is an undisputed truth in history. So Moses speaks oi 
Grenesis chapter YI V 2 and 4 “And theie were giants in the ea:

and Bkifts of the

tl^e giant 
ih in those days,

350

YOGA VASISUTHA.

, 8 It has the extensive eoutineiit o£ Jamhiitlwipa situated 
m one petal, the petioles forming its divisions, and the tubulai 
filaments its livers.

9. The seven elevated mountains, foiming the houndaiy 
lines of this eontiiient, are its seeds , and the gieat mount of 
Sumeiu leachmg to the sky, is situated in the midst. e. the 
topmost noith pole).

10. Its lakes aie as dewdiops on the lotus-leaf, audits foiests 
are as the fauna of the flower, and the peoi le inhabiting the 
land all aiound, are as a swaim of bees about it.

11. Its extent is a thousand yo]anas square, and is surroun- 
ded on all sides by the dark sea like a belt of blaek bees.11. Its extent is a thousand yo]anas square, and is surroun- 
ded on all sides by the dark sea like a belt of blaek bees.

12. It contains nine varskas oi divisions, which are luled by 
nine brother kings, resembling the regents of its eight petalled 
sides, with the Bhdiata-vartha in the midst.

13 It stretches a million of miles with moic of land than 
waterin.it Its habitable paits aie as thickly situated as the 
frozen ice in winter.

14 The biiny ocean which is twice as large as the continent, 
girds it on the outside, as a bracelet enciicles the wiist

15. Beyond it lies the Sdka continent of a ciicular foim, and 
twice as large as the former one, which is also enciicled by the 
sea.

16 This IS called the milky ocean for the sweetness of its 
wa^, and is double the size of the foimei sea of salt.

17. Seyond and double its size is the Kusadwipa 
continent, whic^ jg q£ population It is also of the size 
of a cucle, and sU j-ounded by another sea.

18. Aiound I 3 i^gg of the sea of curds, delectable

to the gods, au|[ double the size of the continent which is 
encuchJ by it.

( 2 ) and also after tlV^ wlien the sons of God saw the daughters of men fair,

they took them to

fives, of all which they chose

, A5ien the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and

chiic , them, the same became mighty men, which were of old, 
men of renown, \ o j >

UTPiTTI KHANDA

351

19. After tHat lies the circle of the Kraimcha dwipa, which 
is also twice the size of the former one^ and surrounded by a sea 
in the mannei of a city by a canal.

20. This sea is called the sea of butter, and is twice as 
large as the continent which is girt by it. Beyond it lies 
the Sdlmali-dwipa, gii t by the foul sea of wine.

21. The fair belt of this sea resembles a wieath of white 
floweis, like the girdle of the Sesha sei^ient, foiming the neck- 
lace hanging on the bieast of Han.21. The fair belt of this sea resembles a wieath of white 
floweis, like the girdle of the Sesha sei^ient, foiming the neck- 
lace hanging on the bieast of Han.

22 Theieafter is stretched the Plaxa dwipa, double the 
size of the former, and encircled by the belt of the sea of sugar, 
appealing as the snowy plains of Himalaya.

23. After that lies the belt of the Pushkara dwipa, twice 
as large as the piecedmg one, and encircled b}’- a sea of sweet 
watei double its eircumfeience.

2d. Hence they saw at the distance of ten degrees, the 
descent to the infernal regions , wheie theie lay the belt of the 
south polar cncle, with its hideous cave below.

25. The way to the infernal cave is full[of danger and fear, and 
ten times in length fiomthe ciiclp of the divtjms , (continents)

26. This cave is encompassed on all sides by the dread- 
ful vacuum, and is half covered below by a thick gloom, 
appearing as a blue lotus attached to it.

27. Theie stood the Lokdloka ICumeru or South Polar 
mountain, which is biight with sun-shme on one side, and coveied 
by daikness on the othei, and is studded with various gems on 
its tops, and decked with flowers growing upon it.

28. It leflected the glory of the thiee woilds (in the ever- 
lasting snows), which are clapped as a cap of hairs on its top.

29. At a great distance from it, is a gieat foiest, untrodden 
by the feet of any living being, and then proceeding upwaid, they 
saw the gieat noithein ocean encompassing the pole on all sides.

30. Further on they beheld the flaming light of the auroia 
borealis, which threatened to melt the snowy mountain to 
water.

352

YOGA YA'STSnYHA

31. Proceeding onward, they met with the fierce boreal 
^01 noith winds, blowing with all then fury and force.

32. They threatened to blow away and upioot the mountains, 
as if they weie dust oi giass , and traveised the empty vacuum 
with then noiseless motion.32. They threatened to blow away and upioot the mountains, 
as if they weie dust oi giass , and traveised the empty vacuum 
with then noiseless motion.

33 Afai from these they saw the empty space of vacuum, 
sti etching wide all about them.

34 It spreads around to an unlimited extent, and encompass- 
es the woildsas a golden circlet enciicles the wiist (^ e. the belt 
of the zodiac).

35 Thus Lila, having seen the seas and mountains, the 
regents of the woilds, the city of the gods, the sky above and 
the eaith below in the unlimited concavity of the uuiveise, le- 
tuined on a sudden to her own land, and found heiself in her 
closet again

CHAPTER XXVI.

\TASISHTHA said —After the excellent ladies had returned

9 from then visit of the mundane spheie^ they entered the 
abode wheie the Bi^hman had lived before.

3 Theie the holy ladies saw in that dwelling, and unseen 
by any body, the tomb or tope of the Bid,hman.

3 Heie the maid servants weie dejected with soirow, and the 
faces of the women weie soiled with teais. Then countenances 
had faded away, like lotuse s with their witheied leaves

4 All joy had fled from the house, and left it as the diy 
bed of the dead sea, aftei its wateis were sucked by the scoichmg 
sun (Agastya). It was as a gaiden paiched in summei, or 
a tree struck by lightening

5 . It was as joyless as the dried lotus, torn by a blast oi withei- 
ing under the frost , and as faint as the light of a lamp, without 
its wick 01 oil , and as dim as the eyeball without its light.

6 The house without its mastei, was as doleful as the count- 
enance of a dying peison, or as a foiest with its falling and 
witheied leaves, and as the dry and dusty giound for want 
of lain6 The house without its mastei, was as doleful as the count- 
enance of a dying peison, or as a foiest with its falling and 
witheied leaves, and as the dry and dusty giound for want 
of lain

7 Vasishtha continued —Then the lady with her giace- 
fulness of di>rine knowledge, and the elegance of her perfections, 
and hei devotedness to and desne of tiuth, thought within heiself, 
that the inmates of the house might behold hei and the goddess, 
in then ordinary foims of human beings

9 The dwellers of the house then beheld the two ladies 
as Laxmi and Graurl together, and biighteinng the house with 
the effulgence of their persons.

10. They weie adorned from head to foot, with wreaths of 
imfadmg flowers of various kinds, and they seemed like Ploia- 
the genius of spring, perfuming the house with thefiagiance of a 
flower gaiden.

VoL. I

45

354

yoga vasishtha.

11. They appeared to rise as a pair of moons^ with their cool- 
ing and pleasant beams ; infusing a ficshness to the family, as 
the moonlight does to the medicinal plants in foiests and villages.

12. The soft glances of their eyes, under the long, loose and 
pendant curls of ban on then foieheads, shed as it weie a shower 
of white m&laii flowers, from the daik cloudy sp ols of their nigics- 
cent eyes

13. Their bodies weie as blight as melted gold, and as tremu- 
lous as the flowing stream The cunent of their effulgence, 
cast a golden hue on the spot wheie they stood, as also over the 
forest all aiound.

Id* The natuial beauty of Laxmi^s body, and the tremulous 
glaie of Lil^^s peison, spiead as it weie, a sea of ladiaiicc ahoiflX 
them, in which their peisons seemed to move as undulatim g 
waves. 1

15 Their relaxed aims resembling loose creepeis. Tilth the^* 
ruddy leaflets of then palms, shook as fiesh Kalpa cicepors in the 
foiest.

16. They touched the gionnd again with their feet, losemlihiig 
the fresh aud tendei petals of a flower, or like lotuses giouing 
upon the giouiid16. They touched the gionnd again with their feet, losemlihiig 
the fresh aud tendei petals of a flower, or like lotuses giouing 
upon the giouiid

17. Then appearance seemed to spi inkle ambiosial dens 
all around, and made the diy Tvitheied and bionn houghs of 
tamdla tiees, to vegitate anew in tender spiouts and leaflets.

18. Oil seenni them, the whole family with J^’^eshtha Sarmd 
(tlie eldest boy of the deceased BiAliman) cued aloud aud said, 
^'Obeysance to the sylvan goddesses,^^ and tbiew handfuls of 
flowers on their feet

19 The offerings of flowers which fell on their feet, resem- 
bled the showers of dew-drops, falling on lotus leaves in a lake of 
lotuses.

20. Jyeshtha Sarmdsaid Be victoiious, ye goddesses ' that 
have come here to dispel our soiiow, as it is inborn in the nature 
of good people, to dehver others fiom their distress.

21. After he had ended, the goddesses addressed him gently

UTPATTI KHAITDA.

86S

and said, tell us tlie cause of your sorrow, which has made you , 
all so sad.

’ 2S. Then Jyeshtha Sarmd, and others lelated to them one by 
one their giiefs, owing to the demise of the Bid.hman pan.

2 3 , They said Know O goddess pan I thei e lived here a Brdh- 
man and his wife, who bad been the resort of guests and a sup- 
poit of the Bi^hminical oidei

24. They were oui paients, and have lately quitted this 
abode, and having abandoned us with all their fiiends and domestic 
animals heie, have depaited to heaven, and left us quite helpless in 
this woild.

25 The buds theie sitting on the top of the house, have been 
continually pouiiiig in the an, their pious and mournful ditties 
ovei the dead bodies of the deceased

26 Theie the mountains on all sides, have been lamenting 
then loss, m the hoaise noise ^of the winds; howling in their 
caverns, and shedding showeis of then teais m the couise of the 
stiekms issuing fiom then sides27. The clouds have pouied their tears in floods of rain** 
watei, and fled fiom the skies, while the quaiteis of the heavens 
have been sending then sighs m sultiy winds all aiound.

28 The pool village jieople are wailing in piteous notes, with 
then bodies mangled by lollmg upon the giound, and trying to 
yield up their lives with continued fasting

. 29. The tiees aie shedding then teais every day in drops of

melting snow, exuding fiom the cells of their leaves and floweis, 
lesembliiig the sockets of then eyes.

30 The stieets are deseited for want of passers-bye, and have 
become dusty without being wateied They have become as empty 
as the heaits of men foisaken by then joys of life

31. The fading plants are wailing in the plaintive notes of 
Cuckoos and the humming of bees, and aie witheimg in their 
leafy limbs by the sultiy sighs of their inwaid giief

32. The snows aie meltdown by the heat of their giief and

35G

YOGA VASISllTIIA.

falling in tlie form of cataracts, whicli bieak tbemselves to a 
liundied channels by then fall upon stony basins.

33. Oui piospeiity has fled fiom us, and wc sit here in dumb 
despair of hope Our houses have become daik and gloomy as a 
deseit

34' Heie the humble bees, aie humming in giief upon the 
Bcatteied floweis in oui gaiden, which now sends foith a putiid 
smell instead of then foimer iiagiance.

35 And theic the cieepeis that tuined so gajly lound 
the vernal aibors, aie dwindling and d}ing away with then 
closing and fading llowcis.

36 The iivnlcts with then loose and low puiling miiimur, 
and light undulation of then liquid bodies in the giound, 
aie luuniug huiiily in then soiiow, to cast themsehes into the 
sea.

37 The ponds aie as still m then soiiow, as men sitting 
in then meditative postiiie {Samddlii), notwithstanding the 
distuibance of the gnats flying incessantly upon them37 The ponds aie as still m then soiiow, as men sitting 
in then meditative postiiie {Samddlii), notwithstanding the 
distuibance of the gnats flying incessantly upon them

38 Veiily IS that pait of the heaven adorned this day by 
the piesencc of oui paients, wheie the bodies of heavcnl}’- cho- 
iisteis, the Kinuaias, Gandhaivas and Vidyddhaias, welcome 
them with then music

39 Theiefoie, O Devis ! assuage this oui excessive giief, 
as the visit of the gieat nevei goes foi nothing

40 Healing these woids, LOd gently touched the head of 
her son with hei hand, as the lotus-bed leans to touch its offshoot 
by the stalk.

41. At hei touch the boy was leheved of all his soiiow 
and misfoitune, just as the summei heat of the mountain, is 
allayed by the showeis of the lainy season

42 All otheis in tlie house, weie as highly giatified at the 
sig^t of the goddesses, as when a pauper is relieved of his 
poverty, and the sick aie healed by a draught of nectar.

43 Udma said Hemove my doubt, sii, why Lild, did not 
appeal m hei own figiiie befoie hei eldest son Jyeshta Sarnia

UTPATTI KHANDA.

357

44 Vasislitha answered • You forget^ O Bdraa ^ to think 
‘that Lildi had a mateiial body, oi could assume any at pleasme. 
yShe was in her form of puie intellect (lingadeha), and it was 
with her spiiitual hand that she touched the innei spiiit of 
the boy and not his body. (Gloss) Because whoso believes 
himself to be composed of his eaithly body only, is veiily 
confined in that , but he who knows his spiiituality, is as fiee 
as an (and it was in this seiial form that Lila was langing 
about and touched her son)

45. Belief in mateiialism leads one to think his unieal 
eaithly fiame as real, as a bojr’s belief in ghosts makes him 
take a shadow foi a sjniit.

46 But this belief m one’s mateiiality, is soon ovei upon 
conviction of his spiiituality, as the traces of oui visions in a dieam, 
aie effaced on the knowledge of their unieality upon waking46 But this belief m one’s mateiiality, is soon ovei upon 
conviction of his spiiituality, as the traces of oui visions in a dieam, 
aie effaced on the knowledge of their unieality upon waking

47. The belief of matter as (vacuous) nothing, leads to the 
knowledge of the spiiit And as a glass door appeals as an open 
space to one of a bilious tempeiament, so does mattei appeal as 
nothin? to the wise.

48 A dieam presents us the sights of cities and lands, of 
ail and water, where theie aie no such things in actuality , and 
it causes the movements of our limbs and bodies (as in somnambu- 
lation) for nothing,

49. As the air appeals as earth in dreaming, so does the 
non-existent woild appear to be existent in waking It is 
thus that men see and talk of things unseen and unknown in 
them fits of deliiium.

60. So boys see ghosts in the an, and the dying man 
views a forest in it , otheis see elephants in clouds, and some 
see pearls m sun-beams.

51. And thus those that are panic-struck and deranged in 
then minds, the halfwaking and passengers in vessels, see 
many appeal ances like the afoiesaid ghosts and forests, as seen by 
boys and men m the air, and betiay these signs in the motions 
and movements of then bodies.

358

YOGA VA'SISHTHA.

63 111 this manner every one is of the form of whatever he

thinks himself to be , and it is habit only that makes him to 
believe himself as such, though he is not so m leality.

53 But Lild who had kuown the truth and inexistence of 
the woild, was conscious of its nothing'ness, and viewed all things 
to be but eiioneous conceptions of the mind.

51 Thus he who sees Brahma only to fill the spheic of his 
intellect, has no loomfor a son or fiiend or consort to abide in it.

55 He who views the whole as full with the spint of 
Biahma, and nothing pioduced in it, has no loom foi his affec- 
tion 01 hatied to any body in it55 He who views the whole as full with the spint of 
Biahma, and nothing pioduced in it, has no loom foi his affec- 
tion 01 hatied to any body in it

56. The hand that Lild. laid on the head of Jyeshtha Sar- 
md hei eldest son, was not lain fiom hei pateinal affection for 
him, but foi his edification in intellectual knowledge.

57. Because the intellect being awakened, theie is all felicity 
attendant upon it It is inoie subtile than ether and far puier 
than vacuum, and leads the intellectual being above the legion of 
an. All things beside aie as images m a dieam.

CHAPTER XXVII 
Past Lives oe L ila”.

T I iHE two ladies tlien disappeared from that place^ leaving the 
® Eiahman family at their house in the mountainous village.

S, The family exclaimed ^^We aie hii^hly favouied by the 
sylvan goddesses and then foigettmg then giief, they betook 
themselves to their domestic employments.

3. Then the ethenal goodess spake to the aerial-Lila, who 
stood fixed in air^ ovei the mansion of the Bidhman, in a state of 
mute astonishment.

4'. They then conversed as familial ly with each other, as 
pei sons having the same thoughts and desiies, agiee with one 
anothei in then views and acts , and as the dieameis of the same 
di earn hold then mutual coiiespondence, like Us/ia and Anmiud^ 
dha (the cupid and Psyche of India)

5. * Then conversation in then iminateiial foiras, was of the 
same intellectual (psychical) kind, as we aie conscious of in our 
dt earns and imaginations

6 . Saiasvati said Now you have fully known the knowable, 
and become acquainted with whatevei is visible and invisible 
such IS the essence of Biahma, say now what moie you want 
to know.

7 Lila said Tell me the reason why I was seen by my son, 
and not wheie the spiiit of my depaited loid is leigning over 
his lealm.7 Lila said Tell me the reason why I was seen by my son, 
and not wheie the spiiit of my depaited loid is leigning over 
his lealm.

8. Sarasvatl replied Because you weie not then peifect 
by your practice of Yoga to haveyoui wish fulfilled, noi had you 
then lost your sense of duality, which is a jireventive of peifection.

9. He who has not known the unity, is not entitled to the 
acts and benefits of his faith m the tiue god , as no one sitting in 
the sun, can enjoy the coolness of shade,

10. You were not practiced to forget yhur identity as LOd,

200 YOGA VASISHTHAi

noi leaiiit that it is not your will, but the will of God that is 
always fulfilled

11. You have afteiwards become of puie desiie, and wi^ed 
that youi son might_^see you, whereby he was enabled to have 
youi si^hi

12 Now if you should 1 etui n to youi husband, and do the 
like, you will undoubtedly be successful in your desiie

13 Lild said . I see within the sphere of this dome (of my 
mind), the Bidhman to have been my husband befoie, and I see 
also 111 it, that he died and became a lulei of the eaith afterwards.

14 I see in it that spot of the eaith, that city and that 
palace of his wheie I sat as his queen

15 I see within myself my lord to be leigning in that place, 
and I see even theie how he died after waids,

16 I see herein the gloiy of the sovereign of so many coun- 
tiies on eaith, and I see also the perfect frankness of his conduct 
through life.

17. 1 see the worlds in the inner sky of my mind, as they

aie placed in a casket, oi as the oil is contained in a mustard seed.

18 I see the blight oib of my husband ever roving befoie me, 
and now I piay you to contiive any how to place me by his side.

19 The Goddess replied : — Tell me Lild, to what husband 
you shall go, as tlieie aie hundreds of them that you had, and 
shall have in youi past and future lives, and now there aie 
three of them confined in this eaith.20 Tlie neaiest of the three, is the Brd,hman who is here re- 
duced to ashes, the next is the prince lying in state and covered 
with fli wois in the inner apartment.

21. The thud Id now a leigiimgpiincein this earth, and has been 
buffetu^? in the waves of enoi in the vast ocean of the world.

22 Ills intellect is darkened and disordered by the splash - 
iiig waves of woildlmess, his intelligence is perverted to stupi- - 
dity, and he is converted to a tortoise in the ocean of the world.

1

UTPATTI KHANDA

361

S3. The Hianagement o£ his very many disoidered state • 
affans^ has stultified him to a lubbaid^ and he is now fast asleep 
amidst the turmoils of business

S4 He is fast bound to subjection by the strong chain of 
his thoughts^ that he is a loid, is mighty, accomplished, and that 
he IS happy and is to enjoy his estates for ever.

Now say, O excellent lady * to what husband you 
Wish to be led, in the manner of the fragiauce of one forest 
borne by the bieeze to anothei.

26. Heie you are in one place, and there they in others 
amidst this vast woild , and the state of their lives and manneis 
diffeis widely from one another

27. These orbs of light in the heaven, though they appear 
to be placed so near us (both to oui eyesight and in the mind), 
are yet situated millions of leagues apait fioin one another j 
and the departed souls are earned in them (in their endless 
transmigiations) .

28 ^ And again all these bodies are as vacuous as air, though 
they contain the great mounts Meru and Mandaia in themselves.

29. All bodies are formed by the combination of atoms, 
incessantly pioceedmg fiom the Great Intellect, like pai tides of 
sun beams over the universe.

30 The gieat and stupendous fabiic of the woild, is no more 
(in the eye of intelligence), than a quantity of paddy weighed 
in the balance.30 The gieat and stupendous fabiic of the woild, is no more 
(in the eye of intelligence), than a quantity of paddy weighed 
in the balance.

31. As the spangled heavens appear like a forest full of 
biilliant gems in it, so the world appears as full of the glory 
of God to the contemplative mind, and not as composed of earth 
or other mateiial bodies in it

32 It IS intelligence alone, that shines in the form of woild 
in the intelligent soul, and not any mateiial body, which was 
never biought into being before.

33 As billows in the lake, rise and set and use again, so 
the using and falling days and nights present these vanous scenes 
to oui knowledge.

VOL. I

46

3G2

YOGA VA'SISIITHA.

. 84^ Lllil said:— So liis, O mother o£ mankind! and so I come 
to remember now, that my present birth (state) is of a loyal 
(^djasila) kind, and neitliei of too pure nor gioss a nature. 
{Bdtticla or Tdmasiha),

35. I having descended fiom Brahmit, had undergone a 
hiindied and eight births (in different shapes) , and after passing 
vaiious states, I find myself still in existence.

36. I lecollect, O goddess > to have been born in another 
woild befoie, and to have been the bride of a Vidyfidhaia, when 
I used to lOve about as fieely as a bee over flovveis.

37 Being debased by my libeitmism, I was born in this 
moital woild, and became the mate of the king of tlie feathered 
tube (an eagle) .

38. And then having been a resident in the woods, I was 
turned to a woodman^s mate, wearing a vest of leaves on my 
loins.

39. Glowing fond of my life, I sported wantonly about 
the forest, and was changed to the gnluncha, plant, delighting the 
woods with my leafy palms and floweimg eyes.

40. This aiboiet of the holy hermitage^ was held sacied by 
the society of saintly sages j and then I was legen crated in the j 
foim of an anchoiite's child, aftei the woods were burnt down by ai 
wild-fiie.41. Here I was initiated in the foiraulaiies for removing 
the cuise of womanhood, and became as a male being m the 
peison of the handsome piince of Suifishtia (Suiat), wheie I' 
leigned foi a hundiead yeais (or for a whole centuiy).

42 I was then denounced to become a weasel, and covered 
with lepiosy, in the lowlands of Tfili, on account of my misconduct 
in the government

43. I remember, O goddess’ how I became a bullock at 
Smat, and was goaded by thoughtless cowherd boys, in then 
meiiy sport foi full eight yeais

^ 44. I bear in mmd when I was tiansformed to a bud, and

with what difficulty I ffioke the net, that was laidj^biid-

UTPATTI KHANDA

363

catchers for my destruction It was in the same manner as we , 
release ouiselves from the snares of smful desiies.

4'5 I lemembei with pleasuie when as a bee, I lighted lightly 
on the leaflets of blossoms^ sipped the honey of the blooming 
buds, dined on the pistils, and slept in the cups of lotus 
flowers.

46. I waiideied about in j)leasant wood-lands and lawns, with 
my exalted and branching noins and beautiful eyes, in the form 
of an antelope, till I was killed by the dait of a huntsman in 
my mortal pait

47. I have been iii the form of a fish, and was lifted up by the 
waves of the sea above the surface of the water I saw how a 
toitoise was killed by the blow of a club on the neck, when it 
failed to break its back-bone.

48 I was a Chanddla huntsman once, loving by the side of 
Charmanvati (the iivei Chenab), when I used to quench my thirst 
with cocoa water, as I was tiied with i earning,

4^. I became a stoik also, delighting m lakes with my mate, 
and filling the air with our sweet cues.

50 In another birth, I lambled about in gioves of palm 
and tamdla trees, and fixed my eyes with amoious looks and 
glances upon my lovei50 In another birth, I lambled about in gioves of palm 
and tamdla trees, and fixed my eyes with amoious looks and 
glances upon my lovei

51. I had next been a faiiy Apsaid, with a foim as bright 
as melted gold, and features as beautiful as those of the lotus 
and lily, in which the celestials like bees and buttei flies, used 
to take delight

52. I lemember to have decked myself in gold and peails, 
and in gems and rubies upon earth, and to have spoited with 
my youthful consoits in pleasuie gardens and gioves, and on 
hills and mountains.

53 And I remember also to have lived long as a tortoise on 
the boideis of a iiver, and to have been cairied away by the waves, 
sometimes under an arboui of creepeis, ovei-hiing with clusters 
of beautiful flowers , and at others to some wild cave washed 
by the waves

364

YOGA V/SISIITHA.

64. I see how I acted the pait of a goose with my covering 
of feathers, swimming on the high heaving waves on the sui- 
face of a lake

55. Then seeing a poor gnat hanging on the moving 
leaf of a Salmali bianeh, I became its associate and as contemp- 
tible a thing like itself.

56 I became an aquatic crane also, skimming playfully over 
the waters gushing from the hills, and slightly kissing the ciests 
of the waves using over the rapid toiient.

57. I lemembei also how I slighted the loves of amorous 
youths, and spumed off fiom me the Vidyddhara boys on the 
Gandha Madana and Mandara hills.

58. I lemembei likewise the pangs of a lovelorn lass, when 
I lay pining in my bed, strewn ovei with the fiagmnce of 
camphor, and how I was decaymg like the disk of the waning 
moon.

59 Thus I passed through many births, in the wombs of 
higher and lower animals, and found them all to be full of pain. 
And my soul has lun over the billows of the ii resistible current 
of life, like the fleet antelope, pacing its speed with the swiftness 
of the wind {Vdtap'aui'i),

CHAPTER XXVIII.

SECTION I

Exposition of Li'la'-’s Vision.CHAPTER XXVIII.

SECTION I

Exposition of Li'la'-’s Vision.

U AMA said . Tell me sii, in wliafc manner the goddesses broke 
out of the stion^holds of their bodies, and the piison- 
house of this woild, (where then souls were pent up), and passed 
thiough infinite space, to survey the scenes beyond its confines, 
(i. e. How does the mind and the flight of imagination, reach to 
legions unknown and unseen befoie).

9j. Vasishtha replied : Wheie is the woild and where is its 
suppoit or solidity ? They were all situated m the region within 
the minds of the goddesses.

8 They saw in it the hilly tract, wheie the Brd.l'mana 
Vasishtha had his abode and his desne of royalty, (pictured in 
in then minds).

4 They saw m a corner of it the deserted mansion of the 
Bi4hman, and they saw in it the suiface of tlie earth stietching 
to the seas. (t. e. in their mental view).

5. They beheld in that imaginary spot of earth the city of the 
prince, and the loyal palace which he had enjoyed with Arun- 
dhati bis consort (m his imagination).

6. How she was born under the name of Lild, and worshipped 
the goddess of wisdom — Saiaswati, by whom she was miiaculously 
conveyed to the delightful legion of the sky.

7. It was in the mansion situated in that hilly village, that 
she beheld the woild placed within the space of a span of her 
mind.

8. Having come out of her vision of the woild, she found 
herself seated in her house, as one finds himself lying in his own 
bed, after his rambling from one dream to another.

9 All that she saw was mere vision and void ; there was no 
woild nor eaith, nor a house nor the distance thereof.

366

YOGA TA'SISHTHA,

10. It was the mind which showed them these images, as it 
presents the objects of our desire to our view , or else theie was 
neither any woild noi earth in actuality.366

YOGA TA'SISHTHA,

10. It was the mind which showed them these images, as it 
presents the objects of our desire to our view , or else theie was 
neither any woild noi earth in actuality.

11. The spheie o£ intelligence is infinite, and without any 
covering , and being agitated by the powers of one^s intellect, it 
presents all the objects of nature to his view, as the sky when agi- 
tated by heat pioduces the winds.

1^ The sjiheie of the intellect is nucleated, (being a mode 
of the Divinity itself) , it is evei calm eveiywheie , and is 
supposed as the woild itself by deluded minds.

13 He who undei stands lightly, views the woild to be as un- 
substantial as air , but whoso is misled by his iviong judgment, 
takes it to be as a solid mountain.

Id. As a house and a city are manifested to us in our dieam, 
so IS this uuieal woild piesented as a leality to our under- 
standings.

15 As IS the misconception of watei in the mirage, and the 
mistake of gold in a biacelet, so does all this unreality app.ear 
as a substantiality to the mistaken mind.

16. Discoursing in this mannei between themselves, the two 
charming ladies, walked out of the house with then graceful 
steps.

SECTION II

DESCRIPTI027 OF THE MOUNTATHOUS HabITATIO:^?'.

17 Being unseen by the village peojile, they viewed the 
mountain which stood befoie them, kissing the vault of heaven, 
and touching the oib of the sun with its lofty peaks.

18. It was decorated with flowers of various colours, and 
covered with a variety of woods of various hues There were 
waterfalls gushing with their tremendous roarings on one side, 
and groves lesoundmg with the waibling of buds in another.

19 The clouds were vai legated by the many coloured clusters 
of flowers sweeping over them, and cranes and storks sat screech- 
ing on the cloud-capt top of gidancka trees.

aTPATTI KHANDA.

se*?19 The clouds were vai legated by the many coloured clusters 
of flowers sweeping over them, and cranes and storks sat screech- 
ing on the cloud-capt top of gidancka trees.

aTPATTI KHANDA.

se*?

20. There were the robust reeds, hedging- the banks of rivers 
with their wide sti etching stems and roots, and the strong winds* 
tossing about the tender creepers, growrng out of the rocky 
caves, for want of suppoit

21. The tops of trees eoveied with flowers, were over -topped 
by the sheds of clouds hanging from the vault of heaven, which 
shed profusely then pearly drops of ram water upon them, and 
formed the current streams below.

22. The banks of the stieamlets were continually laved by 
the waves, raised by the winds playing upon the shaking arbours 
on them , and a continued cooling shade was spread by the 
blanching trees all around.

23 Standing on that sjiot, the ladies beheld the hilly ham- 
let m the lawn, likening a fragment of heaven fallen upon the 
ground.

24 There the puiling rills weie softly gliding by, and here 
the bumming brooks wabbled m the ground The birds of the air 
were chirping on the spiaj’-s and aquatic fowls were flying 
about tbe holes of the sea shoie

25. There they saw the heids of kiiie slowly moving and 
grazing in the plains, and filling the echoing woods with then 
loud loAving , and beheld the space, inteispeised with shady 
gloves and ai bo uis and veidant meadows all about.

26 The cliffs were whitened with snow, impenetiable by sun- 
beams , and the tops of hills weie covered with bushy brambles, 
forming as braids of hair upon their ciaggy heads

27. Cascades falling m torrents m the cavities of rocks, and 
scattering then peaily particles afai, memoialized the churning 
of the milky ocean by the hlandara mountain

28 The trees in the glens, loaded as tliey weie with their 
fruits and flowers, appeared as waiters upon the goddesses, and 
standing to welcome their approach with their rich presents28 The trees in the glens, loaded as tliey weie with their 
fruits and flowers, appeared as waiters upon the goddesses, and 
standing to welcome their approach with their rich presents

29 Shaken by gusts of roaring winds, the forest trees, 
were shedding showers of then mellifluent flowers, as offerings to 
the sylvan gods_ and people.

368

YOGA VifelSIITITA.

30. T^he birds that appioaclied fearlessly to diink tlie water 
'dioppmg from the bill, now fled for feai of tlien' seOraing- as 
sleets, shells and shots of archers.

31 The buds paiched b}'- tliiist, and wishing to drink 
the watei dashed by the waves of the rivulet, were hovering upon 
it as stars in the sky

32 Theie weie lows of ciows sitting on the tops of the 
tall tala (oi palm) tiees, fioin whose sight the boys weie hiding 
the remains ot then sweetmeat.

33 Theie they beheld the rustic lads with garlands of 
flowers on then heads and garments, and roaming in the cooling 
shades of the date, ]am and ininba tiees.

3-1 They saw the lean and hungiy beg^^ar woman passing 
slowly by the way, and clad in her flaven robe, with chairlets of 
blossoms for her ear dress

35 They saw the lazy rustics sitting retired m then lonely 
retreats, and conveising afar fiom the noisy biooks where they 
could hardly hear one another.

36. They saw the naked mendicant boys, besmeared' m 
then face and hands with curd, and with cow*dung upon 
then bodies, and holding the floweiy branches of plants in their 
hands, and crowding in the compound.

37. The bushes on the verdant banks of the river, were 
shaken to and fro as in a swing by the dashing of the waves, 
which left then marks on the sandy shore, as the waters receded 
to their bed.

38 The house was full of flies cloyed with the sweets of 
milk and euids, but the children were moaning with cries for 
then want of suffleient food.38 The house was full of flies cloyed with the sweets of 
milk and euids, but the children were moaning with cries for 
then want of suffleient food.

39 The heidswomen were observed to be fretting, at 
seeing then wristlets daubed by the cow-dung, (which they 
were pasting), and the men were seen to be smiling, at seeing 
the eagerness of women, tor tying the loosened knots oi then hair.

40 The crows were alighting from the tops of hills, to pick 
up the offerings of the holy sages, and the paths about tl eir

tJTPATTI KHAK£)A 363

liDuses, were strewn over with llie sacied Iwr^i and htrunlct , 
leaves.

d'l The floral plants giowm^ m the caverns of the hills, 
and about the piecincts of the house, coveied the g'lound eveiy 
nioimng, with heaps of floweis to the dejith of the heels.

4'S. Theie were the choiiii kine and antelopes, giazing* m 
one pait of the foiest, and also the tendei fawn sleeping on the 
bed of glass under the ganja giovesi

43. There weie the young calves lying on oiie side^ and 
shaking then ears to diive the flies away, which weie flutteiing 
on their faces, and upon the milk exuding fiom the sides of their 
mouths.

44 The rooms were stoied With honej’-, which had been col- 
lected b}’’ driving the bees fiom the hives, the gaidens weie full 
of flowering asolas {asola Joiiesta ) , and then rooms were paint- 
ed with lacdye.

4<5. The winds moistened by the showeis of lain, had given 
the aiboietura to bloom, and the blooming buds of Kadamba, 
oveihung like a cauop^'-, the beds of green giass below.

46. The Kctala (Ji-eya) aibour was blooming white by re- 
moval of its weeds, and the water-course was gliding along with 
its soft mmmuiing tune.

47. The winds whistled in the Windows of the caves, and 
the clouds lested on the roofs of the mountain to^is, the ponds 
weie biimful of water, and filled with lotuses like so many 
lightsome moons.47. The winds whistled in the Windows of the caves, and 
the clouds lested on the roofs of the mountain to^is, the ponds 
weie biimful of water, and filled with lotuses like so many 
lightsome moons.

48. The green arbour cast its cooling and undivided shade 
upon the ground, wheie the dew-drops tiemblmg on the blades 
of glass, glistened like twinkling stais in the azuie sky.

49. The tiees incessantly diopped down then ripened fruits, 
and diied flowers and leaves of various sorts, like showers of 
snow on the whitened giound.

50 Theie some clouds weie seen to hang continually over 
the household compound, like the clnt inti (or kulina) girls, that

VoL. I 47

S70

YOGA VA'SISIITIIA

.never forsake tlie abode of tbeir parents j while there were others 
hovering' over the lOoC of the house, and flashing in hghtenmgs 
that supplied the place of lights.

51. The altar here, I'e-echoed to the loud roaring of the ^Ylnds, 
confined in the caverns of the mountains, and the temple theic, was 
giaeed by the twitteiing swallows and parrots, that alighted 
upon it m then numerous flights.

5^. Soft bieczes were moving slowly, loaded with the fra- 
grance exhaled by the sleepy lloweis (in the evening), and 
gently shaking the leaves of tiees as they passed along the lawn, 
5g. Theie the ladies were attentive to the piattling and 
playful paiiots and paitridges, and heie they listened to the melo- 
dious notes ot the KoJula, lesponsive to the jairing ciows on 
the blanches.

54;. The palma and tamala ticcs were loaded with fiuits, 
and the foiest tiees iveie entwined by creepeis, which waved 
their leafy palms around them.

55. Theie weie the tendei ivy cieepeis, clasping the blanches 
tm one side, and the fiagiance of the efflorescent Kandala and 
sihndha plants, exhaled on the other. The tapeiing idla and 
damdla tiees using as high as spues, and a cooling bieeze ivas 
blowing amidst the flow er plants in the gardens.56. There weie the kine hastening to dunk the water in 
the troughs, and garden trees hanging wuth loads of green iiniipe 
fiuits and beautiful flowers, the running streams were hidden 
under rows of trees on the banks, and the stalks of plants 
were studded with flowers without alternation.

57. The gardens were perfumed with the nectaiious fra- 
'giance of henda floweis, and the lakes w^ere redolent with the 
odour of lotuses, hiding the humble bees giddy wuth liquor, in 
their honied cells The an was reddened with the roseate pollen, 
’.flying from the enmson lotuses {siJiala padinas) of the land,

and mocked the ledness of Indians palace in the sky

58. The gurgling noise of the rivulets running dowm pieei- 
pitately- from .the hills, and the whiteness of the hoary cloud.

UTPATTI KHANDA.

571

liaiigmg wltli the hue of Lundit flowers over them , the heautj ^ 
of the floweiy paiterres in the compound of the house, and the 
melodious waihling of musical birds singing joyous in the^air, 
enchanted the scene

59 The youths were spotting on their beds of flowers, and 
the playfuldamselsweie decked with flowery wieaths hanging down 
to their feet The gi ound was adoi n ed every whei e with sprouting 
and piickly shrubs and blades of glass, and theie was a beauty 
displa3''ed in the clasping of cieepeis about the clumps of leeds.

60. The new shooting buds and blossoms covered the trees 
aiound, and fragments of clouds shiouded the houses below; the 
giouud was decoiated b^'' wieaths of icicles, and the flash of lightn- 
ings in the clouds ovei the houses, teriified the women within.

61 Theie was the fiagiance of blue lotuses exhaling its sweets 
about, and the hoaise lo wings of the lane, hastening to their 
gieen giazing ground The confident deer and does weio 
lying tamely in the honse-j'-aid, and the peacocks dancing 
menily befoie the watei -falls, as if they weie the showeis of 
rain'watei62. The odoiiferous breezes weie blowing giddily, with the 
flavour of the fiagiance they boie about, and the medicinal 
plants weie lending their lights like lamps at night The nests 
of buds weie lesonant with ceaseless waiblings, and the noise 
of the cataracts deafened the eais of men on the bank

63* The peaily dew diops, that weie continually diopped 
on the giound, fiom the leaves of tiees and blades of grass , and 
the gleaming beauty of the evei blooming blossoms above, 
form with others, the everlasting charms of mountainous 
habitations, and baffle the desciiption of poets.

CHAPTER XXIX.

Account of the Previous Life of

A Descnphoii of the BomesUc BiiUes of a Kindu Lady.

Y I HIE two goddesses then alighted in that coohng village 
■ seat^ as the two states o£ felicity and liheiation, meet 
in the tianqml spii'it of the man knowing the Divine spiiit.

2 Lildj who had by this time, become personified to the 
form of puie intelligence, by her knowledge of yoga, now became 
a seer of the thiee times piesentmg themselves hefoie her.

3 She retnemheied the whole course of her past life, and 
deiived pleasure in i elating the events of her formei life and 
death.

4 LiU said I recollect by thy favour, O goddess ’ and 
by sight of this place, all what I did and thought of in my past 
life

5 Heie 1 had giown up to old age, and here I had witheied

and become lean and thin as a skeleton I was a Brtlhmani * 
heie, and had my body scratched by the dried sacrificial 
glass which I had to meddle with,

6 I was the legal wife of my loid, and pioducer of his lace, 
and was employed m the acts of milking the kine, and churn- 
ing the cuid (for butter and ghee). I had been mother of 
many sons, and a kind hostess to my guests.

7. I was devoted to the service of the gods, Bidhmans and 
good people, and lubbed my body with cow milk and ghee I 
was employed m cleaning the frying pans and the boiling kettles 
of the house,7. I was devoted to the service of the gods, Bidhmans and 
good people, and lubbed my body with cow milk and ghee I 
was employed m cleaning the frying pans and the boiling kettles 
of the house,

8. I boiled the food daily with a single bracelet of glass 
and one of conch-shell in my wiists, and sei ved my fathei, mothei , 
biother and daughteis and sons-in-law with their daily victuals.

9. I was emaciated m my body like a domestic servant, by

tJTPATTl KHANDA

273

Wolking all day and night ; and ^ haste and hasten/ were the 
words I used to repeat to myself.

JO. Being thus busied and employed, I was so silly and 
ignoiant, that I nevei thought within myself, even in a dieam, 
about what I was and what was this woild, although I had been 
the wife of a Biahman

11. Wholly engaged in the collection of fuel, cow-dung, and 
saciificial wood and vegetables, I became emaciated in my body, 
which was wiapfc in a worn out blanket.

12 I used to pick out the worms from the ears of the milch 
cow, and was piompt to water the garden of greens with 
watering pots in hand

13. I used to go to the swelling lake every day, and get 
the fresh gieen glass for the fodder of my tender calves I used 
to wash and clean the house every morning, and paint the door- 
way with the white tints of pasted and powdeied nee (giindi)

14. I had to coirect my domestics with gentle rebukes, and 
tell them to keep within their bounds like the billows in the 
nveis.

15 With my infirm body and ears shaking as dried leaves 
of trees, and supporting myself on a stick, I lived here under 
the diead of old age.

16 As she was speaking in this manner, and walking in 
company with Sarasvati about the village, in the valley of the 
mountain, she was astonished to see hei foimei seats of pleasure, 
and showed them to the goddess.

17. This was my flowery arbour, decoiated by these torn 
jpdtala plants, and this was my garden alcove of flowering

Asokas.17. This was my flowery arbour, decoiated by these torn 
jpdtala plants, and this was my garden alcove of flowering

Asokas.

18. This is the bank of the pond where the calves were 
loosely tied to the trees , and this is my pet calf Karmkd,, which 
has refrained from browzing the leaves (in my absence)

19 This IS my watering woman, now so languid and dirty 
in her appearance , and weeping these eight days in my absepce. 
With her eyes daubed in tears.

374

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

20 This, O goddess, is the place, where I used to eat and 
sit, and wheie I slept and walked , and these are the places 
Avheie I gave and leceived the things to and fiom my atten- 
dants.

21 This is my eldest son Jyeshtha Sarmd, weeping in the 
house, and this is my milch cow, now giazing on the grassy 
plain in the foiest.

22 I see thi» poi tico and these windows, once dear to me 
as my peison, and hesmeaied with the diy powder of the kuh 
festival of the vernal season.

23. I see these pulpy plants of gouid planted with my own 
hands, and dear to me as myself, now spieadmg themselves over 
the oven place

24. I see these relatives of mine, who had been the bonds 
of my life before, now smoking in then eyes with teais, and 
caiiymg the fuel for fire, with beads of imlrdlsha seeds on 
then bodies

25. I see that stony shore, baffling the foice of the wayes, 
which have been pelting their pebbles against it, now coveied 
by bushes of the beach

26. The veidant meadows weie full of leafy plants, with pen- 
dant dew drops on then tips , and the plains weie whitened by 
the hailstones falling on them m showers.

27. The mid-day was mantled by sun beams, as by a 
white mist of fiost, and the arbours lesounded with the humming 
of bees, flutteimg about then clusteiing floweis.

28 The blooming palasa glowing as reddish corals, had 
coveied the tiees and the land with heaps of ciimson floweis.28 The blooming palasa glowing as reddish corals, had 
coveied the tiees and the land with heaps of ciimson floweis.

29 The village nil was flowing with the floating fruits, 
which it bore from shoie to shore , and the lustic lads jumbled 
togethei with loud noise, eager to lay hold on them

30, The cool shady beach of the nil, was strewn over with 
pebbles. Washed and earned away by the cuiieiit, and coveied by 
leaves falling fiom the trees

utpatti khanda*

S75

31. There I see the altar of my house, which is so beauti- 
fully oinamented with the floweimg eieepeis, and which is 
oimihung on its windows by clusteis of fiuits and floweis

32 Heie lived niy husband, whose life has fled to the sky 
in its aeiial foim, and became afteiwaids the loid of the eaith, 
reaching to the siiiiounding seas

33 I leinembei, how he had fosteied the fond wish of 
obtaining loyal dignitj'-, and how aidentlj'^ he boked foiwaid on its 
attainment.

31' I see, O goddess I his royal dignity of eight days, 
which had seemed to be of so long a duration (as eighty yeais) 
befoie.

35 I see the soul of my Loid, residing in the empty space 
of this mansion, as in his foimei kingly state, although it is in- 
visible to all as the cuiient air in the sky, and as the odouis 
borne by the winds

36 It is in this vacuous space, that his soul is contained in 
the foim of a thumb, which contains in its bosom, the whole 
extent of the realm of my lord, sti etching to thousands of 
leagues in its ciicumfeience.

37. I see also O goddess > the spacious kingdom of my loid, in 
the space of my intellect, which makes loom foi thousands of 
mountains by the miiaculous powei of God, styled as illusion. 
{in&ya^

38. I wish now, O Goddess > to see the eaithly city of mj'- loid 
again, let us theiefoie turn oui course that way, as no place 
IS distant to the lesolute38. I wish now, O Goddess > to see the eaithly city of mj'- loid 
again, let us theiefoie turn oui course that way, as no place 
IS distant to the lesolute

39. Vasishtha said -Having said so, she bowed down to 
the goddess and enteied into the shiine, and then like a bud, she 
flew into the air with the goddess

40 It was a legion devoid of daikness, and as fair as a 
sea of moonlight. And then it was as azuie as the peison of 
Naiayana, and as blight as the back of a locust.

41. They passed above the legions of the clouds and winds,, 
as also beyond the spheres of the orbits of the sun and moon.

370

YOGA VASISHTttA.

42 They passed beyond the path o£ the north polar siai*^ 
and the limits of the ciicmts of the sddhyas and siddhas and 
othei celestial beings.

43 Thence they ascended to the higher heavens of Biahma 
and the Tushita divinities, and then iipwaid to the spheie of 
Golaka (the zodiac) , and thence again to the Sivaloka, and the 
spheie of the Pitris oi the depaited souls of the dead

44* Passing thus beyond the spheies of the embodied living 
beings, and bodiless souls of the dead, they pioceeded fai and 
faithei to the unknown legions of empty space.

45 Having passed the etherial sphere, they beheld nothing 
theie, except the sun, moon and the stars shining below them

46* There was only a deep darkness to be seen, filling the 
whole vacuity of space, and appealing as the basin of the waters 
of univeisal deluge, and as compact as the impenetiable cavity 
of a lock

47. LiU said — Tell me, O goddess' what became of the 
light of the sun and other luminaiies, and whence came this 
dense darkness as to be compressed under the fist (mushti- 
giahya).

48 The goddess replied you have got to a spot so remote 
from the spheres of heaven, that the hght of the luminanes 
can nevei reach to it.

49. And as one in a deep daik pit, can see no light of a 
fire fly flitting over it , so the solar light is invisible to one behind 
the great belt of heaven.49. And as one in a deep daik pit, can see no light of a 
fire fly flitting over it , so the solar light is invisible to one behind 
the great belt of heaven.

50. Lila said Oh ' the great distance that we have come tO', 
whence the great htminaiy of the sun also, appears as small as an 
atom below

51 Tell me mother, what sort of a place is that which lieS 
beyond this region, and how can we come to it after traversing 
this gloomy expanse

52 Saiasvati said Behind this is the great pole of the 
Universe, which is scattered over with innumerable nebular stars 
in the form of the particles of dust*

UTPATTI KHANDA

377

53. Vasislitlia said As they were talking m this manner, ^ 
they gilded imperceptibly to that pole, as the bee saunters over 
the solitary hut on the height of a mountain.

54. They then were at no pains to come down from that 
precipice, as theie is no pains to effect what must ceitainly come 
to pass in the end, though it ajipeaied difficult at fiist (Or) 
that which is certain must come to pass, however haid it might 
seem at first.

55 They saw the system of the universe, laid naked to their 
sight, as the bold navigator beholds a world exposed to his view 
beyond the wide expanse of wateis.

56 They saw the watery expanse to be ten times greater than 
the eaith, and enveloping it in the shape of the crust of the wal- 
nut fiuit.

57 Then there is a latent heat which is ten times as great as 
the watei, and the circumambient air which is as much gi eater 
than the water , and then the all encompassing vacuum of which

theie IS no end.

•

58 There is no beginmg, middle or end of that infinite space, 
and it IS productive of nothing, like a barren woman of her 
offspiing.

59. It IS only an extended expanse, infinite, calm and with- 
out beginning, middle or end, and is situated in the Supieme

SJUllt.59. It IS only an extended expanse, infinite, calm and with- 
out beginning, middle or end, and is situated in the Supieme

SJUllt.

60 Its immensity is as immeasurable as if a stone is flung 
With full force from its top, or if the phoenix would fly up to it 
With all his might, or if he would ti averse through it in full velo- 
city, it is impossible for him to reach from one end to the other, 
in a whole Kalpa age.

VoL. I

48

0

CHAPTER XXX

Hesoriptioit op the Mtjndapte Ego (Beahmahda).

1 1 iHEY passed m a moment beyond tbe regions o£ the earth, air,

■ file, water, and vacuum, and the tiaeks of the ten planetary 
spheres.

2 They reached the boundless space, whence the universe 
appeared as an egg (ovum)

3 They beheld under its vault millions of luminous particles 
floating in the an (nebulje).

4 < These weie as innumerable bubbles, floating on the waters 
of the unlimited ocean of the sphere of the Intellect.

6 Some of them were going downwaid, and others rising 
upward, some turning lound, and others appeared to their 
undei standing to lemain fixed and immovable.

6. These diffeient motions appealed to them with respect to 
their own situations, as they saw them in their cbffeient sides.

7 Heie theie were no ups and downs and no uiiside or below, 
nor any going foiwaid oi backwaid Here theie are no such 
diiections as men take to be by the position of their bodies.

8, There is but one indefinite space in natuie, as theie is but 
one consciousness in all beings , yet eveiything moves in its 
own way, as waywaid boys take then own couise.

9 Rdma said Tell me sii^ ^by do we call upward and 
downwaid, foiwaid and backwaid, if theie aie no such things nt 
space and natui e

10. Yasishtha said Theie is but one space envelopimjr alll 
things, and the worlds which aie seen in the infinite and ' 
indiscernible womb of vacuity, are as woims moving on the 
suifaee of water10. Yasishtha said Theie is but one space envelopimjr alll 
things, and the worlds which aie seen in the infinite and ' 
indiscernible womb of vacuity, are as woims moving on the 
suifaee of water

11 All these bodies that move about in the woild by their 
want of freedom (^ e. by the power of atti action), are thought tc 
be up and down by oui position on earth

C,

UTPATTI KHANDA

379

12 So wlieii tliere is a number o£ ants on an eaitben ball^ all ^ 
its sides are reckoned below which are undei then feet, and 
thos^e as above which aie over their backs.

13 Such IS this ball of the eaith m one of these woilds, 
coveied bj vegi tables and animals moving on it, and by devas, 
demons and men walking upon it

14' It is covered also by cities, towns and mountains, and 
their inhabitants and pioductions, like the walnut by its coat

15. Like elephants appealing as pigmies m the Vindh 5 ’’an 
mountains, do these woilds apiieai as pai tides in the vast ex- 
panse of space

16 Every thing that is anywhere, is piodueed fioin and 
subsists in space It is always all in all things, which aie contained 
as pai tides in it

17. Such IS the pure vacuous sjiace of the Divine undei- 
standing, that like an ocean of light, contains these mnumeiable 
woilds, which like the countless waves of the sea, aie revolving 
for ever in it.

18 Some of these are hollow within, and otheis as daik 
as the daikness in the end of a Icalpa, age and they are all 
moving about in tlie ocean of vacuity, like the waves of the sea.

19. Some of these aie whuling about with a jaiiing noise for 
ever, which is neither heaid by nor known to any body. It is like 
the motion of men addicted to eaithly puisuits by their natuie.

30. Some of these are now glowing in foim, as if they weie 
newly created, and aie m the couise of then development, like 
sprouts in the cells of seeds newly sown in the giound30. Some of these are now glowing in foim, as if they weie 
newly created, and aie m the couise of then development, like 
sprouts in the cells of seeds newly sown in the giound

21. Some of these aie melting away as icicles under heat, like 
the mountains that weie melted down by the burning sun and 
heavenly fiie, at the dissolution of the woild

33 Others have been continually falling downward with- 
out gaining the giound, till at last they dwindle away, and 
melt into the divine Intellect

33 Otheis are as immovable in the air, as the ammal-

S80

YOGA V/SISIITHA

culae m the watei, which are moved to and fro hy the wind, 
without any sign of motion or sensation in them

24 A gain nothing IS stable in nature, but every thing is 
as changeful as the acts and usages enjoined in the Yedas and 
s4stias, are alteied and succeeded by others

25. Theie are other Biahmds and other patiiarchs, and 
many Vishnus and manj' Indias one after the other. We have 
diffeient kings of men, and sometimes no rulei of them.

26. Some aie as men and loids of others (Ishas), in this 
multiform creation, and some are creeping and crooked living 
beings on eaith, some kinds are as full as the watei s of the 
ocean, and otheis have become quite extinct in the world.

27 Some aie as haid as solid stones, and otheis as soft as 
the poor insects and worms, some aie of godly figmes as the 
giants, and others of puny human forms.

28. Some are quite blind and suited to daikness (as owls

and moles and bats), others aie suited to light (as men, buds and 
beasts), and some to both (as cats and lats) '

29. Some aie boin as gnats sucking the juice of the fiuits 
of the fig tiee , while others aie empty within, and fly about 
and feed upon the air.

30. The woild is thus filled with creatures beyond the con- 
ception of Yogis, and we can not foim even a guess-woik 
of the beings that fill the nifimte vacuum.30. The woild is thus filled with creatures beyond the con- 
ception of Yogis, and we can not foim even a guess-woik 
of the beings that fill the nifimte vacuum.

31 This woild IS the sphere of these living beings, but the 
gieat vacuum spieadmg beyond it, is so extensive, that it is 
immeasuiable by the gods Vishnu and otheis, weie they to 
ti averse thiough it, foi the whole of then lives.

32 Every one of these etherial globes, is enciicledby a belt 
resembling a golden bmcelet, and has an attiaetive power like 
the eaith to attiact othei objects.

83 I have told you all about the grandeur of the univeise 
to my best knowledge, any thing beyond this, is what I have 
no knowledge of, noi power to desciibe

CJTPATTI KHANDA 381

34. There aie many other large woilds^ lolling thiongh the 
immense space of vacuum, as the giddy goblins of Taisias revef 
about in the daik and dismal deseits and forests, unseen by 
others.

CHAPTER XXXL 
SECTION I.

Alighting or the Ladies on Eaiith.

% TASISHTHA said ; After having seen the woilds in their 
V aerial jouiney, the ladies alighted fiom tlieio, and quickly 
entered the mnei apartment of tlie king.

2. Theie they saw the dead body of the king 1) ing in state 
amidst heaps of floweiSj accompanied by the spintnal body of 
hild, sitting beside the corpse.

3 It was the dead of nighty and the inmates had fallen into 
sound sleep one b}' one , and the room was pei fumed with the 
incense of lesin, camphor and sandalw’ood and saffron.

4. LfLi, seeing the house of her latter husband, and wdshing 
to enter mto it, alighted in her assumed body (sankaljiadelia) on 
the spot of his sepulchie

5. She then passed through the ficticious spacious palaca of 
her loid {sa}dalj)asa7isdra), by breaking out of the coniines of 
her body and cranium called the eaithly and wordly environs 
in Yoga terminology (sansdra and Brahmdnda-dvaianas).6. Then she went again with the goddess to the blight 
and spacious temple of the world (Biahmdnda-mandapa), in 
which she quickly entered

7. She saw hei husband^s imaginary world to lie as a dirty 
and mossy pool, as the lioness beholds the mountain cave 
covered by daikness and clouds.

8 The goddesses then enteied into that vacuous world with 
their any bodies, as weak ants make then passage through the 
haid crust of the wood-apple oi J^^-fruit

9 Theie they passed through regions of cloudy hills and 
skies, and reached the surface of the earth, consisting of tracts 
of land and basins of water.

10 They then came to the Jambu-dwipa (Asia), situated 
amidst tlie ninefold petals of the other dwipas (or continents), and

UTPATTI KHANDA.

SB3

ilieiice proceeded to the teiritories of LiU^s husband in the 
varsha land of Bharata (India) .

II. At this mteival of time they beheld a ceitain piince ' 
(the ruler of Sinde), strengthened by othei chiefs^ making an 
attack on this pait which was the beauty of the woild.

13. They beheld the air ciowded by people of the thiee 
worlds, who had assembled theie to see the conflict

13. They lemained undaunted, and saw the an crowded by 
aeiial beings in gioups like clouds.

14. Theie weie the Siddhas, Ghdianas, Gandhaivas, Vidyd- 
dharas, Suias, celestials and Apsaids in laige bodies

15 Theie weie also the goblins of Bhutas and Pisachas, and 
Bdkshasa cannibals, while the Vidyadhaia females weie flinging 
handfuls of floweis like showeis of laiii on the combatants

16 The Vetalas, Yakshas and Kushmd;nds, that weie looking 
at the affiay with pleasure, took themselves to the shelter of 
hills, to avoid the flying daits and weapons.

17. The imps weie flying fiom the air, to keep themselves 
from the way of the flying weapons, and the spectatois were 
excited by sound of the war-whoop of the combatants.17. The imps weie flying fiom the air, to keep themselves 
from the way of the flying weapons, and the spectatois were 
excited by sound of the war-whoop of the combatants.

18 Llld who was standing by with a flappei (oi fan) m her 
hand, was f lightened at the imminent dieadful conflict, and 
smiled to scoin then mutual vauntings

SECTION II

Sight of a Battle Array ih Earth and Air,

19 Virtuous people who weie unable to endure the hoiiid 
sight, betook themselves to prayers, with the chief piiests for 
avei ting the calamity,

30 The messengers of Indra, weieieady with their decoiated 
elephants (called lola-pdlas), for beaimg the souls of mighty 
heioes to giace the seats of heaven

31 The chAianas and Gandhaivas, weie singing piaises of 
the advancing heioes, and heavenly nymphs that liked heioism, 
were glancing at the best combatants.

384

YOGA Vi^SISUTUA.

aa Voluptuous women were wishing to emhiace the arms of 
‘the brave, and the fail fame of the heroes, had tuined the hot 
sunsl)me to cool moonlight.

S3 K^ma asked . Tell me, sir, what soit of a warrior is 
called a hero, that bocoraes a 3 ewel in heaven, and who is an 
insuigent.

S4< Vasishtha answered : He who engages m a lawful wai- 
faie, and fights for his king, and whethei he dies or becomes 
victoiious in the field, is called a hero, and goes to heaven.

25. Whoevei kills men otheiwise m war and dies aftei- 
wards, in an unjust cause, is called an insurgent, and goes to 
hell at last.

26 Whoever fights for unlawful property, and dies in 
battle, becomes subject to everlasting hell fire.

27 Whoso wages a just warfaie, that is justified by law and 
usage, that wamoi is called both loyal as well as heroic in deed.

28 Whoever dies in war, for the preservation of kiiie, 
Bidhmans and fi lends with a willing mind, and vhoso protects 
his guest and lefugee with all diligence, he veiily becomes an 
ornament m heaven after his death.29 The king who is steadfast in protecting his subjects and 
his own country, is called the just, and those that dm in his cause 
aie called the biave.

30. They that die fighting on the side of riotous subjects, or 
in tbe cause of lebelhous princes or chiefs, are doomed to fire.

31. They that die fighting unjustly against their kings, law- 
givers and ruleis, aie subjected to the torments of hell.

32. A war which is just, serves to establish oiderj but the 
giddy that aie feailess of the futuie, destroy all order (by their 
nnjnst waifare).

33 The hero dying, goes to heaven, is the common saying; 
and the sdstras call the lawful wairior only a heio, and not 
otherwise.

34 They who suffer wounds on their bodies, for the protec-

UTPATTI KHANDA

385

tion of the righteous and goodj are said to he heioes_, or else they ^ 
aie insuigents {dimhliams).

35/. It was in expectation of seeing such heioes, that the 
damsels of the godsj weie standing in the an*, and talking to 
themselves of becoming the spouses of such wairiors.

36. The air ivas as decorated as by an illumination on high, 
and by rows of the beautiful heavenly cais of gods and Siddhas, 
and piesence of celestial maidens, wh© sang m sweet notes, 
and decoiated their locks mth hiancldia flowers.

VoL. I

49

CHAPTER XXXII.

0n&I:T of TilB IV AK

/“ASISIITHA said Lild slanding vvilli

V wisdom in an 3 saw the Apsaras dauciii 
eayeiuess of the combatants foi war below.

ilie goddess of 
g thcie, at the

2. She belield tlie assemblage of the foiees m her owni 
ten itoiy once governed by her loid; and saw the field of the 
an not less foiraidable by the assembled ghosts (and its 
eucn cling bell com230sed of the lion^ seoipion, crab and the 
aiclier)

3 The meeting of the two foices made the ground aiipear 
as a billowy sea, like tlie meeting of two clouds 111 the sky, giving 
it the appeal ance of two hostile foiees3 The meeting of the two foices made the ground aiipear 
as a billowy sea, like tlie meeting of two clouds 111 the sky, giving 
it the appeal ance of two hostile foiees

4- The battle aiiay of aimouied w'airiois, flashing as the 
file of heaven, w'as succeeded by tbeir commingled blows, 
lesembling the lattlmg of thunders above, deafening the eais 
and dazzling the sight

5 Then daits and javelins, stioars and lances, and many 
other missiles fpuisas), began to fall on both sides, like showers 
of lamdioiis, hailstones and meteorolites fi om the skies.

6 Showeis of shafts fell with a force, that would pieice 
the pinnions of ganida, and stiuck out the glaie of sunbeams^ 
by bitting at the aimouis of the waiiiois.

7. The combatants standing face to face with their lifted 
aims, and staling at each othei wutli steadfast looks, seemed as 
they W’^eie jnctuies in a [lainting

8 The aimies drawn in long legiments, standing 111 lines 
opjiosite to each othei, weie heaid to answ’"ei one another by 
their ie])eated shouts

9 The battalia of both aimies, and the diums on both

sides, weie jiut to a stop by the warnings of then leadeis, against 
striking the fiist blow 1

UTPATTI KHAANDA

387

10. The intermediate space of the breadth of two bows, that 
separated the hostile forces like'a budge from one another, ap- 
pealed as the gap, caused by the winds in the midst of the^ ocean 
at the universal deluge (Or more like the partition of the 
waters of the Red sea by the rod of Moses).

11 The leaders were drowned in thoughts for fear of blood- 
shed and massacre ; and the cowardly soldiers groaned in their 
heaits, with the hoarse noise of croaking fiogs.

13. There were numbers of biavoes, eager to yield up their 
piecious lives in a trice , and the bowyeis stood with their bow- 
strings drawn to the ear, and ready to let loose their pointed 
arrows at the foe.13. Others stood dieadfully fixed to stiike their arms upon 
the enemy, and many were looking sternly at their adversaries, 
with their frowning looks.

14 The armours were clashing by mutual concussion, tlie 
countenances of the bravoes were burning with rage, and the 
faces of cowards were turned towards sheltered retreats for flight.

15. The lookeis stood in doubt of their lives until the end 
of the war, and old men like big elephants, were covered with 
horripilation on their bodies.

16. The silence which ensued at the expectation of the first 
blow, resembled the calm of the stormy main, and the deep sleep 
of a city at the dead of night.

17. The musical instruments, the drum and conch-shell were 
all silent, and a thick cloud of dust, covered the face of the earth 
and sky.

18. The retreaters were flying from their stronger assailants, 
who kept running after them, in the manner of sharks pursuing 
the shoals of fishes in the sea

19. The glittering fringes of the flags, put the etherial stars to 
blush, and the lifted goads in the hands of the elephant-diivers, 
made a foiest of tapering tiees in the sky

30. The flinging arrows were flying like flocks of the winged

CHAPTER XXXTI.

Onset of the wab

ASISIITHA said Lild, standing with the goddess of 
wisdom in aiij saw the Apsaias dancing tlieie, at the 
eai>einess of the combatants foi war below.

2 She beheld the assemblage of the foices in hei own 
teiiitoij once governed by her loid, and saw the field of the 
an not less foimidable by the assembled ghosts (and its 
enen cling belt composed of the lion, scoipioii, oiab and the 
aiehei)

3 The meeting of the two foices made the giound appear 
as a billowy '="a, like the meeting of two clouds m the sky, giving 
it the ' ^^diice of two hostile foices

4- battle aiiay of aimoiiied waiiiois, flashing as the

file of heaven, was succeeded by their commingled blous, 
lesembling the latthng of thiindcis above, deafening the eais 
and dazzling the sight4- battle aiiay of aimoiiied waiiiois, flashing as the

file of heaven, was succeeded by their commingled blous, 
lesembling the latthng of thiindcis above, deafening the eais 
and dazzling the sight

5 Then daits and 3 avelins, spears and lances, and many 
othei missiles fpidsas), began to fall on both sides, like showeis 
of laindiojis, hailstones and meteoiohtes fiom the skies

6 Showeis of shafts fell with a foice, that would pieice 
the pinnious of ga^ucla, and stiuck out the glaie of '.punbeams, 
by hitting at the aimouis of the waiiiois

7 The combatants standing face to face with 
aims, and staling at each othei with steadfast looks, 
they weie pictuies in a painting

8 The aimies diawn in long legiments, standing in 
opposite to each othei, weie heard to answei one anothei 
then lepeated shouts

9 The battalia of both aimies, and the diums on 
sides, weie put to a stop by the warnings of then leadeis, 
sti iking the fiist blow

UTPATTI KHAAliTDA

387

10. The mteimediate space of the bieadth of two bows, that 
sepaiated the hostile forces lilce'a budge from one another, ap- 
pealed as the gap, caused by the winds in the midst of the’ ocean 
at the universal deluge (Or moie like the partition of the 
waters of the Red sea by the lod of Moses).

11 The leadeis weie di owned in thoughts for fear of blood- 
shed and massacre ; and the cowaidly soldieis groaned in their 
hearts, with the hoarse noise of croaking fiogs

13. There were numbers of bravoes, eager to yield up their 
jnecious lives in a tiice , and the bowyeis stood with their bow- 
strings drawn to the ear, and ready to let loose their pointed 
arrows at the foe

13. Others stood dreadfully fixed to stiike their arms upon 
tihe enem)’', and many were looking sternly at their adveisaries, 
with their frowning looks

14* The armours weie clashing by mutual concussion, tlie 
eountenancGS of the bravoes weie burning with rage, and the 
faces of cowards were turned towards sheltered retreats for flight.14* The armours weie clashing by mutual concussion, tlie 
eountenancGS of the bravoes weie burning with rage, and the 
faces of cowards were turned towards sheltered retreats for flight.

16 The lookers stood in doubt of their lives until the end 
of the war, and old men like big elephants, were covered with 
horripilation on their bodies

16 The silence which ensued at the expectation of the first 
blow, resembled the calm of the stormy main, and the deep sleep 
of a city at the dead of night.

17 The musical instruments, the drum and coneh -shell were 
all silent, and a thick cloud of dust, covered the face of the earth 
and sky.

18. The retreaters weie flying from then stronger assailants, 
who kept lunmng after them, in the manner of sharks pursuing 
the shoals of fishes in the sea.

19. The glittering fiinges of the flags, put the etherial stars to 
blush, and the lifted goads in the hands of the elephant-diivers, 
made a foiest of tapeiing tiees in the sky

30. The flinging’ aiiows weie flying like flocks of the winged

388

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

tube in air, and tlie lend beating* o£ drums and blowing of 
jnpes, lesoimded amidst tlie air.

31 There was a plialanx; in a circular form, attacking 
a host of wicked demons, and here was a squadron in the form of 
Garudav'With its right and left wings, attacking a body of 
elej^ants

XSS Somewhere a great howling was heard to lise from 
^ the vanguard of abodj’’ of troops, disconcerted by a cohort in the 
foim of eagles • and at another many were seen to fall upon one 
another with mutual shouts

23 Thus a tremendous noise was laised by the warriors of 
the many legions, and a multitude of big mallets were seen to be 
raised on high by the hands of the combatants.

24< The glaring of sable steel, shaded the sunbeams like a 
cloud, and hissing daits in the air, emitted a sound, resembling 
the nistling of breeze amidst the diy leaves of trees.24< The glaring of sable steel, shaded the sunbeams like a 
cloud, and hissing daits in the air, emitted a sound, resembling 
the nistling of breeze amidst the diy leaves of trees.

25. Now the brunt of battle, began like the dashing of 
clouds upon clouds at the end of a Kalpa, and the war. raged 
like the raging sea ruffled by a hurricane.

26 Big elephants were falling in the field like coal-black 
rocks, hulled down by gusts of wind.

27. It seemed that the infernal spirits were let loose from 
their eaves of hell, to rage in the battle field with their hoi rid 
and dismal figures

28 The day light was obscuied by the sable cloud of swords, 
and the mallets and lances weie laised up by the black Kunta 
waiiiors, who seemed bent upon convex ting the earth to an ocean 
of bloodshed

CHAPTER XXXIII ^

Comingled Fighting

|>AMA said’ Sir, relate to me in slioit and promptly,

® ^ about this waifaie, as my eaisare delighted with naiiatives 
of tins kind.

2. Vasisbtlia said • These ladies then, in older to have a 
better view of the battle below, aseended in their imaginaiy 
aerial cars vimdnas, to a more retired spot in the higher regions 
of the sky

8. At this interval, there began a mingled fight of the forces 
face to face, with a commingled shout of the two armies, as the 
dashing of the waves against one another in the laging sea

4. At this instant, Viduiatha the loid of the realm, 
(formerly Padma the husband of Lfld), seeing a daiing wairior 
of the hostile force attack one of his soldieis, stiuck him impa- 
tiently on the breast, with the blow of a ponderous mallet

5. Then the battle laged with the impetuosity of the rolling 
waves of the stormy main, and the aims on both sides, flamed 
with living fire and flash of fieiy lightnings

6 Now the edges of waving swoids (lai attarat), glittered 
in the sky, and cracking and clashing noise (Kanakana), filled the 
air with a hedious crackling (kadkada).6 Now the edges of waving swoids (lai attarat), glittered 
in the sky, and cracking and clashing noise (Kanakana), filled the 
air with a hedious crackling (kadkada).

7. Then flew the winged arrows, ovei shadowing the beams of 
the sun, and emitting a booming noise (huiikdia), which hushed 
the rattling clamour (gharghaia) of summei clouds.

8. Armours clashed against aimoiiis (Kaukata) with a clank- 
ing noise (tankdra), and shot foith the spaiks of glistening fiie 
(Kanatkana) j and aims, hashing (chfliina-bhinna) and slashing

* The "whole of this chapter abounds in onomatopoean alliterations, and is 
more a play upon "svoids than display of sense It is intoiesting however for 
these ]in{'ling -words in the language, as also for the names of the whrlike ] 
•weapons in use among the ancients

390

YOGA VA'SISIITJIA

(Klianda-lchanda) against aims, filled the an mthiheii fiagmeiits 
flying like buds in the an

9 The shaking (dodulya) shanks and arms of the army^ 
appealed as a moving foiest (doidruma) on the land, and the 
twangings of then hows (tankdia/, and lumblnig of the disks 
(kienkdia), diove away the birds of the air, and crackled like the 
rattling diive of wheels ( dravat) in heaven

10 The hissing of then* loosened strings (halhala), resembled 
the (ghunghuna) buzzing of bees, heaid in the &amadhi }oga (by 
shutting the ears)

11 Iron shafts like sleets of hailstones, pieicod the heads 
of the soldieis, and the (lanat) crashni!? of aimoiiis (sanghatta), 
bi’oke the arms of the waruors in mail (ICankata sankatab

12 Weapons stiiick on biazen armouis with a howling noise 
(hunkifra), made a clanking sound b}’’ the stroke (tdnkdia), and 
flying like drifts of lain water (taitara), pierced the face of the 
air on all sides (liteially, dentieulaled-dantura dingmukha).13. The stulnng of steel on one another (sanghattah made the 
hands ring with a jinghngsound (jhanjhanat) , and the continued’ 
rapping on the arms, (dsphota), and clapping of hands, 
(karasphota), raised a iiattering and chatteiing sound (chat 
chat and pat pat)

14' The whizzing noise of unsheathing the sword (shitkdra), 
and the hissing of the sparks of fire (sansana) ; the flinging of 
arrows in all \\d 3 ’'s (sadatkara), and the flying of darts, likened 
the rustling of falling leaves (Kharkhaia) in autumn.

15. The spouting of life blood (dhakdhak), from the throats 
separated from the bodies, the mangled limbs and heads, and 
the broken swoids filled the whole space.

16. The flame of fire flaring (sphuiat) from the armouis ^ 
emblazoned the hairs of the warriors, and the fighting and falling 
(ranatpatat) of swordsmen, laised a giddy and loud jingling of 
their weapons (jhanjhana).

17. The lofty elephants pierced b}*' the spears of the Kunta 
lancers, poured out touents of led-hot blood , while the tusky

UTPiTTI KIIAXDA

8!)J

ti'lbe wa? g’oring' whole bodies of them with their shiill crimes 
(ehitkdia).

.18 Obheis ciushed by the pondeious maces of their aiita- 
pomstSj cieaked giieviously undei the blows , while the heads 
of the slain soldiers^ swam in the livers of blood over the j)lain.

19 Heie the hungry vultures weie pouncing from above, 
and theie the sky was coveied by a cloud of dust , and the wea- 
ponless combatants, were engag’ed in KcsAled fighting, by 
holding each other down by the hairs.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

DLSciuprioK or tiik Battli:.

TV'DAV tlic gcncials and minislcis of ilic bellegeient 2’0Wei'5j 
and the acnal apectatois of the wai, were tlms talking 
among themselves.

2 Lo ' hcie the gionnd has become a lake of blood, with 
the heads of the slaughtcicd hosts lloating as lotuses upon it, 
and theie the au has become as the staiiy heaven, glittering 
with biokcii wcajions. Hying like buds in the sky.ii Behold the an is leddcued with the pai tides of vermeil 
blood, boine above by the winds, and the sky presenting the 
evening clouds, with the glow of the setting sun at midday.

4'. AVhat aie these, says one, that aie flying as stiaws in the 
firmament ? They are, says the other, no straws, but the flight 
of allows, that have filled the atmosphere.

6. As long as the dust of the eaith, cries anothei, is mois- 
tened by the bloodshed of the biave, so long are the heroes 
entitled to gloiy, and have their abode in heaven for myriads 
of yeais. *

G Eeai not these sable swords, says the sdstia, whose blades 
aie worn by the biave like petals of blue lotuses about then 
necks and bi easts, and bravoes aie favourites in the eyes of 
the goddess of fortune. (Eoitune favours the brave).

7. The heavenly nymphs that beheld the fighting, felt a 
desiie to embiacc the biave, and the god of the floweiy bow 
(Kdraa oi cupid), was busy to loosen then waist bands (Cuind 
by inversion is Bfpuc, anothei name of the Indian Kdma. And 
Paines or Paries and Huiies are said to fall to the lot of the

* NotiMfcliBtanding the roivard of heavenly abodes proraiBod to the elaj er 
and slam m aar, in the Sastia and Koran, the Asiatics are far backward now- 
a days, both to kill and to be killed than the Europeans, ho are forbidden by 
the Holy wnt, to slay and shed human blood. Thus there is a laxitj of the 
Injunction and prohibition on both sides.

UTPATTI ICHANDA.

393

fighters in - Jehad-battle. So sajs Diyden. "None bnt the^ 
brave deserve the fan”).

8 k j They beckoned then welcome by the waving of their red- 
dish palms, m the shaking of the luddy leaves of tiees, and by 
the fond glances of their eyes, in the blooming blossoms of 
plants, and by the peifume of then bieath in the homed' 
fiagranee of flowers

9. The geniuses of the gaiden of Paradise, were singing 
sweetly in the notes of the sjdvan chon, and betook them- 
selves to dancing in the wagging tails of peacocks9. The geniuses of the gaiden of Paradise, were singing 
sweetly in the notes of the sjdvan chon, and betook them- 
selves to dancing in the wagging tails of peacocks

10 As the biave waiiioi was bieaking the line of the enemy 
with his haidy axe, so was his beloved bieaking his haid heart 
and sxniit, with the soft glances of hei eyes

11 It IS by my lance, says the laneei, that I have severed 
the head of my adveisaiy with the iings in his eais, like the 
head of the ascending node of Rdhii, appi caching the disk of the 
sun.

1?- Lo ’ Theie is a champion huiling the blocks of stones, 
attached to the end of a chain reaching his feet , and another 
wdiiiliug his wheel with a wondious log of wood, held in his 
uplifted aim

13. Theie comes that combatant in the foim of Yama, 
appealing fiora the region of Pluto (Pieta), and spreading a 
hoiiid devastation all aiouiid Come let us go hence as we came.

14 Look there the lavenous buds, greedily plunging their 
long necks in the cells of bodies just separated from tlieii heads, 
and glutting themselves with the gushing blood , and see there 
the headless tiunk of the slam, moving to and fio in the field 
of battle

15 The eloquent among the spectators were talking to one 
anothei, about the fiailty of human life, and the uncertainty of 
the time of then meeting in the next world

16 Oh * the stein cannibal of death, says one, that devours 
in one swoop, whole bodies of the assembled armies, now 
welteiing in blood , and levels the levelling hosts to the ground.

Yol I 50

394

YOGA VAfelSHTHA

17 The showers of arrows falling on the bodies of elephants, 
resemble the showeis of i am droids on mountain tops, and the 
darts sticking* to then fiontal bones, liken the bolts of lightening* 
pieieing* the peaks of clifCs.

18 While the headless body of the beheaded, was g’loveling* 
grievously on tlie giound for i\aut oL its head, the pate flying 
on high as a bud of aii, pioelaiincd its immoitahty in heaven.18 While the headless body of the beheaded, was g’loveling* 
grievously on tlie giound for i\aut oL its head, the pate flying 
on high as a bud of aii, pioelaiincd its immoitahty in heaven.

19 The ainiy haiassed by ‘stones sliing on then heads, 
cued to entiaptlie enemy in the ‘'iiaies set at then feet

20 Wives that liad become Ap'ai.'is (hea\cnly n 3 inphs} 
after death, weie now oagei to chum thou* husbands, ivlio 
were lesloied to their youth, by \ nine of then falling in the 
field of battle

21 The glainig light of the line of lances that had 
reached the skies, seemed as a flight of ‘^tairs oi golden vistas, 
foi the ascent of the hiave to the gates of heaven

22 The wife of the slam ‘^oldiei, seeing now a heavenly 
goddess, taking possession of hci husband’s fan gold-hke hie^st, 
was looking about in seal eh of anothei

23 Gencinls, Mailing loud!} with their uplifted aims, over 
then fallen ainnes m the field, ajipeaied as the cliff‘5 of rocks, 
iGsoundnig to the clamoious singes below

21 They cned out to fight the foiemost in w ai, and to lemov e 
the wounded to the leai , and not to trample ov'ei the bodies of 
their own soldieis, now l^ing low on the gionnd

25 Behold I tlieie the Apsdias ea^^eil}' t} ing then loosened 
locks, and adv^anenig with sobbing bosoms to leceive the depaiLed 
vvaiiiois, joining then company in their celestial foims

V 26. Ahl receive them saj^s one, wdio aie oui guests fiom afar, 
by inv the banks of the riv^eis of Paiadise, decoiated with lotus 
Fames 0).ms of golden hue, and enteitani them with fiesh watei and 
**eeze

* Notwitustanu

and slam in ar, m I theie the groups of weapons, hioken into pieces 
a days, both to kill an. , , t i 1 1 i i i

tho Holy -ant, to slay i’ fill coiicussioii, aie huddlpd 111 the an with a 
injunction and pro]ubitiou^u^t.L«i a}, and shniing as btais in tiie sky

UTPJVTTI KHANDA

395tho Holy -ant, to slay i’ fill coiicussioii, aie huddlpd 111 the an with a 
injunction and pro]ubitiou^u^t.L«i a}, and shniing as btais in tiie sky

UTPJVTTI KHANDA

395

28 Lo 1 the stream ol deeeased souls, flowing in auowy 
eurients and rolling in whirlpools of the flying disks, is rapidly* 
gliding with the pebbles and stones, flung fiom the slings in the 
ail.

29. The sky is become as a Jake of lotuses with the lotiforra 
heads of waiiiois flung aloft in the an, while the flying weapons 
aie floating like then stalks in it, with the bioken swoids as 
their thoinsall aiouiid

30, The flying fiagmeiits of the flags, foiming the folia of 
the plants, and the dai ts sticking to them, appeal as big black 
bees flutteiing about the floweis moving with the bieeze

31 Tne aiiows sticking to the dead bodies of elephants, are 
as emmets on mountam tops, and as timid giils clinging to the 
bosoms of men

32 The winds unfuiling the curling locks of Vidyadhara 
females, indicate then approaching spousals, as the unfolding 
plumage of fowls aie predictions of success m auguiy.

33 The lifted umbiellas aie shining as so many moons on 
high and the moon shining above in the foim of fair fame, 
spreads hei light as a white canopy on eaith

3i The biave waiiioi, soon after his death, assumes a celes- 
tial form flamed by his own merit, as a man in his sleep, attains 
to a state, he has imagined to himself in his waking

35 The flyinr speais and lances and clubs and disks are 
hurtling in the an, like shoals of restless fishes and sbaiks, 
moving about incessantly lu the tioubled wateis of the sea.

36 The milk-white lags of umbiellas, tatteied and sbatteied 
by ariowy shafts, aie flying as cianes an the ciowded an, and 
appearing as the disk of the moon broken into a thousand pieces.

37 These waving flappers flying in the air with a hoaise 
guigling (ghaighaia), ^eem as the waves of the sea lifted in 
the an, and undulating with a babbling noise m the ocean 
of the sky.37 These waving flappers flying in the air with a hoaise 
guigling (ghaighaia), ^eem as the waves of the sea lifted in 
the an, and undulating with a babbling noise m the ocean 
of the sky.

88 Those slips of the flappers and umbrellas, hashed by the

YOGA Va'sI.SIITIIA.

f.306

slasliing arms, appear a? the laurels ofg-loiy fiuiig aloft and 
• flying in the logions of air.

39. Behold yo friends ' how these flying airows andshoweiing 
speais, arc appioaehing to us with hits of thou spoil, like bodies 
of locusts, healing awa}’- then \oidant booty in the air. .

40. Ileaikcn to the clanking sound of the sti iking steel, in 
the uplifted arm of the ai monied soldier, icsounding like the 
loud larum of the icgent of death.

41. Ileai the ticmendoiis blows of weapons, like the blowing 
of an all destroying toinado, thiowing down the elephants like 
oiaigs of mountains, with then long stietching tusks lying like 
watei falls on the giound.

451. Lo ! there the duveis of war chaiiots aie stopped in 
then course, and stiiving to make their wn}' thiongli the puddles 
of blood, in which the wheels and horses of the car, are huddled 
together as in a bog of quagmiie

43 The ,iingling of arms and ai moms, and the jangling o£ 
swoids and steel, lesound as the tinckling of the lute at the 
dancing of thc>due and dreaded dame of death.

41 See the skirts of the sky reddened by the roseate par tides, 
borne by the winds from the sticams of blood, issuing out of 
the wounds in the bodies of men, horses and elephants lying 
dead in the field.

45 Look at the array of arrows formed in the air as a 
wreath of blossoms, and falling as the rays of hghtnings from 
the dark black clouds of weapons hanging on high

4G Lo ' the siiifaec of the earth filled with blood-ied 
weapons, appearing as faggots of file strewn over the giound in 
an universal conflagiation4G Lo ' the siiifaec of the earth filled with blood-ied 
weapons, appearing as faggots of file strewn over the giound in 
an universal conflagiation

. 47 The multitudes of commingled weapons, clashing with 
and breaking one another into pieces, are falling down in showers, 
like the innumerable lays of the sun

48 The fighting of one man among the motionless many, 
is like the magic play of a magician^ uheie the conjurer acts his

UTPATTI KIIAA5TDA

397

paifcs amidst tlie bewitelied beholdeis, Lo I there the indiffeient 
speetatois viewing the waifaie as a dieam (by then 2 }iajna oi 
inward vision of the mind) .

49. The field of battle, where all other sounds are hushed 
under the clashing of aims, lesembles the stage of the maibial 
god Bhaiiava, chanting hispittiless war song in jarimg cacophony.

50. The battlefield is tinned to a sea of blood, filled with 
the sands of jionnded weapons, and lolling with the waves of 
bioken discuses.

51. All the quarteis undei the legents of the sky, aie filled 
with maitial music loudly lesounding on all sides, and the 
lebell'' wing hills seem to challenge one another, in their aeiial 
flight and fighting (as in contest of the gods and titans of old).

5^. Alas f 01 shame ^ says one, that these aiiows flung with 
such foice from the bow stiings, and flying with such loud 
hissmg, and glitteiing as red hot lightnings in the air, are foiled 
in then aim of pieieing the impenetiable aimouis, and driven 
back by them to hit at the stony hills

53. Hear me fiiend, that ait tiied with the sight, that it is 
time foi us to depart from this place, eie we aie pieiced in our 
bodies by these sharp arrows flashing as file, and before the day 
runs its course of the fouith watch (evening).

* P mujosi S. Tatudhana, H, Jadugar= juggler

CHAPTER XXXV.

Description or the BATTLEriELD.‘“'* P mujosi S. Tatudhana, H, Jadugar= juggler

CHAPTER XXXV.

Description or the BATTLEriELD.‘“'

y ASISIITIIA said • — Then the waves of horse tioops mount- 
ing to the sky, made the battlefield appeal as a laging sea, 
9 > The moving umhiellas floated as its foam and fioth, and 
the featheied silveiy aiiows glided like the finny peaily fiahes in 
it, wtiile the high flight and lush of the cavaliy, heaved and 
dashed as singes of the sea

3 The lushing of the weapons resembled the innning of its 
cuuentsj and the circles of the soldiers weie as voitices of its 
wateis The elephants weie as its islets and their motions le^em- 
bled the moving locks in it

4' The whaling disks weie as its eddies, and the flying 
bans on the heads likened its floating weeds The spaikl ng 
sands weie as its shining watcis, and the flash of swoids like its 
glassy spiay

5 The gigantic waiiiois weie its whales and alligators, and 
the lesounding caverns like its guigling whirlpools

6 The flying ariows weie like its swimming fishes, and the 
floating flags likened its upiising waves and boics

7 The shining weapons foimed the wateis of this ocean and 
then whulpools also, while the long lines of foices appealed as 
the huge and houible bodies of its whales.

8. Soldieis clad in black non armoui, were as the dark blue 
wateis of the deep, and the headless bodies giovelimr in dust 
weie as the eddies of the sea, with the enciicled equipments as 
\jie sea weeds

9 The showers of arrows had obscuied the skies with a mist, 
and the confused rattlings of the battlefield, weie as the loaiings 
of the clouds.

• The battle ground is compared firstly with the sky, then with the sea, 
next with a forest, and lastly with the last dooms day

UTPATTI KHAKDA

39'0

10 The flying and falling heads of the slam soldiers, re-» 
semhled the large diops of lam, and. then bodies -weie as pieces 
of jR^ood, whiilmg m the eddies of the disksUTPATTI KHAKDA

39'0

10 The flying and falling heads of the slam soldiers, re-» 
semhled the large diops of lam, and. then bodies -weie as pieces 
of jR^ood, whiilmg m the eddies of the disks

11 The bold bowyei, bending liis stiong bow in the foim of a 
cuive, and leaping above the giound, lesembled the spoutinii sea, 
using tiom niiderneath the giounl with his heaving waves on 
high.

12. The nnn umbel ed umbrellas and flags, that weie moving 
up and down in the field, weie as the foaminu: and fiothing sea, 
lolling in waves of blood, and eaiiying away the beams and 
timbeis of the bioken eais in its cunent

13 The maich of the aimy lesembled the flowing of the 
sea wafceio, and the blood spouting fiom the wounds of the 
elephants likened its bubbles, while the moving hoises and 
elejthauts lepiesented the sea animals in then motion

14 Toe battlefield had become like the wondeious field of the 
ail, wheie the fuiious wai, like a tiemendous eaithquake, shook 
the hills like moving clouds in the sky

15 Heie the waves weie undulating like flights of buds in 
the ail, and the gioups of elephants falling agiound like locks, 
and the cowaidly ranks weie mminuung like heids of the 
temoious deei

16 The field is turned to a foiest of arrows, and wounded 
soldiers aie standing fixed on the giound as tiees, with the aiiows 
flying as locusts, and the boises moving like antelopes in it

17 Heie the loud dium sounded as the humming of bees 
m the hollows of trees, and the aimy appealing as a mist, with 
the bold waiiioi spiawling like a lion in it.

18 The dust was using in clouds and the foices falling as 
locks , the tiuj;e cats bioken down as hills, and the flaming 
swoids shining on all sides.

19 The use and fall of the foot soldiei's feet flitted like 
the ialluig floweis on the giound, and the flags andnmbiellas 
overtopped it as clouds; it waff overflown by sti earns of blood.

400 YOGA VXSISHTHA400 YOGA VXSISHTHA

^Tid the high-sounding elephants falling as thundering shoAvers 
of lain

20 The wav was as the last doom of death ready to devoui 
the woild^ and destioy the flags and banners, the umbiellas and 
chaiiots in a confused chaos

2L The shining weapons were falling like fiagments of the 
lefulgent sun, and burning all things as a burning pain inflames 
the soul and mind.

22 The out-stietched bows were as lainbows, and the falling 
arrows as showers of lain, the flying sabies resembled the foiky 
lightnings, and then falling fiagments like the spaikling 
hailstones

23 The due massacre made a sea of blood, with the hurling 
stones as its shoals and rocks , while the dying aims lesembled 
the falling stars from heaven.

24. ' The sky was as a sea full of the whulpools of the 
groups of disks and circlets, that weie hmled in the an , and 
theie weie the burning dies, that peifoimed the funerals of the 
slain.

25. The missiles were as bolts of thundei, which struck the 
rock-like elephants dead in the field, to block the passage of 
men

26 The earth and sky were obscured by a thick cloud of 
showeimg ariows, and the army below was a sea of tempestuous 
warfare and bloodshed

27 The destiuctive weapons weie flying on all sides, like 
huge dragons of the sea, earned aloft by gusts of wind from 
the stormy main

28. The flying aims of bolts and swords, disks, pikes and 
lances, weie blazing and breaking one anothei in the air with 
such hedious noise, that it seemed to be a second deluge, when 
the last tornado blew up everything on high, scattering them m 
all duections, and eiuslnng and smashing them with a tremen- 
dous peal

CHAPTER XXXVI.

SECTION I.

Collision of Equal Arms and Aemigerents. 
ru '^HE beajDS of auows using m spues above the giound; diove 
tbe cowaids and the wounded afar fiom tbe field.CHAPTER XXXVI.

SECTION I.

Collision of Equal Arms and Aemigerents. 
ru '^HE beajDS of auows using m spues above the giound; diove 
tbe cowaids and the wounded afar fiom tbe field.

3 The hills of the dead bodies of men, hoises and elephants, 
heaving m piomiseuous heaps, and appealing as elouds fallen 
upon eaith, invited the Yakshas and Rakshasas, and the caini- 
voious Pisiehas, to come and spoit in the wide ocean of blood.

3 Now theie commenced a commutual contest, betwixt 
men of lank and viitue, and those of good chaiactei, valoui and 
stieiigth on both sides, not excepting even the hoi}'- and house- 
hold people, all of whom took pait in the combat (that is, 
no condition of life, noi age nor sex, could escape the contagion 
of a waifaie)

4 ’ Duels weie faught between these, like the clashing of 
one cloud with anothei , and like the confluence of two stieams 
disehaiging then fuiy against each othei

5 As a iib is joined to anothei, and one side wuth the other, 
so met the hoise against the hoise, and elephant opposed the 
elejihant in mutual conflict

6 As one f 01 est clasps and clings to anothei, and one hill is 
linked wath the othei in a lange, so the duelists stiove togethei, 
as one ivavc dashes against the othei

7 Footmen faught -nuth footmen, as the leeds ciush the 
leeds, and bamboos clash against one anothei, and the con tiaiy 
wands stiuggle betw'een themselves

8 Cais falling upon cais, and chaiiots lunning against 
chai lots, broke one anothei to pieces, and the citizens beat the 
rustics, as the Devas smote the demons of old.

9 The sky which had been eiewhile clouded by the flight 
of allows, was now emblazoned by the bannei of the bowyer, 
lesembhng the lainbow of vaiious colouis.

VoL. I

51

402

YOGA VA'SISHTHA.

f 10. At last the warriors who were overpowered m their 
conflict with unequal arms, fled away from the field, as they do 
fiom the file of a conflagiation, ‘VoL. I

51

402

YOGA VA'SISHTHA.

f 10. At last the warriors who were overpowered m their 
conflict with unequal arms, fled away from the field, as they do 
fiom the file of a conflagiation, ‘

11 Now the aimigeients with discuses, met the thivaiters 
of disks (chakias) in contest, and bowyers were opposed to 
bowmen, and swoidsmen challenged the sword fighters in the 
field So met thehookeis and eiookeis with then co-rivals with 
crowbais (bhusundis) in hand

13 Maces weie opposed to maces (musalas), and lancers 
weie set against the lance beaiers Ckuntas) in fighting Spearmen ^ 
braved the speaimen (rishtis), and the throwers of missiles weie 
eiossed with missives (piasas) in hand.

13 Mallets militated against mallets (mudguias), and clubs 
weie eontiavened by clubmen in the conflict Combatants with 
pikes (saktis), encountered the pikemen (sakti-dhaias) face to 
face, and non rods were ciossed to pointed lods (sulas) in the 
stiife,

14 Pugilists with missive weapons, counteiaeted the missiles 
of then antagonists (pidsas), and those fighting with battle axes 
(paiasusb bafiled the poleaxes and pickaxes (paiaswadhas) of 
their foes.

15. Tiappeis with their tiaps and snaies, attacked the daiters 
of nooses and lassos (pdsas) , and the daiteis of javelins (sankus), 
withstood the daits of the daitsmen on the other side Daggers 
weie opposed to daggers (kshuiikas), and cudgels weie presented 
before the cudgels (bhindipdlas of the enemy)

16 Combatants with non gloves contravened the boxeis 
with non fistcuffs (Vajiamushtis), and those with iron cianes, 
puisued the fighteis with ciooked goads, (ankusas) in hand. 
Waiiiois with ploughshares attacked the ploughmen, and those 
with Indents, fell upon the tndent holders (tiisuhns) in contest

17 Champions with chained aimouis set upon the soldiers 
attiied in mail (simkhala jdla), and they poured upon the field as 
flights of locusts, 01 as the waves in the troubled sea

UTPATTI KHANDA

403UTPATTI KHANDA

403

18. The ail also seemed as a sea, with flying disks whiiling 
as whiilpools (chakiavartas)^ and the flight of leeds whistling, 
like gusts of wind ; while theiange of lunning weapons^ seemed 
as shaiks and dolphins moving about it

19 The hollow of the heaven became as the great deep of 
the sea^ impassable by the celestials, owing to the waving wea- 
pons, moving as sea monsteis m the an

20 Thus the armies of the two belligeient potentates, each 
composed of eight ranks or battalions, weie fuiiously engaged 
with one another, as desciibed below

SECTION III 
Catalogue OF the Forces

21 Now heai me lelate to you, the forces on the side of 
Padma, now named Vidiiiatha, and the allied povveis that came 
to his side, fiom the Central and Eastern distiicts.

22 Theie came the haidy waiiiois of Kosala (Oudh) and Kd.si 
(Benares), those of Magadha (Behai) and Utkala (Oiissa), 
situated in the east , and the Mekhalas /of Vmdhya lange), the 
Kaikais (of Karnatie), and the Madias (of Maduia) in the south.

23 The chiefs of Hema (Imaus) and Budias and the 
T^mialiptas (Tamils) fiom the south, the Pi^gjyotishas (of east 
Assam), and the hoise faced Osmuks and Ambashtha cannibals

24 Then theie joined the Varna-koshthas and Viswotias, and 
the eaters of raw food and flesh and the fish eateis (piscivoii) , 
and those with faces like tigeis, the Kiiatas (Kiiihoids and Kiia- 
antis), with the Sauviras and one legged people.

25. Next came the mountaineers of Mdlyavdiua, Sibira and 
Anjanagiii, and otheis having the ensigns of bulls and lotuses, and 
the people of the sun using mountain (Udaya-giii) in the east

26 Those that joined fiom the south east (pidgdaxina), are 
the following, namely, the Vindhyaiis, the Chedis, the Vatsas, 
the Das^inas (neai the confluence of the ten sti earns) , and the 
Angas, Bangas and Upabangas (of Upper and Lowei Bengal)

27. They that met from the south were, Kalingas and

404

YOGA VASISUTIIA27. They that met from the south were, Kalingas and

404

YOGA VASISUTIIA

Puudias, the JathaiaSj Vulaibhas and the lull j)eople (on the 
(Kainatic coast) , the Sabaras^ the ontcastcd '^axat^es, the Kainas 
and the Tiipiua people.

28 Those named Kantakas fiom then thoiny distiict/the 
nneuli<rhtoncd Komalas (of Comilhi?), the Kainas (Cauaiesc), 
the Andhias, the Cholas and the people on the hoidcio 'of the 
Chaimanvati uvei

29 The Knkos oi })a](I headed and heaulod jieople, and those 
of the lleraa-knta hills, the fnz/ded .and long necked people, and 
the inhabitants of Kishkindha and eoeoa foie-jts

30 The piinceb that joined with Lilacs husband fiom the 
south, weic as follows vi/. the Vindlij'-ans, the Kusumians (of 
Patna) the ^Maliendias and the Daidiiias, (of the hills of the 
same names)

31 The ^Malays and the solai lace, .and the Pnnee of the 
(33) united states and the iich and united cities of Avanti and 
S{tmba\ ati

32 And those of Dasapura (oi ten cities) of Katha (Kota), 
Chakia, Reshika Cutch and others, and the foiestcis of Upagin 
and Bhadiagiii hills

33 The piince of Nagoie and the chiefs of Dandaka foiest, 
and the joint states of the people, the Sabas, San as, and the hill 
people of the Rishyamuka and Kaikota and the Vimbila foicsteis.

31 Then came the inhabitants fiona the banks of Pampd, 
the Keiakas and Kaikaviias , wnth the Kheiikas, Asikas and the 
people of Dhiumapattana

35 Next came the K.1sikas and Khallukas, the Yadas and 
Tamr.apainikas , the Gonaidas, the Kanakas and the people of 
Dinapattam

36 TheTami'is (Tamils), Kadambhaias, Sahakdias and Ena- 
kas (oi deei hunters) , the Vaitundas, Tumba-vanalas, and those 
attiied m deei and elephant skins.

37. Then came the lotus-like Sibis and Konkans and the 
inhabitants of Chitrakuta mountains, with the people of Kainata, 
the Mantas, Batakas and those of Cattak,

UTPATTI KHANDA

40537. Then came the lotus-like Sibis and Konkans and the 
inhabitants of Chitrakuta mountains, with the people of Kainata, 
the Mantas, Batakas and those of Cattak,

UTPATTI KHANDA

405

38 The Andhras and Kola hill people (Koles^), the Avantis 
and Chedis , with the Chandas and Devanakas and Kiaunch^- 
vahas

*39 At last came the people fiom the thiee peaks of Chitia 
kuta mountains^ called the SiMkhdia, Nanda maidana and 
Malaya, which weie the seats of the guaidian Rdkshasas of 
Lankd.

40 Then those of the southwest wheie theie is the gieat 
realm of Suidstia (Suiat), with the kingdoms of Sindhu (Smde) 
S anvil a, Abhua, and Diavidas (in Deccan)

41 Also those of the distiicts of Kikata, Siddha Khanda, and 
Kdluuha, and the mount Hemagiii oi golden hills and the 
Kaivataka lauge

42. Then the waiiiois of Jaya Kaehchha (the vietoiious 
Catch), and Mayavaia (Mewai) , as also the Yavanas (lonians), 
the Bahlikas (Balkhs), the Maiganas (nomads), and the giey 
colouied Tumbas (on the noith)

^43 Then there came Lahsa laces and many hill peoples, 
inhabiting the boideis of the sea (Caspean), foiming the limit of 
the dominion of Lila’s husband (Hindu Government) on the 
noith

44. Now know the names of the countiies belonging to the 
enemy in the west, and of those composed of the following 
mountain langes, viz

45 The mount Manimd-n and the Kuiai-pana hills, with 
the hillocks of Vanorka, Mesfha-bhava, and the Chakia-vana 
mountain.

46 Theie is the countiy of the five peoples limiting 
the terutoiy of the Kdsa Biahmans, and aftei that the Bhaia- 
ksha, the Pdiaka and Sdntika countiies

47 Thence stietch the countries of the Saivyas, Amaiakas, 
the Pachchyas (Pdschdtyas) and Guhutwas, and then the Hai- 
haya countiy, and those of the Suhyas, Gayas and Tajikas 
and Hunas (Huns),

406

YOGA VA'SISHTHA.406

YOGA VA'SISHTHA.

4-8. Then along the side of some othei* countries, there is the 
range of ICaika lulls, inhabited hy baibaious people, devoid of 
caste, customs and limits of moral duties.

49. Thence stretches a countiy hundieds of leagues in 
length, to the boundaiy mountain of Mahendia, abounding in 
iich stones and gems.

60 Aftei that stands the Aswa range with hundieds of lulls 
about it , and CKtcnding to the dread ocean on the north of the 
Paiiydtia range (Paiopamisus).

51 On the north western side, there are conntiies beyond tbe 
boundaiy mountains (of Asia), wboic Venupati was tbe king 
of tbe land

52 Then there aie the countries of tbe Pbillgunakas and 
and Mdndavayas and many other peoples , and those of 
Puiukundas and Paias (Pans ?) as biigbt as tbe oib of tbe sun.

53 Then the races of Vanmilas and Nalinas and the Dirghas , 
who are so called, from then tall statuics and long aims and 
haus Then theie are the Rangas (Red men) Stdnikas with pro- 
tuberant bicasts, and tbe Grurulias and Clialubas

54, Affcpi that IS tbe kingdom of women (luledby a queen), 
where they feed upon bullocks and heifers. Now about the 
Himdlayas and its hills in the north (of India) •

55 These aie the Kiauncha and MadhumAn lulls ; and the 
KaiUsa, VasumAn and the Sumeru peaks , at the foot of which 
are the people, known uiidei many names.

66 Beside these there met the warlike tribes of India con- 
sisting of the Madiawars, ilalavas and Sara-senas. The Rajputs 
of the race of Aijuna, the Trigartas and the one legged people 
and Khudias

57 There were the Ahalas, Prakhalas, aud Sakas (Saccre or 
Scythians) The Khemadhuitas, the Dasadhanas, the Gaviisanas 
and Dandahanas (club fighteis).

68. The Dhduadas and Sarakas and BAtadhdnas also, with 
the islanders and Gdndhdras and Avanti wariiois of Malwa,

UTPATTI KHANDA.

407

69. Tlie wailike Taksliasilas (Taxilas), the Bilavas, Godhanas 
and the renowned wainois of Pushkaia (Pokhra'UTPATTI KHANDA.

407

69. Tlie wailike Taksliasilas (Taxilas), the Bilavas, Godhanas 
and the renowned wainois of Pushkaia (Pokhra'

* 60. Then there weie the Tikshas and Kd,lavaias, and the in- 
habitants of the cities of K^haka and Suiabhuti likewise

61. Theie weie the people of the Batikadaisa and Antaia- 
daisa also, and the Pingalas, the Pandyas, Yamanas and Ydtu- 
dhanas Rakshasas too

62 Theie weie also the races of men, known as Hematdlas 
and Osmuks, together with the hilly tubes, inhabiting the 
Himalaya, Vasumdn, Kiauncha an Kailasa mountains.

63 Hear me now relate to you the peoples that came fiom 
the north east quaitei, which extends a hundred and eighty 
leagues in its cueumfeience.

64 Theie came also the Kalutas and Biahmaputias, the 
Kunidas and Khudmas, with the warlike Malavas and the 
champions of the Randhia and forest states

65. Then there weie the Kedavas and Sinhaputias of dwar- 
fish statures , the Sabas (Sabae oi Sabians ?), the Kaceaes, the 
Pahlavis (ancient Peisians), the Kamiras and the Daiadas (the 
present Daiduis of Himalayan hills).

66 There were also the people of Abhisa, the Jaivakas, the 
Pulolas and Kuves , the Kiiatas and Yamupaias, togethei with 
tlie pool and iich 23eopIe of desert lands and tracts of gold.

67 Thus Lila saw in one view, the residences of the devas , 
the forest lands and the eaith mall then beauty She saw all 
the seats of ojiulence (viswavasus), and the edifices with Avhich 
they weie adorned, she beheld the summit of Kaildsa, and the 
delightful gloves at its»foot, and the level lauds traversed by the 
aeiial eai s of Vidyddhara and celestial beings.* It was easy for the lively Lila, to learn about these peoples and then native 
lands in her lonely Yoga meditation, by the help of the goddess of learning, but 
it IS hard for us to identify them without subjecting ourselves to a long labour 
of love, which is a soit of Yoga also, called vidya Yoga, or intense application 
and self devotion to learning

CHAPTER XXXVII

Ca-taloguk or the Forces contikoed.*

''i TASTSHTIIA said Tims llie ia%af^irg xvai was malving a 
V lapul end of men, hmse, elephants and all, and the hra\os 
coming foicmost ui the combat, fell m ecjual numbers on both 
sides

Z These (as named bcfoic), and many others w'crc reduced to 
dust and ashes, and the biaveiy of the biavc, seivcd but to send 
them like pool motlis to the fiie and flame of desti notion

3 Know now the names of the ccntial districts, not yet men- 
tioned by me, that sent then waiuoi'3 to the field, in favour of 
the consol L pi nice of Lild

4 These neic the inland foiccs of Sursena (^luttia), tlie 
Gudas (Gaudas?), and the Asganas(?), the !Madhymilcas and 
they tluit dwell uudci sunlight (the tiopics)

5 The Salukas and K.odmal<5, and Pippaldj’anas , the oMdn- 
davyas, Paiidyans, vSugii\as and Gui^ais

G The Pclu^iUias, Kuiasbtias, Yamunas and Udumvaiasj 
the Raj-waias, the Ujjauias, the Kdlkotas vCalicuts) and the 
Mathuias (of jNIuttia)

7 Ihe Pinclutlas (Pdnjdbis), the Noitliein and Southern 
Dhaimakshetias , the Kuiukshetnyas, Panchdlakas and Sdias- 
watas

8 The line of wai chaiiots fiom Avanti, being opposed by 
the aims of the wauiois of the Kunta and Panchanada districts, 
fell in fighting by the sides of the hills8 The line of wai chaiiots fiom Avanti, being opposed by 
the aims of the wauiois of the Kunta and Panchanada districts, 
fell in fighting by the sides of the hills

• Nolo Ifc IS uob c isy to say, ^^licthcr tins contimialion and Icngtliy des- 
cription of the narf irc, is Vusislitha’s oi Valmiki s own making , both of them 
being IV cll acquainted vv nli militaij t ictics tlio former liav mg been the general 
of King Sudisa agiinst tho Persians, and the latter the opic poet of llima’s 
wars with Havana in tho celebrated llamayana

Theso desci ipfcious aie loft out in tho Teinacular translations of this w oilc as 
entirely useless in Yogi philosophj, -without minding, that they formed tho 
preliminary step to llamas military education, which he was soon after called 
to coniplote uiidei the guidance of Viswivmitra m tho hermitage

UTPATTI KHANDA

409

9 Those ai rayed m silken attne, being dismantled by tbe^ 
enemy, fell upon the giound, and were trodden down by tbe ele- 
phants

10 The biavadoes of Daspuia, being hacked in their bieasts 
and shonldeis by the hostile weapons, weie puisued by the Bana- 
bhuma waiiiois, and diiven to the distant pool.

11. The S^ntikas being upped in then bellies, lay dead and 
motionless in naked field, and wrapped in their mangled entiails, 
which weie tom and devouied by the voiaeious Pisaehas at 
night.

12. Theie the veteian and voeifeious waiiiors of Bhadrasm, 
who weie well skilled in the battle field, diove the Amargas to 
the ditch, as they diive the toitoises to their pits

13 The Haihayas weie diivmg the Dandakas, who like fleet 
stags weie flying with the swiftness of wmds, and all gushing in 
blood by the pointed and picicing airows of the enemy

14j The Daiadas weie gored by the tusks of the elephants of 
then, enemies, and weie borne away in floods of their blood, 
like the bioken blanches of tiees14j The Daiadas weie gored by the tusks of the elephants of 
then, enemies, and weie borne away in floods of their blood, 
like the bioken blanches of tiees

15 The Chinas (chinese) were mangled in their bodies by 
daits and aiiows, and cast then toituied bodies in the watei, as 
a buiden they could no longei support

16 The Asuias, pierced in then necks by the flying lances 
of the Kainatic lanceis, fled in all duections like the faggots of 
file, 01 as the flying meteois of heaven.

17. The Sdkas and Dasakas weie fighting together, by hold- 
ing down one another by the haii on then heads, as if the 
whales and elephants weie struggling mutually fiom then res- 
pective elements

18 The flying cowards weie entrapped m the snaies east by 
the Das^rna waiiiois, as dolphins hiding undei the reeds, aie 
diagged out bj'' nets on the blood-ied shoie

19 The lifted swoids and pikes of tlie Tongas (Tonguise), 
destioyed the Guijaia (Guziati) foice by hundieds, and these

VoL I. 52

410

YOGA yXsISHTHA

^ like lazors balded, tbe beads e made widows) of biindreds of 
Guijaia women (It is tbeir custom to remain baldbeaded 
in widowhood) <

30 The lustie of the lifted weapons of the warriors, illumined 
the land a^ by flashes of lighting, and the clouds of aiiows weio 
raining like showeis of lain in the forest.

31. The flight of the ciowbais (bhusundis), which untimely 
otecuredthe oih of the sun, aff lighted the Abhfia (cowherd) 
waiuors with the diead of an eclipse, and oveitook them by sui- 
prise, as when they aie puisued by a gang of plunderers of their 
cattle

33 The handsome gold collared army of the Tdmias or tawny 
coloured soldieis, were dragged by the Gauda wairiois, as cap- 
tois snatch then fan captives by the haii

23 The Tongons weie beset by the Kanasas, like cranes by 
vultures with then blazing weapons, destioying elephants and 
bieakmg the discuses in wai23 The Tongons weie beset by the Kanasas, like cranes by 
vultures with then blazing weapons, destioying elephants and 
bieakmg the discuses in wai

34f The lumblmg noise (guduguduiava), laised by the whirl- 
ing of cudgels by the Gauda gladiatois, frightened the Gdndhd- 
ras to a degiee, that they weie duveu like a drove of beasts, or as 
the dreading DiAvldas fiom the field

35. The host of the S^ka oi Scythian wairiors, pouring as a 
blue toiient fiom the azuie sky, appealed by their sable gaib as 
the mist of night, appioaching befoie then white robed foes of 
the Peisians.

26 The eiowded an ay of lifted aims in the clear and blight 
atmospheie, appealed as a thick foies t under the milk white ocean 
of f lost, that shrouds the mountanousiegion of Manddia

27 The flights of aiiows which seemed as fiagments of 
clouds in the an fiom below, appealed as waves of the sea, when 
viewed by the celestials fiom above

28 The an appealed as a foiest thickly beset by the trees of 
spears and lances, with the ariows flying as buds and bees , and 
innumerable umbrellas, with their gold and silver mountings, 
appearing as so many moons and stais in the sky

UTPATTI KHANDA

411

29. The Kekayas made loud shouts^ like the wai hoops of 
drunken soldieis^ and the Kaiikas coveied the field like a flig-ht of* 
cianesj and the skj was filled with dust ovei their heads

30. The Kiiata aimy made a puiling noise (kulakula) like the 
effeminate voice of women , causing the lusty Angas to lush 
upon them with then furious roai

31 The Kdsas (Khasias) coveiing their bodies with hisa glass 
(in then giassy gaibs)^ appealed as buds with feathers^ and 
raised clouds of dust by flapping then featheied aims

32 The giddy wariiois of Naimada^s coasts^ came lushing in 
the field unaimed with thei weapons^ and began to fleer and 
flout and move about in their meiiy mood32 The giddy wariiois of Naimada^s coasts^ came lushing in 
the field unaimed with thei weapons^ and began to fleer and 
flout and move about in their meiiy mood

33 The low statuied Sdlwas came with the jingling bells of 
their waist bands^ flinging then aiiows in the an, and darting 
showeis of their daits aiound

34 The soldieis of Sibi weie pieiced with the speais bulled 
by the Kuntas They fell as dead bodies in the field, but their 
spirits fled ta heaven in the foim of Vidyddhaias

35 The P4ndu-nagaias weie laid giovellingon the giound 
111 then quick maich, by the mighty and light footed aimy, who 
had taken possession of the field

36 The big Pancha-nadas (Punjabis), and the fiiiioiis 
waiiioisof Kdsi(Benaies), ciushed the bodies of stalwait wariiois 
With then lances and cudgels, as elephants ci ush the mighty 
tiees under then feet aiidAusks

37 The Buimese and Vatsenis weie cut down on the giound 
by the disks of the Nipas (Nepalese), and the Bahyas weie sawn 
down with saws as witheied trees

38 The heads of the while K^kas (Caucasians), weie lopped 
off with shaip axes, and then neighbouiing prince of the 
Bhadias was burnt down by the fieiy arrows Ifiie aims)

39. The Matangajas (of Elephanta) fell under tlie hands of 
Kdshthayodhas (of Katiawai), as old unchained elephants 
falling in the miry pjt , and others that came to fight, fell as dry 
fuel into the blazing fiie.

412

YOGA V/SISHTHA

40 The Mitragartas falling into the hands of the Tiigaitas, 
Wie seatteied about as straws in the fields and having their heads 
stiuek off m their flight, they entered the infernal legions pf 
death

4-1. The weak Vanila foiee, falling into the hands of the 
Magadha aimy, resembling a sea gently shaken by the bieeze, 
went down in the sands, as lean and aged elephants

42 The Chedis lost then lines in fighting with the Tongans, and 
lay witheied in the field of battle, as flowers when scattered in 
the plains, fade away undei the shining sun.42 The Chedis lost then lines in fighting with the Tongans, and 
lay witheied in the field of battle, as flowers when scattered in 
the plains, fade away undei the shining sun.

43. The Kosalas weie unable to withstand the wai cry of the 
deadly Pauiavas, and weie discomfited by showeis of their 
clubs, and missile airows and daits

44 Those that weie pieiced by pikes and speais, became as 
coral plants red with blood all over their bodies, and thus bes- 
meaied in bloodshed, they fled to the sheltering hills like led 
hot suns to the setting mountains (astdchala)

45. The flight of airows and weapons home away by the 
rapid wmds, moved about in the air as fragments of clouds, 
with a swaim of black bees hoveumg under them.

46 The flying allows seemed as showeiing clouds, and their 
feathers appeared as the woolly bleed, their reedy shafts seeming 
as trees, were roving with the roai of elephants.

47. The wild elephants and people of the plains, were all torn 
to pieces like bits of torn linen

48 AVar chaiiots with their broken wheels, fell into the pits 
like the broken craigs of mountains, and the enemy stood upon 
then tops as a thick mist oi cloud

49 The multitude of stalwait wariiors meeting in the field, 
had given it the appearance of a forest of fdla and tamdla tieesj 
but their hands being lopped off by weapons, they made it appear 
as a mountainous wood, with its clumps of tapering pine trees,

50. The youthful damsels of Paradise weie filled with ]oy 
and glee, to find the groves of their native hill (Meiu), full of 
the biave champions (fallen m the field)

UTPATTl KHANDA

413

51. Tlie foie^fc of tbe m my howled in a tre nenlons roai, until 
it was burnt down by the all devouring fiie of the enemy.UTPATTl KHANDA

413

51. Tlie foie^fc of tbe m my howled in a tre nenlons roai, until 
it was burnt down by the all devouring fiie of the enemy.

^2. Hacked by the Piskchas (Assamese), and snatched of their 
weapons by the Bhutas (Bhoteas), the Dasdrnds (at the con- 
fluence of the ten stieams of Vmdhya) thiew off then staffs, 
and fled as a held of heifeis {luLmh^a hj,r}wlhavati-ho\tQ^ with 
their broken staves Pdnini).

53. The Kdsias weie eager to despoil the tinsels fiom the 
dead bodies of the chiefs by then valoui, as the summer heat 
robs the beauty of lotuses in a diying pool.

51. The Tushdkas were beset by the JMesalas, with their 
daits, spears and mallets , and the sly Katakas weie defeated 
and driven away by the Naiakas in battle

55. The Kauntas weie suiiounded by Piastha wairiors, and 
,weie defeated like good people by the tieacheiy of the wily

56. The elephant dll veis, that stiuck off the heads of their 
hosts in a tiiee, weie puisued by the Iiaipooneis, and fled with 
the,ir severed heads, as they do with the lotus-flowers plucked by 
their hands.

57. The S^raswatas faught on both sides with one another 
until it was evening, and yet no paity was the looser or gainer, as 
in a learned discussion between pandits and among lawyers.

58. The puny and shoit statuied Heccanese, being diiven 
back by the R^kshas of Lanka, ledoubled their attack on them, 
as the smotheiing fire is lekmdled by fuel.

69. VV^hat moie shall 1 1 elate Rdma, about this war, which 
baffies the attempt of the serpent Vasuki even, -to give a full 
description of it with his hundred tongues and mouths.

CHAPTER XXXVIII 
CnSSAflON or TIIC Wau.

y ASISITTTIA continued • Now as the war was n aging;

ficiccly, with mingled shouts on both sides, the sun 
shiouded his buim&hed aiinour under tlie mist of darkness, and 
was about to sety ASISITTTIA continued • Now as the war was n aging;

ficiccly, with mingled shouts on both sides, the sun 
shiouded his buim&hed aiinour under tlie mist of darkness, and 
was about to set

2 The waleis of the limpid stieams glided with the showeis 
of stones flung by the foices, and falling on the fading cluslexs 
of lotuses glowing in them r

3 Flashes of fiie glitteicd in the sky, by the clashing of 
the shafts and daits bclou , and waves of arrows were seen, now 
appioaching nigli and now leeeeding at a distance.

4. Seveied heads like loose lotuses, floated and whirled m the 
whulpools of blood below, and the sea of heaven was filled witb 
flying weapons, moving as marine animals above

5 The 1 us Ll mg of the breeze and the whistling of the over- 
shadowing clouds of weapons, frightened the aeiial Sidhas and 
sylvan apes, with the feai of an appioaching lain.

6 The da}”- declined aftei it h.adi units couise of tbe eight 
watches (Ydmdidhas), and assumed the graceful countenance of a 
heio, letuining in gloiy, aftei he has faiight his battle.

7 The aimy like the day, declined in splendour, being bat- 
teied in its cavaliy, and shatteied in its force of elephants.

8 .Then the coininandeis of the aimies, in concert with the 
ministeis of wai, sent envoys to the hostile paities fora truce 
to the fighting

9. Both paities agreed to the armstice, seeing how much 
they weie haiassed in the engagement, and the soldiers with 
one voiee, gave then assent to it

10. They hoisted their soaring banners of truce on the pinna- 
cles of the highest chaiiots (lathas) , and a ciier on each side, 
mounted ovei one, to give proclamation to the aimies below.

UTPATTI KHANDA

415

11 They fuiled the white flags on all sides^ which like so 
many moons in the gloom o£ night, pioclaimed peace on eaith by 
cassation fiom contention

13 Then the diums sent then loud peals aiound, which weie 
resounded by loaiings of the clouds (Pushkaidvaitas) above and 
nil about.13 Then the diums sent then loud peals aiound, which weie 
resounded by loaiings of the clouds (Pushkaidvaitas) above and 
nil about.

13 The flights of aiiowsand weapons, that had been raging 
as file in the atinoshpheie, now began to fall in toiients, like the 
cuiients of the lake Mansaiavaia on the giound below

14 The hands and aims of the wauiois weie now at lest 
like their feet , as the shaking of tiees and the singes of the sea 
aie at an end aftei the ediihquake is ovei.

15 The two aiinies now went then own ways fiom the 
field of battle, as the aims of the sea luu into the land in difleient 
diiections.

IG The aimies being at lest, theie was an end of all agita- 
tion m the field , as the waves of the ocean aie lulled to lest, on 
its calm aftei a stoim (liteially, aftei its churning by the Man- 
daia mountain)

17 It became in an instant as dieadful as the dismal womb 
of death (Putaud.) ; and as deep and daik as the hollow pit of the 
sea, aftei its wateis weie sucked up by Agastya (tlie sun)

18 It was full of the dead bodies of men and beasts, and 
flowed in floods of puipling blood , it was sonant with the sounds of 
insects, like a heath with the humming of beetles

19 The goiy bodies iveie gushing uitli blood, and guigling 
as theivaves of the sea, and the cues of the wounded who wish- 
ed to live, pieiced the ears, and thiobbed the heait stiings of 
the living

20 The dead and wounded welteung side by side in stieams 
of blood, made the living think the dead as still alive like them- 
selves

21 Big elephants lying dead in piles in the field, appealed as 
flagmen ts of clouds, and the heaps of bioken chariots seemed as a 
foiest dispersed by the stoim.-

410

YOGA V/srSIITriA,

32. Sfeicamsof blood weic running with the dead bodies of 
Tioiscs and elephants, and heaps of airows and spears and mat- 
tocks and mallets, flowing togethei witli bioken swoids apd 
missiles.32. Sfeicamsof blood weic running with the dead bodies of 
Tioiscs and elephants, and heaps of airows and spears and mat- 
tocks and mallets, flowing togethei witli bioken swoids apd 
missiles.

33. Horses woie Ijnng girt in their halters and harnesses, and 
the soldieis wiapt in their mails and armours ; and flags and 
llappeis and tuibans and helmets lay scattered in the field,

31- The winds were rustling in the orifice of the quivers, like 
the hissing of aiiowy snakes, or as the whistling of the 
bieeze in the boles of bamboo trees, and the PisAchas were 
rolling on beds of dead bodies, as upon their beddings of straws.

35 The gold chains of the helmets and the head ornaments 
of the fallen soldiers, glittered with the various colouis of the 
lainbow, and greedy dogs and jackals were teaiing the entrails of 
the dead like long lopes or stiings.

36 The wounded were gnashing their teeth in the field of 
blood, like the croaking of fiogs in the miry pool of blood.

37. Those clad in party colouied coats with a hundred spots 
on them, had now their arms and thighs gushing in a hundred 
stieams of blood.

38 The fi lends of the dead and wounded, were wailinjr 
bitteily ovei their bodies, lying amidst the heaps of arrows and 
weapons, the broken cars and the scattered tiappmgs of horses 
and elephants, which had coveied the land

39 Headless tiunks of the goblins weie dancing about with 
their uplifted aims touching the sky, and the stink of the 
can ion, fat and blood, filled the nostiils with nausia.

30 Elephants and hoisesof noble breed, lay de-id and others 
gasping with then mouths gaping upwards , and the dashing 
of the waving stieams of blood, beat as loud as diums against 
their rock-hke bodies

31. The blood gushing out of the pores of the wounded hoises 
and elephants, lan like that of a wmunded whale into a hundred 
stieams And the blood spouting fiom the mouths of the dying 
soldiers flowed into a bundled channels

UTPATTI KHANDA

417UTPATTI KHANDA

417

33 Tkose wlio were pierced with, aiiows in tkeii eyes and 
mouths^ weie utteiing an inaudible voice m then last gasp oi 
death , and those pieieed in then bellieSj had then bowels gush- 
ing out with a houible stench, while the giound was leddened 
with thickened blood issuing out of the wounds

S3. Half dead elephants giasped the headless tiunks with 
then uplifted tiunks (pioboseis), while the loose hoises and 
elephants, that had lost then iideis, weie tiampling over the 
dead bodies at landoin.

34 The weeping, crying and totteiing wives of the fallen 
soldieis, fell upon then dead bodies welteiing in blood, and 
embiaeing them fast by then necks, made an end of themselves 
with the same weajions

35 Bodies of soldieis weie sent with their guides on the way, 
to fetch the dead bodies fiom the field, and the hands of their 
lively companions, weie busily emploj’-ed in diagging the dead

36. The field had become a wide iivei lunning with waves of 
blood, and bieaking into a bundled whii ling streams, caiiyingthe 
seveied heads, as lotuses swimming in them, and the tom biaids 
of hail floating as bushes on them

37 Men weie busy to extiact the weapons fiom the bodies 
of the wounded, who lamented loudly on account of then dying in 
a foieign land, and losing then aims and aimouis and hoises an^ 
elephants in the field

38 The dying souls lemembeied then sons and paients, their 
deal ones and then adoied deities, and called out by then names, 
and began to sigh and sob with heait-i ending beigh-hos and

_ alacks

39 The biave that died cuised their fates, and those falling 
in their fighting with elephants, blamed the unkind gods they 
had adoied in vain

40. The cowaids feaiing to be killed betook themselves to 
base flight , but the dauntless biave stepped forwaid amidst the 
whirlpools of blood

41 Some suffering undei the agony of aiiows pieicing 
VoL I 53

418

YOGA VA'STSIITHA.41 Some suffering undei the agony of aiiows pieicing 
VoL I 53

418

YOGA VA'STSIITHA.

tlieir moiLal pails, ilioug-lit upon the sins o£ tlieir past lives^ 
lliathad biouglit this pain upon them , while the blood sucking 
Vctdlas, advanced with then bon id mouths for dunking the 
blood of the headless tranks (Kabiindhas)

4S. The floating flags and umbiellas and flajipers, seemed as 
white lotuses in the lake of blood below, while the evening stretch- 
ed hei tram oC stais like red lotuses in Iho ctheiial sea above

43 The battle field presen led the appearance of an eighth 
sea of blood j the lathas or waiears forming its rocks, and their 
wheels its whiilpooh, the flags being its foam and fioth, and 
the white flappeis as its bubbles (There are seven 'Jeas only 
on recoid)

4t The field of blood with the scattered cars, appealed as a 
track of laud plunged in mud and nine, and coveied over wuth 
woods broken down and blown away bj’- ahuiiicanc

43 It w'as as desolate as a countiy burnt down b} a conflagra- 
tion, and as the diy bed of the sea sucked up by the sage Agastya 
(the sun). It was as a distuct devastated by a sweeping flo 9 d

46 It was filled with heaps of weapons, as high as the 
bodies of big elephants lying dead about the ground,

47. The lances which were earned down by tne streams of 
blood, were as big as the palm trees giownng on the summits 
of mountains (Compaie the desciiption m Ossian's poems),

48. The weapons sticking in the bodies of the elejihants, 
seemed as the shining flowers giowung on verdant tiees and the 
entrails torn and home up by vultures, spread a fretted net wmik 
in the sky

49. The lances fixed beside the sti earns of blood, were 
as a woody foiest on the bank of a rivei , and the flags floating 
on the surface, appealed as a bush of lotuses in the hquid-blood49. The lances fixed beside the sti earns of blood, were 
as a woody foiest on the bank of a rivei , and the flags floating 
on the surface, appealed as a bush of lotuses in the hquid-blood

50 Dead bodies of men weie drawn up by then fi lends, 
from the bloody pool m which they were di owned, and the 
embedded bodies ot big elephants, weie mi”’ ^d by men by the 
jutting weapons sticking in them

UTPATTI KHANDA

419

51 The trunks, of trees wkicli had Iheii blanches lopped 
oS by the weapons, appealed as the headless bodies of slam soldiei^ 
and the floating’ caicasses ot elephants, seemed as so many boats 
swimming in the sea of blood

5S . The white gaiments that weie swept down by the cui- 
rent, seemed as the fioth of the pool of blood, and weie picked 
up by the seivants sent to seaich them out.

53 The demoniac bodies of headless soldieis, weie rising and 
falling in the field, and huilinglaige wheels and disks upon the 
flying aimy on all sides

54. The dying wail 101 s weie fiothing foith floods of blood 
fiom then thioats, and stones stained with blood weie inviting 
the gieedy vultuies to devoui them

55 Thentheie weie gioups of Sutdia, Vet^la and Uttala 
demons dancing then wai dance about the field, and whirling 
the lafts of the bioken cais upon the flymg soldieis on all sides,

56 The stn and last gasp of those that weie yet alive, weie 
feaiful to behold, and the faces of the dying and the dead that 
weie eoveied m dust and blood, weie pitiful to the beholdei

57 The devouung dogs and lavenous lavens beheld the last 
gasp of the dying with pity, while the feedeis on caiiions weie 
howling and fighting on their common caicass, till many of them 
became dead bodies by then mutual fighting58 Now I have desciibed the sea of blood, which flowed fast 
with thegoie of unnumbeied hosts of hoises, elephants and camels, 
and of wail 101 s and then leaders, and multitudes of eais, and 
wai chariots, but it became a pleasuie gaiden to the god of death, 
delighting in his bed of bloodshed, and grove of the weapons 
beset all aiound

OHAPTEE XXXIX

Description of the Battle-Eield Inpested by 
Nocturnal Eiends.

l^OW the blood-ied sun set down m the west^ like a hero red

^ with blood, and hid his lustie, which was dimmed by the 
brightness o£ the weapons o£ wai in the western mam

2, The sky which had ledeeted the blood-ied flush o£ the 
field o£ blood, was now dimmed by the setting of the gloiious 
sun, and darkened by the veil of evening

8. Thick daikness oveispiead the face of heaven and eaith 
like the waters of the great deluge, and theie appealed a body 
of ghosts (Vetdlas), dancing in a iing and clapping then hands

4 The face of the day like that of an elephant, being 
besmeared with the blackness of night fall, was again painted by 
the light of evening with the peaily spots of stars on the cheeks.

5 The busy buzz of Creation being silent in thedead daikness 
of night, like the humming of bees ovei the surface of the waters, 
the hearts of men were closed in sleep as in death, like the petals 
of the lotus at night

6 The buds lay with their folded wings and fallen ciests 
in their nests, as the dead bodies were lying in the field, covered 
with then wounds and weapons.

7 Then the fan moonbeams shone above, and the white 
lotuses were blown below , the hearts of men were gladdened, and 
the victors fait 3 oyous in themselves

8 The ruddy evening assumed the shape of the blood-red 
sea of battle, and the fiutteiing bees now hid themselves like 
the faces of the fallen soldieis8 The ruddy evening assumed the shape of the blood-red 
sea of battle, and the fiutteiing bees now hid themselves like 
the faces of the fallen soldieis

9 There was an etheiial lake above spangled with stars 
like the white lotuses on high, and here was the earthly lake 
below, beset by lotuses resembling the stars of heaven.

10 The bodies that were thought to be lost in daikness, 
were now reeoveied in light, as the gems hid undei the water, 
are found scattered about in moonlight

UlTATTI KIIANDA

421

11 The battle field was filled by the Vetdla demons^ howling* 
with then hideous ciy ^ while bodies of vultuies^ ciows and owM^ 
wjeie teaiing the caicasses and sporting with the skeletons

12 Then blazed the fiineial piles as biightly as the staiiy 
flame on high, and the file consumed the dead bodies togethei 
with then bones and laiments

13. The file burnt the bodies with then bones to ashes, 
affcei which it extinguished itself as if sated with plenty The 
female fiends now began to spoit in the watei

14 Theie aiose a mingled cry of dogs and mows, of Yakshas 
and Vetalas, with the clapping of then hands, and bodies of 
ghosts weie moving about as woods and foiests.

15 The Dakinis (Dd,yims) were eagei to steal away the flesh 
and fat fiom the piles, and the Pisdchas delighted in sucking 
the blood and the flesh and bones of the dead

16 The demons weie now looking and now luiking about 
the funeial piles, and the Bdkshasas that rushed in, boic away 
tho caicasses on their shoulders

17 Theie came also bodies of feiocious Kumbhdndas, and 
big Ddmaias, utteiing then baibaious cues of cJiumchm, and 
hoveling ovei the fumes of fat and flesh in the shapes of clouds.

18 Bodies ofVetdlas stood in the stieams of blood like 
earthly beings, and snatched the skeletons with hideous cues.

19 The Vetdla younglings slept in the bellies and chests 
of the elephants, and the Rdkshasas were dunking then fill m the 
bloody field19 The Vetdla younglings slept in the bellies and chests 
of the elephants, and the Rdkshasas were dunking then fill m the 
bloody field

2.0 The giddy Vetdlas fought with one anothei with the 
lighted faggots of the piles, and the winds weie wafting the 
stench of the putiid caicasses on all sides

21 The female fiends (Rupikas), filled the baskets of their 
bellies with cairion, with a lat-a-tat ^lataiata) noise, and the 
Yalftha cannibals weie snatching the half-buint caicasses fiom 
the funeral piles, as their loasted meat and dainty food (S, kali. 
A. Kul)

422

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

Aeiial imps (khagas) attacked tke dead bodies of the big 
Bangas and black Kalmgas, and flouted about witli tkeii open 
mouths^ emitting the blaze of falling meteors.

23. The Vetdia goblins fell down in the daik and discoloured 
blood-pits, lying nid in the midst of the heaps of dead bodies ; 
while the Pisdcha ogies and the leaders of Yogini spiites, laughed 
at them for their false step (vetdla).

24. The pulling of the entiails (antras-dnts), vibiated as by 
striking the strings of wired instruments (tantras-or tdnts) , and 
the ghosts of men that had become fiends fiom their fiendish 
desires, fell a-fighting with one anothei

25 Valiant soldiers were aiirighted at the sight of the 
speeties (Rupik4s) , and the obsequies were disturbed by the 
Vetala and Rdkshasa goblins.

26. The hobgoblins of the night, (nisdchaias), got fiightened 
at the fall of the carcasses from the shoulders of the elfs 
(Rupik^s), who were carrying them aloft in the air , whei e they 
weie waylaid by a throng of ghostly demons (bhuta-sankata).''

27. Many dying bodies, that weie lifted aloft with labour 
by the bogies (D^nas), weie let to fall down dead on the ground, 
being found unfit foi then food.

28 Pieces of blood-red flesh, fallen from the fiery jaws q£ _ 
jackals, resembled clusters of asoka flowers, strewn all around the 
funeral ground.28 Pieces of blood-red flesh, fallen from the fiery jaws q£ _ 
jackals, resembled clusters of asoka flowers, strewn all around the 
funeral ground.

29. Vetdla urchins weie busy in putting on the scattered 
heads over the headless bodies of kabandhas (acephali) , and 
bodies of Yaksha, Raksha and Pisdcha ogies, weie flashing as 
firebrands in the sky.

30 At last a thick cloud of darkness, covered the face of 
the sky, and the view of the hills and vallies, gardens and 
groves, was hid under an impenetrable gloom The infernal 
spirits got loose fiom their dismal abodes, and ranged and ravaged 
at large ovei the field, as a hurricane under the vault of heaven

CHAPTEH XL.

Reflections on Human Life and Mind.

y ASISHTHA I elated Tlie nocturnal fiends were thus

infesting- the gloomy fields and the myimidons of death 
(yama), roaming about it as maiauders in the day time

2. The naked and fleeting ghosts^ weie levelling on their 
pio vision of can ion in then nightly abode, and under the 
canopy of thick daikness, which was likely to be laid hold upon 
under the clutches of one^s hand (hasta-gidhya).

3. It was in the still hour of the gloomy night, when the 
host of heaven seemed to be fast bound in sleep, that a sadness 
stole in upon the mind of Lilacs magnanimous husband (the belle- 
gerant prince Vidiiiatha by name)

4 He thought about what was to be done on the next morn- 
ing, in council with his Counselleis , and then went to his bed, 
which was as white as moonlight, and as cold as'fiost. (A cold 
bed in the east vs a waim one in the west)

5 His lotus-eyes weie closed in sleep for a while in his 
royal ea»np, which was as white as the moonbeams, and covered 
by the cold dews of night

6 Then the two ladies, issued foith fiom their vacuous 
abode, and enteied the tent thiough a cievice, as the an pene- 
trates into the heart and amidst an unblown bud of flower.6 Then the two ladies, issued foith fiom their vacuous 
abode, and enteied the tent thiough a cievice, as the an pene- 
trates into the heart and amidst an unblown bud of flower.

7. Rama asked How is it possible sii, that the gioss 
bodies of the goddesses, with then limited dimensions, could 
entei the tent thiough one of its holes, as small as the pore 
of a piece of cloth ?

8 Vasishtha answeied saying that —Whoso mistakes him- 
self to be composed of a mateual body, it is no way possible for 
him to enter a small hole with that gioss body of his

9 Bat he who thiulcs himself to be pent up in his coiporeal 
body as in a cage, and obstructed by it in his flight, and does

424

Yf)GA VA'fcISIITHA.

not believe himself to fill his frame, or to be measured by its 
length, but has the tiue notion of his invvaid subtle spiiit, it is 
no way impossible for him to have his passage any where he 
pleases to go.

10 He who peiceivcs his original spiritual stale, as forming 
the bettei half of his body, may pass as a spiiit through aclimk, 
but whoso lelies in liis subse(|uent half of the raatcual body, can- 
not go beyond it in the foim of lus intellect.

11. As the ail nevci rises upwaid, noi the flame of fire ever 
goes downwaid, so it is the natuie of the spirit to use upnard, 
as that of the body to go down, but the intclleet is made to turn 
in the way in which it is trained.

12. As the man sitting m the shade, has no notion of the feeling 
of heat 01 waimth, so one man has no idea of the knowledge or 
thoughts of another peison.

13 As IS one’s knowledge so is his thought, and such is the 
mode of his life, it is only by means of aident practice (of yoga 
and leainmg), that the mind is turned to the right course.

14i As one’s belief of a snake in a rope, is removed by ‘the 
conviction of his enor, so are the bent of the mind and couise of 
conduct in life, changed fiom wrong to right by the knowledge of 
tiuth15 It IS one’s knowledge that gives rise to Ins thoughts, and 
the thoughts that direct his pui suits in life this is a truth known 
even to the young and to every man of sense

16 Now then the soul that lesembles a being seen in a di cam 
01 foimed in fancy, and which is of the natuie of air and vacuum, 
is nevei liable to be obstructed any wdiere m its course (for ivho 
can constiam the flight of bis imagination ?)

17 Theie is an intellectual body, which all living beincs 
possess in every place It is known both by consciousness, as well 
as the feelings of oui hearts.

18 It IS by the divine will, that the intellect rises and sets 
by turns At fust it was pioducedin its natural, simple and in- 
tellectual form, and then being invested with a material body, it

UTPATTI KHANDA.

425

makes together an unity of the peison out of the duality (of its 
material and immaterial essences) . •

*19. Now you must know the triple vacuity, composed of the 
three any substances the spiiifc, mind and space, to be one and 
the same thing, (all the thiee being equally all pei vasive) , but not 
so their receptacle (of the mateiial body), which has no peivasion

20. Know this intellectual body of beings,' to be like the air, 
present with every thing and eveiy wheie (ovei which it extends 
and which it gi asps in itself), just as your desiie of knowing 
extends over all things in all places, and piesents them all to 
your knowledge

21. It abides in the smallest pai tides, and reaches to the 
spheres of heavens, (which it gi asps within itself) it i eposes 
in the cells of flowers, and delights in the leaves of tiees (t.e. It 
stietches ovei all these things in its knowledge of them)

22. It delights in hills and dales, and dances ovei the waves 
of the oceans, it i ides ovei the clouds, and falls down in the 
shojveis of lain and hailstones of heaven22. It delights in hills and dales, and dances ovei the waves 
of the oceans, it i ides ovei the clouds, and falls down in the 
shojveis of lain and hailstones of heaven

23. It moves at pleasure in tlie vast fiimaraent, and pene- 
tiates thiough the solid mountains Its body beais no break in it^ 
and is as minute as an atom

24 Yet it becomes as big as a mountain lifting its head to 
heaven, and as large as the eaith, which is the fixed and film 
support of all things It views the inside and outside of eveiy 
thing, and beais the forests like hairs on its body

25 It extends in the foim of the sky, and contains millions 
of worlds in itself , it identifies itself with the ocean, and 
transforms its whirlpools to spots upon its peison.

26. It IS of the nature of an uninteiiupted understanding, 
ever calm and seiene in its aspect , it is possessed of its intellectual 
foim, from before the cieatioii of the visible world, and being 
all comprehensive as vacuity itself, it is conversant with the 
natures of all beings

27. It IS an unieality as the appearance of water in the

VoL. I. 54.

426

YOGA VASISHTHA,

milage, but manifests itself as a reality to the mideistanding 
%y its intelligence. Without this (intellection), the intellectual 
man is a nil as the son of abaiien woman, and a blank as the 
figuie of a body seen in a dieam

28 Eama asked — How is that mind to which you attiibute 
so many poweis, and what is that again which you say to be 
nothing 9 Why is it no reality, and as something distinct fiom 
all what we see ?

29 Vasishtha leplied All individual minds are indued 
With these faculties, except all such individualities, whose minds 
aie engiossed with the eiior (of the leality) of the outer woild

30, All the woilds aie eithei of a longer or shoitei duiation, 
and they appeal and disappear at times , some of these vanish in 
a moment, and others endure to the end of a Kalpa But it is 
not so with the mind, whose piogiess I will now relate to you.81. There is an insensibility which overtakes every man 
before his death , this is the daikness of his dissolution (mah^* 
pialaya-yiiminl), c

32 After the sliockb of deliuuin and death are ovei, the 
spiritual part of every man, is legeneiated anew in a different 
form, as if it was loused from a state of tiance, leveiie or swoon; 
(the three states of insensibility-avidyd-tiayam).

33 And as the spirit of God, assumes his inime form with 
the persons of Biahmd and .Viia], after the dissolution of the 
world for its iccieation , so eveiy person receives the triplicate 
foim of his spiiitual, intellectual and corporeal beings, aftei the 
termination of his life by death

34- Edma said — As we believe ourselves to be reproduced 
after death by leason of our lemimscence, so must we undei- 
stand the recieation of all bodies in the woild by the same cause 
Hence there is nothing uncaused in it (as it was said with legard 
to the unprodueed Brahma and others).

85. Vabishtha replied The gods Hari, Haia and others, 
having obtained then disembodied liberation oi hulcha-mulU,

UTPATTI KHANUA

427

{i, e the final extinction of their bodies, their minds tod spiiit 
as in nirvanah at the univeisal dissolution, could not retain the;r 
leminiscence to cause then legeneiation.

36 But human beings having both their spiritual and in- 
tellectual bodies entue at their death, do not lose then lemem- 
bianee of the past, nor can they have then final libeiation 
like Biahmd,, unless they obtain their disembodied state, which 
IS possible to all in this life or heieaftei, by the edification of 
then souls, through yoga meditation alone

37. The birth and death of all other beings like youiself, aie 
caused by then lemmiscence, and for want of their disembodied 
libeiation oi eternal salvation

38 The living soul letains its consciousness within itself, 
after its pangs of death aie over, but lemains in its state oP insen- 
sibility by viitue of its own nature (called piadhtoa)38 The living soul letains its consciousness within itself, 
after its pangs of death aie over, but lemains in its state oP insen- 
sibility by viitue of its own nature (called piadhtoa)

39. The universal vacuum is called nature (piaknti). It is the 
reflexion of the invisible divine mind (chit piativimbam), and is 
th^paient of all that is dulloi moving (Jada-Jada), which aie so 
pioduced by cause of then leminiscence oi its absence (sansmiiti 
and asmiiti) , theformei causing the legeneiation of living beings, 
and the latter its cessation as in inert mattei

40 As the living piinciple oi animal life begins to have its 
uiidei standing (bodha ), it is called mahat oi an intelligent 
being, which is possessed of its consciousness (ahankdia) It has 
then the oigans of peiception and conception, added to it fiom 
then elements (tanm^tias) lesidmg in the vacuous ethei

41. This minutely intelligent substance, is next joined with 
the five internal senses, which foim its body, and which is othei wise 
called its spiiitual body (4tivahika oi lingadeha)

4S This sjniitual being by its long association with the 
external senses, comes to believe itself as a sensible being , and 
then by imagining to have the sensible form, it finds itself 
invested with a mateiial body (.adhibhautika-deha) as beautiful 
as that of a lotus.

43. Then seated in the embiyo, it lejioses in a ceitain

428 YOGA Yi^SlSIlTHA.

position for sometime^ and inflates itself like the air, until it is 
fnlly oxiianded

41' It then thinks itself to be fully developed in the womb^ 
as a man dieams of a faiiy foim in his sleep, and believes this 
illusion as a leality

4'5. He then views the outer woild, where he is born to die, 
just as one visits a land wheie he is destined to meet his death, 
and theie lemams to lelish its enjoyments, as picpaied for him

46 But the spmtual man soon peiceives eveiy thing as puie 
vacuum, and that his own body and this woildaie but illusions 
and vain vacuities.46 But the spmtual man soon peiceives eveiy thing as puie 
vacuum, and that his own body and this woildaie but illusions 
and vain vacuities.

47 He peieeives the gods, and human habitations, the lulls 
and the heavens lesplendant with the sun and stars, to be no 
moie than abodes of disease and debility, decay and ultimate 
death and destiuction.

48 He sees nothing but a sad change in the natuies of 
things, and all that is movable or immovable, gieat oi small, 
together with the seaa, hills and iiveis and peoples of this eaitli 
and the days and nights, aie all subject to decay soouei oi latei.

49 The knowledge that I am boin heie of this father, and 
that this IS my mothei, these my tieasuies, and suchaie my 
hopes and expectations, is as false as empty an .

50 That these aie my meiits and these my dements, and 
these the desiies that I had at heait , that I was a boy and am now 
} oung , aie the any thoughts of the ho'llow mind

51. This woild lesembles a forest, wheie eveiy being is like 
a detached arboi , the sable clouds aie its leaves, and the stais its 
full blown flowers.

52 The walking men are as its lestless deei, and the seiial 
gods and demons its buds of the air, the broad day light is the 
fl,ying dust of its floweis, and the dailc night the deep coveitof its 
grove

53 The seas aie like its nils and fountains, and the eight 
boundaiy mountains as its aitificial hills, the mind is the great

UrPATTI KHANDA.

'429

tank in it, containing tlie weeds and shnibs of liuman tliouglits 
in abundance. *

. 54. Wheievei a man dies, be is instantly changed to this state, 
and views the same things eveiy wheie, and eveiy one thus rises 
and falls incessantly, like the leaves of trees in this foiest of the 
world.

55 Millions of Biahmds, Budras, Indias, Maruts, Vishnus 
and Suns, together with unnumbeied mountains and seas, conti- 
nents and islands, have appealed and disappeaied in the eternal 
course of tlie woild56 Thus no one can count the numbers of beings that have 
passed awaj'^, aie passing and shall have to pass heieafter, nor 
such as aie in existence and have to become extinct in the un- 
fathomable eternity of Biahma

57 Hence it is impossible to comprehend the stupendous 
fabric of the umveise any how except in the mind, which is as 
spacious as the infinite space itself, and as variable as the coinse 
of events in the woild

58. The mind is the vacuous sphere of the intellect, and the 
infinite spheie of the intellect, is the seat of the Supreme

59 Now know the whiilpool and waves of the sea to be of the 
same element, as the sea in which they use andfall, though they aie 
not of the same durable natuie as the sea water, by reason of 
then evanescence So the phenomena aie the same with the 
Noumena, though none of these is a reality.

60 The etheiial spheie of heaven, is but a reflexion of tlie 
intellectual spheie of the Divine mind, and the bright orbs of the 
firmament, are as gems in the bosom of Biahma. Its concavity 
IS the cave of the mind of the Eternal One

61. The woild accoidmg to the sense in which I take it, as 
the seatof Gud, is highly in teiesting, but not so in your sense 
of its being a sobei leality So the meaning of the words and 
thou,"^ refers according to me to the intellectual spirit, and 
accoidiiig to you to the living soul and body.

480

yoga VA'sisnTnA

02 Hence LiU and Sarasvall, being’ m then* vacuous mfcel- 
Ifeetual bodies, weie led by the puie dcsiie of their souls, to eveiy 
place without any obstiuction or inteiruption ,

63 The intellectual spiiit has the powei, to present itself 
wheievei it likes, on eaitli oi m the sky, aiidbcfoie objects known 
01 unknown and wished to be known by it. It was by this 
powei that they could entei into the tent of the piince.01' The intellect has its waj’- to all places and things, over 
which it exeicisesits powois of obseivation, lefleetion and leason- 
ing to then full extent This is known as the spnitual and 
tinconfiiied bodj^ (Ativilhika), whose couise cannot be obsti acted 
bj’' any lestiiction whatever.

0

CHAPTER XLI 
Discrimination of Error

V ASISHTHA said Hpoti tlie entiance of tlie ladies in tEe 
tentj it appealed as a bed of lotuses , and its wbite vaults 
seemed as graceful as the vault of heaven with two moons using 
at once under it^

% A puie and cooling fiagiance spread about it, as if wafted 
by the breeze from the Mandaia flowers , and lulled the piince 
to sleep, with every body lying in then camps.

3 It made the place as pleasant as the garden of Eden 
(Nandana), and healed all the pains and eaies of the people there 
It seemed as a vernal garden, filled with the fiagiance of the 
fiesh blown lotuses in the morning

4. The cooling and moon-bnght ladiance of the ladies, loused 
the prince from his sleep, as if he was sprinkled over with the 
3 Uine of ambiosia.

5 He beheld uponhis using the forms of two fames (apsaids), 
seated on two stools, and appealing as two moons iisen on two 
pinnacles of the mount Meiu

6. The prince beheld them with wondei, and after being com- 
posed in his mind, he rose up from his bed, as the god Vishnu rises 
from his bed of the serpent

7 Then advancing respectfully to them, with long strings of 
flowers in his hands, he made offer mgs of them to the ladies, with 
handfuls of flowers flung at then feet

8 Leaving his pillowed sofa in the midst of the hall, he sat 
with his folded legs on the ground, and lowly bending his head, 
he addressed them saj'ing —

9 Be VIC toi ions, 0 moon-bright goddesses! that drive away 
all the iniseiies and evils and pains and pangs of life, by your 
radiance, and dispellest all my inward and outward darkness 
by youi simlike beams

432

YOGA VA'SISHTHA432

YOGA VA'SISHTHA

10. Saying so lie poured handfuls of flowers on then feet,

the trees on the bank of a lake, diop down then floweis on 
the lotuses ’glowing in it

11 Then the goddess desning to unfold the pedigree of the 
piince, inspired his ministei, who was lying by, to relate it to 
Lild

13. He upon waking, saw the nymphs manifest before him, 
and advancing lowly before them, thiew handfuls of flowers upon 
then feet.

13 The goddess said • Let us know, O piinee • who you are 
and when and of whom you aieboin herein. Heaiing these words 
of the goddess, the ministei spake saying

14) It IS by your favour, O giaeious goddesses ’ that I am em- 
powered to give a relation of my princess genealogy to your 
benign graces

16 There was a sovereign, bom of the imperial line of Ixaku, 
by name of Mukunda-iatha, who had subjugated the earth 
under Ins aims

c

16 He had a moon-faced sou by name of Bhadiaiatha, 
whose son Viswaiatha was father to the renowned piince Biihad- 
ratha

17. His son Sindhuiatha was the father of Sailaiatha, and 
his son Kdmaiatha was fathei of Mahdiatha

18 His sou Vishnuratha was f ither of Nabhoiatha, who gave 
bnth to this my lord of handsome appeal ance

19 He IS renowned as Viduratha, and is bom with the great 
virtues of his sue, as the moon was produced of the milky 
ocean, to shed his ambrosial beams over his people

20 He was begotten by his mother Sumitia, as the god 
Guha of Gauii , and was installed in the realm at the tenth 
year of his ago, owing to his father^s betaking himself to asce- 
ticism.

21 He has been ruling the realm since that time with jus- 
tice, and youi appearance here to night, betokens the blossom- 
uig of his good fortune.

'UTPATTI KHANDA-

■433

SS. O goddesses > whose presence is haid to be had, even 
by tbe meiit of long devotion, and a bandied austeiities, yoif 
see here the loid of the eaith-famed Vidniatha, piesent before 
you.■433

SS. O goddesses > whose presence is haid to be had, even 
by tbe meiit of long devotion, and a bandied austeiities, yoif 
see here the loid of the eaith-famed Vidniatha, piesent before 
you.

23 He IS highly blessed to-day by your favour. After say- 
ing these words, the minister lemamed silent with the loid of the 
eaith.

24. They weie sitting on the giound with then folded legs 
(padmdsana), and clasped hands (kiit^njali), and downcast looks , 
when the goddess of wisdom told the piince, to lemembei his foi- 
mei biiths, by her inspiiation

25. So saying, she touched his head with her hand, and im- 
mediately the daik veil of illusion and oblivion was dispersed 
fiom ovei the lotus of his mind

26. It opened as a blossom by the touch of the genius of 
intelligence, and became as biight as the clear firmament, with 
the lays of his former lemmiscence.

27,. He remembered by his intelligence his former kingdom, 
of which he had been the sole loid, and lecollected all his past 
spoits with Lfld.

28. He was led away by the thoughts of the events of his 
past lives, as one is earned away by the cuirent of waves, and 
leflected in himself, this woild to be a magic sea of illusion.

29. He said I have come to know this by the favour of the 
goddesses, but how is it that so many events have occuiied to 
me in course of one day aftei my death.

30 Heie I have passed full seventy years of my lifetime, 
and recollect to have done many woiks, and lemember also to 
have seen my giand-siie

31. I lecolleet the bygone days of my boyhood and youth, 
and I lemember well all the friends and lelatives and all the 
appaiels and suite, that I had before.

32. The goddess leplied Know O king * that after the fit 
of insensibility attending on your death was ovei, youi soul

VoL. 1 55

m

YOGA VA'SISIITIIA.

continiTcd to icmainin tbo vacuum of Ibo same idacC; of wbicb 
‘you are still a resident.VoL. 1 55

m

YOGA VA'SISIITIIA.

continiTcd to icmainin tbo vacuum of Ibo same idacC; of wbicb 
‘you are still a resident.

35. Tins royal pavilion, where you think yourself to abide, 
IS situated in the vacuous space, within the house of the Brah- 
man in that hilly distiict.

3t*. It is inside that house that you sec the appcaianecs of 
your other abodes picseiit bcfoic you and it was in that Brah- 
maU's house, that you devoted your life to my worship.

35 It is the shrine within the very house and on the same 
spot, that contains the whole ivoild which you aie seeing all 
about you.

36. This abode of youis is situated in the same place, and 
within the clear fiimament of yoiii mind.

37. It LS a false notion of your mind, which you have gamed 
by youi habitual mode of thinking, that you aie born in your 
piesent state, of the lace of Ixdku.

38. It IS mcic imagination, which has made you to sui^pose 
youiself to be named so and so, and that such and such persons 
were your progenitois, and that you had been a boy of ten 
years.

39. That your father became an ascetic m the woods, and 
left you m the government of the realm And that you have 
subjugated many countries under your dominion, and aie now 
reigning as the lord paramount ovei them.

40. And that you aie ruling on eaifch mth these ministers 
and officeis of yours, and aie obseivant of the saciificial iites, 
and a just rulei of your subjects.

4<1. You think that you have passed seventy yeais of your 
Me, and that you are now beset by veiy formidable enemies.

4-2. And that having waged a fuiious battle, you have le- 
turned to this abode of youis, where you are now seated and 
inteud to adoie the godde^ises, that have become your guests 
heiein.

UTPATTI KHANDA.

435

4)3 You are iliinking that these goddesses will bless you 
With your desiied ob3ect, because one of them has given y(3u 
the power of lecollecting the events of your foimer biitbs.435

4)3 You are iliinking that these goddesses will bless you 
With your desiied ob3ect, because one of them has given y(3u 
the power of lecollecting the events of your foimer biitbs.

44.. That these goddesses have opened your undeistandiug 
like the blossom of a lotus, and that you have the piospect of 
getting youi iiddance fiom all doubts.

45. That you are now at peace and rest, and en 3 oy the 
solace of your soliety, and that your long continued eii or (of 
this woild), is now removed foi ever.

46 You remember the many acts and en 3 oyments of your 
past life, m the body of pnnce Padma, before you weie snatched 
away by the hand of death.

47. You now peieeive in your mind, that your present life 
is but a shadow of the foimer, as it is the same wave, that 
eairies one onward, by its use and fall.

48. The incessant eui rent of the mind flows as the stieam 
of a rivei, and leads a man, like a weed, fiom one whirlpool 
into another^

49. The course of life now luns singly as in dreaming, and 
now conjointly with the body as in the waking state, both of 
which leave their tiaces in the mind, at the hoiii of death.

50. The sun of the intellect being hid undei the mist of 
Ignorance, there aiises this netwoik of the eiioneous world, 
which makes a moment appear as a jieiiod of hundred years.

51. Our lives and deaths are meie phantoms of imagination, 
as we imagine houses and towers in aerial castles and leeberes.

52. The woild IS an illusion, like the delusion of moving 
banks and tiees to a passenger in a vessel on water, oi a rapid 
vehicle on land, oi as the trembling of a mountam or q^uaking of 
the earth, to one affected by a conmlsive disease.

53. As one sees extiaoidinaiy things in his dream, such as 
the deeajntation of his own head , so he views the illusions of the 
world, which can hardly be true.

54. In reality you were neithei boin noi dead at any time

436

YOGA VASISHTHA54. In reality you were neithei boin noi dead at any time

436

YOGA VASISHTHA

or place ; but ever remain as pure intelligence in your own Iran- 
c/uility of Boul.

56, You seem to see all things about you, but you see 
nothing real in them , it is your all seeing soul, that sees eveiy 
thing in itself.

56. The soul shines as a brilliant gem by its own light, and 
nothing that appeals beside it, as this eaith oi yourself or any 
thing else, is a leality.

57. These hills and cities, these people and things, and 
ouiselves also, are all unreal and mere phantoms, appealing in 
the hollow vault of the Biahman of the hilly distiict.

58. The kingdom of Lild^s husband, was but a pietuie of 
this eaith, and his palace with all its giandeur, is contained in 
the spheie of the same hollow shime.

59. The known woild is contamed in the vacuous sphere 
of thatshiine, and it is in one corner of this mundane habitation, 
that all of us heie, aie situated.

60. The spheie of this vaulted shiine, is as clear as vacuity 
itself, which has no earth nor habitation in it.

61. It IS without any forest, hill, sea or liver, and yet all 
beings are found to love about in this empty and homeless 
abode, (z. e in the Divine Mind) ,

62. Heie theie are no kings, nor their letinue, nor any 
thing that they have on eaith. Viduiatha asked : If it is so, 
then tell me goddess ! how I happened to have these dependants 
heie ’

63 A man is rich m his own mind and spiiit, and is it not 
so ordained by the Divine mind and spnit also ? If not, then 
the woild must appear as a mere dream, and all these men and 
things aie but cieatures of oui di earns.

6 1. Tell me goddess, what things are spiritually true and 
false, and how are we to distinguish the one from the othei.

65. Saras vati answered — Know prince that, those who have 
Icnown the only kiiowable one, and are assimilated to the natuio

UTPATTI KHANDA

43765. Saras vati answered — Know prince that, those who have 
Icnown the only kiiowable one, and are assimilated to the natuio

UTPATTI KHANDA

437

of pure understanding, view nothing as real in the world, except 
the vacuous intellect within themselves. *

, 66. The misconception of the seipent in a rope being re- 
moved, the fallacy of the lope is removed also , so the nnieality 
of the world being known, the. erior of its existence, also ceases

to exist.

67. Knowing the falsity of water in the mirage, no one 
thiists after it any more, so knowing the falsehood of dreams, no 
one thinks himself dead as he had dieamt. The fear of dreaming 
death may overtake the dying, but it can never assail the hving 
in his dream.

68. He whose soul is enlightened with the clear light of the 
autumnal moon of his pure intellect, is never misled to believe 
his own existence oi that of otheis, by the false application of 
the terms 7, ilmi, Has ^-c.

69. As the sage was sermonizing m this manner, the day 
departed to its evening service with the setting sun. The as- 
sembly bioke with mutual gieetmgs to perform their ablutions, 
aiixi it met again with the rising sun, after dispersion of the 
gloom of night.

CHAPTER XLII.

Philosophy of Dueahing. Siyapnam oe SoMNmi.

r I iHE man wko is devoid of undeisfcandmg, ignoiant and nn- 
■ aec[uainted with the All-pei vadmg principle, thinks the 
unieal woild as leal, and as compact as adamant.

a As a child is not fieed from his fear of ghosts until his 
death, so the ignoiant man nevei gets iid of his fallacy of the 
leality of the unieal woild, as long as he lives

3 As the solai heat causes the error of water in the mirage 
to the deer and unwaiy people, so the unieal woild appears as 
leal to the ignorant part of manlcmd.

4 As the false dieam of one^s death, appears to he true in 
the dieammg state, so the false world seems to be a field of ac- 
tion and gam to the deluded man4 As the false dieam of one^s death, appears to he true in 
the dieammg state, so the false world seems to be a field of ac- 
tion and gam to the deluded man

5. As one not knowing what is gold, views a golden bracelet as 
a mere bracelet, and not as gold, (j.t? who takes the form and not 
the substance for leality) , so aie the ignorant ever nnisled by 
formal appeal ances, without a knowledge of the causal element.

6. As the Ignoiant view a city, a house, a hill and an ele- 
phant, as they aie presented before him, so the visibles^ are aU 
taken only as they are seen, and not what they really are.

7. As strings of pearls are seen in the sunny sky, and various 
paints and taints in the plumage of the peacockj so the phenomenal 
world, presents its false appeaiances for sober realities.

8 Know life as a long sleep, and the world with myself and 
thyself, are the visions of its dieam, we see many other persons 
in this sleepy dream, none of whom is real, as you will now 
leain from me.

9. There is but one All-peivading, quiet, and spiiitually sub- 
stantial reality. It is of the form of unintelligible intellect, and 
an immense outspreading vacuity.

10. It IS omnipotent, and all m all by itself, and is of the 
form as it manifests itself eveiywheie.

UTPATTI KHANDA

m

11. Hence the citizens that you see m this visionaiy city, 
are but tiansient forms of men, presented m youi dieam Vy 
that Omnipotent Being.

15. The mind of the vieumr, lemains in its self-same state 
amidst the s])heie of his dreams, and lepiesents the images 
thought of by itself in that visionary spheie of mankind (So 
the Divine Mind presents its* various images to the sights of men 
in this visionary sx^heie of the world, which has nothing substan- 
tial in it).

13 The knowing mind has the same knowledge of things, 
both in its waking as well as dreaming states, and it is by an act 
of the xiercixiient mind, that this knowledge is im]irinted as true 
in the conscious souls of men.14 Udma said If the peisons seen in the dieam aie un- 
real, then tell me sir, what is that fault in the embodied soul, 
which makes them appeal as leahties

15 Vasishtha leplied The cities and houses, which aie 
seen in dieams aie in leahty nothing It is only the illusion 
(rdsCya) of the embodied soul, which makes them appear as tiue 
like those seen in the waking state, in this visionaiy world.

16. I will tell you in proof of this, that in the beginning of 
creation the self-boin Biahma himself, had the notions of 
all eieated things, m the form of visionaiy appeaiances, as in a 
dream and their subsequent develojimeiit, by the will of the 
cieatoi j hence then creator is as unreal as then notions and 
appeaiances in the dieam

17 Learn then this truth of me, tliat this world is a dieam, 
and that you and all other men have youi sleeping dieams, 
contained in your waking dieams of this visionaiy world (t e. 
the one is a night dream and the other a day dieam, and equally 
untrue in their substance)

18 If the scenes that aie seen in youi sleeping dieam, 
have no reality in them, how then can you expect those in your 
day dreams to be real at all ?

19 As you take me foi a leality, so do I also take you and

/

<340 YOGA Vi^SISIITIIA

all oilier tliingg for rcaliiies likewise, and such is the (iase 
with every body in this woild of dicams.

50. As I appeal an entity to you in this woild of lengthened 
dieams ; so you too appeal an actual entity to me / and so it is 
with all in then piotiactcd di earning.

51. llama asked If both these states of dreaming arc 
alike, then tell me, why the dicamoi in sleep, docs not upon 
his waking, think the visions lU his dicam, to be as ical as 
those of hi& day dieaining slate ?SS Vasishtha leplicd Yes, the day dicaming is of the 
same natuie as night dieams, in which the dicamt objects appear 
to be leal , but it is upon the waking fiom the one, as upon the 
death of the day dieamci, that both these visions arc found to 
vanish in empty air.

S3. As the objects of your night dieams do not subsist in 
time or place upon youi WMlcmg, so also those of your day dream, 
can have no subsistence upon death.

Si Thus IS eveiy thing unreal, which appears leal for the 
piesent, and it disappeais into an airy nothing at last, though 
it might appeal as chaiming as a faiiy foim in the dieam.

S5 Theie is one Intelligence that fills all space, and appears 
as every thing both within and without eveiy body , It is only 
by oui illusive conception of it, that we take it in different 
lights.

S6. As one picks up a jewel he happens to meet with in a 
tieasuie house, so do we lay hold on any thing, with which the 
vast Intellect is fi'led according to our own liking (lieie wm 
find the fiee agency of human ivill).

S7 The goddess of intelligence, having thus caused the 
geim of tiue knowledge, to spiout foith in the mind of the 
piince, by spiinklmg the ambiosial diops of hei wisdom over it, 
thus spake to him in the end ; —

as I have told you all this for the sake of Lild, and now, 
good piince, we shall take leave of jmii, and these illusoiy scenes 
of the woild.

IJTPATTI KHANDA

441

2,9. Vasislitha said The intelligent prince^ being thus gently- 
addressed by the goddess of wisdom, besought hei m a subimssivas 
tone

30. Viduiatha said Your visit, O most bounteous goddess, 
cannot go foi nothing, when wepooi moitals cannot withhold 
oui bounty fi om oni suppliant visitants

31 I Will quit this body to lepaii to another woild, as one 
passes fiom one chain of di earns into another

32 Look upon me, thy suppliant, with kindness, and deign 
to confer the favour I ask of thee, because the great nevei disdain 
to giant the prayers of then suppliants32 Look upon me, thy suppliant, with kindness, and deign 
to confer the favour I ask of thee, because the great nevei disdain 
to giant the prayers of then suppliants

33 Oidain that this virgin daughter of my minister, may 
accompany me to the legion, wheie I shall be led, that we may 
have spnitual joy in each othei^s company heieafter.

34 Saiasvati said Go now piinee to the former palace of 
your past life, and there leign without fear, in the enjoyment of 
tiue pleasure Know prince, that our visits nevei fail to fulfil the 
best wishes of our supplicants.

VoL. I.

56

t

0

CIIAPTEH XLIII.

Burking oi tiik City.

njlllE goddess added — Know fuithei, 0 piince* that you arc

■ de^'tiued to fall m this gi'cat battle^ and uill have your 
ioiaiei realm, picsentcd to 3011 in the same manner as befoie.

2 . Your ministci and his maiden daughter will accompany 
you to your foimci cit}', and you shall enter your lifeless 
coipsc, lying m stale 111 the palace.

3 We «hall fly there as winds before you, and you will 
follow us accompanied bj the mimstci and his virgin daughter 
as one icUnning to \ns naUve Lonntry.

4 . Yonr couises thoieto will be as slow or swift as those of 
hoises, elephant's, asses, or camels, but our course is quite 
dift'cient fiom any of these.

5 . As the prince and the goddess were going on with this 
sw'cet conversation, thoie anived a man on horse back before tliem 
in gieat huiry and confusion.

6. lie said Loid > I come to tell that, there are showeis of 
daits and disks, and swords and clubs, falling upon us as rain, 
fiom the hostile forces, and they have been foicing upon us as a 
flood on all sides.

7 . They have been raining then heavy weapons upon us 
at pleasuie, like fiagments of locks hurled down from the heads 
of high bills, by the impetuous gusts of a huriicane.7 . They have been raining then heavy weapons upon us 
at pleasuie, like fiagments of locks hurled down from the heads 
of high bills, by the impetuous gusts of a huriicane.

8 Theie they have set file to oui lock-like city, which like a 
wild fire, IS raging on all sides It is burning and lavagmg 
with cMt chat sounds, and huilmg- the houses with a hideous 
noise

9 . Tlie smoke nsing as heaving hills. Lave ovexspread the 
skies like deluvian clouds , and the flame of fire, ascending on 
high, resembles the phoenix flying in the sky.

10. Vasistha said. As the royal marshal w'as delivering

htpatti khanda.

443

witTi tiepidation this unpleasaut intelligence^ tlieie arose a loud 
eiy without, filling the sky with its upioai (hallahalloo-kol6

halam)

11. The twanging (tankaia) of bow stiings diawn to the eais/ 
the luStling (saisaia) of flying an ows flung with full foice, the 
loud loaiing (briiighana) of fuiious elephants, and the shrieks 
(chitkdia) of fiightened ones.

12. The gorgeous elephants buisting in the city with a clat- 
tering (chatchata) sound , and the high halloos (halahala) of citi- 
zens, whose houses have been burnt down on the giouud (Here 
dagdhaddia Aiakc daghdaghad-dhi, means both a burnt house 
-and also a burnt wife).

13. The falling and flying of burnt embeis with a crackling 
noise (tankAia), and the binning of i aging fiie with a hoaise 
sound (dhaghdhaga a? daghdagha, Bengali dhakdliak)

14j. All these weie heaid and seen by the goddesses and the 
piiiice and his minister, from an opening of the tent, and the 
city, was found to be in a blaze m the daikness of the night

15 It was as the conflagiation or fieiy ocean of the last day, 
and the city was coveied by clouds of the hostile ai my, with their 
fla_shing weapons, waving on all sides.

16 The flame lose as high as the sky, melted down big edi- 
fices like hills by the all dissolving fiie of destiuction16 The flame lose as high as the sky, melted down big edi- 
fices like hills by the all dissolving fiie of destiuction

17 Bodies of thick clouds loaied on high, and thieatened the 
people, like the clamoui (kala-kala) of the gangs of stout lobbeis, 
that weie gatheied on the giouud foi plundei and booty

18 The heavens weie hidden undei clouds of smoke, lolliuo- 
as tlie shades of Pushkaia and Avaita, and the flames of hie, 
weie flashing, like the golden peaks of Meiu

J9 Burning cindeis and sparks of fiie, weie glitteung like 
meteois and stais in the sky, and the blazing houses and towers 
glaied as burning mountains in tlie midst.

20 The lehcs of the foiees weie beset by the spieading 
flames of clouds of fiie, and the half bmnt citizens (with their

m- YOGA VA'SISIITIIA

bitter cues), were kept from iliglit, for fear of the tliieaiening 
enemy abioacl.

21. Sleets of aiiowy spaiks flying in tbc air on all sulcs; and 
slioweis of ivcapons falling m cvciy ivay, burnt and ineiced the 
citizens in laige numbers.

22 The gieatest and most expert champions, weie crushed 
undei the feet of elephants in fighting, and the loads uere heaped 
With tieasuies, wiested fiom the robbeis in tlieii reticat

23 Theie were wailings of men and u omen at the falling 
of 111 e-biands upon them, and the sphlting ol splinteis and the 
slitting of timbcis emitted n. p/ial-p/ial noise all aiound.

24 ]3ig blocks of binning wood weic blown up, blazing as 
burning suns in the an , and heaps of embeis filled the face of 
the eaith with living fiie.

25 The Clacking of cumbustible noods and the buisting of 
binning bamboos, the cues of the paiched biutes and the howl- 
ing of the soldieis, lecchoed in the air

26. The flaming file was quenched aftei consuming^-the 
loyalty to ashes, and the dovouiing flame ceased aftci it had 
reduced evei^ thing to cindeis.26. The flaming file was quenched aftei consuming^-the 
loyalty to ashes, and the dovouiing flame ceased aftci it had 
reduced evei^ thing to cindeis.

27 The sudden outbieak of the fire w\as as the outburst of 
house breaking lobbeis upon the sleeping inhabitants , and it 
made its piey of eveiytlnng, (whethei living or lifeless), that fell 
in its w'ay

28 At this moment the piince Viduiatha heard a voice, pro- 
ceeding from his soldieis, at the sight of then wives flying from 
the scoiching flames.

29 Oh ' the high winds, that have blown the flames lo the 
tops of oui household tiees, with then lusthng sound (Ichm.ikhaia) 
and hindeied our taking sheltei undei then cooling umbiage.

30 Woe foi the burning of oui ivives, who weie as cold as 
fiost to our bodies befoie (bj’- then assuaging the smait of eveiy 
pain) , and whose ashes nowiest in oui bieasts, like tlie lime of 
shells, z e in the sublimated state of spiritual bodies (sukshma- 
dehas)

TJTPATTI KHANDA

■445

31 011 ' the raighty power of fire, that has set to flame the 
forelocks of oui fair damsels, and is burning the biaids of thfeii 
•hair, hke blades of glass or stiaws.

32 The cuilmg smoke is ascending on high, like a whiil- 
ing and long meandeiing iivei in the an, and the black and 
white fumes of fiie, lesemble the daik stieam of Yamuna in one 
place, and the milkj path of the etheiial Gfangd in anothei

33. Stieams of smoke beaiing the biands of fiie on high, 
dazzled the sight of the charioteers of heaven by their bubbling 
spaiks

34'. There aie our fatheis, mothers, biotheis, sisteis, lelatioiis 
and suckling babes, all burnt alive in the livid flames , and heie 
aie we burning in giief foi them in these houses, which have 
been spaied by the devouiing fiie

35 Lo * there the howling fiie is fast sti etching to these abodes, 
and heie the cinders aie falling as thick as the fiost of Meiu.35 Lo * there the howling fiie is fast sti etching to these abodes, 
and heie the cinders aie falling as thick as the fiost of Meiu.

36 Behold the dueful daits and missiles diopping down as 
the duving laiu, and penetiatiug the windows, like bodies of 
gnats in the shade of evening

37 The flashing speais and flaming fiie, flaiing above the 
wateiy ocean of the sky, lesemble the submaiine fine ascending 
to heaven.

38 The smoke IS using in clouds, and the flames aie tapeimg 
in the form of toweis, and all that was humid and veidant, is 
sucked and diied up, as the heaits of the dispassionate

39 The tiees are broken down by the i aging element, like 
posts of eniaged elephants, and they aie falling with a clacking 
noise (kata -kata), as if they weie screaking at then fall.

40 The trees in the oichaids, now flouiishing in then luxu-. 
liance of fiuitsand floweis, aie left baie by the burning fiie, like 
householders bereft of their piopeities

41 Boys abandoned by then parents in the darkness of the 
night, weie either pieiced by flying aiiows or crushed under the 
falling houses, in then flight through the streets

4a. The elephants posted at the front of the army, got flight^

446 TOGA VA^SISHTHA '

ened at tlie flying embeis diiven by tbe winds, and fled with, 
loud SCI earning at tbe fall of tbe burning bouses upon tbera.

4*3 Obi tbe ]iam of being put to tbe swoid, is not more* 
giierous, than that of being burnt by tbe file, or smashed under 
tbe stones of tbe tbundei ing engine.

44 Tbe sheets aie filled witb domestic animals and cattle of 
all kinds, that aie let loose fiom tbeir folds and stalls, to raise 
tbeii commingled cues like tbe confused noise of battle m the 
blocked up 2 iatbs

45 Tbe weeping women weie passing as lotus floweis onland, 
witb tbeii lotus like faces and feet and jialms, and diops of teais 
fell like flutteiiug bees horn tbeii lotifoim eyes and wet appaiel 
upon tbe giound46 Tbe led taints and spots of alaldvak, blazed as asola 
flowers upon tbeii foiebeads and cbeeks,

47 Alack foi pity I that tbe fuiious flame of fine, should

singe tbe black bee-like eyelids of oui deei-eyed fames , like tbe 
luthless victoi, that delights in his acts of inhumanity. ,

48 O tbe bond of connubial love ’ that tbe faithful wife 
nevei fails to follow bei burning loid, and ciemates beiself in the 
same flame with him (this shows tbe jnactice of coneiemation to 
be older than the days of Valmfki and Viswamitia)

49. The elephant being burnt in bis trunlt, in bieaking tbe 
burning post to which be was tied by tbe leg, lan with violence 
to a lake of lotuses, in which be fell dead. (Heie is a play upon 
tbe homonymous woid "pushkaia/^ in its ti ixfle sense of a lake, a 
lotus and tbe pioboscis of an elephant).

50 Tbe flames of fiie flashing like flitting lightnings amidst 
tbe clouds of smoke in the air, weie daitmg tbe darts of burning 
coals like bolts of tbundei m sboweis.

51 Loid I tbe spaiks of fire spaikling amidst tbe dusky 
clouds, appeal as glitteiing gems in the bosom of tbe any ocean, 
and seem by their twilling to gird tbe crown of heaven with the 
giidle of Pleiades.

5%. Tbe sky was leddened by tbe light of tbe flaming files,

UTPATTI KHANDA

447

4

and appealed as the courtyaid of Death dyed with purple hues 
in joy, foi leception of the souls of the dead *

53 Alas ! the day and want of manneis I that the royal dames 
aie cairied away hy these armed luffians by foiee. (0 iempoies 
0 mo'tes).

54. Behold them diagged in the stieets fiom their stately 
edifices, and stiewing then paths with wi eaths of lloweis tom 
fiom their necks, while their half buiiit locks aie hanging loosely 
upon their baie hieasts and bosoms.

55. Lo ! then loose lairaents uneoveiing their backs and loins, 
and the jewels di opt down fiOxn then wiists, have stiewn the 
giound with gems.55. Lo ! then loose lairaents uneoveiing their backs and loins, 
and the jewels di opt down fiOxn then wiists, have stiewn the 
giound with gems.

56 Then necklaces are torn and then peails are scattered 
about, then bodies are baied of then boddices, and then bieasts 
appeal to view in their golden hue.

57, Their shrill cries and g loans rising above the war cry, 
choked their bieath and split then sides , and they fell insensible 
with their eyes dimmed by ceaseless floods of teais.

58. They fell m a body with then aims twisted about the 
necks of one anothei, and the ends of then cloths tied to each 
othei’'s, and in this way they weie diagged by foiceof the luffi- 
ans, with then bodies mangled in blood

69. '^Ah * who will save them fiom this state,” ciied the 
royal soldieis, with then piteous looks on the sad plight of the 
females and shedding big diopsof then tears like lotuses.

60 The blight face of the sky tui ned black at the hoiiible 
sight, and it looked with its blue lotus-like ejms of the clouds, on 
the fail lotus-lilce damsels thus scatteied on the giound.

6] . Thus was the goddess of xoyal piospeiity, decoiaf ed as she 
was with hei waving and pendant locks, hei flowing gaiments, 
flowery chaplets and gemming ornaments bi ought to hei end 
like these ladies, aftei hei enjoyment of the pleasuies of loyalty 
and gratification of all hei desires

CHAPTER XLIV

Spiritual Inturpultatiox or tiil Vision

V ASISIirilA said — At tins instant the gi eat queerij wlio 
was 111 tlie bloom of ^’•oiitliful beauty, enteied tlie camp of 
Vidiliatlia, as tbe goddess of giaee pops upon the lotus flowei.

Z Slie was decorated with pendant wi oaths of floweis and 
necklaces, and accompanied by a tiam of her youthful compani- 
ons and handmaids, all teriified with fear.

3. With her face as bright as the moon and hei form as fair 
as the lily, she appealed as a luminar}'- of heaven, with her teeth 
shining as sets of stais, and hei bosom thiobbing with feai.3. With her face as bright as the moon and hei form as fair 
as the lily, she appealed as a luminar}'- of heaven, with her teeth 
shining as sets of stais, and hei bosom thiobbing with feai.

4' Then the king was infoimed by one of her companions 
about the fate of the iiaifarc, which lesembled the onset of 
demons upon the Apsdia tube

5 Loid! this lad}", said she, has fled with us fiom Iiei 
seraglio, to take lefuge under thy aims, as a tendei creepei seeks 
the shelter of a tiee, fiom a rude gust of wind

6 Behold' the lavisbeis ravishing the wives of the citizens 
with their uplifted aims, like the sw^elling waves of the sea 
caiiymg away the aibouis of the bank in their rapid curient.

7 The guaids of the royal harem aie all crushed to death by 
the haughty maiaudeis, as the sturdv tiees of the foiest aie bioken 
down by the fuiious toinado

8 Our aimies fiightened by tbe enemy fiom afai, daie -not"" 
appioaeh the falling city, as nobody ventuies t^Aescue the lotus 
beds fiom a flood, undei the threatening thundeis of a rainy night.

9 The hostile foice have ponied upon tbe city in teirible 
numbeis, and having set it on fire, are shouting loudly under 
the clouds of smoke, with their weapons blandishing on all sides 
10 The handsome ladies aie diagged by the ban fiom amidst 
then families, in the mannei of screaming cianes, caught and 
earned away by the cruel fowdois and fishermen.

UTPATTI KHANDA

11 Now we Iiave biouglit fcliis exubeienUender creepei to 
tliee, tliat tliou maj^sfc save liei fiom simliai fate by tliy might*.

• la Healing this, lie looked at the goddesses and said^ now 
will I go to the wai fiom lieie, and leave this my lady as an 
Inimhle bee at your lotus feet

13 Sajnug sOj the king lose in a lage from his seat^ and spiang 
like the eniaged lion fiom. the den, when pieiced and piessed 
by the tusk of a fuiioiis elejihant.13 Sajnug sOj the king lose in a lage from his seat^ and spiang 
like the eniaged lion fiom. the den, when pieiced and piessed 
by the tusk of a fuiioiis elejihant.

14' The widowed Lila beheld the queen Lila to be exactly 
of hei form and featuies, and took hei for a tine leflexion of 
heiself in a miiioi

15 Then said the enlightened Lila to Saiasvati Tell me,

0 goddess > how this lady heie is exactly as myself, she is what

1 have been befoie, and how she came to be as myself.

16. I see this piime minister with all these soldiers and 
citizens, these foices and vehicles, to be the same as mine, and 
situated in the same place and mannei as befoie

1,7 How IS it then, 0 goddess * that they came to be placed 
in this place I see them as images situated within and with- 
out the miiioi of my mind, and know not whethei these be 
living beings (oi the false chimeias of my imagination).

IS Saiasvati lephed All our external peiceptious of things, 
aie the immediate effects of oui mteinal conceptions of them. 
The intellect has the knowledge of all the intelligibles in it, 
as the mind has the iniinessions of mental objects in itself 
(Oi in othei woids —the intellect is possessed of all intelligence, 
like the mind of its thoughts, as they piesent themselves in 
di earns Gloss)

19. The external woild appeals in an instant in the same 
iorm and mannei to one, as he has its notion and impression in 
his intellect and mind , and no distance of time or place, noi any 
intei mediate cause can eieate any diffeienee in them

. 20 The inwaid woild is seen on the outside, as the internal 
impiessions of our minds, appear to be seen without us in our 
dieams M^hatevei is within us, the same appeals without us, 
VoL, I. -7

4')0 YOGA VAl 3 rSHTHA.

as 111 our dreams and desiies, and in all our imaginations and 
fancies of ob 3 ects4')0 YOGA VAl 3 rSHTHA.

as 111 our dreams and desiies, and in all our imaginations and 
fancies of ob 3 ects

21. It IS tlie constant habitude of youi mind, that piesented 
these thiiie^s as lealitie^ to youi sight, and you saw youi husband 
in the same state m which you thought him to be, when he died 
in that cit}’' of youi s

23 It IS the same pl.ice wheioin he cvi'^ts at present, and is 
pi eseiited with the same objects of his thought at present as he had 
at that moment An}'' thing that appears to be difCerent’m this 
state, pioceeds from the tuin of his mind of thinking it so before.

23 All that appeals leal to him, is as umeal as liis dieam or 
desiie, and the cieation of his fancy , foi everything appeals to be 
the same as ifc is thought of iii the mind (All eKteinal objects 
aie repiesentations of their piototj’^pes in the mind).

21' Say theicfoie what tiuth can theie be in these visionary 
objects, which aie altogethei unsubstantial as dreams, and 
vanish in the end into airy nothing

25 Know then eveiy thing to be no better than nothing, 
and as a dieam pioves to be notliing upon waking, so is waking 
also a dieam and equally nothing at death

26 Death in life time is a nullity, and life in death becomes 
null and extinct, and these extinctions of life and death, proceed 
from the fluctuating natuie of oui notions of them.

27 So theie is neither any entity nor nonentity either, but 
both appear to us as fallacies by turns Foi what neither was 
befoie, noi will be, aftei a ivaT/m = creation or dissolution, 
the same cannot exist to-day oi in any Ynga=VL^c, whether 
gone befoie oi coming afterwaids

28 That which is nevei mexistent, is the ever existent 
Biahma, and the same is the woild It is in him that we see 
everything to rise and fall by our fallacy, and what we falsely 
teim as the creation oi the created29 As phantoms appearing in the vacuum, are all vacant and 
void, and as the waves of the sea, are no other than its "water, 
so do these created things exist and appear in Brahma only

UTPATTI KHANDA

451

30 As the mmufciJE appearing in the an, vanish in the 
air , and as the dust diiven by the winds, are lost in the winds , 
so the false notions of yourself and myself, aie lost in that 
Supreme self, in which all things use and fall like waves of the 
ocean

31 What reliance can there be in this dust of creation, 
which IS no more than the watei of themiiage ^ Ihe knowledge 
of individualities is mere fallacy, when eveiy thing is united in 
that sole unity

3£ We see apparitions in the daik, though the daikness 
itself IS no apparition , so oui lives and deaths aie the false 
notions of oui eiioi, and the whole existence is equally the 
production of gross eiioi (md,yd)

33 All this IS Himself, for He is the gieat Kalpa or 'wiH 
which produces every thing, it is He that exists when all things 
are extinct in Him , and theiefoie these appearances, aie neither 
real noi unreal of themselves,

34 But to say both (the real and unieal) to be Biahma, is 
a contradiction , theiefoie it is He, who fills the infinity of space, 
and abides equally m all things and then minutest particles

35. Wheievei the spirit of Biahma abides, and even m the 
minute animalcule, it views the whole world in itself, like one 
thinking on the heat and cold of fiie and fiost, has the same 
sensation within himself at that moment (Vide Hume)

36 So doth the pure intellect perceive the Holy Spnit of 
God within itself, 3 ust as one sees the particles of light flying 
in his closet at suiiiise

37 So do these multitudes of worlds, move about as particles 
in the infinite space of the Divine mind, as the particles of 
odoriferous substances oscillate in the empty aii37 So do these multitudes of worlds, move about as particles 
in the infinite space of the Divine mind, as the particles of 
odoriferous substances oscillate in the empty aii

38. In this mannei does this world abide in its incorporeal 
state in the mind of God, with all its modifications of existence 
and mexistence, emanation and absorption, of its condensation 
and siibtilization and its mobility and lest

39. But you must know all these modes and these conditions

452 yoga VA^SISHTnA

of being to belong to mateual bodies only and not to the spiiit^ 
which 13 unconditioned and indivisible , (i. e without attiibutes 
and pai fcs)

40. And as theie is no change oi division of one^s own soul, 
so tbeie is no paitition or vaiiation of the Supieme Spirit. It 
IS according to the ideas in oui minds, that we view things in 
then different aspects befoie us

41 Yet the word woild-visnu-all, is not a meaningless term, 
it means the all as contained in Biahma (who is io pan) There- 
fore it IS both real and unreal at the same time like the fallacy 
of a snake in a rope

43 It IS the false notion (of the snake), that makes the 
tiue (rope) to appeal as the untiue snake to us, which we are apt 
to take for the true snake itself, so we take the Divine Intellect, 
which IS the piime cause of all, as a living soul (like ouis), by 
mistake

43 It IS this notion (of the living soul), that makes us to 
think ourselves as living beings, which whether it be false or 
true, IS like the appearance of the world m empty an *

44. Thus these little animals delight themselves with thiei 
own misconceived idea of being living beings, while there aie others 
who think themselves so, by then preconceived notions as such

45 Some there aie that have no preconceived notions, and 
others that retain the same as oi somewhat diffeient notions of 
themselves than befoie Somewhere the inborn notions aie 
piedominant, and sometimes they aie entirely lost46 Our pieconceived notions of ourselves, represent unrea- 
lities as realities to oui minds, and present the thoughts of oui 
former family and biith, and the same occupations and professions 
befoie us (^as also the enjoyments we had befoie and no more 
existent at present)

47 Such are the lepiesentations of your former ministeis 
and citizens, impunted as realities in yoiu soul, together with the 
exact time and place and manner of then functions, as befoie

48 And as the intelligence of all things, is jiiesent in the 
omniscient spirit of God, so is the idea of royalty inheieiit

UTPATTI KHANDA

453

in tlie soul o£ tlie piinee (t- e. like tke ex-king Lear, lie thiuks 
liimself eveiy inch a king)

’ 49, This notion of his goes befoie him as his shadow in the 
air, with the same statuie and features, and the same acts and 
movbments as he had befoie.

50 In this manner, Lild ’ Know this woild to he but a 
shadowy reflexion of the eternal ideas of God, and this reflection 
IS caught by oi lefiacted in the consciousness of all animal 
souls as in a piismatic miiioi

61 Everything shows itself in every place in the form in 
which it IS , so whatever there is in the living soul, casts out a 
reflexion of itself, and a shadow of it is caught by the intellect, 
which IS situated without it. (The mind is a miiioi of the 
images in the soul)

52 Here is the sky containing the world, which contains 
this eaibh, wherein you and myself and this prince are situated, 
as reflexions of the One Ego only Know all these to be contained 
within the vacuous womb of the Intellect, and to lemam as 
tranquil and transparent as vacuity itself.

CHAPTER XLV.

Theisai Consisting in Teue Knowledge 
OARASVAT/ continued — Know Lild, ' tins Viduratlia; thy 
o husband, aviII lose his life in this battle-field , and his soul 
will lepaii to the sepulchie in theinnei apartment, wheie it will 
lesume its foimei stale3. Upon healing these noids of the goddess, the second Lild^ 
who was standing by, bent heiself lowly befoie the goddess, and 
addiessed hei with hei folded palms

3 The second Llld-^s speech. Goddess * the genius of intelli- 
gence IS eiei adoied by me, and she gives me hei visits m my 
nightly di earns

4 I find thee heie exactly of her likeness , theief ore give 
me thy blessing, thou goddess with the beauteous face

5. Vasishtha said — The goddess being thus addiessed by 
the lady, lemembeied hei faith and reliance in her, and then 
spake with complacence to the lady standing a suppliant before 
her

6 The goddess said I am pleased my child, with thy 
unfailing and unslakened adoiation of me all thy lifetime, now 
say what thou askest of me

7. The second Lild said Oidain O goddess, that I may 
accompany my husband nith this body of mine to whatever 
place he is destined to go, aftei his death m the w'ai

8 The goddess replied Be it so my child , tha^ hast wor-. 
shipped me witli all diligence and without fail, with floweis, 
incense and olleiings

9 Vasishtha said The second Lild being gladdened by 
this blessing of the goddess, the fiist Lild, ivas much puzzled in 
her mind at the diffeience of their states

10 The fiist Lila said Those who aie desuons of truth, 
and they whose desires lean towards godliness, have all their 
wishes fulfilled without delay and fail.

UTPJiTTI KHANDA.

11 Tlientell me, goddess! wliy could I not keep company 
uith my Biakmaii husband with my body of the Biahmam, hut 
»had to be taken to him in the hilly mansion after my death, 
(and repiodnction in the piesent form)

IS The goddess answered saying Know O excellent lady! 
that I have no power to do anything j but eveiy thing happens 
to pass according to the desiie of the living being,IS The goddess answered saying Know O excellent lady! 
that I have no power to do anything j but eveiy thing happens 
to pass according to the desiie of the living being,

13. Know me only as the presiding divinity of wisdom, and 
I reveal everything aceoiding to my knowledge of it. It is 
by virtue of the intellectual powers as exhibited in every being, 
that it attains its paiticulai end

14 It IS aecoiding to the development of the mental powers 
of living beings in eveiy state, that it obtains its object in 
the maiinei and in the same state as it aims at.

15. You had attained the powers of youi understanding by 
your devotedness to my service, and have always desired of 
me for being liberated from flesh

IG. I have accordingly awakened your undei standing in that 
way, wheieby you have been able to aiiive at your piesent 
state of purity.

17. It was by cause of youi constant desire of liberation, 
that you have gained the same state, by enlargement (of the 
powers) of your intellect.

18 'Whoever exerts his bodily powers according to the 
dictates of his uudei standing, is suie to succeed in gaming his 
object sooner oi latei

19. Performance of austeiities and adoration of gods, are 
as vain without cultivation of the intellect, as to expect the 
falling of fruits fiom the sky.

20 Without cultivation of the intellect and exertion of 
manly powers, theie is no way to success , do therefore as you 
may choose for yourself

21 It IS veiily the state of one^s mind, that leads his internal

soul to that state which it thinks upon, and to that piospeiity 
which it attempts to obtain.

yOOA VA^SISIITIIA.

456

22. Now (listin^uisli between what is closuaLlc or disagree- 
aWe to 3 ’ou, and choose that which is lioly and peifeci, andjou 
■will ceilainly aiinelo it

CHAPTER XLVI.

Onslaught of Vidueatha.

K i^MA said Relate to me the acts of Viduratha, after he 
went out enraged fiom the camp, and left the ladies and 
the goddess talking in that manner.CHAPTER XLVI.

Onslaught of Vidueatha.

K i^MA said Relate to me the acts of Viduratha, after he 
went out enraged fiom the camp, and left the ladies and 
the goddess talking in that manner.

2 Vasishtha said — Viddratha left his camp in company 
with a large body of his companions like the bright moon beset 
by a host of stars.

3 He was in armour and gut by laces and girdles, and thus 
attiied in his martial habit, be went foith amidst the loud war 
cry of voe victts, like the god Indra going to battle.

4. He gave, orders to the soldieis and was informed of the 
battle array , and having given directions to his captains, he 
mounted his chariot

It was adorned with mountings resembling the pinnacles 
of mountains and beset by five flags fiinged with strings of 
pearls and gems, resembling a celestial car

6. The iron hoops of its wheels flashed with their golden 
pegs, and the long and beautiful shaft of the car, rang with the 
tinkling of pearls which were suspended to it

7. It was drawn by long necked, swift and slender horses of 
the best breed and auspicious marks , that seemed to fly m the 
air by their swiftness and bearing aloft a heavenly car with some 
god in it

8. Being impatient of the swiftness of the winds, they spurred 
them with their hinder heels and left them behind, and sped the 
forepart of their bodies as if to devour the air, impeding their 
course.

9. The car was drawu by eight coursers with their manes 
hanging down their necks like flappers, and white spots *or circlets 
resembling the disks of moon on their foreheads, and filling the 
eight Bides around with their hoarse neighing.

VOL I.

(8

YOGA VA^SISHTHA.

458

r

10. At tills time tliere rose a loud noise of the elephants, re- 
sounding like diums fiom the hollows of the distant hills

11. Loud clamours (kala-kalas) were laised by the infuriate* 
Boldieis, and the tinkling of their belted tiinkets (kinkini), and 
clashing of their weapons, lang afar in the 02 ien air.11. Loud clamours (kala-kalas) were laised by the infuriate* 
Boldieis, and the tinkling of their belted tiinkets (kinkini), and 
clashing of their weapons, lang afar in the 02 ien air.

IZ The Cl adding (chatachata) of the bows, and the wheezing 
(shitkaia) of the aiiows, joined with the jangle (jhanjhana) of 
aimouis, by then clashing against one another, laised a confused 
hubbub all aiound.

13 The spaikling (kanatkara) of blazing fiie, and the mutual 
challenge of the champions , the painful shrieks of the wounded 
and the piteous eiy of captives, were seen and heaid on all sides

14. The mingled sounds thickened in the air, and filled its 
cavity and its sides as with solid stones and capable of being 
clutched in the hands.

15 Clouds of dust flew as fast and thick into the air, that

they seemed to be the ciust or stiata of the eaith, rising upwaid 
to block the path of the sun in the sky. c

16 The gieat city was hid in the daik womb of the over- 
spieading dust (lajas), as the ignoiant state of man is covered in 
darkness by the rising passion (rajas) of juvenescence

17 The binning lights became as dim, as the fading stars of 
heaven by day light, and the darkness of night became as thick, 
as the devils of darkness gather their strength at night.

18 The two Lllds saw the great battle with the virgin 
daughter of the raiuister flora the tent , and they had their eyes 
enlightened with farsightedness by favour of the goddess

19 Now there was an end of the flashing and clashing of the 
hostile aims in the city, as the flash and crash of submarine fires 
weie put to an end by the all-submerging floods of the universal 
deluge

20 Viduratha collected his forces and without considering 
the superiority of tlie hostile power pressed himself forward amidst 
them, as the gieat Meiu rushed into the waters of the great deluge.

UTPATTI KHANDA.UTPATTI KHANDA.

21 Now tlie iwanguig of the bo w^strings emitted a clattering 
(Chatachata) sound, aiidAhe forces of the enemy advanced^ m

.battle array, like bodies of clouds with rainbows amidst them

22 "Many kinds o£ missiles flew as falcons in the air , and 
the black steel waved with a daik glaie owing to the massacres

they made

23 The clashing swords flashed with living flames of fire 
by their stiiking against one another, and showeis of ariows 
whistled like hissing lainfalls in the air

24 Two edged saws pieieed the bodies of the waiiiois , and the 
flinging weapons hurtled in the air by then clashing at and crash- 
ing of each olhei

25 The darkness of the night was put to flight by the blaze 
of the weapons , and the whole army was pieiced by aiiows, 
sticking as the bans on their bodies

26. Headless tiunks moved about as players m the hoirid 
solemnity of the god of death (Yama) , and the furies fled about 
at the dint of wai, like the laving lasses at Bacchaneal leveliies.

27. Elephants fighting with their tusks, sent a clatteiing 
noise 111 the an , and the stones flung fiom the slings, flew as 
a flowing stieam in the sk}'-

28. Bodies of men weie falling dead on the giound, like the 
dued leaves of foiests blown away by blasts, and sti earns of 
blood weie running in the field of battle, as if the heights of war 
weie pouiing down the floods of death below

29 The dust of the eai th was set down by the floods of blood, 
and the daikness was dispelled by the blaze of weapons , all 
clamoni ceased in intense fighting, and the feai for life, was lost 
under the stern lesolution of death.

30 The fighting was stem without a ciy or noise, like the

pouung ot lain in the bieezeless sky, and with the glitter of 
swords in the daikened aix, like the flashes of foiky Iightnmes 
amidst the muiky clouds. ^ ^

460 YOGA VA'SISHTHA.pouung ot lain in the bieezeless sky, and with the glitter of 
swords in the daikened aix, like the flashes of foiky Iightnmes 
amidst the muiky clouds. ^ ^

460 YOGA VA'SISHTHA.

31. The darts weie flying about with a hissing noise (Irhad- 
khada)^ and the ciow-bais hit one another witli a harsh (taktaka) 
shund , large weapons weie struek upon one anotlier with a jav- 
rmg noise {jhanjhana), and the dicadful war laged diiefully in 
the dim daikness (timitimi) of the night.

GHAPTEU XLVII.

Encotjnteb of Sinbhu a-ND Vidbeatha.

V ASISHTHA said As the war was waging thus furiously 
between the two armies, the two LiUs addressed the 
goddess of knowledge and said

3, “ Tell us, O goddess ’ what unknown cause prevents our 
.husband to gain the victory in this war, notwithstanding your 
good grace to him, and his repelling the hostile elephants in the 
combat.

3. Sarasvati replied Know ye daughters, that I was ever 
solicited by Viduratha’s enemy to confer him victory inhattle, 
which your husband never craved of me.

4 He lives and enjoys his life as it was desiied by him, while 
his antagonist gains the conquest according to his aim and object.

,5 Knowledge is contained in the consciousness of every living 
being, and rewards every one according to the desire to which 
it IS directed.

6. My nature like that of all things is as uncbangabie 
as the heat of fiie (which never changes to cold). So* the nature 
of Viduratha^s knowledge of truth, and his desiie of liberation 
lead him to the like result (and not to victory).

7 . The intelligent LiU also will he liberated with him, and 
not the unintelligent one, who by her nature is yet unprepaied 
for that highest state of bliss.

8. This enemy of Viduratha, the king of Sinde, has long 
worshipped me for his victory in war j wheieby the bodies of 
Viduratha and his wife must fall into his hands.8. This enemy of Viduratha, the king of Sinde, has long 
worshipped me for his victory in war j wheieby the bodies of 
Viduratha and his wife must fall into his hands.

9. Thou gill wilt also have thy hberation like her^s in course 
of timej hut ere that, this enemy of your’s, the king of Smde, 
will reign notorious in this earth. ^

10. Vasishtha said : As the goddess was speaking in this

r

463 YOGA VA'SISHTHA

maimer, the sun appealed on Iiis rising hill to behold the 
w^mdrous sight of the foices m lighting.

11 The thick mists of night disaiipearcd like the hosts o^ 
the enemy (Sinde), and left the forces of Viduiatlia to glitter as 
stais at the approach of night

la The hills and dales and the land and water giadually 
appeared to sight, and the woild. seemed to leappeai to view 
fiom amidst the dark ocean of the (deluge).

13. The bright rays of tlie using sun ladiated on all sides 
like the stieams of liquid gold, and made the lulls a^ipeai as the 
bodies of waiiiois besmeaied with (blood)

14-'. The sky seemed as an immense field of battle, stretched 
over by the ladiant rays of the sun (Kaias), likening the shining 
arms (Kaiasj of the waruois, shaking in their seipentine mood.

15 The lielmots on then heads laised their lotus-hke tops 
on high, and the lings about then eais blazed wuth their gem- 
ming glaie below'

16 The pointed w'eapons were as fixed as the snots of 
unicoins, and the dying daita ded about as butterflies in the air. 
The bloody field piesentedapictuieof the luddj' dawm and dusk, 
and the dead bodies on the giound, repiesented the figures of 
motionless saints m their Yoga.

17. Necklaces like snakes overhung their bieasts, and the 
armours like sloughs of seipeuts covered their bodies The flags 
weie flying like ciests of cieepeis on high, and the legs of the 
warriors stood as pillais m the field.18 Their long arms weie as blanches of trees, and the 
arrows formed a bush of reeds , the flash, of weapons spread 
as a veidant meadow all aiound, while their blades blazed with 
the lustie of the long-leaved let ala flowers

19. The long lines of weapons formed as lows of barabobs 
and 'bushes of biambles, and then mutual clashing emitted 
sparks of fire like clusteis of the led asola flowers.

20. The bands of Siddhas weie flying away with their leaders 
from, the air, to aveit the weapons which ^ere blazing there

UTPATTI KHANDA

46S

■vrith tlie radiance of the rising snn, and foiming as it were, a 
city of gold on high ,

^ 21’ The sky re-echoed to the clashing of daits and discuses, 
of swoids and speais and of mallets and clubs in the field , and 
the giound was oveiflown by stieams of blood, boaiing awa}' the 
dead bodies of the slain

22 The land Was stiewn with crowbais, lances and spears, 
and with tiidents and stones on all sides , and headless bodies 
were falling hideously, pieiced by poles and pikes and other 
instiuments of death*

23 The ghosts and goblins of death were making boiiible 
noise above, and the shining cais of Sindliu and Viduialha, 
moved with a loud rumbling below

24 They appeared as the two luminaiies of the sun and moon 
in heaven, and equipped with then various weapons of disks and 
rods, of crowbais and speais, and other missiles besides

25 They were both suiiouiided by thousands of soldiers, 
and turned about as thy liked, with loud shouts of their letinues

26 Crushed undei heavy disks, many fell dead and wounded 
with loud cries, and big elephants weie floating lightly on the 
currents of blood,

27 The hairs on the heads of dead bodies, floated like weeds 
in the stream of blood, and the floating discuses glided like the 
disks of the moon, reflected in the jiuiple streamlet27 The hairs on the heads of dead bodies, floated like weeds 
in the stream of blood, and the floating discuses glided like the 
disks of the moon, reflected in the jiuiple streamlet

28. The Jingling (jhanat) of gemming oinaments, and the 
tinkling (ranat) bells of war carriages, with the flapping (patat) 
of flags by the wind, filled the field with a confused noise

29 Numbers of valiant as well as dastardly soldieis followed 
then respective piinces some bleeding under the speais of Kuntas 
and others pierced by the arrows of bowyers

30 Then the two piinces turned lound their chariots in 
circling rings over the giound, and amidst their phalanxes armed 
with all sorts of destructive weapons.

81. Each confronted the other with hiS aims, and having

464

TOGA VASrSHTHA

met one another face to face, commenced showering forth hig 
jiriows with the pattering sound of hailstones.

3J. They both threatened one another with the roaring of 
loud singes and clouds, and the two lions among men, daited 
their arrows upon one another in their rage.

33. They flung their missiles in the air in the form of stones 
and malls, and some faced like swords, and others headed as 
mallets

31' Some weie as sharp edged disks, and some as curved as 
battle axes , some weie as pointed as pikes and spears, and others 
as bais and rod'^ in their forms, and some were of the shape of 
indents, and otheis as bulky as blocks of stones.

35 These missives were falling as fully and as fast as blocks 
of stones, which are hurled down from high and huge rocks, by 
gusts of blustering huriicanes. And the meeting of the two 
aimigeient powers, was as the confluence of the Indus and the 
sea, with tiemenJous roauiig, and mutual collision and clashing.

• * CHAPTEE XLVIIl

Description op Daiva'stras or Supernatural Weapons *

y ASISHTHA said Edjd Viddratha, finding the high 
shouldeied Smdhu-r^ja befoie him, was eniaged like the 
raging sun, in his mid-day furyDescription op Daiva'stras or Supernatural Weapons *

y ASISHTHA said Edjd Viddratha, finding the high 
shouldeied Smdhu-r^ja befoie him, was eniaged like the 
raging sun, in his mid-day fury

2. The twanging of his bow resounded in the air on all sides, 
and* giowled as loudly as the howling of winds in the caveins 
of mountains.

3. He diew his arrows fiom the dark quiver, and darted 
them like the lays of the sun rising from the womb of night.

d. Each an ow flung from the bowstring, flew as thousands 
in the air, and fell as millions on the gionnd (The arrow or 
hdna is a name given to bombs which burst out into unnumbered 
shells).

5. The king Sindhu was equally expert m his bowmanship, 
as* both of these bowyeis owed their skill in aicheiy to the 
iavoui of Vishnu.

6. Some of these daits were called bolts, which blocked the 
renal passages as with bolts at then* doois, and fell down on the 
ground I'^ith the loud loar of thunderbolts.

7 Otheis begirt with gold, flew hissing as if blown by the 
winds in the an, and after shining as stars in the sky, fell as 
blazing meteois on the giound.

8. Showcis of shafts poured foith incessantly fiom the 
hands of Viduratha, like the ceaseless toiients of riveis or 
billows of the sea, and the endless radiation of solar rays.

9. Shells and bullets were flying about as spaiks of file

* llmvo alwajs thouglit tlie Daivastras or superhoTnan arms, described 
in the Raraayana and Mahabbarata epics, as a display of pyrotechnic contri- 
vances mnch m use in early -narfare Or they may have been some kinds of 
cloctnc. hjdrauhc, pneumatic and steam engines emitting gusts of fire water 
nuid and smokoin the field of .var. Halhead in his Gentoo Law^tells them 
to bo shot from aknnd of cross bow used by the Cruaadiera of old

VoL. I

59

YOGA VASISIITIIA.

466

'' stiuclc out o£ ilio balls oE red-boi iion^ and falling as flowers 
of forests, blown away by gusts of wind,VoL. I

59

YOGA VASISIITIIA.

466

'' stiuclc out o£ ilio balls oE red-boi iion^ and falling as flowers 
of forests, blown away by gusts of wind,

*10. They fell as sboweis of rainwatcrj and as tbc lusli of 
watei -falls , and as plentifully as the sparks of Are which flew 
fiom the burning city of Viduialha.

11. The jailing sound (chatchat) of their bowstrings, hushed 
the clamour of the two armies, as a calm c^uiels the loaiing 
of the laging sea,

13. The couise of the airows, \\as as the stieam of Ganges 
(the milky path) in heaven, lunmng towards the king Sindliu, 
as the liver luns to meet the sea (Sindliu).

13 The showci of aiiows flying fioni the golden bow of 
the king, was as the flood of lain falling under the vai legated 
rainbow in the sky.

14. Then Lild the native of that city, saw from the window 
the darts of hoi husband, luslnng like the cuirenls of Ganges, 
against the foiccs of Sindu resembling a sea.

15. She understood the flight of those daits to piomise 
victoiy to her loid, and then spoke gladly to Sarasvati, with her 
lotus like face (Lit by opening hci lotus like mouth).

IG. Be viclouous O goddess ! and behold victory waiting on 
the side of my loid, whose daits aie pieicing the locks, and 
bi caking them to pieces.

17. As she was utteiing these woids full of affection (to her 
loid), the goddesses eyed her askance, and smiled at her womanish 
tenderness of heait.

18. The flaming (Agaslian) fne of Sindhu swallowed the 
raging scaof Viduiatha^s ariows, as the submaiine fire consumes 
the watei, and as Jahnu diaiik the stieam of Ganges.

19. The missive weapons of Sindhu, thwarted the thickening 
airows of his adveisaiy, and diove them back bioken and flying 
as dust m the empty air.

30. As an extinguished lamp loses its light in the an, so the

UTPA'i'Tl KHAHDA

467

flashes of the file arms disappeared in the sky, and nobody* 
knew wheie they fled30. As an extinguished lamp loses its light in the an, so the

UTPA'i'Tl KHAHDA

467

flashes of the file arms disappeared in the sky, and nobody* 
knew wheie they fled

2,1, Having thus dispelled the shower of airows, he sen'? a 
thick cloud of his weapons, appearing as hundreds of dead bodies 
flying in the air.

aa Viduiatha repelled them quickly by means of his better 
bolts, as a huiricane dispeises the f lightening clouds in the air.

as. Both the kings being thus baffled in their aims by the 
opposing aims, which were indisciiminately let loose against 
one anothei, laid hold on more potent missiles (which they 
had got as gifts of their gods to them).

ad Sindhu then let fly his magic missile the gift of a 
Gandharva to him, which kept his hostile army all spell-bound 
except Viduratha’s self.

as. Stiuck with this weapon, the soldieis became as mute 
as moonstruck, staling in their looks, and appearing as dead 
bodies or as pictures in a painting

a6. As the soldiers of Viduiatha remained exorcised in their 
files, the king employed his instiuments of a counter-charm to 
remove the spell

a7. This awakened the senses of Viduiatha^s men as the 
morning twilight discloses the bed of lotuses, and the using 
sun opens their closed petals to light , while Sindhu like the 
raging sun daited his lage upon them.

as. He flung his serpentine weapons upon them, which 
bound them as fast as a band all about their bodies, and encircled 
the battle giound and an, like snakes twining round the eraigs 
and locks.

a9. The giound was filled with snakes as the lake with the 
spieading stalks of lotuses, and the bodies of gigantic waiiiors 
weie begirt by them, like hills by huge and hoinble hydias.

30. Everything was ovei powered by the poignant power of 
the poison, and the inhabitants of the hills and forests were 
benumbed by the venomous infection.

4G8

YOQA VA'SISIITIIA.30. Everything was ovei powered by the poignant power of 
the poison, and the inhabitants of the hills and forests were 
benumbed by the venomous infection.

4G8

YOQA VA'SISIITIIA.

• 31. The smart 2 ’oison spread a firy heat all around^ and the 
fiozeii snows like fire brands sentCorth then burning; particles 
w’ihich weie wafted by the hot winds in the air.

32. The arniig-eioiis Viduiatha who was equally skilled m 
aims, had then lecouiscto Ins Gaiuda oi serpivorous weapons, 
whicli fled like mountainous eagles to all sides.

33 Thou golden pinions spread in the sky on all sides, and 
embroideicd the air with purple gold, and the flapping of their 
wings wheezed like a breeze, which blew away the poisonous 
effluvia afai in the an .

34<. It made the snakes bicathe out of their nostrils with a 
hissing, lesembling the gurgling (ghurghui) of wateis in a whirl- 
liool in the sea.

35 The fljnng Garuda weapons devoured the cieeping teriene 
seipents with a whistling noise (salsala), like that of the using 
waters (watei-sjiouts), in the act of their suction by Agastya 
the sun.

36. The face of the ground delivered from its coveiing of 
these leptiles, again appealed to view, as the surface of the 
eaith le-ajipeaied to light, after its deliverance from the waters 
of the deluge

37 The aimy of Gaiudas disappeaied afterwards from sight, 
like a line of lamps put out by the wind, and the assemblage 
of clouds vanishing m autumn.

38. They fled like flying mountains for feai of the bolts of 
the thundering India, and vanislied like the evanescent woild 
seen in a dream, oi as an aeiial castle built by fancy.

39 Then king Smdhu shot his shots of darkness (smoke), 
which darkened the scene like the dark cave undei the gioiiud

40. It hid the face of the eaith and sky, like the dilnvian 
wateis leaching to the welkin^s face , making the aimy appear as a 
shoal of Ashes, and the stars as gems shming in the deep,40. It hid the face of the eaith and sky, like the dilnvian 
wateis leaching to the welkin^s face , making the aimy appear as a 
shoal of Ashes, and the stars as gems shming in the deep,

41 The overspieading darkness appeared as a sea of mk or 
dark quagmire, oi as the particles of Anjanagiri (Inky mountain) 
wafted by the bieeze over the face of nature.

UTPATTI KHANPA.

42. All beings seemed to be immersed in tbe sea or daikness 
and to lose their energies as m the deep gloom of midnight

43. Viduratha the best of the most skilful in ballistics, shot

’hissun-bught shot which like the sun lUumined the vault of 
the sky.

4)4. It rose®high amidst the overspreading darkness like the 
sun (Agastya) with his effulgent beams, and dispelled the shades 
of daikness, as autumn does the lainy clouds.

45. The sky being cleaied of its veil of darkness, manifested 
itself with its reddish clouds, resembling the blowzy boddices of 
damsels before the king (Here is a pun upon the payodhai a 
which means both a cloud and the breast of a woman).

46. Now the landscape appeared in full view, like the under- 
standing (good sense) of men coming 'in full play after the 
extinction of their avaiice.

47 The eni-aged Sindhu then laid hold on his dieadful 
Rdkshasa weapon, which he instantly flung on his foe with its 
bedeviled darts

’•48. These horrid and destructive darts flew on all sides in 
the air, and roared as the roaring sea and elephantine clouds 
(dighastis) of heaven.

49. They were as the flames of lambent fiie, with then long 
licking tongues and ash-coloured and smoky cuils, rising as hoary 
bans on the head, and making a chatcliat sound like that of 
moist fuel set up on fire.

50. They wheeled round in circles through the air, with a 
hoirible tangtang noise, now flaming as fiie and now fuming 
as smoke, and then flying about as sparks of fiie.50. They wheeled round in circles through the air, with a 
hoirible tangtang noise, now flaming as fiie and now fuming 
as smoke, and then flying about as sparks of fiie.

5 1 . With mouths beset by lows of sprouting teeth like lotus 
stalks, and faces defaced by dirty and fusty eyes, their hany 
bodies weie as stagnate pools full of moss and weeds.

oS. They flew about and flashed and roaied alond as some 
dark clouds, while the locks of hairs on their heads glaied as 
lightnings m the midway sky.

53. At this instant Yiduiatha the spouse of Lila, sent forth

470 YOGA VA'^SISHTUA.

Ins NaiAy ana weapon; having tlie power o£ suppressing wicked 
spiiits and demons.

' 54 . The appearance of this magic weapon, made the hgdies , 
of the Rakshasas, disappear as daikness at sun rise

55 The whole aimy of these fiends was lost m the air, as tli? 
sable clouds of the lainy season, vanish into nothing at the 
aiipioach of autumn.

5G Then Smdhu discharged his fire arms which set file to 
the sky, and began to hum down eveiy thing, as hy the all 
destioymg conflagiation of the last day.

57. They filled all the sides of an with clouds of smoke, which 
seemed to hide the face of heaven undei the darkness of hell.

58. They set fiie to the woods in the hills, which burned 
like mountains of gold , while the trees appeared to bloom with 
3 ’’ellow champala flowers all aiound

59 All the sides of the sky above, and the hills, woods and 
gloves below, wcie enveloped in the flames, as if they weie 
coveied undei the led powder of laih^ with which Yama was 
spoiting ovei the plain i'

GO. The heaven-spieadmg flame burnt down the legions m 
one heap of ashes, as the submarine fire consumes whole bodies 
of the fleet and navy in the sea.

Gl. As Smdhu continued to dart his fiiearms against his 
vanquished adveisaiy, Viduratha let off his watery aims "with 
revel ential legaid ,Gl. As Smdhu continued to dart his fiiearms against his 
vanquished adveisaiy, Viduratha let off his watery aims "with 
revel ential legaid ,

G2. These filled with watei, flew forwaid as the shades of 
daikness fiom then hidden cells, and spiead up and down and 
on all sides, like a melted mountain gushing in a hundred cata- 
lacts

63 They stretched as mountainous clouds or as a sea in the air, 
and fell in showeis of watery aiiows and stones on the ground.

64 They flew up hke laige trees, and being gatheied

in gioups like the shades of night, appeared as the thick 
gloom beyond the loldloka, 01 polar mountains.

65 They gave the sky the appeaiance of subterraneous

tJTPATTI KHANDA

471

caves, emitting a gurgling sound (ghurgliuia) like tke loud 
loaiing of elephants.

'> 66 These waters soon diank (cooled) the spreading furious

file, as the shades of the daik night swallow (efface) the 
cun on n ding red tints of the evening

67. Having swallowed thefiies above, the waters oveiflooded 
the ground and filled it with a humidity which served to enervate 
all bodies, as the power of sleep numbs every body in death- 
like tiopidity.

68. In this manner both the kings were throwing their 
enchanted weapons against each othei, and found them equally 
quelling and lepellmg one another in then course

69. The heavy armed soldiers of Smdhu and the captains of 
his regiments were swept away by the flood, together with the 
waicais which floated upon it.

70 At this moment, Smdhu thought upon his anthydious 
weapons (soshandstra-theimal aims), which possessed the miia- 
culous power of preserving his people from the water, and hurled 
them in the air.

71. These absorbed the wateis as the sun sucks up the 
moisture of the night, and dried up the land and revived the 
soldiers, except those that were already dead and gone71. These absorbed the wateis as the sun sucks up the 
moisture of the night, and dried up the land and revived the 
soldiers, except those that were already dead and gone

72. Their heat chased the coldness as the i age of the illiterate 
emages the learned, and made the moist ground as diy, as when 
the sultiy winds stiew the forest land with dried leaves

73 It decorated the face of the ground with a golden hue, 
as when the royal dames adoin then persons with a yellow 
paint 01 ointment

74f It put the soldiers on the opposite side to a state of 
feverish (or blood heated) fainting, as when tue tender leaves of 
trees aie scorched by the warmth of a wild fiie in summer heat

75 Viduiatha in his rage of warfare laid hold on his bow 
(kodanda), and having bent it to a curve, let fly his cloudy 
arms on his antagomst.

76. They sent forth columns of clouds as thick as the sable

YOGA YASISHTHA.

472

C

shades of nighty whieli flying upward as a forest of dark tamdla, 
tigesj spread an umbrage heavy with water on high.

77. They loweied under the weight of their water, and stood c

still by then massive thickness, and roared aloud in their ciicles 
all ovei the sky. . o

78. Then blew the winds dioppmg the dewdrops of the icy 
stole they boie on their pinions , and showeis of i am fell fast 
fiom the collections of the clouds on high.

79. Then flashed the fieiy lightnings from them like golden 
seipents in then serpentine course or lather like the aslant 
glances of the eyes of heavenly nymphs.

80. The loarings of the clouds resounded in the mountainous 
caverns of the sky, and the quarters of heaven re-echoed to the 
same with the hoaise noise of elephants and the i oaring of 
lions and giowling of tigers and beais.

81. Showeis of lain fell in floods with drops as big as mttsalas- 
malls or mallets, and with flashes of lightnings threatening as 
the stem glanciiigs of the god of death.81. Showeis of lain fell in floods with drops as big as mttsalas- 
malls or mallets, and with flashes of lightnings threatening as 
the stem glanciiigs of the god of death.

Huge mists rising at fiist m the form of vapours of tlie 
earth, and then borne aloft by the heated an into the slcy, seemed 
like titans to rise from the infernal regions (and then invade 
heaven with their gloomy armament.

83 The mirage of the warfare ceased after a while , as the 
woildly desiies subside to rest upon tasting the sweet ]oys 
attending on divine knowledge. ,

84, The ground became full of mud and mire and was 
impassable in eveiy part of it, and the foices of Sindhu were 
overflown by the watery deluge, hke the iiver Sinde oi the sea.

85. He then bulled his airy weapon which filled the vault 
of heaven with winds, and laged in all their fury like the 
Bhaiiava-I'aiies on the last day of resurrection.

86 The winds blew on all sides of the sky, with daits falling 
as thundei bolts, and hailstones now piercing and then ciushing 
all bodies as by the last blast of natuie on the dooms-day.

. . CHAPTER XLIX

Description of Other Kinds of Weapons,

r*| iHEN blew the icy winds of wintei, blasting* the beauty of 
JL the foliage of foiest tiees, and shaking and breaking the 
beautiful arboiSj and coveiing them with gusts of dust

a. Then lose the gale whiilmg the tiees like birds flying m 
the air^ dashing and smashing the soldieis on the ground, and 
hulling and bieaking the edifices to dust

3. This feaiful squall blew away Viduratha and his foice, 
as a lapid curient cairies away the broken and rotten fragments 
of wood

4 Then Viduratha who was skilled in ballistics hurled his 
huge and heavy aiiows, which stretched themselves to the sky, 
and withstood the foice of the winds and lain

^5. Opposed by these roek-iike baiiieis, the airy weapons 
w^ie at a stand still, as the animal spirits aie checked by the 
film stoicity of the soul^5. Opposed by these roek-iike baiiieis, the airy weapons 
w^ie at a stand still, as the animal spirits aie checked by the 
film stoicity of the soul

6 The tiees whi(?h had been blown up by the winds and 
floating in the bieezy air, now came down and fell upon the 
dead bodies, like flocks of ciows upon putiid carcasses.

7 The shouting (shitk^ia) of the city, the distant hum 
(d^tkdia) of the village, the howling (bh^nkara) of forests, and 
the rustling (utkAia) of the trees, ceased on all sides like the vain 
verbiology of men

8 Sindhu saw burning rocks (rockets ?) falling from above 
like leaves of trees, and flying about as the winged Maindkas or 
moving rocks of the sea oi Sinde (sindhu).

9 He then hurled his thundering weapons, falling as flaming 
thunderbolts fiom heaven, which burnt the rocks away as 
the flaming fiie destroys the darkness

10 These falling bolts broke the stones with then pointed

VoL I. 60

474

YOGA VA'SISHTHA,

ends, and hewed down the heads (tops) of the hills, like a 
huiiicane scatteiing’ the fiuits of tiees on the ground.

'll Viduiatha then daitedhis Biahma weapon to quell the* 
thundeibolfcs, which jostling against one another, disappeared 
in then mutual conflict. . •

\l Sindhu then cast his demoniac weapons (Pisdchdstias) 
as black as daikness, which fled as lines of hoi rid Pisdcha 
demons on all sides

13 Phey filled the firmament with the darkness of their 
bodies, and made the daylight turn to the shade of night, as if 
it weie foi fear of them

14 They were as stalwait in their figuies as huge columns 
of smoke, and as daik in their complexion as the blackest pitch, 
and tangible by the hand

15 They weie as lean skeletons with eieet haiis on their 
heads and beaided faces, ivith looks as pale as those of beggars, 
and bodies as black as those of the aeiial and nocturnal fiends.15 They weie as lean skeletons with eieet haiis on their 
heads and beaided faces, ivith looks as pale as those of beggars, 
and bodies as black as those of the aeiial and nocturnal fiends.

16 They weie teirific and like idiots in thCir looks, apd 
moved about with bones and skulls in their hands They weie 
as meagie as chuils, but moie ciuel than either the swOrd 
or thunderbolt.

17 The Pisaehas lurk about the woods, bogs and highwaj^'s, 
and piy into empty and open dooi houses. They hunt about as 
ghosts in their daik foims, and fly away as fast as the fleeting 
lightning

13 They lan and attacked with fury the lemaining foices 
of the enemy, that stood weaponless in the field, with their 
bioken and soiiowful heaits

1& Frightened to death they stood motionless, and diopped 
down then aims and aimouis, and stood petrified as if they were 
demon-stiuck, with staling eyes, open mouths, and unmoving 
hands and feet.

2r0 They let^illlbo'th their lowei and uppei gaiments, 
loosened then bowels aihii^akened then bodies thiough feai, and 
kept shaking as fixed tiees the winds.

' UTPATTI KHANDA

475

21 Tlie line of tlie Pisdclias then advanced to f lighten^ 
Viduiatha out of his witSj but he had the good sense to undei- 
3 stand them as the meie Mumho-jumbos of magic ■>

22, He knew the counter chaim to fight out the Pis^ehas 
f}om the fields and emj)loyed his chaim ed weapons against the 
Pisdeha army of his enemy.

23 He darted in his ire the Rupika weapon, which gave 
comfoit to his own army^ and deluded the Pis^cha foice of his 
adveisaiy,

24 These Rupikds flew in the air with eiecthaiis on their 
heads, then teiiifie eyes were sunk in their sockets, and then 
waists and bi easts moved as tiees with bunches of fiuit.

25 They had past their youth and become old , and then 
bodies weie bulky and worn out with age , they had deformed 
backs and hips and piotubeient navels and naves.25 They had past their youth and become old , and then 
bodies weie bulky and worn out with age , they had deformed 
backs and hips and piotubeient navels and naves.

26. They had daik dusky bodies, and held human skulls in 
their hands all besmeared with blood They had bits of half 
devouied flesh in then mouths, and pouiing out fiesh blood fiom 
their sides

27. They had a variety of gestures, motions and contoitions 
of then bodies, which weie as haid as stone, with wry faces, 
crooked backs and twisted legs and limbs.

28. Some had their faces like those of dogs, ciows, and 
owls, with bioad mouths and flat cheek-bones and bellies, and 
held human skulls and entiails in then hands

29 They laid hold of the Pis^chas as men catch little boys, 
and joined with them in one body as then consoits it e the 
Rupikd, witches jfiewitcning the depaomac Pisdchas, got the bettei 
of them).

30 They joined together in dancing and singing with 
outsti etched aims and mouths and eyes, now joining hand in hand 
and now puisuing one anothei in then meriy spoit

31 They stietched then long tongues fiom then hoiiid 
mouths, and licked away the blood exuding fiom the wounds 
of the dead bodies

476 yoga YASISIITIIA.

33 They plunged in tlie pool of blood with as much delight, 
as if they dived in a pond of ghee, and scrabbled in the bloody 
pilddle with outstretched arms and feet, and uplifted ears, and # 
nose.

33 They lolled and jostled with one anothei in the puddle 
of can ion and blond, and made it swell like the milky ocean 
when churned by the Mandaia mountain.

34 As Viddratha employed his magic weapon against the 
magic of Sindhu, so he had lecouise to otheis from a sense of 
his mfeiioiity

35. He darted his Yetdla weapon, which made the dead 
bodies, whether with or without their heads, to rise up in a 
body in their ghastly shapes.35. He darted his Yetdla weapon, which made the dead 
bodies, whether with or without their heads, to rise up in a 
body in their ghastly shapes.

36. The ]oint foiees of the Vetdlas, Pisdchas and Rupikds 
presented a dieadful aiipearance as that of the Kavandhas, and 
seemed as they weie leady to destroy the earth.

37. The othei monaieh was not slow to show his magical 
skill, by hulling his Rdkshasa weapon, which thieatencd 
giasp and devoui thethiee woilds.

^S--jrhese with their gigantic bodies lose as high as 
mountaii^, and seemed as hellish fiends appealing fiom the 
infeiim regions in their ghostly forms.

3y. The feiocious body of the roaring Rdkshasas, terrified 
both the gods and demigods (suiasuiasj, by their loud martial 
music and war dance of then headless trunks (Kavandhas).

40. Tlie giddy Vetdias, Yakshas and Kushmdndas, devoured 
the fat and flesh of dead bodies as their toast, and drank the 
gory blood as then luiid wines in the course of then wai dance.

41 The hopping and jumping of the Kushmdudas, in their 
war dance in streams of blood, scattered its ciimson particles 
in the air, which assembled in the foim of a budge of red evening 
clouds over the spaikling sea

5

CHAPTER L 
Death oe Vidihiatha

\TAS1SHTHA said As the tide of war was rolling'

’ violently with a geneial massacre on both sides, the belli- 
gerent monarehs thought on the me, ms of saving then own 
foices fiom the impending rum

2 The magnanimous Smdhuraja, who was armed with 
patience, called to his mind the Vaishnava weapon, which was 
the gieatest of arms and as poweiful as Siva (Jove) himself

3 No soonei was the Vaishnava weapon hurled by him with 
his best judgment (mantra), than it emitted a thousand spaiks 
of firefiom its flaming blade on all sides3 No soonei was the Vaishnava weapon hurled by him with 
his best judgment (mantra), than it emitted a thousand spaiks 
of firefiom its flaming blade on all sides

4' These sparks enlarged into balls, as hig and hiight 
as to shine like hundreds of suns m the sky, and otheis flew 
as the lengthy shafts of cudgels m the air 
’ 5 Some of them filled the wide field of the fiimanent with 
thundeibolts as thick as the blades of grass, and otheis ovei- 
spiead the lake of heaven, with battle aves as a bed of lotuses.

6. These poured f 01 th showers of pointed arrows spreading 
as a net-woik in the sky, and daited the sable blades of swords, 
scatteied as the leaves of trees in the an .

7'P At this time, the rival king Viduratha, sent foith an- 
other Vaishnava weapon for repelling the former, and removing 
the 1 chance of his foe in his foible.

8 It sent foith a stream of weapons counteracting those of 
the other, and overflowmg in curients of aiiows and pikes, 
clubs and axes and missiles of various kinds

9 These weapons struggled with and justled against one 
another. They split the vault of heaven with then clattering, 
and cracked like loud thunder claps cleaving the mountain 
cliffs.

10. The airows pierced the rods and swords, and the swoids

478

YOGA VAfelSHTHA

hewed down the axes and lances to pieces. The malls and 
mallets diove the missiles, and the pikes broke the speais 
(sifktis). • ‘

11 The mallets like MandAia rocks, broke and drove away 
the lushing' ar lows as waves of the sea, and the lesistless swords* 
bioke to pieces by staking at the maces.

1^. The lances 1 evolved like the halo of the moon, repelling 
the black swoid-blades as daikness, and the swift missdes 
flashed as the destiuctive flies of Yama.

13 The whiihng disks weie destioying ail other weapons; 
they stunned the world by then noise, and broke the mountains 
by then strokes.13 The whiihng disks weie destioying ail other weapons; 
they stunned the world by then noise, and broke the mountains 
by then strokes.

14 The clashing weapons were bi caking one another in 
numbeis, and Viduiatha defeated the aims of Sindhu, as the 
steadfast mountain defies the thiindeis of India.

1 5 . The ti uncheons (Saiikus) wci e blowing away the falchions 
(asis) , and the spontoons fsulas) were waiding off the stones of 
the slings The ciow bais (bhiisundis) bioke down the pointe/i 
heads of the pikes (bhindhipdlas)

16. The non lods of the enemy (parasulas) weie broken by 
tiidents (tiisulas) of Siva, and the hostile arms were falling 
down by then ciushing one another to pieces.

17. The clatteiing shots stopped the couise of the heavenly 
stieam, and the combustion of powder filled the an with smqke.

18. The clashing of dashing weapons lightened the sky 
like lightnings, then clattering ciacked the woilds like thunder- 
claps, and then shock split and bioke the mountains like 
thundei bolts.

19. Thus were the wainng weapons breaking one another 
by their concussion, and piotiacting the engagement by their 
mutual overthiow.

20. As Sindhu was standing still in defiance of the prowess 
of his adveisaiy, Viduratha lifted his own fire-arm, and filed 
it with a thuudeiing sound.

tJTPATTI KHANDA

479

SI It set tlie war chanot o^ Sindhu on fire like a heap of 
liaj on tlie plam^ while the Vaishnava weapons filled the etheiial 
sph^ie with then meteoiic blaze. ’

SS The two Kings weie thns engaged in fieiee fighting 
jwith each nthei, the one daiting his weapons like diops of 
laging rainj and the other hmling his arms like cuiients of 
a deluging uvei

S3. The two Kings weiethus haiassing each other like two 
biave champions in their contest, when the chaiiot of Sindhu 
was leduced to ashes by its flame

Sl<. He then fled to the woods like a lion fiom its cavern in 
the mountain, and repelled the fiie that puisued him by his 
aqueous weaponsSl<. He then fled to the woods like a lion fiom its cavern in 
the mountain, and repelled the fiie that puisued him by his 
aqueous weapons

S5 Aftei losing bis car and alighting on the ground, he 
blandished his swoid and cut off the hoofs and heels of the 
hoises of his enemy ^s chariot in the twinkling of an eye.

S6. He hacked eveiy thing that came befoie him like the 
Jean stalks of lotuses, when Viduiatha also left his ehaiiot with 
Ills ast (ensis) in hand

27. Both equally biave and comjieeis to one another in then 
skill in waifaie, turned about in then lounds, and scraped their 
swords into saws by mutual stiokes on one another

28. With their denticulated weapons, they toie the bodies 
of their enemies like fishes ciushed under the teeth, when 
Vidhiatha dropt down his broken swoid, and darted his 3 ave- 
lin against his adveisaiy.

29 It fell with a rattling noise on the bosom of Sindhu 
(the king), as a flaming meteor falls rumbling in the breast of 
the sea (Smdhu).

30 But the weapon fell back by hitting upon his breast 
plate, as a damsel flies back from the embrace of a lovei deemed 
an unfit match for her.

31 Its shock made Sindhu throw out a flood of blood 
from his lungs, resembling the water spout let out from the 
trunk of an elephant.

480

YOGA VA^SISHTHA.

' 32. Seeing this, the native Lilil cried with joy to her sister 
hiU see here the demon Sindhu killed by our lion-like husband.

'33 Sindhu is slain by the javelin of our lion-like lord, # 
like the wicked demon by the nails of ithe lion-god Kiisinha, 
and he IS spouting foith his blood like the stieam of water^ 
thiown out by the tiunk of an elephant from a pool.

34- But alas ! this Sindhu is trying to mount on another 
cai, although bleeding so piofusely from his mouth and nostiils, 
as to raise a wheezing (elnilehulu; sound.34- But alas ! this Sindhu is trying to mount on another 
cai, although bleeding so piofusely from his mouth and nostiils, 
as to raise a wheezing (elnilehulu; sound.

35 Lotheie’ oui loid Viduratha breaking down the golden 
mountings of his car with the blows of his mallet, as the 
thundeiiiig clouds Pushkaia and Avarta break doivn the gold 
peaks of Sumeiu

36 See this Sindhu now mounting on another carriage, 
which IS now biought before him, and decorated as the splendid 
seat of a Gandhaiva

37 Alack > oui loid is now made the mark of Smdhu’s mallet 
daited as a thnndei-bolt against him, but lo 1 how he flies oJS 
and avoids the deadly blow of Sindhu.

38 Huzza ! how nimbly he has got up upon his own car ; 
but woe is to me ! that Sindhu has overtaken him in his flight.

39 He mounts on his car as a hunter climbs on a tree, and

pieices my husband, as a bird-catcher does a panot hidden in 
its hollow, with his pointed arrow. ^

40 Behold his car is broken down and its flags flung aside ; 
his horses aie hurt and the driver is driven away. His bow is 
bioken and his armour is shattered, and his whole body is full 
of wounds

41 His strong breast-plate is broken also by slabs of stone, 
and his big head is pierced by pointed arrows. Behold him 
thiown down on eaith, all mangled in blood

42 Look with what difficulty he is restored to his senses, 
and seated in his seat with his arm cut off and bleeding under 
Sindhu^s sword.

UTPATTI KHANDA

481

43. See him ■welteimg m blood gushing out piofusely fiom 
Ins body, like a lubicund stieam issuing fiom a hill of lubietf'. 
Woe IS me* and cuised be the swoid of Sindhu that hath 
^ hi ought this miseiy on us ^

4i4!. It has seveied his thighs as they dissever a tree with a 
saw, and has lopped off his legs like the stalks of trees

45 Ah' it IS I that am so stiuck and wounded and killed 
by the enemy I am dead and gone and burnt away with my 
husband^s body.45 Ah' it IS I that am so stiuck and wounded and killed 
by the enemy I am dead and gone and burnt away with my 
husband^s body.

46 Saying so, she began to shuddei with fear at the woeful 
sight of hei husband^s person, and fell insensible on the ground 
like a creeper cut off by an axe

47. Viduiatha though thus mutilated and disabled, was 
using to smite the enemy in his lage, when he fell down from 
his car like an uprooted tree, and was replaced there by his 
charioteer ready to make his letieat

48 At this instant, the savage Sindhu struck a sabie on 
his neck, and pursued the cai in which the dying monarch

was home back to his tent.

•

* 49 The body of Padma (alias Viduiatha), was placed like a 
lotus in the presence of Saiasvati, shining with the splendour 
of the sun, but the elated Sindhu was kept fiom entering 
that abode, like a giddy fly from a flame

50 The chaiioteer entered in the apartment, and placed the 
body in its death-bed, all mangled and besmeared with blood, 
exiitlmg fiom the poies of the seveied neck, in the presence 
of the goddess, fiom where the enemy returned to his camp

(Gloss) Here Padma flghting in the person of Viduiatha, 
and falling bravely in the field, obtained his redemption by his 
death in the presence of the goddess , but the savage Sindhu, 
who slew his foiled foe in his letieat, proved a ruffian in his 
barbarous act, and could have no admittance into the presence 
of the goddess and to his future salvation. ''

VOL. I.

c

CONCLUSION.

<■ , tVOL. I.

c

CONCLUSION.

<■ , t

The whole vision of Lild,j like that of Mirza^ shows * the 
slate of human life, with its various incidents and phases to its 
last termination by death It is not so compact and allegorical* 
as that of the western essayist, but as idle effusions of those 
ideal leveiies oi loose vagaiies which are chaiacteiistic of the 
wild imagination of eastern ihapsodists. The discontented 
Brahman longs for loyal dignity, imagines to himself all its 
enjoyments m the peison of Padma, and sees at last all its evils 
111 the chaiactei of Viduiatha, which selves as a lesson to 
aspiiants fiom aiming at high worldly honouis which end 
111 their desti notion

LiU by hei wisdom sees in her silent meditation, the whole 
course and vicissitudes of the world, and the use and fall of 
human glory in the aspirations of her husband These parables 
serve to show the nature of Yoga philosophy to be no other, 
than an absolute idealism oi mental abstraction, consisting in 
the abstiact Iniowledge of all things appei taming to oui tempo- 
ral as well as Spiritual concerns

The knowledge is derived either by intuition as that of the 
Brahman and Padma, oi by inspiration like that of the genius 
of wisdom to her votary LiU It may also be had by means of 
communication with others, as in the discourse of Bdma and 
his pieceiitOi , as also from the attentive peiusal of such woiks 
as the present one, treating both of temjioial and spiiitual 
subjects, and reviewing them with the eye of the mind

The Yogi IS said to know all things thiough the medium of 
his intellectual eye (jndiia chakshu), apait fiom his connection 
with every thing in the world called jiilisanga, as it is exjiiessed 
by the Persian sophist, ^‘ainolhich OmamelJdeJi, az Jiaichc 
hast ", Knowing and not mixing with all that is "

From this view of Yoga, it will appear that, all kinds of 
knowledge, whether as it existed among the ancients, or is

c

CONCLUSION

483From this view of Yoga, it will appear that, all kinds of 
knowledge, whether as it existed among the ancients, or is

c

CONCLUSION

483

in the couise o£ its improvement in modern timeSj foims a subject 
of the Yoga or meditative philosophy', which embiaces and 
comprehends in itself a knowledge of all piaetical aits and 
^ seiQnces, as the militaiy ait and othei things treated of in this 
woik Hence it is evident, that a laige fund of learning foi ms the 
^gieatest Yoga, and the most learned among men, weie the 
greatest thmkeis oi Yogis amongst mankind in all ages No 
rational being theiefoie can eithei lefiain fiom thinking, oi 
employing his mind to the acquisition of knowledge, both of 
which are teimed Yoga in Indian philosophy

But the yogi is commonly believed to be an inspiied sage or 
seer, viewing all things appearing before him in his dieam and 
vision These are sometimes letiospeetive, and resultants of 
the vibiations of waking feelings and imagination, as in the 
case <^f the Bialiman^s anticipation of royalty as a coming 
reality '

In many instances they are believed as prospective and 
piophetic of future events, as in Padma^s diead of his future 
life and fate. In LiWs case howevei they weie ^^no di earns but 
Visions stiange^-’ of supeinatuial sights, and prophetical of the 
futuie state of hei husband, as it was levealed to her by the 
goddess

But as theie aie few that lely any faith "in the baseless 
fabiie of a vision'’^ , they require to be told that the books of 
levelation in all religions aie based upon these dieams and 
visions, which aie believed to be the outpouring of the Holy 
Spirit into the souls of saints, in the sacied records of all 
nations

The holy scriptures furnish us with many texts on the divine 
oiigin of dieams and visions as the followingThe holy scriptures furnish us with many texts on the divine 
oiigin of dieams and visions as the following

"But this IS that which was spoken by the prophet Joel And 
rt shall come to pass in the last days, saith God I shall pour 
out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughteis 
shall piophesy, and your young men ^hall see visions, and your 
old men shall dream dreams ,

484

CONCLUSION.

And on my servants and on my handmaidens^ I will poui 
out in those days of my spiiit, and they shall piophesy ,

And I will shew wondeis in heaven above, and .signs in the 
eafth beneath , blood, and fiie and vapour of smoke

The sun shall be turned into daikness, and the mopn into 
blood &c.”

The Book of Acts, Chap II V. IG JiO.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME

pnivTED m BovNrnjEE * co, 
AT THC KAniNoon rncss, calcotTiV

GENEALOG-Y.

I.

KdliMitra ^

II.

Sildliara Mitra.

in.

Sukfcl Mitra

IV.

Sauven Mitra

V.

Han Mitia

VI.

Soma Mitra.

VII.

Kesava Mitia.

VIII.

Miityunjaya Mitia

IX.

Dlmi Mitra t

X.

TSTlsdpati Mitia.

XI.

Lambodaia Mitia Alias Kiiveia

xn.

Paiameswaia Mitia. X

XIII.

Ddnapati Mitia

XIV.

Jayade-va Mitia

XV

Shaslitliivaia IMitra

XVI

Siikdiita Mitia

XVII

Sivaidma Mitia.

XVIII.

Kiislinaidma Mitia

XIX.

Sltdidma Mitia §

XX

Goeula Chaudia Mitia

XXI.

Jagamoliana Mitia.

XXII

Basilca Ldla Mitia

XXIII

Vihdii Leila Mitia.

* He was foimerly an inhabitatnt of KAnya Kubiya, Hoith "Western 
Provinces, India He being invited on an occasion of a ceiemony (yajna) 
by ^disura, KAjA of Goui Bengal, paid a visit at his couit on Thuisday 
12tb Kartick (Octobei-Novembei) Sakabda 994 (Tenth-Eleventh Century 
A.D ), and on his lequest he settled theie and became the foimdei of Gour 
Mitra Family, at ]\Ialdah in Bengal

f Bansd, Twenty four Pargannahs, Histiict Alipur, Bengal 
% B41i Boio Paigunah, District Hugh 
§ BAgbAzar, Calcutta