The Six Systems of Indian Philosophy — F. Max Müller (1899)
===========================================================
F. Max Müller's The Six Systems of Indian Philosophy (1899; this scan the 1919 impression) — the great Oxford philologist's systematic exposition of the six orthodox Hindu darshanas, public domain. The classic Victorian survey of Indian philosophy. Scan via Internet Archive.

Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  Hbrary  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/|


THE

iGHOWKHAMBA  SANSKRIT  STUDIES

VoLXVI


THE  SIX  SYSTEMS

OF

INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY


BY  THE


Right  Hon.  Professor  MAX  MULLER,  K.  M.


THE

CaiOWKHAMBA  SANSKRIT  SERIES  OFFICE

Post  Box  8,  Rs.  15-00       Varanasi-l  (  India )


PRINTED  BY

THE  VIDYA  VILAS  PRESS

VARANASI-l  (  India )


^^^C^i^c^,    ^


^ai  /i^  7-


PUBLISHER'S  NOTE        ^<^%^

During  the  last  one  year  we  have  reprinted  several
important  out-of-print  works,  all  of  which  have  been  greatly
welcomed  by  scholars  and  students  of  Indian  thought.  Thus
encouraged  we  are  now  bringing  out  the  present  work
which  has  been  written  by  the  most  illustrious  of  the
Orientalists  from  the  West,  Prof.  Max  MuUer.

The  work  deals  with  the  Six  Systems  of  Indian  Philo-
sophy, about  the  greatness  of  which  Prof.  Max  MuUer  him-
self observes  :  "It  was  only  in  a  country  like  India,  with

all  its  physical  advantages  and  dis-advantages,  that  such  a
rich  development  of  philosophical  thought  as  we  can  watch
in  the  six  systems  of  philosophy,  could  have  taken  place.

With  this  high  degree  of  admiration  Prof.  Max  MuUer
has  tried  in  the  present  work  to  publish  the  results  of  his  own
studies   in  Indian  Philosophy,  not  so   much  to   restate  the

mere  tenets  of  each  systems,  so  deliberately  and  so  clearly
put  forward  by  the  reputed  authors  of  the  principal  philo-
sophies of  India,  as  to  give  a  more  comprehensive  account
of  the  philosophical  activity  of  our  country  from  the  earliest
times,  and  to  show  how  intimately  not  only  our  religion,
but  our  philosophy  also  was  connected  with  our  National
character.

We  hope  that  our  present  effort  would  also  be  welcomed
by  the  Scholars  and  students  alike.

i:    940


THE  SIX  SYSTEMS

OF

INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY


BY  THE


Right  Hon.  Professor  MAX  MULLER,  K.M.

LATE  FOREIGN  MEMBER  OF  THE  FRENCH  INSTITUTE


NEW  IMPRESSION


LONGMANS,  GREEN  AND  CO.

39  PATERNOSTER  ROW,  LONDON

FOURTH  AVENUE  &  30TH  STREET,  NEW  YORK
BOMBAY,  CALCUTTA,  AND  MADRAS

1919


i


PREFACE

It  is  not  without  serious  misgivings  that  I  venture  at
this  late  hour  of  life  to  place  before  my  fellow-workers
and  all  who  are  interested  in  the  growth  of  philosophical
thought  throughout  the  world  some  of  the  notes  on  the
Six  Systems  of  Indian  Philosophy  which  have  accumulated
in  my  note-books  for  many  years.  It  was  as  early  as
1852  that  I  published  my  first  contributions  to  the  study
of  Indian  philosophy  in  the  Zeitschrift  der  Deut^chen  Mor-
genl'andischen  Gesellschaft,  My  other  occupations,  however,
and,  more  particularly,  my  preparations  for  a  complete
edition  of  the  Rig-Veda,  and  its  voluminous  commentary,
did  not  allow  me  at  that  time  to  continue  these  contri-
butions, though  my  interest  in  Indian  philosophy,  as  a
most  important  part  of  the  literature  of  India  and  of
Universal  Philosophy,  has  always  remained  the  same.  This
interest  was  kindled  afresh  when  I  had  to  finish  for  the
Sacred  Books  of  the  East  (vols,  I  and  XV)  my  translation
of  the  Upanishads,  the  remote  sources  of  Indian  philosophy,
and  especially  of  the  Vedanta-philosophy,  a  system  in
which  human  speculation  seems  to  me  to  have  reached  its
very  acme.  Some  of  the  other  systems  of  Indian  philosophy
also  have  from  time  to  time  roused  the  curiosity  of  scholars
and  philosophers  in  Europe  and  America,  and  in  India
itself  a  revival  of  philosophic  and  theosophic  studies,  though
not  always  well  directed,  has  taken  place,  which,  if  it  leads
to  a  more  active  co-operation  between  European  and  Indian
thinkers,  may  be  productive  in  the  future  of  most  im-
portant results.  Under  these  circumstances  a  general
desire  has  arisen,  and  has  repeatedly  been  expressed,  for


vi  PREFACE

the  publication  of  a  more  general  and  comprehensive
account  of  the  six  systems  in  which  the  philosophical
thought  of  india  has  found  its  full  realisation.

More  recently  the  excellent  publications  of  Professors
Deussen  and  Garbe  in  Germany,  and  of  Dr.  G,  Thibaut  in
India,  have  given  a  new  impulse  to  these  important  studies,
important  not  only  in  the  eyes  of  Sanskrit  scholars  by  pro-
fession, but  of  all  who  wish  to  become  acquainted  with
all  the  solutions  which  the  most  highly  gifted  races  of
mankind  have  proposed  for  the  eternal  riddles  of  the
world.  These  studies,  to  quote  the  wo^ds  of  a  high
authority,  have  indeed  ceased  to  be  the  hobby  of  a  few
individuals,  and  have  become  a  subject  of  interest  to  the
whole  nation.^  Professor  Deussen's  work  on  the  Vedanta-
philosophy  (1883)  and  his  translation  of  the  Vedanta-Sutras

(1887),JProfessor  Garbe's  translation  of  the  Sfimkhya-Sutras
(1889)  followed  by  his  work  on  the  Sfimkhya-philosophy
(1894),  and,  last  not  least,  Dr.  G.  Thibaut's  careful  and
most  useful  translation  of  the  Vedanta  -  Sutras  in  vols.
XXXIV  and  XXXVIII  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East
(1890  and  1 896),  mark  a  new  era  in  the  study  of  the  two
most  important  philosophical  systems  of  ancient  India,  and
have  deservedly  placed  the  names  of  their  authors  in  the
front  rank  of  Sanskrit  scholars  in  Europe.

My  object  in  publishing  the  results  of  my  own  studies
in  Indian  philosophy  was  not  so  much  to  restate  the  mere
tenets  of  each  system,  so  deliberately  and  so  clearly  put
forward  by  the  reputed  authors  of  the  principal  philosophies
of  India,  as  to  give  a  more  comprehensive  account  of  the
philosophical  activity  of  the  Indian  nation  from  the  earliest

^  Words  of  the  Viceroy  of  India,  see  Times,  Nov.  8,  1898.


PREFACE  vil

times,  and  to  show  how  intimately  not  only  their  religion,
but  their  philosophy  also,  was  connected  with  the  national
character  of  the  inhabitants  of  India,  a  point  of  view  which
has  of  late  been  so  ably  maintained  by  Professor  Knight
of  Sf .  Andrews  University,^

It  was  only  in  a  country  like  India,  with  all  its  physical
advantages  and  disadvantages,  that  such  a  rich  develop-
ment of  philosophical  thought  as  we  can  watch  in  the  six
systems  of  philosophy,  could  have  taken  place.  In  ancient
India  there  could  hardly  have  been  a  very  severe  struggle
for  life.  The  necessaries  of  life  were  abundantly  provided
by  nature,  and  people  with  few  tastes  could  live  there  like
the  birds  in  a  forest,  and  soar  like  birds  towards  the  fresh
air  of  heaven  and  the  eternal  sources  of  light  and  truth.
What  was  there  to  do  for  those  who,  in  order  to  escape
from  the  heat  of  the  tropical  sun,  had  taken  their  abode
in  the  shade  of  groves  or  in  the  caves  of  mountainous
valleys,  except  to  meditate  on  the  world  in  which  they
found  themselves  placed,  they  did  not  know  how  or  why  ?
There  was  hardly  any  political  life  in  ancient  India,  such
as  we  know  it  from  the  Vedas,  and  in  consequence  neither
political  strife  nor  municipal  ambition.  Neither  art  nor
science  existed  as  yet,  to  call  forth  the  energies  of  this
highly  gifted  race.  While  we,  overwhelmed  with  news-
papers, with  parliamentary  reports,  -with  daily  discoveries
and  discussions,  with  new  novels  and  time-killing    social

functions,  have  hardly  any  leisure  left  to  dwell  on  meta-
physical and  religious  problems,  these  problems  formed
almost  the  only  subject  on  which  the  old  inhabitants  of
India  could  spend  their  intellectual    energies.      Life  in  a

^  Sec  *Mind,'  vol,  v,  no,  1 7.


vTii  FRE^ACB

forest  was  no  impossibility  in  the  warm  climate  of  India,
and  in  the  absence  of  the  most  ordinary  means  of  com-
munication, what  was  there  to  do  for  the  members  of  the
small  settlements  dotted  over  the  country,  but  to  give
expression  to  that  wonder  at  the  world  which  is  the
beginning  of  all  philosophy  ?  Literary  ambition  could
hardly  exist  during  a  period  when  even  the  art  of  writing
was  not  yet  known,  and  when  there  was  no  literature
except  what  could  be  spread  and  handed  down  by  memory,
developed  to  an  extraordinary  and  almost  incredible  extent
under  a  carefully  elaborated  discipline.  But  at  a  time  when
people  could  not  yet  think  of  public  applause  or  private
gain,  they  thought  all  the  more  of  truth  ;  and  hence  the
perfectly  independent  and  honest  character  of  most  of  their
philosophy.

It  has  long  been  my  wish  to  bring  the  results  of  this
national  Indian  philosophy  nearer  to  us,  and,  if  possible,
to  rouse  our  sympathies  for  their  honest  efforts  to  throw
some  rays  of  light  on  the  dark  problems  of  existence,
whether  of  the  objective  world  at  large,  or  of  the  subjective
spirits,  whose  knowledge  of  the  world  constitutes,  after  all,
the  only  proof  of  the  existence  of  an  objective  world.  The
mere  tenets  of  each  of  the  six  systems  of  Indian  philosophy
are  by  this  time  well  known,  or  easily  accessible,  more
accessible,  I  should  say,  than  even  those  of  the  leading
philosophers  of  Greece  or  of  modern  Europe.  Everyone
of  the  opinions  at  which  the  originators  of  the  six  principal
schools  of  Indian  philosophy  arrived,  has  been  handed  down
to  us  in  the  form  of  short  aphorisms  or  Sutras,  so  as  to
leave  but  little  room  for  uncertainty  as  to  the  exact  position
which  each  of  these  philosophers  occupied    on  the  great


PRfiTACiE  ix

battlefield  of  thought.  We  know  what  an  enormous  amount
of  labour  had  to  be  spent  and  is  still  being  spent  in  order
to  ascertain  the  exact  views  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  nay,
even  of  Kant  and  Hegel,  on  some  of  the  most  important
questions  of  their  systems  of  philosophy.  There  are  even
living  philosophers  whose  words  often  leave  us  in  doubt
as  to  what  they  mean,  whether  they  are  materialists  or
idealists,  monists  or  dualists,  theists  or  atheists.  Hindu
philosophers  seldom  leave  us  in  dou.bt  on  such  important
points,  and  they  certainly  never  shrink  from  the  conse-
quences of  their  theories.  They  never  equivocate  or  try
to  hide  their  opinions  where  they  are  likely  to  be  unpopular.
Kapila,  for  instance,  the  author  or  hero  eponymus  of  the
Samkhya-philosophy,  confesses  openly  that  his  system  is
atheistic,  an-i5vara,  without  an  active  Lord  or  God,  but  in
spite  of  that,  his  system  was  treated  as  legitimate  by  his
contemporaries,  because  it  was  reasoned  out  consistently,
and  admitted,  nay»  required  some  transcendent  and  invisible
power,  the  so-called  Purushas.  Without  them  there  would
be  no  evolution  of  Praknti,  original  matter,  no  objective
world,  nor  any  reality  in  the  lookers-on  themselves,  the
Purushas  or  spirits.  Mere  names  have  acquired  with  us
such  a  power  that  the  authors  of  systems  in  which  there
is  clearly  no  room  for  an  active  God,  nevertheless  shrink
frwn  calling  themselves  atheists,  nay,  try  even  by  any
means  to  foist  an  active  God  into  their  philosophies,  in
order  to  escape  the  damaging  charge  of  atheism.  This
leads  to  philosophical  ambiguity,  if  not  dishonesty,  and
has  often  delayed  the  recognition  of  a  Godhead,  free  from
at  the  trammels  of  human  activity  and  personality,  but
yet  endowed  with  wisdom,  power,  and  will.    From  a  philo-


X  PR£FAG£

sophical  point  of  view,  no  theory  of  evolution,  whether
ancient  or  modern  (in  Sanskrit  Pari/iima),  can  provide  any
room  for  a  creator  or  governor  of  the  world,  and  hence  the
Sawkhya-philosophy  declares  ,  itself  fearlessly  as  an-i^vara.
Lord-less,  leaving  it  to  another  philosophy,  the  .  Yoga,  to
find  in  the  old  Simkhya  system  some  place  for  an  l^vara
or  a  personal  God.  What  is  most  curious  is  that  a  philo-
sopher, such  as  iSamkara,  the  most  decided  monist,  and
the  upholder  of  Brahman,  as  a  neuter,  as  the  cause  of  all
things,  is  reported  to  have  been  a  worshipper  of  idols  and
to  have  seen  in  them,  despite  of  all  their  hideousness,
symbols  of  the  Deity,  useful,  as  he  thought,  for  the  ignorant,
even  though  they  have  no  eyes  as  yet  to  see  what  is  hidden
behind  the  idols,  and  what  was  the  true  meaning  of  them.

What  I  admire  in  Indian  philosophers  is  that  they  never
try  to  deceive  us  as  to  their  principles  and  the  consequences
of  their  theories.  If  they  are  idealists,  even  to  the  verge
of  nihilism,  they  say  so,  and  if  they  hold  that  the  objective
world  requires  a  real,  though  not  necessarily  *a  visible  or
tangible  substratum,  they  are  never  afraid  to  speak  out.
They  are  bona  fide  idealists  or  materialists,  monists  or
dualists,  theists  or  atheists,  because  their  reverence  for
truth  is  stronger  than  their  reverence  for  anything  else.
The  Vedantist,  for  instance,  is  a  fearless  idealist,  and,  as
a  monist,  denies  the  reality  of  anything  but  the  One  Brah-
man, the  Universal  Spirit,  which  is  to  account  for  the
whole  of  the  phenomenal  world.  The  followers  of  the
Siwkhya,  on  the  contrary,  though  likewise  idealists  and
believers  in  an  unseen  Purusha  (subject),  and  an  unseen
Prakriti  (objective  substance),  leave  us  in  no  doubt  that
they  are  and  mean  to  be  atheists,   so  far  as  the  existence


PR£FAG£i  ad

of  an  active  God,  a  maker  and  ruler  of  the  world,  is  con-
cerned. They  do  not  allow  themselves  to  be  driven  one
inch  beyond  their  self-chosen  position.  They  first  examine
the  instruments  of  knowledge  which  man  possesses.  These
are  sensuous  perception,  inference,  and  verbal  authority,
and  as  none  of  these  can  supply  us  with  the  knowledge  of
a  Supreme  Being,  as  a  personal  creator  and  ruler  of  the
world,  Kapila  never  refers  to  Him  in  his  Sutras.  As  a
careful  reasoner,  however,  he  does  not  go  so  far  as  to  say
that  he  can  prove  the  non-existence  of  such  a  Being,  but
he  is  satisfied  with  stating,  like  Kant,  that  he  cannot
establish  His  existence  by  the  ordinary  channels  of  evidential
knowledge.  In  neither  of  these  statements  can  1  discover,
as  others  have  done,  any  trace  of  intellectual  cowardice,
but  simply  a  desire  to  abide  within  the  strict  limits  of
knowledge,  such  as  is  granted  to  human  beings.  He  does
not  argue  against  the  possibility  even  of  the  gods  of  the
vulgar,  such  as  Siva,  Vishnu,  and  all  the  rest,  he  simply
treats  them  as  Ganye^varas  or  K&ryejvaras,  produced  and
temporal  gods  (  Sutras  III,  57,  comm. ),  and  he  does  not
allow,  even  to  the  Supreme  bvar,  the  Lord,  the  creator
and  ruler  of  the  world,  as  postulated  by  other  systems
of  philosophy  or  religion,  more  then  a  phenomenal  existence,
though  we  should  always  remember  that  with  him  there
is  nothing  phenomenal,     nothing     confined    in   space   and

time,  that    does  not  in  the  end  rest  on  something  real  and
eternal.

We  must  distinguish  however.  Kapila,  though  he  boldly
confessed  himself  an  atheist,  was  by  no  means  a  nihilist
or  Nftstika.  He  recognised  in  every  man  a  soul  which  he
called  Purusha,  literally  man,  or  spirit,  or  subject,  because


xii  PREFACE

without  such  a  power,  without  such  endless  Purushas,  he
held  that  Prakrfti,  or  primordial  matter  with  its  infinite
potentialities,  would  for  ever  have  remained  dead,  motion-
less, and  thoughtless.  Only  through  the  presence  of  this
Purusha  and  through  his  temporary  interest  in  Prakr/ti
could  her  movements,  her  evolution,  her  ctanges  and
variety  be  accounted  for,  just  as  the  movements  of  iron
have  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  presence  of  a  magnet.  All
this  movement,  however,  is  temporary  only,  and  the  highest
object  of  Kapila's  philosophy  is  to  make  Purusha  turn  his
eyes  away  from  Prakr/ti,  so  as  to  stop  her  acting  and  to
regain  for  himself  his  oneness,  his  aloneness,  his  indepen-
dence, and  his  perfect  bliss.

Whatever  we  may  think  of  such  views  of  the  world  as
are  put  forward  by  the  SSmkhya,  the  Ved§,nta,  and  other
systems  of  Indian  philosophy,  there  is  one  thing  which  we
cannot  help  admiring,  and  that  is  the  straightforwardness
and  perfect  freedom  with  which  they  are  elaborated.  How-
ever imperfect  the  style  in  which  their  theories  have  been
clothed  may  appear  from  a  literary  point  of  view,  it  seems
to  me  the  very  perfection  for  the  treatment  of  philosophy.
It  never  leaves  us  in  any  doubt  as  to  the  exact  opinions
held  by  each  philosopher.  We  may  miss  the  development
and  the  dialectic  eloquence  with  which  Plato  and  Hegel
propound  their  thoughts,  but  we  can  always  appreciate  the
perfect  freedom,  freshness,  and  downrightness  with  which
each  searcher  after  truth  follows  his  track  without  ever
looking  right  or  left.

It  is  in  the  nature  of  philosophy  that  every  philosopher
must  be  a  heretic,  in  the   etymological  sense  of  the  word.


PREFACE  xiil

that  is,  a  free  chooser,  even  if,  like  the  Vad&ntists,  he,  for
some  reason  or  other,  bows  before  his  self-chosen  Veda  as
the  seat  of  a  revealed  authority.

It  has  sometimes  been  said  that  Hindu  philosophy  asserts
but  does  not  prove,  that  it  is  positive  throughout,  but  not
argumentative.    This  may  be  true  to  a  certain  extent  and
particularly  with   regard  to  the  Ved&nta-philosophy,  but  we
must  remember  that  almost  the  first  question  which  every
one  of  the  Hindu  systems  of  philosophy  tries  to  settle  is.
How  do  we  know  ?    In  thus  giving  the  Noetics  the  first
place,  the  thinkers  of  the  East  seem  to  me   again  superior  to
most  of  the  philosophers  of  the  West.    Generally  speaking,
they  admitted  three    legitimate    channels    by  which  know*
ledge  can  reach  us,  perception,  inference,  and    authority,
but  authority  freely  chosen  or  freely   rejected.      In  some
systems    that  authority  is  revelation,  Sruti,  Sabda,  or  the
Veda,  in  others  it  is  the  word  of  any  recognised  authority
Apta-vafcana.     Thus  it  happens  that  the  Simkhya  philoso-
phers, who  profess  themselves  entirely  dependent  on  reason-
ing (Manana),  may  nevertheless  accept  some  of  the  utterances
of  the  Veda  as  they  would  accept  the  opinions  of  eminent
men  or  Sishras,  though  always  with  the  proviso  that  even
the  Veda  could  never  make  a  false  opinion  true.    The  same
relative   authority  is  granted  to    Smr/ti  or  tradition,    but
there  with  the  proviso  that  it  must  not  be  in  contradiction
with  Svuii  or  revelation.

Such  an  examination  of  the  authorities  of  human  know-
ledge (PramAnas)  ought,  of  course,  to  form  the  introduction
to  every,  system  of  philosophy,  and  to  have  clearly  seen
this  is,  as  it  seems  to  niei  a  very  high  distinction  of  Indian
philosophy.    How   much  useless    controversy  wpuld  have


adv  HIEFAGE

been  avoided,  particularly  among  Jewish,  Mohammedan,
and  Christian  philosophers,  if  a  proper  place  had  been
assigned  in  limine  to  the  question  of  what  constitutes  our
legitimate  or  our  only  possible  channels  of  knowledge,
whether  perception,  inference,  revelation,  or  anything  else  /

Supported  by  these  inquiries  into  the  evidences  of  truth,
Hindu  philosophers  have  built  up  their  various  systems  of
philosophy,     or  their  various    conceptions    of  the  world,
telling  us  clearly  what  they  take  for  granted,    and  then
advancing  step  by  step  from  the  foundations  to  the   highest
pinnacles  of  their  systems.    The  Vadantist,   after  giving   us
his  reasons  why  revelation  or  the  Veda  stands  higher  with
him  than  sensuous  perception  and  inference,  at  least  for  the
discovery  of  the  highest  truth  (Param&rtha),    actually  puts
5^ruti  in  the  place  of  sensuous  perception,    and  allows  to
perception  and  inference  no  more  than  an  authority  restricted
to  the  phenomenal    (Vyavahirika)  world.    The  conception
of  the  world  as  deduced  from  the  Veda,  and  chiefly  from
the  Upanishads,    is    indeed    astounding.     It    could    hardly
r  have  been  arrived    at  by  a   sudden  intuition  or  inspiration,
but  presupposes  a  long  preparation  of  metaphysical  thought,
undisturbed  by    any  foreign    influences.'     All    that  exists
is  taken  as  One,  because  if  the  existence  of  anything    besides
the   absolute  One    or  the    Supreme  Being  were  admitted,
whatever  the  Second  by  the  side  of  the  One  might  be,  it
would  constitute  a  limit  to  what  was   postulated  as  limitless,
and  would  have  made  the  concept   of  the  One  self-contra-
dictory.   But  then  came  the  question  for  Indian  phiosophers
to  solve,  how  it  was  possible,  if  there  was  but  the  One,  that
there  should   be  multiplicity  in  the  world,  and  that  there
should  be  constant  change  in  our  experience.    They  knew
that  the  one  absolute  and    undetermined  essence,  what  they


PREFACB


XV


called  Brahman,  could  have  received  no'  impulse  to  change,
either  from  itself,  for  it  was  perfect,  nor  from  others,  for  it
was  Second-less.

Then  what  is  the  philospher  to  say  to  this  manifold  and
ever-changing  world  ?  There  is  one  thing  only  that  he  can
say,  namely,  that  it  is  not  and  cannot  be  real,  but  must  be
accepted  as  the  result  of  nescience  or  Avidyi,  not  only  of
individual  ignorance,  but  of  ignorance  as  inseparable  from
human  nature.  That  ignorance,  though  unreal  in  the
highest  sense,  exists,  but  it  can  be  destroyed  by  Vidya,
knowledge,  i.  e.  the  knowledge  conveyed  by  the  Vedanta,
and  as  nothing  that  can  at  any  time  be  annihilated  has
a  right  to  be  considered  as  real,  it  follows  that  this  cosmic
ignorance  also  must  be  looked  upon  as  not  real,  but  tem-
porary only.  It  cannot  be  said  to  exist,  nor  can  it  be  said
not  to  exist,  just,  as  our  own  ordinary  ignorance,  though  we
suffer  from  it  for  a  time,  can  never  claim  absolute  reality
and  perpetuity.  It  is  impossible  to  define  AvidyS,  as  little
as  it  is  possible  to  define  Brahman,  with  this  difference,
however,  that  the  former  can  be  annihilated,  the  latter
never.  The  phenomenal  world  which,  according  to  the
Vad&nta,  is  called  forth,  like  the  mirage  in  a  desert,  has  its
reality  in  Brahman  alone.  Only  it  must  be  remembered
that  what  we  perceive  can  never  be  the  absolute  Brahman,
but  a  perverted  picture  only,  just  as  the  moon  which  we
see  manifold  and  tremulous  in  its  ever  changing  reflections
on  the  waving  surface  of  the  ocean,  is  not  the  real  moon,
though  deriving  its  phenomenal  character  from  the  real
moon  which  remains  unaffected  in  its  unapproachable  re-
moteness. Whatever  we  may  think  of  such  a  view  of  the
cosmos,  a  cosmos  which,  it  should  be  remembered,  includes
ourselves    quite  as  much  as  what  we   call  the  objective


world*  it  is  clear  that  our  dame  of  nihilism  would  be  by  no
means  applicable  to  it.

The  One  Real  Being  is  there,  the  Brahman,  only  it  is  not
visible,  nor  perceptible  in  its  true  character  by  any  of  the
senses  ;  but  without  it,  nothing  that  exists  in  our  knowledge
could  exist,  neither  our  Self  nor  what  in  our   knowledge  is

not  our  Self <

This  is  one  view  of  the  world,  the  VedSnta  view;  another
is  that  of  the  Samkhya,  which  looks  upon  our  perceptions
as  perceptions  of  a  substantial  something,  of  Prakrf  ti,  the
potentiality  of  all  things,  and  treats  th9  individual  per-
ceiver  as  eternally  individual,  admitting  nothing  besides
these  two  powers,  which  by  their  union  or  identification
cause  what  we  call,  the  world,  and  by  their  discrimination
or  separation  produce  final  bliss  or  absoluteness.

These  two,  with  some  other  less  important  views  of  the
world,  as  put  forward  by  the  other  systems  of  Indian
philosophy,  constitute  the  real  object  of  what  was  originally
meant  by  philosophy,  that  is  an  explanation  of  the  world.
This  determining  idea  has  secured  even  to  the  guesses  of
Thales  and  Heraclitus  their  permanent  place  among  the
historical  representatives  of  the  development  of  philosophical
thought  by  the  side  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  of  Des  Cartes
and  Spinoza.  It  is  in  that  Walhalla  of  real  philosophers
that  1  claim  a  place  of  honour  for  the  representatives  of
the  Ved&nta  and  S&mkhya,  Of  course,  it  is  possible  so  to
define  the  meaning  of  philosophy  as  to  exclude  men  such
as  eyen  Plato  and  Spinoza  altogether,  and  to  include  on  the
contrary  every  botanist,  entomologist,  or  bacteriologist.
The  name  itself  is  of  no  consequence,  but  its  definition  is.
And  if  hitherto  no  one  would  have  called  himsislf  a  philoso*^


PREFACE


xvii


pher  who  bad  not  read  and  Studied  the  works  of  Plato  and
Aristotle,  of  Des  Cartes  and  Spinoza,  of  Locke,  Hume,  and
Kant  in  the  original.  I  hope  that  the  time  will  come  when
no  one  will  claim  that  name  who  is  not  acquainted  at  least
with  the  two  prominent  systems  of  ancient  Indiaii  philo-
sophy, the  Vedftnta  and  the  Sfimkhya.  A  President,  how-*
ever  powerful,  does  not  call  himself  His  Majesty,  why
should  an  observer,  a  collector  and  analyser,  however  full
of  information,  claim  the  name  of  philosopher  ?    ,

s

As  a  rule,  I  believe  that  no  one  knows  so  well  the  defects
of  his-  book  as  the  author  himself,  and  I  can  truly  say  in
my  own  case  that  fbw  p€[Ople  can  be  so  conscious  of  the
defects  of  this  History  of  Indian  Philosophy  as  I  myself.
Itcandot  be  called  a  history,  because  the  chronological
framework  is,  as  yet,  almost  entirely -absent.  It  professes
to  he  no  more  than,  a  description  of  some  of  th6  salient
points  of  each  of  the  six  recognised  systems  of  Indian
philosophy.  It  does  not  claim  to  be  complete ;  on  the
contrary,  if  I  can  claim  any  thanks,  it  is  for  having  en-
deavoured to  omit  whatever  seemed  to  me  less  important
and  not  calculated  to  appeal  to  European  sympathies.  If
we  want  our  friends  to  love  our  friends,  we  do  not  give
a  full  account  of  every  one  of  their  good  qualities,  but  we
dwell  on  one  or  two  of  the  strong  points  of  their  character.
This  is  what  I  have  tried  to  do  for  my  old  friends,  Bfidari-
>^ana,  'Kapila,  and  all  the  rest  Even  thus  it  could  not
well  be  avoided  that  in  giving  an  account  of  each  of  the
six  systems,  there  should  be  much  repetition,  for  they  all
share  so  much  in  common,  with  but  slight  modifications,
and  the  longer  I  have  studied  the  various  systems^  the  more
have  I  become  impressed  with  the  truth  of  the  view  taken

2S.


icvili  PREFACE

by  Vigo&na-^Bhikshu  and  others  that  there  is  bel^d  the

variety  of  the  six  systems  a  common  fund  of  what  may  be

called  national  or  popular  philosophy^  a  large  Manasa  lake

of  philosophical  thought    and  language,  far  away  in  the

distant  North,  and  in  the  distant  Past^  from,  which  each

thinker  was  allowed  to  draw  for  his  own  purposes^    Thus»

while  I  should  not  be  surprised,  if,  Sanskrit  schola];s .  were

to  blame  me  for  having  left  out^  too   much,  students  of

philosophy  may  think  that  there  is  reaUy  too,  much.,  of  the

same  subject,  discussed  again  and  again  in  the  six  diiSferent

schools.    I  havedonetny  best,  little-  as  it  may.be,  a^d  my

best  reward  will  be  if  a  ptw  interest-  $hall  spriag^  up   for

a  long  neglected  mine  of  philosophical  thought,  and  .if  my

owabook weresoon tobe  superseded vby a  piQi;e; ^complete

and  more  comprehensive  examination,  of  Indian  philosophy*

A  friend  of  mine,  a  native  of  tndiit,  'whom  I :  eonsiiilted
about  the' various  degrees  of  popularity 'ien joyed  at  the
present  day  by  different  systems  of  philosophy  In  his  owq
country,  informs  me  that  the  drily  systdm  that  cann^w  be
said  to  be  living  iin  Itidtia'  is  the  Vkdaiita  with  its  b^^nches,
the  Advaitis,  the  Madhvas~'  the  il&m&nugas,  and  th6  Valla«-
bhas.  The  Vedinta,  being  mixed  with  religion,  he' writes,
has  become  a  living  faiths  and  numerous  Panditsr^can .  be
found  to-day  in  all  these  sects  who  have*  learnt  at  least  the
principal  works  by  Heart  and  can  expound  them,  such  as
the  Upanishads,  the  Brahma-^&tras,  the -great  Commen>-
taries  of  the  Ak&ryas  and  the  Bhagavad-git&.  .  Stome  of  the
less  important  treatises  also  are  studied,  such  as  the  Paitka-
dasi  and  Yoga-Vasishrta.  The  Pdrva-Mimfimsl  is  still
studied  in  Southern  India,  but  not  much  in  other  parts,
although  expensive  sacrifices  are  occasionally  performed.
The  Agnishroma  was  performed  last  year  at  genares*


PREFACE  jax

.  Of  the  Other  systems^  the  NyAya  only  finds  devotees,
especially  in  Bengal,  bat  the  works  studied  are  generally
the  later  controversial  treatises,  not  the  earlier  ones.

The  Vaiseshika  is  neglected  and  so  is  the  Yoga,  except
in  its  purely  practical  and  most  degenerate  form.

It  is  feared,  however,  that  even  this  small  remnant  of
philosophical  learning  will  vanish  in  one  or  two  generations,
as  the  youths  of  the  present  day,  even  if  belonging  to
orthodox  Br&hmanic  faniiries,  do  not  take  to  these  studies,
as  there  is  no  encouragement.

But  though  we  may  regret  that  the  ancient  method  of
philosophical  study  is  dying  out  in  India,  we  should  welcome
all  the  more  a  new  class  of  native  students  who,  after
studying  the  history  of  European  phikMophy,  have  devoted
themselves  to  the  honorabte  task  of  making  their  own
national  philosopliy  better  known,  to  the  world,  at  large.
I  hope  that  my  book  may  prove  useful  to  them  by  showing
them  in  what  direction  tiiey  may  best  assist  us  in  our
attempU  to  s^ure  a^iplsidib  'to  tMnkers  such  as  Kapila  and
B&dariyana  b^'  the  side  of  the  leading  philosophers '  of
Greece,  Rome,  'Germatry^  France,  Italy,  and  England:  In
soixie.ol<e$  the  enthusiasm  of  native  students  may  seem  to
have  carried  them  too  far,  and  a  mixing  up  of  philosophical
with  religious  and  theosophic  propaganda,  inevitable  as  it
is  said  to  be  in  India,  is  always  dangerous.  But  such
journals  as  the  Pandit^  the  Brahmavkdin,  the  Light  of
Truth,  ernd  lately  the  Journal  of  the  Buddhist  Text  Society,
have  been  doing  most  valuable  service.  What  we  want
are  texts  and  translations,  and  any  information  that  can
throw  light  on  the  chronology  of  Indian  philosophy.  Nor
should  their  labour  be  restricted  to  Sanskrit  texts.    In  the


XX  PREFACE

South  of  India  there  exists  a  philosophical  literature  which,
though  it  may  show  clear  traces  of  Sanskrit  influence,  con-
tains also  original  indigenous  elements  of  jgreat  beauty  and
of  great  importance  for  historical  Jpurposes.  Unfortunately
few  scholars  only  have  taken  up,  as  yet,  the  study  of  the
Pravidian  languages  and  literature,  but  young  students
who  complain  that  there  is  nothing  left  to  do  in  Sanskrit
literature,  would,  I  believe,  find  their  labours  amply  re-
warded in  that  field.  How  much  may  be  done  in  another
direction  by  students  of  Tibetan  literature  in  furthering  a
study  of  Indian  philosophy  has  lately  been  proved  by  the
publications  of  Sarat  Chandra  Das,  C.I.E.,  and  Satis  Chandra
Acharya  Vidyabhusha/ia,  M.A.,  and  their  friends.

In  conclusion  I  have  to  thank  Mr.  A.  E.  Gough,  the
translator  of  the  Vaiseshika-Sfiitras,  and  the  author  of  the
•Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads,'  fpr  his  extreme  kindness
in  reading  a  revise  of  my  proof-sheets.  A  man  of  seventy-
six  has  neither  the  eyes  nor  the  Memory  which  he  had  at
twenty-six,  and  he  may  be  allowed  to  appeal  to  younger
men  for  such  help  as  he  himself  in  his  younger  days  has
often  and  glady  lent  to  his  Gurus  and  fellow-labourers.

Oxford,  May  1,  1899.  F.  M.  M.


..''  •  *:'  ..     '^    '


PREFACE     TO     SECOND    EDITION


Though  I  am  aware  that  the  Six  System^  of  Indian
Philosophy,  the  last  large  work  written  by  my  husband,
and  published  only  two  months  before  the  beginning  of
his  fatal  illness,  9how$  spnie  signs  of  weariness^  and  that
the  materials  are  ^  perhaps  less  clearly  gathered  up  and  set
before  the  reader  than  in  his  other  works,  I  have  had  so
many  letters  from  friends  in  India  as  well  as  in  JEngland,
expressing  a  desire  for  a  second  and  cheaper  edition,  that
I  could  not  hesitate  to  comply  with  Messrs.  Lopgmans'
wish  to  add  the  *Six  Systems'  to  the  'Collected  Works.
A  friend  on  whose  judgement  I  have  complete  reliance
writes  :  *There  is  nothing  like  it  in  English  for  compre-
hensiveness  of  view,  and  it  will  long  remain  the  most
valuable  introduction  to  the  study  of  Indian  philosophy
in  our  language.  It  is  an  astonishing  book  for  one  who
had  passed  threescore  years  and  ten.*

GEORGINA  MAX  MULLER.
August,  1903.


CONTENTS


.'^  ? ,  i  U     INTRODUCTORY  CHAtTER

PAGE

Philosophy  and   Philosophers  .  .  .  ...  i

Srutam  and  Smrttam  ,1  .  •  •  •  »  •  ^

Upanishad-pcriod,  from  alsout  700  B.C  .  .  .  •  •  ^

Period  antecedent  to  the  Upanishads        ....  .  .  ^

Intellectual  Life  in  ancient  India  .  ,  .  ,  .  7

Kshatriyas  and  Brahmans      »....#•  ^

The  Evidence  of  the  Upanishads,    Ganaka,  Agatasatru  .  •        11

Agatasatru  .  •  »  .  .  •  •  •  .13

Buddhist  Period. •  .14

Prasena^t  and  Bimbisara     .  .  .  .  •  •  .16

Brahma-gala-sutta         .  .  .  .  .  •  '  •        16

Mahabharata  .  .  .  .  .  .  *  •  •        21

Buddha    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .        2'3

Greek    Accounts.  •  •  •  •  •  .  •  .26

Buddhist* Pilgrims,  Hioucn-thsang  .  .  .  .  .  .27

K\Ti%  Harsha 30

chapter  ii.
The  Vedas

The  Vedas .30

The  Philosophical  Basis  of  the  Vedic   Gods        ....        35

Three  Classes  of  Vedic  Gods.  .  .  .  .  .  ,37

Other  Classifications  of  Gods  ,  .  ,  .  ..         ,38

The  Visve  or  All-gods 39

Tendencies  towards  Unity  among  the  Gods       •  •  •  •        40

Henotheism        •••••.••«        40
Monotheism  and  Monism     •  •  •  »  •  •  .41


^


CONTENTS


Pragapati       .    .      .    .      .    .

Visvakannan     ...
Tvash/n  .  ^  .  .

Search  for  a  Supreme  Deity.
Hymn  to  the  Unknown  God.
Brahman,  Atman,  Tad  Ekam
Nasadiya  Hymn  •         •


Brahman,  its  various  Meanings
Bnh  and  Brahman,  Word  .  .
East  and  West  .
Mind  and  Speech
Atman     *»  •

Pragapati,  Brahman,  Atman.


CHAPTER  III
The  SYSTEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY.


PAGE
42
43
43
45
46

48
49
52
55
58
67
70
72


Growth  of  Philosophical^Ideas     •  .          .     .     •

74

Prasthana  Bheda          .....»•<

.       75

Literary  References  in  the  Upanishads     .          .          *          .          .

84

The  Six  Systems  of  Philosophy       ,           .          .          .          .  .        .

85

Bfihaspati  Sutras          .          •          >          .          •          •          .          .

..      86

Books  of  Reference       •          •     .     •          .          •    .     •

87

Dates  of  the  ^Philosophical  Sutras

88

Samkhya-Sutras           .....••<

90

Vedanta-Sutras  .          .          .          .          ...          .          .          i

90

Mnemonic    I^iterature.          .          .          .          .     .     •          •

92

The  Bnhaspati-Philosophy ,

94

Common  Philosophical  Ideas     .•»••*,

.      104

1.  Metempsychosis — Samsara    ....          «          »          »         ^

.      104

2.  Inmiortalityof  the    Soul.          •          »     .     «     .     •          «

.      105

3.  Pessimism     •          ».          *         ..a^'*

.      106

XXIV  CONTENTS

PAGE  ^

4.  Ka^knan  '    .      *    .  •  .  .  .  ...  C  '  100

6.  Infitllibility  ofthc    Veda ;      111

6.  Three  Giiiias  .  .  .      '    .  .  .      •    .  .      Ill

CHAPTER  IV

VEDANTA  OR  Uttara-Mimamsa

Vedanta  or   Uttara-Mimamsa    *.'•*•'.  •  ,113

Badarayana        •     *     .  .  .  .  .  •  .  '.116  <

Fundamental  Doctrines  of  the  Vedanta    .  .  .  .  1      121

Translation  dr  the  Upanishads         .  .  •        \  .  .      IST

Character*of the  Upanishads  .  .  .  .  .'  .139

Vedanta-Sutras  •  .  .  »     *     .  ..*.•.      140

Appeals  to  tKe-Veda  .  '  .      '    •  .  ,  .  ,      143

Pramanas.  .  .  .  .  .  •  .  •  •      143

Pramanas  according  to  the  Samkhya        .  .  .  .  .144

Pratyaksha 144

Ahum&na  •'..•••  .  •  •  *      145

5'abda       .     •     .     *     .  .  .  .     •     .  .  .  *      146

Authority  of  the  cVedas  .  .  •  »  .  .  •     149

The  Meaning  of  Veda.  •  •  .  .  .  .      149

Work-part  and  Knowledge-part  of  the  Veda     .     •     .  •  .151

Vidya  and  Avidya  •     •    •     »         •  •     *     .    *     .  .  •      152

Subject  and  Object 162  ^

The  Phenomenal  Reality  of  the  World  ...  .  .  .      154

Creation  or  Causation.  ...  ....  •     165

Cause  and  Effect.        .  .     •     .  ...  .  .      156

Dresuning  and  Waking     «...  .  .  .  .  ;      160

The  Higher  and  the  Lovwer  Knowledge  .  •  »  •  •      l^^

Is  Virtue  Essential. to  Moksha  ?    ,  .  •  .  .-  .      166

The  t^oBr^hmans     ...  .  .  .168  ^

Philo¥>phy  »nd  Religion .171


k


COmiilNT^

XXV

\

PAGE

KarautB  •'••>•         .         ...         •         .

»      171

Brahman  is  Everything    <  .         ...

.      172

The  Sthula-and   Sukshma^sarira?  .          .          .          »          »

.      173

Thr  Four  States       ........

.      174

Eachatology  • .          .          .

.      176

Freedom  in  this  Life  ........

180

Different  Ways  of  Studying  Philosophy ,

182

Ramanpga     .....         ,          ,          ,          ,          ,          ,

.      185

Metapl^ors     ,    •          .          ,          .          ,          .          ,          ^

.      195

•          •                    •

CHAKIKRV.

•

'

Purva-^imamsa          .          •          •          .          .          .          .          .

197

Contents  of  the  Purva-Mimamsa    ......

200

Pramanas  of  Gaimini  •      .   «

202

Sutra-Style         .          .          •          •          •          .          .          .

203

Has  the  Veda  a  Superhuman  Origin  ?    .          .          .         «          «

.    206

Supposed  Atheism  of  Purva-Mimamsa  .    .

210

213

CHAPTER  VI.

*  »

Samkhya-Philosqphy,

Samkhya-Philosophy   «          •         .  .          .

Later  Vedant^  mixed  with  Samkhya  .
Relative  Age  of  Philosophies  and  Sutras.      •    .

Age  of 'the  *Kapi  la-Sutras     •          •  •

Samkhya-karikai        •      *   •          .  -    •
Di«e^.£;«uiapada '•  .

Tattva^samasa  •     -    •      *    .         •  •      '   •      •

Anteriority  oS  Vedanta  or  Samkhya  -    .      •    .


215
215
219
220

1222
223
224
229


xxv!                                         CONTENTS

PAGE

^

Atheism  and  Orthodoxy        .          ......

•     231

%

Authority  of  the  Veda          .          .

•     232

Samkhya  hostile  to  Priesthood     ....

.     233

Parallel  developmeBt  of  Philosophical  Systems.       .  ,

»     235

Buddhism  subsequent  to   Upanishads       •          •

.          •          .236

Lalita-^istara    •          •          •          »      -   •       -    •

,          .     237

A^vaghOsha's  Buddha-itarita  •          •          .          •

.     237

Buddhist  Suttas            .           .           .       ■    .

•     238

^

Afvalayana's  Grihya-Sutras  ....          ,

^                »               »        23»

Did  Buddha  borrow  from  Kapila  ?          •          »          .

•     240

Bana's  HarshaA:arita  •          .*         .

.      241

The  Tattva-samasa     .....

•     242

'

List  of  Twenty-five  Tattvas  ....

.          f         ./.     244

The  Avyakta    .......

»     245

Buddhi     «          •          •          .          ....

.          .          .246

Ahamkara         .          .          ......

.      249

Five  Tanmatras          .          .          .          .          .

,      250

Sixteen  Vikaras           ..»..<

,          ,     261

Five  Buddhindriyas     .          .          .          .          •          .

.     261

Five  Karmendriyas     .••.»,

.      252

Manas      »••.».•.

.      252

Five  Mahabhutas        ......

.          .     252

^

Purusha   ........

•          •

.      253

^

Is  Purusha  an  Agent  ?...«.

.      255

Three  Gunas  .    .          .          ,          .          ,          ^

.      255

Is  Purusha  one  or   many  ?  .          .          •          ,

.     256

Vedanta  Sayings         ..•.».

*                     •

•      256

Early  Relation  between  Vedanta  and  Samkhya

.      25a

Traigunya        •♦...».

•          *          •

.      262

•

Sandra  and  PratisanArara    .         •         »         •         «

.         .2154

1

•

CONTENTS'

aowir

I

PAGE

Adhyatma,  Adhtbhuta,

AdhidaiVata     '•

.          V  ^   264

Abhibuddhis  (6)        .

•           •           •
•          •          •          •

Karmayonis  (5)

•                             0                             .

•                   •                   •                   ♦

.       • .       •  .     266

Vayus  (B)

•.    •     t

•    26r

Karmatinans  (5)

•                 •                 •                 •

.     26  r

Avidya,' Nescience  (5)

.

.      26B.

Asakti,  Weakness  (28)

*   •          *   •          ■  •          .  •

*          .26a

Atusha  'and  Tushii     .

•  .         •  .         '  .            •

.=        .26^

Astddhis  and  Siddhrs.

'  •           •  *           '  •           ■  •

•      269^

Tush/is  and  Siddhis  •

•                   •               ■    •                   •

.      270

Mulikarthas

•                     •                     •          .           •

.     270.

Shashti-tantra  .

•                   •                   •                   •

.      271

Anugraba-sarga.     .

.  •        -  •        .  •           *

.      27t

Bhuta-sarga

•                   »                   •                   »

.          .          .      272

Baadha,  Bondage

»                     »                     •              '       •

.          .          .      272-

Dakshiff^-bondage,  Gifts

to  Priests.

'           *           ■

.          •          .272

Moksha.  .          .          .

•          •          •          •

.      27S

Pramanas

»          •           »          •          1

.          .          .,    273

DuAkha  .

•          •          •          •          1

.          .      274

The  true  Meaning  of  the

Samkhya  .       .

.      276.

Nature  of  Pain

»                                               %                                                 •                                                •                                                •

.      276

Vedanta  and  Samkhya

*                                                •                                                 *                                                 »                                                •

.      279^

Vedanta,  Avidya,  and  Aviveka    .          .          ,          .

.      280

Samkhya,  Aviveka     .

•

.281

Atman  and  Purusha  .

.      285.

Origin  of  Avidya

'

.      289^

The  5astra

.      28^

Development  of  Praknti,

Cosmic  .           .          .          .

.      290

Retrospect

,     • .    29a

Is  Samkhya  Idealism  ?

•

.      29*

Purusha  and  Prakrtti

.          •     295

«vi«                                      GONTtKlS

f

PAGE

State  of^Purusha,  when  Free         .          .         •          •          .

.      296

Meaning  of  Pjiin

PunJtsha  .••••.••

•          •

♦      297
.      298

Prakriti,  an  Avtomatpn  ?

.      298

Praknti.'s  Unselfishness       .  ♦

.      299

Cross  and  Subtle  Body       •          .          .

.      300

The  Atheism  of  Kapila

.          .      302

Immorality  of  the   Samkhya

.      304

Samkhya  Parables     •••••««

.      305

CHAPTER   VII.

<

Yoga-Philosophy

•

Yoga  ahd  Samkhya  •          •          •          •          •       •  •

.      807

Meaninjgs  of  the  word  Yoga.        '  •          »          •          •        <  •

4      308

Yoga,  not  Union,  but  Disunion

.      309

Yoga  as  Viveka          »••••••

.      310

Patang^li,  Vyasa        . '        »          .          •          .          .          •

.313

Second  Century  B.  C.         •          .          .          •

.      314

Chronology  of  Thought       .          .          .       .  •

.      315

The  Yoga-Philosophy-          »          ,          ,

.      317

Misconception  of  the  Objects  of  Yoga     .          •          •          .

.      318

Devotion  to  Ixvara,    Misconceptions       •          •          .          .

1                                                            *

.      319

J                  What  is  Ijvra  ?•».»••,

.      321

Kapila's  Real  Arguments    •....,

.      327

The  Theory  of  Karman       .          .          .          .        '  .

.      330

The  four  Books  of  Yoga-Sutras     ....

.  .       .      334

True  OlDJect  of  Yoga         \          ,          .          .        \

.      335

A-itta    \          .          .       '

.      336

Functions  of  the  Mind          .....

.      337

•          -          •          •          »          1          *         ■
Exercises

.     '     .     338

CONTENTS


Xkix


Dispassion,  Vairagya        '    •      *    •
Meditation  With  of  Witliout  an  Objc6t  .
livara  once  more       •  •  •  •

Other  Nfeans  of  obtaining   Samadhi


PAGE
338

341
343
344


Samadhi    Apra^ata  •  •  •  •  •  .  •  •      347

Kaivalya,  Freedom    .  •  •  .       '    •  *  .  .347

Yogangas,  Helps  to  Yoga    .  •  .  ...  •      348

Vibhutis,  Powers 349

Samyama  and  Siddhis  .  .  •  .  .  .  .350

Miracles  .  .  .  .  .       '   .  .  .  .      352

True  Yoga        .  .  .  .....  .      355

The  Three  Gunas       ...'.*..*.  .      357

Samskaras  and  Vasanas        .  .  .  .  .  •  .      357

Kaivalya  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .359

Is  Yoga  Nihilism  ?     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      369

*

chapter  vxii.
NyayX  And  Vaueshika

Relation  between  Nyaya  and  Vai^eshika

Dignaga

Bibliography   *.

Nyaya-Philosophy

Sukimum  Bonum

Means  of  Salvation

The  Sixteen  Topics  or  Padarthas

Means  of  Knowledge

Objects  of  Knowledge

Padartha,  Object

Six  Padarthas  of  Vaijeshika
Madhava's  Account  of  Nyaya


iieshiki

*

.  .      362

f

«M

•

.

.      364

•

•          %          *

«     368

*      «,

*r

V

•     369

•

«          1

«          «

k                                               V

«

*  370

•  373

♦  374

•  374
.      375
.      376

.      376

•          «

•

•

•     377

3txx                                            GCft^TENTS

PAGE

I.  Praijtiana       •          •          •          •

•          •          •          "

1

,  .  378

M

Perception  orPratyaksha     .

'      379

Inference  or  Anumana

*                     >

.      379

Comparison  or  Upamana     .

.      382

Word  or  5abda

.      382

II.  Prameya    ....

«

.      382

III.  Samjaya    ....

.      385

IV.  Prayogana.     V.  Drishmnta.     VI.

SifJdhanta

.      385

M

VII.  The  Avayavas,  or  Members  of  a

•                     1

L  Syllogism       .          »

.      385

Indian  and  Greek    Logic     .

•                      •                      ft                      •

.      386

VIII.  Tarka    •          .          .          .

•                     •                     ft                     •

.      388

IX.  Nimaya    ,          .          •          .

•                     •                     •                     •

.      388

X-XVI.  Vada,    Galpa,  Vitanda,  Hetvabhasa,  Gati,  'Khalj

I,  Nigra-

hasthana           ....

«

.      389

Judgments  on  Indian  Logic

>•                      ■*

.      390

The  Later  Books  of  the   Nyaya    •

,      391

Pratyaksha,  Perception  .     .

.  '        .           •           •

.      392

Time — Present,  rPast,  Future

.      393

Upamana,  Comparison

394

5'abda,  the  Word        .

.      894

The  Eight  Pramanas  •         •          •

'                      •

.      395

Thoughts  on  Language         «     *    •

'                               '                                r

.      397

Spho^aT    •          .          •      '    •          •

•               •               .

.      402

4l

Words  express  the  Summun  Genus    *

*

.      401^

Words  expressive  of  Genera  or  Individuals  ?     •          .

.     406

All  Words  mean  to  d'*'

•                              •                               •

.     406

Vedania  on  Spho^a    .          ...

•                    ,          •                              •

.      410

Yoga  and  Samkhya  on  Sphofa

•           •

.      412

Nyaya  .on  Spho^a        •          •          •

•          #                    •          •                    ,         *

.      413

Vaijeshika  on   Sphgfa

•               •'              •

414

Prame^as,  Olpjects  pf  Knqwledg^  .

.               •               •               <

.      "    .      415

1

CONTENTS

xxxi

•

•■     '

PAGE

Indriyas,  Senses          ....•••-

415

j'atira,  Body    ....

»          i

,          •          •          •

416

Manas,  Mind    •         •

•

•          •          »          •

.      416

Atman    •          •          •          •          -

•

«          •          •          <

.      419

Memory  .....

»

,          .          .          •

.      419

Knowledge  not  Eternal

•

.          •          •          •

421

More  Prameyas.

1          i

t          •          •          •          <

.      421

Life  after  Death

»          <

1                                    •                                    •                    *               .                                    4

.      422

Existence  of  Deity      .

«

•                                    .                                    •                                     1

422

Cause  and  Effect        •          .          .

«

1                         •                         •                         •                         a

423

Phala,  Rewards          •

)          t

>                         •                         •                         •                         t

425

Emancipation    «         •          •

.

.                          •                          .                          •

.      425

Knowledge  of  Ideas,  not  of  things  .

>         «

1                         .                         .                         .                         •

426

Syllogism            •••....

427

Pramanas  in  different  Philosophical  Schools    .          .          .          .

.      428

Anumana  for  Others .

.

•                          «                          .                          •

431

CHAPTER  IX

VAis-ESHiKA  Philosophy

Date  of  Sutras  • 438

Dates  from  Tibetan  Sources.  .  .  .  ,  .  .439

Kanada    ..........      440

Substances        .         .         .         .         .  .         .         .         .441

Qualities  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .441

Actions    ..........      442

Cause 443

Qualities. Examined 443

Time        .  .  .  .  .  .  ...  .  .      444

Space 444

Manas     .....  .....      445

Anus  or  Atoms  ....  .....      445


XXXI I


CONtENTS


Samanya.

Vijiesha  .

Samavaya
Abhava  .
The  Six  Systems

INDEX  .


PAGE
447
447

447
448
449

461


J


INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.


INTRODUCTORY  CHAPTER.


Flillosopliy  moA  FhUMoyhM*.

While  in  most  countries  a  history  of  philosOThy  is
inseparable  from  a  jtiistory  of  philosophers,  in  Inaia  we
have  indeed  ample  materials  for  watching  the  origin  and
growth  of  philosophical  ideas,  but  hardly  any  for  studying
the  lives  or  characters  of  those  who  founded  or  supported
the  philosophical  systems  of  that  country.  Their  work
has  remained  and  continues,  to  live  to  the  present  day,  but
of  the  philosophers  themselves  hardly  anything  remains
to  us  beyond  their  names.  Not  even  their  dates  can  be
ascertained  with  any  amount  of  certainty.  In  Greece,
from  the  earliest  times,  the  simplest  views  of  tlie  world
and  of  the  destinies  of  man,  nay  even  popular  sayings,
maxims  of  morality  and  worldly  wisdom,  and  wise  saws
of  every  kind,  even  though  they  contained  nothing  very
original  or  personal.  Were  geabrally  quoted  as  the  utter-
ances of  certain  persons  or  at  least  ascribed  to  certain
names,  such  as  the  Seven  Saged,  so  as  to  have  something
like  a  historical  background.  We  have  some  idea  of  who
Thales  was,  and  who  was  Plato,  where  and  when  they
lived,  and  what  they  did;  but  of  Eapila,  the  supposed
founder  of  tiie  S&mkhya  philosophy,  of  Pata^/f/ali,  the
foonder  of  the  To^,  of  Gotama  and  Eanfida,  of  Bddai^-
yana  and  Oaimim,  we  know  next  to  nothing,  and  what
we  know  hardly  ever  rests  cm  contemporary  and  trust-
worthy evidence.  Whether  any  of  these  Indian  philosophers
Hved  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  place,  whether  they
were  fiends  or  enemies,  whether  some  were  the  pupils  and

1  »


i


2  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

otlierB  the  teachers,  all  this  is  unknown  to  us,  nor  d^  I  see
any  ehanoe  of  our  ever  knowing  more  about  them  than  we
do  at  present.  We  read  that  lliales  warned  King  Croesus,
we  are  told  that  Empedocles  finished  liis  days  by  throwing
himself  ijnto  the  flames  of  Aetna,  we  know  that  Socrat^
drank  poison,  and  that  Anaxagoras  was  the  friend  of
Pericles,  but  there  is  nothing  to  connect  the  names  of  the
ancient  Indian  philosophers  with  any  historical  events,
with  any  political  characters,,  or  with  dates  before  the
time  €^  Buadha.      .

-  ft  IS  quite  true  that  every  literary  composition,  whether
in  prose  or  in  poetry,  presupposes  an  indiiridual  author,
that  no  poem  r^es^itself,  anHo  philosophical  system  is
elabcHraied  by  the  people  at  large.  But  cm  tiie  ol^er  hand,
no  poet  makes  himselt,  no  {^loeopher  owes  everything  to
himself.  He  grows  from  a.  soil  that  is  ready  made  for
Mm.  «Qd  he  lathee  m  inteUectoal  atmoephelre  which  is
not  of  his  own  making.  The  Hindus  seem  to  have  felt
this  indebtedness  of  the  individuids  to  those  before  and
around  them  far  m(»re  strcmgly  than  ihe  Qreeks,  whO)  if
they  cannot  find  a  human  author,  have  recourse  even  to
mythological  and  divine  personage*  in  order  to  have
a  pedestal,  a  name,  and  an  authority  for  every  great
thought  and  every  great  invention  of  antiquity.  The
Hindus  are  satisfied  with  eiving  us  the  thoughts,  and  leave
us  to  find  out  their  antecedents  as  best  we  can.


The  Hindus  have  divided  the  whole  of  their  ancient
litcmtuse  into  two  ports,  which  really  mean  two  periods,
jSrutam^  what  was  heard,  and  was  not  the  Ivork  oi  men  or
any  personal  being,  Inmian  c^  divine,  and  Smritam,  what
was  remembered,  and  has  always  be^  1a!eated  as  the  work
of  an  individual,  whetibw  man  or  god.  iSfrutam  or  /Sruti
came  afterwards  to  mean  what  hm  been  revealed,  exaetly
as  we  understand  that  wwd,  while  Smritam  or  Smrtii
eomprised  all  that  was  reeogpJsed  as  possesBing  human
authority  only,  so  that  it  there  evar  waa  a  eonfliet  beiwem
the  two,  Smr&i  or  txaditioii  might  at  oiKie  be  oviemried  by
what  Wf«  called  Sruti  w  revelaSion.


OTDTAM   AN0  Stfi?/PAM.  3

It  fa  eiinoas,  however,  to  observe  how  the  revealed
literstnrQ  of  the  Hindus,  such  as  the  hymns  of  the
Rig-veda,  have  in  later  times  been  ascribed  to  certain
families,  nay  even  to  individual  poets,  though  many  of
the  names  of  these  poets  are  clearly  fictitious.  Nor  are
even  these  fictitious  poets  supposea  to  have  created  or
composed  their  poems,  but  only  to  have  seen  them  as  they
were  revealed  to  them  by  a  higher  power,  commonly  called
Bralunan,  or  the  Word.  What  we  call  philosophy  in  its
eystematie  form,  is,  from  an  Indian  point  of  view,  not
revealed,  iSrutam,  but  belongs  to  Smrtti  or  tradition.
We  possess  it  in  carefully  composed  and  sjrstematically
elabcmted  manuals,  in  short  aphorisms  or  Sfitras  or  in
metrical  E&rik&s,  ascribed  to  authors  of  whom  we  hardly
know  anything,  and  followed  by  large  commentaries  or
ind^>6ndent  treatises  which  are  supposed  to  contain  the
outcome  of  a  continuous  tradition  going  back  to  very
ancient  times,  to  the  S&tra,  nay  even  to  the  BrShmemA
period,  though  in  their  present  form  they  are  confessedly
the  work  .or  medieval  or  modem  writers.  In  the  Sfktras
each  system  of  philosophy  is  complete,  and  elaborated  in
its  minutest  details.  There  is  no  topic  within  the  sphere
of  philosophy  which  does  not  find  a  clear  or  straightforward
treatment  in  these  short  Sftti'as.  The  SMra  style,  imperfect
as  it  is  from  a  literary  point  of  view,  would  be  invaluable
to  ns  in  other  syst^s  of  philosophy,  such  as  Hegel's  or
]^ato'8.  We  should  always  kpow  where  we  are,  and  we
rtumld  never  hear  of  a  philosopher  who  declared  on  his
deathbed  that  no  one  had  understood  him,  nor  of  antago-
nistic sdiools,  diverging  from  and  appealing  to  the  same
teacher.  One  tiling  must  be  quite  clear  to  every  attentive
reader  of  these  SMras,  namely,  that  they  represent  the  last
result  of  a  long  continued  study  of  philosophy,  carried  on
tor  centaries  in  the  forests  and  hermitages  of  India.  The
ideas  which  are  shared  by  all  the  systems  of  Indian  phUo-
aophy,  the  large  number  of  technical  terms  possessed  by
them  in  eommon  or  peculiar  to  each  system,  can  leave  no
dmxbt  on  this  subject.  Nor  can  we  doubt  that  for  a  long
time  the  philoeopnieal  thoughts  of  India  were  embodied  in
what  I  call  a  Mnemonic  Literature.    Writing  for  litemry

B  c


4  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY,

purposes  was  unknown  in  India  before  the  rise  of
j^uddhism,  and  even  at  the  Bud^lhist  Ciouneils  when
their  Sacred  Canon,  the  Tripi^aka,  was  settled,  we  hear
nothing  as  yet  of  paper,  ink,  and  reeds,  but  only  of  oral
and  even  musical  repetition.  The  very  name  of  a  Council
was  Samgiti  or  Mah&samgiti,  i.e.  singing  together,  and  the
different  parts  of  the  Canon  were  not  consigned  to  writing,
but  rehearsed  by  certain  individuals.  Whenever  there
arose  a  dispute  as  to  the  true,  teaching  of  Buddha,  it  was
not  settled  by  an  appeal  to  any  MS.,  but  an  invitation
was  addressed  to  a  member  of  the  Samgh&  who  knew  the
text  by  heart.  It  is  actually  mentioned  that  the  Southern
Canon  was  not  reduced  to  writing  till  the  first  century  B.C.,
under  King  Vai^d>glLmani,  about  80  B.C.  Nothing  can  be
more  explicit  than  the  statement  in  the  chronicles  of  Ceylon^
on  that  point :  *  Before  this  time  the  wise  monks  had
handed  down  the  texts  of  the  Tipi^aka  orally;  and  also
the  Ait/takatha  (commentary).  At  this  time  the  monks,
perceiving  the  decay  of  beings  (not  MSS.),  assembled,  and
in  order  that  the  Law  might  endure  for  a  long  time,  they
caused  it  to  be  written  down  in  booka'  Such  a  state  of
things  is  difficult  for  us  to  imagine,  still  if  we  wish  to
form  a  true  idea  of  the  intellectual  state  of  India  in  pre-
Buddhistic  times,  we  must  accustom  ourselves  to  the  idea
that  all  that  could  be  called  literature  then  was  mnemonic
only,  carefully  guarded  by  a  peculiar  and  very  strict  ^
educational  discipline,  but  of  course  exposed  to  all  the
inevitable  chances  of  oral  tradition.  That  Mnemonic  Period
existed  for  philosophy  as  well  as  for  everything  else,  and
if  we  have  to  be^n  our  study  of  Indian  philosophy  with
the  Sdtras,  these  S(^tras  themselves  must  be  considered  as
the  last  outcome  of  a  long  continued  philosophical  activity
carried  pn  by  memory  oiuy.

.irpanisli«d-p«rioA,  from  alMUt  700  B.a

But  while  the  SMras  give  us  abstracts  of  the  various
systems  of  philosophy,  ready  made,  there  must  have  been,
nay  there  was,  one  period,  j^revious  to  the  Sfltras,  durinfi^
which  we  can  watch  something  like  growth,  like  life  and
strife,  in  Indian  philosophy,  and  that  is  the  Imit  stage ,


UPANISHAD-PEBIOD.  5

of   the    Vedic    period,    as    represented    to    us    in   the
Upaniskads.

For  gaining  an  insight  into  the  early  gi^wth  of  Indian
philosophic  thought,  this  period  is  in  fact  the  most  valu-
able; though  of  systematised  philosophy,  in  our  sense  of
the  word,  it  contains,  as  yet,  little  or  nothing.  As  we  can
feel  that  there  is  electricity  in  the  air,  and  tnat  there  will
be  a  storm,' we  feel,  on  reading  the  Upanishads,  that  there
is  philosophy  in  the  Indian  mind,  and  that  there  will  be
thunder  and  lightning  to  follow  soon.  Nay,  I  should  even
go  a  step  further.  In  order  to  be  able  to  account  for  what
seem  to  us  more  sparks  of  thought,  mere  guesses  at  truth,
we  are  driven  to  aclmit  a  long  familiarity  with  philosophic
problems  before  the  time  that  gave  birth  to  the  Upanishads
which  we  possess.

The  Upanishads  contain  too  many  technical  terms,  such
as  Brahman,  Atman,  Dhorma,  Yrata,  Yoga,  Mtmll7ns&,  and
many  more^  to  allow  us  to  suppose  that  they  were  the

f>roduct8  of  one  day  or  of  one  generation.  Even  if  the
ater  systems  of  philosophy  did  not  so  often  appeal  them-
selves to  the  Upanishads  as  their  authorities,  we  could
easily  see  for  ourselves  that,  though  flowing  in  very
different  directions,  like  the  Ganges  and  the  Indus,  these
systems  of  philosophy  can  all  be  traced  back  to  the  same
distant  heights  from  which  they  took  their  rise.  And  as
India  was  fertilised,  not  only  by  the  Ganges  and  Indus,
but  by  ever  so  many  rivera  and  rivulets,  all  pointing  to  the
Snowy  Mountains  in  the  North,  we  can  see  the  Indian
mind  also  being  nourished  through  ever  so  many  channels,
all  starting  from  a  vast  accumulation  of  religious  and
philosophic  thought  of  which  we  seem  to  see  the  last
remnants  only  m  our  Upanishads,  while  the  original
springs  are  lost  to.  us  for  even

If  some  of  the  seeds  and  germs  of  philosophy  could  be
discovered,  as  has  been  hastily  thought,  among  the  savage
tribes  of  to*day,  nothing  would  be'  more  welcome  to  the
historian  of  philosophy,' but  until  these  tribes  have  beefn
elaasified    according   to    language,  we  must  leave   these


6  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY*

dangerous  entexprises  to  others.  For  the  present  wf^  mnsfe
be  satisfied  with  the  germs  of  thought  such  as  we  find
them  in  the  Upanishads,  and  in  the  archives  of  language
which  reach  back  far  beyond  the  Upanishads  and  even
beyond  the  folklore  of  Ehonds,  Bhils,  and  Kole&

It  is  true  that  during  that  distant  period  which  we  can
watch  in  the  Upanishads,  philosophy  was  not  yet  separated
from  religion ;  but  the  earliest  religion,  at  least  among  the
speakers  of  Aryan  languages,  seems  always  to  have  been  not
only  the  first  reli^on,  but  the  first  philosophy  also,  of  the
races  that  had  taken  possession  of  India,  as  well  as  of
the  best  soil  of  Asia  and  Europe.  If  it  is  4he  object  of
philosophy  to  discover  the  causes  of  things,  rer'tcm  co*
gnoHcerecaueas,  what  was  the  creation  of  the  earliest  mytho*
logical  gods  but  an  attempt  to  explain  the  causes  of  light,
of  fire,  of  dawn,  of  day  and  night,  of  rain  and  thunder,  by
postulating  agents  for  every  one  of  them,  and  callin.g  them
Dyaus  or  Ami,  light  or  fire,  Ushas,  dawn,  the  Asvins,  day
and  night,  Indra,  the  sky-god^  and  calling  all  of  them
Devas,  the  Bright,  or  <2n,  the  gods?  Here  are  the  firat
feeders  of  the  idea  of  the  Godhead,  whatever  tributaries  it
may  have  received  afterwards.  Of  course,  that  distant
period  to  which  we  have  to  assign  this  earliest  growth  of
language,  thought,  reUgion,  law,  morals,  and  philosophy,
has  left  us  no  bterary  monuments.  Here  and  there  we
can  discover  faint  traces  in  language,  indicating  the  foo^
prints  left  by  the  strides  of  former  giants.  But  in  India,
where  we  have  so  little  to  guide  ns  in  our  historical  re-
searches, it  is  of  great  importance  to  remember  that  there
was  such  a  distant  period  of  nascent  thought ;  and  that,  if
at  a  later  time  we  meet  with  the  same  ideas  and  words
turning  up  in  different  systems,  whether  of  n:)ligion  or
philosophy,  we  should  be  careful  not  to  conclude  at  once
that  they  must  liave  been  borrowed  by  one  system  from
the  other,  forgetting  that  there  was  an  ancient  reservoir  of
thought  from  which  all  could  have  drawn  and  drunk.

Considering  how  small  our  historical  information  is  as
to  the  intellectual  and  social  life  of  India  at  different  timies
of  its  history,  it  is  essential  that  we  should  caref tilly  gather
whatever  there  is,  before  we  attempt  to  -  study   Tnrjijt^p


INTBLLBOXUAIi  USM  IN  ASOmWi:  IXBiA.  f

f hilcNSKyphy  i&  its  diffeventiatod  and  sytttomatiaed  sjrgtamb
iCiich^of  otur  inlantiMrion  naay  vepraieiit  a  chaos  omy,  hik
we  want  awh  a  ehaoa  ia  order  to  luideistttaad  the  koainoi
that  followed*

In  e^rtainr  chapters  of  the  Brfthiaanas  and  in  the  Upaai-
shads  we  see  a  piotu^  of  the  sooUd  aiod  intellectiial  life
of  India  at  that  early  time,  which  seems  folly  to  justify
ihe  sayizig  ihait  India  has  ^always  been  a  nation  of  philo^
sophers*  The  picture  which  these  sacred  books  give  us
of  the  seething  thoughts  of  that  country  may  at  fiM  sight
seem  faneifni  and  almost  in^srediUe ;  but  becaiase  th^  mea
of  and^it  India^  as  they  aro  there  represented  to  i|s,  if
by  tradition  only,  a^  different  from  Qreefcs  and  Bomana
and  horn  ourselves,  it  does  not  folbw  that  we  h^ve  not
before  us  a  faiUiful  account  of  what  really  existed  at  one
time  in  the  land  of  the  Five  or  Seven  iUvens.  Why  should
these  accounts  have  been  invented,  unless  they  contained*
a  certain  verisimilitude  in  the  eyes  of  the  peopled  It  is
quite  clear  that  they  were  not  composed^  ^  some  pe^te
aeem  to  imi>giiu».  in  older  to  impoM  after  two  thoai«ads
of  years  on  us,  the  scholars  of  Europe,  or  xm  anybody  else.
The  idea  that  the  ancient  nations  of  the  world  wished  to
impose  on  us,  that  they  wished  to  appear  more  ancient
than  they  were,  more  heroic,  more  marvellous,  more  en^
lightened,  is  an  absurd  fancy.  They  did  not  even  think
of  us,  and  had  no  word  as  yet  for  posterity.  Such  thoughts
belong  to  much  later  times,  and  even  then  we  woaidei
rather  how  a  local,  not  to  say,  provincial  poet  like  Horad^
shquld  have  thought  so  mucli  of  ages  to  come.  We  must
nott  aUow  such  ideas  of  fraud  and  forgery,  to  spoil  our
f^tli  and  our  interest  in  ancient  history.  The  ancients
thoij^t  much  more  of  themselves  than  of  the  nations  of
the  custant  future.  If,  however,  what  the  ancients  tell  us
about  their  own  tinies,  or  about  the  past  which  could  never
have  exiended  very  far  back,  seeius  iuciedible  to  us,  we
should  always  try  first  of  all  to  underfttand  it  as  possible,
before  we  reject  it  as  impossible  and  as  an  intentional
fraud.    That  in  very  early  times  kings  and  nobles  and


8  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

Mges  in  Iiidia  should  have  been  absorbed  in  phiiosonhioal
qneetions  seems  no  doubt  strange  to  us^  because  the  energies
of  the  peopfle  of  Europe,  as  far  back  as  we  know  anything
about  them,  have  always  been  divided  between  practiciu
and  intellectual  pursuits,  the  former,  in  ancient  times,  con-
siderably preponderating  over  the  latter.  But  why  should
not  a  different  kind  of  life  have  been  possible  in  a  country
which,  without  much  effort  on  the  part  of  its  cultivators,
jdelded  in  abundance  all  that  was  necessary  fof  the  sujyport
of  life,  which  was  protected  on  three  sides  by  the  silveiv
streaks  of  the*ocean,  and  on  the  fourth  by  almost  impassable
mountain  barriers,  a  country  which  for  thousands  of  years
was  free  from  war  except  the  war  of  extermination  directed
against  barbarous  tribes,  the  so-called  sons  of  the  soil?
After  all,  to  thoughtful  people,  finding  themselves  placed
on  this  planet,  they  did  not  know  how  or  whv,  it  was  not
so  veiy  far-fetched  a  problem,  particularly  while  there  was
as  yet  no  struggle  for  life,  to  ask  who  they  were,  whence
they  came,  and  what  they  were  intended'for  here  on  earth.
Thus  we  read  at  the  beginning  of  the  iSvet&svatara-upani-
shad :  *  Whence  are  we  bom  i  Whereby  do  we  live,  and
whither  do  we  go?  O  ye  who  know  Jbrahman',' (tell  us)
at  whose  command  we  abide  here,  whether  in  pain  or  in
pleasure  ?  Should  time  or  nature,  or  necessity,  or  chance,
or  the  elements  be  considered  as  the  cause,  or  He  who  is
called  Purusha,  the  man,  that  is,  the  Supreme  Spirit  *  ? '

Xali.%trl7Mi  sad  Th^hmMia.

It  tnight  be  thought  that  all  this  was  due  to  the  elevating
influence  of  an  intellectual  aristocracy,  such  as  we  find
from  very  early  times  to  the  present  day  in  India,  the
Bt&hmans.  But  this  is  by  no  means  the  case.  The  so-
called  Kshatriyas  or  military  nobility  take  nearly  as  active
a  part  in  the  intellectual  life  of  the  country  as  the  Br&hmans
themselves.  The  fact  is  that  we  have  to  deal  in  the  earlier
period  of  ancient  India  with  two  rather  than  with  four
castes  and  their  numeix)us  suMi  visions.

This  term  cohte  has  proved  most  mischievous  and  mis-

^  See  also  AnogU&,  chap.  XX ;  a  B.  £.,  VllI,  p.  311.


KSHATBIYAS    AND   BliAHMANS.


leading,  and  the  less  we  avail  ourselves  of  it  the  better
we  shall  be  able  to  understand  the  true  state  of  society
in  the  ancient  times  of  India.  Caste  is,  of  course,  a  Portu-
guese word,  and  was  applied  from  about  the  middle  of  the
sixteenth  century  by  rough  Portuguese  sailors  to  certain
divisions  of  Indian  society  which  had  struck  their  fancv.
It  had  before  been  used  in  the  sense  of  breed  or  stock,
originally  in  the  sense  of  a  pure  or  unmixed  breed.  In
1613  Puichas  speaks  of  the  thirty  aiid  odd  several  castes
of  the  Banians  {Vajiigy  T^o  ask  what  caste  me^ms  in  India
would  be  like  asking  what  caste  means  in  England,  or
what  fetish  (feiti90)  means  in  Portugal.  What  we  really
want  to  know  is  what  was  implied  by  such  Indian  words
as  Varna  (colour),  Gkii  (kith),  to  say  nothing  of  SapiruZ*
atva  or  Samlinodakatva,  Eula  (family),  Gotra  (race),  Pra-
vara  (lineage) ;  otherwise  we  shall  have  once  more  the  same
confusion  about  the  social  organisation  of  ancient  India
as  about  African  fetishism  or  North  American  totemismi
Each  foreign  word  should  always  be  kept  to  its  own  native
meaning,  or,  if  generalised  for  scientific  purjposes,  it  should
be  most  carefully  defined  afresh.  Otherwise  every  social
distinction  will  be  called  caste,  every  stick  a  totem,  every
idol  a  fetish.

We  have  in  India  the  Aryan  settlers  on  one  side,  and
the  native  inhabitants  on  the  other.  The  former  are  named
Aryas  or  Aryas,  that  is,  cultivators  of  the  soil  which  they
had  conquered ;  the  latter,  if  submissive  to  their  conquerors,
are  the  ^^ftdras^  or  D&sas,  slaves,  while  the  races  of  indi*
genous  origin  who  remained  hostile  to  the  end,  were  classed
as  altogether  outside  the  pale  of  political  society.  The
Aryas  in  India  were  naturally  diiferentiated  like  other
people  into  an  intellectual  or  priestly  aristocracy,  the
Br&hmans,  and  a  fighting  or  ruling  aristocracy,  the  Ksha-
triyas,  while  the  great  bulk  remained  dimply  Vi^  or  Vai^ras,
that  is,  hotiseholders  and  cultivatoi*s  of  the  soil,  and  an^er-
wards  merchants  and  mechanics  also.    To  the  very  last

-^  Thus  we  read  as  earJj  as  the  Mah&bh&rata— *  The  three  qualities  abide
iu  the  three  castes  thys  ;  darkn%s8  in  the  Sudni,  passion  in  the  Kshatriya,
aud  the  highest,  goodness,  in  the  Brahma#ta.*     (Anugita,  S.  B.  £.,  VIII,

P-  329)  ,


lO  INDIAN  PHILOSOPflT

the  three  great  divisions,  Brahmans,  Eshatriyas^  and
Vaisyas,  shared  certain  privileges  ancl,  duties  in  oommoo.
Originally  they  were  all  cdt  them  (^ed  twiee-boni)  and
not  only  allowed,  but  obliged  to  be  educated  in  Vedic
knowledge  and  to  pass  through  the  three  or  four  Asramas
or  stages  of  life.  Thus  we  r^  in  the  Mah&bhilrata :  ^  The
order  of  V&naprasthas,  of  sages  who  dwell  in  forests  and
live  on  fruits,  roots,  and  sir  is  prescribed  for  the  three
twice-born  (classes) ;  the  curder  of  householders  is  prescribed
for  all/  (AnugttjL,  S.  B.  K,  VIII,  p.  310.)  WhUe  the  divi-
sion into  Aryas  and  D&sas  was  due  to  descent,  that  into
Br&hmans,  Kshatriyas,  and  Vai«yas  seems  originally  to
have  been  due  to  occupation  only,  though  it  may  soon
have  acquired  an  hereditary  character.  The  Br&.lunans
had  to  look  after  the  welfare  of  soulsf  the  Kshatriyas  after
the  welfare  of  the  body  politic,  and  the  V ai^as  represented
originally  the  undifferentiated  mass  of  the  people,  engaged
in  the  ordinary  occupations  of  an  incipient  civilisation.
The  later  subdivision  of  Indian  society,  as  described'  by
Maatt,  and  as  preserved  under  different  forms  to  the  present
day,  does  not  concern  us  for  our  present  purpose.  The
lessees  which  the  names  of  Varna  (colour)  and  OkU  (genus)
teach  us  had  long  been  forgotten  even  in  Menu's  time»  and
are  buried  at  present  under  a  heavy  heap  of  rubbish^  9till
even  that  rubbish  heap  deserves  to  be  sifted,  as  I  believe
it  is  now  being  sifted  by  scholars  like  Mr.  Bisley  and
others.

In  ancient  times  neither  Kshatriyas  nor  Vaidyas  were
excluded  from  taking  part  in  those  religious  and  philo-
sophical struggles,  wMeh  seem  to  have  occupied  India  far
more  than  wars  of  defence  or  conquest  Nay  women  also
claimed  a  right  to  be  heard  in  their  philosophical  assem-
blies. The  Kshatriyas  never  surrendered  their  right  to
take  part  in  the  discussions  of  the  great  problems  of  life
and  death,  and  they  occasionally  asserted  it  with  great
force,  aiid  dignity.  Besides,  the  strong  reaction  against
priestly  supremacy  Ciuiie  at  last  fi-om  tfiem,  for  we  must
not  forget  that  Buddha  also  was  a  Kshatriya,  a  prince  of
Kapilaviistu,  and  that  his  chief  opposition,  from  a  socia*
and  political  point  of  view,  was  against  the  privileges  of


KING   KANAKA.  XX

teadiii^  and  sacrificmg,  claimed  by  the  Brfthmans  as  their
exelimve  propeF^  and  against  the  mfallible  and  divine
charaet^r  aaenbed  by  them  to  their  Y edas.

If  we  look  back  once  more  to  the  intellectual  life  of
India  in  the  ancient  Yedic  times,  or  at  least  in  the  times
represented  to  ns  in  the  Upanishads,  we  read  there  of  an
ancient  Sing  daoaka,  whose  fame  at  the  time  when  the
Upamakads  were  composed  had^  ah'eady  spread  far  and
WKte  (Kaufih.  Up.  IV,  i ;  Brih.  At.  Up.  II,  i,  i).  He  wajs
a  king  of  the  YidehaB,  his  capital  was  Mithim,  and  his
daug)bter>  Sit&,  is  reinresented  to  us  in  later  times  as  the
famous  wife  of  R&ma  (Rftmapdrvatap.  Up.).  But  in  the
Upaniafaads  he  is  represented,  not  aa  a  successful  general
or  conqueror,  not  so  much  as  a  brave  knight,  victorious
in  chivalrous  toumammts.  We  read  of  him  as  taking
part  in  metaphysical  discussions,  as  presiding  over  philo-
sophical eouncik,  as  bestowing  his  ps^rcmage  on  the  most
ema^  Mges  of  hk  kingdom,  as  the  friend  of  YagrifaTalkya.
one  of  the  most  famoiim  philosophical  teachers  of  the
Upanisfaad  period.  When  performing^  a  great  saerifioe,
this  king  sets  apaort  a  day  lor  a  Brahmpdyam^  a  dispu-
tatiem  in  which  philosc^hers,  such  aa  Y&^/^avalkya,  A^vala,
Artabh&ga,  and  even  women,  such  as  G4rgi,  the  daughter
of  Y&toknu  (Brih.  Ar.  Up.  Ill,  i,  5),  take  an  active  part.
To  the  viok»r  in  these  disputations  the  king  promised
a  reward  of  a  thousand  cows  with  ten  pados  of  gold  fixed
to. their  horns.  As  Yftgr^avalkya  claimed  these  cows  on
aecovQut  of  his  superior  knowledge,  the  other  Br&hmans
ruresent  propounded  a  number  of  questicms  which  he  was
expected  to  answer  in  oider  to  prove  his  superiority.  And
so  he  does.  The  first  question  is  how  a  man  who  oifers
a  sacrifice  can  be  freed  thereby  from  the  fetters  of  death.
Then  follow  questicms  such  as,  While  death  swallows  the
whole  world,  who  is  the  deity  tliat  shall  swallow  death?
What  becomes  of  the  vital  spirits  when  a  man  dies  ?  What
ia  it  thalt  does  not  forsake  man  in  the  hour  of  deatli?

»  lUiMliitaJu  Up.  IV,  I ;  Bfih,  Xr.  Up.  Ill,  i.


12  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

What  becomes  of  man  after  his  speech  at  death  has  entered
the  fire,  his  breath  the  wind,  his  eye  the  sun,  his^  mind  the
moon,  his  ear  space,  his  body  the  earth,  his  Atman  the
ether,  the  hairs  of  his  body  the  herbs,  the  hair  of  his  head
the  trees,  his  blood  arid  seed  the  waters  ?  Whither  did  the
descendants  of  King  Pariksliit  go?  What  is  the  soul?
What  contains  the  worlds?  Who  rules  everything  and
yet  is  different  from  eveiy thing?  Far  be  it  from  me  to
say  that  these  and  other  questions  were  answered  by
Ti^avalkya  in  a  manner  ^that  would  seem'  satisfactory .
to  ourselves.  What  is  important  to  us  is  that  such  ques-
tions should  have  been  asked  at  all,  that  they  diould  have
formed  the  staple  of  public  discussion  at  that  early  time,
a  time  previous  to  the  establishment  qf  Buddha's  religion
in  India,  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  and  that  his  answers
should  have  satisfied  his  contemp(Hraries.  T  lere  is  no  other
country  in  the  world  where  in  such  ancient  times  such
disputations  would  have  been  thought  of,  unless  it  were
in  fegypt.  Neither  Menelaos  nor  Priam  would  have  pre-
sided over  them,  neither  Achilles  nor  Ulysses  would  havie
shone  in  them.  That  these  disputations  took  place  in
public  and  in  the  presence  of  the  king  we  have  no  reason
to  doubt.  Besides,  there  is  one  passage  (Br^h.  Ar.  Up.  III»
2,  13)  where  we  are  told  expressly  that  th^  two  disputants,
Y&4/navalkya  and  Artabhilga,  retired  into  a  private  place
in  order  to  come  to  an  understanding  about  one  (j^uestiou
which,  as  they  thought,  did  not  admit  of  being  discussed
in  public.

Do  we  know  of  any  other  country  where  at  that  early
time  such  religious  congresses  would  have  been  thought  of,
and  royal  rewards  bestowed  on  those  who  were  victorious
in  these  philosophical  tournaments  ?

One  of  the  sayings  of  6ranaka  has  remained  famous  in
Indian  literature  for  ever,  and  deserves  to  remain  so.  •  Wten
his  capital,  MithillL,  was  destroyed  by  a  conflagration,  he
turned  round  and  said, '  While  Mithili  is  burning,  jiothing
that  is  mine  is  burnt.'

Very  curious  is  another  feature,  that,  namely,  in  these
public  assemblies  not  only  was  a  royal  reward  bestowed
on  the  victor  but  the  vanquished  was  sometimes  threatened


Afl^ATAiSATRU.  1 3

with  losing  his  hei^  ^  Nor  was  this  a  threat  only,  but
it  actually  happen'^d,  we  are  told,  in  the  case  of  /S&kalva
(BHh.  Ar.  Up.  Ill,  9,  0,6),  Must  we  withhold  our  belief
rrom  such  statements,  because  we  have  learnt  to  doubt
the  burnt  hand  of  Mucins  Scaevola  and  the  suicide  of
Lucretia?  I  believe  not,  for  the  cases  are  not  quite
parallel.

Besides  these  public  disputations,  we  also  read  of  private
conferences  in  which  Y&gfwavalkya  enlightens  his  royal
patron  kanaka,  'and  after  receiving  every  kind  of  present
from  him  is  told  at  last  that  the  king  gives  him  the  whole
of  his  kingdom,  nay  surrenders  himself  to  him  as  bis  slave.
We  may  call  all  this  exaggerated,  but  we  have  no  right  to
call  it  mere  invention,  for  such  stories  would  hardly  have
been  invented,  if  they  had  sounded  as  incredible  in  India
itself  as  they  sound  to  us.     (Brih.  IV,  4,  23.)

It  is  true  we  meet  in  the  Upanishads  with  philosophical
dialogues  between  ^ods  and  men  also,  such  as  Eausfa.  Up.
in,  I,  between  Inara  aiid  Pratardana,  between  Sanatku-
m&ra,  the  typical  warrior  deity,  and  Nd.rada,  the  repre*
sentative  of  the  Br&hmans,  between  Pragripati,  Indra,  and
Yiro^na,  betwV^n  Yama,  the  god  of  death,  and  NaA;iketa&
But  though  these  are  naturally  mere  inventions,  such  as
we  find  e^rywhere  in  ancient  times,  it  does  not  follow
that  the  grtot  gatherings  of  Indian  sages  presided  over  by
their  kings  should  be  equally  imaginary.  Even  imagina-
tion requires  a  certain  foundation  in  fact.

We  have  a  record  of  another  disputation  between  a  King
A^tasatru  and  the  Br&hman  B§l4ki,  and  here  again  itis
the  king  who  has  to  teach  the  Br&hman,  not  vice  verea.

A^tasatru  was  king  of  KAsi  (Benares),  and  must  have
been  later  than  kanaka,  as  he  appeals  to  his  fame  as  widely
estaUiehed.    When  he  has  convmced  Bftl&ki  of  the  insuffi-

^  I  InuBslate  yipatby'to  fall  off,*  not  by  *  to  bunt,*  aud  the  oauuiiiTe
br  'ta  tDa3u  faU  off,'  Le.  to  cut  off.    Would  not  Ho  bu«st*  hare  been

'  XnUfhitaki  Up.  IV,  a ;  BnA.  ir.  Up.  II,  I.


14  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

dency  of  the  inf ormatioa  which  this  leaned  Bxfthmaii
had  volunteered  to  impart  to  him,  the  proad  BzA^man
actually  declares  himself  the  pupil  of  the  king  ^

I  do  not  mean,  however,  to  deny  that  originally  the  rela-
tion between  the  kings  and  the  sages  of  ancient  India  was
that  which  we  see  represented,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of
King  Gkns^Tnti  and  the  Br&hman  Baikva,  who  contemptu-
ously rejects  all  offers  of  friendship  from  the  kii^,  till  at
last  the  kingjfaas  to  offer  him  not  only  fi;old  and  land  (the
Baikvapartia  villages  in  the  country  of  the  Mafa&vrisfaas)
but  his  own  daughter,  in  order  to  secure  his  amity  and  his
instruction.  But  though  this  may  have  been  ^the  original
relation  between  Br&hmans  and  Eahatriyas,  luad  remained
so  to  the  time  represented  by  Manu's  Law-book,  the  warrior
class  had  evidently  from  a  very  early  time  produced  a
number  of  independent  thinkers  who  w^e  able  to.  grapple
with  and  to  hold  their  own  against  the  priests,  nay,  who
were  superior  to  them  particumrly  in  one  subject,  as  we
are  told,  namely,  in  their  knowledge  of  the  Atman,  the
Self.  In  the  Maitr&yaTia-upanishad  we  read  of  King  Brih-
adratha  who  gives  up  his  kingdom,  retires  into  the  forest,
and  is  instructed  bv  the  sage  iS&k&yanya,  whose  name  may
contain  the  first  allusion  to  ^&kas  and  their  descendants  in
India.  Such  a  royal  pupil  would  naturally  in  the  course
of  his  studies  become  a  sage  and  teacher  himself.

Again,  in  the  iiT^nd.  Up.  Y,  ii  we  see  a  number  ctf
eminent  Br&hmans  approaching  King  Asvapati  Eaikeya,
and  making  themselves  his  pupils.  The  question  which
they  discuss  is,  What  is  our  Self  and  what  is  Brahman
(V,  II,  i)  1  and  this  question  the  king  was  fmpposed.  tx  be
able  to  answer  better  than  any  of  the  Br&hmana.

When  we  leave  the  period  represented  by  the  Upani-
shads,  and  turn  our  eyes  to  that  which  follows  axtd  which
is  marked  by  the  rise  and  growth  oi  Buddhism,  we  find  no

^  See  also  the  dialogue  betwoen  SaDatkmnArit  and  Nftrada  (KktaA.  Vp^
VII,  a,  I).


BUDDHIST  PERIOD.  1 5

very  midden  change  in  the  intellectual  Uf e  of  the  countiy,
as  represented  to  as  in  the  Sacred  writings  of  the  Buddhistis.
*  Though  there  is  every  reason  to  suppose  that  their  sacred
code,  the  original  text  of  the  Tripif  aka,  belongs  to  the  third
century  B.C.,  and  was  settled  and  recited,  though  not  written
down,  during  the  reign  of  Asoka,  we  know  at  all  events
that  it  was  reduced  to  writing  in  the  first  century  before
our  era^  and  we  may  therefore  safely  accept  its  descriptions
as  giving  us  a  true  picture  of  what  took  place  in  India
while  Buddhism  was  slowly  but  surely  supplanting  the
religion  of  the  Veda,  even  in  its  latest  offshoots,  the  Upani*
shads.  It  s^ms  to  me  a  fact  of  the  highest  importance
that  ^he  Buddhists  at  the  time  when  their  Suttas  were
composed,  were  acquainted  with  the  Upanishads  and  the
Sfttras,  at  all  events  with  the  very  peculiar  names  of  these
literary  compositions.  We  must  not,  however,  suppose  that
as  soon  as  Buddhism  arose  Vedism  disappeared  from  the
soil  of  India.  India  is  a  large  country,  and  Vedism  may
have  continued  to  flourish  in  the  West  while  Buddhism
was  gaining  its  wonderful  triumphs  in  the  East  and  the
Soutii.  We  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  some  of  the  later
Upanishads  were  composed  long  after  King  Asoka  had
extended  his  patronage  to  the  Buddhist  fraternity.  Nay,
if  we  consider  that  Buddha  died  about  477  B.C.,  We^  are
probably  not  far  wrong  if  we  look  upon  the  doctrines  to
which  he  gave  form  and  life,  as  represented  originally  by
one  of  the  many  schools  of  thought  which  were  springing
up  in  India  during  the  period  of  the  Upanishads,  and  which
became  later  on  the  feeders  of  what  are  called  in  India  Hb^
six  great  systems  of  philosophy.  Buddha,  however,  if  we
may  retain  that  name  for  the.young  prince  of  Kapilavftstn,
who  actually  gfl^ve  up  his  palace  and  made  himself  a  beggar,
was  not  satisfied  with  tecMching  a  philosophy,  his  ambition
was  to  found  a  new  society.  His  object  was  to  induce
people  to  withdraw  from  the  World  and  to  live  a  life  of
abfliineciee  and  meditation  in  hermitages  or  monasteries.
The  description  of  the  daily  life  of  these  Buddhist  monks,
and  even  or  the  Buddhist  laity,  including  kings  and  nobles,
may  seem  to  us  at  first  sight  as  incredime  as  what  we  saw
before  in  the  Upanishads.


1 6  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.


We  read  in  the  Tripitaka,  the  sacred  code  of  the  Buddhists,
of  King  Prasenagdt,  of  Kosala,  drawing  near  to  Buddha  and
sitting  down  respectfully  at  one  side  before  venturing  to
ask  him  a  question  (Samyutta  NikS,ya  III,  i,  4).  We  read
likewise  of  King  BimbisHra,  of  Magadha,. showing  the  same
respect  and  veneration  to  this  poor  monk  before  asking
him  any  questions  or  making  any  suggestions  to  him.
B&nte  or  -I>ord  is  the  title  by  which  the  paramount
sovereigns  of  India  address  these  mendicants,  the  followers
of  Buddha.


If  we  want  to  get  an  idea  of  the  immense  wealth  and
variety  of  philosophic  thought  by  which  Buddha  found
himself  surrounded  on  every  side,  we  cannot  do  better
than  consult  one  of  the  many  Suttas  or  sermons,  suppc^d
to  have  been  preached  by  Buddha  himself,  and  now  forming

E»rt  of  the    Buddhist  canon,  such  as,  for  instance,  the
rahma-^fdla-sutta  \

We  are  too  apt  to  imagine  that  both  the  believers  in  the
Veda  and  the  followers  of  Buddha  formed  compact  bodies,
each  being  held  together  by  generally  recognised  articles
of  faith.  But  this  can  hardly  have  been  so,  as  we  read  in
the  Brahma-gr&la-sutta  that  even  among  the  disciples  who
followed  Buddha,  some,  such  as  Brahmadatta,  spoke  in
support  of  Buddha,  in  support  of  his  doctrines  and  his
disciples,  while  others,  such  as  Suppiya,  spoke  opex^y
against  all  the  three.  Though  there  was  a  clear  line  of
demarcation  between  Br&hmans  and  Samanaa  or  Buddhists,
as  far  as  .their  daily  life  and  outward  ceremonial  were
concerned,  the  two  are  constantly  addressed  together  by
Buddha,  particularly  when  philosophical  quei^ions  are
discussed.  Br&hmana  is  often  used  by  him  as  a  mere
expression  of  high  social  rank,  and  he  who  is  most  eminent
in  knowledge  and  virtue  is  even  by  Buddha  himself  called

*  W«  PQMMH  now  an  ezaeUeat  translation  of  thia  Sntta  by  Bhya  Darida.
The  earlier  tranilationa  by  Oogerly,  by  Qrimblot  (Sept  Suttas  PMia,  1876),
were  Tery  oreditable  for  the  time  when  they  were  made^  but  haTO  now
been  raperseded.


BBAHFA-(?ALA-8UTrA.  I  ^

'a  true  Brfthmana.'  Br&hmaD  with  us  is  oSi&a  used  in
two  senses  which  should  be  kept  distinct,  meaning,  either
a  member  of  the  first  caste,  or  one  belonging  to  i£e  three
castes  of  the  twioe-bom  Aryas,  who  are  under  the  spiritual
sway  of  the  Br&hmans.

We  must  try  to  get  rid  of  the  idea  that  Brilhmans  and
Buddhists  were  always  at  daggers  drawn,  and  divided  the
whole  of  India  between  themselves.  Their  relation  was
not  originally  very  different  from  that  between  different
ystems  of  philosophy,  such  as  the  Teddnta  and  SJI^mkhya,
which,  though  they  differed,  were  but  seldom  inflamed
against  each  other  by  religious  hatred.

In  the  Brahma-(|f&la-sutta;  i.e.  the  net  of  Brahma,  in
which  all  philosophical  theories  are  supposed  to  have  been
caught  like  so  many  fishes,  we  can  discover  the  faint  traces
of  some  of  the  schools  of  philosophy  which  we  shaU  have
to  examine  hereafter.  Buddha  mentions  no  less  than  sixty-
two  of  them,  with  many  subdivisions,  and  claims  to  be
acquainted  with  every  one  of  them,  though  standing  -him-
self above  them  all.

There  are  some  Samanas  and  Brfthmans,  we  are  told  \
who  are  etemalists,  and  who  proclaim  that  both  the  soul
and  the  world  are  eternal  ^  They  profess  to»be  able  to
remember  an  endless  succession  of  former  births,  including
their  names,  their  lineage,  and  their  former  dwelling-places.
The  soul,  they  declare,  is  eternal,  and  the  worid,  giving
birth  to  nothing  new,  is  steadfast  as  a  mountain  pea£
living  creatures  transmigrate,  but  they  are  for  ever  and
ever.

There  are  some  Samanaf  and  Br&hmans  who  ate  etemal-
ists with  regard  to  some  things,  but  not  with  regard  to
others.  They  hold  that  the  soul  and  the  world  are  partly
eternal,  and  partly  not.  According  to  them  this  world-
system  will  pass  away,  and  there  will  then  be  beingia  reborn
in  the  World  of  light  (Abhassara),  made  of  mmd  only,
feeding  on  joy,  *  radiating  light,  traversing  the  air  and
continuing  in  glory  for  a  long  time.     Here  follows  a  most

^  BrahinaHy&la'Snita,  trans^at^d  by  Rhys  Davids,  p.  fl6  Beq.
'  This  would  be  like  the  Sasvata-T&da.


l8  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

peculiar  account  of  how  people  began  to  believe  in  one
peitonal  Supreme  Being,  or  in  the  orr}inary  Qod.  When
the  world-system  began  to  re-evolve,  there  appeared  (they
say)  the  palace  of  Srahm&,  but  it  was  empty.  Then  a
certain  being  feU  from  the  World  of  light  and  came  to
life  in  the  palace  of  Brahm&.  After  remaining  there  in
perfect  joy  for  a  long  period,  he  became  dissatisfied  and
longed  for  other  beings.  And  just  then  other  beings  fell
from  the  World  of 'Li^it,  in  aU  respects  like  him.  But  he
who  had  come  first  Mgan  to  think  that  he  was  Brahm&
the  Supreme,  the  Ruler,  the  Lord  of  all,  the  Maker  and
Creator,  the  Ancient  of  days,  the  Father  cf  all^that  are  and
are  to  l^.  The  other  beings  he  looked  upon  as  created  by
himself,  because  as  soon  as  he  had  wished  for  them,  they
had  come.  Nay,  these  beings  themselves  also  thought  that
he  must  be  tide  Supreme  Brahmsl,  because  he  was  there
fibrst  and  they  came  after  him,  and  it  was  thought  that
this  Brahm&  must  be  eternal  and  remain  for  ever,  while
those  who  came  after  him  were  impermanent,  mutable,  and
limited  in  duration  of  life.

This  Brahmd.  reminds  one  of  the  Wara  of  the  SS.'jnkhya
and  other  philosophies,  which  as  Brahm&,  masc.,  must  be
distinguished  from  Brahma,  neuter.  Then  we  are  told
that  there  are  some  gods  who  spend  their  lives  in  sexual
pleasures  and  then  fall  from  their  divine  state,  while
others  who  abstain  from  such  indulgences  remain  stead*
fast,  immutable,  and  eternal.  Again,  that  there  are  certain
gods  so  full  of  envy  that  their  bodies  become  feeble  and
their  mind  imbecile.  These  fall  from  their  divine  state,
while  others  who  are  free  from  such  failings  remain  stead-
fast, immutable,  and  eternal.

Lastly,  some  Samana^  and  Br&hmans  are  led  to  the
condusioh  that  eye,  ear,  nose,  tqngile,  and  body  fornn  an
impermanent  Self,  while  heart  or  mind  or  consciousness
form  a  permanent  Self,  and  therefore  will  remain  for  ever
steadfast,  immutable,  and  eternal.

Next  follows  another  class  of  speculators  who  are  called
Ant&nantikas,  and  who  set  forth  the  infinity  and  finiteness
of  the  world.  They  maintain  either  that  the  world  is  finite
or  that  it  is  infinite,  or  that  it  is  infinite  in  height  and


BRAHMA-ti^ALA-SUTTA.  I9

depth   but  finite  in  lateral  extension,  or  lastly,  that  it  is
neither  finite  nor  infinite.

The  next  description  of  the  various  theories  held  hy
either  Samanas  or  Br&hmanas  seems  to  refer  to  what  is
known  as  the  Sy&dvflda,  the  theory  that  everything  may
be  or  may  not  be.  Those  who  hold  to  this  are  call^
wriggling  eels.  They  will  not  admit  any  difference  be-
tween good  and  bad,  and  they  will  not  commit  themselves
to  saying  that  there  is  another  world  or  that  there  is  not,
that  there  is  chance  in  the  world  or  that  there  is  not,  that
anything  has  a  result  or  reward  or  that  it  has  not,  that
man  continues  after  death  or  that  he  does  not.

It  \70uld  seem,  according  to  some  of  the  Suttas,  that
Buddha  himself  was  often  disinclined  to  commit  himself
on  some  of  the  great  questions  of  philosophy  and  religion.
He  was  often  in  fact  an  agnostic  on  points  which  he  con-
sidered beyond  the  grasp  of  the  human  mind,  and  Mahfi,-
vira,  the  founder  of  6fainism,  took  the  same  view,  often
taking  refuge  in  Agnosticism  or  the  A^/?&navd^a  \

Next,  there  are  Samanas  and  Brahmans  who  hold  that
everything,  the  soul  and  the  world,  are  accidental  and
without  a  cause,  l)ecause  they  can  remember  that  formerly
they  were  not  and  now  thej^  are,  or  because  they  prove  by
means  of  logic  tliat  the  soul  and  the  whole  world  arose
without  a  cause.

Furthermore,  jbhere  are  Samanas  and  Br&hmans  who
hold  and  defend  the  doctrine  of  a  conscious  existence  after
death,  but  they  differ  on  several  points  regarding  this
conscious  existence.

Some  maintain  that  the  conscious  soul  after  death  has
form,  others  that  it  has  no  form,  others  again  that  it  has
and  has  not,  and  others  that  it  neither  has  aor  has  not'
form.  Some  say  it  is  finite,  others  that  it  is  infinite^  that
it  is  both  and  that  it  is  neither.  Some  say  that  it  has  one
mode  of  consciousness,  others  that  it  has  various  modes  of
consciousness,  others  tliat  it  has  limited,  others  that  it  has
unlimited  consciousness.  Lastly,  it  is  held  that  the  soul
after  death  is  happy,  is  miserable,  is  both  or  is  neither.

^  M.  M.,  Katanil  Religion,  p.  105.
0%


20  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

There  are,  however,  others  who  say  that  the  soul  after
death  is  unconscioas,  and  while  in  tb-^t  state  has  either
form,  or  no  form,  has  and  has  not,  or  neither  has  nor  has
not  form ;  that  it  is  finite,  infinite,  both  or  neither.

Again,  there  are  some  Samanas  and  Brfthmans  who  teach
the  entire  annihilation  of  all  living  beings.  Their  argu-
ments are  various,  and  have  in  their  general  outlines  been
traced  back  to  some  of  the  teachers  of  Buddha,  such  as
AUu»  E&l&ma,  Udd&laka  and  others  ^  They  uphold  the
doctrine  of  happiness  in  this  life,  and  maintain  that  com-
plete salvation  is  possible  here  on  earth.  Thus  when  the
soul  is  in  perfect  enjoyment  of  the  five  pleasures  of  the
senses,  *they  call  that  the  highest  Nirv&Tia.  Against  this
view,  however,  it  is  said  that  sensuous  delights  are  tran-
sitoiy  and  always  involve  paiuj  and  that  therefore  the
hiehest  Nirv&Tia  consists  in  putting  away  all  sensuous
delights  and  entering  into  the  first  &Mna,  i.e.  Dhy&na,
that  is,  a  state  of  loy  bom  of  seclusion  and  followed  by
reflection  and  meditation.  Against  this  view,  again,  it  is
asserted  that  such  happiness  involves  reasoning,  and  is
therefore  gross,  while  the  highest  Nirv&na  can  only  arise
when  all  reasoning  has  been'  conquered  and  the  soul  has
entered  the  second  Ohkns,,  a  state  of  joy,  bom  of  serenity
without  reasoning,  a  state  of  elevation  and  internal  calm.
But  even  this  does  not  satisfy  the  true  Buddhist,  because
any  sense  of  joy  must  be  gross,  and  true  Nirv&na  can  only
consist  in  total  absence  of  all  longing  after  Joy  and  thus
entering  into  the  third  GhAuA,  serene  ana  thoughtful.
Lastly,  even  this  is  outbidden.  The  very  dwelling  of  the
mind  on  care  and  joy  is  declared  to  be  gross,  i^nd  the  final
Nirvftna  is  said  to  be  reached  in  the  fourth  Ohknsk  only,
a  state  of  self-possession  and  complete  equanimity.

This  abstract  may  give  an  idea  of  the  Variety  of  philo-
sophical opinions  which  were  held  in  India  at  or  even  before
the  time  of  Buddha.  The  Brahma-(;&la-sutta  professes  that
all  speculations  about  the  past  and  the  future  arr  included
in  this  Sutta  of  the  net  of  Brahma.  By  division  and  sub-
division there  are  said  to  be  sixty-two  theories,  arranged

^  RhjB  Davids,  1:  e.,  p.  4&


hahabhAeata.  2 1


into  two  classes  so  f  ar  aa  they  are  concerned  either  with
the  past  or  with  the  future  of  the  soul;  the  soul,  as  it
seems,  being  always  taken  for  granted.

The  extraordinary  part  is  that  in  the  end  all  these
theories,  though  well  Known  by  Buddha,  are  condemned
by  him  as  arising  from  the  deceptive  perceptions  of  the
senses,  which  produce  desire,  attachment,  and  therefore,
reproduction,  existence,  birth,  disease,  death,  sorrow,  weep-
ing, pain,  grief,  and  misery,  while  Buddha  alone  is.  able
to  cut  qS  the  root  of  all  error  and  all  misery,  and  to  impart
the  truth  that  leads  to  true  Nirv&?ia.

It  does  not  seem,  indeed,  as  if  the  philosophical  teaching
of  Buddha  himself  was  so  very  different  at  first  from  that
of  other  schools  which  had  flourished  before  and'  during
his  lifetime  in  India;  nay,  we  can  often  perceive  clear
traces  of  a  distant  relationship  between  Buddhism  and  the
six  orthodox  systems  of  philosophy.  like  streanus,  all
springing  from  the  same  summit,  they  run  on  irrigating
the  same  expanse  of  country  without  proving  in  the  least
that  one  channel  of  thought  was  derived  from  another,  as
has  been  so  often  supposed  in  the  case  particularly  of
Buddhism  in  its  relation  to  the  S&mkhya  philosophy,
as  known  te  us  from  the  E&rik&s  and  S&tras.

Though  the  Brahma-^ala-sutta  does  not  enter  into  full
details,  which  may  be  gathered  from  other  Suttas,  it  shows
at  all  events  how  large  a  number  of  philosophical  schools
was  in  existence  then,  and  how  they  differed  from  each
otiier  on  some  very  essential  points.

If  now  we  compare  one  of  the  numerous  passages  in.  the
Mah&bh&rata,  containing  descriptions  of  the  philosophical
sects  then  floiirishing  in  India,  we  shall  be  struck  by  the
great,  almost  verbal,  iGlimilarity  between  their  statements
and  those  which  we  have  just  read  in  the  Buddhist
Brahma-^a-sutta.  Thus  we  read  in  the  Anugit4,  chap.
XXIV :  *  We  observe  th6  various  forms  of  piety  to  be
as  it  were  contradictory.  Some  say  piety  remains  after
the  body  is  destroyed ;  «some  say  that  it  is  not  so.  Some  say
everytmng  is  doubtful ;  and  others  that  there  is  no  doubt.


22  INDIAN   PHIL0S01>HY.

Some  say  the  permanent  principle  is  impermanent  and
others,  too,  that  it  exists,  and  others  that  it  exists  and
does  not  exist.  Some  say  it  is  of  one  form  or  twofold,
and  others  that  it  is  mixed.  Some  BdLhmanas,  too,  who*
know  Brahman  and  perceive  the  truth,  believe  that  it  is
one;  others  that  it  is  distinct;  and  others  again  that  it
is  manifold.  Some  say  both  time  and  space  exist,  and
others  that  it  is  not  so.  Some  have  matted  hair  and  skins ;
and  some  are  clean-shaven  and  without  any  covering/
This  last  can  only  refer  to  the  followers  of  Buddha,  what
ever  the  dcij^e  of  our  Mah&bh&rata  may  be.  '  Some  people
are  for  bathing ;  some  iFor  the  omission  of  bathing.  Some
are  for  taking  food;  others  are  intent  on  fasting.  Some
people  extol  actions,  and  others  tranquillity.  Some  extol
final  emancipation  and  various  kinds  of  enjoyments ;  some
wish  for  riches,  and  others  for  indigence.'

The  commentator  Ntlakan^Aa  refers  all  these  remarks
to  certain  sects  known  to  us  from  other  sources.  ^  Some
hold,'  he  says,  *  that  the  Self  exists  after  the  body  is  lost ;
others,  that  is,  the  Lok&yatas  or  iT&rv&kas,  hold  the  con-
trary. Everything  is  doubtful,  is  the  view  of  the  Satya-
vMins  (Sy&dv&dins  ?) ;  nothing^  is  doubtful,  that  of  the
Tairthikas,  the  great  teachers.  Everything  is  impermanent,
thus  say  the  Tli,rkikas ;  it  is  permanent,  say  the  Mimllmsa-
kas;  nothing  exists,  say  the  iSilnyav&dins ;  something
exists,  but  only  momentarily,  say  the  Saugatas  or  Buddhists.
Knowledge  is  one,  but  the  ego  and  non-ego  are  two  dif-
ferent principles,  thus  say  the  YogS^Hras ;  they  are  mixed,
say  the  U<2ulomas ;  they  are  one,  such  is  the  view  of  the
worshippers  of  the  Brahman  as  possessed  of  qualities ;  they
are.  distinct,  say  other  MimlbTrisaKas,  who  hold  that  special
acts  are  the  cause  (of  everything) ;  manifbld  they  are,  say
the  atomists ;  time  and  space  they  are,  say  the  astrologers.
Those  who  say  that  it  is  not  so,  that  is  to  say,  that  what  we
see  has  no  real  existence  at  all,  are  the  ancient  philosophers ;
omission  to  bathe  ^  is  the  rule  of  the  Naish^Aika  Brahma*
^rins ;  bathing  that  of  the  householders.'

^  Does  not  this  refer  to'  the  solemn  bathing  which  is  the  fltBi  slop
towards  the  stage  of  a  Grthastha  or  independent  householder  f


BUDDHA.  23

Th'is  both*from  Buddhistic  and  Br&hmanic  sources  we
learn  the  same  fact,  the  existence  of  a  large  number  of  re-
ligions and  philosophical  sects  in  the  ancient  days  of
India.

BitddllA.

Otti  of  the  midst  of  this  whirlpool  of  philosophical
opinions  there  rises  the  form  of  Buddha,  calling  for  a
hearing,  at  first,  not  as  the  herald  of  any  brand  new  philo-
sophy, which  he  Las  to  teach,  but  rather  as  preaching
a  new  gospel  to  the  poor.  I  cannot  help  thinking  that
it  was  Bu5dha'a  marked  peraonaUty,  far  more  than  his
doctrine,  that  gave  him  the  great  influence  on  his  con-
temporaries and  on  so  many  generations  after  his  death.

Whether  he  existed  or  not.  such  as  he  -is  described  to
us  in  the  Suttas,  ther^  must  have  been  some  one,  not
a  mere  name,  but  a  real  power  in  the  history  of  India,
a  man  who  made  a  new  epoch  in  the  growth  of  Indian
philosophy,  and  still  more  of  Indian  religion  and  ethics.
HiB  teaching  must  have  acted  like  a  weir  across  a  swollen
river.  And  no  wonder,  if  we  consider  that  Buddha  was
a  prince  or  nobleman  who  gave  up  whatever  there  was
of  outward  splendour  pei*taimng  to  his  rank.  He  need
not  have  been  a  powerful  prince,  as  some  have  imagined,
but  he  belonged  to  the  royal  class,  and  it  does  not  appear
that  he  and  his  house  had  any  suzerain  over  them.  like
several  of  the  philosophers  in  the  Upanishads,  he  was
a  Kshatriya,  and  the  very  fact  of  his  making  himself  a
popular  teacher  and  religioiis  reformer  attxucted  attention
as  a  social  anomaly  in  the  eyes  of  the  people.  We  see  in
fact  that  one  of  the  principal  accusations  Drought  against
him,  at  a  later  time,  was  that  he  had  arrogated  to  nimself  the
privilege  of  being  a  teacher,  a  privilege  that  had  always
been  recognised  as  belonging  to  those  only  who  were
BriLhmans  by  birth.  And  as  these  Brslhmans  had  always
been  not  only  the  teachers  of  the  people,  but  likewise  the
counsellors  of    princes,   we  find  Buddha  also    not   only

fatronised,  but  consulted  by  the  kings  of  his  own  time,
luriously   enough    one    of    these    kings    has   the  name
of    Af7d.tafeatru,    a    name   well   known    to   us    from    the


i4  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

Upanishads.  He,  the  son  of  Vaideht,  a  Yideha  princess,
sends  two  of  his  ministers,  who  were  IKrlLhnians  by  birth,
to  Buddha  in  order  to  consult  him  on  what  he  ought  to
do.  It  has  been  supposed  l^some  scholars  that  this  is  the
same  A^&tasatru,  king  of  ISJkbi  (or  Benares),  who,  as  we
saw  in  the  Upanishads,  silenced  the  BrShman  B&l&ki
(Kaush.  Up.  IV,  2,  i).  But,  according  to  othera,  A^&ta-
8atru,  i.  e.  *  without  an  enemy,'  should  hd  taken,  like  DevA-
nftm  priya,  as  a  general  title  of  royalty,  not  as  a  proper
name  \  However  that  may  be,  the  coincidence  is  certainly
striking,  aiid  requires  further  explanation.  At  all  events,
we  I9ee  that,  as  m  the  Upanishads,  so  in  the  Tripi^aka  also,
kings  appear  as  friends  and  patrons  of  a  philosopher,  such
as  Buddha,  long  before  he  had  become  recognised  as  the
founder  of  a  new  religion,  that  they  take  a  prominent  part
in  public  assemblies,  convened  for  discussing  the  great  pro-
blems of  religion  and  philosophy,  or  afterwards  for  settling
the  canon  of  tbeir  religious  texts.  The  best  known  are
Bimbis&ra,  king  of  Magadha,  and  Prasena^t,  king  of  Ko««ila.
There  is  in  this  respect  a  clear  continuity  between  the
Upanishads  and  the  earliest  appearance  of  Buddhism ;  and
if  some  of  the  tenets  and  technical  terms  of  the  Buddhists
also  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Hindu  schools  of  philo-
sophy, there  would  be  as  little  difficulty  in  accounting  for
this  as  for  the  continuity  between  Sanskrit  and  P&li.  The
Buddhist  monk  was  clearly  prefigured  in  the  Parivragraka
or  itinerant  mendicant  of  the  Upanishads  (Brih.  Ill,  5).
,  The  name  of  Buddha,  as  the  awakened  and  enlightened,
^ould  hardly  be  understood  without  the  previous  employ-
ment of  the  root  Budh  in  the  Veda ;  nor  Bhikshu,  beggar,
without  Bhiksh,  to  beg  in  the  Upanishads.  Nirv&Tia,  it  is
true,  occurs  in  later  Upanishads  only,  but  if  this  shows  that
they  are  post-Buddhistic,  it  suggests  at  the  same  time  that  the
old  Upanishads  must  have  been  pre-Buddhistic.  Para  gati,
the  highest  goal,  is  taken  from  the  dictionary  of  the  Upani-
shads, and  possibly  £^akrapravartana,  the  turning  of  the
wheel  ^  also  is  taken  from  the  same  source.

'  S.  B.  E.,  XI,  p.  I,  note.

'  Cf.  AnugitA,  cluip.  XVII :  *  You  are  the  one  person  to  turn  this  wheel,
the  nave  of  which  is  the  Brahman,  the  spoke  the  understanding,  and


BUDDHA.  25

But  though  Buddhism  and  the  Upanishads  share  many
things  in  common  which  point  back  to  the  same  distant
antiquity,  Buddhism  in  its  practical  working  produced
a  complete  social  revolution  in  India.  Though  it  did  not
abolish  caste,  as  has  sometimes  been  supposed,  it  led  to
a  mixture  of  classes  which  had  formerly  been  kept  more
carefully  distinct.  Anybody,  without  reference  to  his  birth,
could  join  the  Buddhist  fraternity,  if  onl^  he  was  of  good
report  and  free  from  certain  civil  disabilities.  He  could
'Jien  become  an  itinerant  (Parivr&aaka)  friar,  without  any  of
that  pluvious  discipline  which  was  required  f  ^m  a  Br&hman.
Once  a  member  of  the  Samgha,  he  was  free  from  all  family
ties  and  allowed  to  support  himself  by  charitable  gifte
(Bhiksn&).  Though  kings  and  noblemen  who  had  embraced
the  doctrines  of  Buddha  were  not  obliged  to  become  actual
mendicants  and  join  the  fraternity,  they  could  become
patrons  and  lay  sympathisers  (XJp&sakas),  as  we  see  in  the
case  of  the  Icings  already  mentioned^  and  of  wealthy  persons
such  as  An&thapi7ie!ika.  Whenever  the  Buddhist  friars
appeared  in  villages  or  towns,  they  seem  to  have  been
received  with  splendid  hospitality,  and  the  arrival  of
Buddha  himself  with  his  six  hundred  or  more  disciples
was  generally  made  the  occasion  of  great  rejoicings,  in-
cluding a  public  sermon,  a  public  discussion,  and  other
entertainments  of  a  less  spiritual  character.

In  fact,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  Tripitoka,  the  whole
of  India  at  the  time  of  Buddha  would  seem  once  more
to  have  been  absorbed  in  religion  and  philosophy ;  nay,  the
old  saying  that  the  Indians  are  a.  nation  of  philosophers
would  seem  to  have  never  been  so  true  as  at  the  time
of  the  great  Buddhist  Councils,  held,  we  are  told,  at  B&ga,-

fr/ha,  at  Vais&li,  and  later  on  at  the  new  residence  of
A>ka,  Plitoliputra.

This  Ahoka,  like  Ganaka  of  old,  took  the  warmest  interest
in  the  proceedings  of  that  Council.  It  is  perhaps  too  much
to  say  that  he  made  Buddhism  the  state-religion  of  India.
There  never  yras  such  a  thing  as  a  state-religion  in  India.
Afroka  certainly  extended  his  pati-onage,  formerly  confined

which  does  not  turn  back,  and  which  is  phocked   by  the  quality  of
goodness  as  its  circumference/


26  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

to  Br&hmans  only,  to  the  new  brotherhood  founded  by
Buddha,  but  there  was  nothing  in  India  corresponding  to
a  Defender  of  the  Faith.

It  might  be  objected,  no  doubt,  that  the  authorities  on
which  we  have  to  rely  for  a  description  of  the  intellectual
state  of  India  at  the  time  of  these  Councils,  even  that  of
Asoka,  24a  B.  c,  are  one-sided  and  exaggerated ;  but  when
we  consult  the  Mah&bharata  which,  in  ite  earlier  elements,
at  all  events,  may  be  assigned  to  the  same  Buddhistic
period,  we  get  just  the  same  picture.  We  meet  among
the  Br&hmans  as  among  the  Buddhists  with  an  immense
variety  of  philosophical  and  religious  thought,  represented
by  schools  and  sects  striving  against  each  other,  .not  yet
by  persecution,  but  by  serious  argumentetion.

Or««k  Aooonnts.

Nor  are  the  scant  accounts  which  the  Greeks  hav^  left
us  of  what  they  saw  during  and  after  the  invasion  of
India  by  Alexander  the  Great  at  variance  with  what  we
learn  from  these  native  authorities.  Nothing  struck  the
Greeks  so  much  as  the  philosophical  spirit  which  seemed
to  pervade  that  mysterious  country.  When  Megasthenes  ^,
the  ambassador  of  Seleucus  Nicator  at  the  court  of  £'and-
ragupta  (Sandrocottus),  describes  what  he  saw  in  India
in  the  third  century  B.O.,  he  speaks  of  gymnosophists  living
on  mountains  or  in  the  plains,  having  their  abode  in  groves
in  front  of  cities  within  moderate-sized  enclosures.  '  They
live,'  he  writes,  *  in  a  simple  style,  and  lie  on  beds  of  rushes
or  skins.  They  abstam  from  animal  food  and  sexual
pleasures,  and  spend  their  time  in  listening  to  serious
discourse  and  in  imparting  their  knowledge  to  such  as  will
listen  to  them.'  The  so-called  iSarmanas  mentioned  by
Megasthenes,  have  generally  been  accepted  as  representing
the  ^ramarias  or  Samanas,  the  meml^rs  of  the  !3udahist
brotherhood  who  then  seemed  to  have  lived  most  amicably
with  the  Br&hmans.  Nothing  at  least  is  said  of  any^
personal  enmity  between  them,  however  much  they  may"
have  differed  in  their  philosophical  and  religious  opiniona

^  Ancient  India,  by  J.  W.  M^rindle,  1877,  p.  97  seq..


GEEBK  ACCOUNTS.  2^

His  9^1obioi  or  f orest-dwellers  are  probably  meant  tor  the
Brahmanic  V&naprp^thas,  the  members  of  the  third  A^rama
who  had  to  live  in  the  forest,  at  a  certain  distance  from
their  villages,  and  give  themselves  up  to  asceticism  and
meditation,  such  as  we  see  described  in  the  Upanishada
Even  if  their  name  did  not  tell  us,  we  are  distinctly
informed  that  they  lived  in  the  forest,  subsisting  on  leaves
and  wild  fruits,  and  wore  garments  made  of  the  bark  of
trees  (V&lkalaJ*.  They  communicated,  we  are  told,  with
hings,  who,  like  (kanaka  and  Agrata^atra,  Prasena^it  and
Bimbisd^ra,  or  in  later  times  King  Harsha,  consulted  them
by  messengers  regarding  the  causes  of  things,  and  who
through  them  woi^shipped  and  supplicated  their  gods.
Clement  of  Alexandria,  after  repeating  all  this,  adds  at  the
end  that  there  are  also  philosophers  in  India  who  follow
the  precepts  of  Butta,  whom  they  honour  as  a  god  on
accoimt  of  his  extraordinary  holiness.  This  is  the  first
Greek  mention  of  Budd)ia,  for  no  one  else  can  have  been
meant 'by  Clement.  The  name  was  never  mentioned  by
Alexander's  companions,  though  there  are  early  coins,
which  point  to  Greek  influence,  with  the  figure  and  name
of    Boddo.      We  are   also   told  that  these  philosophers

Practised  fortitude,  both  by  undergQing  active  toil,  and
y  enduring  pain,  remaining  for  whole  days  motionless  in
a  fixed  attitude.

Bnddlilst  VilgriBui,  MioiMiutlisaiiff.

Some  centuries  later  we  have  another  and  independent
source  of  information  as  to  the  intellectual  state  of  India,
and  this  also  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  what  we  have
hitherto  learnt  about  India  as  the  home  of  philosophers.
Beginning  with  the  fourth  century  of  our  era,  that  is,  at
the  time  when  what  I  call  the  Renaissance  of  Sanskrit
literature  and  national  independence  began,  Chinese
Buddhists,  who  made  their  pilgrimages  to  India  as  to
their  Holy  Land,  described  to  us  the  state  of  the  country
such  as  they  saw  it.  Those  who  came  early,  such  as
Fa-hian,  saw  Buddhism  flourishing  in  the  fifth  century,

^  dement  JUes.,  Strom.  L  ii.  a^Sf  ^^  ^^^  ^h®7  neither  live  in  cities
nor  «yen  in  houses.


28  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

those  who  came  later  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  caituries^
witnessed  already  the  evident  signs  of* its  decline.  Thqi
most  important  among  them  was  Hiouen-thsang  who  visited
India  from  629  to  645,  and  whose  travels  have  been  trans-
lated ty  my  late  friend,  Stanislas  Julien.  No  one  can
doubt  'the  trustworthiness  of  this  witness,  tliou^h  he  may
have  been  deceived  in  some  of  his  observations.  He
describes  the  Buddhist  monasteries  scattered  all  over  the
countryi,  the  schools  of  the  most  illustrious  teachers  whose
lectures  he  attended,  and  their  public  assemblies,  par  .
ticularly  those  that  took  place  at  the  court  of  ^Sildditya
Harshavardhana  610-650,  commonly  called  iSri-Harsha  of
Kany&kub^a.  This  king,  who  is  described  as  having  con-
quered the  five  Indias,  seems  to  have  been  in  his  heart
a  Buddhist,  though  he  bestoilvred  hil^  patronage  and  pro-
tection on  all  sects  alike,  whether  followers  of  me  Vedas  or
of  Buddha.  No  one,  we  are  told,  was  allowed  to  eat  flesh
in  his  dominions,  and  whoever  had  killed  a  living  thing
was  himself  put  to  death  ^.  He  built  many  hospit^  and
monasteries,  and  entertained  many  Buddhist  friars  at  his
own  expense.  Every  year  he  assembled  the  £irama»as
from  different  kingdoms,  and  made  them  discuss  in  his
presence  the  most  important  points  of  Buddha's  doctrine.
Each  disputant  had  nis  chair,  and  the  king  himself  was
present  to  mdse  of  their  leamingf  and  their  i;ood  behaviour.
liouen-thL>|,  who  by  this  time  had  made  hiikelf  «  pro-
ficient  Sanskrit  scholar  and  Buddhist  theplogiaci,  having
studied  the  Buddhist  writings  under  .some  of  the  most
illustrious  teachers  of  the  time,  was  invited  by  the  king  to
be  present  at  one  of  these  great  assemblies,  on  the  southern
bank  of  the  Ganges.  Twenty  kings  were  gathered  ther^,
each  bringing  with  him  both  /Sramanas  and  Br&hmanas.
A  large  camp  was  constructed,  and  every  day  rich  alms
wepe  bestowed  on  the  ^Vamanas.  This,  as  it  wouljd  seem>
excited  the  anger  of  some  Br&hmans  who  were  present.
They  tried  to  set  fire  to  the  camp  and  the  iriagnificent
buildings  erected  by  the  king.  And  when  they  foiled  in
this,  they  actually  hired  an  assassin  to  kill  the  inonardL

i  H^moires  sur  lea  Oontrtes  Ocoid«ntal68,  Julien,  i.  p.  a^x  seq.


GHINESB  AGOOUNTS.  29

The  k^'ng,  however,  escaped,  and  forgave  the  would -be
assassin,  out  exiled  a  large  number  of  Br&hmans  from  his
kingdom.  This  gives  us  the  first  idea  of  what  at  i^at  time
religious  persecution  meant  on  the  part  of  Buddhists  as  well
as  of  Brdiimans.  These  persecutions  may  have  been
exaggerated,  but  they  cannot  be  altogether  denied.  Hiouen-
thsaug  himself  seems  to  have  taken  an  active  part  in  this
Congress  of  Religion,  and  I  still  believe  it  was  he  who  is
mentioned  by  his  Sanskrit  name  as  'Mokshadeva'  or  as
^e '  Master  of  the  Tripitoka,'  After  making  all  reasonable
deductions,  such  as  we  should  make  in  me  case  of  the
descriptions  of  any  enthusiastic  witness,  enough  seems  to
me  to  r«^main  to  show  that  from  the  time  of  the  IJpanishads
to  the  time  of  Hiouen-thsang's  sojourn  in  India,  one  domi-
nant interest  pervaded  the  whole  country,  the  interest  in
the  great  problems  of  humanity  here  on  earth.  While
in  other  countries  the  people  at  large  cared  more  for  their
national  heroes,  as  celebrated  in  their  epic  poetry  on
account  of  their  acts  of  bravery  or  cunning,  India  under
the  sway  of  its  Vedic  poets,  most  of  them  of  a  priestly
lather  tLa  a  warrior  011^0,  ^mained  true  to  its  chWter.
Its  kings  surrounded  themselves  with  a  court  of  sages
rather  than  of  warriors,  and  the  people  at  large  developed
and  strengthened  their  old  taste  for  religious  and  philo*-
sophical  problems  that  has  endured  for  centuries,  and  is
not  extinct  even  at  the  present  day.  Of  course,  if  we  call
the  people  of  India  a  nation  of  philosophers,  this  is  not
meant  to  deny  that  the  warrior  class  also  had  their  popular
heroes,  and  t|iat  their  achievements  also  excited  the  mterest
of  the  people.  India  is  large  enough  for  many  phases  of
thought.  We  must  not  forget  that  even  in  the  Vedic
hymns  Indraithe  most  popular  of  their  gods,  was  a  warrior,
llie  two  great  epic  poems  are  there  to  testify  that  hero-
worship  is  innate  in  the  human  heart,  and  that  in  early
days  men  and  even  women  placed  muscle  higher  than
brain.  But  many  even  of  these  epic  heroes  have  a  tinge  of
philosophical  sadness  about  them,  and  Ar^una,  the  greatest
among  them,  is  at  the  same  time  the  recipient  of  the
highest  wisdom  communicated  to  him  by  Er/shna^  as
described  in  the  Bhagavad-gttd..


30  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

Krishna  himself,  the  hero  of  the  Bhagavad-gtt&,  was  of
Kshatriya  origin,  and  was  looked  upon  as  the  very  incar-
nation of -the  Deity.  It  is  curious  that  the  Sanskrit
language  has  no  word  for  epic  poetry.  Itih&sa  refers  to
the  matter  rather  than  to  the  poetical  form  of  what  we
should  call  epic  poems,  and  the  Hindus,  strange  to  say^
speak  of  their  MahabhArata  as  a  Law-book,  Dharma-
8astra  ^,  and  to  a  certain  extent  it  may  have  fulfilled  that
purpose.


If  the  account  given  by  Hiouen-thsang  of  the  spiritual
state  of  India  at  the  time  of  his  visit  and  of  his  stay  at  the
court  of  Harsha  should  seem  to  be  tinged  too  much  by  the
sentiments  of  the  Buddhist  priest,  we  have  only  to  con-
sult the  history  of  Harsha  as  written  in  Sanskrit  by  B&na,
to  feel  convinced  of  the  faithfulness  of  his  account.  No
doubt  Hiouen-thsang  looked  at  India  with  the  eyes  of
a  follower  of  Buddha,  but  Bttrza  also,  though  not  a
Buddhist,  represents  to  us  the  different  schools  and
teachers,  whether  followers  of  Buddha  or  of  the  Veda,  as
living  together  apparently  in  perfect  peace,  and  obeying
the  orders  of  the  same  king.  They  would  naturally  discuss
their  differences  and  exchange  opinions  on  points  on  which
they  were  agreed  or  opposed  to  each  other,  but  of  violent
persecutions  by  one  side  or  the  other,  or  of  excommunica-
tions and  massacres,  we  hear  very  little  or  nothing  The
king  himself,  the  friend  and  patron  of  Hiouen-thsang,
tolerated  both  Buddhism  and  Brilhmanism  in  his  realm,
and  we  feel  doubtful  sometimes  which  of  the  two  he
favoured  most  in  his  own  mind.  We  see  him,  for  instance,
pay  his  respects  to  a  sage  of  the  name  of  Div&kara,  who
had  been  by  birth  and  education  a  Br&hman,  but  had  been
convei-ted  to  Buddha's  doctrine,  without,  as  it  would  seem,
incurring  thereby  the  displeasure  of  tlie  king  or  of  his
friends.  In  the  Harsha^Aarita  *  the  king  is  represented
to  us  as  entering  a  large  forest,  surrounded  by  his  retinue.

^  See  Dahlmann,  Das  Mah&bh&i*ata.

*  Hanha-ilrarita,  tranftlated  by  Cowell  and  Thoman,  p.  ^35*


KING   HAB8HA.  3 1

When  approaching  the  abode  of  the  sage,  the  king  leaves
his  stute  behind  and  proceeds  on  foot,  attended  by  only
a  few  of  his  vassald.  While  still  at  a  distance  from  the
holy  man's  abode,  the  king  perceived  a  large  number  of
'Buddhists  from  various  provinces,  perched  on  pillo«^s,
seated  on  rocks,  dwelling  in  bowei-s  of  creepers,  lying  in
thickets  or  in  the  shadow  of  branches,  or  squatting  on  the
roots  of  trees,— devotees  dead  to  all  passions,  (rainas  in
white  robes  (/9vet&mbaras),  with  mendicants  (Bhikshus  or
Parivr&()fakas),  followers  of  Er?'sh7ia  (Bh&gavatas),  religious
students  (Brahma^rins),  ascetics  who  pulled  out  their  hair,
followers  of  Eapila  (Sd^mkhyas),  &ainas,  Lok&yatikas
(atheisms),  followers  of  Ean&da  (Vaib^hikas),  followers  of
the  Upanishads  (Yed&ntins),  believers  in  God  as  a  creator
(Naiyayikas),  assayers  of  metals  (?),  students  of  legal
institutes,  students  of  the  Pur&nas,  adepts  in  sacrifices
requiring  seven  priests,  adepts  in  grammar,  followers  of
the  Pari^rfttras,  and  others  beside,  all  diligently  following
their  own  tenets,  pondering,  urging  objections,  raising
doubts,  resolving  them,  giving  etymologies,  and  disputing,
discussing,  and  explaining  moot  points  of  doctrine,'  and  ail
this,  it  would  seem,  in  perfect  peace  and  harmony.

Now  I  ask  once  more,  is  there  any  other  country  in  the
world  of  which  a  similar  account  could  be  given,  always
the  same  from  century  to  century  ?  Such  a  life  as  here
described  may  seem  very  strange  to  us,  nay,  even  incredi-
ble, but  that  is  our  fault,  because  we  forget  the  totally
different  conditions  of  intellectual  life  in  India  and  else-
where. We  cannot  dissociate  intellectual  life  from  cities,
from  palaces,  schools,  universities,  museums,  and  all  the
rest.  However,  the  real  life  of  India  was  not  lived  in
towns,  but  in  villages  and  foi^ests.  Even  at  present  it
should  be  remembered  that  towns  are  the  exception  in
India,  and  that  the  vast  majority  of  people  live  in  the
country,  in  villages,  and  their  adjoining  groves.  Here  the
old  sages  were  me  to  meditate  on  the  problems  of  life  and
on  all  that  is  nearest  to  the  heart  of  man.  If  they  were
not  philosophers,  let  them  be  called  dreamers,  but  dreamers
of  dreams  without  which  life  would  hardly  be  worth
living.


32  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

■

An  insight  into  this  state  of  thin^  seemed  jx>  me
necessary  as  a  preliminary  to  a  stndy  of  Indian  philosophy
as  being  throughout  the  work  of  the  people  rather  than
that  of  a  few  gifted  individuals.  As  far  back  as  we  can
trace  the  history  of  thought  in  India,  from  the  time  of
King  Harsha  and  the  Buddhist  pilgrims  back  to  the
descriptions  found  in  the  Uahabh&rata,  the  testimonies
of  the  Greek  invaders,  the  minute  accounts  of  the  Buddhists
in  their  Tripi^aka,  and  in  the  end  the  Upanishads  them-
selves, and  thfe  hymns  of  the  Veda,  we*are  met  everywhere
by  the  same  picture,  a  society  in  which  spiritual  interests
predominate  and  throw  all  material  interests  into  the  shade,
a  world  of  thinkers,  a  nation  of  philosophers.


CHAPTER  n.


ni«T«4Mi.


.  If  after  these  prelimin&ry  remarks  we  look  for  the  real
beginnings  of  philosophy  on  the  soil  of  India/ we  shall  find
them  in  a  stratum  where  philosophy  is  hardly  differentiated:
as  yet  £rom  religion,  and  long  before  the  fatal  divorce
between  reli^on  and  philosophy  had  been  finally  accom-
plished, that  IS  in  the  Vedas*

There  .have  been  curious  misunderstandings  about  this
newly-discovered  relic  of  ancient  literature,  if  literature
it  may  be  called,  having  nothing  whatever  to  do  in  its
origin  with  any  litera  acnpta.  "So  one  has  ever  doubted
that  in  the  veda  we  have  the  earliest  monument  of
Aryan  language  and  thought,  and,  in  a  certain  sense,
of  Aryan  kterature  which,  in  an  almost  nuraculous  way,
had  been  preserved  to  us,  during  the  long  night  of  centuries,
chiefly  by  means  of  oral  tradition.  But  seeing  that  the
Veda  was  certainly  more  ancient  than  anything  we  poosess
of  Aryan  literature  elsewhere,  people  jumped  at  the  oqil-
elusion  that  it.w6uld  bring  U9  near  tp  the  very  beginning
of  all  thiuCT,  and  thiskt  we  should  find  in  the  hymns  dl
the  Big- veda  the  ^  very  songs  of  the  morning  stars  and  the
shouts  of  the.  sons  of  God.'  When  th^  expectations  were
disappointed,  many  of  these  ancient  hymns*  tumins:  out
to  lj^%ery  dmple:  nay  sometimes  veiy  o^onplaol  and
with  little  of  positive  beauty,  or  novel  truth,  a  reaction
set  in,  as  it  always  does  after  an  excessive  entjiusiasm.
The  Yedic  hymns  were  looked  on  askancid,  and  it  was  even
hinted  tha^:  the^.  might  be  but  foxgeries  of  those  very
suspicious  individuals,  the  Br&hmans  or  Pandits  of  India.
In  tiie  end,  however,  the  historical  school  has  prevailed,
and  the  historian  now  sees  that  in  the  Vedas  we  have
to  deal,  not  with  what  European  philosophers  thought

S  i>


34  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

ought  to  have  been,  but  with  what  is  and  has  be'^n ;  not
with  what  is  beautiful,  but  with  what  is  true  and  his-
torically real.  If  the  Vedic  hymns  are  simple,  natural,
and  often  commonplace,  they  teach  us  that  very  useful
lesson  that  the  earliest  religious  aspirations  of  the  Aryan
conquerors  of  India  were  simple  and  natural,  and  often,
rrom  our  point  of  view,  very  commonplace.  This  too  is
a  lesson  worth  learning.  Whatever  the  Vedas  may  be
called,  they  are  to  us  unique  atid^  priceless  ^ides  in
opening  before  our  eyes  tombs  of  thought  richer  in  relied
than  tne  royal  tombs  of  Egypt,  and  more  ancient  and
primitive  in  thought  than  the  oldest  hymns  of  Babylonian
or  Accadian  poets.  If  we  grant  that  they  belonged  to  the
second  milleni^ium  before  our  era,  we  are  probably  on  safe
ground,  though  we  should  not  forget  that  this  is  a  con-
structive date  only,  and  that  such  a  date  does  not  become
positive  by  mere  repetition.  It  may  be  very  brave  to  postu-
late 2000  B.C.  or  even  5000  B.G.  as  a  minimum  date  for  the
Vedic  hymns,  but  what  is  gained  by  such  bravery?  Such
assertions  are  safe  so  far  as  they  cannot  be  refuted,  but
neither  can  they  be  proVed,  coifeidering  that  we  have  no
contemporaneouis  dates  to  attach  them  to.  And  when
I  say  that  the  Vedic  hymns  are  more  ancient  and  primitive
than  the  oldest  Babylonian  and  Accadian  hymns,  all  that
I  mean  and  could  mean  is  that  they  contain  fewer  traces
of  an  advanced  civilisation  than  the  hymns  decjiphered
from  cuneiform  tablets,  in  which  we  find  mention  of  such
things  as  temples  in  stone  and  idols  of  gold,  of  altars,
sceptres  and  crowns,  cities  and  libraries,  and  public  squares.
There  are  thoughts  in  those  ancient  Mesopotamian  hymns
which  would  have  staggered  the  poets  of  the  Veda,  such  as
their  chief  god  being  called  the  king  of  blessedness,  the
light  of  mankind,  &c.  We  should  look  in  vain  in  the  Veda
for  such  advanced  ideas  as  *  the  holy  writing  of  the  mouth
of  the  deep,' '  the  god  of  the  pure  incantation,' '  thy  will
is  made  known  in  heaven  and  the  angels  bow  their  faces/
*  I  fill  my  hand  with  a  mountain  of  diamonds,  of  turquoise^
and  of  crystal/  '  thou  art  as  strong  bronze,' '  of  bronze  and
lead  thou  art  the  mingler,'  or  Hhe  wide  heaven  is  the
habitation  of  thy  liver.'    All  this  may  be  very  old  as  far


PHILOSOPHIOAJi  BASIS   OF  VBDIQ  GODS.  35

as  the  progression  of  the  equinoxes  is  concerned,  but  in*the
progress  of  human  thought  these  ideas  mark  a  point,  not
yet  reached  by  the  poets  of  the  Veda,  In  that  sense,
whatever  their  age^  these  Babylonian'  hymns  are  more
modem  in  thought  than  the  very  latest  hymns  of  the
Rig-veda,  though  I  confess  that  it  is  that  v^ry  fact,
the  advanced  civilisation  at  that  early  time  which  they
reflect,  that  makes  the  Babylonian  hymns  so  interesting
in  the  eyes  of  the  historian.  I  do  not  speak  here  of
philosophical  ideas,  for  we  have  learnt  by  this  time  that
they  are  of  no  age  and  of  any  age.

Whatever  may  be  the  date  of  the  Vedic  hvmns,  whether
1500  or  15C00  B.C.,  they  have  their  own  unique  place  and
stand  by  themselves  in  the  literatiire  of  the  world.  They
tell  us  something  of  the  early  growth  of  the  human  mind
of  which  we  find  no  trace  anywhere  else.  Whatever
aesthetic  judgements  may  be  pronounced  on  them,  and
there  is  certainly  little  of  poetical  beauty  in  them,  in
the  eyes  of  the  historian  arid  the  psychologist  they  will
always  retain  their  peculiar,  value,  far  superior  to  the
oldest  chronicles,  far  superior  to  the  most  ancient  inscrip-
tions, for  every  verse,  nay  every  word  in  them,  is  an
authentic  document  in  the  history  of  the  greatest  empire,
the  empire  of  the  human  mind,  as  established  in  India
in  the  second  millenidum  b.g.

Tlum  VldloMtpUoAl  Basis  of  th*  ▼•dlo  Ooda.

*Let  us  begin  with  the  simplest  beginnings.  Whalt  can
be  simpler  than  the  simple  conviction  that  the  regularly
recurring  events  of  nature  require  certain  agents  ?  Animated
hy  this  conviction  the  Vedic  poets  spoke  not  only  of  rain
(Indu),  but  of  a  rainer  (Indra),  not  only  of  fire  and  light
as  a  fact,  but  of  a  lighter  and  burner,  an  agent  of  fire  and
light)  a  Dyaus  (Zci;?)  and  an  Agni  (ignis).  It  seemed
impoasiUe  to  them  that  sun  and  moon  should  rise  every
day^  should  grow  strong  and  weak  again  every  month
or  every  year,  unless  were  was  an  agent  bemnd  who
oontrolled  them.  We  may  smile  at  such  thoughts,  but
they  were  natural  thoughts,  nor  would  it  be  easy  even
now  to  prove  a  negative  to  this  view  of  the  world.    One


36  •  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

of  these  agents  they  called  Savitar  {Hirrjpf  or  i4Tos),  the
enlivener,  as  distinguished  yet  inseparable  from  Siirya,
the  heavenly,  the  sun,  Greek  Helios.  Soma,  from  the
same  root  Su,  was  likewise  at  first  what  enlivens,  i.e.  the
rain,  then  the  moon  which  was  supposed  to  send  dew  and
rain,  and  lastly  the  enlivening  draught,  used  for  sacrificial
purposes  and  prepared  from  a  plant  called  Soma  or  the
enlivener,  a  piaht  known  to  Br&hmans  and  Zoroastrians
before  the  separation  of  the  two.  Tn  this  way  both  the
religion  and  the  mythology  of  the  Yedic  sages  have  a  philo-
sophical basis,  and  deserve  our  attention,  if  we  wish  to
understand  the  beginnings  not  only  of  Indian  mythology
and  religion,  but  of  Indian  philosophy  also.  '  No^  one,'  as
Deussen  truly  says,  '  can  or  should  m  future  talk  about
these  things  who  does  not  know  the  Big-veda^.'  The
process  on  which  originally,  all  gods  depended  for  their
very  existence,  the  personification  of,  or  tne  activity  attri-
buted to  the  ^reat  natural  phenomena,  while  more  or  less
obscured  in  aU  other  religions,  takesplace  in  the  Bi^-yeda
as  it  were  in  the  full  light  of  day.  Tne  god9  of  the  V edic,
and  indirectly  of  all  the  Aryan  people,  were  the  agents
postulated  behind  the  great  phenomena  of  nature.  This
was  the  beginning  of  philosophy,  the  first  application
of  the  law  of  causality,  and  in  it  we  have  to  recognise
the  only  true  solution  of  Indo-Ekiropean  mythology,  and
likewise  of  Aryan  philosophy.  Whatever  may  have
existed  before  these  gods,  we  can  only  guess  at,  we  cannot
watch  it  with  our  own  eyes,  while  the  creation  of  Dyaus,
light  and  sky,  of  PWtmvt,  earth,  of  Vamna,  dark  sky,
of  Agni,  fire,  and  other  such  Yedic  deities,  requires  neither
hypothesis  nor  induction.  There  was  the  sky,  Dyaus,
apparently  active,  hence  there  must  be  an  agent  called
Dyaus.  To  say  that  this  Aryan  Theogony  was  preceded
by  a  period  of  fetishism  or  totemism,  is  simply  gratuitous.
At  aU  events,  it  need  not  be  refuted  before  it  has  been
proved.  Possibly  the  naming  of  the  sky  as  an  agent  and
as  a  masculine  noun  came  firat,  that  of  the  mere  objective
sky,  as  a  feminine,  second.

*  Deunen,  Allgemeine  Qeschichte  der  Philoflophie^  p.  9^


THtt££   GLASSES  OF  VE0IG  GODS.  37

TlUM«  OUmm  of  ▼•die  Oods.

Wd  know  now  by  what  very  simple  process  the  Yedic
Aryas  satisfied  their  earliest  craving  for  causes,  how  they
created  their  gods,  and  divided  the  whole  drama  of  nature
into  three  acts  and  the  actors  into  three  classes,  those  of  the
skv,  tho^e  of  mid-air,  and  those  of  the  earth.  To  the  first
belong  Dyaus,  the  agent  of  the  sky ;  Mitra,  the  agent  of  the
bright  sky  and  day ;  Yaruna,  the  agent  of  the  dark  sky
and  evening;  Siirya,  the  agent  of  the  sun;  Savitri,  the
agent  of  the  enlivening  or  monung^sim ;  AavinaU,  the  twin
agents  of  morning  and  evening;  Ushas,  the  maiden  of  the
dawtiu

To  mid-air  belong  Indra,  the  agent  of  the  atmosphere  in
its  change  between  light  and  darkness,  the  snver  of  rain ;
the  Marutas,  the  agents  of  the  8torm-clou&;  V&yn  and
V&ta,  the  agents  of  tiie  air ;  Pargranya^  the  a^entof  the  rain-
cloud  ;  Bu&i,  the  agent  of  storm  and  lightmngi  and  several
others  connected  with  meteoric  phenomena.

To  the  earth  belong  Prithivi  herself,  the  earth  as  active ;
Agni,  the  went  of  me ;  Sarasvatt  and  other  rivers ;  some-
times the  Dawn  also,  as  rising  from  the  earth  as  well  as
from  the  sky.  These  gods  were  the  first  phUoaophy,  the
first  attempt  at  explaining  the  wonders  01  nature.  It  is
curious  to  observe  the  absence  of  anything  like  star- wor-
ship in  jbdia  among  the  Aryan  nations  in  general  A  few
of  the  stars  only,  such  as  were  connected  with  human
affairs,  determining  certain  seasons,  and  marking  the  time
of  rain  (^ades),  the  return  of  calmer  weather  (Pleiades),
or  the  time  for  mowing  (KritiilsAa),  were  noticed  and
named,  but  they  never  rose  to  the  rank  of  the  high  gods.
They  were  less  interesting  to  the  dwellers  in  India,  bemuse
they  did  not  exercke  thQ  same  influence  on  their  daily  life
as  they  do  in  Europe.  There  was  of  course  no  settled
system  in  this  pantheon,  the  same  phenomena  being  often
represented  by  different  agents,  and  different  phenomena
by  the  same  agents.  The  gods,  however,  had  evidently
been  known  before  they  were  distributed  into  three  classes,
as  gods  of  the  sky,  of  the  eai*th,  and  of  the  clouds  ^.

*  M.  M.,  Oontributluui  to  the  Seieiioo  of  Mythology^  p.  475.


38  INDIAN   PHIL080PUT.

If  we  call  this  creation  and  likewise  classification  of  the
Devas  or  gods,  the  first  philosophy  of  the  human  race,  we
can  clearly  see  that  It  was  not  artificial  or  the  work  of  one
individaal  only,  but  was  suggested  by  nature  herself.  Earth,
air,  and  sky,  or  again,  morning,  noon,  and  night,  spring,
summer,  an^  winter,  are  triads  clearly  visible  in  nature,  and
therefore,  under  different  names  and  forms,  mirrored  in
ancient  mythology  in  every  part  of  the  world.  These  triads
are  very  oifferent  from  the  later  number  assigned  to  the
godit.  Though  the.  Devas  are  known  in  the  Big-veda  and
the  Avesta  ^as  thirty-three,  I  doubt  whether  there  is  any
physical  necessity  for  this  number  \  It  seems  rather  due
to  a  taste  very  common  among  uncivilised  tribes  of  playing
with  numbers  and  multiplying  them  to  any  extent  ^.  We
see  the  difficulty  experienced  by  the  Br&hmans  themselves
when  they  had  to  fill  the  number  of  thirty-three  and  give
their  names. .  Sometimes  they  axe  called  three  times  eleven;
but  when  we  ask  who  these  three  times  eleven  are,  we  find
no  real  tradition,  but  only  more  or  less  systematising  theories.
We  are  told  that  they  were  the  gods  in- the  sky,  on  earth,
and  in  the  clouds  (1, 139, 1 1),  or  again  that  they  were  Vasus,
Rudras,  Adityas,  Yi«ve  Devas,  and  Maruts  ^  but  the  number
of  each  of  these  classes  of  gods  seems  to  have  been  originally
seven  rather  than  eleven.  Even  this^  number  of  seven  is
taken  by  some  scholars  in  th6  general  sense  of  many,  like
devftn&m  bh£lyishtA&A ;  but  it  is  at  all  events  recognised  in
the  Rig-veda  VIU,  oS,  5,  though  possibly  in  a  late'  verse*
What  we  look  for  in  vain  in  the  Veda  are  the  names  of
seven  Maruts  or  seven  Rudras.  We  can  perhaps  make  out
seven.  Vasus,  if ,  as  we  are  told,,  thev  are  meant  for  Agni,
the  Adityas,  the  Marutas,  Indra,  tJshas,  the  Asvins  and
Rudra}  The  seven  Adityas,  too,  may  possibly  be  counted
as  Yaruna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  Bhliga;  Daksha.  Am^a,  and
Tvashfri,  but  all  this  is  very  uncertain.  We  see  in  fact  the
three  times  eleven  replaced  by  the  eight  Vasus, iihe  eleven

*  Satap.  Br.  XII,  6,  i,  p.  905.
'  Cohtributions,  p.  475.

*  Ved&ntA-SAtras  I,  3,  aS ;  And  Big- Ved*  X,  las,  x.


THB   Y18VE   OR   ALL-GODS.  39

Marutr  and  the.  twelve  Adityas,  to  which  two  other  gods
are  added  as  leaders,  to  bring  their  number  up  to  the
required  thirty-three.

In  still  later  times  the  number  of  the  Adityas,  having
been  taken  for  the  solar  light  in  each  successive  month,
was  raised  to  twelve.  I  look  upon  all  these  attempts  at
a  classification  of  the  Vedic  gods  as  due  once  more  to  the
working  of  a  philosophical  or  systematising  spirit.  It  is
not  so  much  the  exact  number  or  names  of  these  gods,  as
the  fact  that  attempts  had  been  made  at  so  early  a  time
to  comprehend  certain  gods  under  the  same  name,  that
interests  the  philosophiceu  observer.

The  Tl«Te  or  AU-ffods.

The  first  step  in  this  direction  seems  to  be  represented
by  the  Vieve  or  the  Visve  Devas.  Visva  is  difierent  from
Sarva,  all.  It  means  the  .gods  together,  Oesammtgotter
(cunisti),  not  simply  all  the  gods  (omnes).  Sometimes,  there-
fore, the  two  words  can  be  used  together,  as  Taitt.  Br.  Ill,
I,  1,  yisvk  bhuvan&ni  sarvH,  *all  beings  together.'  The
Maruts  are  called  Visve  Mar6taA,  in  the  sense  of  all  the
Maruts  together.  These  Visve,  though  they  belong  to  the
class-gods  (Oa^ias),  are  difietent  from  other  class-gods  inas-
niuch  as  their  number  is  hardly  fixed.  It  would  be  endless
to  give  the  names  of  al^  the  gods  Who  are  praised  in  the
hymns  addressed  to  the  Visve  Devas.  Indra  often  stands
at  their  head  (IndraryyesU^y^),  but  there  is  hardly  one  of
the  Vedic  gods  who  does  not  at  times  appear  as  one  of  them.
Wliat  Is  really  important  in  these  Visve  is  that  they  repre-
sent the  first  attempt  at  comprehending  the  various  gods
as  forming  a  class,  so  that  even  the  other  classes  (Gauos),
such  as  Adityas,  Yasus,  or  Rudras  may  be  comprehended
under  the  wider  concept  of  Visve.  It  is  all  the  more  curious
that  this  important  class,  important  not  Caly  for  mytho-
logical but  for  philosophical  and  religious  purposes  alsp,
should  have  attracted  so  little  attention  hitherto.  They
Are  passed  over,  as  a  class,  even  in  that  rich  treasure-house
of  Vedic  Mythology,  the  fifth  volume  of  Muir's  Original
Sanskrit  Texts,  but  they  ought  not  to  be  ignored  by  those
who  are  interested  in  the  progx*ess  of  the  ancient  mytho-


40  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

logical  religions  from  given  multiplicity  to  postulated  unity,
as  an  esl^ntial  character  of  the  godhead.

But  while  this  conception  of  Yiave  Devas  marks  the
first  important  approach  frbm  the  many  incoherent  gods
scattered  through  nature  to  a  gradually  more  and  more
monotheistic  phase  of  thought  m  the  Yeda,  other  move-
ments also  tended  in  the  same  direction.     Several  gods,
owing  to  their  position  in  nature,  were  seen  to  perform  the
same  acts,  and  nence  a  poet  might  well  take  upon\  himself
to  say  that  Agni  not  only  acted  with  Indra  or  Savitri,
but  that  in  certain  of  his  duties  Agni  was  Indra  and  was
Savitn.    Hence  arose  a  number  of  dual  gods,  such  as  Indra-
Agni,  Mitrft-VaruTiau,  Agni-Shomau,  also  the  two  A«vins.
On  other  occasions  three  gods  were  praised  as  working
together,  such  as  Aryaman,  Mitra  ana  Yaruna,  or  Agin,
Soma  and  Gandharva,  while  from  another  point  of  view,
Vishnu  with  his  three  strides  represented  originally  the
same  heavenly  being,  as  rising  in  the  morning,  culminating
at  noon,  and  setting  in  the  evening.    Another  god  or  god-
dess, Aditi,  was  identified  with  the  sky  and  uie  air,  was
called  mother,  father,  and  son,  was  called  all  the  gods  and
the  five  races  of  men,  was  called  the  past  and  the  future.
Professor  Weber  has  strangely  misunderstood  me  if  he
imagines  that  I  designated  this  phcuse  of  religious  thought
as  Henotheism.

Bcaotlitism.

To  identify  Indra,  Agni,  and  Yaruna  is  one  thing,  it  is
syncretism ;  to  address  either  Indra  or  Agni  or  Yaruna,  as
for  the  time  being  the  only  god  in  existence  with  an  entire
f orgetf ulness  of  s3l  other  goos,  is  quite  another ;  and  it  was
this  phase,  so  fully  developed  in  the  hymns  of  the  Yeda,
which  I  wished  to  mark  definitely  by  a  namis  of  its  own,
calling  it  Henotheism  ^.

^  This  phase  of  religious  thought  has  been  well  described  in  the  same
fifth  volume  of  Muir's  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  p.  35A ;  see  also  Deosaen,
CkNMshiohte  der  Philosophie,  I,  p.  104;


MONOTHEISM  AJ^D   MONISM.  4I

m

M0ii»|]i«i8m  ftnA  MoaUm.

All  these  tendencies  worked  together  in  one  direction,
and  made  some  of  the  Vedic  poets  see  more  or  less  distinctly
that  the  idea  of  Qod,  if  once  clearly  conceived,  included
the  ideas  of  heing  one  and  without  axi  equal.  They  thus
arrived  at  the  conviction  that  above  the  great  multitud.e  of
gods  there  must  be  one  supreme  personality^  and,  after
a  time,  th^  declared  that  there  was  behind  all  the  gods
that  one  (Tad  Ekam)  of  which  the  gods  were  but  various
names.

By.  If  164,  46.  Ekam  sat  yiprM  bahudhA  vadanti,  Agnim,  Yamam,
M&tarUv^iiam  &huA.

The  bdgea  call  that  One  in  many  ways,  they  caU  .it  Agni,  Yama^
M&tarisvan.

By.  X  <a9»  a*  Aiilt  avlitain  «vadhay&  tat  ekam,  tasni&i  ha  anyat  na
paraA  kim  leana  Asa.

That  One  breathed  breathlessly  by  itself,  other  than  it  there  nothing
since  has  been.

Hie  former  thought  led  by  itsdf  to  a  morhotJieietic  rdir
gion^  the  latter,  as. we  shall  see,  to  a  monistic  philosophy.

In  trying  to  trace  the  onward  movement  of  religious  and
philosophical  thought  in  the  Yeda,  we  should  recognize
once  for  all  the  great,  difficulties  with  which  we  have  to
contend.  Speaking  as  ^et  of  the  hymns  only,  we  have  in
the  Big-veda  a  collection  of  1,017  hymns,  each  on  an
average  containing  about  ten  verses.  But  this  collection
was  made  at  different  times  and  in  different  places,  Cfyste-
majbically  in  some  respects,  but  in  others,  more  or  less  at
random.  We  have  no  right  to  suppose  that  we  have  even
a  hundredth  part  of  the  religious  and  popular  poetry  that
existed  during  the  Vedic  age.  We  must  therefore  carefully
^ard  a^inst  such  conclusions  as  that,  because  we  possess
m  our  Big-veda-samhit&  but  one  .hymn  addressed  to  a  cer-
tain deity,  therefore  that  god  was  considered  as  less  inipor-
tant  or  was  less  widely  worshipped  than  other  gods.  This
has  been  a  very  common  mistake,  and  I  confess  that  there
IS  some  excuse  for  it,  just  aa  there  was  for  looking  upon
Homer  as  the  sole  representative  of  the  whole  epic  poetry
of  Greece,  and  upon  his  mythology  as  the  mytnology  of
the  whole  of  Greece.    But  we  must  never  forget  that  the


42  INDIAN   PflrLOSOPHY.

Rig-veda  is  but  a  fragment,  and  represents  the  whole  of
Vedic  mythology  and  religion  even  leps  than  Homer  repre-
sents the  whole  of  Greek  mythology  and  religion.  It  is
wonderful  enough  that  such  a  collection  should  have
escaped  destruction  or  foi*getfuIness,  when  we  keep  in  mind
that  the  ancient  literature  of  India  was  purely  mnemonic^
writing  being  perfectly  unknown,  but  the  art  of  mnemonics
being  studied  all  the  more  as  a  discipline  essential  to  intel-
lectual life.  What  has  come  down  tq  us  of  Vedic  hymns,
by  an  almost  incredible,  yet  well  attested  process,  is  to  us
a  fragment  only,  and  we  must  be  on  our  guard  not  to  go
beyond  the  limits  assigned  to  us  by  the  facts  of  the  case.
Nor  can  the  hymns  which  have  come  down  to  us  have
been  composed  by  one  man  or  by  members  of  one  family
or  one  community  only ;  they  reach  -us  in  the  form  of  ten
collections  (Mandalas)  composed,  we  are  told,  by  different
men,  and  very  likely  at  different  periods.  Though  there  is
great  similarity,  nay  even  monotony  running  through
them,  there  are  differences  also  that  cannot  fail  to  strike
the  attentive  reader.  In  all  such  matters,  however,  we
must  be  careful  not  to  go  beyond  the  evidence  before  us,
and  abstain  as  much  as  possible  from  attempting  to  syste-
matise and  generalise  what  comes  to  us  in  an  unsystematised,
nay  often  chaotic  form.

•

Distinguishing  therefore,  as  much  as  possible,  between
what  has  been  called  tentative  monotheism,  which  is  reli-
gion, and  tentative  monism,  which  is  philosophy,  we  can
discover  traces  of  the  former  in  the  famous  hymn  X,  i%l,
which,  years  ago,  I  called  the  hymn  to  the  Unknown  God.
Here  the  poet  asks  in  every  verse  to  whom,  to  what  Deva,
he  should  offer  his  sacrifice,  and  says  towards  the  end
whether  it  should  be,  yih  dev&hu  ddhi  dev6A  6keJi.  Ssit,
*  he  who  alone  was  go^  above  gods/  Many  of  the  ordinary
gods  are  constantly  representea  as  supreme,  With^  an  entire
forgetfulness  that  one  only  can  be  so;  but  this  is  very
dili'erent  from  the  distinct  demand  here  made  by  the  poet
for  a  god  that  sliould  be  alx)v«  all  other  gods.  It  is  much
more  like  the  Semitic  demand  for  a  god  ahove  all  gods


VliSVAKABMAN.      TYASBTm.  43

(Exod,  xviii.  11),  or  for  a  father  of  gods  and  men,  as  in
Greece  {irariip  iphpvv  t€  6€&v  re).  Aristotle  already  re-
marked that,  as  men  have  one  king,  they  imagined  that
the  gods  also  must  be  governed  by  one  king^.  X  believe,
however,  that  the  ground  for  this  lies  deeper,  and  that  the
idea  of  oneness  is  really  involved  in  the  idea  of  Ood  as
a  supreme  and  unlimited  being.  But  Aristotle  might  no
doubt  have  strengthened  his  argument  by  appealing  to
India  where  ever  so  many  clans  and  tribes  had  each  their
own  king,  whether  Rti^ah  or  Mah&rac/ah,  and  where  it
might  seem  natural:  to  ima^ne  a  number  of  supreme  gods,
each  with  their  own  limited  supremacy.  Still  all  this
would  have  satisfied  the  monistic  craving  for  a  time  only.
Here  too,  in  the  demand  for  and  in  the  supply  of  a  supreme
deity,  we  can  watch  a.  slow  and  natural  progress.  At  first,
for  ifistance,  when  (Rv.  VITI,  89)  Indra  was  to  be  praised
for  his  marvellous  deeds,  it  was  he  who  had  made  the  sun
to  shine.  He  was  called  Sfatakratu,  the  all-powerful  and
all- wise,  or  Abhibhu,  the  conqueror.  At  the  end  the  poet
sums  up  by  saying:  Visvi-karma  visyd-devaA  mah^n  asi,
*  thou  art  the  maker  of  all  things,  thou  art  the  great
Vifivadeva  (all-ged).'  Tha  last  word  is  difficult  to  translate,
but  its.  real  purport  becomes  clear,  if  we  remember  what  wc;
saw  before  with  refei'ence  to  the  origin  of  the  Visve  Deyas.

"VinrakarBLia.

In  such  adjectives  as  £»atakratu,  and  still  more  in  Vi^va-
karman,  the  maker  of  all  things,  we  see  the  clear  germs
that  were  to  grow  into  the  one  supreme  deity.  As  soon
as  Yisvakai^an  was  used  as  a  substantive,  the  Bd^hmans
had  what  they  wanted,  they  had  their  All-maker,  their  god
above  all  gods,  the  god  whose  friendship  the  other  gods
were  eager  to  secure  (VIII,  89,  3).

TvashiiK.

The  xnaker  or  creator  of  all  things  is  the  iicare55t  approach
to  the  am  and  only  god  of  later  times.  It  s.hould  not  be
forgotten,  however,  that,  there  was  already  anotlier  maker,

*  Arist  PoUUos,  i,  a,  7 ;  Muir,  O.  S.  T„  V,  p.  5.


44  INDIAN   PHILOSOFHT.

called  Tvaddri,  i.  e.  riKTanv,  only  that  he  did  not  rise  to  the
position  of  a  real  creator  of  all  things.-  He  seems  to  have
been  too  old,  too  mythological  a  character  for  philosophical
purposes.  He  remained  the  workman,  the  Hephaestos,  of
the  Vedic  gods,  well  known  as  the  father  of  Saranyft  and
Yiavariipa.  He  had  all  the  requisited  for  becoming  a
supreme  deity,  in  fact,  he  is  so  here  and  there,  as  when
he  is  addressed  as  having  formed  heaven  and  earth  (X,  no,
9},  nay,  as  having  begotten  everything  (viavam  bhuvanam
^a^ana).  He  is  m  fact  all  that  a  Creator  can  be  required
to  be,  being  supposed  to  have  created  even  some  of  the
gods,  such  as  Agni,  Indra,  and  Brahmatiaspati  (Bv.  X,  2,
7 ;  II,  23,  17).  If  Agni  himself  is  called  Tvash^rt  ^Bv.  II,
1,5),  this  is  merely  in  consequence  of  that  syncretism  which
identified  Agni  with  ever  so  many  gods,  but  more  par-
ticularly wiui  Tvashtri,  the  shaper  of  all  things.

When  Tvash^ri  is  called  Savitri,  this  does  ifot  necessarily
imply  his  id^ity  with  the  god  Savitri,  but  the  word
should  in  that  case  be  taken  as  a  predicate,  meaning  the  en-
livener,  just  as  in  other  places  he  is  praised  as  the  nourieSier
or  preserver  of  all  creatures,  as  the  sun  (Bv.  Ill,  55, 19).
One  of  the  causes  why  he  did  not,  like  Pra^pati  or  Visva-
karman,  become  a  supreme  god  and  creator  was  his  having
belonged,  to  a  more  ancient  pre-Yedic  stratum  of  sods.
This  might  also  account  for  Indra's  hostility  to  Tyamtri,
considering  that  he  (Indra),  as  a  new  god,  had  himself
supplanted  the  older  gods,  such  as  Dyaus.    We  must  be

Erepared  for  many  such  |K)ssibilities,  thougn.I  give  them
ere  as  guesses  only.  It  is  possible  also  that  the  name«of
Asura,  given  to  TvasMri  and  to  his  son  Yiavariipja,  points
in  the  same  direction,  and  that  we  should  take  it,  not  in
the  sense  of  an  evil  spirit,  but  in  the  sense  of  an  ancient
daimon  in  which  it  is  applied  in  other  hymna  to  Yanma,
and  other  ancient  Peva&  Tvash^r^  is  b^t  known  as  the
father  of  Sara^iyii  and  the  grandfather  therefore  of  the
A^ivins  (day  and  night),  but  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that
as  father  of  Yaina  ana  Yamt  he  was  ever  conceived  as  the
progenitor  of  the  whole  human  race.  Those  who  so  cob-
ndently  identify  Yama  and  Yami  with  Adam  and  Eve
seem  to  have  entirely  forgotten  that  Yama  never  had  any


SEABOH   FOB  A   SUPBEHE   DMTT.  45

childiun  of  Yami  In  his  mythological  character,  Ty^abtri
is  sometimes  identical  with  Dyaus  (Zeus)  \  but  he  never
becomes,  as  has  sometimes  been  supposed,  a  purely  abstract
deity ;  and  in  this  we  see  the  real  difference  between  Tvashtri
and  Visvakarman.  Yi^vakarmitn,  originally  a  mere  pre-
dicate, has  no  antecectents,  noparents,  and  no  offspring,  like
Tvash^ri  (Bv.  X,  8i,  4).  Tne  work  of  Visvakarman  is
described  in  the  following  words,  which  have  a  slight
mjrthological  colouring:  '  What  was  the  stand,  the  support,
what  and  how  was*  it,  from  whence  the  all-seeing  Visva-
karman  produced  by  his  might  the  earth  and  stretched
out  the  sky  ?  The  only  god  who  on  every  side  has  eyes,
mouths,  arms  and  feet,  Uows  (forges)  with  his  two  arms
and  with  wings,  while  producing  heaven  and  earth  V

How  vague  and  uncertain  the  personal  character  of  Yi^^
vakarman  was  in  Vedic  times,  we  can  see  from  the  fact
that  the  Taittiriya  Brfthmana  ascribes  the  very  acts  here
ascribed  to  Visvakarman  to  Brahman  \  At  a  later  time,
Yiavakarman,  the  All-maker,  became  with  the  Buddhists,
as  Yisvakamma,  a  merely  subordinate  spirit,  who  is  sent
to  act  as  hairdresser  to  Buddha«  The  gods  also  have  their
fates!

The  same  human  yearning  for  one  supreme  deity  which
led  the  Yedic  priests  to  address  their  hymns  to  the  Yi^ve
Devas  or  to  visvakarman  as  the  maker  of  all  things,
induced  them  likewise  to  give  a  more  personal  character  to
Pra^pati.  This  name,  meaning  lord'  of  creatures,  is  used
in  Uie  Bi^-veda  as  a  predicate  of  several  gods,  such  as
Soma,  Savitri,  and  others.  His  later  origin  has  been  in-
ferred from  the  fact  that  his  name  occurs  but  three  times
in  the  Big*veda^  These  arithmetical  statistics  should,
however^  be  used  with  great  caution.    First  of  all  my  vndex

'  Oontributions,  II,  p.  560.

*  Thk  bluving  has  reference  to  the  fonse  on  whioh  the  smith  does  his
work.  Wings  w^re  used  instesd  Af  beUows,  and  we  must  take  care  not  to
ascribe  angels*  wings  to  TvashlH  Or  to  any  god  of  Vedic  tiroes,  unless  he  is
oonoeifed  as  a  bird,  ^and  not  as  a  man.

»  Taitt.  Br.  II,  a_9,  6 ;  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  V,  p.  355.

•  Muir,  0. 8.T.,  Y,  p,  390W     .


46  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

verborum  is  by  no  means  infallible,  and  secondly  puE>Sam-
hitA  of  the  Rig-veda  is  but  a  segment,  probably  a  very
small  isegment,  of  the  mass  of  religious  poetry  that  once
existed.  In  the  case  of  PragApati  I  had  left  out  in  my
Index  one  passage,  X,  lai,  lo,  and  though,  for  very  good
reasons,  I  considered  and  still  consider  this  verse  as  a  later
addition,  this  was  probably  no  excuse  for  omitting  it,  like
all  that  is  omitted  in  the  Pada-text  of  the  Big-veda.  The
whole  hymn  must  have  been,  as  I  thought,  the  expression
of  a  yearning  after  one  supreme  deity,  who  had  made
heaven  and  earth,  the  sea  and  all  :that  in  them  is.  But
many  scholars  take  it  as  intended  f mm. the  very  first  verse
for  the  individualised  god,  Pra^d^pati.  I  doubt  this  still,
and  I  give  therefore  the  translation  of  the  hymn  as  I  gave
it  in  i860,  in  my  *  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  literature'
(p.  568).  It  has  been  translated  many  times  since,  but
it  will  be  seen  that  I  have  had  but  little  to  alter.

Kymii  to  the  Unknown  Ood.

z.  In  the  beginning  there  arose  the  germ  of  fzolden  light,  Hiranya-
garbha ;  he  was  the  one  born  lord  of  all  that  is.  He  stablishcd  the  earth
and  this  sky — Who  is  the  god  to  whom  we  should  offer  our  sacrffice?

a.  He  who  gives  life,  he  who  gives  strength :  whose  command  all  the
bright  gods  revere  ;  whose  shadow  is  immortality  and  mortality  (gods
and  men) — Who  is  the  god  to  whom  we  should  offer  our  sacrifice  ?

3.  He  vy^ho  through  his  power  became  the  sole  king  of  this  breathing
and  slumbering  world — he  who  governs  all,  man  and  beast^-Who  is  the
god  to  whom  we  should  offer  our  sacrifice  ?

4.  He  through  whose  greatness  these  snowy  mountains  are,  and  the
sea,  they  say,  with  the  Bas&,  the  distant  river,  he  whose  two  arms  these
regions  are — Who  is  the  god  to  whom  we  should  offer  our  sacrifice  ?

5.  He  through  whom  tiie  sky  is  strong,  nnd  the  earth  firm,  he  tlirough
•whom  the  heaven  was  established,  nay  the  highest  heaven,  he  who  mea-
sured the  light  in  the  air — ^Who  is  the  god  to  whom  We  should  offer  our
sacrifice?  •

6.  He  to  whom  heaven  and  earth  (or,  the  two  armies)  standing  firm  by
his  help,  look  up,  trembling  in  their  minds,  he  over  whom  the  rising  sun
shines  forth — ^Who  is  the  god  to  whom  we  should  offer  our  sacrifice  ?

•  7.  When  the  great  waters  wont  everywhere,  holding  the  germ  aiid
generating  fire,  thence  he  arose  who  is  the  sole  life  of  the  bright  gods —
Who  is  the  god  to  whom  we  should  offer  our  aacrifi^  ?

8.  He  who  by  his  might  looked  even  over  the  waters,  which  gave
strength  and  produced  the  sacrifice,  he  wh<^  alone  is  god  above  all  gods —
Who  is  the  god  to  whom  we  should  offer  our  sacrifice  ?
.  9.  May  he  not  destroy  ns^  he,  the  creator  of  the  earth,  or  he,  the
righteous,  who  created  the  heaven,  he  who  also  created  the  bright  and
mighty  waters— Who  ib  the  god  to  whom  we  ahould  offer  our  sacrifioe?


HYMN   TO    TBB    UNKNOWN   GOD.  47

Then  follows  the  verse  which  I  treated  as  a  later  addition,
because  it  seemed  to  me  that,  if  Pra^&pati'had  been  known
by  the  poet  as  the  god  who  did  all  this,  he  would  not  have
asked,  at  the  end  of  every  verse,  who  the  god  was  to  whom
sacrifice  should  be  oflFered.  However,  poets  have  their  own
ways.  But  the  strongest  argument  against  the.  final  verse,
which  my  critics  have  evidently  overlooked,  is  the  fact
that  this  verse  has  not  been  aivided  by  the  Padakara.
I  still  hold,  therefore,  that  it  was  a  later  addition,  that  it  is
lame  and  weak,  and  spoils  the  character  of  the  hymn.  It
runs  as  follows : —

lo.  *0  Pra^ftpati,  no  other  but  thou  has  held  together  all  these  things ;
whateve»  we  desire  in  sacrificing  to  thee,  maj  that  be  ours,  may  we  be
the  lords  of  wealth.*    .

With  this  conception  of  Frar/^pati  as  the  lord  of  all
created  things  and  as  the  supreme  deity,  the  monotheistic
yearning  was  satisfied,  even  though  the  existence  of  other
gods  was  not  denied.  And  what  is  curious  is  that  we  see
the  same  attempt  ^  repeated  again  and  again.  like  Visva-
karman  and  Pra^^pati  we  find  such  names  as  Purusha,
man ;  Hiranyagarbha,  golden  germ ;  Pr^Tia,  breath,  spirit ;
Skambha,  support  (X,  8i,  7);  Dhat7*i,  maker;  Vidh&tri,
arranger;  Namadhd*,  name-^ver  of  the  gods,  dvofiaroOirq^
and  others,  all  names  for  the  Eka  Deva,  the  one  god,
though  not,  like  Pragf&pati,  developed  into  full-grown  div'ne
peraonaUties.  These  names  have  had  different .  fates  in
later  times.  Some^meet  us  again  during  the  Bnlhma^ia
period  and  in  the  Atharvana  hymns,  or  rise  to  the  surface
in'  the  more  modem  pantheon  of  India ;  others  have  disap-
peared altogether  after  a  short  existence,  or  have  resumed
their  purely  predicative  character.  But  the  deep  groove
which  they  made  in  the  Indian  mind  has  remained,  and  to
the  present  day  the  religious  wants  of  the  great  mass  of
the  people  in  ibidia  seem  satisfied  through  the  idea  of  the
one  supreme  god,  exalted  above  all  other  gods,  whatever
names  mcy  have  been  given  to  him.  Even  the  gods: of
modem  times  such  as  /Siva  and  Vishnu,  nay  goddesses  even,
such  els  KSM^  P4rvati,  Durgd.,  are  but  new  names  for  what

^  M.  M.y  Theoaophy,  pp^  344  seq.


48  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY,

was  originally  embodied  in  the  lord  of  created  things
(Pragffipati)  axid  the  maker  of  all  things  (Visvakarman).
In  spite  of  their  mythological  disguises,  these  modern  gods
have  always  retained  in  the  eyes  of  the  more  enlightened
of  their  worshippers  traces  of  the  character  of  omnipotence
that  was  assigned  even  in  Yedic  times  te  the  one  supreme
god^  the'god  above  all  gods.

We  have  now  to  take  another  step  in  advance.  By  the
side  of  the  stream  of  thought  which  we  have  hitherto
followed,  we  see  in  India  another  powerful  movement
which  postulated  from  the  first  more  tnan  a  god  above,  yet
among,  other  gods.  .In  the  eyes  of  more  thoughtful  men
every  one  of  the  gods,  called  by  a  personal  and  proper
name,  was  limited  ipso  facto,  and  therefore  not  fit  to  fill
the  place  which  was  to  be  filled  by  an  unlimited  and  abso-
lute power,  as  the  primary  cause  of  all  created  things.  No
name  that  expressed  ideas  connected  with  the  male  or
female  sex,  not  even  Pragr&pati  or  Visvakarman,  was  con-
sidered as  fit  for  such  a  being,  and  thus  we  see  that  as
early  as  the  Vedic  hymuGi  it  was  spoken  of  as  Tad  Ekam,
that  One,  as  neither  male  nor  female,  that  is,  as  neuter.
We  come  across  it  in  the  hymn  of  Dirghatemas  (1, 164, 6"^),
where,  after  adding  who  he  was  that  establishea  .these  six
spaces  of,  the  world,  the  poet  asks, '  Was  it  perhs^  the  One
(neuter),  in  the  shape  of  the  Unborn  (masc.)  1 '  This  should
oe  read  in  connection  with  the  famous  forty-sixth  verse  > —

'They  call  (it)  Indra,  Mitra  and  Varuwa,  Agni:  then
(oomes)  the  heavenly  bird  Qarutman;  that  which  is  the
One,  the  poets  call  in  many  ways,  they  call  it  Agni,  Tama,
H&tarisvan.'

Here  we  see  the  clear  distinction  between  the  One  that
is  named  and  the  names,  that  is,  the  various  gods,  and
again  between  the  One  without  form  or  the  unbom>  that

>  This  hymn,  the  auth6r  of  which  is  called  Dirghatnmas,  i.e.  Long
Darkness,  is  indeed  full  of  obscure  passages.  It  has  been  explained  by
Haug  (Vedisohe  REthselfragen  und  Rathselspriiohe,  1875)  and  more  sue-
cesfefnlly  by  Deiissen,  in  his  Allgcmeine  Geschichte  der  Philosophie,
p.  108,  but  it  still  contains  much  that  has  to  be  deared  up.


NASADIFA   HTMK.  49

is,  the  inmaiiifested,  and  those  who  established  the  whole
world.  Thia  One,  or  the  Unborn,  is  mentioned  also  in  X,
82,  6,  wherts  we  read  -  The  One  is  placed  in  the  nayeof  the
unborn  where  all  beings  rested/  Again  in  a  hymn  to  the
Vi«ve  Devas,  III,  54,  9,  the  poet,  when  speaking  of  heaTen
and  earth,  says : —

^They  keep  apart  all  created  things,  and  tremble  not,
thou£rh  bearing:  the  great  gods :  the  One  rules  over  all  that
i8  u^oving  and  tEat  m^es,  that  walks  or  flies,  being
differently  horn.*

'Hie  same  postulated  Bein^  is  most  fuUy  described  in
hymn  X,  129,  i,  of  which  I  likewise  gave  a  translation  in
my  '  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature '  (1859),  P-  5^9*
It  has  been  frequently  translated  siilce,  but  the  meaning
has  cm  the  whole  remained  much  the  same.

I.  There  was  then  neither  what  is  norwhat  is  not,  there  was  no  sky,
nor  the  h«aven  which  is  beyond.  What  coyered?  Where  was  it,  and  in
whose  slielter  ?    Wasthe  water  the  deep  abyss  (in  which  it  lay)  ?

a.  Tliere  ^as  no  death,  hence  was  there  nothing  immoi*tal.  Tiiere  was
no  light  (distinction)  between  night  and  day.  That  One  breathed  by
itself  without  breath,  other  than  it  there  has  been  nothing.

3.  DarknMS  there  was,  in  the  beginning  all  this  was  a  sea  iftithont
light ;  the  gemi  that  lay  covci'ed  by  the  husk,  that  One  was  born  by  the
power  of  heat  (Tapas).

4.  Love  overcame  it  in  the  beginning,  which  was  the  seed  springing
from  mind ;  poets  having  searchc  d  in  their  heart  foond  by  wisdom  the
bond  of  what  is  in  what  is  not.

5.  Tlieir  ray  which  was  stretched  across,  was  it  below  or  was  it  above  ?
There  were  seed-bearers,  thore  were  powers,  self-power  below,  and  will
above,

6.  Who  then  knows,  who  has  declared  it  hei«,  from  whence  was  bom
this  creation  ?  The  gods  came  later  than  this  creation,  who  then  knows
whence  it  arose?

7.  He  from  whom  this  creation  arose,  whether  he  made  it  or  did  not
make  it,  the  Highest  Seer  in  the  highest  heaven,  he  forsooth  knows ;  or  does
even  he  not  know  ?

There  ate  several  passages  in  this  hymn  which,  in  spite
of  much' labour  spent  on  them  by  eminent  scholars,  remain
as  obscure'  now  as  they  were  to  me  in  1859.  The  poet
himself  is  evidently  not  quite  clear  in  his  own  mind,  and
he  is  constantly  oscillating  between  a  personal  and  imper-
sonal or  rather  superpersonal  cause  from  whence  the  uni-

E


50  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

verse  emanated.  But  the  step  from  a  sexual  to  a  sexless
god,  from  a  mythological  vp&To^  to  a  metaphysical  Trp&rov,
had  evidently  been  made  at  that  early  tiipe,  and  with  it
the  decisive  step  from  mythology  to  philosophy  had  been
taken.  It  is  strange  to  meet  with  this  bold  guess  in  a
collection  of  hymns  the  greater  part  of  which  consists  of
what  must  seem  to  us  childish  petrtioiis  addressed  to  the
numerous  Devas  or  gods  of  nature.  Even  the  questicoi
whibh  in  Europe  was  asked  at  a  much  later  date,  where
the  preator  could  have  found  a  vov  otQ  for  creating  the
world  out  of  matter  or  out  of  nothing,  had  evidently
passed  through  the  minds  of  the  Vedic  seers  when  they
asked,  Rv.  X,  8i,  2  and  4 :  *  What  was  the  stand,  what  was
the  support,  what  and  how  was  it,  from  whence  the  all-
seeing  Vi^vakarman  produced  by  hia  mi^ht  the  earth  and
stretched  out  the  sky?'  These  startling  outbursts  of
philosophic  thought  seem  indeed  to  require  the  admission
of  a  long  continued  effort  of  meditation  and  speculation
before  jso  complete  a  rupture  with  the  old  conception  of

Ehysical  gods*  could  have,  become  possible.  We  must  not,
bwever,  measure  every  nation  with  the  same  measure.  It
is  not  neeessaiy  that  the  historical  progress  of  thought,
whetlier  religioi^MS  or  philosophical,  should  have  been  exactly
the  same  in  every  country,  nor  must  we  forget  that  there
always  have  been  privileged  individuals  whose  mind  was
untrammelled  by  the  thoughts  of  the  great  mass  of  the
people,  and  who  saw  and  pix)claimed,  as  if  inspired  by
a  power  not  themselves,  truths  far  beyond*  the  reach  of
their  fellow  men.  It  must  have  required  considerable  bold-
ness, when  surrounded  by  millions  who  never  got  tired  of
celebrating  the  mighty  deeds  achieved  by  su<m  Devas  as
Agni,  Indra,  Soma,  oavitri,  or  Varuna,  to  declare  that
these  gods  were  nothing  but  names  of  a  higher  ]pk>w6r
which  was  at  first  without  any  name  at  all,  ciSled  simply
Tad  Ekajn,  that  One,  and  afterwards  addressed  by  such
dark  names  as  Brahman  and  Atman.  The  poets  who  utter
these  higher  truths  seem  fully  conscious  of  their  own
weakness  in  grasping  them.  Thus,  in  I,  167,  5  and  6,  Uxq
poet  says : —

*  As  a  fool,  ignorant  in  my  own  mind,  I  ask  for  the  hidden  plaoes  of  ilie


.*_  .  _ A.


NASADIYA  HYMN.  5 1

goda ;  the  sagea,  in  order  to  weare,  stretched  the  aoTea  strings  over  the
newborn  calf  ^'

'Not  haying  discovered  I  ask  the  sages  who  may  have  diacoYeYed,  not
knowing,  in  order  to  know :  he  who  supported  the  six  skies  in  the  form
of  the  unborn — ^was  he  perchance  that  One  ?  *

And  .again  in  ver.  4  of  the  same  hymn:-—  .

'Who  has  seen  the  firstborn,  when  he  who  had  no  bones  (no  form)
bears  him  that  has  bones  (form)  ?  Where  i&  the  breath  of  the  earth,  'the
blood,  tho  self?    Who  went  to  one  who  knows,  to  ask  this  ? '

In  all  this  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  poets  themselves
who  proclaimed  the  great  truth  of  the  One,  as  the  sub-
stance of  all  the  gods,  did  not  claim  any  inspiration  ab
extra,  but  strove  to  rise  by  their  own  exertions  out  of  the
clouds  of  their  foolishness  towards  the  perception  of  a
higher  truth.  The  wise,  as  they  said,  had  perceived  in
their  heart  what  was  the  bond  between  what  is  and  what
is  not,  between  the  visible  and  the  invisible,  between  the
phenomenal  and  the  real,  and  hence  also  between  the  indi-
vidual gods  worshipped  by  the  multitude,  and  that  One
Being  which  was  free  from  the  character  of  a  mere  Deva,
entirely  free  from  mjrthology,  from  parentage  and  sex,
and,  if  endowed  with  personality  at  all,  th^n  so  far  only
as  personality  was  necessary  for  will  This  was  very
diffS^nt  fro^  the  vulgar  Personality  ascribed  by  tS
Greeks  to  their  Zeus  or  Aphrodite,  nay  even  by  many
Jews  and  Christians  to  their  Jehovah  or  God.  All  this
represented  an  enormous  .progress,  and  it  is  certainly
difficult  to  imagine  how  it  could  have  been  achieved  at
that  early  peri^  and,  aa  it  were,  in  the  midst  of  prayers
and  sacrifices  addressed  to  a  crowd  of  such  decidedly
personal  and  inythological  Devas  as  Indra  and  Agni  and
all  the  rest.  Still  it  was  achieved;  and  whatever  is  the
age  when  the  collection  of  our  Rig-veda-sa^7ilutd*  was
finished,  it  was  before  that  age  that  the  conviction  had
been  formed  that  there  is  but  One,  One  Being,  neither
male  nor  female,  a  Being  raised  high  above  all  the  con-
ditions and  limitations  of  per^nality  and  of  human  nature,

^  This  calf  seems  meant  for  the  year,  and  in  the  seven  strings  we  might
see  a  distant  recollection  of  a  year  of  seven  seasons ;  see  Galen,  v.  347.
Pra^&pati  is  often  identified  with  the  year.

£2


52  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

and  nevertheleas  the  Bein^  that  waa  really  mean^  by  aU
Buch  names  as  Indra,  Agni,  Mataria^^an,  nay  even  by  the
name  of  Pragr&pati,  lord  of  creatures.  In  fact  the  Vedic
poets  had  arrived  at  a  conception  of  the  Godhead  which
was  reached  once  more  by  some  of  the  Christian  philo-
sophers of  Alexandria,  but  which  even  at  present  is  beyond
the  reach  of  many  who  call  themselves  Christiana.

Before  that  highest  point  of  religious  speculation  was
reached,  or,  it  may  be,  even  at  the  same  time,  for  chronology
is  very  difficult  to  apply  to  the  spontaneous  intuitions  of
philosophical  truthq,  many  efforts  liad  been  made  in  the
same,  direction.  Such  names  as  Brahman  and  Atman,
which  afterwards  became  so  important  as  the  two  main
supports  of  Vedfl.nta-philosophy,  or  Purusha,  the  name  of
the  transcendent  soul  as  U3cd  in  the  BUmkhya  system,
do  not  spring  into  life  without  a  long  previous  incubation.

Br»hin>w,  its  vmxUmM  Mtaadngm,

If  then  we  find  Brfihman  used  as  another  name  of  whaf
before  was  called  Tad  Ekam,That  One,  if  later  on  we  meet
with  such  questions  as —

'Was  Brahman  the  first  cause?  Whence  are.  we  bom?
By  what  do  we  live?  Whither  are  we  htustening?  By
whom  constrained  do  we  obtain  our  lot  in  life  whether
of  happiness  or  of  misery,  O  ye  knowers  of  Brahman?
Is  time,  is  the  nature  of  things,  is  necessity,  is  accident,
are  the  elements,  or  is  Furusha  to  be  considered  the
source  ? '

We  naturally  ask,  first  of  all,  whence  came  these  names?
What  did  Bi^hman  mean  so  as  to  become  fit  to  signify
t5  ovToas  ov'i  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  lightly  this
question  has  been  answered  ^  Brahman,  it  was  said  by
Pr.  Haug,  means  prayer,  and  was  derived  from  the  root
Barh  or  Brih.  to  swell  or  to  grow,  so  that  originally  it
would  liave  meant  what  swells  or  grows.  He  then  assigned
to  Br&hman  the  more  abstract  meaning  of  growth  and
welfare,  and  wliat  causes  growth  and  welfare,  namely
sacred  songs.   Lastly,  he  assigned  to  Brdhman  the  meaning

*  M.  3f.,  Theosophy,  p.  240.


BRAHMAN,    ITS   VAEI0U8    MEANINGS.  53

of  force  as  manifested  in  mature,  and  that  of  universal
force  as  the  Supreme  Being.  I  confess  I  can  see  no  con-
tinuity in  this  string  of  thought.  Other  scholars,  however,
have  mostly  repeated  the  same  view.  Dr.  Muir  starts  from
Bhlhman  in  the  sense  of  prayer,  while  with  the  ordinary
change  of  accent  Brahm&n  means  he  who  prays.

Here  the  first  question  seems  to  be  how  Brdhman  could
have  come  to  mean  prayer.  Prof.  Roth  maintained  that
Bri(hman  expressed  the  force  of  will  directed  to  the  gods ;
and  he  gave  as  the  first  meaning  of  Brahman,  'Die  als
Drang  unci  FiiUe  des  Geniilths  auftretende  und  den
Gottern  zustrebende  Ando/^ht/  words  difficult  to  render
into  intelligible  English.  The  second  meaning,  accoinling
to  him,  is  a  sacred  or  magic  foimula;  then  sjiacred  and
divine  words,  opposed  to  ordinary  language ;  sacred  wisilora,
holy  life;  lastly,  the  absolute  or  impei-sonal  god.  These
are  mighty  strides  of  thought,  but  how  are  they  to  be
derived  one  from  the  other?

Prof.  Deussen  (p.  10)  sees  in  Brfihman  'prayer,'  the
lifting  up  of  the  will  above  one's  own  individuality  of
which  we  become  conscious  in  religious  meditation.  I  must
confess  that  here  too  there  seem  to  be  sevei^al  missing  links
in  the  chain  of  meanings.  Though  the  idea  of  prayer  as
swelling  or  exalted  thought  may  be  true  with  us,  there  is
little,  if  any,  trace  of  such  thoughts  in  the  Veda.  Most
of  the  prayers  there  are  very  matter-of-fact  petitions,  and
all  that  has  been  said  of  the  swelling  of  the  heai*t,  the
elevaticm  of  the  mind,  the  fervid  impulse  of  the  will^  as
expressed  by  the  word  !foahman,  seems  to  me  decidedly
modem,  and  without  any  analogies  in  the  Veda  itself.
When  it  is  said  that  the  hymns  make  the  gods  grow
(Vr/dh),  this  is  little  more  than  wlmt  we  mean  by  saying
that  they  magnify  the  gods  (Deussen,  1.  c,  p.  245).  Even
if  a  more  pix>fouud  intention  wore  supposed  to  be  nectsssaiy
for  the  word  Brdhman  in  the  senso  of  prayer,  there  would
bo  nothing  to  prevent  its  having  onpnally  grown  out
of  Brahman  in  the  sense  of  word.  Of  course  we  cannot
expect  perfect  certainty  in  a  matter  like  this,  when  wo
are  trying  to  discover  tae  almost  impeix^eptible  tmiisitious
by  which  a  root  which  expresses  the  idea  of  growing  forth


54  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

(Ynddhau),  growing  strong,  bursting,  forth,  increasing,
came  to  supj^y  a  name  for  prayer  as  well  as  for  deity.
This  evolution  of  thought  must  have  taken  place  long
before  the  Vedic  period,  long  before  the  Aryan  oeparation,
long  before  the  final  constitution  of  the  Aryan  Language
of  India.  We  can  but  guess  therefore,  and  we  should
never  forget  this  in  trying  to  interpret  the  faint  traces
which  the  earliest  steps  of  the  human  mind  have  left  on
the  half -petrified  sands  of  our  langua^.  That  Br&hman
means  prayer  is  certain,  and  th»t  the  root  Brih  meant
to  grow,  fyy  break  forth,  is  equally  certain,  and  admitted
by*  all.  What  is  uncertain  are  the  intermediate  links
connecting  the  two.

I  suppose,  and  I  can  say  no  more,  that  VWh  or  Brih,
which  I  take  to  be  a  parallel  form  of  Vr/dh,  to  grow,  meant
to  grow,  to  come  forth,  to  spread.  Hence  BWhat  means
simply  great  (like  great  from  growing),  broad,  strong,
Barhish^Aa,  strongest.  We  shoula  note,  however,  though
we  cannot  attribute  much  importance  to  the  fact,  that
Brimhati  and  Brimhayati  also  were  quoted  by  Indian
grammarians  in  the  sense  of  speaking  and  shining.  Here
we  can  see  that  speaking  could  originally  have  had  the
meaning  of  uttering,  and  that '  word '  has  been  conceived
as  that  which  breaks  forth,  or  is  uttered,  an  utterance  (Aus-
druck),  as  we  say.

The  next  step  to  consider  is  the  name  Bnhaspati.  We
must  start  from  the  fact  that  BWhaspati  is  synonymous
with  y&A;as-pati,  lord  of  speech.  Unless  Brih  haa  once
meant  speech,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  form  such
a  name  as  B7^has-pati,  as  little  as  Brahmanas-pati  could
have  been  possible  without  Br&hman  \

From  this  point  once  gained  I  make  the  next  step  and
suppose  that  Br&h-man  was  formed  to  express  what  was
uttered,  what  broke  forth,  or  shone  forth,  that  is,  the  word
or  speech.  If  we  have  arrived  at  this,  we  can  easily  under-
Btsxkd  how  the  general  concept  of  word  was  specialised  in
the  sense  both  of  sacred  utterance  or  formula  and  of  prayer ;
without  any  idea  of  swelling  meditation  at  lifting  up  of

*  See  JQUUid.  Dp.  I,  a,  ii,  vAg  ghi  brjhiitl,  ituiyk  esha  patiA ,  and  VII,
11,  a,  yo  vAtam  bnUunasi^  upAiiaie.    w  BrOu  I,  a,  ao.


Bnia  AKB  BBAHMAN,  WORD.  55

hearts,  so  alien  to  Vedic  poets;  such  as  they  are  known  to
us.  Bat  if  I  am  right  in  seeing  in  Br&hman  the  original
meaning  of  what  breaks  forth,  of  a  force  that  manifests
itself  in  audible  speech,  it  will  become  easy  to  understand
how  Br&hman  could  also,  from  the  very  beginning  though
in  a  different  direction,  have  been  used  as  a  name  of  that
universal  force  which  manifests  itself  in  the  creation  of
a  visible  universe.  We  need  not  suppose  that  it  had  to
ascend  a  scale  first  from  holy  word,  holy  wisdom  to  the
source  of  that  wisdom,  the  absolute  god.

We  may  suppose  therefore^— I  say  no  more — that  Brah-
man meant  force  or  even  germ,  so  far  as  it  bui-sts  forth,
whether  in  speech  or  in  nature  ^  But  now  comes  a  much
more  perplexing  question.  It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that
Vriii  or  Brih  is  a  parallel  form  of  Vridh ;  and  it  is  a  well-
known  fact  that  both  the  Latin  verbum  and  the'Gennah
Wort  can  be  regularly  derived  from  the  same  root,  cor-
responding to  a  possible  Sanskrit  Vr/h-a  or  VWdh-a.  In
that  case  Brahman  also  may  be  taken  as  a  direct  derivation
in  the  sense  of  the  uttered  word,  and  brahman  as  the
speaker,  the  utterer.  So  far  we  are  still  on  safe  ground,
and  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  I  should  not
venture  to  go  much  beyond.  But  Colebrooke  and  other
Vedic  scholars  have  often  pointed  out  the  fact  that  in  the
Veda  already  we  find  a  goddess  VAfc,  speech,  which  we  met
in  VAHs-pdti  and  B?'<lias-p4ti'^,  the  lord  of  speech.  This
V&fc,  as  Colebrooke  pointed  out  as  early  as  1805,  was  'the
active  power  of  BrahmH,  proceeding  from  him'^.'  After
reading  Colebrooke's  remarks  on  it,  few  Sanskrit  scholars
could  help  bein^  reminded  of.  the  Logos  or  the  Word  that
was  in  tne  beginning,  tliat  was  with  God,  and  by  whom
all  things  were  made.    The  important  question,  however,

*  BiyyadA'^A  Patta  quotes  a  )pa8sage  from  the  YogavasislifAa :  '  Brahma-
vrAnhaiya  hi  oaga^,  gu^ikk  Aa  brahmavfimhanam'  (Vediinttsiii,  p.  dS).

'  Xai  tl»e  B}g"VeiJU  we  have  only  \tiktih  pato,  X,  166,  3,  aa  two  words ;
and  a^ain  p4Um  vMA,  TX»  a6,  4.  BhUimanaa  patiA  oceiirs  frequently  in
Riy-veda,  aa  It,  33,  i,  gyeiMaxlllpam  brihman&m  brahmanas  pate,  A(e.


56  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

wbich»  even  Jafter  Colebrooke's  riemarks^  remainAl  still
undecided,  was  whether  this  idea  o^  the  creative  Word
was  borrowed  by  the  Greeks  from  India,  or  by  the  Indians
from  Greece,  or  whether  it  was  an  idea  that  i^rang  up
independently  in  both  countries.  This  is  a  question  the
answer  of  which  must  lead  to  the  most  far-reaching  con-
sequences. Professor  Weber  in  his  '  Indische  Studien/  IZ,
473,  published  an  article  with  the  object  of  showing  that
'  the  JLo0O6-idea  had  no  antecedents  in  Greece  to  aceoant
for  it.'  This  was  certainly  a  startling  assertion,  but  in  the
face  of  w^ll-known  facts  he  added :  '  Without  wishing  to
give  a  decision  on  this  question,  the  surmise  is  obvious,
considering  the  close  relations  at  that  time  existing  between
Alexandria  and  India,  that  the  growth  of  this  Neoplatonic
idea  was  influenced  by  the  like  views  of  the  philosophical
systems  of  India/  He  says  again, '  that  it  may  have  been
simply  on  account  of  the  invigorating  influence  which  the
gods  were  believed  to  derive  from  the  hymns,  that  the
goddess  of  Speech  was  conceived  as  furnishing  to  Fra^apati
the  strength  of  creation,  though  at  last,  particularly  in
the  shape  of  Om,  she  obtained  the  highest  position,  being
identified  with  the  absolute  Br&hman/

I  hope  I  h^ve  thus  given  a  correct  account  of  Professor
Weber  s  somewhat  vague  yet  startling  assertion,  that  the
Alexandrian  Logos  idea  had  no  anteceoents  in  Greek  philo-
sophv,  but  was  influenced  by  the  Yedic  Ykk.  There  are,
no  doubt,  similarities,  but  there  are  dissimilarities  also
which  ought  not  to  be  ignored.  To  say  nothing  else,  Yik
is  a  feminine.  Logos  a  masculine,  and  that  involves  more
than  a  difference  of  grammatical  gender.

I  have  tried  to  mow  in  my  'Lectures  on  Theosophy,'
that  the  facts  of  the  case  leaa  us'  to  a  very  different^  nay
to  the  very  opposite,  opinion.  If  I  did  not  enter  on  a  dis-
cussion of  the  arguments  which  were  intended  to  prove
the  absence  of  antecedents  of  the  Alexandrian  Logos  idea
in  Greek  philosophy,  it  was  because  I  tihought  it  letter  to
state  the  facts  as  tiiey  really  are,  without  entering  on  any
useless  contioversy,  leaving  classical  and  Sanskrit  scholaris
to  form  their  own  conclusions.  While  Professor  Weber
had  asserted  that  the  Logos  appears  in  Alexandria  without


Bi2/El   AND   BBABMAN,   WORD.  57

any  preparatory  sibeps,  I  did  my  best  to  point  out  these
very  steps  leading  up  to  the  Logos,  which  are  very  well
known  to  every  student  of  the  early  history  of  Greek
philosophy^.  If  I  have  succeeded  in  this,  the  presumption
in  favour  of  aiiiy  Indian  influence  having  been  exercised  on
the  philosophers  of  Alexandria,  would  fall  to  the  ground
of  itiself ,  and  the  claims  of  India  and  Greece  would  be
equal  so  far  as  the  original  idea  of  the  Word,  as  a  potemUa
of  the  absolute  Being,  was  concerned.  '  Real  Indian  philo-
sophy/ I  had  said  before,  'even  in  that  embryonic  form  in
which  we  find  it  in  the  Upanishads,  stands  completely  by
itself.  We  cannot  claim  for  it  any  historical  relationship
with  the  earliest  Greek  philosophy.  The  two  are  as  inde-
pendent of  each  other  €U3  the  Greek  Charia,  when  she  ha6
become  the  wife  of  Hephaestos,  is  of  the  Haritas,  the  red
horses  of  tiie  Vedic  Dawn  *  (p.  79).

Then  the  question  arose,  was  there  at  least  a  distant
relationdiip,  sueh  as  exists  between  Gharis  and  the  Haritas,
between  Zeus  and  Dyaus.  between  Ykk  and  the  Los^os
alaol  As  there  wer«  i  linguistic  indications  whatever^
support  of  such  a  view,  I  arrived  in  the  end  at  the  conclu-
sion, that  striking  as  are  the  coincidences  between  the  Vedic
Yd^  and  the  Greek  Logos,  we  must  here  also  admit  that
what  was  possible  in  India  i^ms  possible  in  Greece  likewise,
and  that  we  have  no  evidence  to  support  us  in  any  further
ccmdusions.  In  all  this  I  thought  that  facts  would  speak
far  bettar  than  words.  It  is  quite  true  that  Professor
Weber  was  careful  to  add  the  clause  *  that  he  did  not  intend
to  ^ve  an^  opinion  on  this  question,'  but  af tw  sueh  a  eoa-
f esnoQ  it  is  hardly  beooi&ing  to  hint  that  those  who  have
given  an  opinion  on  this  qu^ion,  had  derived  their  info]^
mation  fimn  him.  It  is  easy  to  state  the  pros  and  cons,
thciPftrvapakshaand  the  Uttarapaksha,  but  both  are  meant
in  the  ODKi  to  lead  on  to  the  oiddh&nte,  the  conclusion.
Even  stronger  ooincidenoes  between  Y&ib  and  the  Sophia
of  the  Old  Testament^  might  have  been  adduced,  for  as
we  read  ^  Y&i  as  the  companion  of  Pragf&pati  ^  Wisdom,

^  Th^osophy,  p.  384,  The  Historical  AntecedentB  of  the  Logos.

*  M.  M.,  Tlieosophy,  p.  381.

*  XMtaka  1%  5  (07^  I).


58  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

in  Prov.  viii.  30,  is  made  to  say,  'I  was  by  him,  as  one
biought  up  with  him ;  and  I  was  daily  his  delight,  rejoicing
always  before  him.'

While  in  the  KMhaka,  we  read  of  YSJc  being  impregnated
by  Fra^&pati,  we  read  in  Prov.  viii,  aa,  *The  Eternal  pos-
sessed me  in  the  beginning  of  his  way,  before  his  works
of  old/

But  with  all  this  I  cannot  admit  that  there  is  any  evi*
dence  of  borrowing  or  of  any  kind  of  interaction  between
Indian  and  Greek  philosophy,  and  I  should  have  thought
that  after  the  historical  antecedents  of  the  Logos  and  the
Logoi  in  Greece  had  been  clearly  laid  open,  the  idea  of  the
Greeks  having  borrowed  their  Logoe  from  Vedic  V4t  or
from  the  0.  T.  Sophia,  would  not  have  been  revived.  The
historical  consequences  of  such  an  admission  would  carry
us  very  far  indeed,  and  it  would  reqtdre  a  far  stronger
lever  to  lift  and  to  remove  the  weight  of  evidence  on  the
other  side  than  the  arguments  hitherto  brought  forward.
If  the  Greeks  had  really  borrowed  their  idea  of  the  Logos
from  India,  why  should  they  not  have  adopted  any  of  the
consequences  that  followed  from  it?


This  requires  some  fuller  consideration.  Every  indica-
tion of  a  possible  intellectual  intAreoorse  between  Greeks
and  Hindus  in  ancient  as  well  as  in  more  modem  times,
haa  been  ear^uUy  noted  and  strongly  urged  of  late,*  but
I  feel  bound  to  say  thai,  partieularly  for  aneient  times,
nothing  beyond  mere  possibilities  of  an  exchange  of  reli-
gious or  philosophical  ideas  between  Greece  and  India  has
as  yet  been  established.  It  seems  not  to  have  been  per-
ceived that  an  exchange  of  philosophical  thought  is  very
different  from  an  adoption  of  useful  arts>  such  as  alphabetic
writing,  astronomical  observations,  coined  money,  or  articles
of  trade  whether  jewels,  wood,  or  clothing  materials.  It  is
only  a  philosopher  that  can  teach  or  influence  a  philosopher,
and  even  in  the  cases  of  two  such  men  meeting,  the  diffi-
culties of  an  interchange  of  thought,  without  a  perfect
knowledge  of  the  languages,  are  far  greater  than  we
imagine.    We  have  an  instance  of  a  foreign  philosopher


EAST  AND  WEST.  59

becoming  a  proficient  in  the  philosophical  language  of  India
in  the  case  of  Hioven-thsang.  Has  he  left  any  trace  of
Chinese  thought,  whether  derived  from  Confucius  or  Lao-
tze,  in  India?  Modem  missionaries,  if  unsuccessful  in
conversions,  may,  no  doubt,  have  left  some  imprint  of
Christianity  and  European  philosophy  on  the  native  mind,
but  the  position  of  the  Christian  missionary  in  India,
accredited  by  membership  in  the  ruling  race»  is  very  differ-
ent from  what  the  position  of  a  few  Buddhist  monks  could
possibly  have  been  in  ancient  times^  even  if  they  had
reached  Alexandria,  and  learnt  to  speak  and  converse  on
certain  subjects  in  Qreek  or  Eg3rptian.  A  courier  may  be
very  conversant  with  French  or  Italian,  but  let  him  try^to
discuss  metaphysical  questions,  or  even  to  translate  a  book
ai  Vioo's  into  English,  and  it  will  be  perceived  what  differ-
ence there  is  between  an  interpreter  and  a  philosopher
capable  of  discussing  religious  and  metaphysical  problems.
That  there  was  a  time  when  the  ancestors  of  the  Aryan
speakers  had  the  same  language  and  held  many  of  their
mythological  and  religious  names  and  ideas  in  common,  is'
no  longer  doubted,  though,  even  here,  we  must  be  satisfied
with  names,  and  could  not  expect  common  mythological
speculations.  Later  contact  between.  Indians  and  Greeks,
whether  in  Persia,  Asia  Minor,  or  Greece,  assumed  no
importance  till  we  come  to  the  invasion  of  Asia  Minor,
Penda,  and  Indifi  by  Alexander  the  Great.  But  long
befcwe  that  time  both  Greeks  and  Hindus  had  invented
many  things,  such  as  kings,  priests,  numbers,  and  seasons,
marriages  and  funerals,  without  our  having  to  imagine  that
there  was  at  that  time  any  exchange  of  ^eas  between  the
two  countries  on  such  points.  If  then  we  meet  in  India  as
well  as  in  Greece  with  similar  philosophic  ideas^  as,  for
instanee,  with  a  name  meaning  atom  and  with  the  atomic
theory,  should  we  suggest  at  once  that  Epieurus  mu«ft  have
borrowed  his  atoms  &om  Kati&da,  or  Kan&da  his  Anus
from  Sf^iAumsl  It  is  interesting,  no  doubt,  to  point  out
ecmieidwiBes  between  Eis^ila  and  Zenon,  IVthagoras,  Plato
and  Asiitdtie^  but  it  is  even  more  interesting  to  point  out
th0  riiadtpi  of  difference  in  cases  where  they  seem  most  to
If  the  YedAnta  could  elaborate  an  ideal  Monism,


6o  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

why  not  tlie  Eleatics  as  well  1  And  yet  where  is  there  a
trace  of  such  a  philoBophical  theory  as  ,^he  absolute  identity
of  Atman  (the  Self),  and  Brahman  (the  absolute  being),  to
be  found  in  Greek  philosophy  ?  Who  would  see  more  than
a  very  natural  coincidence  between  the  Sanskrit  triad  of
Dharma,  virtue,  Artha,  wealth,  K&ma,  love,  and  the  Platonic
ra  KoXd,  what  is  good,  ra  &(l}4Xt,iJLa,  what  is  useful,  and  ra
ffbda  what  is  pleasant?  How  widely  the  triad  of  thought,
word,  and  deed  is  spread  has  been  shown  very  clearly  by
my  old  friend  Professor  Cowell  and  others,  but  no  one
would  venture  to  accuse  either  Oreeks  or  Indians  of  borrow-
ing or  of  theft  on  such  evidence.

The  real  character  of  most  of  these  coincidences  between
Oreek  and  Hindu  philosophy,  is  best  exhibited  by  the  often
attempted  identification  of  the  name§  of  Pythagoras*  and
Buddha-guru.  At  first  sight  it  is  certainly  startling,  but  if
traced  back  to  its  origin,  it  evaporates  completely.  First
of  all,  Buddha-guru  does  not  occur,  least  of  all  as  a  name
of  the  teacher  Buddha,  and  whether  as  a  common  A  ryan
name  or  as  borrowed,  Pytha  could  never  be  the  same  as
Buddha,  or  Goras  as  Guru.  The  belief  in  transmigration
among  the  Buddhists,  besides  being  borrowed  from  the
Veda,  is  very  different  from  that  of  Pythagoras  and  other
philosophers,  both  civilised  ^nd  uncivilised,  while  ascetic
practices  were  certainly  not  confined  to  either  India  or
Greece.

It  is  quite  true  that  after  Alexander's  conquests,  and
after  the  establishment  of  a  Baetrian  kingdom,  in  the
North  of  India,  there  was  a  more  real  intereourse  ev^en
between  philosophers  of  Greek  and  Indian  origin,  and
many  of  the  facts  bearing  on  this  subject  have  been  very
carefully  put  together  by  Count  Goblet  d'Alvidlla  in  his  Ce
que  VInde  doU  d  la  Grke^  1897.  But  even  he  brings  for-
ward coincidences,  which  require  more  convincing  proofs.
With  regard  to  Indian  coinage,  it  should  be  ol)»ervod
that  the  three  gods  mentioned  by  Pata/I jirali  as  used  for
commerce,  i.e.  cm  coins,  are  the  very  gods  found  on  the
earliest  Mauiyan  coins,  i^va,  Skanda,  and  Vis&kha,  ef.  Pkn.
^9  3>  99 ;  provided  that  Vi«&kha  can  refer  to  KAma  shoot-
ing his  arrows  ?


8A8T  AND  WSBt.  6 1

It  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  art  of  coming  money  was
introduced  into  India  by  the  Greeks,  and  it  the  images  of
Indian  gods  and  even  of  Buddha  on  ancient  coins,  may  be
Buppoised  to  have  favoured  idolatry  in  India,  that  too  may
be  admitted.  Indian  gods,  however,  were  anthropomorphic,
had  legs  and  arms,  heads,  noses  and  eyes,  as  early  as  the
Veda,  and  the  absence  of  workable  stone  in  many  parts  of
India  would  natui'ally  have  been  unfavourable  to  a  develop-
ment of  sculptured  idols.  The  Hindus  had  a  god  of  love  m
the  Veda,  but  he  was  very  different  from  the  KHma,  imaged
on  more  modem  coins  as  an  archer  sitting  on  the  back  of
a  parrot.

We  are  now  in  possession  of  specimens  of  much  earlier
Greek  workmanship  in  India,  than  this  E&ma  on  the  back
of  a  parrot,  nor  is  there  any  reason  to  dou\>t  that  the  idea
of  temples  or  monasteries  or  monuments,  built  and  carved
in  stone,  came  from  Greece,  while  some  of  the  Indian  archi-
tecture, even  when  in  stone,  shows  as  clear  surviving  traces
of  a  native  wood-architecture  as,  for  instance,  the  Lycian
tombs.

The  later  influence  which  Christianity  is  supposed  to
have  exen^iaed  in  originating  or  in  powe^fuUy  iXencing
the  sectarian  worship  ot  Krishna,  does  not  concern  us  here,
for,  if  it  should  be  admitted  at  all,  it  would  have  to  be
referred  to  a  much  later  period  than  that  which  gave  rise
to  the  six  systems  of  philosophy.  Ever  since  the  beginning
of  Sanskrit  studies,  nay  even  before,  thase  startling  simi-
larities betwe^i  KridiiTis,  and  Christos  have  been  pointed
out  again  and  again.  But  iteration  yields  no  strength  to
argument,  and  we  are  as  far  as  ever  from  teing  able  to
point  to  any  historical  channel  through  which  the  legends
of  Christ  or  Krishna  could  have  travelled.  No  one  can
deny  the  similarities,  such  as  they  are,  but  no  one,  I  believe,
can  account  for  them.  Some  of  those  who  have  been  most
anxious  to  gather  coincidences  between  the  Bhagavad-git&
and  the  New  Testament,  have  been  rightly  warned  by
native  scholars  themselves,  that  they  should  learn  to  trans-
late both  Sanskrit  and  Greek  before  they  venture  to  com-
pare. It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  as  the'Bhagavad-gifcd,
bears  the  title  of  Upanishad,  it  may  belong  to  the  end  of


62  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

the  Upanishad-period,  and  may,  as  the  late  Professor  Telanff
maintained,  be  older  even  than  the  New  Testament,  ll
Damaseius  tells  us  that  there  were  fir&hmans  living  at
Alexandria^,  we  must  not  forget  that  this  refers  to  the  end
of  the  fifth  century  a«I).,  and  does  not  help  us  much  even
as  indicating  the  way  by  which  the  idea  of  the  Creative
Word  could  have  reached  Clement  of  Alexandria  or  Origen.
That  Clement  of  Alexandria  knew  the  name  of  Butta  is
well  known,  l^e  even  knew  that  he  had  been  taken  for
a  god.  Nor  should  it  be  forgotten,  that  Pantaenus  who,
according  to  Eusebius,  had  preached  the  Qospel  in  India,
was  one  of  the  teachers  of  Clement.  But  all  this  is  far
from  proving  that  Clement  or  Origen  was  able  to  study
the  Veddnta-Sfltras  or  the  Buddhist  Abhidharmas,  or  that
their  opinions  were  influenced  by  a  few  Indian  travellers
staying  at  Alexandria  who  cared  for  none  of  these  things.

Some  of  the  coincidences  between  Buddhism  and  Christi-
anity are  certainly  startling,  particularly  by  their  number,
but  in  several  cases  they  exist  on  the  surface  only  and  are
not  calculated  to  carry  conviction  on  one  side  or  the  other.
I  have  treated  of  them  on  several  occasions,  for  .the  last
time  in  my  paper  on  '  Coincidences.'  but  the  same  coinci-
dences,  which  have  been  proved  to  be  anything  but  real
coincidences,  are  repeated  again  and  again.  The  story  of
Buddha  sitting  under  an  Indian  fig-tree  (Jiims  rdigiosa)  has
nothing  whatever  in  common  with  Nathaniel  sitting  under
a  Palestinian  fig-tree,  and  the  parable  'of  the  Prodigal  Son
in  the  Buddhist  scriptures  is  surely  very  difierent  in  spirit
from  that  in  the  New  Testament.  There  remain  quite
sufficient  similarities  to  startle  and  perplex  us,  without  our
dragging  in  what  has  no  power  of  proving  anything.  No
critical  historian  would  usten  for  one  moment  to  such
arguments  as  have  been  used  to  establish  a  real  exchange
of  thought  between  India  and  Europe  in  ancient' times.
On  this  point  we  owe  a  great  deal  to  students  of  ethnology,
who  have  pointed  out  coincidences  quite  as  startling  be-
tween the  religious  and  philosophical  folklore  of  uncivi-
lised and  civilised  races,  without  venturing  to  suggest  any

>  See  Goblet  d'AlvieUa,  1.  c,  p.  167.


BAST  AND  WEST.  63

borrow:'iig  or  anv  historical  oommumty  of  origin.  The
Kiavat^  bridge,  tor  instance,  which  seems  so  peculiar  to
the  Persians,  had  its  antecedents  as  far  back  as  the  Veda,
and  is  matched  by  a  similar  bridge  among  the  North
American  Indians^.  I  say,  a  similar  bridge,  for  it  differs
also,  as  I  pointed  out,  very  characteristically  from  the
Persian  bridge.  Again,  it  is  *well  known  that  the  creation
of  the  world  by  th^  Word  has  been  discovered  among  so
low  a  race  as  the  Klamaths  ^,  but  no  one  has  ventured  to
say  that  the  two  accounts  had  a  common  origin  or  were
borrowed  one  from  the  other.  This  should  serve  as  a  use-
ful warning  to  those  who  are  so  fond  of  suggesting  channels
through  'which  Indian  thought  might  have  influenced
Palestme  or  Greece,  and  vice  versa.

No  doubt,  such  channels  were  there;  neither  mountains
nor  seas  would  have  formed  impassable  barriers.  Besides,
Buddhism,  as  early  as  the  third  century  b.c.,  was  certainly
a  miaaionwy  religion  quite  as  much  aa  Chrietiaoity  was
at  a  later  tiipe.  Alexandria  was  known  by  name,  as
Alasando,  to  the  author  of  the  Mah&va?n8a^  On  the
oiiier  hand,  the  name  of  King  Qondaphoros,  who  is
mentioned  in  the  legend  of  St.  Thomas'  l^avels  to  India,
has  been  authenticated  on  Indo-Parthian  coins  as  Gondo-
phares,  likewise  the  name  of  his  nephew  Abdayases,  and
Doteibly,  acoofding  to  M.  S.  L^vi,  that  of  Yasu  Deva  as
MiBdeo&  All  this  is  true,  and  shows  that  the  way  between
Alexandria  and  Benares  was  wide  open  in  the  first  century
▲•D.  Nor  should*  it  have  been  forgotten  that  in  the
Dialogues  between  Milinda  and  N&gasena  we  have  a  well-
authenticated  case  of  a  Greek  king  (Menandros),  and  of
a  Buddhist  philosopher,  discussing  together  some  of  the
highest  problems  of  philosophy  and  religion.  All  this  is
true,  and  yet  we  are  as  far  as  ever  from  having  discovered
a  Greek  or  Indian  go-between  in  fiagrante  delicto.  We
have  before  us  ever  so  many  possibilities,  nay  oven  proba-
bilities, but  we  could  not  expect  any  bond  fide  histerian
to  accept  any  one  of  them  as  a  proof  of  a  real  influence

'  Contributions  to  the  Science  of  Mythology.

•  Theoeophy,  p.  168.  »  Theosophy,  p.  3B3.

*  Le  Comte  d'Alviella,  1.  c,  p.  177.


64  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHr.

having  been  exercised  by  Greece  on  India  or.  by  India
on  Greece,  at  a  time  when  Greek  philosophy  and  religion
might  still  have  been  amenable  to  Eastern  guides,  or  Indian
schools  of  thought  might  have  gratefully  received  fresh
impulses  from  the  West.  Though  the  literature  of  India
has  no  trustworthy  chronology,  still,  unless  the  whole
structure  of  the  literary  development  of  India  is  once
more  to  be  jrevolutionised,  we  can  hardlv  imagine  that
the  occurrence  of  such  names  as  Bodda  ana  Zarades
(Zoroaster)  among  the  followers  of  Mani,  or  that  of
Terebinthos  the  pupil  of  Scythianos^,  the  very  founder
of  the  Manichaean  sect  in  Babylon,  would  hqlp  us.  to
discover  the  secret  springs  of  the  wisdom  of  ELapila  or
Buddha  £f&kya  Muni.  They  may  point  out  whence  these
heresiarchiSi  derived  their  wisdom,  but  they  leave  the
question  which  concerns  us  here  totally  untouched.  Gorres,
in  spite  of  all  his  mysticism,  was  right  when  he  looked
for  a  similarity  in  technical  terms  in  order  to  establish
an  Indian  influence  on  Greek  or  a  Greek  influence  on
Indian  philosophy.-  His  principle  was  right,  though  he
applied  it  wrongly.  It  is  the  same  as  in  Comparative
Mythology.  There  may  be  ever  so  many  similarities
between  two  mythologies,  such  as  changes  of  men  and
women  into  animals  or  plants,  worship  of  tre&s  and
ancestors,  belief  in  spirits  and  visions  in  sleep  or  dreams,
but  one  such  equation  as  Dyaus  =  Zeus,  is  moi*e  convincing
than  all  of  them  taken  together.  If  people  ask  why,  they
might  as  well  ask  why  the  discovery  of  one  coin  with  the
name  of  Augustus  on  it  is  a  more  convincing  proof  of
Roman  influence  in  India  than  the  discovery  of  ever  so
many  pieces  of  uncoined  gold.

To  return  to  the  origin  of  the  word  Brahman.  Tempting*^

*  It  has  been  suggested  that  Scythianos  may  have  been  an  adaptation
of  Sukya  the  Soythi;in,  a  name  of  Buddha^  and  Torebinthos  may  contain
traces  of  Thera  (elder).     All  this  is  possible,  but  no  morcb

*  There  is  a  curious  passage  in  Bharfcr/hari's  Brahmukund  which  seems
to  identify  Speech  nnd  Brahman.  See  SarYadarsana-sangraha,  Bkbl.  Ind  ,
p.  140 : —

.  An&dinidhanam  brahma  aal^dataltvatn  yad  afcshai'am,
Vivailatevrthabhrivena  prnkriyii  ^agato  yatliA.


BAST  AND  WEST.  65

as  the  distant  relationship  between  Brihman  and  Brih,  in
the  sense  of  speech,  with  verbwm  and  Word  •  may>  be,  we
could  not  admit  it  without  admitting  at  the  same  time
a  community  of  thought;  and  of  deep  philosophical  thought,
at  a  period  previous  to  the  Aryan  Separation;  and  we
certainly  have  no  evidence  sufficiently  strong  to  support
so  bold  a  hypothesis.  What  we  may  carry  away  from
a  consideration  of  the  facts  hitherto  examined  is  that  in
India  itself  Br&hm'an,  as  a  name  of  the  vp&Tov  kivovv,  need
not  have  passed  through  a  stage  when  Br&hman  meant
prayer  only,  and  that  Brahman,  prayer,  could  not  have
assumed  the  meaning  of  the  object  of  prayers,  that  is,
the  Universal  Spirit,  who  never  required  any  prayers
at  all.

In  order  to  show  what  direction  the  thoughts  connected
with  Ykk  took  in  the  Veda,  I  shall  first  of  all  subjoin
here  a  few  passages  from  the  hymns,  the  Brdhmanas  and
Upanishads : —

V  &i,  speech,  speaking  in  her  own  name,  is  introduced
in  hymn  X,  125,  also  in  Atharva-veda  IV,  30,  as  saying: —

*  I.  I  wander  with  the  Vasus  and  the  Budras,  I  wander
with  the  Adityas  and  the  Viave  Devas,  I  support  Mitra
and  VaruTia  both,  I  support  Agni  and  the  two  Afivins ;

a.  I  support  the  swelling  (?)  Soma,  I  support  Tvashtri
and  Pdshan  and  Bhaga.  I  bestow  wealth  on  the  zealous
offerer,  on  the  sacrificer  who  presses  Soma.

3.  I  am  the  queen,  the  gatherer  of  riches,  the  knowing,
fifst  of  those  who  merit  worship;  the  gods  have  thus
established  me  in  many  places,  staying  with  many,  entering
into  many.

4.  By  me  it  is  that  he  who  sees,  he  who  breathes,  he
'who  hears  what  is  spoken,  eats  food;  without  knowing

it,  they  rest  on  me.  Hear,  one  and  all !  I  tell  tbee  what
I  beUeve.  (?)

•Brabman  without  beginning  or  end,  which  is  the  eternal  euence

of  speech,
la  changed  into  the  form  of  things,  like  the  eyolution  of  the  world.

EqnaUy  strong  is  the  statement  of  M&dhaya  himself,  Sphoakhyo  nirava-
yayo  nityaA  sabdo  brahmaiveti,  'The  eternal  word  which  is  called  Sphofa
and  does  not  consist  of  parts,  is  indeed  Brahman.'

5  «•


66  INDIAN  PHIL080PHT.

5*  I,  even  I  myself,  say  this,  what  is  good  for  gods,
and  also  for  mein;  whomsoever  I  love,  him  I  make
formidable,  him  I  make  a  Brahm&i,  him  a  Bishi,  him
a  sage.

6.  I  bend  the  bow  for  Budra  (the  storm-god)  that  his
arrow  may  strike  the  hater  of  Brahman ;  I  make  war  for
the  people,  I  have  entered  both  heaven  and  earth.

7.  I  bring  forth  the  (my  1)  father  (Dyans)  on  the  summit
of  this  world,  my  origin  is  in  the  watera,  in  the  sea;  from
thence  I  spread  qver  all  beings,  and  touch  yonder  heaven
witn  m^  height.

8.  I  mdeed  spread  forth  like  the  wind,  to  lay  hold  on  all
things,  beyond  the  sky,  beyond  the  earth;  sudi  have
I  become  through  my  greatness.'

I  ask,  is  there  any  trace  in  these  utterances  of  the
thoughts  that  led  in  the  end  to  the  conception  of  the  Greek
Logos)  There  is  another  hymn  (X,  71)  which  is  veiy
obscure  and  has  for  the  first  time  been  rendered  more
intelligible  by  Professor  Deussen  (A,  0«  P.,  p.  148),  where
we  meet  with  some  important  remarks  showing  that
language  formed  an  object  of  thought  even  at  that  early
tinie.  DVit  here  also  there  is  nothing,  as  yet,  approaching
to  the  conception  of  the  Word  as  a  creative  power.  We
meet'  with  such  observations  as  that  words  were  made
in  the  beginning  in  order  to  reveal  what  before  had  been
hidden;  This  is,  no  doubt,  an  important  thought^  showing
that  those  who  uttered  it  had  not  yet  ceased,  like  our-
selves, to  wonder  at  the  existence  of  such  fk  thing  as
lingua^  The  struggle  for  life  th»t  is  ^oing  <m  among
words  IS  alluded  to  by  sayiner  that  the  wise  made  speech
by  mind  (Manas),  aif tiLg.  a^  b^  a  sieve  the  coanely  ^^
flour.  The  power  of  speech  is  greatlj^  extolled,  and  do-'
quence  is  celebrated  as  a  prions  gift.  All  men  shout
when  the  eloquent  man  appears,  holding  the  assembly
subdued  or  spellbound  by  nis  words  (&bh&saha),  nay
he  is  supposed  to  remove  all  sin  and  to  procure  sustenance
for  his  friends.  The  knowledge  of  aB  things  or,  as  Deussen
says  the  knowledge  of  the  origin  of  things,  is  taught  by
the  Brimman.

We  meet  with  passages  of  a  very  similar  character,  in


'  MINO  AHD  SPIEOH.  67

varioofl  ))art8  of  the  'Brtianamaa.  One  of  the  most  etairtimg
ia  found  in  a  verse  inadrted  in  the  Purushii-hymn,  a9  given
in  the  Taiitirt7a-&ranyaka  (III,  ia>  17),  *  I  know  tiiat  great
sun^^coloured  Purusha,  when  on  the  verge  of  jdarkness,  he,
the  wise,  resfe,  addressing  them,  after  having  thought  aU
forms,  and  having  made  their  names.-  Here  we  have  onlv
to  translate  forms  by  cidif,  and  names  by  koyot,  and  we  shall
not  be  very  far  from  the  world  of  thought  in  which  Plato
and  Aristotle  ^  moved.

But  although  we  can  discover  in  this  hymn  an  apprecia-
tion of  the  mysterious  nature  of  speech,  we  look  m  vain
for  the  clear  and  definite  idea  that  lanraage  and  thought
are  one>  which  can  be  so  clearly  read  m  the  Qreek  word
LpgoSy  both  word  and  thought,  nor  do  we  find  more  than
plight  anticipations  of  the  Keo-platonist  dogma  that  the
creation  of  the  universe  was  in  reality  an  utterance  of  the
hidden  thoughts  and  words  of  the  Deity.

The  following  passages  will  give  some  idea  of  what  was
thought  in  India  about  mind  and  language  and  their  mutual
relation.  They  may  be  vague  and  mystical,  but  they  show
at  all  events  that  a  Kood  deal  of  thought  must  have  been
expended  by  the  earfy"  thinkers  of  India  on  this  problem,
the  nature  of  speech  and  the  relation  between  speech  and
thought.

iSfttap.  Br^hmana  VI,  1,1:  'Pragr&pati,  after  having
created  the  Veda  (Brahman,  neut.),  created  the  waters  out
of  Y6J0  (speech),  for  Y&k  was  his.  That  was  created  (sent
forth).  Me  then  altered  the  waters  with  Brahman,  L  e.  the
threefold  Veda,  and  there  arose  from  the  water  an  egg
which  he  touched  and  commanded  to  multiply.  Then  from*
the  egg  there  arose  Oxst  Brahman,  neut,  that  is,  the  three-
fold Veda.'

Fanikaviin«a  Br&hmana  XX,  14,  a :  '  Fragr&pati  alone  was
this,  and  Yi^  was  his  own,  V&fe  as  the  second.  He  thought.
Let  me  create  (send  forth)  this  Y&k,  for  she  will  go  and
become  all  this/

*  Se#  I>«iiiMii,  !•  e.,  p.  ago.

F  2


68  rrnnAV  PHiLOflOFinr.

iSfatap.  Brahm.  VII,  5,  2,  21 :  'The  unborn  is  \iJb,  and
from  VUc  Vi^vakarman  (the  all-mricer)  begat  living  beings.'

Brih.  Ar.  Up.  I,  5,  3:  'The  Atman  oonskriB  01  qpeeeh,
mind,  and  breaih.  ^ere  are  aho  the  three  worlds ;  speech
is  thk  world,  mind  the  air,  breath  the  sky.  The  same  are
the  three  Vedas,  speech  the  Big-veda,  mind  the  Tagrur»veda,
boeath  the  S&ma-yeda.  The  same  are  gods,  ancestors,  and
men,  speech  the  gods,  mind  the  ancestors,  breath  men,  &c'

Brih.  Ar.  Up.  1,  t,  24 :  '  He  desired,  let  a  second  body  be
bom  rtf  me.  and  he  (death  or  hunger)  embraced  speech  with
his  mmd.

And  ibid.  I,  4,  17:  'This  world  in  the  beginning  was
Atmai\  (Self),  alone  and  lonely.  He  desired,  May  1  have
a  wife  . . .  Manas  (mind)  is  the  Self,  speech  the  wif e^  breath
the  child.'

The  same  or  very  similar  and  often  contradictory  ideas
occur  in  later  works  also.  Thus  we  read  in  Manu  1, 2^1 :
'  In  the  beginning  he  (Brahm&)  fashioned  from  the  words
of  the  Veda,  the  several  names,  works,  and  conditions  of  all
thitigs.'

And  to  quote  but  one  passage  from  the  Mah&bh&rata,
fi&nti-parva,  8533:  'In  tiie  beginning  Vidy&  (knowledge,
Serbia)  without  beginning  or  end,  the  divine  Y8Jc  (speech)
of  the  Vedas,  was  sent  forth  by  Svayambhft,  the  self-
existent.'

iSamkara,  when  treating  of  Sphoto^  (word),  of  which  we
shall  have  to  treat  further  on,  quotes  from  the  Bnh.  Ar.
Up.  1, 2, 4 :  'He  with  his  mind  united  himself  with  speech,'
and  he  adds  an  important  verse  from  some  SmWti}  *ln
the  beginning  divine  Y&k,  Speech,  eternal,  without  begin-
ning or  end,  consisting  of  Veda,  was  uttered  by  Svayambhft,
from  which  all  activities  proceeded ' ;

And  again:  'In  the  beginning  M!aheavara  shaped  from
the  words  of  the  Vedp.  the  names  and  forms  of  all  beings
and  the  procedure  of  all  activities.'

The  Laws  of  Manu,  or,  more  correctly,  of  the  MAnavas,
the  dan  of  Manu,  are  no  doubt  later  than  the  firfthmanas,
but  they  often  contain  old  thoughts.

>  Ved.  SatfM  1,  3«  flS.


MIND  AND  8PISICH.  69

These  utterances,  to  which  many  more  mi^ht  be  added,
are  certainly  vague,  aad  chaotic,  and  often  contradictory,
because  they  q^rang  from  different  minds  without  any  pre-
arranged system;  but  they  seem  to  me  to  show  at,  all
events  that  thought  and  language  mi}st  have  occupied  the
philosophers  of  India  far  more  than  they  did  the  philo^
sophers  of  Qreece,  and  even  in  later  times  those  of  modem
Europe.  And  if  some  of  them  assigned  the  first  place  to
thoosht  and  others  to  speech,  this  ako  serves  to  show  that
at  all  evwits  these  early  guessers  did  not  accept* language
simply  as  a  matter  of  course,  as  most  of  our  modem  philo-
sophers are  so  apt  to  do,  but  tried  hard  to  discover  wnence
it  came  and  what  was  its  true  relation  to  thought.  Thus
we  read  in  the  /Satap.  Br.  I,  4,  5,  8 :  ^  A  dispute  once  took
place  between  Mind  and  Speech  as  to  which  was  the  better
of  the  two.  Both,  said,  *'I  am  excellent."  Mind  said:
'^Surely  I  am  better  than  thou,  ioc  thou. dost  not  speak
anything  that  is  not  understood  by  me,  and  since  thou  art
only  an  imitator  of  what  is  done  by  me  and  a  follower  in
my  wake,  I  am  surely  better  than  iiiou."  Speech  said:
"Surely  I  am  better  than  thou,  for  what  thou  knowest
I  make  known,  I  communicate."

'  They  went  to  appeal  to  Fra^pati  for  his  decision,  and
Prajffiipati  decided  in  favour  of  Mind,  &c'

In  me  Anugtt&  (p.  262)  we  read  on  the  contrary :  '  Then
the  lord  of  speech  was  produced,  that  lord  of  speech  looks
up  to  the  mind.  First,  verily,  are  w<»xls  produced,  and  the
mind  runs  after  them.'

Some  of  the  Br&hmanic  thinkers  say  in  so  many  words
that  Speech  is  Brahman  (iS'atap.  Br.  ll,  i,  4,  lo,  V&g  vai
Brahma),  and  the  co-existence  of  Br^'has-pati  and  JSrah-
maTias-pati  could  hardly  have  failed  to  suggest  to  them  the
identity  of  Brahman  and  Brih  in  the  sense  of  speech,  just
as  every  tlioughtful  Greek  must  have  knoM'n  that  there
was  a  reason  why  Logos  meant  both  word  and  thought.
Bat  that  ancient  chapter  of  thought  which  lies  beyond
the  childhood  of  all  pnilosophy  is  for  ever  lost  to  us  and
can  be  reconstructed  by  conjectures  only,  which,  though
they  produce  conviction  in  some  minds,  cannot  be  expected
to  produce  the  same  in  all.


^0  IKDUN  PHILOSOPHY.

Taking  into  aooonnt  all  these  scattered  indications,  I
cannot  bring  myself  to  accept  the  e\olation  of  the  various
meanings  of  the  word  Brahman  as  elaborated  by  former
scholars.  I  am  particularly  reluctant  to  differ  on  such  a
point  from  Professor  Deussen.  Professor  Deussen  holds
that  Brahman  had  a  ritualistic  origin  (p.  239),  and  from
prayer  came  to  mean  he  who  is  prayed  to,  the  Urgrv/nd
der  Wdt  He  calls  it  der  zv/m  Heiligen,  GotUichen  ernpor-
strtlbende  WiUe  des  JUeneehen,  which  is  much  the  same  idea
to  which  fioth  and  others  have  given  currency,  but  which
certainly  requires  a  fuller  iustification.  Instead  of  begin-
ning with  the  specialised  meaning  of  prayer,  whether
ritualistic  or  unpremeditated,  and  theh  rising  to  the  object
of  prayer,  I  prefer  to  begin  with  Br&hman  as  a  synonym
of  Drib,  in  Brthasp&ti,  meaning  word  or  speech,  and  to
admit  by  the  side  of  it  another  Brihman,  meaning  that
which  utters  or  drives  forth  (PraX;y&vayati)  or  manifests
or  creates,  that  which  is  the  universal  support  (Skambha)
or  force  (Daksha),  in  fact  the  Brilhman,  sucn  as  we  find  it
afterwards,  whether  as  a  neuter,  Br&hman,  or,  for  more
popular  purposes,  as  a  masculine,  Brdhm&^.  No  doubt  in
those  dark  passages  through  which  words  passed  silently
before  they,  emerged  into  the  full  light  of  literature,  we
may  often  fail  to  discover  the  right  footsteps  of  their  pro-
gress, and  we  must  be  .prepared  for  differences  of  opinion.
But  the  really  important  point  is  that  on  which  all  scholars
agree,  by  assigning  to  Brahman  the  final  meaning  of  rd  Sv,
rb  Svrm  ov,  rd  irpiirov  Kwavv,  though,  even  of  those  terms,
as  we  shall  see,  not  one  corresponds  fully  and  exactly  to
the  character  of  BriUiman  as  developed  m  the  history  of
the  Indian  mind.

«

Atmaa.

The  next  word  we  have  to  examine  is  Atman.  It  is  next
in  importance  to  Brahman  only,  and  the  two  together  may
be  called  the  two  pillars  on  which  rests  nearly  the  whole
of  the  edifice  of  Indian  philasophy,  more  particularly  of
the  Yedftnta  and  S&mkhya  systems.

»  Taitt  Br.  II,  7,  17,  i.


ATMAJNT.  71

Ab  early  as  the  time  of  the  Apastamha-S&tnus,  that  is,  at
the  end  01  the  Vedic  period,  we  read,  I,  8,  23,  i : —

'The  Brfthmana  who  is  wise  and  recognises  all  things  to
be  in  the  Atman,  who  does  not  become  bewildered  when
pondering  (on  it),  and  who  recognises  the  Atman  in  every
(created^  thing,  he  shines  indeed  in  heaven  . . .'

And  m  the  same  S&tras,  I,  8,  23,  2,  we  find  a  definition
of  Brahman,  as  the  cause  of  the  world,  which  presupposes,
as  clearly  as  possible,  the  prevalence  of  Ved&ntic  ideas  ^  at
Che  time  of  the  author  of  this  Siitra : —

*  He  who  is  intelligence  itself  and  subtler  than  the  thread
of  the  lotus*fibre.  He  who  pervades  the  universe  and  who,
unchangeable  and  larger  than  the  earthy  contains  this
universe;  He  who  is  difierent  from  the  knowledge  of
this  world  which  is  obtained  by  the  senses  and  is  identical
with  its  objects,  possesses  the  highest  (form  of  absolute
knowledge).  From  him  who  divides  himself,  spring  aU
(objective)  bodies.  He  is  the  primary  cause,  eternal  and
unchangeable.'

The  etymology  of  Atman  is  again  extremely  obscure,
probably  because  it  belongs  to  a  pre-Sanskritic,  though
Aryan  stratum  of  Indian  speech.  However,  there  can
be  little  doubt  that  in  the  Veda  Atman,  in  several  places,
still  means  breath,  as  in  Bv.  X,  16,  3,  sffryam  HkshuA
gaJckhatvL,  vfttam  &tmfi,  words  addressed  to  a  dead  person,
'  May  the  eye  go  to  the  sun,  the  breath  (Atm&)  to  the  wind'
It  then  came  to  mean  vital  breath,  life,  and,,like  the  spirit
or  breath,  was  frequently  used  in  the  sense  of  what  we
call  soul.  In  some  passages  it  is  difficult  to  say  whether
we  should  translate  it  by  life  or  by  spirit.  From  soul  there
is  but  a  Hiiiall  step  to  Self,  and  that  step  is  often  gram-
matical rather  than  real.  If  in  the  Atharva-veda  IX,  5,  30
we  read: —

Atuutnam  pit&ram  putr&m  pautram  pitHmah&m,
GkySsa  ^anitrim  mat^iam  y^  priyas  t^in  upa  hvaye,

we  have  to  translate  in  English, '  Myself,  fatlier,  son,  grand-

*  Yoga  and  MimamsA  aUo  are  montionod  by  name  in  t]io  Apastamba-
Siitra-s  bufc  not  yet  as  definite  8y»t«ms  of  philosophy.    Of.  I,  8,  23,  5;.
II,  4»  8,  13.


J2  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

son>  grandfather,  wife,  mother,  whoever  are  dear, — I  call
upon  them.*  But  Self  may  here  b^  translated  by  soul  or
person  also,  just  as  we  may  say,  ^  My  soul  doth  magnify
the  Lord,'  instead  of  *  I  magnify  the  Lord/  Again  we  read,
Rv.  IX,  113, 1,  baUm  d&dh&naA  &tm&ni,  'putting  strength
into  oneself/  In  the  end  Atman  became  the  remSar
pronoun  self.  I  need  not  go  through  all  the  evidence
which  may  be  seen  in  any  Sanskrit  dictionary^,  but  we
have  still  to  see  at  what  stage  in  its  development  Atman
became  the  de^nite  name  of  tne  soul  or  Self  within.  This
transition  of  meaning  in  Atman  offers  a  curious  parallel
to  that  of  As,  in  Asu  and  Asti,  which  we  examined  before.
There  are  passages  such  as  Bv.  I,  164,  4,  bhQmyiA  isuA
&&Ti\i  fttm&  kvJt  svit,  *  Where  was  the  breath,  the  blood,  the
spirit  of  the  world?'  Here  Atma  may  be  rendered  by
spirit  or  life.  But  in  other  passages  Atman  signifies
simply  the  inmost  nature  of  anytmng,  and  more  par-
fcicularly  of  man,  so  that  in  the  end  it  means  much  the
same  _as  what  medieval  philosophers  would  have  called
the  quiddity,  or  Indian  philosophers  the  Idantd.  of  things.
Thus  we  read  at  first  &tm&nam  &tman&  pasya,  'see  tny
Self  by  thy  Self;'  &tmaiva  hy  d.tmana%  s^kshl,  'Self  is
the  witness  of  Self.'  In  this  sense  Atman  is  afterwards
used  as  the  name  of  the  highest  person,  the  soul  of  the
world  (Param&tman),  and  we  read  (ISiatap.  Br.  XIV,  5, 5, 15):
sa  v&  ayam  &tm&  sarvesh&m^  bhiit&n&m  adhipatiA,  sarve-
sh&m  bhiit&nd^m  r%a, '  That  Atman  is  the  sovereign  of  ail
beings,  he  is  the  king  of  all  beings.'

Vra^patl,  BraTimiwi,  Atinaii.

We  have  thus  seen  three  words  growing  up  in  the  hymns
and  Br^hmanas  of  the  Veda,  Pra^&pati,  Brahman,  and
Atman,  each  of  which  by  itself  represents  in  nuce  a  whole
philosophy  or  a  view  of  the  world.  In  Pragffi,pati  we  have
the  admission  of  a  personal  and  supreme  being,  a  god  above
all  gods,  a  creator  and  ruler  of  the  world.  He  created  the
primeval  waters  and  rose  from  them  as  Hiranyagarbha,

^  See  Anthropological  Religion,  pp.  soo  seq.  ;  Theosopliy,  pp.  947  aeq.,
or  more  recently,  Deussen's  Geschichte  der  Philoflophie,  pp.  324  seq.


PBACAPATI,   BRAHMAN,   AtMAN.  73

in  order  to  send  forth,  to  animate,  and  to  rule  all  things.
Whether  this  Pra^&pati  was  himself  the  material  cause
of  the  world  may  seem  doubtful.  Many  times  it  is  said
that  he  was  everything  and  that  he  desired  to  become
many,  and  thus  created  the  world,  in  which  case  matter
also  would  have  come  out  of  him.  In  other  places,  how-
ever, the  primeval  waters  seem  to  have  been  admitted  as
existing  bv  themselves  and  apart  from  Pragr&pati  (Bv.  X,
121,  7).  We  also  read  that  in  the  beginning  there  was
water  over  which  Pragr&pati  breathed  as  wind  and  produced
the  earth,  or  that  the  waters  themselves  produced  a  widen
egg  from  whence  arose  Pragf^pati,  the  creator  of  gods  and
men.  There  occur  even  in  the  BriLhmanas  allusions  to  the
legend  well  known  from  the  Pur&Tias,  that  a  boar  brought
forth  (Udbabarha  or  Udvavarha  from  Vrih)  the  earth,
or  that  a  tortoise  supported  it^

A  i3elief  in  that  Pra^&pati,  as  a  personal  god,  was  the
beginninjg  of  monotheistic  religion  in  India,  while  the
recognition  of  Brahman  an4  Atman,  as  one,  constituted
tiie  foundation  of  all  the  monistic  philosophy  of  that
country.

^  M.  M.,  India,  pp.  134,  287.


OHAPTEE  m.


THE  SYSTEMS  OF  PHIL0S0PH7,

Wb  have  thus  Idamt  the  importajit  lesson  that  all  these
ideas,  metaphysical,  cosmological,  and  otherwise,  burst  forth
in  India  mjreat  profusion  and  confnsion,  and  without  any
preconceived  system.

We  must  not  suppose  that  these  ideas  follow  each  other
in  chronolo^cal  succession.  Here  once  more  the  Neben-
dnander  gives  i2s  the  true  key,  much  more  than  the
Ncuiheinander.  We  must  remember  that  this  earliest  philo-
sophy existed  for  a  long  time  without  being  fixed  by
writing,  that  there  was  neither  control,  authority,  nor
public  opinion  to  protect  it.  Every  A«rama  or  settlement
was  a  world  by  itself,  even  the* simplest  means  of  com-
munication, such  as  high-roads  or  rivers,  being  often  want-
ing. The  wonder  is  that,  in  spite  of  all  this,  we  should
find  so  much  unity  ii\  the  numerous  guesses  at  truth  pre-
served to  us  among  these  Vedic  ruins.  This  was  due,  we
are  told,  to  the  Parampard.,  i.  e.  to  those  who  handed  down
the  tradition  and  at  last  collected  whatever  could  be  saved
of  it.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  imagine  that  there  was
a  continuous  development  in  the  various  meanings  assumed
by  or  assigned  to  such  pre^ant  terms  as  Pra^dpati,
Brahman,  or  even  Atman.  It  is  much  more  in  accoixlance
with  what  we  learn  from  the  Brilhmanas  and  Upanishads
of  the  intellectual  life  of  India,  to  admit  an  infinite  number
of  intellectual  centres  of  thought,  scattered  all  over  the
country,  in  which  either  the  one  or  the  other  view  found
influential  advocates.     We  should  then  understand  better


PBASTHANA   BHEDA.  75

■v.

how  Brahnum,  while  meaning  what  bursts  or  drives  forth,
came  to  signify  speech  and  prayer,  as  well  as  creative

Eower  and  creator,  and  why  Atman  meant  not  only  breath,
ut  life,  spirit,  soul,  essence,  or  what  I  have  ventured  to
render  by  the  Self,  das  Sdhsi^  of  all  things.

But  if  in  the  period  of  the  Br&hmaTias  and  Upanishads
we  have  to  find  our  way  through  religious  and  philo-
sophical thoughts,  as  through  clusters  of  thickly  tangled
creepers,  the  outlook  becomes  brighter  as  soon  as  we
approach  the  next  period,  which  is  characterised  by  per-
sistent attempts  at  clear  and  systematic  thought.  We
must  not  imagine  that  even  then  we  can  always  discover
in  the  various  sjrstems  of  philosophy  a  regular  historical
growth.  The  Sfttras  or  aphorisms  which  we  possess  of  the
six  systems  of  philosophy,  each  distinct  from  the  other,
cannot  possibly  claim  to  represent  the  very  first,  attempts
at  a  systematic  treatment ;  they  are  rather  the  last  summing
up  of  what  had  been  growing  up  during  many  generations
of  isolated  thinkera


What  the  BrsLhmans  themselves  thought  of  their  philo-
sophical literature  we  may  learn  even  from  such  modem
treatises  as  the  Prasth&na-bheda,  from  which  I  gave  some
extracts  by  way  of  introduction  to  some  papers  of  mine  on
one  of  the  systems  of  Indian  philosophy,  published  as  long
ago  as  1852  in  the  Journal  of  the  German  Oriental  Society.
It  is  but  fair  to  state  that  the  credit  of  having  discovered
that  tract  of  Madhustldana  Sarasvati,  and  perceived  its
importance,  belonged  really  to  Colebrooke.  I  myself  came
to  oe  acquainted  with  it  through  my  old  friend,  Dr.  Tritheu,
who  had  prepared  a  critical  edition  of  it,  but  was  prevented
by  illness  ana  death  from  publishing  it.  It  was  published  in
the  meantime  by  Professor  Weber  in  his  Indische  Studion,
1 849,  and  I  think  it  may  be  useful  to  give  once  more  some
extracts  from  it  ^

*•  A  new  traiislation  of  the  Praflthana-blieda  lias  been  published  by
Prof.  Dettnsen  as  an  Introduction  to  his  Allgemoine  Qeschiclite  der
Pliilosophie,  vol.  i,  p.  44,  1894.


76  INDIAN  PHIL0S0FH7.

'  Nyftva^'  he  writes, '  ia  logic  ^  as  p]\>malmted  by  Qotanm^
in  five  Adhy&yas  (lessons).  Its  objeei  is  knowledge  of  the
nature  of  the  sixteen  Pad&rthas  by  means  of  name^  defini*
tion,  and  examination/  These  Pad&rthas  are  the  important
or  essential  topics  of  the  Nyaya  philosophy;  but  it  has
proved  very  misleading  to  see  Padirtha  here  translated  by
categories.  No  one  could  understand  why  such  things  as
doubt,  example,  wrangling,  &c.,  could  possibly  be  called
categories  or  praedMcmlia,  and  it  is  no  wonder  that  Bitter
and  others  should  have  spoken  of  the  Ny&ya  with  open
contempt,  as  they  have  done,  if  such  things  were  repre-
sented to  them  as  the  categories  of  Indian  lo^ic.

'  There  is  alsf^  the  Vaiseshika  philosophy  m  ten  lessons*
promulgated  by  Ean&da.  Its  object  19  to  establish  by  their
similarities  and  dissimilarities  ^  the  six  £ad&rthas,  vis. : —

I.  J>nivya,  subfiianoe.
a.  Gtma,  quality.

3.  Kannaiiy  a'ctivity.

4.  S&m&nya,  what  is  general  and  fonnd  in  more  than  one  object.  Ihe
highest  Sftmftnya  is  SattA  or  being.

5.  Visesha,  the  differentia  or  what  is  speeial,  residing  in  eternal
atomSf  &e.

6.  SamaTd^ya,  inseparable  inhereueOi  as  between  eatise  and  effect,  parts
and  the  whole,  ftc.

To  which  may  be  added

7.  Abh/iva,  negation.

This  philosophy  also  is  called  Ny&ya.'
Thefje  Padarthas  of  the  Vaiseshikas,  at  least  1-5,  may
indeedi  be  called  categories,  for  they  represent  what  can  be

^  Nyftya  is  derived  from  ni  *into,'  and  1  'to  go.'  Tlie  fourth  member
of  a  'ayllogism  is  called  Upanaya,  'leading  towards'  or  *  induction.'
Balla'Atyne  translates  Nyaya  by  fii6o^.  ,

'  ^Luvlkshikl  as  an  old  nnmo  of  philosophy,  more  particularly  of  logic,
OCCU7/8  also  in  Gautama's  Dharmad&stra  II,  3.  It  is  used  sometin^es  as
synonymous  with  Mtm&msft,  and  is  more  oemprehensive  than  logic

'  As  the  HSS.  vary  between  Gotama  and  Gautama,  I  have  kept  the
former  for  the  Nyaya,  '  philosopher,'  the  latter  for  Buddha.

*  Barth^lemy  St.  Hilaire,  in  his  work  on  Indian  Logic,  p.  356.  remark^
'Mais  le  philosophe  Vairashika  n'a  point  cfaerohd  k  dibtinguer  les
catiSgories  entre  elles,  en  ^numerant  leurs  propri^tes,  eomme  Ta  fait  le
Stagirite.  II  n'a  point  montrd,  eomme  Aristote,  leurs  rapports  et  leurs
differences.'    But  this  is  exactly  what  he  has  done,  ef.  Satras  I,  6  seq.


peasthIna  bhbda.  77

predieated,  in  general,  of  the  objects  of  our  experience,  or,
irom  an  Indian  point  of  view,  what  is  predicated  by,  or
what  is  the  highest  sense  (Artha)  of  words  (Pada).  Tbua
it  has  come  to  pass  that  Padd^rtha,  literally  the  meaning  of
a  word,  was  used  in  Sanskrit  in  the  sense  of  things  in
general,  or  objects.  It  is  rightly  translated  by  category
when  applied  to  the  five  Pad^rthas  of  Eati&da,  but  sucn
a  translation,  doubtful  even  in  the  case  of  the  sixth  or
seventh  Pad&rtha  of  the  Yaiseshikas,  would  of  course  be
quite  misleading  when  applied  to  the  Padd.rtha8  of  Gotama.
The  real  categories  would,  in  Ootama's  system,  find  their
place  mostly  under  Prameya,  meaning  not  so  much  what
has  to  be  proved  or  established,  as  what  forms  the  object  of
our  knowledge.

Madhusftdana  continues :  *  The  Mtm&msft  also  is  twofold,
viz.  the  Karma-Mimd<77is§r  (work-philosophy)  and  the  Skvi-
raka-Mim&mS£t  (philosophy  of  the  emlmied  spirit).  The
Karma*Mim&7/is&  has  been  brought  oilt  by  the  venerable
&aimim  in  twelve  chapters.*

^e  objects  of  these  twelve  chapters  are  then  indicated
very  shortly,  and  so  as  to  be  hardly  intelligible  without
a  reference  to  the  original  Stttras.  Dharma,  the  object  of
this  philosophy,  is  explained  as  consisting  of  acts  of  duty,
chiefly  sacrificial.  The  second,  third,  and  fourth  chapters
treat  ^  of  the  differences  and  varieties  of  Dharma,  its  parts
(or  appendent  members,  contrasted  with  the  main  act),  and
the  prmcipal  purpose  of  each  sacrificial  performance.  The
fifth  chapter  tries  to  settle  the  order  of  all  sacrificial  per-
formances, and  the  sixth  the  qualifications  of  its  performers.
The  subject  of  indirect  precepts  is  opened  in  the  seventh
chapter  and  carried  on  more  fully  in  the  eighth.  Inferrible
changes,  adapting  to  any  variation  or  copy  of  certain
sacrificial  acts  what  was  designed  for  the  types  or  models
of  them,  are  discussckl  in  the  ninth,  and  bars  or  exceptions
in  the  tenth.  Concurrent  eflicacy  is  considered  in  the
eleventh  ehapter,  and  co-ordinate  effect  in  ihe  twelfth ;  that
is,  the  oo-operation  of  several  acts  for  a  single  result  is  the

*  I  giTe  thia  more  intelligible  description  from  Colebrooke,  MisoeUaneoiu
Emujs,  vol.  i,  p.  330  aeq.


78  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

subject  of  the  one,  and  the  incidental  effeet  of  an  aet^  of
which  the  chief  purpose  is  different^  is  discussed  in  the
other  ^.

'There  is  also  the  Samkarshana-k&Tz^a,  consisting  of
four  chapters,  composed  by  daimini,  and  this,  which  is
known  by  the  name  of  Devat^-kd^TU^a,  belongs  to  the
Karma-Mim&ms&,  because  it  teaches  the  act  called  Up^sanfi.
or  worship.

'  Next  follows  the  iS%rlraka-Mim&7?2s&,  consisting  of  four
chapters.  Its  object  is  to  make  dear  the  oneness  of
Branman  and  Atman  (Self )» and  to  exhibit  the  rules,  which
teach  the  investigation  (of  it)  by  means  of  Yedic  study,  &c.'
It  is  in  fact  much  more  what  we  call  a  system  of  philosophy
than  the  Piirya-Mim&ms&,  and  it  is  quoted  by  different
names,  such  as  Uttara-Mim&ms&,  Brahma-Mlm&m8&,  Ve-
d&nta,  &c. '

'  In  the  first  lecture  is  shown  the  agreement  with  which
all  Ved&nta  passages  refer,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  the
inward,  undivided,  second-less  Brahman.  In  the  firot  section
are  considered  Yedic  passages  which  have  clear  indications
of  Brahman ;  in  the  second,  passages  which  have  obscure
indications  of  Brahman,  and  refer  to  Brahman  so  far  as
he  is  an  object  of  worship;  in  the  third,  passages  which
have  obscure  indications  of  Brahman,  and  mostly  refer  to
Brahman,  so  far  as  he  or  it  is  an  object  of  knowledge.
Thus  the  consideration  of  the. Ved&nta  texts  has  been
finished,  and  in  the  fourth  section  such  words  as  Avyakta,
AgSk,  &C.,  are  considered,  of  which  it  can  be  doubtful
whether  they  may  not  refer  to  ideas,  adapted  and  formu-
lated by  the  S&mkhya  philosophers,  such  as  Pradyina,
Prakr^ti,  which  is  generally,  though  quite  wrongly,  trans-
lated by  nature,  as  mdependent  of  Brahman  or  Purusha.

'  The  convergence  of  all  Ved&nta  texts  on  the  second-less
Brahman  having  thus  been  established,  Vy&sa  or  B&darft-
yana,  fearing  an  opposition  by  means  of  arguments  such  as

^  Professor  Deossen  has  given  a  somewhat  diiforent  Tendon  of  these
titles.  He  gires,  for  instanee,  as  the  subject  of  the  fifth  chapter  the
suocessive  order  of  reeitation,  as  enjoined  by  £rmti,  but  to  judge  ttom
Mim.  SCttras  V,  z,  i,  the  right  meaning  seems  to  be  the  <  settling  of  the
order  of  p^i-formanee,  aooording  to  Sruti,  subjeot-matter,  reeitation,  fte.'

*  Read  Adya  for  Akhya  in  the  FrasthAna  bheda.


FBA8TH&NA  BHBDA.  79

have  been  prodaoed  by  acknowledged  Smritis  and  varioiiB
other  systems,  undertakes  their  refutation,  and  tries  to
establish  the  inc(xitrovertible  validity  of  his  own  argu-
ments in  the  second  lecture.  Here,  in  the  first  section,  the
objections  to  the  convergence  of  the  Ved&nta  passages  on
Brahman,  as  stated  by  the  SmWtis  of  the  S&mkhya-yoga,
the  E&n&das,  and  by  the  arguments  employed  by  me
S&mkhya9,  are  disposed  of.  In  the  second  section  is  shown
the  f aultiness  of  the  views  of  the  followers  of  the  S&mkhya,
because  every  examination  should  consist  of  two  parts,  tbe
establishment  of  our  own  doctrine  and  the  refutation  of
the  doctrine  of  our  opponents.  In  the  third  section  the
contradictions  between  the  passages  of  the  Veda,  referring
to  the  creation  of  the  elements  and  other  subjects,  are
removed  in  the  first  part^  and  in  the  second  those  referring
to  individual  souls.  In  the  fourth  section  are  considered
all  apparent  contradictions  between  Vedic  passages  referring
to  the  senses  and  their  objects.

'In  the  third  chapter  follows  the  ex^nination  of  the
means  (of  salvation).  Here  in  the  first  section,  while  con-
sidering  the  gom^  to  and  returning  from  another  world
(transmigration),  £spassionatene8S  has  to  be  examined.  In
the  second  section.the  meaning  of  the  word  Thou  is  made
clear,  and  afterwards  the  meaning  of  the  word  Thai  In
the  third  section  there  is  a  collection  of  words,  if  not  purdy
tautological,  all  referring  to  the  unqualified  Brahman,  as
recorded  in  different  iS&kn&s  or  branches  of  the  Veda;  and
at  the  same  time  the  question  is  discussed  whether  certain
attributes  recorded  by  other  /SSUch&s  in  teaching  a  qualified
or  unqualified  Brahman,  may  be  taken  together  or  zK>t.
In  the  fourth  section  the  means  of  obtaining  a  knowledge  of
the  unqualified  Brahman,  both  the  external,  such  as  sacrifices
and  observing  the  four  stations  in  life,  and  the  internal,
such  as  quietness,  control,  and  meditation,  are  investigated.

*  In  the  fourth  chapter  follows  an  inquiry  into  the  special
rewards  or  fruits  of  a  knowledge  of  the  qualified  and  un-
q^ualified  Brahman.  In  the  first  section  is  described  salva-
tion of  a  man  even  in  this  life,  when  free  from  the  influence
of  good  or  bad  acts,  after  he  has  realised  the  unqualified
Brahman  by  means  of  repeated  study  of  the  Veda^  Ac.    In


80  INDIAK  PHILOSOPHY.

the  second  sectidn  the  mode  of  departure  pf  a  dyihg  man
is  considered.  In  the  third,  the  further  (northern)  road  of
a  man  who  died  with  a  full  knowledge  of  the  unqualified
Brahman  is  explained.  In  the  fourth  section  the  obtain-
ment  of  disembodied  aloneness  by  a  man  who  knows  the
unqualified  Brahman  is  first  described,  and  afterwards  tiie
abode  in  the  world  of  Brahman,  promised  to  all  who  know
the  qualified  (or  lower)  Brahman.

'  This,  the  Ved&nta,  is  indeed  the  principal  of  all  doctrines,
any  other  doctrine  is  but  a  complement  of  it,  and  therefore
it  alone  is  to  be  reverenced  by  all  who  wish  for  liberation,
and  this  according  to  the  interpretation  of  the  venerable
iS^amkara — this  is  the  secret  1 '

Here  we  see  clearly  that  MadhusiSldana  considered  the
Ved&nta-philosophy  as  interpreted  by  /Samkara,  if  not  as
the  only  true  one,  still  as  the  best  of  all  philosophies.  He
made  an  importajit  distinction  also  between  ihe  four,  the
Nyfi-ya,  Vaiseshika,  Piirva,  and  Uttara-Mim&msi  on  one
side,  and  the  remaining  two,  the  S&mkhya  and  Toga-
philosophies  on  the  other.  It  is  curious  indeed  that  &s
distinction  has  been  hitherto  so  little  remarked.  According
to  MadhusfLdana,  the  philosophies  of  Qotama  and  Ean&da
are  treated  simply  as  Smritis  or  Dharmaa&stras,  like  the
Laws  of  Manu,  nay  like  the  Mah&bh&rata  ^  of  V y&sa,  and
the  B&m&yana  of  Valmiki.  Of  course  these  systems  of
philosophy  cannot  be  called  SmWti  in  the  ordinary  sense
of  DharmaaS/Stra ;  but,  as  they  are  SmWti  or  tradition,  and
not  £iruti  or  revelation,  they  may  be  said  to  teach  Dharma,
if  not  in  le^l,  at  least  in  the  moral  sense  of  that  word.
Anyhow  it  is  clear  that  S&mkhya  and  Toga  were  looked
upon  as  belonging  to  a  class  different  from  that  to  which
the  two  Mim&mj^,  nay  even  Ny&ya  and  Vaiseshika,  and
the  other  recognised  branches  of  loiowledge  belonged,  which
together  ares  represented  as  the  eighteen  branches  of  the
Trayt  (the  Veda).  Though  it  may  be  difficult  to  understand
the  exact  reason  of  this  distinction,  the  distinction  itself
should  not  be  passed  over.

'The  S&mkhya/  Madhusddana  continues,  'was  brought

*  See  Dahlmuuii  Das  ICahAbhftrata  als  Epos  und  Rechtsbuoh,  i8^.


PEASTHANA  BHBDA.  .  8 1

out  by  ihe  venerable  Eapila  in  six  Adhyd^yaa  In  the  first
Adbyfiy«  the  objects  for  discussion  are  considered ;  in  the
second  the  effects  or  products  of  PradMna,  or  original
matter;  in  the  third  aloofness  from. sensuous  obieets;  in
the  f oikh  stories  about  dispassionate  persons,  such  as
PiAgaia  (IV,  II),  the  fletcher  (IV,  18),  &c.;  in  the  fifth
there  is  refutation'  of  opposite  opinions;  in  the  sixth
a  rfyu/mi  of  the  whole.  The  chief  object  of  the  S&mkhya-
philosophy  is  to  teach  the  difference  between  Prakriti  and
the  Purushas.

'Then  follows  the  Toga-philosophy  as  taught  by  the
venerable  Pata/t^ali,  consisting  of  four  parts.  Here  in  the
first  part  meditation,  which  stops  the  activity  and  distrac-*
tion  of  the  mind,  and,  as  a  means  towards  it,  repeated
practice  and  dispassionateness,  are  discussed ;  in  the  second
the  eight  accessories  which  serve  to  produce  deep  medita-
tion  even  in  one  whose  thoughts  are  distracted,  such  as
(II,  29)  restraint,  observances,  posture,  regulation  of  breath,
devotion,  contemplation,  and  meditation;  in  the* third,  the
supernatural  powers;  in  the  fourth  aloneness.  The  chief
object  of  this  philosophy  is  to  achieve  concentration  by
means  of  stopping  all  wandering  thoughts/

After  this  follows  a  short  account  of  the  P&6upata  and
P^^ar&tra-systems,  and  then  a  recapitulation  which  is  of
interest.  Here  Madhus&dana  says, '  that  after  the  various
systems  have  been  explained,  it  should  be  clear  that  there
are  after  all  but  three  roads.

I .  The  Arambha*v&da,  the  theory  of  atomic  agglomeration.
*  a.  The  Pariii&ma-v&da,  the  theory  of  evolution.

3.  The  Viyarta-v&da,  the  theory  of  illusion.

The  first  theory  holds  that  the  four  kinds  of  atoms
(Aiiu),  those  of  earth,  water,  fire,  and  air,  by  becoming
successively  double  atoms,  &c,  begin  the  world  which
cuhninates  in  the  egg  of  Brahman.

This  first  theory,  that  of  the  Tarkikas  (Nyd.ya  and
Vai^eshika)  and  the  Mim&msakas,  teaches  that  an  effect
which  was  not  (the  world),  is  produced  through  the  activity
of  causes  whi<di  are.

The  second  theory,  that  of  the  S&mkhyas,  Toga-ptUa/i^a-
las,  and  P&6upatas,  says  that  Pradh&na  alone,  sometimes
6  G


82  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHT.

called  PrakWti  or  original  matter,  oompoBed,  as  it  ia^
of  the  Gu?)a8  of  Sattva  (good),  Ba^as  (moderate),  and
Tamas  (bad),ls  evolved  through  the  stages  of  Maliat  /per-
ceiving) and  Ahamkira  (subjectivity)  into  the  shape  oi  the
(subjective  and  objective)  world.  From  this  point  of  view
the  effected  world  existed  before  as  real,  though  in  a  subtile
(invisible)  form,  and  wafii  rendered  manifest  through  the
activity  of  a  cause.

^-The  tbirdjiheory,  that  of  the^Brahmav&dins  (Ved&nta),
says  that  the^self -luminous  and  perfectly  blissful  Brahman
which  has  no  seopnd,  appears  bv  mistake,  through  its  own
power  of  M&y&,  as  the  world,  while  the  vaishTiavas
(Raminu^,  &c.)  hold  that  the  world  is  an  actual  and  true
evolution  of  Brahman.

But  in  reality  all  the  Munis  who  have  put  f  om^ard  these
theories  agree  m  wishing  to  prove  the  existence  of  the  one
Supreme  Lord  without  a  second,  ending  in  the  theory  of
illusion  (Vivarta).  These  Munis  cannot  be  in  error,  con-
sidering that  thev  are  omniscient;  and  these  different
views  have  only  oeen  propounded  by  them,  in  order  to
keep  off  all  nihilistic  theories,  and  because  they  were  afraid
that  human  beings,  with  their  inclinations  towards  the
objects  of  the  world,  could  not  be  expected  at  once  to  know
the  true  goal  of  man.  But  all  comes  right  when  we
understand  that  men,  from  not  understandmg  their  true
object,  imagined  that  these  Munis  would  have  propounded
what  is  contrary  to  the  Veda,  and  thus,  accepting  their
opinions,  have  become  followers  of  various  paths.'

Much  of  what  has  here  been  translated  from  Madhu-
siidana's  Prasth&na-bheda,  though  it  gives,  a  general  survey,
is  obscure,  but  will  become  more  intelligible  hereafter  when
we  come  to.  examine  each  of  the  six  philosophies  by  itself ;
nor  is  it  at  all  certain  that  his  view  of  the  development  of
Indian  philosophy  is  historically  tenable.  But  it  shows  at
all  events  a  certain  freedom  of  thought,  which  we  see  now
and  then  in  other  writers  also,  su<£  ad  Yi^/lana-bhikshu,
who  are  bent  on  showing  that  there  is  behind  the  diversity
of  Ved&nta,  SS.mkhya,  and  Ny&ya  one  and  the  same  truth,
though  differently  expressed;  that  philosophies,  in  fact,
may  De  many,  but  truth  is  one.


pbasthAna  bheda.  83

But  however  we  may  admire  this  insight  on  the  part  of
M adhusiidana  and  others,  it  is  our  duty,  as  historians  of
philosophy,  to  study  the  different  paths  by  which  different
philosophers,  whether  by  the  light  of  revelation  o^  by  that,
of  their  own  unfettered  reason,  have  striven  to  discover
the  tnHh.  It  is  the  very  multiplicitv  and  variety  of  these
paths  that  form  the  chief  interest  of  the  history  of  philo-
sophy, and  the  fact  that  to  the  present  day  these  six
different  systems  of  philosophy  have  held  their  own  in  the
soidst  of  a  great  multitude  of  philosophic  theories,  pro-
pounded by  the  thinkers  of  India,  shows  that  we  must
first  of  all  try  to  appreciate  their  characteristic  peculiarities,
before  attempting  with  Madhusddana  to  eliminate  their
distinctive  features.

These  philosophers  are —

1.  B&dar&yana,  called  also  VvftsaDvaip&yana  orEWshna
Dvaip&yana,  the  reputed  author  of  the  Brahma-Sfttras,
called  also  nttara-Mim&m8&-Si!ltras,  or  V/Asa-Stltras.

2.  -(raimini,  the  author  of  the  Pdrva-Him&7}is&-S{Ltras.

3.  Kapila,  the  author  of  the  Sslmkhya-SfLtraa

4.  PatiEi/?()rali,  also  called  iSesha  or  PhaTiin,  the  autlior  of
the  Yoga-S6tras.

5^  E^Ti&da,  also  called  Eanabhu^,  Eanabhakshaka,  or
UlCika,  the  author  of  the  Vaifieshika-Sfttras.

6.  Gotama,  also  called  Akshap&da,  the  author  of  the
Ny&ya-Sfttras.

It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  philosophers  to  whom  our
l^iitras  are  ascribed,  cannot  be  considered  as  the  first
originators  of  Indian  philosophy.  These  SiJltras  often
refer  to  other  philosophers,  who  therefore  must  have
existed  before  the  time  when  the  S&tras  received  their
final  form.    Nor  could  the  fact  that  <'ome  of  the  Siitras

J[uote  and  refute  the  opinions  of  other  S&tras,  be  accounted
or  without  admitting  a  growing  up  of  different  philo-
sophical sdiools  side  by  side  durmg  a  period  which  pre*
ceded  their  last  arrangement.  Unfortunately  such  refer
ences  hardly  ever  give  us  the  title  of  a  book,  or  its  autlior,
atill  less  the  ipeis»i/ma  verba.  When  they  refer  to  such
tc^Kics  as  Purusha  and  Prakriti  we  know  that  they  refer
to  the  S&mkhya,  if  they  speak  of  Anns  or  atoms,  we  know

a  a


84  INDIAN  PHIIiOSOPHT.

that  their  remarks  are  pointed  at  the  Vaideshikad.  Bat  it
by  no  means  follows  that  they  refer  to  the  SAimkhya  or
Vaiaeshika^S&tras  exactly  as  we  now  possess  th^n.  Some
of  these,  as  has  been  proved,  are  so  modem  that  they  could
not  possibly  be  quoted  by  ancient  philosophers.  Our
S&.mkhya-Siitras,  for  instance,  have  been  proved  by
Dr.  F.  Hall  to  be  not  earlier  than  about  1380  a.  d.,  and
they  may  be  even  later.  Startling  as  this  discovery  was,
there  is  certainly  nothing  to  be  said  against  the  ax^guments
of  Dr.  Hall  or  against  those  by  which  rrof essor  Oarbe  ^  has
supported  Dr.  Hall's  discovery.  In  this  case,  therefore,
these  S&tras  should  be  looked  upon  as  a  mere  rifaccvmentOt
to  take^  the  place  of  earlier  SAtras,  which  as  early  as  the
sixth  cent.  a.d.  had  probably  been  already  superseded  by
the  popular  Sftmkbya-k&rik&s  and  then  forgotten.  This
late  date  of  our  S&mkhya-SCttras  may  seem  incredible,  but
though  I  still  hold  that  the  S&tnirstyle  arose  in  a  period
when  writing  for  literary  purposes  was  still  in  its  tentative
stage,  we  know  that  even  in  our  time  there  are  learned
Pandits  who  find  no  difficulty  in  imitating  this  ancient
SiJltra-style.  The  Siitra-period,  reaching  down  as  far  as
Afioka's  reign  in  the  third  century,  and  his  Council  in
242  B.a,  .claims  not  only  the  famous  S&tras  of  P&mni,  but
has  also  been  fixed  upon  as  the  period  of  the  greatest
philosophical  activity  m  India,  an  activity  called  forth,  it
would  seem,  by  the  strong  commotion  roused  by  the  rise
of  the  Buddhist  school  of  philosophy,  and  afterwards  of
religion.

It  is  of  conside^ble  importance  to  remember  that  of  the
technical  names  of  the  six  systems  of  philosophy,  two  only
occur  in  the  classical 'Dpanishads,  namely  S&mkhya  and  Yoga
or  S&mkhya-yoga.  Ved&nta  does  not  occur,  except  in  the
^•vetftavatara,  MuTidEaka  and  some  of  the  later  Upanishads  \
Mim&m8&  occurs  in  the  general  sense  of  investigation,  Ny&ya

*  Oarbe,  Die  S&mkhya-Philo0ophie,  p.  71.

*  A  curious  distinction  is  made  in  a  commentary  on  the  Gautama-
Sdtraa  Xi:^,  la,  where  it  is  said  that  <  thooe  iiarts  of  the  Aranyakaa  whioh
%r4  not  Upanishads  are  called  Ved&ntaa.'


THE   SIX   6TSTBMS   OF   PHILOSOfflY,  85

and  Vai^eshika  are  altogether  absent,  nor  do  we  meet  with
such  words  as  Hetuvidyd,,  or  AnVtksUkt,  nor  with  the
names  of  the  reputed  founders  of  the  six  systems,  ^^^^
those  of  the  two  Mtm&msfts,  Bftdar&yana  and  Gemini.  The
names  of  Pata/7grali»  or  Kaii&da,  are  absent  altogether,  while
the  names  of  Kapila  and  Gotama,  when  they  occuTi  refer,
it  would  seem,  to  quite  different  personalities.

Thm  Biz  UjwUimm  of  Fbllosoplgr.

No  one  can  suppose  that  those  whose  names  are  men-
tioned as  the  authors  of  these  six  philosophical  systems,
were  more  tha^^he  final  editors  or  redactors  of  the  Sdtras
as  we  now  possess  them.    If  the  third  century  b.c.  should
seem  too  late  a  date  for  the  introduction  of  writing  for
literaiy  purposes  in  India,  we  should  remember  that  even
inscriptions  have  not  yet  been  found  more  ancient  than
those  of  A^ka,  and  there  is  a  wide  difference  between
inscriptions    and    literary    compositions.     The    Southern
Buddhists  do  not  claim  to  have  reduced  their  Sacred  Canon
to  writing  before  the  first  century  B.C.,  though  it  is  well
known   that    they  kept    up    close    relations  with   their
Northern  co-religiohiste  who  were  acquainted  with  writ-
ing ^    During  all  that  time,  therefore,  betvreen  477  and
77  B.C.,  ever  so  many  theories  of  the  world,  partaking  of
a  Ved&ntff,  S&mkhya  or  Yoga,  nay  even  of  a  Buddhist
character,  could  have  sprung  up  and  have  been  reduced  to
a  mnemonic  form  in  various  A^ramas.   We  need  not  wonder
that  much  of  that  literature,  considering  that  it  could  be
mnemonic  only,  should  have  been  irretrievably  lost,  and
we  must  take  care  also  not  to  look  upon  what  has  been
left  to  us  in  the  old  Dar^anas,  as  representing  the  whole
outcome  of   the  philosophical  activity  of  the  whole  of
India  through  so  many  generations.    All  we  can  say  is
that  philosophy  began  to  ferment  in  India  during  the
period  filled  by  Brftlimarzas  and  Upanishads,  nay  even  in
some  of  the  Vedic  hymns,  that  the  existence  of  Upanishads,
though  not  necessarily  our  own,  is  recognised  in  the  Bud-
dhist Canon,  and  lastly  that  the  name  of  Suttas,  as  a

^  The  Mored  Bo-iree  in  the  city  of  Aniir&dhapura  in  Ceylon  wm  grown,
we  aie  told,  from  a  branch  of  the  tree  at  Buddhu  GayA.


86  INDIAN  PUIIiOSOPHT.

component  part  of  the  Buddhist  Canon,  must  be  later  than
that  of  the  earliest  Br&hmanic  SiJltras,  because  in  the  mean-
time the' meaning  of  the  word  had  been  changed  from
short  mnemonic  sentences  to  fully  developed  discourses.
Possibly  SiJltra  was  originally  meant  for  the  text  to  be
elucidated  in  a  sermon,  so  that  the  long  Buddhistic  sermons
came  to  be  called  Suttaa  in  consequence.

BriluHipftti-BtltrMi.

That  some  of  the  earlier  philosophical  Sdtras  were  lost,
is  shown  in* the  case  of  the  Br^haspati-SC^tras.  These  are
said  to  have  contained  the  doctrines  of  the  out  and  out
materialists,  or  sensualists,  the  Ijauk&yatikas  or  ^arv&kas,
who  deny  the  existence  of  everything  beyond  what  is

S'ven  by  the  senses.  Th^  are  referred  to  by  Bhaskara-
xya  at  Brahma-Sdtras  Ul,  3,  53  ^,  and  as  ne  gives  an
extract,  it  is  likely  that  they  still  existed  in  his  time,
though  no  MS.  of  them  has  been  found  as  yet  in  India.
The  same  applies  to  such  SiJltras  as  the  Vaikb^nasa>S<itras,
possibly  intended  for  the  Y&naprasthas,  and  the  Bhikshu-
Sfttras-^,  quoted  bv  P&nini,  IV,  3,  no,  and  intended,  it
would  seem,  for  Br&hmanic,  and  not  yet  for  Buddhistic
mendicants.  It  is  a  sad  truth  which  we  have  to  learn
more  and  more,  that  of  the  old  pre-Buddhistic  literature
we  have  but  scanty  fbigments,  and  that  even  these  may
be,  in  some  cases,  mere  reproductions  of  lost  originals,  as  in
the  case  of  the  S&mkhya-Siitras.  We  know  now  that  such
S&tras  could  have  been  produced  at  any  time,  and  we
should  not  forget  that  even  at  present,  in  the  general  decay
of  Sanskrit  sdiolarship,  India  still  possesses  scholars  who
can  imitate  E&lid&sa,  to  say  nothing  of  such  poems  as  the
Mah&bh&rata  and  B&m&yana,  and  so  successfully  that  few
scholars  could  tell  the  difference.  It  is  not  long  ago  that
I  received  a  Sanskrit  treatise  written  in  S&tras  with  a  com-
mentary, the  work  of  a  living  scholar  in  India,  whicli
might  nave  deceived  many  a  £}iropean  scholar  of  Sanskrit

^  Colebrook^ Hiso.  Essays*,  I,  409.

*  They  were  identified  by  TftjrinAtha  TarkaTMEftspeti.with  the  VedAata-
SCktras ;  see  SiddhAnta  Kaamwi!,  yoL  i,  p.  59a.


BOOKS  OJP  BEFfiRBNCa.  87

literature  \  If  that  is  possible  now,  if,  as  in  the  case  o\
the  Kapila-Siitras,  it  was  possible  in  the  fourteenth  cen-
tuiy,  why  should  not  the  same  have  taken  place  during
the  period  of  the  BenaiBsance  in  India,  nay  even  ''at  an
earlier  time?  At  all  events,  thojagh  grateful  for  what  has
been  preserved,  and  preserved  in  what  may  seem  to  us
an  almost  miraculous  manner,  we  should  not  imagine  that
we  possess  all,  or  that  we  possess  what  we  possess  in  its
original  form.

Books  of  BofiroBOO.

I  shall  mention  here  some  of  the  most  important  works
only,  from  which  students  of  philosophy,  particularly  those
ignorant  of  Sanskrit,  may  gain  by  thenuelves  a  knowledge
of  the  six  recognised  systems  of  Indian  Pliilosophy.  The
titles  of  the  more  important  of  the  original  Sanskrit  texts
may  be  found  in  Colebrooke's  Miscellaneous  Essays,  vol.  ii,
p.  239  seq.,  and  in  the  Catalogues,  published  since  his  time,
of  the  various  collections  of  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  Europe  and
India.'

For  the  Vedfinta-philosophy  of  B&darftyatia  the  most
useful  book  is  Thibaut's  English  translation  of  the  text  of
the  S<itras  and  &imkara's  commentary  in  the  S.  B.  EL,  vol&
xxxiv  and  xxxviii

Of  books  written  in  Qerman,  Deussen's  translation  of  the
same  work,  1887,  preceded  as  it  was  by  his  '  System  des
Ved&nta,'  1883,  can  be  thoroughly  recommended.

Of  the  S&mkhyaHsystem  we  have  the  S&tras  translated
by  Ballantyne  in  1882-1885,  the  Aphorisms  of  the  S&mkhya
Philosophy  of  Eapila,  with  illustrative  extracts  from  me
Commentaries,  1852,  1865, 1885.

In  Qerman  we  have  the  S&mkhya-Pravaibana-Bhftshya,
Vi^i^ftna-bhikshu's  Commentar  zu  den  Sll/mkhva*^&tras,
UbBi^etzt  von  B.  Qarbe,  1889.  Alsp  Aniruddha's  Com-
mentary and  the  oririnal  parts  of  Ved&ntin  Mahftdeva's
commentary  on  the  bftmkhya-Siitras,  by  Richard  Qarbe,
i892,

*  It  is  called  K&tantraA;XrAand2iAprnkri.Vj|  by  JTandrakAntA  TarkAlaAkAni,
1896^  and  gWes  additional  SOtras  to  tho  KAtnntra  on  Vedio  Grammar.
Ue  makes  no  leeroi  that  SAtram  yrittis  A'obhayam  api  mayaiya  TyarUr<
'  the  8&tra  and  the  eonunentaiy,  both  weto  oompoaed  by  me.'


\


88-  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY^

Der  Mohdschein  der  SAmkhya  Wahrheit,y&2raspatimi6ra*8
S&mkhya-tattva-kaumudi/UberBetzt  von  B.  Oarbe,  iSg%,iB
also  a  very  useful  work.

Th4  Simkhya  EirikH  l>^  fswaralqishna.  translated  from
the  Sanscrit  by  H.  T.  Colebrooke,  also  the  Bhfishya  or  com-
mentary by  Oanrapdda;  translated  and  illustrated  by  an
original  comment  by  H.  H.  Wilson,  Oxford,  1837,  may  still
be  consulted  with  advantage.

Other  useful  works  are  :—

John  Davies,  Hindu  Philosophy.  The  Sankhya  Earika
of  IswarakHstugia,  London,  1881.

Die  S&mkhya-Philosophie,  nach  den  Quellen,  von  R.  Oarbe,
1894.

Of  the  Piirva-MtmUmsdr  or  simply  Mlm&msft,  which  deals
chiefly  with  the  nature  and  authority  of  the  Veda  with
special  reference  to  sacrificial  and  other  duties,  we  have
the  S&tras  with  iSabarasv&min's  commentary  published  in
tiie  original ;  but  there  is  as  yet  no  book  in  English  in
which  that  system  may  be  studied,  except  Prof essor  Thi-
baut's  translation  of  Laug&kshi  Bhftskara's  Arthasamgraha,
a  short  abstract  of  that  philosophy,  published  in  the  Benares
Sanskrit  Series,  No.  4.

The  Vaiseshika  system  of  philosophy  may  be  studied  in
an  English  translation  of  its  S&tras  by  A.  E.  Gough,
Benares,  1873;  also  in  a  German  translation  bv  B<^r,
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellsehaft,
vols.  21  and  22,  and  in  some  articles  of  mine  in  the. same
Journal  of  the  German  Oriental  Society,  1849.

The  Ny&ya-S&tras  of  Gotama  have  been  translated,  with
the  exception  of  the  last  book,  by  Ballantyne,  Allahabad,
1850-57.

The  Yoga-SMras  are  accessible  in  an  English  translation
by  R&jendral&la  Hitra,  in  the  BiUiotheca  IncUca,  Nos.  462,
478, 482,  491,  and  492.

BatM  of  tlM  Vkiloflopblottl  Mtnui.

If  we  consider  the  state  of  philosophical  thought  in  India
such  as  it  is  represented  to  us  in  the  Br&hmanas  and
Upanishads,  and  afterwards  in  thp  canonical  books  of  the
Buddhists,  we  cannot  wonder  that  all  attempts  at  fixing


DATES   OF  THE  PHILOSOPHIOAL   StfTBAS.  89

the  dates  of  the  six  recognised  qrstems  of  philosopliy,  nay
even  their  matual  relationship,  snould  hitherto  have  failed.
It  is  true  that  Baddhism  and  Oainism  were  likewise  but
two  philosophical  systems  out  of  many,  and  that  it  has
been  possible  to  fix  their  dates.  But  if  in  their  case  we
know  something  about  their  dates  and  their  historical
development,  this  is  chiefly  due  to  the  social  and  political
importance  which  they  acquired  during  the  fifth,  the
fourth,  and  the  third  centuries  B.O.,  and  not  simply  to  their
philosophical  tenets.  .  We  know  also  that  there  were  many
teachers,  contemporaries  of  Buddha,  but  they  have  left  no
traces  in  the  literary  history  of  India.

Nor  should  we  forget  that,  though  the  date  of  the
Buddhist  Canon  may  be  fixed,  the  date  of  many  of  the
texts  which  we  now  possess  and  accept  as  canonical  is  by
no  means  beyond  the  reach  of  doubt.

In  the  Buddhist  annals  themselves  other  teachers  such
as  0/9&tiputra,  the  Nir^rantha,  the  founder  of  ffainism,
Ptlrana  K&syaipa,,  Eakuda  K&ty&yana,  Ayita  Eesakambali,
Sam^aya  Vairat^i-putra,  Oos^li-putra,  the  Maskarin,  are
mentioned  by  the  side  of  Gautama,  the  prince  of  the  clan
of  the  S&kyas.  One  of  these  only  became  known  in  his-
tory, &/9&tiputra,  the  Nirgrantha  or  gymnosophist,  because
the  society  founded  by  him,  like  the  brotherhood  founded
by  Buddha,  developed  into  a  powerful  sect,  the  G^ainas.
Another,  Qod&li  with  the  bamboo  stick,  originally  an  A^-
vaka,  then  a  follower  of  Mab&vlra,  became  likewise  the
founder  of  a  sect  of  his  own,  which,  however,  has  now
disappeared  ^  &/i&tiputra  or  N&taputta  was  actually  the
saiior  of  Buddha.

Though  it  seems  likely  that  the  founders  of  the  six
systems  of  philosophy,  though  not  the  authors  of  the
Siitras  whien  we  possess,  belonged  to  the  same  period  of
philosophical  and  religious  fermentation  which  gave  rise  to
the  first  spreading  of  Buddha's  doctrines  in  India,  it  is  by
no  means  clear  that  anv  of  these  systems,  in  their  literary
form,  €ure  presupposed  b^  Buddhism.  This  is  owing  to  the
vagueness  of  the  quotations  which  are  hardly  ever  given

'  Kern,  BuddhlBmos,  I,  p.  i8a.


90  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

verbatim.  In  India,  daring  tho  mnemonic  period  of  litera-
ture, the  contents  of  a  book  may  have  become  considerably
modified,  while  the  title  remained  the  some.  Even  at  a
much  later  time,  when  we  see  Bhartrihari  (died  650  a.  d.)
referring  to  the  Mim^7)i8aka,  S&mkhys,  and  VaiMshika
Darsanas,  we  have  no  right  to' conclude  Hbsit  he  knew  these
Darsanas  exactly  as  we  know  them,  though  he  may  well
have  known  these  philosophies  after  they  had  assumed
their  systematic  form.  Again,  when  he  quotes  Naiy&yikas,
it  by  no  means  follows  that  he  knew  our  Ootama-S&tras,
nor  have  we  any  right  to  say  that  our  Gbtama-Sdtras
existed  in  his  time.  !U  is  possible,  it  is  probable,  but  it  is
not  certain.  We  must  therefore  be  very  careful  not  to  rely
too  much  on  quotations  from,  or  rather  allusions  to,  other
systems  of  philosophy*

The  S&mkhya-Sdtras,  as  we  possess  them,  are  very  chary
of  references.  They  clearly  re&r  to  Yai^eshika  and  Ny&ya,
when  they  examine  the  six  categories  of  the  former  (V,  85)
and  the  sixteen  Fad&rthas  of  the  latter  (V,  86).  Whenever
they  refer  to  the  Anns  or  atoms,  we  know  that,  they  have
the  Vaiseshika-philosophy  in  their  minds;  and  once  the
Vaiseshikas  are  actually  mentioned  by  name  (I,  25).  Smti,
which  the  S&mkhyas  were  supposed  to  disregard,  is  very
frequently  appealed  to,'Smriti  once  (V,  123),  and  Vima-
deva,  whose  name  occurs  in  both  jSruti  and  Smriti,  is
mentioned  as  one  who  had  obtained  spiritual  freedom.
But  of^  individual  philosophers  we  meet  only  with  Sanan*
dana  AMrya  (VI,  69)^  and  Pawiasikha  (V,  3a;  VI,  68),
while  the  teachers,  the  A^ryas,  when  mentioned  in  genei-al,
are  explained  as  comprehending  Eapila  himself  ,  as  well  as
others.

▼ed4]ita*MLtrMi.

The  Vedanta-Sfttras  contain  more  frequent  references,
but  they  too  do  not  help  us  much  for  chronological  purposes.

B&dai-^yana  refers  more  or  less  clearly  to  the  Buddhists,
the  G^ainas,  Patmpatos,  and  PaA7^aratras,  all  of  wliom  he  is
endeavouring  to  refute.     He  never  rcfers,  however,  to  any


VSD&NTA-StTBAS.  9 1

Utorary  work,  and  even  when  he  refers  to  other  philo-
sophical systems,  he  seems  to  avoid  almost  intentionally
the  recognised  names  of  their  authors,  nay  even  their  tech-
nical term&  Still  it  is  clear  that  the  systems  of  the  Piirva-
Mimd.ms&,  the  Yoga,  S&mkhya,  and  yai^eshika  were  in  his
mind  when  he  composed  his  S&tras,  and  among  Mtm&msic
authorities  he  refers  by  name  to  ^aimini,  B&dari,  AucJnlomi,
ijonarathya,  E&8akritsna,  Karsh7i%ini,  and  Atreya,  nay
to  a  B&dar&yanra  also.  We  cannot  be  fisur  wrong  therefore
if  we  assign  the  gradual  formation  of  the  six  systems  of
philosophy  to  the  period  from  Buddha  (fifth  century]  to
A«oka  (third  century),  though  we  have  to  admit,  particu-
larly in  the  cases  of  VedlLnte,  S&mkhya,  and  Yoga  a  long
previous  development  reaching  back  through  Upanishads
and  Brsihma^cus  to  the  very  hymns  of  the  Big-veda.

It  is  equally  difficult  to  fix  the  relative  position  ^  of  the
great  systems  of  philosophy^  because,  as  I  explained  before,
they  quote  each  other  mutually.  With  regard  to  the  rela-
tion of  Buddhism  to  the  six  orthodox  systems  it  seems  to
me  that  all  we  can  honestly  say  is  that  schools  of  philosophy
handing  down  doctrines  very  similar  to  those  of  our  six
olassiciS  or  orthodox  systems,  are  presupposed  by  the
Buddhist  Suttas.  But  this  is  very  different  from  the
opinion  held  by  certain  scholars  that  Buddha  or  his  disciples
actually  borrowed  from  our  Sdtras.  We  know  nothing  of
SAmkhya-literature  before  the  S&mkhya-k&rik&s,  which
belong  to  the  sixth  century  after  Christ.  Even  if  we
admit  that  the  Tattva-samJLsa  was  an  earlier  work,  how
could  We,  without  parallel  dates,  prove  any  actual  borrow-
ing on  the  part  of  Buddha  or  ms  disciples  at  that  early
timet

In  the  Upanishads  and  Br&hmanas,  though  there  is  a
common  note  running  through  them  all,  there  is  as  yet
great  latitude  and  want  of  system,  and  a  variety  of  opi-
nions supported  by  different  teachers  and  difierent  schools.
Even  in  tne  hymns  we  meet  with  great  independence  and
individuality  of  thought,  which  occasionally  seems  to
amount  to  downright  scepticism  and  atheism*

^  Bhaadarluur,  84tiikfayft  Philosophy  (1871),  p.  3.


92  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

We  must  keep  all  this  in  mind  if  we  wish  to  gain
a  correct  idea  of  the  historical  origin  and  growth  of  what
we  are  accustomed  to  call  the  six  philosophical  systems  of
India.  We  have  seen  already  that  philosophical  discussions
were  not  confined  to  the  Brahmans,  but  that  the  Kshatriyaa
also  took  a  very  active  and  prominent  part  in  the  elabora-
tion of  such  fundamental^  philosophical  concepts  as  that  of
Atman  or  Self.

It  is  out  of  this  floating  mass  of  philosophical  and
religious  opinion,  which  was  common  property  in  India^
that  the  regular  systems  slowly  emerged.  Though  we  do
not  know  in  what  form  this  took  place,  it  is  quite  dear
that  what  we  now  possess  of  philosophical  manuals,  in  the
form  of  Sfttras,  could  not  have  been«written  down  during
the  time  when  writing  for  any  practical  purposes  except
inscriptions  on  monuments  and  coins  was  still  unknown  m
India,  or  at  all  events  had  not  yet  been  employed  for
literary  purposes,  so  far  as  we  know.

It  has  now  been  generally  admitted,  I  believe,  that
whenever  writing  has  once  become  popular,  it  is  next  to
impossible  that  there  should  be  no  allusion  to  it  in  the
poetical  or  piose  compositions  of  the  people.  Even  as  late
as  the  time  of  /Samkara,  the  writteh  letters  are  still  .called
unreal  (Anrita)  in  comparison  with  the  audible  sounds,  as
classified  in  the  Pr&tiitychyas,  which  are  represented  by
them  (Ved.  SdtrasII,  i,  14,  p.  451).  There  is  no  allusion
to  writing  in  the  hymns,  the  Br&hmanas  and  Upanishads ;
very  few,  if  any,  m  the  S(itras.  The  historical  value  of
these  allusions  to  writing  which  occur  in  the  literature  of
the  Buddhists  depends,  of  course,  on  the  date  which  we  can
assign,  not  to  the  original  authors,  but  to  the  writers  of
our  texts.  We  must  never  forget  that  there  was  in  India
during  many  centuries  a  purely  mnemonic  literature,  which
continued  down  to  the  Siitra-period,  and  which  was  handed
down  from  generation  to  generation  according  to  a  system
which  is  fully  described  in  the  Prfttis&khyas.  What  would
have  been  the  use  of  that  elaborate  system,  if  there  had
been  manuscripts  in  existence  at  the  same  time  ?


HNSMONIG   LITBBATUB6.  *  93

When  that  mnemonic  literature,  that  Smriti»  came  for
the  first  time  to  be  reduced  to  writing,  this  probably  took

Elace  in  something  like  the  form  of  Stltras.  The  veiy
elplessness  of  the  SiJltra-style  would  thus  become  intel-
ligible. Letters  at  that  time  were  as  yet  monumental
only,  for  in  India  also  monumental  writing  is  anterior  to
literary  writing,  and  to  the  adoption  of  a  cursive  alphabet.
Writing  material  was  scarce  in  India,  and  the  number  of
those  who  could  read  must  have  been  very  small.  At  the
same  time  there  existed  the  old  mnemonic  literature,
invested  with  a  kind  of  sacred  character,  part  and  parcel
of  the  ancient  system  of  education,  ^  which  had  so  far
answered  all  purposes  and  was  not  easy  to  supplant
Much  of  that  mnemonic  literature  has  naturally  been  lost,
unless  it  was  i*educed  to  writing  at  the  proper  time.  Often
the  name  may  have  survived,  while  tne  body  of  a  work
was  entire^ly  changed.  Hence  when  we  see  the  S&mkhya
mentioned  by  name  in  the  Buddhist  texts,  such  as  the
Yisuddhi-m^gga  (chap.  XVII),  it  is  impossible  to  tell
whether  even  at  that  time  there  existed  a  work  on  the
SAmkhya-philosophy  in  the  form  of  Sdtras.  It  ia  clear  at
all  events  that  it  could  not  have  been  our  Samkhya-Siitras,
nor  even  the  S&mkhya-k&riklis  which  seem  to  have  super-
seded the  ancient  Siitras  early  in  the  sixth  century^  while
our  present  SiSltras  date  from  the  fourteentib.

It  might  be  possible,  if  not  to  prove,  at  ail  events  to
render  probable  the  position  assigned  here  to  Buddha's
teaching  as  subsequent  to  the  early  growth  of  philosophical
ideas  in  their  systematic  and  more  or  less  technical  form,
by  a  reference  to  the  name  assigned  to  his  mother,  whether
it  was  her  real  name  or  a  name  assigned  to  her  by  tradi-
tion. She  was  called  M4y&  or  MHylUlevt.  Considering
that  in  Buddha's  eyes  the  world  was  M&ya  or  illusion,  it
seems  more  likely  that  the  name  was  given  to  his  mother
by  early  tradition,  and  that  it  was  given  not  without
a  purpose.  And  if  so  this  could  only  have  been  after  the
name  of  Avidy&  (nescience)  in  the  Ved&nta^  and  of  Prakriti
in  the  Samkhya-philosophy  had  been  replaced  by  the  tech-
nical term  of  May&.  It  is  well  known  that,  in  the  old
classical  Upanishads,  the  name  of  Mkyk  never  occurs ;  and


94  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

it  is  equally  si^ificant  that  it  does  occur  in  the  later  and
more  or  less  apocryphal  Upanishads*  In  the  fiSret&svatara,
for  instance,  I,  lo,  we  read,  M&y&m  tu  Prakritim  vidy&t,
'  Let  him  know  that  PrakWti  is  M&y&  or  May&  Prakriti/
This  refers,  it  would  seem,  to  the  S&mkhya  system  in
which  Prakriti  acts  the  part  of  MA.y&  and  fascinates  the
Purusha,  till  he  turns  away  fit)m  her  and  she  ceases  to
exist,  at  all  events  as  far  as  he  is  concerned.  But  whether
in  S&mkhya  .or  Yed&nta,  M&y&  .in  its  technical  meaning
belongs  certainly  to  a  secondary  period,  and  it  might  there-
fore hd  argued  that  M&y&,  as  the  name  of  Buddha's  mother,
is  not  likely  to  have  found  a  place  in  the  Buddhistic  legend
during  the  early  period  of  Indian  philosophy,  as  repre*
sented  in  the  early  Upanishads,  and  even  in  the  Siitras  o(
these  two  prominent  schools.

There  was,  no  doubt,  a  certain  amount  of  philosophical
mnetnonic  composition  after  the  period  represented  by  the
old  Upanishads,  and  before  the  systematic  arrangement  of
the  philosophical  Siitras,  but  wliatever  may  have  existed
in  it,  is  for  ever  lost  to  us.  We  can  see  this  clearly  in  the
ease  of  the  Brihaspati-philoeophy.

Thm  SrtlUMipttfei-Pliilosophy.

BWhaspati  is  no  doubt  a  very  perplexing  character.  Bjb
name  is  given  as  that  of  the  author  of  two  Vedic  hymns,
X,  7i)^X,  7^,  a  distinction  being  made  between  a  Brihas-
pati  AAgirasa  and  a  Brihaspati  Laukya  (Lauk&yatika?).
His  name  is  well  known  also  as  one  of  the  Vedic  deities.
In  Bv.  Vni,  96,  15,  we  read  that  Indra,  with  Brihaspati
as  his  ally,  overcame  the  godless  people  (ddevlA  viaiJi).  He
is  afterwards  quoted  as  the  author  of  a  law-book,  decidedly
modem,  which  we  still  possess.  Brihaspati  is  besides  the
name  of  the  planet  Jupiter,  and  of  the  preceptor  or  Purohita
of  the  gods,  so  that  Brihaspati-purohita  has  oecome  a  recog-
nised name  of  Indra,  as  having  Brihaspati  for  his  C^xohita
or  chief  priest  and  helper.  It  seems  strange,  therefore,
that  the  same  name,  that  of  the  preceptor  of  the  gods,
flhould  have  been  chosen  as  the  name  of  the  representative
of  the  most  unorthodox,  atheistical,  and  sensualisjbic  system
of  philosophy  in  India.    We  may  possibly  account  for  this


THB   BJ?/HA8PATI-PHIL0S0PH1k  95

by  referring  to  the  Brfthmatias  and  Upaninhads,  in  which
Bribaspaii  is  represented  as  teaching  the  demons  his  per-
nicious doctrines,  not  for  their  benefit,  bnt  for  their  own
destruction.    Thus  we  read,  Maitr&yatia  Up.  7,  9 : —

'  Brzhaspati,  having  become  or  having  assumed  the  shape
of  iSfukra,  brought  forth  that  false  knowledge,  for  the  safety
of  Indra  and  for  the  destruction  of  the  Asuras  (demons).
By  it  they  show  that  good  is  evil  and  that  evil  is  good,
and  they  say  that  this  new  law,  which  upsets  the  Veda
and  the  other  sacred  books,  should  be  studied  (by  the
Asuras,  the  demons).  That  being  so,  it  is  said,  Let  no  man
(bnt  the  demons  only)  study  that  false  knowledge,  for  it  is
wrong ;  it  is,  as  it  were,  barren.  Its  reward  lasts  only  as
long  as  the  pleasure  lasts,  as  with  one  who  has  fallen
from  his  station  (caste).  Let  that  false  doctrine  not  be
attempted,  for  thus  it  is  said  ^ : —

1.  Widely  divergent  and  opposed  are  these  two,  the  one
known  as  false  knowledge,  the  other  as  knowledge.  I
(Tama)  believe  NaAdketas  to  be  possessed  of  a  desire  for
knowledge ;  even  many  pleasures  do  not  tempi  him  away.

2.  He  who  knows  at  the  same  time  both  the  imperfect
knowledge  (of  ritual)  and  the  perfect  knowledge  (of  Self),
crosses  death  by  means  of  the  imperfect,  and  obtains,  im*
mortality  by  means  of  the  perfect  knowledge'.

3.  Those  who  are  wrapt  up  in  imperfect  knowledge
fancy  themselves  alone  wise  and  learned,  they  wander
about  floundering  and  deceived,  like  the  blind  led  by  a  man
who  is  himself  blind  \'

And  again  :—

'  The  gods  and  the  demons,  wishing  to  know  the  Self,
went  once  into  the  presence  of  Brahman  (their  father
Pra^pati  *).  Having  bowed  *bef ore  him,  they  said :  **  O
blessed  one,  we  wish  to  know  the  Self,  do  thou  tell  us  I"
Thus,  after  considering,  he  thought,  these  demons  believe
in  a  difference  of  the  Atman  (from  themselves),  and  there-
fore a  ve?y  different  Self  was  taught  to  them.  On*  that
Self  these  deluded  demons  take  their  stand,  clinging  to  it,
destroying  the  true  boat  of  salvation,  and  praising  untruth,

»  Kathfx  UiMinishiid  II,  4.  '  Vaiy.  Up.  IT.

•  Kuth,  Up.  II,  5.  ♦  Khdnd.  Up.  VIII,  8.


96  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

What  is  untrue  they  see  as  true,  like  jugglery.  But  in
reality,  what  is  said  in  the  Vedas,  that  is  true.  What  is
said  in  the  Yedas,  on  tiiat  the  wise  take  their  stand.
Therefore  let  no  Br&hman  study  what  is  not  in  the  Vedas,
or  this  will  be  the  result  (as  in  the  case  of  the  demons).'

This  passage  is  curious  in  several  respects,. ,  First  of  all
it  is  a  clear  reference  of  one  Upanishad  to  aether,  namely
to  th&  ^A&ndogya,  in  which  this  episode  of  Brihaspati
giving  false  instruction  to  the  demons  is  more  fully  de-
tailed. Secoiully  we  see  an  alteration  which  was  evidently
made  intentionally.  In  the  iTA&ndogya  Upanishad  it  is
PrapHpati  himself  who  imparts  false  knowledge  of  the
Atman  to  the  Asuras,  while  in  the  Maitr&yaTia  Upanishad
Brihaspati  takes  his  place.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  BWhas-
pati  was  introduced  in  the  later  Upanishad  in  order  to
take  the  place  of  Pra^&pati,  because  it  was  felt  to  be
wrong  that  this  highest  deity  should  ever  have  misled
anybody,  even  the  demons.  In  the  JTMndogya  the  demons
who  believed  in  the  Anyat&  (otherness)  of  ^e  Atman,  that
is  to  say,  in  the  possibility  that  the  Atman  could  be  in
some  place  different  from  themselves,  were  told  to  look
for  it  m  the  person  seen  in  the  pupil  of  the  eye,  or  in  the
image  in  a  looking-glass,  or  in  the  shadow  in  the  water.
All  this  would,  however,  refer  to  a  visible  bod^  only*
Then  Fra^&pati  goes  on  to  say  that  the  Atman  is  what
moves  about  full  of  pleasures  in  a  dream,  and  as  this
would  still  be  the  individual  man,  he  declares  at  last  that
Atman  is  What  remains  in  deep  sleep,  without  however
losing  its  own  identity.

If  then  in  the  Upanishads  already  Brihaspati  was  intro-
duced for  the  purpose  of  teaching  wrong  and  unorthodox
opinions,  we  may  possibly  be  able  to  understand  how  his
name  came  to  din^  to  sensualistic  opinions,  and  how  at
last,  however  unfairly,  he  was  held  responsible  for  them.
That  such  opinions  existed  even  at  an  earlier  time,  we
can  see  in  some  of  the  hjnxms  in  which  many  years  ago
I  pointed  out  these  curious  traces  of  an  incipient  scepticism.
In  later  Sanskrit,  a  B&rhaspatya,  or  a  follower  of  Brihas-
pati, has  come  to  mean  an  infidel  in  general.  Among  the
works  mentioned  in  the  Lalita-vistara  as  studied  by  Buddha


THE   Bi?/flA8PATI-PHIL080PHT  97

A  BArliaspatyam  is  mentioned,  but  whether  composed  in
Sfttras  or  in  metre  does  not  appear.  Besides,  it  is  weU
known  that  the  Lalita-vistara  is  rather  a  broken  reed  tc
rest  upon  for  chronological  purposes.  If  we  may  trusty
however,  to  a  scholion  of  Bh&skara  on  the  Brahma-SCitras,
he  seems  to  have  known,  even  at  that  late  time,  some
Sfttras  ascribed  to  BrihaspatiS  in  which  the  doctrines
of  the  JE'ftrv&kas,  i'e,  unbelievers,  were  contained.  But
although  such  S&tras  ma^  have  existed,  we  have  no  means
of  fixing  their  date  as  either  anterior  or  posterior  to  the
other  pnilosophic  S&tras.  P&nini^  knew  of  Sfttras  whidi
ore  lost  to  us,  and  some  of  them  may  be  safely  referred
to  the  time  of  Buddha.  He  also  in  quoting  Bhikehu-SAtras
and  Na^a^fttras,  mentions  (IV,  3,  no)  uie  author  of  tiie
former  as  P£.r&£arya,  of  the  latter  as  jSil&lin.  As  P&ift-
«ary&  is  a  name  of  Vy&sa,  the  son  of  Par&eara,  it  has  been
supnpsed  that  P&nini  meant  by  Bhikshu-SAtras,  the.
Brahma-Sfttras ',  sometimes  ascril^  to  Yjr&sa,  which  we
still  possess.  That  would  fix  their  date  about  the  fififh
century  B.O.,  and  has  been  readily  accepted  therefore  by
all  who'  wish  to  daim  the  greatest  possible  antiquity  for
the  philoeophical  literature  of  India.  But  Pftrftsarya  would
hardlv  have  been  chosen  as  the  titular  name  «of  Vy&sa;
and  though  we  should  not  hesitate  to  f^ssign  to  the  doc-
trines of  the  Ved&nta  a  place  in  the  fifth  century  B»o.,  nay
even  earlier,  we  cannot  on  such  slender  authority  do  the
same  for  the  Sdtras  themselves.

When  we  meet  elsewhere  with  the  heterodox  doctrines
off  Brihaspati,  they  are  expressed  in  verse,  as  if  taken  from
a  EftrikA  rather  than  from  SAtraa  They  possess  a,  peculiar .
interest  to  us,  because  they  would  show  us  that  India,
which  is  geAerallv  considered  as  the  home  of  all  that  is
most  e^iritual  and  idealistic,  was  by  no  means  devoid-  of
sensuf  PBtic  philosophers.  But  thoug^'it  is  di£9cult  to  say
how  old  sucn  theories  may  have  been  in  India  it  is  certain
that,  as  soon  fis  we  get  any  coherent  toeatisea  on  philosophy,
sensua^istic  opinions  cit>p  up  among  them;

Of  course  the  doctrines  of  Buddha  wbuld  be  called  /

sceptical  and  atheistic  by  the  Brahmans,  and  iTarv&ka  as

*  Colebrooke,  U,  499.  'See  before^  p.  B6»


98  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

well  as  NAstika  are  names  freely  aj^lied  to  the  BuddUsts.
Bat  the  doctrines  of  Brthafspati,  as  far  as  we  know  them,
go  far  beyond  Bnddhism,  md  joiav  be  said  to  be  hostile
to  all  religious  feelings,  while  Budoha's  teaching  was  both
religious  and  philosophical,  though  the  lines  that  separate
philosophy  and  religion  in  India  are  very  faint.

There  are  some  tenets  of  the  followers  of  Brihaspati
which  seem  to  indicate  the  existienoiB  of  other  schools  of
philosophy,  by  their  side.  The  B&rhaspatyas  speak  as
if  being  inter  parm,  they  differ  from  others  as  oth^B
differed  from  them.  Traces  of  an  oppositicm  against  the
religion  of  the  Vedas  (Slautsa)  appear  in  the  hymns,  the
Br&ma^as,  and  the  Siitras,  and  .to  i^ore  th^n  would  give
us  an  entirely  false  idea  of  the  relupous  and  philosophical
battles  and  battle-fields  of  ancient  £idia.  As  viewed  from
a  Br&hmanic  point  of  view,  and  we  have  no  other,  the
opposition  represented  by  Brihaspatd  and  others  may  seem
insigilificant,  but  the  very  name  giveii  to  these  heretics
would  seem  to  imply  that  their  doctrineis  had  met  witii
a  world-wide  acceptance  (Lok&yatikae).  Another  name,
that  of  N&stika,  is  giveii  to  them  as  saying  No  to  everv-.
thing  except  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  particularly  to  tne
evidence  or  the  Vedas,  which,  furiously  enough,  was  called
by  the  Ved&ntists  Pratyaksha,  that  is,  self-evident,  like
sense-perception.

These  N^atikas,  a  name  not  applicable  to  mere  dissenters,
but  to  out  and  out  nihilists  only,  a^re  interesting  to  us  from
a  historical  point  of  view,  because  in  arguing  against  other
philosophies,  they  prove,  ipso  facto,  the  existence  of  ortho-
dox philosophical  systems  before  their  time.  The  recog-
nised!^ schocds  of  Indian  philosophy  could  tolerate  much ;
they  were  tolerant,  as  we  shall  see,  even  towards  a  qualified
atheism,  like  that  of  the  S&mkhya.  But  they  had  nothing
but  hatred  and  contempt  for  the  N&stikas,  and  it  is  for
that  very  reason,  and  on  account  of  the -strong  feelii^
of  aversion  which  they  excited,  that  it  seemed  to  me  right
that  their  philosophy  should  not  be  entirely  passed  tvei
by  the  side  of  the  six  Vedic  or  orthodox  systems.

M&dhava,  in  his  Sarvadaraana-sam^raha  or  the  Epitome
of  all  philosophical  systems,  begins  with  an  account  of  the


THE   Bi?/HASPATI-PHIL080PHT.  99

N&stika  or  iT&rv&ka  system.  He  looks  upon  it  us  the
lowest  of  all,  bat  nevertheless,  as  not  to  oe  ignored  in
a  catologue^f  the  philosophical  forces  of  India.  jK'&rv&ka
(not  JTarvl^JEa)  is  given  as  the  name  of  a  Bd^kshasa,  and
he  is  treated  as  a  historical  individual  to  whom  Brihas-
pati  or  Vy»spati  delivered  his  doctrines.  The  name  of
JT&rv&ka  is  clearly  connected  with  that  of  £'&rva,  and  this
is  given  as  a  synonym  of  Buddha  by  Bftla^&strin  in  the
Pref^Kse  to  His  edition  of  the  K&6ik&  (p.  a).  He  is  repre-
sented as  a  teacher  of  the  Lok&vata  or  world-wide  system,
if  that  is  the  meaning  originally  intended  by  that  word.
A  short  account  of  this  system  is  given  in  the  Ptabodha-
Jbandrodaya  27,  18,  in  the  following  words:  'The  Lok&yata
system  in  which  the  senses  alone  form  an  authority,  in
which  the  elements  are  earth,  water,  fire,  and  wind  (not
Akftsa  or  ether),  in  which  wealth  and  enjoyment  form  the
ideals  of  man,  in  which  the  elements  think,  the  other  World
is  denied,  and  death  is  the  end  of  all  things.'  This  name
Lok&yata  occurs  already  in  P&Tiini's  Qatia  Ukthddi  It
shdold  be  noted  however,  that  HemaA»ndra  distinguishes
between  Bftrhaspatya  or  Nastika,  and  Jr&rvftka  or  Lok|^
yatika,  though  he  does  not  fell  us  which  he  considers  the
exact  points  on  which  th^  two  are  supposed  to  have
differed  The  Buddhists  use  Lokftyata  for  philosophy  in
general.  The  statement  that  the  Lok&yatas  admitted  but
one  Pram&na,  i.  a  authority  of  knowledge,  namely  sensuous
perception,  shows  clearly  that  there  must  have  been  other
philosophical  systems  already  in  existence.  We  shall  see
that  the  Vaiaeshika  acknowledged  two,  perception  (Prat-
yaksha)  and  inference  (Anumtlna) ;  the  S&mkhya  three,
adding  trustworthy  affirmation  ( Aptav&kya) ;  the  Nyd^ya
four,  adding  comparison  iUpam&na);  the  two  Mtm&TnsAs
six,  adding  presumption  (Arth&patti)  and  privation  (Abhft-
va).  Of  these  and  others  we  shall  have  to  speak  here*
after.  Even  what  seems  to  us  so  natural  an  idea  as  that
of  the  four  or  five  elements,  required  some  time  to  develon,
as  we  see  in  the  history  of  the  Qreek  aroixcta,  and  yet  sudi
an  idea  was  evidently  quite  familiar  to  the  iTftrv&kas.
While  other  systems  admitted  five,  i.e.  earth,  water,  fire,
air,  and  ether,  they  admitted  four  only,  excluding  ether,

H  2


ICX>  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

probably  because  it  was  invisible.  In  tbe  XJponiahads  we
see  traces  of  an  even  earlier  triad  of  elemwta  All  this
shows  the  philosophical  activity  of  the  Hindus  hom  the
earliest  times,  and  exhibits  to  us  the  JT&rv&kas  as  denying
rather  what  had  been  more  or  less  settled  before  their  time,
than  as  adding  any  new  ideas  of  their  own.

So  it  is  again  with  regard  to  the  soiiL  Not  only  philo-
sophers, but  every  Arya  in  India  had  a  word  for  sotil,  and
never  doubted  tliat  there  was  something  in  man  different
from  the  visible  body.  The  JTftrv&kas  only  denied  this.
They  held  that  what  was  called  soul  was  not  a  thine  by
its^,  but  was  simply  the  body  over  again.  They  neld
that  it^was  the  body  that  f«tt,  that  saw  and  heard,  that
remembered  and  thought,  though  they  saw  it  every  day
rotting  away  and  decomposing,  as  if  it  never  had  been.  By
such  opinions  they  naturally  came  in  conflict  with  religion
even  more  than  with  philosophy.  We  do  not  know  how
they  accounted  for  the  evolution  of  oonsdousness  and  in-
tellect out  of  mere  flesh,  except  that  they  took  refuge  with
a  simile,  iappealin^  to  the  intoxicating  power  that  can  be
developed  oy  mixmg  certain  ingredients^  which  by  them-
selves are  not  intoxicating,  as  an  analogy  to  the  production
of  soul  from  body.
*  Thus  we  read: —

'  There  are  four  elements,  earth,  water,  fire,  and  air,

J^dftom  these  four  elements  alone  is  mtelligenoe  pro-
duced —

Just  like  the  intoxicating  power  from  Einwa,  &c^  mixed
together; —  .  .^

Since  in  *"  I  am  fat,"  **  I  am  lean,"  these  attributes  abide
in  the  same  subject,

And  since  fatness,  &c,  resides  only  in  the  body,  it  alone
is  the  soul  and  no  other»

And  such  phrases  as  "  my  body "  are  only  significant
metaphorically.'

In  this  way  the  soul  seems  to  have  been  to  them  the
body  qualified  by  tibie  attribute  of  intelligence,  and  therefore
supposed  to  perish  with  the  body.  Holding  this  opinion,  it
is  no  wonder  that  they  should  have  considered  the  highest
end  of  man  to  consist  in  sensual  enjoyment,  and  that  they


THJB.fiiK/BASFATI-PfllLOSOHl^.  lOI

flhoidid  liave  accepted  pain  simplv  as  on  inevitable  oon-
ooBiitaxit  of  pleasura

A  verse  is  quoted:—

'The  pleasure  whieh  arises  to  men  from  contact  with
aeofldble  objects,

Is  to  be  relinqnished  as  accompanied  by  pain — such  is
the  wamiii^  of  fools ;

The  hemes  of  paddy,  rich  -with  the  finest  white  grains,

What  man,  seeking  his  true  interest,  wonld  fling  them
away,  because  covered  with  husks  and  dust  ^  t '

From  all  thilB  we  see  that,  though  fundamental  philo-
sophiisal  principles  are  involved,  the  chief  character  of  the
KirvkkA  system  was  practical,  rather  ithan  metaphysical,
teaching  utilitarianism  and  crude  hedonism  in  tibe  most
outspoken  way.  It  is  a  pity  that  all  authoritative  books
of  these  materialistic  philosophers  should  be  lost,  as  they
would  px>bably  have  allowed  us  a  deeper  insight  into  the
early  hibtpry  of  Indian  philosophy  than  the  ready-made
fnannals  of  the  six  Daraanas  on  which  we  have  chiefly  to
rel^.  The  following  verses  preserved  by  M&dhava  in  his
Epitome*  are  nearly  all  we  possess  of  the  teaching  ol
BriluuBpati  and  his  followers: —

'  fire  is  hot,  water  cold,  and  the  eir  feels  cool ;

By  whom  was  this  variety  made  1  (we  do  not  know),
therefore  it  must  have  come  from  their  own  nature
(Svabh&vaV

Brihaspati  himself  is  held  responsible  for  the  following
■invective: —  .

'There  is  no  paradise,  no  deliverance,  and  certainly  no
Self  in  another  world.

Nor  are  the  acts  of  the  Asramas  (stations  in  life)  or  the
castes,  prodtictive  of  rewarda

The  Agmhotra,  the  three  Yedas,  the  three  staves  (carried
by  ascetics)  and  smearing^  oneself  with  ashes.

They  are  the  mode  of  life  made  by  their  creator*  for
those  who  are  devoid  of  sense  and  makliness,

^  Sm  for  thep«  ▼•net  CoweU  and  Googh'i  inmslation  of  ^e  Sftm<Unuui-

*  DhAtrf,  creator,  ean  here  be  ii4ed  ironicullj  onlj,  instead  of  SvabliAYaj
eraatww.


I02  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

If  a  victim  slain  at  the  6yotidi^oina  will  go  to  heaven,

Why  is  not  his  own  father  killed  there  by  the  saerifioer?

If  the  iSr&ddha-offerin^  gives  pleasure  to  beings  that,  are
dead,

Then  to  give  a  viaticv/m  to  people  who  travel  here  on
earth,  would  be  useless.

If  those  who  are  in  heaven  derive  pleasure  from  offer-
ings,

Then  why  not  give  food  here  to  people  while  they  are
standing  on  the  roof  ?

As  long  .as  he  lives  let  a  man  live  happily ;  after  borrow-
ing money,  let  him  drink  Qhee,

How  can  there  be  a  return  of  the  body  after  it  has  onoe
been  reduced  to  ashes  ?

If  he  who  has  left  the  body  goes  to  another  world,

Why  does  he  not  come  back  again  perturbed  by  love  of
his  relations  1

Therefore  funeral  ceremcmies  for  the  dead  were  ordered
by  the  Br^imans.

As  a  means  of  livelihood,  nothing  else  is  known  any-
i^here.

The  three  makers  of  the  Vedas  were  buffoons,  knaves,
and  demons.

The  speech  of  the  Pandits  is  (unintelligible),  like  6ar-
phari  TurpharL

The  obscene  act  there  (at  the  horse  sacrifice)  to  be  per-
formed by  the  queen  has  been

Proclaimed  by  knaves,  and  likewise  other  things  to  be
taken  in  hand.

The  eating  of  flesh  was  likewise  ordered  by  demons.'

This  is  Certainly  very  strong  language,  as  strong  as  any
that  has  ever  been  used  by  ancient  or  modem  materialists.
It  is  well  that  we  should  know  how  old  and  how  widely
spread  this  materialism  was,  for  without  it  we  should
hardly  understand  the  efforts  that  were  made  on  the  other
side  to  counteract  it  by  establishing  the  true  sources  or
measures  of  knowledge,  the  Prama?tas,  and  other  funda-
mental truths  which  were  considered  essential  both  for
religion  and  for  philosophy.  The  idea  of  orthodoxy,  how-
ever, is  very  different  m  India  from  what  it  has  been


I

THB  Bi^/flASPATI-PHILOSOFHl^.  lOJ

^laewhera  We  ahall  find/  philcNsophers  in  India  who  deny
the  existence  of  a  personal  god  or  t«vara»  and  who,  never-
theless, were  tolerated  as  orthodox  as  l<Hig  as  they  recog-
nised the  authority  of  the  Veda,  and  tried  to  faring  their
doctrines  into  harmonv  with  Yedic  texts.  It  is  this  denial
of  the  authority  of  the  Veda  which,  in  the  eyes  of  the
Br&hmans,  staof^  Buddha  at  once  as  a  heretic,  and  drove
him  to  found  a  new  religion  or  brotherhood,  while  those.
who  followed  the  S&mkhya,  and  who  on  manyimportani
points  did  not  differ  much  from  him,  remained  secure
within  the  pale  of  orthodoxy;  Some  of  the  chaiges
brought  by  the  B&rhaqpatyas  against  the  Brdhmans  who
foUowed  tiie  Veda  are  the  same  which  the  followers  of
Buddha  brought  against  them.  Considering  therefore,  that
on  the  vital  questicm  of  the  authority  of  the  Veda  the
S&mkhya  agrees,  however  iaconsistenuv,  with  orthodox
Brfthmanism  and  diffeirs  from  th^  Buddhists,  it  would  be
far  easier  to  prove  that  Buddha  derived  his  ideas  from
Brihaspati  than  from  £apila»  the  reputed  founder  of  the
S&mkhya.  If  we  are  right  in  the  description  we  have
given  of  the.  unrestrained  and  abundant  growth  of  philo-
sophical ideas  in  ancdent  India,  the  idea  of  borroyring,  so
natural  to  us,  seems  altogether  out  of  place  in  India.
A  wild  mass  of  guesses  at  truth  was  floating  in  the  air,
and  there  was  no  controlling  authority  whatever,  not  even,
as  far  as  we  know,  iMiy  biiraing  public  opinion  to  produce
anything  like  order  in  ifc  Hence  we  have  as  little  iright
to  maintain  that  Buddha  borrowed  from  Eapila  as  that
Kapila  borrowed  from  Buddha.  No  one  would  say  that
the  Hindus  borrowed  the  idea  of  buildii^g  ships  from  tlie
Phenicians,  or  that  ol  building  Stiipas  from  the  Egvptians.
In  India  we  mbvein  a  world  different  from  that  which  we
are  accustomed  to  in  Qreece,  Bonie,  or  Modem  Europe,  and
we  need  not  rush  at  once  to  the  oondusion  that,  because
similar  opinions  prevail  in  Buddhism  and  in  the  S&mkhya-
pliilosophy  of  Kapila,  therefore  the  former  must  have  bor-
rowed mm  the  latter,  or,  as  some  hold,  the  latter  from  the
former.

Thouflh  we  can  well  imagine  what  the  mixit  of  the
philoso^y  of  the  ancient  Indian  hexetie^  wlietlier  they


t04  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

are  called  JT&rv&kas  or  Bftrhaspatyas,  may  have  been»  we
know,  unfortunately,  much  less  of  their  doctriii^  than  pf
any  other  school  of  philosophy.  They  are  to  us  no  more
ibka  names,  such  as  the  names  of  YAgf^vavalkya^  Baikya^  or
any  other  ancient  leaders  of  Indian  thought  mentioned  in
the  Upanishads,  and  cmiited  there  with  certain  utterances.
We  know  a  few  of  the  conclusions  at  whieh  they  arrived,
but  of  the  processes  by  which  they  arrived  at  them  we
know  next  to  nothing.*  What  we  may  learn  from  thedo
utterances  is  that  a  brge  mass  of  philosophical  thought
must  have  existed  in  India  long  be|ore  Uiere  was  any
attempt  at  dividing  it  into  six  well-defined  channels  of
systematic  philosophy,  or  reducing  it  to  writing.  Even
when  the  names  of  certain  individuals,  such  as  (?aimini,
Eapila,  and  others,  are  given  us  as  the  authoiB  of  certain
systems  of  philosophy,  we  must  not  imagine  that  they  were
the  original  creatcurs  of  a  philosophy  in  the  sense  in  whieh
Plato  and  Aristotle  seem  to  have  oeen  sa

It  cannot  be  urged  too  strongly  that  there  existed  in
India  a  large  common  fund  of  philosophical  thought  which,
like  lanmiage;^  belonged  to  no  one  in  particular,  but  was  like
the  air  breathed  by  every  living  ana  thinking  man.  Thus
only  can  it  be  explained  that  we  find  a  number  of  ideas  in
all,  or  nearly  all,  the  systems  pf  Indian  philosophy  which
all  philosophers  seem  to  take  simply  for  granted,  and
which  belong  to  no  one  school  in  piurtieular.

1.    M^tampvinilioidii^BftmaAK.

The  best  known  of  these  ideas,  which  belong  to  India
rather  than  to  any  individual  philosopher,  is  that  which
is  known  under  thb  name  of  Metempsychosis.  This  is
a  Qreek  Word,  like  Metensomatosis,  but  without  any
literairy  authority  in  Greek.  It. corresponds  in  meaning
.  to  the  SansKrit  Sams&ra,  and  is  rendered  in  German  by
SeelenwaTiderung.  To  a  Hindu  the  idea  that  the  souls
of  men  migrated  after  death  into  new  bodies  of  living
beings,  of  animals,  nay,  even  of  plants,  is  so  self-evident  thai


IMMOBTAUTT  OV  THB  SOUL  IO5

•  •    •

it  was  Uardly  ever  qaestioned.  We  never  meet  with  Aoy
attempt  at  provimr  or  disprovinir  it  amone  the  prominent
write^  of  aiurie^  or  m^em  ^times.  £>  early  as  the
period  of  the  Upanishads  we  hear  of  hmnan  souls  being,
reborn  both  in  axumal  and  in  vegetable  bodies.  In
Qreeoe  the  same  opinion  was  held  by  Empedocles;  but
whether  he  borrowed  this  idea  from  &e  E^pti'ans,  as  is
commonly  supposed  to  have  been  the  case,  or  whether
Pythagoras  and  his  teacher  Pherecydes  learnt  it  in  India,
£b.  a  question  still  hotly  discuissed.  To  me  it  seems  that
such  a  theory  was  so  natural  that  it  might  perfectly  well
have  arisen  mdependently  among  different  races.  Among
the  Aryan  races,  Italian,  Celtic,  and  Scythic  or  Hyper-
borean tribes  are  mentioned  as  having  entertained  a  faith
in  Metempsychosis,  nay,  traces  of  it  have  lately  been  dis-
covered even  among  the  uncivilised  inhabitants  of  America,
Africa,  and  Eastern  Asia.  And  why  not  ?  In  India  certainly
it  developed  spontaneously ;  and  if  this  was  so  in  India,  why
not  in  other  couptries,  particularly  among  races  belonging
to  the  same  linguistic  stock)  It  should  be  remembered,
however,  that  some  systems,  particularly  the  S&mkhya-  *
philo9opay,do  not  admit  what  we  commonly  understand  by
Sedenwanderung.  If  we  translate  the  S&mkhya  Purusha
by  Soul  instead  of  Self,  it  is  not  the  Puruslia  that  migrates,
but  the  Sftkshmanfearira,.the  subtile  body.  The  Self  remains
always  intact,  a  mere  looker  <»i,  and  its  highest  purpose  is
this  recognition  that  it  is  above  and  apart  from  anything
that  has  9pning  fropa  Prakr/ti  or  nature*.

a.    XmmorUlitjr  of  tlM  8011L

The  idea  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  also  should  be
included  in  what  was  the  common  property  of  all  Indian
philosophers.  This  idea  wa«r  so  completely  taken  for
granted  that  we  look  in  vain  for  any  elaborate  arguments
m  support  of  it.  Mortality  with  the  Hindus  is  so  entirely
resinrted  to  the  body  which  decays  and  decomposes  before
our  very  eyes,  that  such  an  expression  as  Atmano  'mWta-.
^am,  immortality  ot  the  Self ,  sounds  almost  tautological  in
No  doubt,  the  followers  of  Brihaspati  would


f06  INDIAN  FHILOSOfHI.

.'      •

deny  a  future  life,  but  all  the  other  adiools  rftther  lesr
than  doubt  a  future  life,  a  long^oontinued  metenmyehoeis ;
and  as  to  a  final  annihilation  of  the  true  S^,  that  would
sound  to  Indian  eard  as  a  contradiction  in  itself.  Inhere
are  scholars  so  surprised  at  this  UTiwayering  belief  in  a
future  and  an  eternal  life  among  the  people  of  India,  that
bhey  have  actually  tried  to  trace 'it  back  to  a  belief  sup-
posed to  be  universal  among  savages  who  thought  that
man  left  a  ghost  behind  who  might  assume  t)ie  body  of  an
animal  oi^  even  the  shape  of  a  tree.  Hiis  is  a  mare  fancy,
and  though  it  cannot  of  course '  be  dii^roved,  it  does  not
thereby  acquire  any  right  to  ouv  consideration.  Besides,
why  should  the  Aryas  have  had  to  learn  lesaons  from
savages,  as  they  at  one  time  were  no  doubt  savages  them*
selves,  and  heed  not  have  forgotten  the  so-called  wisdom
of  savages  as  little  as  the  iSMras  themselves  from  whom
they  are  supposed  to  have  learnt  it?

All  Indian  philosophers  have  been  charged .  with  pe»«
simism,  and  in  some  cases  such  a  charge  may  seep  well
founded,  but  not  in  all.  People  who  derived  tl^eir  naine
for  good  from  a  word  which  originally  me^mt  nothing  but
being  or  real,  Sat,  are  not  likely  to  have  looked  upon  what
is  as  what  ought  not  to  be.  Indian  philoaopheiB  ^re  by
no  means  dwelling  for  ever  on  the  miseries  of  life.  Th&y
are  not  always  whining  and  protesting  that  life  is  not
worth  living.  That  is  not  their  pessimism.  They  simply
state  that  they  received  the  first  impulse  to  philosophical
reflection  from  the  fact  that  there  is  suffering  m  the  world.
They  evidently  thought  that  in  a  perfect  world  sufiering
had  no  place,  that  it  is  something  anomalous,  something
that  ougnt  at  all  events  to  be  accounted  for,  and,  if  possible,
overcome.  Pain,  certainly,  seems  to  be  an  imperfection,
and,  as  such,  may  well  have  caused  the.  Question  why  it
existed,  and  how  it  could  be  annihilated.  But  this  is  not
the  disposition  which  we  are  accustomed  to  call  pessimism.
Indian  philoisophy  contains  no  outci^  against  divine  injus-
tice,  and  in  no  way  encoura,^  suicidal  ^peditots.  They
would,  in  fact,  be  of  no  avail,  because,  according  ta  Indian


ras8iMi8ii.  107

yjowgy  the  same  troubles  and  the  same  problems,  would
have  to  be  faced  a^n  aud  again  in  another  life.  Con-
sidering that  the  aun  of  all  Indian  philosophy  waa  the
removal  01  suffering,  which  was  caused  by  nescience^  and
the  attainment  of  the  highest  happiness,  which  waa  pro-
duced by  knowledge,  we  sLpuld  have  more  right  to  csiil  it
eudsBinonistic  than  pessimisUc

It  is  interesting,  however,  to  observe  the  unanimity  with
which  the  principal  systems  of  philosophy  in  India,  nay
some  of  their  religious  systems  also,  start  Irom  the  oonviq-
tion*that  the  world  is  full  of  suffering,  and  that  this
suffering  should  he  aocounted  for  and  removed.  Thiis
seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  principal  impulses*  if  ifot
the  principal  impulse  to  philosophical  thought  in  India.
If  we  begin  wi4  (?aimmT.  we  cannot  expwst  much  leal
pbilosopliy  from  his  P£lrva-Mtm&ms&,  which  is  chiefly  con-
ceroed  with  ceremonial  questions,  such  as  sacrifices,  &a
But  though  these  sacrifices  are  represented  as  being  the
means  of  a  certain  kind  of  beatitude,  and  so  far  as  serving
to  .dinunish  or  extinguish  the  ordinary  afflictions  of  men,
they  were  never  auppbsed  to  secure  the  highest  .beatitude
for  which  all  the  otner  philosophers  were  striving.  The
Uttara-Mimd^ns^  and  all  the  other  philosophies  take  much
higher  ground.  B&dar&ya?^  teaches  that  the  cause  of  all
evil  is  Avidy&  or  nescience,  and  that  it  is  the  object  of  his
philosophy  to  remove  that  nescience  by  meanii  of  science
(Vidy&^  and  thus  to  bring  about  that  true  knowledge  of
Brahman,  whieh  is  also  the  highest  bliss  (Taitt.  Up.  11,  ly
The^  S&mkhya-philosophy,  at  least  such  as  we  know  %t
from  the  Kfijik&s  and  the  Sfttras,  not  however  the  Tattva-
sam&sa,  begins  at  once  with  the  re(X)gmtion  of  the  existence
of  the  three  kinds  of  suffering,  and  proclaims  as  its  highest
object  the  complete  cessation  of  all  pain ;  while  the  x^oga
philosojphers,  alter  pointing  out  the  way  to  medit-ative
absorptir»n  (Sam&dhi),  declare  that  this  is  the  best  means  of
escaping  from  all  earthly  troubles  (II,  2),  and,  in  the  end,
of  Teaching  Kaivalya  or  pei^ect  freedom.  The  Yaifieshika
promises  to  its  follower^  knowledge  of  truth,  and  through
it  final  cessation  of  all  pain ;  and  even  Gotama's  philosophy
of  logic  holds  out  in  its  fiirst  Siitra  complete  blessedness


I06  INDIAN   FHILCNSOPHY.

(Apavarga)  as  ito  highest  reward,  which  is  obtained  by  the
complete  destruction  of  all  pain  by  means  of  Ic^c.  That
Buddha's  religion  had  the  same  origin,  a  clear  perception
of  human  sufiering  and  its  causes,  and  had  the  same  object,
the  annihilaticMi  of  DuAkha  or  suffering  (Nirv&iia),  is  too
well  known  to  require  further  elucidation,  bui  it  diould
be  remembered  that  other  systems  also  have  one  and  the
same  name  for  the  state  to  which  they  aspire,  whether
Nirv&TiA  or  DuAkhAnta,  i.  e.  end  of  DuAkha,  pain.

If  therefore  all  Indian  philosophy  professes  its  ability  to
remove  pain,  it  can  hardly  be  calledi  pessimistic  in  the
ordinary  sense  of  the  word.  Even  physical  pain,  though
it  oGmnot.  be  removed  from  the  body,  ceases  to  affect  tne
soul,  as  soon  as  the  Self  has  fully  ^realised  its  aloofeess
from  the  body,  while  all  mental  pain,  bein^  traced  back  to
our  worldly  attachments,  would  vanish  by  freeing  our-
selves from  the  desires  which  cause  tiiese  attachments.
The  cause  of  all  suffering  having  been  discovered  in  our-
selveis,  in  our  works  and  thoughts,  whether  in  this  or  in
a  previous  existence,  all  clamour  against  divine  injustice  is
silenced  at  once.  We  are  what  we  have  made  ourselves,
we  suffer  what,  we  have  done,  we  reap  what  we  have  sown,
and  it  is  tibe  sowing  of  ^ood  seed,  though  without  any  hope
of  a  rich  harvest,  tnat  is  represented  as  the  chief  purpose
of  a  philosopher's  life  on  earth.

Besides  this  conviction  that  all  suffering  can  be  removed
by  an  insight' into  its  nature  and  origin,  there  are  some
other  ideas  which  must  be  traced  back  to  tiiat  rich  treasuiy
of  thought  which  was  open  to  eveiy  thinking  man  in  India.
These  common  ideas  assumed,  no  doubt,  different  guises  in
different  systems,  but  this  ought  not  to  deceive  us,  and  a
little  reflection  allows  us  to  perc<£ve  their  common  source.
Thus,  when  the  cause  of  suffering  is  inauired  for,  they  all
have  but  one  answer  to  ^ve,  thousfh  under  different  names,
llie  Ved&nta  gives  Avidy&,  nescience,  the  S&mkhya,  Avi-
veka, .  non-discrimination,  the  Nyiya,  MithyA^r^Ana,  false
knowledge,  and  these  various  aberration^  fiom  knowledge
are  genenilly  represented  as  Bandha  or  bondage,  to  be
broken  again  by  means  of  that  true  knowledge  which  is
supplied  by  the  various  systems  of  philosophy.


KABWAN.  109


4.

•

The  next  idea  that  seema  ingrained  in  the  Indian  mind,
and  therefore  finds  expression  in  all  th9  systems  of  philo*
sophy,  is  a  belief  in  Karmon  deed,  that  i&,  the  continuous
working  of  every  thought,  word,  and  deed  through  all
ages.  '  All  works,  good  pr  bad,  all  must  bear  S^d  do  bear
fruit,'  is  a  sentiment  never  doubted  by  any  Hind\il.  whether
to-day  or  thousands  of  years  ago  K

And  the  same  eternity  which  is  claimed  for  works  and
their  results  is  claimed  for  the  soul  also,  only  with  ihis
difference,  that  while  works  will  cease  to  work  when  rea!
freedom  has  been  obtained,  the  soul  itself  continues  after
the  obtainment  of  freedom  or  final  beatitude.  The  idea  of
the  soul  ever  coming  to  ai^  end  is  ao  strange  to  the  Indian
?mnd  that  there  seemed  to  be  no  necessiw  for  anything
like  proofs  of  immortality,  so  common  in  European  philo-
sophy. Knowing  what  is  meant  by.  '  to  be,'  the  idea  that
'  to  be /  could  ever  become  '  not  to  be '  seems  to.  have  been
impossible  to  the  mind  of  the  Hindus.  If  by  'to.  be'  is
meant  SamsAra  or  the  world,  however  long  it  may  last,
then  Hindu  philosophers  would  never  look  upon  it  as  real
It  never  was,  it  never  is,  and  never  will  be.  Length  of
time,  however  enormous,  ifi  nothing  in  the  eyes  of  Hindu
philosophers.  To  reckon  a  thousand  years  as  one  day  would
not  satisfy  them.  They  represent  length  of  ^ime  by  much
bplder  similes,  such  as  when  a  man  once  in  eVBty  thousand

J  ears  passes  his  silken  kerchief  over  the  chain  of  the  Hima-
lyan  mountains.  By  the  time  he  has  completely  wiped
them  out  by  this  process  the  world  or  Sams&ra  may  indeed
come  to  an  end,  but  even  then  eteniity  and  reality  lie  fair
beyond.  In  order  to  get  an  easier  hold  of  this  eternity^
Oxe  very  popular  idea  of  Rralayas,  i  e.  destructions  or
absorptions  of  the  whole  world,  has  been  invented.  Accord-
ing to  the  Vedftnta  there  occurs  at  the  end  of  each  Ealpa
a  !PraJaya  or  dissolution  of  the  universe,  and  Brahman  is
tiien  reduced  to  its  causal  condition  (E[^Ti&vasth&),  con-
ii^iing  both  soul  and  matter  in  an  Avyakta  (undeveloped)

^  Ct  The  Hytteries  of  Karma,  reyealed  by  a  Brahmin  Togee,  Allaha-
bad, 1898.


no  INDIAN  imiLOSOPHT.

stated  At  the  end  of  thia^  Pralaya,  however, . Brahman
creates  or  lets  out  of  himself  a  new  world,  matter  becomes
gross  and  visible  once  more,  and  souls  become  active  and
re-embodied,  though  with  a  higher  enlightenment  (VikAsa),
and  all  this  according  to  their  previous  merits  and  demerits.
Brahman  has  then  assumed  its  new  Ed^ryftvasthd,  or  effec-
tive state  which  lasts  for  another  Kalpa.  But  all  this  refers
to  the  world  of  change  and  unreality  only.  It  is  the  world
of  Karman,  t^e  temporary  produce  of  Nescience,  pf  Avidy&,
or  Mdy&,  it  is  not  vet  real  reality.  In  the  S&mkhya-
philosophy  these  Pralayas  take  place  whenever  the  three
Qunas  of  Prakriti  recover  their  equipoise  ^,  while  creation
results  from  the  upsetting  of  the  equipoise  between  them.
What  is  truly  eternal,  is  nOt  affectea  by  the  cosmic  illusion^
or  at  least  is  so  for  a  time  only,  and  may  recover  at  any
moment  its  self-knowledge,  that  is,  its  self-being,  and  its
freedom  from  all  conditions  and  fetters.

According  to  the  Vaideshikas  Ihis  process  of  creation
and  dissolution  depends  on  the  atoms.  If  they  are  sepa-
rated, there  ensues  dissolution  (Pralaya),  if  motion  springs
up  in  them  and  they  are  qnited,  the^^  follows  what  we
call  creation.

The  idea  of  the  reabsorfitioci  of  the  world  at  the  end  of
a  Kalpa  (aeon)  and  its  emergence  again  in  the  next  Eialpa,
does  not  occur  as  yet  in  the  old  Upanishads,  nay  even  the
name  of  Sar^isiSlra  is  absent  from  them ;  and  Professor
Garbe  is  inclined  therefore  to  claim  the  idea  of  Pralaya  as
more  recent,  as  peculiar  to  the  S&mkhya-philosophy,  and
as  adopted  from  it  by  the  other  systems  \  It  may  be  so,
but  in  the  Bhagavad-gtt&  IX,  7,  the  idea  of  Pralayas,
absorptions,  and  of  Ealpas  or  ages,  of  their  end  and  their
beginning  (Ealpakshaye  and  Kalp&dau),  are  already  quite
familiar  to  the  poets.  The  exact  nature  of  the  Pralayas
differs  so  much^  according  to  different  poets  and  philo-
sophers,, that  it  is  far  more  likely  that  they  may  all  have
borrowed  it  from  a  common  source,  that  is,  from  the
popular  belief  of  those  among  whom  they  were  brought
up  and  from  whom  they  learnt  their  language  and  with  it

^  ThibMrti  Y.  &  I,  P.  zxriii  >  Sftmkhya^SQtns  VI,  49.

'  S&mkhya*PhUo8ophi«^  p.  aaz


THBBS  QVNAB.  .  Ill

the  materials  of  their  thoughts,  than  tiiat  they  should
ea^  have  invented  the  same  theory  under  slightly  varying
aspects.

s.  xsaauMiitr  of  «iM  v«dft.

One  more  common  element  presupposed  by  Indian  philo-
sophy might  be  pointed  out  in  the  recog^nition  or  the
supreme  authority  and  the  revealed  character  ascribed  to
the  Veda«  This,  in  ancient  times,  is  certainly  a  startling
idea,  familiar  as  it  may  sound  to  us  at  present.  The
Sftmkhya-philosophy  is  supposed  to  have  been  originally
without  a  belief  in  the  revealed  character  of  the  Vedas,  but
it  certainly  speaks  of  /SSruti  (Siitras  I,  5).  As  long  as  we
know  the  S&mkhya,  it  recdgnises  the  authority  of  the  Veda,
calling  it  iSiabda,  imd  appeals  to  it  even  in  matters  of  minor
importance.  It  is  important  .to  observe  that  the  distinction
between  Smti  and  Smriti,  revelation  and  tradition,  so  well
known  in  the  later  phases  of  philosophj^  is  not  to  be  found
as  yet  in  the  old  Upanishads.


The  theory  of  the  three  Gunas  also,  which  has  been
claimed  as  originally  peculiar  tQ  the  S&mkhya-philosophy,
seems  in  its  unscientific  form  to  have  been  quite  familiar
to  most  Hindu  philosophers.  The  impulse  to  everything
in  nature,  the  cause  of  all  life  and  variety,  is  ascribed  to
the  three  Guttaa  GuTia  means  quality,  but  we  are  warned
expressly  not  to  take  it,  when  it  occurs  in  philosophv,  in
the  ordinary  sense  of  quality,  but  rather  as  something
substantial  by  itself,  so  tnat  the  Gunas  become  in  fact  the
component  constituents  of  nature.  In  the  most  general
sense  they  represent  no  more. than  thesis,  antithesis,  and
something' between  the  two,  such  as  cold,  warm,  and  neither
cold  nor  warm;  good,  bad,  and  neither  good  nor  bad;
bright,  dark,  and  neither  bright  nor  dara:;  and  so  on
through  every  part  of  physical  and  moral  natura  Tension
between  these  qualities,  produces  activity  and  struggle:
equilibrium  leads  to  temporary  or  final  rest.  This  mutual
tension  is  sometimes  represented  as  Vishamatvam,  uneven-
ness,  caused  by  a  preponderance  of  one  of  the  three,  as  we


112  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

read,  for  instaace,  in  the  Maiir&yaTia  Upanishad  V,  a:
'  This  wotld  was  in  the  beginning  Tamas  (darkness)  indeed.
That  Tamas  stood  in  the  Highest.  Moved  by  the  Highest,
it  became  uneven.  In  that  form  it  was  Bajjras  (obscurity).
That  'ELagaa,  when  moved,  became  uneven,  and  this  is  tne
form  of  Sattva  (goodness).  That  Sattva,  when  moved,  ran
forth  as  essence  (Basa).'  Here  we  have  clearly  the  recog-
nised names  of  the  three  Qunas,  but  the  MaitdLyanaTJpam-
shad  shows  several  S&mkhya  influences,  and  it  might
therefore  be  largued  ihsi  it  does  not  count  for  much,  in
order  to  establish  the  general  acceptance  of  the  theory  of
the  Qunas,  not  for  more,  at  all  events,  than  the  later  Upani'-
flhads  or  the  Bhagavad-gtt&,  in  which  the  three  Qunas  are
fully  recognised.


CHAPTER  IV.

If  now  we  pass  on  to  a  consideration  of  the  six  orthodox
Sfystems  of  philosophy,  and  begin  with'  the  Ved&nta,  we
have  to  take  as  our  chief  guides  the  Siitras  of  B&d^j^yana;
and  the  commentary  of  £a7>ikara.  We  know  little  of
BSdarilyaiia,  the  reputed  author  of  the  SMras.  Of  course
when  we  possess  commentaries  on  any  Siitras,  we  khow
that  the  S&tras  must  have  existed  berore  their  commen-
taries,  that  the  Stltras  of  B4dar&ya7ia  were  older  therefore
than  /Samkara,  their  commentator.  In  India  he  has  been
identified  with  Yy&sa/the  collector  of  the  Mah&bh&rata»
but  without  sufficient  evidence,  nor  should  we  gain  much
by  that  identification,  as  Vy&9a  of  the  MaSj^bh&rata  also  is
hardly  more  than  a  name  to  -us.'  Thi$  Vy^sa  is  said  by
Sartikarsi,  III,  3,  32,  to  have  lived  at  the  end  of  the
Dv&para  and  the  beginning  of  the  Eali  age,  and  to  have
had  intercourse  with  the  gods,  1.  c,  I,  3,  33.  But  though
he- calls  him  the  author  of  the  Mah^bhllrata,  L  c,  II,  3,  47,
iSamkara,  in  the  whole  of  his  commentaiy  on  the  Vedl^ta-
Sdtras,  never  mentions  that  the  Yy&sa  of  the  epic  was  the
author  of  the  book  on  which  he  is  commenting,  though  he
mentions  BMard^yaria  as  such.  This  convinced  Windischr
mann  that  jSamkara  himself  did  not  consider  these  two
VyAsas  as  one  and  the  same  person,  and  this,  judgment
ought  not  to  have  been  lightlv  disturbed.  It  was  excus-
able in  Qdebrooke,  but  not  after  what  had  been  said  by
Windisehmann,  particularly  when  no  new  argument  coula
be  produced.  All  we  can  say  is  that,  whatever  the  date  of
the  Bhagavad-git&  is,  and  it  is  a  part  of  the  Mah4bh&rata,
the  age  of  the  Ved&nta-S&tras  .and  of  Bftdar&yana  must
have  been  earlier.

We  may  also  say  that  BAdar&^ana  himself  never  refera
to  any  work  which  could  be  assigned  with  any  amount  of

I
8


XI4  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

certainty  to  any  time  after  our  era.  Even  when  B&darft*
yana  quotes  the  SmWti,  it  does  not  follow  that  jSamkara  is
always  right  when  suggesting  passages  from  the  Mah&bbA-
rata  (Bhagavad-gttd.),  or  trom  Manu,  for  it  is  not  too  much
to  say  that  similar  passages  may  have  occurred  in  other
and  more  ancient  Sm7'iti  works  also.  B&dar&yana  is  cer*
tainly  most  provoking  in  never  quoting  his  authorities  by
name.  If  we  could  follow  jSaTnkara,  Bd.dar&ya?ia  would
have  referred  in  his  Siittras  to  Bauddhas,  Gainas,  Pftsupatas
and  Pft^A^arMras,  to  Togins,  Yai^eshikas,  though  not  to
Naiy&yikas,  to  S&mkhyas,  and  to  the  doctrines  of  Oaimini  K
By  the  name  of  SiVLti  B&dar&yaria,  according  to  /Samkara,
meant  the  following  Upanishads,  BWhad-ftranyaka,  Khkn-
^ogya,  KMhaksk,  Kaushitaki,  Aitareya,  Taittirfya»  Mundaka,
Pra«na,  ^vet&svatara,  and  6&b&la.

This  must  suffice  to  indicate  the  intellectual  sphere  in
which*  B&dar&yana  moved,  or  was  supposed  to  have  moved,
and  so  far  may  be  said  to  determine  nis  chronological  posi-
tion as  far  anterior  to  that  of  another  Yy&sa,  who  was  the
father  of  iSuka,  the  teacher  of  Gauc2ap&da,  the  teacher  of
Oovinda,  the  tekcher  of  ^amkara,  and  who,  if  £iamkara
belonged  to  thiB  eighth  century,  might  have  lived  in  about
the  sixth  century  of  our  era  *.

The  literary  works  to  which  iSamkara  refers  in  his  com-
mentary are,  according  to  Deussen  (System,  p.  34),  among
the  Samhit&s,  that  of  the  Rig-veda,  of  the  VA^asaneyins,
Maitrdryanly'as  and  Taittiriyas,  and  Ea^/ias  (nothing  from
the  S&ma  and  Atharva-samhit&s) ;  among  the  Brdhmanas,
the  Aitareya,  Arsheya,  Sha^vimsa,  /Satapatha,  Taittiriya,
Tkndya,  KkAndogy^;  among  the  Ara1^yakas,  Aitareya
and  Taittiriya;  and  among  the  Upanishads,  Aitareya,
BWhad-ftraTiyaka,  tA,  Ka^Aa,  Eaushft»ki-br&hma'na,  Eena,
f  Mndogya,  Maitr&yanlya,  TAnndaka,,  Prasna,  iSvet&^vatara,
Taittiriya,  These  are  sometimes  called  the  old  or  classical
Upanishads,  as  being  quoted  by  6*amkara,  though  Paimgi,
Agnirahosya,  N&rayantya  and   6%b&la  may  have  to  be

^  Deutaen,  Syntem  dot  VodAata,  p.  •4.

<  Another  stemma  of  VjrAsa,  ^r%n  by  aaiiva  writen,  ia  HAxftywM,
Vasish^Aa   (Padroabhava),    6'akil,    Par&sara,  VyAsn,    Sokk,    OaiMtepAda,  1

Hast&malaka  (Sishya),  ItoAikai  VArttikaklkra,  ke'


VEDANTA   OB  TJTTABA-MiMAlfSA.  115

added.  As  belonging  to  Smriti  fifamkara  quotes  MaM-
bhdrata  (Bhagavaa-p;ftd,),  lUlmftyatia,  M&rkancie^a-pxii&na^
Manu,  T&ska,  P&Tiini,  Paribh&shis,  S&mkhya-k&nk&,  and  he
refers  to  Sd^mkhya-Sfttras  (though  it  is  important  to  observe
that  he  gives  no  ijmaeima  verba  from  our  S&mkhya-
Stltras),  to  Toga-SAtras,  Nyftya-Sfttras,  Yaiseshika-Siitras,
and  to  Mimllms&-S£itras.  When  he  alludes  to  Sugata  or
Buddha  he  refers  once  to  a  passage  which,  has  been  traced
in  the  Abhidharma-Eo8^-vyd,khy&.  He  also  knew  the
Bh&gavatas  and  the  Svapn&dhy&yavids.

Though  the  name  of  Ved&nta  does  not  occur  in  the  Old
Upanishads,  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  it  was  the  YedlLntic
thoughts,  contained  in  the  Upanishads,  which  gave  the  first
impulse  to  more  systematic  philosophical  speculations  in
India.  Several  scholars  have  tried  to  prove  that  S&mkhya
ideas  prevailed  in  India  at  an  earlier  time  than  the  Ye«
d&ntic  ideas.  But  though  there  certainly  are  germs  of
Sftmkhya  theories  in  the  Upanishads,  they  are  but  few  and
far  between,  while  the  strictly  YedS^ntic  concepts  meet  .us
at  every  step  in  the  hymns,  the  BrslhmaTias,  the  Aran-
yakas  and  in  the  SAtras.  Yed&nta  is  clearly  the  native
philosophy  of  India.  It  is  true  that  this  philosophy  is  not
vet  treated  systematically  in  the  Upanishads,  but  neither
IS  the  SS^mkhya.  To  us  who  care  only  for  the  growth  of
philosophical  thought  on  the  ancient  soil  of  India,  Yed&nta
IS  clearly  the  first  growth ;  and  the  question  whether
Eapila  lived  before  BcLdar&yana,  or  whether  the  systematic
tr^tment  of  the  S&mkhya  took  place  before  that  of  the
Yed&nta,  can  hardlv  arise.

.  I  only  wonder  that  thosft  who  maintain  the  priority  of
the  Sftmkhya,  have  not  appealed  to  the  Lalita-vistara,
twelfth  chapter,  where,  among  the  subjects  known  to
Buddha,  are  mentioned  not  only  Nirgharito,  iT^andas,
Ta^/fakalpa,  Gyotisha,  but  likewise  S&OTikhya,  Yoga,  Yaise-
shika  Ye^iW  (Yaidyaka?),  Arthavidy&,  Bdxhaspatya^  AsA^ary
Aflura,  Krigapaksniruta,  and  Hetuvidyft  (Nyli>yal  There
are  several  names  which  are  difficult  to  identify,  out  there
CBXk  be  no  doubt  that  the  five  philosophical  systems  here
mentioned  were  intended  for  S&mkhya,  Yoga,  Vai^eshika,
Ny&y&,  and  BA,rhaspatya.    The  two  MtmtlTns&s  are  absent,

12


Il6  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

bat  their  absence  does  not  prove  that  they  did  not  exist,
but  only  that  they  were  considered  too  oithodox  to  form
a  proper  subject  of  study  for  Buddha  This  shows  the  real
cnaracter  of  the  antagonism  between  Buddhism  and  Brd^h-
manism,  now  so  often  denied  or  minimised  ^,  and  is  con-
finned  by  similar  references,  as  when  Hemafamdra  in  his
Abhidhdjia  mentions  indeed  such  names  as  Arhatas  or
6ainas,  Saugatas  or  Buddhists,  Naiy&yikas,  7oga^>  S&m-
khya  or  ^pila,  Yaiaeshika,  B&rhaspatya  or  N&stika,
Kkryika  or  Lok&yatika,  but  carefully  omits  the  two  really
dasigerous  systems,  the  Mtmd.ms&  of  Bftdar&yana  and  that
of  Gaimini.

It  should  also  be  remembered  that  considerable  doubt  has
recently  been  thrown  on  the  age  of  the  Chinese  translation
of  the  Lalita-vistara,  which  seemed  to  enable  us  to  assign
the  original  to  a  date  at  all  events  anterior  to  .70  a.d.
The  case  is  not  quite  clear  yet,  but  we  must  learn  to  be
more  cautious  with  Chinese  dates.

It  has  been  the  custom  to  give  the  name  of  Yedd^nta-
philosophy  to  the  Uttara-Mimd^TT^sd.  of  B&dar&ya^ia,  nor  is
there  any  reason  why  that  name  should  not  be  retained.
If  Yedllnta  is  used  as  synonymous  with  Upanisbad,  the
Uttara-Mim£Lms&  is  certainly  the  VedAnta-philosophy,  or
a  systematic  treatment  of  the  philosophical  teaching  of  the
Upanishads.  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  Vasish^Aa  as  Veil
as  Gautama  distinguishes  between  Upanishads  and  Ye-
d&ntas  (XXII,  9),  and  the  commentator  to  Gautama  XIX,  7
states  distinctly  that  those  parts  only  of  the  Aranyakas
which  are  not  Upanishads  are  to  be  called  Yed&ntas.  But
there  is  no  real  harm  in  the  received  name,  and  we  see
that  the  followers  of  the  Yed&nta  were  often  called
Aupanishadas.


As  to  B&darftyaTia,  the  reputed  author  of  the  Yedftnta-
S&tras,  we  had  to  confess  before  that  we  know  nothing
about  him.  He  is  to  us  a  name  and  an  intellectual  power,
but  nothing  else.  We  know  the  date  of  his  great  commen-
tator, iSamkara,  in  the  eighth  century  a.d.,  and  we  know

^  See  BnhmaYftdin,  Peib.,  1898,  p.  454.


BADAKAYAi^A.  1 1 7

Uiat  another  coiamentator,  BodMyana,  was  even  earlier.
We  also  know  that  BodhSyana's  commentary  was  followed
by  R&m^tnu^a.  It  is  quite  possible  that  Bodhd^yana,  like
BAmd.nu^a,  represented  a  more  ancient  and  more  faithful
interpretation  of  B&darstya?ia's  Sutras,  and  that  ^amkara's
philosophy  in  its  unflinching  monism,  is  his  own  rather
than  BsUlar^yana's.  But  no  MS.  of  Bodhayana  has  yet
been  discovered.

A  still  more  ancient  commentator,  Upavarsha  by  name,
is  mentioned,  and  /Samkara  (III,  5,  ,53)  calls  him  Bhagavad
or  Saint.  But  it  must  remain  doubtful  a^ain  whether  he
can  be  identified  with  the  Upavarsha,  who,  according  to
the  Kath&-sarit-s&gara,  was  the  teacher  of  PkninL

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that,  according  to  Indian  tra-
dition, Bd.dar£tyana,  as  the  author  of  the  A^dd.nta-S&tras,  is
called  Vy&aa  or  V^davy&sa,  Dvaipayana  or  Krishna,  Dvai-
p&yana.  Here  we  are  once  more  in  a  labyrinth  from  which
it  is  difficult  to  find  an  exit.  VyUsa  or  Krishna  Dvaipa-
yana is  the  name  given  to  the  author  of  the  MahS.bharata,
and  no  two  styles  can  well  be  more  different  than  that  of
the  Yyhsa,  of  the  MahibhS^rata  and  that  of  Yyksa,  the
supposed  author  of  the  so-called  Yy&sisk'-Siitras.  I  think
we  should  remember  that  Vy&sa,  as  a  noun,  meant  no  more
than  compilation  or  aiTangement,  as  opposed  to  Samlisa,
conciseness  or  abbreviation ;  so  that  the  same  story  might
be  recited  Sam^na,  in  an  abbreviated,  and  Vyaisena  in
a  complete  form.

We  should  remember  next  that  Vyasa  is  called  P&r&aarya,
the  son  of  'Paxkssi.va,  and  Satyavatt  {ti-uthful),  and  that
Vknini  mentions  one  Pd.rd;£arya  as  the  author  of  the
Bhikshu-Siitras,  while  Vdiraspati  Misra  declares  that  the
Bhikshu-Siitras  are  the  same  as  the  Yed&nta-Si^tras,  and
that  the  followers  of  Pdx&^rya  were  in  consequence  called
PSrriUarina    {Plin.  IV,  3,  110.)

This,  if  we  could  rely  on  it,  would  prove  the  existence  of
our  Stltras  before  the  time  of  P^nini,  or  in  the  fifth  cen-
tury B.C.  This  would  be  a  most  important  gain  for  the
chronology  of  Indian  philosophy.  But  if,  as  we  are  told,
Vy&sa  collected  (Vivyftsa)  not  only  the  Vedas,  the  Mah^-
bh&rata,  the  Purknaa,  but  also  the  Yy&sa-Siitras,  nay  even


Il8  INDIAN   I'HlLOSOPfly.

a  'proae  commentary  on  Pataiijjfali's  Toga-SAtras,  we  can
hardly  doubt  that  the  work  ascribed  to  him  must  be  taken
as  the  work  of  several  people  or  of  a  literary  period  rather
than  of  one  man.  I  formerly  thought  that  Yy&sa  might
have  represented  the  period  in  which  the  first  attempts
were  made  to  reduce  the  ancient  mnemonic  literature  of
India  to  writing,  but  there  is  nothing  in  tradition  to  sup-
port such  a  view,  unless  we  thought  that  Vyiisa  had  some
connexion  with  Ny&sa  (writing).  Indian  tradition  places
the  great  Vy&sa  between  the  third  and  fourth  ages  of  the
present  world,  whatever  that  may  mean,  if  translated  into
our  modem  chronological  language.  If  Vy&sa  had  really
anything  to  do  with  our  Ved&nta-S<itras,  it  would  hardly
have  been  more  than  that  he  arranged  or  edited  them.
His  name  does  not  occur  in  the  Siitras  themselves,  wliile
that  of  BSdarsLyana  does,  and  likewise  that  of  Mdari,
a  name  mentioned  by  Gaimini  also  in  his  PfU:va-.Mim&7)is&  ^.
In  the  Bhagavad-git4,,which  might  well  be  placed  as  con-
temporary with  the  VedSnta-Sutras,  or  somewhat  later,
Yy&sa  is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  Devarshis  with  Asita
and  Devala  (X,  13),  and  he  is  called  the  greatest  of  Rishis
(X,  37).  But  all  becomes  confusion  again,  if  we  remember
that  tradition  makes  Yyllsa  the  author  of  the  Mah&bharata,
and  therefore  of  the  Bhagavad-gtt&  itself,  which  is  even
called  an  Upanishad.

The  only  passage  which  seems  to  me  to  settle  the  rela-
tive age  of  the  Yedanta-Siitras  and  the  Bhagavad-gita  is
in  XIII,  3  ^ '  Hear  and  learn  from  me  the  Supreme  Soul
(Kshetragrwa)  that  has  been  celebrated  in  many  ways  by
Bishis  in  various  metres,  and  by  the  words  of  the  BrahTnO'
Siltras,  which  are  definite  and  furnished  with  reasons.'
Here  the  words  '  Brahma- siitra-padaiA,"  the  words  of  the
Brahma-Siitras,'  seem  to  me  to  refer  clearly  to  the  recog-
nised title  of  the  Yed&nta  or  Brahma-SMras.  Whatever
native  authorities  may  say  to  the  contrary,  the  words
'definite  and  argumentative'  can  refer  to  S&tras  only.
And  if  it  is  said,  on  the  other  side,  that  these  Brahma-

'  Golobrookc,  M.  .£.,  II,  p.  354.

*  Prut  T.  K.  Amalnerkar,  Priority  of  the  Vedanta-S&tras,  1895.


BADAliAYA^A.  1 19

Sftkas,  wh&OL  ihey  refer  to  Smriti,  refer  clearly  to  passages
taken  from  the  Bhagavad-git&  also,  and  must  therefore  be
later/ I  doubt  it.  They  neVer  mention  tlie  name  of  the
Bfaagavad-gtt&,  nor  do  they  give  any  ipsisaima  verba  from
it,  and  as  every  Sn^Wti  presupposes  a  iSruti,  these  references
may  have  been  meant  for  passages  which  the  Bhagavad-
^^  hacl  adapted,  and  may  have  shared  with  other  Smntis.
Brahma-S^tra,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  distiiict  title,  all  the
more  significant  where  it  occurs,  because  neither  the  word
SAtra  nor  Brahma-Siitra  occurs  again  in  any  other  passage
of  the  Oit&.  However,  even  admitting  that  the  Brahma*
Sfttras  quoted  from  the  Bhagavad-gitlir,  as  the  Qii&  certainly
appeals  to  the  Brahma-S&ti'as,  uxia  reciprocal  quotation
mi^ht  be  accounted  for.by  their  being  contemporaneous,
as  in  the  case  of  other  Sutras  which,  as  there  can  be  no
doubt,  quote  one  from  the  other,  and  sometimes  verbatim.

As  to  the  commentary  on  Patai9()fali's  Toga-Siitras  being
the  work  of  the  same  Yy&sa,  this  seems  to  me  altogether
out  of  the  question.  There  are  hundreds  of  people  in  India
who  have  the  name  of  Vyasa.  Nor  has  it  ever  been
positively  proved  that  Pat^%ali,  the  reputed  author  of  the
Yoga-Siitras,  was  the  same  person  as  Fata/7(]rali,  the  author
of  the  Mah&bh&shya,  thie  great  commentaiy  on  P&mni's
grammar,  and  on  K&tyclyana's  Varttikas.  Some  scholars
have  rushed  at  this  conclusion,  chiefly  in  order  to  fix  the
dat^  of  the  Yoga-S&tras,  but  this  also  would  force  us  to
9iBCt^he  the  most  heterogeneous  works  to  one  and  the  same
author  ^

Even  the  age  of  Fata/lg^ali,  the  grammarian  and  author
of  the  Mah&bh&shya,  seems  to  me  by  no  means  positively
settled.  I  gladly  admit  the  plausibility  of  Goldstiickers
arguments  that  if  Pata/7grali  presupposed  the  existence  of
the  Maurya-dynasty  he  might  be  placed  in  the  third
century  13.  c.  I  look  upon  the  AxkSJi,  which  he  mentions
in  the  famous  Maurya-passage,  as  having  been  devised  by
the  Mauiyas  for  the  sake  of  toide,  as  the  first  coins  with
images  of  the  gods,  introduced  by  the  Maurya-dynasty.
Such  coins,  when  the}&  contain  images  of  the  gods,  should

^  Both  La9son  and   Garbe,  Die  SAiiikliya-Philosopliie,  p.  46,  oeem
iiielined  to  aocept  tlie  identity  of  the  two  Patailiifalitt.


I20  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHT.

not^  according  to  the  grammarian,  be  called  suqply  by  the
names  of  the  gods,  bat  by  a  derivative  name,  not  iSiva,  but
jffivaka,  just  as  we  dist|iijg;iii8h  between  an  Angel  and  an
Angelot.  And  I  pointeid  <mt  before,  the  very  gods  men*
tioned  here  b;^  Patai7grali  are  the  ^ods  the  images  of  which
do  occur  on  the  oldest  Indian  corns  which  we  possess,  viz.
jSiva,  Skanda,  and  Yie&kha,  the  last,  if  taken  for  K&ma.
As  a  constructive  date  therefore,  that  assigned  by  Gold-
stUcker  to  Patai^aali  xhight  stand,  but  that  is  very  different
from*  a  positive  date.  Besides,  the  name  of  Mauiya  in  the
Mahftbh&shf  a  is  doubtful  and  does  not  occur  a^B^un  in  it.

We  saw  before  that  B&darftyana  refers  in  his  Siitras  to
Oaimini,  the  author  of  the  Pftrva-Mim&m8&-S<itras,  and  thai
6aimini  returns  the  compliment  by  referring  to  B&darftyavia
by  name.  B&darftyana  is  likewise  acquainted  with  the
atheistical  doctrines  of  Eapila  and  the  atomistic  theories  of
EanAda,  and  tries  to  refute  them.  But  in  India  this  is  far
from  proving  the  later  date  of  Bftdarftyaria.  *We  must
learn  to  look  on  B&dar&yaTia,  (raimini,  Kapila,  and  similar
names,  as  simply  eponymous  heroes  of  different  philo-
sophies; so  that  at  whatever  time  these  systems  were
reduced  to  the  form  of  Siitras,  certain  opinions  could  be
called  by  their  names.  Colebrooke  states,  on  the  authority
of  a  scholiast  to  Manu  and  Y&^/iavalkya,  that  the  instruc-
tions of  a  teacher  were  often  reduced  to  writing  by  his
pupils,  and  that  this  woidd  account  for  the  fact  that  the
author  of  a  system  is  often  quoted  in  the  third  person  in
his  own  book.  It  would  be  interesting  if  this  could  be
established  with  reference  to  ancient  texts,  but  I  remember
nothing  of  the  kind.  All  this  is  very  discouraging  to
students  accustomed  to  chronological  accuracy,  but  it  has
alwajTS  seemed  to  me  far  better  to  acknowledge  our  poverty
and  the  utter  absence  of  historical  dates  in  the  literary
history  of  India,  than  to  build  up  systems  after  systems
which  collapse  at  the  first  breath  oi  criticism  or  scepticism.

When  I  speak  of  a  chronology  of  thought,  what  1  mean
is  that  there  is  a  chronology  which  enables  us  to  distinguish
a  period  of  Vedic  thought,  subdivided  into  three  periods  of
Mantras,  Br&hmaTias,  and  Upanishads.  No^  one  would
doubt  the  succession  of  these  three  periods  of  language,  but


WNDAMBNTAL  DOOTEINES   OF  THB   V£DA»TA.       121

if  Bbme  scholars  desire  to  extend  each  period  to  thousands  of
years,  I  can  only  wish  them  success.  I  confess  I  do  not
share  the  idea  that  we  should  claim  for  Indian  'literature
as  remote  an  antiquity  as  possible.  The  same  attempts
were  made  before,  but  nothing  was  gained  by  them,  and
much  was  lost  as  soon  as  more  sober  and  critical  ideas-
began  to  prevail.  After  the  Upanishad-period  would  follow
that  of  Buddhism,  marked,  on  the  Buddhist  side,  by  the
Suttas,  on  the  Brahmanic  side,  and  possibly  somewhat
earlier,  by  the  large  mass  of  Siitra  literature.  To  that
period  seem  to  me  to  belong,  by  similarity  of  thought,  if
not  of  style,  the  six  systems  of  philosophy.  I  should  hav^
said  by  style  also,  because  the  earliest  form  in  which  we
possess  these  systems  is  that  of  S^itras.  Unfortunately  we
know  now  how  easily  even  that  very  peculiar  style  can  be,
and.in  case  of  the  S&mkhya  and  some  of  the  legal  Smritis,
has  been  imitated.  We  must  not  therefore  ascribe  too
much  weight  to  this.  The  next  period  would  be  what
I  have  called  that  of  the  Renaissance,  beginning  at  a  time
when  Sanskrit  had  ceased  to  be  the  language  spoken  by
the  people,  though  it  continued,  as  it  has  to  the  present
day,  to  De  cultivated  by  the  learned.

Such  are  the  difficulties  that  meet  us  when  we  attempt
to  introduce  anything  like  chronological  order  into  tne
literature  of  India,  and  it  seems  to  me  far  better  to  state
them  honestly  than  to  disguise  them.  After  all,  the  im-
portance of  that  literature,  and  more  particularly  of  its
philosophical  portion,  is  quite  independent  of  age.  It  has
somethinjg  to  teach  us  quite  apart  from  the  names  and
dates  of  its  authors ;  and  grateful  as  we  should  feel  for  any
real  light  that  can  be  thrown  on  these  chronological  mazes,
we  must  not  forget  that  the  highest  interest  of  the  YedlLnta
and  the  other  philosophies  is  not  their  age,  but  their  truth.

rii]idam«]ttal  BoeteinM  of  th»  ▼•dAait*.

If  we  ask  for  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the  Yed&nta,
the  Hindus  themselves  have  helped  us  and  given  us  in
a  few  words  what  they  themselves  consider  as  the  quint-
essence of  that  system  of  thought.  I  quoted  these  words  at
the  end  of  my  '  Three  Lectures  on  the  Yed&nta '  (1894) : —


122  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

*  In  one  half  verse  I  shall  tell  you  what  haa  been  taught
in  thousands  of  volumes :  Brahman  is  true,  the  world  is
false^  the  soul  is  Brahman  and  nothing  else  \'

And  again: —

'  There  is  nothing  worth  gaining,  there  is  nothing  worth
enjoying,  there  is  nothing  worth  knowing  but  BrahmaB
alone,  for  he  who  knows  Brahman,  is  Brahman.'

This  risum^  of  the  Vedslnta  is  very  true,  and  very  helpful
as  a  riawmd  of  that  system  of  philosophy.  After  all  we
must  distinguish  in  every  philosophy  its  fundamental
doctrines  and  its  minute  details.  We  can  never  carry  all
these  details  in  our  memory,  but  we  may  always  have
present  before  our  mind  the  general  structure  of  a  great
system  of  thought  and  its  salient  points,  wl»ether  it  be  the
philosophy  of  Kant  or  of  Plato  or  of  Bidai'^ya?)^  It
would  be  quite  impossible  in  a  historical  sketch^of  the  six
Indian  philosophical  systems  to  give  all  their  details.  They
ai^  often  unimportant,  and  may  easily  be  gathered  from
the  texts  themselves,  such  as  we  have  them  in  the  original
or  in  translations ;  but  they  must  not  be  allowed  to  crowd
and  to  obscure  that  general  view  of  the  six  systems  which
alone  is  meant  to  be  given  in  these  pages.

We  have  another  and  still  shorter  abstract  of  the  VedSiita
in  the  famous  words  addressed  by  UddSJaka  Arutii  to  his
son  iSvetaketu  (KhaxiA.  Up.  VI,  8),  namely,  *  Tat  tvam  asi,'
*Thou  art  That.'  These  words,  however,  convey  little
meaning  without  the  context  in  which  they  occur,  that  is
to  say,  unless  we  know  what  is  meant  by  the  Tat,  that,  and
by  the  Tvam,  thou.  The  Tat  is  what  we  saw  shadowed  forth
in  the  UpanishaJs  as  the^  Brahman,  as  the  cause  of  the
world,  the  Tvam  is  the  Atman,  the  Self  in  its  various
meanings,  from  the  ordinary  I  to  the  divine  Soul  or  Self,
recognised  in  man ;  and  it  is  the  highest  aim  of  the  VedsLnta
to  show  that  these  two  are  in  reality  one-*.  This  fearless
sjmthesis,  embodied  in  the  simple. words  Tat  tvam  asi,
seems  to  me  the  boldest  and  truest  synthesis  in  the  whole
history  of  philosophy.  Even  Kant,  who  clearly  recognised
the  Tat  or  it,  that  is  the  Diifig  an  sick  bcliind  the  objective

*  See  also  Thoosophy,  p*  31?:

'^  Ma»uf&kyu  Up.  IX,  Ayaiu  Atm4  Brahma.


SJJNDAMJflNTAL   DOarJlllNiilS   01^  TQS   YEDANTA.       1 23

world,  never  went  far  enough  to  recognise  the  identity  o£
the  Tat,  the  objective  Ding  an  sick,  and  the  Tvam,  the
Ding  an  sick  on  the  subjective  side  of  the  ,world.  Among
ourselves  such  a  synthesis  of  the  subjective  with  the  objec-
tive Self  would  even  now  rouse  the  strongest  theological,
if  not  philosophical,  protests,  whereas  the  theologi^uos  of
India  discuss  it  with  perfect  equanimity,  and  see  in  it  the
truest  solution  of  the  riddle  of  the  world.  In  order  fully
to  understand  it,  we  must  try  to  place  ourselves  firmly  on
the  standpoint  of  the  Vedinta  philosophers,  forgetting  all
our  own  inherited  theological  misgivings.  Their  idea  of
the  Supreme  Cause  of  the  universe  went  far  beyond  what
is  meant  by  God,  ihb  creator  and  ruler  of  the  world
(Pra^&pati).  That  being  was  to  them  a  manifestation  only
of  the  Supreme  Cause  or  Brahman,  it  was  Brahman  as

Ehenomenal,  and  it  followed  that,  as  Brahman,  as  they
eld,  was  indeed  the  cause  of  everything,  the  All  in  All,
man  also  could  be  nothing  but  a  phenomenon  of  Brahman.
The  idea  therefore  that  it  would  be  blasphemy  to  make  the
creature  equal  to  the  creak)r  so  far  as  their  substance  was
concerned,  never  presented  itself  to  their  minds.  Their
Tat  was  something  behind  or  above  the  purely  personal
creator,  it  was  the  absolute  divine  essence,  the  Godhead,
manifested  in  a  subjective  and  personal  creator,  and  present
likewise  in  all  its  phenomenal  manifestations,  including
gods  and  men.  Even  their  god  beyond  all  gods  (Deveshu
adhi  okoh)  did  not  satisfy  them  any  longer,  as  it  did  in  the
hymns  of  the  Rig-veda;  and  though  they  might  have
shrunk  from  icIentifyiQg  gods  and  men  with  that  personal
divine  being,  Prag&pati,  the  lord  of  all  creatures,  they  saw
nothing  but  truth  in  the  doctrine  that  man  in  his  true
nature  was  the  same  with  Brahman,  that  he  shares  in  the
nature  of  Brahman,  or  in  the  spirit  of  God.  They  saw,  in
fact,  that  God  is  hardly  a  name  that  can  be  used  for  that
Supreme  Brahman,  the  absolute  Cause  of  the  universe,  and
the  absolute  Cause  of  Pra^apati  also,  when  taken  as  the
creative  god.  I  say  when  taken  as  such,  for  we  ought
never  to  forget  that  we  have  always  to  be  satisfied  with
what  we  take  God  to  be  (Vidyam^tra),  and  that  we  can
never  go  beyond.    Translated   into  the  language  of  the


124  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

early  Christian  philosophers  of  Alexandria,  this  lifting  up
of  the  Tvam  into  the  Tat  might  prove  the  equivalent  of
the  idea  of  divine  sonship,  but  from  the  Yedd^nta  point  of
view  it  means  real  identity,  real  recognition  of  the  original
divine  nature  of  man,  however  much  hidden  and  disfigured
for  a  time  by  Avidyfi,,  or  ignorance,  and  all  its  consequences.
With  us  unfortunately  such  questions  can  hardly  be  dis-
cussed  in  a  calm  philosophical  spirit,  because  theolo^  steps
m  and  protests  against  them  as  irreligious  and  blasphemous,
just  as  the  Jews  declared  it  blasphemy  in  Christ  to  teach
that  He  was  equal  to  God,  nay  that  He  and  the  Father
were  one,  Tat  tvam  asi.  If  properly  understood,  these
Ved^nta  teachings  may,  though  under  a  strange  form,  bring
us  very  near  to  the  earliest  Christian  philosophy,  and  help
us  to  understand  it,  as  it  was  understood  py  the  great
thinkers  of  Alexandria.  To  maintain  the  eternal  identity
of  the  human  and  the  divine  is  very  different  from  arrogat-
ing divinity  for  humanity;  and  on  this  point  even  our
philosophy  may  have  something  to  learn  which  has  often
been  forgotten  in  modem  Christianity,  though  it  was
recognised  as  vital  by  the  early  fathers  of  the  Church,  the
unity  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  nay,  of  the  Father  and
all  His  sons.

The  teachers  of  the  Ved&nta,  while  striving  to  resuscitate
in  man  the  consciousness  of  the  identity  of  the  Tat  and  i>he
Tvam,  and,  though  indirectly,  of  man  and  God,  seem  to  be
moving  in  the  most  serene  atmosphere  of  thought,  and  in
their  stiff  and  algebraic  Siitras  they  were  workiifg  out
these  mighty  problems  With  unfaltering  love  of  truth,  and
in  an  ummpassioned  and  truly  philosoiSiic  spirit.

It  is  as  dij£cult  to  give  an  idea  of  the  form  of  the
Upanishads  as  of  the  spirit  that  pervades  the  Upanishads.
A  few  extracte,  howev^er,  may  help  to  show  us  the  early
Yed&ntiste  as  they  were,  groping  their  way  in  the  dark.
We  do  not  indeed  get  there  the  pure  wine  of  the  Ved&nta,
but  we  get  the  grapes  from  which  the  juice  was  extracted
and  made  into  wine.  The  first  is  taken  from  the  Kli&xi-
dogya  Upanishad  which  belongs  to  the  S&ma-veda  and  is
generally  regarded  as  one  of  the  iearlier  Upanishads  *.

^  Traii«Uted  in  S.  B.  E.,  I,  p.  9a.


FUNDAMtiNl'AL  DOCTRINES   OF  THE    V^iDANTA.       1 25

F1B8T  Ehajtda.

X.  fifvetaketa  was  the  son  of  AruTii,  the  grandson  of
Aruna.  Tq  him  his  father  (Udd&laka,  the  son  of  Aruna)
said :  *  /Svetaketn,  go  to  school ;  for  there  is  none  belong-
ing to  our  race,  darling,  who,  not  having  studied  (the  Veda),
is,  as  it  were,  a  Brahma*bandhu,  i.  e.  a  Br&hmana  by  birth
only.'

2.  Having  begun  his  apprenticeship  (with  a  teacher)  when
he  was  twelve  years  01  age,  jSfvetoketu  returned  to  his
father,  whei^  he  was  twenty-four,  having  then  studied  all
the  Vedas,— conceited,  considering  himself  well-read,  and
stubborn.

3.  His  father  said  to  him:  '£^vetaketu,  as  you  are  so
conceited,  considering  yourself  well-read,  and  so  stubborn,
mv  dear  son,  have  you  ever  asked  for  that  instruction  by
which  we  hear  what  is  not  heard,  by  which  we  perceive
what  is  not  perceived,  by  which  we  know  what  is  not
known  1 *  -

4.  '  What  is  that  instruction.  Sir  ? '  he  asked.

The  father  replied :  *  My  dear  son,  as  by  one  clod  of  clay
all  that  is  made  of  clay  is  known,  the  difference  being  only
t6e  name,  arising  from  speech,  but  the  truth  being  that  all
IS  clay ;

5.  *  And  as,  my  dear  son,  by  one  nugget  of  gold  all  that
is  made  of  ;gold  is  known,  the  difference  being  only  the
name,  arising  from  speech,  but  the  truth  being  that  all  is

that  is  made  of  dteel  (Ed^rshrikyasam)  is  known,  the  differ-
ence being  only  the  nanie,  arising  from  speech,  but  the
truth  being  that  al]«  is  steel, — thus,  my  dear  son,  is  that
instruction,'

7.  'The  son  said:  'Surely  those  venerable  men  (my
teachera)  did  not  know  that.  For  if  they  had  known  it,
why  should  they  not  have  told  it  me  1  Do  you.  Sir,  there-
fore tell  me  that.'    '  Be  it  so,'  said  the  father.

Second  'Ehajv^da.
I.  '  Jn  the  beginning,  my  dear  son,  there  was  that  only


126  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY^

which  is  (rh  Sv),  one  only,  without  a  second.  Others  aay,  in
the  be^nning  there  was  that  only  which  is  not  (t6  fiii  &)^
one  only,  without  a  second ;  and  from  that  which  is  not,
that  which  is,  was  bom.

2.  'But  how  could  it  be  so,  my  dear  soni*  the  father
continued.  <How  could  that  which  is,  be  bom  of  that
which  is  not  1  No,  m v  dear  son,  only  that  which  is,  was  in
the  beginning,  one  only,  without  a  second.

3.  *  It  thought,  may  I  be  many,  may  I  grow  forth.  It
sent  forth  fircf.

'That  fire  thought,  may. I  be  many,  may  I  grow  forth.
It  sent  forth  water.

*  And  therefore  whenever  anybody  anywhere  is  hot  and
perspires,  water  is  produced  on  him  from  fire  alone.

4.  *  Water  thought,  may  I  be  many,  may  I  grow  forth.
It  sent  forth  earth  (food).

'Therefore  whenever  it  rains  anjrwhere,  most  food  is
then  produced.  From  water  alone  is  eatable  food  pro-
duced.

Seventh  Kmanjoa.

1.  'Man  (Purusha),  my  son,  consists  of  sixteen  parts.
Abstain  from  food  for  fifteen  days,  but  drink  as  much
water  as  you  like,  for  breath  comes  from  water,  and  will
not  be  cut  off,  if  you  drink  water.'

2.  iSvetaketu  abstained  from  food  for  fifteen  days.
Then  he  came  to  his  father  and  said :  '  What  shall  I  say  ? '
The  father  said:  'Bcp^t  tiie  Rik,  Yaj}fU8,  and  S&man
verses/    He  replied :  '  They  do  not  occur  to  me.  Sir.*

3.  The  father  said  to  him;  'As  of  a  great  lighted  fire
one  coal  only  of  the  size  of  a  firefly  may  be  left,  which
would  not  bum  much  more  than  this  (i.  e.  very  little),  thus,
my  dear  son,  one  part  only  of  the  sixteen  parts  (of  you)  is
left,  and  therefore  with  that  one  part  you  do  not  remember
the  Vedas.    Qo  and  eat !

4.  '  Then  wilt  thou  understand  mo.'  Then  jSvetaketu
ate,  and  afterwards  approached  his  father.  And  whatever
his  father  asked  him,  he  knew  it  all  by  heart.  Then  his
father  said  to  him :

5.  'As  of  a  great  lighted  fire  one  coal  of  the  siae  of


FTlKDAMBNTAIi  DOGTBINfiS  OF  THE   V1?;DANTA.       1 27

m  ftnAy,  if  left,  may  be  made  to  blase  up  again  by  patting
gnas  npon  it,  and  will  thus  bnm  more  than  this,

6.  '  Thus,  my  dear  son,  there  was  one  part  of  the  sixteen
parts  left  to  you,  and  that,  lighted  up  with  food,  burnt  up,
and  by  it  you  remeoiber  now  the  Vedas/  After  that,  he
understood  what  his  father,  meant  when  he  said :  '  Mind,
my  son,  comes  from  food,  breath  from  water,  speech  from
fire.'  He  understood  what  he  said,  yea,  he  under-
stood it.

Ninth  Ehajtda.

1.  'As  the  bees,  my  son,  make  honey  by  collecting
the  juices  of  distant  trees,  and  reduce  the  juioo  into  one
form,

2.  '  And  as  these  juices  have  no  discrimination,  so  that
they  might  say,  J  am  the  juice  of  this  tree  or  that,  in  the
same  manner,  my  son,  all  these  creatures,  when  they  have
bepome  merged  in  the  True  (either  in  deep  sleep  or  in
death),  know  not  that  they  are  merged  in  the  True.

3.  *  Whatever  these  creatures  arte  here,  whether  a  lion,  or
a  wolf,  or  a  boar,  or  a  worm,  or  a  midge,  or  a  gnat^  or
a  musquito,  that  they  become  again  and  again.

4.  '  Now  that  which  is  that  subtile  essence,  in  it  all  that
exists  has  its  Self.  It  is  the  True!  It  is  the  Self,  and
thou,  O  Svetaketu,  art  it/

*  Please,  Sir,  inform  me  still  more,'  said  the  son.

*  Be  it  so,  my  child,'  the  father  replied.

Tenth  Khajtda.

i.  'These  rivers,  my  son,  run,  the  eastern  (like  the
Gang&^  toward  the  east,  the  western  (like  the  Sindhu)
towara  the  west.  They  go  from  sea  to  sea  (i.  e.  the  clouds
lift  up.  the  water  from  the  sea  to  the  sky,  and  send  it  back
as  rain  to  the  sea).  They  become  indeed  sea.  And  as
those  rivers,  when  they  are  in  the  sea,  do  not  know,  I  am
this  or  thatriver,

3.  'In  the  same  manner,  my  son,  all  these  creatures,
when  they  have  come  back  from  the  True,  know  not  that
they  have  come  back  from  the  True.  Whatever  these  crea-


128  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHT,

tares  are  here,  whether  a  lion,  or  a  wolf,  or  a  boar,  or
a  worm,  or  a  midge,  or  a  gnat,  or  a  musquito,  that  they
become  again  and  again.

3.  *  That  which  is  that  subtile  essence,  in  it  all  that  exists
has  its  Self.  It  is  the  True.  It  is  the  Self,  and  thou,  O
Svetaketu,  art  it.'

*  Please,  Sir,  inform  me  still  more,'  said  the  son.
'  Be  it  so,  my  child,'  the  father  replied.

Eleventh  Ehaitda.

1.  '  If  one  were  to  strike  at  the  root  of  this  large  tree
here,  it  would  bleed,  but  it  would  live.  If  he  were  to  strike
at  its  stem,  it  would  bleed,  but  it  would  live.  If  he  were
to  strike  at  its  top,  it  would  bleed,  but  it  would  live.  Per-
vaded by  the  living  Self  that  tree  stands  firm,  drinking  in
its  nourishment  and  rejoicing ;

2.  'But  if  the  life  (the  living  Self)  leaves  one  of-  its
branches,  that  branch  withers ;  if  it  leaves  a  second,  that
branch  withers ;  if  it  leaves  a  third,  that  branch  withers.
If  it  leaves  the  whole  tree,  the  whole  tree  withers.  In
exactly  the  same  manner,  my  son,  know  this.'  Thus  he
spoke :

3.  'This  (body)  indeed  withers  and  dies  when  the  living
(Self)  has  left  it ;  the  living  (Self)  dies  not

'Tnat  which  is  that  subtile  essence,  in  it  all  that  exists
has  its  Self.  It  is  the  True.  It  is  ihe^  Self,  and  thou,
iSvetaketu,  art  it.'

'  Please,  Sir,  inform  me  still  more,'  said  the  son.

*  Be  it  so,  my  child,'  the  father  replied.

Twelfth  Kha^pa.

I.  'Fetch  me  fi*om  thence  a  fruit  of  the  Nyagrodha
tree.'
'  Here  is  one.  Sir.'

*  Break  it.'

'  It  is  broken.  Sir.'

'  What  do  you  see  there  1  *

'  These  seeds,  almost  infinitesimal.'


lONDAMBNTAL  DOCTRINSS  OW  THE   Y'&pkSiHA.      1 29

'  Break  one  of  them.'

'  It  is  brokeHi  Sir.'

'  What  do  you  see  there  1  *

'  Not  anything,  Sir.'

2.  The  father  said :  '  My  son,  that  subtile  essence  which
vou  do  not  perceive  there,  of  that  very  essence  this  great
Nyagrodha  tree  exists,

^.  '  Believe  it,  my  son.  That  which  is  the  subtile  essence,
in  it  all  that  exists  has  its  Self.  It  is  the  True.  It  is  the
Self,  and  thou,  O  iSvetaketu,  art  it.'

*  Please,  Sir,  inform  me  still  more/  said  the4K)n«

*  Be  it  so,  my  child,'  the  father  replied.


Thibteenth  Ehajvda.

1.  *  Place  this  salt  in  water,  and  then  wait  on  me  in  the
morning.'

The  son  did  as  he  was  commanded.

The  father  said  to  him ;  '  Bring  me  the  salt,  which  you
placed  in  the  water  last  night.'

The  son,  having  looked  for  it,  found  it  not,  for,  of  course,
it  was  melted.

2.  The  father  said:  'Taste  it  from  the  surface  of  the
water.    How  is  it  1'

The  son  replied :  '  It  is  salt'

'  Taste  it  from  the  middle.    How  is  it  1 '
•The  son  replied :  '  It  is  salt.'

'  Taste  it  from  the  bottom.    How  is  it  1 '

The  son  replied :  '  It  is  salt.'

The  father  said :  '  Throw  it  away  and  then  wait  on  me.*

He  did  so ;  but  the  salt  continued  to  exist.

Then  the  father  said :  '  Here  a^^o,  in  this  body,  indeed,
you  do  not  perceive  the  True  (Sat),  my  son;  but  there
indeed  it  is.

3.  '  That  which  is  the  subtile  essence,  in  it  all  that  exists
has  its  Self.  It  is  the  True.  It  is  the  Self,  and  thou,
O  5vetaketu,  art  ii'

'  Please,  Sir,  inform  me  still  more,'  said  the  son.
'  Be  it  so,  my  child,'  the  father  replied.
s9  K


\  -■


130  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.


FOUBTEENTU   KhAA^DA.


1.  *  As  one  might  lead  a  person  with  his  ey^  covered
away  from  the  Gandh&ras,  and  leave  him  then  in  a  place
where  there  are  no  human  beings;  and  as  that  person
would  turn  towards  the  east,  or  the  north,  or  the  west,  and
shout,  "  I  have  been  brought  here  with  my  eyes  covered,
I  have  been  left  here  with  my  eyes  covered,'"

2.  '  And  as  thereupon  some  one  might  loose  his  bandage
and  say  to  him, ''  Go  in  that  direction,  it  is  the  Gandh&ras,
TO  in  that  direction;"  and  as  thereupon,  having  been  in-
formed and  being  able  to  judge  for  himself,  he  would  by
asking  his  way  from  village  to  village  arrive  at  last  at  the
Gandh&ras, — ^in  exactly  the  same  manner  does  a  man,  who
meets  with  a  teacher  to  inform  him,  learn  that  there  is
delay  so  long  only  as  '*  I  am  not  delivered  (from  this  body) ;
and  then  I  snail  be  perfect/'

3.  '  That  which  is  the  subtile  essence,  in  it  all  that  exists
has  its  Self.  It  is  the  True.  It  is  the  Self,  and  thou,
O  Svetaketu,  art  it.'

*  Please,  Sir,  inform  me  still  more,'  said  the  son.
'  Be  it  so,  my  ctild,'  the  father  replied.

Fifteenth  Eha^tda.

1.  '  If  a  man  is  ill,  his  relatives  assemble  round  him  and
ask :  "  Dost  thou  know  me  ?  Dost  thou  know  me  ?  "  Then,
as  long  as  his  speech  is  not  merged  in  his  mind,  his  mind
in  breath,  breath  in  heat  (fire),  heat  in  the  Highest  Being
(Devat&),  he  knows  them.

2.  '  But  when  his  speech  is  merged  in  his  mind,  his  mind
in  breath,  breath  in  heat  (fire),  heat  in  the  Highest  Being,
then  he  knows  them  not.

'  That  which  is  the  bubtile  essenee,  in  it  all  that  exists
has  its  Self.  It  is  the  True.  It  is  the  Self,  and  thou,  O
iSvetaketu,  art  it'

'  Please,  Sir,  inform  me  still  more,'  said  the  son.

'  Be  it  so,  my  child,'  the  father  replied.


The  next  extract  is  from  the  Ea^Aa  Upanishad  of  the


FINDAMBNTAL   DOCTRINES   OK  THE   VZDANTA.       13!

f  a^r-veda,  and  has  by  many  scholars  been  classed  as  of
later  date.

First  Vall!.

I.  V&(/asravasa,  desirous  (of  heavenly  irewards),  surren-
dered (at  a  sacrii^ce)  all  that  he  possessed.  He  had  a  son  of
the  name  of  NaMketas.

4.  He  (knowing  that  his  father  had  promised  to  give  up
at  a  sacrifice  all  that  he  possessed,  ana  therefore  his  son
also)  said  to  his  father:  'I)ear  father,  to  whom  wilt  thou
give  me  V

He  said  it  a  second  and  a  third  time«  Then  the  father
replied  (angrily) :

'  I  shall  give  tl^ee  unto  Death/

(The  father,  having  once  said  so,  though  in  haste,  had  to
be  true  to  his  word  and  to  sacrifice  his  son.)

5.  The  son  said :  '  I  go  as  the  first,  at  the  head  of  many
(who  have  still  to  die) ;  I  go  in  the  midst  of  many  (who
are  now  dying).  What  wUl  be  the  work  of  Yama  (the
ruler  of  the  departed)  which  to-day  he  has  to  do  unto  me  ?

6.  '  Look  back  how  it  was  with  those  who  came  before,
look  forward  how  it  will  be  with  those  who  come  here-
after. A  mortal  ripens  like  com,  like  com  he  springs  up
again.'

(NaMketas  then  enters  into  the  abode  of  Yama  Vaivas-
vata,  and  there  is  no  one  to  receive  him.  Thereupon  one
of  the  attendants  of  Yama  is  supposed  to  say :)

7.  ^  Fire  enters  into  the  houses,  when  a  Br&hmaTia  enters
as*a  guest.  That  fire  is  quenched  by  this  peace-oflTering; —
bring,  water,  O  Vaivasvata  !

8.  *A  Br^hmaTia  that  dwells  in  the  house  of  a  foolish
man  without  receiving  food  to  eat,  destroys  his  hopes  and
expectations,  his  ppssessions,  his  nighteousness,  his  sacred
and  his  good  deeds,  and  all  his  sons  and  cattle.'

(Yama,  returning  to  his  house  after  an  absence  of  three
nights,  during  which  time  NaAdketas  hjewi  received  no  hos-
pitality from  him,  says :)

9.  'O  Br&hmaTia,  as  thou,  a  venerable  guest,  hast  dwelt
in  my  house  three  nights  without  eating,  therefore  choose
now  three  boona    Hail  to  thee  I  and  welfare  to  me  I'

K  2


132  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

10.  NaHketas  said :  *  O  Death,  as  the  first  of  tlie  three
boons  I  choose  that  Oautama,  my  father,  be  pacified,  kind,
and  free  from  anger  towards  me ;  and  that  he  may  know
me  and  greet  me,  when  I  shall  have  been  dismissed  by  thee.'

11.  Tama  said:  *  With  my  leave,  Auddd.laki  Aru^n,  thy
father,  will  know  thee,  and  be  again  towards  thee  as  he
was  before.  He  shall  sl^ep  peacefully  through  the  night,
and  free  from  anger,  after  having  seen  thee  freed  from  the
jaws  of  death/

12.  NaAdketas  said:  'In  the.  heaven- world  there  is  no
fear ;  thou  art  not  there,  Q  Death;  and  no  one  is  afraid  on
account  of  old  age.  Leaving  behind  both  hunger  and  thirst,
and  out  of  the  reach  of  sorrow,  all  rejoice  in  the  world  of
heaven.'

13.  '  Thou  knowest,  0  Death,  the  fire-sacrifice  which  leads
us  to  heaven ;  tell  it  to  me,  for  I  am  full  of  faith.  Those
who  live  in  the  heaven-world  reach  immortality, — this  I
ask  as  my  second  boon.'

14.  Tama  said:  'I  will  tell  it  thee,  learn  it  from  me,
and  when  thou  understandest  that  fire-sacrifice  which
leads  to  heaven,  know,  O  NaAdketas,  that  it  is  the  attain-
ment of  the  eternal  worlds,  and  their  firm  support,  hidden
in  darkness.'

15.  Tama  then  told  him  that  fire-sacrifice,  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  worlds,  and  whar  bricks  are  required  for  the
altar,  aiid  how  many,  and  how  thev  are  to  be  placed.  And
NaAdketas  repeated  all  as  it  had  been  told  to  him.  Then
Mrityu,  being  pleased  with  him,  said  again :

19.  '  This,  O  rfaMketas,  is  thy  fire  which  leads  to  heaven,
and  which  thou  hast  chosen  as  thy  second  boon.  That  fire
all  men  will  proclaim  as  thine.  Choose  now,  O  NaAdketas,
thy  third  boon.'  '

20.  NaHketas  said:  'JThere  is  that  doubt,  when  a  man
is  dead, — some  saying,  he  is;  others,  he  is  not.  This  I
should  like  to  know,  taught  by  thee ;  this  is  the  third  of
ipy  boons.*

21.  Death  said :  '  On  this  point  even  the  gods  have  been
in  doubt  formerly;  it  is  not  easy  to  understand.  That
subject  is  subtle.  Choose  another  boon,  O  NaJdketas,  do
not  press  me,  and  let  me  off  that  boon.'


iTUNDAMENTAL   DOOTBINBS   OF  TH£   VEDANTA      1 33

22.  NaA:iketas  said :  ^  On  this  point  even  the  gods  have
been  in  doubt  indeed^  and  thou,  Death,  hast  declared  it
to  be  not  easy  to  understand,  and  another  teacher  like
thee  is  not  to  be  found  v — surely  no  other  boon  is  like  unto
this/

23.  Death  said:  'Choose  sons  and  grandsons  who  shall
live  a  hundred  years,  herds  of  cattle,  elephants,  gold,  and
horses.  Choose  the  wide  abode  of  the  earth,  and  live
thyself  as  many  harvests  as  thou  desirest.'

24.  'If  thou  canst  think  of  any  boon  equal  to  that,  choose
wealth,  and  long  life.  JBe  (king),  NaAdketas,  on  the  wide
earth.    I  make  thee  the  enjoyer  of  all  desires.'

25.  'Whatever  desires  are  difficult  to  attain  among
mortals,  ask  for  them  according  to  thy  wish; — these  fair
maidens  with  their  chariots  and  musical  instruments, —
such  are  indeed  not  to  be  obtained  by  men, — ^be  waited
on  by  them  whom  I  give  to  thee,  but  do  not  ask  me  about
dying.'

26.  NaAdketas  said :  '  Thoughts  of  to-morrow,  O  Death,
wear  out  the  present  vigour  of  all  the  senses  of  man.  Even
the  whole  of  life  is  short  Keep  thou  thy  horses,  keep
dance  and  song  for  thyself.'

27.  '  No  man  can  be  made  happy  through  wealth.  Shall
we  have  wealth,  when  we  see  thee  ?  Let  us  live,  as  long
as  thou  rulest?  Only  that  boon  (which  I  have  chosen)  is
to  be  chosen  by  me.'

28.  'What  mortal,  slowly  decaying  here  below,  and
knowing,  after  having  approached  them,  the  freedom  from
decay  enjoyed  by  the  immortals,  would  delight  in  a  long
life,  after  he  has  pondered  on  the  pleasures  which  arise
from  beauty  and  love  ? '

29.  '  No,  that  on  which  there  is  this  doubt,  O  Death,  tell
us  what  there  is  in  that  great.  Hereafter.  NaHketas  does
not  choose  another  boon  but  that  which  enters  into  what
is  hidden.'

Second  VallI.

I.  Death  said:  'The  good  ia  one  thing,  the  pleasant
Miother ;  these  two»  having  different  objccte,  chain  a  man.


134  INDIAN   THILOSOPHT.

It  is  well  with  him  who  clings  to  the  good ;  he  who
chooses  the  pleasant,  misses  his  end/

2.  '  The  good  and  the  pleasant  approach  man :  the  wise
goes  round  about  them  and  distinguishes  them.  Tea,  the
wise  prefers  the  good  to  the  pleasant,  but  the  fool  chooses
the  pleasant  through  greed  and  avarice/

3.  '  Thou,  O  NaXiketas,  after  pondering  all  pleasures  that
are  or  seem  delightful,  hast  dismissed  them  all.  Thou  hast
not  gone  into  me  road  that  leadeth  to  wealth,  in  which
many  men  perish/

4.  '  Wide  apart  and  leading  to  different  points  are  these
two,  ignorance,  and  what  is  known  as  wisdom.  I  believe
Na^ketas  to  be  one  who  desires  knowledge,  for  even  many
pleasures  did  not  tear  thee  away/

5.  'Fools  dwelling  in  darkness,  wise  in  their  own  con-
ceit, and  puffed  up  with  vain  knowledge,  go  round  and
round,  staggering  to  and  fro,  like  blind  men  led  by  the
blind.'

6.  '  The  Hereafter  never  lises  before  the  eyes  of  the  care-
less child,  deluded  by  the  delusion  of  wealth.  "  This  is  the
world,'*  he  thinks,  *'  there  is  no  other ; " — thus  he  falls  again
and  ac^  under  my  sway.'

7.  *  He  (the  Self)  of  whom  many  are  not  even  able  to
hear,  whom  many,  even  when  they  hear  of  him,  do  not
comprehend ;  wonderful  is  a  man,  when  found,  who  is  able
to  teach  this  (the  Self) ;  wonderful  is  he  who  comprehends
this,  when  taught  by  an  able  teacher.'

9.  'That  doctrine  is  not  to  be  obtained  by  argument,  but
when  it  is  declared  by  another,  then,  O  dearest,  it  is  easy
to  understand.  Thou  hast  obtained  it  now ;  thou  art  truly
a  man  of  true  resolve.  May  we  have  always  an  inquirer
like  thee ! '

10.  NaJdketas  said :  *  I  know  that  what  is  called  treasure
is  transient,  for  the  eternal  is  not  obtained  by  things
which  are  not  eternal.  Hence  the  NSJciketa  fire-sacrifice
has  been  laid  by  me  first;  then,  by  means  of  transient
things,  I  have  obtained  what  is  not  transient  (the  teaching
of  Yama).'

11.  Tama  said:  'Though  thou  hadst  seen  the  fulfilment
of  all  desires,  the  foundation  of  the  world,  the  endless


FtJNpAMENTAL  DOOTBINBS   OP  THE   VBDAnTA      1 35

rewards  of  good  deeds,  the  shore  where  there  is  no  fear,
that  which  is  magnified  by  praise,  the  wide  abode,  the
rest,  yet  being  wise  thon  hast  with  firm  resolve  dismissed
it  aU;

12.  *The  wise  who,  by  means  of  meditation  on  his  Self,
recognises  the  Ancient,  who  is  difficult  to  be  seen,  who  has
entered  into  darkness,  who  is  hidden  in  the  cave,  who
dwells  in  the  abyss,  as  God,  he  indeed  leaves  joy  and  sorrow
far  Ix^hind.'

13.  'A  mortal  who  has  heard  this  and  embraced  it,  who
has  removed  from  it  all  qualities,  and  has  thus  reached
that  subtle  Being,  rejoices,  oecause  he  has  obtained  what  is
a  cause  for  rejoicing.  The  house  (of  Brahman)  is  open,
I  believe,  O  NaHketas/

18.  ' Tlie  knowing  Self  is  not  bom,  it  dies  not;  it  sprang
from  nothing,  nothing  sprang  from  it.  The  Ancient  is
unborn,  eternal,  everloBting;  he  is  not  killed,  though  the
body  is  killed.*

19.  'If  the  killer  thinks  that  he  kills, if  the  killed  thinks
that  he  is  killed,  they  do  not  understand ;  for  this  one  does
not  kill,  nor  is  that  one  killed.'

20.  '  The  Self,  smaller  than  small,  greater  than  great,  is
hidden  in  the  heart  of  the  creature.  A  man  who  is  free
froiTi  desii'es  and  free  from  grief,  sees  the  majesty  of  the
Self  by  the  grace  of  the  Creator  (or  through  the  serenity
of  the  elements).'

0,1.  'Though  sitting  still,  he  walks  far;  though  lying
down,  he  goes  everywhere.  Who,  save  myself,  is  able  to
know  that  Qod,  who  rejoices  and  rejoices  not?'

22.  '  The  wise  who  knows  the  Self  as  bodiless  within  the
bodies,  as  unchanging  among  changing  thmgs,  as  great  and
omnipresent,  he  never  grieves.'

23.  *That  Self  caimot  be  gained  by  the  Veda,  nor  by
understanding,  nor  by  much  learning.  He  whom  the  Self
chooses,  by  him  the  Self  can  be  gained.  The  Self  ch6ose8
him  (his  body)  as  his  own,'

24.  'But  he  who  has  not  first  turned  away  from  his
wickedness,  who  is  not  tranquil,  and  subdued,  or  whose
mind  is  not  at  i'est,  he  can  never  obtain  the  Self  (even)  by
knowledge.'


to  be


136  IKDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

TfliBD  VallI

I.  'There  are  the  two,  drinking  their  reward  in  the
world  of  their  own  works,  enterea  into  the  cave  (of  the
heart),  dwelling  on  the  highest  summit  ^the  ether  in
the  heart).  Those  who  know  Brahman  call  them  shade
and  light;  likewise,  those  householders  who  perform  the
I'riii&^keta  sacrifice.'

a.  *  May  we  t)e  able  to  master  that  N&Aiketa  rite  which
is  a  bridge  for  sacrificers ;  which  is  the  highest^  imperish-
able Brwman  for  those  who  wish  to  cross  over  to  the
fearless  shore.'

|.  '  Know  tiie  Self  to  be  sitting  in  the  chario^  the  body
the  chariot,  the  intellect  (buddhi)  the  charioteer,  and
the  mind  the  reins.'

4.  'The  senses  they  call  the  horses,  the  objects  of  the
senses  their  roads.  When  he  (the  Highest  Self)  is  in  union
with  the  body,  the  senses,  and  the  mind,  then  wise  people
call  him  the  Enjoyer.'

5.  'He  who  has  no  understanding  and  whose  mind  (the
reins)  is  never  firmly  held,  his  senses  (horses)  are  unman-
ageable, like  vicious  horses  of  a  charioteer.'

6.  '  But  he  who  has  understanding  and  whose  mind  is
always  firmly  held,  his  senses  are  under  control,  like  good
horses  of  a  charioteer.'

7.  '  He  who  has  no  understanding,  who  is  unmindful  and
always  impure,  never  reaches  that  place,  but  enters  into  the
round  of  births.*

8.  '  But  he  who  has  understanding,  who  is  mindful  and
always  pure,  reaches  indeed  that  pkce,  from  whence  he  is
not  bom  again.'

9.  'But  he  who  has  understanding  for  his  charioteer,
and  who  holds  the  reins  of  the  mind,  he  reaches  the  end
of  his  journey,  and  that  is  the  highest  place  (step)  of
Vishnu.*

10.  '  Beyond  the  senses  there  are  the  objects,  beyond  the
objects  there  is  the  mind,  beyond  the  mind  there  is  the
intellect,  the  Great  Self  is  beyond  the  intellect.'

11.  '  Beyond  the  Great  there  is  the  Undeveloped,  beyond
the  Undeveloped  there  is  the  Person  "(Purusha).    Beyond


TiJANSLATlON   OF   THE   UPANI8HAOS.  1 37

the  Person  there  is  nothing — ^this  is  the  goal,  the  furthest
road/

12.  'That  Self  is  hidden  in  all  beings  and  does  not  shine
forth,  but  it  is  seen  by  subtle  seers  through  their  sharp  and
subtle  intelleci'

13.  'A  wise  man  should  keep  down  speech  and  mind ;  he
should  keep  them  within  the  Self  which  is  knowledge;
he  should  Keep  knowledge  within  the  Self  which  is  the
Qreat ;  and  he  should  keep  that  (the  Qreat)  within  the  Self
which  is  the  Quiet/

14.  'Rise,  awake  I  having  obtained  your  boons,  under-
stand  them  I  The  sharp  edge  of  a  razor  is  difficult  to  pass
over ;  difficult  is  the  path  (to  the  Self) ;  the  wise  tell  it.     •

15.  '  He  who  h^  perceived  that  which  is  without  sound,
without  touch,  without  form,  without  decay,  without  taste,
eternal,  without  smell,  without  beginning,  without  end,
beyond  the  Great,  and  unchangeable,  is  frera  from  the  jaws
of  death.'

Tnui«Xatloii  of  tli«  Vpanlshads.

May  I  be  allowed  to  say  here  a  few  words  with  regard
to  my  translation.  Those  who  know  my  translation  01  the
Upanishads,  published  in  1879  and  1884,  will  easily  see  that
I  nave  altered  it  in  several  places.  But  I  do  not  wish  it  to
be  understood  that  I  consider  my  translation  even  now  as
quite  free  from  doubt.  •  Our  best  scholars  know  how  far  we
are  still  from  a  perfect  understanding  of  the  Upanishads.
When  therefore,  in  1879,  I  undertook  a  translation  of  all
the  more  important  Upanishads,  all  I  could  hope  for  was
to  give  a  better  translation  than  what  we  had  before.
Though  I  was  well  aware  of  the  difficulties  of  such  an
imdertaking,  I  knew  that  I  could  count  on  the  same  in-
dulgence which  is  always  granted  to  a  first  attempt  at
traublatiBg,  nay,  often,  as  m  our  case,  at  guessing  and
deciphering  an  ancient  text.  Nor  have  I  been  at  all  con-
vinced that  I  was  wrong  in  following  a  text,  such  as  it  is
presupposed  by  the  commentaries  of  Savikara,,  instead  of
introducing  conjectural  emendations,  however  obvious  they
seem  to  be.  Scholars  should  learn  that  the  more  obYious
their  emendations  are,  the  more   difficult  it  becomes  to


138  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

account  for  the  introduction  of  such  palpable  corruptions
into  an  ancient  text,  such  as  it  was  at  the  time  of  jSamkara.
My  determination  also,  whenever  it  was  impossible  to  dis-
cover a  satisfactory  meaning,  to  be  satisfied  with  jSamkara's
interpretations,  who  after  all  lived  a  thousand  years  ago,
may  be  criticised,  and  I  never  represented  it  as  more  than
Apis  aller.  Besides  that,  all  the  translators  of  the  S.  B.  E.
had  to  make  a  sacrifice  in  giving  what  they  could  give  at
the  time,  without  waiting  for  the  ninth  year.  Though
I  have  hardly  ever  referred  to  the  mistakes  made  by  earher
translators  of  the  Upftnishads,  but  have  simply  corrected
them,  anybody  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  compare  them
with  my  own  will  find  a  good  harvest  of  them,  sa  those
who  come  after  me  will  no  doubt  glean  many  a  stray  ear
even  in  a  field  which  so  many  mowers  have  mowed.  But
the  work  of  the  children  who  glean  some  ears  is  very
different  from  that  pf  the  mower  who  has  to  mow  a  whole
field  alone.  Such  a  work  as  Colonel  Jacob's  Concordance
of  the  Principal  Upanishads  and  the  Bhagavad-gttsi.,  pub-
lished in  1891,  has, placed  at  the  disposal  of  all  Ved£ntic
students  what  may  almost  be  called  a  mowing  machine  in
place  of  a  sickle ;  and  the  careful  and  brilliant  translation
of  the  Sixty  Upanishads  published  by  Professor  Deussen,
in  1897,  shows  what  an  immense  advance  has  been  made
with  its  help.  I  have  adopted  many  emendations,  in  the
extracts  given  abbve,  from  Professor  Deussen*s  work,  and
when  my  translations  differ  from  his,  all  I  can  say  is  that
I  always  differ  most  reluctantly  from  one  who  has  devoted
so  many  years  to  Ved&ntic  studies,  and  whose  mind  is  so
thoroughly  imbued  with  VedS-ntic  ideas.  If  wo  could
always  know  at  what  time  each  Upanishad  wets  finally
settled  and  reduced  to  writing,  whether  before  or  after  the
time  when  the  VedS.nta  and  Sa-wikhya-pliilosophy  assumed
each  its  own  independent  and  systematic  form,  bur  task
would  be  much  lightened.  Whenever  we  come  across  such
words  as  Atmin  and  Brahman  we  suspect  Vedslntic  in-
fluences, whereas  Purusha  and  PrakWti  at  once  remind  us
of  Sjlmkhya  doctrines.  But  Atman  is  by  no  means  un-
known to  early  S&mkhya  philosophers,  nor  is  Purusha
entirely  outside  the  Vedfintic  horizon.    To  say,  therefore.


CHARACIEB  OF  THE   UPANISHAI^S.  1 39

that  Paruslia  must  always  be  taken  in  the  technical
S&mkhya  sense,  and  Atman  in  that  of  the  Ved&nta,  is
going  too  far,  at  least  at  present.  We  go  still  farther  out
of  our  depth  if  we  maintain,  with  regard  to  the  Ka^Aa
Upanishad,  for  instance,  that  there  was  a  time  when  it
consisted  of  one  chapter  and  three  Vallls  only.  It  may
have  been  so,  and  who  shall  prove  that  it  was  not  so  ?
But  on  the  other  hand,  what  do  we  know  of  the  compilers
of  the  XJpanishads  to  enable  us  to  speak  so  positively  on
such  a  subject?  Everybody  can  see  that  there  was  a  divi-
sion at  ni,  15,  or  16,  or  17.  The  technical  repetition  of
certain  words  in  lY,  17  might  indicate  that  the  Upanishad
originally  ended  there,  and  that  V,  18  is  later.  Anybody
can  see  also  that  the  second  Adhy&ya  differs  in  spirit  from
the  first.  The  name  of  NaAdketas,  for  instance,  is  never
mentioned  in  the  second  chapter,  except  in  the  last  and
probably  spurious  or  additional  verse,  and  then  it  appears
as  N&Adketa,  as  derived  from  NaAiketa,  not  from  me  old
form  Na/iketas.  We  may  easily  discover  a  different  spin*
in  the  thi|:d,  as  compared  with  the  first  and  second  Vallt
In  fact,  there  is  still  plenty  of  work  left  for  those  who
come  after  us,  for  with  all  that  has  been  achieved  we  are
on  the  threshold  only  of  a  truly  historical  study  of  Indian
philosophy  and  literature.  Here,  also,  we  are  still  like
children  playing  on  the  sea-ishore  and  finding  now  and
then  a  pebble  or  a  shell,  whilst  the  great  ocean  of  that
ancient  literature  lies  before  us  undiscovered  and  unex-
plored.

dhMTttotor  of  tlM  VpwaUbaam.

Such  utterances  as  I  have  here  quoted  from  the  Upani-
shads  will  hardly  seem  worthy  of  the  name  of  philosophy.
It  would  have  been  almost  impossible  to  describe  them  so
as  to  give  a  clear  idea  of  what  the  Upanishads  really  are.
With  us  philosophy  always  means  something  systematic,
while  what  we  find  here  are  philosophic  rhapsodies  rather
than  consecutive  treatises,  feut  that  is  the  very  reason
why  the  Upanishads  are  so  interesting  to  the  historical
student.  Kowhere,  except  in  India,  can  we  watch  that
period  of  chaotic  thought,  half  poetical,  half  religious.


I40  INDIAN  PHILOSOPUy.

which  preceded,  in  India  at  least,  the  age  of  philosophy,
properly  so  called.  Possibly,  if  we  knew  more  of  the  utter-
ances of  such  men  as  Heraclitus  or  Epimenides  in  Greece,
they  might  show  some  likeness  to  the  outpourings  of  the
authors  of  the  Upanishads.  What  is  quite  clear,  nowever,
is  that  the  systematic  philosophy  of  India  would  be  per-
fectly unintelligible  without  the  previous  chapter  of  the
Upanishads.  And  however  unsystematic  these  relics  of
the  childhood  of  philosophy  may  seem,  there  is  really  more
system  in  them  than  appears  at  first  sight.  They  contain
a  number  even  of  technical  terms  which  show  that  the
Upanishads  did  not  spring  up  in  one  day,  and  that  there
must  have  been  a  good  deal  of  philosophical  controversy
during  the  age  that  is  recorded  to  us  m  the  Upanishads.
If  jSvetaketu  is  represented  as  attending  the  schools  of
famous  teachers  till  he  is  twenty-four  years  of  a^e,  and  is
then  only  learning  from  his  father  the  highest  wisdom,  we
see  that  that  highest  wisdom  had  already  oeen  fully  elabo-
rated in  the  formula  of  '  Tat  tvam  asi," '  Thou  art  that,'  that
is,  thou,  man,  art  not  different  from  that  divine  nature  which
pervades  the  whole  world,  as  salt  pervades  the  sea.  You
cannot  see  it,  you  cannot  handle  it,  but  you  can  taste  it  and
know  that,  though  invisible,  it  is  there.  That  divine  essence,
that  which  is  alone  true  and  real  in  this  unreal  or  pheno-
menal world,  is  present  likewise,  though  invisible,  as  the
germ  of  life  in  the  smallest  seed,  and  without  it  there  would
be  no  seed,  no  fruit,  no  tree,  as  without  God  there  would
be  no  world.  That  this  ancient  wisdom  should  be  so  often
mixed  up  with  what  seems  to  us  childish  and  absurd,  is  as
true  as  it  is  difficult  to  explain,  but  we  must  remember  that
a  long  continued  oral  tradition  must  naturally  leave'a  wide
door  open  to  additions  of  every  kind.

Whatever  we  may  think  of  these  Upaniahads,  it  cannot
be  doubted  that  they  represent  the  soil  which  contained
the  seeds  of  philosophy  which  sprang  up  and  had  their  full
growth  in  the  great  systems  of  philosopiiy  of  a  later  age.

▼adAiite-Slltnui.

If  now  we  turn  to  these,  and  first  of  all,  to  the  philosophy


VEDANTA-S&TEA8  1 41

elaborated  by  B^dar&yana,  we  find  no  longer  rhapsodies,  but
a  carefully  reasoned  system,  contained  in  555  short  para-
graphs, the  so-called  Ved&nta-Sfttras.  We  read  there  in
the  first  Siitra  and  as  a  kind  of  title,  *  Now  then  a  desire
to  know  Brahman,'  or  as  Deussen  translates  Gignk^,  *  Now
then  research  of  Brahman/  The  two  words  Atha  and  AtaA
which,  I  believe,  were  originally  no  more  than  iniroductory,
and  which  occur  again  and  again  at  the  beginning  of  San-
skrit works,  always  give  rise  to  endless  and  most  fanciful
interpretations.  '  If  we  must  assign  to  them  any  special
meanmg,  it  seems  to  me  best  to  take  Atha  in  the  sense  of
Now,  and  AtaA  in  the  sense  of  Then  or  Therefore,  implying
thereby  that  the  student  has  fulfilled  certain  preliminary
conditions,  such  as  Upanayana,  reception  by  a  teacher,
Ved&dhyayana,  learning  by  heart  the  text  of  the  Veda,
including  the  Ijpanishads,  and  that  he  is  therefore  likely
to  feel  a  desire  to  understand  the  Veda  and  to  know  Brah-
man. It  may  be  true  also,  as  some  commentators  maintain,
that  in  real  life  the  first  step  would  have  been  to  study  the
Pftrva-Mtm&ms4,  or  what  is  called  Dharma,  law,  virtue,  &c. ;
and  that  only  after  having  ^ned  a  knowledge  of  Dharma,
particularly  of  the  sacrificial  Dharma,  would  there  arise
a  desire  to  know  Brahman.  In  that  case  the  Mtm&ms&
might  be  looked  upon  as  one  body,  the  Piirva-Mtm&ms&
forming  the: first,  the  Uttara-Mlmfiims&  the  second  part,
and  we  should  have  to  consider  the  practice  of  virtue  and
the  performance  of  sacrificial  acts  as  a  necessary  prelimi-
nary to  a  study  of  the  Ved&nta-philosophy,  or,  as  it  is
generally  expressed,  we  should  have  to  consider  works  as
essential  for  producinir  that  purity  and  serenity  of  the
mind  without  which  a  knowledge  of  Brahman  i  impos-
sible.  I  confess  I-doubt  whether  all  this  was  present  to
the  mind  of  Bddar&yaTia.  He  may  have  usea  &i^/?&s&,
wish  to  know,  insteaa  of  ViMra,  research  or  discussion,  on
purpose,  because  in  the  true  sense  Brahman  cannot  be  de-
nned or  known.  But  although  Brahman  cannot  be  known
like  all  other  thin^,  by  being  defined  as  So  and  So,  it  can
be  explained  negatively  as  Not  so  and  Not  so,  and  can  thus
be  cleared  from  many  doubts  which  arise  from  the  various
utterances  about  it  in  the  Upanishada     When  we.  read


142  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

however,  that  food  is  Brahman  \  that  Manas  is  Brahman ',
that  yi^/7&na  is  Brahman  ^  that  the  sun  is  Brahman  \  nav
that  N&r&yaTia  is  Brahman  ^,  there  is  surely  room  enough
for  trying  to  determine  what  Brahman  really  is,  or  at  least
what  he  or  it  was  to  BlUlar&yaTia  and  his  predecessors.

The  best  answer,  however,  to  all  these  questions  is  that
given  in  the  next  SAtra,  *  That  froTn  which  the  oHgin  ^c.
(origin,  subsistence,  and  dissolution)  of  this  world  proceed  V
The  full  sense  of  this  Sfttra,  according  to  the  commentator,
is :  '  That  omniscient,  omnipotent  cause  from  which  proceed
the  origin,  subsistence  and  dissolution  of  the  world,  which
world  is  differentiated  by  names  and  forms,  contains  many
agents  and  enjoyers,  and  is  the  abode  of  fruits  or  effects,
caused  by  ^former  actions,  these  fruits  having  their  definite
places,  times  and  causes,  and  the  nature  of  whose  arrange*
ment  cannot  be  conceived  by  the  mind — that  cause  is
Brahman.'

If  it  be  asked,  how  this  is  known,  the  commentator  in-
sists very  strongly  that  such  knowledge  is  not  to  be  gained
hy  sense  perception  or  by  inference,  but  simply  by  the  Veda
(Upanishads),  passages  of  which  have  been  collected  and
properly  arranged  in  the  SCitras.  If  in  some  places  he
admits  as  a  second  source  of  knowledge  S&ksh^tkAra,  or
manifestation,  that  can  only  be  meant  for  intuition,  but,
strictly  speaking,  such  intuition  also  presupposes  a  previous
working  of  the  organs  of  sensuous  perception,  while  the
object  of  such  Sd.ksh&,tk£Lra,  i.e.  Brahman,  can  at  first  be
supplied  by  the  Veda  only.  In  support  therefore  of  our
Siitra  which  is  intended  to  give  a  general  idea  of  Brahman,
a  passage  is  quoted  from  the  Taitt.  Up.  Ill,  i,  where  Varuna
explains  to  his  son  that  'that  frpm  which  these  beings  are
bom,  that  by  which,  when  bom,  they  live,  that  into  which
at  their  death  they  re-enter,  try  to  know  that,  that  is
Brahman/

*  KJAad.  Up.  VII,  7,  9,  s ;  Bnh.  ir.  V,  la,  i.

«  Kh^nd,  Up.  in,  iB,  i ;  VII,  3,  a ;  Bnh.  At.  IV,  i,  6,

*  JSTMnd.  Up.  VII,  7,  a.

*  Khkxid,  Up.  Ill,  19,  I ;  BrQu  Up.  II,  i,  a.
'^  MahAn&r.  Upw  XI,  4*

*  The  words  which  actually  occur  in  the  Sdtra  are  printed  in  italics,
to  give  an  idea  of  the  enigmatical  style  of  the  Si^tras,  and  their  utter
uaelessnesa  witibiout  a  oemmentary.


APPEALS   TO  THS    VEDA.      PBAMA^'^a  1 43

AppMlfl  to  tlM  ▼•4a.

And  here  we  should  mark  a  curious  feature  of  orthodox
Indian  philosophy.  Though  th^  Ved&nta  appeals  to  the.
Veda,  it  appeals  to  it,  not  as  having  itself  grown  out  of  it
or  as  belonging  to  it,  but  rather  as  an  independent  witness,
looking  back  to  it  for  sanction  and  confirmation.  The  same
applies,  though  in  a  less  degree,  to  other  systems  also.
They  all  speak  as  if  they  had  for  several  generations  ela-
borated their  doctrines  independently,  and,  after  they  had
done  so,  they  seem  to  come  back  to  get  the  approval  of  the
Veda,  or  to  establish  their  conformity  with  the  Veda,  as
the  recognised  highest  authority.  This  shows  that  a  cer-
tain time  must  have  elapsed  after  the  iinal  redaction  of  the
Upanishads  and  the  return,  as  it  were,  of  their  offspring,
the  Siitras,  to  their  original  home.  How  this  came  about,
we  cannot  tell,  because  we  have  no  historical  documents,
but  that  there  had  been  something  very  important  inter-
vening between  the  old  Upanishads  and  the  first  attempts
at  systematising  yedd.nta  and  SUmkhya  doctrines  in  tlie
form  of  Siitras  is  very  clear  by  the  manner  in  which  the
S&tras  appeal  to  the  Veda.  This  constant  appeal  to
the  Veda  as  the  highest  authority  was  justified  by  the
most  elaborate  arguments,  as  part  of  the  question,  How  do
we  know  ?  a  question  which  forms  an  essential  preliminary
to  all  philosophy  in  India.


We  saw  how  the  jBr&rvd.kas  admitted  but  one  source  of
knowledge,  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  excluding  all  others.
How  they  defended  that  sensuous  knowledge  against  the
uncertainties  inherent  in  it,  we  do  not  know,  because  we
do  pot  possess  those  S&tras.  But  it  is  characteristic  of  the
Ved&nta-S&tras,  that  they  pay  much  smaller  attention  to
the  Pramstnas,  the  sources  and  authorities  of  knowledge,
than  the  other  systems.  These  questions  of  Fram^ria  are
often  referred  to  in  the  commentaries,  but  not  so  much  in
the  text.  Pramd,7ia  is  originally  the  instrument  of  measur-
ing, from  Md.,  to  measure,  and  Pra,  forth.  It  may  be
translated  by  measure,  standard,  authority,  and  survives
in  the  modem  Persian  Ferm&n,  an  authoritative  order.


144  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.


The  Pramd.Tia  which  serves  as  a  means  (S&dhana)  of
determining,  produces  Pramiti,  accurate  knowledge,  just  as
a  S&dhana  (means)  produces  Siddhi,  truth  or  certainty.
When  we  come  to  the  S&mkhya,  we  shall  find  there  a  very
full  and  perhaps  the  oldest  description  of  the  three  essen-
tial Pramd.Tias,  viz.  Pratyaksha,  Anum&na,  and  ^abda.
The  first  Piram&Tia,  Pratyaksha,  is  what  we  mean  by
sensuous  perc'eption,  though  it  is  also  used  in  the  sense  of
what  can  be  perceived  by  the  senses,  the  DriAdSk,  i.e.
what  is  seen.  It  is  explained  (Sd,mkhya-Sfttra  I,  89)  as
cognition  which  arises  from  contact  (with  objects)  and
represents  their  form.

It  is  generally  explained  b^  Indriy&rtha-saDinikarsha,
contact  of  the  senses  and  their  respective  objects,  and  is
said  to  involve  really  three  stages,  contact  of  the  sense-
organ  with  its  object,  and  at  the  same  time  union  of  the
Bense  with  Manas,  mind,  and  union  of  Manas,  mind,  with
Atman,  Self.  There  is  a  distinction  made  between  two
kinds  of  Pratyaksha,  called  Savikalpa  and  Nirvikalpa,
with  doubt  and  without  doubt.  The  former  seems  to  con-
sist in  our  seeing  an  object,  and  then  declaring  that  it  is
this  or  that ;  the  latter  in  simply  accepting  a  thing  such  as
it  is,  without  any  previous  idea  of  it,  such  as  when  we
awake  from  sleep,  see  a  tiger,  and  at  once  run  away.'
Each  sense  working  by  itself,  and  on  its  own  objects  only,
is  the  Asftdh&ra7iaksira72a,  the  special  or  exclusive  instru-
ment of  the  knowledge  conveyed  by  it.  Soimd,  for
instance,  is  heard  by  the  ear  only,  and  is  conveyed  by
kk&esk  or  ether.  JBut  not  every  sound  is  brought
into  immediate  contact  with  the  ear;  it  is  transmitted
through  the  ether,  as  we  are  told,  by  means  of  waves
(Vlfcita),  so  that  we  may  perceive  the  beating  of  a
distant  drum,  one  wave  propelling  the  other  across
the  vast  ocean  of  ether,  till  it  strikes  the  shore,  i.6.  the
ear.


ANUHAnA.      .9ABDA.  1 45

The  next  Pramd.iia  is  AnumA;na  or  inference,  which  is
explained  (1.  a,  I,  loo)  as  knowledge  of  the-  connected  on
the  part  of  one  who  knows  the  connection,  or  as  knowledge
of  something  that  is  not  perceptible,  but  is  known  as  being
invariably  connected  (Vy^pya)  with  something  else  that  is
peroeivea,  as  when  we  perceive  fire  (Vyft-paka)  from  per-
ceiving smoke  (Vyilpta);  This  is  a  very  imperiect  descrip-
tion of  Anumana,  which  will  be  more  rally  explained
hereafter,  but  it  suffices  for  our  present  purpose.  As  an
illustration,  we  have  the  common  illustration  that  we  know
the  presence  of  fire  when  we  see  smoke,  and  that  we  know
the  absence  of  smoke  when  we  see  no  fire,  always  supposing
that  fire  has  been  proved  to  be  the  Vy&paka  or  the  sine  qud
non  of  smoke.

Sabda,  (I,  loi)  or  word,  another  Pramftna,  is  explained
to  be  instruction  given  by  one  that  can  be  trusted  (Apto-
padesa) ;  this  one  that  can  be  trusted  being  for  the  Veo&n-
tists  the  Veda,  but  for  the  S^mkhya  and  other  systems,
any  other  person  also  endowed  with  authority  and  there-
fore considered  as  trustworthy.  It  might  easily  be  shown
that  these  three  Pram&nas  all  go  back  to  one,  the  Pra-
tyaksha,  because  the  invariable  concomitance  between
smoke  and  fire  and  the  like,  on  which  the  AnumUna  rests,
can  have  been  established  by  sensuous  experience  only;
and  the  trustworthiness  of  any  knowledge  conveyed  by
word  must  equally  depend  on  experience,  or  on  acquaint-
ance with  the  person  who  is  or  is  not  to  be  trusted.

Thi^  question  is,  whether  this  jSabda,  word,  was  originally
taken  to  signify  the  Veda  such  as  we  possess  it  K  I  have
elsewhere  given  my  reasons  for  believing  that  /Sabda  had
really  a  far  more  general  and  more  philosophical  meaning,
and  tJiat  it  may  have  been  intended  at  first  for  Brahman,
the  Word,  or  for  verbal  knowl^ge  as  is  conveyed  by
a  word*  The  Hindus  knew  quite  well  that  words  such  as
greatnessi  goodness,  nay,  also  such  as  animal,  plant,  metal,

*  SAmkhjarPhilosophid,  p.  154,  Anm.  3.  Tliat  the  connection  between
sound  and  meaning,  and  iherolore  the  authority  of  word»  by  themaelres,
oeenpied  the  SAmkhyas,  we  0»  from  Sfttra  V,  37.

10  ^


146  INDIAN   PHriiOSOPHY.

nav,  even  dog  or  cow,  convey  knowledge  that  cannot  be
gained  either  Djrperception  or  by  inference  alone,  but  only
by  the  word.  The  same  api>lie8  to  Aptava^na,  another
term  for  /Sabda,  word,  used  in  the  S&,mkhya-philosophy.
Apta,  which  is  explained  by  Yogya,  can  hardly  be  trans-
lated by  aptus.  It  means  what  has  been  obtained  or
received,  and  Aptav&kya  or  AptavaA;ana  need  originally
have  meant  no  more  than  our  traditional  language  sucn
as  it  is,  though  it  was  explained  afterwards  as  meaning  the
word  of  a  person  worthy? of  confidence,  or  even  of  a  book
believed  in  by  the  world  at  large.  However,  we  must  be
satisfied  with  what  the  S&mkhya  philosophers  tell  us';  and
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  followers  of  the  orthodox
S&mkhya  understood  £^abda  in  the  sense  of  Veda ;  though,
oonsidering  that  they  admitted  a  divine,  not  a  human
origin  of  the  Veda,  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  they
comd  afterwards  take  it  in  the  generaji  sense  of  the  word
of  one  that  can  be  trusted.  The  important  question  for
us  to  consider  is  what  other  systems  of  philosophy  have
made  of  these  three  Pramd^nas.  The  S&tras  of  all  the
other  systems  of  philosophy  are  well  acquainted  with  them,
and  they  are  even  referred  to  by  the  commentators  of  the
VedA.nta  also.  It  seems  strange  at  first  sight,  considering
that  the  question  of  the  possibility  of  knowing,  and  of  the
instruments  of  knowledge,  forms  the  foundation  of  every
true  system  of  philosophy,  that  the  Brahma-S&tras,  though
not  the  later  Vedfi^nta  works,  should  apparently  have
attached  so  little  importance  to  what  may  be  called  their
Critimie  of  Pure  Reason,  This  would  seem  indeed  to  lower
the  VedSjata-philosophy  to  the  level  of  all  Pre-E^tian
philosophy,  but  a^  little  reflection  will  show  us  that  there
was  in  the  Yedd^nta  a  sufficient  excuse  for  this  neglect.
What  at  first  sight  makes  the  case  still  worse  is  that  while
Pratyaksha,  perception,  and  Anum&na,  inference,  are
ignored,  the  only  evidence  invoked  by  BS^dar&yaTia  is
&uti  or  revelation,  which,  as  we  saw,  was  often  invoked
by  the  modem  orthodox  S&mkhyas  under  the  name  of
jSabda^^r  word.  To  most  philosophers  revelation  would
seem  a  very  wectk  instrument  of  knowledge,  and  one  that
could  never  claim  more  than  a  subordinate  place,  even  if


i9ABPA%  147


ttreaiod  as  a  aobdiviftion  of  AnmnAjia  or  in&r^ioe.  Bat
most  remember  that  it  is  the  highest  object  of  the  Ved&nta
to  prove  that  there  is  only  on^  true  realitv,  namely  Bf ahman,
and  that  the  manifoldness  of :  the  visible  world  is  but  the
result  of  that  nescience  which  the  Veddixta  is  meant  to
destrcqr.  It  will  then  become  intelligible  why  an  appeal
to  Uie  evidence  of  the  senses  or  to  inference  would  have
been  out  of  place  and  almost  self  •contradictory  in  the
Vedslnta.  The  commentator  admits  this  when  he  says,  'If
we  acquiesce  in  the  doctrine  of  absolute  unity  (Brahman),
the  ordinary  meana  of  right,  knowledge,  perception.  &c..
beeome  invalid,  because  the  absence  of  manifoldness  deprives
them  of  their  objects.'  H«ace,  a  doctrine  which  undertakes
to  prove  that  the  manifold  world,  presented  to  us  by  the
senses,  is  unreal,  oould  not  well  appeal  at  the  same  time  to
the  evidence  of  the  senses,  nor  to  interence  which  is  founded
CO  it,  IB  support  of  truth  or  right  knowledge,  though  it  may
and  does  readily  aoknowledge  their  importaiiee  for  all  the
ordinary  tcansaetions  of  life.  Thus  iSamkara  ccmtinues:
'  So  long  as  a  person  has  not  reached  the  true  knowledge
of  the  unity  of  the  Self,  it  does  not  enter  his  mind  that  the
world  of  effects,  with  it»  instruments  and  objects  of  right
knowledge  and  its  results  of  actions,  is  untrue;  and. hence,
as  long  as  true  knowledge  does  not  present  iitself  ,  there  is
no  reason  why  the  ordinary  course  of  secular- and  reHgious
activity  should  not  go  on  undisturbed.'

How  well  B&dard.yana  must  have  been  acquainted  with
the  ordinary  evidences  of  knowledge,  both  Pratyaksha  and
Anumftna,  is  best  shown  by  the  new  meaning  which  he
assigns  to  them,  applying  (I,  3^  28)  Pratyaksha  to  iS^ti
(revelation^  and  AnumAna  to  Smrita. (tradition),  the  Veda
being  to  him  self-evident,  while  other  works,  such  as  the
Law-books  of  Manu,  the  Mah&bhirata  (Bhasavad-gitA),  nay
even  the  S&mkhya  and  Yoga  systems  (IV,  a.  2i),  being
Smriti.  are  true  in  80  far  only  as  they  are  not  ill  opposition
to  the  Veda.    But  everything  else^  every  kind  of  larka  or

rulation,  is  excluded  when  the  fundamental  truths  of
VedAnta  are  at  stake.  Thus  Saniksun,,  II,  i,  it,  says:
*  In  matters  to  be  known  from  iSr^uti  mere  reasoning  is  not
to  be  relied  on.    As  the'  thoughts  of  man  are  altogether

L  k


14^  ^muK  tmoMMfnT.

fiMS  OB  sMHyiORMu  OpIHIOH  <MHy ,  DM  IM>  pfOpOF  lOIIIKlMMSL

One  Mds  how  «rgixiiMfit«  wkich  some  clever  men  had  ex-
€ldgltoted  with  great  pfti]»»  efe  lAowii  hy  people  still  aK>re
inf^ioin  fo  be  faHaaons,  and  how  the  arguments  of  the
la^r  aare  f^fsted  m  their  turn  by  other  men;  k)  that  on
aeiMHSrit  of  ttie  cKt^ersity  of  men's  opinions,  it  is  impossible
to  itieept  mere  r<sas6ni&g  as  havii^  a  sore  foundation.
Hor  ean  we  gbt  over  this  c^iioalty  1^  aeeepting  as  well
f onnded  the  reasoninff  of  some  person  of  reeognised
eminsMs,  whether  Kaptla  or  any  one  else,  sinee  we  dSserve
that  even  meti  of  the  most  tmdonbted  intetteetm&l  emineMe,
snehas  Kiqf>ila,  KanAda,  and  other  fonndersof  pMlosophiMl
sriiooli^  hate  eontradieted  eadi  other/

This  urieelkin  of  imboh  attd  tfsoBisig;  thootfh  not  m^-
fsadlitr  ter  oafsdvea^  sesnis  outainFf  stnmge  m  a  jMkh
Mfmer  i  tsuA  it  is  not  imuatural  that  AMnkara  sbosdkl  have
boon  tawrtid  b^  his  adversaries  with  nsii^  reason  against
laasoBlag^  ^Yaa  eannot/  they  say,  'maintain  that  no
rtatciiiing  wlmtever  is  welKfoimded,  ^.  y<m  yoorself  ean
ifMaA  yoor  assertioli  that  reasoning  has  no  fonndatioii  on
Kfawnming  only.  XouMFver,.  if  all  roasoping  were  nnf  onnded,
the  whue  eomtte  of  ptaetieal  hnman  life  wonld  have  to
sMie  to  anend'  But  even  tiiis  does  not  frighten  Aimkara.
As  an  reasoning  is  admittedly  founded  on  perception  and
inference,  he  replies,  'that  al&oofi^  with  re|pra  to  some
HdAifi  rsaaraiing  is  known  to  be  weU-fonndecC  with  regard
to  the  matter  in  hand  there  will.be  no  escape,  i.e.  reasoning
eannot  there  esoape  from  the  chaige  of  being  iU-fonnded.
The  true  natare  of  the  cause  of  tro  world  on  which  final
emancipation  depends  cannot,  on  account  of  its  excessive
abstmseness^  even  be  thought  of  without  the  help  of  the
holy  texts ;  for  it  cannot  become  tiis  object  of  perception
beoMse  it  does  not  possess  qualities  snch  as  form  and  the  like,
andf  asit  is  devoid  ca  characteristic  signs  or  qxialities,  it  cannot
lend  itself  to  inference  and  other  means  of  right  knowledge/

Here  we  approach  a  very  difficult  queraon,  and  have
possiMy  to  amoit  a  weak  link  in  the  strong  chain  armour
of  both  BAdarftyana  and  /Ssmkara.  How  is  the  supreme
atttlKffity  of  the  Veda  to  be  established  sgainst  those  who


TH8  MM^ma^  Of  v«AL  .  149

»

4iie  Vr6^  Is  ito  aim  jpix)of ,  thiM'  it»  is  te^^ii^awwi^  me  AIm
syn:  but  lK>wau3eabJ6otioi)8  io  beaikneddt  Xbe  V^edtotte
philoao^eFs  have  w  sixpecatitknB  oii4»7.<iai«r  poixiim,  an4
ajce  {MsraecKily  f ea»rle8s  in  tbe  <)reatfli)dK^  of  ^  other  ^roUenw;
they  4WI  eikter  joto  i^e  jooost  •sobtle  iconftro^evsiM^  j»4^^
they  eiiHd  eatiafied  mlh  the  «iere  apai^rtic^  that  #ie  Veda
waote  <io  ]»oof,  that  its  wtkib^tv  ^e^f^sxaKB  j^
eleewheve  {pxAm&inyaaa  nimf^ekeham),  that  it  le  diiMt
0vddeiiQe  of  truth,  just  as  the  l;igbt  ol  the  aan  is  its  omu
evidence  of  light,  and  at  the  same  ttioie  Jthe  dinMt  mmm  ^
ajw  knowledge  of  £«ffiED  aiid  eoloa^

But  :iirho  s^ys  so?  Who  hvA  a  falUUe  moiisll  It
would  be  hardly  enough  if  we  weie  to  say  i«hait  the  ¥edi^
was  the  oldest  document  whieh  the  BAhmans  j>ogoooied»  timt
it  may^ven  have  beeoi  brought  into  India  £rnm  auflifcb<er
country,  tbat  its  v&y  Jaiigusge  jrequired  to  be  imteipreted
hgr  competent  persona*  All  this  might  have  helped  tP
invest  ihe  Veda  mth  some  Mnd  of  mysterious  fhsuracter ;
but  fmy  impressiau  has  always  been  that  this  would  be
taki^gloo  low  a  view  of  the  jLndian intelleet.  Ved»>  Ihdii,
was  not  merely  the  name  of.  a  .ten^t  or  of  te;v;tiBi,  but  pas  oa-
ginally  conceived  in  a  far  deeper  sense.


Whs  JMasiair  ^

We  often  rc;ad  that  Yeda  is  Brahman,  and  Bralunan  is
Veda,  and  in  such  passi^ges  Brahman  is  now  generally
taken  in  the  sense  of  the  Skmhit&s  and  Brfthmanas  suoh  as
we  possess  them.  But  might  it  not,  like  ^tava^kana»  to
which  we  referred  before,  have  meant  originaiiy  knowledge
or  (wisdom  or  Sophia ;  and Mauch. a  Sophia  was  impoesime
without  words,  might  we  Jdot  here  also  have  a  faint  xecol'*
leetion  of  Brahman  as  ^the  Word,  the  first  creation  of  divine
Uioughtb  After  all,  .Veda  mcians  originally  knowledge,  and
not  Iqonns  and  Bxihmatias,  and  as  such  would  come  vei
n^ar  to  Wisdom  or  Sophia.  J  do  not  venture  to
positively  on  such  a  ^ul^ect»  because  there  is  so  little  of
leal  evidence  left  to  (which  we  could  appeal.    I  give  it


156  INDIAN  PHILOSOPftY.


smiply  ad  ah  idea  that  Hals  presented  itself  to  my  mind  as
a  way  out  of  many  difficulties.  To  prevent  all  misunder-
standings I  say  at  once  that  I  do  not  entertain  the  idea
that  sucli  thoughts  wer^  borrowed  from  Greece  and  Alex-
andria, or  had  been  matured  during  the  as  yet  undivided
Airyan  period.  All  I  should  venture  to  suggest  is  that  the
idea  of  the  Word  or  the  Logos  being  the  first  revelation,
manifestation  or  creation  of  a  Divine  Power  is  by  no  means
so  strange,  even  in  a  very  early  period  of  thought,  as  it
seems  to  us.  People  who  have  thought  at  all  about  what
a  word  is,  not  a  mere' 'sign  or  a  means  of  communication,
bub  an  act  embodjring  for  the  first  time  a  definite  idea
which  came*into  existence  b^  being  uttered,  and  afterwards
thrown  forth  and  realised  m  our  objective  world,  would
naturally,  whether  in  Greece  or  in  India,  recognise  in  every
word  an  isict  of  a  Divine  Thinker,  just  as  in  every  species
they  have  to  recognise  the  will  of  a  Divine  Creator.  <Sam-
kara  goes  so  far  as  to  declare  that  the  Veda  is  the  cause
of  the  distinction  of  all  the  different  classes  and  conditions
(m[>ecies)  of  gods,  animals,  and  men  ^I,  i,  3,  and  Brih.  Ar.
Upan.  11,  4,  10).  TSFay  he  speaks  still  more  distinctly  in
1,3,  Q.S:  *We  all  know  from  observiation,'  he  says,  *that
any  one,  when  setting  about  something  which  he  wishes  to
accomplish,  first  remembers  the  word  denotinff  the  thing,
and  after  that  sets  to  work.'  What  should  ne  do  when
there  is  as  yet  no  word  to  remember,  but  the  word,  that  is,
the  idea,  has  firat  to  be  created  1  We  therefore  conclude
that,  before  the  creation,  the  Vedic  words  became  manifest
in  the  mind  of  Pra(;A,pati  the  creator,  and  that  after  that
he  created  the  things  corresponding  to  these  words.  The
Sruti  also,  when  it  says  'uttering  Bhftr  He  created  the
earth,  &c.,'  shows  that  the  worlds,  sucli  as  the  earth,  ftc,
became  manifest,  Le.  were  created,  from  the  word  Bhiir,
which  had  become  manifest  in  the  mind  (of  Pra^Apati).
In  that  case  the  recognition  by  Indian  thinkers  of  Branman
as  the  Word  or 'the  TOi vine  '(nought,  or  as  Veda,  would  W
no  means  be  so  surprising  as  it  sounds  to  us  at  first.  It
might  then  be  Said  quite  truly  that  the  5abda,  sound,  or
Brahman  or  V&A;  or  *Bnh  =  word,  was  e^mal,  absolute,
self-luminous,  self -evident,  in  fact  all  that  the  Veda  is  said


WORK-PART  AND  KNOWLEDGE-PART  OP  THF.   VEDA.       I5I

to  be.  Two  such  words  as  Brahman  and  Atman  w6uld  by
themselves  convey  that  eternal  truth  for  which  the  Vedanta-
philosophy  is  fighting,  and  in  support  of  which  there  is  bu^.
one  appeal^  not  to  sensuous  experience  nor  to  inference,
but  to  the  Word  itself,  i.e.  to  Brahman,  or  the  Veda.
I  know  full  well  how  entirely  hypothetical,  if  not  mystical,
this  may  sound  to  many  Sanskrit  scholars,  but  I  could  not
entirely  suppress  these  thoughts,  as  they  seem  to  me  the
only  way  in  which  we  can  &ee  our  VedHnta  philosophers
from  the  charge  of  childishness,  for  imagining  that  they
could  establish  the  highest  truths  which  are  within  the
reach  of  the  human  mind,  on  such  authorities  as  the  hymns,
the  Brd^hmatias  and  even  some  of  the  XJpanishads,  es  we
possess  them  now.

Betuming  to  the  VedS.nta,  however,  such  as  we  know  it
from  the  SCttras,  we  must  be  satisfied  with  the  expressea
view  of  BMar&yaTia  that  the  evidence  for  what  the  Ved&ntd
teaches  is  neither  perception  nor  inference,  but  the  Word
(£^abda)  alone,  such  as  we  find  it  in  our  manuscripts,  or
rather  in  the  oral  tradition  of  the  Veda.

Wmrk^pavt  and  i:Bowl«dg»-p«rt  of  th«  ▼•dft^

Of  course  a  distinction  has  to  be  made,  and  has  been
made  by  B&darftyatia  between  the  Knowledge-part,  the
Oa&nBrkkndB^y  chiefly  the  XJpanishads,  and  the  Earma-
kftTicia,  the  Work-part,  the  hymns  and  Brahma  na&  3oth
are  called  Veda  or  /Sruti,  revelation,  and  yet  the  work-part
does  not  exist  for  the  true  philosopher,  except  in  order  to
be  discarded  as  Boon  as  he  has  understood  the  knowledge-
part.  £amkara  is  bold  enough  to  declare  that  the  whole
Veda  is  useless  to  a  man  who  has  obtained  knowledge,  or
Mukti,  or  freedom.  '  Not  all  the  Vedas  together,'  he  bajb,
*  are  more  useful  to  one  who  has  obtained  true  knowledge
than  is  a  small  tank  of  water  in  a  country  flooded  with
water.'  A  man  who  has  neglected  the  Veoas  and  disre«
garded  the  rules  of  the  four  Asramas,  in  fact,  a  man  who
has  lost  caste,  may  still  be  allowed  to  study  the  Ved^nta
as  the  fountain  of  all  true  knowledge,  and  thus  become
liberated  (III,  4,  36).  The  hymns  and  IBr&hmanas  refer  in
fact  to  the  'phenomenal  world,  they  presuppose  the  exist-


152  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

ence  of  a  manifold  creation,  of  an  enjoyer  of  what  is  to  be
enjoved,  of  good  works  and  their  fruit  But  all  this,  as  we
fihaU  see,  is  not  real,  but  phenomenal;  it  belongs  to  the
realm  of  Avidy&,  Nescience,  and  vanishes  as  soon  as  true
wisdom  or  Yidyk  has  been  obtained.  It  is  to  be  observed
in  the  world,  such  as  it  is,  as  a  lower  stage,  but  as  ess^tial
in  leading  on  to  a  higher  stage.

TidyA  Mid  ArlArk.

If  then  the  highest  truth  contained  in  the  Veda  is  the
Tat  Tvam,Asi^  that  is,  Thou,  the  Giv&tman,  art  it  (the
Paramii.tman  or  BrahmanV  and  if,  as  we  are  told,  there  is
but  one  Brahman  and  notning  beside  it,  the  Y ed&nta  pliilo-
Bopher  is  at  once  met  by  the  question.  How  then  are  we  to
account  for  the  manifold  Thou's,  the  many  individuals,  and
the  immense  variety  of  the  objective  world  ?  If  the  Veda'
is  true,  our  view  of  the  world  cannot  be  true  at  the  same
time.  It  can  therefore  be  due  only  to  what  is  called
Avidy^,  Nescience,  and  it  is  the  very  object  of  the  Ved^ta-
philosophy  to  expel  and  annihilate  this  Avidyd,  and  replace
it  by  VidyA.

Sii1]()Mt  Mid  Olij«et.

This  Avidy&  is  the  next  point  that  has  to  be  discussed.
iSamkara,  in  the  introduction  to  his  commenteuy,  has  some
important  remarks  on  it  \  '  As  it  is  well  known,'  he  says,
'  that  object  and  subject,  which  fall  under  the  concepts  of
We  and  You  (or  as  we  should  say,  of  the  Ego  and  Non-
Ego),  are  in  their  very  essence  opposed  -to  each  other,  like
darkness  and  light,  and  that  the  one  can  never  therefore
take  the  place  of  the  other,  it  follows  fuither  that  their
attributes  also  can  never  be  interchanged.'  This  means
that  object  and  subject  mutually  exclude  each  other,  so
that  what  is  conceived  as  object  can  never  in  the  same  aiOt
of  thought  be  conceived  as  subject,  and  vice  verea.  We  can»
for  instance,  never  say  or  thinV :  We  are  you,  or  You.  are
we,  nor  ought  we  ever  to  substitute  subjective  for  objective
qualities.  '  Therefore,'  he  continues,  *  we  may  conclude
that  to  transfer  what  is  objective,  that  is  what  is  peiceived

*■  Throe  Lectures  on  the  Vcd&nta^  p.  62.


SUBJlfiOT  AND  OBJIBOT.  1 53

as  Ton  or  Non-ego  with  its  qualities,  to  what  id  subjective,
that  is  what  perceives  as  We,  the  Ego,  which  consists  of
thought,  or  vice  versa  to  transfer  what  is  subjective  to
what  is  objective,  must  be  altogether  wrong.'  A  subject
can  never  be  anything  but  a  subject,  the  object  always
remains  the  object  '  Nevertheless,'  he  adds,  *  it  is  a  habit
in  human  nature  (a  necessity  of  thought,  as* we  might  call
it),  to  say,  combining  what  is  true  and  what  is  false,  '*  I  am
this,"  ''  tnis  is  mine,  &c.  This  is  a  habit,  caused  by  a  false
apprehension^  of  subject  and  predicate,  and  by  not  distin-
guishing one  from  the  other,  out  transferring  the  essence
and  the  qualities  of  the  one  upon  the  other/

It  is  clear  that  iSamkara  here  uses  subject  and  object  n«t
only  in  their  simple  logical  sense,  but  that  by  subject  he
means  what  is  real  and  true,  in  fact  the  Self,  while  object
moans  with  him  what  is  unreal  and  phenomenal,  such  as  the
body  with  its  oi^ans,  and  the  whole  visible  world.  In
'  I  am,'  the  verb  has  a  totally  different  character  from  what
it  has  in  '  thou  art  '.or '  lie  is.'  Such  statements  therefore
as  *1  am  strong,'  or  '  I  am  blind,'  arise  from  a  false  appre-
hension which,  though  it  is  inseparable  from  human  thought,
such  as  it  is,  has  slowly  to  be  overcome  and  at  last  to  be
destroyed  by  the  Vedanta-philosopby.

This  distinction  lietween  subject  and  object  in  the  sense
of  what  is  real  and  what  is  phenomenal  is  very  important,
and  stamps  the  whole  of  the  Yedanta-philosophy  with  its
own  peculiar  character.

It  tollows  in  fact  from  this  f updamental  distincticm  that
we  should  never  predicate  what  is  phenomenal  or  objective
of  what  is  real  and  subjective,  or  what  is  real  and  subjec-
tive of  what  is  phenomenal  and  objective;  and  it  is  in
causing  this  mistake  that  the  chief  power  of  Avidyk  or
Nescience  consists.  I  should  even  go  so  far  as  to  say  that
this  warning  might  be  taken  to  heart  by  our  own  philo-
sophers also,  for  many  of  our  own  fallacies  arise  from  the
same  Avidy&,  and  are  due  in  the  end  to  the  attribution  of
phenomenal  and  objective  qualities  to  the  subjective  reali-
ties which  we  l^ould  recognise  in  the  Divine  only,  and  as
underlying  the  Human  Self  and  the  phenomenal  world.

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  the  Avidy&  or


154  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

NcQcicnce  which  makes  the  world  what  we  make  it  and
take  it  to  be,  is  simply  our  own  individual  ignorance,  our
being  unacquainted  with  the  truths  of  the  Ved§,nta.  It
shomd  rather  be  looked  upon  as  inborn  in  human  nature,
or,  from  an  Indian  point  of  view,  as  the  result  of  accumu-
lated thoughts  and  deeds  before  the  mountains  were  brought
forth.  It  has.  truly  been  called  a  general  cosmical  Nes-
cience) inevitable  for  a  time,  as  darkness  is  with  light.  So
far  as  in  true  reality  we  are  Brahman,  our  Nescience  mi^ht
indeed  be  called  the  Nescience  of  Brahman,  if  for  a  time
only;  and  if  we  remember  that  it  can  be  annihilated,  we
can  understand  why  it  was  said  to  be  nought,  for,  according
to  a  general  principle  of  the  Yedanta,  nothing  that  is  real'
can  ever  be  annihilated,  so  that  nothing  that  is  liable  to
annihilation  haa  a  right  to  be  called  real.

But  it  is  vety  curious  to  find  that  though  /S^amkara  looks
upon  the  whole  objective  world  as  the  result  of  Nescience,
he  nevertheless  allows  it  to  be  real  for  all  practical  purposes
(Vyavah&x&rtham).  Thus  we  read  (11,  i,  14),  'The  entire
complex  of  phenomenal  existence  is  considered  as  true  so
long  as  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  and  the  Self  of  all  haa
not  arisen,  just  as  the  phantoms  of  a  dream  are  considered
to  be  true  until  the  sleeper  wakes.  .  .  .'  Hence,  as  long  as
true  knowledge  does  not  present  itgelf ,  there  is  no  reason
why  the  ordinary  course  of  secular  and  religious  activity
should  not  go  on  undisturbed,  and  more  particularly,  why
all  the  commands  of  the  Veda,  even  of  the  work-part,
should  not  be  obeyed.  .

But  apart  from  this  concession,  the  fundamental  doctrine
of  £^amkara  remains  always  the  same.  There  is  Brahman
and  nothing  else;  and  to  this  Brahmcm  as  the  subject,
nothing  must  be  ascribed  that  is  peculiar  to  the  individual
living  soul  (I,  3,19).  The  individual .  soul  is,  no.  doubt,
Brahman,  for  the  simple  reason  that  there  is  nothing  but
Brahman,  but  Brahman  is  not  the  individual  soul,  which  in
its  present  state  is  personal,  that  is  conditioned,  and  pheno-
menal.   All  we  may  predicate  of  that  Highest  Brahman  is


OBBATION  OB  OAUSATICN.  1 55

that  it  is  one,  never  changing,  never  in  contact  with  any-
thing, devoid  of  all  form,  eternally  pure,  intelligent  and
free.  To  ascribe  anything  phenomenal  to  that  Brahman  or
Atman  would  be  the  same  error  as  to  ascribe  bine  colour  to
the  colourless  ether  of  the  sky.

ChMAtloB  or  OfttUHttlon.

If  with  these  ideas,  taken  as  granted,  we  approach  the
problem  of  what  we  call  the  creation  or  Uie  making  of  the
world,  it  is  dear  that  creation  in  our  sense  cannot  exist
for  the  Yed&ntist.  As  long  as  creation  is  conceived  as
a  making  or  fashioning  of  matter,  it  does  not  exist  for
B&dar&yavia;  only  so  u^  as  it  is  a  calling  forth  out  of
nothing  does  it  approach  the  ideas  of  the  Ved&ntist.  Crea^
tion  with  B&dar&yana  would  be  nothing  b^t  the  result  of
Nesdeiice^  and  yet  Braliman  is  again  .and  again  repre-
sented as  the  cause  of  the  world,  and  not  only  as  ihe
efficient^  but  as  the  material  cause  as  well,  so  far  as  such
foreign  terms  can  be  applied  to  the  reasoning  of  the  Ye-
d&nta.  Here  lies  our  great  difficulty  in  rendering  Hindu-
philosophy  intelligible.  The  terms  Ujsed  by  them  seem  to
be  the  same  as  those  which  we  use  ourselves,  and  yet  they
are  not.  It  is  easy  to  say  that  K&raTia  is  cause  and  K&rya
effect,  that  the  created  woHd  is  the  effect,  and  that  Brah*
man  i^  the  cause.  But  the  Yedlthtists  have  elaborated
their  own  theory  of  cause  and  effect.  According  to  them
cause  and  effect  are  really  the  same  thing  looked  at  from
two  points  of  view,  and  the  effect  is  always  supposed  to
be' latent  in  the  cause.  Hence,  if  Brahman  is  everything^
and  nothing  exists  besides  Brahman,  th0  substance  of  the
world  can  be  nothing,  but  Brahman.  Divyadisa,  a  living
Yed&ntist,  seems  therefore  to  draw  a  quite  legitimate  in-
ference when  he  says^  that  the  universe. with  all  its  sins
and  miseries  must  have  existed  latent  in-  Brahman,  just
as  steam  existed  latent  in  water  before  it .  was  heated,
though  it  does  not  become  evident  as  vapour  till  fire  is
brought  near  to  water.

^  Leetures  on  tho  VedAaia,  p.  04.


156  INJOIAN  PU1L0B0PH¥.


This  question  of  cause  and  ^ect  and  their  mutiiaS  rela*
tion  has  occapied  most  oi  the  i^losop^ical  systeins  of
India;  and  when  we  remember  what  differ^it  views  of
eaiQse  and  effect  have  beun  held  by  some  of  the  HKiBt
eminent  philosc^hers  of  Europe,  it  is  not  surprising  that
the  Hindus  also  should  have  arrived  at  very  different
results.  The  Yed&ntists  stand  up  for  K&rya-lsiraTiftbheda,
the  nonnlifferenee  or  substantial  identity  of  cause  and  effect^
and  the  Skinkhya,  philosophers  agree  with  them  up  to  a
certain  point.  In  the  Ved&nta,  II,  x,  14,  we  read  in  so
many  words,  Tadananyatvam,  that  is,  '  they,  cause  and
effect,  are  not  other,  are  not  different  from  eaoh  other/
On  this,  as  a  general  principle,  rests  their  dogma  of  the
substantial  identity  of  brahman  and  the  phenomenal  world.
Nor  does  iSamkara  support  this  principle  by  passages  from
the  Veda  only,  but  he  appeals  likewise  to  observation.
Thus  he  continues,  II,  i,  15,  'Only  when  a  cause  exists
is  an  effect  observed  to  exist,  not  when  it  docs  not  exist
The  n(m-difference  of  the*  two  (cause  and  effect)  is  perceived,
for  instance,  in  an  aggregate  of  threads,  when  we  do  not
perceive  the  thing  which  we  call  cloth  in  addition  to  the
threads,  but  merely  threads  running  lengthways,  and  cross-
wajrs.  In  the  threads  again  we  perceive  finer  threads,  and
in  these  again  still  finer  threads,  and  so  on.  On  this  ground
we  conclude  that  the  very  finest  parts  which  we  can  per-
ceive are  ultimately  identical  with  their  causes,  viz.  red,
white,  and  black,  these  again  with  air,  the  air  with  ether,
and,  at  last,  the  ether  with  Brahman  which  is  without
a  second  and  the  ultimate  cause  of  the  whole  world.  Or
again,  when  we  look  at  a  tree  and  ask  what  it  is,  when  we
see  through  its  leaves  and  fruits,  its  bark  and  wood^  and
ask  again  what  it  is,  the  answer  comes  that  it  would  be
nothing  if  it  were  not  Brahman,  that  it  lives  through  Brah-
man, that  it  exists  through  Brahman,  that  it  would  not  be
at  all  but  for  Brahman.  This  is  the  real  Pantheism  of  the
y^d&nta :  and  strange  as  it  may  sound  to  us,  it  woidd  not
be  difficult  to  match  it  whether  from  our  own  phlLosophera
or  our  poets.  Even  so  x^oent  a  poet  as  Tennyson  is  reported


01081  AlTD  B1I9DT.  157

io  hmv  mid,^  Beiiiap«^  tiu9  eartli  and  all  that  is  in  it —
sAorxns,  mcmittinn,  cateracts,  the  san  B/ad  the  skies,  are  the
Almighty:  in  fact,  such  is  our  petty  nature,  we  cannot
see  Him,  Imt  we  see  His  shadow,  as  it  were,  a  distorted
shadow/  Is  not  this  pure  Ved^nta  1  only  that  the  Ve-
dftntists  hold  that  s  cause,  by  its  very  nature,  can  never
beeome  the  c^ject  of  perception,  while  what  Tennyscm  calls
the  distorted  shadow  would  come  very  near  to  the  Avidjf&
of  iSamkara.  The  Veda  ha^  declared  '  that  what  is  posterior
in  time,  i.e.  the  effect,  has  its  being,  previous  to  its  actual
bc^pnning,  in  the  nature  of  the  cause.  And  ^amkara  adds
th^  even,  in  cswes  where  the  continued  existence  of  the'
cause  (in  the  effect)  is  not  perceived,  as,  for  instance,  in
the  ease  of  seeds  of  the  fi^-tree  from  which  spring  sprouts
and  new  trees,  the  term  birth,  as  applied  to  the  fiqprout,
means  only  that  the  causal  substance,  viz.  the  seed,  becomes
visible  by  becoming  a  sprout  through  the  continued  aocre-
tkm  of  similar  particles,  "^hile  the  term  death  means  no
more  than  that  through  the  secession  of  these  particles,  the
cause  passes  again  beyond  the  cqphere  of  visibility.

Thk  proUem  of  cause  and  effect  in  connection  with  the
problem  of  Brahman  and  the  world  was,  no  doubt  beset
with  difficulties  in  the  eyes  of  the  Yedkntista  If  they
turned  to  the  Veda,  particularlv  to  the  Upanishads,  there
were  ever  so  many  passages  declaring  that  jBrs^man  is  one
and  unchangeable,  while  in  other  passages  the  same  Brah-
man is  called  the  Creator,  and  from  him,  and  not,  as  the
S&mkhyas  hold,  from  a  second  noh-intelUgent  power,  called
Prakriu,  the  creation,  sustentation,  and  reabsorption  of  the
world  are  said  to  proceed.  If  it  be  asked  how  two  such
opinions  can  be  reccmciled,  iSfamkam  answers :  '  Belonging
to  the  Self,  as  it  were,  of  the  omniscient  Lord,  there  are
names  and  forms  (Nd^mariipa)/  These  correspond  very
dosely  to  the  Logoi  of  Greek  philosophy,  except  that,
instead  of  being  the  ideas  of  a  Divine  Mind,  they  are  the
^pnents  of  Nescience,  not  to  be  defined  as  either  real
(Brahman),  or  us  di&ient  from  it.  They  are  the  germs
of  the  aitire  expanse  of  the  phenomenal  world,  tlu^t  is,
of  what  in  Sxuti  and  Smnti  is  ciaJUed- illusion  (M&y4),  power
(^Sakti),  or  nature  (Praknti).  :  Different,  however,  from  all


158  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

this  is  the  Omniscient  Lord,  and  in  support  of  this  a
number  of  Vedic  passages  may  be  quoted,  sueh  as  ^He
who  is  called  Ether  is  the  reveaier  of  all  forms  and  names ;
that  wherein  these  forms  and  names  are  contained,  that  is
Brahman'  ( jTA&nd^ Up.  YIII,  14,  i);  Let  me  evolve  names
and  forms '  (iTA&nd.  Up.  YI,  3,  2) ;  '  He,  the  wise  one,  having
defined  all  forms  and  having  made  their  names,  sits  speak-
ing/i.e.  creating  (Taitt.  Ar.  Ill,  12,  7);  'He  who  makes
the  one  seed  manifold'  (Svet  Up.  YI,  la).  The  Lord  as
creator,  as  Lord  or  l«vara,  d^>ends  upon  the  limiting
conditions  of  the  Up&dhis  of  name  and  form,  and  these,
even  in  the  Lord,  are  represented  as  products  of  Nescience,
not  like  the  L(^i,  creations  of  a  Divine  Wisdom.  The
true  Self,  according  to  the  Yed&nta,  is  all  the  time  free
from  all  conditions,  free  from  names  and  forms,  and  for
the  truly  informed  enlightened  man  the  whole  phenomenal
world  is  really  non-existent.

To  steer  between  all  these  rocks  is  no  easv  matter.
Brahman,  though  called  the  material  cause  (Upadana)  of
tiie  world,  is  himself  immaterial,  nay  the  world,  of  wnieh
he  is  the  cause,  is  considered  as  unreal,' while  at  the  same
time  cause  and  effect  are  held  to  be  identical  in  sufastanca

While  the  Yed&ntist  is  threatened  by  all  these  breakers,
the  S&mkhya  philosopher  is  far  less  imperilled.  He  starts
with  a  Prakn'ti,  a  power  different  from  Brahman,  gener-
ally, though  very  imperfectly,  translated  by  Nature,  as  the
material  cause  of  the  world.  Prakriti  exists,  as  far  as
man  is  concerned,  only  so  far  as  it  is  taken  notice  of  by
man  (Purusha) ;  and  he,  the  Purusha,  on  taking  notice,
may  therefore  be  called  the  efficient  cause  of  the  worid,
Prakriti  itself  being  its  material  cause.  Otherwise  EapOa
takes  much  the  same  view  of  the  relation  between  cause
and  effect  as  the  Yed&ntist.  The  E&rya-k&ran&bheda,  the
identity  of  cause  and  effect,  is  valid  as  much  for  S&mkh^a
as  for  Yed&nta.  According  to  both,  no  real  effect  would
be  possible  without  the  continuance  of  its  cause.  Though
difi^rent  in  appearance  or  phenomenally,  both  are  the  same
substantially.  An  effect  is  not  something  newly  produced
or  created,  it  is  a  new  manifestation  only,  the  cause  being
never  destroyed,  but  rendered  invisible  only.    This  is  so


CAUSE   AND   EFFECT.  1 59

characteristic  a  dogma  of  the  S&mkhya  that  this  philo-
sophy is  often  spoken  of  as  the  Sat-k&ryav&da,the  doctrine
that  every  effect  pre-exists,  and  is  the  effect  of  something
real,  while  the  Asat-k&rvav&da  is  peculiar  to  Nyllya  and
Vai^eshika,  and  strongly  supported  by  the  louddhista
Whether  this  doctrine  of  the  identity  of  cause  and  effect  wad
first  proclaimed  by  Eapila  or  by  Bfidar^yana,  it  is  almost^
impossible  to  settle,  rrof essor  Qarbe  \  who  dlaims  it  for
Kapila,  may  be  right  in  supposing  that  it  would  be  a  more
natural  theorem  for  a  follower  of  the  S&mkhya  than  of
the  Ved&nta,  but  this  could  never  be  used  as  an  argument
that  the  S&inkhya-philosophy  is  older  in  its  entirety  than
the . Ved&nta.  iSamKara  himself  certainly  gives  us  tne  im-
pressi(Hi  that  with  him  the  recognition  of  the  identity
of  cause  and  effect  came  first,  ana  afterwards  its  religious
application,  the  identity  of  Brahman  and  the  world.  For
he  says  (U,  i,  20),  'Thus  the  non-difference  of  the  effect
from  the  cause  is  to  be  conceived.  And  therrfore,  as  tiie
whole  world  is  an  effect  of  Brahman,  and  non^ifferent
from  it,  the  promise  is  fulfilled.'  It  is  curious  that  Eapila
seems,  almost  in  so  many  words,  to  guard  against  wnat
is  known  to  us  as  Hume's  view  of  caucullity.  For  in  SAtra
1, 4,  I,  he  says,  *  If  it  were  only  priority,  there  would  be  no
law  or  hold  (Niyama)  between  cause  and  effect'

The  Sat-kAryav&aa,  which  might  be  compared  witii
Herbart's  Sdbsterhaltuna  des  Bealen,  is  often  illustrated
by  the  very  popular  simile  of  the  rope  which  is  mistaken
for  a  snake,  but  which,  even  in  its  mistaken  charact^,  has
the  very  real  effect  of  frightening  those  who  step  on  it
There  is  more  in  this  often-quoted  simile  tiian  at  first
sight  appears^  It  is  meant  to  show  that  as  the  rope  is
to  the  snake,  so  Brahman  is  to  the  world.  There  is  no
idea  of  claiming  for  the  rope  a  real  change  into  a  snake,
and  in  the  same  way  no  real  change  can  be  claimed  for
Brahman,  when  perceived  as  the  world.  Brahman  presents
itself  as  the  world,  and  apart  from  Brahman  the  world
would  be  simply  nothing.  If,  therefore,  Brahman  is  called
the  material  cause  of  the  world,  this  is  not  meant  in  the

^  S&mkhyarPhiloaophie,  p.  93a.


l6o  IND^Uf  PHILOSOPHY.

sense  in  which  the  day  is  the  mateml  cause  of  a  jar.

Even  the  apparent  and  illusory  existence  of  a  material
world  requires  a  real  substratum,  which  is  firahman,  just
as  the  appearance  of  the  snake  in  the  simile  reiquires  the
renl  substratum  of  a  rope.  If  we  once  see  this  clearly,  we
shall  also  see  that  Nescience  may  quite  as  well  be  called
the  material  cause  of  the  world  as  Brahman,  the  fact  being
that,  strictly  speaking,  there  is  with  the  Vedantists  no
matter  at  aJli  in  our  sense  of  the  word.

lliere  is,  however,  in  the  Yed^nta,  as  well  as  in  many
other  i^stems  of  philosophy,  a  certain  ambiguitv  as.  to
what  is  meant  by  material  and  real.  One  would  have
tiiought  that  philosophers,  who  look  upon  everything  as
the  result  of  Avidyft  or  Nescience,  would  have  denied
all  reality  in  the  highest  sense  to  everything  except  Brah-
man. And  so  in  a  certain  sense  thev  do.  But  besides  the
concession  to  which  we  alluded  before,  that  for  practical
purposes  (Vyavah&r&rtham)  things  may  be  treated  as  real,
whatever  we  may  think  of  them  in  our  heart  of  hearts,
a  concession,  by-the-by,  which  even  Berkeley  and  Kant
would  readily  have  allowed,  there  is  another  important
argument.  It  is  clearly  directed  against  Buddhist  philo-
sophers  who,  carrying  tne  YedlLnta  principle  to  its  extreme
consequences,  held  that  everything  is  empty  and  unreal,
and  that  all  we  have  and  know  are  our  perceptions  only.
This  is  called  the  jSiinyavMa  (doctrine  of  emptiness  or
vanity)  or  Vidy&md.tra  (knowledge  only).  Although  some
Ved&ntists  have  been  credited  with  holding  the  same
opinion,  and  have  actually  been  called  Cryptobuddhists
in  consequence,  SamkaxB,  himself  argues  most  strongly
against  this  extreme  idealism.  He  not  only  allows  the
reality  of  the  objective  world  for  practical  purposes  (Vya-
vah&rkrtham),  but  he  enters  on  a  full  argument  against
the  nihilism  of  the  Buddhists.  These  maintain  thai  ^r-
ception  in  dreams  is  of  the  same  kind  as  all  other  perception,
and  that  the  admission  of  the  existence  of  external  things
is  therefore  unnecessary.  No,  says  iSat/ikara,  there  is  a
difference  between  perceiving  viands  and  perceiving  the


DREAMING  AND  WAKING.  l6l

satislaciion  arising  from  eating  them.  He  holds,  therefore,
that  in  perceiving  anything  we  not  only  perceive  oar  per-
ceptions, but  perceive  something  not  ourselves,  and  not
our  perceptions.  He  also  points  out  that  there. is  this
difference  between  dreaming  and  waking,  that  dreams  on
awaking  are.  found  to  be  unreal.  Dreams  at  night  are
contradicted  by  full  daylight,  but.  perceptions  in  full  day-
light are  not  contradicted  by  dreams.  When  the  BiHddhist
replies  that,  in  spite  of  that,  we  never  can  be  said  to  per-
ceive anything  but  perceptions,  theyed&ntist  answers  tnat,
though  we  perceive  perceptions  only,  these  perceptions  are
alwavs  perceived  as  perceptions  of  soihething.  And  if  the
Buddhists  answer  that  these  perceptions  are  illusive  only,
'  that  they  are  ^rceptions  o€  things  as  if  ihey  were  without
us,  the  V ed&ntist  asks  What  is  meant  by  that '  without  us,'
to  which  all  things  perceived  by  us  are  referred  ?  If  our
perceptions  conform  to  anything  without  us,  the  existence
of  such  perceived  objects  is  ipso  facto  admitted.  No  one
would  say  that  perception  and  what  is  perceived  are  iden-
tical ;  they  stana  to  each  other  in  the  relation  of  instrument
and  effect,  just  as  when  we  speak  of  an  impression,  we
admit  something  that  impresses  as  well  as  something  that
is  impressed.

This  must  suffice  to  show  what  the  Ved&ntists  thought
of  the  difference  between  the  real  and  the  phenomenal,  and
what  was  the  meaning  they  attached  to  Avidyd.  by  which
not  only  the  individual  E^^,  l)ut  the  whole  phenomenal
World  exists  or  seems  to  exist.  Creation  is  not  real  in  the
highest  sense  in  which  Brahman  is  real,  but  it  is  real  in  so
far  as  it  is  phenomenal,  for  nothing  can  be  phenomenal
except  as  tile  phenomenon  of  something  that  is  real.  No
wonder  that,  with  all  these  ambiguities  about  .the  pheno«
menally  real  and  the.  really  real,  different  schools  even  in
India  should  have  differed  in  their  views  about  AvidyA,
and  that  European  scholars  also  should  have  failed  to  form
a  clear  idea  of  that  creative  Nescience  of  which  we  can
neither  sav  that  it  is  or  that  it  is  not.  Avidvd.,  like  all
other  woros,  has  had  a  history.  In  the  Upanishads  it  is
often  used  in  the  aimple  sense  of  ignorance,  and  opposed
to  YidyA,  knowledge.    Both  are  in  that  sense  simply  sab-

11  »«


1 62  IKBIAK  PHILOSOPHY.

jective.  Thus  we  Fead,  KhJknd,  Up.  I,  i,  lo :  *  Both  perform
the  sacrificial  act,  he  who  knows  and  he  who  ooes  not
know.  But  there  is  a  difference  between  Vidyll  (know-
JedgeJ  and  Avidy4  (ixescience).  For  what  is  performed  with
Yidya,  with  faith,  and  with  the  Upanishad,  that  is  more
efficacious/  Or  again,  B?'ih.  Ar.  Up.  IV,  3,  20 :  'If  he  feels
in  a  dream  as  if  he  were  murdered,  then,  in  his  ignorance,
he  takes  that  to  be  real  whatever  he  fears,  when  awake.'
Here  we  see  that  it  is  ignorance  alone  which  imparts  a  false
character  of  reality  to  tiie  visions  of  a  dream.  In  the  same
Upanishad,  IV,  4,  3,  a  man,  when  dying,  is  said  to  shake
off  his  body  and  his  AvidyA.  We  are  right  therefore,
I  believe,  if  historically  we  trace  the  ^ncept  of  Avidy&
back  to  the  subjective  ignorance  of  the  individual,  just  as
we  saw  that  the  higher  concept  of  the  Self,  though  in  the
end  identical  with  Brahman,  arose  from  that  of  the  indi-
vidual personal  Self,  when  as  yet  not  free  from  the  limits
of  the  Ego.  In  some  of  the  later  Upanishads  this  Nesci-
ence or  Ignorance  assumes  a  more  independent  character
and  even  a  new  name,  viz.  M&ylL  It.  is  then  no  longer  the
Nescience  of  the  individual,  but  the  result  of  that  universal
Nescience,  which  is  the  cause  of  what  we  should  call  the
phenomenal  world.  Thus  we  read  in  -the  /Svet.  Up.  IV,  10 :
'  Ej)ow  Prakriti  (nature)  as  Md.y&  (mamc),  and  the  great
Lord  as  the  M&yiti.  (magician).'  Though  this  is  not  pure
Ved&nta,  it  shows  us,  at  all  events,  the  way  by  which  the
ignorance  of  the  individual  became  the  cause  of  what  we
call  objective  reality,  and  led,  at  the  same  time,  to  the
admission  of  ai^  active  and  creative  Lord,  the  personal
Brahm&  or  l^vara ;  how  AvidyA  in  .fact  became  a  iSakti  or
potentia,  somehow  or  other  related  to  Brahman  itiaelf.

But  before  there  arises  this  Mlly&  of  objective  nature,
belonging  as  it  were  to  Brahman  himself,  there  was  the
Mkyk  of  the  internal  or  subjective  world.  This  was
originally  the  only  Md,y&,  and,  deceived  by  that  MslyS,  or
Avidy4,  the  Atman,  or  pure  Self,  was  covered  up  (Up&hita)
or  blinded,  or  conditioned  by  the  so-called  UpS^dhis,  the
conditions  or  impositions,  if  we  may  say  so,  in  both  senses.
There  is  here  again  a  certain  ambiguity,  the  Upddhis  being
caused  by  primeval  Avidyit,  and,  from  another  point  01


DBEAM1K6   AND   WAKING.  1 63

view,  Avidy&  being  caused  in  the  individdal  sonl  (Gtvft^
man)  by  the  Up&dhis.    These  Up&dhis  aire  :—

1.  The  Mukhyapr&na,  the  vital  spiriic(unoonscioQs) ;

2.  the  Manas,  the  central  organ  of  perception,  t^bAj  to
receive  what  is  conveyed  to  it  by  the  separate  ^nses,  and
to  react  on  them  by  will ;  Manas  being  that  which,  as  we
say,  perceives,  feels,  thinks  and  will8 ;

3.  the  Indriyas,  the  five  senses,  both  afferent  and  efferent.
The  five  afferent  (Upalabdhi)  senses  are  the  senses  of

;  hearing,  touch,  sight,  taste,  scent.  The  five  efferent  or
acting  senses  (Adhyavas&ya  ^)  are  the  senses  of  speaking,
gnuqSng.  going,  evncuat^n^nd  generating;

4.  the  material  organic  body.
To  these  is  sometimes  added —

5.  The  objective  environment,  or  the  objects  br  meanings
of  the  senses  (Artha).         ^  j

All  these  are  not  the  Atman,  and  It  is  only,  through
AvidyS,  that  the  Atman  has  become  identified  with  them.^

That  there  is  in  man  something  that  can  be  called  Atman
or  Self  requires  no  proof,  but  if  a  proof  were  wanted  it
would  be  found  in  the  fact  that  no  one  can  say,  'I  am  not'
(I  being  the  disguised  Atman),  for  he  who  would  say  so,
would  himself  be  not,  or  would  not  be.  The  question  then
is.  What  is  really  I  or  what  is  there  real  behind  the  II  It
cannot  be  the  body  sa  influenced  by  our  objective  environ,
noftot,  for  that  boay  is  perishable ;  it  cannot  be  the  Indriyas
or  the  Manas  'or  the  Mukhyaprd.i'.a,  for  all  these  have
a  beginning,  a  growth,  and  therefore  an  end.  All  these,
callea  the  UpMhis,  conditions,  are  to  be  treated  as  Not-
self  ;  and  if  it  be  asked  why  they  should  ever  have  been
treated  as  Self,  the  only  possible  answer  is  that  it  was
through  Nescience  or  Avidyfi,,  but  through  a  Nescience
that  is  not  only  casual  or  individual,  but  universal.  What
in  our  common  language  we  call  the  Ego  or  Ahamk&ra
is  but  a  product  of  i^he  Manas  and  quite  as  unsubstantial
in  reality  as  the  Manas  itself,  the  senses  and  the  whole

We    can   understand   how  this    startling   idealism   or

^  Adhyavas&yo  biiddhi^,  S&mkhya^SAtras  II,  13.

M  2


164  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

monism — ^f  or  it  is  not  nihilism,  though  our  philosophy  has  no
bettor  pame  for  it — ^led  to  two  distinct,  yet  closely  united
views  6i  the  world.  All  that  we  should  caJl  phenomenal,
"comprehending  the  phenomena  of  our  inwara  as  well  as
of  our  outwara  experience,  was  unreal ;  but,  as  the  phenor
menal  was  considered  impossible  without  the  noumenal,
that  is,  without  the  real  Brahman,  it  was  in  that  sense  real
also,  that  is,  it  exists,  and  can  only  exist,  with  Brahman
behind  it.  And  this  led  to  the  admi^ion  by  the  strict
Advaitists  or  Monists  of  two  kinds  of  knowledge,  well
-Jsnown'  under  the  names  of  Apar&,  the  lower,  and  JPar&,  the
higher  knowledge.

The  higher  knowledge  consists  in  the  distinction  and
thereby  the  freedom  of  the  Self  (Atman)  from  fJl  its
Upadhis,  and  this  not  for  this  life  only,  but  for  all  eter-
nity. This  is  the  true  Moksha  or  freedom  which  implies
knowledge  of  the  identity  of  the  Atman  with  Brahman,
and  deliverance  from  birth  and  rebirth  in  the  constant
evolution  (SamslLra)  of  the  world.  The  lower  knowledge
is  likewise  founded  on  the  Veda,  but  chiefly  on  its  work-
portion  (EarmakAm^a),  and  teaches,  not  how  Brahman  is
to  be  known,  but  how  it  or  he  is  to  be  worshipped  in  its  or
his  phenomenal  state,  that  is,  as  a  personal  Lorn  and  Crea-
tor, or  even  under  the  name  of  any  individual  deity.  Tliifl
worship  (Up&sanll)  being  enjoined  in  many  parts  of  the
Yeda,'is  recognised  as  obligatory  on  all  who  have  not  yet
reached  the  highest  knowledge.  These  are  even  allowed
the  comfort  that,  in  worshipping  a  personal  god,  they  are
really  worshipping  BraJxman,  the  true  Godhead,  though  in
its  phenomenal  aspect  only,  and  they  are  promised*  as
a  reward  of  their  worship,*  happiness  on  earth  and  in
heaven,  nay  by  way  of  preparation,  a  slow  advance  (Elra-
mamukti)  towards  complete  Moksha  or  freedom.

In  this  sense  it  has  been  truly  said  that  jSietmkara  did  not
attack  or  destroy  idolatry,  though  with  him  it  was  always
symbolism  rather  than  idolatry.  On  this  point  which  has
given  rise  to  much  controversy  among  the  Hindus  them-


THE   HIQHEB  AKD  THE   liOWEB  KNOWLEDGE.      1 65

selves,  some  appealing  to  /Samkara's  contempt  of  all  ritual'*
ism  and  Earman,  others  to  his  defence  of  a  worship  of  the
popular  gods,  I  may  quote  the  words  of  a  living  Ved&ntist.
iMvyadiis  Datta,  in  his  Lectttre  on  Yedslntism,  p.  1 2.  *  It
is  certain/  he  says,  'that  iSiamkara  was  opposed  to  the
abuse  of  ritualism,  and  though  he  did  not  cut  off  all  con-
nection with  idolatry,  he  tried  to  introduce  the  right  spirit
of  idcdatry.  Idolatry  in  the  sense  of  religious  symbolism —
and  I  beUeve  the  most  orthodox  Hindus  would  take  no
other  view — cannot  be  open  to  objection.  Symbolism  there
must  be,  whether  in  words  or  things,  verbal  symbols
appeal  to  the  ear,  and  the  symbols  of  things  to  the  eye,  and
that  is  all  the  difference  between  them,  verbal  symbolism
is  language.  Who 'would  object  to  the  use  of  language  in'
religion  ?  But  if  the  one  is  allowed,  why  should  not  ako
the  other?  To  my  mind,  idolatry,  apart  from  its  attendant
corruptions,  is  a  religious  algebra.  And  if  verbal  symbols,
without  the  spirit  or  in  a  corrupted  spirit,  are  not  objec-
tionable, [but  are  they  not?]  so,  and  to  the  same  extent,
formal  symbols,  or  stocks  and  stones  also  are  unobjection-
able. At  one  stage  of  its  growth,  idolatry  is  a  necessity  of
our  nature.  Hie  tender  seed  of  a  religious  spirit  requires
to  be  carefully  preserved  in  a  soft  coating  of  symbols,  till
it  has  acquired  the  strength  to  resist  the  nipping  frost  of
woridliness  and  scepticism. . . .  When  the  religious  spirit  is
mature,  symbols  are  either  given  up,  or  suffered  to  remain
from  their  harmlessness.  ...  iSamkara  did  bow  to  idols,
sometimes  as  symbols  of  the  great  Infinite,  sometimes  as
symbols  of  lower  orders  of  beings  in  whom  he  believed. . . .
These  lower  orders  of  divine  beings,  Brahm&,  VishTiu,  Indra,
Yama,  fee.,  in  whom  he  believed,  are  phenomenal,  and  subject
to  creation  and  dissolution  as  much  as  ourselves.'  /Samkara
himself  expresses  this  opinion  very  clearly  when  (I,  3,  2S)
he  says:  'The  gods  (or  deities)  must  be  admitted  to  be
corporeal,  and  though  by  their  divine  powers  they  can,  at
one  and  the  same  time,  partake  of  oblations  offered  at
numerous  sacrifices,  they  are  still,  like  ourselves,  subject  to
birth  and  death.'

If  Siimkara  did  not  claim  full  freedom  or  Moksha  for
himself,  he  did  so,  as  he  says,  for  the  sake  of  others.    '  If


1 66  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

1/  he  says,  'had  not  walked  without  remission  in  the  path
of  works,  others  would  not  have  followed  my  steps,
O  Lord  I '

Xs  Tlrtiw  gwKttttftl  to  XokiliAf

Another  question  which  has  been  hotly  contested  both
in  India  and  in  Europe  is  whether  Moksha  can  be  the  result
of  knowledge  only,  or  whether  it  requires  a  fulfilment  of
moral  duties  also  \  Though,  as  far  as  I  understand  SMrir-
kara,  knowled^  alone  can  in  the  end  lead,  to  Moksha,
virtue  is  certamly  presupposed.  It  is  the  same  question
which  meets  us  with  regard  to  the  Buddhist  mrv&na.
This  also  was  in  the  beginning  the  result  and  the  reward
of  moral  virtue,  of  the  restraint  of  passions  and  of  perfect
tranquillity  of  soul,  such  as  we  find  it  described,  for  instance,
in  the  Dhammapada ;  but  it  soon  assumed  a  different  char-
acter, as  representing  freedom  from  all  bbndago  and
illusion,  amounting  to  a  denial  of  all  reality  in  the  objec-
tive, and  likewise  in  the  subjective  world.  There  are  a  few
traces  left  in  the  Upanishads,  showing  that  virtue  wjU9-oon-
sidered  an  essential  preliminary  of  Moksha.  In  the  Ka^^
TFpanishad  II,  i,  which  is  generally  quoted  for  that  purpose,
we  read:  'The  good  is  one  thing,  the  pleasant  anomer;
these  l^wo  having  different  objects  cham  a  man.  It  is
well  with  himi  if  he  clings  to  the  good ;  but  he  who  chooses
the  pleasant,  misses  his  end.  The  good  and  the  pleasant
approach  a  man ;  the  wise  goes  round  about  them  and  dis-
tmguishes  them.  Yea,  the  wise  prefers  the  good  to  the
pleasant,  but  the  fool  chooses  thp  pleasant  through  greed
and  avarice.'  But  even  in  this  passage  we  are  not  told
that  virtue  or  self-denial  by  itself  could  secure  Moksha  or
perfect  freedom  ;  nay,  if  we  only  read  a  few  lines  further,
we  see:  'Wide  apart  and  leading  to  different  points  are
those  two,  ignorance  ( Avidygl)  and  what  is  known  93  wisdom
( Vidyd.)/  And  Na&iketas  is  praised  because  he  desires
knowledge,  and  is  not  tempted  away  from  it  by  pleasure.
Still  less  convincing  are  passages  taken  from  the  Bhagavad-
gtt&,  a  w(»rk  which  was  meant  to  present  different  views

See  Moksha  or  the  Ve<Untio  Belease,  by  Diyyadis  Datta,  Journal  of
the  R.  A.  Sb,  vol.  xs,  part  4.  <


IS  VIBTUB  ESSENTIAL  TO  MQKSFA?  1 67

of  Moksha.  All  of  them,  no  doubt,  though  they  do  not
explicitly  say  so,  presuppose  high  morality  on  the  part  of
the  candidate,  so  that  Ar^una  is  made  to  say  for  hjjuself :— -

OknkimdhBxma/m,  na  ka,  me  pravT^ttiA,
G&n&my  adharmam,  <na  ka,  me  nivritti^,

which  has  been  somewhat  freely  translated  :*  For  what
I  woidd  that  I  do  not,  l>ut  what  I  hate  that  do  1/

That  later  treatises,  such  as  the  Pa^A^daat,  should  lay
great  stress  on  the  religious  and  moral  side  of  Moksha  is
^uite  compatible  with  what  has  been  maintained  before,
that  Moksha  cannot  be  achieved  by  sacrifices  or  by  moral
conduct,  but  in  the  end  by  knowledge  only.  Hence  a
prayer  such  as, —

'May  such  unchanging  love  as  foolish  people  feel  for
earthly  pleasures  never  cease  in  my  heart  wnen  I  call  upon
Theel'

— may  well  be  uttered  by  worshippers  of  BrahmS,  or  Isvara,
but  not  by  the  true  Mumukshu,  w  qo  is  yarning  for  Brah-
man and  true  Moksha.

Even  the  prayer  from  the  Brihad-Aratiyaka  (I,  3,  28} —

*Lead  me  from,  the  unreal  to  the  real  I    Lead  me  from
darkness  to  light  I    Lead  me  from  death  to  immortality  I  *'
— refers  to  uie  lower  knowledge  only,  and  has  for  its
reward  another  world,  that  is,  the  heaven  world,  which
will  also  pass  away.

It  would  not  be  difficidt,  no  doubt,  to  produce  passages
which  declare  that  a  sinful  man  cannot  obtain  Mqksha,
but  that  is  very  diiferent  from  saying  that  Moksha  can  be
obtained  by  mere  abstaining  from  sin.  Good  works,  even
merely  ceremonial  works,  if  performed  from  pure  motives
and  without  any  hope  of  rewards,  form  an  excellent  prepa-
ration for  reaching  that  highest  knowledge  which  it  is  the
final  aim  of  the  Yed^nta  te  impart.  And  thus  we  read :
*  Br^imaTias  seek  to  know  Him  by  the  study  of  the  Veda,
by  sacrifices,  by  charitable  gifts'  (BHh.  Up.  IV,  4,  22).

But  when  the  knowledge  of  the  highest  Brsihman  has
once  been  reached  or  is  within  reach,  all  works,  whether
good  or  bad,  fall  away.    '  The  fetter  of  the  lieaH  is  broken.


1 68  INDUN  PHILOSOPHY,

all  doulDts  are  solved,  extin^shed  are  all  his  works,  when
He  has  been  beheld  who. is  both  high  and  low'  (Mxmd.
Up.  II,  %  8).

Hence,  to  imagine  that  true  Moksha  can  be  obtained  by
moral  conduct  alone  is  a  mistake,  while  there  are  passages
in  the  Upanishads  to  show  that  some  Yed&ntists  tau^t
that  a  man  who  had  reached  Brahman  and  the  highest
knowledge,  was  even  in  this  life  above  the  distinction  of
good  and  evil,  that  is,  could  do  nothing  that  he  considered
good  and  nothing  that  he  considered  evil.  Dangerous  as
this  principle  seems  to  be,  that  whosoever  knows  Brahman
cannot  sin, 'it  is  hardly  more  dangerous,  if  properly  under-
stood, than  the  saying  of  St.  John  (Ep.  I,  v.  68),  that  who-
soever is  bom  of  Qod,  sinneth  not.

TlM  Two  BxahsMiui.

It  sometimes  seems  as  if  ^amkara  and  B&dar&yana  had
actually  admitted  not  only  two  kinds  of  knowledge,  but
two  Brahmans  also,  Sagunam  and  Nirgunam,  with  or
without  qualities,  but  this  woidd  again  apply  to  a  state  of
Nescience  or  AvidyA  only;  and  it  is  in  this  sense  alone
that  Brahman  also  may  be  said  to  be  affected  by  Avidya,
nay  to  be  produced  by  AvidyA,  not  by  the  Avidyfi,  of  single
inaividuals,  but  by  an  Avidya  inherent  in  sentient  nature.
The  true  Brahman,  however,  remains  always  NirgUTiam  or
unqualified,  whatever  we  may  think  about  him ;  and  as,
with  re^rd  to  Brahman,  to  be  conceived  and  to  be  is  the
same  thing,  so  likew  ise,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  Brahman
is  conceived  by  us  and  becomes  to  us  qualified,  active,  crea-
tive and  personal  through  the  deception  of  the  same  uni-
versal and  inevitable  Avidyfii.  In  the  same  way  the  creation
of  the  world  and  of  man  is  not  the  work  of  Brahman,  but
the  result  of  AvidyH  and  of  man  while  under  her  sway.
This  ambiguity  runs  through  the  whole  of  the  Vedtota,  at
least  according  to  the  interpretation  of  iSamkara.

It  will  be  seen  how  small  a  step  it  was  from  this  view
to  another  which  looked  upon  Brahman  itself  as  affected
by  Avidy^,  nay  which  changed  this  Avidy4  into  a  ^kii
or  potent Uc  of  Brahman,  thus  lowering  him,  not  raising


THE  TWp  B£AHMANS.  1 69

hxm,  to  the  character  of  an  active  creator.  In  foil  reality
Brahman  is  as  little  affected  by  qualities  as  our  true  Self
is  by  X7p&dhis  (conditions),  but  the  same  Nescience  which
clouds  us  for  a  time,  clouds  ipso  facto  Brahman  also,  Atman
((?ivd.tman)  and  Brahman  being  substantially ^one.  If  the
qualified  Brahman  makes  us,  we,  the  qualified  Atman,  make
Brahman,  as  our  maker.  Only  we  must  never  forget  that
all  this  is  illusion,  so  that  in  truth  we  can  predicate  nothing
of  Brahman  but  Na,  na,  i.  e.  No,  no ;  he  is  not  this,  he  is
not  thai  He  is,  that  is  all  we  can  say,  and  is  more  than
everything  else.  In  that  sense  Brahman  may  be  called  both
Sat  and  Asat,  being  and  not  l)eing,  being  in  the  highest
sense,  not  being,  as  different  from  all  that  the  world  cal]^
being  or  true.  If  in  the  later  Upanishads  Brahman  is  cfJled
Sa^Xid-S,nanda,  *  being,  perceiving,  and  blessed,'  then  these
three  predicates  are  in  reality  but  one,  for  iie  or  it  could
not  be  without  perceiving  itself  (esse  est  perdpere),  and  he
or  it  could  not  pertseive  himself  or  itself  except  as  inde-
pendent, perfect,  unaffected  and  untrammelled  by  anything
else  (Advitiya).  Having  no  qualities,  this  highest  Brahman
cannot  of  course  be  known  by  predicates.  &  is  subjective,
and  not  liable  to  any  objective  attributes.  If  it  knows,  it
can  only  know  itself,  like  the  sun  that  is  not  lighted,  but
lights  itself.  Our  knowledge  of  Brahman  also  can  only
be  consciousness  of  Brahman  as  our  own  subjective  Atman
or  Self.

It  seems  only  a  concession  to  the  prejudices,  or  let  us  say,
the  convictions  of  the  people  of  India,  that  an  ecstatic  per-^
ception  of  Brahman  was  allowed  as  now  and  then  possible
in  a  state  of  trance,  such  as  the  Yogins  practised  in  ancient,
and  even  in  modern  times,  though,  strictly  speaking,  this
perception  also  could  only  be  a  perception  of  the  Atman  as
identical  with  Brahman.  The  fatal  mistake  which  in-
terpreters of  the  Ycdanta-philosophy  both  in  India  and
Europe  have  made  is  to  represent  this  absorption  or  re-
covery (Samradhanani,  accomplishment)  as  an  approcLch
of  the  individual  soul  towards  God.  There  can  be  no
such  approach  where  tibere  is  identity,  there  can  only  be
recovery  or  restitution,  a  return,  a  becoming  of  the  soul
of  what  it  always  has  been,  a  revival  of  its  true  nature.


I70  INDIAN  FHILOSOPHT.

Even  Toga,  as  we  shall  see,  did  not  mean  technically  union,
nor  Yogin  a  man  miited  with  God,  but  Toga  is  effort,
towards  Nirodha  or  suppression  of  £^itta  (the  activity  of
thoughtV  (see  Toga-Sfttras  I,  2).

We  shall  thus  understand  the  distinction  which  the  Ye-
d&ntists  and  other  Indian  philosophers  also  make  between
the  Brahman,  rd  Swats  01/,  and  the  Brahman  as  Idvara,  the
personal  God,  worshipped  under  different  names,  as  creator,
preserver,  and  dissolver  of  the  universe.  This  Isvara  exists,
just  as  everything  else  exists,  as  phenomenally  only,  not  as
absolutely  real.  Most  important  acts  are  ascribed  to  him,
and  whatever  he  may  appear  to  be,  he  is  always  Brahman.
When  personified  by  the  power  of  Avidy4  or  Nescience,
he  rules  the  world,  though  it  is  a  phenomenal  world,  and
determines,  though  he  does  not  cause,  rewards  and  punish-
ments. These  are  produced  directly  by  the  acts  themselves.
But  it  is  He  through  whose  ^ace  deeds  are  followed  by
rewards,  and  man  at  last  ootains  true  knowledge  *  and
Mukti,  though  this  Mukti  involves  by  necessity  the^  disap-
pearance of  I«vara  as  a  merely  phenomenal  god.

It  must  be  clear  to  any  one  who  has  once  mastered  the
framework  of  the  true  Yed&nta-philosophy,  as  I  have  here
tried  to  explain  it,  that  there  is  really  but  little  room  in
it  for  psychology  or  kosmolo^y,  nay  even  for  ethics.  The
soul  and  the  world  both  belong  to  the  realm  of  things
which  are  not  real,  and  have  little  if  anything  to  do  with
the  true  Yed&nta  in  its  highest  and  truest  form.  This
consists  in  the  complete  surrender  of  all  we  are  and  know.
It  rests  chiefly  on  the  tremendous  synthesis  of  subject  and
object,  the  identification  of  cause  and  effect,  of  the  I  and  the
It.  This  constitutes  the  unique  character  of  the  Yed&nta,
unique  as  compared  with  every  other  philosophy  of  the
world  which  has  not  been  influenced  by  it,  directly  or  in-
directly. If  we  have  once  grasped  that  synthesis,  we  know
the  YedAnta.  All  its  other  teaching  flows  naturally  from
this  one  f undamentaJLdoctrine ;  and  though  its  carefully
thought  out  and  worked  out  details  are  full  of  interest,
they  contain  no  thoughts,  so  entirely  new  at  the  time  when
they  were  uttered,  as  this  identity  of  subject  and  object,  or
this  complete  abk>rption  of  the  object  by  this  subject


PHILOSOPHr  AND  JfflUQION.      KAE.1AN.  17I


Fliiloflopliy  md  B^Ugloii.

It  }B  interesting  to  see  how  this  very  bold  philosophy  of'
the  VedS.nta  was  always  not  only  tolerated,  but  encouraged
and  patronised  by  religion  and  by  its  recognised  repre-
sentatives. Nor  aid  the  Ved&nta  as  a  philosophy  interfere
with  popular  religion;  on  the  contrary,  it  accepted  all
that  is  taught  about  the  gods  in  the  hymns  ana  in  the
Br&hmanas,  and  recommended  a  number  of  sacrificial  and
ceremonial  acts  as  resting  on  the  authority  of  these  hymns
and  Br&hmanas.  They  were  even  consioered  as  a  neces-
sary preliminary  to  higher  knowledge.  The  creation  of
the  world,  though  not  the  making  of  it,  was  accepted  as  an
emanation  from  Brahman,  to  be  followed  in  great  periods
by  a  taking  back  of  it  into  Brahman.  The  individual
souls  also  were  supposed,  at  the  end  of  each  Ealpa,  to  Be
drawn  back  into  Brahman,  but,  unless  entirely  liberated,
to  break  forth  again  and  again  at  the  beginning  of  every
new  Ealpa.


The  individual  souls,  so  far  as  they  can  claim  any  reality,
date,  we  are  told,  from  all  eternity,  and  not  from  the  day
of  their  birth  on  earth.  They  are  clothed  in  their  Uplldhis
(conditions)  according  to  the  merit  or  demerit  which  they
have,  acquired  by  their  former,  though  long-forgotten,
acts.  Here  we  perceive  the  principal  moral  element  in  the
ancient  Yed^nta>  so  far  as  it  is  meant  for  practical  life,
and  this  doctrine  of  Earman  or  deed,  to  which  we  alluded
before,  has  remained  to  the  present  day,  and  has  leavened
the  whole  of  India,  whether  it  was  under  the  sway  of
Br&hmans  or  of  Buddhists.  The  whole  world,  such  as  it
i&,  is  the  result  of  acts ;  the  character  and  fate  of  each  man
are  the  result  of  his  acts  in  this  or  in  a  former  life,  possibly
also  of  the  acts  of  others.  This  is  with  them  the  solution
of  what  we  venture  to  call  the  injustice  of  God.  It  is
their  Thiodicee,  A  man  who  sufters  and  suffers,  as  we  say,
uDJustly,  seems  to  them  but  paying  off  a  debt  or  laying  up
capital  for  another  life.  A  man  who  enjoys  health  and
wealth  is  made  to  feel  that  he  is  spending  more  than  he
has  earned,  and  that  he  has  therefore  to  make  up  his  debt


172  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

by  new  efforts.  It  cannot  be  by  a  Divine  caprice  that  ontt
man  is  bom  deaf  or  dumb  or  blind,  another  strong  and
healthy.  It  can  be  the  resiilt  of  former  acts  only,  whether^
in  this  life,  the  doer  of  them  is  aware  of  them  or  not.  It
is  not  even  necessarily  a  punishment,  it  ma^  be  a  reward
in  disguise.  It  might  seem  sometimes  as  if  Avidy&  too,
which  is  answerable  for  the  whole  of  this  phenomenal
world,  had  to  be  taken  as  the  result  of  acts  far  back  before
the  beginning  of  all  things.  But  this  is  never  dearlv
stated.  On  the  contrary,  this  primeval  Avidy&  is  lerfe
unexplained,  it  is  not  to  be  accounted  for,  as  little  as
Brahman  can  be  accounted  for.  Like  Brahman  it  has  to
be  accepted  as  existent ;  but  it  differs  from  Brahman  in
so  far  as  it  can  be  destroyed  by  Vidy&,  which  is  the  eternal
life-spring  of  Brahman.  The  merit  which  can  be  acquired
by  man  even  in  this  state  of  Avidy&  is  such  that  he  may
rise  even  to  the  status  of  a  god,  though  for  a  time  only,  for
at  the  end  of  a  Kalpa  even  gods  lixe  Indra  and  the  rest
have  to  begin  their  career  afresh.  In  fact  it  might  be  said
with  some  truth  that  Avidy&  is  the  cause  of  everything,
except  of  Brahman;  but  that  the  cause  of  that  primeval
Aviay&  is  beyond  our  powers  of  conception.

These  powers  of  conception  are  real  indeed  for  all
practical  purposes,  but  in  the  highest  sense  they  top  are
phenomenal  only.  They  too  are  but  N&marApa,  name  and
form;  and  the  reality  that  lies  behind  them,  the  Atman
that  receives  them,  is  Brahman  and  nothing  else.  This
might  become  clearer  if  we  took  Brahman  for  the  Kantian
Ding  an  ideh,  remembering  only  that,  according,  to  the
Kantian  philosophy,  the  Biipa,  the  forms  of  intuition  and
the  categories  of  thought,  though  subjective,  are  accepted
as  true,  while  the  Vedteta  treats  them  also  as  the  result
of  Nescience,  though  true  for  all  practical  purposes  in  tliis
phenomenal  life.  In  this  sense  the  Yed&nta  is  more  seep*
iical  or  critical  than  even  Kant's  critical  philosophy,  though
the  tii^o  agree  with  each  other  again  when  we  rememtor
that  Kant  aJiso  denies  the  validity  of  these  forms  of  per-
ception and  thought  when  applied  to  transcendent  subjects.


THE  STHftliA-  AND  sdKSHMA-^ABTM.  173

Aeoording  to  Kant  it  is  man  who  creates  the  world,  as  &r
as  its  form  (Nftmar(ipa)  is  concerned;  according  to  the
Yed&nta  this  kind  oi  creation  is  due  to  Avidv&.  And
strange  as  it  may  sound  to  apply  that  name  of  Avidy&  to
Slants  intuitions  of  sense  and  his  categories  of  the  under-
standing,  there  is  a  common  element  in  them,  though
hidden  under  different  names.  It  would  be  natural  to
suppose  that  this  Atman  within  had  been  taken  as  a  part
of  Brahman,  or  as  a  modification  of  Brahman:  but  no.
According  to  S^imkara  the  world  is,  as  I  tried  to  show^  on
a  former  occasion,  the  whole  of  Brahman  in  all  its.integrity,
snd  not  a  part  only ;  only,  owing  to  Avidy&,  wrongly
ooneeived  and  individualisea.  Here  we  have  in  fact  the
Holenmerian  theory  of  Plotinus  and  of  Dr.  Henry  More,
anticipated  in  India.  If  the  Atman  within  seems  limited
like  the  Brahman  when  seen  in  the  objective  world,  this  is
once  more  due  to  AvidyA  Brahman  ought  to  be  omni-
present, omniscient,  and  omnipotent ;  though  we  know  but
too  well  that  in  ourselves  it  is  very  far  from  all  this.

These  are  the  conditiozis  or  Up&dhis  which  oHisist  of
Manas,  mind,  Indriyas,  senses,  Pr&tias,  vital  spirits,  and  the
Aurtra,  \)ody,  as  determihed  by  the  outward  world.  Hiis
Ved&ntic  anrangement  of  our  organic  structure  and  our
mental  organisation  is  curious,  but  it  seems  to  have  been
more  or  less  the  common  property  of  all  Indian  philoso-
phers, and  supplied  by  the  common  language  of  the  people.
What  is  peculiar  in  it  is  the  admission  of  a  central  organ,
receiving  and  arranging  what  has  been  conveyed  to  it  by
the  separate  organs  of  sense.  We  have  no  word  corre-
sponding to  it,  though  with  proper  limitations  we  may
continue  to  translate  it  by  mens  or  mind.  It  wovld  repre-
aent  peioeption  as  unitiiig  and  arranging  the  great  maaa
of  sensations,  but  it  includes  besides  Upalabdhi,  perception,
Adhyavas&ya,  determination  also,  so  tor  as  it  depenos  on
a  previous  interaction  of  percepts.  Hence  a  man  is  said
to  see  by  the  mind  (Manas,  povs),  but  he  may  also  be  said

^  1%«o0Oph7,  p.  980.


1 74  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY,

to  decide  and  act  by  the  mind  (Manas).  All  this  may  seem
very  crude,  leaving  particularly  the  qu^tion  of  the  change
oT  mere  sensations  into  percepts  {VoTStelhiTigen)^  a  subject
so  carefully  elaborated  by  modem  philosophers,  and  of  per-
cepts into  concepts,  unapproached  and  unexplained.  Here
the  philosophy  of  Herbart  would  supply  what  is  wanted.
He  too,  being  opposed  to  the  admission  of  various  mental
faculties,  is  satisfied  with  one,  the  Manas,  and  tries  to
explain  all  psychical  phenomena  whatever  as  the  result  of
the  action  and  interaction  of  elementary  Vorstdlungen
(ideas  or  presentations).

By  the  side  of  the  vital  spirit,  the  Mukhya  Prftria,  we
find  a  fivefold  division  into  Vrkna,  Up&na,  Yy&na,  Sam&na,
and  Ud&na,  meanuig  originally  forth-,  off-,  through-,  with-,
and  out-breathing,  but  afterwards  defined  differently  and
without  much  reference  to  any  physiological  data.  This
also  is  a  doctrine  common  to  most  systems  of  Indian  philo-
sophy, though  it  is  difiicult  to  see  by  what  physiological
observations  it  could  have,  been  suggested.

What  is  more  interesting  is  the  distinction  between  the
Sthiila-  and  SfLkshma-sarira,  the  coarse  and  the  fine  body,
the  former  the  visible  outward  body;  the  latter  invisible
and  consisting  of  Mukhya  Frkna,,  viteA  spirit,  Manas,  mind,
and  Indriyas,  organs  of  sense.  This  body  is  supposed  to
remain  after  death,  while  the  outer  body  is  dissolved  into
its  material  elements.  The  thin  or  subtle  body,  though
transparent  or  invisible,  is  nevertheless  accepted  as  mate-
rial; and  it  is  this  Stlkshma-sartra  which  is  supposed  to
migrate  after  death  from  world  to. world,  but,  for  the  most
part,  in  an  unconscious  state.  It  is  not  like  a  human  body
with  arms  and  legs.

Here  again  we  come  across  an  original  idea  of  Indian
philosophy,  the  doctrine  of  the  four  states,  the  state  of
being  awake,  the  state  of  dreaming,  the  state  of  deep  and
dreamless  sleep,  to  which  is  added^  as  the  fourtti,  the  state
of  death.  In  the  first  state  the  Atman  is  supposed  to  be
perceiving  and  acting  by  means  of  the  Manas  and  the
Indriyas.     In  the  seeona  the  Indriyas  cease  to  act,  but


BSOHATOLOOT.  1 75

the  Manas  remains  active,  and  the  Atman,  joined  to  the
Manas,  moves  through  the  veins  of  the  body  and  sees
dreams  made  out  of  the  remnants'  of  former  impressions
(V&san&s).  The  third  state  arises  from  a  complete  separa-
tion of  Atman  from  Manas  and  Indriyas.  While  these  are
absorbed  in  the  yital  spirit,  which  remains  in  full  activity,
the  Atman  in  the  heart  is  supposed  to  have  for  a  time
become  one  with  Brahman,  but  to  return  unchanged  at  the
time  of  awakening.  In  the  fourth  or  disembodied  state
the  Atman  with  the  Sdkshma-aarira  is  supposed  to  escape
from  the  heart  through  a  vein  in  the  head  or  through  the
hundred  veins  of  the  body,  and  then  to  take,  according  to
merit  and  knowledge,  different  paths  into  the  next  life.

Such  fancies  seem  strange  in  systems  of  philosophy  like
the  Vedd.nta ;  and,  with  the  full  recognition  of  the  limits
of  human  knowledge,  we  can  hardly  understand  how
Veddjitists  accepted  this  account  of  the  Sflkshma-^rtra,
the  circumstances  attending  the  departure  of  the  soul,  in
fact,  a  complete  Eschatology,  simply  on  the  authority  of
the  Veda.  It  is  taken  over  from  the  Upanishads,  and  that
may  be  the  -excuse  for  it,  Ved&ntists  had  once  for  all
bound  themselves  to  accept  the  Upanishads  as  revealed
truth,  and  the  usual  result  followed.  But  we  should  see
clearly  that,  while  much  may  be  taken  over  from  the  Veda
as  due  to  AvidyA,  we  are  here  really  moving  in  an  Avidyft
within  that  Avidyd..  For  practical  purposes  Avidyd,  may
often  be  called  common  sense,  under  its  well-understood
limitations,  or  the  wisdom  of  £he  world.  But  these  dreams
about  the  details  of  a  future  life  are  a  mere  phantasmagoria.
They  cannot  even  be  treated  as  Naisargtka,  or  inevitable.
They  are  simply  Mithy%/)ana,  fanciful  or  false  knowledge,
if  not  that  which  is  commonly  illustrated  by  the  son  of
a  barren  woman — that  is,  a  self -contradictory  statement —
that  kind  at  least  which  is  unsupported  by  any  evidence,
such  as  the  horn  of  a  hare.  This  is  really  a  weakness  that
runs  through  the  whole  of  the  Yedd^ni^,  and  cannot  be
helped.  After  the  supi'eme  and  superhuman  authority  of
the  Word  or  of  the  Veda  had  once  been  recognised,  a  great


176  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

portion  of  the  sacred  traditions  of  the  Vedic  age,  inoor-

e)rated  as  they  are  in  the  hymns,  the  Brldimavias,  and  the
panishads,  had  to  be  accepted  with  the  rest,  though  ac-
cepted as  part  of  the  Apai^  Vidyd.,  the  lower  knowledge
only.  All  the  sacrificial  rules,  nay  the  very  conception  of
a  sacrifice,  bad  no  place  in  the  Par4  Vidyd.,  or  the  highest
knowledge,  because  they  involved  an  actor  and  an  enjoyer
of  the  fruits  of  such  acts,  and  the  truly  enlightened  man
cannot  be  either  an  actor  or  an  enjoyer^.  However,  as
a  preparation,  as  a  means  of  subduing  the  passions  and
purifying  the  mind  by  drawing  it  away  from  the  low  and
vulgar  interests  of  life,  all  such  commandments,  together
with  the  promises  of  rewards  vouchsafed  to  them,  might
perhaps  have  been  tolerated.  But  when  we  come  to  a  mil
description  of  the  stations  on  the  road  b^  which  the  subtle
body  IS  supposed  to  travel  from  the  veins*  of  this  body  to
the  very  steps  of  the  golden  throne  of  the  Lower  Brahman,
we  wonder  at  the  long  suffering  of  the  true  philosopher
who  has  learnt  that  the  true  and  highest  knowledge  of  the
Ved&nta  removes  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  (Ap&tataA)  the
veU  that  in  this  life  seems  to  separate  Atman  from  Brah-
man. As  these  eschatological  dreams  have  been  included
in  the  Ved&nta  system,  they  had  to  be  mentioned  here,
though  they  are  better  studied  in  the  pages  of  theUpani-

We  are  told  there  that,  in  the  case  of  persons  who  have
fulfilled  their  religious  or  sacrificial  duties  and  have  lived
a  ffood  life,  but  have  not  yet  reached  the  highest  know-
lee^,  the  subtle .  body  in  which  the  Atman  is  clothed
migrates,  carried  along  by  the  Ud&na  through  the  Miir-
dhanya  N&c2i,  the  capital  vein,  following  either  the  path  of
the  fathers  (Pitriy&Tia)  or  the  path  of  the  .gods  (Devay&na).
The  former  is  meant  for  good  people,  the  latter  fpr  those
who  are  good  and  have  idready  reached  the  lower,  if  not
the  highest  knowledge.  The  former  leads  on  to  smoke,
night,  the  waning  moon,  the  waning  year,  the  world  of  the
fathers,  the  ether,  and  lastly  the  moon.  In  the  moon  the
departed  souls  remain  for  a  time  enjoying  the  rewards  of

*  See  5amkara'a  Introduction  to  the  Aitareya  XTpaniilucl


BSOHATOLOOy.  1 77

tl^eir  gx)od  deeds,  in  company  with  the  Viiris,  and  then
deacend  again,  supported  by  the  remnant  of  unrewarded
Dderit  due  to  their  good  works,  to  the  ether,  wind,  smoke,
cloud,  rain,  and  plants.  From  the  plants  springs  seed
which,  when  matured  in  the  womb,  begins  a  new  life  on
earth  in  such  a  station  as  the  rest  of  his  former  deeds
(Anu«aya),  Anlage,  may  warrant.  As  this  is,  as  far  as
I  know,  tixe  earliest  allusion  to  metempsychosis  or  Seden-
wamderu/n^,  it  may  be  of  interest  to  see  in  whdt  sense
8emka,m  m  his  commentary  on  Stltra  III,  i,  22  took
it^:—

'It  has  been  explained,'  he  says,  'that  the  souls  of
those  who  perform  sacrifices,  &c.,  after  having  reached  the
moon,  dwell  there  as  long  as  their  works  last,  and  then
redescend  with  a  remainder  of  their  good  works.  We  now
have  to  inquire  into  the  mode  of  that  descent.  On  this
point  the  Veda  makes  the  following  statement:  "They
return  again  the  way  they  came  to  the  ether,  from  the
ether  to  the  air  (wind).  Tnen  the  sacrificer  having  become
air  becomes  smoke,  having  become  smoke  he  becomes  mist,
having  become  mist  he  becomes  a  cloud,  having  become  a
cloud  he  falls  down  as  rain."  Here  a  doubt  arises  whethet
the  descending  souls  pass  over  into  a  statQ  of  identity
(SAbh&vyam)  with  ether,  &c.,  or  into  a  state  of  similarity
(S&myam)  only.  The  P<irvapakshin  (opponent)  maintains
that  the  state  is  one  of  identity,  because  this  is  directly
stated  by  the  text.  Otherwise  there  would  take  place
what  is  called,  indication  only  (Lakshanft,  i.e.  secondary
application ,  of  a  word),  and  whenever  the  doubt  lies  be-
tween a  directly  expressed  and  a  merely  indicated  meaning,
the  former  is  to  be  preferred.  Thus  the  following  words
also, ''  Having  become  air  he  becomes  smoke,"  &c.,  are  ap-
propriate onfy  if  the  soul  be  understood  to  identify  itself
with  them.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  souls  (of  the  de-
parted) become  really  identical  with  ether.  To  this  we
oSamkara)  reply  that  they  only  pass  into  a  state  of  simi-
larity to  ether,  &c.  When  the  Ibody,  consisting  of  water
which  the  soul  had  assumed  in  the  sphere  of  the  moon  for

^  S.B.E.,  Tol.  xzxvii,  Thibaut's  translation.

12  »


178  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

the  purpoee  of  enjoyment,  dissolves  at  the  time  when  that
emoyment  comes  to  an  end,  then  it  becomes  subtle  like
citner,  passes  thereupon  into  the  power  of  the  air,  and  then
gets  mixed  with  smoke,  &c.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the
clauses,  *^  They  return  as  they  came  to  the  ether,  from  the
ether  to  the  air,"  &c.  How  is  this  known  to  be  the  mean-
ing ?  Because  thus  only  is  it  possible.  For  it  is  not  pos-
sime  that  one  thine  should  become  another  in  the  literal
sense  of  the  word,  if,  moreover,  the  souls  became  identified
wI'Ia  ether,  they  could  no  longer  descend  through  the  air.
And  as  connection  with  the  ether  is,  on  account  of  its  all-
pervadingness,  idtemal,  no  other  connection  (of  the  souls)
with  if  can  here  be  meant,  but  their  entering  into  a  state
of  similarity  to  it.  In  cases  where  it  is  impossible  to  accept
the  literal  meaning  of  the  text,  it  is  quite  proper  to  assume
the  meaning  which  is  merely  indicated*  For  these  reasons
the  souls'  becoming  ether,  &c.,  has  to  be  taken  in  the  seoon-
danr  sense  of  their  passing  into  a  state  of  similarity  to  ether,
and  so  on.'

We  see  from  this  that  jSSflkmkara  believed  in  a  similarity
only,  an  outward  and  temporary  similarity  between  the
departed  ^in  ite  Sflkshma-sartra)  and  the  ether,  air,  mist,
cloud,  and  rain;  and  it  is  importani  to  observe  how,  in
doing  so,  he  violently  twisted  the  natural  meaning  of
S&b&vya,  the  word  used  in  the  Siitras,  rather  than  cater-
ing a  word  of  the  Sfttra^  and  replacing  S&bh&vyam  by
S&myam.

A  similar  difficulty  arises  again  when  it  has  to  be  deter-
mined whether  the  departed,  in  his  further  descent,  actually
becomes  a  plant,  such  as  rice,  com,  aesamum,  l)ean8,  &c,  or
becomes  merely  connected  with  tiiem.  Samkara  decides
stron'gly  in  f avotbr  of  the  latter  view,  though  here  again
the  actual  words  of  the  SAtra  have  certeinly  to  1^  twisted
by  him ;  nay,  though  jSamkara  himself  has  to  adnit  that
other  people  may  really,  on  account  of  their  bad  deeds,  sink
so  low  as  to  become  plants.  He  only  denies  this  with  re-
ference to  the  departed  who,  on  account  of  their  pious
works,  have  already  reached  the  moon,  and  are  after  that
redeacending  upon  earth.

Lastly,  if  it  is  said  that  the  plant,  when  eaten,  becomes


BSOHATOLOOY.  179

a  piogenitor,  (his  also,  according  to  ^ibmkara,  cap  only
mean  that  it  is  joined  with  a  progenitor.  For  the  pro-
genitor must  exist  long  before  he  eats  the  rice  or  the
beans,  and  is  able  to  beget  a  child.  Anyhow,  the  child
when  begotten  is  the  soul  that  had  ascended  to  and
descended  from  the  moon,  and  is .  bom  again  according
to  his  former  woi^s.

I  must  confess  that,  though  the  Ved&ntists  may  be  bound
by  /Siomkara's  interpretation,  it  seems  to  me  as  if  the  author
or  the  Sfltras  himself  had  taken  a  different  view,  and  had
looked  throughout  on  ether,  air,  mist,  cloud,  rain,  plants  as
the  habitat,  tiiough  the  temporary  habitat  only,  or  the  de-
parted in  their  subtle  body  \

Little  is  said  in  the  Upanishads  of  those  who,  owing  to
their  evil  deeds,  do  not  even  rise  to  the  moon  and  descend
again.  But  B&dar&yaria  tries  to  make  it  clear  that  the
Upanishads  know  of  a  third  class  of  beings  (III,  i,  12)
who  reap  the  fruits  of  their  evil  actions  in  Samyamana
^abode  of  Yama)  and  then  ascend  to  earth  again.  Theirs
IS  the  third  place  alluded  to  in  the  KMnd,  Upamshad  V,
10,  8.

But  while  evil  doers  are  thus  punished  in  different  hells,
as  mentioned  in  the  Pur&Tias,  and  while  pious  people  are
fully  rewarded  in  the  moon  and  then  return  again  to  the
earth,  those  who  have  been  pious  and  have  also  reached  at
least  the  lower  knowledge  of  Brahman  follow  a  diffej^pnt
road.  After  leaving  the  body,  they  enter  the  flame,  the
day,  the  waxing  moon,  the  waxing  year  (northern  preces-
sion), the  year,  the  world  of  the  Devas,  the  world  of  V4yu,
air^  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  then  lightning ;  but  -all  these,
we  are  told,  are  not  abodes  for  the  soul,  Dut  guides  only
who,  when  the  departed  has  reached  the  lighUiing,  hand
him  over  to  a  person  who  is  said  to  be  not-a-man.  This
person  conducts  him  to  the  world  of  Varuna,  then  to  that
of  Indra,  and  lastly  to  that  of  Pra^&pati  or  the  qualified
Brahm&.  Here  the  souls  are  supposed  to  remain  till  they
realise  true  kpowledge  or  the  Samyagdarsana,  which  does
not  mean  universal,  but  thorough  and  complete  knowledge,

1  See  Vuhiiu  Dh.  &  XLIU,  45.

N  2


l80  INDIAN  PHIUMBOPHT.

thftt  knowledge  whichi  if  obtained  on  earthy  at  once  frees
a  man  from  all  illusion.  Finally  the  soole,  when  fully  re-
leased, share  in  all  the  powers  of  Brahman  except  those  of
creating  and  ruling  the  universe.  They  are  not  supposed
evjBr  to  return  to  the  world  of  Sam«d.ra  (IV,  4t  ^7)-

All  this  is  hardly  to  be  called  philosophy^  neither  do  the
different  descriptions  of  the  road  on  which  the  souls  of  the
pious  are  supposed  to  wander  towards  Brahm&,  and'  which
naturally  vary  according  to  diffex^ni  schools,  help  us  mudi
towards  a  real  insight  into  the  Veda^ta.  But  it  would  have
been  unfair  to  leave  out  what»  'though  childish,  is  a  charac-
teristic feature  of  the  VedlUita-philosoph^,  and  must  be
judged  from  a  pur^y  historical  ppint  of  view.

What  is  of  importance  to  remember  in  tiiese  ancient
fancies  is  that  the  enlightened  man  may  become  free  or
obtain  Hukti  even  in  this  life  ((?tvanmukti  ^).  This  is
indeed  the  real  olgect  of  the  YedAnta'pliilosophv,  to  over-
come all  Nesd^Qce,  to  become  once  more  what  the  Atman
always  has  been,  namely  Brahman,  and  then  to  wait  till
death  removes  the  last  iJp&dhis  or  fetters,  which,  thon|3;h
they  fetter  the  mind  no  longer^  remain  like  broken  chams
hanging  heavy  on  the  mortol  bod^.  The  Atman,  having
recoveml  its  Brahmahood,  is  even  in  this  life  so  free  from
I  V  *  the  body  tiiat  it  feels  no  longer  onj  pain,  and  cannot  do
\l^  an  vthing,  whether  good  or  baa  This  has  been  always  laid
hold  of  as  the  most  dangerous  docoine  of  YedAntism,  and  no
doubt  it  may  be  both  misunderstood  and  misapplied.  Bat
in  the  beginning  it  meant  no  more  than  that  the  Atman,
which  is  above  the  distinctions  of  subject  and  object^  of  past
and  present,  of  cause  .and  effect,  is  im^o  by  necessity  above
the  aistinction  of  good  and  evil  This  never  was^  intended
as  freedom  in  the  sense  of  licence,  but  as  freedom  that  can
neither  lapse  into  sinful  acts  nor  claim  anjr  merit  for  good
acts,  being  at  rest  and  Messed  in  itself  and  in  Brahman*

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  or  to  prove  that  the  Vedftnta-
philosophy,  even  in  its  popular  form,  holds  out  no  en*

'  VodAnU-Satm  III,  3,  oS.


FEEBDOV  nr  THIS  LIYB.  l8x

coQfagement  to  Tic#.  Far  from  It  No  one  emi  even
approaeh  it  who  hsmmot  previonsljr  passed  thxongh  a  eoanie
ol  diecipline,  whether  a«  a  etndent  (Brahma^rin)  or  as
a  hoiueholder  (OribaetKa).  In  order  to  make  this  otiite
dear,  it  may  be  neeftil  to  add  a  few  rereee  from  one  of  the
many  pcmnlar  works  intended  ffy  teaeh  Vedftnta  to  the
maesee.  It  is  MIH  the  licdiamndgan^  the  Hiammer  of
Folly,  and  is  ascribed  to  SBmk$n,  TUongh  not  strictly
philosophical,  it  may  serve  $i  least  to  Aow  ti^e  state  of
mind  in  which  the  tme  VedAatist  is  meant  tON  maintain
himself*  It  was  carefollv  edited  with  BefngaHi,  Hindi  and
English  translations  by  lAirga  Das  Bay,  and  pablished  at
Darjeelingin  1888.

'  Fool  I  dve  tip  thy  thirst  for  wealth,  banish  all  desires
from  thy  neart.  Let  thy  mind  be  satisfied  with  what  is
gained  oy  thy  Karman.

Who  is  thy  wife  and  who  Js  thy  son  ?  Curioos  are  the
ways  of  this  world  '^  Who  art  thou  ?  Whence  didst  thon
come  ?    Ponder  on  ibis,  O  Brother/^

Do  not  be  prond  of  wealth,  of  friends,  or  yonth.  ISme
takes  all  away  in.  a  moment  Leaving  all  this  which  is
fall  of  illu^on,  leave  quickly  and  enter  into  the  place  of
Brahman.

life,  is  tremnlons  like  a  water-drop  on  a  lotnd-leal  The
company  of  the  good,  though  for  a  moment  only,  is  the
onlv  boat  for  crossing  this  ocean  ot  the  world

As  is  birth  so  is  death,  and  so  is  thff  dwelling  in  the
mother's  womb.  Thus  is  manifest  the  misery  of  the  world
How  can  ^ere  be  satisfaction  here  for  ti)^e,  O  Man  I

Day  and  night,  morning  and  eveninj^,  winter  and  spring
come  and  go.  Time  is  playing,  life  is  waning— yet  the
breath  of  hope  never  ceases.

Hie  bpdy  is  wrinkled,  the  hair  grev,  the  mouth  has
become  toothless,  the  stick  in  the  Imnd  shakes,  yet  man
leaves  not  the  anchor  of  hope.

To  live  under  a  tree  of  the  house  of  the  gods,  to  sleep
on  the  earth,  to  put  on  a  goatnakin,  to  abandon  all  worldly
enjoyment ;  when  does  such  surrender  not  make  happy  1

Do  not  trouble  abgut  enemy,  friend,  son,  or  relation,
whether  for  war  or  peace.    Preserve  equanimity  always,  if


/^


l82  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

yon  desire  soon  to  reach  the  place  of  Vishnu  (Vishnu-
pada).

The  eight  great  mountains^  the  seven  oceans,  Brahm4,
Indra,  the  Snh  and  the  Budras,  thou,  I  and  the  whote
world  are  nothing ;  why  then  is  there  any  sorrow  1

In  thee,  in  me,  and  in  others  there  dwells  Vishnu  alone,
it  is  useless  to  be  angiy  with  me  and  impatient.  See  every
self  in  Self,  and  give  up  all  thought  of  difference.

The  child  is  given  to  play,  the  youth  delights  in  a  beauti-
ful damsel,  an  old  man  is  absorbed  in  cares — ^no  one  clings
to  the  Highest  Brahman.

Consider  wealth  as  useless,  there  is  truly  no  particle  of
happiness  in  it. '  The  rich  are  afraid  even  of  their  son,  this
is  the  rule  established  everywhere.

So  long  as  a  man  can  earn  money,  his  family  is  kind  to
him.  But  when  his  body  becomes  infirm  through  old  age,
no  man  in  the  house  asks  after  him.  *

Having  given  up  lust,  anger,  avarice,  and  distraction,
meditate  on  thyself,  who  thou  art  Fools  without  a  know-
led^  offielf  are  hidden  in  hell  and  boiled.

in  these  sixteen  verses  the  whole  teaching  of  the  disciples
has  been  told.  Those  in  whom  this  does  not  produce  under-
standing, who  can  do  more  for  them  ? '

This  may  not  be  exactly  moral  teaching  as  we  under-
stand it.  J3ut  there  are  two  ways  of  studying  philosophy.
We  may  studv  it  in  a  critical  or  in  a  historical  spirit.
The  critic  would  no  doubt  fasten  at  once  on  the  superses-
sion of  morality  in  the  Ved&nta  as  an  unpardonable  flaw.
One  of  the  comer-stones,  without  which  the  grandest
pyramid  of  thought  must  necessarily  collapse,  would  seem
to  be  missing  in  it.  The  historian  on* the  other  hand  will
be  satisfied  with  simply  mesfiuring  the  pyramid  or  trying
to  scale  it  step  by  step,  as  far  as  his  thoughts  will  carry
him.  He  would  tnus  understand  the  labour  it  has  required
in  building  up,  and  possibly  discover  some  counteracting
forces  that  ren4pr  the  absence  even  of  a  corner-stone  in-
telligible, p€trdonable,  and  free  from  dai^r.  It  is  surely
astounding  that  such  a  system  as  the  Ve&nta  should  have


DIFFEBENT  WATS   OF  STUDTINO  PBILOSOFHT.      1 83

beffli  slowly  elaborated  by  (he  indefatigable  and  intrepid
thinkers  of  India  thousands  of  years  «igo,  a  system  wat
even  now  makes  us  feel  giddy,  as  in  mounting  the  last
steps  of  the  swaying  spire  of  L  ancient  Gothic  cathedral
None  of  our  phnos^phers.  not  excepting  HeraeUtus.  PUto.
Kant,  or  Hegel,  lias  ventured  to  erect  such  a  spire,  never
fri£chtened  by  storms  or  lightninfina.  Stone  follows  on  stone
in  regular  Accession  afttr  oncTthe  first  step  has  been
made,  after  once  it  has  been  clearly  seen  that  in  the
beginning  there  can  have  been  but  One,  as  there  will  be
but  One  in  the  end,  whether  we  call  it  Atman  or  Brahman*
We  may  prefer  to  look  upon  the  expansion  of  the  world  in
names  and  forms  as  the  work  of  Sophia  or  as  the  realised
Logos,  but  we  cannot  but  admire  the  boldness  with  which
the  Hindu  metaphysician,  impressed  with  the  miseries  and
evanescence  of  this  world,  could  bring  himself  to  declare
even  tiie  Logos  to  be  but  the  result  of  Avidy&  or  Nescience,
so  that  in  the  destruction  of  that  Avidy&  could  be  recog-
nised the  highest  object,  and  the  summum  bonum  (Puru-
sh^rtha)  of  man.  We  need  not  praise  or  try  to  imitate
a  Colosseum,  but  if  we  have  any  heart  for  the  builders  of
former  days  we  cannot  help  feeling  that  it  was  a  colossal
and  stupendous  effort.  And  this  is  the  feeling  wluch
I  cannot  resist  in  examining  the  ancient  Ved&nta.  Other
philosophers  have  denied  the  reality  of  the  world  as  per-
ceived by  us,  but  no  one  has  ventured  to  deny  at,  the  same
time  the  reality  of  what  we  call  the -Ego,  the' senses  and
the  mind,  and  their  inherent  forms.  And  yet  aftera.lifting
the  Self  above  body  and  soul,  after  uniting  heaven  and
earth,  God  and  man,  Brahman  and .  JTtman,  these' Ved&nta
philosophers  have  destroyed  nothing  in  the  life  of  the.
phenomenal  beings  who  have  to  act  and  to  fulfil  their
duties  in  this  phenomenal  world.  On  the  contrary,  they
have  shown  that  there  can  be  nothing;  phenomenal  without
something  that  is  real,  and  that*  goodness  and  virtue,  faith
and  works,  are  necessary  .as  a  preparation,  nay  as  a  sine
qud  non,  for  the  attainment  of  that  highest  knowledge
which  brings  the  soul  back  to  its  source  and  to  its  home,
and  restores  it  to  its  true  nature,  to  its  true  Selfhood  in
Brahman.


184  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

And  let  us  think  how  keenly  and  deeply  Indian  thinkers
mnst  have  felt  the  eternal  riddles  of  this  world  before  they
could  propose  so  desperate  a  solution  as  that  of  the  Ved^nta;
how  aesperate  they  must  have  thought  the  malady  of
mankind  to  be,  before  they  could  think  of  so  radical  a  cure.
A  student  of  the  history  of  philosophy  must  brace  himself  to
follow  those  whom  he  wants  to  reach  and  to  understand.  He
has  to  climb  like  a  mountaineer,  undismayed  by  avalanches
and  precipices.  He  must  be  able  to  breathe  in  the  thinnest
air,  never  discouraged  even  if  snow  and  ice  bar  his  access
to  the  highest  point  ever  reached  by  the  boldest  explorers.
Even  if  he  has  sometimes  to  descend  again,  disappointed,
he  has  at  all  events  strengthened  his  lungs  and  his  muscles
for  further  Work.  He  has  done  his  atUetic  exercise,  and
he  has  seen. views  such  as  are  never  seen  in  the  valleys
below.  I  am  myself  not  a  mountaineer,  nor  am  I  altogether
a  y ed&ntist ;  but  if  I  can  admire  the  bold  climbers  scaling
Mount  Gauri-Samkar,  I  can  also  admire  the  bold  thinkers
toilinj^  up  to  heights  of  the  Vedft^nta  where  they  seem  lost
to  us  m  clouds  and  sky.  Do  we  imagine  that  these  ascents
were  undertaken  from  mere  recklessness,  from  mere  love  of
danger?  It  ia  easy  for  us  to  call  those  ancient  explorers
reckless  adventurers,  or  dispose  of  them  with  the  help  of
other  names,  such  as  mystic  or  pantheist,  often  but  naif
understood  by  those  who  employ  them.  The  VcdAntiste
have  often  been  called  Atheists,  but  as  the  gods  which  they
denied  were  only  Devas,  or  what  we  call  false  gods,  they
might  thus  far  have  been  forgiven.  They  have  teen  called
Pantheists,  though  their  theos,  or  their  theoi,  were  not  the
Pan,  but  the  Pftn  was  their  theos.  They  have  been  called
Nihilists,  but  they  themselves  have  drawn  a  sharp  line
between  the  upholders  of  the  56nya-vada  *,  the  emptiness-
doctrine,  and  their  own  teaching,  which,  on  the  contrary,
insists  throughout  on  the  reality  that  underlies  all  phe-
nomenal thines,^  namely  Brahman,  and  inculcates  the  duties
which  even  this  world  of  seeming  imposes  on  all  who  are
not  yet  in  possession   of  the  highest  truth.     That  this

*■  An  important  distinction  botween  Buddhiats  md  VedAntists  if  that
the  former  hold  the  world  to  h&ve  arisen  ft'om  what  is  not,  the  Utter
from  what  is,  the  Sat  or  Brahman.


sImakuo'A.  185

phenomenal  world  has  no  exchisive  right  to  the  name  of
real  is  surely  implied  hy  its  very  name.  Besides,  whatever
perishes  can  never  have  been  real.  If  heaven  and  earth
shall  pass  away;  if  we  see  our  body,  oar  senses,  and  all
that  has  been  bnilt  np  on  them,  decajrinj^  OQd  perishing
every  day  before  our  very  eyes ;  if  the  very  Ego,  the  Aham,
is  disisolved  into  the  elements  from. which  it  sprang,  why
should  not  the  Ved&ntiist  also  have  held  to  his  belief  that
Brahman  alone  is  reallj^  real,  and  everything  else  a  dream ;
and  that  even  the  N&ma-rfipas,  the  words  and  things,  will
vanish  with  each  Ealpa  ?

To  sum  up,  the  Ve<d&nta  teaches  that  in  the  highest
sense  Creation  is  but  (Self -forgetfulness,  and  Eternal  Life
remembrance  or  Self-oonsciousness.  And  while  to  us  such
high  abstractions  mav  seem  useless  for  the  many,  it  is  all
the  more  surprising  that,  with  the  Hindus,  the  fundamental
ideas  of  the  Ved&nta  have  pervaded  the  whole  of  their
hterature,  have  Tieaivened  the  whole  of  their  language,  and
form  to  the  meneni  day  the  common  property  of  the  people
at  large.  I^o  doubt  these  ideas  assume  in  the  streets  a
different  garmeist  from  what  they  wear  among  the  learned
in  the  A«ramas  or  the  forests  of  the  country.  Nay  even
among  the  learned  few  stand  up  for  the  complete  Advaita
or  Monism  as  re/presented  by  5amkara.
^  The  danger  with  Ssmkar&'B  Yedftntism  was  that  what
to  him  was  sim  ply  phenomenal,  should  be  taken  for  purely
fictitious.  There  is,  however,  as  great  a  difference  between
the  two  as  there  is  between  Avidy&  and  Mithyft^^l^ia.
M&yA^  is  the  cause  of  a  phenomenal,  not  of  a  fictitious,
wond :  and  if  /Samkara  adopts  the  Vivarta  (turning  away)
instead  of  the  Parin&ma  (evolution)  doctrine,  there  is  always
something  <>n  which  the  Vivarta  or  illusion  is  at  work,  and
which  cannot  be  deprived  of  its  reality*


There  aire  schools  of  Ved&ntists  who  try  to  explain  the
Sfttrafl  of  B&dar&yaTia  in  a  far  more  human  spirit  The
best  known  is  the  school  of  B&m&nu^a,  who  lived  in  the

*  In  tlM  only  puMM  where  the  Siktnw  fpeak  of  Mijrft  (HI,  a,  3),  It
&Md  Aot  mefttt  more  uuax  a  dream.


1 86  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

twelfth  century  a.d.  ^  If  we  place  S^amkariet's  literary
activity  about  the  eighth  century  '\  the  claim  of  priority
and  of  prior  authority  would  belong  to  ^Samkara.  But  we
must  never  forget  that  in  India  more  than  anywhere  else,
philosophy  was  not  the  property  of  individuals,  but  that,
as  in  the  period  of  the  Upanishads,  so  in  later  times  also,
everybody  was  free  to  contribute  his  share.  As  we  find
a  number  of  teachers  mentioned  in  the  Upanishads,  and  as
they  give  us  long  lists  of  names,  pupil  succeeding  teacher
through  more  than  fifty  spiritual  generations,  the  com-
mentators also  ^uote  ever  so  many  authorities  in  support
of  the  views  which  they  either  accept  or  reject.  Hence  we
cannot  accept  ^Samkara  as  the  only  infallible  interpreter  of
the  Veddnta-Siitras,  but  have  to  recognise  in  his  commen-
tary one  only  of  the  many  traditional  interpretations  of
the  Siitras  which  prevailed  at  different  times  in  different
parts  of  India,  and  in  different  schools.  A  most  important
passage  in  this  respect  is  that  in  which  /Samkara  has  to
confess  that  others  (apare  tu  v&/dmah)  differ  from  him,  and
some,  as  he  adds,  even  of  our  own  (asmadiyd«  ka,  kipfcit^  \
This  allows  us  a  fresh  insight  into  the  philosophical  life
of  India  which  is  worth  a  great  deal,  particularly  as/  the
difference  of  opinion  refers  to  a  fundamental  doctrine,
namely  the  absolute  identity  of  the  individual  soul  with
Brahman.  ^SiaT^ikara,  as  we  saw,  was  imcompromising  oa
that  point.  With  him  and,  as  he  thinks,  with  Badarayana
also,  no  reality  is  allowed  to  the  soul  (Atman)  as  an  indi-
vidual (6iva),  or  to  the  world  as  presented  to  and  by  the
senses.  With  him  the  soul's  reality  is  Brahman,  and
Brahman  is  one  only.  But  others,  he  adds,  allow  reaUty  to
the  individual  souls  also.  Now  this  is  the  very  opinion
on  which  another  philosopher,  R&m&nu^a,  has  based  his
own  interpretation  of  BadaSrd.ya'na's  SMras,  and  has  founded
a  large  and  influential  sect.  But  it  does  not  follow  that
this,  whether  heretical  or  orthodox  opinion,  was  really  first
propounded  by  Bamanu(/a,  for  Ramlnu^a  declares  himself
dependent  on  former  teachers  (PiirvdMry&A),  and  appeals

»  Wilson,  Works,  I,  p.  35.

*  I-tsing,  Introduction,  p.  xv,  788-820  a.  d.  ;  Kum&rila,  750  a.  d.

»  S,B.E.,  XXXIV,  p.  XX,  Thibaut.


RAMiNa(7A.  187

particularly  to  a  somewhat  prolix  S&tra-vritti  by  BodM-
yana  as  his  authority.  R&m&nuaa  ^  himself  quotes  not  only
Bodh&yana,  but  after  him  Taiusja^,  Dramicifa  (or  Dravi<i!a^,
Guhadeva,  SApardin,  BharuAi.  One  of  them,  Dravida,  is
expressly  said  to  have  been  anterior  to  ^Samkara,  and  so
must  Bodh&yana  have  been,  if  he  is  meant  by  the  Yritti-
kftra  whom  Samksxa,  himself  criticises  \

We  ought,  therefore,  to  look  on  BAm&nugfa  as  a  perfect
equal  of  ^famkara,  so  far  as  his  right  of  interpreting  B&da-
rftyana's  Siitras,  according  to  his  own  opinion,  is  concerned.
It  is  the  same  here  as  everywhere  in  Hindu  philosophy.
The  individual  philosopher  is  but  the  mouthpiece  of  tradi-
tion, and  that  tradition  goes  back  further  and  further,  the
more  We  try  to  fix  it  cnronologically.  While  ^mkara^s
sjrstem  is  Advaita,  i.  e.  absolute  Monism,  that  of  R&m&nu^a
BM  been  called  Viaishta- Advaita,  the  doctrine  of  unity
with  attributes  or  Monism  with  a  differenca  Of  course
with  R&m&nugfa  also  Brahman  is  the  highest  reality,  omni-
potent, omniscient,  but  this  Brahman  is  at  the  same  time
full  of  compassion  or  love.  This  is  a  new  and  very  im-
portant feature  in  B&m&nugfa's  Brahman,  as  compared  with
the  icy '  self-sufficiency  ascribed  to  Brahman  by  iSamkara.
Even  more  important  and  more  humanising  is  the  recog-
nition that  souls  as  individuals  possess  reality,  that  ^t
and  AAit,  what  perceives  and  *what  does  not  perceive,
soul  and  matter,  lorm,  as  it  were,  the  body  of  Brahman  ^»
are  in  fact  modes  (Prak&ra)  of  Brahman.  Sometimes  ^'it
is  taken  for  the  Supreme  Spirit  as  a  conscious  cause,  AAdt
for  the  unconscious  effect  or  matter ;  but  there  is  always
tavara  as  a  third,  the  Lord ;  and  this,  originally  Brahm&,  is
later  on  identified  without  much  ado  with  Vishriu,  so  that
B&m&nugfa's  sect  is  actually  called  iSri-VaishTiava.  It
assumed  no  doubt  the  greatest  importance  as  a  religious
sect,  as  teaclnng  people  how  to  live  rather  than  how  to
think.  But  to  us  itis  chief  interest  is  its  philosophical
character,  and  more  particularly  its  relation  to  the  Bada-
rayana-Siitras  and  iSamkara's  explanation  of  them.

Brahman^  whether  under  the  name  of  tfivara,  Vishnu,  or

^  aB.B.,  XXXrV,  p.  zxL  *  Deussen,  The  Vedlinta-Philosophy,  p.  31.

'  Golebrooke,  Misc.  ifissayH,  I,  439  n.


1 88    .  INDIAH  FHIL080FHT.

Vtamdevek,  ot  BhsMirat,  10  with  BAm&nti^  as  with  SBm^
kara  both  the  eflfoient  and  the  material  cause  of  all  that
exists,  and  he  is  likewise  tiie  lord  and  mler  of  the  world.
But  here  mytiiology  comes  in  at  once.  From  this  Brah-
man, aceormn^  to  -B&mAnn^,  spring  Samkarshana,  the
individual  som  (^Iva),  from  Si^karshana  Pradynmna^
mind  (Manas),  and  from  Pradjl^mna  Animddha  or  tiie  Ego
(Ahaiikllra).  Brabm&,  masc.,  here  caUed  Yftsadeva,  ignSs^
withoot  qualities,  as  iSeimkara  holds,  bat  possesses  OfkoBb
(knowledge),  Bakix  (ener^),  Bala  ^rengA),  AJsvaam
(supreme  power),  Ylrya  (vigour),  and  Te^  (ener^)  as  his
Ounas  or  qualities.  Much  more  of  the  same  kix^  may  be
found  in  Colebrooke  \

The  real  philosophical  character  of  B&m&nu^'s  Ved&nt-
ism  has  for  the  fint  time  been  placed  in  its  true  light  by
Professor  Thibaut,  froin  whom  we  may  soon  expect  a  com*
plete  translation  of  B&m&nupa*s  own  commentary  on  ti^
Ved&nta-Sdtras,  tihe  /SrlbhAshya  As»  according  to  RAm^
nu^a,  Brahmi.;!  is  not  NirguTia,  without  qualities,  such
qualities  as  intelligence,  power,  and  mercy  are  ascribed  to
him,  while  with   SBmikBXB,  even  intelligence  was  not  a

Sialitv  of  Brahman,  but  Brahman  was  intelligence,  pure
ougnt,  and  pure  being.  Besides  these  qualities,  Brah*
man  is  supposed  to  possess,  as.  constituent  elements,  the
material  woiiid  and  the  individual  souls,  and  to  act  as  the
inward  ruler  (Antary&min)  of  them.  Hence,  neither  the
world  nor  the  individual  souls  will  ever  cease  to  exist
All  that  B&m&nu^ra  admits  is  that  ihey  pass  through
different  stages  as  Avyakta  and  Yyakta.  As  Yyakta,  £>
veloped,  they  are  what  we  know  them  to  be  on  earth ;  as
Avyakta  they  are  enveloped  (SomkoAdta).  This  involution
takes  place  at  the  end  of  each  Kalpa,  when  Brahman
assumes  its  causal  state  (E&nm&vasthft),  and  when  indi-
vidual souls  and  individual  things  lose  for  a  time  their
distinct  and  independent  character.  Then  follows,  by  the
mere  will  of  Brahmft,  the  evolution,  or  the  new  creation  of
gross  and  visible  matter,  and  an  assumption  by  tiie  indi-
vidtial  souk  of  new  material  bodies,  according  to  the  merit


ukukmaA.  189

or  demerit  of  iheir  former  ezittence.  The  important  point
iaihai  the  individual  floals^  ^according  to  BAwkauga,  retain
their  individuality  even  when  they  bve  reached  the  blias-
ful  abode  of  Brahman.  The  world  is  not  considered  hv
him  OS  merely  the  result  of  Avidy&^  but  is  real,  while
Brahman  is  to  be  looked  upon  and  wordiipped  as  a  personal
god,  the  creator  and  ruler  of  a  real  world.  Thus  t^vara,
the  Lord;  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  phenomenal  god;  and  the
difference  between  Brahman  and  ti^ara  vanishes,  as  much
as  the  difference  between  a  qualified  and  an  una  ualified  Brah-
man^  between  a  higher  and  a  lower  knowleoge.  Here  we
perceive  the  influence  exercised  on  philosophy  by  the  com-
mon sense  or  the  common  sentiment  of  the  people.  In
other  countries  in  which  philosophy  is,  bb  it  were,  the
private  property  of  individual  thmkers,  that  influence  is
m  less  perceptible.  But  extreme  views  like  those  pro-
pounded by /Seimkartt  were,  bb  might  be  expected,  too  much
for  the  great  mass  of  the  people,  who  might  be  willing  to
accept  the  doctrines  of  the  Upanishads  in  their  vagueness,
but  who  would  naturally  shrink  from  the  conclusions
drawn  from  them  with  inexorable  consi^itency  by  i^omkaro.
If  it  is  impossible  to  say,  as  iSamkara  savs,  ^I  am  not,'  it  is
difficult  at  least  to  say,  ' I  am  not  I,'  but  ^I  am  Brohmaa'
It  may  be  possible  to  say  that  t^ara  or  the  Lord  is  Brah-
man; but  to  worship  wara,  and  to  be  told  at  the  same
time  that  t^ara  is  out  phenomenal,  must  be  trying  even
to  the  most  ardent  of  worshippers.  If  therefore  iUiranuja,
while  nrof essinfiT  his  faith  in  the  Uoanishods  and  his  alle-
giance  to  BAdarftyana,  could  give  bock  to  his  followers  not
only  their  own  souls,  but  aliK)  a  personal  god,  no  wonder
that  his  success  should  have  h^en  so  great  as  it  was.

In  the  absence  of  any  definite  hirtorical  materials  it  is
quite  impossible  for  us  to  say  whether,  in  the  historical
oevelopment  of  the  VedAnta-phUosophy  at  the  time  of
Bftdarayana  and  afterwards,  it  was  the  absolute  Monism
as  represented  by  iS^omkara  that  took  the  lead,  or  whether
the  more  temperate  Monism,  as  we  see  it  in  S&m&nujgfa's
commentary,  exercised  an  earlier  sway.  There  are  cer-
tainly some  Siitras  which,  as  Dr.  Thibaut  has  shown,  lend
themsdves   far  more   readily  to   E&m&nu^a's   than   to


I  go  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

iSamkara's  interpretation.  The  question  as  to  the  nature
of  individual  souls  seems  decided  by  the  author  of  the
Siitras  in  favour  of  BAmknugs,  rather  than  of  iSamkara.
We  read  in  Sidtra  II,  3, 43,  *  The  soul  is  a  part  of  Brahman/
Here  the  soul  is  clearly  declared  to  be  a  part  of  Brahman,
and  this  is  the  view  of  BAoAnviga, ;  but  S^amkara  explains  it
bv  '  a  part,  as  it  were/  since  Brahman,  being  not  composed
of  parts,  cannot  have  parts  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  ^ord.
This  seems  ;a  bold  proceeding  of  iSfamkara's ;  and  though
he  tries  to  justify  it  by  very  ingenious  arguments,  B&mdr
nugra  naturally  takes  his  stand  on  the  very  words  of  the
Stitra.  Similar  cases  have  been  pointed  out  by  Dr.  Thibaut ;
and  this  very  divemty  of  opinion  confines  what  I  re^
marked  before,  that  the  Ved&nta  philosophers  of  India,
though  they  look  both  on  Upanishads  and  the  Siitras  as
their  highest  authorities,  often  present  a  body  of  doctrine
independent  of  them ;  colonies,  as  it  were,  of  thought  that
had  grown  to  be  independent  of  the  mother-country,  but
are  anxious  nevertheless  to  prove  that  their  own  doctrines
can  be  reconciled  with  the  old  authorities.  This  wiLs  the
position  assumed  by  BlUlarJLyana  towards  the  Upanishads,
so  much  so  that  nearly  the  whole  of  the  first  book  of  his
Siitras  had  to  be  devoted  to  showing  that  his  own  views
of  Brahman  were  not  in  conflict  with  certain -passages  in
the  Upanishads.  Some  of  then>  rnny  refer  to  the  lower
Brahman,  some  to  the  individual  soul  as  one  with  Brah-
man ;  and  it  is  on  these  points  that,  at  a  later  time,  Samfi-
kara  and  B&m&nu^a  would  naturally  haye  differed.  What
was  important  for  Bd.dar&ya7ia  to  show  was  that  no  pas-
sages from  the  Upanishads  could  fairly  be  quoted  in
support  of  other  philosophies,  such  as  the  S&mkhya,  of
which  both  £famkara  and  BAm^nu^a  would  disapprove.
In  the  same  manner  both  S^amkara  and  Bd.md.nu9a  are
anxious  to  show  that  they  themselves  are  in  perfect  agree-
ment with  Bddardyatza.  Both,  however,  approach  the  SMras
as  if  they  had  some  opinions  of  their  own  to  defend  and  to
bring  into  harmony  with  the  Siitras.  We  can  only  sup-
pose that  schools  in  different  parts  of  India  had  been  grow-
ing up  fast  in  the  hermitages  of  certain  teachers  and  their
pupils,  and  that  all  were  anxious  to  show  that  they  had


BAMANUG'A.  I9I

not  deviated  from  such  paramount  and  infallible  autho-
rities as  the  Sdtras  and  the  Upanishada  This  was  done
by  means  of  what  is  called  Mim&ms&,  or  a  critical  discus-
sion of  passages  which  seemed  to  be  ambiguous  or  had
actually  been  twisted  into  an  unnatural  meanmg  by  impor-
tant teachers.

Dr.  Thibaut^  therefore  seems  to  me  quite  right  when  he
says  that  both  jSamkara  and  R&mftnugfa  pay  often  less
regard  to  the  literal  sense  of  the  words  and  to  tradition
than  to  their  desire  of  forcing  Bftdarilyaria  to  bear  testi-
mony to  the  truth  of  their  own  philosophical  theories.
This  only  confirms  what  I  said  before  about  the  rich
growth  of  philosophical  thought  in  India,  independent  of
Stltras  and  Upanishads,  though  influenced  by  both.  Even
if  we  admit  that  Bd,dariLyana  wished  to  teach  in  his  Siitras
nothing  but  what  he  found  in  the  Upanishads,  it  must  not
be  foi^otfcen  that  the  Upanishads  contain  ever  so  many
conflicting  guesses  at  truth,  freely  uttered  by  thinkers
who  had  no  personal  relations  with  each  other,  and  had  no
idea  of  propounding  a  unifcftrm  system  of  religious  philo-
sophy. If  these  conflicting  utterances  of  the  Upanishads
had  to  be  reduced  to  a  system,  we  can  hardly  blame  iSam-
kara  for  his  taking  refuge  in  the  theory  of  a  higher  and
a  lower  Brahman,  the  former  being  the  Brahman  of  philo-
sophy,  the  other  that  of  religion,  and  both,  as  he  thought,
to  be  found  in  different  parts  of  the  Veda.  By  doing  that
he  avoided  the  necessity  of  arguing  away  a  number  of
purely  anthropomorphic  features,  incongruous,  if  applied  to
the  highest  Brahman,  and  dragging  down  even  the  Brah-
man ot  the  lower  Vidyfl,  to  a  lower  stage  than  philosophers
would  approve  of.  K&m&nuprja's  Brahman  is  always  one
and  the  same,  and,  according  to  him,  the  knowledge  of
Brahman  is  likewise  but  one ;  but  his  Brahman  is  in  conse-
sequence  hardly  moi^e  than  an  exalted  t^vara.  He  is.  able
to  perform  the  work  of  creation  without  any  help  from
M&yd.  or  Avidy& ;  and  the  souls  of  the  departed,  if  only
their  life  has  been  pure  and.  holy,  are  able  to  approach  this
Brahmfl,  sitting  on  his  throne,  and  to  enjoy  their  rewards

»  aB.E.,  XXXIV,  p.  xevi


19^  IVDUN  PHIL080PHT.

in  a  heavenly  pamdise.    The  higher  conception  of  Brah-
man excluded  of  course  not  only  everything  m^hological,
but  everything  like    activity   or  workmanship,   bo   that
creation  could  <mly  be  conceived  ae  caused  by  M^y&  ^  or
Avidy& ;  while  the  very  idea  of  im  approach  of  the  souls
of  the  departed  to  the  throne  of  Itrahman,  or  of  their  souls
being  merged  in  Brahman,  was  incompatible  with  the
funtmmental  tenet  that  the  two  were,  and  always  remaiia,
one  and  the  Jutme,  never  separa#ted  except  by  Nescience).
The  idea  of  an  approach  of  the  soul  to  Brahman,  nay,  even
of  the  individual  soul  being  a  separate  part  of  Brahman,  to
be  again  joined  to  Brahman  after  deaths  runs  counter  to  the
conception  of  Brahman,  as  explained  by  iSamkara,  however
promment  it  mav  be  in  the  UpaDishads  and  in  the  system
of  BdmAnu^a.   It  must  be  admitted  therefore  that  in  India,
instead  of  one  Ved&nta-philosophy,  we  have  really  two,
springing  from  the  same  root  but  extending  its  branches
in  two  very  different  directions,  that  of  ^amkara  being  kept
for  unfliiu^  reiuoners  who.  supported  by  an  unwavering
faith  in  Monism,  do  not  shrink  from  any  of  its  consequences ;
another,  that  of  B&m&nu<gfa,  trying  hard  to  reconcile  their
Monism  with  the  demands  of  the  human  heart  that  required,
and  always  will  require,  a  personal  god,  as  the  last  chuse
of  all  that  is,  and  an  eternal  soul   that  yearns  for  an
approach  to  or  a  reunion  with  that  Being.

I  am  well  aware  that  the  view  oi  the  world,  of  Qod,  and
of  the  soul,  as  propounded  by  the  Ved&ntists,  whether  in
the  Upanishads  or  in  the  Stiitras  and  their  commentaries,
has  orten  been  declared  strange  and.  fanciful,  and  unworthy
of  the  name  of  philosophy,  at  all  events  utterlv  unsuited
to  the  West,  whatever  may  have  been  its  value  in  the
East.  I  have  nothing  to  say  against  this  criticism,  nor
have  I  ever  tried  to  make  propaganda  for  Ved&ntism,
least  of  all  in  England.  But  I  maintain  that  it  represents
a  phase  of  philosophic  thought  'nrbich  no  student  of  philo-
sophy can  afford  to  ignore,  an<fi  which  in  no  country  pan
be  studied  to  greater  advantagi^  than  in  India.  And  I  fi^o
even  a  step  further.    I  quite  admit  that,  as  a  popular  philo-

*  Vcd.  SOtrM  XI,  a,  a,  tub  fine :  Avi  dx&pratyupatth&pitftnAnurApAmi*
irAvefavoMna,  'Through  hoing  poNMMOcI  of  the  MAy&  of  uftmof  and  formi
brought  near  by  AvldyA.'


EAHANUOA.  193

Bophy,  the  Vedanta  would  have  its  dangers,  that  it  would
fail  to  call  out  and  strengthen  the  manly  qualities  required
for  the  practical  side  of  life,  and  that  it  might  raise  tfie
human  mind  to  a  height  from  which  the  most  essential
virtues  of  social  and  political  life  might  dwindle  away  into
mere  p^ntoms.  At  the  same  time  I  make  no  secret  that
all  my  life  I  have  been  very  fond  of  the  Ved&nta.  Nay,
I  can  fully  agree  with  Schopenhauer,  and  quite  understand
what  hie  meant,  when  he  said, — *  In  the  whole  world  there
is  no  study,  except  that  of  the  original  (of  the  Upanishads),
so  behefici^  ana  so  elevating  as  that  of  the  Oupnekhat
(Persian  ti'anslation  of  the  Upanishads).  It  has  been  the
solace  of  my  life,  it  will  be  the  solace  of  my  death.'

Schopenhauer  was  the  last  man  to  write  at  random,  or
to  allow  himself  to  go  into  ecstasies  over  so-called  mystic
and  inarticulate  thought.  And  I  am  neither  afraid  nor
ashamed  to  say  that  I  share  his  enthusiasm  for  the
VeddiUta,  and  feel  indebted  to  it  for  much  that  has  been
helpful  to  me  in  my  passage  through  life.  After  all  it  is
not  everybody  who  is  called  upon  to  take  an  active  part  in
life,  whether  in  defending  or  ruling  a  country,  in  amassing
wealth,  or  in  breaking  stones;  and^for  fitting  men  to  leal
contemplative  and  quiet  lives,  I  know  no  better  preparation
than  the  Ved&nta.  A  man  may  be  a  Platonist,  and  yet  a
good  citizen  and  an  honest  Christian,  and  I  should  say  the
same  of  a  VedSntist.  They  may  be  called  useless  by  the
busy  and  toiling  portion  of  humanity;  but  if  it  is  true
that  'those  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait,'  then
may  we  not  hope  that  even  the  quiet  in  the  land  are  not
so  entirely  useless  as  they  appear  to  be  ?

And  while  some  of  the  most  important  doctrines  of  the
Ved&nta,  when  placed  before  us  m  the  plain  and  direct
language  of  the  Ved&nta-Siitras,  may  often  seem  very
startling  to  us,  it  is  curious  to  observe  how,  if  clothed  in
softer  language,  they  do  not  jar  at  all  on  our  ears,  nay,  are
in  full  harmony  with  our  own  most  intimate  convictions.
Thus,  while  the  idea  that  our  own  self  and  the  Divine
Self  are  identical  in  naiuire  might  seem  irreverent,  if  not
blasphemous,  one  of  our  own  favourite  hymns  contains  the
prayer,—

13  ^


194  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHT.

And  that  a  higher  gijft  than  gnu

Should  flesh  and  blood  refine,
God's  Presence  and  His  Tery  Sell^

And  Essence  all-diTinel

This  is  pure  Yedllnta.  We  also  speak  without  hesitation
of  our  body,  as  the  temple  of  God,  and  of  the  voice  of  God
within  us ;  nay,  we  repeat  with  St.  Paul  that  we  live,  and
move,  and  have  our  being  in  God,  yet  we  shrink  from
adopting  the  plain  and  simple  language  of  the  Upanishads
that  the  Self  of  God  and  man  is  the  same.

Again,  the  unreality  of  the  material  world,  though
proved  point  by  point  by  Berkeley,  seems  to  many  a  pure
fancy;  and  yet  one  of  our  most  popular  poets,  the  very
type  of  fiianliness  and  strength,  both  mental  and  physical,
speaks  like  a  Yed&ntist  of  the  shadows  among  which  we
move: —

For  more  than  onee  when  I*
Sat  aU  alone,  reyolTing  in  myself
The  word  that  is  the  symbol  of  myself,
The  mortal  limit  of  the  Self  was  loosed,
And  passed  into  the  Nameless,  as  a  cloud
Kelts  into  Heaven.    I  touched  my  limbs^the  limhs
Were  strange,  not  mine— and  yet  no  shade  of  doubt,
But  utter  clearness,  and  thro'* loss  of  Self
The  gain  of  such  hirge  life  as  matched  with  ours
Were  Sun  to  spark — unshadowable  in  words^
Themselves  but  shadows  of  a  shadow-world*

It  would  be  easy  to  add  similar  passages  from  Words-
worth, Goethe,  and  others,  to  show  that  after  all  there  ie
some  of  the  Indian  leaven  left  in  us,  however  unwilling  we
may  be  to  confess  it.  Indian  thought  will  never  quite
square  with  English  thoughts,  and  the  English  words  which
we  have  to  adopt  in  rendering  Indian  ideas  are  never  quite
adequate.  All  we  can  do  is  to  strive  to  approximate  as
near  as  possible,  and  not  to  allow  these  mevitable  dif-
ferences to  prejudice  us  against  what,  though  differently
expressed,  is  often  meant  for  the  same.

Thei«  is  one  more  point  that  requires  a  few  remarks.

^  Tennyson,  The  Ancient  Sage.


METAFHOES.  1 95


It  has  often  been  said  that  the  Ved&nta-philosophy  deals
too  much  in  metaphors,  and  that  most  of  them,  though
fascinating  at  first  sight,  leave  us  in  the  end  unsatisfied,
because  they  can  only  -illustrate,  but  cannot  prove.  This
is  true,  no  doubt ;  but  in  philosophy  illustration  also  by
means  of  metaphors  has  its  value,  and  I  doubt  whether
they  were  ever  meant  for  more  than  that.  Thus,  when  the
Ved&nta  has  to  explain  how  the  Sat,  the  Real  or  Brahman,
dwells  within  us,  though  we  cannot  distinguish  it,  the
author  of  the  Khkndogya,  Up.  VI,  13,  introduces  a  father
telling  his  son  to  throw  a  lump  of  salt  into  water,  and  after
some  time  to  take  it  out  again.  Of  course  he  cannot  do  it,
but  whenever  he  tastes  the  water  it  is  salt.  In  the  same
way,  the  father  says,  the  Sat,  the  Divine,  is  within  us,
though  we  cannot  perceive  it  by  itself.

Another  application  of  the  same  simile  (Brihad.  Ar.  Up.
II,  4, 12)  seems  intended  to  show  that  the  Sat  or  Brahman,
in  pemeating  the  whole  elementary  world,  vanishes,  so
that  there  is  no  distinction  left  between  the  individual  Self
and  the  Highest  Self  ^

Again,  when  we  read  ^  that  the  manifold  beings  are  pro-
duced from  the  Eternal  as  sparks  spring  from  a  burning
fire,  we  should  remember  that  this  metaphor  illustrates
the  idea  that  all  created  beings  share  in  the  substance
of  the  Supreme  Being,  that  for  a  time  they  seem  to  be
independent,  but  that  they  vanish  again  without  caus-
ing any  diminution  in  the  Power  from  whence  they
sprang.

The  idea  of  a  creating  as  a  making  of  the  world  is  most
repugnant  to  the  Ved&ntist,  and  he  tries  in  every  way  to
find  another  simile  by  which  to  illustrate  the  springing  of
the  world  from  Brahman  as  seen  in  this  world  of  Nescience.
In  ordejr  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  admitting  something
extraneous,  some  kind  of  matter  out  of  which  the  world
was  shaped,  the  Upanishads  point  to  the  spider  spinning
its  web  out  of  itself ;  and,  in  order  to  show  that  things  can

*•  8of>  D^SBen,  UpAfiishaclB.  p.  41$,  for  a  diiTcrent  oxplannf.ion.
■  Brih.  Ar.  Up.  II,  i,  aa

0  2


10  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

spring  into  existence  spontaneonsly,  they  use  the  simile  of
the  hairs  springing  from  a  man's  head  without  any  special
wish  of  the  man  mmself .  •

Now  it  may  be  quite  true  that  none  of  these  illustrations
can  be  coiisidored.  nor  were  they  intended  as  arguments  in
support  of  the  Upanishad-philosophy,  but  they  are  at  all
events  very  useful  in  reminding  us  by  means  of  striking
similes  of  certain  doctrines  arrived  at  by  the  Ved&nta
philosophers  in  their  search  after  truth.


CHAPTER  V,


It  would  be  interesting  to  trace  at  once  the  same  ox
very  similar  tendencies  to  those  of  the  Yed&nta  in  the
developinent  of  other  Indian  philosophies,  and  particularly
of  the  S&mkhya  and  Yoga,  and  to  see  what  tney  have  to
sa^  on  the  existence  and  the  toie  nature  of  a  Supreme
Being,  and  the  relation  of  human  beings  to  that  Ijivine
Being,  as  shadowed  forth  in  certain  passages  of  the  Veda,
though  differently  interpreted  by  different  schools  of  philo-
sophy. But  it  sterns  better  on  the  whole  to  adhere  to  the
order  adopted  by  the  students  of  philosophy  in  India,  and
ir^t  cf  £he  other  Mlm&mslt,  the  Pilrva-Mtm&msdr,  that  is
the  Former  Mim&ms&,  as  it  is  called,  in  connection  with
the  one  we  have  examined.  The  Hindus  admit  a  PArva^
Mim&ms&  and  an  Uttara-Mim&7ns&.  They  look  upon  the
Yed&nta  as  the  XJttara-  or  later  Mtm&msdr,  and  on  that  of
Gaimini  as  the  Pdrva-,  or  prior.  These  names,  however,
were  not  meant  .to  imply,  as  Colebrooke  ^  seems  to  have
supposed,  that  the  Pdrya-Mtm&ms&  was  prior  in  time,
though  it  is  true  that  it  is  sometimes  called  PriU;t^  pre-
vious. It  really  meant  no  more  than  that  the  Pftrva-
Mim&7n«&,  having  to  do  with  the  Earmak&Ticifa,  the  first
or  work-part  of  the  Yeda,  comes  first,  and  the  Uttara-
Mtmfi/m8&,  being  concerned  with  the  Gfi&nakknda^  comes
second,  just  as  an  orthodox  BUndu  at  one  time  was
required  to  be  a  QWhastha  or  householder  first,  and  then
only  to  retire  into  the  forest  and  lead  the  contemplative
life  of  a  Y&uaprastha  or  a  Samnyasin.  We  shall  see,  how-
ever, that  this  prior  Mimams^,  if  it  can  be  called  a  philo-
sophy at  all,  is  very  inferior  in  interest  to  the  Yea&nta,

*•  Colebrooke,  Miso.  Easa^s,  voL  i,  p.  299^    Riiteri  History  of  Philosophy,
▼oL  iv,  p.  37^,  in  Korrisou's  translation.
'  Sarracterfana-samgraha,  p.  xaa,  1.  3.


198  INDIAN  PfilLOSOFHT.

and  could  hardly  be  understood  without  the  previous
existence  of  such  a  system  as  that  of  B&darAyana.  I  should
not  like,  however,  to  commit  myself  so  far  as  to  claim
priority  in  time  for  the  Ved&nta.  It  has  a  decided  priority
in  importance,  and  in  its  relation  to  the  (zA&na-portion  of
the  Veda.  We  saw  why  the  fact  that  B&darslyaTia  quotes
Gaimini  cannot  be  used  for  chronological  purposes,  for
^aimini  returns  the  compliment  and  quotes  B&aar&yana.
How  this  is  to  be  accounted  for,  I  tried  to  explain  before.
It  is  clear  that  while  BMax'ayana  endeavoured  to  intro-
duce order  into  the  XJpanishads,  and  to  reduce  their  various
guesses  to  something  like  a  system,  Gaimini  undertook  to
do  the  same  for  the  rest  of  the  Veda,  the  so-called  Karma-
k&mda,  or  work-{)ortion ;  that  fs,  all  that  had  regard  to
sacrifice,  as  described  chiefly  in  the  BrdhmaTias.  Sacrifice
was  so  much  the  daily  life  of  the  Br&hmans  that  the
recognised  name  for  sacrifice  was  simply  Earman,  i.e.  work.
That  work  grew  up  in  different  parts  of  India^  just  as  we
saw  philosophy  springing  up,  full  of  variety,  not  free  even
from  contradictions.  Every  day  had  its  sacrifice,  and  in
some  respects  those  regular  sacrifices  may  be  called  the
first  calendar  of  India.  They  depended  on  tlxe  seasons  or
regulated  the  seasons  and  marked  the  different  divisions  of
the  year.  There  were  some  rites  that  lasted  the  whole
year  or  even  several  years.  And  as  philosorfiy  eidsted,
independent  of  the  XJpanishads,  and  through  BMarayana
attempted  to  make  peace  with  the  Upaniimads,  we  must
consider  that  sacrifices  alao  existed  for  a  long  time  without
the  Br&hmaTi.as,  such  as  we  possess  them ;  that  they  grew
up  without  being  restrained  by  generally  binding  authori-
ties of  any  kind ;  and  that  at  a  later  time  only,  after  the
Brahmanas  had  been  composed  and  had  acquired  some
kind  of  authority,  the  necessity  began  to  be  felt  of  recqn-
ciling  variant  opinions  and  customs,  as  embodied  in  the
Br&hmanas  and  elsewhere,  giving  general  as  well  as  special
rules  for  the  performance  of  every  kind  of  ceremony.
We  can  hardly  imagine  that  there  ever  was  a  time  in
India  wheii  the  so-called  priests,  settled  in  distant  localities,
did  not  know  how  to  perform  their  own  sacrificial  duties,
for  who  were  the  authors  of  them,  if  not  the  priests  1    Bu^-


FdBVA-MiMiifBi«  199

when  the  Br&hmanas  once  existed,  a  new  problem  had  j^
be  solved:  how  to  bring  the  Brikhmanas  into  harmony
with  themselveB  aad  witl  existing  family  and  local  ens-
toms,  and  also  how  to  discover  in  ihem  a  meaning  that
should  satisfy  every  new  generation.  This  was  achieved
by  means  of  what  is  called  ISimkmsk,  investigation,
examination,  consideration.  There  is  little  room  for  real
philosophy  in  all  this,  but  there  are  (questions  such  as  that
of  Dharma  or  duty,  including  sacrificial  duties,  which  offer
an  opportimity  for  discussing  the  origin  of  duty  and  tiie
nature  of  its  rewards ;  while  m  accounting  for  seeming  con-
tradictions  and  in  arriving  at  general  principles  concerning
'sacrificial  acts,  problems  would  naturally  turn  up  which,
tiiough  often  in  themselves  valueless,  are  generally  treated
with  considerable  injzenuity.  In  this  way  the  work  of
(Taimini  secured  for  i&elf  a  place  by  the  side  of  the  works
ascribed  to  B&dar&yaiia^  Eapila  and  others,  and  was  actu-
ally raised  to  the  rank  of  one  of  the  six  dassiixd  philo-
sophies of  India.  It  cannot  therefore  be  passed  over  in
a  survey  of  Indian  philosophy.

While  Bftdar&yana  begins  lus  Sfttras  with  Atnato  Brah*
ma^^^&sa, '  Now  therefore  the  desire  of  knowing  Brahman,'
(?aimini,  apparently  in  imitation  of  it,  begins  with  Ath&to
Dharma^^^&sft,  'Now  therefore  the  desire  of  knowing
Dharma  or  duty/  The  two  words  'Now  therefore'  offer
as  usual  a  large  scope  to  a  number  of  interpreters,  but  they
mean  no  more  in  the  end  than  that  now,  after  the  Veda
has  been  read,  and  because  it  has  been  read,  there  arises
a  desire  for  knowing  the  full  meaning  of  either  Dharma,
duty,  or  of  Brahman,  the  Absolute ;  the  former  treated  in
the  Uttarsr,  the  latter  in  the  PfiLrva-Mimlk7n8&.  In  fact,
whatever  native  commentators  may  say  to  the  contrary,
this  first  Sfttiti  is  not  much  more  than  a  title,  as  if  we
were  to  say,  Now  begins  the  philosophy  of  duty,  or  the
philosophy  of  taimini.

Dharma,  here  translated  by  duty,  refers  to  acts  of  pre-
scriptive observance,  chiefly  sacrifices.  It  is  said  to  be
a  neuter,  if  used  in  the  latter  sense,  a  very  natural  distinc-
tion, though  there  is  little  evidence  to  that  effect  in  the
SAtras  or  in  the  literature  known  to  us.


200  INDIAN   PHIIiOSOPHT.

This  Dharma  or  duty  is  enjoined  in  the  Br&hmaTias,  and
these  together  with  the  Mantras  are  held  to  constitute  the
whole  of  the  Veda,  so  that  whatever  is  not  Mantra  is
Br&hmaita»  whatever  is  not  BrSiimana  is  Mantra.  The
Br&hmatias  are  said  to  conmst  of  Vidhis,  injunctions,  and
Arthavddas,  glosses.  The  injunctions  are  meant- either  to
make  us  do  a  thing  that  had  not  been  done  before,  or  to
make  us  know  a  thing  that  had  not  been  known  before  \
Subsequently  the  Vidhis*  are  divided  into  Utpatti-vidhis,
original  or  general  injunctions,  such  as  Agnihotram  gfuhoti,
he  performs  the  Agnihotra,  and  Viniyoga-vidhi,  showing
the  manner  in  which  a  sacrifice  is  to  be  performed.  The
latter  comprises  injunctions  as  to  the  detaUs,  such  as
Dadhn&  ^oti,  he  performs  the  sacrifice  with  sour  milk,  &c
Then  follow  the  JPrayoga-vidhis  which  settle  the  exact
order  of  sacrificial  performances,  and*  there  is  lastly  avdada
of  injunctions  which  determine  who  is  fit  to  pe^orm  a
sacrificial  act.    They  are  called  Adhik&ra-vidhis.

The  hymns  or  formulas  which  are  to  be  used  at  a  sacrifice,
though  they  are  held  to  possess  also  a  transcendental  or
mysterious  effect,  the  AptLrva,  are  conceived  by  (jaimini  as
mainly  intended  to  remind  the  sacrificer  of  the  &:ods  who
are  to  receive  his  sacrificial  gifts.

He  likewise  lays  stress  on  what  he  calls  N&madheya  or
the  technical  name  of  each  sacrifice,  such  as  Agnihotra,
Daraaptlmam&sa,  Udbhid,  &c.  These  names  are  round  in
the  BrihmaTiafi,  and  they  are  considered  important,  as  no
doubt  they  are,  in  defining  the  nature  of  a  sacrifice.  The
Nishedhas  or  prohibitions  require  no  explanation.  They
simply  state  what  ought  not  to  be  done  at  a  sacrifice.    .

IjAstly,  the  Arthavddas  are  passages  in  the  Br&hmanas
which  explain  cei:tain  things ;  they  vary  in  character,  being
either  glosses,  comments,  or  explanatory  statements.

OontMits  of  th.%  PtLxya-MlmlkmfA.

Perhaps  I  cannot  do  better  than  give  the  principal  con-
tents of  &aimiiii's  SCltras,  as  detailed  by  M&dhava  in  his

*■  Rigvedabh&shya,  vol.  i,  p.  5.
'  Thibaut,  Arthaaamgralia,  p.  yiii.


A.  A


CONTENTS  OF  THB  PUBVA-MIMAifSA,  20I

Ny&7a«mftl&-vi8tara  ^.  The  Mtm^msft  consists  of  twelve
books.  In  the  first  book  is  discussed  the  authoritative-
ness  of  those  collections  of  words  which  are  severally
meant  by  the  terms  injunction  ( Vidhi),  explanatory  passage
(Axthav&da),  hymn  (Id^ntra),  tradition  (SmWti),  and  name
(N&madheya).  In  the  second  we  find  certain  subsidiary
dkeussions,  as  e.  g.  on  ApArva,  relative  to  the  difference  of
various  rites,  refutation  of  erroneously  alleged  proofs,  and
difference  of  performance,  as  in  obligatory  and  voluntary
offerings.  In  the  third  are  considered  revelation  (fihiti),
*  sign '  or  sense  of  a  passage  (Liiiga),  *  context  *  (Y&kya),  &c.,
and  their  respective  weight,  when  in  apparent  opposition  to
one  another;  then  the  ceremonies  cculed  Pratipathi-Ear-
m&ni,  things  mentioned  by  the  way,  Anl^bhy&dhtta,  things
aecei^isory  to  several  main  objects,  as  Pray&pas,  &c.,  and  tne
duties  of  the  sacrificer.  In  the  fourth  the  chief  subject  is
the  influence  of  the  principal  and  subordinate  rites  on  other
rites,  the  fruit  produced  by  the  6\xht  when  made  of  the
Buteafrondo8a,8cc,,BXid  the  dice-playing,  &c.,  which  forms
part  of  the  B&^asiiya-sacrifice.  in  the  fifth  the  subjects
are  the  relative  order  of  different  passages  of  the  jSruti,  &&',
the  order  of  different  parts  of  a  sacrifice,  as  the  seventeei^
animals  at  the  Vd^apeya,  the  multiplication  and  non-multi-
plication of  rites,  and  the  respective  force  of  the  words  of
the  /Sruti,  the  order  of  mention,  &c.,  as  determining  the
order  of  performance.  In  tlie  sixth  we  read  of  the  persons
qualified  to  offer  sacrific^sr'tneir  obligations,  the  substitutes
for  prescribednESate»[$dB^  supplies  for  lost  or  injured  offer-
ings, expiatory  rites,  the  Sattra-offerings,  things  proper  to
be  given,  and  the  different  sacrificial  fines.  In  the  seventh
is  treated  the  mode  of  transference  of  the  ceremonies  of  one
sacrifice  to  another  by  direct  ^command  in  the  Yaidic  text,
others  as  inferred  by  'name'  or  'sign.'  In  the  eighth,
transference  by  virtue  of  the  clearly  expressed  or  obscurely
expressed  '  sign '  or  by  the:  predominant  '  sign,'  and  cases
also  where  no  transference  takes  place.  In  the  ninth,  the
discussion  begins  with  the  adaptation  (Uha)  of  hymns,

*  See  CoweU  and  Gongh  in  their  translation  of  the  Sarradar^ana.
mngrahay  p.  17S.


202  INDIA17  PHILOSOPHT.

when  quoted  in  a  new  connection,  the  adaptaticm  of  S&mans
and  Mantras,  and  coUakeral  questions  connected  therewith.
In  the  tenth  the  occasions  are  discussed  where  the  non-
performance of  the  primary  rite  involves  the  'preclusion'
and  non-performance  of  the  dependent  rites,  and  occasions
when  rites  are  precluded,  because  other  rites  produce  their
special  results,  also  Oraha-oiferings,  certain  S&mans,  and
various  other  things,  as  well  as  different  kinds  of  negation.
In  the  eleventh  we  find  the  incidental  mention  and  subse-
quently the  fuller  discussion  of  Tantra,  where  several  acts
are  combined  into  one,  and  Av&pa,  or  the  perfonning  an
act  more  than  once.  In  the  twelfth  there  is  the  discussion
on  Frasa&ga/  when  the  rite  is  performed  with  one  chief
purpose,  but  with  an  incidental  further  reference,  on
Tantra,  cumulation  of  concurrent  rites  (SamuA^Aaya),  and
option.

It  is  easy  to  see  from  this  table  of  contents  that  neither
Plato  nor  Kant  would  have  felt  much  the  wiser  for  them.
But  we  must  take  philosophies  as  they  are  given  us ;  and
we  should  spoil  ihe  picture  of  the  philosophical  life  of
India,  if  we  left  out  of  consideration  their  speculations
about  sacrifice  as  contained  in  the  Piirva-Mim&97is&.  There
are  passages,  however,  which  appeal  to  philosophers,  such
as,  for  instance,  the  chapter  on  the  Framilnas  or  the  authori-
tative sources  of  knowledge,  on  the  relation  between  word
and  thought,  and  similar  subjecta  It  is  true  that  most  of
these  questions  are  treated  in  the  other  philosophies  also,
but  they  have  a  peculiar  interest  as  treated  by  the  ritualistic
Piirva-Mlmllms&.

VmnAiiMi  of  iTaliiiliii.

Thus  if  we  turn  our  attention  first  to  the  Pram&nas,  the
measures  of  knowledge,  or  the  authorities  to  wliich  we  can
appeal  as  the  legitimate  means  of  knowledge,  as  explained
by  the  Piirva-MimamsA,,  we  saw  before  that  the  Ved&nfiSts
did  not  pay  much  attention  to  them,  though  they  were
acquainted  with  the  three  fundamental  Prataknas — sense-
perception,  inference,  and  revelation.  The  Piirva-Mtm&ms&,
on  the  contrary,  devoted  considerable  attention  to  this
subject,  and  admitted  five,  (i)  Sense-perception,  Pratyaksha,


6UT&A- STYLE.  2O3

when  the  organs  are  actually  in  contiguity  with  an  object ;
(2)  Inference  ( Anum&na),  i.  e.  the  apprehension  of  an  unseen
member  of  a  known  association  ( Vyilpti)  by  the  perception
of  another  6een  member ;  (3)  Comparison  ( Upam&na),  Imow-
ledge  arising  from  resemblance;  (4)  Presumption  {[Arth&-
patti),  such  knowledge  as  can  be  derived  of  a  thing  not
itself  perceived,  but  implied  by  another ;  (5)  jSabda,  verbal
information  derived  from  authoritative  sources.  One  sect
of  Mtm&msakas,  those  who  follow  Eum&rilaBha^a,  admitted
besides,  (6)  Abhiva,  not-being,  which  seems  but  a  subdivision
of  inference,  as  if  we  infer  dryness  of  the  soil  from,  the  not-
being  or  absence  of  clouds  and  rain.

An  these  sources  of  information  are  carefully  examined,
but  it  is  curious  that  Mim&msakas  should  admit  this  large
array  of  sources  of  valid  cognition,  considering  that  for
their  own  pip-poses,  for  establishing  the  nature  of  Dharma
or  duty,  they  practically  admit  but  one,  namely  scripture
or  iSkbda.  Duty,  they  hold,  cannot  rest  on  human  authority,
becai^e  the  'oujht'  Jhi«h  nnderlies  all  duty,  can  only  I
supjplied  by  an  authority  that  is  more  than  htunan  or  more
than  fallible,  and  such  an  authority  is  nowhere  to  be  found
except  in  the  Veda.  This  leaves,  of  course,  the  task
of  proving  the  superhuman  origin  of  the  Veda  on  the
shoulders  of  Gaimini ;  and  we  shall  see  hereafter  how  he
performs  it

Before,  however,  we  enter  on  a  consideration  of  any  of
the  problems  treated  in  the  Pdrva-Mim&'nt8&,  a  few  remarks
have  to  be  made  on  a  peculiarity  in  the  structure  of  the
Siitras.  In  order  to  discuss  a  subject  fully,  and  to  arrive
in  the  end  at  a  definite  opinion,  the  authors  of  the  Siitras
are  encouraged  to  begin  with  stating  first  every  possible
objection  that  can  reasonably  be  urged  against  what  is  their
own  opinion.  As  long  as  the  objections  are  not  perfectly
absurd,  they  have  a  right  to  be  stated,  and  this  is  called
the  Pdrvapaksha,  the  first  part.  Then  follow  answers  to
all  these  objections,  and  this  is  called  the  Uttarapaksha,
the  latter  part ;  and  then  only  are  we  led  on  to  the  final
conclusion,  the  Siddhdnta.    This  system  is  exhaustive  and


204  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

has  many  advaniaees,  but  it  has  also  tiie  disadvantage,  as
far  as  the  reader  iTooncemed;  that,  without  a  oomme^tacy,
he  often  feels  doubtful  where  the  cons  end  and  the  pros
begin.  The  commentators  themselves  differ  sometimes  on
that  point.  Soinetimes  again,  instead  of  three,  a  case  or
AdhikaraTia  is  stated  in  fivQ  members,  namely : —

1.  The  subject  to  be  explained  (Yishaya).

2.  The  doubt  (Savn^ya).

3.  The  firs^  side  or  prima  facie  view  (Piirvapaksha).

4.  The  demonstrated  conclusion  (Siddh^ta) ;  and

5.  The  connection  (Sanigati).

This  is  illustrated  in  the  commentary  on  the  first  and
second  Siitras  of  the  Mim&ms&  \  which  declares  that  a  de8il:e
to  know  duty  is  to  be  entertained,  and  then  defines  dnij
(Dharma)  as  that  which  is  to  be  recognised  by  an  insta-
gatory  passage,  that  is  by  a  passage  from  the  Veda.  Here
the  question  to  be  discussed  (Yishaya)  is^  whether  the  study
of  Duty  in  &aimini's  Mim&ms&  is  really  necessary  to  be
undertaken.  The  PArvapaksha  says  of  course.  No,  for
when  it  is  said  that  the  Veda  should  be  learnt  (Vedo
«dhyetavya&),  that  clearly  means  either  that  it  should  be
undefstood,  like  any  other  book  which  we  read,  or  that  it
should  be  learnt  by  heart  without  any  attempt,  as  yet»  on
the  part  of  the  pupil  to  understand  li^  simply  as  a  work
good  in  itself,  which  has  its  reward  in  heaven.  This  is
a  veiy  common  view  among  the  ancient  Br&hmans ;  for,  as
they  W  no  written  books,  they  had  a  very  perfect  syst«n
tor  imprmung  texts  on  the  memory  of  youns  persons,  by
making  them  learn  every  day  a  certain  number  of  verses
or  lines  by  heart,  without  any  attempt,  at  first,  of  making
them  understand  what  they  learnt;  and  afterwards  only
supplying  the  key  to  the  meaning.  This  acquisition  of  the
mere  sound  of  the  Veda  viras  considered  highly  meritorious ;
nay,  some  held  that  the  Veda  Wisa  more  efficacious,  if  not
understood  than  if  understood,  l^his  was  in  fact  their
printing  or  rather  their  writing,  and  without  it  their
mnemonic  literature  would  have  been  simply  impossible.

^  Sftrvadaraana-samgraha,  p.  xaa ;   traittlatioii  bj  Cowell  and  Gough,
p.  x8o ;  SlddhAnia  DlpUft,  1898,  p.  194.


SdTEA-STTLE.  205

As  we  warn  onr  com^sitora  against  trying  to  understand
what  they  are  printing,  Indian  pupils  were  cautioned  against
the  same  danger ;  and  they  succeeded  in  learning  the  longest
texts  by  heart,  without  even  attempting  at  first  to  fathom
their  mecming.  To  us  8ucl\  a  system  seems  almost  in-
credible, but  no  other  system  was  possible  in  ancient  times,
and  there  is  no  excuse  for  being  incredulous,  for  it  may  still
be  witnessed  in  India  to  the  present  day.

Only  after  the  text  had  thus  been  imprinted  on  the
memory,  there  came  the  necessity  of  interpretation  or
understanding.  And  here  the  more  enlightened  of  the
Indian  theolpgiama  argue  that  the  Yedic  command  '  Vedo
«dhy*6ftavya%,' '  the  yeda  is  to  be  gone  over,  that  is,  is  to  be*
acquired,  to  be  learnt  by  heart,'  implies  that  it  is  also  to
be  undeirstood,  and  that  this  intelligible  purpose  is  prefer-
able to  the  purely  mechanical  one,  though  miraculous
rewards  may  be  held  out  for  that.

But  if  so,  it  is  asked,  what  can  be  the  use  of  the
MtmUms&t  The  pupil  learns  the  Veda  by  heart,  and
leaniB  to  understand  it  in  the  house  of  his  teacher.  After
that  4ie  bathes,  marries  and  sets  up  his  own  house,  so  that
it  is  ai^ed  there  would  actually  be  no  time  for  any  inter-
vening study  of  the  Mtmd,ms&.  Therefore  the  imaginary
opponent,  the  Pdrvapakahin,  objects  that  the  study  of  the
MixsAm^  is  not  necessary  at  all,  considering  that  it  rests
on  no  definite  sacred  command  But  here  we  Siddh&ntin
steps  forward  and  says  that  the  Smr^ti  passage  enjoining
a  pupil's  bathing  (graduating)  on  returning  to  his  house  is
not  violated  by  an  intervening  study  of  the  Mfm&ms&,
because  it  is  not  said  that,  after  having  finished  his
apprenticeship,  ho  should  immediately  bathe ;  and  because,
though  his  learning  of  the  text  of  the  Veda  is  useful  in
every  respect,  a  more  minute  study  of  the  sacrificial  pre-
cepts of  the  Veda,  such  as  is  given  in  the  Mim&ms&,  cannot
be  considered  superfluous,  as  a  means  towards  the  highest
object  of  the  study  of  the  Veda,  viz.  the  proper  performance
of  its  eonunands.

These  considerations  in  support  of  the  Siddh&nta  or  final
ccModusion  would  probably  fall  under  the  name  of  Samgati,
connection,  though  I  must  confess  that  its  meaning  is  not


206  INDIAN  FHIL080PHT.

quite  clear  to  me.  There  are  besides  several  points  in  the
course  of  this  discussion,  such  as,  for  instance,  the  so-called
four  Kriy&phalas,  on  nehieh  more  information  is  much  to
be  desired.

Km  thm  Tcda  a  enyfrnAumtak  Origin  f

This  discussion  leads  on  to  another  and  more  important
one,  whether  the  Veda  has  supreme  authority,  whether  it
is  the  work  of  man,  or  of  some  inspired  person,  or  whether
it  is  what  we  should  call  revealed.  If  it  were  the  work
of  a  person,  then,  like  any  other  work,  it  could  not  establish
a  duty,  nor  could  it  promise  any  rewards  as  a  motive  for
the  performance  of  any  duty;  least  of  all,  a  reward  in
heaven,  such  as  the  Veda  promises  again  and  again  to
those  who  perform  Vedic  sacrifices.  It  follows  therefore
either  that  tne  Veda  has  no  binding  authoritjy  at  all,  or  that
it  cannot  be  the  work  of  a  personal  or  human  author.  This
is  It  dilemma  arising  from  convictions  firmly  planted  in  the
minds  of  the  ancient  theologians  of  India,  and  it  is  interest*
in^  to  see  how  they  try  to  escape  from  all  the  difficulties
arising  out  of  their  postulate  that  the  Veda  must  be  the
work  of  a  superhuman  or  divine  author.  The  subject  is
interesting  even  though  the  arguments  may  not  be  con-
vincing to  us.  It  is  clear  that  even  to  start  such  a  claim
for  any  book  as  being  revealed  requires  a  considerable
advance  in  religious  and  philosophical  thought,  and  I  doubt
whether  such  a  problem  could  have  arisen  in  the  ancient
literature  of  any  country  besides  India.  The  Jews,  no
doubt,  had  their  sacred  books,  but  theae  books,  though
sacred,  were  not  represented  as  having  been  the  work  of
Jehovah.  They  were  acknowledged  to  have  been  com-
posed, if  not  written  down,  by  historical  persons,  even  if,
as  in  the  case  of  Moses,  they  actually  related  the  death
of  their  reputed  author.  The  Mhnd^msd.  philosopher  would
probably  have  argued  that  as  no  writer  could  relate  his
own  death,  therefore  Deuteronomy  must  be  considered  the
work  of  a  superhuman  writer ;  and  some  of  our  modem
theologians  have  not  been  very  far  from  taking  the  same
view.  To  the  Br&hmans,  any  part  of  the  Veda,  even  if  it
bore  a  human  or  historical  name,  was  superhuman,  eternal


HAS  THE   YEDA   A   StTPEEHUMAN  OEIGIN  t        20''

and  infallible,  much  as  the  Gospels  are  in  the  eyes  of
certain  Christian  theologians,  even  though  they  maintain
at  the  same  time  that  they  are  historical  documents  written
down  by  illiterate  people,  or  by  apostles  such  as  St  Mark
or  St.  John.  Let  us  see  therefore  how  the  Mtm&ms&  deals
with  this  problem  of  the  Apaurusheyatva,  i.e.  the  non-
human  origin  of  the  Vedas.  Inspiration  in  the  oidinary
sense  of  the  word  would  not  have  satisfied  these  Indian
orthodox  philosophers,  for,  as  they  trdly  remark,  this  would
not  exclude  the  possibility  of  error,  because,  however  true
the  message  might  be,  when  given,  the  human  recipient
would  always  be  a  possible  source  of  error,  as  being  Uable
to  misapinrehend  and  misinterpret  such  a  message.  Even
the  senses,  as  thev  point  out,  can  deceive  us,  so  that  we
mistake  motha:-of-pearl  for  silver ;  how  much  more  easily
ihen  may  we  misapprehend  the  meaning  of  revealed
words!

However,  the  first  thing  is  to  see  how  the  Br&hmans,  and
particularly  the  Mtmd.msakas,  tried  to  maintain  a  super-
numan  authorship  in  favour  of  the  Veda.

I  quote  from  Mddhava's  introduction  to  his  commentary
on  the  Rig-veda^  He  is  a  great  authority  in  matters
connected  with  the  P(irva-Mim&m8&,  having  written  the
Ny&ya-mdJ&-vistara,  a  very  comprehensive  t^tise  on  the
subject.  In  his  introduction  he  establishes  first  the  authority
of  the  Mantras  and  of  the  Br&hmaTias,  both  Yidhis  (rules)
and  Arthav&das  (glosses),  by  showing  that  they  were  per-
fectly intelligible,  which  had  been  denied.  He  then  pro-
ceeds to  establish  the  Apaurusheyatva,  the  non-human
authorship  of  the  Veda,  m  accordance,  as  he  says,  with
&aimini's  Siitras.

'  Some  people,'  he  says,  and  he  means  of  course  the  Piirva-
pakshins,  the  recognised  objectors, '  uphold  approximation
towards  the  Vedas,'  that  is  to  say,  they  hold  that  as  the
Baghuvam«a  of  K^lidAsa  and  other  poems  are  recent,  so
also  are  the  Vedas.  The  Vedas,  they  continue^  are  not
?nthout  a  beginning  or  eternal,  and  hence  we  find  m^a
quoted  in  them  as  the  authors  of  the  Vedas.    As  in  the

*  See  my  Seeond  Edition,  toI.  i,  p.  la


208  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

case  of  Vy&sa's  Mah&bMrata  and  Valmtki's  B&m&yatia,
Vyitea,  Valmtki,  &c.,  are  known  to  be  their  hnman  authors,
thus  in  the  case  of  the  KUhaka,,  Kauthuma,  Taittiriya,
and  other  sections  of  the  Veda,  Ka^a,  &c.,  are  given  us  as
the  names  of  the  authors  of  these  branches  of  the  Veda ;
and  hence  it  follows  that  the  Vedas  were  the  works  of
human  authors.

And  if  it  were  suggested  that  such  names  as  Ka^Aa,  &c.,
were  meant  for  men  who  did  no  more  than  hand  down  the
oral  tradition,  like  teachers,  the  Pi]lrvapakshm  is  ready
with  a  new  objection,  namely,  that  the  Vedas  must  be  of
human  origin,  because  we  8(^  in  the  Vedas  themselves  the
mention  of  temporal  matters.  Thus  we^read  i^.  a  Babara
PrA,v&hani,  of  a  Eusuruvinda  AudddJaki,  &t.  .The  Vedas,
therefore,  could  not  have  existed  in  times  anterior  to  these
persons  mentioned  in  them,  and  hence  cannot  be  prehistoric,
pre-temporal,  or  eternal.  It  is  seen  from  this  that  what  is
claimed  for  the  Veda  is  not  only  revelation,  communicated
to  historical  persons,  but  existence  from  all  eternity,  and
before  the  beginning  of  all  time.  We  can  understand  there-
fore why  in  the  next  S&tra,  which  is  the  Siddh&nta  or  final
conclusion,  Gaimini  should  appeal  to  a  former  Siitra  in
which  he  established  that  even  the  relation  of  words  to
their  meanings  is  eternal.  This  subject  had  been  discussed
before,  in  answer  to  the  inevitable  Objector-General,  the
Pttrvapakshin,  who  had  maintained  that  the  relation  between
words  and  their  meanings  was  conventional  (d^crci),  estab-
lished by  men,  and  therefore  liable  to  enx)r  quite  as  much
as  the  evidence  of  our  senses.  For  as  we  may  mistake
mother-of-pearl  for  silver,  we  may  surely  mistake  the
meaning:,  of  words,  and  hence  the  meaning  of  words  of  the
Veda  also.  G^aimini,  therefore^  in  this  place,  wishes  us  first
of  all  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  words  of  the  Vedas  them-
selves are  superhuman  or  supernatural,  nay,  that  sound
itself  is  eternal;  and  thus  fortified  he  next  proceeds  to  answer
the  objections  derived  from  such  names  as  KdiAaka,  or
Babara  PrftyA.haiTi.  This  is  done  by  showing  that  Ka^Aa
did  not  compose,  but  only  handed  down  a  c^^tain  portion
of  the  Veda,  and  that  Babara  Pr&vahairi  wa&  meant,  not  as
the  name  of  a  man,  but  as  a  name  of  the  wind,  Babara


HAS  THB   VKBA  A   SUPEHHUMAN  OBtOm  !         20^

imitating  the  sound,  and  Pravahana  meaning  *  carrying
along/  as  it  were  pro-vehens.

Then  follows  a  new  objection  taken  from  the  fact  that
impossible  or  even  absurd  things  occur  in  the  Veda ;  for
instance,  we  read  that  trees  or  serpents  performed  a  sacri-
fice, or  that  an  old  ox  sang  foolish  ^  son^  fit  for  the  Madras.
Hence  it  is  argued  once  more  that  ttie  Veda  must  have
been  made  by  human  beincp.  But  the  orthodox  (Jaimini
answers,  No ;  for  if  it  had  been  made  by  man,  there  could
be  no  injunction  for  the  performance  of  sacrifices  like  the
G^yotishtoma,  as  a  means  of  attaining  Svarga  or  paradise,
because  no  man  could  possibly  know  either  the  means,  or
their  efiect ;  and  yet  there  is  this  injunction  in  the  case  of
the  ffyotish^oma,  and  other  sacrifices  are  not  different  from
it.  Such  injunctions  as  *  Let  a  man  who  desires  paradise,
sacrifice  with  the  6yotishtoma'  are  not  like  a  speech  of
a  madman;  on  the  contrary,  they  are  most  i^tional  in
pointing  out  the  object  (paradise),  in  suggesting  the  m^ana
(Soma,  &c.),  and  in  mentioning  all  the  necessary  subsidiary
acts  (Dtkshaniya,  &c.).  We  see,  therefore,  that  the  com-
mands of  the  Veda  are  not  unintelligible  or  absurd.  And
if  we  meet  with  such  passages  as  that  the  trees  and  serpents
performed  certain  sacrifices,  we  must  recognise  in  them
Arthavfldas  or  glosses,  oonve}dng  in  our  case  indirect  lauda-
tions of  certain  sacrifices,  as  if  to  say, '  if  even  trees  aAd
serpents  perform  them,  how  much  more  should  intelligerfi
beings  do  the  same ! '  I

^  As,  therefore,  no  flawer  that  might  arise  from  humaii
workmanship  can  be  detected  in  the  Veda,  Gaimini  concludes
triumphantly  that  its  superhuman  origin  and  its  authority
cannot  be  doubted.

This  must  suffice  to  give  a  general  idea  of  the  character
of  the  Piirva-Mtm&ms&.  We  may  wonder  why  it  should
ever  have  been  raised  to  the  rank  of  a  philosophical  svstem
by  the  side  of  the  Uttara-MimAmsd,  or  the  Ved^nta,  but  it
is  its  metiiod  rather  tSian'  the  matter  to  which  it  is  applied,
that  seems  to  have  mvested  it  with  a  certain  importance.
This  Mfm&mad.  method  of  discussing  questions  has  been

^  On  MMraka,  iee  Miiir,  HannK  Text%  IT,  p.  48*.
14  P


2IO  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

adopted  in  other  branches  of  learning  also,  for  instance,  by
the  highest  legal  authorities  in  trying  to  settle  contested
questions  of  law.  We  meet  with  it  in  other  systems  of
philosophy  also  as  the  recognised  method  of  discussing
various  opinions  before  arriving  at  a  final  conclusion.

Th^re  are  some  curious  subjects  discussed  by  (jaimini,
such  as  what  authority  can  be  claimed  for  tradition,  as
different  from  revelation,  how  far  the  recognised  customs
of  certain  countries  should  be  followed  or  rejected,  what
words  are  to  be  considered  as  correct  or  incorrect ;  or  again,
how  a  good  or  bad  act,  after  it  has  been  performed,  can,  in
spite  of  the  lapse  of  time,  produce  good  or  barl  results  for
the  performer.  All  this  is  certainly  of  interest  to  the
student  of  Indian  literature,  but  hardly  to  the  student  of
philosophy,  as  such.

One  more  point  seems  to  require  our  attention,  namely,
the  charge  of  atheism  that  has  been  brought  against
Gaimini's  Mimamsa.  This  sounds  a  very  strange  charge
after  what  we  have  seen  of  the  character  of  this  pliilosophy,
of  its  regard  for  the  Veda,  and  the  defence  of  its  revealed
character,  nay,  its  insisteneo  on  the  conscientious  observance
of  all  ceremonial  injunctions.  Still,  it  has  been  brotPght
both  in  ancient  and  in  modern  times.  So  e^rly  a  philo-
sopher as  Kum^rila  Bhaf^a  tells  us  that  the  Mima'WtsI  had
been  treated  in  the  world  as  a  Lokdvata  ^,  h  c.  an  atheistic
system,  but  that  he  was  anxious  to  re-establish  it  as
orthodox.  Professor  Banerjea^  tells  us  that  Prabhakara
also,  the  other  commentator  of  the  Mimamsd,  had  openly
treated  this  system  as  atheistic,  arid  we  shall  meet  with
a  passage  from  the  Padma-Pura/na  supporting  the  same
view.  However,  there  seems  to  be  a  misunderstanding
here.  Atheistic  has  always  meant  a  great  many  things,
so  inuch  so  that  even  the  most  pantheistic  system  that
could  be  imajjined,  the  Ved4nta,  has,  like  that  of  Spinoza,

*  Lok&yata  Is  explained  by  CbiMors,  s.v.,  &s  controversy  pn  fabnlous
or  absurd  point.s  ^^t  in  tho  Amba/^to-Sutta,  I,  3,  it  is  mcniionod  as
forming  part  of  the  studios  proper  lor  a  Brftbnian.

*  Muii,  III,  95.


SUPPOSED    ATHEISM   OF   PORVA-MlMAifSA.  2TI

been  acctised  of  atheism.  The  reason  is  this.  The  author
of  the  VedAnta-Siitras,  BMarfi^yana,  after  having  established
the  omnipresence  of  Brahman  (III,  2,  36-37)  by  quoting  a
number  of  passages  from  the  Veda,  such  as  'Brahman  is
all  this'  (Mmvrf.  Up.  II,  2, 11),  'the  Self  is  all  this'  (/aand.
Up.  VII,  25,  2),  proceeds  to  show  (III,  2,  38)  that  the  re-
wards also  of  all  works  proceed  directly  or  indirectly  from
Brahman.  There  were,  however,  two  opinions  on  this
point,  one,  that  the  works  themselves  produce  their  fruit
without  any  divine  interference,  and  m  cases  where  the
fruit  does  not  appear  at  once,  that  there  is  a  supersensuous
principle,  called  Apiirva,  which  is  the  direct  result  of  a  deed,
and  produces  fruit  at  a  later  time;  the  other,  that  all
actions  are  directly  or  indirectly  requited  by  the  Lord.
The  latter  opinion,  which  is  adopted  by  BSdarllya?m,  is
supported  by  a  quotation  from  Brih.  Up.  IV,  4,  24,  *  This  is
indeed  the  great,  unborn  Self,  the  giver  of  food,  the  giver
of  wealth.'  Oaimini,  however,  as  wo  are  informed  by
BAdar&ya'na  in  the  next  Sfttra,  accepted  the  former  opinion.
The  command  that  *ho  who  ie  desirous  of  the  heavenly
world  should  sacriiice,'  implies,  as  he  holds,  a  reward  of
the  sacrificer  by  moans  of  the  sacrifice  itself,  and  not  by
any  other  agent.  But  how  a  sacrifice,  when  it  had  been
performed  and  was  ended,  could  produce  any  reward,  is
aifficult  to  undei-stand.  In  order  to  explain  this,  traimini
OBBumes  that  there  was  a  result,  viz.  an  invi.sible  something,*
A  kind  of  after-state  of  a  deed  or  an  invisible  antecedent^
state  of  the  result,  something  Ap<\rva  or  miraculous,  whicli
represented  the  reward  inherent  in  good  works.  And  bo
adds,  that  if  we  supposed  that  the  Lord,  himself  caiisc^d
rewards  and  punishments  for  the  acta  of  men,  we  sliould
often  have  to  accuse  him  of  cruelty  and  partiality;  and
that  it  is  better  therefore  to  allow  that  all  works,  good  or
bad,  produce  their  own  insults,  or,  in  other  words,  that  for
the  mord  government  of  the  world  no  Loivl  is  wanted.

Here,  then,  we  see  the  real  state  of  the  case  as  between
Odimini  and  BMarAyana.  £raimini  would  not  make  the
Lord  responsible  for  the  injustice  that  seems  to  prev«ail  in
the  world,  and  hence  reduced  everything  to  cause  and
effect,  and  saw  in  the  inequalities  of  the  world  the  natural


212  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

result  of  the  continued  action  of  good  or  evil  acts.  This
surely  was  not  atheism,  rather  was  it  an  attempt  to  clear
the  Lord  from  those  charges  of  cruelty  or  undue  partiality
which  have  so  often  been  brought  against  him.  It  wa8
but  another  attempt  at  justifying  the  wisdom  of  God,  an
ancient  Theodic^e,  that,  whatever  v/e  may  think  of  it,
certainly  did  not  deserve  the  name  of  atheism.

Badarabyatia,  however,  thought  otherwise,  and  quoting
himself,  he  says,  '  B§^daraya7ira  thinks  the  Lord  to  be  the
cause  of  the  fruits  of  action,'  and  Re  adds  that  he  is  even
the  ca.use  of  these  actions  themselves,  as  we  may  learn
from  a  well-known  Vedic  passage  (Eaush.  Up.  Ill,  8) :  *  He
makes  whomsoever  he  wishes  to  lead  up  from  these  worlds,
do  good  deeds;  and  makes  him  whom  he  wishes  to  lead
down  from  these  worlds,  do  bad  deeds.'

Atheism  is  a  charge  very  freely  brought  against  those
who  deny  certain  characteristics  predicated  of  the  Deity,
but  do  not  mean  thereby  to  deny  His  existence.  If  the
Mim^msakas  were  called  atheists,  it  meant  no  more  than
that  they  tried  to  justify  the  ways  of  God  in  thdr  own
way.  But,  once  havi^jg  been  called  atheists,  they  were
accused  of  eve*  so  many  things.  In  a  passage  quoted  by
Professor  Banerjea  from  a  modem -work,  the  Vidvan-
modataraAginl,  we  read:  'They  say  the^Q  is  no  God,  or
maker  of  the  world ;  nor  has  the  world  any  sustainer  or
destroyer;  for  every  man  obtains  a  recompense  in  con-
formity with  his  own  works.  Neither  is  there  any  maker
of  the  Veda,  for  its  words  are  eternal,  and  their  arrange-
ment is  eternal.  Its  authoritativeness^  is  self-demonstrated,
for  since  it  has  been  established  from  all  eternity  how  can
it  be  dependent  upon  anything  but  itself?'  This  shows
how  the  Mim^msakas  have  been  misunderstood  by  the
Ved&ntists,  and  how  much  5amkara  is  at  cross-purposes
with  Gaimini.  What  has  happened  in  this  case  m  India
is  what  always  happens  when  people  resort  to  names  of
abuse  rather  than  to  an  exchange  of  ideas.  Surely  a  Deity,
though  He  does  not  cause  us  to  act,*  and  does  not  Himself
reward  or  punish  us,  is  not  thereby  a  non-existent  Deity.
Modem  Ved&ntists  also  are  so  enamoured  of^  their  own
conception  of  Deity,  that  is,  of  Brahinan  or  Atman,  that


IS  THE  POEVA-MlMAifSA  A  SYSCKM  Oil'  PHlLgSOPl/Y  ?    21  3

they  do  not  hesitate,  like  Vivekananda,  for  instance,  in  his
recent  address  on  Practical  Vedanta,  1 896,  to  charge  those
who  differ  from  himself  with  atheism.  *  He  is  the  atheist/
he  writes,  *  who  does  not  believe  in  himself.  Not  believing
in  the  glory  of  your  own  soul  is  what  the  Vedanta  calls
atheism/

Zs  tlie  FtUrva-XimAifiaik  a  wjmt&m  of  Mdlosapliyf

Let  me  say  once  more  that,  in  allowing  a  place  to  the
P&rva-Mimamsa  among  the  six  systems  of  Indian  Philo-
sophy, 1  waQ  chiefly  influenced  by  the  fact  that  from  an
Indian  point  of  view  it  always  held  such  a  place,  and  that
by  omitting  it  ,a  gap  would  have  been  left  in  the  general
outline  of  tne  philosophic  thought  of  India.  Some  native
philosophers  ^o  so  far  as  not  only  to  call  both  systems,
that  of  &aimini  and  Bddanlyaiia,  by  the  same  name  of
Mim4ms&,  but  to  look  upon  them  as  forming  one  whole.
They  actually  take  the  words  in  the  first  Sfttra  of  the
VedAnta-philosopby,  *Now  then  a  desire  to  know  Brahman,'
as  pointing  back  to  Gaimini  s  Siitras  and  as  thereby  im-
plying that  the  Piirva-Mimamsa  should  be  studied  first,
and  should  be  followed  by  a  study  of  the  Uttara-Mhnslmsfl
afterwards.  Besides,  the  authors  of  the  other  five  systems
frequently  refer  to  Gaimini  as  an  independent  thinker,  and
though  his  treatment  of  the  sacrificial  system  of  the  Veda
would  l^ardly  seem  to  us  to  deserve  the  name  of  a  system
of  philosophy,  he  has  nevertheless  touched  on  many  a
problem  which  falls  clearly  within  that  sphere  of  thougiit.
Our  idea  of  a  system  of  philosophy  is  ditferent  from  the
Indian  conception  of  a  Dar6ana.  In  its  original  meaning
philosophy,  as  a  love  of  wisdom,  comes  nearest  to  the
bansknt  (ji(///asa,  a  desire  to  know,  if  not  a  desire  to  be
wise.  If  we  take  philasophy  in  the  sense  of  an  examination
of  our  means  of  knowledge  (Epistemology),  or  with  Kant
as  an  inquiry  into  the  limits  of  human  knowledge,  there
would  be  nothing  corresponding  jbo  it  in  India.  Even  the
Vedanta,  so  far  as  it  is  bjxsed,  not  on  independent  reasoning,
but  on  the  authority  of  the  ^S'liiti,  would  lose  with  us  ita
claim  to  the  title  of  'philosophy.  But  we  have  only  to
>vaivc  the  claim  of  infallibility  put  forw2U*d  by  BSdariiya/ia


214  INDIAN   PUILOSOPUY.

in  favour  oi  the  utfcerances  of  the  sages  of  the  Upanishads,
and  treat  them  as  simple  human  witnesses  to  Uie  truth,
and  we  should  then  find  in  the  systematic  arrangement  of
these  utterances  by  BAdarayajia,  a  real  philosophy,  a  com-
plete view  of  the  Eosmos  in  which  we  live,  like  those  that
have  been  put  forward  by  the  great  thinkers  of  the  philo-
sophical countries  of  the  workl,  Greece,  Italy,  Germany,
France,  and  England.


CHAPTER  VT

Havykg  explored  two  of  the  recognised  systems  of  Indian
philosophy,  so  far  (is  it  seemed  necessary  to  a  ^ei)eral  survey
of  the  work  done  by  the  ancient  thinkers  of  India,  we  mntst
now  return  and  enter  once  more  into  the  densely  ontaxi^k'd
and  almost  impervious  growth  of  thought  from  which  ml
the  hi^  roads  leading  towards  real  and  definite  system.^
of  philosophy  have  emerged,  branching  oft  in  different
dixtdctions.  One  of  these  and,  as  it  seems  to  me,  by  tar  tiio
most  important  for  the  whole  intellectual  development  of
India,  the  Vedtlnta,  has  been  mapped  out  by  us  at  least  in
its  broad  outlines.

It  seemed  to  me  undesirable  to  enter  here  on  an  examina-
tion  of  what  has  been  called  the  later  VedSnta  which  can
1k3  studied  in  such  works  as  the  Pa/iA^a^i  or  the  Ved^nta-
Sara,  and  in  many  popular  treatises  both  in  prose  and  in
verse.


It  would  be  unfair  and  unhtstorieal,  however,  to  look
upon  this  later  development  of  tlie  Ved&ntOi  as  simply
a  detenoiation  of  the  old  philoscmhy.  Tliough  it  is  cer-
tainly rather  confused,  if  compared  with  the  system  as  laid
down  in  the  old  Vedanta-Siiti'as,  it  represents  to  us  what
in  the  course  of  time  Ixjcame  of  the  Vedanta,  when  taught
and  discussed  in  the  jdiHei'ent  schools  of  philosophy  in
medieval  and  modern  India.  What  strikes  us  most  in  it  is
the  nnxtni**}  of  A''(»<h\nta  ideas  with  ideas  l)ori'owed  chiefly,
a.s  it  would  iS^tiii,  lioiii  ScU/tkhya,  but  also  from  Yoga,  and
Nyaya  sources.  l>ut  hejce  a^ain  it  is  difficult  to  decide
whether  such  iileas  were  actually  bori'owed  from  these
systems  in  their  finished  state,  or  whether  they  were
orifjcinally  common  juoperty  which  in  later  times  only  luui
becuiA«>  restricted  to  one  or  tlie  otiier  of  the  six  systems  of


2l6  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

philosophy.  In  the  Pa  7A»*da8},  for  instance,  we  meet  witii
the  idea  of  Prakrtti,  nature,  which  we  are  accustomed  to
consider  as  the  peculiar  property  of  the  S&mkhya-system.
This  Prakriti  is  said  there  to  be  the  reflection,  or,  as  we
shoulc*  say,  the  shadow  of  Brahman,  and  to  be  possessed  of
the  three  Gunas  or  elements  of  goodness,  passion,  and
darkness,  or,  as  they  are  sometimes  explained,  of  good^
indifferent,  and  bad.  This  theory  of  the  three  Gunas,  how-
ever, is  altogether  absent  from  the  origin&l  Yed&nta;.  at
least,  it  is  not  to  be  met  with  in  the  purely  Ved&ntic
Upanishad^,  occurring  for  the  first  time  in  the  Svet&dvatara
Upanishad.  Again  in  the  later  Vedanta  works  Ayidy&
and  May&  are  used  synonymously,  or,  if  distinguished  from
one  another,  they  are  supposed  to  arise  respectively  from
the  more  or  less  pure  character  of  their  substance  ^.  The
omniscient,  but  personal  tsvara  is  there  explained  as  a
reflection  of  Maya,  but  as  having  subdued  her,  while  the
individual  soul,  FiAgila,  or  Gtva,  is  represented  as  having
been  subdued  by  Avidyft,  and  to  be  multiform,  owing  to
the  variety  of  Avidy&.  The  individual  soul,  being  endowed
with  a  causal  or  subtle  body,  believes  tiiat  body  to  be  its
own,  and  hence  error  and  suffering  in  all  their  variety.
As  to  the  development  of  the  world,  we  are  told  that  it  was
by  the  command  of  tsvara  that  Prak7*iti,  when  dominated
by  darkness,  produced  the  elements  of  ether,  air,  fire,  water
and  earth,  all  meant  to  be  enjoyed,  that  is,  to  be  experienced
by  the  individual  souls.

In  all  this  we  Ciin  hardly  be  mistakeh  if  wc  recognise
the  influence  of  SS,r/ikhya  ideas,  ol)SCuring  and  vitiating
the  monisiii  of  the  Vedanta,  pure  and  simple.  In  that
philosopliy  there  is  no  room  for  a  Second,  or  for  a  Frakrtti,
nor  for  the  three  GuYias,  nor  for  anything  real  by  the  side
of  Brahiwan.

Hrw  that  influence  wa«  exercised  we  cannot  discover,
and  it  is  possible  that  i?)  Jiucieiit  times  already  there  existed
this  iufluenee  of  outj  philosophical  system  upon  the  other,
for   wc   see   ev^n    in   some   of  the  Upanifihads  a  certain

'  I  tianklati>  Sattva  here  by  substMCei  i^P   Hieeontezt  hardly  allows
that  wo  fthoulU  take  it  for  the  Guna  of  goodneSS


LATEE   VEDANTA   MIXED    WITH    SAifXHYA.  21 7

mixture  of  what  we  sLould  afterwards  have  to  call  the
distinctive  teaching  of  VedHnta,  Samkhya,  or  Yoga-philo-
sophy. We  must  remember  that  in  India  tue  idea  of
private  property  in  any  philosophic  truth  did  hardly  exist.
The  individual,  as  we  saw  before,  was  of  little  consequence,
and  could  never  exercise  the  same  influence  which  such
Uiinkers  as  Socrates  or  Plato  exercised  in  Greece.  If  the
descriptions  of  Indian  life  emanating  from  the  Indians
themselves,  and  from  other  nations  they  came  in  contact
with,  whether  Qreek  conquerors  or  Chinei^e  pilgrims,  can
be  trusted,  we  may  well  understand  that  truth,  or  what
was  taken  to  be  truth,  was  treated  not  as  private,  but  as
common  property.  It'  there  was  an  exchange  of  ideas
among  the  Indian  seekers  after  truth,  it  was  far  more  in
the  nature  of  co-operation  towards  a  common  end,  than  in
the  assertion  of  any  claims  of  originality  or  priority  by
individual  teachers.  That  one  man  should  write  and
publish  his  philosophical  views  in  a  book,  and  that  another
should  read  and  criticise  that  book  or  carry  on  the  work
wherS  it  had  been  left,  was  never  thought  of  in  India  in
ancient  times.  If  A.  referred  to  B.  often,  as  they  say,  from
mere  civility,  Pii;;artham,  B.  would  refer  to  A.,  but  no  one
would  ever  say,  as  so  often  happens  with  us,  that  he  had
anticipated  the  discovery  of  another,  or  that  some  one  else
had  stolen  his  ideas.  Truth  was  not  an  article  that,  accord-
ing to  Hindu  ideas,  could  ever  be  stolen.  All  that  could
happen  and  did  happen  was  that  certain  opinions  which
had  been  discussed,  sifted,  and  generally  received  in  one
A«rama,  hermitage,  Arama,  garden,  or  Parishad,  religious
settlement,  would  in  time  be  collected  by  its  members  and
reduced  to  a  more  or  less  systematic  form.  What  that
form  was  in  early  times  we  may  see  from  the  Brahmaf^as,
and  more  particularly  from  the  Upanishads,  i.e.  Btancea,
gatherings  of  pupils  round  their  teachers,  or  later  on  from
the  Siitras.  It  cannot  be  doubted  tliat  those  Siitras  pre-
suppose, by  their  systematic  form,  a  long  continued  in-
tollectaal  labour;  nay  it  seems  to  me  difficult  to  account
for  their  peculiar  literary  form  except  on  the  ground  that
they  were  meant  to  be  learnt  by  hcai*t  and  to  be  accom-
panied from  the  very  beginning  by  a  running  commentary.


2l8  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

without  which  tliey  would  have  been  perfectly  unintel-
ligible. I  8ii^*^e8ted  once  before  that  this  very  peculiar
style  of  the  Sutras  would  receive  the  best  hii^rical  expla-
nation, if  it  could  be  proved  that  they  represent  the  tmt
attempts  at  writing  for  litcraxy  purposes  in  India.  What-
ever the  exact  date  may  be  of  the  introduction  of  a  sinia*
trorsuvi  and  dextroraum  alphabet  for  epi^raphic  purposes
in  India  (and  in  spite  of  all  efforts  not  a  single  inscription
has  as  yet  been  discovered  that  can  be  referred  with  cer-
tainty to  the  period  l)efore  Asoka,  third  century  B.C.),  every
classical  scholar  knows  that  there  always  is  a  long  interval
iKitweeu  an  epigraphic  and  a  literary  employment  of  the
alphabet.  People  forget  that  a  period  marked  by  written
literary  coniix)6itions  requires  a  public,  and  a  large  public,
which  is  able  to  read,  for  where  tliere  is  no  demand  there
is  no  supply.  Nor  must  we  forget  that  the  old  system  oi
a  mnemonic  litemture,  the  Parauiparft,  was  invested  with
a  kind  of  sacred  character,  and  would  not  liave  been  easily
surrendered.  The  old  mnemonic  system  was  upheld  by
a  strict  discipline  w  hich  formed  the  principal  pai*t  of  the
established  system  of  education  in  India,  as  has  been  fully
described  in  the  l*r;Ui6akliyas.  They  explain  to  us  by
what  process,  whatever  existed  at  thai  time  of  literature,
chiefly  sacred,  was  firmly  imprinted  on  the  meuicry  of  the
young.  These  young  pupils  wei*e  in  fact  the  books,  the
scribes  were  the  Gurus,  tlie  tablet  \^as  the  brain.  We  can
hardly  imagine  such  a  state  of  literature,  and  the  transition
from  it  to  a  written  literature  must  have  marked  a.  new
start  in  the  intellectual  life  of  the  peo}>le  at  large,  or  at
least  of  the  educated  classes.  Anybody  who  has  come  in
contact  with  the  PaHRlits  of  India  has  been  able  to  observe
the  woiuleri'iil  feats  that  can  1x5  achieved  by  that  mnemonic
discipline  even  at  present,  tliou<;h  it  is  dying  out  before
our  t*ye.s  ai  the  approach  of  printed  Ijooks,  nay  of  printed
editions  of  their  own  sacred  texts.  1  need  liariUy  say  that
even  if  liuhler's  idea  of  the  introduction  of  a  Semitic
alphabet  into  India  by  U'eans  of  commercial  travellers
about  800  or  1000  B.C.  wore  more  th.*in  a  hypothesis,  it
would  not  prove  the  existence  of  a  written  literatuix)  at
that  time.    The  adaptation  of  a  Semitic  alphaliet  to  the


RELATIVE   AGJS   OF  FHILOSOPlliES   AND   SUTUAS.       219

phonetic  system  as  elaborated  in  the  FrAti^akhyos  may
date  from  the  third,  possibly  from  the  fourth  century  li.c,
but  the  use  of  that  alphabet  for  inscriptions  begins  in  the
middle  of  the  third  century  only;  and  though  we  cannot
deny  the  possibility  of  its  having  been  usid  for  literary
purposes  at  the  same  time,  such  possibilities  would  form
very  dangerous  landmarks  in  the  chronology  of  Indian
literature.

But  whatever  the  origin  of  the  peculiar  Sfttra-literature
may  have  been — and  I  give  my  hypothesis  as  a  hypothesis
only — all  scholars  will  probably  agree  that  these  S&tras
could  not  be  the  work  of  one  individual  philosopher,  but
that  we  have  in  them  the  last  outcome  of  pi-cvious  centuries
of  thought,  and  the  final  result  of  the  laboui-s  of  numerous
thinkera  whose  numc»^  are  forgotten  and  will  never  b^
recovered.

Belatlve  Age  of  Vliilosopliies  and  Stitnusk

If  we  keep  this  in  mind,  we  shall  Bce  that  the  question
whether  any  of  the  texts  of  the  six  philosophies  which  wo
now  possess  sljould  be  considered  as  older  than  any  other,
is  really  a  question  iixpossible  to  answer.  The  tests  for
settling  the  relative  ages  of  literary  works,  applicable
to  European  literature,  are  not  applicable  to  Indian
literature.  Thus,  if  one  Greek  author  quotes  another,
we  feel  justified  in  taking  the  one  who  is  quoted  as  the
predecessor  or  contemporary  of  the  one  who  quotea  But
because  Craimini  quotes  Biklaraya?ia  and  Bivdar&yana
Gaimiui,  and  because  their  systems  show  an  acquaintance
with  the  other  five  systems  ot*  philosophy,  we  have  no
right  to  ari'ange  them  in  chronological  succession.  Kart&da,
who  is  acquainte^l  with  Kapila,  is  clearly  criticised  by
Kapila,  at  least  in  our  Kapila-Siltrus.  Kiipila,  to  whom
the  SiWirkhya*Si)itras  are  ascribed,  actually  adopts  one  of
Badaray  ana's  Siitnus,  IV,  j,  1,  and  inserts  it  tuUdevi  verb  its
in  his  own  work,  IV^,  3.  He  does  the  same  for  the  Yoga-
S&tras  I,  5  and  II,  46,  which  occur  in  II,  33,  III,  34,  and
VI,  ^4  in  the  Samkhya-Silitras  which  we  possess.  .  Kaufida
was  clearly  acquainted  with  Goidnux,  while  Gotama  attacks
in  turn  certain  doctrines  of  Kapila  auic]   BadahlvaTzn      It


220  INDIAN    PHILOSOPHY,

has  been  supposed,  because  Pata/f/ali  ignores  all  other
systems,  that  therefore  he  was  anterior  to  all  of  them  ^.
But  all  such  conclusions,  which  would  be  perfectly  legiti-
mate in  Greek  and  Latin  literature,  have  no  weight  what-
ever in  the  literary  hisfcoiy  of  India,  because  during  its
mnemonic  period  anything  could  be  added  and  anytliing
left  out,  before  each  system  reached  the  form  in  which  we
possess  it.

Ag9  of  XapUa-BntrM.

The  Siitras  of  Kapila,  which  have  come  down  to  us,  are
so  little  the  work  of  the  founder  of  that  system,  that  it
would  bo  far  safer  to  treat  them  as  the  last  arrangement
of  doctrines  accumulated  in  one  philosophical  school  during
centuries  of  ParamparS.  or  tradition.  •  It  is  easy  to  see  that
the.  Yoga-philosophy  presupposes  a  Siimkhya-philosophy,
but  wlnle  Pata^T^ali,  the  reputed  author  of  Yoga-Siitras
has  been  referred  to  the  second  century  B.C.,  it  is  now
geneially  admitted  that  our  StV/vikhya-Siitras  cannot  be
earlier  than  the  fouiteenth  century  a.d.  It  is  necessary
to  distinguish  carefully  between  the  six  philosophies  as  so
many  channels  of  thought,  and  the  Sfitras  which  embody
their  teachings  and  have  been  handed  down  to  us  as  the
earliest  documents  within  our  reach.  Yoga,  as  a  technical
term,  occurs  earlier  than  the  name  of  any  other  system  of
philosophy.  It  occurs  in  the  Taittirlya  and  Kaf/ta  Upani-
shads,  and  is  mentioned  in  as  early  an  authority  as  the
Asvalayana-Grihya-Sutras.  In  the  Maitray.  Up.  VI,  lo  we
meet  even  with  Yogins.  But  it  by  no  means  follows  that
the  Yoga,  known  in  those  early  times,  was  the  same  as
what  we  possess  in  Pata;7«yali's  Siitras  of  the  Yoga-philo-
sophy. We  look  in  vain  in  the  so-called  classical  Upanishads
for  the  names  of  either  Sa/wtkhya  or  Vedilnta,  but  Sa^mkhya
occurs  in  the  compound  Sar/ikhya-Yoga  in  the  /SvetfWvatara
Up.  VI,  13  and  in  several  of  the  minor  Upanishads.  It
should  be  observed  tJiat  Vedanta  also  occurs  for  the  first
time  in  the  same  >Sveta«vatara  VI,  22,  and  afterwards  in
the  smaller  Upanishads.  All  such  indications  may  become
valuable  hereafter  for   chronological    purposes.      In    the

^  Bujondialal  Mitra,  l.c.,  p.  xviili


AGE    OF   KAPILA-StTTBAS.  221

Bhagavad-gitft  II,  39  we  meet  with  the  S&mkhya  as  the
name  of  a  system  01  philosophy  and  likewise  as  a  name  of
its  adherentis,  V,  5.

As  to  our  SimkhysrSfttras  their  antiquity  was  first
shaken  by  Dr.  FitzEdward  Hall.  Vd.A;aspati  Mi^ra,  the
author  of  the  S8,mkhya-tattva-Kaumudt,  who,  according
to  Professor  Garbe,  can  be  safely  referred  to  al)Out  1 150  A.  d.,
quotes  not  a  single  Sfttra  from  our  S&,mkhya-SAtras,  but
appeals  to  older  authorities  only,  such  as  Pa;7A:a«ikha,  VS,r-
shaganya,  and  the  B%av8,rtika.  Even  M&dbava  about
13^0  A.n.,  wlio  evidently  knew  the  Siitras  of  the  other
systems,  never  quotes  from  our  SS-mlihya-Sfttras ;  and  why
not,  if  they  had  been  in  existence  in  his  time  ?

But  we  must  not  go  too  far.  It  by  no  means  follows
that  every  one  of  the  Sfttras  which  we  possess  in  the  body
of  the  S&mkhya-Sdtras,  and  the  composition  of  which  is
assigned  by  B^laaastrin  to  so  late  a  period  as  the  sixteenth
century,  is  of  that  modem  date.  He  declares  that  they
were  all  composed  bv  the  well-known  Vigf/?&,na-Bhikshu
who,  &  was  then  the  fashion,  wrote  also  a  commentary  on
them.  It  is  quite  possible  that  our  SS^ryikhya-Sfitras  may
only  be  what  we  should  call  the  latest  recension  of  the
old  SCltras.  We  know  that  in  India  the  oral  tradition  of
certain  texts,  as,  for  instance,  the  Sfttras  of  Fknini,  was
interrupted  for  a  time  and  then  restored  again,  whether
from  scattered  MSS.,  or  from  the  recollection  of  less  forget-
ful or  forgotten  individuals.  If  that  was  the  case,  as  we
know,  with  so  voluminous  a  work  as  the  Mahabh&shya ;
why  should  not  certain  portions  of  the  S4mkhya-Siitras
have  been  preserved  here  and  there,  and  have  been  added
to  or  remodelled  from  time  to  time,  till  they  m^t  us  at
last  in  their  final  form,  at  so  l^^te  a  date  as  the  fourteenth
or  even  the  sixteenth  century  ?  It  was  no  doubt  a  great
shock  to  those  who  stood  up  for  the  great  antiquity  of
Indian  philosophy,  to  have  to  confess  that  a  work  for
which  a  most  remote  date  had  always  been  claimed,  may  not
be  older  than  the  time  of  Des  Cartes,  at  least  in  that  final
literary  form  in  which  it  has  reached  us.  But  if  we  con-
sider the  circumstances  of  the  case,  it  is  more  than  possible
that  our  Sfltras  of  the  S&mkhya-philos?ophy  contain  some


222  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHy.

of  the  moRt  ancient  as  well  as  the  most  modern  Sfttras,
the  utterances  of  Kapila,  Asuri,  Pav^a^ikha  and  Y&rslia-
gfa^rya,  as  well  as  those  of  Isvam-K^nshna  and  even  of
Vij/zana-Bhi  kshn.

But  if  we  must  accept  so  very  modem  a  date  for  ouc
Kapila-Sutras,  we  are  fortunate  in  being  able  to  assign
a  much  earlier  and  much  more  settled  date  to  another
work  which  for  centuries  seems  to  have  fonned  the  recog-
nised authority  for  the  followers  of  the  Sfi.mkhya  in  India,
the  so-called  Samkhya-karikas  or  the  sixty-nine  or  seventy
Versus  memoriales  of  lavara-Krish^a  (with  three  supple-
mentary ones,  equally  ascribed  to  that  author).  That  these
Karikas  are  older  than  our  STiti-as  could  easily  be  proved
by  passages  occurring  among  the  SOtras,  which  are  almost
literally  taken  from  the  Karikas  ^.

Alberuni,  who  wrote  his  pxcomit  of  India  in  the  first
half  of  the  eleventh  century,  was  well  acquainted  not  only
with  l&vara-K?/sh77a's  work,  but  likewise,  as  han  been
shown,  with  GauciapSda's  commentary  on  it^.  Nay,  we
can  even  make  another  step  backward.  For  the  Sfi.mkhya-
k&rik&s  exist  in  a  Chinese  translation  also,  made  by
/fan-ti  (lit,  true  truth),-  possibly  Paramslrtha,  a  Tripi^aka
law-teacher  of  the  Khan  dynasty,  A.  o.  557  to  589  (not
583).  Paramartha  camo  to  China  in  about  547  A.D.  in  the
reign  of  the  Emperor  Wu-ti  of  the  Liaii  dynasty  which
ruled  in  Southern  China  from  502  to  557  A.D.^,and  was
followed  by  the  Kluxn  dynasty.  He  lived  till  58a  A. p.;
and  there  are  no  less  than  twenty-eight  of  his  translations
now  in  existence,  that  of  the  Suvar/ia-Saptati-6alstra  being
the  twenty-seventh  (No.  1,300  in  B.  Nanjio's  Catalogue  J
The  name  given  to  it  in  Chinese,  *the  Golden  Seventy
Discourse,*  is  supposed  tg  f efer  to  the  number  of  verses  in
the  KiirikS.  -ffan-ti  was  not  considered  a  good  Chinese
scholar,  and  his  translation  of  the  Abhidhanna-Kosha-
s^tra,  for  instance,  had  in  consequence  to  be  replaced  by
a  new  translation  by  flioucn-thsang.

^  Seo  Hnll,  S&mkhya-Sftr:i,  p.  la ;  Donsscn,  VedAnta,  p.  36X.

•  Garlx),  SamkhvA  ini4  Yoga,  p.  7.

^  See  Mayor'fi  Chtnesi:  Keudcr's  Mnnua],  '>\hic1i  gives  the  exact  dates.


DATE  OP  QAXJDWkVA.  223

But  though  we  are  thus  enabled  to  assign  the  S^mkhya-
k&rik&  to  the  sixth  century  a.d.,  it  by  no  means  follows
that  this  work  itself  did  not  exist  before  that  time.  Na-
tive  tradition,  we  are  told,  assigns  his  work  to  the  first
century  B.c.

Bate  of  Oan^ap&da.

But  even  here  new  difficulties  arise  with  regard  to  the
age  of  GaurZap&da,  the  author  of  the  commentary  on  the
Karikas.  This  commentary  also,  so  we  were  informed  by
Beal,  had  been  translated  into  Chinese  before  582  A.  D. ;
but  how  is  that  possible  without  upsetting  the  little  we
know  of  Gaudapada's  date.  ^*amkara  Is  represented  as
the  pupil  of  Govihda  who  was  the  pupil  of  Gau(?apS,da,
But  jS'amkara's  literary  career  began,  as  is  generally
supposed,  about  788  a.d.  How  then  could  ho  have  been
the  literary  grandson  of  Gaurfapada,  and  son  or  pupil  of
Goviuda  ?  As  J|r.  Beal  could  no  longer  be  consulted
I  asked  one  of  my  Chinoso  pupils,  the  late  Mr.  Kasa-
wara,*to  translate  portions  of  the  Chinese  commentary  for
me ;  but  the  specimens  he  sent  me  did  not  STifRce  to  settle
the  question  whether  it  was  really  a  translation  of  GaucZa-
pd^da's  commentary.  It  is  but  right  to  state  here  that
Telang  in  the  Indian  Antiquary,  XIII,  95,  places  iS'amkara
much  earlier,  iu  590  A.n.,  and  that  Fleet,  in  the  Indian
Antiquary,  Jan.,  1887,  assigns  630  to  65.5  as  the  latest  date
to  King  V^'ishadeva  of  Nepal  who  is  said  to  have  received
iSaiukara  at  his  court,  and  actually  to  have  given  the  name
of  iSW/ikaradeva  to  his  son  in  honour  of  the  philosopher.
In  order  to  escape  from  all  these  uncertainties  I  wrote  once
more  to  Japan  to  another  pupil  of  mine,  Dr.  Takakusu,  and
he,  after  carefully  collating  the  Chinese  translation  with  the
Sanskrit  commentary  of  Gaurfapada,  informed  me  that  the
Chinese  translation  of  the  commentary  was  not,  and  could
not  in  any  sense  be  called,  a  translation  of  GaucZap&da's  com-
mentary. So  much  trouble  may  be  caused  by  one  unguarded
expression !  Anyhow  this  diflSiculty  is  now  removed,  and
iSamkara's  date  need  not  be  disturbed.  The  author  of  the
Kirik&£  informs  us  at  the  end  of  his  work  that  this  philo-
sophy, proclaimed  by  the  greatest  sage,  i.  a  Kapila,  had


224  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHT.

been  communicated  by  him  to  Asuri,  by  Asuri  to  Paw7::a-
sikha,  and,  as  the  Tattva-samlijsa  adds,  from  Pa//^ikha  to
Pata/zgfali  ^,  and  had  been  widely  taught  until,  by  an  unin-
terrupted series  of  teachers,  it  reached  even  Isvara-KWshna^
He  calls  it  the  Shashtt-tantra,  the  Sixty-doctrine.  A  simi-
lar account  is  given  by  Paramglrtha  in  his  comment  on  the
first  verse, '  Kipila  (Kapila),'  he  says, '  was  a  jR/shi  descended
from  the  skv  and  was  endowed  with  the  four  virtues,
dutifulness  (Dharma),  wisdom  (Fragrk),  separation  from
desires  (VairSgya),  and  freedom  (Mpksha).  He  saw  a
Br&hman  of  the  name  of  0-shu-li  (Asuri)  who  had  been
worshipping  heaven  or  the  Devas  for  a  thousand  years,
and  said  to  him :  "  O  Asuri,  art  thou  satisfied  with  the
state  of  a  G?'ihastha  or  householder  1 "  After  a  thousand
years  he  came  again,  and  Asuri  admitted  that  he  was
satisfied  with  the  state  of  a  GWhastha.    He  then  came  a

A  A

third  time  to  Asuri,  whereupon  Asuri  quitted  the  state  of
a  householder  and  became  a  pupil  of  Kapila.'  These  may
be  mere  additions  made  by  ParamS,rtha,^but  they  show,  at
all  events,  that  to  him  also  Kapila  and  Asuri  were  persons
of  a  distant  past.


But  however  far  the  Kftrik&s  of  Isvara-Krishna  may  go
back,  they  are  what  they  are,  a  metrical  work  in  the  stjae
of  a  later  age,  an  age  that  gave  rise  to  other  K&rikfts  like
Bhartrihari's  (about  650  A.n.)  Kftrik&s  on  grammar.
Everybody  has  wondered,  therefore,  what  could  have  be-
come of  the  real  Sstmkhya-Sdtras,  if  they  ever  existed ;  or,
if  they  did  not,  why  there  should  never  have  been  such
Sdtras  for  so  important  a  system  of  philosophy  as  the
SS,mkhya,  There  is  clearly  a  great  gap  between  the  end
of  the  Upanishad  period  and  the  literary  period  that  was
able  to  give  rise  to  the  metrical  work  of  levara -Krishna.
In  what  form  could  the  S&mkhya^philosophy  have  existed
in  that  interval  ?

To  judge  from  analogy  we  should  certainly  say,  in  Uie

^  This  would  pcom  to  plnce  the  Tnttya-siixnAsa'  later  than  Ftita^t^itli
*  See  Kurikft,  w.  70,  71.


TATTVA-8AVASA.  225

form  of  SAtras,  such  as  were  handed  down  for  oiher
branches  of  learning  by  oral  tradition.  The  El&rik&s  them-
selves presuppose  such  a  tradition  quite  as  much  as  the
much  later  Sfttras.  which  we  possess.  They  are  both  meant*
to  recapitulate  what  existed,  never  to  originate  what  we
should  call  new  and  original  thoughts.  When  we  see  the
Kftrikftfl  declare  that  they  leave  out  on  purpose  the  Akh&r
yik&s,  the  illustrative  stories  contained  m  the  fourth  book
'  of  our  S&tras,  this  cannot  prove  their  posteriority  to  the
^tLtras  as  we  have  them:  but  it  shows  that  at  t#vara-
EWshria's  time  there  existed  a  body  of  S4mkhya-philosophy
which  contamed  such  stories  as  we  .find  in  our  modem
S&tras,  but  neitjier  in  t^e  K&rikfts  nor  in  the  Tattva-
saiyiftsa.  Besides  these  stones  other  things  also  were  omitted
by  lavara-EruahTia,  comprehended  under  the  name  of  Para-
v&da,  probably  controversies,  such  bs  those  on  the  necessity
7  of  aniavara.

Under  these  circumstances  I  venture  to  say  that  such
a  work  in  SAtras  not  only  existed,  but  that  we  are  in
actual  possession  of  it,  namely  in  the  text  of  the  much
Aeglecteid  Tattva-sam&sa.  Because  it  contains  a  number
of  new  technical  terms,  it  has  been  put  down  at  once  as
modem,  as  if  what  is  new  to  us  must  be  new  chronolo-
gically also.  We  know  far*  too  little  of  the  history  of  the
S&mldiya  to  justify  so  confident  a  conclusion.  Colebrooke  ^
told  us  long  ago  that,  if  the  scholiast  of  Eapila  ^  may  be
trusted,  and  why  should  he  not  1  the  Tattva-sam&sa  was
the  proper  text-book  of  the  SJI^mkhya-philosophy.  It  was
a*  mere  accident  that  he,  Colebrooke,  could  not  find  a  copy
of  it.  '  Whether  that  Tattva-samli43a  of  Eapila  be  extant,'
he  wrote,  '  or  whether  the  Siitras  of  Pa;7/ba8ikha  be  so,  is
not  certain.'  And  again  he  wrote :  '  It  appears  from  the
Preface  of  the  Eapib-bh&shya  that  a  more  compendious
tract  in  the  forin  of  Siitras  or  aphorisms,  bears  the  title
of  Tattva-samftsa,  and  is  ascribed  to  the  same  author,  i.  e.  to
Eapila.

I  admit  that  the  introductoiy  portion  of  this  tract  sounds
modem,  and  probably  is  so,  but  I  find  no  other  marks  of

^  Enays,!,  p.  944.

'  S&mkhya-prava/cana-bhAshya,  pp.  7,  xia

15  ^


226  INDIAN   PHTLOSOPHY.

a  modem  date  in  the  bod  v  of  the  work.  On  the  contrary
there  are  several  indications  in  it  of  its  being  an  earlier
form  of  the  S&mkhya-philoeophy  than  what  we  possess  in
the  KiUik&s  or  in  the  SiHtras.  When  it  agrees  with  the
K&rik&s,  sometimes  ahnost  verbatim,  it  is  the  metrical
text  that  seems  to  me  to  presuppose  the  prose,  not  the
prose  the  metrical  version.  In  the  Sdtras  themselves  we
find  no  allusion  as  yet  to  the  atheistic  or  non-theistio  doc-
trines which  distinguish  the  later  texts  of  the  S&mkhya^
and  which  are  still  absent  from  the  Sft.mkhya-k&rik&s  also.
The  so-called  Aisvaryas  or  superhuman  powers,  which  are
recognised  in  the  Tattva-sam&sa,  might  seem  to  presuppose
the  recognition  of  an  Idvara,  though  this  is  very  doubtful ;
but  the  direct  identification  of  Purusha  with  Brahman  in
the  Tattva-samstsa  points  certainly  to  an  earlier  and  less
pronounced  Niriavara  or  Lord-less  character  of  the  ancient
S&mkhya.  It  should  also  be  mentioned  that  YignSaiar-
Bhikshu,  no  mean  authority  on  such  matters,  and  even
supposed  by  some  tb  have  been  himself  the  author  of  our
modem  Sd.mkhya-Siitras,  takes  it  foi^  granted  that  the
Tattva-sam&sa  was  certainly  prior  to  the  Eapila-Sfitras
which  we  possess.  For  why  should  he  defend  Kapila,  and
not  the  author  of  the  Tattva-samdsa^  against  the  cnarge  of
Punamkti  or  giving  us  a  mere  useless  repetition,  and  why
should  he  have  found  no  excuse  for  the  existence  of  the
Eapila-Siitras  except  that  they  are  short  and  complete,
while  the  Tattva-samdsa  is  short  and  compact  ^  ?

Not  being  able  to  find  a  MS.  of  the  Tattva-samlifla  Cole-
brooke  decided  to  translate  instead  the  S&mkhya-k&rik&s,
and  thus  it  came  to  pass  that  most  scholars  have  been
under  the  impression  that  in  India  also  this  metrical  ver-
sion was  considered  as  the  most  authoritative  and  most
popular  manual  of  the  Ssimkhya-philosophy.  This  is  the
way  in  which  certain  prepossessions  arise.  We  have  learnt
since  from  Ballantyne  -  that  at  Benares,  where  he  resided,
these  Karikas  were  hardly  known  at  all  except  to  those
who  had  seen  Professor  Wilson's  English  edition  of  them,

^  S&mkhya-prav.'Upana-bh&shya,  Introduction.
*  Drift  of  the  S&mkhya,  p.  i.


tattva-samAsa.  ^27

while  the  Tattvarsam&sa  was  well  known  to  all  the  native
assistants  whom  he  employed.  Nor  can  we  doubt  that  in
the  part  of  India  best  known  to  Ballantyne  it  was  really
an  importimt  and  popular  work,  if  we  consider  the  number
of  commentaries  written  on  it  ^,  and  the  frequency  of  allu-
sions to  it  which  occur  in  other  commentaries.  The  com-
mentary published  by  Ballantyne  is,  if  I  understand  him
rightly,  anonymous.  It  gives  first  what  it  calls  the  Sftm-
khya-SAtrd.7ii,  and  then  the  SamlUad^khya-siitra-vrtttiA.
Hally  L  c,  p.  13,  quotes  one  commentary  by  KshemiUianda,
called  Sllmkhya-kramadipik&^  but  it  is  not  quite  clear  to
me  whether  this  is  the  same  as  the  one  published  by
Ballant3nie,  nor  have  I  had  access  to  any  other  MSS.

We  must  not  forget  that  in  modem  times  the  S&mkhya-
philosophy  has  ceased  to  be  popular  in  several  parts  of
India.  Even  in  the  sixteenth  century  Yia/zft^na-Bhikshu,
in  his  commentary  on  the  Sd^mkhya-Stltras  (v.  5),  complains
that  it  has  beai  swallowed  up  by  the  sun  of  the  time,  and
that  but  a  small  part  of  the  moon  of  knowlddg6  remained;
while  in  the  Bhdgavata  fnrkvs,  I,  3,  10,. the  SJLmkhya  is
spoken  of  as  E&la-vipluta,  destroyed  by  tima  Professor
Wilson  told  me  that,  during  the  whole  of  his  intercourse
with  learned  natives,  he  met  with  one  Br&hman  only  who
professed  to  be  acquainted  with  the  writings  of  this  philo-
sophical school,  and  Professor  Bhandarkar  (1.  c,  p.  3)  states
that  the  very  name  of  S&mkhya-pravaA»na  was  unknown
on  his  side  of  India.  Hence  we  may  well  understand  that
S&mkhya  MSS.  are  scarce  in  India,  and  entirely  absent  in
certain  localities.  It  is  possible  also  that  the  very  small-
ness  of  the  Tattva-sam&sa  may  have  lowered  it  in  the  eyes
of  native  scholars,  and  that  in  time  it  may  have  been
eclipsed  by  its  more  voluminous  commentaries.  But  if  we
accept  it  as  what  it  professes  to  be,  and  what,  up  to  the
time  of  Vi^^diut-Bhikshu  at  least,  it  was  considered  to  be
in  India,  it  seems  to  me  just  the  book  that  was  wanted  to
fill  the  gap  to  which  I  referred  before.  By  itself  it  would
fill  a  few  pages  only.  In  fact  it  is  a  mere  enumeration  of
topics,  and,  as  such,  it  would  agree  very  well  with  the

^  Five  are  mentioned  by  Hall  in  his  Prelaoe,  p.  33.

Q  ^


22S  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

flomewhai  piusling  name  of  SUmkhya,  which  means  no
more  than  enmneration.  All  other  derivationB  of  this  title
seem  far-fetched  ^  as  compared  with  this.  Aooording  to
Yijr/t&na-Bhikshu  in  his  commentary  on  the  S&tras  ^pp.  6^
no,  ed.  Hall),  both  the  S&mkhya-Sfttras  and  thB  x  oga-
Siitras  are  reaily  mere  developments  of  the  Tattva-aamAsa-
S&tras.  Both  are  called  therefore  S&mkhya-prayaJbana^
exposition  of  the  S&mkhya,  the  latter  adding  the  peculiar
arguments  in  support  of  the  existence  of  an  Isvara  or
Supreme  Lord,  and  therefore  called  Se«vara»  in  opposition
to  the  S&mkhya,  which  is  called  An-tsvara,  or  Lora-less.

And  here  it  is  important  to  remark  also  that  the  name
of  Shaehti-tantra,  the  Doctrine  of  the  Sixty,  which  is  siven
by  lavara-Krishtia^  or  at  all  events  by  the  author  en!  the
72nd  of  his  E&rik&s,  should  occur  and  be  accounted  for  ini
the  TattvarsamAsa,  as  containing  the  17  (enumerated  in  64
and  65),  and  the  33,  previously  exhibited  in  62  and  63,
together  with  the  10  MMik&rthas  or  fundamental  facte
which  together  would  make  up  the  sixty  topics  of  the
Shashti-tantra.  At  the  end  of  the  a5  great  topics  of  the
Tattva-sam&sa  we  find  the  straightforward  declaration :
'Iti  tattva-sam&s&khya-s&mkhya-siitr&tii,'  Here  end  tiie
Sftmkhya-Siitras  called  TattvaHEuun&sa.

At  first  sight,  no  doubt,  SamAsa  seems  to  mean  a  mere
abstract;  but  Sam&sa  may  be  used  also  in  opposition  to
Brihat,  and  there  is  no  other  work  in  existence  of  which
it  could  be  called  an  abstract,  certainly  not  either  of  the
E&rik&s  or  of  the  modem  S&tras,  such  as  we  possess  them.
The  whole  arrangement  is  different  from  the  Other  and
more  recent  treatments  of  S&mkhya-philosophy.  The  three
kinds  of  pain,  for  instance,  which  geneiully  form  the
starting-pomt  of  the  whole  system,  are  relented  to  the
very  end  as  a  separate  topic.  We  meet  with  technical
subjects  and  technical  terms  which  are  not  to  be  found  at
all  in  other  and,  as  it  would  seem,  more  modem  Sftimkhya
works.  The  smallness  of  the  TattvaHsuun&sa  can  hardly  be
aaed  as  aa  aigmnent  against  ito  ever  having  been  an

^  They  are  mentioned  in  the  Preface  to  Hall's  edition  of  the  S&fNkh7»>
praTaikana-bhAahya,  1856.  Some  of  them  ari  mare  definitions  without
any  attempt  at  etymology.


A__-.  . _A


ANTERIOBITT  01  VSDANTA  OR  BUiKEYA.         229

important  work,  for  we  find  similar  short,  yet  old  Sfttra-
works,  for  instance,  the  Sarv&nukrama  and  other  Anukra-
manis  described  in  my  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  litera-
ture ^  However,  in  matters  of  tins  kind  we  must  avoid
being  too  positive  either  in  denying  or  asserting  tl^e  age
and  authenticity  ol  Sanskrit  texts.  All  I  can  say  is  that
there  is  iio  mark  of  modem  age  in  their  language,  though
the  commentary  is,  no  doubt,  of  a  later  date.  What  weighs
with  me  is  the  fact  that  Indian  Pandits*  evidently  con-
sidered the  Tattva-sam&sa-Siitras  bs  the  origimd  outlines
of  the  S&mkhya-philosophy,  while  the  idea  that  they  are
a  later  spurious  production  rests,  as  far  as  I  can  see  at
present,  on  no  real  argument  whatever.

Aat«rlovitgr  of  ▼•AAatft  or  04mkhj».

It  must  be  clear  from  sli,  this  how  useless  it  would  be,
with  the  limited  means  at  our  disposal,  to  attempt  to  prove
the  anterioritv  either  of  the  Yeddnta  or  of  the  Sftmkhya,
as  isfystems  of  philosophy,  and  as  distinguished  from  uie
Siitras  in  which  we  possess  them.  External  or  historical
evidence  we  have  none,  and  internal  evidence,  though  it
may  support  a  suggestion,  can  but  seldom  amount  to
positive  proof.  We  can  understand  bow,  out  of  the  seeds
scattered  about  in  the  Upanishads,  there  could  arise  in
time  the  systematic  arrangement  and  final  representation
of  systems  such  as  have  been  handed  down  to  us  in  the
Siitras  01:  the  Ved&nta,  the  S&mkhya,  and  the  other  schools.
It  cannot  be  denied  that  in  the  Upanishad  period  Yed&ntic
ideas  are  certainly  more  prevalent  than  those  of  the
S^'nikbya.  I  go  even  a  step  further  and  admit  that  the
S&Tnkhya-philosophy  may  have  been  a  kind  of  toning
down  of  the  extreme  Monism  of  the  Advaita  Ve^ldnta.
I  think  we  can  enter  into  the  misgivings  and  fears  of
those  who  felt  startled  by  the  unflinching  Monisia  of  the
Ved&nta,  at  least  as  interpreted  by  the  school  which  was
represented  rather  than  founded  by  /Samkara.  Now,  the
two  points  which  are  most  likely  to  have  caused  difficulty

^  These  Amikramas  huve  >een  very  carefully  published  in  the  Anecdota
Oxonienaia  by  Professor  Macdoncll,  to  whom  I  had  handed  oyer  my
materiaLs.


230  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

or  given  offence  to  ordinary  consciences,  would  seem  to  have
been  the  total  denial  of  what  is  meant  by  the  reaHty  of
the  objective  world,  and  the  required  surrender  of  all
individuality  on  the  part  of  the  subject,  that  is,  of  our-
selves. These  are  the  points  which  seem  most  startling
even  to  ourselves,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  they  may
have  given  rise  to  another  system  free  from  these  startUng
doctrines,  such  as  we  find  in  the  Sd^khya.  They  certainly
formed  the  chief  stumbling-block  to  R&m&nu^a  and  those
who  had  come  before  him,  such  as  Bodhft.yana  and  other
VihrvtJekryasy  and  led  them  to  propound  their  own  more
human  interpretation  of  the  Ved&nta,  though  sacrificing
the  lavara  in  order  to  save  the  reality  of  each  Pnrusha.

These  conflicting  views  of  the  world,  of  the  soul,  and  of
Qod,  emerge  already  in  the  Upanishads ;  and  in  a  few  oi
them,  the  jSvet&8vatara,  Maitr&y.,  and  Ea^^  Upanishads,
for  instance,  there  are  utterances  that  come  very  near  to
what  we  know  as  Sllmkhya  rather  than  Yedltnta  doctrines.
Veddnta  ideas  preponder::,te,  however,  so  decidedly  in  the
Upanishad  literature,  that  we  can  well  understana  that  in
the  oral  tradition  of  the  schools  the  S&mkhva  doctrines
should  have  exercised  a  limited  influence  only,  whatever
favour  they  may  have  found  with  those  who  were  repelled
by  the  extreme  views  of  the  monistic  Vedilnta.  The  fol-
lowers of  ELapila  had  an  advantage  over  the  Ved&ntists  in
admitting  a  Prakriti,  or  a  something  objective,  independent
of  Brahman  or  Purusha,  though  called  into  life  and  activity
by  the  look  of  Puru3ha  only,  and  disappearing  when  that
look  ceased.  They  were  also  less  opposed  to  the  common
consciousness  of  mankind  in  admitting  the  reality  of  indi-
vidual souls.  Dualism  is  always  more  popular  than  rigorous
Monism,  and  the  S&wkhya  was  clearly  dualistic  when  it
postulated  nature,  not  only  as  the  result  of  Avidy4  or
M.kyk,  but  as  something  real  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  that
word,  and  when  it  allowed  to  the  individual  souls  or  Olvas
alito  an  independent  character.  It  should  be  remembered
that  the  denial  of  an  Wara  or  personal  Lord  did  not
probably  form  part  of  the  original  S&mkhy  a,  as  presented
to  us  in  the  Tattva-samaaa.  It  would  seem  tiierefore  that
on  these  very  important  points  the  S&mkhya  was  more


ATUfllSM   AND  OBTHODOXT.  23 1

conciliatory  and  less  defiant  to  the  common  sense  of  man-
kind than  the  Ved&nta,  and  though  this  is  far  from  proving
that  it  was  therefore  posterior  to  the  Vedanta  in  its  severest
form,  it  might  well  be  accepted  as  an  indication  that  these
two  streams  of  thought  followed  parallel  courses,  starting
'  from  a  common  fund  of  ancient  Yeaic  thoughts,  but  diverg-
ing  afterwarda.  the  Vedltata  unflinchingTy  foUowing  its
straight  course,  the  other,  the  S4mkhya,  avoiding  certain
whirlpools  of  thought  which  seemed  dangerous  to  the
ordinary  swimmer.  To  the  people  at  large  it  would  natur-
ally seem  as  if  the  Yed&nta  taught  the  oneness  of  all  indi-
vidual souls  or  subjects  in  Brahman,  and  the  illusory
character  of  all  that  is  objective,  while  the  S&7)ikhya
allowed  at  all  events  the  temporary  reality  of  the  objec-
tive world  and  the  multiplicity  of  individual  souls.  Of
course,  we  must  leave  it  an  open  question  for  the  present
whether  the  extreme  monistic  view  of  the  Veda  was  due  to
^amkara,  or  whether,  like  B&xakmxgs,,  he  also  could  claim
the  authority  of  PiUrvaMryas  in  his  interpretation  of  Bada-
r4ya'#<a's  Siitras.  If  that  were  so,  the  aifference  between
the  two  systems  would  certainly  seem  to  be  irreconcilable,
while  minor  differences  between  them  would  in  India  at
least  admit  of  a  friendly  adjustment.

'  Athwisai  mUL  OvthoAosjr.

Even  on  what  seems  to  us  so  vital  a  point  in  every
philosophy  as  theism  or  atheism,  Indian  philosophers  seem
to  have  been  able  to  come  to  an  understanding  and  a  com-
promise. We  must  remember  that  in  the  eyes  of  the
^rahmans  the  Samkhya  is  atheistic  and  yet  orthodox.
This  seems  to  us  impossible ;  but  the  fact  is  that  orthodoxy
has  a  very  different  meaning  in  India  from  what  it  has
with  us.  What  we  mean  by  orthodoxy  was  with  them
not  much  more  than  a  recognition  of  the  supreme  authority
of  the  Veda.  The  S&mkhya,  wh(it6ver  we  may  think  of
it«  Yedic  character,  never  denies  the  authority  of  the  Yeda
in  so  many  words,  though  it  may  express  a  less  decided
submission  to  it.  Whether  in  its  ori^n  the  Silmkhya  was
quite  independent  of  the.  Yeda,  is  diiScult  to  say.  Some
scholars  think  that  the  recognition  of  the  supi'ome  authority


232  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

of  the  Smii  was  an  afterthought  with  Eapila,  a  mere  stroke
of  theological  diplomacy.  But  if  so,  we  should  be  forced
to  admit  that  the  S&mkhya  philosophers  wished,  by  means
of  this  diplomacy,  to  be  raised  to  tne  same  position  which
others,  such  as  the  Yedftntists,  had  occupied  before  them  ;
and  so  far  it  might  seem  to  indicate  the  posteriority  of  the
S&mkhya,  as  a  system  of  philosophy.

It  is  important  here  to  remember  that  the  Sftmkhya  not
only  declared  for  the  authority  of  the  Veda,  but  had  never
openly  rejected  it,  like  Brihaspati  or  Buddha.  It  is  <|uite
another  queflstion  whether  ifc  really  carried  out  the  spirit  of
the  Veda,  particularly  of  the  Upanishads.  That  /Siamkara,
the  great  defender  of  Yed&ntism,  should  deny  the  correct-
ness of  the  interpretation  of  the  Veda,  adopted  by  Eapila,
proves  after  all  no  more  than  that  a  difference  of  opinion
existed  between  the  two,  but  it  would  show  at  the  same
time  that  Kapila,  as  well  as  fifamkara,  had  tried  to  repre-
sent his  philosophy  as  supported  by  passages  from  the
Veda.  To  judge  from  a  passage  in  the  beginning  of  the
SA,mkhya-k&rik&3  it  might  seem  indeed  that  Eapila  placed
his  own  philosophy  above  the  Veda.  But  he  teally  says
no  more  there  than  that  certain  reme(£es  for  the  removal
of  pain,  enjoined  by  the  Veda,  are  good,  and  that  other
remedies  enjoined  by  philosophy  are  likewise  good;  bat
that  of  the  two  the  latter  are  better,  that  is,  more  efficacious
(Tattva  Kaumudi,  v.  a).  This  does  not  affect  the  authority
of  the  Veda  as  a  whole,  as  compared  with  philosophy  or
human  knowledge.  We  must  not  forget  that  after  all  it  is
Smti  or  revelation  itself  which  declares  that  all  remedies
are  palliative  only,  and  that  real  freedom  (Moksha)  from
all  suffering  can  be  derived  from  philosophical  knowledge
only,  and  that  this  is  incomparably  higher  than  sacrifices  or
other  meritorious  acts  (SS.mkhya-pravaA:ana  I,  5}.

▲utliovitir  of  tlM  ▼•te.

What  authority  Eapila  assigns  to  the  Veda  may  be
gathered  from  what  he  says  about  the  three  possible
sources  of  knowledge,  perception,  infex^nce,  and  Apta*
vaA;ana,  that  is  the  received,  correct,  or  true  word,  or,  it
may  be,  the  word  of  a  trustworthy  person.    He  explains


SAilKHYA   HOSTILE  TO   PAIK8TH00D.  233

Aptavafawa  in  v.  5  by  Aptasrufciy  wfaidi  dearly  means
receivedxTevelaiion  or  revelation  from  a  trustworthy  source.
However  the  commentators  may  differ,  iSruti  can  here  mean
the  Veda  only,  though,  no  doubt,  the  Veda  as  interpreted
by  Eapila.  And  that  the  Veda  is  not  only  considered  as
equal  to  sensuous  perception,  and  inference,  but  is  placed  by
hun  <m  an  even  higher  pedestal,  is  shown  by  the  fact  that
EapOa  (Siitras  V,  51)  declares  it  to  be  self-evident,  SvataA-
pramAnam,  while  perception  and  inference  are  not,  but  are
admitted  to  be  liable  to  error  and  to  require  cotifirmation.

Though  it  is  true,  therefore,  that  witn  the  true  Sdmkhya
philoso^er  the  Veda  does  not  possess  that  superhuman
authority  which  is  ascribed  to  it  by  B&dar&yana,  I  cannot
faring  myself  to  believe  that  this  concession  on  the  part  of
Eapua  was  a  mere  artifice  to  escape  the  fate  which,  for
instance,  befell  Buddha.  There  are  many  passages  where
Kapila  appeals  quite  naturally  to  iSruti  or  revelation  In
I,  36  he  appeals  to  both  iShiti  and  Ny&ya,  reasoni li^,  out  in
many  places  he  appeals  to  £fruti  alone.  That  r^ivjlation  is
to  be  looked  upon  as  superior  to  experionce  or  sensuous
perception  is  stated  by  him  in  so  many  words  in  I,  147,
where  we  read  'There  is  n*  denial  of  what  is  established
by  firuti.'  Again,  when  the  Ny&ya  philosophy  tries  to
establish  by  reasoning  that  the  organs  of  sense  are  formed
of  the  elements,  Kapila  squashes  the  whole  armiment  by
a  simple  appeal  to  /Sruti.  '  They  cannot  be  so  formed,'  he
says, '  because  fi^ti  says  that  they  are  formed  of  Aham-
kllra,  self-consciousness  (II,  ao)  ^'

Other  passages  where  the  authority  of  /Sruti  is  invoked
as  paramount  by  Eapila,  or  supposed  to  be  so  by  the  com-
mentator, may  be  found  in  Samkhya-Siitras  1, 36 ;  77 ;  83 ;
147;  154;  II,iio;  aa;  in,  15;  80;  IV,22;  &c.

■taiUhyft  iMMto  to  PxlMtlMMa.

There  is  one  passage  only  in  which  a  decidedly  hostile
feeling  towards  the  Br&hmanic  priesthood  may  be  dis-
covers in  Eapila's  S&tiras,  and  it  seems  full  of  meaning.
Among  the  different  kinds  of  bondage  to  which  men  are

*  Bnt  are  not  the  eleoMnts  mere  VikArae  of  AhamkAra?


234  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

liable,  but  onght  not  to  be,  is  one  called  Dakshinft-bandha,
bondage  arising  from  having  to  offer  gifts  to  priests,  which
seems  to  be  condemned  as  superstitious  and  mischievous^.

As  springing  from  the  great  mass  of  philosophic  thought
accumulated  in  the  Upanishads,  the  S&mkhya,  like  the
Ved&nta-philosophy,  was  probably  at  first  considered  as
neither  orthodox  nor  unorthodox.  It  was  simply  one  out
of  many  attempts  to  solve  the  ridSle  of  the  world,  and  even
the  fact  that  it  did  not  appeal  to  a  personal  Lord  or  creator,
was  evidently  at  first  not  considered  suffident  to  anathe-
matise it  as  unorthodox  or  un-Vedic.  It  was  probably  at
a  much  later  time  when  the  Yedanta  and  other  systems  had
already  entrenched  themselves  behind  revelation,  or  the
Veda,  «as  the  highest  authority  even  on  philosophical
questions,  that  other  systems,  having  been  proved  un-
Vedic,  came  to  be  considered  as  objectionable  or  unor-
thodox, while  the  Ved&nta,  as  its  very  name  implied,  was
safe  UTuTi  r  the  shadow  of  the  Veda.  I  know  that  other
scholars  maintain  that  tv^ith  the  S&mkhya  any  appeal  to  the
Veda  was  an  afterthought  only,  and  not  an  essential  part
of  the  original  system,  nay,  not  even  quite  honeidt.  We
m^iy  admit  that  the  Sd.mkhya  has  no  need  of  the  Veda,  but
why  should  it  appeal  to  it  even  on  indifierent  questions,  if
the  Veda  hod  not  been  considered  by  it  as  of  supreme
authority.  It  is  possible  that  there  may  have  been  origin-
ally a^  difference  between  /Sruti,  revelation  as  not  human,
and  Apt&vsJesjia,  authoritative  tradition  as  human,  and
that  with  Eapila  the  Veda  was  treated  at  first  as  coming
under  AptavaArana.  But  however  this  may  be,  unless  our
conception  of  the  development  of  Indian  philosophy,  as  we
catch  glimpses  of  it  now  and  then  in  the  course  of  centuries,
is  entirely  wrong,  it  must  be  clear  that,  in  the  present  state
of  our  knowledge,  to  call  one  channel  of  philosophic  thought,
whether  S&mkhya  or  Ved4nta,  in  the  form  in  which  it  has
reached  us,  more  ancient  than  tlie  other,,  would  be  mere
playing  with  words.


^  860  TaiivA-MUBiM  aa ;  SAiwUi/a-k&rikte  44.


PABALIiEL  DBYELOPMBirr  OF  PHILOSOPHICAL  SYSTEMS.  235


The  result  of  this  desire  to  fix  dates,  where  dates  are
impossible,  has  often  proved  most  mischievous.  Scholars
of  recognised  authority  have  arrived  at  and  given  expression
to  convictions,  not  only  widely  different,  but  diametrically
opposed  to  each  other.  The  chief  cause  of  this  confusion
has  been  that,  by  a  very  natural  tendency,  we  always  wish
to  arrange  things  NacheiruiTider  or  in  causal  connection,
instead  of  being  satisfied  with  taking  things  as  Nebenein-
aruier,  parallel  and  formed  under  similar  conditions,  spring-
ing from  acommon  source  and  flowing  on  side  by  side  m
the  same  durection.

A  reference  to  the  history  of  language  may  make  my
meaning  dearo^^.  ^  No.  one  would  say  that  Greek  was  older
than  Latin.  (Treek  hfut  some  forms  more  primitive  than
Latin,  but  Latin  also  hD«^  some  forms  more  primitive  than
Greek.  It  is  true  that  we  know  literary  productions  in
Greek  at  a  much  earlier  time  them  literary  productions
in  Latin,  nor  would  >^y  Sanskrit  scholar  deny  that  the
Siitras  of  B&dar&yana  are  older  than  the  S&mkhya-Siitras,
as  we  now  possess  the  two.  But  for  all  that,  Greek,  as
a  language,  cannot  be  a  day  older  than  Latin.  Both
branched  off,  slowly  it  may  be  and  ahnoet  imperceptibly
at  firsu,  from  the  time  when  the  Aryan  separation  took
place.  In  their  embryonic  form  they  both  go  back  to  some
indefinite  date,  far  beyond  the  limits  of  any  chronology.
In  Incia  we  may  learn  how,  like  language,  religion,  and
mythology,  philosophy  also  formed  at  first  a  kind  of
common  property.  We  meet  with  philosophical  ideas  of
a  Vedantic  character,  though  as  yet  in  a  very  undecided
form,  as  f a^  back  as  the  hymns  of  the  Big-veda ;  they  meet
us  again  in  the  Br&hmaTias  and  in  some  of  the  Upanishads,
while  the  S&mkhya  ideas  stand  out  less  prominently,  owing,
it  would  seem,  to  the  ascendency  gained  at  that  early  period
already  by  the  Ved&nta.  Instead  of  supposing,  however,
that  passages  in  support  of  S&imkhya  ideas  occurring  in
certain  of  the  older  Upanishads  were  foisted  in  at  a  later
time,  it  seems  far  more  probable  to  me  that  they  were
survivals  of  an  earlier  period  of  as  yet  undifferentiated
philosophical  thought


236  INDIAK  PHILOSOPHT.


What  remiUBB  of  the  chronological  framework  of  Indian
philosophy  is  in  the  end  not  mudi  more  than  that  both
Ved&nta  and  S&mkhya  ideas  existed  before  the  rise  of
historical  BuddhisuL  The  very  name  of  Upanishad,  for
instance,  is  so  peculiar  that  its  occurrence  in  ancient  Bud-
dhist texts  proves  once  for  all  the  existence  of  some  of  these
works  before  the  rise  of  Buddhism.

The  recognition  of  mendicant  friars  also,  as  a  social  insti-
tution, seems  to  me  simply  taken  over  from  the  Brfthmans.
The  very  name  of  Bhikkhu,  applied  to  the  members  of  the
Buddhist  fraternity,  comes  m>m  the  same  source.  It  is
truer  no  doubt,  that  the  name  of  Bhikshu  does  not  occur  in
the  classical  Upanishads,  but  the  right  of  b^ES^C*  whether
in  the  first  or  the  third  of  the  Asramas  (Snkhma^&rin  or
y&naprastha),  is  fully  recognised,  onl^  that  the  third  and
fourth  A^ramas  are  not  so  clearly  distinguished  in  early
times  as  they  are  in  Manu  and  afterwards.  In  the  Eaush.
Up.  II,  2  we  read  of  a  mem  who  has  begged  through  a  vil-
lage and  got  nothing  (Bhikshitv&) ;  in  the  iSTAAnd.  Up.  IV,
3,  5,  a  BrahmalArin  is  mentioned  who  has  begged.  The
technical  term  for  this  begging  is  Bhiksh&A:ftry&  in  the
Brih.  Ar.  Up.  HE  (V),  5, 1,  and  exactly  the  same  com^und,
Bhikkh&jfc&rydr,  occurs  in  tixe  Dhammapada  39a ;  Bhaiksh&-
}Aty&  occurs  also  in  the  MuTuJaka  I,  c,  11,  so  that  the  fact
that  the  substantive  Bhikshu  does  not  occur  in  the  classical
Upanishads  can  hardly  be  used  as  an  argument  to  prove
that  the  status  of  the  mendicant  friar  was  not  known
before  the  spreading  of  Buddhism.  It  is  true  that  in  its
£(ocial  meaning  Awama,  the  name  of  the  three  or  four  stages,
does  not  occur  in  the  classical  Upanishads ;  but,  as  we  find
A^ramin  in  the  Maitrily.  Up.  I V,  3,  we  can  hardly  doubt
that  the.  three  or  four  stages  (BralunaHrt,  Gaha^^Ao,  Y&na-
pa^^^o,  Bhikkhu)  were  known  before  the  rise  of  Buddhism,
and  taken  over  by  the  Buddhists  from  the  Yedic  Br&hmans.
Socially,  the  only  A^ramas  that  remained  among  the  Bud-
dhists were  two,  that  of  the  GWhins  and  t^t  of  the
Bhikkhus.

That  many  of  the  technical  terms  of  the  Buddhists
(Uposhadha,  &c.)  could  have  come  from  the  same  source


AiSYAGHOSHA's   BUBDHA-JTABITA.  237

only,  has  long  been  known,  so  mncb  so  that  it  has  been
rimtly  said/ Without  Brfthmanism  no  Buddhism.

The  institution  of  the  Yasso  ^,  for  instance,  the  retrciat
during  the  rainy  season,  is  clearly  taken  over  from  the
Varsb^  the  rainy  season,  as  kept  by  the  Br&hmans,  and
so  is  the  quinquennial  celebration  of  the  Panj^varsha-pari-
shad,  and  many  other  customs  adopted  by  the  Buddhists.

bOite-Tistera.

I  have  explained  before  why  at  present  I  attribute  less
importance  than  I  did  formerly  to  the  occurrence  of  a
number  of  titles,  including  S&mkhya,  Yoga,  Yaiseshika,
and  possibly  Ny&ya,  in  the  Lalita-vistara.  If  the  date
assigned  by  Stanislas  Julien  and  others  to  certain  Chinese
tnu^latibns  of  this  work  could  be  re-established,  the  passage
so  often  quoted  from  the  twelfth  chapter  would  be  of  con-
siderable value  to  us  in  forming  an  idea  of  Indian  literature
as  it  existed  at  the  time  when  the  Lalita-viistara  was  orig-
inally composed.  We  find  here  the  names  not  onh"  of  the
Yedic  glossary  (Nigha^ito  ?)  the  Nigamas  (part  of  ^irukta),
Pmrftnas,  Itihlsas,  Yedas,  grammar,  Nirukta,  iSiksh&,  iSTAan-
das,  ritual  (Ealpa),  astronomy  (&yotisha),  but,  what  would
be  most  important  for  us,  tike  names  of  three  systems  of
l^osophy  also,  S&mkhya,  Yoga,  and  Yaiaeshika,  while
HetuvidyA  can  hardly  be  meant  for  anything  but  Ny&ya.
But  until  tto  dates  of  the  various  Chinese  translations  of
the  life  of  Buddha  have  been  re-examined,  we  must  abstain
from  using  them  for  assigning  any  dates  to  their  Sanskrit
originals.

We  may  perhaps  place  more  reliance  on  Asvaghosha's
Buddha-A^rita,  wnich,  with  jgrcAkt  probability,  has  been
ascribed  to  the  first  century  a.d.  He  mentions  Yy&sa,  the
son  of  Sarasvatt,  as  the  compiler  of  the  Yeda,  though  not
of  the  Ved&nta-SAtras ;  he  knows  Yalmiki,  the  author  of
the  R&m&vana,  Atreya  as  a  teacher  of  medicine,  and  Oaxiska,
the  well-known  king,  as  a  teacher  of  Yoga.  By  far  the
most  important  passage  in  it  for  our  present  purpose  is  the
conversation  between  Arkda,  and  the  future  Buddha,  here

»  aB.EL,  vol.  Tiil,  p.  ai3.


2$$  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

already  called  Bodhisattva  in  the  twelfth  book.  This
Ax&da,  is  clearly  a  teacher  of  Sftmkhya-phUoBophy,  it  may
be  of  S&mkhya  in  an  earlier  state ;  and,  thouffn  uie  name
of  S&mkhya  does  not  occur,  the  name  of  Eapi|a  does  (XII,.
2i),  and  even  a  disciple  of  his  is  mentioned.  Here  then  we
have  in  a  poem,  ascribed  to  the  first  century  A.  p.,  a  clear
reference  to  that  philosophical  system  whsohjs  known  to
us  under  the  name  of  Sd,mkhya,  and  we  ha\^  actually  the
name  of  Kapila,  the  reputed  author  of  that  systemr  The
aame  6i  Eapila-v&stu  ^  also  occurs,  as  the  birthplace  of
Buddha  and  as  the  dwelling  of  the  famous  sage  Eapila.
No  reference  to  the  Yed&nta  has  been  met  with  in  Asva-
gfaosha's  Buddha-A^rita,  though  the  substitution  of  the
Ved&ntic  name  of  Brahman  for  the  S&mkhya  name  of
Purusha  deserves  attention.

Snddliist  SuttM.

If  we  consult  the  Buddhist  Suttas,  which,  whatever  the
date  of  their  original  composition  may  have  been,  were  at
all  events  reduced  to  writing  in  t!ie  first  century  B.O.,  and
may  be  safely  used  therefore  as  historical  evidence  for  that
time,  we  find  there  also  views  ascribed  to  the  Brfthmans
of  Buddha's  time  which  clearly  breathe  the  spirit  of  the
S&mkhya-philosophy.  But  it  would  be  very  unsafe  to  say
more,  and  to  maintain  that  such  passages  prove  in  any  way
the  existence  of  fully  developed  systems  of  philosophy,  or
of  anything  very  different  from  what  we  find  already  in
certain  Upanishada  All  we*  can  say  is  that  there  are
a  number  of  terms  in  the  Suttas  which  are  the  very  terms
used  in  the  Yedanta,  S&mkhya  and  Yoga-philosophies,  such
as  Atman,  iS&8vata,  Nitya  (?  Anitya),  Akshobhya,  Brahman,
l«vara,  Dharma,  Parin^ma,  and  many  more ;  but,  so  far  as
I  know,  there  is  not  one  of  which  we  could  say  that  it
could  have  been  taken  from  the  Sutras  only,  and  from
nowhere  else.

We  should  remember  that  in  the  Buddhist  Canon  we  find
constant  mention  of  Titthiyas  or  Tlrthakas  and  their  here-

^  I  write  ViUtu,  because  that  alone  means  dwelling-place,  while  V&stu
means  thing.  Vtlstu  became  Vatthu  in  P&li,  and  was  then  probably
reti-aiislated  into  Sanskrit  as  Vastu.


k


AiSVALATANA's   6J7/HTA-SnTBAS.  239

tical  Efystems  of  philosophy.  Six  oontemporftries  of  Buddha
are  mentioned,  one  of  them,  "NigArUho  Nataputta,  being  the
well-known  founder  of  OainiBm,  P&ratia  Kassapa,  Hakkhali,
Agita,  Pakudha  and  Sa/v^aya^.  Nor  are  the  names  of  the
reputed  authors  of  the  six  systems  of  Br&hmanic-philosophy
absent  from  the  Tripi/aka.  But  we  hear  nothing  of  any
literary  compositions  ascribed  to  Bd>dar&ya7ia,  &aimini,
Kapila,  Pata/?^li,  Qotama  or  EaTi&da.  Some  of  these
names  occur  in  the  Buddhist  Sanskrit  texts  also,  such  as
the  Laftk&vat&ra  where  the  names  of  Ean&da,  Eapila,
Akshap&da,  Brthaspati  are  met  with,  but  again  not  a  single
Gj>ecimen  or  elctract  from  their  compositions.


Another  help  for  determining  the  existence  of  ancient
SAtras  and  Bh&shyas  may  be  found  in  the  QWhya-Siitras
of  Afival&yana  and  ^&mkhi.yana,  works  belonging  to  the
aee  of  Vedic  literature,  though  it  may  be  to  the  very  end
of  what  I  call  the  S&tra-period  Here,  as  I  pointed  out  in
1859  in  my  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  we  find
not  only  the  Big-veda  with  all  its  subdivisions,  but  such
names  as  Sumantu,  &aimini,  Y^ai^mp^yana,  Paila,  Sdtras,
Bh&shyas,  Bh&rata^  Mah&bh&rata,  teachers  of  the  law,
6&nanti,  Bdhavi,  Q&rgya,  Qautama,  AS&kalya,  BUbhravya,
M&TuZavya,  M&7u2iikeya,  Qlirgi  Vyraknavt,  Yadav^  Pr&ti-
XheyU  Sul&bh&  Maitreyi,  E^ahola  Eaushitaka,  Mah&kausht>
taka,  Paimgya,  Mah&paim^^  Suya^^a  iS&mkh&yana,
Aitareya,  Mahaitareya,  the  o&kala  (text),  the  Bashkala
(text),  Su^&tavaktra,  Audav&hi,  Mahaudav&hi,  SaugfsLmi,
£aunaka,  Asval&yana.  The  ^&mkh&yana  Grihya-Stltras
IV,  10,  give  the  same  list,  though  leaving  out  a  few  names
and  adding  others.  The  most  valuable  part  iiji  both  sets
of  Grihya-Siitras  is  their  testifying  at  that  early  and
probably  pre-Buddhistic  time,  not  only  to  the  existence  of
Sfttras,  but  of  Bh&shyas  or  commentaries  also,  w;ithout
which,  as  I  said  before,  neither  the  philosophical,  nor.  the

'  SamafrfSa-Phala-SuttA  3.

*  How  carefiil  we  must  be,  we  may  lean  from  the  fact  that  instead  of
Bharata  and  Mah&bh&rata,  other  MSS.  read  Bh&ratadharm&A4ryas  ;  while
in  the  S&mkh&yana  Gnhya-Siitras  IV,  10,  4,  Bharata,  Mshiibhflrata  and
DharmAA&ryas  are  left  out  altogether.


240  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

^pnunmatical,  nor  any  other  S&tras  woold  ever  have  been
intelligible,  or  even  possible.

Did  SnAdlift  homow  firom  XayiUf '

I  ma^  seem  very  sceptical  in  all  this,  but  I  cannot  even
now  bnng  myself  to  believe  that  the  author  of  Buddhism*
borrowed  from  the  S&'Dikhya  or  anv  other  definite  system
of  philosophy,  as  known  to  us  in  its  final  S&tra  form,  in
the  sense  which  we  ourselves  assign  to  borrowing.  Buddha,
it  seems  to  ni^e,  had  as  much  right  to  many  of  the  so-called
S&mkhya  or  Ved&nta  ideas  (  as  Eapila  or  anybody  else.
Who  would  say,  for  instance,  that  his  belief  in  Sams&ra
or  migration  of  souls  was  borrowed  from  B&dar&yana  or
Eapila  1  It  belonged  to  everybody  in  Ifidla  aa  much  as
a  belief  in  Earman  or  the  continuous  Working  of  deeda
In  the  great  dearth  of  historical  dates  it  may  no  doubt  be
excusable,  if  we  lav  hold  of  anything  to  save  us  frcm
drowning  while  exploring  the  chronology  of  Indian  litera^
ture.  Our  difficulties  are  very  great,  for  even  virhen  the
names  of  the  principal  systems  of  philosophy  and  the
names  of  their  reputed  authors  are  mentioned,  how  do  we
know  that  they  refer  to  anything  written  that  we  possess  1
Unless  we  meet  with  verbcctvm  quotations,  we  can  never
know  whether  a  certain  book  or  a  certain  author  is  in-
tended, or  simply  the  general  Paramparft,  that  is,  the  tradi-
tion, as  handea  down  m  various  Asramas,  two  things  Which
should  be  carefully  distinguished.

It  is  strange  to  see  how  often  our  hopes  have  been  roused
and  disappointed.  We  were  told  that  in  Ptof essor  Hardy's
most  valuable  edition^  of  the  Aftguttara  a  number  of
philosophical  sectc(  were  mentioned  which  existed  at  the
time  01  Buddha's  appearance,  such  as  (i)  A^vakas,  (a)
NigaTi^Aas,  (3)  Munofas&vakas,  (4)  ^atilakas,  (5)  Paribb&-
grakas,  (6)  Migemdikss,  (7)  TedaTufikas,  (8)  Aviruddhakas,
(9)  Gotamakas,  and  (fo)  Devadhammikas.  But  not  one  of
these  names  helps  us  to  a  real  chronological  date.  A^vakas
and  TSigsmthaA  are  the  names  of  &aina  ascetics^  the  latter
belonging  to  the  Digambara  sects,  which  could  hardly  have
been  established  long  before  Buddha's  appearance,  while

'  The  P&li  Texi  Society,  toL  iii,  p.  a^6.


BANAS   HAESHAiTAIilTA.  24 1

Mam{aA&yaka8,  i.e.  pup?Is  of  the  shaveling,  the  Huddha;
and  Gotamakas  would  seem  to  be  schools  which  owed  their
existence  to  Buddha  himself.    The  other  names  &cb^ilakas,
ascetics,  ParibMgrakas,  religious  mendicants,  Teda/idik&s,
i.e.  Samnj^'flsins  carT3ring  the  three  staves,  would  be  appli-
cable both  to  Brilhmanic  and  Buddhist  sects.     MUgam^ikas,
if  meant  for  M&gadhikas,  people  of  Magadha,  would  be
Buddhists  again.    Aviruddhakas,  a  name  not  clear  to  me,
may  have  been  intended  for  ascetics  no  longer  impeded  by
any  desires.,  while  Devadhammikas  are  clearly  worshippers
of  the  ancient  national  Devas,  and  therefore  Brd.hmanic/
and  possibly  Vedic.     We  get  no  historical  dates  from  the
names  of  any  of  these  schools,  if  schools  they  were.    All
i^ey  teach  is  that  at  tLe  time  Brd^hmanic  and  Buddhist
sects  were  existing  side  by  side  in  large  numbers,  but  by
no  means,  as  is  commonly  supposed,  m  constant  conflict
with  each  other  *. '  Of  the  six  recognised  systems  of  philo-
sophy, of  their  eponymous  heroes  or  their  written  works,
we  do  not  hear  a  single  word.

Not  even  in  later  works,  which  have  been  referred  to  the
sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth  centuries  A.D.,  do  we  meet  witii
actuai  quotations  from  our  SCltras  of  the  six  Dar^anaa
B&na,  in  his  Life  of  King  Harsha,  knows  indeed  of  Aupani-
shadaB,  K&pilas,  Kiknkdas;  and  if  the  E^pilas  are  the
followers  of  the  Sawkhya,  KA.7idddS  the  followers  of  the
Vaij^eshika  school,  the  Aupanishadas  can  hardly  be  meant
for  anybody  but  the  Vedkntins.  Variha-Mihira  also,  in
the  sixth  century  A.D.,  mentions  Kapila  and  Ka^iabhu^
(Yaiseshika),  but  even  this  does  not  help  us  to  the  dat.es  of
any  Sfttfas  composed  by  them.

The  Chinese  translator  of  the  K&iik&s,  likewise  in  the
sixth  century,  informs  us  that  these  E&rik&s  contain  the
words  of  Kapila  or  of  Pa/7A;a8ikba,  the  pupil  of  Asuri,  who
was  the  pupil  of  Kapila.  We  are  told  even  that  there  were
originally  60,000  Gd.th&s,  and  all  that  lAvara-Kin'shTia  did

r

^  Cf.  Rliya  Davids,  J.  R  A.  S.,  Jan.,  1898,  p.  197.

16  *


542  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

was  to  select  seventy  of  them  for  his  seventy  or  seventy-
two  BL&rikaa

That  Madhava  (1350  A.D.),  while  mentioning  the  Sfttras
of  the  other  svctems,  should  not  have  mentioned  those  of
the  Samkhya,  is  no  doubt,  as  I  pointed  out  before,  a  strong
ari^anient  in  support  of  their  non-existence  in  his  time.
But  it  is  no  proof,  as  little  as  we  may  conclude  from  the
fact  that  Hiouen-thsang  translated  the  Yaiseshika-nikll^^a-
dasapadartha-sastra  by  (^/l^aibandra,  and  not  the  Vawe-
shika-Svitras  by  EaTi&da,  that  therefore  these  Stltras  did  not
exist  in  his  time.  We  cannot  be  too  careful  in  such  matters,
for  the  unreserved  acceptance  of  a  purely  conjectural  date
is  very*  apt  to  interfere  with  the  discovery  of  a  real  date.
Hiouen-thsang  likewise  mentions  a  number  of  Nyllya  works,
but  not  Gotaraa's  Nyaya-Sfitras,  Does  that  prove  that
Gat&ma  s  SCitras  were  imknown  in  the  seventh  century  1
It  niay  or  may  not.  He  relates  that  Gunamati  defeated
a  famous  S&mkhya  philosopher  of  the  name  of  M&dhava,
but  again  he  tells  us  no  more.  His  own  special  study,  as
is  well  known,  was  the  Yoga-philosophy.  And  here  again,
though  ha  speaks  of  a  number  of  Yoga  works,  he  says  not
a  word  of  the  most  important  of  them  all,  the  SCltras  of
Pata%ali  ^  Yet  I  doubt  whether  we  may  conclude  from
this  that  these  Siitras  did  not  exist  at  his  time.

If  then  I  venture  to  call  the  Tattva-sam&sa  the  oldest
record  that  has  reached  us  of  the  S&mkhya-philosophy,
and  if  I  prefer  to  follow  them  in  the  account  I  give  of  that
philosophy,  I  am  quite  aware  that  many  scholars  will  object,
and  will  prefer  the  description  of  the  Samkhya  as  ^ven  in
the  Karikas  and  in  the  Sfttras.  Both  of  them,  particularly
the  Karikas,  give  us  certainly  better  arranged  accounts  of
tliat  philosophy,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  excellent  editions
and  tninrJations  which  we  owe  to  Professor  Garbe,  isind
1  may  now  add  to  Satish  Chandra  Banerji,  1898.  If,  as
I  believe,  the  Tattva-samlUsa-SiHtras  are  older  than  our
Sa7Hkhya-Sutras,  their  account  of  the  S&,7)ikhya-philosophy

*  M.  M.,  India,  p.  362.


THE   TATTVA-SAMASA.  2^^

would  always  possess  its  peculiar  interest  from  a  historical
point  of  view;  while  even  if  their  priority  with  regard  to
the  E&riklLs  and  Sfttros  be  doubted,  they  would  always
retain  their  value  as  showing  us  in  how  great  a  variety
the  systems  of  philosophy  really  existed  in  so  large  a  country
as  India.

These  Sam&sa-S&tras,  it  is  true/ are  hardly  more  than
a  table  of  contents,  a  mere  SUmkhyam  or  Pari-sariikhy^,
but  that  would  only  show  once  more  that  they  presuppose
the  existence  of  a  commentiiry  from  the  very  first.  What
.we  possess  in  the  shape  of  commentaries  may  not  be  very
old,  for  commentaries  may  come  and -go  in  different  schools^
while  the  S&tras  which  they  intend  to  explain,  would  re-
main unchancred,  engraved  on  the  memory  of  teachers  and
pupUs.  How^enaSs  that  philosophicS  Paraxnpara  was
we  can  see  from  the  pregnant  fact  that  the  Akhy&yik&s  or
stories,  though  left  out  in  the  Kd.rik&s,  must  surely  have
exisfed  both  before  and  after  the  time  of  lavara-KWshrm,
for  though  absent  in  the  Tattva-sams^  and  in  the  K&rik&s,
they  reappear  in  our  S4mkhya-S\itras.  Where  were  they
during  the  interval  if  not  in  Siitras  or  Kdrik&s,  now  lost
to  us?

The  commentary  on  the  Tattva-samd^sa^  the  publication
of  which  we  owe  to  Ballantyne,  begins  with  an  introiiuction
which  sounds,  no  doubt,  like  a  late  tradition,  but  reminds
us  in  some  respe«its  of  the  dialogue  at  the  beginning  of  the
Chinese  translation  of  the  commentary  on  the  S&7>ikhya-
kJLrik&s.  But  though  it  may  sound  like  a  late  tradition,
it  would  be  very  difficult  to  prove  that  it  was  so.  Chron-
ology is  not  a  matter  of  taste  that  can  be  settled  by  2oere
impressions.

A  certain  Brilhman,  we  are  told,  overcome  by  the  three
kinds  of  pain,  took  refuge  with  the  great  Ri^hi  Kapila,  the
teacher  (not  necessarily  the  originator)  of  the  Samkhya  \
and  having  declared  his  familj'',  his  name,  and  his  clan  in
order  to  become  his  pupil,  he  said  :  *  Reverend  Sir,  W^hat  is
here  on  earth  the  highest  (the  tiUninwTH  bonur)i)'i  What
is  ti-uth  ?    What  must  I  do  to  be  saved '? '

'  lu  the  Bhftgavatu-purdna  I,  3,  11^  Kapila  is  said  to  liavo  revived  tho
S&mkliya  C^mkbya-S&ra,  ed.  Hall,  p.  7,  noto).

B  2


744  INDIAN   PHTL0S0P9T.

Kapila  said, '  I  shall  tell  thee/    Then  follow  the  topics
which  are  twenty-five  in  number  :~

Ust  of  Vw«»tF*ftV6  TftttVMI.

r.  The    eight  Prakritis   (primary  and    productivev
elements^,  \

1.  The  Prakriiti  as  Avyakta  (the  non-differenUated

or  undeveloped  principle) ;

2.  The  Buddhi  (mtellect),  of  eight  kinds ;

3.  The  Ahamk&ra  (the  subject),  of  thi^de  kinds

(Vaik&rika,  Tai^asa,  Bhat&di);
^    4~8.  The  five  Tanm&tras  (essences)  of  sound,  touch,  y^
colour,  savour,  and  odour.  ^

II.  The  sixteen  Vik&ras  (modifications),
9-13.  The  five  Buddhtndriyas  (perceptive  organs) ;
14-18.  The  five  Earmendriyas  (active  organs);

j  19.  Manas  (central  organ  or  mind) ;

(  ao-24.  The  Mah&bhiitas  (materiid  elements);  ,

III.  25.  The  Purusha  (Spirit  or  Self).  '


I


ft


IV.  The  Traigunya  (triad  of  forces).

V.  The  Sa/iiara  ^volution).

VI.  The  Pratisa^i/cara  (dissolution).


VII.  The  Adhyjltma

VIII.  The  Adhibhtita  \

IX.  The  Adhidaivata


referring  to  the  thirteen  instru-
ments, 1.  e.  to  Buddhi,  Ahp>mkAra,
Manas,  and  the  ten  Indriyas.

X.  The  five  Abhibuddhis  (apprehensions),  five  acts  of
Buddhi  or  the  Indriyas.

XI.  The  five  Earmayonis  (sources  of  activity).

XII.  The  five  V&yus,  winds  or  vital  spirits.

XIII.  The  five  Earmatmans,  kinds  of  Ahamkdx&

XIV.  Avidyfi,  (Nescience),  fivefold,  with  sixty-two  sub-
divisions.

XV.  A^akti  (weakness),  twenty-eightfold  (nine  Atushtis
and  eight  Asiddhis).

XVI.  Tush^i  (contentment),  ninefold.

XVII.  Sidelhi  (perfection),  eightfold,

XVIII.  Miilikarthas  (cardinal  facts),  eight.

XIX.  Anugrahasarga  (benevolent  creation).


THB   AVYAKTA.  245

XX.  Bhiitasarga  (creation  of  mateiial  elements),  fourteen.

XXI.  Bandha  (bondage),  threefold.

XXII.  Moksha  (freedom),  threefold.

XXIII.  Pram&na  (authorities),  threefold.
XXIY.  DuAkha  (pain),  threefold.

I  have  given  these  titles  or  headings  in  Sanskrit,  and
shall  often  have  to  'ise  these  Sanskrit  terms,  because  their
English  equivalents,  even  when  they  can  be  found,  are  too
often  unintelligible  or  misleading  without  a  commentary.
This  commentanr  which  follows  immediately  on  the  Siitra,
is  meant  to  elucidate  their  meaning,  and  it  does  so  on  the
whole  satisfactorily,  but  the  English  word  seems  never  to
square  the  Sanskrit  terms  quite  accurately.

The  commentator  begins  by  asking,  *  Now  what  are  the
eight  Prakritis  ? '  and  he  answers,  again  in  technical  terms
which  will  have  to  be  explained:  I.  'i.  The  Avyakta
(chaos),  a.  Buddhi  (light  or  perception),  3.  Ahamk&ra
(subjectivity),  and  4-8,  the  five  Tanm&tras  (transcendental
elements),*

He  then  continues:  1.  *Here  then  the  Avyakta,  neuter
(the  undeveloped),  is  explained.  As  in  the  world  various
objects  such  as  water-jars,  cloth,  vases,  beds,  &c.,  are  mani-
fest, not  so  is  the  Avyakta  manifest.  It  is  -not  apprehended
by  the  senses,  such  as  the  ear,  &c.  And  why  }  Because  it
has  neither  beginning,  middle,  nor  end,  nor  has  it  any  parts.
It  18  inaudible,  intangible,  invisible,  indestructible,  eiemal,
without  savour  and  odour.  The  learned  declare  it  to  be
without  beginning  and  middle,  to  be  beyond  what  is  great  \
unchanging,  pre-eminent.  And  again,  this  Avy.^  kta  is
subtle,  Mrithout  attributes,  without  beginning  or  end,  pro-
ducing (Prasiita),  but  alone  of  all  the  eight  Prakritis  un-
pioduced  (Aprasuta),  without  parts,  one  o'lly,  but  common
to  ail  And  these  are  its  synoLyms,  that  is  to  sny,  words
applicable  to  the  Avyakta,  under  certain  circumstances .

^Mahtt  in  the  sense  of  mind,  and  Pradhana  in  the  sense  of  nature,
&etm  hardly  to  be  approprisi^  here.


<^


246  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

Fradhana  (principal),  Brahman^,  Para  (abode),  Dhruva
(unchanging),  Pra^h&naka  (chief),  Akshara  (indestructible),
Kshetra  (field,  object),  Tamas  (darkness),  PrasOita  (produc-
tive)/

Buddhl.

2.  'And  what  is  called  Buddhi  (intellect)  1  Buddhi  is
Adhyavasaya  (ascertainment).  It  is  that  through  which
there  is  in  regard  to  a  cow,  &c,  the  conviction  (Pratipatti),
"This  is  so  and  so,  not  otherwise,  this  is  a  cow,  not  a  horse;
this  is  a  post,  not  a  man."  Such  is  Buddhi,  the  most  won-
derful phase  of  Prakr/ti.'

Buddhi  is  generally  taken  here  in  its  subjective  or  psycho-
logical sense,  but  whatever  native  and  European  authorities
may  have  to  say,  it  is  impossible  that  this  should  have  been
its  original  meaning  in  the  mind  of  Kapila.  If  Buddhi
jmeant  only  determination  (Adhyavasaya),  even  in  its  widest
sense,  it  w^ould  clearly  presuppose  the  later  phases,  not  only
Ahar?^ikara,  Manas,  Indriyas,  as  subjective,  but  likewise
something  that  is  knowable  and  determinable,  such  as
Maliabhiitas,  or  at  least  Tanmatras.  Though  this  psycho-
logical acceptation  is  the  common  acceptation  of  Buddhi
among  native  writers  on  SS.mkhya,  yet  sense  is  more
important  than  commentaries.  The  Bu(ldhi  or  the  Mahat
must  here  be  a  phase  in  fehe  cosmic  growth  of  the  universe,
like  Prakriti  in  the  beginning,  and  the  senses  and  the
oiher  organs  of  the  soul;  and  however  violent  our  pro-
ceeding may  seem,  we  can  haraly  help  taking  this  Great
Principle,  the  Mahat,  in  a  cosmic  sonse.  Now  the  first
step  after  Avyakta,  the  undeveloped,  dull,  find  as  yet
senseless  Prakriti,  oan  only  be  Prakriti  as  lighted  up,  as
rendered  capable  of  perception,  and  no  longer  as  dull
matter.  If  taken  in  a  psychological  sense,  it  supplies,  no
doubt,  in  a  later  stage,  the  possibility  of  individual  per-
ception also,  or  of  the  determination  of  this  and  that.     But

*  Brahman  ^Hoems  onfc  of  place  here,  and  to  bo  eynonymous  with
Pui'u^ha  or  Atir\:tn  rather  than  with  the  Avya^ta.  It  is  given  as
a  i{yiii;oy:nVof  I*uru6ha  further  on,  but  strictly  speaking  Vrnkriti  also
woii|<U  tri;m|a  Vcdantic  point  of  Yiew,faU  to  Brahman  as  being  what  U.
calied  the  smWantial  causae  of  Che  world,  i«ut  of  an  immaterial  world,  a&
it  woul<}s«eM<'.


BTJDDHI.  247

originallv  it  must  have  been  meant  as  Prakriti  illuminated
and  intellectualised,  and  rendered  capable  of  becoming  at
a  later  time  the  germ  of  Ahamkd;ra  (distinction  of  subject
and  object),  Manas,  mind,  and  Indriyas,  apprehensive  senses.
Only  after  PrakWti  has  become  lightea  up  or  perceptive,
only  after  mere  material  contact  has  become  consciousness,
can  we  imagine  the  distinction,  whether  general  or  indi-
vidual, between  subject  and  object  (Ahamkdra),  and  their
new  relation  as  perceiver  and  perceived,  as  *  I '  on  one  side
and  '  this '  and  '  that '  on  the  other.

This  may  seem  a  very  bold  interpretation,  and  a  complete
forsaking  of  native  guidance,  but  unless  a  more  reasonable
and  inteUigible  account  can  be  given  of  Buddhi,  there  seems
no  escape  from  it.

What  native  interpreters  have  made  of  Buddhi  may
be  seer  in  all  their  commentaries,  for  instance,  Vft&aspati-
Miara's  commentary  on  K&rikk  23 :  '  Every  man  uses  firSt
his  external  senses,  then  he  considers  (with  the  Manas),
then  he  refers  the  various  objects  to  his  Ego  (Ahamk&ra),
and  lastly  he  decides  with  his  Buddhi  what  to  do/  This
may  be  quite  right  in  a  later  phase  of  the  development  of
Praknti,  it  cannot  possibly  be  right  as  representing  the
first  evolution  of  Prak?'iti  from  its  chaotic  state  towards
light  and  the  possibility  of  perception.  It  could  not  be  the
antecedent  of  Ahamkdra,  Manas,  and  even  the  Tanm&tras,
if  it  were  no  more  than  the  act  of  fixing  this  or  that  in
thought.  I  am  glad  to  find  that  Mr.  S.  C.  Banerji  on  p.  146
of  hiy  work  arrives  at  much  the  same  conclusion.

There  are  eight  manifestations  of  this  Buddhi  (intellect),
(i)  Dharma,  virtue,  (2)  Owana,  knowledge,  (3)  Vair&gya,
dispassionateness,  (4)  Aisvarya,  superhuman  power.

As  each  of  these  requires  explanation,  he  explains  them  by
a  very  favourite  process,  namely,  by  contrasting  them  with
their  opposites,  and  saying  that  (i)  Dhanna,  virtue,  is  the
opposite  of  Adharma,  vice,  and  is  enjoined  by  ^Sniti  and
Smriti,  revelation  and  tradition.  It  is  not  opposed  to,  nay,
it  ib  in  harmony  with,  the  practice  of  the  best  people,  and
has  happiness  for  its  outward  mark.

(a)  GMna,  or  knowledge,  the  opposite  of  Agnkna,  or
ignorance,  is  explained  as  the  underst^tndiiig  of  the  twenty-


248  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHT.

five  subjects  (Tattvas),  the  states  of  thought  (Bh&va)>  and
the  elements  (Bhftta).

(3)  Vairsigya,  dispassionateness,  is  the  opposite  of  passion,
and  consists  in  not  being  dependent  on  or  influenced  by
exteiT,  al  objects,  such  as  sound,  &c.

(4)  Aisvarya,  superhuman  power,  is  the  opposite  of
powerlessness,  and  consists  of  the  eight  qualities  such  as
ATiiman,  extreme  minuteness,  Le.  being  able  to  assume  the
smallest  form  and  weight,  &c.  ^

These  four*  kinds  of  intellect  (Buddhi)  are  classed  as
S&ttvika.

Their  opposites  are  classed  as  T&masa,  dark  or  bad.

Through  virtue,  as  a  means,  there  takes  place  going  up
ward,  through  knowledge  there  arises  liberation,  through
dispassionateness  men  are  absorbed  in  Prakriti  (Praki*iti-
laya  ?),  through  superhuman  power  there  comes  unfettered
movement.

Thus  has  Buddhi  in  ita  eight  forms  been  described.

Synonyms  of  Buddhi  are,  Manas,  mind,  Mati,  thought,
Mahat,  the  great,  BrahmS,*^,  masc.,  Khy&ti,  discrimination,
Freigni,  wisdom,  ^ruti,  inspiration,  DhWti,  firmness,  Pra-

f»£lnasantati,  continuity  of  thought,  Smriti,  memory,  and
)hi,  meditation.
It  is  quite  clear  that  in  all  these  explanations  Buddhi  is
taken  as  intellect,  and  as  personal  intellect,  and  that  the
idea  of  a  cosmic  stage  of  mtellectucdity  has  been  entirely
forgotten.  Thus  oe^  can  we  account  for  the  statement
that  this  Buddhi,  if  dominated  by  Sattva  (Gnna,  of  purity),
is  said  to  assume  the  form  (Riipa)  of  virtue,  knowledge,
dispassionateness,  and  superhuman  powera,  while,  if  domi-
nated by  Tamas  (Guna  of  darkness),  it  takes  the  four
opposite  forms  of  vice,  &c.  How  could  this  be  possible
beforfe  the  distinction  between  subject  and  object  has  been
realised  by  Ahamk&ra,  and  before  Buddhi  has  assumed

^  These  AisvAryas  ~are  believed  in  by  SSmkhya  and  Yoga,  and  are
acquired  by  Yogins  by  means  ef  long  and  painful  practicen.

*  This  also  seems  oufc  of  place  here,  unless  the  S&mkhyas  give  their
own  meaning  both  to  Brahman  and  firahma.  In  later  times  Buddhi,
taken  collectively,  becomes  the  Up&dhl  or  mental  limitation  of  Brahm&
or  Hiranyagarbha.


axulmkaaa,  249

fche  character  of  sense-perception  (BuddhindriyaniJI  We
have,  in  fact,  to  read  the  S&mkhya-philosophy  in  two
texts,  one,  as.  it  were,  in  the  old  uncial  writing  that  shows
forth  here  and  there,  giving  the  cosmic  process,  the  other
in  the  minuscule  letters  of  a  much  later  age,  interpreted  in
a  psychological  or  epistemological  sense.

3.  Now,  he  asks,  What  is  called  Ahamkara?  And  he
answers,  *It  is  Abhim^a,  assumption  or  misconception,
and  this  consists  in  the  belief  that  I  am  in  the  sound,
i.  e.  I  hear,  I  feel,  I  see,  I  taste,  and  I  smell,  I  am  lord  and
rich,  I  am  Iflvara,  I  enjoy,  I  am  devoted  to  virtue,  by  me  a
man  was  slain,  I  shall  be  slain  by  powerful  enemies,  &c/  ,

iSa9ukara  in  his  commentary  on  the  VedlLnta-SAtras  gives,
though  from  a  different  point  of  view,  some  more  instances,
as  when  a  man,  because  his  wife  and  children  are  unhappy,
imagines  that  he  is  unhappy,  or  that  he  is  stout,  thin,  or
fair,  that  he  stands,  walks,  or  jumps,  that  he  is  dumb,
impotent,  deaf,  blind,  that  he  has  desires,  doubts,  or  fears,
whereas  all  these  things  do  not  pertain  to  him  at  all,  but '
to  Prakriti  only.

*  Synonyms  of  Ahamk^a,  or  rather  modifications  of  it,
arer  Yaik&rika,  modifying,  Taif/asa,  luminous,  Bhtit&di,  the
first  of  elements,  S&numdjia,  dependent  on  inference,
NiranumlLna,  not  dependent  on  inference.'

Here  we  must  distinguish  again  between  Ahamk^a,  as
a  cosmic  power,  and  Ahamkd,ra  as  a  condition  presupposed
in  any  mental  act  of  an  individual  thinker.  Aliamkdxa
was  so  familiar  in  the  sense  of  Egoism  that,  like  Buddhi,
it  was  taken  in  its  ordinary  rather  than  in  its  technical
Sd^mkhya  sense.  I  quite  admit  that  this  is  a  somewhat
bold  proceeding,  but  how  to  get  without  it  at  a  proper
understanding  of  the  ancient  Samkhya,  the  rival  of  the
VedSnta,  I  cannot  see.  We  must  remember  that  Ahamkara,
whatever  it  mav  mean  in  later  times,  is  in  the  Samkhya
something  developed  out  of  primordial  matter,  after  that
matter  has  passed  through  Buddhi.  Buddhi  cannot  really
act  without  a  distinction  of  the  universe  into  subject  and
object,  without  the  introduction  of  the  Ego  or  1,  which


250  IKDIAN  PHIL080PHT.

r'n  is  impossible  without  a  Non-Ego,  or  something
^  ctive.  After  that  only  do  we  watch  the  development
of  what  is  objective  in  generul  into  what  is  objectively  this
or  that  (the  Tanm&i»*as).  But  while  the  creation  of  what
is  subjective  and  objective  is  the  only  possible  meaning  of
the  cosmic  Ahamk^ra,  its  psychological  interpretation  is
far  more  easv.  Thus  we  ai*e  told  that  there  are  three  or
four  modifications  of  the  Ahamk&ra,  (i)  the  Vaik&rika,
dominated  by  the  Sattva-guria,  helps  to  do  good  works;
(a)  the  Tai^asa,  dominated  oy  the  Ba^asgUTia,  helps  to  do
evil  works ;  (3)  the  Bhtitd.di,  dominated  by  the  Tamas-guna,
helps  to  do  hidden  works ;  (4)  the  Sdnumd^na  Ahamk&ra  is
responsible  for  unintentional  good ;  (5)  the  Niranum&na,
for  unintentional  evil  works.  This  (Jivision,  though  rather
confused,  shows  at  all  events  that  the  Ahamk&ra  is  here
treated  as  simply  a  moral  agent,  dominated  by  the  Gun€»,
but  no  longer  as  a  cosmic  potentia.  These  five  modes  of
AhamkA>ra  are  spoken  of  as  ELarmatmans  also,  i.ef  the  very
essence  of  our  acts,  while  in  another  place  the  Tattva-
sam&sa  itself  explains  that  Ahamk&ra  should  be  taEen  as
an  act  of  Buddhi  directed  towards  the  perception  of  the
nature  of  what  is  Self  (subjective)  or  Not-Self  (objective).
Though  Ahamk&ra  means  only  the  production  of  Ego,  yet
the  production  of  Ego  involves  that  of  the  Non-Ego,  and
thus  divides  the  whole  world  into  what  is  subjective  and
objective.

4~8.  If  it  is  asked.  What  are  the  five  Tanmdrtras  (sub-
stances)? he  answers,  The  five  substances  or  essences  as
emanating  from  Aha772.k&ra,  the  esscncr  of  suund,  contact,
colour,  savour,  and  odour.

The  essences  of  sound  are  perceived  in  sounds  only.
Diiferences  of  sound,  such  as  acute,  grave,  circumflexed,
and  the  notes  of  the  gamut,  such  as  Sha^i^a,  C,  -Kishabha,
D,  GS,ndh^ra,  E,  Madhyama,  F,  PaiiJErama,  G,  Dhaivata,  A,
Nishada,  B,  are  perceived ;  but  there  is  no  difference  in  the
essence  of  sound.

The  essences  of  touch  are  perceived  in  touch  only.  Dif-
ferences of  touch,  such  as  soft,  hard,  rough,  slippery,  cold,


FIVB  BUBDHIND&ITAS.  25 1

and  hot,  are  perceived,  but  there  is  no  difference  in  the
essence  of  touch.

The  essences  of  colour  are  perceived  in  colour  only.
Differences  of  colour,  such  as  white,  red,  black,  green,  yel-
low, purple,  are  perceived,  but  there  is  no  difference  in  the
essence  of  colour.

The  essences  of  savour  are  perceived  in  savour  only.
Differences  of  savour,  such  as  pungent,  bitter,  astringent,
oorrosive,  sweet,  acid,  salt,  are  perceived,  but  there  is  no
difference  in  the  essence  of  savour.

The  essences  of  odour  are  perceived  in  odour  only.
Differences  of  odour,  such  as  sweet  and  offensive,  are  per-
ceived, but  there  is  no  difference  in  the  essence  of  odour.  «

Thus  have  the  essences  been  indicated ;  and  their  syn-
onyms, though  sometimes  very  inaccurate  ones,  are  said  to
he:  Ayi«esha,  not  differentiated,  and  therefore  not  percep-
tible, Mahabhiitas  (1),  the  great  elements ;  Prakr^tis,  natures,
Abhogya,  not  to  be  experienced,  Ann,  atomic,  Asanta,  not-
pleasuf able,  Aghora,  not-terrible,  AmikfAa,  not-stupid ;  the
last  three  being  regations  of  the  qualities  of  the  MahlL-
bhtltas,  according  to  the  three  Qunas  preponderating  in  each.
And  if  it  is  asked  why  these  eiffht  Prakritis  only,  from
Avyakta  to  the  Tanmatras,  are  called  Prakritis,  the  answer
ib  because  they  alone  Prakurvanti,  they  alone  bring  forth,
or  evolve.

Sixteen  TiktaM.

II.  If  it  be  asked  '  Which  are  the  sixteen  Vikslras  or
evolutions  1 '  the  answer  is,  '  the  eleven  sense  organs  (in-
cluding Manas),  and  the  five  elements.'

Vivo  Buddh&ndxlyav.

9-13.  '  Now  the  organs  are  set  forth ;  Che  ear,  the  skin,
the  eyes,  the  tongue,  and  the  nose,  constitute  the  five
Buddhindriyas,  or  perceptive  organs.

The  ear  perceives  as  its  object  sound,  the  skin  touch,  the
eye  colour,  the  tongue  savour,  the  nose  odour.'

Being  produced  from  the  TanmS,tras,  the  senses,  as  per-
ceiving, are  represented  as  being  of  the  same  nature  as  the
pbjecte  perceived,  a  view  of  considerable  antiquity.


2 $2  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY,

71v»  3C»nn«ftdrlym«.

14-18.  *The  five  Karmendriyas  or  organs  of  action,
voice,  handB,  feet,  the  organ  of  excretion,  and  the  organ  of
generation,  perform  each  its  own  work.  The  voice  utters
words,  the  hands  work,  the  feet  perform  movement,  the
organ  of  excretion  evacuation,  the  organ  of  generation
pleasure.'


19.  'Manas,  mind,  both  perceptive  and  active,  performs
its  acts  of  doubting  and  ascertaining.'

Central  organ  of  the  senses  or  kcivoi*  alaOrjrifpioif  might
be  the  nearest  approach  to  the  meaning  of  Manas;  but
mind  may  do,  if  we  only  remember  its  Samkhya  definition,
as  perceptive,  like  the  other  organs,  and  at  tha  same  time
active  like  the  Karmendriyas.

'Thus  have  the  eleven  organs  been  explained.  Their
synonyms  are  Kara7?a,  instruments,  Vaikarika,  changing,
Niyata,  special,  Padslni,  appliances*,  Avadhrit&ni,  kept
under  (?),  Ann,  atomic,  Aksha  ^  organ.*

ao-M*  'The  Mah&bhiltas,  or  gross  elements,  are  earth,
water,  light,  air,  and  ether/

Here  the  earth,  we  are  told,  helps  the  other  four,  by
being  their  support.  Water  helps  the  other  four  by  moist-
ening. Light  helps  the  other  four  by  ripening.  Air  helps
the  other  four  by  drying.  Ether  helps  the  other  four  by
giving  space.

*  Earth  is  possessed  of  five  qualities,  sound,  touch,  colour,
savour,  and  odour.  Water  is  possessed  of  four  qualities,
sound,  touch,  colour,  and  savour.  Light  is  possessed  of
three  qualities,  sound,  touch,  and  colour.  Air  is  possessed
of  two  qualities,  sound  and  touch.  Ether  has  one  quality,
sound.     Thus  are  the  five  MahS-bhAtaa  explained.

Their  synonyms .  are :  Bhiitas,  elements,  ^Bhiita-vifeeshas,
special  elements,  Vikaras,  modifications,  Ak?*iti8,  species,
Tanu,  skin  (or  body  ?),  Vigraha,  shapes,  ^'anta,  pleasurable,

*  Garbe  SAmkhya-Philosophie,  p.  257.
'  Or  Akshara,  imperishable  ?


PUBUSHA.  253

Ohora,  fearful,  MMha,,  stupid.     Thus  have  the  sixteen
Vik&ras  been  doseribed/


III.  25,  Now  it  is  asked,  'What  is  the  Purusha?'  and
the  answer  is,  *  Purusha  is  without  beginning,  it  is  subtle,
omnipresent,  perceptive,  without  queHities,  eternal,  seer,
experiencer,  not  an  agent,  knower  of  objects,  spotless,  not
producing.  Why  is  it  called  Purusha?  Because  of  its
ueing  old  (Pnrknki),  because  it  rests  in  the  body  (Puri
My^),  and  because  it  serves  as  Purohita  (Director).'
These  are,  of  course,  fanciful  et}nnologies ;  and  we  can
hardly  doubt  that  we  have,  in  the  name  of  Purusha,  a  recol-
lection of  the  Vedic  Purusha,  one  of  the  many  names  of  the
supreme  deity,  by  the  side  of  Yisvakarman,  Hiranyagarbha^
Fnu/&pati,  &;c.  Like  Brahman  when  conceived  as  Atman,
Purusha  also  was  probably  used  both  for  the  divine  and
for  the  human  side  of  the  same  power.  It  is  the  multi-
plicity only  of  the  Purusha  which  is  peculiar  to  the  S&m-
khya-philogophy.

'  Aiid  why  is  the  Purusha  without  beginning?  Because
there  is  no  beginning,  no  middle,  and  no  end  of  it.'  This
is  not  a  very  satisfactory  answer,  but  it  is  probably  meant
for  no  more  than  that  we  never  perceive  a  beginning,
middle,  or  end  of  it.  Why  is  it  subtle  ?  Because  it  is
without  parts  and  supersensuous.  Why  omnipresent  ?  Be-
cause, like  the  sky,  it  reaches  everything,  and  its  extent  is
endless.  Why  perceptive  ?  Because  it  perceives  (that  is,
for  a  time)  pleasure,  pain,  and  trouble.  Why  without
qualities  ?  Because  the  qualities  of  good,  indifferent,  and
bad  are  not  found  in  it.  Why  eternal  ?  Because  it  vfrj?
not  made,  and  cannot  be  made.  Why  seer  ?  Because
perceives  the  modifications  of  Prakriti.  Why  enjoyerf
Because  being  perceptive  it  perceives  (for  awhile)  pleasure
and  pain.  Why  not  an  agent  ?  Because  it  is  indifferent  and
without  the  qualities  (Gurtas).  Why  tho  Knov^er  of  body
or  of  objects  ?  Because  it  knows  the  qualities  of  objective
bodies.  Why  spotless  ?  Because  neither  good  nor  evil
acts  belong  to  the  Purusha.  Why  not  producin^J?  Be-
cause it  has  no  seed,  that  is,  it  can  produce  notliing.  Thus
has  the  Purusha  of  the  SS^^^tkhya  been  deacrib<?cl


254  INDIAN   PHIL080PHT.

The  synonyms  of  Purasha  are,  Atman,  Self,  Pom&n,  male,
PumgUTia^antogivaA,  a  male  living  creatine,  Eahetrajjrfo,
knower  of  objects  or  of  the  body,  Nara,  man,  S^avi,  poet.
Brahman,  Akshara,  indestructible,  Pr&Tia,  spirit,  YaJiKsJi  \
anybody,  Sa^,  He.

Thus  I^ve  the  twenty-five  substances  been  described,
viz.  the  eight  Prakritis,  the  sixteen  Vik&ras,  and  the
Purusha.  He  who  knows  these  twenty-five  substances,
whatever  stage  of  life  he  may  be  in,  and  whether,  he  wear
matted  hair,  d  topknot,  or  be  shaven,  he  is  liberated,  there
is  no  doubt.  This  verse  is  often  quoted  by  Sd>73ikhya  philo*
sophers.  Here,  it  seems,  the  first  part  of  the  Tattva*sam&aa
is  ended,  containing  a  list  of  the  twenty-five  Tattvas^  in  the
three  divisions  of  Prakritis,  YiksLras,  and  Purusha.

Panisha  (subject).

I.  PrakHti  (object),
▲vyakta  (ohaos),

I
a.  Mahat  or  Buddhi  (light  and  intelligence  aa  Samaahfi,  not  jet

I  indtvldiaaliaed).

3.  Ahamk&ra  (subjeotivation).

5  Tanm&traa  (S&ttvika)  10  Indriyaa,  organs  (RA^aaa)  +  x  Manas  (mind)
(subtle  elements).        (5  Buddhindriyas,  5  Karmendriyisa,  and  Manas}*

Tanm&tras.  Buddhtndriyaa.  Karmendriyas.

I.  Sound,  iS^abda.  i.  Srotra,  iiearing  z.  Speaking  in  tongue

in  ear.
9.  Touch,  Sparra.         a.  Tva^,  touch  in  a.  Grasping  in  handa.

skin.

3.  Colour,  Kdpa.  3.  iCakshus,  seeing  3.  Moving  in  feet

in  eye.   ,

4.  Savour,  Rasa.  4.  Griliva,     tasting  4.  Evacuating  in  P&yu.

in  tongue.

5.  Odour,  Gandha.        5.  Ghr&na,  smeU-  5.  Generating  in  Upaatha.

ing  in  nose.

5  Mahdbhiitas  (Tftmasa).

1.  Akfisa,  ether  (»abda).

2.  VAyU)  air  (sabda't-sparsa).

3.  Tcgas,  fire  («abda  +  sparAa  +  rftpa).

4.  Ap,  wfiter  (sabda  -f  sparsa  +  rQpa  +  rasa).

5.  Frtihivi,  earth  (mbda  +  sparsa  +  r&pa  -r  rasa  4*  gandha).

*  As  yaA,  the  relative  pronoun  could  hardly  be  uned  as  a  name,
I  Hupponed  it  might  be  meant  for  tliti  indefinite  pronoun  yaAkaA,  but  this
is  doubtful.


THREE   GU^AS.  255

Xs  Fnraslia  mi  Aftttf

Now  follow  a  number  of  special  questions,  which  seemed
to  require  fulla:  treatment  The  first  is,  Is  the  Purusba  an
agent,  or  is  he  not  ?  If  Purusha  were  an  agent,  he  would
do  good  actions  only,  and  there  would  not  be  the  three
different  kinds  of  action.  The  three  kinds  of  action  are
(i)  Good  conduct,  called  virtue  (Dharma),  which  consists  in
kindness,  control  and  restraint  (of  the  organs),  freedom
from  hatred,  reflection,  displaying  of  supematur«d  powers.

(a)  But  passion,  anger,  greed,  faultr-finding,  violence,
^iiscontent,  rudeness,  shiTwn  by  change  of  countenance,
these  are  called  indifferent  conduct.

(3)  Madness,  intoxication,  lassitude,  nihilism,  devotion  to
womeU;  drowsiness,  sloth,  worthlessneit?s,  impurity,  these
are  called  bad  conduct.

We  see  here  once  more  that  the  three  Gu?<as  must  have
had  originally  a  much  wider  meaning  than  is  here  described.
They  are  here  taken  as  purely  moral  qualities,  whereas
originally  they  must  have  had  a  much  larger  cosmic  sense.
They  -fire  not  qualities  or  mere  attributes  at  all ;  they  are
on  the  contrary  ingredients  of  Prakr^ti  in  its  differentia-
tion of  good:  inidifferent,  bad ;  bright,  dim  and  dark ;  Ught,
mobile,  heavy.  We  see  here  the  same  narrowing  of  cos-
mieal  ideas  which  we  had  to  point  out  before  in  the  case  of
Buddhi  and  Ahamkara,  and  which,  it  seen)^  to  me,  would
render  the  original  conception  of  the  Sd^mknya-philosophy
quite  unmeanmg.  We  must  never  forget  that,  even  when
the  SsLmkhya  speaks  of  moral  qualities,  these  qualities
Ijelong  to  nature  as  seen  by  the  Funisha,  never  to  Purusba
apart  from  Prakrtti.

Whenever  this  triad  is  pereeived  in  the  world  it  is  clear
that  agency  belongs  to  the  Gurias,  and  it  follows  that
Purusha  is  not  the  agent.

Deceived  by  passion  and  darkness,  and  taking  a  wrong
view  of  these  Gunas  which  belong  to  Prakr^ti,  not  to  himself,
a  fool  imagines  that  he  himself  is  the  agent,  Jthough  in
reality  he  is  unable  by  himself  to  bend  even  a  straw.  Nay,
he  becomes  an  agent,  as  it  were,  foolish  and  intoxicated  by


256  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

vain  imagination  and  saying,  'All  this  was  made  by  me
and  belongs  to  me/

And  then  it  is  said  (in  the  Bhagavad-gitft  III,  217^ :  '  Acts
are  effected  by  the  ^qualities  (Guwas)  of  Prakriti  m  everj'^
way,  but  the  Self  (Atman),  deluded  by  the  conceit  of  the  I
(AhamkS.ra),  imagines  that  the  I  is  the  agent/

Ibid.  Xm,  31  :—

'This  imperishable  supreme  Self,  from  being  without
beginning  and  devoid  of  qualities,  neither  acts  nor  suffers,
even  while  staying  in  the  body/

And  XIII,  29:—

'  He  sees  (aright)  who  looks  upon  actions  as  in  all  re-
spects performed  by  Prakriti  alone,  and  upon  the  Self  as
never  an  agent.'

Xs  Fnmslui  oim  or  auuqrt

Now  comes  the  important  question.  Is  that  Purusha  one
or  many  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  divides  the  Skm-
khya  from  the  VedS,nta-philosophy.  The  SUmkhva  answer
is  that  the  Purusha  is  clearly  many,  because  of  the  variety
in  the  acts  of  pleasure,  pain,  trouble,  confusion  and  purify-
ing (of  race),  health,  birth  and  death :  also  on  account  of
the  stages  in  life  (Asrama)  and  the  difference  of  coste
(Variia).  If  there  were  but  one  Purusha,  as  the  Ved&ntins
hold,  then  if  one  were  happy,  all  would  be  happy ;  if*  one
wore  unhappy,  all  would  be  unhappy,  and  so  on  m  the  case
of  people  affected  by  trouble,  confusion  of  race,  purity  of
race,  health,  birth  and  death.  Hence  there  is  not  one
Purusha,  but  many,  on  account  of  the  manifoldness  ir  li-
eated  by  form,  birth,  abode,  fortune,  society  or  loneliness.
Thus  KapHn,  Jusuu,  Pawiasikha  and  Pataw^ali,  and  all
other  Sarnkfju  tfeachers  describe  Purasha  as  many.

Ved^Bta  Bajiiiffs.

But  teachers  who  follow  the  Vedtota,  such  as  Harihara,
Hira7iyi»garfjha,  VyA,sa  and  others,  describe  Purusha  as  one.
And  why  so  ?     Eecanse  (as  the  Vedlnta  says),

r .  '  Purusha  is  all  this,  what  has  been  and  what  is  to  be,
h«  i^  lord  of  that  immortality  which  yprings  up  by  (sacri-


VEDANTA   SAYINGB.:  257

ficial)  food,  that  is,  he  is  beyond  the  immortality  of  the
ordinary  immortal  gods  \

2.  That  is  ^gni,  that  is  Y&yu,  that  is  SQirya,  that  is
fandramas,  that  is  pure,  that  is  Brahman,  that  is  ifvater
and  Prao&pati  ^.

3.  I'hat  is  true,  that  is  immortal,  it  is  liberation,  it  is
the  highest  point,  it  is  indestructible,  it  is  the  glory  of  the
sun;

4.  Higher  than  which  there  is  nothing  else,  nothing
smaller,  and  nothing  greater,  the  One  stands  like  a  tree
planted  in  the  sky ;  by  him  and  by  the  Purusha,  all  .thts
is  filled  *.

5.  Having  hands  and  feet  everywhere,  having  mouth,
head  and  ey^s  everywhere,  hearing  everywhere  in  this
world,  it  stands  covering  everything;

6.  Shining*  through  the  qualities  (Guna)  of  all  the
senses,  and  yet  free  from  all  the  senses,  the  master  of  all,
the  Lord,  the  great  refuge  of  all ;

7.  He  is  all  substances  everywhere,  the  Self  of  all,  the
source  of  all ;  that  in  which  everything  is  absorbed,  that
the  sages  know  as  Brahman.

8.  For  *  there  is  but  one  Self  of  beings,  settled  in  every-
body, it  is  seen  as  one  and  as  many,  like  the  moon  in  the
water.

9.  For'  he  alone,  the  great  Self,  dwells  in  all  beings,
whether  moving  or  motionless,  he  by  whom  all  this  was
spread  out.

10.  This  Self  of  the  world  is  one — ^by  whom  was  it  made
nianifold  ?  Some  speak  of  the  Self  as  several,  because  of
the  existence  of  knowledge,  &c.  (because  knowledge  is
different  in  different  people).

11.  Wise^  people  see  the  same  (Atman)  in  the  Brahman,

^  llieae  Tersee  are  mdi^n^  to  represent  the  views  of  the  Vedftnta,  and
they  are  mostly  taken  from  the  Upanishads.  The  first  from  Svat.  Up.
Ill,  15,  oocurs  also  Taitt.  Ar.  Ill,  la,  i,  and  in  the  Rig-veda  X,  90,  a,
where  we  should  read,  tit  ilnnen&dhirishatit  see  Denssen,  Geschichto,

I,  p.  153.

*  Ifah&n&r.  Up.  I,  7  ;  ef.  Y&g.  Saiith.  3a,  x.
'  Sret  Up.  Ill,  9 ;  MahAnAr.  Up.  X,  ao.

*  Sret.  Up.  Ill,  17  ;  of.  Bhag.  GitA  XIII   14.

»  Brahmabindn  Up.  la.  •  Cf.  Bhng.  OltA  V,  xB,

17  S


258  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

in  worms  and  insects,  in  the  outcast,  in  the  dog  and  the
elephant,  in  beasts,  cows,  gadflies,  and  gnats.

12,  1^.  As  one  and  the  same  string  passed  through  gold,
and  pearls,  jewels,  corals,  porcelain,  and  silver,  thus  is  one
and  the  same  Self  to  be  known  as  dwelling  everywhere  in
cows,  imen,  and  in  elephants,  deer,*  &c.

We'  see  in  these  extracts  a  mixture  of  VedSnta  and
SalTTikhya  terms  and  ideas;  and  in  verse  10  the  two  %news
of  Brahman  being  one,  and  the  Purusha  being  many,  are
given  in  the  same  breath*

Sarly  XelAtioa  betwoon  Vodft&ta  and  BIkmkliya.

The  relation  between  Ssi-mkhya  ajjd  Vedanta  during  the
XJpanishad-period  is  by  no  means  clear.  Most  scholars
seem  to  regard  it  as  a  kin<i  of  syncretism,  but  it  may  also
represent  to  us  a  period  of  philosophic  thought  when  these
two  views  of  the  world  were  not  yet  finally  differentiated,
and  were  not  felt  to  be  altogether  incompatible.  Though
there  is  in  the  Upanishads  which  we  possess  a  decided  pre-
ponderance of  a  Vedintic  interpretation  of  the  wcrld,  the
SliTnkhya  philosophers  are  not  altogether  wrong  when  they
maintain  that  their  view  also  can  be  supported  by  Vedic
authority.  All  these  views  were  at  first  no  more  than
guesses  at  truth,  gropings  in  the  dark  ;  but  the  idea  that  if
the  one  was  right  the  other  must  be  wrong,  belongs  de-
cidedly to  a  later  period,  to  that  of  systematised  and  con-
troversial philosophy.  There  are  certain  technical  terms,
such  as  Purusha,  Buddhi,  Gunas,  &c.,  which  are  looked
upon  as  the  peculiar  property  of  the  Samkhya,  and  others,
such  as  Atman,  Brahman,  AvidyA,  May^,  &c.,  which  remind
us  at  once  of  the  Vedanta-philosophy ;  but  even  these
terms  are  used  far  more  freely  in  the  Br&hmaiias  and
Upanishads  than  in  the  Darsanas,  nor  are  they  always  used
in  the  same  sense  or  in  the  same  order  by  earlier  and  later
authorities.

Thus  we  read  in  the  KMhokn,  Up.  Ill,  10,  11 : —

'Beyond  the  senses  are  the  objects  (Artha),  beyond  the

objects  is  the  mind  (Manas),  beyond  ^the  mind  is  intellect

(Buddhi),  the  Great  Self   (Mah&n   Atmjl)  is  beyond  the

intellect.      Beyond  the  Great  there  is   the  Undeveloped


EELATION   BETWEEN   VEDANTA  AND   SAifKHYA.      259

(Avyakta),  beyond  the  undeveloped  there  is  the  Purusha.
Beyond  the  Purosha  there  is  nothing,  that  is  the  goal,  the
highest  point.'

In  the  same  Upanishad,  VI,  7,  8,  we  read : —

*  Beyond  .the  senses  is  the  mind,  beyond  the  mind  the
highest  being  (Sattvam  Uttamam),  higher  than  that  being
is  the  great  Self  (Mahgin  Atmsl),  beyond  this  great  (Self)  is
the  highest,  the  Undeveloped.

Beyond  the  Undeveloped  is  the  Purusha,  the  all-pervading
and  imperceptible.  Every  creature  that  knows  him  is
liberatea,  and  obtains  immortality.*

The  successive  development,  as  here  described,  is  not  in
strict  accordance  with  the  systematic  Samkhya,  but  still
less  does  it  represent  to  us  Ved^lntic  ideas.  Even  the  two
accounts,  as  given  in  the  same  Upanishad,  vary  slightly,
showing  to  us  how  little  of  technical  accuracy  there  was  as
yet  during  the  Upanishad-period.     We  get—

m,  10,  II.  VI,  7,  8.

I.  Indriyas.  Indriyas.

a.  Arthas.

3*  Manas.  Manas.

4.  Buddhi.^  Sattvam  Uttamam.

5.  Mahdn  Atm&.  Mahd^n  AtmS..

6.  Avyakta,  Avyakta.

7.  Purusha.  Purusha,

The  omission  of  the  Arthas  as  objects  would  not  signify,
because,  as  Indriydrthas,  they  are  implied  by  the  Indriyas
or  senses.  But  why  should  Buddhi,  generally  the  first
emanation  of  Prak?*iti  in  its  undeveloped  (Avyakta)  state,
be  replaced  by  Sattvam  Uttamam,  the  Highest  Being?
The  word  may  be  meant  for  Buddhi,  for  Buddhi  is  often
called  Mahat,  the  Qreat,  but  why  it  should  be  called  Great
is  difficult  to  say.  It  is  certainly  not  an  equivalent  of  the
Phenician  Mot,  as  P^of essor  Wilson  conjectured  many  ^ears
ago  ^.  MahsLn  Atmli,  looks  like  a  Ved^tic  term,  but  even
then  it  -would  only  occupy  the  place  Of  (?ivatm&,  the  indi-

^  See  S&mkfaya-Sutras  I,  61,  71 ;  the  Ek&dasakam  is  Sattvikam,  cf.  II,
18,  that  is  the  five  Buddhlndriyafl,  the  iivo  Karmendriyaa,  and  the
Manas ;  seo  Garbe,  Sa)nkhya-prayaA;ana-bh&shya,  p.  188.

S  2


260  INDIAN    PHILOSOPHY.

vidualised  Self»  and  how  could  this  be  said  to  emanate  from
the  Avyaktal

Another  passage  which  reminds  us  of  Sa^nkhya  ratlier
than  of  Vedltnta-philosophy  occurs  in  the  Maitray.  Up.
II,  5,  where  we  read :  '  He  who  has  the  name  of  Purusha,
and  is  very  small,  intangible,  invisible,  dwells  of  his  own
will  ^  here  in  part  ^  as  a  man  who  is  fast  asleep  awakes  of
his  own  will.  And  this  part,  which  is  entirely  intelligent.
present  in  every  single  man,  knowing  the  body,  attested  by
conceiving  (Manas),  willing  (Buddhi),  and  belief  in  subject
and  object  (Ahamkara)  is  Pragiapati,  called  Visva.  By  him,
the  intelligent,  is  the  body  made  intelligent,  and  he  is  the
driver  thereof.'

This  passage  does  not  contain  much  of  Samkhya  thought,
yet  the  words  Purusha  and  possibly  Buddhipiirvam  seem
to  allude  to  Kapila's  ideas  rather  than  to  those  of  Badarli-
yana.  Other  words  also,  such  as  Samkalpa,  Adhyavasllya
and  Abhim^na,  in  the  sense  of  Ahamkara,  point  to  the
same  source.  The  whole  passage,  however,  is  obscure,  nor
does  the  commentator  help  us  much,  unless  he  is  nght  in
recognising  here  the  germs  of  the  latfjr  VedS^ntic  ideas  of
a  Prag'^ati,  called  Visva  or  VaisvS.nara  (Vedanta-s&ra,
§  138),  Taigasa,  and  Vrkgnau

One  more  passage  of  the  MaitrS-y.  Upanishad,  III,  2,
may  here  be  mentioned,  as  reminding  us  of  'SS-wikhya
doctrines.  There  we  read :  '  There  is  indeed  that  other
different  one,  called  the  elemental  Self  (BhiltS^tmsl)  who,
overcome  by  the  bright  and  dark  fruits  of  action,  enters  on
a  good  or  evil  birth,  so  that  his  course  is  upward  or  down-
ward, and  that  overpowered  by  the  pairs  (the  opposites)  he
roams  about.  And  this  is  the  explanation.  The  five
TanmsLtras  (of  s^und,  touch,  light,  taste,  and  smell)  are
called  Bh&ta  (elements),  and  the  fiye  Mah&bhiitas  (gross
elements)  also  are  called  Bhiita.  Then  the  aggregate  of  all
these  is  called  Sarira,  body,  and  he  who  dwells  in  that  body-
is  called  BhM^tman  (the  elementary  Atman).    True,  his

^  The  AnubMti-prak&sa  reads  Buddhipfirvam ;  Beussen  translates
Abuddhipurvam.

*  As  to  the  idea  of  parts  (Awwa),  sec  Vediinta-Sfltras  II,  3»  43,  and
Thibaut's  remarks  in  his  Introduction,  p.  xcvii.


BELATION   BETWEEN   VEDANTA   AND   SAJTKHYA.       26 1

immortal  Atman  (Self)  remains  untainted,  like  a  drop  of
water  on  a  lotus-leaf ;  but  he,  the  Bhiitatman,  is  in  the
power  of  the  Gu?ias  of  Prakriti.  Then,  thus  overpowered,
he  becomes  bewildered,  and  because  thus  bewildered,  he  sees
not  the  creator,  i.e.  the  holy  Lord,  abiding  within  him.
Carried  along  by  the  Gunas,  darkened,  unstable,  fickle,
crippled,  full  of  devices,  vacillating,  he  entera  into  Abhi-
mS-na  (conceit  of  subject  and  object),  believing  "I  am  he,
this  is  mine,"  &c.  He  binds  himself  by  himself,  as  a  bird
is  bound  by  a  net,  and,  overcome  afterwards  by  the  fruits
of  what  he  has  done,  he  enters  on  a  good  or  evil  biiiih,
downward  or  upward  in  his  course,  and,  overcome  by  the
pairs,  he  roams  about.*

Here  we  see  again  a  mixture  of  Sd7>ikhya  and  VedS-nta
ideas,  the  S^mkhya  claiming  such  terms  as  Prakriti  and
GuTias,  the  Ved^nta  such  terms  as  Atman  and  possibly
BhfttAtman.  This  BhfttS,tman,  however,  is  by  no  means  so
clear  as  has  sometimes  been  imagined.  It  is  a  term  peculiar
to  the  MaitrS;y.  Upanishad,  and  seems  to  have  been
borrowed  from  it  wlicn  it  occurs  in  some  of  the  later
Upanisliads.  If,  like  many  other  things  in  the  Maitr^y.
Upanishad,  it  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  belonging  to  the
S^^nkhya-system,  we  must  remember  that  Atman,  though,
quoted  sgmetimes  as  a  synonym  of  Purusha,  cannot  be
supposed  tp  stand  here  for  Purusha.  A  compound  such
as  jBhftta-Purusha  would  be  impossible.  The  Maitr&y.
Up.  Ill,  I  itself  says  that  thc^  Atman  of  BhfttHtman  is
another,  though  likewise  called  Atman,  and  that  he  dwells
in  the  body,  >Sjirira,  which  is  a  compound  of  Tanm&tras,
Bhiitas,  and  Mahabhiitas,  It  would  therefore  correspond
to  the  Vedantic  Givcttman.  But  if  this  BhAtatman  is  said
to  spring  from  Prakriti,  it  could  not  possibly  stand  for  the
Purusha  of  the  Sa7}ikliyaa,  because  their  Purusha  does  not
spring  from  Prak?*iti,  as  little  as  Prakriti  springs  from  him.
Nor  could  any  Atnuin  be  said  to  be  purely  objective.  In
fact,  strictly  speaking,  this  Bhiltatuuin  fits  neithej'  into  the
VedSnta,  .  nor  into  the  Sa7?ikhya-pIulosophy,  and  would
rather  seem  to  belong  to  a  pliilosophy  in  which  these  two
views  of  the  world  were  not  yet  finally  separated.

Another  difficult  and  rather  obseure  expression  in  the


d


262  INDIAN   PHIL030PHI.

Maitrd.y.  Up«dshad  is  Nirlltman  (sdbsUos),  an  expression
which  would  be  impossible  in  the  Vedanta-philosophy,  and
is  certainly  perplexing  even  in  the  S&mkhya.

A  similar  mixture  of  philosophical  terms  meets  us  in  the
Svet&svatara,  Upaiiishad.  In  verse  I,  lo,  for  instance,  we
have  PradhS^na,  which  is  S&mkhya,  and  Msly&,  which  is
Vedanta,  at  least  the  later  VedSnta,  while  in  IV,  xo  Mkyk
is  directly  identified  with  Prakriti.  Purusha  occurs  in
III,  i2,y  where  it  evidently  stands*  for  Brahman,  IV,  i.
But  though  in  this  XJpanishad  Sd.mkhya  ideas  would  seem
to  prevail;  Ved&nta  ideas  are  not  excluaed.  The  very  name
of  SglTnkhya  *  and  Yoga  occurs  (VI,  1 3),  but  the  name  of
VedSruta.  also  is  not  absent,  VI,  22.  In  all  this  we  may
possibly  get  a  glimpse  of  a  state  of  Indian  philosophy
which  was,  as  yet,  neither  pure  S&'Wikhya  nor  pure  Vedanta,
unless  we  look  on  these  Upanishads  as  of  a  far  more
modem  date,  and  on  their  philosophy  as  the  result  of  a  later
syncretism.

IV.  If  now  we  return  to  the  Tattva-sam&sa^  we  meet
first  of  all  with  some  more  remarks  about  the  three  Gunas,
Sattva,  explained  as  virtue,  purity,  goodness ;  Ba^as,  ex-
plained as  dust,  mist,  passion,  movement,  and  Tamas,  dark-
ness, as  ignorance.  Colebrooke  had  already  warned  us
against  taking  the  Gunas  of  the  S&mkhya  in  the  sense
of  qualities.  '  These  three  qualities,'  he  says,  *  are  not
mere  accidents  of  nature,  but  are  of  its  essence,  and  enter
into  its  composition  like  different  rivers  forming  one  stream,
though  for  a  time  retaining  their  different  colours.'  Con-
stituent *  parts  *  might  be  a  better  rendering,  out  for  the
present  it  is  best  to  retain  Guna,  there  being  neither  thought
nor  word  in  English  corresponding  to  GuTia,  as  defined  in  the
Sar)ikhya.  We  ourselves  have  inherited  our  ideas  of  sub-
stance and  quality  from  Greek  and  medieval  philosophers,
but  even  with  us  a  definition  of  inherent  qualities  is  by
no  means  easy,  considering  that  our  substances  never  exist

^  Samkliyn  should  be  here  taken  as  ilie  title  of  the  two  systems,  S&mkhya
and  Yoga,  or  better,  still  as  one  word,  Samkhyayoga.  It  cannot  well
mean  Pru/uity,


TSAIGUJVYA.  263

without  qualities,  nor  our  qualities  without  substances.
Our  commentary  continues:-

He  now  asks,  What  is  the  triad  of  Gutias  ?  and  the  answer
is,  the  triad  consists  of  Ooodjaess,  Passion,  and  Darkness.
The  triad  of  GuTias  means  the  three  Gfunas.

Goodness  (Sattva)  is  of  endless  variety,  such  as  calm-
ness, lightness,  complacency,  attainment  of  what  is  wished
for,  contentment,  patience,  joy,  &c.  In  short  it  consists  of
happiness.

Passion  is  of  endless  variety,  such  as  grief,  distress,  separa-
tion, excitement,  attainment  of  what  is  evil,  &c.  In  short
it  consists  of  pain.

Darkness  is  of  endless  variety,  such  as  covering,  ignorance,
disgust,  misery,  heaviness,  sloth;drowsiness,intoxi^tion,&c.
In  short  it  consists  of  trouble  or  madness.

Thus  far  has  the  triad  of  the  GuTias  been  explained.  liet
it  be  known  that  goodness  is  all  that  is  bright,  passion  all
that  excites,  and  darkness  all  that  is  not  bright.  This  is
what  is  named  TraigUTiya.

These  GuTias  have  been  again  and  again  explained  as
Dravy&m,  matter;  quality  ^d  what  fs  qualified  bemg
considered  in  the  S^mkhya  as  inseparable.  The  four  sides
of  a  cube,  for  instance,  would  be  called  its  Gutias  as  much
as  the  blue  of  the  sky.  These  GuTias  act  a  very  prominent
part  in  In  lian  philosophy,  and  have  quite  entered  into  the
sphere  of  popular  thought.  We  can  best  explain  them  by
the  general  idea  of  two  opposites  and  the  middle  term
/between  them,  or  as  Hegel's  thesis,  antithesis  and  synthesis,
tthese  being  manifested  in  nature  by  light,  darkness,  and
mist ;  in  morals  by  good,  bad,  and  indifferent,  with  many
applications  and  modifications.  If  'the  Sglmkhyas  look  on
certain  objects  as  happy  instead  of  happifying,  &c.,  we
should  remember  that  we  also  call  sugar  sweet,  meaning
that  it  ealls  forth  the  sensation  of  sweetness  in  us.  The
Hindus  look  upon  the  state  of  equilibrium  of  the  three
GuTios  as  perf  feet,  and  they  see  in  the  preponderance  of  any
one  of  them  tne  first  cause  of  movement  and  activity  in
Prakriti  or  nature,  in.  fact  the  beginning  of  ci"eation.


264  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

V,  VI.  Then  comes  the  question,  What  is  Sa/iA»ra  and
what  is  Pratisai?A»ra  ?  The  answer  is,  Sa/7Jkara  is  evolation,
Fratisajii  j».ra  dissolution  or  re-involution. '  Evolqtion  is  as
follows :  From  the  Avyakta  (undeveloped  Prakriti)  before
explained,  when  superintended  by  the  high  and  omnipresent
Purusha  (Spirit),  Buddhi  (intellect)  arises,  and  this  of  ei^ht
kinda  From  this  Buddhi,  the  substance  of  intellect,  arises
Ahamk&ra  (conceit  of  I,  or  subjectivity).  Ahamk&ra  is  of
three  kinds»  Yaikd*rika,  modified,  that  is,  modified  of  Sattva^;
Tai^asa,  luilhinous,  as  under  the  influence  of  Ra^as  pro-
ducing the  Buddhindiiyas ;  and  Bhiit&di  (first  of  elements).
From  the  modified  or  Yaik&rika  Ahamk&ra,  which  under
tiiie  influence  of  Tamas  produces  the  gross  material  elements,
spring  the  gods  and  the  senses ;  from  the  first  of  elements,
Bhiitl.di,  the  Tanmitras  (essences) ;  from  the  luminous,
Taigrasa,  both.  From  the  Tanmd.tras,  essences,  are  produced
the  material  elements.  This  is  the  development  or  Sa^^ara.
Pratisa;/A:ara  or  dissolution  is  as  follows:  The  material
elements  are  dissolved  into  the  essences,  Tanm&trais,  the
essences  and  senses  into  Ahamk^xa,  ALamkara  into  Buddhi
(intellect),  Buddhi  into  Avyakta  (the  undeveloped),  all  being
di^erent  forms  of  Pi'akWti.  The  Undeveloped  is  nowhere
dissolved,  because  it  was  never  evolved  out  of  anything.
Enow  both  PrakWti  and  Purusha  as  having  no  beginning.
Thus  has  dissolution  been  explained.

A.6}ijktJxus,  AdMblilita,  and  AdbidAivata.

VII-IX.  Now- it  is  asked,  What  is  meant  by  Adhy&tma
(subjective),  AdhiBhAba  (objective),  and  Adhidaivata  (per-
taining to  deity)?  To  tliis  it  is  answered.  Intellect  is
subjective,  what  is  to  be  perceived  is  objective,  Brahm&  is
deity.  Ahamk&ra  is  subjective,  what*  is  to  be  received  and
perceived  by  it  is  objective,  Budra  is  the  deity.  Manas,
mind,  is  subjective,  what  is  to  be  conceived  is  objective,
ifandra,  moon,  is  the  deity .^  The  ear  is  subjective,  what  is
to  be  hoard  is  objective,  Akd.8a,  ether,  is  the  deity.  The
skin  is  subjective,  what  is  to  be  touched  is  objective,  V&yu,

^  Garbe,  S&mkhya-Philosophie,  p.  336.


ABHIBUDDHIS.  265

wind,  is  the  deity.  The  eye  is  subjective,  what  is  to  be
seen  is  objective,  Aditya,  the  sun,  is  the  deity.  The  tongue
is  subjective,  what  is  to  be  tasted  is  objective,  Varuna^  is
the  deity.  The  nose  is  subjective,  what  is  to  be  smelled  is
objective.  Earth  is  the  deity.  The  voice  is  subjective,  what
is  to  be  uttered  is  objective,  Agni,  fire,  is  the  deity.  The
two  hands  are  subjective,  what  is  to  be  grasped  is  objective,
Indra  is  the  deity.  The  feet  are  subjective,  what  has  to  be
gone  over  is  objective,  Vishnu  is  the  deity.  The  organ  of
excretion  is  subjective,  what  is  to  be  excreted  is  objective,
Mitra  is  the  deity.  The  organ  of  generation  is  subjective,
what  is  to  be  enjoyed  is  objective,  Pra^&pati,  lord  of
creatures,  is  the  deity.  Thus  in  the  case  of  each  of  the
thirteexn  instruments  is  there  what  is  subjective,  what  is
objectiire,  and  the  deity.

Whoever  has  properly  learnt  the  substances,  the  forms
6f  the  qualities  (GuTiasvarAp&ni),  and  the  deity  (Adhi-
daivatam)  is  freed  from  evil  and  released  from  all  his
sins ;  he  experiences  the  qualities  (QuTias),  but  is  not  united
to  thetn.  Here  ends  the  discussion  of  the  Tattvas  (sub-
stances)^* '

▲bM^nddliis  (6).

X.  Now  what  are  the  five  Abhibuddhis  (apprehensions)  ?
The  answer  is.  They  are  Vyavasaya,  ascertainment,  Abhi-
m&na,  conceit,  tkkftk,  desire,  Kartavyata,  determination  to
act  or  will,  Kriya,  action.

The  apprehension  that  this  has  to  be  done  by  me  is
ascertainment ;  an  act  of  the  intellect.  AbhimSna,  conceit,
is  directed  towards  the  perception  of  the  nature  of  Self  and
not-Self,  it  is  Ahamkara,  an  act  of  the  intellect,  tkkhk,
desire,  is  wish,  an  idea  of  the  mind,  an  act  of  the  intellect.
Kartavyata,  the  will  of  doing  such  acts  as  hearing,  &c.,

^  Erldently  taken  already  as  god  of  thQ  wafcers.

*  I  ought  to  say  that  in  this  and  the  subsequent  paragraphs  I  had
often  to  be  satisfied  with  giving  the  words  such  as  they  stand,  without
being  myself  able  to  connect  any  definite  ideas  with  them.  I  did  not
like  to  leave  them  out  altogether,  but  while  they  may  be  safely  passed
over  by  philosophical  readers,  they  may,  I  hope,  elicit  from  Sanskrit
scholars  some  better  elucidation  than  I  am  able  to  give.  At  present  most
of  them  spem  to  me  to  consist  of  useless  distinctions  and  hair-splitting
definitions  of  words.


A


266  INDUN  PHILOSOPHY.

performed  by  the  senses  that  have  sound,  &c.,  for  their
objects,  is  an  act  of  the  intellect  pertaining  to  the  Bud-
dhindriyas.  Kriy&,  the  act  of  the  intellect,  such  as
speaking,  &c.,  pertaining  to  the  EArmendri^as,  is  action  ^.
Thus  Imve  five  Abhibuddhis  (apprehensions)  been  ex^
plained*

liannayoiils  (6).

XI.  What  are  the  five  Karmayonis  ?  The  answer  is
that  they  are  Dhriti,  energy,  jSraddha,  faith  or  faithfulness,
Sukh&,  bliss,  Avividish&,  carelessness,  Yividish^,  desire  of
knowledge.

The  character  of  DhWti  or  energy  is  when  a  man  resolves
and  carries  out  his  resolution.  Sraddhd*,  faith  or  faithful-
ness, is  said  to  consist  in  study  of  the-Y eda  religious  student-
ship, sacrificing  and  causing  sacrifices  to  be  performed,
penance,  giving  and  receiving  proper  gifts,  and  making
Homaroblations.

•  But  SukhsL  or  bliss  arises  when  a  man,  in  order  to  obtain
blessedness,  devotes  himself  to  knowledge,  sacrifices  and
penance,  being  always  engaged  in  penitential  acts.

Avividishd.  or  carelessness  consists  in  the  heart's  being
absorbed  in  the  sweetness  of  sensual  pleasures.

VividiahJl  or  desire  of  knowledge  is  the  source  of  know-
ledge of  thoughtful  people.  What  has  to  be  known  is  the
oneness  /belonging  to  Prakriti),  the  separateness  (of  Purusha
and  Prakriti),  &c.,  (Prakriti)  being  eternal,  and  not-perci-
pient, subtle,  with  real  products,  and  not  to  be  disturbed ;
and  this  is  Vividislisl.  ...  It  is  a  state  belonging  to  Prakriti
destroying  cause  and  effect.  Thus  have  the  five  Kar-
mayonis been  explained  (?).

Some  portions  of  these  verses  are  obscure,  and  the  text
is  probably  corrupt.  I  have  taken  Gileyit,  for  G/7eyam,
referring  to  each  of  the  subjects  with  which  Vividisha,  the
desire  of  knowledge,  is  concerned.  The  construction  is  very
imperfect,  but  may  be  excused  in  what  is  after  all  no  more
than  an  index.  I  separate  Sdkshmam  and  take  it  in  the
sense  of  SCikshmatvam.  Satkaryam  refers  to  the  Satkarya-
vdda.    The  third  line  is  quite  unintelligtbTe  to  me,  and

'  The  text  is  somewliat  4<oubtful.


VAYUS.      KABMATMANS.  267

BaUantyne  haa  very  properly  left  it  altogether  untrans-
lated. It  may  mean  that  Vividishd,  is  a  state  belonging  to
Prakriti  which  helps  to  destroy  cause  and  effect  by  showing
that  they  are  one  and  the  same,  but  this  is  a  mere  guess.

YkroM  (6).

XII.  What  are  the  VAyus  (windsj?  They  are  Pr&na,
AplUia».  Sam&na,  Udliiia,  and  Vy&na,  i.e.  the  winds  in  the
bodies  of  those  who  have  bodies.  The  wind  called  PdlTia
is  superintended  by  mouth  and  nose,  and  is  called  PrUna
because  it  leads  out  or  moves  out.  The  wind  called  Ap&na
is  superintended  by  the  navel,  and  is  called  Ap&na  because
it  leads  away  and  moves  downward.  The  wind  called
Sam&na  is  superintended  by  the  heart,  and  is  called  Sam&na
because  it  leads  equally  and  moves  equally.  The  wind
called  Udllna  is  superintended  by  the  throat.  It  is  called
Uddna  because  it  goes  upward  and  moves  out.  Yyllna
is  the  all-pervader.  Thus  have  the  live  winds  been  ex-
plained.

The  real  meaning  of  these  winds  has  never  been  dis-
covered. If  they  are  rendered  by  vital  spirits,  nothing  is
gained  except  explaining  obscurum  per  obscurius.  They
may  have  been  intended  to  account  for  the  vital  processes
which  iTiake  the  action  of  the  senses  (Indriyas)  and  of
other  organs  of  the  body  also,  possible,  but  their  original
intention  escapes  us  altogether.  They  form  a  kind  of
physical  organism  or  Antc^karatia,  but  their  special  func-
tions are  often  stated  differently  by  different  authors.

KamiAtmaaui  (6).

XIIL  What  are  the  five  KannS^tmans,  the  (Ego  as
active)?  They  are  Vaik^rika,  Tai^asa,  BhAtMi,  Slinu-
m&na,  aiad  Niranumana.  The  Vaikarika,  modifying,  is  the
doer  of  good  works.  The  Tai^asa,  luminous,  is  the  doer  of
bad  works.  The  BhAt^-di  ^,  first  of  elements,  is  the  doer  of
hidden  works.  If  associated  with  inference  (SS^numllna),
the  Ahamk&ra  is  the  doer  of  what  is  good  and  reasonable ;

^  BhQt&di  is  used  in  the  sense  of  Manas,  because  the  Bhiktas,  though
springing  from  the  Tanm&tras,  are  due  to  it.


268  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

if  not  associated  with  inference  (Niranum&na)  it  is  the  doer
of  what  is  not  good  and  not  reasonable.  Thus  have  the  five
Karm&tmans  been  explained.

▲▼Idy4»  Vafldtaet  (6).

XIV.  What  is  the  fivefold  Avidyft.  (Nescience)  ?  It  is
Tamas,  darkness,  Moha,  illusion,  Mah&moha,  great  illusion,
T&misra,  gloom,  Andhatainisra,  utter  gloom.  Here  dark^
ness  and  illusion  are  again  each  eightfold,  great  illusion  is
tenfold,  gloom  and  utter  gloom  are  eighteenfold.  Tamas,
darkness,  is  the  misconception  that  Self  is  identical  with
things  which  are  not  Self,  namely  with  Prakriti,  Avyakta,
Buddhi,  Ahamk&ra,  and  the  five  Tanm&tras.  Moha,  illu-
sion, is  the  misconception  arising  from  the  obtainment  of
S^ipematural  powers,  such  as  minuteness  and  the  rest.
MahSmoha,  great  illusion,  is  when  one  supposes  oneself  to
be  liberated  in  the  ten  states  with  regard  to  the  objects
of  sound,  colour,  &c.,  whether  heard  or  seen,  &c.  Qloom  is
unrestrained  hatred,  directed  against  the  eightfold  (Super-
human powers,  such  as  minuteness,  &c.,  and  against  the
tenfold  world  of  sense  causing  threefold  piun.  Utter
gloom  is  that  distress  which  arises  at  the  time  of  death
after  the  eightfold  human  power  has  been  acquired,  and
the  tenfold  world  of  sense  has  been  conquered.  Thus  has
ignorance  with  sixty-two  subdivisions  been  explained,

A»kti,  WMlmera  (28).

XV.  What  is  called  the  twenty-eightfold  weakness  1
The  faults  of  the  eleven  organs  of  sense  stod  the  seventeen
faults  of  the  intellect.  First,  with  regard  to  the  organs  of
sense,  there  is  deafness  in  the  ear,  dullness  in  the  tongue,
leprosy  in  the  skin,  blindness  in  the  eye,  loss  of  smell  in
the  nose,  dumbness  in  the  voice,  cripplcdness  in  the  hands,
lameness  in  the  feet,  constipation  in  the  organ  of  excretion,
impotence  in  the  organ  of  generation,  madness  in  the  mind ;
these  are  defects  of  the  eleven  organs.  The  seventeen
defepts  of  the  intellect  are  the  opposites  of  the  Tush^is,
contentments,  and  of  the  Siddliis,  perfections.


ATUSHTf   AND    TUSH^TI.      ASIDDHIS   AND   SIDDHIS.      269

▲tnslitt  and  Toslitt.

XVI.  First  then  the  opposites  of  the  Tush^is  or  the  oon-
tentments.  They  are  Ananta,  the  conviction  that  there  is
no  Pradh&na  (Prak^-iti) ;  Tamasalina,  consisting  in  recog-
nising the  Atman  in  the  Maliat  (Buddhi,  intellect);  Avidy&,
the  non-recognition  of  the  Ego  (AharnkSira) ;  Avrishti,  the
denial  that  the  Tanm&tras,  essences,  are  the  causes  of  the
elements ;  Asutara,  occupation  in  acquiring  the  objects  of
the  senses;  Asup^ra,  occupation  in  their  preservation;
Asunetra,  occupation  for  wealth,  without  seeing  that  it  is
liable  to  be  lost;  AsumariA;il^£l,  addiction  to  enjoyment;
AnuttamlLmbh&siksl,  engaging  in  enjoyment  without  seeing
the  evil  of  injury  (to  living  beings).  Thus  have  the  nine
opposites  of  Tushti,  contentment,  l3een  explained.

▲•iddlilji  and  Biddhla.

XVII.  Next  follow  the  opposites  of  Siddhi,  perfection,
which  are  also  called  Asiddhis,  non-perfections:  Atllra,
when  diversity  is  mistaken  for  phenomenal  unity ;  SutS.ra,
when;  after  hearing  words  only„  the  opposite  is  understood,
as,  for  instance,  when  after  hearing  that  a  man  who  knows
the  various  principles  (tattvas)  is  liberated,  a  man  under-
stiatids  "the  opposite,  that  such  a  man  is  not  liberated ;
AtS«ratara,  ignorance,  when  a  man,  thougn  devoted  to
hear  n^  and  simdying,  does  not  succeed  in  knowing  the
twenty-five  principles,  owing  either  to  his  obtuseness  or  to
his  intellect  being  impaired  by  false  doctrines.  If  a  man,
though  ovei*come  by  mental  suffering,  is  not  anxious  to
know,  being  careless  as  to  transmigration,  so  that  know-
ledges is  no  pleasure  to  him,  this  is  ApramodS..  Thus  the
next  pair  also  of  Apramuditi\  (mutually  not  delighted)  and
Apramodam&na  (mutually  not  delighting)  should  be  con-
sidered. Ignorance  of  a  man  of  undecidea  mind  even  with
regard  to  what  has  been  taught  him  by  a  friend  is  Arasya.
But  failure  of  an  unfortunate  man  in  obtaining  knowledge,
either  because  of  bad  instruction  or  disregard  on  the  part
of  the  teacher,  is  Asatpramuditam.  Thus  have  the  eight
Asiddhis,  the  opposite  of  the  Siddhis  or  perfections,  been
explained,  and  the  twenty-eightfold  A^akti  (weakness)  is
finished.


270  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

TiuOifls  and  UddUfl.

Next  follow  the  Tushfis  and  Siddhis  themselves,  but  as
their  opposites  have  already  been  examined  we  may  dis-.
pense  with  their  enumeration  here.  Some  of  these  technical
terms  vary  in  different  texts,  but  they  are  of  very  small
importance  \  I  am  afraid  that  even  what  I  have  given  of
these  long  lists,  which  are  so  characteristic  of  the  S&mkhya-
philosophy,  may  have  proved  very  tedious,  and  not  very
closely  connected  with  the  great  problems  of  philosophy.
I  confess  that  'in  several  cases  many  of  these  subdivisions
seemed  to  me  entirely  meaningless,  but  I  thought  that
they  were  of  some  importance  historically,  and  for  a  right
appreciation  of  the  methods  of  Indian  philosophy.  The
long  lists  of  the  instruments  and  the  acts  of  intellect,  of
the  sources  of  activity,  of  Nescience  with  its  sixty-two
subdivisions,  &c.,  though  certainly  meaningless  to  my
mind,  may  possibly  serve  to  show  how  long  and  how
minutely  these  philosophical  questions  ^ust  have  been
discussed  in  order  to  leave  such  spoils  behind.  This  large
number  of  technical  terms  is  certainly  surprising.  Some
of  them,  as,  for  instance,  Suki,  Pada,  Avadharita,  &a,  are
not  mentioned  either  in  the  K&rikS^  or  in  the  Siitras,  and
this,  which  has  been  taken  for  a  sign  of  their  more,  recent
date,  seems  to  me,  on  the  contrary,  to  speak  in  favour  of
an  early  and  independent  origin  of  the  Tattvasanldfia  and
its  commentary.  If  these  technical  terms  were  modem
inventions,  they  would  occur  more  frequently  in  modem
works  on  the  Sa77ikhya-philosophy,  but  as  far  as  I  know,
they  do  not.

XtlikArthas.

XVIII.  We  have  still  to  examine,  though  as  briefly  as
possible,  the  MiilikS^rthas  or  eight  cardinal  facts,  that  is,
the  most  important  subjects  established  by  the  S&mkhya  \
They  are  with  regard  to  Prakriti  or  Pradhana,  its  reality
(Astitva),  its  oneness  (Ekatva),  its  having  an  object  or  an

^  The  namoB  of  the  nine  Tushfis  or  contentments  are :  Ambhns,  water,
Salilft,  Oghkj  Vrishti,  SutArft,  Sup&r&,  Sunetr&,  SumartAdkA,  Uttamii
S&ttTikt.  The  names  of  the  eight  Siddhis  are :  TAr&,  SutAi-ft,  T4rayantt,
Pri^mod&,  Pramudit&,  Pramodamivn&,  Ramyakil,  Satpramudit4.

'  Soo  Samkhya-tattTa-kaumud!,  p.  59.


SH  ASH  in-TANTEA.      ANUGBAHA-SABGA,  2  7 1

intention  (Arthavattva),  and  its  lieing  intended  for  some
one  else  (Par&rthya).  They  are  with  regard  to  Pnrusha
his  being  different  from  Prakriti  (Anyatva),  his  not  being
an  agent  (Akartritva),  and  his  being  many  (Bahutva).
They  are  with  regard  to  both  PrakWti  and  Purusha,  their
.temporary  union  and  separation,  while  Sthiti,  durability,  is
said  to  refer  to  the  SClkshma-  and  SthAla-sarira,  the  gross
and  the  subtle  bodies.  Astitva,  reality,  might  seem  to
belong  to  both  Prakriti  and  Purusha,  but  it  is  meant  as
the  reality  of  Prakriti  only,  which  the  Sslmkhya  is  chiefly
concerned  with  establishing  as  against  the  Ved&ntins  who
deny  it  with  regard  to  all  that  is  objective,  keeping^  it  for
the  subject  only,  whether  he  is  called  Purusha  or  Atman.
The  commentator,  however,  and  Prof.  Garbe  also,  connect
Astitva  with  Purusha  as  well  as  with  Prakriti.  The  matter
is  of  little  consequence,  unless  Astitva  is  taken  in  the  sense
of  phenomenal  or  perceptible  reality.  The  liighest  reality
of  the  Purusha  or  the  Atman  has  of  course  never  been
doubted  by  Sslmkhya  or  Vedanta  philosophers,  but  that  is
more  than  mere  Astitva.

It  should  be  added  that  the  commentator  in  this  place
account^  once  more  for  the  name  of  Sliashti-tantra,  the
Sixty-doctrine,  but  this  time  by  adding  the  17  Tushtis  and
Siddhis,  the  33  (AvidyS*  5+A«akti  a8)  and  lo,  not  8,
MiilikS,?:thas,  and  thus  arriving  at  60  topics.  The  Chinese
name  presupposes  a  Saptati-sS^tra,  or  Seventy-treatise,
probably  with  reference  to  the  original  number  of  verses
in  the.  Kglrikfl.

XIX.  But  even  here  the  Tattva-sam&sa  is  not  yet
finished,  for  it  goes  on  to  explain  the  Anugraha-sarga,  lit.
the  creation  of  benevolence,  which  is  explained  as  the  pro-
duction of  external  objects  from  the  five  Tanm&traa  or
subtle  essences  for  the  sake  of  the  Purusha.  BrahmcL,  after
seeing  these  (the  organs  of  sense  ?)  produced,  but  as  yet
without  a  sphere  in  which  their  measuring  or  perceiving


272  INDIAN    PHILOSOPHY.

power  could  find  scope,  created  for  them  the  so-called
Dene volent  creation,  shaped  from  the  Tanmfttra8\

Bhftta-Bargft.

XX.  After  this  follows  the  Bhlita-sarg^in  fourteen  divi-
sions. The  divine  creation  has  eight  divisions,  consisting
of  eood  and  evil  spirits  and  gods,  such  as  Pi8&feas,  Rakshas,
YaKshas,  Gandharvas,  Indra,  Pra^d.pati,  and  BrahmiL  The
animated  creation  consists  of  domestic  animals,  birds,  wild
animals,  reptiles,  and  immovable  things  or  plants.  The
human  creatibn  consists  of  one,  of  man  only,  from  Br&h-
mans  down  to  Kknd^as.  Domestic  animstls  are  from  cowa
down  to  mice;  birds  from  Garuda  down  to  gnats;  wild
animals  from  lions  down  to  jackals ;  reptiles  from  f^esha
(world-serpent)  down  to  woi4i8 ;  immovable  things  from
the  P^igf&ta-tree  (in  paradise)  down  to  grass.  This  is  the
threefold  creation,  consisting  of  gods,  men,  and  animals,
the  animals,  i.e.  living  beings,  forming  again  five  classes.

Bandlia,  Sondaff*.

XXL  If  it  be  asked  what  the  threefold  bondage  (Bandha)
consists  in,  it  is  replied,  In  the  eight  Prakritis,  in  the
sixteen  Yikaras,  and  in  DakshitiA  (gifts  to  priests).  There
are  eight  Prakntis,  as  often  described  before  (pp.  244, 251) ;
and  as  long  as  a  man  considers  these  as  the  highest,  he  is
absorbed  in  Prakriti  and  bound  by  PrakritL  The"  bondage
of  the  sixteen  VikSras  applies  both  to  ascetics  and  to  men
of  the  world,  if  they  are  subdued  by  the  senses,  which  are
Vikflxas,  if  they  are  devoted  to  objects  of  sense,  if  their
organs  of  sense  are  not  in  subjection,  if  they  are  ignorant
and  deluded  by  passions.

DakshlnA-liondairVf  CMfta  to  VrlMrts.

The  priestly  bondage  applies  to  those,  whether  house-
holders, students,  mendicants  or  anchorets,  whose  minds
are  overcome  by  passions  and  delusions,  and  who  from
misconception  bestow  sacrificial  gifts  on  priests.  A  verse
is  quoted  here  in  support :  '  Bondage  is  spoken  of  by  the

^  This  passage  ia  very  doubtftil,  unlosa  we  connect  Hdna  with  TanmAtra,
and  take  meaauring  in  the  sense  of  perceiring,  so  that  the  creation  would
bo  rcpreseniod  as  made  for  man.


pbamIj^ab.  273

name  of  Prakr^ti-bondage,  Vik&nirbondage,  and  thirdly
bondage  throngli  priestly  giftaJ  This  last  bondage  seems
to  me  very  important,  and  it  is  strange  that  it  should  never
have  been  pointed  out  as  marking  the  nnecclesiastical
and  unorthodox  character  of  the  S&mkhya-philosophy  *.
What  would  have  become  of  the  Br&hmans  without  their
Dakshin&s  or  fees^  the  very  name  of  a  Br&hman  being
Dakshititya,  one  to  be  fee'dl  In  the  Aitareya-BrlLhmana
already  we  read  of  Tatis  who  condemned  sacrifices,  but
they  are  said  to  have  been  thrown  to  the  jackals.  That
this  feeing  of  a  priest  should  have  been  considered  one  of
the  three  bondages  shows  at  all  eyents  that  the  followers
of  Kapila  were  above  superstition,  and  looked  upon  sacrifice
and  priestcraft  as  hindrancei^  rather  than  as  helps  to  true
freedom  and'Moksha  of  the  spirit.

XXIL  This  Moksha,  the  highest  aim  of  Eapila's  philo-
sophy, is  again  of  three  kinds,  according  as  it  arises  from
increa8e  of  Knowledge,  from  the  quieting  of  the  passions  of
the  senses,  or  lastly  from  the  destruction  of  the  whole.
From  increase  of  knowledge  and  quieting  of  the  passions
of  the  senses  there  arises  the  destruction  of  all  that  is
commonly  considered  as  merit  and  demerit;  and  from  the
destruction  of  merit  and  demerit  there  arises  final  beatitude
oqnsisting  in  complete  detachment  from  the  world,  and  in
concentration  of  the  Purusha  in  himself.

VramAfias.

XXni.  The  three  Pram&nas  which  follow  next  require
little  explanation  here,  as  they  have  been  fully  examined
before  ^  Still  each  system  of  philosophy  takes  its  own
view  of  them,  and  the  character  of  each  is  more  or  less
determined  l>y  the  view  taken  of  the  real  nature  of  know-
ledge. What  is  most  creditable  is  that  each  system  should  -
have  recognised  the  importance  of  this  question,  as  a  pre-
liminary to  every  philosophy^  This  distin^ishes  Indian
pliiloRophy  very  favourably  from  other  philosophies.  All
systems  of  philosopliy  in  India  admit  Pratyaksha  or  per-

*  See,  however,  KArikA  44.  '  p.  '43.

18  ''


274  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

ception  of  the  senses  as  the  first  of  Pranid.nas.  The  VedAata»
however,  looks  upon  the  Veda  as  the  only  source  of  true
knowledge,  and  actually  applies  to  it  the  name  of  Praty»-
ksha.  The  ordinary  three  or  six  Pram&1^a8  of  the  MimimA
would  apply  to  the  world  of  AvidyA  or  nescience  only,
never  to  the  true  world  of  Brahman.  See  VedsLnta-Siitras
II,  I,  14.  The  names  vary  sometimes,  but  the  meaning  is
the  same.  Sensuous  perception,  if  it  is  meant  for  what  is
perceived,  is  sometimes  called  Dr^sh^am,  what  is  seen;  and
mstead  of  Veda  we  meet  with  iSabda,  word,  and  Apta-
vaA;ana  (Sllmkhya),  right  affirmation.  Anumdjia,  inference,
is  illustrated  by  the  usual  examples,  such  as,  inference  of
rain  from  the  rising  of  clouds,  inlerekce  of  w^ter  fiom  the
appearance  of  cranes,  inference  of  fire  from  the  rising  of
smoke.  Whatever  cannot  be  proved  by  either  sense  or
inference  has  to  be  accepted  as  Apta- vaA;ana,  as,  for  instance,
the  existence  of  Indra,  the  king  of  the  gods,  the  Northern
Eurus,  Meru,  the  golden  mountain,  the  Apsaras,  or  nymphs
of  S varga,  &c.  For  all  these  things,  Munis  such  as  Vasisht^a
must  l:^  accepted  as  authorities.  Apta  is  explained  as
a  name  for  a  man  who  is  assiduous  in  his  work,  free  from
hatred  and  passion,  learned,  and  endowed  with  all  virtues,
and  who  can  therefore  be  relied  upon.  These  three  Pram&nas,
or  measures,  are  so  called  because  in  the  same  way  as  in
common  life  grains  are  measured  by  measures*  sudi  as
a  Prastha,  and  sandalwood,  &c.,  weighed  by  a  balance,  the
Tattvas  also,  the  principles,  the  BhiLvas  (their  modifica-
tions), and  the  Bh&tas,  elemental  substances,  are  measured
or  proved  by  the  Pram^Tias.

XXIY.  The  last'  paragraph  in  the  Tattva-samll.8a  points
back  to  the  first.  We  saw  in  the  beginning  how  a  Brahman
was  introduced  who,  overcome  by  threefold  pain,  took
refuge  with  the  great  Rishi  Eapila.  If  we  ask  what  was
meant  by  that  threefold  pain,  the  answer  is  that  it  is
Adhyatmika,  Adhibhautika,  and  Adhidaivika.  Adhy&tmika
is  pain  arising  from  the  body,  whether  produced  by  wind,
bile,  or  phlegm,  &a,  and  from  the  mind  (Manas),  such  as
is  due  to  desire,  anger,  greed,  folly,  envy,  separation  from


THE   TRUE    MEANING   Of  THE   SAJfKHYA.  275

what  is  liked,  union  with  what  is  disliked,  &c.  Adhibhau-
tika  is  pain  that  arises  from  other  living  beings,  stich  as
thieves,  cattle,  wild  beasts,  &c.  Adhidaivika  is  pain  that
is  caused  by  divine  agents,  as  pain  arising  from  cold,  heat,
wind,  rain,  thunderbolts,  &c.,  all  under  the  direction  of  the
Vedic  Devas.  If  a  Bnihman  is  affected  by  this  threefold
pain,  a  desire  to  know  (the  reason)  arises  in  him,  as  a  desire
for  water  arises  in  a  thirsty  man*  Freedom  from  pain,  or
final  beatitude,  is  to  be  gained,  as  we  are  told,  from  a  study
of  the  Tattva-samAsa.  Whoever  knows  the  philosophy
which  is  contained  in  the  Tattva-samAsa,  is  not  bom  again.
This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  great  sage  Kapila,  and  thus  is
finished  the  commentary  on  ttie  Sdtras  of  the  Tattva-samdsa.

The  Tsne  Maaalnir  of  the  Slinikliya.

In  giving  an  account  of  the  S&mkhya,  I  have  followed
entirely  the  Tattva>$am&sa,  without  mixing  it  up  with  the
K&rik&s  or  Siltras.  I  was  quite  aware  that  the  Karikas  or
the  Sfttras  might  have  supplied  us  with  a  clearer  and
better-arranged  account  of  that  philosophy.  But  if  I  am
right,  that  the  Tattva-samlisa  is  older  than  either,  it  seemed
to  me  more  important  that  we  should  know  what  the
Sllmkhya  really  was  in  its  original  form.  By  comparing
the  Tattva*sam&sa  with  the  K^rik^  and  Siitras,  we  can
easily  see  how  this  dry  system  was  developed  in  later
times.  But  though*  the  K&rikds  and  Siitras  give  us  a  more
systematic  account  of  the  SUmkhya,  all  that  is  essential
can  be  found  in  the  Samasa,  if  only  we  try  to  arrange  the
dry  facts  for  ourselves.  It  must  be  confessed,  no  doubt,
that  neitbor  in  the  Siitras,  the  K&rikas,  nor  in  the  Tattva-
sam&sa,  do  we  find  what  we  most  value  in  every  philosophy,
an  insight  into  the  mind  and  heart  of  the  founder  of  that
philosophical  system.  If  we  wore  asked  why  such  a  system
should  ever  have  been  imagined  and  elaborated,  or  what
kind  of  comfort,  whether  intellectual  or  moral,  it  could
have  afforded  to  any  human  being,  we  should  indeed  have
little  to  answer.  All  we  can  learn  is  that  a  man  crushed
by  the  burden  of  what  is  called  the  threefold  misery,  and
seeing  no  hope  of  relief  either  by  means  of  good  actions  or
of  sacrifices,  which  can  promise  no  more  than  a  temporary


276  IKDTAN   PHIL060PHT.

happiness  on  earth  or  in  Heaven,  should  seek  advice  from
a  philosopher,  snch  as  Eapila,  believing  that  he  oonld  pro-
cure for  him  entire  freedom  from  all  his  troubles.

Vatitr»  of  Pain.

Here  we  come  across  sometliing  like  a  really  human
sentiment.  We  can  well  understand  why  pain,  not  only  as
actual  suffering,  but  as  an  apparent  anomaly  or  imperfec-
tion in  the  universe,  should  have  opened  man's  eyes  to  the
fact  that  there  was  something  wrong  or  limited  in  his
nature,  and  in  the  world  in  which  he  found  himself ;  and
it  is  quite  intelligible  that  this  consciousness  of  his  limita-
tionr  should  have  acted  aS  the  first  impulse  to  an  inquiry
for  the  cause  of  it.  This  would  naturally  lead  either  to
a  religious  or  to  a  philosophical  solution,  and  it  certainly
did  so  in  India.  A  religion  must  have  existed  alreadv
before  this  question  of  the  origin  of  suffering  could  well
have  been  mooted :  but  religion  seems  rather  to  have  in-
creased the  diiiiculty  of  the  questioner  than  solved  it.  The
gods  or  god,  even  in  their  imperfect  conceptioi*,  ^ere
generally  supposed  to  be  good  and  just.  How  then  could
they  be  the  authors  of  human  suffering,  particularly  of
that  siiffering,  bodily  or  mental,  for  which  the  individual
was  clearly  not  responsible,  such  as  being  'bom  blind,,  or
deaf,  or  dumb,  or  mad.'  This  seems  to  have  been  keenly
felt  by  the  ancient  Indian  philosophers,  who  shrink  from
charging  any  divine  power  with  injustice  or  cruelty  to-
wanfa  men,  however  low  an  opinion  they  may  otherwise
have  formed  of  Indra  and  Agni,  nay  even  of  Pra^&pati,
Visvakarman  or  Brahmft.

Here  then  it  was  that  philosophy  was  called  in,  nay  was
first  brought^  to  life,  and  the  answer  which  it  gave  as  to
the  origin  of  suffering  or,  in  a  wider  sense,  the  origin  of
evil,  was  that  all  that  seemed  wrong  in  the  world  must
have  been  the  effect  of  causes,  of  deeds  done,  if  not  in  this,
then  in  a  former  life.  No  deed  (Karman)  good  or  bad,
small  or  great,  could  ever  be  without  its  effect,  its  reward
or  punishment.  This  was  the  fundamental  principle  of
their  ethics,  and  an  excellent  principle  it  was.  It  was  but
another  version  of  what  we  mean  by  eternal  punishment.


NATUEB  OP  PAIN.  277

without  which  the  world  would  f ajl  to  pieces ;  for  it  has
rightly  been  observed  that  eternal  punishment  is  in  i*cality
but  another  ncune  for  eternal  love.  This  idea  of  eternal
love,  however,  cannot  hang  in  the  air,  it  presupposes  an
eternal  lover,  a  personal  Uod,  a  creator -and  ruler  of  the
world:  but  even  this  idea  Indian  pliilosophers  would  not
have  taken  for  granted.  In  some  cases,  though  allowing
deeds  to  have  their  effects,  they  went  so  far  as  to  admit  at
least  the  superintending  care  of  a  Divine  Being,  just  as  the
giver  of  rain  enables  seeds  to  grow,  though  the  seeds  them-
selves were  the  deeds  performed  by  men,  as  independent
actors,  and  therefore  liable  to  take  all  their  consequences
upon  themselves,  whether  good  or  evil.

But  though  this  ought  U>  have  sufficed  to  convince  men
that  the  world  was  exactly  as  it  ought  to  be,  and  could  not
have  been  otherwise,  because  man  himself  bad  mode  It
what  it  was,  whether  as  an  individual  or  as  a  memb^  of
a  class,  there  arose  a  new  question  which  could  not  well  be
supprc^ised,  namely,  Whether  it  was  beyond  the  power  of
man  ever  to  put  an  end  to  the  unbroken  and  irresistible
sequence  of  the  effects  of  the  deeds  of  himself  and  of  his
fellow  creatures;  whether,  in  &ct,  the  cycle  of  life  and
death,  or  what  was  called  Sams&ra,  would  go  on  for  ever.
And  here  the  bold  answer  was,  Yes,  the  SatnsAra  can  bo
stopped,  *  man's  former  acts  can  be  shaken  off  and  an-
nihilated, but  by  one  means  only,  by  means  of  knowledge
or  philosophy.  In  order  to  achieve  this  deliverance  from
all  suffering,  from  all  limitation,  from  all  the  bondage  of
the  world,  man  must  learn  what  he  really  is.  He  must
learn  that  he  is  not  the  body,  for  the  body  decays  and  dies,
and  with  it  all  bodily  sufferings  might  seem  to  end.  But
this  is  again  denied,  because  through  an  invisible  agency
{Adrishtsk  or  Ap&rva)  a  new  Ego  would  spring  up,  liable  to
»uffer  for  its  fonner  acts,  jiLst  as  it  was  in  this  life.  A  man
must  learn  therefore  that  he  is  not  even  what  is  meant  by
the  Ego,  for  the  Ego  alno  has  been  formed  by  surrounding
or  circumstances,  and  will  vanish  again  like  everything
else.  Then  what  remains?  There  remains  behind  the
body,  and  behind  the  Ego,  or  the  individual  person*  what
is  called  the  Purusha  01^  the  Atman,  the  Self,  and  that  Sell


278  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

is  to  be  recognised  either  as  identical  with  what  was  in
earlier  times  conceived  and  called  the  Divine,  the  Eternal,
the  Unconditioned,  namely,  Brahman,  or  as  Purusha,  per-
fect, independent,  and  absolute  iji  itself,  blissful  in  its
independence  aod  in  the  complete  aloofness  from  every-
thing else.  The  former  was,  as  we  saw,  the  view  of  the
Yed&ta,  the  latter  is  the  view  of  the  Simkhya-philosophy.
Both  may  have  had  the  same  roots,  but  they  differ  in  their
later  growth.  The  view  which  the  VedlLnta  took  of  man
has  sometimes  been  mistaken  for  human  apotheosis.  But
people  forget  that  for  these  philosophers  there  were  no
t#l€oi  left  whose  company  man  could  have  joined,  and  whose
eminence  they  coula  have  reached.  The  Divine  which
they  meant  was  the  Divine  in  man,  and  what  they  wanted
was  reconciliation  between  the  Divine  within  and  the
Divine  without.  Their  Moksha  or  Nirvatia  was  not  meant
{or  Vergotterumg,  not  even  for  the  Vergottung  of  Eckhart ;
it  was  meant  for  complete  freedom,  freedom  from  all
conditions  and  limitations,  selfdom,  in  fact;  whether  as
i*ecovery  of  the  Divine  as  Brahman,  or  as  Atman,  or  as
something  beyond  all  names  that  had  ever  been  given  to
the  Divine,  as  the  eternal  Subject,  undetermined  by  any
qualities,  satisfied  and  blissful  in  his  own  being  and  in  his
own  thinking.

Whatever  we  may  think  of  these  two  solutions  of  the
world's  great  riddle,  we  cannot  but  admire  their  originality
and  their  daring,  particularly  if  we  compare  them  with
the  solutions  proposed  by  other  philosophers,  whether  of
ancient  or  modern  times.  None  of  them  seems  to  me  to
have  so  completely  realised  what  mav  be  called  the  idea  of
the  soul  as  the  Phoenix,  consumed  by  the  fire  of  thought
and  rising  from  his  own  ashes,  soaring  towards  regions
which  are  more  real  than  anything  that  can  be  called  real
.  in  this  Hie.  Such  \ie\^  cannot  be  criticised  as  we  criticise
ordinary  systems  of  religion  or  morality.  They  are  visions,
if  you  like,  but  they  are  visions  which,  to  have  seen  is  like
having  been  admitted  to  the  vision  of  another  world ;  of
a  wond  that  must  exist,  however  different  in  its  eternal
silence  from  what  we  and  from  what  the  ancient  seers  of
India  imagined  it  to  be.


VBDANTA   AND   SAJ/KflYA.  279

The  most  curioUis  thing  is  that  such  viows  could  be  held
by  the  philosophers  of  India  without  brining  them  into
conflict  with  the  representatives  of  the  ancient  religion  of
the  country.  It  is  time  that  the  S&?7ikhya-phiIosophy  was
accused  of  atheism,  but  that  atheism  was  very  different
from  what  we  mean  by  it.  It  was  the  negation  of  the
necessity  of  admitting  an  active  or  limited  personal  god,
and  hence  was  carefully  distinguished  in  India  from  the
atheism  of  the  Nd^tikas  or  nihilists,  who  denied  the  ex-
istence of  anything  transcendent,  of  anything  bevond  our
bodily  senses,  of  anything  divine.  To  call  the  l^amkhya
atheistic,  and  the  VeiUnta  not,  would  be  philosophically
most  unfair,  and  it  does  the  Indian  priesthood  great  credit
that  they  treated  both  systems  as  orthodox,  or  at  all  events
as  not  prohibited,  pi^ovided  always  that  the  students  had,
by  a  previous  severe  discipline,  acquired  the  strength  and
fitness  neccssiiiy  for  so  arduous  a  task.

How  difliBrent  the  world  of  thought  in  India  was  from
our  own,  we  may  see  by  an  extraordinary  defence  set  to^
for  the  so-called  atheism  of  the  Sd,?>ikliya-philosophy.    It^
seems  to  us  perfectly  absurd,  but  it  was  by  no  ^neans  so,'if^
we  consider  the  popular  superstitions  of  the  Hindus  at  the
time.    It  was  a  common  belief  in  India  that  man  could,
by  seY^:^  psnanoe,  raise^  himself  to  the  status  of  a  god,
or  Deva.    Tliere  are  ever  so  many  legends  to  that  eflect.
This  might  no  doubt  be  called  apotiieosis;   and  it  was
expressly  stated  that  it  was  in  order  to  put  an  end  tc^atich
vain  desires  of  becoming  personal  g6ds  tnat  Eapila  ignored
or  left  out  ofVaestion  the  existence  of  such  theomorphic  or
anthropomorphic  beings  as  could  ever  excite  the  rivalry  of
men.     We  are  hardly  prepared  for  such  explanations^  and
yet  in  India  they  seem  quite  bondfide^

▼•AAata  and  BAiukliya.

We  have  thus  iinished  our  account  of  the  Vedanta  and
of  the  SsiTn-khya-philosophy.  At  fii"st  siglit  no  two  philo-
sophies would  seem  ta  Ih)  so  different  from  each  other,  nay,
to  start  from  such  opposite  points  of  view  as  the  Vedftnta
and  tints  S47Hkhya.  •  The  Vedaiitist  of  the  schcx>l  of  ^am-
kara  looks  upon  the  whole  world,  ingludiug  auimate  and


28o  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

ixumimaie  nature,  indading  the  small  ^ods  and  the  irtill
smaller  men,  as  a  phencnneiuil  manifestation  of  an  unknoiirn
power  which  he  calls  Brahman.  There  is  notiiing  beside
it,  nothing  that  can  be  called  real  except  this  one  invisible
Brahman.  Then  came  the  question,  But  whence  this  pheno-
menal world?  or  rather,  as  he  starts  with  the  idea  of  there
bein^  but  one  real  being  from  eternity  to  eternity,  How
could  that  iBtemal  Brahman  ever  give  rise  to  the  world,
not  only  as  its  efficient,  but  also  as  its  material  cause,  if
indeed  {here  is  anything  material  in  the  obiects  known  to
the  Ved&ntist?  Under  the  circumstances  thus  given,  but
one  answer  is  possible,  That  Brahman  is  the  world,  and
that  the  world,  so  far  as  it  is  Brahman,  but  so  far  only,  is
real.  The  phenomenal  world,  such  as  we  see  it  and  live  in
it,  is  changeful,  ever  passing  away,  and  consequently  never,
in  the  Ved&ntic  sense  of  that  word,  real.  We  never  see  it
or  know  ii^  as  it  really  is,  until  we  have  become  Vedliiitists.
It  is  impossible  to  think  that  this  eternal  Being,  whatever
name  be  cdven  to  it,  could  ever  chan&fe  or  be  chane^ed.  This
view  of  tixe  amye»e  as  a  develo^ent  of  BraLiau  wa«
possibly  the  original  view  taken  by  B&dar&yana,  and  it
was  clearly  that  of  B&m&nugra  and  his  followers,  who
explain  the  world  as  an  evolution  (ParitzAma).  But  this
was  not  jSamkara's  theory*  He  accepts  the  two  facts  that
the  world  is  cHan^ng  and  unreal,  and  yet  that  the  real
cause  of  it,  that  is.  Brahman,  is  incapable  of  change.

Hence  nothing  remains  but  to  ascribe  the  changeful
phenomenal  character  of  the  world  to  something  else,  and»
according  to  the  Vediiiita,  to  ignorance,  not^  however,  to
our  individual  igtiorance,  but  to  some  primeval  ignorance
directed  towards  Brahman  as  manifested  and  seen.  This
ignorance  or  Avidyil,  again,  is  not  to  be  called  real,  it  is
nothing  by  the  side  of  Brahman,  nothing  therefore  that
could  ever  have  dominion  over  Brahman.  All  such  views
are  excluded  by  the  postulate  that  Brahman  is  free,  is  one
and  all ;  though  here  again,  other  Ved&ntists  differ  from
^amkara,  and  represent  Avidy&  as  an  actual  power  ^jSeJcti)
of  Brahman,  or  as  M&y&,  i.e.  illusive  power,  which  m  fact


SlaiKHTA/  AYIVEKA.  281

performs,  or  is  answerable  for  what  we  call  creation.  We
should  of  course  ask  at  once,  Whence  comes  that  Avidy&  or
that  M&y&,  and  what  is  iti  How  can  it  be  anything,  if  not
again  Brahman,  the  only  thing  that  exists?  The  answer
given  by  iSamkara,  which  satisfied  his  mind,  if  not  the
minds  of  other  VedlLntists,  was  that  we  know  as  a  fact
that  Avidy&  or  Nescience  is  there,  but  we  also  know  that
it  is  not  there,  as  soon  as  we  see  through  it,  in  fact,  as
soon  as  we  are  able  to  annihilate  it  by  Vidy&  or  knowledge,
such  as  is  given  to  us  b^  the  Ved&nta-philosophy.  The
Yed&ntist  holds  that  nothing  that  can  be  annihilated  can
claim  true  reality  for  itself.  Therefore  Avidydr,  though  it
is,  must  not  be  called  something  i*eal.  The  gi*eat  difficulty
how  Brahman  could  ever  be  atfected  by  Avidy&,  which  is
a  weakness  or  a  defect,  is  avoided  by  looking  upon  Brah-
man, while  affected  by  Avidydr  or  seen  through  Avidya,  as
for  the  time  under  a  clQud  or  forgetful  of  iti^lf ,  but  never
really  unreal.  We  ourselves  also,  that  is  the  individual
souls,  can  be  in  full  reality  nothing  but  Brahman,  though
for  a  while  we  are  divided  from  it,  because  forgetful  of
Brahman  through  Avidy&.  While  that  state  of  Avidy&
lasts  the  true  Brahman,  neuter,  may  become  to  us  Bralimd*,
masculine,  may  become  the  creator  and  ruler  of  the  world,
and,  as  such,  receive  worship  from  his  creatures.  But  as
soon  as  "the  cloud  of  Avidy&  is  lifted,  this  creator  also  re-
cedes and  is  restored  at  once  to  his  true  state  and  dignity.
He,  the  so-called  tavara,  or  Lord,  or  Creator,  becomes  what
he  is  and  always  has  been,  the  whole  Brahman ;  and  we
ourselves  also  remember  and  thereby  recover  our  true
Brahmahood,  or  Selfhood,  not  as  if  we  had  ever  been
divided  from  it,  but  only  as  having  been  blinded  for  a
while  1^  Avidyft  so  as  to  forget  ourselves,  our  true  Self,
that  is  fin^man.

The  Sllmkhya  takes  wliat  seems  a  very  different  attitude
towards  the  problem  of  the  world.  These  attitudes  towards
the  world  form  indeed  the  kernel  of  every  philosophy.  If
we  call  the  Yed&nta  monistic,  the  Samkhya  is  decidedly
dualistio. '  It  accepts  the  whole  obiective  universe  as  real.


282  INDIAN    rHlLOSOPIlY.

and  calls  it  Prakr^ti,  a  word  ol'ten  trnnslaied  by  Nature,
but  in  reality  untranslatable,  because  the  idea  which  it
represents  has  never  arisen  in  our  philosophy.  PrakWti  luay.
be  called  the  undeveloped  matter  or  Uratoff,  containing  in
itself  the  possibilities  ot*  all  things.  By  itself  it  has  no
consciousness,  it  simply  grows  or  develops  into  conscious-
ness when  seen  by  Purusha.  And  it  develops  not  only
into  an  objective  or  material  world,  but  at  the  same  time,
into  what  we  should  call  the  subjective  or  intellectual  world,
supplying  the  instruments  of  perception  and  thought,  both
what  perceives  and  what  is  perceived.  The  question
whence  it  came  is  never  asked,  as  little  as  we  could  ask
that  questiqn  with  regard  to  Brahman.  It  is,  it  has  been,
and  it  has  had  no  beginning.  But^in  order  to  account  for
the  world  of  experience,  it  is  supposed  that  this  undeveloped
Prakriti  is  always  operative,  so  long  as  it  is  noticed  or
perceived  by  a  Purusha  (Self),  and  always  passing  through
a  process  of  evolution.  This  is  an  important  condition.
Prakriti  is  at  work  so  long  only  as  it  is  perceived  by
a  Purusha  or  a  true  Self.  This  would  come  very  near  to
the  recognition  of  the  subjectivity  of  all  our  knowledge,
and  to  the  recognition  that  the  world  exists  for  us  in  the
form  of  knowledge  only.  If  we  call  Prakriti  matter,  the
S&mkhya  philosopher  saw  clearly  enough  that  dead,  dull,
inert  matter  alone  would  not  account  for  the  world.  There-
fore he  makes  Prakriti,  under  the  eye  of  a  Purusha^
develop  into  Buddhi,  commonly  translated  by  percepticm,
but  really  a  kind  of  perception  that  involves  something
like  what  we  should  call  intellect  (vovs).  What,  as  far  as
I  can  see,  is  really  meant  by  Buddhi  in  this  place,  is  the
lighting  up  of  Prakriti  or  dull  matter  by  intelligence,  so
as  to  render  it  perceptive,  and  also  perceptible.  It  is  the
Indian  '  Let  there  be  light.'  In  this  stage  Prakriti  is  called
Mahat,  the  jjre^t,  possibly  in  order  to  indicate  its  impor-
tance in  the  great  developnjent  of  the  universe.  It  cannot
be  taken  here  in  an  exclusively  psychological  sen^e,  though
it  supplies,  no  doubt,  the  possibility  of  the  intelligence  of
tlie  individual  also.  In  the  cosmical  sense  the  devdopm^tit
of  the  world  is  often  spoken  of  as  Sainashti,  in  the  psycho-
logical sense,  ana  as  applied  to  each  individual  it  goes  by


SAJfKHYA,   AVIVEKA.  283

the  name  of  Vyashii.  Thus  Viy/7d,na-Bhikshu  (S&inkhya-
Sdtros  1,  63)  remarks :  As,  according  to  passages  of  Snxti
and  Srariti,  such  as  (ii/tand.  Up,  VI,  a,  3) '  Let  me/^ultiply
myself,  let  me  procreate/  the  creation  of  the  elements,  &c.,
is  preceded  by  AbhimsLna  (i.e.  Ahamkd*ra  or  subjectivity),
it  follows  that  this  AbhimlLna  is  really  the  cause  of  the
creation  of  tlic  world,  as  preceded  by  an  activity  of  Buddhi,
i.e.  the  cosmical  Buddhi,  and  not  simply  the  personal  organ
of  deciding,  as  Buddhi  is  generally  explained  when  part  of
the  individual  or  psychological  development.  For  short-
ness sake,  it  is  sometimes  said  that  Abhimdna  or  Ahamk&ra
is  the  cause  of  cnjation,  for  in  the  end  all  the  Vik4ras  or
evolutes  serve  one  and  the  same  purpose.  Buddhi  exists
in  human  nature  as  the  power  of  perception,  and  it  is  then,
though  not  quite  correctly,  identified  with  Manas  or  AntaA-
karar^a,  the  mental  activity  going  on  within  us,  which
combines  and  regulates  the  impressions  of  the  senses,  as  we
shall  see  hereafter.  But  as  a  cosmic  force,  Buddhi  is  that
which  gives  light  as  the  essential  condition  of  all  know-
ledger  &^<1  ^s  afterwards  developed  into  the  senses,  the
Eowers  of  light  and  thought,  two  ideas  often  comprehended
y  the  root  Budh,  to  awaken  or  to  perceive.  Budh  means
literally  to  awake.  And  as  a  sleeping  person  is  dull  and
inert  to  the  world,  but  begins  to  perceive  as  soon  as  he  is
awake,  "PrakWti  also  is  inert  till  it  is  awakened  (Pra-
buddha),  and  thus  becomes  Buddhi,  perceiving  or  perception.
This  Buddhi,  however,  which,  as  we  must  always
remember,  is  here  conceived  as  a  development  of  Prakriti,
and  'j^s,  as  yet,  neither  subjective  nor  objective,  requires
a  new  development  before  it  can  serve  for  conscious
intellectual  .work.  Perception,  according  to  the  S&Tiikhya,
cannot  work  without  Abamk&ra,  literally  I-making  or
Egoism,  but  philosophically  used  with  a  much  larger
meaning,  namely,  if  I  am  ri^t,  as.  that  which  produces
the  sense  of  subject,  and  in  consequence  of  object  also.
Nature,  in  spite  of  being  lighted  up  or  rendered  capable  of
perceiving  and  being  perceived,  requires,  oven  after  it  has
reached  we  stage  of  Buddhi,  the  division  of  the  whole
world,  tihat  is,  of  itself,  into  subject  and  object,  before  any
real  perception  can  take  place.    Subjectivation,  therefore,


284  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

would  Bccin  to  be  the  nearest  approach,  though  naturally
there  can  be  no  subjectivation  without  simultimeous  objec*
tivation.

After  this  clevelopment  of  Frakr^ti  into  Buddhi,  and  its
differentiation  as  subjective  and  objective,  the  next  step  is
that  it  produces  the  TanmA.tras,  the  elements  of  the  senses
as  well  as  of  the  sense-objects,  such  as  sight  and  light,
hearing  and  sound,  smelling  and  odour,  tasting  and  savour,
feeling  and  touch.  All  these,  the  faculties  as  well  as  the
corresponding  qualities  of  sense-[)erception,  are  modifica-
tions of  the  same  PrakWti,  and  therefore  in  one  sense  the
same  thing,  only  viewed  from  different  points  of  view,  as
we  should  say,  as  subjective  and  objective,  and  as  changed
at  last  into  the  material  reality  of  the  sentient  powers  on
one  side,  and  the  objective  world  on  the  other.  Lastly,  all
this  development  remains  without  real  consciousness,  till  it
attracts  the  attention  of  some  Purusha,  Spirit  or  Self,  who
by  becoming  conscious  of  PrakWti  and  all  its  works,  pro-
duces what  is  the  Only  reality  of  which  we  have  any
conception,  the  phenomenal  reality  of  a  self -conscioufiT  souL
I  hope  I  have  understood  this  train  of  thought  rightly,  but
there  is  much  that  requires  fuller  light.  Does  Kapila
really  look  upon  perception  and  thought  as  an  instrument,
ready  made  by  Prak^^iti  for  the  use  of  the  Purusha,  bat
remaining  inert,  like  a  telescope,  till  it  is  looked  Ihrough
by  the  Jrarusha,  or  is  it  the  first  glance  of  Purusha  at
I^kriti  in  its  state  of  Avyakta  or  chaos,  that  gives  the
first  impulse  to  the  activity  of  Prakriti,  which  impulse
is  generally  ascribed  to  the  working  of  ti.e  Ounas?  Much
may  be  said  for  either  view.  I  do  not  feel  competent  to
pronounce  so  decided  an  opinion  as  others  have  done  on  this
subject.

If  the  Veddntist  explains  what  we  call  Creation  as  the
result  of  Avidyd.  or  Nescience,  the  Samkhya  explains  it  by
the  temporary  union  between  Purusha  and  PrakWti,  Thid
union  is  said  to  arise  from  a  want  of  discrimination
(Aviveka),  and  it  is  not  in  the  highest  sense  a  real  union,
because  it  vanishes  again  by  discriminating  knowledge
(Viveka),  nay,  it  is  actually  said  to  have  the  one  object
only  of  evoking  at  last  in  the  Purusha  a  revulsion^  ana  in


JTMAN  AND  PUBUSHA.  285

the  end  a  eldar  x^ecognition  of  his  complete  independenee,
and  his  freedom  from  Frakriti  (E&rik&  66):  Thus  the
creation  of  the  phenomenal  world  and  our  position  in  the
phenomenal  world  are  due  to  Nescience  (AvidyA)  with
the  Yeddntist,  but  to  a  want  of  discrimination  (Aviveka)
with  the  Sftmkhya  philosopher  (S.  S.  I,  55),  and  this  want
of  discrimination  is  actually  called  by  the  VedA^ntic  term  of
AvidyA  in  the  Yoga-SMras  II,  114.  Where  then,  we  may
well  ask,  is  the  ditierence  between  the  two  views  of  the
universe  ?  There  is  a  difference  in  the  mode  of  representa*-
tion,  no  doubt,  but  in  the  end  both  Ved&nta;  and  S&mkhya
look  upon  what  we  call  reality  as  the  result  of  a  temporary
error,  call  it  nescience,  illusion,  want  of  discrimination,  or
anything  else.  If,  therefore,  philosophers  like  Vigrwdna-
Bhikshu  recognised  this  original  similarity  in  the  tendencies
both  of  the  Ved&nta  and  the  Sd/mkhya,  it  is  hardly  fair  to
blame  them  as  having  mixed  and  confounded  the  two.  No
doubt  these  two  philosophies  diverged  in  their  later  develop-
ment, but  they  started  with  the  same  object  in  view,  and
they  advanced  for  a  time  in  the  same  direction.  If  the
Vedftntists  desired  to  arrive  at  whatsis  called  Atm&-
an&tma-viveka,  discrimination  between  Atman  and  An&t-
man,  the  S&mkhyas  looked  forward  to  Praknti-purusha-
viveka,  discrimination  between  Purusha  and  Prakriti
'Where  ttien  is  the  difference  1  If  their  later  defenders  forgot
their  common  interest  and  laid  greater  stress  on  the  points
of  difference  than  on  the  points  of  similarity  between  them,
it  was  but  right  that  those  who  could  see  deeper,  should
bring  to  light  whatever  features  there  were  left  of  the
original  family  likeness  between  the  two  philosophies.

Greater,  however,  than  the  difference  between  Nescience,
Avidy&,  apd  want  of  discrimination,  Aviveka,  as  the  causes
of  the  world,  according  to  Yed&nta  and  Sllmkhya,  is  that
between  the  Brahman  of  the  YedS^nta,  and  the  many
Purushas  of  the  S&mkhya.  According  to  Samkara  the
individiial  souls  are  not,  according  to  Eapila  they  are.
According  to  the  former  there  is  in  reality  but  one  Atman
or  Self,  as  it  were,  one  sun  reflected  in  the  countless  waves


286  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

of  the  world-ocean ;  according  to  the  latter  there  are  many
Purushas,  as  many  as  there  are  divine,  human,  animal,  and
vegetal  souls,  and  their  plurality  is  conceived  as  etemalf
not  as  phenomenal  only.  On  this  point,  therefore,  there  is
a  radical  difference ;  and  this  is  due,  as  it  seems  to  me,  to
a  want  of  accurate  reasoning  on  the  part  of  the  S^mkhyas.
Such  a  peculiarity  must  not  be  slurred  over  in  an  account
of  the  S&mkhya-philosophy,  but  it  is  fair  to  point  out  what
the  reason  of  this  aberration  may  have  been.  From  a
higher  point  of  view  the  Purusha  of  Eapila  is  really  the
same  as  the  Brahman  or  the  Atman  of  the  Ved&nta^  the
absolute  subject.  It  differs  only  in  that  the  Purusha  was
never  conceived  as  the  material  cause  of  the  universe,  while
Brahman  was,  though,  of  course,  with  the  important  pro-
viso that  everything  material  was  due  to  Nescience.  Apart
from  that,  if  the  Purusha  was  meant  as  absolute,  as  eternal,
immortal,  and  unconditioned,  it  ought  to  have  been  clear  to
Kapila  that  the  plurality  of  such  a  Purusha  would  involve
its  being  limited,  determined  or  conditioned,  and  would
render  the  character  of  it  self-contradictory.  Kapila  has
certainly  brought  forward  every  possible  argument  in
support  of  the  plurality  of  individual  Purushas,  but  he
has  forgotten  that  every  plurality  presupposes  an  original
unity,  and  that  as  trees  in  tlie  lost  resort  presuppose  the
tree,  as  men  are  descended  from  man,  call  him  Adam  or
Manu  or  any  other  name,  many  Purushas,  from  a  meta-
physical point  of  view,  necessitate  the  admission  of  one
turusha.  just  as  the  many  gods  had  to  be  recognised  aa  in
reality  the  One  God  without  a  second,  and  at  last  as  mere
mistakes  of  Brahman.  In  this  way  Vig«&na-Bhikshu  was
right  that  Eapila  did  not  differ  so  much  from  BMarayaTia
as  it  would  seem,  because,  if  the  Purushas  were  supposed
to  be  many,  they  would  not  be  Purushas,  and  being  Purusha
they  would  by  necessity  cease  to  be  many.  It  may  be  said
that  this  is  going  beyond  Eapila,  but  surely  we  have  aright
to  do  so.

It  is  necessary,  at  all  events,  that  we  should  see  all  this
clearly,  just  as  Vic/ziana-Bhikshu  and  other  philosophers
saw  it  clearly,  in  order  to  perceive  the  unity  that  underlies
the  apparent  diversity  in  the  philosophy  of  India.     Nor


ATM  AN   AND   URUSHA.  287

should  we  ever  forget  that  our  philosophical  Sutras,  what-
ever  their  age,  whether  of.  the  fourteenth  century  a.d.  or
ihe  fifth  century  B.C.,  are  but  the  last  outcome  of  the
philosophical  activity  of  a  whole  country,  and  that  we
are  entirely  ignorant  of  their  historical  antecedents.  We
should  remember  that  the  grammatical  Siitras  of  P&^ini
are  contradicted  again  and  again  by  grammatical  forms
which  have  fortunately  been  preserved  to  us  in  the  earlier
Br&hmatMbs  and  Mantras  of  the  Vedic  period.  We  have  no
such  remnants  of  an  earlier  period  of  philosophy  anterior
to  the  Siitras,  with  the  exception  of  the  as  yet  unsystema-
tised  Upanishads,  and  possibly  of  some  of  the  more  ancient

{>arts  ot  the  Mah&bhS^rata ;  but  in  other  respects  we  are
eft  without  any  earlier  facts,  though  not  without  a  firm
conviction  that  such  perfect  systems  as  we  find  in  the
Siitras  cannot  have  sprung  up  in  a  day>  still  less  from  one
brain,  but  that  they  must  have  passed  through  many
changes  for  better  or  for  worse,  before  they  could  assume
that  final  and  permanent  form  in  which  they  are  now  pre-
sented to  us  in  literature.  The  Siitras  are,  in  fact,  the  final
outcome  of  ages  of  inquiry  and  discussion.

It  would  seem  then  to  follow  from  Vi(7/7dJia-Bhikshu's
remarks,  that  in  India  a  philosopher  might  at  one  and  the
same  time  have  been  a  follower  of  the  Vedliiita  as  well  as
of  the  S&mkhya,  if  he  could  only  see  that,  where  the  two
follow  different  roads,  they  started  nevertheless  from  the
same  point  and  were  proceeding  towards  the  same  goal«
If  this  is  seen  and  accepted  in  a  historical  spirit,  it  can  do
no  harm,  though  no  doubt  there  is  danger  of  the  distinctive
features  of  each  system  becoming  blurred,  if  we  dwell  too
much  on  what  they  share  in  coijamon  or  on  what  they  may
have  shared  in  common  at  an  earlier  period  of  their
growth.  In  one  respect  Vi^/I&na-Bhikshu,  to  mention
him  only,  has  certainly  seen  more  rightly  by  not  resorting
at  once  to  the  idea  that  actual  borrowing  must  have  taken
place,  whenever  V^dAnta  and  Sd.mkhya  shared  the  same
ideas.  We  should  always  remember  that  there  must  have
beeo  a  period  of  unrestricted  growth  of  philosophical
thought  m  ancient  India,  and  that  during  that  period  philo-
sophical ideas,  whether  true  or  false,  were  common  property


288  INDIAN  PfllLOSOPHT.

and  could  bo  freely  adopted  by  different  schools  of  philo-
sophy. It  was  in  the  Siitras  that  these  sdiools  became
sterilised  and  petrified.

Cn  one  point  Vi(7Nft.na-Bhikshu  may  have  gone  too  far,
yielding  to  a  temptation  which  does  not  exist  for  ns.  To
him  not  only  Vedftnta  and  S&'Dikhya,  but  all  the  six-
Dar^anas  or  aystoms  of  philosophy  were  orthodox,  they
were  all  SmWti,  though  not  Srutu  Hence  his  natural
desire  to  show  that  they  did  not  on  any  essential  points
contradict  each  other.  After  he  had  reconciled  to  his  own
satisfaction  the  conflicting  tenets  of  Yed&nta  and  S&fiikhya,
and  had  certainly,  at  least  to  my  mind,  succeeded  in  dis-
covering the  common  background  of  both  of  them,  he
attempted  to  do  the  same  for  the  Ny&ya  and  Vaiseshika.
These  two,  as  he  says,  as  they  represent  the  Self  as  en-
dowed with  qualities,  might  seem  to  be  contradicted  by
the  Ved&nta  and  S&mkhya  which  show  that  the  Self,  or
the  Purusha,  cannot  be  endowed  with  qualities ;  but  this  is
not  so.  Nykya  and  Yai^eshika  are  intended,  as  he  thinks,
as  a  first  step  only  towards  the  truth ;  and  though  they
admit  the  Self  to  be  qualified  by  pain  and  joy,  they  teach
that  the  Self  is  at  all  events  different  from  the  body.  This
is  what  marks  the  first  advance  toward  a  right  under-
standing of  the  Self,  not  only  as  different  from  the  body,
but  as  unaffected  by  pain  and  joy,  as  neither  suffering  nor
enjoying,  as  'neither  thinking  nor  acting  in  any  way.  To
the  followers  of  the  Nydrya-philosophy  also.  Brahman,  the
Absolute,  is  Anirvaftf^ntya,  undefinable  or  inexpressible.
The  full  light,  however,  of  the  S&mkhya-doctrine  might
dazzle  the  beginner,  and  hence,  according  to  Vigrw&na-
Bhikshu,  the  usefulness  of  the  Ny&ya  and  Vaiseshika,  bs
slowly  preparing  him  for  the  acceptance  of  the  highest
truth.  There  does  not,  however,  seem  to  be  any  ancient
evidence  to  support  this  view  of  Vigf/J&na-Bhikshu's,  that
the  Nyftya  and  Vaiseshika  were  intended  as  a  preparation
only,  still  less  that  they  existed  as  systems  before  the
doctrines  of  the  Sdmkhya  began  to  influence  the  thinkers
of  India.  The  S&mkhya  is  indeed  mentioned  in  the  Mahft-
bharata  (XII,  iii,  98)  as  the  highest  truth,  but  the  other
systems  are  never  represented  as  merely  preparations  for


THE   i^ASTRA.  289

it.  They  present  themselves  as  independent  philosophies,
quite  as  much  as  the  other  Darsanas :  nor  do  I  remember
any  passage  where  Qotama  and  Eandda  themselves  repre-
sent their  teaching  as  a  mere  step  leading  to  the  higher
knowledge  of  Ve<Sjita  or  ^si'^khya,  nor  any  utterance  of
BlUlar&yaTia  or  Kapila  to  the  effect  that  such  preparation
was  required.

Hie  question  which  the  S&mkhya  may  seem  to  have  left
unanswered,  but  which  is  really  unanswerable,  is,  How
this  ^-^veka,  this  failure  of  Purusha  to  recognise  himself
as  distinct  from  Prakriti,  could  ever  have  arisen,  and  how
and  by  what  stages  the  development  of  PrakWti  may  be
supposed  to  have  taken  place  which  led  in  the  end  to  the
delusion  of  Purusha  and  made  him  look  on  the  senses,  on
the  Manas  (central  sense),  on  the  Aham  or  ego,  nay  on
Buddhi  or  intellect,  on  everything,  in  fact,  within  his
experience,  as  belonging  to  him,  as  his  own  ?  What  Kapila
widies  to  teach  is  that  nothing  is  in  reality  his  own  or
belongs  to  him  except  his  Self,  or,  as  he  calls  it,  the  Purusha.
Here  we  can  observe  a  real  diiierence  between  Sdrtnkhya
and  Vedlbita.  And  while  in  all  these  discussions  Bdxlar&-
yaim  had  only  to  appeal  to  the  Veda  in  support,  of  any  one
of  his  statements,  Eapila,  with  all  his  i-egard  for  Aptava-
faina,  had  evidently  meant  to  reason  out  his  system  hy
Mmaelf,  though  without  any  declared  antagonism  to  the
Vedas.  Hence  the  Sdtras  of  Kapila  received  the  name  of
Manana-8&stra,  institute  of  reasoned  truth.

TiM  iSiUtxa.

I{  then  it  is  asked  how  Kapila  came  to  know  anything
about  Prakriti  or  Uretoff  which,  as  superintended  by
Purusha,  is  said  to  stand  for  the  whole  of  creation,  and
how  we  ourselves  can  know  anything  about  its  various
developments,  beginning  with   Buddhi  or  intellect,  and

ring  on  from  Buddhi  to  Ahamk&ra,  the  making  of  the
or  Elgo,  or  subjectivity  as  inseparable  from  objectivity,
and  from  Ahamkdra  to  the  Tanmatras  or  subtle  substances,
fcc,  we  have  to  confess  with  the  author  of  the  Sdmkhyi^

19  "


290  IKDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

sara  that  there  was  nothing  but  the  fi&stra  itself  to
depend  on  in  support  of  what  may  be  felt  to  be  very  crude
and  startling  assertions  ^  S&sirsb  sometimes  stands  f#r
Veda,  but  it  cannot  well  be  taken  in  that  sense  here.  It
scenes  rather  to  point  to  the  existence  of  a  treatise,  such  as
the  S^mkhya-k£rik&  or  the  original  text  of  the  S&mkhya-
Siitras,  or  the  whole  body  of  S&mkhya-philosophy,  as
handed  down  from  time  immemorial  in  visknous  schools  in
India.  At  first  sight,  ner  doubt,  it  seems  strange  to  us  to
derive  Buddhi  or  Intellect  from  Prakriti,  nature,  .or  from
Avyakta,  the  undeveloped.  But  we  must  remember  that
all  these  English  renderings  are  very  imperfect.  Prakriti
is  very  different  from  nature  or  ^vo-iy,  though  there  is
hardly  a  more  convenient  term  to  render  it  by.  In  the
S&mkhya-philosophy  PrakWti  is  a  postulated  something
that  exists,  and  that  produces  everything  without  being
itself  produced.  When  it  is  called  Avyakta,  that  means
that  it  is,  at  first,  chaotic,  undeveloped,  and  invisible.

]>«v«lopmMit  of  FxakHtl,  OoMBle.

In  place  of  this  one  Prakriti  we  often  read  of  eight
Prakr^tis,  those  beginning  with  Buddhi  or  the  Manat
being  distinguished  as  produced  as  well  as  producing,
while  the  first,  the  Avyakta,  is  producing  only,  but  not
produced.  This  need  not  mean  more  than  thati^he  seven
modifications  (Yikllras)  and/orm8  of  Prakriti  are  all  effects,
and  serve  again  as  causes,  while  the  Avyakta  itself,  the
undeveloped  Prakriti,  has  no  antecedent  cause,  but  serves
as  cause  only  for  all  the  other  forms  of  Prakriti.

After  going  through  the  long  list  of  topics  which  form
the  elements  of  the  S&mkhya-philosophv,  it  may  be  well
to  try  to  give  a  more  general  view  of  Kapila's  system.

*  For  the  adual  succession  in  the  evolution  of  Ahamk4ra  from  the
Mahaty  and  of  the  Mali  at  from  Prakriti,  &c.,  the  *S'&fttra  alone,  we  are
told,  can  be  our  authority,  and  not  inference,  because  inference  <ian  only
l«ad  us  to  the  conclusion  that  all  effects  must  have  a  cause,  while  there
is  Tio  infprcticv  to  prove  either  the  succession  beginning  with  the
6]em«»nt&,  or  tliat  beginning  with  the  mind  in  the  way  in  Which  the
SAii>khya-philosop>>y  toachvs.     Tlion  what  is  mount  by  S&stra  here  ?


RETROSPECT.  29 I

Whether  we  begin  with  the  beginning,  the  ix)stiilated
Prakriti,  or  with  the  end,  the  phenomenal  world  aa  re-
flected by  the  Indriyas  and  the  Manas,  it  is  but  natural
that  Kapila  should  have  asked  himself  the  question  how
what  was  postulated  as  the  beginning,  the  undeveloped
Prakriti,  could  account  for  all  that  was  to  follow,  or  how
Ul  that  did  follow  could  be  traced  back  to  this  postulatod
Prakriti.  Given  t?  undeveloped  Praknti,  he  imagined
that  it  was  due  to  the  disturbance  of  the  equilibrium  of  its
ihree  constituents  (Gunas)  that  it  was  fii-st  awakened  to
life  and  light  or  thought,  to  physical  and  intellectual
activity.  Some  such  impulse  is  required  by  ^  ineta-
physicianxx,  a  irp&rov  kivovv.  rFhis  first  step  in  the  develop-
ment of  Prakriti,  this  first  awakening  of  the  inert  substance,
is  conceived  by  Kapila  as  Buddhi,  the  lighting  up,  and
hence,  so  long  as  it  is^coilfined  to  Prakviti,  described  as
Prnkisa,,  or  light,  the  chief  condition  of  all  perception.
After  Prakr/ti  has  thus  been  lighted  up  and  become  Buddhi,
or  potential  perception,  another  distinction  was  necessary
in  this  luminous  and  perceiving  mass,  in  this  so-called
Mahat  or  Buddhi,  namely,  the  differentiation  between  per-
ceiver  and  what  is  perceived,  between  subject  and  object.
This  was  the  work  assigned,  I  believe,  to  AhamKara,
which  I  should  prefer  to  translate  by  subjectivation  (Sub-
jectivirung,  Garbe)  rather  than  by  Ego  or  Effoism.

This  step  from  Buddhi  to  Aha7>ikrtra  has  been  compared
to  J)es  Cartes'  Cogito  ergo  sunt  \  but  is  il  not  rather  Sum,
ergo  cogito,  as  showing  th«t  being  itself  would  be  impos-
sible unless  it  were  first  lijjhted  up,  and  differentiated  into
subject  and  object;  that  e^se,  in  fact,  is  xtevcipi,  or  even
perciperet

When  the  evolution  of  the  Avvakta  has  gone  so  far,  the
question  arises,  how  this  process  of  per^^eption  could  take
place,  how  perception  is  possible  subject  iyel)^  how  it  is
possible  objectively.  If  we  begin  with  the  t^bjective  side,
the  answer  of  Xajjib  is  that-  there  must  be  Tanmatnis
(This-only),  potential  percept ibllia,  which  are  not  the  poten-
tialities of  everything  in  general,  but  of  this  and  this  on'ly


*  DAviiiSy  Hindu  Philosophy,  p   t8.

V  2


2Q2  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

(Tan-m&tra).  lliese  five  potentialities  are  Sound,  Touch,
Odour,  light,  and  Taste.  They  are  not  yet  what  is  actually
heard/ seen,  &c.,  nor  what  actually  hears  and  sees,  but  ih€y
contain  the  possibilities  of  both.  As  there  is  no  hearing
without  sound,  the  S&mkhyas  seem  to  have  argued,  neither
is  there  any  sound  without  hearing.  But  there  is  in  the
Tanm&traa  the  potentiality  of  both.  Hence,  according  to
the  division  produced  by  Ahamk&ra  into  subject  and  object^
the  live  Tanm&tras  are  realised  as  the  five  subjective
powers  of  perception,  the  powers  of  hearing,  touching,
smelUng,  seeing,  and  tasting,  and  corresponding  to  them
as  the  five  objects  of  sense,  the  objects  of  sound,  touch,
odour,  sight,  and  taste.  In  their  final  form  the  five  potential
Tanm&t)*a8  stand  before  us  in  their  material  shape,  sub*
jectively  as  ear,  skin,  nose,  eyes,  and  tongile,  objectively  as
ether,  air,  light,  water,  and  earth  (tiie,  fite  Mahfbhfttas).
These  five  supply  all  possible  and  real  fortns  under  which
perception  can  and  does  take  place.

It  should  be  remembered,  however,  that  in  order  to
account  for  perception  such  as  it  really  ig,  another,  a  sixth
sense,  is  necessary,  in  addition  to  the  five,  which  is  called
Manas,  generally  translated  by  mind,  but  really,  a  kind  of
central  organ  of  perception,  acting  aS  A  door-keeper,  meant
to  prevent  the  crowding  in  of  perecptio.  s,  to  arr^ge  them
into  percepts,  and,  as  we  should  say,  into  concepts  also,
being  in  fact  the  conditw  sine  quA  nan  of  all  >Yell-ordered
and  rational  thought.  One  might  feel  inclined  U>  translate
Manas  by  brain,  if  biain  had  not  become  so  unscientific
a  term  in  our  days.  It  might  also  be  called  the  point  of
attent/ion  and  apperception,  but  even  this  would  hardly
help  us  to  a  clear  view  of  what  Eupila  really  meant  by
Manas.  Only  we  must  guard  against  taking  this  Manas,
or  mind,  for  the  true  Self.  *  Manas  is  aa  much  a  mere
instrument  of  knowledge  and  a  product  of  Prakviti  as  the
five  senses.  They  all  are  necessary  for  the  work  of  percep-
tion, conception,  and  all  the  rest,  eja  a  kind  of  clockwork,  quite
different  from  the  highest  Self,  whether  it  is  called
Atnian  or  Piirusha.  The  Purusha  watches  the  clockwork,
an«l  is  for  a  time  misled  into  believing  in  his  identity  with
the  workings  of  Prakriti.


IS   SAJTKHTA   IDEALISM  293

This  is  but  a  poor  attempt  to  make  the  S&mkhya  tiewv
of  being  and  knowing  intelligible,  and  I  am  far  from  main-
taining that  we  have  gained,  as  vet,  a  fhll  insight  into  the
problems  which  troubled  Eapifa,  or  into  the  solutions
which  he  proposed.  What  I  feel  is,  that  it  is  not  enough
simply  to  repeat  the  watchwords  of  any  ancient  philosophy,
which  are  easily  accessible  in  the  SAtras,  but  that  .we  must
at  least  make  an  attempt  to  br|ng  those  ancient  problems
near  to  us,  to  make  them  our  own,  and  try  to  follow  the
ancient  thinkers  along  the  few  footsteps  which  they  left
behind

There  is  an  illustration  in  the  !S4mkhya-tattva-Kaumudl

26,  which  suggests  a  very  different  view  of  the  process  of
nowing,  and  deserves  to  be  taken  into  consideration :  '  As
the  seniors  of  a  village,'  they  say,  *  collect  taxes  from  the
householders  and  hand  them  over  to  the  governor  of
the  di&trict,  who  again  remits  them  to  the  treasurer,  and
the  treasurer  to  the  king,  thus  do  the  outer  senses,  when
they  have  perceived  anything,  hand  it  on  to  the  inner
sense,  the  Manas,  the  organ  which  determines  what  there
is  and  then  hands  it  over  to  Ahamkd^ra,  and  the  Ahamk&ra,
after  appropriating  it,  to  the  Buddhi,  the  supreme  Lord/
Here  Buddni,  though  supreme,  is  decidedly  different  from
the  cosmic  Buddhi  that  springs  from  the  Avyakta  and
leads  to  ^AhamikkrA ;  nor  is  it  easv  to  see  how  these  two
Buddhis,  or  rather  that  one  Buddhi  in  its  two  functions,
could  have  been  adiinitted  by  one  and  the  same  philosopher.

There  is  another  point  on  which  it  i&  difficult  to  come  to
a  clear  understanding.  We. are  asked  whether  the  Hindus
fully  realised  the  fact  that  we  are  conscious  of  our  sensa-
tions only,  arid  that  all  we  call  bodies,  or  the  outside  or
objective  world,  is  no  more  than  the  result  of  an  irresistible
inference  of  our  mind,  which  may  be  called  AvidyA.  We
arc  conscious,  no  doubt,  that  we  are  not  ourselves  the
en  use  of  our  sensations^  that  we  do  n«t  make  the  sky,  but
that  it  is  given  us.  But  beyond  that,  our  world  is  only  an
inductive  world,  it  is,  so  to  say,  our  creation ;  we  make  the
sky  concave  or  blue,  and  all  that  remains,  after  deducting


294  INDIAN   PHILOSOPflY,

both  the  primary  and  secondary  qi:alitics,  is  Prakriti  as
looked  at  by  Purusha,  or,  as  v.  a  sh*  uld  say,  das  Ding  an
hich,  which  we  can  never  know  directly.  It  is  within  iss,
or  under  our  sway;  that  this  Prakr/ti  has  grown  to  all  that
it  is,  not  excludii'.g  our  own  bodies,  our  senses,  our  Manas,
our  Tanmatras,  our  Ahamk&ra,  our  Buddhi.  Was  this  the
view  ta\en  by  the  SS.mkhyas1  Did  they  see  that  the
Sajiikara,  the  development  of  the  world,  takes  place  within
us,  is  oup  growth,  though  not  our  work,  that  the  light
which,  as  Buddhi  emerges  from  Prakriti,  is  the  light
within  us  that  has  the  power  of  perceiving  by  its  light ;
that  both  the  Aham,  the  Ego,  and  the  Tvam,  the  Non-Ego,
determine  not  only  ourselves,  but  the  whole  world,  and
that  what  we  call  the  real,  the  sensuously  perceiving  and
perceived  world,  is  no  more  than  the  development  of
thoughtless  nature  as  reflected  through  the  senses  on  our
enchanted  Self?  The  riddle  of  the  world  which  the
.S&mkhya-philosophy  has  to  solve  would  then  be  no  more
than  to  account  for  the  mistaken  interest  which  the  Self
t^kes  in  that  reflex,  the  consciousness  which  he  assumes  of
it,  the  fundamental  error  by  which,  for  a  time  at  least,  he
actually  identities  himself  with  those  images  This  identi-
fying process  would,  from  this  point  of  view,  really  take
the  place  of  what  we  call  creation.  The  closing  of  the
mental  eyelids  would  be  the  dropping  of  the  curtain  and
the  close  of  the  drama  of  the  world ;  and  this  final  recogni-
tion of  our  cosmic  misconception  would  lead  the  Self  back
from  the  stage  of  the  world  to  himself,  would  undo  all
creation,  and  put  an  end  to  that  suffering  which  is  the
result  of  bondage  or  finiteness.

It  sometimes  seems  to  me  as  if  such  views  had  been  at
the  bottom  of  all  Hindu  philosophy,  though  forgotten
again  or  obscured  by  a  belief  in  that  reality  which  deter-
mines our  practical  life  (Vyavah&ra).  By  admitting  this
blending  of  cosmic  and  psychological  views,  much  in  the
Samkhya-philosophy  would  cease  to  be  obscure,  the  Buddhi
of  the  world  and  the  Buddhi  of  ourselves  would  indeed
become  one,  and  the  belief  in  the  reality  of  things,  both
objective  and  subjective,  mi^ht  truly  be  explained  as  due
to  Aviveka,  the  absence  of  discrimination  between  the  Self


PUBUSHA  AND   ?RAKJtin.  ?95

and  the  imagery  of  nature.  It  would  become  intelligible
why  Prakriti  should  be  supposed  to  play  her  part  so  loW
gnly  as  it  was  noticed  bv  Ftuusha;  it  would  explain  why
Prakriti,  by  itself,  was  taKen  as  A^etana,  objective,  thought-
lessy  and  the  Purusha  only  as  subjective,  conscious  and
thinking;  why  in  its  solitude  Purusha  was  conceived  as
not  active,  but  I^kriti  as  always  active;  why  Purusha
should  sometimes  mean  the  eteiiial  Self,  and  sometimes
man  such  as  he  is  or  ima^nes  himself  to  be,  while  in-
terested in  the  world,  believmg  in  the  world,  and  yet  with
a  constant  longing  after  a  higher  and  truer  state,  freedom
from  the  world,  freedom  from  pain,  freedom  from  all  cosmic
bdngy  freedom  as  alone  with  himself.

Ponuto  Mid  FxakHfcL

But  if  we  may  credit  the  founders  of  the  Sd^mkhya^
whether  Kapila  or  Asuri  or  Pa^iasikha,  with  such  ad-
vanced views,  if  they  really  had  made  it  quite  dear  to
themselves  that  human  beings  cannot  have  Miything  but
their  own  knowledge,  we  can  understand  why  they  should
have  represented  the  whole  process  of  perception  and  com-
bination, aU  J07  and  pain,  and,  in  consequence,  aU  willing
also,  as  belonging,  not  to  the  Purusha  or  the  Self,  but  to
a  stranger,  to  the  Manas,  and  indirectly  to  Prakriti,  while
the  Purtuskha,  when  he  seems  to  see,  to  combine,  to  rejoice,
to  suffer,  and  to  will,  does  so  by. misapprehension  only,
like  a  spectator  who  is  carried  away  by  his  sympathies  for
Hecuba,  but  who  in  the  end  dries  his  tears  ana  stops  his
sighs,  leaves  the  theatre  of  the  world,  and  breathes  the
fresh  air  of  a  bright  night  The  Sd/?7ikhya  uses  this  very
simile.  The  whole  development  of  Prakriti,  it  is  said,
takes  place  only  when  Purusha  is  looking  on  the  dancer,
that  is,  on  Prakr/ti,  in  all  her  disguises.  If  he  does  not
look,  she  does  not  dance  for  him,  and  as  soon  as  he  turns
his  eyes  entirely  away  from  her,  she  altogether  ceat>e3  to
try  to  plefose  him.  She  may  please  othei*8  who  are  still
looking  at  her,  and  so  far  it  may  be  said  that  she  is  never
annihiTftted,  because  there  will  always  be  new  PuruHhos  to
be  enchanted  and  enchained  for  awhile,  but  at  last  to  be
set  free  by  her.


296  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

•tett  of  Vnnulub,  wbmi  rr«e.

Often  has  the  question  been  asked,  What  then  becomes  of
the  Purusha,  after  the  spell  of  Prakriti  has  been  broken,
and  he  has  ceased  to  take  any  interest  in  the  phantasma-
goria of  the  world,  thrown  on  him  by  the  Manas  and  all  the
products  of  Prakriti  that  support  the  Manas.  But  this  is  a
question  which  no  philosophy  can  be  expected  to  answer.
Ail  that  can  be  said  is  that  Purusha,  freed  from  all
Prakritic  bonds,  whether  ignorance  or  knowledge,  joy  or
sorrow,  would  remain  himself,  would  be  what  he  alone  can
be,  unrestricted,  not  interfered  with,  free  and  indepiendent,
and  hence,  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word,  perfect  and
happy  in  himself.  This  ineffable  state  of  bliss  has  naturally
shared  the  fate  of  similar  conceptions,  such  as  the  oneness
with  Brahman,  the  NiA»reyada  or  Non  plus  vUra,  and  the
NirvflTia  of  the  Buddhists.  In  the  eyes  of  less  advanced
thinkers,  this  unfathomable  bliss  assumed  naturally  the
character  of  paradisiacal  happiness  painted  in  the  most
brilliant  and  even  sensuous  colours,  while  to  the  truly
enlightened  it  represented  tranquillity  (iS4nti),  perfect  rest,
and  self-satisfaction.  While  I  agree  with  Dr.  1)ahlmann  ^
that  the  Buddhist  idea  of  Nirvd^na  was  the  same,  origin-
ally, as  that  of  the  higher  bliss  of  the  Yed&nta  and  Slm-
khya-philosophy,  I  cannot  believe  that  it  was  borlX)wed  by
the  Buddhists  from  either  of  those  systems.  Nirv&na  was
one  of  the  ideas  that  were  in  the  air  in  India,  and  it  was
worked  out  by  Buddha  as  well  as  by  Kamla  and  B&dar&-

Jrana,  but  by  each  in  his  own  fashion.  The  name  itself,
ike  many  technical  terms  of  Buddha's  teaching,  was  no
doubt  Br&hmanic.  It  occurs  in  the  YedAnta,  though  it  is
absent  in  the  S&mkhya-Siitras.  We  see  in  the  Buddhist
Suttas  how  it  was  used  by  the  Buddhists,  at  first,  in  the
simple  sense  of  freedom  from  passion,  but  was  developed
higher  and  higher,  till  in  the  end  it  became  altogetner
negative.  If  it  had  been  simply  taken  over  by  Buddha
from  some  individual  teacher  of  an  established  philosophy,,
it  would  betray  its  origin,  while  we  see  it  spring  up  as

^  Nirv&fia,  eine  Studie  zur  VorgMohiohte  des  Buddhitmiui  ▼on  Jo«^ph
Dahlounn,  S.J.    Berlin,  1896.


MEANING   OP   PAIN.  297

naturally  in  Buddha's  philosophy  as  in  that  of  BsLdar&yana
and  Kapila.  They  all  took  their  materials  from  the  same
stratum  of  thought,  and  elaborated  them  into  systehis,
probably  about  the  same  time.  But  in  spite  of  Dr.  Dahl-
mann's  very  learned  and  very  able  pleading,  I  must  say
once  more  that  I  cannot  yet  see  any  evidence  for  supposing
that  either,  Buddha  borrowed  direct  from  Eapila  or  that
Kapila  borrowed  from  Buddha.

Kapila  does  not  enter  into  a  minute  analysis  of  his  Nir-
v&na,  or»  as  he  calls  it,  Kaivalya,  aloneness.  His  object  was
to  show  how  p8.m  arose  and  how  pain  can  be  absolutely
removed.  If  freedom  from  limitation  and  pain  is  happi-
ness, that  happiness  can  be  secured  by  the  S&mkhya  just
as  much  as  by  the  Yed&nta  and  the  Buddhist-philosophy  J
but  though  the  Yed^tist  admits  happiness  f  Ananda)  by
the  side  of  existence  and  perception  (Sa£-A;it},  as  peculiar
to  the  highest  Brahman,  he  does  not  attempt  to  explain
what  kind  of  happiness  he  means;  and  some  Yecmnta
philosophers  have  actually  objected  to  Ananda  or  happi-
ness as  a  positive  predicate  of  the  ^highest  Brahman.
Negatively,  nowever,  this  happiness  may  surely  be  defined
as  freedom  from  pain,  freedom  from  all  limits  or  fetters,
and  therefore  perfect  bliss.

MMUiliiff  of  Pftin.

It  would  seem  extraordinary,  and  wholly  unworthy  of
a  great  philosopher,  if  Kapila  had  had  eyes  for  the  ordinary
sufferings  only  which  are  entailed  on  all  the  sons  of  men.
He  must  have  known  that  there  is  happiness  also  for  them,
and  something  between  suffering  ana  nappiness,  the  even
tenoor  of  a  man*s  life.  Kapila  meant  something  else  bv
pain.  He  seems  to  have  felt  what  Schelling  felt,  that  sad-
nese  cleaves  to  all  finite  life,  but  that  is  very  different  from
alwavs  being  intent  on  getting  rid  of  the  sufferings  inherent
^in  life  on  earth.  Kapila  evidently  meant  by  Du/ikha  or
pain  something  moi'e  than  pliynical  or  even  mental  suffer-
ing, namely  the  consciousness  of  being  conditioned,  limited,
or  fettered,  which  is  inseparable  from  this  life.  But  what-
ever suffering  he  may  have  meant,  the  method  sn^ggested
by  him  for  its  removal  is  certainly  bold  and  decided.    All


298  INDIAN  PHILOSOPflr.

this  suffering,  he  tells  ns,  is  not,  as  we  imagine,  our  suffer-
ing. Like  the  whole  evolution  of  Prakr^ti,  this  suffering
also  belongs  to  Prakr^ti  and  not  to  ourselves,  not  to  th^
Puruflhaa.


In  order  to  explain  the  world,  we  have  to  admit  not  only
Prakriti,  rising  in  the  form  of  Buddhi,  AhamksLra,  and
Manas  to  the  height  or  the  depth  of  individual  existence,
perception,  and  action,  but  likewise  another  quite  indepen-
dent being,  the  Purusha,  the  real  or  the  better  and  truer
Self,  and  therefore  very  much  the  ^same  as  the  Atman  of
the  Yed&nta.  Both  Purusha  and  Atman,  it  should  be  re-
membered, are  absent  in  Buddha's  teaching,  and  by  their
removal  the  idea  of  Nirv&na  has  become  almost  meaning-
lesa  But  on  this  point  also  we  must  wait  for  further
light

With  Eapila  the  Purusha  or  Self  always  remains,  aiter
as  well  as  before  his  release.  It  is  true  he  is  only  the
looker  on  of  all  that  takes  place  through  Prakriti,  looking
as  it  were  into  a  glass  m  which  all  the  doings  of  Prakriti
are  mirrored.  For  a  time  by  some  strange  want  of  discern-
ment, this  Purusha,  always  one  of  many  Purushas,  forgets
his  true  nature  and  identifies  himself  with  this  image  of
PrakWtL  He  imagines  therefore  that  he  himself  fieea  and
hears,  that  he  himself  suffers  and  rejoices,  that  he  himself
is  an  I,  really  possessing  all  that  the  world  offers  to  him,
and  imwilling  to  give  it  up  again,  whether  in  life  or  in
death.  His  very  hody,  however,  his  organs  of  sense,  nay
his  mind  and  his  individuality,  are  neither  he,  nor  his ;  and
if  he  can  only  learn  the  wisdom  of  Kapila,  he  is  for  ever
above  the  body,  above  all  sensation,  above  all  suffering.
Nay  Prakriti  even,  which  has  no  soul,  but  acts  only  as  im-
pelled by  her  nature  when  looked  at  by  Purusha.  ceases  her
jugglery  as  soon  as  Purusha  turns  away,

VMkrtti  Ml  ▲utonifttoaf

It  might  possibly  help  us  to  understand  the  relation  be-
tween Purusha  and  Prakn'ti  Utter,  if  we  saw  in  Prakriti
an  automaton,  such  as  Des  Cartes  described,  performing  all


PBAiU?/riS   UNS£LFISHNESS.  299

the  functions  which  we  consider  onr  own  and  which  are
common  to  man  and  animals,  as  in  fact  a  mere  mechanism,
•and  if  we  took  the  rational  soul,  the  Purusha,  as  the  chose
j^ensanvte,  superadded  to  the  automaton.  It  was  Professor
Haxley  who  showed  that,  as  a  consequence  of  this  assump-
tion, all  our  mental  conditions  might  be  regarded  as  simply
the  symbols  (Pratibimba)  in  consciousness  of  the  changes
which  take  place  automatically  in  the  organism.  In  the
same  way  all  the  changes  of  PrakHti,  from  mere  sensation
to  conceptual  thought,  might  be  taken  as  including  pain
and  joy  and  consequent  action,  the  working  of  Prakriti,
independent  of  the  looker  on,  although  that  looker  on  in
his  enchanted  state  imagines  that  he  is  himself  doing  what
in  reality  Prakriti  is  doing  for  him.  This  is  beautifiilly
illustrated  by  tha  simile  0?  the  dancing-girl  to  which  we
referred  before,  but  who  is  here  represented  not  only  as
intent  on  pleasing  and  beguiling  Purusha,  but  as  trying
herself  to  open  his  eyes  and  make  him  free  from  her  charms
and  fetters.  We  thus  get  a  new  application  of  the  simile
mentioned  before.

We  read  in  the  Karikas  59-62:  *As  a  dancer  having
exhibited  herself  on  the  stage  ceases  to  dance,  so  does
Nature  (Prakriti)  cease,  when  she  ha3  made  herself  mani-
fest to  Purusha.

60.  In  many  ways  Prakriti  serves  Purusha,  who  yet
does  nothing  for  her  in  return ;  she  is  noble  minded  and
cares  only  for  the  welfare  of  him  who  is  so  ungrateful
to  her.

61.  There  is  nothing  more  modest,  I  think,  than  Prakrtti,
who  does  not  exjx)se  herself  again  to  the  gaze  of  Purusha
after  she  knows  that  she  has  been  gaze<l  at.

62.  No  Purusha  is  therefore  really  chained,  nor  does  he
become  free,  or  wander;  PrakWti  alone,  dependent  as  she
is  on  different  Purushas,  wanders  from  bii-th  to  birth,  is
bound,  and  is  freed.'  ^

In  fact  it  would 'seem  that  Prakriti,  in  enchanting  or
binding  Purusha,  has  no  dbject  in  view  except  that  Purusha


30O  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

should  in  the  end  perceive  his  fetters,  and  by  discrimination
become  free  from  them  (E&rik&  59).

Here  is  indeed  the  Gordian  knot  of  the  whole  S&?}ikhva-
philosophy.  We  believe  for  a  time  in  our  own  physical
nature  and  in  the  nature  by  which  we  are  surrounaed,  and
so  long  as  we  do  this,  we  suffer.  We  are  exposed  to  all
kinds  of  pain,  till  our  eyes  are  opened  and  we  learn  that
it  is  Prakriti  that  sees  and  acts,  that  kills  and  is  killed,
that  suffers,  while  we  imagine  that  we  ourselves  do  and
suffer  all  this.  As  soon  as  this  insight  has  been  gained,  as
soon  as  Purusha  has  distin^ished  between  himself  and  what
is  not  himself,  liberation  is  achieved  at  once,  and  the  dance
of  life  is  ended  for  ever,  at  least  so  far  as  the  liberated  Self
is  concerned.  Until  that  final  liberation  has  been  accom-
plished and  everything  like  body  has  been  completely  re-
moved,  trensmigratipn  continues,  and  the  Porusta  18  sup-
posed  to  be  clothed  in  what  is  called  the  LiAga-sartra,  or
subtle  body.  Whatever  we  may  think  of  the  truth  of  such
A  system  we  cannot  help  admiring  its  consistency  through-
out, and  its  boldness  and  heroism  in  cutting  the  Gotdian
knot.

ChroM  aad  SnMto  8o4j.

The  idea  of  a  subtle  body  by  the  side  of  our  gross  body
is  very  natural ;  and  we  know  that  among  the  Greeks  also
Pythagoras  claimed  a  subtle  ethereal  clouiing  f6r\he  soul
apart  from  its  grosser  clothing  when  united  with  the  body.
But  the  exact  nature  of  that  subtle  body  and  its  relation  to
the  grosser  body  is  by  no  means  as  clear  as  we  could  wish
it  to  be.

Both  S&mkhyas  and  Ved&ntists  agreed  in  admitting  the
necessity  of  a  subtle  body  in  order  to  make  the  process  of
migration  after  death  intelligible.^  In  the  VcuSnta  the
name  of  that  body,  or  vehicle,  or  A«raya  for  the  journey
of  the  soul  from  existence  to  existence  is  Silkshma-sarira,
the  subtle  body.  The  Vecl&.ntists  look  upon  tliis  thiu  and
transparent  vehicle  of  the  soul  as  a  seminal  or  potential
(Vlga  or  fi^akti)  body,  which  at  death  leaves  the  coarse
material  body,  without  being  injui^d  itself.  This  subtle
body  arises,  according  to  the  Yedanta,  from  the  so-called
Up^his  (conditions),  and  consists  of  the  senses  of  the  body


6B0S8   AND  SUBTLE   BODY.  3OI

^driyas),  both  perceptive  (Buddhlndriyas)  and  active
[Karngiendriyus),  and  of.  Manas  (mind),  of  Buddhi  Qntellect)^
vedan&  (sensation),  iinplying  beyond  its^jlf  the  Vishayas,
objects  required  for  sensation  and  presupposed  already  by
Manas.  Its  physical  life  is  dependent  on  the  Mukhya
Tri/m,  the  vital  spirit,  and  on  the  five  PrknaA,  the  special-
ised spirits.  Its  Ihdriyas  or  senses  are  not  to  be  taken  as
the  external  organs  of  sense^  such  as  ears,  eyes,  &c.,  but  as
their  functions  only  (Yritti).  This  subtle  and  invisible  bodv
or  Siikshma-sarira  remains,  a<^K>rding  to  the  Yed&nta,  till
true  knowledge  arises,  and  the  individual  soul  recovers  its
true  being  in  Brahman.  The  Ved&ntists  are,  however,  by
no  means  consistent  in  their  views  on  these  two  bodies,  the
subtle  and  the  coarse  body  (SiikshmaT^i  and  SthMam  ^Sari-
ram),  or  on  the  process  by  which  the  one  affects  or  controls
the  other.  At  the  final  dissolution  of  the  coarse  body  we
are  told  that  the  Indriyas  are  absorbed  in  the  Manas,  the
Manas  in  the  Mukhya  PrslTia,  this  in  the  GIva,  the  indivi-
dual, and  this  in  the  Isubtle  body ;  but  neithei  the  Upani-
shads  nor  the  Yed&nta-Si^tras  are  always  quitef  consistent
and  clear  in  their  views  on  the  subject,  and  it  seems  to  me
useless  to  attempt  to  reduce  their  various  jesses  to  one
unifonr  theoy.

In  the  S&mkhya-philosophy  this  Siikshma-sarlra  appears
as  lai^ga-aanra,  or  the  sign-body.  The  SthiUa-sadra  or
coarse  material  body  consists,  according  to  some  S&mkhya
teachers,  of  the  five  or  four  coarse  elements  (Bh&tas),  ac-
cording to  others  of  the  element  of  the  earth  only,  and  is
made  up  of  six  coverings,  hair,  blood,  flesh,  sinews,  bones
and  marrow.  The  subtle  or  inner  body,  sometimes  called
the  vehicle,  or  the  AtivSJiikd-^arira,  is  formed  of  eighteen
elements^,  of  (i)  Buddhi,  (2)  Aliamkara,  (3)  Manas,  (4-8)
the  five  TanmMras  or  Si^kshma-bhCttas,  and  (9-18)  the  ten
senses.  This  body  is  of  course  invisible,  but  without  it  the
coarse  body  would  be  useless.  It  forms  what  we  should
call  our  personality,  and  causes  the  difference  in  the  char-

^  K&rik&  40,  and  Samkhya-Siitras  III,  9.  Why  tho  Linga-sarira  shnuld
be  said  to  consist  of  seventeen  and  one  (Saptada«aikam)  elements^  is
difficult  to  say,  unless  £ka  is  taken  for  the  Purusha  who,  for  the  time
being,  idontifit/s  him*«clf  with  the  subtk  body.


207  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

acters  of  individoala,  being  itself  what  it  has  been  made  to
be  by  former  work&  All  fitness  for  reward  and  punish*
ment  attaches  to  it,  not  to  the  Purashas  who  are  all  alike
and  nnchanging,  and  it  likewise  detertnines  by  means  of
its  acquired  dispositions  the  gross  bodies  into  which  it  has
to  enter  from  life  to  life,  till  final  freedom  is  obtained  by
the  Purusha ;  and  not  only  the  gross  body,  but  the  subtle
body  also  is  reabsorbed  in  Prakriti.

Thm  Atktiam  of  XftplU.

We  have  still  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  charge  of
atheism  brought  against  the  Sllmkhyas.  It  seems  certainly
strange  that  at  this  early  time  and  surroundefl  as  he  no
doubt  was  by  sacrifices  and  hymns  addressed  to  the  in-
numerable Vedic  Devas,  nothing  should  have  been  said  by
Kapila  either  for  or  against  these  beings.  Most  lil^ely  at
his  time  and  before  his  time,  the  different  Devas  of  the
popular  religion  had  already  been  eclipsed  in  the  minds
of  thoughtful  people  by  one  Deity,  whether  Pragf^pati,
Vi«vakarman,  or  Brahman.  Both  Pra^&pati  and  Branrnft
are  mentioned  in  the  Tattva-saniasa-bhashya.  But  even
such  a  supreme  Deva  or  Adhideva  is  never  asserted  or
denied  by  Kapila.  There  is  a  place  in  his  system  for  anj'
number  of  subordinate  Devas,  but  there  is  none  for  God,
whether  as  the  creator  or  as  the  ruler  of  all  things."  There
is  no  direct  denial  of  such  a  being,  no  oiit-spoken  atheism
in  that  sense,  but  there  is  simply  no  place  left  for  him  in
the  system  of  the  world,  as  elalx)rated  by  the  old  philo-
sopher. He  had,  in  fact,  put  nearly  everything  that  be-
longed to  God  into  Prak7'iti,  only  tliat  this  PrakrZti  is  taken
as  purely  objective,  and  as  working  without  a  conscious
purpose,  unless  wlien  looked  at  by  Purusha,  and  then
working,  as  we  are  told,  for  his  benefit  only.

Tliis  has  sometimes  been  illustrated  by  what  must  have
been  a  very  old  fable,  viz.  that  of  a  cripple  who  could  not
walk,  meeting  another  cripple  who  could  not  see.  A.s  they
could  not  live  by  themselves,  they  lived  t(]gether,  the  lame
one  mounting  on  the  shoulders  of  the  blind  one.  Pmkriti.
we  are  told,  was  the  blind,  I'uruslia  the  lame  traveller.

We  must  remember,  however,  that  Prakr/ti,  though  blind.


THE   ATHEISM   OP   KAPILA.  3O3

is  always  conceived  as  real,  because  the  Sftmkhya-philoeophy
looks  upon  everything  that  is,  as  proceeding  out  of  some-
thing that  is  real  (Satk&ryav&da).  And  here  we  see  a^ain,
the  Sindamental  difference  between  the  SiLmkhya  and  the
other  philosophies,  as  V&£aspati-Mi«ra  has  pointed  ont  in
his  commentary  on  the  Sllmkhya-klLrik&  9.  The  Buddhist
takes  the  real  world  as  the  result  of  nothing,  the  Veddntist
takes  the  unreal  world  as  proceeding  from  something  real,
Naiy&yika  and  Yaiseshika  derive  what  does  not  yet  exist
from  what  does  exists  while  the  S&mkhyas  derive  what  is
from  what  is  ^

If  it  be  asked  how  the  unconscious  Prakriti  began  to  «
work  and  attract  the  attention  of  Purusha,  Eapila  has  an
answer  ready.  The  Ourias,  he  says,  are  first  in  a  state  of
equipoise,  but  as  soon  as  one  of  the  three  preponderates,
there  is  tension,  and  Prakriti  enters  on  the  course  of  her
unceasing  kbours,  beginning  with  the  emanation  of  Buddhi,
and  ending  with  the  )ast  of  the  twenty-four  Tattvas.

There  is  this  didereuee  also  betw;een  the  atheism  of
Kapiia  and  that  of  other  atheistic  systems  of  philosophv,
that  Kapiia  nowhere  puts  himself  into  a  hostile  attituae
towards  the  Divine  idea.  He  nowhere  denies  distinctly  the
existence  even  of  the  purely  mythologic-^I  gods,  such  as
Indra,  which  is  strange  indeed ;  nor  does  he  enter  on  any
axgumcnts  to  disprove  the  existence  of  one  only  God.  He
simply  says — and  in  that  respect  he  does  not  differ  much
from  Kant — that  there  are  no  logical  proofs  to  establish
that  existence,  but  neither  does  he  offer  any  such  proofs
for  denying  it.  We  know  that  Kant,  honest  thinker  as  he
was,  rejected  all  the  logical  proofs  of  the  existence  of  Deity
as  insufficient,  and  based  the*  arguments  for  his  belief  in
God  on  purely  ethical  grounds.  .Though  we  have  no  right
to  assume  anything  of  the  kind  with  regard  to  Kapiia,
when  brought  face  to  face  with  this  great  religious  and
moral  problem,  the  existence  of  a  supreme  God,  we  ought
to  parK  his  imnartiality  and  the  entire  absence,  in  the
whole  of  his  phuosopby,  of  anything  like  animus  against
a  belief  in  God.    The  Devas  he  could  hardly  have  seriously

»  Uarbe,  Samkhya-Pbilosoplilo,  p  202.


304  indUn  philosophy.

believed  in,  we  should  sa;^,  and  ^et  he  spares  them  and
allows  them  to  exist,  possibly  with  the  reservation  that
people,  in  worshipping  them,  were  unconsciously
mg  the  true  Purusha.  We  should  not  forget
many  people  atheism  meant,  and  means,  a  denial  of  Devas
rather  than  the  denial  of  the  one,  only  Ood,  the  First
Cause  of  the  world.  This  whole  question,  however,  will
be  better  discussed  when  we  reach  the  To^a-philosophy
and  have  to  Examine  the  arguments  produced  by  PektaJigeli
against  Kapila,  and  in  support  of  the  admission  of  a  Su-
preme Being,  generally  called  l^vara,  the  Lord

XauniNE»Utj.  of  tlM  Mmklija.

It  has  also  been  said  that  Eapila's  system  is  not  only
without  a  Gk>d,  but  likewise  without  any  morality.  But
though  it  is  quite  true  that,  according  to  Ka];  ila,  rorusha
in  his  perfect  state  is  non-mond,  neither  merit  nor  demerit,
virtue  nor  vice,  existing  any  longer  for  him,  he  is  certainly
not  allowed  to  be  immoral.  The  S&mkhya,  like  the  YcdlLnta
and  other  systems  of  Indian  philosophy,  implies  strong
moral  sentiment  in  the  belief  in  E^arman  (deed)  and  trans-
migration. Kapila  also  holds  that  deeds,  when  once  done,
can  never  cease,  except  at  the  time  of  Moksha,  but  produce
effect  after  effect,  both  in  this  life  and  in  the  lives  to  come.
This  is  one  of  the  unalterable  convictions  in  the  BSndu
mind.  There  is,  besides  the  admission  of  virtue  and  vice,
the  dispraise  of  passion  and  the  praise  of  dispassion.  These
are  represented  as  forms  of  Buddhi,  as  Riipas  or  Bh&vas,
forms  or  states,  inherinsf  in  Buddhi.  and  therefore  following
the  Li6ga-5artra  from,  birth  to  birth.  Nay,  it  is  distinctly
added  that  going  upward  is  due  to  virtue,  going  downward
to  vice,  so  that  virtue,  as  a  preliminary,  is  really  indis-
pensable to  final  liberation.  It  may  be  true  that  in  this
way  morality  is  reduced  to  mere  calculation  of  consequences,
but  even  such  a  calculation,  which  is  only  another  name
for  reasoning,  would  serve  as  a  strong  incentive  to  morality.
Anyhow  there  is  no  ground  for  saying  that  Kapila's  system
i^iores  ordinary  morality,  stiil  less  that  it  encourages
vice.


8Ai/KHTA   PARABLES.  365


Mmkliyft  MvablM.


There  is  one  more  feature  of  the  S&mkhya  that  deserves
to  be  mentioned,  because  it  is  not  found  in  the  other  Indian
philosophies,  but  may  be  supposed  to  have  suggested  to
the  Buddhists  their  method  of  teaching  by  parables.
A  whole  chapter  of  the  Sdtras,  the  fourth,  is  assigned  to
a  collection  of  stories,  each  of  which  is  meant  to  illustrate
some  doctrine  of  Kapila's.  Some  are  very  much  to  the
point,  and  they  can  be  appealed  to  by  one  word,  so  as  to
recall  the  whole  lesson  which  they  were  meant  to  teach.
The  first  is  meant  to  illustrate  the  complete  change  that
comes  over  a  man  when  he  has  been  taught  his  true  nature
by  means  of  the  Sftmkhya.  *  As  in  the  case  of  the.  son  of
a  king/  The  story  which  follows  is  that  a  young  prince
who  was  bom  under  an  unlucky  star,  was  taken  out  of  his
capital  and  brought  up  by  a  iSabara,  a  kind  of  wild  man
of  the  woods.  When  he  grew  up  he  naturally  thought
that  he  himself  was  a  5abara,  and  lived  accordingly.  But
a  min]«jter,  who  had  found  out  that  the  prince  was  alive,
went  to  him  secretly  and  told  him  that  he  was  the  son  of
the  king,  and  not  a  /Sahara.  At  once  the  prince  gave  up
the  idea  that  he  was  a  savage,  believed  that  he  was  a
prince,  and  assumed  a  truly  royal  bearing.  In  the  same
manner  a  man  who  has  been  told  his  true  character  by  his
teacher,  surrenders  the  idea  that  he  is  a  material  and  mortal
l^ing,  and  recovers  his  true  nature,  saying  '  As  a  son  of
Brahman  I  am  nothing  but  Brahman,  and  not  a  being
different  from  him  in  this  phenomenal  world.'

The  commentator  adds  an  extract  from  the  Qarucfa-
Purkns,  which  must  have  been  borrowed  from  a  S&mkhya
source : —

*  As  everything  that  is  made  of  gold  is  known  as  gold,  if
even  from  one  small  piece  of  gold  one  has  learnt  to  know
what  sold  is,  in  the  same  way  from  knowing  God  the  whole
world  becomes  known.  -

As  a  Brfthman  possessed  by  an  evil  spirit,  imagines  that
he  is  a  iSiidra,  but,  when  the  possession  is  over,  knows
that  he  is  a  Br&hman,  thus  the  soul,  possessed  by  Mfty&y
imagines  that  it  is  the  body,  but  after  M&y&  has  come  to

20


306  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

an  end,  it  knows  its  own  tme  being  again,  and  says,  I  am
a  Br&hman/

The  seventh  illustration  is  '  like  a  cut-off  hand,'  and  k
meant  to  teach  that;  as  no  one  takes  his  hand  again  after
it  has  once  been  cat  off.  no  one  should  identify  himself  with
anything  objective,  after  having  once  surrendered  the  illu-
sion of  the  objective.  The  sixteenth,  to  which  I  called
attention  many  years  ago  as  connected  with  old  Aryan
folklore,  is  meant  to  teach  that  even  an  accidental  negli-
gence may  be  fatal  to  our  reaching  the  highest  goal,  as  in
the  case  of  the  '  frog- wife.'

The  story  is  that  of  a  king  who,  while  hunting,  had  seen
a  beautiful  girl  in  a  forest.  She  became  his  wife  on  condi-
tion that  he  should  never  let  her  see  water.  He  gave  the
promise,  but  once  when  the  queen,  tired  after  playing,
asked  him  for  some  water,  he  forgot  his  promise,  and
brought  her  some,  whereupon  the  daughter  of  the  frog-
king  became  a  frog  (Bheki),  and  disappeared  in  the  lake.
Neither-nets  nor  anything  else  was  of  any  avail  for  bringing
her  back,  the  king  had  lost  her  for  ever.  Thus  true  know-
ledge also  will  disappear  by  one  act  of  negligence,  and  will
never  return.

This  system  of  teaching  by  parables  was  very  popular
with  the  Buddhists,  and  it  is  just  possible  that  the  first
impulse  may  have  come  from  the  followers  of  Kabila,  who
are  so  often  called  Erypto-buddhists  or  Fra^A^Aanna-
Bauddhas.

I  have  called  attention  already  to  the  fact  that  these
illustrative  parables,  though  they  do  not  occur  in  the
E&rikdfi  and  in  the  Tattva-samSsa,  must  have  existed  al!
the  time  in  the  Parampar&  of  the  Br&hmans,  because  theji
appear  in  the  modem  Siitras,  that  is  in  the  sixteenth
century.  Like  the  Siitras  referring  to  these  stories,  other
SAtras  also  may  occur  in  our  modem  collection  of  S^mkhya-
Siitras,  which  existed  for'  centuries,  as  handed  down  by
tradition,  but  were  omitted  in  the  Karik^  and  even  in  the
Tattva-sam&sa.


CHAPTER  VII.


Tog»  Mid  SAMkh jft.


The  relation  ot  the  To:;a.  to  the  S&^ikhya-philoeophy  is
not  easy  to  determine,  buri  the  Bhagava(l~gtt4  Y,  4,  goes  so
far  AS  to  say  that  children  only,  not  learned  people,  distin-
guish between  S&ryikhya  and  Yoga  at  all,  as  it  were  between
faith  (knowledge)  and  works.  We  £nd  the  S&mkhya  and
7oga  represented,  each  in  its  own  SAtras,  which  are  bscribed
to  different  authora,  Eapila  and  Pata/7^ali  ^  and  they  are
spoken  of  in  the  dnsi  as  the  two  old  systems  (Mah&bh.  XII,
104,  67) ;  but  we  also  find  a  philosophy  called  Sa^^ikhya-
yoga  (Svetftav.  Up.  II,  13),  and  this  not  as  a  Dvandva,  as  it
were,  Samkhya  and  Yoga,  but  as  one  philosophy,  as  a
neuter  sing.,  representing  Yoga  and  Ssttiikhya  together  as
one,  or  possibly  as  Yoga  belonging  to  the  S^mkbya.  Thus
we  read  again  in  the  Bhagavad-gita.  V,  5,  that  he  who
understands  Samkhya  and  Yoga  to  be  one,  understands
aright.  Yoga,  in  the  sense  of  ascetic  practices  and  medita-
tions,  may  no  doubt  have  existed  in  India  in  very  ancient
thnes.  It  iii  called  Puifttana  (old),  (B.  G.  IV,  3),  and  this  is
probably  what  the  author  of  the  Bhagayad-gitsl  (IV,  i),
meant,  when  he  made  the  Bhagavat  say  to  Argruna:—

'  I  declared  this  imperishable  Yoga  to  Vivas  vat,  Vivasvat
told  it  to  Manu,  Manu  to  Ikshvaku.  Thus  royal  sages
came  to  know  it,  having  received  it  througi\  tradition;  but
this  Yoga  was  lost  here  by  long  lapse  of  time.'

A  similar  oral  tradition  descending  from  Pra^&pati  to
Manu,  and  from  Manu  to  the  people  (to  Ikshv^ku,  accord-

*  The  identification  of  these  two  names  with  the  name  of  one  person
KApja  Pdtatl/cala,  who  is  mentioned  in  tlie  Satapatha-brftlimafta,  once
proposed  by  Pi-ofessor  Weber,  has  probably  long  been  given  up  by  h'tn.
See  also  Oarbe,  S&mkhya-Fhilohophie,  p.  36.

X  2


308  IKDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

ing  to  iSiftmkara)  is  mentioned  already,  in  the  f  A&ndogya
Upanishad  (III,  ji ;  VIII,  15I

It  is  much  the  same  with  the  other  philosophies,  and  w^
are  left  in  donbii  ap  to  whether  the  three  conples,  l^mkhya
and  Yc^a,  Ny&ya  and  Vai«eshika,  nay  even  Pihrva-  and
nttara-Mtin&'»?.s&,  were  amalgamations  of  systems  which
had  originally  an  independent  existence,  or  whether  they
were  differentiations  of  former  systems.    S&mkhya  and
Toga  might  easily  have  formed  one  comprehensive  systeni,
because  tiieir  divergence  with  regard  to  the  existence  of  an
Idvara,  or  Lord,  was  not  so  essential  a  point  to  tibem  as  it
seems  to  us.    l^.ose  who  wanted  an  lavara  mieht  have  him
as  a  first  and  super-eminent  Purusha ;  while  those  who  had
gone  beyond  this  want^  need  not  have  quarrelled  with
those  ^o  still  felt  it.    The  Ny&ya  and  VaiMshika  show
clear  traces  of  a  common  origin ;  while  the  two  MtmftmsAs,
which  in  character  are  more  remote  from  one  another  ihom
the  other  systems,  seem  to  sanetion,  by  their  names  at  least,
the  suspicion  of  th^ir  former  unity.    But  the  deplorable
scarcity  of  any  historical  documents  does  not  enable  us
to  go  beyond  mere  conjectures ;  and  though  the  names  of
Kapila,  Vysbsa,  and  Gotama  may  seenr  to  have  an  older  air
than  those  of  Pata//gfali,  &aimini,  and  Ean&da,  we  must
not  in  such  matters  allow  ourselves  to  be  guided  by  mere
impressions.    The  often-cited  passage  from  the  YedHnta-
Siitras  II,  1,  3,  Etena  TogaA.  pratyukta/»,  *By  this  the  Yoga
is  refuted/  proves  of  course  no  more  than  the  existence  of
a  Yo^-phiiosophy  at  the  time  of  Badac&yaim ;  it  cannot  be
uised  to  prove  the  existence  of  the  Yoga-SMras,  such  as  we
p(je>i5<;8s  them,  as  previous  to  the  composition  of  the  Yed&nta-
SOtras.

X^aniiiffB  of  tli«  word  Tog».

In  the  Biiagavad-gita  Yoga  is  defined  as  Samatva,  equa-
bility (II,  4S\  It  has  been  repeated  again  and  again  that
Yogti,  ht>iii  Yu(9,  to  join,  meant  originally  joining  the  deity,
or  union  with  it.  Even  native  authors  occasionally  tavour
that  vi(jw.  A  nionient'a  consideration,  however,  would
have  shown  that  sucli  an  idea,  could  never  have  entered  the
mind  of  a  SA77)khya,  for  tVie  simple  reason  that  there  was


TOGA,   NOT  UNION,  BUT  DISUNION.  309

nothing  for  him  that  he  conld  have  wished  to  join.  Eyen
the  Yed&ntist  does  not  reallv  join  Brahman,  thot^h  this  is
jr  very  common  misconception;  nay,  a  movement  of  the
soul  towards  Brahman  is  distinctly  guarded  against  as
impossible.  The  soul  is  always  BraJbtman,  even  though  it
does  not  know  it,  and  it  only  requires  the  removal  of
ignorance  for  the  soul  to  recover  its  Brahmahood,  or  to'
become  what  it  always  has  been.  Yu^,  from  meaning  to
join,  came,  by  means  of  a  very  old  metaphor,  to  mean  to
join  oneself  to  something,  to  harness  oneself  for  some  work.
Thus  Yng  assumed  the  sense  of  preparing  for  hard  work,
whether  preparing  others  or  getting  read^  oneself.'  And
as  people  with  us  use  the  expression  to  go  mto  harness,  ie.
to  prepare  for  work,  or  to  buckle-to,  i.  e.  to  get  ready  for
hard  work,  Yu^,  particularly  in  the  Atmanepada,  came  tp
mean  to  exert  oneself.  Possibly  the  German  Angespan^nt
and  ATispairmung  may  have  been  suggested  by  the  same
metaphor,  though  the  usual  explanation  is  that  it  was
suggested  by  a  metaphor  taken  from  the  stretching  of  the
bow.  In  Sanskrit  ^this  Yu<7  is  often  used  with  such  words
as  Manas,  Zittam,  Atman,  &c.,  in  the  sense  of  concentrating
or  exerting  one's  mind ;  and  it  is  in  this  sense  only  that  our
word  Yoga  could  have  sprung  from  it,  meaning,  9ft  ihe
Yoga-SAtois  tell  us  at  the  very  beginning,  I,  2,  the  effort
of  restraining  the  activities  or  distractions  of  our  thoughte
(JTitta^vritti-nirodha),  or  the  effort  of  concentrating  our.
thoughts  on  a  definite  object.

A  false  interpretation  of  the  term  Yoga  as  union  has  led
to  a  total  misrepresentation  of  Pata^^ali's  philosophy.
Sajendralal  Mitra,  p.  ao8,  was  therefore  quite  right  when
he  wrote:  'Professor  Weber,  in  his  History  of  Indian
Literature  (pp.  238-9),  has  entirely  misrepresented  the  case.
He  says,  *  One  very  peculiar  side  of  the  Yoga  doctrine —
and  one  which  was  more  and  more  developed  as  time  went
on^  is  the  Yoga  practice,  that  is,  the  outward  means,  such
as  penances,  mortifidgtions,  and  the  like,  whereby  this
absorption  into  the  supreme  Godhead  is  sought  to  be


1


lO  INDIAN   PHIL0801»Uir.


attained."  **  The  idea  of  absorption/'  he  continues  rightly,
''into  the  supreme  Godhead  forms  no  part  of  the  Yoga
theory."  "  FaiaJigsM,  like  Kapila,"  he  adds,  "  rests  satisfiei
with  the  isolation  of  the  soul,  ^.nd  does  not  pry  into  the
how  and  where  the  soul  abides  after  separation."'  But
when  he  charges  the  professor  with  not  naving  r^ad  the
Yoga  he  goes  a  little  too  far,  and  he  ought  to  have  known,
from  his  own  experience,  that  it  is  small  blame  to  a  man
who  writes  a  complete  histoiy  of  Indian  literature,  if  he
has  not  read  every  book  on  which  he  has  to  pronounce  an
opinion.  jEven  the  best  Ixistorian  of  German  literature  can
hardly  have  read  every  German  author  of  any  eminence,
much  less  can  the  first  historian  of  Sanskrit  lit^ature.

Rajendralal  Mitra,  however,  is  quite  right  so  far  that
Yoga,  in  the  philosophy  of  Pata/?^ali  and  Eapila,  did  not
mean  union  with  God,  or  anything  but  effort  (Udyoga,  not
Sariiyoga),  pulling  oneself  together,  exertion,  concentration.
Yoga  might  mean  union,  but  the  proper  term  would  have
been  Sa97iyoga,  Thus  we  read  in  the  Bhagavad-gtt&  11,
50:—

Buddhiyukto  <|rah&tiha  ubhe  sukritadushknte,

TasmM  yogA.ya  yu(/yasva,  yogsJi  karmasu  kauaalam.
'  He  who  is  devoted  to  knowledge  leaves  behind  both  good
and  evil  deeds ;  therefore  devote  yourself  to  Yoga,  Yoga  is
success  in  (all)  actions.'

That  native  scholars  were  well  aware  of  the  double
meaning  of  Yoga,  we  may  see  from  a  verse  in  the  beginning
of  Bhogradeva's  commentary  on  the  Yoga-Siitras,  where  he
states  that,  with  avtrue  Yogin,  Yoga,  joining,  means  really
Viyoga,  separation,  or  Viveka,  discrimination  between
Purusha  and  Prakriti,  subject  and  object,  self  and  nature,
such  as  it  is  taught  in  the  S&t)ikhya:  Pumprakrityor
viyogo*pi  yoga  ityudito  yay&,  'By  which  (teaching  of
Patai/^ali)  Yoga  (union)  is  said  to  be  Viyoga  (separation)  of
Purusha  and  Prakr;iL'


We  saw  that  this  Viyoga  or  Viveka  waa  indeed  the
highest  point  to  which  the  whole  of  the  Slimkhj^philoeophy


YOGA  AS   VIVBKA.  31 1

leads  up.  But  granted  that  this  discrimination,  this  sub-
duing and  drawing  away  of  the  Self  from  all  that  is  not
Self,  is  the  highest  object  of  philosophy,  how  is  it  to  be
reached,  and  even  when  reached,  how  is  it  to  be  maintained  ?
By  knowledge  chiefly,  would  be  the  answer  of  Kapila  (by
G/tftnayoga);  by  ascetic  exercises  delivering  the  Self  from
the  fetters  of  the  body  and  the  bodily  senses,  (by  Kar^
mayoga)  adds  Pata/7gfali.  Patan^ali  by  no  means  ignores
the  Gfi&xiSLyogsi  of  Kapila.  On  the  contrary,  he  presup-
poses it;  he  only  adds,  as  a  useful  support,  a  number  of
exercises,  bodily  as  well  as  mental,  by  which  the  senses
should  be  kept  in  subjection  so  as  not  to  interfe^  again
with  the  concentration  of  all  thoughts  on  the  Self  or  the
Purusha  ^.  *  In  that  sense  he  tells  us  in  the  second  S&tra  that
Yoga  is  the  effort  of  restraining  the  activity  or  distractions
of  our  thoughts.  Before  we  begin  to  scoff  at  the  Yoga  and
its  minule  treatment  of  postures,  breathings,  and  other
means  of  mental  concentration,  we  ought  first  of  all  to  try
to  understand  their  original  intention.  Everything  can
becofae  absurd  by  exaggeration,  and  this  has  been,  no  doubt,
the  case  with  the  self -imposed  discipline  and  tortures  of  the
Yogins.  But  originally  their  object  seems  to  have  been
no  other  than  to  counteract  the  distractions  of  the  senses.
We  all  consider  the  closing  of  the  eyelids  and  the  stopping
of  the « ears  against  disturbing  noises  useful  for  serious
meditation.  ^Hiis  was  the  simple  beginning  of  Yoga,  and
in  that  sense  it  was  meant  to  be  a  useful  addition  to  the
S&mkhya,  because  even  a  convinced  Sd.mkhya  philosopher
who  had  obtained  (r^&nayoga  or  knowledge-yoga  would
inevitably  suffer  from  the  disturbances  caused  by  external
circumstances  and  the  continual  inroads  of  the  outer  world
upon  him,  i.e.  upon  his  Manas,  unless  strengthened  to
resist  by  Karmayoga  or  work-yoga  the  ever  present  enemy
of  his  peace  of  mind.  More  minute  directions  as  to  how
this  desired  concentration  and  abstraction  could  be  achieved
and  maintained,  might  at  first  have  been  quite  harmless,

^  I  prefer,  even  in  the  Sftmkhya-philosophy,  to  render  Purusha  by
Self  rather  thto  by  man,  because  in  English  'nan  cannot  be  used  in  the
sense  of  simply  subject  or*  soul.  Besicbes,  Atwan,  Self,  is  often  used  by
Pataji^ali  himself  for  PuruBfa%  of.  Yoga-S^tras  III,  ax  ;  II,  41.


312  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHT.

but  if  carried  too  .far  they  would  inevitably  produce  tfaose
torturing  exercises  which  seemed  to  Buddha,  as  they  do  to
most  people,  so  utterly  foolish  and  uselesa  But  if  we  onx>
selves  must  admit  that  our  senses  and  all  that  they  imply
are  real  obstacles  to  q^uiet  meditation,  the  attempts  to  reduce
these  sensuous  affections  to  some  kind  of  quietude  or  equa-
bility (Sauiatva)  need  not  surprise  us,  nor  need  we  be
altogether  incredulous  as  to  the  marvellous  results  obtained
by  means  of  ascetic  exercises  by  Yogins  in  India,  as  little
as  we  should  treat  the  visions  of  St.  Francis  or  St.  Teresa
as  downright  impositions.  The  real  relation  of  the  soul
to  the  body  and  of  the  senses  to  the  soul  is  still  as  ^reat
a  mystery  to  us  as  it  was  to  the  ancient  Yogins  of  &dia,
and  their  experiences,  if  only  honestly  rebtted,  deserve
certainly  the  same  careful  attention  as  the  stigmata  of
Roman  Catholic  saints.  They  may  be  or  they  may  not
be  true,  but  there  is  no  reasofi  why  they  should  be  treated
as  a  priori  untrue.  From  this  point  of  view  it  seems  to
me  that  the  Yoga-philosophy  deserves  some  attention  on
the  part  of  philosophers,  more  particularly  of  the  pkysical
school  6f  psychologists,  and  I  did  not  feel  justified  there-
fore in  passing  over  this  system  altogether,  thou^  it
may  be  quite  true  that,  after  we  have  once  understood  the
position  of  the  Sd^mkhya-philosophy  towards  the  great
problem  of  the  world,  we  shall  not  glean  many  new  meta*
physical  or  psychological  ideas  from  a  study  of  the  Yoga.
We  must  never  forget  that,  although  our  Sanikhya-Sfttras
are  very  modem,  the  S&mkhya  as  such,  is  not,  and  is
always  presupposed  4>y  the  Yoga.  It  has  its  root<s  in  a  soil
cai^efuUy  prepared  by  centuries  of  philosophical  cultivation,
and  has  but  little  in  common  with  the  orgiastic  ecstasies
which  we  see  among  savage  tribes  of  the  present  day.  The
Hindus  also,  before  they  became  civilised  and  philosophers,
may  or  may  not  have  passed  through  such  a  phase.  But
how  little  of  true  similarity  there  really  exists  between  the
Yoga  and  Tapas  of  the  Hindus,  and  the  sweating  processes
of  the  American  Indians  in  their  steam-lxx)ths,  may  easily
be  seen  from  the  excellent  Reports  of  the  Bureau  of  Eth-
nology, by  J.  W.  Powell,  1892-3,  p.  1 17  seq.;  p.  823  seq.,  to
mention  no  other.and  more  painful  reports.


PATAi^C;ALI,  VI ASA.  3I3

Before  w6  enter  upon  an  examination  of  the  peculiar
teaching  of  the  Toga-philosophy,  a  few  words  with  refer-
ence to  the  sources  on  which  we  have  to  depend  for  our
information  miay  be  useful

The  Siltras  of  the  Toea-philosophy  are  siscribed  to  Pata/7-

Sili,  who  is  also  called  rha^nin  or  /Sesha,  th  /divine  serpent,
e  may  have  been  the  author  or  the  representaulve  of  the
^ogA-philosoph^  without  being  necessarily  the  author  of
the  S&tras,  His  date  is  of  course  uncerteun,  though  some
scholars  have,  with  great  assurance,  assigned  him  to  tl\d
second  centuiy  b.  c.  It  may  be  so,  but  we  should  sav  no
more.  Even  the  commonly  received  identification  or  the
philosopher  Patan^ali  with  Pata;?^li,  the  grammarian  and
author  of  the  MaMbh&shya,  should  be  treated  as  yet  as
a  hypothesis  only.  We  Imow  too  little  about  the  history
of  Sanskrit  proper  names  to  be  able  to  say  whether  the
samc'^xame  imphes  the  same  person.  That  is  not  the  case
in  any  other  country,  and  can  hardly  be  true  in  India
considering  how  freely  the  names  of  the  gods  or  of  great
Bishis  were  taken,  and  are  still  taken,  as  proper  names.
It  has  actually  been  asserted  that  Yy&sa,  the  author  of  a
late  commentary  on  Pata%ali's  Yoga-SCltras,  is  the  same
person  as  Yy&sa,  the  collector  of  the  Yedas,  the  reputed
author  of  the  Mah&bh&rata  and  of  the  Vedftnta-S(itra&
But  there  are  ever  so  many  Yydsas  living  even  now,  and
no  solid  argument  could  possibly  be  derived  from  the  mere
recurrence  of  such  a  name.  There  are  works  ascribed  to
Hiranya^arbha,  Harihara,  Yishnu,  &c.;  then  why  not  to
Pata^gfali  ?  It  is  of  course  aa  impossible  to  prove  that  Pata^-
^ali  the  philosopher  and  Pata^^ali  the  graiiiniarian  were
not  the  same  person,  as  to  prove  that  they  were ;  but  if
style  of  language  and  style  of  thought  are  any  safe  guides
in  such  maUers,  we  ought  certainly  to  hesiuitc,  and  should
do  so  in  any  other  literature,  before  taking  the  gmmmarian
and  the  philosopher  Pata/iri/ali  as  one  and  the  same  person.
It  would  no  doubt  be  a  great  help  if  we  could  transfer  the
date  of  the  grammarian,  the  second  century  b.c.,  to  the


314  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

author  of  our  Toga-Sdtras,  but  on  that  point  also  it  seems
to  me  better  to  wait  till  we  get  some  more  tangible  proof.
In  the  present  state  of  knowledge,  or  rather  ignorance,  of
all  dates  to  be  assigned  to  the  philosophical  SAtras,  it  is  the
duty  of  every  scholar  to  abstain  from  premature  assertions
which  only  encumber  and  obstruct  the  way  to  further  dis-
ooveries.

gtooad  Ckntuy  B.O.

The  second  century  would  certainly  be  most  welcome  as
a  date  for  any  of  our  extant  philosophical  S&tras,  but
that  is  no  excuse  for  saying  that  the  Yoga-philoiaophy  was
reduced  to  the  form  of  Siitras  in  that  century,  because  the
grammarian  Patar7^ali  has  been  referred  to  that  date.
Besides,  even  the  date  assigned  to  th^  grammarian  Pataii^ali
is  a  constructive  date  only,  and  e^ouid  not  for  the  present
be  considered  as  more  than  a  working  hypothesis..  The
fact  that  these  Yoga-Siitras  do  not  enter  on  any  controversy
might  certainly  seem  to  speak  in  favour  of  theif  being
anterior  to  the  other  Sdtras ;  but  we  saw  already  why  we
could  no  more  build  any  chronological  conclusions  <m  this
than  we  should  think  of  proving  the  anteriority  of.  our
S&mkhya-Sfttras  by  the  attacks  on  its  athei^ical  doctrines
which  occur  in  the  S  Atras  of  the  other  philosophical  systems.
I  think  we  must  be  satisfied  with  the  broad  ^Eact  that
Buddha  was  later  than  the  dassical  UpaniiBhadi^  and  that
our  philosophical  S&tras  are  later  than  Buddha,  because
they  evidently  refer  to  his  doctrines,  though  not  to  his
name.  As  to  popular  tradition,  it  is  no  aoxxbi  of  little
value,  particularly  in  India ;  still  I  doubt  whether  tradition
could  have  gone  so  completely  wrong  as  to  pxtmhesy  in  the
SaAkshepa^filamkara-Viyaya  ^  and  ebewhere  that  ffaimini,
Vydsa,  Pata>?^ali,  and  S&vikara  would  appear  on  earth  to
uproot  all  heresies,  if  they  had  lived  before  the  great  heresy
of  Buddha.  Pata/igfali  is  said  to  have  been  a  portion  of
SaAkarsharia  or  Ananta,  the  hooded  serpent  ^Sesha,  encir-
cling the  world,  and  it  may  be  for  the  same  reason  ^that
he  is  sometimes  called  Phanin  (Phanibhartri).  This  is  the
kind  of  useless  information  which  tradition  gives  us.

^  Yoga  AplioriMiu,  pw  Izvi.


OHBONOLOGT  OF  THOUGHT.  315


dLTonoloffy  of  Thoui^t.

In  India  we  must  learn  to  be  satiBfied  with  ihe  little  we
know,  not  of  the  chronology  of  years,  but  of  the  chronology
o£  thought;  and  taking  the  Toga,  in  its  systematic  form,
i  e.  in  the  Patan^ali-Siitras,  as  post-Buddhistic,  we  can
best  understand  the  prominence  which  it  gives  both  to  th€
exercises  which  are  to  help  toward  overcoming  the  dis-
tracting influences  of  the  outer  world,  and  to  the  arguments
in  support  of  the  existence  of  an  i^vara  or  Divine  Lord.
This  marked  opposition  became  intelligible  and  necessary
as  directed  agamst  Kapila  as  well  as  against  Buddha;  and
in  reading  the  Yoga-Siitras  it  is  often  difficult  to  lAy
whether  the  author  had  his  eye  on  the  one  or  the  other.
If  we  took  away  these  two  characteristic  features  of  the
To^,  4;he  wish  to  establish  the  existence  of  an  ibvara
agamst  all  4X>mers,  and  to  teach  the  means  of  restraining
the  affections  and  passions  of  the  soul,  as  a  preparation  for
true  ^knowledge,  such  as  taught  b}r  the  S&mkhya-philosophy,
litU'd  'Would  seem  to  remain  that  is  peculiar  to  Pata/rgfaii.

But  iiiough  the  Siltras  are  post-Buddhistic,  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  not  only  the  general  outlines  of  the  Sd/mkhya,
bvit  likewise  all  that  belongs  to  the  Earmayoga  or  work-
y(3ga  was  "known  before  the  rise  of  Buddhism.  Thus,  if
we  turn  to  the  Mahabh&rata,  we  find  that  the  twenty-four
principia,  with  Purusha  as  the  twenty-fifth,  are  often
mentioned,  though  arranged  and  described  in  different
way».  Then  we  read  again  (Anugtt&  XXY) :  *  That  which
sageis  by  their  understanding  memtate  upon,  which  is  void
of  sinoU,  of  taste,  of  colour,  touch  or  sound,  that  is  called
Pradiyiiia  (Prakriti).  That  PradhsLna  is  unperceived;  a
development  of  this  unperceived  power  is  the  Mahat ;  and
a  development  of  the  PradhlLna  (when  it  has)  become
Maliat,  is  Ahar^tk^ra  (egoism).  From  Ahamk&ra  is  pro-
duced the  development,  namely,  the  great  elements,  and
from  the  elements  respectively,  the  objects  of  sense  are
stafi^ed  to  be  a  development'

As  to  the  Toga-practices  or  tortures  we  know  that,
afbBT  practising  the  most  severe  Tapas  for  a  time,  Buddha
himMlf  declared  against  it,  and  raJther  moderated  than


3l6  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

enoouramd  the  extravagant  exeieisea  of  Br&hmanie  as-
oetic&  His  own  experience  at  the  beginning  of  his  career
had  oonyinced  him  of  their  nselessness^  nay,  of  their
danger.  But  a  moderately  ascetic  life,  a  kind  of  via
mealay  remained  throughout  the  ideal  of  Buddhism,  and
we  can  well  understand  that  the  Br&hmans,  in  trying  to
hold  their  own  against  the  Buddhists,  should  have  tried  ta
place  before  tiie  people  an  even  more  perfect  system  of
asceticism.  And,  lest  it  should  be  supposed  that  the
S&mkh^ra-philosophy,  which  was  considered  as  orthodox
or  Vedic,  had  given  its  sanction  to  Buddha's  denial  of  an
Atman  and  Brahman,  which  was  far  more  serious  than  the
denial  of  an  l«vara.  Lord,  it  would  have  seemed  all  the
more  necessary  to  protest  decidedly. against  such  denial,
and  thus  to  satisfy  the  ingrained  theistio  tendencies  of
the  people  at  large,  by  showing  that  the  Sdmkhya,  by
admitting  Purusha,  admitted  a  belief  in  something  .tran-
scendent^ and  did  by  no  means,  according  to  Pata^'^^ali
at  least,  condemn  a  belief  even  in  an  t^ara,  or  Lord.
In  that  sense  it  might  truly  be  said  tiiat  the  ^^^
philosophy  would  have  been  timely  and  opportune,  if  it
came  more  boldly  forward,  after  the  rise  of  Buddhism,
not^  so  much  as  a  new  system  of  thought,  but  as  a  re*-
invigorated  and  determined  assertion  of  ancient  SA^ikhva
doctrines,  which  for  a  time  had  beeii  thrown  Into  the
shade  hyf  the  Buddhist  apostasjr.  In"  this  way  it  would
become  intelligible  that  Buddhism,  though  erorung  from
a  soil  saturate  vrith  Sftmkhya  ideas,  dioula  have  been
anterior  to  that  new  and  systematic  development  of
Sftmkhya-{)hilosophy,  whid^  we  know  in  the  Sdtras  of
Eapila  or  in  the  S&rik&s  or  even  in  the  Tattva-sam^Ha ;
that  in  fact,  in  its  elements,  the  S&mkhya  should  be  as
decidedly  pre-Buddhistic  as  in  its  final  systematic  foirm
it  was  post-Buddhistic.  That  the  existence  side  by  side
of  two  such  systems  as  thoso  of  Eapila  and  Buddlm,  tlbe
one  deemed  orthodox,  the  other  unorthodox,  gave  matter
for  reflection  to  the  people  in  India  we  see  best'  by  ^  a
well:known  verse  which  I  quoted  many  years  ago  in
my  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature  (p.  loa) :  '  Kf
Bujddha  knisw  the  law  and  Kapila  not,  what  is  truth?


THB  T0OA-PHIL080PHT.  317

If  both  were  omniweiftn^  how  eonld  there  be  diflbienoe  of
opinioD  between  the  two  f '


The  Yog8-S&tras»  or  the  Tog&nusasana  ^  called  also  hy
the  same  name  which  was  giv^^n  to  the  SUmkhya-Sfttras,
vis.  S&mkhya-pravaA»na,  roth  being  considered  as  ex-
positions of  the  old  S&mkhya,  may  have  been  contained
originally  in  some  such  text-book  as  the  Tattva-sa/in&sa.
The  Sfttras  were  published  and  translated  by  BaUantyne,
1852,  a  translation  continued  by  Qovindadeva-edBtrin  in
the  Pandit,  vol.  Ill,  Noa  28-68.  A  more  useful  edition,
but  not  always  quite  correct  translation,  was  given  by
Rajendralal  Mitra  in  the  Bibliotheca  Indies,  1883,  'Yoga
Aphorisms  of  Pati9i/7|gfali,  with  the  commentary  of  Bhogra
Ba^A.'  Yia^&na-Bhikshu,  whose  commentary  on  KapiWs
Sfi^khya-Siitras  was  mentioned  before  ^  and  who  is  chiefly

^  It  i«  not  much  of  an  argument,  but  it  may  deserre  to  be  mentioned,
that  th«  title  gtyen  by  Patailsfali  to  the  Yoga-Sfltras,  Atha  Yogftnu«ftsanam,
*Now  begins  the  teaching  of  the  Toga,*  and  not  Atha  Yogasfigf^AsA,  reminds
ns  of  the  title  whieh  the  grammarian  Pata  jfgoiU  gives  to  his  Mah&bh&shya,
Atha  flabd&nnsftaanam,  ^Now  liegins  the  teaching  of  Words  or  of  &e
Word.*  This  title  does  not  belong  to  Pinini*s  Siitras,  but  to  the  HaliA-
bhAshja;  and  it  is  eurlous  that  such  a  compound  as  SabdAnusftsanam
would  really  offend  against  one  of  PAnini*s  rules  (II,  a,  14).  According
to  PAiiini  there  ought  to  be  no  such  compound,  and  though  he  does  not
give  na  the  reason  why  he  objects  to  this  and  otlier  suoh-like  compounds,
we  ean  easily  see  that  Sanskrit  did  not  sanction  -  compounds  which
might  be  ambiguous,  considering  that  Word^teaching  might  be  taken
in  the  aense.of  teadiing  coming  from  words  as  well  as  teaching  having
words  for  its  object.  It  is  true  that  thi.s  apparent  irregularity  might
be  removed  by  a  reference  to  another  rule  of  PAnini  (II,  3,  66),  yet  it  is
curious  that  the  same,  if  only  apparent,  irregularity  should  occur  both
in  tlie  Mah4b>i&shya  and  in  the  Yoga-SAtras,  both  being  Mcribfd  to

PatasSoali-
*  other  works  ascribed  to  the  same  author  are : —

The  Brahma-mSm&ms&-bh&fthya,  called  Vi^nAmHta.

The  SAiMkhya-kArikA-bhAahya,  ascribed  to  him,  but  really  oompoaed

by  OandapAda  (see  GangAn&tha,  p.  a).
The  Yoga-vArttika.
**  The  Imra-gitA-bhAshya,  ftrom  the  Kiirma-pnrAfia.
The  Pnumopaniahad-aloka.
An  explanation  of  PrasaatapAda's  oommentary  on  the  Vaisoshika-

SAtras,  called  Vaijeshika-vArttika.
Tliere  are  printed  editions  of  the  SAmkhya-pravaAana-bhAshyay  the
TogarvArttika,  and  the  SAmkhya*BAm.


31 8  INDItUY  PHILOSOPHY.

knonhi  by  hifl  Yoga-v&rttika,  ifi  the  author  also  of  the
.Yoga-8&ra-8amgraha»  an  abstract  of  the  Yom,  which  has
been  edited  and  translated  by  Qang&n&tha  Jha,  Bombay
1894,  and  may  be  consulted  with  advantage  by  students
of  philosophy.  Colebrooke's  essay  on  the  Yoga,  like  all
his  essays,  is  still  most  useful  and  trustworthy ;  and  there
are  in  uerman  the  excellent  papers  on  the  Sd.mkhya  and
Yoga  by  Professor  Garbe  in  Biihler's  Grundrias.  Garbe
speaks  well  of  a  dissertation  by  P.  Markus,  Die  Yopa-
philosophie  nach  dem  Rajamdrtanda  dargeatellt^  which,
however,  I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain.

MUmmotiytloa  of  tbm  Oltf  oeti  of  Togft.

It  was  almast  impossible  that  the  Yoga-philosophy,  as
represented  by  European  scholars,  should  not  have  suffered
from  its  close  association  with  the  Samkhya,  properly  so
called.  All  its  metaphysical  antecedents  were  there.  Yoga
is  indeed,  as  the  Brihmans  say,  S&mkhya,  only  modified,
particularly  in  one  point,  namely,  in  its  attempt  to  develop
and  systematise  an  ascetic  discipline  by  which  concentration
of  thought  could  be  attained,  and  by  admitting  devotion
to  the  Lord  God  as  part  of  that  discipline.  Whether  this
was  done,  as  is  generally  supposed,  from  mere  theological
diplomacy  is  a  question  we  should  find  difficult  tor  answer,
considering  how  little  we  know  of  the  personal  character
of  Patail^ali  or  of  the  circumstances  under  which  he
elaborated  his  theistic  S&mkhya-philosophy.  There  is  an
entire  absence  o^  animosity  on  his  part,  such  as  our  own
philosophers  would  certainly  have  displayed  in  accusing
another  philosopher  of  atheism  and  in  tnring  to  amend  his
system  in  a  tncistic  direction.  No  doubt  there  must
always  have  been  a  majority  in  favour  of  a  tlieistic
philosophy  of  the  universe  as  against  an  atheistic,  but
whether  Patawgrali  may  be  fairly  accused  of  having  yielded
to  the  brutal  force  of  numbers,  and  curried  favour  with
the  many  against  the  few  is  quite  another  question.  It  is
certainly  extraordinary  to  see  the  perfect  calmness  with
which,  with  very  few  exceptions,  Kapila's  atheism  is  dis-
cussed, and  how  little  there  is  of  the  adpopviuvn  advocacy


DEVOTION  TO  ti^ABA,  HISCONOEPTIONS.  3I9

in  aawovt  of  a  belief  in  Qod  and  %  personal  QocL  Nor
does  Kapila,  like  other  atheistic  philosophers,  display  amr
animosity  against  the  Divine  idea  and  its  defenders,  ne
criticises  indeed  the  usual  arguments  by  which  theists
make  and  unmake  their  God,  if  they  represent  Him  as  the
creator  and  ruler  of  the  world,  and  charge  him  at  the  same
time  with  cruelty,  by  making  him  responsible  for  the  origin
of  evil  also.  But  all  this  is  done  by  Kapila  in  a  calm  and
what  one  might  almost  call  a  businesslike  manner ;  and  in
answering  Eapila's  arguments,  Pata/7^ali  also  preserves  the
same  Samatva  or  even  tempcT.  He  impute^;  no  motives
to  his  antagonist,  nor  does  ho  anywhere  defend  himself
against  any  possible  suspicion  that  in  showing  the  neces-
sity of  a  personal  God,  an  l^vara,  he  was  defending  the
interests  of  the  Br&hman  piiesthood.  After  all,  ti^vara
was  not  even  a  popular  name  for  God,  or  the  name  of  any
special  god,  though  it  occurs  as  a  name  of  Rudra,  and  in
later  times  was  applied  even  to  such  gods  as  Vishnu  and
£lva,  after  they  had  been  divested  of  much  of  their  old
mythological  trappings.

JHmMom,  to  tnrATft,  Mtaoomofviioas.

In  this  respect  also  we  have  something  to  learn  from
Hindu  ]6hiloaophers.  Considering  the  importance  of  the
subject,  it  is  useful  to  see  how  little  heat  was  expended  on
it  either  by  Kapila  or  by  Pata/i^ali.  If  we  remember  how
the  two  philosophic  were  in  popular  parlance  distinguished
fi-om  eadi  other  as  Sslmkhya  with  and  Sli*mkhya  without
a  Lord,  we  should  have  expected  to  see  this  question  treated
'  in  the  most  prominent  place.  Instead  of  which  we  find
Pata/7^ali,  at  the  end  01  thcr  first  chapter,  after  having
described  the  different  practices  by  which  a  man  may  hope
to  become  free  from  all  worldly  fitters,  mentioning  simply
as  one  of  many  expedients,  I,  23, '  Devotion  to  the  Lord,'
or,  as  it  is  generally  translated, '  devotion  to  God.'  Devotion
or  Prani(uidna  (lit.  placing  oneself  forwnrd  and  into)  is
explained  by  Bhot/a  as  one  of  the  forms  of  resignation,  as
worship  of  Mim,  and  as  the  surrender  of  all  one  s  actions
to  Him,. '  If  a  man,  without  wishing  for  any  rewards  con-


320  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY'.

sifiiing  in  worldly  ^njojrments,  makes  over  all  his  cares  to
tayara  as  the  highest  gaide,  that,  we  are  told,  is  Pranidhftna.
Pata/?^li  then  goes  on, '  As  it  has  been  said  that  Sam&dhL
or  complete  absoi-ption  can  be  obtained  through  devotion
to  the  Lord,  the  next  that  has  to  be  explained  in  order,  is
the  nature  of  that  Lord,  the  proof,  the  majesty,  the  name
of  Him,  the  order  of  His  worship,  and  the  fruit  thereof/
In  I,  24  Pata/7(gfali  goes  on  to  say :  ^  tsvara,  the  Lord,  is
a  Puriusha  (Self)  that  has  never  been  touched  by  sufferings,
actions,  rewariis,  or  consequent  dispositions/  The  commen-
tary adds :  *  Suffering  are  such  as  Nescience^  Avidyft,  &c. ;
actions  are  either  enjoined,  forbidden,  or  mixed ;  rewards
are  the  ripened  fruits  of  actions  manifested  in  birth  (genus,
caste)  and  life,  while  dispositions  (A^aya,  Anlage)  are  so-
called  because  they  lie  in  the  soil  of  the  mind  till  the  fruit
has  ripened,  they  are  instincts  (SatJiskftra)  or  impressions
(V&sand.).  If  the  Lord  is  called  a  Purusha,  that  means  that
He  is  different  from  all  other  Purushas  (Selves),  and  if  He
is  called  Lord,  that  means  that  He  is  able  by  His  work
alone  to  liberate  the  whole  world.  Such  power  is  due  to
the  constant  prevalence  of  goodness  (a  Gutia)  in  Him,  who
has  no  beginning,  and  this  prevalence  of  goodne&s  arises
from  His  eminent  knowledge.  But  the  two,  knowledge
and  power,  are  not  dependent  on  each  other,  for  they  are
eternally  abiding  in  the  very  8tibsian'Ce  of  t8vai«.  His
very  relation  to  that  goodness  is  without  beginning,  be-
cause the  union  of  Prekriti  and  Purusha,  that  is,  the
creation  would,  from  a  Yoga  point  of  view,  have  been
impossible  without  the  will  of  such  an  t^vara.  While  the
iTitta  or  mind  in  ordinary  Purushas  or  Selves  undergoes,
while,  in  the  body,  modifications  tending  towards  happiness,
unhappiness,  and  delusion,  and,  if  remaining  without
blemish,  good,  and  full  of  virtue,  becomes  conscious  of
the  incidence  of  the  pictures  mirrored  on  the  mind,  it
is,  not  so  with  i^ara.  His  highest  modification  is  of
goodness  alone,  and  he  remains  steadfast  in  enjoyment
through  eternal  union  with  it.  Therefore  he  alone  is
Isvara,  eminent  above  all  other  Purushas.  Again,  even  for
one  who  has  gained  freedom,  a  return  of  sufferings,  &e.,'
is  possible,  and  has  to  be  guarded  against  by  such  means


WHAT   IS   tSVk&nl  321

as  are  inculcated  in  the  Toga ;  but  he»  the  tsvara,  as  he  is
always  .such  as  he  is,  is  not  like  a  man  who.  has  gained
fireeaom,  but  he  is.  by  nature  free.  Nor  should  ohe  say
that  there  may  be  many  such  tavaraa.  Though  there  be
equality  of  Purushas,  qud  Purushas,  yet  as  their  aims  are
different,  such  a  view  would  be  impossible.  And  though
there  be  a  possibility  of  more  or  less,  yet  the  most  eminent
would  always  be  the  Isvara  or  the  Lord,  he  alone  having
reached  the  final  goal  of  lordship/

The  P&ta^^ala-bhdfihya  dwells  very  strongly  on  this
difference  between  the  liberated  soul  and  the  Liord;  for
'the  liberated  or  isolated  souls/  it  says,  'attain  their
isolation  by  rending  asunder  the  three  bonds,  whereas  in
regard  to  lavara  there  never  was  and  never  can  be  such
bondage.  The  emancipated  implies  bondage,  but  this  can
never  be  predicated  of  the  Lord/

We  need  not  point  out  here  the  weak  points  of  this
argument,  and  the  purely  relative  character  of  the  great-
ness and  separateness  claimed  for  thS  lavara,  as  compared
with  other  Purushas,  but  it  may  be  well  to  try  to  compare
our  own  ideas  of  Qod,  when  put  into  clear  and  simple
language,  with  the  ideas  here  propounded.  Pata/i^ali
seems  to  me  to  come  very  near  to  the  Homoiousia  of  man
with  Qod,  though  he  does  not  go  quite  as  far  as  the  Ve-
ddntin  who  claims  for  the  Attnan  perfect  Homoousia  with
Brahman.  His  lavara  may  be  primus  ivter  jHires,  but  as
one  of  the  Purushas,  he  is  but  one  among  his  peers/  He
is  a  little  more  than  a  god,  but  he  is  certainly  not  what  we
nfean  by  God.

Wliat  is  ifvmsat

As  Kapila  bad  declared  that  the  existence  of  such  a  being
as  lavara  did  not  admit  of  proof,  PatangraJi  proceeds  in  the
next  Siitra  to  offer  what  he  calls  his  proofs,  by  saying:
'  In  Him  the  seed  of  the  omniscient  (or  omniscience)  attains
infinity.'  It  would  be  difficult  to  discover  in  this  anything
like  a  proof  or  a  tenable  appeal  to  any  Pram&iia,  without
the  help  of  the  commentary.  But  Bhogfa  explains  that
what  is  meant  here  is  that  there  are  different  degrees  of
all  excellences,  such  as  omniscience,  greatness,  smallness,

21  ^-


322  INAU^   PHILOSOPHY.

and  other  Ai^varyas,  and  that  therefore  there  mt^  be  for
all  of  them  a  point  beyond  which  it  is  impossible  to  go.
This  Nirati89ya  point,  this  non  plus  ultra  of  excellency
id  what  is  claimea  for  tavara  or  the  Lord.

Though  this  could  hardly  be  considered  as  a  convincing
argument  of  the  existence  of  a  Being  endoTcred  with  all  such
transcendent  excellences  as  are  here  postulM^ed,  it  shows
at  all  events  an  honest  intention  on  the  part\)f  Fativ%ali.
Pata/7gfali's  argument  reminds  us  to  a  certain  extent  of  the
theistic  argument  of  Cleanthes  and  Boethius.  What  he
means  is  that  where  there  is  a  great  and  greater^  there  must
also  be  a  greatest,  and  this  is  l«vara,  and  that  where  there
is  good  and  better,  there  must  be  best.

Nor  does  he  flinch  in  trying  to  answer  the  questidns
which  follow.  The  question  is  supposed  to  have  been
asked,  how  this  Isvara,  without  any  inducement,  could  have
caused  that  union  and  separation  of  himself  and  Prakrt'ti
which,  as  we  saw,  is  only  another  name  for  creation.  The
answer  is  that  the  inducement  was  his  love  of  beipgs,
arising  from  his  mercifulness,  his  determination  being  to
save  all  living  beings  at  the  time  of  the  Kalpapralayas  and
Mah^pralayas,  the  great  destructions  and  reconstructions
of  the  world.  This,  of  course,  would  not  have  been  admitted
by  Kapila.

Next  Fatan^ali  proceeds  to  explain  the  majestyof  tavara
by  saying,  in  I,  26,—

'He  is  the  superior  (Guru)  even  of  the  former  ones, being
himself  not  limited  by  time.'

By  the  former  ones  are  meant,  as  we  are  told,  the  ancients,
the  first  creators,  such  as  Brahm^  and  others,  and  by
.superior  is  meant  instructor  and  guide,  so  that  it  would
seem  difficult  to  assign  a  higher /position  to  any  divine
being  than  by  placing  him  thus  above  BrahmH  and  other
accepted  builders  of  the  world.  Next  follows  his  name.
I,  27  :—

'  His  name  is  Prawava.*

Pratiava  might  etymologically  mean  breathing  forth  or
glory.  It  is  assigned  as  a  name  to  the  sacred  sjalable  Om,
possibly  a  relic  of  a  time  beyond  our  reach.  It  is  said
to  have  been  the  name  of  Isvara  from  all  eternity,  just  as


WHAT   IS   iiSyABA^  ^$

the  name  of  father  oc  scm.  This  may  be  true,  but  it  does
not  satisfy  us.  However  old  the  name|  Pratiava  a^d  ^®
sellable  Om.may  have  been,  thev  must  have  bad  a  begin-
ning, but  in  spite  of  all  the  theories  of  the  Br&hmans,  there
is  not  one  in  the  least  satisfactory  to  the  scholar.  Om  is
their  sacred  syllable,  which  has  to  be  repeated  a  hun&^ed
or  a  thousand  times  in  order  to  draw  the  mind  away-^|om
all  disturbing  impressions  and  to  concentrate  it  on  the
Supreme.  Being.  But  why  it  is  so  we  cannot  tell.  It  may
be  a  mere  imitation  of  the  involuntary  outbreathing  of  the
deep  vowel  o,  stopped  by  the  labial  nasal,  and  then  drawn
in;  or  it  may  be  the  contraction  of  a  pronominal  stem
Avam, '  tiiat,'  corresponding  to  Ayam, '  this/  and  it  is  .cer-
tainly used  in  the  sense  of  i  es,  much  as  hoe  iUud  Vas  used
in  French  when  contracted  to  oui.  But  however  that  may
be,  it  is  called  Praiiava,  praise  or  breathing  forth,  and  can-
not be  explained  any  further  etymologically.  It  is  a  name,
as  Bho^a  says,  not  made  by  anybody,  and  if  it  has  any
historical  or  etymological  justification,  this  is  at  all  events
not  known  to  us.  Still  we  cannot  go  (|uite  so  far  as
Bajendralal  Mitra,  who  sees  in  it  an  Indianised  form  of  the
Hebrew  Amen  I  First  of  all.  Amen  does  not  mean  Qod,
and  how  should  such  a  >rord  have  reached  India  during  >
the  BriLhmana  period  1  ^^  v

Pata/i^ali  contraues  by  telling  us  in  Stltra  I,  38,  thalt
repetition  of  iixe  syllable  Om  and  reflection  on  its  meanii^
are  incumbent  on  the  student  of  Yoga.  And  this,  as  Bhogia
adds,  as  a  means  to  concentrate  our  thoughts,  and  to  attiun
to  Sam&dhi,  the  chief  end  of  the  whole  Yoga-philosophy.
In  that  sense  he  adds,  I,  29 : —

'  *  Thence  also  obtainment  of  inward-turned  thought,  and
^  Absence  of  obstacles.'

Inward-turned  thought  (PratyakX»tan&)  is  explained  as
a  turning  away  of  our  senses  from  all  outward  objects,
and  turning  them  back  upon  the  mind.  The  obstacles  to
Sam&dhi  are  mentioned  in  the  next  Siitra,  I,  30,  as

'Disease,  languor,  doubt,  carelessness,  idleness,  worldliness,
error,  not  having  a  settled  standpoint,  and  not  keeping  it ;
these  are  the  obstacles  causing  unsteadiness  of  mind.'

1,31.  'With  them  arise  pain,  distress,  tremor  of  limbs,

Y  3


324  'INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

and  disttirbance    of    the    regular  inbreathing  and   oni-
breathing/

I,  32.  '  To  prevent  all  this>  there  is  oonstantr  fixing  of  thtf
mind  on  one  subject  (Tattva)/

I,  33.  *  And  likewise  from  a  reviving  friendliness,  pity,
complacency,  and  indifierence  towards  objects  of  hmpiness,
unhappiness,  virtue  and  vice,  there  arises  serenity  of  mind.'

The  commentator  adds,  'If  one  sees  happy  people,  one
should  not  envy  them;  if  one  sees  nnhappiness,  one  should
think  how  it  could  be  removed ;  if  one  sees  virtuous  people,
one  should  rejoice  and  not  say,  Are  they  really  virtuous  1
if  one  sees  vicious  people,  one  should  preserve  indifierence,
and  show  neither  approval  nor  aversion.  Thus  does  the
mind  become  serene  and  capable  of  Sam&dhi.  But  all  these
are  only  outward  helps  towards  ifixing  the  mind  on  one
-subject,  and  of  thus  in  time  obtaining  l%bm&dhL'

I  have  given  this  extract  in  order  to  show  how  subordinate
a  position  is  occupied  in  Pata^rali's  mind  by  the  devotion
to  tsvara.  It  is  but  one  of  the  many  me^ns  for  steadying
the  mind,  and  thus  realising  that  Yiveka  or  discrimination
between  the  true  man  (Furusha)  and  the  objective  world
(Prakriti).  This  remains  in  the  Toga  as  it  was  in  the
Stlmkhya,  the  awmrav/m  bonum  of  mankind.  I  do  not
think,  therefore,  that  Bajendralal  Mitra  was  right^when  in
his  abstract  of  the  Yoga  (p.  lii)  he  represented  tfiis  belief
in  one  Supreme  QoA  as  the  first  and  most  important  tenet
of  Pataj^giali's  philosophy.  '  The  leading  t^eis  of  the
Yogins/  he  says,  'are  first,  that  there  is  a  Supreme  God-
head who  is  purely  spiritual,  or  all  soul,  perfectly  free  from
afflictions,  works,  deserts,  and  desires.  His  symbol  is  Om,
and  He  rewards  those  who  are  ardently  devoted  to  Him
by  facilitating  their  attainment  of  liberation ;  but  He  does
not  directly  grant  it.  Nor  is  He  the  father,  creator,  or
protector  of  the  universe,  with  which  He  is  absolutely
unconrected.'

Bajendralal  Mitra  does  not  stand  alone  in  this  opinion,
and  the  very  name  of  Sesvara-S&mkhya,  theistic  S&mkhya,
given  to  the  Yoga,  would  seem  to  speak  in  his  favour.
But  we  have  only  to  look  at  the  Stitras  themselves  to  see
that  originally  this  belief  in  a  personal  God  was  by  no


WHAT  IS  kVAEA?  325

meam  looked  upon  aa  the  most  characteristic  feature  of
Pata^^ali's  system.

Bajendralal  Mitra  is  right,  howeyer/in  stating  the  tenet,
second  in  importance,  to  have  been  that  there  are  countless
individual  souls  or  Pui^ishas  which  animate  living  brings,
and  are  eternal  They  are  pure  and  immutable;  but  by
their  association  jvdth  the  universe  they  become  indirectly
the  experiencers  of  joys  andsorrow8,and  assume  innumerable
embomed  forms  in  the  course  of  an  ever-reciirring  metem-
psychosis.- .

I3i6  lavara,  with  the  Yogins,  was  originally  no  more  than
one  of  the  many  souls,  or  rather  Selves  or  Piuiishas,  but
one  that  has  never  been  associated  with  or  implicate-d  in
metempsychosis,  supreme  in  every  sense,  yet  of  the  same
kind  as  all  other  Furushas.  The  idea  of  other  Purushas
obtaining^  union  with  him  could  therefore  never  have
entered  Fata/fgfali's  head.  According  to  him,  the  highest
object  of  the  Yogin  was  freedom,  cuoneness,  aloofness,  or
seij^centredness.  As  one  of  the  useful  means  of  obtaining
that  fi'eedom,  or  of  quieting  the  mind  previous  to  liberating
it  altogether,  devotion  to  the  lavara  is  mentioned,  but  again
as  one  only  out  of  many  means,  and  not  even  as  the  most
efficacious  of  alL  In  the  popular  atmosphere  of  India  this
belief  in  one  Supreme  Being  may  have  been  a  strong  point
in  f avoinr  of  Pata^pali's  system,  but  from  a  philosophical
point  of  view,  Pata^grali's  so-called  proofs  of  the  existence
of  Ood  would  hardly  stand  against  any  criticism.  They
are  mere  7rap€pya,  or  side  issues.  We  must  remember  that
Eapila  had  committed  himself  to  no  more  than  that  it  is
impossible  to  prove  the  existence  of  Isvara,  this  tsvara  not
being  synonymous  with  God,  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word,
but  restricted  to  a  personal  creator  and  ruler  of  the  world.
Such  a  confession  01  an  inability  to  prove  the  existence  of
an  tdvara  does  not  amount  to  atheism,  in  the  current  sense
of  that  word,  and  thus  only  can  we  explain  the  fact  that
Kapila  himself  was  considered  orthodox  by  friends  and
foes.  In  the  Ved&nta-philosophy  the  question  of  the  real
existence  of  a  person^Ll  lavara  never  arises,  though  we
know  how  saturated  that  philosophy  is  with  a  belief  in  the
existence  of  Brahman,  tlie  absolute  Divine  Essence  of  which


.•f


326  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

the  active  or  personal  tavara  or  the  Lord  is  but  a  passing
maiiifestation,  presented  by  Brahm&,  masc.,  a  mere  phase
of  Brahman,  neuter.  The  S&mkhya,  in  attempting  tor
explam  the  universe,  such  as  it  is,  both  in  its  subjective
and  objective  character,  has  no  need  to  call  in  the  assistance
of  a  personal  lavara.  What  we  mean  by  the  objective
world  is,  according  to  Kapila,  the  work  or.  outcome  of  Pra-
kriti,  w;hen  animated  by  Puriisha,  not  of  Brahman.  His
system  is  therefore  without  a  creator  or  personal  maker  of
the  world,  but  if  we  called  it  therefore  atheistic,  we  should
have  to  apply  the  same  name  to  Newton's  system  of  the
world  and  Darwin's  theory  of  evolution,  though  we  know
that  both  Newton  and  Daiwin  were  thoroughly  religious
men.  Darwiu  himself  went  so  far  as  to  maintain  most
distinctlv  that  his  system  of  natm  e  required  a  Creator  who
breathed  life  into  it  in  the  beginning,  and  even  those  Dar-
winians who  look  upon  this  admission  of  Darwin's  as  a
mere  weakness  of  the  moment,  would  strongly  object  to
be  Called  irreligious  or  atheists.  Eapila  might  easily  have
used  the  very  words  of  Darwin,  and  this  is  very  much
what  Pata/?gfali  actually  did  in  his  Yoga-Siitras.  His
supreme  Purusha,  afterivards  raised  into  an  Adi-Purusha,
or  First  Being,  satisfied  the  human  craving  after  a  First
Cause,  and,  so  far  as  I  axn  see,  it  was.  this  natural  craving
rather  than  any  vulgar  wish  to  curry  favour  with  the
orthodox  party  in  India  that  led  to  Pataz/^ali's  partial
separation  from  .Eapila.  We  certainly  need  not  suppose
that  the  recognition  of  Eapila's  orthodoxy  was  a  mere
contrivance  of  theological  diplomacy  on  the  part  of  the
Brahmans,  and  that  these  defenders  of  the  faith  were
satisfied  with  an  insincere  recognition  of  the  supreme
authority  of  the-Vedas.  I  confess  that  with  what  we  know
of  the  religious  life  of  India  and  the  character  of  the  Br&h-
mans  at  all  tinies,  it  seems  to. me  very  difficult  to  admit
the  idea  of  such  a  compromise.  Besides,  Eapila  appeals,
as  we  saw,  to  the  Veda  m  good  earnest,  particularly  when
it  supports  his  own  views,  as  in  V,  12,  when  he  wants  to
prove  *that  the  world  arises  from  primitive  matter,*  and
appeals  to  the  Veda,  that  is,  to  such  passages  as  Svet&s-
vatara  Upanishad  .IV,  5,  and  Brihad.  Ar.  up.  I,  4,  7,  that


kapila's  mal  aegdmbnts.  327

can  be  made  to  support  his  view.  Thfe  two  oldest  repre-
sentatives of  the  S8,mkhya-philosophy,  the  Tattva-samdsa
.and  the  K&rikSa^  do  not  even  allude  to  the  difficulty
arising  from  the  Isvara  question,  which  seems  to  me  an
important  argument  in  favour  of  their  antiquity.  The
charge  of  atheism  became  more  popular  in  later  times,  so
that  in  the  Padma-pur&iia  the  charge  of  atheism  is  brought
not  a^inst  the  SAmkhya  only,  but  against  the  Vaieeshika
and  Ny&ya-philosophies  also,  nay  even  against  the  Pftrva-
MimUmsi.  Two  systems  only  escape  this  charge,  the
Uttara-Mtm&ms&  and  the  Yoga;  and  in  the  case  of  the
Uttara-Mtm&rnsS*,  its  explanation  by  iSiamkara  is  stigmatised
as  no  better  than  Buddhism,  because  it  perverts  the  mean-
ing of  passages  of  the  Veda,  which  teach  the  identity  of
the  individual  soul  with  the  highest  soul  (Brahman  without
qualities),  and  recommends  the  surrender  of  good  works,
and  complete  indifference  towards  this  world  and  the  next.

Saplla's  B««A  Argtaawitn,

But  it  is  but  fair  that  we  snould  hear  what  Kapila  him-
self has  to  say.  And  here  it  is  important  again  to  observe
that  Eapila  does  not  make  a  point  of  vehemently  denying
the  existence  of  an  t^vara,  but  seems  likewise  to  have  been
brought  to  discuss  the  subject,  as  it  were,  by  the  way  only,
while  engaged  in  discussing  the  nature  of  sensuous  percep-
tion (I,  89).  He  had  been  explaining  perception  as  cogni-
tion arising  from  actual  contact  between  the  senses  and
their  respective  objects.  And  here  he  is  sto|)ped  by  the
inevitable  opponent  who  demurs  to  this  definition  of  per-
ception, because  it  would  not  include,  as  he  says,  the
perceptions  of  the  Yogins.  Kapila  replies  that  these  visions
of  the  Yogins  do  not  refer  to  external  objects,  and  that,
without  denying  their  reality,  he  is  dealing  with  the  per-
ceptions of  ordinary  moiials  only.  But  the  controversy
does  not  end  here.  Another  opponent  starts  up  and  main-
tains that  Kapila's  definition  of  perception  is  faulty,  <?f  at
all  events  not  wide  enough  because  it  does  not  include  the

^  Hall,   Preface  to  Sd>nkliy<i-s4rn,   p.  39,  note,  and  Introducttor   to
SAmkhya-pravaftana/


328  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

perception  of  ihe  tavara  or  Lord.  It  is  then  that  Eapila
turns  round  on  his  opponent,  and  says  that  this  Wara,  tiiis,
as  it  is  pretended,  perceptible  tavara,  has  never  been  proved
to  exist  at  all,  has  never  been  established  by  any  of  the
three  legitimate  instruments  of  knowledge  or  Bram&Tias.
This  may  seem  to  us  to  amount  to  a- denial  of  an  Isvara)
but  Yi^/}&na-6hikshu  remarks  with  a  great  deal  of  truth,
that  if  Eapila  had  wished  to  deny  the  existence  of  God,  he
would  have  said  IsvadLbh&v&t,  and  not  tavar&siddheA,  that
is,  because  Isvara  does  not  exist,  and  not,  as  he  says,
because  lavara  has  not  been  proved  to  exist.  Anyhow  this
is  not  the  tone  of  a  philosopher  who  wants  to  preach
atheism,  and  in  what  follows  we  shall  see  that  it  is  the
manner  rather  than  the  matter  of  the -proof  of  an  tavara
which  is  challenged  by  Eapila  and  defended  by  his
antagonist.  Taking  his  stand  on  the  ground  that  the
highest  blessedness  or  freedom  consists  in  having  renounced
all  activity,  because  every  activity  presupposes  some  kind
of  desire,  which  is  of  evil^  he  says  '  that  every  proof  in
support  of  an  t^vara  as  a  maker  or  Lord,  a  Sat-kara,  would
break  down.  For  if  he  were  supposed  to  be  above  all
variance  and  free,  he  could  not  have  willed  to  create  the
world;  if  he  were  not  so,  he  would  be  distracted  and
deluded  and  unfit  for  the  supreme  task  of  an  t«vara/  Then
follows  a  more  powerful  objection,  based  on  the  Tact  that
the  Veda  speaks  of  an  tavara  or  Lord,  and  therefore  he
must  exist.  Eapila  does  not  spurn  that  argument,  but,  as
he  has  recognised  once  for  all  the  Veda  as  a  legitimi^
source  of  information,  he  endeavours  to  prove  that  the
Vedic  passages  relied  on  in  support  of  the  existence  of  a
maker  of  the  world,  have  a  different  purpose,  namely  the

florification  of  a  liberated  Self  or  Furusha,  or  of  one  who
y  devotion  has  attained  supernatural  power  (I,  95).  This
is  explained  by  Aniruddha  as  referring  either  to  a  Self
which  is  almost,  though  njot  altogether,  free,  because  if
altogether  free,  it  could  have  no  desire,  nor  even  the  desire
of  creation ;  or  to  a  Yogin  who  by  devotion  has  obtained
supernatural  powers.  7i9/7&na-Bhikshu  goes  a  step  further,
and  declares  that  it  refers  either  to  a  Self  that  has  obtained
freedom  from  all  variance  and  disturbance,  or  to  the  Self  that


kapila's  beal  arguments.  329

»  and  has  remained  free  from  all  etermty.  that  is.  to  the
Adi-punisha,  the  First  Self,  who  in  the  theistic  Yoga-philo-
^sophy  takes  the  place  of  the  Creator,  and  who  may,  for  all
we  know,  have  been  the  origin  of  the  later  Purushottama.

Aniruddha  thereupon  continues  that  it  might  be  said
that  without  the  superintendence  of  some  such  intelli^nt
being,  unintelligent  Prakriti  would  never  have  acted.  But
this  also  he  rejects,  if  it  is  meant  to  prove  the  existence  of
an  active  creator,  because  the '  8Ui)erintendence  of  the
Purusha  of  the  Sstmkhyas  over  Prakriti  is  not  an  active
one,  but  arises  simply  from  proximity,  as  in  the  case  of
a  crystal  (I,  96).  What  he  means  is  that  in  the  Sd^mkhya
the  Purusha  is  never  a  i^eal  maker  or  an  a^ent.  He  simply
reflects  on  Prakriti,  or  the  products  of  Prakriti  are  reflect^
on  him ;  and  as  anything  reflected  in  a  crystal  or  a  mirror
-seems  to  move  when  the  mirror  is  moved,  though  it  remains
all  the  time  quite  unmoved,  thus  the  Purusha  also  seems  to
move  and  to  be  an  agent,  while  what  is  really  moving;
changing,  or  being  created  is  Prakriti.  The  Purusha  there-
fore cannot  be  called  superintendent,  as  if  exercising  an
active  influence  over  Prakriti,  but  Prakriti  is  evolved  up
to  the  point  of  Manas  under  the  eyes  of  Purusha,  and  the
Purusha  does  no  more  than  witness  all  this,  wrongly
ipiagining  all  the  time  that  he  is  himself  the  creator  or
ruler  of  the  world.  In  support  of  this  Aniruddha  quotes
a  passage  from  the  Bhagavad-gitll  (lU,  27 ) :  '  All  emac  ations
oi  PrakWti  are  operated  by  the  Guiias ;  but  the  Self
deluded  by  Aliamk&ra  imagines  that  he  is  the  operator.'

Another  objection  is  urged  against  the  S&mkhya  view
that  the  Purusha  is  not  a  doer  or  creator,  namely  that,  in
that  case,  a  dead  body  also  might  be  supposed  to  perform
the  act  of  eating.  But  no,  he  says,  such  acts  are  performed
not  by  av^ead  or  inactive  Atman,  as  little  as  a  dead  body
eats.  It  is  the  individual  Puruslia  (Giva)  that  performs
such  acts,  when  under  the  influence  of  Prakriti  (Buddhi,
Ahamk&ra,  and  Manas),  while  the  Atman  or  Purusha
remains  for  ever  unchanged.

A  last  attempt  is  made  to  disprove  the  neutrality  or  non-
activity  of  the  Atman,  that  is,  the  impossibility  of  his  being
a  creator,  namely  the  uselessness  of  teaching  anything,


330  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

supposing  the  Self  to  be  altogether  without  cognition.  To
this  the  answer  is  that  though  the  Atman  is  not  cognitive,
yet  the  Manas  is.  The  Atman  reflects  on  the  Manas,  and
hence  the  illusion  that  he  himself  cognises,  while  in  reality
he  does  no  more  than  witness  the  apprehension  of  the
Manas.  Thus  when  it  is  said, '  He  is  omniscient  and  omni-
potent,' he  (in  spite  of  the  gender)  is  meant  for  Prakriti,  as
developed  into  Manas,  and  not  for  the  Purusha  who  in
reality  is  a  mere  witness  of  such  omniscience  and  omni-
potence (III,  56),  deluded,  for  a  time,  by  PrakritL

Thit  ThmoTj  of  Xarmaa.

•

In  another  place  where  the  existence  of  an  Isvara,  or
active  ruler  01  the  world,  is  once  more  discussed  in  the
S&mkhya-Siitras,  the  subject  is  again  treated  not  so  much
for  its  own  sake,  as  in  order  to  settle  the  old  question  of
the  continuous  effectiveness  of  works  (Karman).  The
reward  of  every  work  done,  according  to  Eapila,  does  not
depend  on  any  ruler  of  the  world ;  the  works  themselves
are  working  on  for  evermore.  If  it  were  otherwise,  we
should  have  to  ascribe  the  creation  of  the  world,  with  all
its  suffering,  to  a  Lord  who  is  nevertheless  supposed  te  be
loving  and  gracious.

Mdrdhava  in  his  Sarva-darsana-samgraha  (tranfilated  by
Cowell  and  Gough,  p.  228)  uses  the  same  argument, saying:
'  As  for  the  doctrine  of  "  a  Supreme  Being  who  acts  fix)m
compassion,'  what  has  been  proclaimed  by  beat  of  drum
by  tne  advocates  of  His  existence,  this  has  wellnigh  passed
away  out  of  hearing,  since  the  hypothesis  fails  to  meet
either  of  the  two  alternatives.  For  does  He  act  thus  before
or  after  creation  ?  If  you  say  before,  we  reply  that  as  pain
cannot  arise  in  the  absence  of  bodies,  &c.,  there  will  be  no
need,  as  long  as  there  is  no  creation,  for  any  desire  to^ree
living  beings  from  pain  (which  is  the  main  characterisfic  of
compassion; ;  and  if  you  adopt  the  second  alternative,  you
will  be  reasoning  in  a  circle,  as  on  the  one  hand  you  will
hold  that  God  created  the  world  thi-ough  compassion,  and
on  the  other  hand  that  He  compassionated  it  ifiiter  &e  had
created  it.'»*


THE   THEORY  OF  EABtfAN.  33 1

And  again,  as  every  activity  presupposes  desire,  the  Lord,
whether  working  for  Himself  or  for  others,  would  ipBo  facto
cease  tobefree  from  desires.  This  argument  is  examined  from
different  points  of  view,  but  always  leads  to  the  same  result
in  the  end ;  that  is  to  say,  to  the  conviction  tlbat  the  highest
state  of  perfection  and  freedom  from  all  conditions  is  really
far  higher  than  the  ordinary  conception  of  the  status  of  the
popular  Hindu  deities,  higher  even  than  that  of  an  tsvara,
if  conceived  as  a  maker  and  ruler  of  the  universe.  This
concept  of  the  liberated  Purusha  or  Atman  has  in  fact
superseded  the  concept  of  the  tavara,  and  to  have  made
this  quite  clear  would  have  been,  on  the  part  of  Kapila,  by
far  the  most  effective  defence  against  the  charge  of  atheisnl.
The  conscience  of  Eapila  and  pi  the  ancient  Slmkhyas  was
evidently  satisfied  with  a  belief  in  a  Purusha  in  which  the
old  toncepts  of  the  divine  and  the  human  had  been  welded
into  one,  without  claiming  even  the  aid  of  an  Adi-purusha,
a  first  Purusha,  which  was  a  later  expedient.

Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that  other  philosophies  also
besides  the  S&mkhya  have  been  suspected  or  openly
accused  of  atheism  for  the  same  reason.  It  is  easy  to
understand  why  almost  every  philosophy,  whether  Indian
or  European,  if  it  endeavours  to  purify,  to  dehumanise,  and
to  exalt  the  idea  of  the  Godhead,  can  hardly  avoid  the
suspicion  of  denying  the  old  gods,  or  of  being  without
a  belief  in  the  God  of  the  vulgar.  It  is  well  known  that
on  that  ground  even  the  early  Christians  did  not  escape  the
suspicion  of  atheism.

Even  Gaimini's  Pftrva-M!mfi.7n8&,  though  based  on  the
belief  that  the  Veda  is  of  superhuman  origin,  and  though
entirely  devoted  to  the  interpretation  of  the  Vedic  sacrifice,
has  been  charged  with^  atheism,  because  it  admitted  the
independent  evolution  of  works,  which  was  supposed  to
imply  a  denial  of  God ;  nor  did  the  NyjLya  and  Vaiseshika
systems,  as  w%  flKW,  escape  the  same  suspicion.  It  may  be
that  the  recognition  of  the  authority  of  the  Veda  was  con-
sidered suflicient  to  quiet  the  theological  conscience ;  but
there  is  certainly,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  no  passage  in  the
Ny&ya  and  Vaiseshika-Sfttras  where  an  Isvara  is  clearly
deni^  or  postulated,  either  as  the  author  or  as  the  controller


332  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

of  the  infinitesimally  small  elements  or  atoms  of  which  the
world  is  by  them  supposed  to  consist.  There  is  one  passage
in  the  Nyftya-Sfltras  in  which  the  question  of  a  divine  Lord
is  discussed  in  the  usual  way,  namely  Book  V,  Siitras  19-21,
but  otherwise  we  hoar  nothing  of  what  the  tfivara  is  meant
fco  be  or  to  do. '

These  attacks/as  met  by  the  Ny&y a  philosophers,  may
be  looked  upon  as  purely  academic,  but  the  tone  in  which
they  are  met,  for  instance,  by  later  philosophers  such  as
M&dhava  in  his  Sarva-dar^ma-saTrtgraha,  shows  that  they
at  all  events  took  them  seriously.  As  specimens  of  Indian
casuistry  some  extracts  from  M^dhavas  chapter  on  the
Ny&ya  may  here  be  of  interest.  I  quote  from  the  transla-
tion by  Cowell  and  Gough  (p.  171) :  * '  It  is  quite  true/  he
says,  'that  none  of  the  three  Pram&r2:as  can  prove  the
existence  of  a  Supreme  Being.  Perception  cannot,  because
the  Deity,  being  devoid  of  form,  must  be  beyond  the
senses.  Inference  cannot,  because  there  is  no  imiversal
proposition'  or  middle  term  that  could  apply.  The  Veda
cannot,  because  we  Naiy&yikas  have  ourselves  proved  it
to  be  non-eternal.  All  this  we  admit  to  be  quite  true,  that
is,  we  admit  that  a  Supreme  Isvara  cannot  be  established
by  proof.  But  is  there  not,  on  the  other  side,  the  old
argument  that  the  mountains,  seas,  &c.,  must  have  had
a  maker,  because  they  possess  the  nature  of  bein^  effects,
quite  as  much  as  a  jar  (or,  as  we  should  say,  a  watch)  ?
And  that  they  are  effects  can  easily  be  proved  by  the  fact
that  they  possess  parts,  these  parts  existing  in  inti&iate
relation,  and  again  by  the  fact  that  they  possess  a  limited
magnitude  half-way  between  what  is  infinitely  great  and
infinitesimally  small.  •  Nor  has  any  proof  ever  been  pro-
duced on  the  opposite  side  to  showi^hat  the  mountains  nad
no  maker.  For  if  any  one  should  argue  that  the  mountains
cannot  have  had  a  maker  because  they  were  not  produced
by  a  body,  just  as  the  etemisd  ether — this  pretended  in-
ference would  no  more  stand  examination  than  the  young
fawn  could  stand  the  attack  of  the  full-grown  lion,  for  you
have  not  even  shown  that  what  you  say  about  the  eternal
ether  is  a  real  fact.  We  therefore  abide  by  our  old  arra-
ment  that  the  mountains  have  the  nature  of  effects,  and  if


THE  THEOBT  OF  KABtfAN.  333

ihey  had  no  maker,  they  cotdd  not  be  effects,  that  is,  pro^
dnced,  not  by  themselves  alone,  but  by  concnrrent  causes,
jne  of  them  being  a  maker.  A  maker  is  a  being  p<^Bses8ed
of  a  combination  of  volition,  desire  to  act,  a  knowledge  of
proper  means,  setting  in  motion  all  other  causes,  but  itself
moved  by  none  ^the  Aristotelian  kipovv  tLKlvrfrovY

But  though  yielding  to  this  argument,  the  objector  aska^
next,  what  object  this  maker  or  tavara  cotdd  have  had  in
view  in  creating  the  world.  A  feeling  of  compassion,  if
he  had  any,  should  surely  have  induced  him  to  create  all
living  beings  happy,  and  not  laden  with  misery,  since  this
militates  against  his  compassion.  Hence  he  concludes  that
it  would  not  be  fitting  to  admit  that  Qod  created  the
world.  Hereupon  the  Ny&ya  philosopher  becomes  very
wroth  and  exclaims :  '  O  thou  crest-jewel  of  the  atheistic
school,  be  pleased  to  close  for  a  moment  thy  envy-dimmed
eyes,  and  to  consider  the  following  suggestions.  His  action
in  creating  is  indeed  caused  by  compassion  only,  but  the
idea  of  a  creation  which  shall  consist  of  nothing  but
happiness  is  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  things,  since
there  cannot  but  arise  eventual  differences  from  the  different
results  which  will  ripen  from  the  good  and  evil  actions
(Karman)  of  the  beings  who  are  to  be  created.*

In  answer  to  this,  the  atheistic  opponent  returns  once
more  to  the  authority  of  the  Veda  and  says :  *  But  then,
how  will  you  remedy  your  deadly  sickness  of  reasoning  in
a  circle  [for  you  have  to  prove  the  Veda  by  the  authority
of  Qod,  and  then  again  God's  existence  by  the  Veda].'

But  the  theistic  interpreter  and  defender  of  the  JSTyftya
is  not  silenced  so  easily,  and  replies :  *  We  defy  you  to
point  out  any  reasoning  in  a  circle  in  our  argument.  Do
you  suspect  this  "reciprocal  dependence  of  each"  which
you  call  "reasoning  in  a  circle,"  in  regard  to  their  being
produced  or  in  regard  to  their  being  known  ?  It  cannot
be  the  former,  for  though  the  production  of  the  Veda  is
dependent  on  Qod,  still  as  Qod  Himself  is  eternal,  there  is
no  possibility  of  His  being  produced;  nor  can  it  be  in
regard  to  theii  being  known,  tor  even  if  our  knowledge  of
God  were  dependent  on  the  Veda,  the  Veda  might  be
learned  from  some  other  source;   nor,  again  can  it  be  in


334  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

I

regard  to  the  knowledge  of  the  non-etennity  of  the  Veda^
for  the  non-eternity  of  the  Veda  is  easily  perceived  by  any
Togin  endowed  with  transcendent  faculties  (Ttvra,  &C.).

Therefore,  when  God  has  been  rendered  propitious  by
the  performance  of  duties  which  produce  Hw  favour,  the
desired  end,  liberation,  is  obtained;  thus  everything  is  clear.'

Eveiything  may  be  clear  to  one  accustomed  to  the  Indian
way  of  arguing;  but  from  our  point  of  view  it  would
certainly  seem  that,  .though  the  Ny&ya  does  not  teach  the
non-existence'  of  an  l^vara,  it  is  not  very  successful  in
proving  by  its  lo^c  the  necessity  of  admitting  a  maker  or
ruler  of  the  world,  that  is,  an  tsvara.

•xam  Won*  Books  of  Toga^MitsMk

If  now  we  turn  to  the  Yoga-Siitras  of  Pata^^ali  we  find
that  the  first  book,  the  Sam&dhi-pdda,  is  devoted  to  an
explanation  of  the  form  and  aim  of  Yoga,  and  of  Sam&dhiy
meditation  or  absorption  of  thought ;  Hie  second,  the
Sd.dhana-plida,  explains  the  means  of  arriving  at  tLis  ab-
sorption ;  the  third,  VibhMi-pada,  gives  an  account  of  the
supernatural  powers  that  can  be  obtained  by  absorption
and  ascetic  exercises ;  while  the  fourth,  the  Eaivalyap&da,
explains  E^ivalya  to  be  the  highest  object  of  all  these
exercises,  of  concentration  of  thought,  and  of  deep^  absorp-'
tion  and  ecstasy.  Eaivalya,  from  Eevala,  aJone,  means  the
isolation  of  the  soul  from  the  universe  and  its  return  to
itself,  and  not  to  any  other  being,  whether  Isvara,  BnSiman,
or  any  one  else.

That  this  is  the  right  view  of  the  case  is  confirmed  by
the  remarks  made  by  Yi^z/Hna-Bhikshu  in  his  Yoga-s&ra-
sar/igraha,  p.  i8.  Here  we.  are  told  that  even  when  there
is  some  imperfection  in  the  employment  of  the  above
means  (faith,  energy,  memory,  absorbiug  meditation,  and
knowledge),  the  two  results  (absorption  and  liberation)  can
be  brought  very  near  by  the  grace  of  the  Parama-l^ara,
the  Highest  Lord,  and  secured  by  devotion  to  Him.

By  rarama-lfivara  or  the  Highest  Lord  is  here  meani
that  particular  Purusha  (Self)  who  was  never  touched  by
the  five  troubles,  nescience  and  the  rest,  nor  by  virtue  or


TBUB   OBJECT   OF   YOGA.  335

vice  and  their  various  developments,  or  by  any  residue
(results  of  former  deeds)  in  general.  Yi^^&na-Bhiksliu
ahstains  from  saying  much  more  on  the  Lord,  because,  as
he  says,  he  has  treated  of  this  Being  very  fully  in  his
remarks  on  the  Brahma-Siitras  I,  i.  He  probably  refers
to  his  commentary  on  the  VedsLnta;  and  he  is  evidently
quite  convinced  that,  however  diflferent  the  roads  followed
by  the  Ved&ntins  and  S&mkhya-yogins  may  be^  the  Divine
idea  of  both  schools  is  much  the  same.  .  He  only  adds  that
ttie  powers  and  omniscience  of  the  lavara  are  equalled  or
excelled  by  none,  that  he  is  the  spiritual  chief  and  father
of  all  the  gods,  such  as  Brahm&,  Vishnu,  and  Hara,  that  he
imparts  spiritual  vision  ((r/<diia-A:akshus)through  the  Vedas,
and  that  he  is  the  inner  guide,  and  called  Pranava.  Devotion
to  Him  is  said  to  consist  in  contemplation  and  to  end  in
direct  perception.  Steadfastness  with  regard  to  Isvara  is
represented  as  the  principal  factor  in  abstract  meditation
and  in  liberation,  because  it  leads  to  greater  nearness  to
the  final  goal,  steadiness  with  regard  to  the  human  self
being  secondary  only.  This  devotion  to  Isvara  is  also
declared  to  put  an  end  to  all  the  impediments,  such  as
illness,  &a  (I,  3c) ;  and  a  passage  is  quoted  from  the  Smriti,
'  For  one  desiring  liberation  the  most  comfortable  path  is
clinging  to  or  resting  on  Vishtiu  ;  otherwise,  thinking  only
with  the  mind,  a  man  is  sure  to  be  deceived.'

Tziw  OI^Mt  of  Toga.

It  is  clear  throughout^  the  whole  of  this  chapter  on  tavara
that  devotion  to  him  is  no  more  than  one  of  the  means,
though,  it  may  be,  a  very  important  one,  for  the  attainmenjb
of  liberation,  the  highest  goal  of  the  Yoga.  But  it  is  not
that  highest  goal  itself,  but  only  a  means  towards  it,  nor
could  it  be  accepted  as  the  most  important  feature  of  the
Yoga.  The  really  important  character  of  the  Yoga  con-
sists in  its  teaching  that,  however  true  the  S&mkhya-philo-
sophy  may  be,  it  fails  to  accomplish  its  end  without  those
practical  helps  which  the  Yoga-philosophy  alone  supplies.
The  human  mind,  though  fully  enlightened  as  to  its  true
nature,  would  soon  be  carried  away  again  by  the  torrent


33^  INDIAN  PHIL080PHT.

of  life ;  (he  impressions  of  ih^  senses  and  all  the  oares  and
troubles  of  eveiy-day  life  would  retnm,  if  there  were  no
means  of  making  the  mmd  as  firm  as  a  rock.  Now  thi^
steadying  of  the  mind,  this  Yoga,  is  what  faianga^^  is
chiefly  concemM  with.

iTitta.

We  saw  that  in  the  second  SAtra  he  explained  Yoga  as
£ltta-yritti-nirodha,  that  is,  restraining  or  steadying  the
actions  and  distractions  of  thought.  Yritti,  which  I  trans-
late by  action,  has  also  been  rendered  by  movement  or
function ;  while  iCitta,  which  I  give  as  thought,  has  often
been  translated  hy  mind  or  the  thinking  principle.  It  is
curious  that  the  i  oga  should  have  employed  a  word  which,
as  far  as  I  know,  was  not  a  recognised  technical  term  of
the  Sd.mkhya.  In  the  S&mkhya,  Uie  term  would  be  Manas,
mind,  but  Manas  in  a  state  of  activity,  and,  of  oonrse,  as
a  development  of  Ahamkftra  and  Buddhi.  It  has  to  be
taken  here  as  a  psychological  term,  as  a  name  for  thought,
as  carried  on  in  real  life,  and  indirectly  only  of  the  i/istru-
ment  of  thought.  As  I  had  to  use  mind  for  Manas  in  the
S&mkhya-philosophy,  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  better
rendering  of  the  word  when  used  by  Yoga  philosophers.
Of  course  Manas  is  always  different  from  Buddhi,  in  so  far
as  it  is  a  modification  of  Buddhi,  which  itself  has  passed
through  Ahamk&ra  or  the  differentiation  of  subjectivity
and  objectivity.  But  for  practical  purposes,  what  is  meant
by  iCitta  is  simply  our  thought  or  our  thinking,  and
though  mind,  with  us  also,  has  been  defined  very  differently
by  different  philosophers,  and  is  used  most  promiscuously
in  common  parlance,  its  etymological  relationship  with
Manas  pointed  it  out  as  the  most  convenient  rendering  of
Manas,  provided  always  that  we  remember  its  being  a
technical  term  of  the  Yoga-philosophy,  as  we  have  to  do
whenever  we  render  Prakr^ti  by  nature.  Nirodha,  re-
straint, does  not  mean  entire  suppression  of  all  movements
of  thought,  but  at  first  concentration  only,  though  it  leads
in  the  end  to  something  like  utter  vacuity  or  self-absoiption.
In  all  the  functions  of  the  Manas  it  must  be  remembered
that  the  real  self-conscious  seer  or  perceiver  is,  for  the  time


FUNOnOKS  0¥  THE  MIND.  337

being,  the  Purusha  or  Splf .  It  is  he  who  is  temporarily
interested  in  what  is  going  on,  though  not  absorbed  in  it
except  by  a  delusion  only.  like  the  moon  reflected  in  the
ripples  of  the  waters,  the  Self  appears  as  moving  in  the
waves  which  break  against  it  from  the  vast  ocean  of
Prakriti,  but  in  reality  it  is  not  moving.  We  saw  that  the
mind,  when  receiving  impressions  from  the  outer  world,
was  supposed  in  Hindu  philosophy  to  assume  for  the  time
being  the  actual  form  of  the  object  perceived,  but,  when
once  perfect  in  Yoga,  it  perceives  notfamg  but  itself.

Vimetio&s  «f  til*  miUL

The  principal  acts  and  functions  of  the  mind  are  described
as  right  notion,  wrong  notion,  f ancv,  sleep,  and  remember-
ing, and  they  may  be  either  painful  or  not.

Bight  notions  are  brought  about  by  the  three  i^am&Tias,
so  weU  known  from  different  systems  of  Indian  philosophy,
as  sensuous  perception,  inference,  and  testimony,  Vedic  or
other  «nse.  It  is  significant  that  Pata/7^ali  should  have
used  Agikina.  instead  of  the  Aptava^^na  of  the  Sd.mkhya,
for  Acama  means  distinctly  the  Veda,  and  thus  would
establish  once  for  all  what  is  called  the  orthodox  character
of  the  Yoga.

Wrong  notions  require  no  explanation.  They  are  illus-
trated by  our  mistaking  mother-of-pearl  for  silver,  a  rope
for  a  snake,  &c.  A  state  of  doubt  also  when  we  are  uncer-
tain whether  what  we  see  at  a  distance  is  a  man  or  the
trunk  of  a  tree,  is  classed  among  wrong  notions. .

Fancy  is  explained  as  chiefly  due  to  words;  and  a
curious  instance  of  fancy  is  given  when  we  speak  of  the
intelligence  of  the  Self  or  Purusha,  or  of  the  head  of  B4hu,
the  fact  being  that  there  is  no  intelligence  belonging  to
Self,  but  that  the  Self  is  altogether  intelligence,  just  as
B&hu,  the  monster  that  is  supposed  to  swallow  the  moon,
is  not  a  being  that  has  a  head,  but  is  a  head  and  notliing
else.

Sleep  IS  defined  as  that  state  (Vntti)  of  the  mind  which
has  nothing  for  its  obiect.  The  commentator,  however,
explains  that  in  sleep  auso  a  kind  of  perception  must  take

z

22


338  INDUN   PHILOSOPHY.

place,  because,  otherwise,  we  could  not  say  that  we  had
slept  well  or  badly.

Remembering  is  the  not  wiping  out  of  an  object  that  has
once  been  perceived.  While  true  perception,  false  percep-
tion, and  lancy  take  place  in  a  waking  state,  a  dream,
which  is  a  perception  of  vivid  impressions,  takes  place  in
sleep,  while  sleep  itself  has  no  perceptible  object.  Kemem-
bering  may  depend  on  true  or  false  perceptions,  on  fancy,
and  even  on  dreama


Now  all  these  actions  or  functions  have  to  be  restrained,
and  in, the  end  to  be  suppressed,  and  this  is  said  to  be
effected  by  exercises  (Abhy&sa)  and  freedom  from  passions
(Vair&gya),  I,  12.

Indian  philosopheil^  have  the  excellent  habit  of  always
explaining  the  meaning  of  their  technical  terms.  Having
introduced  for  the  first  time  the  terms  exercise  and  freedom
from  passion,  Pata/7^ali  asks  at  once:  'What  is  Abhy&sa
or  exercise  1 '  Abhyd,sa  is  generally  used  in  the  seoae  of
repetition,  but  he  answers  that  he  means  hereafter  to  use
this  term  in  the  sense  of  effort  towards  steadiness  (Sthiti)
of  thought.  And  if  it  be  asked  whdt  is  meant  by  steadiness
or  Sthiti,  he  declares  that  it  means  that  state  of  the  mind
when,  free  from  all  activity  (Y Wtti),  it  remains  in  its  own
character,  that  is,  unchanged.  Such  effort  must  be  con-
tinuous or  repeat<^,  as  implied  by  the  term  AbhyAsa  (1, 13).

This  Abhy&sa  is  said  to  become  firmly  grounded,  if
practised  for  a  long  time  thoroughly  and  unintermittiiigly


Next  follows  the  definition  of  dispassion  (Vair&gya),  as
the  consciousness  of  having  overcome  (the  world)  on  the
part  of  one  who  has  no  longer  any  desire  for  any  objects
whatsoever,  whether  visible  or  revealed  (I,  15).

Here  visible  (DriahiA)  stands  for  percepu^ble  car  sensnouc
objects,  while  Anusr&vika  may  be  translated  by  revealed,
as  it  is  derived  from  Anunrava,  and  this  is  identical  witiii
Smii  or  Veda.    Perhaps  Anunrava  i)s  more  general  than


WSPASSIQN,   VAIRAGYA.  339

Veda^  .mduding  all  that  has  been  hand^  down,  8uqh  aa  the
stories  about  the  happineaa  of  the.  gods  in  paxadise
(Devaloka),  &o.  The  consciousness  of  having  subdued  or
overcome  f^XL  such  desires  and  being  no  longer  the  slave  of
them,  that,  we  are  told,  is  Yair&gj^a  or  dispassionateness,
and  that  is  the  highest  point  which  the  student  of  Yoga-
philosophy  hopes  to  reach.

It  is  interesting  to  see  how  deeply  this  idea  of  Vair&g^a
or  dispassionateness  must  have  entered  into  .the  daily  life
of  the  Hindus.  It  is  constantly  mentioned  as  the  h^hest
e:$:cellence  not. for  ascetics  only,  but  for  everybody.  It
sometimes  does  xK)t  mean  much  more  than  what  we  mecM^
by  the  even  and  subdued  temper  of  the  true  gentleman^  but
it  sigmfies  also  the  highest  tmworldliness  and  a  complete
surrender  of  all  selfish  desires.  A  very  good  description  of
what  Yair&gya  is  or  ought  to  be  is  preserved  to^is  in  the
hundred  verses  ascribed  to  Bhartrihari  (650  A.i).),  which
are  preceded  by  two  other  centuries  of  yerses,  one  on
worldly  wisdom  and  the  other  on  love.  Manv  of  these
verses  occur  again  and  again  in  other  works,  and  it  is  very
doubtful  whether  Bhartrihari  was  really  the  original
author  of  them  all,  or  whether  he  only  collected  them  aa
Subh&shitas  *.  Anyhow  they  show  how  the  philosophy  of
Vair&gya  had  leavened  the  popular  mind  of  India  at  that
distant  Gme,  nor  has*  it  ceased  to  do  so  to  the^present  day.
It  was  perhaps  bold,  after  BhartWhari,  to  undertake  a
similar  collection  of  verses  on  the  same  subject.  But  as  the
Vair&gya-Mtaka  of  OainSMxjA  seems  in  more  recent~times
to*  have  acquired  considerate  popularity  in  India,  a  few
extracts  from  it  may  serve  to  show  that  the  old  teaching  of
Patan^ali  and  Bhartrihari  has  not  yet  Been  forgotten  in
their  native  country.

'  Death  follows  man  like  a  shadow,  and  pursues  him  like
an  enemy ;  perform,  therefore,  good  deeds,  so  that  you  may
reap  a  blessmg  hereafter.'

'Frequent  enjojrment  of  earthly  prosperity  has  led  toyour
sufferings.  Pity  it  is  that  you  have  not  tried  Ihe  *'  Ejiow
Yourself."'

^  Hia  work  is  aotuaUy  called  SubhAshitfutrisatl,  see  Report  of  Sanskrit
and  TamU  MSS.,  1896-97,  by  Seahiigiri  Sastri,  p.  7.

Z  2


340  INDIAN  PHUiOSOPHT.

*  live  in  the  world  but  be  not  of  it,  is  the  precept  taught
by  our  old  lUfihiSy  and  it  is  the  only  means  of  Uberatuig
yourself  from  the  world/

'  The  body  is  perishable  and  transitory,  whil<»  the  Self  is
imperishable  ana  everlasting ;  it  is  connected  with  the  body
only  by  the  link  of  Earman ;  it  should  not  be  subservient
to  it'

*  11,  through  sheer  negligence,  you  do  nothing  good  for

C*  fellow  creatures,  you  wiU  be  your  own  enemy,  and
me  a  victim  to  the  miseries  of  this  world.'

*  Better  to  do  less  good,  with  purity  of  heart,  than  to  do
more  \^ith  jealousy,  pride,  mahce,  or  fraud.  Little,  but
good  and  lo^ig  work,^is  always  valuable,  Uke  a  pure  gem,
the  essence  of  a  drug,  or  pithy  advice.'

'If  you  are  unable  to  subject  yourself  physically  to
penances,  to  undei^  austerities,  and  engage  in  deep  con-
templation,  the  proper  course  to  liberate  your  soul  from  the
hard  fetters  of  Karman  would  be  to  keep  the  passions  of
your  heart  under  control,  to  check  your  desires,  to  carry  out
your  secular  affairs  with  calmness,  to  devote  yourself  to  the
worship  of  Ood,  and  to  realise  in  yourself  the  *'  Permanent
Truth,"  bearing  in  mind  the  transitory  nature  of  the
universe.*

'  To  control  your  mind,  speech,  and  body,  does  not  mean
to  be  thoughtless,  silent  or  inactive,  like  beasts  or  trees ;
but,  instead  of  thinking  what  is  evil,  speaking  untruth,  and
doing  harm  to  others,  mind,  speech,  and  hoav  should  be
applied  to  good  thoughts,  good  words,  and  good  deeds.'

Dispassionateness,  as  here  taught  for  practical  purposes
chiefly,  reachiBs  its  highest  point  in  the  eyes  of  the  Yoga-
philosopher,  wh^n  a  man,  aftor  he  has  attained  to  the
knowledge  of  Purusha,  has  freed  himself  entirely  from  all
desire  for  the  three  Qunas  (or  their  products).  This  is  at
least  what  Pata/7^ali  says  in  a  somewhat  obscui4  Siltra
(I,  1 1)  ^  This  SCttra  seems  intended  to  describe  the  highest
state  within  reach  of  the  true  Vairilgin,  involving  in(Ufier-
ence  not  only  to  visible  and  revealed  objecto,  but  likewise
towards  the  QuTias,  that  is^  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  the

^  Gsrbe,  Grundriss,  p.  49.


MEDITATION   WITH   OB  VnCTHOUT  AN  OBJBOT.      34 1

twenty-four  Tattvas,  here  called  Qnnas^,  because  detei^
mined  by  them.  The  knowledge  of  the  Purusha  implies
the  distinction  between  what  is  rurusba,  the  Self,  and  what
is  not,  and  therefore  also  between  Purusha  and  the  Qunas
of  Prakriti.  Vijir/i&na-Bhikshu  explains  i{  by  Atml^t-
mavivekas&ksh&tk&r&t,  i.a  from  realising  the  difference
between  what  is  Self  and  what  is  not  Self,  and  not  as
a  possessive  compound :  the  sense,  however,  remaining  much
the  same.  It  is  curiotis  that  Rajendralal  Mitra  shouM  have
rendered  Purushakhy&teA  by  '  conducive  to  a  knowledge  of
Qod.'  From  a  purely  philosophical  point  of  view  Purusha
may  be  translated  by  God,  but  such  a  translation  would  be
misleading  here,  particularly  as  the  S&tra  23,  on  the
devotion  to  the  Lord,  follows  so  soon  after.  It  would  have
been  better  also  to  translate  ^arising  from,'  than  '  conducive

to;

WMLtMUMt  WItk  Mr  WUlMVl  w  OMmI.

Pat'i/v^ali  next  proceeds  (I,  17)  to  explain  an  important
distinction  between  the  two  kinds  of  meditative  absorption
fSam&dhi),  which  he  calls  Sampra^/i&tA  and  Asampragr/i&tJL
This  seems  to  mean  that  there  is  one  kind  of  meditation
when  our  thoughts  are  directed  and  fixed  on  a  definite
objeet,  and  another  when  there  is  no  definite  object  of
meditation  left  Here  the  spirit  of  aninute  distinction  shows
itself  onoe  more,  for  though  these  two  kinds  of  meditation
may  well  be  kept  apart,  and  the  former  be  considered  as
preliminary  to  the  latter,  the  Bumerous  subdivisions  of
each  hardly  deserve  our  notice.  We  are  told  that  what  is
called  conscious  meditetion  may  have  for  ite  object  either
one  or  the  other  of  the  twenty-four  Tattvas  or  the  Isvara,
Tooked  upon  as  one  of  the  Purushas.     The  twenty-four

^  Th€M  Ovmaa  art  mor*  MI7  d««erib«d  in  II,  19,  wh«ro  w  ftA  tluit
ilM  fenx  Oufiiui  wOnm^rvlad  art  meant  for  (i)  VUeaha,  ia.  the  sroaa
elaoianta  and  the  orfana;  (a)  Ayitnahn,  i.e.  the  aubtla  alementa  and  the
mind ;  (3)  the  limc^imAtra,  i.e.  Bnddhl ;  (4)  the  Alimga,  Le.  Prakrtti  aa
▲i^akta.  In  the  oommentarj  to  I,  43,  the  tame  eliiaeai  of  Onnaa  are
deaeribad  aa  Alimga,  a  name  of  PradhAnia,  VitiahtBliNifla,  the  groaa  elamanla
(BhttAni);  ▲Tlfiahtelimga,  Iha  aubtla  eaaenaaa  and  the  aanaaa;  liaig*-
nAftns  ia.  Bvddhi,  and  AliMga,  that  ia,  the  PkmdhAna.


342  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

Tattvas  are  called  unconscious,  the  twenty-fifth  or  Purusna
is  conscious.  When  meditation  (Bh&vanft^  has  something
definite  for  its  object  it  is  called  not  only  rragfw&ta,  known,-
or,  as  referred  to  the  subject,  knowing,  but  also  Savt^,
literally  with  a  seed,  which  I  am  inclined  to  take  in  the
sense  of  having  some  seed  on  which  it  can  fix,  and  from
which  it  can  develop.  The  Asampra^^ta-sam&dhi,  or
meditation  without  a  known  object,  is  Called  Avloa,  not
having  a  seed  from  which  to  spring  or  to  expand.  Native
c^mentators,  however,  take  a  diflferent  view.

Those  who  in  their  Samftrdhi  do  not  go  beyond  the
twenty-four  Tattvas,  without  seeing  the  twenty-fifth,  the
Purusha,  but  at  all  events  identify  themselves  no  longer
with  the  body^  are  called  Videhas,  bodyless ;  others  who  do
not  see  the  Purusha  yet,  but  only  existence,  are  called
Prakritilayas,  absorbea  4n  Prakriti.
.  Thils  again  is  not  quite  clear  to  me,  but  it  is  hardly
necessary  that  we  should  enter  into  all  the  intricate  sub-
divisions of  the  two  kinds  of  meditation,  suchaa  Savitarki,
argumentati"^,  SaviHrft,  deliberative,  S&nax^dft^  joyoud,  and
S&smit&  \  witix  false  conceit.  They  may  become  important
in  a  more  minute  study  of  the  Yoga,  but  they  can  hardly
be  of  interest  to  speculative  philosophers  except  so  far  as
they  furnish  another  proof  of  a  Ions  continued  study  of
th^  Ypga-pfailospphy  in  India  before  &e  actual  composition
of  the  Siitras.

The  Aflampragf^&ta-sam&dhi,  or  meditation  without  a
known  object,  or,  it  may  be,  unconscious  meditation,  is
explained  as  being  preceded  by  a  repetition  of  negative

ferception,  and  as  the  end  of  all  previous  impressions.
,i8.

This  S&tra  has  been .  differently  explained  by  different
European  and  native  conmientators.  It  may  mean  that
there  is  a  residue  of  previous  impressions,  or  that  there  is
not.  The  Samskdras,  which  I  have  rendered  by  previow
impressions,  are  everything  that  has  given  to  the  mind  its


^  Amiitt  i»  different  from  AlL«mkAnt,  and  tneani  the  miseoaoepUon
thet  I  am  (Asmi)  what  I  am  not*  aaeh  as  Prakriti,  Buddbi,  AluiiiikAi%
Manaayfte.


I9VARA  ONOE  MORE.  343

pecnUar  diaracter,  its  flavour,  so  to  say,  or  its  general  dis-
position,

<Quo  MnMi  est  bnbuta  reoens  tenrabit  odovtm
Testa  dia.'

It  may  be  intended  that  these  Samskllras  are  either  all
wiped  out,  or  that  there  is  but  a  small  residue  of  them
manifested  in  the  final  act  of  the  stopping  aU  functions
of  the  mind.

In  summing  up  what  has  been  said  about  the  different
kinds  of  Samadhi,  Patangrali  says  (I,  19)  once  more  that  in
the  case  of  the  Yidehas  and  FrakWtilayas  (as  explained
before,  p.  342)  the  object  or,  if  you  like,  the  cause  of  Sam&dhi
is  the  reaJ  world  (Bhava),  but  that  for  other  Yogins  there
are  preliminary  conditions  or  steps  to  Sam&dhi,  namely,
faith,  energy,  memory,  concentration,  and  knowledge  suc-
ceeding each  other.  Every  one  of  these  Sam&dhis  is  aj?ain
carefully  de&ied,  and  some  more  helps  are  mentioned  in
the  next  SCttra  (I,  21),  where  we  read  that  Samftdhi  mav
be  saM  to  be  near  or  within  reach  when  the  zeal  or  the  will
is  strong.  These  strong-willed  or  determined  aspirants  are
again  divided  (I,  2a)  according  as  the  means  employed  by
them  are  mild,  moderate,  or  excessive.  Thus  we  ^et  nine
classes  of  Yogins,  those  who  employ  mild  means,  with  mild,
with  mvxlerate,  or  with  excessive  zeal ;  those  who  employ
moderate  means,  with  mild,  with  moderate,  or  with  excessive
zeal]  and  those  who  employ  excessive  means  with  mild,
with  moderate,  or  with  excessive  zeal.

Such  divisions  and  subdivisions  which  fully  justify  the
name  of  S&mkhya,  enumeration,  make  both  the  S&mkhya-
and  Yoga-philosophies  extremely  tedious,  and  I  shall  in
future  mspense  with  them,  though  they  may  contain  now
and  then  some  interesting  observations.


After  an  enumeration  of  all  these  means  of  Yoga  to  be
employed  by  the  student,  follows  at  last  the  famous  Stirs
1, 23,  which  has  alwayA  been  supposed  to  contain,  in  answer
to  AApila,  the  proof  of  the  existence  of  a  Deity,  and  which
I  translated  bcS^ore  by  '  Devotion  to  the  Lord.'    The  com-


344  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

mentator  calls  it  simply  an  easy  expedient,  an  alternative.
Nor  is  it  right,  with  Rajendralal  Mitra,  to  translate  this
SAtra  at  once  by  'Devotion  to  (jkxL'  lavara,  as  we  saw,
is  not  Qod  in  the  sense  in  which  Brahin&  might  be  called
so.  He  is  a  Ood,  the  highest  Ood,  but  always  one  of  many
Purushas;  and  though  he  was  looked  upon  as  holy  (I,  25)
and  omniscient,  he  never  seems  to  have  risen  to  the  rank
of  a  Creator;  for  which  there  is  really  no  room  in  the
S&mkhya  system.  Though  it  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  the
orthodox  Yogins  derived  great  comfort  froin  this  Sdtra  as
shielding  Pa^/vgfali  against  the  charge  of  atheism,  it  woold
be  impo6sil)le  to  look  upon  it  as  a  real  proof  in  support
of  the  existence  of  God,  or  as  more  than  a  somewhat  forced
confession  of  faith.

OilMr  Mmoui  of  OMafadiiff  SunMlii.

The  benefits  arising  fronpi  this  devotion  to  the  Lord  are
not  essentially  different  from  those  that  are  to  be  obtained
from  other  Up&yas  or  means  of  attaining  SamlLdh),  as  may
be  seen  from  S&tras  I,  29  to  I,  33  translated  beforei  -  Nor
is  this  devotion  even  the  last  or  the  highest  Up&ya,  for
Pataii^ali  goes  on  immediately  after  to  mention  other  means
equally  conducive  to  concentrated  meditation  or  absorption
in  the  thought  of  one  object.  Expedients,  such  as  the
espulsion  and  retention  of  the  breath,  follow  next^  the  so-
caUed  Pri^^&ydmas,  which  we  can  well  believe,  may  have
been  really  useful  as  contrivances  to  draw  away  the  thoughts
from  all  subjects  except  the  one  chosen  for  meditation,
generally  one  of  the  Tattvas.  But  this  opens  far  too  large
a  subject  for  our  purpose  in  this  place.  We  approach  here
to  the  pathological  portion  of  the  Toga,  the  so-called  ILaths,
or  Kriyll-yoga,  a  subject  certainly  far  more  important  than
has  generally  been  supposed,  but  a  subject  for  students  of
pathology  rather  than  of  philosophy,  unless,  as  is  now  the
fashion,  we  include  the  so-called  physioo-psycholofiiical
experiments  under  the  name  of  philosophy.  One  tning
may  certainly  be  claimed  for  our  Siitras;  they  are  honest
in  their  statements  as  to  the  discipline  that  can  be  applied
to  the  mind  through  tibe  body,  and  even  if  thev  oomd  be
proved  to  have  been  mistaken  in  their  observauoii%  their


OTHBB  MBAN8   OF  OBTAINING   SAMADHL  345

illtUEdons  do  not  seem  to  me  to  have  been  mere  frauds,  at
least  in  the  days  of  P^ta^^ali,  though  it  is  far  from  my
purpose  to  undertake  a  defence  of  all  the  doings  and  sayings
of  modem  Yogins  or  Mah&tmans.

Next  to  the  moderation  or  Restraint  of  the  breathing,
follow  descriptions  of  how  the  mind,  by  being  directed  to
the  tip  of  the  nose,  cognises  a  heavenly  odour,  and  the  samt.
with  all  the  other  senses,  which  therefore  are  supposed  to
have  no  longer  any  inclination  towards  outwaid  objects,
having  everything  they  want  in  themselves.  We  are  next
told  of  the  perception  of  an  inward  luminous  and  blessed
state,  which  produces  a  steadiness  and  contentedness  of  the
mind  when  directed  towards  objects  which  no  longer  appeij
to  the  passions  (1, 37}.  No  wonder  that  even  objects  seen  in
dreams  or  in  sleep  are  supposed  to  answer  the  same  purpose,
that  is,  to  fix  the  attention.  In  fact  any  object  may  be
chosen  for  steady  meditation,  such  as  the  moon  without,
or  our  heart  within,  provided  always  that  these  objects  do
not  appeal  to  our  passions.

All  these  are  means  towards  an  end,  and  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  they  have  proved  efficacious ;  only,  as  so  often
happens^  the  means  have  evidently  encroached  in  this  case
also,  on  the  aims,  and  to  such  an  extent 'that  Toga  has  often
been  understood  to  consist  in  these  outward  ettbrts  rather
than  in*  that  concentration  of  thought  which  they  were
meant  to  produce,  and  which  was  to  lead  on  to  Kaivalya
or  spirit  lal  separateness  and  freedom.  This  true  Yoga  is
often  disfcinguished  as  R&gra-yoga  or  royal  Toga  from  the
other  called  Eriy&-yoga  or  working  Toga,  which  is  some-
times called  Ha^Aa-yoga,  though  it  is  not  clear  why.
Though  some  of  these  bodily  exercises  are  represented
as  serving  as  a  kind  of  staircase  on  which  the  mind  ascends
step  by  steps  we  are  told  at  other  times  that  any  step  may
be  useful,  and  that  some  may  be  skipped  or  taken  for  passed.

Now,  if  Awe  ask  what  is  the  result  of  all  this,  we  are  told
in  SAtra  41  that  a  man  who  has  put  an  end  to  9II  the
motions  and  emotions  of  his  mind,  obtains  with  regard  to
all  objects  of  his  senses  conformation  grounded  in  them
(sie),  or  steadiness  and  consubstantiation,  the  idea  being
that  the   miiud  is  actually  modified  or  changed  by  the


34^  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

objects  perceived  (1, 41).  As  a  crystal,  whefi  plaeed  near
a  red  flower,  becomes  really  red  to  our  eyes,  in  the  same
way  the  mind  is  supposed  to  become  tinged  by  the  objects
perceived.  This  impression  remains  true  as  grounded  in
the  object,  and  our  mind  should  always  be  centred  cm  one
object  of  meditation.

Having  mentioned  in  a  former  Sfttra  that  Sam&dhi  (here
called  Sam&patti)  may  be  either  Savitarkd.  or  Saviik&r&,iie
now  explains  (I,  42)  that  when  meditation  is  mixed  with
uncertamties  as  to  word,  meaning,  or  knowledge,  it  is  called
Savitarkft.  Thus,  supposing  that  our  meditation  was  cen-
tred on  a  cow,  the  question  would  be  whether  we  should
meditate  on  the  sound  cow,  Sk.  Oo,  or  on  the  meaning  of
it  (Begriff),  that  is  the  genus  cow,  t)r  the  idea  or  picture
(Vorstellunfi;)  conveyed  by  it.  Such  a  meditation  would
be  called  »avitark&.  Its  opposite  is  Nirvitarkft  when  all
memory  vanishes  and  the  meaning  alone,  without  any  form,
remains,  or,  as  the  commentator  puts  it,  though  not  much
more  clearly,  when  the  knowing  mind  (Prajjf/7&),  tinged
with  the  form  of  its  object,  forgeto  its  own  subjectiveTform
of  knowinir,  and  becomes,  as  it  were,  one  in  form  with  the
object.

After  Sam&dhi,  both  Savitark&  and  Nirvitark&,  has  been
described,  the  next  division  is  into  SaviA;&r&  and  Nirvii&riL
They  are  defined  as  having  reference  to  subtle  objects
(I,  44),  that  is,  to  the  Tanm&tras,  essences,  and  the  senses,
and  thus  we  learn  that  the  former,  the  Savitark&  Sam&dhi
had  to  deal  with  material  objects  only.  Subtle  objects
include  Prakriti  also,  and  there  is  nothing  subtle  beyond
it^  for  the  Purusha  is  neither  subtle  nor  non-subtle.

If  we  look  upon  the  Nirvijk&r&  Sam&dhi  as  the  lushest
of  the  Sam&dhis,  then  there  would  follow  on  the  compktion
of  that  meditation  contentment  or  peace  of  the  Self  ( Atman).
Knowledge  in  this  state  is  called  jBitambhar&,  riffht  or
truth-becuing,  quite  diiSerent  from  the  knowledge  which  is
acquired  by  imerence  or  h^  revelation..  And  from  this
knowledge  springs  a  disposition  which  overcomes  all  former
dispositions  and  renders  them  Siuperfluous.


KAIVALYA,   FRBBDOM.  347

This  knowledge  therefore  wotfld  seem  to  be  the  highest
goal  of  the  true  login ;  but  no,  there  is  still  something  beyond
knowledge,  and  that  is  what  was  called  before  Apra^gnktk
Sam&dhi,  meditation  without  any  object,  or  pure  ecstasy.
This  restores  the  Purusha  to  his  own  nature,  after  he  has
been  delivered  from  all  the  outside  disturbances  of  life,  and
particnlarly  from  the  ignorance  that  caused  him  to  identify
himself  for  awhile  mth  any  of  the  works  of  PrakWti
(Asmit&).


This  short  account  of  what  is  contained  in  the  first
chapter  of  the  Yoga-Sfitras  contaiiis  almost  all  that  can
be  of  interest  to  European  philosophers  in  the  system  of
Patanf^ali,  and  it  is  not  impossible  that  it  may  have
originally  formed  a  book  complete  in  itself.  It  shows  us
tiie  whole  drift  of  the  Yo^  in  its  simplest  form^  beginning
wiib  the  means  of  steadying  and  concentrating  the  mind
on  certain  things,  and  more  j^trticularly  on  the  twenty-four
Tattvas,  as  taken  over  from  the  Sftmkhya,  and  leading  on
to  a  description  of  meditation,  no  longer  restricted  to  anv
of  the  Tattvas,  which  is  tantamount  to  a  meditation  Which
does  not  dwell  on  anything  that  can  be  offered  W  an  ideal
lepresenliation  of  what  is  <3alled  the  real  world.  It  is  really
meditation  of  each  Purusha  on  himself  only,  as  distinct
from  all  the  Tattvas  of  Prakrtti.  This  is  Kaivalya  or  the
highest  bliss  in  the  eyes  of  the  true  Yogin,  and  it  may  well
be  called- the  highest  achievement  of  &^&na-yoga,  i  e.  Yoga
carried  on  by  thought  or  by  the  will  alone.  Outward
hdtps,  such  as  the  n&nft»y&ma,  the  in-  and  out-breathing,
are  just  alluded  to,  but  that  is  almost  the  onl^  allusion  to
what  in  lator  times  came  to  be  the  most  promment  part  of
the  practical  or  Kriyft-yoga,  namely,  the  postures  and  other

ascetic  perfonnimoee  ^og«Aga^,  ««EP<»^  *<>  P"P«?  ^
nund  for  its  own  high<br  efforts.    The  above-mentioned

t«vara-pranidh&na^ '  Devotion  to  the  Lord,'  is  classed  here

as  siqiply  one  of  the  YogAftgas  or  accessories  of  Yoga,

together   with    purification,   contentment,   penance,   and

mumbling  of  prayers  (H,  32},  showing  how  little  of  real


34^  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

philoBophical  importance  was  ascribed  to  it  by  Pata^i^Ii
It  help€(  towards  Sam&dhi,  meditaticm,  it  is  a  kind  of  wor-
ship ( JBhakti-visesha)  addressed  to  Bhagavat ;  but  that  u
all  the  commentator  has  to  say  in  recommendation  of  it.
There  is  nothing  to  show  that  Pata/7  jfali  imagined  he  had
thereby  given  a  full  and  satisfactory  answer  to  the  most
momentous  of  all  questions,  the  existence  or  non-existence
of  an  individual  Creator  or  Ruler  of  the  world.

It  is  quite  possible  that  some  of  mv  readers  will  be
disappbinted  by  my  having  suppressed  niller  details  about
these  matters,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  they  really  have
nothing  to  do  with  philosophy  in  the  true  sense  of  the
word ;  and  those  who  take  an  interest  in  them  may  easi^
consult  texts  of  which  there  e:2(ist  English  translations,  such
as  the  second  and  third  books  of  the  Toga-S&traa,  and
better  still  the  Ha^Aaprayoga,  translated  by  Shrhiivas
Jy&ngar,  Bombay,  1893 ;  On  the  Ved&ntic  K^-Yoga,  by
Sabhftpati  Svftmi,  edited  by  Siris  Chandra  Basu,  Lahore,
1880;  the  Qheranc2a-samhit&,  Bombay,  1895,  and  several
more.  There  is  also  a  very  useful  Qerman  translation  by
H.  Walter, '  Sv&tm&r&ma's  Ha^Aa-yoga-pradipikft,  Miinchen,
1893.

TogA&ifMh  X«lps  to  Yogtk,

It  is  true  that  considerable  antiquity  is  daimed  for  some
of  these  Tog&Agas,  or  members  of  Yoga.  &'iva  himself  is
reported  to  have  been  their  author,  and  names  sudi  as
Yasish^Aa  and  Y&gr^avalkya  are  quoted  as  having  described
and  sanctioned  eighty-four  postures,  while  GorakshanAttia
reckoned  their  true  number  as  8400,000^.  I  take  a  few
specimens  from  BajendralalMitra'8YogaAphorisms,p.  103: —

'  I.  Padm&sana.  The  right  foot  should  be  placed  on  the
left  thigh,  and  the  left  foot  on  the  right  thigh ;  the  hands
should  be  croeeed,  and  the  two  great  toes  should  be  firmly
held  thereby ;  the  chin  should  be  bent  down  on  the  chest,
and  in  this  posture  the  eyes  shofuld  be  directed  to  the  tip
of  the  nose.  It  is  called  Padmftsana,  lotus-seat^  and  is
highly  baieficiat.in  overcoming  all  diseases.


viBH*ris,  PowvBs.  349

a.  Yttftsona.  Place  each  foot  under  the  thigh  of  its
side,  and  it  will  produce  the  heroic  posture  Ylr&sana.

3.  Bhadrftsana.  Place  the  hands  in  the  form  of  a  tortoise
in  front  of  the  scrotum,  and  under  the  feet,  and  there  is
Kiadr&sana,  fortunate-se^t.

4.  Svastikftsana.    Sittmg  straight  with  the  feet  placed
under  the  (opposite)  thiglS  is  ccdled  Svastik&sana,  cross
seat.

5.  Dandlftsana.  Seated  with  the  fingers  grasping  the
ankles  brought  together  and  with  feet  placed  extended  on
the  legs,  stick-seat.'

This  will,  I  believe,  be  considered  enougH  and  more  than
enough,  and  I  shall  abstain  from  giving  descriptions  of  the
Muddbs  (dispositions  of  upper  limbs),  of  the  Bandhas  or
bindings,  and  of  the  rules  regarding  the  age,  sex,  caste,  food
and  dwelling  of  the  performer  of  Yoga.  To  most  people
these  minute  regulations  wiU  seem  utterly  absurd.  I  do
not  go  quite  so  far,  for  some  of  these  facts  have,  in  a  general
way,  been  recorded  and  verified  so  often  that  we  can  hardly
doubt  that  these  postures  and  restrainti^  of  breathing,  if
properly  practised,  are  helpful  in  producing  complete  ab-
stracticm  (Praty&h&ra)  of  the  senses  from  their  objects,  and
a  complete  indifference  of  the  Yogin  towards  pain  and
pleasure,  cold  and  heat,  hunger  and  thirst  \  TbiB  is  what
IS  meant  by  the  complete  subjugation  of  the  senses  (Param&
vaayatft  indriy&Ti&m,  II,  55)  which  it  is  the  highest  desire
of  the  Yogin  to  realise,  and  this  not  for  its  own  sake,  but
as  an  essential  ^condition  of  perceiving  the  diiference  be-
tween the  Purusha,  the  seer,  and  PrakWti,  the  spectacle,
presented  to  Purusha  through  the  agency  of  the  Manas  as
developed  from  Prakriti.  rrpf easional  students  of  hypno-
tism would  probably  be  able  to  account  for  many  state-
ments of  the  followers  of  KriyA-yoga,  which  to  a  reader
without  physiological  knowledge  seem  simply  absurd  and
incredible.

▼ibhfttis.  Powers.

The  third  chapter  of  Pata/i^ali  s  Yoga-Sfitras  is  devoted
to  a  description  of  certain  powers  which  were  supposed  to

»  Cf.  N.  C.  Paul,  Yoga-PhiloBophy.


350  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

be  obtainable  by  the  Yoeiit  They  are  called  Vibhfltig,  ot
simply  Bhfltie,  Mah&sid&is,  £id(ihis,  or  Aiayaryaa  Hero
also  we  are  able  to  watch  the  transition  from  rational  be-
ginnings to  irrational  ezaggerations»  the  same  tendency
which  led  from  intellectual  to  practical  Yoga.  That  tran-
sition is  clearly  indicated  in  the  Yog&Agas  or  aooessories  of
Yoga.  In  n,  29  we  find  eight  of  these  accessories  men-
tipned,  viz.  restraints  (Yama),  subduing  (Niyama)>  postures

iAsana),  regulation  of  breathing  (Pr&Ti&y&ma),  ah^raction
Praty&h&ra),  firmness  Dhftrani^,  contemplation  (Dhy&oa),
and  absorption  (Sam&dhi),  but  in  III,  4  three  only  are
chosen  as  constituting  Samyama,  firmness^  namely  DhAxanft,
Dhy&na,  and  Sam&dhi,  the  otiier  five  being  treated  as
merely  outward  helps.  Dh&ran&,  firmness  in  holding,  is
explamed  (UI,  i)  as  the  confinement  of  the  Manas  to  <»6
place,  and  this  place  is  said  to  be  the  tip  of  the  nose,  the
navel,  the  ether,  the  sky  or  some  other  place.  By  this  all
other  Yrittis  or  motions  of  the  Manas  are  stopped,  and  the
mind  can  be  kept  fixed  on  oob  object  The  next,  Dhy&Da,
is  contemplation  of  the  one  object  to  the  exclusion  of  all
others;  while  the  third,  real  Sam&dhi,  absorption,  arises
when  the  mind,  lost  in  its  work,  illuminates  one  object
only.  This  Sani&dhi,  of  which  absorption  or  meditation.'is
a  very  poor  rendering,  is  explained  ctymologically  as  that
by  which  the  mind,  Samyag  &dhtyate,  is  thoroughly  c6K
lected  and  fixed  on  one  point  without  any  disturl»ng
causes  (III,  3).

The  SaDiyama,  which  comprises  the  three  highest  helps
to  Yoga,  is  called  internal  (lit,  7]  in  contradistinction  from
the  other  helps,  but,  in  itself,  it  is  still  but  an  outside  hel^
of  the  so-called  objectless  (Nirvi^a)  state  (III,  8).  It  is
difficult  to  find  a  word  for  Samyama,  firm  grasp  being  no
more  than  an  approximative  rendering.  It  is  this  Samyama,
however,  which  leads  on  to  the  Siddhis,  or  perfectiona
These  are  at  first  by  no  means  miraculous,'  though  they
become  so  afterwaras,  nor  are  they  the  last  and  highest
goal  of  Yoga-philosophy,  as  has  often  been  supposed  both
by  Indian  and  by  European  scholars.     Patai<yali,  before


SAJmrAMA   AND   SIBDHIS.  35 1

ezplaining  these  Siddhis,  endeavours  to  show  that  every
thing  exists  in  three  forms,  as  not  vet,  as  now»  and  as  no
more,  and  that  it  is  possible  from  knowing  one  to  know
the  oi&er  states.  Thus  a  jar  is  not  yet,  wh^i  it  exists  only
as  day ;  it  is  now,  when  it  is  the  visible  jar,  and  it  is  no
more,  when  it  has  been  broken  up  and  reduced  to  dust
again.  So  in  all  things,it  is  said, the  future  mav  be knoWQ
from  the  present  and  the  present  aoeouzited  for  by  the  past
This  is  expressed  by  Patatf^ali  in  Sfttra  m,  16.  So  far  all
is  clear;  rat  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  Samyama  is  required
for  this,  and  how  it  is  to  be  applied  to  what  is  called  the
threefold  modification.  Enomedge  of  the  paat  from  the
present^  or  of  the  future  from  the  present,  is  hardly
miraculous  yet ;  though,  w'hen  we  are  told  that  a  Yogin
l^. means  of  Samyama  knows  what  is  to  come  and  what
is  past,  it  sounds  very  much'like  a  claim  of  the, gift  of
prod^ecy,  and  certainly  became  so  in  time.  The  same
applies  in  a  stUl  higher  degree  to  the  ac)iievements  by
means  ai  Samyama  daimed  by  the  Yogins  in  the  following
SAtrc  iu  Here  (III,  1 7)  because  a  man  has  learned  to  under-
stand the  meanings  and  percepts  indicated  by  words,,  a
Yogin  by  applying  Samyama  to  this  gift,  is  supposed  to  be
able  to  understand  the  language  of  birds  and  otheiTanimala
In  fact  we  get  more  and  more  into  superstitions,  by  no
means  without  parallels  in  other  countries,  but  for  all  that,
sup^stitions  wnich  have  little  claim  on  the  attention  of
the  philosopher,  however  interesting  they  may  appear  to
the  patholc^ist.  Then  follow  other  miraculous  gif to  all
ascribed  to  Samyama,  such  as  a  knowledge  of  former
existences,  a  knowledge  of  another's  mind,  or  thought-
reading,  though  not  of  the  merely  casual  objecte  of  his
thoughts,  a  power  of  making  oneself  invisible,  a  fore-
knowledge of  one's  death,  sometimes  indicated  by  portenta
By  Samyama  with  respect  to  kindness,  a  man  may  make
hunself  beloved  by  everybody.  This  is  again  natural,  but
soon  after  we  are  landed  once  more  in  the  supernatural,
when  we  are  told  that  he  may  acquire  the  strength  of  an
elephant,  may  see  things  invisible  to  ordinary  eyes,  may,
by  meditating  on  the  sun,  acquire  a  knowledge  of  geography,
by  meditating  on  the  moon,  a  knowledge  oiastronomy,  by*


353  INDUN  PHILOSOPHY.

meditating  on  the  Polar  star,  a  knowledge  of  the  move-
ments of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  by  meditating  on  the
navel,  a  knowledge  of  anatomy.  He  may  actually  snppresR
the  feelings  of  hunger  and  thirst,  he  may  acquire  firmness,
see  heavenly  viisions,  in  fact  know  evexn^thing,  if  only  he
can  bring  his  will  or  his  Samyama  to  bear  on  the  things
Hrhich  produce  such  effects.  More  of  these  Siddhis  are
mentioned  from  lY,  38  to.  49,  such  as  the  soul  entering
another  body;  ascension  to  the  sky,  efiulgenoe,  unlimitea
hearing,  lightness  like  that  of  cotton,  conquest  of  all  elements,
conquest  of  the  oi^ims,  conquest  of  time,  omnisdenoe,  &c.
These  matters,  though  trivial,  could  not  be  passed  over,
whether  we  accept  uiem  as  xnere  hallucinations  to  whidi,
as  we  know,  our  senses  and  our  thinking  organ  are  liable,
or  whether  '^e  try  to  account  for  them  m  any  other  way.
They  form  an  essential  part  of  the  Toga-phuosophy,  and
it  is  certainly  noteworthy,  even  from  a  philosophical  point
of  view,  that  we  find  such  vague  and  incredible  statements
side  by  side  with  specimens  of  the  most  exact  reasoning
and  careful  observation.


In  reading  the  accounts  of  the  miracles  performed  by
Yogins  in*  India  we  have  in  fact  the  same  feeling  of  wonder-
ment which  we  have  in  reading  of  the  miracles  performed
by  the  Neo-platonists  in  Alexandria.  The  same  writer
who  can  enter  into  the  most  abstruse  questions  of  philosophy  ^
will  tell  us  with  pei*fect  good  faith  how  he  saw -his  Qiaster
sitting  in  the  air  so  many  feet  above  the  ground.  One
instance  of  the  miracles  supposed  to  have  been  wrought
by  a  Yogin  in  India  must  suffice.  A  writer  with  whom
I  have  been  in  correspondence,  the  author  of  a  short  life  of
Iiis  teacher,  Sabh&pati  Svllmy,  bom  in  Madras  in  184c,
relates  not  only  visions  which  the  young  student  had —
these  might  be  accounted  for  like  other  visions — but  miracles
which  he  performed  in  the  presence  of  many  people.  We
are  told  that  it  was  in  the  twenty-ninth  year  of  his  age
that  Sablieipati,  thirsting  for  Brahmagf/zilna  or  knowledge

*  H.  M.,  Theocophy,  Iioct.  xiii.


HIEAOLBS.  353

of  Brahman,  had  a  vision  of  the  Infinite  Spirit,  who  said
to  hin) :  '  Enow,  O  Sabh&pati,  that  I  the  Infinite  Spirit  am
in  all  creations,  and  all  the  creations  are  in  me.  You  are
not  separate  from  me,  neither  is  any  soul  distinct  from  me :
I  reveied  this  directly  to  you,  because  I  see  that  you  are
holy  and  sincere.  I  accept  you  acr  my  disciple,  and  bid  you
rise  imd  go  to  the  Agastya  Asrama,  where  you  will  find
ma  in  the  shape  of  Bishis  and  Yogins.'  After  that,  in  the
dead  of  th0  night»  for  it  was  one  o'clock  in  the  morning
when  <  he  saw  the  divine  vision,  Sabh&pati  left  his  wife  and
two  sons,  went  out  of  his  house  and  travelled  all  the  night
till  he  reached  the  temple  of  Mah&deva,  also  called  Yedasreiii-
Svayambhu-sthalam,  seven  miles  from  Madras.  There'  he
s&t  f (Mr  three  days  and  three  nights  immured  in  deep  con-
templation, and  was  again  commanded  in  a  vision  to  pro-
ceed to  the  Agastya  Aarama.  After  many  perils  he  at  last
reached  that  Asnuna  and  found  there,  in  a  large  cave,  a
great  Yogin,  two  hundred  years  old,  his  face  benign  and
shining  with  divinity.  The  Yogin  had  been  expecting  him
ever  bmce  Mah&deva  had  commanded  him  to  proceed  to
the  Agastya  Asrama.  He  became  his  pupil,  acquired
Brahma^/i&na  and  practised  Sam&dhi  till  he  could  sit
several  de^js  without  any  food.  After  seven  years  his
Guru  disnussed  him  ynih  words  that  sound  strange'  in  the
mouth  of  a  miracle-ihonger :  *Qo,  my  son,  and  try^to  do
good. to  the  world  by  revealing  the  truths  which  thou  hast
leikmed  from  me.  Be  Ub^ral  m  imparting  the  truths  that
should  benefit  the  Gk^ihastiias^bouseholders).  But  beware
lest  thy  vanity  or  the  importunity  of  the  world  lead  thee
to  peitorm  miracles  and  show  wonders  to  the  profane.'
Salm&pati  seems  afterwa^  to  have  taught  in  some  of  the
principal  cities  and)'  to  have  published  several  books,  de-
clining, however,  to  perform  any  miracles.  In  1880  he
waa  still  living  at  Ijlahore.  But  though  he  himself  declined
to  perform  an^  of  the  ordinary  miracles,  he  has  left  us  an
account  of  a  miracle  pe  rf  ormed  by  one  of  the  former  members
of  his  own  Aarama.  About  180  years  ago  a  Yogin  passed
through  Mysore  and  visited  the  B&jah  who  received  him
with  great  reverence  and  hospitality.  Meanwhile  the
Nabob  of  Arcot  paid  a  visit  to  Mysore,  and  they  all  went

33  ^»


354  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.


•.-j-i:^


wiih  the  Togin  to  his  Asrama.    The  Nabob,  being  a  Mussol-
.p^jftn,  ^8ke^:j '  WJ^  h|^e<y!Ofiftj^^ii'ai!idg«&lo

yomwlf  WW  baoQiir,.  and  fifFbat:lMi;^er  i|r|saL>tltit  mdricaU

yoiprsdves  divine  fej^em^S '  .  A ,  l^cjgia!  mmwttc^(ilS^i  we
.pofiH9ei»  tl^,,{^  divi2i%^I^lir!^^i4o,«il  thaiiQ6dteiM^.do>':;

lo^dtb^e  T^gin^i^
^tbrewii  in  tbe  $ky« .  '£h^.  stAofii  w0b  tramfoniuid  AUbb

xpiUipn^  of  anrdtWA,  am  Anit  down  the  bsi^iciKto  of  tluKoniit
'fcteea  to  pi^c^i  thip^<jle]:  began  to  roior  4ii<  <{he)iUi]^laiMi

liglitmng  began  jtp  fl^ahy  a  deep  dar)q)esajefMread'6yei>4iito
iiand,  cmais ,  oymnaai^,  tlie  sky^  an4; ^tb^  b^gaii ^t^ilfaflilin

toiren^    Bei^trndAOii  was  impeding  j  mi  in  vtbenmidafr.txE

this,  conflict  q1  tbe  ejj^pifents,  the,  ygiee  ;C^'  the'llS!k)giii[Misa.

^^^|tp  siay^:  *K  Z.giye  more  powerii^0j9K«ridi(^^

^n  ruins/  ,  T^e  peode.  inmlpi^d. ;  thdrryegpufj  tp '{Cdm>i  tins

nnive^^  l^vpc^,,  He  rmljLed^  i^y  t^

thundeiV:  an4.ibe  i^aip  .aind  tha  pipd«  ii»dpifai#L&fe»  aliAeril

is^^re  ^topped,  wiithe^^
i  do  not  say  th^^jb  the  eyidea^ce  b^^ipe  cKld«0edr<^


muster  in  a  Court  of,  X^w; .  jpi  that  [9ti$ke0^n)^jiti»  k|af»the
simplicity,  wifih  wl^iebexeiything  is<tQld»ftoA^^e!^1^i«yfl^
ing  conyiction  on  tl^e  pi^rt  of  tfapse  wJk^  <reli|texibU<'ti^  .Of
qpun^^  lye  ]j:n(xw  that  sudi  iJun^  osi  the 'iiiibf^euh^
related  are  impossible,  but  it  seems  aliaost  itag^eat  a
in  human  4mWe  that  such  tJpJpga  at^ould  ^^i^iihaf
believed,  and  should  stiU  continue  to>be  'belifi^vieKtilvyffaiB
belief  in  iniracles.  eyident|y.b^an  with  i^maU  brtgxn^iingi^i
with  what  Pata/?^ali  d^s^ribes  as  a  foi»tellingQ£)tjie(]6iii»d
by  a  knowledge  of  the  present  or  the  past. i^hilltlitoulii
be  foretold  might  poon  be  acc^ted.  na  .th^'lmffk^  ikd
prophet  who  foretold  it,  and  from  pro|)ihe(y  eMeo3  dlrre^
current  events,  there  is  but  a  step:  to  |>r<^lke»yi):ig}.^ra^
events  also,  whether  wished  for,  feaired^^^ex^^j^t^*!  Jl^

fhets  woul4  sQoi;i  begpba  to  outbid  pufophets^  and  rthf^^onall
all  of  superstition  would  roll, on  rapidly -tilLithi^c^iM  4iie
avalanche  which  we  know  it  ta  be»  and  to  have  beeoKiBdiraU
times  and  in  all  countries.  -^  •   -t^  r.v  ?ij» '

'  ^  Ofi[^  a  ir^tise  on  Vedftntie  fiaj  Ydga  Philosophy,  lifiheiiaiiiim^
aiana  Oujroo  Yogi  Sabhftp«ti  Sovai-ni,  edited  by  Strife'  tMh^l'^ti,
Student,  4K>v^xiuilfnt  Con^,«  Lfthopte,  tSSft.  i    .'•     'x;    '' -^


,   TW§,?tPpA.-.,,.T  ,        15^


of  our  copBciousneBs,  and  Yogft,  ■vvheDi  ip^ect,  represented
the  achievemeiit  of  ittia  di^tmctioh.  ti^e  ^p^raiion  or  de*
liverance  of  the  .subject  frpm  ftU  t^f^t,  la  oi;  ever  was  o1>t;
jective  in  him;  Uie  truth  being  thfd  the  Ft;ru9ha  never. qfisf^
be  the  immediate  experieneer  op  iperceiver  of  pain  or

Sleasure,  hut  can  only  see  them  .9a.  beiiia  reflected  on  thei
Fanos  or  mind,  this  miqd  not  being,  m  trut^.  -  hia,  the.
Piirusha's^  hut  simply  the  working  of  Frakr^ti,  the  ever
objective.  In  enumerating  the  means  by  which  this  dis-
tinction cui  be  realised,  Fata'i^ali  always  gives  the  prefer^
ence  to  efforts  of  thought  over  thtrae  of  the  fiesh.  If  h«.
does  not  discard  the  latter  altogeth^,  we  ought  to  remember
that  only  by  practical  ezperiiueuta  npuld  we  possibly  gain
the  right  to  reject  them  altc^ether.  .; '


But  though  Fataji^ali  allows  all  these  postures  and'
tortures  as  steps  towards  rcachiitg  complete  abstraction
and  concentration  of  thought,  he  never  forgets  his  highest


356  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

object,  nay  he  allowB  that  all  the  Siddhis,  or  miraculous
powers,  claimed  by  the  Yogins,  are  useless  and  may  even
become  hindrances  (III,  37)  in  the  career  of  the  true  aspirant
after  Viveka,  distinction,  Moksha,  freedom,  and  Kaivalya,
aloneness.  One  sometimes  doubts  whether  all  the  Sfltras
can  really  be  the  work  6f  one  and  the  same  mind.  Thus
'While  in  the  course  of  Fata%ali's  {^peculations,  we  could
not  but  give  him  credit  for  never  trymg  to  locate  the  mind
or  the  act  of  perceiving  and  conceiving  in  the  bram,  or  in
something  like  the  pineal  gland,  we  md  him  suddenly  in
m,  34,  claiming  the  muscle  of  the  heart  as  the  seat  of  the
consciousness  of  thought  (Hridiaye  £^ittasamvit).  While
the  human  body  as  sudi  is  always  regarded  as  dark  and  as
unclean,  so  that  the  Yogin  shrinks  m>m  contact  with  his
own,  much  more  from  contact  with  other  bodies,  we  are
suddenly  told  (III,  46)  that  by  Sam^ama  or  restraint,
colour,  loveliness,  strength  and  adamantme  firmness  may  be
gained  for  the  body.

However,  the  general  drift  of  the  Yoga  remains  always
the  same,  it  is  to  serve  as  a  Tdxaka  (III,  54),  as  a  ferry,
across  the  ocean  of  the  world,  as  a  light  by  which  to
recognise  the  true  independence  of  the  subject  from  any
object;  smd  as  a  preparation  for  this,  it  is  to  serve  as
a  discipline  for  suoduing  all  the  passions  arising  from
worldly  surroundings,  m  the  last  Siitra  of  the  third  book,
Pata^^ali  sums  up  what  he  has  said  by  a  pregnant  sentence
(m,  55) :  '  Kaivalya  (aloneness)  is  achieved  when  both  the
mind  and  the  Self  have  obtained  the  same  purity.'  This
requires  some  explanation.  Instead  of  Mind,  Pata^l^ali
jsays  simply  Sattva,  which  the  commentator  renders  by
£'ittasattva,  and  defines  as  the  entering  of  thought  (f  itta)
into  its  own  causal  form,  after  the  removal  of  the  miscon-
ception of  activity.  This  seems  not  quite  exact,  for  if  we
took  Sattva  as  the  Guna  Sattva,  we  should  be  told  that
a  QuTia  cannot  have  a  cause,  while  the  Manas^  has  a  cause,
and  is  to  be  reabsorbed  into  its  cause  or  causes  (Ahamk&ra,
Buddhi,  Prakriti),  as  soon  as  its  QuTia,  here  the  Sattva^  has
become  perfectly  SkniA  or  quieted.


SAJIBKAbAS  and  ViSANAS.  357

I  have  tried  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  three  Gunas
before,  but  I  am  bound  to  confess  that  their  nature  is  by
no  meatis  dear  to  me,  while,  unfortun&tely,  to  Indian
philosophers  they  seem  to  be  so  clear  as  to  require  no
explanation  at  all.  We  are  always  told  that  the  threi
Ounas  are  not  qualities,  but  something  substantial  fDra-
vykrd).  In  everything  that  springs  from  nature,  and  tnere-
fore  in  the  Manas  also,  there  are  these  three  Gunas  (lY,  15)
striving  for  mastery^.  Sattva  of  the  mind  is  goodness,
light,  joy,  and  its  purification  means  its  not  being  overcome
by  the  other  two  Gunas  of  Baqsis,  passion,  or  Tamas,
darkness  (11,  47).  From  this  purification  springs  first
Saumanasya,  serenity,  from  this  Ek&grat&,  concentration,
from  this  Ind^ya^aya,  subjugation  of  the  organs  of  sense,
and  from  this  at  last  Atmadareanayogyat&,  fitness  for
beholding  the  Self,  or  in  the  case  of  the  Rirusha,  fitness  for
beholding  himself,  which  is  the  same  as  Eaivalya,  alonenesa

In  the  fourth  and  last  chapter  Pata/taali .  recurs  once
more  to  the  Siddhis,  perfections,-  natural  or  miraculous,
and  tells  us  that  they  may  be  due  not  only  to  Sam&dhi^
meditation  in  its  various  forms,  but  also  to  birth,  to  drugs,
to  incantations,  and  to  heat  (Tapas)  or  ardour  of  asceti-
cism, &e.  By  birth  is  meant  not  only  birth  in  this  or  in
a  future  life,  as  a  Br&hman  or  /SMra,  but  also  rebirth,  puch
as  when  Nandtavara,  a  Br&hman,  became  a  Deva,  or  when
Yidv&mitra,  from  being  a  Eshatriya,  became  by  penance
a  BriLhman.  This  is  accounted  for  as  being  feiimply  a  re-
moval of  hindrances,  as  when  a  husbandman,  wishing  to
irrigate  his  field,  pierces  the  balk  of  earth  that  kept  the
water  from  flowing  in.


Though,  as  a  rule,  whatever  a  man  does  has  its  results,
whether  good  or  bflid,  the  act  of  a  Togin,  we  are  told,  is

^  Yaih4rth«8  trigufiafl  tath&  Mttam  api  trigunain,  'As  th«  objeet  !•
threefold,  the  thought  also  in  threefold.'  The  mind  in  fact  is  doubly
atfected  by  tiie  Gunas,  first  as'having  them  or  being  them,  then  aa  being
tinged  onoe  more  by  the  Gunas  of  the  objects  peroeived  (IV,  16).


35^  '  tarurkk  'rgkhdM^:

neither  black  nor  white^t"^  p^^tices  iio  fruit,  because  it  is
pc0i<^i;me4  without  any  desire,     i  :  '  ':        ;  .     st

,  As  the  ^99ulta  of  metions  we  harei  V&sin&s^  impr^ssioiis,
or  Samsk&raa,  dispositions.    They  show  themselves  either
in  whU't  i:exaainB,  oiten  donnanti,  and  is  then  called  mismoity  ^,  r
or ) in  the -peculiar,  genus,  x)£  man,  bird,  ioawi  .Br&hman  or
SC^drik)  Vk  the  .locality .  and  in.  the  time  i?rhen  a  manis  bon^
Thes^  •  temaindera  nevfer.  ceasis,  so .  that  the  animal  pio-
pBnsitlds  may  lie  dormant:  foe  a  time  in  a  Bsffthman^  but
DjPeak  out  again  when;  he:  enters  on  a  oanine  birUi.  ,  They
ai?e  not  said  to  be  without  beginning,  because!  desires  and
fears  can  only  slxise  when  there  are  ol^jects  to  be  feared  or
desitiBd  (ly,  ,io^     Impresficms  :are  caHised  by  |)ero^tio<is,
perceptions  apnng  from  desire,  desire  i rom  nescienoei    The
result  of  them  aU  is  the<  body  with  its  instipcts,  their  habitat
themind^th^ir  snpportv  or  that  on  which  they  leaui  the
same  as  the  support  of  perc^tion,  i.a  the  objective -wcnrld.
H^ice  it  is  saaa  that  they  sprout;  like  seeds>  but  that  by
Knowledge  and  Toga  they^  can  be:  annihilated  also  like
seeds,  when  roasted.    Inccoinexion  wiith  this  the  question  is
discussed,' how  anything  can  ever  be  completely  destroyed,
how  what  eidsts  can  be  made  not  to  exist,  tod  how  what
does  jiot  i  exist  can  be  made  to  exist.     I  doubt,  however,
whether  Ea)endralal  Mitra  can  be  right  (III»  9,  IV,  13)
wlien  heidiscovers  here  something  like  the  theory  of  ideas
or.^agwi.in  the  inind  of  Pataiipali,  and  holds  that  the  three
ways.or  AdhvaJis  in  which  objects  piresent  tJiemselvee  to
the  mind,  or  affect  the  mind,  as  past^  present  and  future,
correapoxKi  to  the  admission  of  nmwersaMei  ante^rem^  the
ideas  or  types,,  the  univeTsalia  in  re^  th0  essence,  and  the
univerealia  post  rem,  the  concepts  in  our  mind^    I  eonfen
I  hanlly  understand  his  meaning.    It  should  never  be  for-
gottep  t&at  the  mind  is  taken  by  Pata/r^rali  as  by  itsdf
unconscious  (not  as  Sv&bh&sa^  self-illuminated,  IV.  18)  and
as  becoming  conscious  and  intelligent  for  a  time  onlv  by  the
union  between  it  and  the  Purusha,  who  is  pure  intelligence.
The  Manas  oi^ly  receives  the  consciousness  of  pereeption
which  comes  in  reality  from  the  Purusha,  so  thi^  here  we

^  This  kind  of  memory  comes  Tety  near  io  what  wo  eall  invtlBet,
propensity,  or  untaught  ability.


18  TOGA  NIHILISM?  359

8hinild>lum  tibid  etymoldgioalJiboEiigh!  souMtwhat'  ftmeifdl,  ^
dfifiniticii  lof  tcomsKnoosness  (eon^-aDieii^)  m  well  as  o£  the  -
S^BU^cflntf  Saryi^vid,  1.19^1  iknowii^  'aIong>  with  the  mmd,  iei^  -
Appj^bmBdmg^^iibB^  iminMsians  iof  ^m  miiid  (STabuddhi-  ^
Sfl^vbdaoaai^ .  Bmt  tbongh  JSTiita^  is  the  work  of  the
Maa^a,  Jdtotdiiteotly  iaf  the  .Baddhi^  t}ii8>£ltta,  .when  secra
byfitaai*^  ^Barasha).  on;  one  side  an^  tinged  witit'  what  i^  ^
sain  oniiheother^^mi^.  be  spoken  of  aat£e  thonglht  of  the>
Boxiii^^iai^itfajra^hi  it  is  so,  by^  a  -  t^aibonuy  misodikoci^oii
on]|^i  Xhis  JTitta  again  is  coloured  07  many  finpsier  im«*
P|^»4aBS(<¥&8an&)>i .  It  inay  be  called  the  hiffhest  form  of
!ri»kmfi|  and  as  snfh  it  «ervee^  no  purpose  of  its  own^bnfr
wiearks  vtaOy  for  another^  the  Pnruoh^  whom  it  binds  and
fascinaies.^  a'iitae  with  thift  sole  poipose,  we  aieiold,^
bimlpiiig  Jutn  b^k  to  a  final  reot^gnition.  of  his  true  Self


li


C.


t       i  I    -1


.J  >'/  ; .     .    ■      .  ;     .   ■      ■;:;  I-  i !


If  (that  is  OQC^  achi^ved^  the  JHiii^sba  knows :  that  he,
h^p&3^f^ju3.Qot6zperiencer«  ^either  knpwer  oor  actor;  and
the  Manas  or  active  mind,  when  beginning  to  feel  the
appi?pach  1^  K^iyjGklyaf  turns  mt>v^  and .  more .  inward  and
aY^f^r^&oniL|  ti^e  world,  so  as  not  to  interfere  with  the
o^iwi^q^t  of  the  ^ghest  bliss  of  t^e  Puru^hja. :  Tet  there
is,  fB^lf  10^  .4^S^  ^^  A  relapse  in  unguarded  moments  or  in
tli^^ter7als  oji  ^poieditatipi^  Qld  in]{pi:essions  may  reassert
th^gtmsejiyes^  and  the»;caind  mav  lose  its  steadines8>  unless
tl^  9f4i  T^S^^^^^  !^  xised  again  and  a^in  to  remove
al)L  ip^^pediments.  Then  at  last^perfefst  discrimination  ifl  re-
wjfjrd^  by. what  is  called  bv  a  stri^i^  term,  Dharmamegha,
the  jcloud  o^  virtue,  knowledge  and  virtue  being  inseparable,
like  ^  cause  and  effect  All  works  and  all  sufferings  have
^^Tf  f^^'i'^'  even  what  is  tp  be  known  becomes  smaller  and
8i^9lter>  |the  very  Ounas,  i.e.  Braknti,  ha^g  done  their
wprk,  cease  troubling^  Vurusha  becomes  himself,  is  in-
dependeni,  undisturbSl,  free»  and  blessed.


I  f


'Im  Toga  aihfllwwt


.Xhfe  la  the  ei^^  of  the  YegaTphiloaophy,  and  no  wonder
that  it  should  have  been  mistaken  for  complete  nihilism  by


36o  INDIAN  PHIIiOSOFHT.

Cousin  and  others.  But  first  of  all,  the  play  of  Prakrtti/
though  it  has  ceased  for  our  Purusha,  who  has  gained  true
knowledge,  is  supposed  to  be  going  on  for  ever  for  the
benefit  of  other  mnumerable  Purushas ;  and  as  long  M^
there  are  any  spectators,  the  spectacle  of  Frakriti  will
never  cease.  Secondly,  the  Purosha,  though  freed  frpm
i^usion,  is. not  thereby  annihilated.  He  is  himself,  apvit
from  nature,  and  it  is  possible,  though  it  is  not  di^tincUy  *
stated,  that  the  Purusha  in  his  aloneness  may  continue  his
life,  like  the  &ivanmukta  of  the  Yed&nta,  maintaining  bis
freedom  among  a  crowd  of  slaves,  without  any  fear  or  hope
of  another  Jife,  unchanged  himself  in  this  ever-changing
Sa/m49&ra.  However,  we  need  not  attempt  to  supply  what
Pata/?9ali  himself  has  passed  over  in  silence.  The  final
goal  whether  of  the  Yoga,  or  of  the  S&wkhya,  nay  even  of
the  yedd.nta  and  of  Buddhism,  always  defies  description.
Nirv&na  in  its  highest  sense  is  a  name  and  a  thought,  but
nothing  can  be  predicated  of  it.  It  is  *  what  no  eye  had
seen  and  what  has  not  entered  into  the  mind  of  man.'  We
know  that  it  is ;  but  no  one  can  say  what  it  is,  and  !>hose
who  attempt  to  do  so  are  apt  to  reduce  it  to  a  mere
phantasmagoria  or  to  a  nothing.

Though  I  hope  that  the  foregoing  sketch  may  give
a  correct  idea  of  the  general  tendency  of  the  Yoga-
philosophy,  I  know  but  too  well  that  there  are  several
points  which  require  further  elucidation,  and  on  which
even  native  expositors  hold  different  opinions.  What  we
must  guard  against  in  all  these  studies  is  rejecting  as
absurd  whatever  we  cannot  understand  at  once,  or  what  to
us  seems  fanciful  or  irrational.  .1  know  from  my  own
experience  how  often  what  seemed  to  me  for  a  long  time
unmeaning,  nay  absurd)  disclosed  after  a  time  a  far  deeper
meaning  than  I  should  ever  have  expected.

The  great  multitude  of  technical  terbis,  though  it  may  be
bewildering  to  us,  could  not  be  entirely  supprei^ed,  because
it  helps  to  show  through  how  long  and  continuouis  a
development  these  Indian  systems  of  thought  must  have
passed,  before  any  attempt  was  made,  as  it  was  by  Patan-
gfali  and  others,  to  reduce  them  to  s;^tematic  order.  There
remains  with  me  a  strong  conviction  that  Indian  philoso*


18  TOQA  NIHILISM  1  36 1

phers  arevkonest  in  their  reasonings,  and  never  use  empty
words.  But  there  remains  much  to  be  done,  and  I  can  only
hope  that  if  others  follow  in  my  footsteps,  they  will  in  time
make  these  old  bones  to  live  again.  These  ancient  sa^
should  become  fellow-workers  and  fellow -explorers  with
ourselves  in  unknown  continents  of  thought,  and  we  ought
not  to  be  afraid  to  follow  in  their  track.  They  always
have  the  courage  of  their  convictions,  they  shrink  from  no
consequences  u  they  follow  inevitably  from  their  own
premisses^  This  is  the  reason  why  I  doubt  whether  the
admission  pf  an  tsvara  or  lord  by  Pata^^ali,  in  contra-
distinction to  Kapila  who  denies  tnat  there  are  any  argu-
ments in  support  of  such  a  being,  should  be  put  down  a^
a  mere  economy  or  as  an  accommcdation  to  popular  opinion.
Indian  philosophers  are  truthful,  and  Pataii^aJi  (II,  36)  says
in  so  many  words  that  truth  is  letter  than  scbcrifice  ^.  They
may  err,  as  Plato  has  erred  and  even  Kant,  but  they  are
x^ot  decepti  deceptores,  they  do  not  deceive  or  persuade
t^iemselves,  nor  do  they  try  to  deceive  othera

^  SfttjapniithAATftm  kriyftpliAlAfrayattftt


i:  ;;  }"  i':!iI.T.iR'.;'i'   A^   ){    di

liii^^  ;.})•!  TTMifi  III  deeaod  sib  ai9il«j


>,  I  •'  .    ■>  <


•t.


r

'J  <


/  '.    .  .


jii '•/-.>  b/ii  ()J  h'»no((  bio  sasdi  95li>i:i
/{■    I  lis  ..'i')/l'icw-'-7oiit)i  eaioood  hliKKiV

€H!APTBBv.VIIl.  ^-t  b/xjila  sd  oi  ion

on  :j,  ill  /./.'!..  ,"'.''•  ,rv'icr hr7Ji.':>  •.i-.ffr  io  0)4^1000  9ili  9 v^iH

WmiiE  in  the  ciystems  lii&drio  eTtmdoeififfqtisvikxI^iimi
religious  md.  even  McAical  iiseiiv  ^  iiflR^«niirfc^jtiiroI

unipiagtaative, :  laul  jsiixohj.iiiDitB  like^  iiaiAiiiMe>:Bieffii  lign
schqlaetio  systems  of  pbilonphy,.  1  bu8mete)iki>  eaqpositioikBn
of  what  can  be  known,  eitlubr  of  thci  ifcurU;  Wbicb  Marrawaid^
us  or  of  the  world  within,  that  is,  of  our  faculties  or  powers
of  peroeivine ,  oaacd^Hig,  or  l?ead6niiDtg^  on  one  side,  wd  the
objects  which  they  present  to  us,  on  uie  other.

It  should  be  remembered  that,  like  the  Sftmldrro  and
Toga,  and  to  a  certain  extent  like  the  Pftrva  a^d  tlttara-
Mtm&ms&,  the  Ny&ya  and  Yaiseshika  also  have  by  the
Hindus  themselves  been  treated  as  forming  but  erne  disci-
pline. We  possess  indeed  a  separate  body  of  T^jtyarSHitns
and  another  of  Vaiaeshika-SAtras,  and  these-  with  their
reputed  authtes,  Gotama  and  Kan&da,  have  long  been
accepted  as  the  original  sources  whence  these  two  streams
of  toe  ancient  pmloBophy  of  India  proceeded.  But  we
know  now  that  the  literary  style  which  sprang  up  naturally
in  what  I  called  the  SAtra-period,  the  period  to  which  tl^e
first  attempts  at  a  written,  in  place  of  a  purely  mnemcynic,
litoratore  may  have  to  be-  ascribedi  was  by  no  means
restricted  to  that  ancient  period,  but  obntinusd  to  be  so  well
imitated  in  later  times  that  we  find  it  used  with  great
success  not  only  in  the  S&mkhya-Sfttras,  which  are  later
than  'MAdliava7i35o  a.d.),  but  in  more  modem  oompositKiiis
alsa  It  shoula  always  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  SAtms
ascribed  to  Gtptama  and  Kan&da  presuppose  a  long  previous


BBLATTQN  BETWEEN  NTitA  AND  VAIOTSHIKA,         5^3

development  of  philosophical  thought,  and  instead,  pt
regarding  the'  two  as  two  independent  streams,  it  seems
far  more  likely  that  there  existed  at  fiifst  an  as  yet  un-
differentiated body  of  half  philosophical  half  popular
thought,  bearing  on  thii:^  th^  can  be  known,  the  F^^-
thas,  i.e,  omne  sciiUe,  a^a  pn  the  means  of  acquiring  :Spc4
knowledge,  from  which  at  a  later  time,  according  to  .the
preponderance  of  either  the  one  or  the  pthex;  s^bjeqk,  the^
two  systems  of  Vaiseshikia  and  Ny&ya  branched  off.  llieise
two  systems  shared  of  course  mai^y  things  in  oommoin,.  ap4
hence  we  can  well  understand  that  at^  a  later,  time  tbi>y
should  have  been  drawn  together  i^in  and  treated  as  one«
as  we  see  in  iSlv&ditya's  Saptapadfi^hi  (about  140c  A-D.),  in
the  BhkahirT?axikkh^%  with  its  commentary  the  Mukt&vali,
in  the  Tarls;a^Mimgrah^,  the  Tarkakaumudi,  the  Tarkj^ritu,,
&C.  For  practical  purposes  it  is  certainly  preferable  that
we  shonld  follow  their  example  and  thus  avoid  the  necessity
of  discussing  the  same  subjects  tiHce  over.  ..There  may
have  been  an  old  Tarka,  very  like  pur  Tarkasaingraha,  the
one  betore  the  bifurcation  of  the  old  system  of  Anvikshiki,
the  other  after  the  confluence  of  the  two.  But  these  are  as
yet  conjectures  only,  and  may  have  to  remain  meire  con-
iectures  always,  so  tiiat,  in  the  present  state  of  our  know^;
ledge,  and  depending,  as  we  have  to  do,  diiefly  on  the:
existing *Si!i.tras  as  the  authorities  recognised  in  India  itself,,
we  must  not  attempt  a  historical  treatment,  but  treat  each
system  by  itself  in  epite  of  unavoidable  repetitions.

A.  very  zealous  native  scholar,  Mah&deo  R&j&r&m  BodaSi
in  the  Introduction  to  his  edition  of  the  TarkaaaTngraba^
has  indeed  promised  to  five  us  some  kind  of  history  of  the
Ny&ya-philosophy  in  India.  But  unfortunately  that  period
in  the  historical  development  of  the  Nyftya  which  is  of
greatest  interest  to  ourselves,  namely  that  which  pi^^eeded
mt  composition  of  the  Ny&vi^&traa,  had  bv  him  also  (o
be  left  a  Uank,  for  the  sunple  reason  tiiat  nothing  is  known
of  NT&ya  before  Qotam^-  The  1  later  periods,  however^
have  been  extremely  well  treated  by  Mr.  Bodas,  and  I  may
ref cor  my  readers  to  him  for  the  best  information'  on  the
sul^ject.  Mr.  Bodas  places  th^  Sfttras  of  GdEama  and
KanAda  in  the  fifth  or  fourth  cent.  b.c.;  and  he  expresses


364  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

a  belief  that  the  Yaiseahika,  nay  even  the  SiLmkhya,  ai
systems  of  thought,  were  anterior  to  Buddha,  without  how
ever  adducing  any  new  or  certain  proofs.


Dates  are  the  weak  points  in  the  literary  history  of
India,  and,  in  the  present  state  of  our  studies,  any  date,
however  late,  should  be  welcome.  In  former  years  to  assign
the  Kapila-Sdtras  to  the  fourteenth  or  even  fifteenth
century  A.D.,  would  have  seemed  downright  heresy.  Was
not  Kftlid&sa  himself  assigned  to  a  period  lon^  before  the
beginning  of  our  era?  it  seems  now  generally  accepted
that  E&lidlLsa  really  belonged  to  the  sixth  century  A.D.,  and
this  date  of  E&lid&sa  may  help  us  to  a  date  for  the  SMras
of  Qotama,  valuable  to  ns,  though  it  may  be  despised  by
those  who  imagine  that  the  value  of  Sanskrit  literature
depends  chiefly  on  its  supposed  remote  antiquity.  I  have
pointed  out  ^  that,  according  to  native  interpreters,  Kftlidftsa
alluded  to  the  logician  DignSga  in  a  verse  of  his  Megha-
diita^.  We  may  suppose  therefore  that  Di^^iga  was
considered  a  contemporary  of  Ed.lidd<sa.  Now  I)ign&ga  is
said  by  Vy^aspati  Mi^a,  in  his  NyS.ya-vfirrttika-t&Aparya-
tlkk,  to  have  interpreted  the  Ny^ya  aphorisms  of  Qotama
in  a  heterodox  or  Buddhist  sense,  while  XJddyotakara  wrote
his  commentary  to  refute  his  interpretation  and  to  restore
that  of  Pakshilasv&min.  If  Vd,iaspafci  Miara  is  right,  we
should  be  allowed  to  place  Dign&ga  in  the  sixth  century,
and  assign  the  same  or  rather  an  earlier  date  to  the  Sfttras
of  Gotama,  as  explained  by  him  and  other  Ny&ya  philo-
sophers. So  late  a  date  may  not  seem  to  be  worth  much,
still  I  think  it  is  worth  having.  Several  other  dates  may
be  fixed  by  means  of  that  of  Dignsiga  as  I  tried  to  show  in
the  passage  quoted  above  (India,  PP*  3^7  scq.)*

A  more  comprehensive  study  or  Buddhist  literature  may
possibly  shed  some  more  light  on  the  chronology  of  the
later  literature  of  the  BrUhmans,  if  I  am  right  in  supposing
that  in  the  beginning  the  followers  of  Buddha  broke  by  no

^  India,  p.  307.

^  See  ftlflo  Prof.  Satts  Chandra  Vidy&b||y08hana  in  Journal  of  Buddhist
Text  Society,  IV,  parts  iii,  and  iv,  p.  16. "     .


dignAga.  365

means  so  entirely,  as  has  generally  been  supposed,  with  the
literary  traditions  of  the  Br&hmans.  It  is  quite  intelligible
"▼hy  among  the  various  systems  of  Hindu  philosophy  the
Buddhists  should  have  paid  little  attention  to  the  two
Mlm&ms&s,  concerned  as  they  both  were  with  the  Veda,
an  authority  which  the  Buddhists  had  rejected.  But  there
was  no  reason  why  the  Buddhists  should  forswear  the
study  of  either  the  Nyfl.ya  or  Vaiaeshika  systems,  or  even
the  S&mkhya  system,  thougli  making  their  reserves  on
certam  pomts,  such  as  the  existence  of  an  tsvara,  which
was  admitted  by  the  Nyfl.yas,  but  denied  by  Buddha.  We
know  that  at.  the  court  of  Harsha,  Br&hmans,  Bauddhas,
and  (Tainas  were  equally  welcome  (India,  pp.  307  seq.).
We  know  from  Chinese  travellers  such  as  Hiouen-thsang
that  Vasubandha,  for  instance,  before  he  became  a  Buddhist,
had  read  with  his  master,  Yinayabhadra  or  Samghabhadra  ^
not  only  the  books  of  the  eighteen  schools  which  were
Buddhist,  but  also  the  six  Tirthya  philosophies,  clearly
meant  for  the  six  Br&.hmanic  systems  of  philosophy.  This
Vasubandha,  as  a  very  old. man,  was  actually  the  teacher
of  Hiouen-thsang,  ;^ho  travelled  in  India  from  629  to
648  A.D.  Therefore  in  Vasubandha's  time  all  the  six
systems  of  Indian  philoso^^y  must  have  been  in  existence,
in  the  form  of  Siitras  or  !Kd,rik&s.  For  we  possess,  in  one
case  at  least,  a  commentary  by  Pakshila-sv^min  or  VlLtsyll-
yana  on  the  Nyllya-Siitras,  the  same  as  those  which  we
possess,  and  we  know  that  the  same  Sfitras  were  explained
afterwards  by  DignS^ga,  the  Buddhist.  This  Buddhist
commentary  was  attacked  by  Uddyotakara,  a  Brd.hmany  of
the  sixth  century,  while  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventh
century  Dharmakirtti,  a  Buddhist,  is  said  to  have  defended
'Dign&ga,^  and  to  have  criticised  XJddyotakara's  Ny&ya-
v&rttika.  In  the  ninth  century  Dharmottara,  a  Buddhist,
defended  Dharmaklrtti's  and  indirectly  Dign&ga's  inter-
pretation of  the  Nyd/ya-Sdtras,  and  it  was  not  till  the  tenth

^  See  also  Journal  of  Buddhist  Text  Society,  1896,  p.  z6.

*  Though  none  of  Dignftga's  writings  have  as  yet  been  diacoyered,  £frl
Starat  Chandra  states  that  there  is  in  the  library  of  the  Grand  I^ma
a  Tibetan  translation  of  his  Ny&ya-samuAcftaya  (Journal  of  Buddhist  Text
Society,  part  iii,  1896,  p.  17).


366  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

cenioiy  that  VftX^aspati  M i£M  finally  re-establifihed  the
l^tihmanic  view  of  the  Ny2,ya  in  his  Ny^ya-virttika-
tktparya-ttk&.  This  would  coincide  with  the  period  of
the  BrahmanJ&'Teaction  and  the  general  collapse  of  ^d-
dhism  in  Indi&z,  and  thus  place  Defore  tis  an  intelligible
progf ess  in  the  study  of  the  JNy&ya  both  by  Br&hmat^  iind
Duolhists  from  the  sixth  to  the  tenth  century,  while  the
revival  of  the  NySlya  dates  from  Gamge^a  UpSShyiya  who
lived  in  the  fourteenth  century  at  Mithila.
/Thanks  to  the  labours  of  Sarat  Chandra  DlLs  and  Satts
Chandra  YichrllbhAshaTia,  we  have  lately  gained  access  to
some  of  the  oiitras  of  the  Buddhist  schools  of  philosophy,
which  are  full  of  interest.  Of  the  four  great  seho9la  of
the  Buddhist  the  MsUlhyamika,  Yogi/iSara^  Sautrd^ntika,
flbd  Yaibh^hika,  the  first  or  Mddh^amika  now  liei^  before
tis  in  the  M^dhyamika  Vritti  by  -Kandra-Klrtti,  and  there,
is  every  hope  that  other  philosophical  treatises  also,  for
instance,  the  NyS*ya-saniuA;^ya,  may  be  made  Accessible  to
ug  by  the  labours  of  these  indefatigable  scholan^

The  S&tras  or  rather  K&rikds  of  the  Mddhyamika  school
muist,  of  course,  be  distinguished  from  the  system  of  thought
which  they  are  meant  to  explain.    The  characteristic  feature


43,  44,  in  Badarfi-yaTia's  VedSnta-Siltras  II,  2i  38,  where
iSamkara  distinctly  refers  the  doctrine*  that  We  know  no
objepts,  but  only  our  perceptions  of  theijD,  t<>  Sugata  or
Buddha.  The  author  of  the  PawAadasl  quotes  ttte  MsUihya-
niikas  by  name  as  the  teachers  of  universal  nihilism  (Sarvam
i$^nyam).

'  If  NUg&r^una  was  really  t)|e  author  of  the  M&dhyamika-
Silitras,  as  we  how  possess  tb^m,  they  would  carry  us  backj
to  about  the  first  century  a.1>v,  and  we  should  have  in  liis'
l^rikli^s,  as  explained  by  iTandra-Ei^ti,  the  oldest  docu-
ment of  systematic  philosophy  in  India,  which  wiU  require
very  careful  examination.  Though  it  is  different,  no  doubt,
tron^  all  the  six  systems,  it  nevertheless  shares  in  common
with  them  many  of  the  ideas  and  even  technical  terms.  If
it  teaches  the  ^'^nyatva  or  emptiness  of  i^he  world,  this  after


tH  IB  not  veiy  difieieot  from  the  Ved&ntic  Avldyfl,  and  the


')il.lWlMtllWTiBuddhiat!']^^lofaopfay'8h&'M«  iho^  in  comOioD
(Witivlthfa'S&mlthyB,  tJ^^  wm  tile  NyiLya  and  Vaisesb^
MsmsttxitiD^'as  doubtful  as ^veri  The'randaniental  positibii
ofiQie  Sfti^khytt/ab  SatkSiyavada,  lu^' the  veiy  opposite  df
■a»tBdddhik>Vi*i»t*  the  world.

wkdBMA^Itjr  ddpHrfMII  ofeMfdiUbiledL  A  ^n,  for  liutuios,  Is  &  m»i,
J^tuD). pTiUtiH,,  d^aOdtnt  OD  A  f^ter,'Mid  »  fitbcr  J*  impoiaiUci

^ti    S'!'!S-^''   i''°i""  ^t""*,***  »'*fjrthi°«  i*  dspWjdjBnt  an  fomav


368  WDXAS  PHILOSOPHT.


smiiofni^iiar.

It  was  in  1852  that  I  published  my  first  oontributioiia
to  a  study  of  Indian  philosophy  in  the  Zeitschrift  der  DetU-
schen  MorgerUd'idischen  Gfeadlschafl,  These  papers  did  not
extend,  however,  beyond  the  Vaiseshika  and  Ny&ya-philo-
Hophy  as  treated  in  the  Tarkasamgraha,  and  more  urgent
occupations  connected  with  the  emtion  of  the  Rig-veda
prevented  me'  at  the  time  from  finishing  what  I  hw  pre-
pared for  publication  on  the  other  systems  of  Inoian
philosophy.  Though,  of  course,  much  new  and  important
matericQ  has  come  to  light  in  the  meantime,  particularly
through  the  publications  of  the  Vaiseshika-S&tras  in  the
Bibliotheca  Indicay  through  the  complete  translation  of
them' by  A.  E.  Qough,  1873,  and  through  the  con^prehen-
sive  researches  of  European  scholars,  such  as  ProfessoKrs
Deussen  and  Qarbe,  I  found  that  there  was  not  much  to  alter
in  my  old  account  of  Ootama's  and  Ean&da's  philosophies,
as  ^ven  in  the  German  Oriental  Journal,  and  m  my  ni^r
on  Indian  Lo^c  contributed  to  the  late  Archbishop  Thom-
son's Laws  of  Thought.  Indian  philosophy  has  this  great
advantage  that  each  tenet  is  laid. down  m,  the  Siitras  with
the  utmost  precision,  so  that  there  can  be  little  doubt  as
to  what  EaTi&da  or  Qotama  thought  about  the  nature  of
the  soul,  the  reality  of  human  knowledge,  the  relation
between  cause  and  effect,  the  meaning  of  creation,  and  the
relation  between  Qod  or  the  Supreme  Being  and  man.
Thus  it  may  be  understood  why  even  papers  published  so
long  ago  as  1824,  such  as  J.  ColebrooWs  papers  on  the
Nylya  and  Yaiseshika  and  the  other  systems  of  Indian
philosophy,  may  still  be  recommended  to  all  who  want
trustworthy  information  on  Indian  philosophy.  These
essays  have  sometimes  been  called  antiquated,  but  there
is  a  great  difference  between  what  is  old  and  what  is  ainti-
quated.  The  difficulty  in  ^ving  an  account  of  these
systems  for  the  benefit  of  European  readers  consists  far
more  in  deciding  what  may  be  safely  omitted,  so  as  to
bring  out  the  sSient  points  of  each  system,  than  in  re-
'all  their  tenets.
>ks  in  which  the  Nyd.ya  and  Yaiaeshika-systems  may


NTAYA-PHILOSOPHT,  569

ba  studied  by  those  who  are  unaeqnainted  with  Simskiit
are  besides  the  papers  of  Colebrooke: —

Ballantyne,  The  Aphorisms  of  the  Nyltya-Philosophy
by  Gautama.  Sanskrit  and  English,  Allahabad,  1850.  (Gau«
tama  is  the  same  as  Gotama,  only  that  by  a  tacit  agreement
Ootama  has  generally  been  used  as  the  nanie  of  the  philo-
sopher, Gautama  as  that  of  Buddha,  both  belonging,  it
would  seem,  to  the  family  of  the  Gautamas  or  Gotamas,
the  MSS.  varying  with  regard  to  the  vowel.)

A..  E.  Gough,  The  Yaiseshika  Aphorisms  of  EanlUia.
translated,  Benares,  1873.

Manilal  Nabubhai  Dvivedi,  The  Tarka-Eaumudt,  bein^
an  introduction  to  thA  principles  of  the  Vaiaeshika  and
Ny&ya-philosophies  by  Laug&kshi  Bhfiskara,  Bombay,  1886.
This  is  the  same  author  to  whom  we  owe  a  valuable  edition
of  the  Yogas&ra-sa^ngraha.

Windisch,  tlber  das  Ny&ya-bh&shya,  Leipzig,  s.  a.

Eesava  /S&stri,  The  Nyd.ya-dar«ana  with  the  commentary
of  VHtsy&yana,  in  the  Pundit,  1877,  pp.  60,  109,  311,  363
(incomplete) ;  see  also  Bibliothtca  Indica.

Mahadeo  Bl^&r&m  Bodas,  Tlxe  Tarkasar^igraha  of  Annam-
bhai^to,  with  the  author's  Dipikfi.  and  Govardhana's  Nyd,ya-
bodhini,  prepared  by  the  late  Rao  Bahadur  Taaavanta
V&sadeo  Athalya,  and  published  with  critical  and  explana-
tory notes,  Bombay,  1897.  This  book  reached  me  after
these  chapters  on  the  Nyaya  and  Vaideshika  were  written,
but  not  too  late  to  enable  me  te  profit  by  several  of  his
explanations  and  criticisms;  before  they  were  printed.

Though  Ny&ya  has  always  been  translated  by  logic,  we
must  not  imagine  that  the  Nydya-SCltras  are  anything  like
our  treatises  on  formal  logic.  There  is,  no  doubt,  a  greater
amount  of  space  allowed  to  logical  questions  in  these  than
in  any  of  tne  other  systems  of  Indian  philosophy,  but
originally  the  name  of  Ny&ya  would  have  been  quite  as
applicable  te  the  Ptlrva-MiroAms&,  which  is  actually  called
Nyaya  in  such  works,  for  instance,  as  S&yaTia's  Ny&ya-
inlkl&-vistera,  published  by  Goldstuoksr.  Nor  is  lo^c
the  sole  or  chief  end  of  Govama's  philosophy.    Ito  chief

24  *^


370  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

end,  like  thsi  of  ibe  other  Darsanafl,  ia  mlvation,  the
9fwmm/wm  bonv/m  which  is  promised  to  alL  This  mxm/m/wfA
bomum,  is  called  by  Ootama  NiAsreyasa,  literally  that  which
has  nothing  better,  the  rvon  plus  ultra  of  blessedness.  This
blessedness,  aocorxiing  to  the  ancient  commentator.  Vatsyft-
yana,  is  described  as  consisting  in  renunciation  with  regard
V>  all  the  pleasures  of  this  life,  and  in  the  non-acceptance
of,  or  indifference  to  any  rewards  in  the  life  to  come ;  as
being  in  fact  what  Brahman  is,  without  fear,  without
desire,  without  decay,  and  without  death.  Even  this
Brahmahood  must  not  be  an  object  of  desire,  for  such
desire  would  at  once  produce  a  kind  of  bondage,  and
prevent  that  perfect  freedom  from  all  fear  or  hope,  which
IS  to  follow  by  itself,  but  should  never  be  yearned  for.
This  perfect  state  of  freedom,  or  resignation,  can,  according
to  Ootama,  be  realised  in  one  way  only,  namely^  by  know-
ledge, and  in  this  case,  by  a  knowledge  of  the  sixteen  great
topics  of  the  Ny&ya-philosophy

In  this  respect  all  the  six  systems  of  philosophy  are
alike,  they  always  promise  to  their  followers  or  their
believers  the  attainment  of  the  highest  bliss  that  can  be
obtained  by  man.  The  approache£|  leading  to  that  bliss
vary,  and  the  character  also  of  the  promised  bliss  is  not
always  the  same ;  yet  in  each  of  the  six  systems  philosophy
is  recommended  i^ot,  as  with  us,  for  the  sake  of  knowledge,
but  for  the  highest  purpose  that  man  can  strive  after  in
this  life,  that  is,  his  own  salvation.

We  saw  that  the  VedAnta  recognised  true  salvation  or
Moksha  in  the  knowledge  of  Brahman,  which  knowledge
is  tantamount  to  identity  with  Brahman.  This  BraJiman
or  Gkxi  is,  as  the  Upanishads  already  declare,  invisible,  and
far  beyond  the  reach  of  the  ordinary  faculties  of  our  mind.
But  he  can  be  learnt  from  revelation  as  contained  in  the
Veda,  and  as  Svetaketu  was  taught  *Tat  tvam  asi,'  *  Thou
art  iV  every  Yed&ntist  is  to  learn  in  the  end  the  same
lesson,  and  to  realise  his  identity  with  Brahman,  as  the
fulfilment  of  all  desires,  and  the  surcease  of  all  suffering
(DuAkhdnta).


SUMMUM   90NUM.  37 1

The  end  of  all  suffering  is  likewise  the- object  of  the
S&mkhya-philosophy,  though  it  is  to  be  reached  by  a  dif-
ferent road.  Kapila,  being  a  dualist,  admits  an  objective
substratum  by  the  side  of  a  subjective  spirit  or  rather
spirits,  and  he  sees  the  cause  of  all  sufferibg  in  the  spirits'
identifying  themselves  with  what  is  purely  objective  or
material.  He  therefore  recognises  the  tme  means  of
destroying  all  bondage  and  regaining  perfect  freedom  of
the  spirit  in  our  distinguishing  clearly  between  spirit  and
matter,  between  subject  and  object,  between  Purusha  and
PrakHti.  Elaivalya^  or  aloneness,  is  the  right  name  for
that  highest  state  of  bliss  which  is  promised  to  us  by  the
S&mkhya-philqsophy.

The  Yoga-philosophy  holds  much  the  same  view  of  the
soul  recovering  its  freedom,  ^but  it  insists  strongly  on
certain  spiritual  exercises  by  which  the  soul  may  best
obtain  and  maintain  peac^  and  quietness,  and  thus  free
itself  effectually  from  the  illusions  and  sufferings  of  life.
It  also  lays  great  stress  on  devotion  to  a  Spirit,  supreme
among  all  the  other  spirits,  whose  very  existence,  according
to  Elapila,  cannot  be  established  by  any  of  the  recognised
means  of  real  knowledge,  the  'Pramhnss.

Of  the  two  Mimki^ds  we  have  seen  already  that  the
Brahma-Mtm&m8&  or  the  Ved&nba  recogniises  salvation  as
due  to  knowledge  of  the  Brahman,  which  knowledge  pro-
duces at  once  the  recognition  of  oneself  as  in  reality  Brah-
man (Brahmavid  Brahma  eva  bhavati,  'He  who  knows
Brahman  is  Brahman  indeed ').  It  is  curious  to  observe
£bat,  while  the  S&mkhya  insists  on  a  distinction  between
Purushas,  the  subjects,  and  PrakWti,  all  that  is  objective,
as  the  only  means  of  final  beatitude,  the  Ved&nta  on  the
contrary  postulates  the  surrendering  of  all  distinction  be-
tween the  Self  and  the  world,  and  between  the  Self  and
Brahman  as  the  right  means  of  Moksha.  The  roads
are  different,  but  the  point  reached  at  last  is  much  ^e
same.

The  other  Mimd^mslL,  that  of  Gaimini,  diverges  widely
from  that  of  B&darftyarva.  It  lays  its  chief  stress  on  works
(Karman)  and  their  right  performance,  and  holds  that
salvation  may  be  obtained  through  the  performance  of

B  b  2


J72  INDIAN  PHIL080PHT.

such  works,  if  only  they  are  performed  without  any  derfre
of  rewards,  whether  on  earth  or  in  heaven.

Lastly,  the  Ny&ya  and  Vai^eshika  systems,  though  they
also  aim  at  salvation,  are  satisfied  with  pointing  out  the
means  of  it  as  consisting  in  correct  knowledge;  sudi  as  can
only  be  obtained  from  a  clear  apprehension  of  the  sixteen
topics  treated  by  Gotama,  or  the  six  or  seven  categories
put  forward  by  EaTi&da.  These  two  philosophies,  agreeing
as  they  do  among  themselves,  seem  to  me  to  differ  very
characteristically  from  all  the  others  in  so  far  as  they
admit  of  notiiing  invisible  or  transcendent  (Avyakta),
whether  corresponding  to  Brahman  or  to  Prakriti.  They
are  satisfied  with  teaching  that  the  soul  is  different  from
the  body,  and  they  think  that,  if  this  belief  in  the  bodv
as  our  own  is  once  surrendered,  our  sufferings,  wfaidk
always  reach  us  through  the  body,  will  cease  by  them-
selves.

But  while  we  can  understand  that  each  of  the  mz
systems  of  Indian  philosophy  may  succeed  in  remoiving
pain,  it  is  very  difficult  to  see  in  what  that  actual  uaj^i-
ness  was  supposed  to  consist  which  remained  after  that
removal.

The  Yed^ta  speaks  of  Ananda,  or  bliss,  that  resides  in
the  highest  Brahman ;  but  the  happiness  to  be  enjoyed  by
the  souls  near  the  throne  of  Brahman,  and  in  a  kind  of
paradise,  is  not  considered  as  final,  but  is  assiraed  to
a  lower  class  only.  That  paradise  has  no  attraction,  and
would  give  no  real  satisfaction  to  those  who  have  reached
the  knowledge  of  the  Highest  Brahman.  Their  blissful
knowledge  is  described  as  oneness  with  Brahman,  but  no
details  are  added.  The  bliss  held  out  by  the  Slimkhyas
also  is  very  vague  and  indefinite.  It  can  arise  cmly  from
the  Purusha  himself,  if  left  entirely  to  himself,  far  from  all
the  illusions  and  disturbances  arising  from  objective  nature,
or  the  works  of  Prakriti.

Lastly,  the  Apavarga  (bliss)  of  the  Ny&ya  and  Yaise-
shika  systems  seems  entirely  negative,  and  produced  simply
by  the  removal  of  false  knowledge.  Even  the  different
names  given  to  the  supreme  bliss  promised  by  each  system
of  philosophy  tell  us  very  little.    Mukti  and  Moksha  mean


HBANS    01'  SALVATION.  373

deUveranee,  Eairalya,  iaolation  or  detachment,  NiA^reyasa,
nan  phis  ultra,  Amrita,  immortality,  Apavarga,  fleliveiy.
Nor  does  the  well-known  Buddhist  term  Nirv&Tt'a  help  us
much.  We  know  indeed  from  P&nini  fVIII,  a,  50)  that
the  word  was  pre-Buddhistic  and  existed  in  his  time.  He
tells  us  that,  if  used  in  the  sense  of  '  blown  out/  the  rifi;ht
form  would  be  Nirv&ta^,  such  as  Nirv&to  vd*ta^, '  the  wm^d
has  ceased  to  blow/  but  Nirvfi,7i;o«ar7i^  Hhe  fire  is  gone
out/  We  cannot  prove,  however,  tnat  Nirv&Tia  was  used
as  the  technical  term  for  the  summum  bonurn,  in  Vknim's
time,' and  it  does  not  seem  to  occur  in  the  classical  Upani-
shads.  Its  occurring  as  the  title  of  one  of  the  modem
(Jpanishads  makes  it  all  the  more  likely  that  it  was
borrowed  there  from  Buddhistic  sources.  There  is  one
passage  only,  in  the  shorter  text  of  the  Maitreya^  Upani-  .
shad  where  Nirv&1^am  anua&sanam  occurs,  possibly  meant
for  Nirvdn&nu^ftsanam,  the  teaching  of  Nirvkna^  What
should  be  dearlv  understood  is  that  in  the  early  Buddhistic
writings  also,  Nirv&na  does  not  yet  mean  a  complete  blow-
ing oat  of  the  mdividual  soul,  but  rather  the  blowing  out
and  subsiding  of  all  human  passions  and  the  peace  and
quietness  which  result  from  it.  The  meaning  of  complete
annihilation  was  a  later  and  purely  philosophical  meaning
attached  to  Nirvd,^a,  and  no  one  certainly  could  form  an
idea  of  what  that  Nirv&ria  was  meant  to  be  in  the  Buddhist
Nihilistic  or  iSi!tnyat&-philosophy.  I  doubt  even  whether
the  Upanishads  could  have  given  us  a  description  of  what
they  conceived  their  highest  Mukti  or  perfect  freedom  to
be.  In  fact  they  confess  themselves  (Taitt.  Up.  U,  4,  i)  that
*  all  speech  turns  away  from  the  bliss  of  Brahman,  unable
to  reach  it  ^/  and  when  language  fails,  thought  is  not  likely
to  fare  better.

Mmumi  of  SalTftttoa.

Turning  now  to  the  means  by  which  the  Ny&ya-phiio'
sophy  xmdertakes  to  secure  the  attainment  of  the  av/mvvu/m

*■  Saored  Books  of  the  East,  XV,  p.  61.

*  See  a  very  learned  .ai*tiole  on  Nirv&na  hy  Professor  Satis  Chandra
Vidy&bhiishaiia,  in  the  Journal  of  the  Buddhist  Text  Society,  VI,
part  i,  p.  39.


374  INDIAN  PHILOSQPHT.

bomi/nh  or  Apavarga,  we  find  them  enumerated  in   the
following  list  :-^

Thm  UztMA  TopiMi  or  Trnttkrihtm.

(j)  Pramdiiia,  raeansof  knowledge;  (2)  Prameya,  objects
of  knowledge;  (3)  Samaaya,  doubt;  {4)  Prayogfana,  pur-
pose ;  (5)  DriahtkntAy  instance ;  (6)  Siddh&nta^  established
truth;  (7)  Avayava,  premisses;  (8)  Tarka,  reasoning;  (9)
Nimaya, conclusion;  ( 10) V&da, argumentation;  (ii)§alpa,
sophistry;  (12)  YiiATidii,,  wrangling,  cavilling;  (13)  HetvAr
bh&sa,  fallacies;  (14)  Khsia,,  quibbles;  (15)  OkH,  false
analogies;  (16)  Nigrahasth&na,  unfitness  for  aiguing.

This  may  seem  a  veiy  strange  list  of  the  topics  to  be
treated  by  any  philosophy,  particularly  by  one  that  claims
the  title  of  Ny&ya  or  logic  It  is  clear  that  in  -reality
the  chapters  on  Pram&iMi  or  means  of  knowled^^,  and
Prameya,  objects  of  knowledge,  comprehend  the  whole  of
philosophy.

Mmumi  of  XnowUdfft.

The  four  PramlLrMU,  according  to  Ootama,  are  Pratyaksha,
sensuous  perception,  Anum&na,  inference,  Upam&na»  com-
parison, and  iSabda,  word.

Perceptioil  comes  first,  because  inference  can  only  begin
to  do  its  work  after  perception  has  prepared  the  way,  and
has  supplied  the  material  to  which  inference  can  be  applied.
Comparison  is  no  more  than  a  subordinate  kind  of  inference,
while  the  fifabda  or  the  word,  particularly  that  of  the  Veda,
depends  again,  as  we  should  say,  on  a  previous  inference
by  which  the  authority  of  the  word,  more  particularly  the
revealed  word,  has  first  been  established.  Imperfect  as  this
analysis  of  our  instrumente  of  knowledge  may  seem,  it
seems  to  me  highly  Creditable  to  Indian  philosopheiB  that
they  should  have  understood  the  necessity  01  such  an
analysis  on  the  very  threshold  of  any  system  of  philosophy.
How^any  misunderstanding  might  have  been  avoided  if
all  philosophers  had  recognised  tiie  necessity  of  such  av
intixKluctory  chapter.  If  we  must  depend  for  all  our  know-
ledge,  first  on  our  senses,  then  on  our  combinatory  and
reasoning  faculties,  the  question  whether  revelation  falls


i


OBJECTS  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  37$

under  the  one  or  the  other,  or  whether  it  can  daim  an^
independent  anthority,  can  far  more  easily  be  settled
than  if  such  questions  are  not  asked  in  li/miney  but  turn
up  casually  whenever  transcendental  problems  come  to  be
treated.

The  objects  of  knowledge,  as  given  by  the  Ny&ya,  com-
prehend (ymne  scibUe,  such  as  bray^soul,  oi^ns  of  sense,
qualities,  cognition,  mind,  will,  fault,  dea^  enjoyment,  pain,
and  final  freedom.  These  objects  are  an^rwa^ds  discussed
singly,  but  have  of  course  little  to  do  with  logic.  Doubt
and  purpose  mark  the  first  steps  towards  philosophical  dis-
cussion, instances  and  established* truths  supply  materials,
while  premisses  and  reasoning  lead  on  to  the  conclusion
which  disputants  wish  to  reach.  From  Nos.  lo  to  i6,  we
have  rules  for  dialectic  rather  than  for  logic.  We  are  taught
how  to  meet  the  artifices  of  our  antagonists  in  a  long  argu-
mentation, how  to  avoid  or  to  resist  sophistry,  wrangling,
fiallajies,  quibbleSj  false  analogies,  and  downright  mis-
statements, in  fact,  how  to  defend^  truth  against  unfair
antagonists.

If  from  our  point-of  ^ew  we  deny  the  name  of  logic  to
such  problems,  we  should  be  perfectly  justified,  though
a  glance  at  the  history  of  Greek  philosophy  would  sh^
us  that,  before  logic  became  an  mdependent  branch  of
philosophy  it  was  likewise  mixed  up  with  dialectic  and
with  questions  of  some  more  special  interest,  the  treatment
of  which  led  gradually  to  the  elaboration  of  general  rules
of  thought,  applicable  to  all  reasoning,  whatever  its  subject
mfi^  be.

it  is  quite  clear  that  these  sixteen  topics  should  on  no
account  be  rendered,  as  the^  mostly  have  been,  by  the  six-
teen categorie&  Categories  are  the  praedicabiliuy  or
whatever  can  be  predicated,  and  however  much  the  mean-
ing of  this  term  may  have  been  varied  by  European  philo-
sophers, it  could  never  have  been  so  far  extended  as  to
include  wrangling,  fallacies,  quibbles  and  all  the  rest.  We
shall  see  that  the  six 'or  seven  PadiLrthas  of  the  Vaise-
ahikas  correspond  far  more  nearly  to  the  categories  of  the


37^  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

iristotelian  aiid  aftenrards  of  £niopeaii  philosophy  in
general

Nothing  flhows  so  well  the  philosophical  character  of
the  Sanskrit  lauguage  as  this  very  word  Pad&rtha,  which
has  been  translated  by  category.  It  means  in  ordinary
Sanskrit  simply  a  thing,  but  literally  it  meant  ^rtha^  the
meaning,  the  object,  Pada,  of  a  word.  What  we  should
call  objects  of  thought,  they  called  far  more  truly  objects
of  words,  thus  showing  that  from  the  earliest  times  they
understood  that  no  thought  was  possible  except  in  a  word,
and  that  the  objects  of  our  knowledge  became  possible
only  after  they  nad  been  named.  Their  language  passed
through  an  opposite  process  to  that  of  Latin.  Latin  called
every  kind  of  knowlec]^  or  all  known  things  gnomina,
from  g)n08C0f  to  know;  but  after  a  time,  and  after  the
initial  g  had  been  dropped,  as  we  drop  it  involuntarily  in
gnat,  their  gnomina  became  nomina,  and  were  then  sup-
posed to  be  something  different  from  the  old  and  forprotten
gnomina;  they  became  nomiria,  ie.  mere  names.

Six  V«d4rtkM  of  TaliMldkft.

According  to  the  Vaiseshikas,  we  have  six  Pad&rthas,
Le.  six  general  meanings,  categories  or  predicates,  to  which
all  words  i.e.  all  things  can  be  referred.  All  known  things
must  be  either  substances  (9),  qualities  (24),  or  motions^
the  last  meaning,  however,  more  than  mere  local  move-
ment, so  as  to  correspond  in  fact  to  our  activity  or  even
to  our  becoming  (Werden).  Knowledge  ^Buddhi)  is  here
treated  £U9  one  of  the  qualities  of  the  soul,  which  itself  is
one  of  the  substances,  so  that  many  things  which  wiUi  us
bielong  to  psychology  and  logic,  are  treated  by  the  Vaise-
shikas  ander  this  head.

The  next  two,  the  general  and  the  particular,  com-
prehend what  is  shared  in  common  by  many  objects,  and
what  18  peculiar  to  one,  and  thus  distinguishes  it  from  all
others.

Samav&ya  or  intimate  connection  is  a  very  useful  name
for  tt  connection  between  things  which  cannot  exist  one


madhava's  aooount  of  ntata.  377

without  the  other,  such  as  cause  and  effect,  parts  and  the
whole,  and  the  like.  It  comes  veiy  near  to  the  Avin&-
bhllva,  i.e.  the  Not- without-being,  and  should  be  carefully
distinguished  from  mere  conjunction  or  succession.

The  seventh  category,  Abh&va,  or  negation,  was  added,
it  would  seem,  at  a  later  time,  and  can  be  applied  to  previous,
to  present  or  to  subsequent  non-existence,  or  even  to  absolute
Abh&va.

MEAdlMTft's  Aeoownt  of  Mj$jm,

In  order  to  see  what,  in  the  eyes  of  native  scholars,  the
Ny&ya-philosophy  was  meant  to  achieve,  it  may  be  useful
to  look  at  an  account  of  it  given  by  the  great  M&dhavdi-
kkrysb  in  his  Sarvadaraana-sam^aha,  the  compendium  of
all  the  systems  of  philosophy.  'The  Ny&ya-slLstra,'  he  says,
'  consists  of  five  books,  and  each  book  contains  two  daily
portions  pr  Ahnikas.  In  the  first  Ahnika  of  the  first  booK
the  venerable  Qotama  discusses  the  definitions  of  nine
subjects,  beginning  with  "proof"  (Pramd^na),  and  in  the
second  those  of  the  remaining  seven,  beginning  with  dis-
cussion (V&da).  In  the  first  daily  portion  of  the  second
book  he  examnes  doubt  (8),  discusses  the  four  kinds  of
proof,  and  refutes  all  objections  that  could  be  made  against*
their  being  considered  as  instruments  of  right  knowledge ;
and  in*the  second  he  shows  that  "  presumption"  and  other
Pramd»7ias  are  really  included  in  the  four  kinds  of  "  proof  "
already  given.  In  the  first  daily  portion  of  the  third  book
he  examines  the  soul,  the  body,  the  senses,  and  their
objects ;  in  the  second,  "  undersfasinding  "  (Buddhi)  and  mind
(Manas).  In  the  first  daily  portion  of  the  fourth  book  he
examines  activity  (Pravritti),  faults  (Dosha),  transmigra-
tion (Pretyabha^va),  fruit  or  reward  (Phala),  pain  (DuAkha),
and  nnal  liberation  ( Apavarga) ;  in  the  second  he  investi-
gates the  truth  as  to  the  causes  of  the  "  faults,"  and  also
the  subject  of  "wholes"  and  "parts."  In  the  first  daily
portion  of  the  fifth  book  he  discusses  the  various  kinds  of
rutility  (CrS,ti),  and  in  the  second  the  various  kinds  of
objectionable  proceedings  (Nigrahasthina) '

After  having  held  out  in  me  first  Siitra  the  promise  of
eternal  salvation  to  all  who  studv  his  philosophy  properly.


378  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

Gotama  proceeds  at  onoe  to  a  <lescription  of  the  steps  by
which  the  promised  NiAsreyasa,  or  highest  happiness,  is  to
be  attained,  namely  by  the  saccessive  annihilation  of  false
knowledge,  of  faults,  of  activity,  and,  in  consequence,  of
birth  and  suffering.  When  the  last  or  suffering  has  been
annihilated  thereroUows  ipmfo^to  freedom,  or  blessedness
(Apavarra),  literally  abstersion  or  purification.  This  pro-
cerremlndk  us  strongly  of  some  of  the  links  in  the  Pa4b
Samupp&da  of  the  Buddhists.  This  is  generally  translated
by  Chaan  of  Causation,  and  was  meant  to  sum  up  the  causes
of  existence  or  of  misery,  the  twelve  Nid&nas.  It  really
means  origin  resting  on  something  else.  The  first  step  is
Avidy&  or  that  cosmic  Nescience  which  was  so  fully  elabo-
rated in  the  Ved&nta-philosophy.  According  to  tike  Bud-
dhists there  follow  on  Aviay&  the  Samkh&ras^  all  the
varieties'of  existence ;  on  these  Vigf/lf&na,  sensation ;  on  this
N&mar&pa,  names  and*forms;  on  these  the  Shad&yatana,
the  six  organs  of  perception.  Then  follow  in  succession
Spar«a,  contact,  YedanJl,  sensation,  THshtiA,  desire,  Upft-
dina,  attachment,  Bhava,  state  of  existence,  Okii,  birth,
&ar&mara7M^  decay  and  death,  iSbka,  sorrow,  Parideva,
lamentation,  DuAkha,  suffering,  Daurmanasya)  grief,  and
Up&y&sa,  despair^.

This  chain  of  successive  states  proclaimed  by  Buddha
has  formed  the  subject  of  ever  so  many  commentaries,  none
of  which  seems  quite  satisfactory.  The  chain  of  Gk>tama
is  shorter  than  that  of  Gautama,  but  the  general  likeness
can  hardly  be  mistaken.  Who  was  the  earlier  of  the  two,
Gotama  or  Gautama,  is  still  a  contested  question,  but  what-
ever the  age  of  our  Sutras  (the  sixteen  topics)  may  be,
a  Ny&ya-philosophy  existed  clearly  before  the  rise  of  H3ud-
dhiffln.

Z.    Vxuaavia.

Gotama  proceeds  next  to  examine  each  of  the  sixteen
topics.

The  first  topic  or  Padllrtha  is  Pram&na,  which  is  said  to
consist  of  four  kinds,  all  being  means  or  measures  of  know-

^  Gf.  Oarbe,  Sumkhya-Philosophle,  p.  969  seq.
'  Of.  Childers,  s.v.


IN]«i£BENOB   OB  ANUMANA.  379

ledge.  They  are  in  the  Ny&ya  as  in  the  Yaiseshika,  (i)
Pratyaksha,  sense-perception ;  (2)  Anumftna,  inference ;  (3)
Upamftna»  comparison ;  and  (4)  iSabda,  word.

^MOfptlim  OS  Vsmlar»k«li».

1.  Perception  (Pratyaksha)  is  explainea  as  knowledge
produced  by  actual  contact  between  an  organ  of  sense  and
its  corresponding  object^  this  object  being  supposed  to  be
real.  How  a  mere  passive  impression,  supposing  the  con-
tiguity of  the  organs  of  sense  with  outward  objects  had
once  been  established,  can  be  changed  into  a  sensation  or
into  a  presentation  (VoreteUung),  or  what  used  to  be
called  a  material  idea,  is  a  question  not  even  asked  by
Gotama.

2.  Inference  (Anum&na),  preceded  by  perception,  is
described  as  of  three  kinds,  Piirvavat,  proceeding  from
what  was  before,  i.e.  «n  antecedent;  Sfeshavat,  proceeding
front. what  was  after,  i.e.  a  consequent;  and  S&m&nyato
DWshto,  proceeding  from  what  is  constantly  seen  together.
Though,  as  we  saw,  ^&rv&ka  reject»^  every  kind  of  Anu-
m&na  or  inference,  he,  as  YSJcaspekH  Misra  remarks  very
acutely  (Kknkk  5),  in  attacking  his  antagonists  for  their
mistaken  faith  in  inference,  does  really  himself  rely  on
inference,  without  which  he  could  not  so  much  as  sur-
mise that  his  antagonists  held  erroneous  opinions,  such
erroneous  opinions  l^ing  never  brought  into  contact  with
his  organs  of  sense,  but  being  supposed  to  exist  on  the
strengSi  of  Anum&na.

The  meaning  of  the  three  kinds  of  inference  differs  Con«
siderably  according  to  different  commentators.  It  is
generally  explained  that  a  PArvavat,  preceded  by  or
possessed  of  a  prius,  refers  to  the  mutual  relation  between
a  sign  and  what  is  si^ified  by  it,  so  that  the  observation
of  the  sign  leads  to  the  observation  or  rather  inference  of
what  is  universally  .associated  with  it  or  marked  by  it.
This  unconditional  association  is  afterwards  treated  under
the  name  of  Vy&pti,  literally  pervasion  of  one  thing  by
another.    Examples  will  make  this  clearer.    When  we  see


380  INDIAN   FHILOSOPHV.

a  river  nsiog  we  infer  as  its  Ptlrva  or  prius  that  it  hsff
rained.  When  we  see  that  the  ants  carry  their  eggs,  or
that  the  peacocks  are  screaming,  we  infer  as  the  SesbA  or
posterior  that  it  will  rain  (Ny&ya  S.  11,  5,  37).  It  is  true
that  in  all  these  cases  the  reason  given  for  an  inference
may,  as  it  is  called,  wander  away,  that  is,  may  prove  too
nuch  or  too  little.  In  that  case  the  fault  arises  from  the
conditioned  character  of  the  Vy&pti  or  the  pervasion.
Thus  the  risiiig  of  a  river  may  be  due  to  its  having  been
dammed  up,  the  carrying  off  their  eggs  by  the  ants  may
have  been  caused  by  scone  accidental  disturbance  of  their
hill,  and  the  screaming  of  the  peacocks  may  really  have
been  imitated  by  men.  The  fault,  however,  in  such  cases
does  not  affect  the  process  of  inference,  but  the  Vy&pti
only;  and  as  soon  as  the  relation  between  the  sign  and
the  thing  signified  has  been  rectified,  the  inference  will
come  rignt.  Each  Yy&pti,  that  is  each  inductive  truth,
consists  of  a  sign  (liAga),  and  the  bearer  of  a  sign  (liAgin).
The  bearer  of  the  sign  is  called  Vy&paka  or  pervading,
the  sign  itself  VyApya,  what  is  to  be  pervaded.  »-Thus
smoke  is  the  sign  (LiAga,  Vy&pya),  and  fire  is  what  per-
vades the  smoke,  is  always  present  when  there  is  smoke,  is
the  siTie  qud  non  of  smoke,  is  therefore  lifigin  or  Vy&paka

But  everything  depends  on  whether  the  two  are  either
absolutely  or  only  conditionally  related.  These  conditions
are  called  the  Upddhis.  Thus  the  relation  between  fire  and
smoke  is  conditioned  by  damp  firewood;  and  there  are
other  cases  also  where  fire  exists  without  smoke,  as  in
a  red-hot  iron  ball.

The  third  kind  of  inference,  the  S&md^nyato  DWshto,
based  on  what  is  constantly  seen  together,  is  illustrated
by  our  inferring  that  the  sun  is  moving  because  it  is  seen
in  different  places,  everything  that  is  seen  in  different
places  being  known  to  have  moved.  Here  the  Vy&pti,  on
which  the  ancient  logicians  depended,  had  to  wait  till  it
was  corrected  by  Copernicus.

Even  a  deaf  man  may  infer  the  existence  of  sound  if
he  sees  a  particular  conjunction  of  a  drumstick  with  a  dram.
It  requires  but  a  certain  amount  of  experience  to  infer  the
presence  of  an  ichneumon  from  seeine  an  excited  snake,  or


INFBBENCE  OB  ANUMInA.  38 1

to  infer  fire  from  pereeiving  the  heat  of  water,  nay  to  infer
the  existence  of  an  organ  of  touch  from  our  feeling  any
animated  body.  In  all  anch  cases  the  correctness  of  the
inference  is  one  thing,  the  truth  of  the  conclusion  quite
another,  the  latter  being  always  conditioned  by  the  presence
or  absence  of  certain  XJp&dhis.

Different  from  this  very  natural  explanation  of  the  three
kinds  of  Anum&na  is  another,  according  to  which  fi^esha  is
not  supposed  to  mean  subsequent  effect,  allowing  us  to
infer  its  invariable  cause,  but  is  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of
what  is  left  This  is  illustrated  by  an  example,  such  as
*  Earfch  i^i  different  from  all  other  elements,  because  it  alone
possesses  the  quality  of  smell/  that  is  to  say,  earth  is  left
over,  being  separated  from  all  other  elements  by  its
peculiar  quality  of  smell.  One  might  have  inferi'ed  from
the  fact  that  the  element  of  earth  possesses  smell,  that  all
elements  possessed  the  same.  But  this  is  wrong,  because
it  is  Aprasakta,  i  e.  does  not  apply.  It  would  be  no  better
than  it  we  were  to  infer  that  smell  must  belong  to  other
qualities  and  actions  also,  which  would  be  simply  absurd.
But  as  earth  is  different  from  all  other  substances,  we  may
infer  that  smell  does  not  belong  to  anything  that  is  not
earth,  except  artificially,  as  in  scented  articles.  This  is  the
residuary  inference,  or  method  of  residues.

In  the  same  maimer  we  are  told  that  Pib'va,  the  privs,
should  not  be  taken  in  the  senso  of  antecedent  cause,  but
as  a  general  concept  the  properties  of  which  have  been
formerly  comprehended  as  known.  Thus  from  smoke  on
a  hill  we  should  infer  the  presence  of  a  particular  lire  on
the  hill,  falling  under  the  general  concept  of  fire  as  belong-
ing to  the  ^enus  fire.

T^e  third,  or  S&mlUayato  Drish^a,  inference,  is  illustrated
by  our  inferring  the  existence  of  senses,  which  are  by
themselves  imperceptible  (hidnykni  Attndriy5.72.i).  because
we  do  perceive  colour  &c.,  and  as  no  actions  (vm  take  place
without  instruments  we  may  infer  the  existence  of  senses
as  instruments  for  our  action  of  seeing,  &c.  S&m&nyato
Driahtsk  thus  becomes  very  like  the  seeing  of  a  general
concept.  It  is  inference  from  the  sensible  to  the  super-
sensiUe.


^


382  INDIAN   PHIIiOSOPHT.

With  all  respiect  for  native  oummentators,  boUi  ancient
and  modem,  I  must  confess  that  I  prefer  the  more  natoral
explanation  of  the  three  kinds  of  inference  being  based  on
cause,  effect,  and  association,  nay  I  find  it  difficult  to  under-
stand why  this  view  should  have  been  given  up  by  the
modem  Naiy&yikas.

Among  these  three  inferences,  the  first  afad  last  are^  called
Vtta  or  straightforward,  the  second  Avita,  or  not  straight-
forward ;  but  this  only  if  we  adopt  the  second  explanation
of  the  three  kinds  of  Anum&na.

We  shall  have  to  deal  again  with  Anum&na  when  we
come  to  consider  the  seventh  Pad&rtha,  the  Avayavas
or  Premisses,  or  what  we  should  call  the  members  of  a
syllogism.

3.  Next  follows  Comparison  (Upam&na)  or  recognition
of  likeness,  explained  as  an  instrument  for  ascertaining
what  has  to  be  ascertained  by  means  of  similarity  with
something  well  known  before.  For  instance,  having  been
told  that  a  Qavaya  (boe  gavaevs)  is.  like  a  cow,  and  seeing
an  animal  like  a  cow,  but  not  a  cow,  a  man  may  infer  that
it  is  a  Qavaya.

Word  or  jSbMa.

4,  Word  (iSabda)  is  explained  either  as  a  precepii  of  one
worthy  to  be  trusted,  or  as  a  right  precept  It  refers,  we
are  told,  either  to  visible  or  invisible  objects.  It  is  curious
to  see  that  among  the  people  to  be  trusted  (Apta)  the  com-
mentator should  mention  not  only  Bishis  and  Aryas,  but
MleA:A;//a8  or  barbarians  also,  provided  they  are  well  in-
formed. .  Strictly  speaking  the  Veda  would  not  come  under
iSSabda,  unless  it  can  be  proved  to  be  Aptavaiana^  the  word
of  one  worthy  to  be  trusted.

The  second  Pad&rtha  or  topic  is  Prameya,  that  is,  all  that
can  be  established  by  the  four  Pramaiias,  or  what  we
should  call  (yinne  acibile.  Twelve  such  objects  are  men-
tioned:   (i)  Self  or  soul,  (2)  body,  (3)  senses,  (4)


PBAMBYA.  383

objects,  (5)  understanding,  (6)  mind,  (7)  aeuvity  (will),  (8)
faults,  (9)  transmigration,  (10)  rewards  of  deeds,  (11)  suf-
fering, (12)  final  Deatitude.  The  first  six  of  these  are
callea  causative,  the  other  six  caused.  Gotama  next  pro-
ceeds to  define  each  of  these  Prameyas,  by  enumerating  the
characteristics  peculiar  to  each.

1.  The  characteristics  of  the  Self  are  desire,  hatred,  will,
pleasure,  pain,  and  knowing  (Buddhi).

2.  Body  is  defined  as  the  seat  of  action,  of  the  s^oses,  and
what  they  intimate,  that  is,  their  objects  ^.

3.  The  senses  or  organs  of  sense  are  defined  as  those  of
smell,  taste,  sight,  touch,  and  hearing.  They  are  supposed
to  arise  from  the  elements.

4.  These  elements  (from  which  the  senses  draw  their
origin  and  their  peiceptions)  are  earth,  water,  light,  air.
and  ether ;  while  the  objects  of  the  senses  are  the  qualities
of  earth,  &c.,  such  as  odour,  savour,  colour,  touch,  and
sound.  It  is  essential  to  remember  that  of  the  elements
the  first  four  are  both  eternal  and  non-eternal,  while  the
fifth,^k&8a,  which  we  translate  by  ether,  is  eternal  only,
and  hence  not  tangible.  The  non-eternal  substances  are
either  inoi^ganic,  organic,  or  sensitive,  but  always  related
to  the  sense,  so  that  the  sense  of  light  perceives  or  sees
light  only.  The  sense  of  scent  perceives  G^dour  only,  and
so  on.

5.  As  to  Buddhi,  understanding,  it  is  by  the  Naiy&yikas
explained  as  being  the  same  as  apprehension  or  knowledge,
and  as  being  twofold,  notion,  Anubhava,  and  remembrance,
SmaraTia.

6.  Mind  (Manas)  is  different  from  understanding,  and  is
explained  as  that  which  prevents  more  than  one  notion
from  arising  at  the  same  time,  that  is  to  say,  it  prevents
the  rushing  in  of  all  sorts  of  sensuous  impressions  at  once,
and  regulates  them  in  our  consciousness.  It  is  sometimes
called  the  gatekeeper  or  controller  of  the  senses.  The
transformation  of  sensations  into  percepts,  and  of  percepts
into  concepts,  a  subject  little  cultivated  by  Indian  philo-

^  According  to  the  commentary  the  sensations,  and  according  to  the
next  Siltra,  tiie  qualities  of  the  objects  of  sense,  which  alone  can  be
p«rMiT«d.


384  INDUy  FHILOSOPHY.

sophers,  would  naturally  fall  to  the  Manas.  Little  att^i-
tTon»  howAver,  is  paid  by  Hindu  logicians  to  this  subject,
which  has  assumed  such  large  proportions  with  us.  Even
the  distinction  between  percepts,  VorsteUungeTiy  and  con-
cepts, Begriffe,  has  never  been  fully  realised.  Dy  Indian
logicians.

Manas  or  mind  is  considered  as  Anu  or  an  atom,  and
the  question  has  been  fully  discussed  how  Manas,  being
AnUy  can  be  united  with  Atman,  which  is  Yibhu,  or  in-
finitely great.  If,  with  the  Mtm&msakas,  it  were  admitted
that  the  two  could  unite,  then  there  could  never  be  asry
cessation  of  knowledge,  such  as  we  know  there  is  in  sleep,
for  the  union  of  Atman  and  Manas,  if  onceb  effected,  would
be  indissoluble.  It  is  held  by  the  Naiy&vikas  that  when
Manas  enters  a  particular  region  of  the  body  called  Puritat,
the  effect  of  the  union  of  Atman  and  Manas  is  neutralised,
and  sleep  ensues.  If  Manas  were  supposed  to  be  co-exten-
sive with  the  body  it  would  be  Anitya,  non-eternal,  and  be
destroyed  with  the  body,  and  we  should  lose  that  which
retains  the  impressions  of  acts  done  in  the  body,  nay  we
should  be  unable  to  account  for  a  future  life  and  the  in-
equalities of  birth  in  any  future  life ;  we  should  have  to
admit,  in  fact,,  effects  without  a  cause.  The  Naiy&yikas
hold,  therefore,  that  the  Manas  is  both  Anu,  infinitely
small,  and  Nitya,  eternal  (Tarka4:aumudi,  p.  4,  n.  2,4),  while
Manas,  like  Atman,  is  eternal  and  numerous,  differing,  how-
ever, from  Atman  by  being  atomic  in  dimension.

7.  Activity  (will)  is  the  effort  of  body,  of  the  under-
standing working  through  the  mind  (Manas),  and  of  the
voice.

8.  Faults  cause  acts,  and  acts  bear  fruit,  good  or  bad  \

9.  Pretyabh&va  is  transmigration.

10.  Rewards  are  results  produced  by  faults,  in  the  most
general  sense,  and  by  actions  consequent  on  them,  so  that
they  are  sometimes  explained  as  consciousness  of  pleasure
an/ pain.

11.  Pain  is  characterised  by  vexation:  A.nd  as  pleasure
also  involves  pain,  both  pain  and  pleasure  are  here  treated

^  See  I,  9O,.Pravrtttidosha0ranit&rthaA  phalam.


THE  AVAYAVAS,  OR  HBMBEBS  OF  A  SYUOGIBM      385

together  under  pain.  Entire  deliverance  from  pain  and
pleasure  is

12.  Apavarga  or  final  beatitude.

Having  thus  examined  all  that  can  form  the  object  of
our  knowledge,  the  Pram&nas  or  measures  of  knowledge,
and  the  Prameyas,  we  now  enter  on  the  third  of  the  sixteen
topics.


Samsaya  or  doubt.  Doubt,  we  are  told,  arises  from  our
recognition  of  various  attributes  opposed  to  one  another
in  one  and  the  same  object,  as  when  we  recognise  in  a
distant  object  the  qualities  of  a  man  and  of  a  post.  The
definition  given  of  doubt  shows  that  the  ancient  logicians
of  India  had  carefully  thought  about  the  different  causes  of
doubt,  bO  that  they  were  led  to  the  admission  of  three  or
even  five  kinds  of  it.

But  these  disquisitions,  as  well  as  those  referring  to  (IV)
Prayogfana,  purpose  or  motive;  (V)  Drtsh/Anta,  example,
familiar  case ;  (Vl)  Siddh&nta»  tenets,  contain  nothing  that
is  of  peculiar  interest  to  the  historian  of  philosophy,  except
so  far  as  they  offer  once  more  the  clearest  evidence  of  a  long
continued  previous  study  of  logic  in  the  ancient  schools  or
settlements  of  India.

▼XX.    Vhm  Avmf9s9tmf  «v  ftflira  of  m  flyUeglim.

Much  more  important  is  the  next  subject,  the  so-called
members,  that  is,  the  members  of  a  syllogism.  To  us  a
syllogism  and  its  structure  are  so  familiar  that  we  hsrdly
feel  surprised  at  meeting  with  it  in  the  schools  of  logic  in
India.  Yet,  unless  we  are  inclined  to  admit  either  an
influence  of  Greek  on  Indian,  or  of  Indian  on  Greek  philo-
sophy, neither  of  which  has  as  yet  been  proved,  the  coin-
ciaences  between  the  two  are  certainly  startling.  As  to
myself  I  feel  bound  to  confess  that  I  see  no  evidence  of
any  direct  influence,  cither  on  one  side  or  on  the  other;
and  though  I  am  far  from  denying  its  possibility,  I  keep  to
my  eonvietion,  expressed  many  jrears  ago,  that  we  must
here  also  admit  the  existence  of  undesigned  coincidences  to

oc

26


386  INDIAN  PBILOSOPHT.

a  much  larger  e^ctent  than  onr  predeceasors  were  inelined  to
do.  We  must  never  forget  that  what  has  been  possilde  in
one  country,  is  possible  in  another  also.

At  the  time  when  the  different  systems  of  Indian  philo-
sophy became  firnt  known  to  the  scholars  of  Eurcq)e  every-
thmg  that  came  from  the  East  was  looked  upon  as  of
extreme  antiquity.  There  had  been  vague  traditions  of
ancient  Indian  philosophy  evea  before  the  time  oi  Aristotle.
Alexander  himself,  we  are  told,  was  deeply  impressed  with
that  idea,  as  we  may  fi^ther  from  his  desire  to  communicate
with  the'gymnoeopffi  of  India.

ZmdlMi  Mid  OvMk  ZiOfflo.

One  of  these  gymnosophists  or  Digambants  seems  to  have
been  the  famous  Ealanos  (Ealy&na  %  who  died  a  voluntary
death  by  allowing  himself  to  be  burnt  before  the  eyes  of
the  Macedonian  army.  It  was  readily  admitted,  therefore,
by  European  scholars  that  the  Hindu  systems  of  philosophy,
and  particularly  Indian  Lqgic,  were  more  ancient  than  that
of  Aristotle,  and  that  the  Greeks  had  borrv/wed  the  first
elements  of  their  philosophy  from  the  Hindua

The  view  that  Alexander  might  actually  have  sent  some
Indian  philosophical  treatises  to  his  tutor  at  home^  and
this  even  at  a  time  when,  as  far  as  we  know  at  present,
manuscripts  in  India  were  still  unknown,  and  that  Aris-
totle might  have  worked  them  up  into  a  system,  incon-
ceivable as  it  now  seems  to  us>  was  taken  up  and  warmly
defended  by  men  like  Gorres  and  othera.  Gorz^  under-
took to  prove  t)iat  the  Greeks  had  actually  retained  some
technical  terms  taken  from  Sanskrit.  For  instance,  as
Indian  nhilosophers  admit  five  elements,  the  fifth  being
ca^ed  Ak&sa,  ether,  Gorres,  without  giving  any  reference,
[uoted  a  passage,  from  Aristotle  in  which  he  speaks  of  a

'jh  element  and  calls  it  dxar-ovofiaror,  i.e.  ahda'Tiomi-

itv/ra,  this  being  probably  an  ingenious  conjecture  for
iLKa{ov6jM<rrov  ^.  It  is  quite  true  that  one  such  verbal  coin-
j^d^nce  would  settle  the  whole  question,  but  even  that  one

^  PLatareh,  De  Plaeit*  Philos.,*  quotes  Spiounis  as  io  the  soal  being
*  mixture  of  thi^ee  elements,  fire,  air,  and  water,  ani  a  fourth  '


IKDTAK  AND  GBJJEK  LOGIC.  3Sf7

coincidence  has  not  yet  been  n  discovered.  No  doubt  there
were  many  points  of  coincidence  between  Greek  and  Indian
logic,  but  none  in  <^hnical  terms,  which,  like  proper  names
in  Comparative  Mythology,  would  have  clinched  the  argu-
ment once  for  all

But  does  it,  on  the  other  hand,  show  a  higher  power  of
historical  criticism,  if  Niebuhr  and  others  stood  up  for  the
opposite  view  and  tried  to  derive  Indian  philosophy  from
ffreece  t  Niebuhr  is  reported  to  have  said  in  his  Lectures
on  Ancient  History, '  If  we  look  at  Indian  philosophy  we
discern  traces  of  a  great  sitnilarity  with  that  of  the  Greeks.
Now  as  people  have  giv^i  tip  the  hypothesis  that  Greek
philosophy  formed  itself  after  Indian  philos6phy,  we  can-
not explam  this  similarity  except  by  the  intercourse  which
the  Indians  had  with  the  Graeco-Macedonic  kingdom  of
Bactra.'

Is  that  really  so  1  To  Niebuhr  and  to  most  Greek  scholars
it  would  naturally  seem  next  to  impossible  that  Greek  philo-
sophy, which  can  be  watched  from  its  first  childhood,  should
have  been  of  foreign  origin,  a  mere  importation  from  India.
They  know  how  Greek  philosophy  grew  up  gradually,  how
its  growth  ran  parallel  with  the  progress  or  Grecian  poetry,
religion,  art,  and  civilisation.    Th^  feel  it  to  be  a  home-

Srown  production,  as  certainly  as  rlato  and  Aristotle  were
^  reeks  and  not  Br&hmans.

*  But  they  ought  not  to  be  surprised  if  Sanskrit  scholars
have  just  tiie  same  feeling  with  regard  to  Indian  philosophy.
They  also  can  show  how  in  India  the  first  philosophical
ideas,  as  yet  in  a  very  va^e  and  shadowy  form,  show
themselves  in  the  hymns  of  the  early  poets  of  the  Veda.
They  can  trace  their  gradual  development  in  the  Brd^hmanas
and  Upanishads  They  can  show  how  they  gave  rise  to
discussions,  public  and  private,,  how  they  assumed  a  more
and  more  definite  form,  and  how  at  last  they  were  fixed  in
different  schools  in  that  form  in  which  they  have  ^reached
us.  They,  too,  are  as  certain  that  philosophy  was  auto-
dithonous  in  India  as  that  Gotama  and  Kandda  were
Br&hmans  and  not  Greeks.

What  then  remains?  It  seems  to  me  that  until  it  can  be
proved  historically  that  the  Greeks  could  freely  converae

oc  2


388  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

with  Indians  in  Greek  or  in  Sanskrit  on  metaphysical  s^b-
iects  or  vice  veraa^  or  until  technical  philosophical  terms  can
De  discovered  in  Sanskrit  of  Greek,  or  in  Greek  of  Sanskrit
origin,  it  will  be  best  to  accept  facts  and  to  regard  both
Greek  and  Indian  philosophy  as  products  of  the  intellectual
soil  of  India  and  of  Greece,  and  aerive  from  their  striking
similarities  this  simple  conviction  only,  that  in  philosophy
also  there  is  a  wealth  of  truth  which  forms  the  common
heirloom  of  all  mankind,  and  may  be  discovered  by  all
nations  if  they  search  for  it  with  honesty  and  perse-
verance.

Having  once  learnt  this  lesson  we  shall  feel  less  inclined,
whenever  we  meet  with  coincidences  of  any  kind,  to  con-
dtide  at  once  that  they  cannot  be  explained  except  by
admitting  a  historical  contact  and  a  borrowing  on  one  side
or  the  other  ^.  No  doubt  there  are  the  Yai^eshika  catego-
ries =:Pad&rthas,  there  is  Dravya,  substance,  Guna,  quality;
there  is  genus  i=S3.m&nya,  and  species =Vii»esha,  nay,  even
syllogism = the  Avayavas;  there  is  induction =Vy4pti,  and
deduction =Upanaya,  both  in  Sanskrit  and  in  GreeK.  But
why  not  ?  If  they  could  be  developed  naturally  in  Greece,
why  not  in  India  1  Anyhow,  we  must  wait  and  not  hamper
th6  progress  of  research  by  premature  assertions.


But  before  we  enter  into  the  intricacies  of  the  Indian
e^Uogism,  it  will  be  best  to  finish  first  what  remains  of
the  sixteen  topics  of  the  Ny&ya.  After  the  five  members
follows  Vni,  Tarka,  which  is  explained  as  refutation,  or
reasoning  from  the  fitness  of  the  case,  as  when  a  person,
though  seeing  smoke  on  a  hill,  does  not  see  that  there
must  be  fire,  and 'is  thereupon  made  to  see  that  if.  the  hill
were  without  fire,  it  would  of  necessity  be  without  smoke.
It  is  meant  to  be  a  reductio  ad  absurdum.

The  next  topic  to  be  considered  is  IX,  Nimaya,  ascer-
tainment.

^  See  If.  M.,  On  Coinoidenoes,  a  paper  read  before  the  Boyal  Soeiety
•f  literature,  1P96.


VADA,  JBTC,  389


Then  follow  the  paragraphs  connected  with  rhetoric  or
eristics  rather  than  with  logic,  such  as  X;  V&da  or  area-
mentation,  consisting  of  objections  and  answers,  both  ms-
putants,  however,  caring  for  truth  only;  next  XI,  (ralpa,
sophistical  wrangling  or  attacking  what  has  been  estab-
lished, by  means  of  &aud ;  XIY ,  G^ti,  futility,  arising  from
false  analogies ;  XY,  Khalak^  quibbling ;  and  XYI,  rfigra-
hasth&na,  unfitness  for  discussion.  &  the  Icust  five  cases
disputants  are  supposed  to  care  for  victory  only,  and  not
for  truth.

If  this  wrangling  is  devoid  of  any  attempt  at  really
establishing  an  opposite  opinion,  it  is  called  Xll,  YitsTkia,
cavilling.

We  next  come  to  XTTT,  Hetv&bh&sas,  or  specious  argu-
ments, that  is,  paralogisms  and  sophisms.  These  are
Savyabhi^ra,  arguments  that  prove  too  much,  Yiruddha,
that  prove  the  reverse,  Prakaranasama,  that  tell  equally  on
both  sides,  S&dhyasama,  that  stand  themselves  in  need  of
proof,  and  E&l&tita,  mistimed.

As  to  X Y,  Khala,,  fraud  in  using  words  in  a  sense  different
from  what  is  generally  understood,  and  XIY,  ffati,  futility
arising  from  change  of  class,  they  have  been  mentioned  be-
fore. It  is  difBcmt  to  understaiid  why  (r&ti,  i.a  birth  or
genus,  should  mean  a  futile  argument,  unless  it  meant  ori-
ginally a  trandtio  in  cUterum  genus,  as  when,  in  answer
to  an  argument  that  a  man  is  unable  to  travel,  because  he
has  a  fever,  it  should  be  answered  that  he  is  able  to  travel,
because  he  is  a  soldier.  Here  the  same  man  is  referred
first  to  the  class  of  those  who  sufler  from  fever,  and  then
to  that  of  soldiers  who  are  always  supposed  to  be  able  to
march.

The  last,  XYI,  NigrahasthS^na,  unfitness  for  discussion,  is
when  a  man  by  misunderstanding  or  not  understanding,  yet
continuing  to  talk,  renders  himself  liable  to  reproof.

This  may  seem  a  long  list,  though  in  several  cases  there
are  subdivisions  which  have  here  been  left  out,  and  yet  at
the  end  of  the  list  Qc^ma  actually  apologises  and  says
that  there  ai'e  many  more  sorts  of  futility,  ftc,  which  have


390  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

been  passed  over  by  him,  but  will  have  to  be  discoased
herearter.

If  we  were  to  I<9ok  upon  this  list  of  the  sixteen  topics,  as
some  have  done,  as  an  abstract  of  Qotama's  whole  philo-
sophy, or  with  others,  as  his  table  of  the  categories,  Euro-
pean philosophers  would  no  doubt  be  justifi^  in  saying
what  Kitter  said  in  his  History  of  Philosophy  that  the  ex-
position of  the  Ny&ya  is  tedious,  loose,  and  unmethodical,
it  is  certainly  mixed  up  with  subjects  which  have  nothing
to  do  with  pure  logic,  but  so  was  Greek  logic  in  its  begin-
ning, in  the  school  of  .2jeno,  for  instance.    It  may  be  also
too  minute*  for  our  taste,  but  it  cannot  be  called  loose  at  the
same  time.    It  is  equally  unfair  to  charge  the  Nv&ya  and
all  the  other  systems  of  Indian  philosophy,  with  oemg  un-
practical and  with  entirely  ignoring  all  the  problems  of
ethicas.    We  must  remember  uiat  philosophy  in  India  had
very  different  antecedents  f rOm  what  it  had  with  us.     We
ourselves  can  hardly  conceive  a  philosophy  which  inrthe
end  is  not  to  be  of  practical  usefulness,  and  which  ignores
all  questions  of  morality.   But  we  must  learn  to  take  philo-
sophers as  they  are.    Morality  with  the  Brdlimans  depends
either  on  prescriptive  sacra  (Dharma),  or  on  what  is  called
Samaya,  the  agreement  of  good  people.    But  its  strongest
support  is  a  firm  belief  in  the  solidarity  of  life  here  and
hereafter,  and  a  firm  conviction  that  nothing  can  ever  be
lost.    The  popular  mind  of  India  seems  never  to  have
doubted  the  fact  that  every  good  or  every  evil  thought
or  deed  will  grow  and  bear  nruit  and  that  no  one  can
ever  escape  f^m  the  consequences  of  his  own  acts  and
thoughts.    Whether  such  a  belief  is  right  or  wrong  is  not
the  question,  but  it  produced  at  all  events  a  deep  sense  of
responsibility.    Instead  of  complaints  about  the  injustice
and  cruelty  of  God,  people  were  taught  that  what  seemed
undeserved  misfortunes,  were  fully  deserved,  were  in  fact
the  natural  consequences  of  previous  acts,  and  in  one  respect
the  safest  means  of  paying  off  all  debts.    Philosophy  at  the
Qsixae  time  held  out  a  hojpe  that  in  the  end  this  net  of  con-
(sequences  might  be  broken  through,  and; the  Self,  enlight^


THE  LATEB  BOOKS  OP  THB  NTAIA.      39 1

exkied  by  true  knowledge,  return  to  whence  it  came,  retom
to  himself  and  be  himself ;  that  ia^  be  again  the  Univeisal
Self;  free  for  ever  from  the  chains  and  pains  of  this  tran«
aient  episode  of  life  on  earth*

That  highest  freedom  and  beatitude,  according  to  Indian
views,  depended  cm  philosophy  or  knowledge ;  it  could  not
be  aequix^  by  j|;ood  works  or  good  thoughts  alone.  This
agiun  may  be  nght  or  wrong,  but  I  can  Saoover  no  Ipoee-
nesB  of  reasoning  in  it,  nor  in  Indian  philosr^hy  in-general.
We  must  not  forget  that,  from  a  Hindu  point  of  view,  this
life  on  earth  is  but  an  episode  that  may  be  very  important
in  itself,  but  is  a  mere  nothing  compared  with  what  lies
behind  and  before,  the  eternal  life  01  the  soul.  If  they
hold  that  a  knowledge  of  the  true  relation  between  man
and  the  world,  and  between  man  and  the  Author  of  the
world,  is  essential  to  true  freedom  and  true  happiness,  aro
thev  so  far  wrong  t  And  what  is  true  in  the  case  of  tiie
Vea&nta,  the  S&mkhya  and  Yoga  systems  of  philosophy,
is  true  in  a  certain  sense  of  the  Ny&ya  also.  It  may  be
said  that  the  fundamental  points  of  this  philosophy  arc
contained  in  what  can  be  known,  Prameya,  and  the  means
Kii  knowing,  Pram&iTia,  that  is  to  say,  it  seemed  necessary'
to  Ootama  to  establi^,  first  of  ail,  the  limits  of  the  two,
just  as  Eaut  began  his  philosophy  with  his  Critique  of
Pure  Reason,  that  is,  the  tracing  of  the  limits  of  Pure
Reason.  But  this  being  done  in  full  detail  under  his
sixteen  headings,  Qotama  too,  like  B&dar&yana  and  Eapila,
enters  on  an  explanati<m  of  the  process  by  which  it  was
possible  to  destroy  ij^oranoe  or  Mithyli^^&na,  which,  as  he
holds,  is  the  true  cause  of  error  or  sin, '  which  is  the  cause
of  activity,  which  is  the  cause  of  birth,  which  is  the  cause
of  sufiTerin^f '  (I,  %).  This,  whether  right  or  wrong,  is  at  all
events  pextectly  coherent,  nor  does  it  betray  any  looseness
of  reasoning,  if  indirectly  the  whole  Nyftya-phuoeophv  is
called  the  cause  of  final  freedom  or  blessedness.  Modem
Ny&ya  is  almost  entirely  confined  to  Pram&Tia.

In  this  way  the  first  book  of  the  Ny&ya-S&tras  gives  us
indeed  a  fair  outline  of  the  whole  of  Uciama's  philosophy,


392  INDIAN   PHIL080PHT.

while  the  following  three  books  enter  into  a  more  miniite
examination  of  its  details.  Thus  the  second  book  treats
more  folly  of  the  PramAnas,  the  third  and  fourth  of  the
Prameyas,  the  fifth  treats  of  all  that  comes  under  the  head
of  paralogisms*  Some  of  the  questions  discussed  in  theae
books  show  quite  clearly  that  they  must  have  formed  the
subject  of  lively  and  long-continued  controversy,  for  though
some  of  the  objections  raised  may  seem  to  us  of  Httie
importance,  they  prove  at  all  events  the  consdoitioasness
of  the  early  Naiy&yikas.

That  sensuous  perception  should  be  a  Pram&na  or
authority  would  hardly  seem  to  us  to  have  required  farther
proof.  iBut  Gotama  or  his  opponent  starts  the  questicm,
on  what  ground  the  evidence  of  the  senses  can  claim  such
authority,  or  who  is  the  authority  of  its  authority.  This
is  an  idea  that  anticinates  an  important  element  of  modem
philosophy.  As  a  balance  may  serve  to  weigh  a  thing,  but
must  also  be  weighed  or  tested  itself,  it  mi^t  be  said Jhat
the  authority  of  the  senses  also  requires  to  be  established
by  another  authority,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.  In  answer
to  this  Qotama  uses  what  seems  to  be  an  ac2  haminem
argument,  namely,  that  if  there  is  no  authority  anywhere,
there  can  be  none  on  the  side  of  the  objector  eithei.  The
objector  would  cut  away  the  ground  under  his  own  feet,
and  thus  would  himself  have  no  locua  standi  for  offering
any  objections  (II,  13).

But  admitting  that  sensuous  perception  has  authority
just  as  a  lamp  has  light  to  light  up  the  things  around  it,
the  next  question  is  whether  the  definition  of  sensuous
perception,  that  which  results  from  contact  of^  sense  with
its  object,  is  not  incomplete,  because  for  real  perception
there  must  be  contact  not  only  with  the  organs  of  sense,
but  likewise  between  the  senses  and  the  mind  YManas),  and
between  the  mind  and  the  Self  (Atman).  This  is  not
denied  by  Gotama,  he  only  defends  himself  by  saying  that
everything  cannot  be  said  at  the  same  time,  and  that  his
definition  of  perception,  though  it  dwells  only  on  what  is
essential  (the  contact  of  sense  and  object),  does  by  no


TIME — PRESTSKT,   PAST,  FUTUEB  393

means  exclude  that  between  mind  and  Self,  on  the  oontrary
takes  it  here  for  granted.  He  also  admits  that  contact
between  sense  ana  object  does  not  invari&bly  produce
perception^  that  in  fact  there  may  be  sensation  without
perception,  as  when  we  are  so  absorbed  in  listening  to
music  that  we  do  not  perceive  the  objects  around  us,  from
want  of  attentioo,  TIus  again  reminds  us  of  modem
philosophy.  Even  such  questions  as  to  whether,  there  is
any  interval  of  time  between  our  hearing  the  sound  of
a  word  and  our  realising  its  meaning,  are  alluded  to  by
Gotama  and  his  school,  and  the  question  whether  several
impressions  can  be  taken  in  at  the  same  time  is  negatived
by  a  reference  to  the  running  of  a  pin  through  a  number
of  sheets  of  a  MS.  Here  the  piercing  seems  sunultaneous,
yet  we  know  that  it  can  only  be  successive.  Another
question  also  which  has  lately  occupied  our  psycho-physi-
ologists, whether  perception  does  not  involve  inference,  is
discussed  by  Gotama  (ll,  31),  particularly  in  cases  where
our  senses  can  apprehend  a  part  onlv  of  their  object  when
perceiving,  for  instance,  a  tree,  of  whidi  one  side  only  can
be  se^i  at  the  time,  while  the  rest  has  to  be  supplied  by
memory  or  inference.  This  leads  him  on  to  another  ques-
tion whether  there  really  is  such  a  thing  as  a  whole,  and
as  we  can  in  reality  never  see  more  than  one  side  at  a  time,
he  triesix)  account  for  the  process  by  which  we  take  a  part
for  the  whole.  No  one,  for  instance,  has  ever  seen  more
than  one  side  of  the  moon,  yet  taking  it  as  a  whole,
and  as  a  globe,  we  postulate  and  are  convinced  that  there
is  another  side  also.  The  illustration  given  by  Gotama  to
show  that  a  tree  is  a  whole,  namely,  because  when  we
shake  one  branch  of  it,  the  whole  tree  trembles,  may  seem
childish  to  us,  but  it  is  exactly  in  these  simple  and  So-called
childish  thoughts  that  the  true  interest  of  ancient  philo-
sophy seems  to  me  to  consist.

TinM — lfT9Mmt,  Past,  ]*atiir«.

The  next  problem  that  occupies  Gotama  is  that  of  time —
of  present,  past,  and  future.  The  objector,  and  in  this
case,  it  seems,  a  very  real  objector,  for  it  is  the  opinion  of
the  Buddhists,  denies  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  present


394  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

time,  because  the  moment  we  see  a  fruit  falling  from  a  tree,
we  see  only  that  it  has  fallen  ot  that  it  has  still  to  fall,  bat
never  that  it  is  falling.  Here  the  answ^  is  tiiat  past  and
future  themselves  would  be  impossible,  if  the  present  did
not  exisA,  and  on  the  objector's  admitting  such  a  possibility.
CJotama  remarks  that  in  tiiat  case  perception  and  all  that
springs  from  it  would  be  altogether  impossiUei  because  it
can  only  depend  on  what  is  present.


Passing  over  what  is  said  in  tliu»  piace  about  the  validity
of  inference,  because  we  shall  have  to  return  to  it  hereafter,
we  find  Qotama  bent  on  establishing  by  the  side  of  it^  by
the  side  of  Anumftna,  his  next  instrument  of  knowledge,
namely  Upam&na,aiialogy  or  comparison.  And  here  Gotama
seems  in  conflict  with  KanMitL  who,  as  we  shall  see,  declines
to  accept  Upam&na,  compari8(»i,  as  one  of  the  independent
authoritative  evidences,  or,  at  all  events,  as  essentially
different  from  Anumltna,  inference.  We  might  feel  tempted
to  conclude  from  this  that  Qotama  must  have  been  laier  in
time  than  Ean&da.  But  first  of  all,  KatiAda's  name  is  not
mentioned  here  nor  that  of  his  system,  Viddeshika;  land
secondly,  we  know  that  this  question  of  the  Pram&nas  had
been  discussed  again  and  again  in  every  sdiool  of  Tndian
philosophy,  so  that  a  mere  reference  to  the  subject  cannot
be  used  as  determining  the  seniority  either  of  the  opponent
or  of  the  defender.  All  we  can  say  is  tiiat,  whenever  we
see  Upamllna  appealed  to  as  a  means  of  valid  knowledge,
we  know  that  we  have  to  dtsal  with  followers  of  the  N^&ya
«chool;  but  the  Vai^eshika,  though  d^ijdng  it  an  mde-
pendent  place  among  the  Pram&nas,  would  by  no  means
reject  it,  if  presented  as  a  kind  of  Anum&na^

i^ftbdft,  Hhm  Word.

We  now  come  to  the  various  kinds  of  verbal  testimony.
Testimony  is  said  to  be  conveyed  by  words,  and  by  a  sen-
tence, consisting  of  many  words,  conveying  the  meaning  of
each  word  in  its  relation  to  the  other  woms.  Though  the
meaning  of  words  is  admitted  to  be  conventional,  yet
opinions  difier  because  some  consider  such  conventions  to


THE   EIGHT  PRAMA^AS.  395

be  eternal  or  divine,  while  others  take  them  to  be  non-
eternal  or  human.  The  chief  aathority.  for  determining
the  meaning  of  a  word  is  admitted  to  be  the  usage  cS
trustworthy  persons,  but  it  is  argued  that  as  the  highest
authority  is  Brahman  or  Qod,  and  as  the  Veda  is  the  word
of  Brahman,  it  follows  that  every  word  of  the  Veda
possesses  the  highest  authority.  This,  however,  as  we  know,
does  not  satisfy  the  Mim&msakas,  who  assign  eternity  to
the  iSabda  itself,  the  word  or  the  sound  of  a  word.

In  the  examination  of  the  validity  of  /8abda  or  word,  we
find  again  the  same  question  started  as  before,  whether  it
deserves  a  place  by  itself,  or  whether  it  should  not  rather
be  treated  as  a  kind  of  inference.  Then,  after  Qotama  has
shown;  the  difierence  between  ^  I  know '  and  '  I  infer/
betweeh  acceptance  of  the  word  of  an  authority  (Apto-
padesa)  and  reliance  on  an  inference,  he  enters  on  new
problems  such  as  the  association  of  sense  with  sound,
a  question  which  is  intimately  connected  with  the  question
of  what  authority  is  due  to  the  Veda  as  the  Word  par
excell&iice.  Here  we  meet  with  a  number  of  arguments  in
defence  of  the  supreme  authority  of  the  Veda  with  which
we  are  familiar  from  the  P£Lrva-Mim&m8&,  but  which
again,  though  clearly  referring  to  (Taimini,  must  not  be
taken  to  prove  the  anteriority  of  Oaimini's  Sdtras  to  those
of  Qotai&a's,  and  certainly  do  not  enable  us  to  admit  more
than  the  contemporaneous  activity  of  the  various  schools
of  Hindu  philosophy  during  the  centuries  intervening  be-
tween the  close  of  the  Vedic  age  and  the  rise  and  spread
of  Buddhism.

Having  defended  the  teaching  of  the  Nyllya,  that  there
are  four  Pram&nas,  neither  more  nor  less,  Qotama  proceeds
to  criticise  the  four  additional  Pram&tias  of  the  Mlrnkm-
sakas,  and  shows  that  their  number  is  superabundant.
They  include,  as  we  saw,  Aitihya,  tradition,  not  necessarily
authoritative,  Arth&patti,  assumption,  Sambhava,  proba-
bility, and  even  Abhilva,  non-existence,  because  the^  hold
that  there  can  be  knowledge  arising  from  not-bemg  or
from  absence,  as  when   we  conclude  fi^in  the  fact  that


30  INPUN  PHILOSOPHY.

Devadatta  is  not  in  his  house,  that  he  must  have  gone  out
Of  these  four  Pram&iias  the  fiiet  is  referred  by  Gotama  to
iSHabda,  Word,  the'  othevs  to  Annmftna,  inference,  while
Kesibtk,  or  mere  gesture,  as  supplying  knowledge,  may,  it
is  added,  be  classed  either  under  Word,  like  written  letters,
or  under  Auumftna.  The  Frsxnknss  seem  to  have  formed
a  subject  of  prominent  interest  to  the  Ny&va  philosophers ;
in  modem  times  they  have  absorbed  the  whole  of  Ny&ya.

We  are  told  that  N&g&rgnma,  before  he  became  a  Budcudst,
was  a  sealous  student  of  the  Ny&ya-philosophy.  He  wrote
a  work,  called  Pram&7Mi-6amu£jkaya,  which  was,  however,
supposed  to  be  lost,  till  Sarat  Chandra  discovered  a  Tibetan
version  oi  it  in  the  library  of  the  Grand  Lama  at  Lhassa
(Journal  of  the  Buddhist  Text  Society,  IV,  parts  iii  and

Here  f oUow  long  discussions  as  to  the  nature  of  words,
the  difference  between  sound  (Dhvani)  and  words,  till  we
arrive  again  at  the  question  whether  the  word  is  eternal,
and  tiierefore  a  Pram&Tia  by  itself,  or  not.  Similar  ques-
tions occur  in  most  of  the  Indian  philosophical  s^tems,
and  as  I  passed  them  over  before,  it  will  be  necessary  to
examine  them  more  fully  in  this  place,  where  we  meet  with
t)iem  again  as  worked  out  by  Gotama.  Though  they  deal
with  such  purely  grammatical  questions  as  whether  a  vowel
such  as  i  can  ever  be  changed  into  the  semi- vowel  y,  in
fact  whether  any  letter  can  ever  become  another  letter,
these  disquisitions  branch  out  very  far,  and  we  shall  be
surprised  to  see  how  intimately  in  the  minds. of  Hindu
philosophers  they  are  connected  with  some  of  the  greatest
problems  of  philosophy,  such  as  the  existence  of  a  Creator
and  the  relation  between  the  cause  and  the  effect  of  our
created  world.

The  oftener  we  read  these  discussions  on  the  eternal
character  of  sound,  on  words  and  their  true  nature,  and  at
last  on  the  divine,  nay  transcendental  character  of  language,
the  more  we  shall  feel  the  difference  between  Eastern  and
Western  philosophv.  The  true  problem  of  language  has
been  almost  entirely  neglected  by  Greek  philosophers  and

^  This  would  proTA  at  the  same  time  the^tudy  of  the  KjAya^pliiloeophy
in  the  flnt  eentury  of  our  era ;  see  p.  966.


THOUGHTS  ON  LANOUAOB.  397

their  disciples  in  Europe,  for  all  the  diseussldns  about  the
ip-vaei  or  dia-fi  origin  of  language  touch  only  the  very  hem
of  the  question,  as  it  presents  itself  to  Indian  philosophers.
The  way  in  which  the  problem  of  language  is  handled  by
them  will  no  doubt  be  dismissed  as  childish  by  modem
philosophers,  and  I  do  not  mean  to  deny  that  some  of  their
remarks  on  language  are  really  childish.  But  we  shall  see
that  the  whole  question  is  treated  by  Hindu  philosophers
in  a  very  serious  and  searching  spirit.  Students  of  philo-
sophy should  overlook  what  may  seem  strange  to  them
in  the  manner  of  treatment,  and  always  try  to  keep  their
eye  on  what  is  important  and  has  often  been  overlooked
even  by  the  greatest  thinkers  among  us.  Language  has
been  to  most  oi  us  so  familiar  a  sul^ect  that  we  have  hardly
perceived  what  is  behind  it,  and  have  scarcely  asked  the
questions  which  it  has  cost  so  much  effort  to  Ijndian  philo-
sophers to  answer.  We  have  already  on  a  former  occasion
exajnined  some  of  the  views  on  language,  as  expressed  in
the  philosophical  hymns,  Br^hma1^as,  and  Upanishads  of
the  Ygdic  period.  We  have  now  to  follow  up  these  views
as  they  are  presented  to  us  in  a  more  systematic  form  in
the  Sfttra-period.

If  I  was  right  in  tracing  the  word  Bnh,  speech,  in
BHhas-pati,  back  to  the  same  root  as  that  of  Brahman,  the
connection  of  the  two  ideas,  Word  and  Creator,  would
carry  us  back  even  beyond  what  we  call  the  Vedic  period.
At  all  events  the  idea  that  Brahman  was  the  Word,  and
that  the  world  was  created  by  the  Word,  existed,  as  w©
saw,  long  before  the  rise  of  philosophical  systems.  It  was
shadowcS  forth  in  the  very'  language  of  India,  but  it
ipeceived  its  full  development  in  the  Sfttras  only,  more
particularly  in  the  Vedknta-Sfttras,  to  which  we  must
return  for  our  present  purpose.  We  read  in  Siitra  1, 3,  a8 :
'We  refute  his  objection  on  the  ground  that  (the  world)
originates  from  the  Word,  as  is  shown  both  by  perception
and  by  inference.*  Perception  is  here  taken  in  the  sense  of
Sruti,  scripture,  and  inference  in  the  sense  of  Smriti,
tradition.    An  objection  had  been  started  that  the  Veda


398  [NDIAK  PHILOSOPHY.

oould  not  be  considered  as  eternal,  if  it  contained  names  of
non-eternal  things,  and  as  even  the  gods,  the  Devas,  were
looked  upon  as  non-eternal,  having  been  proved  to  be
subject  to  birth  and  rebirth,  it  followed  that  the  Veda,  as
containing  their  names,  could  not  possibly  be  ante-temporal
or  eternal.  Against  this,  though  readily  admitting  the
non-eternal  character  of  the  gods,  the  Devas,  jSkmkara
argues,  that  in  spite  of  that,  the  gods  and  other  beings,  nay
the  whole  word,  must  be  admitted  to  have  ori^teS  from
the  Word  or  the  Veda,  and  that  this  Word -is  Brahman.
Only,  he  adds,  it  is  not  the  individuals,  nor  this  or  that
Deva,  not  this  or  that  cow  or  horse,  that  had  their  origin
in  the  Word,  but  the  genus  to  which  they  belong,  that  is,
the  tOirj  (AkWtis).  It  is  with  the  genus  that  words  are
connected,  not  with  individuals,  for  these,  as  being  infinite
in  number,  are  not  capable  of  entering  into  that  connection.
Hence  all  individual  things,  and  individual  gods  also,  are
allowed  to  have  had  an  origin,  but  not  the  genus  to  which
they  belong,  which  was  thought  and  uttered  at  first  by
Brahman*.  Nor  must  it  be  supposed  that  the  Word  con-
stitutes the  material  cause  of  things ;  this,  as  shown  before,
lies  in  Brahman  only,  which  is  therefore  more  than  the
Word.  The  word  of  the  Veda  is  simply  the  expression  of
what  is  permanent  and  eternal  in  all  things  (universalia
in  r^ma),  and  as  all  individual  things  are  created  in
accordance  with  it,  they  are  rightly  said  to  have  their  true
origin  in  the  Veda  and  in  Brahman.  This  is  afterwards
confirmed  by  passages  from  Srxiti  and  Smriti,  such  as  Brih.
Ar.  Up.  I,  a,  4 :  '  Then  with  his  mind  he  united  himself
with  Speech.'  The  Word  therefore,  or  Speech,  existed
before  creation,  as  we  read  in  the  Smriti  also,  e.g.  the
Mah&bh^rata  XII,  8534:  'He  who  exists  by  himself  let
first  stream  forth  the  Word,  the  eternal,  without  .beginning
or  end,  the  Divine  Word  which  we  read  in  the  Veda,
whence  proceeded  the  evolution  of  the  world ' ;  and  again,
Mah&bh.  XII,  8535:  'God  in  the  beginning  created  the
names  and  forms  of  things,  and  the  continuous  process  of
their  works.'

If  we  read  such  passages  carefully,  it  is  easy  to  see  that
Veda,  which  is  identified  with  the  words  of  creation,  or  the


THOUGHTS   ON  IiANOUAM.  J99

ideas  or  logoi  of  the*  world,  was  meant  for  more  than  what
was  afterwards  called  the  three  Yedas,  the  Samhit&s»  and
Br&hmaiiaa  Veda  stands  here  for  Logos  or  8ofMa,  and
comprehends  all  named  concepts,  necessary  for  the  creation
of  all  created  things.

In  order  to  show  that  there  is  nothing  strange  in  this,
iSamkara  remarks  that  even  we  ourselves,  whe  a  we  mean
to  do  anything,  have  first  to  think  of  the  word  for  what
we  mean  to  <fo.  In  the  same  manner  the  words  of  the
Veda  had  to  be  present  to  the  mind  of  the  Creator,  Pragrft*
pati,  before  he  could  have  created  the  things  corren)onding
to  tibem.  And  thus  it  is  said  in  the  Veda  (Taitt.  Br.  U,  2,
4,  3):  "'This  is  the  earth,"  he  said,  and  created  the  earth.'
This  will  sound  strange  to  many  readers,  as,  I  confess,  it
sounded  strange  to  me  when  I  first  came  across  these
thoughts,  so  full  of  Neo*platonic  reminiscences,  nay  even  to
such  O.  T.  thougbl  as  *  Uod  epake,  Let  there  be  Ught,  and
there  was  light.'  Of  course,  if  we  can  bring  ourselves  to
say.  that  the  Logos  of  the  Alexandrian  philosophers  had  no
antecedents  in  early  Qreek  philosophy  %  there  would  be  an
eaod  of  the  whole  question,  and  we  diould  simply  bave  to
admit  that  Br&hmans  came  to  Alexandria,  and  indoctrinated
pagan  and  Christian  philosophers  with  their  ideas  of  Yii
or  Speech.  But  as  every  Greek  scholar  knows  that  the
very  oraosite  is  the  case,  and  I  have  tried  to  show  this  on
several  occasions,  the  question  requires  a  very  different
solution  from  that  proposed  by  Professor  Weber,  if  indeed
it  admits  of  any.  Why  will  people  not  see  that  it  is  far
more  scholarlike  to  confess  onr  ignorance  than  to  give  an
aniswer,  however  hesitatingly^  and  thus  to  discourage  further
research?

Hindu  philosophers  have  treated  this  whole  question
with  so  much  care  that  we  can  see  at  least  that  they  truly
cared  for  it,  and  had  fully  perceived  its  intimate  connection
with  some  of  the  highei^  problems,  both  reUgious  and
{rfiilosophical,  which  were  nearest  to  their  heart.

They  begin  with  the  beginning  and  try  first  to  miarke  it
dear  to  themselves  what  SahdA  is.    jSabda  means  word,

^  See  Anathon  Aall,  Ghisohichte  der  Logosidee,  i8q6,  pp.  a  18  seq.


400  IKDIiN  PHILOSOPHY.

but  it  also  means  sound,  and  they  therefore  begin  with
asking  what  sound  is.  We  have  seen  abeady  that  they
actuaay  postulated  a  fifth  element  Aksi.6a,  which  we  trans-
late by  ether,  and  which  was  meant  to  be  th«  vehicle  gf
sound  and  of  sound  only.  The  existence  of  this  fifth
element  was  altogether  denied  by  the  materialists,  the
B&rhaspatjas,  because  it  is  supersensible,  but  it  was
admitted  as  an  independent  element  by  the  other  schools
of  thought,  even  by  the  Buddhists,  because  they  held  that
air  could  not  'possibly  be  the  vehicle  of  sound.  Its  loud-
ness might  depend  on  it,  but  not  its  quality.  The  Vaif  e-
shika-philosophy,  for  instance,  which  takes  a  special  interest
in  the  question  of  .the  elements,  explains  sound  as  the
object  apprehended  by  the  sense  of  hearing  (II,  2,  2i).  It
then  declares  that  sound  is  neither  substance  nor  action,
but  a.  quality  (cf.  I,  i,  6  com.),  having  AkiLsa  or  ether  for
its  substance.  The  opinion  that  sound  exists  always  and
eternally,  and  is  only  made  manifest  by  each  spei^ef ,
which  is  held  by  the  Mimil'msakas,  is  rejected  by  K&nhdsL,
sounds  and  words  being  accepted  as  momentary  manifesta-
tions only  of  eternal  sound.  This  is  illustrated  by  the
striking  of  a  drum  with  a  drumstick,  where  we  can  clearly
see  that  sound  is  produced  by  a  conjunction  between  a
drum  and  a  drumstick,  and  that  it  is  only  carried  along  by
the  air.

All  these  ar^ments  are  clearly  directed  against  the
Htm&,7n8akas  who  for  reasons  of  their  own  require  /Sabda,
whether  sound  or  word,  to  be  eternal.  It  must  be  said,
however,  to  their  honour  that  they  allow  full  credit  to
the  PClrvapakshin  who  opposes  the  eternal  character  of
sounds  and  words.  *  No,'  he  says  ^,  *  sound  cannot  be  eternal,
because  we  see  (i)  that  it  is  a  product,  (z)  that  it  passes
away,  (3)  that  it  is  made  (the  very  letters  being  called
A-k&ra,  Ka-k&ra  &c.,  A-making,  Ka-making  &c.).  We  see
(4)  that  it  is  perceived  by  different  persons  at  once,  (5)  that
it  changes  (as  Dadhi  Atra  changes  to  Dadhy  Atra),  and
(6)  that  it  is  augmented  by  the  number  of  those  who  make
it.    But  to  all  these  difficulties  the  Mtm&rnsaka  has  a  ready

^  Cf.  Ballantyne'B  Mim&myi-»atras,  p.  8  ;  Muir,  Orig.  Sansk.  Texts,  III,
pp.  70  aeq.


THOCOHTS  ON  LANOUAGE.  4OI

answer.  The  word  is  eternal,  he  says,  and  though  the
perception  of  sound  is  the  same  on  both  sides,  we  are  right
m  looking  on  sound  as  eternal  and  as  always  present,  only
not  always  manifested  on  account  of  the  absence  of  an
utterer  or  an  exciter.  The  letter  k,  now  heard,  is  the  same
which  has  always  been  heard.  If  it  is  said  that  sound  is
miade,  that  only  means  that  it  is  employed,  and  if  it  is
perceived  at  the  same  time  by  many,  the  same  applies  to
the  sun,  Aa  to  the  n(iodification  of  sound,  it  is  nojb  the
same  letter  modified,  but  it  is  another  letter  in  the  plac^
of  a  letter,  and  as  to  the  increase  of  noise,  that  is  due  to
the  increase  of  the  number  of  conjunctions  and  disjunctions
of  the  air.

Gaimini's  reasons  in  suppcHrt  of  the  eternal  character
of  sound  are  that,  though  the  sound  may  vanish,  it  leaves
its  traces  in  the  mind  of  the  hearer  or  learner;  that  it  is
everywhere  at  the  same  time ;  that,  if  repeated,  it  is  the
same,  and  that  we  have  no  right  to  suppose  that  it  is  ever
annihilated.  If  it  should  be  supposed  that  sound  is  a  mere
modi^cation  of  air,  the  answer  is  that  the  ear  does  not
simplv  hear  the  air,  but  is  sensitive  only  to  what  is  in-
tangible in  sound,  the  quality.  Besides,  there  are  the
definite  words  of  the  Veda  which  tell  us  of  an  eternal
Voice.

Haviug  thus  established  to  his  own  satisfaction  the
eternity  of  sound,  (raimini  proceeds  to  defend  the  sounds
or  words  of  the  Veda  against  all  possible  objections.  These
flft^ments  were  examined  by  us  before,  when  the  author-
ship of  the  Veda  had  to  be  discussed,  and  when  it  was
shown  that  the  author  of  the  Veda  could  not  have  been
a  personal  being,  but  that  the  Veda  could  only  have  been
seen  by  inspirea  Rishis  as  revealed  to  them,  not  as  made
by  them,  we  may  therefore  at  once  proceed  to  the  next
point,  namely,  to  the  question,  as  to  what  constitutes  a
word,  and  what  according  to  Indian  philosophers  is  its  real
character.  Though  tbes<^  discussions  are  of  a  grammatical
rather  than  of  a  philosophical  character,  they  deserve  our
attention,  because  they  show  how  keen  an  interest  the
ancient  philosophers  of  India  had  taken  in  the  Science
of  Language,  and  how  clearly  they  had  perceived  the

26  "^


402  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

intimate  relation  between  language  and  thought,  and  in
consequence  between  the  Science  of  Language  and  the
Science  of  Thought  or  Philosophy.

How  well  the  Hindus  understood  that  the  study  of
language  forms  an  integral  part  of  philosophy,  we  may
gather  from  the  fact  that  they  actually  admitted  PILnini,
their  greatest  grammarian,  among  their  representative
philosophei'S.  They  had  evidently  perceived  that  language
IS  the  only  phenomenal  form  of  thought,  and  that,  as
human  beings  possess  no  means  of  perceiving  the  thought-s
of  others,  nay  even  their  own  thoughts,  except  in  the  form
of  words,  it  was  the  duty  of  a  student  of  thought  to  inquire
into  the  nature  of  words  before  he  approached  or  analysed
the  nature  of  what  we  mean  by  thought,  naked  thought,
nay  skinned  thought,  as  it  has  been  truly  called,  when
divested  of  its  natural  integuments,  the  words.  ITiey
understood  what  even  modem  philosophers  have  failed  to
understand,  that  there  is  a  difference  between  VarstdluT^
(presentation  or  percept)  and  Begriff  (concept^,  and  that
true  thought  has  to  do  with  conceptual  worcw  only,  nay
that  the  two,  word  and  thought,  are  inseparable,  and  perish
when  separated.  Madhava  in  his  survey  of  all  philosophies,
assigns  a  place  between  6aimini's  P&rva-Mim&77is&  and
Kapila's  Sa7>ikhya  to  the  F^''/2'ini  Dar^ana,  what  we  should
call  the  giammatical  system  of  P&'mni.  Other  .systems
also  treat  most  fully  of  linguistic  questions,  as,  for  instance,
the  Pi\rva-Mima7)is^when  treating  of  the  question  whether
sound,  the  material  element  of  words,  is  eternal  or  not.

Hindu  philosophers  have  actually  elaborated  an  idea
which  does  not  exist  in  any  other  philosophy,  that  of
Spho^a.  It  is  true  that  in  Pa?iini*s  OAvn  Sfttras  the  word
Sphoia  does  not  occur,  but  the  name  of  a  grammarian  whom
he  quotes  (VI,  i,  123),  Sphoiayaiia,  shows  that  this  peculiar
word  Sphofa  must  liave  existed  befoi^e  P&flini's  time.  De-
rived as  it  is  from  Sphu^,  Spho^a  must  have  meant  origin-
ally what  bursts  foi-th.  It  hay  been  translated  by  expres-
sion, notion,  concept  or  idea,  but  none  of  these  I'enderings
can  be  considered  as  successful.     It  really  means  the  sound


sPHorA,  403

of  a  word  as  a  whole,  and  as  conveying  a  meaning,  apart
from  its  oamponeat  letters.  The  subject  has  been  well
treated  by  Madhava  in  his  Sarva-daraana-samgraha.  Here,
when  examining  the  PHiiini  Darsana,  he  shows  first  of  all
that  the  iSabda  or  word  which  P&Tiiui  professes  to  teach
in  his  ^SabdanuasLsalia,  or  grammar,  is  really  the  same  as
Brahman.  *  The  eternal  word,'  he  writes,  *  which  is  called
Spho^a,and  is  without  parts,  is  the  true  cause  of  the  world/
is  in  fact  Brahman,  and  h^  adds  thereupon  some  lines  from
Bhart7*thari's  Bra}imakaWa,  where  that  grammarian  (died
650  A.  D.)  says  : —

Brahman,  without  beginning  or  ^d,  the  indestructible

essence  of  language,
Which  developed  in  the  form  of  things,  and  whence

springs  the  creation  of  the  world/  -' .
What  more  could  be  said  of  the  Neo-platonie  Logos?

In  answer  to  some  who  deny  the  existence  of  such  a
Sphota,  it  is  maintained  "that  it  is  actually  an  object  of
perception,  for  all  men,  on  hearing  the  word  'cow/  know
it  as  distinct  from  the  letters  composing  it.  I^is  shows,
as  we  knew  already  from  the  Pi4tiij4khyas,  thalf  the  Hindus
had  elaborated  the  idea  of  letters,  nay  even  of  vowels  and
consonants,  long  before  they  became  acquainted  with  the
written  letters  of  a  Semitic  alphabet,  and  I  only  wonder
that  thoiie  who  believe  in  an  ancient  indigenous  alphabet,
'should  never  have  appealed,  though  vainly,  to  the  dis-
cussions of  Spho^a,  in  support  of  their  opinion.  And  if
it  were  said  that  cognition  arises  from  the  separate  letters
of  a  word,  we  ast,  he  says,  whetlier  these  letters  are  sup-*
posed  to  produce  cognition  in  their  collective  or  in  their
separate  form.  It  cannot  be  in  theii*  collective  foiui,
because  each  letter,  as  soon  as  pronpunced,  vanishes,  and
therefore  cai^not  form  a  whole;  nor  can  it  be  in  their
separate  form,  because  no  single  letter  has  the  power  of
producing  cognition  of  the  meaning  of  any  word.  As
therefore  thcuetters,  whether  in  their  single  or  their  united
form,  cannot  produce  cognition,  there  must  be  something
else  by  means  of  which  knowledge  is  produced,  and  that
is  the  Spho^a,  the  sound,  distinct  from  the  letters  though
revealed  by  them.     He  then  quotes  fvoni  Pat4;7<7ali's  Maha-

nd  a


404  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

bh&shya:  'Now  what  i^  the  word  Cow?  It  is  that  l^
which,  when  prononBced,  there  is  produced  in  ra  the  simul-
taneotiB  cognition  of  dewlap,  tail,  homp,  hoofis,  and  horns.'
Kaiya^a  explains  this  more  rally  by  saying:  '  Grammarians
maintain  that  it  is  the  word,  as-  distmct  from  the  lefeterc;
which  expresses  the  meaning,  since,  if  the  letters  expressed
it,  there  would  be  no  use  in  pronouncing  the  second  and
following  ones  (as  the  first  would  alreacfy-  have  conveyed
all  that  IS  wished).  It  is  therefore  sometMng  distinct  from
the  single  letters  which  conveys  the  meaning,  and  that  is
what  we  call  the  Sphota.'

The  objector,  however,  is  not  silenced  at  once.  He,  too,
asks  the  question  whether  this  Sphoto  is  manifest  or  non-
manifest.  If  it  required  no  manifestation,  it  would  always
be  there,  but  if  it  requires  manifestation,  this  could  be
by  its.  letters  only,  when  they  are  pronounced ;  and  thus
the  same  difficulties  which  were  pointed  out  before  as  to
the  Collective  or  single  action  of  fetters,  would  arise  again.
This  dilemma  is  put  forward  by  Bha^a  in  his  MtmftTns&-
doka-v^tika :  '  The  grammarian  who  holds  that  Sphota  is
manifested  by  the  letters  as  they  are  severally  pronounced
and  apprehended,  though  itself  one  and  indivisible,  does
not  thereby  escape  from  a  single  difficulty/

On  this  point  P&nini  (I,  4,  14)  seems  to  have  given  the
right  solution,  by  laying  it  down  as  a  principle  that  letters
can  never  form  a  word  unless  they  have  an  affix  at  the
end,  while  the  letters,  as  they  are  apprehended,  simply
help  to  convey  the  meaning  by  means  of  a  conventional
association  (^eVet).  This  shows  that  the  conventional
character  of  the  relation  between  sound  and  meaning  was
fully  recognised  in  India,  whether  tjiat  sound  was  called
jSabda  or  SphofaJ  Nor  is  it  enough  that  the  letters  should
be  the  same,  they  must  also  follow  each  other  in  the  same
order,  othervsdse  Vasa  and  Sava,  Nava  and  Vana^  ftc,
would  carry  the  same  meaning,  which  they  do  not.

AH  this  was  meant  to  show  that  the  admission  of  a
Spho^a  was  unnecessaiy ;  but  we  now  get  the  orthodox
answer,  namely,  that  the  admission  of  Spho^a  is  necessary,
and  that  all  the  objections  are  no  more  than  a  eatehing
at  a  straw  by  a  drowning  person,  because  separate  letters


WOBDS  SXPBB88  THB  8UMMUM  QBNU8.  405

would  never  be  a  word,  as  litUe  as  flowers  without  a  string,
would  be  a  wreath.  And  as  the  letters  cannot  combine,
being  evanescent  as  soon  as  they  have  been  pronounced,
we  are  asked  to  admit  a  Sphoto,  and  to  accept  the  first
letten^  as  revealing  the  invisible  Sphoto,  whereas  Uie
following  letters  serve  only  to  make  that  Sphota  more  and
more  manifest  and  explicit

Words  MKprMNi  tiM  Smmmum  Omimt,

After  having  thus  in  his  own  way  established  the  theory
of  a  Spho^a  for  every  word,  our  philosophical  grammarian
takes  another  step,  trying  to  prove  that  the  meaning  of  all
words  is  ultimately  that  aurmrhum  genvs  (Safct&),  namely
pure  existence,  the  characteristic  of  which  is  consciousness
of  the  supreme  reality.  And  lest  it  should  be  thought
that  in  that  case  all  words  would  mean  one  and  the  same
thing,  namely  Brahman  or  being,  it  is  remarked  that  in  one
sense  this  is  really  so ;  but  that,  as  a  crystal  is  coloured  by
its  surroundings,  Brahman,  when  connected  with  different
things  and  severally  identified  with  each,  stands  after-
wards for  different  species,  such  ais  cow,  horse,  &a,  these
being  first  of  all '  existence '  (Satt&)  or  the  highest  gemis,
as  found  in  individuals,  and  then  only  what  they  are  in
this  phenomenal  world.  In  support  of  this  another  passage
of  Bhaxt^^hari's  is  quoted:  'Existence  bein^  divided,  a$
found  in  cows,  &c.,  is  called  tliis  or  that  species  by  means
of  its  connection  with  different  objects,  ana  on  it  all  words
depend.  This  they  call  the  meaning  of  the  stem,  and  the
meaning  of  the  root.  This  is  existence,  this  is  the  great
Atman  (or  Brahman),  expressed  by  affixes  such  as  Tva,  Tal,
&c.,  which  form  abstract  nouns,  such  as  GlQ-tva,  cow-hood,
&c  For  existence,  as  the  8v/m/nmm  genus,  is  found  in  alt
things,  in  cows,  horses,  &c.,  and  therefore  all  ^ords,  expres-
sive of  definite  meanings,  rest  ultimately  on  the  ffurnimum
genus,  existence,  differentiated  by  various  thoughts  or  words,
such  as  cows,  horses,  &c.,  in  which  it  resides.  If  the  stem-
word,  the.  PrsLtipadika,  expresses  existence,  the  root  ex-
presses Bh&va,  a  state,  or,  as  others  say,  Kxiyk,  action.'

This  will  remind  us  of.  many  of  the  speculations  of  Greek
as  well  as  medieval  logicians ;  and  i^  is  Exactly  what  my


406  IKOUK   PMtliOSOPHr.

late  friend  Noire  tried  to  eRtablish,  that  all  words  originally
expressed  action,  to  which  I  added  the  amendment  that
they  expressed  either  an  ^iion  or  a  status.  If  this  tme
kernel  of  every  word  is  Jby  Hindu  philosophers  called  the
Great  Atman  (Mah&n  Atmd,),  and  Ssttcl,  the  aum/mU'm
genu8t  we  must  remember  that,  accoi-ding  to  the  Ved&nta,
Brahman  is  the  true  substance  of  everything.  This  is
stated  again  by  Bhart?*2hari : —

*  The  true  reality  is  known  under  its  illusory  forms,  by
words  under  untrue  disguises ;  the  true  reality  is  named
(for  a  time),  like  the  house  of  Devadatta,  so  called  for  a'
vanishing  reason  (that  is,  only  so  long  as  Devadatta  is
the  possessor  of  the  house) ;  but  by  the  word  house,  pure
househood  *  only  is  expressed.'

Words  •KpvMHidT*  of  Oonorft  or  ladividnaUi  >

*

But  while  the  meaning  of  all  words  is  thus,  admitted
to  be  Brahman,  we  meet  with  two  schools,  the  one  of
VIU7apyS.yana,  maintaining  that  our  ordinary  words  mean
a  genus,  the  other,  of  Vyarfi,  who  holds  that  they  mean  indi-
vidual things.  PaTiini  holds  both  views  as  true  in  grammar,
for  in  one  place,  I,  2,  58,  he  shows  that '  a  Br&bman '  may
mean  many  Brahmans,.  as  when  we  say,  tliat  a  Brahman
is  to  be  honoured ;  in  another,  I,  2,  64,  he  states  that  the
plural  Ramas  means  always  B&uia,  BAma  and  BAma,  ie.  so
many  single  Ramas.

All  Words  moan  rd  Sv,

The  idea  that  11II  words  in  the  end  mean  Brahman,  the
one  Supreme  Being,  was  necessitated  by  the  very  character
of  Hhe  VedS,nta-phiIosophy,  which  admits  of  no  duality
except  As  the  result  of  nescience.  Hence  it  is  said :  The
Supreme  Being  is  the  thing  denoted  by  all  words,  and  it  is
identical  with  the  word ;  but  the  relation  of  the  two,  while
they  are  ultimately  identical,  varies  as  it  does  in  the  case
of  the,  two  Atmans,  the  Paramatman  and  the  (?iv&tmaD,
the  highest  or  universal,  and  the  living  or  individual  bouI,
the  differenipe  between  the  two  being  due  to  Avidy&  or

1  Read  QnliatTam  instead  of  Grihltam  ?


ALL   WOliJDS   MEAN   rb  6k  ^  407

temporary  nescienoe.  As  early  as  the  Maitr^ya^ia  Upa-
nishad  we  meet  with  verses  to  the  «ame  efieet,  and  of  to
earlier  date  than  itself,  such  as  (VI,  2a), '  Two  Branmans
have  tQ  be  meditated  on,  the  Word  and  the  Non-word^  and
by  the  Word  alone  is  the  Non-word  revealed.*  In  this
way  the  grammatical  philosophers  endeavoured  to  prove
th^  grammar  or  exposition  of  words,  as  it  was  called
by  Pata^^ali  (iSabdlbiusd^sana),  is,  like  every  other  system
of  philosophy,  '  the  means  of  final  beatituae,  the  door  of
emanci^tion^  the  medicine  of  the  diseases  of  langpuage,
the  punfier  of  all  sciences,  the  science  of  sciences ;  it  is  me
first  rung  on  the  ladder  that  leads  up  to  final  bliss,  and
the  straight  royal  road  among  all  the  roads  that  lead  to
emancipation/

This  majr  be  accepted  as  representing  the  viewh,  if  not
of  "Pknim  himself,  at  least  of  his  followers ;  and  I  must  say
that  if  his  explanation  of  a  word  as  a  number  of  letters
ending  in  a  suffix  had  been  accepted,  there  would  have
been  no  necessity  for  the  admission  of  a  Sphoto.  It  was
evidently  not  seen  by  the  inventors  of  this  Sphoto  that
letters  have  no  independent  existence  at  all,  and  can  be
considered  only  as  the  result  of  a  scientific  analysis,  and
that  words  existed  long  before  even  the  idea  of  letters
had  been  formed.  Letters,  by  themselves,  have  no  raison
d'etre.  Sphota  is  in  fact  the  word  before  it  had  been
analysed  mto  letters,  the-  breaking  forth  of  a  whole  and
undivided  utterance,  such  as  Qo,  ^cow,'  conveying  a  mean-
ing which  does  not  depend  on  any  single  letter  nor  on  any
combination  of  them.  Though  from  our  point  of  view  the
idea  of  such  a  Sphota  may  seem  unnecessary,  we  cannot
help  admiring  the  ingenuity  of  the  ancient  philosophers  of
India  in  inventing  such  a  term,  and  in  seeing  difficulties
which  never  attracted  the  attention  of  European  philo-
sophers. For  it  is  peiiectly  true  that  the  letters,  ajs  such,
have  no  reality  and  no  power,  and  that  every' word  is
something  different  from  its  letters,  something  undivided
and  indivisible.  In  such  a  word  as  V&fc,  Vox,  we  have
not  a  combination  of  three  letters,  v,  a,  k,  v/hich  would  be
nothing,  but  we  liave  an  indivisible  explosion,  expressive
of  its  meaning  in  its  Undivided  form  only,  and  this  may  be


A6S  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

raised  to  the  status  of  a  word  by  means  of  a  grammatical
suffix  which,  as  we  should  say,  makes  an  organised  whole
ofit.  All  this  is  true  and  recognised  now  by  all  students
of  the  Science  of  Language,  though  never  even  suspected
by  the  philosophers  of  other  countries.

Still  more  important  is  the  idea  that  all  words  originally
meant  Brahman  or  to  ov,  and  receive  their  special  meaning
from  their  relation  to  the  genera  or  logoi  in  the  mind  of
Brahman,  as  creative  t3rpes.  Words  are  not  names  of  in-
dividuals, but  always  of  classes  or  genera,  and  as  genera
they  are  eternal  These  logoi  exist^  before  the  creation
of  the  worliJ,  nay,  rendered  that  creation  possible.  This  is
the  much-despised  Neo-platonic  philosophy,  the  basis  of  the
Christian  theory  of  creation;  and  that  we  should  find  it
so  fully  elaborated  in  the  ancient  world  of  India  is  surely
a  surprise,  and,  I  should  add,  a  welcome  surprise.  And  can
we  suppose  that  ideas  which,  in  Greece,  required  so  many
evolutions  of  thought  till'  they  reached  the  point  which
they  reached  in  Alexandria,  and  afterwards  in  Palestine,
should  have  sprung  up  in  India  suddenly  or,  as  it  were,
casually  1  Do  we  not  rather  see  clearly  here  also  how  long
and  how  continuous  a  development  oi  thought  must  have
taken  place  south  of  the  Him&layas  before  such  fruits
could  have  ripened  ?  Would  any  Greek  scholar  dare  to
say  that  all  this  was  borrowed  from  Greece  1  Would  any
Sanskrit  scholar  be  so  intrepid  as  to  hint  that  the  Greeks
might  possibly  have  learnt  their  io(708  from  the  Vedic  V&i?
Even  if  we  do  not  accept  the  lost  results  of  this  Indian  line
of  thought,  which  ended  w\ere  Greek  philosophy  ended,
and  where  Christian  philosophy  began,  nay  even  if  we
should  put  aside  as  unintelligible  the  beginning  words  of  the
fourth  CJospel,  *  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,'  we  can  at
least  admire  the  struggle  which  led  up  to  this  view  of  the
world,  and  tried  to  establish  the  truth  that  there  is  a  Logos,
thought,  that  there  is  Bhyme  and  Reason  in  the  world,  and
that  the  whole  universe  is  full  of  Brahman,  the  Eternal
and  the  Divine,  not  visible  to  the  human  eye,  though
visible  to  the  human  mind.  That  mind,  according  to
Indian  philosophy,  has  its  true  being  in  the  Divine  Mind,
in  which  it  lives  and  moves,  in  which  alone  it  has  its


ALL   W0BD8   MBAN  ri  ll¥,  4O9

true  Self  or  Atman,  which  Atman  is  Brahman.  To  have
mounted  to  such  heighi»,  even  if  we  have  to  descend  again
frightened  and  giddy,  must  have  strengthened  the  muscles
of  human  reason,  and  will  remain  in  our  memory  as  a  sight
never  to  be  forgotten,  even  in  the  lower  spheres  in  which
we  have  to  move  in  our  daily  life  and  amidst  our  daily
dutieis.  Speaking  for  myself,  I  am  bound  to  say  that
I  have  felt  an  acquaintance  with  the  general  spirit  of  Indian
philosophy  as  a  blessing  from  my  very  youth,  being
strengthened  by  it  against  all  the  antinomies  of  being  and
thinking,  and  nerved  in  all  the  encounters  with  the  scep-
ticism and  materialism  of  our  own  ephemeral  philosophy.
It  is  easy,  no  doubt,  to  discover  blemishes  in  the  form  and
style  of  Indian  philosophy,  I  mean  chiefly  the  Yedslnta*,
and  to  cite  expressions  which  at  first  sight  seem  absurd.
But  there  are  such  blemishes  and  such  absurdities  in  all
philosophies,  even  in  the  most  modem.  Many  people  have
smiled  at  the  Platonic  ideas,  at  the  atoms  of  Democritus,  or
at  the  location  of  the  soul  in  the  pineal  gland  or  in  certain
parts  of  the  brain ;  yet  all  this  belongs  to  the  history  of
philosophy,  and  had  its  right  place  in  it  at  the  right  time.
What  the  historian  of  philosophy  has  to  do  is  first  of  all  to
try  to  understand  the  thoughts  of  great  philosophers,  then
to  winnow  what  is  permanent  from  what  is  temporary,
and  to  discover,  if  possible,  the  vein  of  gold  that  runs
through  the  quartZj  to  keep  the  gold,  and  to  sweep  away
the  rubbish.  Why  not  do  tne  same  for  Indian  philosophy?
Why  not  try  to  bring  it  near  to  us,  however  far  removed
from  it  we  may  seem  at  first  sight.  In  all  other  countries
philosophy  has  railed  at  religion  and  religion  has  railed  at
philosophy.  In  India  alone  the  two  have  always  worked
together  harmoniously,  religion  deriving  its  freedom  from
philosophy,  philosophy  gaining  its  spirituality  from  re-
ligion. Is  not  that  something  to  make  us  think,  and  to
remind  us  of  the  often-repeated  words  of  Terence,  Huviani
nihil  a  nie  alienum  puto  ?  A  rich  kernel  is  often  covered
by  a  rough  skin,  and  true  wisdom  may  be  hiding  where  we
least  expect  it.


4^0  INDIAN   PHIL080PHT.

▼•dAate  OB  Bpliofft.

We  have  now  to  see  what  the  other  systenis  of  philo-
sophy have  to  say  on  this  subject,  for  it  is  quite  clear  that
the  idea  of  a  Spho^a,  though  known  to  them,  was  not  ac-
cepted by  all.  SwrrvksbTs.,  as  representing  the  Ved&nta-philo-
sophy,  is  entirely  opposed  to  the  admission  of  a  Spho^a.
He  fully  admits  that  earth  and  aU  the  rest  were  created
according  to  the  words  earth,  &c.,  which  were  present  to
the  mind  of  the  Creator,  but  he  asks^  how  were  these  words
present  ?  Beginning  as  usual  with  the  Pftrvapakshin  ^  or
opponent,  he  produces  as  arguments  in  favour  oi  the  admis-
sion of  a  Spho^a,  that  the  letters  cannot  convey  the  meaning,
because  as  soon  as  they  are  pronounced  they  perish,  because
they  differ  according  to  the  pronunciation  of  each  speaker,
because  they  possess  neither  singly  nor  collectively  any
significative  power,  because  not  even  the  last  letter  with
the  impression  left  by  the  preceding  letter  in  our  memory,
would  convey  to  us  the  sense  of  a  word.  Hence  something
different  from  the  letters  must  be  admitted,  the  Spho^a,  the
outburst  of  the  whole  word,  presenting  itself  all  at  once  as
the  object  of  our  mental  act  of  apprehension.  That  Sphofo
is  what  is  eternal,  different  therefore  from  perishable  and
changeable  letters,  and  it  is  that  Spho^a  from  which  what-
ever IS  denoted  by  it  was  produced  in  creation,  and  which
_in  conversation  conveys  to  others  what  is  in  our  own  mind,
but  always  clothed  in  sound.

£a7?ikara  himself,  however,  considers  such  an  admission
of  a  Sphoto  entirely  unnecessary,  and,  in  order  to  prove
this,  he  goes  back  and  calls  to  his  aid  an  old  Yeds^tist,
Upavarsha,  whom  he  refers  to  elsewhere  also  (III,  3,  53)*.
This  Upavarsha  argues  that  the  letters  by  themselves  con-
stitute the  word,  because  though  they  pensh  as  fast  as  they
are  pronoimced,  they  are  always  recognised  again  as  the
same  letters^  not  only  as  belonging  to  the  same  class,  but

^  Ved.  Sfltras  1,  3,  aS.  This  is  one  of  the  cases  where  the  PQrvapaksha,
the  opponent's  view,  has  been  mistaken  for  Samkara's  own  final  opinion,
or  for  the  Siddhanta.

*  Here  Samkara  charges  oauarasvdmin,  the  famous  commentator  on
the  POrva-MlnuLmsa,  I,  £,  $»  ^ith  having  borrowed  an  argument  from
B&dar^yana.


VSDANTA  ON  SPHO^A.  4II

as  act'UslIy  the  same.  Thus  when  the  word  cow  is  pro-
nounced twice,  we  do  not  think  that  two  words  have  been
pronounced,  but  that  the  same  word  has  been  pronounced
twice.  And  though  two  individuals  may,  no  doubt,  pro-
nounce the  same  word  differently,  such  differences  are  due
to  the  organs  of  pi*onuneiation,  and  not  to  the  intrinsic
nature  of  the  letters.  He  holds  that  the  apprehension  of
difference  depencte  on  external  factors,  but  that  their  recog-
nition is  due  only  to  the  intrinsic  nature  of  the  letters.  The
sound  which  enters  the  ear  (Dhvani)  may  be  different,  strong
or  weak,  high  or  low,  but  the  letters  through  all  this  are
recognised  as  the  same.  And  if  it  be  said  that  the  letters
of  -a  word,  being  several,  cannot  form  the  object  of  one
mental  act,  this  is  not  so,  because  the  ideas  which  we  have
of  a  row,  or  a  wood,  or  an  army,  show  that  things  which
comprise  several  unities  can  become  objects  of  one  and  the
same  act  of  cognition.  And  if  it  be  asked  why  groups  of
letters  such  as  Pika  and  Kapi  should  convey  different
meanings,  viz.  cuckoo  and  ape,  we  have  only  to  look  at
a  number  of  ants,  which  as  long  as  they  move  one  after
another  in  a  certain  order,  convey  the  idea  of  a  row,  but
cease  to  do  so  if  they  are  scattered  about  at  random.

Without  adducing  further  arguments.  iS^amkara  in  the
end  maintains  that  the  admission  of  a  Spho^a  is  unneces-
sary, and  that  it  is  simpler  to  accept  the  letters  of  a  woi-d
as  having  entered  into  a  permanent  connection  with  a  de-
finite sense,  and  as  always  presenting  themselves  in  a  definite
order  to  our  understanding,  which,  after  apprehending  the
several  letters,  finally  comprehends  the  entire  aggregate  as
conveying  a  definite  sense.  We  never  perceive  a  Spho^a,
he  argues,  and  if  the  letters  are  supposed  to  manifest  the
Spho^a,  the  Sphoi^a  in  turn  would  have  to  manifest  the
sense.  It  would  even  be  preferable  to  admit  that  letters
form  a  genus,  and  as  such  are  eternal,  but  in  either  case
we  should  gain  nothing  by  the  Spho^a  that  we  could  not
have  without  it,  by  the  admission  of  eternal  words  from
which  all  non-eternal  things,  such  as  gods,  cows,  and  horses,
originated.  Hence  we  see  that,  though  the  theory  of  the
Spho^a  is  rejected  by  the  VedS,nta,  the  eternal  character  of
the  words  is  strenuously  retained,  being  considered  essential


413  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

as  it  would  setmi,  in  order  to  maintaii.  the  identity  of
Brahman  and  the  Word,  and  the  creation  of  the  world  by
Brahman  in  accordance  with  the  eternal  words.

The  Yoga-philo8ophy  accepted  the  theoi^  of  the  Sphote»
nay  it  has  been  supposed  to  have  first  originated  it  ^  for,
actording  to  the  commentary,  it  was  against  the  Yoga
philosophers,  rather  than  against  the  Mtmli^ns&,  that
iLapilas  objections  concerning  the  Sphofo  were  directed.
What  Kapifa  says  about  Sphoto  i&of  much  the  same  char-
acter as  what  he  had  said  about  t^vara,  the  Lord,  namely
that  its  existence  cannot  be  proved,  not  that  it  does  not
exist.  If  Spho^,  he  says,  is  meant  for  the  group  of  letters
forming  a  word,  then  why  not  be  satisfied  with  this,  and
simply  speak  of  a  word  (rada),  as  manifesting  its  sense)
Why  invent  something  which  has  never  been  perceived,
and  which  exists  as  little  apart  from  the  letters  as  a  forest
exists  apart  from  the  trees>  what  is  in  fact  entirely  gratuitous

(V,57).

Nor  are  the  letters,  from  Eapila's  point  of  view,  eternal

(V,  58),  because,  as  B&dar&ya^a  also  remarked,  we  can  wit-
ness their  production ;  and  our  being  able  to  recognise  them
as  the  same,  proves  no  more  than  their  belonging  to  one  and
the  same  genus,  but  not  their  bein^  eternal.

It  is  curious  to*  observe  the  ebborateness  with  which
what  seems  to  us  a  purely  grammatical  question  is  dis-
cussed in  the  various  schools  of  Indian  plulosophy.  The
Sphoi^,  however,  is  to  Indian  thinkers  not  merely  a  gram-
matical problem ;  it  is  distantly  connected  with  the  question
of  the  eternity  of  the  Veda.  This  eternity  is  denied  by
KapUa  (Samkhya  Y,  46)  because  the  Yedas  speak  of  them-
selves as  having  been  produced  in  such  passages  as :  '  He
became  heated,  and  from  bim,  thus  heatea,  the  three  Yedas
were  produced/  Eternity  of  the  Yeda  can  therefore,  ac-
cording to  Kapila,  mean  no  more  than  an  unbeginning  and
unbroken  continuity,  so  that  even  at  the  beginning  of  a  new
creation  the  order  of  words  in  the  Yeda  remains  the  same
as  before.    But  if,  as  Ny&ya  and  Yaiaesbika  maintain,  this

^  0«rbe,  SAmkhya-Philosophie,  p.  z  1 1  n.


ntAta  on  sraorA.  413

Tedii  was  the  work  of  a  personal  being,  such  as  tavara,  this
18  declared  imposBible  by  Eapila,  because,  as  he  holds,  such
an  t«rara  has  never  been  proved  to  exist.  For  he  holds  that
the  Lord  or  Wara  could  only  have  been  either  a  liberated
or  an  unliberated  Pumsha.  rfow  a  liberated  Purusha,  such
as  YishTiu  for  instance,  could  not  have  composed  this  enor-
mous Veda,  beci^use  he  is  free  from  all  desires,  nor  could  an
active,  non-liberated  Putusha  have  been  the  author,  because
he  would  not  have  possessed  the  ommseienee  required  for
such  a  work.

But  we  must  not  conclude  that,  because  we  know  of  no
possible  perHonal  author,  therefore  the  Veda  is  eternal,  in
the  same  way  as  germs  and  sprouts.  What  is  called  the
work  of  a  personal  being  always  presupposes  a  corporeal
person,  and  it  presupposes  a  will.  We  should  not  call  the
m'ere  breathing  of  a  person  in  sleep,  a  personal  work.  But
the  Yedas,  as  we  read,  rise  spontaneously  like  an  exhalation
from  the  Highest  Being,  not  by  any  effort  of  will,  but  by
some  miraculous  virtue.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the
words  of  the  Veda  are  manifested,  like  the  notes  of  birds,
without  any  purpose  or  meaning.  No,  they  are  the  means
of  right  knowledge,  and  their  innate  power  is  proved  by
the  wonderful  effects  which  are  produced,  for  instance,  by
medical  formulas  taken  from  the  Ayur-veda.  This  is  the
same  arrgument  which  was  used  in  the  Nyd.ya-S<itras  II,  68,
as  a  tangible  and  irrefutable  proof  of  the  efficiency  of  the
Yedas.  Here  all  would  depend  on  the  experimental  proof,
and  this  the  Hindus,  ancient  or  modem,  would  find  it  diffi-
cult to  supply ;  but  if  tUe  Hindus  were  satisfied,  we  have  no
reason  to  find  fault.

If  now  we  turn  to  the  Nyaya-philosophy  we  find  that
Gotama  also  denies  the  eternity  of  sound,  because,  it  is
argued,  we  can  see  that  it  has  a  beginning  or  cause,  because
it  18  an  object  of  sense-perception,  and  because  it  is  known
to  be  factitious.  Besides,  if  sound  were  eternal,  we  should
be  able  to  perceive  it  always,  even  before  it  is  uttered,  there
being  no  known  barrier  between  the  ether  and  our  ear  (II,
3,  86).    This  ethereal  substratum  of  sound  is,  no  doubt.


414  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

intangible  (II,  3»  104),  but  it  is  nevertheless  a  someuhing
perceptible  oy  one  of  our  senses,  that  of  hearing,  and  hence
it  must  be  non-eternal.  The  true  eternity  of  the  Yedas
consists,  according  to  Gotama,  in  the  unbroken  continuity  of
their  tradition,  study,  and  employment,  both  in  the  Man-
vantaras  and  Yugas  which  are  past  and  those  that  are  still
to  come,  whilst  their  authority  depends  on  the  authority  of
the  most  competent  persons.  This  is  the  same  with  secular
words  \  Thisf  last  admission  would  of  course  be  strongly
resisted  and  resented  by  Y eddnta  philosophers,  but  it  shows
at  all  events  the  freedom  with  which  aU  Indian  philo-
sophers were  allowed  to  handle  the  ancient  Sacred  Books
of  the  coimtry.

The  Yaieeshikas  lastly  dp  not  differ  much  from  the
Naiy&yikaa  as  to  whether  the  Yeda  is  eternal  or  not,  is
authoritative  or  not,  but  they,  follow  their  own  way  of
reasoning.  The  very  last  SAtra  of  the  Yaideshika-Sastra,
X,  2 J  9,  says:  'It^has  been  declared  that  authoritativeness
belongs  to  the  Amn&ya  (Yeda)  because  it  is  uttered  by
Him  * ;  and  this  declaration  is  found  likewise  in  the  thiitl
Sfitra  of  the  first  book  to  which  the  final  Siitra  refers.
But  though  this  Sfttra  is  given  -twice,  there  attaches  some
uncertainty  to  its  meaning,  because,  as  pointed  out  by  the
native  commentators,  the  words  *  because  uttered  by  Him,*
may  also  be  translated  by  'because  it  declares  it,'  i.e.  'be-
cause it  teaches  duty  (Dharma).'  But  in  either  case  there
are  objections,  the  same  as  those  with  which  we  are  familiar
from  the  Pi^rvapaksha  in  the  Vedanta  and  Mim^msaka-
Sfttras,  such  as  self-dontradictoriness,  tautology,  and  the
rest  discovered  by  some  critics  in  the  text  of  the  Yedas.
Thereupon  the  eternal  character,  too,  of  the  Yeda  is  called
in  question,  and  whoever  its  author  may  have  been,  whether
Iiuman  or  divine,  it  is  doubted  whether  he  can  justly  claim
any  authority.

In  answer  to  this  sweejDing  condemnation  the  Yaiseshlka
points  out  VI,  1,1,*  that  at  all  events  there  is  in  the  Yeda

^  Vfttiyfiyana'-s  GomnienUry  on  the'  Nyaya.  p.  91,  ed.  Biblioth.  Indica,
Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  III.  \,.  V15.


INBRITAS;   SBNSSB.  415

a  condtruction  of  sentences  consequent  upon  intelligence/
or  as  we  should  say,  the  Veda  must  at  least  be  Admitted
to  be  the  work  of  a  rational  author,  and  not  of  an  author
of  limited  intelligence/  because  no  merely  rational  author
could  propound  such  a  rule  as  '  He  who  desires  paradise,
should  sacrifice/  Such  matters  could  not  be  known  in  their
causes  and  effects  to  men  of  limited  knowledge  like  our-
selves. Whatever  we  may  think  of  this  argument,  it  shows
at  all  events  the  state  of  mind  of  the  earliest  defenders  of
revelation.  They  argued  that,  because  the  author  must  at
least  be  admitted  to  have  been  a  rational  being,  he  could
not  possibly  have  declared  things  that  are  beyond  the
knowledge  of  ordinary  rational  beings,  such  as  the  rewards
of  sacrifices  in  another  world,  and  other  matters  beyond  the
ken  of  experience.  The  Vai^eshikas  admitted  a  personal
author  of  the  Veda,  an  tsvara,  but  this  by  no  means  in-
volved the  eternity  of  the  Veda.  With  the  Vai^eshikas.
also,  the  eternity  of  the  Veda  meant  no  more  than  its
uninterrupted  tradition  (SampradS^ya),  but  some  furthet
supports  to  its  authority  were  found  in  the  fact  that,,
besides  being  the  work  of  a  rational  being,  in  this  ease
of  tfivara,  the  Lord,  it  had  been  accepted  as  the  highest
authority  by  a  long  line  of  the  great  or  greatest  men  who
themselves  might  safely  be  regarded,  if  not  as  infallible,  at
least  a&  trustworthy  and  authoritative.

If  now,  after  an  examination  of  the  various  opinions
entertained  by  the  NyS»ya  and  other  Hindu  philosophers
of  the  significative  power  of  words,  we  return  to  the  Satras
of  Qotama,  we  find  that,  in  his  third  book,  he  is  chiefly
concerned  with  the  Prameyas,  that  is,  the  objects  of  know-
ledge, as  established  by  the  Pram&nas ;  and  the  first  ques-
tion that  meets  us  is  whether  the  senses  or  Indriyas,  the
instruments  of  objective  knowledge,  should  be  treated  as
difierent  from  the  Atman,  the  Self,  or  not.

Qotama  holds  that  they  are  different  from  the  Atman ;
and  in  order  to  prove  this,  he  argues,  that  if  each  sense


41 6  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

oonld  perceive  by  itself,  each  sense  would  perceive  its  own
object  only,  the  ear  sound,  the  eye  colour,  the  skin  warmth,
&c,;  and  that  therefore  what  perceives  all  these  impres-
sions tof|;ether,  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same'  ol^ect,
must^be  something  different  from  the  several  senses,  namely
the  Atman,  or,  according  to  other  systems,  the  Manas  or
mind.

Next  follows  the  question  whether  the  body  is  the  same
as  the  Atman,  a  question  which  would  never  occur  to
a  Yed&ntist.  But  Qotama  asks  it  and  solves  it  in  his
own  way.  It  cannot  be,  he  says,  because,  when  the  body
has  once  been  destroyed  by  being  burnt,  the  consequences
of  good  and  evil  deeds  would  cease  to  pursue  the  Self
through  an  endless  series  of  births  and  rebirths.  A
number  of  similar  obiections  and  answers  follow,  aU
showing  how  much  this  question  had  occupied  the  thoughts
of  the  Ny&ya  philosophers.  Some  of  them  suggest  difficul-
ties which  betray  a  very  low  state  of  philosophical  reason-
ing, while  other  difficulties  are  such  that  even  in  our  own
time  they  have*  not  ceased  to  perplex  minute  philosophers.
We  meet  with  the  question  wy,  with  the  dual  organ  of
vision,  there  is  no  duality  of  perception ;  why,  if  memory
is  supposed  to  be  a  quality  or  mode  of  the  Self,  mere
remembrance  of  an  acid  substance  can  make  our  mouth
water.  After  these  questions  have  been,  if  not  solved,  at
least  carefully  considered,  Gotama  goes  on  to  show  that  if
the  body  be  not  Atman,  neither  can  Manas,  mind,  be  con-
ceived as  the  AtiAan.

liaiUM,  Kind.

The  Self  is  the  knower,  while  the  mind  or  Manas  is  only
the  instrument  (Karana)  of  knowledge  by  which  attention
is  fixed  on  one  thing  at  a  time.  The  Self  is  eternal,  not  of
this  life  only,  without  beginning  and  therefore  without
end.  And  here  a  curious  argument  is  brought  in,  different
from  the  usual  Indian  arguments  in  support  of  our  previous
existence,  to  show  that  our  Self  does  not  begin  with  our
birth  on  earth,  because,  as  he  says,  the  smile  of  a  new-bom
child  can  only  arise  from  memory  of  a  previous  experience.


MANAS,  MIND.  417

While  our  modern  pByeho-physiologists  >/ouia  probably
see  in  the  smiles  or  tne  cries  of  a  new-bom  child  a  reflex
action  of  tiie  muscles,  our  Indian  objector  declares  that  such
movements  are  to  be  considered  as  no  more  than  the  open-
ing and  closing  of  a  lotus-flower.  And  when  this  view  has
been  silenced  by  the  remark  that  a  child  does  not  consist
of  the  five  elements  only,  is  not  in  fact,  as  we  should  say
a  mere  vegetable,  a  new  argument  of  the  same  character  it
adduc^,  namely  the  child's  readiness  to  suck,  which  can
only  be  accounted  for,  they  say,  by  the  child  having,  in
a  former  life,  acquired  a  desire  for  milk.  When  this  again
has  been  rejected  as  no  argument,  because  we  see  that  iron
also  moves  towards  a  magnet,  Gotama  answers  once  more
that  a  child  cannot  be  tieated  like  a  piece  of  iron.  And
when,  as  a  last  resource,  desire  in  general,  as  manifested
by  a  child,  is  appealed  to  as  showing  a  child's  previous
existence,  and  when  this  also  has  once  more  been  answered
by  the'  remark  that  a  child,  like  every  other  substance,
must  be  possessed  of  qualities,  Ootama  finaUy  dismisses  all
these  objectors  by  maintaining  that  desires  are  not  simply
qualities,  but  can  arise  from  experience  and  previous
immressions  (Samkalpa)  only.

The  consideration  of  the  body  and  of  the  substances  of
which  it  consists,  whether  of  earth  only,  or  of  three
elements,  earth,  water  and  fire,  or  of  four,  earth,  water,
fire  and  air,  or  of  five,  because  it  displays' the  qualities  of
the  five,  is  naturally  of  small  interest  in  our  time.  The
final  solution  only  deserves  our  attention,  in  so  far  as  it
clearly  shows  that  the  Ny&ya  also  recognised  in  some  cases
the  authority  of  the  Veda  as  supreme,  by  stating  that  the
body  is  made  of  earth,  and  why  ?  'jSrutiprilmftTiy&t,'
'because  scripture  says  so/

What  follows,  the  discussion  of  sight  or  of  the  visual  ray
proceeding  from  the  eye,  and  the  question  whether  we
possess  one  general  sense  only,  or  many,  may  contain
curious  suggestions  for  the  psycho-physiologist ;  but  there
is  little  of  what  we  mean  bv  really  philosophic  matter  in  ik
The  qualities  assigned  to  the  objects  of  perception  are  not
very  difierent  from  what  they  are  supposed  to  be  in  the
other  systems  of  philosophy,  and  they  may  be  passed

27  »•


41 8  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY.

by  here  all  the  more  because  they  will  have  to  be^  con-
sidered more  fully  when  we  come  to  examine  the  Yaiseshika
system.

More  interesting  is  the  discussion  which  occupies  the  rest
of  the  third  book«  It  is  chiefly  concerned  with  tlie  nature
of  Self  (Atman),  the  mind  (Manas),  the  difference  between
the  two,  and  their  relation  to  knowledge.  Here  we  should
remember  that,  according  to  I,  15,  Bu^hi  (understanding),
Upalabdhi  (apprehension),  and  G^koA  (knowledge)  are  used
synonymously.  Though  there  are  many  manif estaticms  of
Manas,,  such  as  memory,  inference,  verbal  testimony,  doubt,
imagination,  dreaming,  cognition,  guessing,  feeling  of
pleasure,  desire,  and  all  the  rest,  yet  its  distinguishing
feature,  we  are  told,  is  what  we  should  call  attention,  or  as
Qotama  explains  it  CL,  16), '  the  preventing  of  knowledge
arising  altogether.'  This  is  declared  to  be  aue  to  attention,
and  in  many  cases  this  would  be  the  best  rendering  of
Manas.  Manas  is  therefore  often  called  the  doorkeeper,
preventing  sensations  from  rudhing  in  promiscuously  and
all  at  once.  If  therefore  we  translate  Manas  by  mind,  we
must  always  remember  its  technical  meaning  in  Indian
philosophy,  and  its  beinec  originally  different  from  Buddhi,
Weiston^,  which  ni%ht  often  be  rendered  b/  lighter
the  internal  light  that  changes  dark  and  dull  impressioDS
into  clear  and  bright  sensatiS.  perceptions.  «.d  k£iwledge
in  general,  or  by  understanding,  at  least  so  far  as  it  enables
us  to  transform  and  understand  the  dull  impressions  of  the
senses.

The  difference  between  the  philosophical  nomendatareB
in  English  and  Sanskrit  for  the  Manas  and  its  various
functions  is  so  great  that  a  translation  is  almost  impossible,
and  I  am  by  no  means  satisfied  with  my  own.  It  should
also  be  remembered  that  the  same  Sanskrit  term  has  often
verv  different  meanings  in  different  systems  of  philosophy.

The  Buddhi  of  the  Ny&ya  philosophers,  for  instance,  is
totallv  different  from  the  Buddhi  of  the  S&mkhjjwu  Their
Buddxii  is  eternal,  while  the  Buddhi  of  Qotama  is  distinctly
declared  to  be  non-eternal.  The  Buddhi  of  the  Sftmkhya
is  a  cosmic  principle  independent  of  the  Self,  and  meant  to
aobount  for  the  existence  of  the  light  of  reason  in  the  whole


MBMOBT.  419

univei'se;  while  in  the  Ny&ya-phiIcN9ophy  it  signifies  the
subjective  activity  of  thought  in  the  acquisition  of  know-
ledge, or  in  the  lighting  up  and  appropriating  of  the  inert
impressions  received  by  the  senses.  This  knowledge  can
come  to  an  en'd  and  vanish  by  f orgetfulness,  while  an  eternal
essence,  like  the  Buddhi  of  the  Sfi.mkhyas,  though  it  may
be  ignored,  can  never  be  destroyed


In  answering  the  question,  What  is  knowledge,  Gbtama
declares  in  this  place  quite  clearly  that  real  Knowledge
belongs  to  the  Atman  omy,  the  Self  or  the  soul.  It  cannot
belong  to  the  senses  and  their  objects  (Indriyftrtha),  because
knowledge  abides  even  when  the  senses  and  wnat  they

Krceive  have  been  suppressed.  Nor  does  knowledge
long  to  the  Manas,  which  is  but  the  instrument  of  know-
ledge, but  it  arises  from  the  conjunction  of  Atman  (Self)
wim  Manas  (attention),  and  on  the  other  side  of  Manas
with  Indriyas  (senses).  Manas  is  the  instrument,  and  the
wielder  of  that  instrument,  like  the  wielder  of  an  axe,
must  be  some  one  different  from  it ;  this,  according  to  the
Ny&ya,  can  only  be  the  Self  who  in  the  end  knows,  who
remembers,  who  feels  pain  and  pleasure,  who  desires  and
acts.


Memory,  Smnti,  has  not  received  from  Indian  philo-
sophers the  attention  which  it  deserves.  If  it  is  treated  as
a  means  of  knowledge,  it  falls  under  Anubhava,  which  is
either  immediate  or  mediate,  and  then  called  Smrtti.  Every
Anubhava  is  supposed  to  leave  an  impression  or  modifica-
tion of  the  mind,  which  is  capable  of  being  revived.  There
is  another  manifestation  of  memory  in  the  act  of  remember-
ing or  recognising,  as  when  on  seeing  a  man  we  say,  This  is
he,  or  This  is  Devadatta.  Here  we  have  Anubhava,  know-
ledge of  this,  joined  with  something  else,  namely  he  or
Devadatta,  a  revived  Samsk&ra,  impression,  or  Sm>7ti.  The
subject  of  memory  is  more  fully  treated  in  III,  1 13,  and  the
various  associations  which  awaken  memory  are  enumei^ted
AS  follows: —

se  2


420  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

1,  Attention  to  sn  object  perceived ;
a.  Connection,  as  when  the  word  Pram&na,  p/oof,  recalls
"Prameja,,  what  has  to  be  proved ;

3.  Repetition,  as  when  one  has  learned  a  number  of  things
.together,  one  calls  up  tiie  other ;

4.  A  sign,  as  when  a  thing  recalls  its  sine  qvd  non ;

^.  A  mark,  as  when  a  standard  reminos  one  of  its
beiurer;

6.  likeness,  as  when  one  body  recalls  a  similar  body ,

7.  Possession,  as  when  a  property  reminds  us  of  its
owner ;

8.  BeJonginfiT,  as  when  royal  attendants  remind  us  of  the
king;

9.  Relation,  as  when  a  disciple  reminds  us  of  the  teacher,
or  kine  of  a  bull ;

10.  Succession,  as  when  the  pounding  or  noe  reminds  one
of  sprinkling;

J  I,  Absence,  as  of  a  wife ;

12.  Fellow-workers,  as  when  one  disciple  reminds  us  of
the  co-disciples ;

13.  Opposition,  as  when    the    ichneumon    recalls  the
snake;

14.  Pre-eminence,  as  when  investiture  with  the  sacred
string  recalls  the  principal  agent,  the  Guru  or  teacher ;

15.  Receiving,  as  when  a  gift  reminds  one  of  the  giver;

16.  Coveiring,  as   when  a  sword  reminds  one  of  the
sheath;

1 7.  Pleasure  and  pain,  eacH  of  which  recalls  the  oocasioner
of  it;

18.  Desire  and  aversion,  reminding  us  of  their  causes ;

19.  Fear,  remii^ding  us  of  what  is  feared,  such  as  death ;
ao.  Want,  which  makes  us  think  of  those  who  can  supply

our  wants ;

21.  Motion,  as  when  a  shaking  branch  reminds  us  of  the
wind;

22.  Affection,  reminding  us  of  a  son,  &c. ;

23.  Merit  and  Demerit,  whidi  make  us  reflect  on  joys
and  sorrows  of  a  former  life.

Such  lists  are  very  characteristic  of  Hindu  philosophy,
and  they  show  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  a  mistake  in


MORE   PBAMEYAS.  421

ascribe  them  exclusively  to  the  S&mktLya-philosophy.
Though  they  do  not  add  much  to  our  knowledge  of  the
fundamental  tenets  of  'Indian  philosophy,  they  show  once
more  how  much  thought  had  been  spent  in  the  elaboration
of  mere  details ;  and  this,  as  we  are  told  in  this  case  by
the  commentator  himself,  chiefly  in  order  to  stir  up  the
thoughts  of  the  learners,  ^shyavyutp&dan&ya,  to  indepen«
dent  activity.

MACfWMLg9  mot  StonuO.

The  important  point,  however,  which  Gotama  wishes  to
estaolish  is  this,  that  knowledge,  though  belonging  to  the
eternal  Self,  is  not  in  itself  eternal,  but  vanishes  Uke  any
other  act.  He  also  guards  against  the  supposition  that  as
we  seem  to  take  in  more  thcmi  one  sensation  at  the  same
time,  as  in  eating  a.  cake  full  of  different  kinds  of  sweets,
we  ou^ht  to  admit  more  than  one  Manas ;  and  he  explains
that  this  simultaneousness  of  perception  is  apparent,  only,
just  as  the  fiery  circle  is  when  we  whirl  a  firebrand  with
grea^i  I'apidity,  or  as  we  imagine  that  a  number  of  palm-
leaves  aro  pierced  bv  a  pin  at  one  blow,  and  not  in
succession,  one  after  the  other.  Lastly,  he  states  that  the
Manas  is  Atiu,  infinitely  small,  or,  as  we  should  say,  an
atom.

While  the  third  book  waa  occupied  with  the  first  six  of
the  Prameyas,  or  objects  to  be  known  and  proved,  including
the  whole  apparatus  of  knowledge,  such  as  Atman,  Self  or
soul,  Indriyas,  senses,  Manas,  mind,  central  sensorium,
Buddhi,  understanding,  and  iSiarira,  body,  and  therefore
gave  rise  to  some  important  questions  not  onlv  of  meta-

Shysics,  but  of  psychology  also,  the  fourth  book  which  is
evoted  to  the  remaining  six  Prameyas,  such  as  (7)  Pra-
vritti  (activity),  (8)  Dosha  (faults),  (9)  Pretvabh&va  (trans-
migration), (10)  Phala  (rewards),  (11)  DuAkha  (pain),  and
(12)  Apavaxga  (final  beatitude),  is  naturally  of  a  more
practical  character,  and  less  attractive  to  the  student  of
the  problems  of  being  and  thinking.  Some  questions,  how-
ever, are  treated  in  it 'which  cannot  well  be  passed  over,  if


422  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY,

we  wish  to  ^ve  a  full  insight  into  the  w!iole  character^  and
thepractic^ bearing  of  the  Ny&ya-philoflophy.

Though  this  philosophy  is  supposed  to  represent  Indian
logic  only,  we  have  already  seen  enough  of  it  to  know  that
it  included  almost  every  question  within  the  sphere  of
philosophy  and  religion,  and  that  its  chief  object  was  the
same  as  that  of  all  the  other  systems  of  Indian  philosophy,
namely  salvation.

One  of  the  seven  interesting  subjects  treated  here
is  Pretyabh&va,  literally  existence  after  having  departed
this  life,  and  this  is  proved  in  a  very  short  way.  As  the
Self  has  been  proved  to  be  eternal,  Gotama  says  (IV,  lo)  it
follows  that  it  will  exist  after  what  is  called  death.  Some
of  the  objections  made  to  this  tenet  are  easily  disposed  of,
but  nothing  is  said  to  establish  what  is  meant  by  trans-
migration, that  is  being  bom  again  in  another  world  as
either  a  human  or  as  some  other  animal  being,  or  even  as
a  plant.

SzistMiM  Of  ]>«itar.

Another  important  subject,  if  it  is  not  passed  over  alto-
getherj  is  treated  by  Gotama,  as  it  was  by  Kapila,  inci-
dentally only,  I  mean  the  existence  of  a  Deity.  It  comes
in  when  a  problem  of  the  Buddhists  is  under  discussion,
namdy,  whether  the  world  came  out  of  nothing,  and
whether  the  manifestation  of  anything  presupposes  the
destruction  of  its  cause.  This  is  illustrated  by  the  fact
that  the  seed  has  to  perish  before  the  flower  can  appear.
But  Gotama  strongly  denies  this,  and  reminds  the  opponent
that  if  the  seed  were  really  destroyed  by  being  pounded  or
burnt,  the  flower  would  never  appear.  Nor  could  it  be
said  that  the  flower,  if  it  had  not  existed  previously,
destroyed  the  seed,  while,  if  it  had,  it  would  have  owed  its
existence  to  the  simple  destruction  of  the  seed.  Therefore,
he  continues,  as  nothing  can  be  produced  from  nothing,  nor
from  an  annihilated  something,  like  a  seed,  the  world  also
Qannot  have  sprung  from  nothii^^ess,  but  requires  the
admission  of  an  t«vara,  the  Lord,  as  its  real  cause.    And


GAUSS  AND  EFFBOT.  423

this  admitssiou  of  an  tftvara^  even  though  in  the  ci^Mcity
of  a  governor  rather  than  of  a  maker  of  tlie  world,  is  oon-
firmra  by*  what  was  evidently  considered  by  Ootama  as
a  firmly  established  truth,  namely,  that  eveir  act  of  man
invariably  produces  its  result,  though  not  by  itself,  but
under  the  superintendence  of  some  one,  that  is,  of  Idvara.
We  then  meet  with  a  new  argument,  different  from  that  of
the  liiim&msakas,  namely  that,  if  work  done  continued  to
work**  entirely  by  itself,  the  fact  that  some  good  or  evil
deeds  of  men  do  not  seem  to  receive  their  reward  would
remain  unaccounted  for.  This  is  certainly  a  curious  way
of  proving  tt^  existence  of  Qod  by  the  very  argument
which  has  generally  been  employed  by  those  who  want  to
prove  Biis  non-existence.  Qotama's  real  4>bject,  however,
iS  to  refute  the  Buddhist  theory  of  vacuity  (Siinya),  or  of
Nothing  being  the  cause  of  the  world,  ami  afterwards  to
disprove  the  idea  that  effects  can  ever  be  fortuitous.  And
as  Gotama  differs  from  Gautama  in  denying  the  origin  of
the  world  out  of  nothing,  he  also  differs  from  the  Sd^mkhya
philosophers,  who  hold  that  all  things,  as  developed  out  of
rrakriii,  are  real  only  so  long  as  they  are  noticed  by  the
Purusha.  He  holds,  on  the  contrary,  that  some  things  are
real  and  eternal,  but  others  are  not,  because  we  actually
see  both  their  production  and  their  destruction.  If  we
were  to  doubt  this,  we  should  doubt  what  has  been  settled
bv  the  authority  of  all  men,  and  there  would  be  an  end  of
all  truth  and  untruth.  This  ^  is  a  novel  kind  of  argument
for  an  Indian  philosopher  to  use,  and  shows  that  with  aU
the  boldness  of  their  speculations  the^  were  not  so  entirely
different  from  ourselves,  and  not  entirely  indifferent  to  the
SectMTua  judicat  or  bis  terrarum.

If,  however,  we  call  the  NyJLya-philo»Dphy  theistic,  we
should  always  remember  that  such  terms  as  theistic  and
atheistic  are  hardly  applicable  to  Indian  philosophy  in  the
sense  in  which  they  are  used  by  Christian  theologians.
With  us  atheistic  implies  the  denial  of  a  supreme  and

^  Sknralffukil(apnuiiAtva.


424  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

absolute  Being ,  but  we  saw  that  even  the  so-called  atneigm
of  the  S&mkhya-philosophy  does  not  amount  to  that.  It  is
simply  the  deniaf  of  an  Warn,  as  an  active  and  peiBopal
creator  and  ruler  of  the  world.

And  even  such  a  personal  Qod  is  not  altogether  denied
by  the  S&mkhyas ;  they  only  deny  that  He  can'  be  proved
to  exist  by  human  arguments,  and  if  He  exists  as  such,
th«y  hold  that  in  the  eyes  of  philosophers  He  would  be  but
a  phenomenal  manifestation  of  the  Qodhead,  liable  to
change,  liable  even  to  temporary  disappearance  at  the  end
of  each  aeon,  and  to  reappeamnce  at  the  bejrinninir  of
a  new  aeofi.  It  is  this  kinHf  a  divine  being,  a  ^^odbI
Iflvara  or  Lord,  that  is  taken  for  granted  by  the  Nykya
philosophers,  and,  it  may  be  added  at  once,  by  the  YeoBe-
shika  philosophers  also  ^

In  the  Tarka-Samgraha,  for  instance,  it  is  distinctly
stated  that  '  the  Atman  or  Self  is  twofold,  the  &iv&tman

rrsonal  Self),  and  the  Param&tman  (the  Highest  Self).'
mui^t  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  lavara,  the  omni-
scient Lord,  is  Pattmi&tman,  which  is  one  only,  while  the
(riv&tman  is  separate  for  each  individual  body,  all-per-
vading and  eternal.  Though  ParamJLtman  is  l^vara,  l«vara
is  not  Param&tman,  but  a  phenomenal  manifestation  of
Param&tman  only.  The  argument  which  we  met  with
before  is  fully  stated  in  Qo&ma's  Siitras,  IV,  19-21.  The
actions  of  men,  it  is  said,  do  not  always  produce  an  effect
Good  actions  do  not  always  produce  good  results,  nor  bad
.actions  bad  results,  as  they  ought,  if  eveiy  act  continued  to
act  (Karman).  Hence  there  must  be  another  power  that
modifies  the  continuous  acting  of  acts,  and  that  can  be
tfivara  only.  It  is  not  denied  thereby  that  human  actions
are  required,  and  that  no  effects  would  take  place  without
the  working  of  human  agents,  only  they  are  not  the  sole
cause  of  what  happens,  but  we  require  another  power,  an
tsvara,  to  account  for  what  would  otherwise  be  irrational
results  of  human  actions.


BaKantyne,  Christianity  contrasted  with  Ilindn  Philosophy,  p.  ta:
Muir,  0.  S.  T.,  vol.  iii,  p.  133.


BMAKGIPATION.  425


VlMto,  B«w»rdfl.


We  now  oome  to  the  tenth  of  the  Prameyas,  Phala;  and
here  the  same  subj^t  is  treated  once  more»  though  from
a  different  pcmit  of  view.  It  is  asked,  how  are  effiMsts,
rewards  or  punishments,  possible  in  another  life  ?  As  both
good  and  evil  works  are  done  in  this  life,  the  cause,  namelv
tiieee  woriLS,  would  have  ceased  to  exist  long  before  theur
fruit  Is  to  be  gathered.  This  objection  is  met  by  an  illus-
tration taken  from  a  tree  which  bears  fruit  long  after  it
has  ceased  to  be  watered.  The  objector  is  not,  however,
satisfied  with  this,  but,  on  the  contrary,  takes  a  bolder
st^,  and  denies  that  any  effect  either  is  or  is  not,  at
the  same  time.  Ootama  is  not  to  be  frightened  by  this
apparently  Buddhistic  argum^it,  but  appefius  again  to  what
we  should  call  the  common-sense  view  of  the  matter,
namely,  that  we  actually  see  production  and  destruction
before  our  very  eyes.  We  can  see  every  day  that  a  doth,
before  it  has  been  woven,  does  not  exist,  for  no  weaver
world  say  that  the  threads  are  the  cloth,  or  the  cloth  the
threads.  And  if  it  should  be  argued  that  the  fruit  pro-
duced by  a  tree  is  different  from  the  fruit  of  our  acts,
because  there  is  no  receptacle  (Asraya)  or,  as  we  should,
say,  no  subject,  this  is  met  by  the  deckuration  that,  in  the
case  of  good  or  bad  acts,  there  is  a  permanent  receptacle,
namely  the  Self,  which  alone  is  capable  of  perceiving  pain
or  joy  in  this  or  in  any  other  state  of  existence.

BtawaoipAtioa.

After  examining  the  meaning  of  pain,  and  expressing  his
conviction  that  everything,  even  pleasure,  is  full  of  pain,
Gkytama  ac  last  approaches  the  last  subject,  emancipation
(Apavarga).  He  c^^ns  as  usual  with  objections,  such  as
that  it  is  impossible  m  this  life  to  pay  all  our  moral  debts,
that  certain  sacrificial  duties  are  enjoined  as  incumbent  on
us  to  the  end  of  our  lives,  and  that  if  it  is  said  that  a  man
is  freed  from  these  by  old  age,  this  does  not  imply  that,
even  when  he  is  no  longer  able  to  perform  his  daily  duties,
he  should  not  perform  certain  duties,  if  in  thought  only.
If,  therefore,  good  works  continue,  there  will  be  rewartls


4^6  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

for  them,  in  fact  there  will  be  paradise,  thongh  even
would  really  have  to  be  looked  upon  as  an  obstacle  to  real
emancipation.  Nothing  remains  but  a  complete  ^xtinetion
of  all  desires,  and  this  can  be  effected  bv  knowledge  of  the
tmtii  only.  Therefore  knowledge  of  the  truth  or  removal
of  all  false  notions,  is  the  be^nning  and  end  of  all  philo-
sophy, and  of  the  Ny&ya-philosophy  in  particular.  The
firat  step  towards  this  is  the  cessation  of  Ahamk&ra,  here
used  in  the  sense  of  personal  feelmgs,  such  as  de&tre  for
a  beautiful  and  aversion  to  a  deformed  object.  Desire
therefore  has  to  be  eradicated  and  aversion  also ;  but  before
he  explains  how  this  desire,  which  arises  from  false  appre-
hension (Mithy&9^ JLna)  can  be  eradicated,  Qotama  is  carried
back  once  more  to  a  subject  which  had  been  discussed
before,  namely  whether  the  objects  of  desire  exist  as  whdies
or  as  part&  And  this  leads  him  on  to  what  is  the  distin-
guishing doctrine  both  of  the  Ny&ya  and  of  the  Vadaeshika-
philosophies,  namely  the  admission  of  Anus  or  atoma  If
wholes  are  constantly  divided  and  subdivided,  we  should
in  the  end  be  landed  in  nihilism,  but  this  is  not  to  be.
There  cannot  be  annihilation  because  the  Anus  or  the
smallest  parts  are  realities  (lY,  8-82),  and,  according  to
their  very  nature,  cannot  be  further  reduced  or  compressed
out  of  being.  Against  tiiis  view  of  the  existence  of  what  we
should  call  atoms,  the  usual  arguments  are  then  adduced,
nsanely  that  ether  (or  space)  is  everywhere,  and  therefore
in  an  atom  also,  and  if  an  atom  has  figure  or  a  without  and
a  within,  it  is  of  necessity  divisible.  In  reply,  ether  is  said
to  be  intangible,  neither  resistant  nor  obstructing,  that  is,
neither  occupying  space  against  others,  nor  preventing
others  from  occupying  space  ;  and  in  the  end  an  appeal  is
made  to  a  recognised  maxim  of  Hindu  philosophy,  that
there  must  never  be  a  regreeaio  in  irifinitum,  as  there  would
be  in  attempting  to  divide  an  atom.

KnowUdf*  of  Xdmm,  not  of  TMaffs.

And  now  the  opponent,  again,  it  would  seem,  a  B^iddhist,
makes  a  still  bolder  sweep  by  denying  the  existence  of  any
external  things.  All  we  have  is  knowledge,  he  says,  not
things;   nothing  different  from  our  knowledge,  or  inde-


^  SYLLOGISM.  427

pendent  of  our  knowledgei  can  exist  for  us.  Qotama
objects  to  this  pTidy&m&tra)  doctrine,  first  of  all  because,  if
it  were  impossible  to  prove  the  existence  of  any  external
things,  it  would  be  equally  impossible  to  prove  their  non-
exis&nce.  And  if  an  appeal  were  made  to  dreams,  or
visions  produced  by  a  mirage,  or  by  jugglery,  it  should  be
remembered  that  dreams  abo,  like  remembrances,  presup-
pose previous  perception  of  things ;  and  that  even  in  mis-
taking we  mistake  something,  so  that  false  knowledge  can
always  be  removed  by  true  knowledge.  After  granting
that,  one  more  question  arises,  how  that  true  knowledge,
if  once  gained,  is  to  be  preserved,  because  we  saw  t^t
knowledge  is  not  eternal,  but  vanishes.  And  here  the
Ny&ya  suddenly  calls  the  Yoga  to  its  aid,  and  teaches  that
Sam&dhi  or  intense  meditation  will  prove  a  safe  preserva-
tive of  knowledge,  in  spite  of  all  disturbances  from  without,
while  the  Ny&ya-philosophy  retains  its  own  peculiar  use-
fulness as"  employed  in  the  defence  of  truth  against  all
comera,  in  which  case  even  such  arts  as  wrangling  and
cavilling  inay  prove  of  service.

This  "may  seem  a  very  humble  view  to  take  with  r^:ard
to  a  system  of  philosophy  which  at  the  very  outset  promised
to  its  students  final  latitude  as  the  highest  reward.  But
considering  the  activity  of  philosophical  speculation,  of
which- we  have  had  so  many  indications  in  the  ancient  as
well  aaJn  the  modern  history  of  India,  we  can  well  under-
stand that  philosophers,  skilled  in  all  the  arts  and  artifices
of  reasoning,  would  secure  for  their  system  that  high  posi-
tion which  the  Ny&ya  certainly  held  and  still  holds^  among
the  recognised  systems  of  orthodox  philosophy.  It  would
be  useless  to  go  once  more  over  the  topics  from  Oktit
futility,  No.  XI V,  to  No.  XVI,  Nigrahasth&na,  objectionable
proceedings,  which  are  fully  treated  in  the  fifth  book.

UjHogimm,

There  is  one  subject,  however,  which  requires  some  more
special  consideration,  namely  the  Syllogism,  or  the  Five
Members,   treated  as  YII.    This  has  always  excited  the

'  Cowell,  Report  on  the  ToIm  oi  x^uddea,  1867.


428  THDUK  PHILOSOPHY.

speeial  interait  of  European  logieians  on  aooonnt  of
startling  similaritiea  which  no  doubt  exist  between  it  and
the  eyltogism  of  Aiistotiie  and  the  schoolman.  But  from
a  Hindu  point  of  view  this  i^Ilogism  or  even  logic  in
general  is  by  no  means  the  chief  object  of  the  Ny&ya-
philosophy,  nor  is  it  its  exclusive  property.  It  has  bten
fully  discussed  in  the  Ved&nta  and  S&mkhya  systems,  and
oDiA  more  in  the  Vai^eshika ;  but  as  it  forms  &e  pride  of
the  NyHya,  it  will  find  its  most  appropriate  place  her^  ^.

As  we  saw  colour  mentioned  as  the  distinguishing  quality
of  li^ht»  we  found  knowledge  put  forwara  as  the  char-
acteristic feature  of  Self.  Ilie  JNV&ya  looks  upon  know-
ledge as  inseparably  connected  with  the  Self,  though  in  the
larger  sense  of  being  the  cause  of  every  conception  that  has
found  expression  in  langua^.  EjK)wledsey  according  to
the  Ny&va^  is  either  perception  or  rem^nbrance.  Percep-
tion again  is  twofold,  ri^ht  or  wrong.  Right  peroepticm
represents- a  thin^  such  as  it  is,  silver  as  silveir.  This  is  called
truth,  Pramfir.  Wrong  perception  represents  a  thing  as  it
is  not,  mother-of-pean  as  silver.

This  right  perception,  according  to  the'N^&ya-philosophy
is,  as  we  saw,  of  four  kinds,  sensuous,  inferential,  com-
parative, and  authoritative,  and  is  produced  by  perception,
by  inference,  by  comparison,  and  by  revealed  authority.
Here  we  are  brought  back  to  the  Pram&nas  again  whioi
wew  diacossed  in  the  beginning,  but  among  which  one,
Anum&na  or  inference,  receives  here  a  more  special  treat-
ment We  are  thus  obliged,  in  foUowing  the  Sfttras,  to
go  over  some  of  the  ground  again.  Different  systems  of
philosophy  differed,  as  we  saw,  in  the  number  of  Pram&iias
which  they  admit,  according  to  what  each  considers  the
only  trustworthy  channels  of  knowledge.

TwtaUMtm  in  41As«Bt  VhflMi^liioal  0«]ioola.

One,  Pei'ception :  ^&rv&kas.

Ti&OyPerception  and  inference:  Vaifieshikas  and  Buddhists.

^  See  M.  M.,  Appendix  to  Archbishop  Thomson's  Laws  of  Thought;
also  Die  Theorie  den  indischeu  Rationalisten  von  den  Erkeuntnitamitteln,
Ton  R.  G&rbe,  188&


PBAMAJ^AS  IN  DIITER1SNT  PHITX)SOPHIOAL  S0H00L8,     429

Three,  Perception,  inference,   and    word   (revdtttoi)
Sftmkhyat.

Four,  Perception,  inference,  rey^lobion,  ana  comparison
Niuy&yikae.

live.  Perception,  inference,  revelation,  comparison,  and
presumption :  Pntbh&kara  (a  Mlmftmsaka)

Six,  reroeption,  inference,  revelation,  comparison,  pre-
somption,  and  not-bein^ :  Mim&msakas.

Ot&ers  achnit  also  Aitihya,  tradition,  Sambhava»  equiva-
lence, Keabtk,  gesture.

After  sensaons  knowledge,  which  takep  cognisance  of
substances,  qualities,  and  actions,  has  been  examined,  the
question  arises,  how  can  we  know  things  which  are  not
brought  to  us  by  the  senses?  How  do  we  know,  for
instance,  that  there  is  fire  which  we  cannot  see  in  a  moun-
tain, or  that  a  mountain  is  a  volcano,  when  all  that  we  do
see  is  merely  that  the  mountain  smokes)  We  should
remember  that  there  were  three  kinds  of  Anum&na  (Nyftya-
Sfttras  U,  37)  called  Pftrvavat,  having  the  sign  before,  or
as  the  cause,  iSeeiiavat,  having  the  sign  after  or  as  the
effect,  and  S4m&nyatodrishto,  seen  together.  In  the  first
dass  the  sign  of  past  rain  was  the  swelling  of  rivers ;  in
the  second  the  sign  of  coming  rain  was  the  ants  canning
off  tiheir  eggs ;  in  the  third  the  sign  of  the  motion  of  the
sun  was  its  being  seen  in  different  places.  Knowledge  of
things  unseen,  acquired  in  these  three  ways,  is  callea  in-
ferential knowledge  (Anum&na),  and  in'  order  to  arrive  at
it,  we  are  told  that  we  must  be  in  possession  of  what  is
cflJled  a  Vy&pti.  This,  as  we  saw,  was  the  most  important
woid  in  an  Indian  syllogism.  Literally  it  means  pervasion.
Vy&pta  meauB  pervaded ;  Vyiljpya,  what  must  be  pervaded ;

!•    This


Vy&paka,  w^^t  pervades.  This  expression,  to  pervade,  is
used  by  logicians  in  the  sense  of  invariable,  inseparable  or
univeraal  concomitance.  Thus  sea* water  is  always  per-
vaded by  saltness^  it  is  inseparable  from  it,  and  in  this
sense  Yy^pya,  what  is  to  be  pervaded,  came  to  be  used
for  what  we  should  call  the  middle  term  in  a  syllogism.
Vy&ptir  or  invariable  pnnaomitaoee,  may  sometimes  be
taken  as  a  general  rule,  or.  even  as  a  general  law,  in  some
cases  it  is  simply  the  dm  fmd  non.    It  is  such  a  Vyipti,


430  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

for  instance,  that  smoke  is  pervaded  by  oi  invariably  con-
nected with  fire,  or,  as  the  Hindus  say,  that  smokiness  is
pervaded  by  fieriness,  not,  however,  fieriness  by  smokiness.
We  arrive  by  induction  at  the  Vy&pti  that  wherever  there
is  smoke,  there  is  fire,  but  not  that  wherever  there  is  fire,
there  is  smoke.  The  latter  Vy&pti  in  order  to  be  true
would  require  a  condition  or  Upftdhi,  viz.  that  the  fii^wood
should  be  moist.  If  we  once  are  in  possession  of  a  true
Yykj^ti  as  smokiness  being  pervaded  by  fieriness,  we  only
require  what  is  called  groping  or  consideration  (Par&marsa)
in  order  to  make  the  smoke,  which  we  see  rising  from  the
mountain,  a  Paksha  or  member  of  our  Vy&pti,  such  as
'wherever  there  is  smoke,  there  is  fire.'  The  conclusion
then  follows  that  this  mountain  which  shows  smoke,  must
have  fire.

All  this  may  sound  very  clumsy  to  European  logicians,
but  it  would  have  been  easy  enough  to  translate  it  into
our  own  more  technical  language.  We  might  easily  clothe
E[aTi&da  in  a  Grecian  garb  and  make  him  look  almost*  like
Aristotle.  Instead  of  saying  that  inferential  knowledge
arises  from  discovering  in  an  object  something  which  is
always  pervaded  by  something  else,  and  that  the  pervading
predicate  is  predicable  of  all  things  of  which  the  pervaded
predicate  is,  we  might  have  said  that  our  knowled^  that
S  is  P  arises  from  discovering  that  S  is  M,  and  M  ifi  P,  or
with  Aristotle,  6  avXkoyia'iibs  bia  rov  ixiaov  ri  ixpov  r^  Tplri^
b€Uw(ruf.  What  Ean&da  callb  one  member  of  the  pervasion,
Paksha,  e.g.  the  smoking  mountain,  might  have  been  trans-
lated by  subject  or  terminus  minor]  what  pervades,
Vy&paka  or  Sldhya,  e.g.  fieriness,  by  predicate  or  terminus
major;  and  what  is  to  be  pervaded,  Vy&pya, i.e.  smokiness,
by  termin/us  'medius.  But  what  should  we  have  gained
by  this  ?  All  that  is  peculiar  to  Indian  losic  would  have
evaporated,  and  the  remainder  might  have  oeen  taken  for
a  cmmsy  imitation  of  Aristotle.  Mutta  fiunt  eadem,  Bed
aliter,  and  it  is  this  very  thing,  this  aiiter,  that  constitutes
the  principal  charm  of  a  comparative  study  of  philosophy.
Even  such  terms  as  syllogism  or  conclusion  are  incon-
venient here,  because  they  have  with  us  an  historical
colouring  and  may  throw  a  false  light  on  the  subject    The


ANUHAKA  FOB  OTHBBS.  43 1

Sanskrit  Anum&ca  is  not  exactly  the  Greek  &viA'»4fMafui,
but  it  means  measuritig  something  by  means  of  somethmg
else.  This  is  done  by  what  we  may  call  erjrllogism,  but
what  the  Hindus  describe  as  Far&marsa  or  f^roping  or
trying  to  find  in  an  objeet  somethin^^  which  can  be  measored
by  something  else  or  what  can  become  the  member  of
a  pervasion.  This  corresponds  in  fact  to  the  looking  for
a  terminua  medvus.  In  Eapila's  sj^tem  (1, 6i)  the  principal
object  ^of  inference  is  said  to  be  transcendent  truth  that  is,
truth  which  transcends  the  horizon  of  our  senses.  Things
which  cannot  be  seen  with  our  eyes,  are  known  by  in-
ference, as  fire  is,  when  what  is  seen  is  smoke  only.
Gotama  therefore  defines  the  result  of  inference  (I,  loi)  as
knowledge  of  the  connected,  that  is,  as  arising  from  the
perception  of  a  connection  or  a  law.  But,  again,  the  rela-
tion of  what  pervades  and  what  is  pervaded  is  very  different
from  what  we  should  call  the  relative  extension  of  two
concepts.  This  will  become  more  evident  as  we  proceed.
For  tne  present  we  must  remember  that  in  the  case  before
us  the  act  of  proving  by  means  of  Anum&na  consists  in  our
knowing  that^hl^is  In  the  mountain  something  always
pervaded  by,  or  mseparable  from  something  else,  in  our
case,  smoke  always  pervaded  by  fire,  and  that  therefore  the
mountain,  if  it  smokes,  has  fire.

By  this  process  we  arrive  at  Anumiti,  the  result  of
Anum&na,  or  inferential  knowledge,  that  the  mountain  is
a  volcano.  So  much  for  the  inference  for  ourselves.  Next
follows  the  inference  for  others.

Annmiaa  fbv  OUun.

■»

What  foUows  is  taken  from  Annambha^fo's  Compendium.
'The  act  of  concluding,'  he  says,  'is  twofold,  it  being
intended  either  for  one's  own  benefit  or  for  the  benefit  of
others.  The  former  is  the  means  of  arriving  at  knowledge
for  oneself,  and  the  process  is  this.  By  repeated  observa-
tion,  as  in  the  case  of  kitchen  hearths  and  the  like,  we  are
reminded  of  a  rule  (Vy&pti),  such  as  that  wherever  we
have  seen  smoke,  we  hibve  seen  fire.  We  now  approach
a  mountain  and  wonder  whether  there  may  or  may  not  be
fire  in  it.    We  see  the  smoke,  we  remember  the  rule«  and


432  IKBIAN  PHILOSOPHT^

immediatoly  peroeiva  that  the  mountain  itself  is  fierv.  rhis
18  the  pzooeas'when  we  reason  for  oorselveB.

Bat  if  we  have  to  convince  somebody  else  of  whrt  we,
by  inference,  know  to  be  true,  the  case  is  different  We
then  start  with  the  assertion.  The  mountain  is  fiery.  We
are  asked.  Why?  and  we  answer,  Because  it  smoke&
We  then  give  onr  reascm,  or  the  major  premiss,  that  all
that  smokes  is  fiery,  as  yon  may  see,  for  instance,  on  a
Idtchen  hearth  and  the  like.  Now  yon  perceive  that  the
moontain  does  smoke,  and  hence  yon  will  admit  that  I  was
right  when  I  said  that  the  mountain  is  fiery.  This  is  called
tte  fivcrmembered  form  of  exposition,  and  we  five  members
are  severally  called  \ —

(i)  Assertion  (Pratignk),  the  mountain  has  fire;

(aS  Reason  (Hetu  '),  because  it  has  smoke ;

[3)  Instance  (Ud4harana  or  Nidarsana),  look  at  the
kitchen  hearth,  and  remember  the  Vyftptl  between  smoke
«ndfire;

[4)  Application  (IJpanaya),  and  the  mountain  has  smoke ;

[5)  Conclusion  (Nigamana),  therefore  it  has  fire  \*
both  cases  the  process  of  inference  is  the  same,  but

the  second  is.  supposed  to  be  more  rhetorical,  more  per-
suasive, and  therefore  more  useful  in  controversy.

What  is  called  by  Annambha^  the  conclusion  for
oneself,  corrdljponds  totidem  verbis  to  the  first  form  of
Aristotle's  e^llogism: —

All  that  smokes  is  fiery.

The  mountain  smokes;

Therefore  the  mountain  is  fiery.
We  must  not  forget,  however,  that  whatever  there  is
of  formal  Logic  in  these  short  extracts,  has  but  one  object
with  Ootama,  that  of  describing  knowledge  as  one  of  the
qualities  of  the  Self,  and  as  this  knowledge  is  not  confined
to  sensuous  perceptions,  Ootama  feit  it  incumbent  on  him
to  explain  the  nature  and  prove  the  legitimacy  of  the  in-
ferential kind  of  knowledge  aiao     It  is  not  so  mudi  Ip^e

*■  Ayftya-Siiiiras  I,  M.

*  Synonyms  of  Hotn  are  Apadot*     TJntsa.   Prunftna,  mu4   Kaimiyu
Vabeshika-SatrM  IX,  a,  4.

*  The  Vaifeshika  terma  are  (z)  Prali|rftt,  (a)  ApadeMy  (3)  Nidanaaa.

(4)  Anuaamclhana,  (5)  PnttyftmnAya.


anumAna  fob  othehs.  433

as  it  is  noetic  that  interested  KB,ni/ia>.  He  was  clearly
aware  of  the  inseparability  of  inductive  and  deductive
reasoning  The  formal  logician,  from  the  time  of  Aris-
totle to  our  own,  takes  a  purely  technical  interest  in  the
machinery  of  the  human  mind,  he  collects,  he  arranges
and  analyses  the  functions  of  our  reasoning  faculties,  as
they  fall  under  his  observation.  But  the  question  which
occupies  Qotama  is,  How  it  is  that  we  know  any  thing
whiclh.  we  do  not,  nay  which  we  cannot  perceive  bv  our
senses,  in  fact,  how  we  can  justify  inferential  kuDwledffe.
From  this  point  of  view  we  can  easily  see  that  neither  m-
duction  nor  deduction,  if  taken  by  itself,  would  be.  sufficient
for  him.  Deductive  reasoning  may  in  itself  be  most  useful
for  forming  Yy&ptis,  it  may  give  a  variety  of  different
aspects  to  our  knowledge,  but  it  can  never  aad  to  it.  And
if  on  one  side  Gotama  cannot  use  dieduction,  because  it
teaches  nothing  new,  he  cannot  on  the  other  rely  entirely
on  induction,  because  it  cannot  teach  anything  ceitain  or
unconditional.

The  only  object  of  all  knowledge,  according  to  Qotama,
is  aosolute  truth  or  Pramdi.  He  knew  as  weU  as  Aristotle
that  ivayoayri  in  order  to  prove  the  S\a>$  must  be  Sea  -navTtAv^
and  that  this  is  impossible.  Knowledge  gained  by  epagogic
reasoning  is,  strictly  speaking,  always  l-nl  rd  iroAv,  and  not
what  Gotama  would  call  Pramd*.  The  conclusion^  IL,  at
which  Aristotle  arrives  by  way  of  induction,  that  animals
with  little  bile  are  long-lived,  might  be  called  a  VyApti.
He  arrives  at  it  by  stfying  that  man,  horse,  and  mule  (C)
are  long-lived  (A) ;  man,  horse,  and  mule  (C)  have  little  bile
(B);  therefore  aal  animab  with  little  bile  are  long-lived.
Gotama  does  not  differ  much  from  this,  but  he  would
3xpress  himself  in  a  different  way.  He  would  say,  wher-
ever we  see  the  attribute  of  little  oile,  we  also  see  the
attribute  of  long  life,  s  for  instance  in  men,  horses,  mules,
&c.  But  there  he  would  not  stop.  He  would  value  this
Vy&pti  merely  as  a  means  of  establishing  a  new  inile ;  he
^ould  use  it  as  a  means  of  deduction  and  say,  'Now  we
know  that  the  elephant  has  little  bile,  therefore  we  know
also  that  he  is  long-lived/  Or  to  use  another  instance,
where  Aristotle  says  that  all  men   are  mortal.  Eaiidda

28  '^f


434  IKDUN  PHILOSOfHT.

would  say  that  humanity  is  pervaded  by  mortality,  or  that
we  have  never  seen  humanity  without  mortality;  and
where  Aristotle  concludes  that  -kings  av^  morttJ  because
they  belong  to  the  class  of  men,  Gotama,  if  he  ai^^ed  for
himself  on^,  and  not  for  others,  would  say  that  kinghood
is  pervaded  by  manhood  and  manhood  by  mortality,  and
therefore  kings  are  mortal.

I^  would  be  easy  to  bring  objections  against  this  kind  of
reasoning,  and  we  shall  see  that  Indian  philosophers  them-'
selves  ha^e  not  been  slow  in  bringing  them  forward,  and
likewise  in  answering  th^m.  One  thing  can  be  said  in
favour  of  the  Indian  method.  If  we  go  on  accumulating
instances  to  form  an  iiiduction,  if ,  as  in  the  afore>»men-
tioned  case,  we  add  horses,  mules,  men,  and  the  like,  we
approximate  no  doubt  more  and  more  to  a  general  rule,
but  we  never  eliminate  all  real,  much  less  all  possible,
exceptions.  The  Hmdu,  on  the  contrary,  by  saving,
'  Wherever  we  have  seen  the  attribute  of  little  bile,  we  have
observed  long  life,'  or  better  still, '  We  have  never  observed
lon^  life  wimout  the  attribute  of  little  bile,'  and  by  then
^vmg  a  number  of  mere  instances,  and  these  by  way  of
illustmtion  only,  excludes  the  reality,  though  not  the  pos-
sibility, of  exceptions.  He  states,  as  a  fact,  that  wherever
the  one  has  been,  the  other  has  been  seen  likewise,  and
thus  throws  the  onus  probandi  as  to  anv  case  to  the  con-
trary upon  the  other  side.  The  Hindu  knows  the  liature
of  induction  (j^uite  well  enough  to  say  in  the  very,  words  of
European  philosophers,  that  because  in  ninety-nine  cases
a  Yy&pti  ^  or  rule  has  happened  to  be  true,  it  does  not
follow  that  it  will  be  so  in  the  hundredth  case.  If  it  can
be  proved,  however,  that  there  never  has  been  an  instance
where  smoke  was  seen  without  fire,*  the  mutual  inherence
and  inseparable  connection  of  smoke  and  fire  is  more  firmly
established  than  it  woidd  be  by  any  r umber  of  accumulated
actual  instances  where  the  two  have  been  seen  together.

The  conditions  (Upftdhis)  under  which  it  is  allowable  to
form  a  Yy&pti,  that  is  to  say,  to  form  a  universal  rule,
have  greatly  occupied  the  thoughts  of  Hindu  philosophers.

*  'Sata<aA  sahateritayor  api  ▼yabhiAftropalabdha^'    AnunUUiaUiaiMla
of  TattraJHiitlkmani/


imUMiXA  FOB  .OTHERS.  435

Volumes  after  vAlumes  have  Deen  written  on  the  subject,
and  though  thev  may  not  throw  any  new  light  on  the  origin
of  universals^  they  nimish  at  all  events  a  curious  paraHel
to  the  endeavours  of  European  philosophers  in  defence  both
of  inductive  and  deductive  thinking.

It  seems  hardly  time  as  yet  to  begin  to  criticise  the  in-
ductive and  the  deductive  methods  as  elaborated  by  Hindu
philosophers.    We  must  first  know  tliem  more  fully.    Such
objecMons  as  have  hitherto  been  started  were  certainly  not
unknown  to  Gotama  and  Eanfida  themselves.    In  accord-
ance with  their  system  of  Pikrvapaksha  and  Uttarapaksha,
every  conceivable  objection  was  started  by  them  and  care-
fully analjnsed  and  answered.    Thus  it  has  been  pointed
out  by  European  philosophers  that  the  proposition  that
wherever  there  is  smoke  there  is  fire,  would  really  lose  its
universal  character^  by  the  introduction  of  the  instance,
'  BS  on  the  kitchen  hearth.'    But  the  Hindu  logicians  also
were  perfectly  aware  of  the  fact  that  this  instance  is  not
essential  to  a  syllogism.    They  look  upon  the  instance
simbly  as  a  helpful  reminder  for  controversial  purposes,  as
an  illustration  to  assist  the  memory,  not  as  an  essential
part  of  the  process  of  the  proof  itself.    It  is  meant  to
remind  us  that  we  must  look  out  for  aVyd^pti  between  the
smoke  which  we  see,  and  the  fire  which  is  implied,  but  not
seen.    It  is  therefore  in  rhetorical  qrllogifflns  or  syllogisms
for  others  only  that  the  instance  has  its  proper  place.    In
Sfttra  I,  35  Qotama  says,  '  The  third  member  or  example
iflTsome  familiar  case  of  the  fact  which,  through  its  having
a  character  which  is  invariably  attended  by  that  whicn
is  to  be  established,  establishes  (in  conjunction  with  the
i*eason)  the  existence  of  that  character  which  is  to  be
established'    It  is  Indian  rhetoric  therefore  far  more  than
Indian  logic  that  is  responsible  for  the  introduction  of  this
third  member  which  «,ontains  the  objectionable  instance;
and  rhetoric,  though  it  is  not  logic,  yet,  as  Whately  says,  is
an  offihoot  of  logia

^  Rlttor,  Hittoiy  of  Philosophy,  ly,  p.  365,  Myt  that  <  two  mombon
of  Kasi4<U's  -Argainent  are  evidently  superlluoue,  while,  by  the  intro-
daction  of  an  example  in  the  third,  the  universality  of  the  conclueion
ia  vitiated.'

Ffa


436  INDIAN  PHILOSOFHY.

Hie  fact  is  that  Gotama  careB  far  more  for  the  f ornuitioii
of  a  Vy&pti,  pervasion,  than  for  the  maimer  in  which  it
may  serve  hereafter  as  the  basis  of  a  syllogism,  which  mnst
depend  on  the  character  of  the  .Vy&ptL  A  Vy&pti  was
considered  as  threefold  in  the  school  of  Gotama,  as  Anvaya-
vyatireki,  Keval&nvayi,  and  Kevala-vyatireki.  The  first,
the  Anvaya-vyatireki,  present  and  absent,  is  illustrated  by
sucn  a  case  as,  Where  there  is  smoke,  there  is  fire,  and
where  fir^  is  not,  smoke  is  not.  The  second,  or  Ke\al&n-
yjffif  i-s.  present  only,  is  illustrated  by  such  a  case  as,
"^^^tever  is  cognisable  is  nameable,  where  it  is  impossible
to  bring  forwi^  anything. that  is  not  cognisable.  The
third  case,  or  Eevala-vyatireki,  is  illustrated  by  a  case
such  as.  Earth  is  different  from  the  other  elements,  because
it  is  odorous.  Here  we  could  not  go  on  and  say,  all  that
is  different  from  the  other  elements  has  odour,  because  the
only  case  in  point  (Ud&harana)  would  asain  be  earth.
But  we  have  to  say,  what  is  not  different  nrom  the  other
elements  is  not  odorous,  as  water  (by  itself).  But  this
earth  is  not  so,  is  not  inodorous,  and  therefore  it  is  not
not-different  from  the  other  elements,  but  different  from
them,  q,e.d,

,  Muidi  attention  has  also  been  paid  by  Hindu  philoso-
phers to  the  working  ox  the  Up&dhis  or.  conditions  assigned
to  a  Vyd^pti.  Thus  in  the  ordinary  Vy&pti  that  there  is
smoke  in  a  mountain,  beca^ise  there  is  fire,  the  presence  of
wet  fuel  was  an  Up&dhi,  or  indispensable  condition.  This
UpJUlhi  pervades  what  is  to  be  established  (S&dhya-vy&-
paka),  in  this  case,  fire,  but  it  does  not  pervade  what
establishes  (S&dhana-vyipaka),  i.e.  smoke,  because  fire  is
not  pervaded  by  or  invariably  accompanied  by  wet  fuel,
as,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  a  red-hot  iron  ball,  where
we  have  really  fire  without  smoke..  Hence  it  would  not
follow  by  necessity  that  there  is  fire  uecause  there  is  smoke,
or  that  there  is  no  fire  because  there-  is  no  smoke.  How
far  the  Indian  mind  may  go  in  these  minutiae  of  reasoning
may  be  seen  from  the  following  instance  given  by  Dr.  Bal-
lantyne  in  his  Lectures  on  the  Wyfitya-philosophy,  founded
chiefly  on  the  Tarkasamgraha,  p.  59 : —

'  To  be  the  constant  aceom.panier  of  what  i^  to  be  esta-


i


ANUMANA   FOB  OTHERS.  437

blished  (S&dhyarVy&pakatva)  consists  in  the  not  being  the
counter-ectity  (Apratiyogitva)  of  any  absolute  non-exist-
ence (Atyantabh&va)  having  the  same  subject  of  inhesion

Saman&dhikarana)  as  that  which  is  to  be  established.

^o  be  not  the  constant  accompanier  of  the  argument
(S&dhan4vy&pakatva)  consists  in  the  being  the  counter-
entity  (Pratiyo^tva)  of  some  absolute  non-existence  ^not
impossibly]  resident  in  that  which  possesses  [the  character
tendeired  as  an]  argument.'

The  credit  of  tms  translation  belong  not  to  me,  but  to
the  late  Dr.  Ballantyne,  who  was  assisted  in  unravelling
these  cobwebs  of  Nyaya  logic  by  the  Ny&ya-Pandits  of  the
Sanskrit  College  at  Benares.  Such  native  aid  would  seem
to  be  almost  indispensable  for  such  an  achievement.


V


CHAPTER  IX.

VAISE8HIKA  PHILOSOPHT.
D«to  of  #&tnui.

It  is  fortunate  that  with  regard  to  the  Vaimhika
philosophy,  or  rather  with  re^rd  to  the  Vaiaeshika-Sfttras,
we  are  able  to  fix  a  date  b3ow  which  their  composition
cannot  be  placed.  In  the  year  1885  Professor  Leumann,
well  known  by  his  valuable  researchep  in  Craina  literature,
published  an  article, '  The  old  reports  on  the  schisms  of  the
(zainas/  in  the  Indiache  Studieny  XVII,  pp.  91-135.  Among
the  various  heresies  there  mentioned,  the  sixth,  we  are
told,  p.  121,  was  founded  by  the  author  of  the  Yaisediya-
Butta  of  the  ChaulA  race,  and  hence  called  Chauldga  \  If
there  could  be  any  doubt  that  this  is  meant  for  the  Yai^-
shika-SAtras  it  would  at  once  be  dispersed  by  the  144
so-called  points  of  that  system,  as  mentioned  by  the  author,
Crinabhadiu.  6rinabhadi*a's  date  is  fixed  by  Professor  Leu-
iiiann  in  the  eighth  century  a.d.,  and  is  certainly  not  later.
This,  it  is  time,  is  no  great  antiquity,  still,  if  we  consider
the  age  of  our  S^mkhya-S&tras,  referred  now  to  the
thirteenth  centurj^  A.D.,  even  such  a  date,  if  only  certain,
would  be  worth  having.  But  we  can  make  another  step
backward.  Haribhadra,  originally  a  Br&hman,  but  con-
verted to  (?ainism,  has  left  us  a  work  called  the  Shacfdar-
^anasamuMaya-sutram,  which  conta^'ns  a  short  abstract  of
the  six  Dar^anas  in  which  the  Vaij^eshika-darsana  is  de-
scribed as  the  sixth,  and  in  that  description  likewise  we
meet  with  tlie  most  important  technical  terms  of  the
Vai^shika.  This  short  but  important  text  was  published
in  the  first  volume  of  the  Giomale  ddla  Societd  Aeiatiook

^  Could  this  U)  meant  for  Auluka  ?


DATES   FBOM   TIBETAN   SOUBOES.  439

RalrUma,  1887,  and  Sanskrit  scholarship  is  greatly  indebted
to  Profesi^r  C.  Pcuni  for  this  and  other  vwiable  contrilSb-
tions  of  his  to  0aina  literature.  The  author,  Harib}uMlra»
died  in  10.55  0^  ^^^  Vira-era»  i.e.  585  Samvat,  that  is
528  A.D.  This  would  give  us  an  attesi^tion  for  the  Vaise-
shika-Sfttras  as  early  as  that  of  the  S&mkhya-k&iik&s,
if  not  earlier,  and  it  is  curious  to  observe  that  in  Hari-
bhadra's  time  the  number  six  of  the  Daraanas  was  already,
firmhr  established.  For,  after  describing  the  (1)  Bauddha,
(2)  Naiyfi.yika,  (3)  S&mkhya,  (4)  ffaina,  (5)  Vaweshika,*  and
(6)  Gaiminlya  systems,  he  remarks,  that  if  some  consider
the  Vaiaeshika  not  altogether  different  from  the  Nykya,
there  would  be  only  five  orthodox  systems  (Istika),  but
that  in  t^t  case  the  number  six  could  be  completed  by  the
Lok&yita  (sic)  system  which  he  proceeds  to  describe,  but
which,  of  course,  is  not  an  Astika,  but  a  most  decided
N&stika  syisrf^m  of  philosophy.  It  is  curious  to  observe
that  here  again  the  Vedftnta-philosophy,  and  the  Yoga  also,
are  passed  over  in  silence  by  the  &amas,  though,  for  reasons
explained  before,  we  have  no  ri^ht  to  conclude  from  this
that  these  systems  had  at  that  tiii;ie  not  yet  been  reduced
to  a  systematic  form  like  tike  other  four  Daraanas. .  What
we  learn  from  this  passage  is  that  early  in  the  sixth  cen^
tury  A.i>.  the  Ny&ya,  Samkhya,  Vaiseshika,  and  P&rva-
MbniMhak  systems  of  philosophy  formed  the  subject  of
scientific  study  among  the  (?amas,  and  we  may  hope  that
a  further  search  for  uaina  MSS.  may  bring  us  some  new
discoveries,  and  some  further  li^ht  on  the  chronological
development  of  philosophical  studies  in  India.

Whenever  we  shall  know  more  of  the  sources  from  which
Tibetan  writers  derived  their  information  about  Indian
literary  matters,  more  light  may  possibly  come  from  thence
on  the  dates  of  the  Indiw  philosophical  systems  of  thought
also.  It  is  true  that  the  introduction  of  Buddhism  into
Tibet  dates  from  the  eighth  century  only,  but  the  trans-
lators of  Sanskrit  originals,  such  as  jS&nti  Bakshita,  Fadma
Sambhava,  Dliarmakirti,  Dipamkara  Srigfi&na,  and  others,
may  have  been  in  possession  of  much  earlier  information.


440  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.

In  an  account'  of  King  Kanislika  (85—106  a.d.)  and  his
Great  Council  under  Vasumitra  and  Piir^iaka,  we  read  that
there  was  at  that  time  in  Kashmir  a  Buddhist  01  the  name
of  SatvB,  who  maintained  a  large  Buddhist  congregation
headed  by  a  sage  Dharmarakshita,  and  he  is  said  to  have
belonged  to  the  Yai&eshika  school  *.  This  would  prove  the
existence  of  the  Vai^eshika  philosophy  in  the  first  century
A.D.,  a  date  so  welcome  that  we  must  not  allow  ourselves
to  accept  it  till  we  know  what  authority  there  was  for  the
Tibetan  writers  to  adopt  it.  It  is  taken  from  Siunp&hi
Choijtlng,  and  the  same  authority  states  that  after  the
death  of  Kanishka,  a  rich  householder  of  the  name  of  Jati
who  lived  at  A^vaparanta  in  the  north,  invited  Vasunetra,
a  monk  of  the  Vaiseshika  school,  from  Maru  in  the  west,
and  another,  Gosha  Sa-wigha  from  Bactria,  and  supported
the  native  clergy,  consisting  of  three  hundred  thousan^?
monks,  for  a  period  of  ten  years.


Although  Ny&ya  and  Vaiseshika  have  been  often  treated
as  sister  philosophies,  we  must,  after  having  examined
Gotama's  philosophy,  give,  for  the  sake  of  completeness,  at
least  a  general  outline  of  KaTi&da's  system  also.  It  does
not  contain  much  that  is  peculiar  to  it,  and  seems  to  pre-
suppose much  that  we  found  already  in  the  other  systema
Even  the  theory  of  Anus  or  atoms,  generally  cited  as  its
peculiar  character,  was  evidently  known  to  the  Ny&ya,
though  it  is  more  fully  developed  by  the  Vaieeshikas.  It
begins  with  the  usual  promise  of  teaching  something  from
which  springs  elevation  or  the  suTnvium  b<muin,  and  that
something  Kaii&da  calls  Dharma  or  merit.  From  a  par-
ticular kind  of  merit  springs,  according  to  KaTi&da,  true
knowledge  of  certain  Pad&rthas,  or  categories,  and  from
this  oncife  more  the  sv/m7nu7n  bonum.  These  cate^ries,  of
which  we  spoke  before  as  part  of  the  Ny&va-philosophy,
embrace  the  whole  realm  of  knowledge,  and  are:  (i)  sub-
stance, Dravya ;  (2)  quality,  Guiwi ;  (3)  action,  Earman ;
(4)  genus   or  community,  S&m4nya,  or  what  constitutes

^  Jouniftl  of  Buddhist  Text  Society,  voL  I»  p.  i  aeq.
'  Ibid.,  Tol.  I.  part  3,  p.  19.


QUALITI&S.  441

a  genus ;  (5)  species  or  particularity,  V ii^^aa,  or  what  con*
stitutes  an  individual ;  (6)  inhesion  or  inseparability,  Sama-
v&ya ;  (7)  according  to  some,  privation  or  negation,  Abh&va.
These  are  to  be  considered  by  means  of  their  mutual
similarities  and  dissimilarities,  that  is^  by  showing  how
they  differ  and  how  far  they  agree.  Here  we  have,  indeed,
what  comes  much  nearer  to  Aristotle's  categories  than
Gotama's  Pad&rthas.  Thes6  categories  or  predicaments
were  believed  to  contain  an  enumeration  of  ».ll  things
capable  of  being  named,  Le.  of  being  known.  If  the
number  of  Aristotle's  categories  was  controverted,  no  wonder
that  those  of  Kari&da  should  have  met  with  the  same  fate.
It  has  always  been  a  moot  point  whether  Abh&va,  non-^
existence,  deserves  a  place  among  them,  while  some  philo-
sophers were  anxious  t>o  add  two  more,  namely,  ^akti,
potentia,  and  S&drisya^  similitude.

SnlbvlMioM.

I.  The  substances,  according  to  the  Vai^jeshikas,  are:
(1)  earth,  PWthivi;  (2)  water,  ApaA;  (3)  light,  Tegras ;  (4)
air,  V&yu;  (5)  ether,  AksLaa;  (6)  time,  Eala;  (7)  space,  Di»;
(8)  self,  Atman ;  (9)  mind,  Manas.  These  substances  cannot
exist  without  qualities,  as  little  as  qualities  can  exist  with-
out substances.  The  four  at  the  head  of  the  list  are  either
eternal  or  non-eternal,  and  exist  either  in  the  form  of
atoms  (Anus)  or  as  material  bodies.  The  non-eternal  sub-
stances again  exist  as  either  inorganic,  organic,  or  as  or^ns
of  sense.  The  impulse  given  to  the  atoms  comes  from  God,
and  in  that  restricted  sense  the  Yai^eshika  has  to  be
accepted  as  theiiitic.  God  is  Atman  in  its  highest  form.
In  itis  lower  form  it  is  the  individual  soul.  The  former  is
one,  and  one  only,  the  latter  are  innumerable.

II.  The  principal  qualities  of  these  substances  are:
(i)  colour  R^pa,  in  earth,  water,  and  light;  (2)  taste,  Rasa,
m  earth  and  water ;  (3)  smell,  Qandha,  in  earth ;  (4)  touch,
Sparsa,  in  earth,  water,  li^ht,  and  air;  (5)  number,  Sam-
khy&,  by  which  we  perceive  one  or  many;  (6)  extension
or  quantity,  Parim&na;    (7)   individuality   or   severalty,


442  INDIAU   PHILOSOPflT.

PWihaktva;  (h)  *  conjunction,  Samyoga,  (9)  disjunction,
Viyoga ;  (10)  priority, Baratva ;  (i i)^  pcwteriority, Aparatva ;
(12)  thought,  Buddhi ;  (13-14)  pleasure  and  pain,  Sukha-
duAkha;  (15-16)  desire  and  aversion,  I&£A&-dveshau;  (17)-
will,  effort,  Prayai^na.

in.  The  principal  actions  affecting  the  substances  are:
(i)  throwing  upwards,  Utkshepana;  (2)  throwing  dawn-
wards,  Avakshepatia  (or  Apa);  (3)  contracting,  AkxJtkmB.]
(4)  expanding,  Uts&raTia  (or  Pras*);  (5)  going,  Gamana.
Tliese  actions  or  movements  are  sometimes  identified  with
or  traced  back  to  the  Samsk&ras,  a  word  difficult  to
translate,  and  which  has  been  rendered  by  dispositionB  and
instincts,  as  applied  to  either  animate  or  inammate  bodies.
These  Sa^nskd^ras^  have  an  important  position  both  in
the  S&mkhyar  and  in  the  Bauddha-philosophies.  In  the
Tarkadipik&  Samsk&ra  is  rendered  even  by  OkH  (gktih
samsk&i^tmik&  bhavati),  i. e.  nature  or  inborn  peculiarity;
and  in  the  Tarkasamgraha  it  is  represented  as  threefold
(VegeJi,  Bh&van&,  and  Sthitisthd^pakaA).

In  the  SAtras  which  follow,  KaTi&da  tries  to  point  out
certain  features  which  the 'three  categories  of  substance,
quality,  and  action  share  in  common,  and  others  which  are
peculiar  to  two,  or  to  one  only.  In  the  course  of  thi?  discus-
sion he  has  frequently  to  dwell  on  the  effects  which  they
produce,  and  he  therefore  proceeds  in  the  next  lesson  to
examine  the  meaning  of  cause  and  effect,  and  likewise  of
genus,  species,  and  individuals.  It  may  be  that  the  name
of  Vaiseshika  was  given  to  Kari&da's  philosophy  from  the
differences,  or  Viseshas,  which  he  establishes  oetween  sub-
stances, qualities,  and  actions,  or,  it  may  be,  from  Yi^esha
as  a  name  of  individual  things,  applicable  therefore  to
atoms.  But  this,  in  the  absence  of  decisive  evidence,  must
for  the  present  remain  undetermined.

^  Here  follow  in  some  lists  as  zi  to  15,  gravity,  fluidity,  ri&didity,  and
sound.  l*he  remaining  Gunas  are  said  to  be  perceptible  by  the  mental
organ  only,  not  by  the  organs  of  sense.

*  Here  again  some  authorities  add  Dharma,  virtue,  and  Adharma,  Tioe^
Samsk&ra,  faculty  or  disposition,  and  Bh&vana,  imagination.

'  See  Garbe,  Siinikhya,  p.  269  tteq.


QUALITIES   EX>MINE!D.  443


As  to  cause  and  effecfc,  Ea9i&da  remarks  that  cause  pre-
cedes the  effect,  but  that,  m  order  to  be  a  true  cause,  it
must  be  a  constant  antecedent,  and  the  effect  must  be
unconditionally  subsequent  to  it.  There  is  an  importcmt
and  often  neglected  difference  between  Efiratia  and  K&rana.
E&rana,  though  it  may  mean  cause,  is  properly  the  instru-
mental cause  01^,  or  simply  the  instrument.  An  axe,  for
instance,  is  the  ^krana,  or  instrument,  in  felling  «» tree,  but
it  18  not  the  E&rana,  or  cause.  Causes,  according  to  Ka^i&da,
are  threefold,  intimate,  non-intimate,  and  instrumental.
The  threads,  for  instance,  are  the  intimate  cause  of  the
cloth,  the  sewing  of  the  threads  the  non-intimate,  and  the
shuttle  the  instrumental  cause.

In  the  second  book  KaTi&da  examines  the  qualities  of
earth,  water,  &c.  He,  like  other  philosophers,  ascribes  four
qualities  to  earth,  three  to  water,  two  to  light,  one  to  air
(AkJLsa).  These  are.  the  principal  and  characteristic  quali-
ties, but  others  are  mentioned  afterwards,  making  alto-
gether fourteen  for  earth,  such  as  colour,  taste,  smell,  touch,
number,  extension,  individuality,  conjunction,  di^unction,
genus,  species,  gravity,  fluidity,  and  permanence  (II,  i,  31).
Qualities  ascribed  to  l«vara,  or  the  Lord,  are  number,
^uwledge,  desire,  and  volition.  In  the  case  of  air,  which
is  invisible,  he  uses  touch  as  a  proof  of  its  existence,  also
the  rustling  of  leaves ;  and  he  does  this  in  order  to  show
that  air  is  not  one  only.  Curiously  enough  Ean&da,  after
explaining  that  there  is  no  visible  mark  of  air  (II,  i,  15)
but  that  its  existence  has  to  be  proved  by  inference  and  by
revelation  (II,  i,  17),  takes  tlic  opportunity  of  proving,  as
it  were,  by  the  way.  the  existence  of  God  (II,  i,  18)  by
saying  that '  work  and  word  are  the  signs  of  tne  substantial
existence  of  beings  different  from  ourselves.'  This,  at  least,
is  what  the  commentators  read  in  this  Siitra,  and  they
include  under  beings  different  from  ourselves,  not  only  God,
but  inspired  sages  also.  It  seems  difficult  to  undei*stand
how  such  things  as  earth  and  the  name  of  earth  could  be
claimed  as  the  work  of  the  sages,  but,  as  far  as  God  is


444  INDIAK  PHILOSOPHT.

concerned,  it  setAnIs  certain  that  Ean&da  thinks  he  is  tfble
to  proVe  His  existence.  His  omnipotence  and  omniscienoe
by  two  facts,  that  His  name  exists,  and  that  His  works
exist,  perceptible  to  the  senses.

Immediately  afterwards,  Kan&da  proceeds  to  prov«  the
existence  of  AkJU^a,  ether,  by  showing  that  it  must  exist  in
order  to  account  for  the  existence  of  sound,  which  is  a
quality,  and  as  such  requires  the  substratum  of  an  eternal
and  special  substance,  as  shown  before.  The  questilon  of
sound  is  treated  again  more  fully  II,  2,  21-37.

A  distinction  is  made  afterwards  between  characteristic
and  adventitious  qualities.  If  a  garment,  for  instance,  is
perfumed  by  a  flower,  the  smell  is  only  an  adventitious
quality  of  the  garment,  while  it  is  characteristic  in  the
case  of  earth.  Thus  heat  is  characteristic  of  light,  cold  of
water,  &a

Tim*.

Time,  which  was  one  of  the  eternal  substances,  is  declared
to  manifest  its  existence  by  such  marks  as  priori^,  poe^ri-
ority,  simultaneity,  slowness,  and  quickness.  The  argu-
ments in  support  of  the  substantiality  of  air  and  ether
apply  to  time  also,  which  is  one,  while  its  divisicm  into  past,
present,  and  future,  hibernal,  vernal,  and  autumnal,  is  due
to  extrinsic  circumstances,  such  as  the  sun's  revolutions.
Time  itself  is  one,  eternal,  and  infinite.

Space,  again,  is  proved  by  our  perceiving  that  one  thing
is  remote  from  or  near  to  another.  Its  oneness  is  proved
as  in  the  case  of  time ;  and  its  apparent  diversity,  such  as
east,  south,  west,  and  north,  depends  likewise  on  extrinsic
circumstances  only,  such  as  the  rising  and  setting  of  the
sun.    Like  time  it  is  one,  eternal,  ana  infinite.

So  far  Kanftda  has  been  chiefly  occupied  with  external
substances,  their  qualities  and  activities,  and  he  now  pro-
ceeds, according  to  the  prescribed  order,  to  consider  the
eighth  substance,  viz.  Atman,  the  Self,  the  first  in  the  list
of  his  sixteen  Padllrthas.  Like  Qotama,  EanAda  also  argues
that  the  Atman  must  be  different  from  the  senses  because


ANUB  OB  ATOMS.  445

whilo  the  senses^  apprehend  each  its  ow:i  object  oxily —
(1)  the  sense  of  heariog,  sound ;  (a)  the  sense  of  smeUmg,
oaour;  (3]  the  sense  of  tasting,  savour;  (4)  the  sense  of
seeing/ colour ;  (5)  the  sense  of  feeling,  touch;  it  follows
that  there  must  be  something  else  to  apprehend  them  all,
the  work  which  in  other  philosophies  was  ascribed  to
Manas,  at  least  in  the  first  instance.  Besides,  the  organs
of  sense  are  bht  instruments,  and  as  such  unconscious,  c*n^
they  .require  an  agent  who  employs  them.  If  we  see  a
number  of  chariots  skilfully  driven,  we  know  there  must
.be  a  charioteer,  and  we  know  also  that  chariots  and  horses
are  different  from  the  charioteer.  The  same  applies  to  the
senses  of  the  body  and  to  the  Self,  and  shows  that  the
senses  by  themselves  could  not  perform  the  work  that
.  results  in  cognition.  In  defending  this  argument  against
all  possible  objections,  Eaiz^da,  following  the  example  of
Gotama,  is  drawn  away  \nto  a  discussion  of  what  is  a
valid  and  what  is  an  invalid  argument,  and  more  par-
ticularlv  into  an  examination  of  what  is  a  Yy&pti,  or  an
invariable  concomitance,  fit  to  serve  as  a  true  foundation
for  a  syUogism.


But  he  soon  leaves  this  subject,  and,  without  finishing  it,
proceeds  to  a  consideration  of  Manas,  the  ninth  and  last  of
the  t>ravyas  or  substances.  This,  too,  is  to  him  much  the
same  that  it  was  to  Gotama,  who  treats  it  as  the  sixth  of
the  Prameyas.  In  this  place,  as  we  saw,  Manas  might  be
translated  by  attention  rather  than  by  mind.

Anxm  or  Atoms.

What  is  thought  to  be  peculiar  to  Ean&da,  nay  the  dis-
tinguishing feature  of  his  phihDSophy,  is  the  theory  of  Atius
or  atoms.  They  take  the  place  of  the  Tanm&tras  in  the
S&mkhya-philosophy.  Though  the  idea  of  an  atom  is  not
unknown  m  the  Ny&ya-philosophy  (Ny&ya-Sfttras  IV,  2,
4-25),  it  is  nowhere  so  fully  worked  out  as  in  the  Vai«e-
shika.  Kan&da  argued  that  there  must  be  somewhere  a
smallest  thing,  that  excludes  further  analysis.  Without
this  admission,  we  should  have  a  regreasus  oil  infitn/UuTa^
a  most  objectionable  process  in  the  eyes  of  all  Indian  philo-


446  INDIXN  PHILOSOPHY.

sophers.  A  mountain,  he  says,  would  not  be  larger  than
a  mustard  seed.  These  smallest  and  invisible  particles  are
held  by  EaTi&da  to  be  eternal  in  themselves,  but  aon-etemal
as  aggregates.  As  aggregates  again  they  may  be  oiganised,
organs,  and  inorganic.  Thus  the  human  body  is  earth
organised,  the  poiver  of  smelling  is  '^he  earthly  organ,
stones  are  inorganic.

It  is,  no  doubt,  very  tempting  to  ascribe  A  Greek  origin
to  Ean&da's  theory  of  atom&  But  suppose  that  the  atcnaie
theory  had  really  been  borrowed  from  a  Greek  source,
would  it  not  be  strange  that  KanAda's  atoms  i^  snpnoeed
never  to  assume  visible  dimensicms  till  there  is  a  combina-
tion of  three  double  atoms  (Tryatiuka),  neither  the  simple
nor  the  double  atoms  being  supposed  to  be  visible  oy
themselves.  I  do  not  remember  anything  like  this  in
Epicurean  authors,  and  it  seems  to  me  to  give  quite  an
independent  character  to  Ean&da's  view  of  the  nature  of
an  atom.

We  are  told  that  water,  in  its  atomic  state,  is  eternal,  ae
an  aggregate  transient.  Beings  in  the  realm  of  Varutia
(god  of  the  sea)  are  organised,  taste  is  the  watery  organ,
rivers  are  water  inorganic.

Light  in  its  atomic  state  is  eternal,  as  an  aggregate
transient.  There  are  organic  luminous  bodies  in  me  sun,
sight  or  the  visual  ray  is  the  luminous  organ,  bumipg  fires
are  inorganic.

Air,  again,  is  both  atomic  and  an  aggregate.  Beings  of
the  air,  spirits,  &c.,  are*  organised  air ;  touch  in  the  skin
is  the  aerial  organ,  wind  is  inorganic  air.  Here  it  would
seem  as  if  we  Imd  something  not  very  unlike  the  doctrine
of  Empedocles,  ratty  ijl(v  yap  yaxav  oTrdvofJLtv^  vbari  d*  vbo^p
AlOipi  0  aldipablov,  irap  irvpl  injp  aibrfXov.  But  though  we
may  discover  the  same  thought  in  the  philosophies  of
KaTilUla  and  Empedocles,  the  foi*m  which  it  takes  in  India
is  characteristically  different  from  its  Greek  form.

Ether  is  always  eternal  and  infinite.'  The  sense  of  hear-
ing is  the  ethereal  organ :  nay,  it  is  supposed  by  some  that
ether  is  actually  contained  in  the  ear.

As  to  atoms,  they  are  suppased  to  form  first  an  BggreggJbe
of  two,  then  an  aggregate  of  three  double  atoms,  then  of


S  AM  A  V  ATA.  447

four  triple  atoms,  and  so  on.  While  single  ^tbms  are  inde-
stnictible,  composite  atoms  are  by  their  very  nature  liable
to  deeompcsitiony  and,  in  that  sense,  to  destructioti.  An
atom,  b^  itself  invisible,  is  compared^  to  the  sixth  part  of
a  mote  in  a  sunbeam.


IV.  As  to  S&m&nya,  community,  or,  as  we  should  say,
mus,  the  fourth  of  KanSuiekS  categories,  it  is  supposed  to
i  eternal,  and  a  property  common  to  several,  and  abiding
in  substance,  in  quality,  and  in  action.  It  is  distinguished
by  degrees,  as  fiigh  and  low ;  the  highest  Sftm&nya,  or,  as
we  should  say,  tiie  highest  genus  (6&ti)  is  Satt&,-mere
being,  afterwards  differentiated  by  XJp&dhis,  or  limitations,
and  developed  into  ever  so  many  subordinate  species.  The
Buddhist  .pnilosophers  naturally  deny  the  existence  of  such
a  cate^ry,  and  maintain  that  all  our  experience  has  to  do
with  smgle  objects  only.


V.  These  single  objects  are  what  Eaoi&da  comprehends
under  his  fifth  category  of  Vi^esha,  or  that  which'  consti-
tutes the  individuality  or  separateness  of  any  object.  This
also  is  supposed  to  abide  in  eternal  substances,  so  that  it
seems  to  have  been  conceived  not  as  a  mere  abstraction,
but  as  fiomething  real,  that  was  there  and  could  be  dis-
covered by  means  of  analysis  or  abstraction.


VI.  The  last  category,  with  which  we  have  met  several
times  l^efore,  is  one  peculiar  to  Indian  philosophy.  Sama-
v&ya  is  translated  by  inhesion  or  inseparability,  ^ith
Kan&da  also  it  is  different  from  mere  connection,  Samyoga,
such  tA  obtains  between  horse  and  rider,  or  between  milk
and  water  mixed  togf>ther.  There  is  Samav&ya  between
threads  and  cloth,  between  father  and  son,  between  two
halves  and  a  whole,  between  cause  and  effect,  between  sub-
stances and  qualities,  the  two  being  interdependent  and
therelore  inseparable.

Thou^^h  this  relationship  is  known  in  non-Indian  philo-
sc^hitis,  it  has  not  received  a  name  of  its  own,  though


448  INDIAN  PHIL080PHT.

such  a  term  r^ight  have  proved  very  useful  in  sevAral
controversies.  The  relation  between  thought  and  word,
for  instance^  is  not  Samyoga,  but  Samav&ya,  insepar-
ableness.

AUi4t».

VII.  In  addition  to  these  six  categories^  some  logicians
required  a  negative  category  also,  that  of  Abh&va  or
ab&ence.  And  this  also  they  divided  into  different  kinds,
into  (i)  Prftgabh&va,  former  not-being,  applying  io  the
cloth  before  it  was  woven ;  (a)  Dhvamsa,  subsequent  non-
being,  as  when  a  jar,  being  smashed,  exists  no  longer  as
ajar;  and  (3)  Atyantkbh&va,  absolute  not-being,  an  impos-
sibility, such  as  the  son  of  a  barren  woman ;  (4)  Anyonya-
bh&va,  reciprocal  negation,  or  mutual  difference,  such  as  we
see  in  the  case  of  water  and  ice.

It  may  seem  as  if  the  Vaiseshika  was  rather  a  disjointed
and  imperfect  system.  And  to  a  certain  extent  it  is  so.
Though  it  presupposes  a  knowledge  of  the  Ny&ya-system,
it  frequently  goes  over  the  same  ground  as  the  Ny&ya,
though  it  does  not  quote  verbatim  from  it.  We  should
hardly  Imagine  that  the  Yaiseshika-Siitras  would  argue
against  Upamd.na,  or  comparison,  as  a  separate  Fram&7ia,
in  addition  to  Fratyaksha  (sense)  and  Anum&na  (inference),
unless  in  some  other  school  it  had  been  treated  as  an  inde-
pendent means  of  knowledge ;  and  this  school  was,  as  we
saw,  the  Ny&ya,  which  is  so  far  shown  to  be  anterior  to
the  Vaiijeshika-philosophy.  Kankda,  denies  by  no  means
that  comparison  is  a  channel  through  which  knowledge
may  reacn  us,  he  only  holds  that  it  is  not  an  independent
channel,  but  must  be  taken  as  a  subdivision  of  anotner  and
larger  channel,  viz.  Anum&na  or  inference.  He  probably
held  the  same  opinion  about  £fabda,  whether  we  take  it  in
the  sense  of  the  Veda  or  of  an  utterance  of  a  recognised
authority,  because  the  recognition  of  such  an  authority
always  implies,  as  he  rightly  nolds,  a  previous  inference  to
support  it.  He  differs  in  this  respect  from  the  Kkrvika
secularist,  who  denies  the  authority  of  the  Veda  outright^
while  Kan&da  appeals  to  it  in  several  places.

A  similar  case  meets  us  in  Gotama's  Ny&ya-Siltras  (1, 16).
Here,  apparently  without  any  definite  i*eason,  Uotama  tells


THE   SIX  STSTBHS.  449

OS  o  a  separate  aphorism  that  BuddhI  ('inderstandingjy
Upalabdhi  (apprehension),  and  Onkna,  (knowing)  are  not
different  iix  meaning.  Why  should  he  say  so,  unless  he  had
wanted  to  enter  his  protest  against  Elbme  one  else  who  had
taught  that  they  meant  different  things  1  Now  this  some
one  else  could  only  have  been  Eapila,  who  holds,  as  we
saw,  that  Buddhi  is  a  development  of  Prakriti  or  unintel-
ligent nature,  and  that  conscious  apprehension  (Sam^  id)
originates  witii  the  Purusha  only.  But  here  again,  though
Ootama  seems  to  have  had  the  tenets  of  the  S^mkhya-
school  in  his  eye,  we  have  no  rieht  on  this  ground  to  say
that  our  S&mkhya-Siicras  existed  before  the  Ny&ya-Siitras
were  composed.  All  we  are  justified  in  saying  is  that,  like
all  the  other  systems  of  Indian  philosophy,  these  two  also
emerged  from  a  common  stratum  in  which  such  opinions
occupied  the  minds  of  various  thinkers  long  before  the
final  outcome  settled  down,  and  was  labelled  by  such  names
as  S&mkhya,  or  Ny&ya,  Kapila,  or  Qotama,  and  long,  of
course,  before  the  S&mkhya-Siitras,  which  we  now  possess,
were  constructed.

Tli«  Six  MywUmm,

It  must  have  been  observed  how  these  six,  or,  if  we
include  the  B&rhaspatya,  these  seven  systems  of  philosophy,
though  they  differ  from  each  other  and  criticise  each  other,
share  nevertheless  so  many  things  in  common  that  we  can
only  understand  them  as  producte  of  one  and  the  same  soil,
though  cultivated  bv  different  hands.  They  all  promise  to
teach  the  nature  ox  the  soul,  and  its  relation  to  the  God-
head or  to  a  Supreme  Being.  They  all  undertake  to  supply
the  means  of  knowing  the  nature  of  that  Supreme  Being,
and  through  that  knowledge  to  pave  the  way  to  supreme
happiness.  They  all  share  the  conviction  that  there  is
suffering  in  the  worlds  ivhich  is  something  irregular,  has  no
right  to  exist,  and  should  therefore  be  removed.  Though
there  is  a  strong  religious  vein  running  through  the  six
so-called  orthodox  systems,  they  belong  to  a  phase  of
thought  in  which  not  only  has  the  belief  in  the  many  Yedic
gods  long  been  superseHed  by  a  belief  in  a  Supreme  Deity,
such  as  Frag^Hpati,  but  this  phase  also  has  been  left  behind

29  ««^


450  INDIAN   PHILOSOPHY,

tx3  make  room  £or*a  faith  in  a  Supreme  Power/ or  ir  the
Godhead  which  has  no  name  but  Brahman  or  Sat,  'I  am
what  I  am/  The  Hindus  themselves  make  indeed  a  dis-
tinction between  the  six  orthodox  systems.  They  have  no
word  for  orthodox ;  nay,  we  saw  that  some  of  these
systems,  though  atheistic,  were  nevertheless  treated  as  per-
missible doctnnes,  because  they  acknowledged  the  authority
of  ihe  Veda.  Orthodox  might  therefore  bfe  replaced  by
Vedic;  and  if  atheism  seems  to  us  incompatiUe  with
Vedism  or  Vedic  orthodoxy,  we  must  remember  that  athe-
ism with  Indian  philosophers  means  something  very  dif-
ferent from*  what  it  means  with  us.  It  means  a  de4d  of
an  active,  busy,  personal  <jr  humanised  god  only,  who  is
called  tsvara,  the  Lord.  But  behind  him  and  above  him
Hindu  philosophers  recognised  a  Higher  Power,  whether
they  called  it  Brahman,  or  Paramd.tman,  or  Pnrnsha.  It
was  the  denial  of  that  reality  which  constituted  a  !N&&tika,
a  real  heretic,  one  who  could  say  of  this  invisible,  yet
omnipresent  Being,  Na  asti,  *  He  is  not.'  Buddha  therefore,
as  well  as  B/^^'haspati,  the  ^&rv&ka,  was  a  N&stika,  while
both  the  Yoga  and  the  Sd.mkhya,  the  former  Sesvara,  with
an  tsvara,  the  other  Anisvara,  without  an  tsvara,  the  one
theistic,  the  other  atheistic,  could  be  recognised  as  ortl^odox
or  Vedic.

The  Hindus  themselves  were  fully  aware  that  qome  of
their  systems  of  philosophy  differed  from  each  other  on
essential  points,  and  that  some  stood  higher  than  others.
Madhusiiaana  clearly  looked  upon  the  Ved4nta  as  the  best
of  ^  all  philosophies,  and  so  did  iS'amkara,  provided  he  was
allowed  to  interpret  the  Siitras  of  Bdidar&yana  according
to  the  principles  of  his  own  unyielding  Monism.  Madhu-
siidana,  as  we  saw,  treated  the  S&mkhya  and  Yom  by
themselves  as  different  from  the  two  Mlm&Tns&s,  Wy&ya
and  Vai6eshika,  and  as  belonging  to  Smr^ti  rather  than  to
&Vuti.  Vif;/iS,na-Bhikshu,  a  philosopher  of  considerable
grasp,  while  fully  recognising  the  difference  between  the
six  systems  of  philosophy,  tried  to  discover  a  common  truth
behind  them  all,  and  to  point  out  how  they  can  be  studied
together,  or  rather  in  succession,  and  how  all  of  thenoi  are
meant  to  lead  honest  students  into  the  way  of  truth.


THE   SIX   STOTIBMS.  45 1

In  his  Preface  to  the  S&mkhya-Siitras,  so  well  edited
and  translated  by  Professor  Gai*be,  Vip^&na-Bhikshn  says :
"*  If  we  read  in  the  Brihad&ranyaka  Upanishad  II,  4, 5,  and
I^*  5»  ^9  that  the  Self  must  be,  seen,  must  be  heard,  mnst
be  pondered  and  meditated  on,  hearing  and  the  rest  are
eviaently  pointed  out  as  means  of  a  curect  vision  of  the
Self,  by  which  the  highest  object  of  man  can  be  realised.
If  it  is  asked  how  these  three  things  can  be  achieved,
SmWti  or  tradition  answers :  *  It  must  be  heard  from  the
words  of  the  Veda,  it  must  be  pondered  on  with  proper
arguments,  and,  after  that,  it  must  be  meditated  on  oon-
tinuously»    These  are  the  means  of  the  vision  of  the  Self/

'Meditated  on,'  that  is,  by  means  proposed  in  Toga-
^lilosophy.  Three  things  are  known  from  passages  of  me
Veda,  (i)  the  highest  object  of  man,  (a)  knowledge  essential
for  its  attainment,  (3)  the  nature  of  the  Atman  or  Self  which
forms  the  object  of  such  knowledge.  And  it  .was  the  pur-
pose of  the  Exalted,  as  manifested  in  the  form  of  Eapila,
to  teach,  in  his  six-chaptered  manual  on  Yiveka  or  distinc-
tion between  Purusha  and  Prakriti,  all  the  arguments  which
are  supported  by  SratL

If  then  it  should  be  objected  that  we  have  already  a
logical  treatment  of  these  subjects  in  the  Ny&ya  and
Yai^eshika  svstems,  rendering  the  Sftmkhva  superfiuo'iis,
and  that  it  is  hardly  possible  that  both — tne  S&mkhya  as
well  as  the  Ny&ya  and  V  aiaeshika — could  be  means  of  right
knowledge,  considering  that  each  represents  tho  Self  in  a
different  form,  the  Ny&ya  and  Yai^eshika  as  with  qualities,
the  S&mkhya  as  without,  thus  clearly  contradictmg  each
other,  we  answer  No,  by  no  means !  Neither  is  the  S&m-
khya  rendered  superfluous  by  the  Ny&ya  and  Yaiaeshika,
nor  do  they  contradict  each  other.  Thev  difier  from  each
other  so  far  only  as  Nyftya  ancl  Yaisesnika  tret^t  of  the
objects  of  empirical  knowledge,  but  the  S&mkhya  of  the
highest  truth.  The  Ny&ya  and  Yai^eshika,  as  they  follow
the  common-sense  view  that  it  is  the  Self  that  feels  joy
and  pain,  aim  at  no  more  than  at  the  first  steps  in  know-
ledge, namely  at  the  recognition  of  the  Atman  as  different
from  the  body,  because  it  is  impossible  to  enter  per  scdtum
into  the  most  abstruse  wisdom.    The  knowledge  of  those

cga


452  INDIAN  FHILOSOPHT.

preliminary  schools  which  is  attained  by  dimply  removmg
the  idea  that  the  Self  is  the  body  is  no  more  than  an
empirical  comprehension  of  facts,  in  the  same  manner  as  by
a  removal  of  the  misapprehension  in  taking  a  man  at
a  distance  for  a.  post,  there  follows  the  apprehension  that
he  has  hands,  feet,  &c.,  that  is,,  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,
yet. purely  empirical.  If  therefore  we  read  ihe  following
verse  from  the  Bhagavad-gitfir  III,  29 : —

'Those  who  are  deceived  by  the  constituent  Guiias  of
PrakHti,  cling  to  the  workings  of  the  Gu^ias  (Sattva,
Ba^as,  and  Xamas).  Let  therefore  those  who  know  the
whole  truth  take  care  not  to  distract  men  of  moderate
understanding  who  do  not  as  yet  know  the  whole  truth; '
— we  see  that  here  the  followers  of  the  Ny&ya  and  Yai^-
shika  systems,  though  they  hpld  to  the  false  belief  that  the
Self  can  be  an  agent,  are  not  treated  as  totally  in  error,
but  only  as  not  knowing  the  whole  truth,  if  compared  with
the  S^mkhyas,  who  know  the  whole  truth.  Even  such
knowledge  as  they  possess,  leads  step  by  step  by  means
of  tho  low^r  impassiveness  (Apara-vair&gya)  to  libemiion;
while  the  knowledge  of  the  S^mkhyas  only,  as  compared
with  the  lower  knowledge,  is  absolute  knowledge,  and
leads  by  means  of  higher  impassiveness  (Paravairdgya)
straight  to  liberation.  For  it  follows  from  the  words
quoted  from  the  Bhagavad-glt&  that  he  only  who*  knows
that  the  Self  is  never  an  agent,  can  arrive  at  the  whole
truth,  and  from  hundreds  of  true  Yedic  texts,  such  a3  BWh.
Ar.  Up.  IV,  3,  22 :  *  Then  he  has  overcome  all  the  sorrows
of  the  heart ' ;  thinking  that  desires,  &c.^  belong  to  the
internal  organ  (Manas)  only ;  or  Brih.  Ax.  Up.  iV,  3,  7 :
'  He,  remaining  the  same  (the  Self),  wanders  tlurough  both
worlds,  as^  if  thinking,  and  as  if  moving  (but  not  really) ' :
or  Brih.  Ar.  Up.  IV,  3,  16:  *  And  whatever  he  may  have
seen  there  he  is  uot  followed  (affected)  by  it ' ;  and  likewise
from  hundreds  of  similar  passages  in  the  Smriti,  such  as
Bhag.  Ill,  27 : '  All  works  are  performed  by  the  constituents
of  matter  (the  Gunas  of  Prakriti) ;  he  only  who  is  deceived
by  Ahamkara  or  subjeetivation  imagines  that  he  is  the
agent';  and  such  as  V.  P.  VI,  7,  22:  'The  Self  consists  of
bliss   (Nirv&iia^L  and  knowledge   only,  and    is   not   con-


tHT5   StX   SYSTEMS.  453

6aminated  (by  the  Gunaa).  The  qualities  (Gu7?as)  are  full
of  suffering,  not  of  knowledge,  and  they  belong  to  Praknti,
not  to  the  Self ' — from  all  such  passages  we  say  that  it  is
clear  that  the  knowledge  proclaimed  by  Nyfi,ya  and  Vaise-
shika  with  regard  to  the  highest  subject  is  overcome.

By  this,  however,  we  do  not  mean  to  say  that  Ny&.ya
and  Vaiseshika  are  not  means  of  right  knowledge,  for  iheir
teaching  is  not  superseded  by  the  Sfi^mkhya  so  far  fits
regards  that  portion  which  treats  of  the  difference  between
Self  and  the  material  body.  Here  we  must  follow  the
principle  (laid  dowr  in  the  PArva-Mim^msft),  that  what
a  word  (chiefly)  films  at,  that  is  its  meaning ;  (and  apply  it
to  the  systems  of  philosophy).  The  Ny&ya  simply  repeats
the  popular  idea  that  joy  pertains  to  the  Self,  without
referring  to  any  further  proofs ;  and  this  chapter  therefore
is  not  to  be  considered  as  really  essential  (or  as  what  the
NyS,ya  chiefly  aims  at).

But  admitting  that  there  is  here  no  difference  between
Nyftya-Vaiseshika  and  the  S&mkhya  systems,  is  there  not
a  c^'ear  contradiction  between  the  S&mkhya  on  one  side
and  the  Brahma-Mimfl,^is&.  (VedS^nta)  tad  the  Yoga  on  the
other?  The  former  denies  the  existence  of  an  eternal
t^vara,  the  two  others  maintain  it.  Surely  it  cannot  be
said  that  here  also  the  contradiction  between  these  systems,
the  atheistic  and  theistic,  can  be  removed  by  simply  ad-
mitting, as  before,  two  points  of  view,  the  ifietaphysical  and
the  empirical,  as  if  the  theistic  doctrine  existed  only  for  the
sake  of  the  worship  of  the  multitude.  Such  a  decision
would  here  be  Impbssible.  The  atheistic  view  that  an  tsvara
is  difficult  to  know  and  therefore  non-existent,  may  well
have  been  merely  repeated  by  the  Slimkhyas,  as  a  popular
idea,  and  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  the  desire  of  men  for
acquiring  a  divine  status  and  divine  li^nours  (by  means  of
penance,  &c.),  as  in  the  case  of  the  NaiyS,yikas  when  they
say  that  the  Self  possesses  qualities  (which  must  be  taken
as  merely  a  provisional  remark).  In  the  Veda  or  elsewhere
t«vara,  the  anthropomorphic  deity,  is  never  explicitly  denied;
so  that  one  could  say  that  theism  should  be  taken  as  the
common  popular  view  only.

In  spite  of  all  this  we  hold  that  here  too  these  different;


454  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHT.

views  are  really  due  to  empirical  or  to  metaDhvsicai  con-
ceptions.

For  as  works  like  the  Bha^vad-f^tft  (XVI«  8)  when
saying: —

'Those  say  that  the  world  is  unreal,  without  support,
without  an  Wara/
con<lemn  the  atheistic  doctrine,  we  may  very  well  suppose
that  the  S&mkhyas  simply  repeated  a  common  popular
view  that  there  is  no  Wara,  in  order  to  discourage  the
striving  after  a  divine  status  (so  common  among  Saints),
or  for  some  similar  purpose.  They  v^ould  naturally  think
that  if  they,  so  far  allowing  thematerialistSi  did  not  deny
the  existence  of  an  active  l^vara,  the  acquisition  of  the
discriminating  knowledge  (of  the  S&mkhyas,  between
Prakriti  and  Purusha)  would  be  impeded,  because  those
who  believe  in  an  infinite,  eternal  and  perfect  Wara^  have
their  thoughts  entirely  absorbed  by  uds  Wara  (so' that
they  might  not  attend  to  the  essential  doctrine  of  the
S&mkhyas).  No  attack  is  made  anywhere  on  theism,  so
that  the  theistic  doctrine  of  the  Ved&nta  should  be  restricted
to  sacrificial  and  similar  purposes  only.  But  from  passages
like  Mah&bh.  XTT,  1167:  'No  knowledge  is  equal  to  that
of  the  S&mkhya,  no  power  to  that  of  the  Yoga,'  and  again
XII,  1 1 198 :  'Let  there  be  no  doubt,  the  knowledge^  of  the
S&mkhya  is  considered  the  highest,'  we  should  learn  the
excellence  of  the  Sd.mkhya  knowledge  as  superior  to  other
systems,  though. onlv  with  regard  to  that  portion  which
treats  of  the  distinction  of  Self  and  Prakriti,  and  not  with
regard  to  the  portion  that  objects  to  an  Isvara.  Furthermore
from  the  consensus  of  Parft^ara  also  and  all  other  eminent
authorities,  we  see  that  theism  alone  is  absolutely  true.
And  from  Par&sara's  Upa-pur&im  and  similar  works  th^
truth  of  the  Brahma-Mim&7ns&  in  its  chapter  on  the  lavara
is  perfectly  manifest.    There  we  read  :—

'  In  the  systems  of  Akshap&da  and  Eati&da  (NyAya  and
Vaiaeshika),  in  the  S&mkhya  and  in  the  Yoga,  whatever
portion  is  in  conflict  with  the  Veda,  that  has  to  be  rejected
by  all  to  whom  the  Veda  is  the  only  law.*

'  In  the  systems  of  &aimini  and  Vy&sa  (in  the  Piirva  and
I7ttara-Mtm&ms&)  there  is   nothing  in  conflict  with  the


THE   SIX  STSTBMS.  455

V^dk;  for  these  irro  in  their  knowledge  of  the  meaning  of  the
Veda  havg  by  means  of  the  Veda  fufly  mastered  the  Veda/
-  From  other  passages  also  the  superior  authority  of  the
Brahma-Mim&msft  may  be  gathered,  at  least  with  regard
to  that  portion  which  treats  of  tavara.  Thus  we  read  in
Mah&bh.  XII,  7663  aeq. : —

'  Manifold  philosophical  doctrines  have  been  propounded
by  various  teisichers ;  but  cling  to  that  only  which  has  been
settled  by  argi.uneni»,  by  the  Veda,  and  by  the  practice  of
good  people/

From  this  passage  of  the  Motehadharma  also  (XII,  7663),
and  on  account  of  the  practice  of  Parsl^ara  and  all  eminent
authorities,  it  follows  ^at  the  proof  of  the  existence  of  an
tdvara,  as  proclaimed  by  the  Brahma-Mim&t^sd.,  the  Nyd.ya,
Vaifieshika  and  other  systems,  is  to  be  accepted  as  the
strongest ;  and  likewise  because  by  passages  in  the  Eiirma
and  other  Purft.7ias  the  ignorance  of  the  SS^mkliyas  with
regard  to  an  Isvara  has  been  clearly  pronounced  by  NArit-
jH/na.  and  others;  e.g.  'Take  thy  refuge  with  the  begin-
nir;Tless  and  endless  Brahman,  whom  the  S^t>ikhy as,  though
strong  as  Yogins.  are  unable  to  perceive.'

Besides,  that  Isvara  alone  is  the  principal  object  of  the
Brahma-Mimd.m8&  is  proved  by  the  very  first  words  and
by  other  indications.  If  then  it  had  been  refuted  on
that  iSrincipal  .point,  the  whole  philosophy  (the  Brahma-
Mim&msdr)  would  no  longer  be  a  means  ol*  right  knowledge,
according  to  the  principle,  mentioned  before,  that  what
a  word  chiefly  aims  at,  that  is  its  meaning.  The  chief  aim
of  the  S&mkhya,  on  the  contrary,  is  not  the  denial  of  an
Itfvara,  but  the  highest  object  to  be  obtained  by  the  Self
by  means  of  the  discrimination  between  body  and  Self
which  leads  to  it.  Hence,  though  it  be  superseded  in  that
part  which  treats  of  the  denial  of  the  l^vara,  it  will  I'emaiu
as  a  means  of  right  Jitnowledge,  and  this  once  more  accord-
ing to  the  principle  that  what  a  word  chiefly  aima  at,  that
is  its  purpoit.  The  Sa7?ikhya  has  therefore  its  ^proper
sphere,  and  is  vulnerable  in  that  pai-t  only  which  treats  of
tne  denial  of  the  l^^vara,  the  personal  and  active  god.

Nor  would  it  be  right  to  say  that  in  the  Brahma-Mima wjsA
Isvara  may  indeed  be  the  principal  object,  but  not  its


INDIAN  FHII090PHT

eternal  lordship  ot  godhead.  For,  as  the  objection  raised
in  the  Pdrvapaksha  as  to  its  (the  Mtm&msft's)  alloinang  no
weight  to  the  other  Sjnritis  cannot  be  sustained,  it  is  deas
that  Wara  can  only  be  the  object  of  the  Brahma-MimftmcA,
provided  he  is  characterised  by  eternal  lordship.

If  it  is  said  that  the  first  Siitra  of  the  Brahma-Mlni&m8&
does  not  say  'Now  then  a  wish  to  know  the  highest
Brahman/  and  that  therefore  it  does  not  by  the   word
Brahman  mean  the  Farabrahn^an.  we  must  not  on  account
of  the  Sd.mkhya  denial  of  an  Isvara  suppose  that  the
Ved&nta  and  Yoga  systems  likewise  refer  only  to  an  evolved
tsvara  (a  EL&ryesvara,  a  product  of  PrakWti),  for  in  that
case  tha whole  string  of  SMras  from  II,  2,  i,  directed  against
the  S&mkhva  and  showing  that  mindless  matter,  being
incapable  of  creating,  cannot  be  established  by  mere  reason-
ing, would  be  absnra ;  for  if  the  Gkxl  of  the  Y  ed&nta  were
a  made  God,  or  a  product  of  matter,  the  S&mkhyas  would
have  been  right  in  teaching  an  independent  matter  (Pra-
kWti).    Lastly,  the  eternal  character  of  Isvara  is  quite
clear  from  such  Yoga-Siitras  as  I,  26, '  He  (God)  is  the  Guru
even  of  the  oldest  sages,  because  he  is  not  limited  by  time,'
and  likewise  from  Yy&sa's  commentary  on  that  StLtra.   It  is
clear  therefore  that  as  the  Sd.mkhya  means  to  deny  the
common  popular  anthropomorphic  view  of  Isvara  only,
whether  as  a  concession,  or  as  a  bold  assertion,  or,  for  oome
other  reason,  there  exists  no  real  contradiction  between  it,
and  the  Brahma-Mlm&ms&,  and  the  Yoga.

Such  concessions  are  found  in  other  authoritative  works
also,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  YishTiu-Fur&Tia,  I,  17,  83 : —

'O  Daitya,  these  various  opinions  have  I  declajred  for
those  who  admit  a  difference  (who  are  not  yet  monists),  by
making  a  concession  (to  dualism).  Let.  this  abstract  of
mine  l^  listened  to.'

Nay  it  is  possible  that  in  some  accredited  systems  also
opinions  should  have  been  put  forward  in  contradiction
with  the  Yeda  in  order  to  shut  out  bad  men  from  a  know-
ledge of  the  truth.  Such  parts  wotdd  of  course  not  be
means  of  right  knowledge,  but  the  other  and  principal
parts  only,  which  are  in  harmony  with  Smti  ana  Smnti.
Hence  we  see  that  in  the  Padma-PurliTia  fault  is  found  with


THE   SrX  SYSTEMS.  457

all  systems  except  the  Brahma-Mim&msd.  and  Yoga.  Here
we  see  God  (/Siva)  saying  to  P&rvatl : —

*  Listen,  O  goddess,  I  shall  in  suecession  tell  you  the
heretical  theones  by  the  mere  hearing  of  which  even  sages
lose  their  knowledge.

First  of  all,  I  myself  have  taught  the  Saiva,  P&supata
and  other  systems,  and  afterwards  others  have  been  pro-
mulgated by  Brd.hmans,  who  were  filled  by  my  powers.
Ea7i&da  has  promulgated  the  great  Vaiseshika  doctrine,
Gautama  the  Ny&ya,  Eapila  the  S&mkhya.  The  BriLhman
&aimini  has  composed  a  very  large  work  of  atheistic
character,  the  first  of  the  two  MtmSms^s,  which  treat  of
the  meaning  of  the  Veda.  Then,  in  order  to  destroy  the
demons,  DhishaTia'  (Brihaspati)  propounded  the  altogether
despicable  Kkrvkksh  system ;  and  VishTiu,  under  the  disguise
of  Buddha,  propounded  the  erroneous  Bauddha  system
which  teaches  that  people  are  to  go  naked,  and  should  wear
blue  or  other  coloured  garments,  while  I  myself,  O  goddess,
under  the  disguise  of  a  Br&hman  (i.e.  of  /Samkara)  have
taught  in  this  Kali  age  the  doctrine  of  illusion  (M&yS;)
which  is  false  and  only  a  disguised  Buddhism.  It  is  spread
far  and  wide  in  the  world,  and  attributes  a  false  meaning
to  the  words  of  the  Veda.  In  it  it  is  said  that  all  works
should  be  relinquished,  and  after  surrendering  all  works,
compfete  inactivity  is  recommended.

I  have  taught  in  it  the  identity  of  the  highest  Self  and
the  individual  Self,  and  have  represented  the  highest  form
of  Brahman  as  entirely  free  from  qualities;  and  this  in
order  to  destroy  the  whole  world  in  this  Kali  age.  This
extensive,  non-Vedic,  deceptive  doctrine  has  been  pro-
pounded by  me,  as  if  it  presented  the  true  meaning  of  the
Veda,  in  order  that  all  living  things  might  perish.'

All  this  and  more  has  been  explained  by  me  in  the  com-
mentary on  the  Brahma-Mtmd.ms&,  and  it  is  wrong  there-
fore to  say  of  any  of  the  admittedly  orthodox  systems  of
philosophy  that  it  is  not  the  means  of  right  knowledge  or
that  it -is  refuted  by  others.  For  in  reality  none  of  them
is  contradicted  or  refuted  in  what  constitutes  its  own  chief
object.

But,  if  it  be   asked  whetner  the   Sslmkhya-philosophy


45^  IKBIAN .  PHIliOSOPET.

has  not  likewise  made  a  mere  concession  with  regard  to
the  multiplicity  of  souls,  we  answer  decidedly.  No.  For
on  that  point  there  is  really  no  contradiction  (between*
the  two,  S&mkhya  and  Vedllnta)  because  it  is  G^own  in
the  chapter  which  begins  at  Brahma-SAtras  II,  3, 43,  and
declares  that  the  individual  self  is  a  part  of  the  Highest
Self,  because  the  multiplicity  is  stated  (in  the  Veda) ;  that
the  Brahma-Mtm&7ns&  also  recognises  a  multiplicity  of
Atman.  But  that  the  individual  souls,  as  conceived  by  the
S&mkhya,  are  Atman  is  certainly  denied  by  the  Ved&nta,
for  it  follows  from  Siitra  IV,  i,  3 :  *  They  Know  him  and
teach  him  as  Atman,'  that  to  the  Yed&ntins,  from  the
standpoint  of  absolute  truth,  the  highest  soul  only  is
Atman.  Nevertheless  the  S&mkhya  does  not  thereby  lose
its  authoritative  character,  because  it  is  not  superseded
by  the  Ved&nta  in  what  constitutes  its  own  characteristic
doctrine,  namely  that  for  the  individual  soul,  the  kuow-
ledge  of  its  being  different  from  everything  else,  constitutes
the  true  means  of  liberation.  There  is  no  contradiction
therefore^  because  the  concepts  of  the  manifold  Atman  ^nd
of  the  one  Atman,  so  well  known  from  Veda  and  tradition,
can  be  fully  reconciled  according:  as  we  take  an  empirical
or  metaph/sical  view,  as  has  bl,n  explained  by  ouLlves
m  the  CoTtvmentary  on  the  6rahma-Mim&ms& — SapierUt
sat"

I  have  given  here  this  long  extract  from  Vigrw&na-
Bhikshu,  though  I  have  to  confess  that  in  several  places
the  thread  of  the  argument  is  difficult  to  follow,  even  after
the  care  bestowed  on  disentangling  it  by  Professor  Garbe.
Still,  even  as  it  is,  it  will  be  useful,  I  hope,  as  a  good
specimen  of  the  Indian  way  of  carrying  on  a  philosophical
controversy.  Nay,  in  spite  of  all  that  1ms  been  said  against
Vigfw&na-Bhikshu,  I  cannot  deny  that  to  a  certain  extent
he  seems  to  me  right  in  discerning  a  kind  of  unity  behind
the  variety  of  the  various  philosophical  systems,  each  being
regarded  as  a  step  towards  the  highest  and  final  truth.
He  cei^inly  helps  us  to  understand  how  it  came*to  pass
that  the  followers  of  systems  which  to  our  mind  seem
directly  opposed  to  each  other  on  very  important  points,
managed  to  keep  peace  with  each  other  and  with  the  Veda.


THE   SIX  SYSTBMS.  459

.the  highost  authority  in  all  matters  religioas,  philosophical
and  moral.  The  idea  that  the  largely  accepted  interpre-
tation of  the  Yed&nta-SAtras  by  Sa^kara  was  a  perversion
of  the  Veda  and  of  B&dar&yana's  SAtras,  not  much  better
than  Buddhism,  nay  that  Buddhism  was  the  work  of
Vishnu,  intended  for  the  destruction  of  unbelievers,  is  very
extraordinary,  and  evidently  of  l&te  origin.  Nay,  nothing
seems  to  me  to  show  better  that  these  Pur&nas,  in  the  lorm
in*  which  we  possess  them,  are  of  recent  origin,  and  certainly
not  the  outcome  of  a  period  previous  to  the  Renaissance  of
Sanskrit  literature,  tjian  passages  like  those  quoted  by  Via-
^&na-Bhikshu,  representing  the  gods  of  the  modem  Hindu
pantheon  as  interfering  with  the  ancient  philosophy  of
India,  and  propounding  views  which  they  know  to  be  erro-
neous with  the  intention  of  deceiving  mankind.  Whatever
the  age  of  our  philosophical  Siitras  may  be,  and  some  of
them,  in  the  form  in  which  we  possess  them,  are  certainly
more  modem  than  our  Pur&nas,yet  the  tradition  or  Param-
par&  which  they  represent  must  be  much  older;  and  in
tr}  ing  to  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  Six  Systems,  we  must
implicitly  trust  to  their  guidance,  without  allowing  our-
selves to  be  disturbed  by  the  fancies  of  later  sects.


INDEX.


ABDAYASES,  nephew  of  K.  Gon-
d«.phores,  found  on  Indo-Par-

^      thian  coins,  63.

Abhassara,  spirits,  17.

Abh&ra,  377,  448.

—  not-being,  iao3,  395.

Abhibuddhis,  the  five,  965.

Abhy&sa,  338.

Absorption,  no  part  of  the  Toga
system,  310.

A.ctions,  Karman,  449.

Adhibhautika,    pain    from    other

^      living  beings,  375,  367.

Adhidaivika,  pain  from  divine
agents,  975,  367.

Adhik&ra-ridhis,  aoo.

Adl  y&tma,  Adhibhillta,  and  Adhi-

^      daivata,  964.

Adhy&tmika,  pain  from  the  body,

374,  367-
^■dhyaTas&ya,  determination,  173.

Adi-pttrusha,  the  First  Self,  399.

—  a  firfct  Purusha,  331.

Aditi,  identified  with  sky  and  air,
^     the  gods,  ftc,  40.
Adityas,  seyen  In  number,  38.

—  later  raised  to  twelye,  39.
Adn'shia  or  ApClrva,  977.
4-flfft,  doubtful  meaning  of,  78.
Agama,  used  by  Pataj!g«ll  instead

of  Aptava/cana,  337.
Afffttasatru  and  B&l&ki,  13,  97.

—  K.    of  Kft«i,    son    of   Yaideht,

Aghora,  not  terrible,  35:
Ayita  Kesakambali,  teaeher  men-
A     tioned  in  Buddhist  annals,  89.
AglTaka,  Gosftli  originally  an,  89.
A^vakos.  94a

A^navlda,  Agnosticism,  19.
Agni  as  Indra  and  Sayitri,  40.
Ahamk&ra,  subjectiyation,  949, 950,
983.


Ahamk&ra,  a  cosmic  power,  95^

—  modifications  of  the,  350.

—  mental  act,  950.

—  of  three  kinds,  964.

— -  the  cause  of  creation,  983.

—  personal  feelings,  496.
Ai^aryas,  or  superhuman  powers,

.^tihya,  tradition,  395,  499.
A.kft«a,  fifth   element,   vehicle    of

sound,  383,  386,  400,  443.
Akhy&yik&s,  or  stories,  995,  943.

—  absent  in  tlie  Tattya-sam&sa  and

the  KftrikAs,  943.

—  reappear  in  the  S&mkhya*Sfttras,

343-
Aidt,  matter,  187.

Akrttis,  species,  959,  398.

Aksha,  organ,  959.

Akshap&da  and  Kan&da,  454.

Alftra  K&l&ma,  90.

Alberuni,  999.

Alexander  and  Indian  philosophy,

386.
Alexandria,  known  as  Alasando,

saec.  Ill,  63.

—  Brfthmans  did  not  borrow  ideas

from,  150.

—  did  Brahmans  come  to?  399.

—  Logos-idea,  no  antecedents  of  it

in  Greek  philosophy,  56.
Aliinga,  i.  e.  Prakrit i,  341  n.
American  Indians,  their  svireating

processeu,  31a.
AmtidhtLj  not  stupid,,  951.
Ananda,   or  bliss  in  the  highest

Brahman,  379.
AnArabhy&dhlta,  901.
An&thapindika,  95.
Aniruddha,  188.

Ann'ta,  unreal  written  letters,  99.
AntAnantikas,  18.
Anugraha-sarga,  971,


462


INDEX.


AnumAna,  or  into  nc^  145,  874,

374»  37^  448.

—  applied  by  BAdarftyafia  to  Qmriti,

tradition,  147.

—  Ipr  others,  431.

Asinsy  or  atoms,  406,  440,  445,  446.
Anusaya,  Atdagt,  177.
AnnsrAyika,  reTealed,  338.
AnattamAmbhA8ik&,  969.
AnTi^a-yyatirekii  436.
A  nyikshikt,  old  name  of  philosophy,

76  n.
' —  bifaroation.of  the  old  system  of,

363.
Anyatva,  971.

Apax&,  lower  knowledge,  164.

Apara-yairftgya,  lower  impassiye-

ness,  45fl.
Apanmsheyatva,  non-human  origin

of  the  Vedas,  007.
Aptvargai  or  final  beatitude,  373,

378,  3851  4ai»  4*4.

—  bliss  of  the  NyAya,  37a.
Apotheosis,  979.
AppUcation,  Upanaya,  439.
ApramodA,  969.
Apramodam&na,  969.
ApramuditA,  969.
Aprasiita,  not  produced,  045.
Apratiyogitva,  437.

Apta,  not  to  be  translated  by  opftw,
X46.

—  explanation  0(^,974.
AptayaAana,  the  true  word,  9389

389.
Apta-vaAana,  974.
Aptopadeta  <x>  Aptavaftsna,  X45, 395.
ApArva-principle,  9ti.        _

—  miraculous,  211.  ^
AhUla,  teacher  of  S&mkhya-philo-
^     sophy,  938.
Arambha-vAda,  theory  of  atomic

agglomeration,  81.
Aranyakas,  distinction  of  parts  of,

into  Upanishads  and  Yed&ntas,

84  n.
Arasya,  969.
ArAftX;  the,  119.
Artabhaga,  19.

Artha,  objects  of  the  senses,  163^
ArtliApatti,  assumption,  395.
Artha%'&das,  glosses,  909.
Asakti,  weakness,  969.


Ajanta,  not-p]'«aiix«ble.  351.
Aaat-kAryavida,  peeuliidr  to  Hyftys

and  Vaiseahika,  159.
Aaatpramuditam,  969.
Aaaya,  Anlage,  39a
Aaiddhis  and  Siddhia,  969.
Aamarathya,  referred  to  by  BAda-

r&yana,  91.
AamitA,  different  from  AhaaikAxa,

349  n.
Ajoka,  King,  963  n.  a,  96u
Aarama,  not  found  in  the  *'''yiMiHi^
^     Upanishads,  936.
Asramas   of  the  Buddhists,    only

two,   Gnliins  and  Bhikkhus,

Asramas,  stations  in  life,  xoz.
Aaramin  in  the  Haitr&y.  Upw,  agfi.
Assertion,  PratipfEa,  439.
AatitTa,  reality,  971.
AsumariftikA,  969.
Asunetra,  969.
AsupAra,  969.
Asura,  name  glTen  to  TraahM;  and

.  to  his  son  VisyarApa,  44.
Asuri,  995.
'AsutAra,  969.
Asyaghosha*s  Buddha-karita,   lint

cent.  ▲.  ih,  937.
Afyala,  zx.

AfyalAyana  Qrthya-Siltras,  939.
A<yapati  Kaikeya,  14.
AtAra,  969.
AtAratAra,  969.

Atheism  of  PArya-UlmAmaA,   the
supposed,  910.

—  of  Kapils,  309.

— -  attributed  to  the  Yaiseshika  and
NyAya    and    POrya-HimAmsA,

-  337.

AtiyAhika-sarIra  formed  of  eighteen

elements,  301.
AtmA-anAtma-viveka,  985.
AtmadarsanayogyatA,    fitneaa    for

behol&ing  the  Self,  357.
Atman,  taught  by  Kshatriyaa,  X4.

—  imjioi'tance  of  the  word,  70.

—  etymology  of,  71.

—  »  breath  in  Veda,  the  Tife,  aonl,

71.

—  the  name  of  the  highest  person,

79.

—  and  Ptirusha,  977,  985.


INDEX.


463


At  ID  an,  not  oognitiye,  330.
Atom,   inTisible,  sL^th  part  of  a

mote,  447.
Atoms,  Greek  origin  of  theory  of,

^       446.

Atreya,  referred  to  by  B&darftyaiuty

91.
Atnsha  and  Tnshd,  969.
AtyantftbhUva,  437.
Audulomi,  referred  to  by  Bftdarft-

yatia,  91.
ATftpr,  aoa.
ATayavas,  or  Premisses,  Le.  the

members  of  a  syllogism,  38a,

385.
ATidya,  histoiy  of,  i6x.

—  changed  to  a  Sakti  or  pcim/Uia

of  Brahman,  168.

—  not  to  be  accounted  for,  179.

^-  applied  to  Kant*s  inttiitions  of
sense  and  his  categories,  173.

—  and  Mithy&^na,  185.

—  N. science,  a68,  984,  985,  378,

386.

—  an  actual  power,  Sakti,  980.
— -  origin  of,  989.

At!.-^,  not  having  a  seed,  349.
AvinAbMya,     Not-without-being,

377-
Ayiruddhakos,  940.

Avijesha,  subtle  elements,  341  n«

Aviyeka,  985,  367.

Avividi^hA,  carelessness,  966.

Ayrishti,  969.

Ayyakta,  188,  946,  341  n.,  379.

—  producing,  Prasfita,  945.

—  doubtful  meaning  of,  78.

—  chaos,  945.

Awake,  state  of  being,  174.
Ayar-veda,  413.

BABABA    PBlVAHAia,    signi-

ficative  name,  908.
A^abylonian  hymns,  more  modern

in  thought  than  thor3  of  Big-

yeda,  34.
BAdarAyana,  author  of  one  of  the

Mlm&msAs,  85,  xi6,  I90,  371.
'— '  quotes  Gaimini,  91,  198.

—  identiifed  with  VyAsa,  1 13.
BAdari,  referred  to  by  BAdarftyana,

Bahntya,  971.


BAna  knowF  K^pilas,  KAitAdas,  941.
BAfta's  Harshailcarita,  600  ▲.  d.,.  941.
Bandha,  bondage,  97s.
Bandhas,  or  bindings,  349;
BAnte,  Buddhist  title,  16.
BArhaspatyam,  studied  by  Buddha,

97.
Bathing,  ^graduating)  the  pupil,

905.
Berkeley,  194.
BhadrAsana,  349.
BhAgayatas,  followers  of  Krishfia,

3X.
Bhartfihari,  date  of  death,  650  ▲.  n.,

90>339«

—  refers  to  the  Daisanas,  90.

Bha^,  404.

Bhaya,  the  real  world,  the  eausci

of  SamAdhi,  343.
Bhikkhu,  name  of,  236.
BhikshA/fAryA,  or  begging,  936.

—  and  BhaikshAftAxyA,  93(6.
Bhikshu-Si!ltras,  loss  of,  referred  to

by  BhAskarAiUlrya,  86.
•—  —  PArAsarya,  the  author,  97,

X17.

same  as  VedAnta-Stitraa,  2x7.

Bhikshus,  mendicants,  94,  31.

BhOr,  150.

Bhflta-sarga,  979.

Bh&tAdi,  949,  950.

BhtktAtman,    elementary    Atman,

961.
BimbisAra,  16,  97.
Boar —legend  that  it  brought  forth

the  earth,  allusions  in  BrAh-

manas,  73.
Bodda,  name  found  amongfollowers

of  Hani,  64.
Boddo  (on  coins),  name  of  Buddha,

97.
BodiiAyana,  Z17,  930.
Body,  a  subtle  and  a  gross,  300.

—  &'artra,  416.

—  is  it  the  same  at  Atman,  416.
BrahmA,  creator,  z8.

—  called  VAsudeya,  188.
Brahmadatta,  16.
Brahma-||(Ala-sutta,  z6,  17,  9Z.
Brahman,  yarious  meanings  o^  59.

—  identified  with  speech,  65.

—  is  the  sun,  149.

—  i»  Hauas,  149.


464


INDEX.


Brahman  is  food,  Z4«.

—  i«  yicrJU^na,  14a.

—  M  the  Word,  the  first  ereiiion

of  divine  thought,  X45, 149^  150,

397.

—  or  VAfc  or  BWh,  eternal,  150.

—  is  everything,  179.

—  as   the    Kantian  Ding  an  aiehf

172.

—  is  the  world,  980.

—  may  become  to  us  BrahmA,  a8i.

—  of  the  Yed^nta,  985.

—  is  Anirva^Miniya,  uadefinable,a88.
Br&hmana,  a  social  title,  i7«
BrAhmanas  consist  of  Yidhis,  in-
junctions    and     Arthay&das,
glosses,  900.

Bra^nans,  two,  Sagnna  and  Nir-

guna,  168.
Brth,  parallel  form  of  Vrtdh,  54.

—  a  to   grow,  c.  p.  Latin   verlmm

and  German  loorf,  55.

—  speech,  397.

BWhaspati,  synonymous  with  V&-
Araspati,  lord  of  speech,  54,  99,

397.
->  Sfitras,  lost,  86.

—  philosophy,  the,  94.

—  Laukya,  94.

—  Angirasa,  94.

Budh,  means  to  awake,  983.
Buddha,  a  Kshatriya,  10.

—  guru,  identified  with  Pythagoras,

60.

—  works  studied  by,  96.

—  did  not  borrow  from  Kapila,  X03.

—  subjects  known  to,  1x5.

—  borrowed  from  Kapila  no  evi-

dence that,  or  vie$  rersd,  997.

—  later  than  the  classical  Up«ni-'

shads,  314.

—  declared  against  Yoga  tortures,

315-
Buddha-ftarlta,  the,  937.

Buddha's  mother,  name  of,  93.

—  denial  of  an  Atman  or  Brahman,

3x6^
Buddhiv intellect,  946,  376,  385.
— 'Or  Mahat,   in  a  cosmic   sense,

946.

—  the  lighting  up  of  Prakrtti,  989.

—  of  the  Ny&ya  different  from  that

of  the  S&mkhyas.  418.


'Buddhindriyas,  five,  asr.
Buddhism,  sul  sequent  to  XJpaiu-
shadsy  936.

—  in  Tibet,  eighth  oentury  ▲•».,

439-
Buddhist-Suttas,  reduoed  to  writing

in  the  first  century  b.  c,  338.
Buddhists  support  Asat-kilryaTAdn,

159.

—  derive  the  real  5h>m  the  unreal,

303.
. —  paid  little  attention  to  tlL>  two
Mim&msAs,  365.

—  deny  present  time,  393.

Butta  (first  Greek  mention  of
Budaha  by  Clement  of  Alexan-
dria), 97.


CALF,  the  new-bom  year,  51  n.
Case,  five  members  of  a   (Adhi-

karana),  904.
Caste,  Portug.  caste,  9.
Castes,  origin  of,  in  India,  9,  xa
Categories  of  the  Nyftya,  440.
Causal  state  of  Brahman,  188L
Causation,  chain  of,  378.
Cause  and  eifect,  YedAntist  theory

of,  155-
— — —  with  them  are  the  same  thing,

seen  from  different  points,  X5S.
Causes,  are  intimate,  non-intimate^

and  instrumental,  443
Chronology  of  thought,  190.
Cleanthes  and  Boethius,  399.
Clement  of  Alexandria,  97.

knows  name  of  Butta,  97,  60,

Coining  money,  6x.
Colebrooke  on  the  Gunas,  969.
Comparison,  TJpam&na,  389.
Conclusion,  Nigamana,  439.
Conditions,  Up&dhis,    of  forming

a  Yy&pti,  or  universal    rule,

434*
ConHroiei>«ia,  Sam-vid,  359.

Consideration,  Par&marsa,  43a

Creation,  or  causation,  155.

-^  the  result  of  Nescience,  154.

—  proceeds   from   Brahman,    155,

157-

—  caused  by  K&yft  or  AvidyA,  199.

Cripple  who  could  not  walk,  and
cripple  who  could  not  see,  goe.


INDBX.


465


VA&SKk,  fan;  one  meaning  of

Brahman,  7a
Dak8iiitt&-l>a  :idha,  bondage,  034,

—  gifts  to  priests,  979,
Pamascius  says  Brfthmana  Hyed  at

Alexandria  saeo.  V,  69.
DatMJftaana,  349.
Damnas,  or  systems,  the  six  aU

orthodox,  988,  439.
Death,  state  of,  174.
Deity,  existence  of  a,  499.
Deussen,  Professor,  theory  of  oto*

lution  of  Word  and  Brahman,

70.
Daya.  supreme,  never  asssTted  by

Eapila,  309.
Deyadhammikaa,  940.

—  worshippers  of  the  Deyas,  941.
Deyas,  thirty-three  in  number,  ao-

eording  to  Rig-yeda  and  Avesta,

diifieulty    of    filling   up   this

number,  38.
DeyayAna,  path  of  the  gods,  176.
Devotion  to  the  Lord,  one  of  many

expedients,  319.
Dhamia,  duty,  199,  440.
Dharmaklrtti,  seyenth  century,  364,

Dharmamegha,    eloud    of   virtue,

357-
Dharmarakshita,  a  sage,  439.

Dharmottara,  ninth  century,  de-
fended Dharmaklrtti,  365.

Dhfttri,  maker,  name  given  to  the
one  god,  47.

Dhishana  (Brihaspati),  457.

Dhriti,  energy,  966.

Dhj&nas  (Qhkna),  four,  90.

Digndga,  the  logician,  364.

DignAga's  writings  lost,  365  n.

—  Ny&ya-samu/cfcaya,  a  Tibetan
translation  of,  365  n.

7ipamkara  3ri0ff!&na,  439.
Distinction  of  good  and  e^il,  180.
DivAkara,  a  sage,  600  a.  d.^  30.
Divine  thinker,  every  word  an  act

of  a,  150.
DivyadiUa  Datta,  living  VedAntist,

155,  105.
Dosha,  faults,  491.
Dreaming,  staie  of,  174.
Drtshtem*  what  is  seen,  974.
DHdiMuta,  example,  385*


Drumstick  and  Irum  together  cAka-
vey,  even  to  the  dwt,  the  idea
of  sound,  38a

Dual  g^ds,  tr^o  or  three  gods  work-
ing  together,  tendency  towards
unity  among  the  gods,  40.

DuAkha,  pian,  974,  367,  491.

DuAkhAnta,  or  Nirv&na,  108,  370.

£FF£GT,  an,  only  a  new  manLesta-
tion,  dogma  eharaoteristio  of
the  SAmkhya,  158.

EkAgratA,  eonoentration^  357.

Emancipation,  Apavarga,  495.

Eschatology,  175.

EuB  is  perdpi  or  perdperey  991.

Eternal  punislanen^,  976.

Evolution,  ParinAma,  980.

—  of  works,  the  independent.  331.
Exercises,  AbhyAsa,  338.
Exposition,' five-membered  form  of,

43a.

FABLES  in  the  Sfktras,  305.
Fa-hian  visits  India,  399-414  ▲.  n.,

97.
Fancy  chiefly  due  to  words,  337.
Fetishism  or  Totemism,  did  they

precede  the  Aryan  theogony?

36.
Fifth  element,  called  d«ar-oi^/iaror,

386.
First  and  last  inference,  Vtta,  or

straightforward,  389.
Fivefold  division  of  the  vital  spirit,

174.
Four  or  five  elements,  the,  99.

—  states,  the,  174.

—  PramAnas,  according  to  Gotama,

374-
Freedom  from  passions,  YoirAgya,

338.

—  or  beatitude  deponda  on  philo-

sophy? 39<*
Frog-wife,  the,  3x6.

(7AIMINI,  author  of  one  of  the
M!mAm8A9,  85,  371.

—  refeiTed  to  by  BAdarAyana,  91,

198.

—  his  work  atheistic,  457.

—  and  VyAsa,  454.

-«-  8<itras,  contents  of.  aoa


30


nh


466


INDKX.


CMiM  literminre,  4^,  439.
0aI]iMi  in  white  robet,  31.
Oftlpai  •ophirtical  wnaglingy  389.
Gamgetft    Up&dhyAya,    foafteenth

oetQtiuyy  366.
GtoikAy  king  of  MithiU,  the  Yide-

ha,  iz-Z3f  97*
GftDgfcnAtha  Jha,  of  Bombay,  3x8.
GJli]g;I  YAAcaknavI,  zz.
(MLti,  kith  and  oaste,  9.
^  birth   or  genus,  a  iriuuiUo   M

ottenim  iillimify  389.

—  fdtility,  389.
Oatilakas,  a4Z.
Qftadap&da,  date  of,  093.
Gaorl-Sainkar,  Mount,  Z84.
Ghora,  fearful,  053.
(?inabhadra,  eighth  eentury,  438.
Otranmukti,  z8q,  360.
OWnayoga,  3x1,  347.
Ollfttiput^^  ieaeher  mentioned  in

Buddhiit  anz&ali,  the  Nirgran-
•  tha,  founder  of  Gainiam,  89.
Gnomiiia,  nomiiu,  376.
God    in    the    beginnizig    ereated

ziamea  and  forma  of  things,

398i
Gods  of   the   Yedie   people,   the

agents  postulated  behind  the

great  p&nomena  of  nature,  36.
Gondaphoros,  king,  authenticated

as  Gondophares,  63.
Gktrres  on  Sk.  terms  -  retained  by

the  Greeks,  386.
€k>aha-Samgha,  from  Bactria,  440.
Goddiputra,  teacher  mentioned  in

Buddhist  Annals,  89.
Gotama  and  KanAda,  i^osophies

of,  80.
Gotamakas,  040.

Greek  accounts  of  India,  fl6,  386.
Gunas,  constituents  of  nature,  zii.

—  the  three,    izi,  az6,   255,  956,

a^»  a63»  357-

—  as  Dravyani,  matter,  263.

—  equilibrium  of  the  three,  263.

—  of  Prakrit i,  341  n.

—  not  qualities,  but   substantial,

357-
(?yotish(oma  sacrifice,  009.

HAMMER  OF  FOLLY,  Mohamud-
gara,  x8i


Haribhadra,  his  ShaM||rwiiwafc-
ukfcaya-aftttam,  438.

—  died,  5fl8  A.  n.,  439.
Harihara,  956, 3Z3.
Haniha,  King,  600  ▲.  n.,  97.

—  history  of^  by  B&im,  30.

—  court  of,  365.

HaAa,  or  Kriyft-yoga,  344,  345.

Head,  forfeited  in  disputations,  13.

Heart*  seat  of  consciousness,  356.

H^gels  thesis,  antithesis,  and  syn-
thesis, 963.

Henotheism  «-  nhaae  in  whidi  God
is  addressed  as  if  i^e  only  god
in  tfdstenoe,  with  foigetftiliMSji
of  all  others,  40.

Harbart's  Sifbiltfhaltunff  4tt  RmIm
Z59.

— -  philosophy,  Z74.

HetyftbhAsas,  speciooa  aignments,
four  kinds,  389.

Hiouen-thsang,  Buddhist  pilgrizn,
TiBits  India,  699-645  ▲.  n.,  97.

—  did  not  trazislate  the  Yaissahika-

Stktras  by  Kan&da,  949.
Hiranyagarbha,  956,  3x3.
Holenmerian   theory  of  Plotinus

and  Henzy  More,  173.
Homoiousia,  39Z.
Human  souls  reborn  in  animal  and

Tegetable    bodies   (in   Upani-

ahads),  Z05.
Hume's  view  of  causality,  ZS9.
Hyades,    stars   markizig   Ume  of

rain,  37.
Hylobioi,  foiestHlwellerB,.  97.
Hymn  to  the  Unknown  Gk>d,  46^
Hymns,  adaptatiozis  of^  901.
Hypnotic  states,  how  produced,  365.
Hypnotism,  349.

IGHKEUMOK  AND  SNAKE,  380.
Idealism,  is  SAmkhya?  993.
Identity,  S&bhAyyam,  Z77.
Idolatry,  a  necessity  of  our  nature

Z65.
Ignorance,  or  MithyAtPttna,  39Z.
Immortality  of  the  soul,  Z05.
India,  a  nation  of  philosophers,  7.

—  early  philosophers  in,  8.
Indian  coinage,  60.

—  leaven  in  our  thoughts,  Z94,  385.

—  philoeophy,  books  ozi,  36^  369.


INDW.


467


IndiTldiial  aonl  is  Btahmaiii  not

9100  Vtfmtf  X^4*

Indn,  the  ndner,  35.
Indriya^ya,  subjugation  of  sensMy

357.
IndriyASy  IIto  tenaesy  16^,  4x5.

—  aenae,  173.
Indu,  tlie  ndn,  35.
Inference,  Aniim4iia,  879*

—  three  kinds  of,  379,  38a.

—  Smf<ti,  397.
Instance^  UdAhanmai  43a.
Inward-tamed  thought,  Ptatyak-

tsrara  exists  phenomenally  only,
X70.

—  the  Lord,  x88.

—  Krtehfia,  ^04.

—  or  personsl  I<ord.  denial  of,  not

in  the  original  Sftsikhya,  asa
— •  abo  re  all  Puruahas,  3aa
-T-  a  Purusha,  3fla

—  one  of  many  aouls,  325,  344.

—  perception  of  the,  397,  3a8.

—  a  maker,  a  Sat-kan|,  3^.
ttraraai  not  many,  3ax.

,  JATI,  of  Asraparanta,  440.

KAIVALYA,  aloneneaa,  345,  356^

359»  370,  373.
KaiTalja-pAda,  334.

—  meana  isolation  qf  the  aoul,  334.
Kaivalya,347,  359.

Kaiyate,  404.

Xakraprayartana,   the  turning  of

the  wheel,  04.
Kakuda  K&ty&ysna,  teacher  men-
tioned  in    Buddhist    annals,

69.
Kalanos  (Kaly&na)  gymnoaophist,

386.
KAlidAsa,  alludea  to  the  logician

DignAga,  364.
KanAda,  369,  37a}  44a
^andrakAnta  TsrkaiahkAra,  author

of  Sau'-krit  treatiae,  87  n.
K&niahka,  King,  85-106  ▲.  n.,  440.
his   Great   Council,   under

Yaaumitra  and  Famakii^  440.
Ean-ti,  not  a  good  Ohinese  scholar)


Xapila  and  Pataj|ga»,  307.

—  and  Buddha,  eristcmee  side  hy

si.4e  of  their  systems,  3x6.

—  appeals  to  the  Yeda,  396

—  his  atheism,  30a.

— tlid  '  Buddha  borrow  from?
a4a

—  did  not  borrow  from  Buddha,

103.

—  -SOtras,  age  of,  aao,  364.

—  reyiyed  the  SAmkbva,  043  n.

.»-  'YAstu  or  TJUtu,  birthplace  of
Buddha,  938.

Kftpya  P&taiitola,  307  n.

Ktoma  and  KAnma,  diffsrenoe  be*
tween,  959, 443.

BjUranAyaathA,  causal  state  of  Brah-
man, X09,  188.

KArikAa,  975,  306.

Karman,  109^

—  or  deed,  171,  440.

—  theory  oi;  330,  371.
KarmAtmans,  950,  967.

^■^p^^w^k  •••^^■^w  ^r^M^we    ^j  a  ^»  %

Karmayonis,  fiye,  966.
Karmendriyas,  fiye,  959.
KarshnAyini,  referred  to  by  BAdarA-

yana,  91.
JGIrya,  synonym  of  Buddha,  99.
JCArvAka,  99.

—  system,  457.

JQIryAkas  admitted  but  one  aouroe
of  knowledge,  143.

—  sensualists,  86.

KArya-kAranAbheda,  the  non-differ-
ence, or  substantial  identity,
of  eause  and  effect,  1561.

KAryesyara,  456.

KAsakfitsna,  referred  to  by  BAdarA-

yana,  91.
Kasawara  of  Japan,  died,  993.
KAtantralrJIeAandaAprakriyA,  modem

Sanskrit  treatisf  in  SCktras,  87  n.
KA/Aaka,  author  of  the,  908.
Kauthuma,  author  of  tiie,  908.
Keahtkf  gesture,  396^  499.
KeyalJLnyayi,  436.
Keyala-yyatireki,  43d
iCAala,  quibbling,  389.
KhyAti,  diacrimination,  948.
JCinyat  bridge,  had  anteoedenta  In

the  Veda,  63.
Xlt,  Supreme  '^^rit,  167.


Hh  2


468


iNDn.


^  worik  of  tlM  XaiiAis  359^
KlftDMithi^   a  V,  Am«rieftii   xsm^

tb«ir  tUiw  of  creation,  63^
Knowledge  alone  leadi  to  Moksha,

166.

—  true^  or  SamjagdarMna,  179.  ^

—  ariies  from  coiijunotioa  of  At*>

man  with  Manas,  ^19,

—  not  eternal,  431.

—  of  ideaa,  not  things,  406.

—  eharacterifitio   featore    of  SeU^

4a8.
Knunamakti,  slow  adranoe  towarda

freedom,  164.
Krishna,  the  hero  of  the  BhagaTad-

glt&,  of  Kshatriya  origin,  3a

—  similarity^  of  name  with  Ohristos,

61.

—  Ihraipftyans^  name  fi>r  B&darft-

yana,  1x7.
Krittik&s,  the  time  for  mowing,  no

star-worship  in  India,  37^
Kriyftphalas,  the  four,  ao6.
KriyAyoga,  347»  349»

—  working  Toga,  345.
Krypto-hnddhists,  306.
Kshatriyas,  as  i^tloso[^er%  8.
Knm&rila  Bhal&^  aio.
KnsuruTinda  Aodd&laki,  9o8»


ULKSHAJyl,   secondary   appUca-

tion  of  a  word,  177.
Language,  thoughts  on,  396,  397,

40a.
Laukkystika,  94.
Lauk4yatikas,  materialists,  86.
Letters,  idea  of,  elaborated  hy  the

Hindus  before  they  knew  the

Semitic  alphabet,  403.

—  have  no  raiaon  d'etre,  407,
Limgftm&tra,  i.  e.  Buddhi,  ^^z  n.
Logic,  375.

Logos,  the  result  of  Avidyft,  183.

—  or  Sophia,  399.

Lok&yata,  used  by  Buddhists  for
philosophy  in  general,  99,

—  or  world-wide  system,  99.

—  atheistic,  ^76,  976  n.
Lok&yatikas,  atheists,  31*

—  or  LaukAyatikas,  heretics,  98.
LokAyita  system,  439,


XlDHAVA'S  aeooant  of   KKj&ya,
377.

ICidhyaatika    Yrttti    kgr    JQuain

Xirtti,366.
Madras,  the,  009^
MAgandikas,  840.
MahAbhArata,  as  a  law-hook,  aou
MahAbhdtas,  a5a»
Mahat  is  not  Phenieian  Mot,  059.
MaitrAyaaa  Upanishad,  zz9b
Manas,  central  organ  of  pavoeptiosit

i^  999.
--  mind,  173,  95a,  9675,  416.

—  hraBu  99a.  ■

—  point  of  attention,  990.

—  a  mere  instrument,  990.

—  is  cognitiTO,  330.

—  diffei-ent  from  Buddhi,  3316b

—  or  mind,  aa  Ami  or  atom,  30!9,

384,  491.

—  as  nitya,  eternal,  384.

•—  efeernal  and  numeroua,  384*

—  many  manifestations  of,  4x8.

—  ninth  and  laat  of  tha  I>ravyas,

445.
Manifestation  or  intuition,  149.
Manu,  307.
Maruts,  eleyen,  h^lp  to  make  up

the  thirty-three  ]>e¥as,  39.
Maurya,  name  of,  doubtfol,  X19.
M.  M.'s  Indian  Logic,  366*
MAyA,  or  MAyAdei3,  name  of  Bnd-

dhh'a  mother,  93*
— not  mentioned  in  ttfee  old  Upani-

shads,  93.

—  illusion,  157,  16%  z^  aSo,  a8x.

—  aometimes  called  Samvrili,  367.

—  doctrine,  a  disguised  Buddliism,

457-
Moaning  of  a  word,  the,  ia  that

which  it  chiefly  aims  at,  453.
Meditation   with   or  without    am

objv  3t,  341.

—  BhAvanA,  34a.
Megasthenes,  detoription  hy,  305

B.  o.,  96k
Memory,  4x9.
Menandroa,  Greek  king,  oonyarsss

with   Buddhist   philoaoplmrs

63.
Mero,  974.

Metaphors,  195.


iHrax.


4«9


M^^mf&fehoaiM,  Bmmakrm,  104.
XllindA  (Menander)  and  N^Agasena,

dialogncj,  importance  o^  63.
MMstkiMuA,  quoted  in  UpaBiahads,  %.

—  UM  of,  in  Upaniriiads,  84,

—  inetliod,  ao9.
Himftms&s,  two,  308,  371.

Nyftya  and  VaiMshika,  590.

MlmAmsaka,  Daraana,  referrsd  to

hj  Bhaiirtfa%ri,  90.
MiniA«n«akas  require  Sabda  to  be
«temaly  400.

—  maintained     the     superhuman

origin  of  the  Vedas,  ao^.
Mindf  relation  to  language,  67.
— -  diapute  with  speech,  ^

—  for  Manas,  336,  383.

—  modified  by  objects  peroeiTed,

Miracles,  359.

Misdeos,  name  for  VasiSt  Deva  on

Ir  do-Partbian  coins,  ^.
Mnemonic  litefatui^  in  India,  3,

93.  904.
of  India,  reduced  to  writing,

»i8.
Mokaha,  hii^eat  aim   of  Kapila,

a73.  ,
MokahadcTa,  or  Master  of  the  Tripi-

teka,  Sanskrit  name  of  Hioo^i-

thsang,  09.
Moksha<^harma|  455.
Monotheism,   Monism,  tendencies

working  ioge^Mr  produce  idea

of  aupreme  personality,  41.
Morality  depends  on  prescriptiye

sacra  or  on  Samaya,  39a
More,  Henry,  HolenBMrian  theory

of,  I73»
Mddta,  stupid,  353.
Mudrfts,  349.
Mukhya-Prftna,  i^  174.

▼ital  spirit,  as  first  UpMhi,  1^3,

—  the  vitSsl  spirit,  301.
MAUkftrthas,  ^70.
MundasATakas,  940.
MArdhanya  Nftdi,  capital  Tain,  176.

NAGH£II«ANDER  AND  NEBEN-

EINANDEB,  935.
N&giitruna,  author  of  the  M&dhya-

mika-Sdltraa,  366,  396.

—  first  century  a.  d..  366.


NaishiSftika,  aa.

Kaiy&yika  derives  what  is  not  yet

from  what  is,  303.
VaiyAy.kas  beliere   in   God  as  a

Creator,  31.
— -  hold  the  Veda  to  be  non-etemal,

33a.
KftmadhA,  name-giTor,  name  iciyen

to  the  one  God,  47.
Kimadheya,    technical    name    of

each  sacrifice,  aoa
N&marapa,  157.

—  correspond  to  the  Greek  Logoi,

157-
IN'ftr&yayia  is  Brahman,  14a.
Nftsadlya  hymn,  49.
H&stika,  heretics,  98,  979.

—  or  JCftrr&ka  system,  99.
Hala-Slktras,  SilAlin  author  o^  97I
Hebeneinander,  truerJkey  to  growth

of  philosophical  ideas  thtai  the
Kacheinander,  74.

Kescience,  cosmical,  154.

Kewton's  system,  and  Darwin's
theoi^  of  oTolution,  396.

ITiebuhr's  deriyation  of  Indian
philos<^hy  from  Greece^  387.

Kiganf/ias,  940^  941.

Kigrahasth&na,  unttnesa  for  .dis-
cussion, 389.

KiranumAna,  949^  950,  968.

Kiratiaaya,  non  pht8  tUira,  399.

Kirfttman  (aalbi^),  969.

Nimaya,  ascertainment,  388.

Kirodha,  restraint,  336*

Kinr&na,  996,  360,  373.

—  also  Nirv&ta^,  373.

—  not  a  technical  term  in  Plnini's

time,  373.
~-  the  blowing  out  of  p.,^on8, 373.
— -  or  DuAkh&nta,  108.
Kirrikalpa,  one  kind  of  Pratyaksha,

144*
Kinritark4,  346.
Northern  Kurus,  974.
Notion,  Anubhava,  383.
NyAsa,  writing  (VyAsa?),  ir8.
NyAya-Sdtras,  83.

—  not  found  in  Upanishads,  84.

—  modem,  confined  to  PramAna,

391.

—  later  books  of  the,  391.  '

Nydya-m&lA-yistara,  901.


470


INDEX.


KyAya   and  Vidjt»«ii]ui   reprwant
Self  endowed  with  qnalitieey


a  first  itep  towards  tntth,

a88)  308.

systems,  331,  36a,  37a.

relation  between,  36a.

books  on,  369.

KyAys-philosophy,  history  of,  363,

—  also   applioable  to  the  Pftrva-

MlmAmtA,  369.

—  studied  first  century  ▲.  ]>.,  396  n.
Ny&ya  on  Sphoft^  4x3.

f  —  recognised  the  Veda,  417.

—  calls  Toga  to  ita  aid,  4a7.

OM,  393.

—  contraction  of  Avam,  393.
Organic  body,  the,  163.

FADJLnI,  appliances,  959.
PadArtha,  not  categories,  76,  375.

—  the  meaning  of  the  word,  376.
PadArthas  of    Kan&da,   the   five,

77.

—  (ofRfM  »e(biUi)f  363.

Padma-Pur&na,  456.
Padma  Sambhava,  439.
PadmAsana.  348.
Pain,  nature  of,  9761

—  meaning  of,  997.

Paksha,  or  memb^i'  of  a  Vy&pti,

430-

—  or  termimu  minor j  43a

PakshilasWkmin,  365.
Palm-leaves  pierced,  491.
PIfiini.  lost  Sfttras  Imown  to,  97.
P&nini's   principle    as    to   letters

forming  a  word,  404.
PaKftadad,  915.

—  author  of  the,  quotes  the  MAdh-

jamikas,  36<S.
PMDnrfttra,  account  of  system  in

PrasthAna  Bheda,  81.
Pam^rAtras,  31.
PaXtasikha,  philosopher  referred  to

in-SAmkhya-SOtras,  90,  995.
Pantaenus  in  India,   one  of  the

teachers  of  Clement,  69.
FarA,  higher  knowledge,  164.
Parables,  Buddhist  Iotc  <^  teaching

by,  306.


Part  gatly  the  bluest  fiMl,.a4,
Parama-tsrara,  highest  Lord,  334.
PammArtha,  a  law  tMeher,   a.s>.

557-589, 994.
PAramArthika,  rsal,  367.
ParamAtman  is  isvant,  but  Xsran

is  not  ParamAtman,  494.
PlaramparA,  tradition,   as  bandied

down  orally,  n^,

—  mnemonic  literature,  9x8.

—  of  the  BrAhmans,  306^
ParAsara,  455.

PArAsarya  (VyAsa),  author  <tf  Bhik-

shu-Sfitras,  97,  xx7.
PisravAHa,  controversies,  095.
ParavairAgya,    higher    impaaalTe-

nees,  459.
ParibhAgaksa,  941.
Parikahit,  old  King,  ra.
PariMAma!,  eyolutiun,  185,  980.
ParisiAma*TAda,  theorr  of  evoliitloii,

8x.
ParivxAgaka,  or  Bhikshu,  04.

—  an  itinerant  fHar,  as

—  (mendioanta),  31.

PAfupata,   account   of  system   in

PrasthAna  Bheda,  8x.
PAAsliputra,  Buddhist  Oouneil  at,

976  B.a,  95.
Pata^li,  author  of  Toga-Sfttras,

and  Patatl^ali,  author  of  the

MahAbhAshya,  xx8.

—  the  grammarian,  age  cf^xig,

—  by  no  means  settled,  XX9.

—  second  century  B.oil,  990.

—  the   philosopher   may    be    the

same  as  the  grammarian,  3x3.

—  called  Phanin,  or  Sesha,  313.

—  date* of,  only  constmctiTe,  314.

—  eaUed  a  portion  of  Safikaxshasia

or  Ananta,  314.

—  his  theistic  SAmkhya-philosophy,

318.
"PaWekh  SamuppAda,  378.
Perception,  I^tyaksba,  379,

—  contact  of  sense  with  ita  object,

393-
^  contact  of  thp  senses  and  mind,

39a.

—  contact  of  mind  and  the  Sel^  39a.

—  Sruti,  397.

Perceptions,  always  peroeired   as
perceptions  of  somethings  x6x.


OrDUL


471


N


I06i»

PhmlA,  nwmrdi,  49^  4*5.

Pliawibluurtyi,  3x4.

PliAfiin,  name  for  Patail^^  3x3,

3x4.
Fbenomenftl  and  floiiiioiui,  diflbr-

enoe  between,  X85.
Fhilosophieal  ideas,  oommon,  X04.

—  systems,   parsllel    development

of,  ass.

—  senta  at  the  time  of  Buddha,  040.
Philottophies  and  SAtras,  relative

age  of,  8x9.

Philosophy,  different  ways  of  study-
ing, 189.

Fin  ran  through  sheets  of  a  KS.
seems  simultaneous,  but  is
Buooessive,  393.

Pitriyftna,  path  of  the  fkthers,  X76.

Pleiades,  the  return  of  calmer
weather,  37.

Plotinus,  HoUnmerian  theozy  o^
X73.

Postures,  TogAngas,  347.

—  and  tortures,  355.
Prabh&kara,  oommentator  on  the

Mfmftmsl,  a  10.

—  a  Ml mlmsaka,  499^
Plraotioal liferVyavahAra),  094.

—  purposes  (vyavahArArtham),  160.
PradhAna,  PnJ»^  069, 3x5, 341  n.
Pradyumna,  x88.

PruiApati,  supreme  god,  40.

attains  more   personal  ahar-
acter,  45.

—  called  Vijva,  ftc,  060.
—7  tradition  from,  307.

Prft^,  or  Olva,  individual  soul,

ax6,  060,  346.
PftJcarasiasama,  argumen     telling

on  both  sides,  388.
PrAM,  previous,  197.
PrsMAannarBauddhas,  306.
Prakfiti,  nature,  poten^al  matter,

157.

—  not  the  author  of  creation,  158.

—  wrongly  translated  by  nature,

X58..
«*  nature,  known  as  XAyA  (magic),
x6a.

—  or  Urstoff,  989.

—  is  not  1^  work  when  not  peroeived

by  a  Purusha,  989.


PiakHti,  diifeLent  from    aaioray

4^(f,  990.
— -  PrakAM,  or  light,  99X.

—  firsf-  wakened  to  life  by  disturb-

ance of  its  three  constituents,
991.

—  In  all  her  disguises,  Purusha  and

the  dancer,  995.
Prakriti-puru8ha-viveka»  9815.
Prakrttilaya,  948.

—  absorbed  in  PrakHti,  349, 343.
Plrakn'tis,  eight,  990.
Prakn'ti's  unselfishness,  999.
Pralaya,  the  idea  of,  recent  xio.
Pralayas,  absorptions  of  the  whole

world,  109.
PlramAna,  only  one  admitted  by  tha
LokAjratas,  99.

—  instrument  of  measuring,  X43.
PramAna,  374,  378.
PramAna-BamuJfeAcaya,  the  Tibetan

version,  396.  .
PramAnas,  143.
— three  essential,  X44.
~-   the   three    go    back    to   one,

X4S-
-^  authoritative  sonrcea  of  know-
ledge, 909.

—  of  Oaimini,  909.

—  three,  973, 974.

—  eight,  395.

—  in       different       Philosophical

Schools,  498.
I*W«tteya,  374t-375»  SSa.
Prameyas,  objects  of  knowledge,

39a>  415,  431.
PrAna  ^  breath,  47.

PrAnas,  vital  spirits,  173.

Pranava,  399.

—  the  inner  guide,  335.
PrAsiAyAmas,  344,  347.
Prasena^t,  97.
PrasthAna-bheda,  treatise  on  phil<^

sopLrcal  literature,  75.
Pratipathi-karmAiti,  aox.
PrAtisAkhyas,  9x8.
PratisaiUrara  is  dissolution,  964.
Pratltya,  dependent  or  conditioned,

367  n.
Pratttyatva,  367.
Pratiyogitva,  437.
PratyAhAra,  compleU  abatraction,

349.


472


INPEX.


Pratyftkaba,  senae  |.«roaptia«i,  144,

«73,  374.

—  two  kinds  of,  144.

—  peroeption  and  Anum&ra,   in-

ferenoe,   ignored   by   B&dasft-
yana,  146.

—  applied  by  B&darftyana  to  firuti

(revelation),  147.

—  perception,  379,  393.
Pravntti,  activity,  431.
Prayoga-yidhis,  aoo.
Prayoyana,  purpose,  385.
Presumption  (Arth&patti),  303.
PretyabhAva,  transmigration,  384,

431,  49a.

Primeval  waters,  existing  apart
from  Pra^pati,  79.

Panarokti,  useless  repetition,  996.

POrana  KAsyupa,  teacher  men-
tioned in  Buddhist  annals,  89.

Por&tana,  307.

Purohas,  1613,  mentions  castes  of
Banians,  9.

Purusha  »  man,  name  given  to  the
one  god,  47.

—  (soul)  does  not  migrate,  but  the

SClkshma-aarlra,    subtle  body,
105.
Pw™rfia>  a53,  977.

—  name  of  supreme   deity,  953,

341.

—  one  or  many  ?  956.

—  never  the  material  caoae  of  the

universe,  986.
—r  state  of,  when  firee,  996.

—  rendered  by  Self,  not  by  man,

3Zin.

—  the  95th  Tattva,  349*
Purushas  of  the  Sftmkhya^  many,

a85»  371-
Purushottama,  399.

Piirva,  the  prius,  381.'

PCLrvyE&ryas,  83a

PQrva-Mtm&ms&,  the  first  step,  141.

—  196,  aoo,  909,  913.

and  Uttara-MlmAm8&,  913.

charged  with  atheism,  391.

Purvapaksha,  904,  435.
Purvavat  preceded  by  a  prius,  379.
Pythagoras,  identified  with  Bud-
dha-guru, 60.

—  olaim^  a  subtle  eovering  for  the

soul,  300.


<)UALinSS,  Gmia,  441
<)iiality,  intang  ble  in  sound,  401

KkaXGRIBA,  Buddhist  Cooneilat.
477  a.  0.,  95.

K*P*"yog»>  true  Yoga,  345.
Raghuvamsa  of  K&lidftsa,  907.
BAho,  head^of,  337.
Baikva  and  G&nasruti,  14.
BajendralalMitra,  394,395,341, 358.
BAmftnu^,  lived  twelfth  century
▲.  D.,  Z85.

—  his  view  of  universe,  980.
Bftm&nupa*B  system  called  YitiahCa-

Advaita,  187.
Beal  and  the  phenomenal,  dittut-

enoe  between  the,  i6z.
Season,  Hetu,  439.
Beceptade,  An^ya,  or  subject,  495.
Beligion     and    philosophy     have

worked  together  harmoniously

in  India  alone,  409.
Beligious   persecution,    Buddhists

and  BrAhmans,  99.
Beligious  and  Popular  Poetry  of

Yodic  Age,  not  one  hundrodth

part  of  it  remains,  41.
Bemembering  is   not  wiping  out,

338.
Bemembrance,  Smaraita,  383.

—  can   make  our  mouths  w^ter,

416.

Btddhis,  or  Aisvaryaa,  350.

Big-veda,  a  fragment  only,  does  not
represent  whole  of  Yedic  my-
thology and  religion,  49.

BttambharA,  truth-bearing  346^

Bitter,  his  contempt  of  the  NyAya,
76,  390.

Boot,  the,  expresses  BhAva,  a  stats,
or  KriyA,  action,  405.

SABDA,  the  wont  «74,  394,  3»>
404,  448.

—  or  wora,  a  PramAna,  145,  374?

389.
^labdAnuaAsanam,  317  n.
Sabh&pati  SvAm]^  353,  ^53.
Sacrifice  was  Karman,  woHe,  198.
SAdhana-pAda,  334.
Sadness  cleaves  to  all  finite  life,

997.
Saiva  and  PAsupata  systems,  457.


niMx.


473


bloned,  BnhBwn  called,  169^
84ki]ifttkjlra,  or  manifestaiion,  14a.

StikU,  poweir,  IS7»  44i.
8aniAdfii»  obataelea  tb^  ^03.

—  asieditation  or  absorption,  334,

341, 350.     -

—  or  SamApatti,  346.

'  Samddki,  Apra^tft,  347, 407.
SftmAiiya,  genus,  441,  447.
SAm&n jato  Brtehia,  oonstanUy  seen

together,  380.
Samashti,  aSfl.
SaoaavAya,    intiinate     ooaneetioii,

37^,  447.
SambhATa,  probability,  395.

—  eqniTaleiiee,  409.
SaiHgati,  connection,  004,  905.
Sasn^ya-Vairatti-putoa,        teacher

mentioned  in  Bnddhiiit  annals,

89.

Sain^ti,  a  council  (sjn^ony),  4.

fllitwkag%  literary  works  referred  to

^y  "4.

—  his  contempt  of  ritualism,  J65.

—  Ured  ei^th  century  ▲•  B^  id6,

—  and  B&m&nu0«,  joints  of  differ-

ence. 190.
-T  no  better  than  Buddhism,  307.

—  opposed  to  Sphofo,  4xa
Saatkarshana,  x88.
Ssffikarshafia-kftffuia,  consists  of  four

ehapters,  78.
SamkhAras,  the,  378.
SAmkhya,  distinguished  tmm  other

VedAnta-phUoaophies,  8a
BAmkhya-yoga,    name    occurs    in

tJpanishads,  84.
SAsnkhya-DarMina,  referred  to  by

Bhartfihari,  90.
TAmkhya,  mentioned  in  Buddhist

texts,  93.

—  and  Toga  systems  «re  Smriti,

H7-

—  dogma  of  eifeet,  158,  159.

—  the  duplistic,  z6a

—  I^Uosopby,  ais-

» ideas,  influence  ol^  016.

—  atheistic,  yet  orthodox,  931, 979.

—  title  of  two  systems,  SAnduiya

and  Yoga,  069  n.


SAtiAhya,  true  meaning  of^  97$.

—  Aviveka,  981.

—  imidorality  of  the,  304

—  parables,  305.
SAmkhya-Toga,  306.

SAmkhya  as  SatkAryavAda  the  op-
posite of  the  Buddhist  view  ci
'the  world,  367.

—  and  Toga  treated  by  Xadhus^i-

dana  as  different  from  cue  two
MimAmsAs,  450.

—  kiiowledge,    supeflor    to   etiier

systems,  454.
SAmkhya-kArlkAs^  the,  999.
exist  in  a  Chinese  translation.


SAmkhya-SCltras,  date  of,  1380  a.i>.,

«4.

—  —  fourteenth' century  ju  n.,  99a

SAmkhya-yogins,  the,  335.
SAfukl^as,  followers  of  KapiU,  31 .

—  deriTO  what  is  not,  from  what

M>383.
SamkoJkiU,  i8a

Sami'Adlianam,      accomplishment,

169.

SamsAra,  can  be  stopped,  977.

Samaaya,  907.

—  or  doubt,  383.
SamskAra,  instincts,  390,  349.
SamskAras  and  VAsanAs,  357.

—  dispositions,  358,  449.
SAmyvitika,  367.

Samyama  constituted  of  DhAranA,
DhyAna  and  SamAdhi,  35a

—  leads  to  Siddhis,  perfection,  33a

SAnandA,  joyous,  349.

Sanandana  JUArya,  philosopher  re-
ferred to  in  SAmkhya-Satraa,
90.

Saflttora  is  CTolution,  964.
Sanskrit  proper  names,  313.
SAnta,  pleasurable,  959.
iSAnti  Rakshita,  439.
ffAnumAna,  949,  950i>

—  with  inference,  967.
SArlra,  body,  173,  4x6.
Sarmanas,  aS,

SAsmitA,  with  false  conceit,  349.

SAstra,  the,  99a

Sat-kAryavAda,    cTery   effect   pre

exists,  X59,  367.
-»  something  real,  303.


474


QIBBX.


SMUBAiiMjmy  •eruutj',  SS7*
8*Tage  tribes,  their  philosophy,  5.
SftTl^  with  ft  Mod,  943.
SftTikftlpft,  one  kind  of  Pratyftkahfty

X44-
SftTiMrft,  delibermtiYe,  04%  346^

—  and  NinriJttrft,  346.
SaritarkA,  argumentatife,  34a,  346.
Sayitn  (Asuxa),  the  enliyener,  one

of  the    ac^nta    of   reourring

oTanta  01  natore^  apofcan  of  in

Veda,  37.
Schopenhauer  on  the  Peruan  trana-

lation  of  the  Upaniahada,  193.
Scienoe  of  Language,  and  Seienoe

of  Thought,  40a.
Second  centory  a.  a,  314.
— Inference,  Avtta,  not  atralght-

f orward,  383.
8$mn»8  judical  orMs  ttrrarMm,  fiir-

TalankikapramAtva,  403.
Seed  moat  periah  before  the  llowar

can  appear,  4aa.
SaU^  the,  077.

—  of  Qod    and    man,  the   aame,

194.

—  charactariatica  of  the,  38I3.

—  doea  not  begin  with  birth  on

earUi,  4x6.
Senaation  without  j^eroeption,  39a,

993*
Senaea,  Indriyaa^  41^
SMha,  name  for  Patail^ali,  3x4.

—  or  pcaterior,.  37^
Shaahii-tantva,  aaS.

—  —  the  Sixty-dootrine,  971.
Siddhinta,  303.

—  teneta,  385.

Siddkia,  perfectiona,  350, 351,  357.

—  miraculooa  powerk,  353-354.
Sign,  longa,  or  Vy&pya,  380.

—  bearer  of  a,  Li^gin,  380.

AlAditya  Harsharaidhana,  com-
monly called  iSri-Harsha  of
KanjFlkubga,  ▲•  n.  610-650,  a8.

filUlin,  author  of  Nate-Siitraa,  97.
Similarity,  S&myami  X77.
SttA,  daughter  of  Oanaka,  xx.
SiTa,  found  on  earliest  Mauryian

coins,  60.
Six  ayatems  of  philosophy,  449.
Sixteen  Topics,  or  PadArthaa,  374.


17,  "o,
Mrambha,  aupporl,  naoa  ghRon  to
the  one  god,  47.

—  the    uniTeraal     aupport,     00a

meaninjg  of  Brahman,  70.
Skanda  found  on  eartieat  lUaryaa

coins,  60.
Sleep,  state  of  dreapileas,  174.

—  comes  when  Manaa  enteia  Pux»

tati«d84.
Smriti  Indudea  philoaophy,  3.

—  reread  to  writing,  93.

Smritia  of  the  S&aikhya-yoga,  ob-
jections to  conTargenoe  of  the
VedAnta  paaaagea  on  Brahman,

79.

—  philoaophiaa    of    Gotamn    and

KafiAda  treated  aa,  80.
Souls,  multiplicity  of,  457.
Sound,  a  quality,  having  JLkAita  or

ether  for  ita  aubatanoe,  4rou

—  eternal  character  of,  4ox.
Spaoe,  444-

Spho(a,  *  the  eternal  word  •■  Bnh-
man/  65  n.,  68,  40a.

—  Yedinta  on,  4x0.

—  Toga  and  Siaikhya  on,  419.

—  Ky&ya  on,  4x3.

—  Yaiseshika  on,  4x4.

—  sound,  diatinct  from  tha  lattswj

403.
Sphot&yana,  400.
AraddhA,  faith,  a66.
firutam  and  Smritam,  a.

—  or  rsTelation,  the  only  aridanM

iuToked  by  BAdarftyana,  X46.

—  and  JLptapTakana,  diiferanoe  bt*

tween,  934.

—  inspiration,  347.

State  religion  in  India,  95.
Statistics,  to  be  used  with  aantiflii,

45-
Stem  and  root,  meaning  of^  405.

Sthiti,  338.

Sthaia-  and  Stlkahma-tarlra,  1731

a7x.
Subh&shitas,  33^
Subject  and  object,  aa  rAl  or  pbs-

nomenal,  X53.

identity  of,  170.

SubjeotiTation,  983.
Subatancea,  Dravya,  44X.


INDIX.


475


OaMo  htijf  ifloording  to  th*  ¥•-

dinifty  900.
SakhA,  blisd,  a66.
Sakahma-tarlray      mlgntoi    allor

death,  174.

—  —  sabtle  body,  300.

the  liAgft'^iuIra  of  the  SAm-

khy»>philorophy,  301.
SiHRimtm  htmum^  the  Vihtnywuk  of

Ooteme,  370.

of  the  ■ixsyBtems,  370-373.

BtnjAf    not    altogether    no&iiiig,

367.
5ftnyay&dSy  nihilism,  aa,  366.

—  doctrine  of  emptineesy    ao

—  empiinees  dootorine,  184/

—  nihilism,  386.
Suppiya,  16.

Supreme  Being  soting  from  eom-

petsion,  330.
Suttos  969.
SAtn. -style,  3,  903.
Sfttrs,  a  Bqddhist,  440.
S^tra-TWtti  by  Bodh&yana,  187.
Sfttras  known  to  Buddhists,  15.

—  ♦heir  style,  93,

—  now  lost,  known   to   Flninif

97.
~  aseribed  to  BKhaspati,  97.

-—  style  of  the,  9x8.

—  of  KapHa,  Wled  Manana-dLstra,

incMtute   of   reasoned   truth,

989.

—  Ikbles  in  the  fourth  ehapter,  305,

306.

—  the    philo8ophioal|    later  than

Buddha,  314.

—  date  of,  3iSa.

Suttas  (Siktras),  namd  of  part  of

Buddhist  Canon,  85.
8uTama-8aptati-«totra,  the,  999.
STAbh&sa,  self-illuminated,  358.
liTastlkAsaia,  349.
;9yetaketu,  370.
8vet&sTatara  Upanishad,^  the  three

Gunas  found  first  in  the,  9x61

—  Upanishad,  969.
8y&dvada   X9,  99.
Syllogism,  497.

Systoms  of  philosophy,  the  Six,  ex-
isting during  period  from  Bud-
dha, Cfth  century,  to  Atoka,
third  century,  90,  91.


T13>  BKAm,  thas  Una,  tha  aMilfr

Supreme  Being,  48.
Taifliasa,  luminous,  949,  950,  960.
Taittirlya,  author  of  tSie,  908.
Takakusn,  Dr.,  993.
Tftmasaltna,  969.
TanmfttrM,  flre,  950,  999,  346.

—  (this  only),  99X.

Tantra,  cumulation  of  concurrent

rites,  909.
Tapes  of  the  Hindus,  3x9.
T^ka,  old,  363.

—  refritation  or  reasoning,  388.
Tat  tTam  asi,  Thou  art  that,  xaa.

—  —  Thou  art  it,  370.
Tattva-samAsa,  974,  975,  306.
the,  949.

Tattraa,  the  twenty-fire,  944,  974.
Technical  terms  in  Upanishads,  5.
Tedandikas,  94a
Tennyson,  quoted,  X56.

—  Ancient  Sage,  194.
Terebinthos,  pupU  of  Scythianoa,

name  Ikmed  among  followers
of  Mani,  64.
Terminus  minor,  Paksha,  430

—  midor,  VyApaka,  430.

—  medius,  VyApya,  430.

Terms  used  in  Hindu'  philosophy,

not  the  same  as  we  use,  X55.
Tb^odictfe,  the  Hindu,  X7X.

—  an  ancient,  919.
Third  place,  the,  179.

Third  Vallt  of  Katfta  Upanishad,
X36.

Three  couples  of  philosophical  (sys-
tems, 308.

Time,444.

—  present,  past,  f utura,  393.
Titthiyss,  or  Ttrthakas,  939.
Txiilgunya,  969.
Tranquillity  (SAnti%  996.

Triad,  Dharma,  Arthaand  KAma,6o.

—  of  elements,  xoo.
Tripiteka,  date  of,  15.

Trithen,  Dr.,  and  PrasthAna  Bheda,

Truth  better  than  sacrifim,  361.

—  PramA,  498.

Tryanuka,  three  double  atoms,  446.
Tnshtis  and  Siddhis,  970,  970  n.
TrashM,  the  maker,  not  real  crea-
tor, of  ail'  things,  43,  44.


476


IKDUL


non-wordy  4^*


Mid  AO


UDDALAKA,

Uddyotaluura,  not  TJdyotakarft,  364,

UffnlomM,  99.
UmvBnalia  in  rvftnc,  398.
UpAdA  %,  materiAl  canae,  X58.
Up&dhi,  condition,  430.
UpAdhis,    linrlting   conditions    of
name  and  form,  158.

—  4t«^  i^.

—  oonditions,  impositions,  163.

—  or  conditions,  173.

—  conditions,  380,  436.
Upslabdhi,  perception,  173,  418.
Upam&na,    comparison,  374,  3^,

44«.

—  belongs  to  the  Kjr&ya  school,  394.

Upana^rana,  141.
Upanishad-period,  700  b.  o.,  4.
Upanishads,  known  to  Buddhists,

a4-

—  existence  of,  recognised  in  Bnd-

dhist  Canon,  85.

—  translation  of,  published  1879,

1884,137.

—  character  of  the,  139.

—  contain  the  seeds  of  later  philo-

sophy, T40.

—  and  YedAnta,  something  between

the,  Z43.
Upftsakas,  laymen,  95.
Upayarsha,  teacher  of  P&nini,  1x7.

—  the  Vedkntist,  4x0.

Upftyas,  means  of  attaining  Sam4-

dhi,  344.
Uposfaadha,  936.
Utpatti-yidhl8,original  injnnetions,

900.

Uttarapaksha,  903,  435.

vIda,  389.

VAsiapy&yana,  words,  mean  a  genus,
406.

VaikkrikiL,  950,  959,  967.
VaikhAnasa-Sutras,  Joss  of;  referred

to  by  BhAskadUeirya,  86.
VairAgya-eataka  of  OainAfcArya,  339.
Vai«Alt,B«ddhist  council  at, 377  b.c.,


Vaiseshika,   word   as4    fnml  n
trpanishads,  35.

—  en  Sphote,  4x4.

—  philosoi^y^  438.
Vaiseshikas,  followers  of  KanAda,

31.
— >  creation  and  disaolntioB  n^eoid-

ingto,  xxo.
▼aiahnaTss  (RAmAn^vi^),  theoiy  o(

contrasted  with  that  of  Brah-

mavAdina,  89.
VAky  diiection  taken  in  Veda  bj

thoughts       connected       with

speech,  63.
VAkaspaf '-Mim,  on  Budtiii,  947.

—  tenth  centunr,  366.
VAlkah^  dress  of  bark,  97.
YAnapxasthas,  xo^  97,  86.
Vaniflf«s  Banian,  9,
YarAha-Mihira  mentionsKapilaand

KaMabhu0^  941.
Yama,  colour  and  caste,  9.
YAsanAs,  inmressioBS,  175, 390, 358.
Yasso,  from  YarshAa,  937.
Yasubandha,  knew  the  six  ^nrthya

philosophies,  363.
Yaaunefera  c^  the  Yaiaeshika  school,


Yasns,  sereBy  oaa  be  diating«ished,

38.
YattAgAmani,    80    B.O..    Tripilika

written,  4.
YAyus,  winds,  967.
Yeda,  infallibility  of  the,  xxx.

—  authority  of,  149,  93a.

—  meaniag  of^  X49.

—  acquisition  of  tiie  mere  aouad,

meritorious,  904.

—  superhuman  origin  of  the,  906.

—  authority  assigned  by  Kaplla  to

the,  93a.

—  cannot  prove  the  existence  of  1

Supreme  Being,  339.

—  the  worl  of  Brahman,  395.
YedAdhjrayana,  learning  the  Yeda

by  heart,  141.
YedAnta,   word  does  not  eecnr  ia
old  Upanisb  Jds,  84.

—  or  Uttaira-MimAmsA,  Z13.

—  the  first  growth  of  philoso^icy

though^  ZX5.

—  followers  of  the,  called  Aupaai-

shadas,  116.


WDMX.


477


-^  philoiiophfw,  two^  X90.

—  first  ooonn  in  tW  Sv«li«vatftra,


—  and  SftfRkhym,  moAj  vtlaAioii  !>•-

twe«i,  958.

—  AVidyl^  AviTela^  aSa

—  i^tu  monistiey  a9z.
— *  on  apho<%  410.
YedftntarSArSy  0x5.
YedftnU-Sfttrw   and    Bftdari^ana,

•arliar  IKan  the  Bluig^Tad-gttft,
X13.

—  and  Bhagavad-gtti,  ralailva  af»

O^  ZI&

—  mathodieaL  141.
yedintin%  followen  of  Upaniahadii

31.
Yed  ntiaty  %  does  not  t'eally  join

Brahiaany  309.
Yedftntiati  darive  the  vsreal  from

the  real,  30^
Yedaa,  anthority  of  the,  149.

—  eoond  of,  eternal,  908.

—  words  of  the,  supernatural,  act.
Vedie  gods,  three    olasses — ^z)  of

the  sky ;    (a)  of  the  mia-air ;
(3)  of  me  earth,  37.
Vedie  hymns,  date  for,  oooo  b.o.  or
5000  B.a,  little  gained  hy  this,

34-
Vedie  Yftft,  a  fominine^  56.

—  eoineidenee  with  S<q»hia  of  O.T^

57-
VedosdhyetaTyaA,  005.

Verbal  symhoto,  Z65.
Vibhilti-pftda,  334.
Vibhfttis,  powers,  349^
Videhas,  bodyless,  34a,  343.
Vidhfttri,  arranger,  name  giTon  to

the  one  god,  47.
VidTaa-moda^taraiikgial,  aza.
VidyAmAtra,  knowledge  only,  z6o.
•—  doetrine,  497.
VlflriknarBhifcshu.  985,  a88,  45Z.
-r  sonposed  to  hsTO  composed  the

Siktrasi  aaz.
VikAirsa,  aiarteen»  953,  9B3.
Vikisa,     r  higher  enli^itenment.

zio^


ViniyogapTidni,

Yhflaana.  349^

Virtue,  a  prelizninary  of  If^dia,

Viraddha,  avgnmanis  proving  the

rererse,  389.
Vidhkhafonnd  on  eaxlieit  Manryan

coin,  6a
Vinsha,  gross  elements,  34Z  n.,  447.
Visham^tvam,  onevenneM^iZz.
Yishi^a,  904.
Vishmi,  3x3.

—  diagnised  as  Baddha,  457.
Yishita-Pnrftfia,  456.
Vi^hta-Advaita,  BAmftnuj^'s  93^

tern,  187.
"^sva,  or  VaitfTtnara,  a6a
Visrakamma,  later  development  of

Yitvakarman,  45.
Viflrafcarman,  described,  Tagoe  and

uncertain  character,  45.

—  maker  of  aU  things,  adjeetive

shewing  germs  that  were  to
grow  into  suj^me  deity,  used
as  snbstantiTe,  43.
Yifve,  or  All-gods,  represent  first
attempt  at  comprehending  ^e
various  gods  as  forming  a  class,

39-
VltandA,  cavilling,  389.

Vivarta,  turning  away,  Z85.

l^varta-vftda,   theory  of  IKusioii,

8z.
Vivasvat,  307.
VivekAnanda,  9Z3.
VividishA,  desire  of  knowledge,  966.
Viyoga  or  Viv^a,  3za
Vriha  or  Vn'dh-a,  possibly  Sanskrit

words,  55.
VHshadeva  received  8atnkaraT  993.

—  king  of  Nepal,  ▲.z^  630,  993.
Y^ki'u    words    znean    individual

things,  406.
Vyakta,  z8a
Vy&paka,  fii-e,  145.

—  what  pervades,  499.

—  or  S&dhya,  terminus  zni^or,  430.
VyApta,  pervaded,  499.

YyApti,  universal  rule,  pervasion,

4^99  434*

—  a,  may  be  true  in  ninety-nine

oases,yet  not  in  the  hundredth,
484.


47»


IN0SX.


yjkpji,  what  must  b«  ptnradbd,

—  tonninos  medins,  430.

TJiM^  idenisUied  with  BAdivAxaiM,
X13.

—  lived  «t  the  end  «f  th6  DvApant

«ee,  1x5.

—  neyer  named  by  Samk«r»  as  the

auiAior  of  the  SAtraSy  zxa.

—  the  father  of  5iika,  1x4.

—  ealled  P&raiarya,  XX7.

—  and  Harihaia,  956.

— eenunentary  on  Toga^Siitraai  3x3.

VyaTahilrartham,    praotioal    pur-

poees,  z6o.
YyaTahAriha,  phenomenal,  367.


WEBEBy  A.,  Professor,  56^  307  n.

Whole,  is  there  a?  393.

Women,  |»«sent  at  philosophical

discussions,  la
Wood-architectore^    previous      to

stonework,  6x.
Word,  the,  as  a  oreatiye  power,  66.

—  or  iSabda,  389,  399.

Words,  meaning  o^  conTentional,

394*

—  express  the  sicmmnm  (wmif,  405*

—  not  names  of  indiyiduals,  hut  of

classes,  408.
World,  phenomenal  reality  of  the,

154-

—  created  by  the  Word,  397.

Worlds,  the,  created  from  the  Word,

xsa
Worship  (Up&8an&>,  164.
Writing,  allusions  to,  9a.


Wxiii4&  whan  flni  allanipf  sd^  in

India,  ax8.
Written  letters  ea^Ied  nureal,  9a

TAffilfAVAlKTA,  XX,  xa,  340.

—  and  CNmaka,  X3.
TaAka4,  anybody,  054,  954  n.
Tama  and  Tamt,  usually  identifled

with  Adam  and  Ere,  children
of  Traah^i^  hut  childless  theaa-
■ehesy  44.
TogSy  quoted  in  tJpanishads.  5,  84.

—  and  S&mkhya,  the  true,  philoao-

phies,  8a

—  not  iMion,  X70W

—  in   the    Taittiilya  and  Kaflha

TJpanishads,  aao.

—  and  Sftmkhya,  307.

—  meanings  of  the  word,  908.

—  is  Samatra,  equability,  308L

—  not  union,  but  disunion,  30^
— -  means  really  Yiyoga,  310.  -  -

—  steadying  of  the  mind,  336.

—  as  a  T&raka,  or  ferry  across  the

world,  356.

—  is  it  Nihilism?  359.

—  and  SAmkhya  on  Sphola,  4x0.
Yoga-Sfttras,  334.
YogftHras,  fl9, 366.

YogAngaa,  helps  to  Yoga,  347,  34a

—  eight  accessories  of  Yoga,  350.
Yog&nu^ftsanam,  3x7  n.
Yoga-s&ra-satngrafaa,  abstract  of  the

Yoga,  31a
Yogins  in  Maitrfty.  Up.  YI,  ana

—  perceptions  of  the,  397.

—  nine  classes  of,  343.

ZARADES  (Zoroaster),  name  found
among  followers  of  Hani,  64.


THE  END.


Skylark    ^rinter^


PHOTO  -  LITHO  GRAPHER


M  7fB  HOOEL  TOWN


oewMi -  •


RETURN
TO


CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT

Main  Library  •  198  Main  Stacks


LOAN  PERIOD  1

HOME  USE

2

3

4

6

6

AU  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS.

RwMwIs  and  Rachargat  may  b«  mod*  4  days  prior  to  (ho  duo  date.

Books  may  b*  R«n«w«d  by  coMng  642-3405.

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW

WAK  i  5  t598

FORM  NO.  DD6


UNIVERSnV  OF  CAUFORNIA,  BERKELEY
BERKELEY,  CA  94720-6000


Ya.35424


U.  C.  BERKELEY  LIBRARIES


coMaans^M


•t
