r

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL

LIBRARY

0 __

[ > '

Claes_ _ _

| Call No SalT AtifA.M*

D.O.A. 70.

'

71

.

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

1st Edition 1914 
Snd Edition 1952

Primed by D. V. Syamala Ran, at the Yasanta Press, 
The Theosophlcal Society, Adyar, Madras

I

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

THE TANTRATA TTVA OF $HRIYUKTA SHIVA 
CHANDRA VIDYARNAVA BHATTACHARYYA 
MAHODAYA

WITH INTRODUCTIONS BY

ARTHUR AVALON

AND

SHRlYUKTA BARADA KANTA MAJUMDAR

- 3580

EDITED BY

ARTHUR AVALON

By the Same Author

THE WORLD AS POWER

A series of 5 volumes [Reality, Life, Mind, Matter, 
Causality d Continuity ,] explaining in simple language the 
Shakta Doctrine that the Universe is a manifestation of the 
Supreme Power — Maha Shakti—in various aspects.

5 Volumes Rs. 11/-

MAHA MAYA

The World As Power : Power As Consciousness 
(Chit Shakti) —2nd Edition (1953) Price Rs. 10/-

A student of Occultism twites from California, U.S.A .:

They “ (World As Power Series) are truly marvellous 
in clarity. The spiritual uplift experienced since reading 
these books has impelled me to own two more of his books 
namely, Shakti and Shakta and his Garland of Letters. 
I have had The Serpent Power on hand for years but, 
could not understand it until I read his Power series Books. 
Sir John Woodroffe truly does India’s Wisdom justice with 
its grand sweep of Knowledge. For years I have been a 
student of Theosophy r 1 the Occult generally but this is 
the first real freedom tl ' v,n ”e experienced that expresses 
real joy in wanting to .»ve.”

I

M

Si

$

V

a

S3

PUBLISHERS’ NOTEI

M

Si

$

V

a

S3

PUBLISHERS’ NOTE

The Tantra Tattva of Shriyukta Shiva Chandra Vidydr - 
naua Bhattacharyya Mahodaya is the most exhaustive and 
clear exposition of Tantra Shastra in its various aspects 
and it is to the credit of Arthur Avalon (Sir John Woodroffe) 
that this great work was published 38 years ago, with his 
masterly, introduction and with the aotive collaboration of 
Shri. Jnanendralal Majumdar and Shrl. Barada Kanta 
Majumdar. Since then, Sir John’s other famous books on 
Tantra Shastra have gone into several editions and there 
has been a growing demand from the public for a second 
edition of Tantra Tattva, originally published in two parts 
entitled *' Principles of Tantra The Publishers have great 
pleasure in presenting this second edition to the public 
(two parts together under one cover) and hope it will satisfy 
a long-standing need.

Madras, August 1952

.'TTJ,

if

35 #o

to- f0 )

6<^tT j

5 S •

By the Same Author

THE GARLAND OF LETTERS

(YARNAMALA) 
Studies in Mantra Shastra

CHAPTER

I.

II.

in.

IV.

v.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

IX.

x.

XI.

XII.

XIII.

xiv.

XV.

XVI. 
XVII.

xvm.

XIX.

XX.

XXI.

XXII. 
XXIII. 
XXIV.

XXV.

XXVI.

XXVII.

xxvm.

XXIX.

XXX.

XXXI.

CONTENTS

Yak or the Word 
Artha, Pratyaya and Shabda 
Ashabda and Parashabda 
Parashabda, Causal Shabda 
Shakti as Stress 
Eternality of Shabda 
Shabda as Language 
Natural Name 
Yaidika Shabda 
The Tattvas

Shakti—Potency to Create

NSda—the First Produced Movement

Bindu or Shakti—Ready to Create

MayS Tattva

The Eanchukas

Hangsa

K&ma-kali

The Gross Tattvas and their Lords 
Causal Shaktis of the Pranava 
The Eal&s

The Garland of Letters or Varnamal&

“ Om ”

The Necklace of Eali 
Dhvani

Sun, Moon and Fire 
Bija Mantra 
Shadadhv&s 
Mantra-Sadhana 
Gayatri Mantra

The G&yatrl Mantra as an Exercise of Reasoning 
Atma-Sadhana

2nd Edition (1951)

Cloth Bound— Price Rs. 15/-

t

CONTENTS

Preface by Arthur Avalon . • .

Introduction by Arthur Avalon

PAGE

•The G&yatrl Mantra as an Exercise of Reasoning 
Atma-Sadhana

2nd Edition (1951)

Cloth Bound— Price Rs. 15/-

t

CONTENTS

Preface by Arthur Avalon . • .

Introduction by Arthur Avalon

PAGE

•

1

19

PART I

Invocation .....

•

109

Preface by Shrlyukta Shiva Chandra Yidyarnava

Bhattachiryya Mahodaya

•

117

CHAPTER I

Appearance and Applicability of the Tantra

Scripture .....

Necessity for the Scripture

181

Understanding of the Scripture

134

Doubts concerning the Scripture .

137

Reasoning on the Scripture

148

On Meeting Sadhakas

162

CHAPTER H

What Is the Necessity for the Tantras when

THERE Is THE VEDA ? .

•

174

Introduction of Tantra

•

184

Monism, Vedanta, and ShangkarScharyya

•

199

CHAPTER m

The Ephemeral and Modern Monism

•

212

Difference between and Similarity of Veda and 
Tantra ......

218

Consensus of other Scriptures as regards 
Authority of the Tantra

the

•

227

The Direct and Superior Power of Tantra

•

241

CHAPTER IV

Gayatrt Mantra and Image Worship

•

258

Worship of Gayatri ....

•

268

The Yachya and Vachaka $haktis of a Mantra

•

•

273

•

• .*

viii

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

CHAPTER V

COM>LANDB OF SHaSTRA

• •

PAOE

287

On Formlessness and Form .

• •

295

CHAPTER VI

Worship of Deyatas

• «

328

CHAPTER Yn

What Is Shakti ? .

• •

868

CHAPTER VIII

What is Shakti ?— Continued

• •

408

CHAPTER IX

Shiva and Shakti

• •

455

CHAPTER X

Worship of the Five Devatas

• •

518

Tantrik Initiation

a •

528

Loss of Tantras and Treatises on these Scriptures .

581

PART II

Preface by Arthur Avalon ..... 589

Introduction by ShrTyukta Baradfc K&nta Majumdar . 567

CHAPTER XI

On Mantra ....... 727

CHAPTER XII

Lettered and Unlettered Sound . . . 751

CHAPTER Xm

On the Guru . . . . . , .786

CHAPTER XIY

Discussion Upon, and Selection Of. the Guru . . 805

Women Gurus ..... 807

Guru Family and Family Guru . . . 810

CONTENTS

ix

PAGE

The Guru Profession

. 824

The Characteristics of Disciples .Discussion Upon, and Selection Of. the Guru . . 805

Women Gurus ..... 807

Guru Family and Family Guru . . . 810

CONTENTS

ix

PAGE

The Guru Profession

. 824

The Characteristics of Disciples .

. . 836

The time for Initiation

. 863

CHAPTER XV

Worship in General ....

. 872

CHAPTER XVI

The Play of Gunas .

. 908

Adhyatmikism .

. 949

CHAPTER XVII

Outer Worship .

. 958

CHAPTER XVIII

Ordinances Relating to Worship

. 1018

CHAPTER XIX

Ceremonial Worship ....

. 1082

Bhava . • • .

. 1084

Entrance into the House of Worship

. 1106

Removal of Obstacles

. 1108

Seat . . ...

. 1110

Rules relating to Direction in Worship .

. 1114

Time for Worship ....

. 1116

Place for Worship ....

. 1117

Worship of Shiva .

. 1119

Order of Worship ...»

, 1122

CHAPTER XX

Ceremonial Worship— Continued ....

Purification of the “ Five ”

. 1124

Purification of the “ Twelve "

. 1125

Purification of Elements .

. 1127

Nyasa .....

. 1186

Mental Worship ....

. 1144

Invocation .....

. 1158

Articles nsed and Acts done in Worship .

. 1164

B

By the Same Author

SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

Essays and Addresses on the Shakta 
Tantra Shastra

C0NTENT8

Section 1.—Introductory—Chapters I-XIII 
Bharata Dharma—The World as Power (Shakti) 
—The Tantras—Tantra and Veda Shastras— 
The Tantras and Religion of the Shaktas— 
Shakti and Shakta—Is Shakti Force ?—Chlna- 
chara—Tantra Shastras in China—A Tibetan 
Tantra—Shakti in Taoism—Alleged Conflict of 
Shastras—8arvanandanatha.

Section 2.—Doctrinal-Chapters XIV-XX 
Chit Shakti—Maya Shakti—Matter and Consci¬ 
ousness—Shakti and Maya—Shakta Advaita- 
vada—Creation—The Indian Magna Mater.

Section 3.—Ritual-Chapters XXI-XXVIII 
Hindu Ritual—Vedanta & Tantra—The Psycho¬ 
logy of Religious Ritual—Shakti as Mantra— 
Varnamala—Shakta Sadhanaor Ordinary Ritual 
—Panchatattva or Secret Ritual—Matam Rutra 
(The Right and Wrong Interpretation).S*c. 4.— Yoga & Conclusions—Chaps. XXIX-XXXI 
Kundalini Shakti (The Serpent Power)—The 
Agamas & the Future—Conclusions.

Fourth Edition (1951)-750 Pages 
Cloth Bound-Price Rs. 25 ’.

lr-

. j

CayatrT Yantra.

By the Same Author

THE GREAT LIBERATION

(MAHA NIRVANA TANTRA)

Sanskrit Text, English Translation and Commentary

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

Introduction

I. Questions Relating to the Liberation of Beings

II. Introduction to the Worship of Brahman

III. Description of the Worship of the Supreme Brahman

IT. The Mantras, Placing of the Jar. and Purification of the 
Elements of Worship

V. The Revelation of the Mantras, Placing of the Jar, and

Purification of the Elements of Worship

VI. Placing of the Shrlpatra, Homa, Formation of the

Chakra, and other Rites

VII. Hymn of Praise (Stora), Amulet (Kavacha), and the 
Description of the Kula-tattva

VIII. The Dharma and Customs of the Castes and Ashramas

IX. The Ten Kinds of Purificatory Rites (Samskara)

X. Rites Relating to Briddhi Shriddha, Funeral Rites, and 
Purnabhisheka

XT. The Account of Expiatory Acts

XII. An Account of the Eternal and Immutable Dharma

XIII. Installation of the Devata

XIV. The Consecration of Shiva Linga and Description of the

Four Classes of Avadhutas

3rd Edition—Cloth bound—Over 1,000 Pages—In the Press

PREFACEXIII. Installation of the Devata

XIV. The Consecration of Shiva Linga and Description of the

Four Classes of Avadhutas

3rd Edition—Cloth bound—Over 1,000 Pages—In the Press

PREFACE

Medieval “ Hinduism *' (to Use a convenient, if somewhat 
vague, term) was, as its successor, modern Indian orthodoxy, 
is, largely Tantrik. The Tantra was then, as it is now, 
the great Mantra and Sadhana 1 Shastra (Scripture), and 
the main, where not the sole, source of some of the most 
fundamental concepts still prevalent as regards worship, 
images, initiation, yoga, the supremacy of Guru, and 
so forth. This, however, does not mean that all the in¬ 
junctions whioh are to be found in the Shastra are of 
universal acceptance, as is pointed out in the Introduction 
which follows. This Introduction, however, is but a mere 
sketch of that which I hope to develop in a future volume 
after the ritual (in its widest sense) has been dealt with 
in detail. What is, in fact, wanted in this matter is an 
accurate statement of the facts; whereas up to now such 
cursory accounts of the Tantra as have appeared are 
as a rule mere general statements by way of condemnation 
of it.

One of the earliest of such accounts in English is 
contained in that interesting though biassed and, in essen¬ 
tial respects, ill-understanding work * written by W. Ward, 
and published by the Seram pore Mission in 1818. Of 
this book Horace Hayman Wilson wrote, in his well-known

1 That is, ritual, practice. See Introduction to my Edition of 
Mah&nirv&na Tantra.

"‘A View of the History, Literature, and Mythology of the 
Hindus.’ 1 See vol. i, pp. 496-502; vol. ii, pp. xxxviii-xli.

2

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA"‘A View of the History, Literature, and Mythology of the 
Hindus.’ 1 See vol. i, pp. 496-502; vol. ii, pp. xxxviii-xli.

2

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“essays,” 1 that Ward’s information was merely oral, and 
might be regarded as unsatisfactory. It is a fuller account, 
however, than his own, and contains a certain amount 
of information which is fairly accurate with some which 
is not so. The author, however, like so many of his 
English successors, was influenced by a strong racial and 
credal bias, which in the old style he quite frankly and 
honeBtly displayed to view. With a strong faith in Pro¬ 
testant Christianity he combined exaggerated notions of 
the universal piety and morals of his own people who 
professed it* * On the other hand, he wrote at a time 
when, according to his account, Hinduism was at a low 
ebb, and in its lower forms apparently productive of many 
evils. Contrasting, as some of his successors have sinoe 
done, an overpainted picture of Western “ Light ” with a 
fictitious or exaggerated Eastern “ Darkness," he expressed 
himself, as some of them have also since done, much 
perturbed by the fact “ that for some time past a very 
unjust and unhappy impression appeared to have been 
made in the public mind by encomiums passed on the 
Hindu writings.”* He was certainly not himself guilty of 
the offence he here deplored. For we are told by him that

‘ '* Essays and Lectures, chiefly on the Religion of the Hindus," 
Ed. 1862, vol. i, p. 268.

’ Comparing the virtues of his country with the general Indian 
iniquity, ho writes: " Where shall we find piety more elevated or morals 
more correct even among individuals in the lowest orders of society 
than in our own land ? "* Ward. vol. ii, p. lxxiv. The author of a quite recent work inspired 
by the same motive thinks to cure the European mind, ** corrupted by 
theosophical moonings and mystical sentimentalism," by violent and 
ignorant invective. " Hinduism," he writes, “ is the most material 
and childishly superstitious animalism that has ever masqueraded ob 
idealism." It has no morality, and the absurd object of its worship 
is " a mixture of Bacchus, Don Juan, and Dick Turpin." It is not 
a religion at all, but “ is a pit of abomination, as far set from God as 
the mind of man can go": and so forth. “ The Light of India," by

Harold Begbie.

PREFACE

3

the “ Hindu system is the most puerile, impure, and bloody 
of any system of idolatry that was ever established on earth 
amongst “an idle, effeminate, and dissolute people 1 ’ of 
“ disordered imaginations,” who “ frequent their temples, 
not for devotion, but for the satisfaction of their licentious 
appetites.” The result of this alleged general depravity is 
stated in the extraordinary charge that “ a chaste woman 
faithful to her husband is scarcely to be found in all the 
millions of Hindus,” whose “ notions of the evil of sin are 
so superficial ” that “ they cannot be expected to promulgate 
the doctrine ” of endless punishment in Hell-fire. 1Given these circumstances, we are not surprised to find 
that ho had only eyes for that which he understood to be 
bad. The good which is to be found in other religions is 
of no value to the mere controversialist. Thus, given the 
general brevity of his account, over lengthy descriptions 
are set forth of such matters as how to kill an enemy by 
making his image in bull’s-dung, taking it to a burning- 
ground, then boiling the flesh of a hawk with spirits in a 
skull, with invocations to Antaka; charms against snake¬ 
bite, and so forth. Ward, like many another who followed 
him (and I deal with his case as in many respects typical 
of the others), seems to have thought that the chief and 
practically the sole subjects of the Tantra were sensual 
rites and black magio. It does not seem to have occurred 
to either him or them that, apart from its manifold secular 
oontents, the Shastra is the repository of a high philosophic 
doctrine, and of the means whereby its truth may through 
bodily psychic and spiritual development be realized. It is 
doubtless less easy to understand and describe these matters. 
The Scripture, however, is misjudged if we look merely to 
practices to be found therein similar to those contained in 
Western Grimoires, such as “ Le Petit Albert,” and other

1 Ward, see vol. ii, pp. Ixxvii, xlix, xiii, xlii, xxii; vol. i. p. 499.

4

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Ward, see vol. ii, pp. Ixxvii, xlix, xiii, xlii, xxii; vol. i. p. 499.

4

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

even less reputable works. A cursory glance, it is true, is 
thrown on higher matters, but with the same result. The 
lofty’ doctrines of Yoga, which the author of a quite recent 
work 1 finds to be, “with its repulsive developments ” “much 
the same as Shamanism,'’ was long ago declared by his 
predecessor to be “ absurd, impious, and ridiculous." It is 
not surprising, therefore, to find that the more disputable 
theories and ill-famed practices of some of the Tantras are 
not accurately described, and are indeed misunderstood. 
Whatever we may think of such doctrines, they are not 
truly represented by the statement that a certain division 
of worshippers seek to “ blunt the edge of the passions with 
excessive indulgence."

The later experience of Brian Hodgson, whose valued 
work in Nepal should be better known, led him to describe 
the Tantra as “ luBt, mummery’, and black magic."

The work of H. H. Wilson, though stated to be based 
in part on the texts, is admitted by its author to be neces¬ 
sarily superficial, depending on -a cursory inspection of 
some of the documents. 1 The account of the Tantras 
occupies but a small part of a description which purports 
to deal with all the Hindu sects. Of these Scriptures in 
particular he wrote what is as true now as then, “ that they 
had been little examined by European scholars.” He added, 
however, that such attention as had been paid to them was 
enough in his opinion to warrant the accusation that “ they 
are authorities for all that is most abominable in the present 
state of the Hindu religion."* His work is also written from 
the standpoint of one to whom all other sy’stems are “ shown 
to be fallacious and false by the Ithuriel spear of Christian 
truth, a standpoint which did not permit a countenance 
of either “ devotees of superstition " on the one hand, or' ” Antiquities of India." by Dr. L. Barnett, p. 17.

' Wilson, vol. i, p. 8. • Wilson, vol. 0. p. 77.

PREFACE

5

the men of learning on the other, “ whose toleration,” 
he complained, “ is so comprehensive that it amounts to 
indifference to truth.” The T&ntrik ritual in particular 
is described to be “ nonsensical extravagance,” at which, 
he says, he is disposed to laugh. Ny&sas 1 are “ absurd gesti¬ 
culations,” and so forth. H. H. Wilson was doubtless 
a distinguished Orientalist, and his work is in many 
respects of acknowledged value; but there are matters 
in his book which, from want of sympathy and knowledge, 
he wholly failed to understand, not only as regards general 
Hindu doctrines, but the specific teaching and ritual which 
is to be found in the Tantra. Nyasa, for instance, iB alleged 
to be absurd, but it does not appear that he or those 
who followed him really knew what it was, any more than 
he understood the nature of Vlja. We learn nothing from 
his definition “ monosyllabic ejaculations of imagined 
mysterious import ” beyond this—that he had nothing else 
to say. His observation that the Abbe Dubois committed 
some egregious blunders may be applied to many others 
who have dealt with Hinduism, including himself. 1 Indeed 
if we are duly modest, we will all of us be ready to admit 
the possibility of going astray in what is to us both a 
difficult and alien subject. Thus he appears to think 
that the oft-quoted verse commencing with the words, 
“ Pltva, pltvft punah pltva,” * * is a T&ntrik counsel of 
drunkenness as a means to secure what we call salvation.

1 See as to this form of ritual Introduction to my Edition of the 
Mah&nirvftna.

* Wilson, vol. ii. pp. 8, 116, 82, 89. 219, 78; Wilson, vol. i, p. 208.1 See as to this form of ritual Introduction to my Edition of the 
Mah&nirvftna.

* Wilson, vol. ii. pp. 8, 116, 82, 89. 219, 78; Wilson, vol. i, p. 208.

’ " Having drunk, drunk, and again drunk, and having fallen, let 
him rise ogain and attain liberation " (vol. i, p. 260). We find appa¬ 
rently the same error in Ward, vol. ii, p. xl. The explanation is too 
long to be given here. I deal with it elsewhere. It. however, refers 
to the ascent and descent in the body of KundalinI Shakti from its 
basic to its cerebral centre.

6

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Apart from any special knowledge on the point, it might 
have been reasonably supposed that such an interpretation 
was* absurd. And if it be hardly credible that a celebrated 
Sanskritist and intelligent man thought otherwise, this 
only shows that more is required for the understanding 
of a Hindu Shastra than linguistic talent, however great. 
The verse is as little understood as some others (such as 
M&triyonim paritajya viharet sarvvayonishu ”) which, 
in the language of a recent work, 1 are supposed to inculcate 
“ the sacred duty to practise incest.”

Sinoe Wilson's time all who have derflt with the 
Tantras appear to have adopted second-hand the accounts 
given by him and Ward, but never, so far as I am aware, 
with the qualifications which Wilson thought in fairness 
should be added to his adverse judgment. Thus, to take 
but one instance, we find all authors up to the present 
time reproducing Wilson’s erroneous statement that the 
Mudra of the Panchatattva are “ mystical gesticulations," 
when in fact the term means parched cereal food of various 
kinds. The matter may appear to some a small one, even 
though accuracy is always important. But it is not the 
only instance of a repeated error; and how was it possible 
for those who have discoursed upon the Panchatattva of 
the Vir&ch&ra ritual to have read the texts dealing with 
it, and not to have learnt what this particular Tattva means?In the work last cited, and in a review of my Edition 
of the Mah&nirvana, the opinion is expressed that there 
is in the body of Scripture called Tantra a nucleus only

mean

' " Antiquities of India," by Dr. L. Barnett. The verse does not 
that incest may be committed with any woman save a mother.

hnf J . —' ”-«oman save a momer,

ln recitation hapa) of the Shakti Mantra count is to

, °° ttU „ the Joints (yoni) of the fingers, except on the two upper 
C, f th ? (mdex) dn 8©r, technically in such case called the 
i/- ' * the case of japo of the Mantra of a male Dcvata. the

two lower joints of the middle finger are called M&trijoni

PREFACE

7

of Tantrik teaching properly so called, which nucleus is 
defined as “ black art of the crudest and filthiest kind, 
with a rough background of the Shiva Shakti cult.” 
Round this nucleus, it is suggested, gathered a varying 
mass of Vaidik and “ Brahmanic ” ritual, together with 
a certain “ quantum of Upanishadio idealism.” “ The 
Tantra ” is itself said to be of two kinds. One of suoh 
classes is alleged to represent the “ unvarnished ” T&n- 
trik teaching above stated. Of Scriptures representing 
this class it is said that they are not merely “ full of silly 
and vulgar superstition and magio," but have the additional 
“ spice of wickedness and obscenity." It is of them that 
the author cited says: “ The highly coloured Yogic imagina¬ 
tion pales beside the doctrines of the infamous Tantras 
in which a veritable Devil’s mass is purveyed in various 
forms to a swarm of sects, mostly of the Sivaite persuasion." 
The alleged second class of Tantras are apparently those 
in which the original wickedness and obscenity has been 
removed or rendered innoouous, or at least comparatively 
so, with the result that, according to the author cited, 
the most that can be said of them is that they are “ full 
of silly and vulgar superstition and magic."I cannot within the limits of this Preface disouss these 
strongly worded appreciations. I would, however, like to 
add this much to what is stated in the Introduction which 
follows: Allegations as regards “ the Tantra "—that is, 
as regards the whole body of existent Scripture which 
passes under that name—must be received with caution. 
There is no European scholar who has read “ the Tantra " 
in this sense even approximately. The reasons for this are 
obvious. In the first place, a great deal of the Shastra 
has disappeared. Of the Tantras which survive, and which 
are still numerous, some are extremely rare and others are 
fragmentary. I have myself been endeavouring for some

8

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA8

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

years past to secure MSS. of several Tantras, but without 
sucoess. A few only have been printed and imperfectly 
edited, and even these are but little, if at all, known in 
Europe. The frequently erroneous character of current 
criticism of the Tantra leads me to suppose that its authors 
are, generally speaking, second-hand by report, and without 
a knowledge of the actual texts. If this be in some cases 
not so, then it would seem that only portions of some 
Tantras have been read, and not infrequently ill-understood. 
The Tantra, in fact, contains many a technical term and 
seoret doctrine which are not to be understood by the 
sole aid of a Sanskrit dictionary and grammar. When it 
is better known, some of the charges which have been 
made against it will have to be withdrawn. It has hitherto 
commonly been supposed that this Scripture is the ex¬ 
pression in all its parts of all wickedness. The distinction 
above made, whether correct in itself or not, at least marks 
an advance 1 towards a more correct appreciation of the 
Shastra, even though it renders the same kind of justice as 
that which is done when a not unintelligent man whom 
we have hitherto called a knave is charged with being 
merely a vulgar fool. It must, however, be now obvious 
that conclusions based on such fragmentary material, and 
without knowledge of the occult teachings, is without 
authoritative value. In the present state of our knowledge, 
generalizations concerning the Tantra are likely in import¬ 
ant matters to be hazardous. They seem to me to be parti¬ 
cularly valueless when they take the form of mere abuse.

There is another important matter whioh is to be 
borne in mind, and which one of my Indian critics thinks

William^ £5? ? i8 , the flrst ' [ a moro ““derate language Sir Monier- 
Sitrik 8 ' lg8C3 , tcd a distinction between the original

Tantris and jr subsequent developments and between the

£5£ fcBSwa*,!Sap u,tle ~

PREFACE

9Tantris and jr subsequent developments and between the

£5£ fcBSwa*,!Sap u,tle ~

PREFACE

9

that I have myself overlooked in my Edition of the 
Mahanirvana. He says that the account I have there given 
of T&ntrik teaching is vitiated by the erroneous supposition 
that all the Tantrik works are complementary to each other, 
and that I have ignored the distinctions which exist be¬ 
tween varying schools and traditions. I was not unaware of 
the alleged distinctions to which my critic refers, though 
their existence and nature have yet to be established. I, 
however, then expressly stated that I did not deal with these 
subjects, reserving as I did such observations as I had at 
present to make for this work. A number of questions present 
themselves for solution upon this difficult matter. What, for 
instanoe, are the specific characteristics of the various classes 
of Agamas known as Damara, Y&mala, Uddlsha, and Tantra, 
whether of the so-called Shaivn (such as the Kamika Dipta, 
Vijaya, eto.); Vaishnava (such as the Gandharva, Gautama, 
Radha, Brihadrudrayamala, and others); or the Shakta, 
Kaula, or Devi type of Tantra ? A similar question may 
be raised as to the sixty-four Tantras of the three Krantas 
respectively. Again, what are the Tantras in force in the 
present Svetavaraha Kalpa ? Again, what is the relation 
between all these Shastras as representing the specifically 
“ Indian ” Tantra and the “ Buddhist ” Tantra ? Finally, 
what, if any, are the developments which have taken place 
as regards these Sh&strik teachings ? For Indian thought 
moves, even though some who write of it from books only 
think of it as something merely past. As H. H. Wilson 
says of the Hindu religion generally: “ Its internal con¬ 
stitution has not been exempt from those varieties to whioh 
all human systems of belief are subject, and it has under¬ 
gone great and frequent modifications, until it presents an 
appearance which there is great reason to suppose is very 
different from that which it originally wore.” Lastly, 
what (and this is my immediate subject) is the Tantrik10

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

doctrine and practice as it is at present understood and 
followed ? When these and a number of other questions 
of great difficulty are solved, we may permit ourselves a 
greater dogmatism than our present state of knowledge 
allows. I am more immediately concerned with another 
matter—namely, the present beliefs of the Indian peoples. 
In connection, however, wdth this purpose, I may here say 
this: if it is assumed that there are different schools, then 
Tantras of the same school may obviously be taken as 
complementary to one another. In respect of other Tantras, 
oven if they do, as alleged, represent varying traditions, it 
will, I think, be found that there are in any case many com¬ 
mon elements accompanying their own alleged distinctive 
differences which render them complementary to other 
Tantras to that extent. Take, for instance, the specific 
Tantrik \oga, known as Shatchakrabheda, which involves 
concentration on the lower centres. This is dealt with in 
Tantras which are alleged to be the expression of differing 
doctrine and practice in other respects. Similar obser¬ 
vations may be made as regards the general worship 
(Upasana), and so forth.

As the foregoing observations may possibly be mis¬ 
understood by some to mean that I think that there is 
nothing in the Tantra which is likely to provoke dissent, and 
that nothing has been done in the name, or by followers, 
of the Shustra, which is in fact evil, it is necessary for me 
to say that that is not my opinion, though I think that the 
Shastra as a whole has not hitherto been understood—a

fate which it has shared with many another Hindu doctrine 
and practice.

Looking at the matter from a purely objective stand¬ 
point, e\ery Orientalist must admit that an accurate know¬ 
ledge of this Shastra is of first-rate importance. But apart 
from this historical view, there are in the Tantra principles

PREFACE

ilPREFACE

il

and practices which are of value in themselves. There is, 
for instance, a deep philosophic dootrine and a wonderful 
ritual which artistically shares with the Buddhist Tantras, 
though in a different way, the vehement splendour which 
has aptly been ascribed to the latter; a ritual which is at 
the same time, when rightly understood, singularly rational 
and psychologically profound. One of my English critics 
aptly appreciated this character of the Tantrik ritual when 
he said that “ from one point of view it is perhaps the most 
elaborate system of auto-suggestion in the world 1 a remark 
which, as well as the theory of auto-suggestion itself, will 
have a deeper content for those who are conversant with 
the Indian doctrine of the Atman and states of conscious¬ 
ness than for the ordinary English reader. It is necessary, 
however, that the ritual should be understood, otherwise 
it will not unlikely appear to be the “ nonsensical extrava¬ 
gance ” which H. H. Wilson called it. Disdain for “ mean¬ 
ingless mystical syllables," “absurd gesticulations,” and 
so forth, is often, after all, nothing but the rather foolish 
expression of annoyance which is felt at the presence of 
something not understood. These things, however, are not 
so senseless as some suppose.

In the next place we have in the Tantra the recognition 
of the tine principle that this doctrine and its expression 
in ritual are (subject to their varying competencies) for 
all, whatever be their race, caste, or sex. This marks a 
great advance on the parochial restrictions of the Vedas, 
which are so often placed in favourable opposition to the 
Tantra by English writers. The Shudra and woman are 
under none of the Vaidik bans. What, again, can be 
finer than the high veneration of woman which the Tantra 
inculcates. The Sufi author of the Dabistan,* describing, 
in the seventeenth century, the Shaktas, speaks of the

* Ed. Shea and Troyer (1848).

' The Quest, October. 1918.

12* Ed. Shea and Troyer (1848).

' The Quest, October. 1918.

12

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Mother of the World in the following charmful passage : 1 
“ This Mayft is the maker of the productions of this 
world and of its inhabitants, and the Creator of the spirits 
and of the bodies: the universe and its contents are born 
from Her: from respect of the said production; and of 
the mentioned effects She is entitled JagadambA, or Mother 
of the Universe. Nonentity finds no access to this Creator. 
The garment of perishableness does not sit right upon 
the body of this fascinating Empress. The dust of nothing¬ 
ness does not move round the circle of Her dominion. The 
real beings of heaven and the accidental creatures of the 
nether world are equally enamoured and intoxicated of 
desire before Her. Bound b}' these ties of deceit in this 
revolving world, whoever rebels feels the desire of Mukti

that is, of emancipation, independence, and happiness; 
nevertheless, from carelessness, he pays obedience and 
worship to this world-deceiving Queen, and never abandons 
the path of adoration of this bewitching Lady who, as the 
spiritual principle, exists in all living beings in the Six 
Circles. As women are the earthly incarnations of this 
great Queen he goes on then to say: “ The Agama (Tantra) 
favours both sexes equally, and makes no distinction 
between women, for men and women compose equally 
humankind. This sect hold women in great esteem and 
call them Shaktis (powers), and to ill-treat a Shakti—that 
is, a woman—is held to be a crime.” As H. H. Wilson 
also himself points out,’ women, as manifestations of the 
Great Cause of all, are entitled to respeot and even to 
veneration. Whoever offends them incurs the wrath of 
Prakriti, the Mother of all, whilst he who propitiates them 
offers worship to Prakriti Herself.’

1 E^en if if ho ( w ? V °; “• ► 140 - Essays." vol. i. p. 246.

„n„ lf f lt heW - “ Wilson does, that this doctrine has led with1 E^en if if ho ( w ? V °; “• ► 140 - Essays." vol. i. p. 246.

„n„ lf f lt heW - “ Wilson does, that this doctrine has led with

n utt 0 ., th , e S . eCt at ,east to abase, the existence of such abuse 
cannot affect the doctrine itself as above described.

PREFACE

18

And bo, at a time when, as some allege, in accordance 
with the Vedas , 1 the rite of Sati was being practised, and 
many a woman was being horribly oppressed, it wak the 
Mahanirvftna Tantra* * which forbade it on the grounds 
above stated. In conformity, also, with these views we 
find that, according to the Tantra, alone of the great 
Shastras, a woman may be a spiritual teacher (Guru), and 
initiation by her achieves increased benefit. Thus initiation 
by a mother of her son is eightfold more fruitful than any 
other. This, some may think, is not without example to 
us in the West, where, notwithstanding the increasing 
recognition of the place of woman, her right of spiritual 
teaching is still denied. There are other matters in the 
Tantra to which in this connection I might refer, such as 
true principles of Sadhana on the path of desire, were it 
not impossible to discuss such a subject shortly except at 
peril of misunderstanding.Whatever we may think upon these matters, it will 
occur to everyone of experience and free from prejudice 
that there must be more in a Shastra which has obtained 
so great a credence and wide-spreading authority than the 
moral abuses and silly superstitions alone with which it 
is charged. From the purely objective and detached stand¬ 
point of the historical student, the whole of the Shastra 
is of value and interest. Historical research in itself is 
not concerned with moral values. Its subject is whatever 
man has taught, or said, or done. When we consider, 
however, these values, the case is, of course, different. 
From the latter point of view, the Tantra is an encyclopedic 
amalgam of elements of varying character and worth, ex¬ 
tending from the doctrines of a lofty speculation to practices

1 Tbe existence of Vaidik authority is disputed.

* See Introduction, post.

14

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

which to the higher occultism are suspect,' and to prescrip¬ 
tions which may be used for the purposes of evil-iutentioned 
magifc. Here, therefore, we must distinguish. In short, we 
must first inquire and learn what, in fact, the Shastra is, 
and then understand and discriminate.

Up to the present, however, want of knowledge is 
responsible for an ^discriminating condemnation of the 
whole of an extensive literature, the cultural expression 
of the varied activities of a secular epoch. It is sufficient 
at present for practical purposes to say that (apart from 
magic) the ritual in the Shastra to which objection has 
been taken forms but one portion of the Scripture properly 
applicable to a select class of adepts, and that the remainder 
of its provisions deal with matters which are free from 
exception on the grounds on which the Tantra has been 
adversely criticized. It is unnecessary here to further 
develop a proposition of which the book now translated is 
itself the proof.I had at first intended merely to draw upon the 
author’s work and other sources for the purpose of a pre¬ 
sentation in Western form of some of the fundamental 
principles of a Sh&stra which has been hitherto so little 
understood. The execution of this intention I defer to 
some future time, when I hope to deal in my own wav 
with the metaphysical and psychological bases of Hindu 
worship, a subject, on its practical side, hitherto untouched. 
For the present, however, I present the subject in the 
words of an othodox Hindu, who is an adherent of the 
Tantra Sh&stra, and whose work (Tantratattva) is here

' I have here in mind what is technically called Nil „ a

SSSdTVk'J? rei "r b f; in8 . tl! “ l ~ sSfifiTiS!

'" d “ T »°‘™ -blob tZuZSLgSZSS? m **“

PREFACE

15

translated . 1 For those who might be disposed to accept 
the correctness of the views expressed by the A at hors 
above cited would not unlikely entertain a suspicioh of 
the genuineness of the Tantrik character of a work of the 
present description, if upon a reading they should find 
it to be neither silly, nor vulgarly superstitious, magical, 
wicked, or obscene. The exposition, therefore, here given 
is not mine, but the Pandit’s.His work is, however, in no sense complete, but deals 
in a popular style with some portions only of the subject- 
matter. After I had written the Introduction which fol¬ 
lows, I received a letter from him in which he explains 
that his book was published over twenty years ago, with 
a view to combating both the errors of what is called 
“ Reformed ” or *' Protestant ” Hinduism, and the mistakes 
of some incompetent defenders of orthodoxy; and that 
therefore both the matter and form of his work were deter¬ 
mined by the arguments of those whom he controverted. 
As a result, his reply, which is presented in a somewhat 
discursive manner, does not treat of some subjects with 
which he desired to deal. Ho writes, therefore, to me to say 
that he has in preparation a third part, in which he proposes 
to give an exposition of the philosophy of the Tantra. 
The two Parts, now published, treat of (to use our parl- 
anoe) the religious side of certain portions of the subject, 
though in India philosophy and religion are mingled 
in a way which the West has not known sinoe the age 
when philosophy was held to be Ancilla Theologi®. This 
third Part, when ready, I hope to publish in continuation 
of the volume now issued.

Further, there are certain matters of doctrine and 
practice which are, as the Author states, for the initiate

1 The work and its author are referred to in the Introduction which 
follows.

16

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 The work and its author are referred to in the Introduction which 
follows.

16

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

alone, and of which, therefore, he treats either cursorily or 
not at all. What, however, he does say will effect more 
thatf a mere acquittal of his system of the wholesale charges 
of absurdity and vice so commonly made against it. Re¬ 
ferring to what is blameworthy, the Pandit himself says : 
4< We know thafc fchere are reasons for saying some hard 
things ’; though he adds: “ But how are Kali or Shiva or 
Tantra to blame ? ” As regards the likelihood of abuse in 
any system, there is more to be said for the Hindu view 
of the naturally crooked influence of time than for the 
notion of “ progress ” from moment to moment which some 
of us in the West would seem to entertain. But for 
all that, it would indeed be a phenomenon of strange 
degeneracy if India, which has thought the deepest thoughts 
of the world, and which has been marked by the intensity 
of its religious feelings, should, even in its most unfor¬ 
tunate days, have produced a system of extensive influence 
and authority whioh is intellectually nothing but “ brainless 
hocus-pocus, and morally a mere facile reversal of the high 
notions of Dharma , 1 which have distinguished its peoples 
beyond all the races. As a matter of fact, and to my 
knowledge, even at the present day some of the most 
learned Pandits and the greatest Sadhakas esteem and 
follow this Scripture, which they regard as the treasure of 
their heart. How comes this to be if it is merely, as alleged 
the debased product of the Hindu spirit “ at its lowest and 
very worst ” ? Whether particular portions of its teachings

° r . P Tl 1Ce , 8h0Uld be generally approved is another matter. 
The difficulties, however, which attend an exposition of 
even such parts of the Shftstra as seem to be at first view 
readily exposed to attack are such that those who have any 
real knowle dge concerning them will be the first to abstain' Religion, doty. etc. See Introduction. Mnhflnirvana Tantm.

PREFACE

17

from hasty generalizations, particularly when they take the 
form of mere abuse.

As regards such portions of doctrine as are here exposed, 
the Author in the course of the defence of his own beliefs 
has in many an instance severely castigated his opponents 
for their inaccurate statements and loose thinking. For 
reasons, however, which I give in the Introduction which 
follows, views more favourable to the Author’s position 
now more generally prevail in India than was the case 
when his work was first written. Many even of those who 
nowadays are not prepared to accept orthodox doctrine in 
its entirety are yet disposed to think that the beliefs of 
their fathers were not, after all, quite so foolish as under 
the first influences of the English “Illumination” they 
considered them to be. But this change of view is not 
peculiar to India only. We ourselves have also recently 
experienced something of the same kind. An intelligent 
understanding of Christian ideas and Catholic ritual has 
dispelled many a shallow criticism to which they have been 
subjected by a narrow sectarianism on the one hand, and 
an equally narrow “ rationalism ” on the other. By this, 
however, it is not meant that no adverse criticisms in either 
of these matters have had force, or that in some Indian 
quarters the Shastra is not still regarded as (to use the 
words of an Indian writer) “ mines of superstition.”

Though the Pandit’s work is issued in two parts , 1 I 
have, for the benefit of the readers of the first volume, 
given the table of contents of the second part now in 
the press, which will be ready for publication this year. 
This will be preceded by an Introductory essay from the 
pen of Sj. Barada Kanta Majumdar.

1 Publishers’ Note: Combined in one volume in the present 
edition.

18

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Publishers’ Note: Combined in one volume in the present 
edition.

18

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Later I hope to make up for the deficiencies in the 
present work by others dealing with the ritual in greater 
detail. Thus the Pandit in the second part refers to, but 
does not treat of, the Tftntrik yoga process, known as 
Shatchakrabheda. This I have dealt with in the work 
now in the press,' entitled “ The Six Centres and the 
Serpent Force," being a translation from the Sanskrit, 
with Introduction, commentary, and plates of the Shat- 
chakranirflpana of Purnananda Sv&ml, the Sanskrit treatise 
itself forming part of the extensive Shrltattvachint&mani, 
which is also being prepared for publication in the series 
of “ T&ntrik Texts."

The references to the “ Introduction ” are to the Intro¬ 
duction of my Edition of the Mahanirvana Tantra. Refer¬ 
ences to “Introduction, ante,” are to the Introduction 
which follows this Preface.

Arthur Avalon

Benares

December 28,1913

Publishers' Note : Since published under the title ” Serpent 
Power ”, Fourth Edition, 1960.

INTRODUCTION

This work, by an Indian Pandit, is a presentment, the first 
of its kind, of the principles of that development of the „ 
Yaidika Karmak&nda which, under the name of the Tantra * 
Sh&stra, is the scripture (Shastra) of the Kali age. - This 
Shastra, together with its accompanying oral tradition, is 
the voluminous source of the greater part of the Hindu 
ritual, Hathayoga, and the various forms of spiritual 
training which pass under the generic term “ S&dhana.” 
In fact, both popular and esoteric Hinduism is, in its, 
practical aspects, largely Tantrik.Recently an increased interest has been shown in the 
Hindu beliefs. Hitherto, however, attention has been chiefly 
directed to those great Vedantik principles, whioh, sub¬ 
sumed, to a greater or less degree, in the beliefs and prac¬ 
tices of all the Hindu sects are yet, in their conscious 
realization, the very end only of the highest spiritual effort. 
Little has been done to present the practical application of 
those principles in the particular form which they assume 
in the various divisions, methods, and rituals of the Indian 
worshippers. This side of practice, though neglected, has 
both intrinsic value and helps to a clearer and deeper un¬ 
derstanding of the general principles than can be gathered 
from any bare theoretical statement of them. Ritual 
and spiritual exercise are objectively considered their pic¬ 
torial statement, as they are subjectively the effective 
means of their realization. The knowledge of hymn, and 
legend, of worship and sadhana, will alone give that full

•20

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

knowledge of the Hindu spirit without whioh its religious 
and philosophical conceptions are likely to be but poorly 
understood. The present development of upasana (worship) 
and sadhana can only be learnt from the Tantra, which is 
the Mantra and Sadhana Shastra and its accompanying 
oral traditions.

“ Some years ago,” Professor Cowell wrote, “ the 
Tantras form a branch of literature highly esteemed, though 
at present much neglected yet, as Professor Sir Monier 
Williams 1 has more recently pointed out, none of the 
numerous Tantras had, when he wrote,* been printed in 
Europe or investigated or translated by its Orientalists.The account, which the work last cited gives of them, 
itself affords, by its meagre character and inaccuracies, 
evidence of the lack of information on the subject of which 
its author speaks. Thus the mudra of the Panchatattva does 
not, as there stated, mean “ mystical gestures,” but, in the 
case of the r&jasika and tamasika panchatattva, parched 
cereal of various kinds as defined by the Yoginl Tantra. 3 In 
the sattvika sadhana it has another and esoteric meaning/ 
equally dissimilar from the sense of the term “ mudra ” as 
that word is employed in ordinary upasana and hathayoga. 
“ Nigama ” is not the name of a “ sacred book appealed to 
by Dakshinacharins ” as opposed to “ Agarna,” but is that 
form of Tantra in which the Devi is guru instead of shishya, 
as opposed to “ Agama," in which the Devi is shishya and

1 “ Indian Wisdom.” p. 522 et seq.

3 I have since published an English translation of the current 
Sanskrit version of the Mah&nirv&na Tantra. and have in preparation 
a translation of the KnlArnava.

* Chap, vi :

Blirishtad&ny&dikang yad yad charvaniyang prachakshate.

Sa mudra kathita devi sarveshting nagan&ndini.

The same and other errors occur in Encyc. Brit, *iii, pp. 511-512.

' See Agamas&ra; Raivalya Tantra, and the Tantra passim, and 
Introduction to my edition of Mahanirvann Tantra.

INTRODUCTION

21The same and other errors occur in Encyc. Brit, *iii, pp. 511-512.

' See Agamas&ra; Raivalya Tantra, and the Tantra passim, and 
Introduction to my edition of Mahanirvann Tantra.

INTRODUCTION

21

Shiva is guru. 1 It follows, therefore, that Agama does 
not mean “ a sacred book appealed to by V&m&charins ” as 
opposed to Nigama of the followers of Dakshin&chara.* * Nor 
is the term V&machariu itself a synonym for Kaula, for a 
person may be the first without being the second. 1 The 
Mahanirvana Tantra is not the only Tantra “attributed to 
Shiva," but all Shastra so called has Him as its Revealer 
and Ganesha as its scribe.' The Sh&raddtilaka and Mantra- 
mahodadhi are not Tantras, but Tantrik compendia and 
commentaries. The Tantrik rite called BhUtashuddhi does 
not mean “ removal of demons," ' but the purification of 
the elements (earth, air, fire, etc., and the tattvas of which 
they are derivatives) in the body of the sadhaka, and so forth.

As might be expected, errors abound in accounts given 
by authors claiming less expert competence, whether Euro¬ 
pean or Indian. Thus an Indian writer* explains the 
MudrA of the Panchatattva to be “ gold or coins." It is true

' See the AgamAdvaitanirnaya , citedjposf. On the contrary, the 
Nigamos are said to bo Pflrnarahasya. Agama and Nigama are also 
applied to the Veda, but Agama as applied to the Tantra has the above 
signification, though, as Professor Whitney says.it etymologically means 
“ that which has come down ” (Century Dictionary and Cyclopaedia, 
vol. ix, p. 978).

1 The Kaula is a member of the highest of the several divisions of 
worshippers (Achftra), of which VAmAchAra is one. It is only after a 
Sftdhaka has fulfilled all preceding Dharmas that he is qualified for 
Kauladharma.* See Gflyatri Tantra, chap. I. Professor Whitney (foe. eit.) says 
that their authorship is sometimes ascribed to DattAtreya. Of this I 
have never heard, and if such ascription is made it is incorrect. There 
is a work dealing with IndrajAla VidyA called the DattAtreya Tantra, 
as also a YAmala of the same name, and DattAtreya is a Rishhi said to 
be particularly revered by the NakulAvadhuta Sect. The Tontras 
generally were, as stated in the text, revealed by Shiva.

* See same author’s (Monier Williams), Sanskrit Dictionary, aub 
voce “bhuta.” where also are given some inaccurate definitions of the 
Shatchakrn.

' " Country and Temple of KAmAkhyA," Calcutta Review, October,

1911.

22

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

that "coin ” is one of the meanings of the term “ Mudra,” 
but even in the absence of special information it might 
have' reasonably been surmised that “ T&ntriks " do not 
worship with a gold mohur or rupee. Nor is the Shakti, 
which is by these and other rites worshipped, material 
force, as was supposed by the founder of the Bharatavar - 1 
shiva Brahmasamaj, who wrote some years ago of the 
European materialists of his day as " Sh&ktos offering dry ■ 
homage to force victorious over the European Bhaktas, \ 
worshippers of the God of Love.” 1 Nor is it the fact “ that 
Sh&ktas divide themselves into the Dakshina and Varna 
classes according to whether they attach the greater import¬ 
ance to the male or to the female principle respectively ” 1 l 
and so forth. Misconception of the teaching of Tantra, 
together with abuses committed by one of the communities 
of T&ntrik worshippers, led a Bengali apologist of the 
Sh&stra, when writing some twenty years ago on the subject 
of Tantra, to say: * “ Unfortunately, however, their inten- ^ 
tions have been so grossly misrepresented in our days that • 
the very name of Tantra shocks our nerves ; yet two-thirds I 
of our religious rites are T&ntrik, and almost half our j 
medicine is T&ntrik.”/* The causes of this neglect of the Sh&stra in the country 
of its origin and in the West are several. Their considera¬ 
tion will also explain the standpoint from which this book 
\ here translated is written. J In the first place, in the case of

"The New Dispensation," pp. 108, 109. Nor, it may be here noted, 
is it correct to say that Tftntriks believe the universe to have been 
developed by the inherent power of matter, as stated in the “ Cycloptedia 
of India," vol. v. p. 72. Nor is it correct to speak, as H. H. Wilson did 
( Essays, p. 241), of the worship of the female principle as distinct 
from the Divinity.”

' The Soul of India," by G. Howells, p. 320.

' " Lectures on the Hindu Religion." by K. Chakravarthi (1898), 
itself an inaccurate, though well-intentioned, little book.

INTRODUCTION

23

India, must be reckoned the effects of English education. 
This, when first introduced, not merely struck at faith in all 
Indian Sh&stra, but was in a particular manner adverse to

that form of it which was then ourrent, and with which we

•that form of it which was then ourrent, and with which we

•

here deal. Tftutrik Hinduism is in its more common aspect, 
essentially of a sacramental and ritualistic character. Those 
who first introduced and gave English education were for 
the most part Protestants, with no sympathy with, or 
understanding of, a mode of religious thought and prac¬ 
tice which to a considerable extent, both in its inner spirit 
and outward forms, bore resemblance to that which in 
Europe Protestantism, in its various sects, had arisen to 
oppose. Their general attitude is illustrated by a passage 
in a recent work 1 (containing a singularly ignorant and 
unjust estimate of Hinduism), in w’hieh the author says 
that, when standing before a Buddhist shrine, he felt as 
if he was before that of St. Carlo Borromeo at Milan, 
adding: “ But the chief feeling that one had was of the 
extraordinary close similarity of Latin Christianity and 
Pre-christian Buddhism—the feeling and sensation of the 
same immemorial superstition persisting through the forms 
and ritual of two religions so diametrically opposed.' 
As this matter presented itself to the English teachers, 
so it did to the Indian students, who (to use a Bengali 
expression) “ held their tail.” This the latter did the 
more readily both because of the abuses for which some 
of the followers of the Sh&stra were responsible and of the 
unintelligent and mechanical formalism of the worship 
of others. To the Hindu so educated the Tantra was in 
all its parts as much superstitious “ mummery” as it 
was to his English teachers. This education did not, how¬ 
ever, from the religious point of view, bear the results

1 " The Light of Asia," by Harold Begbie, p. 148.

24

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 " The Light of Asia," by Harold Begbie, p. 148.

24

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

which were expeoted of it. For while many Hindus were 
led throngh such teaching to reject their ancestral belief, 
but few were found who were willing to accept the form of 
faith which was offered to them as its substitute. Possibly 
to some extent different results might have been achieved 
had there been more points of contact between the two 
faiths, for these might have served both to guard the 
common religious sentiment and to afford some sort of 
foundation upon which a Christian structure might have 
been raised. Such had been the thought, in earlier 
times, of Jesuit missionaries both in India and China. 
Many of the Hindus whose faith had been unduly dis¬ 
turbed commenced (so far as Indians can—a matter for 
them of fortunate difficulty) to question the validity of 
the religious sense itself. A period of soepticism then 
followed, which, of course, has not wholly passed away in 
India any more, than it will wholly pass away elsewhere.

Theories stale in the West, but new in the East, were 
adopted by some with the same indiscriminating fervour i 
as were the discarded fashions of English “ art ” and” 
articles of commerce. Some there were who, judging all* 
things by a narrow test of “ utilitarian ” principle, found * 
every historio religion, whether of East or West, to be the * 
outcome merely of the deoeit of priests, whose “ highest- 
achievement ” in all lands has been “ abomination wor- r 
ship.” And of this in India 1 the Sh&kta and other cults/ 
were cited as the worst examples.*

As regards the West, the author of the work cited is of opinion 
t at tho system of auricular confession made further priestly efforts 
m the direction of " abomination worship" supererogatory.As regards the West, the author of the work cited is of opinion 
t at tho system of auricular confession made further priestly efforts 
m the direction of " abomination worship" supererogatory.

Hindu Castes and Sects." by J. N. BhattAch&rji. I cite this 
apparently nftstika work as one of a type only, it being fairly well 
known and read. The author writes down even the Buddha as an 
ambitious schemer.

INTRODUCTION

25

The ase of this strong language applied to all the 
religions of East and West suggests the observation that, 
while grounds for adverse judgment may have existe’d, we 
must examine the criticisms by Hindus of the beliefs 
of their countrymen as we would any other, in order to 
see whether the author knows that of which he speaks, 
and, if so, whether he is free (which the author cited was 
not) from prejudice against “religion” in general, or the 
sectarianism which exists in India, as elsewhere. 1 Nor 
is the language used in such cases to be always taken 
literally. If, for instance, we can imagine the astonished 
mind of an otherwise uninformed Hindu, after the perusal of 
the stanza of the “ Orange ” hymn cited below,* * it is not 
improbable to suppose that a too literal understanding of 
its words might give him notions as to the “ obscenity ” of 
the tenets and practice of the Catholic Church which would 
appear exaggerated even to the inflamed judgment of the 
author of the “ hymn ” in question.

In the West this raw philosophizing has for some time 
past been appreciated at its true value. More mature views 
will find a deeper source for the religious instinct than the 
machinations (even though they exist) of priests.

The following passage from another writer,* purporting 
to give the verdict of “ New India on Religion,” is, in its

1 Particular animosity used to exist, and amongst the sectarian* 
minded still exists, between ShAktas and Vaishnavos.

* " Scarlet Church of all uncleanness,

Sink thou to the deep abyss,1 Particular animosity used to exist, and amongst the sectarian* 
minded still exists, between ShAktas and Vaishnavos.

* " Scarlet Church of all uncleanness,

Sink thou to the deep abyss,

To the orgies of obsceneness,

Where the Hell-bound Furies hiss,

Where thy father's Satan's eye 
Hails thee, hellish Popery."

1 The Indian World, July, 1810.

26

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

blustering crudities, reminiscent of our own cheap rational¬ 
ism of the second half of the last century:

« The world is passing from faith to reason. The future 
is for reason. When reason is established the problem of 
the world will be easy of solution. Reason will stand no 
miracles, no humbug, no special incarnations or exclusive 
revelations. It will elbow out all creeds, and admit nothing 
which cannot be demonstrated to the intelligence. Forms 
of worship are excrescences of religion. Belief in the 
supernatural and transcendent is getting into a discount. 
The element of mystery once believed to be an inseparable 
factor of religion is disappearing,” and so forth.

They are but weakly met by such mawkish present¬ 
ments of the “ Religion of the Future ” as those of which 
the following passage is a vaguely-conceived and worded, 
however well-intentioned, example: “ No priest can lead 
us by the nose and make us believe in meaningless practices 
which profit no one but the professional priest! 1 Free 
thought will be the watchword of the churches of the 
future. Religion will be a real being, becoming. Growing in 
life from within like an endogen ; drawing sustenance also 
from without. Religion is to be in tune with the infinite. 
It will be the budding forth of the lotus of the heart; the 
correspondence with the environments of the soul; the 
opening out of the fountains from within; the setting allow 
of the waters of life proceeding from the throne of the Most 
High. Religion will not be a theorem, a Q.E.D., but a 
problem, Q.E.F.”*1 This and tho rest of the quotation are, of coarse, inspired by a 
type of Western thought. To the Hindu mantra is not mere aksham, 
nor guru a mere man, but the manifestation of the Supreme and only 
Guru, the Adin&tha Mah&kiUa. The revolt, however, is supported to 
some extent by the fact of the incompetence of many of the gurus.

’"The Religion of the Future,” by Hemendra Nath Sinha, B.A., 
pp. 89. 89. The last sentence is like the rest obscure, but perhaps 
indicates the workings of the pragmatic bacillus even in the East.

INTRODUCTION

27

A more definite attempt to reconcile religious tradition 
and 4 ‘ modern thought ” was made by the Brahmasamaj, 
the doctrines of which, as also of the Secularist school, are 
combated in this book. The Adisamaj, which preceded it, 
more closely adhered to orthodox Hinduism, being distin¬ 
guished from the latter by the rejection of some of its 
beliefs and practices. In the Brahmasamaj the doctrines 
became of a more syncretistic character. There was a 
further divergence from orthodoxy, and an attempt was 
made to incorporate alien forms of thought and ritual. The 
Brahmasamaj describes itself in the words of one of its 
prominent supporters as “a humble gleaner of the truth 
wherever found.” The resulting eclecticism possesses its 
share of the weaknesses of all such systems.

All these influences, the outcome of English education 
—whether they be of the Secularist type, abandoning all 
ancient forms of beliefs, or of that which claims to reform 
but as often destroys them, or of the more modern kind 
which seeks a belief which shall he freed of form—led away 
from the standpoint of orthodox form, which is that of the 
Tantra. The process was accelerated by the decadence of 
many of the followers of the Vam&ch&ra community governed 
by the Shastra.In the general neglect of Shastra, and repulsion caused 
by abuse, no attempt was made to ascertain what in 
fact were the true teachings of that portion of it which 
governed this community. No distinction was made be¬ 
tween such doctrine and the abuses of it, nor between 
the particular portion of the Shastra prescribing and 
regulating V&mftch&ra ritual and those other portions 
which governed other divisions of Sadhakas or the com¬ 
munity in general. The Sh&stra was, generally in its 
entirety, condemned as useless where it was not considered 
morally harmful. To some extent these conclusions may

28

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

have influenced European Orientalists, but probably in 
much less degree ; for scientific investigation of human 
activities in whatsoever sphere is not (without closure of 
all historical inquiry) to be thwarted by the fear that what 
may be found on investigation is not that which is likely 
to be approved. Nor are the difficulties of a linguistic 
character, the Tantra* being written in comparatively simple 
Sanskrit. The reason is rather to be found in difficulties 
of a different kind.

The Tantra in some of its aspects is a secret dootrine 
(guptavidya) to be gathered, not from the written record, 
but verbally from those who hold the key to it. So with 
Eastern allegory it is said: “ Verily, verily, and without a 
doubt the Veda Shastra and Puranas are, like a common 
woman, free to all, but the doctrine of Shambhu (i.e., the 
Tantra) is like a secret house bride, to reveal which is 
death.” 1 The key to the method has been with the initiate.Next there are two special difficulties as regards the 
record; firstly, its fragmentary character and its exist¬ 
ence in manuscripts which are not easily procurable, and 
then the technical character of the terminology. Next, 
the ritualistic character of the Tantra requires as a pre¬ 
liminary for its exposition at least some general know¬ 
ledge regarding the subject, which does not ordinarily 
exist except among Hindus. In the case of certain Tantrik 
doctrines and practices, the more ordinary difficulties have 
been increased owing to the complex and esoteric character 
of the rituals, and, as some allege, to the existence of 
higher and lower traditions (ftmnaya), which to-day have

' VedashAstrapuriinAni samtinyaganikii iva

Yft punah shftmbhavT vidyA guptfi kulabadhuriva 
PrakAsho prftnohAnib syftt sat yang sat yang na sangshaynh.

So also the Tantros&ra (Ed. R. M. ChatterjO, p. 691, which says: 
" RadAchiddehah&nistn na chAgnpti kad&chana, varam pfijfi na karttaryA 
na cha vyaktih kad&chana.”

INTRODUCTION

29

become confused. Lastly, while the Sh&stra provides by 
its various ftch&ras for all types, from the lowest to the 
most advanced, its essential concepts, under whatever 
aspects they are manifested, and into whatever pattern 
they are woven, are (as Professor de la Valine Poussin says 
of the Buddhist Tantra) of a metaphysical and subtle 
character. This is particularly so as regards Shaktitattva, 
Mantratattva, and Yogatattva, though there are others. 
It is claimed that the true TantrikftcMiyya is the master 
of Veda, and that its esoterio teaching can only be fully 
understood from the Shastra and its accompanying tradi¬ 
tions, and the personal experiences which are the practical 
fruits of its Sadhaua.Since this work was first published the so-called 
“progressive" movement has been followed by a re¬ 
action in the orthodox Hindu world, which is not with¬ 
out its own defects. 1 The spread of Theosophical ideas 
first renewed an interest in the teachings of India’s great 
past, and an awakening national spirit has done the 
rest. The Tantra has had a share in this interest as is 
manifested in the fair number of Tantras, T&ntrik com¬ 
pendia such as the Pranatoshinl,* and other works on 
the Shastra (of which that now translated is one), 
which have been first published or reprinted in recent 
years. It is a sign of the times to find even a Brahma

1 To those, for instance, whose supposed “ Hindu " sentiment v ould 
revive the practice of 8atl may be recommended the words ef the 
Mah&nirv&na Tantra : “ O Kuleshitni, a wife should not be burnt with 
her dead husband. Every i coman is thy image. Thou residest con¬ 
cealed in the forms of all women in this world (tava sv4rup& ramani 
jagatyachcbhnnnavigrahfi). That woman who in her delusion (n.oha) 
ascends the funeral pyre of her lord shall go to hell" (chap, x, verses 
79-80).

’ From the same source comes the Prftnakrishnashabdp.mbuddhi, 
which I hope to publish.

30

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

publication on the Shatchakra. 1 This interest is due in 
part to the general religious revival in progress, and also 
to the increasing recognition of the necessity of sfidhana 
(practice), as distinct from mere philosophizing, if any 
practical result is to be attained.

According to orthodox views, the Tantra will continue 
in force until the close of the Kaliyuga, when the golden 
age (Satya yuga) will reappear, governed by its appro¬ 
priate Shastra. The India of to-day is, however, not in 
the same sense as of yore the “ Shrl Bharata, adored of 
the Devas ” (Surarchitabharata), to which the book now 
published makes salutation.The author has many a lament over the changes 
occurring in what appears to him to be a darkening time.

“ If to-day all men had the strength of faith of Rama- 
de\a Tarkika, hero most powerful in the field of austerity, 
or of Ganesha Upftdhyfiya, whose life was one long sur- 
render to the Mother; or of Ramaprasftda,* * who was, as it 
were, a bee intoxicated with the honey of the lotus feet 
of Shakti, should we in that case have had to sing in 
Tantra T&ttva the song of all these evil designs (against 
the Sh&stra). But the day is now lost to us. That un¬ 
flinching faith in Tantra, the Sadhana-Shastra, has been 
shaken.” 1

“ Alas! the lion-hearted heroes, pillars of Sanatana 
Dharma ! where are you to-day in this dismal time ? That

. ' ^» trT malaka shatchakrervyAkh j Ana o sAdhanA. a publication

bj the Mangala Ganga Mission Press.

* The celebrated Bengali poet and $hAkta.

Fn V > 8 Devi—that is. both the power of God and God Himself

h “ H “ ?h,k " " -orshippea S

* This book.

” Principles of Tantra.”

INTRODUCTION

31

resplendent lustre of yours hallowed by Sfidhana, is mingled 
with the Mantra Shastra itself. Do ye to-day shed that 
lustre in every letter, in every accent. Let the Shfistra of 
Bharata be again resplendent with the fire of the Tapas 1 * * 
of Bharata’8 sons."*

But his cause is not wholly lost to him, and he 
continues to defend it—with a certain spacious splendour 
of imagery and feeling which belong to a passing world.But his cause is not wholly lost to him, and he 
continues to defend it—with a certain spacious splendour 
of imagery and feeling which belong to a passing world.

“ Reasoning, argument and inference may be the work 
of other Shastras, but the work of Tantra is to accomplish 
superhuman and divine* events by the force of its own 
Mantras. Destruction, driving away, and establishment 
of control, 4 and such other powers, are still to be daily 
seen. Hundreds of thousands of great and accomplished 
S&dhakas still illumine all India with the glory of their 
austerities. 1 * In every cremation ground* in India the 
refulgent and divine halo of Bhairavas and Bhairavls 7 
is yet to be seen mingling with the light of the dames of 
funeral pyres, rending apart the waves of nocturnal dark¬ 
ness and illuminating the wide expanse of Heaven. Dead 
and putrefying corpses submerged * near cremation grounds 
are still brought to life by the force of the Sadhakas’ 
Mantras, and made to render aid to Sadhana and Siddhi. 
Whilst still living in this mortal world T&ntrik Yogis 
even now obtain, through the potency of Mantras, direct

1 Austerities, etc. (see Introduction).

1 " Principles of Tantra."

* Daiva.

' MAranam, UchchAtanam. Vashlkaranani.

4 Tapas.

* SmashAna, where Slmvfisann, MundAsana, LatAsAdhana and other 
TAntrik rites, are practised.

' Adept TAntrik men and women.

' Before and whilst awaiting burning, the corpse is placed in the 
sacred stream.

32

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Adept TAntrik men and women.

' Before and whilst awaiting burning, the corpse is placed in the 
sacred stream.

32

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

vision of the supersensual activities of the world of Devas. 
She, with dishevelled hair, the dispeller of fear from the 
hearts of Her devotees, still appears in great cremation 
grounds, 1 to give liberation to Her devoted Sadhakas who, 
made afraid by the fear of this existence, make obeisance to 
and supplicate Her. Sadhakas still merge themselves in the 
Self of Brahman by laying their Brahmarandhra * * at those 
lotus feet of Brahmamayl,* which are adored by BrahmS. and 
other Devas. The throne of the Daughter of the Mountain 4 
is still moved by the wondrous, attractive force of Mantras. 
This, in the eyes of Sadhakas, is the ever broad and royal 
road upon which they travel untiring to the city of 
liberation.”*

The same forces, however, against which this book, as 
also other orthodoxies, protest, are in conflict both with 
Hinduism in its present Tantrik form and with Chris¬ 
tianity of the older type. In the present mingling of 
East and West, each is providing a ferment for the other, 
which, when all is said, is as much a divine product as 
the Revelations which it sometimes appears to threaten. 
The embodied Atmft, however, must ever seek itself re¬ 
vealing its search to us in that which we call the “ religious 
spirit,” clothed though It must also be in forms new or 
renewed *—its changing expression in a world of unceasing 
ohange.

1 Mah(lsma§hilniu. where some of the most difficult forms of 
T&ntrik Sftdhanft are practised. The auspicious KAlikft is thought of 
as with dishevelled hair (vigalitacbikurA), and so is the hair of the 
devotee (see Karpur&di stotra, verses 8, 10).

The cavity of Brahman at the top of the head, here used for the 
head generally.

' The Devi.

* The Devi as daughter of Himavnt.

' " Principles of Tantro."

* Hinduism is already tnking on n new life.

INTRODUCTION

33' The Devi.

* The Devi as daughter of Himavnt.

' " Principles of Tantro."

* Hinduism is already tnking on n new life.

INTRODUCTION

33

For the understanding of the Tantrik, or, indeed, any 
other beliefs and practices, the usual dry-as-dust in¬ 
vestigation of the savant is insufficient. In the first place 
a call should be made upon actual present experience. 
The primary inquiry should be addressed to the ascertain¬ 
ment of the present belief and practice of those whose reli¬ 
gious history is under investigation. It is obvious that the 
course of time effects changes. But whatever these may 
be, present beliefs are the descendants of those of the past. 
Much, therefore, which was in the parent will be found in 
the child. A study of the present will help to an under¬ 
standing of anoient documents which, if made the sole basis 
of research, often prove the source of error. For these 
reasons I have selected a modern exposition of the general 
basis of T&ntrik doctrine by one who, as its adherent, has 
inherited its traditions (vaktr&dvaktrena). We are now 
recommencing to value tradition, which everywhere pro¬ 
vides the key to truth. It is in all religions of equal if not 
of greater truth than the imperfect and sometimes falsified 
documentary evidence we at present possess of their origin 
and history.

Whatever may be the case upon the purely historical 
questions which have been raised in connection with the 
Shastra, with respect to doctrine and practice, the first and 
simplest course is to learn from the lips of its living adhe¬ 
rents what in fact they are, and, in so far as they can be 
given, the reason of and authority for them.

Mere book-learning (pustake likita vidyft), will not 
carry the student the full way without error. It must be 
supplemented by information derived from the Tantrik 
Acharyyas and Gurus. The truth of the learning so gained 
can only be tested by personal experience.Hindu beliefs, to be understood aright, should, if pos¬ 
sible, be learned both of those who have not, as also of 
s

34

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

those who have, received an English education. The latter 
—in the past, at any rate—has generally involved the 
neglect of, and (prior to the recent national movement) 
often resulted in a contempt for, all that is ancient and 
specifically Hindu, whether in Religion, Literature, or Art. 1 
In its tendency it is not only—under its present condi¬ 
tions, at any rate, and whether for good or ill—destruc¬ 
tive of tradition, but also in varying degrees of the 
mentality which originally produced the beliefs, and by 
which alone they may be completely apprehended. Even 
in cases where competency assumes a favourable attitude 
towards the ancient teaching, there is often to be found 
a tendency to read modern ideas into it.

A modern Indian publicist and author* makes upon 
this matter some very just observations. In treating of the 
concept “ Mother ” as applied to India by her children, 
he says that there is no mere metaphor behind it, though 
most modern educated Hindus understand the word in a 
poetical and metaphorical sense. “ But this is,” he says, 
“ because their education and environment have more or 
less completely diverted their thought and imagination 
from the ancient realities of their language and literature. 
There are, indeed, numerous words in common use amongst 
us to-day that have entirely lost their original sense, owing 
to the loss of the genuine thought-life of the people in the 
wilderness of un-understood and un-assimilated foreign 
words and concepts accumulated by our present system of 
education. With the Europeanization of our minds and 
modes of thinking, even our words have been percepti¬ 
bly Europeanized.” This criticism has a very extensive1 As regards the two former, see the observations in Babn Dinesh 
Chandra Sen's valuable “ History of Bengali Literature." published by 
the Calcutta University. As to Art. a limited residence in India will 
afford distressing proof.

’ Bepin Behary Pal. " The Soul of India." p. 145.

INTRODUCTION

35

application, and one is reminded of it at every step in read¬ 
ing the works of English-educated Hindus on Hindu life and 
thought, which their prudent reader will in some instances 
do well to peruse, bearing the above well-founded remarks 
in mind. As regards his countrymen, the author, in the 
second volume 1 of this work, observes: “Nowadays, most 
of those who represent the ideal type of a learned man in 
society are considered ignorant and devoid of all sense in 
the community of the Religious (Sadhakas).” It iB also 
to be remembered that amongst the English-speaking 
Hindus who have attained success and even distinction 
there are many who, being of other castes, have neither 
inherited the traditions of the Brahmana nor had the 
benefit of his teaching. Interpretations coming from these 
classes are likely (though exceptions may exist) to suffer 
by reason of their ancient disabilities.

The Tantratattva (Principles or subject matter of 
Tantra), of which the first part* * is here translated, is, so 
far as I am aware, the only considerable modern work of 
its kind. It was written in Bengali by Pandit Shiva 
Chandra Vidyftrnava Bhattacharyya,* and first published 
some twenty years ago, being now in its second edition.

The present work is a defence of the Tantra, of which 
Shastra the author is an adherent and a polemic, under¬ 
taken in the interests of Hindu orthodox}’ in its Shakta 
and Tantrika form against Secularism on the one hand, 
and on the other the religious eclecticism and various 
“ reforming" movements, of which, when the book was

1 See chapter on Gurukula and Rnlaguru.1 See chapter on Gurukula and Rnlaguru.

' The work was originally published in one volume. The second 
edition has been divided into two parts, of which the first only has 
been published, the other being, when this was written, in the press. 
(Publishers' Note : Both the parts are contained in this edition.)

* Editor of the journal Shaivi, and author of several other works_

“ Gtt&njali,” “ Mil," " Svabhiva o abb&va," “ Vidyarnaver dureotsnva •» 
“ Karta o Mana." “ Plthamala," ** Gangesba." 8 '

36

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

first written, the Br&hmasam&ji was a leading type. In 
fact, in parts the book reads like an orthodox Catholio 
protest against “ modernism,” and is thus interesting as 
showing how many fundamental principles are common to 
all orthodox forms of belief, whether of West or East.

The author of the Tantratattva is a well-known Tantrik 
Pandit, preacher, and secretary of the Sarvamangalasabha 
of Benares, who, happily for our purposes, knows no English. 
His work, which is written in Bengali, may therefore be 
taken to be an accurate popular statement of modern or¬ 
thodox views on the subject treated of by him. The word 
“ Tattva is a very comprehensive one, which it is by no 
means always easy to translate. I have rendered the title 
of the book as “ Principles of Tantra,” though, maybe, as a 
friend has pointed out, it should be “ Subjects of Tantra.” 
The work deals, it is true, with ohosen topics of Tantra. 
This, however, also involves a statement of certain funda¬ 
mental principles which govern Shftstrik teaching on the sub¬ 
jects dealt with, and this as well as the contents of possible 
future volumes must be my justification for giving the 
book a more ambitious title.The author is both a poet and a preacher—a circum¬ 
stance which accounts for the rhetorical style and popular 
devotional character of the work. Apart from such in¬ 
trinsic merits as it may possess, it is of value as a docu¬ 
ment which records the thought and workings of an Indian 
mind affected but little, if at all, by the current notions 
of the day. It deals in the main, and in a popular way, 
with the philosophical and religious grounds of the ortho¬ 
dox system in its Sh&kta form. As regards some of its 
practical aspects, the author has considered that this 
was a subject fitter for the reader’s Guru than for a book 
addressed to the public at large. It may therefore have 
proved a disappointment to those who, at the mention

INTRODUCTION

37

of Tantra, always expect to hear of rituals with wine and 
woman, the midnight circle (Chakra), black magic in the 
cremation grounds, and so forth. The constant desire to 
hear of such things is not evidence of a true interest in the 
Shastra, but a confession of personal weakness . 1 To such 
it may oome as a surprise to learn that the Tantra also 
concerns itself with matters of undoubted respectability 
even to its critics, and of universal, if less sensational, 
interest. It is commonly assumed by such persons (though 
altogether erroneously) that the Tantra Shastra is only 
concerned with the Chakra ritual of those who are called 
(but incorrectly so) “ lefthand ” upasakas, who follow 
virachara.* This, however, is of course not the fact. On 
the contrary, the main subjects of Tantra are Mantra and 
Sadhana in all its forms. It is also the chief repository 
of Yoga practioe, and its general range of subject, as here¬ 
after mentioned, is encyclopaedic.As Professor B. K. Sarkar has well said, the encyclo¬ 
paedias of India known under diverse names, suoh as San- 
ghitas, Pur an as and Tantra#, are really generio terms 
under which the whole culture of certain epochs in Indian 
history found expression and currency. He adds that, 
while it is difficult and sometimes impossible to assign 
to such storehouses of information respecting the national 
life the names of any particular authors or compilers 
and the question of their dates may never be solved

Inquiry as to these matters is, to use a chess term, a common 
though bad " opening " for those who have a real desire to know the 
ShOstra.

5 In “ Non-Christian Religions," by Howard, pp. 77-78. The author, 
after a statement that the " TOntrik System " originated with the 
Buddhist monk Asanga. says: “ Further than this we must decline to 
plunge, even with the parts of the Tantra accessible to English 
readers." I am unaware of any parts “ accessible to English readers " 
when this statement was made, and the author was evidently ignorant 
of any other.

38

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

satisfactorily, they furnish undeniable, though sometimes 
conflicting accounts, of the manners and customs, rites and 
ceremonies, sects and Samprad&yas, sentiments and tradi¬ 
tions, which prevailed among the Hindus for epochs extend¬ 
ing over hundreds of years.The translation is primarily the work of my friend 
Babu Jn&nendral&l Majumdar, himself a Bengali. My 
own part has consisted in its revision. The translation 
may read rather cumbrously in parts, but this is due to 
our desire to keep as close as possible to the somewhat 
discursive and rhetorical form of the original. I have 
added some explanatory notes to the text I should have 
liked to have made the notes fuller if it could have 
been done without overloading the text. I have, how¬ 
ever, referred in the notes to the Introduction written 
for my edition of the Mahanirv&na Tantra , 1 where I 
have explained at greater length such terms as “ yantra," 
“mantra,” “‘mudrft,” “nyasa,” “ panohatattva,” the 
shatchakra, and others, and have in a general and 
summary way dealt with sadhana, upasana, and hatha- 
joga. I have retained certain technical Sanskrit terms 
in the text, as there is no corresponding English word 
which accurately gives their meaning.

The following pages deal with certain general aspects 
of the Shastra, its nature, origin, age, and authority—sub¬ 
jects which were either not then treated of or were more 
summarily referred to. If upon some of these topics, such 
as the age of the Shastra, I have not presented sufficiently 
certain and detailed conclusions, it is because, for want of 
the necessary knowledge, I am unable to do so. The subject 
is a no\e! one, and possibly many years of inquiry into

to that l worli f<?renCCS * ntro< * act ' on are - unless otherwise stated,

INTRODUCTION

39

Indian, Chinese, and Tibetan records 1 will have to be made

before opinions of any finality can be formed as to many

matters in and touching the Sh&stra.

• • • •INTRODUCTION

39

Indian, Chinese, and Tibetan records 1 will have to be made

before opinions of any finality can be formed as to many

matters in and touching the Sh&stra.

• • • •

Current definitions of Tantra as “ Sacred writings of 
the Hindus,” “ Scriptures of Sh&ktas,” “ Collections of 
Magical Treatises,” and the like, are either inaccurate and 
insufficient, or by their generality useless. A type of such 
inaccurate statements characterized by the usual vagueness 
and indecision says that: “ The Tantras are a later develop¬ 
ment of the Puranic creed. They are the writings of 
Shaktas- or votaries of the female energy of some Divinity 
(sic), mostly the wife of Shiva. Such ideas are not alto¬ 
gether absent in the Puranic works. But in the Tantras 
they assume a peculiar character, owing to the admixture 
of magic performances and mystic rites of perhaps an inde¬ 
licate nature. Amarasinha knows not of them.” ' In pass¬ 
ing, it may be noted that this reference to the Amarakosba 
is a common one. It is true that the word Tantra is not 
mentioned in the Svargavarga of that book. On the other 
hand, those who so cite it omit to state that some other 
ancient Sh&stras, including the Atharvaveda, are not there 
mentioned ; and in the Nanarthavarga reference is made to 
Agama Shastra, which is one of the names of Tantra. An 
anonymous author who writes on what he calls “ Trans¬ 
formed Hinduism " ' says, after a description of the Puranas, 
“ Another literature of a still more degrading type has been 
incorporated in the modern Hinduism, and this is the reli¬ 
gious books called the Tantras, of which there are sixty-four

1 Indian tradition connects China and the Tantra, and both Chinese 
and Tibetan records are reputed to contain Sanskrit works which have 
long since disappeared from India.

' “ History of Classical and Sanskrit Literature, M by M. Krishna* * 
macharyya, M.A.. B.L., p. 84.

* P. 180.

40

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' “ History of Classical and Sanskrit Literature, M by M. Krishna* * 
macharyya, M.A.. B.L., p. 84.

* P. 180.

40

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

volumes . 1 These books are mostly manuals of mysticism 
and magic, written otherwise very much on the same lines 
as the Puranas. The religion advocated in these books is 
the exponent (sic) of Saktism, the wife of Siva (sic), under 
her various manifestations.” Whilst the Indian author last 
quoted rather vaguely refers to “ mystic rites of perhaps an 
indelicate character ” the book now cited more definitely 
affirms. “ It is a licentious worship, and leads to cruelty, 
self-indulgence, and sensual gratification. Hence it is a 
blot upon the * * Modern Hinduism.’ This sect goes under 
the name of the Bahrn Marges (sic), or the secret sect.” * 
The accounts of these and other uninformed authors treat 
the Tantra as a Shastra of the Shaktas only where they do 
not as in the last cited quotation regard it merely as the 
Shastra of the Vamachara community of Shakta Sadhakas.

The word Tantra has various meanings, and amongst 
others Sh&stra generally, and therefore does not neces¬ 
sarily denote a religious Shastra.'' In the sense, however, 
in which the term is most widely known and is here used, 
it denotes that body of religious scripture (Shastra) which 
is stated to have been revealed by Shiva as the specific

The author, in speaking of these “ volumes," as he calls them, is 
thinking of the 64 Tantras assigned to each of the throe krAntAs, which 
make them, however, so far as such divisions are concerned, 192 and 
not 64.

* The author means the vAma marga, or vAmAchAra, as it is ordi¬ 
narily called. The Tantra does not only deal with this “ sect," which 
is one only of its AchAras; the tenets of which the author does not 
understand. DakshinAchAras and others are also followers of Tantra. 
The work is incorrect both as to the Tantra and other ShAstras and 
practices of the Hindus which it proposes to " transform."’Thus in the ShabdashaktiprakAshikA it is said: Tarkangtan- 
tranchavidusbft vidushAngtoshakArikA, kriyate jagadlshena ”; where 
Tantra means the theory or science of argument. So the Panchatantrn, 
which the so-called Tantrik Order of America" includes in its 
IntertiahcmalJournal amongst the Sanskrit and Tibetan Tantras, is not 
a Tantra in the sense here dealt with at all, but a book of fables.

INTRODUCTION

41

scripture of the fourth or present Kali age (yuga). This is 
the definition of the Tantra according to the Shastra itself.

There are four such ages (Mahayuga)—namely, the 
Satya yuga, or golden age; the Treta yuga age, in which 
righteousness (dharwa) decreased by one-fourth; the Dva- 
para yuga, in which dharma decreased by one-half; and the 
present Kali yuga, the most evil of the ages, in which 
righteousness exists to the extent of one-fourth only. At 
the close of this last age the Kalki Avatara of Vishnu, “ the 
rider on the white horse,” will destroy iniquity and restore 
the rule of righteousness. Each of these ages has its 
appropriate Shastra, or Scripture, which is designed to meet 
the requirements of the men of each age.The Hindu Shastras are classed into Shruti, Srnriti, 
Purana, and Tantra. The three last all assume the first 
as their base, and are, in fact, merely special presentments 
of it for the respective ages. It has been said that the 
Tantras “ are regarded by those who follow them as a fifth 
Veda as ancient as the others and of superior authority .” * 1 
No Shastra is or can be superior to the Veda. That practical 
application of its teachings, however, whioh is prescribed 
in the Tantra is to be followed in preference to the vaidika- 
chara in the Kaliyuga. The relations of the Veda to the 
Tantra has been compared with that of the Jiv&tm& to the 
Paramatma. The Tantra is said by its adherents to re¬ 
present the inner core of the former. Professor de la Vallee 
Poussin says*: “Si l'on veut instituer une comparaison 
qui d’ailleurs n’est pas sans danger on sera frappe des res- 
semblances inaperques qui permettent de rapprocher ces 
deux manifestations si differentes de la pensee Hindoue, le 
V^disme et le Tantrisme.” These resemblances which struck

1 Beveridge, “ History of India," ii. 77. And to the same effect 
Biblical, etc., Encycloptedia." McClintoch and Strong, xii. 864.

1 Bouddhisme Etudes et Materiaux.

42

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Beveridge, “ History of India," ii. 77. And to the same effect 
Biblical, etc., Encycloptedia." McClintoch and Strong, xii. 864.

1 Bouddhisme Etudes et Materiaux.

42

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the learned author are, of course, due to the fact that there 
is a .base common to the Veda and the Tantra, the lattei 
being, according to orthodox notions, a branch of the Vaidik 
tree. It is only those who would altogether disassociate 
the Tantra from the Veda who will experience any surprise 
at finding resemblances between the Shastras for the res¬ 
pective ages. As the Kul&rnava Tantra says, for each age 
(yuga) a suitable Sh&stra is given—namely, in Satyayuga, 
JShruti; in Treta, Smriti; in Dvapara the Puranas; and 
in the Kali age the Tantra . 1 The truth to be taught ever 
remains the same, though the method of inculcating it 
varies with the ages. Current definitions, when not incorrect, 
fail to bring out this character of the Tantra as a Yuga 
(age) Shastra and its relations to the other Scriptures. As, 
however, our author well says* it is by no means impossible 
that now towards the end of the Kali age a few parasites 
should be found growing on some of its branches.

The original and highest source of dharrna is Shruti, or 
that “ which has been heard,’ and which is the tpstssitna 
verba of divine revelation. The Vedas are apaurusheya 
(without any personal composer), manifested to the 
Rishis who were not their authors, but only their Seers 
(drashtarah). The term “ Shruti ” is sometimes used in 
(what is to some) an extended sense, as where Kulluka 
Bhatta speaks of Tantra (which has sometimes been 
described as the fifth Veda) as Shruti (vaidikl tantriklchaiva 
dvividha klrttitA shrutih). Popularly, however, the term

1 Krite shrutynkt&ch&rastret&yy&ng smntisambhavah 
Dvftpare tu pur&noktang kolau Agamakevalam.1 Krite shrutynkt&ch&rastret&yy&ng smntisambhavah 
Dvftpare tu pur&noktang kolau Agamakevalam.

See also MahAnirv&na Tantra, chap. i. verse 28, and Knbjikft Tantra, 
where Shniti, Smriti, and PnrAna are assigned to the first three ages, 
and Tantra to the fourth.

’ See post. And as to the relation of Agama and Veda, see Mahii • 
bh&gavata cited, post.

INTRODUCTION

43

is limited to the four Vedas—Rik, Sam a, Yajus, and 
Atharva—and the Upanishads, of which, Professor Paul 
Deussen says: “ Die Upanishads, sind far den Veda was 
fur die Bibel das neue Testament ist.” 1 In its primary 
significations the term “ Vedanta ” means the latter part 
of the Veda. The Jnanakanda of the Vedas is therefore 
the Vedanta in the original sense of the word. As such it 
is Shruti, and therefore in this sense the Vedanta is 
identical with the Upanishads, which teach as the gist of 
Vaidik doctrine the knowledge of the Absolute Being 
(Paramatma) and union with It. The Devas worshipped 
in the Mantras of the Karmakanda are, as well as the 
whole visible universe, but manifestations of It—the “ Tat 
Sat,” or the Reality. Based on Upanishad is the Vedanta 
Darshana, or philosophy embodied in the Vedanta Sutras 
ascribed to Vyasa, which have again been the subject 
of the commentaries known as Shangkarabhashyam (of 
Shangkar&charyya), Shribhashyam (of Ramanuja), Mftdhva- 
bhashyam (of Madhva), and the less important Govinda- 
bh&shyam.Smriti is “ that which is remembered,” and has been 
handed down by Rishis. It is regarded as the expression 
of the Divine will conveyed to mankind by inspiration 
through the agency of human beings. It is divided into 
the Shrauta sQtras, dealing with Vaidik ceremonies, and 
the Gribya sutras, concerning the household rites; the 
prose Dharma sutras, which lay down rules of law properly 
so called (of which there are various charanas or schools, 
such as those of Gautama, Baudhayana, Apastamba, 
Vashishtha, and others), and Dharma Shfistras, or metrical 
versions of previously existing dharma-sQtras, such as the 
Code of Manu (Manusmriti), the Yajnavalkya, Narada,

I u

Die Gebeimlehre des Veda ” (1009).

44

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

Parashara Smritis, and other fragmentary Dharma Shastra* 
and secondary Smritis of later periods. On these Smritis 
there are various commentaries, such as those of Medhatithi, 
Kulluka Bhatta, and others on the Manusmriti; the com¬ 
mentaries on the Y&jnavalkya Srnriti by Vijn&neshvara 
(known as the Mit&kshara), and others ; commentaries on 
the Parashara Srnriti; and other commentaries such as 
those on the Mitakshara. These commentaries have given 
rise to various schools of law, such as the Mitakshara, 
Dayabhaga, Mithila, and others. Srnriti provides for 
pravritti dharma, as the Upanishads had revealed the path 
of nivritti, or, as it is loosely called, “ renunciation."The third Shastra, that of the Dvapara yuga, is that 
contained in the Puriinas, the principal of those now 
extant being eighteen in number . 1 They by myth and 
story oonvey in an exoteric manner the doctrines of the 
Vedas to the declining intelligence and spirituality of the 
men of the third age. ^iiike, however, the Tantra, they 
deal with nearly every subject of knowledge—theogonies, 
cosmogonies, genealogies, chronology, the astronomical, 
physical, and other sciences. In addition to the Maha- 
puranas, there are the secondary’ Puranas or Upapuranas.* 
Both of these are referred to in the Mahan irvana 
Tantra, when dealing with the Shastra of the different ages, 
as Sanghito. This word, which literally means “collec¬ 
tion," and, according to the Shabdaratnavali, includes 
Dharmma Shastra, Srnriti, Shrutijlvika, also comprises*

1 The Vishnu Bhiigavata (it is a matter of dispate whether this is 
the Shrimadbhagavata or Devi Bhftgavata, both of which are iargely 
quoted in this book); Nlradiya; Garuda; Padma ; Var&ha ; or Yaish- 
nava Pur&nas; Shiva, Linga, Skundu, Agni (or, according to other 
accounts, VAyu), Matsyn. Kurma ; or Shaiva Pur&naa ; the Brahma, 
Brahm&nda, Brahmavaivarta. M&rkandeya, Bhavishya. and VOmann 
Pur&nas.

* Kali kit, SanatkumOra, N&rasingha, and others.

* See Brahmavaivarta Parana, Jnanakhanda, chap, cxxxii.

INTRODUCTION

45

Parana, Upapurana, Itihasa (hiBtory such as Mahabharata 
and Ram&yana), the work of Valmlki, Vashishtha, and 
others.* See Brahmavaivarta Parana, Jnanakhanda, chap, cxxxii.

INTRODUCTION

45

Parana, Upapurana, Itihasa (hiBtory such as Mahabharata 
and Ram&yana), the work of Valmlki, Vashishtha, and 
others.

The specific Shastra for the fourth or Kaliyuga (accord¬ 
ing to orthodox views the present age) is the Tantra. 
Though there are Agaraas or Tantras which are called 
Shaiva and Shakta or Devi (according to the particular 
form of the One which is regarded therein as Ishtadevata), 
it is, according to orthodox notions, a mistake to regard 
the Tantra generally as if it were a petty Shastra of any 
particular division of Hindu worshippers. It is said, on the 
contrary, to be an universal Shastra governing all men in 
the Kali age, though particular provisions in it may have 
reference to particular divisions of worshippers. Thus, 
while certain communities who perform the rahasyapuja 
make use of wine in worship, others do not, and it is, in 
fact, forbidden to them by the Tantra itself, as is the 
specific Shaktipaja associated with such use. So the Nitya 
Tantra prohibits the latter in the case of the Pashu 1 (ratrau 
naiva yajeddevlng sandhy&yang vaparanhake). On the 
other hand, other portions of the Tantra govern the whole 
orthodox Hindu community. So not only the Shakti 
mantra, but also the Vishnu and Shiva mantras are T&ntrik. 
The Tantrika Sandhya may be said by all, and the Shastra 
is the source of the bulk of the generally current ritual. A 
remark of a friend who read the first volume of this book, 
“that he could find little of the Tantra in it.’’* * is typical 
of the general misconceptions which prevail as to the 
nature of the Shastra.

1 Because such worship connotes m&ithuna. which is not for the 
pasha on the path of pravritti. and who is still in the heavy bonds of 
desire.

* Because it does not deal with those portions of the Tantra which 
are concerned with the Panchatattva. virOcbAra, etc.

46

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Because it does not deal with those portions of the Tantra which 
are concerned with the Panchatattva. virOcbAra, etc.

46

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

It is true that the so-called “ Shakta Tantras pre¬ 
scribe, in the case of one of the Acbaras, a form of sadhana 
peculiar to this achara known as the Panchatattva , 1 or 
worship with wine, meat, fish, grain, and woman (Shakti): 
and not uncommonly the Tantra is associated with such 
worship onlv, with the result that a Tautrik has come 
to connote, in the minds of many, merely a Hindu who 
practises this Sadhana. Less narrow and crude notions 
popularly associate the Tantra with the Shakta cult only, 
though they would include all forms of worship within 
the Shakta community, and do not limit the scope of 
governance of the Tantra to the community of Varna- 
ch&rins worshipping with the rajasika Panchatattva. The 
reason for such views appears to be this: Though there 
may have been Shaiva Tantras, as there have been what are 
called Shaiva Pur&nas, and there are Tantras such as the 
Radha Tantra, which deal with the Vishnu cult; and 
though in ordinary worship there is adoration of the “ Five 
Devatas* *” (Panchopasana), yet in those scriptures which 
are more usually referred to when the Tantra is spoken 
of, the worship of Shakti assumes a more special form. 
All such notions, however, as regards Tantra, though 
popular, bespeak according to its followers a funda¬ 
mental misconception of the scope of the Shastra.

1 This is the term used by T&ntriks themselves in speaking of the 
conjoined elements. Vulgarly, they are called the “ five M’s ” (pancha 
makAm), because each of the ordinary names of the elements com¬ 
mences with that letter (mndya. mangsa. matsya. mudra, maithuna). 
Some of these have, however, esoteric names used by Tantriks amongst 
themselves. " Lata Sadhana" is a better and in some cases more 
accurate description ot f the fifth tattva than the word " maithuna ” 
with its vulgar implications.* Shiva. Vishnu, Suryya. Ganesha. and the Devi.

* According to the views (whether historically justifiable or not) 
of Tantrik Pandits with whom I have discussed this matter, it is not 
as though there were separate and conflicting ShOstras, but one Sh&stra

INTRODUCTION

47

Properly speaking, a Tantrik should be defined as one 
who is governed by and follows the provisions of Tantra 
which are applicable fco his particular case. In *1881 
Dr. Rajendra Lai Mitra * 1 wrote that the followers of Tantra 
might be reckoned by the hundreds of thousands, and that 
the life of many an Indo-Aryan (he might have said, in 
one way or another, practically all) was that of “ bondage 
to its ordinances.” As a Yuga Shastra, the Tantra claims 
to govern all orthodox communities of worshippers in the 
Kaliyuga. But this does not mean that all its provisions 
are applicable to each one of them. The contrary is the 
case. There are some matters, such as Mautratattva, 
which are of common applicability to all such com¬ 
munities. There are other matters which are peculiar to, 
and govern only, a particular community or section of 
it. But both the common and special provisions have 
the same Shastra as their source. It is, however, not here 
meant that every practice followed by the orthodox com¬ 
munities is of Tantrik origin. Some rites, such as that 
of Homa, have descended from Vaidik times. Others are 
of modern origin. Thus, to take one instance from amongst 
others: the Vaishnavas sing and dance and recite the name 
of Hari (Vishnu) in Kirtans which are of a popular and 
emotional character. This mode of worship was introduced 
by the great Chaitanya Deva to meet the needs of his time,—the Tantra with different sections appropriate to the various divi¬ 
sions in the community of worshippers. So. again, the. Pur&nas 
constitute one body of Shastra. though any particular Puruna may 
appear to give support to the sectarian hypothesis by reason of its 
emphasizing the cult of some particular DevatA.

1 “ Indian Aryyans" (1898). voL i. p. 404.

» ] thus exclude all the little sects, some of a very peculiar and 
original character, with which India abounds, though sometimes 
loosely affiliated, or claiming to be affiliated, to the larger one; such 
as. apparently, the Cboliya Pantha of Jodhpur, which Sellon. in his 
Annotations, calls Kauchiluas. ,

48

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA48

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and has nothing in common with the formal and intel¬ 
lectual character of the Tantrik ritual. As to this, the 
author says. 1 “ When Chaitanya Deva deluged all Bengal 
with huge waves of the name of Hari, he observed that 
Br&hmana, Kshatriya, and Vaishya families were on the 
verge of ruin. He thought that in the then state of 
^society, full of middle-class (Navash&kha) Shudras, in¬ 
competent for either the Vaidik or Tantrik dharma, 
Harinam sangkirtana * * was the best form of dharma (re¬ 
ligion), and consequently he preached that dharma.” 
Though some may nowadays be disposed, through ignor¬ 
ance or other reasons, to dispute their connection with 
the Shastra. the matter may be put to some very simple 
tests. If such disputant be orthodox (whether Shaiva, 
Vaishnava, or Shakta), he might, if he would answer 
such a question, be asked whether he has been initiated, 
and, if so, in what form—what mantra he then received, 
and where that mantra comes from* And then, when 
worshipping before an image 4 in Sakara upasana, with 
the sixteen articles of worship (shodasha upach&ra), inquiry 
may be made as to the authority for such image-worship, 
and in what Shastra this ritual and the rules relating 
to Ny&sa, BhQtashuddhi, and so forth, is to be found. 
The answer in all these and similar cases will be the

1 Sec post.

* Thp Binging of Vishnu's (Bari's) name with music and dancing. 
Among the Vaishnavas there is a good deal of worship of a congrega¬ 
tional character.

' Thus in the Vishnn mantra “ Kllng kltng OopAla," Kllng is a 
Tftntrik vlja which is to be found in no other Shastra but the Tnntra. 
In the same way. in the Krishna mantra, given in the notes to p. 112. 
Aing and Shrlng are T&ntrik vljas.

* 1 include under this term not merely the image strictly so-called, 
but also the jar (ghata) in Devi worship, and the lingam and sh&lagrfiroa 
in Shaiva and Vaishnava np&sanfi, respectively.

INTRODUCTION

49INTRODUCTION

49

Tantra. On the other hand, as above stated, certain 
provisions of the Shastra may have no applicability to a 
particular Sadhaka. As the Ishtadevati of the various 
religious communities differs, so in some respects does 
the pOja and s&dhana. The Basil leaf (tulsi) is sacred to 
Vishnu; the Bael (bilva) to Shiva; the Scarlet hibiscus 
or China Rose to the Devi. Whilst animal sacrifice is 
made to Kftll, it is forbidden in the worship of the aspeot 
of the One which is named Vishnu. The use of the 
rfijasika panchatattva is prescribed for Shaktas initiate 
in Vamachara. It is forbidden to the Shakta not initiate, 
and to other communities of worshippers. But both the 
injunctions and the prohibitions have as their authority 
the same Shastra, 1 which governs in some way or other all 
orthodox communities.

In short, it is considered an error to regard the Tantra 
as the petty Shastra of any religious sect only, and a 
still greater mistake to limit its operation to that which 
is but one only of its particular methods or divisions of 
worshippers (acharas).

As mentioned later, the Tantra deals with all matters 
of common belief and interest, from the doctrine of the 
origin of the world to the laws which govern kings and 
the societies which they have been divinely appointed to 
rule, medicine and science generally. The Tantra is not 
only the basis of popular Hindu practice, on which 
acoount it is known as the Sadhana Shastra, but it is the1 This is overlooked in the common, though erroneous, appellation 
—“ right hand " and “ left hand " worship, used in a sense as if the two 
had no Sh&strik connection with one another. The worship i6 not 
" right " and “ left ” in the sense of “ proper ’’ and “ improper,” 
orthodox and heterodox. Each is a recognized form of worship, 
presented by the “ Tantra ” for differing grades of its S&dhakas. 
F ^h has a common authority. Therefore no follower of the Tantra 
which prescribes these two ich&ras thus speaks of them.

4

60

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

repository of esoteric belief and practices, particularly 
those relating to yoga and mantratattva. Indeed, as 
regards the last, which is one of the most peculiar, and 
at the same time most profound, aspects of Hindu teach¬ 
ing, the Tantra is to such an extent the acknowledged 
repository of this spiritual science that its other name 
is the Mantra Shastra. Its claims to such a name could 
not have been made good were there not some ground 
for its assertion that it is a Yuga Shilstra for the Kali 
age. As to which Tantras, however, are authoritative 
there appear to be differences of opinion, such differences 
being due either to a mistaken sectarianism, or possibly 
to real divergences as regards doctrinal thought and 
historical descent.The Tantras are referred to as Agamas. An Indian 
author 1 and student of the Shaivagama expresses the 
opinion that the Agamas have branched out from the 
same stem of the Vaidik tree which produced the earlier 
Upanishads, and were at one time as widespread in India 
as the Upanishads themselves; that, like the Upanishads, 
the Agamas also became in course of centuries the basis 
of a number of “ creeds ” which, unanimous in accepting 
the essentials of the Agamic teaching, were divergent as 
regards rituals, observances, and minor essential details. 
He says: “ The Agamas contend that they constitute 
the truest exegesis of the Vedas, and their origins are 
certainly as ancient as those of some of the classical 
Upanishads. If the Fire worship be regarded as the 
ritual inculcated in the Vedas as the outer symbolism 
of spiritual truths, the temple worship may, on its side, 
be also said to assume a similar importance in regard to 
the Agamas. For the rest, it will be seen that in India

Pi/ Y; V. Rikmana Shastrin, in bis Introduction to J. M. Nalla- 
swami Pillai's Studies in Sbaiva Siddb&nta."

INTRODUCTION

51

at the present day there is hardly a Hindu who does not 
observe some kind of temple worship or another, which 
points to the conclusion that the Agamas have had, in one 
form or another, an universal hold upon the continent of 
Hindu India, and that their influence tells.” The prin¬ 
ciples and ritual of Shaivaism are said to be determined 
by the Agamas or Tantras, which are twenty-eight in 
number, from Kamika to Vatula.According to some, the Vedas, issued from four out of 
the five mouths of Shiva and the Tantra of the “ higher 
tradition ” (tlrddhvamnaya) from His central or fifth 
mouth. The other Tantra is said by some to have 
proceeded from the current issuing “ below the navel ” 1 
of the Deva. According to another account, all the 
mouths of Shiva gave issue to those Tantras which 
spring from the “ upward current,” and the others are the 
produce of the “downward current” “ below the navel.” * 
According, however, to both versions a distinction is made 
between the two classes of tradition. In the Lalit& Sahasra- 
nama, Bhftskararaya, commenting on the Shloka in which 
the Devi is addressed as NijajnarQpS. Nigama, (the “ Nigama 
are the expression of Thy commands ”), says: * “Athavfi, 
santi vedanuy&ylni sbaivatantrani k&mik&dlnyashta- 
vingshatih vedaviruddhani * kapalabhairavadlni cha teshu 
vaidikani nigamapadavftchyani paraineshvarasya mukhadud- 
bhQtatvSdajnarQpani napunarnabhyadho bhagadutpannani 
vedaviruddh&nltyarthah.” He there, referring to the Devi

1 See post.

* See as to the meaning of these expressions post.

* Verse 67.

4 As to whether the rahnsyapQj& of the Tantra is opposed to the 
Veda, see post. In similar fashion Aufrecbt (see Adikarmapradipa) 
says“ Snbbagama appellata a via Vedis prceseripta non' discendunt 
ideoque samayachara appellantur.

60

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA60

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

repository of esoteric belief and practices, particularly 
those relating to yoga and mantratattva. Indeed, as 
regards the last, which is one of the most peculiar, and 
at the same time most profound, aspects of Hindu teach¬ 
ing, the Tantra is to such an extent the acknowledged 
repository of this spiritual science that its other name 
is the Mantra Shastra. Its claims to such a name could 
not have been made good were there not some ground 
for its assertion that it is a Yuga Shastra for the Kali 
age. As to which Tantras, however, are authoritative 
there appear to be differences of opinion, such differences 
being due either to a mistaken sectarianism, or possibly 
to real divergences as regards doctrinal thought and 
historical descent.

The Tantras are referred to as Again as. An Indian 
author 1 and student of the Shaivagama expresses the 
opinion that the Agamas have branched out from the 
same stem of the Vaidik tree which produced the earlier 
Upanishads, and were at one time as widespread in India 
as the Upanishads themselves; that, like the Upanishads, 
the Agamas also became in course of centuries the basis 
of a number of “ creeds ” whioh, unanimous in accepting 
the essentials of the Agamic teaching, were divergent as 
regards rituals, observances, and minor essential details. 
He says: “ The Agamas contend that they constitute 
the truest exegesis of the Vedas, and their origins are 
certainly as ancient as those of some of the classical 
Upanishads. If the Fire worship be regarded as the 
ritual inculcated in the Vedas as the outer symbolism 
of spiritual truths, the temple worship may, on its side, 
be also said to assume a similar importance in regard to 
the Agamas. For the rest, it will be seen that in India

Pj[*. Y X." Shastrin. in his Introduction to J. M. Nalla-

swatni I illm s Studies in Sbaiva Siddhilnta."

INTRODUCTION

51Pj[*. Y X." Shastrin. in his Introduction to J. M. Nalla-

swatni I illm s Studies in Sbaiva Siddhilnta."

INTRODUCTION

51

at the present day there is hardly a Hindu who does not 
observe some kind of temple worship or another, which 
points to the conclusion that the Agamas have had, in one 
form or another, an universal hold upon the continent of 
Hindu India, and that their influence tells.” The prin¬ 
ciples and ritual of Shaivaism are said to be determined 
by the Agamas or Tantras, which are twenty-eight in 
number, from Eamika to Vatula.

According to some, the Vedas, issued from four out of 
the five mouths of Shiva and the Tantra of the “ higher 
tradition ” (flrddhvamnaya) from His central or fifth 
mouth. The other Tantra is said by some to have 
proceeded from the current issuing “ below the navel " 1 
of the Deva. According to another account, all the 
mouths of Shiva gave issue to those Tantras which 
spring from the “ upward current,” and the others are the 
produce of the “ downward current ” " below the navel." * 
According, however, to both versions a distinction is made 
between the two classes of tradition. In the Lalita Sahasra- 
nama, Bhaskararaya, commenting on the Shloka in which 
the Devi is addressed as NijajnardpiL Nigamfi, (the “ Nigama 
are the expression of Thy commands"), says:' “ AthavS, 
santi vedanuyaylni shaivatantrOni kamikadinyashta- 
vingshatih vedaviruddhani * kapalabhairavftdlni cha teshu 
vaidikani nigamapadavachyani pararaeshvarasya mukh&dud- 
bhatatvadijnarup&ni napunarnabhyadho bhagadutpannani 
vedaviruddh&nltyarthah.” He there, referring to the Dev!

1 See post.

’ See as to the meaning of these expressions post.

* Verse 67.

* As to whether the rahnsyapQj& of the Tantra is opposed to the 
Veda, see post. In similar fashion Aufrecht (see Adikarmapradipa) 
says: “ Snbbagama appellata a via Vedis prescripts non' discendunt 
ideoque samayachara appellantur."

52

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA52

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Bhagavata and Skanda Puranas, states that there are 
twenty-eight Shaiva Tantras commencing with Kamika 
which adhere to the Vaidik injunctions, as there are others 
commencing with KapAla, Bhairava, etc. (assigned by him 
to the “ downward current ”), which do not, and the refer¬ 
ence in the Lalita to Nigama is, according to his views, 
to the former class. As they sprang from the mouth of 
Parameshvara, they are said to be the form of the Devi’s 
commands. The five Tantras commencing with Kamika 
sprang from the sadyojata face of Shiva. From the other 
four faces— viz., the vamadeva, aghora, tatpurusha, and 
ishiina—sprang respectively the five Tantras, Dlpta, and 
others of its olass, the five Vijaya and others, the five 
Vairochana and others, and the eight Tantras Prodgita and 
others. These twenty-eight are said to have sprung from 
the “ upward current,’’ and the others from the current 
issuing “ below the navel.” 1 The Kamika identifies these 
twenty-eight Shaiva Tantras or Agamas with various parts 
of the body of the Devi, Her ornaments and garments; and 
all other auxiliary and supplementary Tantras with the 
hair on Her body. For the body of the great Tshvarl, who 
is one with Ishvara Her Lord, is contemplated upon under 
the form of all the Tantras (SarvatantrarQpa). The same 
commentator,* * citing the Karina Purana, observes:

“ Yani shastr&ni drishyante lokesmin vividhftni tu 
Shrutismritiviruddhani dvaitavfidaratani cha 
Rapalang bhairavangchaiva shakalang gautamang 
matam

' Urddhnsrotobhavit ete n&bhyadhasrotasah paruli; the former 
existing in the chaste (urddharetas), whose “ stream of life " (rotas) 
tends upwards.

* Lalita, verse 187.

INTRODUCTION

53

Evangvidhani chanyani mohanarthani tani tu 
Ye kushastr&bhiyogena mohayantlva manavan 
Maya srishtani shastrani mohayaisbhang bhftvan 
tare.’’* Lalita, verse 187.

INTRODUCTION

53

Evangvidhani chanyani mohanarthani tani tu 
Ye kushastr&bhiyogena mohayantlva manavan 
Maya srishtani shastrani mohayaisbhang bhftvan 
tare.’’

In another place Devi aaya to Himavat: “Whatsoever 
Scripturea are found opposed to Sbruti and Smriti devoted 
to dualism— viz., Kapala, Bhairava, Sakala, Gautama, 
and similar ones—exist for the purpose of bewilderment. 1 
Those who are confused by false scriptures also confuse 
the world. These were all created by me for the sake of 
bewilderment." * *

In the passage cited from the Lalitfi, Bhaskararaya 
refers to the Shaivagamas or Shaiva Tantras, and, accord¬ 
ing to his apparently sectarian view, the other Tantras 
are those which proceed from “ below the navel.

There are, however, what are called Shakta Tantras, 
and to these the term Tantra is more commonly applied, 
because in this form they have been perhaps more known 
and spoken of. According to the view of the author cited, 
the “ Shaivagamas are not related to the Shakta Tantias by 
any organic community of thought or descent. W hatever 
be the historical basis of this conclusion, which is not 
stated, it is to be noted (for the thought is profound) that 
in the passage from the Lalita, though different types of 
Tantra are said to have sprung from different currents, they

' The Devi is. while the great Liberatrix, also the “ all-bewildering '' 
(Sarvamohini). When devoid of Her grace, men are bewildered bj

Her MAyA.

* Similar language is used as regards the Atheistic School in chap. 
Uxvii of the KalikA Parana, which says: “ VAmah kayobrfthma nopi 
mAngsamadyAdibhuktaye, kritomnyA mohanftya charwOkadipravart- 
tnkah." The reference here is to the nAstika doctrines of Charw aka

and his followers.

* Dr. namnim Shastrin, lo c. cit. See post.

54

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRAand his followers.

* Dr. namnim Shastrin, lo c. cit. See post.

54

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

are yet both represented as issuing from the body of the 
God. Shiva is represented as the author of all Agarnas. 
There is, in fact, but one source whence all forms of religion, 
as all else, come. If the ray of pure sattvik light appears 
to be variously coloured, or even at times clouded or 
obscured, it is not by reason of the alteration of its nature, 
but of the disturbing and darkening qualities of the other 
gunas constituting the Devi’s substance manifesting in the 
Jiva. It is not without reason that Shiva, the Friend of 
all, is represented as surrounded by Bhat-a and the demoniac 
hosts. If the Devi, as Yidya, liberates; by Her Maya (from 
which the religious sense no more than any other is free), 
She also binds. The sectarian, whether a Shaiva or other, 
naturally discovers abundance of this miyik play in the 
creed of his neighbour which he condemns. I doubt myself 
whether there exists at present material for conclusions of 
any degree of certainty as to the historical origin of the 
so-called Shakta Tantras. Certainly no one has yet collected 
such as may exist. They are, however, I believe, at base 
(whatever may be the accretions they are said by some to 
have received) an outcome from the same Vaidik source, the 
Mother of all Dharma, as the Shaiva Tantras, though, 
having regard to the difference of achara, they may derive 
from this common source in different form.

That which is commonly regarded as telling against 
this conclusion is the vir&ch&ra ritual with the Pancha- 
tattva. It is said 1 by a modern Shaivite that the Shaiva- 
gamas prohibit drink and the eating of flesh. Though we 
may recall both Vaidik usage and the curse of Bhrigu on 
those who follow the rites of Bhava : Vishantu shiva- 
dikshuyam yatra daivam surasavam ;* this prohibition is in

Shaiva Siddhanta, 815, r. ante.

' Bh&gavata Purftna, cited in Muir, S.O.T., 877-882.Shaiva Siddhanta, 815, r. ante.

' Bh&gavata Purftna, cited in Muir, S.O.T., 877-882.

INTRODUCTION

55

accordance with the provisions of the' l Shakta’ Tantras, 
which limit the ritual use of wine and flesh to the worship¬ 
pers of Shakti initiate in vamachara.

That the provisions of the Tantra which relate to the 
Panchatattva are opposed to the Veda is a notion which is 
declared by the Indian Tantrik pandits to be erroneous. 
Mauu says:

“Na mangsabhakshane dosho na madye na cha mai- 
thune,

Pravrittiresha bhQtanang nivrittistu mahaphala. ‘ 1

“ There is no wrong in the eating of meat, nor in the 
drinking of wine, nor in sexual intercourse; for these 
things are natural to men. At the same time abstention 
therefrom is productive of great fruit."

He is doubtless there referring to those enjoyments 
which belong to the Pravritti Marga—the use of meat and 
fermented liquor during the Vaidik age being well known. 
But such use formed also a part of its sacrificial and 
ritual system. As regards Latasadhana, the Kalikopani- 
shad of the Atharvaveda and other Shastras are relied 
on as authorities by Tantrik Pandits in support of the 
Virachara ritual. It is unnecessary to deal with this 
ritual here, as its discussion forms no part of the author’s 
work. Not improbably (in part at least) originating in a

1 So also the Mah&nirvftna Tantra says : “ Eating and sexual union, 
O Devi, are desired by and natural to men, and their use is regulated 
for their benefit in the ordinances of Shiva.”

“ Nrln&ng svabhavajang devi priyang bhojanamaithunam 
SangkshepiVya hit&rth&yA shaivadharmme nirupitam."

(UllAsa ix, verse 283.)

56

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA“ Nrln&ng svabhavajang devi priyang bhojanamaithunam 
SangkshepiVya hit&rth&yA shaivadharmme nirupitam."

(UllAsa ix, verse 283.)

56

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

doctrine intended for the detached non-dualistic initiate, 1 
and kept closely secret,* it may have been perverted by the 
vulgar, to whom some portions of it became later known. 
The abuses of these commoner people, as time went on, 
developed such proportions as to ultimately obscure all 
other matters in the Tantra, thus depriving them of that 
attention which is their due.

The objections, however, which have been made to the 
Tantrik rahasyapQjfi have probably been the chief cause 
of the attack made upon the age and authority of the 
Shastra. It would be beyond the limits of a general 
Introduction such as this to enter at length into this diffi¬ 
cult and debated question. As the view which is to be 
found more commonly stated is adverse to the Shastra on 
both these points, it may be shortly pointed out that the 
Tantra is referred to in works of acknowledged authority 
such as the Shrimadbhagavata, the celebrated Vaishnava 
Shastra, the Devi Bhagavata (which in the ninth skanda 
speaks of it as a Vedanga), and in the Varaha, Padrna, 
Skanda, and other Puranas. In the first-named work 
Bhagavan says: “ My worship is of three kinds, Vaidik, 
Tantrik, and mixed (mishra)," and in the fifth chapter of 
the eleventh Skanda of the same work it is said that 
Keshava assumes different forms in the different Yugas, 
and should be worshipped in different ways, and that in 
Kaliyuga he is to be worshipped according to the injunc¬ 
tions of Tantra. The great Shangkaracharyya recognizesThus, as regards worship with woman (Latdsidhana). it is said 
that it is not possible for one who is a dualist devoid of the knowledge 
of Knla, and addicted to sexual intercourse, to duly foUow Shiva’s 
mandate. Hell follows lust. As the Tantrasftra says. *’ Lingayonirato 
mantrt rauravang narakang brajet ” (” The Mantrln addicted to lust 
^ Hell T-that is, the hell in which the qualities

of the faery tejas tattra exist in painful excess.

* Mfttriyonivat, as it is said.

INTRODUCTION

67of the faery tejas tattra exist in painful excess.

* Mfttriyonivat, as it is said.

INTRODUCTION

67

the Shastra in his Ananda Lahari and Shaktamoda, as does 
Ananda Tlrtha, the commentator of Purnaprajnadarsbana. 
The Shdstra is frequently quoted in the celebrated work on 
Smriti, the Ashtavingshatitattva of Raghunandana, which 
is itself universally accepted as an authority throughout 
Bengal. In short, as the Veda issued from the mouth of 
BrahmA, so the Agama Sh&stra is said to have come from 
that of Sadashiva. 1 Current objections to the Tantra on 
the ground that it lacks the authority of Shruti. Smriti, or 
Purana, and is of more recent date, are based, according to 
orthodox views, on a misconception. According to those 
views, all Shastras are without beginning and eternal, as 
indeed in one sense they are, though their phenomenal 
appearance may be successive. Letters or sounds are the 
sensuous manifestation of words, the essence of which re¬ 
sides in the sphota or conception which existed from all 
eternity before ever these sounds or words were uttered. 
The phenomenal appearance of Tantra postdates the other 
Shastras in the same sense as that in which the Kaliyuga 
is said to succeed to the earlier ages of the present Maha- 
yuga. There is, in fact, but one truth variously presented 
to the respective ages. So the Tantra has been said to 
exist in the Veda as the perfume exists in the flower. 
While the theoretical portion of the Gayatri Tattva is con¬ 
tained in the Vedanta, the practical and ritualistic portion 
is in the Tantra. Both the theoretical exposition and 
practical application of universal principles varies with the 
needs of the ages and the Jiva living therein. It is said of 
the Devi: “ Many are the paths which vary according to the1 Some other authorities will be found cited in the later pages 
of this book; and I summarise in the following pages the opinion 
of Mahfuimhopiidhytiya J&daveshvara Tarkaratna, in his article on the 
antiquity of Tantra (TontrerprOchlnatva) in the Silhitya Sanghitu of 
Assin, 1817.

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

58

Shastras but all leading to fruition (siddhi) merge in 
Thee alone, as all rivers merge and are lost in the sea.

For orthodox views on this matter I will here refer 
the reader to our author and to a recent essay on the 
“ Antiquity of the Tantra," by Mahamahopadhyaya Jada- 
veshvara Tarkaratna. 1 The Pandit prefaces the matter by a 
notice of the views generally entertained by what are called 
“ educated ” Indians, which he summarizes as follows: 
They hold, he tells us, that the Tantras are of recent pro¬ 
duction ; that to the Vaidik age succeeded the Upanishadik. 
Then followed the Pauranik age, and then, quite recently, 
that of the Tantras. But even then the latter Shftstra was 
not of gereral authority, having neither governance nor 
influence in other parts of India than Bengal, where alone 
it was predominant. There it was created by Bengali Pandits 
upon the model of the Buddhist teaching and practice of 
the Mah&yana sect.* These Bengali Pandits are also alleged 
to have incorporated therewith the worship of Shakti, the 
goddess of the aboriginal barbarian inhabitants of Bengal. 
The date of many of the Tantras is said to fall within the 
last three hundred years, and, amongst other proofs of 
this, reference is made to the fact that the Yoginl Tantra 
mentions the name of the founder of the Kuchbehar Raj, 
which was established within that time.

These objections are then classified under four headings:

(1) The Tantra is not an ancient Dbarmma Shastra of the 
Aryan race having effect in all parts of India, but was in 
force in Bengal alone, being, indeed, an invention of the 
Bengalis, who naturally honoured their own creation.(2) Amongst Mahayana Buddhists there is worship of Tara, 
VajrayoginI, Kshetrapala, and the use of mantras, vljas, and 
japa, in the cult of such Devatas. There is similar worship

1 See preceding note.

' See post.

INTRODUCTION

59

in the Tantra, which must therefore be derived from Maha- 
yana Buddhism. (3) Aboriginal tribes are worshippers of 
Shakti, ghosts, snakes, and trees. The Tantras also deal 
with such worship, and has therefore adopted the worship 
of such aborigines. (4) A book which relates an incident 
which took place not more than three hundred years ago 
cannot itself be older.

To these objections the Mahamahopadhy&ya replies as 
follows: As to the first, he rejoins that Tantrik influences are 
to be found, not only in Bengal, but throughout India. Just 
as the Bengalis of the higher castes are divided into Shaktas. 
Vaishnavas, and Shaivas, so it is with the peoples of Kama- 
rapa, Mithila, Utkala, and Kalinga, and the Kashmirian pan¬ 
dits. The Shakti mantra, Shiva mantra, and Vishnu man¬ 
tra, are each Tantrik. Amongst Dakshinatyas, 1 Mahamaho- 
padhyaya Subramanya Shastri, and many others, are Shaktas. 
The late Mahatnahop&dhj&ya Rama Mishra Shastri, Mahft- 
mahopadhyaya Rama Shastri Bhagavatacharya, and many 
others, were and are Vaishnavas. Mahamahopadhy&ya 
Shivakuinara Shastri, and a number of others, are Shaivas. 
In Vrindavana there are many Shakta as well as Vaishnava 
Brahma nas, though amongst the higher castes in Maha¬ 
rashtra and other Southern Indian countries, Shaivas and 
Vaishnava* * are more numerous than Shaktas. Followers 
of the P&shupat-a and Jangama cults are Shaivas whereas 
those of Madhavftcharyya and Ram&nujachfiryya are Vaish- 
navas. Many in the North-West are initiated in the Rama 
mantra, which is to be found only in the Tantra. It is still 
more remarkable that, according to this author, the pandas 
of Shrl Purushottama* are all Shaktas, and the priests of 
Kamakhya Devi* are all Vaishnavas.1 Pandits of Southern India.

* Jagann&tha at Puri.

* AJ Kamrup in Assam, a great Tftntrika centre.

60

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Passing to the second argument, he denies that simi¬ 
larity between two doctrines and practices iB necessarily 
proof that the first is borrowed from the second. It may 
equally be argued the other way. If, because the Bud¬ 
dhists worship Tara, Hayagriva and others with dhyanas 
and vljas similar to those in the Tantra, it is contended 
that the latter is derived from the former, it may equally 
well be urged that such Buddhist worship is taken from 
the Tantra. If the Hindu mind was moved by and drawn 
to the touching teachings of Buddhism, why, he asks, 
should it concern itself with the externals, and not with 
the fundamental principles of the religion to which it is 
so attracted ? Why should the Hindu, instead of striving 
for Nirvana, stand before Buddhist images, fashioned 
after Buddhistic models, and with folded palms pray 
for beauty, victory, glory, and the destruction of foes ? 
There is obviously a great difference between yoga 
undertaken for the extinction of all desires, and such 
prayers to the Deity for wealth and the destruction of 
foes, as form part of the Vaidik religion. The Bhagavad- 
glti preaches niBhkama dharma,’ which, with the pursuit 
of spiritual knowledge leads to the acquisition of such 
knowledge, and thereafter to Nirv&na ; and on this account 
the “ educated ” say that the Gita is influenced by Bud¬ 
dhistic ideals. In the Tantra there is performance of 
work with desire, which is contrary to Buddhist teaching. 
Hinduism alone, of all religions, provides different forms 
of religious teaching for persons of differing religious com¬ 
petence (adhikara). Buddhism does not. How, otherwise, 
is it possible to account for Buddhadeva’s vairagya/ 
his loss of faith in Hinduism, and his discovery of the

1 The performance of work selflessly, without desire for its fruit. 
* Dispassioo.

INTRODUCTION

611 The performance of work selflessly, without desire for its fruit. 
* Dispassioo.

INTRODUCTION

61

new path whereby man shall escape the infirmities of 
old age and death. Buddhism, out of pity for all, liv¬ 
ing creatures, forbids the sacrifice of animals. It is, he 
thinks, an astonishing proposition that Tantrikas fol¬ 
lowed such a religion, when at the same time they are 
supposed to have invented a novel Sh&stra, enjoining the 
sacrifice of goats, buffaloes, and other animals, before 
images of Devas and Devls, also drawn from Buddhism. 
While it is not to be expected that all will understand 
the complexities of Buddhist philosophy, pity is a virtue 
which goes with humble minds. If there be anything 
which might prove attractive in Buddhism to men in 
general, it is its prohibition against the slaughter of ani¬ 
mals—an ordinance which melted the hearts of a large 
number of the Hindus and made them Buddhists. It is 
scarcely probable, then, that Hinduism should omit that 
which is fundamentally attractive in a religion which (in his 
view) denies the existence of God, and should inaugurate 
a new Shastra (the Tantra) providing for the worship of 
Devas and Devls, according to the tenets of the Buddhist 
Mahayiina school. It is modern Vaishnavism, on the 
contrary, which, in its prohibition of animal sacrifice, is 
inspired by the Buddhistic principle that “ cessation 
from the killing of animals is the highest form of reli¬ 
gion.” In the great yajna, which lasted a hundred years, 
Shaunaka and other Rishis used to listen to the Shrlmad- 
bhagavata from the mouth of Sttta, and at the same time 
to sacrifice animals. 1 In the Ashvamedha yajna which 
King Yudishthira, the disciple of Krishna, performed under 
the guidance of Slirl Krishna himself, a horse was killed, 
offered to Devas, and eaten. Bhagavan Shrl Krishna him¬ 
self hunted a boar under the command of Vfisudeva for the

1 Skandha I.

62

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Skandha I.

62

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

satisfaction of the Pitris in Shr&ddha. The eleventh skandha 
of the Bhagavata 1 explicitly states that the killing of 
animals in sacrifice is no killing.

Amongst the Yaishyas of Mathura, many had become 
Buddhists, and others Jains. Greatly moved as they 
were at the sight of Chaitanj'a’s love for Krishna, and 
drawn thereby to Hinduism, they yet hesitated to return 
to it on the ground that it sanctioned the slaughter of 
animals in sacrifice. It was perhaps at that time that 
the Vaishnava teachers announced that the killing of 
animals was not sanctioned by their tenets, and thus 
succeeded in converting Buddhists and Jains to their 
faith. It is probably from this time that Vaishnava 
families abandoned animal sacrifice on occasions of pflja. 
Although common Vaishnava-s eat fish, the flesh of other 
animals is forbidden. In Bengal, Utkala, and other countries, 
Buddhist teachers adapted from Hinduism the establish¬ 
ment of images of Devas, the worship of such Devas with 
mantras and vljas, and called themselves Mahiiy&na Bud¬ 
dhists—a sect which, of course, came into existence long 
after the passing away of the Buddha. The Lalitavistara,* * 
or biography of Shakyasingha, states that he had a special 
knowledge of Nigaraa, Puranas, Itihiisa, and the Vedas. 
Whenever both Veda and Nigama are mentioned in the same 
passage, the latter term refers to Tantra, whioh goes by the 
names of Agama and Nigama.’

Again, Shakyasingha is made to say to the Bhikshukas. 4 
“ Such fools seek the protection of, and pay obeisance to, 
Brahma, Indra, Rudra, Vishnu, the Devi, Kartikeya, Mother 
KatyuyanI, Ganapati, and others. Some perform tapasyft 
in cremation grounds, and at the crossing of four roads.”®

1 XI, Chapter v. shloka xiii. 
' Chapter xii.

* Buddhist Sanny&sis.

* Vide ante.

* Lalitavistara, chap. xvii.

INTRODUCTION

631 XI, Chapter v. shloka xiii. 
' Chapter xii.

* Buddhist Sanny&sis.

* Vide ante.

* Lalitavistara, chap. xvii.

INTRODUCTION

63

Speaking of the practice of heretics (pashandas), Sh&kya- 
singha mentions the use of wine and flesh. Had not the 
Tantrik form of worship been then in existence how could 
he have known and spoken ill of it ? 1 Seeing, also, what the 
Lalitavistara says, can it, he asks, be contended that the 
Tantra is derived from Mahay&na Buddhism ?

To the third objection the Mahamahopadhy&ya answers 
that the views there expressed are similar to those given 
under the second heading, and the rejoinder, therefore, is 
similar. It may, however, he says, be asked who are meant 
when the barbarian aborigines of India are spoken of. 
According to the English, such aborigines were Dravidians, 
Odras, and Paundrakas. Is it, he says, to be supposed that 
Bengali Pandits composed the Tantra Shfistra in imitation 
of the practices of Dravidians inhabiting the distant Deccan ? 
Or was the Tantrik system adopted from Mundas, Santhals, 
Garos, Meches, Ruches, Khasias, and other primitive in¬ 
habitants of Assam ?* * The Pandit hesitates “ to lay this 
heavy burden of ignominy on the heads of Bengali Pandits 
seeing that the Shakti Devata is established and worshipped 
in aH parts of India. Thus Kamikhya is worshipped at 
K&marupa, VindhyavasinI on the Vindhya Hills, YogamayS. 
and PaurnamasI at Vrindavana; Annapurna Sankata, 
Tripurabhairavl, sixty-four Yoginls, Kalabhairavl, Durgfi,, 
Shftala, Mangala, and other Devis at Kashi; Kushall at 
Kaushall; Parvatl on the Sahya Hills, Poona ; Guhyeshvari 
in Nepal; Gftyatrl and Savitrl in Rajputana; Lalita at1 This, of coarse, does not necessarily follow. All that is here proved 
is that T&ntrik practices antedated the Lalitavistara, whatever he the 
date at which the latter was written. From the standpoint of Western 
criticism this and all similar orthodox arguments are weakened by the 
too ready credit sometimes given to the age and authority of the lite¬ 
rary materials on which they rest.

* The Pandit's reply, of course, takes benefit from the folly of the 
statement be answers.

64

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Pray&ga; Ugratftrft at Trihut; May&devI at Haridv&ra; 1 
Chandl ou the Chandi Hills near Haridvara; .7 villam ukhl at 
Jalandhara;* * Chinnamasta, some forty miles therefrom; 
Kali (whom King PrithvI worshipped) seven miles to the 
south of Delhi; Mumvft in Bombay city; Mahalakshmi, on 
the sea coast near Bombay; Kulika on the Harsha Island, 
west of and near Mahakaleshvara; KshlrabhavanI near 
Kashmir; and Devi Minakshl, south of Madras." All these 
Devis (to which many others might be added) are still 
worshipped, and were established in their various places in 
distant and unknown ages. Even at the seat of Purushot- 
tama in Utkala, 4 Vimala is worshipped, so also are Sarasvati, 
Bhubaneshvari, Kali, and Lakshml. Obeisance is made to 
Subhadra 6 with the mantra: “KatyftyanI, salutation to 
Thee.” Bhubaneshvari is worshipped at Bhubaneshvara; 
Dhavaleshvarl at Dhavaleshvara; eight Shaktis, Viraja, 
IndranI at Yajpur, and Katakachandi at Cuttack.If it be argued that the Tantra Shastra is of recent 
origin because it provides for the worship of Shakti, then 
the same observation must apply to the Puranas, Maha- 
bhiirata, and even the Vedas and Upanishads. The Maha- 
bharata contains hymns in honour of the Devi. The Shri- 
madbhagavata provides for the worship of Uina. The maidens 
of Vraja worshipped K&ty&yanl. The Markandeya Purana 
relates the greatness of Devi. In the Puranas Her great¬ 
ness is sung. Numerous passages in proof of this may be 
culled from the Skanda, Brahma, Brahmavaivarta, Bha- 
vishya, Padma, Devi, and Kalika Puranas. The autumnal

1 After whom the place (Hardwar) is called Milynpuri in the ShAstra.

* Where fire is said to ever bum to consume the offerings.

’ The Devi at Madura.

' The temple of Jagannfitha (Vishnu) at Puri Orissa.

' Sister of Jagannatha.

INTRODUCTION

65

Durga Paja is mentioned in many Pur&nas. It is an error 
to suppose that Raghunandana Bhattaoh&ryya alone has 
prescribed for the worship of Durga. Previous to him 
many others had done so, such as Shrldatta, Harinatha, 
Vidyadhara, Ratnakara, Bhojadeva, JimQtavahana, Hala- 
yudha, Rayamukuta, Vachaspati Mishra and many other 
renowned compilers. Many well-known books written before 
the age of Raghunandana contain provisions for Durga 
Paja, such as the Durgabhaktitaranginl, Samvatsara- 
pradlpa, KalakaumudI, Jyotisharnava, Smritisagara, Kal- 
pataru, Krityamaharnava, Krityaratnakara, KamanipQjani- 
bandha, Krityatattvarnava, ChakranarayanI, Kriyayogo- 
pasamvara, Durgabbaktiprakasha, Dakshinatya, Kalanirnaya 
and PQjaratnakara.Although the Bengali practice of worshipping earthen 
images of Durga with great pomp is not followed in all 
parts of India, yet She is everywhere worshipped in Ghatas 
(jars). Shrines which contain Her images are visited ; nine- 
day vratas are made, fasts observed, and the Chandl lead on 
the MahashtamI day. Even now the women of Vraja in 
Vrindavana bathe in the Jumna early every morning for the 
first nine days of the bright fortnight of the month of 
Ashvina, and worship images of the Devi, which they draw 
on the banks of the river. Readers of the Chhandogya, 
Talavakara and other Upanishads are aware of the incident 
in which Uma, the Daughter of the Mountain, riding a lion 
in a blaze of light, appeared to Indra and the other Devas in 
order to prove that it was not by their shakti that they 
lived and moved, but that all whioh was done was so done 
by virtue of that Mahashakti. In the Veda there is the 
Sarasvatl sfikta, in the Yajurveda the Lakshml sQkta, and 
in the tenth Mandala of the Rigveda the Devi stlkta. Even 
the worship of Devi Manasa is based, not on the Tantra, 
but Purana. And the same may be said as regards the 
s

66

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

worship of the TulsI plant, and the Bael and Ashvattha 
tree. 1 Far distant from Bengal, on the summit or Mount 
Govarddhana, there is an image of Devi Manastt. And in 
the land of Vraja, where animal sacrifice is condemned, 
goats are sacrificed before this Devi. Snake worship exists 
in other countries than Bengal, and was not introduced by 
the Tantra Shastra. A survey of the religious practices 
prevalent in ancient times and in other countries does not 
support the conclusion that because the Tantra advocates 
Shakti worship it is therefore of recent origin.Passing to the fourth heading, the Pandit asks how it 
is that, if the Yogini Tantra is at most only three hundred 
years old, Raghunandana Bhattfichftryya, the great Sm&rta, 
and Krishnftnanda Bhattach&ryya, contemporaries of Shrl 
Chaitanya, referred to and quoted it as an authority in 
the Smrititattva and Tantrasfira. On the other hand, it 
is common knowledge that if in some obscure family a 
great person (mah&purusha), or a succession of great 
persons, is born, their descendants and disciples name the 
members of that family after those of some other well- 
known family, so as to create the notion that the two 
families are the same. It was perhaps in this way he 
surmises that the Raj family of Kuch Beh&r was raised 
to the position of being the descendants of Shiva mentioned 
in the Yogini Tantra.

M&dhav&charyya, the commentator upon the Yedas, 
has, in dealing with the P&tanjala Darshan in his com¬ 
pilation of the six Darshanas, quoted many passages from 
the Tantra Shastra with reference to the ten forms of 
Sangskfiras prescribed therein. Vachaspati Mishra, the

1 The Tula! and Ashvattha are worshipped, and bael leaves are 
offered to Shiva. AshvatthnrupobbagavAn vishnureva na sangshayah 
rudrorapovatastadvat pal&sho brahmarflpadhrik. Padma Purina, Uttara 
Khanda, cb. clx.

INTRODUCTION

67INTRODUCTION

67

commentator upon the six Darshanos, has, in his commen¬ 
tary on the P&tanjala Darshana, recommended dhy&na of 
Devat&s as prescribed in the Tantras. Bhagavan Shangka- 
racharya, also, has, in the Sh&rlraka Bhashya, made mention 
of the Tftntrik Shatchakra. It is hardly necessary to say 
that none of these three great men—Shangkar&charyya, 
Madhavficharyya, and Vftohaspati Mishra,—was a Bengali. 
Before the compilation of Rrishnananda's Tantras&ra, 
there were many compilers of Tantra, such as R&ghavft- 
nanda, R&ghavabhatta, VirQpaksha, and Govindabhatta. 
In his observations upon the Yantra of Nllasarasvatl, in 
his Tantrasara, Krishnananda, observes: “ Said by even 
Shri Shangkaracharyya.” The famous Shakti Stotra, 1 
named Anandalaharl (wave of bliss) 1 is everywhere known 
to be the work of Shangkaracharyya, and is, as such, uni¬ 
versally recited by devotees before Devatas with feeling 
and reverence. Compilations of Tantra, such as the 
Ramarchana Chandrika, 1 the Mantramuktavall, the Sftra- 
sangraha, the Bhuvaneshvarlparijata, the Saradatilaka, the 
Trlpurasarasamuchchaya, the Svachchhandasangraha, the 
Sarasamuchchaya, the Mantratantraprakasha, and the 
Somabhujangavall, were prepared long before the time of 
Krishnananda and Raghunandana. References to these 
books are to be found in the works of Krishnananda and 
Raghunandana. In the well-known astronomical work 
called Dipika, days for taking Dlksha (initiation) have been 
determined separately from those for commencement of

1 Hymn to Shakti.

* See Arthur and Ellen Avalon's " Hymns to the Goddess ” for this 
and other Hymns to the Devi.

* Passages compiled in the R&m&rchana Chandrik&lhave been Qnoted 
by Y&chaspati Mishra in the chapter on YftsantI Pajfl in his Krityn- 
chint&mini. This supports the antiquity of R&m&rchana Chandrika.

68

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA68

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

education and investiture with the sacred thread (upa- 
nayana). That Dlkshft must, therefore, be T&ntrik Dlkshft, 
distinct from Vaidic Dlkshft or Upanayana. Compilations 
come into existence long after the preparation of original 
works and when capacity for their production has ceased. 
It is when ordinary folk And difficulty in establishing a 
concordance between the ordinances contained in numerous 
original and other works—that the learned undertake the 
making of compilations for the determination of the right 
forms of religious practice, the regulation of objections 
against the Shastra, the establishment of a concordance 
between apparently conflicting authorities and the settle¬ 
ment of all disputed matters. A period of at least a thou¬ 
sand years must, in this author’s opinion, be considered to 
have elapsed between the date of original works and that of 
compilations. Many of the compilers whose names have 
been mentioned lived a thousand years ago. There is 
therefore no ground, in the Pandit’s opinion, for doubting 
that the Tantra Shftstra is at least two thousand years old. 
In the eleventh skandha of the Shrlmadbhagavata it 
is said that Keshava (Vishnu) should be worshipped 
in the manner prescribed in the Tantra Shftstra;' and, 
again, that men desirous of acquiring jnftna (spiritual 
knowledge) should worship Bhagavan according to Vaidik 
and Tantrik ordinances.* * The same book in the same 
skandha also says: “ Hear how people should worship Me 
in the Kali age according to various Tantras.' They should 
observe my Yfttrfts (Dolay&trft, Rathayfttra, etc.), perform 
sacrifices, be initiated in the Vaidik and Tantrik modes, and 
undertake to perform the vrata in which I am worshipped.”

1 Chapter iii. shlokaa 47 and 48. See Shrldhara Sv&mTs note.

* Chapter v. shloka 28. Shrldhara SvOinfs note.

* Chapter v. shloka 81. Shrldhara Svfimi's note.

INTRODUCTION

691 Chapter iii. shlokaa 47 and 48. See Shrldhara Sv&mTs note.

* Chapter v. shloka 28. Shrldhara SvOinfs note.

* Chapter v. shloka 81. Shrldhara Svfimi's note.

INTRODUCTION

69

In the Brahma Purana it is said that people should 
enter into the temple of Bhuvaneshvara in the Garden of 
a Single Mango Tree. 1 and there worship Mahftdeva accor¬ 
ding to Vaidik and Tantrik rites. This passage has been 
quoted by Raghunandana in his Purushottamatattva. The 
Karma Pur&na says: “ There are found in the world many 
Shastras antagonistic to Shruti and Smriti. The ordinances 
of suoh Shastras are tamasik. 1 Karala, Bhairava, Yamala, 
and similar other books follow Vamamarga,” * * and so on. 
This passage, whioh is also contained in the Kurma Pur&na, 
has been quoted by Raghunandana and other compilers. 
The Pandit points out that Karala, Bhairava, and Yamala 
are Tantrik works, and that the Vamamarga is a mode of 
Tantrik worship. In the R&m&yana there are references 
to Bala and AtibalS., 4 which are Tantrik, and the mode of 
acquiring which is given in the Tantrasara. Raghava Bhatta 
and Raghunandana quote Narada as to the nature of the 
Tantrik mode of worship for persons in impure conditions. 
In the Parashara Bhashya there is a quotation said to have 
been originally made by Govindabhatta, which says that 
mantras with Om should not be taught to Sudras, and so 
on. In Bhojaraja's Vyavaharasamuchchaya there is re¬ 
ference to a passage stating that Upanayana and Dlkshd. 
should not be performed whilst Vrihaspati* is in R&hu.* 
The Varaha says that learned men should worship Janar- 
dana either according to the Vedas or according to the

' The town of Bhuvaneshvara.

1 That is, the outcome of a state in which the tamoguna predomi¬ 
nates.

* See Introduction to my edition of the MahAnirv&na Tantra.

* Valakftnda, canto xxii, shlokas 12. 18, and 16. These are Vidy&s 
taught by VishvAmitra to RAma and Lakshmana.

’ The planet Jupiter. ' The ascending node.

70* Valakftnda, canto xxii, shlokas 12. 18, and 16. These are Vidy&s 
taught by VishvAmitra to RAma and Lakshmana.

’ The planet Jupiter. ' The ascending node.

70

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Tantras. The Padma Purana, in its Uttarakh&nda, asks 
how it is possible that one may become bbfigavata 1 without 
taking dlksha in the Vaishnavl cult ? In the third chapter 
of the Narada Pancharatra it is said that whilst meditating 
on the six Chakras named Mttl&dh&ra, Sv&dhisthana, Mani- 
pQra, An&bata, Vishuddha, and Ajn&, Shrl Krishna was 
seen in the thousand-petalled lotus, resplendent, of the 
colour of a freshly-formed cloud, wearing yellow silk, two¬ 
armed, beautiful, pure, and smiling, in the company of his 
own Shakti, Kundalinl. Again, in the fourth chapter of 
the same book, the author uses the terminology of the 
Tantra Shastra when he says, “ Lakshmlrm&ya Kamavljara,” 
etc.,* * and thus introduces the great mantra of Shrl Krishna, 
consisting of vljas, and formed of eight syllables. All are 
aware that the piercing of the six Chakras, their names, and 
the Devi Kundalinl are matters of the Tantra Shastra. 
There are references to T&ntrik prftnayama in the Patan- 
jala Darshana and in the Bhagavadglta, and other places 
of the Mahabharata.* It should also be pointed out here 
that there is indirect, though not direct, reference to the 
Tantra Shastra in Yudhishthira's question to Bhlshma 
contained in the 7th, 8th, and 9th shlokas of the 259th 
chapter in the Shanti Parva of the Mahabharata, dealing 
with Mokshadharma. These shlokas may be translated as 
follows:

“ I have heard that Vaidik ordinances are gradually 
coming into disuse, in the progress of ages. There is one 
form of dharma for the Sat}’a age, another for the Treta 
age, another for the Dvapara age, and another again for

1 Devoted to Bhagav&n.

* Lakshmi. Maya and Kama Vija a.

' Shanti Parva, chap, cci, shlokas 17 and 19. with NlIakamha'B 
note.

INTRODUCTION

711 Devoted to Bhagav&n.

* Lakshmi. Maya and Kama Vija a.

' Shanti Parva, chap, cci, shlokas 17 and 19. with NlIakamha'B 
note.

INTRODUCTION

71

the Kali age; The Vedas contemplate different forms of 
dharma according to different capacities of men. The 
words of the Vedas are true, and from these words, 
again, have emanated all-embracing Vedas, and so 
forth. Now, here it may be asked, what are these all- 
embracing Vedas which have emanated from the Vedas ? 
In the Mahamahop&dhyaya’s opinion no other reply is 
possible but that the Tantras are here referred to. Smritis 
also, like the Vedas, do not give to all castes equal 
adhik&ra (right) to them, and prohibit their study to Shud- 
ras. The “ all-embracing Vedas,” therefore, cannot mean 
Smritis. The Tantras give adhikara to people belonging to 
all castes, so that they alone are ** all-embracing.' More¬ 
over, there is no instance of the word Veda being used in 
the sense of Smriti. There is, however, ample use of the 
terms Agama and Nigama in the sense of the Tantras— 
terms which originally meant the Vedas. Just as, accord¬ 
ing to the Shastra, the Vedas have no author, but are merely 
remembered by fourheaded Brahm&, so the Tantras also 
have not, according to the Shastra, any author, but have 
merely emanated from the mouths of Shiva. Neither the 
Vedas nor the Tantras have emanated from the mouths of 
munis, rishis, or the spiritually wise (jn&nl). Brahma is 
Ishvara and Shiva also is Ishvara, and the Shastra says 
that the Vedas emanate from the mouths of the former, 
and the Tantras have issued from those of the latter. More 
explicit are the shlokas 121, 122, 123, and 124 of chapter 
ccxxciv in the Shanti Parva of the Mahabharata dealing 
with Mokshadharma. Here Mahadeva says to Daksha: 
“ Extracting from the Vedas complete with their six angas 
(limbs), and from the Sankhya-Yoga, I promulgated the 
Pashupata vrata with such austere and extensive tapas as 
no Deva, or Danava could perform. This vrata is superior 
to all practices ordained in the Vedas and other Shastras,72

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

all-good, beneficial to all castes and ftshramas, 1 * everlasting, 
performed in three years and ten days,* secret, highly 
spoken of by wise men, spoken ill of by fools ; opposed (vi- 
paritam) in some matters to Varn&shramadharma, 3 4 * * * though 
in many others similar thereto; prescribed by learned men; 
practised by men who have risen superior to Ashramas,* 
and beneficial. Daksha, you will obtain all the fruits of 
such Pashupata vrata,” and so forth. To what SbAstra, 
the Pandit asks, other than the Tantra Shastra, can this 
Pashupata vrata belong ? It cannot be the Vedas, for the 
vrata is said to have been extracted from them. Again, 
the reader will, he thinks, be astonished to know that the 
Mah&bh&rata has adopted the T&ntrik terminology and 
T&ntrik methods in the introduction of mantras. In the 
74th shloka of chapter cclxxxiv of the Shanti Parva re¬ 
ferred to above, the following mantra occurs :

“ GhantI charu chell mill brahma kayikamagnlnam.” 8

1 It is open to all. which the Veda is not.

* Qaaere. The text I have before me runs, Abdair dash&rdha 
sangyuktam, which, according to Nllakantba, means that it may be 
acquired in years or shortly by the merit of those who practise the 
fire yamas and five niyamas. Some read ‘‘dash&ha" (ten days) for 
" dash&rddha." There seems to be no reason for limiting the period 
of the vrata thus.

' Thus there is no caste in the chakra; the sm&rtha v rat as, each as 
fasting, are not generally observed ; puj& in V&m&ch&ra is done at night 
and other matters.

4 Paramahangsas, parivr&jakas, etc.

1 The fall verse is—

“ Ohanto'ghanto ghatl ghantl charu chell mill mill

Brahma k&yikamagnlnAng dandimandastridandadhrik."4 Paramahangsas, parivr&jakas, etc.

1 The fall verse is—

“ Ohanto'ghanto ghatl ghantl charu chell mill mill

Brahma k&yikamagnlnAng dandimandastridandadhrik."

The meaning of which is ns follows: Ghantah=*prak4shav&n, or 
shining—that is, Pamabrahmasvarupah. Aghantah = Mfty&vritatvena 
praehchbannaprak&sha—ris., that whose shining is concealed on account 
of its being covered with may& or jlva. Gathl“he who ghatayati Goins) 
men with the fruit of their karma, or who attaches fruit to the karma 
of men. Ghanti = ghantav&n, or possessor of ghantah (q.v.). Charu = 
those who move (charanti)—that is, jlvaa movable and immovable 
men, animals, trees, etc. Chell=*player; as men play with birds, so

INTRODUCTION

78

Nll&kantha explains this mantra as follows:

“GhantI = Om. The word ‘ Rudra ' must be introduced. 
Agnlnam kayikam = the wife of Fire, or Svfiha; Brahma 
= Om. Thus the following mantra, containing eighteen 
syllables, has been here quoted: Ong Rudra chell chell 
cheli chell miH mill Ong Svaha.” * 1 In the 379th shloka 
of chapter xiv of the Anushasana Parva, Shr! Krishna 
says to Yudhishthira : “ Eight days passed as though they 
were but a moment, and I took mantra from that Brahruana 
(Upamanyu).’’ After this verse it is narrated how Shrl 
Krishna performed austere tapasya in the worship of Shiva 
by repeating this mantra; how Shiva, being pleased, ap¬ 
peared before him in the company of Uma: how the hymn 
sung by Shrl Krishna pleased Shiva and Um&, so that they 
granted him blessings and so forth. One is therefore 
astonished to hear some educated persons say that nowhere 
in the Mah&bbarata is there any mention of Shakti save in 
the Virata Parva, where Yudhishthira hymns Durga. In 
the story of Daksha's yajna, related in the Mahabh&rata, 
there is no mention of the death of Daksha’s daughter,* 
but it is said that Bhadrak&ll rose out of Her body for the 
destruction of the yajna/ and that pleased by the hymnShiva plays with us. Mill—one who has miln (attchment). Shiva as 
the cause is attached to, or, as we should say, in, all effects. The word 
is mentioned twice for emphasis. Brahma “ Pranava. K&yikamngnl- 
n&m=»the spouse of Fire, or Sv&hft. Dandimunda “ascetics, parama- 
hangsus, etc. Tridandadhrik«holding the three staffs of bael. pal&sha 
and bamboo, as is done in Upanayana. These staffs are thrown into the 
Ganges on the twelfth day following Upanayana. Shiva is thus 
Pnrnabrahman ; Jfva: the Giver of the fruit of Karma; the all-brilliant 
One: all-moving Jlvas: He who plays with Jlva; who as all Causes is in 
all effects; Pranava : and Sv&bft ; the ascetic and Grihastha life.

1 This is according to the Gauras who say that GhantI=Om ; and 
insert Rudra in the vocative case, and repeats chell four times.

* Satl.

* Sh&nti Parva, chapter oc.xxc.iv. shloka* 82 and 64.

74

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Satl.

* Sh&nti Parva, chapter oc.xxc.iv. shloka* 82 and 64.

74

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

sung by Daksha, Durg& appeared with Mahadeva before him, 
and then disappeared. Amongst the thousand names spoken 
of by Krishna in the Anushasana Parva there appear 
“ Vamadeva, and Vama, and PrAk, and Dakshina, and 
VAmana,” and 44 author of the Vedas and author of Mantras.” 
Mantras here cannot be said to refer to Vaidik mantras 
owing to the distinction made between the author of the 
Vedas and the author of mantras, and Nilakantha, the com¬ 
mentator, in fact, explains mantras as T&ntrik mantras. 
By VAma and the Dakshina are meant (the Pandit thinks) 
the vama and the dakshina ach&ras in Tantra. Tantrik 
Vlja mantras are known to many. In the AnushAsana 
Parva also, where mokshadharma is treated of, it is said: 
44 Four-mouthed Mahalinga and ChArulinga etc., ruler of 
vijas, author of vljas,” and 60 forth. There are even more 
explicit references to the Tantra ShAstra in the Maha- 
bharata. For instance, it is said, “ 0 Rftjarshi 1 the Sankhya 
Yoga, the Pancharatra, the Vedas, and the P&shupata, 
know these ShAstras, the purpose of which is to establish 
jnana,” and, again: “Shrlkantha Shiva, husband of Uma 
and lord of all things, promulgated the Pashupata Jnana- 
shastra when in placid mood. BhagavAn Himself is the 
Kuower of the entire Pancharatra.”' Sanskrit scholars in 
India, according to the Pandit, believe the Pancharatra to 
be a Tantra. Again, the injunction that in the Kali age 
people should worship Ishvara in the manner prescribed 
in the Tantra Shastra leads many people to think that 
the Tantras are recent because they are intended for 
the Kali age. The Pandit replies that the Mahabharata 
itself answers this view in the ShAnti Parva, where it is 
said that in the Satya age Rudra, engrossed in yoga, told

* Rishi and Ring,

* Sh&nti Parva, chap. ccc.ud, shlokas 64 to 68.

INTRODUCTION

75* Rishi and Ring,

* Sh&nti Parva, chap. ccc.ud, shlokas 64 to 68.

INTRODUCTION

75

the Tantra Shastra to Balakhilya 1 Rishis; but that sub¬ 
sequently it again disappeared through the maya of that 
Deva.* * In the 17th shloka of Chapter cclxvii * of the Sh&nti 
Parva, Maharshi Kapila questions Syumarashmi as follows: 
“Tell me if you have seen any Shastra other than Agama.” 
In reply Syumarashmi speaks of many things, and at the 
end of each statement he remarks: “ This is Shruti.” The 
Pandit then asks what is meant by the word Agama in 
Maharshi Kapila’s question. In his Commentary on the 
Sharlraka Sutra, “ owing to the impossibility of generation,’ 
Bhagavan Shangkaracharya refers to the fourfold division 
of Yasudeva, Sankarshana, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha 4 as 
stated in the Panoharatra, and whilst he does not attempt 
to disprove it, he does disprove the theory of the generation 
of Sankarshana from Vasudeva advanced by the followers 
of the Pancharatra. Again, in his Commentary on the 
Sutra: “ The Lord cannot be merely the instrumental cause 
on account of the existence of diversity in creation,’ he 
writes: “ M&heshvaras, too, admit it,” “All this was taught 
by Pashupati, who is Ishvara, for undoing the bonds of 
pashus," etc. In his Shrlbhashya on the first Sutra quoted 
above, Ramanuja Svami writes, “ Elucidated by Nftrayana 
Himself in the Pancharatra Tantra,” and, again, “ Non-vedio 
practices are opposed, and not the cults of \oga and Pashu¬ 
pati ; for Sangkhya, Yoga, Panoharatra, the Vedas and 
Pashupata, are self-evident, and cannot be disproved by rea¬ 
soning,” and so forth. Ramanuja Svami quotes as evidence

1 8mall Rishis the size of a thumb (angushtha), 60,000 in number. 
M&rkandeya Purina says they are children of the wife of Kratu and 
Urdharetas. It is believed that they still appear, and bathe on Pausha 
SankrAnti Day at Gang&sigara.* SkAnti Parva, chap, ccc.xl.viii, see shlokas 17 and 18. The refer¬ 
ence should be to chap. 849. * This should be chap, cclxviii.

' Visudeva =* Param&tmA; Sankarshana 53 Jlva; Pradyumna = Manas; 
Aniruddha = AhangkAra.

76

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Visudeva =* Param&tmA; Sankarshana 53 Jlva; Pradyumna = Manas; 
Aniruddha = AhangkAra.

76

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

all the passages of the Mahabh&rata above mentioned, as 
well as many other passages from the same epic, and 
other works. There is a scripture named SQtasanghita, of 
which the BrahmagltS is a portion. Its speaker is Brahma, 
and throughout it deals with Shangkara. Its annotator is 
Madhavacharya himself, the writer on all Darshanas, aud 
commentator of the Vedas. At the end of every Chapter he 
writes: “By Madhavacharya, an inhabitant of Kashi, a 
devotee of the Shakti of action, a Berver of the lotus-feet of 
the three-eyed Deva and illuminator of the path of Upani- 
shad.” Here Madhavacharya calls himself a devotee of the 
Shakti of work (Kriyashakti), but the Tantra alone deals 
with Shakti of will, Shakti of knowledge, and Shakti of 
action. Not only in the Mahabharata, but in all Puranas 
the greatness of the Devi, as extolled in the Tantras, has 
been described either shortly or with elaboration. In the 
account of the greatness of Rudra contained in the Varaha 
Purana it is said : “ Shangkara has as many aspects as there 
are Makashaktis. He who worships Her ever worships Him 
as husband.” Again: “ If he who worships the Devis pleases 
Rudra also, these Devis become for ever siddha to that 
Mantrin. There is no doubt of this.” 1 What is there in 
the Tantras, it is asked, more than what this verse says ? 
In the Shangkara-Sanghita, whioh formB a part of the 
Skanda Purana, the Rishis ask Sdta, “ Bhagavan, we desire 
to hear of the system of Viramaheshvara,” and so forth. 
And Kartikeya says to Mahadeva: “ There are few who know 
Shaiva-Agama." Shangkara, in His reply, says: “ The es¬ 
sence of the Vedas, the Agama, and the Puranas charms the 
mind and should be kept secret.”* According to the Maha- 
mahopadhyaya, Shaiva-Agama undoubtedly means the 
Tantra-Bhastra, 1 as does the word Agama in the expression‘ Varaha Parana, chap. xxci. * Chapter xxc.

' Vide ante.

INTRODUCTION

77

“the Vedas, the Agama, and the PurAnas,” because it is men¬ 
tioned separately from the Vedas. There are many Upani- 
shads other than the ten on which ShangkarAcharya wrote 
his Commentary. He selected these ten because they support¬ 
ed his monistic theories. Just as there was no necessity to 
write a Commentary on the Vedas, so it was not necessary 
that he should write commentaries on the Upanishads which 
dealt with the methods of worship (upasanA). The Aksha- 
raalika Upanishad enumerates the substances which should 
be used for the rosary with which japa 1 is done. They 
are coral, pearl, crystal, conch, silver, gold, sandalwood, 
putrajlvika, lotus-seed, and rudraksha. The Tantra ShAstra 
mentions exactly the same substances. There are many 
Upanishads of the Atharva Veda, such as Atharvashikha, 
Atharvashirah, AdvayatAraka, Adhyatma, Annaparna, Amri- 
tanada, Amritavindu, Avyakta, Krishna, Kaula, Kshurika, 
Ganapati, KAtyAyana, KalAgnirudra, Kundika, TripurA-tapa- 
nlya, DakshinAmQrti, Devldvaya, Dhyanavindu, Nadavindu, 
NArada, NarAyana, Nirvana, Nrisingha-tapanlya, Pashupata, 
Brahma-paingala, Paippalada, Vahvricha, VrihajjAvAla, 
Bhasma, MuktikA, Rahasya, RAma-tapani, Vajra-panjara, 
Varaha, Vasudeva, Sarasvatl-rahasya, SUA, Sudarshana, 
Hayagriva, eto.* As there are 21 recensions of the Rigveda, 
109 of the Yajurveda, and 1,000 of the Samaveda. so 
there ai-e the same number of Upanishads belonging to 
each of the Vedas respectively. The Sanskrit-knowing 
reader will have surmised from the names of the Upani¬ 
shads above enumerated that each of them deals with 
forms of worship similar to that prescribed by the 
Tantra. There are many commentaries on the Nrisingha- 
tApaniya Upanishad, one of which is written by BhagavAn

1 See Introduction, MahOnirvftna Tantra.

' See Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. in the Government 
Oriental MSS. Library, Madras, vol. i, part in.1 See Introduction, MahOnirvftna Tantra.

' See Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. in the Government 
Oriental MSS. Library, Madras, vol. i, part in.

78

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Shangkarachftrya and another by his great guru Gauda- 
padacharva, known by the name of Munlndra. There is, 
therefore, no ground it is contended, for the supposition 
that this Upanishad may be a spurious one. Kulluka Bhatta, 
the author of the most authoritative commentary on the 
Manu Sanghita, has, in his note on the first shloka of 
Chapter ii of the book quoted a passage from Harlta’s 
work, which says: “ Now we shall explain dharma. Dharma 
is based on the authority of Shruti. Shruti is of two 
kinds—Vaidik and Tantrik." From this it is evident that 
the Tantra Shastra is nothing else than a part of the 
Vedas, and is, consequently, known by the names of Agaraa 
and Nigama. The passages above quoted from the Maha- 
bharata prove that Mah&deva first promulgated the Vedas, 
and then the Pashupata dharma from a part of it. Thus, 
from the statement also made by Mahadeva Himself, we 
learn that the Tantra Shastra is a part of the Vedas.

According to the Pandit, the Tantra Shastra is referred 
to by the word “ rahasya " (mystery), used over and above 
the expression “All the Vedas," in the 165th shloka of 
chapter ii of the Manu Sanghita, and also by the word 
“ vidya,” which is used in addition to the Vedas and 
the Cpanishads to the 10th sQkta of the 4th Brahmana 
in the 2nd varga of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. 
The Vriddhaharltasanghita contains a full account of 
the Tantrik form of initiation (dlksha). The Ushanah- 
sanghita makes clear references to the Pancharatra and 
the Pashupata dharma. The Katyayana Sanghita ordains 
worship of Ganesha, Gaurl and other Devas and Devls. 
The Vyasa Sanghita recommends japa of the guhyavidya, 1 
use of rosaries, with beads of crystal and the like, and 
worship of Rudra with Gayatrl. Nowhere else but in the

‘ Secret Mantra,

INTRODUCTION‘ Secret Mantra,

INTRODUCTION

79

Tantra Shftstra is there a Gftyatrl for Rudra or any other 
Devatft. The 8hangkha Sanghitft says that after dhyana of 
a Devatft, japa should be made with a rosary of crystal of 
other beads, the number of recitations being recorded by 
the fingers of the left hand. In the Vriddhagautamasan- 
ghitft there is a list of the names of the authors of Dharma 
Shftstras. In this list there occur the names of Brahma, 
as also those of Uma and Maheshvara. It is unnecessary, 
in the Pandit’s opinion, to further quote passages or to cite 
more authorities. Like the Puranas, all Smriti, and Sang- 
hitfts contain references, direct as well as indirect, to the 
Tantra Shastra, but the Tantra Shftstra makes no reference 
to either Smriti or Purftna. This also proves the great 
antiquity of Tantra Shastra. There is a Tantrik scripture 
named Shivagama containing Sutras which have been 
quoted as authorities by Krishnananda in his Tantrasftra. 
Its commentator is Abhinavagupta, the Court pandit of 
Gonardda, King of Kashmir. Gonardda died the death of a 
hero in the great war of Kurukshetra. 1

We need not here follow the Pandit in his speculations 
aB to Buddhistio influences in Ancient America as estab¬ 
lished by Mexican architecture, or as to the similarity of 
the ritual of Ancient Egypt * to that of the Tantra, beyond 
stating that in his opinion such speculations support the 
more direct inferences derivable from the study of Indian 
history and literature as to the antiquity of the Tantra 
Shftstra, which his essay is written to prove. The learned 
Mahftmahopftdhyftya concludes with the expression of a

* See the RftjataranginT of Kashmir, and the Commentary on ShivA- 
gama, of which there is a copy in the Library of the Mahftrftja of 
Darbh&nga.

’ He points out with regard to Horus, one of the Egyptian Devat&s, 
that Aharpati (Lord of the Day) and Aharfshu (Ruler of the Day) are 
Sanskrit epithets of the sun.

80

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA’ He points out with regard to Horus, one of the Egyptian Devat&s, 
that Aharpati (Lord of the Day) and Aharfshu (Ruler of the Day) are 
Sanskrit epithets of the sun.

80

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

doubt whether the reasons and arguments he adduces will 
appeal to “the great men, free of all prejudice, learned in 
Western language and science, with intellects brightened, 
sharpened, and coloured by Western philosophy.” and apo¬ 
logizes for himself, with perhaps some latent sarcasm, as 
follows: “ I had not the good fortune of learning deductive 
and inductive logic. In the Chatusp&thi of a native Brah- 
mana Pandit, I learnt to argue 1 whether sound follows the 
fall of a palm-fruit or precedes it,' ” though he says it must 
not be supposed that other great logicians were mainly 
engaged in discussions of the “ palm-fruit-falling " nature.Western writers and Indians influenced by their works 
and general outlook are much occupied with this question 
of the antiquity and date of the Tantra. To the orthodox 
all Sh&stra is eternal. Moreover, to the Indian tempera¬ 
ment, as one of them has well said, sugar is prized for its 
sweetness without regard to the land whence it came or the 
cultivator by whom it was grown. It can hardly be said 
that we have the necessary materials for final judgment 
from the purely historical standpoint. If it be alleged that 
Indians have sometimes gone to opposite extremes, Euro¬ 
pean critics and their Indian followers have, as a general 
rule, displayed almost a mania for belittling the antiquity 
of Indian religions, literature, and art. In coming to any 
conclusion on this matter, it is necessary first to inquire 
into the different elements of dootrine and practice, to dis¬ 
tinguish what is original from what is alleged to be an 
accretion, or interpolation, and to consider the allegation of 
non-Aryan influences and so forth. It is necessary also to 
distinguish between Tantrik doctrine and practice so ascer¬ 
tained from its expression or record in any particular docu¬ 
ment. The latter may be of yesterday, and yet its subjects 
may be of the ages. Some would derive the Tantra from 
Mah&yana Buddhism. Others contend that the Mahayftna

INTRODUCTION

81INTRODUCTION

81

Bohool appears to have adopted the doctrines of the Indian 
Tantra, which is in notable respects opposed to the original 
doctrines of the Buddha. The influence of his teachings 
are rather, it is said, to be found amongst the Vaishnavas, 
who have in their number many cryptic Buddhists, than 
in forms of worship which, not to mention other salient 
differences, prescribe the sacrifice of animals with elabo¬ 
rate rituals before the images of Devas and Devis. In 
fact, the Lalitavistara 1 already cited represents Sbakya- 
singha as condemning the “ fools ” who make obeisance 
to numerous Devat&s and who perform tapasya in the 
cremation grounds and at the crossing of four roads, as 
also the practice of “ sinful men and heretics (p&shandas) ” 
who use wine and flesh, he having prescribed the ascetic 
life and the avoidance of injury (whether by sacrifice or 
otherwise) to all beings. Professor Masaharu Anezaki,* * 
after citing the Rajatarangini as evidence of Tantrik wor¬ 
ship at the time of Asoka (240 b.c.),* says that without a 
doubt the Tantra began to develop even before N&g&rjuna 
(a.d. 200), and that in absorbing Buddhism it has been 
successful despite all efforts to the contrary. In fact, as 
regards Buddhism, the Tantra, according to this view, 
stands for a Hindu conquest. How far, as some allege, 
the conquering doctrine has been itself subjected to non- 
Aryan influences is another question. Some contend that 
here, as in most things, there is some truth in both conten¬ 
tions, and that Indian and Buddhist thought are likely to 
have influenced one another. Such may think that the

1 Chap, xvii, using that work, not historically, bat as an indication 
of a Buddhist view of a Shfistra which some would derive from 
Buddhism.

* “ History of the Religions in Ancient India."

* I cite the author's views without myself expressing an opinion on 
the evidential value of the particular work cited.

6

82

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* “ History of the Religions in Ancient India."

* I cite the author's views without myself expressing an opinion on 
the evidential value of the particular work cited.

6

82

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

influence of the latter has predominated as regards certain 
Tantrik schools and rituals. It is thus noteworthy that the 
Tara Tantra, which is said by some to belong to the northern 
tradition, states that Buddha and Vashishtha were Tantrika 
munis and Kula Bhairavas. 1 * * According to the Rudray&mala, 
the worship of Tilrft was introduced from Mahachina in the 
Himalayas by Vashishtha, who worshipped the Devi Bud- 
dhishvari, according to one of the Shakhas of the Atharva- 
veda. The solution may possibly be found in a more perfect 
knowledge of the various traditions, which are said by some 
to have existed, than we now possess.

Whatever be the date of the first appearance of specifi¬ 
cally Tantrik doctrines, which, owing to the progressive 
nature of its developments, may never be ascertained, it will 
be probably found, upon a profounder inquiry into the sub¬ 
ject than has been hitherto made, that the antiquity of the 
Tantra has been much under-estimated. This, however, 
does not mean that all the current Tantras, or all their 
contents, are of great antiquity. The contrary is, I believe, 
the fact. The Meru Tantra,* in a curious shloka, says: 
“There will be born at London English folk whose mantra' 
for worship is in the Phiranga 4 language, who will be un¬ 
defeated in battle and Lords of the world." * Whatever be

1 See A. K. Maitra’s Introduction to this Tantra published by the 
Varendra Anusandhana Samiti.

’ Twenty-third Prnkftsba.

* That is, unlike some defiled (mlechcha) countries, it is not without 
a religion of its own.’ Twenty-third Prnkftsba.

* That is, unlike some defiled (mlechcha) countries, it is not without 
a religion of its own.

* Here English. The term, which is ordinarily derived from 
" Frank.” is applicable to the European peoples generally. Its mean¬ 
ing, however, according to the Shabdakalpndruma, is, “ those addicted 
to sin and anger.” It is also used, as a qualificative of disease, to 
denote syphilis, because of the prevalence of the disease in Europe.

4 Phirangabh&shaya mantrasteshangsangs&dbnnadbhuvi 
Adipilmnndal&n&nchn songrameahvaparftjit&h 
Ingrej&navashatpancha landraj&shch&pi bhavinah.

INTRODUCTION

83

the age of this Tantra, it may be argued that this passage 
at least was probably not written earlier than the eighteenth 
century.INTRODUCTION

83

the age of this Tantra, it may be argued that this passage 
at least was probably not written earlier than the eighteenth 
century.

Comparatively modern Tantras may, however, be based 
on older versions now lost. 1 On the orthodox hypothesis, 
moreover, there is no reason why new Sbastras should not 
even now appear in the world. The work of Shiva has not 
come to an end with the inception of the Kaliyuga. In 
this, as in other matters, Indian tradition, when rightly 
understood, may perhaps be found to largely justify itself. / 
The following remarks of Professor Hayman Wilson have a 
bearing on this point, both on the general question of the 
antiquity of the Hindu Sb&stras and that of the Tantra, if, 
as is commonly done, the date of the latter is to be fixed with 
reference to the alleged date of the Paur&nik period, which, 
according to general European views, precedes them: “ It 
is therefore as idle as it is irrational to dispute the anti¬ 
quity or authenticity of the greater portion of the contents 
of the Puriinas in the face of abundant positive and circum¬ 
stantial evidence of the prevalence of the doctrines which 
they teach, the currency of the legends which they narrate, 
and the integrity of the institutions which they describe 
at least three centuries before the Christian Era. But the 
origin and development of these doctrines, traditions, and 
institutions were not the work of a day, and the testimony 
which establishes their existence three centuries before 
Christianity carries it back to a much more remote antiquity 
—to an antiquity that is probably not surpassed by any 
of the prevailing fictions, institutions, or beliefs of the 
ancient world."*

The Tantras are generally cast in the form of dialogues 
between Shiva and his Shakti Parvatl, the form in which

1 8ee also what the author of the Tantrattva says, post.

’ Vishnu Purftna, xcix,

84

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 8ee also what the author of the Tantrattva says, post.

’ Vishnu Purftna, xcix,

84

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

gat I, HiB Spouse, reappeared after her death at Daksha’s 
sacrifice, or in their forms as Bhairava and Bhairavl. Shiva 
is called Adinfitha, the first Guru. But he is also Shakti, 
for He and the Devi are one. 1 The Devi is therefore includ¬ 
ed with him in the circle of Gurus. SadAshiva, as the 
Mahasvachanda Tantra states, promulgates as both guru 
and shishya (disciple), the Tantras in the form of question 
and answer, by the division of his real and manifested forms 
(prakasha and vimarsha). Where the questioning is by the 
Devi as shishya and the answers are given by Shiva as 
guru, the Tantra is in the form called Agama. Where the 
Devi* * is the teacher, as in the Nigamakalpadruma and other 
Nigamas,* the ShAstra is known as a Nigama. Both terms 
are derived from the italicized letters of the Sanskrit verses 
which occur in the Agamadvaitanirnaya,* and which run: 
“ An Agama is so called because it proceeds from the mouth 
of Shambhu * and goes to Girija* being approved by Vasu- 
deva.' Nigama is so described because it emanates from 
the mouth of Girija to enter the ear of Girisha, 7 being 
approved by Vasudeva." The seven marks or topics of

» Mahtairvana Tantra. chap. i. verses 14-1G. Mamarupusidevit- 
vam nabhedo’ste tvay&mama: for in their ultimate ground both Puru- 
sha and Shakti are one.

• It is noteworthy that the Nigamas appear to deal largely with 
the Rahasyapajft.

• igatang Sbambhuvaktrebyah 
potancha girijft mukhe 
matancha vSsudevena 
tasnutdfigama ucbyatd 
Nirgato girija vaktrftt

f/atascha girishashrutrim 
matashcha v&sudevasya 
nigamah parikathyate.

• Shiva

• The mountain-bora Devi. His Spouse.

' Vishnu. The above is the special meaning of these two terms, 
which both also denote the Veda. See as to Nigama, Shrluiadbh&ga- 
vatu Skandha, chap, v, verse 89. 7 Shiva.

INTRODUCTION

86' Vishnu. The above is the special meaning of these two terms, 
which both also denote the Veda. See as to Nigama, Shrluiadbh&ga- 
vatu Skandha, chap, v, verse 89. 7 Shiva.

INTRODUCTION

86

an Agama are said by the V&r&hl Tantra to be shrishti, 
pralaya, devatanamarchanam, sadhana, purascharana, shat- 
karina, and dhyanayoga.

Shrishtishcha pralayashchaiva devatanang yatharcb- 
chanam.

Sailhanangchaiva sarveshang purashcharanameva cha,

Shatkarmmasadhanangchaiva dhyanayogashchatur- 
vvidhah.

Saptabhirlakshanairyuktamagaraamtadbidurbudhah.'

The same and other Tantras describe the subject 
(lakshana) of such a Shastra to be: The Supreme Spirit, 
the creation and destruction of the universe, the origin 
and worship of the Devas, classification of beings (bhuta- 
nang sangsthanam), the heavenly bodies, description of 
the worlds and hells, of man and woman, and of the 
centres (chakra) of the human body, the law and duty 
(dharma) of the different ages and of the stages of life 
in the individual called ashrama, the sacraments (sang- 
sk&ras), the consecration of images of Devata, mantra, 
yantra,* mudra* all forms of spiritual training (s&dhana), 
and worship (puja, upasana), whether external or mental,

* That is, creation and destruction of the universe, the worship of 
Devas, spiritual exercises, the rite called purascharana. the six 
“magical" powers called Sbatkarma (vis., maranam, uchch&tanam, 
vashlkaronam, stambhanaui. vidveshanatn, svastynyanam), and the 
form of Yoga, so called.

' Is the diagram for worship by which the mind is fixed on its object. 
The imprints of the Shrf yantra, the Gftyatrf yantra and the Kill yantra 
appear elsewhere in the book. Yantra is Mantra in the sense that it is 
the body of the Devata who is Mantra. Yantram mantramayam proktam 
man t rat nut devataiva hi. Dehatmonoryatha bhedo yantradevatayo- 
statha (KaulAvalTya Tantra). As to this and Mantra, see Introduction 
to my edition of the Molu\nirvana Tantra.* Gestures made by the hands and positions of the body employed 
in worship and hathayoga. Devanum modadA mudra taa mat tang 
yatnataahoharet.

86

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

including worship with the panchatattva , 1 consecration of 
houses, tanks, wells, trees, etc., descriptions of holy shrines 
(tlrtha), purascharana,' japa, vrata* * shatkarmasadhana,' 
and all forms of ceremonial rites and “ magic,” meditation 
(dhyana), and yoga, the dutieB of kings, law, custom, medi¬ 
cine, and science generally.

The Tantras, in fact, were (for they exist only in frag¬ 
ment) encyclopredias of the knowledge of their time.

The Tantras are still very numerous, though the greater 
part has been lost, destroyed, or is missing. Of those 
which are known, only a portion have been printed, and of 
these last the versions in circulation axe sometimes incom¬ 
plete. Thus the current version of the Mahanirvana lacks 
the second part, which is double the extent of the first. 
This latter part has been long supposed missing.' On the 
other hand, the first part, of the Rudray&mala' is at present

1 Wine, meat, fish, grain, woman (maithnna), both in their literal, 
substitutional, and esoteric meanings, for the Tattva are of three kinds. 
See Introduction to my edition of the Mahilnirv&na Tantra.

’ Vide ante.

' Japa is recitation, either external or mental, of mantras, according 
to certain rules (viddh&nena mantrochch&ranam). Vratam is a part 
of naimittikam or occasional karma, such as those of the Janm&shtami, 
Shivar&tri, Durgflpuja, etc. ' Vide ante.

* It exists, however, and I hope to publish it in my collection of 
T&ntrik Texts.* It exists, however, and I hope to publish it in my collection of 
T&ntrik Texts.

• Certain Tantrik Shistras are called Yamal os and Damaraa, such 
os the Y&malas, Siddhi-YAmala, Rudra-Yftmala. Brfthmu-Yftmala, and 
the Bhuta Dftmara, Deva Dftmara. Yaksha Dftmara. The writer of 
an article in vol. v of the " Asiatic Researches," pp. 58-67 (Calcutta, 
1798), says: "I am informed that the Tantras collectively are noticed 
in very ancient compositions; but as they are very numerous they 
must have been composed at different periods. It may be presumed 
that the Rudrayftmala is amongst the most ancient, ns it is noticed 
in the Durgft Mahattva, where the principal Tantras are noticed as 
' Ball. Mundnmftlft. T&rft. Nirvana (not the Mahanirvana), Sarvasftsana, 
Blra. LingArchann. Bhuta, UddAsana, KAlikA. Bhairavl, Bhairavikulpa, 
Todala, Matribhedanakn. Maya. Blresvara, Visvosftra, Samiija, Brahma- 
yamala, Rudrayamala, SunkuyAmala, Gftyatrl. K&likakala, Sarvasva,

INTRODUCTION

87

not found, though fragments may exist, such as the 
Mantrabhidh&na, which is reputed to belong to that part, 
and which I have published . 1 The Sharadatilaka, a T&ntrik 
compendium which is much esteemed in Orissa, contains 
more matter than is to be found in the current printed 
versions known to me,* * as is also the case with the current 
Vijakosha. Other Tantras appear to exist in defective or 
mutilated copies only.According to the Tantras, there are three regions called 
Vishnukranta, Rathakranta, and AshvakrantA (sometimes 
called GajakrantA) respectively, to which different Tantras 
are assigned. According to the Sbaktimangala Tantra, 
Vishnukranta extends from the Vindhya Mountain to 
Chattala (Chittagong), thus including Bengal; the Ratha- 
kr&nta from the same place to Mahachina, including Nepal; 
and Ashvakranta, from the same mountain to “ the great 
ocean,” apparently including the rest of India. The Maha- 
siddhasara Tantra agrees with this as to Vishnukranta and 
Rathakranta, but makes the Ashvakranta extend from 
the Karatoya River* (in the Dinajpur District) to Java. 
The following Tantras are assigned * to the several regions, 
though there are differences of opinion as regards particular 
Tantras. Thus, in the first list some would exclude the 
Tantrantara and include the Yogarnava. Some Tantras 
appear in more than one of these lists.

KuUVrnava, YoginI, Mahishamardini. These are universally known, 
Oh Bhairavi. greatest of souls: and many are the Tantraa uttered by 
Shambhu (Shiva).’’

' Vol. i of my T&ntrik Texts.

* I have come across what appears to be a complete manuscript in 
Puri.

* A very sacred river which is notable in this—that it never loses 
its Bnnetity. All others do so in the month of Shravan (July-August).

4 See Sadhanakalpalatikft. by Nilmani Mukhopadhyaya, part ii, 
pp. 22-26: and Introduction to Vol. I. of my “ Tantrik Texts.” As to 
other Tantrik works, see post.

88

PRINCIPLES OF^TANTRA4 See Sadhanakalpalatikft. by Nilmani Mukhopadhyaya, part ii, 
pp. 22-26: and Introduction to Vol. I. of my “ Tantrik Texts.” As to 
other Tantrik works, see post.

88

PRINCIPLES OF^TANTRA

The Tantras of the Vishnukr&nta, are said to be: 
1. Siddhlshvara, 2. Kalltantra, 3. Kularnava, 4. Jnanarnava, 
5. Nllatantra, 0. Phetkari, 7. Devyagama, 8. Uttara, 9. Shri- 
krama, 10. SiddhiyAmala, 11. MatsyasQkta, 12. Siddhas&ra, 
13. Siddhis&rasvata, 14. Varahl, 15. YoginI, 16. Ganesha- 
vimarshinl, 17. Nitya-tantra, 18. Shivagama, 19. Chamunda, 
20. Mundamala, 21. Hangsa-Mabeshvara, 22. Niruttara, 
23. Kulaprakashaka, 24. Devlkalpa, 25. Gandharva, 26. Kriya- 
sara, 27. Nibandha, 28. Svatantra, 29. Saramohana, 30. 
Tantra-rAja, 31. Lalita, 32. Radha, 33. MalinI, 34. Rudra- 
yamala, 35. Brihat-Shrlkrama, 36. Gavaksha, 37. Suku- 
mudinl, 38. Vishuddheshvara, 39. Malinl-vijaya, 40. Samaya- 
chara, 41. Bhairavl, 42. YoginI-hridaya, 43. Bhairava, 44. 
Sanatkumara, 45. Yoni, 46. Tantrantara, 47. Navaratnesh- 
vara, 48. Kulachudamani, 49. Bhavachfldfimani, 60. Deva* 
prakasha, 51. Kamakhya, 62. Ka m adhenu. 53. Kunifirl, 
54. BhOtadfimara, 55. Yamala, 56. BrahmayAmala, 67. 
VishvasAra, 68. Mahakala, 59. Kuloddlsha, 60. Kulamrita, 
61. Kubjika, 62. Tantrachintamani, 63. Kallvilasa, 64. 
MayAtantra.The following are given as RathakrantA Tantras: 1. 
Chinmaya, 2. Matsya-sukta, 3. MahishamarddinI, 4. Matrl* 
kodaya, 5. Hangsa Maheshvara, 6. Meru-tantra, 4. Mahanlla, 
8. MahA-nirvana, 9. Bhfltadamara, 10. Deva-daraara, 11. 
VljachintAinani, 12. Ekajata, 13. Vasudeva-rahasya, 14. 
Brihadgautamlya, 15. Varnoddhriti, 16. ChhAyAnlla, 17. 
Brihadyoni, 18. Brahmajnana, 19. Garuda, 20. Varna-vilasa, 
21. BAlA-vilAsa, 22. Purashcharanachandrika, 23. Puraah- 
charana-rasollasa, 24. PanchadashI, 26. PichchhilA, 26. 
Prapanchasara, 27. Parameshvara, 28. Navaratneshvara, 
29. NAradiya, 30. NagArjuna, 81. YogasAra, 32. Dakshina- 
tnurti, 33. Yoga-svarodaya, 34. Yakshinltantra, 35. Sva- 
rodaya, 86. Jnana-bhairava, 37. Akasha-bhairava, 88. 
RajarAjeshvarl, 39. Revati, 40. Sarasa, 41. Indra-jAla,

INTRODUCTION

80

42. Krikalasa-dipika, 43. Kangkalamalinl, 44. KAlottama, 45. 
Yakshadamara, 46. Sarasvatl, 47. SharadA, 48. Shakti-sang- 
gama, 49. Shaktikagamasarvasva, 50. Sammohini, 61. 
Achara-sara, 52. ChinAchAra, 53. ShadamnAya, 54. Karala- 
bhairava, 55. Shodba, 56. Mahalakshml, 67. Kaivalya, 58. 
KulasadbhAva, 59. Siddhi-taddhari, 60. KritisAra, 61. Kala- 
bhairava, 62. Uddamareshvara, 63. MahA-kala, 64. Bhuta- 
bhairava.The Tantras of Ashvakranta are given as follows: 1. 
Bhata-Shuddhi, 2. Guptadiksha, 3. BrihatsAra, 4. Tattva- 
siira, 5. Varnas&ra, 6. Kriyasara, 7. Gupta-tantra, 8. Gupta- 
sara, 9. Brihat-todala, 10. BrihannirvAna. 11. Brihatkang- 
knlinl, 12. Siddha-tantra, 18. Kala-tantra, 14. Shiva-tantra, 
15. Saratsara, 16. Gaurltantra, 17. Yoga-tantra, 18. Dharma- 
katantra, 19. Tattvachintamani, 20. Vindutantra, 21. Maha- 
yogini, 22. Brihad-yogin!, 23. ShivAchchana, 24. Samvara, 
25. ShulinI, 26. MahamalinI, 27. Moksha, 28. Brihanmalini, 
29. Maha-moksha, 30. Brihanmoksha, 31. Gopitantra, 32. 
BhQtalipi, 33. Kamini, 34. Mohini, 35. Mohana, 36. 
Samlrana, 37. Kamakeshara, 38. Mahavlra, 39. Chuda- 
mani, 40. Gurvarchchana, 41. Gopya, 42. Tlkshna, 43. 
MangalA, 44. KAmaratna, 45. GopalilAmrita, 46. Brahmanda, 
47. China, 48. Mahaniruttara, 49. Bhuteshvara, 50. Gayatrl, 
51. Vishuddheshvara, 62. Yogarnava, 53. Bheranda, 54. 
MantrachintAmani, 55. Yantrachudamani, 6b. Vidyullata, 
57. Bhuvaneshvari, 68. Lilavatl, 69. Brihachchina, 60. 
Kuranja, 61. JayaradhamAdhava, 62. UjjAsaka, 63. DhumA- 
vatl, 64. Shiva.

Particular Tantras have been from time to time printed, 
such as the well-known MabAnirvana, the Yogini, Kali 
Tantras, and others. The chief collection, however, is 
that of Babu Rasik Mohun Chatterjee, who has pub¬ 
lished at Calcutta the following Tantras or TAntrik works 
in Bengali character: Mundamala, Shaktakramana, Maya,

90

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Bhutashuddhi, Kaulikarcbanadipika, Kubjika, Vishva* 
sara, Purascbaranarasollasa, Sbaktanandataranginl, Nila, 
Todala, Gaudharva, Rudrayamala, Guptasadhana, G&yatrl, 
FetkarinI, Niruttara, Mahachlnacharakraina, Nirvana- 
kramadlpika, Mantrakosha, YoginI, Kularnava, Kama* 
khya, Kankalamalini, Matrikabheda, Kiunadhenu, Maha- 
nirvana (first part), Sanatkumiira, Sharadatilaka, Tripura* 
sarasamuchaya, Uddftraareshvara, Kaulavall, Mantra- 
mahodadbi, Vrihannila, Tararahasyam, Radha, Sbyama- 
rahasya.A few of these and others have been printed at Calcutta 
in Devanagri and edited by Pandit Jivananda Vidyasagara 
—namely, Kularnava, Tiirarahasya, Tripui'asarasamuch- 
chaya, MaMnirvana, YoginI, Rudrayamala (Uttarabhaga), 
Sbyamarabasya, Tantras ; the Sharadfttilaka, PrfinatoshinI* 
Mantramahodadhi; also a collection of small works on magic 
(Indraj&la) entitled Indrajalavidyasangraha.

Considerable portions of some of the Puranas are ap¬ 
propriated (as Professor llayman Wilson pointed out as 
regards the Agni Purana) to instructions for the perform¬ 
ance of religious ceremonies which belong to the Tantrik 
ritual and are translated from the principal authorities 
of that system. In fact, a large number of Puranas and 
Upapur&nas contain Tantrik forms of worship, and are on 
that account and in accordance with the general view of 
the comparative modernity of the Tantras rejected as 
“ genuine ” Puranas, though accepted and relied on as such 
by the Tantrik pandits. The reader is referred to the 
introduction of Professor H. H. Wilson’s Vishnu Purana. 
Reference may be here made to the Kalika, Brahmanda, 
Garuda, Agni, Shrlmadbhagavata, Devl-bh&gavata, and other 
Puranas. In the twelfth chapter of the Kurma Purfina, on 
the other hand, it is said: “ The Bbairava, Varna, Arhata, 
and Yamala Shastras are intended for delusion.”

INTRODUCTION 91

In addition to the Tantras, there aro Tantrik com¬ 
pendia, commentaries and dictionaries, such as the Tantra- 
sara, Pranatoshinl, Pranakrishnashabdambuddhi, TantrA- 
bhidhana, or Mantrakosha, and others. Krishnananda s 
Tantrasara is one of those now best known. But before 
his time there were, as already stated, other compilers, 
such as Raghavananda, Raghavabhatta, VirQpaksha, and 
Govindabhatta; and such works as the Ramarchanachan- 
drika, Mantramuktavali, Bhuvaneshvaripftrijata, Sharada- 
tilakam, Tripurasarasamuchchaya, Svachchandasangraha 
S&rasamuchchaya, Somabhujangavali, and Mantratantra- 
prakasha.Controversy has also divided the Agamas into “ good ’ 
Agamas (Sadagama) and “ bad ” Agamas (Asadagama). 
Brahmananda Giri, the author of the celebrated Shakta- 
nandatarangini (Wave of delight for Shaktas), says: 1 
“ Sadagama eva agamashabdasya mukhyatv&t ” (“ Sada¬ 
gama alone is Agama (Tantra) according to the primary 
meaning of the word Agama ”). Shiva condemns, in the 
Agama Sanghita,* * the Asadagama, saying: “ Oh! Deveshi 
men in the Kali age are generally of a rajasik and tamasik 3 
disposition, and being addicted to forbidden ways deceive 
many others. Oh ! Sureshvarl—those who in disregard of 
their varnashramadharmma * offer to us flesh, blood, and 
wine—become bhatas, pretas, pishachas, and brahmaraksha- 
sas.” * It is denied that this passage is any proof that

1 Chap. ii. * Cited in Sh&kt&nandataranginI, chap. ii.

* That is, of a sensual and ignorant disposition.

* The law governing caste; and the stages of life, student, house¬ 
holder. etc., called Ashrnmas. The term as a general one includes the 
ach&ra of the S&dhaka.

* That is, unclean, malignant, and demoniac spirits :

Kalan prayena deveshi r&jasast&mas&stathn, 
Nishiddhacharanah santo mohayantyaparftn bahan,

Avabhyang pishitang raktang suranchaiva sureshvari, 
Varnashramochitang dbarmmamavich&ryyarpayanti ye, 
Bhutapretapishacbaste bhavanti brahmarakshasah.

92

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRAAvabhyang pishitang raktang suranchaiva sureshvari, 
Varnashramochitang dbarmmamavich&ryyarpayanti ye, 
Bhutapretapishacbaste bhavanti brahmarakshasah.

92

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the Tantra prescribing the Panchatattva Sadhana with 
wine and so forth is an Asadagama. That these verses 
do not, in the opinion of the author of the Shakta- 
nandataranginl, amount to condemnation of this sadhana 
is said to bo shown by the following passage in the 
same work in which the previous verses appear. “ He 
who sees wine, fish, meat, woman, should salute the 
Bhairavi Devi and say: Ong! salutation to the beloved of 
Shiva, the remover of all obstacles. Salutation to Thee, 
the giver of all boons, adorned with a garland of severed 
heads stained with streams of blood. Thee I salute for the 
destruction of all obstacles and the wellbeing of Kulachara.” 1 
The meaning of these two passages is therefore said to be 
that wine, flesh, and so forth, are prohibited in those cases 
where their use is forbidden by the Achara of the particular 
worshipper, as in the case of the Pashu. This form of 
worship is not to be followed indiscriminately and without 
reference to the rules whioh properly govern it. For in 
that case instead of being a help to the sadhaka, it leads 
him along the downward path. The Asadagama, in short, 
is said to be that Agama whioh prescribes forbidden acts, 
that is, acts forbidden by the achara of a particular wor¬ 
shipper; not all such rites, but the false rites followed by 
the bad. Where true worship is the aim there is aat , whore 
it is not there is aaat.

• • • •

It may be asked, What is the general characteristic of 
the Tantra as compared with other Shastras ? In the first 
place the Shastra contains provisions which are applicable 
for all without distinction of race, caste, or sex. The 
Shastra affords to all, with freedom from Vaidik exclu¬ 
siveness, the practical method (more extensive than mere

Chap. xv.

INTRODUCTION

98Chap. xv.

INTRODUCTION

98

ritual in its ordinary English sense) which qualifies the 
Sadhaka for the reception of the higher doctrine of the 
path of knowledge (jnana m&rga). The Shudra and woman 
are not, as in the case of Vaidik&chara, under any ban. 
As the Gautamlya Tantra says 1 people of all castes, and 
whether men or women, may receive its mantras “ Sarva- 
varnadhikilrushcha narinfim yogyameva cha." In the Chakra 
there is no caste at all, even the lowest Chand&la* being 
deemed, whilst therein, higher than Brahmanas. The 
Mahanirvana Tantra says:* “ That low Kaula who refuses 
to initiate a Chandala or a Yavana 4 into the Rauln dbarma, 
considering them to be inferior, or a woman, out of dis¬ 
respect for her, goes the downward way. All two-footed 
beings in this world, from the vipra* to the inferior castes, 
are competent for kulacbara.”

In the next place, as regards the subject matter in 
respect of which liberty is so given, it is necessary to un¬ 
derstand the distinction which Hindus draw in religious 
matters between knowledge (jnana) in the sense of actual 
experience, as distinguished from mere mental theorizing, 
and action (kriya). The answer, then, is that the Tantra 
is above all a practical scripture primarily concerned with 
action and ritual, which the undisceming may think has, 
in any case, been prescribed to an excessive extreme. It 
is bo concerned because, though action cannot alone and 
directly secure liberating knowledge, the attainment of the 
latter must necessarily be preceded by right action. For

' Chap. i. * One of the lowest and most unclean castes.

' Chap. xiv. verses 187, 184.

' Here generally used for non-Hindu, a term specially applied to 
the Greeks or Bactrians. There is nothing, therefore, to prevent a 
non-Hindu from being initiated in Kaula dharma, provided that he 
be fit for such initiation. Initiation, however, in such case would 
ordinarily be given by an avadhQta. 1 Bruhmana.

94

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA94

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

how otherwise can such spiritual knowledge be gained ? 
In order to secure the development of the Jlva’s body, 
certain physical exercises are necessary. Similarly both 
these and other mental and spiritual exercises are required 
if liberating knowledge (brahmajnana) is to be attained. 
Such exercises are generically termed “ S&dhana,” and in¬ 
clude both worship (pflja) and all its ritual.

Sadhana has historically varied with race and creed. 
The Hindu has his own in the Tantra which is called the 
Sadhana Sh&stra. The provision of such a definite training 
is the strength to a greater or less degree of all ancient 
orthodoxies, just as its absence may prove to be the rock 
on which the more modern forms of religion may split. 
Doubtless to the newer “ Protestant ” spirit, whether 
issuing from Europe, Arabia, or elsewhere, all ritual is 
liable to be regarded as “ mummery,” except possibly the 
particular and perhaps jejune variety which it calls its 
own. For even the most desiccated “ Protestantism ” has 
not been able altogether to dispense with it. There is room 
for this spirit as for others, or it would not be there. Like, 
however, everything else, it may go beyond the purposes 
which are claimed to justify its origin.

Etymologists have derived the word “ ceremony ” from 
“ cor " and “ monere.” The derivation, though inaccurate, 
explains well the purpose of the thing itself. The sacred 
rites which are the expressions of innermost feeling pro¬ 
claim the religious truths which have inspired them and 
excite devotion, rendering man more sensible of the Divine 
Presence. So, as the Council of Trent declared, “the 
Catholic Church, rich with the experience of ages and 
clothed with their splendour, has introduced mystic benedic¬ 
tion (mantra), incense (dupa), water (achamana, padya, etc.), 
lights (d lpa), bells (ghant&), flowers (pushpa), 1 vestments,

1 Portions of the Shodasha Upachftra of Hindn worship.

INTRODUCTION

951 Portions of the Shodasha Upachftra of Hindn worship.

INTRODUCTION

95

and ail the magnificence of its ceremonies in order to 
excite the spirit of religion to the contemplation of the 
profound mysteries which they reveal. As are its faithful, 
the Church is composed of both body (deha) and soul 
(atm&). It therefore renders to the Lord (Ishvara) a double 
worship, exterior (v&hyapQjfi,) and interior (manasapQja), the 
latter being the prayer (vandana) of the faithful, the breviary 
of its priest, and the voice of Him ever interceding in our 
favour, and the former the outward motions of the liturgy.” 
The human need for ceremonial in the sense of the neces¬ 
sity whioh man feels of an exterior manifestation which 
shall both stimulate and translate his inner feelings, is 
such that no religion of the past has been without its rites 
and ceremonies, and even the shallowest of epochs, whilst 
affecting a superiority to them, have yet preserved these 
ceremonies in its civil life.

The necessity which is thus admitted exists with 
greater urgency in the spiritual sphere. It is idle to suppose 
that all or any may, through Ved&ntik talk or by the mere 
closing of the eyes in pious pose realize the Nirguna 
Brahman. The great teaching of the Vedanta by itself and 
without accompanying Stldhana, can achieve nothing of 
real worth. Its study may produce a Pandit. But to 
the Sadhaka the disputations of Pandits, whether philo¬ 
sophical or scientific, is like “ the cawing of crows.” There 
is both reason and humour in the Hindu saying that a 
logician will be reborn a jackass. It is Sadhana which 
alone in any system, whether Hindu or otherwise, is really 
fruitful. The Tantra claims to be practical and to be a 
pratyaksha Shastra in that it affords the direct proof of 
experience. It is therefore one of its common sayings that,“ Whereas other Shastras are concerned with speculation 
only, the art of medicine and Tantra are practical, self- 
evident, and prove themselves at every step.”

96

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The Tantra further claims not only to be practical 
and to contain provisions available for all without dis¬ 
tinction of caste or sex, but also to be fundamentally 
rational. Nowhere else, in fact, than in the Hindu 
Shastras do we find greater stress laid on the necessity 
of thought and reasoning. For in India it is said want 
of reasoning involves loss of dharma. “ There is no sage 
who has not an opinion of his own." 1 The virtue of its 
general method is not merely thaumaturgic,* but is inherent 
in the mental states induced by dhyana and other physical 
and mental processes, and the excitation of the exterior 
rituals; an inherence chiefly explained by the fact that as 
at base all existence is of the nature of mind, the trans¬ 
formation of mind is the transformation of existence itself. 
Thus the sacramental energy of the Mantra, even when 
the Guru (who is himself the manifestation on the terrestrial 
plane of Adlnatha Mahak&la)' has vivified it with con¬ 
sciousness (chaitanya), depends in part for its efficacy on 
the competence (adhikara) of him who receives it.

Profoundly based on truth, however, as all ritual is, 
the Tantra yet recognizes that there is a stage in spiritual 
progress in whioh it becomes not merely unnecessary, but 
an obstacle to* further advance. If sadhana be, as it is, 
but a means to an end (brahmajnana, or the realization 
in personal experience of the Brahman), with the attain¬ 
ment of such end, and to the extent that approach is made 
to it, it becomes superfluous. As the Mahfinirvana says:

To him who has faith in the root, of what use are the 
branches and leaves ? This stage is, however, both a 
high and infrequent one, which the great majority (not¬ 
withstanding the fancies of some of the “emancipated”1 Nasau muniryasya matang na bhinnam. u the Mahftbhiirata

says.

See ae to this De la Valine Poussin, op. cit.

1 Yoginl Tantra.

INTRODUCTION

97

in this matter) have by no means reached. As the Mah&- 
nirvana Tantra says, Brahmasadhana is the highest state 
of mind; dhyjinabhava is the middling state, and japa 
comes next. External worship is the lowest of all. Yoga 
is the process whereby union of the Atma and Param&tma 
is achieved. Poja (worship) is the union of worshipper 
and worshipped. But for him who realizes that all things 
are Brahman, there is neither yoga nor pfljfi. For him 
there is neither sin nor virtue, heaven, or future birth. 
There is none to meditate on nor one to meditate. 1

In the opening chapter of the Kularnava Tantra it is 
said that “ there are fools who, pleased with the mere name 
of the Karmakanda, deceive themselves with a multitude 
of rites. It is not by eating one meal a day that know¬ 
ledge of the transcendent is attained.” “If the ant-hill 
be struck, is the serpent thereby killed?” “If the mere 
rubbing of the body with mud and ashes gains liberation, 
then the village dogs who roll therein have attained it.” 
Ritual is necessary, but it must be accompanied both by 
sincerity and increasing knowledge, which leads to tattva- 
jnana, the sole cause of liberation. It is not to be had 
by talk and self-conceit. Those who read the Scriptures 
and know not the truth, but pass their time in disputation, 
are like “ the ladle which, lying in syrup, knows not the 
taste of it.” Mere talk leads to nothing. “ One may dis¬ 
cuss as to what is knowledge and what is knowable, for 
a thousand years.” “ Life is short. Many are the Vedas, 
many are the Shastras, infinite are the obstacles; therefore 
is it necessary that the essence be mastered, as the gander 
sips from the water the milk which has been mixed with 
it." Ritual schemes exist to meet the requirements of 
all grades of competency; and their accomplishment with1 Dllasa xiv, verses 122, 124. See post. 
7

98

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

sincerity and intelligence effects their purpose. But of 
the perfected (siddha) Tftntrika Kaula, who has passed 
through all preliminary ftchara*, it is said: “The wise man 
who through study of the Scriptures has realized the Truth 
discards them all as he who gathers paddy throws away 
the husk and straw.” Jnana derived from the Agamas leads 
to the Shabdabrahman. That which issues from viveka 
(discrimination) is the Parabrahman. There is no reali¬ 
zation (tattvajnana) with attachment to Vaidik and Agamic 
rites, however much these may be necessary as the 
preliminary means to its attainment.

« • * *

If the injunctions of the Sh&stra are to be rendered 
intelligible, certain general principles must first be under¬ 
stood. This is the necessary preliminary to the presenta¬ 
tion of the ritual facts. For in these principles lie their 
ultimate significance. The author, in his preface, very truly 
says: “ I feel it keenly myself how useless it is to follow a 
religious practice without understanding it.”

For those to whom the Indian way of thinking, expres¬ 
sion, imagery, allusions, and metaphor are unfamiliar, it is 
not always easy to follow at a first reading the author’s 
discursive argument. A summary of that argument in a 
Western and more ordered form would therefore be useful. 
The conclusion of our enquiry however, appears to be the 
fitting time for such a summary', even were there space 
available for it in this volume. The author’s preface, indi¬ 
cates the main lines on which he proceeds, which I here 
shortly state and amplify.

The previous portion of this Introduction states the 
circumstances under which Indian Shastra was at one time 
neglected where it was not misunderstood or condemned. 
Scepticism, unbelief, and then (according to orthodox views) 
heresy, passing under the name of “ reform,” had prevailed.

INTRODUCTION

99INTRODUCTION

99

The author, in the beginning of his Preface, rejoices to note 
a revival of true religion, but as an adherent of Tantra is 
grieved to observe that this Shastra had not, when he wrote, 
received its due share of attention. This was the more 
necessary in that it is the source of all Sadhana (practice) 
and of all Mantras and Yantras. Brahma-knowledge cannot 
be attained without self-purification, and for this the Tantra 
provides the only means in the Kaliyuga.

Doubtless there are (he writes) to be found nowadays 
some superior Vedantic persons 1 who are wont at all times 
to say that the portion of the Shastras which relates to 
worship and ritual practice (Karmakanda) is only for those 
who are devoid of knowledge. This is so; but the impli¬ 
cation that they have escaped this class has often but little 
foundation. They are doers of action (Karma), and as much 
affected by it as are others. The knowledge of which the 
Shastra speaks is not the metaphysical faculty (with its 
acquisitions) of the mind on the ordinary plane of j&grat 
consciousness, but is that spiritual experience the existence 
of which constitutes the fourth stage of turlya consciousness 
attained by successful yoga. Notwithstanding—and, in 
fact, because of—their philosophical disquisitions, such per¬ 
sons still belong to the dualistic world, and there is nothing 
to be ashamed of in that. We cannot blow it away with 
our breath, and why should we trouble to do so if it is 
alleged to be a mere nothing. It would seem as if modern 
Monism had, through dread of the dualistic world shrunk 
all its limbs, and was trying to find a place wherein to hide 
its head in an unhappily existing universe. 1 Monism (advaita- 
vftda) is doubtless true; but so also, necessarily, is the 
world of duality for that state of consciousness whence, 
indeed, it comes. In its own way, this world is as real as

1 See post.

100

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 See post.

100

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the Brahman whose Ilia 1 it is. What else is the world 
play of the Brahman but that show of duality which sur* * 
rounds us?

Worship, by its deiinition, involves the dualistic idea, 
and is itself necessary for every dualist, since it is, whether in 
its ordinary sense, or in that in which it is conceived as all 
action dedicated to and informed by spiritual purpose and 
intention,* the true and only expression of the Atrna to Itself 
on this plane. It is an essential verity that the Self alone 
knows the Self. But how may complete self-recognition be at¬ 
tained except the preliminary stages of Sftdhana and worship 
have been passed ? If the elect attain success along the path 
of knowledge (jn&na m&rga), it is because, through action 
and devotion in this and previous births, they have become 
competent for that path. What the persons to whom the 
author refers really mean is that such Karma as consists 
in worship and so forth must be abandoned, but that which 
is required for the service of wife and children may be 
retained by the possessors of Brahma knowledge. It is, 
however, only those who have truly acquired siddhi who 
are thereby released from the obligation of observing these 
rules of the Karmakanda, which help to produce it.* The 
Tantra does not, therefore, at the outset ignore this visible, 
palpable world. We must acknowledge and rightly tread 
this earth before the consciousness of the embodied Atma

1 “ Play." When understood, n very profound Indian concept, pro¬ 
ceeding on the ground that no other reason can be assigned for the 
world appearance thnn that which is inherent in the nature of the 
Brahinnn itself. See post.

* See the fine Mantra in MahAnirvilna Tantra. Ch. vi, vv. 178-181.* See the fine Mantra in MahAnirvilna Tantra. Ch. vi, vv. 178-181.

’ The results of sincere worship are patent. If, however, the cause 
of thU be sought, it will be found to lie in the psychological truth that 
such a worshipper grows akin to that which he worships—a truth 
which is expressed in the Indian notion of the blissful abodes, s&tnlpya, 
salokyu, and others. The Devatu becomes not only the content of, 
but the consciousness itself, of the Sudhoka.

INTRODUCTION

101

can be transformed into that other state of consciousness 
which reveals—for it is in fact—the unconditioned Atma 
Itself. But haste to know the Beyond should not blind us 
to that which is its present manifestation, constituting both 
the spacious field and material for Sadhana. He alone 
realizes the sweetness of the Divine Play “ who has plunged 
into non-dualistic truth after having churned the dualistic 
world,” which is Its expression to us.The Brahman is reached through Its universe-aspect. 
The world does not intervene, as though it were an obstacle 
hard to surmount between man and God, and set to frighten 
us. It is the wealth of the Shakti of Vishveshvari, 1 whom 
it reveals. The Tantra, therefore, takes into its arms, as if 
they were its two children, both Dualism and Monism, 
affording by its Sadhana and the spiritual knowledge 
generated thereby the means whereby their antinomies are 
resolved. It does not entertain the conceit that metaphysics, 
and still less science, however useful in their own sphere 
they may be to the full development of conditioned con¬ 
sciousness, can effect anything beyond it. Being but 
workings of the jfcgrat mind, they can never of themselves 
transcend the limits of those conditions which constitute 
it. The ultimate questions which that mind raises never 
receive an answer which it can verify whilst it remains in 
its conditioned state. The end of all Sadhana is the 
establishment of that fourth or higher state of conscious¬ 
ness, the existence of which is itself the answer to a question 
whioh is no longer put. The Tantra harmonizes Vedantik 
Monism and Dualism. Its purpose is to give liberation to 
the jiva by a method through which monistic truth is 
reached through the dualistic world. It immerses its 
sadhakas in the current of divine bliss by changing duality

‘ The Devi as Mistress of the Universe.

102

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA‘ The Devi as Mistress of the Universe.

102

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

into unity, and then evolving from the latter a dualistic 
play, thus proclaiming the wonderful glory of the Spouse of 
Paramashiva in the love-embrace of Matter (jada) and Spirit 
(chaitanya). Those who have realized this, move and yet 
remain unsoiled in the mud of worldly actions the mere 
touch of which is to others the cause of their perdition. 
Though resting and rocking upon the waves of the sangsara, 
they are not of it, but detached, and as it were the petals 
of some wind-rocked lotus. Shiva has therefore said : “ In 
the world some desire non-dualistic, others dualistic, know¬ 
ledge, but those who have known My truth have passed 
beyond Dualism and Non-Dualism.’’Sadhana, which is of three kinds—physical, verbal, and 
mental—must be accomplished by the body, senses, and 
intellect, according to present conditions of country, time, 
and person. These, however, are all now bad. India, 
which has for centuries eaten the bread of servitude to 
strangers, is to-day filled w T ith persons born of parents of 
different castes, foreigners, defiled people, and adherents of 
other religious faiths. Bad and filthy habits and prac¬ 
tices, oppression, license, and prostitution prevail. In 
the impure body, lust, anger, greed, pride, delusion, and 
envy, contend as upon a battle-field. Restless are the 
senses, and doubting the heart. The circumstances of the 
times render the carrying out of the Vaidik rites and discip¬ 
lines impossible. That Aryan life no longer exists in 
which every event, from the conception in the womb to the 
cremation of the body, was accompanied by Vaidik Mantra. 
A heavenly body which, through the control of the passions, 
has become a suitable vehicle for the development of 
Brahma knowledge according to Vaidik rules, is nowadays 
impossible of achievement. Foreseeing this, Shiva revealed 
the path of Tantra, the Sadhana of which is framed to meet 
the needs and circumstances of the Kaliyuga, and the

INTRODUCTION 103

•

varying temperaments and proficiency of those who live in 
it. If there be any doubt of its efficiency, actual practice 
will verify the reality of its claims.INTRODUCTION 103

•

varying temperaments and proficiency of those who live in 
it. If there be any doubt of its efficiency, actual practice 
will verify the reality of its claims.

It is not necessary that faith should precede Sadhana. 
This if sincerely performed, will produce faith by the effects 
it achieves in the mind of the Sadhaka. If the knowledge 
of the Brahman already exists, there is no use of Sadhana. 
It is in fact, the very want of such knowledge which renders 
all prayer and practice necessary. Further, whether one 
believes in it or not, medicine has the power to cure disease. 
It does not wait upon the intellectual recognition of that 
fact. In the same way Siddhi (success), the visible (prat- 
yaksha) fruit of the Sh&stra, is the result of its inherent 
potency. Who knows what will happen in the next birth ? 
That is the best of all philosophies which bears actual 
and visible fruit in this world. For reasons which the 
author explains the provisions of this Shastra act with 
speed and efficiency, so that fruit ripens on the T&ntriks 
tree before even blossoms appear on the Vaidiks tree. 
Owing, however, to the negleot of these practical principles, 
no useful results were being obtained from the renewal of 
the religious spirit beyond mere barren, pious velleities.

The spiritual ambitions of some were far too presump¬ 
tuous. Instead of attending to daily duty and worship, 
they were giving quite an incompetent attention to suoh 
extremely subtle and advanced subjects as Nirvikalpa 
Samadhi, Videhakaivalya, 1 and the like matters, which 
are in no way the concern of the vast bulk of men, who 
are making good progress, according to their state, if they 
worship God, and do not hate or cheat their neighbours. 
Others of greater spiritual competence, through neglect

1 That is, the higcst form of ecstasy: liberation from the gross 
body, etc. The author’s remarks are not without application to such 
Westerns as are prematurely attempting Yoga.1 That is, the higcst form of ecstasy: liberation from the gross 
body, etc. The author’s remarks are not without application to such 
Westerns as are prematurely attempting Yoga.

104

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

W104

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

W

or ignorance of the practical directions of the Tantra, 
which alone reveals the path, had lost their way. After 
pointing out that it is idle to suppose that knowledge 
of the truth can be acquired by simply reading the Yoga 
Vashishtha or Gita in the gloom and under the sway of 
the Kali age, the author, in an interesting passage, states 
that he has known many a spiritually disposed man who, 
under the influence of such a day-dream, “ has ended in 
becoming neither a believer nor an unbeliever, but a queer 
being, half man, half lion. “ By constant meditation on a 
misty nothing his mind and heart become such a vacuity 
that there is neither faith, reverence, devotion, nor love 
in them, but merely a bewilderment, with the inward 
lament, Alas ! I am lost.’ He continues “ In many places 
we have found such persons coming secretly to ask, 
‘ What means are there left to us ? ’ But their only difficulty 
is this—they want to know whether it is not possible for 
them to become Tantrik or Pauranik worshippers in secret 
whilst keeping up the show of the possession of Brahma 
knowledge, and without having publicly to wear the sacred 
crown lock, or thread, or to paint their body with the 
sacred marks. “ Is it not deplorable,” he asks, “ that a man 
should be in this condition, repenting at last in this fashion, 
at the close of his life, after having gone through all its use¬ 
less troubles ? ’’ Doubts concerning the Tantra, the Sadhana 
Shastra, arise from ignorance of its true character. Here is 
to be found the reason why recourse has not been had to it. 
Common people had, no doubt, much talked about the 
Shastra, and quarrelled over it. Some “ illiterate traders, 
crafty discoverers of magic, and thoughtless and starving 
interpreters of the Shastra,'' had busied themselves with 
it. But want of faith in the Shastra is becoming deeply 
rooted in people’s minds by the troubles into which they 
fall through failure to realize the truth, and by tlicINTRODUCTION

105

exposition to vulgar gaze of things a proper understanding of 
which can be acquired from Gurus only." 1 “ It is difficult," 
he says, “ to guess how many hundreds of simple-minded 
Sad bus have been, and are being, deceived by the dangerous 
temptations held up before them by these people." Want 
of understanding of the Shastra, together with actual abuses 
of its injunctions by some of its adherents, have led to the 
insults now levelled at it. Discussion and agitation and 
insult have, he says, to such an extent and with such con¬ 
stancy persecuted and wounded the community of Sadhaka-s 
that no one who is a son with a body of flesh and blood and 
strength can bear to see the sacred names of the Mother 
and Father of the universe slandered and abused in such 
manner. “ Whose heart,’’ he writes, “ is not pained to see 
the axe of bitter abuse laid at the root of siddhi and 
sadhana? The object of our effort is to remove this great 
pain in the heart of the community of Sadhakas. We hope 
that the sons of the Aryyan race will not hesitate to uphold 
the blissful standard of triumph in the assuring name of 
Her who destroys all Asuras.’’* From the Tantra alone, 
must be learnt its principles, the exposition of which he 
lays as his dakshina (offering) at the Lotus Feet of Dakshina 
(the gracious Devi).

Arthur Avalon

1 See post. One of the Causes of this degeneracy is referred to by 
the author later.

’ The demoniac enemies of the Devas and of Dliarma. Here also 
the earthly representatives of tho Asura spirit, who oppose religion.

.

TANTRA TATTVA 
PART I

INVOCATION 1

OBEISANCE TO THE ALL-GOOD MOTHER WHO IS THE 
SUPREME DEVATA

1

0 All-Good Mother !

I bow to Thee Who, sweet in the joyous play of the 
music of the flute, art the beloved of R&dhika ;*

Who appeareth as a sun illumining the three worlds 
with Thy effulgent rays ; 3

Who destroyeth the body of Rama in the right half of 
Thine own eternal Self; *Who appeareth as a sun illumining the three worlds 
with Thy effulgent rays ; 3

Who destroyeth the body of Rama in the right half of 
Thine own eternal Self; *

Who art in joyous play Heramba 1 the son, resting on 
the lap of Thine own Self as Ambika the Mother;

Who art the field of play for the desires of Mahiik&la:

and

Who giveth birth to the three worlds.

1 Mangalucharnna.

! The beloved Prakriti of Krishna in Goloka. “ He who is the 
First Male, the imperishable One, Hari. on Him yon have fixed your 
affection. Him whom all extol as the invisible, the unseen, the im¬ 
penetrable, you regard as your husband" (Prom Sugar). Here the 
Devi is saluted in Her incarnation as Krishna, the adored of the women 
of Vraja. Tantra says that in the Kali age, Krishna and Kali, Gopala 
and Kalika, are awake (jagrata)—that is, effective.

* See Lolita Snbasranuma, verse 3.

' Man and wife form one body, of which the right half is the male. 
Shiva destroyed K&ma, the Deva of Desire, with fire flashed from bis 
eye, when the latter sought to distract him from bis great Yoga.

The elephant-headed Ganesha. son of $hiva and P&rvatT.

110 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

2

May the Kaivalya fruit of Kulatattva 1 grow in the 
grove of my heart on that blossoming and verdant Creeper 
who, crowned by the beauty of the crescent moon, and more 
beautiful than the rain-clouds, and more playful than the 
wife of the rain-cloud , 3 rests on the soft, flowery bed of the 
breast of Mah&kala , 1 intoxicated with the sweetness of 
supreme bliss.

3

O my heart, seek the shelter of that blue cloud-like 
Lady Who saith “ Fear not," Whose restless curling hair 
makes lines of refulgent beauty, Whose graceful form is 
clothed with space/ Who charms the great Bhairava 4 with 
the soft and sweet delights of Her eyes, playful like two 
large bees/

44

I bow at the lotus feet of the Supreme Deviat those 
feet which give joy to the heart of Him Who is ever joyful,’ 
whose form is the mantra* * in the mahsiyantra,' and "Whose 
embodiment ** is the Tantra.

1 The liberation which is the fruit of T&ntrik Kulasiidhnna.

’ Latil: a terra for woman, who is thus thought of. embracing and 
dependent on man. as the creeper (lat&J clings to a tree. Thus, in the 
YogavAshistha. Gauri, the wife of Shiva, is described “ embracing him 
as the MAdhavT creeper clasps the young Amra tree, with her bosom 
like a cluster of blossom " (NirvAna Prakarana, chap, xviii.)

* That iB, the lightning. * 3biva.

That is. who is naked as both Kali and Shiva are represented to be.

* So the Yogav&shistha speaks of the eyes of Gauri " as resembling 
the clusters of black bees fluttering in the summer sky” (Nirvana 
Prakarana, chap, xviii.)

f “ Goddess ” or God in Its mother aspect as creatrix, nourisher.and 
ruler of the worlds.

Shiva, Her spouse ; as ore also His worshippers. The Tilntrik 
Gurus* names end with Ananda (joyful).

* See Introduction. DevT is SarvayantrAtmikii (LalitA, verses 68 
and 56).

" T&ttva. And so the Lalita (verse 58) addresses the Dev! ns 
Sarvatantrarfipu.

INVOCATION

111

$* See Introduction. DevT is SarvayantrAtmikii (LalitA, verses 68 
and 56).

" T&ttva. And so the Lalita (verse 58) addresses the Dev! ns 
Sarvatantrarfipu.

INVOCATION

111

$

Mother, in Thy two aspects of Shakti 1 and Sbftkta,* 
Thou art the source of both Agama and Nigama Shastras.* 
What Thou hast said as Pfirvatl * is Nigama, and what 
Thou hast said as Shiva is Agarna. Thou alone, in Thy 
two aspects of Shakti and Shftkta, art the nurse and nour- 
isher of both Agarna and Nigama. Thou alone, in Thy two 
forms as SfLdhikft and Sadhaka, koldeth in Thy bosom the 
Tantra Shastra, with its teachings concerning Shivatattva 
and Shaktitattva . 8 Again, it is Thou Who, in Thy aspects of 
Shakti and Shftkta, art the shelter and guardian of both 
Nigama and Agama. Whatever modes of Sftdhana 7 have been 
prescribed in the Tantra ShSstra are hidden in Thy bosom 
in Thy two aspects of Shiva and Shakti. It was for this 
I said, O Mother, that it is Thou Who giveth birth to, 
nourisheth, and guardeth Nigama and Agama in this world. 
But to destroy them, that even Thou canst not do. For 
the Tantra Shastra all full of mantra is but another form 
of Thyself. Were the Tantra destroyed, Thou also would 
be destroyed. Though Thou Art the destroyer of the 
universe, Thy power of destruction avails not against 
Tantra. So I say, O Mother, that the Nigama and Agama 
which are in Thee will never be destroyed! But destroy 
for once, O Mother, the Nigama and Agama which are in

* Power.

That is Shaktiinfin. or one who possesses power. He in whom 
She as Shakti inheres, though in reality both are one.

See Introduction.

' Spouse of Shiva.

’ That is, male and female practises of Srtdhana. and worshippers 
(see Introduction).See Introduction.

' Spouse of Shiva.

’ That is, male and female practises of Srtdhana. and worshippers 
(see Introduction).

‘ That is, the principles relating to the Shiva and Shakti aspects of 
the one Brahman. The Devi is in the form of .Shiva (Shivamurtih) 
for, as $hruti says; There is one Rudra hidden in all things. He is 
with Maya. He is Devi Herself, and not separate from Her.”

See Introduction.

112

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

me. Make cease my repeated coming in and going out 
of this world as Shakti, as Shakta, as Prakriti, as Purusha . 1

(Or it may be explained in another way). * O Mother, 
Thou alone, as Shakti and Sh&kta (as Prakriti and Purusha), 
art the creator of the Nigama and Agama 3 of Jlva/ It is 
by Thy law that Jlva,' through the union of Prakriti and 
Purusha, takes birth. It is Thou who, in Thy two aspects 
of Shakti and Shakta (mother and father ), 1 nourisheth 
and protecteth Jlva. Thou alone, O Mother, in Thy twin 
aspects of Shakti and Shakta, whereby Thou createth, and 
sustaiueth and guardeth the outgoing and incoming of the 
world, art the cause of the outgoing, sheltering, incoming, 
birth, sustenance, and preservation of Jlva.

By Thy Mercy, bring about the dissolution' of ray 
world 7 in these twin aspects of Thyself as Shakti and Shakta.

O Thou Who art Shakti-Shiva in Thy universal Pra¬ 
kriti-Purusha form,* grant me wisdom so that the beauty 
of the world-enchanting Mother may fill my eyes, my mind, 
ray heart, and the whole of my world . 7

Appear, O Mother, in Thy eternal form illumining the 
ten quarters.

* There if? a play on the words Nigama and Agama, as meaning not 
only forms of the Tantm bnt also the coming in and going out, the 
birth and death and rebirth, of the human Jlva, who is the manifesta¬ 
tion on the earthly plane of Prakriti and Pnrusha. — -

’ That is, the Author says that this Sanskrit “ shlokn " may bear 
(and probably was written to bear) another interpretation.

’ Birth and death.’ That is, the Author says that this Sanskrit “ shlokn " may bear 
(and probably was written to bear) another interpretation.

’ Birth and death.

' The embodied spirit, which is the Supreme Spirit, viewed under 
the apparently limiting conditions known as “ upiidhis."

The mother is always placed first, not " father and mother." as 
in English.

4 Pralaya, or the dissolution of the world, which completes the 
return movement to its cause.

That is, the world as it appears to the Author. For to each per¬ 
son the world is his own creation ; it is only imagined.

* See as to Prakriti and Purusha (Introduction).

INVOCATION

113

With the collyrium paint 1 * * * of wisdom grant glorious 
vision to the eyes of Thy son blind since birth.

Grant to me that wheresoever I may turn them, 
whether on earth, the waters, or on space, Thy beaute¬ 
ous form may make me forgetful of the appearance of 
the world.

Invocation *

Mother! in this world, all, before setting themselves to 
ought, make invocations of varying kinds.

But what invocation shall I make ?

I know of none but that to the feet of the all-good 
Goddess.

All that I am about to write in the Tantratattva is already 
known to Thee who knoweth the hearts of men.

Yantra,* Mantra,* and Tantra are not distinct from Thee.

But I, though in reality inseparate, wish to remain separate.*

As Thou in thy substance art Brahman , 5 * * 8 as Thou existeth 
in the form of the universe,* so art Thou full of play 
and danoing/

1 Anjaim. which is used to clear the vision.

* Mangalieharana — in Bengali: the preceding invocation being in 
Sanskrit, with Bengali translation and commentary.

1 See Introduction.

* By the will to separate life, which while itself a manifestation of 
the Devi, is overcome by Her as Mab&vidyft : and because thus only can 
he enjoy Her.1 See Introduction.

* By the will to separate life, which while itself a manifestation of 
the Devi, is overcome by Her as Mab&vidyft : and because thus only can 
he enjoy Her.

' Brahmamayl. In the Kurma Purina Shiva says: “ The supreme 
Shakti is in me. and is Brahman Itself. This MftyA is dear to me. by 
which this world is bewildered." Hence the Devi in the Lalitft is called 
*' SarvamobinI ” (all bewildering).

' Viijhvamayl.

: Nrityamayl and Lil&mayl. The world is the movement and play 
of the Supreme, os the Sutra says : Lokavattullia kaivalyam.

8

114

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

As Thou art all full of joy, will, consciousness and matter, 1

So, O Mother, I wish Thee to fill my mind, my eyes, my 
heart, with love.

Thou, too, art the power whereby it is in me to take 
Thy name.

It is Thine own song which Thou wilt hear.

In the love of Thyself Thou wilt dance.

What invocation then can I make ?

The food which I shall give Thee is already Thine. Of it 
my portion will be the sacred remnants only.

Thou wilt be intoxicated and forget Thyself in Thine 
own joy.

In the tranquil and solemn ocean of unity I shall swim, 
and raise therein the waves of duality which are the 
cry of “ Mother, Mother.’*

If it vexes Thee, drown me with a thrust of Thy foot, but 
then in so doing Thou must first raise Thy foot from 
the breast of Mah&k&la. 1

May be Thou wilt turn to Him with wrathful eyes, and 
say: “ Kill him.” But instantly I shall laugh outright 
and clap my hands, and say: “ This is Mother's.” * 
0 Dark Beauty, whose substance is a mass of con¬ 
sciousness ! * 0 Mother! show me for once the full1 Anandamayl, Ichcbh&mayl, Chinmayl and Mrinmayl. The Brah- 
man is Sat (existence). Chit (consciousness), and AnandA (bliss). Ichchha 
(will) is one of its §haktis, and. having created the visible world, the 
Brahman enters into it. Tat srishtvft tadevAnupravisbat. The Devi 
is (LalitA, verse 76* Kshetrasvarupa—that is, the field, which is known 
by the Soul (KshetrajnA) or matter. Linga Pr. says: " Devi becomes 
matter " (Kshetra).

’ Shiva. The Devi is represented as standing on §hiva, who is, as 
it were, a corpse, for he is bhokta (enjoyer) only, whilst she is karttri 
(actress).

This is a play on the word “ ma ” (mother) which, as a noun in 
the possessive case becomes in Bengali “ mar," which is also the verbal 
imperative " mar," meaning “kill."

‘ Cbidghana, as if Her body were a thickened mass of consciousness.

INVOCATION

115

play of wrath upon the splendour of Thy world- 
bewitching beauty.

Great is my desire, 0 Mother! to see the play of merciful 
flames reddening with wrath 1 in that face of Thine 
adorned with smiles.* *

Unless that desire of mine is fulfilled, Sadhana * becomes 
full of pain.

0 Thou who dispelleth fear from the heart of Thy Devotees 4

0 Thou who gladdenest the heart of Bhava *

Thou knowest (the secret of) Thy play.

Whether Thou makest me afraid or makest me laugh or 
weep, teach me to say “ Mother,” so that in doing that 
which is auspicious (Mangalacharana) or inauspicious 
(Amangalacharana) I may take shelter at the feet of Her 
Who is good (Mangala),* dancing and shouting:

“ Victory to the Mother.”

Victory to Kulendra Kulananda. 7

Viotory to Guru,* Kamadeva Tarkika. 1

1 The Devi is Krodb&k4r&nkushojjvalA (LalitA. verse 2). This is 
explained in chap, xviii of the second part.Victory to Kulendra Kulananda. 7

Viotory to Guru,* Kamadeva Tarkika. 1

1 The Devi is Krodb&k4r&nkushojjvalA (LalitA. verse 2). This is 
explained in chap, xviii of the second part.

’ The Devi is (Lalita. verse 69) cbaruhAsa (with beautiful smile) ; 
the saying “ The moon is thy sweet smile ” means that there is a certain 
state of consciousness (prabodha), which gives the highest bliss, and 
which should be learnt from the Guru.

* See Introduction.

' Fearlessness, at which the TSntrik aims, and which is the special 
gift of the Devi. The M&rkandeya Purftpa says: “When you ore 
remembered in times of difficulty, you take away all fear of all beings " 
She is BhayApaha (remover of fear). $bruti says (Tai. Dp., ii. 9-ij • 
“ By knowing the bliss of that Brahman, none fear anything."

1 The watery form of §biva in the Ashtamurtih.

* A play on the word “ mangalacharana," which also means “ in¬ 
vocation."

; Celebrated Tantrikas.

* See Introduction. See the Lalita (verse 187): " We adore the 
DevT who assumes the form of the Guru (Secret) in the form of secret 
knowledge beloved by her secret devotees, residing in the secret place " 
Hence she is GubyarApinl.

116

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Victory to KuladSnanda 1 and his disciples.

Victory to the Lord, the Supreme Guru.

Victory, Victory, Victory to Kjishnananda. 1 
Viotory to the most Supreme Guru.

Victory to Guru, the object of highest desire.

Viotory, Victory to Bhairava and Bhairavl.*

Victory, Victory to the accomplished SfLdhaka.’

Viotory, Victory to the Sftdhika who grants Siddhi. 4 
Viotory to Yantra, Victory to Tantra.

Victory, Victory to the Tantra Sh&stra.

Victory, Victory to the revealer of the Tantra;

Victory, Victory to the I§hvarl 1 of the Tantra.

Victory, Victory to Her who fulfils all desires.

Victory, Victory to’Her who is all-good.

Victory, Victory, Victory, Victory to the name “The 
all-good Mother of the world.”*

Celebrated T&ntrikas.Victory, Victory to Her who fulfils all desires.

Victory, Victory to’Her who is all-good.

Victory, Victory, Victory, Victory to the name “The 
all-good Mother of the world.”*

Celebrated T&ntrikas.

Shiva and Sbakti and their worshippers are so named. 
See Introduction.

Success (Introduction).

Feminine of Ishvara Lord ; the Devi the object of Tftntrik 
worship, who is ruler or promulgator of all Tantra* Sarvatantreshi and 
SarvatantrarQpA (Lalita. verse 68).

The Devi is the Holy Mother—Shrtm&ta-the first of Her 
thousand names in the Lalita Sahasrnnama. where its commentator 
Bhaskararaya says: The mother is usually called upon in times of 
sorrow, but our natural mothers are not able to remove the three forms 
of pain (tapatraya). Great men have said: ‘ Since I have had many 
thousands of births, I have had many mothers and many fathers I 
know not how many I may have in the future. 0 Treasure House of 
compassion, save me who am overpowered with fear, and have no other 
m £°.v ht> T ff* °®*“ of Sahara, full of disaster.' The greatest

h W l \ th u 0n > 0ne ti Wh0 Can remove the endless misery of 
existence. We should praise Her as the Mother, so that She mav be 
induced to show mercy to us, * e

VICTORY TO SHRl SHRl ISHVARl, THE ALL-GOOD DEV!

PREFACEVICTORY TO SHRl SHRl ISHVARl, THE ALL-GOOD DEV!

PREFACE

By the grace of the all-good Mother, the drum of Sanatana 
Dharma 1 seems to be again sending forth sweet and auspi¬ 
cious notes of triumph in Bharatavarsha,* * the land of 
Aryyas. Just as an intelligent man, who has a good 
knowledge of music, is naturally impelled, as it were, by 
some mantra on hearing the deep and soft sound of musical 
instruments to beat time at every measure; so also a child 
who has no knowledege of, but who loves and is charmed 
by, music, feels himself impelled to keep time at every 
measure by shaking his head, or moving his finger, or 
clapping his hands, or dancing, or by some other movement. 
Similarly, every scion of the Aryyan race in India, be he 
intelligent or not, is to-day intoxicated with the sweet 
music of the charming mantra of the widespread agitation 
on the subject of the San&tana Dharma, and is keeping 
time at every measure and dancing. In this great festival, 
in this anoient Durg& festival of India, astrology, philo¬ 
sophy, Smriti, Pura^a, Veda, Vedanta, and many other 
musical instruments are playing in the extensive courtyard 
of the universe. But we are grieved to find that the great

1 In tho present connection the phrase may be understood to refer 
to the eternal religion of the Hindus. As to Dharma, see Introduction.

* India.

118

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 In tho present connection the phrase may be understood to refer 
to the eternal religion of the Hindus. As to Dharma, see Introduction.

* India.

118

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

instrument of the Tantra SbAstra, in which all other 
instruments are included, on which all other instru¬ 
ments depend, and which is the sole source of all 
vantras 1 * * and mantras, is to-day silent. We know that 
the proper place for the playing of this instrument is not 
a courtyard, but the interior of the temple of Tantra 
Shastra, which is full of mantras; as also that the proper 
place for its discussion is not at a meeting or by society at 
large, but in the heart of the accomplished Sadbaka. But 
what can we do ? We are players on the outside. So long 
as we do not hear the solemn sound of sweet mantras from 
the accomplished mouth of the S&dhaka within the temple 
as also the triumphant sound of the bell in his hand, so 
long do we fail to make out what music to play—the music 
of ablution, the music of ftrati,* the music of sacrifice,* 
or the music of bhoga. 4 The discordant noise of musical 
instruments in the mantra-less oourtyard outside the seat 
of worship is the sole cause of all the disorder which now 
besets the work of preaching dharma, even in spite of so 
much agitation, discussion, speech-making, and interpreta¬ 
tion. These musical instruments observe neither time 
nor measure. Perhaps at the place of worship the rite 
of great ablution has not yet been begun; but in the 
courtyard outside the music of the final oblation in homa* 
is commencing. It is deeply to be regretted that the very 
community which trembles with fear, like a person suffer¬ 
ing from constitutional fever, at the very mention of the 
rules of practice, is to-day constantly busying itself with

fchA* nf e <fm In ^ 0du ^ i ? n ' ‘“Prints of the Shri VidyA Tantra. and

that of SmashAna Kali appear elsewhere in the book.

Arati (waving of light before the image).fchA* nf e <fm In ^ 0du ^ i ? n ' ‘“Prints of the Shri VidyA Tantra. and

that of SmashAna Kali appear elsewhere in the book.

Arati (waving of light before the image).

4 VaU * ' Offering of food. * MahAanAna.

The sacrifice in fire (see Introduction).

PREFACE

119

such extremely subtle and secret matters as nirvikalpa- 
samAdhi, samadhi, 1 * * * videha kaivalya,* supreme love, and 
nirvAna, liberation. The result is that this untimely and 
timeless music has come to be of no purpose and impossi¬ 
ble of performance.

In fact, the sight of this outward bustle of science and 
philosophy made by the community devoid of siddhi and 
sadhana* reminds us of our village (bArwAri) pUjA.* Just 
as the condition of the pQja makes one fear lest in course 
of time even the image itself should be dispensed with, 
so the condition of sooiety to-day makes one afraid lest 
the talk of siddhi and sadhana should one day disappear 
from the Aryyan Society. Let us, however, console our¬ 
selves with the knowledge that, even if it were possible 
for the sun and moon to cease to move, it is impossible 
for this pQja 5 to become a village pQjA. Although it is 
the property of common people, it is always uncommon; 
and, although it is always uncommon, every member of 
the Aryyan Society has always a perfect right to it as an 
independent sAdhaka. In this pQjA there is no priest 
(purohita). Its object is not self-deception, but sadhana 
for the self and acquirement of siddhi. In this temple 
of 6adhana the worshippers are not* unwilling to repeat 
the mantra on whioh we depend, but are doubtful about 
its efficacy. They are not incapable of repeating the 
mantra, but are apprehensive lest it be of no effect.

1 Highest form of " ecstasy " (see Introduction).

’ Kaivalya, in which the Jlva becomes free from the trammels of 
the body (see Introduction).

’ See Introduction.1 Highest form of " ecstasy " (see Introduction).

’ Kaivalya, in which the Jlva becomes free from the trammels of 
the body (see Introduction).

’ See Introduction.

' A pQja carried out by subscription, in which often more attention 
is paid to the accompanying amusements than the pQjft (worship) itself, 
which is their justification.

* That is, Siddhi and Sadhana.

* As in the village pQjft, where the worship is left to the purohita.

120

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

There is, therefore, a hope that if this doubt can be dis¬ 
pelled and this apprehension removed, a day will soon 
come when the ten quarters of India will resound with 
the united voice of innumerable Aryyas, loudly declaring:

There is no Shastra superior to Tantra, no guru superior 
to Tantra, no path superior to Tantra, no method superior 
to Tantra. Emboldened by this hope, we make this 
novel entry into the field of work, depending on the 
community of S&dhakas for support.

It may be said that when doubts have arisen about the 
Sadhana Shastra, it is no easy matter to remove them. 
We, too, do not deny this. But we say that the fact that 
it is not easy does not make it altogether impossible. It 
is happy news that doubts have arisen. When thirst 
has appeared, one need not be anxious about getting 
water. An unfathomable lake full of water to the brim 
lies in front. One has only to come down to drink of the 
water. Having before us the well-arrayed presence of 
the Tantra Shastra full of the neotar of eternal truth,* 
we need not be anxious about dispelling the doubts of 
the Aryyan mind. It is only necessary to advance slowly 
in the path of truth. It is a matter for regret that, 
although thirst has appeared and the lake lies in front, it 
has yet become necessary to advertise the fact and to 
preach in order to induce people to drink the water. 
Advertisement is. however, in fact, required, not so much 
in order to induce people to drink the water, but that the 
path may be cleared.There is now much discussion, dispute, and quarrel 
among common people over the Tantra Shastra, and the 
path which leads to the inner truth has become very

The Tantra which, being a practical Shfistra, is essentially 
concerned with Sadhana, as to which see Introduction.

’ Tattva.

PREFACE

121

difficult, very tortuous, full of doubts and thorns. These 
thorns and doubts are not ascribable to any fault in the 
lake itself, but are due to want of traffic thereto.

Formerly, in the glorious days of happiness and good 
fortune of Bharatavarsha, Aryyan sadhakas were wont 
to enjoy, even in their homes, the blessing of drinking 
the nectar of truth * 1 granted to them by their gurus. It 
was not then necessary that they should bathe in a place 
of pilgrimage s for the purpose.

Under the remorseless pressure of the wheel of destiny 
such days are now past for Bharatavarsha. One by one 
the crest-gems of the race of sadhakas have found rest at 
the lotus-feet of liberation J of Her who is all-merciful. 
For want of competent gurus the community of disciples 
is lamenting in deep darkness. We know not when 
again will the I§hvari 1 of the world illumine the hearts of 
devotees with the brilliant light of Her merciful glances; 
when again the blind children of the world, who now 
live at a distance from their Mother, will open their eyes 
of consciousness, and, immersed in the effulgence of the 
beauty of Her whose substance is consciousness, get up 
on the lap of Anandamayi,* crying with an overpowering 
joy, “Mother, Mother”; nor when again shall we hear 
the words, “The tie of the heart is broken; all doubts are 
dispelled and all karraaa c are destroyed for him who has 
seen Him is higher than the highest.”It is true that the path of Tantra has become full of 
thorns, but if, on hearing this terrible news, we sit down 
for ever to ponder on it with fearful hearts, the thorns will 
never be removed. If you wish to follow a path, you must 
take your stand on it. The thorns do not belong to the

Tattva. ’ Tlrtha. 1 KaivaJya.

1 The Devi Mother and Mistress of the world.

1 The ever-Blissful Mother. * Effects of action (see Introduction).

122

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

path, but have come to it from outside. Do not be 
afraid. The dry and worthless thorns will be broken 
and ground to dust under the heroio tramp of the feet of 
sadhakas. 1 Fearing lest you should not believe in our 
words, we shall, with our eyes fixed on the feet of s&dhakas, 
be to them their shoes.' We care not if we be cut, torn, 
wounded, and lacerated all over. We have a strong desire 
to reach the path of truth, holding the feet of s&dhakas 
to our heart, and to sink for once in the vast lake of the 
nectar of Tantra. We hope that the community of accom¬ 
plished s&dhus J and s&dhakas will not fail to fulfil this 
desire on our part.During the progress of the nineteenth century many 
Tantras have been printed and translated. Of these, the 
compilation made by Mahatma R&matoshana Bhatta- 
charyya under the title of “ Pr&natoshipi," and published 
by Prana Krishna Biswas Mahodaya, is a work which 
really gladdens the heart of the world of S&dhakas. Next 
the Aryyan Society has been greatly benefited by the 
publication, by Rasika Mohana Chattopadhy&ya Mah&- 
shaya, of the Tantrasara with a translation, and of many 
other Tantras. A faint idea of many a T&ntrik principle 
has thus been reflected in the mirror of the hearts of 
sadhakas. But, unfortunately, these indistinct impres¬ 
sions have themselves become a source of terror arising 
from deep doubts. A study of the Shastra has served 
rather to make the intricate bonds of the heart stronger 
than to break them. Still, it seems to have been a source 
of great good; for, from the doubts it has raised, there 
has to-day appeared in society a spirit of inquiry into

| Those who practise Sadhan& (see Introduction): devotees.

’ As the shoe comes between the road and the feet and protect, 
them, so the Author will come between Sfidhakas and the thorns to 
protect them. . g^y men .

PREFACE

123

shastric (scriptural) truths. With the exception of the 
Pr&riatoshiijl and the Tantrasara, all works which have 
been published on the subject of Tantra are but thorns 
on the path of truth.123

shastric (scriptural) truths. With the exception of the 
Pr&riatoshiijl and the Tantrasara, all works which have 
been published on the subject of Tantra are but thorns 
on the path of truth.

Three classes of vipers are riding together over the 
Tantra Shastra—namely, a number of short-sighted and 
illiterate traders, a few crafty discoverers of practices of 
magic, 1 and some thoughtless and starving spiritual inter¬ 
preters of the Shastra. Through them society is to-day 
going down to perdition. It is difficult to guess how 
many hundreds of simple-minded sfidhus have been, and 
are being, deceived by the dangerous temptations held 
up before them by these people. Want of faith in the 
Shastra is becoming deeply rooted in people’s minds by 
the troubles into which they fall through failure to realize 
the truth, and by the exposition to vulgar gaze of things 
a proper understanding of which can be acquired from 
gurus only. This want of faith cannot be eradicated by 
anything but the weapon of Shastra. One must stand 
at the door of Shastra in order to dispel doubts about it. 
From the Tantra alone must be learnt what the Tantra 
has said about the principles of Tantra. 2

Secondly, as regards worship," many people think that 
faith must precede practice. But we do not think this 
possible, particularly in the case of those most hidden 
and obscure mysteries about Tantrik worship to which 
we find reference made. The intellect is powerless to 
understand why the Shastra has enjoined their perform¬ 
ance. Nothing but disgust, hatred, disrespect, and irrever¬ 
ence can find place in the conclusion at which man’s erring 
intellect then arrives. Not to speak of matters which 
are unknown to common people, even amongst such things

1 Indraj&la.

’ Tantra-tattva.

1 Up&sana.

124

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Indraj&la.

’ Tantra-tattva.

1 Up&sana.

124

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

as are of common knowledge, and thus well known to them, 
concerning Shatchakra 1 alone tbei’e are innumerable inter¬ 
pretations, ideas, and experiences.* * Most of those who, 
in the rush of the daily novel religious waves of the 
twentieth century, lose their footing and know not what 
to do, nowadays take the name of Kula-kupdalinl,’ in order 
to establish themselves on firm ground.

Besides this, there is a class of yogis * devoted to the 
Upanishads and enlightened by the Yogava§hishtha, who 
often say that there is really a lake of clear water within 
the body, and that lotuses blooming in them form the 
Shatchakra ! In sorrow the S&dhaka and poet R&maprasada 
has said:

“ 0 mind, what searoh do you make for Her ? Mad¬ 
man ! She must be contemplated with feeling in a dark 
room. Can She be caught without such feeling ? "

But, with a loud voice intoxicated with the drink of 
the honey of lotuses he has sung:

“ In the bed of lotuses Kali, in the form of a female swan 
(hangs!), plays amorously with the male swan (hangsa).’’

It has become difficult to bear in silence all the insult to 
which we see the Shastra subjected nowadays. Moreover, 
there is a class of pure sattviks * who every now and then 
say that Kali is “butcher Kali”,* that Tantra means 
“licensed grog-shop"; 7 that Shiva wrote the Tantra

The centres in the body (see Introduction).

* Pratyaksba siddbi.

' IrtniMlT WhOSe SCat ' 6 ^ the M0,ftdhfira Chakra (see Production).

•' <“• Introduction).

* Because animal sacrifice is made to this Devata.

Tantrfk bl refeTeDC ? £ in *“se of wine in the ritual of the

ShLtric he abuse of that rituttl in disobedience to

to HeU n,Unct,ODB - Intemperance, as the Shy&marahasya says, leads

PREFACE 125

Sh&stra under the influence of the fumes of g&nja, 1 and 
so forth.to HeU n,Unct,ODB - Intemperance, as the Shy&marahasya says, leads

PREFACE 125

Sh&stra under the influence of the fumes of g&nja, 1 and 
so forth.

We have no time to pay any heed to the words of these 
Non-Aryyas. Goats begin to cry as soon as the drum 
sounds the music of the Durga ptija festival, but that does 
not do away with the PQja. 1 Good deeds, of which the 
Dakshayajna J is an example, will be taken care of by Vlra- 
bhadra * * himself. We know that there are reasons for saying 
some hard things, but how are Kali or Shiva or Tantra to 
blame ? The pity of it all is that those who abuse the 
Tantra in this way are themselves initiated in Tantrik 
mantra. But what can we do ? It is the nature of unchaste 
women to live on the means of their husbands, and at the 
. same time to sing the praises of their paramours. We are 
not sorry to see the downfall of those whose nature is such. 
What we are sorry for is that the discussions and agitations 
oarried on by these wicked people, and their example, con¬ 
stantly persecute and wound the community of sadhakas 
to such an extent that it is almost on the point of being 
destroyed. Who that is a son with a body of flesh and blood 
and possessed of strength, can bear to see the sacred names 
of the Mother and the Father of the universe slandered 
and abused in such a manner ? Whose heart is not pained 
to see the axe of bitter abuse laid at the roots of siddhi 
and sadhana ? The object of our effort is to remove this 
great pain in the heart of the community of S&dhakas. We 
hope that the sons of the Aryyan race*will not hesitate to 
uphold the blissful standard of triumph in the assuring 
name of Her who destroys all Asuras.®

1 Hemp (Cannabis indiea).

1 At which they are sacrificed. * See Introduction.

' The Great Bhairava produced by Shiva to destroy Daksha's 
sacrifice.

* Demons.

126

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Hemp (Cannabis indiea).

1 At which they are sacrificed. * See Introduction.

' The Great Bhairava produced by Shiva to destroy Daksha's 
sacrifice.

* Demons.

126

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Thirdly, we often find that of 8uch members of the 
Aryyan Society as have been recently initiated, or are 
willing to be initiated, many are aimlessly moving about 
along various paths. Of some, perhaps, the gurus are 
dead; some have taken initiation from woman gurus; 
some are sorry for the incompetence of their Gurus; some 
are disciples of sanyasis, who have gone away to distant 
places where it is difficult to go to them ; some have only 
sons of gurus, who, too, are of immature age, ill educated, 
or uninitiated. In the case of some, the families of gurus 
have died out; and some, again, who have seen the dif¬ 
ferent views of different munis 1 in the works of Tantra 
Shastra printed with translations and commentaries 
are, as it were, counting one by one the waves of a vast 
sea. Every one says: “Do this,” “Don’t do this.” 
But if I ask why I should do this, he becomes dumb. I 
do not disbelieve the words of the Shastra, nor do I say 
that it will be useless to follow them. I only want to 
know what it is that I do. Unfortunately, there is no 
means of my knowing it. Such a destructive thunder has 
fallen on the high head of the present high society that 
not only people are ignorant that the mfllamantra* of 
the Ishtadevata,* the DevatS of one’s worship, has a 
meaning, but many are even averse to believing that it 
may have one. It might not have mattered whether I 
know the meaning or not, had not the Shastra itself, on 
the authority of \fhich we base our practices, or the little 
of them we follow, said that it was useless and improper 
to follow a practice without knowing and understanding it.

In the Kulftraava Tantra it is said: “0 Spouse of 
Shambhu! fruitless are the worship and all the acts of 
those who do not know the true nature of Devati, theIn the Kulftraava Tantra it is said: “0 Spouse of 
Shambhu! fruitless are the worship and all the acts of 
those who do not know the true nature of Devati, the

1 Sages (satirically). * The principal Mantra of a Deva.

* Deity of the worshipper.

PREFACE 127

principle 1 underlying yantras,* * and the shakti * of man 
tras.”

I cannot disbelieve the great saying of the Sbastra, for 
how can I ignore the prohibitions of the Shastra whose 
commands I have to obey ? Next I see it proved in my 
own case that it will be useless to follow a practice without 
knowing and understanding it. How can I disbelieve 
that of which I myself am a witness ? I feel it keenly 
myself how useless it is to follow a religious practice with¬ 
out understanding it. The prohibition, therefore, must be 
acted upon, and in order to do so the thing must be known 
and understood. I have, however, already stated what 
the condition is of those from whom I am to know and 
understand it. Owing to these circumstances, it has 
become necessary to find out a means by which people will 
be prevented from giving up practice through want of 
understanding, trampling, through want of knowledge, on 
the Svamantaka gem which adorns His head, and think¬ 
ing that daily worship and the like are so much waste 
of labour. It is necessary that I should have firm faith 
in the doctrine, that the truth which I have come by 
is unerring whether or not I can act according to it, 
and that the path which I have taken is the broad royal 
road to the seat of the Queen of Queens 4 of the universe. 
It is after a due consideration of the opportunities which 
the elements of time, place, and person may at present 
offer for finding out a means of effecting this that we 
undertake this great pious act * of expounding the prin¬ 
ciples of Tantra. This pious act is no doubt higher than 
the highest, and we are more insignificant than the most

1 Tattva. * Worshipped diagrams (see Introduction).1 Tattva. * Worshipped diagrams (see Introduction).

* The potency of the mantra.

' Rajrftjeshvari. 1 Vrata (see Introduction).

128

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

insignificant. It makes one laugh to think of a RajasQya * 1 * 
Yajna in a beggar's house. But there is no help for it. 
One who is hungry cannot afford to be ashamed of eating. 
In particular one who stands on this path should naturally 
be devoid of shame; for He who is the crest-gem of shame¬ 
less people and clad with space* is the Revealer of the 
Tantra Shastra. In this path there is no cause for shame 
in being a beggar. He who has shown the path by per¬ 
forming this RajasQya Yajna is Himself the crest-gem of 
beggars. In spite of his being the King of Kings 3 of the 
three worlds, He is eternally a beggar at the door of Anna- 
pQrofi,,* the Mother of the universe. Being the meanest 
of the servants of such a world-renowned Beggar-Master, 
why should I be ashamed of begging? Begging is the 
tribute which we have to pay to our King. The funda¬ 
mental principle of our worship is to worship the Mother 
with alms received from Her (to worship the Ganges with 
Ganges water). If one is to be called a beggar or to be 
ashamed for this, then we do not know who is not a beggar 
and who will not be ashamed. The three worlds beg, and 
there is none but that Jagaddhiitrl 6 to give alms. Directly 
or indireotly, She is the only hope. We, therefore, trust 
that Mother Annapflraa, who dwells in the hearts of all 
Sfidhakas, and is the Intelligence who works the jiva-instru- 
ment,* will fill this begging bowl of ours with remnants 
of Her food. By the blessing of the Father of the universe 
and the grace of the Mother of the universe, even in such

A great sacrifice performed in nncient times by conquering Kings. 
’ Shiva is represented naked. 1 Rajrftjeshvara.

^The Devi bountiful who dispenses food, and who presides at

1 The Devi as supporter of the universe.^The Devi bountiful who dispenses food, and who presides at

1 The Devi as supporter of the universe.

* Jlva-yantra : the jlva, or embodied spirit, is Her instrument.

PREFACE

129

a destitute bouse as we possess, the final dakshipa 1 of the 
r&jasQya of Tantra Tattva will be placed at the lotus'feet 
of Dakshina (the gracious Devi).

Shri Shiva Chandra 
Sharmma Vidyarnava

Kashi (Benares),

1811, Saka Era,

The month of Falguna.

' Presents offered to the officiating Brahmanaa at the conclusion 
of a rite.

CHAPTER I

APPEARANCE AND APPLICABILITY OF THE 
TANTRA SCRIPTURE

Necessity for the Scripture

The living together of many persons in one family is called 
the Sangsara. 1 He is a praiseworthy Kartta,* who in the 
performance of his family duties, justly makes all members 
of the family the objects of an equal care, and of both 
affection and punishment. Though the householder has 
equal care and affection for all, yet punishment is properly 
awarded to him who strays from the right path and thinks 
the Kartta is partial. This is household morality in man’s 
small kingdom, the house. This morality, when applied 
to a kingdom, is called statesmanship. In short, whenever 
equality is to be kept among a number of people living in 
union, the King must, as all admit, make provision both 
for the contentment and punishment of his subjects. 
Whether these understand it or not, the King must, if he 
would preserve the kingdom, take hold of this rod of states¬ 
manship which is both stern and sweet. What Indian is

' The Sangs&ra is the coming and going, the cycle of birth, action, 
death, and rebirth: the world in which all live who have not, by know, 
ledge of the self (Atmajnana) and the extinction of the will to separate 
life, attained liberation (Moksha). Brahman is the root of the eternal 
Asvattha (fig) tree, with roots above and branches below (Hath. Up., 
iii. 2. 1). It also means in Bengali a family.

' The head of the joint family in a Hindu household.' The head of the joint family in a Hindu household.

132

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

there who, living in this portion of the Empire which is 
under the sole sovereignty of the present Queen Empress 1 
(Rajrajeshvarl) will deny this ? You and I are each the King 
of a small family kingdom. It iB of such combined king¬ 
doms that the Empress of India is to-day Rajrajeshwarl. 
Again, She 1 is the Rajrajeshvarl of the three worlds, 1 
whose kingdom is the countless millions of vast worlds. 
She is the Queen without a second of the kingdom of 
the universe, and Sh&stra 4 is the name of her universe¬ 
controlling and unfailing will. You and I have not the 
capacity to understand the principles which govern the 
profound statecraft of the kingdom of eternal worlds which 
belong to the Empress of the universe. You and I are 
in this more insignificant than the most insignificant, 
illiterate, and ignorant people. Our sole capacity is to 
obey Her commands. They alone understand the world- 
play * * of Brahmamayl, 4 who, by the mercy of Mah&vidyft 
and the grace of Brahmavidya, 7 have been able to make 
their way through the mass of dualistic * darkness thick

1 The book was written under the reign of Queen Victoria, whose 
name is retained to give point to that which follows.

’ The Devi (" Goddess ") or God in Its mother aspect as creatrix, 
nourisher, and ruler of the worlds (see A. and E. Avalon’s “ Hymns to 
the Goddess ").

* The Triloka, Earth (Bhuh), the upper world (Bhuvah, Svah, and 
others), and the underworlds (PAtAla).

' Scripture.

* The world is the play of the Brahman. As the Sutra, says 
LokavattulIlA Kaivalyam.

* The Devi who is one with Brahman (see ante, note 2, and 
Introduction).

r The Devi as destroyer of ignorance and illusion (AvidyA), which 
veils the Reality. Both MAyA and VidyA reside in the Lord as His 
Sbaktis, like shade and light of the sun, and are the respective causes 
of bondage and liberation.' Dvaita is that which sets the world and the embodied spirit 
(Jlva), apart from the supreme spirit (Parabrahman), as opposed to 
Advaita which proclaims their unity.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE 138

with illusion,’ and to reach the ultimate truth of monistic 
doctrine.' You and I have come to this world with the 
duty cast upon us of advancing only along that path 
which is marked by their footprints. As the courtiers 
of a royal court are not the authors, but merely the 
interpreters, of statecraft, so the truth-seeing Rishis * are 
not the originators of the Sadhana Shastra, 4 but its 
remembrancers merely/ It is not a Shastra marred bj' 
mistakes, errors, and deception. Bhagav&n, the creator 
of all ereatures and knower of all hearts, is its revealer. 
He in whom mistakes are mistaken, in whom error is 
erroneous, and in whom deception is itself deceived: 
Bbagavatl,* the supporter of the world is its hearer. 
Xarada and other Rishis learnt the truth 7 from Brahma' 
and other Devas.' Vashishtha, Vishvamitra, Gautama, 
and other Gurus 0 learnt in their turn from the latter. 
It is these alone who are the courtiers of the royal 
court of the Empire of the Universe. You and I, the 
subjects of this Empire of the Universe, are merely 
the servants of that statecraft in the form of Shastra 
which has been promulgated by them. They have had

1 Avidya.

* Advaita.

’ Inspired seers, by whom the Shastra were “ seen "—that is. to 
whom it was revealed.

* Sadhana is the means employed to attain an end; in this case the 
ultimate aim of Being (see Introduction). The Tantra is pre-eminently 
a practical Sadhana Shastra.

* The Author of Shastra is the Brahman (God). The Rishis merely 
heard and handed it down.

* Feminine of Bhagavan—the Devi.

’ That is. the Shastra.

.. ’The creative Deva of the M Trinity" (Trimfirti), who must be 
distinguished from the Supreme Brahman in the neuter voice.

* “ Shining ones," or “ Gods " (see Introduction).

14 Spiritual teachers.

134* “ Shining ones," or “ Gods " (see Introduction).

14 Spiritual teachers.

134

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the privilege of being near the person of the King, and 
have thus had an opportunity of observing with their 
own eyes the principles which, even in the smallest 
matters, govern His actions. They have, with bowed heads, 
admitted the unerring truths of Shastra. To look, then, 
askance at these truths, to attempt airily, without reach¬ 
ing the greatness or acquiring the knowledge of the 
Rishis, to set them aside is just as if one were to try to 
blow away the Himalayas—an act which is ridiculous 
enough to make the intelligent laugh, the mad man dance, 
and which is likely to bring a violent death to the foolish 
Non-Aryya. x

Understanding of the Scripture

I hear you say: “ Take me there; I will examine with 
my own eyes whether the thing be true or not.” But the 
answer is that it becomes him alone to say this who has 
eyes to see and feet to walk, and simply desires a knowledge 
of the path. As for me, I have neither eyes nor feet nor 
knowledge of the path, but only a demoniac, indomitable 
egotism, which prevents me from seeing what I have, and 
what I have not. Still, I know not how kind She is. Lame 
as I am, the Mother® has carried me through the journey 
of eighty-four lakhs of births, 3 fraught with the greatest of 
difficulties, and has placed me in an Aryyan gotra 4 in 
Aryyavarta, in the land of Bharata, 4 where freedom has

' The Hindus are properly called Aryya, and their country Aryya- 
varta.

* The Devi who is called Ambika and §hrimat4.

‘ The previous births, as inorganic things, aqueous animals, creep¬ 
ing animals, birds, beasts, and man, through which the soul evolves. 
Cf. Empedocles apud Diog. Leart., viii. 77.

1 Lineage. * * India.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

1351 Lineage. * * India.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

135

its fullest play. But how hard is the wheel of ill fortune! 
The moment I fall from the lap of the Mother,' that very 
instant my head is made restless with the waves of freedom. 
Now, I would rather sink in that sea of freedom whioh I 
love so much, and would rather die than believe that I am 
dying without ocular proof of it.

You may say, “ My path leads to death, but, unless I 
die, how can I know that that path of mine is bad and that 
yours is good ? This is all that I can say about acquaintance 
with the path.” Even he who is prepared to serve egotism 
with such deadly resolve, the ever* *merciful Ilishis call with 
a sweet tone softened with love, and say: “You are not 
asked to believe as a favour. Practise, and you will see for 
yourself that Medicine, Astrology, and Tantra produce 
visible results at every step.”* Lame though I am, I thus 
reach the place I sought by the blessing of the Most High ; 
and by the grace of Shastra, unbelieving even as I am, the 
path is made known to me. But still my wants are not 
supplied. Without eyes, how can I see ? How can I look 
for the path? Instantly the Shastra says: “Jlva,* even 
though you are blinded by the darkness of ignorance, seek 
shelter at the feet of the Guru . 4 He with sticks smeared 
with the brilliant paint* of wisdom will open your celestial 
eyes.” The Shastra says: “By whom the eye is opened.” 
But I hear: “ By whom the eye is rooted out .” 4

1 Literally, “ the skirt of the dress " of the mother, to which little 
children cling. '•

* A common saying establishing the praty&ksha and experimental 
character of the Shastra, which is primarily concerned not so much 
with speculation as with fact.

* The embodied spirit, here the human being. ' Spiritual director.

1 Collyrium, applied with stick to the eyes, which is believed to 
clear the vision.

* A play on the words " unmllitam " and “ unmillitam."

136

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Collyrium, applied with stick to the eyes, which is believed to 
clear the vision.

* A play on the words " unmllitam " and “ unmillitam."

136

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

How may one avert this misfortune? What shall I 
do with this egotism which makes me feel ashamed to say 
to the Guru: “ I do not understand.” It was for this I 
said that there is no peace until this indomitable egotism 
ceases. It is useless to take a Guru if you have yourself 
understood. But if you have not, why should you be 
ashamed to admit it ? Perhaps you will say: “ Explain 
first, and then I shall believe.” Why all this useless 
importunity? If you think that you can show that the 
Shastras are mistaken by dint of your own intelligence, 
and that you will destroy it with the sharpened arrows of 
reasoning, argument, and judgment, then you must have 
made good progress indeed! This Shastra is neither 
philosophy nor science. It is the Sadhana 1 which leads 
to Siddhi . 1 It must be practised as well as understood. 
By practice, even though without understanding, it will be 
made plain. But no amount of understanding without 
practice will effect this. A Mahamahopadhyaya pandit * * 
who has conquered the whole world with his learning is, if 
devoid of practice, not the equal of the meanest of inseots 
in the domain of Sadhana. On the other hand, should a 
great fool prove himself to be a faithful devotee attached to 
Sadhana, he is considered by Shastra to be one in a thousand. 
It has been said: “ Perhaps but one man in a thousand 
strives for Siddhi, and amongst a thousand of those who 
strive, maybe only one may be found who knows me truly.” 
It is not the hero of intellect, who is not also the hero of 
austere practices/ who wins the battle of Sadhana. Just

1 Art and practice (see Introduction).

J Siddhi means success generally. It includes the eight lesser great 
powers, such as dominion over the elements, and the great Siddhi or 
liberation (Mukti) (see Introduction).J Siddhi means success generally. It includes the eight lesser great 
powers, such as dominion over the elements, and the great Siddhi or 
liberation (Mukti) (see Introduction).

* A title of honour given to learned pandits.

‘ Tapas (see Introduction).

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

137

as all the efforts of a great charioteer who has with him an 
army complete in all its four component parts 1 is useless 
if he be himself unarmed, so all the learning of a pandit of 
mighty intellect is but a vain thing if he bo not equally 
possessed of the power which arises from S&dhana. Who¬ 
ever with the resolve, “ I will accomplish my object or die 
in the effort,’' has jumped into a fire, to him, a crest-gem 
amongst devotees, the Shastra gives shelter in its secure 
arms. If to-day all men had the strength of faith of Kama- 
deva Tarkika, hero most powerful in the field of austerity, 
or of Ganesha Upadhy&ya, whose life was one long surrender 
to the mother; or of Ramaprasada,* * who was, as it were, a 
bee intoxicated with the honey of the lotus feet of Shakti , 3 
should we in that case have had to sing in Tantra Tattva* 
the song of all these evil designs (against the Shastra). 
But the day is now lost to us. That unflinching faith in 
Tantra, the Sadhana-Shastra, has been shaken.

Doubts concerning this Scripture

It is said : “ We have the Vedas the Shastra of prayer. 
Wliy, then, has the Tantra Shastra again been put for¬ 
ward ? ” This is the first point of doubt in the present-day 
society of men vain of their education. What appears to 
them as a matter of still greater doubt and the mere raving 
of a madman is the assertion that by means of the Tantra 
Shastra suoh Siddhi may be gained in one life, in one year—

1 That is. infantry, cavalry, elephant corps, and the chariots.

1 The celebrated Bengali poet and $h&kta.

‘ §hakti ia Devi — that is, both the power of God and God Itself. 
Each of the Devas has His Shakti or power worshipped under the form 
of His spouse.1 The celebrated Bengali poet and $h&kta.

‘ §hakti ia Devi — that is, both the power of God and God Itself. 
Each of the Devas has His Shakti or power worshipped under the form 
of His spouse.

* This book.

138

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

nay, in one week—as oan only be otherwise with uncer¬ 
tainty attained after the practice of age-long austerities. 
Why, they say, should Bhagavan * 1 be so merciful to the Kali 
age with all its most heinous sins, as to make it possible 
to attain in one life or in one week that which was rarely 
attained even by Devas like Indra . 1 If such be possible, 
then I$hvara,‘ they say, must be highly partial. At such 
talk it is difficult to restrain a smile. You and I might 
just as well be inspectors of the kingly work of Ishvara, 
whose reputation for administration would in that case 
depend on your or my criticism. On the other hand, 
I ask, if He is partial, what do you or I lose by that ? 
If He who is the highest, all-powerful, omnipresent, and 
the knower of all hearts beoomes partial, how can you or 
I prevent that ? You may say we shall blame Him. But 
what does it matter to Him whether you and I blame Him ? 
He who knows the hearts of the meanest insect, does He 
not know that you and I will blame Him ? In spite of His 
knowing it. He has taken on Himself the blame, and, 
solemnly declaring, “ True, true, again true—true there is 
no doubt," has said: “ It is true and beyond all doubt true

1 God ; that ^ He who is possessed of the six forms of ai?hvnryya 
which pertain to I^hvar*—via., $hrl (auspiciousness), Viryya (power), 
Jndna (wisdom). Vairagya (dispassion), Klrti (glory), and M&hatmya 
(greatness).

1 The fourth or last of the four ages in which the orthodox consider 
the world now to be, and which is marked by sin and weakness. The 
first, or Satya Yuga, was the golden age; in Tretfl Yuga virtue declined 
by one-quarter; in Dvftpara Yuga by one-half; and in Kali Yuga by 
three-quarters (see Introduction).Deva of the firmament, King of the celestials.

. ' The personal God,'* Creator and Ruler of the world, the Brahman 
with qualities; thought of with Prakrit! : associated with, but not Him¬ 
self subject to, Maya (MAy&vichchhinnam chaitanyam cha Paramesh- 
vara) (Vedanta Paribhashft, 9), The supreme individuality is the quality 
of Ijhvara. In the Vi^hvasharlru chapter of the VirupakshapunchAshika

explained as Lordship, activity, independence, consciousness

itself.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

139

that in the Kali age there is no liberation for him who 
forsakes the path laid down in the Againa.' and attempts to 
pursue another. In the Kali age the fool who seeks to attain 
Siddhi by the paths shown in other Shastras is like a thirsty 
man who digs a well on the very banks of the JahnavL* * For 
the attainment of happiness in this world or the next there 
is no path which leads to both enjoyment and salvation so 
excellent as that shown in the Tantra.’' '

What will you gain by threatening with your blame 
Him from whose own mouth has come this unerring con¬ 
clusion ? He who is afraid of blame or pleased by praise 
may be your Ishvara, but he is not the God of the world. 
He who is God (Ishvara) of the world is the Lord (Ishvara). 
His divinity and lordship over the universe stands supreme, 
spurning both glory or disgrace, praise or blame. This is 
the wealth of his Vaikuntha.® If you please, you may blame, 
you may chastise, you may deal hard blows with your fist 
at the foot of the Himalaya Mountains, yet the immovable 
Lord of mountains will not be shaken, though your fingers 
will be torn and broken. Those who, in endeavouring to 
discuss the truth as to the divine (Ishvara Tattva), have 
realized the effect of doing so may desist. But those who 
judge God by their own ideas of justice will not be satisfied

1 Here the Tantra. 1 The River Ganges.1 Here the Tantra. 1 The River Ganges.

* The peculiar claim of the Tantraa is that it gives both worldly 
enjoyment and salvation. It is Bhuktimuktikar&nicha. In Yoga there 
is no enjoyment (Bboga), and in enjoyment no Yoga (union with 
the Supreme). But the T&ntrik has both {Mahfinirvana Tantra, chap, i, 
verses 50. 61 ; Muijijam&lft Tantra, chap. ii). Bhoga, or enjoyment, is 
of five kinds—pleasure arising from sound, touch, 6igbt, taste, and 
smell. This enjoyment may be had on earth or in the transitory 
heavens of enjoyment, which are to be distinguished from mukti. or 
liberation, the state which alone endures.

' Mahanirv&na Tantra, chap. v.

1 The heaven of Vi?hpu.

140

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA' Mahanirv&na Tantra, chap. v.

1 The heaven of Vi?hpu.

140

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

with that. We ourselves do not deny the apparent partiality 
alleged, but we say that His strict adherence to justice has 
not been broken by the mercy shown to the creatures of the 
Kali age. On the contrary, not to have treated them with 
such kindness would have been unjust. We ask what sort 
of justice was it on the part of God to give to them of the 
atya age 1 a longevity of a lakh of years,* with their life 
centred in the marrow , 5 and then to give to men in the Kali 
age a longevity of a hundred years, and life dependent on 
ood. If one injustice is done, that is no excuse for doing a 
hundred others. Moreover, what can you do if injustice has 
been once done ? But, as a matter of fact, “ Poison is the 
remedy for poison.” What does it matter to you or me if He 
has made up for the deficiency in justice caused by the grant 
of greater longevity in the Satya than in the Kali age, by, 
according to Sadhana, a more rapid effect in the Kali’ a «e 
than in the Satya age ? In fact, in Him there is neither 
eficiency nor the reverse. In this drama of the world He 
is both the Chief Actor and the Chief of Actresses. This 
drama commenced in the beginning with the union of Actor 
and Aotress, and will conclude, according to His unfailing 
will, at that night which is the end of time.

Those who are acquainted with the principles of 
Sanskrit drama know that it is composed in the form of 
the tail of a cow . 4 I do not know on what evidence rhe¬ 
torical poets discovered this form of composition, but, so

totSJStoS 1 m,rk0<l bS ' " r ‘"''. C 1 'S ) 6 S. ty ' h «**'

marrZ h 0 ;n H iK dU bcHe i “ ^ L in the first age life wu centred in tho

S SeCond age >“ the bono8 'the third age in the blood, 
and in tho last or present age is dependent on food.

As Shloka, 277. of the S&hityn Durpana. says* Gomichchhii

Vand f ha ! mnti ‘ sya . kIrt ‘tani. The acts of a drama shouldAs Shloka, 277. of the S&hityn Durpana. says* Gomichchhii

Vand f ha ! mnti ‘ sya . kIrt ‘tani. The acts of a drama should

as thl « 1° b<? redu L ced ,n 8ize the first to the last, just

as tbt tail of a cow beginning broadly tapers to a point.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

141

far as one can surmise, it appears that form was adopted 
in imitation of the ideal drama of that Primeval Poet , 1 the 
Creator of the universe. From the description of the four 
ages—namely, Satya, Treta, Dvfipara, and Kali * *—it would 
seem that in the ideally composed play of the universe the 
chain of things from Brahma, the Hiranyagarbha and grand¬ 
father* of men, to the close of the Kali age is arranged in the 
form of a cow’s tail. When the close of the play approaches, 
the King of actors, Mahakala , 4 will after hastily withdraw¬ 
ing all the materials for the play, lay down to rest upon the 
couoh of Mahapralaya* in the last world-scene, the great 
cremation ground strewn with ashes. The Mother, the 
Queen of actresses and Charmer of Mahak&la,* will place 
Her right foot on His heart, and, losing Herself in the 
waves of love and joy of the great mass of consciousness,’ 
appear, as it were, a dancer maddened by untiring dancing. 
The hasty closing and destruction of the Kali age is but a 
preparation for this dancing, and nothing else. The thought 
of this scene may make the unbelieving and impious tremble 
with fear, but these happy tidings will raise joyous waves 
of love in the heart of the devout. The will of Her whose 
substance is will * shall be fulfilled, for it is in the power of 
none to frustrate it.

1 Brahma, so called in the $hrlmadbhagavata, and elsewhere.

* See Introduction. •

' Lokapit&maha.

* Shiva (see Mahilnirv&na Tantra, chap. v).

' The great dissolation of things, when all will return to that from 
which they on the morning of the day of Brahma originated.

' The Devi, as Mah&k&li.* Shiva (see Mahilnirv&na Tantra, chap. v).

' The great dissolation of things, when all will return to that from 
which they on the morning of the day of Brahma originated.

' The Devi, as Mah&k&li.

1 Chidghana. Chit, the pure Brahman, is the hearth of fire from 
which,according to the Lalita.the Devi springs (Cbidagnikundasambhatfi).

' Ichchhimayl. The substance of the Devi is the three Shaktis. 
Icbcha (will or desire). Jn&na (knowledge), and Kriya (action).

142

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Next, when you become jealous at the mere mention of 
His unfathomable mercy towards His creatures of the Kali 
age as compared with that whioh He showed to those of 
the Satya age, it would seem as if you thought that the 
creatures of these two ages constituted two distinct classes 
at feud one with the other, and never meeting in each 
other’s home. A creature of the Satya age will not (you 
suppose) appear in the Kali age, and one of the latter age 
will not have appeared in the former. No matter; be 
it so. But I ask: Everyone admits that not every creature 
in the first three ages has attained Siddhi , * 1 * * nor, on the 
other hand, is everyone in the Kali age devoid of Siddhi. 
What, then, is the fate of such Sadhaka-s * of the first three 
ages who have not attained Siddhi, and of such men of 
the Kali age as are not, but are about to become, Sadha- 
kas ? According to your argument, no creature of the 
Kali age will have appeared in the Satya age, and no indi¬ 
vidual of the latter age will appear in the Kali age. In 
other words, at the close of these ages such persons will 
attain either Nirvana,’ and be totally absorbed in the 
Parabrabman , 4 or will sink at once into an eternal hell. 
Blessed be this judgment to which j-our justice leads you ! 
What an unerring decision! * You were startled at hearing 
that the Jlva 4 in the Kali age can attain Siddhi in one

1 That is, become a Siddhapurusha.

4 That is, those worshippers who practise Sftdhann.1 That is, become a Siddhapurusha.

4 That is, those worshippers who practise Sftdhann.

1 That is, complete unconditioned Mukti. as distinguished from the 
temporary and conditioned padas known as Siilokya, SftrOpya, Sftmlpya, 
and Sftyujya.

The unconditioned, attributeless or higher Brahman, as con¬ 
trasted with the same Brahman manifesting itself with attributes in 
creation — the apara or “ lower ” Brahman.

‘ Valihari.

... embodied spirit, which is the supreme spirit, viewed under

the limiting conditions known as npOdhis.”

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

143

lifetime. But the Jlva of your Satya age attains Nirvana 
the moment it commences Sadhana. It may thus, indeed, 
happen that a man who by good fortune is born at the 
close of the Satya age may attain without labour in one 
life, and by the mere circumstance of his birth at the close 
of that age, that same Siddhi which another has only 
attained in the same age by the practice of austerities for 
ten million years . 1 Advocate of Justice, tell me now of 
what kind of justice is this the impartial and carefully 
considered opinion ?You and I, whose knowledge does not extend beyond, 
at most, a hundred years, are not in a position to argue 
as regards that justice, the wheel of which turns but once 
in eighty-four lakhs* * of births. In the Vi$hvas&ra Tantra 
the Shfistra says: “ There is no birth like unto the human 
birth. Both Devas* and Pitj-is" desire it. For the Jlva 
the human body is of all bodies the most difficult to come 
by. For this it is said that human birth is attained with 
extreme difficulty. O P&rvatl , 1 amongst those beings who 
have obtained this rare human birth, those who have con¬ 
quered all doubt are very few, and of those who have 
conquered doubt such as are attaohed to Mantra" and 
Tantra are again very few. Among such pious men as are 
attaohed to Mantra and Tantra, such as are proficient in 
Tantra, which is adored by all, are the best; and, again, 
amongst the latter the Sadhaka is the best of all, who is 
deeply versed in all the Tantras.”

“ It is said in all the Shastras that of the Jlva’s eighty- 
four lakhs of births the human birth is the most fruitful.

1 A crore, or an hundred lakhs, or 10,000.000. * 8,400,000.

1 Devas, the celestial intelligences intermediate between I$hvara, 
the Lord, and Man (see Introduction). * See Introduction.

* The spouse of the God Shiva. The Tantraa are generally cast in 
the form of a dialogue between Her and Her husband.

‘ See Introduction.

144

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In no other birth can Jlva acquire knowledge of the truth. 
Human birth is the stepping-stone to the path of libera¬ 
tion. But rare are the meritorious 1 who come by it.”

“0 Daughter of the mountain,' Jlvatma, which de¬ 
cs reaseth not, passes through eighty-four lakhs of births as 
inorganic things, insects, birds, beast, and the like. And 
after that, 0 Supreme Devi, it attains that human body 
which is so difficult to acquire."Jlva attains the position of the twice-born,' having 
had thirty lakhs of births as inorganic things, nine lakhs 
of births as aqueous animals, ten lakhs of births as creep¬ 
ing animals, 4 eleven lakhs of births as animals of the air 4 
twenty-four lakhs of births as beasts, and four lakhs of 
births as human beings, having thus in all travelled 
through eighty-four lakhs of births. When Jlva attains 
the human body, it becomes Lord of Dharma." It i 8 
again born and again dies. In this manner, controlled 
by the bonds of Karma/ the Jlva takes birth from various 
sources/ and dies eighty-four lakhs of times. By the com¬ 
mand of Yama,” Jlva goes to the Brahmaloka." On its 
return from thence, it obtains the human body, which

1 Pupya.

’ A title of Pflrvatl as daughter of the mountain-king Himavat,

’That is. the three superior castes. Brahmana, Ksbatriya and 
\aish>a, which upon the Cpanayana ceremony become twice hnm 
and have thus both a natural and a spiritual birth twice-born.

' Worms, serpents, etc. A lakh = 100,000. » Birds

* See Introduction.

Karma is action and the product of action. Each action produces 
tha^khfeiffe reSU t ‘ ?°}? t De . as a man ’ s Ka 1- ™® is not worked out. and 
^nds ^ STJEm i fe 18 D °} lasted, «> long he remains inTts 
purity of aclion " ’ g00d ^ both constituting the " im-

u ^ 0ni ' Lord of the lower world and of death,

three ££t ^e^^^

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

145u ^ 0ni ' Lord of the lower world and of death,

three ££t ^e^^^

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

145

is so rarely obtained, and is able feo secure from a good 
Guru initiation in the mantra of Mahavidya and know¬ 
ledge of the truth. Then alone does the Jlva gain the 
supreme liberation, and by the grace of Mahavidya has 
not to return so long as the universe 1 endures. In its 
eighty-four lakhs of births as inorganic and organic 
things, beasts, birds, insects, flies, and the like, the Jiva 
enjoys longevity according to its Karma. Some live one 
hundred years, some a thousand, some a lakh, some even 
more, and some live crores* * and crores of years. It 
passes my understanding that Shastra can be your authority 
for the notion that all Jlvas—past, present, and future— 
of this enormous cycle will attain the highest Samftdhi, 3 
owing to the simple circumstance that an age has come 
to an end, and this in spite of the fact that their Karma 
is of all forms fulfilled, unfulfilled, and partly fulfilled, and 
partly unfulfilled, worked out and unworked out, partly 
worked out and partly unworked out. 4

But you may, as a last resort, say: “ I do not believe 
in eighty-four lakhs of births." But it does not become 
you to say this either; for the very authority and reasoning 
upon whioh you accept the four ages spoken of in the 
Sh&stras are the same as that on which you are bound 
to accept the statement as to eighty-four lakhs of births. 
Both are conclusions of Shastra. Who will believe the 
man who accepts one part of the Sb&stra and judges the 
other mistaken ? Who thinks the right half of a man's 
bodv to be conscious and the left unconscious ? Let me 
put you a plain question. WTiy should you not believe? 
WTiat is the cause of your unbelief? You will say, The

1 Brahm&nda, lit. " egg of Brahma."

’ A crore is 100 lakhs, or 10,000,000. ’ Here “ end.”

* Purna, aparna, purnSpurna, bhukta, abhukta, bhuktfibhukta. 
10

>

146

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Brahm&nda, lit. " egg of Brahma."

’ A crore is 100 lakhs, or 10,000,000. ’ Here “ end.”

* Purna, aparna, purnSpurna, bhukta, abhukta, bhuktfibhukta. 
10

>

146

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

number eighty-four lakhs. But I reply that that very 
number which is the cause of your unbelief is the ground 
of my firm faith. Who are you to say that, because these 
eighty-four lakhs of births are unseen by you and me, 
that what is unseen does not exist ? The most you can 
say is that you do not know whether they exist or not. 
For the same reason, that I cannot say that it exists be¬ 
cause I have not seen it, you cannot say that it does not 
exist because you have not seen it. If it is non-existent 
because I have not seen it, then the world does not 
exist for the blind man. The blind man, moreover, does 
not himself see. Is it, therefore, to be concluded that 
he does not exist for himself ? It matters not if he does 
not exist. But I ask, who is it that affirms the negative ? 
He who is himself non-existent cannot affirm or deny 
anything.At the time of the happening of that cause which 
gives fatherhood to man and motherhood to woman, the 
ohild exists in the atoms of semen and blood. He does 
not see that incident. WTiy do you, then, without visual 
evidence on your part and on the faith of others' words 
believe that those who are called your father and mother 
are such ? Maybe on principle you will object and say 
that you do not believe in that also. On rare occasions 
a real cause may exist for this unbelief. But, being a 
man, can you boldly assert it ? Are we to suppose that 
every father and mother in the world is subject to such 
a doubt? Such a statement, even if one were able to 
make it, would be nothing but the raving of a madman. 
I have no objection to your doubting the eighty-four 
lakhs of births. But I say in that case let it be strictly a 
doubt. Do not bring it under the category of things 
certain. For the doubt is whether the eighty-four lakhs 
of births exist or not, and no doubt can exist without a

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

147TANTRA SCRIPTURE

147

knowledge of either existence or non-existence. There 
can never be a doubt about the existence of that which 
you know to be non-existent. It does not exist. This 
is not a doubt, but a certainty. This is why I said that, 
should you be doubtful, say that you do not know- whether 
the eighty-four lakhs of births exist or not. To arrive at 
once at the conclusion that they do not exist because it 
is doubtful whether they do exist is but a shocking mani¬ 
festation of ignorance. In our discussion upon reincarna¬ 
tion we will set ourselves to dispel this doubt. Here we 
shall say this inuoh—that when the number of eighty- 
four lakhs is definitely given, it would be wise to believe 
in it. Of him who does not admit the fact of reincarnation 
in any manner, whether partly or incompletely, directly 
or indireotly, I ask : “ Are the eighty-four lakhs of births 
mentioned in the religious book of any other religious com¬ 
munity of any country of w’hich we know the history ? ” 
Can either the philosophy of Charvaka, 1 or the Koran or 
Bible, proclaim boldly that the Jlva takes eighty-four lakhs 
of births ? Whose sight can stretch to the extremity of the 
universe, so as to’ be able to penetrate through the mole¬ 
cules and atoms of the fourteen worlds—namely, Bhuh, 
Bhuvah, Svah, Mahah, Janah, Tapah, Satya, Atala, Bitala, 
Sutala, Talatala, Rasatala, Mahfttala, and Pfttala,* and thus 
gaining knowledge of the nature of every Jlva with grave 
solemnity affirm and say: “Jlva has eighty-four lakhs of 
births. True, true, true again—true, there is no doubt." 
Not to speak of pointing this out, how can one even boldly 
say that the number of births is eighty-four lakhs ? The

1 Sceptic and atheist.

' The worlds from Bhnh (the earth) to Satyaloka are the upper 
world, and from Atala to PAtAla the nether worlds, which according to 
some accounts must be distinguished from the Hells, which lie between 
earth and the nether world.

148148

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Jlva, through change of the curtain of memory in every 
birth, forgets its previous birth. Its memory is opened and 
closed. It is not, then, within its power of intelligence 
to say with certainty, either by philosophy, science, percep¬ 
tion, or inference, that the number of births is eighty-four 
lakhs. Only that Dharrna and that Shftstra can affirm this, 
which takes its birth in the heart whose substance is will 
of Her who is the infinite and eternal Intelligence, 1 who 
dwells in the heart of all Jlvas who are manifested with 
Her breath.* * Who can measure the extent of the births of 
the Jlva but that Sh&stra which has emanated from the 
mouth of Anandamayl 8 Herself, at whose feet this small 
world is but a plaything for Her eternal play ? It is only 
that Shastra which dances with joy at the sight of the play 
of creation, preservation, and destruction taking place at 
every twinkling of the eye which can boldly assert that the 
number of births is eighty-four lakhs. If other Shfistras 
be astounded, let them remain so. You and I have no need 
to faint away on hearing that. At present merely under¬ 
stand this much : that as he who can count a thousand has 
surely known the mathematical sign for that number, so he 
who can assert the number of eighty-four lakhs of births 
has surely seen them.

Reasoning on the Scripture

You may have heard that a reasonable saying should be 
accepted even from a boy, and that discussion without 
reasoning causes loss of Dharrna. But perhaps you have

1 Chnitanya—the supreme is Sat (existence), chit (intelligence, con¬ 
sciousness). and Ananda (bliss). The Devi is Cbinmayi (LalitA. third 
hundred).

* The world is the out-breathing of the Supreme.

' A title of Devi, whose substance is bliss (see post).

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

149* The world is the out-breathing of the Supreme.

' A title of Devi, whose substance is bliss (see post).

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

149

not had the leisure to discern what is the subject of that 
reasoning, and what kind of reasoning it is. The reason¬ 
ing by which the Shastra asks you to disouss is that 
reasoning which is within the control of your intellect— 
the reasoning of practical Shastras helpful to discussion. 
How can you, with worldly reasoning, prove the truth of 
that unworldly spiritual Shastra which, if studied and 
followed with constancy, will develop the intellect and will, 
and when Siddhi is attained by such Sadhana, open the 
portals of the super-sensual principle 1 which is within you ? 
Do not lament because you have intellect, nor be ashamed 
because you cannot come to any decision without it. It is 
true that you have an intellect, but the pity of it is that you 
have not the intelligence to understand what sort of intellect 
it is. You may feel sorry and ashamed, but that will not 
open the lock. If you put too much pressure, the key will be 
broken, and even a Bengal lock 1 * * will not open. This is why 
I was saying that if you proceeded to open the lock of spirit¬ 
ual principles with the key of worldly reasoning, even the 
play of native intelligence will cease, and, being unable 
what to decide, you will find yourself at loss in everything. 8 
For this reason the Shastra has, after careful consideration, 
and taking the oath upon its head, said : “ Do not attempt 
to deal by argument with things which are beyond the 
range of thought.’’

What, again, may be asked, is the necessity for a 
Shastra, in respect of a matter which you and I can decide 
by argument and discussion ? That is called Shastra which 
deals with things beyond the reach of the senses, which are 
unthought of, unseen, and unattained by you and me.

1 Atlndriya tattva.

* Thnt is, locks manufactured in Bengal, which are (or were) of

inferior quality.1 Atlndriya tattva.

* Thnt is, locks manufactured in Bengal, which are (or were) of

inferior quality.

* Literally. " to fall off from here and be lost from there."

150

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Where direct vision is blind and inference lame, there 
Shastra alone reigns supreme. The fact that you and I 
have got eyes does not enable you and I to see what the 
animals moving in the unfathomable depths of ocean see. 
The power of sight is different in that kingdom from ours. 
You and I are blind in this respect, despite our eyes. 
Similarly you and I have not the privilege to behold that 
which the Rishis, seers of deep truths immersed in the 
Divine bliss, 1 have seen.

Many people are heard to say in argument as follows : 
“ How can those whose minds are constantly occupied with 
the thought of the feet of the Devatfl, of their heart in 
Nirvikalpa Sam&dhi Yoga,* by the complete immersal 
of their own mind and Prakyiti* in Paramatma, 4 find 
time to observe also the physical principles* governing 
the molecules and atoms * of the untold millions of uni¬ 
verses, 7 each of which is composed of fourteen worlds? 
How, again, can Yogis,* Rishis, and Munis,* whose state 
is one in which the illusion of a dual existence disappears 
through their acquirement of non-dualistic truths," find 
time to turn their eyes from Brahman to observe the 
Brahmanda ? " 11 Brahman, you say, cannot be seen unless 
the Brahmagtja is forgotten. The Brahmanda cannot be 
seen unless the Brahman is forgotten. You argue, there¬ 
fore, that it is impossible to harmonize these two mutually 
conflicting statements. We, too, do not deny the difficulty,

Brali mananda. ’ Ecstasy. See Introdaction.

Ibid. ' The Supreme Spirit.

Vastutattvo. ' Ann and param&nu.

Brahmanda. " Egg of Brahma."

Adepts in Yoga (see Introduction).

’ Seers and Sages. * Advaita tattva.

u Universe.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

151Vastutattvo. ' Ann and param&nu.

Brahmanda. " Egg of Brahma."

Adepts in Yoga (see Introduction).

’ Seers and Sages. * Advaita tattva.

u Universe.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

151

and, although this is not the place for an elaborate expla¬ 
nation, we will briefly refer to one point.

Poets have said that if a pearl and a java 1 flower are 
brought together, the red hue of the java will redden the 
pearl, but the white lustre of the latter will not whiten 
the former. This is because the pearl is free of all im- 
puritjy while the javft is not so. A thing which is natur¬ 
ally transparent will take the reflection of other things, 
whilst that which is not so may itself be reflected but 
cannot receive reflection. For instance, ray face is re¬ 
flected in a mirror, but the mirror is not reflected in my 
face, because the mirror is pure, which my face is not. 
Similarly in a Brahm&ijda made impure by Maya," every¬ 
thing is impure. Only that one Brahman who is beyond 
Maya is pure. The impure Brahmapda cannot receive a 
reflection of the pure Brahman, but is itself naturally 
reflected in it.

Looking at a spot of ground on the bank of some lake 
or river, we see only the verdant land and clumps of trees, 
but not the stretch of water. Yet the instant we with¬ 
draw our sight from the bank and cast it on the water, 
we see everything therein—the trunks, the tops, the 
branches, twigs, fruits, and flowers of the trees, and their 
very roots, together with the verdant land on which they 
stand. We see also the immense zone of the firmament 
covered with countless clusters of stars. We thus see all 
things one after another displayed in the lake. But that 
which faces upwards on land faces downwards in the water, 
and that which faces downwards on land faces upwards in

* The scarlet hibiscus, the flower of the Tilntrika.

* Literally, " iB dirtless.'’* The scarlet hibiscus, the flower of the Tilntrika.

* Literally, " iB dirtless.'’

* Illusion, the power of the Supreme whereby It makes Itself to 
appear other than It really U. MAyii enshrouds and conceals the 
nature of the Atman.

152

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the water. Similar is the vision of those who are immersed 
in the sea of truth. 1 Just as we can see everything up to 
the very zone of the firmament merely by looking at the 
water of the lake and without casting our eyes around it, 
so the Itishis, without glancing at the Brahmanqla produced 
by May&, cast their vision upon Brahmamay!,* and see in 
Her person whose substance is a mass of conscious bliss : 
endless millions of worlds in the hollow of every’ hair of Her 
body/ now appearing and now disappearing in each twink¬ 
ling of the eyes, as it were bubbles in water. No need is 
there for them to take any wearying journey, nor to waste 
their lives, nor to pass over the courtyard * of the world so 
hard to traverse. But they merely, by the eye of wisdom,' 
in the bed of meditation/ in the house of S&dhana, see 
that beauteous dream of the three worlds, and that truth' 
to which the Jlva cannot attain even in its causal body, 
and which, notwithstanding the break of ecstasy/ they 
cannot forget. Their vision has, however, this peculiarity: 
whatever you and I, acquainted with the scientific truths 
of the gross world, see and think of appears to us to be 
elevated and of uplifted face, as if nothing else in the 
sangsara was more elevated than they; but, on the other 
hand, the devotees, looking at the reflection cast upon the

1 Tattva. ’ The Devi. ' Chidghanilnanda.1 Tattva. ’ The Devi. ' Chidghanilnanda.

' The KAmika is quoted a s saying that there arc 224 worlds, which 
should be meditated upon os if they were the hairs on the body of the 
Lord. This is the Bhuvana method. Others are the " letter ” method 
of meditation on the fifty letters, as on the skin of the Lord of Devas : 
the Mantra method of meditation on the blood of Shiva by means of 
Mantra; the ‘word" method, where they stand for the flesh of the 
bloodvessels of the Lord; and the “Tattva” method, where the 
thirty-six Tattvas, beginning with the earth, are the forms of Shiva’s 
sinews, bone, and marrow (see Bhaekararaya Commentary, Lolita, 
v. 62).

* That is, the surface. * Jnana.

’ Dhy&na (see Introduction). ' Tattva. * SamAdbi.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

158

waves of blood of the causal sea in the womb of Bhagavati, 
perceive that that which is elevated in this world is low 
at the feet of Bralimamayl, and that whatever was down¬ 
cast in the world has, on approaching the Mother, received 
Her caress and joyfully lifted its head on seeing the 
Brahman aspect of AnandamayJ. The same things arc 
there in both cases. What was seen on land appears again 
in water, but reversed through change of the medium 
through which we view it. For those who only see the 
Brahmanda in the Brahmanda, what can be higher to them 
than it ? But those who have seen the Brahm&oda in 
Brahman have seen the Queen of Queens, Brahmamayi, 
sitting on a throne made of all the highest things of the 
Brahmanda from the regions of the pole star, moon, and 
Brahma 1 to the cloud-piercing peak of Mount Sumeru* * on 
earth. Seeing that all-pervading* play of Shakti which makes 
the universe stare with wonder, Devas and Rishis have bowed 
their heads to earth, and said: “ Obeisance, obeisance to the 
Devi who, as consciousness,* pervades the entire universe.”“ Is it necessary to say, 0 great Devi, that She lives in 
the bodies of all living creatures when She is present in 
the form of energy,* even in such lifeless things as stocks 
and stones ? There is no place in the world where the 
substance of Mahamaya is not.”

Man, how dare we expeot that that divine * sight of 
theirs and this carnal r sight of yours and mine will be the 
same ? The Shastra says that this play of the universe 
is nothing but the play of the waves in the sea of con¬ 
sciousness. Just as those who have gone to the sea,

* Dhruvalokn, Chandraloka, and Brahnmloka,

’ Mount Meru, wherein is the pole of the earth.

' Yirftt Tattva. ' Cbaitanya

* Tejas, which also denotes fire, brilliancy, glory, and energy.

* Daivl. ’ Jaivi, or sight pertaining to the Jlva.

154

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Yirftt Tattva. ' Cbaitanya

* Tejas, which also denotes fire, brilliancy, glory, and energy.

* Daivl. ’ Jaivi, or sight pertaining to the Jlva.

154

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

need, in looking at the sea, make no speoial effort to see its 
waves, so those who had seen B rah mam ay I had not to 
make any effort to see the Brahmap<Ja. They did not see 
the universe with the help of telescopes or of vehicles on 
land, in water, or in air. When they saw the Ishvari 1 of 
the universe it was then they saw the latter* * also resting 
at Her feet. The difference between the sight of those 
who nowadays display their knowledge of science by a 
discussion of the principles of matter* and that of the 
Bishis is this: The former, in their short lives having seen 
but a small portion of the small world, gasp out with tired 
voices: “ Who knows what lies beyond this ? ” However, 
on seeing this world-play, one only feels that wonderful 
indeed must be the nature 4 of the real form of Her whose 
play it is, and that if one would have knowledge of that 
wonderful Shakti,* there are no better means in human life 
than to study the principles of the universe. It is here 
that B i8 his are wont to say that this sport is nothing 
wonderful for Her who is full of eternal and ever-novel play. 
The playful manifestation in the molecules and atoms of a 
single world counts for an incident scarcely worth mention 
for Her upon whose mere glance* depend the creation, 
preservation, and destruction of countless millions of 
universes. The universe does not appear wonderful in the 
sight of him who has seen the primordial Shakti/ the 
source of birth of this perfect play. And therefore the 
Bishis, disregarding the Sangsara with its charming display

1 Feminine of Lhvarn (Lord). Title of the DevT. * Tattva.

1 Bhutatattva. The Bhuta are the elements.

' Tattva. ' Power.

* “ The series of worlds arise and disappear with the opening and 
shutting of Her eyes ” (Lnlitu Sahasran&ma, v. 66).1 Bhutatattva. The Bhuta are the elements.

' Tattva. ' Power.

* “ The series of worlds arise and disappear with the opening and 
shutting of Her eyes ” (Lnlitu Sahasran&ma, v. 66).

T Adyil Shakti the DevT as primordial source and manifestation of 
the Divine energy.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

155

of actors and acting, have sunk in the fathomless sea of the 
ocean of Her who, holding the thread of the universe in 
Her hand, makes all those actors act. They, after an 
attentive view and the attainment of Siddhi, have thrown 
up their hands, and cried and said : “ Do not let your mind 
and heart be charmed with the varied beauty of this world. 
This pleasant illusion will not last for ever. As you hope 
for peace, surrender your mind and heart at the lovely 
lotus-feet of Anandamayi playing on the breast of Sada- 
nanda. 1 Cast off the threefold sorrow,* and you will then 
discover that millions of worlds move and move around 
every petal, every filament, every particle of pollen, of those 
lotus feet, and then disappear immersed in the love-pollen 
of those lotuses.”

To our ears these words, though true, appear somewhat 
strange. To disregard the joys and sorrows of the visible 
world, and to be immersed in the joy of the unseen Brah¬ 
man, is a remote affair. For the present anyone who avers 
it seems to be an unsocial, witless fellow. This advice to 
run in search of something unseen, in disregard of the 
visible phenomenal sangsara, is thought to be as unbearable 
and inopportune as would be flippant talk to a person who, 
disconsolate and with flooding tears, is holding his dead 
child to his breast, or as would be a request to accompany 
a funeral procession to a young man adorned and joyful on 
his way to his marriage. Owing to the unacceptable nature 
of the advice, you and I consider the adviser mad ; but the 
latter is not to be put off from his purpose by that.Let us suppose that you and I do not know what act¬ 
ing is, but are present at a representation of the Rdmaya^a. 
The grief of Kau?halya, the death of Dasharatha, the

' Shiva the ever Joyful. 
' T&patraya (Bee post).

156

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Shiva the ever Joyful. 
' T&patraya (Bee post).

156

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

lamentation of Sita, the tears of Mandodari, move us to 
profuse tears. On the other hand, the heroic valour of 
Lakshmana, the world-subduing military skill of Rama- 
chandra, the pride of Indrajit, the war-cries of Ravana, 
till us now with joy and delight, now with fear, astonish¬ 
ment, and awe. At the same time we observe that some¬ 
one who is sitting in our midst, but whom we do not know, 
has been shaking his sides with laughter at the very same 
scenes. You and I will probably say that the man is 
mad, but that will not stop his laughter. I say that it 
does not matter whether or not you call the man mad. Still 
you ought to reflect why the man laughs. The place is the 
same, the scenes are the same, the subject is the same. But 
while all other people are laughing at one time and weeping 
at another, why does that one man alone constantly laugh ? 
If we seek to know why this is so, we shall discover that 
there is only one cause for the laughing and weeping, and 
it is this: You and I have come to see the play without 
either knowing how to act or what acting is. But that man 
has come to it with the full knowledge of what acting is. 
To us Rama and Ravana appear as real, and so we make a 
great display of weeping, and so on. But that man sees 
that Nllambara Chakravarti 1 is playing the part of Ravana 
and that Plt&mbara Chakravarti 1 is crying in the part of 
Sita. What to our eyes are Rama and Sita to him are 
Nll&mbara and Pltambara, and so he is full of laughter. 
We become restless at the sight of the incidents in the 
play, but that man who sees what is at the back of them is 
calm. We are calling him mad, but you may be certain 
that he is forgiving us on account of our ignorance. The 
man w T hom we slight by repeatedly referring to him as 
“ that man, that man,” is not mad. From the spiritual

I **

Monsieur un tel."

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

157I **

Monsieur un tel."

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

157

point of view, he it is who is possessed of the highest wis¬ 
dom, and is the crest-gem of the race of devotees. He who 
knows that all things on the stage of Sangs&ra are merely 
the materials for the play is not, on seeing the performance, 
charmed with the acting, but is intoxicated with the 
blissful love of the actor and actress whose acting it is. 
Rishis, though calm, are yet maddened by that love; and 
so they have told us not to waste this human birth, which 
is so difficult of attainment, by thinking of the little things 
of the Sangsara, but to think that thought only which will 
save us from all further thinking. And, so speaking to 
himself, the Sfidhaka has thus expressed the purpose of 
his heart:

“The time of life (Kala) is past, death (Kala) ap¬ 
proaches ; let me repair to solitude.”

In deep seclusion let me sing the glory of Kalak&minL 1

The day upon which you and I shall be on their side, 
and shall believe or attain the fitness for believing their 
word, on that day all thinking will be at an end. And we, 
too, shall understand that the Sangsara is but a mock 
representation, and that both the things we see, as well as 
the people themselves who see, are She, the Brahmamayl, * 
full of the bliss of the mass of consciousness who has 
entered the Sangsftra as Jiva, and is revelling in this joyous 
play. But because you and I have not eyes to see, we say :

“ What sort of a play is this of yours, O Mother ? It is 
not a play, but the very- father of imprisonment.

The first scene of the play is a gathering on the stage 
before the actor and actress.

Here the actor is nowhere to be found, so who can find 
the actress ?

1 Shiva’s spouse.

’ The Devi.

158

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

With the first act begins the play ; next the scenes of a 
drama are required.

Here, be it the first act or the last, from beginning to 
end, the drama is full of scenes.158

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

With the first act begins the play ; next the scenes of a 
drama are required.

Here, be it the first act or the last, from beginning to 
end, the drama is full of scenes.

The scene in which the son appears is that in which 
the father disappears.

Instantly the curtain is dropped before the eye, and 
then who is the son, and who is the father ?

You and I have restless hearts, and so we become dis¬ 
consolate with weeping. But the very same play raises 
waves of love in the heart of a calm devotee. Kainala- 
kanta, the peaceful Sadhaka, has therefore sung as follows :

“ You know not, 0 mind, the highest cause

Shy&m& 1 is not always in the form of a woman.

At times assuming the colour of clouds,

She takes on the form of a man.

With dishevelled hair and sword in hand,

She strikes terror into the hearts of the sons of Danu.

At times She comes to the city of Vraja, 9 and, playing 
on the flute, captures the hearts of the women of 
Vraja.

At times, holding the three gunas,* * She creates, pre¬ 
serves, and destroys.

Oh! She binds Herself * with her son Maya.*

The sufferings of the world She Herself endures.

In whatsoever form one thinks of Her in that form, 
She grants one’s desires.

In a lotus in the lake of Karaalakanta’s heart She 
appears.”

1 The Dev! 1 That is, in the form of Krishna.

* That is, the three “ qualities" which form the substance of 
Prakriti.—namely, sattva, rajas, tamas (see Introduction).

* That is. in the person of Jiva. * Power of illusion.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

159* That is. in the person of Jiva. * Power of illusion.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

159

It is for this, I was saying, that in what the Sb&stra 
has said there is nothing to discuss, but there is ground for 
faith. Of Her to whom the Sh&stra belongs, the Rishis 
have said that that eternal highest Vidyfi , 1 who is the sole 
first cause in sangsftra both of bondage and liberation, is 
the creatrix of all creators.* The creative power of none 
surpasses Her who is the creatrix of all creators. Whether 
you and I understand it or not, the unfailing wheel of state 
of that Queen of Queens,* whose substance is will, is sure 
to turn in eighty-four lakhs of births of the Jlva. Should 
you ever after this ask why it should be so, and what is 
the reason for it, I shall not in reply need to say much, 
but will simply put you this question : What reason is 
there which establishes that the present birth has at 
all taken place? At base the reasoning is the same for 
all births. For reasoning which establishes this birth 
establishes that which follows it. If one section of a 
wheel turns, all sections turn at the same time. This 
is the law of Her nature. From Brahman, the Jlva who 
is His avat&ra has come into this sangsara. There after 
wanderings and wanderings, it will again assume the 
aspect of Brahman and be absorbed in the Parabrabraan. 
This is the natural law in the world of Jlvas. In our dis¬ 
course on the principles of reincarnation, we will enter into 
a detailed explanation as to the law under which, and the 
process by which, this will be accomplished.

Should, even after this, anyone say, “ Everything ends 
with death. Who will then be born again ?” to him also 
we shall explain in that discourse that he is probably 
ignorant of what life and death mean. He who knows the 
nature of life knows also that Jlva has no real death

1 The Devi.

* Rftjrftje$varl.

* levari of all i$varas

160

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 The Devi.

* Rftjrftje$varl.

* levari of all i$varas

160

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

except that in Nirvana.* * What you and I speak of as 
death is but the death of the mind, and not the death of 
Jlva. In short, just as it is impossible to make a com¬ 
plete survey of a life in its various stages of boyhood, 
youth, manhood, old age, and so forth, so also it is im¬ 
possible to judge of the justice or injustice of eighty-four 
lakhs of births, or even the justice or injustice of any 
single birth —which forms but a fraction of the entire life 
of a Jlva. Bhagavftn Ramachandra, crest-gem of the 
race of Raghu,* after killing all Rakshasas : in Vishvft- 
mitra’s yajna , 4 threw M&rlcha with the force of his arrows 
to the other side of the sea. On hearing this, a short¬ 
sighted, restless man might easily form the idea that 
Ramachandra felt weak after slaying so large a number 
of R&kshasas, and thus, while able with such strength as 
he still retained to throw Maricha to a great distance 
from the seat of the sacrifice, was yet unable to kill him. 
But he who has read the whole of the Rftmavana from the 
Avodhyakanda to the Aranyakapda* knows that Maricha 
reappears in the guise of a deer in the forest of Dandaka 
at the time of Sltft’s abduction and has at the same time 
understood whether Ramachandra had strength or not. 
Bhagavan, dweller in Vaikuntha, who ever relieves the 
burden of earth, there incarnated to carry out the work of 
the Devaa—the killing of Ravana. It was because he knew 
that the work of destroying Ravana would, later on, have 
to be commenced through the same Maricha, that Rama- 
chaudra, instead of killing him, threw him to the other side 
of the sea. Had this not been so, no greater effort would

' When the Jlva ceases to exist as such.

* The solar race, celebrated in the Raghuvang?ha.

1 Demons. ' Sacrifice.

' The titles of the parts of the R&mayana epic.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

161' When the Jlva ceases to exist as such.

* The solar race, celebrated in the Raghuvang?ha.

1 Demons. ' Sacrifice.

' The titles of the parts of the R&mayana epic.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

161

have been needed to send Mftrioha to the other side of 
the sea of existence 1 than to send him to the other side 
of the salt sea. To understand the deep mysteries under¬ 
lying this play of Bhagavan, the dweller in hearts, it is 
necessary to know the incidents of the Aranyakanda; other¬ 
wise I should not understand more than this—that the 
Almighty had not sufficient strength in His body to enable 
Him to kill Marlcha.Similarly, in order to judge of His justice or injustice 
towards Jiva in the Satya and Kali ages, I must know the 
history of all the ages to their final chapter, Brahmakaivalya 
or Nirvana. Then only can be considered the justice and 
injustice of the entire existence of Jiva. It is therefore the 
height of impudence to judge the justice of Her who is the 
eternal ever-present truth by a life of forty years’ duration. 
If we are to judge His justice upon the strength of reason¬ 
ing alone, why should we not suppose that it is the 
sadhakas of the Satya, Tretft, and Dvapara ages who failed 
to acquire Siddhi and have therefore been reborn in the 
Kali age through the revolution of the wheel of time, and 
the attraction of the mass of their religious merits. This 
mass, which is nearly ripe, is about to bear fruit through 
the opportunities offered by place, time, and person. They, 
the children of the Mother, will again get up on Her lap. 
\ou say that Siddhi has been attained in one age, but I see 
that Siddhi has been attained in Kali, the fourth age, after 
austerities which have extended over three ages. The 
jack-fruit which ripens in the month of Ashadha does not 
first grow in that month. It first grows in winter, increases 
in spring, and matures in ;summer. The bael fruit first 
grows in the month of Chaitra. It also ripens in Chaitra. 
From this fact a European eating the fruit, but who had

* Bh&vasamudra.

162

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

never seen it growing, might draw the conclusion that the 
growth, death, and final dissolution of a bael fruit all took 
place in one and the same month ; but a descendant of the 
Aryvas living in India knows that:

“ In the month of Chaitra the bael grows 
In the month of Chaitra it ripens.

In one Chaitra it grows,

But in another Chaitra it ripens.”

On meeting Sadhakas 1“ In the month of Chaitra the bael grows 
In the month of Chaitra it ripens.

In one Chaitra it grows,

But in another Chaitra it ripens.”

On meeting Sadhakas 1

You may ask, “ Why, then, is the number of Sadhakas 
so small in the Kali age ? " But I reply: “ Who says that 
it is small ? You may rejoin that if the number be not 
small, why do we not see them everywhere, in every village, 
in every city ? I, however, say that the population of a 
country may be considered to be small if people are not 
seen everywhere in it, but the number of Sadhakas cannot 
on similar grounds be so considered. It has been already 
stated that the Creatrix of the universe, incarnated as 
Daughter, told Her father that “ one in a thousand struggle 
for Siddhi, and perhaps only one amongst such thousand 
knows me in my true aspect.” The same was said' to 
Arjuna by Bhagavfcn, the Lord of Vaikuntha on the battle¬ 
field of Kurukshetra. She has again said: “ It is only on 
attaining Siddhi after many births that Jlva reaches the 
highest station.” Again : “ Jlva attains to me only upon 
the acquisition of knowledge after many births." In the 
Niruttara Tantra it is said : “ The root of knowledge is that 
which relates to the union of Shiva and Shakti. Knowledge 
of Shakti is acquired after many births. 0 Devi, without 
a knowled ge of Shakti, Nirvipa can never be attained.”

, ^ Sudhaka is he who does sfidhana (see Introduction), a devotee.

In the BhagavadgltA.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE 163, ^ Sudhaka is he who does sfidhana (see Introduction), a devotee.

In the BhagavadgltA.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE 163

How, then, dare you and I expect to see crowds of 
travellers upon a road on which the Sinistra says they are 
so very soarce. There is a full number of S&dhakas even 
should but one man in a hundred thousand become such. 
Wise men have said that a ruby is not to be had in every 
hill, and^that every elephant’s head does not contain a pearl. 
A saint 1 is not to be met with everywhere, and sandal 
does not grow in every forest. BhagavSn Shrl Krishna told 
Uddhava, crest-gem of devotees, that when a Muni* * passes 
who is calm, free of malice, and equal mind he follows 
him, hoping to be sanctified by the touch of the dust of 
his feet. What impurity could attach to Him, the utterance 
of Whose name by a devotee sanctifies the three worlds, 3 
so that He should need to purify Himself by touching the 
dust of the latter s feet ? It was no impurity, but intoxi¬ 
cation caused by love for the devotee, which led BhagavSn, 
in his desire to proclaim his greatness, to lose Himself, and 
to show that, were it possible for Him to be tainted with 
impurity, even He could regain purity by touohing the 
devotee. Realize from this how rare a thing a true devotee 
is. Another Sh&stra has said: ‘‘As a cow runs after its 
calf, so Shiva and Gauri 4 run after him who repeats 
‘Mahadeva,* Mahadeva, Mahadeva.”' Why, what reason 
has the consort of Bhavani,* the Creator of all, the shade of 
Whose feet supports the Brahmanda, to run after His de¬ 
votees ? The necessity was none other than that of showing 
that where there is a devotee there He Himself is.

* Sadhu.

■A sage o, «tat Mdh.™, a“ *«r»d «

B , The eart *>. the upper and nether worlds.

A name of Devi as spouse of $hiva.

hU trusts* " Sh,r *- ““ » BO called in

* A name of the Devi as sponse of Bhava (Shiva).

164

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRAB , The eart *>. the upper and nether worlds.

A name of Devi as spouse of $hiva.

hU trusts* " Sh,r *- ““ » BO called in

* A name of the Devi as sponse of Bhava (Shiva).

164

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

It is said in the Tantra that “ all admit that the plabes 
of pilgrimage 1 are the cause of purity. But, 0 Girija.* ** in 
very truth, I say that it is the S&dhaka of the Kul&oh&ra 1 
rite who gives purity even to all such places of pilgrimage. 
Blessed is the mother * of a Kaula!* Blessed are his father 
and kinsmen and relatives! Blessed are those who have 
conversed with him ! In heaven the ancestors of a master 
of Kula* sing: ‘In our race will be born a master of Kula.’” 
In the Utpatti Tantra it is said: “ Devi, wherever a Vlra* 
or a Divya * resides, there also are all the sacred shrines.' 
0 Thou who art desired of the Vlra, there is no doubt that 
a Vlra, though having a human body, is in flesh and blood 
a Devata M and Shiva Himself. 0 Devi, what fear can he 
have who lives where a Vlra lives, and under his protection ? 
The protection of a worldly u Vlra relieves us of worldly 
fear, but the protection of the spiritual u Vlra relieves one 
of the fear of famine, disease, the king, and death. It relieves

* Tlrtba. holy shrines, soch a a Gaya, or the temple of Jaggernath 
at Pnri, with which India is Btndded.

* Daughter of the mountain—a title of the Devi as daughter of the 
Mountain King.

* The way of the Kaulas, one of the divisions of T&ntrik worshippers.

* The mother is always, by way of honour, placed first and before 
the father.

* One who follows Kul&chAra (see Introduction).

' One who is versed in Kul&chara.* The mother is always, by way of honour, placed first and before 
the father.

* One who follows Kul&chAra (see Introduction).

' One who is versed in Kul&chara.

’ Men are by the Tantras divided into three classes or tempera¬ 
ments : Pashu (" animal "). in whom the dark, inert quality (Guna) 
of tamas predominates, and who is bound by the bonds; Vlra (hero), 
or those in whom the active quality (rajas) prevails: and divya 
(celestial), in whom the pure (Sattva) quality prevails. Worship 
varies, and is adapted to the temperament of the worshipper (see 
Introduction).

' See post. • Tlrtha post.

M Deva (see Introduction). The Vlra here referred to is the Siddha 
Vlra. Laukika, or hero in the ordinary English sense.

** P&ram&rthika.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

165

of the three forms of fear—namely, that which arises from 
troubles of the body, senses, and mind, 1 from external 
material objects;* and from all superhuman beings."*

In the Kulargava Tantra * it is said :In the Kulargava Tantra * it is said :

“ My beloved, in all the world the sight of a Kula- 
ch&ryya is indeed rare, and is only obtained after enjoyment 
of the fruits of a vast heap of religious merit.” Should even 
a Chandala * or a person of still lower caste become attached 
to Kuladharma, 1 then the very memory of him, the recitation 
of his name and qualities, the singing of his praises, sight 
of, and talk with him purifies a Jlva. “ O noble lady, you 
and I for ever reside there where he who has a knowledge of 
Kul&chara lives. It is not on Mounts Kailfi$ha,* Sumeru,* 
or Mandara 10 that I always live. I ever abide there where 
Sadhakas versed in Kulatattva 11 are.” (The meaning of this 
i® that He would rather abandon his abode on these moun¬ 
tains than the companionship of Kaulikas. 1 * The devoted 
Sadhaka will know from this which is the greater—the 
glory of Mount Kailfi$ha or that of a Kaula.) “ The place 
where a great T&ntrika ** lives should be visited and seen 
with care, even if it should be remoter than the remote, for 
you and I live in joy there."

I Adhy&mika.

t -^dhibhautika— e.g., fear of injury from the elements or other men.

Adhidaivika, such as Devos, ghosts, demons, etc.

t Chap. ix. 1 Master of Eaula doctrine.

* One of the lowest castes, rag-pickers, cleaners of privies, etc.

The Dharma or doctrine of the Eaulas, a division of T&ntrik 
worshippers (see Introduction). * The paradise of §hiva.

Vide ante , and chap, ii, Vishpu Purfina. The Devi is Merunilayft 
(residing on Mount Meru) (Lalita S.. v. 148). The Shrlchakra has, it 
is said, three aspects—BhOmi. KailA^ha, Meru : the last being when it 
is identified with the sixteen Nitya Deities.

“ Used as a staff to churn the Ocean for Amrita.

II Kaula knowledge. “ Kaulas. u Mahftpurusha.

166

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA“ Used as a staff to churn the Ocean for Amrita.

II Kaula knowledge. “ Kaulas. u Mahftpurusha.

166

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The meaning of this is: It may be asked why one 
should take so much trouble to see a man. Lest such an 
evil notion should seize the naturally weak heart of man, 
Bhagavan has dearly given us to understand that we should 
not desist from visiting a Eulasadhaka, considering him to 
be a mere man. It iB not a human body that the Eaulika 
possesses. The Shiva Shakti aspect * 1 is that of which the 
Kaulikas are worshippers, and is that which the world iH 
so eager to behold. In that aspect Shiva and Shakti unite 
and, as Ardhan&rishvara, 2 * live in the enjoyment of perfect 
joy in the body of the Eulasadhaka. To see him, therefore, 
is the same as seeing Their undivided and united form.

If a Guru of Eulatattva lives even afar, visit him, but 
not a Pashu,' even if he be near.” By the term “ Eaulika,” 
worshippers should understand a Sadhaka of Eul&chara, 4 
the characteristics of which we shall explain in our dis¬ 
course on Ach&ratattva. By Pashu is meant a person bound 
by the eight fetters of shame, eto. “ Sacred is the land in 
which a master of Eula is born. By seeing and honouring a 
Eaulika one gives deliverance to thrice seven generations.”

“ Seeing a master of Eula born in their family and 
living in their house, his ancestors in heaven say, * At length 
we shall obtain the highest abode.’ As cultivators with 
craving eyes pray for rain, so the ancestors in heaven pray 
with eager hearts that a son or grandson of their family

1 M&rti, or form ’ The bisexual form of Uhvara.

1 Vide ante, See poet. See Introduction.

® ne an< ! highest division of Tintrik worshippers, whose way 
of life (&ch&ra) is according to Kula doctrine.

Introduction The reference is to the classification of the 
? a ' a a «* ra ^ afflictions ” which are variously numbered,

are given as five in the Lmga Purina. The Devi Bhfig. Pr. says : “ InIntroduction The reference is to the classification of the 
? a ' a a «* ra ^ afflictions ” which are variously numbered,

are given as five in the Lmga Purina. The Devi Bhfig. Pr. says : “ In

»leep to the Yogi, they .re boned £ 
la those attached to the world they arise unimpeded.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE 167

may be initiated in the truths of Kula doctrine. Then 
. blessed will that sinless great man be in Sangsara.”

Beloved after death, masters in Kula joyfully come to 
me. When a great Kaulika comes to the Kaulika house, 1 
Yoginls,* with Yogis, come to see and welcome him.”

Even Pitfis and Devat&s seek the protection and pay 
homage to the great Kaula Yogi. And for this great men 
devoted to the knowledge of Kula should be honoured and 
worshipped.”

Devi, such sinful men as after the adoration of 
Tin self fail to worship Thy devotees never win favour 
of Thee.”

When Sadhakas place the Naivedya* before me, I 
accept it by sight only. But, 0 lotus eyed, I eat it by the 
mouths of the saintly devotees.”

" Devi » ^ere is no doubt that if one worships Thy 
devotee he worships Me, so that he who would do that 
which is pleasing to Me adores Thy devotees only.

Whatever is done in the name of Kula disciples is 
done in the name of Deva. All Devatas love Kula. There¬ 
fore should Kaulikas be worshipped."

Paivati, even if in any other place, 4 1 am worshipped 
with great reverence, I am not so well pleased as when a 
great Kaulika is worshipped.”

The fruit which he cannot obtain even by pilgrimage, 
austerities,* gifts, sacrifices,* and voluntary religious prac¬ 
tices, that the Jlva can obtain by the worship of a

' That is, to §hiva’s abode. * Female yogis

v eg itli“ U ho P « r !e°' 0fferi " BS 10 “*"• C °“ isti “ 8 *

’ That is, than in the person of a great Kaulika.

Tapasyft (see Introduction). • Yajna (ibid)

obltotowVi 08' Vol “ nl * ri '’ “ from those which ore

168

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA’ That is, than in the person of a great Kaulika.

Tapasyft (see Introduction). • Yajna (ibid)

obltotowVi 08' Vol “ nl * ri '’ “ from those which ore

168

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Kaalika. O, Ambika, 1 even if a Kaulika (not to speak of 
any other) dishonours a master of Raula, all his gifts, 
sacrifices, hom&s,* austerities, worship, and recitation of 
mantra’ are of no avail.’’

As a reward for what religious merit can worldly 
creatures like you and I expect to meet those unworldly 
great men whose greatness the Sh&stras have declared by 
lakhs of such evidence ? To what hill, to what forest 
hermitage, to what great cremation ground, to what great 
shrine * have we been ? In what Muni’s hermitage, * * * 5 6 in what 
saint's 6 humble abode, in what Dandi’s 7 matha, 6 * in what 
Brahmachari's* abode have we sought protection ? What 
mantra have we recited according to the rules of Japa ? 10 
What Devata have we worshipped ? In what Vrata u have 
we been initiated ? Along what path have we advanced ? 
Restraint of mind and body, contentment, forbearance, 
meditation, concentration of thought and process towards 
ecstatic contemplation "—which of these have we practised ? 
Listening," thinking, 1 * and constant meditation," which of 
these have we done ? Of discrimination," dispassion, 17 what 
have we understood ? In the name of Oharma open vour 
heart and say, brother, what have we done to deserve to 
meet the saintly Sadhakas whom even Devas rarely meet ? 
You will say, maybe, we have not done anything, but still

1 Mother, title of the Devi (see post).

' The sacrifice made by pouring clarified batter into fire (see

Introduction).

5 Japa (see ibid.). * MahApItha. 1 See post.

S&dbu. A class of ascetics.

' Monastic institution. ' Celibate ascetic. " See Introduction.

" Ibid.

u Samftdhi. u Shravapa. M Manama

M Nididhyieana. 11 That is, between the real and the unreal.

' Vairagya ; unattachment to worldly things.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

169" Ibid.

u Samftdhi. u Shravapa. M Manama

M Nididhyieana. 11 That is, between the real and the unreal.

' Vairagya ; unattachment to worldly things.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

169

we honour and revere them, bow to them, and anxiously 
pray to meet them. That is not altogether untrue. We 
pray in our minds, but what of our actions ? Had we acted, 
we should not have remained satisfied with mere prayer, 
but we should have run with passionate hearts without 
looking at the path, and having found him, we would have 
prostrated ourselves and clasped his feet, and said : ** Lord, 
I have made no provision. How shall I be saved?” Say 
truly, O brother, has anyone’s heart wept in this fashion ? 
If it had, it would not have had to weep any more. The 
pious poet Dasharathi Ray has, on the subject of the com¬ 
ing 1 * of the Mother of the world,* said:

“ My child, the mother says, you will come to know, , 
You will no longer have to weep.

Incessant tears have brought an end to weeping,

The child who clings to and calls * mother,’

That child holds the mother fast.

The mother is ashamed to let it weep.

Mother does not care for the children who mix with 
others

And go about laughing and playing.

She does not go to them and easily obtains leisure, 
And takes the child who weeps on her lap.”

0 Thou who art full of mercy for the poor, tell me, 
0 Mother, when will the day come for Thy Sadhaka, when 
I shall weep as I ought to weep for Thee, the day on which 
Thou wilt come and say: “ No longer weep. Incessant 
tears have brought an end to weeping ? ”

A patient in delirium suffering from Sannipatika fever 3 
feels no sorrow. Hari, Hari, 4 shall we learn to weep ? If,

1 Agamanl. * Jagadamba. a title of the Devi.

A violent fever, said to affect the blood and produce delirium.

' Name of Vishpu.

170

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Agamanl. * Jagadamba. a title of the Devi.

A violent fever, said to affect the blood and produce delirium.

' Name of Vishpu.

170

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

when we are at worldly work, anyone should happen to 
stand before us in the dress of a Sadhaka we instantly leave 
the woik, and with all the frown and fury at our command, 
expel him from our house and then find peace. Being such 
as we are, will our sinful hearts weep to obtain Sadhakas, 
instead of weeping for Hell. O thou Dweller in the Heart! 
0 thou Saviour! Dost thou know, O Mother, how long it 
will be before we are delivered of this sin ? With a heart 
such that the very attempt to speak of it makes me fear 
because of the fearful visions of sin which it raises before 
my eyes, I am prepared to dishonour Shastra, Sadhu, and 
Dharma. With such a heart again I proceed to meet 
Sadhus. How great is my shamelessness! To say that 
were there living any saintly Sadhaka, he would surely one 
day or other meet me in my house, argues great vanity on 
my part. What a ridiculous display of impudent presump¬ 
tion! Why, what Indras, Chandras, Vayus, or Varuijas 1 
have you and I become that we should meet Sadhakas 
without having to stir from our houses ? You will say, you 
have learning, wealth, and a following. You have. But 
what is that to the Sadhaka ? It is our mistake which leads 
us to tell him we have learning. Shall I speak of learning 
to him who, through the grace of Mahavidya, holds the 
eight forms of Siddhi' in the palm of his hand ? Shall I 
toast of my wealth to those who, possessing the priceless 
wealth of the feet of Tara, J consider even the position of 
an Indra as of no worth ? I want to show the strength 
of my following to the son of that Mother, Creatrix of all 
Whose very glance commands the service of everyone from

^ ®evos of the firmament, moon, wind, and water.

t e ’8ht great powers, as to which see Introduction.^ ®evos of the firmament, moon, wind, and water.

t e ’8ht great powers, as to which see Introduction.

° f , t . he great forms (Da*ha Mahavidya) of the Devi (see 
Dn ? ha Mahavidya, Cpasana Babasya. by Prosanna Kumar Shastri).

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

171

Shangkara 1 * * Himself to the moleeolesand atoms of the Brah- 
manda ! How mighty is the strength of my intellect! And 
even should we, whilst sitting at home, or going to places 
of pilgrimage, or moving about oremation grounds or places 
of execution, ever come across S&dhakas, are we able to 
zecognize them ? Have we come to know Devatfl because 
He is installed in every house?* When, after killing 
Hiranyakashipu, Bhagavan Nrisinghadeva* wished to grant 
a boon to Prahlada, 4 crest-gem of devotees, the latter at 
once said: “ As worldly persons who are unable to dis¬ 
criminate the unreal from the real, form lasting attach¬ 
ments to wife, children, and other things, so often as they 
willingly or unwillingly constantly think of them, so may 
I constantly remember Thee. May my love for Thee never 
forsake me. Bhagavan, the abode of the supreme love, 
was then standing in a visible form before him, but yet 
Prahlada did not say: “ I want Thee." Without seeking 
Bhagavan himself, he prayed that he might have devotion 
towards Him. For, Prahlada, the crest-gem of those who 
have true knowledge,* knew that the presence of Bhagavan 
was not rare, since He pervades the universe. He knew, how¬ 
ever, that what is rare is devotion to His feet. To him who 
desires to possess devotion, the presence or absence of 
Bhagavan are the same, since there can be no realization of 
Bhagavan without piety. But if a man have devotion, 
Bhagavan, even though he were at a distance of a hundred 
crore of yojanas a must appear before him wherever, and

1 ?biva.

’ Referring to the image (Pratima) installed in Hindu households. 
Vishiju in his man-lion incarnation, undertaken for the destrnc-1 ?biva.

’ Referring to the image (Pratima) installed in Hindu households. 
Vishiju in his man-lion incarnation, undertaken for the destrnc-

° f , t “ e atheis *' Hiranyakashipu. who had cruelly tortured his son 
Prahlada because the latter was a devotee of Vishnu.

4 For his great devotion to the Deva.

' Literally, persons proficient in tattva.

A crore is 10,000,000, and a yojana is about eight miles.

172

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in whatsoever form, he desires. Just as the water of a 
river when mingling with the sea cannot be distinguished 
from it; so the existence of a devotee mingling with Bhaga- 
van cannot be distinguished from Him. Just as the rare 
presence of Bhagav&n is obtained through devotion, so 
pious men too, though rare in every place, are subject to 
control by love. Again, just as through want of piety we 
are a hundred yojanas from the presence of Bhagav&n, 
though he is always before us, so we are unable to discern 
the real self of a saintly Sadhaka, a devotee of Bhagavan, 
even if we meet him. We see with our physical e 5 r es, but 
our eyes of wisdom are ever blind. The Tantra Sh&stra 
has said that he alone is dear to the Mother of the world, 1 
whose heart naturally rejoices with love at the sight of 
Kulasadhakas,* in the same way as the heart naturally re¬ 
joices at the sight of wife, children, and friends.Now, to speak truly, do I look at Sadhakas with eyes 
open with such joy and softened with such love ? If I 
did, how could my heart forsake their company and be 
charmed by that of kith and kin ? And why does my heart 
long for the latter even after I have seen a Sfidhu ? The 
reason is, that a saint is saintly, but my vision is unsaintly,* 
and is therefore a hindrance instead of being a help towards 
meeting Sadhakas. Say now, is it not a great sin to think 
that there are no Sadhakas merely because we do not see 
them in every city or village ? Whether we see them or 
not, do not widen your own path to Hell by saying that 
there are no Sadhakas in the world. Do not also be 
astounded to hear that in the Kali age Sadhakas who follow 
the Tantrik form of worship attain Siddhi in one lifetime. 
At the very moment when you and I are virulently criti¬ 
cizing the subject of Sadhakas, be sure that at that moment

Jagadamba. * Worshippers according to Kal&ch&ra.

' A Sadha is S&dhu, but the vision is As&dhn.

TANTRA SCRIPTURE

173

hundreds of Sadhakas in the boundless kingdom of the 
universe are making their births blessed, their lives blessed, 
and the world blessed by clasping to their hearts the feet 
of Her who gives success to all purposes. Blessed are we 
who, being born in Bharatavarsha, 1 made holy by the 
touch of their feet, are able to gratify ourselves by the 
taking of their names.

CHAPTER II

WHAT IS THE NECESSITY FOR THE TANTRAS 
WHEN THERE IS THE VEDA?

Now we come to the doubt we have mentioned—namely :CHAPTER II

WHAT IS THE NECESSITY FOR THE TANTRAS 
WHEN THERE IS THE VEDA?

Now we come to the doubt we have mentioned—namely :

Why, seeing that there is the Veda, was the Tantra 
Shastra created?” In the first place, we object to the 
objection itself. The question why the Tantra Shastra 
was created comes next. We ask why this question has 
arisen ? Perhaps the modern educated community of fasti¬ 
dious critics will be astonished to hear us ask this question. 
The reason for their astonishment lies in our assertion 
that it is not possible that the Shastra should be created. 
vThe Shastra in our opinion is an eternal thing. I know 
that you will probably say : “What orthodoxy! what blind¬ 
ness ! what shocking superstition!” It does not matter 
if you do. Just as it is blind faith to be partial to one side 
without heeding the reasons which really exist in favour 
of the other, so it is scepticism to rely on mistaken inferen¬ 
ces in total disregard of the reasons which exist against 
them. In your opinion it is orthodoxy to speak of the 
Shastra as an unerring and eternal thing, but in mine it 
is scepticism to deny it. We shall therefore at once proceed 
to investigate that which, if disregarded, is scepticism, and 
if regarded, is orthodoxy.

In the first place the root and cause of dispute is that 
while m your opinion the Shastra was prepared after a 
view of the world and in accordance with it, in my opinion

175

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS175

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

the world was constructed on a view of the Shastra and in 
accordance with it. Consequently, while in your opinion 
man is the author of the Shastra, in mine the Shastra has 
no author but only revealers—namely, Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Maheshvara, 1 and after them the succession of Risbis. To 
this perhaps the philosophic Pandits of our own country 
will take some exception. For they not improbably have 
heard, or read in the Veda, that the Veda,* Vedanga, 1 and 
Vedanta * all emanated from the mouth of Parame§hvara 
Himself. We do not deny this, but would point out that 
the very Veda which they know to be the language of Para- 
raeshvara has been described to be Brahman Itself by its 
Revealers, those three most worshipful Devas.

>*In the Vrihannila Tantra' it is said:

“ Daughter of the mountain! know the Veda to be 
Brahman Itself. The Veda has no author, but is self- 
manifested. Of yore the Veda was sung by Bhagavfin 
to SvayambhQ Brahma.' From Mahftdeva Himself T to 
the Rishis all are, age after age, the remembrancers of the 
Veda, but none is its author.”

The Shastra says that the Rig Veda and other Vedas 
came out with the breath of Brahma. Many consider 
this to be strong evidence of Parameshvara’s authorship 
of the Veda. But it is not that, but evidence of the 
revelation of the Veda. Because the Veda was breathed 
out by Brahma, it does not follow that He was its author, 
for no one is the author of his own breath. We are

‘ Shiva.

’ The scriptures of the Hindus—Rig, Yajur. Sftma. and Atharva 
Vedas. It has been said that the Tantra is a fifth Veda.

* See post.

' Doctrine of the Vedas (Upanishads): the subject of the philosophy 
(darsbana) so named. See also Rudra Yimala, chap. iv.

* The self-born. • 1 Shiva.

176

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* See post.

' Doctrine of the Vedas (Upanishads): the subject of the philosophy 
(darsbana) so named. See also Rudra Yimala, chap. iv.

* The self-born. • 1 Shiva.

176

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

simply instruments of inspiration. None of us is their 
creator. For he who can create breath is indestructible 
even in the great dissolution of things. 1 Brahma’s body, 
unlike our own, is not made of gross matter consisting 
of the five elements. That body of His is all Himself, full 
of the play of eternal consciousness. It is some particular 
part of Himself which has emanated from Him as Veda in 
the form of breath. This is why the Shastra has said: 
“ Daughter of the mountain, know the Veda to be Brahma 
Himself."

Bhagavan, though capable of creating all things, is 
incapable of creating another like Himself—that is, some¬ 
thing which is not Him but is yet similar to Him. Rama, 
Krishna, Ganga, Vishnu, DurgA, Kali, whomsoever you may 
mention, all are Himself. You cannot point to anyone who 
is different from, and yet is like, Him. Had there been, or 
could have been, another like Him, he would never have 
been sole Mistress* * without a second.* As I can only appear 
and disappear with my own selfness, but cannot create 
another like myself, so Brahma, too, cannot create the Veda, 
which is but another aspeot of Himself. He merely reveals 
the Veda as His expiration at the beginning of creation, 
and withdraws it as His inspiration at the time of the great 
dissolution. The Shastra has therefore said: “ In respect 
of the sayings of a man, it is permissible to inquire whether 
there be error or not, but in the case of the Veda, as it has 
no author, the question of error does not arise at all."

Here someone may say that, if that be so, Para- 
meshvara’s creation itself is an impossibility, for if you and 
I, and every other Jlva are all He, whom then does 
He create? If, however, creation by Brahma becomes

1 Mah&pralaya.

* Adhlshvarl.

* Advitlya.1 Mah&pralaya.

* Adhlshvarl.

* Advitlya.

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

177

impossible, we are not at all afraid. Why should the descen¬ 
dants of Arvyas be astonished to hear that “ there is no 
creation,” when all their Sh&stras freely say that, in a real 
spiritual sense, there is no creation, preservation and de¬ 
struction by Brahma, all such being a mere illusive display ? 
As a matter of fact, although in a real sense there is no 
creation, yet for us Jlvas subject to Maya, of which we are 
the product, creation undoubtedly exists. But the Veda 
was not created even in the sense of that which we call 
creation. Just as Rama, Krishna, and the other incar¬ 
nations are the eternal Brahman, so is the Veda. Just as 
It, although self-manifest, manifested Itself in the womb 
of KaushalyS. 1 or DevakI * by means of its Mayft; so also the 
Veda, though self-manifest, appeared in the heart of Bhaga- 
vfLn, and came out with His breath at the will of Her 
whose very substance is will. The Vedas, PurtLnas, Tantras, 
and other Sbistras, are self-manifest and self-evident. 
Language, which is the gross form of sound, is its own 
author* It matters very little if at the first hearing these 
things seem impossible. In our discussion as to the princi¬ 
ples of Mantra, we shall proceed to decide this point accord¬ 
ing to the ShOstras. For the moment the Sadhaka will 
excuse me a few intervening Chapters.

Here let us understand what harm will result if the 
Dharrna Shastra of the Aryyas is supposed to be of human 
origin. What is that defect for fear of which it has been 
declared to be self-manifest and emanent with the breath 
of Ishvara? We reply not for fear of any defect. The 
Veda is called self-manifest because it is so. It is not 
for fear of darkness that we admit the fact that light 
gives lustre. Whether darkness be present or not, it is

‘ Mother of Rama. * Mother of Krishna.‘ Mother of Rama. * Mother of Krishna.

> That is sound in the subtle state and which exists in gross form 
as speech (Vaikhari) is uncreated.

12

178

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA‘ Mother of Rama. * Mother of Krishna.

> That is sound in the subtle state and which exists in gross form 
as speech (Vaikhari) is uncreated.

12

178

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

for ever evident that a light is self-manifest. That which 
cannot be manifested by another, but which itself makes 
manifest all things, is called self-manifest. The Shastra 
says: “ There is no need to sweeten by means of some¬ 
thing else a thing which is sweet by nature, and which 
imparts sweetness to things which are not sweet, nor 
is there anything which can impart sweetness to that 
which is naturally sweet. We sweeten things like milk, 
cream, and curd with gur, 1 sugar-candy, honey, and 
the like. But there is no need to sweeten honey in a 
similiar way; nor is there anything in the world which 
can sweeten honey. We reveal the courtyard and interior 
of a house, and all things in it by a light. But to reveal 
that light another is not required. The light reveals itself, 
and is therefore called self-manifest. Light alone of all 
things in the world possesses the power to reveal. Light 
is itself luminous; what else, then, can reveal it ? Like 
honey and light, the Veda also is self-manifest. The Veda 
reveals the principles of all things in the Brahmanda, but 
is itself its own revealer. Who can reveal that which reveals 
all ? It is not possible to have something which is beyond 
everything. Even if for fear that there may be darkness 
we do not admit the existence of light, yet light, reveal¬ 
ing itself, makes visible and thus destroys darkness. 
Similarly, if for fear of any imperfection we do not admit 
that the Shastra is self-manifest, yet the Shastra, reveal¬ 
ing itself, makes plain and thus removes the imperfection. 
That imperfection is this: Aryyan philosophers have said: 
“What is free from mistake, error, and deceit, that is 
authoritative." * Sh&stras are authoritative sayings—that 
is, the sayings of Shastra are free from mistake, error, and 
deceit. When we hear it said that man is the author of 
Pharma .^hastra, it seems to us as if light and darkness 
1 Molasses. * S pta .THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

179

were holding a consultation. It is evident that while man 
is erring, Shastra is unerring. Shastra never makes a 
mistake. Man is always doing so. Shastra is the eternal seat 
of mercy. Man the source of deceit. Shastra has no begin¬ 
ning or end, Man is ever subject to birth and death. Man 
is the slave of his senses. Shastra guides to the super- 
sensual. Shastra is the unselfish Guru ‘ of the world. Man 
is a very worm of selfishness. It is a baseless fancy to try 
to bring about an agreement between these mutually con¬ 
flicting conditions.

Many, made restless by the inconstant waves of glitter¬ 
ing physical science, are wont to say that Shastra is nothing 
but the outcome and evidence of extensive experience. 
Someone, it is supposed, has said, or written down, as 
much as he has seen. From this it follows that whether 
the principles contained in Shastra be true or not, great 
credit must be given to him who spoke it. We, too, 
are not niggardly in giving such credit, but we find it 
very difficult to give credit to another whilst going to 
perdition oneself. You yourself are blind, and will, by 
leading me along some thorny path which you have 
discovered, drown me in a dark well. It is the height of 
folly to expect that in this state of things I shall speak 
of your extensive experience. I admit that you have seen 
and heard much more than I have. But who says that 
all which you have seen and heard are unerring, incontro¬ 
vertible, and eternally pure ? May be one da}', in going to 
a river, its water seemed to you very pure and very cool. 
But who told you that, if relying on your word, I go 
into the river to bathe, I shall not be caught by a crocodile ? 
What is the evidence that, even if the water be pure, there 
is no fear of danger? My going into the water may be the

1 Spiritual teacher (see Introduction).

180

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Spiritual teacher (see Introduction).

180

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

result of your extensive experience, but who will be respon¬ 
sible for my life? Secondly, this extensive experience appears 
to be to a large extent worthless. In the first place, it is the 
experience of a blind man. Next, it is difficult to ascer¬ 
tain the length of the period of which experience has 
been had. Of all the experience which man has acquired 
during the four ages—namely, Satya, Tretfi, Dvfcpara, 
and Kali—we know only Aryyavarta,* Bharatavarsha,* 
or at the most, Jambudvlpa, 5 and perhaps the salt sea 
beyond. This is the furthest limit of experience. Now 
I ask, Who is it that has made mention in the Shastra 
of seven seas to wit, the seas of salt, sugar-cane juice, 
wine, clarified butter, curd, milk, and sweet water? 
You will say that whoever may have done so has made 
a mistake. It matters not. But whence came the names 
of the seven seas ? You and I have not orossed the uncross- 
able sea, and reached the region of those seas. Whence 
could this country have got the names of the seven seas 
lying one after the other beyond the salt sea, which it is so 
difficult to traverse, and upon view only of the farthest 
quarter of which expert foreign navigators retrace their 
steps ? You may say: “ I do not believe in your salt sea ”; 
but you know by what language you will be addressed 
should such ingratitude on your part to that which 
supports your body with its salt become known. Lay 
aside your far-fetched interpretation, your philosophical 
reasoning, your scientific argumentativeness. I do not 
want to hear of them where a matter of direct vision is 
concerned. I will not admit the validity of any other evid¬ 
ence. I will not bow my head before anything except the 
Shastra. May I be reminded of the lives of Samarasingha,

1 Country of the Aryyas.

’ India, os described in chap, iii 0 f the Viahpu Pur&na.

The continent of that name (see Ibid., chap. ii).1 Country of the Aryyas.

’ India, os described in chap, iii 0 f the Viahpu Pur&na.

The continent of that name (see Ibid., chap. ii).

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

181

Pratftpasingha, and Sivaji, 1 before I turn my thought to the 
words of those who, though possessed of the sense of sight, 
proceed to disprove the existence of things seen, and of 
truths established by Shastra, and to give far-fetched inter¬ 
pretation of them. Alas! the lion-hearted heroes, pillars 
of Sanatana dharma! where are you to-day in this dismal 
time ? That resplendent lustre of yours hallowed by 
Sadhana, is mingled with the Mantra Shastra itself. Do 
ye to-day shed that lustre in every letter, in every accent. 
Let the Shastra of Bharata be again resplendent with the 
fire of the austerities 1 of Bharata’s sons.

Next, the earth is composed of seven islands, each of 
which is divided into nine continents.* * The nature of the 
surface of each continent, its extent, heights, and depths, 
its inhabitants, their religion, practices, and longevity, the 
various Devatfis who exercise particular power in each 
particular place, the different Devatas who are worshipped 
in different places, and lastly, the special accounts given of 
the seven Svargas 4 and seven Pat&las,* and so forth: these 
are all matters which I have not at all mentioned. Say, 
are all these things dreams or illusion,* or mere imagina¬ 
tion ? It matters not if you explain them away as mere 
imagination, but save your own head. If you call it all 
imagination, then, as the salt sea is imagination, as 
Bh&ratavarsha is imagination, so you and I too are imagina¬ 
tion. We would advise you, instead of calling so many 
things imagination, to consider yourself alone as imaginary, 
in which case all trouble will be at an end. Not to speak 
of you and I, who are but the meanest of insects, even those 
whose acute and overpowering intellect penetrated into

1 Rajput and M&hratta heroes.

’ Tapaa (see Introduction). * Yaraha.1 Rajput and M&hratta heroes.

’ Tapaa (see Introduction). * Yaraha.

* Upper worlds. * Under worlds. * Maya or Moha.

182

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Brahmaloka 1 have, when dealing themselves with things 
which are beyond the senses, trampled on all kinds of 
evidence, and loudly declared to the world “ Sh&stra- 
yonitv&t.”* * In that deeply dark place where all kinds of 
evidence fail, Shastra alone is the glowing light. We 
know not how powerful must be the evil Karma'' acquired 
from birth to birth of him who suspects or believes the 
Shastra to be of human authorship. It is said ‘ “ Thieve 
not, lie not, believe in and love the Creator, aud you will 
attain eternal peace.” A Dharma Shastra, the founda¬ 
tions of which are based on a few such settled maxims 
as these may be the fruit of extensive experience. To be 
induced by such a form of faith to doubt or disbelieve 
the Sanatana Dharma and Sanatana Shastra,* visible 
manifestation of Brahman himself, is the greatest degra¬ 
dation possible. It may be that in the case of that 
Shastra which has as its main object the maintenance 
without conflict of a balance between the four actions of 
eating, sleeping, fearing, and sexual intercourse, its res¬ 
ponsibility may cease with the provision of a few such 
maxims as “ Thieve not, lie not, etc." It is, however, the 
greatest impudence for us to discuss the truth or other¬ 
wise of that Shastra the object of which is to declare the 
principles relating to the molecules and atoms of the endless 
orores of Brahm&ijdas, each consisting of fourteen worlds. 
These principles we shall state, so far as it lies in our

1 The highest of the seven upper worlds.

On account of its having $h&stra as its source," the third 
aphorism of the First Part, chap, i, in the Yed&nta Sutra.

Priirabdha, or that Karma which has begun and is already bearing 
fruit (see Introduction. Karma ").

' By reformed " Hinduism.

* The eternal and immutable scripture and code of duty of thePriirabdha, or that Karma which has begun and is already bearing 
fruit (see Introduction. Karma ").

' By reformed " Hinduism.

* The eternal and immutable scripture and code of duty of the

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

183

power, in our discourse on worship. 1 Man is imperfect, 
and whatever he does is imperfect. The imperfect can never 
attain the goal, and that which has not reached the goal is 
ignorant of the full truth about the Brahman. Who dare 
proceed along an unseen path in reliance upon the word of 
such an ignorant guide ? Instead of relying upon their own 
words, Devas and Rishis have therefore admitted the 
evidence of Sh&stra, composed of authoritative sayings, to 
be alone the sole authority.

Responsibility for the education of children always 
rests with the parents. How can a senseless child be 
saved unless warned by parents, who point out to it 
which is the path of life, and which is the path of death ?

It is under this responsibility that, after the declaration 
of the truth, Bhagavan Himself has, descending on earth 
in the form of Sh&stra, said: “ Both Turiya * * and Shabda^/ 
Brahman 1 are my eternal bodies.” Though invisible to 
human eyes, the Supreme Oeatrix, 4 taking the world which 
She maintains upon Her lap has, as it were, with the finger, 
pointed out, and declared: “ Do not, through misunder¬ 
standing, fall away from truth, and Dharma, and the Veda.

Do not stray from the path of right practice."* Following

1 Paja.Do not stray from the path of right practice."* Following

1 Paja.

’ The fourth state of consciousness above dreamless slamber 
(sushupti), the sleep of dreams (svapna), and the awakening (Jftgrat). 
According to the Upanishads, there are the three last states; three 
functions —viz., creation, preservation, destruction: and the three 
individual Jlva (Vi$hva, Taijasa, Prajnfi), the collective Jiva (Vaish- 
v&nara, Hlranyagarbha, Sutr&tm&n), and the Param&tm&n. The fourth 
state above these is the Turlya. Shaiva doctrine speaks of a nameless 
fifth beyond Turlya, and two functions, pi*.. Turodhana, the function of 
I?hvara, and Anugraha. the function of Sad&?iva.

* The manifested Brahman with attributes—the sound or word as 
distinguished from the attributeless, unmanifested absolute—the 
Parabrahman.

' Parameshvari—the Devi.

‘ Ach&ra.

184

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

upon the echo of that solemn sound, millions of saori- 
fioial pits 1 have been lighted on mountains, riverbanks, in 
fields, forests, hermitages, temples, sacrificial chambers of 
monarchs, and house-holders, and in the abodes of celibate 
ascetics. The very tops of the palaces in Heaven 1 have 
been reddened with the light of the sacrificial fires on 
earth. None can say how many millions of Aryyan great 
men* have done sacrifices in religious observances 1 ex¬ 
tending over twelve, a hundred, and a thousand years, and 
have with bodies cleansed of sin by their austerities, 4 
entered through its open portals the Brahmaloka.*

Introduction of Tantra

The curtain of the drama of time gradually and in¬ 
exorably continued falling. Slowly evil days of unrighteous¬ 
ness, 1 murky with Maya, continued to cast a gloom of 
impure practices* over the world of Dharma. Unknowingly, 
men steeped in that darkness began to enter wrong paths. 
Disease, sorrow, grief, and anguish sorely oppressed the life 
of the world.A diseased ohild brings death on itself by eating, under 
the influence of delirium, unwholesome food. Although 
the child does not understand, the mother, who foresees 
the consequences, does. The thought of the child's in¬ 
evitable harm naturally pains the heart of the mother, 
who is goodness incarnate. In accordance with this natural 
law, the loving heart of the good All-Mother Creatrix of

The Kupda, in which the sacrificial fire is lighted.

Svarga - ’ Mahapnrusha.

Vrata (see Introduction). * Tapas (ibid.).

The highest, or the three highest, of the fourteen worlds. 
Adharma - * An&ch&ra.

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

185

the three worlds was moved, and the Mother, deluded by 
Her own play with a grieving heart, questioned Vaidya- 
natha, 1 saying: “ Deva of Devas, how shall the Jtva 
be saved ? ”

In the Kularaava Tantra we read :

“ Devi said: 1 Bhagavan, Thou art the Deva of even 
Devas, Thou art I$hvara, the ordainer of the five duties, 
omniscient, easily approached by devotion, and merciful 
to thy supplicants. Though Parameshvara, Thou art the 
I?hvara * * of Kulasadhakas, and the only source of the nectar 
of mercy. Deva, in this worthless dark Sangsara, all Jlvas 
are oppressed with the gloom of sorrow. The countless 
multitude of Jivas inhabiting all kinds of bodies constantly 
suffer the pains of both birth and death. There is no end 
of all this. None is happy, but all are oppressed with a 
deep sorrow. 0 Chief of Devas and Lord, tell me how these 
may be delivered from the bonds of existence.' ”Here the Mother has given full expression to the pur¬ 
pose for which She has willingly become the Mother of 
the world. The heart of the Mother of the world was the 
first to weep at the sight of its miseries. Though Herself 
ever changeless, Her heart throbbed with the agitation 
caused by the immense rolling waves of emotion into which 
Her eternal mercy was now thrown. Mother, this Brah- 
manda is Thy image and reflection. Thou seest Thine own 
face in the mirror of Maya, and art intoxicated with Thine 
own love. The day upon which, at sight of the misery of 
the world, Thy mercy shadowed with gloom that ever- 
joyful countenance of Thine, on that same day the counte¬ 
nances of Thy children were shadowed with the thought of

* Shiva, as chief physician of all human ills.

* That is. though He is the supreme Lord and Guide of all, He is in 
a special sense the Lord and Guide of worshippers according to Kul&- 
ch&ra.

186

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* That is. though He is the supreme Lord and Guide of all, He is in 
a special sense the Lord and Guide of worshippers according to Kul&- 
ch&ra.

186

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the pain which comes of separation from Thy love. From 
that day the world which had been separated from its 
Mother knew the love of the Mother’s heart. From that 
day Thy children in the universe have learnt to call Thee by 
\aiious names: Durga, when they have fallen amidst the 
insurmountable difficulties of the world; TaiA, when they 
behold the huge waves of the ocean of existence so difficult 
to traverse; and K&ll, when crushed by the torment of a 
terrible fate. Glory to the stream of mercy in the merciful 
Mother. Glory to the wave of pity in Her who is full of 
pity. Glory to the Mother's endless love. From that day 
the never-ceasing currents of Thy love flow through all the 
veins, the marrow of the bones, and the heart of Jiva. 
And so to-day, O Mother, should even a vile, hellish sinner 
like myself forget in his danger all else, he cannot forget 
Thy name. Whenever the fearful form of danger appears, 
Someone opens, as it were, the door of the heart, and at that 
instant the courtyard of the universe resounds with the 
ory: “ Victory, Victory, Victory to Tara! ” I know not 
whether others hear the sound; but, Mother, since Thy 
own substance is the sounds Nada and Vindu, 1 what sound, 
then, wilt Thou hear ? Whether Thou hear it or not, I 
hear, 0 Mother, that as I sound “ Victory to Tara,” another 
instantly raises as an echo: “Fear not, have no fear.” 
Who is that Other, O Mother ? Glory to Thy eternal play. 
O Mother ! Thou knowest and Father knows.

When the pain of disease becomes unbearable, I am 
instantly healed by saying: “O Mother!" But the dis¬ 
ease is again made worse by the taking of a bad diet. 
The heart is again attacked by doubts, misgivings, and 
reasonings. Nowadays our ears are constantly tormented

N&dl F a°nd Pa . ram ®*hvara came §hakti; from Shakti cameN&dl F a°nd Pa . ram ®*hvara came §hakti; from Shakti came

l^ Ued V,ndu - 1116 Devi Parameshvari i s 
container of them all (see Sbarad&tilaka. chap. i).

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

187

by the ravings of that Sannipfitika delirium. Wherever 
we go we hear: “Why is there the Tantra when there 
is the Veda ? ” The patient does not understand that the 
delirium has got worse, and that his end is near. Upon 
this the chief of Physicians * 1 * is at a loss to discover what 
He should do. He then searches His entire store of re¬ 
medies, and prescribes ras&yana.* At other times it is 
poison, but for delirium it is the elixir of life. 3 In a healthy 
body poison is the messenger of death, but in delirium it 
acts as a great mantra, renewing life. This is the reason 
why, 0 Sadhaka, a Sfidhana of acute, powerful, and burning 
mantras, is prescribed for us in the Tantra. It is when all 
other medicines, all other Sadhanas, have failed that the 
necessity arises for the Tantra Shastra, because in the store¬ 
house of Shastras there is no other S&dhana than that 
prescribed in the Tantra. Shastra has therefore said: 
“ When the south wind blows strongly from the Malaya 
mountains, there is no longer need to wave the palmleaf 
fan.” By S&dhana we nowadays understand something 
which has to be done upon one day in our life, like vacci¬ 
nation against smallpox. 1 Formerly we took the Bengal 
form of vaccination. 4 What does it matter that we now 
take the English form ? * Formerly we did both S&dhana 
and Bhajana r according to the Veda, Purana, and Tantra. 
What harm (you say) will follow if we now do them accord¬ 
ing to the Bible or even the Koran ? No other harm is done 
than this, that life is itself harmed. It may be enough for

1 Vaidyanatba or Shiva.

1 A class of medicine in the Ayurvedic system.

* Literally, Amrita, or nectar.

‘ The true nature of S&dhana is long and persistent effort and self¬ 
training until Buccess (Siddhi) is achieved.1 A class of medicine in the Ayurvedic system.

* Literally, Amrita, or nectar.

‘ The true nature of S&dhana is long and persistent effort and self¬ 
training until Buccess (Siddhi) is achieved.

1 Vaccination direct with small-pox virus.

* Vaccination with serum. ' Worship.

188

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

those to whom religion and duty are mere forced labour. 1 
But in the case of those who wish to see Dharma as a thing 
directly visible, and who wish by its minute vision to realize 
all supersensual things, their resolve extends to death, their 
purpose to fruition,* their path to the Brahma loka, and 
their destination is the Brahman Itself. O Jlvas of this 
earth! Conceive to what highest of abodes they, after pene¬ 
trating through this caldron-shaped Brahmapda, must 
ascend, whose final aim is the lotus feet of the Mother of 
the world,* kissed by the head of Him who bears the crescent 
moon.*

This great Siddhi is the Jiva’s perfect wealth to be 
gained by Sadhana, without which none can come by it; 
sought for as it is even by Him who is worshipped by all 
creatures. Sadhana is the name of that which ends in 
Siddhi. If I want that Siddhi I must do Sadhana, which 
is the work of a Sadhu.* So that if I have to do Sadhana, 
I must become a Sadhu, or if I do Sadhana, I shall, as a 
matter of course, become a Sadhu.

That Sadhana is of three kinds: physical, verbal, 
mental. Siddhi and Sadhana I must accomplish with my 
body, senses, and mind according to circumstances, country, 
time, and person. Now it must be remembered that all my 
best wealth consists only of what I shall be able to acquire 
under the following conditions: It must be acquired in this 
country, crowded by Varnasangkaras,* Mlechchhas, Yavanas/ 
and persons who adhere to other religious beliefs; in the 
Kali age, with its bad practices, filthy habits, oppression, 
licence, and prostitution; with an impure body where

Beg&r, done by compulsion and without reward. 
t Siddhi. * Jagadambft.Beg&r, done by compulsion and without reward. 
t Siddhi. * Jagadambft.

§hiva called Cbandrashekhara. ' Pious person.

* People born of parents of different castes.

Defiled person and foreigners of different kinds.

189

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

lust, anger, greed, pride, delusion, and envy* * contend as 
upon a battlefield; with restless senses, a doubting 
heart, and in a life which will last at the most a hundred 
years. All my commerce in the market of this world 
is with this capital only, and in its use I must both 
guard the capital and see to the profits. Now tell me who 
will perform religious ceremonies* and sacrifices * lasting 
twelve, a hundred, or a thousand years ? Where shall I get 
the Vaidik Rotars, Ritviks, Adhvaryus, and Acharyyas, 4 
versed in mantra for such a sacrifice ? Of the thousands of 
Shakhils of the Veda, but a few now remain as memorials ; 
the rest are lost. WTiich mantra of which of these Shakhas 
will to-day draw down which Deva to the seat of sacrifice ? 
From whence will the needed lakhs of heaps of Samidh' be 
to-day daily procured ? Will it ever again happen in that 
Bharatavarsha, T in the capital of which a thousand cows 
are now daily slaughtered, that the milk and ghee of milch 
cows will flow in streams like rivers ? Will the glowing fire 
be ever again gratified by the offering purified by mantra 
of mountainous heaps of the holy flesh of animals sacri¬ 
ficed? Will Bhagav&n Vaishv&nara,* with bearded face and 
matted hair effulgent with Brahroik light, ever again rise 
from the sacrificial pit and,, bursting through columns of 
fire playing in fearful tongues of flame, stand before the 
giver of the sacrifice,' and say: “ Choose thy blessing ? ” 
Will the Lord of Vaiku^tha “ ever again leave Vaikuntha u

1 The six sins—Kama, Krodha, Lobha, Moha, Mada. Mfitsaryya.

’ Vrata (see Introduction). * Yajna (see Introduction).

* Various classes of Vedic priests.1 The six sins—Kama, Krodha, Lobha, Moha, Mada. Mfitsaryya.

’ Vrata (see Introduction). * Yajna (see Introduction).

* Various classes of Vedic priests.

* Benches or schools of Veda : the traditional text followed bv a 
particular school.

' Wood used for the houia sacrifice. 1 India.

' Agni, Lord of Fire, or the Bhagav&n Himself in His aspect of fire. 
’ Yajamflna. “ Vishnu. “ The heaven of Visbpu.

190

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

at the prayer of Rishis oppressed by R&kshasas and Asuras 1 
and descend to earth to guard the sacrifice from the harm 
which they fear? Will a master of truth * like Sbukadeva,* 
or a great Shakti like Draupadl, 4 be ever again born of the 
sacrificial fire? Will Takshaka, King of Nfigas,* trembling 
with fear because of a sacrifice, ever again have to seek the 
protection of Indra? Will the Deva of a thousand e}'es' 
ever again be about to fall with Takshaka into a sacri¬ 
ficial pit, whirled down through space by the power of 
Brfthmanas and the wondrous potency of Mantras ? India 
has to-day lost her old strength and the vigour of her 
austerities. 1 Gone is that old faith, strength, and fortitude; 
gone is that courage. In what an unlucky moment was 
the fatal snake sacrifice' commenced! Then worshipped Fire 
became displeased with India, because of the deprivation of 
his worship. Then the mantra power of the Brahmana 
became offended at being prevented from consuming the 
King of the Devas* with Takshaka. That displeasure and 
that offence has been operating ever since. The old day 
has never returned. The curtain of the sacrificial world 
has finally dropped. It has not been raised again. How 
contaminating must be the effect of the Kali age, that, 
despite the presence in their full strength of Devatfts, 
Mantras, Brahmanas, and the materials for sacrifice, the 
latter was never completed. Who can unravel the mystery 
of the play of Yajne§hvarl ? “

Demonic beings. ' Tattvajna. * Son of Vyftsa. 
Wife of the five Pftp^ns.Demonic beings. ' Tattvajna. * Son of Vyftsa. 
Wife of the five Pftp^ns.

Serpent divinities of the nether world.

Indra.

’ Tapas.

purpose of

191

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

For this reason I was saying: “ O Jlva, born in the Kali 
age, how dare either you or I proceed there where Maharfijas 
Parlkshifc, and Janamejaya failed?” And even if we were 
to advance, would that make everyone happy ? Yajna 1 is the y 
Sadhana of those only who desire enjoyment, wealth, and */ 
heaven. Are those who, being supplicants for the ambrosial 
feet of the spouse* of Shangkara,* set no value upon the 
abode of the Suras, 4 Indra, or Brahma'—are they to be 
tempted by Yajna? What is to be done for such as these ?

With what Sadhana will you gratify them ? You will sav bv^ 
purity of mind and body, 7 living in the Guru’s house, listen-^ 
mg,* thinking,' constant meditation,” contemplation, 11 con^ 
centration 1 and ecstasy.” These means exist in the Vaidik / 
path for the acquisition of the truth. True; they exist as 
jewels exist in the sea. But what is that to you or me ? Who 
can be such a sacrificing monarch as Ravana that Varuija- 
deva 14 should collect the jewels and present them to him ?

Who is such an Emperor in the domain of austerity like 
Vashishtha, Vishvfimitra, Jav&li, Janaka, or Jaimini,' that 
Bhagavan will churn the ocean of the Veda, and place all 
the jewels of the knowledge of truth in his hand ? Who can 
acquire a heavenly 15 body with the effulgence of Brahman," 
like that of Nachiketa, so as to enable him to go to the 
house of Yama," and there from Yama himself receive in¬ 
structions in the knowledge of the Brahman ? No more is ^ 
to be found that Aryyan life in which every event from I v/

I

I

ft

«

If

It

14

(ft

Sacrifice (see Introduction). * Svarga

That is. of the Goddess, or Devi. ‘ $hiva. her husband

Devas. Lord of the Celestials and the creative Brahma

Brahmacbaryyu. * Shravana ‘Manana '

Nididhyftsana. " Dhyftna (see Introduction)That is. of the Goddess, or Devi. ‘ $hiva. her husband

Devas. Lord of the Celestials and the creative Brahma

Brahmacbaryyu. * Shravana ‘Manana '

Nididhyftsana. " Dhyftna (see Introduction)

Dharana (see ibid.). “ Samadhi (see ibid.).

Lord of the waters. '* Divya.

Brahmatejas. " Lord of death.

192

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the conception in the womb to the cremation of the body 
was accompanied by Vaidik mantra. It is no exaggeration 
to say that a heavenly body, the passions of which have 
been controlled, and which is thus made a suitable vehicle 
for th*e development of the knowledge of Brahman accord¬ 
ing to Vaidik rules, is nowadays impossible of achievement. 
Need it be said that no longer does anyone lie with lawful 
wife but once only after her monthly period 1 kindling the 
sacrificial fire* with a heart set steadily on the Para- 
brahman* in the desire to get a son who will himself be 
full of the divine spirit. The ancient Br&hmanik fire ' has 
sunk to ashes through eating the bread of servitude to 
foreigners* for huudreds of generations. No longer are 
our blood and seed pure and vigorous with the strength of 
austerity* and mantra. No longer do parents observe 
continence/ And so I was saying, long past is that day 
when the summit of the edifice of the Vaidik Brahma- 
knowledge could be made to rest upon the foundations 
of an unswerving purity.* Men no longer meditate on the

* According to the ancient Vaidik rule, sexual union must take 
place once a month, from the fourth or fifth to the fifteenth day after 
the menses (the conceptual period), and then only, without breach of 
that continence which governs the married state. The follower of this 
Vaidik rule is described us Pasbu in the Nitya Tantrn (Ritukulang 
vinfidev iramanang paribarjayet).* The union of man and wife is a veritable sacrificial rite, a homa. 
wherein she is both hearth (Kunda) and flame. See the great 
thirteenth Mantra of the Homaprakarana in the Brihadaranyaka 
Upanishod.

' The Supreme. Similarly the Tantra (Yogini, chap, vi) says that 
union should be performed with a divine feeling and disposition (Mai- 
thunam prachareddblnmn devat&bh&vacheshtitam), accompanied by the 
mantras given in the Tantras&ra.

* Brabmatejas. * Yavanas. ' Tapas.

* See post. It is a mistake to suppose that brohmacharyya (con¬ 
tinence) is limited to one of the ashramas only. It governs all, 
including the married state (see Yogiyajnavalkya, chap. i).

' Brahmacharyya.

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

198

Parabrahman with dosed eyes, restraining the senses of 
perception and action, merging the mind in Prakriti. 1 * * 4 
Amongst those who nowadays shut their eyes and make 
a pretence of such meditation you will disoern a move¬ 
ment in their shuttings and blinkings even in the darkness. 
All this is but a show of self-restraint. Bhagav&n, speak¬ 
ing even of those who have really controlled their senses, 
but who have not through habit been able to dispel the 
mass of impressions which these have made upon their 
minds, has said in the Gita: “ The fool who, after controll¬ 
ing his senses of action, inwardly thinks of the objects 
of those senses, is called a hypocrite.”Is it not a vain presumption on our part to hope to be 
able to successfully travel along a path in which the 
discipline is so strict and the trial is of so searching a 
character? Shri Krishna, who was Bhagavan in person, 
failed to impress the truth on Arjuna, though he pointed 
it out to him, as it were, with a finger in the Yuga- 
Sandhyi,* at the close of the Dvapara age and the com¬ 
mencement of the Kali age. He failed (Arjuna being a 
Kshatriya *)» to make him hold fast in his heart the know¬ 
ledge of the truth * which is the possession of Brahmanas. 
We are surely, therefore, not awake but dreaming if we 
hope to acquire knowledge of truth by reading the Yoga- 
vashistha, Ramfiyana, and the Gita while sunk in the gloom 
and under the full sway of the Kali age. We, on the 
contrary, know that many a spiritually disposed man, who, 
under the influence of such a daydream, has attempted 
to become a Yogi along the Yaidik path, has ended in

1 The Source whence the senses (indriyas), mind (manas), and all

the phenomenal being, derives.

’ That is, the period of transition from one Yaga to another, 
reckoned at a thousand years. 1 Warrior caste.

4 Tattva.

13

194

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRAthe phenomenal being, derives.

’ That is, the period of transition from one Yaga to another, 
reckoned at a thousand years. 1 Warrior caste.

4 Tattva.

13

194

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

becoming neither ft believer nor an unbeliever, but a queer 
being, half man, half lion. By constant meditation upon a 
misty nothing, 1 his mind and heart become such a vacuity 
that there is neither faith, reverence, devotion, nor love in 
them, but merely a bewilderment with the inward lament: 
11 Alas, I am lost! ” In many places we have found such 
persons coming secretly to ask: “ What means are there 
left for us?” But their only difficulty is this: They want 
to know whether it is not possible for them to become 
Tantrik or Pauranik worshippers in secret, whilst keeping 
up the show of the possession of Brahma knowledge and 
without having publicly to wear the sacred crown lock,' or 
thread," or to paint their bodies with the sacred marks.* Is 
it not deplorable that a man should be in this condition, 
repenting at last in this fashion at the close of his life, after 
having gone through all its useless troubles ?

It was with the knowledge that man might have to die 
such an unhallowed death even after the acquisition of the 
precious human body, which is, as it were, a thornless step 
to the door of Brahman, that She who dwells in the heart 
prescribed the remedy millions of years ago. But what can 
we do ? As I have said, a diet which is daily bad aggravates 
the disease. The musical Sadhaka ‘ has therefore said:

“ It is the fault of none, 0 Mother Shy&mft.

It is I myself who dig and thus sink in the water.”

And is that death an easy one ? The suffering of that 
repentance is more unbearable than even the torture of a

' Akasha : literally, ether, space.

* The §hikha, or long strand of hair worn at the back of the top 
of the head by orthodox Hindus from after the date of the ChQda- 
karana ceremony.

Worn by the twice-born classes among the Hindus.* The §hikha, or long strand of hair worn at the back of the top 
of the head by orthodox Hindus from after the date of the ChQda- 
karana ceremony.

Worn by the twice-born classes among the Hindus.

Tilaka, or sectarian marks, and Nilma, or names of the Deities.

1 Ritniaprasilda.

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

195

hundred rods at the hands of Yama. The thought of the 
remembrance of such a horrible death melts the hardest 
heart, and flooding tears wet the livid visage of the dying 
man. Then, with unrestrainable force, a fountain of tears 
bursts forth from the innermost recesses of the heart.

“ What shall I do, 0 Mother ? Day by day the malady 
grows stronger. I am in grave danger through the disorder 
of Pitta as Sattva, V&yu as Rajas, and Kapha 1 as Tamas. 
This time the delirium is that of Sannipata.* 0 Mother, it 
is my destruction, 3 and thus I weep incessantly! "

At the close of such a life, wanting in trust and full of 
lament, both inward and outward restraint * are impracti¬ 
cable. The ecstatic trance * is impossible. The dawning 
of the truth that all is Brahman* is a far-off thing. In 
consequence, a journey along that difficult path, with a 
body decrepit such as mine, is hardly to be thought of. To 
take to the Vaidik path and then, upon failure to acquire a 
knowledge of truth, to judge the Veda to be ineffectual, is 
as though one were to judge a tree to be without fruit after 
we had touched its roots only, when the tree gives its fruit 
to him alone who can reach its topmost branches. There 
is more ohance of getting the fruit some day or other with¬ 
out even touching the tree if one has but faith in the exist¬ 
ence of the fruit, and takes up one’s abode in its shade.

It may seem a mystery hard to unravel that the mere 
sitting down at the foot of a tree which gives its fruit only 
to him who can reach its topmost branch, without even 
touching its root and in dependence on faith alone, will yet1 Bile as sattva, the manifesting principle ; wind as rajas, principle 
of activity ; and phlegm as tamas, principle of inertia.

s A fever. 1 Sannipata—a play on the word.

* $hama and dama. 1 Sara&dhi.

' Literally, the tattva of advaita Brahman.

196

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

one day or other surely seoure the fruit, yet, in fact, it is not 
such an impossibility as it appears to be when first stated.

It often happens that parents walk about in the gardens 
attached to the houses of rich landholders, enjoying the 
evening breeze, holding by their hands their son and 
daughter. It may also happen that on such an occasion a 
tree is discovered in the garden to be laden with ripe fruit. 
The parents, desirous of seeing how the hearts of their 
children yearn for the fruit, speak to them, and pointing 
out the fruit, say: “ See what nice fruit has ripened on the 
tree.” Instantly turning their eyes to the fruit, the rich 
man s children, bred up in softness and indulgence, are 
unable to restrain themselves, and at once assail their 
parents with weeping and the cry: “Give, give, give!” 
Out of play the parents say: “ Then climb up the tree and 
bring the fruit down." But the children know that they 
cannot do so, and the parents’ fun only fires them with 
anger. They then throw themselves about on the ground 
weeping. The heart of the loving mother is melted, and 
she says to her husband: “ Enough now, find out the 
means.” Then father and mother take up the two children 
in their arms, and hold them up to the branches of the 
tree. Thus supported by their parents’ arras, the boy and 
girl pluck the wished-for fruit with their own hands and 
dance with joy. And thus we see that it is not impossible 
for the children of the rich, brought up with indulgence, 
to make unreasonable demands, and yet to have them 
satisfied.Sadhaka, tell me what King and what Queen you 
consider to be the greatest in the world ? Who is a King 
. before the King of Kings of three worlds ? And who is a 
Queen before the Queen of the greatest Yogi ?* She whose

That ia, Shiva, who. by His great austerities, is the Lord and 
exemplar of all ascetics.

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS 197

foet are worshipped by Upendra and Surendra ? 1 You and 
I are children of such parents. Wherein are we of no 
account ? Wherein do we lack tender, affectionate, and 
indulgent treatment ? On the day upon which Jlva sheds 
bitter tears for the fruit of liberation borne by the Tree of 
\eda in the garden of the world, on that very day the 
Mother of the world, seeing that her weak children were 
unable to climb that tree, addressed the Deva of Devas,*and 
affectionately said : “ No longer play: but quickly find some 
means.” And what other means could there be than that 
which they gave ? The Father and Mother of the world 
extended their two assuring arms of Agama and Nigama,* 
and held up their sons and daughters, the men and women 
of the world. Supported by their parents’ arms, they have 
plucked with their own hands the fruit of liberation precious 
even to Yogis borne by the tree of Veda. Sadhakas have 
thus, without having had to climb the tree of Veda, easily 
attained, by means of the mantras of the Tantra Shastra, 
Kaivalyasiddhi, 4 the fruit of Veda. We do not know whether 
so much kindness is shown at all times. But it must at least 
be shown at the time of enjoyment of the evening breeze. 4

The sun is setting, and a deep, dark, fearful night 
approaches. At such time can the Mother leave Her child¬ 
ren alone in the dense and gloomy forest ? Satya, Treta, and 
Dvapara ages, the three praharas * of the Mother’s day, are

Names of Vishnu and Indra. Vishnu was younger brother of 
Indra. * $hiva.Names of Vishnu and Indra. Vishnu was younger brother of 
Indra. * $hiva.

’ T* 16 Agama is here the Tantra when in the form in which the 
Devr is questioner and $hiva the teacher ; and Nigama when the Devi 
assumes the latter rdle to instruct Her spouse.

Final liberation (Moksha); Bhojaruja. commenting on the Yoga 
Sutra (iv. 88). explains Kaivalya to be that state of energy in which 
modification is extinct, and it remains alone in its own nature.

’ That is, at the close of the last of the ages.

A prahara is three hours, day and night thus being of eight pra¬ 
haras duration.

198

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA’ That is, at the close of the last of the ages.

A prahara is three hours, day and night thus being of eight pra¬ 
haras duration.

198

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

passed, and the last prahara of the Kali age is about to 
pass. The sun of the life of Jlva in the Kali age cannot 
long remain above the horizon, and so he too is going to 
set. A dense, dark, deadly night is coming. Is it to be 
thought that the Mother who gladdens the heart of Maba- 
kala 1 and dispels all fear arising from existence will leave 
Her children alone in such a terribly perilous evening? 
When She enters her Chintamapi house 1 surrounded by 
parijata,* dowers in the island of gems,' Her sons and 
daughters also, whose only support is the skirt of their 
mother’s dress, will, with quick steps, follow their Mother 
into the eternal region. Our Mother is Rajr&jeshvarl * and 
all-merciful, and thus we are so spoilt, proud, and prone to 
take offence. We cannot give up the habit of readily taking 
offence,* 1 which we have acquired from our companionship 
with our mother. This habit is essential to the relation¬ 
ship between Mother and child, and so, as long as life 
exists, we cannot give it up. This habit is a part and 
parcel of our life, and at death we will make a present of 
it to Her feet. Reciting the life-renewing mantra, 41 We 
are of the Mother and the Mother is ours,” we shall bid 
farewell to the Sangsara. This, by the Mother’s grace, is 
the standard of perpetual victory here and hereafter for the 
S&dhaka, the Mother’s child. The Sadhaka knows that this 
play, consisting of mantras of Her whose embodiment is

1 Shiva.

assMs&u- «** —

’ A heavenly tree in the paradise of Indra.

•■>b.K V t'S.i°orl5' ° CC “ 01 ncctar -

• • ... Queen of Queens.

done bv Is , a child takes more offence at that which is

i?-hS lbw “ ih * 1 - *»• »> * d

199

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

yantra 1 and Tantra, ia very beautiful, sweet and charming 
to the mind and heart.

Monism *i?-hS lbw “ ih * 1 - *»• »> * d

199

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

yantra 1 and Tantra, ia very beautiful, sweet and charming 
to the mind and heart.

Monism *

Vedanta and ShangkarAchXryya

Here and there we find a number of monists 5 who 
firmly believe that the knowledge of Tattva or non-dualistic 
Siddhi, as promulgated by the adored great man Shangkara- 
charyya, cannot be attained in any other way than that 
laid down by him, and that none but he can teach the 
principles of monism. Had these people been themselves 
proficient in such principles, we might have found ground 
to believe what they said.

But we regret that their statement is the only evidenoe 
of their knowledge. We are unable ourselves to make out 
by what evidence they have arrived at the conclusion that 
non-dualistic Siddhi * is not attainable by any other means 
than that prescribed by the Vedanta. It may be that 
they believe that there was never born another as pro¬ 
ficient in its principles as Shangkar&charyya, who was 
an incarnation of Shangkara* Himself. We, too, admit 
this with bowed heads. But what is the proof that 
the attainment of monistic truth is impossible except 
through the Vedantik philosophy, as taught by him ? 
You and I cannot be men like Shangkaracharyya. But 
cannot he be like Hid) whose incarnation he is said to be, 
and for which he is honoured and worshipped? Is that 
truth unknown to Shiva which was promulgated by His

' Tantrik diagrams, used in worship (see Introduction).

’ Advaita - * Advaitists.

' That is. the realization of the unity of all things.

* Shiva.

200 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Tantrik diagrams, used in worship (see Introduction).

’ Advaita - * Advaitists.

' That is. the realization of the unity of all things.

* Shiva.

200 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

incarnation ? How can we believe that a spark can burn 
the whole world, and that yet there is no heat in fire ? As 
a matter of fact, the principle of monism, which was taught 
by the Vedanta philosophy, has been brought into harmony 
with the principle of dualism in the Tantra Shastra. It 
is hard to say how many hundreds of Yogis and Rishis, 
Sadhus and Sadhakas, have been slain or wounded in the 
fights over dualism and monism. Bhagavan, the Creator 
of all things, has in the Tantra Shastra brought that fight 
to a close by harmonizing prakriti and vikriti. 1 But those 
who are by nature inclined to fighting ever consider peace 
to be a trouble, and this is why even to-day there are to 
be found many dualists in the community of the learned 
who are hostile to Tantra. But the idea of a quarrel be¬ 
tween Jlva and Shiva at one and the same time shames us 
and makes one laugh.

Looking at the matter with the eye of a philosopher, 
it seems as if monism and dualism are as much asunder 
as the eastern and western seas. On the one side monism 
says that the Sangsara is a mirage, a wave of Maya, an 
effect of illusion, just as the mistaking of a rope for a 
serpent or of the nacre of an oyster shell for silver. Brah¬ 
man, who is knowledge, eternal, pure, and without attribute, 
is beyond ignorance, attributes and the sangsara. He has 
no desire, activity, endeavour, nor is subject to Karma. 
In short, only He exists, and nothing else. On the other 
hand, dualism says that He has desire, activity, endeavour, 
care, and is subject to Karma.* In’short, all things which

• _ • ^tl is,m 0n uy. change," as of form—here effect. The mean* 
Gtodlid harm0nizeB the ori * in of with its effects-• _ • ^tl is,m 0n uy. change," as of form—here effect. The mean* 
Gtodlid harm0nizeB the ori * in of with its effects-

Thus it ll i B m ^ fC K ati0n * ? r , Deity are “bi 6 ® 1 t0 both time and Karma. 
Thns it .a said. Namastat karmabbyo ridhirapi na yebhyah prabhavati

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

201

are said to exist, exist in Him. There is nothing which 
does not exist in Him. Both are Shastras. The one is not, 
in authority, either superior or inferior to the other. Which 
will give way to which ? Both have Bhagavan for their 
witness and Judge. The settlement of this dispute is 
impossible by mere men. Therefore, to dispel the doubts 
of the three worlds, She who dwells in all hearts Herself 
assumed the role of questioner, and He who dwells in all 
hearts and is the beloved consort of the all-good Devi 
answered Her questions, and N&rftyaua 1 Himself accepted 
the answer as the truth *— Agata, or issued from the mouth 
of Shiva; Gata, or entered into the mouth of the Daughter 
of the Mountain;* and Abhimata, or approved of by 
V&sudeva. 1 *

For these three reasons, and taking the initial letters 
of the three words, the Tantra Sh&stra is called Agama. 4 
Where Parvati is the questioner and Maheshvara answers, 
there the Sh&stra is called Agama. Where, to heighten 
the sweetness of the play, Mahadeva is the questioner and 
Maheshvarl answers, there it is called Nigama. The 
Tantra Shastra is called Nigama by taking the initial 
letters of the three words mrgata, grata, and mata, in the 
verse in which it is said— Nirgata, or issued out of the

(Salutation to Karma, over which even the Creator Brahma cannot 
prevail), and,

Ye samastit jogatsrishtisthitisangharak&rin&h 
Te pi kAleshu llyante kalohi balavattarah

(The Creator. Preserver, and Destroyer, in time become extinct ; 
because time is the stronger).

1 Vishpu. * Tattva.

’ Girija, or the Devi as Pirvatl.

4 The author here refers to the deBnition of Agama—1 Vishpu. * Tattva.

’ Girija, or the Devi as Pirvatl.

4 The author here refers to the deBnition of Agama—

“ /Igatang shnmbhuvaktrevyah 
Gatancha girij&mnkhe 
A/atancha vasudevena 
Tasmut agama uchyate.

202 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

mouth of the Daughter of the Mountain ; Gata , or entered 
into the mouths of the five-mouthed Deva; 1 and Sammata, 
or acquiesced in by Y&sudeva.* * The Tantra Shastra is 
divided into these two parts of Agama and Nigama. Just 
as, however, there is in reality no difference between Bhaga- 
vam and Bhagavatl, the male and female speakers of Tantra, 
so there is none between Agama and Nigama revealed by 
them. The sole purpose of both is to give liberation to the 
Jiva by a method through which monistic truth is reached 
through the world of duality.

Despite the essential truth of the monistic principle, 
its comprehension by all is an impossibility in this dualistic 
phenomenal Sangsara. For this reason it has not been 
generally accepted as the path to be followed, though it has 
been preached even to the farthest quarters of the earth by 
Shangkar&charyya himself, and successive generations of 
thousands of disciples who have followed him. Amongst 
those who have travelled along the monistic path, scarcely 
one in a thousand has succeeded in reaching his destina¬ 
tion safely, without trouble. When we speak of the non- 
dualistic path shown by ShangkarAcharyya, many may 
think that that which is devoid of T&ntrik practice and 
is advocated solely by the Vedanta is that path. But we 
mean nothing of the kind, nor is it our purpose here to say 
anything as to whether that path is or is not accompanied 
by Tantrik practice. This much only we now say—namely 
that the monistic path advocated by Shangkaracharyya is 
one which is characterized by the force of an intense

1 §hiva.

* Tfa e definition as ordinarily given is :

" Mrgato girijavaktrat 
Gatascha girl?ha ehrutim 
Ma t.'ischn visudevasya 
Nigama parikathyate.1 §hiva.

* Tfa e definition as ordinarily given is :

" Mrgato girijavaktrat 
Gatascha girl?ha ehrutim 
Ma t.'ischn visudevasya 
Nigama parikathyate.

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

203

Vair&gya, * 1 as is shown by the commandHastily get out 
of your home.” It is doubtful whether one man in a hund¬ 
red thousand has ever been able to attain Siddhi * along 
this path. We do not know whether there are at the 
present time any true monists, but whether there are 
any or not, there are still many who in the name of Shang- 
karacharyya pretend to be such in the Daijdl's rnatha, 1 * the 
Brahmachari’s ashrama, 4 * * and the Mohanta’s akharha.® It 
is not yet time to speak of these. There are men in the 
successive generations of Shangkaracharyya’s disciples who 
have earned, in the opinion of philosophers, a world-wide 
reputation as monistic Ved&ntists, and are still worshipped 
as Gurus, owing to the uncommon power of argument 
which they displayed in demolishing the views of Nyaya 
philosophers,* atheists, and others. How much Siddhi 
such men (despite their being Gurus of the philosophic 
world) really attained, Sadhakas can only guess from the 
fact that they disproved other’s views and established 
their own. It passes our understanding how he who has 
knowledge of nothing beyond Brahman can yet resolutely 
engage in militant discussion with Ny&ya philosophers. 
A power of astute argument in philosophy, and monistic 
Siddhi attained by Sadhana, are not one and the same 
thing. 7 Non-dualistic Siddhi is a far cry for him who has 
still the principle of argument in him. Who will deny 
that a discussion with philosophers creates an amount of

1 Dispassion or indifference to the things of the world; other¬ 
worldliness.

1 Success: thnt is, here, the liberation which is the end of all

spiritoal striving; or success in the preliminary stages leading to it.

* Monastic establishment of D&ndfs, a sect of Sanyasis.

' Abode of celibate ascetic.spiritoal striving; or success in the preliminary stages leading to it.

* Monastic establishment of D&ndfs, a sect of Sanyasis.

' Abode of celibate ascetic.

s Monastic establishment, presided over by its chief or Mohant.

' One of the six systems of Hindu philosophy.

One is talk about, and the other is realization of, the Brahman.

204

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

distracting dualistio propensities a thousand times greater 
than that created by contact with wife and children ? How¬ 
ever that be, while we are bound to make our reverence to 
these philosophical Dandls on the ground of their power of 
discussion, we are disinclined to give them even a nod on 
the ground that they should be considered as having attain¬ 
ed monistic Siddhi. Such being the case of the Gurus, it 
is needless to say what sort of Siddhi is attained by their 
disciples.

The power upon attainment of Siddhi in Vairagya 
Sadhana 1 to make the knowledge of the Truth* one’s 
pursuit is a very rare thing in this Sangsara.The power upon attainment of Siddhi in Vairagya 
Sadhana 1 to make the knowledge of the Truth* one’s 
pursuit is a very rare thing in this Sangsara.

It is, therefore, no exaggeration to say that the achieve¬ 
ment of the comprehension of monistic truth in face of the 
antagonism of a dualistic world is an impossibility. Non¬ 
dualists travelling the path of the Vedanta know that a 
person, in order to acquire a knowledge of truth, must 
first appear before a Guru devoted to Brahman and seek 
his help, and that it is only if the latter kindly gives him 
instructions that he cam acquire non-dualistic knowledge. 
Where, however, according to monism, all are Brahman, 
the relation of teacher and student becomes an impossi¬ 
bility. “ Non-duality is to be sought everywhere except 
with Guru. The relationship between Guru and disciple 
is a thing of dualism. Just as, in order to pursue the 
monistio path, I must first with submission travel along 
the path of dualism—since, without a Guru, the attain¬ 
ment of Siddhi is impossible—so the Tantra Shastra points 
out to us that if we entertain any hope of being able to 
travel along the monistic path we must first pass through, 
and must not attempt to leap over, the duajistic world.

‘ That is. upon having attained to the state of dispassion. 
Tattva.

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

205

Great and mighty heroes have maimed themselves by taking 
snob a jump.

I know that I have to elimb to the top of a high pre¬ 
cipice, but to throw my arms in the air and try to fly to 
it is not the act of an intelligent man. Those who, in the 
pride of the strength of their arms, have attempted to do 
so have invariably ended in being thrown to earth with 
broken bones and joints. At length, with grieving hearts, 
they, too, have said: “ Know, O Sadhu! that it is more 
difficult to control the mind than to drink up all the water 
of the ocean, to uproot Mount Sumeru* or to eat fire, were 
such possible."It was to save the Sadhaka from this deplorable con¬ 
dition and from these lamentations that the Tantra Shastra 
was at length introduced. The Tantra Shastra does not, 
therefore, at the outset ignore this visible, palpable dualistic 
world. As, to ascend a precipice, one must advance slowly, 
stepping on the earth itself, so also, in order to realize 
monistic truth, one must progress slowly through the 
dualistic world. You will only make monistic Siddhi more 
distant and difficult to achieve if it be believed that the 
dualistic world is inimical to Sadhana.

The Tantra Shastra, instead of calling the dualistic 
view of things inimical to Sfidhana, embraced it as a friend. 
It took into its arms, as though they were its children, 
both dualism and monism. Tantrik Sadhaka,s are filled 
with joy at the sight of the loving sports of both. He alone 
realizes the sweetness of the play of both who has plunged 
into the non-dualistic Truth after having churned the 
dualistic world. Though resting and rocking upon the 
waves of Sangsara, he is not of it. Though living in and 
affected by the dangers and prosperities of the Sangsara, 
he, like the petals of a wind-rocked lotus, is ever detached

1 See Introduction.

206

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

from its joys and sorrows. Full as his heart is of the 
perfect joy, sorrow never casts its gloomy shadows upon 
him. Because of this, Sad&nanda, 1 elated with joy for his 
devotees, has said in the Tantra: “ In the world some 
desire non-dualistic, others dualistic knowledge, but 
those who have known My truth have passed beyond 
both dualism and non-dualism."Had those who would do away with the dualistic world 
as unreal been really able to do so, then no harm would 
have been done. But on many occasions we see that, 
whether they have or have not this power, they unques¬ 
tionably do away with themselves. Why do you, who 
consider it to be nothing, dread the dualistio world, which 
you think to blow away with your breath ?. Again, why 
take so much trouble to blow away that which is nothing ? 
On listening to the lamentation of non-dualists, one feels 
as if the dualistic Sangs&ra had been created merely to 
frighten them. For them there is no peace, love, free¬ 
dom from disease, or joy in the Sangsfira, but only the 
cry, “ Alas, I am lost! ” and the lamenting call to “ Save, 
save!” It is as though, from dread of the dualistic world, 
monism had shrunk all its limbs, and was trying to find 
a place wherein to hide its head in the eternal Brahmanda. 
Where shall it go to save itself ? Wheresoever it goes, it 
finds a dualistic world. It is of the dualistio principle that 
the world-play of Brahmamayl is made. Who, living in 
the world, can understand monistic truth by ignoring the 
dualistic world ? What greater folly can there be than to 
expect that you and I can with a frown do away with the 
dualistic world, which even men like the royal Rishi Janaka. 
Shukadeva,* * Shangkarftcharyya,* and others could not ignore.

1 §hiva, the ever joyous.

' The Rishi. son of Vy&sa.

* The expounder of the Vedanta philosophy.

207

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

Not to mention others, even Parameshvara Himself, the 
Guru of all moving and motionless things, at whose feet 
Suras 1 and Asuras* * pay homage, made pretence to be 
deluded by Maya, and sought protection at the feet of Her 
whose Mayfi, it was.

In the Tararahasya it is said:In the Tararahasya it is said:

“The Deva of Devas* in obeisance prostrated himself 
at the lotus feet of Jagadamba, 4 and said: ‘ Devi, I have 
been through 120,000 books, and I am yet unable to say 
what is Kalatattva.* O Sureshvarl, 8 do thou relate to me 
that Kalayoga! T 0 Devi, lover of devotees, O Mother Kalika, 
be pleased with me! ’ Hearing these words of Maheshvara,* 
the Saviour of the three worlds smiled and said: ‘All men 
in the Brahmanda are Thy image,* and all women are My 
image. O Mahadeva, practise this yoga day by day!' ”

Let the Sadhaka here particularly take note. Here 
Maheshvarl Herself is the teacher, and Maheshvara the 
pupil. Mahadeva is Sadhaka; MahadevI answers his ques¬ 
tions. The men and women of the world are the objects 
of S&dhana. Though omniscient and Lord of all, Shiva 
himself is bent on practising this yoga of knowledge,* and 
She who dwells in all hearts warms to-day even a disciple 
such as Shiva, and says: “ Mahadeva, practise this yoga day 
by day." 10 The crest-gem of the greatest Yogis will practise 
Yoga, and that by means of daily meditation. Though He 
is Himself the Creator of the world, He must worship the

1 Devas. * Demonic spirits. * Shiva.

* The Devi as Mother of the world. 5 Art of Sadhana.

* Mistress of Suras (.ante). Art of Yoga.

* Svarapa.

* That is, as Shiva and Shakti are the objects of Sadhana; so are 
men and women, who are their vibhtitis.

" Jninayoga

208

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

world before the Truth of Shakti 1 can bloom in his heart. 
It is only when it has fully bloomed that the dualistic 
universe will disappear in the knowledge which draws no 
distinction between Shiva and Shakti. The disappearance 
of the Brahmanda will lead to the knowledge of the true 
substance of Brahmamayl. The Sadhaka will now under¬ 
stand how the truth as to the Brahman* may be reached 
through Its universe.To this objection may be raised that there are not 
only men and women in the world, but rivers, seas, tanks, 
forests, groves, fields, mountains, earth, air, sky, sun, moon, 
planets, and stars. How will these be eliminated? We 
reply that nothing will be eliminated, but everything will 
remain. When direct knowledge of the truth of Shakti* 
is gained, the Sadhaka will perceive that the entire Sang- 
sSra is nothing but the wealth of the Shakti of Vishvesh- 
varl.* The dualistic world will then no longer appear to be 
inimical to Sadhana. On the contrary, this Sangsftra will 
then be recognized to be a most spacious and sacred field 
full of materials for Sadhana. We will fully discuss this 
matter in the Chapter on the worship of form (Sakara 
Upasana) and the play of Shakti (ShaktiIlia). Here we 
close, after giving a mere hint of the matter in connection 
with the subject of the necessity of Tantra.

Next, many people express an anxiety as to the 
possibility of attaining knowledge of this hidden Yoga 
during this polluted Kali age. This also is not the 
place for a full reply. This much only I here say, that 
just as rasayana 1 is the proper treatment for a delirious 
patient, so also the delirious condition of a patient is that

| $haktiuttva - * Brahmatattva.

Mistress of the Universe.

' See post.

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

209| $haktiuttva - * Brahmatattva.

Mistress of the Universe.

' See post.

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

209

whioh is proper for the application of rasayana. By the 
beneficial law of nature, delirium generates such force and 
strength in the patient's body that, when he drinks poison, 
he is able easily to counteract its life-destroying, and to 
absorb its life-restoring, properties. Similarly, the corrupt 
influence of the Kali age has generated such a strong 
poison in the body of Jlva that in the delirium which is 
born in the malady of existence 1 he overcomes the life- 
destroying property of that mighty cure, full of the fire of 
Yogis and Bhairavls,* * the Tantrik Mantra, and with the 
help of its life-renewing properties attains to the position 
of a conqueror of death. Consequently, the Kali age is as 
fit for the Tantra Shastra as that Shastra is for the Kali age.

Non-dualistic Siddhi in the attainment of knowledge 
of Shiva and Shakti existing in all men 5 and women* may 
be new to you and me, but in the domain of Sadhana it is 
the utterance, ever true and eternal, of Deva. In the 
Kulftnjava Tantra it is said:

“The substance of the world is Shiva and Shakti ‘ — 
that is to say, Prakriti and Purusha. Whether this truth 
exists or not, Kuladharma eternally exists. On account 
of this sovereign privilege, Kuladharma is the greatest of 
all Dharmas. How can that which is greatest be common 
to everybody? That is to say, since qualification for 
Sadhana in Kauladharma arises only after the achieve¬ 
ment of Siddhi in other dharmas, how can it be said to be 
upon equality with them ? ”

It is by virtue of this direct knowledge of the Brahman 
in the form of Shiva and Shakti that Tantrik Sadhakas 
ever conquer the world. Strengthened by it, the Sadhaka 
does not deign even to cast a look at other Shastras. To

1 Bhavaroga.

' Women yogis (yoginl), adepts in the T&ntrik yoga.

* Parasha. * Prakriti. ‘ See Introduction.

14

210

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Bhavaroga.

' Women yogis (yoginl), adepts in the T&ntrik yoga.

* Parasha. * Prakriti. ‘ See Introduction.

14

210

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

him to whom the realization of Shiva and Shakti through¬ 
out the world is a constant achievement, the world is but 
an insignificant thing. Even the Brahm&nda itself can¬ 
not contain the love which the Father and Mother, every¬ 
where present in it, bear for him who has realized that 
Jlva is Shiva and Shiva is Jlva, whether in Suras , 1 Asuras,* 
or men, or moving, or immovable things, insects. Hies, 
water, land, space, or in the eternal millions of moving and 
non-moving things. It is the intoxication of that love that 
the Sadhaka poet R&maprasada has said :

“ The Mother is present in every house.

Need I break the news as one breaks an earthen pot 
on the floor ?

Jfmakl goes with Rama,

Notwithstanding younger brother Lakshmana is with 
him.

Ahairavls are with Bhairavas, and boys with girls.

RamaprasOda says: 4 What shall I say of mother,

Daughter, wife, sister, or other ? ’

Think for yourself.”*

Tantra Sh&stra has discovered the hidden path by 
which one may learn the monistic truth through the 
dualistic world. It has immersed the world of Sadhakas 
in the current of the divine Bliss 4 by now changing 
duality into unity, and again from the latter evolv¬ 
ing a dualistic play. It has proclaimed the wonderful 
glory of the beloved spouse of Paramashiva in the 
love-embrace of Matter 5 and Spirit.' At the sight of 
all this, one feels as if duality and non-duality were

I

a

4

^ evas » 1 Demoniac spirits.

These are all aspects under which the Mother exists in the world. 
Literally, current of the rasa of Brahm&nda.

‘ Cbaitanya,

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

211I

a

4

^ evas » 1 Demoniac spirits.

These are all aspects under which the Mother exists in the world. 
Literally, current of the rasa of Brahm&nda.

‘ Cbaitanya,

THE NECESSITY FOR TANTRAS

211

two boys who, quarrelling with each other and madden¬ 
ed by anger, go weeping to their mother, and stand 
before her in the eager expectation to see whom she will 
caress and whom she will rebuke. But, on the contrary, 
the mother instantly puts forth her two arms and takes 
both upon her lap, when each melts with the love she 
bestows upon him. Then in their love for their mother, 
with hearts full of, and gazing upon, her, they both forget 
themselves in their joy, and fall asleep on their mother’s 
lap, her mere presence having put an end to all their 
quarrels and disputes. Here the Sadhaka will receive parti¬ 
cular help from the last song in the first part of Gltanjali * 
entitled, “ The great subject of discussion between the 
Tantra and the Veda is the Mother."

‘ A volume of poems by the Author.

CHAPTER III

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM

We shall have to refer to many a picture painted by former 
accomplished Sadhakas. Here we reproduce two modern 
examples, joyous and sorrowful, of dualism and non-dualism. 
Although it is not a picture of pure non-dualism, as 
advocated by the Vedanta, yet we refer to it as having been 
drawn in that light. Sadhakas will pardon me for such a 
quotation, which, though out of place in the Tantra Tattva, 
is necessitated by the corrupt state of things produced by a 
revolution in dharma. A thinker, overpowered by a dread 
of the dualistic world, has said :

“ Thy intoxication of pride is unceasing, and Thy 
desires are unending.

Thou knowest that thy body and mind pass away ;

Still thou doeth as if thou knew it not.

The seasons, tithis , 1 and months will come as before,

But thou dost not once think whither thou wilt go.

So listen, I bid you. Abandon the gunas of rajas and 
tamas.*

Think of Him who is stainless,But thou dost not once think whither thou wilt go.

So listen, I bid you. Abandon the gunas of rajas and 
tamas.*

Think of Him who is stainless,

And thy dangers will then cease."

To this song the high-souled T&ntrik Sadhaka Digam- 
bara Bhattacharyya has made the following reply:

“ Om intoxicates the mind. Desire is eternal.

The body is true, the mind is true.

' Lunar days.

' The qualities of passion and darkness or sloth.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 213

And so is the Sadhana of Shyama. 1

Winter, summer, all six seasons,* come, stay and depart.

The Sadhana of the Mother’s son endures,

And so does the kindness of the Mother's heart;

So I say to you, listen. Cease saying: * Untrue, untrue ’!

Seek the Devi, who is Herself truth.

Free then shall thou be of thoughts untrue.”

The Sadhaka will here realize the difference between 
the two. The non-dualist says: “ Thy body and mind pass 
away—thou knowest this—yet still doeth as if thou knew 
it not.” But Digambara, despite his knowledge of the 
ephemeral nature of body and mind, says that, though they 
may be ephemeral in and as part of the Sangsara, yet “ The 
body and mind and practice of the Sadhana of Shyama are 
true.” If the mind and body be untrue, how can I expect 
to reach the true and eternal Mother by doing Sadhana 
with these false materials? And can you, too, think of 
“ Him who is stainless ’’ with your false mind ? The pur¬ 
suit of the false Sangsara makes the work of the mind and 
body false. But the work of the same body and mind will 
turn out to be true if these undertake a search for Her 
whose substance is truth.*. If the body and mind be false, 
why should your dread be true ? Next, the non-dualist,says: 
“ Winter, summer, and the other seasons, the tithis, and 
twelve months, will come as before ; but whither thou wilt 
go thou dost not once think.”

These words, however, do not lie well in the mouth of 
a believer, as if there were no certainty as to where I shallThese words, however, do not lie well in the mouth of 
a believer, as if there were no certainty as to where I shall

1 The Black One—a title of the Dev! os Kali.

! There are six seasons— viz., Grlshma, corresponding with parts of 
March and April (VaishAkha and Jyaishtha); VarshA, May, June (Ash&dha 
and ShrAvapa); Sharnt, July, August (BbAdra and A?hvina); Hemanta, 
September and October (KArtika and Agruhayana); Shlta, November. 
December (Puusha and Magha); Vasanta, January', February (F&lguna 
Ch&itraJ. ’ Literally, the true tattva.

214

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

go on leaving the world in which there are the tithis, and 
twelve months, and other seasons; as if all things changing 
and revolving in the world will remain, but I only shall 
not remain ; as if this will be my final end. 1 This is much 
like what infidels say: “ Can the body return after it has 
once been reduced to ashes ? ”

However that may be, the believing Sadhaka has 
frowned upon this lament of the transitoriness of things, 
and with an unflinching heart has said : “ Winter, summer, 
six in all, come, stay, and go. The Sadhana of the Mother's 
son endures, and so does the kindness of the Mother’s 
heart.’’ Nothing goes away anywhere for ever. Things 
remain at the place to which they belong. The only dif¬ 
ference is that they go, and return as new things. As in 
the Sangs&ra all things go, and return in a new form, so 
the kindness of the Mother is ever w f ith the Sadhaka Her 
son in birth after birth. Nothing is lost for ever.The Sadhaka will here take note of the divine vision 
of the accomplished devotee. “Winter, summer, six in 
all, come, stay, and go,” but the son’s Sadhana and the 
Mother’s kindness alone endure. Everything is ephemeral 
in the world which you know to be ephemeral. Only the 
son's Sadhana and the Mother’s kindness endure. To the 
eyes of the Sadhaka privileged to know that truth, the 
ephemeral world also appears as eternal. Again, the non¬ 
dualist says: “ I say to you, listen. Abandon the gunas 
of rajas and tarnas. Think only of Him who is stainless, 
and your dangers will cease.” That is, “ These gupas are 
merely inimical to Sadhana ; so drive them away; do not 
tread a path infested by robbers. On the other hand, think 
of Him wiio is stainless, and your perils will be at an end.’’ 
That is, He who is to be thought of is stainless. His beauty

’ Ecstasy—here " end."

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 215

is of a pure and perfeot whiteness. The gunas of rajas and 
tama* * are, as it were, stains. With such stains one cannot 
think of Him who is stainless.

Thus we must understand that the white Sattva guna 
is necessary in order to think of the white Brahman. Now, 
I ask, is not Maya a bond, and is it not composed of Sattva 
as well as of Rajas and Tamas ? Some day you will have to 
throw off that Sattva guija also. Perhaps you will say that 
constant thought of the Stainless One will cause the Sattva 
. guga to fall off of itself. To that I would ask, Is that 
thought of yours, which can drive away even the Sattva 
guna, so afraid of the other gunas that it cannot appear in 
their presence? Thinker, your thought is full of cares. That 
it is which makes you so thoughtful. It is because rajas- 
guna and tamas-guna ever maintain the false show of the 
Sangsara that they have to be discarded, and the mind made 
to rest on the Stainless One.It is at this point that the Sadhaka says: “ Brother, if 
you are a hero, 1 with the keen sword of Sadhana in your 
hand, why should you be afraid of the robber ? It is only 
the frail coward who fears him.” In reliance upon the fear¬ 
dispelling name of Abhay&* you cry: “ Victory to Jaga- 
darnba! ” and advance to conflict face to face, and by the 
grace of Vijayabhairavl,* victory will, without doubt, be 
yours. See, however, that you do not destroy anything in 
the dominion of Rajrajeshvarl. Put your foes under your 
feet, and then you will see that these very enemies will be 
charmed by your dauntless bearing, and become your 
obedient servants, and will be to you like sons, friends, and 
attendants. Then joy will over-power you at the sight of 
the eternal and the transitory playing with one another.

‘ Vtrn.

* The Devi as dispeller of fear. The true Tftntrik is essentially the 
fearless one. * Devi of victory.

216

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Do not despise anything as untrue. Digambara the Sadhaka 
has therefore said: “ So I say, listen. Give up repeating, 
‘ Untrue, untrue! ’ Seek the Devi, who is truth Herself, and 
you will be free of untrue thoughts. Just so long as the 
truth 1 of Her whose substance is truth itself does not 
possess the mind, so long the world will appear to be fleet¬ 
ing. When, however, the rays of the beauty of the Mother 
who is Truth itself come to fill the heart, when the eyes are 
filled with the vision of the Mother, then the variegated 
picture of the world is merged in the Mother's Self.”In whatever direction I turn my eyes I see nothing, 
nothing but the Mother. In water, on land, and in space 
the Mother dances before the eyes of the Sadhaka, to whom 
the world thus appears true. When the world becomes full 
of the Mother, then all the gunas cease to be enemies. 
Nothing is then a stain. It is no longer necessary to 
regard the world as stained, and to look upon another 
as stainless. When the Mother, painted with brilliant 
collyrium,* dispeller of the fears of Her devotee, seats Her¬ 
self in his heart, then everything, be it stained or stainless, 
becomes but the ornament of Her lotus feet. When great 
waves of emotion rise in the ocean of the Sadhaka's love, 
then the three worlds sink in the surging billows of its 
waters. The lustre of the black* beauty of Her who charms 
the three worlds, falling whereon, lays open the gate of 
Brahraaijcla. Maddened with joy, the Sadhaka then also 
opens the door of his heart, and sings:

“ He who takes shelter at the feet of Shj r ama

Never goes to the house of Death.

‘ Tattva.

Anjana, pat on the eyes to increase brilliancy, to cure redness, 
burning of the eyes, etc.

' $hyum&, a name also of the Devi as Kali.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 217

Whose heart and soul revels to drink the nectar of 
Shyama's name.

Whose thought and meditation Shyama fully possesses, 
For him, in life and death, Shy&m& is his death’s 
destruction.

Opening wide the portals of heaven and earth,

Raising on high the standard in Shyama’s name,

By his own strength he goes to the cremation-ground ; 
Yet, having attained Shivahood, he does not become a 
oorpse.

How can he become a corpse whose Yoga has been done 
on hundreds of corpses ? 1

He who holds in the cage of his heart the Shyama bird* * 
Makes Shyama one with the Self,

And ever beholds the Self in Shyama.

In love and with joy Shyama, uniting with the Self, 
dances.

Oh, the hair of my Shyama is dishevelled !

In Her black hand She holds a black sword ;And ever beholds the Self in Shyama.

In love and with joy Shyama, uniting with the Self, 
dances.

Oh, the hair of my Shyama is dishevelled !

In Her black hand She holds a black sword ;

The dark moon adorns Her dark tresses ;

On Her dark face a dark smile plays.

The dark rajs of Her body darken the face of the three 
worlds.

The spirit (Atma) is Shyama,

The body is Shyama,

The Sangsara is Shy&ma,

Shyama is one’s home.

Nothing exists but Shyama.

Delusion also is full of Shyama.

In the false vision, which is Shyftma,

* Referring to the Tiintrik $hav&sana, or posture in which the 
fearless Tiintrik performs his rite, seated on a corpse.

* An Indian bird of that name.

*218

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The only cure of this ShyAmA malady

Is a draught of the pure nectar of ShyAma’s name.

Oceans and rivers and all other waters

Become one in the waters of dissolution ; 1

All these are but corpses at the feet of Shyama.

The memory of Shyama fills the Sangsara with Shyama.

When shall the form of Shyama meet my gaze

In the form of corpses and in the form of Shiva ? ” *

The community of Sadhaka-s will consider whether he 
is non-dualist or duality itself, the mirror of whose heart 
reflects the scene:

“ The spirit is Shyama;

The body is Shyama;

The Sangsara is Shyama.

Shyama is one’s home, and ocean and rivers

And all other waters become one in the water of dis¬ 
solution.”

Difference between and Similarity of Veda

AND TANTRAThe Sangsara is Shyama.

Shyama is one’s home, and ocean and rivers

And all other waters become one in the water of dis¬ 
solution.”

Difference between and Similarity of Veda

AND TANTRA

The world, of course, appears to be thus blissful in the 
eyes of every Sadhaka, be he Vaidik or Tantrik, who by 
the grace of Anandamayl has attained Siddhi. There is, 
however, this difference, that the Tantrik Sadhaka does not 
—in this unlike the Vaidik Sadhaka—see a hell in the 
Sangsara. The hateful and hideous picture which the 
Vaidik Sadhaka has drawn of the Sangsara, full as it is 
of wife, sons, friends, attendants, and other relations, is 
enough to create a revulsion in the mind of even an 
ordinary man. But it is a matter for great wonder that 
Tantrik Sadhakas have discovered the play of the waves

1 Pralaya.

* The ab ove verses are from the Author’s OltAnjali.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 219

of Brahma-Bliss in this very Sangsara, and have pointed 
out, as it were with the finger, that every process of 
cause and effect which obtains in the Sangsara is in a 
direct manner the stairway of Sadhana. It is a matter 
of still greater wonder that T&ntrik Sadhakas, like fish, 
move and yet remain unsoiled in the mud of worldly 
actions, the mere contact with which would send you or 
I to perdition. 1 That pure transparent heart of his is not 
soiled or stained by anything. Even in the midst of 
fierce waves he remains as free as the petals of a lotus in 
water. A Vaidik Sadhaka, also, on attaining Siddhi, does 
not think of the Sangsara as being anything but Brah¬ 
man. There is, however, this much difference, which we 
may illustrate as follows:Let us imagine that there is in a forest an ancient royal 
palace, the inner rooms of which are adorned with untold 
treasures. I approach the building with a desire freely to 
see or to take them. But such a foul stench comes from 
all sides that it is difficult to stay there for even a minute. 
Unable to settle what to do, I look about in every quarter. 
I find that at my very side there is a flight of stairs. The 
lower wall bears elaborate ornaments, but the stench pre¬ 
vents me from standing there to closely examine it. In 
particular, I note that, though there is ornament, there is 
no sign of a door w hereby to enter the house. I am there¬ 
fore obliged slowly to ascend by the flight of stairs, and 
with good fortune find myself at the top of the building. 
I there find that the entrance door of the palace is wide 
ajar, as if to welcome visitors. Entering by that door, 
I descend by a staircase, and in every room discover proof 
of the incomparable wealth of the King of Kings illuminat¬ 
ing it with the lustre of its beauty. Whilst gazing with 
astonishment I descend into the lowest room. I then see

1 Ras&tala.

220

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the leaves of a side door dung open at my very side, through 
which another visitor enters into the building. Astonished 
and curious, I say to Him : “ Sir, I did not know that there 
was a door here. When I came I examined the wall for a 
long time, but could only discover ornament, and not a 
door." The new-comer laughs, and says: “ There was, of 
course, the door, but you could not find it.” I again say: 
“ But you found it. How was it that I did not ? ” He 
says: “ You came by the right path, but I by the left one,” 1 
upon which the following dialogue ensued :

I. What is the difference between the two paths, 
New-comer ?

N. The decorations of the right path merely beautify 
the wall, whilst in the left path there is, besides beauty, a 
device whereby the lines of a door are worked into it.N. The decorations of the right path merely beautify 
the wall, whilst in the left path there is, besides beauty, a 
device whereby the lines of a door are worked into it.

1. How came you to know of this device ?

N. By the instruction of the Guru.

I. But how came the Guru to know of it ?

N. By command of the Great Architect who built this 
edifice.

I. When you pushed, did the door at once open, or 
was a key required ?

N. A key was required.

/. Where did you get the key ?

N. Gurudeva gave it to me.

I. But how were you able to stand in that foul smell ?

N. The bad smell is on the right path only. The left 
path is ever pleasant, fragrant with the scent of full-blown 
flowers, and illumined by their beauty.

Upon this I am very much astonished, and ask:

/. As both are paths to the royal palace, why, then, 
this difference between the two ?

1 That is, that of the Veda and Tantra (vide post.)

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 221

N. (laughing). The portion on the left is the inner 
apartment. 1 Seekers of justice and favour and payers of 
taxes alone pass along the right path. It is their evil con¬ 
duct and contact which renders the path on the right so 
miserable. But should anyone amongst those who have 
more intimate acquaintance with the royal family desire at 
any time to see the Queen of Queens (Rajrajeshvari), he 
goes along the path on the left.

J. What intimate connection, then, have you with the 
royal family ’?

N. The Queen our Mother is my dharma-mother.* *

1. In our country the relationship between a dharma- 
mother and a dharma-son is a very distant one. How, 
then, do you call it intimate?

N. I have said She is my dharma-mother.

I. But what of that ?

N. You have said that in your country a dharma 
relationship is a very distant one, but in this our royal 
palace the relationship is very intimate, so 1 say She is no 
mother according to your dharma, but my dharma-mother.I am abashed, and, taking him with me, leave the 
house. Standing by the sides of the door, I mark with 
his help the places of junoture. I see that the lines meet 
in such a fashion that one cannot avoid giving innumer¬ 
able thanks to the artist, and showering a thousand curses 
on the blindness of one’s own eyes. The edges of the 
door leaves are so neatly formed that it is not possible to 
discover them without knowledge of the secret sign. Look¬ 
ing with ordinary eyes, one sees nothing but decorations

' Antahpura. occupied by the ladies, who in all Hindu households 
live in the zenana, apart from the men.

* Persons not connected by blood, but who entertain tender feelings 
for each other, establish such relationship by making Dharma their 
witness.

222

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in the wall. Moreover, one is likely to receive a sudden 
fright at the sight of the snake-like markings to be found 
at ever}’ joint. However that may be, I am happy to see 
and hear. But I ask myself why, in spite of the existence 
of this path, I took the needless trouble to traverse one 
which was so circuitous.Sadhaka, the “ I ” of this dialogue, is a Vaidik, and 
the new-comer a T&ntrik Sadhaka. The building is our 
gross 1 * * 4 and subtle body.* The foul smell which surrounds 
it is egoism, attachment, delusion, affection, hatred, shame, 
anger, fear, slander, and the like. The flight of stairs is 
the succession of Sadhanas. The open door at the top of 
the edifice is knowledge of Tattva.* The store of jewels 
therein is Siddhi or Brahmavibhtlti.* The paths to the 
left and right are the Tantra and Veda respectively. The 
key is the Tantrik Mantra given by the Guru. The decora¬ 
tions of the wall are the mechanism of the human body. 
The door leaves in the wall are the Mul&dh&ra,* and the 
snake-like markings are KulakupdalinT Herself.* What else 
remains to be understood cannot be revealed. This much 
alone we can disclose. The rest the Sadhaka will under¬ 
stand of himself. The Vaidik Sadhaka does not enter the 
house, 1 or even wait a minute on the ground-floor, for fear 
of the foul smell. He has no knowledge of the Shatchakra.*

1 Sthula, or material body of food.

* Sukshma, the subtle body.

' The Brahman. ‘ Power, wealth, and manifestion of Brahman.

* The lowest of the six chakras (Shatchakra), or centres in the body, 
situate in the perimenm, between the genital organs and anus.

4 The Devi who abides in this chakra, coiled round the SvayambhQ 
Lingu (see the Shatchakra NirQpana, edited by Arthur Avalon, and 
Introduction).

That is, on the ground-floor of the Snngs&ra. with its senses and 
passions.

Doctrine of the six chakras or centres in the body, which is one 
of the fundamental principles of the Tantrik Toga.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 223Doctrine of the six chakras or centres in the body, which is one 
of the fundamental principles of the Tantrik Toga.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 223

In deep disgust he goes up, and there attains the knowledge 
of the unity of the Jlva 1 * * and the Brahman, which is the 
meaning of all such great sayings as “ Thou art that. * But 
from the moment that knowledge of “ That thou art ’ 
causes him to see the Brahmanda as a BrahmavibhOti,* he 
slowly acquires knowledge of the truth as to Jlva through 
knowledge of Brahman. And then, not to speak of the 
ground-floor, 4 even the despicable hell of foul smell which 
surrounds it appears to him as nothing but the Brahman. 
On acquiring this Siddhi, the world no longer has any 
terror for him. Then the Vaidik Sadhaka at last comes 
to see the Brahmavibhdti in the Sangsara.* On the other 
hand, the T&ntrik Sadhaka renounces the Sangsara whilst 
seeing the BrahmavibhOti in the Sangsara itself.* Although 
the latter is full of foul smells, his nostrils are pleased 
with a divine fragrance, nor has the Sangsara power to make 
its own foul smell perceptible or to quench this fragrance. 
For who can quench that sweet perfume which by a natural 
law proceeds from its navel,' and spreads over a yojaua ?* 
And, similarly, when the KulakundalinI Mantra, with its 
fragrance of musk, awakes in the cave of the Muladhara 
at the base of the Sadhaka’s navel, the universe becomes 
filled with fragrance, which intoxicates the world. The

1 The embodied spirit, which is one with Brahman.

’ The MahavOkya of the Upanishada (Tat Tvam Asi), which estab¬ 
lishes this unity.

* That is, he sees the universe as a flowering of that tree which is 
God’s power.

* The Sangsara, or transitory world.

4 That is, the display of the Brahman in the Sangsilra itself which 
is but Its aspect to us.

* He neither denounces the Sangsara nor becomes attached to it, 
recognizing it to be, what it is, the display of the Brahman to us.* He neither denounces the Sangsara nor becomes attached to it, 
recognizing it to be, what it is, the display of the Brahman to us.

* N&bhi, as in the case of the musk deer.

* A distance of eight to nine miles,

224

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Sadhaka himself, overpowered by his own joy, scatters the 
lustre of that joy throughout the Sangsara. Such would 
also be the case were the Sangsara really a hell. But, in 
fact, and when viewed wnth discernment, 1 the Sangsara is 
neither a heaven nor a hell. It is only that which is its 
root ingredient. 1 Just as, by whatever name you or I may 
call a thing, whether cup, jar, bowl, or vessel, it remains 
in reality nothing but earth; just as, by whatever name you 
or I may call a thing, whether earring, bracelet, or necklace, 
it is in reality nothing but gold; just as water is water, 
whether you call it a river, lake, or sea; so the Brahmanda, 
by whatever name we may call it, husband or wife, father 
or son, friend or stranger, is but one or other aspect of the 
Brahmamayl.* * You or I may not understand or admit it. 
But call upon all Dharmas, 4 all Dharmash&stras, 6 and all 
the religious bodies on earth, and ask them. None will be 
able to deny the glaring truth told in Chandl: 9 “ O Thou 
all-pervading Devi, Thou art the Shakti 1 in all things 
spiritual * or gross,' whatsoever or wheresoever they be. 
How is it possible to hymn Thy praise ? ”

The whole world will surely and loudly admit the truth 
of this Shastrik Tattva. What, then, will you hate as 
being a hell, or foul smelling? In the Vaidik path the 
perception of this truth is the fruit of Sadhana: in the 
Tantrik path it is both the root and the fruit. The Vaidik 
Sadhaka lirst tastes the sweetness of the fruit, and then 
waters the root; the Tantrik Sadhaka, though he does not

1 Viveka.

* That is. it is only that which it really is—on aspect of the 
Brahman. 1 The Devi, or God.

' Codes of religion, dnty, etc. * Scripture touching the same.1 Viveka.

* That is. it is only that which it really is—on aspect of the 
Brahman. 1 The Devi, or God.

' Codes of religion, dnty, etc. * Scripture touching the same.

' The most sacred portion of the Mftrknndeya Pur&na, reciting the 
actions and praises of the Devi.

Power. * Sat. ' Asat.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 225

find sweetness in the root, yet waters it in the hope that 
he may enjoy the sweetness of the fruit. This is the reason 
why fruit ripens on the Tantrik's tree long before blossoms 
appear upon the Vaidik’s tree. It is impossible for a Vaidik 
to attain in a hundred years the Siddhi which a T&ntrik 
has in the palm of his hand in the course of one year. 
Tantra therefore says: “ Without doubt, Jlva, during its 
sojourn in Sangsara, will quickly reach the abode of libera¬ 
tion if he but tread the great path of Kula Dharma. 1 For 
this reason the protection of the Kaula Dharma should 
be sought."

Many, whilst admitting without doubt that the essen¬ 
tial conclusion of all Shastras is that She is all Shakti, and 
pervades all things, yet ask: “ What is the use, so long 
as knowledge of this fact is not realized, of worshipping 
according to the Tantra Shastra ? ” Suoh an objection in¬ 
clines one to laughter. We in turn ask: “ If the know¬ 
ledge that * She pervades all things’ is realized from the 
very beginning, then what is the use of Sadhana at all ? ” 
It is, in fact, the very want of that knowledge which makes 
all prayer and Sadhana necessary. It is not want of know¬ 
ledge which should make one desist from practising Sadhana. 
On the contrary, this circumstance should increase one’s 
attachment to it.To prescribe giving up food because the patient has 
a distaste for it is not the advice of an intelligent man. 
On the contrary, an honest physician will advise that 
morsels of food be eaten every day, so that thereby the 
distaste for it may be overcome. In Tantra Shastra, also, 
the chief of Physicians* has given this very prescription. 
Different diets have been prescribed in different cases,*

' Tuntrik Dharma of the Kaulas.

' Vaidyanfttba. a title of §hiva.

' Adbikara, which is also a division of Hindu treatises on medicine

13

226

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

according to the nature of the disease. 1 But all the trouble 
and danger of which we hear nowadays in the community 
of Tantriks are fundamentally due to mismanagement of 
those diets. The patient, through greed, eats bad food. 
Local medical men, for the sake of self-interest (and it may 
be, perhaps, without knowing the condition of the patient), 
will assent to his doing so. At last, when death arrives, a 
number of laymen will come and say that the fault is attri¬ 
butable to the system of medicine, and to nothing else. 
Similarly, through the disciple’s greed and the Guru’s fault, 
many an untimely death happens in the community of 
Sadhakas. Seeing that, a number of laymen belonging to 
the outside world are of opinion that the fault is that of 
the Tantra Shastra, and of nothing else. Hearing this, 
many people show their intelligence by asking: “ Is initia¬ 
tion in the T&ntrik mode indispensable ? ” Valihari! * What 
a conclusion! we say: Why take all this trouble, when 
medicine makes a distinction between good diet and bad 
diet imperative ? May not all treatment be dispensed with ? 
You and I find fault with Shiva and with the Shastra, but 
the suffering patient plaintively says:

“ Whom else shall I blame, O Mother,

But myself only and through fault of my own ?

I was mine, but said I was Thine,

And thus in a falsity I am caught.”“ Whom else shall I blame, O Mother,

But myself only and through fault of my own ?

I was mine, but said I was Thine,

And thus in a falsity I am caught.”

Old men say that if both the diseased and the disease 
be on one side, not even the physician’s father or grand¬ 
father can cure him. But as ill-fortune would have it, in 
our case the diseased, the disease, and the physician are all

The reader should note the following passages, which give the 
Author s explanation of the corruptions which have taken place in 
practice.

„ . ^ n ,. exc l a mation at some absurdity. As we should say

astounding.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 227

three on one side. That even in this state of things a few 
cures are taking place is due to the unfailing fitness of the 
Sh&stra.

Consensus of other Scriptures as regards the 
Authority of the TantraConsensus of other Scriptures as regards the 
Authority of the Tantra

Who asks the wind to make the fire blaze ? As wind 
comes of itself to a smoking fire, and reduces villages, towns, 
forests, and groves to ashes, so when the first signs of chaos 
in Dharma appear through the crooked influence of time, 
suspicious doubt and unbelief manifest themselves, and the 
heart of man, well furnished with the wealth of heaven, is 
burnt by the fire of irreligion, and reduced to ashes. Just 
as a fire first breaking out in a poor man’s cottage gradually 
turns even the royal palace into a mass of charcoal, so if 
unbelief takes root in the mind of any member of a religious 
body it makes even the hearts of Pandits of the greatest 
intellect shake. An inflammable thing burns itself and at 
the same time any other thing which comes in contact with 
it. Similarly, an unbelieving man himself falls from Dharma, 
and also turns others who come into contact with him into 
unbelievers. For this reason all Shftstras, from the Veda 
and Tantra to the ordinary Nltish&stra, 1 have counselled the 
companionship of pious men. a In the course of time society 
has long been denied the sight of such. Moreover, impious 
men have proudly usurped their seats, and, though them¬ 
selves deceived, deceive society. The Rishis were wont, sitting 
on the banks of a lake, to worship the Devaa and the Pit^is,* 
and to throw the offerings into the water. In the belief that 
the Rishis are there, and attracted thereby, the fish in the 
waters swarm near the shore, but, fools that they are, they do

1 Prescribing good conduct.

' The " Gods " and forefathers.

* Sad bus.

228

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Prescribing good conduct.

' The " Gods " and forefathers.

* Sad bus.

228

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

not know that the Rishis have gone, and that their place is 
to-day occupied by fishermen who spread their nets. They 
who were wont to practise austerities and to distribute for 
the good of living creatures the offerings accepted by Devas 
have disappeared, and it is beyond the power of the ordinary 
man to penetrate the motive of those who have spread nets 
of selfishness from their place. Moreover, it is these people 
who lead the hosts of different sects and different Sh&stras. 
They are very often heard to say that other Shiistras have 
no sympathy with the Tantra Shastra, and that the latter 
is not a Shastra, which all admit to be authoritative. By 
other Shastra* * are meant principally the Vedas, Puranas, 
Sanghit&s, 1 and Jyotisha,* and, following them, the Dhanur- 
veda," Ayurveda,* Gandharva-veda,* and other Sh&stras.

The severe blows of political and religious revolutions 
have left us but portions of all Shastra*. The rest are lost. 
Rik, Yajur, Sarna, Atharva, Dhanuh, and Gandharva Vedas 
are almost entirely lost. Of Tantra*, Puranas, Jyotisha, 
and Ayurveda, portions only are extant. All present criti¬ 
cism must, therefore, be made to rest on ruined columns. 
Let us suppose that three subjects have been dealt with in 
the beginning, middle, and end of a Shastra, and that only 
a portion of the first, middle, and final part of the Shastra 
is extant. Every intelligent man will admit that it is a 
very wrong inference to draw if in such a case it were said 
that the Shastra sought to establish only what was men¬ 
tioned in that particular portion, and nothing else. It is, 
therefore, a sign of one-sidedness and shortsightedness to 
conclude that the Tantra is authoritative only if its author¬ 
ity is acknowledged in such fractional Shiistras as are now

1 Such as the Monnva and other Dharmn^hastros.

* Astrology. ’ Veda of the art of warfare.1 Such as the Monnva and other Dharmn^hastros.

* Astrology. ’ Veda of the art of warfare.

\ eda of the art of medicine. * Veda of the art of music, etc.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 229

current, and not otherwise. Next, if these current Shastras 
anywhere assert the Tantra to be unauthoritative, then the 
Tantra is authoritative; for Shastra which disproves the 
Tantra must be subsequent to it. If the T&ntrik cult had 
not been in vogue previous to such Shastra, how could it 
proceed to disprove it ?

According to Aryyan principles, all Shastras are with¬ 
out a beginning, so that none is anterior or posterior to 
another. Even now, in almost all of the extant Sh&stras, 
mention is made of all other Sh&stras. Such a deeply secret 
tie binds them the one to the other that, should anyone slip 
from it, all are torn and scattered. It is, therefore, impos¬ 
sible for one Aryya Shastra to disprove another. Such 
adverse criticisms as, despite this fact, we see nowadays 
paraded as “opinions of the Shastra ” on the Tantra Shastra, 
are not the opinions of Aryya Shastra at all, but the mere 
outcome of the activity of non-Aryyan intellects. Upon 
the question whether there is in reality any opposition to 
the Tantrik cult in the Aryya Shastra, we shall lay before 
Sadhakas a few Shastrik authorities, so that they may for 
themselves see whether other Shastras approve or disapprove 
of the Tantra.

Upanishad says: “ The Supreme Shiva, 1 the Author of 
all Shastras and ordinances, prepared the eighteen Vidyas* * 
of Shruti * and all the Darsbanas, 4 manifesting Himself 
therein in play. 4 Being anxiously requested by Bhagavatl,* 
who is inseparable from His own Self, He revealed them from 
His five mouths in five amnayas 7 as the highest good.* The

1 Parama$hiva. 1 Branches of knowledge described post.

* Revelation. * Systems of Philosophy.

* That is, by incarnating Himself as the Rishis, who were their 
rovealers or authors.1 Parama$hiva. 1 Branches of knowledge described post.

* Revelation. * Systems of Philosophy.

* That is, by incarnating Himself as the Rishis, who were their 
rovealers or authors.

* The Devi. ' Teachings handed down from Guru to Guru.

' Paramartba.

230

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

eighteen Vidyas are the four Vedas — Rik, Sama, Atharva, 
and Yajur; the four sub-Vedas — Ayurveda, Gandharva Veda, 
Danda Nlti, and Dhanurveda ;* * six Ved&ngas — viz., Shiksha. 
Kalpa, Vyakarana, Nirukta, Chhandah, and Jyotisha ;* and 
Purana, Ny&ya, Mlmans&, and Dharma Shastra; and, lastly, 
the six Darshanas® — Vedanta, Yoga, Sankhya, Mlmansa, 
Vishesha, and Ny&ya.”

We believe that no one is ignorant of the fact that a 
fundamental part of Tantrik Sadbana is Shatchakrabheda. 4 
The first aphorism 4 of the Shatchakrabheda comes from 
Upanishad itself. We are unable to quote the Vaidik 
Mantra in a book, 4 but for the purpose of illustration we 
shall refer only to its substance. It says: “One hundred 
and one n&ifis 7 emanate from the base of the heart. Of 
these, only one—Sushumna — passes out through the head.® 
If at death the life-giving Shakti passes upward along this 
nadi, the Jlva penetrates through the gate of Sflryaloka,' 
and attains liberation. All other na</is are the cause of 
the Jiva s return to Sangs&ra. 10 Sushumna alone leads to 
liberation.”

Medicine, art, code of punishments, warfare.

That is, pronunciation of words, or euphony, ritual, grammar, 
glossary, prosody, astronomy, and astrology.

* Systems of Philosophy.

That is, the piercing of the six chakras or centres in the human 
body by rousing Kuntfalini in the MulftdhAra. and leading Her to and 
trough each of them successively, by the passage of the Sushumna 
fcadi (see Introduction and Arthur Avalon's Description of the six

centres or shatchakranirtipana). 
4 Sutra.

^ flannmtll., _1 ••

This being forbidden, 
or '‘artery," but as used in the

between Ida and PingalA. 
* Abode of the sun.centres or shatchakranirtipana). 
4 Sutra.

^ flannmtll., _1 ••

This being forbidden, 
or '‘artery," but as used in the

between Ida and PingalA. 
* Abode of the sun.

8ituated »n the Merudapda, or spinal column.

The world.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 231

The same is stated in the seventh Mantra of the 
Pra§hna Upanishad. In the Kalika, Tara, Narayana, Shiva, 
Upanishad-s, the Nrisinghatapani, GopalatapanI, and other 
works, short but pregnant aphorisms deal with the ap¬ 
pearances 1 of Devata, Mantras, Dhyana," worship," and 
other things alone related in the Tantra. This, we believe, 
is not unknown to any worshipper. In addition to this, the 
greater part of the processes dealt with in Tantra relative 
to killing, driving away, and so forth, 1 is contained in the 
Atharvaveda. Many Vaidik Mantras have also been pres¬ 
cribed in Tantrik worship. Then who can say how many 
hundreds of Tantrik upasana tattvas * * have disappeared 
with the loss of hundreds and thousands of Shukh&s * of the 
Vedas ? Other examples are unnecessary.

In our discussion upon the principle of Mantra, Sadha- 
kas will be given clear proof to show that even the Prapava,* 
the greatest treasure and very pith of the Veda, is not 
outside the scope of the T&ntrik Mantras. In the Narada- 
pancharatra' it is said: “ Meditating on the six chakras, 
Muladhara, Svadishthana, Manlpura, Anahata, Vishuddha, 
and Ajnakhya," he sees his own adored Devata, Shrl Kj-ishria, 
in his heart, seated on the lotus of a thousand petals 
embraced by the Shakti Kupdalinl smiling, beauteous, pure,

1 Murti of a DevatA ' Contemplation. * Up&sana.1 Murti of a DevatA ' Contemplation. * Up&sana.

* This refers to the Tintrik Sliatkarma, or magical powers— 
M A ran am (destruction); uchch&tanam (driving away); vashlkaranam 
(bringing under control, which would include hypnotism); stambhanam 
(arrest— e.g ., staying a storm, striking a man dumb); vidveshanam 
(causing antagonism between persons); svastyayanam (curative and 
helping power in disease, misfortune, and danger).

' Forms of, or discourses concerning, worship.

* Branches of the Veda. ' The Mantra Om. ' Chap. iii.

' These are the names of the six chakras situate in the perinmum 
and in the regions of the genital organ, navel, heart, throat and between 
the eyebrows, respectively.

232

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

having the lustre of a young cloud, 1 garmented in yellow 
silk. In the following Shloka* * the great eight-lettered 
Mantra of Bhagavan .Shrl Krishna is given :

“ Lakshmlrmayil kamavljam ’ng’entam krishnapadam 
tatha

Vahnijayantamantrancha mantrarajam manoharain.'’*

In the Varaha Purana it is said: “Beloved, the remem¬ 
brance, praise, sight, or even touch of a Chandala® who 
is devoted to Bhagavan® easily purifies the world. Lady! 
knowing this more than earthly power of devotion to 
Bhagavan, intelligent men should worship Janardana* by 
the rites prescribed in the Veda of Agama." T

In the Kalika Purina* it is said: The Devi should be 
meditated upon as ten-handed, and worshipped according 
to Durga Tantra." This is merely an indication of the 
line of worship. The entire Kalika Purana follows the 
Tantra. All the vijas®, Mantras and MArtis of Bhagavan 
Mahe^hvara “ which are given for the Shivakavacba u in 
the Brahmottara Khaijda * of the Skanda Purana are in¬ 
spired by Tantra.

' A cloud when first formed—black with a tinge of blue from the 
sky behind it.

* Prom chap, iv of same work.' A cloud when first formed—black with a tinge of blue from the 
sky behind it.

* Prom chap, iv of same work.

' ^ aut £° r , doe * translate this verse, which, however, runs 
ns follows: The charming King of Mantras is LakshmJ Mavu 
Kama vijas. together with the fourth case ending of Krishna’fKrish- 
nftya), followed by the wife of fire.”

Vahnijayft is Svilha, the wife of the Lord of Fire. Nor does the 
author give the Mnntra. which is: Aing. Shrlng, Kllng. Krishnaya

rlw 4- ; T vt P fir8t word9 aro Tantrik vijas (see Introduction) of

Lakshml, Maya, and K&ma. respectively.

One of the lowest, untouchable castes. § God.

,* 5 rish "^. ’ The Tantra. * Sharadlya Adbikara.

^Tantrik Seed mantras, such as kllng, bring, shrlng. hang, etc. 
Shiva.

„ f mu,e * of * hiva - borne as an armour (Kavacha) against evil. 
A portion of the Skanda Purana.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 283

The Padma Purana says. 1 * * “ 0 Devi of beautiful thighs,* 
the religious arts of the uninitiated avail not. Such a one 
is begotten a beast after death. How can Jlva be beloved 
of Bhagavan without Vaishnavl initiation, without the 
Gauri’s favour, and without Vaishnava Dharma ? ”

In the Devi Bhagavata we read : “ In this manner in 
the Satya Yuga* Brahmanas used to make constant japa 4 
of the Gayatri, Tara, and Hrillekha Mantras." Hrillekha, 
is a Mantra spoken of in the Tantra. Besides this, the 
whole of the Upasana Khanda* of the Devi Bhagavata is 
ornamented with garlands of Tantrik Mantras.Id the Mahabharata 1 we have Bhagavan Maheshvara’s 
words to Daksha on the subject of his sacrifice : “ 0 doer 
of good deeds, I shall again grant you a blessing. Accept 
it, and hear the message of this blessing with joyous 
countenance and attentive mind. This auspicious Pfishu- 
pata Vrata 1 was of yore created by me. It is a vrata 
extracted by me with careful consideration from the Veda 
with its six angas* and the Sankhya and Yoga Shastras. 
It is performed with severe and long austerities by Devas 
and Danavas"; hitherto known ; of universal application and 
everlasting effect. It may be accomplished in five years, is 
secret, never blamed by the wise (or it is blamed by fools),

1 Uttarnkhamln (last part).

J See Liilita Sahosranama ; IL\me$hajnatasaubb&gya mardavoni 
dvAyanvitii.

’ The first or golden age.

* Recitation of Mantra (see Introduction).

4 The portion of the Devi Bhagavata dealing with worship.

* SbAntipurva (see translation, Introduction, ante).

' Voluntary religious vow or site (see Introduction).

* Parts (see post). • Demonic spirits.

234

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and is opposed to the Dhanna based on caste distinctions . 1 
It is above fishrama dhanna 1 and is practised by the great, 
who are not afraid of death. High-favoured Daksha! Enjoy, 
without even performing the great vrata, the great fruits 
which it bears to those who duly perform it. Cease to grieve 
at the destruction of the sacrifice. Granting this blessing 
to Daksha Prajapati, Bhagavdn Mahddeva, of immense 
might, disappeared with his consort and followers." The 
community of Sildhakas will understand that this great 
Pashupatavrata was according to the Tantra. Besides this, 
there are many places which closely follow the Tantra. 
It is needless to mention them all.Next comes the Mahabhagavata. It is unnecessary to 
say that this great Purana follows the Tantra, seeing that 
it is eternally set on the thousand petals of the lotus, 
whereon Jagadamba is seated, and that it is that which 
Bhagavan Vedavyasa* declared to be only another form of 
Tantra. It is needless to quote any single piece of evidence 
from the book, for the whole of it, from beginning to end, 
is evidenoe.

In the Yoga Shastra, the philosophy of Patanjall, it 
is said: “ Siddhi is of five kinds—namely, acquired by 
birth, drugs, Mantra, austerity, and ecstasy . 4 Some are in 
possession of Siddhi from birth, such as Kapila, Prahlada, 
Shuka, and others. Some get it by taking drugs, such as 
the Itishi Mapdavya. Some acquire it by constant japa of

v «^>&?hramadharraa—relating both to caste and the ftfhramn. or 
0 V lf t ; b ^T a , ch t Arf foment), grihastha (householder), vann- 
E‘ ta (recluse), bhikshu (religious mendicant). Historically, the

ITJb’ZIZ'Z; “ “ me d ' 8r " «o

’ Law and d “fy relating to the Afhrama (see post). 
great Purt^ 118 ^ ““ Wr ° t ® Mah4bhar “ta and the eighteen

* Janmaja, Oshadhija, Mantraja, Tapoja. and Sam&dhija.

TIIE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 286

the Mantra, such as the successful Sadhakas. Others obtain 
it by dint of austerities, such as Vishvftmitra and others. 
Some attain to it by means of ecstasy, 1 and such are Yogis.”

All these five forms of Siddhi are the results of practice 
in Yoga in former births. In the present life they are 
simply revealed by the help of such causes as birth, drugs, 
Mantra, etc. That form of Siddhi which comes from con¬ 
stant repetition of Mantras cannot be acquired without the 
help of Tantra the Mantrashastra. Again, according to the 
Tantra, it is not the highest, but the second form of Siddhi.As to the Ayurveda, every good physician knows (as is 
also not unknown to Sadhakas) that all forms of worship 
direoted in connection with the saying of Mantra * * over 
medicines, preparation of metallic drugs of the ash of 
mercury, and other things, as described in the Ayurveda, 
follow processes prescribed in the Tantra and employ Tan- 
trik vljas, Mantras, etc. 1 We are unable to openly quote all 
those Vijas, Mantras, etc. Competent inquirers will obtain 
a mass of evidence by going through this Shastra.

In Jyotisha it is said: “At inauspicious times, such as 
unclean months, the following acts should not be done: 
commencement of education, piercing of the ear-lobes, ton- 
sure, investiture with the sacred thread, marriage, bathing 
for the first time at a place of pilgrimage, seeing the An&di- 
devata, 4 examination, enjoyment of ease, purashcharana,* 
and initiation.” * Had not the Tantra .Shastra been an ever- 
existent authority, how could purashcharana and diksh& 
have been dealt with in it ?

1 SatnOdhi. ’ AmantranA.

' Indian medicine is greatly indebted to the T&ntriks.

‘ Shiva I ingam.

* A rite in which mantras are repeated at prescribed manner of limes 
(see Introduction). • DikshA

236

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Smriti Agastya Sanghita says: “ The Mantra, which 
Guru gives with satisfaction and a joyous countenance 
. . . performing these preliminaries and mentioning the 
time of solar eclipse, it has been said that the Mantra 
which a person receives from his Guru at that time becomes 
easily successful 1 for the Sadhaka.”

In the MahAkapila Pancharatra we find : “ Instruction 
in Mantra given by Guru at the said Nakshatra, Tithi, 
Karana, Yoga, and Vara,* becomes auspioious to a Sadhaka.”

According to Pingala, “ a Mantra, once rightly accom¬ 
plished, becomes propitious even if it is not practised and 
worshipped (afterwards).”According to Pingala, “ a Mantra, once rightly accom¬ 
plished, becomes propitious even if it is not practised and 
worshipped (afterwards).”

In the Mantramuktavall: * “Initiated persons should 
dulj make japa of Mantras and worship Devatas, for no 
sin or unoleanliness touches the initiated who are self- 
controlled.”

It has been said in the Narada Sanghita: “ Next, we 
shall provide for puja, as prescribed in Agarua,* concerning 
persons tainted with uncleanliness.”

Besides this, there is a mass of proof in Brahma Purina, 
Shiva Purana, Vishnu Purana, Markandcya Punina, Agni 
Purana, Aditya Purina, Vayu PurOija, Linga Purana, Nandi- 
keshvara Purana, Bhavishya Purina, Matsya Puraga, KQrma 
Puraija, Garurfa Purana, BrahmAnda Purana, Brahmavai- 
varta Purana, Matsya SQkta, Shiva Rahasya, Shiva Sanghita, 
Ishana Sanghita, Shiva Dharraa, Shiva Sfltra, and other 
ShAstras. Were we to quote the evidence of every book, it 
would not be possible to find room for them in this small 
volume. We are, therefore, obliged to refrain from doing 
ao against our will.

1 Siddha.

conjaocMoo! week Jay. a ot ,h, > d “> <«' eloven).

’ Adhikira (chapter) on Afhaucha (uncleanlinesa). 4 Tantra.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 287

Next, it is necessary to inquire in this connection 
whether there were ever any Sadhakas or Sadhikas 1 * initiated 
in Tantrik Mantras, and possessed of Siddhi therein, amongst 
those who were discoverers, controllers, and founders of 
Shastras, or amongst those who were worshipped throughout 
the world as successive generations of gurus for their 
practices, study, Sadhana, and Siddhi in every Shastra, or 
amongst those who descended on earth from the Devfloka 
and Devaloka * for the establishment of Dharrna, the pre¬ 
servation of the human race, and the promulgation of 
Shastra. We shall make no reference to the community of 
Sadhakas coming after them. Those only we shall present 
here whose names the Shftstras have proclaimed.The KQlachurfftmaqi says: “Manu, Chandra, Kuvera, 
Maumatha, Lopamudra, Manl. Nandi, Shakra, Skanda, 
Shiva, Krodhabhattaraka, Pancharai, Durvasfi, Vyasa, SQrya, 
Vashishtha, Parashara, Aurva, Vahni, Yama, Nirrita, Varuna, 
Aniruddha, Bharadvaja, DakshinamQrti, the Ganapa, the 
Kulapa, Lakshml, Ganga, Sarasvatl, Dhatrl, Shesha, Pra- 
matta, Unmatta, Kulabhairava, Kshetrapala, Hanuman, 
Daksha, Garu(/a, Kashyapa, Kutsa, Kunta, Yamadagni, 
Bhrigu, Vrihaspati, the Chief of the Yadus, Dattatreya, 
Yudhishthira, Arjuna, Bhlmasena, Dronacharya, Vrishakapi, 
Durjodhana, Kunti, Sita, Rukmlnl, Satyabhama, Draupadl, 
Urvashl, Tilottama, Pushpadanta, Mahabuddha, Vala, Kala, 
Mandara, Kailasiha, Kshlrasindhu, Udadhi.Himavan, Narada 
—all these are Virasadhakas. 3 They have been spoken of as 
great Vlras, 4 and by the grace of Mahavidya 4 they have 
attained Samadhi in their respective lines of action.”

1 Female Sadhoka. * Abode of Devi and Devas (heaven).

’ That is. Sfidbakas following viraehftra.

' Here one of the Tantrik divisions of worshippers.

1 The Devf.

•23K

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The Jn&n&rnava 1 says: “ The said Vidya* is worshipped 
by Manu ”; and the DakshinSmtlrti Sanghita says: “ The 
above-mentioned Mantra is worshipped by Surya," and “ the 
said Vidyi is worshipped by Agastya,” and as to another 
Mantra, “ The said Vidya is worshipped by Durvasha.”In addition to all these, Dattatreya, Parashurama, 
Vishvamitra, Ramachandra, Balarama, Shrl Krshna, Brahma, 
Vishnu, Maheshvara, Mah&kala Himself, the imperturbable 
Narada, Matanga, and other Bhairavas, Sanatkumara, 
Gautama, Kapila, KatySyana, and other Rishis, were all 
initiated in the Mantras of Tantra, and attained Siddhi 
therein. From the special mention of these persons as 
initiates it does not follow that the rest were uninitiate. 
Shastra has merely mentioned the names of those whom 
circumstance has made renowned in all the worlds, and of 
the names mentioned but one small sQtra has been quoted. 
In one word, it may be said that, amongst those whose 
names have been mentioned in the Aryya Shastras, Snmtis, 
and Sanghitas, those who were uninitiated in the Mantras 
of the Tantra are very rare.

On hearing that even Mahakala, imperturbable Brahma, 
Vishnu and Maheshvara, Ramachandra, Shrl Krishna,' 
Ganga, Lakshml, Sarasvatl, Slta, Rukminl’ and others' 
were initiated in Tantrik Mantras, let none think that’ 
their greatness was lowered thereby. Their store of great¬ 
ness is not so small as yours or mine that it is tiable 
to be dried up at every wind. The addition or subtrac¬ 
tion of one or two waves makes very little difference in a 
greatness which is of endless extent, unfathomable, and 
solemn, like a vast ocean unruffled by any wind. How can 
their greatness be lowered unless they worship another ?*

| ,n the Mantra ftdhiklira (chapter). • Feminine Mantra.

That is. they worship themselves.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 239| ,n the Mantra ftdhiklira (chapter). • Feminine Mantra.

That is. they worship themselves.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 239

It is because we are talking that we are obliged to use the 
word “ their.” But from the spiritual point of view it 
should be “ His.' Sadhaka, know it for certain that, under 
the names of Kftli or Krishna, Hari or Hara, 1 it is Him 
whom we know —He who, moved by the sweetness of His 
own play, and with the desire to shed the joy of love and 
Brahma-bliss upon the hearts of His devotees, saves the 
universe in five * * forms, though but one Brahman in reality. 
He is five in one and one in five, and, together with the 
universe, is one without a second. What other, then, is 
there whom He can worship ? If in any form, in the course 
of play or in any incarnation, He has worshipped, know that 
worship to be nothing but the tapasya of Nara Narayana * 
in the VadarikfLshrama, 4 the panchatapah of Jagadamba 
in the Himalaya, 8 the worship of Govardhana in Brindfi.- 
vana,' the Katyayanl-Vrata, 1 the love for Shri Krishna, and 
worship of Krishna-Kall by Shri Radhikii, and the worship 
of Mah&deva by Shri Krishna, after receiving initiation 
from Vedavyasa. He has made obeisance to Himself, and 
that not in order to worship another, but in order to preach 
to the world the potency of Mantra, Tapas, and Dharma. 
Whenever it has become necessary to preach any Shakti 
to the religious world, He Himself has shown the path by 
acquiring Siddhi in the Sadhana of that Shakti, worship 
being but the means to the attainment of Siddbi. He has

1 Vishnu and $hiva.

' The panchadevatA ?hiva, Vishnu, $hakti. Ganosha. and Surya.

’ Nara, an ancient rishi, and Nftrftyana is Vishnu. Both did tapas 
in the VodnrikAshrama (Badarinnth) in the Himalaya. Nara subse¬ 
quently incarnated as Arjnna, and Nftrfiyana as $hrl Krishna, at the 
end of Dvfipara Yuga. 4 See last note.

* Gaurl performed the panchatapah (five penances to secure Shiva 
as Her husband).* Gaurl performed the panchatapah (five penances to secure Shiva 
as Her husband).

* ?hrl Krishna worshipped the mountain Govardhana.

’ Vrata which tfhrt Krishna asked the Gopfj (herdswomen) to 
perform before the Rosa festival.

240

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

thus given instruction to all people. Bhagav&n appears in 
the heart of Guru, and Himself gives His own Mantra to 
the disciple. In this His greatness does not suffer. How 
can the son learn to make obeisance to his parents unless 
the parents themselves show it to him ? The parents of the 
world have, therefore, made obeisance to themselves, and so 
taught the world how to make obeisance to them. As His 
full Brahmahood is not affected by His appearance as a 
daughter of the Lord of Mountains as the fruit 1 of Maha- 
deva's austerities and for the destruction of the demon * 
Taraka, or by his appearance as the son or daughter of 
Nanda as the fruit of the devotion of the herdswomen* and 
for the destruction of Kangsa and others, so neither His 
sole unity without a second nor His greatness are affected 
by His initiation in Tantrik Mantras and the attainment 
of Siddhi in worships prescribed in the Tantra, done to 
show to the world the potency of Mantra.It is needless to point out that Dattfitreya, Gautama, 
Sanatkumara, Kapila, Nfirada, and other Rishis were Tan- 
triks. Works such as the Dattfitreya Sanghita, Gotama 
Tantra, Sanatkumfira Tantra, Kapila Pancharatra, Nfirada 
Pancharatra, and others, are obvious proofs of it. Probably 
there is no Sadbaka who does not know of the great Risbi 
Katyayana. Drawn by the intensity of his devotion, Devi 
Herself assumed the form of a girl, full of youth, and ap¬ 
peared at the root of a bael tree on the sixth evening after 
the new moon, in the month of Ashvina, for the destruction 
of the Demon * Mahisha. Since then the Victrix of Mahisha 
has been worshipped in autumn * under the name of Katya- 
yanl, or daughter of Kfityfiyana. It is this Rishi Kfityayana 
who is the author of the Gfihya* of the Yajur Veda.

1 Siddhi. * Asum ' The gopis, who loved $hri Krishna.

* Asnra. * ijharat, the months of Bhiidra and Ashvina.

* Grihya. or household sfltras of that Veda.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 241 
The Direct and Superior Power of Tantra

It seems the result of some great sin even to harbour 
the thought that upon the favourable or unfavourable 
opinion of other Sbastras the authority of that Tantra 
depends which keeps living and safe in the shadow of its 
mighty arms all things moving and unmoving in the 
universe and world of S&dhana from the creation of the 
First Self 1 to the great dissolution. 1 Authors of Smriti, 
Sanghitas, Puranas, and Darshanas, have, even after the 
practice for ages of severe austerities, failed to discover 
Her, and, prostrating themselves to the earth in obeisance, 
have said: “0 Thou whose gunas* * are unknown to all 
Nigamas/ how can we, 0 Mother, describe that beauty of 
Thine which is visible only to Paramashiva ? ”*Again, it has been said: “0 Mother, Creatrix of all! 
who else is able and will dare to describe the greatness of 
Thy gu^as, which even BrahmfL, the Lord of creation,* 
with his four mouths; the victor of Tripura, with his five 
mouthsK&rtikeya, commander of the celestial armies, 
with his six mouths;* and Anantadeva, the Lord of ser¬ 
pents, with bis thousand mouths,* are unable to describe?”

Pushpadanta has said: “ If Sarasvatl herself were to 
write for unending ages with a pen made from an inde¬ 
structible branch of the Kalpa-tree,* with ink in volume 
equal to that of the Black Mountain contained in the ocean 
as its pot, upon the wide surface of the earth as writing- 
paper, even then She would fail to record Thy gunas.”

' Parasha or Ego. * MahApralaya. * Qualities, functions.

' Tantra*. * The Supreme Shiva. ' PrajApati.

r ?hiva called Tripur&ri from his victory over the Demon Tripura, 
or as some say, the three cities of the Asuras. * Son of $biva.

* Who. from under the nether worlds (pflt&la), supports the universe 
on his head (see Vishnu Purfipa ii, chap. 5).

,s The heavenly tree, which granted all desire as its fruit.

16

242

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

It is a dangerous learning whioh to-day makes a man, 
in order to prove the authority of Tantra Shftstra, the word 
of Shiva Shakti (who is beyond the mind and speech of this 
woi Id, Whose merciful regard the three worlds supplicate, 
whose meanest servants, the Yogis, Rishis, Munis, Siddhas,’ 
Sadhus, and Sadhakas, 1 are honoured throughout the world), 
depend on the words of the self-same Rishis.Learned man! lay aside this learning of yours, and be 
not ashamed for having done so. If any have come to this 
world with a perverse intellect, you undoubtedly are their 
chief. Disputes, questionings, doubts, and misgivings on 
this subject arise in your and my minds. But in none of 
the Shastras do we find those who are to remove our doubts 
themselves raising a whisper against Tantra. Nowhere 
therein do we find it questioned whether the Tantra Shftstra 
is authoritative or not. You will say that perhaps they 
had not such an all-embracing vision as we have got. But 
there is no “perhaps" in the matter. Such scepticism 
was not in their nature. You and I, though born of Brfih- 
mana parents, are to-day behaving like Chandftlas* through 
bad companionship. And so we consider it derogatory to 
our honour to bow our heads at the feet of our parents. 
But they were sons of Brahmanas, and Bnihmanas them¬ 
selves, and thus the sceptical question suitable only to a 
Chand&la’s nature never found a place in their minds. 
Where there is no question, how can there be an answer?

Just as people fearlessly enter the palace of their King 
at the time of payment of their yearly taxes, and seek 
is protection when unavoidable danger appears, so, when¬ 
ever any unavoidable difficulty has arisen in matters of 
worship or any ftdhyatmik, ftdhibhautik, or ftdhidaivik

* One of the lowest castes.

\

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 243* One of the lowest castes.

\

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 243

danger 1 has arisen, all Sh&straa have stood at the door 
of Tantra and given instructions in its name for man’s 
safety. And at other times, whenever there has been occa¬ 
sion to describe practices,* * rules of caste," history’, and the 
like, they have timidly assumed silence, considering the 
saying of Tantra to be as weighty and solemn as royal 
messages, and beyond penetration on their part. Conse¬ 
quently, they do not launch into a discussion upon Tantra 
at every word. This is not due to want of faith, but be¬ 
speaks perfect reverence on their part.

It is in Bengal alone that we hear people, now here, 
now there, raising the grating cry of “ Tantra, Tantra ! ” 
But in other provinces, such as Maharashtra, 4 Dr&virfa,* 
Utkala,* Kashmlra, and Nepala, people do not call that 
Sh&stra, Tantra, but Mantra Sh&stra, just as people do not 
take the name of their fathers, but call them “ Father.” 
The meaning of this is that worship of I^hvara 7 is every 
person's daily duty, and that Mantra is essentially neces¬ 
sary for worship. If Mantra be necessary, then one must 
necessarily ask the help of a Mantra Sh&stra. If, in spite 
of such etex-nally valid evidence as the words of Sh&stra, 
lives of Rishis, immemorial practice, anyone still says 
“ Unauthoritative ’’ to such we, as followers of the Sh&stra, 
will reply : “ The Vedas, Smj-iti and words inspired by the 
spirit of Dharma are authority, and if to any person all 
this is of no authority, then who will accept his words as 
authority’ ? "

Such evidence is sufficient to prove the acquiescence of 
the Sh&stras, but the acquiscence which is required by 
polemics is different.

1 See post. * Achiira. * Varnadbarma.

* Mahratta country. 4 Dravidian country — Madras.

‘ Orissa. ’ The “ personal " God.

244

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 See post. * Achiira. * Varnadbarma.

* Mahratta country. 4 Dravidian country — Madras.

‘ Orissa. ’ The “ personal " God.

244

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In anticipation of danger from doubt, which is the 
characteristic of the Kali age, the great Ordainer has made 
adequate provision against it. Other Shastras have repeat¬ 
edly and clearly said : “ The doubt of a person without faith 
is no example —that is, should au unbeliever do any work 
ordained of Shastra, and yet derive no benefit from it, then 
his case does not stand for an example, “ because every¬ 
where it is only a believer who is competent 1 for the per¬ 
formance of Vaidik rites.'’ Whatever may be the reason, 
the Shastra will only bear fruit for those who have faith in 
it. The matter is, however, otherwise with Tantra. For 
I cannot disbelieve it even though I be the greatest and 
most obdurate of sceptics. I may not have faith in Veda 
or Shastra, in God, the next world, sin and righteousness, 
Heaven and Hell, yet I cannot but believe in Tantra.

Of the three forms of evidence ■—namely, perception, 
inference, and Shastra * *—the sceptic * may not have faith 
in inference and Shastra, but he yields to and accepts direct 
perception as the only true form of evidence. And thus, 
even though I be the greatest sceptic, I cannot ignore 
Tantra, which is a Pratyaksha Shastra ‘: “ The potency of a 
thing does not wait upon intellectual recognition.” Whether 
you believe it or not, medicine has power, and will cure 
disease. It does not wait upon your intellectual recognition 
of the fact. There is an inherent power in fire to burn. It 
will burn the hand which is knowingly or unknowingly put 
into it without waiting for the belief or unbelief of the owner 
of that hand or anyone else. Similarly Siddhi, the visible* 
fruit of the Tantra Shfcstra, is the outcome of its natural 
potency. Whether you or I believe it or not, Tantra Shastra

' Adbikfira. * Pramapa.

* That is. pratyakshara. anumtaam, $habda.' Adbikfira. * Pramapa.

* That is. pratyakshara. anumtaam, $habda.

* Nfistika. or disbeliever in the Veda*

A practical SbOstra of experience. 4 Pratyaksha

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 245

will, when applied as directed by itself, bear visible 1 fruit. 
The combined determination of lakhs of persons such as 
you or I will not avail to prevent that. Relying on the 
strength of its own arms, Tantra does not recognize the 
efficacy of anything, call it reasoning or evidence, judgment 
or inference. All Shastras, in making ordinances in con¬ 
formity with Tantra, have guarded their individual honour. 
For as it would matter little to the sea if all the waves 
were to become cross and to turn their currents away from 
it, so it would matter little to the Tantra even if all other 
Shastras were to go against it.You may rush towards a lion with marshalled herds of 
furious elephants, but at the moment the resounding roar 
is heard of the maned King of Beasts, subduing even the 
loudest voices, then everyone will fly, one knows not 
whither. Similarly, place all Sh&stras on one side and 
Tantra on the other, and then you will see that the directly 
perceptible 1 war cry of Mantras, resounding like the solemn 
booming of thunder-clouds, will make them senseless, and 
disperse and drive them away to places of which there is 
no knowing. It is because of this eternally self-evident 1 
superhuman virtue of the power of Mantra that the Tantra 
and the Devata worshipped therein are eternally awake. 
Who will with impunity throw weapons of crooked and 
fallacious argument at one whose voice is guided by the 
Devata, who directs all intellects in the Brahmiijda, and 
who dwells in every heart ? The fancies of inference * are 
ever trampled under foot by direct perception. 1 Tantra has 
therefore said Kulashastra 5 is eternal evidence, because it 
bears visible ' fruit, Putting aside the sceptics, even such 
animals as beasts, birds, and the like, admit visible 1 things 
to be evidence. It is by force of the realization of such

1 Pratyakshu. 1 Anumanam. ' Tantra.

246

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Pratyakshu. 1 Anumanam. ' Tantra.

246

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

evident 1 fruit that Tantra has destroyed all perverse arguers. 
Who knows what will happen in the hereafter ?* That is 
the best of all philosophies which bears actual and visible 1 
fruit in this world.” This is what Shastra says. When, 
however, in Society it is found that on many occasions 
Tantrik rites bear no fruit, doubt arises in the people’s 
mind. We ourselves are much pleased to see and hear all 
this. For where they complain of a want of fruits we do 
not discern it. Is it not a fruit if Svastyayana * leads to 
dire consequences ? Through our ill-fortune a mango-tree 
bears amrfa, or through lack of intelligence we wish an 
amdah-tree to bear mangoes. This it is which gives rise 
to the difficulty about fruit. Your and my belief that “we 
do a work according to Shastra' is really a wicked vanity 
on our part. And it is because Shastra and Devata are 
unable to bear with this insolence of ours that they shatter 
our conceit in giving us fruit the opposite of what we 
sought. And then we think “ alas! what has happened ? 
faith is shaken ! but if we understand the matter rightly 
it is only a wrong belief which is dissipated. Neither place, 
time, nor subject is according to faith, yet still there is the 
meaningless and unreasoning cry, “according to Shastra.”' 
Why should Shastra tolerate this wrong ? Shastra ordains 
that a pQja is to be held at dead of night. But maybe, 
either from fear of keeping up at night or attracted by the 
mahaprasada, 1 you sit in worship in the early evening. 
Why then should not what is begun in early evening end 
in misfortune ? For this reason Shastra has said: “ Who

t Pratyaksha. ’ That is, in the next birth. ’ Dar^hana.

A rite to dispel evil and to bring about good.

A sour, skinny fruit.

r ' 7 hat i8< e '; cr > one noways is speaking of Shastra. but none really 
cares for or applies it. *

The great food or flesh of the animal of sacrifice.A sour, skinny fruit.

r ' 7 hat i8< e '; cr > one noways is speaking of Shastra. but none really 
cares for or applies it. *

The great food or flesh of the animal of sacrifice.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 24?

does not worship Mah&vidyfi, 1 or repeat Mantras." It is 
only for want of one thing—namely, the proper disposition 1 
— that there occurs a want of fruit. It is a very difficult 
thing to worship Her with a heart inspired with true 
feeling for Her. Ramapras&da has therefore said: She 
is to be sought through feeling. Can we without feeling 
find Her ? ”

In fact, it is great foolishness to doubt Mantra or 
Devata on account of one’s own deficiencies. It bespeaks 
great stupidity to put out a fire by pouring water on it, 
and then to opine that it has not the power to burn. 
Similarly, it is a heinous sin to misdo Tantrik work and 
then to doubt Shastra. It is always the mark of a weak, 
feminine nature to endeavour to establish one’s superiority 
on the issue of a verbal quarrel, whereas it is the sign of 
a man to desire to conquer the world by the strength of 
one 8 own arms. Similarly reasoning, argument and in¬ 
ference may be the w’ork of other Shastras, but the work 
of Tantra is to accomplish superhuman and divine* * events 
by the force of its own Mantras. The power to destroy, to 
banish, and control/ are, with others, matters of daily 
accomplishment. Thousands of great and accomplished 
S&dhakas still illumine all India with the glory of their 
austerities/ In every Indian cremation ground * the reful¬ 
gent and divine halo of Bhairavas and Bhairavls 1 is yet to 
be seen mingling with the light of the fiames of funeral 
pyres, rending apart the waves of nocturnal darkness and

1 The Devi. ’ Bh&va.

' Daiva. * M&ranam, Cchcb&tanam, Va$hlkarnnam.

* Tapa*.

' Sma^h&na. where Shavasana, MundAsana. Lat&sAdhanA, and other 
Tantrik rites, are practised.

' Adept Tantrik men and women.

248

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Tapa*.

' Sma^h&na. where Shavasana, MundAsana. Lat&sAdhanA, and other 
Tantrik rites, are practised.

' Adept Tantrik men and women.

248

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

illuminating the wide expanse of Heaven. Dead and putre¬ 
fying corpses submerged 1 near cremation grounds are still 
brought to life by the force of the S&dhakas’ Mantras, and 
made to render aid to Sadhana and Siddhi. Tantrik Yogis 
even now and in this world obtain, through the potency of 
Mantras, direct vision of the world of Devas, which lies 
beyond our senses. She, with dishevelled hair, the Dis¬ 
peller of fear from the hearts of those who worship Her, 
still appears in great cremation grounds,* to give liberation 
to Her devoted Sadhakas, who, fearful of this existence, 
make obeisance to and supplicate Her. Sadhakas still 
merge themselves in the Self of Brahman, laying their 
Brahmarandhra* at those lotus feet of Brahmamayl, 4 which 
are adored by Brahma and other Devas-. The throne of the 
Daughter of the Mountain ’ is still moved by the wondrous, 
attractive force of Mantras. This, in the eyes of Sadhakas,' 
is the ever broad and royal road upon which they travel 
untiring to the city of liberation. Maybe there is nothing 
but darkness for the bedridden and dying blind man. Yet

know that of a surety, oh blind man, that the darkness 
exists only in your eyes.

We are obliged to say something else. In Bengal a 
species of high-class creatures called “educated critics” 
has come into existence, who at every word are wont to 
say: The Tantra Shastra is a recent production. The age 
of the earth is 5,000 years in all. Within this period the 
creation of man dates back 3,000 years. Previous to that

8acred B 8tr 0 e r r m and WhU8t aWaiting burmn «' the cor P^ * placed in the

^^ aha3ffia?ha . nJM ' J Wh ^ some of the n,08t difficult forms of Tantrik 
rt P^tised. The auspicious Kalikd is thought of as wS

JSZ.'ZSZfSC* “ d “ is tbc hair of ** d0 °“

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 249JSZ.'ZSZfSC* “ d “ is tbc hair of ** d0 °“

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 249

his forebears were, according to some, frogs, and according 
to others, monkeys.’’ Whose antiquarian researches have 
led to such discoveries ? It is no wonder that they should 
deem the Tantra Shastra a recent thing. We, too, cannot 
oppose or be sceptical of their views. Even if we think we 
shall not believe it, our intellect believes of itself. For had 
not such been the state of their forebears, why should the 
descendants be such as they are ? Alas! 0 Providence, * 1 we 
know not whether you ever dreamt of such a perversion of 
intellect, of such a disastrous change of nature in the child¬ 
ren of Manu. Be the idea sound or superstitious, we still 
say: “ From the time that the Devas were established in the 
seven heavens,* on the summit of Mount Surneru, from that 
time we Brahmana-s have belonged to the race of Brahma. 
So long as Ganga* endures on earth, we, too, shall endure 
in the race of Brahma. So long as the sun and moon 
shine in the sky, we, too, shall endure in the race of 
Brahma. In Shastra alone does a Brahmana live, so that 
the existence of Brahman&s and Shastras are one and the 
same thing. Judging from the point of view of those for 
whom the creation of man is 3,000 years old, Tantra will 
be a recent creation of, say, a 100 years’ age. Intelligent 
men must therefore now consider that within these 100 
years only, in the midst of four or five revolutions caused 
by minor forms of Dharma ;' in the course of contest with 
sceptics, the Tantrik Sh&stra and initiation have been 
promulgated and preached through heaven,* the mortal 
world, and the nether world,* to the ears of every man and 
woman of every home in Bharatavarsha, consisting of 
China, great China," Nepala, Kishmira, the Dravidian Land,*

1 Vidhutii. * Svarga.

1 1116 My Ri^er Ganges. * Opadharma. used in a bad sense.

^ Svarga. * Martya. ' Rasatalu. * Mahachina.

' Madras country.

2501 Vidhutii. * Svarga.

1 1116 My Ri^er Ganges. * Opadharma. used in a bad sense.

^ Svarga. * Martya. ' Rasatalu. * Mahachina.

' Madras country.

250

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Maharashtra, 1 Anga, 1 Banga,* * Kalinga, 4 Saurash^ra,* Maga- 
dha,* P&nchala, 1 LJtkala,' and other countries and continents 
beginning from the mount of sunrise to the mount of 
sunset. 8 What blessed criticism ! *® It is on this account 
that old far-sighted grammarians gave the prefix “ sam ” 
instead of any other to sam&lochana 11 (criticism). Histori¬ 
cal critic, what shall we say to you ? Valihari! u

There is yet another sad thing to tell. In the com¬ 
munity of worshippers there are a few persons belonging 
to the Vaishnava sect" who believe that the Tantra is the 
Shastra dealing with the worship 14 of Shaivas w and Shaktas” 
alone, and that it is in thorough antagonism to the Vaish- 
Tjava Dharma. We do not know what to say in reply to 
this. To those who hold such a belief we with folded 
hands put the question: “ What Tantra is this ? ” The 
name of the Tantra of which they have heard from their 
Lords 17 is Svatantra," while that which is Shastra is called 
Tantra. When dealing with the subject of the charac¬ 
teristics of Tantra, it has been said that it is that which

1 Mahratta country.

' Country about Bhagalpur, Tirhut. * Bengal.

‘ Part of Orissa described in the Tantras as from Puri to the 
Krishna River. * Surat. ' Southern portion of Behar.

’ Punjab. ' Orissa.

* Uday&chala and Ast&chala: the mountains from which the sun is 
said to rise, and on which it sets, respectively.

M Sam&lochana.

11 A pun ; the word “ sam " in Bengali meaning " a clown."

u A form of exclamation which literally means " I am beaten. I 
have no words for it. Astounding."

“ Worshippers of Vishnu. “ Upasanft Shastra.

Worshippers of Shiva.

* Worshippers of the Goddess, or of Shakti the Devi.“ Worshippers of Vishnu. “ Upasanft Shastra.

Worshippers of Shiva.

* Worshippers of the Goddess, or of Shakti the Devi.

Prabhu, the title by which the gosvarats, or religious preceptors of 
Vaishnavas. are called by their disciples.

Svatantra means different." There is a play on the words, the 
meaning of the passage being that Tantra is Shftstra, but what they 
have heard is different, that is not Sh&stra.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 251

is “approved of by Vasudeva.’* * In this there is nothing 
to which a true Vaishnava can take exception. But then 
we have nothing to say to those with whom the objection 
lies, because they are Lords.* When they interpret the 
Shastra of Devotion,* it seems that they are Lords of 
Vaishnavas alone; but when they sit in judgment disprov¬ 
ing Tantra, it would seem that they are Lords of Vishnu 
also; otherwise, how can they dare to disprove the words 
of their Lord? 4 If the Tantra Shastra is hostile to Vaish- 
nava-s, we then ask by whose grace did they receive that 
Vishnu Mantra, initiated in which they, in their pride of 
Vaishnavism, cast sinister glances at the Tantra Shastra ? 
It is, indeed, a sign of great scepticism to be an enemy of 
Tantra after initiation in a T&utrik Mantra. We know that 
honest Vaishnava Sadhakas are never inimical to Tantra. 
But still, for those who are so mistaken, it is necessary to 
point out what the Tantra itself has to say in this respect.

Tantra says: “ Kali alone in the Kali age, Kyishria 
alone in the Kali age, Gopala and Kalika 1 in the Kali age, 
are the Devatas who are awake." *Tantra says: “ Kali alone in the Kali age, Kyishria 
alone in the Kali age, Gopala and Kalika 1 in the Kali age, 
are the Devatas who are awake." *

“ Mahakali and Mahakala exist in the manner of a grain 
of gram. Just as the grain of gram has on the outside a 
covering, and is in the inside divided into two equal portions 
closely touching each other, so the Parabrahman* is covered 
on the outside by M&ya, and exists interiorly as Shiva and 
Shakti in equal parts closely united the one to the other. 
It is this Param&tma existing in the forms of Shiva and

1 Vishnu, Lord of Vaishnavaa (see po$<).

’ Prabhu, the title by which the goavamls, or religious preceptors of 
Vaish^avas, are called by their disciples. 1 Bhaktisjhftstra.

* Vishnu, by whom the Tantra is approved (see post)- 
' Krishna and K&H.

* That is, active ; whose activities are efficacious.

Literally. “ Tattva of.”

252

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Vishnu, by whom the Tantra is approved (see post)- 
' Krishna and K&H.

* That is, active ; whose activities are efficacious.

Literally. “ Tattva of.”

252

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Shakti who is Maharudra, Mahavishnu, and Mahabrahma. 
The one only Brahman is called and differentiated by the 
three names Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara. 1 But he 
who looks upon the different forms which pass under these 
different names as really different never attains liberation.”* 
In the Mundamala Tantra* it is said: “So long, O 
Supreme Devi, as it is thought that there is a different 
Spirit in different beings, 4 so long only is the world multi* 
form, activities different, and feeling diverse; Brahma, 
Vishctu, and Maheshvara distinct; Gape^ha, Dine§ha,’* 
Vahni,* Varuna, 1 Kuvera,* and the Dikpalas* different 
Devas; effort is of many kinds; beings are masculine, 
feminine, and neuter; bael leaves“ are different from tulsi 
leaves, 11 Java, Drona, and Aparajita L ‘ are different from 
Tulsi-leaves; the Divya, Vlra, and Pashu forms of worship 
are different,” the idea of difference exists in Tantra; 
different forms of worship are prescribed for different 
Devatas; and so long (0 Mother of the world) is Hari “ 
deemed separate from Hara, u and so long (O Shiva) 14 are 
Kali with the terrible jaws, Shewith the beautiful matted 
hair,” Shorfashi and Bhairavi,** different Devls; Bhuvanesh* 
varl, Chhinnamasta, AnnapQrna, BagalomukkI, Matangi, and 
Kamalatmika," are different Devls, and Sarasvatl and

I ijhiva.

* Such as he who worships Vishpu. thinking him to be different from

Shiva. ' Chap. vL * Jlva. 4 The Son.

* The Lord of Fire. ’ Lord of water. * Lord of wealth.

' The regents of the ten quarters. “ Sacred to .Shiva.

II The holy basil (ocymum sanctum), sacred to Vishpu.

u The hibiscus, drona (a white flower) and clitoria—flowers sacred 
to the DevT.

“ The three different forms of Tantrik worship (Upasana); see 
Introduction.

“ “ Shiva. M A title of the Devi.u The hibiscus, drona (a white flower) and clitoria—flowers sacred 
to the DevT.

“ The three different forms of Tantrik worship (Upasana); see 
Introduction.

“ “ Shiva. M A title of the Devi.

Tara, one of the Dashatnahuvidyti, or ten great forms of the Devi. 
l ’ Forms of the Devi. , * Ibid.

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 253

Radhika, 1 II are distinct. As long as the notion of unity at 
the lotus feet of Bhavani* does not exist, so long endeavours, 
activities, modes of worship, and practice are different, O 
Devi of fair body! O Shangkarl! * when perception of the 
truth* grows in the lake of the Sadhaka’s pure heart, then 
in the resplendent bloom of the flower of non-duality, which 
is the lotus feet of TarinI, 4 the vision of one only Brahman, 
not only in all Devas and Devls, but in every being 0 in the 
Sangsara, opens to the view of the Sftdhaka.”

“The Sadhaka who contemplates Maheshvari, 1 know¬ 
ing that She is not different from Guru,* Vishnu, and 
Maheshvara, and Mantra, is undoubtedly Maheshvara* 
Himself, even though he be a Jlva."“

To say that the Shastra in which such a universally 
accepted conclusion is the object of Sadhana and Siddhi, 
is yet antagonistic to Vaishnavas, though it does not harm 
Tantra, yet smears the spotless Vaishnava name with the 
mud of indelible infamy.

To bring about harmony in place of their quarrels, 
Pushpadanta has said in the Mahimnastava: u “ All the 
conflict of opinion which exists in the threefold Shastra, 1 * 
Sfingkhya,“Yoga, cultof Pashupati,* 4 and Vaishnava Shastra, 14

1 Santsvatl is Devi of speech, and Radhikn the beloved of Krishna,

1 Title of the Devi; Bhava is Shiva. The Devi and Vftyu Puritans 
say that the Devi is Bbavftnl, as giving life to Bhava.

* Shangkarl is feminine of ^hongkara, a title of Shiva.

* Tattva. * Title of the DevT, as Saviour. * Jlva.

I Title of Devi, as spouse of $hiva, Maheshvara.

' Religious preceptor. * Shivn.

An embodied spirit : here, “ man.”* Tattva. * Title of the DevT, as Saviour. * Jlva.

I Title of Devi, as spouse of $hiva, Maheshvara.

' Religious preceptor. * Shivn.

An embodied spirit : here, “ man.”

“ Hymn in praise of the greatness of Shiva.

II Trayl — the Veda. So called because it consists of the three things 
—song, prose, und verse ; or because the first three Vedas are alone 
included.

u Philosophical school. 14 The Tantra.

* Sliilstraa dealing with the cult of Visbpu.

254

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

is due to differences of ideas, and is nothing but the doubt 
whether this or that is the right path. But, O Lord ! just 
as the waters of all rivers, in whatever direction they flow, 
and whether in straight or sinuous course, mingle in the 
end in one great ocean, so Sadhaka* * (whatever be the path 
they follow) are at their journey’s close sure to meet each 
other in Thee Who art the one only ocean of Unity.’’

Sildhaka, know it for certain that that is the final con¬ 
clusion of every Sh&stra, be it Veda or Tantra.

There are present-day Vaishriavas who revel in daily 
new emotions, 1 who are not satisfied with the forms* of the 
ten incarnations* of Bhagavan, or the four armed NSravana 
VSsudeva dwelling in Vaikun$ha,' nor even with the con¬ 
joined form of BhagavSu Shri Krishna, the perfect incarna¬ 
tion,' and who in many instances abandon the Chaitanya- 
less’ Mantra of Vishnu and Krishna worshipped by their 
forefathers, and received by them at the time of initiation, 
and get initiated in a Mantra which has Chaitanya in it.* 
Amongst such people there are many who say that it were 
better if Tantra Shfistra ceased to exist. They have both 
the daring and the opportunity to say this because, con¬ 
sidering the nature of the daily novel Mantra* in which 
they are initiated, and which are found neither in Veda, 
Purana, nor Tantra, the existence of the Tantra Shastra is

] Rasu - ’ Marti. ’ AvatAra of Vishiju. * Vishnu’s heaven.] Rasu - ’ Marti. ’ AvatAra of Vishiju. * Vishnu’s heaven.

' Yugalaraorti, or that in which the persons of both Krishna and 
KilnliA arc shown together.

* Pan ? a avatAra. ’ See next note.

There is hero both pun and sarcasm. Chaitanya means con¬ 
sciousness or intelligence, and is also the name of the celebrated 
uisbpava Saint who is the head of a large section of the Vaisbnavas. 
The meaning is that some people have the audacity to think that the 
Man ra of Vishnu is without chaitanya (achaitanya)—that is, without

Dot ,,H80ciated the Saint Chaitanya and 
lhat » Mantra associated with the same Chaitanya has alone 
consciousness (saclisuUwyn)

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 255

a source of danger to them. However that may be, it is 
not necessary to waste time in writing about them. The 
only refuge of the Hindu race is the tree of Veda, which is 
manvantaras 1 and kalp&ntaras* * old. The five forms* of 
T&ntrik worship are its five branohes.

It is by no means impossible that now, towards the end 
of the Kali age, a few parasites should be found growing on 
some of its branches. Those, however, who know the origin¬ 
al tree will recognize the parasites the moment they see 
the leaves. However that may be, we do not consider 
them as included in any of the five communities of worship¬ 
pers, and are therefore unable to accept their opinion as 
that of Hindu society. We know them only as Vaishnavas 
who are initiated according to Sh&stra in Vishnu Mantras. 
If they want to destroy the Tantra Sh&stra they will simply 
destroy themselves, because the Vishnu Mantras them¬ 
selves are stated in Tantra alone. To become inimical to 
Tantra owing to enmity with Sh&ktas, ‘ caused by difference 
in practice, is like turning a father out of home because of 
a quarrel with a brother.There is another thing of which we are ashamed even 
to think. We are really pained to see so much anger and 
enmity in Vaishnavas who worship such an amiable, 
peaceful, smiling, and sweet-faced Devatft, and who daily 
eat havishya* without flesh. If in this matter they were 
to ask their Gurus, instead of venting independent opinions 
of their own, then we, too, shall be saved. If Tantra 
Sh&stra be deemed merely the Shastra of the Sh&ktas, then

1 A manvantara ia a fourteenth part of a Ralpa (see jxmt).

’ A Kalpa, or day of Brahma, is 4,820,000,000 years.

* Vaishtjava-s, $haivas, Shilktiu, Sail rax, Giinapatya*.

* Worshippers of §hakti. or the Devi.

1 A very pure form of food, prepared with fruit, vegetable, and rice 
j(see Introduction).

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

25H

by the grace of what Shastra have Vaishnavas and the 
Gosvamls of the well-known families of Advaita, Nityfi- 
nanda, and others, who are Gurus of the Vaishnavas, and 
who give initiation, preserved their great glory so long ? 
Blinded by anger, people often forget their relation with 
others, and abuse them, but that is another matter. As a 
fact, both Sb&ktas and Vaishnavas are equally initiated in 
Tantrik Mantras. The authority of the Skrlmadbhftgavata 
is held by the Vaishnavas in much higher esteem than that 
of any other Puraija or Tantra. That Shrlmadbhagavata 1 * * 
sayB: “ He who would free himself of the bond of the heart 
should worship Bhagavftn in the manner prescribed in 
Tantra." Again, after referring to the forms of worship 
prescribed in both Veda and Tantra, it refers separately to 
the T&ntrik form of worship for the Kali age, and says: 
“ Hear also how worship is to be performed in the Kali age 
according to the ordinance of various Tantras."

Commenting on this verse ShridharasvamI says: “ By 
a separate reference again the superiority of the Tantrik 
path in the Kali age is shown."Commenting on this verse ShridharasvamI says: “ By 
a separate reference again the superiority of the Tantrik 
path in the Kali age is shown."

In the same work Bhagavan counselled Uddhava, the 
orest-gem of devotees, as to what should be done in His 
own worship. “ In all parvas* in the year provision should 
be made for Jatras" and Valis 4 in my honour. Vaidik 
initiation* and Tantrik initiation* should be received 
successively, and the Ch&turmftsya,* Ekadashl,* and other 
Vratas* should be observed." Again, “ All articles of poja,

1 Eleventh Book.

* Auspicious tithi* (or lunar days) for religious observances.

1 Festivals in the worship of Krishna, such as Rnthaj&trA, DolnjAtru, 
Sn&nnjAtrn.

4 Worship (pujii) with offerings. 1 Diksha. * Four monthly. 
' On the eleventh lunar day after new or full moon.

* Occasional and voluntary religious observances (see Introduction).

THE EPHEMERAL AND MODERN MONISM 267

such as water for washing the feet, 1 for sipping, 1 and the 
others,* * should be set out in order. Marking out a seat for 
me with Dharma and other Shaktis, nine in all, make there¬ 
in a lotus of eight petals bright with the pollen of its womb. 
Then worship me with Mantras prescribed in both the 
Veda and Tantra Shastras for the attainment of siddhi in 
both.” Here ShrldharasvamI has in his Commentary laid 
down that worship, according to both Veda and Tantra, is 
requisite for the acquisition of both enjoyment 4 and libera¬ 
tion, 5 as stated in both Veda and Tantra. “ Worship of me 
is of three kinds—namely, Vaidik, T&ntrik, and mixed (that 
is, Vaidik and T&ntrik and mixed, or Paur&nik). I should 
be duly adored according to all the three forms.” 4 “ If the 
Sadhaka adores me by the Vaidik and T&ntrik paths of 
Kriy&yoga, T he will receive from me siddhi in both Veda 
and Tantra.”We ask those who have faith in Bhagav&n and the 
Bh&gavata whether they have faith in these oommands of 
Bhagav&n, as stated in the Bh&gavata. Now the S&dhaka, 
who stands arbitrator in the dispute, will see whether the 
T&ntrik initiation and Scripture do not form the very life’s 
stay for the Vaishnava who follows Shastra. When the 
time for the dissolution of a family comes, we find that 
both inmates and outsiders become of the same mind, and 
so through the misfortune of the present Aryyan society 
we find that in many cases to be so.

1 Pfidyam. 1 Acbamanam. .

* That is, the other (ordinarily fourteen) upach&ras.

* Bhoga. ‘ Moksha.

* The author’s Bengali translation appears here to differ somewhat

from the Sanskrit, which runB : “ Trayftp&mlpsitenaiva vedhina mam 
samarchchayet." or “I should be adored by whichever of the three 
forms it is desired.” • Yoga of work.

17

CHAPTER IV

GAYATRI MANTRA 1 AND IMAGE WORSHIP* *17

CHAPTER IV

GAYATRI MANTRA 1 AND IMAGE WORSHIP* *

Although all admit that the G&yatrl is the fundamental 
part’ of worship as directed in Shfistra, yet the character¬ 
istics of the present time make it necessary to consider it 
both in some degree separately, and also in connection with 
Tantra. For there are nowadays some who even ask: 
“ What is the necessity for the adoption of Tantrik Mantras 
when there is the Vaidik Gayatrl ? ” The reply is that there 
is no necessity if necessity for initiation ends with initia¬ 
tion ; but those who, on the contrary, have to perform 
worship based on initiation must certainly be reinitiated 
according to the Tantra. For in the Kali age worship of 
Giyatrl is not possible according to the Vaidik method. 
Without reinitiation in Tantrik Mantra, worship of the 
Gayatrl even cannot be considered to be accomplished. 
Should anyone on that account regret because he thinks 
the Gayatrl is disgraced thereby then Gayatrl Herself * will 
judge the matter. But there is no cause for lament. There 
is no fear that the line will fail even if the son should feel 
himself insulted and therefore die, when the grandson is

1 G&yatrltattva. The Gftyatrl, is the famous Mantra, the essential 
tattva of Vedas : “ Om, let ns contemplate upon the wonderful spirit of 
the Divine Creator of the terrestrial, atmospheric, and celestial regions. 
May he direct our minds (towards the acquisition of Dharma, Artha, 
Kama and Moksha).” (See Introduction.)

* SakAra upftsana. * Tattva.

* For the Mantra is the Devi Herself.

GAYATRl MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 259* SakAra upftsana. * Tattva.

* For the Mantra is the Devi Herself.

GAYATRl MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 259

taken in the arms. It is asked what is the necessity ? But 
we ask where is even the want of it. Who will say that 
the boy who has passed the matriculation examination will 
not in time be eligible for studies suitable for a degree 
examination ? However that may be, more of this hereafter. 
At present let us discuss what Gayatrl is according to 
Aryyan notions. Is the Gfiyatrl mere words or Mantra ? 
If it be merely the former, how can it be so supreme as to 
be accepted as the fundamental part 1 of worship, the sup¬ 
reme Brahman Himself? If the glory of Gayatrl is due 
merely to its being a great saying, weighty and solemn, pure, 
full of sense and truth, then there are hundreds of thou¬ 
sands of great sayings in the Aryyan Sbastras which are 
equally replete with truth, and marked with more feeling 
and sweetness. Why, instead of worshipping them, do we 
worship Gayatrl alone as the essential portion 1 of all the 
Vedas ? Why am I, whether learned or ignorant, with or 
without understanding, called a Brahmana provided I am 
initiated according to Shastra in the Gayatrl Mantra? 
Putting aside the world, why has the Lord of it 8aid: 
“ Every Brahmana is my body, be he learned or unlearned.” 
In Shrlmadbbagavata, Shrl Bhagavan has said : “ Even this 
four-armed form * dwelling in Vaikuntha is not dearer to me 
than a Brahmana. A Brahmana is full of all Vedas, and I, 
too, am full of all Devas.” That is to say, the world is 
maintained by both Veda and Devata, and both are there¬ 
fore equally worshipful. But as all Vedas and myself 
who are full of all Devas, unite in the Brahman body of a 
Brahmana, the latter is the most worshipful of all. 1 
“ Malicious and misguided men who know not this truth 
slight me who am the all-pervading Supreme Spirit, the

1 Tattva or principle. 1 Marti.

' A Brahmana is called “ earth-deva ” (Bhudeva).

2601 Tattva or principle. 1 Marti.

' A Brahmana is called “ earth-deva ” (Bhudeva).

260

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Guru of the three worlds, and Brahma^a in form, by 
worshipping my images and symbols only ’ (that is to 
say, by omitting to worship a Brahmana as Bhagavan). 
Manu says: “ On the birth of a Brahmana, Xshvara Him¬ 
self 1 is born on earth in order to guard the sheath of 
Dharma of all creations.” For him who neglects the Gfiyatrl, 
Sh&stra again says in the Gfiyatrl Tantra: “ It is the em¬ 
bodied spirit of a twice-born person formed of Gfiyatrl who 
is the worshipper of Devata, and not the body nor senses, 
nor anything else. Vishnu, Shiva and other Devatas are 
fit objects of worship for him only who is such a Devata. 
A Brahmana who negleots the Gfiyatrl should not touch 
tulsi leaves nor take the name of Hari. A twice-born who 
neglects the Gfiyatrl is like the lowest Chandfila. What will 
he gain by worshipping Shrl-Krishna ? If through ill- 
fortune a miscreant who forsakes Mantra, Guru and Deva is 
born in one's family, he as well as all his kith and kin of the 
same gotra* * should do expiation for it. An effigy made of 
fifty ku$ha leaves should be burnt according to the rules 
prescribed in Veda. Otherwise his sin will soon enter into 
all his relatives of the same gotra, and such as come in 
oontaot with him will share in his guilt. In the Kali age 
the number of such sinners will daily and particularly in¬ 
crease.” Again in the same Tantra it is said : “ The twice- 
born who through wilfulness or neglect omits to do japa* 
of the Gfiyatrl is of a surety born of the seed of a Yavana. 4 
The Brfihmana who is without faith in even the Gfiyatrl is, 
O Devi, truly a Yavana, and being such how can he repeat 
the Gfiyatrl ? Fallen is the country in which that sinful 
Yavana dwells, and fallen also is the Ruler of that country. 
Brfihmanas who associate with him are fallen and infamous.

* The Lord.

* Recitation of Mantra (see Introduction).* The Lord.

* Recitation of Mantra (see Introduction).

* Lineage.

* Foreigner.

GAYATRI MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 261

Food given by a person who neglects the Gayatri is worse 
even than food given by a Yavana. It were better to partake 
of the food of a Yavana than even to drink water brought 
by a sinner who neglects the G&yatrl.”

Why ? Why is it that the influence of a few words 
makes a man worthy of adoration by Devatas ? and again, 
why is it that the want of those few words makes him the 
lowest Chaojdala, lower than a Yavana ? 1 The Shastra has 
neither enmity nor friendship with Jlva. It rebukes none 
and caresses none. It says only what is true. If anyone's 
feelings are wounded on account of the statement of a truth, 
then not he who utters that truth but the truth itself must 
be considered the cause, and therefore inquiry should be 
made into that. The truth about Jlva will be revealed if 
the true principles* * concerning Gayatri, according to Shastra, 
are discovered. In fact, it is because we do not know the 
true nature * of Gayatri that we hear of all these “ why's.” 
The moment we realize the true aspect of Gayatri then 
no “ why ” will remain. Then we shall understand that 
there can never be distrust in Gayatri unless a Brahmaija’s 
nature beoomes fundamentally oorrupt, and that in suoh 
a case the epithets of Chaudala and Yavana are not exagge¬ 
rated, but merely appropriate expressions. The authors of 
$h&stra knew at least as well as you or I that it is of little 
moment whether a few words are said or not. You or I have 
not done well in thinking that the Gayatri, whioh even a 
muni,’ who has taken a vow of silence, may not omit to in¬ 
wardly repeat without ceasing to be a twice-born, is mere 
language and words. It should be understood that that which 
makes a Br&hmaua by its presence and a Yavana by its

' Foreigner.' Foreigner.

1 Gftyatrl Tattva, or the nature of or principles concerning Gayatri. 
In a general way Gayatri Tattva means the subject of Gayatri.

* Sage or saint.

262

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

absence is not mere language, but the great supersensual 
Mantrashakti 1 which controls the Br&hm&Qda, and appears 
as eternal consciousness ; and that what we have taken for 
mere words and feet of verse is not so, but a great Mantra, 
full of brilliance appearing in the form of characters replete 
with transcendent principles.* A firestick 1 may be only an 
ordinary piece of wood to a Shavara * gathering fuel in the 
forest, but to the performer of sacrifice with the fire it is a 
veritable womb which bears luminous fire. Similarly the 
Gayatrl may appear only a string of letters to an unbeliever, 
but to a Sadhaka of divine wisdom it is a very mass of radiant 
shining energy 1 of Mantra. Just as when, sitting even in a 
dark room, the sacrificer lights the sacrificial fire by the 
friction of fire-sticks, and by casting the offerings in that fire 
offers full oblation * in homa, T so the sadhaka living in the 
deep dark sangsfira illumines the cave of his heart with the 
light of Brahman,* kindled by the friotion of mind and 
Mantra. He then offers to that burning fire of the Para- 
brahman in the fire-pit of consciousness' existing as mind 
engirdled with the three gmjas, all the three forms of action 
done in waking, dream, and dreamless sleep, whether sattvik, 
rajasik, or tamasik,* and whether by mind, speech, or action, 
and lives in a state of constant and perfect liberation.

The effect of mere language is to produce ideas of skill 
and emotions and sweetness, whilst that of Mantra is to 
stimulate the mental .faculties with the divine radiant 
energy, 11 and to thus lead to a full understanding of

1 Mantra power.

' Gayatrl Tattva, or the nature of or principles concerning Gayatrl. 
In a general way Gayatrl Tattva means the subject of Gayatrl.1 Mantra power.

' Gayatrl Tattva, or the nature of or principles concerning Gayatrl. 
In a general way Gayatrl Tattva means the subject of Gayatrl.

Arapi. * Chan$4la. 1 Tejas.

^Ahuti. ’ The sacrifice into fire. ' Brah mate jas. * Chaitanya.

That is, possessing the characteristics of the three gupas—sattva 
rajas, and Lamas. •* Tejas.

gayatri Mantra and image worship 263

constantly visible supersensual realities. 1 A mere collection 
of words is something gross, whilst Mantra is full of con¬ 
sciousness. A word is a mere display of letters, whilst 
Mantra is a mass of radiant energy. Sayings give advice 
to men of the world, whilst Mantras awaken * superhuman 
Shakti. A mere saying is, therefore, like a Jlva. subject 
to birth and death ; whilst a Mantra is Brahman Himself, 
unwasting, undecaying. So long as there is a difference 
between gross matter and consciousness, between Jlva and 
Brahman, so long will there exist this difference between 
a saying and a Mantra—a difference as wide as that be¬ 
tween the heaven and the nether world. ThiB is why, as 
regards the Gayatri, the notion that sayings and Mantra 
are identical is a false and mistaken idea. In order to guard 
ourselves against it, we must first understand the word¬ 
meaning of Mantra, and then proceed to deal with Mantra 
Shakti. 1 * * * In the Gftyatrl Tantra it is said : “ That is called 
Mantra by the meditation* upon which Jlva acquires free¬ 
dom from sin, enjoyment of heaven, and liberation,' and 
by the aid of which he attains in full the fourfold fruit.” 6 * 
Again: “ Because She is sung (glta) in meditation from 
Muladhara ' to Brahmarandhra '—that is to say, She enjoy¬ 
ing the music of the lute,* ever resides as the Mother, 
consisting of the fifty letters in the regions which extend 
from the four-petalled to the thousand-petalled lotus 10 — 
therefore is She gdyat, u and because, if meditated upon, 
She gives liberation (traija) to Jlva by the piercing of the1 Tattvas. * Literally, make to shine.

' Power of Mantra. * Manana. ' Moksha.

' That is, dharma, artha, k&ma, moksha.

' The lowest Chakra in the perinaal region.

' The cavity of Brahman on the crown of the head. * Vlnft.

" That is, from the Mal&dh&ra padma to the Sahasr&ra padma.

“ “ Song."

264

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

sheath of the Shatchakra, 1 therefore is She tri. By the 
combination of gayat and tri is formed the word Gayatrl, 
which is the name of that great Shakti who consists 
of Mantra.”

In another Tantra it has been said: “ Mantra is so 
called because it is achieved by a mental process. Dhyana 
is meditation. In Samadhi * * the self merges with the Self 
of the Ishtadevata,* and Homa is so called because in it 
offerings are made.’'

The nature of mind and its faculties is thus explained 
in Shastra: * “ Mind is the master of the ten senses, and 
is situate in the centre of the lotus of the heart. It is 
also called antahkarapa,* because, without the senses, it 
has no power of action as regards external things—that 
is, if the ear does not hear a sound, if the skin does not feel 
a touch, or if the eye does not see a form, if the tongue does 
not perceive a taste, or if the nose does not perceive a smell, 
mind becomes incapable of perceiving the nature of any¬ 
thing. The mastery of mind consists in this alone, that 
when the senses have been directed each on its own object, 
mind sits in judgment on them. Mind examines what is 
good and what is bad. Mind has three gupas*—namely, 
sattva, rajas, and tamas. It is from these gurtas that all the 
different changing states 1 of mind arise. The gupas being 
three, therefore, the three mental states are also threefold 
according as they are sattvik, rajasik, and tamasik. The 
sAttvik states are non-attachment to the world,* forgiveness, 
generosity, and the like. The rajasik states are passion,That is. the process called Shatchakrabhoda by which the roused 
Kuodaliul pierces and ascends the six Chakras until She unites with 
the Shiva of the SahasrOra. * Ecstasy.

That is, the Deity which a particular person worships.

^ The Panchadashi. * Literally, means “ doing inside.”

* Qualities or principles (see Introduction). ’ Vikara. * VairAgya.

GAYATRl MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 265

anger, greed, striving, and the like; and laziness, error, 
lethargy, and the like, are tamasik states. Sattvik states 
lead only to virtuous acts, rftjasik only to sin, and tamasik 
states give rise neither to sin nor virtue, but merely waste 
a life, which is spent to no purpose.”

“ Antahkarana ” 1 is fourfold—namely, manas, of which 
the function is doubt;' buddhi, of which the function is 
certainty; 5 and ahangkara* * and chitta,' of which the func¬ 
tions are egoism and remembrance' respectively.

The function of antahkarana, consisting of doubt, is 
called “manas”; the function of antahkarana, consisting 
of certainty, is called “ buddhi ” ; the function of antah¬ 
karana, consisting of self-consciousness, is called “ ahang¬ 
kara”; and the function of antahkarana, consisting of 
remembrance, is called “ chitta.” In the sphere of wor¬ 
ship ohitta occupies the first place. Remembrance of 
Mantra and Devata, contemplation on the meaning of 
Mantra, and meditation on Devata, and all such related 
matters, are accomplished by processes of the function of 
chitta. The meaning of aksha is sense. The taking cogni¬ 
zance by the senses of anything is called in the 8h&stra

' The antahkarana, which is the ego in general (Ahamartha antah- 
karana B&m&nyam — Yoga Vashishtha), is really one, thongh its func¬ 
tions are distinguished as above.

’ Manas is that mental faculty which considers whether the subject 
presented to it is this or that—" doubt ” — manah sankalpa vikal- 
pak&tmaka m (S&nkhya Tattva Kaumudi).’ Manas is that mental faculty which considers whether the subject 
presented to it is this or that—" doubt ” — manah sankalpa vikal- 
pak&tmaka m (S&nkhya Tattva Kaumudi).

1 After manas functions it presents it6 object to the self, which Bets 
itself as subject against it. Then Buddhi, which is determination 
(Adyavasfiya buddhi, ii, chap. xiii. Sutra S&ngkhya Pravachana 
Dar?hanam), follows with its quality of certainty (Nishchayakaripl).

* Self-consciousness—the ego recognizing itself (abhim&na ahang- 
k&ra, ii, chap. xvi. Sutra, ibid.).

* A term, in its wide signification meaning *' mind " or the antah- 
karapa in general, but here meaning that which functions as chintA, 
" contemplation " of a present or remembered object of thought. In 
S&ngkhya, as opposed to Ved&nta, ChintA is included in Buddhi.

' Involved in all contemplation.

•266

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Involved in all contemplation.

•266

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ pratyaksha." 1 A sense devoid of consciousness cannot 
perceive. The senses are but the doors through which the 
antahkarana perceives all directly perceptible things. This 
is the reason why in dreamless sleep, 1 swoon, and delirium, 
the mind, being unable to function, even things close by are 
not perceived, despite the existence of the senses. When 
mind has perceived a thing through the gate of sense, the 
thought of that thing continues like the steady flow of a 
current in the antahkarapa, which is not possessed by any¬ 
thing else. But just as innumerable waves rise and fall 
during the rainy seasons upon the heaving bosom of a river, 
so various operations of the mind, working upon the in¬ 
numerable things of the outside world, come and go in the 
antahkarana of Jiva. In consequence, no particular function 
of the mind is stationary even for a moment. Some other 
appears and thrusts it aside. That process by which the 
antahkarapa endeavours to put aside a later and to recall an 
earlier operation is remembrance, or function of chitta. The 
next question is, What will chitta remember? How can 
chitta remember that which has not been registered by 
the senses and perceived by the mind? Unless a thing 
has once been perceived, its remembrance is not possible. 
Here it may be objected that persons in dreams perceive 
heaven, places of pilgrimage, and the effulgent forms of 
Devas and Devls which they have never seen before. How 
can these things be reflected in the mind during dreams 
without having first been seen by the physical eye ? This 
objection has no force, because all such things as are per¬ 
ceived in dreamB are mental. During sleep all the senses 
become inactive, mind alone remaining conscious. In the 
dream-play mind is the only actor, so that, whatever is 
shown, the acts and scenes of that play are but the sport of

Direct perception.

* Su6hupti.Direct perception.

* Su6hupti.

GAYATRl MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 267

that one actor assuming different characters. Lions, tigers, 
snakes, bears, wife, son, friend, and servant, heaven and 
hell, and all such things seen in dreams are nothing but 
transformations of the antahkarana. Whatever the mind 
has at any time seen, heard, or thought, remains engraved 
thereon like marks on a stone. For various reasons, in 
sleep subsequent superimposed impressions disappear, lay¬ 
ing former marks exposed to view. As the outer curtain is 
raised, the inner scene is revealed. It is not that heaven 
has never been perceived. All that we can say is that it 
has not been perceived in this birth. We have no right to 
say that it was not perceived in any previous birth. These 
matters 1 will, however, be explained in our discourse on 
reincarnation. This much only we shall say here, that 
mind is the builder 1 of the heaven seen in dream, when it 
perceives not by aid of the senses, but works only with the 
aid of such materials as were perceived by it before. It is 
with such materials that the mind builds in dream heaven, 
earth, hell, and all such things. Mind, then, without the 
aid of eye or ear, sports with such things as it has seen or 
heard by the eye or ear, but with this difference, that by 
bringing one thing in contact with some other previously 
peroeived thing, it makes both appear in a form different 
from their real one. True, we see heaven in dreams, but 
the idea that that heaven is heaven is but a reflection of 
the heaven whioh the ear has perceived through Vedas and 
Vedangas. Had we not heard the beauty of heaven described 
by Itihasas,* Puranas, and the like, and impressed that 
heaven in our minds, the idea of heaven would never have 
been found within us, and without such idea we should 
never have seen heaven in dream. It is the previous 
impressions caused by our having heard of heaven which

1 Tattvas.

* Vishvakarma.

1 Histories.

2681 Tattvas.

* Vishvakarma.

1 Histories.

268

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

makes us see heaven in the dream picture. In this lies the 
distinctive character of the picture. The palaces, temples, 
woods, and groves which we see in it are but reflections of 
things whioh we have seen on earth, with this difference, 
that through its previous impressions the mind decks 
them out in various ways. In the case of a shining city 
seen in dream the brilliance as well as the city are of pre¬ 
vious perception. Mind only puts the brilliance and the 
city together. Dense forests full of animals of prey have 
always existed, but to-day mind places me before a tiger in 
such a forest. In this alone is to be seen the handiwork of 
mind, the hidden mystery of the drama, the characteristic 
of the dream. It is for this reason that I have said that a 
thing which has not been perceived by one of the five 
senses can never be seen in dream, for mind, the showman, 
does not contain it in his store-house. Dreams relating to 
Devatas worshipped by Sadhakas are, however, brought 
about by a different process, which we shall explain in the 
chapter on the eight forms of Siddhi of a Sftdhaka.

This instance of dream proves that, whether in waking 
or sleep, chitta cannot remember anything which has not 
been heard, touched, seen, tasted, or smelt.

Even in the case of meditation upon a Mantra some 
one or other of these five sense-principles must be present. 
In the case of the Gftyatrl there is much difficulty on this 
point.

Worship of GAyatri

Many people nowadays believe that it is the Brahman 
without attribute who is the Devatft of the Gftyatrl, so 
that with the Gftyatrl Mantra only his attributeless aspect 
should be contemplated. But in this there is a difficulty. 
The attributeless Brahman is beyond the range of the 
mind, speech, or senses, and how can mind think or

GAYATRI MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 269GAYATRI MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 269

ohitta remember that which is not within the range of 
the senses. If it is impossible even in dream to see any¬ 
thing which has not been previously perceived by the 
senses, how is it possible to do so when awake ? The 
contemplation of the G&yatrl Mantra is thus rendered 
impossible. Secondly, the attributeless Brahman is beyond 
all attributes. That which is such shows neither favour 
nor disfavour, neither satisfaction nor dissatisfaction, so 
that nothing should be desired or expected from it in this 
Sangsara. And what is the use of going to that from which 
nothing can be obtained, of which nothing can be expected, 
and to whom nothing is near, and nothing is distant ?

It may be said that G&yatri does not ask anyone to 
go or come, but only to sit down and meditate. But 
meditation is not possible without mind. The latter is 
intimately associated with the three qualities. The supreme 
Brahman is without them. It is, therefore, as impossible 
to hold the firmament between a pair of tongs as it is to 
worship the attributeless Brahman by a mind with attri¬ 
butes. Thirdly, whether we be on the paths of knowledge, 1 
devotion,* * or work,* worship of the Brahman without 
attribute is against all opinions, reason, and Shastra. “ The 
mental process by which the self is related to the Brahman 
with attributes is called worship." For this reason it 
would have been preferable that anything else than worship 
should be done in relation to the attributeless Brahman, 
which it is supposed the Gayatrl seeks to establish. But 
how, can we help it ? The Sh&stra has, again, said: “ The 
twice-born—that is, Brahmanas, Ksbatriyas, and Vaishyas 
—are all Sh&ktas,* and not Shaivas or Vaishnavas; for they 
all worship Gayatrl Devi, the Mother of the Vedas.’’ This

1 Jn&na. ' Bhakti. ’ K&rma.

* Worshippers of the DevT, as opposed to worshippers of §hira and 
Vishpa.

270

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Jn&na. ' Bhakti. ’ K&rma.

* Worshippers of the DevT, as opposed to worshippers of §hira and 
Vishpa.

270

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

means that, whatever one may become afterwards, whether 
Shaiva, Vaishnava, Saura, 1 or Gapapatya, 1 one is at base 
a Sh&kta.

For G&yatrl, who is the Mother of the Vedas, and from 
whom a person derives his twice-born character, iB Herself 
an embodiment of mighty Shakti.

Here also it has been said: “ All worship Gayatrl Devi." 
How can one who is attributeless be made the subject of 
a mind with attributes ? Fourthly, it is said that the Brah¬ 
man which Gayatrl seeks to establish is attributeless. 
Shastra, however, says that, when meditating on Gayatrl 
during japa,* * She should be contemplated under three forms 
according as it is morning, noon, or evening. In the 
morning She is Gayatrl, and appears as a young girl, rosy 
like the young sun. She is two-armed Brfihmanl, 4 riding a 
swan,* holding in her hand rudraksha beads, 4 the thread, and 
begging-bowl, T residing in the disc of the sun, the presiding 
Devi* of the Rigveda. At noon She is Savitrl, and appears 
as a j'oung woman, dark as the petals of a blue lotus. She 
is Vaishnavl,* riding the bird Garurfa, holding in Her four 
arms a conch shell, 10 discus, u mace,” and a lotus, residing in 
the orb of the sun, the presiding Devi of the Yajurveda. 
In the evening She is Sarasvatl, and appears as an older

* Worshipper of the sun. ’ Worshipper of Gane?ha.

’ That is. Dhy&na. during recitatiou (japa) of mantra, as the 
Catholic, when saying the rosary , thinks of each scene of the joyful, 
sorrowful, or glorious mysteries.

* Feminine aspect or §hakti of Brahma.

* Hangsa, which is also described as a goose or flamingo, the vehicle 
(Yah ana) of Brahma.

* The seed of a fruit, used for mala (rosary), etc.

* Kamarnjalu. used by ascetics to carry food given to them.

* Adhishthatrl.

* Feminine aspect or shakti of Visbpu, whose Yahana is the Bird-

King Garuda. * Sbangkba.* Kamarnjalu. used by ascetics to carry food given to them.

* Adhishthatrl.

* Feminine aspect or shakti of Visbpu, whose Yahana is the Bird-

King Garuda. * Sbangkba.

“ Chakra. u Gada, all three held by Vishpu.

GAYATRI mantra AND IMAGE WORSHIP 271

woman of spotless white beauty. She is three-eyed RQdr&nl, 1 * * 
crowned with the crescent moon, riding a bull, holding a 
trident* and drum* residing in the solar disc, the presiding 
Devi of the SfLmaveda.

In the commentary of Sangkar&charyya on Sandhya, 4 
as prescribed in the Yajurveda, the following passages 
are quoted: “ Gftyatrl at morn, Sftvitrl at noon, Sarasvatl 
at eventide. She bears these three names at these three 
times of the day, and She herself is Sandhya at all three 
times (Yyasa).

“ The morning Sandhya is Gayatrl, the noon Sandhya 
is Savitrl, and the evening Sandhya is Sarasvati ” (Yajna- 
valkya).

“ Gayatrl is red, Savitrl is white (according to some J 
Veda), and Sarasvatl is dark (according to some* Veda). 
These three appearances of Gayatrl have been mentioned for 
the three Sandhy&s. In meditation at other times She should 
be contemplated upon as being of a white colour ” (Vyasa).

“ Three-footed Gayatrl who in Her three feet embodies 
the three Shaktis * of Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara; 
Her alone should the twice-born seek and worship in 
three forms.”

Again, it has been ordained that this very Gayatrl, who 
appears as Shakti, should be contemplated as a male at 
the time of pr&nayfima* thus:

“ At the time of inspiration * of breath contemplate 
(according to some * Veda) the Mahatma * dark as the petals

1 Feminine aspect or ^hakti of Bodra (Shiva), whose Yahana is a

ball. * Tri?bfila.

* Damaru. a small " hoar-glass ” drum, held as well as the trident 
by Shiva.

4 Daily worship, performed at morning, noon, and eventide.

1 Sic in original. * Powers.

’ Regulation of breath, or breath exercises (see Introduction).

* Puraka. * Great Spirit; here Vishnu.

2724 Daily worship, performed at morning, noon, and eventide.

1 Sic in original. * Powers.

’ Regulation of breath, or breath exercises (see Introduction).

* Puraka. * Great Spirit; here Vishnu.

272

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of a bine lotus, with four arms in the cirole of the navel. 
At the time of retention of breath 1 contemplate (accord¬ 
ing to some* * Veda) Brahma, the grandfather of the world* 
red of body, with four mouths seated on a lotus in the 
region of the heart. At expiration 4 of breath contemplate 
Maheshvara,* the Destroyer of sin, clear, fair and white, 
like the purest crystal in the region of the forehead.”

Oh, thou Br&hmana, who hast privilege * in Veda and 
worshippest Gayatrl, tell me now, do these forms represent 
that aspect of the Brahman whioh is without attributes ?

Whether the Brahman be with or without attribute, 
and possessed of form or not, will be hereafter discussed. 
Sh&stra says that the Brahman whom the Gayatrl speaks 
of is without attribute, but it also says that at time of 
japa and pr&p&y&mq His form with attributes should be 
contemplated. How are we to harmonize these two state¬ 
ments of Sh&stra? If in Gfiyatrl He is explained to be 
without attribute, why does Shastra again enjoin that He 
should be contemplated with attributes? How shall we 
establish a concordance between these apparently conflict¬ 
ing statements? We shall deal with this matter afterwards. 
But here we ask why has this conflict come about ? Has 
Sh&stra itself the power to determine anything in Him ?* 
Of course not. Is it not bound to say that which He really 
is ? Had the Sh&stra been the creation of mere human 
authorship then there would certainly have been much 
ground both for affirmance and denial. But according to 
the Aryyan view Sh&stra is not a human production, but 
the production of Him concerning whom these questions

1 Kumbhaka. ’ Sic in original.

* Loka. 4 Rochaka. * §hiva.

* Literally, ** enjoyeet adhik&ra in Veda.”1 Kumbhaka. ’ Sic in original.

* Loka. 4 Rochaka. * §hiva.

* Literally, ** enjoyeet adhik&ra in Veda.”

: Literally, " to build or break anything about Him."

GAYATRI MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 273

arise. How then can objection arise as to why the Sh&stra 
has said this or that ? Bhagavan Himself takes his own 
portraits in His own camera. These portraits reproduce 
the different appearances in which He is sitting before it. 
His will is the sole cause of these differences. For this 
reason an objection as to why Sh&stra has said this or that 
is fundamentally impossible.

The VAchya 1 and Vachaka 1 Shaktis of a Mantra ^

S&dhakas will particularly bear in mind that not only 
in the Gayatrl but in every Mantra there are two Shaktis 
—the Vachya Shakti and the Vachaka Shakti. The DevatA 
who is the subject of a Mantra, 3 is the Vachj'a Shakti, and 
the Devata who is the Mantra itself* is Vachaka Shakti.^ 
For instance, the Devata presiding 4 over all Vishnu 
Mantras is Durga in the Mantra of the hymn of one thou-*' 
sand names of Durga. Durga is the Devata and Mahamaya 
is the Shakti. In the hymn of a thousand names of 
Vishnu, Paramatma Shrlkrishna is the Devata, and the son 
of DevakI * is the Shakti, and so on. As the seed lies inside 
the fruit so the Vachya Shakti lies within the Vachaka 
Shakti. As one cannot see the seed without penetrating 
through the fruit, so one cannot perceive the true nature 
of the Vachya Shakti without first worshipping the Vachaka 
Shakti. It is the Vachya Shakti who is the life of a 
Mantra, and the Vachaka Shakti is that by which such life 
is sustained. Without life what is there to sustain ? And 
if it be not sustained life is not possible. For this reason, 
without both of these two Shaktis a Mantra cannot even be

* These terms are explained in the text.

a Pratip&dya Devata. * Mantramayt Devata.

* Adhisthatri residing in or presiding over. Every mantra has its

Adhisthatri Devata. 1 Mother of Krishna.

>8

274a Pratip&dya Devata. * Mantramayt Devata.

* Adhisthatri residing in or presiding over. Every mantra has its

Adhisthatri Devata. 1 Mother of Krishna.

>8

274

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

awakened 1 and Siddhi cannot be obtained in it.* In parti¬ 
cular, without worship of the Vachaka Shakti life cannot 
be infused into a Mantra* To think of Sadhana and 
Siddhi in connection with an unconscious Mantra is as 
though one were to take a dead child in one's lap, and 
thought to attain worldly prosperity with its help. By 
worship * the Sadhaka must here understand not the wor¬ 
ship of the twentieth century spreading like some conta¬ 
gious disease, but the worship ordained by Sh&stra for the 
Aryyan race. For the fruit of this worship, to which we 
shall refer, is stated in the Shastra. The Mantra of this 
worship is not prayer or self-dedication, ending in roaring 
thunder and storm-clouds in an autumnal sky.* The first 
fruit of its utterance is a shower of glances from Devas 
powerful enough 4o deluge the universe, and the last is the 
wealth of Siddhi. As the waters of earth drawn by the sun 
gather in the sky, and then fall on the earth as rain and 
are dried up, and again and again are drawn by the sun, 
and fall and are dried up, so is this dualistic world drawn 
towards the brilliant solar orb which is the subject of the 
Gayatri, and then descends as knowledge of the non-dualis- 
tic truth,* flooding the dry dualistic sangs&ra, making a 
current of non-dualistic Brahma-knowledge and Brahma- 
bliss to flow all over the dualistic universe, setting aside 
illusive dualism, drawing non-dualistic knowledge towards 
Her from whom dualistic existence originates. And in the

1 That is, there is no mantrachaitonya. Unless the mantra is 
awakened in and by the consciousness of the sAdhaka the mantra thus 
becoming parcel of and the consciousness of the sadhaka himself, it is 
mere dead sound and letter and without fruit.

’ Mantrasiddhi (see Introduction).’ Mantrasiddhi (see Introduction).

The conditioned consciousness necessarily works by and through 
form (which is the nature of its thinking) to the formless “ That" 
which manifests to the sadhaka in worship as form.

Up&sanA. ‘ That is, in moaning, weeping etc. * Tattva.

GAYATRI MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 275Up&sanA. ‘ That is, in moaning, weeping etc. * Tattva.

GAYATRI MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 275

meantime the wealth of the eight Siddhis* * grows and 
ripens, filling the vast universe, the field of action* belong¬ 
ing to that worthy cultivator the Sadhaka. For this reason 
we are not to understand by the Gftyatrl Mantra the begin¬ 
ning of a storm, but the Mother, who is fair as clouds laden 
with water. The attributeless Vachya Shakti, who is the 
subject of the G&yatrl, knows that Her aspect without 
attribute is unapproachable by Jlvas who have attributes. 
She has therefore blessed the world of devotees by the 
assumption of form with attributes favourable to the 
Sadhana and Siddhi of the S&dhaka, and it is this form 
dwelling in the hearts of devotees which is the Vilchaka 
Shakti resident in the Gayatrl Mantra. It is the lustre of 
Her colours, white, yellow, blue, and red, which manifests 
itself in the lustre of KulakundalinI, 5 voicing the fifty letters 
of the Alphabet. It is of Herself that every letter speaks. 
Sh&stra therefore says: “Oh, Muni, who can relate the 
unparalleled greatness of that Ady& Shakti ? 4 Shiva Him¬ 
self, with his five mouths, has failed to describe it. When 
death approaches the dweller at Benares who longs for 
liberation, to him Shambhu* Himself appears, and utters 
in His ear the great Mantra called Tfiraka-Brahma in the 
form in which it was given by his Guru, and thus grants 
him the supreme liberation of Nirvana. Oh, Jaimini Brah- 
mana and Rishi! it is that great Shakti who gives the libera¬ 
tion of Nirvana, for She alone is the vlja 4 of all Mantras. 
Oh, high-souled man, all Vedas have described that Guru 
of liberation as the Devata who resides in all Mantras. 
In the city of Benares, Maheshvara, desirous of granting 
liberation to all creatures, even to such as hares, insects, 
and the like, who have received no initiation, Himself utters

1 See Introduction. ’ Karma.1 See Introduction. ’ Karma.

1 The Devi whose seat is in the Mulftdhara. * Primal Shakti.

* $hiva. ‘ Seed or seed mantra.

276

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in their ears at the time of death the name Durgi, the 
great Taraka-Brahma Mantra.” 1

Again, in the chapter on Creation in the same Shastra, 
it has been said: “ High-souled man! in this manner Bha- 
gavan Brahmfi, created the whole world, and Prakriti Devi, 
appearing through part of Herself as Sftvitrl, whom the 
twice-born worship at three sandhy&s,* * received Him as 
Her husband. Similarly the Devi incarnated Herself in 
part as Lakshml and Sarasvatl, and in Her play recei¬ 
ved Vishnu, the maintainer of the three worlds, as Her 
husband.”

Over and above this there are descriptions of Her innu¬ 
merable manifestations * in the form of the M&trika varnas. 4 
To these aspects we shall refer in their proper place. In fact, 
there is no difference in substance between the different 
states, Viichya and V&chaka, of Sachchidanandamayl.* As 
clouds are the compact state of water, so the aspect with 
attributes of the Vachaka Shakti is but the compact state 
of the attributeless V&chya Shakti. As clouds moved by 
the wind liquefy and pour rain, so, moved by the love of 
devotees, the Deva with form and attributes gratifies them 
by manifesting to their view that aspect of Hers without 
attributes which pervades the universe. Siidhana and 
Siddhi are the necessary processes to secure such gratifica¬ 
tion. For this reason we find in Shastra that whenever 
She has out of Her extreme favour to a devotee fully mani¬ 
fested Herself, She has, despite of Her being formless, 
shown the world-form * as Her own form. Had the Vachaka 
Shakti been separate from the Vachya Shakti, how were it

1 Mahiibhiigavata Discourse between Yyasa and Jaimini.

' Morning, noon, and evening. * Vibbuti.

* Letters of tbe alphabet.

1 She whose substance is existence, conscionsness, and bliss: tbe 
definition of the Brahman. ‘ Visbvarupa.' Morning, noon, and evening. * Vibbuti.

* Letters of tbe alphabet.

1 She whose substance is existence, conscionsness, and bliss: tbe 
definition of the Brahman. ‘ Visbvarupa.

GAYATRI MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 277

possible for the unlimited Shakti extending throughout the 
universe to appear in that limited form ? How could the 
womb of a limited form hold this universe ? And so, oh, 
devotee, I say the cloud is but a condensed mass of particles 
of water. Open your heart, cry “Oh, Mother!" fan it 
with the wind of devotion, 1 and then you will see that a 
copious incessant downpour will deluge the three worlds. 
And then, not only ourselves, but the whole dualistic 
world will enter and sink in the unfathomable womb of 
the one and only existence.' When the Shakti with attri¬ 
butes resident in the Mantra is, by dint of the Sadhana of 
the Sadhaka, awakened, She will open the gate of the 
monistic truth, when it will become possible to see the 
true nature and essence 1 of this universe. Just as in 
order to obtain a knowledge of the magic art of acting the 
actors and actresses must themselves play their parts, 
so unless the Actor and Actress in the play of this world 
themselves graciously show us their art, none can give a 
true perception of what is Brahmavidya* * But the matter 
is different for those who, appearing themselves in the 
character of actors and actresses, make a play of that play, 
who in reading dramas themselves become the dramatis 
persona?, and who the moment they close their eyes cause 
the universe with attributes to vanish, and see the attri¬ 
buteless Brahman. 4 For they are themselves both exhibitors 
and spectators, both actors and audience. They can change 
their character ten times in an hour, and themselves enjoy 
the sight of it. They can do what they like. We have 
nothing to say to it. Nevertheless, whatever others may

' Bhakti. * Tattva.

* Knowledge of Brahman.' Bhakti. * Tattva.

* Knowledge of Brahman.

* A remark directed against the Brahmo sect, who are here des¬ 
cribed as thinking that they can do without Sadhana, and by simply 
closing their eyes can see the Nirguna Brahman.

278 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA278 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

say, they, they themselves know that they are not one whit 
better than what they were before, but have merely assumed 
a part. So much about the playing of parts; the seeing 
of the real play is a different matter. But the thirst of 
the heart of those who hope that He will play, and they 
will see ; that He will dance, and they will be the cause of 
His dancing; that He will show His real aspeot and they 
will enjoy it to their hearts' content, cannot be satisfied by 
the sight of this worthless play. Their solemn resolve is 
that so long as new and charming clouds do not appear in 
the sky, they would rather cry with plaintive hearts and 
parched throats incessantly, like a chataka, 1 in this life, 
tormented by the three kinds of sorrow,* * than, being drawn 
by the false attraction of the mirage, rush towards it like 
foolish deer, and be untimely consumed with the fire of a 
burning thirst. Sooner or later a day must come in the 
year of human life when the eye will be soothed and the 
heart refreshed by the blissful world-filling beauty of the 
soothing shining cloud, and the thirst of the heart will be 
satiated for life by the shower of Her gracious glances full 
of nectar. For this reason the devotee depends on Her 
alone, is all submission to Her, never begs at the door of 
others, and says: “ Oh, Mother, I know that Thy true 
aspeot is Brahmakaivalya,* that Thou art without attribute, 
and attainable by true knowledge alone. I know that Thou 
art also full of kindness for Thy devotee. I know that 
Thou art our Lady, 4 and that the universe is Thy form. I 
know that Thy substance is existence, consciousness, and 
bliss, and that Thou in various forms grantest the desires 
of Sadhakas. I know that Thou boldest the three worlds

1 A bird which is said to live only on rain. 1 Vide ante.

* The supreme liberat ion.

Lhvart. feminine of Lhvara, the " personal ” Deity.

GAYATRI mantra AND IMAGE WORSHIP 2701 A bird which is said to live only on rain. 1 Vide ante.

* The supreme liberat ion.

Lhvart. feminine of Lhvara, the " personal ” Deity.

GAYATRI mantra AND IMAGE WORSHIP 270

in play. I know, oh, Mother, that Thou art the ordainer 
of all ordainers. Bat still I know that for the man who is 
helpless, destitute, and woebegone, who seeks a shelter from 
danger, and who has no means of fulfilling his desire, Thou 
art the sole amulet, Mantra, and healing balm. It is in 
order that She may grant this prayer of the S&dhaka and 
to prove the truth of this faith that She who is the Vachya 
Shakti, whose substance is eternal consciousness, assumes 
playful forms as Vachaka Shakti. Dwelling as Daughter 
in such a form the Mother of the world said to Her Father, 
Himalaya: * * None can comprehend my subtle 1 form without 
first having duly meditated * on my gross* form. The sight 
of this subtle form releases Jlva from the bonds of Sangsara, 
and gives him Nirvana Samadhi.* For this reason a 
Sadhaka who desires liberation must first seek refuge in 
ray gross forms, and then, having by Kriyayoga duly wor¬ 
shipped these forms slowly and step by step, think of My 
supreme, unwasting, subtle form.’ ”

The Sadhaka will from this realize that it is only 
after full worship of Her in Her aspects with form 
that he has the right to think, little by little, of Her subtle 
aspect. Now where is that subtle aspect, and where stand 
you and I ?

As in Gayatri, so in every Mantra, the Vachya Shakti 
is without attribute, and the Vachaka Shakti is with attri¬ 
bute, for the latter is the object of worship and the former 
the object which is to be attained. The Vachaka Shakti 
must be used as a means and support in order that the 
Vachya Shakti may be attained.

So long as I must worship with this, my mind and 
heart preserving the distinction that I am the worshipper

‘ Suksbma. * Dby&na.

* Ecstasy of liberation.

' Sthula.

•280

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRASo long as I must worship with this, my mind and 
heart preserving the distinction that I am the worshipper

‘ Suksbma. * Dby&na.

* Ecstasy of liberation.

' Sthula.

•280

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and She is the worshipped, so long there is no other alter¬ 
native than to worship that aspect of Her which has both 
form and attributes. But on the day that ray mind and 
heart sink in the womb of Prakriti \ the twenty-four tattvas* 
will disappear in Herself, all egoism will be destroyed, and 
I shall lose myself in that state beyond all speech and 
thought, in which “ neither you nor 1 exist.” On that day 
where am I or who is mine ? Your existence depends on 
mine, so that if I cease to exist where, then, are you ? And 
even if “ you ” do exist there will be no “ I ” to discover 
“ you.” Only so long as a river does not fall and lose itself 
in the sea does the distinction between river and sea exist. 
But when the river mingles with the sea the former ceases 
to exist; and so does the sea to the river, which is lost in 
it, though it exists for all the world besides. The indi¬ 
viduality of the river ceasing to exist, it can no longer say 
what it has become owing to the loss of its self. There 
is then no means of either separating the “ self ” of the 
river, nor can the river separate itself. For this reason I 
say that when I cease to exist She, too, notwithstanding 
Her existence, ceases to exist so far as I am concerned, for 
with the destruction of my individuality Her individuality 
in its relationship to me has also been destroyed. Now 
tell me, 0 Sadhaka f whom shall you worship when sinking 
in the attributeless aspect of the Self. This state is not 
worship, but the ultimate fruit of it called Nirv&na or 
Brahmakaivalya. In this state the worshipper becomes 
one with the worshipped. There remains neither wor¬ 
shipper nor worshipped, but only She. If you consider 
this as also suitable for worship, I know not where in the

1 See Introduction.1 See Introduction.

1 Of Singkhya—uis., Prakriti. Mahat. AhangkAra, Manas. Indriyaa, 
Tamnatras, Mali abb ut as.

GAYATRI MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 281

domain of the Lady with dishevelled hair 1 you can get 
liberation. However that may be, the question is one 
which concerns only those who have attained that state. 
We say to you, Jlva, that so long as that state of a Jlva 
lasts, no other means are available to you but worship. 
So long as you must worship you must, in order to main¬ 
tain that worship as such, continue to worship a Deity 
which possesses form. Do not be afraid. Neither you nor 
I will have to clutch indiscriminately at anything or 
everything.

She who created .Jlva knew aforehand the pangs of the 
Jiva’s heart, and because She must be attained the 
Daughter of the Mountain has surrendered Herself to 
various forms. Because of this we on earth may dare to 
stretch our hands towards heaven to seize Her. Although, 
whether on earth, in heaven, or in the nether world, She 
is one without a second, She has yet assumed various forms 
as Mother of the dualistic world. It is the sight of this 
grand play of Brahmamayi which has led Sh&stra to say in 
the Kularnava Tantra : 1

“ Brahman, who is all consciousness, without body or 
part, and beyond the power of speech and mind, builds 
forms for Himself for the benefit of Sadhakas.”

In the Mahanirvana Tantra, Sadftshiva says to the 
Devi: “ Hear why Thou art worshipped, and why Thy 
Sadhana leads Jlva to Brahma-Sayujya'? Thou art the 
supreme Prakriti of the Supreme Soul. 0 Shiva! * * the 
whole world is born of Thee. Hence Thou art its Mother. 
0 Lady! everything in this world, be it great or small, 
moving or unmoving, has been created by Thee, and exists

1 Devi as Kali and other appearances (Murti) is so represented.

’ Chap. vi. * Union with Brahman (Bee Introduction and ante).

* The Devi.

*282

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Devi as Kali and other appearances (Murti) is so represented.

’ Chap. vi. * Union with Brahman (Bee Introduction and ante).

* The Devi.

*282

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

under Thy control. Thou art the Mulaprakfiti 1 of all 
Vidyas,' and the origin of even Us*; Thou knowest the 
Tattva * of the entire universe, yet none know Thy true 
aspect. Thou art Kftll, Tara, Durga, Shodashl, Bhuva- 
neshvarl, and Dhiimavatl. Thou art Bagalil, Bhairavl, 
and Chinnamasta. Thou art Annapurna* and the Devi of 
speech/ Thou art Mahalakshml, who dwells in a lotus. 
Thou dost embody all Shaktis. In Thee are all Devas. 
Thou art subtle as well as gross, manifested as well as 
unmanifested. Formless, Thou dost possess also forms. 
Who can know Thy true aspect? For the success of worship¬ 
pers, the welfare of the whole world, and the destruction 
of the Danavas, 7 Thou assumeth all kinds of bodies. Thou 
art four-armed, two-armed, six-armed, and eight-aimed. 
For the preservation of the universe Thou holdeth all kinds 
of arms and weapons. Mantra, Yantra,* and other modes 
of Sadhana, as well as the three forms of worship, Pashu, 
Vira, and Divya,* are all described in Tantra in accordance 
with these different aspects of Thine." The same Tantra 
says: *' Thou dost embody all Shaktis; Thou art the 
supreme Adyashakti." Our Shaktis” as Creator, Preserver, 
and Destroyer of the universe, are derived from Thy 
Shakti. Thy eternal forms are of varied colour and shape, 
and adored by means of various forms of Sadhana. Who 
can describe all these ? It is by the grace of a drop of 
Thy mercy that it has been given to Me to describe in

The root or primal Prakriti. * Shaktis.

That is, Brahma, Vishnu, $hiva, and other Devas.

Truth, Principle, Nature. Essence.

\ arious forms of the Devi, including the DashamahavidyA.

Saras vat I.

Demons. ' The worshipped diagram (see Introduction).

The three Bhavas (sec Introduction). * Primal $bakti.

That is, the powers of BrahmA and others.Saras vat I.

Demons. ' The worshipped diagram (see Introduction).

The three Bhavas (sec Introduction). * Primal $bakti.

That is, the powers of BrahmA and others.

GAYATRI MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 283

Kulatantra Agaraa and other Shastra# the mode of Sadhana 
and worship of those forms of Thine."

From these Sh&strik references it appears that the 
Daughter of the Mountain, knowing the incapacity of Jlva 
to conceive any idea of Her subtle nature, * 1 incarnated 
Herself in various forms for S&dhana and Siddhi, the wel¬ 
fare of the three worlds, and for the relief of earth from 
the burden of its sins. 1 This is the firm faith of those who 
proceed along the path of Sadhana under the control and 
protection of Shastra. Different is the opinion of those 
who hurry along the path of selfishness, keeping Shastra 
under their control. None can object to another preaching 
his own individual opinions. But those who hide them¬ 
selves under the cloak of Sh&stra, and in an unnatural 
way kill or wound it, stabbing its heart with wrong mean¬ 
ings and perverted interpretations, pouring into it the 
poison of selfishness, proclaiming to the world that they 
are doctoring the Sh&stra from the poisonous bag, full of 
sharp weapons of selfishness belonging to modern social 
reformers, founders of religion, critics, and murdering 
charlatans, must be exposed in order to show with what 
excellent remedies they trumpet their doctoring of the 
religious world. We must also see whether the very wasted, 
contracted, and slumbering state of religion which they have 
brought about in the present time by virtue of their treat¬ 
ment is merely a sleep of rest for religion, or its eternal sleep 
in death. In this section we shall disclose to Sadhakas that 
new treatment of Sadhanadharma by these doctors, which 
consists of hitting its head with the Brahma-weapon:'

Chinmayasyaprameyasya nishkalasyasharlrinah.

Sadhakanam hitarthaya brahmano rupakalpana.Chinmayasyaprameyasya nishkalasyasharlrinah.

Sadhakanam hitarthaya brahmano rupakalpana.

‘ Tattva : existence or reality. 1 Bhubhora.

1 A pun : the Brahma-weapon is a very dangerous one. Here it 
refers to the modern eclectic sect, called the Br&hma SamAj.

284

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

That is to say, Brahman who is all consciousness, 
without body or parts and beyond the reach of speech and 
mind , 1 builds forms for the benefit of Sadhakas.284

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

That is to say, Brahman who is all consciousness, 
without body or parts and beyond the reach of speech and 
mind , 1 builds forms for the benefit of Sadhakas.

We have given before the interpretation of this verse, 
based on the authority of Shastra. But the above-men¬ 
tioned doctors are opposed to this interpretation. They 
say that worshippers have themselves given imaginary 
forms to Brahman for their own purposes, although, as 
a matter of fact, Brahman has no form. If this be true, 
then S&lhaka# have not only given imaginary forms to 
Brahman, but their alleged purposes and benefit must be 
imaginary. If Brahman has really no form, how can we 
believe that a true purpose can be served by attributing 
false and imaginary forms to Him ? You may say that 
contemplation of form merely produces concentration of 
mind, and that, by His grace, gives siddhi. Here we ask, 
Does it not make one feel inclined to laugh when one 
thinks of something as existing which one knows to be non¬ 
existing? It is neither contemplation nor concentration, 
but the play of a child with Brahman. A girl knows well 
enough that a doll can never be a living thing. She is 
not also ignorant of the fact that she is a little un-married 
maiden. Still when she plays she shows great concern for 
her doll-son, pretends that it is crying, feigns to give it 
milk, takes it on her lap, caresses it, and so satisfies her 
own mind. The attribution of false forms to Brahman is 
exactly similar. I know that the attributeless Brahman 
has no pleasure, displeasure, virtue, vice, attraction, attach¬ 
ment, pity, generosity, no love, affection, dual relation, 
or even body. Is it not then absolutely useless for me 
to meditate upon imaginary forms of that attributeless 
reposeful Brahman who has no form, and to worship Him

1 Aprameyn.

GAYATRI MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 2861 Aprameyn.

GAYATRI MANTRA AND IMAGE WORSHIP 286

to gain His favour ? Who will deny that they are mad-men 
who believe that during the eternal flow of worldly events 
from time immemorial Aryyan worshippers have been 
simply wasting their energies in such a useless task ?

Secondly, if forms are imagined in order with their help 
to acquire concentration of mind, why abandon such forms 
as are naturally beautiful and calculated at the very first 
glance to captivate the mind; and why make the restless 
mind still more restless by the imagination of all kinds 
of unnatural and various forms for Devas- and Devls ? 
There is no objection to such an argument in the case of 
those who have imagined such unnatural forms. But such 
an idea is dangerous to those whose success depends on 
the dictates of Shastra. Whilst worshipping, 1 am inde¬ 
pendent, but at the time of receiving the fruits of worship 
I am dependent on Shastra! It is very difficult to enter into 
this monstrous mystery.

Does Siddhi obey my command ? Is it not the height 
of impudence or the raving of a madman to suppose that 
Siddhi will appeal- and move in the way I shall order it, 
and follow upon whatever form I shall contemplate? Know¬ 
ing that this vanity of free thought in Shastra must one 
day be shattered, Bhagavan, in the discourse between Shrl 
Bhagavan and Uddhava in the Shrl mad bhagavata, 1 says:

“ The Sadhaka who disobeys Shftstrik ordinances and 
does sadhana according to his will, not only fails to achieve 
siddhi, but also goes to Hell.” His licence deprives him of 
siddhi, and the great sin of disobedience to Shastra leads 
him to Hell.

Will you and I to-day give imaginary' forms to Him 
whose will has created the infinite form of the Brahmanda? 
It is, indeed, creditable to you that you, being a man,

' Chap. xii.

280

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Chap. xii.

280

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

have been able to believe it. I ask, What is your authority 
for this imagination of forms ? You will reply that Shistra 
has said: “ Sadhakanamhitarthaya.brahmanorQpakalpana.” 1 
I find nothing to object to in what Shastra has said, but 
the danger lies in the manner in which it is understood.

Vtde ante ; the proper translation is, " For the good of sadhnWo* 
Brahman builds forms." but, as pointed out laterthe anthmS ™ 
ponents translate the sentence differently. ' tb 8 op-

CHAPTER V

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

Shastra, which sees Brahman as He really is, has said that 
Brahman Himself builds forms for Himself for the benefit 
of S&dhakas. But you take the Shastra to mean that wor¬ 
shippers have given imaginary forms to Brahman. The 
word Sadhakanam is formed by adding the sixth case-ending 
to the word Sadhaka. This sixth case, according to you, 
indicates the nominative, and you take the word Ropakal- 
pana with Sadhakanam. Again, the word Brahmanah which 
is formed by adding the sixth case-ending to the word 
Brahman is supposed by you to have its sixth case in the 
genitive sense. You thus explain the whole thing as 
“ forms have been imagined by Sadhaka-s in relation to 
Brahman." But this is not its right explanation. It is the 
word Sfidhakanam, which has its sixth case in the genitive 
sense, and should be read with the word hitarthaya. Ag ain, 
the word Brahmanah has its sixth case in the nominative 
sense, and should be read with rupakalpanA. Thus the 
whole verse comes to mean “ forms have been built by 
Brahman for the benefit of S&dhakas.” Although both sides 
may be equally liable to mistake, still the view which I 
have taken harmonizes with the context of the Shfistrik 
saying. For the above verse appears in the Kularnava 
Tantra in connection with the worship of Devas possessing 
forms. First Devi says:I now desire to hear of the character of worship, 
so tell me the mode of worship in the purification of Kula

288

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

articles, etc.” In answer to this question Bhagav&n Shiva, 
the Creator of all things, explains in the Chapter on Worship, 
the necessity or otherwise of invoking Devatils, and estab¬ 
lishes the fact of the possession of form to be the very 
foundation of invocation. It is in this connection that the 
verse appears whilst making provision for the worship of 
embodied Deities. To say that it is impossible that they 
should have aspects with form is not merely irrelevant, 
but disproves the very thing which it is sought to 
prove. This instance affords no opportunity for the service 
of selfish ends by giving a fallacious interpretation of the 
Sanskrit verse.

Secondly, there are ample grounds for the support of 
my view—namely, (1) If Sadhakas- give, according to their 
desire, imaginary forms to Brahman, why should the 
eternal Shiistra accept such as evidence ? (2) If Sadhakas 
may create forms according to their own sweet will, it 
would be hard to guess the number which have been 
already created by innumerable Sadhakas of different 
casts of mind, and the countless forms which will also 
in the future be created. Besides, if worship of all these 
forms gives siddhi, why has not Shastra separately pro¬ 
vided in the case of each of them the mode of worship, 
consisting of Dhyana 1 , Mantra, etc. ? (8) If I am inde¬ 
pendent in the matter of the imagination of forms, why 
(should not also the mode of worship be guided by my own 
'free-will ? (4) If I imagine a form according to my own 
' desire, what is there to oblige Ishvara to appear in that 
form ? (5) If I can build forms, why cannot I build 
Mantras as well? (6) If Mantra Shakti* is guided by my 
Shakti, why, instead of expending it on Mantra, do I not 
Iworehip in some other way ? (7) Why should one accept

1 Meditation.

' Potency of mantra.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

2891 Meditation.

' Potency of mantra.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

289

a guru in respeot of a worship which is to be performed by 
me according to my imagination ? (8) What shakti 1 is 
there in Jlva himself whereby he may obtain supersensual, 
superhuman siddhi without the help of Shastra ? (9) When 
have I seen, or heard, or been convinced by argument 
of such siddhi having been obtained by any person so that 
I may believe it ? (10) Who will be responsible if in trying 
to obtain such siddhi I happen to fall ? (11) Who knows 
in what time such siddhi may be attained ? (12) If siddhi 
may be attained according to one's own desire, what is the 
necessity of worshipping Gfiyatrl, whose substance is mantra, 
as said in Sh&stra ?

These and other grounds are as favourable to my view 
as they are unfavourable to yours. How will you dare to 
say that Sadhakas imagine forms without first answering 
fully these questions I have put against you ?

When dealing with Her dhySna, the Gftyatrl Tantra 
has said: “She has adopted playful bodies according to^ 
Her own desire.” Again, in Bhagavadgltft, 5 Bhagavfin Him¬ 
self (whose form is in question here), has said :

“ Though unborn, the imperishable Self, and also the 
Lord of all beings, brooding over Nature, which is Mine 
own, yet I am born through My own Power.

“ Whenever there is decay of righteousness, O Bharata! 
and there is exaltation of unrighteousness then I Myself 
come forth.

For the protection of the good, for the destruction of 
evil doers, for the sake of firmly establishing righteousness 
I am born from age to age.

“ Any devotee who seeketh to worship with faith any such 
aspect, I verily bestow the unswerving faith of that man.” *

, p o w ef- * Chap, iv, verses 6. 7. 8 ; and chap, vii, verse 21.

Tor convenience, reference is made to a published translation 
This and the other extracts from the Bhagavadglta are from Mrs 
Besant s translation, with the Sanskrit text.

19

290

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA19

290

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The Markandeya Pur&na in Devlmabatmya * * says: 
“ Eternal is She whose appearance 1 is the universe which 
She pervades, yet hear from me of Her birth in various 
forms. Wherever She appears to do the work of Devaa She 
is known in the three worlds to be born (although She is 
in reality free from birth and death)."

The same book in the hymn in praise of the Devi says: 
“ Mother, Thou hast by dividing Thyself into many forms, 
achieved the destruction of great Asuras,’ the enemies of 
Dharma. By whom else can this be done ? "

The following discourse between Himalaya and Parvatl 
appears in Bhagavatl Gita in Mah&bhagavata :

The Devi said : “ 0 father, Lord of Mountains, of my 
own free-will have I divided My own form for the purpose 
of creation into the dual aspects of male and female. Of 
these, Shiva is the supreme Purusha, and Shiv& the supreme 
Shakti. 4 Great King, Yogis who discern the truth * speak 
of Me as Brahmatattva, with its two aspects of Shiva and 
Shakti. 4 As Brahma I create this universe of moving and 
non-moving things/ and as Maharudra I, of My own will, 
destroy it at the time of dissolution.* High-souled Himalaya, 
it is I, too, who, for the putting down of evil-doers, main¬ 
tain as Vishpu, the supreme Purusha, this entire created 
universe. High-souled Himalaya, it is I, too, who, by 
repeated incarnations on earth as Rama and others, destroy 
Danavas * and save this world. Father! of all these eternal 
and occasional forms of Mine, the greatest is that consisting 
of Shakti, for it is certain that without Shakti, the spirit in 
the form of Purusha has no power of action. Great King,

Chap. i. 1 Murti. * Demons.

* That is. the supreme “ male " and “ female ” principles.

Tnttva. See note 2. 1 That is, the organic and inorganic world.

* Pralaya, 1 Demons.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

291* That is. the supreme “ male " and “ female ” principles.

Tnttva. See note 2. 1 That is, the organic and inorganic world.

* Pralaya, 1 Demons.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

291

know all such forms of Mine as have been above mentioned, 
as well as my forms of daughter and the like visible to you, 
to be My gross forms. I have already told you what My 
subtle form is. Great Mountain, none can apprehend My 
subtle form, the sight of which gives nirvana kaivalya to 
Jlva without first meditating on My gross form. For this 
reason a Sadhaka who desires liberation must first seek 
refuge with My gross forms, and after having fully and 
duly by kriyayoga 1 worshipped these forms, slowly and 
little by little meditate on my unwasting, subtle, and 
supreme form."

Himalaya then said: “ Mother MaheshvarT, many are 
Thy gross forms. Which of these should Jlva seek refuge 
with in order easily to attain to liberation ? As thou wouldst 
favour me, Mah&devl, tell me this.”

The Devi replied : “ This universe consists of my gross 
forms. Of all these, the Devi form deserves the highest 
worship, and soon grants liberation. High-souled Hima¬ 
laya, that Devi form is also manifold. Of these, the Maha- 
vidyas grant liberation speedily. Great King, hear their 
names from me: Mah&kall, Tftr&, Sho/fashl, Bhuvane§hvarl, 
Bhairavl, Bagala, Chhinnamasta, Mahatripurasundari, 1 
DhQmavatl, Mfttangl.* * All these insure liberation. If Jlva 
will give his devotion to these forms liberation is of a cer¬ 
tainty soon within his reach. Father, by means of Kriyayoga 
seek the protection of any of these forms. Directing your 
mind towards Me alone you will of a surety possess Me. O 
Mountain, high-souled people who have found Me are never 
reborn. For them there is no birth in this life transient 
and full of sorrows. King! to the devoted yogi who ever re¬ 
members me with undistracted devotion I grant liberation.

1 Yoga of action. ' KamaltL1 Yoga of action. ' KamaltL

* The ten forms which the Devi assumed prior to Dakshayajna (see 
Introduction).

292

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

If one but once remember Me with devotion at the time 
Joi death he is nevermore overcome with the mass of worldly 
sorrows. High*souled man ! to him who worships Me with 
devotion and singleness of heart I grant eternal liberation. 
Seek My protection in My aspect as Sbakti. It is that which 
surely procures liberation, and liberation will be attained 
by you. Great King! even those who worship other Devat&s 
with respect and devotion really worship Me alone, for I am 
in all and the giver of reward in every sacrifice. [That is, 
since I am in everything there is, leaving aside Devatfts, 
nothing in this world which, in a spiritual sense, is separate 
from me. And as to Devat&s, whoever of them may be 
worshipped, they are merely manifestations of My own great¬ 
ness ; so that, whatever sacrifice may be performed, it is 
I who, in the form of the Devata worshipped therein, grant 
in return for such worship its reward.] But, great King! 
liberation can never be obtained by those who are devoted 
to these Devatas alone [that is to say, who in their devotion 
to the Devatag whom they worship are indifferent, disres¬ 
pectful, or wanting in devotion to other Devat&s, considering 
the latter to be different from the former]. Therefore with 
thy mind under control, seek shelter with Me for the loosen¬ 
ing of the bonds of physical existence, and without a doubt 
you shall find Me.”

In the Niruttara Tantra it has been said : “ Devi, Shiva 
and Shakti are each divided according as they are with or 
without attribute. The supreme attributeless Brahma- 
san&tanl 1 is full of lustre, as is also the supreme attribute¬ 
less Purusha,* who shines like a great blue jewel. But that 
attributeless shining Dakshinakfilika 1 is far removed from 
all prapanchas * [that is to say, Her attributeless aspect,

1 Shakti. * $hiva. * See note 1.1 Shakti. * $hiva. * See note 1.

„ * consisting of the combination of the live tattvos •

earth," water." " fire." “ air," and " ether." '

293

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

being imperceivable by physical beings formed by Maya, 
lies at a great distance, for it is beyond the reach of Maya, 
and therefore, so far as Jlva formed of Maya is concerned, 
is situate beyond the sea of Mayft].

“ In Her attributeless aspect that unbounded Sarasvatl 
is of unmeasurable power, and the mulaprakfiti of the 
fifteen phases of Shakti, such as Kali, Kapalini, Kulva, 
and others. Again, in Her state with attributes, when 
She gives birth to the three Devas—Brahma, Vishpu, 
and Maheshvara—in the great ocean of the original cause, 1 
Her womb; it is She who gives birth to Mahakala, the 
first-born. It is She who assuming a female form, gives 
birth to the entire universe, consisting of moving and 
unmoving things. It is She who, as Vishnum&ya and 
Mah&lakshmi, has spread Her charm over this entire uni¬ 
verse. That Ady&shakti Dakshiimkall is Siddhavidya, and, 
as such, She is Mulaprakriti and Purusha. Prakjiti and 
Purusha are inseparably connected. One does not exist 
independent of the other. United with Shakti, Purusha 
attains Shivahood ; and united with Shiva, Prakriti attains 
Shaktihood. It is the inseparable connection consisting of 
this union which is Parabrahmatattva. It is in this union 
that they should be contemplated. It is of this union that 
Shiva Mantra consists. In dhyanayoga * alone should japa 
be made of this union. The Mantra consisting of this union 
of theirs is the Mah&inantra, and gives both enjoyment 1 
and liberation.' He who desires enjoyment attains the four 
abodes, Salokya and others,* and he who desires liberation 
is absorbed in nirv&pakaivalya. Kill, unbounded Sarasvati, 
is the great desire-gratifying tree * of those who long for 
the fourfold fruit of dharrna, artha, karna, rnoksha, 1 for She

1 Kirana.

* Bboga.

* See Introduction.1 Kirana.

* Bboga.

* See Introduction.

' Yoga by meditation.

' Moksha.

Kalpataru. ' See Introduction.

294

PRINCIPLES OE TAN'fRA

is the sole source of enjoyment and liberation even for 
Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara. [That is to say, imperfect 
Jlvas, alone, completely under the influence of Maya, seek 
from such a tree that fruit which is according to their 
individual desire. But the pecularity of this tree is that 
even those who are the guardians and controllers of Maya, 
and who are perfect Ishvaras, have to depend upon it for 
their individual enjoyment and liberation.] A Sadhaka 
should be initiated by his guru, and by virtue of his grace 
worship Kali, that great tree gratifying the desires of Maha¬ 
kala, who embodies all Mantras and Tantras.”

The following are Sadashiva’s words to Devi in the 
Mahanirv&pa Tantra: 1 “ Mahakala, the destroyer of the 
universe, is but another aspect of Thyself. At the time 
of the great dissolution Kala will swallow the entire uni¬ 
verse. Because of this gathering unto death and destruc¬ 
tion of all created things, Be is called Mahakala and you 
Kali. The three worlds sing of Thee as the Primal One,* 
because at the time of giving birth Thou didst give birth 
to even Mahakala, the first Purusha; and as Kali, because 
at the time of destruction Thou dost gather into Thyself 
even Mahakala, the Destroyer of all. Then Thou alone, 
in Thy formless aspect, unknowable and beyond speech 
and mind dost exist. Thou art formless, though possessing 
form [that is to say, Thou art not bound to any particular 
form, as a Jlva is who possesses form], for by means of 
Maya Thou dost assume innumerable forms according to 
Thy desire. Thou Thyself art without beginning, and yet 
art the beginning of all [that is to say, there is none prior 
to Thee]. It is Thou who createth, preserveth, and des- 
royeth the world.”

1 Chap. iv.

* Adya.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA 
On Formlessness and Form

2951 Chap. iv.

* Adya.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA 
On Formlessness and Form

295

Sadhaka, what do you understand from these state¬ 
ments of Sh&stra? Are the forms of Brahman imagined 
by 8adhakas or built by Himself? What clearer evidence 
than this do you expect from Shastra ? This is why I 
said that there can be no objection to what Shastra has 
said. It is the fault of our intelligence which does all 
the mischief. Shastra has repeatedly said that He took 
forms according to His own desire. But you and I are 
ashamed of believing this, because on first entering school 
it dawned on us that “ Ishvara is formless and conscious¬ 
ness itself.” Every dawn has its setting, but in the 
“ Dawn of sense " 1 there is neither dawning nor setting. 
From beginning to end, in both purpose and effect, it is 
only full of accounts of Ishvara’s own self. Many people 
are therefore troubled with the thought that Sh&stra is 
Ishvara’s 1 word, and “the Dawn of Sense ” is also Ishvara’s * * 
word, so they know not which to disregard at the risk of 
going to Hell. The Ishvara of the nineteenth century is 
truly an extraordinary and wonderful thing: for though, 
according to Shastra. Brahman * and Ishvara are in one 
sense one and the same, yet in another sense they are not 
so. Brahman is without, whilst Ishvara is with, attributes. 
Brahman is inactive, while Ishvara creates, preserves, and 
destroys. But in the various little religions* of the nine¬ 
teenth century Brahman and Isjhvara have come to mean

' Bodhodaya, the title of a work for children by the late Pandit 
4hvara Chandra VidyasAgara. The following passages are a satirical 
nlav on the word Ishvara as denoting the Pandit and also the name 
It God. ’ God. * The Pandit.

* Brahman as the unknowable Supreme without attributes is con¬ 
trasted with that aspect of It which manifests Itself in the work of 
creation, etc., and is adored as the “ personal " God (I?hvara).* Brahman as the unknowable Supreme without attributes is con¬ 
trasted with that aspect of It which manifests Itself in the work of 
creation, etc., and is adored as the “ personal " God (I?hvara).

1 Dpadharma: as if one were to say not creeds but “ creedlets."

296

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

one and the same thing. Suoh a golden cup of stone was 
never seen before. 1 This also, indeed, is part of Ishvara’s 
sport! However that may be, He whom the Shastra names 
Ishvara can never be formless, for His function is ai$hvarya, 
or lordship over the universe. He who has this self-con¬ 
sciousness of lordship cannot be without attribute, and it 
is impossible to be formless without being attributeless. 
Again, self-consciousness is a particular state of mind. 
He who has mind has surely body, and it is mere tautology 
to say that He whose body is eternally established possesses 
form. To call Ishvara the Lord of the universe, devoid 
of form, whether done under the authority of Shastra or 
reason, is as though one said that the ocean was devoid 
of water. An Ishvara with form is necessary for the 
oreation of a universe with form. Had He been devoid of 
form, His creation also would have been devoid of it.Suoh were our dawning ideas as the result of our 
training under a schoolmaster in boyhood. What we 
have subsequently understood of ourselves, and which 
science is supposed to confirm, is that an Ljhvara possess¬ 
ing body can never be omniscient; for we suppose that, 
having a body, He must necessarily be bound by Maya, 
and possessed of limited knowledge. Such being our in¬ 
ference, it would be wrong to hold that Yogis and Rishis, 
who were free of the bonds of life, were unerring either; 
for they, too, had bodies. Not to mention Ishvara, the 
powers of Yogis, Rishis, Sadhus, and Sadhakas, derived 
from Siddhi are still daily visible. Even infidels cannot 
ignore this directly perceptible* * truth. Believers as we 
are, how can you and I ignore it ? Is He, then, by whose 
worship even Jivas with limited knowledge and under the

A Bengali saying for an impossibility.

* Pratyakaha.

297

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

influence of Maya become free from the bonds of Maya, 
and acquire omniscience—is He not omniscient also ? Is 
not this a point worthy of thought ? As when the door of 
a room is opened the air within it is united with the 
great spaces without, so by the opening of the doors of 
their minds composed of the three gunas the individual 1 
and the supreme * * principles unite, and are merged in the 
Self of the Parabrahman. Is He by whose grace they achieve 
this unable to keep Himself free of the influence of MSya 
because of His having of His own free-will assumed form?

Shastra 1 says: “ How can He be subjected to bondage 
because of His having taken to Himself a body of his own 
free-will— He who gratifies by the enjoyment of the pollen 
of His lotus feet Munis who, by the force of Yoga, have 
thrown off the ties of all Karma, 1 and are no longer bound 
whatsoever they may do ?Bhagavan, then, in spite of His contact with Maya due 
to the assumption of mayik forms, is free from the bondage 
of Maya. This, of course, is a thing unattainable in the 
Jivatattva. 5 But how can we help that? He is I§hvara 
for the very reason that such superhuman conditions are 
possible with Him. His I$hvarahood consists of this super¬ 
human power. Sinistra has therefore said : “ Anima, Laghi- 
ma, Prapti, Prakamya, Mahirna, Ishitva, Vashitva, and 
Kamavasayitva — these are the eight Siddhis of Ishvara." '

The Shrlmadbhagavata, in the discourse between Bha¬ 
gavan and Uddhava, says : “ Anima is minuteness so fine 
as to be imperceptible by the senses, 7 Mahirna is greatness.

Jivatattva. ’ Parabrahmatattva.

' Chapter on Rasa in the Shrlmadbhagavata.

See Introduction. 1 World of embodied spirits.

' See post and following passage.

* That is. the power to make oneself as little, as big, as light, as 
heavy, etc., as one will.

298

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Lagbiraa is lightness. Pr&pti is knowledge of all which the 
Jlvas perceives by His senses, due to the fact that Ishvara 
is the presiding Devata of the senses of all living creatures. 
Prakamya is the enjoyment of all things heard, seen, etc., 
Xshitva is the application of Shakti or the spreading of the 
Shakti of His own may& over every Jiva in the universe. 
Vashitva is freedom from the three gunas of sattva, rajas, 
and tamas. Kam&vasayitva is the attainment of whatsoever 
I desire. Good man ! these are My eight natural siddhis.”

He is Ishvara or Ishvari, Bhagavan or Bhagavatl, in 
whom these eight siddhis eternally exist. Now tell me, 
0 Jiva, are these human powers ? Without such powers 
He becomes a mere Jiva like you or me. If He becomes 
subject to maya like you or me, what difference is there 
between Jiva and Ishvara ?

Though eternally connected with maya, m&y& is yet 
subject to Him. Though full of maya, 1 He is above it. 
It has therefore been said in the Vedanta doctrine:Though eternally connected with maya, m&y& is yet 
subject to Him. Though full of maya, 1 He is above it. 
It has therefore been said in the Vedanta doctrine:

“ Prakriti, in which the Brahman, who is all conscious¬ 
ness* and bliss* is reflected, and which consists of the three 
gunas, sattva, rajas, and tamas, is twofold. Prakriti con¬ 
sisting of pure sattva guga is rafty&, and prakriti consisting 
of impure * sattva guna is avidyft. The image of conscious¬ 
ness reflected in maya is called Ishvara. When reflected 
in avidya it is called Jiva. As maya has but one aspect, so 
Ishvara, the reflection in it, has but one aspect*. Avidya 
which consists of many gunas, has many aspects, with the 
result that Jiva, the reflection in it, has also many aspects. 
The difference between Jiva and Ishvara is that while 
Ishvara rules maya, Jiva is subject to it.”

1 May&maya. ’ Chit.

' That is. sattva and the other gupos.

1 Svarupa—that is. that which it really is.

1 Ananda.

209

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

Both are connected with m&ya, but whereas rnaya is 
subject to I?hvara, Jiva is subject to may&. This is the 
difference between Jiva and Ishvara. It is only because 
man cannot conceive the superhuman force of Ishvara’s 
§hakti that he wonders how Ishvara can be almighty and 
omniscient if he possesses form. Foreseeing such an error, 
Bhagavan said to Arjuna: * 1

“ The foolish disregard Me, when clad in human sem¬ 
blance, ignorant of My supreme nature, the great Lord of 
being."

In the Bhagavati gita * the Mother of the universe * gave 
the same instruction to Himalaya:In the Bhagavati gita * the Mother of the universe * gave 
the same instruction to Himalaya:

“ Similarly all other sattvik, rajasik, and tamasik dis¬ 
positions which exist derive from me and exist in me under 
my control. But, Great Mountain! I am not under their 
control. Great King! Jivas, charmed by my m&y&, fail to 
recognize this all-pervading supreme, unwasting, non- 
dualistic form of Mine. But, Father! only those who with 
a single mind worship Me with devotion can cross this vast 
ocean of maya and enter into that supreme form of Mine."

As we cannot direotly see the beauty of the lunar orb 
unless the moon rays come in contact with the eye, so 
unless the mind and heart become intoxicated with the 
worship of Him, His true essence 4 cannot be perceived. 
For this reason, although Shastra gives a thousand and 
one instructions to persons who have not yet acquired a 
fitness to receive them, they are but as music to the ears 
of a deaf man.

The root objection nowadays is that as something with¬ 
out bounds cannot be contained in a receptacle with 
bounds, as unbounded space cannot be held in a limited

1 Bhagavadgltti, chap, ix, verse II.

' Part of the Devi Bhagavata Purina.

1 Jagadamba. * Tattva.

300

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Bhagavadgltti, chap, ix, verse II.

' Part of the Devi Bhagavata Purina.

1 Jagadamba. * Tattva.

300

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

room, as a lake which measures a yojana 1 cannot contain 
such a mass of water as can deluge the universe, so the 
limited body of Ishvara cannot possibly hold the shakti * * 
of Ishvara. But here let us say that while illustrations 
and comparisons may be of value and adornment in history 
and literature, yet illustrations taken from the things of 
this world have not always equal application to matters 
touching superworldly realities. It is the height of folly 
to proceed to discuss the matter with the notion that only 
that is true which fits with our illustrations, and that that 
which will not so fit is false. For instance, in worldly 
matters whoever does a thing, does it with some object. 
There is no inclination to action which has not a selfish 
interest in it. If, however, you apply this rule to the 
matter* of the creation, will you tell me what selfish 
interests Ishvara served, or will serve, by creating this 
universe? Ask all Sh&stras and Sub-Shastras on earth, 
Veda, Tantra, Puraija, Koran, the Bible, etc., and see if you 
get an answer to this question. Who can say that for a 
selfish end Ighvara has created this world ? Ask of the 
greatest and bravest of warriors, “ Why has this world been 
created ? ” and he will at once be vanquished and fly from 
the field. All discussions, disputes, inferences, and theories 
of Philosophy 4 are concerned with such questions as to how 
the world was created, is preserved, and will be destroyed. 
But directly the question arises as to why the world was 
created the six systems of dar?haija (philosophy) become 
adar§hana (sightless).* The authors of Yoga, Vi^hesha, 
Mimangsa, Nyaya, and Sangkhya, the Veda and Vedanta, 
are all blind to the path whereby an answer may be got to

' Eight miles. ’ Power.

* Tattva. * Dar^hana^h&stra.' Eight miles. ’ Power.

* Tattva. * Dar^hana^h&stra.

* Dar?hana means sight. Philosophy is said to be the cause of 
sight.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

801

the question, “ Why does this sangs&ra exist ? ” The 
Sadhaka poet Ramaprasada has therefore sorrowfully said: 
“ Six blind men wrote books, and they were called Darshana 
(philosophies)/’ When Shastra does not answer this ques¬ 
tion I must either be a sceptic, or say that Ishvara must 
have some selfish purpose. But to say that He has self- 
interest is to divide Him. There can be no self without 
others, nor self-interest without self. As there can be no 
happiness without sorrow, nor sorrow without happiness, 
no light without darkness or darkness without light, so 
there can be no “ others’interest ” without “self-interest,” 
and no “ self-interest ” without “ others’ interest.” If 
Ishvara, then, created for His own selfish interest, there 
must certainly have been other interests existing before the 
creation. For there can be no self without another. And 
if there are others, then Ishvara is not one without a 
second, and there must be someone else to dispute His 
sovereignty (the idea of the Musalman’s Satan comes in 
imperceptibly here). Secondly, if before Him there was 
another different from Him, who created that other? If 
someone else created that other, then Ishvara is not the 
creator of all. And if it be said that Ishvara Himself created 
him, then in the first place was He such a fool as to Him¬ 
self create His own enemy ? In the second place, had 
Ishvara any interest in creating him ? If He had such inter¬ 
est, who was that other in respect of whom such interest 
arose, 1 and against whom did Ishvara create him ? Proceed¬ 
ing continually in this manner to think of others and others, 
the world is filled with others only. And if then Ishvara 
begins His creation He becomes a creator no better than' A play upon the words “ Sv&rtha " (own interest) and “ parirtba ” 
(another’s interest), in the sense that the first suggests the second.

802

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Vishvamitra. 1 Secondly, if Tshvara created him without 
self-interest, what was the reason of being self-interested 
when creating us ?

But be His interest served or not, what right has He 
to throw me on the rack of this sangsara and crush me ? 
You say He is almighty. That He may or may not be; 
but I am weak, and He is sufficiently mighty to crush me 
at every step. Is not, according to you, Tshvara just ? Now, 
what sort of justice is it that He should crush me day 
and night at every step because He is mighty ? You will 
say that I suffer the fruits of my own karma, and that 
for this He cannot be blamed. Then I reply: “ Who 
created me and gave me this propensity for doing karma ? ”* * 
It was the work of your Tshvara, and I am unable to under¬ 
stand what sort of mercy this is of your merciful Tshvara 
to put a thorn into one’s eyes, and then to chastise one 
for crying on that account. Advocates of illustrations tell 
me now; shall I become a sceptic, or say that Tshvara is 
extremely partial or selfish ? It is to such a conclusion that 
your illustration leads. Ask this illustration for once 
whether the selfish propensity of ourselves has any corres¬ 
pondence in Tshvara, and you will see that it will follow the 
same* path as Veda and Vedanta have followed. Press it 
hard, and the illustration will say: “ In the name of Dharraa 
my name is drishtanta (illustration). I am the end (anta) 
of what is visible (drishta). I am not even the beginning, 
not to speak of being the end, of that which I have neither 
seen nor heard. Illustration is the conclusion of only such 
things as we perceive by natural processes. But we must 
understand whose is this natural process ? The nature of 
Jlva is to exist only, whilst that of the Mother of thecreated*** 1 **' h<? W ° Uld b<?8in creation when the world was already

* Pravritti.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

303

universe is to create, exist, and destroy. How can we, 
with our nature made to exist, only, judge of the nature 
of her of whom we know neither the beginning nor the 
end ? Illustration has not the power to move a step in a 
matter unheard and unseen beyond the scope of intellect.”

Puzzled by this problem of the solution of questions by 
illustrations, Gltanjali 1 sings, with a sorrowful mind, as 
follows:

Whose sport is this? this Sangsara bound by Maya 
from which there is no escape.

Who arranges this dance and clown show ? Whom 
should I blame ?

Who is the author of Yoga, Visbesha, Ny&ya, Sankhya, 
Veda, and Vedanta ? * Why this SangsAra ?

All are blind to the answer of this question.

The blind put forth their shoulders to lift the blind 
thereon that they may trample on opponents and 
wave the banner of triumph.

These six systems of philosophy are a fearful sight.

They are mere disputations, like the rumblings of 
clouds,

Hence difference of opinion is likely to bring death by 
thunderstroke.

True it is Thy sport is eternal, and Thou playest the 
instrument of Maya.

So decked like a clown we all dance. The whole is like 
a juggler's display.

Bands of ghosts play with dust, blind to the time Thou 
keepest.

From five ghosts innumerable ghosts are created.

The Sangsara is but the playground of ghosts.

1 A volume of verse by the author. 
' Veda and systems of philosophy.

304

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

But, O Mother ! I ask again, It is Thou who niakest the 
Sangs&ra dance,

And it dances; but what fruit dost thou reap from its 
dance,

That Thou should make it dance incessantly ?

If Thou sayest, Thou desirest no fruit, then the dance 
closes.

Who is it that Thou makest to dance ?

It is Thyself who dances under the enchantment of 
Thy own Mantra,

Discrimination says all are one; or maybe I am differ¬ 
ent from Thee.Who is it that Thou makest to dance ?

It is Thyself who dances under the enchantment of 
Thy own Mantra,

Discrimination says all are one; or maybe I am differ¬ 
ent from Thee.

Thjself am I; or I am Thine, according as it is unity 
or separation.

All are transient. Such is the supreme truth. Why. 
then, is Jlva in bonds?

The lire of the Sangsara burns the heart. Why does 
Jlva suffer so miserably?

When a madman dances, what interest has he to dance

Similarly it is Thy nature to dance. There is neither 
beginning nor end of the dance Thou dancest.

Unceasing is Thy dance on the lotus of Mahakala’a 
heart.

That dance makes dance the Sangsara, and all its Jivas 
in the womb of K&la (time).

Whoever Thou rnayest be, O Brahraamavi I thou art the 
place of birth of the Brahmanda.

“I," “You," and “All” exist in Thee without whom 
all are blind.

The joyous dance of the Dancing Lady is in the hearts 
of all.

When it ceases, then Jlva ceases also.

All this, 0 Mother! is surely fruit of Karma All arp 
subjeot to Thy will. re

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

805

Thou art full of desires to oreate, preserve, and destroy.

It was Thyself who existed before and exists now.

There is nothing of “ I ” in me.

In Thee all is born and destroyed.

That only which remains is the relation of Mother.

If in Thy aspect of Jlva Thou constantly makest Jlva 
dance,

Or laugh, or weep, wherein is the harm ? What matters 
it?

Thine is the rule. Thyself art the ultimate cause.

This knowledge, too, I possess, but the mind is blind.

So, 0 Shyama! O Mother! I say mayest thou destroy 
Shiva Chandra’s sorrows.

For this it was that I said that all things do not equally 
come within the province of illustrations. If in spite of 
his having (as you say) no attributes, you impute attributes 
to the attributeless Ishvara, and call Him Creator, why, 
because of the absence of attributes are you so unwilling 
to admit that Ishvara with form has omnipotence ?Secondly, you are unwilling to admit that a small 
receptacle can contain a vast number of powers. But how 
is it that you will admit the existence of these powers where 
there is no receptacle at all? Shastra says: “He takes 
swiftly even without hands, moves swiftly even without 
feet, sees even without eyes, and hears even without ears. 
He knows the universe, but none know Him. It is Him 
whom Shastra has called Pradhana and Adipurusha. 1 The 
Brahman without body and without hands, feet, eyes, and 
ears, can yet take, move, see, and hear. Why, then, are you 
astonished when told that the embodied Brahman, who has 
hands, feet, eyes, and ears, can take, move, see, and hear. 
The possibility, then, of applying the illustration that a

1 That is, material and efficient canBe.

20

306

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

small receptacle cannot hold a vast number of shaktis is 
removed to the distance of a hundred yojanas. 1 You will next 
say that if He can see and hear without eyes or ears, why 
should He take eyes and ears to Himself? Do you really 
take the Shloka to mean that He has no eyes and ears, 
and still sees and hears ? If this be so you understand it 
wrongly. Just consider that seeing and hearing are func¬ 
tions of eyes and ears. Where did He who had never eyes 
and ears learn to see and hear ? Who will believe that there 
is action without acting? As a matter of fact, He has 
neither action nor acting. He who is the sole cause of all 
causes of “acting” has not to wait for “acting” Himself.

He has no eyes, ears, nor sees, nor hears. He is the 
embodiment of eternal knowledge, and is all consciousness. 
Ignorance cannot avail against Him so as to make Him 
lack the knowledge of anything in the universe. Even 
without the organs of sense, He is full of that knowledge 
which \ou and I acquire only through direct perception bymeans of the organs of sight, hearing, and so forth. He 
does not lack knowledge because of the absence of sense- 
organs. He knows all without seeing or hearing. Shastra 
has therefore said: He knows the universe, but none know 
Him. In fact, it is not the purpose of Shastra to say that 
He sees even without eyes. Sh&stra means that He has 
knowledge of all things even without seeing. For what we 
understand by sight is not possible without eyes. For this 
reason Shastra only says at the end, “ None know Him," 
instead of saying at each of the different parts of the §hloka: 
“None hold Him,” “None go to Him," “None see Him,” 
None hear Him. The sutra consists only of that part 
of the shloka which says “ None know Him.” All other 
portions are merely explanatory and are required that we

About 8 or 9 miles.

807

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

may understand it. Sh&stra first of all taking a comprehen¬ 
sive view of the various forms of knowledge acquired by 
direct perception mentions the sense organs through which 
such perception is had, and then says that the knowledge 
which we acquire by direot perception through the organs 
of sense exists eternally in Him despite the absence of such 
organs. Therefore at the end only it is said: “ None know 
Him.” 1 The conclusion is that although He knows every¬ 
body, none know Him; or, in other words, He is the vessel 
of all knowledge, but none are the vessel of His knowledge. 
All knowledge rests in Him, and has Him as its end. 
This is what Sh&stra means, and not that He sees even 
without eyes.Thirdly, you say that eternal Shakti cannot exist in 
limited forms, by which you wish to say that His Shakti 
of seeing all things is infinite, but that the eyes of a limited 
body are small. It does not, however, follow from this 
that you have no faith in His possessing a body or eyes. 
On the contrary, your dissatisfaction appears to rest on the 
ground that the eyes I speak of are very small. You wish 
to see a body much bigger than that to which I refer; so 
big that we cannot see the whole of it from head to foot 
all at once. You are then a more profound believer in 
Ishvara's body than I am. In fact, whenever Bhagav&n 
(or Bhagavatl) has shown His (or Her) true appearance to 
a devotee in order to gratify the desire of the believer in 
His or Her body, whenever a devotee, weeping, has eagerly 
prayed to see Its true appearance, then Bhagav&n, who is 
ever merciful to devotees, has shown His universal appear¬ 
ance ; and knowing that that appearance, boundless and 
of shining brilliance, is invisible to ordinary eyes, He 
has first granted Divine vision to the devotee, and then

1 Aphorism, verse.

808

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

manifested that appearance to Him. The following occurs 
in the Bbagavadglta:

“ 0 Supreme Lord, even as Thou describest Thyself, 0 
best of beings, I desire to see Thy form omnipotent.

“ If Thou thinkest that by me It can be seen, O Lord, 
Lord of Yoga, then show me Thine imperishable Self.”

The Blessed Lord said: “ Behold, 0 Partha f a Form 
of Me, a hundredfold, a thousandfold, various in kind, 
divine, various in colours and shapes.

“ Behold the Adityas, the Yasus, the Rudras, the two 
Ashvins, and also the Maruts; 1 behold many marvels never 
seen ere this, 0 Bharata.”

“ Here, to-day, behold the whole universe, movable and 
immovable, existing in My body, 0 Gu<j&ke$ha. What else 
desirest thou to see ?“ Here, to-day, behold the whole universe, movable and 
immovable, existing in My body, 0 Gu<j&ke$ha. What else 
desirest thou to see ?

“ But verily thou art not able to behold Me with these 
thine eyes. The Divine eye I give unto Thee. Behold My 
Sovereign Yoga.”

Sanjaya said: “ Having thus spoken, 0 King, the great 
Lord of Yoga, Hari, showed to Partha His supreme form 
as Lord.

With many mouths and eyes, with many visions of 
marvel, with many Divine ornaments, with many upraised 
Divine weapons.

“ Wearing Divine necklaces and vestures, anointed with 
Divine unguents, the God all-marvellous, boundless, with 
face turned everywhere.

If the splendour of a thousand suns were to blaze out 
together in the sky, that might resemble the glory of that 
Mahatman.*

‘‘There Pandava beheld the whole universe, divided 
into manifold parts, standing in one in the body of the 
Deity of D eities.

1 Vaidik DevatA.

' Great Spirit

309

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

“ Then he, Dhananjaya, overwhelmed with astonish¬ 
ment, his hair upstanding, bowed down his head to the 
Shining One, and with joined palms spake.”

Arjuna said:

“ Within Thy Form, 0 God, the Gods, I see 
All grades of beings with distinctive marks ;

BrahmA, the Lord, upon His lotus-throne,

The Rishis all, and Serpents, the Divine 
With mouths, eyes, arms, breasts multitudinous,

I see Thee everywhere, unbounded Form.

Beginning, middle, end, nor source of Thee,

Infinite Lord, infinite Form, I find.” *

The following passage occurs in the discourse between 
Devi and Himalaya in the Bhagavatlgita in Mah&bhagavata. 
Himalaya said:Infinite Lord, infinite Form, I find.” *

The following passage occurs in the discourse between 
Devi and Himalaya in the Bhagavatlgita in Mah&bhagavata. 
Himalaya said:

“ Mother, although Thou art eternal (devoid of birth 
and death). Thou hast graciously taken birth in my house. 
The cause of this grace must surely be a store of religious 
merits accumulated in many births in consequence of 
which I am favoured to see Thee in this appearance of a 
Brahmamayl daughter. (But for the fruit of austerities 
and devotions earned in scores of births this could not 
have been even with a thousand years of prayer. By the 
sight of this appearance of Thine all the fruit of religious 
merit has been exhausted. I am thus, O Mother ! destitute 
and without claim. Formerly you were bound to show 
meroy to me; but now, 0 Mother! I am a mendicant for 
your mercy.) Of Thy grace show unto me now Thy appear¬ 
ance as Mahe?hvarl. (Vi?hveshvarl, Thou art the I§hvari 
of the universe—Viehva. Poor as I am, what can I do 
for Thee ? What is there, O Mother 1 in my power to do ?

' Bbagavadglta. chap, xi, verses 8-18. I have slightly altered 
Mrs. Besant’a translation in the first three lines of this passago.

810

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

All that I am capable of is to offer my lasting obeisance to 
those beauteous lotus-feet of Thine.) I bow to Thee."

Vi§heshvarl Devi said: “Father, I grant you divine 
vision. (With that vision) look at my appearance as I§hvara 
of all. Destroy all the doubts of your heart, and know Me 
as holding all Deva-s in Myself."Shrl Mahadeva said to Narada: “ Thus granting the 
most excellent (knowledge of Brahman) to the King of 
mountains who made obeisance, Dev! then showed him 
Her divine Mahe§hvara aspect effulgent with the brilliance 
of ten million moons; bearing on His head, with its clusters 
of matted hair, the beautiful crescent moon; holding in 
His left hand a trident, and with the right bestowing 
blessings, yet awesome and terrible to see.” Himalaya 
was struck with wonder, and (with a heart- fearful and 
unsatisfied) said again:

Mother, show me another aspect of Thine. There¬ 
upon, 0 great Muni! the Devi, eternal and of universal form, 
withdrew that appearance of Hers and showed another."

This next was beautiful as the moon in autumn. The 
head bore a beautiful crown, and the four hands were adorn¬ 
ed with a conch-shell, discus, mace, and lotus. 1 The form 
was brilliant, with three lustrous eyes, clad with celestial gar¬ 
ments, hung with celestial garlands, anointed with celestial 
perfumes, and its fair lotus feet were adored by great yogis. 
The King of mountains saw that from all sides of this vast * 
body innumerable arms were extended, and innumerable 
feet were displayed, and that faces with opened eyes were 
all over its body. The sight of this supreme excellent ap¬ 
pearance, replete with the qualities of I§hvara, filled the 
Great Mountain with wonder. Prostrating himself at the 
lotus feet of his daughter Brahmamayl, Himalaya, said :

1 ijhangkha, chakra. gad& and padma of Vishpa

' Virft*.

311

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA1 ijhangkha, chakra. gad& and padma of Vishpa

' Virft*.

311

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

“ Mother, the sight of this supreme and excellent 
appearance of Thine, replete with the qualities of Ishvara, 
has filled me with wonder. Again I pray Thee show me 
another aspect of Thine. 0 Highest I?hvara, for Him who 
possesses Thee none in this world can grieve. He is truly 
blessed. (There is no one in this world who has not a want 
of some sort, but, O Mother! what want can he have who 
possesses Thee; whose self is merged in Thy vast Self; whose 
littleness has by its force compelled Thee to abandon Thy 
greatness, and to attach Thyself to the heart of Thy devotee ; 
whose force has compelled the Ishvara of all to supplicate the 
supplicant, the Kalika maintainer of the universe entreating 
the devotee that he may be satisfied ; and has even compelled, 
O Mother! the mother of the three worlds, to incarnate as 
daughter. A want must exist in relation to something, 
but, O Mother! where Thou existeth such a want can never 
exist. Thou art the Shakti in all things good or bad, life¬ 
less or living, in the world. So I say, O Mother 1 he who 
possesses Thee of universal form can, because of Thee, 
have no want, not merely in this universe alone, but even 
in untold millions of universes. People grieve for him alone 
who is destitute. But who will grieve for him who holds 
Thee? who holdest all things in Thyself? Sinking in Thy 
existence Jlva is beyond all want and its satisfaction. 
Though he be the meanest and poorest of men in the 
sangs&ra, he is by Thy grace a King of Kings. None there¬ 
fore grieve for him. All rather envy him, and being unable 
to emulate him speak of him as a man thrice blessed. 0 
Mother! by Thy grace favour me; even after receiving 
such grace I again seek grace, for how else shall I dare 
to look at the true appearance of Her whose appear¬ 
ances are numberless ?) Knowing that I shall receive this 
grace, I say, 0 merciful Mother! obeisance to Thy feet 
for evermore.”312

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

After seeing many other forms of his daughter, H iin&laya, 
at the end of the hymn, says: “ Mother, who is there, 
Deva or human being, in the three worlds capable of fully 
describing this universe, which is Thy appearance, or Thy 
qualities, even by the effort of many ages ? (Devi, Thy true 
aspect is unapproachable by even Brahma and the other 
Devas.) What can one of small intelligence like myself 
say of it ? What I have to say, O Mother! is this: If Thou 
hast mercy for me, by Thy grace charm me not by Thy 
great maya. I have nothing else to say to Thee. 0 Mother! 
I?hvarl of the universe, I bow to Thee."

Oh, thou advocate of formlessness, after witnessing all 
this vast play full of forms and attributes as described in 
the Shftstra, do you still grieve at the smallness of His 
appearance ? Wheresoever you will look you will see in¬ 
numerable eyes, innumerable feet, innumerable hands, in¬ 
numerable heads, which even infinite space is unable to 
contain. What more eternal sports of eternity do you 
wish to see ? Even Arjuna, conqueror of the three worlds, 
was tormented with fear at the sight of the terrible K&la- 
aspect of Bhagav&n, and, weeping, said :

“ Radiant, Thou touchest heaven, rainbow-hued,

With opened mouths and shining vast-orbed eyes.

My inmost self is quaking, having seen.

My strength is withered, Vishiju, and my peace,

Like Time’s destroying flames: I see Thy teeth, 
Upstanding, spread within expanded jaws;

Nought know I anywhere, no shelter find.

Meroy, 0 God ! refuge of all the worlds." 1 
(Formerly I thought that you were a Deva, now I know 
that you are Devesha (Lord of Devas). Formerly I thought 
that Thy abode was in the universe. Now I know that 
the univers e is in Thee. So I say, O Lord ! the conclusions 
1 BbogavadgitA, chap, xi, verses 24 and 25.

313

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA313

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

at whioh I, a Jlva, have arrived are false. Be now pleased 
with Thy natural graciousness to grant me power to see 
Thy true aspect.)

Sildhaka, do you still believe that you and I have the 
courage to look upon that appearance ? Does this enormous 
power which shatters the Brahroanda and destroys all the 
regions bespeak, in your opinion, but a small ?hakti ? The 
quantity of water which the sea holds is not small, but 
the jars which you and I possess are small. The Shaktis 
and VibhQtis 1 * * in the body of Bhagavan are unlimited and 
eternal, but neither your nor my brain can contain them. 
The smallness of the quantity of water in our jar makes us, 
when sitting in our houses, think that the endless sea is 
small when in truth it is not. In case you should say that 
a perfect display of I?hvara’s ?hakti was not proved by the 
fact that it overpowered the weak human heart of Arjuna, 
frightened at the prospeot of kith and kin, I will cite 
another example. It is true that Arjuna, in his play as a 
human being,* was already afraid of committing an un¬ 
righteous act. That fear was the fear of a Jlva, but He 
who is above both righteousness and unrighteousness, and 
is ever feared by Indra, Yama, Chandra, and SQrya, is afraid 
of nothing. The heart of the almighty Supreme Purusha, 
higher than the highest, who alone among the Devas is the 
vanquisher of death, whose name, Parame$hvara, is the 
true epithet of His real self, who after he has destroyed the 
Brahmftnda 5 at the time of the great dissolution, 4 Himself 
exists for ever as Ptlnja Brahman : * Mah&kAla, unwasting, 
untouched by time, immortal, is neither weak nor afraid of 
anything. Yet, notice how He, too, once trembled with

1 Manifestations.

' Arjuna was an incarnation of the $ishi Kara.

' The egg of Brahman, or universe. * Mahftpralaya,

‘ Perfect or complete Brahman.

314 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

fear and was beyond Himself when He coaid not find a 
path of escape.' The egg of Brahman, or universe. * Mahftpralaya,

‘ Perfect or complete Brahman.

314 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

fear and was beyond Himself when He coaid not find a 
path of escape.

When Mah&deva refused Jagadamb& permission to 
attend Daksha’s sacrifice, 1 even though She repeatedly be¬ 
sought it, the daughter of Daksha,* * who is eternal perfect 
Brahman, seeing that Bhagavan was influenced by a hus¬ 
band’s vanity, 1 assumed a terrible aspect, with the object 
of shattering that vanity. Sh&stra gives the following 
account of this in Mahabhagavata. Shri Mahadeva said :

“ When thus spoken to by Maheshvara, Satl, the daugh¬ 
ter of Daksha, with eyes reddened with anger, pondered 
for a moment. Shangkara 4 has obtained me as His wife 
(by virtue of My own gift) after long prayer and severe 
austerities;* yet to-day He slights and speaks harshly 
to me (though in the play of incarnation He is my 
husband, I shall forsake this proud Mahadeva, as also 
My father, the arrogant Prajftpati, and in my own play 
live for some time in My own abode, the region of Kaivalya. 
Later on, being begged (and entreated in severe s4- 
dhana) by this Maheshvara, I shall reappear as Himalaya’s 
daughter, and become Shambhu’s wife. Pondering thus 
in her mind for a moment, the Daughter of Daksha open¬ 
ed Her three fearful eyes, and overpowered Shangkara 
with illusion.* Shambhu stood still at the sight of the 
Devi, with Her lips parted in anger and eyes shining like 
destructive fire. On being thus looked at by the fright¬ 
ened Maheshvara, the Devi suddenly displayed the terrible 
teeth in Her terrible mouth and laughed aloud. On hearing 
that frightful sound of laughter, Mahadeva was paralyzed

* Yajna.

1 That is, the Devi (Jagadamb&) in Her incarnation as Satl, wife of 
Shiva.

* Thinking himself superior to his wife: as appears from the text a 
very ancient piece of presumption.

' §hiva. ' Tapasyft. ' Moha.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA 315* Thinking himself superior to his wife: as appears from the text a 
very ancient piece of presumption.

' §hiva. ' Tapasyft. ' Moha.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA 315

with fright. Opening His three eyes with great effort He 
saw (but once) the world-terrifying aspect of JagadambA 
When He looked upon Her, Her body immediately lost its 
golden colour, and took on that of a dark mass of crushed 
eye-paint. 1 She appeared naked as space, with dishevelled 
hair, with a lolling tongue, and four arms. She was 
languorous with desire,* terribly furious, bathed in sweat 
(caused by her anger), and of frightful countenance; garland¬ 
ed with skulls, bearing on her head a brilliant crown and 
a crescent moon, shining like ten million suns. Her voice 
thundered loudly.

In such a fearful aspect Sati, dazzling by the mass of 
her own brilliant energy* stood before Mahadeva, and 
uttered loud peals of laughter. Seeing the wonderful appear¬ 
ance of the Devi, Mahadeva lost all self-control, and, 
bewildered with fright, sought to flee in all directions. 
Seeing the Lord of Kailasha thus overcome by fear, the 
daughter of Daksha again uttered peal after peal of dreadful 
laughter, and, with the object of reassuring Him, shouted: 
“ Fear not! fear not! ” Hearing this cry and the fierce peals 
of laughter, Mah&deva was so bewildered with terror that 
He frantically rushed again in flight in every direction. 
Seeing Her husband so overcome with fear Parame^hvar 1 
was moved to pity, and with a view to restrain Him stood 
for a moment before Him at each of the ten quarters of the 
Heaven in the form of the ten Mah&vidyas. In whatever 
direction He ran with haste He thus saw a fearful form 
standing before Him. In fright He fled in another direction, 
only to be again confronted by another such form. After 
having thus run towards each of the ten quarters of the 
Heaven He saw that there was none without danger for 
Him. Then, feeling altogether helpless, He sat down on

1 Anjana.1 Anjana.

' KAm&lasakalevarft.

' Tejas.

316

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

earth and shut His three eyes, and (a moment later as 
through an inner fear) he opened them. He saw before 
Him Shy&m&. Her smiling face was like a full-blown lotus. 
Her breasts were large. Her eyes wide and terrible, and 
Her hair dishevelled. She was four-armed, naked as space, 
shining with the light of ten million suns (although black 
in colour like a fresh cloud), and stood facing the south, 
the heavenly form of Dakshina. Seeing Her thus (of a 
strange form full of an uncommon beauty), Shambhu, as 
if in great fear, asked: “ Who art Thou, Shyam& ? 1 Where 
has Satl, my beloved, gone?”

Devi said: “ Mahildeva, I am Thy Sat! here standing 
before Thee, and yet Thou dost not recognize Me ? Why 
is Thy mind so confused to-day ? Do I appear to Thee 
different from Thy Satl ? "

Shiva said: “If Thou really art my beloved Satl, 
daughter of Daksha, why hast Thou become black and 
fearful ? Who are these forms of terrible aspect standing 
in all directions around me ? Amongst these which art 
Thou ? Tell me everything, for these wonderful forms have 
made Me greatly afraid.”

Sat! said : “lam the subtle (beyond the reach of speech 
and mind) Mahaprakfiti who creates and destroys. Owing 
to the promise I had aforetime given Thee (to bless Thee 
for Thy tapasya) I (put my true form under restraint, and) 
incarnated as a fair girl in Daksha's house merely to get 
Thee as My husband (to charm Thee by becoming Thy 
wife). I have to-day assumed this fearful aspect for the 
destruction of father Daksha’s great yajna. But, 0 
Mahe§hvara! Thou hast no reason to be afraid of Me 
(for this fearful aspect is assumed to terrify Daksha 
alone). The ten terrible forms which Thou seest in each 
of the ten directions are each of them My aspect. Oh,

1 Black Lady.

f

COMMANDS OF SH3.STRA

3171 Black Lady.

f

COMMANDS OF SH3.STRA

317

Shambhu! Thou possessest immense wisdom. Be not 
afraid (but see with Thy eye of wisdom). Thou art My 
most beloved husband, and I am Thy wife. Seeing Thee 
so greatly afraid and turning in all directions, I stood before 
Thee blocking them by these ten forms of Mine.”

Shiva said : “ Thou art the subtle (beyond the reach of 
speech and mind) Malaprakfiti who creates, preserves, and 
destroys. It is not possible that one should know Thee 
who art beyond the reach of speech and mind, so, not know¬ 
ing Thee through great illusion, I have said unpleasant 
words to Thee. Pardon me, O Parameshvarl, the offence 
which I have thus committed. Tell me, 0 Consort of Shiva 
with fearful eyes, the names of each of these ten most dread¬ 
ful forms of Thine standing in each of the ten quarters.”

Devi said: “ 0 Mahadeva, these Mabavidy&s are but 
different aspects of My own Self. Listen! Their names are 
Kali, Tara, ShodashI, Bhubane?hvarl, Bhairavl, Ckhinna- 
masta, Sundarl, 1 Bagalamukbl, DhQraavatl, and M&tangL”

Shiva said: “ O Devi! who supporteth the universe, if 
Thou art pleased with me, tell me which of these forms 
bear these respective names.”

Devi said : “ The dark-coloured form, with terrible eyes, 
which Thou dost see before Thee is Kali. She who is above 
Thee of Shyama' colour is Mahavidya Tara, the very image 
of Mahakala. The lean, destitute, and very frightful Devi 
whom Thou dost see on Thy right side is, O high-souled 
Mahadeva, Mahavidya Chhinnamasta. O Shambhu, the 
Devi on Thy left side is Bhubaneshvarl. She who is behind 
you is Devi Bagalamukhl, Destructress of foes. She who 
appears as a widow on the south-east is Devi Mahavidya 
DhOmavatl, a great Ishvarl. The Devi on the south-west 
is Tripurasundarl.* * In the northwest is Matangl, and in

1 Kamalft or Mah&lakshml.

* Grass green, dark blae, blackish.

’ KamalA.

818

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Kamalft or Mah&lakshml.

* Grass green, dark blae, blackish.

’ KamalA.

818

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the north-east Mah&vidya Shodashl, a great Ishvarl. She 
who is below Thee is Bhairavl. 1 O Shambhu! be not afraid 
(at the sight of these ten forms, which are My manifesta¬ 
tions, and destroy the fear of existence). Of My many forms 
(ninety millions of manifestations) 1 these ten are the best 
(the most perfect vibhQtis). 1 To such Sadhakas as worship 
them with devotion they grant the four-fold fruit * and 
all that is desired. O Maheshvara! all such things as 
Sadbakas desire, such as M&rana, Uchchataua, Rshobhana,

1 See Da^haMahftvidyA-Up&sanA-Rahasya, by Prasanna Rumarri 
Shastrl, which illustrates both the figures and yantras. The text also 
illustrates the positions as follows :

TARA

Above

kAlT

N

Below

BHAIRAVI

* Vibhfttis. * See post.

* Dharma, artha. kftma. mokaha (see Introduction).

819

COMMANDS OF SHASTRATARA

Above

kAlT

N

Below

BHAIRAVI

* Vibhfttis. * See post.

* Dharma, artha. kftma. mokaha (see Introduction).

819

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

Mohana, Dravana, Stambhana, Vidveshana, 1 are granted by 
them. Each of these ten Mahavidyas, is to be kept secret 
and never revealed. Thou shalt be the ordinancer and inter¬ 
preter of yantras, mantras, pOja, horna, purashcharana^stotra,* * 
kavacha' practices, rules, and all else concerning them 
which may be required by sadhakas. There is none else 
in the world who can reveal them. The Agama Sb&stra 
which Thou shalt reveal from Thy mouth will be renowned 
in the three worlds. 0 Shangkara ! Agama and Veda are 
my two arms. With them I support the entire universe of 
moving and unmoving things. The world is maintained by 
Dbarma, as ordained in Tantra and in Veda. The fool who 
disregards them through delusion falls assuredly from the 
arms which save the three worlds. I am unable to save 
him who, in disregard of Agama or Veda, worships Me in a 
manner different from that ordained in it. This is nothing 
but the strictest truth. Agama and Veda are both causes of 
liberation. But both are difficult to understand and carry out. 
Knowledge of them is hard to attain even by intelligent men. 
They are eternal and without end. The intelligent will know 
that the purpose of both the Shastras is the same, and will 
practise dharma accordingly. The wise will never, through 
delusion, consider them to be different. Those who worship 
these ten Mah&vidyaa will act like Vai?hnavas, but in rapt 
concentration will rest their hearts on Me. The Sadhaka 
will with great care keep secret, and never speak to others 
of mantra, yantra, kavacha, and other matters which he 
receives from his guru. If these things are given out siddhi 
will be unattained and evil will result. A good Sadhaka will 
therefore conceal them with every care. High-souled Mah&- 
deva, I have now spoken to you of the subject of worship.' “ Magical ” powers of destruction, driving away, perturbing, en¬ 
chanting, putting to flight, stopping or paralyzing, causing dissension.

* See Introduction. ’ Hymn. * Amulet.

820

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

(Let not the sight of these aspects of Mine strike terror 
into Thy heart, and make Thee doubt My single-minded 
love for Thee. I am Thy beloved wife, and Thou, too, art 
My very beloved husband. To-day I wish only to humble 
the pride of my father, Prajapati. So I pray to Thee, 0 
Deva of Devas, that if Thou will not go to the place of 
sacrifice permit Me so to go. 0 Deva! it is my intention, 
with Thy permission, to go and destroy the sacrifice 1 of my 
father, Prajapati Daksha (and not to frighten Thee).

Mahadeva said to Narada: “ Hearing these words of 
the Devi Sbambhu stood as one struck with intense fear, 
and then spoke as follows to the fierce-eyed Kali.”

Shiva said: “ Devi, I know that Thou art Paramesh- 
varl, the best, perfect, and supreme Prakriti. Pardon me 
the unbecoming words which, overpowered by delusion, I 
have in forgetfulness used towards Thee. Thou art the 
primal * * supreme Vidya' who existeth in all created things. 
Thou art independent and supreme. Thou art Shakti. 
Who is there to order Thee to do or to desist from doing 
anything? O Shiva*! if thou goest to destroy Daksha's 
sacrifice, what power have I to restrain that? And why 
should I dare to do so ? 0 Maheshvarl! pardon me for what 
(presuming on my position as Thy husband) I have, under 
the influence of intense delusion, said to Thee. Do Thou 
as it pleases Thee.” '

1 Because Daksha had. to offer him a slight, purposely neglected 
to invite §hiva, Her husband.

* Adyft.

* As opposed to Avidyft (see Introduction), though She is both.

* The Devi as wife of Shiva.* Adyft.

* As opposed to Avidyft (see Introduction), though She is both.

* The Devi as wife of Shiva.

' Sati then went to the sacrifice (ynjna). There, Daksha poured 
invectives on the head of §hiva. Sati’s great devotion to her husband 
(the Hindu girl prays that she may become like Sati and get a husband 
like Shiva) could not bear to hear Daksha's abase of Him, and She 
gave up Her life. Nandi hastened to Kail&sha and told Shiva, who 
rose in terrible wrath. Fire Hashed from his eye and took the fearful

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

321

Interpreter of Sh&atras, do you consider that that 
display of power is of no acoount, at the sight of which 
even Malmradra, who causes the great dissolution, was 
astounded, trembled with fear, and sought to flee ?

When Nishumbha was killed in the battle with the 
Devi, * 1 Shumbha, seeing BrahmanI, Vaishnavt, Mahesvarl, 
Indr&nl, Kaum&rl, V&r&hl, Narasinghl, Chamunda, KaushikI, 
and Shivadatl,* fighting with fury, sarcastically addressed 
Her who rejoices in war, saying:

“ 0 Durga, proud of the strength of Thy arms, be no 
longer proud. She who fights with the help of the powers 
of other Devas has no reason to pride Herself so much as 
the single-handed conqueror of the three worlds.’’ *

She who dwells in all hearts and who ever leans to 
mercy showed it then without stint. In that field of battle 
she made Shumbha a reply unheard of even by great yogis 
who had attained siddhi and became pure and free of the 
bonds of life. Jagadamba knew that the King of the Daityas 
was moved in his actions by an ill-directed intelligence and 
a naturally wicked nature. Thus, just as a mother cannot 
forsake her son even if he commits hundreds and thousandsform of Bhairava, who wont with a host of ghosts and goblins to 
destroy the yajna. $hiva followed. The yajna was destroyed. Nandi 
Khiva's follower cut off Daksha’s head and threw it into the fire. $hiva 
then took up the dead body of Sat! and went away bearing it on His 
shoulder. The story continues with the history of the Mah&pithas 
(see Introduction). Satl reappeared in Her incarnation as daughter of 
the Mountain-king. The story of the Daksha-yajna is one of the most 
ancient, as it is one of the best known, of all Shivs and $hakti legends.

1 The brothers Nishumbha and Shumbha were Lords of the Demo¬ 
niac D&navas, who had defeated the Devas. The Devi, however, in 
whose body was the united $bakti of all the Devas, slew first Dhnmra- 
lochana, Chanda, and Munda, who had been sent against Her, and then 
the great Dflnava Raktabrja. and finally both Shumbha and Nishumbha 
(see Chapdl of Markondeya Purina).

* The Sbaktis of Brahma, Vishnu, §biva, and other $haktia.

' That is, $humbba himself,

21

322

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of offences against her, but rather with smile and joy takes 
him on her lap, and then with feigned anger calls him 
wicked, so the Mother of the universe, looking upon Shumbha 
with merciful eyes but with such a feigned anger, said: 
"Wicked one, I alone exist. Who other is there in the 
world ? Look ! All these manifestations 1 will enter into Me. 
I will then dispel the doubt which has arisen in your mind 
at the sight of a number of Devashaktis.” (The mother, as 
if caressingly, said: “ Wicked one, you see these Devashaktis, 
and now by a trick wish to know the truth concerning 
them.") Then in an instant, at the will of Her who is all 
will Herself, BrahmanI and all other Devls entered into 
Brahroaraayl’s body, and (Shumbha saw that in the battle¬ 
field) there was none but Ambika alone.Then Devi again said : “ 1 withdraw the many forms in 
which I (displaying my wealth of manifestation) 1 appeared. 
I now alone stand in the battle-field. So, Shumbha, now 
desist."

It was as if a boy on seeing many mothers was disconso¬ 
late on being unable to recognize his own. The Mother 
therefore showed him Her real self, and consoled him, saying: 
“ Look, I am thy Mother, so be quiet." But Shumbha was 
not one to be satisfied with knowing what She was without 
letting Her know what he was, so putting on the arms and 
accoutrements of the hero, the hero son of the heroine 
Mother advanced to heroic struggle. O Mother! he who 
runs to your arms with his own strength is not a mendicant 
for your mercy. So the music of war rang out, fiercely 
shaking heaven, earth, and the nether world, and the ever- 
triumphant Lord of Daityas stood in hand-to-hand conflict, 
to the sound of victory-giving shouts from this and other 
worlds.

1 Yibbati, eee post.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

8281 Yibbati, eee post.

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

828

Sh&stra says that when, wounded in the heart by the 
Devi’s spear he fell dead and dropped from the sky to earth, 
the latter, with its seven principal mountain ranges, 1 seven 
seas, and seven islands, shook with the unbearable weight 
of his body. At his death all the regions rejoiced. The 
whole world regained health. The sky, hitherto overcast 
with a deep mist, cleared. Inauspicious clouds which had 
been shooting meteors all around, disappeared. Rivers, the 
flow of which had long been stayed by the din of the twang 
of his bow and his thundering shouts, became on his 
destruction again free, and moved along their channels. 
The hearts of Devas were filled with immeasurable joy. 
Gandharvas* * commenced to sing in sweet tones. Einnaras, 
Siddhas, and Sadhyas* began to play on musical instru¬ 
ments. Apsarils' commenced to dance. Pure air again 
flowed; the sun at length assumed his natural radiance. 
Fires could at last burn quietly, and without making the 
heavens resound with the sound of their burning.

S&dhaka, whose power can compare with the power of 
him for whose sake the ordained course of nature was 
arrested? Is it not a sign of the shortness of our life, 
intelligence, good fortune, and sadhaua that we presume 
to deem small the power of manifestation'of Her whose 
great m&ya charmed even the great charmer Shumbha, 
ruler over the three worlds? Can you say that the Shakti 
is small of her who can make the impossible possible,

1 Kul&chala.

* Celestial beings (Devayonis) who. according to the Vishpu Pnriina. 
were sons of Brahmfi, “ born imbibing melody ”; celestial musicians 
and choristers who play and sing at the banquets of the Devas; belong¬ 
ing, together with the Apsaras—their wives—to Indra's heaven.

* Other classes of Devayonia.

' Beautiful and voluptuous Dcvayonis of Indra’s Heaven; wives of 
the Gandharvaa; produced at the churning of the ocean.

* VibhOti.

324

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Other classes of Devayonia.

' Beautiful and voluptuous Dcvayonis of Indra’s Heaven; wives of 
the Gandharvaa; produced at the churning of the ocean.

* VibhOti.

324

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

whose m&yfi made even Bhagavan Rftmachandra forgetful 
of himself upon the occasion of the destruction of the 
hundred-headed Ravana.' Does not Her play in Her incar¬ 
nations as a fish, tortoise, and boar, whereby She saved 
the Vedas, supported the universe, and held the earth on 
the end of the boar’s tusk, bear evidence of a full display 
of divine Shakti ? * * The sudden appearance, bursting through 
a crystal pillar, of the strange half-man, half-lion, in order 
to save Prahlftda, chief among devotees ;* the display of the 
Brahra&nda within Her mouth to mother Yashodft;* the 
destruction of Patana by sucking milk from her breasts;* 
the upholding of Mount Govardhana by a boy of seven*; 
the charming, unknown to the three worlds of Brahma 
through one whole year, by the raising of calves, cows, and 
oowherds by may&, T ; the humbling of the pride of Kan- 
darpa* by the assumption, in playful favour to devotees, of 
thousands of forms in early youth for the gratification of 
herdswomen who were maddened with love, and had attained 
siddhi by the practice of tapas for many ages*; the showing 
of the virftt"; aspect to Akrura 11 in the waters of the

1 When Ratnn was returning from Langkft, he met the hundred- 
headed RAvann. On seeing him, forgetful thnt he was Bhagavitn. 
RAran did not dare to fight. ' Various incarnations of Vishnu.

’ The Nrisingha Avat&ra of Vishnu.

* Ya?hodft was wife of Nnnda, in whose home Krishna was brought 
up. The infant Krishna showed to YashodA the universe in His mouth.

* Putana was a female demon (RAkshasi) with poisoned breast, sent

by Kangsa to destroy the infant Krishna, who, however, destroyed her 
by sucking her breasts. * By Krishna* Putana was a female demon (RAkshasi) with poisoned breast, sent

by Kangsa to destroy the infant Krishna, who, however, destroyed her 
by sucking her breasts. * By Krishna

1 Brahma stole the calves and cowherds of Gokuln in order to test 
Krishna's power. The latter assumed the forms of the stolen cows 
and cowherds, so their absence was not noticed. This lasted for one 
year, when the calves and cowherds were restored by BrahmA, and 
Krishna withdrew his mAyA.

* Dev a of love. The reference here is to the RasalihV

* That is, the Gopts. ** Universal.

" Uncle of Krishna, who induced R&ma and Krisbpa to go to 
Mathura and kill Kangsa.

325

COMMANDS OF SHASTRA

Yamuna 1 —all these are doubtless not perfeot manifestations 
so far as the perfeot Brahman is concerned, yet, O man, I ask 
you, can you imagine even in dream anything greater than 
these? The world of Jivas could (were it to desire it) obtain 
even greater things of Him. But there are none who have 
the capacity to entertain suoh a desire.“ Manifest Thy divine shakti to suoh an extent." It 
is beyond the power of Jlva to measure His greatness 
by saying “to suoh an extent.” For this reason the 
extent to which He has manifested His §hakti for the 
removal of the burdens of the earth in consequence of 
the tapasya performed by the devotees is sufficient for 
Jivas. So I say, Do not trouble yourself with the thought 
that the receptacle is small. It is not really so; it assumes 
a small form to serve the extremely small purposes of the 
small world. You and I, the small Jivas of this small 
world, do not count even as much as the smallest atom 
in His view. What right have we to see His universal 
aspect, whioh is rarely seen by Brahma and other Devas. 
Secondly, the Lord of the universe has no need to show 
that sort of lordliness which you and I show to others with 
greatness, largeness and the like. WTiat avails our ignor¬ 
ing of His lordliness when even Shumbha, Ni^humbha, 
Ravana, and Kumbhakarua,* could avail nothing by their 
ignoring it ? So I say that when the greatly powerful Ring, 
Vali, could not save himself by looking on V&manadeva* as 
really a dwarf, why do we, who are really dwarfs, stretoh 
out our arms to catch the moon shining in the firmament 
of the devotee’s heart ? As you use the illustration of water 
to show that a small receptacle cannot contain a vast §hakti 
so I will take that of fire to show that an immeasurable

' River Taman ft.

' Daityas and R&kshasoj. The last was brother of Rfcvapa. 
' Incarnation of Vishnu in the form of a dwarf.

326

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' River Taman ft.

' Daityas and R&kshasoj. The last was brother of Rfcvapa. 
' Incarnation of Vishnu in the form of a dwarf.

326

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

shakti can be eternally hidden even in a small receptacle. 
Put a spark of fire on a mountain heap of grass, and you 
will see that spark will extend throughout it and will 
illumine every side with enormous tongues of flame, kiss¬ 
ing the cheeks of the firmament. The spark is no longer 
a spark, but has become a destructive tire flaming terri¬ 
fically and fit to consume the whole heap. Similarly, how¬ 
ever small Bhagavan’s appearance in His incarnation may 
seem to you to be, bring to it a substance fit for the dis¬ 
play of divine manifestation 1 and you will see that the 
Brahmanda is filled with the eternal Brahma-play of 
Shakti and has become the field for the display of Shakti 
such as the Npsingha of Prahlada,* * Shrlkpshna of Arjuna, 
Gopala* of Ya^hoda, Shyamasundara * of the herdswomen;* 
Nandanandana of Akrura,* Shyfima of Shumbha, 7 Uma of 
Himalaya,* Sltfi of Rama,* and Satl of Shiva. 10 You will then 
realize that His greatness is not small, but that the Jiva’s 
capacity is small: His appearance is not small, but the eyes 
of Jlva are so. He is not small, but you and I are so. So 
I say, 0 Sadhaka, do not suppose that a small receptacle 
cannot hold the eternal shakti, or proceed to measure the

1 Vibhati.

’ The man-lion incarnation of Vishnu for the protection of the son 
of Hiranyakasipu.

* One of Krishna's 108 names. That by which he was called by 
Ya.?hod&.

' The name by which Krishna was colled by the GopTs.

1 Gopls of Vraja who loved Krishpa.

' Name of Krishna; as to Akrura, see post.

' The Devi Victrix of the demon $humbha (see post).

* The Devi as daughter of Himalaya and wife of $hiva. As to the 
derivation of the name see the first canto of K&lidAsa's Kum&ra- 
sombbavam. UmS unmarried, is the shakti of will, as the Sutra says,

Ichchh&$hokti uma kumArl.

' Wife of R&ma.Ichchh&$hokti uma kumArl.

' Wife of R&ma.

Devi, wife of $hiva and daughter of Daksha.

COMMANDS OF SHlSTRA 32?

greatness of Mahamaya. Whose power can make that 
possible which seems impossible.

But while there is yet time, seek the protection of Her 
feet, and opening the door of your heart say: “Mother, 
all my intelligence, learning, and reasonings are at an end. 
Now be gracious to me. In my struggle with doubt stand 
before me as Thou didst stand before Arjuna and before 
Shumbha. Fill the world for once with Thy true appear¬ 
ance so that my birth may be blessed, my life may be 
blessed, my eyes may be blessed, and I, 0 Mother, may 
sink in Thee, becoming wholly Thine.”

CHAPTER VI

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

Sadhaka, against our wish we are obliged to say again that 
the healers of whom we have spoken are wont to quote 
four sayings from the Mahanirvana Tantra as evidence in 
favour of their views. Though these statements are sup¬ 
posed to be evidence on their behalf, we shall, in order to 
show what this evidence is, quote the entire text consisting 
of the Devi’s questions and the answer of Sad&shiva. From 
these texts the right thinking will readily understand how 
difficult it is to become a healer without killing thousands. 1

In the fourteenth Ullasa of this Tantra, 1 after Mahft- 
deva had spoken of the rules and ritual relating to the con¬ 
secration of the images of Devas, Devi said :

“ Lord, tell me truly what devotees should do if, for 
some unforeseen reason, the consecrated image of a Devata 
is left without worship. Tell me also through what faults 
images of Devaa become unfit for worship, for what faults 
they should be rejected, and what means exist for remedying 
those faults."

Sadashiva said:

“ If there be an omission to worship for a day, then the 
worship should be twice performed ; if for two days, then 
the worship should be four times performed; if for threeSadashiva said:

“ If there be an omission to worship for a day, then the 
worship should be twice performed ; if for two days, then 
the worship should be four times performed; if for three

1 That is to say, without having had experience at the cost of others. 
* Verse 06 et seq.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

329

days it should be celebrated eight times. If the omission 
does not exceed six months then the Deva should be bathed 
with eight jars full of water, sanctified by His mantra, and 
then worshipped. If the omission to perform worship exceeds 
six months, then the image should again be consecrated 
and then worshipped. If the image of a Deva is defective, 
cracks, or breaks, it should be consigned to water. If it has 
fallen on unholy ground it should not be worshipped. A 
defective, cracked, or broken image should be consigned to 
water, but an image polluted by touch should be purified 
and then again worshipped. Mah&plthas 1 and Anadilingas * * 
are free from all faults—that is to say, the above-mentioned 
causes do not operate on them to detract from their virtue. 
For this reason the people should worship their own Iahta- 
devas * in them for the attainment of their desired blessings.* 
Mahamaya, I have thus related to you in detail all that you 
wished to know for the good of men who act with a view 
to the fruits of aotion.” 8

As He thus spoke the eye in the forehead of Bhagav&n 
Mahakala opened as if to peer into futurity.

Nowadays one meets with many an adept in Tattva,* 
who professes to have renounced action, and says at every

Holy shrines where the body of Devi as Satf fell to earth (see 
Introdnotion).

Anlldi, without beginning. That is, those Ungaros which spring 
from earth supernatnrally (called SvAyambhu, or self-existent), as 
distinguished from those fashioned and installed by men. Of the former 
class are the iingams at VaidyanAtha, Tarakeshvara, the Chandra- 
?hekhara at Chittagong and other places.

* The worshipper’s own chosen Deity.* The worshipper’s own chosen Deity.

* Dharma, Artha, Kama Moksha (see Introduction).

* That is, those on the path of pravriti (see Introduction), who act

interestedly (sakAma karma), as opposed to those who renounce, and 
who act rightly and unselfishly without thought of gaining fruit of their 
action (nisbkAma karma). ' Sacred science.

380

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

opportunity: “ The karmak&ijda 1 is intended only for those 
who are devoid of knowledge; why then should he who has 
attained to it do action ? ”

Unfortunately, most of those who say this are 
themselves doers of karma.* What they therefore say must 
mean that such karma alone as consists in the worship of 
Devas is for those who are devoid of true knowledge; while 
such karma as is required for the service of wife, children, 
and the like may be done even by those possessed of true 
knowledge. For their Shastra says: “ It is also by doing 
what pleases Him that He is worshipped.” However that 
may be, it was as if He thought of what would happen in 
the future that Bhagavan, who dwells in the hearts of all 
wise men, said again *: No Jlva possessing body can be 
without karma for even half a minute. Helpless he is 
drawn by the current of karma even against his will. That 
is to say, just as everything follows the wind, which it is 
unable to check, so everyone follows the irresistible flow of 
karma. By karma 1 * 4 alone Jlva enjoys happiness, by karma 
alone he suffers misery. Under the influence of karma alone 
he is born, lives, and dies. For this reason I have made 
mention of various kinds of karma in sadhanayoga, in order 
to attract the minds of those of little knowledge to nirvana- 
dharma 5 —that is to say, in order to induce them to work 
until they reach the stage which follows nirvikalpa samadhi,' 
and to keep them away from wrong action (that is to say, 
if the mind remains ever engaged in the thought of good 
things, no bad thoughts can germinate in it).”1 The portion of the scripture which relates to worship, ritual prac* 
tice (karma), which last word means that which is done, action.

* See post.

' Verse 104 et seq. of chap, xiv of the Mah&nirv&pa Tantra.

4 See post. * That is, to the path which leads to liberation.

' See Introduction.

Worship of devatas

331

Sad&shiva next proceeded to explain the subject of 
karma with more explicitness 1 : “ Karma is of two kinds, 
auspicious and inauspicious. Through the latter Jlva suf¬ 
fers acute pain, and, 0 Devi! through the former Jlva 
becomes attached to the fruits of action, and controlled by 
the bonds of karma, sojourns again and again in this world 
and the next.” That is to say, you must correct your 
notion of a twofold bond of karma to the effect that karma 
consisting of worship of Devas and Devis is the cause of 
bondage, whilst that done in the service of the world 
removes bondage ; and you must understand that whatever 
you do is karma, that what is good karma is auspicious, 
and what is bad karma is inauspicious, and that both aus¬ 
picious and inauspicious karma are instrumental in causing 
the bondage of Jlva to sangsara.“ Not even in a hundred kalpa & 1 can Jlva attain libera¬ 
tion unless both his auspicious as well as inauspicious 
karma come to an end ”—that is to say, as good karma 
will come to an end so will bad karma come to an end 
with it; otherwise, if all your good karma pass away, 
leaving the flow of your bad karma the same or gradually 
increasing, such a destruction of karma will not remove 
bondage to sangsara. Rather the want of good karma 
will break the tie with Heaven and make that with Hell 
yet firmer still through the influence of bad karma. “ As 
it makes no difference to the binding power of a chain 
whether it be of iron or gold, so karma, whether aus- 
pioious or inauspicious, is equally powerful to bind Jlva.” * * 
Accumulated karma, whether good or bad, inevitably acts 
so as to bring the Jlva baok to sangsara. “Jlva, even 
though he be in constant action and endure hundreds of

1 Mahanirvftna Tantra, chap, xiv, verse 107.

* See post.

’ Mah&nirvipa Tantra, chapter xiv. verses 100. 110.

332

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

austerities, cannot attain liberation so long as he does not 
acquire true knowledge 1 ”—that is to say, if knowledge 
is not sought as the accompaniment of action the latter 
alone can never be directly instrumental to secure libera¬ 
tion. “ It is only after the destruction of sin and the puri¬ 
fication of the heart by thought upon Tattva (the thought 
that Brahman alone in an essential sense exists, while 
the world does not—that is to say, that the world is noth¬ 
ing but a display * * of the Brahman) and by performance of 
disinterested action * that knowledge dawns * M —that is to 
say, that knowledge only appears when the mind has been 
so purified by the practice of Brahma-Tattva and constant 
worship of Bhagav&n with karma performed without desire 
for fruit, that no sinful propensity arises in it, but only the 
presence of the pure sattva gutia is felt without the least 
appearanoe of the rajas and tamas guna.s.“ From Brahmfi. to a blade of grass everything in the 
world is the creation of mftya. Para brahman alone is the 
sole truly existent one. When knowledge of this tattva is 
gained then the Jiva attains true happiness 8 ”—that is to 
say, whatever variety we see in the dualistic world, is like a 
dream or a magic show, the creation of m&yft. Just as the 
magician alone truly exists and all which he does is illusion, 
so the nondual Parabrahman alone is true and all the things 
raised by Him to form the sangs&ra are illusive. Just as 
when sleep is dispelled all dreams disappear, so when, by 
the grace of Bhagavan, the Bleep of mays, is dispelled, this

1 Ibid., verse 111. ’ Vibhfiti, see post.

* That is, nishkama karma (opposed to sak&ma karma), or right 
action done unselfishly without hope of reward and simply because 6uch 
action is right.

’ Mahiinirvana Tantra, chap, xiv, verse 118.

' Ibid., verse 118. Brahma is the first Devu of the Trinity, a 
transitory manifestation of the supreme Brahman.

WORSHIP OP DEVATA.S

333

sangsilra, full of m&yft, disappears at the same time. As 
when Jlva awakes he sees that he alone and neither sleep 
nor dream remains, so when Jlva becomes self-conscious 
he sees that neither mayfi, nor the sangsara remains, but 
only he himself as the Supreme Spirit. 1 It is only when 
Jlva thus sinks into the sea of Tattva* * that he gains such 
happiness as never gives place to sorrow.“ He alone is free from the bonds of karma who, re* 
nouncing name and form, has attained to the knowledge 
that on the immutable Brahman all things’ rest.” 4 One 
must rise above name and form and make all things * rest in 
the true immutable Brahman. From this it must be under¬ 
stood that if Brahman is true and immutable, names and 
forms are false and mutable. What is true is stable and 
what is false is unstable, so that to reach the true the false 
must be abandoned. To sink in Brahmatattva, whioh is 
above rafty&, names and forms which are made of mayfi. must 
be abandoned. By name and form we must understand not 
true name and form, but the name and form which arises 
from change of nature.® For instance, the true name of 
earth is earth. Its form is the ordinary ground. When, 
however, cups, jugs, pots, dishes, and other like things, are 
made of it, the names and forms of those articles are due to 
nothing but change-~that is to say, had not the true form 
of earth been transformed into the changed forms of cups, 
and the like, the substance earth would never have received 
the names of cups, jars, and the like. When these break 
and return to the form of common earth those names also 
disappear along with those forms. Cups, jars, and the like,

1 Paramatmfi. * Here tbe infinite waters of the ocean of Brahman,

* Lit. “ all Tattva rest." ' Mahinirva^a Tantra, ibid., verse 114.

* Vikara: change of form or nature; transformation; deviation 
from natural state. In Sangkbya, Yikriti is that which is evolved from 
a previous source or Prakriti.

334

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Vikara: change of form or nature; transformation; deviation 
from natural state. In Sangkbya, Yikriti is that which is evolved from 
a previous source or Prakriti.

334

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

are all false; earth alone is true. Just as in understanding 
the nature 1 of earth I cannot leave out of consideration 
cups, and the like, so in directing the mind to the nature 1 * 
of Brahma I must not omit to consider the Brahmanda 
consisting of names and forms. It was earth before the 
formation of cups, and subsequently it again became earth. 
Only for a short time between these two states the cry of 
* ^ U P» CU P '■ arose, which alone is to be considered false. 
Shastra has therefore said : “ If a thing whioh did not exist 
either before or afterwards appear to exist during a middle 
period, know it also to be false.” This falsehood, again, is 
not fundamentally false. A thing seen in a dream may 
be false, but neither dream nor sleep is false. Similarly, 
this world may be false, but the may& at its root never false. 
If sleep be false, who shows the dream ? If mays, be false, 
who creates the sangsara ? If may a be false, then the 
sangsara becomes true. Maya therefore, exists and will 
exist, and it is through this m&yii that mother Mahamaya 
must be seen.

Gltanjali * therefore sings:

“ Veda says: vain is our effort, for everything,

O Brother! is Maya.

Tantra says through Maya is heard the laugh of 
Mahamaya;

For it is the Mother’s Maya.

Veda says: “ Whatever is designated by speech and 
called by name is Vikftra.’ Only earth is true .” 4 Vikara 
is not false; it is only the state of change of that which 
is real. A changed thing is only the real thing in another 
state; it is only the changed name and form which appear 
and disappear. The true form as neither appearance nor

1 Tattva. * A volnmc of verses by the Author. 1 See pout.

Referring to the simile of a ghata Gar^. What is called jar is

untrue : but the earth of which it is composed is true,1 Tattva. * A volnmc of verses by the Author. 1 See pout.

Referring to the simile of a ghata Gar^. What is called jar is

untrue : but the earth of which it is composed is true,

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

335

disappearance. Just as cups, jars, dishes, or whatever else 
you may make with earth will undoubtedly remain earth 
in substance; as wrist-chains, bracelets, earrings, or what¬ 
ever else you may make with gold will be gold in substance 
and nothing else, so in this dualistic world, with all its 
variety of names and forms, father, mother, brother, sister, 
wife, son, daughter, you and I, non-moving and moving 
things, insects, flies, and the other names and forms which 
we see, are all only the Parabrahmau manifesting Itself in 
different forms, such forms being due to change by May&, 
and in reality nothing but a manifestation of Brahman.* * 
The only distinction is that in the body of Ishvara this 
power of manifestation * is fully manifested, whilst in the 
body of Jlva it is not so. I therefore said that because 
changed names and forms are false, the true names and 
forms are not so.

In the domain of Sadhana this is Brahma-vision. 
Gltanjali * has therefore put into the mouth of Menaka:

“ Urnfi. is the adored of the world ;

No mere daughter is She.

With Brahman as Hara, on a bejewelled throne,

She sits as Parabrahmasanatani.*

Thy Tripurasundara Digambara* exists,

Far excelling in lustre ten million suns.

On the left of Hara sits ray Um&,

Whose golden beauty shines as a thousand millions 
moons.

There laughs Sbad&nana,' in Sadananda's* arms;

1 Bruhmavibh&ti.

* Referring to the simile of a ghata (jar)* What is called jar is 
untrue : but the earth of which it is composed is true.

* A volume of verses by the Author.

* Devi as the eternal Parabrahman. ' Shiva.

* The six-beaded K&rtikeya, son of $hiva.

836

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Gajunana 1 dances in Jagadamba's* * arms,

The Music of Shambhu's damvura 1 
Draws peals of laughter from Kum&ra'* The six-beaded K&rtikeya, son of $hiva.

836

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Gajunana 1 dances in Jagadamba's* * arms,

The Music of Shambhu's damvura 1 
Draws peals of laughter from Kum&ra'

And from Ganesha, at the clap of Um&’s hands.

In the arms of two Brahmas 4 rest the two Brahma* 
children,"

And you and I again are Brahmas father and mother. 
This sangsara instinct, with Brahma-bliss, is but a 
Vikara T of Brahman,

And thus my perfect Brahman is His charming spouse. 
O Mountain! I hear another strange thing—

Brahma, Vishnu, and Hara are Uma’s sons;

Uma is not thine and mine alone.

She exists as everything moving or immovable in the 
Universe.

Grandfather says She is grandmother

Who gave birth to Pltamvara' and Digambara. 4

Upon hearing you and me call her ‘ daughter'

How She must laugh in her mind!

Being thus ashamed and afraid to call Her daughter, 
The Queen (Menaka) may well call herself the daughter’s 
daughter.

But that daughter is not daughter to the Queen alone. 
If entreated She becomes even the daughter of a beggar- 
woman ; Shiva Chandra says, 0 Lady of the Moun¬ 
tain ! (Menaka)

Why, now that you know all, do you still call Her 
daughter ?

Be yourself daughter for once.

1 Elephant-headed Ganesha. ’ The Devi. * Shiva's drum.

* KArtikeya. vide ante. 4 Devi and Shiva. * KUrtikeya and Ganesha.

See poet. * Vishpu, who, as Krishna, wears yellow cloth.

* Shiva, who is naked.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

337

And offering Jabs flowers to the daughter’s lotus feet, 
Cry: * * Victory to Mother! ’ ” 1See poet. * Vishpu, who, as Krishna, wears yellow cloth.

* Shiva, who is naked.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

337

And offering Jabs flowers to the daughter’s lotus feet, 
Cry: * * Victory to Mother! ’ ” 1

One must rise above names and forms and make all 
things * rest on the immutable Brahma. In order to rise 
above written names and forms discrimination* is necessary. 
Discrimination* is nothing but the understanding of the 
true nature of things. In discussing the fundamental nature 
of name and form the whole attention must be directed to 
the Parabrahman, just as in discussing the question of the 
substance of a cup the attention is directed to the earth (of 
which it is made). But because you must use names and 
forms this does not mean that you must leave this Brah- 
manda, with its names and forms, and go to live in another 
Brahraauda. Judge as you are, your name and form will 
accompany you to whatever Brahmaqda you may go. One 
cannot, therefore, disouss name and form by throwing off 
name and form altogether. Just as the true nature of light 
would not be known were it not for the existence of dark¬ 
ness, so the non-dualistio existence 8 cannot be known 
without the existence of this dualistic Brahmftnda composed 
of names and forms. Without it there could have been no 
judge of dualism and non-dualism, nor indeed any necessity 
for suoh a judge. To understand the true nature of earth 
it is not necessary to go to a country where there are no 
pots and potters. A person of intelligence will place a pot 
before himself, and see that under its form there is really 
nothing but earth. He who has recognized this is not 
astonished at the sight of a pot, but is, on the contrary, 
pleased to see the wonderful capacity which earth possesses 
of taking on forms. Similarly, he who has mastered the1 The gist of these verses is that Parvatl and Shiva are not merely 
the daughter and son-in-law of the Lord of Mountains and MenakA, bat 
are the one Supreme Spirit, manifesting as, and dwelling in, all forms.

* Tattva. * Viveka.

22

338

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

Brahmatattva 1 is not astonished at the eight of this created 
universe, but is, on the contrary, overjoyed to see the eternal 
shakti of Brahmamayl. He forgets all names and forms and 
sees in every form the Brahma-form underlying the worldly 
form. As everyone sees that there are pots, but the wise 
alone know that there is nothing but earth, so, although all 
see the sangs&ra full of wives, sons, and relations, the 
Tantrik sadhaka alone knows that it is nothing but Brahma- 
mayl’s self. He who has understood that in order to rise 
above name and form it is necessary to forget that things 
have distinctive properties giving rise to such names and 
forms, and to know that the true shakti of Brahma alone 
exists, he alone has risen above name and form and has 
perceived that all is but the immutable Brahman.

“ No amount of japa, homa, and fasting will give libera¬ 
tion. It is by the realization alone that * * I am indeed 
Brahman,’ that Jlva will gain liberation.”“ No amount of japa, homa, and fasting will give libera¬ 
tion. It is by the realization alone that * * I am indeed 
Brahman,’ that Jlva will gain liberation.”

As the mind of a drunken or deeply slumbering man is 
not affected even if he is embraced by a young woman, so 
self-realization or perception of the real does not come to one 
who is intoxicated with an intense delusion 1 and is under 
the influence of the sleep of may&, even should he be animat¬ 
ed by S&dhana. If Japa, Homa, Vrata,* and fasts are not 
accompanied by self-knowledge they avail nothing, even 
though they be practised for a hundred years. It is not, 
however, meant that all japa, homa, etc., is ineffectual to gain 
liberation. For why, then, should it be necessary to state that 
(under certain conditions) they are so ineffectual ? As a 
matter of fact, japa, homa, fasting are so many means of at¬ 
taining self-knowledge. Shastra has consequently said that 
liberation will not be gained even after a hundred years by

1 i.e., who knows that all. whatever may be its varied appearance, 
is bat the one Brahman.

* Moha.

* See Introduction.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

339

the mere performance of the ordinary karma, 1 if there be 
complete disregard for what is fundamental—namely, self- 
knowledge. Shftstra does not mean that one who has known 
the self* * has no karma to perform; it rather means that none 
but those who know the self have a right to perform karma.Atma* is witness 4 (that is, It only looks upon the 
working of the universe caused by mays, without interest 
therein) and is omnipresent, perfect, true, without a second 
and higher than the highest. (Like the space in a room.) 4 
Atmii possesses, yet does not possess, body (that is, although 
Atma inhabits the body, it remains ever detached from its 
qualities). Jlva attains liberation when he realizes this 
truth. He is without a doubt liberated who has cast off 
all idea of name and form as mere child’s play and has 
become solely devoted to the Brahman.

During play children think of their dolls as sons and 
daughters ; but their names and forms disappear when play 
is over. In the same way, however much you may build 
in your own mind names and forms by the establishment of 
relationships, whether by way of wife, son, father, and 
mother, with jlvas who are the maya-dolls in the play¬ 
ground of this sangs&ra, know it for certain that with the 
end of your earthly life all such names and forms will dis¬ 
appear. Therefore, he who has ceased from play and cast 
aside all m&yik* names and forms while there is yet time,

' Ritual acts.

* Presumably the author here and in next line refers to the stages 
prior to complete self-recognition— via., regard for and endeavour to 
obtain self-knowledge. ' The Spirit.

' And so it is said: “ Atma s&kshl chetah keralo nirgunashcha" 
(Atm& is the sole intelligent witness without attributes). To its endur¬ 
ance as permanent witness of all changing states is due the Kantian 
“ synthetic unity of apperception.”

' That is, space has no form itself but takes form from the room in 
which it is.

‘ Made of and by Maya.

340

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and who, setting his mind and Atma on the Parabrahman 
who is above mftyft, has united himself with the Para- 
matmii, such an one, even though inhabiting the mayik 1 
body, is undoubtedly eternally free, like the Brahman Itself.“ If images imagined in the mind could give liberation 
to Jiva, then one could also become a King by receiving a 
kingdom in dream.”

As, despite his Mayik body, Jiva may obtain freedom 
from birth by knowledge of the essential truth,* the per¬ 
ception of the truth of the Self being the sole cause of such 
freedom, so a Sadhaka may attain nirvana kaivaiya by the 
worship (with knowledge of the Self) of an image of Jaga- 
damba in the form in which She appeared in maya for the 
benefit of Her devotees, and by perception of the greatness 
of that image—that is, of the presence in it, in eternal 
forms, of the eternal shakti of Her who is eternity itself. 
This is the sole cause of such nirvana kaivaiya.*

He,* who with loins girt with yellow cloth, sat as 
Partha’s' charioteer, glorious with the glory of his devotee, 
on the seat of Arj una’s chariot as the P&ndavas’ friend, 
holding the reins of the white horses in his left, and a 
whip in the right hand; He, who but a moment before, 
finding his friend Arjuna overcome by impatience and 
delusion,' and unwilling to do his own dharma,’ had coun- / 
selled him in words of wisdom ; He, in the twinkling of 
an eye, changed that form of His—that sweet form of a 
delicate, dark hue, like that of a freshly formed cloud, 
charming the minds and hearts of the whole world, and 
disappeared, and in the twinkling of an eye thousands of 
hands and feet of the universe-embracing great body extend¬ 
ed to each of the ten quarters of the heavens, and a terrible

1 Made of and by M&yii.

‘ Tattva. * Supreme liberation (see Introduction).

$brl Krishna. * Arjuna. ‘ Mftyu and Mohi. ’ Doty.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

3411 Made of and by M&yii.

‘ Tattva. * Supreme liberation (see Introduction).

$brl Krishna. * Arjuna. ‘ Mftyu and Mohi. ’ Doty.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

341

mass of light, issuing from thousands of widely-expanded 
eyes, dimmed the rays of the sun. Notwithstanding his 
endowment of divine vision, that Prince of Heroes, Arjuna, 
shook with fear, and with trembling voice and folded 
hands said : “ I cannot see the quarters of space nor am I 
at ease. Have mercy, 0 Lord of Devas ! in whom the world 
resides.’’

In Vali’s 1 Yajna* heaven, earth, and the nether world 
were covered by the two feet of the Vamana Brahmana. 1 
By Vali’s good fortune a third foot, hitherto unseen by 
even Brahma and other Devas, shot out from Bliagav&n's 
navel, through the wonderful shakti of the Almighty. Advised 
by his Queen, who was learned in spiritual lore, King Vali 
bowed down, and then the foot, the dispeller of fear and 
the wealth of devotees, was placed on his head. The for¬ 
tunate King Vali went to the nether world, and Bhagav&n, 
the reliever of the burdens of the world, abandoned even 
Vaikuptha, and Himself beoame Vali’s door-keeper in the 
nether world. To-day, only if he permits and kindly opens 
the door, can one see King Vali. The Lord of Vaikupfcha, * 
the monarch of monarchs, Himself stands at Vali’B door, 
though at His own door of Vaikuntha Brahma and other 
Devas ever remain standing, praying for admittance to His 
presence, the all in all of a devotee’s life. Bhagavan, the 
creator of all things, Thou alone, O Lord! knowest the 
greatness of a devotee. And you, King Vali, a Prince of 
Daityas,* are a Prince of Devotees. What kingdom is it1 Vali was a Daitya grandson of PrahlAda, who conquered the three 
worlds and then performed a great yajna, in which he intended to give 
away all that belonged to him, when Vishnu as Vilmana appeared before 
him and asked for land sufficient to put three feet on. This was promised, 
when the Vamana with two feet covered the world. * Sacrifice.

’ The Vishpu avatara of that name—as dwarf. * Viahpu’s heaven.

' Demonic beings.

342

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

which you have acquired, to guard which the Supreme 
Monarch of the universe has Himself become your door¬ 
keeper ?

Again, on the banks of the Yamuna, at the root of the 
kadamba-tree, the sweet flute 1 sounded. By what mantra 
of what secret sadhana we know not, the fair women of the 
city of Vraja stood in their thousands in the ecstasy of their 
great love, 1 surrounding Bhagav&n, the son of Nanda, as 
immovable stars surround the full moon. Instantly, by 
virtue of his wonderful vaishnavl mayA Bhagav&n appeared 
to each of them in a separate body, and threw his arms round 
the neck of each of the fair women, unseen by the others. 
The Devas assembled in the sky above Vrindavana in order 
to see the incomparable beauty of the body of Krishna in 
the waters of the Yamuna, on land and in space. Amidst 
showers of flowers offered by them with reverence, to the 
joyous sounds of music and dancing by Vidyadharas, Siddhas, 
Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Apsaras, Yakshas, and Charaijas, 1 
to the song of triumph by the herdswomen, and amidst the 
manifestation of the perfect greatness of Pilrija Brahmas- 
an&tana, 4 the huge waves of the heroic valour of the charmer 
of Madana 5 rolled in the sea of the play of love.* *The sight of the misery of Devas, caused by the oppres¬ 
sions of Mahisha the Asura, pained the loving heart of Her 
who is full of mercy for all sufferers. She, who embodies 
all $haktis, manifested Her shakti and appeared in the form 
of a mass of fury born of the anger of the Devas. The earth 
sank under the weight of the beauteous lotus feet of that 
form, all full of consciousness of Her who is consciousness

1 Of §hri Krishna. * Basa.

Various forms of celestial male and female spirits (Devayoni).

* Tbe full eternal Brahman. * The Deva of love.

‘The passage refers to the rSsalila play of love of §hrt Krishna and 
the Gopls.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

343

itself. Her orown pierced the firmament, and, delighting 
in war. She stood extending Her thousand arms over the field 
of battle. Seeing the Brahman aspect of the Brahmamay! 
the immortals shouted: “Victory! viotory! victory!” and 
in joy began to worship the lotus feet of the blissful Devi.Again, when previous to the destruction of Shumbha 
and Nishumbha, 1 Kau§hiki 1 emerged from the body of 
Parvati, beautiful as a golden champak flower, the fair 
appearance of Parvati became instantly changed into 
the shining blue lustre, more beautiful than that of a 
blue lotus, of Uma, who appeared as Shyama. Into the 
glowing tire of Her presence the King of the Daityas 
jumped and was thereupon consumed as if he were a 
mere insect. Again, in the battle with Chanda and 
Mupda,' the §hakti of ChamundA* * burst forth from the 
forehead of Shyama, wrinkled with wrath. In the battle 
with Raktabija, 1 Shivadfltl* issued from Shyama, who 
is Mulaprakriti. In the fight with Shumbha it was into 
Her body that Brahman! and other Shaktis suddenly disap¬ 
peared. Prior to Daksha’s yajna* ten Mahavidyas appeared 
from out of the single body of Sat! and again disappeared 
into it. Again, at the time of the destruction of that yajna, 
a shadow-Sat! 4 appeared from out of the original body of 
Satl, and the rnayik body was abandoned into the fire of 
yajna. Later, in the home of Himalaya, he was shown 
the world-form manifestation of Brahman in the newly-born 
body of a daughter,* and into that body again those mani¬ 
festations were withdrawn.

1 Demons (see the Devl-M&h&tmya).

* A terrific form of the Devi. 1 A $hakti issuing from Rhy4m&.

* See Introduction and ante.

* Chhuyasati.

' Devi incarnating as P&rvatl.

344

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* A terrific form of the Devi. 1 A $hakti issuing from Rhy4m&.

* See Introduction and ante.

* Chhuyasati.

' Devi incarnating as P&rvatl.

344

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The appearance and disappearance in the manner of 
innumerable playful bodies from and into Her single body 
dearly proves that the body of Saohchidanandamayl 1 is 
nothing but Sachchidftnanda; that the variety in forms is 
due to variety in maya made by Her own desire, and that 
there is no means of specifying any of Her particular forms 
as being Her real form truly defined by unquestionable 
signs. From the One comes the infinite, which becomes 
One again by the disappearance of the infinite. In this 
manner, in Her body, in the twinkling of an eye, there is 
creation, and in another twinkling a dissolution.* In this 
state of things to endeavour to ascertain the forms of Her 
who is co-extensive with the universe is but the counting 
of the waves of the sea. Again, in the hearts of Sadhakas 
who have attained Siddhi She appears and disappears eter¬ 
nally in infinite forms, such forms changing at every 
moment; this being so, it is impossible to say that She is 
in reality bound to any one particular form. To know, 
therefore, the truth * as to Her form, we must understand 
that Her real Self is above all forms. Though connected 
with infinite forms, She is, in fact, unattached to any form. 
Whenever the Icbchamayi * puts forth any form of maya 
according to Her desire, then a reflection appears of the 
form which She willingly assumes. Seeing that reflection 
in the mirror of maya She becomes charmed with Her own 
form and, like an enchanted girl, the Anandamayl * dances 
with joy and claps Her hands. In the establishment of a

• The Devi as existence, knowledge, and bliss. Sacbchidftnanda is 
the Brahman.• The Devi as existence, knowledge, and bliss. Sacbchidftnanda is 
the Brahman.

’ So in the Lolita Sahasranflma (verse 68), it is said : “ Unmesha- 
nimishotpannavipannabhuvanavalih " (The series of worlds arise and 
disappear with the opening and shutting of Her eyes). * Tattva.

The Devi whose Bubstonce is will.

' The Devi whose substance is bliss.

WORSHIP OP DEVATAS

345

dual relationship between Jiva and Brahman She dances in 
Her own joy, into which She sinks.

Overwhelmed with emotion at this play of Hers, a 
Sadhaka, had said:

*• Kftll, Charmer, of the mind of Mah&kala. Thou who 
art ever full of bliss, Thou danceth in Thy own joy, O 
Mother ! and Thyself dost olap Thy hands.”

He who, when practising Sadhana of the Brahma-forms 
of the Brahmamayl, does not possess this knowledge con¬ 
cerning the Brahman is not, in fact, competent to worship 
Her forms. Whenever, during creation, preservation, and 
destruction, a necessity has arisen for any particular form 
She who is will itself has entered into that form, and when 
Her purpose has been served, that mayik form has at once 
disappeared. The forms, however, with which the eternal 
flow of the universe is eternally concerned and in which 
the three principles 1 of creation, preservation, and destruc¬ 
tion are contained are ever true and eternal. As they are 
eternal before creation, so they are eternal after the great 
dissolution ; for the Shastra has said that such eternal forms 
are resident in the non-dualistic region unknown to this 
ephemeral mayik world. 1

Veda has said:

“Just as one fire in entering into the womb of earth 
assumes in every object its form, so the one Dweller in all 
objects assumes their forms."

Fire exists in a subtle form in every object in this world 
composed of the five elements; but from without it is not 
at all visible. If, however, there is friction by mutual 
contact, or fire from without touches it, the fire burns forth.

1 Tattva.1 Tattva.

* That is, the forms referred to exist in potential state, otherwise 
there could be no re-creation after dissolution.

346

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

It is the law of nature that what does not exist in a thing 
can never appear in it. Had not fire existed in a subtle 
form in everything in the world, all things would not have 
been combustible. We must therefore understand that fire 
exists eternally in the subtlest form in every atom of any 
object, and that it also exists in a subtle form in the gross 
body of any object (which is but a conglomeration of atoms), 
permeating every part of it. For this reason the body of a 
piece of wood composed of the five elements should also be 
considered as the body of one of those elements—namely, 
fire. Similarly, Param&tma, 1 which dwells in all things, 
enters and exists throughout the body of the universe.* 
Tantra has therefore said that he cannot worship images 
who is ignorant of the spiritual knowledge that “ She exists 
as shakfci in even vehicles, stones, and metals." Again, 
Shrlmadbh&gavata has said images are of eight kinds— 
namely, those made of stone, wood, iron, vermilion, sandal 
paste, etc.; painted, made of sand, jewels, and mental. “ At 
the time of worship a sadhaka first of all worships the mental 
image inwardly,* and then, after communicating the spirit * 
of Brahman within him to the image without, commences 
external worship. Again, those who worship yantras * with¬ 
out an image, worship the mental image of the Devatft. 
This is the fundamental principle * relating to Her eternal 
presence and manifestation in yantras and images. For 
those who do not understand Her omnipresence and this 
communication of the inward spirit, but merely think to 
attain liberation by the simple imagination of a form in

1 The Supreme Spirit.

’ The Brahman is in, though also beyond, the Brahminda.1 The Supreme Spirit.

’ The Brahman is in, though also beyond, the Brahminda.

lastlwfIt Uy ’. •“ iDWard yajn ?C“ to w bich see Introduction and 
last chapter. yoI. u. * Tejas-light. force, brilliance, spirit.

* See Introduction. ' Tattva. or truths.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS 34 1

their minds, such liberation is but a dream.” Shastra has 
therefore said :

“ If the mere imagination of forms in the mind, without 
spiritual knowledge and sadhana, can secure liberation, 
then people can also become Kings by receiving kingdoms 
in dreams.”

Along with the contemplation of images the entire 
fundamental truth concerning them must be understood. 
When this is understood it must be realized,’ and then the 
spirit must be communicated to the external image, when 
the process of giving it life will have been accomplished.* * 
It is only when in this manner the Devatft has been esta¬ 
blished that the lustre of consciousness of Chaitanyamayi 3 
will burst through that earthly image and scatter its rays 
around, illuminating the heart of the Sadhaka, tilling him 
with joy and liberating his soul from physical existence. 
The Sadhaka will find this subject 4 dealt with in greater 
detail in the Chapter on ordinary worship.

Preserving the former $hloka,* in the form of a sfltra, 4 
Bhagavan Himself has explained it in the form of a clear 
vritti: *

“ Without knowledge men cannot attain liberation, even 
though they practise severe austerities with the full belief 
that images made of earth, metals, wood, and the like are 
I?hvara Himself.”

1 Literally, " made Pratyaksha." There are four kinds of proof, 
according to Ny&ya, and throe according to SAngkhya. The latter are : 
(l) Pratyaksha, or direct perception by the mind and senses of sight, 
smell, touch, taste, and sound; (2) onum&nam, or inference; (8) shabda- 
pram&nam, or scriptural proof; to which the Nyftya adds (4) upamana 
—that is, analogy or recognition of likeness.* That is, the prAnapratiBhthft rite (see Introduction).

1 The Devi Whose substance is consciousness.

* Tattva. * Verse. * Aphorism.

' A form of commentary.

348

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Ritual action 1 is futile if, in performing it, one is 
ignorant of the supreme Truth which is to destroy the 
bonds arising from action. If I do not know by what 
process this earthern image which I worship is changed 
into an image full of consciousness, then my image worship 
is nothing but earth worship. Shastra has therefore said 
that without knowledge no amount of severe austerities 
will enable one to see the True Form of Her who is the 
embodiment of all spiritual and intellectual knowledge. It 
is the sight of Her alone which frees one of bondage. He 
who is devoid of such knowledge is therefore not qualified 
to worship images. Without knowledge neither asceticism * * 
nor enjoyment of worldly pleasure can give liberation.

To illustrate this, Bhagavan has said:

‘‘If performance of Karma 1 alone, without knowledge 
of the Brahman, can give liberation, then those who by 
fasting have reduced themselves to skeletons, and those 
who, through gluttony, have become big-bellied, can gain 
liberation by such abstinence and indulgence. But in truth 
are they really liberated ? ” “ If the mere performance of a 
vow to live on air, grass, broken particles of rice, or water 
alone can give liberation, then serpents, beasts, birds, and 
animals of the waters also (who live on such things) can be 
liberated (in spite of the absence of knowledge)."

There are four different forms of worship called “ states" 
or “dispositions,"* according to four different states of 
knowledge. These are: “ Seeing the Brahman in all things; 
this is the highest form. 1 Constant contemplation * of the 
Devata in the heart is the middle form. Recitation of

1 Karma. ’ TapasyA.

' Ritual action, austerities, alms-giving, and action generally, etc.

* Bhftva. * Ibid. ' Dbyftna (see Introduction).1 Karma. ’ TapasyA.

' Ritual action, austerities, alms-giving, and action generally, etc.

* Bhftva. * Ibid. ' Dbyftna (see Introduction).

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

349

mantra* * 1 and saying of hymns 1 is the lowest form, and mere 
external worship* is lower than these."

“ Perception of the identity of Jlv&tma and Param&tma 
is Brahinabhava. Concentration of mind on the Devatft 
by the process of yoga is dhyanabb&va. PQja as the bhava 
which arises out of the dualistic idea of the servant and 
the Lord, the worshipper and the worshipped. But he 
who knows that all is Brahman needs neither yoga nor 
pQja, because his competency is such that he has risen above 
both the bhavas of yoga and pQjfi. For him there is neither 
worshipper nor worshipped, but all is Brahman. In his 
sight Jlva and Brahman, Ishvara and Sadhaka are not 
different things. Where there is no difference between two 
things there can be no yoga, uor worship of the one by the 
other. For this reason, hymn, recitation of mantra, con¬ 
templation, concentration, vows, restraint, 4 and the like, 
are not for those* who know the Brahman. “ For him in 
whose heart the highest knowledge, that of the Brahman, 
reignB, recitation, sacrifice, austerities, restraints, vows,* 
and the like am useless." They are not only useless for 
him, but he has not even the right to do ritual acts.

The S&dhaka will now gradually see who is such a 
knower of Brahman. “The Brahman, who is the em¬ 
bodiment of pure knowledge and bliss, alone is true that 
is, without Him all this visible world is but the false dis¬ 
play of maya. “Whoever realizes this and becomes Brah¬ 
man, for him there is no longer any necessity for external 
worship, contemplation, and concentration.

' Japa, v. ibid. * Stava. * Pfljft.

* Stava, japa, dhy&na. dhftrana, vrata, niyama (see Introduction). 
4 Laterally. “ are beyond the adhikftra (competency).”

* Japa. Yajna, Tapa. Niyama, Vrata. (see Introduction).

1 Puja. dhyunu. and db&rana.

360* Japa. Yajna, Tapa. Niyama, Vrata. (see Introduction).

1 Puja. dhyunu. and db&rana.

360

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ I am Jlva.” The liberated Mahnpurusha whose heart 
is freed from the egoism involved in this saying has neither 
sin, nor piety, nor heaven, 1 nor rebirth. For him who has 
realized that all is Brahman there is neither subject for 
meditation nor person meditating, neither Jlva to meditate 
nor Ishvara on whom He may meditate.

“This Atma is always free and unattached to any 
objects. In what bondage can it be? Why, then, should 
men of perverted intellect demand its liberation ? ” * *

“ The Universe is composed of His own maya, and im¬ 
penetrable even to the intellect of Devas. Atma exists as 
one who has entered into it although in reality He does 
not enter into it.”

“Just as space exists both inside and outside all things, 
so Atma, whose substance is consciousness, shines as 
witness, both inside and outside all things.”

“Atma has neither birth, boyhood, youth, nor age. It 
is ever the same, incorruptible, and is consciousness.”

“ Birth, youth, age, and the like belong to the gross body 
alone. Atma is free of them. Jivas whose intellect are 
obscured by maya see this, but yet seem not to see this.”

“Just as the one sun appears as many (when reflected) 
in the water contained in a vessel (although in reality the 
sun is one and not many), so in the water of maya con¬ 
tained in the vessel of the jlva's gross body Atma appears 
as many (although in reality it is one and not many).”

“ As when the lunar orb is reflected in water a fool, 
who sees the quivering of the restless ripples, thinks that 
the lunar orb itself is quivering, so those who are destitute 
of true knowledge, on seeing the restlessness of intellect, 
think that the Atma is restless.”

* Svarga.

* That is, the Atm& is ever free. It is the Buddhi which must be 
liberated from the bonds which obscure this actually existing freedom.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

351* Svarga.

* That is, the Atm& is ever free. It is the Buddhi which must be 
liberated from the bonds which obscure this actually existing freedom.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

351

“ Ab when a cup is broken the space contained in it 
remains the same, so even when the body is destroyed 
Atma remains the same."

“ Devi, when jlva attains this supreme knowledge of 
the self which alone can give salvation, he is liberated 
even in this world. This is true, again true, and without 
a doubt true."

“Neither action, 1 nor charity, nor progeny* * can bring 
liberation. Knowledge of the Atmft by the Atmil oan alone 
give liberation to man.”*

“ Atma is the dearest of all. There is nothing so dear 
as the Atma. O consort of Shiva! all other things (wife, 
son, and the like, etc.) become dear because of their rela¬ 
tion to Atma.”

“ Knowledge, object of knowledge, and knower—this 
threefold division is caused by maya. If we carefully 
consider the nature 4 of these three, Atma alone, which is 
knowledge, remains in the end.”

“ It is Atma or consciousness who is knowledge, it is 
Atma who is the object of knowledge, and it is Atma who 
is the person who knows. He who knows this knows 
the truth.”

“I have thus related to you the truth 6 about know¬ 
ledge, the direct cause of nirvana liberation. This iB the 
highest treasure of the four classes of avadhtltas.” 4

1 Karma.

* That is, through their offering of the pinda in the obsequial rites.

‘ Only the Atma can know Atma. * Tattva.

* Those who have renounced the world ; ascetics. The life of the 
avadh&ta is the Sannyas&sbrama of the Kali Yuga (see Mahanirvana 
Tantra. chap. viii. verse 2). The term has been defined as follows:

“ Aksharatvat varenyatvat dhutasangsAravandhaniit. 
tattvamasyarthasiddhatvadavadhatobhidhlyate.”

(An avadhuta is so called on account of bis being possessed of undecaying 
greatness, having washed off the bonds of sangsara and learnt the 
meaning of (the great saying) “ Thou art That.”)

362(An avadhuta is so called on account of bis being possessed of undecaying 
greatness, having washed off the bonds of sangsara and learnt the 
meaning of (the great saying) “ Thou art That.”)

362

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The religious healers, of whom we have already spoken, 
quote the following four shlokas out of those above-mention¬ 
ed as strong evidence in support of their theory that He 
is devoid of form: 1

“ He alone is free from the bonds of Karma who has 
risen above name and form and has made all principles 
and things rest on the true immutable Brahman.” “ He 
is undoubtedly liberated who has shaken off all notions of 
name and form as though they were child’s play, and has 
solely devoted himself to Brahman." “ If forms imagined 
in the mind can give salvation to Jlva, then men may also 
be Kings by receiving kingdoms in dreams.” “Without 
knowledge men cannot attain liberation even though they 
practise severe austerities with the full belief that images 
made of earth, metals, wood, etc., are Ishvara Himself.”From the explanation which, along with those shlokas 
we have given of their meaning, supported by considera¬ 
tion of the context, conclusion, and object, sadhakas will 
understand to what perversion of sh&strik conclusions the 
wrong interpretations of present day interpreters, blinded 
by selfishness, lead. Sh&stra says that Jlva, before he can 
attain liberation, must forget the condition of Jlva subject 
to may&, assumed by Brahman in the m&ya-built Brah- 
rnanda, and sink himself in the unity of Jlva and Brahman, 
which it is the purpose of all great sayings, such as “ Thou 
art It,” to establish. Jlva must rise above all names and 
forms which are the object of dualistic knowledge. Accord¬ 
ing to our notion of this non-dualistic perception of the 
truth * we, whilst keeping intact the names and forms of our 
own selves and relatives and also of the whole world, con¬ 
sisting of moving and non-moving things, yet consider it to 
be the pith of the teaching that it is only the names and

1 Niruk&rnv&da.

* Tattva.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

3581 Niruk&rnv&da.

* Tattva.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

358

forms of Devat&s which are false and that these only should 
be abandoned. I fail to understand the necessity for suoh 
hurry in doing away with that particular name and form 
which alone will endure, whilst keeping those names and 
forms which will prove to be false. It is as though a great 
famine threatens the market of Brahmajnana 1 —a famine 
which will make all things so dear, that whatever purchase 
be now made will then be profitable. I do not want to 
deprive them of this profit. What I am sorry for is that 
the names and forms which constitute the bonds of sang- 
sara remain, whilst the names and forms which will cut 
those bonds is done away with. Hearing that the price of 
things will go on increasing our purchasers have been in 
such a hurry that they have forgotten to bring even the 
wherewithal to make purchases at the outset. Even He 
has been forgotten whose worship gives the fruit of the 
knowledge of Brahman. I know that they say: “ For him 
whose nature has become Brahman * there is no longer any 
necessity for pOja, dhyana, and dh&rana.” We, too, do not 
deny this. Shastra has said: “ Whose nature.” That is, 
the case of the man who, even without dhy&na and the like 
remains immersed in Brahma-bliss as naturally as he eats 
or sleeps. For one who has thus become Brahman or, in 
other words, whose condition of a Jlva has disappeared and 
been converted into Brahman ; for him there is no longer 
any necessity for dhyana, dharana, and pQja. But through 
our ill-fortune it has nowadays so happened that a number 
of persons who, by nature, are Brahma-ghosts, 1 have appear¬ 
ed who have neither dhyana, nor dharana, nor pQja, nor

1 Knowledge as to the Brahman.

’ Svabb&v&t Brahmabhata.

’ The reference is to the sect of Br&hmoa. There is here a pan on 
the term, “ bhata.” which, used as a suffix, means " state," and used 
independently means (among other things) “ ghost."

23

354’ The reference is to the sect of Br&hmoa. There is here a pan on 
the term, “ bhata.” which, used as a suffix, means " state," and used 
independently means (among other things) “ ghost."

23

354

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA23

354

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

adoration. The words of the Sh&stra cannot be false. As 
a matter of fact, such self-willed people who pervert the 
true meaning of the Shastra have no right to dhy&na, 
dhftrana, pQj&, or japa. Consequently, these things do not 
exist so far as they are concerned. The four shlokas on 
which they rely are preceded by the shloka: “ From Brahma 
to a blade of grass everything in the world is the creation 
of mfiya, and Parabrahma alone is the sole truth. When 
this knowledge is attained Jlva attains liberation.” The 
shloka: “ Atma is witness, omnipresent, perfect, true, 
without a second and higher than the highest. Atma 
possesses body and yet does not possess it. Jlva attains 
liberation when he realizes this truth,” is in the midst 
of the shlokas cited. The following §hloka follows them: 
“ If, without knowledge of Brahman, performance of 
Karma alone can give liberation, then such men as are 
reduced to skeletons by constant fasting, and such men as 
become big-bellied by excess of eating may be liberated 
through such abstinence and indulgence. But are they 
really liberated ? ” We fail, then, to understand how these 
four shlokas, can be put forward to prove that “ Brahman 
cannot have any form,” seeing that they relate to knowledge 
of Brahman. Shastra of course, says: “ From Brahma to 
a blade of grass everything in the world is the creation of 
maya, and Parabrahman alone is the sole truth," and we, 
too, do not deny this. But in the world, where everything 
from Brahma to a blade of grass is false, are you and I— 
advocates of the theories of Brahman possessing form, and 
Brahman being formless respectively—are we true ? If this 
word “ false ” means non-existent, then you and I too do 
not exist. I admit that spiritually you and I do not exist, 
but because we admit it do we really feel it? Is it possible 
that such men as do feel it question whether Brahman 
possesses or does not possess form ? Where you and I turnWORSHIP OF DEVATAS

355

out false, where your “ you-ness ” and my “ I-ness " disap¬ 
pear, two persons cannot exist. And where two do not 
exist, with whom can there be argument ? Now, will the 
dualistic world become non-existent because you and I 
desire it to be so ? Shastra has said everything from Brahma 
to a blade of grass is false; but the question is, whether 
we have ever been able to make even a single blade of grass 
false as the Shastra says ? If we have not, why do we, who 
have not the power to do away with a blade of grass, 
presume to do away with Brahma ? Do we feel ashamed 
even to think of this? Why, the very Shastra which is 
invoked to do away with the existence of Devas and Devls, 
who are Brahmas with forms, that very Shastra itself says: 
“From Brahma to a blade of grass.” If Brahman does not 
take form, whence comeB this Brahma ? And if it is “ from 
Brahman ” instead of “ from Brahma,” then everything 
vanishes, and nothing remains as true.

Shastra is the command of Devata. For Jlvas it con¬ 
tains ordinances and teachings. Because it has said that 
the world is false you and I oannot beat time to that 
tune and dance. The speaker of Shastra is Bhagavan, 
who dwells in all things, and is above maya. Its hearer 
is Maheshvarl. She who dwells in all things is turlya- 
chaitanya 1 * incarnate, and governs universal maya. To 
them, the falsity of the world is a matter of direct percep¬ 
tion ; but to you and me it is Brahma-tattva, 8 attainable only 
by age-long Sadhana, and beyond the reach of mind and 
speech. What the result of a battle will be is the concern 
of the King or Queen; the soldier’s only duty is to start 
for war immediately on receiving an order to do so. The 
King and Queen know that in this war their victory is

1 As to the turlya state of consciousness, see Introduction and ante.

• The truth concerning the Brahman.

356

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 As to the turlya state of consciousness, see Introduction and ante.

• The truth concerning the Brahman.

356

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

inevitable, so that in their conversation on the subject they 
can express satisfaction and joy. But if, on hearing this 
conversation, their soldiers were to think, “ Since victory 
is inevitable what is the use of fighting ? ” and were to give 
themselves up to rejoicing, it is most likely that the banner 
of triumph would fly in the dust. You say: “ Mahadeva 
has said that the world is false; why, then, should I worship 
and adore names and forms?” If, with this idea that the 
world is nothing but Brahman, Sadhakas were to give up 
performing worship and ritual, 1 the kind of Brahma-know¬ 
ledge which will be attained, and is, in fact, being now¬ 
adays attained, is not worth mentioning. Veda has said :

“ When everything in relation to a Jlva has been unified 
with Brahman what will he then see, what will he hear, 
what will he smell, etc., and with what ? ” That is to say, 
where mind, intellect, body, senses, and everything else is 
Brahman, then worship and ritual 1 is impossible. It is 
of no use to see Brahman, to hear Brahman, etc., with 
Brahman. The author of Vedanta Paribhash& concludes: • 
“ Although the world is false, it is not false to those who 
are in the sangsara.” That is to say, a dream is not false 
when a person sees it. Had dreams been false when seen, 
why should we have cried with terror at the sight of tigers 
in dreams ? Shruti, again, says, as the result of a spurious 
perception of a dualistic world, Jlva becomes instantly 
separated from Brahman and sees the world in a separate 
aspeot.” Philosophers have therefore said as follows: 
Although the notion that the body is the Self is spiritually 
false, it is yet deemed an established fact from the worldly 
point of view—that is to say, people consider the body to be 
the Self and say: “ I have become thin, I have become fat,I have been cured, I am ill, etc.; ” yet Atm&, which is nothing

1 Karma.

WORSHIP OF DEVAT&S

357I have been cured, I am ill, etc.; ” yet Atm&, which is nothing

1 Karma.

WORSHIP OF DEVAT&S

357

but existence, consciousness, and bliss, is neither thin nor 
fat, diseased nor cured, but is ever free from change or 
corruption, joy, sorrow, disease, grief, thinness, fatness, eto., 
which are conditions of the body alone. Just as people 
consider the body to be that Atma, and consider all these 
conditions to be established facts in the worldly state, so 
the dualistic world, though in fact false, must yet, so long 
as Brahman is not perceived in all things, be considered as 
an established, separately-existing fact. We know that the 
sun always rises in the east; still, if we go to a new place, 
it appears that the sun is rising in the west, north, or south. 
Just as, in spite of knowing the truth in this matter and 
disbelieving the opposite, we become firmly convinced that 
that opposite itself is really true; just as this mistake in 
the matter of the direction of the sun’s rising is inevitable, 
so this false perception of the dualistic world also is inevit¬ 
able. We cannot be asked as a favour to accept the dualistio 
world as an established fact. Until this dream of maya is 
dispelled, until the bonds of Karma are destroyed, until the 
idea of difference between “ you and me ” disappears, Jlva 
cannot but have faith in this dualistic universe, call it false, 
a dream, or fancy, as you may. The influence of Karma, 
the force of action, will compel me, even against my own 
will, to believe in it. Just as a weak fish caught in a net 
in water can never pass outside the net, however much it 
may move about inside it, so the worldly Jiva caught in the 
m&y& of the sangsara can never sever the bonds of maya 
and enter into the unfathomable depth of Brahmatattva 
outside of maya. Just as, in spite of being in water, the 
fish is prevented from moving out by the bondage of the net, 
so, in spite of being in the universe full of Brahman, Jlva 
is prevented by the bondage of maya from entering freely 
into that Blissful Presence. Living in this dualistic world, 
you and I, mayik Jlvas, are, therefore, bound to believe in358 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

it as a constant reality even against our will, although it is 
in fact not so.

Every worshipper is aotuated by an earnest desire to 
know the nature 1 of his real self; but the existence of the 
desire does not bring about its fulfilment for all. It is for 
the accomplishment of this desire that sadhana is required. 
Without sadhana it can never be fulfilled. A child in the 
womb may, of course, form a desire to see its mother, but 
so long as it is in the womb it is impossible for it to do so. 
The desire can be fulfilled only for that child who has fortu¬ 
nately been safely born. Similarly, it is impossible for 
people living in Maham&y&’s m&y&-womb of this universe 
to see that beautiful appearance of Hers which charms the 
heart of the conqueror of Death. 1 He who has, by the 
accumulation of religious merits in many births, been deli¬ 
vered from the sheath of the womb of may& of the Mother 
of the Universe, he alone is a fit child to see the Brahma- 
form of the Brahmamayl. It is only such a child who truly 
has the right to suck that milk from the breast of Brahma¬ 
mayl, which even Brahma and other Devas rarely obtain. 
He alone may share Her assuring lap with Kartika and 
Gapesha. If, however, on seeing the pains of austere Sadhana 
practised by any of Her children, the merciful Mother 
should gratify him ; if She, who dwells in the heart of the 
Lord of Yogis,* * should rend the deep darkness of the black 
night 4 in Her womb by the mass of light issuing from Her 
black, cloudlike appearance, which dispels the fear of death 
and Herself appear in the heart of the child lying in yoga 
in her womb; if She cuts the bonds of sangsara mSya 
with the sharp edge of Her own maya sword and takes 
the devoted sadhaka up on Her lap—then also in such a 
ca se know that this is done as the inevitable fruit of muoh

Tattva. * Mrityunjaya, or $hiva.

* Mab&deva ; -Shiva. * KAlar&tri.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

359Tattva. * Mrityunjaya, or $hiva.

* Mab&deva ; -Shiva. * KAlar&tri.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

359

austere sadhana practised in many previous births, and 
that none of these things have been accomplished without 
sadhana. It is a domain which none can reach but through 
real sadhana. Although the desire for going out may be 
strong, yet the door of the room in which Jlva is shut 
is not within his reach. The utmost that Jlva can do 
is to lie down on the bed of maya and weep; but it is 
Mother alone who can open the door. Jlva can only weep 
loudly and awaken the Mother. By virtue of austere 
sadhana the Sadhaka can awaken Mother Kulakuijdalinl , 1 
sleeping in the Muladhara . 2 If She rises and opens the 
door of Brahmarandhra,* then alone may Jlva come forth ; 
otherwise all worship and adoration are but a crying in 
the wilderness. The siddhi, which is attained in Sadhana 
by the piercing of the six chakras , 3 is never attained by Jlva 
whilst he is crushed by the wheels of the Sangsara.

Secondly, it is not within the province of Jlva to say 
whether Brahman has or has not name and form and 
even if he speaks none will hear him, for the matter 4 is 
beyond the knowledge and intellectual perception of Jlva. 
Our belief and unbelief in this world are due merely to 
the fact that what we believe has been stated, and what 
we disbelieve has been denied, by a Shastra, which is re¬ 
vealed and not of human origin. The point is this: the 
very Shastra which says that Brahman has no name and 
no forms also says, “ From Brahman to a blade of grass 
everything in the world is the creation of maya.” If the 
practical existence of a thing could be done away with 
by the mere statement that it is the creation of maya, 
why, then, does this world, consisting of moving and non¬ 
moving things, exist ?

1 Vide. ante, and Introduction. ' See Introduction.

' Sha^chakrabheda {vide ante and Introduction). * Tattva.

860

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Vide. ante, and Introduction. ' See Introduction.

' Sha^chakrabheda {vide ante and Introduction). * Tattva.

860

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The world is not a thing imperceptible to Jiva. If it 
is perfeotly true that in the world created by maya even 
a blade of grass can exist, we are unable to understand 
what it is which makes the existence of Brahma in it 
impossible. If, by a far-fetched interpretation , 1 it is said 
that the root word Brahman here does not refer to four¬ 
headed and red-coloured Brahma possessing a body, there 
is an end of the matter. If even formless and attributeless 
Brahman becomes the creation of maya and, consequently, 
false along with a blade of grass, then what remains as 
the true Brahman ? To cut the branch of a tree on which 
one sits; to do away with formless Brahman in endeavour¬ 
ing to dispense with Brahman possessing form is a Kali¬ 
dasa" kind of intelligence which will produce an inevitable 
fall for the interpreter. In this connection we have 
nothing to say but to give a warning. It is on the author¬ 
ity of that Shastra we say that Brahma is inoluded in 
the world, so that Brahma will exist so long as the world 
exists, or the world will exist so long as Brahma exists. 
As the world is not false to you and me, in spite of its 
being the creation of maya, so Brahma and other Devat&s 
also are not false to Sadhakas.

Thirdly, if, in spite of its being untenable according 
to reasoning, argument, and authority, we were to accept 
the interpretation of the followers of the theory that 
I?hvara is formless and to say that Brahman has really 
no name and form, then also there is no escape. If Brah¬ 
man has no name and form, who is it, then, that says, 
“Brahman has no name and form”? The speaker of 
the Mahanirvana Tantra is Sadashiva and the person

Adhy&tmik, in the sense of nntrne.

such the 5 re t t p0€tl 18 8aid t0 have been in his early years

ss* “ a ssrtast: “ to lmve , “ e ” ,,ted to eot d< ”"° theAdhy&tmik, in the sense of nntrne.

such the 5 re t t p0€tl 18 8aid t0 have been in his early years

ss* “ a ssrtast: “ to lmve , “ e ” ,,ted to eot d< ”"° the

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS 361

spoken to is Adyashakti, both being the Brahman with 
names and forms. Shastra says: “Maheshvara has in¬ 
ti oduced the Tantras by means of questions and answers, 
Himself taking the places both of Guru (teacher) and 
Shishya (pupil) that is to say, in Agama the Devi has 
put questions as disciple and Mahadeva has answered them 
as guru, and in Nigama Mahadeva Himself has asked 
questions as disciple, and the Devi has replied as Guru; 
or, in aspect inseparable from the Devi, the Deva Himself 
has, in both places, revealed the Tantras both as guru and 
pupil. If Brahman has no name and form, then this Deva 
and this Devi become false; and if the Deva and the Devi 
become false, how can the Tantra Sh&stra remain true? 
Tantra is the most glorious of all Shfistras because it is the 
word of Mahadeva and MahAdevI. If to-day that Deva and 
Devi, the speakers of Tantra, turn out to be false, where 
then is the glory and authority of Tantra? If Tantra is not 
the command of Devata it may be easily explained away as 
the mistaken word of man and, consequently, unworthy of 
respect. No one will then bow his head to the authority 
of the Mah&nirv&na Tantra. If the follower of the theory 
of Brahman possessing no form says that he does not 
believe that Brahman has name and form, the follower of 
the theory of Brahman possessing form will instantly reply 
that he has no faith in the authority of the Mahanirvaua 
Tantra. Thus all discussion and reasonings will cease, all 
interpretations will be useless, and all authorities and 
evidenoe will be of no value. I therefore say, where there 
is no means of defending one’s own side, it is the height of 
folly to try to serve one’s purpose by tricks.Another thing. If in discussion a position of authority 
must be assigned to Shfistra everything which is said in it 
should be accepted as correct. If a sadhaka abandons the 
worship of images and takes to dhyana and dharaiia alone,

362

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

then the mental image formed by him in his mind becomes 
the object of his dhyana and adoration. If an image im¬ 
agined in the mind is supposed to be unable to give libera¬ 
tion, then there is no reason why dhyana and dharana' with¬ 
out image worship should give it, because in that dhyana 
also the sadhaka has to depend on a mental image. And 
if dhyana does not bring liberation, then Devarshis, Maha- 
rshis, Rajarshis,* * Yogis, and Munis* are mere fools, who 
waste their days in useless labour. Accomplished great 
sadhakas also become deprived of siddhi. Morever, why in 
that case should the Mahanirv&ga Tantra have said: “ The 
dhy&nabhava is the middle form of worship ” ? Who says 
that only the four shlokas of the Mahanirvapa Tantra, 
referred to above, are worthy of being considered as author¬ 
ity and the rest of the book, consisting of two voluminous 
parts—Uttarakhancla and PQrvakhanda—is erroneous? If 
this Tantra is correct, then the whole of it must be correct; 
if incorrect, then the whole of it must be incorrect. What 
sort of impartial judgment is it to consider only four 
shlokas whioh are to one’s liking as correct and all the rest 
incorrect ? I take out four palmfuls of water from the 
Ganges and consider that small quantity of water as Brah- 
mamayl Ganga, who dwells in Brahma’s Kamandalu/ and 
all the rest of the stream flowing in an irresistible current 
from the Himalaya to the sea, as but ditch-water. What 
sort of faith is this ? The Mahanirvana Tantra deals with 
Varaashrama,* Yugadharma, 4 Yogatattva, T the six Chakras,*

1 Meditation and concentration of mind (see Introduction).

* Classes of Rishis, or seers. * Adepts in yoga and sages.1 Meditation and concentration of mind (see Introduction).

* Classes of Rishis, or seers. * Adepts in yoga and sages.

* A vessel carried by ascetics. * Caste system and rules.

The pecnliar characteristics and Dbarma of the different ages.

* Science and art of Yoga.

Centres in the body which are dealt with in works on T&ntrik 
yoga (Bee Introduction).

WORSHIP OF DEVATlS

363

politics, Vy&vahara dharma, 1 Sadhana dharma, : creation, 
preservation, and destruction, the divisions of the Brah- 
manda,’ the fourteen worlds, 4 seven svargas, 4 and seven 
patalas,® names, seats, and worships of Devas and Devis, 
the divya, vlra, and pashu forms of worship,® Mantras,® 
and Yantras,® of Devat&s, the consecration of temples and 
images, the various kinds of liberation, 7 and with a whole 
mass of rules and regulations on various other subjects.

To consider the statements contained in the book on 
all these subjects to be incorrect with the exception of four 
§hlokas, and these only subject to a wrong and perverse 
interpretation, is not judgment but treachery, intense 
selfishness, lawlessness,® or the raving of a madman. Every¬ 
where the Sadhana dharma has been classified under the 
three distinct sections of Karma, Jn&na, and Bhakti, whether 
according to Tantra or Veda or Pur&^ui.* * According to this 
system Bhagavan has, in the Mahanirvajja Tantra, given 
instructions in the Jnana division after purification of the 
mind by performance of Karma. It is from these instructions, 
when handled by the senseless interpreters of the present 
day, that all this scepticism, by whioh nothing is gained 
but everything is lost, arises. Just as milk put into the 
mouth of a naturally venomous snake is turned into poison, 
so ShAstra, handled by selfish persons who are naturally 
faithless, gives rise to such scepticism. As a matter of fact, 
it is not the case that those who are determined thus to 
ruin the Aryyan society by wrong interpretations of Sh&stra1 Law. * Boles relating to S&dhana (see Introduction).

' Universe * See Introduction.

* See Introduction. ‘ Suited to the three classes of man ( oide ibid.). 
' Mukti, which iB not gained at one step.

' Svechchha—that is, acting according to own will, and not accord¬ 
ing to law or rule.

' Action (including ritual), knowledge, and devotion.

364

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

are themselves unaware of their own treachery; but al¬ 
though they are aware of it the selfishness of the weak 
human heart prevents them from acting according to that 
knowledge. What they know remains within them, and 
what they try to make illiterate and foolish villagers under¬ 
stand is something quite different. Nowadays we can, 
in speaking of them, merely use the expression “ double- 
tongued,” one tongue being within and another without. 
But we can dare say that had an Aryyan Prince now ruled 
the country the tongues of such interpreters would forth¬ 
with have been actually made double. 1Again: It is not to be wondered at that he should 
always speak ill of that, the excellent virtues of which he 
has no knowledge; just as a huntswoman throws away the 
pearl which is formed in the heads of elephants and adorns 
herself with a garland of berries,* Aryyan poets have, 
therefore, said that such things should not be regretted, 
for what one has no power to comprehend one neglects 
but does not dishonour. “ The nose alone smells the fra¬ 
grance of Mallika and Mftlatl flowers and not the eye.” 
The eye does not, however, commit any offence thereby; 
it is merely devoid of the power of smelling. Similarly, 
should a person (who has yet to await many births before 
he acquires that Jnana and Bhakti and purity of mind 
which befit one for the worship of images) say that worship 
of images is a mistake, he must not be understood to 
commit any offence or to deserve any punishment. In 
faot, he is an objeot of pity to the public, for Bhagav&n 
has not yet granted him the power to comprehend the 
deep and solemn truth * relating to the worship of images

1 Their tongues would have been slit for their heresy.

3 Gnnja, a red blackberry, used by goldsmiths in India as a small 
weight. * Tattva.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

8651 Their tongues would have been slit for their heresy.

3 Gnnja, a red blackberry, used by goldsmiths in India as a small 
weight. * Tattva.

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

865

of the Deity. It should be understood that although he 
is a manava (man) in outward appearance, internally he 
is still imperfect in manavatva. 1 He is still a stranger in 
the human world, only just elevated from the lower stratum 
of being. However that may be, wayfarers need be warned 
before giving moral advice to a highway robber. All this argu¬ 
ment should be postponed and first of all society should be 
warned. Fortunately, the robbers have, by their inopportune 
howling, made themselves known, and wayfarers have 
recognized their voice. The Aryyan society has for some 
time discovered the hidden purpose of these interpretations 
of the Sh&stra. The Mother of the world, the subduer of 
Daityas,* * has appeared in the hearts of devotees and saved 
the world from these Daityas of the Kali Yuga. At that 
part of the Shrlmadbhftgavata where BhagavAn, the dis¬ 
peller of the fear of existence, in dealing with sadhana 
dharma,* discusses with Uddhava, the Prince of devotees, 
the subject * of devotees, He says:

“Tlrthas* consisting of water are not such tlrthas; 
images of Devas made of earth and of stone are not such 
Devas as sAdhus* are, for tlrthas consisting of water and 
images of Devas made of earth and stone purify sinners 
after long service and worship, whilst sadhus possess such 
wonderful power that their sight alone sanctifies Jlva."

' The proper state of a descendant of Mann or Humanity. As some 
one has remarked, the bulk of human beings now existing can only 
be said to be candidates for true humanity.

* Demons.

* The rules relating to Sddbana. For Dharma, (see Introduction).

* Lit. : “ states the tattra."

* Places of pilgrimage, such as Kalfgb&t. Gaya, KAmakhya, Puri, 
etc. The esoteric tlrthas are in the human body itself.

* Saintly men.

366

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Lit. : “ states the tattra."

* Places of pilgrimage, such as Kalfgb&t. Gaya, KAmakhya, Puri, 
etc. The esoteric tlrthas are in the human body itself.

* Saintly men.

366

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ He who worships my image without (through illusion) 
knowing me, as Atma-Ishvara, the dweller in all things, 
merely pours oblations into ashes.” 1

The aforesaid healers consider these two §hlokas also 
as evidence in favour of the theory of the Deity possess¬ 
ing no form. From the first shloka they glean that tlrthas 
consisting of water are not tlrthas at all, and images of 
Devas made of earth are not Devas at all. But, I ask, bad 
it been so, why should it be said that they purify after a 
long time ? By what power can a tlrtha which is not a 
tlrtha, and a Deva who is not a Deva, purify jlva even after 
long sendee ? When Bhagavftn has said that they purify 
if they are long served, the shloka must be understood to 
mean that the power of purification which pious devotees 
possess is greater than that of tlrthas and images of Devat&s. 
Purification by tlrthas and images of Devas depends on long 
service and worship by Jlva, but this is not needed to gain 
purification by the gracious look of devotees who freely 
dispense their meroy. We are confident that s&dhakas will 
forgive the thieves who possess so little intelligence and 
cunning as to proceed to commit theft in the first and 
second parts of a verse, in the third of which they are 
detected.

Again, from the second shloka they have gathered that 
those who worship images instead of praying in this fashion, 
“Ishvara, who dwells in all things,” merely pour oblations 
into ashes. We regret to say that the thought of this 
illustration in connection with such an illustrator induces 
us to smile as well as puts us to shame. Why do such 
men as have no faith in pQjfi, japa, stava, and homa* make

1 That is, he does what is useless ; for oblation should be poured 
into fire.1 That is, he does what is useless ; for oblation should be poured 
into fire.

’ Worship, recitation, hymn and fire sacrifice (homa) (see Intro¬ 
duction).

WORSHIP OF DEVATAS

367

use of the illustration of pouring oblations into ashes? 
It is because oblations are actually poured into fire that 
the expression “pouring oblations into ashes” means the 
contrary thing. To pour oblations into fire is an act of wor¬ 
ship towards an embodied Deity. If this worship of embodied 
Deity is itself a mistaken act, whence comes this illustration 
drawn from homa ? However that may be, Bhagavan has 
said that whoever worships His image without the know¬ 
ledge that He dwells in all things and is Atma and Ishvara, 
merely pours oblations into ashes, because, without the 
knowledge that He is in all things, sentient as well as 
non-sentient, how can one believe in His existence in that 
image and in the possibility of the invocation of His life 
into it, and the like ? In other words, whoever has not the 
knowledge that He is Brahman without distinctions is 
even totally unfit for image worship. The import of the 
shloka, therefore, comes to this, that without knowledge 
of Brahman, image-worship is of no avail; but by virtue 
of the pernicious influence of the present time it has 
come to mean that whoever worships images merely pours 
oblations into ashes. Great man ! keep your interpreta¬ 
tion to yourself. Do not, with an uncalled-for generosity, 
come forward to preach that to people which will make 
them as poor as street beggars. Do not, I pray, any 
longer create mischief in the name of interpretation.

CHAPTER VII

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ‘CHAPTER VII

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ‘

Here, in the course of the present discussion, it has become 
necessary to decide a few points about Shakti-tattva. 
Whether because of the particular age we live in, or of 
sectarianism, there exist in Bengal a number of leaders, or 
pseudo-leaders, of the religious community who think and 
preach that they alone and a few other persons belonging 
to their community and holding their views are learned in 
all ShAstras, competent to pass judgment on all Tattvas 
and Dlksha-gurus of sadhakas * * belonging to all communi¬ 
ties. We know not by what curse of Bhagavan they 
consider it a great sin, for which there is no atonement, 
to believe that BhagavAn and Bhagavatl are one and the 
same being, nor why they look down with hatred and 
disgust, even as though their touch were polluting as that 
of hell-worms, on all persons who entertain such a belief. 
Such conduct by men towards their fellow-beings is not 
altogether impossible; but there is no escape for even 
DevatAs, no pardon for even Ishvara, from them. A 
little inquiry in confidence will reveal to Sadhakas that in 
most places these people, being themselves Vaishnavas, 
first worship Shrlkrishna, and then offer to Shrl RAdhika

' §hakti-tattva. Shakti is that which makes able, or that Power 
by virtue of which things happen or act (see post). That power 
belongs to, or more properly is. the Brahman, and is of various kinds, 
as to which see following pages.

* That is, gurus who initiate: and other matters relating to s&dhakas.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

369* That is, gurus who initiate: and other matters relating to s&dhakas.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

369

the articles already offered to Him. The reason for their 
doing so is that Shrlkrishna, who holds all shakti, is 
Lord and Shrt Radhiku, who is Shakti Herself, is His 
handmaid, and that it is the duty of the handmaid to 
partake of the leavings of Her Lord's food leavings which 
are tokens of His favour and, consequently, precious and 
particularly dear to Her. The honour of Radhikft, how¬ 
ever, is thus in a fashion maintained, because She is the 
companion or, at least, handmaid of Shrlkrishna. But the 
case of Gayatri, jvyh.n ia single, is different. Had She been 
the companion of any Deva they could easily have included 
Her in the same class with Radhika; but Gayatrl, the 
Moth er of the three Vedas, and the progenitrix of the 
t riad of Devaa , 1 is no one’s companion, and thus there is 
no opportunity to call Her anyone’s handmaid. For this 
reason they have altogether abandoned Gfiyatrl, considering 
Her to be “ bare Shakti.” Born in the line of Brahma, 
these people yet think that it is a great sin to repeat 
Gayatrl or even to admit that She is Brahman or Ishvara, 
and consider that it is improper to divulge to the public 
this intense secret devotion in the store of s&dhana. It 
is only with a view to keeping up social and family custom 
and distinction of caste in the sight of others that Brah- 
mana Purohitas* * are called in, as a formal matter, to 
invest their children with the sacred thread. 1 If, unable 
to make time himself, the Purohita requests the father 
or grandfather of the invested boy to teach him Sandhya 4 
and Gayatrl, 4 it is often found that the greatest difficulty 
arises.

* Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara. * Priests.

* At the npanayana ceremony.

* The prayers and ritual which go by that name (see Introduction).

* The mah a mantra of that name.

24

370

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* At the npanayana ceremony.

* The prayers and ritual which go by that name (see Introduction).

* The mah a mantra of that name.

24

370

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Besides this, there are a few philosophical 1 pandits 
who say that worship of Shakti is not directly worship of 
Brahman. In their opinion such an inference is not even 
contrary to tlie teaching of Shastra. They have decided 
.that Adyftshakti Maham&yft* is She who is called nifty ft* 
yor avidyft by the Vedanta. This mftyft or avidyft is gross 
matter, something devoid of consciousness. It is only when 
Atmfi, who is consciousness itself, is reflected in Her that 
She appears to possess consciousness for Her work. For 
this reason these people say that He who possesses shakti 
is full of consciousness while shakti is gross matter. What, 
then, are those who worship gross matter instead of 
Brahman but gross matter themselves ?

Let us see whether this conclusion of theirs is approved 
of by the Shftstra. What the Tantra-shftstra has said 
about shakti we reserve for subsequent discussion. For 
those people firmly believe that the purpose of the Tantra 
Shftstra is to give predominance to shakti, and, conse¬ 
quently, evidence drawn from this source will not appear 
to be of much weight to them. For this reason we shall 
first of all quote evidence from the Shrimadbh&gavata. 
The following appears in the hymn to Shiva by Brahma 
contained in the Chapter on Daksha’s sacrifice in the 
>/Shnmadbhftgavata:

“ I know that thou art the Ishvara (creator) of the 
universe. I know also that Thou art Parabrahman, in 
whom are inseparably united Shakti and Shiva, the womb 
(yoni) and the seed from which the universe is born. 
Bhagav&n, it is Thou who dividest Thyself into the two 
forms of Shiva and Shakti, and, like a spider in play, dost 
create, preserve, and destroy the universe.”

1 D&rshanik.

Illusion (see Introduction).

’ The Devi as primal Shakti.

‘ Ignorance (see Introduction).

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

3711 D&rshanik.

Illusion (see Introduction).

’ The Devi as primal Shakti.

‘ Ignorance (see Introduction).

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

371

Here Brahma Himself says that Parabrahman is the 
J non-differentiated substance 1 of Shiva and Shakti. He, 
therefore, has not embraced Brahmaism by omitting that 
part which consists of Shakti. Again, in the Shrimad- 
bhagavata, Bhagavan says to Uddhava:

“ Prakjiti, the material of this universe, the supreme 
Purusha, its receptacle and K&ln (Time) its revealer—I am 
Brahman divided into these three parts.”

In the Shrlmadbhagavadglta, Bhagavan says to Arjuna:

“ Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, and reason also, 
^ and egoism *—these are the eightfold division of My nature.

“ This the inferior. Know my other nature, the higher, 
the life-element, O mighty-armed ! by which the universe 
is upheld.” *

Here Bhagav&n first speaks of gross * Prakriti, which is 
divided into eight parts, and then calls the Shakti, who is 
eternal consciousness 8 itself and gives life to all Jlvas, as 
His (Supreme) 8 prakriti, thus dividing prakriti into two 
main parts according as She is “gross” and “conscious.^''' 
•J Again, “ Brooding over nature (prakriti) which is mine 
own, I am born through My own Power (m&y &)." 1

Here, also, Bhagav&n has differentiated between His 
own true prakriti and m&ya.

The following appears in the hymn to Shiva by Pat- 
atma contained in the Kashlkhanda of the Skanda Purana:

“ 0 Vishveshvara, 8 Thou art the universe itself. There 
is no difference between Thee and the universe, for Thou

1 Tattva. ’ Manas, buddhi, ahangk&ra.

* Bhagavadglta, obap. vii., verses 4 and 5. 4

* Chaitanya. 4 Parftprakriti.

’ Bbagavadgltfi. chap, iv., verse 6. A slight departure has been 
made from Mrs. Besant’s translation in order not to differ from the 
author’B Bengali version. Mrs. Besanfs translation is: “Though 
brooding over nature, which is Mine own. yet I am born through my 
own Power.’’ • * Lord of universe.

S72S72

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

art omnipresent and the subject of praiseful hymn, 1 the 
maker of the hymn and even the hymn itself. Thou art 
both with and without attribute. Even yogis are without 
spiritual perception of this truth concerning Thee, 0 Lord, 
who moveth as Thou willeth. She is Thy Shakti who ap¬ 
peared as an embodiment of Thy desire when Thou wert 
no longer able to enjoy Thyself alone. Though one in 
reality, Thou hast acquired a dual aspect according as Thou 
art Shiva and Shakti. Thou art Bhagav&n, the embodiment 
of knowledge and desire is Thy Shakti. Thou, in Thy two¬ 
fold aspect of Shiva and Shakti, gave rise in Thy play to the 
Shakti of action, and from this Shakti of action has been 
generated this world. Thou Thyself art the embodiment 
of the Shakti of knowledge, Uma is the embodiment of the 
Shakti of desire, and this universe is the embodiment of 
the Shakti of action. 1 Thus Thou art the sole cause of 
the universe.”

Again: “ Thou as Prakriti and Purusha first created 
the Brahra&^da, and then inhabited it as all things moving 
and non-moving. Therefore, 0 Thou who pervadeth the 
whole world, nothing is different from Thee. All things 
exist in Thee, and Thou pervadeth all things.” Valmiki 
says in the Uttarakanda of AdbhQta Ramayana :

“ Janakl is primeval, eternal. She is the visible Pra¬ 
kriti itself. Through Her, austerity is fruitful and heaven 
is gained. She is the eternal vibhQti of vibhus.* It is that 
Mah&shakti whom Brahmav&dls * describe in the two forms 
of Vidya and AvidyA She is Riddhi;' Siddhi, full of

1 Stavft.

* The three Shaktis—Jn&na (cognition), Ichehhfi (volition), Krlya 
(motion).

* Vibhoti is the thing which characterizes the higher nature. 
Vibho is one who is all-pervading, and vibhuti is both that which it 
displays and the power by which it displnys.

* Worshippers of the Brahman.

* Spiritual wealth.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

373* Worshippers of the Brahman.

* Spiritual wealth.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

373

gun 06 , made of gunas, and above gunas. She exists as both 
Brahman and Brahman da. She is the eause of all causes. 
She eternally plays as Prakriti and Vikpti. 1 She is full of 
consciousness, and blooms in consciousness. She exists in 
all things, is Brahman and Mahakundalinl. All this world, 
consisting of moving and non-moving things, is but Her 
play, O Brahman. Holding Her in their hearts, yogis sever 
the heart’s ties, and exist under their own true aspect. 0 
Good Doer! whenever dharma * becomes tarnished and 
adharma* flourishes, Mahiiprakriti appears through Her 
own m&y&. Rama also is the supreme light, the supreme 
abode, and the supreme Purusha in flesh and blood; for 
there is, in reality, no real difference between Sita and 
Rama. It is because s&dhus have realized this that they 
have thrown off the slumber of maya, awakened to the state 
of the knowledge of truth, and orossed from the jaws of 
death to the other side of the sea of sangsara. Rama is 
incomprehensible, full of eternal consciousness, omniscient, 
omnipresent, the sole creator, preserver, and destroyer of all 
things, blissful and all pervading. Yogis contemplate Him 
inseparably with Sita. I shall truly relate, by way of illu¬ 
stration, how, though in truth birthless, Prakriti and 
Purusha, who exist in causal bodies, take high and wonder¬ 
ful births. Being in truth formless, They assume forms for 
the salvation of mankind and out of their meroy for it.”

Again, when thou sand-headed Ravana was killed by SltA 
in the form of Kalika, Ramachandra said in his hymn to Her:

“ Blessed is my birth to-day, and successful is my 
devotion; for, being unrevealed to the world, Thou hast 
favoured me by appearing to my view. All the world is 
Thy creation, and Pradhana 4 and other Tattvas * are seated

1 Freely rendered as " As cause and effect."

' Righteousness. * Unrighteousness.1 Freely rendered as " As cause and effect."

' Righteousness. * Unrighteousness.

4 The material cause. * Its derivatives.

374

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in Thee. At the time of the great dissolution this world 
disappears in Thee. Thou art the highest goal of Jiva. Some 
speak of Thee as Prakfiti, different from Vikjiti, while, O 
Companion of Shiva, others of the spiritually wise describe 
you as Shiva, Pradhana, Purusha, Mahfittattva, Brahma, 
Ishvara, Avidhya, Niyati, M&yfi. and Kala 1 and hundreds of 
other limbs emanate from and exist in Thee. Thou art the 
supreme Shakti, which is eternal and the highest good. 
Thou art free from all differences, and the shelter of all 
differences. Thou existeth as Thine own true Self, 0 Yoge§h- 
van, who art Parameshvarl. It is by entering into Thee 
Purusha makes and unmakes Pradhana 1 and all other things 
of the world. It is by uniting with Thee that Purusha, 
the supreme Deva, enjoys the bliss of His Ownself. Thou 
art the supreme bliss and also the giver of supreme bliss. 
Thou art the supreme space, the supreme light, immaculate, 
Shiva, omnipresent, subtle, Parabrahman, and eternal.”

The following appears in the Mah&bhagavata :

“ I bow to the Devi, who grants heaven and liberation, 
by worshipping whom Virinchi * has become the creator, 
Hari 4 the preserver, and Girlsha * the destroyer, of this 
world; who is the object of contemplation by Yogis, whom 
Munis possessed of spiritual knowledge describe as the 
primal and supreme Prakriti.

“ May She preserve us * who on creating this world ac¬ 
cording to Her free will has taken birth in it, and receiving 
Shambhu for Her husband, and whose feet Shambhu placed 
on His breast when receiving Her for His wife as the fruit 
of his austerities.”

1 Shiva: the material and efficient cause; the Tattra Mahat, first of 
their issue ; Creator; Lord ; nescience ; destiny; power of illusion and 
time. Niyati also is the $haivn category of space. ’ Vide last note.' Brahms. * Visbpu. ' $hiva.

The author's rendering is free here. He writes: ** May the creatrix 
of the universe who is worshipped by $hiva preserve the three worlds."

WHAT IS SHaKTI?

3?5

Suta 1 said : “ High minded Maharshi Bhagavan Vyasa, 
the speaker of endless Dharmashastras, chief of all men, 
learned in the Vedas, and profioient in spiritual knowledge, 
received no satisfaction from his work in connection with 
the seventeen Pur&ijas. He then bethought himself ‘ How 
shall I relate that Mahapurana, than which no greater 
Puratja exists on earth, and wherein the supreme Bhagavatl 
is dealt with in all detail ? ’ Failing to know the truth' 
about the Devi, his heart became agitated. He thought, 
* How can that supreme and most abstruse truth * be known 
to me which is not known to even Maheshvara of vast know¬ 
ledge ? ’ So thinking, and finding no other means, Vyasa 
of great intelligence set his whole-hearted devotion * on 
Durga, went to the Himalaya, and there practised severe 
austerities. The consort of Shiva, who is ever fond of Her 
devotees, was pleased with such devotion, and remaining un¬ 
seen in the sky, said, ‘ Mahamuni, Vyasa, go to Brahmaloka 
where all the Shrutis incarnate 4 live; there you will know 
my stainless supreme existence." There sung by the Shrutis, 
I shall become visible and do what is desired of by you.” 
Hearing this message from above, Bhagavan Vedavyasa at 
once repaired to Brahmaloka* bowed to the four Vedas and 
asked, “What is the supreme and undecaying Brahman?”

“Great Muni, hearing the Ijtishi ask this question with 
modesty and submissiveness, the Vedas at once replied 
by turns."

Rigveda said : “ In whom are contained all things, out 
of whom appear all things, and whom all describe as the 
highest Being," that Adya (primal) Bhagavatl is Brahman 
itself.”

1 Lomaharshana. the narrator. ' Tattva. * Bhakti.

4 That is. the four Vedaa incarnate (Martimatl). Literally, " pos¬ 
sessing form.'*

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Lomaharshana. the narrator. ' Tattva. * Bhakti.

4 That is. the four Vedaa incarnate (Martimatl). Literally, " pos¬ 
sessing form.'*

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

*

3t6

Yajurveda said: “ The I^hvari who is worshipped in 
all yajnas and in yoga and for whose existence we (Vedas) 
are deemed the authority, that Bhagavati alone is Brahman 
itself.’*

Samaveda said: “ By whom this universe in moved, 
whom all yogis contemplate, and by whose light the uni¬ 
verse is manifested, that world-pervading Durg& alone is 
supreme Brahman.”

Atharvaveda said: “The Ishvarl of Suras 1 whom all 
who are favoured for their devotion see, that Bhagavati 
Durg& all Shastras describe as Supreme Brahman.”

Suta said, hearing the incarnate Shrutis thus express 
themselves: Vy&sa, the son of Satyavatl, became certain 
that Bhagavati Durgft was supreme Brahman.” After they 
had spoken as above mentioned, the Shrutis also again said 
unto the Mahamuni: “ What we have Baid we shall make 
directly visible to yob." So saying, the Shrutis began to 
sing in praise of that Parame?hvari who is existence, con¬ 
sciousness, and bliss, who is pure, and who holds in Her¬ 
self all Devas and Devis.

The Shrutis said: “ Supreme, universe-embracing

Durga be pleased. The three Purushas* Brahma, Vishpu, 
and Mahe?hvara, are created with their individual gupas 
according to Thy will for the threefold work of creation, 
preservation, and destruction. But, 0 Mother, Thou hast 
no creator in the three worlds. Who in the world can 
therefore describe Thy qualities, impenetrable by the intel¬ 
lect of Jlvas ?

" O Mother of the three worlds, it is by worshipping 
Thee that Hari destroys invincible Daityas and thus pre¬ 
serves the three worlds, and it was by holding Thy feet on 
His breast that Mahe$hvara was able to drink poison deadly

1 Devas and Devis.

f ••

Persons.”

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

37*?1 Devas and Devis.

f ••

Persons.”

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

37*?

enough to destroy the three worlds. 1 What can we say 
which will describe the force of that (incomprehensible) 
nature of Thine ? ”

“ We bow to Thee, 0 Mother who art the body, the 
consciousness, the Shakti of motion, and other Shaktis, 
and the highest Shakti, constituted of Thy own gunas by 
the instrumentality of maya of the supreme Purusha 
(Paramatma), and Thou art She who residest as conscious¬ 
ness in the bodies of Jlvas, who, charmed by Thy maya and 
with differentiating knowledge,* * describe Thee aB Purusha.”

“ Brahma-tattva is that aspect of Thine which is devoid 
of all distinctive conditions,* such as masculinity, femi¬ 
ninity, eto. Next, shakti is that primary desire of Thine 
which arose in Thee for oreating the world. That Shakti 
appeared in one half as the supreme Purusha, so that both 
Prakriti and Purusha are but Shakti in different forms. 
Both are but manifestation of Thy m&ya. Even Parama- 
brahmatattva, therefore, is nothing but Thyself as Shakti.”

“ Just as to a searcher for truth things like hail formed 
of water and yet hard, are known to him to be water, so 
to an inquirer into the nature 4 of all things in this world 
which has its origin in Brahman, the latter has no separate 
existence from that of Shakti. Buddhi as Purusha, when 
realised as Shakti, also is Brahman ; for Shakti is mani¬ 
fested Brahman.” *

“ The six Shivas, beginning with Brahma, w’hich exist 
in the six chakras in the body of the Jiva are, when

1 At the churning of the ocean, poison was one of the things which 
issued from the waters. As this poison was powerful enough to destroy 
the worlds, $hiva drank it, holding it in his throat, which made it blue. 
Hence be is called Nilakaptha (blue-throated).

* BhedajnAna ; that is, knowledge distinguishing between Purusha 
and Prakriti. who are in reality and according to monistic knowledge 
one. 1 Up&dhi. * Tattva.* BhedajnAna ; that is, knowledge distinguishing between Purusha 
and Prakriti. who are in reality and according to monistic knowledge 
one. 1 Up&dhi. * Tattva.

' If we realise Buddhi to be $hakti, and Shakti is manifested Brah¬ 
man, then Buddhi is such Brahman.

378

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

considered separately from Thee, only pretax (that is to say, 
gross matter 1 in regard to their individual functions). It 
is only when they come under Thy protection that they 
attain Parameshvara-hood (that is to say, become Shiva* 
under the influence of Shakti). So, O Shiva, Ishvara-hood 
is not in Shiva, but in Thee. O universe-pervading Devi 
Durga, 0 Mother Whose lotus feet are worshipped by im¬ 
mortals, have mercy on us.”

Suta said: “ Thus sung in a hymn by the incarnate 
Shrutis the eternal Mother of the universe showed Herself 
to them.”

“ Although that Mahadevi exists as light (conscious¬ 
ness) in all living things yet She assumed a distinct body 
in order to dispel the doubts of.Vyasa."

“ That body was of the brilliance of a thousand suns, 
and fair with the beauty of ten million moons. She had 
a thousand arms bearing celestial weapons, was decked 
with oelestial ornaments and garments; smeared with 
celestial unguents, and seated on a lion. At times She 
was also seated on a corpse, and had four arms, and was 
of the colour of a freshly formed cloud. In this manner 
She appeared sometimes as two-armed, sometimes as four¬ 
armed, sometimes as ten-armed, sometimes as eighteen¬ 
armed, and sometimes as an hundred armed. At times 
She appeared possessed of an infinite number of arms and 
of a sublimely divine form.”

“ Sometimes She appeared as Vishnu, with Lakshmi on 
His left, at others as Shrikfishija with Radhika on His 
left; yet again as Brahma, with SarasvatJ on His left, and 
then as Shiva, with Gaurl on His left.”

“ The all-pervading Devi who is Brahman in reality 
dispelled Vyasa's doubts by thus assuming various forms^”

Jatf'a.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?“ The all-pervading Devi who is Brahman in reality 
dispelled Vyasa's doubts by thus assuming various forms^”

Jatf'a.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

379

Suta said: “ Seeing all these wonderful forms of 
Jagadambi, 1 Vyftsa, the great Muni and son of Parashara, 
knew the sublime Brahmatattva, and became free from the 
condition of a Jlva. Then, knowing the desire of Vyasa, 
Dev! Bhagavati, the dweller in all hearts, showed him the 
thousand-petalled lotus lying under Her feet. In the petals 
of the lotus Vyasa, the great Rishi, saw the great Purina 
named Mahabhagavata replete with sublime letters. Thus 
blessed, he praised the Devi in various ways, bowed to the 
earth before Her, and returned to his hermitage."

“ He then disclosed the Mah&bh&gavata Purana, most 
sacred and full of sublime letters, just as he had found 
it in the thousand-petalled lotus lying under the lotus feet 
of Jagadambfi..” 1

Again, the following appears in the second chapter of 
the same book:

N&rada asked : “ O Thou, the worshipped of the three 
worlds, chief of Devas and merciful to devotees, Thou art 
the greatest of those who know* * the pure Atma and 
Brahman. 0 Parameshvara! Thou alone knowest the 
nature of all things,* 0 Lord of the universe. The other 
Devas and ^ishis know it not.” “ Thou (alone of all 
Devas) fondly holdest on Thy head Gangs,,* who puri¬ 
fies the three worlds (because Thou knowest Her great¬ 
ness). Thou hast made the moon Thy head* ornament 
(because Thou knowest its essential beauty.) Tell me, 
therefore, O omnipresent Deva, that which I ask of Thee

1 The mother of the world. ' Jniini.

' Vastu-tattvn, the principle of all physical existence.

* Shiva colled Gangadharu. “ Whose coiled and matted hair iB 
wet with the spray of Gangft ” (Mah&nirv&pa Tantra, chap. i.). When 
the River Ganges descended from Heaven, be intercepted it by His 
head, so that the earth might not be crushed by the weight of the 
falling stream.* §hiva is represented as bearing the crescent moon.

380 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

now. O Maheshvara, who is the Devata whom Ye too 
worship ? ” 1

“Whoever worships Thee as well as Bhagavan Vishgu, 
and Brahma, the Lord of the Universe, with devotion, 
attains to such a high state as it is in the power of none 
on earth to describe. Such being the more than worldly 
greatness of yourselves, I desire by all means to know 
the Devata whom Ye too worship. Tell me, O Maheshvara 
who is that Devata.”

Vyasa said: “ 0 great Muni Jaimini, hearing these words 
of Narada, Mahadeva repeatedly revolved the matter in His 
mind, and then Mahadeva said : * Great Rishi, that which 
you desire to know is the highest and most abstruse truth. 1 
My child, how can I reveal that unrevealable truth ? ’ ” 1

Vyasa said: “ Thus replied to by the Deva of Devas, 
Narada stood, and, with folded hands, thus addressed 
Narayana, the omnipresent Lord of the universe,^

“Though very merciful to His devotees, Bhagavan 
Maheshvara, the Deva of Devas, is yet reluctant to say who 
is the Devatft He worships. Tell me therefore, O Thou 
WTio art merciful to the supplicant, and chief of Devas, 
who that Devata is.”

Narayaga said: “Great Rishi, what need have you to 
hear of that matter ? 1 We are your Devatas, and you will 
attain the highest state by worshipping us. What reason can 
you then have to know the Devata We ourselves worship ? ”

Vyasa said: “Thus spoken to by Bhagavan Vishpu 
also, Narada, the great Muni (finding no other means), thus 
prayed with folded hands and propitiatory words, to both 
Shiva and Vishnu.”

Narada said: “0 Vi§hve?hvara, the Deva of Devas, 
be gracious unto me; 0 Vasudeva N&rayaga, be gracious

1 Tuttva.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

381Narada said: “0 Vi§hve?hvara, the Deva of Devas, 
be gracious unto me; 0 Vasudeva N&rayaga, be gracious

1 Tuttva.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

381

unto me. 1 0 Sbambu, brilliant with the ornament of 
snakes, be gracious unto me. O Vishnu, decked with the 
kaustubha jewel, be gracious unto me. O merciful Gangfi,- 
dhara, O worshipful Deva, armed with the chakra,* * be 
gracious unto me. Vishvesbvara, naked as space, 0 Gada- 
hara, dressed in j r ellow, be gracious unto me. O Destroyer 
of Asura Tripura, I bow to Thee. O Destroyer of Asura 
Baka, I bow to Thee. O Destroyer of Asura Andhaka, I 
bow to Thee; O Destroyer of Asura Kangsa,* I bow to Thee. 
O five-headed Deva, riding on a bull, I bow to Thee. O 
Vishnu, seated on Garuda,* I bow to Thee.”

“ Seeing N&rada, the great Devarshi, thus engaged in 
prayer, Bhagav&n Vishnu looked towards Deva Mahesb- 
vara and said:

Vishnu said : “ Narada, the son of Brahma is devoted, 
wise, and modest. Thou ought by all means to favour him, 
for Thou art gracious to devotees.”

Vyftsa said: “ Hearing these words of Vishnu, Mah- 
eshvara, too, who is ever gracious to the supplicant, said, 
‘ Be it so.' ”

“Then high-souled Narada, possessed of pure know¬ 
ledge, again questioned Mahadeva, the seat of meroy and 
Deva of Devas."

Narada said : “ It is by worshipping Thee, Vishnu and 
Brahma, the Lord of the Universe, that Indra and other 
Lokap&las* have attained high states. O chief of Devas, 
who is the perfect, immutable Devata whom Ye worship? 
Tell me this if Thou hast favour for me. If Thou wilt tell 
me by whose favour Ye have attained such high Ishvara- 
hood, then shall I know that Thou art gracious unto me."

1 Nil rod ft prayB alternately first to §hiva and then to Krishna.

* Discus of Vishnu.

* Demons, Tripura, and Andhaka, slain by §hiva and the other two

by Krishna. * The king of birds, carrier of Vishnu.

* Regents of the quarters, Indra, Agni, Yama, Nirriti, and others,

. 382 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRAby Krishna. * The king of birds, carrier of Vishnu.

* Regents of the quarters, Indra, Agni, Yama, Nirriti, and others,

. 382 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Vyftsa said: Thus addressed, Bhagav&n, high-souled 
Shangkara, the Lord of Yogis, receiving Narada’s words 
m good grace, revolved all things* in His heart, repeatedly 
contemplated the lotus-feet of Shrl Durgfi, and began to 
speak to Narada the great Muni of the one perfeot and 
supreme Brahman.”

Mahadeva said: “She who is pure, eternal Molaprak- 
riti is Parabrahraan itself and the Devatfi We worship.

“ That Maheshvarl is the sole Mistress* of the millions* 
of Brahmas, Vishnus, and Maheshvaras who are Lords of 
creation, preservation, and destruction in different Brah- 
rnagdas just as this Brahma, this Janardana, and myself, 
Maheshvara, are the Lords of creation, preservation! and 
destruction in this BrahmSnda. Though really formless, 
that Mahadevl assumes bodies in play. This entire universJ 
has been created, is being maintained, and will, in the end, 
be destroyed by Her. And during its existence the world 
is overpowered by Her enchantment.”

In Her own play 8he, in former times, incarnated 
Herself in full 4 as the daughter of Daksha Prajapati; She 
also incarnated Herself as Uma, daughter of Himalaya! In 
partial incarnation* She is the consort of Vishnu as 
Lakshml and Sarasvatl, and the consort of Brahma as 
SavitrJ.”

Narada said: “ Chief of Devas, if Thou art pleased with 
me, if Thou hast kindness for me, then, O Lord, tell me 
fully and in detail how that perfect Prakpti formerly took

' Tattva.

* Vidhfttrl.

Shiva Cr0re8 EaCh wor,d ' 8y8tem haa it8 own Brahma, Visbnn, and

t *u P °S a—that “• in 8Uch incarnation all the Vibhati* (see post) 
tion Bhagavan are “anifested. not so in partial (Angshik) incarna-

festatiwT^K P ° r “ 8 Brahma and Visbnn are but partial mani-

festation of the Brahman, so are their §bnktis.

WHAT IS SHAKTI'?

883festatiwT^K P ° r “ 8 Brahma and Visbnn are but partial mani-

festation of the Brahman, so are their §bnktis.

WHAT IS SHAKTI'?

883

birth as Daksha Prajapati’s daughter, and how Maheshvara 
obtained Her who is in truth Brahman for wife; again, how 
She took birth as Himalaya’s daughter, and how three-eyed 
Mahadeva obtained that three-eyed Devi for His wife; and 
again, how that Mother of the universe gave birth to Her 
two sons, invincible and six-headed Kartikeya and elephant 
headed Gapesha.”

“ Before creation this world was devoid of sun, moon, 
and stars, and without day and night. There was no fire 
and no distinction of directions. The Brahmfinda was then 
destitute of sound, touch, and the like, etc., devoid of 
other force. 1 and full of darkness. Then but that one 
eternal Brahman of whom the Shrutis speak, and the 
Prakriti, who is existence, consciousness, and bliss, alone 
existed.”

“ She is pure, full of knowledge, beyond the reach of 
speech, perpetual, immaculate, unapproachable by even 
yogis, all-pervading, untroubled, eternally blissful, subtle, 
and devoid of all such properties as heaviness, lightness, 
and the like.”

“ Subsequently, when that Anandamayl became de¬ 
sirous to oreate in order to manifest Her own play of bliss, 
that supreme Prakriti, though in truth formless, at once 
assumed a form by the strength of Her own will.”

“ That Devi with form was of the colour of crushed 
collyrium,* * Her face was fair and as charming as a full¬ 
blown lotus. She bad four arms, fiery eyes, dishevelled 
hair, and full and erect breasts.* She was naked as space, 
terrific, and seated on a lion."

' Tejfts. ' Anjana.

* The Devi is generally represented as so formed. They and other 
physical features are the signs of the Great Maternity. See passages 
cited in A and E. Avalon’s “ Hymns to the Goddess.”

384

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA384

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ She then at once created, of Her own will, a Purusha 
(Mahakala) with her three gunas, sattva, rajas, and tamas. 
But that Purusha was even then devoid of consciousness.”

Seeing that Purusha made of three gunas unconscious, 
She oommunicated to Him Her own desire for creation.”

“ t^us possessed of Shakti through the communi¬ 
cation of the desire of Mah&shakti, that Malapurusha ‘ 
created with delight three Purusha.?, according to the three¬ 
fold division of gunas—namely, sattva, rajas, and tamas, 
and the three Purusha? thus created were termed Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Maheshvara.”

Still, when She saw that there was no sign of creation, 
the Devi divided the Molapurusha into two parts—namely,* 
Jiva and Paramapurusha.”

“ Prakriti also divided Herself, according to Her own 
will, into three parts—namely, Maya, Vidya, and Parama.”

“ Of these Maya is She who charms Jlvas and is the 
Shakti who creates the sangsira. Parama is the Shakti, 
full of consciousness and life, who is the cause of movements 
in Jiva?, and Vidya is She who is made of pure spiritual 
knowledge and who is the Shakti which dissolves the 
sangsara.”

Mayavrito hi jlvast&ng paranmng nekshate mune 
Tabhyang samashritastespi purusha vishayaishinah 
BabhQburmunisharddOla mugdhastanmayaya tada 
Sa tritija para vidya panchadha yabhavat svayam 
Ganga durga cha savitri lakshmishchaiva sarasvatl 
Sa praha prakfitirvidya brahmavishnumaheshvaran 
Pratyakshaga jagaddhatrt viniyojya prithak prithak 
Srishtyarthank purusha ytiyang maya srishta nijech- 
chhaya

Primeval or root Parasha.

385

/

WHAT IS SHAKTI?Primeval or root Parasha.

385

/

WHAT IS SHAKTI?

Tatkurushva iuahabhaga yathechchha mama jftyate 
Brahma srijatu bhutani sth&varani charu.nl cha 
Vividhani vichitr&ni cbasangkhyeyfLni sangyatah 
Vishnuresha mahav&huh karotu pratip&lanam 
Nihatya jagat&ng kshobhak&rak&n valinang varah 
Shivastamognnakr&ntah sheshe sarvamidang jagat 
Nashayishyati nftsheohcha yada me sainbbavishyati 
Parasparancha srishtyadikaryeshu trishu vaidhruvam 
Vidhatavyang hi sahayyang y ushmabhih purushatrayaih 
Ahancha pancbadha bhtltva savitryadya varanganah 
Bhavatam vanita bhQtva viharishye nijechchaya 
Tathangshatascha sambhOya sarvajautushu yoshitah 
Prasavishyami bhatani vividhSni nijechchaya 
Brahmangstvang manaslng srishting karotu mama 
shasanat

Sampratam nanyatha srishtirvistriteyam bhavishyati 
Ityuktva tanmahavidya prakritih sa paratpara 
Svayamantardadhe teshang brahmadlnancha paahyatam 1

[“ O Muni! overpowered by maya, Jlva does not see 
that Parama. Subjeot to these two (Parama and Maya), 
O great Muni, those Purushas (Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva) 
also became at that time attached to the world, being in¬ 
fluenced thereto by maya. The third supreme Vidya is She 
who divided Herself into five forms—namely, Ganga, Durga, 
SavitrT, Lakshml, and Sarasvatl. Addressing Herself to 
Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara separately, that Prakriti 
Vidya, the visible Jagaddhatrl (holder of the universe), said 
to them: ‘ You, Purusha, have been created by me of my 
own accord for the purpose of creation. O high-favoured 
Devas, do that which is my desire. Brahma, do Thou create 
with care all things, movable and immovable, of various

1 The author does not translate these verses, an English rendering 
of which is given in brackets below.

25

886

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 The author does not translate these verses, an English rendering 
of which is given in brackets below.

25

886

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

kinds, diversified and innumerable. Vishnu, this great¬ 
armed Deva, the best of the strong, do Thou maintain by 
destroying all such as oppress the worlds. Shiva, through 
the tamas guna, will in the end destroy all this world when 
the desire for destruction will arise in Me. In these three 
works of creation and the like do you three Purushas render 
help to each other. I, too, will divide myself into five forms 
as Savitrl and other fair women, and being your wives move 
as I desire. And becoming, with a part of Myself, the female 
among all living things, I shall give birth to various beings 
of my own will. O Brahma, do you, under my order, make 
a mental creation. At present no other creation should be 
made. Saying this to them, that Prakriti Mahavidya, who 
is supreme over the supreme, Herself disappeared from the 
sight of Brahma and the other Devas.”]

The following appears in the second chapter of Devi 
Bhagavata:

“ The Parama (supreme) Adya (primal) Shakti, who is 
called Vidya according to Shruti, She who dwells in all 
things, resides in all hearts, destroys the bonds of sangsara, 
and is incomprehensible to the wicked; She who is ever 
visible to munis who meditate upon Her—may that Bhaga- 
vatl, whose substance is existence, consciousness, and bliRS 
—grant a pious mind to Jlva.”

“ She who, after having created the universe as sat 1 and 
asat* * and jada* and chaitanya/ maintains it by Her own 
shakti consisting of three gunas; She who, again, at the end 
of the Kalpa, alone sinks in Self-bliss after destroying the 
manifestation of this universe—I remember that Mother of 
the Universe in ray heart.”

1 True, permanent. * Untrne. transient.

' Gross, material, immovable.

* Consciousness, moving sentient life.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

3871 True, permanent. * Untrne. transient.

' Gross, material, immovable.

* Consciousness, moving sentient life.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

387

“ It is generally known that Brahma creates all this 
universe; but those who are acquainted with the Puranas 
and Vedas say that He took birth in the navel-lotus of 
Vishnu. They have thus indirectly said that Brahma is 
not an independent Creator of the world for He, too, has 
had to be born elsewhere according to another’s desire."

“ For when in Mahapralaya Vishnu lay on the bed of 
Ananta , 1 Brahma appeared in His navel-lotus. Here, too 
thousand-headed Ananta Deva supports Vishnu on His 
body. How can Bhagavftn be said to possess independent 
Shakti when He has to depend on another for his support ? ” 
When in Mahapralaya the world is converted into a 
single ocean the water of that single ocean is undoubtedly 
liquid. All admit that a liquid can never exist without 
a receptacle. But Vishnu supports Brahma, Ananta Deva 
supports Vishnu, and the water of the ocean supports Ananta 
Deva; but who supports this mass of water ? Extremely 
difficult to understand is this matter. When, on carefully 
examining one receptacle after another, one comes to the 
end of all receptacles, then it is that there is disclosed the 
Supreme existence* * of the Mahashakti who supports all 
things. I make supplication to that Mother of all things.

“ I make supplication to that Supreme Shakti, to that 
Devi to whom Brahma, seated on the navel-lotus, prayed 
when (on the occasion of the destruction of Madhu and 
Kaitabha) he saw Vishnu with His eyes shut in yoganidra."* 
Again, the following appears in the fourth chapter of 
the same book:

Suta said: “ Thus, asked by Vyasa, high-minded 
Narada, profioient in the knowledge of Veda, spoke, with 
great delight."

1 The thousand-beaded snake.

* Tftttva.

' Sleep of yoga.

388

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 The thousand-beaded snake.

* Tftttva.

' Sleep of yoga.

388

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Narada said: “ High-favoured son of Parashara the 
matter which you ask me was, of yore, asked by ray father, 
BrahrnA, of BhagavAn MadhusQdana.’ 1

“ 8eeing Hari, the chief of Devas, Lord of the world, 
and husband of Lakshml, rapt in meditation, my father 
was astonished and questioned that Vasudeva, immersed 
in intense devotion, who is deoked with the Kaustubha 
Jewel, 1 holds the conch-shell,* * disous, 4 and mace,* bears 
the Shrivatsa* mark, and is dressed in j'ellow garments; 
He who is four-armed, the cause of all Lokas/ the Guru of 
the world, the Lord of the world, the Deva of Devas.”

Brahma said: “ 0 Janardana, Deva of Devas and Lord 
of the world, since Thou art Thyself the I$hvara' of 
past, future, and present, why dost Thou perform austerity 
and devotion, and whom dost Thou contemplate? This 
i8 a matter of great wonder to me. Being Thyself the 
Lord of all the world, yet Thou contemplateth another. 
What, O chief of Devas, can be stranger than this ? ”

“ Sprung from Thy navel-lotus I am Creator of this 
entire universe. Thou art the cause of all causes. What 
greater DevatA oan there be in this world than Thyself ? O 
husband of Lakshml! tell me this.”

“ Lord of the world, I know that Thou art the first of 
all, the cause of all, the creator, preserver, and destroyer 
of all, the doer of all work, and the possessor of all 
Shaktis. Great King, I create this world according to Thy 
desire; and Hara, who destroys it at the time of dissolution, 
is also always guided by Thy words.

' A name of Krishna as the destroyer of Madhu, the demon.

• A gem secured by Vishpu at the churning of the ocean.

*Shangkha. * Chakra J Gada.

* A patch of white hair on the breast of Vishnu.

' The fourteen regions. * Lord Ordainer,

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

389• A gem secured by Vishpu at the churning of the ocean.

*Shangkha. * Chakra J Gada.

* A patch of white hair on the breast of Vishnu.

' The fourteen regions. * Lord Ordainer,

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

389

“ Isha,' it is under Thy orders that the sun travels in 
the sky, the wind blows auspioiously or inauspioiously, fire 
gives heat, and clouds pour rain.

“ Being I$hvara of all, what DevatA dost Thou contem¬ 
plate? This I cannot conceive; for as for myself I do not see 
a greater Devata than Thyself in the three worlds.”

“ O Noble-doer, I pray Thee, kindly tell me this, for 
Smriti says that great people seldom make a secret of 
anything.”

Hearing these words of Prajapati,* * Vishnu said : “ Be at¬ 
tentive; I shall tell you that which I have in my mind.”

** Although Devas, Asuras, and men know Thyself, My¬ 
self, and Mahadeva to be oreator, preserver, and destroyer, 
yet Thou, versed in the Veda, know that it is through 
Shakti that Thou art creator, I am preserver, and Mahadeva 
is destroyer.” *

“ In Thee exists the Rajasi Shakti who brings forth the 
world, in Myself the Sattvikf Shakti, who maintains the 
world, and in MahArudra the T&masI Shakti, who destroys 
the world."

“ Devoid of these Shaktis Thou art no longer Lord of 
creation, I am unable to maintain the world, and Mah&deva 
also is unable to destroy it.”

“ Vibhu,* both directly and indirectly we are always 
subject to that I^hvarl of all. O Noble-doer, listen to an 
instance of this.”

“It is true that in MahApralaya* I lie on Ananta as 
my couch, but even then I am oertainly dependent; for

1 Lord. Ordainer. * Brahma.

* And so the KubjikA Tantra says that it is not BrahmA, bat 
BrAhtnf, who creates ; it is not Vishnu, but Vaijhpavr, who preserves: 
it iB not Radra, bat Radranl, who destroys. Their hasbands are as 
inert as corpses.

4 Omnipresent Deva.

The great dissolution of things.

390

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA4 Omnipresent Deva.

The great dissolution of things.

390

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

subject to that Maha§hakti, I again awake at the proper 
time under the influence of Kfila.” 1

v ** It is under Her that I ever practise austerity and at 
times freely enjoy the company of Lakshml, and at tynes I 
am engaged in terrifio wars with Danavas—wars fearful to 
all Lok&s and oppressive to the beings therein.”

^ “ Knower of Dharma, of yore, in that one ocean, I fought 
a hand to hand fight for five thousand years. You saw that 
with Your own eyes.”

✓ “ It was through the grace of the Supreme Devi that 
I was able to kill the two wioked Danavas Madhu and 
Kaitabha, intoxicated by vanity and born of the dirt of 
my ears.”

✓ ‘ Did You not perceive even then that the Shakti 
aspect alone, supreme over the supreme, is the cause of all 
action ? Great Soul, who do You, then repeatedly ask about 
the matter ? ”

“ She is the cause of all causes, created by Whose will 
I, as Purusha, live in the one ocean and incarnate myself 
age after age as tortoise, boar, half-man, half-lion, dwarf, 
and the like.”

„“No one in the three worlds wishes to be born as a 
lower animal. I, too, did not of my own free will, take 
birth as a boar and as other lower animals.”

i/* Who will willingly take birth as a fish or the like, 
forsaking the blissful company of Lakshml in Vaikinjtba? 
What independent Purusha leaves a soft bed for the back 
of Garuda,* and proceeds to wage formidable wars with 
invincible Daityas ? ”

O birthless Deva, in ancient time, when the bow-string 
slipped in your presence, my head was severed and thrown 
off, no one knew where. At that time You cut off the head

1 Time.

’ The Bird-king, Vehicle (v&hana) of Vishpu.

391

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

of a horse and had it attached to my body by Yishvakarma, 
the great artisan.’’ 11 Time.

’ The Bird-king, Vehicle (v&hana) of Vishpu.

391

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

of a horse and had it attached to my body by Yishvakarma, 
the great artisan.’’ 1

J “ Since then I am known by the name of Hayagrlva, 
Lord of Lokas.* That incident You saw with Your own 
eyes. Had I been independent why should I have suffered 
so much trouble amongst the Lokas ? ” *

“ Know, therefore, that I am not independent, that I 
am in every way subject to Shakti, and that I always con¬ 
template that great Shakti. Lotus-born Deva, I do not 
know of any truth* superior to this."

Narada said: “ This was told by Vishiju to the lotus- 
born Deva. 0 great Muni, the lotus-born Deva subsequently 
told this truth* to me.”

“ Do you too, therefore, worship the lotus-feet of the 
Devi in your heart without misgiving, for the attainment 
of your object.”

Sadhaka, can anyone who has no bias as regards Shakti 
and no malice also as regards Vishnu, if chosen an arbiter, 
ever say, on seeing all this evidence drawn from the Shastra, 
that he who considers Shakti to be devoid of consciousness ‘ 
is a believer ? In all ages, and particularly in the Kali age, 
the career of religious revolution is indomitable. When 
Chaitanya-deva * deluged all Bengal with huge waves of 
the name of Hari, he observed that Brahmaija, Kshatriya, 
and Vai$hya families were on the verge of ruin. He thought

1 Hence Visbpu is called Hayagrlva (horse-faced one). The incident 
is related in Devi Bh&gavata. Vishpu fell asleep resting on his bow. 
BrahraA and others, wishing to awaken him, induced the white ants, 
called vamrls, to bite through the bow-string. The mighty bow was 
» released and cut off Yishpu's head, which was not found, and a horse's 
head was then joined to the body.

' The fourteen regions. See Introduction. ' Tattva.

* Jada. * The Yaishpava Saint of that name.

892

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' The fourteen regions. See Introduction. ' Tattva.

* Jada. * The Yaishpava Saint of that name.

892

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

that in the then state of sooiety full of Navashakha Shfldras, 1 
incompetent* * for either the Vaidik or Tantrik dharma, 
Harinam Sangklrtana * was the best Dharma, and conse¬ 
quently he preaohed that Dharma.

In those days, owing to the degeneration of Brahmanas 
in a society full of Shudras and of the lowest classes, such 
Pur&nas as Devl-bhagavata, Mahabhagavata, etc., in which 
the greatness of Shakti is established, ceased to be preached 
in Bengal. Moreover, owing to the steady increase of the 
lowest classes through the influence of the Kali age, only 
such Pur&nas and Sh&stra as are favourable exclusively to 
the preaching of the name of Hari, and mainly and elabo¬ 
rately describe the greatness of Vishnu amongst all Devas 
and Devls, began to be read, explained, recited, and so forth. 
Although the teachers * and Brahmanas of the country pro¬ 
ficient in Shastra were in many cases worshippers of the 
Shakti Mantra, most of them were yet dependent on Shudras 
for their living, so that in spite of their knowledge of the 
Shastras in which the greatness of Shakti is established, 
they dared not bring them forward to the publio notice for 
fear of thereby losing their means of livelihood.

Next, those who beoame Prabhus* upon the spread 
throughout the country of branches and sub-branches of the 
VCbaitanya * community, have from generation to generation 
shown extreme partiality towards one part of the Sh&stra, 
so that the inferences which they have drawn therefrom 
touch only that part of the Shastras, and are alone revered

1 Milkman, gardener, oilman, weaver, confectioner, betel-grower, 
potter, smith, and barber castes — middle-class §hQdra*, as opposed both 
to the highest class Kayasthas, etc., and the lowest class.

1 Adhikftra.

’ Singing Hari’s (Vishpu’s) name with music and dancing.1 Adhikftra.

’ Singing Hari’s (Vishpu’s) name with music and dancing.

Adhyftpakas. Gossains, or religious preceptors of Vaishpavaa.

* The Vaiahnava Saint of that name.

WHAT IS SHAKTI?

893

as essential troths within their own community. It is these 
one-sided inferences of the Prabhus which have brought 
ruin on Bengal. Ordinary Vaishnavas have been given to . 
understand that the Lord is the owner of Shakti and that 
Shakti is His servitress, so that they worship Radhika with 
artioles of food already offered to Shrlkrishfla. * 1 * * * At the 
present time the book Chandl, contained in the Markajjdeya 
Purftija, which describes the greatness of the Devi, is com¬ 
monly taken to be the Sh&stra in which Shakti stands 
supreme. The Prabhus, quoting it as their authority, say 
that as one of the names of Shakti is Vishnumaya, she must 
therefore be a great Vaishpavl.* It is thus because Shakti 
is considered to be a great Vaishijavl, that modern Vaishpa- 
vas do Shiva the favour of taking Him for a “ Spiritual 
brother.” Let Bhagavan judge their conduot. Here we 
shall merely discuss the Shastrik evidence, on which the 
notion that Bhagavatl is a great Vaishnavl is based.

It has been said in Chandi:

“ Under the influence of the Maham&y& of Bhagav&n, 
who preserves the sangs&ra, Jlvas fall into the pit of 
illusion,* with its eddies of * mineness.’ ”*

Do not, therefore, be astonished at this. Maham&yft 
is the Yoganidrft 5 of Hari, the Lord of the universe, and 
it is by Her that this world is charmed.

44 That Dev! Bhagavatl Mahamaya forcibly draws the 
mental faculties of even the wise and gives them over to 
illusion.”"

1 Literally, leavings of food partaken by ^hrlkp^hpa.

1 Worshipper of Viahpu. * Moha.

‘ Mamata (egoism). ' Sleep of Yoga of i?hvara.

' Moha ; and so also the K&likA Purina states that the Dev! leads

men into confusion, egoism, sensual desire, etc. She is the Bewilderer‘ Mamata (egoism). ' Sleep of Yoga of i?hvara.

' Moha ; and so also the K&likA Purina states that the Dev! leads

men into confusion, egoism, sensual desire, etc. She is the Bewilderer

(sarvamohinl) (Lalita Sahas ran <\m a, verse 137), bewildering the world 
with Her m&ya f Karma Por&pa).

394

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

By Her is created this world, consisting of things 
moving and non-moving, and She alone, when so pleased, 
is the dispenser of blessings and gives salvation to Jlva.

“That eternal (Supreme) Vidya* is both the cause of 
salvation, and the cause of Jlvas’ bondage in Sangs&ra. 
She is the Ishvarl of the Ishvaras of all.”*

The Vaishnava Prabhus here say that the two adjec¬ 
tival expressions, “The Yoganidra of the Lord of the 
Universe” and “The Mahamaya of Hari,” prove beyond 
doubt the subordination of Mahamaya or Shakti to Hari, 
otherwise, “ Why,” they argue, “ should Shastra call Her the 
Mahamaya of Hari or the Yoganidra of the Lord of the 
Universe ? ” What is known through another is surely 
subordinate to that other; as, for instance, expressions such 
as man s sleep, man's intelligence, and man's power indicate 
sleep, intelligence, and power subordinate to man.We shall subsequently refer to the §hastrik interpreta¬ 
tions and inferences regarding the points in issue. Here 
it is merely necessary to understand whether Bhagavan’s 
Yoganidra is a thing similar to your or my nidra.' As¬ 
suming, for argument, that Yoganidra is nothing but the 
nidra$hakti 4 subordinate to Bhagavan: the question still 
remains, why, in the chapter relating to the destruction of 
Madhu and Kaitabha, and in which the power of Yoganidra 
has been described, Brahma, seated on the navel-lotus of 
Bhagavan, is said to have prayed to Nidra instead of to 
Vishnu for Vishqu’s awakening ? Who is there in the world 
so foolish as to pray to Bleep, a thing unconscious, instead 
of to the sleeping conscious person for his awakening? 
Again, the killing of Madhu and Kaitabha by Bhagavan 
redounds to the glory of Bhagavan alone. But why, when 
about to relate the greatness of Shakti in the Chandl, does

The Devi (see Introduction). * Lord of ail Lords.

Sleep- ' Power of sleep.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

395

Marka^ideya, the great $ishi, first of all speak of the great¬ 
ness of Vishpu as illustrated by the killing of Madhu and 
Kaitabha ?Sleep- ' Power of sleep.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

395

Marka^ideya, the great $ishi, first of all speak of the great¬ 
ness of Vishpu as illustrated by the killing of Madhu and 
Kaitabha ?

We deem it a sin even to believe that anything said 
by the great Rishi, Markandeya, can be tainted with the 
vfault of superfluity. What, then, is the right solution of 
these questions? Some interpreters of the Cha 9 <Jl have, 
with the objeot of arriving at that solution, devised forced 
meanings of the $hlokas concerned, and by their means 
endeavoured to establish the greatness of Shakti. But we 
say that a solution arrived at through forced meanings of 
ithe words of Sh&stra can never be a right solution. Again, 
[what danger has there appeared which is so great that the 
unsuspeoting world must be deceived with forced inter¬ 
pretations of the words of Sh&stra ? What does it matter 
to you or to me 'if, according to Shastra, Vishnu becomes 
supreme and Shakti His subordinate ? In reality, what the 
interpreters consider to be a danger is none at all, but rather 
a blessing. None can become subordinate or supreme. What 
one is, one remains. Only you and I, through the perversity 
of our intellects, ascribe to Devatas the states of superiority 
and subordination to which we ourselves are subject, and, 
being thus unable to perceive the subtle Sh&strik truth, 1 
we go down to perdition. The Shakti-tattva made of m&yft, 
with which you and I are acquainted, is not the same thing 
as the §hakti-tattva superior to m&yfi. whioh belongs to 
Bhagavan. The sleep consisting of delusion 1 and maya, 
which we know of, is not the same thing as Bhagavan’s 
sleep, whioh consists of constant consciousness. Just as 
you and I are overpowered by sleep, so your and my sleep 
is also corrupted by the corruption of non-conscious gross 
matter.* But when Bhagav&n is overpowered by sleep, His

1 Tattva.

’ Moha.

*Ja^a.

396

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Tattva.

’ Moha.

*Ja^a.

396

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

iyoganidr& is that great Shakti which is ever awake and full 
Jof light. 1 When a Jlva sleeps his imperfeot sleep, another 
can awaken him by any means; for any sharp contact with 
sound, touch, etc., causes the Jlva’s senses to ruffle the 
imperfect power of sleep and to awaken him by his own 
consciousness; thus you and I can awaken a Bleeping person 
by oalling or pushing him.

But not so with Bhagav&n. He possesses all ?haktis. 
No $hakti in Him is imperfeot. For this reason, while Jlva’s 
sleep is sleep, Ishvara's sleep is yoganidra. Your and my 
m&y& is called simply m&y&. But his may& is called yoga- 
raaya. You or I can, at the utmost, be a yogi, but Bhaga¬ 
v&n is the Ishvara of all yogas, and so His Shakti is Ishvari 
of the Ishvara of all yogas. A Jlva can rarely acquire 
an infinitesimal part of that §hakti by dint of yoga, but 
that shakti is eternally present in Bhagavan. Jlva is im¬ 
perfect ; so Jlva’s shakti also is imperfect. Bhagavan is 
perfect; so His Shakti also is perfect. Jiva is constituted 
mainly of the inert* principle ; and so Jlva’s shakti is also 
predominated by the same principle. Bhagav&n is made of 
consciousness; so His Shakti also is made of consciousness. 
Your or my ?hakti of sleep is constituted of the inert prin¬ 
ciple, but Bhagav&n's Shakti of sleep is constituted of the 
conscious principle.

Even when He is asleep, He remains awake; for while 
your or my sleep is merely constituted of the tamas guna, 
His sleep is superior to tamas gu^a, although constituted 
of it. For this reason, at the time of the great dissolution * 
the Mother of the universe assumes the aspect of sleep; 
and, taking on Her lap all Her sons and daughters from 
Brahma, Vishiju and Mahe?hvara downwards, inhabiting 
the innumerable crores of Brahm&ij<Jas, She puts them all

1 Jyotih.

* Ja<Ja.

' M&h&pralaya.

WHAT IS 8HAKTI ?

3971 Jyotih.

* Ja<Ja.

' M&h&pralaya.

WHAT IS 8HAKTI ?

397

to sleep. But She who is existence, consciousness, and 
bliss, a«d supports the universe, Herself remains awake. 
When, after a whole day’s play, the son stands before the 
mother in the evening, with a weary body, she at once takes 
him on her lap and removes the weariness by putting him 
to sleep. It is this subject 1 which has been so well depicted 
in the illuminating story of the killing of Madhu and Kaita- 
bha. After the great dissolution* when the world remains 
immersed in the one ocean, Bhagavan sleeps in Yoganidra 
to the close of ages, shutting his eyes and lying on Ananta 
in the midst of that mass of water which deluges the 
Brahmand&$.

Vishnu is the preserver of the world. Whom will 
He preserve when the great dissolution * is accom¬ 
plished ? When there will be creation again, then there 
will be necessity for preservation. The long period in¬ 
tervening is the time for Vishnu’s rest. Vishnu plays 
till the arrival of the great dissolution, and instantly the 
son’s play is ended the Mother lays Him on the bed of 
rest and puts him to deep sleep. Unlike other mothers, 
She has to make no effort in order to put the son to sleep. 
The universe-pervading Devi is Herself in one aspect sleep. 
In proper time She appears in that aspect, and lays Bhaga¬ 
van on Her lap. He cannot, therefore, be awakened by 
being called like other sleeping persons. He can rise only 
when the Devi, who appears as sleep, frees Him from Her 
own t&inasik bonds. When therefore, Bhagavan Brahma 
failed to break Vishnu’s sleep by all manner of prayer, 
entreaty, eto., He understood that that sleep, which was in 
reality consciousness, was not ordinary sleep. Perceiving 
that the mercy of Yoganidra, the Mother of the world, 
could alone save Him, he began to praise Her. From the

1 Tattva.

’ Mah&pralaya.

898

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Tattva.

’ Mah&pralaya.

898

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

very faot that all the prayers, entreaties, loud calls, and 
the like, of Brahma, with His four mouths, could not break 
Vishnu’s sleep, it must be understood that sleep was not 
subordinate to Vishnu, but Vishnu was subordinate to 
sleep. Had it been Vishpu’s sleep, it would have been 
easily broken; but it was sleep’s Vishnu, and, therefore the 
sleep did not break.

Again, in the place where Bhagav&n is described as 
being tired with fighting with Madhu and Kaitabha, 
Shastra says:

“ Charmed by Mahftmftyft, those two Daityas, maddened 
with the pride of their great strength, requested Keshava 1 
to ask for some blessing from them.” What kind of thing 
was that charming by Mahamayfl ? The Chandl does not 
particularly relate when and how She charmed the Asuras, 
and why the two Daityas also all at once asked Bhagavan 
to seek a blessing from them. In fact, although the great¬ 
ness of the Devi has been described in the Chandl, the 
description is very short. We cannot, therefore, get a correct 
answer to these intricate questions from the Chandl itself. 
For this reason we shall quote from the Devl-Bhagavata 
the relevant portions of the account which it gives of the 
killing of Madhu and Kaitabha. Seekers of truth will 
know from them the deep mystery which surrounds the 
story of the killing of Madhu and Kaitabha and free their 
minds from doubts.

When, after having performed severe austerities for a 
thousand years, and having received, on that account, the 
blessing of death-at-will 1 from the Devi, Madhu and Kai¬ 
tabha advanced to fight with Brahma in order to wrest from

1 Viahna.

* Death only when desired.

WHAT IS SHAKTI?

399

Him His lotus-seat; Brahmft prayed to Vishnu in great fear, 
but failed to awaken Him. Here Sh&stra says:1 Viahna.

* Death only when desired.

WHAT IS SHAKTI?

399

Him His lotus-seat; Brahmft prayed to Vishnu in great fear, 
but failed to awaken Him. Here Sh&stra says:

“ Seeing that all His prayers were of no avail in awak¬ 
ening Bhagavan Hari, who was lying under the influence of 
Yoganidrfi,, Brahma thought to himself that Vishnu was 
surely sleeping under the influence of that Mah&shakti. 
What will my sorrow avail, when the Founder of Dharma 1 
Himself will not awake at this crisis of Adharma? :

“ The two Danavas, puffed up with pride, have come 
with the object of killing me. What shall I do—where 
shall I go ? There is none to save me.” Revolving this 
in His mind, Brahma decided and resolved to pray to 
Yoganidra with unswerving devotion. He considered in 
His mind that in the insurmountable danger which faced 
Him at the time, Mahfishakti alone could save Him ; that 
Mahashakti, under whose influence even Vishnu, whose 
substance was eternal consciousness, lay deprived of the 
power of movement.

“ Just as a dead man does not perceive sound and other 
qualities of the things of the world, so Hari also, with 
eyes closed in sleep, does not perceive the prayers that I 
am making to Him." “ When, in spite of my many and 
earnest prayers, He does not shake off His sleep, I know 
of a certainty that sleep is not under His control, but that 
He is under the control of sleep. He who is under the 
oontrol of another is surely that other’s servant. This 
Yoganidrft is, therefore, mistress over even Bhagavftn Hari, 
husband of LakshmI.”

(It is not only that Bhagavan Vishnu is under the power 
of Parameshvari in Her full aspect, but He is also under 
the power of Her partial incarnation.) “ He is always 
bound in love to even LakshmI, the daughter of Ocean, and 
under Her control.”

1 Righteousness.

’ Unrighteousness.

400

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Righteousness.

’ Unrighteousness.

400

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ It is therefore oertain that Bhagavatl, in Heraspeot of 
Shakti, thus holds the entire universe under Her control. 
There is not the least doubt that myself, Vishnu, Shambhu, 
S&vitrl, Rama, and Uma—everyone of us — is under the 
control of that Ishvar! of all: under Whose influence even 
Bhagavftn Hari sleeps like an ordinary mortal without 
control over His limbs. What wonder, then, that under Her 
influence all other great persons should remain charmed ? 
I shall to-day please, by means of prayers, that Yoganidra 
by whom, when released, Janardana Vasudeva 1 will engage 
in war.” Having thus determined, Bhagavan Brahma began 
to pray, from His place on the stem of Vishnu’s navel-lotus, 
v4jO Yoganidra in Narayana’s body.

Brahma said: “ Mother, all that the Vedas say has taught 
me that Thou, O Devi, art the sole cause of this phenomenal 
world; wherefore even Purushottama* Vishnu, who awakens 
all worlds, is to-day lying asleep under Thy influence. 
Dweller in all things, Mother, Thou art above gunas. Who 
is so wise amongst the millions of Devas as to certainly 
know that whioh is the free play of illusion caused by Thee ?

I am in every way ignorant in the matter, and N&rftyana 
here sleeps without control over Himself. The person whom 
followers of the Sangkhya Philosophy call Purusha, whose 
substance is consciousness, is admitted by them to be also 
Prakriti, the Creatrix of the world devoid of consciousness.* 
Art Thou really suoh Prakpti? Otherwise, why should 
Nir&yana, the seat of all consciousness in the world, be to-day 
made unconscious by Thee ? (Unless the Mother be uncon¬ 
scious, how can She bear the sight of such misery of Her

Viflbyu. s Tho best of Parashas.Viflbyu. s Tho best of Parashas.

Sangkhya distinguishes between Purusha and Prakriti. But 
probably Brabmft. the speaker, here means to say that Prakriti and 
Purusha are really one. and not two. and it is that one whom the 
Sangkhya Philosophy sees in two aspects, at one time as full of con¬ 
sciousness, and again as devoid of consciousness.

401

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

#

son ?) Bhavftnl, with Thy gunas, Thou art making all manner 
of play. 1 Who has the power to know the process of this 
yoga of creation practised by Thee whom munis thrice daily 
contemplate under the name Sandhyil with all gunas ? 
Mother, Thou art intelligence, which is the source of all 
knowledge in the three worlds. Devi, Thou art Lakshml, 
who ever grants happiness to Suras,* * and glory (intelligence, 
patience, beauty, reverence) and love in the hearts of all 
beings in the three worlds.* Thinking even in a hundred 
ways on the present state of my sorrow and suffering, I find 
nothing more strongly proved than this, that Thou art the 
Genetrix of all the world; otherwise who but the Mother of 
Brahma and others, and the Genetrix of the Brahmanda, 
can put to sleep the son who is all full of Brahman ?* Devi, 
withdraw Thyself from the limbs of N&rayajia and assume 
a wonderful form. Sportful as Thou art, like a child (Thy 
sport is sport of will like that of children) Thou canst do 
whatever Thou likest. Do Thou kill me or these two Daityas. 
And if Thou wilt not kill them Thyself, awaken Hari, who, 
when awake, will kill them. Whether Thou Thyself killest 
or by means of Vishnu, in both cases the work will be 
Thine alone.”

Suta said: “ Thus prayed to by Brahmft in the waters 
of the one ocean that Devi whose substance was the tamas 
guna,* withdrew Herself from all the limbs of Vishpu of 
incomparable brilliance, in order to destroy the two Daityas. 
Assuming a charming form. She stood beside Bhagavan.

1 N&tya. * Devas.1 N&tya. * Devas.

* And so also the Gita says Klrttih shrlrv&k cha nflrln&m smritir- 
medhfl dhritih kshamft.

* The son all full of Brahman is Vishnu under the influence of yoga- 
nidrft. Brahma is here saying that this Yoganidra must be the mother 
of Brahma. Vishpu, and Maheshvara. for who but this mother can put 
Vishnu to sleep ? The Mother alone can put the son to sleep.

' Sleep.

26

402

PRINCIPLES OF T^ANTRA

Upon the Devi withdrawing Herself from Bbagav&n’s 
body, it moved. Seeing N&r&yana regaining consciousness, 
Vidhata 1 was greatly satisfied.”

Again, the following appears in the eighth chapter in 
connection with the fight with Madhu and Kaitabha:

“ When full five thousand years had passed in the fight, 
Nar&yana bethought himself how their death might be 
oaused. ‘Five thousand years have I fought. It is a 
wonder to me that although I feel tired, these formidable 
Danavas are not at all wearied. Where are gone my strength 
and prowess in this fight ? And why do they fully retain 
their strength ? What is the cause of this ? Let me think 
upon it.’ Seeing N&r&yana thus immersed in thought, the two 
Daityas, intoxicated with vanity, became overwhelmed with 
joy, and said, with voices deep as the rumbling of clouds:

‘“Vishnu, if you have no strength left in you, if the 
fight has wearied you out, join the palms of your hands, 
and, putting them on your head, say: “ Surely do I become 
your slave.” Otherwise, if you are capable, fight with us, so 
that we may first kill you, and next this four-headed one.’ ”

Sflta said: “Hearing these words spoken by them in 
that vast ocean, Vishnu, of mighty intellect, and wise to 
conciliate, gently spoke.”Sflta said: “Hearing these words spoken by them in 
that vast ocean, Vishnu, of mighty intellect, and wise to 
conciliate, gently spoke.”

Hari said: “ It is the San&tana Pharma* of heroes not 
to strike anyone who is wearied or is afraid, or has given 
up arms, or has fallen down, or is young in age. Besides 
this, for five thousand years I have fought singly with 
yon two brothers, who are both equally powerful. You 
have alternately taken rest. But from beginning to end 
I have fought singly, so that I shall first take as much 
rest as you have done, and then fight with you. Although 
you are strong and intoxicated with pride, you are in justice

‘ Brahmil.

' The immutable doty.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

408

bound to wait so long as I take my rest. And after rest I 
too shall, as in justice bound, engage in fight with you.”‘ Brahmil.

' The immutable doty.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

408

bound to wait so long as I take my rest. And after rest I 
too shall, as in justice bound, engage in fight with you.”

Sflta said: “ Hearing these words uttered by Bhagav&n, 
the two Danavas became assured, and, being resolved on 
fighting, sat at a distance from the field of battle. Seeing 
the Daityas sitting at a considerable distance, Vftsudeva 
began to think to himself how their death might be caused. 
In meditation Bhagavftn, the Dweller in all things, came to 
know that Devi had given them the blessing of death-at- 
will, and, consequently, the hard labour of fighting could not 
weary them. He thought: Uselessly have I fought so long, 
useless has become my labour, and now that I have for cer¬ 
tain known the truth, how can I fight with them? But if I 
do not fight, how will these two Danava^, puffed up with 
the blessing which they have received, and who are the 
source of constant trouble to Deva«, be destroyed ? The 
blessing which Bhagavatl has granted to them is but little 
likely to be fulfilled; for even they who have most cause for 
grief do not willingly court death. 1 When even the diseased 
and poverty-stricken do not desire to die, why should these 
two Asuras, in the intoxication of pride, court death willingly? 
However that may be, I shall to-day seek the protection of 
Mahavidyfi who is Sbakti and fulfiller of all desires; for, un¬ 
less She is pleased, no desire can be fulfilled.” As He thus 
thought, Bhagav&n Vishnu saw Yoganidrfi, the consort of 
Shiva, appear in a charming form in the sky. There¬ 
upon, almighty Narayana, the master of yoga, began to 
pray with joined hands to that Ishvari of the world, the 
dispenser of blessings, for the destruction of the two Asuras.

Vishnu said: “ I bow to Thee, O Devi, Chandl Mah&- 
maya, Thou who hast no beginning and no end, who dostVishnu said: “ I bow to Thee, O Devi, Chandl Mah&- 
maya, Thou who hast no beginning and no end, who dost

1 The blessing is death-at-will, and as no one desires death there is 
no likelihood of this blessing being fulfilled—that is to say, of their 
death, which depends on their will, occurring.

404

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

create, preserve, and destroy, who grantest both enjoy¬ 
ment and salvation, and who art the consort of Shiva. 
Devi, I know neither your form with attribute, 1 nor your 
attributeless * aspect.

“ How can I, therefore, know the innumerable forms 
under which Thou appearest? Although it is impossible 
for me to gauge your power, this much at least I know, 
that I slept and was unconscious under Thy influence. I 
could not awaken, though repeatedly and assiduously sum¬ 
moned by Brahma. Mother, because my five senses of 
knowledge, and my mind, contracted under Thy influence, 
I became wholly unconscious. I awoke only when I was 
released by Thee, and after that I have fought much. This 
long fight has tired me, but failed to tire these two Asuras 
whom your blessing has made great heroes. When the 
D&navas, intoxicated with pride, came to kill Brahma, I 
challenged them in fight in any fashion they might choose. 
Since then I have fought hard with them in this vast ocean.“ But, O Giver of honour, who can dishonour those 
whom Thou hast honoured ? When, after five thousand years 
of fight, I saw that they neither desisted nor were tired, 
then I came to know that Thou hadst granted them a 
wonderful blessing in the matter of death. Knowing this, 
I seek the protection of Her who protects all who are 
helpless. Mother, in the long fight I have become tired. 
O Destroyer of the foes of Devas, help me in the work of 
the Devas. Through haughtiness caused by the blessing 
granted by Thee, the two Asuras, who are incarnations 
of sin, have now become ready to kill me. Mother, what 
shall I do now, where shall I go (but seek Thy protection 
in this great peril)?" Thus addressed, the Devi smiled, 
and Baid to the bowing Lord of the world: “ V&sudeva, 
these two heroes can be deceived and then killed. Narayapa,

* Nirguna.

1 Saguna.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ?

405

I shall charm them with arch glances. Thus charmed by 
my m&y& you shall, O N&raya^a, soon destroy them.”

Sata said: “ Hearing these loving words of the Devi, 
Bhagavan reappeared in the field of battle in the midst of 
that vast ocean. Then, those two composed and mightily 
powerful heroes came to the same place and were delighted 
to see that Vishnu had already arrived there. They said : 
* 0 high-aspiring one, stay (we are two-armed), but you are 
four-armed. Still take the field of battle, knowing for 
certain that victory and defeat depend on fate. The strong 
ever win, but the weak also do sometimes win by chance. 
Wise persons should, therefore, indulge in neither joy nor 
grief in these matters. Enemy of Danavas, many Daityas 
have, in former times, been defeated by Thee. But now, 
fighting with us, you are defeated.’ ”Sata said : “ Seeing that the two long-armed Danava^ 
who had thus spoken were prepared for fight, Vishiju, with 
wondrous skill, dealt blows on them with his fists. They 
also, intoxicated by their great strength, began to strike 
Bhagav&n with their fists. Thus they waged terrible war 
with each other. Seeing the powerful Danavas thus en¬ 
gaged in fighting, Nftrayaija, with a pained look, cast his 
gaze upon the Devi’s face.”

Sata said: “ Seeing Vishiiu thus looking pained and 
pitiable, the Devi (whose three eyes were like the morning 
sun) deeply reddened them, and, glancing at the two 
Asuras, laughed. Then, smiling softly, she pierced their 
hearts with arch glances, which spoke of feelings of love 
and desire, and were as the five arrows of Kama. 1 Sorely 
struck by the arrows of desire, the two sinful Danavas, 
thinking that the arch glances of the Devi meant favour 
to them, were charmed. They stood motionless, regarding 
the transparent beauty of the Devi. Visbgu, too, who

1 Deva of Love.

406

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

knows the purpose of every action, understood the Devi's 
object, and perceiving that the Danavaa were charmed, 
smiled and sweetly said, with a voice which sounded like 
the rumbling of clouds: ‘Heroes, I have been much pleased 
with your fighting. Ask for any blessing which you may 
desire and I shall grant it. Formerly, I have seen many 
Danavas fighting; but I have neither seen nor heard of any 
Danava who can fight as you have done. I am, therefore, 
greatly pleased at the incomparable strength of arms pos¬ 
sessed by you two brothers, and am ready to grant you any 
blessing which you may desire.’ ”Suta said : “ The two Daityas, who were overcome by 
lust, at the sight of Mahamaya, in whom all the world 
find delight, said, their vanity being wounded by Vishnu's 
words: 4 Hari, what is it that you desire to give us ? We 
are not beggars, rather we are ready to give to you. Know 
us to be givers and not beggars. Hrishlke$ha,' ask for 
whatever blessing you may desire. Vftsudeva, we too have 
been pleased with your admirable fighting.' Hearing these 
words, Jan&rdana 1 said in reply: 4 If you have been pleased, 
grant me to-day this blessing that you be killed by me.' ”

Stlta said: “ Hearing these words of Vishiju the two 
Ddnavas became extremely astonished and, thinking them¬ 
selves to have been deceived, were grieved at heart. Then, 
seeing all the world full of water and destitute of land, they 
bethought themselves, and said to Vishnu : 4 Lord of Devas, 
Janardana Hari, you are truthful, therefore grant us now 
the blessing desired of us, which you promised us but a 
while ago; kill us in some extensive place where there is 
no water. We have kept our promise by being willing to 
be killed by you, and now you too keep your promise and be 
truthful.’ Remembering His Sudarsha^a chakra,’ Bhagavan

Vishpu. * Sudharshana ia the name of the weapon (chakra

or dtacne) of Viahiju, and means of good appearance.

WHAT IS SHAKTI?

407Vishpu. * Sudharshana ia the name of the weapon (chakra

or dtacne) of Viahiju, and means of good appearance.

WHAT IS SHAKTI?

407

Vishnu smiled and said: ‘High-favoured D&navas, I 
accept your proposal, and shall kill you in an extensive 
place where there is no water.’ So saying, the Lord of 
Devas extended His thighs and displayed them as a water¬ 
less place above the waters of that vast ocean, saying to 
the two Danavas ; * Here there is no water; lay your heads 
upon them so that I may keep my word and you too may 
keep yours.’ Hearing these words of Bhagavan in keeping 
with His promise, the two Daityas devised a plan in their 
minds and extended their bodies to an extent of one thou¬ 
sand yojanas 1 each. Seeing this, Bhagavfin also extended 
His thighs to double those dimensions. Madhu and Kaitabha 
were astonished at seeing such inconceivable power of maya 
possessed by Narayaga, in whom all maya is seated, and 
laid their heads on the two wonderfully extended thighs of 
Bhagavan. Thereupon Vishnu of great prowess, rapidly 
severed with His Sudarshana chakra, the great heads of the 
two Daityas lying upon His thighs. Thus the two Daityas 
died, and the mass of fat which was emitted from their 
bodies covered the whole surface of the ocean. Because of 
this, the earth is everywhere known as medinl, and for the 
same reason (that is to say) because formed in mixture 
with that mass of fat soil is unfit for eating.

“ Great Munis, what you asked me I have related truly 
and precisely. Wise men should worship Mahamftyft, who is 
also Mah&vidyft. She is Paramft Shakti, who Suras and Asuras 
and all worship. There is no truth* higher than this in the 
three worlds. This is the truth, the truth, and the truth 
again. This is the spiritual truth which the Veda Sh&stra 
establishes. Worshipful is that Param& Shakti, whether 
in Her form with attribute or in Her attributeless aspect.”

1 A yojana is about eight mile6.

* Tattva.

CHAPTER VIII1 A yojana is about eight mile6.

* Tattva.

CHAPTER VIII

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

In the case of the ordinary followers of the theories that 
Shakti is unconscious or that She is a great Vaishnavl, we 
entrust judgment upon their opinions to the Sadhakas of 
these communities respectively. 1 Let them consider whether 
the above two classes adopt their respective conclusions 
because there is Sh&strik evidence in their support, or 
because of their inability to enter into the deep and weighty 
truth which the Sh&stra reveals in the §hlokas above quoted, 
or because they have not seen or heard of all this Shastrik 
evidence, or lastly because, even if they have so seen or 
heard it, they do not, through vanity, care to take note of 
it. The above-quoted Shfistrik evidence proves that Shakti- 
tattva is divided into two parts—first, mftya.shakti, that 
is, Shakti whose substance is gupas, and second, chit- 
$hakti, which is above gupas, and is massive bliss. By 
m&y&§hakti has this vast and variegated drama of sangsara 
been composed. In this drama chit$hakti appears as 
Purusha and Prakpti who, though free from all attachment 
in their real aspects, as Jivas perform this vast Brahtnairfa 
play. Giving birth to all things from Brahma, Vishpu, and

* That is, the Sadhakas of the same communities to which these 
theorists belong are a superior order of men, not likely to be swayed 
by such foolish ideas. To their judgment, therefore, the question may 
be safely left. The theorists are those who form the bulk of the 
Nastika nnd \ aishnava communities. Nastika as here used means 
a person who thinks that Shakti is unconscious.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

409WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

409

Maheshvara, to the minutest insect, and spreading the mani¬ 
festations 1 of Herself both as gross and intelligent sub¬ 
stance,* * She pervades the world. If you and I were to 
understand the Mother’s maya, which charms the minds of 
even munis, with whom will that Anandamayi play the play 
of the unoonsoious world? Blind man! should you be proud 
of your philosophical knowledge? False devotee! If, in 
spite of your being an enemy of Shaktas* you deem yourself 
to be a learned devotee, it is not the glory of the Shastra 
which will be in any way dimmed, but it is you who will 
be liable to punishment. You and I may hate or be 
malicious towards Shaktas and yet not consider ourselves 
sinners, but Hirapyagarbha Brahma 4 becomes a Shakta, 
and says:

“ 0 Thou who art all things, how canst Thy greatness 
be hymned * when Thou art the Shakti in everything, asat or 
sat,' which is anywhere in the world ? Who can hymn Thee 
by whom even Bhagav&n, the creator, preserver, and des¬ 
troyer of the world, has been overcome through sleep ? 
From Thee, Vishiju, Myself, and I§hana' have derived our 
bodies. Who is, therefore, capable of making hymn to 
Thee who art the origin of even Brahma and others? Devi 
of unspeakable power, Thy own vast powers be praised: 
and do Thou oharm these two indomitable Asuras, Madhu 
and Kaitabha.”

Again, Vishnu says: “ Devi, I know not any form in 
which Thou appeareth, be it with attribute or attributeless. 
How, then, can I know the innumerable aspects of Her of 
whose form even I am ignorant ? ”

1 Vibhati. 1 Jada and chaitanya. 1 Worshippers of Shakti.

* BrahmS, who sprang from the effulgent or golden womb.

' Stava or hymn in which the powers and doings of the Deity- 
adored are lauded.

' That is, jada or chaitanya (ante).

* §hiva.

410

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Stava or hymn in which the powers and doings of the Deity- 
adored are lauded.

' That is, jada or chaitanya (ante).

* §hiva.

410

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

After the war with Mahishiisura all Devaa, descendants 
of Devaa, and Maharshis 1 stood before K&tyfty&nl, who 
visibly appeared to them, and said :

“ We bow with reverence to the lotus feet, worshipped 
of all Devas and Maharshis, of the Mother who has 
assumed form by the withdrawal of all the Shaktis from 
the bodies of Devas, and who has, by Her own Shakti, 
created this world consisting of things moving and non- 
moving. May She grant us good things! May Chandika, 
whose incomparable power and strength even Bhagavan, 
Ananta, Brahma, and Malie§hvara are unable to describe, 
resolve to maintain all this world and destroy pernicious 
fear! Mother of the world! Thou art the cause of all this 
world, but still Thou containeth three gunas. (From Brahma 
to Brahmaijda) everything is covered with these gui?as, so that 
not even Hari, Hara, and others are able to penetrate this 
covering and know Thy true reality. For Thy greatness is 
unfathomable. Thou art the shelter of all things. All this 
world is derived from a part* * of Thee (and yet Thou art above 
this world). Thou art unchanged,* primal, Supreme Prakriti.”

Advocate of the theory that Shakti is unconscious gross 
matter or force ! * 0 man ! blundering Jlva as you are, will 
not your tongue become void of strength before it enounces 
your conclusions that that Shakti is unconscious* whose 
nature even Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara have des¬ 
cribed to be indefinable and beyond the reach of mind and 
speech ? By constantly thinking of Prakfiti-tattva as “ Prak- 
fiti of the world ” your mind has become void of under¬ 
standing,* and so to-day you dare call Mah&prakfiti gross

1 Groat Qishis.

* That is, God, though in the world, is yet more than the world.1 Groat Qishis.

* That is, God, though in the world, is yet more than the world.

' Avikrita: that is, Prakriti in the state in which no vik&ra (change) 
has occurred as opposed to the evolving Btate of Prakriti.

* Jada. * Lit.: “ become ja^a."

411

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd.)

unconscious matter *, who is Herself existence, conscious¬ 
ness, and bliss. But have you ever considered Prakfiti- 
tattva in the light that “ the world is of Prakriti ” instead 
of Prakriti being of the world ? Had you done that you 
would not have fallen into such a gross blunder as to 
the true nature of prakriti. Leaviug aside philosophical 
theorems,* if your knowledge extends to even the root mean¬ 
ings of words, I ask you, do the expressions ** Prakrita- 
tattva ” and “ Prakrita-tathyam ” * which you are wont 
to use, signify things false ? Or do they signify things 
true ? If the meaning of Prakfita be “ not true,” what will 
you call Vikrita ? * In the SangsQra there are two things# 
one Prakriti, and another Vikriti. That which is instinct 
with Prakriti is Prakrita, and the rest Vikrita. Leaving 
out of consideration differences of gender due to suffixes, 
Prakriti and prakara * are one and the same thing. What is 
one’s svarQpa * is one's prak&ra; as, for instance, the ex¬ 
pression “ Of what prakara is such and such a thing ? ” 
means “ what is its svarupa ? ” SvarQpa is nothing but 
another name for Prakriti. For this reason, to explain a 
thing as what it is, an idea of its Prakriti has to be given. 
In common parlance, therefore, what is a thing's Prakriti 
is called that thing's svabhava. 7 Analyzing the word 
svabh&va we get sva, signifying self, and bhava, signifying 
substance, 1 * * 4 SvarQpa, Prakriti, or Shakti. In conclusion! 
therefore, that which is the SvarQpa of Self is svabh&va or 
Prakriti. Now, tell me, O philosophical advocate of the 
theory that Shakti is unconscious, 1 is Brahman's Brahma- 
hood, Shakti, Prakriti, or SvarQpa false ? If not, on what1 Ja$a. * Tattva. * Real truth.

* Untrue ; that which is changed, transformed, or, os it is some¬

times said, corrupted. ' Kind ; nature.

4 Own form ; whnt a thing or person really is. The thing or person 
in itself or himself. r Own nature. * Sattvn.

412

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

authority do you call Shakti unconscious? 1 Brahman of 
eternal consciousness is, as you say, truth in substance.* 
Unless Shakti be false, it can never be separate from 
Brahman who is truth in substance; and unless it be some¬ 
thing separate from Brahman, who is all consciousness, it 
can never be called unconscious. 1 The ultimate conclusion, 
therefore, of this theory is that it is the svarQpa tattva of 
Brahman who is all consciousness which is unconscious. 1 
Philosopher! praised be your knowledge of Shakti! Wonder¬ 
ful is your faith in the Supreme! It is from seeing and 
hearing all this that a Sadhaka has said: “ Who knows 
that Kali, the dar$hana* of whom the six Darshanaa 4 do 
not obtain ? ”

It is by trying to understand Prakpti-tattva, according 
to the notion that “ Prakriti is of the world,” that Char- 
vftkas* have become sceptics. Different is the method of 
understanding for the faithful.

The faithful will understand that Prakriti is not of the 
world, but the world is of Prakriti.The faithful will understand that Prakriti is not of the 
world, but the world is of Prakriti.

The expression “ Prakriti of the world ” conveys no 
idea to a man; for the world is of infinite extent and 
destined to last till the end of the Kalpa,* while the longest 
stretch of longevity for man is one lakh of years. 1 And he, 
although superior to all other worldly Jlvas, is yet liable 
to mistakes and blunders. The only wealth of man is his 
little intelligence and he is, moreover, oppressed by hunger, 
and thirst, boyhood, youth, and age, disease, sorrow, and 
fear. For man to judge of the substance of the Brahm&gd& 
is tantamount to the acquisition of a thorough knowledge 
of the sea by a shallojv-water fish (that is to say, both 
are equally impossible). An Aryyan Sadhaka desiring to

1 Imla. 1 Satyasvarupa. 1 Sight. * Systems of Philosophy.

Followers of the atheist Ch&rr&ka. ' See poet. ' 100,000.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

4131 Imla. 1 Satyasvarupa. 1 Sight. * Systems of Philosophy.

Followers of the atheist Ch&rr&ka. ' See poet. ' 100,000.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

413

understand the Prakriti-tattva of the world will have to be¬ 
come a slave of the Mother of the world instead of the world 
itself. He must adore Her world-embracing form by seeing 
Her reflection in the mirror of the Sh&stra. He must form 
an idea of the appearance of the son by seeing the appear¬ 
ance of the mother; to know the truth 1 concerning the 
Brahm&nda by sinking into the self of Brahmamayi. Those 
who have known the matter in this fashion have earned 
immortality in mortal life and laid down their lives as an 
offering to the lotus-feet of Pararaeshvarl! To say that 
Prakriti is of the world first of all gives rise to the suspi¬ 
cion, in an ordinary mind, that if the world be nothing 
else than a composition of the five elements,* * then Ishvara, 
Devata, Brahma, Prakriti, or Shftkti—in short, nothing 
superior to gunas, may a, and the world—can exist; for 
Prakriti is then what the world is. Thus scepticism slowly 
appears in the field, and to a sceptic’s eye the sangsara 
appears full of only such things as are perceptible to the 
senses.* But if, with the vision of the faithful, it is realized 
that “ the world is of Prakriti,” no danger of such doubts 
exists, for whether made of five elements, or unconscious 
(whatever the world may be), there is no possibility of such 
qualities being necessarily attached to the self of Prakriti, 
because of the mere fact of Her being known through the 
world. It is not necessary’ that the mother’s body should 
resemble the son’s body limb per limb. On the contrary, 
there must be some resemblance of the mother in the son. 
Similarly, whether the Mother of the world has anything 
in Her of the world or not, the world has surely some 
shakti of the Mother in it. This is the method of under¬ 
standing for those who are subject to differentiating know¬ 
ledge, 4 although, according to the spiritual vision of adepts* Tattva. ’ Bbfltoa: elements—earth, air, water, fire, ether.

* Pratyakaba. * Bhedajnftna, vide ante.

414

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in spiritual science, 1 there is no difference between the 
world and the Mother of the world. Again, to know the 
world merely in relation to itself we have to know the 
world and the world’s shakti, but to know the world in 
relation to the Mother of the world, we have to know the 
world, the world’s shakti, and the great Shakti superior to 
the world. Although I am imperfect in the world, the 
Mother of the world is perfect, eternal Brahman. Con¬ 
sequently in order to know Her I must rise above the 
imperfect existence of the imperfect world and reach that 
most perfect existence in which all things besides Herself 
are imperfect and yet all such imperfect things are full of 
Her perfection. For this reason Aryyan worshippers, the 
best of faithful men, are averse to respect imperfect know¬ 
ledge at the cost of a disregard for perfection, or to discuss 
created things in disregard of the supreme subject for our 
thought—the Creatrix of the Creator of all created things.

Another thing. It is indeed a terrible mystery that 
you should, through perceiving the visible world to be 
unconscious,* have come to think that the great Shakti who 
has created that world is also so. If you consider the world 
to be unconscious,* I do not want to dispute the matter 
with you for the present; but I wish to know on what 
authority you consider the Shakti who works the world to 
be unconscious.* On the one hand, philosophers say that 
« although the shakti of the world is unconscious* it appears 
as conscious owing to the reflection of the Shakti of con¬ 
sciousness* in it.’’ On the other hand, Brahma himself 
says: “ Thou art the Shakti in everything, asat (jada) or 
sat (Chaitanya).” 1 In each of these statements both the 
states of shakti have been demonstrated, but with this

1 Tattvu. 
* Chit.

* Jada.1 Tattvu. 
* Chit.

* Jada.

‘ That is, in gross and intelligent substance.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd.)

415

difference, that while philosophers say that it appears as 
conscious on account of its reflecting consciousness thrown 
upon it, Brahma says that it seems to be unconscious' 
because unconsciousness appears in it (otherwise, nothing 
is so).* * According to philosophers, the shakti of the world 
is in reality unconscious, but appears as conscious because 
it reflects the Shakti of consciousness; and, according to 
Brahma, the shakti of the world is in reality conscious, but 
seems to be unconscious because that state 1 appears in it. 5

Now, whether the shakti of the world reflects conscious¬ 
ness or unconsciousness, each of these views admit the 
existence of both consciousness and unconsciousness 1 at 
least in the ordinary state of things, if not in the state of 
spiritual vision. It is admitted on all hands in the com¬ 
munity of the faithful that unconsciousness 1 has come 
out of consciousness, 4 and that the $hakti of the world has 
its origin in the Shakti of consciousness. “ The world is 
all full of Brahman." “One alone exists and no second.” 
“The world is all full of Y&sudeva." “The universe is 
all full of Shiva and Shakti." “There is no difference 
between Thee and the universe. “ Hari is the world and 
the world is Hari." “ When Hari is both within and with¬ 
out, what is the use of performing austerities?" If all 
these great sayings of the Shastra be true, if He alone

J &dfl<

* That is, asat: that is, otherwise nothing in the world wonld he 
unconscious.

* The meaning of these passages is as follows: Brahma has saidJ &dfl<

* That is, asat: that is, otherwise nothing in the world wonld he 
unconscious.

* The meaning of these passages is as follows: Brahma has said

that $hakti is in everything conscious and unconscious. On the next 
page it is said that unconsciousness is a false or mftyik manifestation. 
Hence it follows that §hakti is in reality conscious, but sometimes 
appears as unconscious on account of the play of mftyft in it, and which 
Mftyft also is itself nothing but a peculiar aspect of Shakti. Thus 
unconsciousness is but a Mftyik phase of conscious Shakti, and in this 
sense a thing which really exists, otherwise Brahma's word that Shakti 
is in unconscious things is meaningless. ‘ Chaitanya.

416

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA416

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

exists and no second thing, whence have come this un* * 
conscious 1 world and the §hakti of the world ? In reply 
to this question, it must either be said that the world and 
the shakti of the world are the Brahma-vibhotis* of that 
great Shakti, or that the world and the shakti of the world 
have no existence. Otherwise, the singleness of Brahman 
or Shakti cannot be maintained. It can by no means be 
said that the world does not exist and again it is not the 
view of the Aryya Shastra that anything besides and second 
to Brahman exists. It must, therefore, be said that the 
world, the shakti of the world, or whatever else they may 
be, all are nothing but the pure display 1 of that great 
Shakti; or, in other words, nothing really exists but the 
shakti of consciousness. 4 All which is seen as unconscious 
matter in the world, full of maya, although it appears to 
be true, is not in reality so, but is only a display of error.* 
Again, that error itself is a manifestation * of Brahmashakti 
and that manifestation* is called m&ya. Of that maya, 
consisting of three gunas, the part in which the rajas and 
tamas gunas predominate is called avidy&; the state 
which includes everything from pure sattva guna to the 
attributeless Brahman is called vidya; in that vidya again, 
She who is turlya shakti above all,* and whose substance 
is pure bliss, is called Mah&vidy&. Overpowered with joy 
in love for Her who is pure existence, consciousness, and 
bliss, the ever-joyful Ishvara of all has said in the 
Chftmunda Tantra:

“ Kali and Tara are Mahtlvidy&s; Shodashl, Bhuvane$h- 
varl, Bhairavl, Chhiunamasta, and DhQmavatl are vidyfts; 
Bagalti, Matangl and Kamal& are Siddhavidy&a.” These ten

1 Jada. * Brahma manifestations (see post).

’ Vibhflti (see post). * Chit^hakti. * Bhranti.

* Literally, *' above all Tattva."

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

4171 Jada. * Brahma manifestations (see post).

’ Vibhflti (see post). * Chit^hakti. * Bhranti.

* Literally, *' above all Tattva."

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

417

Maha?haktis are Mahavidyas, V idylls, and Siddhavidy&s in 
order. That is to say, in these ten Mahashaktis which 
embody perfect manifestations of the Shaktitattva must be 
sought the harmonious setting forth of Mabavidy&s, Vidy&s, 
and Siddhavidy&s, in the above order. This is the meaning 
of the above quotation as it appears from the wording of the 
§hlokas. In the Shyama-Rahasya/ however, all the ten 
Shaktis have been called Mahavidy&s. “ Kali, Tarft, Shoda- 
?hl, Bhuvaneshvarl, Bhairavl, Chhinnamasta, Matangl, 
Kamala, Dhumfivatl, and Bagala are called Mah&vidyas.” 
In another place of the same treatise it has been said : “ In 
the Kali age Siddhi in all the Mah&vidyas is the best." 
Here the word “ all, ” which expresses combination, and 
the use of the plural number, signify that all the ten are 
called Mahavidy&s. Besides this, in the Vishva sara Tantra 
it has been clearly stated that “ Mah&vidya is preceded by 
the prefix maha.’^ For this reason all Tantrik teachers are 
of opinion that in the last line—“eta dasha mah&vidyah 
siddhavidyah praklrtitah"—of the above quotation from 
the Chainunda Tantra all the ten have been indirectly called 
by the general names of raah&vidya and siddhavidyft. Hence, 
according to Vishvasara Tantra, Kali and T&rii are Mahft- 
maha-siddhavidy&s, Shodashi, Bhuvaneshvarl, Bhairavl. 
Chhinnamasta, and DhOmavati are mahasiddhavidy&5, and 
Bagala, Matangl, and Kamal& are Siddhamahasiddhavidy&s.

In the Chapter on the play of Shakti, we shall attempt 
to show, so far as it will lie in our power, what appearances 
of massive Bliss they have in the aspect of turlya conscious¬ 
ness. At present we shall discuss, according to Shastra, 
whether She is m&yft or m&y& is Hers.The Mother's name is Maham&y&, and this, too, is a 
maha (great) may& of Hers. Blinded by this M&y& pandits 
of unripe intelligence fall into the pit of erroneous inferences, 
and losing themselves in it, think that tnaya is nothing

27

418

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA27

418

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

but the material of the gross unconscious 1 world and that 
She, too, is mfiyfi, by whom that mayfi. is held, and who is 
primal, eternal, and perfect Brahman. If She too is may&, 
then why has She the name Mab&m&y&? If m&yfl and 
the person possessing mayfi are one and the same thing, 
if the seed and the tree are one and the same thing, then 
why should there be difference of conditions of names and 
aspects ? In fact, wherever Sb&stra has made mention of 
that Mahfi.$hakti, with reference to the part of Her which 
is m&ya, it has given Her the name of Mahamfiya; and 
again, wherever it has made mention of Her with reference 
to Her Brahma-aspect, there also it has called Her Mabfl- 
maya. In both places the rootword raahat is the adjective 
of maya with this difference, that in the place where re¬ 
ference is made to maya the samasa* is KarmadbSraya*— 
that is to say, She who is mahatl (great) maya is Mahft- 
maya, while in the place where reference is made to the 
Brahma-aspect the Samasa is Bahubflbi 1 —that is to say, 
She who has mahatl (great) maya is MahfLm&y&. Just as 
the larva of a silkworm is both the instrumental and the 
material cause of the production of thread—instrumental 
because threads are produced by its will, and material be¬ 
cause they are produced from its body—so Mahashakti is 
both the instrument and the material cause of the work of 
the world. She is the instrumental cause because, being 
will itself, She has willed to create the world in Her blissful 
true resolve, and She is the material cause because She 
has spread mfLyfi, which is her own vibhtlti,* and out of it 
fashioned all things both moving and non-moving. That 
instrumental aspect is Shakti or Brahman, and this mate¬ 
rial aspect is Maya.

1 Jftda.

* Possessive.

* Compound.

* Descriptive.

' Manifestation.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .) 4191 Jftda.

* Possessive.

* Compound.

* Descriptive.

' Manifestation.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .) 419

Id the process of creation also, in the body of the 
Jlva, the Brahma-aspect is Atma and the Maya aspect is 
antahkarana.* * In the illustration of the larva of the silk¬ 
worm itself there appears another phase of mfiya. Im¬ 
prisoned in the web of threads produced by itself, which it 
thinks belongs to itself, it remains for some time bound by 
them and yet does not feel itself to be so. In course of 
time its aspect undergoes a change under that covering of 
threads, and after a while that very larva assumes the form 
of a butterfly, rends the sheath formed of its own threads, 
and with its sublimely beautiful body flies forth, spreading 
its fine and transparent wings in the infinite sky, in perfect 
bliss, with an unfettered life and a free heart, leaving 
behind on earth only its rent sheath of threads. Similarly, 
the m&y& aspect, mind, which is bound by the self-created 
threads of sangsara and is attracted to and crushed by that 
sangsAra, controls, by means of self-restraint, all affection, 
attraction, and attachment of and to the sangs&ra, and is 
even, while confined in the womb of sangsara, absorbed in 
the thought of the beauteous lotus-feet of Her who holds 
the universe in Her womb and dwells in the heart of 
Vi?hveshvara. Thus absorbed, its form changes of itself, 
unknown to the three worlds; then, in the fulness of time, 
it rends, with its own strength, the may&-sheath of sang¬ 
sara. Blessed with the merciful regard of the Charmer of 
Mah&k&la* and dispeller of the fear of death, it spreads its 
two wings of discrimination* and dispassion,* and taking 
with it the brilliant and shining Atm& which then forms 
its body, the pure and sattvika mftyft, which is mind, be¬ 
comes a Praj&pati (lord of the universe through shakti).

' Mind, etc. (see Introduction). * The Devi.

* Viveka. the poorer to distinguish the real and the unreal.' Mind, etc. (see Introduction). * The Devi.

* Viveka. the poorer to distinguish the real and the unreal.

* Vairagya, indifference to worldly things.

420

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

As Vidya 1 it rises above the universe and soars high in the 
infinite expanse of heaven towards the seat of existence, 
consciousness and bliss, which belongs to Mahavidya. 
The flame of the forest fire is lost in the orb of the sun; 
lightning shot from its region is lost in the body of the 
cloud of massive bliss* * The broken cage of mind—that is 
to say, the body composed of five elements—is alone left 
behind in the sangsara.

It is this phase of m&y& consisting of spiritual know¬ 
ledge which is called vidya. By virtue of this vidyft one 
reaches Her, the Mahavidya, who is adored of all the world, 
and is the object of sftdhana. Sfidhaka, he alone in the 
world has acquired useful knowledge whose knowledge is 
employed not to earn worldly riches, but spiritual wealth or 
Mahavidya. In this vast sea of sangsara he alone is past 
master of the art of sailing across the world who has 
moored his vessel in the port of Kulakundalinl. Thus, O 
S&dhaka, the Mother is yours. Am I, then, motherless? 
Have I no mother, although the three worlds have their 
mother? Say then, O Mother, that you are the Sadhaka’s 
Mother. Extremely ignorant and devoid of siddhi and 
sadhana as I am, what will become of me? Although a son 
of Mahavidya, I have, 0 Mother, been blinded and benighted 
by deep avidya. 1

What, then, will be my fate ? This vessel of mine is 
drifting down the stream of sangsara with the ebb of pra- 
vritti.* I cannot hold it back; I have not the power to 
stay it with nivritti.® Nay, Mother, the vessel is unable 
even to drift on any longer. It is a small craft, and has.

1 Spiritual knowledge; as the soul which knows (vide post).

1 Anandaghana.

* Ignorance. * The path of desire. See Introduction.

' Cessation of desire (vide ibid).

421

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? (< Contd .)1 Anandaghana.

* Ignorance. * The path of desire. See Introduction.

' Cessation of desire (vide ibid).

421

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? (< Contd .)

moreover, nine openings in it. 1 The sea has, by constantly 
breaking over it, filled it with its salt waters, and has 
left not even standing-room. Now I shall sink, and that 
not to rise. Daughter of the earth’s supporter,* * hold me, 
hold me, 0 Mother. There is no strength left in these 
my weak arms. Extend for once, 0 Mother, your two 
hands of blessing and assurance.' Merciful Mother, turn 
once and look at me. My Mother, in this vast sea this 
witless, helpless child of yours has none else whom he can 
call his own. 0 Mother, Mother Kula-kimdahnl, be a 
mother and take me up once into your bosom. Let this 
vessel sink for good. 1 The Sh&stra says that you are 
Mahavidyft, because you can be reached through vidyft. 
But, I ask, how are you Mahavidya unless you can save 
the child of yours who is destitute of vidya ? Through my 
vidya' I sink. Now through your vidya save me, and prove 
that you are rightly called Mahavidya. Let the vanity 
which this sinner entertains of having acquired vidya, such 
a vidya as has led to his downfall, be destroyed. Glory to 
you, Mother Mahavidya! Whether I have the power or not, 
you are the wealth which the world seeks in sadhana.

Sadhaka, just as mental Shakti, which is manifested 
maya, is called vidya when it becomes free from the bonds 
of sangsara and rushes towards the Mahftshakti with 
dishevelled hair ; so it is called avidya when it forgets Her 
and is intoxicated by the things of the world—wife, children,

1 The vessel is the body. The nine openings are the two eyes, the 
two ears, the two nostrils, the mouth, the genitals, and the anus.

* Dhar&dhara, the mountain.

' The Devi's hands make the mudr&s, vara and abhaya.* Dhar&dhara, the mountain.

' The Devi's hands make the mudr&s, vara and abhaya.

* That is, let the vessel sink for good so that it may not have to 
straggle again on the surface of the worldly ocean of sangsara. Let it 
sink in Her bosom where there is no such straggle.

* This vidya is " my vidya " which is really avidya.

422

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and the like. In this connection we may cite the following 
from the Markandeya Purapa :

“ That Devi Bhagavatl Mahamaya forcibly draws the 
mental faculties of even the wise, and gives them over to 
delusion. By Her is created all the world, consisting of 
things moving and non-moving, and She alone, the dis¬ 
penser of blessings, when pleased, grants salvation to Jiva. 
That eternal supreme Vidy& is the cause of liberation. 
She, again, is the cause of Jlva’s bondage in sangsara. 
She is the Ishvari of all Isbvaras.”Again: “King! although eternal, that Devi Bhagavatl 
incarnates Herself again and again in the manner afore¬ 
said, and maintains the world. By Her is this universe 
deluded, and She gives birth to the universe. If pleased, 
She grants wealth and knowledge to all who beg it of Her. 
Lord of men! at the time of the great Dissolution 1 this 
entire universe is pervaded by that Mabakall in the form of 
a great destructive power.* * She it is who at times appears 
as a destructive power; She it is who again appears as 
the creation; and, again, it is that unborn eternal Devi 
who at times preserves all things. In prosperity She is 
Lakshmi in the houses of men granting increase. In 
adversity She becomes Alakshmi for their ruin. (Here it 
may be objected, Why, then, worship Her, if, according to 
men's lot, She appears as Lakshmi and Alakshmi in pros¬ 
perity and adversity in order to do service or disservice to 
them ? In answer to this question the following is said): 
When duly prayed to and worshipped with flowers, incense 
and the like, She grants wealth, progeny, and other things 
to the S&dhaka who desires such things, and beneficial 
attachment to dharma* to him who does not desire them.”

1 Mah&pralaya.

* Mah&mftrl, which generally means a great plague. 
’ Duty, religion (see Introduction).

WHAT IS SHAKTI? ( Contd.)

4231 Mah&pralaya.

* Mah&mftrl, which generally means a great plague. 
’ Duty, religion (see Introduction).

WHAT IS SHAKTI? ( Contd.)

423

Again, in the following Chapter it is said: “ Oh King, 
I have thus related to you the greatness of the Devi, which 
is the best of all things which man can relate. So wonder¬ 
ful is the power of the Devi who supports the world. 
Even as She holds the world under the spell of m&yflmoha, 1 
so also the same Bhagavatl Vishnu-m&yS. provides it 
with vidyfi..* * That m&y& has deluded and deludes you, 
this Vaishya, and all other people who have the faculty of 
discrimination, 1 and will delude all such people born in 
future. Great King, seek the protection of that Para- 
meshvarl. Being worshipped, She grants worldly happiness, 
heaven, 1 and liberation* to men.” Here, too, the Rishi has 
in view two aspects of Shakti. In relation to the bondage 
of sangs&ra, He speaks of the m&y& aspect, and, again, for 
liberation from that bondage he points out the Brahma- 
aspect for worship, and says: “ Seek the protection of Para- 
me§hvarl.” “ She alone, the Dispenser of blessings, grants 
liberation to Jlva when pleased.” “0 Devi, a spell of 
delusion spreads over all this world. Being pleased, Thou 
alone in the world can grant liberation.”

It is when the Mother of the world, in the aspect of 
m&ya, appears as the deluder of the world that She assumes 
various forms, the variety of which is due to differences in 
sattva, rajas, and tarnas gunas in them, and it is then that She 
plays the Acts and the Scenes of the drama of Sangsara. 
Such forms are intelligence, sleep, hunger, chhaya,' power, 
thirst, forbearance, caste and class, shame, peace, reverence,

1 The delusion which is caused by m&yft. ' Spiritual knowledge.

* Literally, " possessing viveka.” This is ordinary discrimination1 The delusion which is caused by m&yft. ' Spiritual knowledge.

* Literally, " possessing viveka.” This is ordinary discrimination

which distinguishes one thing from another in the common world of 
appearance, as, for instance, happiness from sorrow, and not the higher 
form of discrimination, which distinguishes the “ real" from that which 
appears to be such. ' Svarga. ' Mukti.

* Lit.: shadow or reflection. (See A. and E. Avalon’s “ Hymns to 
the Goddess.")

424

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

beauty, wealth, function, 1 memory, mercy, contentment (in¬ 
clination), error, intellect, earth, nourishment, brilliance, 
restraint, and other innumerable shaktis. At the root of all 
these forms lies She who is eternal consciousness, and who, 
again, is, as m&ya, known in the three worlds by the name 
of Vishnu-may&. It is a sight fit only for the divine vision 
of Devas. When, therefore, through fear of Shumbha and 
Ni§humbha, they began to worship Her who dwells in the 
heart of Shambhu, they first of all showed that She was the 
Ordainer of the universe as mfiy&, and then made prayer 
to Her by calling Her “ Saviour." So at the beginning of 
the hymn it is said:

“ To the Devi who is Vishnu-maya in all things, Obei¬ 
sance, obeisance, obeisance to Her, obeisance, obeisance. 
To the Devi who is called consciousness in all things, 
obeisance, obeisance to Her, obeisance to Her, obeisance, 
obeisance. To the Devi who exists in all things as intelli¬ 
gence, obeisance, obeisance to Her, obeisance to Her, obei¬ 
sance, obeisanoe," and so forth.It is here that the philosophers who advooate the 
theory that shakti is unconscious* * have given supreme evi¬ 
dence of their intelligence and learning. They think that 
all these shaktis held in the body of the Jlva are gross* 
shaktis. The Devas have said: “The Devi who is called 
the Shakti of consciousness in all things,” “ who pervades 
this entire universe as consciousness, obeisance, obeisance, 
obeisance to Her.” The Devas say that She is conscious¬ 
ness itself, but the philosophers possessing so-called acute 
vision, think that She is unconscious. For this we cannot 
blame the philosophers, for of course nothing that they say

1 Vritti. The vfitti of a thing is the work that it does, and there¬ 
fore funotion.

* Jada.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

4251 Vritti. The vfitti of a thing is the work that it does, and there¬ 
fore funotion.

* Jada.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

425

.is unsupported by reason. And tbe reason here is this : If 
She is not unconscious, 1 whence have the philosophers got 
such an idea, notwithstanding Her being intelligence, 
memory, and the like ? What they say is, therefore, true. 
What difference would there be between Deva, Danava, and 
man, if what Devas see as conscious does not appear as 
unconscious to the eyes of men? Whilst the sight of a 
lovely child makes the milk flow from a mother’s breast it 
causes the lolling tongue of a wolf to quickly waggle. The 
form in which She appears before a person depends on 
the peculiar tendencies with which he is endowed by Her. 
Moved by fear for Madhu and Kaitabha, Bbagavan 
Brahma made prayer to the tamasl jada-shakti,* * appear¬ 
ing as sleep, and instantly that sleep, which robs people 
of consciousness, became consciousness itself, and, assum¬ 
ing the aspect of a four-armed Devi riding a lion, stood 
forth in the firmameut. Philosopher, if you are a believer, 
if you have faith in the words of Devas, explain to me by 
means of reasoning and arguments why you understand 
this Shakti to be unconscious 1 §hakti. What shall I say to 
you ? To Her alone I say, 0 Mother, in the Satya age you 
destroyed the Daityas Shurabha and Ni§humbba by first 
spreading your vibhnti shaktis 1 and then withdrawing 
them, but how much longer will you allow these Daityas 
of the Kali age to live ? Or who is such a Sadhaka in this 
Kali age as can, like the Devas, bring You to earth with 
hiB prayer ? I, therefore, ask, 0 Mother, when will such a 
powerful Sadhaka be born as will be able to sacrifice these 
Daityas before You, and with their blood make the current 
of your worship again flow strong in India ?

1 Jada.

' The unconscious shakti, whose substance was the tamas guna.

* Kau?hiki. Kill, and so forth.

426

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Jada.

' The unconscious shakti, whose substance was the tamas guna.

* Kau?hiki. Kill, and so forth.

426

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

So much about what philosophers have understood. 
What S&dhakas will next hear will astound them. The 
very remembrance of the thing makes me feel as if the 
gates of hell are opening under me. The Brahma-daityas 1 
of the nineteenth century have arrived at still another 
j conclusion. v xhey say that the Sh&kta-Dharma* * is a result 
of the coalescence between Hinduism and Buddhism.* In 
sorrow for such things as this have poets sung: “ What 
do not people see when the sun sets! Innumerable stars 
shine in the sky, lights show their power in every house, 
and even the tiny young of glow-worms spread their lustre 
in every direction." There is nothing in what they (the 
Brahmos) say which deserves a reply rather than mere 
ridicule. To-day the sun of Bh&rataV Dharma has, in 
circling round Bharata-Sumeru,* disappeared on one side, 
and in the darkness which has ensued Daityas, Danavas 
and Pi?hachas* have made their appearance. Community 
of Sadhakas ! this state of things will not last much longer. 
Ruddy rays of the young sun have become visible on the 
summit of the Sumeru. She who grants all desires Herself 
stands forth to reply, and, with high arms outstretched, 
says: “ Fear not, fear not! Sit for one more moment on 
the vlra’s seat of §hava-s&dhana in this great cremation 
ground and firmly continue the japa’ of the great mantra 
of the great Shakti. The sun of siddhi for the T&ntrik

1 The sect of Br&hmos, against whom the book wars, and who are 
called demons of the nineteenth century.

* The religion of the worshippers of Shakti.

' See Introduction to this book. * India.

' Mount Meru. * Demons and filthy and malignant spirits.

' An allusion to the T&ntrik rite in which the s&dbaka recites 
mantras seated on a corpse.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

427' Mount Meru. * Demons and filthy and malignant spirits.

' An allusion to the T&ntrik rite in which the s&dbaka recites 
mantras seated on a corpse.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

427

world is about to rise. She to whom the Tantra belongs 
says: ‘No Pashus 1 will remain on earth, but only Kaulas.”’

Even here the trouble does not end. Towards the 
close of the above-mentioned saying of the Devas relating 
to the aspeots of the Devi, and while dealing with the 
maya-vibhfitis * * of the M&yfimayl, they sayTo the Devi 
who exists in all things as error, obeisance, obeisance 
to Her, obeisance to Her, obeisance, obeisance. But this 
expression of truth from the small hearts of Devas has 
found no place in the large heart of this little religion." 
A thief's wife may enter into the apartments of a queen 
and steal her ornaments, but on reaching home she is at 
her wits' end to know which ornament to put on which 
part of her body.

Similarly, the eclectic fraternity, which is bent on 
establishing concordance between all schools of thought, 
has, by purloining this statement of the aspects of Mayfi- 
Brahma from the Marka^deya-Chandl, put it on the head 
of the new Brahman of theirs, which is partly with and 
partly without attributes, and have at last found, with 
utter astonishment, that “The Devi exists in all things 
as error.” Horror of horrors! This cannot be. The 
Merciful Father can never exist as error; for everyone 
professing the “little religion,”'is unerring and above all 
error. The Br&hmo has, therefore, substituted the ex¬ 
pression “ as good ” (mangala-rupena) for the expression 
“ as error ” (bhrantirQpena). 0 what depth of learning! 
His knowledge of versification is commensurate with his 
knowledge of Brahman! The Brahman who is supposed 
to be formless, taintless, and made of all sorts of negation, 
has nothing to do with whatever is frightful, horrible.

1 See Introduction. * M&y&-manifestations.

* Upadharma—that is, Br&hmoism.

4281 See Introduction. * M&y&-manifestations.

* Upadharma—that is, Br&hmoism.

428

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

oppressive, and dangerous, or with the darkness, sorrow, 
grief, disease, dirt, abomination, damnation, and sin whioh 
there are in the world, bat sits still and alone in a formless 
abode of peace, seleoting and gathering by Its side only 
such things as are good according to Brahmos. Around 
It the infinite multitude of Jlvas inhabiting the infinite 
universe are consumed in the fire of sin, trouble, grief, 
sorrow, disease, and suffering. But Brahman, who is Ishvara 
and Bhagav&n, and aware of their existence, takes no heed 
of them, but in hatred and disgust turns His face against 
them. Tell me, brother Brahmajnanl/ does not this be¬ 
speak onesidedness on the part of the universe-pervading 
Creator of the Universe? Brother, you take pride in your 
knowledge of Brahman. But what is the meaning of the 
word Brahman ? The verbal root “ bringha ” means per¬ 
vasion. What is all-pervading is called Brahman. Is it 
possible for Brahman who is all-pervading to be so one¬ 
sided as to be associated with what is good to the exclusion 
of what is bad, with smiles and not with tears, with heaven 
and not with hell—to be in virtue and not in sin ? Our 
Brahman is a quite different thing; the Brahman of the 
Aryashastra, from which you have obtained the name of 
Brahman exists as well in heaven as in hell, as well in 
virtue as in sin, as well in desire as in cessation of desire, 1 
as well in good as in evil, as well in oreation as in destruc¬ 
tion, as well during awaking as in sleep, as well in Atmfi, 
as in mind, as well in prana as in the senses. It exists the 
same everywhere, in every molecule and atom* of the innu¬ 
merable millions of universes, 4 consisting each of fourteen 
worlds*; It exists everywhere in unconsciousness, 4 con¬ 
sciousness/ and in the play of consciousness. It is She

’ Knower of Brahman ; here, a Br&htno.

* Ana and param&nn.’ Knower of Brahman ; here, a Br&htno.

* Ana and param&nn.

* Bhuvanas. 1 Ja<Ja.

* Nivjritti.

4 Brahm&^daa. 
' Chaitanya.

W HA T IS SHAKTI ? (< Contd .)

429

who causes bondage, and it is She, again, who brings about 
liberation. For this reason, after the killing of Mahisha 
the Asura, the Devas understood that just as the worship¬ 
ping propensity in their hearts came from Her, so the 
fighting propensity in the hearts of Asuras also came from 
Her. Just as She provided the Devas with Svargalakshml 1 
for their prosperity, so also She was the cause of the fatal 
night of Asura Mahisha’s death. When the Devas perceived 
this, they said:

“ Oh Devi, who art Lakshml * * in the houses of virtuous 
men, Alakshml 1 in the houses of sinful men, intelligence 
in the hearts of cultured men, reverence in the hearts of 
pious men, and shame in men born of good families, I bow 
to Thy lotus-feet. O Devi, maintain the universe.” It is 
because as avidyS, which is error,' She can bind, that as 
v idyll, which is knowledge, 5 She can again remove the 
bondage. Otherwise, who is She to liberate who has not 
the power to bind ? It can never be that while the judge 
will order imprisonment, the jailer will give release. Just 
as the judge’s order is necessary for imprisonment, so it is 
also necessary for release. The Aryash&stra is not so blind, 
so foolish, and so erring, as to be terrified on hearing that 
“ She exists as error." The Shastra therefore says: " That 
eternal supreme Vidya is the cause of liberation. She, again, 
is the cause of Jlva’s bondage in sangsara. She is the 
I$hvarl of the I?hvaras of all! Although, according to prison 
rules, a prisoner can sometimes obtain temporary freedom 
to walk in the prison yard, such freedom cannot give him 
permanent release, for his hands and feet remain still firmly 
bound by iron chains. Similarly, although one can live in

1 The tutelary Devi of Svarga, or Heaven.

* The opposite of Lakshml. ‘ Bhr&nti.1 The tutelary Devi of Svarga, or Heaven.

* The opposite of Lakshml. ‘ Bhr&nti.

* Devi of prosperity. 
1 Jn&na.

480

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

heaven 1 and similar regions * * in consequence of having per¬ 
formed works of high religious merit, one does not thereby 
become free from the bondage of maya. Unless Mahft- 
m&y&, in whom are the three gunas and who holds in Her 
hand the cords of the three gunas constituting the bond¬ 
age of maya, Herself removes the bonds, who else in the 
world can grant release'? The Shastra has, therefore, said, 
“ She is the Ishvarl of the Ishvaras of all ”—that is to 
say, although Brahma and other Devas are Ishvaras of all, 
they have to pray to Her, the supreme Ishvarl, for the 
removal of their bondage and liberation. She is the sole 
I$hvarl of the Ishvaras of all.

The aforesaid physical shaktis—intelligence, sleep, 
hunger, thirst, beauty, memory, intellect, restraint, etc.— 
which appear unconscious 3 to us in our ordinary vision, 
are not in reality unconscious. Just as light cannot be 
dark, so shakti cannot be unconscious. Different parts of 
the mftya-shakti which consists of the three gunas sattva, 
rajas, and tamas, can only differ from each other in so far 
as one or other of the gunas predominate; for instance, the 
sattva guna predominates in shaktis like mercy, peace, 
beauty, shame, forgiveness, and reverence; the rajas guna 
predominates in shaktis of passion like desire, anger, greed, 
effort, intoxication of mind, 4 and vanity; and the tamas 
guija predominates in shaktis like delusion, lethargy, error, 
drowsiness, and sleep.

y; Of these, the sfittvik shaktis are always naturally mani¬ 
fest and conscious; the tSmasik shaktis are always unmani¬ 
fest and seemingly unconscious, full of delusion, and insen¬ 
sible ; and the rftjasik shaktis are partly manifest and partly

1 Svargu. one of the fourteen regions (lokas).

* Loka (see poet and Introdnction).

’ Ja 4*- • Mada.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? (Contd.)

4311 Svargu. one of the fourteen regions (lokas).

* Loka (see poet and Introdnction).

’ Ja 4*- • Mada.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? (Contd.)

431

unmanife 9 t, partly conscious and partly unconscious. On 
seeing the tamasik shaktis above-mentioned, a person may 
easily arrive at the conclusion that they are unconscious. 
But does he never ask himself, Whence have these shaktis 
oome ? According to Jiva’s destiny, from the very time that 
he takes a body, an inseparable relationship is established 
between him and the enjoyment of happiness and suffering 
of sorrow. The senses, the mind, the function of life and 
the whole of the Jiva’s body are made in such a manner as 
to be suitable for this enjoyment and suffering. For this 
reason sleep is as much necessary to him as food. And 
according to this necessity She, as Jlva, appears both as 
enjoyment and suffering as well as sleep. If She does not 
exist as consciousness at the root of sleep, who, then, is its 
cause ? Light in the moon, radiance in the sun, power of 
burning in fire, motion in air, coolness in water, smell in 
earth—these shaktis may ordinarily appear to be uncon¬ 
scious, but in reality they are not so. They merely seem 
to be unconscious. To admit that all these shaktis are 
really unconscious is almost to accept the atheistic princi¬ 
ple ; for self-origination of material shakti is the same thing 
as creation, preservation, and destruction of the world by 
Nature. In the eyes of the faithful there is nothing really 
unconscious in the dominion of the Mother, who is made of 
consciousness. All the things which we know to be uncon¬ 
scious are, to the sight of wise men, nothing but emanations 
of consciousness from Her whose substance is conscious¬ 
ness ; only, by reason of the incapacity of the world which 
is composed of the three gunas to manifest pure conscious¬ 
ness, they are darkened just as are the sun’s rays when 
passed through a blue glass, with this difference—that 
while the sun’s rays and the blue glass are different things,' N&stika.

432

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in the case of this light the sun, the rays, and the glass 
are one and the same thing.

In the root She is all-Brahman ; in the stem She is all- 
mAyA; in the flower She is all-world, and in the fruit She 
is all-liberation. Brahman, I$hvara, MajA, and Avidya— 
these are Her four aspects. Dividing Herself into these 
four parts, the Player of the blissful play throughout the 
world becomes Herself mad in the intoxication of Her 
own joy—Herself taking birth, Herself dying, Herself 
dancing in Her own cremation ground, and Herself be¬ 
coming Shiva in Her own corpse. She Herself enjoys the 
play. She is Herself Purusha, * 1 Herself Prakriti, Herself 
the spouse of Mahakala, Herself attachment, inclination, 
and goal, and Herself the daughter of Supreme bliss. 
She is Herself m&yfi, Herself non-m&yft, and Herself She 
who yields rnayA. She is Herself vidya, Herself avidya 
and Herself the eternal Devi who is the object of sadhana. 
Ask the Vedas, the Vedantas, the PurAnas, or the Tantras, 
and every one of these ShAstras will bear unmistakable 
testimony to this Her (monistic) character. In this§hastrik 
vision of faith a sAdhaka sees the Brahmapda-play in both 
Her aspects of vidya and avidya, and sits on the Mother’s 
lap in both bondage and liberation. The world regards the 
bondage as due to rnayA, but he sees it to be caused by the 
Mother. It then inspires him with love and a feeling of 
wounded pride. Softened by that love, and hardened by that 
feeling of wounded pride, he sits lovingly on the lap of the 
Mother, holding Her hand with his hands, which are bound 
with the bonds of maya, and, overwhelmed with tender 
feeling, says: “ Mother, what a mad 1 girl you are 1 ” The

1 See Introduction.

1 As pointed out by Babu Dinesh Chandra Sen (" History of Bengali 
Language and Literature," p. 119), the English word " mad ” does not 
convey the meaning of the word " pagla," for in Bengali it is tingedWHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

483

mad S&dhaka Nil&mbara has, therefore said, addressing the 
mad Mother: “ Is it for nothing that I tell you, 0 Kali, that 
you were a magician’s daughter ? Otherwise, why should 
you have enchanted the whole world with m&y&-magic ? ” 
Again, the peaceful S&dhaka Kamalakanta has sung: 
“ Tell me, what is bad and what is good in you. Some you 
save by granting them knowledge in the form of vidyft. 
Others you oover with avidyft and draw down into the pit of 
delusion. Many people say that every Jlva is Shiva. Why, 
then, does He who is ever joyful become destitute of joy ? 
Mother Kali, I, Kamalakanta, tell you my mind. Some enjoy 
happiness followed by happiness, while others pass their 
lives in sorrow.” After seeing, hearing, and thinking over 
all this, one can only say: “I always seek Thee who art 
above m&y&, full of mfty&, universal maya, eternal, pure, 
blameless, one without a second, and, again, the cause of 
the world’s liberation through mfiyft,* * the bridge over the 
sea of existence.”

Those who, on merely hearing the name of shakti, leap 
to the conclusion that shakti is mayft without understanding 
the three-fold division of §hakti-tattva * into vidyft, avidyft, 
and paramft, and without knowing the difference between 
mayft-shakti and Brahma-shakti — to them it is needless to 
show any evidence other than the words of that Mftyft and 
Professor of Maya; for these words are sufficient. When 
the Mother of the world was born of the womb of Menakfi 
in the house of Himalaya, the King of mountains was

with a feeling of tenderness, and persons so called are greatly loved. 
The term denotes rather a person of amiable and eccentrio character, 
and is akin to the Persian dew&nft.

'Mftyft is here both the binder and the liberator (see post). As 
binder She is universal mftyft, and as liberator She is above mftyft. In 
what sense Mftyft can liberate, is explained, see post.

* Here meaning $hakti.

18

434* Here meaning $hakti.

18

434

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

astonished at the sight of Her form possessing the lustre of 
a crore 1 of suns, bearing on Her head the crescent moon, 
large-eyed, and eight-armed and, bowing down to the earth 
before Her, with folded hands, and voice trembling with 
reverence, said *:

“ Mother, who are you of wonderful form, possessing 
large eyes and auspicious marks ? My child, I fail to dis¬ 
cover who you really are. Yourself tell me the truth about 
Yourself.”

In reply to this question put by Himalaya, the Devi 
said:

“ Know Me to be (supreme) Shakti, the Genitrix of the 
world, under whose protection Maheshvara lives, whose sub¬ 
stance is all aishvaryyas* and knowledge, and who is the 
cause of all activities and the ordainer of oreation, preser¬ 
vation, and destruction. I dwell in the hearts of all things; 
I carry men across the sea of sangsara; I ajn eternal bliss; 
I am eternal, Brahman in substance and I.shvarl . 4 Father, 
pleased with the austerities' practised by you and mother 
Menakft, and worshipped as daughter by you both, I have, 
through your wonderful good fortune, taken birth in your 
house.” Here, also, She has described Herself as parama- 
shakti,* above m&y&.

Again, in the same book , 1 where reincarnation is dealt 
with. She says:

“ On coming out of the mother's womb, Jlva is deluded 
by my m&y&, and forgets the pains it suffered therein.”

“ Father, for his liberation from the chains of the body 
a seeker of salvation should contemplate me as blameless,

* 10.000,000. 1 BhflgftvatlgTta, in the Mahabh&gavata.

' Qualities of lordship of I$hvara (see post).

' Ruler. * Tapas (see Introduction).

' Supreme ?hakti. ' Chap. xvii.

WHAT IS SHAKTI? ( Contd .)

435' Qualities of lordship of I$hvara (see post).

' Ruler. * Tapas (see Introduction).

' Supreme ?hakti. ' Chap. xvii.

WHAT IS SHAKTI? ( Contd .)

435

subtle, beyond the reach of speech, pure, attributeless, 
transcendently luminous, all-pervading, the sole cause of 
oreation, preservation, and destruction, without a second, 
without beginning, whose substance is existence, conscious¬ 
ness and bliss.” “ Great King, deluded by my m&y&, Jivas 
fail to know that supreme and undeoreasing form of mine 
which is in everything and is without a second. But those 
who worship Me with devotion cross the great sea of 
this mayS..”

Himalaya also himself says: “ Do not delude me any 
longer with Thy supreme may&. O Ishvarl of the universe, 
I bow to Thee.”

In the Devi Bhagavata, and other books also, the same 
thing has been said. Now tell me, 0 advocate of the maya 
theory ! If Shakti Herself is nothing but maya, what is that 
other maya which She specifies as “ my maya ” ?

The following appears in the Mahanirvana Tantra 1 :

“ The Devi asked : What is the form of Mahakall who 
is the origin of mahat* * and other tattvas ; who is subtler 
than the subtlest, greatly luminous, and the primal Shakti ? 
Form is possible in only such things as are the work of 
Prakriti. But She is above Prakriti, and supreme beyond 
all. Deva, be pleased to thoroughly dispel this doubt from 
my mind.” Now, if She is merely Prakriti, why, then, does 
the Devi say that it is not possible for Her to have a form 
originated from Prakriti ? *

In the Kul&rnava Tantra, Mahadeva says to the Devi: 
“ He who iB deluded by Thy m&ya sees not while he sees,

1 13tb ull&sa. ' Baddhi (see Introduction).

* That is. if Mah&k&ll is, in substance, nothing but Prakriti, then it 
is but natural that She should arise out of Prakriti and have a form. 
The very fact that the Devi thinks it impossible for Mah&k&ll to have 
a form arising out of Prakriti proves that She i6 more than Prakriti.

430430

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

understands not while he hearB, and knows not the truth 1 
while he reads.”

(Here, also, if the Devi is only maya, why, then, does 
Mahadeva say “ Thy maya ? ”) The Shastra says that She 
is maya, whose substance is maya, and who is yet above 
maya. Advocate of the mayi-theory! forget for once the 
maya of maya and be charmed by the maya of the Mother. 
Know this maya to be not maya only, but the Mother’s 
maya—seeing the maya-play of the Mother sink in the 
sweetness of maya. It is because this maya exists that 
as children of the Mother we strive to sit on the lap of the 
Mother. It is with reference to this maya-theory that 
in Gltanjali * * it is said: “ The Vedas say that all efforts 
are in vain; for, 0 brother, everything is maya. The 
Tantras say that Mahamaya smiles through maya, for it is 
the Mother's maya."

Viewed with a little discrimination, the very maya 
which is nothing but the cause of bondage in sangsara 
appears as attractive as an elysium of bliss. Cannot the 
very same maya, by the influence of which we become at¬ 
tached and bound in love to father, mother, wife, children, 
ete., also liberate us, if through it we become attached by 
love to the Mother who is all full of maya ? It is because 
this maya exists that there exists the difference between the 
worshipper and the worshipped. Once the tie of this maya 
is broken, the relation between the worshipper and the 
worshipped will cease, as much as that between father, 
mother, wife, children, and the like. A devotee is, therefore, 
afraid lest maya should disappear, and he should thus be 
debarred from taking the name of Mother. Although a 
Jnanl* desires to be altogether free from maya, a bhakta,*

1 Tattvn. * The author’s work of that name.

' He who follows the path of jnfina, or knowledge.

* He who follows the path of bhakti, or devotion.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

4371 Tattvn. * The author’s work of that name.

' He who follows the path of jnfina, or knowledge.

* He who follows the path of bhakti, or devotion.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

437

while he throws off ruftyft so far as the sangs&ra is con¬ 
cerned, secretly and carefully nourishes mfty& for the Mother 
in the core of his heart. Leaving the sangsftra of mayfi, he 
enters into the sangs&ra of the Mother. All who live in 
this sangs&ra of the Mother constantly sing: “ Pftrvatl is our 
Mother, Deva Mahe§hvara is our Father, the Bhairavaa 
are our brothers, and the three worlds are our home."

But lest, through the influence of the Mother's name, 
which is antagonistic to mayft, this mfty& should disap¬ 
pear, leaving no means of protecting the self, I desire, 
while there is yet time, to take the name of the Mother to 
my heart’s content; lest, when the Mother and the son 
will meet, there should be left no opportunity for the son 
to take the Mother’s name; lest there should be for the 
rest of my existence an end to my taking the name of 
Mother—the Gitanjali mournfully says :

“ The day passes; it will last no longer. How much 
longer, O Mother, shall I bear the torments of the bondage 
of existence ? ”

“ To this sangs&ra full of mfty& you make me return 
time after time, under the influence of m&yft. My heart is 
rent; I can bear it no longer.

“ If everything in sangs&ra is possessed of m&yft, then 
grant me, 0 Mother, that mftya in which the son knows 
none but the Mother."

“ Ontie the oords of the present m&yft, and tie, 0 
Mother, the cord of that mfty& by virtue of whioh the fire 
of m&y& will not touch me." 1

“ Putting away from me the three-fold fire,* * take me 
up, 0 Mother, on Thy lap. Let me, for the last time in my 
life, call ‘ Mother, Mother,’ and then I shall call no more."

1 That is, instil vidyi in order that avidyA may be dispelled.

* That is, the three-fold sorrows (t&patraya).

438

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 That is, instil vidyi in order that avidyA may be dispelled.

* That is, the three-fold sorrows (t&patraya).

438

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ My life burns with an intense hunger. Give me, O 
Mother, the nectar of Thy milk to drink. The fire of woes 
burns constant and furious. It will not be extinguished 
but by that nectar.”

“ 0 Spouse of Shiva, do not fear that if once I get that 
nectar I shall not seek it any more. Simple child ! do you 
not know that the thirst for neotar is not satiated with the 
drinking of it ? "

Such Paur&pik evidence as has so far been produced 
on the subject of Shakti-tattrva proves that it is from 
Sbakti that the entire and universal Brahm&nda takes its 
birth; that She alone creates, preserves, and destroys it, 
and that She alone is the highest and the best, and the 
object of worship to even the Devas whom the world 
worships. Because of this Shaivas, Vaishijavas, Sauras, 
and G&napatyas 1 should not think that Shiva, Vishnu, 
the Sun and Gaijapati avail nothing. As a matter of 
fact, all the Devas who are worshipped according to the 
five forms of worship (panchopasana)' are equally instinct 
with §hakti; none is superior or inferior to another. When 
Rishis have had it in mind to intensify the piety and 
devotion of a class of Sadhakas, they have described the 
character and play of a particular Devatft in a Purana, 
and shown that Devata of that Purfiija to be the highest 
of all Devat&s. So much is this so that in books like the 
Devi Bhagavata, the Skanda Pur&ria, the Kalikft Pur&na, 
and the Eorma Puranas, the greatness of §hiva, Vishpu, 
or Shakti has been described in such a way in one part, 
and in such another way in a subsequent part, that the 
two parts seem to be mutually contradictory. The con¬ 
tradiction, however, lies in our human vision, full of

, " ors hippers of Shiva, Vishpu, the Sun, and Gape$ha respectively. 
That is the four Devae above mentioned and the Devi.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

439, " ors hippers of Shiva, Vishpu, the Sun, and Gape$ha respectively. 
That is the four Devae above mentioned and the Devi.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

439

differentiating ideas. It did not in the least exist in 
the divine vision of the great Rishis, who were endowed 
with the non-differentiating faculty. 1 They say that the 
DevatA, whose greatness they were describing in one place 
under the name of K&ll or Shiva, was Vishnu Himself, and 
that the DevatA whose greatness they are describing in 
another place under the name of Vishnu was none other 
than Kali or Shiva. Questions of inconsistency, super¬ 
iority, exaggeration, or false imputation, did not, therefore, 
at all arise in their minds. They revealed for the liberation 
and benefit of the followers of the five forms of worship, 
the manifestations* * of Brahman (of which great I^ishis, 
possessed of divine virtue, had direct knowledge), in the 
course of their description of the play of the particular 
Devatas the latter individually worshipped. This point 
will be more elaborately explained in the section on “Con¬ 
cordance between the five forms of worship.” Sfidhakaa 
will, on inquiry, find that Devatas like Shiva, Vishnu, and 
others, have been extolled immediately before or after the 
places from which we have quoted evidence on the subject 
of ^hakti-tattva. There is scarce room in the small volume 
of the Tantra-tattva for illustrations of every instance of 
this kind. It is only with the object of acquainting S&dha- 
kas with the learning and intelligence of this class of 
precocious, avidyA-born, and matricidal monsters, who give 
expression to their malice against MahavidyA by calling 
Her rnaya, ja<jla, avidya, a great Vaishijavl*, and so on, that 
we have said a few words concerning the Mother of the 
world.

“ 0 Devi, nirvAga cannot be attained without a know¬ 
ledge of $hakti”—this is the conclusion of the Tantra

* Tattva. 1 Vibhflti*.

* As explained in preceding pages.

%

440“ 0 Devi, nirvAga cannot be attained without a know¬ 
ledge of $hakti”—this is the conclusion of the Tantra

* Tattva. 1 Vibhflti*.

* As explained in preceding pages.

%

440

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Shflstra. At first sight it would seem to mean that no 
Devata other than Shakti has the power to grant nirvana 
salvation. But if this matter 1 is understood in accordance 
with the purpose for which, and the manner in which, it 
has been explained in the Tantra Sh&stra, there will remain 
no ground for any such conclusion.

We shall therefore quote here what the Tantra Sh&stra 
itself has said in brief about Shakti-tattva:

“Brahm&nl creates, and not Brahma. So, 0 Mahesh- 
varl, Brahma is undoubtedly a mere preta. 1 Vaishnavl 
preserves, and not Vishnu. So, O Maheshvarl, Vishnu is 
undoubtedly a mere preta. Rudranl destroys, and not 
Rudra. So, 0 Mahe$hvari, Rudra is undoubtedly a mere 
preta. Without the part of Shakti which they possess, 
Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara, and other Devas are all with¬ 
out power,' for it is beyond all doubt that without Prakyiti 
they are unable to do anything by their own efforts." *

Now it remains to be considered what is the true nature 
of that which is called Shakti. But here we are in a 
difficulty. All Shastras have at the conclusion of their 
specification of all aspects of Her nature, merely said the 
term “ Shakti," and, after a low obeisance, retired from 
the field. How can it then be possible for us to specify 
the nature of that Shakti who is Herself Herself?' The 
juice of the sugar-cane when boiled becomes molasses,' 
the molasses when boiled becomes uncrystallized sugar,* 
the uncrystallized sugar when boiled becomes crystallized 
sugar,' and the crystallized sugar when boiled becomes

1 Tattva.

' This term literally means the human spirit after death and before 
the performance of the §hr&ddba ; in the general sense, a ghost. Here 
used in the sense of a dead body. * Jacja.

' The above is from the Kubjikft Tantra.' The above is from the Kubjikft Tantra.

' Svarupa : who is Herself Herself. * Gn^a.

' $harkar& sikatA. called dalo. * Sita sharkarft.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

441

sugar-candy. 1 After the state of sugar-candy, the juice 
admits of no more condensation. Similarly, the conse¬ 
quence of Brahman is the Brahmanda; of Brahmftnda 
may a; of mayft I§hvara; and of Ishvara Shakti; that is 
to say, in order to know what there is in the cause it 
should first of all be seen what there is in the effect. To 
understand the truth * * concerning Brahman, it is neces¬ 
sary’ to understand, first of all, that concerning the 
Brahmftnda. 1 If the beginning, middle, and end of the 
Brahmanda is considered, the sole and final conclusion is 
mftyft. In order to understand the fundamental truth* 
concerning maya, it is necessary to fix the mind on Ishvara, 
the possessor of m&y&. And in order to know the funda¬ 
mental nature of Ishvara, it is necessary to fix the mind on 
Shakti. Beyond Shakti there can be no discussion of any¬ 
thing.* Shakti is the real nature of all things, 4 but the 
nature of Shakti is nothing but Shakti Herself; The sun 
reveals all things, but nothing reveals the sun save itself. 
However that may be, just as the Shakti of the seed can 
be guessed by observing the fruits, flowers, leaves, branches, 
roots, and stem of the tree, so we shall proceed to open the 
Tantra-door of the temple of Shakti-tattva by observing the 
process of creation, preservation, and destruction of Brah- 
man<Ja, the seat of Her eternal play.

May the Mother of the universe hold the lamp of Self- 
revelation in Her hand, and showing to Her children, who 
are living separate from their Mother, the path leading to 
Her own Self, ultimately take them up on Her lap.

The word “?hakti” is formed by adding the suffix 
“ kti ” to the verbal root 44 ?hak ” in the passive voice.

1 Sitopala, called michhri. * Tattva.

* The universe, or "egg of Brahma.”The word “?hakti” is formed by adding the suffix 
“ kti ” to the verbal root 44 ?hak ” in the passive voice.

1 Sitopala, called michhri. * Tattva.

* The universe, or "egg of Brahma.”

4 Shakti is the svarflpa, or thing in itself.

442

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The verbal root “§hak” means “ §hakti ” just as the word 
“ gam ” means “ gati ” (motion). The philosopher would 
explain “ shakti-tattva ” by means of discussion.

This method, however, has little pertinenoy. At the 
very outset the grammarian has, in trying to define the 
term “ $hakti,” found himself at sea, and left the matter 
exactly where he found it. The root “ shak ” means 
“ shakti ”; the passive voice means the same thing as does 
the root—that is to say, “ shakti ”; and the word that is 
formed by adding the Buffix to the root is also “ shakti.'’ It 
therefore comes to this, that the grammarian has explained 
the word “shakti ’’ as shakti, shakti, shakti ” ; as if he has 
sworn thrice and said : “ In the name of dharma, the word 
* shakti ’ means ‘ shakti, shakti, shakti.’"Sadhakas will here see that, if the interpretation of the 
word itself has led to such difficulty, how much more 
difficult must be the interpretation of the thing denoted by 
the word. In the opinion of philosophers “ mutual depend¬ 
ence ” is a fault, but grammarians adopt it as the funda¬ 
mental principle for safe guidance. The objeot of gram¬ 
marians is to state the true nature of a thing in conformity 
with its use, while the object of philosophers is to explain 
a thing with a show of learning and intelligence. A gram¬ 
marian will plainly say, The root "gam” means “gati” 
(motion); but a man, if a philosopher, will, with a show of 
keen intelligence, explain the same thing as: “ Going is 
that particular form of action in which there is produced a 
cessation of touch confined to one place with a view to 
establish at the same time a touch confined to another 
place.’’ 1 The word “gati,” consisting of two syllables only 
is thus explained by thirty-five syllables. And one can 
easily increase this number by adding to the interpretation

1 ParYadeshftvachchhinnasnngyoga bhAvasahakritottaradcshavach- 
chh iDn&s&Dgyog&aukalavy&pAravi^hesboganuuiam.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

448

a few more “ fcva-tva-avachchhinna.” 1 But what is the 
result of so much labour ? If a grammarian asks a philoso¬ 
pher, “ Have you eaten ? ” the latter will most probably 
reply, “ I have made food to go ”—that is to say, “ I have 
made food to leave the plate and be deposited in my 
stomach.” Again, when the same food leaves the stomach 
and returns to the earth as in vomiting, a great difficulty 
arises if this action, too, has to be named according to the 
definition of leaving one place and establishing touch with 
another. After all the trouble taken over the interpreta¬ 
tion, eating, going, and vomiting become one and the same 
thing.To avoid this difficulty the clever philosopher has 
added the expression “a particular form of action," mean¬ 
ing thereby that every act of abandoning one place and 
establishing touch with another place is not going, but that 
a particular form only of such action is called going. Now, 
if it is asked, What is this particular form of action which 
is called going? the philosopher will reply: “ It is touching 
another place with the feet." But in that case kicking also 
becomes going. One is therefore at last obliged to say that 
“ going ” is the name of that aotion whioh people call 
“going." It thus comes to this: “gamana” (going) means 
“ gati " (motion), and “ gati ” (motion) means “ gamana " 
(going). It is because he will, after all, have to die this 
death that the old and intelligent grammarian has at the 
outset accepted the death, and said in plain terms that 
“ gamana ” means “ gati." But the philosopher will not 
easily accede to this. He will die the same death at last, 
but with a frown on his brow. This is what is oalled

1 Limitations, such as " ness,“ " ness," “ confined to,” etc., for 
which the Nava Nyaya school here satirized displays snch predilection. 
It is commonly believed that a logician will in his next birth be born a 
jackass.

444

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA444

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

having too muoh intelligence. A philosopher’s wisdom 
consists in puzzling the intelligence with a voluminous 
combination of words while he knows full well that there is 
no other means than “ mutual dependence." It must there¬ 
fore be understood that the loquaoious philosopher and the 
s&dhaka who knows the truth 1 concerning things are not 
one and the same person. The fundamental principle of a 
sadhana $hastra is attainment of siddhi, while the funda¬ 
mental principle of philosophy is merely looking abroad 
with the eyes wide open. In the present discussion of 
?hakti-tattva we shall therefore depend entirely on S&dhana- 
$hastra,' and have nothing to do with philosophy; for 
millions of systems of philosophy inay disappear from view, 
but not the least change can occur in a sadhaua-shastra.* 
However that may be, what we understand from grammar 
is that, as in the case of “ gati," there is no means of under¬ 
standing $hakti with the help of any term expressive of 
quality other than the same word “ $hakti." Considering 
the manner in which the word “ shakti ” is ordinarily UBed, 
it appears from the adjunots of §hakti in such expressions 
as intellectual $hakti, mental $hakti, mnemonio shakti, 
visual ghakti, aural shakti, active §hakti, vital $hakti, etc., 
that §hakti merely takes different names according as it 
manifests itself in different places, while in reality the 
thiog §hakti is everywhere the same. What is the root of 
the shaktis which are in the branch, the leaf, the fruit, and 
the flower? What is that shakti under the influence of 
which these shaktis disappear ? And what, again, is that 
Shakti under the influence of which they appear? It is 
universally admitted that the answer to this question is, 
that Atm& is at the root of all these ?hakti$. Now we must 
understand what this Atma is.

1 Tattva.

* Tantra.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd.)

4461 Tattva.

* Tantra.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd.)

446

There is a class of believers who, when they hear the 
Upanishads taking the name of Atmft, become senseless 
with emotion, and say that Atmft is “ attributeless and 
omnipresent.” On the other hand, there is a class of 
sceptics who take up the sword at the very mention of the 
name of Atmft, saying that it is “ a false and fanciful thing." 
Put under the edges of the saws applied by these two class¬ 
es of people, Atrna has, in the nineteenth century, become 
finer and finer, and has ended in being something almost 
non-existent. It is only because Atmft has an Atmft of its 
own that it has not altogether ceased to exist. For this 
reason, in order now to find out the true nature of Atmft, it 
must be rescued from the hands of both these classes of 
people, kept in a separate place, and viewed from there.

In dualistic vision cause and effect are two different 
things, but looked at from the monistic point of view, they 
are the same. That which is the effect is also the cause, and 
that which is the cause is also the effect; for what did not 
exist in the cause oannot exist in the effect, and what does 
not exist in the effeot oannot have existed in the cause. 
The $hakti which does not exist in the seed can never 
appear in the tree, and the shakti whioh does not appear 
in the tree cannot have existed in the seed. A considera¬ 
tion of the similarity between the seed and the tree leads 
to the conclusion that the seed is the latent state of shakti 
while the tree is in its patent state. Similarly, all the 
shaktis which appear manifest in life*—the senses, the 
body, and the mind—are but patent states of Atmft, that 
great ?hakti of the seed. To say that shakti resides in Atmft 
is to present the thing in the form in which it may be 
understood by means of ordinary intelligence. The final 
decision of the Shastra, however, is that in reality Shakti

* Pr4pa.

44G PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Pr4pa.

44G PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

is Atmft and Atmft is Shakti. It is but a mode of speech to 
say that fire has the power (ehakti) of burning. The truth 
is that fire exists as power of burning and the power of 
burning appears as fire. We in our ordinary vision see only 
the material and gross aspect of fire.

The Shiistra has therefore called that easily perceptible 
aspect by the name of fire, and designated the power of 
burning as its shakti (power). But leaving the material 
aspect aside, spiritually speaking fire is nothing but shakti. 
Although the expression “My Atma/' used in ordinary 
parlance by worldly people, means, in reality, “ What is 
Atma that I am, yet, by falsely considering the physical 
body to be the person (Atma) we are wont to say “ my 
Atma in the sense that Atma exists in this my physical 
body. Here, also, if we leave out of consideration the 
physical side, Atmft becomes nothing but Shakti, because 
no such thing exists in the world as the shakti of Atmft. 
That which is Atmft is Shakti, and that which is Shakti is 
Atmft. In many places in the Shftstra there is mention of 
the shakti of Atmft, but in all such places it is Atma alone 
which has really been spoken of, just as people speak of the 
water of the Ganges, the head of Rahu, 1 the refulgence of 
the sun, the light of the moon, etc., although, in reality, the 
water is Ganges, the head is Rahu, the refulgence is the 
sun, the light is the moon, and so on. Just as, in order to 
express the power of shakti, a distinction has to be imagin¬ 
ed in ordinary usage, and expressions like “ the water of 
the Ganges " have to be used ; so, although what is Shakti 
is Atmft, yet authors of Shftstras have, in order to enable 
people to understand the §hakti-tattva,* often spoken of the 
shakti of Atma; but in conclusion they have unanimously, 
and with one voice, said: “ There is no distinction between

1 One of the navagrah&s (planets).

Subject of or principles concerning shakti.1 One of the navagrah&s (planets).

Subject of or principles concerning shakti.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? (< Contd.)

447

Shakti and the possessor of shakti.” In spite, however, of 
this absence of distinction, they have had, even while esta¬ 
blishing such absence, to speak of two—namely, Shakti 
and the possessor of shakti—in order to explain the matter 
to people whose knowledge consists of distinctions. With¬ 
out two there can be no distinction, and without dis¬ 
tinction there can be no establishment of the absence of 
distinction.

There is yet something more for consideration. What 
is the true nature of that Atm& over which there is so 
much quarrel, dispute, and discussion ? Why do we admit 
its existence ? Looking at this part of the question we 
see that the body of the Jlva is unconscious, his senses are 
unconsoious, and even his mind is almost so, for although 
the mind possesses a little of consciousness, it cannot exist 
independently and supported by itself. It is, therefore, a 
subject for consideration under whose subjection all these 
dependent things exist. This matter has been very clearly 
decided in the form of a question in the Kena Upanishad. 
There it is asked, By what are the senses of work, the 
senses of knowledge, mind, intellect, etc., able to perform 
their respective functions ? What is the true nature of Him 
who is the eye of the eye, the ear of the ear, the life of the 
life, the mind of the mind ? He has been called “ the eye of 
the eye, the ear of the ear, the life of the life,” but not the 
Atmft of the Atm&; because if the nature 1 of Atma is 
decided first of all, the question “ By what ? ” cannot at all 
arise. For that is the final point, the ultimate goal. How¬ 
ever that may be, after all these questions the Kena Upani¬ 
shad goes on to say: “ Indra, Chandra,* Vayu, 3 Varupa, 4 
Agni,' and other Devas who preside over the senses in the 
Jlva’s body were directing the working of the universe with

'Fire.

1 Tattva.

* Moon.'Fire.

1 Tattva.

* Moon.

'Air.

* Water.

448

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

their various powers and boastiDg of their victory over 
Asuraa, when suddenly a mass of indescribable brilliance 1 
appeared before them. Unable to make out what that 
enormously powerful mass of light was, Agni and other 
Devas, deputed by Indra, went over one by one to It and 
were asked by It who they were. First of all Agni said that 
he was Agni (fire) aud Jataveda. 1 and that he could burn the 
whole world. Thereupon that Devatft made of light, placed 
before Agni a blade of grass and said, “ Burn it." Agni 
tried his best but failed to burn the grass.

Subsequently, after Vayu and other Devas had been 
equally put to shame and had returned, Indra himself went, 
but in an instant that Devatft, the refulgent mass of light, 
disappeared. Seeing the mass of light disappear, Indra 
understood that It had disappeared because, although He 
was the ruler of the three worlds, He was yet not a fit 
person even to approaoh that Devatft. Thus shattering the 
pride of Indra, She, who is perfect Brahman and eternal, 
assumed the fairest form of Gaurl and appeared before the 
Devas, illumining the firmament with Her lustre. Then, 
when the Lord of Devas * * questioned Her about Her real 
nature, She replied. ...

We are unable to divulge Her reply to the public, for 
that is Upanishad. We shall, however, quote, from the 
elaborate account of this subject given in the Devi- 
Bhagavata, that portion in which the Devi’s reply is 
contained. From this sftdhakas will know Her real nature.

The Devi said : “ This aspect of mine is Brahman in 
reality, the cause of all causes, the seat of mftyft, witness to 
all and free from all defect. Divided into two parts, I create

* Tejas.

* A Vaidik name for Agni. The word means " known by all things

that are born." or "known aa it is born" (spreads) (Sayana's Com¬ 
mentary on Bigveda). ' Indra.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

449* A Vaidik name for Agni. The word means " known by all things

that are born." or "known aa it is born" (spreads) (Sayana's Com¬ 
mentary on Bigveda). ' Indra.

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

449

the entire world. One of these parts is Sachchid&nanda- 
Prakriti and the other is Maya-Prak^iti. That maya is my 
Paramft 1 shakti, and I am the Ishvarl who possesses that 
shakti. But just as moonlight is not distinct from the 
moon, so I am not distinct from maya. O Lord of Devas! 
during the dissolution * * of the whole world this maya exists 
inseparate from me in a state of equilibrium, and again, in 
consequence of the past karma of Jlvas, this unmanifested 
maya becomes manifest. The aspect of shakti, in which She 
is inward looking, is called ‘ m&yft,' and that in which She 
is outward looking is called ‘avidya.’ It was from tamas, 
the outward-looking avidya, that sattva, rajas, and tamas, 
the three gunas, appeared at the beginning of creation, and 
from that threefold division appeared Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Maheshvara. The rajas guna predominates in Brahma the 
satttva guna in Vishiiu, and the tamas guna in Rudra, who 
is the embodiment of all causes. 3

“ In this Brahmanda (which is but a manifestation of 
avidya consisting of tamas) Brahma is like my gross* 
body, Vishnu is like my linga* body, Rudra is like my 
causal* body, and I myself am turiya chaitanya. T It 
is in my state of equipoise that I reside in all things. 
Beyond that, I am Parabrahman, devoid of form. I 
have two aspects, according as I am with and without 
attributes. The aspect which is above mfty& is attri¬ 
buteless, and the aspect with maya is with attributes. 
Thus, possessing two aspects, I create the world as Maya, 
enter into it as Brahman, and send Jivas along their

' Supreme. * Pralaya.' Supreme. * Pralaya.

' The Bengali word is “ K&rana." All effects lie in a potential stnte 
in their causes. This potential state represents tamas guna. Rudra, 
in whom tamas predominates, thus holds all effects in him as their 
cause.

* St.hu la. * Subtle body. * Earapa.

* Consciousness in its fourth state (see Introduction).

29

450 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

respective paths, whether good or bad, according to law 
and karma.” 1

“ It is I, again, who appoint Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Maheshvara to do the work of creation, preservation, and 
destruction of the three worlds. It is out of fear of me* 
that the wind blows, the sun rises and sets, Indra gives 
rain, fire burns, and death takes the lives of Jivas. For 
this reason I am called ‘ the best of all ’ (sarvottama), ‘ the 
ruler of all ’ (sarveshvarl). It is through my grace that Ye 
triumph in all things. Ye are but puppets in my hand. 
Being will in substance, I ever act according to my own 
will, and according to your karma I grant victory at one 
time to you, and at another to Asuras. Through pride, and 
overpowered by intense delusion, you forgot Me, the dweller 
in all things. For this reason, in order to favour Ye, my 
energy,* the shakti, which is ‘the best of all,' emerged from 
out of your bodies and appeared before you as what you 
thought to be a \aksha.”‘ (That is to say, separated from 
that great shakti, you failed to recognize your individual 
shaktis and also were unable to do the works for which 
you are appointed in the world.)

“ Henceforward, by all means shake off pride and seek 
the protection of Me, who am existence, consciousness, and 
bliss.” (That is to say, knowing Me to be the controller 
of all, attribute the fruits of all works, done or undone, 
to the full exercise of my great shakti, and be gratified on 
thus resigning yourselves to Me.)Adya-Shakti (primal shakti) says: “ Divided into two 
parts, I create. One of these parts is Sachchhidananda- 
Prakriti, and the other is Maya-Prakriti.” Again, when

' See Introduction.

’ That is, in obedience to me. 1 Tejas.

^bat is, as some being of a high order deserving 
adoration.

honour and

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Cvntd .)

451

maya is Her shakti She is the Ishvari possessing that shakti. 
Spiritually speaking, shakti is not different from Her, just 
as moonlight is not different from the moon. It is the said 
part whioh is pure Sachchhidananda which has been 
designated as Atmft in all Shastras. The body, the senses, 
the mind, the life, all are subordinate to Him, all functions 
are within His control; for all things in the body are 
unconscious and that Atma which is consciousness is the 
sole cause of their being possessed of consciousness.

Just as the sun is the only source of all light during 
the day, so Atma is the only source of all physical con¬ 
sciousness. As the sun is not a different thing from its 
light, so Atm& is not a different thing from Shakti or con¬ 
sciousness. The ultimate point to which atma-tattva 1 leads 
is, therefore, Chitshakti.* * What we know as consciousness 
is called shakti. In explaining the word shakti it may finally 
be said that shakti is that thing which makes able—that is 
to say, that power by virtue of which the body, the senses, 
the mind, and the prana,* which are all unconscious, 1 be¬ 
come able to act like conscious things. It is because Shakti 
is universe-pervading that its other name is Atmft. What 
pervades is Atma; He who pervades all is called Atma.In the driving of a carriage we see that the carriage, 
the driver of the carriage, the person driven, and the 
horse, all four in fact, are in motion. Of these four, only 
one is independent and conscious, two are dependent and 
consoious, and the remaining one, though itself uncon¬ 
scious, is drawn like a conscious thing. The horse, 
though conscious, is under the control of the driver; the 
driver, though conscious, is under the control of the

1 The discussion of the Atm4—spiritual science.

’ Consciousness as the ultimate $hakti. • Vital principle.

* That is. when dualistically considered as separate things.

452

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

person driven; and the oarriage, though itself uncon¬ 
scious, is successively under the control of all three— 
viz., the person driven, the driver, and the horse. Sftdha- 
kas constantly see such a carriage-driving within their 
bodies. The body composed of five elements is nothing 
but a carriage for carrying a person in and out on this 
journey of sangs&ra. The ten senses are its ten horses, the 
mind is its driver, and Atma, that great Shakti, is the per¬ 
son driven. Just as the driver guides the horses according 
to the directions of the person driven, so the mind also, 
urged by the shakti of Atma, sends the senses to their indi¬ 
vidual pursuits.As the carriage runs drawn by the horse, the body 
moves drawn by the senses. The mind and the senses are 
both conscious under the influence of the consciousness of 
Atma. In all the pursuits of the senses the body appears 
as conscious. The body is subordinate to the senses, the 
senses are subordinate to the mind, the mind is subordinate 
to Atma. Of the four, therefore, three are dependent, and 
only Atma is independent, all the others being subordinate 
to Him. There is, however, this peculiarity here, that, un¬ 
like the ordinary person, seated in a carriage, the person 
who is driven in the carriage of the body does not travel 
along any path fixed by Him ; He simply orders the driver 
to drive the carriage and then retires. The driver is left to 
choose whichever path he likes, and to enjoy or suffer from 
the comfort and discomforts of the path on which his choice 
may fall. The person driven has neither comfort nor dis¬ 
comfort. Atma is ever free from attachment.

The driver may, with unerring discretion, take the 
carriage safely through the paths of sin and virtue which 
the Shastra indicates; but if he is weak, there is danger for 
him. The ten wayward horses draw the carriage in ten 
different directions and, consequently, the small carriage,

WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

453WHAT IS SHAKTI ? ( Contd .)

453

built with five pieces of wood * 1 and full of innumerable 
joints, breaks down in mid-path. Besides this, the hero 
who has taken charge of driving the carriage is hardly able 
to control himself, not to speak of controlling the horses. 
He has a dread of the two reins §hama and dama, 1 which 
are prescribed for controlling the horses. Even the thought 
of them often greatly frightens him, and, in many cases, he 
is of opinion that the idea of handling and using them in 
tightening or loosening the hold on the horses, is but an 
incredible fancy. It is owing to such weakness on the part 
of the driver that in the hunt for happiness in the 6angs&ra, 
Jlva so often forgets his aim.

It is here in the sangsara that the terrible catastrophe 
begins. Although the driver is weak, he can cast his eyes 
towards the person sitting in the carriage, and then, forget¬ 
ting fatalism/ one becomes inclined to say: “ 0 Mother! 
what play is this of yours ? The strength and intelligence 
of the driver are not unknown to You; why, then, knowing 
everything, have You placed the carriage in charge of such 
a worthless driver ? True it is that I am a great sinner, but 
for that You cannot abandon me. In this great crisis 
neither the driver nor the person driven 1 can save himself. 
I know that I must suffer the fruits of my own karma; but 
still, O Mother! I desire to see You once in this broken 
carriage* of mine.”

“ As in Havana's last drive in a carriage, so in this 
last drive of mine appear for once, 0 Mother! mad

1 The five elements.

' Equanimity and self-restraint, external and internal.

1 Adriskfa vftda.

' There is no escape for the driven, because he, too, is associated 
with the sufferings of the Jiva, though bo does not feel them.

’ The human body.

454

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Adriskfa vftda.

' There is no escape for the driven, because he, too, is associated 
with the sufferings of the Jiva, though bo does not feel them.

’ The human body.

454

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and shouting, * * Fear not! fear not! ’ Stand in the carri¬ 
age, holding me to Thy bosom. Do not disappear, but 
appear for a moment in my heart, so that I can for 
once see the lustrous glory of your world-encompassing 
beauty, filling my eyes, filling my mind, filling my life. 
0 Mother! let the light of that death-conquering black 
beauty of yours, which has the lustre of a million 
moons, dispel the darkness of my fear of death. 0 
Mother! may I, climbing to your bosom and becoming 
yours, die the death 1 for which even immortals, regardless 
of their privilege of immortality, long. So I say, come, O 
Mother! let us two, Mother and son, together undertake to¬ 
day the journey by carriage. Let me for once see, O 
Mother! your Car-journey* in the carriage of my body, 
in the carriage of my eyes, in the carriage of my mind, in 
the carriage of my heart. I have heard that there is no 
return journey* in your carriage, and hence this desire on 
my part.”

1 Of the individual self in the bosom of the Mother.

* Rathaj&tm, or car festival, in which the Deva or Devi is drawn in 
a car. Here the human body is the Devi's car.

' To the worlds of birth and death.

CHAPTER IX

SHIVA AND SHAKTI* Rathaj&tm, or car festival, in which the Deva or Devi is drawn in 
a car. Here the human body is the Devi's car.

' To the worlds of birth and death.

CHAPTER IX

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

Sadhaka, no Sh&stra or community denies that the above- 
mentioned Atma, who is Shakti, is Brahman. Differences 
of opinion exist among those whose knowledge consists of 
distinctions only, in respect of the three words Atma, Shakti 
and Chaitanya. 1 The word Atma is masculine, the word 
Shakti is feminine, and the word Chaitanya is neuter. As 
there are differences of gender between the three as names, 
so there are also differences of kind between them as things 
—Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara are male, Shakti is 
female, and Chaitanya or Brahman is neuter. As there is 
no scope for distinction of kind in attributeless Chitshakti, 
the Shastra has designated Chaitanya or Brahman as neuter. 
Again, owing to differences in the forms in which the shakti 
of will, the shakti of knowledge, and the ?hakti of action 
appear,* * the Shastra calls the Deva male and the Devi 
female, in accordance with the male or female principle 
inherent in all fathers and mothers in the world, begin¬ 
ning at the root from the Father of the world and 
the Mother of the world. This is no mere imagination 
on the part of the authors of the Shastra; it is but a 
statement of what is really true. Femininity and mas¬ 
culinity exist wherever there is a description of creation,

* That is, spirit, power, and intelligence or consciousness respect¬ 
ively.

* Ichchb&^hakti, jn&na$hakti, kriy4$hakti.

466

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* That is, spirit, power, and intelligence or consciousness respect¬ 
ively.

* Ichchb&^hakti, jn&na$hakti, kriy4$hakti.

466

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

preservation, and destruction caused by maya through 
a union of the two persons. The neuter state, or the state 
beyond that of a male or a female exists when the 
aspect above maya is described. To speak of neuter 
does not imply complete absence of the male or the female 
principle; it implies only an unmanifested or undeveloped 
state of those principles (shakti). Even in the bodies of 
neuters we see in life that both the masculine and feminine 
marks are found to be present. In some cases the neuter’s 
body is found to be more like that of a male, while in others 
it is found to be more like that of a female, the only dis¬ 
tinction being that the male or the female principle is not 
fully developed.

From what the Shastra says about the generation of 
neuters it appears that when neither the male nor the female 
principle can subdue the other, a neuter is created, in whom 
the two principles exist in a state of equilibrium. The 
Saradatilaka 1 says: “ An excess of menstrual blood causes 
the birth of a female, an excess of seed that of a male, and 
an evenness of the quantities of blood and semen that of a 
neuter. This is certain.”

The M&trik&bheda Tantra says: " An excess of the 
Rhakti’s (woman’s) blood over the purusha’s (man's) seed 
causes the birth of a female child; its opposite causes the 
birth of a male child, and if the blood and the semen be 
equal in quantity a neuter is born. This is certain.” It 
has also been stated what proportions of blood and semen 
mean equality in quantity.

“ At the time of procreation twenty-two 1 units of 
menstrual blood and fourteen units of seed are produced 
in the bodies of the woman and the man respectively. This

1 See also as to the process of sexual union, chap, ii, of the M&trika- 
bheda Tantra, chap, i, Sbukt&nondatarangini; Prilnatoshini, p. 29.1 See also as to the process of sexual union, chap, ii, of the M&trika- 
bheda Tantra, chap, i, Sbukt&nondatarangini; Prilnatoshini, p. 29.

* See Saradatilaka.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

457

is equality. If the blood be in excess (that is to say, if 
twenty-two units of blood mix with less than fourteen units 
of semen), a female is born ; and if the semen be in excess 
(that is to say, if fourteen units of semen mix with less 
than twenty-two units of blood), a male is born; and if the 
above-mentioned numbers of units of blood and semen re¬ 
main the same, a neuter is born.”Even in this equality of the numbers of units the 
excess 1 of half a unit one way or the other leads to the 
appearance of female marks or male marks in the body of 
a neuter; and according to these marks neuters may be 
divided into male-neuters and female-neuters. But the 
Shastra, which notices the result only, has rejected this 
useless classification and has ordinarily treated all neuters 
as the same. Nevertheless, although the difference between 
male neuters and female neuters makes no difference in the 
fruit, it makes some difference at the root and in the flower; 
otherwise, the difference would not have appeared. At the 
root there is the difference between the quantities of blood 
and semen, and in the flower there are differences, physical, 
mental, and functional. The neuter whose body resembles 
that of a male develops mostly masculine tendencies, and 
the neuter whose body resembles that of a female develops 
mostly feminine tendencies. Similarly, 0 just as the male 
and female principles exist undeveloped in neuters, their 
developed forms being the male and female entities, so 
both the principles of Shakti and Shiva exist unmanifested 
in the Brahman, their manifestations being Umft and 
Mahe§hvara, Lakshml and Nar&yapa, Rad ha and Kpshiia, 
Sita and Rama, and so on. Besides this, that blissful 
Brahman aspect of Shiva and Shakti, wherein They are 
manifest and yet unmanifest and are inseparate from each

1 The equality is supposed to hold so long as there is not the 
difference of one full unit.

458

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

other, and whioh can be worshipped only as an undifferen¬ 
tiated mass of consciousness and bliss—that aspect is Mah&- 
vidya, primordial, beginningless, worshipped of Brahma 
and other Devas and sought by the three worlds.We shall possibly, while dealing with the subject of 
sadhana, be able to present to the scrutiny of Sadhakas 
a sketch of a part of that aspect wherein bliss has 
its full play and which is monistic and eternal and 
above maya. Here we must understand that Chaitanya 1 
is nothing but Shakti, although the word itself is neuter 
in gender. To this end we shall quote a single sQtra from 
the Tantra Shastra, in whioh the all-luminous aspect of 
Brahman is established. The Nirvana Tantra* says:

“In the Satyaloka 1 Mahakali and Mahanidra live, 
embracing one another inseparably. That eternal Shakti, 
possessing the lustre of the moon, the sun, and fire, taken 
together and united with the eternal Purusha, exists like 
a grain of gram. (That is to say, just as the two halves 
of a grain of gram are attached to one another, so they 
too are attached to one another.) As a grain of gram is 
covered by an external shell, so She is covered by Her own 
covering of may^ As the shell of a grain of gram is 
dark and hard Compared with its brilliant and soft valves, 
so may&, also, discordant with its three gurias, is dark 
and hard compared with Shiva-Shakti, full of brilliance 
and soft with supreme bliss. As the whole, consisting of 
two halves and a shell, is called gram, so the whole, con¬ 
sisting of Shiva-Shakti and ra&y&, is called Brahman. To 
an ordinary observer, making his observation from outside 
the shell, a grain of gram seems to contain only one thing, 
but he who can see through the shell finds within that

1 Consciousness.

This is not to be confused with the MahanirvAna Tantra.

' See Introduction.

469

SHIVA AND SHAKTI1 Consciousness.

This is not to be confused with the MahanirvAna Tantra.

' See Introduction.

469

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

grain two halves facing and inseparably attached to one 
another. Similarly, he who judges Brahma-tattva through 
m&y& finds Brahman to be but one. To the eyes, however, 
of an adept in suoh knowledge , 1 an accomplished Sadhaka, 
who is aware of the deceptive character of maya, there 
are manifested both His aspects of Shiva and Shakti, all 
full of supreme love. As sparks shoot from a burning 
fire, so Jlvas, forming parts of Her body, shoot from the i 
limbs of the luminous Devi into infinite millions of } 
Brahmaijdas.”

The male and female forms, different from one another, 
are, whether they appear in the aspect of Ishvara or in 
time of Jlva, bnt ingfonrnftn ts in the dualistic play. They 
are different only as instruments, but not as agents. The 
agent is the same for both the instruments, and that is Atm a 
or Shakti. Again, as in the bodies of males and females, so 
in the bodies of neuters, also, Atma or Shakti ifi the presiding 
Devata. It therefore comes to t his, that the bodies o f males, 
females, and neuters are alike seats of the play of Chit- 
shakti. There is no other alternative. It is an extremely 
erroneous conclusion that because words ending in the suffix 
“ kti ” are feminine, shakti must always refer to the female 
body and have no concern with the male body.

But, then, it may be asked, Why does the word §hakti 
mean a female only? To this question we shall be bound 
so far as it will be in our power, to give a suitable answer 
in its proper place. Here, we shall say this muoh alone, 
that the word shakti, meaning the female principle, is 
Yogarudha,* for, fundamentally, Shakti is the same as

1 Tattva.1 Tattva.

’ That is, a word which has an etymological as well as a special or 
conventional meaning, but is used only in the latter sense. ThuB, 
p&nkaja, which etymologically applies to what is “ mud born," is used 
only in respect of a particular thing— viz., the lotu6 of which it is the 
synonym.

460

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

Prakriti, and males and neuters are but changed forms 
of that Prakriti. The assumption of the male form by 
Shakti for the purpose of creation is but an exhibition of 
play. At the close of the play of sangsara, Mahaskakti 
will withdraw this form and exist in that which is really 
Her own. This is the conclusion of those who believe in 
a perfect Maha-pralaya . * 1 * * But the arguments and authorities 
in favour of this view are very weak.

The Tantra§hastra, therefore, holds that the purusha 
side * is the cause of the bondage consisting of attachment 
to the sangsara, and that the shakti side is the cause 
of liberation 5 or cessation of attachment to the sangsara. 
There is no ground for the occurrence of a perfect great 
Dissolution 4 of the flow of worlds. For this reason, eternal 
are the creation, preservation, and destruction by Her who 
is eternally blissful. Eternal is Her bondage, and eternal 
also is Her liberation. In the eternal form of Her who is 
ever liberation itself, eternal also is Purusha as the seed of 
creation. But in the case of liberation in the form of 
perfect nirvtiga, the Purusha$hakti exists only to enjoy the 
play of bliss. Waves of creation no longer play in Her.*

' A pralayu (dissolution of things) after which there is no creation.

* Literally, " part" (of $hakti) — that is, the .Shakti of creation. 
Purusha is not here used in the Sftngkhya sense, but in that of the 
male side of creation. According to Hindu ideas it is the male who 
creates: the mother side is the support—ddhftra only.1 In so far os Shakti represents the supreme motionless Brahman, 
and Purusha the Daks hi pa shakti its manifestation (see Mah&k&la 
Tantra, poet).

* Mahdpralaya. For karma is eternal, and after pralaya, exists in

the Brahman in a latent subdued form, which, on the rcwakening, be¬ 
comes the seed of new worlds.

* That is, in liberation (mukti) that aspect of $hakti which is 
creative ceases to create, and there is then only lil&nanda mukti, the

play of the supreme Divine Bliss.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

401

For this reason, keeping that shakti 1 beneath Her as 
a mere instrument of play, the Mahflshakti, who grants 
liberation, stands upon it and, lost in the enjoyment of 
the sweetness of Brahma-bliss, assumes the part of a mad 
woman, subduing the inactive Purusha, or creative shakti,' 
under Her feet. She of dishevelled hair proclaims the 
victory of liberation, and, extending Her uplifted hands, 
gives assurance to Her children, frightened by the dread 
of existence, with the cry, “Fear not! fear not! That 
Purusha, the creative shakti, is Mahak&la, and on his breast 
that Dispeller of the fear of death, that Delighter of the 
heart, Charmer of the mind of Kiila holds Her Kaivalya- 
play. It has, therefore, been said in the Mahakala Tantra:“ Purusha is called right (dakshina, because he is the 
right side of the body), and Shakti is called left (Vama, 
because she is the left side of the body). So long as the 
right and left, the male and female, remain equally power¬ 
ful, so long alone does the bondage of sangsara endure. 
When, by dint of intense sadhana, the left shakti has been 
awakened; when the left has overpowered Purusha, the 
right Shakti, and lost Herself in graoious joy on His body 
(that is to say, when both the parts of right and left are 
filled with Her power), then She (who is bliss unalloyed) 
grants highest liberation * * to Jlva. For this reason, the 
Mother, the saviour of the three worlds, is called Dakshina, 
Kali. Just as the body of a neuter, which represents the 
unmanifested state of both the male and female sides, is 
not produced without a union between a male and a female, 
so the Brahman aspect does not appear without the presence 
in it of Shiva and Shakti, the Father and Mother of the 
Brahmanda in an unmanifested state.

1 That is, Purusha.

* Though the creative agent. He has ceased to create. 
’ Mah&moksha.

462

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“As a neuter cannot give birth to children, so the 
Brahman aspect, which is above the three gunas, is devoid 
of the creative, preservative, and destructive activities. 
Again, in its state with attributes there appear from it 
Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara, SGrya, Ganesha, Savitrl, 
Lakshml, Sarasvatl, Gauri, and other forms, according to 
distribution of gunas, and as the male and female agents 
for the contiol of those gunas. It is from the same aspect 
of Shakti that the creation, preservation, and destruction of 
untold millions of Brahm&ndas take place."It therefore follows that Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara, 
Rdma, Krishna, Siirya and Ganesha, Radha, Lakshml, 
Sarasvatl, Savitrl, Durga, RukminI, and whomsoever else! 
male or female, you may mention, are all aspects of Shakti! 
Brahma is the aspect of Shakti in Her play of creation, 
Vishnu is the aspect of Shakti in Her play of preservation! 
and Maheshvara is the aspect of Shakti in Her play 
of destruction. SGrya is the aspect of Shakti in Her play 
as light and heat , 1 Ganesha is the aspect of Shakti in 
Her play as siddhi,* Radha, Lakshml, Sarasvatl, Savitrl, 
DurgG, Sita, RukminI and others are the aspects of Shakti 
in her play as the Mah&shakti, who is at the root of all 
Shaktis, and in whom they all rest. If a sadhaka is a 
Vaishpava, his knowledge of Vishiju-Shakti will remain 
imperfect so long as he does not understand that that 
Shakti is not different from Shiva, Durga, SGrya, and 
Ganesha Shaktis; and if he is a Shakta his knowledge of 
Shaktitattva will remain imperfect so long as he does not 
recognize that the Adyashakti * is not different from Vishpu, 
Shiva, SGrya, and Ganesha Shaktis. And this is the case 
whichever be the Shakti a Sadhaka may worship. And so 
long as knowledge remains thus imperfect, liberation is 
unattainable.

Tajas. * Success (see Indroduction).

' The primordial §hakti.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

463Tajas. * Success (see Indroduction).

' The primordial §hakti.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

463

The Devatft I worship is the DevatA whom the world 
worships. I do not think of Shiva, Shakti, Sflrya, Ganesha, 
Visbiiu, or whomsoever else you may mention, as nothing 
to me, and as one whom I cannot worship, for all of them 
are but different aspects, assumed in play, of Him whom I 
do worship. All these aspects represent the play which He 
loves, who is the life of my life and the dearest treasure of 
my heart. How can I dishonour those aspects, the beloved 
wealth, and the treasure of sAdhana of Him who forms my 
most beloved treasure? When such perfeot love appears 
with full force, the heart of the Shakta is rent, as it were, 
into a hundred pieces by the thunderbolt of discriminating 
knowledge 1 were he to think of Krishna as different from 
Kali. The Vaishnava, also, is sorely pained to think of 
Kali as different from Vishnu. No one can be perfectly 
happy with an imperfect knowledge of the Dovata he 
worships. The Tantrash&stra has therefore said, with a 
deep voice which stirs the community of Sadhakas:

“‘O Devi! Nirvana can never be attained without a 
knowledge of Shakti.’ This message is as dear to the heart 
of the devoted Sadhakas, full of love, as it is painful to the 
community of Asuras in human form, who are inimical 
to Devas. It has always been a self-evident truth that 
words spoken by Devas pain the hearts of Asuras. We 
have, therefore, nothing to say on the point. Just as 
Shaktas have imperfect knowledge of shaktitattva if they 
think that the term * Shakti ’ denotes only such aspects as 
Kii.lt, Tara, and Durga, which are but fruits of shaktitattva 
so Vaishnavas have imperfect knowledge of Vishputattva, 
also if they distinguish Vishnu from Shakti, with this dif¬ 
ference, however, that the latter consider themselves pandits 
to boot. But Bhagavan, the ocean of eternal knowledge,

1 Bhedajn&ua.

464

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Bhedajn&ua.

464

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and the treasure which devotees worship, has, in speaking 
of His own self, said in the Tantrashastra :

44 4 Shakti, Maheshvara, and Brahman—these three 
words mean the same thing. The only difference which 
exists between them is that one is feminine, another is 
masculine, and another is neuter.

‘‘‘This difference, however, belongs only to the words. 
In themselves there is, in the highest sense, no difference 
between them.' ”

We fail to understand the notions which those people 
entertain of Parameshvara and Parameshvarl who, when 
they observe marks of masculinity and femininity in the 
appearance of Devat&s of worship, thereupon say that 
the forms of even Parameshvara and Parameshvarl dif¬ 
fer, in that the one is a male and the other a female 
principle. If the shape of Ishvara's body be as fixed 
and material as that of the body of a Jlva, then of what 
does his lllft 1 consist? That is called Ilia whioh, though 
not really true, is done as if it were true in the excite¬ 
ment of the bliss enjoyed by the Self. Just as an 
actor has really no connection with the parts he plays, 
so Bhagav&n or Bhagavatl also have no connection with the 
forms which, in play, they assume in various ways.

Their connection with the assumption of forms is the 
same as that which exists between an actor and his acting. 
Nevertheless, although the assumption of forms is not really 
true so far as they are concerned, it is perfectly and un¬ 
doubtedly true so far as a Jlva is concerned. For, to their 
eyes, the sangsara is as much a play as their own bodies, 
but so long as this sangsara does not appear to you and me 
as a play. Their bodies also do not appear to us as such. 
Secondly, if for the sake of peculiarities of terms, it be

1 Play (see Introduction to this book).

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

4651 Play (see Introduction to this book).

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

465

necessary to admit that their forms follow those peculiari¬ 
ties, then, like the female and male forms of Shakti and 
Shiva, or Lakshml and N&r&yana, the form of Brahman 
becomes neuter owing to the term Brahman being neuter; 
but in reality the thing denoted by the term Brahman is 
not neuter, although it is so according to the gender of the 
term. Similarly, the things denoted by the terms Shiva 
and Shakti are not in reality always bound in male and 
female forms respectively, although they are male and female, 
according to the gender of the terms.

There is, however, this particularity to be noted here, 
that as forms for play are impossible in the Btate of an 
attributeless neuter, He assumes male and female forms 
as a being with attributes for the purpose of creating, pre¬ 
serving, and destroying the dualistic world , 1 fulfilling the 
desire of Sadhakas, and that the sweetness of the play be 
enhanced. Worship of an attributeless being is impossible. 
The Tantra * * therefore says:

“ The neuter state of monistic existence, whioh is the 
result of the union of Shiva and Shakti, is revealed of Itself, 
without any separate worship thereof.* The attributeless 
aspect, which is the fruit of all sadhana, and in which, at 
the conclusion of all sadhana, the worshipper sinks and 
loses himself, cannot be attained while sadhana continues. 
It is attained by the great siddhi known as nirvana.”

Whatever form She may assume in Her aspect with 
attributes is but Her form. That Shakti alone who grants

1 Prapancha: literally things formed by the combination of the live 
elements.

' Gandharva Tantra, 84th patala.

* That is, the male and female forms are assumed by the Supreme 
for s&dhana. When a sadhaka has attained siddhi in any of these 
forms, the neater form reveals itself before him without any farther 
effort on his part.

30

466

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA30

466

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

enjoyment, salvation, and devotion, is in all such forms. 
Now the Sadhaka may, if he so desires, know Her as Vishnu, 
Krishna, Shiva, and Rama, or as Kali, Tara, Radha, Durga, 
Slta, and Lakshml, or please himself by calling Her mother, 
father, friend, and well-wisher. It does not matter whether 
the Vaishrtava considers Her as Vishnu in the form of 
Shakti, or the Shakta considers Her as Shakti in the form 
of Vishnu. When we sink in the ocean of Her substance, 
which is Chit-shakti, 1 forgetful of all differences of masculin¬ 
ity and femininity appertaining to forms, theu Krishna§hakti, 
Shivashakti, or Kallshakti, and all other Sbaktis, will be 
mingled into one by the waves of that ocean.

That Mahashakti is everj^where the real giver of libera¬ 
tion, from whomsoever it may come, whether Shiva, Vishnu, 
Durga, Ganesha, or Surya. This condition of unity does not 
arise without a knowledge of shakti-tattva.* * Nirvana libera¬ 
tion is impossible so long as all things do not combine into 
a state of unity. It is for this reason that the Tantra has said: 
“0 Devi! Nirvana can never be attained without a knowledge 
of Shakti.” Rumaprasada * also, whose life was in the Tantra, 
has sung the same air: “ You assume five principal forms, 
according to differences of worship. But, O Mother! how 
can you escape from the hands of him who has dissolved 
the five and made them into one ? ”

To our great misfortune, our doubts thicken round the 
very names of the Mother of the world on account of that 
very sadhana, with which devoted sadhakas sink into the 
sweetness of Her being * and are blessed and liberated from 
the state of a Jlva. One of her names, which are suspected

1 See post. * The truth relating to $hakti.

* Rama Prasada Sen, the great Bengali poet, Tuntrik, and worship¬ 
per of Kill Mu; born 1718, died 1770.

* Lit. : “ sweetness of Tattva."

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

467* Rama Prasada Sen, the great Bengali poet, Tuntrik, and worship¬ 
per of Kill Mu; born 1718, died 1770.

* Lit. : “ sweetness of Tattva."

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

467

to contain imprints of M&yfcvada, 1 is Vishnunmya. It is 
out of this name that Her title of “ great Vaishnavl ” has 
been evolved. It has been said in the YoginI Tantra*: “Re¬ 
membering the time when, after the destruction of the 
Asura, Ghora, in the waters of pralaya, Ady&shakti gave to 
Brahma, Vishiiu, and Maheshvara the charge of creation, 
preservation, and destruction respectively; Mahadeva said: 
‘O Spouse of Shambhu! that Mahakall granted us the shakti 
of will, the $hakti of knowledge, and the shakti of action for 
doing the work of creation, preservation, and destruction. 
She gave the shakti of will to Brahma for creation, the 
shakti of action to Vishnu, and the shakti of knowledge, 
which is the embodiment of all §hakti.s, to me.' ”

According to differences in the mutual relation of the 
gunas of maya which consists of three gunas, the rajas 
guna gives rise to the shakti of will, the sattva guna gives 
rise to the ?hakti of action, and the tamas guna gives rise 
to the shakti of knowledge. In Her play, wherein She 
appears as embodied beings, these three forms of shakti 
constitute the forms of Brahman!, Vaishnavl, and Mabesh- 
varl. In these three forms She is as much Brahniamaya and 
Shivainaya as She is Vishnunmya; but still, in most places, 
the Sbastra has spoken of Her as Vishnumaya. The reason 
for this is that from the commencement of creation to the 
time of Pralaya, Jlvas, in this sangsara are subject to the 
preservative .Shakti* The preservative Shakti rests in Vishnu, 
and the presiding Devi over the act of preservation is 
Vaishnavl-shakti or Vishnumaya. The Devas have there¬ 
fore said in this hymn to the Devi:“ 0 Devi! thou art Vaishnavishakti of infinite power, 
Thou art Parama (supreme) Maya, which is the seed of the 
universe. All this world is deluded by Thee, and Thou,

* Maya theory'.

* 10th patala.

4G8

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

again, when pleased, grantest liberation to Jlvas." Although 
as Maya She is Shivamaya and Brahmam&y& also, the Devas 
said: “Thou art Vaishnavishakti, Thou art Paramft (sup¬ 
reme) Mayfi,” because preservation of the Universe is im¬ 
possible without the influence of Vaishnavl-Mayft. For this 
reason they again said: “ Thou art the seed of the Uni¬ 
verse,” because “all this world is deluded by Thee"—that 
is to say, without delusion the Universe cannot exist. It 
is under the power of Vishnushakti that Jlva is overcome 
by delusion, 1 and for this reason one of the names of Vishnu 
is Janiirdana, or He who overcomes Jana.*The world, whilst in the condition of preservation, has 
not so much concern with the Maya of Brahma, by which it 
was created on the past, or the Mayft of Maheshvara, by 
which it will be destroyed in the future, as with the 
Maya of Vishnu, which has operation in the present time. 
At the time of creation Jlvas had no independence in the 
matter of coming into the world, for the Jlvahood of 
Jlvas was created by the force of the will of Him who also 
created the world by His will. Again, at the time of the 
great Dissolution, 1 Jivas will have no independence in 
the matter of leaving the sangsara for the Jlvahood of 
Jlvas is withdrawn by Him who also destroys the world. 
Neither, therefore, at creation or dissolution have Jlvas 
an opportunity to think or even a right to pray inde¬ 
pendently. At those periods Jlvas are naturally bound to 
enter into the womb of prakriti, and to issue from it 
even against their will, just as a child is bound to enter 
into and issue from the womb of its mother. As from 
the time of conception to that of delivery a mother re¬ 
mains pregnant with child, so from the time of creation 
to that of dissolution M&ya remains full of the spirit of

1 Maya and inoha.

' Ad Asura.

' Mahupralayn.

469

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

preservation. It is during this period that She is called 
Vishnumfiya. The ShfLstra says: “ The child in the womb 
grows according to the quality of the food which the 
Mother takes.” Similarly, we, the children in the womb 
of Prakriti, will be built or grow according to the things 
She enjoys in the sangsiira. The best efforts of the Jlva 
should therefore be directed towards seeing that the 
things enjoyed by Prakriti become free from elements of 
rajas and tamas guijas, and full of the sattva gui?a. 
Customs, principles, practices, rules, and regulations, sadha- 
nas and bhajanas, 1 mantras and Tantras, all are required 
for this end.He who, by satisfying the Prakriti of the self with 
s&ttvik food, and being himself nourished by the high 
quality of that food, is able in due time and with safety 
to issue from the womb of Maya; he alone is able, after 
Her delivery, to see the child-bearing aspeot of Mother 
Mahamaya, and will fondly be placed on Her lap. Just 
as on issuing from the womb a child who has, while living 
within it, suffered indescribable pains, forgets them all 
at the sight of the affectionate face of its mother, so, issuing 
from the womb of Maya, a great yogi, who has attained 
siddhi, forgets all the sufferings of the dualistic sangsara 
at the sight of the refulgent liberating* beauty of the face 
of Mother Brahmamayl, full of love for the universe. When 
confined in the womb of M&yfc, the S&dhakas saw the 
terrors of the darkness of delusion; but issuing from it he 
to-day takes shelter in the lap of the same Mother of the 
Universe.

He now, instead of beeing in darkness, sinks in the sea 
of an existence made of light, brilliant with the lustre of 
a hundred crores * of autumnal moons, and beauteous with

1 Worship.

* Kaivftlya.

' See post.

470

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

bliss. Rocked on the lap of the Mother by the waves of 
his emotion and the ripples of affection, he now plays, 
and sees that Maya no longer exists as Mflyii, but has 
become Mother M&yamayT. 1 For this reason I said that 
in conformity with the custom of entertaining a pregnant 
mother in sadha, so all the sadhana* and bhajana* in the 
sangsara are but eatables offered to Prakriti for Her sadha. 
In preparing for this entertainment it is only necessary 
to understand that these infinite millions of Brahmandas 
receive their conception from the Shakti of Brahma, or 
the Shakti who is Brahma; that the nourishment of the 
child in the womb comes from Vishnushakti, or the Shakti 
who is Vishnu, and that the delivery is caused by Shiva- 
shakti, or the Shakti who is Shiva.The Shakti in whom the rajas guna predominates 
causes the creation of the world of Jlvas; the Shakti in 
whom the sattva gupa predominates causes its preserva¬ 
tion; and the Shakti in whom the taraas guija predomin¬ 
ates causes its dissolution—that is to say, release from 
the bondage of Maya. A change in the creation which 
proceeds from Brahma§hakti is impossible, so that any 
desire on the part of a Jlva to alter the physical creation 
by means of worship of Brahmashakti or Brahmamaya is 
futile; but if the worship is intended for any other object, 
that is a different thing altogether. Every Jiva is, in the 
present state, subject to Vishnushakti or Vishnumaya, 
The question of destroying the rajas guria and the tamas 
guna can arise only in the future state when, by means of 
sadhana and bhajana practised in the present state, the 
sattva guna has been developed. It is only then that one

1 The Mother whose substance is may a.

.^^ba is the entertainment of a mother during the eight or ninth 
month of her pregnancy, so that no desire for food may be left unful¬ 
filled. . * See Introduction. ‘ See post.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

471

becomes fully competent to worship Shivashakti, the 
Destructrix and Dispeller of the woes of sangsara.SHIVA AND SHAKTI

471

becomes fully competent to worship Shivashakti, the 
Destructrix and Dispeller of the woes of sangsara.

Fundamentally, the very tamas guna with which, as 
Avidya, She creates the sangsara, is again destroyed at 
the time of the great dissolution 1 by Herself in Her aspect 
of Shivashakti, as is eternal knowledge and bliss; but this 
competence for worship arises only with the perfection of 
sattva guna. All the instructions of Shastras are meant 
for the development of the sattva guna during the period 
that Jlva lives in the womb of Avidya, overpowered by the 
rajas and tamas gurias. In explaining mayatattva to those 
who have acquired competence for sadhana, the Sh&stra has 
therefore in most places referred to Maya as Vishnumaya, 
who exercises direct power in the present state instead of 
as Brahmamaya or Shivamaya, whose work concerns the 
past and the future respectively. The reason why the 
Shastra does this is that the Jiva’s direct knowledge of 
Maya* must be derived from the present display of Her 
power in the sangsara.

By Vishnumaya or Vishijushakti is not meant maya 
or Shakti subordinate to Vishnu. Such Vaishnavas as 
are ill-disposed towards Shakti will probably refuse to 
understand this; but we say that whether Vaishnavas 
understand it or not, Vishiiu Himself understood, in His 
battle with Madhu and Kaitabha, whether Shakti is sub¬ 
ordinate to Vishnu or Vishnu is subordinate to Shakti, and 
made others also understand it. In short, O Yaishnava! 
the very notion which you possess of the" dual ’’ existence 
of Shakti and possessor of Shakti, or of maya and the 
wielder of maya, is erroneous. In reality the aspect of 
Vishnu is but an aspect assumed by Her who is Maya 
or Shakti.

Mah&pralaya.

: Maya Tattva.

472

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRAMah&pralaya.

: Maya Tattva.

472

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Again, some communities, proud of their Vaishnavism, 
are nowadays heard to say that Bhagavati is a great 
Vaishnavl. “ To serve as if it were one’s own self ” (to 
serve God as one would serve oneself) is the conclusion (idea) 
of the Vaishnava shastra. We have therefore nothing to 
say to the Vaishnava who holds that Bhagavati is a great 
Vaishnavl, because this notion merely bespeaks his own 
nature. There is, moreover, this delightful inconsequence, 
that while the Mother is considered a Vaishnavl the Father 
is a spiritual brother. 1 Blessed be thou, 0 Vaishnava! 
Bravo to thy conclusion! Living in the society of men, 
you alone have realized the beauty of this relationship. If 
you have such a strong desire to call Mahadeva your 
spiritual brother in order to create a precedent (which 
they may follow) for your own community, then why not 
treat every one equally, from the Mother of Brahma, Vishnu 
and Mahe?hvara to the mother of the smallest insect ? Let 
the Sh&kta and the Vaishnava unite their voices in singing:

s B hiva ! Shi\ a is Jiva!” Then, why Mahadeva 
alone ? All Devas, Adhidevas,' Upadevas/ Danavas/ Mana- 
va.s, and all the creatures in the Brahmanda will appear to 
be nothing but the children of Jagaddhatri/ who brings 
forth endless millions of worlds/

There will then exist no other relationship but that of 
the spirit, so that the three worlds will then be full of 
spiritual brothers only. Can you tell me, O Vaishnava! 
when, by the blessings of Vaishnavas and the grace of 
Vishnu, the day will come on which you will realize Shakti,

That is, §hiva the Father mast be a Vaishnava if the DevT be 
Vaishpavl; and os Yaishpava he is a spiritual brother—that is, one of 
the same sect. * Ruling Devas.

Subordinate Devas. ‘ Demonic spirits.

„ ^ en - * Devi as supporter of the universe.

Brahmandas.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

473Subordinate Devas. ‘ Demonic spirits.

„ ^ en - * Devi as supporter of the universe.

Brahmandas.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

473

not as Vishnumaya, but as Vishnu ? Shakti is called Vaish- 
navf, not because She is possessed by Vishnu, but because 
She is progenitrix of Vishnu. Ganga 1 is called Bhaglrathi 
because She was worshipped and brought down by Bhagl- 
ratha. The reason for Her being called after the name of 
Bhagiratha is not that She, whom even Brahma, and other 
Devas are rarely able to worship, is under the protection of 
Bhagiratha, but that, urged by the tender desire “ to be 
called the mother of Bhagiratha," and in order to immortalize 
in the three worlds the immense glory of Bhagiratha, that 
crest-gem of devotees, the Mother of the universe, dweller on 
the head of Shangkara, and dispeller of the sorrow’s of sang- 
sara, has proclaimed to the three w'orlds, out of love for 
Her devotees, the greatness of devotion shown to Her, by 
the adoption of the name of Bh&glrathl.

Similarly, in spite of Her being the progenitrix of 
Brahma and other Devas, and Mother of the universe, She 
has proclaimed Her shaktis of creation, preservation, and 
destruction by adopting the names of Brahmanf, Vaishijavi, 
and Maheshvari. She was born as Brahma, Vishiju, and 
Mahe§hvara and was, again, Herself their Mother. If you 
call Her dependent, She is dependent on Herself alone. 
If you call Her patroness, She patronizes none but Herself. 
There is, therefore, no possibility of Her being injured by 
anything which may be said about Her. What, however, 
we can do is to march along the path to hell. So I say, O 
Sadhaka, beware! save yourself from all these sinful notions.

Another of the names of the Mother is BrahmamayL 
This, too, gives to the detractors an opportunity to object 
that She who is Brahman can never be Brahmamayl. 
If She is BrahmanI why, then, is She called Brahma- 
rnayl? She might very well be called Brahman. In reply

1 The River Ganges.

%

4741 The River Ganges.

%

474

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

to this objection we shall not, after recitation of the 
whole of Ramayana, proceed to give an account of Slta. 1 
It is no wonder that man, whose nature it is to err, 
will be deluded by Her maya, which sometimes deludes 
even Brahma and other Devas ardently devoted to Her. 
Sadhakas who are inquirers after spiritual knowledge* 
should, however, know that just as beads are made of gold* 
images are made of earth, 4 Ganga* is made of water,* and 
the sun is made of light and heat, T so the substance of the 
Mother of the world is Brahman. The word Brahmamayl 
has been formed by adding the suffix rnayat to the word 
Brahman in the sense of “Own form.”*

What is Her “own form ” that is Brahman; or what 
is Brahman's “own form ” that is She. Even while embodi¬ 
ed Brahman She is, in reality, above all gunas, and so She 
is called Brahmamayl. Her hands, feet, and other limbs, 
her raiments, ornaments, and conveyances, the members 
of Her family, etc., are all Brahman’s “own form,” and so 
She is Brahmamayl. The meaning of the term Brahmamayl 
is not “One who pervades Brahman,” 10 but “One who is 
Brahman.” 11 Brahman pervades the universe, but the Aryya 
Shastra makes no mention of anything which can pervade 
Brahman.

^ From all that we have so far said on the subject of 
shakti-tattva, Sadhakas have surely come to understand 
that the §hakti to whom ill-disposed Shaktas and Vaish- 
ijavas refer is not the same Shakti as forms the subject 
of the Tantrash&stra.

That is to say, to repeat which is a useless task.

* Lit .: “ inquirers of tattva."

* The River Ganges.

* Brahmamayl.

’* BrahmavyApinl.

* Svarpamayl. * Mrinmayf.

* Jalamayi. ' Tejomayl.

* Svarupa.

11 Br&hmarupini.

SHIVA AND vSHAKTI

475* Lit .: “ inquirers of tattva."

* The River Ganges.

* Brahmamayl.

’* BrahmavyApinl.

* Svarpamayl. * Mrinmayf.

* Jalamayi. ' Tejomayl.

* Svarupa.

11 Br&hmarupini.

SHIVA AND vSHAKTI

475

Radka, Lakshmi, Sit4, RukminI, Savitrl, Sarasvati, 
Gauga, Gauri, Ganesha, 1 Surya, Shiva, Vishnu, Indra, 
Chandra, Vayu, Varuna, Deva, Danava, 1 Gandharva, Kinnara, 
Yaksha,* * Raksha, 4 man, beast, bird, insect, and the endless 
universe which is full of all such moving and motionless 
things is Shakti in substance. Again, Radha, Lakshmi, 
Sltfi, Satl, and other manifestations of Brahman, are but 
the Kaivalya play* of Mahashakti. In the quotation which 
we have already made in connection with the destruction 
of thousand-headed Havana, Sftdhakas have obtained a 
notion of Sltatattva.*

Here we shall make a few quotations to illustrate the 
manner in which the Shastra supports 7 the contention of 
the Vaishnavas that Radhika is “ Shrlkrishqa’s hand maid,” 
and their practice of worshipping R&dhika with articles of 
food first offered to Shrilq-ishna. From this play of the 
waves of shistrik authority, Sadhakas will form a concep¬ 
tion of the vast expanse and grave solemnity of the sea of 
the nectar of R&dhatattva.*

In the Devi Bhagavata * Shrl N&rayana says to Narada: 
“ In the region of Goloka w Radhika was first of all

' RAdhil, beloved of Krishna ; the Devi Lakshmi : wife of Rama ; 
wife of Krishija ; wife of Brahma, the Dev! Sarasvati : the River 
Ganges (considered as Devi) ; the elephant-headed Devil, son of Shiva.

* The sun ; Shiva ; Vishnu ; Lord of the Devas ; the moon as a 
Deva ; the Lord of air : the Lord of waters : Deva ; and demonic 
spirit.

* Devayonls of those names (see Introduction).

* Demonic beings.

' That is, the play of unity in diversity. R&dh&, Lakshmi, Sltft. and 
Satl are Maha§hakti, and so one with Her.

* The subject of STt4, wife of Rftma.

’ That is, does not support.

* The subject of R&dhiL * Chap. ix.* The subject of STt4, wife of Rftma.

’ That is, does not support.

* The subject of R&dhiL * Chap. ix.

* Krishna's heaven (see Vishpu Purina, I. iii).

476

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

worshipped by Krishna, the Paramatma, within the Rasa- 
mandala 1 on the fall-moon day in the month of Kartik. 
Next, under the command of Bhagavan, She was worship¬ 
ped by the company of herdswomen and cowherds, their 
boys and girls, the cows, and Surabhi, the queen of the 
race of cows. Since Her worship by the inhabitants of 
Goloka, Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara, and other Devas, and 
the Munis inhabiting the city of immortals ever worship 
and adore Her with devotion, with flowers and inoense. 
On earth She was first worshipped by Suyajna in the sacred 
field of Bharatavarsha, under the direction of Bhagav&n 
Mabadeva. Subsequently, under the command of Shri- 
krishna, the Paramatma, the inhabitants of the three worlds 
began to worship Her.”

In the second Ratra* * of the Naradapancharatra it is 
said : “ Just as Shrlkrishna, who is Brahman in reality, is 
above Prakriti and free from attachment,* so Radhika, 
who is also Brahman in reality, is above Prakriti and 
free from attachment. Just as, for the sake of work to 
be done, He at times assumes forms with attributes, so 
Mahaprakriti Radhika also, for the same purpose, at times 
assumes the form of gross Prakriti. In gross form that 
subtle Prakriti lives, by the force of yoga, in the life,* the 
tongue, the intellect, and the mind of Shrikrishpa, the 
Parameshvara. Narada ! at times She seems to appear in, 
and disappear from, the world formed of maya; but in 
reality She neither takes birth, nor is dependent on the 
action of any other being or person. Like Bhagavan Hari, 
Bhagavatl Radhika also is eternal and truth in substance. 
0 Muni! the Mabashakti who presides over the life of 
Bhagavan Shrlkrishna appears as Radha, and She who

1 The enclosure within which the raealllA was performed.

* Chap. ii. * Nirlipta.1 The enclosure within which the raealllA was performed.

* Chap. ii. * Nirlipta.

' Pr&na, the vital principle.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

477

presides over His tongue is Sarasvati Herself. * * She who 
presides over His intellect is Durga, the destroyer of evil, 
who has now incarnated Herself as the daughter of Hima¬ 
laya, the Mountain-king, the destroyer of the enemies of 
the Devas, who, by appearing in the form of the mass of 
energy 1 of all the Devas, crushed the race of Daityas,' and 
gave back to the Devas the sovereignty of the kingdom of 
heaven ; She it is who holds the three worlds, who appears 
as hunger, thirst, mercy, sleep, contentment, nourishment, 
forgiveness, shame, and error, who rules over all Jivas, and 
who, in particular, presides as S&vitrl over the hearts of 
Brahmanas. It was from the left side of Radhika that 
Mah&lakshml appeared, She who is the presiding Devata 
over the wealth,' of Tshvara. From a part of that Maha- 
lakshml appeared the sea-born 4 Kamala, who arose from out 
of the sea of milk what time it was churned. It is She 
who is the earthly Lakshml on earth, and the spouse of 
N&rayana who lies upon the sea of milk. The heavenly 
Lakshml also, who presides over the dwellings of Indra and 
other Deva-s, appeared from a part of Devi Mahalakshmi 
who Hereelf is the spouse of the Lord of Vaikuntha. S&vitri, 
who dwells in the Brahmaloka, is the wife of Brahma. At 
the command of Bhagavan, Sarasvati had already divided 
Herself into two parts. The first part remained as Sarasvati 
and the second became Bharatl. 1 Both were accomplished 
yoginls by dint of yoga. Of them, Bharatl is the wife of 
Brahma, and Sarasvati is the spouse of Vishnu. Para- 
meshvarl Radhika, the mistress of the play of Rasa,* is the 
presiding Devata, over the Rasa-circle, and that eternal 
BrahmasanatanI incarnated Herself in full in the region of

* Tejas. ’ Titans.

' Aishvaryya, that which constitutes Ishvaro-bood (see post).* Tejas. ’ Titans.

' Aishvaryya, that which constitutes Ishvaro-bood (see post).

4 Sindhuviilu, who came out of the sea.

* Savitrl. * See post.

478

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Vrind&vana. 1 Within the Rasa-circle She was the principal 
actress of the play of Rasa, making use of the occasion of 
the love-play to show Her love to devotees. Bhagavatl 
ate betel chewed by Bhagavan, and Bhagavan ate betel 
chewed by Bhagavatl (in order to show their love for 
devotees, or to show that both of them were, in fact, 
the same). In reality both of them have the same body. 
(In outward vision they appear to possess different bodies, 
to enhance the sweetness of their play, but in reality no 
such difference exists.) The difference between them is 
like the difference between milk and its whiteness (that is 
to say, just as the substance milk is an aggregate of such 
constituent qualities as whiteness, liquidity, sweetness, and 
so forth, so the substance Brahman is an aggregate of 
existence, consciousness, bliss, and the like. Just as the 
state of milk cannot be determined if we omit any of its 
qualities, such as whiteness, liquidity, sweetness, and so 
forth, so Brahiuanhood cannot be determined if we omit 
any of its qualities, such as shakti, possessor of §hakti, 
shakti vibhQti,* and the like. Just as substantially no 
difference exists between the constituent parts of a thing, 
although, according to the method of linguistic exposition, 
differences are imagined to exist between them, and differ¬ 
ent names are assigned to them, so actually no difference 
exists between Radba and Krishna, although they are 
different in the aspects they assume in play. Brahman is 
both Riidba and Krishna. She who is RadhikS. is also 
Krishna, and He who is Krishna is also Radhika). Those 
who distinguish between R&dha and Krishna, who constitute 
one non-differentiable, non-dualistic supreme Being, J will 
not escape the torments of hell so long as the sun and1 Tho town Yrind&vana. in the North-West Provinces. 
' Manifestation of $bakti (see post).

’ Tattva.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

479

moon will endure. The heinous bodies of those who make 
a distinction between them, and, failing to understand the 
play of Brahman, speak ill of R&dhikft, the supreme Prakriti, 
will be boiled in the Kumbhlp&ka hell so long as Brahma 
lives.”

Again, in the sixth Chapter it is said : “ First utter the 
name of Radha and next that of Krishna or M&dhava. 1 
Whoever reads in the opposite way surely commits a sin 
equal to that of murdering a Brahmana. Radhika is the 
Mother and Shilkrishna is the Father of the universe.* * 
Although both are the same in substance, yet in the in¬ 
carnation They take in play, and, according to human * 
custom, the Mother is the object of a hundred times greater 
glory, adoration, and worship 4 than the father."

It is in order to maintain this glory that Shftstra 
has enjoined men to take the name of Radhika first 
and that of Shrlkrishna next. It is natural to expect 
that because the mother is the wife of the father her 
position will be less glorious than his, according to men's 
notions; but here custom is inspired by dharrna,* and is, 
consequently, approved by the Shastra. Not only the 
custom of men, but even the Shastra itself says: * In 
glory the mother surpasses the father a thousand times.' 
The reason, also, for this has been stated in the Shastra. 
It says that: ‘ The mother is an object of greater glory 
than the father because she holds the child in her womb 
and nourishes it.' He is the Guru of the world by whom

' Mudhava is one of the names of Krishna as destroyer of the 
demon Madhu.

* The mother's name is always placed first.

' Laukika.

4 See post. The child should regard its mother and father as two 
visible incarnate Deities (MahOnirvana Tantra, chap, viii, verse 25).

* A religious spirit.

480

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA' Laukika.

4 See post. The child should regard its mother and father as two 
visible incarnate Deities (MahOnirvana Tantra, chap, viii, verse 25).

* A religious spirit.

480

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

the world is educated and initiated. Prakriti tests this 
education and initiation of the world-that is to say, the 
Guru can teach only what the Jlvas 1 (nature) can accept. 
Prakriti, therefore, has the charge of testing the passion 
or dispassion for education.

This Prakriti, the examiner of the world, however, has 
also to receive education and initiation from mother Mahd- 
prakriti. For ten months and ten days before its appear¬ 
ance in the world of men the child's prakriti is initiated 
in the mantra which is contained in the mother's body 
food, senses, and mind, and educated therein. It has 
a ready been shown that in the proportion of seed and 
blood the quantity of blood, which is the mother’s portion, 
is the greater. For this reason the mother's contribution 
to the Jlya s body ,s larger than the father’s. At the very 
outset this gives to the mother superiority to the father. 
Next comes the pregnancy for ten months and ten days. 
During this period the record of the Jiva s destiny lL 
engraved on the foundations of the mother’s body. The 
* ° y . bui,t and developed according to her

• °, Ugh l t8 ' lei doiDgs ’ and the humours* and blood {lowing 
m her body. 6

After this, again, for five years the ohild drinks the 
mother 1ft. Taking all these matters together, « 
appears that the child’s indebtedness to the mother per¬ 
meates his veins, arteries, bones, marrow, vital airs, body, 
senses, mind, and, indeed, every molecule and atom from

n G hf P f°f k 8 t0e t0 , the t0p ° f hi8 head - His indebtedness

This 1 , 18 °? y m re8pe0t ° f thG act of Procreation.

This lb the law of nature. The child’s indebtedness to

his father for acts done subsequent to procreation, such as

performance s of the ten sangskaras,* education, maintenance

i _

1 Prakriti.This lb the law of nature. The child’s indebtedness to

his father for acts done subsequent to procreation, such as

performance s of the ten sangskaras,* education, maintenance

i _

1 Prakriti.

* R&sa.

* The greater prakriti. 
Sacraments (see Introduction).

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

481

and so forth, is not such as must naturally appertain 
to the father, for in his absence these acts may be done 
by any other guardian. For this reason it does not matter 
very much to the child if the father dies after prooreation; 
but if the mother dies after conception, not even the united 
power of the three worlds can supply her place.

“ Under the weight of this great and solemn glory the 
Shastras ordaining household duties have, with heads 
bowed down, said: * 1 * The mother is a thousand times more 
glorious and more worshipful than the father.’ Such 
being the decision of even such Sh&stras as deal principally 
with domestic duties, it need hardly be said that in the 
spiritual 1 vision of the Tantra Shastra, which deals princi¬ 
pally with sadhana dharrua/ there is in this no difference 
between the worldly mother and the spiritual Mother (or 
Shakti). In the Chapter on Shaktillli* we shall try, as 
far as it will be in our power, to show how the principle 1 
(of the superiority) of human motherhood is applicable 
to Radha, the embodiment of the unattached * Brahman, 
and what the Tantra Shastra says on the subject. Here 
we desist, for to do so would be to digress. For the pre¬ 
sent, the very notion under whioh Sadhakas know Her 
as Mother will enable them to understand this much, that 
the name of Radha should be taken first and then that of 
Krishna, and that a reversal of this order is faulty worship 
in their sadhana for truth. 1

“ Those who speak ill of Radhika either through perver¬ 
sity of intellect caused by unavoidable fate, or through 
blindness due to ill-feeling towards Vamach&ra, 3 or through

* Tattva. * Bales as to ritual practice, worship, etc.* Tattva. * Bales as to ritual practice, worship, etc.

' The play of §hakti.

* Nirlipta. The supreme inactive Brahman, unaffected by and un¬ 
attached to the Brahmans (universe).

1 Y&macbara is one of the TOntrik Achfiras (see Introduction).

81

482

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

ignorance or sin, do not know that Radhika is an aspect of 
Hari’s own self, and that an enemy of Radha is also an 
enemy of Hari. In the next world the place of such a man 
will be in a cauldron of boiling oil in the midst of the 
Kumbhlpaka hell for the life-time of a hundred Brahmas, 
and in this world the extinction of his progeny and his own 
total ruin is inevitable.”

“(So long as that detractor of shakti shall not die), he 
will fall (from his own dharma 1 through unrighteousness),* * 
and be deprived of the power to rise on account of malice 
against Shakti; he will be prostrate on earth and suffer 
from endless disease and perils at every step. In the 
Brahmakshetra, 5 the Pushkara tlrtha, this (truth) about 
R&dh& was told by Hari to Brahmk, and subsequently I 
heard it from Brahma. Sadhu.s (who are themselves pure 
and purify others) constantly worship the lotus-feet of 
Radha, who purifies the three worlds. Bhagavan Shrl- 
kfishija Himself ever offers arghya 4 with devotion at those 
worshipful lotus-feet. Besides this, (during the play he 
enjoyed) in the woods and groves of VrindAvana, Bhagavan 
(possessed of a form sweet with love) painted with devotion 
(by soft touches of his own finger) the tips of the toes of 
the lotus-feet of Her (who was all full of love and Brahman 
incarnate) with the cool and brilliant paint of alakta.”*

In the Radha Tantra it has been said: “ In the great 
mantra consisting of Radhika’s thousand names, Shrl- 
krishna is the Rishi, the great Devi who crushed Mahisha

1 Svadharnm. 1 Adharma.

’ At Pnshkara, in Ajmere, where there is a temple to Brahmfi.1 Svadharnm. 1 Adharma.

’ At Pnshkara, in Ajmere, where there is a temple to Brahmfi.

* An offering of grains of paddy and blades of durv& grass to a 
person honoured and respected, or to an image.

Bed lac paint, with which the soles of the feet of Hindu women 
are painted.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

483

is the presiding Devata and G&yatrl is the metre. The 
application of this mantra is for siddhi in Manavidya. 1

The Rishi of a mantra is he who was the first to be 
initiated and attain siddhi in it.' There is nothing to say 
to those who are worshippers of the yugala form * * and with 
a knowledge of monistic truth do not discriminate between 
R&dha and Krishna. But even from the dualistio stand¬ 
point s&dhakas should now understand how Rfidhika stands 
in relation the Shrlkrishna.'

Again, in the N&rada Pancharatra* it has been said: 
“ Of the great mantra consisting of one thousand names 
of Rftdhika, by whose grace Shrlkpishna is the Sovereign 
Master* of the region of Goloka, and has attained the posi¬ 
tion of supreme Lord of that great mantra, Narada is the 
Rishi, and (owing to its being a different mantra) 7 R&dhika, 
who is supreme over the supreme, is the Devata. Its ap¬ 
plication is for the fulfilment of the fourfold aim." s

Radhika is the handmaid, initiation in whose mantra, 
and education and accomplishment in whose Tantra, made 
BhagavAn to become Bbagavan. To worship Her, even the 
Lord of the universe descended on earth from Goloka and 
became Her servant. In the hope of kissing Her graceful feet 
the head of ChintAmani '—the thought of whose feet gratifies 
the world of moving and unmoving things, who is the crest- 
gem of the four-headed Deva M — touched the dust. If, then, 
you call Her who is such an one Shrlkrishna’s handmaid, then

1 The successful attainment of knowledge of Devi MahAvidyA.

’ And who reveals it.

' The form in which RAdbA and Krishna are combined.1 The successful attainment of knowledge of Devi MahAvidyA.

’ And who reveals it.

' The form in which RAdbA and Krishna are combined.

* That is, even if they make a distinction between RAdbA and 
Krishna, sAdhakas should understand from the above the relation of 
the one to the other.

* Chap, v, 6th RAtra. * AdhT$hvara. ’ Prom the preceding.

* Dbarma, artha, kAma, moksha (see Introduction).

' One of the names of Krisbpa. u BrahmA.

484

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

whom would you call Shrlkrishria's Ishvari ?* I would not of 
my own accord, say all this. I am obliged to do so in reply 
to your words. It is for this reason that there is so much 
discussion about honour and dishonour. My Efishpa has 
neither a handmaid nor an Ishvari; but when your Kyishpa 
has necessity for a handmaid, why should he not have neces¬ 
sity for an Ishvari as well ? The moment you step within 
the bounds of dualistic knowledge He, in spite of his being 
Ishvara, will have, by your grace, to suffer inevitably as well 
the state of a servant as that of a master. Or, if in your 
language, the person served is called handmaid and the per¬ 
son serving is called master, then we have nothing to object 
to this servitude and lordship. However that may be, O you 
whose knowledge is of a dualistic kind, take note that it is 
the nineteenth century of the Kali yuga, and apparently the 
custom of the age is to call mothers and aunts handmaids !However that be, it requires now to be seen what we 
gain or lose, whether or not there exists a relation of master 
and servant between Bbagavan and Bhagavati. If it exists, 
a worshipper has no right to discuss it, nor is there the 
necessity to do so. If R&dhika is to be worshipped merely 
on the ground of Her being Bhagav&n’s handmaid, and if, 
in that worship, Her satisfaction is to be sought, then surely 
it is necessary to ascertain and arrive at a final conclusion 
as to whether She is really Shrlkpshna’s handmaid or not. 
But, then, who will judge the matter ? If you say that we 
shall be the judges, and R&dh& and Krishna themselves will 
supply the evidence, then, too, it will be extremely difficult 
to arrive at a definite conclusion. For in the play of love 
which they enjoyed during their stay at Vraja, when 
R&dhika said to Shrikrishna, “ You are my all,” Shrlkrishna 
said to R&dhika, “ I am unable to call You 1 You.’ To call

1 Feminine of Ifhvara, or Lord.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

485

You * * my own ’ is not much.” 1 Putting aside even what 
Shrikrishija said, which is more * than what Radhika said, 
if the two are considered to be of equal positions, then, also, 
one of them cannot be a servant or handmaid of the other. 
Now, how can the matter be judged on the evidence of such 
witnesses ? If, therefore, you want to judge the matter by 
a consideration of acts instead of words, then it is not for 
you and me to judge and arrive at a final conclusion on the 
matter. In this effort to appease the anger * of Radhika, 
Bhagavan Himself finally decided the question at the feet 
of R&dhika.But if you say that you will call Radhika Shrlkj-ishga’s 
handmaid, and worship Her with food first offered to Shrl- 
krishija in reliance only on the sentiment expressed by the 
words, “ You are my all,” spoken by Radhikfi, to Shrikfishija 
in a temporary moment of service—a ripple, as it were, in 
the midst of waves of play in the sea of love—then even 
Radhika cannot be called inferior to Krishna. If you can 
worship Radhika with food first offered to Shrlktishna, then 
I, too, can, in reliance upon the incident in which he 
appeases Radhika’s anger, represent him as hankering after 
the leavings of Radhika’s food and driven off with weeping. 
The service I speak of is as much one of sentiment as the 
one you speak of. As your words are sweet, but your acts 
are deceitful, so I am obliged to make my acts and words 
similar. In this state of things it is impossible for us even 
to come together, much less to arrive at any decision.

In sorrow have poets said: “ If two persons be both 
candid, then the love that grows between them remains for

* The meaning of this is: “ You and I are the same," bo that the 
relationship of the speakers is not fully expressed by the expression 
“ You are my all."

* For Krishna did not discriminate between Him and Her.

* —of wife with husband in love matters.

486 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* For Krishna did not discriminate between Him and Her.

* —of wife with husband in love matters.

486 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

ever candid and unshaken. If one of them be candid 
and another crooked, then love between them endures 
foi a few days only that is to say, so long as the crooked¬ 
ness of the crooked person does not show itself. And if 
both of them be crooked, there can be no love between 
them, much less a permanent love.” 0 you who speak 
of distinctions, this crookedness of yours and mine pre¬ 
cludes the possibility that love may grow between us. 
Think but once that They who are referred to in this 
discussion on the subject of love are both very crooked, 1 
with three bends in their bodies, 3 and yet unite to form 
one person.* * The devotee has therefore said: “ The moon 
will perish, the sun will perish, the Brahmfinda formed b}' 
the spread of the three gunas will perish, in the great dis¬ 
solution, but it is the firm conviction of the Harivangsha* 
community that the constant play of R&dha and Krishna at 
Vrind&vana will never come to an end.”

So I say, 0 Sadhaka, see the threefold plaj T of creation, 
preservation, and destruction in the thrice-bent and fair 
bodies of the Father and the Mother of the universe, and 
forget all distinctions. Call, for once, the Father Mother 
and the Mother Father, and making the Father and the 
Mother one, take them to the Sahasrara. 8 There, in the 
heart of that full-bloomed and thousand-petalled lotus,

1 Kut i In.

* Tpbhanga: a favourite representation of the body with Indian 
artists is that with three curves, formed by the inclined neck, trunk 
and legs.

* Bhagavan and Bhftgavatl are here called kutila and tpbhanga 
because of the inscrutability of Their ways.

* Vaiahnava. Harivang^ha. or “family of Hari,” is the name of 
a Paurftrnk work which gives the history of the family of Hari or 
Krishna.

. thousand-petalled lotus in the head, above the six chakras

tsee Introduction).

487. thousand-petalled lotus in the head, above the six chakras

tsee Introduction).

487

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

shining with the refulgence of the sun and moon, in that 
seat of the undifferentiated 1 kaivalya-play* * of Him who 
is full of light and Her who is full of light, stand with 
folded hands, and with a disconsolate heart weep, and say: 
“I know not who you are? Be you Father or Mother or 
another, tell me whose I am?’’ Brother Sadhaka, be you a 
worshipper of the Father or a worshipper of the Mother, 
you cannot have a better opportunity for putting both the 
Father and the Mother to shame* than at that time when 
they become one.

When the Father and the Mother will lower their faces 
in shame at making themselves known as Father or Mother, 
know, O Sadhaka, that on that day you will be victorious 
in this discussion. Whoever has once seen the play of the 
soft and sweet smile of shame in their silent faces, lowered 
in shame at the question of the son, for him all doubt as to 
who is the Father and who is the Mother, or who is great 
and who is small, has been for ever dispelled. 0 ye who 
are intimately associated with the principles of Tantra! O 
S&dhakas, who form the most beloved wealth* of the 
Mother! if for any of you such a day has ever come or maj 
come in future, then on this or that day kindly remember 
for once, at least, this poor and destitute son of the Mother

who is full of mercy for the poor.

What can I do, O brother ? The truth which has to be 
attained by sadbana cannot be explained in words. Once 
call out to Her who is truth* itself, and of whom we now 
speak, and opening the portals of your heart, say. 0 
Mother, be Thou RadbA adored by Shrikrishija, or Radhika

1 Abhinna. * Kaivalya is moksha.

* The shame (lajjft) is caused by their having manifested them- 
selves in the distinctive aspects of Father and Mother.

• Literally, “ wealth bound in the skirt of the dress of the Mother." 
1 Tattvamayi.

488

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA• Literally, “ wealth bound in the skirt of the dress of the Mother." 
1 Tattvamayi.

488

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

adoring Him, Thou knoweth Thy own play. O playful 
Mother, 1 appear once in Thine own real form in the solitary 
grove of this heart, and in the company of Thy companions 
stand with three-fold bend, yet making your body one with 
the body of Skyfima. O charmer of the mind of the charmer 
of love,* * illumine but once the forest of my heart with the 
refulgence of Thy world-enchanting beauty, so that I may 
see Thee with Thine own light, just as one worships the 
Ganges with Ganges’ water.

0 beloved of Shvama, stand forth once with a dark 
body, so that, 0 Gauri! all idea of difference between a 
fair and a dark body may be dispelled from my mind. 4 O 
Mother, Thou Thyself dost rouse and allay Thine own 
anger,* Thou Thyself dost clasp Thine own feet as Rai 
(Rftdhikil), Thou Thyself dost inflame Thine own anger, 
and as Shyama Thou Thyself dost appease it. Thou art 
all full of play, and art Brahman,* and so this anger be¬ 
comes Thee. But, O Mother, we are erring Jlvas, blinded 
by an intense intoxication. 7 We can be angry, but cannot 
appease it. Being Jivas full of maya,* we cannot, therefore, 
understand the meaning of the (appeasing) of the anger of 
Her who is Brahman.

O Mother, for him who has understood its meaning, 
both honour* and dishonour' have for ever disappeared. 0

1 LilAmayi.

* Shyftma is a name of Krishna, meaning of dark colour.

1 Madana.

„ ‘ The beloved of $hy&ma is Radha, who is fair-coloured. The word

Gauri means one who is fair." It is also the name of the wife of 
£hiva, who is in reality the same as Radha. The author here prays 
Radha to assume a dark body—that is to say, a body of the colour of 
njishpar-so that his mind may be disabused of all ideas of difference 
between Radha and Kj-iskpa.

Mann (see ante). * Brahmamayi.

* Mayamaya. • Apamana.

' Mada.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

489Mann (see ante). * Brahmamayi.

* Mayamaya. • Apamana.

' Mada.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

489

Dispeller of the fear of existence, Gladdener of the hearts 
of devotees, eternally pure Devi; 0 Mother, Thou art 
Shakti incarnate and grantor of shakti and liberation. Of 
Thy mercy grant unto us the shakti to understand the 
truth concerning Thyself, so that we may leave this 
sangsara never to return thereto, after having offered all 
honour and dishonour at those lotus-feet, so desired of 
devotees.

O you who speak of distinctions, do not widen the 
path whereby you go to your downfall by imagining 
distinctions between Shakti and the possessor of shakti. 
If you offer to Radhika food first offered to Shrikrishija, 
She will not be insulted thereby; for in Her eyes the 
person 1 of Krishna is but a manifestation of Herself in play. 
But, for yourself, should this insulting idea arise in your 
mind, there is no escape from hell. Even He in the 
pride of whose glory you entertain these insulting notions 
concerning Radhika—even He has, in intense devotion 
to Her who is ever kind to devotees, said, in the Nirvana 
Tantra:

“ Those who make japa of the names of Radha and 
Krishpa, placing the name of Krishna after that of Radha, 
to him do I undoubtedly grant the lot that is mine. Those 
who, instructed by gurus in the path of bhava or of 
mantra, worship me in this manner that is to say, those 
who, knowing Radha and Krishna to be inseparable in 
reality and yet, in order to proclaim the triumph of the 
love of Her who is all full of love,* * make japa of the great 
mantra of the two names, placing the name of Krishna after 
that of Radha—they are ever as powerful as Myself.

“ That woman who worships me, a male, in the faith 
that of I am inseparable from Thee, also of a truth acquires

1 Marti.

* Sentiment, emotion, love, devotion. 1 Premamayl.

490

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Marti.

* Sentiment, emotion, love, devotion. 1 Premamayl.

490

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

power equal to Thine own. Hear, O Radhika! To those 
who (firmly believing that you and I are inseparable) 
worship the yugala aspect 1 with or without pious devo¬ 
tion, to them I grant the state which is mine, owing to 
Thy love for me.” That is to say, such is the unthink¬ 
able power of the yugala aspect, that, whether one has 
full devotion or not, it pours an abundant shower of love 
on one’s heart, were it even the adamantine heart of a 
great sinner,* and makes the tree of Parabrahmatattva,* 
which is love for Radha and Krishna, blossom, flower, and 
bear fruit thereon.

0 you discriminating Vaishriava! How dare you 
extend your authority over Yishpu, after whose name you 
are called a Vaishnava, and who is your authority in every- 
thing ? Being the servant of Vishnu’s servant s servant, 
what makes j-ou so proud that you insult the Dovata whom 
Vishnu adores? You would not admit the superiority of 
any over the Devata you worship. Very well. But ought 
you, on that account, to divide one thing into two parts, 
and attribute lordship to one and servitude to another ? 
Why should you call Radha Krishna’s handmaid instead of 
Krishna’s own self?' And even should you do so in the 
spirit of play, why do you not also call Krishria Radha’s 
servant, just as you call Radha Krishna's handmaid ? Or do 
you think that Krishna’s lordship cannot be maintained 
without calling Radha His handmaid ? Is this your idea of 
Krishna’s Brahmahood ? He who is the Lord will always be 
so, whether Radha becomes His handmaid or not. O 
brother, you proceed to establish Krishna’s lordship on 
Radha’s servitude; you proceed to worship the adored

In which both Krishna and R&dhA are combined. 
' Literally. “ heretic ” (pAshanda).

The tree which symbolizes the Parabrahm&n.

* Svarupa.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

491In which both Krishna and R&dhA are combined. 
' Literally. “ heretic ” (pAshanda).

The tree which symbolizes the Parabrahm&n.

* Svarupa.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

491

Dpvata of Krishna with food first offered to Him. But you 
do not even once desire to understand why you are in suoh 
a miserable plight in spite of your worship of Krishna ? 
Why are you not saved in spite of the presence of the Lord, 
the Saviour of the three worlds ? To strike with a weapon 
the left limb of Him whose right limb you worship! Ah, 
we know not whether, in consequence of such worship, 
Bhagavan will gratify you by appearing before you, or greet 
you with His sudarshana. 1 Friend of the poor! Merciful 
Deva! Thou alone art the Saviour of the three worlds, 
Thou art ever the reliever of burdens of the earth.

“ Lord, save the community of Sadhakas from these 
false beliefs. Or, 0 Lord, it is miserliness shown by your 
self of your own accord. It is because Thou, 0 Krishna, 
art unwilling to make the being * of Radha in which Thou 
hast sunk and lost Thyself the property of all, that Thou, 
0 crest-gem of schemers,* hast turned the wheel of the 
intelligence of Jlvas. So I say, 0 discriminating Vaish- 
nava, if your understanding of the subject is of a dualistio 
character, then understand this also, that it is doubtful 
whether even after a hundred crores * of births, you will be 
able to worship Her whose worshipper Kfishija Himself is."

Amongst those who, by throwing all these thorns upon 
the spiritual path, consider themselves to be learned,* there 
are some who are even heard to say that $hakti can exist 
only by the support * of the possessor of §hakti, and there¬ 
fore ask what is the necessity of worshipping the thing 
supported instead of the supporter ?

Sadhakas have already been given ample evidence to 
show the nature of this relation of the supporter and the 
supported, between the possessor of §hakti and Shakti.

1 The discus of Vishnu.

4 1 , 000 , 000 . 000 .1 The discus of Vishnu.

4 1 , 000 , 000 . 000 .

* Tattva. 
: Pandit.

* Cbakrl.

* Atihraya.

49*2

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

What new answer can we now give to the above question ? 
If, however, the matter must be judged from the point of 
view of the supporter and the supported, then, leaving aside 
considerations of shakti-tattva, we see that Brahma is 
supported by a swan, 1 Vishnu is supported by Garutfa, 
Mahadeva is supported by a bull, and the Devi is supported 
by a lion. Should we, then, for this reason ignore Brahma, 
Vishnu, Maheshvara, and Maheshvarl, and worship the 
swan, Garuda, the bull, and the lion, in the belief that as 
supporters they are the more important of the two ? The 
relation between the possessor of shakti and Shakti is the 
same as that which exists between the carrier 1 and the 
person carried. This is the only fit reply to a fit question.

In reality, there are no such two things as Shakti and 
possessor of shakti. There is no evidence of, nor is there 
any necessity for, the existence of the two things. Male, 
female, and neuter, all are Shakti. Body, senses, mind, 
and Atma, all are manifestations * of shakti. Chit$hakti * 
as Atma is, like the solar orb, the condensed and 
massive form of shakti; while body, senses, mind, 
and other things are, like sun’s rays spreading on all sides, 
but fluid parts of that great massive shakti. Although the 
sun is in reality energy* in substance, yet for common 
understanding such expressions as “ the sun is possessed 
of energy ’ and “ the sun's energy ” are used. Similarly, 
although Atma is Shakti itself in substance, yet in order 
that Jlva may the better understand, Sh&stra has used suoh 
expressions as “ Atma is possessed of ?hakti ” and “ Atma’s 
shakti. This is the only difference between Shakti and 
the possessor of $hakti. In a spiritual sense, nothing exists 
as possessor of ?hakti besides Shakti.

Etangsa, or some say goose, duck, or flamingo. 
' Vibhati. * See ante.Etangsa, or some say goose, duck, or flamingo. 
' Vibhati. * See ante.

' Vahana. 
' Tejaa.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

493

Even the Purusha-form, 1 which you and I, according to 
our language and understanding, know as the possessor of 
$hakti, is but another or changed * form of Prakriti. Other 
evidence is unnecessary. Parameshvara himself, the sole 
and beBt Purusha in the world/ who presides or dwells in 
all Purushas, has said in the Nirv&na Tantra :

“ Just as trees grow on the earth and again disappear in 
it; just as bubbles are formed in water and again disappear 
in water; just as lightning is formed in clouds and again 
disappears in them; so at the time of creation Brahma, 
Vishnu, Maheshvara, and other Devas are born of the body 
of that beginningless and eternal K&llkfi., and at the time of 
dissolution they again disappear in Her. O Devi, for this 
reason, so long as Jlva does not know the supreme truth 4 
in regard to Her who plays with Mah&kala, his desiie for 
liberation can only give rise to ridicule. From a part only 
of Kalika, the primordial Shakti, arises Brahma, from a 
part only arises Janardana, and from a part only arises 
Shambhu. O fair-eyed Devi, just as rivers and lakes are 
unable to traverse a vast sea—that is to say, however strong 
their currents may be, they all lose their individual exist¬ 
ence entering into the vast womb of the sea—so Brahma 
and other Devas lose their separate existence on entering 
into the untraversable and infinite being 4 of Mahakall. 
Compared with the vast sea of the being 4 of Kali, the exist¬ 
ence of Brahma and other Devas is nothing but such little 
water as is contained in the hollow made by a cow’s hoof. 
Just as it is impossible for a hollow made by a cow s hoof 
to form a notion of the unfathomable depth of a sea, so it is 
impossible for Brahma and other Devas to have a knowledge

1 Marti.

1 Jagadekapuruahottama.

* Tattva.

* Vikriti.

4 Mabak&lavil&sini.

494

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Marti.

1 Jagadekapuruahottama.

* Tattva.

* Vikriti.

4 Mabak&lavil&sini.

494

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of the nature 1 of Kali. (For Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Maheshvara are the presiding Devas of the three periods of 
creation, preservation, and dissolution ; but who can master 
with his intellect the nature 1 of that Kali with whose play¬ 
ful glance even Mahakala, to whom the three periods of 
time are but three twinkles of His three eyes, appears at 
one moment and disappears at another?). Neither Brahma, 
nor Vishnu, nor Maheshvara knows Her full}’.”

“ They, too, are born at the beginning of creation as 
Lords of creation, preservation, and destruction, and again 
disappear in Her at the time of dissolution. For this reason 
Her Purusha appearances 9 can lead only to svarga and other 
regions.* * There is none other but Herself who can grant 
nirvftna liberation. The south is the region where Yama, 
who awards punishment to sinners, presides. Even if a 
great sinner, trembling with fear of death, utters but once 
the name of Kail while passing towards that south, the 
holder of the rod of punishment 4 becomes frightened by the 
(tremendous force of the Brahmanda piercing) name of 
Brahman,* and flees to all the quarters (forsaking his own 
place of rule, the southern region). The inhabitants of the 
three worlds, therefore, sing Her name as ‘ Dakshina * Kali ’ 
(the Dispeller of the fear of the south). Or She is called 
Dakshina T Kali, beoause She is dakshina or skilful in 
creating and destroying even Mahakala, the Purusha, who 
is above guijas.”

Vikriti alone appears and disappears, while Prakriti * 
is eternally unchanging. Bbagavan, therefore, has again 
said: “ It is only when Prakriti attains the state of Vikriti

' Tattva. • Marti.

’ Loka. Only the BrahmamayT can give liberation (innkti).

* Yama-dapdadhara. • Kali.

* Southern. The south is the region of death. * Skilful.' Tattva. • Marti.

’ Loka. Only the BrahmamayT can give liberation (innkti).

* Yama-dapdadhara. • Kali.

* Southern. The south is the region of death. * Skilful.

„ * The tme nature, as compared with its changing transformations 
or corruptions " (vikriti).

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

495

that She sees the three worlds (fashioned by Herself); and 
again when Vikriti attains the state of Prakriti, She does 
not see anything (for, She then exists in the form of 
Kaivalya Ml )—that is to say, when Vikriti in the form of 
the dualistic Brahmftnda disappears in the womb of Prakriti, 
that monistic Prakriti alone exists in whose womb the 
Brahmanda is contained, and, consequently, nothing remains 
to be seen but Herself. In another place the Shastra has 
clearly said: “ Purusha is but a Vikriti * * of Prakriti.”

In the ShAktamala Chandrika it is said : “Brahma is 
Shakti, Shiva is Shakti, Vishnu also is Shakti, and Visava* 
is Shakti. Shakti is at the root of all the many other 
Devas. Without Shakti none is able to preserve his indivi¬ 
dual existence. O Thou who possesseth a high mind, know, 
therefore, that Shakti is the greatest of all.”

In the Brahmftnda Tantra it is said : “ Amongst Vaish- 
navas some meditate upon that great Shakti as Krishna, 
two-armed and beautiful with a dark* complexion, and 
others as the husband of Lakshml, four-armed and tranquil. 
She whom some Shaivas see as five-headed, naked as space, 
and holding the trident; and others as four-headed, one¬ 
headed, and so on, according to different forms of medita¬ 
tion—that great Devi Prakriti inhabits the region* of 
Brahma-tejas. tt Great yogis, by single-minded practice of 
the yoga of devotion, 7 see that Prakriti alone behind all things. 
Just as one single sun is reflected in thousands and thou¬ 
sands of forms in mirrors, so one single Prakriti is reflected 
in infinite forms in Her own m&ya. Just as in spite of the 
existence of different up&dbis,* by which space* is known1 The Btate of liberation from all phenomenal existence.

' Evolved from (ride ante).

* Indra. * Shyilma. * Mandala.

* The glorious luminous energy, which is Brahman. Bhakti.

* Apparently limiting conditions. Ak&sha.

496

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

according as it is space in a pot, 1 space in a room,' space 
reflected in water,' extensive space,' and so on, there is in 
reality no difference in space; so in spite of the existence 
of infinite different forms,* * there is in reality no difference 
in Her who is infinity itself. That one sole Mahavidy& 
fills the universe.® The names only are different."

The Korina Pur&na says: “ The truth, which is the 
conclusion of all Brahmavadins 1 in the Vedas and Ved&ntas, 
is that which yogis see as one all-pervading, subtle, attri¬ 
buteless, motionless, aud fixed. That is the supreme state 
of Mahadevl. What yogis see as endless, unwasting, sole, 
pure Parabrahman, that is the supreme state of Mah&devl. 
That eternal existence,' higher than the highest, universal, 
beneficent and faultless, which is in the womb of Prakriti, 
that is the highest state of Mahadevl. That which is white, 
spotless, pure, attributeless and non-dualistic, that which 
is only a matter for realization by the Atma, that is the 
highest state of Mahadevl.” ,

The Devi's words in the same Purfina are : " The sup¬ 
reme aspect of Mine the substance of which is conscious¬ 
ness,* sole, 10 and pure; the immortal state which is free 
from all upudhis, 11 and eternal, that is only attainable by 
knowledge alone. Those who see the Atmft as knowledge," 
undoubtedly enter into Me.”

In the Devi Agama it is said: “ That Mahamfiya, who 
in reality is consciousness and Parabrahman, has assumed 
various forms out of favour to devotees."

' Ghat&kasba. ' Grihaka?ha. * Jalikfi^ha.

* Mah&k&sha. 4 Rapa. * Vishvaraiyl.

’ Those who speak of and worship the Brahman.

' Tattva. ’ Cbinmaya. “ Kevala.

11 Apparent limitations, vide ante. •’ Jn&na.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI* Mah&k&sha. 4 Rapa. * Vishvaraiyl.

’ Those who speak of and worship the Brahman.

' Tattva. ’ Cbinmaya. “ Kevala.

11 Apparent limitations, vide ante. •’ Jn&na.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

497

The YoginI Tantra says: “He who exists pervading 
the vi^hva (universe) as Deva Viahveshvara is Himself 
Vishveshvarl, the universe-pervading Devi.”

“ Whatever shakti anything possesses, that is Devi 
Vishveshvarl, and all those things are Deva Vishvei?hvara. 
She into the hollows of whose every hair millions of Brah- 
mandas constantly disappear; She it is who grants the 
desires of Sadhakaa by the assumption of various forms in 
play (for such is Her kindness).”

In the Navaratneshvara it is said : “ That Devi who is 
absolute existence, absolute consciousness, and absolute 
bliss, should be thought of as a female, or as a male, or as 
pure Brahman. In reality, however, She is neither male 
nor female, nor neuter—(that is to say, she is not bound to 
any particular form).

“ Still, just as a kalpalata 1 is called by a feminine 
name, so She, too, is called by a feminine name (Shakti— 
that is to say, one obtains from a kalpalata anything which 
he desires, be it the fruit of a creeper (lata) or that of a 
tree, and this reveals a divine s shakti beyond that of a lata 
(creeper) or of a tree). Still, just as a kalpalata is a lata 
(creeper) in form, so She assumes a female form, 3 in spite 
of Her being all forms and above all forms.” Just as the 
form of a lata (creeper) is the real form of a kalpalata, in 
spite of its bearing fruits of trees, so the form of Shakti is 
Her real form in spite of all male appearances,* * such as 
Devas, Danavas, and so on, which are Her forms* only. 
Whether in dualistic or in non-dualistic play, in the form 
of Brahman or in the form of Jiva, the female is shakti, and 
the male is shakta. Shakti is the person worshipped, and 
Purusha is the person worshipping. This is the last step 
of sfidhana, the highest state of spiritual realization.*' Desire-fulfilling creeper. * Daiva. * Strtrflpadhflrini,

* Marti. 1 Rupa. * Pr&pti,

32

498

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Although male and female are both Her aspects, yet 
Her shakti is naturally revealed more in the female than 
in the male form, and this is the cause of the distinction 
of worshipper and the worshipped, * 1 * and it is on account 
of this greater manifestation that females are called 
“shakti.” From this one must not suppose that shakti 
is less present in such appearances* as Shiva, Krishna, 
R&ma, Silrya, Vishnu, Ganesha, and so on. For although 
these appearances are actually male, they are not bound to 
the male form. They are merely formed in the play of 
Her who is consciousness in manifesting consciousness. If 
a Sadhaka who is a worshipper of the form Krishna desires 
to see Him as Kail, then Bhagavan, the fulfiller of the 
desires of devotees, is bound to appear before him in 
that form.

Radhika Herself has, by pretending 3 to be afraid of 
Ay&na,* given evidence of this perfect Shakti of Bhagavan.* 
It is with reference to this force of perfect Shakti in the 
female form that Maheshvarl Herself has said, in the Durga- 
gita of the Mundamala Tantra:

“ It is I who am Radhika in Goloka, Kamala in Vai- 
kuntba, and Savitrl and Sarasvatl, the presiding Devi of 
speech in Brahmaloka. It is I who am Parvatl in Kailasha, 
Janaki in Mithila, RukminI in Dvaraka, and DraupadI * in 
Hastinapnra. I am Sandhya ' and Gayatrl, the Mother of 
Vedas, the objects of adoration to all the twice-born people.

1 The female principle is called shakti because there is more shakti 
revealed in it than in the male principle. As the MundamAlA Tantra 
says, “ Wherever there iB a female (^hakti), there I am." For the same 
reason the female is worshipped by the male.

1 Marti. ’ Ahhinaya. * R&dbik&'s husband.

' This point here is not at all clear. For the story is that Krishna 
took the form of Kali for fear of Ay Ana.

* As to these names, t'idf ante.1 Marti. ’ Ahhinaya. * R&dbik&'s husband.

' This point here is not at all clear. For the story is that Krishna 
took the form of Kali for fear of Ay Ana.

* As to these names, t'idf ante.

’ Morning, noon, and evening prayers personified (see Introduction).

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

499

Among Yogas 1 1 am Pusha, among flowere I am black AparA- 
jita,* * among leaves I am the bad-leaf,* among plthas I am the 
Yonipltha, 4 I am Mah&vidya formed of Hari and Hara,* and 
I am also the worshipped of BrahmS, Vishnu and Shiva. O 
Lord. O Shangkara,* it is only by my special favour that Jlvas 
can know me (what more need I say, O my husband !); 
wherever there is Shakti (a female) there I am. O Maha- 
deva, know for certain that this is the manner in which I 
am best contemplated. Whoever forsakes this path of 
Shakti and proceeds along another path in search of Me 
throws away the jewel which is in the palm of his hand, 
and runs after a heap of ashes."

This is the command of Shastra. If, after this, any 
of you wish to solve the matter by a thorough understand¬ 
ing in the light of science or philosophy, in that case also 
it must be admitted that there is no Shakti or posses¬ 
sor of Shakti other than the Shakti of Atmfi,, by which body, 
senses, mind, and life 7 are guided. If everything is per¬ 
formed by Shakti, then why wait for a possessor of Shakti ? 
If you ask by whose support* this Shakti exists, then do 
you yourself tell me by whose support the possessor of 
Shakti exists. If the Brahmashakti who supports the 
Brahmanda has to wait for another’s support, then this 
Brahmapda must go to perdition." Who is the container 19 
of the contained Shakti ? By whose energy 11 does fire burn ? 
By whose speed does wind blow ? Such questions do 
not bespeak a natural state of the mind. However that 
may be, it is because Purusha is enabled l?y the sup¬ 
port of Shakti to display Himself** that Shastra has

’ See post. * The flower clitoria. * Sacred to Shiva.’ See post. * The flower clitoria. * Sacred to Shiva.

' Kamriip, in Assam (see Introduction). ' Vishnu and $hiva.

* Shiva. ’ Prftpa. ' Ashraya. * Rasataln. ** Adhfira. 11 Tejas.

u Lit.: to spread his own vibhutis (see post).

600

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

designated him as Shaktiman (the possessor of Shakti). 
The Brahm&nda play of Brahmamayl manifests the same 
principles. For this reason, in the creation, preserva¬ 
tion, and destruction of the dualistic material world, 1 * * 
the Purusha aspects of Shakti are Brahma, Vishpu, and 
Maheshvara, and Her prakriti aspects are BrahmanI, Yaisb- 
navl, and Maheshvarl. In the Gayatrl mantra also it is 
these two Purusha and Prakriti aspects which have to be 
worshipped at the commencement in pr&n&y&ma.* Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Maheshvara are the Purushas, and at the end, 
in the Gayatrl dhyana,* BrahmanI, Vaishnavl, and Mahesh¬ 
varl are the Prakritis. The Gayatrl is merely a Sutra (ap¬ 
horism), and the Sandhya-prayers are its vritti (exposition) 
or Bhashya (commentary)- In the Gayatrl mantra five forms 
of Brahman’s self 4 * * have been specified—namely, pervader 
of the universe,* creator of the world,* objeot of worship, 7 * 
playful Deva,* and instigator of Jlva’s intelligence.* Of these 
five, the epithet “ pervader of the universe ” denotes the 
Self-aspect, 10 and comes first. Next follows the introduction 
of the dualistic world. The world cannot be created in the 
attributeless state, and without fully bringing into play the 
three gunas. By whom will He be worshipped if no wor¬ 
shipper exists *? Play 11 is impossible if no desire exists. 
Lastly, why should He direct Jlva’s intelligence if He has 
not taken upon Himself the lordship of the Brahin&nda ?

1 Prnpancha. * Breath-control (see Introduction).

* The formula of meditation on the Gayatrl. 4 Svnrftpa.

* Bhttrbhuvah svah. * Tatsavituh.

1 Yarenyam Bhargah.

4 Devasya dhlmahi. The Deva is described in the text as playfnl* The formula of meditation on the Gayatrl. 4 Svnrftpa.

* Bhttrbhuvah svah. * Tatsavituh.

1 Yarenyam Bhargah.

4 Devasya dhlmahi. The Deva is described in the text as playfnl

(lllumaya), for Ilia is a characteristic of Devas.

* Dhiyo yo nah prachoday&t (see Introduction). The Sanskrit in

notes 4 to 8 are the portions of the G&yatri referred to. though not

expressed, in the text. * Svarupa. “ LUft.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

501

Intelligent Brahmanas will now understand from the Gayatri 
mantra itself whether the Devata, who forms its subject,' 
is attributeless Brahman or with attribute. Brahman, whom 
the Gayatri seeks to establish, is neither attributeless nor 
with attribute—that is to say, It is both attributeless and 
with attribute. A Sadhaka, when he has attained siddhi in 
the sadhana of Brahman, with attribute will, in natural 
course, lose himself in the attributeless Self.* * He need not 
before this time shut his eyes and see darkness for three 
ages.* By Brahman with attribute you and I may under¬ 
stand a small Brahman. But in the eyes of the Shastra, 
Brahman is neither small nor great, as you think.As an aquatic animal must pass through the rivers if 
it wishes to journey to the sea, so a Jlva must pass through 
the dualistic world if he wishes to make his way to the 
Brahman. Shastra has, therefore, said that to reach maha- 
nirvana, whioh is His attributeless aspect, one must 
proceed by the aid of the support of His forms 1 with 
attributes. By the term “attributeleBs” one is not to 
understand that Brahman has no attribute,' but that, 
although with attributes,* He is not attached’ to them. 
The Sea is not waterless. But as, notwithstanding its 
fulness of water, it is the Lord or presiding Devata over 
waters, so Brahman, with attribute or attributeless, is, not¬ 
withstanding suoh attributes, Lord or presiding Devata 
over attributes. Every attribute bears eternal evidence of 
the infinite number of attributes of Her in Whom are all 
attributes.*

To say, therefore, that She is attributeless is only to 
show one’s ignorance. The manifestations of Shakti in

* Pratipftdya. ’ SvarQpa.

* That is. be has not got to wait, bat the resalt follows immediately.

* Murti. 1 Gana. * Gupamaya. ’ Lipta. ' Gupamayi.

502 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the forma 1 of Devas, Danavas, and men, signify nothing 
but the spread' of attributes belonging to Her who holds 
the three gupas. Attachment, inclination, permanence, 
peace, self-control, patience, error, enjoyment, liberation, 
devotion, and the like are all nothing but Shakti. Thanks, 
then, to the tongue of him who says that She is uncon¬ 
scious, She in whose substance hearing, thinking, going, 
seeing, and other acts of consciousness exist. Whether 
a person who asks if he has got a tongue has really got it 
or not, will be understood by others if not by himself. But 
he, too, ought to understand .this much, that if he has not 
got a tongue, with whose help, then, does he ask: “ Have I 
got a tongue ? ”Similarly, an advocate of the theory that Shakti is 
unconscious, ought at least to ask himself under whose 
influence earthly Jlvas become conscious? If Shakti be 
not really consciousness, by whose grace do I possess the 
power of asking whether Shakti is conscious or uncon¬ 
scious ? I know not what severe punishment for terrible 
crimes committed in previous births it is which smites a 
man so senseless as to cause him to make so delirious a 
stafement as that ** Shakti is unconscious.” He is saying 
that of a Shakti the beams of the moon of whose conscious¬ 
ness are powerfully manifested in every vein, ever}' artery, 
and in every atom of a Jiva’s body. Shastra has said: *! O 
Devi, without a knowledge of Shakti nirvftpa cannot be 
attained.” Do you think, O Jlva! that you will gain the 
knowledge of Shaktitattva which leads directly to nirv&na 
liberation, merely by virtue of your being a great polemist, 
and without the possession of a wealth of sadhana stored 
by in many previous births ?

Are you to possess the wealth which is worshipped by 
Brahma an d other Devas—the treasure which lies eternally 
‘ Marti - * Yist&ra. ■ Jatfa.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

503

hidden in the storehouse of Sadananda's heart? Hari, 
Hari, Hari! You and I want to obtain Her by the force of 
intelligence, but we fail to realize that we have not the 
power to understand anything beyond what She, who is 
the intelligence of even intelligence, has, with proper judg¬ 
ment, given us the competence to understand. Not to speak 
of anyone else, even Shangkar&ch&ryya himself, O Sadhaka, 
played at this sport.When Bhagavan Shangkaracharyya, upholder of the 
rnaya doctrine, preacher of the Vedanta philosophy, and 
crest-gem of philosophers, arrived at Kashi after having 
proved himself a conqueror in every quarter; when followers 
of other systems of philosophy, wounded all over by the 
powerful arrows of his arguments, had been dispersed 
and scattered, he, by some play of the Mother of the 
world which we know not of, commenced, to the im¬ 
mense joy of the Shaiva community, to hurl relentless 
thunderbolts on the heart of the Shakta community. For 
he proceeded to establish that “ nothing exists as Shakti ” 
besides Shiva. Shaktas thus sorely oppressed by him, 
though defeated outwardly by arguments, were undefeated 
in inner reasoning. They were, however, intensely grieved 
to see such scepticism * 1 proclaimed against the Devata 
whom they worshipped. Who but She who dwells in all 
hearts can realize the intensity of such grief in the hearts 
of Sadhakas ? Shangkaracharyya, however, could not under¬ 
stand this even then ; for his ideas did not go beyond the 
notion that “ K&§hl * belonged to Shiva.” It was even then 
unknown to him that there was also a Mistress* of Ka§hl. 
The throne of Her who is Shakti in reality, was therefore 
moved to appease the pangs of the hearts of Sadhakas, and

1 Nustikavada.

1 Adhl^hvarl.

' The city of Benares.

504

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

to lift the curtain of error which had fallen upon Shangka¬ 
racharyya, the incarnation of all devotion. 11 Nustikavada.

1 Adhl^hvarl.

' The city of Benares.

504

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

to lift the curtain of error which had fallen upon Shangka¬ 
racharyya, the incarnation of all devotion. 1

One day, therefore, Shangkaracharyya, after an untiring 
discussion lasting till midday, lay with a wearied body on 
the Manikarijika ghat, enjoying in his mind his triumph 
in having disproved the Shakti doctrine.* * He then saw 
a girl of serene appearance slowly approaching the ghat,* 
carrying a small pitcher on her lap. Shangkaracharyya 
was lying with his head towards the south and feet 
towards the north, in such a way as to completely block 
the path. On coming near him, the girl very meekly said : 
“ Bhagavan, please raise your feet so that I may fill my 
pitcher with water and go away.” Shangkaracharyya said : 
“ Mother, you may step over me. There will be no blame 
in your doing so.” The girl replied : “ How can that be ? 
You are a Brahmana. How can I step over you ?” Shangka¬ 
racharyya, proud of his knowledge, said: “ Mother, you are 
an ignorant female, and in that a mere girl. Brahmana, 
Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shadra, female, male—all such differen¬ 
ces merely arise from our ignorance.* In the eyes of the 
wise everything is, in a spiritual sense, in substance, Brah¬ 
man. You may pass over me, and will commit no sin 
thereby.” The girl looked greatly grieved, and said: “ Lord, 
you yourself have said that I am an ignorant female, and 
have no competence for such spiritual knowledge.* I can 
by no means step over a Brahmana. Be good enough to 
raise your feet so that I may pass.” Shangkaracharyya was 
displeased, and said : “ Mother, I have repeatedly told you 
what to do, and yet you will not hear me ? My body is 
extremely tired, and, moreover, suddenly I feel, I know not

‘ BhaktAvatura.

* 8teps leading down to the river. 
' Tattva-jn&na.

’ ShaktivAda. 
' AjnAna.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

505‘ BhaktAvatura.

* 8teps leading down to the river. 
' Tattva-jn&na.

’ ShaktivAda. 
' AjnAna.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

505

why, as if I had not the shakti (strength) even to raise my 
feet.” The girl, who appeared to be somewhat frightened, 
said : “ Lord, pardon me. Had I but known that you had 
not the $hakti to do so, I would never have asked you to 
raise your feet. I am one who is not fit to understand your 
spiritual knowledge, and have, in consequence, disturbed 
you repeatedly through my great fear at having to step 
over a Brahmana. Had you, instead of speaking of spirit¬ 
ual knowlege, told me, at the beginning, plainly that 
‘you had not the shakti to move/ I would myself have 
raised j T our feet and gone down to the water. However 
that may be, if you will now let me, I shall myself raise 
j'our feet.” Shangkarach&ryya was greatly abashed at 
these words of the girl, and said: “ You may do what 
you like.” The girl then raised his feet with her own 
hands and put them aside, and then went down to the 
water, filled the pitcher, and ascended the steps. Shangka- 
racharyya, who was lying prostrate with fatigue, called 
to the girl, and said: “ Mother, I have been long thirsty, 
give me a little water.” The girl smiled, and asked: 
“ Why ? You are lying on the water-side. How is it, 
then, that you suffer from thirst?” Shangkaracharyya 
replied: “ How many times more need I tell you that I 
have not the shakti to rise?” The girl then rolled her 
eye, 1 and making the banks of the Ganges resound with 
Her solemn voice, said: “ Shangkara, is it not you who 
ignore Shakti ? ” Wounded by the echo of that heartpene- 
trating solemn sound, Shangkaracharyya, who had been like 
a sleeping child startled by lightning, shut his eyes for a 
moment, and then, as he fearfully opened them, he saw 
that in the angry eyes of the girl waves of unbearable light, 
such as might proceed from hundreds of suns and moons,

1 In surprise and resentment.

506

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 In surprise and resentment.

506

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

were playing. Instantly, as he cried “ Mother!" and with 
outstretched arms rushed to clasp Her feet, the play of that 
playful Devi closed. The great light of Her who is Light 
itself, 1 which had shown itself in the form of a girl, dis¬ 
appeared. None but a kindred sufferer can understand the 
darkness into which Shangkar&ch&ryya sank upon the dis¬ 
appearance of that light. The summit of pride of Brahma- 
jn&na 1 * 4 to which he had risen was shattered into pieces by 
a single glance of the daughter of the King of Mountains,* 
as the summit of a mountain is shattered by a thunderbolt. 
Then, like a blind man who has fallen, like a child which 
has lost its mother, he wept loudly, and crying, “ 0 my 
Mother, where have you gone ? " ran with breathless speed 
towards the temple of Annapurpa. Now the mother's son 
belongs to the Mother, and goes to the Mother’s temple 
crying, Mother! Although there was nothing strange in 
this, yet the sight of such an unprecedented change in 
Shangkaracharyya, the sceptic about Shakti, charmed the 
Sh&ktas with the greatness of the Mother. The temple- 
yard was filled with their cry : “ Victory to the Mother of 
the world. Surrounded on all sides by the assembly of 
Sh&kta devotees, Shangkaracharyya came to the door of 
the temple of the Rajr&je?hvarl* of the three worlds, the 
Queen 5 of the Lord ' of K&?hi, and, trembling with fear at 
having committed so grave an offence, placed his head on 
the shrine of the feet touched by the heads of Suras and 
Asuras, of Adya Shakti, the Mother of the world. Then, 
weeping, he said: “ 0 Mother, Shiva is able to maintain 
His Lordship only if He is united with Shakti; otherwise 
(if He is separated from Shakti) He is unable not merely to

Jyotirmayi. ' Knowledge of Brahman.

The Devt. who had thus appeared to the philosopher.

4 Queen of Queens. ' Adhi$hvarl. ' I ? hvara.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI 607Jyotirmayi. ' Knowledge of Brahman.

The Devt. who had thus appeared to the philosopher.

4 Queen of Queens. ' Adhi$hvarl. ' I ? hvara.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI 607

maintain His Lordship, but even (to maintain His own 
existence) to move His eyes. Explained in another way : 
According to Tantra, Shakti is denoted by the letter * * i.' 1 
Shiva is Shiva so long only as He is joined with Shakti— 
that is, with * i.’ The instant He is separated from Shakti— 
that is, from ‘ i ’—He ceases to be Shiva, and becomes a 
motionless Shava [corpse]. Thou art, therefore [Adya 
Shakti] an object of worship to even Hari, Hara, Virincbi,* 
and others who are themselves worshipped by the world. 
0 Mother, how am I, who have done no act of religious 
merit, able to bow my head to, or hymn thy feet [the lotus- 
feet, difficult of attainment by the three worlds, at which 
Brahmtl and other Devas lay their heads]—that is to say, 
unless Thou thyself reveal it, who has the power to know 
the Shakti-tattva, which is in reality Thyself? Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Mahe.?hvara, who know but a part only of Thy 
greatness, have sought shelter at Thy feet. That tattva is 
not revealed to any who have not a store of religious merits 
acquired by Sadhana in many a previous birth. It is not 
within the power of Jlvas to know the nature of Tara,* who 
is beyond the reach of mind and speech. It is therefore 
that a Jlva fails to know Thee, O Mother, even though he 
lies on Thy lap. 0 Mother, such is my state to-day. Out 
of fear for the offence I have committed, I have not the 
courage either to make hymn or to bow to Thee.”

In this manner Shangkar&charyya made hymn to the 
Mother of the world by one hundred and three verses, in 
which he described Her appearance, qualities, and great¬ 
ness. In the conclusion he said: " To make hymn to Thee

1 Called Vftmakshi or Vftmanetra (left eye), also RatT.

* Visbzju, $hiva, Brahma.

’ That is, the tattva of Tilra, one of the Mah&vidyas (see Introduc¬ 
tion).

5081 Called Vftmakshi or Vftmanetra (left eye), also RatT.

* Visbzju, $hiva, Brahma.

’ That is, the tattva of Tilra, one of the Mah&vidyas (see Introduc¬ 
tion).

508

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

with words uttered by Thy grace is like the waving of 
lights * 1 before the sun in his worship, or the preparation 
of Argbya 1 for the moon with the particles of water secreted 
by a moon-gem, 1 or the offering libations of its own water 
to the sea."

Thus gratified, Shangkaracharyya made provision so 
that none among the descendants of his disciples might 
ever be deprived of the wealth of the Sadhana of Shakti, 
or fall from Tantrik initiation, notwithstanding that they 
were Sanny&sins in the Vaidik cult. For this reason we 
see the Yantra of Shri* established wherever there are 
Mathas,* temples, and the like, founded amongst such 
Dandis" as are followers of Shangkaracharyya. This fact 
people daily see even at the present time, except that it 
is in some places openly displayed, and in some places 
kept secret as Sadhakas, who know T the secret, are fully 
aware.

However that may be, we have something to say about 
the spiritual error of Bhagavan Shangkaracharyya, an 
incarnation of Shangkara, in the incident described above. 
Bhagavan Shangkaracharyya w r as an incarnation of Shiva, 
who is Shakti Herself. It is extremely astonishing that 
He who has in His original form laid His breast under 
the feet of Mahashakti, and sunk in Brahma-bliss by 
resigning Himself to the Brahma-form of Brahmamayi, 
should, in His incarnate form, commit such an error in 
respect of Shakti-tattva. We are therefore led to think 
that it was in order to shatter the pride of knowledge, 
consisting of eternal ignorance, which filled the followers

1 Arnti, or the waving of lights in worship before an image.

1 An offering made to show respect to a person on meeting him, or 
to a Dcvata. * ChandrakAnta maiji. * The Devi.

Monastic establishments. ' A class of high Sonny&sins.1 An offering made to show respect to a person on meeting him, or 
to a Dcvata. * ChandrakAnta maiji. * The Devi.

Monastic establishments. ' A class of high Sonny&sins.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

509

of the Vedantik system of philosophy, who were advocates 
of the Maya doctrine , 1 deluded by the Mfty& of Mahamaya, 
that he first ignored the existence of Her who is perfect 
and eternal Brahman, and then proclaimed the greatness 
of the Mother of the world by holding, through Her grace, 
the ever-triumphant banner of the Tantra Shastra in his 
own hand. Otherwise, it is not to be believed that the 
author of the hymn of which we have quoted the beginning 
and the end, and which bespeaks a deep and impressive 
knowledge of the entire Tantra Shftstra, was a disbeliever 
in Shakti, or did not know or worship Her.

Gaura Chandra,* * the full-moon of the Sea of Gaura,* 
descending upon Navadvlpa , 4 also belonged to a branch 
of Bhagavan Shangkaracharyj’a’s followers. His Guru who 
initiated him in asceticism,* was SwamI Keshava Bharatl, 
a disciple in the line of the disciples of the Shangkara 
community. Intelligent Sftdhakas will, therefore, easily 
understand in what system Gaura Chandra was initiated, 
and according to which he was accustomed to worship. 
Still, we shall try to deal with this subject in its proper 
place, so far as it will lie in our power.

Sadhaka, whom shall I recognize as a greater philoso¬ 
pher than Bhagavan Shangkariicharvya, who played his 
part in the above-mentioned sport ? Where is the advocate 
of the theory that Shakti is unconscious,* who is himself 
thereby lowered to the state of some unconscious thing, 
whose words I shall respect? If ShangkarachAryya, an 
incarnation of Him who possesses all Shaktis, lost the 
power (shakti) of raising his feet because he said, “ There

1 The Mfiyavfida, which speaks of Maya as Avidya only, and not 
(ignoring the true nature of $hakti) as both Vidya and Avidya.1 The Mfiyavfida, which speaks of Maya as Avidya only, and not 
(ignoring the true nature of $hakti) as both Vidya and Avidya.

' The Vaishnavite Saint Chaitanya. ' The country Gaur or Bengal.

* The town of Nadia, where Chaitanya was born.

' Sannyasa. * Jada.

510

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

is no Shakti,” who are yon and I that we should raise our 
heads to say, “ There is no Shakti " ?

He is very deeply mistaken who thinks that he can 
understand the shakti-tattva by means of philosophical 
arguments, discussions, and reasonings. If She were a 
treasure to be acquired by arguments, discussions, and 
reasonings, for whose sake, then, are sadhana and bhajana 1 
required ? Shangkarfieharyya did not know Her by means 
of philosophy (darshana). He knew Her in consequence of 
seeing Her (darshana).* * He was not a blind philosopher, 
like the pandits we meet nowadays. His spiritual eye was 
painted and made brilliant by the collyrium paint * of the 
light of Her who is ever stainless. 4 The Mother of the world 
showed Herself to him, and that sight (darshana) made him 
(one who sees or) a philosopher (d&rshanik). But we un¬ 
fortunate Jlvas of the Kali age are becoming blind in the 
name of philosophy (darshana). This is our ill-fortune.*

Is he not the greatest of sceptics* who finds it in him 
to say that Shakti “does not exist”—the Shakti whose 
existence has given to Bhagavan the name of "possessor 
of all Shaktis”? What can be a greater folly than that 
you, 0 Jlva, should proceed to discuss the existence or 
non-existence of the Shakt i, whose greatness is preached 
by Bhagavan; the Shakti whose greatness is such that 
Bhagavfin Himself has, in order that it may be proclaimed, 
ordained that the name of Shakti should be uttered first, 
and then that of the possessor of shakti, declaring that he 
who shall fail to utter the names as Radha-Krishna,

' Worship. ’ A play on the word " darshana.’

* Anjana used to give brilliance to the eyes. * Kiranjana.' Worship. ’ A play on the word " darshana.’

* Anjana used to give brilliance to the eyes. * Kiranjana.

* A play on the word darshana. Philosophy is so called, as it is 
supposed to give sight: but is here the cause of blindness.

* Literally, the great-grandfather of sceptics.

SHIVA AND SHAKTI

511

Lakshml-Narftyana, Umfi-Maheshvara, Gaurl-Shangkara, 1 
and Sita-R&ma is guilty of a sin as great as that of murder¬ 
ing a Brahmana. In the uncrossable ocean of Her exist¬ 
ence a Brahni&nda-cauldron is less even than a bubble of 
water.* *

Is it the Mother’s fault or the son’s ill-fortune that 
living in that bubble and even sinking in that ocean, you 
and I do not see Her; that sitting in the Mother’s lap, 
nourished by the Mother’s milk, and tended by the soft 
fingers of the Mother’s hand, the son, born blind, does not 
see Her? Who does not take birth in his Mother’s womb ? 
But for that reason everyone does not have the good 
fortune of seeing his mother. The graceful and refulgent 
beauty of the three eyes* of the three-eyed Devi are reflected 
in the mirror of the eye of him only whose eye of know¬ 
ledge has been opened by Her mercy, and has been smeared 
by his guru’s kindness with the collyrium paint of love. 
Shangkaracharyya has said: “ What power has Jlva to 
see that beauty of Thine, which is visible only to Parama- 
shiva ? ”

So I say, 0 brother Sadhaka, do not forget the Mother's 
authority and power because you have not yourself got 
the power to see Her. And you, community of false 
devotees, who see a difference between Shakti and possessor 
of §hakti, who are partial on the Father’s side and inimical 
to the Mother’s side, to you, too, I say’, whichever form a 
Jlva may* worship, be it the form of a male or that of a 
female, the door of liberation is free to him.

1 That is. the names of the §haktis are placed first, and those of 
the Deva* second.1 That is. the names of the §haktis are placed first, and those of 
the Deva* second.

1 The universe, which is shaped like a cauldron, is but as a bubble 
in the limitless ocean of Her being.

* Including the central eye of wisdom.

512

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

He who worships the Father has not to wait to worship 
the Mother before he can secure liberation; but know it 
for certain that not even the Father's father has the power 
to liberate him who worships the Father in a spirit of an¬ 
tagonism to the Mother. Shumbha, Nishumbha, Jambha, 
Mahishasura, 1 and many others, worshipped the Father in 
this spirit. But I know not how vast is the mercy of Her 
who is full of mercy. Enmity cannot touch Her in the least, 
so that the Devi with dishevelled hair, whom immortals 
worship, liberated them from the bonds of existence even 
when in war with them. Nevertheless, by placing Him¬ 
self in the form of a corpse under the Mother's feet, the 
Father showed to the Daityas that the garland of pearls 
of liberation lies ever set and ever stored under the feet 
of the Devi with dishevelled hair. To put on that garland 
one must place one’s heart under those feet and lose one’s 
self. It is with the view of this truth* * that thoughtful 
devotees of subtle insight have said: “ Everyone says 
* Father, Father! ’ no one says ‘ Mother! ’ But in the Father 
court * the final decision is that which is the Mother’s 
command.”

So I say: “ 0 you who discriminate between the Father 
and the Mother, human birth is difficult of attainment. 
Open, then, the door of your heart while there is yet time, 
and with tears in your eyes say for once.

“ * A bad son may sometimes be born 
But a bad mother never.’ ” *

1 Daityas or demonic beings so named (sec Introduction and ante).

* Tattva. * Durbar or court held by Ruja*, etc.“ * A bad son may sometimes be born 
But a bad mother never.’ ” *

1 Daityas or demonic beings so named (sec Introduction and ante).

* Tattva. * Durbar or court held by Ruja*, etc.

' Kuputro jayeta kvacbedapi kumatfi nabbavati. This is a quota¬ 
tion from $hangkarftchOryyn's hymn, ” Devyaparadhakshamfipnna 
stotra," translated in A. and E. Avalon's “ Hymns to the Goddess."

CHAPTER X

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

Brahman with attributes is the object of adoration in the 
Gftyatrl worship already mentioned, although attributeless 
Brahman is the goal. That worship, however, is sufficient 
and adequate only for the saudhyA-prayers * 1 said thrice a 
day. The sandhya-prayers may be the only and highest 
form of worship for him who, disregarding the dualistio 
Brahraauda, has profoundly understood the monistic truth, 
and lost all false dualistic notions concerning the body, 
senses, mind, and life. Although in the achamana * of 
sandhyA, there is something of self-resignation which belongs 
to the province of dualistic perception, yet that is intended 
only for the casting off of sin. For this reason, this part 
may be called self-purification instead of self-resignation. 
However that may be, the loving heart of a devotee cannot 
rest satisfied with this part only. The sandhya cannot gratify 
the heart's desire of Him whose earnest wish is to place 
everything which he can call his own at Her feet, and to be 
taken as a slave in return for Her love.

From the G&yatrl I learn that Mahashakti, under the 
aspects of BrahinA, Vishnu, and Maheshvara, is the crea- 
trix, preservatrix, and destructrix according to differences 
which exist between the three gunas of sattva, rajas,

' Sec* Introduction.

1 A portion of the sandbyA ritual (see Introduction).

33

514

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Sec* Introduction.

1 A portion of the sandbyA ritual (see Introduction).

33

514

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and tamas. But this amount of understanding does not 
satisfy the mind and heart. Why this play of Hers ? 
What is the process by which this play is regulated ? What 
was Her true aspect 1 before this play, and what will Her 
aspect be after it? Being Herself full of play, 1 how is She 
detached from it ? How can Jlva, who is but a mere puppet, 
pass beyond this play and enter into Her real Self? A Jlva's 
heart is naturally anxious to have the answer to these and 
other questions.

Secondly, suppose that I understand from the Gayatrl 
as much as I can of these matters. 3 I then understand 
that She is pure Brahman whose substance is existence, 
consciousness, and bliss. But what do I gain by that ? I 
am an impure, unconscious 3 Jlva. I hear that the sea 
contains innumerable gems. But what is that to me? 
The gems of the sea are in the sea, and my poverty is in 
me. So long as I do not secure those gems in ray own 
hand, it will not end my miseries to hear or know of them. 
So long as I do not see Her with my eyes and bless myself 
by holding Her to my breast, there is no peace for me. I 
am therefore in want of a means whereby I can secure Her. 
I shall do so the day on which my egoism will be destroyed 
by the intense fire* * of spiritual knowledge. But my gross 
intellect, mind, and life are not satisfied with such a subtle 
form of attainment. I am a Jlva with ten senses, and 
possessed of mind and life, and these things form the only 
hope and support of my egoism. I want a suitable way of 
obtaining Her without losing these things. Atroa has 
never any happiness or sorrow.

My sangsara exists in order to make the mind happy. 
If I cannot make that mind happy, if I am only to meet

* SvarApa. ’ Lll&mayT. * Tattvaa.

* Jnda—that is here, spiritually unconscious. * Tojaa,

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

515* SvarApa. ’ Lll&mayT. * Tattvaa.

* Jnda—that is here, spiritually unconscious. * Tojaa,

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

515

Her after the mind is dead, then it is the same to me 
whether I meet Her at all or not. And if the mind is to 
die, with whom will that meeting take place ? 1 This too, 
is a serious problem. For this reason I want Her whom 
my mind wants. This is no doubt a very great expectation. 
But what can I do? I shall not be able to make my mind 
suited to Her, so that She must make Herself suited to my 
mind, for She or He is possessed of all shaktis. Mind is 
not able to suit itself to Her, for She is beyond the reach 
of mind—that is to say, mind cannot see Her or become 
suited to Her by its own power. But She dwells in every* * 
thing and sees everything, so that it is neither impossible 
nor astonishing for Her to become suited to the mind as 
She sees it. For my mind is happy if it can form a sang* 
sara with the senses. Its concern is with happiness, and 
it is as much ready to form a sangs&ra with persons who 
are in no way connected with it, provided it can be happy 
with them, as it is to forsake father, mother, wife, and son, 
if it does not get happiness from them. If, therefore, it 
obtains happiness,—that is to say, if the senses which are 
its limbs obtain objeots upon which they can function; if 
the eye can see Her; if the ear can hear Her words; if the 
skin can touch Her; if in this manner and in every way 
She can provide happiness to the mind, the life, the body, 
and the senses; if by withdrawing all the functions of the 
senses to the mind * She can immerse them in the sea of 
joy along with the mind—then the mind may forsake father, 
mother, wife, son, and others, and live as in a sangsara 
with Her.

1 Cf. the saying: " I do not want to be sugar, but to eat it."1 Cf. the saying: " I do not want to be sugar, but to eat it."

* That is, withdraw the senses from external objects and concent¬ 
rate them in the mind, in order that Bupersensual perception may be 
had of Her. The senses arc the effects of the mind, and can be 
withdrawn into it by yoga, when the Jlva acquires the power of 
spiritual perception.

516

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

If it is happy, why should it consider as to who is its 
own, and who is not its own? To judge of happiness by 
relationship is not a sure mode of judgment. On the 
contrary, relationship should be judged by happiness. 
It is because happiness is concerned that She, who has 
no connection with even seven generations above me, is 
my (better) half. This is an instance of a person’s happi¬ 
ness in the sangs&ra. If the mind in the sangs&ra loves to 
be occupied with the sangsara, then why not form that 
sangs&ra with Her ? She then becomes father, mother, wife, 
son, friend, and companion. Devotion, respect, affection, 
and love, whatever I have to bestow, I bestow on Her. If 
I can be happy by feeding, clothing, and decking Her, just 
as one is said to be happy in this sangs&ra by feeding, cloth¬ 
ing, and decking one’s children ; if the sangsara can be kept 
up with Her in this manner, then it will not be long before 
the mind is made suited to Her—that is, just as She would 
have it to be.'

But in order thus to make my mind suited to Her, it is 
necessary that She should first be suited to my mind. It 
will not do for Her to remain sitting in the orb of SQrya* 
or the sphere of Agni,* but She must oomo and sit in the 
circle * of my heart. I shall not be able to contemplate 
different forms of Her at different times— viz., three forms* 
in three sandhy&s. She must remain for ever fixed in one 
form, whether standing, sitting, or in any other posture. 
It will not do that I shall meet Her in three sandhyas 
during daytime, but never during the night. Like the flow1 If the sildhaka’s sangs&ra consists of Her alone — that is to say, if 
he is occupied with nothing but Her—then the frame of his mind will 
easily become what She likes, so that he may be in a position to enjoy 
Her company constantly.

’ The sun. 1 Fire^ * Man daliy

‘ Rapa ; an allusion to the three dhyftnas of the sandhyft.

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

517

of the Ganges towards the sea, the flow of my sight towards 
Her will be uninterrupted. Whatever else may cross my 
sight, it will turn only towards Her.

Unless I desire, all distinctions of time, space, and 
person will cease to exist. In whatever state, under what¬ 
ever circumstances, I may live, in happiness or in sorrow, 
in prosperity or in adversity, my life will encirole Her 
beauteous feet. If, answering these expectations of mine, 
You first make yourself suited to my mind, then I shall 
make myself suited to Your mind. It is in order to fulfil 
these loving expectations of the Sadhaka, that She who is 
perfect and eternal Brahman has provided for T&ntrik 
initiation in addition to initiation in the Gayatrl. And Her 
mercy appears all the more from the fact that even those 
who have no competency’ for initiation in the Gayatrl have 
beon made eligible by Her for Tantrik initiation. All per¬ 
sons, and whether men or women, are equally eligible for it. 
This Door of liberation is ever free to the access of even the 
basest and lowest born ChamJala.*We do not observe distinction of caste when stepping 
into a ferry-boat; no distinction is made between sinful and 
virtuous men as regards bathing in the Ganges; and no 
distinction exists between unmoving objects, moving 
objects, insects, and the like dying in the region of Benares 
in respect of their right to Nirvana liberation. In the same 
way in the boat in whioh we cross the sea of existence, in 
the sacred water of the Ganges of knowledge, and in the 
Benares of Tantrik initiation extending over the whole 
Brahmai^da, no bar is set against the initiation of any. In 
short, just as fire will appropriate anything to itself, so the 
Tantra will appropriate anyone to the Brahman. The

1 AdhikAra.

1 One of the lowest castes.

618

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Tantrik form of initiation is therefore an unfailing means, 
having no equal, for the liberation of the three worlds.

Why not, then, worship in this manner any one of the 
three Purusha aspects and the three Shakti aspects 
specified in the Gayatrl-tattva ? There is no fear of 
such an objection here; for Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, 
Shakti, and Surya, are the five Devatas mentioned in 
the Gayatrl. Of these the worship of Brahm&, in the 
Tantrik form, has been abolished by Devarshi Narada's 
curse, and in the place of Brahma the worship of 
Ganesha, who is an avatara of Vishnu, has been established; 
in fact, the worship of none of these five Devatas is outside 
the scope of the Gayatrl-tattva. It is, therefore, super¬ 
fluous to say that it is the Devatas of worship according 
to the Gayatrl-tattva who are also objects of worship accord¬ 
ing to the Tantrik initiation.Moreover, in the Gayatri Mantra five attributive 
epithets have been used — namely, pervader of the universe, 
creator of the world, object of worship, playful 1 Deva, and 
director of Jlvas’ intelligence.* The Shakti qualified by 
these five attributes is eternally seated in each one of the 
five Devatas of worship. The five aspects 3 are all eternal 
and perfect Brahman. The Shakti of will, the Shakti of 
action, and the Shakti of knowledge 4 are infinite and un¬ 
limited in each of them. They are all equally powerful 
in creating, preserving and destroying, for He is five in 
one and one in five. Secondly, the aspects for worship in 
the Gayatrl-tattva are six,* while the worshipper—that is,

I and my mind—are one. It is impossible for a Jlva to

1 LU&maya. 
' Marti*.

’ See ante, and Introduction.

Icheha. KriyA, and JnAna Shakti* (see Introduction).

nrw1 >atis.three Purusha forms—Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara— 
and three $hakti forms—Bruhmilni, Vaishnavl, Budr&ni.

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

519

adore six aspects with equal love in the same mind. The 
love, which is to sound constantly in the mind like the 
note of a tanpura, 1 will be interrupted if transferred from 
one aspect to another. Sh&stra itself has said :“ For one whose mind travels from one state * to 
another, and so on, there is no liberation," for it is impos¬ 
sible for such a one to perform simple-minded Sadhana. ’ 
Again: “ From morning to evening, and from evening to 
morning, all that I do, O Mother of the world, is your 
worship.” Thus, to resign oneself wholly day and night 
to the lotus-feet of the supreme Devata; to be dependent on 
Her protection only by maintenance of an intimate relation 
with Her at all times, whether in adversity or in prosperity, 
awaking or sleeping, in life or in death ; to feel truly in 
the heart and say, “ My mind knows nothing but Thy 
beautiful feet”: to sink in the untraversable sea of the 
thought* that “I am Mother and the Mother is mine" 
—such a whole-hearted love for one cannot be formed in 
respect of six aspects. I know that She is one in six; 
but my mind cannot be two instead of one in the unbegin¬ 
ning and unending flow of time. How can I offer my 
one mind to the feet of six persons ? How can I love six 
persons as 1 love my life ? For this reason I must accept 
some one aspect as the centre of the joy of love, making 
it the support of my life. Though all aspects are but 
really Her, yet the three worlds do not possess another 
aspect similar to that of which the Mantra restores my 
life, of which the Yantra is the amulet for my safety, 
and of which the Tantra* is the occupation of my whole 
lifetime, whether that aspect be dark blue like crushed

1 A stringed instrument used by singers in keeping up the note. 
’ Bh&vu. * Cult, authority.

520 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 A stringed instrument used by singers in keeping up the note. 
’ Bh&vu. * Cult, authority.

520 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

colljrium, or fair like a mass of heated gold,* * or white 
like a mountain of silver. 1 “With Thyself alone, O Mother, 
can Thyself be compared,” and “O Mother, what Thou 
art to me, Thou alone art that to me.” The sweetness 
of Her beauty is not to be judged by these physical 
eyes of the Jiva. Who but She, who is the only beauty 
in the world, and who is full of love for devotees, can 
say whom the eye of love will consider beautiful ?* Here 
Deva Hanuman, a guide * for the journey to the sea 
of love, has said: AJthougb from the point of view 
of spirit there is no difference between Narayajja, the 
husband of Lakshmi, and R&machandra, the husband of 
JanakI, yet lotus-eyed R&machandra alone is my all.” That 
is to say, although there is no real difference between the 
aspects of Rama and Narayapa, yet Ramachandra is the 
full-moon of the sea of my love, and consequently there is 
nothing in the three worlds so charming to my mind, life, 
and eyes, as the aspect of lotus-eyed Rama, fair of colour, 
like a young blade of grass. Bhagavan, also, is ever bound 
by the tender ties of this love, so dear to the Sadhaka. We 
therefore read in such books as the Puranas that whenever 
that incarnation of devotion, the son T of Parana* went to 
VaikimJha, Bhagavan, through love for the devotee, changed 
His usual aspect of N&r&yapa into that of Rama, and, caus¬ 
ing Mahalakshml to appear as the daughter of Janaka, sat 
with Her on the same seat. This love play of Brahman is

1 The Deri as Shy&mft, Kali, Tara. etc.

1 The Devi as Dma, Gaurl, Durga, etc. ' §hiva is thus described.

‘ That is, She determines for each devotee that which he will 
regard as most beautiful.

* Used honorifically of the monkey Hanumiln, the son of Pavana.

‘ Guru ; because of his great devotion of BAmaehandra.

Hanam4n - ' Deva of the Wind.

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

521* Used honorifically of the monkey Hanumiln, the son of Pavana.

‘ Guru ; because of his great devotion of BAmaehandra.

Hanam4n - ' Deva of the Wind.

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

521

fully displayed to a devotee. Bhagavan has therefore said : * * 
“ Any devotee who sceketh to worship with faith any such 
aspect, I verily bestow the unswerving faith of that man." 
He alone presides in all appearances.* He alone is the seat 
of all forms of love. Of whatever aspect a Sadhaka may be 
the worshipper, it is He alone, the only desire-gratifying 
tree, who, by the play of the sacred fountain of his love, 
can cool the Jiva’s heart, scorched by the threefold heat. 4 If 
He be attained there is no need for the protection of another- 
The Sadhaka has therefore loudly said, with arms thrown 
up in joy: "I do not wish to look at another. I do not 
strive for another. I do not remember another. I do not 
want to seek the protection of another. My only prayer 
is that I may never forget in my heart the fair form of 
Tripurasundarl.” *

“ Bhagavan Maheshvara, crowned with the crescent 
moon, is my refuge. Maheshvarl, the daughter of the King 
of Mountains, is my refuge. I again say that they both 
form my only refuge. I will not seek the shelter of any 
other Devata."

I do not believe in any Deva whose throat is not 
marked with the blue stain caused by the drinking of 
poison, whose body is not decked with ornaments of 
serpents; whose hand does not hold a pot made of a 
skull, who has not a shining ej*e on his forehead, whose 
forehead is not adorned with the crescent moon, and

' Bhngavadgitu, chap, vii., Shloka 21. * Marti.

’ K&lpataru. * TApatraya, or threefold miseries (see ante).

* The Devi, so called, according to the KAlika Purina, because She 
is everywhere triple, and, according to the Tripurftrnava, because She 
dwells in the three Na^is (see BhAskararaya, Comm. LalitA, verse 125, 
and Benedictory §hloka).

4 At the churning of the ocean (Shiva Nllakapjha).4 At the churning of the ocean (Shiva Nllakapjha).

522

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

whose left side ib unoccupied by his better half.” 1 By the 
words “ I do not believe ” is not meant that I do not admit 
the existence of any other Deva, or that I have no love or 
respect for Him. What is meant is that there is no neces¬ 
sity for me to believe in any other Deva for the purpose of 
worship, for I am ever gratified with Him whom I have got. 
Just as a chaste woman* may love her husband only with a 
pure attachment in which none else has a share, so a 
SAdhaka may bestow his love for the Lord of the world on 
one Person only. Initiation in the Mantra of one Devata 
is necessary in order that the mind and Atmft (spirit) may 
have this right, and this initiation is the T&ntrik initiation.

A system of fivefold initiation is found to prevail in the 
families of many accomplished Sadhakas. Many people 
express great astonishment at this form of initiation ; for it 
is an extremely troublesome and almost useless affair to be 
initiated in the Mantras of the five DevatAs, Shiva, Shakti, 
Surya, Vishnu, and Ga?e?ha, and to attempt to worship them 
all with equal devotion. It is no doubt so if all of them 
have to be worshipped with equal devotion. But as a matter 
of fact, it is not ^ question of equal worship. The worship of 
every worshipper is fivefold ; for in the centre of the oircle 
is the worshipper’s own IshtadevatA,* and on each of His 
four sides the four other DevatA# preside. The only 
peculiarity, in this respect, of the fivefold initiation is that 
in this form of initiation a person takes from the mouth 
of his Guru the Mantras of all the five DevatAs, while in 
other forms of initiation Mantra# of only one Devata are 
thus taken. Initiation in any one Mantra entitles a 
SAdhaka to all Mantras. Although want of initiation in 
the Mantras of all five Devatas in no way interferes with1 Male and female form one complete whole, of which the male is 
the right side, and the female the left and better half. 1 Satr.

The Devata selected by the SAdhaka for his special worship.

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

5*23

this right, yet the speciality of initiation by a Guru in all 
the Mantra# is that this right is thereby made to bear fruit 
more speedily.

Secondly, in their anxiety for the welfare of their des¬ 
cendants, accomplished and non-discriminating 1 * * Sftdhakas, 
crest-gems of Kula,* understood it to be great imprudence 
to allow of the possibility of their families being ruined 
through the great sin of bearing ill-feeling towards any 
Deva. They therefore provided against this contingency 
by prescribing initiation in the Mantra# of all the five 
DevatAs, so that no one might think that because he was 
a Shakta, Vishnu was not a Devata for his worship, and 
that consequently it was not necessary for him to bear 
respect and devotion for Vishnu; or that because he was a 
Vaishnava, Shakti was not a Devata for his worship, and 
consequently it was useless for him to worship, Shakti.

Tantrik Initiation

The moment a Brahmana is initiated in the G&yatri 
Mantra, he becomes fundamentally entitled to the five 
forms of worship. The speciality of Tantrik initiation is 
that it matures this title to the point of bearing fruit.* 
Tantrik initiation indicates the sprouting state of that, 4 
of which the seed is sown by initiation in the Gayatrl. 
Bhagav&n Shrikrishija has therefore said to Uddhava, the 
orest-gera of devotees, in the Shrlmadbhagavata:*

' That is. between one Devata and another in the knowledge that

all are one. * Tantrik doctrine.

’ A person may be qualified to do a thing, but it does not follow 
that without further aid he can accomplish it; and this aid the Tantrik 
initiation supplies.

4 Tattva.

* Eleventh Skandha.

524

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA4 Tattva.

* Eleventh Skandha.

524

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“In all parvas 1 during the year one should perform 
my Yatra : and Vali/ and should take both Tantrik and 
Vaidik initiation, and observe Vrata 4 in my name.”

Again: “ My worship is of three kinds—namely, Vaidik, 
Tantrik, and mixed (Paurapik). I should therefore, be 
worshipped according to the rules prescribed in the three 
Shastras of Veda, Tantra, and Purana."

In the Tantra Shastra, Bhagavan Maheshvara also has 
laid down the same rule, drawing, however, a distinction 
between the ages.

In the Kubjika Tantra it is said: “ In the three Yugas 
of Satya, Treta, and Dvapara, Devas should be worshipped 
according to rules prescribed in Shruti and Smriti. In 
the Kali Yuga Devas should be worshipped only according 
to rules prescribed in the Tantra. In the Kali Yuga, Devas 
are not ploased with worship performed according to rule 
laid down in any other Shastra.” *

In another Tantra* this has been more clearly stated.

“Performance of Dharma 1 should follow the Vaidik 
method in the Satya Yuga. the method of Smriti in the 
Treta Yuga, the Pauraijik method in the Dv&para Yuga, 
and the Tantrik method in the Kali Yuga."

The following passage occurs in the Pura?hcharaj?a 
Rasollasa: “In the Kali Yuga, in Bbaratavarsha,'' the 
Dhyanas* and Mantras prescribed in Tantra are proper. 
0 Devi of restless glances, 0 fair-faced lady, the Dhyanas

Specified occasions for religions observances.

Festivals sach as DoIyAtra, Ratbayatru, etc.

Worship. * See Introduction.

See Introduction.

Not stated, but a similar passage occurs in the Kularnava Tantra. 
Religious rites. ( India.

Formula) of meditation (see Introduction).

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

525

and Mantras prescribed in the Vedas, the Smritis, and the 
Puranas are never proper in Bbaratavarsha in the Kali Yuga.”Formula) of meditation (see Introduction).

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

525

and Mantras prescribed in the Vedas, the Smritis, and the 
Puranas are never proper in Bbaratavarsha in the Kali Yuga.”

In the Mahanirvana Tantra it is said : “ My beloved ! 
In the Kali Yuga there is no other path but that path pres¬ 
cribed in Agama. 1 O spouse of Shiva, it has already been 
stated by me in Shruti, Smfiti, Purina, etc., that in the 
Kali Yuga the wise should worship Devas according to the 
rules prescribed in Agama.” 1

“•In the Kali Yuga the Mantras prescribed in Tantra 
are naturally efficacious,* * speedily bear fruit, and are proper 
in Japa, Yajna,* and all other rites. The Mantras of the Veda 
were fruitful in Satya and other Yugas. In the Kali Yuga 
they are as impotent as venomless snakes, and are, as it were, 
dead. Just as the senses of figures pictured on a wall are 
without action, so in the Kali Yuga Mantras other than 
those prescribed in Tantra are unable to effect any result.”

In the Datt&treya Y&mala we read : “Just as a person 
without a guardian has no protection in the world, so a 
person without initiation has no protection, whether in 
this world or the next.”

In the Gautamlya Tantra it is said : “Just as the sons 
of the twice-born 4 who have not received the sacred thread 
have no right to study the Veda and so forth, but acquire 
such right by investiture with the sacred thread, so the 
uninitiated twice-born have no right to recite* Mantras, 
worship Devas, and so forth, but acquire such right by 
initiation. For this reason, after investiture with the 
sacred thread, the twice-born should again purify them¬ 
selves according to the Shastra revealed by Shiva.”*

The following is from the Kularnava Tantra: “ Tap- 
asya,' observance of rules, 7 observance of Vrata,* pilgrimage

' The Tantra. * Siddha.

1 See Introduction. * Members of the three superior castes.

* Japa. * See Introduction. 5 Niyama.

526

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' The Tantra. * Siddha.

1 See Introduction. * Members of the three superior castes.

* Japa. * See Introduction. 5 Niyama.

526

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

to Tlrthas, 1 bodily restraint and other acts, are ineffectual 
if performed by one who is uninitiated. One should, there¬ 
fore, by all means be initiated by a Guru."

In the Agama Sandarbha it is said: “ To take the 
Gayatrl is the first initiation for the awakening of a know¬ 
ledge of the Atmft."

For this reason worship of the Gayatrl should come 
first and worship of another (Ishtadevata) according to 
Tiintrik initiation should follow. This is the proper Tattva* * 
for the Brahmana, Kshatriya, and Vaishya castes—that is 
to say, after first taking initiation in the Gayatrl by the 
Sangskara* of Upanayana, 4 one should be initiated accord¬ 
ing to Tantra in the Mantra of one's Ishtadevata. For 
Sudras, for whom there is no Sangskara of Upanayana, the 
Tiintrik initiation alone is prescribed. In the Kali Yuga 
initiation in the Gayatrl, though originally Yaidik, is accept¬ 
able only in the form prescribed in the Tantra Sh&stra.

The Mahfmirv&na Tantra says: “ This Savitrl,* who is 
Brahman, is as much Tantrik as Vaidik—that is to say, is 
proper both in Vaidik and Tftntrik rites. O Devi! for this 
reason, when the Kali age is in strength, the twice-born are 
entitled to perform daily worship with the Gayatrl Mantra 
alone of all Vaidik Mantras. But in the Kali age the 
G&yatrl Mantra should be preceded by the Pranava * in the 
case of Brahmanas; by the Lakshml-vlja 7 in the case of 
Kshatriyas; and by the Sarasvatl-vlja * in the case of 
Vaishyas.”

1 Holy shrines. ' Principle, doctrine, line of work.

Sacrament ” (see Introduction).

* Putting on of the sacred thread.

* Gftyatrl Mantra, ns to which see Introduction.

‘ That •*. “ Om." ' That is, “ 9hring.” * That is, “ Aing.'

' That is, “ §hring.*'

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

527* Gftyatrl Mantra, ns to which see Introduction.

‘ That •*. “ Om." ' That is, “ 9hring.” * That is, “ Aing.'

' That is, “ §hring.*'

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

527

Besides this, the Vaidik Mantras which have been 
prescribed in TJhtrik rites, such as the ten Sangskaras 
and the like, have, in spite of their Vaidik origin, become 
Tantrik ow’ing to their having been repeated by Mahesh- 
vara and Maheshvarl in connection with the Tantrik 
Method. For this reason, riteB performed with those 
Mantras in the Hali Tuga will not be fruitless.

“ 0 Devi, without Sangskaras 1 the body is not purified, 
and therefore without them a person is not entitled to 
perform rites relating to Devas and Pitris.* * Members of 
the Brahmaga, and other castes who desire their welfare 
in this and the next world, should, therefore, by all means, 
and with care, receive the Sangskaras specified for their 
respective castes. GarbhAdhAna, Pungsavana, Slmantona- 
yana, Jatakarma, Namakarana, Nishkramaua, Annaprasaua, 
ChadAkarana, Upanayana, and Vivaha*—these are the 
ten Sangskaras prescribed in the ShAstra for Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas, and Vaishyas. Shadras and people other than 
Shadras—that is to say, the lowest classes of Shadras 
—have no Upanayana; so that they have only nine 
SangskAras, the twice-born castes only having the full ten 
SangskAras. O fair Lady! these ten SangskAras and all 
other rites, daily, incidental, or done to gain some reward,* 
should be performed according to the mode laid down by 
Shambhu *—that is to say, according to the Tantrik method.

“ My beloved, as Brahma, the revealer of the Vedas, I 
have already related the rules which should be followed in 
different rites. Mantras also have been indicated according 
to different castes, such as Brahmana and others, for all the 
SangskAras and other rites. O KalikA,* in the Satya, Treta,

' Sacraments, (see Introduction.)

' The forefathers (see Introduction).' Sacraments, (see Introduction.)

' The forefathers (see Introduction).

' For a description of these varions " sacraments,” or SangskAros 
see Introduction.

* See Introduction. * ' The Devi.

528

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and Dv&para ages, 1 in those rites the Pranava* should precede 
those Mantras. 0 Parameshvarl, in the Kali age men should 
perform those rites, using the May&vlja * at the commence¬ 
ment of those Mantras by the command of Shangkara 1 — 
that is to say, according to the Tantra Shfistra. In Nigama, 
Agama,* the Tantras (Gautama, Sanatkumara, etc.), the 
Vedas, and the Sanghitas,* I have laid down all Mantras. 
But in different ages they should be applied in different 
ways. 0 Maharaayft, I shall next speak of Garbhadhana and 
other rites. Of these, hear first of all of the purification of 
the menses,' and next, in their order, of all the other rites.”

From the above Sadhakas will learn that initiation 
in the Gityatri, although originally Vaidik, is Tantrik in 
the Kali age.

Again: 44 In the Kali age men should by all means 
purify their Atom by practice of truth, and perform all the 
' duties prescribed for their respective castes according to the 
mode prescribed by Myself—that is to say, according to 
the Tantra Sh&stra. Dlksha, T Paja,* Japa, Homa, Purash- 
oharana,* Tarpaija, 10 Vrata,'(Upanayana)Vivfi,ha,Pungsavana, 
Slmantonnayana, Jatakarma, Namakaraun, Chodakarana, 11 
Antyeshthikriyn, 1 * Shradha of forefathers (Pitris), should all 
bo performed according to the Tantra Shastra. Shradha* 
in Tirthas, Vrishotsarga,** Shftradlya Utsava, 14 Yatrft, 1 *

* See Introduction, * That is. “ Om.”

* That is. “ Hrlng." 4 Shiva.

* See Introduction, ante.

* Ritusangskfira, which precedes Garbhadhana Sangsk&ra.

’ Initiation.

* External worship, consisting of the rites beginning with Avarana- 
pujn, and ending with the worship of the principal Deity.

* See Introduction, ante. M Offering, oblations.’ Initiation.

* External worship, consisting of the rites beginning with Avarana- 
pujn, and ending with the worship of the principal Deity.

* See Introduction, ante. M Offering, oblations.

11 These are various Sangsk&ros. or 44 Sacraments." described in

Introduction. *’ Funeral rite. “ Offering of bulls in $hrftdbas.

“ The autumnal festival, called Durgft Paja.

“ The commencement of journey.

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

529Introduction. *’ Funeral rite. “ Offering of bulls in $hrftdbas.

“ The autumnal festival, called Durgft Paja.

“ The commencement of journey.

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

529

Grihapravesha, 1 the putting on of new clothes and the like, 
consecration * * of tanks, wells, and the like; rites to be per¬ 
formed on particular Tithis,* such as Pratipada, 4 beginning 
the construction of a house, the consecration of a house, the 
establishment of images of DevatSs, duties to be performed 
by day or night on specifio occasions 1 in particular seasons 
or months, or every year, and all other acts daily or in¬ 
cidental to be done or not done, should be governed by the 
rules prescribed by me. If through delusion or wickedness, 
any Jlva fails to perform these acts according to Tantrik 
rules, he will be deprived of the fruits of all religious per¬ 
formances done by him, and will in the next world be born 
as a worm in dung. O Maheshvarl, should anyone in the 
Kali \uga forsake my cult* and perform any rite according 
to another Sh&stra, that rite will bear for him fruit contrary 
to that which he desires. In the Kali age initiation in a 
cult opposed to mine (prescribed in a Shastra other than 
Tantra) will prove to be the destruction of the Sftdhaka’s 
life. Paja performed by him will be fruitless, Homa per¬ 
formed by him will be as the pouring of Ghee into ashes.’ 
He will inour the anger of Devas, and will be in danger at 
every step. O Arnbika, when the Kali age is ripe, should 
anyone who knows the command of the Shastra issued from 
My mouth, perform any rite according to another Shastra, 
such a one will be guilty of a great sin. And in particular, 
if anyone should perform the sacred thread ceremony,* or 
marriage, according to other methods than those prescribed 
by me, that man will remain in a terrible hell so long as 
the sun and moon endure. The performance of Upanayana

1 The first entry into a house.

* Pratistha. • Lunar days.1 The first entry into a house.

* Pratistha. • Lunar days.

* The first day after the new moon or the full moon.

Parva. ' Mata. ' It should be poured into fire.

* Upanayana.

34

530

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

according to rules laid down by any other Sh&stra will be 
equivalent to the sin of killing a Br&hmana. 1 And the boy 
who in such case wears the sacred thread will be fallen* * 
and more degraded than a Chandala.* The thread, too, 
worn by him round his neck will be without virtue.* A 
wife married according to the rites of another Shftstra will 
not be a legitimate wife, according to Dharma. O Devi, 
leader in Kula, the man who marries her will sin. By 
intercourse with her he will daily commit the sin of having 
intercourse with a prostitute. Devas and the Pitris will 
not accept food and water from his hand. For the food 
offered by him is like excrement, and the water offered by 
him is like pus. The child born of that man and woman 
will be a bastard, 8 excluded from all religious aots, 8 and 
deprived of the right to perform all rites’ relating to Devas 
and Pitris, and to be a follower of Eula. Should the image 
of a Devata be established by a method other than that 
ordained by Shambhu, then such Devatft will never appear 
in such image. The establishment of that image will, there¬ 
fore, be useless as respects the next world, and will simply 
spell trouble and waste of money in this. Should anyone 
perform a Shrfidha according to a method other than that 
prescribed in Tantra, then that Shrftdha will be useless, and 
the person so performing it will go to hell with all his fore¬ 
fathers. Water offered by him will be like blood, and pipda* 
offered by him will be like excrement. For this reason, 
man should by all means seek the shelter of the path pres¬ 
cribed by Shangkara. 0 Devi, what more need I say ?

' One of the six great eins. Upanayana is investiture with the 
sacred thread. * Vrfttya. * One of the lowest castes.' One of the six great eins. Upanayana is investiture with the 
sacred thread. * Vrfttya. * One of the lowest castes.

* That is, it will be a mere common piece of thread.

' K&nlna : child born of an unmarried woman.

* Dharma. ’ T&ntrik rites.

* Balls of food offered in $hr&dha to the Pitris.

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

531

Truly, truly, I say, any act performed according to any other 
method than that prescribed by Shambhu will prove of no 
avail. Not to speak of religious merit to be acquired in 
future, even that whioh has been acquired in the past will 
be destroyed. There is no escape from hell for one who 
follows not the practices ordained by Shambhu. O Mahesh- 
varl, it is by the performance of daily and incidental reli¬ 
gious acts according to the path described by me that a 
person performs your Sadhana. Of these, worship with 
your Mantra, Yantra, etc., form special Sadhana. I shall 
now speak of the great remedy for the disease brought 
about by the Kali age. Do Thou listen to it.”

Loss of Tantras and Treatises on this Scripture

From these commands of Bhagavfin, who is the seat 
of the welfare of the three worlds, S&dhakas will also 
surmise what irremediable loss has been caused to the 
Aryyan race through want of knowledge of, and practice 
according to, the Tantra Sh&stra. A large number of trea¬ 
tises on the Tantra Sh&stra are required for the proper 
performance of these religious rites and duties, and it is 
inevitable that there should be a longing in the hearts of 
S&dhakas to collect such treatises for the purpose of meet¬ 
ing this requirement.What, however, is lamentable in this respect, is that 
the store of medicines has been burnt before the appear¬ 
ance of the disease. The mountain-heap of religious treatis¬ 
es has been almost consumed at the very beginning of the 
Kali age in the powerful destructive fire of religious revolu¬ 
tion. Later on in this book we shall not have the opport¬ 
unity to mention the names of the treatises of which we 
have information from original books and compilations on 
Tantra, and which formed a part of the mass of treatises

582

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

which has now been almost destroyed. For this reason, 
before we proceed to deal with the subject of Mantra-tattva, 1 
we shall state here, for the information of Sfidbakas in 
connection with the present subject, the names of a few 
such treatises. From these they will be able to see that 
when compared with the mass of other treatises on Sh Astra,* 
they form such an insignificant mass that they are lost in 
the vast womb of the untraversable sea of Tantra so full 
of deep truths.Kftllvilftsa, Kangk&lam&linI, Mundamala, Mahisha- 
mardinl, M&yfttantra, Matrikabheda, Mfttrikodaya, Mahanir- 
vAna, Malinlvijaya, Mahamla, MahakalasanghitA, Pheru- 
tantra, Bhairavatantra, Bhairavltantra, Bhutadamara, 
Vlrabhadra, Vljaohintamani, EkajatA NirvAnatantra, Tri- 
purAsara, VishvasAra, Varadatantra, Vasudevarahasya, 
Varahltantra, Vrihadgautamlya, Varaoddliyititantra, Vishnu- 
yamala, Vrihannlla, Vrihadyoni, Vishnurahasya, Vamakesh- 
vara, Brahmajnanatantra, Brahmayamala, Advaitatantra, 
Varpavilasa, Phetkarinl, Pura^hcharanarasollasa, Purash- 
charanachandrika, Pichchhilatantra, Prapanchasara, Hang- 
sa, Parameshvaratantra, Navaratneshvara, Nityatantra, 
Nllatantra, NarAyai?ayaka, Niruttara, Naradlya, Nagadina, 
DakshinamQrtisanghita, Yakshiyiltantra, YoginItantra, 
Yonitantra, Yogasara, Yogarnava, Yoginlhyidaya, Yoga- 
svarodaya, Akashabhairava, Rajaraje?hvarl, Radhatantra, 
Revatltantra, RudrayAmala, Ramarchanachandrika, 
ShAvaratantra, Indrajalatantra, Kalltantra, Kamakbya- 
tantra, Karaadhenutantra, Kallkulasarvasva, Kumarl- 
tantra, KyikalAsadlpika, Kalofctara, Kubjikatantra,

1 The principle of Mantras.

Apparently Tantra Sh&etra, in which case the sense ia that the 
treatises which the anthor enumerates form but an insignificant 
part of the vast mass of Tantrik books which are not found or

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

533WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

533

EuloddI$ba-Ku]arpava, Kulamdlavatara, Kula§utra, Yaksha- 
damara, Sarasvatltantra, Saradatantra, Shaktisangama, 
Shaktikagamasarvasva, Urddhamnaya, Svatantratantra, 
Sammohanatanfcra,CbInach&ra f Todalatantra, Buddhatantra, 
Ekavlratantra, Nigamakalpadruxna, Nigama-kalpalata, 
Nigamasara, Shyamarahasya, Tararahasya, Skandayft- 
mala, Annadakalpa, AnnapQrpakalpa, Agamakalpadruma, 
Agamatattvavil&sa, Agamfidvaitaninjaya, Agamasan- 
darbha, Agamas&ra, Adityabridaya, Uttarak&makhy&, 
Uttaratantra, Utpattitantra, Um&yamala, Ekavlr&kalpa, 
Ramalatantra, Kamal&vilasa, Katyftyaijltantra, Kalikar- 
chanacbandrika, Kalikalpa, KallkulasadbhAva, Kallkulam- 
rita, Kallkulanjava, Kallkrama, Kallhj-idaya, Kuinarl- 
kalpa, Kulachudamani, Kulaprakasha, Kulasara, Kula- 
sundara, Kulachara, Kulanjava, Kfishijarchana-ohandri- 
ka, Kaularohanadlpika, Kaulavall, Kramacbandrika, 
Kramadlpika, Kriyayogasara, Kjiyasara, Gajje§havimarsbuji, 
Gandbarvatantra, Gayatrltantra, Guptadlksha, Guptasa- 
dhana, Guptarnava, Gurutantra, Gudbarthadlpika, Gautaml- 
yatantra, Gaurlyamala, Gherapdasanghita, Cbakravichara, 
Chlnatantra, Yamala, Jnanatantra, Jnananjava, Damara, 
TantrakaumudI, Tantracbadamapi, Tantradlpika, Tantra- 
pramoda, Tantraratna, Tantraraja, TantraBagarasangbita, 
Tantrasara, Tantradar$ba, Tantrikadarpapa, Tarakbaijda, 
Taraniganm, Taratantra, Tarapradlpa, Tarabhaktisudhar- 
nava, Taranjtava, Tarasara, Tripurakalpa, Tripuranjava, 
Tripurasarasamuchobaya, Trailokyasammohana, Daksbiija- 
mdrtikalpa, Dattatreyayaraala, Durgakalpa, Devlyamala, 
Devyagama, Nandike^hvarasanghita, Naradapancharatra, 
Narayaglt-antra, Nigamakalpas&ra, Nigamatattvasara, 
Nibandhatantra, Nrisinghakalpa, Paramahangsapafcala, 
Paradevlrabasya, Pura$hcharagabodhinI, PQjfisftra, Pra- 
pancbasara, Prayogasara, Vfi,lavilasa, Brahmayamala, 
Erabmandatantra, Bhagavadbhaktivilasa, Bbavacbudamapi,

534

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA534

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Bhimaparakrama, Bhuvaneshvarltantra, Bhuvaneshvarl* 
parij&ta, Bh(lta§huddbitantra, Bbairavakosha, Bhairavaya- 
mala, Bhairavasanghita, MatsyasQkta, Mantratantra- 
praka?iha, Mantradarpapa, Mantrawahodadbi, Mantra- 
muktavall, Mantraratna, Mantra ratnivall, Mabakapila- 
pancharatra, Mahakalamohinlfcantra, Mahanllatantra, Maha- 
lingeshvaratantra, MOnasollasa, Malinltantra, Mfidanitantra, 
Merutantra, \ogachintamapi, RevAtantra, Lakshasagara, 
Lakshmlkularnava, Lingftrohana, Varpabhairava, Vamadeva- 
tantra, Vayavlj'atantra, Varahltantra, Vidyanandanivandha, 
Vidyotpattitantra, Vimalatantra, Vlratantra, Vribatfcantra- 
saia, Vfihattodalatantra, A rihatshrlkramasangraba, Vfiha- 
drudray&mala, Vrihannirvana, Vrihanmiyatantra, Vebayasl- 
mantrakosba, Vyomake§hasanghita, Vyomaratnatantra, 
Shaktiyamala, Shaktitantra, Shambhusanghita, ShAkta- 
krama, SbaktAnandatarangipI, Shambhavltantra, Shftrada- 
fcantra, Sharfidatilaka, Shasbvatatantra, Sbikhariptantra, 
Shivatapflava, Shivadbarma, Sbivarahasya, Sbivasangraha, 
Shaivaiatna, Shaivagama, ShyAmAkalpalatA, ShyAmApradipa, 
Shyamarcbanacbandrika, Sby&masaparyakrama, Shyama- 
saparyavidbi, Sbrlkularpava, Sbrltattvachintainapi, Shri- 
ramasangraha, Sanatkumaratantra, Samayatantra, Samaya- 
charatantra, Sammohanatantra, Sarasvatltantra, Sarachin- 
tamapi, Sarasangraha, Sarasamuchchaya, Svarasvatatantra, 
Singhavahinitaotra, Siddhalaharltantra, Siddhavidyadipika, 
Siddhautasara, Siddheshvaritantra, Soma§hambhu, Saobch* 
handamahe$hvara, Haya^birshapancharAtra, Haragaurisam- 
vada, U<ftamare?hvara, Kalikollasa, Kulakalpalata, KAmA- 
khj ada r papa, Kaumarivilaaa, CbapqbkArchanaohandrikA, 
CbamupdAtantra, Aghorabhairava, Bhairavanandasara, Niga- 
matattvaratna, Shivasutra, Nityaprayogasara, Nirvanasang- 
bit&, KAmarQpadlpika, Kdme§hvaratantra, KamakbyApra- 
yoga, Hanumatkalpa, Yijayatantra, Pltharatnakara. Katya- 
yapikalpa, Gaurltantra, Matangltantra, SbodasblsangbitA,

WORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATASWORSHIP OF THE FIVE DEVATAS

585

Parvatltantra, D&marasQtra, Shatkarmadlpika, Shatkarma- 
dldhiti, Chakre§hvara, Chakramukura, Kaulakrityatattva, 
Kfityatattva, Kfityaprayoga, Agam&njava, Abhioh&raka- 
vacha, Shyfi.masapary&, Siddhitantra.

We have mentioned the above, in order to give an idea 
of a fraotion only of the names of the treatises of whioh 
authoritative mention has been made in the way of ordinary 
research. Besides this, we hear from Tantrik teachers 1 * * that 
the number of treatises on Tantra is one lakh,* and some say 
that it is even more. Moreover, a particularly trustworthy 
community holds that even now there is no cessation in the 
creation of Tantras, and that there will also be no such cessa¬ 
tion in all the ages to come. Even now Bhagav&n Gaijapati 
Deva, at the command of his Father and Mother,* relates to 
Rishis , 4 inhabiting the Himalayas any Tantra which he hears 
from them. Maharshis,* and accomplished Sfldhakas, the 
well-wishers of the three worlds, promulgate them therein 
through successive generations of disciples. As it is in 
this way that Tantras reach the earth, there can be nothing 
to wonder at if new Tantras daily appear in the world. 
Even to-day, in the discourse of the Father and the 
Mother of the three worlds * (the pair who are the Para- 
brahman), seated on a throne in the midst of the assemblage 
of Brahma and other Devas in the bejewelled temple of 
Kailasa, the Tantra Sh&stra, whioh is Shabdabrahman ’

1 Acb&ryyas. 1 100.000.

1 $hiva and Pftrvatl.

4 See the Gftyatrl Tantra, chap. iv.

4 Great seers (see Introdaction).

* The Tantras are written in the form of a discussion between 
Shiva and His spouse Pftrvatl.

1 Sound-Brahman (see Introduction).

536

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA4 Great seers (see Introdaction).

* The Tantras are written in the form of a discussion between 
Shiva and His spouse Pftrvatl.

1 Sound-Brahman (see Introduction).

536

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

daily appears in new forms. Lost Tantras also are being 
recovered for the salvation of the race of sinners sunk in 
the sea of the sins of the profoundly sinful 1 Kali age. 
This is the unerring proclamation of the race of Sadhakas 
based on knowledge gained by divine vision.

END OF PAST I

Ghor, which literally means "intense," "unadulterated," an 
adjective here implying the markedly (sinful) characteristics of the 
Kali age.

TANTRA TATTYA

PART II

PREFACEEND OF PAST I

Ghor, which literally means "intense," "unadulterated," an 
adjective here implying the markedly (sinful) characteristics of the 
Kali age.

TANTRA TATTYA

PART II

PREFACE

This second part of Tantratattva, the translation of 
which is primarily the work of Sj. Jnanendral&l Majumdar, 
is the last. In the Preface to the First Part I spoke of 
the preparation of a third seotion, dealing with the philo¬ 
sophical bases of Tantra. I greatly, however, regret to 
announce the unexpected death of Pandit Shiva Chandra 
about the middle of this year. This particular project 
therefore unfortunately falls to the ground, and the work 
is limited to the dimensions in whioh it was first issued 
some twenty-two years ago. The philosophical aspect of 
the Tantra will, however, be found touched upon in the 
Introduction from the pen of Sj. Barad& Kanta Majumdar 
which follows, and I have myself further set out my own 
views on this part of the subject in my forthcoming work 
“The six Centres and the KundalinI Power /’ 1 The work 
here translated is, as already stated, that of an Indian 
mind unaffected by Western thought. On the other hand, 
a knowledge of the latter gives a special value to the In¬ 
troduction which precedes it. Apart from its intrinsic 
merits, it has suoh value as being the record of the views 
of an English-educated Hindu, who finds in the conclusions 
of recent Western science a corroboration of his ancient 
Eastern beliefs. Its author is now an old man, to whom 
the Tantra has been the subject of study for many years. 
He yet modestly says (see post ): “ I have attempted to give 
the reader the result of a general survey of the philosophy

1 Serpent Power, 4tb Edition. 1960.

540

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Serpent Power, 4tb Edition. 1960.

540

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

upon which Tantrik S&dhana, or self-culture, is based. 
But in so recondite and unfamiliar a subject, when the 
correctness of every individual interpretation may be called 
in question, the reader is requested to go himself to the 
souroe, and there, with faith and devotion, and under the 
guidance of a Guru, drink of its waters."

So far as I have examined the matter, I find myself to 
be in general agreement with his statements as to what 
constitutes the teaching of the Tantra on the matters 
dealt with. This agreement does not, however, neces¬ 
sarily extend to every statement or to all matters of detail. 
Some of these are open to discussion, as he admits. I 
should, for instance, myself dispense with the “ magnetic 
ourrent" to which the Introduction refers with reference 
to the worship of images, and would deal with the matter 
as one of purely transformed consciousness in the worship¬ 
per himself. Some things also are from the limited char¬ 
acter of the Introduction unsaid.

As the reader will see for himself, Sj. B. K. Majumdar 
treats his subject from a religious standpoint. There 
are, in fact, two lines of work in the Tantra—namely, 
religion and magic. It is with the former that the author 
of this book and of the Introduction which follows deals. 
There are to be found described in the Tantra practices 
whioh have nothing to do with religion in its proper 
sense, and are indeed opposed to it. Such are deemed 
“obstacles” by all those who are desirous of liberation. 
Thus what is called Nayika S&dhana, or the invocation of 
female spirits, is alleged in the Tantrio works to have the 
effect there described. But nevertheless the same Scriptures 
assert that these and other practices exist “for delusion.” 
So the Sh&ktananda TaranginI says “Avidy& binds the,, 
Sadhaka with Karma, and destroys knowledge. Therefore it 
is that Vidya should be worshipped, but Avidya never.” But

PREFACEPREFACE

541

why, it may be then asked, are snch practices to be found in 
the Tantra at all, if it be admitted that they destroy and 
delude ? This is a characteristically modern question. A com¬ 
plete answer to it would, however, on account of its length, 
be out of place. It is sufficient here to say that the Tantras^ 
are an encyclopaedia of all the sciences on all the planes J 
though the worker on the higher path is also taught not to 
venture below. A statement in a work on “ Toxicology ” 
that such and suoh substances will, if compounded, produce 
a deadly poison is a description of simple fact, and not an 
invitation to compass thereby the death of a neighbour who 
stands in our way. A correct recipe may have been given, 
but he who so employs it is likely to incur the extreme 
punishment. In the same way there are spiritual executions.

I raise the question to distinguish that aspect of the Tantra 
of which the author of the Introduction and myself speak 
from practices with which we are not here concerned.I raise the question to distinguish that aspect of the Tantra 
of which the author of the Introduction and myself speak 
from practices with which we are not here concerned.

The Introduction also limits itself to a short review of 
the contents of the Tantra in the sense above described. 
Notwithstanding the present fashion in English-educated 
India, Sj. B. K. Majumdftr has not essayed historical 
speculation. Whilst every form of knowledge has its use, 
the Indian mind rightly apprizes as of the highest value 
the world of ideas, deeming the question of their “ historical ” 
origins and development to be, as it in fact is, of much 
inferior importance. To the Western, and in particular the 
English, Sankritist the position is in general reversed. For, 
from the point of view he not uncommonly adopts, Indian 
civilization has little, if any, intrinsic value of its own ; the 
bulk of its content—religious, philosophical, scientific, and 
artistic—being demode where it was not in its inception 
altogether absurd. In such case the only issue of importance 
is the question, When, where, and whence did these various 
“ errors ” and “ absurdities ” arise, and how they developed

542

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and propagated ? Yet they are not altogether niggardly of 
compensation even to suoh an inquirer, for material which 
is itself without value may yet be so put together as to 
make very good history. I do not myself share these views, 
since I find that many Indian concepts conform to the 
results of the most recent scientific and psychological re¬ 
search and metaphysical speculation, not to speak of other 
matters which demand, and in fact obtain, a different kind 
of verification. The historical aspect of the question is 
not, however, to be negleoted, and I therefore avail myself 
of this opportunity of adding some observations to those I 
have already made in the first volume, and which have been 
suggested to me by criticisms received since its publication.When it is asked what is the doctrine of the Shfistra of 
which this work treats, it is necessary to clearly understand 
what is meant by “ the Tantra.” It is sometimes held that 
S" the Tantra ” is something altogether different from and 
J wholly unconnected with ordinary prevalent “ Hinduism,” 
v to use a convenient, though in itself vague, term. According 
to this view, the doctrines and practice of “ the Tantra ” 
are really foreign to ordinary Indian thought. Another 
and less extreme view agrees with the last mentioned in 
J so far as it holds that there is in “ the Tantra ” a nucleus 
of doctrine and practice which is specially “ Tantrik ” in 
the sense that it is different from general Indian dootrine 
and praotice and the particular teachings and practices of 
all others of its various sects. It is then suggested that 
around this nucleus has accumulated a body of doctrine 
and practice which the Tantra shares in common with other 
Shastras. In this view the supposed “ original Tantra ” has 
borrowed doctrine and practice both from general Hinduism 
and its praticular division of worshippers, and has incor¬ 
porated them into a composite system which is then called 
“ Tantrik.”

PREFACE

643PREFACE

643

The result, on this view, is that the Tantra is an amal¬ 
gam consisting of a hypothetical nucleus, foreign in its 
character to Hinduism proper, enveloped by a number 
of other dootrines and practices borrowed by it from the 
latter. Those who hold by this theory of an original 
nucleus have not yet told us what it precisely is, or when 
it arose, nor whenoe it came, nor, indeed, where we may 
look for it. This theory may or may not be correct, but 
before we can be called upon to accept it, it must be estab¬ 
lished by evidence. Until then our hesitation to do so 
seems warranted by the fact that doctrines and practices 
which have been alleged to be specifically “ Tantrik” have 
their counterparts in the Vaidik aohara (way or practice). 
Thus the use of flesh, fish, and wine , 1 which are supposed 
to be peculiar to one form of the Tantrik ritual, was com¬ 
mon in the Vaidik age. The Mababharata, Harivansgha, 
Kalika, Markandeya, and Karma Puranas also refer to the 
consumption of wine, meat, and flesh. As regards “the 
fifth,” even if we exolude Upanishads and other Shastras 
which are alleged by some to be of sectarian authority only,’ 
we find a ritual use of that Tattva, though doubtless in 
different form, in the Mahavrata of the Aitareya Aranyaka - 
and in the Vamadevyam Vrata of the Sama VedaXIn this 
connection reference may be made to the Brahmavaivarta 
Purana. Magic, again, with which the Tantra has been 
particularly oharged, forms a large part of the Atharvaveda.

Then, as to the worship of Shakti or Devi, reference 
is made to Her in the Veda, such as the SarasvatisQkta, in 
the Yajur Veda the Lakshmi Sakta, and in the tenth 
Mandala of the Rig Veda the Devi Sakta; * and we have

1 Tho term is here nnd elsewhere used by me in a general sense for 
intoxicating beverages. In India wine is also made of other substances 
than the grape— e.g.. honey, rice, molasses, etc.

' See Introduction to Part I.

644

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' See Introduction to Part I.

644

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in the Upanishads 1 the story of Um& appearing in a blaze 
of light to Indra and the other Devas, to prove to them 
that it was not by their shakti that they lived and moved, 
but that all which was done was so done by virtue of 
that Mah&shakti. Touching this subject, nothing more 
is taught by the Tantra, though one portion of it has 
doubtless greatly elaborated, both on its theoretical and 
practical side, the magnifioent doctrine of Shakti, or the 
Power or Energy of the Brahman whereby the Universe 
originates. Though this notion of Shakti is of great im¬ 
portance in the Tantra, it is by no means the peculiar 
appanage of that Scripture, but is, like other concepts, shared 
by it with other Indian ShSstras, commencing, as above 
mentioned, with the Mulashastra—that is, the Vedas and 
Upanishads. It is, however, of special importance in Tantra, 
because one of its schools has developed, presented, and 
emphasized the dootrine, and has moulded its scheme of 
s&dhana and worship in such a way as to be the practical 
expression of its form of theoretical exposition. Thus, on 
the one hand, we have in what are called for convenience 
the Shakta Tantras, a philosophical doctrine of Shakti fully 
developed on the one side (Jnanakanda), and devotion to 
and worship of the World-Mother on the other (Upasanfi- 
kanda). As the notion of Shakti is accepted by other 
classes of Indian worshippers,* * the promulgation of this 
cult has historically done much to weld together the differ¬ 
ent Indian sects through the recognition of a bond of com¬ 
mon unity which the acceptance of the doctrine of Shakti

1 See Introduction to Part I.

* 1° varying ways—thus some worship Shaktimftn, “ He who is the 
possessor of Shakti ” in varying Deva forms; others worship Shakti 
Herself—philosophically there is no difference, as the possessor of 
Shakti and Shakti are one and the same.

PREFACE

546PREFACE

546

implies. To this the Shaktisangama Tantra 1 refers when 
it says: For the purpose of creation various religions 
have been promulgated, such as those of the Shaktas (wor- 
shippers of Shakti), Shaivas (worshippers of Shiva), 
Vaishnavas (worshippers of Vishnu), Ganapatyas (worship¬ 
pers of Ganesha), Sauras (sun worshippers), and Buddhists, 
and many others. These sects often blame one another, 
and yet a harmony may be found. Explanation has been 
gi\en of these doctrines in order to bring about this unity. 
In order to attain this all should worship the Devi Kali- 
ka, the Saviour (Tarinl). I have promulgated the Sh&kta 
cult in order to demonstrate the unity of the fourteen 
branches of knowledge.* * The Goddess BhavatarinI is the 
Deity presiding over the four Vedas, and the Goddess Kallka 
is the Deity presiding over the Atharva Veda. Though 
different sects find fault with one another, a harmony may 
be established between the seemingly contrary doctrines. 
In order to bring about this desired harmony all seots should 
worship KftllkA, the Saviour of the world. Rites, according 
to the Atharva Veda, cannot be performed without Kali or 
Tara.* She is called Kalika in Kerala (Malabar), Tripura 
in Kashmir, and Tara in Gauda (Bengal). She is the Kolat- 
tara or chief Divinity of Kalottarayana . 4

It appears, says the author of the work last cited,

“ that the above passages of the Shaktisangama Tantra 
the Shakta or Tantrika cult was promulgated in order to 
effect harmony among the various jarring sects. The result 
was that all the sects began to worship the female Energies

' Eighth Patala cited with text in Nagendra Nath Vasu’s ** Archseo 
logical Survey of Mayarabbanja." p. lx. ffo ‘

* 'niat is. as the verse says. Parana. Nyaya. Mimamsa. Sfinekhva

the^our Veda^ Dta Dharma8h&6tra - Chhnnda. Astronomy, and

1 Vina kallng vina tarang natharvvano vidhi kvachit. See lost note.

* One of the Buddhist sects.

is - .

546

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRAthe^our Veda^ Dta Dharma8h&6tra - Chhnnda. Astronomy, and

1 Vina kallng vina tarang natharvvano vidhi kvachit. See lost note.

* One of the Buddhist sects.

is - .

546

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of their own respective Deities . 1 Some accepted a few 
Shakfcis, others accepted many.

“ This is perhaps the reason,” he adds, “ of the great 
fellow-feeling between the Hindu and the Buddhist Sh&ktas, 
as well of the rites of.the one being found in the Tantras of 
the other, and vice versa, for, according to Dr. Kern,* * the 
development of Tantrism is a feature that Buddhism and 
Hinduism in their later phases have in common.”

So far I have referred only to what are called the Shfikta 
Tantras, or those Tantras which predominantly * deal with 
the worship of Shakti or Devi, the great Mother of the 
Universe. Thus, in the Shaiva Tantras, or rather in the 
Shaiva (as distinct from Sh&kta), worship governed by the 
Agama, the use of wine and animal-food is forbidden *—on 
the other hand, matters which appear in the Shakta Tantras 
occur elsewhere. The particular Yoga called Shatchakra- 
bheda, or matters dealt with by it, are to be found referred 
to in some of the Upanishads and PurfLnas, and in the works 
on Hathayoga, such as Shivasanghita, Gherandasanghita, 
and Hathayogapradlpika. It has indeed been suggested 
that the Tantriks borrowed this Yoga from “ Nathism." 
There are some who think that they have given both fact 
and explanation when they have invented a name. But 
what proof is there that the Hathayogis were not Tantriks, 
or that the latter did not also include as part of its doctrine 
Hathayoga. And if the two were different from one another,

1 Thus establishing a common worship of Shakti, whatever be the 
form the latter might assume in the different sects,

* " Manual of Indian Buddhism," p. 188.

' In all Tantrik cults Shakti is worshipped ; for where Shiva or 
Vishnu are the Ishtadevatft, Shakti is necessarily associated with them.* " Manual of Indian Buddhism," p. 188.

' In all Tantrik cults Shakti is worshipped ; for where Shiva or 
Vishnu are the Ishtadevatft, Shakti is necessarily associated with them.

' In some forms of worship substitutes are prescribed (see Intro¬ 
duction to my Tantra '* of the Great Liberation This practice of 
substitution has, I am informed, been extended even to such Upakriya 
as Shav&sana, where the corpse is made of Eusha grass.

PREFACE

547PREFACE

547

which borrowed from the other and what is the proof of it ? 
The matter is of subordinate interest. It is more important 
to know whether this Tantrik Yoga is confined to and is the 
invention of the Tantrik and HathayogI, or whether it has 
its roots in common Indian tradition. The Tantra is called 
the Mantrashastra, but Mantras are not confined to the 
Tantra. It deals with the theory of sound (Shabda), but so 
did the Mimangsakas. It mentions the twenty-five Tattvas, 
but these are drawn from the Sangkhya. There are Tantrik 
works which are Vedantik in their general trend and aim. 
If there be one subject which appears to distinguish the 
Tantras it is portions of its ritual, such as the Yantras, 
Mudras, Vljas, Bhatashuddhi, and so forth. Indeed, it is more 
by these than anything else that the “ Tantrik ” character of 
a work is established, and yet we find portions of this ritual 
in the Puranas. Further there appear to have been varieties 
of traditions or schools in the Shastras which are gathered 
together under the collective name of Agama, which 
after the Upanishadic age regulated the temple and 
domestic rituals. Which (or is it all of these) constituted 
the alleged Tantrik “ nucleus ” ? There are thus the Tantras 
of the three Krantas.* * There are also what are called the 
Five Aronaya,* not to mention the Shaiva, Shakta, and 
Vaishnava divisions of Tantrik worshippers. Though the 
fact is not generally known certain Tantras are alleged 
to have authority in different ages and places. Thus 
certain existent Tantras, such as the Kallvildsa, are alleged 
not to be in force in the present Kalpa, but to represent 
a prior tradition.* So this Kfillvilasa and other Tantras

' See " Principles of Tantra," Part I. Introduction.

* Uttar&mnAya, Dakshinamnflya. PflrvAmnaya. PasbchimamnAv* 
CrddbvAmnAya. • x ’' See " Principles of Tantra," Part I. Introduction.

* Uttar&mnAya, Dakshinamnflya. PflrvAmnaya. PasbchimamnAv* 
CrddbvAmnAya. • x ’

' In the 28th Patala of this Tantra Kail is represented as savin* 
to Krishna: After this day of Brahma yon will become the belov«a 
RAdha. who will be born of my body ” ; and the 85th Patala refers to

548

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

are said to have been operative in Ashva Krftnta in the 
Kalakalpa. Of such the Mahfivishvasara Tantra says that 
Tantras which belong to other Kalpas exist for the delusion 
of unbelievers (Pashandas). The burden of proof is on 
those who put forward a theory or hypothesis in these 
matters. Present historical knowledge is not enough to 
answer the various questions here raised. I prefer myself 
to proceed as far as possible upon the sure ground of fact 
and not upon historical surmises, for which there is at 
present at least no sufficient evidence, and which are not 
infrequently prompted by a dislike of the Shastra, and 
therefore by a desire to disassociate it altogether from 
the common current of Indian tradition. In any case 
doctrine and practice are of greater importance than the 
question of historical origins. But those who are interested 
in this form of research should first study and endeavour 
to understand the living Tantra with the aid of those who 
profess it, and then accumulate the fact upon which alone 
any historical hypothesis of value can rest.Whatever theories may be advanced as to the existence 
and origin of some elements in the Tantra peculiar to 
itself, there is no doubt that as it now stands it embodies 
a large number of others which are to be found in other 
Sb&stras, both religious and philosophical, though some 
of these are expressed by this Scripture according to its 
own peculiar terminology and form of exposition. But 
if we deal with the facts as they are known to exist now 
and have existed for unknown centuries past, we find 
that the Tantra embodies and is interwoven with the 
general fabric of “ Hinduism," of which it is an integral 
and closely associated part. Professor de la Valine

Krishna, Nanda, R&dh& of the third (present) Kalpa. It is noteworthy 
that in the 10th Patala wine is forbidden in the Kaliyuga: and Pat&Ia 1 
directs all to follow the &ch&ra of the Pashu.

PREFACE

549

Poussin was then, ifc seems to me, right when, in answer 
to one of his English critics, he said of the Tantras: “Je 
constate qu’ils sont inherent^ a toutes les formes religieuses 
de rinde .” 1

In a similar manner a oritic of a previous work of 
mine 1 incompetently complained that in a general account 
I there gave of some portions of Tantrik doctrine I had 
dealt with beliefs and practices to be found in other 
Shastras and systems of philosophy, a procedure which 
he charged was calculated to mislead others into the be* * 
lief that they formed part of Tantrik teaching. A want 
of knowledge was here displayed. Why, he queried, had 
I dealt with the S&ngkhya, thereby “creating for the 
thousand and first time the false impression that the 
Tantra was concerned with it.” This criticism, which is 
a display of ignorance, might equally well be directed 
against the work here translated, which not only cites the 
Tantra, but also the Puranas, Darshanas, Smriti, and Vedas.The answer is the simple one that I dealt with some of 
the notions of the Sangkhya because they are expressly 
incorporated in the Tantras and Tantrik works with which 
I was conversant. I may refer my reader by way of ex¬ 
ample to the first chapter of the celebrated Prapanchasara 
Tantra,* and to the well-known and authoritative treatise, 
ShSrada Tilaka. From what source other than the S&ngkhya

' From a letter to Professor Rhys Davids, dated November 29, 
1896, published in J. R. .4. S., January, 1899. He adds: " lie vous 
choquent, j’en suis chagrin; mais avouez que je n’y pens rien. De¬ 
clarer inutile l’etude des Tantras sous pretextes qu'ils sont modernes 
c’est vraiment abuser d'une premisse peu stable et mal dertnie."

* Mah&nirv&na Tantra. I should like to here state that the Intro¬ 
duction which I wrote for that work does not in any way profess to be 
an historical criticism. It was a simple and very abbreviated state¬ 
ment of some generally accepted notions and practices prevalent in 
the Tantra as it exists to-day.

a Published as the third volume of my “ Tantrik Texts.”

550

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

did the former derive its notions of Purusha, Prakriti, Bud- 
dhi, Ahangk&ra, and the other Tattvas, the Gunas, and so 
forth ? And of a passage in the second the great Tantrik 
Commentator Raghava Bhatta expressly says: “ Here the 
Sftngkhya doctrine is exposed.” From what source again 
but the Vedanta does the Tantra derive those doctrines 
which reconcile the Sangkhyan dualism in the unity of the 
Brahman ? The Tantra, in fact, could not claim to be an 
authoritative Indian Shastra if it did not recognize com¬ 
monly accepted Indian doctrines.According to orthodox teaching, all Shastras, just as 
truth itself, constitute a unity. Otherwise the Tantra 
would be a mere sectarian Scripture out of all relation with 
common Indian beliefs, and essentially foreign to them. 
But a Scripture which is not in essential agreement with 
other Shftstras is itself no Shastra at all. The Shastra, 
therefore, generally accepts and incorporates such common 
beliefs, though it may present them in its own peculiar way 
and terminology, and though it seeks practically to realize 
them by its own peculiar methods. It is in faot the latter 
which is the chief characteristic of this Shastra. The 
sphere of Indian religion has three departments, respectively 
known as Karmakanda (or formal ritual in its Vaidik sense), 
Up&sana Kanda (or psychological worship), and Jnana Kanda 
(or esoteric knowledge). It is the second which is the 
peculiar subject of Tantra. Thus, again, it is said that 
ritual in its widest sense, as ineluding both Earma and 
Upasana, is threefold—that is, Vaidik, Tantrik, and Mixed 
(Mishra), or Pauranik. But each of these, according to 
Indian teaching, has in common certain philosophic and 
religious doctrinal bases. When I speak of “ the Tantra,”

I refer to what passes under that name to-day 1 so far as it

1 Similarly, in the letter of Professor de la V&llee Poussin, from 
which I have already cited, he says: ” M. B. appelie Bouddhisme la

PREFACE

551

is known to me, and not some hypothetical doctrine of past 
time of which at present we know with certainty nothing. 
In a review, however, of the first volume of this work an 
Indian writer, in the Prabuddha Bhdrata * 1 made the follow¬ 
ing remarks on what he believes to be the origin of the 
Tantra. His speculations, whether correct or not, are of 
such interest that I quote them in full. He writes:“ Hitherto all theories about the origin and the import¬ 
ance of the Tautras have been more or less prejudiced by a 
wrong bias against Tantrikism which some of its own later 
sinister developments were calculated to create. This bias 
has made almost every such theory read either like a con¬ 
demnation or an apology. All investigation being thus dis¬ 
qualified, the true history of Tantrikism has not yet been 
written; and we find cultured people mostly inclined either 
to the view that Tantrikism originally branched off from the 
Buddhistic Mahayana or Vajray&na as a cult of some corrupt¬ 
ed and self-deluded monastics or to the view that it was the 
inevitable dowry which some barbarous non-Aryan races 
brought along with them into the fold of Hinduism. Accord¬ 
ing to both these views, however, the form which this Tan¬ 
trikism—either a Buddhistic development or a barbarous 
importation—has subsequently assumed in the literature of 
Hinduism is its improved edition as issuing from the cruci¬ 
bles of Vedic or Vedantio transformation. But this theory of 
the curious co-mingling of the Ved&s and Ved&nta with 
Buddhistic corruption or with non-Aryan barbarity is 
perfectly inadequate to explain the all-pervading influence

doctrine pr^chee, par Sakyamuni; j'appelle Bouddhi&me I’itat general 
de croyance qui s’est condense autour da nom da Buddha.” In the 
case of the Tantra the reasons for such a course are much stronger; 
for whilst we do know something of the origins of Buddhism, those of 
the Tantra are obscure.

1 A journal published at the Miy&vatl Ashrama, founded by the late 
SvAmi Vivek&nanda in the Himalayas (issue of July, 1914).

552

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 A journal published at the Miy&vatl Ashrama, founded by the late 
SvAmi Vivek&nanda in the Himalayas (issue of July, 1914).

552

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

which the Tantras exert on our present-day religious life. 
Here it is not any hesitating compromise that we have 
got before us to explain, but a bold organio synthesis, a 
legitimate restatement of the Vedic culture for the solution 
of new problems and new difficulties which signalized the 
dawn of a new age.“ In tracing the evolution of Hinduism, modern his¬ 
torians take a blind leap from Vedic ritualism direct to 
Buddhism, as if to conclude that all those newly formed 
communities with which India had been swarming all 
over since the close of the fateful era of the Kurukshetra 
War, and to which was denied the right of Vedic sacrifices, 
the monopoly of the higher threefold castes of pure orthodox 
descent, were going all the time without any religious 
ministrations. These aryanized communities, we must re¬ 
member, were actually swamping the Vedic orthodoxy, 
which was already gradually dwindling down to a helpless 
minority in all its scattered centres of influence, and was 
just awaiting the final blow to be dealt by the rise of 
Buddhism. Thus the growth of these new communities 
and their occupation of the whole land constituted a mighty 
event that had been silently taking place in India on the 
outskirts of the daily shrinking orthodoxy of Vedic ritualism, 
long before Buddhism appeared on the field, and this 
momentous event our modern historians fail to take due 
notice of, either, it may be, because of a curious blindness 
of self-complacency or because of the dazzle which the 
sudden triumph of Buddhism and the overwhelming mass 
of historical evidences left by it create before their eyes. 
The traditional Kali Yuga dates from the rise of these 
communities, and the Vedic religious culture of the preced- 
mg Yuga underwent a wonderful transformation along 
with the wonderful attempt it made toaryanize these rising 
communities.

PREFACE

553PREFACE

553

,l History, as hitherto understood and read, speaks of 
the Brahmins of the pre-Buddhistic age—their growing 
alienation from the Jn&na-kanda or the Upanishadic 
wisdom, their impotenoy to save the orthodox Vedic 
communities from the encroachments of the non-Vedic 
hordes and races, their ever-deepening religious formalism 
and social exclusiveness. But this history is silent on the 
marvellous feats which the Upanishadic sects of anchorites 
were silently performing on the outskirts of the strictly 
Vedic community, with the object of aryanizing the new 
India that was rising over the ashes of the Kurukshetra 
conflagration. This new India was not strictly Vedic, like 
the India of the bygone ages, for it could not claim the 
religious ministrations of the orthodox Vedic Brahmins, 
and could not therefore perform Yajnas like the latter. 
The question, therefore, is as to how this new India be¬ 
came gradually aryanized, for aryanization is essentially 
a spiritual process, consisting in absorbing new communi¬ 
ties of men into the fold of the Vedic religion. The Vedic 
ritualism that prevailed in those days was powerless, we 
have seen, to do anything for these new communities 
springing up all over the country. Therefore we are 
obliged to turn to the only other factor in Vedic religion 
besides the Karma-k&nda for an explanation of those 
changes which the Vedic religion wrought in the rising 
communities in order to aryanize them. The Upanishads 
represent the Jnana-kanda of the Vedic religion, and if 
we study all of them, we find that not only the earliest 
ritualism of Yajnas was philosophized upon in the earlier 
Upanishads, but the foundation for a new, and no less 
elaborate, ritualism was fully laid in many of the later 
Upanishads. For example, we studv in these Upanishads 
how the philosophy of Pancha-upasana (fivefold worship— 
viz., the worship of Shiva, Devi, Sun, Ganesha, and Vishnu)

554

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA554

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

was developed out of the mystery of the Pranava (‘ Om 
This philosophy cannot be dismissed as a post-Buddhistic 
interpolation, seeing that some features of the same philoso¬ 
phy can be clearly traced even in the Br&hmanas— e.g., the 
discourse about the conception of Shiva.

“ Here, therefore, in some of the later Upanishads we 
find recorded the attempts of the pre-Buddhistio recluses 
of the forest to elaborate a post-Yedic ritualism out of the 
doctrine of the Pranava and the Vedic theory of Yogic 
practices. Here in these Upanishads we find how the Vlja- 
mantras and the Shatchakra of the Tantras were being 
originally developed, for on the Pranava or Udgitha had 
been founded a special learning and a school of philosophy 
from the very earliest ages, and some of the 4 spinal ’ centres 
of Yogic meditation had been dwelt upon in the earliest 
Upanishads and corresponding Br&hmanas. The Upa- 
karanas of Tantric worship — namely, such material adjuncts 
as grass, leaves, water, and so on—were most apparently 
adopted from Vedic worship along with their appropriate 
incantations. So even from the Brahmanas and the Upani¬ 
shads stands out in clear relief a system of spiritual disci¬ 
pline—which we would unhesitatingly classify as Tantric 
—having as its core the Pancha-up&sand, and around it a 
fair round of rituals and rites consisting of Vlja-mantras 
and Vedic incantations, proper meditative processes and 
proper manipulation of sacred adjuncts of worship adopted 
from the Vedic rites. This may be regarded as the earliest 
configuration which Tantrikism had on the eve of those silent 
but mighty social upheavals through which the aryaniza- 
tion of vast and increasing multitudes of new races proceed¬ 
ed in pre-Buddhistic India, and which bad their culmination 
in the eventful centuries of the Buddhistic coup de grace.

“ Now, this pre-Buddhistic Tantrikism, perhaps then 
recognized as the Vedic Pancha-up&sanfi, could not have“ Now, this pre-Buddhistic Tantrikism, perhaps then 
recognized as the Vedic Pancha-up&sanfi, could not have

PREFACE

555

contributed at all to the creation of a new India, had it 
remained confined completely within the limits of monas¬ 
tic sects. But, like Jainism, this Pancha-upasan& went 
forth all over the country to bring ultra-Vedio communities 
under its spiritual ministrations. Even if we inquire care¬ 
fully into the social conditions obtaining in the strictly 
Vedic ages, we find that there was always an extended wing 
of the aryanized society where the purely Vedic Karma- 
kanda could not be promulgated, but where the moulding 
influence of Vedic ideals worked through the development 
of suitable spiritual activities. It is always to the Jnana- 
kanda and the monastic votaries thereof that the Vedic 
religion owed its wonderful expansiveness and its progres¬ 
sive self-adaptability, and every religious development 
within the Vedic fold, but outside the ritualism of Homa 
sacrifices, is traceable to the spiritual wisdom of the all- 
renouncing forest recluses. This ‘ forest ’ wisdom was most 
forcibly brought into requisition when, after the Kuru- 
kshetra, a new age was dawning with the onrush and 
upheaval of non-Aryan and semi-Aryan races all over India 
—an echo of which may be found in that story of the 
Mahabharata, where Arjuna fails to use his Gandlva to 
save his proteges from the robber}’ of the non-Aryan hordes.“ The greatest problem of the pre-Buddhistic ages was 
the aryanization of the new India that rose and surged 
furiously from every side against the fast-dwindling 
centres of the old Vedio orthodoxy struggling hard, but 
in vain, by social enactments to guard its perilous insula¬ 
tion. But for those religious movements, such as those 
of the Bhagavatas, Sh&ktas, Sauras, Shaivas, Ganapatyas, 
and Jains, that tackled this problem of aryanization most 
successfully, all that the Vedic orthodoxy stood for in the 
real sense would have gradually perished without trace. 
These movements, specially the five cults of Vedic worship,

556

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

took up many of the non-Aryan races, and cast their 
life in the mould of the Vedic spiritual ideal, minimizing 
in this way the gulf that existed between them and the 
Vedic orthodoxy, and thereby rendering possible their 
gradual amalgamation. And where this task remained un¬ 
fulfilled owing to the mould proving too narrow still to fit 
into the sort of life which some non-Aryan races or com¬ 
munities lived, there it remained for Buddhism to solve the 
problem of aryanization in due time. But, still, we must 
remember that by the time Buddhism made its appearance, 
the pre-Buddhistic phase of Tantric worship hafi already 
established itself in India so widely and so firmly that, in¬ 
stead of dislodging it by its impetuous onset—all the force 
of which, by the by, was mainly spent on the tottering 
orthodoxy of Vedic ritualism—Buddhism was itself swal¬ 
lowed up within three or four centuries by this Tantric 
worship, and then wonderfully transformed and ejected on 
the arena as the Mahayana.“The latest configuration of Tantrikism dates from 
this, its wonderful absorption and assimilation of Buddh¬ 
ism, and from this important fact it derives some important 
features of its later development. The prophecy of Gautama 
Buddha on the eve of investing his aunt with Abhisampada 
or Sannyasa was fulfilled too literally when the proximity 
and free intercourse between the two orders of monks and 
nuns created in Buddhist history that odious problem of 
their religious life which they had to solve by introducing 
some mysterious rites, the philosophy of which, however, 
can be traced in the Vedas. No wonder if the current of 
such developments grew deeper and dirtier in time; only it 
is alleviating that there were cross-currents of constant 
correction flowing from Vedantic sources. Neither is it 
possible to deny that the Buddhistio phase of Tantrikism 
absorbed into the fold of Hinduism non-Aryan conceptions

PREFACE

557

and rites of worship far more promiscuously than its pre- 
Buddhistic phase; but history proves that the digestive and 
secretive processes, as it were, have ever since been working, 
tardily sometimes, but successfully always, and the Tantras, 
as the marvellous restatement of the Vedas and the Vedanta, 
have at last appeared in the boldest relief through that 
miraculous embodiment of the synthetic spirituality of the 
whole race which we have to recognize to-day by the name 
of Shrl Ramakrishna Paramahangsa.”

The writer adds that a “vindication of the Tantras 
redounds directly to the benefit of Hinduism as a whole," 
for, in his opinion," Tantrikism in its real sense is nothing 
but the Vedic religion struggling with wonderful success 
to reassert itself amidst all those new problems of religious 
life and discipline which later historical events and develop¬ 
ments thrust upon it."Of equal interest with the above is the following extract 
from another review by the well-known Bengali litterateur 
Sj. Panchkori Bandyop&dhyaya in the Calcutta journal 
Sahitya. 1 This article, from which I omit passages personal 
to myself or touohing the book there criticized, deals with 
the history of the Tantra in quite recent times in Bengal. 
Sj. Panchkori Bandyopadhyfiya writes:

“ At one time the Mahanirv&na Tantra had some popu¬ 
larity in Bengal. It was printed and published under the 
editorship of Pandit Ananda-chandra Vedftntav&gisha, and 
issued from the Adi-Brahma-Samaj Press. Rftjft R&m Mohan 
Roy himself was a follower of the Tantras, married after the 
Shaiva form, and used to practise the Tantrik worship. His 
spiritual preceptor, Svami Harihar&nanda, was well known 
to be a saint who had attained to perfection (siddha-purusha). 
He endeavoured to establish the Mah&nirvana Tantra as the

1 Sraban 1820 (July. August, 1918), translated from the Bengali.

658

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Sraban 1820 (July. August, 1918), translated from the Bengali.

658

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Scripture of the Brahma-Samaj. The formula and the forms 
of the Br&hma Church are borrowed from the initiation into 
Brahman worship (Brahma-diksha) in thiB Tantra. The 
later Brahmos, somewhat losing themselves in their spirit 
of imitation of Christian rituals, were led to abandon 
the path shown to them by Raja Ram Mohan j but yet 
even now many among them recite the Hymn to the Brah¬ 
man which occurs in the Mahanirvana Tantra. In the 
first era of the excessive dissemination of English culture 
and training Bengal resounded with opprobrious criticisms 
of the Tantras. No one among the educated in Bengal could 
praise them. Even those who called themselves Hindus 
were unable outwardly to support the Tantrik doctrines. But 
even then there were very great Tantrik Sadhakas and 
men learned in the Tantras, with whose help the principles 
of the Tantras might have been explained to the public. 
But the educated Bengali of the age was bewitched by the 
Christian culture, and no one cared to inquire what did or 
did not exist in their paternal heritage j the more especially 
that any who attempted to study the Tantras ran the risk 
of exposing themselves to contumely from the educated 
community. Maharaja Sir Jatindra Mohan Tagore, of sacred 
name, alone published two or three works, with the help of 
the venerable Paijdit Jaganmohan Tarkalankfira. The Hara- 
tattva-dldhiti associated with the name of his father is even 
now acknowledged to be a marvellously glorious production 
of the genius of the Paridits of Bengal. The venerable 
(vriddha) Pandit Jaganmohana also published a commentary 
on the Mah&nirv&na Tantra. Even at that epoch such study 
of the Tantras was confined to a certain section of the edu¬ 
cated in Bengal. Maharaja Sir Jatindra Mohan alone 
endeavoured to understand and appreciate men like Bama 
Khepa (mad Bama), the Naked Father (Nyang$a Baba) of 
Kadda and Svaml Sadananda. The educated community ofPREFACE

569

Bengal had only neglect and contempt for S&dhakas like 
Bishe P&gla (the mad Bishe), and Binu, the Chand&la 
woman. Bengal is even now governed by the Tantra; even 
now the Hindus of Bengal receive Tantrik initiation. But 
the glory and the honour which the Tantra had and received 
in the time of Maharajas Krishna Chandra and Shivachandra 
no longer exist. This is the reason why the Tantrik Sadha- 
kas of Bengal are not so well known at present. . .

“ The special virtue of the Tantra lies in its mode of 
Sadhana. It is neither mere worship (Upasana) nor prayer. 
It is not lamenting or contrition or repentance before the 
Deity. It is the Sadhana which is the union of Purusha 
and Prakriti; the Sadhana which joins the male principle 
and the mother element within the body, and strives to 
make the attributed attributeless. That which is in me and 
that for which I am (this consciousness is ever present in 
me) is spread like butter in milk, throughout the created 
world of moving and unmoving things, through the gross 
and the subtle, the conscious and unconscious—through all. 
It is the object of Tantrik Sadhana to merge that self¬ 
principle (Svarat) into the Universal (Virfit). This Sddhana 
is to be performed through the awakening of the forces 
within the body. A man is Siddha in this Sadhana when 
he is able to awaken KundalinI and pierce the six Chakras. 
This is not mere ‘ philosophy ‘—a mere attempt to ponder 
upon husks of words—but something which is to be done in 
a thoroughly practical manner. The Tantras say: ‘ Begin 
practising under the guidance of a good Guru; if you do not 
obtain favourable results immediately, you can freely give 
it up.' No other religion dares to give so bold a challenge. 
We believe that the Sadhana of the Moslems, and the 
‘ esoteric religion ' or secret S&dhana (and rituals) of the 
Christians of the Roman Catholic and Greek Churches, is 
based on this groundwork of the Tantras.

560

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA560

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ Wherever there is Sadhana we believe that there is 
the system of the Tantra. While treating of the Tantras 
some time back in the Sahitya, I hinted at this conclusion, 
and I cannot say that the Author Arthur Avalon has not 
noticed it too. For he has expressed his surprise at the 
similarity which exists between the Roman Catholic and 
the Tantrik mode of Sadhana. The Tantra has made the 
Yoga system of Patanjali easily practicable, and has com¬ 
bined with it the Tantrik rituals and the ceremonial obser¬ 
vances (Karraakanda); that is the reason why the Tantrik 
system of Sadhana has been adopted by all the religious 
sects of India. If this theory of the antiquarians—that the 
Tantra was brought into India from Chaldea or Shakadvlpa— 
be correct, then it may also be inferred that the Tantra 
passed from Chaldea to Europe. The Tantra is to be found 
m all the strata of Buddhism; the Tantrik Sadhana is 
manifest in Confucianism; and Shintoism is but another 
name of the Tantrik cult. Many historians acknowledge 
that the worship of Shakti, or Tantrik Sadhana, which was 
prevalent in Egypt from ancient times, spread into Phmnicia 
and Greeoe. Consequently we may suppose that the in¬ 
fluence of the Tantras was felt in primitive Christianity.“ The Tantra contains nothing like idolatry, or' worship 
of the doll,’ which we, taking the cue from the Christian 
missionaries, nowadays call it.... The Tantra repeatedly 
says that one is to adore the Deity by becoming a Deity 
(Devata) himself. The Ishta-devatA is the very self of At¬ 
man, and not separate from It; He is the receptacle of all, 
yet He is not contained in anything, for He is the great wit¬ 
ness, the eternal Purusha. The true Tantrik worship is the 
worship in and by the mind. The less subtle form of Tantrik 
worship is that of the Yantra. Form is born of the Yantra. 
The form is made manifest by Japa, and awakened by Man- 
trashakti. Tens of millions of beautiful forms of the Mother

PREFACE

661

bloom forth in the heavens of the heart of the Siddha puru- 
sha. Devotees or aspirants of lower order of competency 
(nimna-adhik&rl), under the directions of the Guru, adore 
the great Maya by making manifest (to themselves) one of 
Her various forms which can be only seen by Dhjana 
(meditation). That is not mere worship of the idol; if it 
were so, the image would not be thrown into the water; 
no one in that case would be so irreverent as to sink the 
earthen image of the Goddess in the water. The Primordial 
Shakti is to be awakened by Bh&va, by Dhy&na, by Japa, 
and by the piercing of the six Chakras. She is all-will. 
No one can say when and how She shows Herself, and to 
what Sftdhaka. We only know that She is, and there are 
Her names and forms. Wonderfully transcending is Her 
form—far beyond the reach of word or thought. This has 
made the Bengali Bhakta (devotee) sing this plaintive 
song:

‘ Hard indeed is it to approach the sea of forms, and 
to bathe in it.

Ah me! this my coming is perhaps in vain.’‘ Hard indeed is it to approach the sea of forms, and 
to bathe in it.

Ah me! this my coming is perhaps in vain.’

“ The Tantra deals with another special subject— 
Mantra Shakti. ... The Tantras say that the soul in the 
body is the very self of the letters—of the Dhvani (sound). 
The Mother, the embodiment of the fifty letters (Varga), is 
present in the various letters in the different Chakras. 
Like the melody which issues when the chords of a lute 
are struck, the Mother who moves in the six Chakras, and 
who is the very self of the letters, awakens with a burst of 
harmony when the chords of the letters (Vargas) are struck 
in their order. Then Siddhi becomes as easy of attainment 
to the Sadhaka as the keeping of an Amalaka fruit in one’s 
hand when She is roused. That is why the great Sadhaka 
Rftmaprasada awakened the Mother by the invocation—

90

662

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

* Arise. 0 Mother ’ (Jagrihi, janani). That is the reason 
why the Bhakta sang:

‘How long wilt thou sleep in the Moladbara, 
O Mother KulakupdalinI ?’

“ The Bodhana (awakening) ceremony in the Durga 
PQja is nothing but the awakening of the Shakti of the 
Mother, the mere rousing of the consciousness of the 
Kupdalinl. This awakening is performed by Mantra- 
Shakti. The Mantra is nothing but the harmonious 
sound of the lute of the body. 'When the symphony is 
perfect, She who embodies the Worlds (Jaganmayl) rouses 
Herself. When She is awake, it does not take long before 
the union of Shiva and Shakti takes place. Do Japa 
once; do Japa according to rule, looking up to the Guru, 
and the effects of Japa of which we hear in the Tantra 
will prove to be true at every step. Then you will under¬ 
stand that the Tantra is not mere trickery, or a false 
weaving out of words. What is wanted is the good 
Guru—Mantra capable of granting Siddhi, and application 
(S&dhana). . . .“ The Tantra accepts the doctrine of rebirth. It does 
not, however, acknowledge it as a mere matter of argu¬ 
ment or reasoning, but like a geographical map, it makes 
clear the unending chain of existences of the Sfidbaka. 
The Tantra has two divisions—the Dharma of Society 
(Samaja), and that Dharma of Spiritual Culture (Sadbana). 
According to the regulation of Samaja-Dbarma, it acknow¬ 
ledges birth and caste. But in Sadbana Dharma there 
is no caste distinction, no Brahmapa or Shfldra, no man or 
woman; distinctions between high and low follow success 
in Sadbana and Siddhi. We only find the question of 
fitness or worthiness (Adhikara-tattva) in the Tantra. 
This fitness (Adhikara) is discovered with reference to the

PREFACE

563PREFACE

563

Sangsk&ras (tendencies) of past existences; that is why the 
Chapd&la PQrn&nanda is a Br&hmaija, and Kj-ip&siddha 
the S&dhaka is equal to Sarvvananda; that is why R&ma- 
pras&da of the Vaidya cast is fit to be honoured even by 
Brahmanas. The Tantra is to be studied with the aid of 
the teachings of the Guru, for its language is technical, 
and its exposition impossible with a mere grammatical 
knowledge of roots and inflections. The Tantra is only a 
system of Shakti-S&dhana. There are rules in it whereby we 
may draw Shakti from all created things. There is nothing 
to be accepted or rejected in it. Whatever is helpful for 
S&dbana is acceptable. This S&dhana is decided according 
to the fitness of the particular person (Adhik&rl-anus&re). 
He must follow that for which he is fit or worthy. Shakti 
pervades all, and embraces all beings and all things—the 
inanimate and the moving, beasts and birds, men and 
women. The unfolding of the powers (Shakti) enclosed 
within the body of the animal (Jlva) as well as the man is 
brought about only with the help of the tendencies with¬ 
in the body. The mode of Sadhana is ascertained with 
regard to these tendencies. The very meaning of Sadhana 
is unfolding, rousing up or awakening of power (Shakti). 
Thus the Sh&kta obtains power from all actions in the 
world. The Sadhana of the Tantra is not to be measured 
by the little measuring-yard of the well-being or ill-being 
of your community or mine.

* Let you understand, and I understand, 0 my mind !

Whether anyone else understands it or not.’

“ The Tantra has no notion of some separate far-see¬ 
ing God. It preaches no such doctrine in it as that God 
the Creator rules the Universe from heaven. In the eye 
of the Tantra the body of the S&dhaka is the Universe, the 
autokratos (Atma-shakti) within the body is the desired

664

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA664

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

(Ishta), and the ‘to be sought for’ (Sadhya) Deity (Devatfl) 
of the Sftdhaka. The unfolding of this self-power is to 
be brought about by self-realization (Atma-darshana), which 
is to be achieved through S&dhana. Whoever realizes 
bis self attains to liberation (Mukti). . . . The principles 
of the Tanfcra must be lectured on to the Bengali afresh. 
If the Mabfinirv&pa Tantra as now translated is spread 
abroad; if the Bangali is once more desirous to hear, that 
attempt might well be undertaken.

“ Our land of Bengal used to be ruled by Tantrik works 
such as the Sbfirad&tilaka, ShaktfinandataranginI, Prfina- 
to?hinI, Tantra sfira, etc. Then the Mahfinirvfina Tantra 
did not have so great an influence. It seems to us that 
considering the form into which, as a result of English 
education and culture, the mind and intellect of the Bengali 
has been shaped, the Mahftnirvfi.ua is a proper Tantra for 
the time. Rfijfi Ram Mohan Roy endeavoured to encourage 
regard for the Mahfinirvfina Tantra because he understood 
this. If the English translation of the Mahftnirvftpa Tantra 
is well received by the thoughtful publio in Bengal, the 
Btudy of the original Sanskrit work may gradually come 
into vogue. This much hope we may entertain. In fact, 
the English-educated Bengali community is without religion 
(Dharma) or action (Karma), and is devoid of the sense of 
nationality (Dharma), and caste. The Mabftnirvana Tantra 
alone is fit for the country and the race at the present time.. . . An auspicious opportunity for the English-knowing 
public to understand the Tantra has arrived. It is a counsel 
of the Tantra itself that if you desire to renounce anything, 
renounce it only after a thorough acquaintance with it-; if 
you desire to embrace anything new, accept it only after a 
searching inquiry. The Tantra embodies the old religion 
(Dharma) of Bengal. Even if it is to be cast away for good, 
that ought only to be done after it has been fully known.

PREFACE

665

. . . Will not the Bengali receive with welcome such a full 
offering (Arghya) made from a foreign land ? "

Whether (as the writer of this article and of the Intro¬ 
duction which follows contend) the doctrines and ritual 
of orthodox Hinduism are suitable for the India of to-day 
is a matter for its people to decide. I have cited this highly 
interesting appeal to stand on ancient ways because, to use 
the language of a friend of mine, and student of the Bud¬ 
dhist Tantra, it is “ pleine de details int^ressants et r£v6le 
d’une facon tr6s claire l’6tat d’esprit des Bengalis—je crois 
que Ton pourrait m6me dire des Hindous en g£n£ral—et 
leur opinion intime touchant le Tantrisme.”

Even if this statement be held to go too far, it has 
certainly a very wide application, and it is for this very 
reason that, in a study of the Indian religions, the Tantra 
is of such importance.

Arthur Avalon

KonIrak,

December 31, 1914.

-

INTRODUCTION

Vaidik and TIntrik Systems of Spiritual Culture

ComparedArthur Avalon

KonIrak,

December 31, 1914.

-

INTRODUCTION

Vaidik and TIntrik Systems of Spiritual Culture

Compared

As the Vedas are the Word of Brahma, so are the Tantras 
the Word of Shiva. Both are the Breath of the Supreme. 
It is not to be supposed that the Hindus look upon the 
Vedas or the Tantras in the same light as the Christians, 
Jews, and Muhammadans regard the Revelation on Mount 
Sinai, or the Koran. The Hindus have never said that the 
Godhead, having assumed a human form, descended and 
revealed: Divine knowledge in human language to His 
ohosen; nor do they hold that God or one of His Angels 
wrote out the Divine Revelation, and then handed it over 
to His Rasool. The meaning of Hindu Revelation is differ¬ 
ent from that which is generally assumed. The Breath of 
the Supreme is pure Divine Ideation, from which is evolved 
the universe. Sitting on his cosmic lotus-throne, alone in 
the primeval darkness of immense space, Hiranyagarbba, 
the infant Brahma, the progenitor of the manifested 
universe, knew not yet what He was nor what He had to do. 
Long years of meditation at length revealed to him the 
Divine Law, which is Divine knowledge (Jnftna), thus 
enabling him to evolve the universe. From Brahma to the 
hosts of illuminated Rishis all are Seers or revealers of the 
arcane (immutable knowledge), which, like respiration, 
comes forth from the Brahman who is the Supreme at the 
dawn of evolution, and, like inspiration, is withdrawn into 
Its fathomless Unknowable depths on the eve of dissolution.

This eternal, immutable Jnana (knowledge) is the 
Word of Brahma or Shiva which is revealed to humanity

568

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRAThis eternal, immutable Jnana (knowledge) is the 
Word of Brahma or Shiva which is revealed to humanity

568

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in its language by the illumined and, therefore, unerring 
Seers, the Rishis. The Word is the Sound, the Spiritual 
Sound, which is the Vehicle of the manifested Divinity the 
Saguria Brahman, and hence it is that the infallible, immut¬ 
able Gnosis, the Vedas, is given the same name as that 
which is given to the Divinity Himself—namely, Shabda- 
brahman (the Sound-Brahman, or Immense Sound).

Such being Divine Revelation, the Tantra is to the 
human spirit what soienoe is to its intellect. The evolu¬ 
tion of the human intellect, and the consequent mastery of 
man over phenomenal nature, depend upon the pursuit of 
scientific method, which reveals to man the secrets of objec¬ 
tive nature, and thereby renders her subservient to his 
purposes. Similarly, the Tantras have a science, a methodo¬ 
logy, by the pursuit of which the human spirit can enter 
into the secret background of objective nature, free itself 
from the trammels of the senses and of their objeots, and 
soar above them until, by gradual evolution, it raises itself 
into that plane of consciousness which is unalloyed bliss. 
At length the embodied spirit (Jlva), after its long and 
tedious journey in eight millions of bodies from the min eral 
to the animal, and many thousands of births and re-births 
in the human vehicle, returns to That whence there is no 
journeying back again.

It may here be asked, “ why are there the Tantras when 
the Vedas exist to point out to man his several paths 
to Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha, 1 the fourfold

1 See Introduction.

[Dharma is the performance of meritorious acts for the enjoyment 
of happiness in Heaven.

Artha is the acquisition of wealth and of whatever renders life 
happy here below.

Kama is desire and its fulfilment.

n rr M M k i 8ha “ Uberation or emancipation from birth and death.—

INTRODUCTION

569Kama is desire and its fulfilment.

n rr M M k i 8ha “ Uberation or emancipation from birth and death.—

INTRODUCTION

569

aspirations of humanity ? ” No such question arose for the 
thousands of years during which the Tantrik method 
of spiritual culture was, as it is still being followed by the 
Hindus, be they Shaktas, Shaivas, Vaishnavas, Sauras or 
G&uapatys. * 1 The five classes of Hindu worshippers must 
be initiated according to the Tftntrik method, which has 
been directed to be followed even in the Yaishijavik sorip- 
ture Shrlmadbh&gavata (see Skandha XI, chap, xxvii). 
All the Vlja Mantras,' excepting the Pranava are

Tintrik, and the greater part of the methodology is either 
Tantrik or mixed—that is, Tantrik mixed with Vaidik, 
pure Vaidik methods having long been, and rightly so, 
abandoned. Under these circumstances, the question, thus 
mooted, savours somewhat of scepticism and unbelief in 
the Hindu Dharma; at any rate, it does not lie in the 
mouth of a Hindu to put such a question. Be that as it 
may, since the question arises in these degenerate days, 
it is but meet that it should be answered.

The influence of time upon the constitution of roan is 
a factor which must always be borne in mind in all con¬ 
siderations affecting his spiritual progress. The Hindu 
Sh&sfcras hold that the ever-recurring four ages (yugas)' 
exert a mighty influence not only upon the human race, 
but upon everything in the universe. Men in the first 
or Satya Yuga had a very long life on earth; their average 
height was that of a giant; they were capable of under¬ 
going very great physical and mental strain. They were 
truthful, honest, kind, compassionate, unavaricious, pure- 
hearted, and contented. Mendacity, theft, greed, lust,

1 The five divisions of Hindu worshippers worshipping os their 
Ishtadevatft, $hakti, Shiva, Vishjju, the Sun and Gane?ha.1 The five divisions of Hindu worshippers worshipping os their 
Ishtadevatft, $hakti, Shiva, Vishjju, the Sun and Gane?ha.

' [Root-Mantras. A particular Vjja Mantra is a particular sound- 
expression of a particular form of the Deity, so that a Vlja Mantra is 
not a combination of letters, but is the Divinity Itself.—B.K.M.]

1 See Introduction.

570

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 See Introduction.

570

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

anger, vanity, jealousy, oppressiveness, and other faults 
were almost unknown to them. They were a race of 
sturdy, pure-minded humanity, for whom the method of 
spiritual culture was that promulgated in the Vedas. They 
had their passions under their control, which enabled 
them not only to undergo long Brahmacharya 1 and Tapas* 
in their youth, but to pass cheerfully through the most 
rigid ordeals incumbent upon a Vaidik neophyte. Their 
extraordinary physical and moral stamina enabled them 
to practise DhfLrauS, (concentration), Dhy&na (meditation), 
and Sam&dhi (union with the Brahman) for a great length 
of time. Their longevity favoured their protracted spirit¬ 
ual exercises according to the Vedas; and their indomitable 
will, unyielding fortitude, and strong physique permitted 
the performance of Yajnas* extending continuously over a 
period of twelve years or more. It was for the guidance of 
men of such a constitution that the Vaidik method of 
spiritual self-culture existed. Men of the next Yaga (Tretfi.) 
naturally deteriorated, but were still giants compared 
with the pigmies of the Kali (or last and present) yuga. 
For them the pursuit of Vaidik methodology, though 
comparatively arduous, was yet still practicable. Then 
came the Dv&para Yuga, when longevity declined by nine- 
tenths and stature by a half. Men began to fall considerably 
from the moral and spiritual eminence of the former two 
Yugas. Lust, avarice, jealousy, greed, and all other expres¬ 
sions of the lower human nature appeared prominently on 
the scene, to degrade man from his high physical and moral 
throne. It was then that Dharma 4 appreciably deolined

Control of the sexual propensities and over whatever ministers 
to them.

Austerities. Endurance of the pairs of opposites, such as heat 
and cold, light and darkness, happiness and misery, pleasure and pain, 
e c ' , . . ' Sacrifices, etc. See Introduction.Austerities. Endurance of the pairs of opposites, such as heat 
and cold, light and darkness, happiness and misery, pleasure and pain, 
e c ' , . . ' Sacrifices, etc. See Introduction.

Religion, Morality. See Introduction.

INTRODUCTION

571

owing to men's incapacity to pursue and practise Vaidik 
methods. The great Rishis, who are ever solicitous of 
the weal of the human race, perceiving this inevitable 
decline, dived deep into the perennial ocean of eternal 
verities, which is the Vedas, and drew from out of them 
the Smritis 1 as the methodology which to them seemed 
to be adapted to the altered circumstances of the times. 
The Vedas fell into the shade, and in course of time there 
existed very few who could really unravel their mysteries. 
The Pur&^as were devised partly to preserve Vaidik teaching 
in the form of legends and myths, and partly to present a 
popular exposition of the cardinal truths of the Sanatana 
Dharma (Vaidik cult) to humanity such as it then was.It must not be thought that the method of self-culture 
prescribed for humanity of the Satya yuga was irksome and 
arduous to them. It was, on the contrary, exactly such as 
to suit the people of those times in view of their longevity, 
and of their physical and moral strength. But to the short¬ 
lived, debilitated, and morally debased men of the Kali Yuga 
the Vaidik methodology is a mountain-load which they have 
not the capacity to bear. What is deemed irksome to us 
was but natural to them. Let us imagine the fate of some 
weak Indian, were the dumb-bells with which Ram Murti, 
the modern Hercules, exercises, placed in his hands, and he 
were bidden to strengthen his muscles with them 1 Such 
an Indian must have instruments suited to his physique 
for his physical culture. Even so is the case with spiritual 
culture. How can people whose average age is about thirty 
or forty years devote two-thirds or more of it to Vaidik study 
and Vaidik practice of Karmakanda, 1 maintaining strict 
celibacy and undergoing great privations ? They have 
neither the physical nor the moral strength necessary for it.

1 See Introduction.

* Sacrifices and other rites and ceremonies prescribed in the Yeda^.

672

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 See Introduction.

* Sacrifices and other rites and ceremonies prescribed in the Yeda^.

672

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

And, even if it be supposed that they could do it in some 
fashion or other, how can they find the time sufficient to 
carry on the arduous duties of a Vaidik householder, then 
go to the jungles to prepare themselves for jnftna (know¬ 
ledge), and finally, when ripe in divine wisdom, to assume 
the Sanny&sl’a bowl? 1 This, indeed, is the Yaidik scheme 
of life. It was suited to men of that fortunate time. As 
it is now impracticable by the average man, it has naturally 
fallen into disuse. Methods of self-culture based on the 
immutable Vaidik truths are, from time to time, either 
devised by Rishis, such as the innumerable Vaidik Sh&kh&s,* 
most of which are now defunct, or are promulgated by 
Avataras, 1 or revealed by the Godhead in view of the times 
in which men live. The Vedas stand paramount for each 
one and all of them. A method, therefore, which is essen¬ 
tially at variance with the Vaidik cardinal truths must be 
rejected as a man-made scheme, unworthy of acceptance.

Towards the eve of the third Yuga (age) moral and 
spiritual degeneration overtook mankind, and it was then 
that the Divine Mother and the Divine Father revealed 
those Tantras whioh were suited to the constitution of the 
degenerate race of the men of the Kali Yuga.

The Divine Mother, the ambrosial milk of whose breast 
ever flows for the suocour of her children, thus addressed 
Her Lord:

fli&f <TT<HTTftoi: I

' The mendicant ascetic of the fourth or last Vaidik IshraTn^ See 
Introduction.

Branches or recensions of the Vedas.

„ . Descents of the Brahman : when on to the physical plane called 
incarnations."

INTRODUCTION

673

33 afol qfawifaf JTfT^'Tfl^n: I

g^fcrei: qtfpi maifq^: ft^T: n

*3U*f33T: 2^T: T^t3 qU^g^T: I

^cn^wra? gwraqtqqrr: n

35T?T SfflfMlTSI STHR^HRRHT: I 
ftew 3I3T3T3T3T: $33*3 f^cTRT 33 ||

Mahanirvdna. First UUCisag^fcrei: qtfpi maifq^: ft^T: n

*3U*f33T: 2^T: T^t3 qU^g^T: I

^cn^wra? gwraqtqqrr: n

35T?T SfflfMlTSI STHR^HRRHT: I 
ftew 3I3T3T3T3T: $33*3 f^cTRT 33 ||

Mahanirvdna. First UUCisa

“Under cyolio influence men will naturally become 
evil-minded and will be addicted to sinful acts. O saviour 
of the humble! 0 Lord! graciously tell Me the means by 
which men may acquire long life, health, strength, vigour, 
and manliness; by which they may become learned and 
sound-minded; by which they may get effortless welfare; 
by which they may become endowed with great strength and 
intrepidity; by which they may become pure-minded, bene¬ 
volent, obedient to parents, faithful to their wives, averse 
to others’ wives, lovers of God and of Guru, supporters of 
sons and relatives; by which men may become knowers of 
Brahman, learned in Brahmavidyft (the transcendental 
science), and thinkers on Brahman. I pray Thee to tell me 
the means by which their welfare both here and hereafter 
may be secured.”

The result of this prayer is the statement by Shiva of 
the T&ntrik methods of self-culture and of the rules of 
conduct to be pursued by Sadhakas (aspirants).

Here I may state parenthetically that esoteric Tantrism 
is as ancient as the Vedas.

HU qi 33^ ff^3 9*3T $>T: 93 3T93) 33T3 1 
^3 ^331: 333T3T3 3% II

Shukla Yajurveda, Chap, xix

674

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ Oh, Deva Soma! being strengthened and invigorated 
by Surft (wine), by thy pure spirit, please the Devas; give 
juicy food to the sacrificer and vigour to Br&hmaijas and 
Kshatriyas,”

Rigveda

“ Worshipping the sun before drinking madira (wine).”

*PT |

Mantra Brahmava

" By which women have been made enjoyable by men, 
and by which water has been transformed into wine (for 
the enjoyment of men),” etc.

^ sg ffa? sjft 11 
<nwn« 3^: 11

Riimayana, Uttara K&ntfa ( 20 - 18 - 20 )^ sg ffa? sjft 11 
<nwn« 3^: 11

Riimayana, Uttara K&ntfa ( 20 - 18 - 20 )

“ Like Indra in the case of (his wife) Shachl, Rama 
Chandra made Slt& drink purified honey-made wine. Ser¬ 
vants brought for Rama Chandra meat and sweet fruits." 7

^ |

3T^«r =? fWITCT ^ ||

Mah&bh&rata, Udyoga Parva 
“ Arjuna and Shrlkrishna drinking wine made from honey 
and being sweet-scented and garlanded, wearing splendid 
cloths and ornaments, sat on a golden throne studded with

INTRODUCTION

675

various jewels. I saw Shrlkrisbna's feet on Arjuna’s lap, 
and Arjuna's feet on DraupadI and Satyabbamfi’s lap.”

It is only old wine in new jars which is presented by 
Shiva and Bhagavatl to men of the Kali Yuga. An exoteric 
aspect, however, suitable for the generality of folk was 
added to the already extant esoteric path, which only a few 
are competent to pursue.It may be contented that Ishvara Himself, having 
incarnated towards the end of the Dv&para Yuga for the 
salvation of mankind, there was no need for the Tantras. 
But, in the first place, it must be understood that Ishvara, 
Hari, Shrlkjishna, Adyfishakti, and Mah&deva are one and 
the same Supreme, only the vehicle in which the Supreme 
manifests Itself beiDg different. The Tantras had already 
been revealed before the incarnation of Skrlkrishi?a. The 
worship of the Divinity as Mother, which is the principal 
characteristic of the Tantras, bad prevailed long before the 
advent of Sbrlkrisbna. The Vraja Gopls worshipped Katya* 
yanl that they might gain Kanai as their husband. RukminI, 
having paid homage to the Divine Mother, prayed : “ 0 
Katyfiyanl! O Maham&y&! 0 Mabfiyoginl! 0 Lady Para¬ 
mount of all the Lords ! 0 Devi! give me the son of Nanda 
Gopa as my consort; I bow to Thee ” (Shrlmadbhftgavata 
Sk. X.) Besides this. I have already drawn attention to the 
fact that the Shrlmadbhftgavata prescribes the T&ntrik form 
of worship, and that all the Pauranik worships abound in 
T&ntrik Mantras. To the mass Shrikfishna taught Karma 
Yoga by Himself, performing various Yajnas, 1 to the cul¬ 
tured classes He gave the transcendental philosophy of the 
Vedas, which is also the rock upon which the Tantras are 
built; and to those who, having emancipated themselves 
from the thraldom of the world and its conventions, to the 
God-loving Gopls, He imparted the highest mystery of

1 Sacrifices, etc. See Intredaction.

570

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Divine communion, which is likewise the highest mystery 
of Tdntrik worship. Shrikrishna perpetuated the Tftntrik 
methods of worship and yoga. He did not set up a new 
method, nor did He revive the obsolete Yaidik system.Mankind in the Kali Yuga have, by the efflux of cyolic 
time, dwindled into pigmies, both physically and .spirit¬ 
ually, though, by the law of evolution, their intellectual 
capacity has increased. But it is not through intellect alone 
that that Spirit can march on in its career of spiritual pro¬ 
gress. A man, howevergreat in intellectual accomplishments, 
may yet be a child so far as his spiritual nature is con¬ 
cerned. To cultivate the spirit, it is necessary to withdraw 
to a considerable extent his mind from the senses and the 
brain, which are the instruments of intellectual culture. 
The Kali Yuga dwarf finds himself a prey to the glamour 
of phenomena and the allurements of the senses. Not having 
spiritual insight, he takes the unreal for the real, the evane¬ 
scent for the eternal, bondage for freedom, and identifying 
himself with the body and the lower mind, makes of him¬ 
self, in spite of his intellectual acumen, in spite even of his 
Upanishadik, Vedantik, and philosophic lore, a being who, 
so far as spirituality is concerned, is not far above the ani¬ 
mal kingdom. Not having the strength nor the longevity 
to pursue the arduous Vaidik spiritual training, man would 
find himself in a very precarious state, and the Divine 
Scheme of spiritual evolution would be frustrated, had not 
provision suitable to the times, been made for his salvation. 
The Divine Mother, Adyashakti, in Her unbounded com¬ 
passion for Her children and in concert with the Divine 
Father, Mahadeva, therefore, revealed the Agamas and the 
Nigamas 1 for the salvation of humanity. These Agamas 
and Nigamas are known as Tantra.

p . t ® chDical “waning of these terms, see Introduction to

Fart I of this book.

' INTRODUCTION

577p . t ® chDical “waning of these terms, see Introduction to

Fart I of this book.

' INTRODUCTION

577

There may be soals, few and far between, who having, 
after ages of self-culture, been born in the present Kali 
Yuga with a goodly stock of spiritual training, are fitted 
to continue their evolution according to the Vaidik 
methods. But the vast vessel of humanity as a mass 
would be rudderless to pass safely through the ocean of 
the world were it not for the Tantra which is revealed 
towards the dawn of every Kali Yuga. The Tantrik 
methodology of spiritual self-culture has been followed 
and practised these thousands of years, and the country, 
from end to end, is permeated with it. But it is to be 
deplored that, owing to English education, which has 
given a great impetus to intellectual culture, and has 
brought philosophy within the reach of all, the aspirations 
of many who are spiritually-minded far exceed their spiri¬ 
tual capaoity. Aspiring thus to what they do not deserve, 
they become, oftener than not, disappointed and dejected.

The great merit of the Tantra is its all-comprehensive¬ 
ness. Humanity, in each of its phases and condition, has 
been provided with a system of culture suited to the nature 
and capacity of each individual. The milk of compassion 
of Jagadamba, the Divine Mother, flows perpetually and 
equally to every one of Her children, that they may drink 
of it and, acquiring thereby spiritual strength, may return 
to Her loving lap. She does not exact from Her weak and 
short-lived children of the Kali Yuga long and trying 
Brahmacharya 1 and austerity to show them the way to 
Her Lotus Feet. Enervating is the influence of the Kali 
Yuga, but, in inverse ratio, high is the potency of the 
medicament She has prescribed for Her children. The low 
and the high, all are equally taken care of, and, for all, the 
path has been made smooth and straight.

' See ante . 
37

578

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' See ante . 
37

578

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The doctrine of the Tantras, whilst recognizing Sang- 
khya-Patanjala, is Vedantik Advaitavada. It reconciles 
duality (Dvaita) with unity (Advaita), the haven into which 
the wandering ego will at last find its eternal rest after it 
has worked out its Karma. The Advaita philosophy and 
the method of self-culture founded upon it, have their 
origin in the Vedas. It has, in modern times, been expound¬ 
ed by Shiimat SbangkaiAcharya; at any rate, its interpre¬ 
tation by Shangkarftcbarya has obtained firm hold in many 
men's minds, and is regarded by them as infallible. There 
is another interpretation of Advaitism by Ramanuja, which 
has also a large following in many parts of India. Both 
Shangkara and R&manuja are human expounders of the 
Vaidik law, and both are great souls of the Kali Yuga, but 
not Rishis. Shangkara's transcendental philosophy advo¬ 
cates knowledge (jnana); Ramanuja’s Vedantism champions 
devotion (bhakti) as the means to salvation. But both 
agree in having a pessimistic standpoint. The world, they 
maintain, has nothing in it which may help a man’s spiri¬ 
tual progress. It is darkness, misery, and the arch-enemy, 
which, by heavy chains, binds down man. The aspirant 
to spiritual culture must shun it as he would the python 
who might strangle him. All the faculties of the brain- 
mind have to be brought into requisition to combat the 
world, both subjective and objective, and thus to free the 
aspirant from the coils of the enemy. By elaborate pro¬ 
cesses of discrimination (viveka) the world must be negativ¬ 
ed; and renunciation of everything appertaining to it 
crowns the efforts of the aspirant to knowledge (jnana). 
Even if the world were really what it is dismally painted 
to be, how many among all its millions can fight such a 
battle and emerge the conqueror ? Such a system of spiri¬ 
tual culture is bound to fail, and to render religion an 
impossibility for the mass of the people. They, no doubt,INTRODUCTION

579

have been provided with an elementary system of religion, 
but the root-idea is there, and fighting nature out is the 
watchword everywhere. This impotent militant spirit has 
wrought havoc in the Hindu mind, and rendered it a slave 
to the very world which it has been taught to vanquish. 
There have, certainly, been great souls who, after a culture 
extending over many births and rebirths, have at last 
succeeded in attaining the spiritual heights. But such 
souls are but few among many millions. “ Sarvam khalvi- 
dam Brahma" (Verily all this is Brahman) is the saying 
of the Veda and Vedanta. The neophyte who had been 
taught to hate the world as Kakabishtha (excrement of the 
crow), at length, and after ages of Sadhana, finds it to be 
nothing but Brahman. The Kakabishtha then reveals itself 
to him in all the glory of Divine effulgence.

The Tantras prescribe a very different method of self¬ 
culture. Here the Great God (Maha Deva) Himself is the 
expounder of the Law—that is, the Divine knowledge— 
which He revealed at the dawn of creation in His aspect 
as Brahma.

“ The hall of sorrow,” “ the vale of tears,” “ the hall of 
torments," and other such names by which schools of 
transcendental philosophy disparage the world, have no 
place in the Tantra. The Tantra is the Breath of Divinity, 
and the world is evolved from that Breath. The Divine 
Mother (call Her Father or Father-Mother as you choose) 
is in every molecule, in every atom, in all things which 
constitute the world. In fact, She is the causeless Cause 
of whatever is; She is the manifested Brahman. The world 
is the playground (Lllakshetra) of the All-blissful Ananda- 
mayl. The world is neither an illusion nor a non-reality ; 
nor is it under the government of the Ruler of Hell, whose 
autocratic tyranny drives sensible men first to raise the 
standard of revolt, and then, when they find no King great

580

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA580

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

enough to drive the tyrant off, sends them in a stampede to 
the unknown and unknowable kingdom of an Abstraction, 
whioh is absolute existence, absolute knowledge, and 
absolute bliss. But, to their misfortune and discomfiture, 
they come to realize that the ramparts and battlements and 
fortifications of the kingdom of the supposed Archdevil are 
impregnable; that, as far as their imagination can extend, 
his empire also extends ; and that their own selves—that is, 
their minds and whatever constitutes their individual 
selves—is of the same material as that with which the 
alleged nefarious world is constituted. Having learnt this 
sad truth at last, many Sadhakas of other schools fall pre¬ 
cipitately from the height of their hopes and aspirations. 
Discomfited, dejected, and crest-fallen, they can neither 
seek the supreme object of life (Paramartha) nor reconcile 
themselves to the world, in which they have to live not 
only during their present lives but in many lives yet to 
come. This dismal philosophy is not merely the heirloom 
of Sadhakas. It has been almost indelibly impressed upon 
the consciousness of the ordinary run of men, with the 
result that the Hindus are in general pessimists and 
fatalists in high degree.

The T&ntrik Sadhaka, by his method of worship, is led 
from the outset to feel, and then by higher processes of 
self-oulture to realize, the All-blissful Mother in the uni¬ 
verse—nay, to regard the universe as the Mother Herself. 
Every man and every woman is to him the Mother Herself; 
every living object is to him an objeot of obeisance. His 
thought and conduct are made to flow in that all-loving and 
all-reverencing channel. Training his mind thus, the 
Sadhaka, far from finding the world to be a vale of tears, of 
sorrow, and of suffering, views it as the very Kashmir of 
subjective and objeotive beauty. Every man and woman— 
nay, all living things—are glowing with Divinity. This

INTRODUCTION

581INTRODUCTION

581

state of mind not only quenches the thirst of his lower 
nature, but spiritualizes its animal tendencies; not only 
does it buoy him up with fresh energy to pursue the Path, 
but he attains liberation (Mukti), eating the sweet fruit of 
the world, of which the Sadhakas of other schools are 
deprived. On the other hand, the man of the world who 
professes Tantrism has every faith in. the reality of the 
world. To him it is not an illusion nor an evil, and there¬ 
fore he exerts his utmost to make it the happy lap of the 
Mother, whioh it really is.

The T&ntrik Path, as 1 have already said, is smooth 
and straight. It is fitted to the constitution of the Kali Yuga 
man. The method of Tantrik self-culture has the supreme 
merit of accomplishing within a short time what other 
methods can hardly accomplish within a life. This is testi¬ 
fied to by numberless adepts, ancient and modern. And it 
is for this that Paura^iks have largely drawn upon it. It is 
also said that Shangkarach&rya's Yoga system owes much to 
Tantrism. The Mahayana Buddhistic system is saturated 
with it. Nagarjuna, the great Buddhistik Arf/iat, who 
flourished about seven hundred years ago, was a gieat 
Tantrik yogi and alchemist, whose Baudha-Tantrik works 
are the authority of Northern Buddhism.

The Tantra is non-sectarian. It provides methods ol 
self-culture to all schools of Sftdhakas, be they Shfiktas, 
Shaivas, Sauras, G&napatyas, or Vaishnav&s, and holds that 
the S&dhana of the Divine, as the All-blissful Mother, is the 
easiest and straightest Path.

The Tantra is the only Divine Revelation which throws 
open the gates of arcane nature to those who have the 
courage to peer into it. Man, in his onward Path, must 
dive deep into nature’s heart to discover what he, and the 
universe of which he is a component part, is. The method 
of spiritual self-oulture leads him, step by step, to an

582 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA582 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

acquaintance with nature's supersensuous beings, high and 
low, and teaches him how to utilize the services of the 
high, and to ward off the evil influences of the low. This 
knowledge is of essential importance to the sojourner on 
the Path; for the evil spirits throw every manner of ob¬ 
stacles to impede his march and encompass his ruin; 
whereas the good spirits would gladly help him on if he but 
knew how to obtain their help. Woe to the aspirer who, 
having made the acquaintance of the lower spirits, abandons 
his true end and aim and utilizes their service for unlawful 
worldly purposes. Such are the black magicians whose lot 
is miserable both here and hereafter.

Self-culture, according to the Tantrik method, develops 
the Will and endows the Sadhaka with some lower powers 
(Siddhis) within a comparatively short time. Those who 
are charmed with those powers and are tempted to use 
them are like to share the same fate with the black magi¬ 
cians. The end and aim of high Tantrik Sadbana is the 
realization of the Advaita Tattva—the attainment of Kai- 
valya Mukti; 1 and it is to this end that the true Sadhaka 
consecrates not only his present life, but a succession of lives 
extending over many ages. By intense Sadhana* he has 
first to free himself from the chain of Karma,* which fastens 
him down to the three Lokas, Bhuh, Bhuvah, and Svah. 1 
When past this triad of the Karmik chain, his onward 
progress continues until he can "pierce through” the 
Spiritual Sun (the manifested Brahman), and merge him¬ 
self with the Supreme. There must, indeed, be very few, 
even throughout countless periods of time, who have at¬ 
tained this liberation (Mukti) upon earth. But Sidhakas 
who devotedl y and perseveringly pursue the path become

Union with the Brahman.

• Sec Introduction - * see Introdnction.

Abe three worlds—Earth, the atmospheric and celestial planes.

INTRODUCTION

583Union with the Brahman.

• Sec Introduction - * see Introdnction.

Abe three worlds—Earth, the atmospheric and celestial planes.

INTRODUCTION

583

Devas, Lords of Manvantaras,' Lokap&las (planetary Lords), 
and Dikp&las (Lords of space), and the like, and rise higher 
and higher until their work is ended. There are others who, 
refusing liberation, come down from time to time as Saviours 
of mankind.

The investigations of the T&ntrik into the inner temple 
of nature reveal to him many secrets both of an objective 
and subjective nature, including those of the human mecha¬ 
nism. It is thus that he is a theurgist and thaumaturgist, 
alchemist, herbalist, metallurgist, physician, astrologer, and 
astronomer. The Tantrik’s alchemy crossed the ocean and 
reached Europe; his chemistry discovered ages ago many 
truths, some of which have dawned upon European scien¬ 
tists within but recent times. He was the first in the world 
to use mercury, snake poison, and the metals as medicine. 
His system of medicine has superseded that of the Ayur¬ 
veda. His science of Breath is still a mystery to the 
Europeans. Last, though not the least, there is what may 
be called his science of psycho-physical culture, which 
renders the physical body obedient to the will, and thus by 
certain postures not only enables him to ward off and 
cure diseases, but to control the mind. The Tantra, in fine, 
is from its very nature an Encyclopaedic science. It is 
practical, and has no concern with wordy warfare. It 
lights the torch and shows the way, step by step, until the 
sojourner comes to the end of his journey, realizing the 
universe in the Brahman and the Brahman in the universe. 
So has it been said:

* ^3 swfa i

q^ STtfqWSfrl II

1 A period of time. See Introduction.

584

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ All other Shastras are merely entertaining; they can 
show nothing on earth. But the medical science, astrology, 
and Tantra prove themselves at every step.”

Shakti584

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ All other Shastras are merely entertaining; they can 
show nothing on earth. But the medical science, astrology, 
and Tantra prove themselves at every step.”

Shakti

In the Sanskrit language the word Shakti is feminine. 
It must not, therefore, be supposed that that which is 
denoted by it is feminine. There is no word in the English 
language which conveys the exact meaning of the word 
Shakti as it is used in the Hindu Spiritual Science. It is 
neither force nor energy of physical science. The word 
Power may be used to designate it.

Power or Shakti is the root of all existence. It is from 
Shakti that universes are evolved; it is by Shakti that they 
are sustained; and it is into Shakti that they are finally 
resolved. It is the same as Parabrahman. Parabrahman 
is Existence (Sat), Consciousness (Chit), and Bliss (Ananda). 
By Shakti is denoted exactly these three aspects in the One 
without a second. Chit is the Power, and the two other 
aspects go along with it; for without consciousness there 
would be neither existence or happiness. Shakti, then, is 
essentially absolute Satchit&nanda.

Within, so to say, the womb of Shakti, is May& or 
Prakjiti, the matrix of the universe which, during cosmic 
inaction or Mahapralaya is potential and latent, even as 
fire is latent within wood. Maya or Prakfiti is not a non- 
reality, nor a state of equilibrium of certain things; nor is 
it a something-nothing, something little (yatkinchit), an 
idea (bhava). It is as immutable and permanent as the 
triple aspects already mentioned. It enfolds, to use chemi¬ 
cal phraseology, a triad of Guijas or Reals which, mutating 
and combining, make up the appearance of the ever-chang¬ 
ing world, and which, in Mahapralaya, are withdrawn

INTRODUCTION

585INTRODUCTION

585

within the bosom from whence they emerged. Maya or 
Prakriti it must be understood, is ever in association with 
Chit, be it in Mahapralaya or in evolution ; for there is only 
One without a second, and Prakriti must be an inseparable 
part or power of It. Parabrahman thus has a quadruple 
aspect, and is symbolized in the Tantra by a grain of gram 
(Chanaka). As a grain of gram is a bi-valvular unity , 1 
enveloped by an outer skin, so is Shakti a Unity having the 
characteristic of a duality when viewed through the veil of 
Prakriti. This duality is neither Jlva nor Atma, nor matter 
and spirit, but a polarity. From the fathomless womb of 
Parabrahman or Shakti is evolved the universe, and into 
that womb it is withdrawn when the hour for final dissolu¬ 
tion strikes. Shakti is, therefore, both centrifugal and 
centripetal Power. It is male-female, and therefore ex¬ 
pressed by the word Brahman, in the neuter gender.

The notion seems to prevail that what the Tantriks 
posit by Shakti is dead matter, Prakriti. Nothing can 
be farther from this unwarrantable conclusion. Shakti, 
as that which is potential, is much more expressive than 
Brahman considered as something neutral. Prakriti, the 
matrix of the universe of names and forms, is the veil 
through which alone it is possible to approach the Sat- 
chit-ananda Brahman by the human consciousness. It is 
the destiny of human consciousness, which is relative, 
to merge itself into the one true Consciousness, which is 
absolute, and thus to fulfil the end and aim of life. The 
Tantra, therefore, along with all other spiritual sciences, 
worships the Absolute through that in which It is mani¬ 
fested.

The expression “ Veil of Prakriti ” is, however, not an 
appropriate one. It is borrowed from the Theosophical

‘ A grain of gram containa within one enfolding sheath two halves.

586

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA‘ A grain of gram containa within one enfolding sheath two halves.

586

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

literature. Chit or Shakti is self-manifesting. But im¬ 
mutable, undifferentiated Prakyiti is the only ground in 
which it can manifest itself so as to be cognizable to the 
self, be it of man or of Devatfi. Prakfiti, therefore, is 
not a “ Veil,” but, on the other hand, is Shakti itself in 
Evolution. When the first hour strikes for the commence¬ 
ment of the cosmic play (Jagat Lila), Prakriti becomes 
the Conscious Shakti, the Unmanifested Manifest, the 
First Cause, the Supreme Power, the Sun of all suns, 
from which universes are to evolve. It is the K&rana 
Deha (causal body) of Chit-?hakti. It is impersonal, all- 
pervading, immutable, and Chit itself. It is the God of 
all Gods; the object of the highest form of human worship 
—nay, the object of the worship of all the Gods, including 
Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara. It is symbolized in 
the Tantra by a Vindu or dot (.), and expressed in human 
language by the word “ Chidghana ” 1

Vindu or Shakti is neither male nor female, but par¬ 
takes of the characteristics of both. In its Advaita, or 
non-dual nature, is a dual characteristic, a polarity, as I 
have already said, which may be expressed by the terms 
“ positive ” and “ negative,” and which is denominated 
in the Tantra by Shiva and Shakti; pum (male), and stri 
(female); Sun and Moon; the male principle being Shiva, 
and the female principle being Shakti or Mahak&ll Maha- 
kala (Shrlkrishna) is as much Shakti as Mahakall, the one 
being the female, and the other the male aspect of the 
selfsame Shakti.

The Tantra is, therefore, all-comprehensive and non¬ 
sectarian. It enjoins the worship of Shakti—that without 
which nothing can live and move and have its being. 
The worship of Vishnu is as much a part of it as is the 
worship of Kali, although the worship of the latter is held

* That is, a thickened masg of chit or consciousness.

INTRODUCTION

58?* That is, a thickened masg of chit or consciousness.

INTRODUCTION

58?

to be comparatively easy, and more suited to the present race 
of men for reasons which I shall have occasion to state later.

It must not be thought that, although Prakriti be¬ 
comes conscious Shakti in manifestation, it is in any of 
its forms the ultimate object of worship. Worship, how¬ 
ever, implies a duality. And although essentially the wor¬ 
shipper and the worshipped are the same—and it is the 
realization of this Unity which is the end and aim of 
worship—yet Shakti in manifestation cannot but be the 
object of worship so long as the Ego has its individuality, 
which is made of the stuff of Prakriti. It is, therefore, 
that in spiritual culture the Tantra postulates two Shaktis 
Vachaka Shakti is manifested Chit in Prakriti, and Vachya 
Shakti is Chit itself, which is the goal to be attained. It 
is by the realization of Vachaka Shakti that the Vachya 
Shakti can be attained. The Vachya Shakti is formless, 
and cannot, therefore, be the object of any form of Upasana 
(worship) or yoga practice.

The manifested Shakti is the Power which is the object 
of adoration, prayer, and praise. So long as the human 
Soul remains such, it cannot go beyond. But when the 
Soul—that is, the causal body or Karana Sharlra—is cast 
off, the duality for ever disappears, and the self is merged 
into that which is Shakti in itself.

By whatever name it may be, whether Krishna, Vishnu, 
Shiva, Kali, Durga, Ganapati, or SQrya, It is the mani¬ 
fested Shakti, the Saguna Brahman. But there are cer¬ 
tain sects of worshippers who assign an inferior position 
to Shakti, and regard it as a female power only, subordi¬ 
nate to the God they worship. That the God they wor¬ 
ship is Shakti as well is ignored by them. In this they 
take an anthropomorphic view of the Supreme, who 
according to them, is male (Shaktiman), and Shakti (his 
Consort) is his inferior, like some conceptions of an Oriental

588588

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

wife. The Tantra repudiates this view, and regards both 
Shaktiman and Shakti as the male and female aspects of 
the one Shakti. Where would be Vishnu or Krishna without 
Shakti (Power) ? Bereft of Shakti, the Vehiole, designated 
as Krishna or Vishnu, and all other Vehicles from the highest 
God to the lowest atom, would be but a dead inert mass. 
It is Shakti which is life, intelligence, and consciousness. 
No state of existence can be superior to it. Both these 
aspects of Shakti are inseparable, and the one is not inferior 
to the other, any more than the negative pole of electricity 
can be considered to be subordinate to the positive. Hence 
it is that all the Gods are associated with Goddesses; hence 
it is that R&ma has his Sita, Krishna has his Radhfc, and 
Mah&k&la is accompanied by Mah&kali.

It is Shakti (Power) which creates, Shakti which sus¬ 
tains, and Shakti which withdraws into Her fathomless 
womb innumerable worlds in infinite space. Indeed, She 
is space itself, and every being therein.

Physical science is acquainted with one of Her physical 
powers, and that by its abnormal manifestations only; for 
the nature of electric force is unknown to the scientist. 
Science used to distinguish force and matter as two different 
things; but the trend of scientific thought seems to have 
undergone in this respect a revolution. The theory is now 
put forward that matter is a modification of force. Spiritual 
science holds exactly a similar view, but on a very broad 
line of thought, and maintains that from Shakti (Power) 
everything emanates, first in the spiritual, then in the cele¬ 
stial, and then in the terrestrial Kosmogenesis.

It is peculiar to the Universal Mother that, unlike 
human and animal mothers, She devours and then disgorges 
Her offspring. Seated in the lotus forest, which floats 
in the water of space, She is perpetually devouring and 
disgorging the Elephant (the Kosmos). When She disgorges

INTRODUCTION.INTRODUCTION.

589

and nourishes She is the most beautiful of the beautiful; 
Her beauty enchants even the Gods; She is then Bhuva- 
neshvarl and BhuvanamohinL It is the descent of Spirit 
into matter. When She devours Her offspring with Her 
thousand mighty jaws, She is Mahakali; Her transcendental 
beauty is realizable only by the wise and the devotee. 
Westerners and Hindus demoralized by Western civilization 
have the profanation to call this Her aspect as ugly and 
terrible. Yes, She is terrible to the earth-bound soul. But 
to the pilgrim on the path of return—the path of Nivritti— 
the Majesty of Her beauty and the message of peace and 
comfort in Her right hand are ineffable. It was this stu¬ 
pendous Majesty which the Lord Shrlkrishna (who is the 
same as Kali) exhibited to His dear disciple Arjuna, 
when the latter entreated Him to appear before him in 
His godly form. Arjuna had entreated Him thus: “ O 
Yogi, how should I contemplate Thee so as to know Thee ? 
O Bhagavan ! in what object should I contemplate Thee ? " 
The Lord then enumerated some of His Vibhutis (distin¬ 
guishing qualities) which yet could not satisfy the disciple; 
for they were too abstract for contemplation and devotion. 
The Bbakta (devotee) must have something tangible to fix 
his mind upon. Therefore he exhorted the best of Purushas 
to show him his Divine ROpa(Forra). Endowing him with 
spiritual vision, the Lord showed him the Rapa with which 
he had to commune. .Shangkarftchftrya, in his commentary, 
describes this Rapa as endowed with Knowledge (jnana), 
Godly Qualities (aishvarya), Shakti, Strength, Virility 
(vlrya), and Effulgence (tejas). O Sadhaka of the Vaishnava 
sohool! is this Rapa ugly and hideous ? 0 devotee! do not 
be deluded by the glamour of earthly beauty; feast your 
spiritual eye with the Majesty of Divine grandeur and beauty.

She is May&, because Mfiy& is a part of Her nature ; She 
is Avidyft because She binds; She is Mah&m&ya because

690She is May&, because Mfiy& is a part of Her nature ; She 
is Avidyft because She binds; She is Mah&m&ya because

690

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

She dominates Mtly&; She is Yidya because She holds the 
torch which illumines the Path of return, She is Mahavidyft 
because She is the Mother in whose sweet and soothing 
bosom the wayworn pilgrim finds his eternal rest.

The Divine Mother iB thus the cause both of bondage 
as well as of liberation. She is in all things, and all things 
are in Her. She is consciousness; She is intelligence; 
She is sleep; She is wakefulness; She is hunger; She is 
thirst; She is shadow; She is substance; She is power; 
She is impotence; She is mercy; She is compassion; She 
is bashfulness; She is peace; She is esteem: She is beauty: 
She is ugliness; She is prosperity; She is adversity; She 
is memory: She is truth; She is falsehood; She is good; 
She is evil; She is avarice; She is contentment; She is 
mother; She is error; She is rectitude; She is illusion: 
She is reality; She is the power of the senses: She is 
ignorance; She is knowledge ; She is the mysterious dis¬ 
penser of a double force, from one of which surges forth 
the universe, and the other it is which withdraws it; She 
is the tide and ebb, the inspiration and respiration, the 
diastole and systole of the universe. Both centrifugal and 
centripetal forces are in Her. The Human Ego has the 
privilege to choose either of these spiritual forces to 
work out its destiny: by the one it is thrown into the 
eddy of Pravptti (desire), to be whirled round and round 
until the great dissolution (Mahapralaya); the other girts 
it up with that power and energy which will enable it 
to strike through the eddy and reach the serene centre of 
the Mother’s bosom.The three aspects of Shakti, which constitute the 
Trinity of the Hindus, are Volition (ichchh&shakti). Ad¬ 
ministration (kriy&shakti), and Cognition (jnfinashakti). 
These are the three Powers which direct the evolution, the 
sustentation, and the involution of the Universe. The

INTRODUCTION

591

Nirv&na Tantra says: “ In the region of Truth, the Form¬ 
less and Resplendent Pervader of the universe, casting off 
the covering of Maya, became divided into two. The idea 
of creation arises from the division of Shiva and Shakti, 
O Parvati! First of all was born the son named Brahma. 
Said K&lik&: Hear me, 0 son ! O Hero! take care to marry. 
Hearing this, Brahma then said : There is no Mother other 
than Thee; 0 beautiful one, give me a Shakti (wife). Hear¬ 
ing this, the Mother of the universe, from Her own body, 
gave him a charming wife, who is the second Mahavidyft, 
the great Power named S&vitrL Associate thyself with 
Her, and publish the Veda (Divine Knowledge), and become 
the Creator of the universe with ease. The second son 
born was Vishnu vehicled by Sattva gu$a. Said Kalika: 
Hear me, O Son! O Hero! take care to marry. Said 
Vishnu: Thy sight renders man passionless. O Mother, 
O Consort of Shiva ! How can I marry unless Thou givest 
me a fair maiden for wife ? The Mother, from Her own 
body, gave him a wife. O Goddess ! She is the Vaishgavl 
Mah&vidya, ShrlvidyA With her help Vishnu sustains the 
universe. The third son begotten was the great Yogi Sadft- 
shiva. Seeing him Mah&kftll beamed with joy. 0 Son, great 
Yogi! give heed to what I say. Who is there a male like 
thee, and who is there a female like me ? Therefore, 0 Shiva ! 
forthwith marry me. Sadashiva said: 0 Mother! Thou hast 
verily said the truth ; there is none who charms like Thee. 
There is no Purusha like myself. But I cannot marry Thee 
in Thy present body. If Thou art kind to me, change Thy 
body. Instantaneously Mahakaii gave him Bhuvaneshvarl."The Kubjika Tantra says: “ Brahman! creates, surely 
not Brahm&, therefore Brahma is but a Preta,” 1 and so on

1 Literally a disembodied spirit before the performance of the 
obsequial rites. Here used in the sense of an inert corpse, for He 
do nothing without the vivifying influence of Shakti.

592

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

with regard to Vishnu and Shiva. Brahm&, Vishnu, and 
Shiva are quite powerless to discharge their respective 
functions without Shakti or Power.

The Devlbh&gavata (Skandha III. Cha. vi) relates that 
Brahma having asked Adyashakti as to whether She was 
male or female, the Divine Mother thus explained Herself:

||

^ ^ ff fl: i

ftgrH: a § ^ mv. n

% m f%*4 Affray i

^ 3^*8% ||

^ I a*iS q>rq?q* i

|f^r n

ffT? 51 yTTajTf q I

«fil fq^: WTff. fan 35T: ||

“ That Male (Purusha) and Myself are ever the same. 
There is no difference between Him and Me. The Purusha 
is what I am; I am what the Purusha is. Difference arises 
only from ignorance. He who is intelligent and is free from 
the bondage of the world can know our subtle difference; 
there is no doubt about this. The one without a second, 
perennial Brahman becomes dual at the time of creation. 
As a single lamp becomes dual by difference of Upfldhi 
(condition), as a single face becomes dual in the form of an 
image in a mirror, as a single body appears in dual form 
with its shadow, even so our images are many owing to the 
difference of minds (whioh are made up of M&y&). O Aja

INTRODUCTION

593

(unborn), for the purpose of creation the difference arises 
at the time of creation. It is only the difference between 
the seen and the unseen. At the time of final dissolu* 
tion I am neither male nor female nor neuter. The difference 
(male and female) is imagined only at the time of creation.”To form a concept of the Godhead one worships, the 
idea of Shakti or Power is for the devotee a surer guide 
than the nebulous idea of Atmii (spirit). It is very hard 
for those who have no faith in Shakti to trace the “ one 
without a second ” through the physical to the spiritual 
plane of existence, there being no appreciable link to 
chain the planes together. But a worshipper of Shakti 
need contend with no such difficulty. In all the planes 
of existence he finds the one power all-pervading. It is 
therefore laid down in the Tantras:

tftore to gfrfi:

“ 0 Devi! without a knowledge of Shakti, Mukti (libera¬ 
tion) is mere mockery." 1

The Soundless Sound

The second bell of cosmic evolution tolls. A flutter, a 
vibration thrills the triple Gunas in the womb of Shakti. 
Rajas, the active guna, after its long Pralayik slumber, 1 
reoeives an impulse towards awaking. Immediately as its 
eyes open a bifurcation takes place in Shakti, resulting in 
what all religions designate the Verbum, the Shabdabrah- 
man the immense, all-pervasive, all-comprehensive, un¬ 
broken, undifferentiated Sound Spiritual. One aspect of 
Shabdabrahman is Nada, and another aspect is Vindu. As 
Nada She is the Mother, and as Vindu He is the Father, of

' That is, without such knowledge liberation cannot be attained.

' That is. slumber during dissolution (pralaya).

38

594

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the universe. They are an inseparable twain, ever in 
association in cosmic evolution. Shabdabrahman is the 
God, the Lord, the Mother, the Word, the objeot of worship 
of all sentient beings.

The first manifestation of Shakti in the Spiritual plane 
is “ Sound,” which is undifferentiated intelligent Ak&sha, 1 
the Chid&kasha 1 of philosophy, the Saguna Brahman of 
religion.The first manifestation of Shakti in the Spiritual plane 
is “ Sound,” which is undifferentiated intelligent Ak&sha, 1 
the Chid&kasha 1 of philosophy, the Saguna Brahman of 
religion.

This Sound, the causeless cause of manifold universes, 
must not be confused with the sound with which we are 
familiar, and whioh we have been taught to regard as the 
result of vibrations in molecules of matter. It is not the 
K&ryak&sha or atomic Akasba of philosophy, which is 
integrated and limited and evolved from T&masik Ahan- 
gk&ra.* * Nor is it a quality of such Akasha. It is Chit 
Shakti vehicled by undifferentiated Prakriti—the manifest¬ 
ed Godhead, uncreate, unborn, and eternal. Shabdabrahman 
is consciousness and intelligence, both cosmic and individual. 
It is the dual Shakti in unity, inseparately associated, 
though functioning in different ways.

Duality in unity is the root principle of the Tantra. 
This duality may, for want of a better expression, be called 
a “ polarity.” The Vaishnavas have adopted this idea in 
their Krishna and R&dha, Hari and LakshmI. The Hindu 
Sh&stras hold that the universe has been evolved from the 
One—“ without a second ”—Cause, and that that Cause is 
both immanent and transcendent. The microcosm is in 
miniature what the macrocosm is. Evolution proceeds from

1 “ Ether," the quality of which is sound, but. as hereafter explained, 
not the ether of the elements (mab&bhuta).

* Literally. " ether consciousness," which is explained post.

' Ahangkara or egoity is threefold, according as one or other of the 
gupas of Prakriti predominate in it. T&masika Ahangkara is therefore 
that form of this tattva in which the inert Tamas gupa predominates.

INTRODUCTION

695INTRODUCTION

695

the subtle to the gross. We find in the great physical force 
a duality of poles, which when brought in mutual contact 
produces a magnetic current. In the realms of atoms and 
moleoules the same force has the aspects of attraction and 
repulsion which make the existence of material objects 
possible. In living mechanisms the heart and the lungs are 
worked by a dual force which draws in and throws off blood 
and air, which render organized life possible. The fluid 
space of the earth is dominated by a similar dual force, 
which rhythmically causes both ebb and tide. We thus find 
that what little wo know of force on the physical plane 
gives countenance to the theory of duality in unity.But the most extraordinary fact is the duality of all 
organized structures. Take, for instance, the structure of 
man. It is a duplex structure. “ Man is not formed,” to 
quote the learned author of “ The Mechanism of Man,” “ as 
one whole, but of two distinct halves joined together. He 
has two sets of bones, muscles, and nerves, and two brains. 
True there is but one liver, stomach, and intestine. This 
at first sight seems to be in conflict with the theory. But 
further examination shows the internal structure to be 
substantially the same as the external frame, the only dif¬ 
ference being that the position is reversed, and instead of 
the point of junction being side by side, as with the frame¬ 
work of bone and its appendant muscles, it is, from the 
necessity of its position within the body and the require¬ 
ment of but one heart, one liver, etc., only a junction of 
two halves before and behind. Tracing these internal parts 
from their point of union with the external frame at the 
neck, it will be seen at once that one-half of the whole 
springs from one side of the body, and the other half from 
the other side, and that they unite at a central line through¬ 
out, precisely as the two halves of the external frame are 
united. . . . Looking beyond the human body, it will be

590 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

seen that all organized beings are built after the same 
fashion. It will be found, on dose inspection, that all other 
animals are so made. So likewise are all vegetables. Every 
leaf is duplex; so is every part of a flower. All organised 
beings are, in truth, formed of two halves joined together 
at a central line. Nothing organized is structured as 
one whole .'" 1This duality in unity in all organized structures is, 
as is pointed out by the learned author above quoted, 
due to the fact that two parents are required for the pro¬ 
duction of every organized being, and that each parent 
contributes a germ, by the junction of which the duplex 
structure is formed. The human mind, also, has a dual 
nature—it is swayed as much by sentiments as by reason. 
Taking all these facts into consideration, it will not be 
wrong to infer that the Cause from which these effects 
are produced is a dual unity. The Tantra, however, postu¬ 
lates this as a fact, and builds up its Science upon it.

The Nada aspect of Shabdabrahman is Kula-kunda- 
jini. Kula means the female organ of generation (yoni) 
In the Bhagavadgltfc (xiv. 3), Lord Shrl Krishna, as the 
male power, says:

qq *1$ I

qqq-. qq’lffPfT qqft TO II

“ My womb is the great Eternal; in that I place the 
seed ; thence cometh the birth of all beings, O Bharata.

According to the Mahanirvftna Tantra, Kula means 
Jlva, Prakriti, Dik, Kala, and the five mababhfltas (sensibles) 
taken together. Now, all these taken together constitute 
the intelligent and material cause of the universe, which 
is the same as Yoni. As Kundala means the Coil (of the

1 " The Mechanism of Man." by E. W. Cox, vol. i.

INTRODUCTION

5971 " The Mechanism of Man." by E. W. Cox, vol. i.

INTRODUCTION

597

serpent), Kulakundalini means the Spiritual Power (the 
cosmic Mother) who Creates the universe of names and 
forms and coils up round it. She is Chit or consciousness 
vehicled by Prakriti. She is Sound, because the first 
manifestation of Prakriti is sound, which is withal Jnana 
(knowledge) and Light Spiritual. She is the One Breath, 
One Life. She is universal Consciousness, all-pervading, 
not limited by time and space. She clothes herself with 
Prakriti when the hour for creation arrives. Essentially 
She is not different from the male aspect of Shabdabrahman, 
as both the aspects are indissolubly associated. She is the 
Paraprakfiti or Supreme Power of Brahman. From Her 
is sprung the universe, from Mahat 1 to the atom, and 
the universe is under Her control. She is Adya—the 
First Cause; She is all knowledge; and Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Shiva have their being in Her. She knows the universe, 
but none know Her. She is the embodiment of all Power; 
She is subtle; She is gross; She is manifested; She is 
unmanifested ; She is formless, and yet with form.

From the Sound Spiritual proceed two lines of Evolu¬ 
tion. The first line is by Sadri$ha paripama—that is, the 
resolution of like to like—and consists of three female 
Powers and their male Counterparts in the following order:

RaudrI —Rudra —fire — Tamas—Power of Cognition.

(f) (m)

Jyesh^hS—Brahma—Moon—Rajas —Power of Volition.

(/) (m)

Yama —Vishnu —Sun —Sattva—Power of Causation 
(/) (m) (action).

These three male and female Powers are the first 
triplication of the One Shabdabrahman, possessing within 
itself the three Powers of Volition, Causation, and Cogni¬ 
tion ; the three gupas, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas; and Its

1 The Tattva also called Buddhi.

598

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

duplex Constitution. This line of creation is called Sound 
Creation (Shabdasrishfci).1 The Tattva also called Buddhi.

598

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

duplex Constitution. This line of creation is called Sound 
Creation (Shabdasrishfci).

The second line of evolution is called Fonn-creation 
(Arthasj-ishti). It is subdivided into two. The first sub¬ 
division embraces the Lords, and the second the Tattvas. 1 
These are the Lords of our universe, having Parashiva as 
their Overlord. There are seven cosmic centres (Lokas) 
of Power, over each one of which each of these Lords 
presides in association with an aspect of Kulakundalini 
as His guiding Power. The centres and the Lords are 
thus stated:

Loka

Satyam

Tapah

Janah

Mahah

Svah

Bhuvah

Bhuh

Male Power

Parashiva or Mahavishnu

§hambhu 
Sadashiva (called 
Ardhanarishvara) 
lsha 
Rudra 
Vishnu 
Brahma

Female power

Adyashakti

Mahakall

Siddhakall

Mahagauri

Bhuvaneshvari 
Bhadrakali 
Rad ha 
Savitrl

These seven centres are also seven planes of conscious¬ 
ness. Philosophy generalizes these seven planes of con¬ 
sciousness into three— viz., Jagrat (waking), Svapna (dream¬ 
ing), and Sushupti (slumbering, or dreamless sleep). The 
cosmic Virat-body is waking. Hiranyagarbha-body is dream¬ 
ing, and the Ishvara-body is slumbering consciousness. 
The Virat-body is evolved from the last three centres, the 
Hiranyagarbha-body from the three centres above it, and 
the Ishvara-body from the highest centre. The conscious¬ 
ness of Vishnu is higher than that of Brahma, the con¬ 
sciousness of Rudra is higher than that of Vishnu, and the

1 Buddhi and other derivatives of Prakriti.

INTRODUCTION

599

consciousness of Ishvara is higher than that of the three; and 
so on until we oome to Parashiva or Mahavistuju, whose 
consciousness is the highest form of relative consciousness.

The second subdivision begins with Mahat Tattva, and 
ends in the five Bhutan, which, being familiar to every 
student of Hindu philosophy, need not be detailed here.The second subdivision begins with Mahat Tattva, and 
ends in the five Bhutan, which, being familiar to every 
student of Hindu philosophy, need not be detailed here.

Kulaku^dalini is the vital Power of the universe. Her 
vehicle is the Hangsa of philosophy and religion. By 
Hangsa is to be understood the vital force, dual in its 
character, borne upon which She creates the universe.

In the human body Kulakuijdalinl is said to reside 
in the root-centre (Muladhara chakra) of force evolution 
inside a coiling nerve (Nadi). She coils round Svayambhu 
the male aspect of Shabdabrahman, and covers his mouth 
with Her hood. Though sound is perpetually emanating 
from Her body, She is said to be slumbering. What Her 
slumber in the human body means is explained later on. 
I shall now deal with the sound emanating from Her body, 
and its nature and function.

Hangsa is the name given to the root-sound emanating 
from the Pr&nik Vehicle of the Divine Mother. From 
Hangsa emanate forms, and from forms evolve universes, 
and all that appertains to them. This Pranik Vehicle is a 
duality of male and female principles, the function of the 
male prinoiple being to throw out and that of the female 
principle to draw in, or, in other words, they are centrifugal 
and centripetal respectively. In the human body and in 
the body of every living being the Prfijjik principle or Vital 
Power expresses itself in expiration and inspiration, and 
represents the sum total of a man’s life on this earth in his 
present birth. From the involuntary expiration of breath 
in the human body arises an inaudible sound, called Ajapft 
Mantra, which every man recites unawares. Cosmically 
this Ajapa is the centrifugal and centripetal energy, the

600

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

attraction and repulsion of forces, observed everywhere; 
spiritually these two mighty aspects of the same Shakti are 
Pravritti and Nivritti, and so it is said:

m ftsn qpTT 3^3^ 1

a«n 11attraction and repulsion of forces, observed everywhere; 
spiritually these two mighty aspects of the same Shakti are 
Pravritti and Nivritti, and so it is said:

m ftsn qpTT 3^3^ 1

a«n 11

“ That Lady paramount of all the Lords as the great 
Vidya is the cause of liberation; and as (Avidya) She too 
is the cause of bondage.”—Chandl.

The Vital Power is called N&da, Jiva, Prana, Ghosha, 
and by other names. The Vital Sheath of the Divine 
Serpent undergoes differentiations. From the first differ¬ 
entiation arise the Seeds of the universe. When the 
second differentiation takes place, the root—sound Hangsa, 
Sound and Form, and all other dualities, come into 
being. In its triple state the three Gugas, three Vedas, 
three articulate sounds (Varnas), three nerves (Nadis), and 
other triads, are projected. In its quadruple form four 
Vargas (sounds) and the quarternaries are evolved. In 
this wise various Sounds and Forms are produced, until 
in the fiftieth differentiation the fifty articulate Sounds, 
called Varnas, or letters of the alphabet, are manifested in 
the Divine Vehiole of the cosmio Mother. It is therefore 
said that the Divine Mother Bings the symphony of the 
universe, the beginning of which is creation, and the con¬ 
clusion is dissolution (Mahapralaya).

In the human mechanism the Muladhara Chakra is, 
as already said, the seat of Mother Eulakun^alinl, where 
She with the fifty Vargas as the strings of Her Divine 
harp for ever chants Her Celestial Song. Blessed be the 
Soul who has listened to this Divine Nada, and thereby 
liberated itself from the trammels of Maya.

The fifty Vargas are fifty sounds of the Sanskrit lan¬ 
guage, or rather of the primitive language of which Sanskrit

INTRODUCTION

601The fifty Vargas are fifty sounds of the Sanskrit lan¬ 
guage, or rather of the primitive language of which Sanskrit

INTRODUCTION

601

is the modification. These articulate sounds have been 
represented in different languages by different symbols; 
and, according to the divergent conformations of the vocal 
organs of different races inhabiting different zones of the 
earth, they are pronounced differently. For instance, the 
first sound of the vowels is symbolized by ar in Sanskrit, a 
in English, a in Greek, i in Arabic, and so on. It is pro¬ 
nounced aw in Sanskrit and derived languages in India, a 
in English, Alpha in Greek, Alipli in Arabic, and so on.

These sounds are very subtle things, effulgent and 
chromatio. They are living energies, which human thought 
prompts to expression through the vocal organ. When the 
seat of Sound—that is, the vehicle of Mother KuijdalinI— 
is penetrated by the active principle (Rajas) of Prakriti the 
sound is called dhvani. Dhvani penetrated by the inert 
principle (Tamas) is called Nada. N&da becomes Nibodhika 
by a further impression of Tamas, and by successive im¬ 
pressions of the same quality it passes through successive 
stages of Ardhendu and Vindu, until at last it translates 
itself in the Muladhara Chakra into what is known as the 
Para state of sound.When the sound reaches the Svadhishthana Chakra, 
it is called Pashyanta. It is then propelled to the heart- 
chakra, where it makes a more distinct vibration, which 
is audible to the Yogi during his first stage of concentra¬ 
tion, when his mind for the time being is withdrawn within 
itself. This is called the Madhyama state of sound. It 
is what i6 known as Nada Anahata Shabda of Mother 
Kundalini. It is stated in Sharadatilaka, a Tantrik work 
of high authority, that the first sound heard by a Yog! is 
like the humming of bees; the next sound he hears is like 
that of air passing through a hollow bamboo; then is heard 
a bell-like sound; and so on. When a Yogi becomes ac¬ 
customed to the hearing of sound, his inner consciousness

602

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

wakens and he begins to acquire knowledge, which dispels 
the dark illusion of the world. From the heart-lotus the 
sound is propelled upwards, and, coming into contact with 
the eight organs of speech, it issues from the mouth and 
becomes audible.

The fifty primary sounds which constitute the vehiole 
of Mother KuijdalinI are called Vardas, because they are 
coloured. They are of various colours: some red, some white, 
some blue; some are the colour of melted gold, and others 
of coral, and some are like electric light or other colours 
and hues. They are called Aksharas because, forming as 
they do the body of the universal Mother, they are imperish¬ 
able. They are called M&trika, because from them the 
whole universe of forms, visible and invisible, terrestrial 
and celestial, has sprung into being.That molecular vibrations or sounds with which we 
are familiar produce forms on sandy or some such sur¬ 
face over whioh sound-vibrations can act without friction, 
is known to scientific musicians. A particular tune pro¬ 
duces a particular form. A tune being a compound of 
primary sounds, it stands to reason that primary sounds 
have forms as well. If each of the seven tones of the gamut 
did not possess a form of its own, it would be quite im¬ 
possible for a tune, which is a compound of primary tones, 
to express itself in a form. It has been found by experiment 
that each tune has a peculiar figure or form of its own. It 
may therefore safely be said that each musical form or 
figure is the molecular expression of a tune, which is a 
compound of primary sounds. If this state of things is 
found to be the order of nature in the world of molecules, 
it is but reasonable to suppose that the same law should 
prevail at the primordial source, whence worlds are evolved. 
The Tantra says that the Kosmos is evolved out of the 
fifty Matrika sounds. The meaning of this, in the light of

INTRODUCTION

603

the above experiment, is plain enough. The Matj-ika, sounds, 
in the processes of evolution, undergo various permutations, 
thereby giving rise to subtle figures, which form the ground¬ 
work upon whieh, with the accumulation of atoms and 
molecules, bodies of diverse density and shape are formed. 
The gross human figure of bones, muscles, and flesh has for 
its groundwork a network of fine nerves. Behind this nerve- 
structure is the subtle body, or SQkshma Sharlra. Farther 
in there is the K&rana Sharlra or causal body, the fifty¬ 
stringed lute (Vina) of Kuiidalini Herself, upon which She 
plays the Divine Song of the universe until its dissolution 
(Mahapralaya).When in the course of evolution rational man appeared, 
it was necessary to impart to him knowledge for the perpetua¬ 
tion of the human race as well as for his liberation. It was 
to this end that the Self-existent Manu came down and 
gave him language. And what is that Language ? It is not 
an arbitrary invention of words to signify objects. The 
Divine Manu, knowing the sound-forms of objects, gave man 
those forms and taught him the relation between those 
forms and the objeots they connote. These sound-forms 
are words, and the objects they connote are the meanings 
of those words. The sound-forms or subtle bodies of 
universal objects being imperishable, words are imperish¬ 
able. Gross bodies are evanescent, but the subtle body or 
Sflkshma Sharlra persists till final dissolution of the uni¬ 
verse, and the Karana Sharira, or causal body, is said to be 
eternal. The language which Manu taught was the primeval 
language of root-words, remnants of which are to be found 
in the Vaidik Mantras. Sanskrit is derived directly from 
it. The innumerable languages of the world are its corrup¬ 
tions, or rather adaptations, in consonance with man’s 
environments in different parts of the earth, and the con¬ 
sequent divergent configurations of his vocal organs. In

604

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA604

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

every language there are root-words which are identical. 
There could, in fact, be no language without such root- 
words as their basis. True it is that man has invented 
arbitrary words, and given them conventional meanings, 
but they are mere accretions to the original language. 
One may hear of words being coined (often-times from the 
primitive root-words), but who has ever heard of language 
being invented? If none have so heard, then scoffing at 
what the Tantras reveal as the origin of language is un¬ 
justified. It may, in any case, be accepted as a workable 
theory which will help materially—nay, powerfully—in 
aspiration for spiritual development. This aspect of the 
question I shall touch on later when dealing with Mantra.

The Bhagavadgita is regarded universally as the highest 
embodiment of spiritual truths. In it (chap, viii, verse 13) 
we find:

m JTwgwpt i 
ki * STfa Wit *ifa* ll

“ ‘Om! ’ the one-syllabled Eternal (Brahman), reciting, 
thinking upon Me, he who goeth forth, abandoning the body, 
he goeth on the highest path.”

If words be human inventions, and meanings conven¬ 
tional, then would it not be foolish to believe that a conven¬ 
tional word like sth. (Om) should possess suoh mighty power 
as to liberate a man from his cumulative Karmik causation, 
and to carry him there whence there is no return ?

The Ma^dukyopanishad opens thus:

“ One is Ishvara. The universe is its meaning. Pre¬ 
sent, past, and future are all one. That which is beyond 
the triple time is also (Om).”

INTRODUCTION

605

In the Shrlmadbhagavata we read:

“ Soundbrahman and the supreme Brahman are both 
my immutable body.”

From these and innumerable other passages in the 
Vedas, Upanishads, Darshanas, * 1 and Pur&ijas, the discerning 
will learn that the Tantra only explains what the Veda 
asserts.From these and innumerable other passages in the 
Vedas, Upanishads, Darshanas, * 1 and Pur&ijas, the discerning 
will learn that the Tantra only explains what the Veda 
asserts.

The teaching of Jesus Christ, as embodied in the 
Gospel of St. John, strengthens our position, and proves 
the unity of truth in all revelations. The Gospel says: 
“In the beginning was the Word, the Word was God, and 
the Word was with God.” The “Word” is the Logos of 
the Greeks and Kabalists, and the Shabdabrahman of the 
Hindus. When the Kosmos is evolved, the Supreme 
Sachchidananda, 1 becomes Shabdabrahman, the Word; and 
Shabdabrahman, or Ishvara, being uncreate, unborn, and 
immutable, is ever with the Supreme. Hence in the Gita 
we read: 33M1 f| “lam the image of God.”

33*31 3 33T3 3*3 33 I

“ That is my Supreme abode, whence there is no com¬ 
ing back.”

If Ishvara be vehicled by Sound, then the inevitable 
conclusion is that the Kosmos is evolved out of Sound.

That there was one root-language is also borne out by 
the Biblical myth of the confusion of tongues. Philology 
has considerably cleared the ground, and the day may not 
be very far distant when Science will astonish the world 
by its discovery of the one common root-language of the 
human race.

1 Systems of philosophy.

1 Existence, consciousness, and bliss—or the Brahman.

606

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Mantra1 Systems of philosophy.

1 Existence, consciousness, and bliss—or the Brahman.

606

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Mantra

If one were to make a Mantrik survey of India, one 
would be astonished to find that the Hindu life is saturated 
with Mantra.. Be he a peasant or a prince, his whole life 
is regulated by Mantra. Various are the purposes for which 
Mantras are invoked, and their enumeration here will help 
towards the elucidation of the subject under consideration. 
Mantras are invoked for: (1) Secondary mukti (liberation). 
(2) Worship of the manifested God. (3) Worship of Devatas. 
(4) Communication with Devat&s. (5) Acquisition of super¬ 
human powers. (6) Feeding Pitris and Devatas. (7) Com¬ 
munication with Ghosts and Upadevatas. 1 (8) Warding 
off evil influences. (9) Exorcizing Devils. (10) Cure of 
diseases. (11) Preparing curative water. (12) Doing injury 
to plants, animals, and men. (13) Eliminating poison from 
the animal body. (14) Influencing others’ thoughts and 
actions. (15) Bringing men, beasts, Upadevas 1 and Ghosts 
under control. (16) Purification of the human body by 
ceremonies called Sangskftras, and many other purposes f 
which need not be mentioned here. From the mother’s 
womb to the funeral pyre a Hindu literally lives and dies in 
Mantra.

What, then, is this mighty force which is believed to 
wield such a great influence upon a nation reputed to be 
both spiritually great and intellectually acute? From 
the hoary antiquity of Vaidik Mantras down to modern 
times, great and varied are the changes which have taken 
place in the Hindu’s philosophical thoughts and religious 
ideas, but Mantra stands with its head erect and limbs 
sturdy as the undying witness of God’s grace to His Hindu 
sons. The question, I fear, has not been seriously asked by

1 Leaser spirits.

INTRODUCTION

6071 Leaser spirits.

INTRODUCTION

607

the English-educated Hindu. The Hindu of the old school 
takes it as an heirloom from his ancestors without ever 
trying to understand what it really is and how it can be 
utilized. He recites it parrot-like, and thinks he has done 
his duty. It is this indifference on the one hand, and apathy 
on the other, which has rendered the Hinduism of the pre¬ 
sent day almost a dead religion.

The above enumeration of uses for which Mantras are 
invoked will have shown that they are of various classes, 
and that they possess subtle powers of action on the spiritual, 
mental, and physical planes of existence. They are not 
words and sentences, neither are they syllables, although they 
are expressed by written character in words and sentences. 
There are various Mantras in the vernacular of India, used 
for non-spiritual purposes. In the Bengali language, espe¬ 
cially in the form in which it is used in Assam, there are 
numbers of Mantras which are apparently quite meaning¬ 
less ; many of the words used therein are no words at all, 
for they convey no meaning. Words and sentences which 
have no meanings to convey to the understanding are no 
part of a language. If you believe that they are efficacious, 
you must admit that they are sound-powers acting on 
different planes of consciousness.

The efficacy of Mantras is not a matter of opinion, a 
mere theory which needs cogent arguments to bring it home 
to men’s minds. It is a fact in the arcana of nature revealed 
by God, testified to by the unimpeachable evidence of self¬ 
less, disinterested Rishis of hoary antiquity, and corroborated 
by hosts of Sadhakas 1 of all ages. There are numberless 
Sftdhakas still living who have had direct proof of the 
efficacy of Mantras. Each one of us can, if we will, obtain 
suoh direct proof ourselves. The Tantra which is known

1 In a general sense worshippers. See as to S&dhana. or practice 
Introduction.

608

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 In a general sense worshippers. See as to S&dhana. or practice 
Introduction.

608

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

as the Mantra-shastra is an exact soience, and does not 
shrink from the severest test which may be applied to it. 
Use a Mantra under the directions of a competent Guru, 
and you will acquire direct evidence of its efficaciousness. 
Our hereditary professional Gurus initiate us with sacred 
Vljamantra * 1 and Gftyatrl, 1 and teach us Mantras for the 
worshipping of our Ishtadevati.* We go on, as we have 
been taught, from the day of our initiation to the end of our 
life, but it may be that no result is perceived. If we ask our 
Guru how this is so, he will reproach us with impatience 
and want of devotion. Placed in this predicament, we lose 
our faith in Mantras, and become indifferent to them. But 
we do not pause to reflect whether it be the fault of the 
Mantra, or of the instructor from whom we had the mis¬ 
fortune to receive it, or of ourselves. It is quite an error to 
suppose that if Mantra be a sound power, it must yield the 
result sought for as soon as it is pronounced. Now, eleotri- 
city is a physical force which has been imprisoned, so to 
say, in various sorts of mechanical contrivances in order to 
produce various results. There are books whioh describe 
these contrivances and prescribe their uses. Can anyone, 
by mere reading of the books, handle these machineries and 
produce the desired results ? If such be the case in dealing 
with physical forces, how much more is practical instruction 
necessary for the handling of spiritual and psychical forces.

For the moment I leave out all other Mantras in order 
to confine my attention to such alone as are known as Vija 
Mantras. They are the powers which carry us safe through 
the world's entanglements towards that haven of peace 
and bliss for which the human mind naturally, though

1 Seed-Mantras. See ante.

’ The celebrated Vaidik Mantra of thnt name. See Introduction, 
“ Gftyatrl."1 Seed-Mantras. See ante.

’ The celebrated Vaidik Mantra of thnt name. See Introduction, 
“ Gftyatrl."

1 The chosen Deity of the particular worshipper.

INTRODUCTION

609

unconsciously, yearns, though in ignorance of the path it 
diverges into different treacherous ways, lured by the tempt¬ 
ing light of Kama desire).

From what has been said regarding Varnas, it will 
have been seen that Varnas are living, conscious sound- 
powers. From Varnas are evolved secondary sound-powers, 
called Mantras. It has also been related how Shabda- 
brahman becomes a septenary of male and female Powers 
for the purposes of ereation. Innumerable other Powers 
are evolved from them, who constitute the hierarchy of 
Devatas. The Powers, higher or lower, are spiritual entities, 
possessing body and mind, though the body of the higher 
Gods, such as Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, is to the human 
consciousness as unfathomable as the human body and 
mind is to a cell inhabiting the human body. The embodied 
higher Devatas are Lords of Mercy. They also manifest 
themselves from time to time in the Deva Loka (the region 
of Devas), and on earth for the good of Devas and of 
humanity. They create their Avat&ra-body when they find 
it necessary to manifest themselves. The bodies of Devatfts 
are sound-powers. In the fourth chapter of the Mahanir- 
vina Tantra it is said :

TOPTft I 
^ || 
c4 fggcrr crt i

.

(^are:, 8-U-U-)

“ For the benefit of worshippers, for the good of 
the universe, and for the destruction of D&navas, 1 Thou

1 Demons.

39

610

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

assumest various bodies. Thou art four-handed, two-handed, 
six-handed, and eight-handed. For the safety of the uni¬ 
verse Thou bearest divers weapons. In the Tantras are 
revealed Yantras, Mantras, and other methods of self-cul¬ 
ture, according to those bodies.”

Again, in the fifth chapter of the same Tantra it is 
stated:

qfarjj %5T II

Wife! II

?T3 ^ 3^3 * * ^T: *1^31: I

^ «if ||

(q^iesra:, K-)Again, in the fifth chapter of the same Tantra it is 
stated:

qfarjj %5T II

Wife! II

?T3 ^ 3^3 * * ^T: *1^31: I

^ «if ||

(q^iesra:, K-)

“ Thy manifestations are infinite, having diverse 
colours and forms. Different are the methods which must 
be diligently followed in order to realize them. None can 
describe them all. A little of Thy favour has enabled me 
to describe, according to My power, the methods of their 
worship and attainment in the Tantras.”

“ Thy Mantras are infinite, by crores and arbuds 1 . . . 
Because thou art the Adya Prakriti, therefore all the 
Mantras mentioned in the Tantras are Thy Mantras.”

From the above it will appear that Mantras are the 
bodies of the Devatfis. They are not gross (sthola) bodies, 
but subtle vehicles through which they manifest themselves. 
In the Yamalatantra this is more explicitly stated:

^ x>

1 An arbnd is ten crores, and a crore is ten millions.

INTRODUCTION

611

“ Verily the body of the Devata arises from Vlja."

The Shfiktanandatarangini, a Tantrik work of great 
reputation by the renowned Brahm&nanda Giri, explains 
the word 4)3TIct (vlj&t) to mean (varnat). And qq

(varna) means sound-power, as already explained.

If one reads between the lines, divesting his mind of 
the Illusion Theory of Shrlmat Shangkar&charya, he may 
find a corroboration of the principle above laid down in 
the following couplet from the fourth chapter of the 
Bhagavadgtta:

3T3TTSft |

STf# ^l**IRR*TW«n II

“ Unborn, immutable, Lord of all beings though I am, 
entering my Prakriti, I am born by my own Maya."3T3TTSft |

STf# ^l**IRR*TW«n II

“ Unborn, immutable, Lord of all beings though I am, 
entering my Prakriti, I am born by my own Maya."

Here the Lord Ishvara, and not Parabrahman, explains 
to his disciple Arjuna how He incarnates—that is, appears 
in human body. His birth is not like the birth of men; 
it is divyam (Divine) (vide Shloka, ix, chap. iv). The 
Bflkshma sharlra (subtle body) of man, after having spent 
its subjective Karma, is impelled, by its own inexorable 
destiny, to take birth on earth through an earthly father 
and mother, who supply the materials for the building 
up of the physical body. The Lord has no such Sakshma 
Sharlra which may serve as the instrument by which a 
Sthula body functions; for it must be borne in mind that 
without Prana (the vital principle) an Antahkarana (the 
mind and the sensorium) a physical body cannot for a 
moment live. The Lord enters his Prakriti, or rather 
brings it into requisition to form a Sokshma Sharlra for 
Himself. Now, what is the Prakriti of Ishvara but Mula 
Prakriti in action ? Is it not for exactly that reason that 
Ishvara is called Shabdabrahman ? It is therefore spiritual 
sound by which Ishvara (that is Shabdabrahman) forms

612

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA612

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

his subtle body of life and sensorium. Herein lies the 
Divine character of Ishvara’s appearances (Avatara). It 
is therefore called Divine (divyam). The subsequent process 
of acquiring a gross body is described in the above verse 
to be Atmainayaya (by My own Maya). Now, if Maya 
and Prakriti be one and the same, the verse becomes mean¬ 
ingless. Maya or Avidya is that phase of Prakriti in 
which evolution from spirit to matter takes place, as 
distinguished from Mahamaya or Vidya, which is the agent 
for the involution of matter to spirit. The Lord, to 
appear in flesh and blood, had therefore first to build his 
Sound-body, and then to issue from the Mother’s womb 
in the ordinary way. It is this Sound-body of the Lord 
which is the Mantra of the Vaishnavas worshipping Shrl 
Krishna.

Mantra is not merely an important, but an essential, 
element of self-culture in Kriya yoga. The realization 
of Atma, the One True Self, is not possible so long as the 
mind functions in the brain and identifies itself with the 
sensations, perceptions, and conoepts furnished by the 
phenomenal world. By Samadhi (communion) alone the 
true self can be realized. Kriya yoga prepares the mind 
for Samadhi. In Patanjali’s Darsbana (yoga philosophy) 
Kriya yoga is thus defined:

This aphorism is explained by Vedavyasa in his Com¬ 
mentary thus:

aq: aro 3qr?Tq»L era f^r-

I *3T3TT3: irq:,

i f'trcqftapi flteiFri q*qg*T3q% *n |

INTRODUCTION

618

A free translation of the aphorism and its Bhasbya is 
given below:

“ Discipline (of body, speech, and mind), repetition of 
Mantras, or study of Moksha Shastras (scriptures teaching 
liberation), and worship of God, constitute Kriyfl, yoga/’“ Discipline (of body, speech, and mind), repetition of 
Mantras, or study of Moksha Shastras (scriptures teaching 
liberation), and worship of God, constitute Kriyfl, yoga/’

“ Yoga is not attainable by persons who have not 
brought their body, speech, and mind under discipline. 
The mind being coloured with the accumulated Sangs- 
karas or impressions of Karma without beginning and with 
desires resulting in misery', its Rajasik and Tamasik. func¬ 
tions cannot be minimized without Tapas. 1 Mind-cleansing 
TapasyS, should be so practised that it may not injure the 
body. The word Svadhiyaya means repeating (japa) of 
Pranava (aTH^-Om) and other Mantras, or the study of 
such Shastras as inculcate Moksha (liberation). Ishvara- 
pranidhana means the dedication of all works to the great¬ 
est Guru I§hvara (The Lord), or doing unselfish works."

Japa* * of mantra thus is an important factor in arriving 
at that stage of the mind which, in Yoga Sh&stra, is 
called Samprajnata Samadhi—that is, conscious com¬ 
munion. When man reaches that plane of consciousness, 
his accumulated Karma, and his earth-bound desire which 
is the cause of Karma, vanish never to return again. He 
realizes the all-blissful Divinity, and becomes Divinity 
itself. Divine worship is ordained as a preliminary step 
for this consummation; for it is by Bhakti and Prema 
£Faith and Love) to God that our congenital tenacious 
attachment to worldly things can be replaced, and the 
thirst for happiness of the ever-restless mind quenched.

1 Devotion, austerity, etc. See Introduction, and also for the 
meaning of the gunas, rajas, tamas. sat tv a.

* “ Recitation " or “ repetition " are the nearest English equivalents 
for this term, which is more fully explained in Introduction su6. iocc. 
M Japa.”

614

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* “ Recitation " or “ repetition " are the nearest English equivalents 
for this term, which is more fully explained in Introduction su6. iocc. 
M Japa.”

614

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The daily worship which the Hindus perform consists of 
Sandhy& and Puja, 1 in both of which Mantra is a necessity; 
for the Mantra is not only potent in withdrawing the mind 
from its external functions, but it makes worship possible. 
From Mantra the worshipper gains the form of the object 
of his worship upon which he must practise his concentra¬ 
tion and devotion, and when the worshipper has made 
some advance he will recognize the Mantra itself to be his 
IshtadevatA. Last, though not the least, is the power of 
Mantra to awaken the latent powers of the mind. The 
last chapter of Patanjali's Darshana opens thus:

“ Uncommon power of the mind is attained by birth, 
drugs, Mantra, Tapas, and Samadhi."

The practice of Mantra according to the Tantrik 
method develops without fail the latent faculties of the 
mind, with the help of which the Sadhaka must climb step 
after step until the final rung of the ladder is reached.

The object to be attained, or rather the one Immutable 
True Existence to be realized, according to the Tantrik 
philosophy, is Parabrahman. But the instrument—the 
mind—with which man has to realize is Prakritik—that is, 
evolved out of the three gm?a$ of Prakfiti. The gupas, 
being dissimilar in nature to Sat, Chit, and Ananda,* 
cannot be the instrument which can directly seize the 
Absolute, just as one cannot catch air by iron tongs* 
Hence it is that the Son of God is the Mediator of the 
Christians, and Shabdabrahman or Saguna Ishvara * is the 
object of worship of the Hindus. The Mantra, I mean

1 See Introduction.

’ Existence, consciousness, and bliss, the nnture of the Brahman.

* The Lord with attributes, as contrasted with the attributeless 
supreme—the Parabrahman.

INTRODUCTION

6151 See Introduction.

’ Existence, consciousness, and bliss, the nnture of the Brahman.

* The Lord with attributes, as contrasted with the attributeless 
supreme—the Parabrahman.

INTRODUCTION

615

Vija Mantra, is Shabdabrahman. The Mantra power of 
Shakti has two aspects—Vachaka and Vachya, which are 
explained in the text. 1

The Vachaka Shakti of a Mantra is the vital, intelligent, 
and conscious entity through which the unconditioned 
evolves, or through which Nirgupa (attributeless) Brah¬ 
man must be realized. Vachaka Shakti in its female 
aspect is KupdalinI, and its male aspect Parashiva or 
Mahavishnu. Vachya Shakti is that which is sought to be 
realized through the Vachaka Shakti. It is Nirgupa Brah¬ 
man. The Mantra, by its innate power, reveals the Vachaka 
Shakti to the human mind which, being thus freed from 
the chain of causation, is translated into the Vachaka 
Shakti itself. The realization of the Vachya Shakti is the 
last leap forward into that region of the Absolute whence 
no traveller ever returns either as Ishvara or Deva or 
Manava (man). The Tantrik Sadhaka is therefore warned 
against that ignorance which takes Mantras to be mere 
words or letters of the alphabet:

f5ic5T?H ^ II

“ Perdition is the lot of him who thinks that Guru is a 
mere man, that Mantras are mere letters of the alphabet, 
and that Pratima (the Image of the Deity, is mere stone.”

The word Mantra is thus explained in the Pingala 
Tantra, quoted in Sh&rad2tilaka:

WTO |

“ That from which the true knowledge of the universe 
and freedom from the bondage of the world is attained is 
called Mantra.”

1 See ante.

616

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRAWTO |

“ That from which the true knowledge of the universe 
and freedom from the bondage of the world is attained is 
called Mantra.”

1 See ante.

616

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The “ true knowledge ” of the universe, according to 
Tantra, is the realization of the identity of Brahman and 
Brahmaiida. This, too, is the Vaidik conception, as it is 
expressed in the aphorism : tfef a?? (“ Verily all this is 
Brahman ”). I have elsewhere quoted from the Bhagavad- 
gita a passage in which it is said that the Mantra stth (Om) 
is capable of freeing the Jiva, or embodied spirit, from the 
bondage of births and deaths. How mighty is the power of 
Mantra! It is Sound-spiritual, it is Divinity itself. Blessed 
is the man who, having heard the sweet, soul-soothing, 
ineffable Madhyama sound in the lotus of the heart* 
plunges deep into the ocean of Sushumnfi, * 1 to rise at the 
feet of KulakuiidalinI, singing Her song of the universe in 
Her Para melody.* Of all the methods for hearing the 
Sound-spiritual, taught in different schools of Yoga, the 
Mantra Yoga is the best, straightest, and easiest, because 
Mantra itself, being Sound-power, has greater aptitude than 
anything else to reach the bodily Sound-centres.

Initiation (DikshA), Guru (Teacher), and 
Shishya (Disciple)

According to the Ayurvedik system of medicine, four 
factors are essential for the successful treatment of a 
disease. They are called Khuddak Chatushthaya. They 
are physician, medicine, nurse, and patient. The physician 
must be capable of making a correct diagnosis of his 
patient’s ailment, the medicine should be appropriate and 
powerful, the nurse must be dutiful, and the patient 
careful of his health and possessed of faith in his physician* 
A successful treatment of the disease of the soul, called

1 The channel of energy (nodi) of that name situate in the spinal 
axis. See Arthur Avalon's Serpent Power.”

1 In the Mul&dh&ra. (vide ibid.).

INTRODUCTION

6171 The channel of energy (nodi) of that name situate in the spinal 
axis. See Arthur Avalon's Serpent Power.”

1 In the Mul&dh&ra. (vide ibid.).

INTRODUCTION

617

Bhavaroga, or earthly sufferings, is, similarly, dependent 
upon four essential factors. The patient is the man who, 
convinced of the existence of the disease which has over¬ 
taken him, is anxious to be oured ; Bhakti, or devotion, is 
his nurse; he is the Guru, or teacher, who can properly 
diagnose the particular form of the patient’s illness, and 
impart to him the proper medicament—I mean Mantra— 
which has the potency to heal.

The disease of the soul needs much more physicking 
than the disease of the body, of which the patient is fully 
cognizant, and which is of comparatively shorter duration 
and can be diagnosed by objective means. But the 
disease of the soul is a chronic ailment of many births 
and re-births. The lot of such a patient is spiritually 
dismal, no doubt, but the glamour of Maya transports 
him to a fool’s paradise, where lust, avarice, greed, power, 
and ambition feed him with dainty dishes, and lull him 
to forgetfulness of the disease which is eating into his 
very vitals. Fortunate is the man who, knowing his real 
condition, is to be found at the lotus-feet of his Guru.

Knowledge of the human ego's real condition arises first 
mediately from a proper study of the Sh&stras, and then 
direotly by 6elf-illumination. But the study of the Shastras 
as a mere intelleotual exercise is fraught with mischief. In 
the Kularnava Tantra the Lord has a significant admonition 
on this subject, which translated, runs thus:“ Fools led by the bondage of their animal nature fall 
into the deep well of the six systems of philosophy, and are 
unable to know what the Param&rtha (supreme good) is. 
Perverse logicians, owing to their ignorance of the real 
meaning of the Vedas, roam here and there, scorohed by 
the fire of scepticism. They do not know that within the 
surging waves of time they are under the mighty jaws of 
death. The man who knows the Vedas, Agamas, and

618

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Puranas, but who is yet ignorant of the Paramartha, and 
gives instructions, simplj r caws like a orow. Unmindful of 
the Paratattva (the Supreme), he is ever thinking of what 
is knowledge and what is knowable, and is immersed in 
study day and night. The words of such are flowing and 
rhetorical, but at heart they are anxious, sorry, and ill at 
ease. Men take great pains to prove the Paratattva to be 
what it is not. They explain the gist of the Shastra to be 
what it is not. They explain supersensuous matters with¬ 
out themselves realizing them. Some, led by vanity, study 
the Vedas without a Guru’s help ; but a knower of the real 
sense of the Vedas is hard to find. As a spoon does not 
know the taste of the food cooked with it; as the head 
carries a load of flowers, but the nose enjoys its fragrance, 
so they study the Veda Shastra, but, being ignorant of the 
Paramartha (which is known only to Sfidbakas), quarrel 
among themselves. As a milkman, forgetting the goat in 
his arms, sees it in its image in a well, even so are men, 
who are unconscious of the Paratattva that is in them, 
deluded by the Shastras. As the darkness of a house can 
never be dispelled by uttering the word “ lamp,” even so 
is the word-meaning of Shastra impotent to dispel the 
mayik darkness of the Ego. The study of Shastra by people 
not possessed of Prajna—that is, the inner light—is as 
though a blind man opened his eyes to see. The Shastra 
gives Divine knowledge (Tattvajnana) to those who have 
Prajna.’'“ The object of Shastra is to impart 
such knowledge as cannot be gained through the senses.” 
It therefore stands to reason that the real meaning of 
Shastra cannot be acquired merely through the brain. The 
door to supersensuous knowledge must be unlocked, and the 
sleeping Kula-Kuu<Jalini awakened. This is done by Diksha 
or initiation. Diksha is thus explained in the Tantras:

INTRODUCTION

619

arat s($ra 3^fg ||

4lPiqld*-^ i

^! <t33Tf%^r^«T q fafetf q e^: I 
cT«n^ S^qqqq *J$OTT ^ II

qsqrssqj

STCftfsRlT 1 fife ^nr^f^T: f^T: |

q qqfrr faq! qqf f^qqTsftfraqq; n

qqqrq^q. i

q*n ftsqq; qraqqf ^ i 
faq<q fqif ! ||

sfaifji^qiqnft qpn^f^q^R: i 
q q*q q;4q«ftsfa fqsrfaai f^rat vkn n *

^qmqisrfoifq *it ftqi qq fag^fq i 
qi 3tei*n«ra«Rn<i gftgn fe t fts ? ii

f^mqqj

3*q% fafaqi q^T qq g^fq i 
q m q^ q^ n

<qqqq?WU

^ qm<ir$q qgq i

3?3^T: ta: qqT gfq>gfaq*5q?T: II

The above verses, rendered freely into English, read 
thus:

“ Those who commune with the Divinity call it Diksha 
because it imparts Divine knowledge and cuts worldly 
bonds ” Ofogini Tantra).

** He who has not been initiated cannot acquire Divine 
knowledge, and cannot gain a desirable state after death.

620

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Hence it is that one should, by all means, get himself 
initiated by a Guru ” (Rudra Yamala).

“ Those who, without being initiated, perform Japa, 
Puja, etc., derive no benefit, even as seeds, sown on stone, 
do not germinate ” (Rudra Y&mala).

“ As iron is transmuted into gold when it is penetrated 
by Rasendra (great fluid), even so is the individual Ego 
converted into the Divinity by Diksha. His Karma being 
burnt by the fire of Diksha, he becomes freed from the bond¬ 
age of Karma, and thus the fetters of Karma being removed, 
the Jlva becomes Shiva ” (Kularnava Tantra, quoted in the 
Commentary on Kalpasutra).“ No amount of Up&sana (worship), without Diksha, 
can give Divine knowledge: so one should, by all means 
get himself initiated for the purpose of rendering the Mantra 
efficacious ” (Kularnava Tantra).

“ One cannot derive any benefit by repeating a Mantra, 
learnt from books; on the other hand, injury is incurred at 
every step ” (quoted by Raghava Bhatta).

“ Having acquired the Mantra from the Guru, it should 
be cultivated in the disciple’s consciousness. Religious 
exercises for liberation are for fruition dependent entirely 
upon the Guru.”

From what has been stated regarding the Sound 
Spiritual, Mantra and Kula-KundalinI, it will have been seen 
that Mantra is a living spiritual sound-Power emanating 
from the vehicle of the Divine Serpent. The human Ego, 
born on the earth as the consequence of his actions in 
previous lives, must work out such Karmas as are germi¬ 
nating, and will also germinate Karmas for its weal or 
woe. He is placed here below in direct communication with 
the objective world through its five agents of knowledge 
and five agents of action. The knowledge acquired through 
the fivo senses is phenomenal: it is not true knowledge; it

INTRODUCTION

623INTRODUCTION

623

is knowledge as it seems, not^knowledge as it is. It is the 
knowledge of actors as they appear on the stage, and not of 
the individuals who are dressed as actors in the green room. 
The green room of nature is hidden from the view of the 
senses. But it is in the green room that nature must be 
seen by the Ego in order that it may free itself from the 
glamour of m&yii. which has rendered it an earth-bound 
spirit. Unless one recognizes the reality, there is no escape 
from its semblance. But the physical brain is not the place 
where, nor are the senses the avenue through which, the one 
Reality, the All-blissful Sat-chit-ananda enthroned in the 
effulgence of the spiritual world is to be seen. The human 
body is a duality not only in the objective plane, but in the 
subjeotive plane as well. The mind receives objective know¬ 
ledge through the brain by means of the senses and the 
sensory nerves. It can receive subjective knowledge through 
the spinal column by means of senses which have to be 
developed. But the passage through which the green room 
of the human body must be entered is barred by the hood 
of the Slumbering Serpent Kula-Kundalinl. To wake Her 
up, to implore Her Divine grace that we may be shown the 
Real (which is no other than She), and that the unreal 
may be dispelled, is the work of the living Mantra-Power 
for the earnest Ego.

Electrioity is ubiquitous. It is in every atom, in every 
molecule, and in every thing made up of atoms and mole¬ 
cules. My pen is made up of atoms and molecules. Why 
does it not, then, announce to me the existence of elec¬ 
tricity in it ? Why does it not fan me in this grilling heat 
and give brilliant light to my failing vision, although that 
is my earnest wish ? The reason is that electricity, by pro¬ 
cesses known to experts, must be roused into action, and 
manipulated in different ways to yield different results. 
Mantra Shakti, similarly, is ubiquitous; it is in every form

622622

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of existence. Indeed, from Sound-power the universe is 
built. It has countless forms which pervade the universe. 
It is the Guru, the Mantrik Scientist, who alone knows 
how to manipulate it and to employ it in producing the 
desired result—that is to say, in awakening the Slumbering 
Divine Serpent in man.

The mere communication of an atomic sound from 
one’s mouth to another’s ear cannot be expected to pro¬ 
duce such a result. The Guru has himself to vitalize and 
energize the Mantra in his own inner consciousness, and 
then to communicate the living spiritual force to the con¬ 
sciousness of his disciple (Shishya). If there be reason 
to believe in transference of thought from a hypnotiser 
to his subject—and hypnotism has now been recognized 
as a science—there is no ground for disbelieving the 
transference of a power even subtler than a thought (which 
is a power as well) from a Guru to his disciple. When 
such an event happens in the life of a person, his whole 
mental system undergoes a revolution; he receives a second 
birth, and it is for this that an initiated man is a Dvija 
(twice-born). The Veda withheld the privileges of a Dvija 
from the fourth caste (Shodra), but the Tantra throws 
the portals of initiation wide open to every man or woman, 
whoever he or she may be. The Chaijdala 1 and all others 
are all the children of the Divine Mother, the milk of 
whose eternal breast is sucked by every living being.

Dlksha, thus, is not a conventional usage, a toll paid 
to the Divine ferryman for carrying the sojourner across 
the ocean of the world (Bhavasindhu). Spiritual India 
has, unfortunately, come to this pass, and it is the Tantra 
which can alone save it, as it has saved it in the Kali 
Yuga of ever)’ Kalpa.

1 One of the lowest castes.

INTRODUCTION

6231 One of the lowest castes.

INTRODUCTION

623

Shabdabrahmamayl, the Divine Mother, must be reach¬ 
ed. A deep, surging sea divides the sojourning Ego from 
Her. It is the Black Sea of objective knowledge, the 
Yaitarani of Hindu mythology. Mantra is the bark to 
carry it thither. The Guru must help the Ego in each 
of its steps forward into the region of the unknown. 
Indeed, without the Guru’s help the disciple cannot move 
one such step. The disciple must also work hard, under 
the instructions of the Guru, to keep up the energy of the 
Mantra. And when the Mantra is assimilated in the 
inner consciousness of the disciple, he is said to have be¬ 
come Siddha (accomplished) in it. He can then use it 
at his will, and, awakening Kula-KundalinI, plunge with 
Her into the Lotus-garden, where alone the nature of the 
Atma and Anatma 1 can be realized. The human body, 
according to the Tantra, is a microcosm, which contains 
in miniature all that is contained in the Kosmos. It has 
the seven Lokas, worlds or regions located in it, and the 
Sadhaka, who, with the help of his Vlja Mantra, has known 
them and their over-Lords has left the mother's womb 
never to come back again. It may here be noted by way 
of parenthesis that the seven Lokas are not states of 
existence, but worlds made up of different modifications 
of matter, and peopled by beings on different planes of 
consciousness.

Such being Diksha, imagine what the Guru is!

3^ §1 fa^B) sb szfoam I

# ftrar 3ET SB SBT =? II

3TST gSBfSTTHl |

BTST ^ ^ 3SBV^m: II

* Not &tm&.

624 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ If the Guru is pleased, Shiva is pleased ; if he is dis¬ 
pleased, Shiva is displeased. If the Guru is pleased, 
ShivanlMs pleased; if the Guru is displeased, Shivanl is 
displeased. Hence, 0 MaheshanI! 1 the Guru is the Lord, 
the sustainer and the annihilator. It is he who can give 
Moksha ” (Guru Tantra).But the human Guru is not the real Guru. The real 
Guru is in the Thousand-petalled Lotus. The human Guru 
bears the same relation to the Divine Guru that the 
Vfichaka Shakti of a Mantra bears to the V&chya Shakti. 
The YoginI Tantra thus explains Guruship:

aft I

g*: # rt *1 i

II

fl TOT: I

g*: S ^ RT'R: II

5TT% |

^ g^lk «3P1: ||

wiivim: i

^ mg^ |

aiftSH RpTOR II

3RTl »T g^l RTg^ 'TTR fRPI: I 
R^f^TT f5R:R^ W* gft: |

II

arc rr ^ g*: m- I

*ngw i

w ^ slsnsg n

' Tbe Devi as consort of Shiva.

INTRODUCTION

626

“ Shrl Devi said : * Merciful Maheshvara! tell me who 
is Guru. You have told me that the Guru is greater than 
Thou art.’ Shrl Ishvara said: * He who is the first Lord 
and is called Mahak&la is the Guru, 0 Devi! in all Man¬ 
tras. None else is the Guru. He is verily the Guru of 
the Shaivas, Sh&ktas, Vaishnavas, Gftnapatyas, Moon- 
worshippers, Mahashaivas, and Sauras. 1 He and none 
else is the promulgator of Mantra. At the time of im¬ 
parting Mantra, O Daughter of mountain 1* He manifests 
Himself in him who imparts Mantra. Hence, 0 Devi! 
verily there is no Guruship in man. The human Mantra- 
giver meditates upon the same Guru in the Head-Lotus 
as Him upon whom the disciple must there meditate. 
Therefore, O Maheshvarl! there is only one Guru. Be¬ 
cause He manifests himself in the human Guru, therefore 
the greatness of the human Guru is published in all the 
Shastras."

The Y&mala Tantra says:

fa* Jifal: tftsi ^ * ffa* |

^fa n^sfq ii 
arat sjff SRP1H |

k to 3?: && 1

sfofcft II

“ There is only one Guru, who undoubtedly is Myself; 
Thou, too, O Devi! and Mantra, too, is Guru. Therefore 
Guru, Devatfi, and Mantra are the same. He is always 
to be contemplated in the Thousand-petal led Lotus, some¬ 
times in the Heart-Lotus, and sometimes as existing before 
the eyes—that is, in human form.”

1 Vide ante.

’ The Devi as PArvatl, daughter of the mountain King Himavat. 
40

626

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Vide ante.

’ The Devi as PArvatl, daughter of the mountain King Himavat. 
40

626

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In initiating and instructing a disciple, the human 
Guru undertakes a vicarious duty, the magnitude of which 
he should fully realize. He must fill himself with the Divine 
Presence, that his Shishya may be born to the spiritual life. 
He must also, impart to his disciple that sure knowledge 
which will lead him without error on the onward path of 
Sddhana. Henceforward the life of the disciple becomes a 
part of the Guru’s life. The Guru becomes responsible for 
the sins of his disciple.

We are apt to complain of the rarity of the Gurus, but 
we do not pause to consider the paucity of Shisbyas (disci¬ 
ples). Ganapati, the elephant-headed Devata, by the grace 
of His Divine mother, had the consolation to believe that 
He was the best of singers. We, too, by the grace of AvidyO, 
have an overweaning confidence in our intellectual attain¬ 
ments, thinking that we are perfectly qualified to receive 
the highest spiritual instructions.

The Gautamiya Tantra says:

I

fq-JUT^ *3: II

WQ snsn&lTS?) ||

f^qt mfoRi faq <Rciftn'4¥.q??i i

faqrpwaW: I

fstf feq) fsraFwft fqqw: II

“ The Shishya (disciple) should be of good parentage, 
pure-minded, bent upon realizing the fourfold aspirations; 1

1 That is. Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha. See Introduction to 
A. Avalon's ** Moh&nirv&na Tantra."

INTRODUCTION

6271 That is. Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha. See Introduction to 
A. Avalon's ** Moh&nirv&na Tantra."

INTRODUCTION

627

he should be learned in the Vedas, diligent, devoted to the 
welfare of parents; he should know Dharma and practise 
it; he should serve the Guru ; he should be acquainted with 
the true meaning of the Shastras; he should possess a 
strong physique and a strong mind. He should always do 
good to living objects ; he should do only such deeds as are 
good for the afterlife. He should serve the Guru by speech, 
thought, body, and money. He should avoid works of 
which the result is transitory, and be diligent in working 
for enduring results. He should be one who has conquered 
passions, indolence, illusory knowledge (Moha), and anger.”From the above it will appear that to be a real Shishya 
mere intellectual attainment is not sufficient. While he 
should be conversant with the Shastras (scriptures) to 
enable him to understand what he is, what his destiny is, 
what relation he bears to the universe and to the Lord of 
the universe, he should have purified his mind from the 
thousand and one worldly pursuits which detract rather 
than bring peace to it. He should diligently do what the 
Shastras enjoin, and scrupulously avoid un-Sh&strik actions. 
He should have a living faith in his religion, and an earnest, 
irrepressible longing for spiritual advancement. Lust, 
anger, and their train should not be his masters. His pro¬ 
fession should be in strict accordance with Shastrik morality. 
He should consciously do nothing that hurts or injures a 
fellow-being, and the milk of his kindness should ever flow 
to relieve suffering humanity. These and many other 
qualifications are required of the aspirant to the great path. 
It is also stated that a candidate must remain under the 
personal observation of a Guru for a whole year before he 
can hope to be initiated. Deluded by AvidyS,, however, we 
do not pause to reflect whether the field in which the seed 
is to be sown is worthy of it. Sometimes, in our impati¬ 
ence (which is a state of mind quite unfitted for spiritual

628

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

culture), we fly to sanny&sls (ascetics), and, getting our¬ 
selves initiated by them, hasten homeward, hardly knowing 
that thereby we transgress a positive injunction of the 
Shastra, and place ourselves in difficulties. It is laid down 
in the Tantras:

apq*ll II

* «jhw«ww, I 
=3 Wife:!: I

sfTstfr ^ f¥ta* 1

f^TTCcT^U

3^1«i p*pm«*ra: 1

os'-d^wn, I

“ In the initiation one should exclude the maternal 
grandfather, father, a Sanny&sl, and Vanaprastha, 1 other¬ 
wise, there being contrariety in the respective positions of 
Guru and Shishya, the Shishya is sure to meet death.”“ Initiation by a Yati,* by one’s father, by a Vftna- 
prastha, 1 or by a Sanny&sl is not favourable to the welfare 
of a Shishya.”

“ One should receive Dlksha from a householder resid¬ 
ing in the same locality with the Shishya.”

' One who has gone to the forest according to the role of the third 
Ashrama. * Ascetic.

INTRODUCTION

629

44 The Tantra enjoins initiation from a Guru who has 
wife and children."

44 The Guru should be a householder, meditative and 
well versed in Tantrik knowledge and in Mantra."

The reason why a man who has freed himself of the 
illusory world and stands outside of it is ill-qualified to 
show the light, step by step, to a disciple whirling in the 
eddies of the world is plain enough. A Sanny&sl is one 
who has given up Karma, his mind having been purified. 
He is an Advaiti, 1 whose only avocation is the realization 
of the One without a second. But a householder is a 
man in, even if he be not of, the world. He is practically 
a Dvaitl,* though intellectually he may not be so. His 
distracted mind must be soothed by worship, prayer, and 
hymn, and by other acts of devotion (Bhakti) to his Ishta- 
devata.* A SannyasI, on the other hand, is a Jnani (one 
possessed of true knowledge) who, having crossed the thresh¬ 
old of Bhakti (devotion), looks down upon it as an illusion, 
an unreality. The mental attitudes of a householder and 
of a SannyasI are poles asunder. It is, therefore inevitable 
that, in spite of his best endeavours, a Sanny&sl's teachings 
must contain much that is unassimilable by a householder, 
who, by bis strenuous efforts to practise such instructions, 
must sucoumb bodily and mentally.A householder Guru, on the other hand, is much on 
the same plane of consciousness with his disciple. Though 
in •the small rowing-boat of Bhakti (devotion), he has oared 
manfully towards the ship of his destination, and neared 
it. His Bhakti is suffused with the Divine halo of Jn&na 
(knowledge). He is the fittest person to lead a world-ridden

* A spiritual monist, not a mere philosophical monist, but one who 
himself in various degrees experientially realizes the truth of that 
doctrine. ' Dualist * See post.

630

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

disciple by the hand, instructing him in every point, and 
teaching him by personal example :

fawrouft ^Tq^fq |

“ Himself practises and puts disciples in practice ” 
(Rudra Yamala).

Those who are real aspirants need not encumber their 
progress by adhering to the ancestral Guru. If they have 
already been initiated by him, they may leave him and find 
out a higher one.

The Kam&khya Tantra says:

gqq m ?RTq 3?>q fs i

fNFqteqqnnft quprc^ n

<q%?3*3 i

ft** fk fqq 11

SR qq aqimfff s 3*: faq <rq fg 1 
anrifqq qsirqRT sw siPrt ^ 11

JRT 5?Jf: 3«n^ I

3^3^ ^ 11

qjiqFeqicR?RUi

“ A Guru exists to impart Jnanas (different forms of 
knowledge). Jnana leads one to Moksha (liberation). 
Hence Jnana is the supreme good. Therefore the Guru 
who is incapable of imparting Jnana should be abandoned, 
as one who is desirous of food abandons the person who 
has no food to give. One in whom Jnina shines is Guru; 
he is Shiva. Abandoning the ignorant, one should take 
the shelter of the wise. As a bee roams from flower to 
flower in quest of honey, even so should a Shishya, in quest 
of Jnana, go from one Guru to another.”

INTRODUCTION

631INTRODUCTION

631

If the ancestral Guru be really ignorant, there is noth¬ 
ing in the Tantra Shastra to compel one to seek initiation 
from him. But I feel the necessity of a word in favour 
of this much-abused man. I fear the Hindu Society is 
much more to blame than the ancestral Guru for this 
state of things. There was a happy time when every 
Hindu deemed it his duty not only to be initiated, but to 
practise worship with devotion and piety. Many amongst 
the higher classes lived a life which was rather religious 
than a purely social one. It was, therefore, incumbent 
upon the Guru so to qualify himself as to render himself 
a being higher than those around him. But the Hindu 
mind having considerably receded from such an ideal of 
life, initiation and worship are disregarded. There being 
very little demand for real initiation and instruction in 
true worship, the supply of duly qualified Gurus has natur¬ 
ally fallen off. That the Guru-class still exists is due, 
to a large extent, to our love for the husk with which we 
want to fill the social granary. The Gurus, moreover, are 
now ill-fed by the Shishya community, which accounts 
for many Guru families giving up the profession. It 
is the paramount duty of the Hindus of the present 
generation to reform the Guru community, which can, 
I think, be easily effected by fostering the growth of a 
sincere and earnest desire to learn and to practise among 
ourselves.

There is one aspect of initiation which I have left un¬ 
touched for want of information—I mean its astrological 
aspect. It is said that the nativity of a candidate and 
the particular Mantra in which he should be initiated are 
correlated. As I am not an astrologer, I am not com¬ 
petent to speak as to this. Those who profess to be 
astrologers are really empirics, and, having no scientific 
knowledge of astrology, cannot explain this correlation.

632

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA632

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

But opinions are divided amongst Tantriks on this point, 
and so it need not trouble us.

The Octagon of Self-Culture

In the previous sections I have attempted to give the 
reader the result of a general survey of the philosophy 
upon whioh Tantrik Saclkana, or Self-culture, is based. 
But in so recondite and unfamiliar a subject, where the 
correctness of every individual interpretation may be called 
in question, the reader is requested to go himself to the 
source, and there, with faith and devotion, and under the 
guidance of a Guru, drink of its waters.

I shall now address myself to the subject of the 
supreme importance of T&ntrik S&dhana, which, as already 
observed, is the easiest and the straightest path to follow 
for men of the Kali Yuga. 1 I should not be understood to 
preach Shakta Dharma* to one and all. The Tintrik method 
of spiritual culture is not, as I have already said, sectarian. 
The Tantra provides paths of culture for all the five classes 
of Upasakas (worshippers) in Hinduism, and an advanced 
T&ntrik Guru is as capable of illumining the path of a 
Vaishnava as that of a Shakta.

The path of Dharma is twofold: the path of desire 
(pravjitti) and the path of cessation of desire (nivyitti). 
These two paths are in conformity with the two great 
Powers which are perpetually at work in the universe. One 
of the Powers is called Maya and the other MahAmaya. 
They are tho two phases of the one immutable Shakti. 
Mayft weaves the woof and the warp of Evolution from

I ___ •

The present, the last, and worst of the ages. See A. Avalon’s 
Introduction, “ Mah&nirv&na Tantra."

' The way or religion of those who worship Shakti.

INTRODUCTION

633I ___ •

The present, the last, and worst of the ages. See A. Avalon’s 
Introduction, “ Mah&nirv&na Tantra."

' The way or religion of those who worship Shakti.

INTRODUCTION

633

Spirit to matter; Mahamaya frees the Ego from its Karmik 
garb, and leads it on to its destination. To sail down¬ 
stream is easy enough. It needs no toil, no struggle. The 
current is favourable; hoist the sail of your Desires on the 
mast of your untrained Will, and sail pleasantly along. 
But your pleasure is 6hort-lived; there is sorrow in all of 
it. Like Sisyphus, you roll your stone up the mountain-top 
only to come down again. And as the desires, even of the 
most intellectually cultured, know no bounds, the Ego is 
drowned more and more in the quagmire of matter, for¬ 
getting its own self, and forgoing the privileges of a human 
Ego which after millions of journeyings, it has had the 
good fortune to acquire. The soft heart of the Divine 
Mother cannot bear to sec Her children thus lost. She 
steps in and proclaims Pravritti Dharma, which her ordinary 
children must follow, so that in the long-run Pravritti may 
lead to Nivfitti. This Dharma is work prescribed in the 
Sh&stras to be performed with Bhakti or devotion to God 
for accomplishing definite results. Pravritti being bridled 
by Dharma, unrestrained licence of desires is prevented, 
and the sojourner on the Pravfitti path begins to learn 
Bhakti or devotion. The fulfilment of his desires, however 
worldly, depends upon the favour of God whom he invokes 
from the depths of his heart. He performs the rites and 
oeremonies prescribed for the particular object he has in 
view with austerities and penances which are required, and 
thus, though the mainspring of his action be selfish, he 
unconsciously develops his higher instincts and nobler 
nature. From hankering after sensuous pleasure in tha 
shape of money, power, fame, popularity, progeny, and so 
forth, he gradually lifts his eyes upwards and longs for 
power in the unseen world. He devotes his mind and soul 
to its acquisition. And when he is fortunate enough to 
obtain but a morsel of it, he at once realizes the nothingness634

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of worldly desires. He forthwith parts with them as 
a serpent parts with its deadskin. The worshipper on the 
path of desire now lives in the supersensuous world; his 
worldly hankerings have ceased at any rate to a consider¬ 
able extent, and he has made more progress towards the 
path of Nivfitti than one whose desires are not restrained 
by Dharma, and who depends solely upon his own resources 
to combat Pravritti.

To combat Pravritti! How sweetly sounds the phrase! 
To do works for others! How much sweeter still! Let 
us not deceive ourselves, as we are apt to do. The 
octopus-like grasp of our cumulated Karma, extending over 
millions of births and rebirths, is so firm that it is im¬ 
possible to free ourselves from it unless we begin in Pra- 
vyitti Dharma and end it Nivritti. Is it possible for 
anyone to jump from the bottomless abyss of desires to 
the celestial height of Nivfitti by a single leap? There 
must be intermediate rounds on the ladder, for nature 
does not work by leaps and bounds; sequences of causes 
and effects pervade it. Not even the Lokapalas, Dik- 
palas, 1 and Lords higher still are free from desires, though 
they, by spiritualizing many of such desires, have risen 
higher and higher on the upward path of progress. How 
can one be selfless unless he has dedicated his self to the 
Lord of all selves? And how can one dedicate his self to 
the Lord of all selves by one single bound? As house¬ 
holders (Grihls) we are chained to the world by a thousand 
and one knots. Our family, our lust, our greed, our avarice, 
our ambition, all bind us down. We are overwhelmed with 
desires even unto death. Where, then, is our altruism ? 
If there were a scalpel to open the mind, or an X-ray 
apparatus to display it, it would doubtless be found that 
altruism is, in many a case, traceable to love of fame, love 
' Lords of the Regions and Quarters.

INTRODUCTION

635INTRODUCTION

635

of popular applause, love of power, and other little self-loves. 
It is intense love of God alone which can make a person 
selfless in action. It is very unfortunate that in the name 
of altruistic work many English-educated Hindus have 
given up Pravritti Dharma, the inestimable boon which 
the wise, holy Rishis have given us for our salvation.

In the Bhagavadgita, the Lord (I adopt Mrs. Besant'e 
translation) says:

fafsrgmfaf frit ^ ii 
fFft ftogvfi I

fqm ^ *W ft*: II

J^KT: *4 *T ^ I

snfcra: « ft *ifcrc n

*ri nism I

“ Fourfold in division are the righteous ones who wor¬ 
ship Me, O Arjuna: the suffering, the seeker for knowledge, 
the self-interested, and the wise. Of these the wise, con¬ 
stantly harmonized, worshipping the One, is the best; I am 
supremely dear to the wise, and he is dear to Me. Noble 
are all these ; but I hold the wise as verily Myself; he, self- 
united, is fixed on Me, the highest goal. At the close of 
many births the man full of wisdom cometh unto Me. 4 Vasu- 
deva is all,’ saith he, the Mahatma, very difficult to find.’’

Of the four kinds of worshippers mentioned by Bhaga- 
v&n, the artta and the artharthl (the suffering and the 
self-interested) are Sakama Up&sakas, 1 who are on the path

1 Worshippers for reward, and with the view to benefits to be 
gained such as the worshipper whose action is determined by the hope 
of gaining the pleasures of heaven or avoiding the pains of hell; as con¬ 
trasted with the NishkAma Sadbaka who acts for God’s good sake only, 
and not because such action will produce benefits for him.

636

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA636

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of desire. All the worshippers are called “ sukritinah " 
(righteous)—that is, even those who are on the path 
of desire, have germs of good work in them, otherwise 
worship would not have formed a part of their work. 
“ Udarah sarva eva te ” — that is, all of them are noble, dear 
to God, because the Godward mind, even if selfish, attains 
an amount of mental purification and contentment which 
is impossible for others to acquire. The last couplet means 
that a true JnanI—an advaitist 1 is a product of many, 
many births, and that such a Mahatma * is very rare. It 
will thus be seen that Pravritti Dharma has a place in 
self-culture, however low compared with the highest, that 
place may be. It is for those who cannot dissociate their 
minds from worldly desires. And I need hardly say that 
the bulk of humanity is of that temperament. If there be 
a blessed few amongst us who have governed their desires 
effectually, who are rather in than of the world, Pravritti 
Dharma. like dry leaves of trees, will fall from off them; 
but they are not, therefore, justified in giving up the 
Sh&strik Dharma-Karma. The Lord Himself has exhorted 
them to perform religious works prescribed in the Shftstra 
selflessly for the instruction of the mass of men. Like a 
patient who accepts his physician’s diagnosis but rejects 
his prescription, it would be the height of folly to accept 
Hindu philosophy and to reject its practice.

The Tantrik system of culture on the path of desire is 
remarkable for its aptitude in producing desired results. 
This is known to Hindus of all denominations. But it is 
not a mere hankering after worldly benefits. On the con¬ 
trary, the Sakama S&dhaka longs more for a glimpse into 
the arcana of nature than for mundane comforts, and his 
longing is soon crowned with success. And having acquired

1 See ante.

1 Great sonl.

INTRODUCTION

6371 See ante.

1 Great sonl.

INTRODUCTION

637

a personal proof positive of supersensuous things, the 
vanity of sensuous desires forces itself upon him in a 
manner that mere Shravana (study) and Manana (con¬ 
templation) can hardly approach. This, it must be conceded, 
is a long leap forward. To withdraw the mind from worldly 
attractions and repulsions many births and rebirths have 
to be spent in study, contemplation, and discrimination. 
The T&ntrik, on the much-despised path of desire, however, 
transfers his consciousness from mundane attractions and 
repulsions to a higher plane of existence within one life 
and even a much shorter period. Although it cannot give 
him Mukti (liberation)—and Mukti is not a bunch of grapes 
to be had by the mere stretching of the hand upwards to 
the trellis on whioh they hang—it can make him a Loka- 
pala, a Dikpala , 1 a Manvantaradhipati * * or the like.

It must not be supposed that the Sakama T&ntrik 
worships Devatas* as the Divinity. He no doubt pays 
homage to Devat&s as higher beings; but the object of his 
worship is the Divine Mother, who is the same as Maha- 
vishnu, the manifested God, a^d the methods of his worship 
are very much the same as those of the worshipper on the 
Nivritti path. What is stated in the Gita as to the conse¬ 
quences of worshipping Devatas, Pitps, and Bhiltas has no 
application to a Tantrik, the ladder of whose spiritual 
culture begins with the path of desire as the lowest round, 
and ends at that of which none knows—that is, Kaivalya 
Mukti, or complete liberation.

So long as a man is a Grihi (householder), so long is 
his path the path of Pravfitti. If he thinks that he has

1 Lords of the regions and quarters.

* Lord of the period called Manvantara.

* The writer here refers to the higher Intelligences intermediate 
between Ishvara and man. DevatA is used also in another sense. Thus, 
the Divine Mother in Her various leading forms is called DevatA.

638

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA638

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

outgrown it, but at the same time earns money, enjoys 
the world, forms attachments and repulsions, seeks name, 
fame, and popular applause, discharges the functions 
of a father of his household and of a member of the com¬ 
munity in which he lives, he deceives himself. The path 
pointed out to him by the T&ntrik is the best that he 
can have as an individual, as the father of a family, and as 
a member of society. The T&ntrik culture is an all-round 
growth. It makes the body sturdy and strong, and proof 
to heat, cold, and rains; it wards off diseases from without, 
and resists diseases from within; it makes one hardy, 
painstaking, and patient. His will being regularly trained, 
he is resolute and intrepid. All these qualities of body and 
mind render him as much a useful member of society as a 
humble supplicant for the dust of the Mother’s feet. As 
for altruism, people thus trained are taught from the very 
beginning to do good to others. tkl<taKd(ci*ii I

“ Kali is the slave of those pious men, the rule of whose 
life is to do good to others,” says the Tantra.

Now let us pass to the,study of the path of cessation, 
called the path of Nivritti. Those whose minds have 
become sftttvik by the reduction of their rajasik desires 
through practice on the path of desire, and those fortunate 
few whose past lives have prepared them for it, are the fit 
Adhik&rls 1 on the Nivritti path. The Hindu Shfistras, 
whether Vaidik or Tantrik, regard Adhikara or personal 
competency as the most important factor in determining 
the mode of culture to be prescribed for a candidate. The 
Guru must test the mental calibre, moral proclivity, and 
physical aptitude of his would-be disciple (shishya), and

' Persons competent for a thing. The whole of Hinduism rests on 
the theory of competency, or adhik&rav&dn.

INTRODUCTION

639

must point out to him that path for which he is the 
most suited.' Persons competent for a thing. The whole of Hinduism rests on 
the theory of competency, or adhik&rav&dn.

INTRODUCTION

639

must point out to him that path for which he is the 
most suited.

Sadhakas on the path of cessation of desire are divided 
into two classes— viz., those who are yet bound by the ties 
and conventionalities of the world, and those who have got 
rid of, or are resolved to get rid of, them. Their methods 
of culture are different. The ties and conventions are 
called Pasha—that is, fetters. They are eight in number, 
as the Kularnava Tantra says:

W TO TOift I 
f® 5ft® <n5IT: qf^T: II

“ Aversion, shame, fear, grief, disgust, family, custom, 
and caste; these are declared as fetters.”

I need hardly point out that there is hardly one among 
a million who can say that he is free from these fetters. 
And there are but few who struggle to sail clear of them. 
My task is to study the Sadhana of the Adhikarls of the 
former class. This Sadhana may be roughly, though not 
exhaustively, classed under four heads: 1. Sandhya, or 
obligatory daily service. 2. Upasana, or worship. 3. Sbat- 
chakrabheda. 4. Mudra Sadhana. The first two of these 
will form the subject of this section.

In Patanjali’s Yoga Shastra eight methods are laid 
down as modes of self-culture for realizing the True Self. 
They are: 1. Constant practice, and Vairagya or that state 
of mind which is proof against worldly attractions and 
repulsions. 2. Worship of the manifested God. 3. Prana- 
yama, or regulation of breath. 4. Concentration of mind 
on any one of the objects of the senses. 1 5. Concentration

1 Yishayavatl va pravrittirutpannS Btbitinibandhant. (Patanjala, 
1 - 85 ).

640

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Yishayavatl va pravrittirutpannS Btbitinibandhant. (Patanjala, 
1 - 85 ).

640

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in the heart-lotus. 6. Concentration with a mind free from 
desires. 1 7. Concentration on the particular image of the 
Godhead worshipped by the S&dhaka, as it appears in the 
dream-state, and on the Sattvik nature of the mind in 
dreamless sleep. 8. Meditation on any object of liking.

Excepting Nos. 4 and 6, which are particular modes of 
concentration practised by Tantriks in Shatchakrabheda * * 
and secret worship,* the T&ntrik Upasanai includes all these 
and much more. I shall first take up the last, about which 
much misconception seems to prevail. The original text is:

“ And by meditation on any object of liking” (the being 
copulative and not alternative).

Vy&sa's commentary on the above aphorism is:

“ Whatever may be the object of one’s liking, let him 
meditate upon that. If the mind settles upon that parti¬ 
cular object, it may settle also elsewhere.”

This aphorism does not give unbridled licence to 
practise concentration upon any object at random. There 
are people who have very pronounced predilections for 
particular objects which they are unable to ignore. It is for 
these people that the above wholesome advice is given. An 
anecdote may here be related in illustration of this. Once 
upon a time there lived a very pious King, who was earnest 
upon giving a religious training to his son. He repaired to 
a famous Yogi for whom he entertained great respect.

' Vltar&ga vishayftdv& chittam (»6. 1-87).

* Ab in Dhy&na on the gandha tattva in the MaladhOra. etc.

’ Rahasya pfija; a special mode of worship undertaken with the 
object of freeing the mind from desires.

INTRODUCTION

641* Ab in Dhy&na on the gandha tattva in the MaladhOra. etc.

’ Rahasya pfija; a special mode of worship undertaken with the 
object of freeing the mind from desires.

INTRODUCTION

641

After the usual exchange of greetings the King said: 
“ M aha t man ! If you please, I should like to have my son 
initiated by your Holiness.” “Very well, my 6on,” replied 
the Yogi, “ send him hither.” The King, very much grati¬ 
fied, prostrated himself before the holy man, and sped home¬ 
ward. The day after the royal scion appeared before the 
Yogi, and paid his obeisance. “ God bless you, child; Live 
here, and make yourself comfortable,” said the Yogi to him.The royal youth, however, found not much in the 
Yogi’s Ashrama (hermitage) to comfort him, but the wild 
scene, the beautiful rivulet, the ravine, and the birds’ song 
made captive his heart. For three or four days he was 
found to enjoy Nature, but in the midst of his enjoyment 
he was observed suddenly to sigh and become pensively 
meditative. One day the Yogi asked him: “Child, what 
ails you ? ” “ Sir," replied the Prince, I have a beautiful 
young elephant at home, which I love with all my heart. 
Its absence pains me.” “ Very well I shall send for it," 
said the holy man. The day after the young elephant was 
brought. The Prince’s joy knew no bounds; he began to 
caress it, kiss it. The Yogi said : “ Child, the first lesson 
I give you is to forget everything else and to concentrate 
your mind upon this young elephant.” “ I obey,” said the 
Prince. A year after the Yogi inquired: “ Well, how far 
have you progressed ? " The Prince said : “ I have not yet 
been successful.” The Yogi encouraged him to persevere. 
Two years rolled on. One day the Prince appeared before 
the Yogi, and said : “ Holy Father, my mind is completely 
lost in the image of the young elephant. I see it every¬ 
where. There is nothing else in the world to captivate my 
mind." “ Sarvamangalft 1 bless you, my child, you have 
quickly won the battle. Come now and be initiated in the

' The all-auspicious Goddess. 
41

642

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Mantra of your IshtadevattL” 1 So saying, the holy one put 
the Prince on the path.' The all-auspicious Goddess. 
41

642

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Mantra of your IshtadevattL” 1 So saying, the holy one put 
the Prince on the path.

The reader will thus find that the choice of the object 
of concentration does not depend upon individual caprice. 
If the mind be so weak that it cannot readily part with 
its predilections, it is by a regulated exercise of those 
predilections that the ever-roving mind is settled. It is 
but a temporary arrangement for rare cases. To reduce 
the mind to a focus is a task of great magnitude, perhaps 
of a whole life. Nothing should be allowed to be identi¬ 
fied with the mind except a Divine image—that is, a form 
in which Divinity incarnates, and for this plain reason 
that what a man thinks upon that he becomes. If one 
concentrates upon a glass ball, a glass ball shall he become. 
Says Lord Shri Krishna:

In the T&ntrik Mantra the worshipper finds an image 
of the Incarnation of the Divinity, not a dead image, a 
shadow, but an image which, by Sfidbana, can be conjured 
up into the Divinity itself, the spiritual power inherent in 
the Mantra fortifying the will-power of the Sadhaka to 
produce this result. From the very outset a Sadhaka is 
enjoined to fill his mind with the thought that he and the 
Divinity are one and the same. The realization of 
(I am He) is the aim and end of his worship.

The T&ntrik Sandhya is an obligatory service, which 
must be performed thrice a day—at dawn, at noon, and 
at sunset. It opens with a Mantra, which reminds the 
worshipper that his individual self is really no other than 
the one Self, manifested in the universe as the male and 
the female Power. The Matrikti Shaktis are then brought

1 See poti.

INTRODUCTION

643

into requisition to render his body and mind active with 
their soul-inspiring energy. The worshipper pays homage 
to the Devas, Risbis, Pitjris, to his Guru, 1 and to humanity. 
With a libation of water he declares: —that is,

“ I gratify mankind.”“ I gratify mankind.”

As the Divine Mother is in everything and everything 
is in Her, service to every living being, whether human or 
not, is a part of his religion.

Meditation, concentration, PiAnftyfima, and Japa are 
the principal features of Sandhyft. The object of Praijnyama 
is to bring the involuntary act of breathing under control, 
and suspend its action at the will of the Sadhakft. The con¬ 
stituents of the subtle body are the vital air, the sensorium 
and the mind. The latter is intimately connected with breath. 
The breath serves as an instrument to introduce the mind to 
the world without. If one can regulate the breath, he can con¬ 
trol the otherwise uncontrollable mind. The more one learns 
this art, the more is his will-power developed, the more is he 
enabled to concentrate his mind upon a particular object, 
and the more do his passions cease. As breath is the 
measure of life, and not days, years, and months, the 
Sadhaka’s span of life is prolonged, and his body is ren¬ 
dered immuue to diseases. Life is a resultant of the kinetio 
karmik forces of a man in his previous birth. The karmic 
forces, either potential or kinetic, become a part of the 
mental sheath of the reincarnating Ego along with its 
sensorium and vital power, which latter is manifested in 
the body as breath. Breath is the nexus which joins the 
body with the mind. Control it, and you control the dalli¬ 
ance of the mind with the external world through the body. 
Pr&nay&ma is, therefore, an indispensable aid to meditation, 
concentration, and the development of will-power.

' Gods, seers, and forefathers.

644

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In his commentary on verse 7, chap, ii, of the Shvetfish- 
vatara Upanishad, Shangkariicharya quotes from Shruti:

^ i

aPTraicf: q? snaiWlftfe «ft: II

“‘The soul being purified by PrftnS,yS,ma realizes Para- 
brahman, henee there is nothing higher than Pran&y&ma,’ 
thus says Shruti.”

He then says:^ i

aPTraicf: q? snaiWlftfe «ft: II

“‘The soul being purified by PrftnS,yS,ma realizes Para- 
brahman, henee there is nothing higher than Pran&y&ma,’ 
thus says Shruti.”

He then says:

“First, Yajnas and other works should be performed, 
then Pranayaraa, etc.; then Communion, then knowledge 
of Vedantic teaching, and then liberation.”

Then, in his commentary’ on verse 8 of the same 
chapter, he says: “Because the man, the impurities of 
whose mind have been cleansed by Pr&n&y&ma is able to 
concentrate his mind on Brahman, therefore Pr&n&y&ma 
is introduced (in this Upanishad). At first the nerves 
should be purified, and after that one becomes fit to practise 
Pra^&yilma.”

The Shet&shvatara Upanishad says (chap, ii, verse 9):

sn*r snfroqtesdfcr i 
fajH. *R*\ II

“A wise man should skilfully regulate his breath. 
When the Prana becomes feeble it should be let off through 
the nostrils in small quantities. When one thus becomes 
gradually accustomed to holding the breath, the mind, 
like a chariot drawn by unruly horses—that is, senses— 
becomes fixed and fitted for Brahma-Jnana ” (knowledge 
of the Brahman).

INTRODUCTION

645INTRODUCTION

645

In Chapter XIV, Skandba XI, of Shrimad Bh&gavata, 
in answer to Uddhava’s question as to how one who 
desires mukti (liberation) should contemplate Him, Bhaga- 
v&n says: “Sitting at ease upon an Asana (seat), neither 
high nor low, with the body erect, keeping the palms of 
the hands one upon another upon the lap, one should 
fix his eyes upon the tip of his nose; then, governing 
all the senses, the path of breath should be cleansed by 
Puraka (drawing in the breath), Kumbhaka (holding it) 
and Rechaka (giving it out). Having by Pr&nayama drawn 
the senses from their respective objects, practice should 
also be made by degrees in an opposite direction. The 
sound 3TT^ (Ora) in the heart, which is like a continuous 
bell-sound, should be drawn upwards by Pra^&yilma, and 
then Vindu should be placed upon it. In this wise Prap&- 
yama, with a?[^(Om), should be practised ten times in each 
of the three Sandhj'fis. By doing this the breath is con¬ 
quered within a month.”

It will thus be seen that the Upanishads, the Pur&pas, 
and the Tantras with one voice proclaim the supreme 
importance of Prnp&yama in self-culture. It is, however, 
the Tantra which has preserved knowledge of the mode 
of practice of this noble art, and it is the Tantriks 
who can teach it. 8hangkaracbiirya, in his commentary 
above quoted, mentions or purification of the

Nadis, 1 as a condition precedent to practising Pr&payama. 
I believe the Tantriks are the only Gurus who know how 
to do it. Prft^ayaraa is essential in Sandhy&, Upasani, 
and Shatobakra Sadhana. But it must be learnt very 
cautiously and with the help of a Guru. As it has to be 
learnt by degrees it forms an essential part of daily service.

* " Nerves." See Arthur Avalon's “ Serpent Power," and Introduc¬ 
tion to his “ MabAnirvAna Tantra.”

646

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* " Nerves." See Arthur Avalon's “ Serpent Power," and Introduc¬ 
tion to his “ MabAnirvAna Tantra.”

646

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Sandhyfi, is mental exercise. The image of the Divine 
Mother, which is potential in the worshipper’s Ishta- 
Mantra 1 and described in what is generally known as 
Dby&na (Contemplation), must be done in the mind. The 
mental image thus arising should be identified with the all- 
pervading Divine Mother, and concentration practised 
upon it.

Dhyana (meditation) is of two kinds, Sdkshma and 
Sthdla—that is, supersensuous and sensuous.

PJ^RfqR^T § fgfaq I

Qjcq ||

sq i

S^r ^ qfq *cq q? ^firr 11

^R*HR *T%5nf>| 3TRH |

«TTR 3 q^i I

RT'-rqHRqreRRRRtq^ I 
«4n> sqiafq^fq^ II

m 4tPiWl*q f^R%qqTfqfR: i

qiwrafa site i

^rsrtr 3ftqTR ^^qpi q^ifq h ii

The Y&mala says:

“ Dhy&na is of two kinds, Sthdla (gross) and Sdkshma 
(subtle). Sdkshma, or supersensuous, is Thy sound-body 
(r^rr ^5*1.); Sthula is meditation on Thy image, which

1 The particular Mantra which the particular S&dhaka receives at 
initiation.

INTRODUCTION

647

is made up of hands, feet, eto. Thy Sukshroarflpa (subtle 
form) is the Jnanamaya (conscious) body of Prakyiti. 0 
Maheshvarl! The supersensuous seldom aiises in the mind; 
therefore one should concentrate his mind on the Stlifila 
form and attain Moksha (liberation).”

The Mahanirvana Tantra says:

“ Dhv&ua is of two kinds, SarQpa (having visible image) 
and ArQpa (not having visible image). Thy ArOpa Dhyana 
is beyond the cognizance of speech and mind ; it is unmani¬ 
fested, all-pervading, incapable of being pointed out as 
‘this’ or ‘that.’ Yogis alone can cognize it by long 
Sara&dhi (ecstasy). I relate to you Sthula Dhy&na, so that 
Sadhakas being hopeful of Sflkshma Dhyana may practise 
it by fixing the mind upon it for the attainment of the 
object of their desire.”In the Dawn-Sandhyft the Divine Mother must be con¬ 
templated in the root-lotus as the Creative Power, Sym¬ 
bolized by a maiden having a string of beads in Her right 
hand and a jar filled with water in Her left, riding on a 
white swan. The white swan is the Hangsa of philosophy, 
the vital Power which must needs be Her vehicle for the 
purpose of creation, for without the vital power creation is 
impossible. The string of beads symbolizes Japa—that is, 
meditation on the creation of the previous Kalpa and pro¬ 
duction of similar sound-forms, which are the substratum 
of all things sensuous and supersensuous. The jar of 
water is the “ cause-water" (?RTt<Jpnft) of philosophy, the 
protoplasm out of which all bodies are formed.

In the Noon-Saudhya She rides on the King of Birds, 
GarQda, in the heart-lotus holding in Her four hands conch, 
discus, mace, and lotus, and wearing a garland of flowers 
on Her breast. GarUda is light (which is life as well), 
the conoh is sound, the discus is Avidya or that Power 
by which creation comes; the mace is the symbol of

648

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

authority, and the lotus is the universe. She is now the 
Vaishnavl Shakti, who maintains and nourishes the uni* 
verse. The garland of flowers symbolizes the countless 
beings whom She nourishes. The explanations of the 
symbols given in this and the preceding and succeeding 
paragraphs! are my own. The Shrimad-Bbagavata explains 
the garland as meaning Maya, the mace as denoting the 
vital Power, the conch as meaning water, the discus as sym¬ 
bolizing light, and the lotus as signalizing Ananta, or space.In the Evening-Sandhya She rides the Great Bull 
( 351 ??:) in the white lotus holding a trident in Her right 
hand and a noose (qr^T:) in the left. When the day of 
Brahma—that is, a Kalpa—comes to a close the bifurcated 
male and female Powers again meet in equilibrium. This 
is symbolized by the trident. The noose is AvidyA which 
She has withdrawn into Her own hand to repose there until 
the darkness of Brahm&'s night is dispelled.

As Creator Her vehicle is Rajasik, as Preserver it is 
S&ttvik, and as Withdrawer of the universe it is Triguna 
May&,' the Taraasik Guna predominating. The creative 
energy is volition (f^T^Tfe:) the preservative energy is action 
(frrcreTfrfi:), and the destructive energy is cognition ).

These three phases of the all-pervading Shakti must be 
contemplated on day by day in order that the Sadhaka may 
realize what the objeot of his worship is in manifestation.

The image of the Ishtadevata must first be formed in 
the mind by Dhyana. Then the Vija mantra should be 
repeated, keeping the image in view and withdrawing the 
mind from all other thoughts. This is called Japa.

_

' May* of the three goiuu.

649

INTRODUCTION

fs*^ ii

The Bhatashuddhi Tantra says :

“ Meditating on the form of the Devata denoted by 
the Mantra, Japa should be made in the mind.”

The Kalarnava Tantra says:

“ A mantra should be repeated with faith, devotion, 
attention, submission, and perception of the Divine image 
in the mind.”The Kalarnava Tantra says:

“ A mantra should be repeated with faith, devotion, 
attention, submission, and perception of the Divine image 
in the mind.”

Japa is of three' kinds: Vachika (by audible words), 
Upangsha (lips and tongue moving; but inaudible to the 
person making Japa), and Manasika (mental; lips and 
tongue not moving). Japa has the supreme virtue of 
gradually withdrawing the mind from other thoughts and 
impressions, and fixing it on the Divine image. When 
concentration by this means is perfected, the consciousness 
of the Sadhaka is transferred to the Mantra-devata. This 
is called Mantra-chaitanya (awakening of Mantra) and the 
Sadhaka is said to have become Mantra-siddha (Mantra- 
perfect).

It will thus be seen that Sandhya is of the highest 
efficacy in spiritual culture, and it is on this account that 
it is obligatory on every Hindu of whatever division of 
worshippers he be. I have already quoted from the Shrl- 
mad-Bhagavata, which is the scripture of the Vaishnavas, 
to show the importance of Pr&nayama and Sandhya. Other 
quotations from the same Sbastra follow :

“ One who is desirous of cutting the bondage of I-am- 
ness of the Jlv&tma should worship Keshava according to 
the T&ntrik method, which contains in it the Vaidik method 
as well."

650

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

!•- •*

The man who in this wise worships Ishvara in Agni, 
Sflrya, water, etc., or in one’s own heart, as the Atma, accord¬ 
ing to the Tantrik Karmayoga, soon attains Mukti (libera¬ 
tion).*’

Skandha XI, chap, iii

“ 0 Uddhava! visiting My image and other symbol 
visiting My Bhakta (devotee), . . . Diksha, according 
to the Vedas and the Tantras . . . these are the signs of 
Bhakti (devotion) to Me.”

Skandha XI, chap, xi

“My worship is of three kinds: Vaidik, T&ntrik, and 
mixed. Whichever of these three be to one’s liking, let 
him worship Me by that.”

Skandha XI, chap, xxviiSkandha XI, chap, xi

“My worship is of three kinds: Vaidik, T&ntrik, and 
mixed. Whichever of these three be to one’s liking, let 
him worship Me by that.”

Skandha XI, chap, xxvii

“ Shaunaka said: 0 SQta, you are devoted to Bhagavftn, 
you know all the doctrines of Tantra and many other 
things. I now ask you a question. Narayaija, the husband 
of Shrl, is only Chidghana (massive consciousness), but 
Tantrik Upftsakas (worshipper), at the time of worship, 
attribute limbs, and these and other parts, such as GarGda, 
etc., weapons such as Sudarshana, and ornaments such as 
Kaustubha, to Him. Tell me what things (Tattvas) are 
symbolized by them. I am desirous of knowing Kriyft yoga. 1 
Therefore, relate to me that skill in Kriyfi, (action) by which 
men attain Mukti (liberation). Sttta said: Saluting my 
Gurudeva, I relate to you the Vibhatis* of Vishnu as stated 
in the Veda and the Tantra by Brahma and other Acharyas 
(teachers)."

Skandha XII, chap, xi

These and other like statements should induce my 
Vaishnava brothers, who are too often apt to assail the 
Tantra, to abstain from the terrible sin of a patricide.

1 Yoga through action.

' Powers and manifestations.

INTRODUCTION

6511 Yoga through action.

' Powers and manifestations.

INTRODUCTION

651

Up&san& is the worship of the Vachya Shakti 1 through 
the Vachaka Shakti of a Sddhaka’s Ishtamantra.* * If the 
Ishtamantra denotes an Avat&ra 1 in male body, the wor¬ 
ship is regulated in conformity with it; and if the Ishta- 
mautra denotes a female Avatara the method of worship 
is of a different type. But the main principles of worship 
are identical. The Ishtamantra, or Vlja Mantra, as pre¬ 
viously stated, denotes two Powers, the Vachaka and the 
Vachya Shakti. By realizing the Vachaka Shakti, the 
abstract, unconditioned Paramatma, which is the V itchy a 
Shakti of a Mantra, must be realized, the ultimate goal of 
all Sadhana being the realization of the One True Self. 
The V&chaka Shakti is the Manifested God Saguna I§hvara, 
the Shakti of the Tantrik philosophy. We have seen how 
the one Shakti is bifurcated into male and female Shaktis 
for the purposes of evolution, thus giving expression to 
Shabdabrahraan. We have also seen how our solar system 
is presided over by seven Lords in its seven planes, each of 
these Lords being an aspect of Shabdabrahraan. In Up&san& 
(worship) the Virata Sharlra—that is, the physical body of 
Shabdabrahman—is the vehicle through which worship is 
offered. It is the Virata Sharlra, which is the ground of 
all Avatar&s. The Sahasrashlrsha Purusha (thousand¬ 
headed Purusha) of the Vedas is the Vir&t Purusha of 
philosophy. The five Mah&bhOtas (elements), the ten senses, 
the five vital airs, Manas (sensorium), Buddhi (intuition), 
Ahangkara (ego), and Chitta (mind) constitute the Sharlra 
or body of Shabdabrahman, the plane of whose conscious¬ 
ness is called J&grata, or waking. Worship begins from this 
state of Divine consciousness until it reaches the dreaming

1 See post. * See post.

* Manifestation called “ incarnation” when it takes place on the 
physical plane.

652

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 See post. * See post.

* Manifestation called “ incarnation” when it takes place on the 
physical plane.

652

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

state, or Svapna. Bej'ond the dreaming state is Sa6bupti, 
or slumbering consciousness of Shabdabrahman, where 
worship ends. It must be remembered that the self-same 
Sachchid&nanda is worshipped in different vehicles, even as 
the selfsame gold is worn as a ring, a chain, a bracelet, and 
the like.

It will thus be seen that Kill and Vishnu are essenti¬ 
ally the same, only the vehicles and their characteristic 
qualities differing. The Tantrik’s predilection for the Divin¬ 
ity in its female form, as the Mother of the Universe, 
arises in part from the fact that the mother’s heart being 
softer than that of the father, she is more readily moved 
in favour of the son than the father. Some no doubt would 
regard this as a very pronounced instance of anthro¬ 
pomorphism. But in truth it cannot be denied that as 
the human mother is a spark of the Divine Mother, the 
qualities of head and heart of the former are but an in¬ 
finitesimally small expression of similar qualities in the 
latter. From the bodies of the Divine Father and the 
Divine Mother proceed all evolutions of body and mind. 
The human father and the human mother, and all fathers 
and mothers in the universe, are Angsa-Shaktis—that is, 
individual powers emanating from the Divine Parents, 
who do not, like the Christian and the Mohammedan God, 
personally create bodies and souls. The characteristic 
predominance of emotional qualities in human mothers 
is an index that it must be so in the Divine Mother; the 
experience of Sadhakas proves this, and it is conceded in 
the scriptures of Vaisbnavas as well.There is yet a weightier consideration than the above 
which has won the T&ntrik over to the lotus-feet of Mother 
Kali. The paternal and maternal Shaktis, the positive and 
negative poles, the centrifugal and centripetal forces, are 
perpetually in harmonious association to evolve and nourish

INTRODUCTION

653

the universe. The Paternal Shakti is ever fecundating, 
and the Maternal Shakti ever holding the child in her womb 
and nourishing it. This is the law of Pravjitti (desire) 
in the universe. When the Divine Mother refuses fecunda¬ 
tion and, dominating the Divine Father, asserts Her Will, 
then is She Mahftvidya, then is She Niramayapadonmukbl 
(facing the state of freedom from sufferings). The milk 
of Her perennial breast then nourishes the aspirant, and 
gives him strength to march along the path of Nivyitti 
(cessation). It is then that She, the Vam&, the left-hand 
consort, 1 usurps the right-hand place, and, slaying the 
demon-propensities of Her beloved sons, gives them hope 
and courage with Her right hand. The Fecundating Father, 
the source of Pravritti, falls prostrate under Her feet to 
avert the destruction of His world. Such is Mah&vidy&, 
the Divine Mother, the Lady Paramount of the Path of 
Nivptti (path of cessation), whom the Tantrik worships.

Updsani, or worship, is of two kinds, internal and 
external.

I

“ Up&san& (worship) of the initiated is of two kinds— 
internal and external. Internal worship is ordained for 
Sannyasls, and both internal and external for others.”

Tantra Sanghita.

1 The position of the wife is on the left hand.

654 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ Antary&ga, or internal worship, gives Mukti (libera¬ 
tion) even to a living Sftdhaka. Only Mumukshus or 
Munis (sages) bent upon Mukti are entitled to it. The 
S&dhakas, who are incapable of Antaryaga, should perform 
it like external Paja (worship) with mental offerings.”

Gautamiya Tantra.Gautamiya Tantra.

Antaryaga is based entirely upon a direct knowledge 
of the Power-centres or Chakras in the human body. 
The Sadhaka, having awakened Kula-KuijdalinI in the 
root-chakra, takes Her up, with the help of the vital air, 
from centre to centre, until the thousand-petalled centre 
in the crown of the head is reached; there the male and 
female Powers are brought together in blissful union. 
The Sadhaka having enjoyed this temporary bliss, which 
vitalizes his body and mind, transfers his consciousness 
to the heart-centre, in the ethereal space of which he 
forms the mental image of the Divine Mother as it is 
expressed in his Vlja-mantra. When the image has been 
thus formed, the mind is concentrated upon it with firm 
faith and devotion. When the image is portrayed upon 
the canvas of the mind with all the details of limbs and 
organs, as if it were a painting, the Sadhaka offers his

sacrifices:

favi 3^ ^ utotr I

zmri * tfiw »

INTRODUCTION

655

g*q i

siqiqiqqsqnwuiqq^ a«n n

=q 3l|qT5^*?% <rai i 
■pnwSuaW ** 35r]cq qqftf&t** n 
*qf|si q*q 3 c q scqftr^q^n^ i

?qi^»n?R3cq qgicq 99: q*q ||

qg^J'qqfqi^: q^ 51 '"^ liINTRODUCTION

655

g*q i

siqiqiqqsqnwuiqq^ a«n n

=q 3l|qT5^*?% <rai i 
■pnwSuaW ** 35r]cq qqftf&t** n 
*qf|si q*q 3 c q scqftr^q^n^ i

?qi^»n?R3cq qgicq 99: q*q ||

qg^J'qqfqi^: q^ 51 '"^ li

“ Give the heart-lotus as the seat; give the nectar flow¬ 
ing from the thousand-petalled lotus for the washing of 
the feet: dedicate the mind (Manas) as Arghya (offering). 
For washing the face and for bathing give the same nectar. 
Give ether (Akasha) as clothing; the principle of smell for 
odour; the mind (Chitta) for flower; the vital airs (Pranas) 
as incense; the principle of light (Tejas) as the lamp; 
the ocean of nectar for food; the sound called Anahata 
(inaudible sound in the heart-lotus) as the bell (ghanta); 
the principle of air as fan and fly whisk (Chamara); the 
actions of the senses, as well as the restlessness of the 
mind, as dancing. For the realization of divine thought 
give diverse flowers: freedom from delusion, egotism, 
attachment, spiritual insensibility, pride, arrogance, enmity, 
perturbance, envy, and greed—freedom from all these are 
called the ten flowers. The supreme flower of Ahingsa 
(non-injury of any living thing), the flower of subjugation 
if the senses and the flowers of pity, forgiveness, and 
knowledge—these are the five flowers. With these fifteen 
flowers formed of sentiments (bhavas) should a worship 
be performed.”

After offering this mental sacrifice to his Ishfadevata 
standing before his mental eye in the heart-lotus, the 
S&dhaka makes mental japa:

qqqtf 41*51

656

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ The rosary is said to be formed of Varnas, or sound- 
powers, strung together by the thread Eugdali.

The fifty severed heads of men which make up the 
necklace of Mother Kali must be replaced mentally by 
the fifty sound Powers (Varnas), strung together by

Kulakundalinl as thread, and the Vlja Mantra is repeated 
with the help of this rosary. He then performs mental 
Homa.

The Nitya Tantra says:

W $6? fa! II

snttft 3 iKulakundalinl as thread, and the Vlja Mantra is repeated 
with the help of this rosary. He then performs mental 
Homa.

The Nitya Tantra says:

W $6? fa! II

snttft 3 i

3ITcRl<KrcRT RpIjJR'RRT I

II

3WR15li Rlft^Rr I

si wi fi^nww n

fTRiffl ^ i

515^4 rt^rtisr li

^ ft 51*4 W RTTRH ||

goq rir ^ 4r>?r I

f.c4 ^ f?Rjftsnft pVrmft RT^ft it 
fWR^ft^T =R ffRFRST 1 
CPU sfcRR: «R SflR* 3%^ ||

“ 0 All-beautiful One ! I tell you the ritual of Jn&na- 
homa (homa of knowledge), give ear unto me. By knowing 
it one becomes Sadftshiva, the Creator and Destroyer. The 
quadrangular Vedi (altar) is made of Atma (individual soul), 
Antaratma (the manifested God), Paramatma (the Divine 
Mother), and Jnanatma (the Absolute). The Ardhamatra 
(Kuo^alinl) should be considered the Yoni of the Homa-pit;

INTRODUCTION

657

tho MekhalA of the Vedi (altar), that is to say, the line 
which encircles it as if by a waist-chain, should be thought 
of as consisting of Ananda (bliss); and the other three lines 
on the Vedi should be taken as its three Valis, that is to 
say, beauty-lines on the abdomen. The Kula-bhairava— 
that is, the Yogi—should kindle in it the fire of knowledge 
(Jnana); then the forms of the M&trik&-sounds should be 
sacrificed in the fire of Jn&na, by which the sounds become 
Soundless Brahman. O the Adored of Vlras! Merits, 
demerits, desires, doubts, action, inaction and Prakyiti 
should be sacrificed by the mental spoon. Thus one be¬ 
comes full of Jnana, and Parabrahman Itself."

From the above description of subjective Upftsanft, it 
will have been seen that only such highly developed Yogis 
and devotees are capable of it as have attained Samprajnata 
Sam&dhi, or Temporary Communion, in which the knower and 
the known are distinguished, lit is the last stage of Up&san&, 
a thin veil only separating the individual Atma from the un¬ 
iversal AtmO. Such Yogis are the product of ages of culture.Sadhakas, whose mental image is not so well defined 
and who cannot make it steady for any length of time, 
must form an objective image, exactly in the likeness of 
the subjective image, and worship their Ishtadevat& in it. 
They must, however, perform mental Upasan& first as best 
as they can, and then vitalize and energize the external 
image. By establishing a magnetic current between him¬ 
self and the image before him, the mentally vitalized image 
is communicated to it. The external image is no longer a 
mere doll; it is the Ishtadevata Herself. Between the 
S&dhaka’s faith and will, on the one side, and his Mantra- 
power, on the other, a change, so to say, takes place in the 
inanimate image. It is Mantra-shakti which is alone 
capable of performing this wonderful change and of render¬ 
ing worship in images possible.

42

653

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The RulArnava Tantra says:

irai «*!**#* sX i

<rar «3na\ qfa*nf?3 *i*h n

gnfa^cqi^ <£^1 ^ I

flmpi ^ fwaT^RiII

“ As milk, which is produced in every limb of the cow, 
flows out through the udders, so the all-pervading DevatA 
manifests Herself in external images, etc. By the simili¬ 
tude of the external image to the mantrik image, by the 
speciality of the PujA, and by the faith of the Sodhaka, the 
DevatA manifests himself.”PranapratishthA (enlivening) thus accomplished, the 
SAdhaka worships the Divine Mother, rapt in devotion and 
love. He has now no great difficulty in concentrating bis 
mind upon the visible IshtadevatA. He makes medita¬ 
tion (Dhyana) and recitation (Japa) before this living image 
as long as he is capable of it. He offers flowers, 
incense, sweet-scents, the choicest eatables, valuable cloths 
and ornaments to his beloved Mother, who accepts them 
all. Thus, practising day by day, his restless mind 
begins gradually to compose itself, finding better and 
purer happiness in the Lotus Feet of the Divine Mother 
than in all that the world can offer him. Thus, learning 
to taste of celestial happiness, true VairAgya (dispassion) 
towards worldly happiness engrosses his mind. A man 
might spend a dozen lives in discrimination as to what is 
permanent and what is not so, yet VairAgya would be as far 
off from him as the mirage in a sandy desert; for, according 
to VcdAnta Nitya-anitya-vicliAra, or discrimination between 
what is permanent and what is transient, does not unfold 
itself in a mind which has not been purified by worship

INTRODUCTION

659

(Up&san&). To try to be indifferent to worldly happiness 
without Upasana is to put the cart before the horse.

The more the mind composes itself by external worship, 
the more abiding becomes the mental image. When, by 
this means, the state of Samadhi, or ecstasy, is reached, the 
external image is no longer required.

After finishing his worship, the S&dhaka, by a process 
known as Sangharamudra, withdraws the vitality communi¬ 
cated to the image, which then becomes a mere material 
image, fit to be thrown away.After finishing his worship, the S&dhaka, by a process 
known as Sangharamudra, withdraws the vitality communi¬ 
cated to the image, which then becomes a mere material 
image, fit to be thrown away.

External Upasana is not mere prayer and praise and 
offering of food and drink. The Bhakta’s (devotee’s) mind 
cannot rest satisfied without singing the praise of his beloved 
Mother; the more he sings Her praise, the more his mind 
is elevated towards Her. The Mantra-power helps him to 
make his offerings acceptable. In the Gita the Lord says 
that he accepts flowers, leaves, etc., offered to Him with 
Bhakti (devotion). But how are such offerings to be com¬ 
municated to Him unless the offerer and the image through 
which He is worshipped are en rapport ? The Tantra here 
steps in and solves the question. Prayer, praise, and 
offerings apart, the most important features of Upasana 
are : (1) BhQtashuddhi (purification of the elements consti¬ 
tuting the subtle body). (2) Nyftsa (the placing of the 
Matrika sounds and Ylja Mantras on different parts of the 
body). (3) Prflnayama, or breath control. (4) Meditation 
(Dhyana). (5) Mental worship. (6) Japa, or recitation of 
Mantra. The first is accomplished either by Yoga process 
or by means of a particular Mantra. The object of this is 
to purify the mind of its good and evil tendencies which 
have rendered the Ego a body-bound, selfish, small thing. 
The worshipper, in doing this purificatory rite, must think 
that, for the time being, his Earmik body has been purified, 
that he (the true self—that is, Atma) now wears the mantle

660

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of KulakundalinI (the body of the Sound Spiritual), and 
that, therefore, he is no other than the object of worship 
himself. Being Deva himself, he worships Deva, thus 
realizing the Vaidik saying:

mm wrorgffn i

sfo a* mn&wfon 11

IFFRfaTT |mm wrorgffn i

sfo a* mn&wfon 11

IFFRfaTT |

“ Brahman the oblation, Brahman the clarified butter, 
are offered in Brahman the fire by Brahman ; unto Brahman 
verily shall he go who in his action meditates wholly upon 
Brahman.”

The object of the second rite (Nyftsa) is to render the 
body spiritualized by the sound and Mantra Powers.

The rest (8, 4, 6, and 6) have been dealt with in their 
proper place.

It is by spiritualizing the body and the mind, and by 
devoutly thinking himself to be a part of the Unity, that 
a Sfldhaka must perform his worship, which is, in fact, 
more subjective than objective. Without these essentials, 
Upasanfi, would be like royalty without territory. To with¬ 
draw the mind from external attractions and repulsions and 
to consecrate it to the Divine Mother, Pr&n&yama, Dhy&na, 
and Japa are essential.

Up&san& has many subsidiary elements in it, upon 
which it is not necessary here to dwell, as they are not 
likely to interest the general reader; they are, however, 
all-important, and should not be eliminated by an earnest 
S&dhaka from his Sadhana.

Hindu society has been so constituted by the ^ishis 
of Vaidik antiquity that it is not enough that every 
member of it is a good citizen. One should not only be 
a good citizen, but a good individual; and not only a 
good individual, but a God-loving individual withal. Such

INTRODUCTION

661INTRODUCTION

661

is the end and aim of Vanjftshrama Dharma (oaste-system 
of Hinduism). Caste is not only a civil rule, but a religious 
ordinance as well. Society was so framed that it worked 
automatically to supply the material and spiritual wants 
of its members. Hindu society being thus constituted, 
every member of it is bound to be initiated, either accord¬ 
ing to his own choice, or according to the form of religion 
of his ancestors. The Hindus are generally either Vaish- 
navas or Sh&ktas. The mode of Upasanfi, briefly sketched 
above, is too high for the average Sh&kta Hindu, who must 
practise Sandhya and Upasana with devotion and faith, so 
that in the long run he may be prepared for the path.

Spiritual self-culture is pre-eminently Sattvik. 1 The 
passions, propensities, attachments, aversions and all those 
creations of Rajas and Tamas* which chain man down to 
earth and to things earthly, must be gradually but effect¬ 
ually washed off and the mind rendered perfectly Sattvik. 
The Upisana, above described, is Sattvik in all its forms. 
Those, therefore, who, though governed by the laws of 
their caste (Varna) and stage of life (Ashrama), which is 
called Varnashrama Dharma, yet infringe them, and under 
cover of religious practice unlawfully eat, drink, and sexually 
enjoy for the gratification of their senses, are condemned 
by Shiva in the passage which the author of the Shakta- 
nanda TaranginI quotes from the Agamasanghita on the 
subject of false Tantras (Asadagama):

qiqoi uaaiwuflieraT i

ftfaKRW. ^ ||

^ gu ^ i

iWKT*GT: II

ffa fsrc: I

1 The outcome of the Sattvn guna. (See Introduction.)

' See, as to these gunas, ibid.

662

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“0 Devi! in the Kali Yuga most of the R&jasik and 
Tamasik people, having adopted prohibited practices, delude 
many others. 0 Sureshvarl! those who, regardless of 
Varaashrama Dharma, offer us flesh, blood, and wine, are 
(various forms of) evil spirits.” 1I believe, however, that more than half of Hindu India 
is Shakta, and I can safely assert that 90 per cent, of them 
are free from reproach in respect of the violation of true 
Shastric principles and practice.

The Pilgrimage of the Human Ego

snoifog s44)3 fa^q arem n

In the above quotation from the Mugdakopanishad 
it is said:

“ This subtle Paramatma can only be known by the 
mind, within the body, where the five vital airs reside. 
The minds of all are pervaded by the vital airs. The 
Param&tmA manifests Himself in the mind when it is 
purified.”

The Ego must clothe itself with eight millions of 
bodies, from the stone to the animal, before it can be fit to 
assume the human form. There is, however, no know* 
ing how many births and rebirths in each class of bodies 
it must undergo before it can adapt itself to the next 
higher body. Ages untold and births unnumbered at last 
usher the journeying Ego into the human body—the 
most perfect of all bodies cognizable by the senses. The 
Ego itself is but a body, a Sokshma Shartra—that is, a

1 See as to this passage the remarks in the Introduction by Arthur 
Avalon to Part I of this book.

INTRODUCTION

6C31 See as to this passage the remarks in the Introduction by Arthur 
Avalon to Part I of this book.

INTRODUCTION

6C3

subtle body, consisting of the vital airs, the sensorium, 
and the mind. This bundle of very fine “ matter,” unlike 
its gross sheath, which decomposes and decays at short 
intervals, persists from the creation to the final dissolu¬ 
tion of the universe. It has a causal body (Karapa Sharlra) 
within itself, which is composed of a homogeneous finer 
“ matter.” The experiences of countless births and re¬ 
births are stored up in the subtle body, and very fine 
impressions of those experiences are stamped upon the 
causal body. The one immutable Atma, pervading and 
containing all existences, is made a captive, as it were, 
in each subtle body, from which circumstance it acquires 
its Egoity. The unconditioned Atma being thus condi¬ 
tioned, the pleasures and the pains, the happiness and 
the misery of the body are attributed to it; this is the 
work of Nature’s great housewife called Avidya (ignorance). 
When, however, the Ego acquires the human body, which 
is the most perfect of Sthola Sharlras—that is, gross 
bodies—it is blessed with the opportunity of making a 
pilgrimage to its primeval source, and (dissolving the 
compact subtle body) of uniting Atma with Atma. It 
needs ages of self-culture to accomplish this Paramartha 
(supreme object); but a beginning must be made by every 
human being.Avidyft, the most expert and cunning housewife, has 
ten thousand arts and wiles to captivate her children. 
Like Rassellas, they must not be allowed to peep beyond 
the lofty ramparts of the happy valley. She has provided 
every creature comfort for her children. People, charmed 
by her unceasing attentions, quite forget their real Mother, 
Vidya (knowledge), and hug the other with all the devo¬ 
tion of dutiful children. To save humanity from their 
pseudo-mother, Divinity from time to time incarnates and 
sends His chosen sons to teach them. It is by this means

664

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

that man acquires the knowledge of his real state, and 
learns that he has a true Mother, who alone can save him 
from the glamour of Avidyft.

In this golden land of Divine Rishis, the land whence 
Divine knowledge radiated to all other lands, the path 
to Yidya was made an art and divided into different pro¬ 
gressive grades. The curriculum consists of Varn&shrama 
Dharma’ (for full particulars of which the reader is referred 
to my Bengali book on the subject), external and internal 
worship, and Yoga. Vanjii§brama Dharma is the ground 
whereon the first battle must be fought with Avidyft. It 
is the place where the Ego must put chains around the 
neck of Avidya so that she may not lead people where¬ 
soever she may choose. It is here that man gets the first 
glimpse of his real Mother Vidya. External worship fur¬ 
ther girds up the Ego to cope with Avidyft. By these 
two means the Ego gradually learns to feel that it has a 
real Father and Mother; to find out, to worship, to love, 
and to know whom is the end and aim of its being. When 
the conviction of its necessity grows irresistible, the Ego 
determines to make the pilgrimage. But where is the 
grand trunk road over which it must wend its way.From the text of the Mundakopanishad, which opens 
this section, it will be seen that the Divinity has to be 
sought within the body of the Sadhaka. Although the 
Divine Essence is immanent in everything in the Kosmos, 
the body of the Sadhaka, which is a part of the Kosmos, 
is the place where he can best find it, for the mind, which 
has to make the search, and the apparatus, with which 
the search has to be made, are located in the body; besides, 
the body is a Microcosm, containing within it the seven 
centres of Power and the seven presiding Lords mentioned

' Vide ante.

INTRODUCTION

665

in the second seotion. The seven centres are seven planes 
of evolntion, and over each plane there is a presiding Deity, 
who directs and controls its work.

The Universe, according to Tantra, consists of a 
single Mah&brahmap^a, or grand universe, and numberless 
Brihat Brahmandas, or great universes. From the seven 
planes of the grand universe are evolved innumerable 
great worlds each one of which is also divided into seven 
planes. Each planet, each satellite, each star, and every 
living entity in each world is itself a world in miniature, 
and has within it the seven centres of Power and the seven 
presiding Deities.

The Nirvana Tantra says:

“ODevl! within the Mahabrahmftnda is Brihat Brah- 
m&oda; within it are beings and regions.”

“ q*H |

“0 Parameshvarl! O Deve§bl! all varieties of beings 
and things which are in the Mahabrahm& 9 <pa are also 
within the Brihat Brahmanda.”

“ 0 beautiful-eyed one! hundreds of thousands of Brah* 
mAndas (universes) are evolved within it (Mah&brahmanda)."

A vivid description of Brihat Brahm&g(la is given in 
the same Tantra. But as it is very long, I am reluctantly 
compelled to resist the temptation to quote it. I shall, 
however, place before the reader its salient points. The 
Brihat Brahmanda, or Macrocosm, has its Meru or vertebral 
oolumn extending longitudinally from top to bottom. At

666

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA666

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the top is situated Satya Loka, and at the bottom Avlchi. 
Between Satya Loka and Avlchi lie the other six Lokas 
(worlds or regions) and the other six nether regions, alto¬ 
gether making up fourteen Bhuvanas or regions. "Within 
the Meru reside the Gods—that is, the Powers which 
preside over the fourteen Bhuvanas. The centres of Power 
within the Meru are:

1. Adbara 1 Chakra, which is also called Brabma-Padma 
(Brahma-lotus). It is just above the seven nether regions. 
The element earth is within its anther. The seat of Kama 
(desirej is there. Within the seat of Kama is the male 
Deity, Svayambhu Linga, and the female Deity, Kula- 
kundalinl. The Creator Brahma resides in the element 
earth. His female Consort is called Savitri. This is the 
causal Bhurloka. Here resides the Spiritual Sun.

2. Bhima Padma, or lotus, or Svadhisbth&na Chakra. 
The element water is within its anther. Visbpu resides 
here with His consort. It is the causal Bhuvarloka in 
which the heaven of Vishnu, called Vaikuntba, is situated. 
On the right of Vaikunfcha is Goloka, where Vishnu as¬ 
sumes the form of a two-handed being with a flute in 
his band. Here he is associated with the female Power 
R&dhika.

3. Manipura Padma. The element fire is within its 
anther. Rudra resides here with his consort Bhadra Kali. 
This is the causal Svarloka.

4. Anahata Padma. The element air is within its 
anther. I§hvara resides here with his consort Bbuva- 
nesbvarl. Ishvara is the overlord of the three previous 
Lokas and their Lokap&las—viz., Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Shiva. This is the causal Maharloka.

1 Or Malftdhara. as to which and the following chakras, or centres 
see A. Avalon’s “ Serpent Power.”

INTRODUCTION

6671 Or Malftdhara. as to which and the following chakras, or centres 
see A. Avalon’s “ Serpent Power.”

INTRODUCTION

667

5. Vi§huddha Padma. The element ether, or Akfisha, 
is in its anther. The presiding Deity is half-male and 
half-female, called Ardhanarishvara, or Mabagaurl, and 
Sadhashiva, whose Vahana (carrier) is an animal, which 
is half bull and half-lion. This is the causal Jana Loka.

6. Ajna, or Jn&na Padma. There is no element, but 
the universal Manas (sensorium) is the seed here, The 
Deities are Para$biva and his consort Siddha Kali. This 
is the causal Tapa Loka. Here resides the Spiritual Moon.

7. Sahasrara Padma. This is the region of the First 
cause, the cause of the six previous causes; it is duality 
in unity described in the second section. This is the Satya 
Loka.

These are the seven Lokas, or regions, of the Bfihat 
Brahman da.

The reader will note that they are within the Meru. 
We have heard of a Meru of the earth, a mountain situated 
ust were there is a depression on the orange-shaped planet 
of ours. This mountain is said to be a hollow, vertical 
column of stone, which externally holds the earth fast, and 
internally contains the centres in which the Devas—that is, 
the presiding septenary Gods—reside. This idea of Meru 
must be magnified and transferred to the Meru of the 
Bfihat Brahmanda with a view to form a notion of what is 
meant by it.

It must be noted that the Kosmic KundalinI is vehicled 
by Trigurta Prakriti 1 in Satya Loka, where She is called 
Mah& Kundali, and by the eight primary divisions, [earth, 
water, fire, air, ether, manas (sensorium), Buddhi (mind), 
and Ahangkara (I-am-ness)J, of Prakriti in Bhurloka, where 
She is called KulakundalL The highest and the lowest of 
the centres of Power are both guarded by Kugdalinl in

1 That is, Prakriti composed of the three gunas—Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas.

668

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 That is, Prakriti composed of the three gunas—Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas.

668

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Her two aspects. As in the Mfil&dh&ra, so in the Sahasr&ra 
Padma She covers the cleft in the biale Power with her 
hood. She coils up round the Universe with Her tail 
within Her mouth, having the inverted triangles within 
Her coils. The Theosophical Society has adopted this 
symbol from the Tantraa. The triangles, as the Tantrik 
symbol of the male and the female Divinity, being well 
known, it is not necessary to quote Tantra to prove it; 
but as it is not generally known that the serpent lying 
with its tail within its mouth is a Tantrik symbol, I quote 
the following from the Shiva Sanghita:

q ?i n

flW JfT^: flNfajfosTfftl: |

3^ AT 3^3 farTT II ”

1

“ Between the anus and the generative organ is the 
Toni, having its mouth downwards. There is what is 
called the root. Kund&ll is always there. Enoircling all 
the nerves with her body of three and a half coils (and) 
with her tail in her mouth, She lies within the cavity of 
the Sushumn& nerve.”

As the Macrocosm has in it centres of Power, so has 
the Microcosm. The Nirv&na Tantra says:

a ^ ii

qidl*«8+ dq !

q* gqqrfa ii 
qfcnfa iWTFS mi ii ”

INTRODUCTION

669

“ Within the Brahma Padma, the earth, are men and 
other beings. O Devi! they are all worlds, and within 
them are the regions. Within them are the seven nether 
regions and the seven heavens. In this manner in all bodies, 
within the lotuses, are the fourteen regions. 0 Lady Para¬ 
mount ! verily every body is a Brahmanda (world).”The human body is called by the Hindus Bbog&yatna 
—that is, a mansion wherein the reincarnating Ego is born 
to reap the fruits of its Prftrabdha or Kinetic Karma; but 
it is also called Brahma-pura, the city of Brahman. Under 
the Hindu’s law of evolution it must be so; for evolution, 
as I have already pointed out in. the previous section is a 
double parallel motion, one tending downwards and the 
other tending upwards. Pravfitti and Nivfitti, that is the 
outgoing and return movements are conspicuous everywhere 
in nature. For the purpose of reaping the fruits of Karma 
the embodied Ego must come in contact with the outside 
world, its subjective enjoyments and sufferings having come 
to an end in heaven and hell. The objective world is the 
arena where it must battle with the results of its own pre¬ 
vious Karma, and generate new Karma in accordance with 
the Pravritti law of nature. To this end it is furnished 
with a system of nerves, whioh presides over, controls, and 
regulates the functions of the other systems—viz., the cir¬ 
culatory system, the respiratory system, the digestive 
system, the excretory system, the muscular system, and 
the skeletal system. These nerves are classified into three 
main groups: (1) Efferent nerves. (2) Afferent nerves. 
(8) Inter-central nerves.

“ Efferent or centrifugal nerves are those which con¬ 
duct impulses from the central nervous system (brain and 
spinal cord) to other parts of the body." “ Afferent or 
centripetal nerves are those which conduct impulses in the 
reverse direction—viz., from all parts of the body to the

670

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

central nervous system.” “ Inter-central nerves are those 
which connect nerve-centres together; they connect dif¬ 
ferent parts of the brain and of the cord to one another. 1

The Bhogayatana aspect of the human body is dealt 
with in the science of Biology, and its Brahmapura aspect 
in the science of Yoga.The Bhogayatana aspect of the human body is dealt 
with in the science of Biology, and its Brahmapura aspect 
in the science of Yoga.

The earth, as a Microcosm, has its Meru, a stony 
vertical column extending from its nothern point of depres¬ 
sion to the southern point. It is within the bowels of the 
earth that the Meru is situated, and the septenary Gods, 
presiding over the earth, are located inside the Meru. 
What are known as the north and the south pole are only 
circumpolar regions of the earth. The human body is a 
Microcosm as well. Its Meru is the vertebral column of 
bones extending from the depression, called Brahmarandhra 
(the hollow of Brahman, where the two halves of the body, 
like the two hemispheres of the earth, meet) to the anus. 
This bony column is filled with white and grey matter, 
wherein are nerves and nerve cells. The principal Yoga 
nerves aro fourteen in number, of which three are prominent 
—viz., Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna. Like all other nerves, 
their root lies in the Yoni—that is, the region between the 
anus and the generative organ. This region is called the 
Mul&dhara Padma. The Sushumna nerve is within the 
cerebro-spinal axis, and extends from the Muladhara Padma 
to the Sabasrftra Padma, which is in the crown of the head. 
It is called the Jnana nerve, the nerve of pure psychosis. 
The Ida and the Pingala nerves are in the periphery of the 
spinal cord, and starting from the Yoni (the Ida from the 
root of the left testes, and the Pingala from that of the 
right testes), wind up spirally, meeting the Sushumna nerve 
at five points—viz., the Yoni, the root of the generative

1 " Handbook of Physiology," chap, xv, by W. D. Halliburton, 
M.D.. F.R.C.S.

INTRODUCTION

6711 " Handbook of Physiology," chap, xv, by W. D. Halliburton, 
M.D.. F.R.C.S.

INTRODUCTION

671

organ, the navel, the heart, and the throat. From the throat 
Pingala makes a cirouit of the root of the nose between the 
two eyebrows and enters the right nostril; the I d&, making 
a similar circuit, enters the left nostril. In this wise an 
island-like centre is formed at the root of the nose. The 
five points of contact of the I d& and the Pingala nerves 
with the Sushumna nerve are five Padmas, or lotuses, or 
Chakras, or centres, and the island-like place is another 
centre, thus making six centres from the Yoni to the root 
of the nose. Above the sixth centre and below the thousand- 
petal led lotus are two Padmas, which are described in 
connection with the sixth. With these two and the 
thousand-petalled lotus the Padmas, or lotuses, are nine in 
number. All of them are located within or above the 
cerebro-spinal axis, which is called the Meru of the human 
body.

The cause of a thing is called its Prakriti, and that 
which arises out of Prakriti is called Vikriti. The three 
principles of Mola-prakriti (original “ material ” cause of 
the universes)—viz., Sattva (spirit-manifestation), Rajas, 
(activity), and Tanias (inertia) are the primary cause of the 
universe. From these three are evolved eight derivative or 
secondary causes, which are:

(1) Mahat, which is also called Buddhi, or intelligence, 
intuition; (2) Ahangk&ra, the sense of separateness, indi¬ 
viduality; (3) Manas, the mind in its ordinary 6ense, includ¬ 
ing the sensorium, the perceptive, ratiocinative, imagin. 
ative, volitional, emotional, and other faculties; (4) Akaslia 
(ether); (5) Vayu (air); (6) Tejas (fire); (7) Apas (water); 
and (8) Kshiti (earth).

What is called Par&prakriti in the Bhagavadglta is 
Chit Power, which has been discussed in the first section. 
When worlds are evolved, MQlaprakriti and Paraprakriti 
are united kinetically, and the result is the formation of

072072

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

seven, or rather nine, planes of conscious Powers, corres¬ 
ponding to the one primary cause and the eight secondary 
causes of the universe. In the human body, which is a 
miniature universe, these planes or centres of conscious 
power are:

(1) Sahasrara Padma. (2) Nada Padma. (3) Vindu 
Padma. (4) Ajnft Padma, two-petal led Padma. (5) Vi§hud- 
dha, sixteen-petalled Padma. (6) Anahata, twelve-petalled 
Padma. (7) Manipura, ten-petalled Padma. (8) Svadhish- 
thana, six-petalled Padma (9) Muladhara, four-petalled 
Padma.

It may here be noted that the conscious Intelligences 
from the second plane downwards are sound-powers, ema¬ 
nating from the first cause, the MabasQrya (the Grand 
Sun) of the worlds, whose hallowed mansion is the 
Sabasrfira Padma, as also that from the fourth to the 
ninth, the Padmas are petal led by fifty primary sound- 
powers (see second section). These primary sound-powers 
are distributed in the Padmas in accordance with esoterio 
principles of combination of sounds.

Enough has been said in the first section regarding the 
bifurcation of Shakti into male and female, and there is 
no necessity to recapitulate it here. Sufficient be it to 
say that all the conscious powers in the nine Padmas are 
male and female.

Before entering into a general description of these 
Padmas, it is to be observed that the nomenclature of the 
Gods and the Goddesses is according to the religious ideas 
of the great Sadhakas, who have revealed this most esoteric 
knowledge for the Supreme good of suffering humanity. 
The Padmas and their presiding Gods are facts in nature, 
which a S&dhaka has the privilege to 6ee and to call by 
whatever names he chooses. Hindus, Mahommedans, Chris¬ 
tians, Parsees, Buddhists, nay, agnostics, if they choose,

INTRODUCTION

673INTRODUCTION

673

oan enter this Yoga path without committing themselves 
to any particular form of religion. One’s own religion, 
whatever it be, will, if practised through this esoteric 
path, lead the soul with scientific precision on to its 
destination.

With a view to put the subject in a clear light before 
the reader, I shall first divide the nine Padmas into three 
groups. The first three Padmas constitute the first group, 
the region of cognition, in which the three cognitive 
Powers (Jnana Shaktis) are located. It may be called the 
region of pure Ideation in which the universe exists 
potentially. The second three Padmas constitute the 
second group, the region of action, in which the three 
active Powers are located. It may be called the region 
of mind, in which the universe assumes a form more 
definite, having the vital power, the sensorium, and the 
mind as its constituents. The third group of Padmas are 
presided over by the Powers of volition, action, and cogni¬ 
tion, in subordination to the former group, who create, 
sustain, and destroy the fully manifested universe.

At the top of and above the cerebro-spinal axis is the 
Sahasrara, and at the bottom the Mulfidhftra Padma. 
KundalinI is at both these points. The Sahasrfira is the 
MabasQrya, the grand sun, both kosmically and indi¬ 
vidually, within whose effulgence Adyftshakti Mabfik&U and 
Para§hiva are inseparably united. This Power is the First 
Cause, the Vachaka Sbakti of Sadhaka’s worship. The 
First Cause is Saguna Brahman, or Brahman with at¬ 
tributes, and contains within it the three Gupas, the 
three Powers, and the nine planes in the same manner 
as a lotus-seed holds within itself the future lotus-tree. In 
the Maladhara Padma lies the duplicate Sun, which is 
the effulgence of Kula-KugdalinI and Svayambhfi Shiva. 
Brahma, the creator of names and forms, is there with his

43

674

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA43

674

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

consort Sfivitrl. The creative desire or Will, called Kama, 
is there also. As there is a hollow on the top of the highest 
Padma, so is there a cleft on the head of Svayambhtl Shiva, 
which is closed up by Mother KulakundalinI, who, coiling 
round all the nerves at their root and encircling the Shiva, 
breathes forth the rhythmic vital Power through Ida. and 
Pingalfi. Like one who sleeps, all Her other functions are 
apparently at rest; hence She is said to be sleeping. The 
creative Brahma with his consort Sfivitrl is the conscious 
Power of earth.

Earth is evolved from water. The preservative Vishnu 
with his consort Rfidhfi is the conscious Power of water. 
The centre within which they are located is Svadhishthana 
Padma.

Water is evolved from fire. The destructive Shiva or 
Rudra with his consort Bhadrakfi.il is the conscious Power 
of fire. Their centre is Manipura Padma.

These three Pad mas are the three Lokas, Bho, Bhuvah, 
and Svah respectively. The re-incarnating Ego takes its 
recurring births and re-births in these three Lokas.

Higher above, in the heart-lotus, is the region of air, in 
which are located I?hvara and Ishvarl, the immediate cause 
of the three lower regions and their presiding Deities. This 
is called Anfihata Padma. If the Ego can escape the eddy 
of birth and re birth, and merge its consciousness in I§hvara, 
it attains what is called Salokya Mukti. This region is 
called Maharloka. The heart-lotus has behind it another 
lotus, in which lies the seat of the Jlvfitmfi, the reincarnat¬ 
ing Ego. To bring this truth home to the mind of the 
Sadhaka the Upanishad says:

“ gr S*THT *T*TH ?5T 1

INTRODUCTION

675

“ Two friendly birds live together on the same tree; of 
whom one cats the sweet fruits, and the other, without 
eating, only sees.”

Higher up is Vishuddba Padma, in the region of the 
throat. Here is the region of ether, in which are located 
Sadashiva and Mahogaurl. This is the Janaloka.Higher up is Vishuddba Padma, in the region of the 
throat. Here is the region of ether, in which are located 
Sadashiva and Mahogaurl. This is the Janaloka.

Between the eyebrows, at the root of the nose, is the 
region of mind, where Shambhu or Mab&k&la and Siddha- 
kali reside. This is called Ajnii Padma. This region is the 
subjective V&ran&sl 1 (Ki?hl) of Visveshvara, between the 
Ganga and Jamun&—that is, Irfa and Pingala nerves. Within 
the anther of this Padma is the spiritual moon.

The second and third Padmas are, in fact, the higher 
Powers of the fourth—that is, the Ajna, Padma. Their 
Vehicles are Mahatattva and Ahangk&ratattva, which 
arc luminous like the Sun. The second, third, and fourth 
Padmas are Tapas Loka, while the Sahasrara is the Satya 
Loka of the microcosmic human body.

The knowledge of these centres of Power in the human 
body is as old as the Vedas themselves. The great Rishis 
of the Vaidik wisdom-religion (Ju&nadbarma) learnt it from 
their Gurus, and it was passed on until we reach Manu, 
who, having received it by inspiration from the Most High, 
instructed humanity in the knowledge of Yoga, of which the 
doctrine of the centres of Power in the human body is an 
essential part. The wisdom-religion enunciated in the 
Upanishads is based upon Yoga, which one must practise if 
he be solicitous of Brahma-Jnftna (knowledge of Brahman, 
or spiritual knowledge). A mere study of the Upanishads 
does not impart that wisdom. The Upanishads contain fre¬ 
quent references to some of the centres of Power on which 
the attention is particularly directed to be fixed. Rishi

1 Benares.

076

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Benares.

076

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Patanjali’8 Philosophy of Yoga and Vedavy&sa’s Com¬ 
mentary thereon mention these centres as the places in 
the human body where concentration, meditation, and com¬ 
munion should be practised. Rishi Yajnavalkya of Upani- 
shadik fame has a treatise on the method of Yoga in which 
he instructs his wife Gargi as to how Yoga should be 
practised within these centres.

It will thus be seen that the centres of Power in the 
human body are not an innovation of the Tantriks. They 
have their root in the Kostnic Law of evolution, and were 
revealed to mankind for their salvation. But man, ever 
prone to drink of the lethean water of desire, bad, in the 
great efflux of time, forgotten the inestimable boon of Yoga 
conferred on him and, therefore, towards the middle of the 
third cycle—that is, Dvapara yuga—his condition as a 
religious being had greatly deteriorated. In view of this 
state of things, and having regard to the approach of the 
Kali Yuga (age), with its darkening influences, the Lord of 
Yoga, Mahadeva, made a fresh revelation of Yoga with a 
method at once comprehensive and suited to the times. 
In the method thus revealed the centres of Power in the 
human body have been perspicuously dealt with, and cul¬ 
ture through them definitely laid down. Thus has Yoga 
been saved ; and even now there are numbers who have 
kept the Divine science alive by following the method 
of the Lord of Yoga. The description of this Yoga is to 
be found iu the Tantras, and the Tantriks are the masters 
of its practice.

I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to make a 
few observations on Yoga, about which much misconception 
seems to prevail amongst a certain section of the English- 
educated Hindu community. The Hindus have only one 
system of Yoga, which has come down to them from the 
time of the Vedas. It is called Ashtanga, or eight-limbed

INTRODUCTION

677INTRODUCTION

677

Yoga. Maharshi Pantan jali’s “Yoga Aphorisms " constitute 
the philosophy of this Yoga. Although the methods of Yoga- 
practice are in the keeping of Gurus, books on such methods 
are not wanting. From Maharshi Y&jnavalkya and Maha¬ 
rshi Dattatreya to Yog! Gorakshan&tha of modern times 
many have left treatises on the subject, and there is the 
Shiva Sanghiti attributed to Shiva himself. The eight- 
limbed Yoga, for the purpose of practice, is divided under 
five heads:

(I) Mantra Yoga. (2) Laya Yoga. (3) Hatha Yoga. 
(4) Raja Yoga. (5) Raj ad hi raj a Yoga.

I have dwelt upon Mantra Yoga in the previous sec¬ 
tion. Laya Yoga is a Yoga the nature of which is described 
in the Gheranda Sanghita and similar works. Hatha Yoga 
includes what is commonly known as PrfLniyftma, the object 
of which is to produce in one’s own body voluntary 
suppression of breath. In the previous section I have 
quoted Upanishad and Purina to prove its vital impor¬ 
tance in Yoga. The following quotations will show that 
Veda, Tantra, Smriti, and Purina are unanimous in hold¬ 
ing that Pr&gayama is an absolute necessity in Yoga. 
Manu says:

upw ll ”

I

“ As baser things mixed with gold and other metals 
are removed by burning those metals, so the propensities 
of the senses are removed by Pranayama."

Rishi Patanjali says:

“ i »>

“ From that fviz., by practising Prftnfiyama) the veil 
which hides pure knowledge is removed."

678

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRARishi Patanjali says:

“ i »>

“ From that fviz., by practising Prftnfiyama) the veil 
which hides pure knowledge is removed."

678

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Now, it must be distinctly understood that as Pr&na- 
y&ma is Ha£ha Yoga, the elimination of the latter from 
Yoga-practice would be as beneficial to the practiser as 
the removal of his brain would be to a thinker. \oga 
has two divisions, one outer and the other inner. The 
outer division comprises Yama (control), Niyama (regu¬ 
lation), Asana (posture), Pr&iiayama (breath-exercise), and 
PratyaMra (withdrawal), and the inner division com¬ 
prises Dharana (concentration), Dhyitna (meditation), and 
Samidhi (communion). Pranayama, without which Pra- 
tyahara or withdrawal of the senses from their objects 
is impossible, stands at the gate leading from the outer 
to the inner division. It cannot be avoided if one seriously 
wishes to practise Yoga. It may here be observed that 
there is no royal road to Yoga, which is, in fact, nothing 
less than the complete reversal of the natural order of 
things in its aspirer. Round after round, from Yama (con¬ 
trol) upwards, the aspirer must ascend, fortifying his body 
and mind with energy and vitality enough to enable him to 
cope with the nature he has built within himself during 
myriads of births. The chronic diseases of the body and 
the mind must first be grappled with by means of Yama 
(control) and Niyama (regulation), which include among 
other things continence and worship. When the mind is 
full of faith and devotion, and the body is buoyant, due to 
ths conservation of virile energy, it is then that the aspirer 
must perfect his postures (&sana), which help him materi¬ 
ally in regulating his breath.Purification of nerves (dealt with in the fifth section) 
is the next step to be taken. The nerves, in their natural 
state, are covered with impurities, which must be removed 
before commencing Pranayama. To accomplish this there 
are available two alternative processes. The first is by 
inspiration (Puraka), retention (Eumbhaka), and expiration

INTRODUCTION

679

(Rechaka) of breath upon a regulated scale and with the 
repetition of certain Vlja Mantras. The second is alto¬ 
gether physical, and is known by the name of Shatkaima 
(six practices) 1 —that is, Dkauti (washing), Vasti (contiac- 
tion and expansion of the anus), Neti (cleansing of nostrils 
and throat by thread), Lauliki (pendulum-like motion of 
the stomach), Trataga (gazing at an object without winking 
until the tears trickle), and Kapalabkati (inspiration and 
expiration of air, etc.). The second alternative method is 
not mentioned in the Shiva Sanghitft. It need not be 
practised by a real aspirant who has no physical iufiimity 
or disease to obstruct his S&dhana. One of these viz., 
Trataka—however, is practised by those who are very loud 
in their denunciation of Hatha Yoga. In consideration of 
the physical and mental temperament of his Skishya the 
Guru must decide which of the six modes of physical 
culture should be given him along with the first method, 
which is absolutely necessary. It generally happens that 
almost all the six modes are dispensed with.

Here I must warn the reader that mere physical 
oulture, such as Asana, Skatkarma, and Prapayama, are of 
little avail unless they are accompanied with other practices 
of Sidkana. We daily meet pseudo-sanny&sis and athletes 
who exhibit for a few pice their skill in such physical feats, 
and even levitation. They may accompany spiritual self¬ 
culture, but by themselves they are nothing.Having purified his nerves, the Siidhaka must practise 
PrflnAyama, the object of which is to suspend breathing 
for a considerable time without feeling the least uneasiness 
in respect of this reversal of the ordinary respiratory law

1 Sec as to them Introduction to Arthur Avalon's “ Mab&Dirvflna 
Tantra.”

680

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of Nature. This is called Kumbhaka; and when that is 
attained, it is then that real Yoga begins. For those who 
are physically or otherwise unfit to practise Kumbhaka by 
the inspiration (PQraka) and expiration (Rechaka) method, 
other methods are laid down in the Yoga Sh&stra.

To awaken Kulaku^cjlalinl ia the first grand work 
achieved through long-practised Kumbhaka. In the Muia- 
dh&ra Chakra Her vital sheath sends out, through the 
Ida and Pingala nerves, an incessant centrifugal and 
centripetal energy, which draws in and drives out the 
atmospheric air. It is said that the range of the vital 
energy thus sent out extends to nine inches without the 
nostrils. This output of the vital energy has, by volun¬ 
tary effort by means of Kumbhaka, to be withdrawn. When 
Kumbhaka is of sufficiently long duration, the vital energy, 
being no longer able to act and re-act upon atmospherio 
air, rebounds upon the vital sheath itself, thus producing 
an abnormal action, not only upon the vital sheath, but 
on the space in the vicinity occupied by potential fire. 
When those two Nature’s finer forces, allied togther, im¬ 
pinge upon the vital sheath, the mind, ever sensitive to 
abnormal actions of the body, forthwith repairs to the spot, 
and makes its first acquaintance with its real Mother, 
Kulakur^aiinl. KulakuydalinI is thus aroused from Her ap¬ 
parent slumber, and the Ego finds itself at the lotus-feet of 
its long-lost Mother. The glamour of its stepmother, AvidyH, 
for the time being vanishes, and the Ego—the reincar¬ 
nating Jlva of millions of births and sufferings—implores 
the arms of its ever-gracious loving Mother.But the accomplishment of this end by the ordinary 
process of PrSpay&ma is very arduous and tardy. The 
\°ga Sh&stra, therefore, provides certain psj’cbo-physical 
processes, called Mudr&s, which operate as stimuli to 
Kumbhaka.

INTRODUCTION

681

The Shiva Sanghitft says:

au n^sfq ^ n

TOFSp* W 3?r«JT« n ”

r?T^%TT I

“ When, by the grace of the Guru, the slumbering 
Kundali wakes up, it is then that the lotuses are pene¬ 
trated, and the knots (of karma) untied. Hence, to awaken 
the Ishvarl, sleeping on the cleft of Brahman, practise 
Mudr& by all means.”

Being thus awakened, Kui?^alinl enters the great road 
to liberation (Mukti)—that is, the Sushumna nerve—and 
penetrating the centres one by one, ascends to the Sahasr&ra, 
and there coming in blissful communion with the Lord of 
Lords, again descends down through the same passage to 
the MQl&dhara Chakra. Nectar is said to flow from such 
communion. The Sadhaka drinks it and becomes supremely 
happy. This is the wine called Kulainpta, which a Sadhaka 
of the spiritual plane drinks. There are three planes of 
Sadhana, corresponding to the three planes of consciousness 
in which the manifested Divinity is realizable—viz., the 
Adhibhautik (subtle physical) plane, the Adhidaivik (psychic), 
plane, and the Adhy&tmik (spiritual) plane. In reference 
to the latter the Tantra says :

“ to to 3*: to to I

^ 3 * to 3Jfiwr * H ”

“ Drinking, drinking, again drinking, drinking fall down 
upon earth; and getting up and again drinking there is 
no re-birth.”

682

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA“ to to 3*: to to I

^ 3 * to 3Jfiwr * H ”

“ Drinking, drinking, again drinking, drinking fall down 
upon earth; and getting up and again drinking there is 
no re-birth.”

682

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

During the first stage of Shatcbakra Sftdhana, the 
Sadhaka cannot suppress his breath for a sufficiently long 
time at a stretch to enable him to practise concentration 
and meditation in each centre of Power. He cannot, there¬ 
fore, detain KuijiJaliuI within the Sushumna longer than 
his power of Kumbhaka permits. He must, consequently, 
come down upon earth—that is, the MQladkfi.ra Chakra 
which is the centre of the element, earth, aftei ha\iDg 
drunk of the heavenly ambrosia. The Sadhaka must 
practise this again and again, and by constant practice the 
cause of re-birth—that is, vasanti, (desire)—is removed.

When Kumbhaka has, bj’ practice, become of sufficient 
duration, the Sadhaka must concentrate his mind upon 
each of the centres, beginning from MQ’.adhara. Mother 
Kurtdalinl leads him. She unites Herself with the Lord 
of each of the centres, and the Sadhaka must meditate 
on the united male aud female Deity as his Isbtadevata, 
that is, the object of his worship. When meditation on 
each of the centres is thus perfected, the Sadhaka becomes 
master of the element which dominates it. In this wise, 
the five elements dominating the five centres, from Mala* 
dhara to Vi^huddha, being conquered, the Sadhaka is 
emancipated from the bondage of the objective world. 
Wealth, power, prestige, carnal passion, and all their train, 
have no power over him, he having become the master, and 
no longer the slave, of the elements. His mind and body 
gain immensely by the acquisition of such mastery. By 
meditation on and communion with the presiding Deities 
of the centres, his consciousness becomes identified with 
their consciousness. Thus the effect gradually merges into 
the cause, as the Sadhaka rises from the lower to the higher 
Divine Lotuses.The sixth lotus from the lowest—that is, the Ajnft 
Chakra—is reached. It is called Ajna Chakra because

INTRODUCTION

683

therein is the Lord of mind, whose Ajna or fiat creates and 
ancreates the elements and their Lords. Meditation on 
and communion with the Lord of this centre (which com¬ 
prises the Nada and the Vindu centres) renders the Sadhaka 
master of Manas, Aliangkara, and Buddhi. He is no longer 
the creature of duality that he was. Worship of forms 
is passed, and true knowledge is revealed to him. He 
learns to distinguish between Atma and non-Atma. Pra- 
kriti, with her multifold divisions and subdivisions, being 
cognized, At-ma is realized. Mother Kui^dalinl now reveals 
Herself to Her dear son in Her pure Prakfitik garb, and 
leads him on to the Lord of Lords, Cause of Causes, the 
Saguna Ishvara, where the Sadhaka finds Her and the 
Lord in undistinguishable association, and becomes the 
Lord Himself. This is called Raja Yoga.

The Sadhaka, who, having now discovered the Vachaka 
Shakti of his worship, and having himself become the 
Vdchaka Shakti, wishes to become the Vachya Shakti (the 
real object of his search), casts off the last remains of his 
Sukshma Sharlra (subtle body), or, rather, Karana Sharira 
(causal body) and piercing the Spiritual Sun, drops, as it 
were, into the ocean of Chit—the real Shakti, the one true, 
blissful existence, the bourn whence no traveller ever returns. 
This is accomplished by what is called Rajddhir&ja Yoga.In the Taittiriyopanishad self-culture through what 
are called Sheaths (Kosha) is indicated but not detailed. 
Bhfigu, the son of Varuija, is said to have accomplished it 
by (Tapas). Shangkaracharya explains Tapas to here mean 
concentration of the mind and the senses. Concentration, 
meditation, and communion are the higher practices of 
Raja Yoga, and as nothing within the body can be cognized 
without concentration, it is clear that Bbrigu practised 
Raja Yoga for the acquisition of Brahmajnana (spiritual 
knowledge). The Sheaths are five in number—viz.:

684

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

(1) Annamaya Kosha (the Sheath of food). (2) Prftija- 
maya Kosha (the Sheath of life). (3) Manomaya Kosha 
(the Sheath of lower mind). (4) Vijnanamaya Kosha (the 
Sheath of higher mind). (o) Anandamaya Kosha (the 
Sheath of bliss).

Aooording to my view, these Koshas are mentioned to 
indicate the caases from which they arise, for Yoga is 
practised in the lotuses or centres of Power through the 
Sushumna nerve. There is no difference of opinion on this 
point. That Brahmajnana cannot be acquired without 
Yoga, and that Raja Yoga is the most potent means to 
acquire, it is conceded by the Commentators and indicated 
in the Upanishads themselves. Even in the Taittiriyo- 
panishad the lotuses are broadly hinted at thus:

“ H 3TT-ST5J: | affJTvR qjjfaq: |

%5TT^ | ” ^

Within the heart (lotus) is an ethereal space, in which 
the immortal, resplendent Lord of mind resides. The path 
of Brahman lies within the hanging breast-shaped thing 
(cranium) at the crest of the head where the hairs divide.”The centres of Power are the causes from which the 
five Sheaths arise. Bhrigu. by practising Yoga in those 
centres, gradually discovered the Sheaths. His first dis¬ 
covery was the Annamaya Kosha, which arises from the 
elements—earth, water, and fire. Earth and water produce 
food, which is assimilated by fire and converted into the 
substance which forms the body it nourishes. Earth, water, 
and fire, being the presiding elements in Mfiladbftra, 
Svftdhishthina, and Manipura centres respectively, they 
became the objeots of Bhfigu’s concentration in the first 
place; because, by awakening KulakujuJalinl the Sadhaka

INTRODUCTION 685

first meets MQltldhara, then Svadhishth&na, and then 
Manipura.

The Pr&namaya Kosha arises from Anahataand Vi$hud- 
dha centres, in whioh vital air and Akasha respectively 
preside.

The Manomaya Eosha is evolved from the Ajn& centre, 
which is the centre of mind.

From the Vindu and Nfida Chakra.? arises the Vijnfina- 
maya Kosha. And undifferentiated Prakriti in the Sahas- 
rara is Anandamaya Kosha.

It will thus be seen that by mentioning the Koshas the 
Upanishads do not laydown a system of culture different 
from that through the centres of power in accordance with 
the Rujayoga system. In fact, there are only two systems 
of self-culture mentioned in the Hindu Shastras—viz., 
Bhakti Yoga (Path of Faith and Love) and Jnana Yoga 
(Path of the Eight-limbed Yoga). As the Upanishads are 
the science of Jnana (knowledge), it is plain that Bhakti 
Yoga is not meant to be the instrument of culture for 
cognizing the Koshas. I have touched upon the Koshas to 
impress upon the minds of the public which reads the 
Upanishads the fact that in self-culture the path of know¬ 
ledge is but one, and that that path is the Eight-limbed Yoga.I will conclude with a few observations on self-culture 
by Faith and Love (Bhakti Yoga) and self-culture by 
knowledge (Jn&na Yoga). The path, which begins with the 
suppression of breath (Kumbhaka) and ends in the realiza¬ 
tion of the unconditioned, immutable Brahman, is no doubt 
the high road to perfect knowledge; but it is a long, tedious, 
and trying journey, which very few are physically and 
mentally capable of accomplishing. Many aspirants, indeed, 
break down, and many succumb. One who is desirous of 
following this path should undertake it early in youth if 
he be physically and morally strong enough to pass through

686

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the rigid ordeals to which a neophyte is subjected by the 
Gurus who follow the Vaidik method of Yoga-training. 
I have heard it said by a venerable personage, who is 
reputed to be an eminent Yogi and a great Sanskrit scholar, 
that successful Yoga-culture is not possible unless pursued 
according to the Tantrik method, which renders the other¬ 
wise bleak prospect cheerful to the neophyte, and buoys 
him up with strength and courage commensurate with the 
arduous task he has undertaken. Very few, indeed, are 
there who are physically and morally fit for, and who have 
the opportunity to devote their life almost entirely to, the 
pursuit of Jnana Yoga. Besides, the Hindu scriptures 
insist upon the culture of the path of Faith and Love as 
the initial stage through which an aspirant must pass 
before he is fit to undertake the path of Knowledge.

Of the Eight-limbed Yoga Niyama (Regulation) is the 
second limb, in which Ishvarapranidhflna—that is, worship 
of God—is the most prominent feature. It will, therefore, 
be seen that to eliminate the first and second limbs and 
begin with the third is a violation of the scheme of self¬ 
culture laid down in the Sh&stras, the effect of which cannot 
but be disaster.When the fiery path of Jnana Yoga, dwelt upon in 
this section, is fit for but a few, the milky way of Bhakti 
Yoga, which is the subject of the previous one, is open to 
a ll—1 0 tbe young and the old, the weak and the strong, 
and to the man of business who has not much time to 
spare for the systematic pursuit of Jnfina Yoga. Bhakti 
Yoga carries the aspirant slowly but surely through the 
eddy of the world to that bourn where serene peace and 
calm predominate. It yields almost the same result as 
does the other system of culture. The first and foremost 
achievement of a Sadhaka is the awakening of Kula- 
kundalinl. Unless and until that is done, the roving mind,

INTRODUCTION

687

identified with the objective world, cannot be drawn in, 
and concentration and meditation successfully practised.

It is by concentration and meditation that the blessed 
state of Samadhi (communion) is reached, and the Ego is 
freed from the trammels of the objective world. The 
important work of awakening the Divine Serpent is as 
much within the reach of the Tantrik Bhakti Yogi as it is 
of the Jnana-Yogl. Japa and worship according to the 
Tantrik method and other means as taught by the Tantrik 
Guru, will infallibly awaken Kulakundalini.

The following aphorism from Patanjali’s “ Yoga Dar- 
shana Sad h ana pad a,” S. 45, will convince the reader that . 
worship of God leads to Samadhi:

“ fltnfw | ”

“ By worshipping God Samadhi is attained.”

High Tantrik Sadhakas unite both the Yogas in their 
self-culture, and obtain most happy results within a com¬ 
paratively shorter time, without undergoing those priva¬ 
tions and hardships which are the inseparable companions 
of the Sadhakas of the other school.Spiritual self-culture, like the culture of the mind, 
must be begun from the beginning. As with the cultiva¬ 
tion of the mind, so is it with the unfoldment of the spirit; 
the rudimentary stages of knowledge cannot be leaped over 
and the highest wisdom at once attained. External worship 
leads to internal worship; internal worship purifies the 
mind; purity of mind induces concentration and meditation; 
when meditation is ripe communion (Samadhi) ensues and 
the Sadhaka attains, at last, the Highest Bliss.

Tantrik Bhakti Yoga has another phase. It leads the 
intrepid Sadhaka, within but a short period, into the arcana 
of nature, and brings him even face to face with the Vftchaka 
Shakti of his worship. But as these are secret things,

I cannot speak of them here.

688

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The Science of TXntrik—Spiritual Culture

Tantrik Spiritual Culture (Sadhana) connotes three 
terms—viz., the subject, the object, and the means. The 
subject is the aspirer, the disciple who employs certain 
special means for the achievement of certain definite results, 
and who is called the Sildhaka. The object is that which 
is sought to be attained, and is called the SAdhya. Thirdly, 
the means are the various methods of culture laid down in 
the Tantras, which are only to be employed by a disciple 
under the directions of a competent Guru.S&dhakas are of three classes. The ordinary’ house¬ 
holder, who has a family to support, and who is bound by 
social and other ties, belongs to the lowest class. Higher 
Sadhakas, though householders, are free from many of the 
passions, prejudices, and desires for the enjoyment of 
earthly blessings which form the principal mainspring of 
aotion of the lowest class. The highest clasB of S&dbakas 
comprises god-like men, who have no fixed habitation, or 
family, or other ties which chain, who have no social duties 
to discharge, no conventionalities to conform to, no desires 
to satisfy, and nothing which is of this earth to seek. A 
S&dhaka of the lowest class is practically a dualist, for his 
own self is not in harmonious association with the Supreme 
Self of all the universes. His actions, therefore, flow from 
his desire for self-gratification. His devotion to the Sup¬ 
reme or his acquisition of occult Yoga powers is motived 
by the enjoyment of blessings suited to his taste. A S&dbaka 
of the next higher class believes his self to be in esse the 
same as the Supreme Self, thus, fixing his faith on the 
Advaita (non-dual) Brahman, he endeavours to view the 
universe as one unbroken chain of appearances, which, 
though apparently divided, are but inseparable parts of 
one homogeneous whole. His actions, therefore, are in

INTRODUCTION

689INTRODUCTION

689

accordance withhis faith. Passions, prejudices, distinctions, 
conventionalities, and all those hosts of feelings, emotions, 
and motives which crystallize themselves into attachment 
(Raga) and repulsion (Dvesha) have consequently no place 
in his broadened mind. Though living in the world, he is 
not of it. He is called, in the Tantra, a Grib&vadhata. 
Persistent conduct in conformity with these ideas leads 
him to that stage of blessed consummation where he is 
more a god than a man; the egotism of his gross and subtle 
bodies vanishes, he realizes the Eternal Blissful Mother, 
and finds Her in every being and in every thing. He is 
called a Kulavadhata, and belongs to the highest class of 
S&dhakas.

The S&dhya, or the object sought to be attained, varies 
from the Highest Advaita Brahman to the lowest beings 
of the spirit-world, according to the capacity and proclivity 
of the Sadhaka. Unseen beings, intermediate between man 
and the manifested Brahman, good, bad, and malignant, 
swarm in the universe in every direction. They are either 
nature-born, or disembodied human egos. The Science of 
Tantra not only recognizes their existence, but describes 
and classifies them, and provides means by which communi¬ 
cation may be had with them, and by which they may be 
controlled or avoided. Whilst the higher among these 
unseen Powers bestow upon a Sadhaka prosperity, progeny, 
health, fame, power, learning, and the like, and grant to 
him whatever he prays for his welfare, the lower and the 
lowest of the Powers only satisfy his base and carnal long¬ 
ings. He who cultivates acquaintance with such inter¬ 
mediate beings can never hope to attain liberation from the 
sorrows and pains of the world. Even Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Shiva are perishable; allegiance even to them is not 
beyond the grip of Maya. The fate of such worshippers is 
thus summarized in the Bhagavadglta:

44

690

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA44

690

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ Those who worship the Devas go to the Devas; to 
the Pitris (ancestors) go the Pitris-worshippers; to the 
Bhatas (spirits) go those who sacrifice to Bhatas ; but My 
worshippers come unto Me.” — Chap, ix, verse 25.

The Kul&rnava Tantra thus admonishes unwise men:

“ Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha, and other Devat&s, being 
within the category of * matter ’ (Bhttta), are hastening 
towards destruction. Hence do what is right.”

What is right (Shreya) is distinguished from what is 
dear (Preya) in that the thing dear, though honey for the 
time being, is venom in the long run; whereas what is 
right is unsavoury in the beginning, but is ambrosia in the 
end. The Tantra Shastra holds that the right conduct of 
man is to identify himself with what is unperishable and 
perennial Bliss, and to forgo all objects of desire, however 
sweet they may be, as so many binding chains added to the 
already numerous heavy bonds which bind the Karmic body.

The Tantras, like the Vedas, while laying down the 
Up&sana (worship) of hosts of Devas and Devls for unwise 
men, who cannot overcome their cherished Vasanft (desires) 
for present and but short-lived future happiness, proclaims 
the Dpasana of the “ One-without-a-second ” Brahman, and 
explains in detail how that supreme good may be attained.

The manifested aspect of Brahman is the object of 
worship. The Kathopanishad describes the Manifested 
Brahman thus :

ii: crrat i

5?t qfaq «TT I ^ |

INTRODUCTION

691

“ He, who was, by meditation, the first-born before the 
ereation of the five elements, who resides in the hollow of 
the hearts of beings, and is in all causes and effects. He 
who perceives Him in this manner perceives the Absolute 
in Him.”“ She, who was born as Prftna (the ‘ One Life ’)» in 
whom are all Devat&s, who is Aditi (eater of the five 
elements), who resides in the hollow of the heart, is in all 
causes and effects. He who perceives in this manner per¬ 
ceives the Absolute Brahman in Her.”—Kathopanishad, 
chap, iv, verses 6 and 7.

The Shvet&shvataropanisbad opens with the query, 
What is the cause of the universe and all that is contained 
in it ? The answer to this question is given in the follow¬ 
ing verse:

“ Immersed in concentration and meditation they 
found the Power (Shakti) which is the cause of the universe 1 
to be lying hidden by Her own Gunas ” (Sattva, Rajas, and 
Tamas).—Chap, i, verse 3.

Reading between the lines, the truth is patent that the 
manifested Brahman is Shakti, and that Shakti, though 
one and indivisible, has dual action in cosmogenesis, and 
is therefore expressed in terms masculine and feminine; 
to explain, however indirectly, the idea of Divine causa¬ 
tion in human language. The manifested Brahman being 
essentially the same as the unmanifested Absolute Brah¬ 
man, Shakti, when unmanifested is Chit (pure conscious¬ 
ness), and when manifested, is Chit with Mayft or Prakfiti,

1 The phrase means ^^TfFTT arcffenar i com¬

mentary of $hangkar&ch&ryya.

692

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

which is the material cause of the Universe, and which is 
the “ own attribute or gu^ia ” (fqjjor) of Shakti.

The Tftntrika View of Shakti is exactly the same, as 
has been explained already in an earlier portion of this 
essay. In Sarvasamr&jyaraedha Stotra of Dakshin&k&ll the 
following very clear statement is to be found:

qferci sfarar n

3 igresvn rrai q*T i

^TSlfrF,^ BT ^ II

(The word s5PJT in the above is thus explained in 
Brahmay&mala: frfe l fa fci I “ This Chchaya

is Devi-Shakti emerged from the body of Brahman.”)

The above four lines may be thus rendered:(The word s5PJT in the above is thus explained in 
Brahmay&mala: frfe l fa fci I “ This Chchaya

is Devi-Shakti emerged from the body of Brahman.”)

The above four lines may be thus rendered:

“ The ineffable Superior Power is supremely attribute- 
less (that is, Absolute). This Devi (Power), being playful, 
imagined forms in ShOnya 1 (that is, in the Absolute). In 
the initial work of creation, when She saw Chchaya, then 
She became the Power of Volition, and by Her Mahak&la 
was created.”

Duality in unity is the characteristic of the Tantrik 
doctrine, and all its methods of worship are based upon 
this truth. The Kularnava says:

BB cfN Iffllfffqqftrn: II

“ Some wish (me to be) Advaita (non-dual), and others 
wish (me to be) Dvaita (dual). He who knows me in 
essence is free from both Dvaita and Advaita.

“'The soundless Sat chit ananda Brahman is called Shunya" 
(Y og&s varoday a).

INTRODUCTION

693

The Sadhaka who realizes Duality in the “ one-without- 
a-second ” Brahman liberates himself from the bondage 
of Maya. He is a true knower of Brahman; he is a true 
Haula.

$3 3 sTOSlfa: 3 m I

fcfcT: e ^ II

“Kula is the Power of Brahman; Akula is called Brah¬ 
man ; he who knows Atma to be essentially Kula and Akula 
is called Kullna.” — Kulanjava Tantra.

As in Kosrnio creation Shakti becomes N&da and Vindu 
— Shakti and Shiva—so does Shakti become male and

T • •

female in individual creation, the male prinoiple existing 
in the smallest degree in the female, and the female prin¬ 
oiple existing in the smallest degree in the male. These 
two great principles, which are ever in association in every 
act of creation, sustentation, and dissolution, are never 
divorced from each other, but are ever inseparably con¬ 
nected, though the predominance of the one or the other in 
objects present the spectacle of apparent separation.It is Shakti alone which can save a Sadhaka from the 
quagmire of the senses and their objects and lead him on 
to the blessed abode of Brahmananda (Brahman as Bliss). 
The individuality of a person is but the resultant of his 
feeling and emotions, ideas and thoughts in relation to 
the objective world, whioh he has experienced in thou¬ 
sands of births and rebirths, and whioh bind him down 
to the world and its objects. The dissolution of his 
physical body translates him into a region of temporary 
subjective happiness or misery, but as sure as the sun 
rises from the east, he must again pass into the mother’s 
womb, there suffer untold misery; and thence issuing into 
the world, must there for a brief span of time be tossed

694

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

to and fro by his own Karma. This play is enacted for 
ever and ever, and there is no escape therefrom unless he 
can extricate himself from the grip of Avidyfi, (nescience), 
the charming syren of worldly bondage, and take refuge 
at the holy feet of Vidyfi (knowledge). Vidya alone can 
make a Sadhaka the master of himself, and the conqueror 
of the elements, the senses, and the mind.

*JT foil HI H5TRP1T HT 3 fcan I

“Vidya is Mabamaya, She should be served by the 
wise; he who worships Avidyfi enters the region of dark¬ 
ness.”—Shaktfinanda Tarafiginl.

How Shakti became Shabdabrahman has been pre¬ 
viously described. Shakti, when manifested, is Prana, the 
one intelligent,.all powerful, creative vital principle:

w moft snqn i qtfar 3^ 1^.

“ From the Atmfi this Prana is born. As shadow is 
to the body, so is Prana associated with Atma; it comes 
to this body by the action of the mind.” 1 —Pra§hnopani- 
shad, verse 32.“ From the Atmfi this Prana is born. As shadow is 
to the body, so is Prana associated with Atma; it comes 
to this body by the action of the mind.” 1 —Pra§hnopani- 
shad, verse 32.

Hiranyagarbha or Prana is called the ‘ First-born' in 
the Upanishads. We have seen that Hiranyagarbha and 
Aditi are one and the same, and that Aditi is what the 
Tantra called Shakti. We have also seen that Shakti as 
KulakundalinI is the Mother of Universes, whose Breath 
is life. The fifty Matfikfi sounds, which form Her body, 
are Pr&nik principles, from which universes are evolved,

1 Karma which works is SangskAra, and the latter manifests as the 
mind. Therefore SangakAra as mind produces life. With the destruc¬ 
tion of mind (manas) there is liberation.

INTRODUCTION

695

by which they are sustained, and into which they are 
disintegrated. “Sound” and Prana are univocal terms:

“(Sound) is called N&da, Prana, Jlva, Ghosha, etc."— 
Prapaiichasara, 4th Patala.

In Rudray&mala, quoted by the author of Praijatoshini 
Kulakundalini, is called “ of aerial

form, located in the Mal&dhara Chakra.”

The knowledge of Shakti as Prana is of vital import¬ 
ance in spiritual self-culture. The Prashnopanishad thus 
summarizes the result of such knowledge:

pin ^ i

“He who knows in detail the birth, the arrival (in 
human body), the place (in the body), the pervasiveness, 
the external (as sun, etc.) and the internal (as eyes, etc.) 
manifestations of Pratta becomes immortal.”—Verse 41.

The Upanishad lays down the Sutra or principle, 
which the Tantra works out and develops into a method¬ 
ology, by the faithful observance of which a Sadhaka can 
not only approach the “ the One Life,” the Sbabdabrah- 
man, the All-blissful Mother, but, freeing himself from 
the Karmik sheath which made him dissimilar to the 
Mother, become Her Very Blessed Self.It is only Yoga culture, described under the heading 
“The pilgrimage of the human ego,” which enables a 
Sadhaka to know in detail “the birth, the arrival, the 
place,” and the like of Praija.

The relation of the manifested Brahman or Shakti to 
the universe in its three planes of existence and itfextra- 
kosmik aspect must be thoroughly grasped by a Sadhaka 
of the two higher classes. For without such knowledge

696

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

Sadhana is impossible, and its ultimate result, the realiza¬ 
tion of Brahman, unattainable. The following is quoted 
from the Ma^dukyopanishad as a key to the acquisition 
of such knowledge:

srawnof m ii ^ n

flHTW <?Stafq5tfcl3Sr: qspT:

<TR: II * II

flHTW q^folfrlS^: qfqfqvf.gtpirfl) fgrftq;

^.: II 9 ||

** ^ qnq qriw q q;qq fqjj q^qfq i

31®*W r V?!*I5 ; %^3^: qi^ftq:

II ^ II

ii ^ ii

q qf|:q? qtqqq:q? q q^Tiqqq q q^ qjq^ | ai^q-

qsqqfiqqqraq^asaiqfq^qqsqq^qq^KqjKqqqij qqgfasiq faq-

q|q =q$$ q^d H SfRqj B fq?q: || a ||

“ The syllable ‘ Om * is all that is the universe, and 
is Brahman; it is the Atma, and is Brahman. Brahman 
(as Para and Apara) consists of four parts. (Not that 
Brahma has really four parts, but to explain its all-per¬ 
vasiveness parts are imagined.)”

“ The first part is the Wakeful State, cognizer of the 
objective world, seven-limbed, 1 nineteen-mouthed, 1 gross- 
eater (called Vaishv&nara).

1 Seven limbs: Heaven is his head, the sun is hU eyes, air is his 
Prana, the Aka?ha is the trunk of bis body, water is the hinder part of 
his body, the earth is his foot, and fire is his mouth.

’ Nineteen mouths—vis., ten Senses, five Pr&pas, Manas, Buddhi, 
Ahaftgkara, Chitta. Because he cognizes, feels and eats the gross 
objects by means of these nineteen mouths or doors, therefore he is 
called gross-eater,"

INTRODUCTION

697

The second part is the Dreaming State, cognizer of 
the subjective world, seven-limbed, nineteen-mouthed, eater 
of desires (called Taijasa ‘).INTRODUCTION

697

The second part is the Dreaming State, cognizer of 
the subjective world, seven-limbed, nineteen-mouthed, eater 
of desires (called Taijasa ‘).

That is, the State of Sound Sleep, where no desire 
is felt, no dream is seen, whioh is the undistinguishable 
cause and effect, in which the mentalities of the two pre¬ 
vious states are undistinguishably blended together (as 
different objects in pitch dark nights), which is blissful 
(unaffected by the senses, their objects, and the mind), 
the eater of bliss and cognizer of the wakeful and dream¬ 
ing states through the mind. This, the third part, is 
called Prajfia.*

He, Prajfia, is the Lord of all, is allwise, is the regu¬ 
lator of all beings, is the birthplace (yoni) of all, is the 
creator and destroyer of all beings.*

Not the cognizer of the objective world, not the 
cognizer of the subjective world, not the cognizer of both, 
not one in whom all states of mind are inseparably blend¬ 
ed together, neither cognizer nor non-cognizer; unseen, not 
an object of action, imperceptible, undefinable, unthinkable, 
ineffable, cognizable only by the knowledge that the One 
Atma pervades all the three previous states; in which the 
three previous Mayik states are not—that is, the undif- 
ferentiable, peaceful, all-blissful Advaita the fourth—He is 
Atma, He is the fit object of knowledge."

The human mind being the result of accumulated Karma, 
good, bad, and indifferent, of untold ages, its natural alli¬ 
ance with the objective world has rendered it rather a

Taijasa is beyond the cognizance of senses. He feeds upon mental 
states only.

These three states of Divine Consciousness are symbolized by 
the three letters of afol (om) ; si being the first state, and is called 
fcigveda: 3 the second state, is called Yajurveda; and *1 the third state, 
is called S&maveda.

698

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA698

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

product of such alliance than an entity possessing intrinsic 
capacity for cognizing the Supreme. As it is, the formation 
of a true concept of the Godhead is a difficult task, which 
depends much more upon the purification of mind, by 
religious works, penances, devotion, and the like, than upon 
the power of the intellect, however cultured the latter may 
be. Such being the case, it is but natural that Sadkakas 
should oftener than not form a partial idea of the Supreme. 
The Sadhaka’s idea of the Supreme regulates the results 
of his Sadhana. The Prashnopanishad thus sets forth 
the matter:

mfh ii * ii

« n » n

q: 5^ q i g^qqfavq|qfa

«q^T: I *TCT <rF$HRWT qq ? | HqTcJTPTT fqRgrfi:

a gfara gwftyd n ^ u

“ If he (the Sadhaka) meditates on Brahman as consist¬ 
ing of one part only (the first part, as cognizer of the 
objective world), then by such meditation, acquiring know¬ 
ledge, forthwith does he come to the earth (after deathj ; 
the first part as Rigveda transmits him to the human 
species, where, by penance, continence, and faith, he enjoys 
glory."

“ If he meditates on Brahman as consisting of the second 
part (cognizer of the subjeotive world), he attains the sub¬ 
jective world. He (after death) is carried by Yajurveda to

the Soma Loka (Moon). There enjoying glory, he comes 
back amongst men."

INTRODUCTION

699

“ He who meditates on the Great Lord as one whole, 
consisting of all the three parts, attains to the effulgent 
sun. As a snake gets rid of its skin, so is he freed from his 
impurities, and is raised to the Brahma-Loka 1 by Samaveda. 
He realizes by meditation the Paramitma, which is within 
the body of every being, and which is greater than the 
aggregate of Jlvas (individuals).” * *The Tantrik systems of self-culture are constructed in 
strict accordance with the three aspects of the Divine 
Mother, so that no Sadhaka's work and toil may go amiss. 
They raise him step by step from the most external belfry to 
the innermost Tabernacle of Mother Mahakall, never forci¬ 
bly weaning him from his habits, but transforming those 
habits into fragrant flowers and grateful offerings.

The importance of possession of a thorough knowledge 
of Shakti is thus stated in Niruttara Tantra:

f^T ftqioj fa n

“ After many births the knowledge of Shakti is acquired. 
O Devi! without the knowledge of Shakti Nirvana is 
unattainable.”

The knowledge of Shakti is dependent upon self-culture 
for its attainment, for mere intellectual knowledge gained 
by study cannot raise a man to the state of Divinity. Even 
intellectual unerring knowledge of the transcendental 
science is not attainable without devotion to God and Guru.

1 Called also Satyaloka. the highest region of the manifested 
Supreme.

* The manifested Supreme is the soul of all Jlvaa. He is the 
Antar&tma of all beings within the form of Linga Deha. The apparently 
separated Jrvaa are heaped together, as it were, in him without distinc¬ 
tion. hence he is called “ aggregate of Jlvaa " While in the

Brahmaloka-state, the Sadbaka is blessed with the vision of the Abso¬ 
lute, and of union with It as water unites with water (B. K. M.).

700

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

The mind must be thoroughly trained in spirituality, and 
brought in harmony with supersensuous truths before one 
can hope to be able to understand the true import of that 
with which the transcendental science deals.

3# mh flfTWT: ||

“ The meaning of these truths of which I have spoken 
is revealed to the high-souled man, who has supreme and 
equal devotion to DevatA and Guru.”3# mh flfTWT: ||

“ The meaning of these truths of which I have spoken 
is revealed to the high-souled man, who has supreme and 
equal devotion to DevatA and Guru.”

The path of desire and the path of non-desire or cessa¬ 
tion are the two paths, either of which a Sadhaka must 
choose for himself. As man is a bundle of desires and propen¬ 
sities, the regulation of such desires and propensities on lines 
which may eventually free him from those bondages of woe 
is the end and aim of all method, either Vaidik or Tantrik. 
As the four Vedas are replete with hymns and prayers to 
God, or the Gods for the attainment of objects of desire, so 
also the Tantra* are full of methods for the attainment of 
the same end. By following those methods, desires and pro¬ 
pensities are circumsoribed, passions curbed, and animal 
nature transformed into Divine nature. It is in the lot of 
but a few to pursue the path of cessation from the outset. 
The vast majority of men must be looked after, in order that 
they may not only save themselves from being mere brutes, 
but may become good fathers, mothers, sons, brothers, 
neighbours, citizens—healthy, robust, and God-loving. The 
Tantra proclaims that its votaries shall become all these, 
irrespective of caste, colour, and creed.

Whether one be on the path of desire or on the path 
of cessation, Earma Yoga, Jnana Yoga, and Bhakti Yoga 
are indispensable to him. By continually practising works 
prescribed by the Tantra* one’s mental and physioal

INTRODUCTION

701INTRODUCTION

701

imparities are expurgated, the mind becomes pare and 
transparent, so as to be susceptible of the presence of the 
Divine light within; the body is no longer the habitual 
store of Rajasik and T&masik cells which incite the senses 
to ignoble works. By Jnanayoga knowledge of Divinity 
is gained, and by Bhakti Yoga, Jlva and Shiva are united, 
and the supreme good attained; for, according to T&ntrik 
Monism, not even a scintilla of difference is admitted to 
exist between .Jlva and Shiva essentially.

One of the characteristic works prescribed in the 
Tantras is what is called Prayoga (deputation). Ordi¬ 
narily, what man achieves is the result of his own exertions 
aided by the exertions of others, or of labour and skill 
purchased. But human exertions, labour, and skill often 
fail to produce a desired result. In the Hindu mind belief 
in the help of supersensuous beings is as ancient as the 
Vedas. Indeed, the Vedas are replete with sacrifices to 
Devas for attaining desired objects. The Tantrik System, 
called “ Deputation,” is less arduous and less expensive, 
and can be given effect to within a short time. When at 
critical moments human efforts and skill give way, man 
in every country naturally raises his eyes upwards, im¬ 
ploring Divine help and mercy. Divine help and mercy, 
though in fact attainable, are yet very difficult to attain, 
for the degree of spiritual culture requisite for such a 
purpose is the attainment of but very few. The Tantra 
provides, however, comparatively easy means by which 
Devatas may be communicated with and their help obtained. 
This branch of Tantrik knowledge is no part of a man's 
self-culture, it being merely an art, more useful than 
spiritually efficacious.

Whether in the path of desire or in the path of cessa¬ 
tion, the worship of one Brahman is the burthen of the 
Tantra, and the object of that worship is the liberation of the

702

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA702

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

individual soul from eternally recurring misery, uniting Atma 
with Atma by the dissolution of the Karmik body. To achieve 
that end, concentration, meditation, and communion are 
essential. But an object is necessary upon which to 
concentrate the mind. The universal or all-pervading form 
of Brahman functioning in undivided, homogeneous, efful¬ 
gence, through the waking, dreaming, and slumbering 
Btate of being, is scarcely such an object as the mind 
can grasp. Pratlkas* are therefore used as its subtitute. 
The Avat&ra forms, Yantras, and human forms in special 
PQj&s, are the best forms. Images are fashioned after 
Avatdra forms. When by dint of Sadhana Divine effulgence 
is cognized in a Pratlka, then is it that the Sadhaka’s vision 
opens to see the universal Form. The incarnation forms* 
of the Divine Mother, called the Ten Mah&vidyas, are the 
Upasya Devata (the worshipful God) of the Shakta Tantriks. 
Sadhakas, according to their predilections, heredity, or 
mental conditions, worship one or other of them, believing 
the particular Form to be Brahman. Images of such Forms, 
or Yantras, are made, and external worship made to them 
as Brahman. If a Sadhaka’s Sadhana be intense and high, 
Brahman or the Divine Mother manifests Her Divine Self 
in the image, which for the time being glows with Divine 
Life.

asiT JlfcRTfeS ||

raws fairas: i

1 PratTkaa are substitutes of Brahman in Up&saniL Such substi¬ 
tutes are an aspect of Brahman, or a part of it, and are worshipped as 
if it wore Brahman itself (B. K. M.).

These forms are Nitya — that is, everlasting (B. K. M.).

INTRODUCTION

703

“ As milk, pervading the whole body of cows, comes 
out through the teats, so is the all-pervading Deva revealed 
in images, etc. The reflection (of Atma) in images, eto., 
being the same as the Atm& of the Ssdhaka. 1 By virtue 
of the Puja and the Sadhaka’s faith, the Devata appears.”— 
Kularnava Tantra.Sacrifice to God or the Gods in the form of food and 
drink is an old institution found in the records of almost 
all religions, ancient and modern, in all parts of the world, 
not even excepting Christianity and Mohammadanism. 
But the ethics of these religions do not give the raison 
d’etre of such an institution. This seems to be, on the face 
of it, an anomaly, considering that the God of most of 
those religions is extra-kosmic and formless. The Vaidik 
manifested God being both immanent and transcendent in 
the Eosmos, the legitimate conclusion is what the Manduk- 
yopanishad quoted above lays down as positive truth. In 
the Bhagavad-Glta, the Lord says:

“ He who offeretb to Me with devotion a leaf, a flower, 
a fruit, water, that I accept from the purified self, offered 
as it is with devotion.”—Chap, ix, verse 26.

The Tantra, which claims to be the most correct and 
practical interpretation of Vaidik truths, holds that the 
S&dhaka who longs to be in harmony with the Divine 
Mother should not only sacrifice to Her as Vaishv&nara, 
but as Taijasa and Prajna as well.* Indeed, the whole 
life of a Sadhaka is a sacrifice; he must efface his own 
personality and Ahangk&ra (I-am-ncss), dedicating all his 
thoughts, deeds, and speech to the Divine Mother who

1 The Sfldhaka communicates the ray of his Atma to the image by 
what is called Pr&napratishth& (Life-giving ceremony). (B. K. M.)

’ See Introduction to A. Avalon’s “ Mah&nirvana Tantra," and 
** Serpent Power."

704 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

resides in full glory in his heart, and is the real cognizer 
of the body.

Understand me as the Knower of the Field (body) in all 
Fields, O Bh&rata!”—Bhagavadglta, chap, xiii, verse 2.resides in full glory in his heart, and is the real cognizer 
of the body.

Understand me as the Knower of the Field (body) in all 
Fields, O Bh&rata!”—Bhagavadglta, chap, xiii, verse 2.

Thi9 is called Atmanivedana (self-dedication). Egoism 
is the cause of heterogeneousness. The thought, “ I am the 
doer, I am the eater, I am the enjoyer, and I am the 
sufferer.” makes apparent divisions within the homo¬ 
geneous One, thereby rendering the individualized egos 
a prey of the attractive and repulsive forces of Avidyfi and 
their miseries. The initial work, therefore, of a Sadhaka 
is to surrender himself completely to the Divine Will.

“Whatsoever thou does!?, whatsoever thou eatest, 
whatsoever thou offerest, whatsoever thou givest, what¬ 
soever thou doest of austerity, 0 Kaunteya ! do thou that 
as an offering unto Me.

“ Thus shalt thou be liberated from the bonds of action, 
yielding good and evil fruits; thyself harmonized by the 
Yoga of renunciation, thou shalt come unto Me when set 
free.”—Bhagavadgftfi, chap, ix, verses 27, 28.

The question is, How can this complete resignation be 
effected—resignation in act, resignation in speech, and 
resignation in thought? Men’s physical wants, passions, 
propensities, and emotions are the motives of his actions— 
either these are to be suppressed for the development of 
his spiritual nature, or they are to be so used that they 
may not bind, but become useful agents for leading the 
small self to the Great Mother. Suppression being out 
of the question, various devices have been resorted to for 
circumscribing them, prominent among which is Brahma- 
charya (absolute continence) and offering of food to God 
before it is taken. A Sadhaka on the high spiritual path 
should be a celibate and very abstemious in food. Such 
are the hardships and restraints imposed upon him that

INTRODUCTION

705INTRODUCTION

705

oftener than not he succumbs in his effort to soar to his 
high aim ; the strength of his wings fails, and he falls down, 
bruised*and broken. Thus rendered unfit for both the 
lower and the higher paths of culture, his life becomes a 
desert of burning sands and scorching winds. A house¬ 
holder is bidden to offer food to God, and then eat it as 
Prasada (graoious leaving). He is enjoined to cohabit with 
his wife only during a few days in the month when fecunda¬ 
tion is physiologically possible. These, as restraints on 
the propensities of eating and sexual intercourse (the two 
most prominent propensities which rule man’s life), are 
serviceable bits wherewith to check the wayward steed of 
the senses; but the desire to relish the one and the other 
remains as fresh as ever. Though constant restraint may 
put down, it cannot efface. So says the Lord in the 
Bhagavadglt&.

“ The objects of sense, but not the relish for them, turn 
away from an abstemious dweller in the body, and even 
relish turneth away from him after the Supreme is seen." 
—Chap, ii, verse 59.

The Yogavfi^hishtha Ramayana says:

fefitfld dl3d!3$i I

33T II

“ Man’s disrelish for the objects of sense does not arise 
until the Knowable is known, as a creeper (is not bom) in 
a desert.”—Chap. ii.

So long as relish remains, so long is man’s individual¬ 
ity in the ascendant; and so long as man’s individuality is 
in the ascendant, so long he is the enjoyer of food, drink, 
and the like. How can, then, all his actions be offered to 
the Supreme so that the offerer may be liberated from the 
bonds of aotion ?

700

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA700

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The answer is, By self-surrender or resignation to the 
Supreme. The T&ntrik Sadhaka is enjoined to feel the 
Supreme as Divine Mother and Father, not only within 
himself, but within every being. By knowledge of Sh&stra, 
by faith, and by devotion to God and Guru, he must persist¬ 
ently practise this feeling so that in time it becomes a part 
of his nature. The nature of the Supreme as the True Self, 
the real doer and the real feeler being realized, he can place 
his Karmik self completely at Her disposal in all his acts 
with a devout heart and inflexible will; he can worship Her 
with his thoughts, feelings, and propensities, whatsoever 
they may be, and realize what he recites every morning.

“ From the time I rise in the morning till evening, and 
from evening till morning, whatsoever I do, 0 Mother of 
the Universe! that is surely Thy worship.”

This is the mental attitude of a hero (^k:) as 
distinguished from the mental attitude of the animal man 
Org:), who, however otherwise devoted and wise, eats the 
gracious leavings of God, relishing them as an individual 
only 1 and does not dare unite with his wife as an act of 
divine worship. Whereas every mouthful of food, every 
sexual relation, and every act is an oblation of the hero, 
who by these practical means spiritualizes his nature, and 
with the Divine Mother’s blessings becomes a Man-God

'When food (prasftda) is offered to the Devatft by the Pashn it i.

Mrt 1 for e th hat th ®. 1Devatft “‘a the subtle portion and leaves the irross 
part for the worshipper. The latter eats it as devotee (Bhakta)— that 
s, as one who considers himself as separate from the Devatft and 
whom he worships. The Vlra. however. Regards

he n.? t8 ’ “ “ th * D "« a - “<1 »ot ttofaiwSS

' h0 Th “ “ * fondamenta] priacipla of tha

INTRODUCTION

707

to be eventually dissolved and lost within the bliss¬ 
ful effulgence of Mother Anandamayl.*' h0 Th “ “ * fondamenta] priacipla of tha

INTRODUCTION

707

to be eventually dissolved and lost within the bliss¬ 
ful effulgence of Mother Anandamayl.*

Brahmamayl* has created this earth as the field wherein 
Jivas must reap the fruits of this Karma, and as sparks 
of Divinity perpetuate the human species. To reap the 
fruits of Karma the body must be kept up by food, and 
to perpetuate the species sexual union must take place. 
But considering the misery attendant upon both these 
functions, none would care to participate in them were 
not the monitors of hunger and passion implanted in him, 
to goad him to action which he would not otherwise 
willingly take. But mere hunger and passion would not 
effectually serve the Divine purpose if relish for both were 
not implanted in him. As the Divine Mother and Father 
enjoy their creation in the aggregate, so does the Jlva in 
the individual. The Jlva being essentially the same as the 
Divine Mother and Father, bliss (Ananda) is his natural 
heritage.

Thus both eating and sexual union are Divine acts, 
which have nothing impure in them. Impurity is the 
progeny of Ajfl&na (absence of knowledge), which, having 
divorced Divinity from the Divine act, has lowered it 
into being mere sexual enjoyment. Thus, man divine 
has fallen from his high state to that of man the beast. 
It is the work of the Vlra (hero) to undo the instincts born 
of Ajfl&na and harmonize himself with the Divine Law.

The Divine Mother creates, maintains, and annihilates 
the Universe as an act of retributive justice to Karma- 
bound Jlvaa. It is Her pleasure or play (Lila), that Her 
children, by reaping the fruits of their Karma, may return 
to Her lap, never again to be tied and fettered by Karma. 
She enacts this drama of the universe, and Herself enjoys 
it. Her actions, however, cast no fetters round Her,

' The Devi who is Brahman.

1 The Devi who is Bliss.

708

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' The Devi who is Brahman.

1 The Devi who is Bliss.

708

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

because 8he is free from attachment and repulsion, which 
are the binding cords of Maya. It is this feature of Her 
character which differentiates Her from the Jlva. So the 
Vedftntik terse saying is:

fa: *?TCT,

“ He is God, under whose control is Mfty&; He is Jlva, 
who is lorded over by Her (Maya,).”

The Jlva, who sets his heart upon the task of freeing 
himself from the bondage of Maya, must infuse every 
part of the alluring frame of the Enchantress with Divine 
love, and then throw them as a sacrifice into the Fire of 
that Love. It is only by this means that lording Maya 
may be brought under control.

What a Sadhaka must do to free himself from the 
attractions of objects of sense is thus stated in the Vama- 
keshvara Tantra:

wnft & n

•T'RflT WT: PZ3T: I

areTOTOfl ft ftnwt qfrtftf&n*. u

Hfaqfr ^ ftW P^cTT: |

TO TOTOT5T3: ^rfl: ||

M wht >23^%^ ft* i

II

TO* ftTO«ft qTUTHTO: ||

flfftft qjfiRfT ftRKl* fa* ||

INTRODUCTION

709

RT^ ^ 3^ I

WFi R^lft 5^ RiSRtS*! || 
sftfciR ^ aira sifagwr i 
aiWTft *ft*TOF*lwft^: II

^?irs ^ fan ilaro&i i

«ll 9 $ft *35® JTT^^fa a RR: n 
3^5iw«*n3ri5T fasreTOPn **n: i 
qft&i w>i n

3r4a *&& i

& rrwt »r^mt R^ar: u

fljR;*aftarci»iT*rcn^<jnR a i 
$faTT: Rmifa fa^ RvT^ *flT: II 
RT«IT: R^aT: torF^gRja^R^T: I

<^3 flwroji R % % *ffon ^ai: ii 
fcRftfR^TRf^SRsfaM ftfa: 1 
anRmafaqft <£*1 ftfa** ii 
3wfftfa(fa qtf^Fsrft wr I 
fan Ria-. arafat a*u n

3133? aaK fomias fa^ra a i

am: fwfaaa 3«iJfataa* ll

“ Many are the branches of knowledge touching work, 
some distinguishing features of which I shall briefly tell 
thee. In literature there are nine Rasa 1 ; there are said 
to be eight Rasa in Yoga; in learning there are eighteen 
Rasa; nine are the Rasa in the Yoga of devotion; in 
objeots of sense there are six Rasa. 0 Devi! the Rasa 
of wine are five. These are the fifty-five Rasa. 0 Dear1 This term means taste, relish, sentiment, juice, etc.

710

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

One! hear attentively the names of the Rasa in the different 
works mentioned. The nine Rasa in literature are—sexual 
love, heroism, compassion, laughter, wonder, terror, hate, 
peace, and anger. 0 MahadevI! O Dear One! In Yoga- 
Shistra, Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pr&^t&y&ma, Pratyahira, 
Dhirana, Dkyana, and Samadhi are the eight Rasa told 
in detail. 1 The eighteen Rasa of learning are—(1) Chhan- 
das, which are the legs of the Veda; (2) Vyakara^ia 
(Grammar) is known to bo its mouth; (3) Shiksha is its 
nostrils; (4) its hands are said to be Kalpa; (5) 0 Devi! 
Jyotisha (astronomy, astrology) is its eyes; (6) Nirukta 
is its ears; (7-10) each of the four Vedas is a limb of the 
Veda; (11) Mlmangsi; (12) Nyaya*; (13) Dharma Shastra; 
(14) PurOija; (15) Ayurveda; (16) Dhanurveda; (17) Gan- 
dharva Veda; and (18) Arthashastra.' The nine Rasa in 
Bhakti Yoga (Yoga of devotion) are known, 0 Devi! to 
be thinking, praise, meditation, remembrance, serving 
the Holy Feet, worship and hymn, servitude, fellowship, 
and self-dedication. In objects of sense, O Parame^hvarl! 
the six Rasa are—flowers, scents, the beloved woman, 
bed, dress, and ornaments. In wine the five Rasa are 
that made of molasses, that made of honey, that made 
of sugar-cane, that made of fruits, and that made of corn."

“ Those who are experienced in the feeling of Rasa in 
these are called Rasika.”

0 Parame§hvarl! 0 Devi! regulations concerning 
work are of five classes—namely, regulations as to daily 
service, Japa, purification, external and internal worship, 
and Pura^hchara^a. 1 Regulations as to daily service relate 
to morning, noon, and evening rites.”

1 See Introduction to A. Avalon's " Mah&nirv&pa Tantra." 
' Philosophies so-called.

Science of medicine, warfare, music, and economics.

INTRODUCTION 7111 See Introduction to A. Avalon's " Mah&nirv&pa Tantra." 
' Philosophies so-called.

Science of medicine, warfare, music, and economics.

INTRODUCTION 711

“Experiencing all the Rasa and performing the pre¬ 
scribed works, the S&dhaka, with tranquil mind, shall 
perform Panj&bhishechana.” 1

M tfTHI RRT I

^ WIW II

Jjwrcft >fal. I

<$R <KRT 511^0 II

a«n § 33 Rfa i 
rt 4 f^*TT stoa a afcifaia faa n 
3 Rfasta **raa i 
fan 3^ a Prt^ II

ag:R{\^: WJ. vatftftlii 3RR R I 
RURT^ SR^fe: SRR^aifRRTif. II

^sn*n srenflmr rtrr i

RTa^tf IW*n^ srafoi II

?&r aia$<R a gsaiftaatf^ i 
ara f4ar a ^ ^4 aifar rtr^ ii

5I5^sqiq^ui |

^ftaTanKfaRT^ gafta gfafara n 
4^1: RSJfSfaTT: irasRT^RTaaPRT: I 
^naa ntf jftatar m ftoffaa aa^ ii 
3 afaw i

oqq^nf^Ra^fta: II 
guwnfa a^a rtr^ aaa faa I 
R5lH^d aft* amw^OTT^: II

1 The POrpftbhishechana here mentioned is not the second, but the 
fourth degree of initiation, known as P&raadiksb& (B. E. M.)

712

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

^ ^ I

are ^ TO: ||

sr^T *?ft<n$qri qprasrrRfa^ u 
^ jjwhwrtwi i 
<J3R =5f qw ^ ||

*ifa: ^ nm ii

^T %i W*W ?T*nf^^ft ^qfil: | 
^ ^ %rrft fa *flra m \\ 
*&& «tr m \ qrorara fto i 
$m f^cqrr*ft ffa h

f^RJFT 'R951?T&J^ b] 5^frl I

^ ki smfsrtf ^ ^ ii

f^TT fa*H WW%4 I

“ Hear attentively from me the different characteristics 
of the Rasa. Sexual love should be learnt of the hero; 
in it are compassion, etc. 8exual love, etc., and hate, etc., 
arise from the sexual Rasa ” (Shring&ra). 1

“ 0 Devi! when sexual love realises the Supreme 
Object (Paramartha),* then is Supreme tranquillity. (The 
S&dhaka) then acquires the state of Rudra."

1 Which 18 the root principle of all creation. Sexual love in this 
passage refers to its manifestation in the individual. The sexual Rasa 
from which it arises is its general principle of origin.1 Which 18 the root principle of all creation. Sexual love in this 
passage refers to its manifestation in the individual. The sexual Rasa 
from which it arises is its general principle of origin.

’ That is when shringara, which the author translates as sexual 
love, is experienced in the union of the Jivatma and Paramatma— that 
is, the supreme object of Sadhana. The Bhairavl is Devi. The s/UImlm

IB OQ1VA. In thair nninn fhorn tc nn diotinofmn

INTRODUCTION

713

*' 0 dearer than life ! hear from me the purport of this. 
0 Dear One ! as the body cannot move without limbs, so 
the Vedio path none oan enter without a knowledge of 
Chhandas (metre). O sweet-tongued Devi! Chhandas is 
not beautiful without rhetoric. The eye penetrates that 
whioh is unseen, so does astronomy; eclipses of the sun 
and the moon make astronomy a science of direct evidence. 
Nirukta is a branch of Veda; from the branches Brahmfi is 
born. Devotion to Brahm& arises from hearing songs; 
song arises from the mouth and nostrils. Without song 
there is no dance; dancing is born of songs. Shikshft and 
drama, etc., words and grammar are the couples insepara¬ 
bly allied. The Vedas with their six limbs explain the 
Brahman. The Nyaya with Mlmangsa surely explains 
Brahman. From constant thought upon the Param&tma, 
knowledge of Brahman arises in the Jlva. Precepts are 
settled according to Dharma Shastra; Puranas spring from 
it, 0 Dear One! The Jlva, the Supreme object of whose 
life is bliss Divine (Brahmananda), and who is eager for 
self-preservation, must learn Ayurveda (science of life—i.e., 
medical science), Dhanurveda (archery), and Gandharva 
Veda (musio).”“ 0 Devi, the fully wise Sadhaka, with honey, juice of 
sugar-oane, milk, corn, scents, garlands, dress, and orna¬ 
ments, should worship in union woman, who is the image 
of the Mother of the Universe. 0 Devi! the culture of the 
Rasa of sexual love 1 consists in the worship of woman.* * 
Worship and the five classes of work already stated should 
be performed by the hero (Vlra) for attaining the Devi. 
By worship arise nine degrees of devotion and ecstasy of

1 8 bringararasasAdhana.

* VanitapQjane. According to the " Mah&nirvana Tantra" the wor¬ 
shipper's own wife.

714

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Rasa. Then the Yogi, practising Yoga, shall be immersed 
in oommunion ” (Sam&dbi).

“ Therefore, 0 Mahe§h&nl, have I already stated that 
by feeling all the fifty-five Rasas one loses all desire for 
objects of sense and worldly work. 1 The effect of non¬ 
desire is wonderful, and the Divine Mother is gratified 
by it. Embodied man cannot give up Karma (action) so 
long as he is embodied; so, concluding in this wise, divine 
acts by festive, religious, and other works, the S&dhaka 
verily becomes liberated in this life (Jlvanmukta) by virtue 
of his full knowledge and bliss of Rasa.”—Chap. liv.Wine, as a means of spiritual self-culture, is another 
singular feature of some forms * of T&ntrik S&dhana. In 
India the free use of wine in social and religious festivals 
was fairly general in the Satya, Treta, and Dv&para Ages 
(Yugas). It was, however, probably after the ruin of the 
race of Yadus during the last days of Shrl Krishna’s life 
that stringent laws were framed in the Smyiti Sh&straa 
against the use of wine by the three higher classes. Those 
laws were sedulously administered by the Hindu Govern¬ 
ments, and the result was a general abhorrence of spiritu¬ 
ous drinks. Nothing better could have been devised for 
the welfare of man, for wine not only wastes the body, but 
it works havoo on the intellectual and moral faculties, 
pulling down man to the level of beasts. The Tantra 
Shftstra—the Word of God—is fully alive to this :

\ Each pleasure is but a portion (khanda) of the whole mixed with 
pain. He who has felt the whole (akhanda) attains Brahma bliss and 
loses desire for worldly things.

Not of all and by some Tantras only.

INTRODUCTION

715

griffs *ai«f>i}ui i

^fqnoi ^ qi« foi JR? 3^ II

?VRl^ 3 g*NH cT^qH |

WCNI'W ^Tf^3 II

“ One who, being unripe in Kaula knowledge, wishes 
to drink wine, is, 0 Devi! a great sinner, and is unfit to 
perform all religious works.”

" He goes to Raurava Hell who drinks unpurified 
wine, commits rape, and slaughters animals for self¬ 
gratification.”

“ 0 Devi! that is called drinking of wine which is not 
for Divine purposes; that is a great sin according to the 
Vedas, etc."—Kularpava Tantra.

Further, it is said in the same Tantra:

Wl^T fafig aim | |

fafig * 1^3 qrou: n

551% SiflTfem: II

11

*#sfq srmql at% 3^1; *3: liFurther, it is said in the same Tantra:

Wl^T fafig aim | |

fafig * 1^3 qrou: n

551% SiflTfem: II

11

*#sfq srmql at% 3^1; *3: li

“ If man could attain spirituality by drinking, then 
all ignoble drinkers would be liberated. If residence in 
heaven be the result of meat-eating, then all carnivorous 
beings would be righteous. If, O Devi! enjoyment of 
women be the cause of liberation, then all creatures by 
enjoying women would be liberated.”

Why, then, it may be asked, are all these “ gates of 
hell ” introduced in self-culture, the object of which is 
liberation from the fascinations of M&y& ? The same 
Tantra whioh prescribes Sadhana with woman, wine, and

716

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

meat, prescribes also various other methods of worship, 
and supplies Mantras, without which Hinduism all over 
India would be paralyzed. It is irrational to accept one 
portion of a Sh&stra as valuable and reject another as 
worthless. The earnest inquirer must forgo his prejudices 
and passions, cherished ideas and preconceived notions, 
before he can enter the holy temple of spiritual truth 
embodied in the mandates of Lord Shiva. It must always 
be remembered that this is spiritual culture, and not the 
culture of the body and its senses.

The Tantra Shastra, like all other revelations, does 
not always assign reasons for its mandates, but asserts 
that as Sadhana is practical, the most direct evidence of 
the truth of its statements can be obtained by accepting 
the Sadhana and working according to instructions.

The principle underlying this Sadhana is thus enun¬ 
ciated :

|

“ The Great Bhairava has ordained in the Kaula 
doctrine that Siddhi (spiritual advancement) must be 
aohieved by means of those very things which are the 
causes of man’s downfall.” — Kular^ava Tantra.The consideration of this principle leads us, in the first 
place, to adopt the evidence of analogy in regard to the 
physical body of man. Cobra poison, arsenic, aconite, 
croton, opium, and other animal and vegetable poisons, 
are destructive of life. But skilfully prepared and puri¬ 
fied, they not only save life but invigorate it. The Indian 
physician’s preparation of cobra poison is famous for its 
life-giving and invigorating virtues, so are the apothe¬ 
cary’s preparations of arsenic, etc. In some parts of India 
raw arsenic is used in moderate quantities for prolonging

INTRODUCTION

717

life and patting off old age. It would thus appear that 
nothing is absolutely harmful in nature. By skilful mani¬ 
pulation even poison yields manna. The poison of wine, 
by skilful treatment according to T&ntrik precepts and 
instructions of Gurus, is not only rendered innocuous, but 
is turned into a distinct force of labour, energy, patience, 
and intrepidity, all of which are essential in spiritual 
culture.

Wine, by exciting the brain, turns the mind to that 
channel of thought which is uppermost in the drinker’s 
mind.' When the mind is pre-eminently devotional, the 
effect of wine upon it is to render it more so by concen¬ 
trating all the thoughts upon the object of devotion. 
Ecstasy (Ull&sa) and communion (Samfidhi) are after a 
long practice its riper developments in a Sadhaka.

That which most attracts men to the taking of wine 
is its power to develop happiness in the drinker. The 
S&dhaka’s mind, freed from all base and ignoble thoughts 
and feelings, enjoys Brahmfinanda (Brahman Bliss) under 
its influence.

As to the use of meat and fish, the Vaidik and the 
T&utrik Shftstras agree in holding that slaughter of animals 
for Divine purposes is not sinful.

RTfori ft*n q a rcfcftfau fa* n 
arfafN 30} *rfa ite.** 1RTfori ft*n q a rcfcftfau fa* n 
arfafN 30} *rfa ite.** 1

“0 Dear One! in sacrifices to the Pityis and Gods 
killing of prescribed animals is ordained. For self-gratifi¬ 
cation killing of beings is nowhere permitted. Even a blade

1 The effect of wine is to intensify and reveal what is already in 
the mind. Hence it is said, In vino vtritaa.

718 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of grass should never be cut without a lawful purpose, 
Killing for the satisfaction of the Gods and twice-born 
(Dvijas) 1 is not sinful."

The Kul&npava Tantra says:

7T*T fagT: qf?«77T: |

3 ^ fqgj quft ||

fqf&rraq*!. i 
H^fqqT: ^ ||

Siqfl qpqqj feg ||

STT^ $Rq&5T: flqq ||

OT:qf^a hp w cftfa ^ | 
m HTCl# *n?i?T 57*jqT^q II 
f^cq fqifr j

^ ffafar JT ||

577 ?rf%: fsFr^V qrq: *qqq |

aqfe 11

TOuft Kq ffd ^ sqqfnr?p^ I 
^ifa^ST* *m q^fnfqTHq «fti& ||

fonfa^smsnif q^i qi^ff fq^ n 
• ••••• 
JT^HTW^TSnWT^T 'TTqfrl I 
wmr\ ^qqRTqt ^rqq^qfqq^: ||

' Hera Brfthm&nas to whom the sacrificial meats are given.

INTRODUCTION

719

3FT$ SWUHI^ =q |

jftcl *TgJTTfllfq T 31 ^ ^ « 'TT^t II

HqqT$lfaT?qq II

fcqq q-. §*n*ik a qratf | 
roro^ar<ft& sfosTqfqqfiq: n

rn^nqf ftfoqq, i 
qmis* faq-pre f?oi $fa<i fqq n 
q*n fqq^n flfaqiq foftqq i 
qgqiq s*it *m ataataTO ii

« 03 ?t: f35ma*l: fl*qfa*ITq qTH^T«I |

‘rag?! ft^ra ^q*iT ^ n

3NBT ^qqfsqi q^iafaq. I

qgqfffoft q'tar ^jsfq jr? ^ n

^qifqfeqqoi flWCTfq i

RRTOft R ^TTT: 1%: qifaf|fl$T: II 
^«r «Rlt: 5lfai: *351 * I

5 if% ai a u

TOresnwfo^atansafspfr: i 
*r 3 »t^ ^ pnfoft sfifatoFi: u 
f?*nfq q^g^Fii sprit $aaTfa% i 
ST?st g?gsn^fs a: a 3^ 11

• •••••

Tsifa^af^ ^fs si paisa Tsfs^ 1 
^tT3$*r% a ftss fa% u

720

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

qg5Rlf^m5^: fq^ ||

tti 3 ^T »RTft W» » WI^ II 
fFTTrl fl%f5g<JTTfa<I: |

«?Wta: f^Ra) ||

^TTf^^wftrl: ^tf^T |

gf^Rq): JTT3H: ||720

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

qg5Rlf^m5^: fq^ ||

tti 3 ^T »RTft W» » WI^ II 
fFTTrl fl%f5g<JTTfa<I: |

«?Wta: f^Ra) ||

^TTf^^wftrl: ^tf^T |

gf^Rq): JTT3H: ||

“ As the personal servants of a King and not the State 
servants are dear to him, so, 0 Devi! are those who are 
devoted to internal worship, not others. Those who 
with devotion offer with their hands meat and wine cause 
bliss (Ananda); they are, my Dear One! Kaulikas. Our 
Supreme form described as Sat, Chit, and Ananda, verily 
develops, 0 Dear One! by the enjoyment of wine. Bhairava 
inspires those who drink with a knowledge of the principles 
of Kula (Shakti), and who view all objects with an even 
eye. As a dark house is illumined by light, so does the 
Atma, enveloped by Maya, become visible by drinking. 
O Dear one! those who drink wine sanctified by Mantra 
(the mystic words of power) and offered to Gurudeva 
will never drink the mother's milk again (that is, will never 
be reborn). Wine is Shakti, meat is Shiva. Their enjoyer 
is Bhairava himself; the bliss arising from their union 
is called liberation. Ananda is Brahman. It exists in 
bodies. Wine reveals it; hence Yogis drink it. Without 
attachment, fearless, unmoved by pairs of opposites (as 
pleasure and pain), without curiosity to know, versed in 
Vaidik lore, the Vlra drinks wine which grants blessings.”

INTRODUCTION

721

“ 0 P&rvatl! the drink of nectar purified by Mantra 
develops god-like nature, and liberates man from the 
bondage of the world.”

• • • •INTRODUCTION

721

“ 0 P&rvatl! the drink of nectar purified by Mantra 
develops god-like nature, and liberates man from the 
bondage of the world.”

• • • •

For the gratification of the Gods, and also for the 
attainment of the knowledge of Brahman, should wine 
and meat alone be taken; he is a sinner who consumes 
them in order to satisfy his carnal appetite. Wine should 
be drunk in order that a clear perception of the form (of 
the Devata) arising from the Mantra (of the Sadhaka) 
may be thereby attained, and for pacification of the mind 
and the undoing of the bondage of the world. He who 
takes wine and the rest for self-gratification is a sinner. 
These things should be taken without thirst and longing, 
for the satisfaction of the Devata alone. 0 Dear One! 
the partaking of fish, meat, wine, and other things which 
cause excitement, at times other than those of worship, 
is sinful. As Soma-drinking is prescribed to Brahmanas 
during sacrifice, so wine, as that which yields joy and 
liberation, should be drunk at its proper time. It is only 
after the true import of the Kula Sh&stra has been learnt 
from the Guru that one should partake of the five articles, 1 
otherwise one becomes a sinner. Even a Kaula goes to 
hell who drinks after the manner of Pashus" without 
worshipping Bhairava Deva, and without doing Tarpana 
with Mantra."

• • • •

" He w ho withdraws the senses from their objects and 
unites them with Atma is a true meat-eater, others are 
mere slaughterers of animals. The Shakti of a Pashu is 
asleep, that of a Kaula is awake; he who enjoys this Shakti

1 See Introduction to A. Avalon’s " Mahanirvflija Tantra." 
* PanchamudrA

722

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

is an enjoyer of Shakti. He who enjoys the bliss arising 
from the union of Par&shakti with Atma has true sexual 
union, 1 others are mere enjoyers of women. O Mistress 
of Kula! he who partakes of the five articles, knowing 
from the mouth of the Guru their true significance, is 
liberated.”• • • •

“0 Devi! I myself with Thee accept with pleasure 
Shrlchakra PQj& performed with Mantra by one, well- 
versed in the Sh&strik import of Pflja and Abhisheka, 
who is devoted to Devatfl and Guru, who worships daily, 
who knows the esoteric meanings of the Kula Shastra, 
who with zeal performs worship, who has received instruc¬ 
tions from Guru, whose mind is pure, who is active, who is 
devoid of anger and greed, who is averse to the religious 
practices of Pa§hus, and who offers oblations. The wise 
Yogi should perform Kula-pflja, filling his mind with 
the thought * I am Bhairava.’ Possessed of these and other 
qualities the Kaulika who regularly worships Thee obtains 
enjoyment and liberation.”

These rather long extracts will, it is hoped, amply 
repay perusal, and bring home to the mind of the un¬ 
biased, earnest inquirer the truth of the compatibility of 
enjoyment and liberation existing harmoniously, provided 
that such enjoyment be lawful and not sinful. Yoga, 
which liberates, and Bhoga (enjoyment), which chains 
rdown, have been treated as though they were poles asunder 
in other schools of thought, which make it incumbent 
upon the pursuer of the one to shun the other as one would 
shun a deadly cobra. The effect of this has been referred 
to more than once in this essay. The Tantra Shastra

' This is the Shring&ra Rasa of the Vlra.

INTRODUCTION

723

reconciles the two, not only in theory, but in practice. The 
testimony of thousands of Tantrik Yogis from remote anti¬ 
quity corroborate its truth.INTRODUCTION

723

reconciles the two, not only in theory, but in practice. The 
testimony of thousands of Tantrik Yogis from remote anti¬ 
quity corroborate its truth.

According to the eight-limbed Yoga process, Kula- 
kundalinl can be united in the thousand-petalled lotus with 
Para$hiva. This is the union of Shiva and Shakti, and 
the fluid arising from this union is wine which the Yogi 
drinks. The truth of this is unquestionable, and forms 
the basis of the Shatcbakra-Sadbana briefly described in 
a previous part of this essay. This system of Sadhana is 
called Jfiana Yoga—that is, the Yoga of Knowledge as 
distinguished from Bhakti Yoga, the Yoga of Devotion. 
The Yoga of Knowledge is so arduous and difficult that but 
very few amongst many thousands can appreciably succeed 
in it. On the other hand, very many persons are physically 
unfit for it.

Tantrik Yogis who pursue the path of knowledge 
regard the path of devotion as indispensable, for the latter 
wonderfully develops the spiritual faculties, unties worldly 
bondage more effectually, and operates as a guarantee 
against fall, the danger of which attends every step taken 
in the practice of the Yogi of Knowledge.

Tantrik Bhakti Yoga stands upon its own feet, firm, 
sure, unerring, and suited to all constitutions and to all 
stations of life. It is for the prince as for the peasant, 
for the poor as for the rich, for the man of business as for 
the man of leisure. It makes no distinction of caste, colour, 
oreed, or nationality, welcoming one and all who will bow* 
to the lotus-feet of the Divine Mother. It exhorts no 
privation, imposes no hard and fast conditions, but ac¬ 
commodates itself to the tastes and capacities of its 
followers, so that they may slowly but surely march on 
like heroes to the capture of the citadel of bliss. It only 
asks the ordinary disciple to be honest, sincere, kind,

724

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA724

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

compassionate, and trnthfal, and to keep his passions and 
greed under oontrol. If he wants prosperity, progeny, and 
other material advantages, let him devoutly pray to the 
Divine Mother, and “ depute ” Her angels to secure them 
for him. His desire will thus have a better chance of being 
gratified than by servitude, servility and many another 
questionable worldly artifice.

Passion and greed being the two great powers of 
AvidyS, which sow seeds of disease, death, discord, poverty, 
and ruin broadcast all over the world, they are so handled 
in the Yoga of Devotion that they not only lose their own 
strength, but become cheerful friends of the sojourner. The 
path of devotion—that is, the Kaula path—is therefore a 
blessing, not only individually, but socially.

Extreme Ved&ntik pessimism has rendered India what 
it is to-day—neither soaring to heaven nor blooming on 
earth. Both heaven and a fruitful life on earth were the 
portion of its great ancestors who were wont to perform 
the Soma sacrifice in bygone ages. Casting our eyes on 
the West, we are dazed by the dazzle of worldly wealth on 
the one hand, and terrified by the ghostly shadow of 
poverty on the other. Big religious bodies there are, but 
where is God ? Whilst India has no faith in the world, 
and only a dreamy faith in heaven, the West seeks a 
heaven in this world. The best remedy for this disease 
is to be found in that religion which both fully recognizes 
the reality of the world, and regards it as the training- 
ground whereon man may grow into God. And so says the 
Kulargava Tantra:

^ ASK: ||

“ O Mistress of Kula! in Euladharma, Bhoga 
(enjoyment) becomes complete Yoga (union of Jlva with

INTRODUCTION 725

Brahman), bad deeds are made good deeds, and the world 
becomes the seat of Liberation. 1 ’

Om Shftntih, Om Shintih, Om Shantih, Om Kftll.

Benares, 
March 23, 1914.

Barada Kanta MajumdIr

IBrahman), bad deeds are made good deeds, and the world 
becomes the seat of Liberation. 1 ’

Om Shftntih, Om Shintih, Om Shantih, Om Kftll.

Benares, 
March 23, 1914.

Barada Kanta MajumdIr

I

OBEISANCE TO THE SUPREME DIVINITY. THE 
ALL-GOOD AND BEAUTEOUS MOTHER

CHAPTER XI 
ON MANTRA 1

The tribute of water which Bhagav&n Sflryyadeva, 1 the 
Regulator of the entire universe, takes from the earth 
durmg the eight months of K&rtika, Agrahaya^a, Pausha, 
Magha, Falguna, Chaitra, Baishakha, and Jyaishtha, He 
returns to the same earth in the form of rain during the 
four months of Ashadha, Shravana, Bhadra, and A§hvina. 
This taking of tribute again is performed by the stretching 
out of arms. Arm is the name of the agency by which 
things are done.* * For this reason Suryyadeva is called by 
the names of “ the thousand-rayed one,” “ the thousand¬ 
armed one," and so forth. Terrestrial water is drawn by 
the power of the sun, and rises to the solar region. 4 It is 
this power of the sun which is called by the name of 
Raudra. 4 It is, however, a matter for consideration why 
the power of the sun is called Raudra. It ought to have 
been oalled Saura (that is, appertaining to the sun). 
Raudra is what appertains to Rudra. Why, then, is sun¬ 
shine called Raudra ? In order to understand that it is 
necessary to discuss the subject * of Gayatrl. Brahma^il,

Mantratattva—that is, the subject of and principles relating to 
Mantra. 1 Sun God.

* There is from the beginning a play on the Sanskrit word kara, 
which means "tribute.” “ray." and "arm,” and is derived from the 
verbal root Kri. to do.

* S&ryy&loka. * Sunshine. * Tattva.

728

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA* S&ryy&loka. * Sunshine. * Tattva.

728

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

Vaish^avl, and M&heshvari, the presiding and controlling 
Deities of the three gunas of sattva, rajas, and tamas, the 
Creatrix, Preservatrix, and Destructress respectively, are 
the three Shaktis 1 whose forms are meditated upon in the 
solar orb at the three Sandhyas.* * In the creation, preserva¬ 
tion, and destruction, which take place every day, the 
morning Sandhya, is the time of creation, the noon Sandhya 
is the time of preservation or maintenance, and the even¬ 
ing Sandhya is the time of destruction. In the morning 
the world of Jlvas is freed from sleep, the t&masa* Shakti 
who rules supreme at the time of dissolution, 4 and, loosen¬ 
ed from the grasp of darkness, awakes. In the night 
the universe, although existing as before, remains cover¬ 
ed by a tamasa envelope, so that, notwithstanding 
its actual existence, it is not perceived by Jlvas in a 
state of sleep. For this reason, the universe must then 
be considered “ non-existing," otherwise dissolution 4 has 
no meaning. 8 In dissolution 4 the world of Jlvas exists 
in the womb of Prakfiti in a subtle form as seeds* 
and then later the first blooms of creation appear 
through the power of Brahmashakti. In the creation also 
which takes place every day it is this Brahmashakti who

* !?hakti is that " which makes able," or the power by which things 
happen or act. That power belongs to, or more properly is, the Brah¬ 
man (God), and manifests in varions ways (see Chapter VII of First 
Part). At Sandhya the SOdhoka worships the three powers of the 
Brahman as creator, maintainer, and destroyer of all things. These 
Shaktis are contemplated upon in the female forms of Brahm&pl. 
Vaishnavi and BandrT, or M&heshvarT, the Shaktis of Brahm&, Vishnu, 
and Shiva, threefold aspects of the One.

* That is, morning, noon, and evening.

* That is, the Shakti which manifests the dark inert Tamas Guna.

(See Introduction.) * Pralaya.* That is, morning, noon, and evening.

* That is, the Shakti which manifests the dark inert Tamas Guna.

(See Introduction.) * Pralaya.

* That is, if the world ceases to exist daring pralaya, it mast cease 
to exist (to the sleeper) daring sleep. If the condition during sleep is 
not pralaya, then nothing can be called such.

ON MANTRA

729ON MANTRA

729

emerges from the solar orb and suffuses the whole world. 
This is why in the morning-SandhyA rite, Brahma§hakti, 
the Creatrix, should be contemplated upon in the form of 
BrahmanI in the solar orb. At noon, when the adult world 
has reached its full maturity, when the forces (Shakti) of 
hunger and thirst have established their full sway over 
the world of Jlvas; when even trees, plants, shrubs, and 
creepers are wearied of drinking the rays of the sun, and 
yet, under the influence of the force (Shakti) of preservation, 
hanker for that drink till evening; when the sun has been 
established in mid-sky between the mount of sunrise on 
one side and the mount of sunset on the other, it is then 
that in the noontime-Sandhya rite—the Vishnu§hakti, the 
Preservatrix of the Sangsara—must be contemplated upon 
in the form of Vai^h^iavl in the solar orb. Again, in the 
evening, when the world of Jlvas has done its daily play 
and, weary of body, seeks to enjoy the blessing and balm 
of the sleep of dissolution, 1 it is then that Shiva§hakti, She 
who gives the unalloyed bliss of the enjoyment of the balm 
of dreamless sleep* and is the Destructress of the universe, 
appears (in order that She may provide that balm) in the 
solar orb in the form of Mahe$hvari. She covers life with 
Tamasa Shakti, and drops the curtain of sleep on this 
SangsAra, the MAyik playground of error, and dispels from 
the minds of Jivas all the impressions which they have 
received from the outer world, such as wife, children, and 
so forth. It is this Shiva?hakti who must be worshipped 
in the evening-SandhyA rite. The ShAstra, therefore, enjoins 
that the Sandhya-rite, if performed other than at the pre¬ 
scribed time, is ineffectual. To let the morning-Sandbya 
(when the Shakti of creation is supreme) go by, and to 
worship the Shakti of creation during the period of supre¬ 
macy of the Shakti of preservation, is tantamount to living

1 Pralayo. * Sushapti.

7301 Pralayo. * Sushapti.

730

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in the domain of one King and paying the tribute due to 
him to another. The same rule also holds good in the case 
of the performance of the midday-Sandhya in the evening 
or at night when the supremacy of the Shakti of preserva¬ 
tion ha9 passed, or in the case of the performance of the 
evening-Sandhyft on the following day after the supremacy 
of the Shakti of destruction has passed away in the previous 
evening. I here give a general idea of the matter. To 
understand it more deeply and accurately we should know 
that Mahaprakriti, 1 who is the aggregate of the three 
Shaktis of creation, preservation, and destruction, is com¬ 
posed of the three Gunas of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas.’ It 
is not that when one of the Guijas is in play that the other 
Giuta$ remain dormant. The eternal play of creation, pre¬ 
servation, and destruction is ever equally present in Her, 
but we fail to recognize this with our imperfect vision. 
Let us suppose, for instance, that we see a hungry tiger 
killing a deer. "We think that it is the play of destruction 
of the Mother of the world. But a keener insight into the 
inoident will make it clear to us that even in this play of 
destruction there equally exists, in succession, the play of 
the three Gui?as of Her whose substance is the three Gupa^. 
We see only the destruction of the deer. But although this 
is a case of destruction so far as the deer is concerned, 
it is a case of preservation if we look at it from the point 
of view of the tiger. For the tiger’s body is preserved 
by the blood and flesh of that deer. Again, the genera¬ 
tion of the tiger's cub is due to the maintenance of the 
tiger’s body. Consequently, what is destruction for the 
deer is creation for the tiger’s cub, just as our own eatiDg 
involves destruction of the seed-power of the tree, pre¬ 
servation of ourselves, and creation of our children. It

' Great Pralq-iti.

' See Introduction.

ON MANTRA

731' Great Pralq-iti.

' See Introduction.

ON MANTRA

731

must, therefore, be understood that in Her the three forms 
of play of the three Gunas exist equally and always, but 
that according to the Prarabdha Karma 1 * * of Jlvas they 
appear as creation to some, preservation to others, and 
destruction to the rest. The Mother’s play is uniform, 
but with this difference—that, owing to diversity in the 
Karma of Jlvas, the nature of that play is different.* She is 
the aggregate of all Shaktis whose substance is the eternal 
play of all three Gupas. That triple play of Hers does not 
rest for a single moment. It is only the blind vision of 
Jlvas involved in error which makes it appear as if suoh 
play oocurred in succession. The same water which quen¬ 
ches the thirst and gives life to one man may give death 
by drowning to another. What are we to understand 
from this—that water possesses the power (Shakti) of pre¬ 
serving life, or that it has the power of destroying it ? 
Again, fish, tortoise, crocodile, shell-fish, and other aquatic 
animals are born in that same water and live therein, and 
die if taken out of it. Are we to understand from this that 
water has the power of creating and preserving life ? The 
same sunshine which destroys the life of the wayfarer 
oppressed by summer heat in some far-stretching plain 
gives life to the cold Himalayan traveller whose limbs have 
been stiffened by the fall of snow. Say, now, does this 
indicate the life-destroying power or the life-preserving 
power of sunshine ? Without this sunshine trees, shrubs, 
and creepers dwindle and die. Again, this very sunshine 
draws water from the earth and carries it to the solar orb. 
It was N&rftyapa, * the preserver of the world, who des¬ 
troyed R&vana, Kumbhakanja, Kangsa, 4 and others in their

1 Ripe Karma.

’ That is, it is either creation, preservation, or destruction.

' Vishpu. * Daityas, or demoniac beings.

732

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Ripe Karma.

’ That is, it is either creation, preservation, or destruction.

' Vishpu. * Daityas, or demoniac beings.

732

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

incarnations, as Rama and Krishna. His name varies 
accordingly, and is suited to the different forms of His 
play in different capacities. The energy 1 which draws 
water from the earth is Raudra 3 or terrible, so far as water 
is concerned. The same energy which previously mani¬ 
fested a different form then assumes a terrible aspect * * 
for the purpose of drawing water. For this reason, although 
it is Saura or solar energy, it is then Raudra or terrible 
energy. Thus sunshine is called Raudra or terrible. The 
play of His forms and their names corresponds to the play 
of the Gugas. Brother Sadhaka, consider but once what 
difference does there lie between this Raudra or sunshine 
and Sflryya or sun. Sun is the name of a mass of compact 
energy 4 solid and circular in form, while Raudra or Bun- 
shine is the name of the rays which it scatters on every 
side of it. In faot, the difference between the sunshine and 
the sun is the same as that between the waves of the sea 
and the sea. Just as in the sea, water exists in a collected 
form, so in the solar orb energy 4 exists in such form. Just 
as in the sea single waves heave eternally, so do waves of 
energy in the solar orb. It must, therefore, be understood 
that wave is the same thing as water, and sunshine is the 
same thing as sun. The solar orb lies above (terrestrial 
water) at a distance of one lakh of yojanas,* and terrestrial 
water lies below (the sun) at the same distance. If the 
sun were to cease to draw this water from the earth by 
his energy, would it be in the power of water to rise to 
the solar orb ? Or would it be in the power of anything 
else in this universe to raise water to the solar orb ?

1 Tejas.1 Tejas.

* Raudra is an adjective of Rudra or ?hiva, and means " terrible." 
The reason why sunshine is called Raudra or “ terrible " is later ex¬ 
plained.

* Rudra Marti. * Tejas.

A yojana is equal to eight or nine miles, and a lakh equals 100,000.

ON MANTRA

783

At what height lies that Brahmamayl who is hardly known 
to Vedas and Vedangas, and worshipped with difficulty 
by Yogis and princes of Yogis—She who is beyond the 
reach of mind and speech of even Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Maheghvara, and who is above the three Gunas ? Again, 
at what depth does the insignificant Jlva lie—he who is 
devoid of true consciousness, 1 full of Maya, and a member 
of the Sangsara, which is made of the Gunas in various 
combinations ? Can it ever be in the power of the Jlva to 
enter by his own unaided Jlvashakti * * into Shivashakti ? * 
Can the child who wishes to rise to the arms of its mother 
do so unless the gracious mother extends her affectionate 
arms and herself raises her child ? Who has the power 
and courage to say to him who stands in this limitless field 
of the universe and desires to go to Her, “ Go, S&dhaka, 
reach safely the arms of the Mother of the Dispeller of all 
obstacles, 4 I stand security for your success ? ” That alone 
whioh has such power is Mantra-shakti.* Both Bhagav&n 
and Bhagavatl, therefore, say, “ Just as Parabrahman is 
my eternal self, so also Sbabdabrahman * (which is Mantra- 
shakti) is my eternal self.” Like sunshine, which is the 
energy of the sun, Mantrashakti alone is able to raise the 
Jlvas who inhabit this universe to the arms of Brahma¬ 
mayl, for Mantrashakti is Herself. Mantraghakti alone can 
lead the unconscious Jlva-world to a true perception of 
Param&tma by endowing it with that consciousness which 
it is. For this reason Mantraghakti is that which is alone

' Literally, “ he who is Ja<fa."

* The $hakti appertaining to Jlvahood, the state of the embodied

spirit. * The $hakti appertaining to §hivahood.' Literally, “ he who is Ja<fa."

* The $hakti appertaining to Jlvahood, the state of the embodied

spirit. * The $hakti appertaining to §hivahood.

4 Vighnahara, a name of Gane$ha.

* The potency of Mantra, which is Devat&.

* Supreme Brahman as contrasted with the Manifesting §habda 
Brahman (Sound Brahman).

784

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

efficient in all S&dbana,* * prescribed in the Aryya Sh&stra, 
or to secure the Siddhi spoken of in it. Just as a lifeless 
body is incapable of work, so methods and processes devoid 
of Mantrashakti are incapable of achieving anything in the 
domain of Sadhana.

In my brief account of Mantra in the First Part of 
“ Tantra-tattva," * I have shown that the Devata presiding 
over a Mantra appears in a two-fold aspect—first in the aspect 
of V&chaka Shakti, and secondly in the aspect of Vachya 
Shakti. The Vachya Shakti reveals Itself only when the 
Vachaka Shakti has been aroused through the worship of 
the Sadhaka. Whatever may be the appearance of the 
Devata presiding over a Mantra, such appearances are 
nothing but different manifestations of power* of Kula- 
kundalinl* playing at the aperture in the Muladhara. It 
is the string of fifty letters from A to Ksha which is the 
(rosary) of Akshas 5 of Mother Sarasvatl. Out of these 
fifty letters have been formed the nine crores* of great 
Mantras, which are the sole source and means of Siddhi 
and Sadhana. T A Mantra takes different forms according 
as it appears as seed, sprout, root, stem, trunk, branch, 
twig, leaf, flower, and fruit. Just as one cannot have leaf, 
flower, fruit, twig, and so forth, without first sowing the 
seed, so one cannot acquire competence* for the reception 
of other Mantras without first being initiated in the special 
Mantra of the Devata.* For this reason the Mantra of the

* That is, spiritual training, practice, and ritual of all kinds which 
are the cause of spiritual achievement (Siddhi). (See Introduction.)

* p. 279.

* Vibhati.* That is, spiritual training, practice, and ritual of all kinds which 
are the cause of spiritual achievement (Siddhi). (See Introduction.)

* p. 279.

* Vibhati.

* The Devf of that name whose abode is the MulOdh&ra Chakra of

the Jlva. (See Introduction and Arthur Avalon’s " The Six Centres and 
the Serpent Force.”) * Seeds of a plant used for rosaries

' A orore is ten million. ' See note ante. * Adhik&ra.

' That is, the S&dhaka's IsbtadevatA

ON MANTRA

785' A orore is ten million. ' See note ante. * Adhik&ra.

' That is, the S&dhaka's IsbtadevatA

ON MANTRA

785

Devata which is received at the time of initiation is called 
Vijamantra, or seed-mantra. The great Vlja or seed which 
Parabrahman as Guru sows in the field of the Sadhaka’s heart, 
after having cleared, ploughed, and irrigated it with the water 
of His grace. The Mantra formed of the name of a Devatfi, is 
the sprout which rises out of that great Mantra, and Tantrik 
Sandhya , 1 Gayatrl,* * Ny&sa , 1 Paja , 1 and Upacharamantras/ 
are all its stems, trunk, branches, and twigs. Hymns of praise * 
and homage* are its leaves and flowers; and the Kavacha,' 
consisting of Mantras, is its fruit. Just as all seeds are 
contained in the fruits, and sprout, trunk, leaf, flower, 
and so forth, are contained in the seed in extremely subtle 
states, so all Vijamantras are contained in the Kavacha, 
which is the fruit of Mantra; and Siddhi and Sadhana- 
shakti/ and so forth, are also contained in the Vlja in 
extremely subtle state. Now, to-day many people, through 
ignorance of Shastrio principles, think that Mantra is the 
name of the words by which one expresses what one has 
to say to the supreme Divinity. It therefore follows that 
I may submit my prayer to Him in whatever language I 
ohoose. What, then, is the necessity of my using the ever- 
ancient words of the Sh&stra? In reply to this we would 
at the very start point out that the definition which has 
been given to Mantra by those who hold this view is con¬ 
trary to Sh&stric principles, and consequently incorrect. 
In defining Mantra, ShAstra says: “ That is called Mantra/

' These terms are explained in Arthur Avalon’s Introduction to the 
“ Mah&uirv&na Tantra.”

* The Mantra by that name.

’ Mantra* used in making offerings to Devata*. * Stuti.

* Vandana. ' The protective Mantra. (See Introduction.)

’ That is, the Shakti generated by Sadhana.

* Derived from the combination of man and fra.

786* Vandana. ' The protective Mantra. (See Introduction.)

’ That is, the Shakti generated by Sadhana.

* Derived from the combination of man and fra.

786

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

from the Manana or meditation of which arises the Uni¬ 
versal special knowledge (that is, special knowledge embrac¬ 
ing the whole universe) or realization of the Monistic truth 
that the substance of the Brahmanda 1 is not different 
from that of the Brahman. Man of mantra comes from 
Manana, which leads to Tr&na, or liberation from the 
bondage of Sangsara* * (tra of Mantra comes from trana) 
and which calls forth (fcmantrana) Dharma, Artha, Kama, 
and produces Moksha . 1

Putting aside unbelievers, such as have faith in the 
ordinances of the Sh&stra must now understand that to 
be Mantra, in which eternally exists the super-worldly 
threefold power of perceiving the Brahman in and through¬ 
out the Universe, of loosening the bonds of Sangsara,* and 
of calling forth Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha . 4

Everyone desires to practise Sadhana and Bhajana,* 
but the question is whether the hard labour which is 
involved will bear fruit directly. Who can answer this 
question? Faced by this difficult problem, who but Mantra 
alone can proudly and loudly declare, “ Siddhi comes from 
Japa,’ Siddhi comes from Japa, Siddhi comes from Japa 
without doubt"? Who has the confidence to say: “If 
Siddhi is not achieved, I shall be responsible”? Who holds 
such dominion over the three worlds as to be able to stand

1 Universe, or " egg of Brahma."

* The Sang64rft is the coming and going, the cycle of birth, action, 
death, and rebirth ; the world in which all live who have not by know¬ 
ledge of the self (atmajna) and the extinction of the will to separate 
life attained liberation or moksha.

* That is. Religion, Wealth, Desire, and its fulfilment known as the 
Trivarga, forming with moksha (liberation) the chaturvarga, or foar 
aims of all sentient beings. (See Introduction.)* That is. Religion, Wealth, Desire, and its fulfilment known as the 
Trivarga, forming with moksha (liberation) the chaturvarga, or foar 
aims of all sentient beings. (See Introduction.)

* See ante. * See ante.

* As to 8&dhana, see ante. Bhajana is simple worship,

1 Japa, oral or mental, " recitation" of Mantra, which is here 
stated to lead to success (Siddhi).

ON MANTRA

787* See ante. * See ante.

* As to 8&dhana, see ante. Bhajana is simple worship,

1 Japa, oral or mental, " recitation" of Mantra, which is here 
stated to lead to success (Siddhi).

ON MANTRA

787

between that Devata who is sought for, difficult of worship, 
and beyond the reach of mind and speech on the one hand 
and the JTvasadhaka steeped in great delusion on the 
other, and say: “Sadhaka, be not afraid, I stand surety 
for you”? That surety is Mantra alone, the grantor of 
Siddhi and redeemer of all liabilities. How indomitable 
must be the attractive force of Mantra that it is able of 
its own strength to move even the great Devata, who is 
eternally possessed of Siddhi, and so stay by its own mighty 
power even the movements of Prakpti, instilling Shivahood 
into the Sadhaka by the expulsion of his Jlva nature; thus 
making, without labour on his part, the eight forms of 
Siddhi to play constantly before his eyes. When by virtue 
of Siddhi in Mantra vision of the three worlds is opened 
to the Sadhaka, then nothing is super-worldly to him. 
When by the grace of Mahamaya the door of Her Maya 
which makes the impossible possible is opened, then 
there is nothing impossible for the Sadhaka himself. 
For this reason, it is sheer ignorance to suppose that 
Mantra is mere language. Vljamantras, in particular, 
cannot possibly be language, for they convey no meaning 
according to the human use of language. They are the 
Devata Herself , 1 who is the highest spiritual object for 
us. They are neither language, nor words, nor letters,* * 
nor anything which you and I read or write but the Devata, 
who is eternally possessed of Siddhi, and is the Dhvani,* 
which makes all letters sound, and exists in all that we 
may say or hear. It is a great sin even to think that 
that Devata is mere letters. The Shastra has, therefore, 
said: “ They go to hell who think that Gurudeva is but' Literally, SvarApa of the DevatA. Svarupa literally means 
having its own form." as opposed to the existence or appearance of 
the same thing in another form.

* Varna or Aksbara.

47

1 Unlettered sound.

738

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

a man, Mantra is but letter, and the image of a Devata 
is but a stone.”

Here it is necessary to understand with some clear* * 
ness the nature 1 of alphabets.* Commonly we consider 
alphabets to be written characters and pronounced letters. 
In ordinary usage all the letters* are called Akshara, 
but “ Letters” * come to an end the moment they are pro¬ 
nounced, and never wait for a third moment. \ iewing 
the matter from this philosophical standpoint, it is im¬ 
possible for a word, a sentence, or language in general 
to be a combination of letters. As, for instance, in pro¬ 
nouncing the word Kalasa (pitcher), when La is pronounced 
after Ka, Ka is no more; and when Sa is pronounced 
after La, La is no more; so that, although the letters Ka, 
La, and Sa are successively pronounced, it is impossible 
to pronounce (all at once) the word Kalasa. As a matter 
of fact, it is the letters which are pronounced, and not 
the words. Only the letters linked together in the forms 
of words as willed by Ishvara are pronounced successively 
one after another according to rules of the Shastras. It 
has, therefore, been said: “The particular letters and 
number of letters which Ishvara has ordained should convey 
a particular meaning, and are capable of conveying that 
meaning, do, when uttered successively in the manner 
fixed, convey that meaning.” The truth concerning the 
origin of language is that after the appearance of the Vedas, 
which are the Shabdabrahman * in the form of Mantras,

1 Tattva. * Akshara.

1 Varpa. Both Varna and Akshara (Letters) are KupdalinI made 
articulate in speech and visible in writing. Akshara also means an 
alphabet and ” indestructible.”1 Tattva. * Akshara.

1 Varpa. Both Varna and Akshara (Letters) are KupdalinI made 
articulate in speech and visible in writing. Akshara also means an 
alphabet and ” indestructible.”

* That is, there cannot be a combination of letters any more than 
there can be snch between the present and the past.

' Sound. Brahman.

ON MANTRA

789

Tshvara, when creating for the world of Jlvas languages 
consisting of an aggregate of sounds , 1 willed that such and 
such letters, * * when combined together, should as a sound 
convey such and such a meaning.* This is the eternal law 
and accomplished fact. No one can change it by reasoning, 
argument, and controversy, and cause a revolution in lan¬ 
guage. It is the existence of this eternal law which sup¬ 
ports the world. For this reason the Shastra has said: 
“ The three worlds would all have lain in deep darkness 
had not the light called Shabda (sound) blazed throughout 
the entire Sangsara. The sound here referred to is that 
of the Yaidik language approved of by the Shastra. It is 
unnecessary to mention other languages, for they are 
all but transformations 4 of that great Prakriti the Vaidik 
language. However that may be, our concern at present 
is with the original language only. Here also two letters 
cannot be pronounced together. How can we admit that 
to be an Akshara* (letters of the alphabet), which 
is created at one instant, is destroyed at the next, 
and which when pronounced has disappeared ? Yet its 
name is Akshara—that is to say, that which never wastes, 
is never destroyed, but is unbeginning, unending, ever 
established, and everlasting. It is a pity that, although we 
have all along been writing, reading, seeing, and hearing 
Aksharas,' we do not know as yet what an Akshara is. 
Bhagav&n has said: “Just as Parabrahman is my eternal 
body, so Shabdabrahman is also my eternal body.” Who

1 Shabda*. ’ Varna.1 Shabda*. ’ Varna.

' The relation between sound and its meaning is permanent. 
Language is not a mere matter of convention. A word denotes a thing 
because it must do so: I^hvara having so willed it.

* Vikriti.

• Akshara means both a letter of the alphabet and “ indestructible." 
' See ante.

740

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

but that self-manifest Bhagavan whose eternal body is 
sound can set forth its nature ? In the YoginI Tantra it is 
said that at the beginning of creation, after the dissolution* * 
at the end of a Kalpa,* the unborn and immortal charmer 
of the mind of Mahakala* stood with warrior frenzy on his 
breast in order to destroy the Daitya * named Ghora, who 
had been born out of a part of Shiva in the course of the 
joyful play of the two Parabrahmans. 1 The infinite millions 
of Yoginls' born of the rays of that lustrous form of the 
Mother of the World then began to dance around Her in 
mad joy. The war-music of Brahmamayl in martial play 
began to resound upon the battlefield of the entire Universe. 
Beating time to that music, my Mother, who is, as it were, 
the flag of victory over death/ set in motion a second 
period of dissolution* by Her untiring dancing. Of that 
time Mahakala Himself gives the following account:

14 Seeing that very wonderful and mad dance of the 
Mother of the world, my mind was so distracted with fear 
that (finding no other means of escape) I took shelter in 
the body of Herself of Universal form/ and then, entering 
the path of Sushumna/ I saw and heard (inside that 
luminous Brahman body) things which, 0 Devi, were all 
so wondrous that I have never seen or heard the like again, 
and whioh I have not even the power to describe. Who

1 Pralaya.

’ A Kalpa is a period between two dissolutions.

* Shiva.

4 Demon.

* That is, Sbakti and Shiva, who though in fact one, manifest in 
these dual forms. * A class of Shaktis attendant on Kali.

1 Whoever reaches Her becomes victorious over death.

• Virata.4 Demon.

* That is, Sbakti and Shiva, who though in fact one, manifest in 
these dual forms. * A class of Shaktis attendant on Kali.

1 Whoever reaches Her becomes victorious over death.

• Virata.

* The Nadi, or channel of energy* of that name, 
and Arthur Avalon's " Serpent Power.”)

(See Introduction

ON MANTRA

741

can oount, 0 Devi, the countless millions of great Univer¬ 
ses, 1 which constantly move within Her body ? Brahmas, 
Vishnus, and Maheshvaras,’ with millions of arms, heads, 
and differing forms (not to speak of Brahmas, Vishpus, and 
Maheshvaras with four, five, or a thousand heads) exist in 
that body. They are all Creators, Preservers, and Des¬ 
troyers of different Universes, and possessors of all great 
powers.* * 0 Devi, the sight of all these wonderful things 
overpowered my mind, and I forgot all (which had happened 
in the past. I even forgot myself, and) I wondered who 
I was (Great Devas were there, but none seemed to 
notice me). Nowhere was I asked by anybody who I 
was, (where I had been), and whence I came. 0 Devi, in 
the World of that Devi’s body I thus became forgetful, and 
doubts arose in my mind. I could remember nothing. 
Moving about in this way for a million years I (passed 
your navel region and) reaohed the lotus of your heart. 4 The 
wonderful and beautiful sight whioh I saw there I have not 
the power, 0 Parame^hvarl, to describe fully. There I saw 
the Sh&sfcras which are the source of the Dharma, Artba, 
Kama, and Moksha of Jlvas.* Of that Sh&stra body Agama 
or Tantra (consisting of Mantra) is the Param&tm&, Vedas 
are the JlvatmA, Dar§hanas* are the senses, Purftnas are 
the body, and Smritis are the limbs. O fair-faced Devi, all

1 Brahman 4a*.

* There is not only one Brahma, Yisbpu, and Mahe$hvara. Those 
which men worship are the Devas of this Universe, bat there are coant¬ 
less Universes, each of which has its own trinity of Devas.

* Aishvaryya—that is, the attributes of I$hvara.* Aishvaryya—that is, the attributes of I$hvara.

* That is, he passed the Mapipura chakra in its Universal form, 
and reached the heart (anahata) centre of the Devi's body, the universe. 
The brackets are the Author’s.

1 Beligion and religious merit, wealth, desire and its fulfilment, and 
liberation. (See Introduction.)

* The philosophies.

742

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the other Shastras exist as hairs of Her body. In short, as 
the Jlv&tm& is to the Paramatma, so is the Veda to the 
Tantra. (That is to say, just as the existence of the mind 
or the Jivatma, according to the Nyaya Philosophy, depends 
on the existence of Atma, so the existence of Veda depends 
on the existence of Tantra. Just as in the body of the Jlva 
Paramatma is the Shakti 1 of pure consciousness, so in the 
body of the Sh&stra Tantra is the Shakti of consciousness 
consisting of Mantras. Just as all activities of the Mana- 
§hakti * * with Gunas * flow constantly through the Jivatma, 
so all Vich&ra Shaktis/ consisting of knowledge varying 
according to competence/ caused by differences in the three 
Gunas, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, are eternally seated in 
the Veda. Just as the ultimate goal of mind is immersion 
in the Parabrahman, and the end of the active forces, con¬ 
sisting of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, is to disappear al¬ 
together, so the ultimate goal of Veda is to be merged in 
Tantra through the knowledge of the omnipresence of 
Brahman. And the end of the different Adhik&ras' caused 
by differences in the Gunas is to be totally destroyed.) 
Then, 0 Devi, I saw letters 1 of dazzling brightness at the 
edges, the middle, and the roots of the petals of that 
lotus of Thy heart, embracing Shiksha, Ealpa, Nirukta,

1 Force, power, or active principle.

' Mind-power, or more strictly. Shakti in the form of the lower 
mind or Manas.

a Qualities. (See Introduction.)

* Powers of judgment and reasoning. * Adhik&ra.' Mind-power, or more strictly. Shakti in the form of the lower 
mind or Manas.

a Qualities. (See Introduction.)

* Powers of judgment and reasoning. * Adhik&ra.

' Adhik&ra is competency. A S&dhaka is entitled to worship and 
to have knowledge according to such competency. This competency 
is affected by the predominance of particular Gupas in the S&dhaka 
himself. When Brahmajn&na is attained, then all question whether a 
man is fit for this or that necessarily disappears. The establishment 
of AdhikAra is only a means to an end, and with the attainment of the 
end (spiritual knowledge) disappears. T Varna.

ON MANTRA

748ON MANTRA

748

Chhandas, 1 and all other minor Shastras, givers of welfare 
to the three worlds. Then, 0 Devi, I saw, within the 
pericarp of Thy lotus, hundreds of groups of letters * * shin¬ 
ing most brilliantly like millions of suns and moons, and 
surrounded by circles of the light of millions of great fires. 
Those luminous letters, 3 with as their substance the true 
and lasting Parabrahman, shone with the brilliance of 
millions of suns, were cool like millions of moons, and 
radiant as millions of fires. 0 Devi, those luminous letters’ 
consisted of all knowledge, of all wonders, of all sacrifices,* 
and of all places of pilgrimage. 4 (That is to say, when the 
subject of Sadhana is the form of Mantras, the letters * 
generate knowledge of the science of all things in the 
Brahmaijda. It is a matter of everyday experience that 
wonderful events are brought about by changes produced 
inevitably in the laws of Nature by the great power of 
Mantrashakti,* which can make the impossible possible. 
The Sadhana of letters leads unfailingly to the vision of 
the supreme Devata, a result which the performance of all 
the sacrifices like the A§hvamedha 1 and so forth cannot 
give. By the Sadhana of the great Mantra of letters one 
achieves at the same time the fruits of seeing and touching 
all places of pilgrimage. In fact, we go not too far in 
saying that places of pilgrimage themselves desire to be 
sanctified by the sight and touch of Great men 1 accomp¬ 
lished in Mantras. For a Sadhaka's body is not an ordinary 
material body, but is the permanent dwelling-house of Her 
who is the Mistress of all places of Pilgrimage, 4 and who 
raises the fallen and grants liberation to the three worlds.

1 These are four Vedangas, dealing with orthography, ritual, 
etymology, and prosody.

* Varija. * Yajnas. ' * * Tlrthas.

* The potency of Mantra or ?hakti as Mantra. “ . .

' The Vaidik horse sacrifice. ' Mah&puruahas. .

744

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Varija. * Yajnas. ' * * Tlrthas.

* The potency of Mantra or ?hakti as Mantra. “ . .

' The Vaidik horse sacrifice. ' Mah&puruahas. .

744

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

0 Devi, in these letters 1 reside all religious merit, 1 all 
righteousness, 1 all knowledge, and all Brahma bliss. (That 
is to say, by worshipping them one performs all acts of 
religious merit at one and the same time. One achieves by a 
single means all forms of righteousness whioh are the fruits 
of all religious acts; and one acquires that knowledge, which 
is the fruit of all righteousness—namely, that Brahman 
is omnipresent throughout the universe; for such an one 
the Brahmanda 4 is filled with Brahmabliss, which is the 
fruit of the knowledge of Brahman.) 0 Maheshvari! these 
(Mantras) are evidence * * of the existence of the Vedas and 
the Shastras, and all Jlvas are themselves the supreme 
energy' of Brahman and the supreme blessing. That is 
to say, many may easily say that a spiritual Sh&stra which 
speaks of fruit to be reaped in the next world is unauthori- 
tative. But even unbelievers 7 will shrink from calling a 
Shastra unauthoritative the fruits of which are visible 
in this very world. What this self-evident Shastra lays 
down as authoritative must also, as a matter of course, be 
considered as such by all people. Even believers 8 may 
sometimes be led to doubt the authority of Veda because 
they see not its effects. But if Tantra which produces 
visible effects admits that Veda or Vedanga, or any other 
Shastra, is authoritative, then not even unbelievers can 
dispute it, for Tantra is self-evident. It is also self-evident 
that the letters 5 which are Mantras are a form of evidence 
of the existence of Jlvas.** The use of the terms guttural,

* Varga. * Pupya. * Dharma.

4 Universe. * Pram&na, vide post. * Tejas.

* N&stika. * Astika.

* Each individual letter is a Mantra.* Varga. * Pupya. * Dharma.

4 Universe. * Pram&na, vide post. * Tejas.

* N&stika. * Astika.

* Each individual letter is a Mantra.

Sound outwardly expressed manifests itself to the senses. As the 
organs of speech are not the seat of its generation, this indicates that 
tncre is an inner manifestation, as to which see post.

ON MANTRA

745

palatal, cerebral, and so forth, in classifying letters 1 relates 
only to seats of pronunciation,* * and not to seats of genera¬ 
tion.* For instance, what is pronounced from the throat is 
called guttural, what is pronounced from the palate is called 
palatal, and so forth. The word pronunciation * also means 
ut (above), char ana (to cause to move)—that is, to make 
letters 1 which were moving below to move above. When 
that motion above is manifested outwardly, and is per¬ 
ceived by the sense of hearing, it is certain that the motion 
below has also an inward manifestation in the most subtle 
supersensual form. It is this deep truth which has been 
clearly expressed in the Shastra as follows: In the Pra- 
panchasara * it is said: “ When through obstruction * of 
the vocal passage a child utters indistinct sounds, it is 
KulakundalinI, who, playing in the aperture of the Mul&- 
dhara and coiled round Sushumna, utters indistinct sounds 
repeatedly. It is the echo of this indistinct sound which 
comes out of the passage of the child’s throat.”

The Prayogas&ra says: 0 Devi, at that time Anta- 
ratma, the substance of which is sound/ Himself utters 
sounds. It is these sounds of His which, in combination 
with each other, appear as letters.”

In the Sarad&tilaka it is written : “ Shabdabrahman 1 
exists in all things as consciousness. So it is this Shabda¬ 
brahman, the substance of which is consciousness, whioh 
exists in the bodies of living beings in the form of Ku^qta* 
lini, and then appears as letters in prose, poetry, and so 
forth, being carried by air * to the throat, palate, teeth, and 
other places.”1 Varna. ’ Uchch&rana. ' Ctpatti.

4 See vol. iii of the “ T&ntrik Texts,” edited by Arthur Avalon.

* This may also refer to incomplete formation. * Nada.

1 Brahman as sound " manifesting the Universe, which is its 
BrahmavibhOti. * Vftyu.

746

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In the Vishvas&ra Tantra there is the following: “Sada- 
shiva Himself has spoken of Him as Shabdabrahman. That 
Shabda (sound) is in the Anahata Chakra."

And in the second Patala of the same book it is said : 
“ 0 beloved one! in the Jiva's own body itself blissful 
Parabrahman exists as Shabdabrahman, whose substance 
is all Mantras.” All Mantras are manifestations 1 of Kula- 
kupdalinl Herself, who is the Shabdabrahman, whose 
substance is consciousness. So that the fact that they 
are pronounced (outwardly manifested) from such places 
as the throat, palate, and so forth, does not prove that 
Shabda (sound) or Mantras are generated at such places. 
Although Brahman as Shabda is not in reality generated, 
yet it first appears at the Mulfi.dhara. However that may 
be, what is known to us as Shabda (sound) or varna (letter) 
is the Shakti which gives life to Jivas, so that without 
doubt Mantras which are Shakti : are eternal evidence of 
the existence of Jlvas. Next it has been said that “ Mantras 
are the supreme energy * * of Brahman. According to philoso¬ 
phers, Shabda (sound) is everywhere the quality (Gupa) of 
Ak&§ha (ether and space). For this reason many people sire 
under the impression that Shabda (sound) is produced from 
Space (Ak&sha). This is merely observation of the effect. 
According to Tantra which sees the cause of everything, 
this is a mistaken inference. Tantra, which sees through 
the subtlest supersensual things,* and is ever in favour of 
direct perception,* holds that Shabda is the cause of the 
Universe,* and not the effect of anything. The production 
of Shabda from Aka§ha is merely its outward manifestation. 
In reality Shabda eternally exists as Brahman.* Svarupavibhuti. 
' $haktim&ya

* Pratyaksha.

* Tejaa.

' Brahm&nda.

' Tattvaa.

ON MANTRA

747

In the Kamadhenu Tantra it is said: “Matrikashakti, 1 
consisting of the fifty letters,* * from A to Ksha, is the seed 
of all things moving or non-moving. Of these letters,* 
again, Visarga* is Shakti, and Vindu* is Purusha, and in 
the Ajapamantra* of Pralqiti and Purusha in union She* 
is undifferentiated Pdrpabrahman/ 0 Dev!, from letters 
which are Mantras * are born Praj&pati Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Rudra, the Destroyer of the world."

“ It is true and certain that supreme KulakugdalinI 
Herself, who is the fifty letters,* from A to Ksha, has 
given birth to this entire universe, consisting of moving 
and non-moving things."

In the M&trikodaya it is said: “ Ishvara is the author 1 
of Vedas, Maharshis (great seers) are the authors of Pur&rtas, 
but in no Shastra is it said that there is any author of Her. 
Matfika Devi, who is letter, is, therefore, not created, but 
self-existent. 11 (For this reason a name of KulakuijdalinI, 
the Mantradevata whose substance is letters, is Matjika— 
that is to say, the Generatrix of these infinite crores of 
universes. It is not possible for Her to have a father and 
a mother. She is, therefore, called only by the name of 
Matrika, the Mother. She is the Mother of all, and not 
the child of any.) Just as in space 1 * waves of sound are 
produced by movements of air,'* so also in the 6pace 11 inside

1 Matrika, which is an adjective derived from Mother, means the 
letters of the alphabet.

* Varpa. * The h breathing with two parts.

‘ The nasal breathing with one point.

a That is, the Mantra of inhalation and expiration.

* That is, Matrika$hakti. ' Perfect Brahman. ' Mantramaya.

* Varna.

" Eartta : here only in the sense that the world got it through him 
(see post).

" Svayambhu. 11 ikasha, or ether.

" Literally, by strikes and counter-strikes of air (vftyn).

748

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA" Svayambhu. 11 ikasha, or ether.

" Literally, by strikes and counter-strikes of air (vftyn).

748

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the Jlva’s body currents of sounds flow owing to the move¬ 
ments 1 of the vital air,' and its inward and outward passage 
as inhalation and exhalation. There is no generation of 
sound in space. 1 Sound is only manifested therein. Every 
intelligent man will understand that this manifestation 
of the gross* * form of sound is impossible unless sound 
exists in space 3 in a subtle * form, whioh is the permanent, 
separate root of gross sound. Such people, however, as 
want to explain away the universe with its fourteen worlds 
by reading only the history of India or the Science of 
language * may find scepticism more agreeable to them than 
the taxing of their brains with such an extremely remote 
question as “whence come sounds"* in space?* They 
satisfy themselves by saying that it is the law of nature 
that sound* should be produoed in space,* and nothing 
can be said in respect of that which is a natural law.* 
We, however, have no faith in the words of those who 
are so pleased to put suoh implicit faith in nature. For 
we think that in reality nature as a thing in itself does not 
exist. The existence of those qualities and properties in 
a thing which constitute such thing is its nature. If, 
therefore, one says, “A thing is produced by nature," does 
he answer the question why it is so produced ? To say that 
a thing happens by nature is to say that it happens because 
it happens. Such a statement indicates no searoh for 
truth, but only an attempt at escape. In faot, Sh&stra 
(Scripture) is for those people only whose minds have be¬ 
come restless with the desire to know the truth. Those

1 Literally, by strikes and coanter-strikes of air (vSyn).

* Pr&ijav&ya. 1 Aka^ha, or ether.

* Sthala. ' Snkshma.

* Bh&sh&parichchheda. * Sbabda.

' Sv&bh&va. In other words, it is the nature of the thing, and

there is an end of it.

ON MANTRA* Pr&ijav&ya. 1 Aka^ha, or ether.

* Sthala. ' Snkshma.

* Bh&sh&parichchheda. * Sbabda.

' Sv&bh&va. In other words, it is the nature of the thing, and

there is an end of it.

ON MANTRA

749

who have understood that the manifestation of sound 1 in 
space* * is an effect, and does not indicate that space is the 
cause of sound, are hardly likely to find peace and satisfac¬ 
tion in the statement that sound iB the quality of space.* 
What they want to know is the real truth, supersensual 
though it be. But it is not within the power of any Jlva 
to open the door which hides that deep truth from us. 
Nevertheless, the pain which is caused by ignorance of 
that truth is unbearable. For this reason Bhagavan, who 
is the creator of all things, and sheds His mercy on all 
who seek it, has Himself revealed in Tantra, for the benefit 
of the three worlds, what He Himself saw in the eternal 
body of waves of existence,* consciousness,* and bliss* of 
Her who is all merciful. He has said that in the eternal 
body of the Devi, Mantras also, in the form of letters,* are 
eternal Brahman, full of energy’ and aspects of Herself. 
Mantras which are seeds * out of which grow the fruit of 
the universe are eternally present in Her body. For this 
reason they are called Vljamantras (seed-mantras). Such a 
Mantra is the seed of Mantras, Yantras, Tantras, and Devat&s. 
It is the seed of the creation, preservation, and destruction 
of the Universes, the maintenance of Jlvas’ lives, Siddhi 
and Sfidhana* of the four-fold aim of Purusha—namely, 
Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha," and is also the most, 
ancient, permanent, and eternal seed for the Shabda, which 
first puts forth its young shoot in Akasha. If Shabdabrah- 
man had not gem-like eternally shone as Mantras on the 
other side of the sea of Sangsara," on the outside of the 
cauldron-shaped Universe beyond the reach of the mind

' Shabda. ' Akasha. ' Sat.

* Chit. * Ananda. ' Varna*. ’ Tejas. ' Vlja.' Shabda. ' Akasha. ' Sat.

* Chit. * Ananda. ' Varna*. ’ Tejas. ' Vlja.

* They are the seed of S&dhana. initiating, maintaining it, and pro-

cnring its fruit (siddhi). w See ante.

11 See ante.

750

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and intellect* * of Suras, Asuras, Kinnaras,* men (Naras), 
and the entire world of Jlvas ; before the three eyes of the 
Guru of all things moving and non-moving, and in the 
body of Brahmamayl, who is beyond the reach of mind 
and speech—would the resplendent luminous waves of 
sound have to-day illumined all quarters, piercing the 
vacancy* of space and scattering themselves throughout 
the Universe? However learned you and I may to-day 
become by the reading of commentaries and the like, the 
subtle aphorism 4 of sound remains eternally hidden in the 
deep womb of Her who is the unfathomable, untraversable, 
and unbounded ocean of truth.* None but She can make 
it known. He, however, whose wealth of Sadhana accumu¬ 
lated in many births haB reached the stage of bearing fruit, 
is alone gratified by the taste of the immortalizing juice 
of that fruit, and acquires direct knowledge through sight 
of the luminous form of Mantra.

1 Bnddhi.

* Dev as : their enemies the Asuras : and a class of the minor spirits

called Devayonia. Avak&sha.

• Sntra. A common form of Hindu literature is the statement of

the essence of a subject-matter in the form of an extremely abbreviated 
aphorism (sutra), the very brevity and consequent obscurity of which 
requires an extended commentary, and sometimes further notes on 
such commentary. ' Tattva.

CHAPTER XII

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND* *CHAPTER XII

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND* *

Shabda, or sound, is of two kinds—namely, Dhvani and 
Varna. 1 What is expressed in the string of letters 1 from 
A to Ksha * is called Varna, and that which is not expressed 
by any alphabetical mark' is called Dhvani. Difference of 
tone s alone is the cause of this two-fold aspect of Shabda. 
Those who are learned in sound' have divided it into these 
two classes but in reality there is no such difference in 
sound itself. 7 Fundamentally, Dhvani is the real substance,' 
of which Shabda 9 is only a manifestation. 10 This Dhvani 
is the subtle aspect of the Jlvas’ vital force,* 1 whch is 
consciousness. It is in the form of Dhvani that this Shakti 
appears in and disappears from a Jlva’s body. Here it is 
necessary to expound the Shastrik principle with some 
clearness. According to Aryyas, Veda is not the production 
of any person, for it has no author. From Mahadeva 
himself to the Rishis all are remembrancers of Veda, and 
none its author. Shastra says that Bhagavan Himself, as

1 The first or unlettered form of shabda (sound), or sound in its 
subtle form, is Dhvani. Lettered sound is called Varna, which means 
letter (see post). * Akshara.

* The first and last letter of the Sanskrit alphabet.

* MAtrA. * Svara. ' Shabda.

’ That is, the difference noted is a conventional one. * Padartha. 
’ Sound. ** ParinAma. development or effect. u Shakti.

752

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* MAtrA. * Svara. ' Shabda.

’ That is, the difference noted is a conventional one. * Padartha. 
’ Sound. ** ParinAma. development or effect. u Shakti.

752

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the Avat&ra,’ Shrlkrishna, and others, has only revealed the 
Veda in the mortal world. But it also has been already 
said: “ Ishvara is the author of Veda.” Again, Ishvara 
Himself says: “Shabdabrahman and Parabrahman are both 
My eternal bodies.” We must now see how these two 
apparently mutually contradictory statements of the Sh&stra 
may be reconciled. Every Mantra, be it Vaidik or T&ntrik, 
is an appearance* * of Brahman. Veda or Tantra, consisting 
of Mantras, is only a manifestation * of Brahman. There¬ 
fore, it cannot be said that Mantra has been created by 
Brahman. Rather is it that the Parabrahman appears as 
Mantra. For, although Brahman is the Creator of the 
world, He is not the Creator of Himself. Creation of 
Brahman is impossible, for He is without beginning and 
ever-existent. For this reason Shastra concludes that He 
appears to and disappears from the view of the world 
according to the will of Her who is will itself. Just as 
in the physical world Bhagav&n has incarnated Himself 
as R&ma, Krishpa, and so forth, so in the world of Dharma* 
also He* has, through Samadhi or spiritual knowledge, 
manifested Himself as Shastra,' which is Shabdabrahman,

' Avat&ra is a descent of the Supreme. It may or may not be 
what is called an " incarnation." An Avat&ra is an incarnation where 
there is a descent to the physical plane. A large number of Avat&ras 
are non-material manifestations. In the case of Shrlkrishna there was 
an incarnation.

* R&pa.

' SvarQpavibhuti. Vibhu is one who is all-pervading, and Vibhati 
is that which characterizes this higher nature. It is that which this 
nature displays and the power by which such display is made. Thus 
the world is known as a Brahma-vibhOti or vibhati of the Brahman 
(God).

* Here the spiritual world. * As Yogin.* Here the spiritual world. * As Yogin.

* He appears to the mind of the Yogin who is Bhagav&n as $hfistra.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 763

for the severance of the bonds of ignorance. 1 As Shyama- 
sundara,* * *• whether in His four-armed or two-armed appear¬ 
ance, 1 residing in Vaiku^tha 4 or Goloka, 4 incarnated as 
Rama and Krishna, so the luminous Mantra form,* existing 
in the beautiful dark blue T limbs, made of massive con¬ 
sciousness, of Her whose substance is consciousness, and 
in every undulation of Her supreme beauty appears to the 
world as Sh&stra,, which is Shabdabrahman.*

At the beginning of the oreation of the Universe the 
luminous bud of Mantras blossomed and created the 
fourteen worlds, which are the petals of its flower. It is 
the fragrance of its pollen which is existence* conscious¬ 
ness, 10 and bliss, 11 which fills the three worlds with delight. 
After the greater dissolution, 1 * Brahma, the lotus-born, 10 
appeared in the centre of the thousand-petalled lotus.

' Avidyft. * Vishiju. * Marti.

• The abode of Vishnu (Vishnohparamangpadam); a heaven of 
enjoyment with its celestial city, jewelled dwellings, and aerial cars 
(vim&na), as described in Chapter XXIV of Padma Purftoa.

‘The abode of light (go-jyotih). a white circular ring of res¬ 
plendent light, like a thousand moons: purity itself (suddha tattva). 
surrounded by translucid waters situate in Vaikuntha, the abode of 
the flute-playing Krishpa and of Rfidhikfl. Devi; a heaven, where there 
are many Devas offering homage to Visbpu SattvarOpa amidst the 
scanting of Vedas and of the musical modes known as Ragas, as des¬ 
cribed in Chapter XXVIII of the Brabmavaivata Purftpo. In the 
Tantra Shiva says: " I know of no place which is better than Goloka" 
(Yadrapang golokang dhama tadrupang nftsti m&make jnfine).

• Marti. * Shy&masundara.• Marti. * Shy&masundara.

• The meaning of this passage is that jnst as Visbpn is the mfllasva- 
rupa (root being) of those incarnations of His which are called Rama. 
Krishna, and so forth, so the luminous mantramflrti is the mulasvarflpa 
of §histra. which is Shabdabrahman.

• Bat. “ Chit. " Snanda.

*• Mahkpralaya. There are minor and intermediate dissolutions 
(pralaya).

u Brahma was bom on the lotos which sprang from Vishpu's navel.

48

754

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

which orowned the stem issuing from the navel of Bbaga- 
v&n N&r&yaija, 1 lying in the causal 1 sea. He then medi¬ 
tated the oreation of a Universe suited to the age, and 
became immersed in Samfi,dhi,* achieved through the Yoga 
of meditation upon Brahmamayl. * 4 It was then that Yeda, 
which is Shabdabrahman, appeared of itself in the firma¬ 
ment of His heart, and, issuing out with His breath, assum¬ 
ed four visible forms corresponding to Rik, Yajur, S&ma, 
and Atharva, and stood before him. After learning the 
principles * of creation, preservation, and destruction from 
the mouths of those incarnate Shrutis,' Brahma set about 
His work. Many make abundant efforts to explain away 
this perfectly true account of creation by adorning it with 
such adjectives as “ Mystery," “ Metaphor,” and other far¬ 
fetched terms. 1 * * * * But they do not care to understand that 
the day that this Tattva * vanishes you and I, along with 
these infinite Universes, will all vanish, one knows not 
where. Although Brahma is Himself perfect-Brahman, yet 
He appeared, as a Mother by the assumption of the form 
of Nar&yana, and Himself in play' took birth in the body 
of the lotus sprung from his own 10 Navel, and thus became 
the first and yet beginningless 11 Jlva in the created Brah- 
m frnfo- 13 The same process which He adopted at the time of 
His own appearance is that which exists eternally in the 
oreation of the world of Jlvas, chief amongst whom are the

' Vishpu. ' Karapa. * Yoga, ecstasy.' Vishpu. ' Karapa. * Yoga, ecstasy.

4 The Devt as Brahman. * Tattva.

* That is, the four incarnate Vedas.

I Adhyfttmik.

* That is, creation, maintenance, and dissolution, for the existence 
of the world is bound np with the existence and operation of these

Tattvas.

* Lila. The world is the play of the Brahman.

14 Because Brahma and Vishnu are but aspect of the One.

II Anadi.. 14 Universe or mundane " Egg of Brahma."

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 755

Suras, Asuras, Kinnaras, and Naras. 1 Narfiyana stands in 
the place of a Mother to Him. The BrahmSnda is the issue 
of His womb. Maya is the womb. The causal * * sea is the 
mass of water inside that womb. The stalk issuing out of 
the navel of Bhagavfin stands for the umbilical cord,' and 
the thousand-petal led red lotus for the flower on that stalk. 
And Brahra&, the grandfather of the world, who is Himself 
placed on that lotus as its fruit, stands for the child. Shakti 
at first held the vast world-child in Her womb, and became 
the Mother of Brahma, and then, as the power of preserva¬ 
tion appeared, as N&rayapa, and assumed the form ofJagad- 
dhatrl.* The child in the mother’s womb, on gaining 
consciousness, remembers the events of the past lives; 
so the child in Brahmamayl’s" womb began, on the rising 
of consciousness, to remember all previous acts of creation, 
preservation, and destruction in other Kalpas.' Just as 
the memory of previous lives then arises of itself in the 
child’s mind, so Shruti 1 appeared of itself in the mind 
of Brahma. Again, as memory is the Atraa-Shakti in a 
Jlva’s mind, so Shruti is the Shakti of consciousness in 
Brahma’s mind. The hidden state of this Shakti of con¬ 
sciousness is Dhvani, and its outward manifestation is 
sound." That Dhvani which is as it were the first shoot 
of sound is the Jlva’s vital 1 force.

1 That is, the Devas, their enemies, a class of Devayonis called 
Kinnara and men (Nara).

* Kirana. ' Literally the mother’s natfi.1 That is, the Devas, their enemies, a class of Devayonis called 
Kinnara and men (Nara).

* Kirana. ' Literally the mother’s natfi.

* The Devi as supporter of the Universe.

* The Devi. ' The period between two dissolutions.

» The revealed Scripture. (See Introduction).

* Here that which constitutes individuality. * Shabda.

» rjbat U, the earliest manifestation. Dhvani is unlettered sound. 
u Safijlvanl.

756

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In the Prapaflchasfira it is said: “The Universe of 
immovable and movable things is linked together and 
pervaded by this Shakti, which is Dhvani. It is this 
Shakti which is called by such names as N&da, 1 Prftna, 1 
Jlvaghosha, 1 and so forth.” Again: “It is this great 
Shakti whom Yogis know as KulakundalinI moving in 
the heart, and it is She who ever makes an indistinct and 
sweet murmuring sound,' like the humming of a black 
bee, at the aperture* * in the MQladh&ra.” It is with 
reference to this Dhvani that the Shatchakratattva has 
said:

“KulakundalinI lustrous as the flash of a hundred 
lightnings resides in all hearts, and is ever immersed in 
play in the Maladh&ra* lotus. She it is whose sweet 
constant murmuring humming sounds like that of a swarm 
of black bees intoxicated with a draught of honey, and 
who is Dhvani. Her voice it is which sounds in the words 
of soft poetry, and is clearly audible in styles of Bheda 
and Atibheda composition.' Again, it is the heaving of 
the Dhvani whioh causes the alternate inspiration and 
expiration of all Jlv&tmas in this infinite world. [By 
the above reference is made to the Sthtlla or gross form of

1 Sound. * The vital force manifesting in breath. * Dhvani.

' The Devi lies close to the aperture in the Sushumn&.

* The lowest chakra of that name. (See Introduction and Arthur 
Avalon’s " Six Centres and the Serpent Power.”)' The Devi lies close to the aperture in the Sushumn&.

* The lowest chakra of that name. (See Introduction and Arthur 
Avalon’s " Six Centres and the Serpent Power.”)

* Bheda and Atibeda are two modes of composition (Alangk&ra). 
Bheda is the mode in which difference is posited between things which 
are really the same. Thus, to say that a woman possesses celestial 
beauty not to be found on earth is bheda. because a distinction is 
made between the beauty of the woman, which is celestial and terres¬ 
trial beauty, although no such distinction really exists. Atibheda, on 
the other hand, is the mode in which equality is posited between dif¬ 
ferent things; as, for instance, to speak of a woman's face as a moon is 
atibheda, because an equality is here established between a face and 
the moon which ore really different things.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 757

Kulaku£<JaIinI. The Book then proceeds to define her 
Sukshma or subtle form.] She who dwells within this 
gross form as the supreme extremely subtle Kala,' who is 
consciousness shedding the sweetness of everlasting bliss 
and surpassing in beauty masses of lightning; She by 
whose light the whole visible sphere of the Universe is 
lighted, is that Parame§hvarl Kulakuudalini, who is eternal 
knowledge, and the I§hvarl* * of all.’S&dhakas will now understand that Kulakugd&lini 
has two aspeots—namely, a Sthula, or gross form with 
attributes,* in whioh, like the humming of a moving 
8warm of black bees, She indistinctly utters the fifty letters 
and a Stikshma, or subtle form, which is attributeless/ 
and is existence, consciousness, and bliss.* It is the SthQla 
form appearing in different aspects as different Devatas, 
which is the presiding Devatft of all Mantras; and it is 
the Sakshma form, whioh is that one Devatfi, towards 
whom all Sadhakas worship is directed. For this reason 
the door of the temple of the Mother of the World is not 
opened so long as Kulakuij<jlalinl, the snake sleeping in 
the bed of Svayambhu,* is not awakened; and Siddhi in 
Mantra is not gained so long as the Mantra is not awaken¬ 
ed.* However that may be, we seek only to establish here

1 Malapr&kfiti, which is here regarded a6 one with the Brahman.

* Female of Ifhvara, “ Lord."

’ Saguna. * Nirguna. * Sat. chit, ftnanda.

' “ The self-existent one,” referring to the Linga of that name in 
the Mal&dh&ra, around which Eup^all is coiled.

1 The awakening of the Mantra is called Mantracbaitanya. Unless 
the Mantra is awakened in and by the consciousness of the S&dhaka, 
the Mantra thuB becoming a part and parcel of the consciousness of 
the S&dhaka himself, it is mere dead sound and letter without fruit 
(Siddhi). It is true that Shakti is there as everywhere, but it must be 
rendered conscious or realized to the S&dhaka.

758

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA758

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

that Shabda (sound), which is the manifestation 1 of Dhvani, 
is nothing bat a manifestation of the Shakti of conscious¬ 
ness itself, and Shabda is eternally present, full of lustre, 
in the lustrous eternal body of the Mother of the World. 
Because during creation it is manifested as the property* * 
of Aka§ha,* it is not to be inferred that it is created with 
the creation of Akasha,* and disappears with the dissolu¬ 
tion 4 of the latter. Those, again, who believe that Ak&§ha * 
is a permanent thing can have no ground for objecting to 
our view. However much opinions may differ, it is certain 
that Veda consisting of Mantras is formed of Dhvani and 
Varija 4 together. For this reason, drawn by the Samadhi* 
Yoga of Brahmi, Brahmamayl appeared in His heart as 
Veda, whioh is the Shabdabrahman, and to instil into Him 
the notion of the process of creation, issued out of His 
nostrils. The phrase “ Brahma is the author of Veda ” 
means that Brahma is the author of the appearance of 
Veda in the sense that a Jlva is the author of his expiration 
and inspiration of breath. In truth, Veda eternally exists 
as Shabdabrahman, 1 and is not created by Brahma. Thus 
Veda is not the oreation of any.* The effect* of the Dhvani 
of Eulaku^alinl in the body of I§hvara is Veda, and the 
effect of the Dhvani of Kulaku^alinl in the body of Jlva is 
Shabda." In that Shabda is every form of Mantra, which 
is that which gives vitality to Jlva.

According to natural law, a great Mantra repeats" 
itself when inspiration and expiration through the oircular

1 Literally, "effect.” * Gupa. ' Space: ether.

* Pralaya. * Letters; that is, audible Dhvani.

' Vide Introduction. 7 The sound or manifested Brahman.

* That is, it is apaurnsheya. * Parin&ma. "

u Veda is Dhvani uttered by Brahm&, and §habda is Dhvani 
ottered by Jlva.

“ Literally, “ is made Japa of.”

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 769* That is, it is apaurnsheya. * Parin&ma. "

u Veda is Dhvani uttered by Brahm&, and §habda is Dhvani 
ottered by Jlva.

“ Literally, “ is made Japa of.”

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 769

movement of the vital air of Jlva revolves the wheel of 
Dhvani. It is this Mantra which is called Ajap& Mantra, 
and it is so called either because it repeats 1 itself naturally 
without any effort on the part of Jlva, or because there is 
no other Japa' of a Mantra which is superior to this one. 
This AjapA is the full life-time of a Jlva. 1 For this reason 
it is said: “Being Ajapa (one who does not repeat any 
Mantra) during Ajapa (life-time), I have neither done Japa 
of any Mantra nor done any Tapas.* * My Ajapa (life-time) 
is about to end, and yet my Ajapa (the state of being with¬ 
out Japa) does not end."' As Brahma when on the navel- 
lotus of Bhagavan thought of previous Kalpas,* so a Jlva 
when in his mother’s womb constantly thinks of his past 
lives. At that time waves of deep thought, such as, “ W ho 
am I ? ’’ “ Where was I ? " “ Whence have I come ? ” “ Whose 
am I?" “Who is mine?” and so forth, arise in the Jlva’s 
mind. These waves of thought mingle with the PrAija- 
shakti.' ThatPrAnashakti in its turn within the two Nadis. 
I(fa and Pibgala strikes and strikes again against the Kuijda- 
lini Chakra below the abdominal fire 7 of the belly. Stung 
by those blows dealt by Herself, the sleeping snake Kula- 
kuijdalinl then hisses loudly.* The Malikas,* or fifty

1 Vide last note and Introduction,

* For the Mantra consists of the breathing and expiration which 
ceases at death.

' Devotion, austerity, etc. As to Japa or recitation of Mantra, 
see Introduction.

* A play on the word Ajapa. Ajapa means life-time because 
life exists only so long as it is repeated. Next Ajapa may be made to 
mean “one who does not perform Japa," and also not Japa" — 
*.e., the state of being without Japa.

' See post.

* Vital force. 7 Ja(baragnl. * Garjjana. Literally, " roars."' See post.

* Vital force. 7 Ja(baragnl. * Garjjana. Literally, " roars."

* A name for the letters as embodying mother-sound.

760

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

letters 1 of the alphabet from A to Ksha 1 * axe only the 
manifested state of that hissing Dhvani. 1 It is with the 
help of these letters 1 that the thoughts of the Jlva in the 
womb relating to past lives is reflected in waves of lan¬ 
guage ; * and then the Jlva’s mind 1 sees with mental eyes 
and hears with mental ears. 4 When at birth upon the 
bursting of the womb the doors of all the senses of the 
Jlva are opened, then that internal Dhvani* passes out 
through the passage of the throat. When Jlva sitting in 
the dark prison-chamber of the womb meditates on the 
deep past history of itself,* then, as in the case of dream, 
it is mind alone which works and judges eveything. The 
final conclusion to whioh that judgment leads is also related 
in the Shastras as follows:

In the Bhagavatlgltft in MahAbh&gavata Devi says to 
Himalaya:

“ Jlva, dejeoted at the remembrance of the work of 
his bodies in previous births, then bethinks himself over 
the matter as follows:

“ 1. In this way suffering many sorrows in previous 
lives, I have again taken birth on earth; for whilst in the 
Sangsara I failed to worship Bhagavatl Durga, the Dis¬ 
peller of misery, but merely maintained relatives with 
money earned by unfair means.

“ 2. If, however, I am this time delivered from any 
suffering in the womb,* no work will I do but the service

1 Varpa. * Subtle sound (see ante). * Yak.

The meaning appears to be that, though being in the womb, the 
Jtva has no articulate speech, yet all thinking is by the aid of words 
whether expressed or not. At that stage it is the mind and not the 
outward senses which are working.

Literally, on the profound past tattva of his Atma."

According to Hindu notions, the child in the womb endures great 
pains, which are forgotten on birth.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 761Literally, on the profound past tattva of his Atma."

According to Hindu notions, the child in the womb endures great 
pains, which are forgotten on birth.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 761

of Mahe?hvari Durga, ever worshipping Her with self- 
restraint.

“ 3. By my useless desires for wife, ohildren, and the 
like, I have over and over again bound myself to the 
8angs&ra, 1 and thus worked only evil for myself. There¬ 
fore is it that 1 am suffering this intense pain in the womb. 
1 therefore do resolve that I will no more uselessly serve 
this Sangsara.

“ 4. Thus suffering from various sorrows according to 
his Karma,* * the Jlva enveloped in the womb is expelled 
by the labour wind * and orushed through the pelvic bone. 
And then, widening his inner path, and smearing himself 
all over with fat and blood, he falls on earth, as it were, 
a sinner in some terrible HelL Whereupon, deluded by my 
Maya, the Jlva forgets all the sorrows experienced during 
his stay in the womb, and then exists for some little time 
an insignificant mass of flesh.

“ 5. So long as the outside of the child’s sushumna 
na<fi 4 remains covered with mucus,* he cannot utter words 
with clearness."

We are here obliged to make mention of a modern say¬ 
ing in this connection, hoping to be pardoned by Sadhakas 
for this digression.

Nowadays a number of poets and men learned in its 
science say that the exoruoiating pain of the mother in 
child-birth has no other cause than I§hvara’s despotic 
will; for, as He is Almighty, could He not, had He so 
desired, have provided an easy form of delivery instead 
of one which is very painful both for the child and its 
mother? Why, because Jlva is to be born, should an¬ 
other Jlva causelessly suffer suoh horrible pain ? We say

1 See ante.

' Actions and their effects. (See Introduction). * Prasava-vAyu.

* The nerve ” of that name. (See Introduction.) * Shleshma.

762

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 See ante.

' Actions and their effects. (See Introduction). * Prasava-vAyu.

* The nerve ” of that name. (See Introduction.) * Shleshma.

762

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

that no such questions can be put to Him. For in the 
first place, in the vast scheme of Bhagav&n's designs, 
which are like a great ocean, the individual counts for 
less than a mere bubble; and secondly his work consists 
in “ killing seven serpents with one blow.” 1 Who, then, 
can say that what you and I consider as your or my woe 
or weal is not linked with the weal and woe of hundreds 
of Jivas in this infinite world of moving and unmoving 
things? Did Mantharft* * think that her words could have 
any other consequence beyond the gaining of Kaikeyl’s 
favour ? It was Bhagav&n (Rama) alone, he who for whose 
fourteen years' exile in the wood all Devas had conspired, 
seeking the help of wicked Sarasvatl* who understood what 
the effect.of her words would be; for He is the dispenser 
of all effeots in the universe. Manthara did not expeot 
anything from her words besides the fulfilment of a selfish 
end. Those words, however, brought about Ramachandra’s 
exile in the woods for fourteen years with his younger brother 
and wife; * the untimely death of Maharaja Dasharatha; * 
the widowhood of Kau§haly&, Sumitra, and Kaikeyl; the 
severe brahmacharya of Bharata; the killing of Maricha; 
the abduction of Sita; the death of Jatayu ; the killing of 
of Bali; the bridging of the sea; the burning of Lafikft;

1 The Bengali expression for killing two birds with one stone.

' Maidservant of Kaikeyl, wife of Dasharatha and stepmother of 
B&ma, whose exile she caused when at the instance of Mantharft she 
requested Dasharatha, her husband, to make Bharata her son king 
instead of B&ma.

1 The Devas wanted R&ma exiled that he might go and destroy 
R&vapa and the R&kshasas. Sarasvati is here spoken of as wicked 
(duahta), as the authoress of Manthar&’s evil suggestions.

* Shakti.1 The Devas wanted R&ma exiled that he might go and destroy 
R&vapa and the R&kshasas. Sarasvati is here spoken of as wicked 
(duahta), as the authoress of Manthar&’s evil suggestions.

* Shakti.

* This and the following are all incidents in the B&m&yana, which 
were the effects of Manthar&’s advice to Kaikeyl.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 768* Shakti.

* This and the following are all incidents in the B&m&yana, which 
were the effects of Manthar&’s advice to Kaikeyl.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 768

the wounding of Lakshma^a with shakti?hela; 1 * * the des¬ 
truction of R&va^a, with his whole family; the ordeal 
through fire of Sita; the gaining of heaven 5 by the Devas, 
and so forth. These incidents, further, are but a few of 
the greater waves in the untraversable sea of Ramalllfi..* 
Who can measure the destinies of the millions of Jlvas 
which are linked with this Ramalila*? The RamalllS* was 
but the gateway through which those destinies issued. 
In a Jlva’s Ilia, 4 also, a similar mutual connection of fates 
always exists, with this difference only, that in Bhagav&n’s 
lll& 4 the destinies concerned are in number millions, whilst 
in your or my Ilia they are only hundreds. Who can say 
that the destiny which, in the course of its production of 
fruits brings about the terrible suffering of the child at 
birth, is not connected with the destiny of the Mother ? 
Secondly, the question why Ishvara did this instead of 
doing that cannot be asked of Him. We cannot object 
and ask: “ Why has He created eyes in man’s face instead 
of in his back ? ” For, had He created eyes in man’s back, 
it might have been asked : 44 Why has He created eyes in 
man's back instead of in his face ? ” One can question in 
this way anything. I§hvara never escapes these interroga¬ 
tions, which are the natural characteristic of ignorance. 
A Jiva devoid of the knowledge of the Self* is ever ignorant 
to Him who possesses all knowledge. So long as the Jiva, 
as it were a drop of water, does not mingle with the ocean, 
which is Shiva, there is no end to the former’s interroga¬ 
tions. Shiva gratifies the Jlva's curiosity to the extent of 
telling him that only which He has been pleased to divulge 
in the Sh&stra spoken by Himself. The Medical Shftstras

1 A missile named $hakti

' Rama's play on earth.

' Atmajn&na.1 A missile named $hakti

' Rama's play on earth.

' Atmajn&na.

* Svarga.

* Play.

764

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

may be ignorant of that purpose of His whioh is served by 
woman’s labour-pains, but it is known to the S&dhana- • 
sh&stra. 1

In Tantra, Bhagav&n says: “ O Devi, at this critioal 
ninth or tenth month of pregnancy the Jlva is struck by 
the powerful labour-wind, 1 and issues through the ohannel 
like an arrow let loose from a bow. Senseless from the 
womb, he does not know of his fall. The force of the 
labour-wind and the pressure of the generative channel at 
the time of birth make the Jlva forget all that whioh he had 
revolved in his mind during his stay in the womb.”

In the Prapafichasara it is said : “ The more sinful the 
Jlva is, the greater is the pain which he suffers in issuing 
from his Mother's womb. Extremely wonderful is the his¬ 
tory of men's Karma guided by the will of the Lotusborn.” *

One sometimes meets a person who was formerly half 
paralyzed, or was attacked with some other disease equally 
or even more serious, or who was injured and almost died 
through violent delirium, but who has returned to life, and 
is now free from disease. He, however, cannot now recognize 
his wife, son, or daughter, or others, or his possessions. 
Although to this man’s friends he still possesses all he 
had, yet the man himself is not aware that he has anything 
whioh he can call his own. This is a kind of rebirth in 
one’s life.

When we find that such deep knowledge as one acquires 
through impressions received in early life is lost in old 
age, maturity, or even adolescence, it is a matter for no 
wonder that the light impressions on the child's soft mind 
should disappear under the grinding oppression of the 
horrible pain of birth, and that the terrible horror of the

The Tantra which is called by that name. 
Pnuava-v&yu. ' Padmayoni, or BrahmA.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 765The Tantra which is called by that name. 
Pnuava-v&yu. ' Padmayoni, or BrahmA.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 765

frightful swooning and insensibility then experienced should 
dispel all memory of past events. Loss of memory is * * 
possible whenever the mind and brain, which are the store¬ 
houses of all knowledge, are violently disturbed through 
any cause. If by any violent shook the order in which the 
picture impressions lie arranged in successive layers in the 
mind is in any way disturbed, the tie with all these im¬ 
pressions is loosened, and the threads which bind them to 
each other are scattered one knows not where. The pain 
of ohildbirth has been ordained only that the trace of past 
events may be dispelled from the Jlva’s mind. Jlva's 
assumption of a body is in order that he may suffer the 
consequence of past sin. It is not that the punishment is 
suffered owing to the assumption of body, but, as Shastra 
holds, assumption of body takes place owing to the neces¬ 
sity of suffering punishment. It is, therefore, useless to 
regret the assumption of body. Things have been so arrang¬ 
ed according to the desire of the all-good Devi, who is full 
of goodness, that a Jlva suffers the consequences of sin at 
such times, in suoh manner, and by such means, as may 
clear of obstruction the path of his welfare. This is why 
it is often found that Jlvas whose Destiny* is almost 
worked out die of the very pain of childbirth in places of 
pilgrimage,* and other seats of liberation, and are thus 
themselves liberated.

As regards the question why the mother suffers pain, 
the answer is that the mother’s destiny 1 is alone respon¬ 
sible for the suffering. We must understand that she is 
engaged in giving birth simply because she may thereby 
suffer the fruits of her destiny,* and not that she suffers 
pain in order that she may give birth to a child. In that1 Adrishta. That is the “ unseen ” cause of man’s fate, which he 
has himself produced through previous Karma.

* Tlrthas.

766

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

market in which the commodity is destiny 1 there does not, 
and cannot, exist any consideration of relationship. In this 
domain of merciless creatures of stone, no body, be he or 
she father or mother, son or daughter, husband or wife, or 
anyone else, cares for another. And yet there does exist a 
strong, intimate, and mysterious mutual connection be¬ 
tween such stones, like the mutual attraction between 
iron and magnet* * Both are hard to the utmost, and 
yet the two are in thorough union. But if destiny 1 
separates them, then in a moment all connection ceases, 
and the hard heart of the stone breaks through its own 
heat* The stone-mother breaks in pieces through the heat 
of her grief, 4 but her offspring, the stone-child, driven 
by its own destiny, has not one moment in which to 
think of the suffering of its mother. 4 For this reason I 
was saying that in this stony domain all are stones ac¬ 
cording to the behest of the Daughter of Stone. Here 
the child does not suffer because of the mother, nor does 
the mother suffer because of the child. Each one follows 
his own path.

It is only at crossing that one meets another for a 
short while. Then May&, the guide, often establishes rela¬ 
tionships “ dearer than life ” between them under the sweet 
and enchanting influence of which the traveller is made 
to forget the weariness of the journey, and adroitly taken

• Adrishta. That is the " unseen " cause of man’s fate, which he 
has himself produced through previous Karma.

* Each person on this world works out his own destiny through 
others, and is thus brought into relationship with those who are asso¬ 
ciated with him by Karma. The attraction which binds one to the other 
manifests in worldly relationships.

• That is, it suffers. ' That is. 6he is overwhelmed with grief.• That is, it suffers. ' That is. 6he is overwhelmed with grief.

* In the working out of fate there iB no reason why the mother 
should not suffer in birth if that be her destiny. Relationships tempor¬ 
arily established at the crossing-points of different lives will not affect 
this.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 767

by Her M&y& to far-away abodes, sometimes in Heaven, 1 
and sometimes in Hell.* * Shfistra has appeared in order 
that the traveller may surmount this forgetfulness, and 
that he be reminded now and then of the journey; and it 
is in order so to remind him of the pains of the journey, to 
bring to his memory the pangs which torture the depths 
of the traveller’s tired heart, that Sh&stra has spoken to 
us in the Sangs&ra of the good resolves which he had made 
during his stay in his mother’s womb.

It is only when a S&dhaka’s mind has been perfectly 
cleansed by devotion * that he can, on hearing the graciouB 
relation of Shfistra, recall such resolves to his mind. It 
was with a heart pained with such recall of past and unful¬ 
filled resolve that a Sadhaka sang:

“ I am, O Mother, 0 liberatrix, a debtor at Thy feet.

0 Mother, I am helpless, having forsaken adoration 
and worship.*

O Mother, I die through eating the poison of worldly 
enjoyment.'

Buffering pains in the womb, I said: * This time I 
go to the world that I may adore Thee.

I will remain at my own place* as a good ohild, 
and will offer three-leaved twigs of bael T at the 
beauteous feet of the Mother.'

Now, having fallen on earth, I remain, 0 Mother! 
fallen'

' Svarga. ’ Naraka.

* Tapas. * Bhajana, Pfljana. * Vishaya.

' Svapada. which expresses the same idea as SvarAj. All the suffer¬ 
ings of Jlva follow from neglect of this.

1 Tripatra. Bael twigs, with three leaves, are offered in worship.

' A play on the word “ fallen," which here means firstly fallen 
from the womb or born, and then degraded.

768

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' A play on the word “ fallen," which here means firstly fallen 
from the womb or born, and then degraded.

768

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Through forgetfulness of Thee. 0 Mother, 0 de¬ 
liverer of the fallen,

I have not performed, nor can I now perform, Sad- 
hana.

0 Durga, Mother! I can no longer bear my sorrow.

Good for nothing is Dasharathi. 1

What shall I do, 0 Shafigkarl ? I cannot control 
my mind.

Now, 0 Mother f I pray that Thou mayest bind the 
elephant-like mind

With the rope of Thy own high quality,* * and de¬ 
liver me,

O Devi, of dishevelled hair, 5 from this bondage to 
the world."

Severely beaten and oppressed by the waves of a 
boundless sea of sorrows, the Sadhaka has here fully 
opened his heart, and with tears in his eyes said : “ I have 
not done, nor can I now do, Sadhana. 0 Durga, Mother, 
I can no longer bear my sorrow.” In these few words 
the Sadhaka has expressed the insufferable mental agony 
whioh a Sadhaka feels when he falls from Sadhana, and 
is burnt in the flaming torments of Sangsara. Having 
relieved himself of such an outpouring, he moves, as it 
were, a cloud freed from its burdens of water in some 
invisible sky. There are many with poetic talent, but 
to draw such a living picture of the sufferer is the work 
of a living Sadhaka, who has gained such power* from 
Sadhana of the Mother of the World, and not the work

1 The celebrated Bengali poet and author of this song.

* Her quality as deliverer.

' Kali and other destructive (Sangh&rinl) forms of the Devi are so 
dishevelled.

* §haktl.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 769

of some unconscious poet, 1 * * with his idle pictures of leaves 
and oreepers. Blessed are you, oh conscious Dfi^harathi, 
the neck jewel of the land of Bengal. Blessed is your 
musical Sadhana, or the modulation * of the Dhvani * of 
Kulakundalinl. You have said that you are a debtor to 
the Mother. But this account of your debt has made the 
entire race of S&dhakas indebted to you.Many are experts in falling from Sadhana, but very few 
have the good fortune to be capable of such heart-felt 
repentance. It is, however, in order to secure such good 
fortune that the Mother of the World has, in spite of the 
Jlva's forgetfulness of the events of past times and of the 
life in the womb, repeatedly pointed to them in the mirror 
of Shastra, saying: “My child, you have forgotten all 
that you said. Pain of birth has been created that there 
may be this forgetfulness, according to your Karma.”

However that may be, our object here in introducing 
a discussiou of this subject is to show this much only, that 
the appearance of consciousness in the Jlva is nothing 
but the appearance of the eternally existing Sbakti of 
Dhvani * in the child in the womb, and that the vital 
Shakti of the Jlva is nothing but Dhvani in the form of 
Ajapa-Mantra. Through impressions acquired in previ¬ 
ous births, a Jlva forms words mentally to himself while 
in the womb. This is why the Sh&stra has said: “ Jxva, 
then, himself thinks and speaks in his mind.” 4 This 
initial mental process manifests later as crying and the 
like after birth. Even the commencement of such crying 
is made whilst in the womb. At the time of birth the

1 That is, one not possessed of the high consciousness of the 
enlightened and devout S&dhaka.

’ Murchchhanft.

’ Power of subtle sound (see ante).

4 See ante.

49

770

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 That is, one not possessed of the high consciousness of the 
enlightened and devout S&dhaka.

’ Murchchhanft.

’ Power of subtle sound (see ante).

4 See ante.

49

770

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Jlva in the womb is greatly agitated. As he sits within 
the womb, all his limbs are repeatedly shaken. A feeling 
of weariness, which spreads all over the body, makes the 
child yawn. He swoons at every moment, and heaves 
sighs. Steeped in the deep darkness of the womb, the 
Jlva, on discovering himself to be in such terrible danger, 
becomes desirous of crying. All the inner processes neces¬ 
sary for such an act are performed at that time; it is 
only the outer process which is begun after birth. That 
process is as follows : The extremely subtle state of (that 
which subsequently appears as) a word 1 is called Parft, 
and issues from the MQl&dh&ra.' The less subtle state, 
when it reaches the heart,* * is called Pashyantl. The still 
less subtle state which exists in conjunction with * Buddhi * 
is known as MadhyamA Lastly, there is the gross state 
of sound in which it issues from the throat of the Jlva, 
who now cries out. This state is known as Vaikharl, 
and it is at this stage and in this state of sound that the 
child’s cry becomes clearly audible. Therefore is it that 
the string of letters which exist (as subtle sound) in the 
Jlva’s Sushumna * are (not produced by), but merely mani¬ 
fested by means of the outward pressure of the vital air* 
Although all letters ' exist in subtle forms in the perpetual 
Dhvani in the Sushumna,' yet they cannot issue at the

‘ Vftkya.

* For these and other centres in T&ntrik Toga, see Arthur Avalon's 
“ Six Centres and the Serpent Power.”

’ Hridaya.

* Snngyukta.

* One of the aspects of the mind.

* Literally, in the yantra of the Sushumnft, the N&<fi of that name 
(see ante).

’ Pr&pav&yu.

* Varpa.

' The “ nerve " of that name.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 771* Literally, in the yantra of the Sushumnft, the N&<fi of that name 
(see ante).

’ Pr&pav&yu.

* Varpa.

' The “ nerve " of that name.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 771

same time that KulakundalinI, whose substance is con¬ 
sciousness, makes Her appearance. For so long as the 
paths along which the current of sound flows from the 
Muladhara to the vocal orifice is not divided, so long 
letters cannot manifest in distinct forms, because those 
parts of the body are seats of the manifestation of letters.

Mantras are in all cases manifestations 1 of Kulakuijda- 
lini Herself—She whose substance is all letters* and 
Dhvani, and who is the Param&tma Itself.* Therefore, 
the substance of all Mantras is consciousness, though 
their appearance and expression is in words. As, not 
withstanding the existence of consciousness in all things, 
it does not manifest without such processes as the union 
of blood and semen and the like; so, although the sub¬ 
stance of Mantras is consciousness, that consciousness is 
not perceptible without the union of the Sadhaka’s Shakti 
derived from S&dhana with Mantra§hakti. Hence it has 
been said in the Sarad&tilaka: “ Although KulakundalinI, 
whose substance is Mantras, shines brilliant as lightning 
in the Malildhara of every Jiva, yet it is only in the lotuses 
of the hearts of Yogis that She reveals Herself and dances 
in Her own joy. (In other cases, though existing in subtle 
form, She does not reveal Herself.) Assuming the bodily 
appearance of a coiling serpent, that Devi coils round 
Svayambhu Shaftgkara* in the manner of the spirals of a 
conch-shell (in three and a half coils). Her substance is 
all Vedas, all Mantras, and Tattvas * She is all good, and 
the extremely subtle, perceptible' Parameshvari. She is

1 Vibhati (See ante). ' ^arpas.

‘ That is. Kundall. Paramfttma. SvarOpinl, and VarnadhvanimayT.

' That is. the linga of 9h*va so named in the Mulftdh&ra.

' Here all things.1 Vibhati (See ante). ' ^arpas.

‘ That is. Kundall. Paramfttma. SvarOpinl, and VarnadhvanimayT.

' That is. the linga of 9h*va so named in the Mulftdh&ra.

' Here all things.

' Pratyaksha. Derived from prati before, aksha sense; that is, per¬ 
ceptible to any sense according to the form of her manifestation.

772 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the Mother of the three forms of energy,* * and Shabdabrah- 
man Itself.”

Now, SAdhaka, remember that passage in the Toginl 
Tantra in which it is said: “ Mantras are proof of the 
existence of all Jlvas,' and are the supreme energy 3 of 
Brahman and the Supreme Good.” 4 “ Those Mantras con¬ 
sisting of energy are beyond all MAyA. (For unless Mantra* 
had been above MAyA, it would not have been possible 
for Mantra$hakti to destroy the process of cause and effect 
in the world. It is not to be thought of that a subordinate 
should defeat by its own power the person to whom he is 
subordinate. It is, therefore, again said): All Mantras are 
destroyers of M&yA. (One who is entangled in MAyA can 
never sever its bonds.) Mantras are all blissful. (That is 
to say, when Mantra§hakti is awakened, then all forms of 
bliss which may be had from the attainment of any object 
in the world are enjoyed. And for this reason a second 
adjective is given, it being said that) Mantras are full of 
Brahma-bliss. (That is to say, there is nothing in the 
world in whioh Brahman does not exist, and there is no 
bliss which is unattained on the attainment of Brahma- 
bliss. It has, therefore, been again said): Mantras are 
full of perfeot bliss. (That is to say, She, who is Mantra,' 
is existence, consciousness, and bliss, and the sole centre 
of all bliss in the universe. Whoever, therefore, attains Her 
through Siddhi in Mantra lacks no form of bliss. It is this

1 Tejas, that is, Moon, Sun, and Fire.

’ Bat for Mantra, Jlva coaid not exist: and as Jlva exists, Mantra 
exists.

* Brahmatejas.1 Tejas, that is, Moon, Sun, and Fire.

’ Bat for Mantra, Jlva coaid not exist: and as Jlva exists, Mantra 
exists.

* Brahmatejas.

See ante. The quotation from the YoginI Tantra is continued 
from this place.

* Literally. “ the Tattva of Mantra.”

* Literally, " 8he who is the S vara pa of Mantra.”

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 773

state of perfect bliss which is called liberation whilst in 
the state of a Jlva, 1 For this reason another adjective is 
applied to the Mantra, winch is), Mantra is that highest 
good which is Brahma-nirvana—(that is to say, Kaivalya- 
liberation itself). Mantras are all Maya,* * all Yidyft, all 
Tapas, all Siddhi.* (Just as Brahman Himself, though with¬ 
out attributes, is yet the Lord of all attributes * and all 
attributes ;* so Mantra, notwithstanding that it is above 
all Maya, is the seat of the manifestation of Maya, and 
is all Maya. Mantrasadhana' is the great cause which 
enables a Sadhaka to accomplish wonders by means of 
Maya. By the words “ Mantra is all Vidya ” is meant 
that Mantra is the cause of the divisions of Adya§hakti T 
into the aspeots of Mahavidya, Siddhi vidya, Upavidya, 
Vidya, and so forth, according to the different forms * 
of Vidya. It is by virtue of Mantra-Sadhana' that Sad- 
haka.s see the manifestation of Her different aspects. Or, 
Mantras are Vidya because by Mantrasadhana one easily 
acquires the fourteen forms of worldly knowledge with their 
sixty-four branches, as also Brahma-knowledge," whioh 
destroys all sins. Mantras are all Tapas, 11 because by their 
grace one acquires, without subjection of the body to hard¬ 
ships, the religious merit/ u which is otherwise only acquired 
through physical austerities. Mantras are all Siddhi, be¬ 
cause there is no Siddhi in the world which cannot be 
acquired by a S&dhana with Mantra.) ” *

1 Jlvanmnkti. 1 Sarvam&y&maya.

' That is, all Yidy& (as to which seo post), devotion, austerity, etc., 
and achievement (see Introduction).

* Gupa. * Gupamaya.1 Jlvanmnkti. 1 Sarvam&y&maya.

' That is, all Yidy& (as to which seo post), devotion, austerity, etc., 
and achievement (see Introduction).

* Gupa. * Gupamaya.

* That is, S&dbana with Mantra.

’ Primal §bakti. ' Tattvas.

' That S&dhana, the object of which is Mantra.

" Brahmavidy&. 11 Tapomaya. " Dharma.

774

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ Mantras are all forms of liberation. (That is to say, 
all forms of liberation bestowed by the DevatA he worships, 
whether Salokya, SarQpya, Sar§hti, S&yujya, 1 or Nirv&na, 
are attainable by Mantrasadhana; for Mantra is itself 
liberation. 1 * He who wishes to ascertain the depth down 
to a particular point of an unfathomable ocean must des¬ 
cend to such a point. So a Sadhaka who desires a parti¬ 
cular form of liberation must attain Siddhi in a Sadhana 
suitable for its acquisition. Just as the sea can from its 
fulness supply with ease water in any quantity from a 
mere pailful to a mass great enough to deluge the universe, 
so Mantra, whioh is replete with liberation, can grant to 
the Sadhaka any form of it from the lowest Siddhi to the 
supreme Nirvapa. Mantra is truly Brahman, who is light* 
and perpetual liberation. Differences in effect produced 
by Mantras&dhana are due to differences in such Sadhana. 
S&dhakas will now be able to say whether Mantra, which 
is unchanged 4 even in Nirvana,* should be considered to 
be a mere worldly physical sound, or Brahman Itself as 
the fourth state of consciousness.*) Mantras are all Vedas. T 
(That is to say, if a Sadhaka attains perfect Siddhi in even 
a single Mantra, he becomes with ease possessed of the

1 These nre qualified forms of Mukti (liberation) via., dwelling in

the same abode with the Devatft worshipped, the assumption of his 
form and powers and unity with Him. Nirv&pa is unqualified Mukti.

' Muktimaya. ’ Jyotih.

4 Literally, “ whose Svarflpa is not changed."

* Because the Mantra is the Brahman.' Muktimaya. ’ Jyotih.

4 Literally, “ whose Svarflpa is not changed."

* Because the Mantra is the Brahman.

* Turlya chaitanya. Turlya comes from chatur (four) and chha 
(the cha of chatur being dropped), and is the fourth state (avasthft) of 
consciousness. S&yana says that Turlya is t&raka (deliverer). Accord¬ 
ing to the Ved&ntaa&ra, it is that state in which the Brahman exists 
without up&dhi (limiting conditions). Yadanup&dhitang chaitanyam 
tat turtyam iti chy&yate. Shruti says that it is thus: Shantam (peace), 
§hivam (excellence), and Advaitam (non-duality). (See Introduction).

* Sarvavedamaya.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 775

spiritual knowledge which is acquired by learning all the 
Vedas, with all allied matters; or he can perform with 
his own Mantra all the rites which are performed with 
different Mantras.) Mantras are all worlds.* * (That is to 
say, Mantrashakti can, at the S&dhaka’s desire, reach and 
operate in all the fourteen worlds, and, penetrating through 
all their barriers, merge the Sadhaka in Itself.*) In Mantra 
are all enjoyments.* (That is to say, whatever things are 
enjoyed by Siidhakas, are all produced by Mantrashakti *; 
or in Mantrashakti alone Sadhakas find all the enjoyments 
and happiness which others obtain from wife, children, and 
other worldly objects; or through the influence of the 
intense universe-consuming power of Mantra all enjoy¬ 
ments become favourable to Siddhi.* Mantras are all 
Shftstras. (That is to say, after Mantrashakti has been 
acquired, there is no necessity to know any Sh&stra.

“ Mantras are all forms of Yoga. (That is to say, 
there is no form of Yoga which cannot be accomplished 
Mantrasadhana.)"“ Mantras are all forms of Yoga. (That is to say, 
there is no form of Yoga which cannot be accomplished 
Mantrasadhana.)"

“O Devi, my sight was paralyzed by the powerful 
splendour of the light 1 of this mass of Mantras and Sh&s- 
tras borne on every petal of the lotus of Thy heart. I 
then sank into the sea of unconsciousness, which is de¬ 
lusion/ On recovery from that swoon, I again saw that 
mass of Mantras resplendent as the sun, as one who has 
been steeped in the deep darkness of night views the 
brilliant morning sunrise. By the grace of Mah&k&ll, the

' Sarvvalokamaya. In Mantra are all the worlds, in that Mantra 
pervades all the worlds.

* That is, the Mantra can procure Nirv&na for the Sadhaka.

' Sarvvabhogamaya. * The power of Mantra. * Success.

• Tejas. ’ Moha>

776

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Deity presiding over ‘ all Mantras, I have attained Siddhi, 
and have become versed in all ShAstras.”

The string of fifty letters,* * from A to Esha, which are 
the Matfika,* “ is eternal, unbeginning and unending, and 
Brahman itself.” This great saying is the gist of all 
Tantras. Lest through human error the pronunciation 
of any letters * should be lost or distorted, Vidhata * has 
created alphabets,* and put them into writing. Bjihas- 
pati * says: “ Because Jlva is prone to error before he is 
even six months old, Vidhata 4 has created all Aksharas,* 
and put them into writing in their due order.” S&dhakas 
should understand Aksharas* to be created by Vidhata in 
the same way as the Vedas are created by Him. T Vidhata 4 
has created the forms' of written letters in resemblance 
to the forms seen by Mahe$hvara in the lotus of Mahe$h- 
varf s heart.That the Vindu, Matra,' and Rekha in the alphabet 
are all really Brahman is dearly shown in that which the 
Kamadhenu and other Tantras say as to the identity of 
the letters from A to Esha, with the Brahman, Vishiju, 
Mahe$hvara, Shakti, Sflryya, Gane§ba; and other Devas 
and Devls are presiding Devatas of those lines and points. 
In faot, the writing which we in ordinary use know as 
Akshara (alphabet) is nothing but the Yantra of the

1 Adhishthatr!, which is previously described as the sthala form.

* Varpa.

* Mothers, a name for the letter as embodying sonnd produced by

Mother Kupdalinl. * Brahmfl.

* Akshara. • Guru of the Devass.

That is, He does not really create them, but they issue from 
Him as part of Hi6 being or His breath. ' Marti.

Vindu is the dot which indicates the nasal breathing Anusvara. 
Mfttrft is the upper part of a letter or the headline ; and Rekhft is the 
lines forming the letter itself.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 111

undecaying Akshara Brahman. 1 Just as in Sadhana forms 
made of earth or stone are used as Devatas, so in writing 
Yantras made of lineB are used as AJksharas.* * When, by 
virtue of Sadhana, Mantrashakti is awakened, the pre¬ 
siding Devata of every line of the resplendent linear form 
(as it were an image) breaks through that form, and later, 
when Siddhi in the Mantra has been acquired, the Devata 
of worship who presides over all Mantras, considered as a 
whole, and who is existence, consciousness, and bliss, grati¬ 
fies Her devotees by the revelation of Her very Self.*At dawn the powerful spreading rays of the sun pierce 
the deep, dark night, and are slowly followed by the orb 
itself, as it were a mass of heated gold reddening the sum¬ 
mit of the Mount of sunrise. 4 Great Yogis, who are 
immersed in SandhyS, * prayer, see in the centre of that 
luminous orb the beautiful form of SQryyadeva, seated 
on a red, full-blown lotus. In the same way, at the 
blessed appearance of dawn of Brahmamayf s * grace, the 
fierce light 1 of Mantra dawns in the S&dhaka's heart, 
rending the darkness of delusion * of the deadly night of 
ignorance,’ and fills the entire universe with the joyous 
love of the supreme Devatfi. Then successive companies 
of Devas show themselves unsought in the petals of the 
S&dhaka's thousand-petalled lotus. At the conclusion of

1 The word Akshara etymologically means a (not), and kthara 
(decaying).

* Yantra, whioh literally means an " instrument," here means the 
lines of a letter. As a stone image is used to represent tho Devata, 
so the lines, etc., which go to make np the written alphabetical char¬ 
acters are used to denote the Devata, which manifests as letters.

' Svasvarupa.

* The sun rises from the top of UdayOchala, or the Mount of rising 
(sunrise), and goes and descends to the Mount of sunset (astachala).

* A rite performed thrice daily at morn, noon, and eve (see Intro¬ 
duction).

' The Devi’s.

' Tejas.

' Moha.

* AvidyO.

778

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* A rite performed thrice daily at morn, noon, and eve (see Intro¬ 
duction).

' The Devi’s.

' Tejas.

' Moha.

* AvidyO.

778

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the fall display of her power,* * Brahmasan&tanl, who is 
perfeot and eternal Brahman, reveals Herself in the form 
worshipped by the Sadhaka in the midst of a circle of light 
overspreading the assembly of Devas and Devls. Immers¬ 
ed in the great sea of self-realization,* which is the 
Kaivalya' of Her who is Kaivalya itself, the Sadhaka, in 
the enjoyment of the sleep of Brahman-bliss, rests in the 
bed of consciousness in the bosom of the great deep Peace. 
This it is which is the undecaying nature* of Aksharas 
(letters). In fact, Akshara, or written Mantra, is the same - 
thing as DevatA in image, or Yantra. By the force or lack 
of force of the S&dhaka's S&dhana, the Devatfi, appears 
therein and disappears therefrom Varna, Nftda, Vindu, 
vowel and consonant in a Mantra, denote different appear¬ 
ances of the Devata. This is, of course, known to Sadhakas 
proficient in the knowledge of Mantra. 1 ?; but as the matter 
is striotly one to be learnt from Gurus only, we are unable 
. to deal with it here. Certain aspects or VibhQtis'of the 
Devata are inherent in certain letters,' but perfect Shakti 
appears only in a whole Mautra, and not in any disjointed 
letter. 7 For this reason, any word or letter cannot be a 
Mantra.' The Mantra alone in which the plaj’ful DevatA

* Literally, " when all VibhfltU have appeared " (sec ante).

’ Bhava: that consciousness which is the experience of the 
Kaivalya state. Bh&va literally means existence, and then feeling, etc. 
the term being here loosely used for such experience. * Liberation.

' Svarupa — that is, the true nature or aspect. * See ante.

* It is not merely the whole Mantra which is the Devata, though,' Svarupa — that is, the true nature or aspect. * See ante.

* It is not merely the whole Mantra which is the Devata, though,

as pointed out later, perfect Shakti appears only in a whole Mantra. 
Thus, in the Miy4-Mantra —viz., “ Hring,” H = Shiva, R = fire, 1“ 
M&y&?hakti. Bach letter is thus a Devata, and the whole Mantra is 
the Devatil Tripurasundarl, the meaning being that Mayft is dissolved 
in the Are of knowledge. ' Varna.

* Each of the letters is, as above stated, a Mantra. What is here 
meant is that it is not every Mantra which revealB a particular aspect 
sought. One must have recourse to that particular Mantra which is 
that aspect.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 7?9LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 7?9

has revealed one of Her particular aspects is alone capable 
of revealing that aspect. Hence that Mantra is called in 
Shastra the Mantra of that particular aspect. Bbagavan, 
the Guru of all Mantras and Siddhis and creator of all 
things, has therefore said to Bhagavatl: “ It is certain that 
the form of a particular Devatft will appear from the par¬ 
ticular Mantra of which that Devata is the presiding 
Deity, 1 for a Devata’s body is formed out of Vljamantra.” 
In the Kamadhenu Tantra it has been said : “ If a Sad h aka 
contemplates with all his power the Devi, according to the 
Vlja of individual Devat&s, and Prafulla and Kalika (parti¬ 
cular Mantrashaktis), then from that Vlja itself appear 
Shakti, Vishnu, Shiva, SQryya, and other Devas. From 
Vlja is manifested the immaculate Supreme Brahman. 
How can Hari or Sad&$hiva appear in a Sadhaka’s heart 
without contemplation of Vlja, for the eternal Devi, appear¬ 
ing as Vlja. is the Genetrix of even Sadashiva ? ” All the 
fruits of accomplishment* * which are borne by the creeper* 
of a Sadhaka’s Sadhana depends on the great Mantra§hakti 
appearing in the form of Vlja. 4 Shastra has therefore 
specified the rules and injunctions relating to the 
sowing of this Vlja,* according to place, time, and person. 
Mantravicbara, Mantrodhara, 4 and the like, are prescrib¬ 
ed in order that it may be ascertained what Mantra 
should be selected, and then, on selection, in which field 
and according to what method it should be sown in 
order that it may speedily have good fruit under the

1 Adhisht&tri Devatft, which is described (see ante) os the Sthfila 
form. * Siddbi.

' S&dhana is here compared to a creeping plant.

* VljarOpinl. * Vlja means seed.

* Mantroddh&ra is the search for and finding ont of a Mantra for 
the purposes mentioned after Mantravich&ra, or disenssion with the 
same object.

780

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Mantroddh&ra is the search for and finding ont of a Mantra for 
the purposes mentioned after Mantravich&ra, or disenssion with the 
same object.

780

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

special influence of the Devata. For this purpose refer¬ 
ence is had to such matters as the zodiacal constella- 
tions, 1 star,' the planets, and the ascending and descending 
modes of the moon,’ conjunctions, 4 and so forth, which 
exist as forces operating in the body of the S&dhaka.*

In the Vishvasara Tantra it has been said : “ Wise men 
should know Mantras to be of four kinds, according to the 
distinctive nature of the Chakra *—namely, Siddha, Sadhya, 
Susiddha, and Ari. Of these, a Siddha Mantra, when it 
has been the subject of due Sadhana, becomes Siddha 1 in 
due time (that is, the time specified in the Shistra for 
Siddhi in respect of that particular Mantra). A Sfidhya 
Mantra * becomes Siddha ’ after a long time through both 
Japa * and Homa. 4 A Susiddha Mantra 14 becomes Siddha * 
the moment it is received (from the Guru; but its fruit 
appears according to the S&dhaka’s Sadhana), and a Ripu

1 Ba?h!. ' Nakshatra.

1 Graha—that is, R&hu and Eetu, or the points at which the path 
of the moon intersects the ecliptic.

* Toga; conjunctions of stars with earth.

4 The universe is contained in the body with all its external details. 
With the objective conjunction, etc., there is a corresponding conjunc¬ 
tion in the Sodhaka's body, or, more strictly, it is the same conjunc¬ 
tion viewed in different aspects.

' Before initiation it is usual to ascertain whether a Mantra is 
svakula or akula. The circle in which nativity is marked in Astrology 
is called Chakra, but here the reference is also to the T&ntrik Chakras, 
such as the A-ka-da-ma and others described in Tantras&ra (see ante 
of my edition of the Mah&nirv&pa Tantra).

’ Accomplished, perfected, fruitful. (8iddha) accomplished—that 
is, without much difficulty.’ Accomplished, perfected, fruitful. (8iddha) accomplished—that 
is, without much difficulty.

* Literally, 11 which has to be accomplished." This term, as the 
others, is here technically used as descriptive of a particular Mantra ; 
here a Mantra accomplished with great difficulty.

Recitation of Mantra and sacrifice unto fire (see Introduction).

'* Literally, " well accomplished."

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 781

Mantra 1 lays the axe at the root of Siddhi." “Know* * 
Siddhamantras to be friends, S&dhyamantras to be servers,* 
Susiddha mantras to be helpers,* and Shatrumantras 4 to 
be destroyers. Friendly Mantras become Siddha * through 
Japa,' according to rules laid down in the Sh&stra. Sadhya- 
mantras become Siddha' through much serving. 1 Helper 
Mantras grant desires even without much service, and 
destructive Mantras more surely destroy the S&dhaka.”

This is the general rule, but in oertain special circum¬ 
stances, which must be learnt from Gurus only, there is no 
necessity for adjudging the suitability of Mantras.' Here 
the point for special consideration of Sadhakas is that, 
although the object of worship' of the Ishtadevata," Patha, 11 
Stava, 1 ' Homa, 1 * Dhy&na, 1 * Dh&raga, 1 ' Samadhi," or other 
means, and of Siddhi and Sadhana with one’s own DlkshA- 
mantra,” is the same ; yet the actual working varies. The 
fruit whioh a S&dhaka achieves in ten years by means of

1 Or Ari. Ari and Ripu aro synonymous words meaning " enemy "; 
a Mantra with which no Siddhi is attainable by the S&dhaka to whom 
it is inimical.

' Sevaka; daring accomplishment. * Posbaka.

* Meaning the same as Ari or Ripu.

' Accomplished, perfected, fruitful. (Siddha) accomplished—that 
is, without much difficulty.

' Recitation of Mantra and sacrifice unto fire (see Introduction).

’ That is, much S&dhana.

' As where the Mantra is received in dream.

* Ceremonial worship. For this and the following terms see Intro¬ 
duction.’ That is, much S&dhana.

' As where the Mantra is received in dream.

* Ceremonial worship. For this and the following terms see Intro¬ 
duction.

" The particular Devatft whom a particular S&dhaka worships, such 
os Kyishpa in the case of a Vaishnava. and in whose Mantra the 
S&dhaka is specially initiated. " Reading of §b&stra.

H Hymn of praise. " Sacrifice into fire, which is of several kinds.

u Meditation. “ Concentration.

“ Yoga ecstasy, or realization of the Brahman.

" The particular Mantra in which the Sfldhaka has been initiated.

782

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Paja, P&tha, Stava, and so forth, can be obtained in but one 
year, month, week, or even one day, by force of a powerful 
Mantrasadhana; for in the case of PQja, Stava, Dhy&na 
Dh&rana, 1 and so forth, only the S&dhaka's Sadhanashakti* * 
operates; whilst in the case of Sadhana with Mantra, 
Sadhanashakti works in conjunction with Mantrashakti/ 
For reasons of place, time, and person a S&dhaka’s Sadhana- 
§hakti* may be, and actually often is, imperfect, and meets 
with obstacles. But the invincible power of Mantrashakti* 
can never be defeated. Mantra is equally and in all places 
powerful, whether in the Upper/ Middle/ and Nether* 
worlds, or in water, on land, or in space. Mantrashakti ; 
is unconcerned with the question whether the S&dhaka’s 
purpose is good or bad. Fire will equally burn down a 
house in the case of a malicious arson as it will in Homa 1 
accept the offerings made in the sacrificial pit in the name 
of Devatas. Whenever Mantrashakti is invoked, whether 
it be with the object of doing good or harm to one’s own 
self or another person, it will of a surety accomplish that 
work. It is the S&dhaka who reaps the consequence, whe¬ 
ther it be Heaven * or Hell/ As fire only dies out after it

1 Vante.

' That is. the force generated by the S&dhana of the S&dhaka 
himself. Its nature and intensity therefore varies.1 Vante.

' That is. the force generated by the S&dhana of the S&dhaka 
himself. Its nature and intensity therefore varies.

* The power of the Mantra itself— i.e., a constant quantity when 
once realized through MantrasAdhana.

' Svarga, the heavens.

' Martya, the world of mortals or this earth.

' RasAtala, one of the nether worlds, for which it here stands as a 
general term.

* Sacrifice into fire. A pit is prepared, and on the hearth (Kun^a)

the fire is laid into which the offerings are thrown, that Agni (Fire) may 
carry them to the Devas. * Svarga.

* Naraka. When called into active operation, Mantrashakti dis¬ 
plays its power, whatever be the result. If, however, the S&dhaka 
invokes that power for an evil purpose, that is the S&dhaka's affair, and 
he will likely go to Hell.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 783LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 783

has consumed that to which it has been set, so Mantra- 
shakti ceases to operate only when it has fully revealed 
its power. A S&dhaka’s individual (&tma) Shakti is like 
wind, and Mantrashakti is like fire, so that where the 
S&dhaka’s individual Shakti is weak, the Divine Shakti 
of Mantra can in a moment make it very, very great. Just 
as waves of air, when struck and restruck by dames of fire, 
flow strong and fast in the sky, and these flames of fire, 
fanned by the rapid currents of air, blaze with redoubled 
force, so the S&dhaka’s individual Shakti, when struck 
again and again by Mantrashakti, is very rapidly devel¬ 
oped, and then a strong, active individual Shakti unites 
with Mantrashakti to make the latter doubly powerful. 
Just as with the help of a breath of wind a small fire is 
generated, which then, by the movements of the air which 
is drawn into it, become so great that it illuminates the 
world and firmament with its lustre, so with the help of 
a mere particle of individual Shakti, Mantrashakti in a 
very small form appears, which then, with the development 
of the previously almost inert individual Shakti, becomes 
so great that it illumines the heart of the Jiva and pene¬ 
trates even through Brahmaloka. 1 It is simply because 
Mantra possesses this wonderful power that a Jiva may 
accomplish that which appears to be impossible; otherwise, 
how could anyone expect a Jiva to achieve by his own 
effort the treasure which is worshipped by Shiva ? What 
individual Shakti does Jiva possess by virtue of which he 
can, without the help of Mantra, conquer the Jivashakti * * 
and transform it into the Daivl?hakti ?* In the vast field 
of the Sangsara, and in that darkness which is delay in

1 The highest of the fourteen worlds or regions.

* That is, the $hakti of a Jiva aa such.

* The §hakti of a Deva as such. With this $hakti he can accom¬ 
plish that which a Deva can.

784

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* That is, the $hakti of a Jiva aa such.

* The §hakti of a Deva as such. With this $hakti he can accom¬ 
plish that which a Deva can.

784

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the attainment of Siddhi, Mantra alone is the everlasting 
autumnal full moon which never sets and never rises.' 
The cool, pure, and bright rays of this moon are the in¬ 
finite mercy of the Mother of the world. Pious S&dhakas 
and S&dhik&s* *are the Chakoras'and Chakorla, 4 who are 
ever thirsty to drink these rays. Spreading their two 
wings of knowledge* and notion,* they soar above the 
region of Sangs&ra to the greatest heights of the far- 
extending firmament of S&dhana, and there, dancing with 
joy, are blessed with the draught of nectar. Sad&nanda 1 
has therefore said to Anandamaj-I :* “ None but the 
Chakoras know the beauty of moonshine." (Similarly, 
none but S&dhakas and S&dhik&s know the neotar of 
Mantra$hakti. The sight of it ever makes the community 
of one-eyed, faithless crows to squat in their dry nests, 
shutting their eyes in fear, and hiding their heads.)

More than the above cannot be made public on the 
subject of Mantra?hakti, the creeper which grants the 
fourfold fruit* to the Sadhaka. We, therefore, here stop 
after having merely pointed out the main principles alone. 1 * 
The entire tree will become revealed when its branches, 
twigs, leaves, and fruits are distinctly shown." The Tantra 
Sh&stra is not a pleasure-ground for the ease-loving and

1 As it is always above the horizon, it cannot be said to rise or set.

* Female S&dhakas.

* Birds celebrated in Sanskrit poetry as being very fond of moon¬ 
light.

* Female Chakoras.

* Jn&na. • Karma.

1 He who is ever-joyfol—Shiva.

' She who is bliss; the Devi, His spouse.

Dharma. Artha, Kama, and Moksha (see Introduction).

“ Mala-tattva. “ Which the Gum will do.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 786' She who is bliss; the Devi, His spouse.

Dharma. Artha, Kama, and Moksha (see Introduction).

“ Mala-tattva. “ Which the Gum will do.

LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND 786

luxurious. It is the hermitage, in the woods* * built by 
Yoga, of Him who is the orest-gem of great Yogis,* and 
the Guru of all mobile and immobile things. Who has 
the power to touch, without His command, a single leaf 
or flower belonging to this lovely forest, full of energy ? * 
Whoever, with the mad thought of reliance on the powers 
of his own arms, enters into this forest without His 
command will of a certainty be burnt into ashes by the 
most terrible fire* of the Lord of Destruction, like flies 
which fall into a flame or Kandarpa * when seized by the 
jaws of death. This is why, after having come so far, we 
now recede in fear.

As to what yet remains to be explained, we bow to 
those Lotus-feet, so sought by devotees, and fervently pray 
that He may, according to What He Himself has said, 
appear in the hearts of all Gurus, and through them teach 
their disciples that aspeot of His which is Mantra.

1 Tnpovana. ’ Shiva. ’ Tejas.

* The God of Love who was burnt into ashes by the fire of $hiva's 
third eye.

CHAPTER XIII

ON THE GURU 1

All that has been above mentioned in relation to Mantra 
Tattva depends on Gurutattva, for the root of initiation,* 
is in Guru; the root of Mantra is in initiation; 1 the root 
of Devatft is in Mantra; and the root of Siddhi is in 
DevatA Bhagavan has, therefore, said in the Mun<Jamala 
Tantra: “Mantra is born of Guru, and Devata is born of 
Mantra, so that, O Beauteous One, Guru stands in the 
place of a grandfather to the IshfcadevatA. Just as service 
done to the father or grandfather pleases the son or grand¬ 
son, service done to Guru pleases Mantra; service done to 
Mantra pleases Devata; and servioe done to both Guru 
and Mantra also pleases Devata.Any deviation from this line of action produces con¬ 
trary results; that is to say, just as service done to the 
son and grandson disregarding the father and grandfather 
really displeases instead of pleasing the former, so the 
worship of Mantra at a disregard of Guru or worship of 
Devata, at a disregard of Mantra or worship of Ishtadevata, 
at a disregard of Guru and Mantra, rather angers than 
pleases them. Here it should also be understood that, 
just as there is no possibility of pleasing the son and grand¬ 
son by serving them at a disregard of the father and 
grandfather, so also there is no possibility of pleasing the

1 Gurutattva.

' DlksbA

ON THE GURU

7871 Gurutattva.

' DlksbA

ON THE GURU

787

father and grandfather by serving them without care for 
the son and grandson. There is no likelihood of pleasing 
the Guru even by serving him and Mantra at a disregard 
of DevatA, or him alone at a disregard of Devat& and 
Mantra. The necessity for these observations exists in the 
fact that nowadays one finds many disciples * 1 * * who only 
seek the protection of Guru for fear of having to make 
Japa* of Mantra, and to worship DevatA. Such respeot 
for Guru is in itself a sign of dishonest motive. In fact, 
Siddhi is near at hand for him only who makes no distinc¬ 
tion between Guru, Mantra, and DevatA.' Shastra has 
therefore said : “ What does not the greatly pleased Jagad- 
dh&trl 4 give to him who makes no distinction between 
Mantra and Gurudeva ? ” This is what Shastra says. But 
nowadays people greatly dispute about the Guru. There 
are many who dislike to worship a man as being in a real 
sense Brahman. As Mantra is, in their opinion, mere 
letters,* so Guru is, in their judgment, a mere man.' As 
a matter of fact, ignorance as to the subject of Gurus is 
the sole cause of such a conclusion, for from what Shastra 
says on the point there is no room for doubt that the Guru 
is not to be regarded as a mere man. She who is the dis¬ 
peller of all doubts and Mother of the Universe has Herself 
made this clear. In the YoginI Tantra it is said : “ Devi 
said, 0 Maheshvara, who is the Guru whom Thou, O all- 
merciful Deva ! has called greater than Thyself ? ” I§hwara 
replied: “O Mah&devI, the DiksbAguru 1 in all Mantras is, 
0 great Devi, the First Lord * MahAkAla, and none other.

1 $bisbya. ’ Vide Introduction.

1 All are DevatA and manifestations of the Brahman.

* She who supports the Universe. 4 Aksbara.

' Instead of being the embodiment of the one and only Guru, the 
Brahman.

* The Gam who initiates.

4 Adin&tha.

788

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* She who supports the Universe. 4 Aksbara.

' Instead of being the embodiment of the one and only Guru, the 
Brahman.

* The Gam who initiates.

4 Adin&tha.

788

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

He is undoubtedly the Dlkshfiguru in all Mantras—Shaiva, 
Shakta, Yaishnava, Gftnapatya, Aindava, 1 Mahashaiva, and 
Saura. He alone, and none else, is the speaker of all 
Mantras. 0 Daughter of the Mountain, at the time of 
giving Mantra to a disciple' Mahakala appears in the body 
of man. 0 Devi, the Guru on whom the giver of Mantra' 
meditates in the lotus in his head is the same as Him on 
whom the disciple * * also meditates in the lotus of his head. 
Therefore, 0 Maheshvarl, there is the same Guru for both 
teacher 4 and disciple. O Shaftkarl, it is because the 
Supreme Guru * appears in the body of the human Guru 
that Shastras relate the greatness of the latter." * Just as 
an image is, after infusion of life into it, the appearance’ of 
Her who lives on Mount Kailasa, 1 notwithstanding that it 
is made with mere clay taken from your or my house, so, 
notwithstanding that the body of Guru is born in this or 
that country, it is the appearance of IshtadevatA As in 
the Durga Pflja festival and other Pfljas life * must be 
established M in the image, so at the time of initiating dis¬ 
ciples in Mantras the Guru must establish the life of the 
Guru 11 in his own body. Were Guru nothing but what 
we take him to be, then whose life is it that is established 
in him? Again, at the time of such establishment the Guru

1 From Indu, meaning the moon. Moon worshipper.

' Shishya. * The initiator. * Guru.

* Whom both the earthly Gnrn and his $hishya worship.

' It is not the man who is praised, bnt the Supreme Spirit, whose 
representative and embodiment he is. T Marti.

' The abode of §hiva, where the Devi lives with Her Spouse.

* Prftpft.' It is not the man who is praised, bnt the Supreme Spirit, whose 
representative and embodiment he is. T Marti.

' The abode of §hiva, where the Devi lives with Her Spouse.

* Prftpft.

M Pratishtha. This refers to the Prilna-pratishthft rite by which 
through power of the worshipper's consciousness $hokti is awakened 
in tho inert substance of the image, and which is known as establish¬ 
ment of life in the image.

u That is the Supreme Guru.

ON THE GURU

789u That is the Supreme Guru.

ON THE GURU

789

does not do so, saying: “ Let the life of me, holding such 
title, belonging to such caste, and possessing such an 
appearance, be established.’' He then establishes in Him¬ 
self the vital force 1 of the Supreme Guru seated in the 
thousand-petalled lotus in the head of Jlvas. He who is 
beautifully white like camphor, the jasmine '-flower, or 
the Autumnal Moon with His two hands granting blessing 
and dispelling fear,' embraced on the left by His Shakti,* * 
bright like the rising Sun* He sinks His own existence in 
the sea of His existence, and, considering Himself to be 
that Supreme Existence, bows to His own self as His 
Shishya bows to Him. Just as an image is an instrument* 
in which Divinity 6 is seated, so also is the body of the 
Guru. Were it the physical body of Guru which Shastra 
has spoken of as “ Guru,” then the formula for medita¬ 
tion’ for every Guru would differ according to the appear¬ 
ance of the individual Guru. For this reason §hastra has 
dearly stated that one who thinks of Guru as a mere man 
—“ My Guru is such a person having such an appearance " 
—is never liberated. If we were to consider that the image 
made for worship this year alone represents the true form 
of the Mother of the World, it follows that the image of 
the preceding or following year is unlike Her, for Her 
images cannot be exactly similar. Indirectly, also, it 
follows that there is no divinity in the images built in 
other people’s houses. Similarly, if we think that “ my 
Guru is He whose name is suoh and such, and who has 
such and such a title,” we contradict the truth that “ He 
who is my Lord is the Lord of the world, He who is 
my Guru is the Guru of the world.” We must therefore

* Pr&na?hakti. * Kunda.

' That is, he mokes the two modr&a (gestures) called Vara and 
Abhaya. * Spouse. ' Yantra.

* Devattva. ' Dhy&na.

790

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Pr&na?hakti. * Kunda.

' That is, he mokes the two modr&a (gestures) called Vara and 
Abhaya. * Spouse. ' Yantra.

* Devattva. ' Dhy&na.

790

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

understand that in whatever form an image may be made, 
in every such image She alone appears who is in all 
things in the world ; hence all images, though differing in 
appearance from each other, are the same, in that each 
embodies the Mother who is one, and not many. Simi¬ 
larly, although Gurus have different physical bodies, they 
are all the same in so far as they are embodiments of the 
One. Shftstra has therefore said: “He who is my Lord 
is the Lord of the world, He who is my Guru is the Guru 
of the world;" and hence in all Tantras there has been 
ordained one Dhy&na 1 and one Mantra in the case of the 
Guru. In fact, just as the wick of one lamp is ignited at 
the flame of another, so the Divine Shakti which is Mantra 
is communicated to the disciple's body from that of the 
Guru. Just as the power 1 of burning and giving light in 
the case of either lamp or of the fire which is the result of 
their combination remains the same both before and after 
the ignition (the fire in both lamps being the same), so 
the real Guru is everywhere the same, whether in the body 
of the (earthly) Guru or in that of his disciple.

It is only so long as Shakti is not fully communicated 
to the disciple’s body from that of the Guru that there 
subsists the relation* of Guru and disciple. One is a 
disciple 4 only so long as one is a Sadhaka. On the attain¬ 
ment of Siddhi, this dualism is surpassed. Then there is 
none other than She, the One only, so that the relation of 
Guru and disciple 4 no longer subsists. Siddhi and libera¬ 
tion are existence as attributeless Brahman. But just as 
it is impossible to attain liberation beyond the reach of 
attributes without worship of the Devatft with attributes, 
so it is impossible to attain monistio knowledge without

' Formula of meditation.' Formula of meditation.

’ Shakti. 1 Yyftvah&ra.

* Shishya.

ON THE GURU

791

worship of fche Guru. Hence Shastra has said: “ Obeisance 
to the Guru, by whom is shown the Brahman, 1 who per¬ 
vades the entire universe of mobile and immobile things. 
Obeisance to the Guru, by whom the eyes of Jlva, blinded 
by the darkness of ignorance, are opened with the collyrium 
stick* * of knowledge." He by whose grace the Brahman 
who pervades the Universe is revealed and the eye of know¬ 
ledge is opened is not a mere man, in spite of his appear¬ 
ance as such.

When, after attainment of the previous human birth 
at the close of a journey through eighty-four lakhs of 
births, the gate of a Jlva’s good fortune is opened, then 
Bhagav&n, Mahe?hwara Himself, appears before his eyes 
as Guru. At that time the wheel of Destiny has revolved 
to a point at which it places the Jlva in a position where 
he can see all-meroiful Sadashiva standing before him as 
Jlva’s Guru. Hence it often happens that the Guru, 
who has baffled search for even a hundred years, gratifies 
of his own accord, unsought and in one moment, the 
fortunate disciple without any effort on the latter’s part. 
By good fortune, a current of air then blows similar to 
that whioh, after a period of terrible drought, stirs fresh 
clouds heavy with rain, which will soothe with its ample 
showers the bosom of the parched yet sprouting fields. 
The crop of Sadhana which adorns the great heart of the 
S&dhaka intoxicates the world with the fragrance of full¬ 
blown flowers and the beauty of full-grown fruits. As 
a rule that fortunate day does not arrive unless it has 
been preceded by the germs of intense Sadhana performed 
in previous births. We therefore often find that, even 
if a great saint,* the very incarnation of Shiva, appears

' Brahmapadam.

* Afijana or collyriam is used to brighten the eyes.

* Mah&purasha.

792

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Brahmapadam.

* Afijana or collyriam is used to brighten the eyes.

* Mah&purasha.

792

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

before an unfortunate Jiva, the latter does not bow to 
his lotus-feet. At that time the Jlva’s heart is so com¬ 
pletely Bubdued by ignorance through the deluding Maya 
of the Mother of the World that his eyes open to discover 
only faults and no virtues in such a man. On the other 
hand, if a Jiva has acquired a store of religious merits 
in previous births, attachment and single-minded devotion 
to the feet of the Guru are natural qualities of his. For 
this reason Bhagavan Maheshvara Himself has said in the 
Kulargava T&ntra:

“ 0 beloved, how can that subtle aspect of Shiva which 
is one, omnipresent, attributeless, 1 indifferent, undecaying, 
unattached like space, unbeginning and unending, be an 
object of worship to the dualistic mind ? " “ Hence it is that 
the Supreme Guru has entered into the body of the human 
Guru. O Devi, if a Sadhaka duly worships Him with 
devotion he grants that S&dhaka both enjoyment and 
liberation (2). 0 Devi, although this My form as Shiva 
is My gross aspect, it is yet being full of light and energy’ 
imperceptible to human eyes. For this reason I have 
assumed the form of Guru in the world of man, and thus 
protect the race of Shisbyas* (3). Paramashiva Himself in 
human body secretly wanders on the earth in order to favour 
$hishyaa (4). For the protection of Sadhus, 1 Sadfishiva 
assumes a modest (merciful)' form, and though being Him¬ 
self above the Sangsara, yet appears and acts in this world 
as though he were a man of the Sangsara (5). 0 beloved,

' Ni&hkala. The Brahman is called Sakala when with Prakpti, as 
it is Nishkala when thought of a s without Prakpti, for KalA is Prakpti 
(SAradatilaka, chap. i). (See Introduction to A. and E. Avalon's 
Hymns to the Goddess.")

^®ias. * Disciples. * The pious.^®ias. * Disciples. * The pious.

■ u ** 16 brackets are the author's. The original word is Nirahangk&ra 
without Ahangk&ra or egotism, which is here rendered by the author 
m modest.

ON THE GURU

.793

the Shriguru 1 is Shiva, though He has not three eyes 1 ; 
Vishnu, too, though He has not four arms; and Brahma 
also, though He has not four heads* * (6). O BhavanI, 4 when 
the fruits of sin predominate, Guru appears as man, and * 
when the fruits of virtuous acts prevail, Guru appears as 
Shiva (7). Like blind men deprived for ever of sight 
of the sun, unfortunate Jlvas are unable to see the real 
aspect of Guru, the embodiment of the Brahman, though 
he is present before their eyes (8). It is undoubtedly 
true that Guru is Deva Sadashiva Himself, for who is it 
who grants liberation to Sadbaka« if Guru be not Shiva 
Himself? 0 P&rvafcl,* there is not the least difference 
between Deva Sad&shiva and Shriguru. Whoever makes 
a distinction between them commits sin (10). For, O 
Devi, by assumption of the form of a preceptor, Guru 
Deva 4 severs the multitude of bonds which bind a Jlva 
to the state of a Pashu/ and enables him to attain to the 
Parabrahman (11). Assuming the form of a preceptor* all 
merciful, I$hvara liberates by means of initiation * Pashus 
bound by the bonds of May& (12). Just as the words 
Gha^a, Kalasa, and Kumbha 10 designate the same thing.

1 The revered Gnru. ?hrl, or Auspicious, is a term of respect

* As has Shiva.

' Vishnu has generally fonr arms, though in his Krishpa avat&ra he 
has two. Brahma has four heads.

' Feminine of Bhava, a name of $hiva in the watery form of the 
AshtamUrti. The V&yu Purflna says that He iB called Bhava because 
all things come from Him and subsist in water. The Devi is Bhav&ni 
as the Spouse and Giver of life to Bhava.

* The name of the Devi, os daughter of the Mountain King, 
Himalaya.

' The Guru, who is truly a Deva, being the earthly incarnation of 
Shiva Himself.* The name of the Devi, os daughter of the Mountain King, 
Himalaya.

' The Guru, who is truly a Deva, being the earthly incarnation of 
Shiva Himself.

1 The unlightened tamasik state (see Introduction).

1 Acharyya. ' Dlksha.

“ Synonymous words meaning " pitcher” or " jar.”

794

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

so the words Devatft, Mantra, and Guru designate the 
same subject 1 (13). Devata in its ground * * is the same as 
Mantra,* and Mantra in its ground is the same as Guru. 4 
Thus the effect of worshipping Devata, Mantra, and Guru 
is the same (14). In My person as Shiva I accept worship, 
and by appearing as Guru I sever the bonds of the Jlva’s 
existence (15)."

In the Guru Tantra it is said: “ If through good 
fortune acquired by merit in previous births a Sadhaka 
does Dhyana and Stotra of Guru,* Japa of Gurumantra,* 
worship of, satisfaction, and devotion to the feet of Guru,’ 
then, 0 Devi, their Mantras become Siddha,* and they are 
liberated from existence. The merit which a Shishya * ac¬ 
quires during his stay in the Guru’s house is imperishable, 
and if the Guru’s house happens to be in a sacred place of 
pilgrimage,* that merit is increased a hundred-fold."

In the Rudrayamala it is said: “ By devotion to Guru 
a Jlva will attain the state of Indra,” but by devotion to 
Me he will become swine. (That is to say, if a Jlva, whilst 
giving devotion to his Isht&devatft, yet slights his Guru, he 
becomes swine.) In faot, no Shftstra speaks of anything 
which is superior to devotion to the Guru."

Again: “ 0 Maheshvarl, fie to his wrath, fie to his 
strength, fie to his race, fie to his works in whom devotion 
to Guru is not engendered ! ’’

1 PadArtha. ’ That is, the SvarQpa of DevatA (see ante).

' That is, the Svarupa of Maatra.

' That is, the Svarflpa of Guru.

' That is, meditation on and hymns of praise of the Gorn. Service 
is always given to the Garn by the Shishya.' That is, the Svarupa of Maatra.

' That is, the Svarflpa of Guru.

' That is, meditation on and hymns of praise of the Gorn. Service 
is always given to the Garn by the Shishya.

* That is, " recitation " (see Introduction) of the Mantra, of which 
Gorn is the DevatA or “ Aing."

' As Deva the Guru is object of worship.

* Perfected and fruitful. * Disciple. “ Tlrtha.

Lord of the Celestials.

ON THE GURU

795

The YoginI Tantra says: “ The place where Guru 
resides is Kail&sa. 1 The house in which Guru lives is 
Chint4mani house.* * The trees in the Guru’s house are 
Kalpa trees.* The creepers are Kalpa creepers. 4 The water 
even in ditches is Gangft.* In short, 0 Devi, everything 
in that sacred place is sacred. The female servants in 
the Guru’s house are Bhairavls,* and the male servants are 
Bhairavas." In this manner it is that an earnest S&dhaka 
should think of his Guru. 0 Mahesbvarl, He who has gone 
round his Guru but once has circled the whole earth with 
its seven islands."

In the Vi?hvasara Tantra it is said: “ The place where 
Guru resides is Kashl. T The water of his feet is J&hnavl * 
Herself. Gurudeva is Vishve§hvara * incarnate, and the 
great Mantra uttered by his fair mouth is the Saviour * 
Brahman Himself."

“ The appearance u of Guru is the root of Dhy&na, the 
lotus-foot of Guru is the root of PQja, the word of Guru 
is the root of Mantra, and the grace of Guru is the root of 
Siddhi.”

1 The sacred mount and abode of Shiva (see Introduction to my 
" Mah&nirv&na Tantra ”)•

* The Chint&mani Griha is that which yields all objects desired* 
Of that the chamber or house is built. The Devi there resides. In the 
commentary on the Gaurfap&da Sotra the ChintAmani house is said to 
be tho place of origin of all those Mantras which bestow all desired 
objects (Chintita). See “ Mahanirv&pa Tantra."

' Desire-gratifying celestial trees.

‘ Creepers of the same character.

' Water of Ganges.' Desire-gratifying celestial trees.

‘ Creepers of the same character.

' Water of Ganges.

* The terms Bhairava and Bhairavl mean Shiva and Sbakti in these 
forms of that name. They also mean T&ntriks who have been initiated 
in the Vlr&ch&ra ritual.

’ The sacred city Benares. 1 The Ganges as daughter of Jahnn.

* Lord of the Universe. 14 T&raka.

“ Marti.

796

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ If a S&dhaka be cursed by Munis, Pannagas, or 
Suras, 1 or if he be threatened with the calamity of death, 
then, 0 Parvatl, Guru can save him even at the time of 
such terrible peril and none other.”

In the Guptasadhana Tantra it is said: “ Guru is 
Brahma. Guru is Vishnu. Guru is Deva Mahcshvara 
Himself. Guru is the place of pilgrimage.' Guru is the 
sacrifice.* * Guru is charity (that is, the religious merit 
acquired by means of charity). Guru is devotion and aus¬ 
terities. 4 Guru is fire. Guru is SQryya.* The entire Uni¬ 
verse is Guru.”'

“ What further religious merit can be acquired by 
oharity or devotion,* or by visiting places of pilgrimage,* 
by him who has worshipped the beautiful feet of his Guru? 
For such an one has worshipped the three worlds. All 
places of pilgrimage which exist in the whole Universe 
reside in the sole of the Guru's Lotus-foot."

“ Brahma, Vishiiu, Rudra, and Parame$hvart Parvati 
Indra, and other Devas, Yakshas, and other beings born of 
Devas,* Pitfis,' Ganga, and other sacred rivers, all Gandhar- 
vas,* reptiles, mountains, and other moving and unmoving 
things in the Universe, are eternally seated in the Guru’s 
body. That very instant the Guru is satisfied, they, too, 
are satisfied.”

“ Even ShAstra is not greater than Guru, nor is Tapa- 
ByA, 10 Mantra, or the fruit of religious rites greater than 
Guru, nor is the Dev! Herself greater than Guru, nor is

1 Sages, Serpent Divinities and Devas.

* Tlrtha. * Yajna. • TapasyA.

The sun. * Gurumaya. ' Devayoni.

The forefathers (see Introduction).

* Musical Devayonis : sons of BrahmA.1 Sages, Serpent Divinities and Devas.

* Tlrtha. * Yajna. • TapasyA.

The sun. * Gurumaya. ' Devayoni.

The forefathers (see Introduction).

* Musical Devayonis : sons of BrahmA.

Devotion, austerities, etc. (see Introduction).

ON THE GURO

797

even Shiva greater than Guru. No form and appearance ' 
is superior to that of Guru, and there is evennoJapa 1 
which is superior to Guru—that is to say, by performance 
of Sadhana of Guru alone one becomes Siddha* * in all the 
other modes of S&dhana. Hence it has been said in the 
Y&mala:

“ Shiva alone is Guru, and I am that Shiva. 0 great 
Devi, Thou, too, art Guru, and Mantra alone is Guru. For 
this reason as regards Mantra there is no difference between 
Gurudeva and IshtadevatfL* That Gurudeva must some¬ 
times be contemplated in the thousand-petalled lotus (in 
the head), sometimes in the lotus of the heart (as Ish(a- 
devata),* and sometimes in His visible worldly form."

In the Pichchhila Tantra it is said: “ Gurus are of 
two kinds according as they teach and initiate.' The first 
is the initiating Guru, T and then follows the teaching Guru.' 
The initiating Guru is he from whom initiation in Mantra 
is taken, and the teaching Guru is he from whom Samadhi, 
Dhyana, Dh&rana, Japa, Stava, Kavacha, Purashcharana, 
Mah&pura§hchara$a,' and other various forms of Sadhana 
and Yoga are learnt after initiation. Of these two he is

1 MurtL * See Introduction and ante.

* Successful, accomplished, perfect: for Shakti is thereby fully 
developed.

' That is, the Guru as Deva and the patron Deva of the worshipper. 
The Mantra is both.

* This is not tbe.An&hata lotus, but another close by it, where the 
chosen Deity is always worshipped.

' Shikshftguru and Dlksb&guru.

' Dikshftguru. * §hiksh&guru.

* That is, Yoga, ecstasy, concentration. “ recitation ” of Mantra, 
hymn, amulet, and the two rites known as Pnraschcharana and the 
greater Pura?bchcharana (see Introduction).

798

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA798

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the supreme Guru, from whom the great Mantra of Ishta- 
devat& has been heard and learnt, and by him alone Siddhi 
can be attained."

In the Kul&gama Gurus have been described and 
divided into the following six classes:

“Instigator 1 (or he who instigates initiation by ex¬ 
plaining its utility and that of Sadhana); Inaugurator* * 
(he who inaugurates Sadhana and its aims) *; Explainer * 
(or he who explains Sadhana and its object); Director* 
(or the person who definitely and clearly shows what 
Sadhana is and its object); Teacher* (or he who teaches 
Sadhana and its object’); and Illuminator* (or the person 
who imparts knowledge of, and concerning, Sadhana and 
its object by tearing asunder the ties of the heart). Know 
Gurus to be of these six kinds, of which the first five kinds 
are, as it were, the effects of the last as the cause ” (that 
is to say, without the spiritual knowledge which the Illumi¬ 
nator imparts, instigation, inauguration, explanation, 
direction, and teaching, are not only ineffectual, but even 
productive of great harm both in this world and hereafter).

For this reason Bhagavan, the creator of all things, has 
said in the Pichchhila Tantra: “This Sadhanashastra is 
based solely on Guru. In it there is no beneficent lord 
other than Guru (that is to say, there may be hosts of 
lords who are not beneficent). O Mahe?hvarl! a S&dhaka 
should seek the protection of Guru."

' Preraka. • Sftchaka.

‘ He who after the first has sown the seed of desire, for it bringB 
the S&dhaka to the point of commencing S&dhana.

* V&chaka. ' Darghaka. * §bikshaka.

5 That is, he who goes into details and teaches the ritual.

Bodhaka, who gives intellectual grasp of the various aspects of 
the subject and spiritual knowledge.

ON THE GURU

7995 That is, he who goes into details and teaches the ritual.

Bodhaka, who gives intellectual grasp of the various aspects of 
the subject and spiritual knowledge.

ON THE GURU

799

In the Rudrayamala it is said: “ O Parameshvarl! the 
fool who commences Japa and Tapas 1 by reading books 
instead of receiving instructions from Guru acquires 
nothing but sin. Neither mother nor father nor brother 
can save him. 0 fair Lady! Guru alone can in a single 
moment destroy the mass of his sins, for in the Tantra 
Shastra none but Guru has any competence.' One should 
therefore take as one’s Guru a very good man.”

In the Guru Tantra it is said: “ If Guru be pleased, 
Shiva Himself is pleased; if Guru is displeased, the three¬ 
eyed Deva* * is displeased; if Guru be pleased, the all-good 
Devi is pleased; and if Guru be displeased, TripurA- 
sundarl' becomes displeased. Hence, O Mahe§hvarl! for the 
crossing of the sea of Sangsara, Guru is the only master, 
protector, and destroyer, and he also is the grantor of 
liberation.”

The Sadhaka should now realize whether the state of a 
Guru as described in the above-mentioned quotations 
from the Shastra is something human or Divine, something 
appertaining to a Jlva or to the Brahman. If we are to 
suppose that the Gurudeva becomes man because that 
Guru§hakti* which is Brahman appears in a human body, 
we must also conclude that Devata becomes clay or stone 
because She appears in a day or stone image.' In fact, 
that which constitutes the state of a Guru* is undivided 
perfect Brahman/ Though appearing in clay or in stone, 
the Brahman is all-pervading, and cannot be limited to 
any point. It is impossible that that which does not

* " Recitation" of Mantra, devotion, austerity, etc. (see Intro¬ 
duction). * Adhik&ra.

* $hiva. * One of the Dashamah&vidyft.

* The power resident in the Guru as such—not the ordinary human

$hakti. ' The Gurutva or Guruhood.

1 Literally, Brabmatva or Brahmanhood.

800

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* The power resident in the Guru as such—not the ordinary human

$hakti. ' The Gurutva or Guruhood.

1 Literally, Brabmatva or Brahmanhood.

800

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

become limited in inert clay or stone will become so in 
conscious man. As a matter of fact, a Sadhaka can by 
the force of his own Sadhana awaken the Shakti of con¬ 
sciousness in unconscious images made of clay or stone. 
On the other hand, to him who is even not entitled to be 
called a S&dhaka, but is merely a seeker of competency 1 
for S&dhana, that clay image is never conscious. For 
this reason, then, it is necessary, in order to gain that 
Shakti,* * to distinguish between conscious and uncon¬ 
scious. Amongst all conscious things such an one is 
required as can by the overpowering force of its conscious¬ 
ness make even other unconsoious things conscious. That 
is why, on the subject of taking Gurus* the Shftstra pre¬ 
scribes that discrimination be made between persons 
competent and incompetent to become Gurus, otherwise, 
had the Shakti which constitutes man been identical with 
the Shakti which constitutes the state of a Guru, any man 
would be acceptable as Guru, and there would have been 
no necessity for such a critical examination of inner and 
outer Shaktis. 4

In the Kulagama it is said : “ Those who are instruct¬ 
ed by sages possessed of spiritual knowledge become un¬ 
doubtedly possessed of spiritual knowledge themselves. 
Those who are instructed by Pashus* should, 0 Devi! 
be themselves known as Pashus. For though a learned

1 Adhikftra.

’ The §hakti of consciousness spoken of above. That is, those who 
have not realized consciousness in all things most, in order to arrive at 
this state, make the distinction and take a Guru.

' Gnrnkarana.

* The inner §hakti in that which manifests as true spirituality. 
The outer Shakti is such knowledge and faculties as learning in ?h&stra. 
details of SAdbana, ritual, etc.' Gnrnkarana.

* The inner §hakti in that which manifests as true spirituality. 
The outer Shakti is such knowledge and faculties as learning in ?h&stra. 
details of SAdbana, ritual, etc.

' S&dhakas of the Tftmasik class in the three BbAvat (see Intro¬ 
duction).

ON THE GURU

801

man can save an ignorant man, the latter can never save 
another ignorant man. A boat can carry a stone across 
a river, bat a stone can never carry another stone across 
it. One person can never guide another person along a 
path which he has never trod himself; but he who has 
travelled along any one path, reached its end, and thus 
known the goal of all paths, can, standing at the centre 
to which all paths trend, call to the travellers on each of 
the paths, and thus help them to reach the place where he 
himself stands.”

In the Mahanirv&na Tantra it is said: “ For Shakti- 
mantra a Sh&kta Guru is best, for Shivamantra a Shaiva 
Guru is best, for Vishnumantra a Vaishnava Guru is best, 
for Stiryyamantra a Saura Guru is best, for Gaijapati- 
mantra a G&napatya Guru is best, and a Kaula Guru is 
best for all these Mantras. 1 A wise man should, therefore, 
beartfully desire to take initiation from a Kaula.” For 
“ whoever has been initiated in a Mantra by a PashuGuru* * 
is undoubtedly a Pa§hu. Whoever has taken Mantra from 
a Vlraguru * becomes a Vlra. Whoever has taken Mantra 
from a Kaula Guru (one following Kul&ch&ra)* knows 
Brahman.”

1 To each member of the communities worshipping Devi (Sh&kta). 
Shiva (§haiva). Vishnu (Vaishpava), the Sun (Saura), or Gane$ha 
(G&papatya), the Mantra of the Devatft worshipped is given. Thus 
the Sbftkta receives the $haktimantra at initiation. The passage says 
that the Mantra should ordinarily be given by a Guru of the same com¬ 
munity as the worshipper, though a T&ntrik Guru of the Kaul&ch&ra 
may give, and is the best to give them all.

* One practising the PaghvfichAra— that is, the way of the Pa$hu 
(see ante).* One practising the PaghvfichAra— that is, the way of the Pa$hu 
(see ante).

* One practising the Vlrftch&ra. the Acbfira of the Vlrabb&va ; as to 
which, see Introduction.

* The last and highest of the T&ntrik Ach&ras (see Introduction).

91

802

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In the Brihannlla Tantra it is said: “ A Shaiva may 
teach other Mantras (than the Shivamantra). A Vaish- 
nava may teach those (Vaishijavas) belonging to his own 
community. A Saura may teach Sauras. A Ganapatya 
may give initiation in worship of Gapapati. A Kaula, how¬ 
ever, is competent to give initiation in Shaiva, Shakta, 
Vaishnava, and all other worships. One should, therefore, 
by all means seek the protection of a Kaula Guru.”

In the S&radfi.tilaka it is said : “ A Guru, according to 
the Tantra Shastra, is one who is possessed of the following 
qualities: A body which is pure both on the mother’s and 
father’s side ; purity of thought; mastery over the senses; 
knowledge of the substance of all Tantras; knowledge of 
the purpose of all Shastras; a doer of good to others; 
devoted to Japa, PQja, 1 and so forth; truthfulness of 
speech acquired by Tapas: * * calmness ; proficiency in the 
Vedas and the Vedaflgas;* eagerness to know the truths 
of the Yoga path, and who feels the presence of Devata in 
the heart, and so forth.”

In the Vi§hvasara Tantra it is said: “Such a Guru is 
prescribed by the Shastra as is eager to impart knowledge 
of all Shastras, efficient, learned in the meaning of all 
Shastras, sweet of speech, of good appearance, having all 
his limbs, Kullna (one practising the Kulachara). Of 
auspicious appearance, self-control led, truthful, Br&hmapa, 4 
of a peaceful mind, devoted to the welfare of his parents,

‘ “ Recitation ” of Mantra and ceremonial worship.

' Devotion, austerity, self-restraint, self-control, etc.‘ “ Recitation ” of Mantra and ceremonial worship.

' Devotion, austerity, self-restraint, self-control, etc.

* The VedAAgaa or " limbs " of the Vedas are $hiksh& (science of 
proper articulation), Ralpa (ritual), Yyfikarana (linguistic analysis or 
grammar), Nirulcta (explanation of difficult Vedic words), Jyotisba 
(astronomy), Chhandas (metre).

* This is explained pott.

ON THE GURU

803

and to all other duties belonging to an A§hrama,' and 
living in the same country as the disciple." * *

From the special mention of the adjective “ Brah- 
mana ” it must be understood that none but a Brahma$a 
can be a Guru for the initiation of all castes.

In the Bhuvaneshvarl Tantra it is said: “ 0 great 
twice-born ! A Br&hmana possessed of the knowledge of all 
times* can favour all castes by giving them initiation in 
Mantras. In his absence a peaceful and pious Kshat- 
riya can so favour Vai§hyas and ShQdras. In the absence 
of even a Eshatriya Guru, a Vaishya possessed of the above 
good qualities may favour ShQdras.” A Shudra cannot be 
a Guru even for the initiation of his own castemen, much 
less can he initiate men belonging to other castes. Thus 
the Shaktananda TarafiginI saya: “If a ShQdra hears 
Vidy& 4 —t.c., receives a great Mantra from the mouth of 
another ShQdra—he is doomed to hell* in the next world, 
and suffers from constant misery in this."

In the Vasudeva-rahasya it is said: “ If a ShQdra hears 
Vidyft or Mantra from the mouth of another ShQdra, he 
starts for the Raurava Hell with ten million generations 
of his family. Both the giver and receiver of Mantra 
in such a case meet with the same consequence. For 
every word given and received both become guilty of the 
sin of Brahminicide.*

In the Jnan&nandatarafiginl it is said; “A ShQdra 
should never give Mantra to another ShQdra. If he does

1 This is explained post.

1 For the reason of this, see poat. ' Past, present, and fatnre.In the Jnan&nandatarafiginl it is said; “A ShQdra 
should never give Mantra to another ShQdra. If he does

1 This is explained post.

1 For the reason of this, see poat. ' Past, present, and fatnre.

* Vidyft is a Mantra, but may here mean such matters as are the

subject of spiritual knowledge, though the text would indicate the 
former meaning. Naraka.

* The killing of a Brihmana is one of the great sins.

804

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

so, both the giver and the receiver of Mantra will dwell in 
Hell with thirty million generations of their own families.”

In the Kamadhenu Tantra it is said: “ The country in 
which a sinful ShQdra selling 1 Mantra lives becomes fallen, 
and its ruler also is contaminated with sin. 0 Lady of 
restless glances! how can the tongue of that great sinner 
pronounce Mantra ? 0 fair Lady 1 his tongue is full of 
excrement, urine, and blood. His face is like excrement 
and urine, his food is made of excrement, his water is urine 
itself, and he is a Chandala* * by caste. The sight of his 
face makes Gang&* to fly from Her own waters, and 
millions of sites of pilgrimages * to fly from their respective 
seats. Ganga, the purifier of the three worlds, undoubtedly 
purifies even such great sinners as have committed such 
sins as Brahminicide and so forth, but at the sight of a 
Mantra-selling Shfldra She at once leaves the place and 
repairs to Brahmaloka.”*

The adjective, “belonging to an A?hrama,”* specified 
above in the enumeration of the necessary characteristics 
of a Guru should be understood to mean “ belonging to 
the domestic Ashrama.” In the definition of a Guru given 
by the Kul&rijava Tantra it is stated: "A Guru should 
know the meaning of all Sh&stras and be a householder.” 
The purpose of the requirement that the Guru should be 
“ living in the same country " (as the disciple) is that if the 
Guru liveB in another country it is difficult for the disciple 
to take instructions from and to serve him constantly.‘That is. making a trade of giving Mantra ; which is not. however, 
unfortunately confined to $h<ldnu.

‘ One of the lowest castes. * The Biver Ganges as Deity.

Tirthas. * Th© highest of the regions.

* See the quotation from the Vi$hvas4ra Tantra ante.

CHAPTER XIV

DISCUSSION UPON, AND SELECTION, OF 
THE GURU 1 * *

In the YoginI Tantra it is said :

“ Mantra should not be taken from the father, mater¬ 
nal grandfather, brother, one who is younger in age, or 
from one who is of the party of one’s enemy.”

In the Gageshavimarshigl it is said: “ Initiation by a 
Yati,' the father, one living in a forest, or when taken from 
a Sanny&sl does no good to a Sadhaka.”

In the Rudrayamala it is said: "A husband should 
not initiate his wife, nor a father his son or daughter, and 
a brother should not initiate his brother. But if a 
husband is Siddha Mantra," he can initiate his wife as his 
Shakti, and in that case the Guru will not acquire father¬ 
hood by reason of his having given Mantra, nor will the 
disciple become his daughter by reason of having received 
it from him. 4 (The provision that a husband may initiate 
his wife as his Shakti must be understood to apply to

1 GuruvichAra—that is, selection with judgment after discussion.

* Literally, “ One who has completely subdued the senses ": an 
ascetic so called.

' This term has here a technical meaning, which is explained at 
Bee post.

* Ordinarily, when the Guru gives Mantra, the §hishya becomes 
his son: but this is not so in the case stated.

806

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Vlrachara and Kul&chara 1 only. Suoh an initiation is not 
ordained for Pa$hv&ohara* * and the like, for in such Ach&ras 
there is no worship with Shakti.) The letters* in a 
Mantra are the DevatA, and the Devata is Guru himself; 
so that Sidhakas and SSdhik&s 4 who desire their own good 
should make no distinction between Mantra, Devata, and 
Guru.”In the Siddhi Y&mala it is said: “ O beloved one ! if 
by good fortune a S&dhaka attains Siddhi in a Mantra, he 
may dispense with the ordinary conditions for becoming a 
Guru, and initiate his own Shakti (wife).”

In the Yamala it is said: “ A husband should not 
initiate his wife nor a father his daughter; but if a hus¬ 
band is Siddhamantra,® he may initiate his wife as his 
§hakti, and in that case the initiated does not become a 
daughter to him. If a father is Siddhamantra,* he may 
initiate his son, and a brother may be initiated by a brother 
who is Siddhamantra, and thus become a Siddhamantra 
himself. For, in the case of a Siddhamantra all disquali¬ 
fications for giving and receiving initiation become quali¬ 
fications.'

The word Siddhamantra does not here mean “ one who 
has attained Siddhi in a Mantra." It is a technical word, 
explained in the Eramachandrika as follows: “ Kali, Tarfi, 
ShodashI, Bhuvane?hvarl, Bhairavl, Chhinnamasta, Dhuma- 
vatl, Bagala, MatafigI, Kamal&traika. These ten Mah&- 
vidy&s are called Siddhavidy&s. Those who are initiated 
in their Mantra are called Siddhamantras.”

1 The two divisions of T&ntrik S&dhaka* 
Introduction). * The Achftra of the Pa?hu».

* Women Sidhakas. * See below.

That is, all disqualifications cease.

of those names (see 
* Varpa.

SELECTION OP THE GURU

807

In the Kali Kalpa it is said: “ O Mah&devI! if a 
Mantra is worshipped by three generations (great-grand¬ 
father, grandfather, and father) in succession, then that 
great Mantra becomes Siddhamantra."

In the Matsyasukta, it is said: “ A mantra given by a 
father is not faulty in Shaiva and Shakta rites, although 
it may not have force in other rites.”

Moreover, in certain special matters a father has the 
right to initiate his eldest son if he is worthy, as, for 
instance, the Matsyas&kta says: “ One may give (Mantra) 
to his eldest son, the crest gem of his family.”The Shrlkrama says: “ Mantra may with prudence and 
care be given to an intelligent eldest son.”

And so forth.

Women Gurus

The Rudray&mala says that a woman may be a Guru 
who possesses the following qualities: She must be Kullna 
(practising Kul&ch&ra, 1 Kulaja (born of a Kaula * * or res- 
peotable family), of auspicious appearance,* fair face,* and 
lotus-eyed; deoked with gold and gems; endowed with 
intellect, calmness of mind, and all other good qualities; 
a follower of her Aohara,* good, pious, and chaste,* with 
control over the senses; of good oonduct and devoted to 
the service of her elders; proficient in Mantras and in 
their meanings; ever engaged in Japa, T and devoted to the

1 That is, the Ach&ra of the Eaala division of T&ntrik S&dhakas.

* A family which is and has been in past generations follows of 
KulAch&ra.

1 She must be endowed with all good signs.

' Literally, " whose face is like the moon.”

1 Sod&ch&ra. Ach&ra is the way or practice which the particular 
person should follow.

* S&dhrT, female of S&dhu.

' " Recitation ” of Mantra (see Introduction).

808

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

worship of her IshtadevatA 1 By the worship of such a 
woman both S&dhana Shakti 1 and spiritual knowledge is 
attained. A widow should not initiate.* * Initiation by a 
woman is to be recommended ; in particular, initiation by 
a mother of her son, which gives results eightfold greater 
than is ordinary.A widow, however, may initiate if she has sons. A 
Siddhamantra 4 may, without any restriction, be taken 
from widows, and such initiation will have ordinary effect. 
If, however, it is taken from the mother, it will produce 
eight-fold effect. If a Satl* who has both husband and 
sons gives Siddhamantra without request and of her own 
initiative, then also suoh initiation will produce an effect 
eight times that of an ordinary initiation. If a mother 
gives her son the Mantra she herself worships, and the son 
becomes devoted to it, he undoubtedly acquires the eight 
forms of Siddhi. 0 Devi! initiation in the mother’s own 
Mantra is indeed precious; the Sadhaka who receives it 
from his mother in the first place obtains enjoyment * in 
whatsoever form ' he desires, and then undoubtedly becomes 
possessed of the knowledge of the meaning of thousands 
of crores * of Mantraa, and finally attains liberation. If a 
mother gives her own Mantra in a dream, and notwith* 
standing the Sadhaka is again initiated, he is doomed to 
be born as a Danava. If through special good fortune a

The particular Devatft which she worships.

* Power inherent in and derived from S&dhana.

* Ordinarily ; for. see post. 4 see ante.

* A wife perfectly devoted to her husband. * Bhoga.

Literally, body " (Sharlra)—he may by Sak&ma S&dhana obtain 
such forms of enjoyment in this body, or in another body in another 
j, 1 ™ 1, he can enter into other bodies in this birth. Thus,

if he desires to become a Raja, he may in this or the next birth 
become one. • ^ crore jg ten millions.

Demoniac enemies of the Dcvai.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

809

mother initiates her son at his request, there is in that 
case no necessity for Mantravichara, 1 II and the Sadhaka 
acquires Siddhi. In the case also of a Mantra received in 
a dream there is no need for VichAra, 1 either in respect of 
the Guru or the Mantra.In the Rudrayamala it is said: “ In the case of a 
Mantra received in a dream there is no necessity for 
Vichara 1 of Guru and Shishya. If a Mantra is received 
in a dream from a woman, it will be purified by a Sang- 
sk&ra.’' * “ No Mantra becomes effective without the taking 
of Guru,* therefore the life of the Guru should be invoked 
into a Mantra received in a dream and into a Gha(a, and 
the Mantra should then be received by writing it on a 
banian* leaf with KuAkuma.’’* This is laid down in the 
YoginI Tantra and other books.

The Dhyana, T Mantra, Stava,* Kavacha * and so forth, 
for women Gurus are different from those for male Gurus. 
S&dhakas will learn them from the Matrikabheda, Gupta* 
s&dhana, and other Tantras.

We have above quoted but briefly a few short excerpts 
from all that has been said in Sh&sfcra concerning Guru* 
vioh&ra 10 and the outer characteristics n of Guru.

We have not even touched the inner characteristics 
of Guru, whioh have been specified in the Kularoava,

1 See ante.

' Discussion with a view to select (see ante).

’ MantrasangskAra — that is, purification of the Mantra, which is 
done afterwards.

* That is, acceptance of Guru by Shishya, and of $hishya by Guru.

I Vafca. ‘ A red powder made of a root called Sathi, coloured red.

’ The formula containing a description of the Devat&, who is the 
subject of meditation. * Hymn of praise.

* Amulet. M Selection with judgment of a Guru.

II That is, his knowledge of S&dhana, Sh&stra, etc., as compared 
with spiritual intuition.

810

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Amulet. M Selection with judgment of a Guru.

II That is, his knowledge of S&dhana, Sh&stra, etc., as compared 
with spiritual intuition.

810

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Kilmakhya, Rudrayamala, and other Tantrag. For an 
exposition of these deep and solemn spiritual sayings would 
require a separate volume; secondly, these statements are 
not for public ears; and thirdly, we doubt whether the 
Gurus of the present day will be able to put their teeth 
into them . 1 Far less do we expect that Shishyas* * will 
be able to judge and seleot Gurus with intelligence. We 
therefore refrain from undertaking what is both a useless 
and, at the same time, improper task.

Guru Family axd Family Guru*

In the YoginI Tantra it is said: “A special honour 
appertains to the Guru family for ten generations 4 by 
reason of giving Mantra in Pashv&ch&ra; for twenty-five 
generations by reason of giving Mantra in Vir&ch&ra; for 
fifty generations where the Mantra is one of any of the 
Mahavidyas , 4 and for one hundred generations by reason 
of teaching Brahmayoga.”

In the PichchhilS Tantra it is said: “ If a Shishya for¬ 
sakes the family of his ancestral Guru under a sinful 
delusion, he dwells in terrible Hell* as long as the Sun, 
Moon, and Stars, endure.”

In the Brihaddharma Purina it is said: “ For this 
reason, if a descendant of the Guru family, who is even

' That is, understand them even a little. * Disciples.

* Gurukula and Kulaguru -that is. the subject of the Guru’s own 
family and of the Guru himself, who is family Guru to others.

4 That is, if in searching for a Guru one finds a member of a Guru 
family who comes within ten generations of an ancestor of his who had 
initiated an ancestor of the present intending $hishya, then the §hiahya 
should accept him as his Guru, and so mutatis mutandia with the rest.

' The ten great m&rtis of the Devi.

* Na.ra.ka.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

811' The ten great m&rtis of the Devi.

* Na.ra.ka.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

811

younger in age , 1 ia a learned man, be should be accepted 
without discussion as Guru for initiation because he be¬ 
longs to the Guru family.” Many Tantras have in this 
way ordained that the Shishya cannot forsake the Guru 
family. But in course of time this ordinance has become 
the cause of the ruin of the Aryya Society.

As a matter of fact, the cause of this ruin is not the 
ordinance itself, but it is the arrogance of the Guru family 
and the ignorance of Shishy&s which has brought it about.

In the Kul&rgava Tantra it is said: “ Death overtakes 
him who forsakes Mantra, poverty overtakes him who 
forsakes Guru, and the Sadhaka who forsakes both Mantra 
and Guru goes to the Raurava Hell.” Nowadays there 
are many who would make this verse an authority against 
forsaking the Guru family. But according to T&ntrik 
Acharyyas* * a S&dhaka will be considered sinful in the 
sense of this verse only if he forsakes his own Guru and 
Mantra; for one cannot abandon a thing which one has 
not accepted. The saying “One should not forsake the 
family of his ancestral Guru ” means that while there is a 
person fit to be Guru in the Guru family, one should not 
forsake him and adopt another Guru. Otherwise, the 
Shishya is not prohibited from leaving the Guru family. 
What, then, do the words “ should not forsake ” mean ? 
Even the verses quoted above from the YoginI Tantra' 
are interpreted by some people to mean that successive 
generations should be honoured as descendants of Gurus 
of the Shishyas ancestor, even if they are not actually 
taken as Gurus . 4

That is, than some third person not belonging to the Gum family.

' Learned men. ' See ante.

* That is, though such may not be taken sb Gurus, respect most be 
shown and support given to them.

812

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Learned men. ' See ante.

* That is, though such may not be taken sb Gurus, respect most be 
shown and support given to them.

812

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

We do nofc object to this interpretation. It cannot, 
however, have been intended by the Shftstra that members 
of the ancestral family of Guru must be taken as Gurus, 
even if they are not fit to be suoh. This is clearly put in 
the Bfihaddharma Puraija, which says that, “ If a descend¬ 
ant of the Guru family who is even younger in age is a 
learned man, he should be taken as Guru ” *; that is to say, 
in such a case only the olaim of the Guru family is indis¬ 
putable. As to placing oneself in the hands of an incom¬ 
petent person simply out of regard for the Guru family, we 
leave it to the intelligent reader to decide whether upon a 
consideration of the principles whioh govern the matter 
of the Guru suoh a proposition is reconcilable with Dharma 
and reason. A learned man, though younger in age, is 
older in knowledge. In the domain of knowledge the 
S&dhanagh&stra is concerned :with seniority of knowledge 
only. Hence a learned man, even if he is younger in age, 
is considered older, and this seniority entitles him to be 
a Guru. Shishyaa should also remember here that the 
learning which is here spoken of 1 is not the sort of learning 
for which degrees or titles * are given. On the contrary, 
the learning I speak of is that which utterly destroys all 
the bondage of Jlva/ Nowadays, most of those who re¬ 
present the ideal type of a learned man in worldly society 
are considered devoid of all sense, and perfectly ignorant 
in the society of Sadhak&s. Hence, when one speaks of 
a learned man in the Guru family we must be understood 
to be speaking of one who possesses the learning which 
makes a man a Guru, and not the learning which consists

1 See ante.

1 That is, the learning of the Gurn, on which accoant he is selected 
to give initiation. ' UpAdhi.1 See ante.

1 That is, the learning of the Gurn, on which accoant he is selected 
to give initiation. ' UpAdhi.

* Literally, destroys all UpAdbis of Jivahood, meaning the philo* 
Bophical UpAdhis of name and form. There is here a play on the word 
Up&dhi.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

813

in knowledge of the ordinances of the Smriti, or the sub¬ 
tleties of the Nyaya philosophy. Notwithstanding that a 
man is considered to be learned according to the notions 
of sooiety, the Shishya should ascertain whether he is 
learned in the Bcienoe of Sadhana. To the misfortune of 
Indian Society accomplished S&dhakas and Mah&purushas 1 * * 
have disappeared from Guru families, and with them also 
the divine energy * acquired by their Sadhana. The ruins 
of those Guru families now generally consist of a few 
Gurus, who exist like wicks which smell foul after the 
lamps have been extinguished. Society is on the verge 
of being destroyed by their oppressions and persecutions. 
They think that the profession of a Guru is a second 
Eulinism.'

Considering how their indulgence in acts repugnant to 
Dharma is daily increasing, and how much of thepoisoDous 
fruits of their Karma have become ripe, it seems that the 
day is not far off when these Gurus will be paid off . 4 Although 
suoh paying off is inevitable, according to natural laws, yet 
we shall raise here one or two points dealt with in the 
Sh&stra. For these Gurus have deoided that they have got a 
charter over the race of Shishyas for all time, till the day of 
final dissolution, so that no one has now the power to deprive 
them of their right. They think that even if they are self- 
willed and oppressive, Shishyas have no right to discuss the 
matter, for “ there should be no discussion of the Guru's 
family.” * We ask, Who has given them this charter ? He

1 Great men. . ’ Tejas.

1 As the Kullns think that by virtue of their birth they have a right

to a superior position in society, 60 do Guru families.1 Great men. . ’ Tejas.

1 As the Kullns think that by virtue of their birth they have a right

to a superior position in society, 60 do Guru families.

4 That is, will receive the Dakshipi or present made to the 
Brihmana and go.

* This is an adaptation from the latter portion of the quotation 
from Brihaddharma Purina at see, ante, which says: “ Without dis¬ 
cussion on account of his belonging to the Guru family.”

814

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

within whose dominion these matters are has not given such 
a charter. On the contrary, he long ago foresaw that a forged 
charter might be produced, and made provisions accordingly. 
It is because these provisions are not known to the public 
that all this mischief has been done. If either Guru or 
Shishya has wrong notions on this matter, he should 
know the truth as seated in the Sh&stra, and be careful 
of his welfare.

In the Rudray&mala it is said : “ One should abandon 
a Guru who is destitute of Brahma-bliss, ill-favoured, of 
evil repute, debased, of crooked mind , 1 and heinously sinful. 
No man, unless he is the Guru, should be honoured who 
suffers from the decomposing, or the Shitra, form of the 
eight kinds of leprosy; one who habitually practises black 
magic *; sells gold 1 * ; is a thief or a fool; who is very short 
statured ; or has a small tooth between his two front teeth; 
who is a person devoid of Kul&ch&ra, or restless , 4 or with 
a stain on his character; who is diseased in the eyes, or 
adulterous, foul-tongued,* sensuous, or with any additional 
limb (as a person possessing an additional finger); or a 
hypocrite; or who has fallen from Dharma; or is garrulous; 
or is greedy, miserly, or a liar; who is a restless character; 
or without reverent feeling*; or who does not follow the 
five Acharas T ; or possessed of many faults.” That is to 
say, if after a person has been initiated his Guru contracts 
any of the above-mentioned faults, he should continue to

1 Krflra.1 Krflra.

* Literally, “ A person who habitually earns money for injnring 
(Hingsft) people by means of special rites intended for the purpose."

' Sale of gold is forbidden in the Sb&stra for the higher castes.

4 That is, without peace on account of outside troubles.

' In talk.

* Bh&vahlna. The brackets in the preceding case are the author’s. 
^Apparently here the five-fold worship.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

816

honour and not abandon him; bat one who has previous to 
such initiation contracted any of these faults should never 
be made a Guru.

In the Ealpachint&mani it is said: “ He is unfit to be 
Guru who is consumptive, or has skin disease, or dead 
nails, or a small tooth between the two front teeth 1 ; or 
is deaf, or has a cataract of the eye; or is bald, or lame, 
or deformed, or has an additional limb; is pink-eyed, or 
of foul breath , 1 or has enlarged testicles; or is a dwarf, 
hunchback; or leper, or who is impotent, or possessed of 
any other physical defect.” After mentioning the physical 
defects, the book goes on to point out defects in habit 
and character. “ Wise men should be careful not to take 
initiation from or engage in any work (such as the estab¬ 
lishment of the image of a Devata) a Guru who does not 
perform his duties as enjoined in the Vedas and Smptis; 
who is rough of speech 1 ; or is of evil repute; or does a 
priest's work * *; or a medical man ; or one who is sensuous, 
crooked of mind, arrogant, vain, addicted to vices, miserly, 
or wicked; who keeps bad company; or is an unbeliever *; 
who is timid, or guilty of a great sin ; who does not wor¬ 
ship Devat&, Agni,* Guru, the Mah&vidy&s , 7 and so forth ; 
who is ignorant of the Mantras for the Sandhya-rite , 1 
Tarpana, PQja,* and so forth; who is idle, given over to 
enjoyments, or devoid of Dharma ; who is an astrologer, or 
has any other defect mentioned in the Agama. 1 *1 $hy&vadanta ordinarily means " brown-toothed,” bat is translated 
as above, according to the previous translation of the author.

* Putin&sika. Literally, " foul nosed,” which apparently refers to

foul breath. * The Guru should speak softly and tenderly.

* Purohita, who is engaged in ritual service. * NAstika.

* Fire. ’ The ten great appearances of the Devi.

1 See Introduction. ' Offering and worship.

* Tantra Sh&stra.

816

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Id the K&m&khya Tantra it is said : “ Through know¬ 
ledge 1 a Jiva attains liberation, and knowledge is supreme 
over the supreme. Henoe one should forsake a Guru who 
is unable to give knowledge just as a hungry man-seek¬ 
ing food forsakes a householder who has no food to give 
him (1). That Guru is Shiva Himself, in whom shine 
the three forms of knowledge (namely, knowledge of Vlra, 
Divya, and Kaula* *; of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas*; of 
Guru, Mantra, and DevatA; of the meaning of Mantra 4 ; 
the awakening of Mantra*; and the Yonimudr&).' One 
should seek the protection of such a wise Guru, forsaking 
an ignorant one (2). From knowledge constantly proceeds 
Dharma; from knowledge proceeds wealth*; from know¬ 
ledge proceeds desire 1 and its fulfilment; and from know¬ 
ledge proceeds Nirvana liberation (8). Knowledge is the 
highest object; nothing than it is of greater worth; it 
is for knowledge that Jlvas worship Devat&; and know¬ 
ledge is the final fruit of Tapasyft' (4). Just as a honey¬ 
seeking bee flies from flower to flower, so a knowledge¬ 
seeking Shishya should seek the protection of Guru 
after Guru (5). Many are the Gurus who extract money 
out of Shishya, but, 0 Devi! rare are those truly good 
Gurus who allay the burning of the Shishyas’ hearts (6). 
Obeisance to that Guru who has, with the collyrium-stick *

1 Jn&na.

* Vlra and Divya are two of the T&ntrik temperaments (Bh&va), 
and Eaula is the highest of its Ach&ras.

* The three gunas of Prakriti.

* Mantr&rtha. 4 Mantraehaiianya.1 Jn&na.

* Vlra and Divya are two of the T&ntrik temperaments (Bh&va), 
and Eaula is the highest of its Ach&ras.

* The three gunas of Prakriti.

* Mantr&rtha. 4 Mantraehaiianya.

* A celebrated Mndr& in Hathayoga. When Yftyu is stopped by 
this Mudra, steadiness of mind is produced, and the detachment of 
Manas from Ub objects leadB to the Btate known as Unman! (see Com¬ 
mentary of Kalicharona on v. 86 of the Shatchakranirflpana).

' Artha, ' Kama. * Devotion and austerities.

" Anjana, which is used to clear the vision.

817

SELECTION OF THE GURU

of knowledge, opened the Jlva’s eye blinded by the dark¬ 
ness of ignorance. Mindful of this (that is to Bay, know* 
ing how great is the responsibility of Guru), a great 
Sadhaka will recognize the wise to be Gurus only, and 
then, 0 consort of Shiva, Siddhi will surely be attained 
by means of the Shishya’s devotion only 1 (7). A good 
Guru is he who is calm and self*controlled, is a Kulina, of 
pure mind worshipping with the five Tattvas* (8). He 
is called a good Guru who has the reputation of being 
Siddha* maintains his Shishyas in any way which their 
necessities require, and works wonders by means of Divine 
Shakti (9). A good Guru is he who speaks of things 
previously unheard of and suited to the mind of the hearer 
truly and in a oharming way, and who can equally explain 
both Tantra and Mantra (10). A good Guru is he who is 
always anxious to benefit the Shishya by giving him 
knowledge, and who is capable of punishing as well as 
rewarding (11). A good Guru is he whose aim is always 
the highest good * who ever converses upon spiritual truths, 
and who has a single-minded devotion to the lotus-feet 
of his own Guru (12). O Devi! if a Shishya is able to 
obtain a Guru who is the possessor of such qualities, he 
should at once seek his protection, relinquishing* an in¬ 
capable Guru, and in such a case time * need not be taken 
into account (13). Reprehensible is the Guru who only1 Quaere whether there is a mistake in the author's translation of 
the original Sanskrit, which runs, “ $hishyabhaktr& kevalam ni?h- 
chitom " which may mean that Kevala or Kaivalya-liberation is sure to 
bo attained by means of the Shishya's devotion. The author appears 
to have taken the word Kevala to mean " only.”

* Pafichatattva (see Introduction).

' Accomplished. * Param&rtba.

* Tyaktvft. This does not mean that he should forsake a man 
actually taken as Gurn. but that in such a case he should relinquish 
selection from the Guru family.

* Kalavich&ra—that is. whether the time is suitable for Gurukarapa.

n

818

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

takes property from the Shi shy a; who is an oppressor 
of many (extracts money, etc., from many Shishyas (dis¬ 
ciples) on the pretext of giving initiation) 1 and is openly 
ridiculed by the people (14). If, notwithstanding that the 
Shishya is reverent in body, mind, and speech towards 
his Guru, the latter does not approve of a thing for a 
Shishya out of desire for that thing himself, and wastes 
the Shishya’s money in improper ways, then that most 
depraved man who wishes harm to his Shishya out of greed 
should be forsaken (15).”S&dhakas will now ask themselves if the Guru family 
is to be considered above all discussion ? All the authori¬ 
ties quoted above say that such and such a Guru should 
be relinquished. By the use here of the word Guru is 
meant not a person who has been accepted as Guru, but 
reference is made to that Guruhood 1 which is nothing 
but the family Guruhood occasioned by birth in the 
family of ancestral Guru. If suoh a Guru is fully qualified 
according to Sh&stra, the Shishya should take him as 
Guru instead of seeking the protection of another Guru; 
otherwise he should be forsaken. This is the meaning of 
Shastra. A Judge and Administrator * with the necessary 
qualifications, though he is not the King himself, is yet his 
representative, and by virtue of the King’s power his com¬ 
mands are inviolable, and he himself is worshipped by all. 
This is the civil law * of the State. By the authority of 
this law he is the ruler of the kingdom, and the kingdom 
desires to be ruled by him. It is because he performs the 
duties imposed on him by the King that his commands are 
accepted without question, and people pay with confidence 
revenue into his hands. But if through arrogance or

1 Author’s bracket.

' Gorutva. ’ YiehAraka. • Rajonlti.

819

SELECTION OF THE GURU1 Author’s bracket.

' Gorutva. ’ YiehAraka. • Rajonlti.

819

SELECTION OF THE GURU

selfishness he, trampling on all political principles, mis¬ 
appropriates that revenue and oppresses the innocent, then 
that kingdom is in danger of destruction through his 
oppressions. The community of Shishyas is in like peril 
through the oppressions committed by Gurus. In the ad¬ 
ministration of the State the Judge is concerned with 
political matters only, and if he interferes in any way with 
the principles of Dharma/ the whole kingdom is in an up¬ 
roar, and gives unending fuel* * to the flaming fire of rebel¬ 
lion. Similarly, Guru is only the Judge of principles of 
Dharma; but if he interferes in any way and in any matter 
concerning purely temporal matters, there is every likeli¬ 
hood that the fire of rebellion may break out among 
Shishyas. And this is what has actually happened. There 
is, however, this good news to tell—namely, that the One 
Supreme Queen* of the three worlds has entrusted the 
people with the selection of the Judge. If, then, the people 
select a robber as their Judge, the Queen cannot be blamed 
therefor. While in such case the oppressiveness of the 
robber will, on the one hand, deprive the people of the 
spiritual wealth which is their greatest possession both here 
and hereafter, the revenue, on the other hand, which they 
pay will not reach the Sovereign’s treasury. The person to 
whom, as our Supreme Guru, we will entrust our all, that 
it may be carried to Parameshvarl, will misappropriate it, 
but because he does so we shall not ourselves be exempt 
from the punishment of being sent to hell/ which we incur

• See Introduction. Here religious and ethical rules of universal 
validity requiring universal allegiance as opposed to particular State 
laws.

* Ahuti. Literally, offering.

‘ B&jrAjeshvarT.

* Naraka.

820

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Ahuti. Literally, offering.

‘ B&jrAjeshvarT.

* Naraka.

820

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

under the regulations of Her kingdom. 1 * * * V Just as a Judge 
has two aspects, in one of which he is an ordinary subject 
of the King like you and I, and another in whioh, as repre¬ 
sentative of the King, he is Judge over us both, so the Guru 
has two aspects, in one of which he is an ordinary Jlva 
with ten senses, May& and Moha,* like you and I, and in 
the other he is Parabrahman Shiva, above the senses, and 
the M&ya which affects them. Revenue paid into a Judge’s 
hand is intended for the sovereign power. In the same way 
worship of the supreme Devata in the person of the Guru- 
deva is intended for Brahma§hakti. But as revenue paid 
into the hands of a Judge who does not serve his Sovereign 
goes not to the latter but to the people,' so worship of the 
R&jr&je§hvarl (Queen of Queens) entrusted to a Guru inimi¬ 
cal to Brahma^hakti is likely to go, not to the Brahma§hakti, 
but to the robber Shakti.' Hence the King of Kings,' who 
has promulgated rules of State for the universe, has in His 
ordinance on the selection of Guru Himself proclaimed to 
all people as follows:

In the Brihaddharma Purina it is said: "Sad4§hiva 
Himself is angered against him who is disliked by all. 
As people pay the King's dues to the Headman, Judges, 
or Superintendents of administration, so Shishya^ pay the 
Ishtadevat&’s worship to Gurudeva. But just as if headmen 
and others who are dishonest or inimical to the Sovereign 
must be deposed, and the King’s dues paid to particularly

1 Literally, " Which will be brought upon us by the invincible 
power of politics ”—that is, on the ground of not having paid revenue. 
If a person owes revenue and knowingly charges a robber with its 
transmission, he cannot set up the robbery as an excuse for non* 
payment.

* He. like the disciple, perceives with the senses which are subject

to illusion.

' PrajS-flbakti.* He. like the disciple, perceives with the senses which are subject

to illusion.

' PrajS-flbakti.

V • 8uch wor * hi P does not advance spirituality, but

robs the Sadhaka of it. • R fl jrije?hvara.

821

SELECTION OF THE GURU

trustworthy and good men, so Shishyas should forsake 
an inimioal or arrogant Guru (that is to say, a mere man 
devoid of Divine Shakti, acquired by Sftdhana, and subject 
to the six enemies 1 ), and take as Guru a mahftpurusha* * 
possessing the Shakti spoken of in the Shftstra, and then 
offer his Sftdhana at his feet.”

Now I ask you (who belong to the Guru-Family), by 
whose grace are you Family-Guru ? You are Guru because 
you carry out the orders of the Guru of all moving and 
unmoving things. To-day that King of Kings,* through 
whose Political Power you wield the rod over the whole 
kingdom, is Himself wielding the rod against you. After 
receiving punishment from you, I may shift my residence 
to the jurisdiction of another Judge; but where in the 
infinite millions of universe can you find a place which 
is not within the jurisdiction of Him by whom you are 
going to be punished ? In heaven, 4 the mortal world, 4 or the 
nether world,* wheresoever you may flee, the tremendous 
trident T of Virtkpftksha* is pointed with unfailing aim at 
your breast. An ignorant Shishya may be afraid of you, but 
in the blazing fire of the wrath of the Bhairava, who 
creates, preserves, and destroys, and from fear of whom 
the Sun and Moon shine, the wind blows, and the God 
of Death* is ever busy, you are nothing but an insignifi¬ 
cant speck of an inseot. A Shishya who has committed 
even a thousand offences may receive pardon, but for 
you, relentless Robber-Guru, there is no escape. O Judge! 
to me an ignorant subjeot you appear to be a Judge,

4 “ The six ''—that is, the six great deadly sins.

’ Great man. * Rajr&je?hvara. * Svarga.

* Martya. 4 RasAtala. ’ §hilla.4 “ The six ''—that is, the six great deadly sins.

’ Great man. * Rajr&je?hvara. * Svarga.

* Martya. 4 RasAtala. ’ §hilla.

' §hiva. with the slanting, dreamy, half-closed e^res of one who has 
taken bh&ng. Yama.

822

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

though not really so; but to the King you are nothing 
but a subject who has been guilty of a most heinous 
crime. And if you are proud of your judgeship, then, 0 
Judge! how much greater is the punishment for theft 
when the Judge is himself the thief? Hence I say, O Guru- 
Family, type of the Kali age! do not attempt to put 
forward a deed of permanent lease * 1 * * as Family-Guru of 
Shishyas. If misappropriation of revenue is to be taken 
as the mark of an official, then can you tell me what it 
is which is called robbery? 0 Guru-Family of worship¬ 
ful feet! know (and we say this with great sorrow) that 
to-day you have become so degraded in mind and position 
that one prays to be free of your presence, and is even 
ashamed to describe you as belonging to the Guru-Family. 
To-day a descendant of the Guru-Family plays the part of 
a down in Jatra parties,* or of the heroine in dramatic per¬ 
formances, or, in the part of the Shishya of some low 
man, touches the feet of a Chandala Guru 9 and the next 
moment this same man again places his feet on the head 
of a pure Br&hma?a and receives offerings of sandal- 
paste and flower consecrated with the great Mantra of 
Maha?hakti. Alas! 0 Mother of the World ! where are 
you, O Mother! at this time ? Rather the Mother is every¬ 
where, but where are we ourselves ? Had not the Mother 
been everywhere, had not Her eyes been wide open to see 
everything, and had not She with indomitable force spread 
the power of Her commands in every place, would the

' Maurasi pattft, a lease in perpetuity. Such a Guru is not to pretend 
to hold his disciples in perpetual fief because he belongs to the Guru- 
Family without regard to his qualifications to be the Family-Guru.' Acting without stage and scenery; generally the actors are all 
males.

1 The meaning is that the man who plays the part of Guru may be a

Chandftla (one of the lowest castes), whose feet the man who plays the

part of §hishya must touch.

823

SELECTION OF THE GURU

families of Siddha and Sadhaka Gurus, 1 * * the orest-gems of 
Aryyftvarta,* which is the crown jewel of Bh&ratavarsha, 
have become thus extinct to-day ? Would the race of S&dha- 
kas devoted to Her who fulfils all Arthas (purposes and 
desires) have thus been exterminated for want of S&dhana 
and for the sake of Artha (money) ? Would descendants of 
Br&hmanas, who had performed austere Tapas, 4 have thus 
turned Chagd&las in habit? A blind man feels no discom¬ 
fort in the dark, bub he who can see is greatly frightened 
if the light in his room be extinguished. Malpractices * do 
no harm to Non-Aryyas, but if families of S&dhakas forsake 
S&dhana they are naturally ruined. So it is, 0 Guru- 
Family ! that doves nowadays roam over your homestead 
even at noon,* and Dharma’ looks at it with eyes wide 
open. But so intoxicated are you with the wine of delusion 
that your closed eyes can no more be opened by any means. 
Such as you are, you yet teach your Shishya a Mantra of 
obeisance which runs “ obeisance to the Guru who has, by 
means of the collyrium-stiok of knowledge, opened the eye 
of him who was blinded by the darkness of ignorance.” 
0 Mother! dwelling in great cremation grounds,* direct the 
band of Bhairavas' to clear away the heavy mass of ashes 
whioh are, as it were, this sin. Command them to fan 
into flame the fire of the funeral pyre of Sat, Chit, and

1 That is, the Gurus who have attained and those who are seeking

and on the way to attainment.

* The land of the Aryyaa. ' India.

4 Devotion, austerities, etc., (see Introduction). AnSchftra.

* Roaming of doves is a mark of ruin and desolation.and on the way to attainment.

* The land of the Aryyaa. ' India.

4 Devotion, austerities, etc., (see Introduction). AnSchftra.

* Roaming of doves is a mark of ruin and desolation.

' Dharma (religious duty, eto- here religion personified) cannot 
bear the sight of any wrong, but here He is represented as looking on 
with indifference.

• -

* $hmash&nas, where She in Her dread forms dwells.

* Attendants of Mab&deva and Mahftdevl.

824

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Ananda, 1 and to thus dispel the darkness of deep and crass 
ignorance in Bh&ratavarsha.* * Let the children who have 
lost the Mother rediscover the Father with the help of 
this light even in the deep darkness of the present new- 
moon night. Let them run to Thee, 0 Mother! and find 
eternal rest at those lotus-feet which are fair as ten million 
autumn moons.

The Guru Profession*

In India there has been, along with political revolu¬ 
tions, a revolution in language; and people now speak of 
Gurugiri, or profession of Guruhood.* Of all the means of 
earning money this profession of Guruhood is nowadays one 
of the best. In it the Param&rtha (the highest spiritual 
end) has joined with Artha (money), and from their union 
has been born an Anartha (evil). As a matter of fact, 
however, there has not been a union in the true sense 
between Param&rtha and Artha, and hence it is that this 
Anartha has come about; for a union between Param&rtha 
and Artha would have the effeot rather of destroying than 
of creating Anarthas (evils).

However that may be, the community of Gurus who 
follow this profession is divided into two classes—namely, 
Prabhu (lord)* and Vibhu (omnipresent).* There is, more¬ 
over, another class which has taken the field recently— 
namely, the Svayambhu (self-existent). There is no need

1 The state of existence, consciousness, and bliss, which is the 
Brahman.

’ ! °dia- * Gurugiri.

' Though Guruhood can never properly be a profession.

* Vaishnava Gurus.1 The state of existence, consciousness, and bliss, which is the 
Brahman.

’ ! °dia- * Gurugiri.

' Though Guruhood can never properly be a profession.

* Vaishnava Gurus.

... Referring to the Brahmos, who do not worship images or Brahman 
with iorm, but only the formless omnipresent.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

825

to explain what the first two classes are, or of whom they 
are composed. The name Prabhu has come into use through 
the grace of Prabhus. Nowadays, if anyone appears to 
be at all out of the common, people at once say: “ He is 
a Prabhu.” As for the class of Vibhus, they are going to 
be Vibhu (etherealized) themselves through their constant 
efforts to show the Vibhu (the Omnipresent). Whether 
they be good or bad, the first, two classes originally 1 based 
themselves on the Sh&stra. The third class which has 
succeeded them takes no heed, however, of any Sh&stra. 
“ These sober men are learned men in their own estima¬ 
tion.” “ In their own estimation they are men of calm 
mind* * and learning. They pretend to teach “ Yoga.” It 
is by long searoh in Pur&ijas, historical works, and so forth, 
that one comes across the name of a Yogi here and a Yogi 
there. These had by centuries of TapasyH* at first ac¬ 
quired the title of “ Muni ” or “ Ijtishi,” and then after 
another hundred or thousand years received initiation in 
Yoga from a Devatfi, or some great Yogi like a Devata. 
But nowadays we have regular fairs of Yogis on the river¬ 
side and in the field,* and we often hear it said: “ Such and 
such a Babu has received Yoga from such and such a 
Babu.” To-day a gang of men who are at heart atheists,* 
Chand&las defiled by eating the leavings of women of the 
town, the handmaids of Pi^h&chas,* lapped in luxury, and,

* Whatever be the subsequent developments leading away from 
§h&stra.

* Dhfra—the first fruit of Yoga, and a quality highly prized.

* Devotion, austerity, study, meditation, etc.* Whatever be the subsequent developments leading away from 
§h&stra.

* Dhfra—the first fruit of Yoga, and a quality highly prized.

* Devotion, austerity, study, meditation, etc.

* H&tem&the. " In the fair and in the field " is a colloquial expres¬ 
sion—that is, so-called Yogis are available in any number at any place.

* UpanOstika—though they may not know it, or may pretend not 
to be so.

* Low, unclean spirits.

820

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

heedless both of DevatA and Dharma, has taken the place 
of the true Yogis of yore, on whose account 1 * * t)rva§hl, 
Menakft, Rambha, PanchachadA, and TilottamA/ were wont 
to hide the lustre of their world-enchanting beauty by the 
assumption of the forms of beasts and birds, and flee to 
the very ends of the earth. Lord of the Kali Yuga! mighty 
indeed is your unfailing power. In this (so-called) Yoga 
no Devata’s name is mentioned. It has no form or Mantra; 
in short, it has little to do with worship* Next, it has 
absolutely no concern with suoh things as distinction of 
caste and VarnAshramadharma. 4 Its Sadhana consists of 
inspiration and expiration of breath, and its results * are 
consumption, phthisis, or cough. Nowadays one meets a 
few such Siddhas * in every populous place, and as for 
SAdhakas ' there is no lack of them anywhere. Those who 
tread this path generally belong to the community of ease- 
loving people who are ignorant of the A B C of the Aryya 
ShAstra, cast-offs of society with perverted intellects. The 
evil of all this is that such people and their male and 
female Gurus profess themselves to be followers of the 
Aryya Dharma.

A still greater evil is threatened by the fact that 
young men puffed up with their western education, but

1 That is. for fear of disturbing their Yoga.

* Celestial female spirits called Apsar&s, of surpassing beauty, who 
sometimes came to tempt the Munis and Yogis, and thus to test the 
reality of their spiritual progress.

* Up&sanft.* Celestial female spirits called Apsar&s, of surpassing beauty, who 
sometimes came to tempt the Munis and Yogis, and thus to test the 
reality of their spiritual progress.

* Up&sanft.

4 Rules relating to caste (Varpa) and stage of life (Aghrama; see 
Introduction). By these qualities (which are also those of the real 
Yoga) it is rendered attractive to those who have spiritual ambitions, 
but wish to avoid trouble.

4 Siddhi.

* Persons accomplished in such pseudo-S&dhana.

That is, persons striving to be so “ accomplished."

.827

SELECTION OF THE GURU

destitute of real worth, aimless and extremely lazy, show 
particular eagerness to learn this newly discovered \ oga, 
which presents itself to them as a religion 1 which may 
be followed without any labour, trouble, or cost to them¬ 
selves. To avail themselves of suoh a golden opportunity, 
young men often leave their houses and roam about hills 
near railway stations,* * and on return they are often heard 
to say: “As I ascended the summit of such and such a 
hill I saw a great Yogi resplendent with light* lying in a 
state of ecstasy * in a cave. My heart melted at the sight. 
Silently I bowed to him and remained standing. After a 
short time the Yogi quietly opened his eyes; I again bowed 
to him. Immediately the Mahapurusha* looked at me, and, 
affectionately and with a smiling face, said: ‘ So you have 
come, my child ? I was very anxious for you; I have already 
known all about you by means of Yoga. I have myself a 
Guru in the Himalayas. Hark there, he is saying, my 
child, a future Yogi has appeared before you,’ and so and 
so on.” Sadhaka, the “ Yogi,” who tells this story, is the 
future “ Yogi ” of whom you have just heard from the 
ghost Yogi (in the Himalayas).Again, some people are heard to say: “Sitting in a 
forest a Yogi is singing to the strains of his vlna,' and deer, 
tigers, elephants, and lions are embracing each other, and 
Bwooning away on hearing his song, and so on.’ The 
“ Yogi" has renounced all and become a SannyasI, but 
has not been able to part with his dear vlnA. 4 Needless to

1 Dharma.

* Here follow some caustic and amusing passages on spiritual 
shamming. As the aspirants after easy Yoga arc only making a pre* 
tence of “ going into the wilderness." the railway station which brings 
them comfort and safety and affords the means of return must be 
near at hand.

* Jyotih. ' Sam&dhi. * Great man.

' A stringed musical instrument.

828

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

say, that the “Yog!” who tells us the story has also a 
vlnA These sham Yogis are daily gaining mastery over 
the ignorant community, spreading the web of their charm, 
to the danger of even intelligent men.Finding no other means of success, Mahir&vana, 1 the 
wizard of LaAk&, at last deceived Hanum&n by assuming 
the form of Bibhlshaga,* * and entering into the camp, 
carried away Raghunitha* and Lakshmana* to P&tftla.* 
Similarly, the band of these wizardly unbelievers* are 
deluding and deceiving the faithful hearts of intelligent 
men by holding before them the standard of the Hindu 
religion. Thus creeping into society, they have spread 
their net so as to carry away to Ras&tala the Aryya 
Dharma, 1 whioh is full of real Siddhi and S&dhana. Aryya 
society even now, I say, do not listen to the words of Mahl- 
rftvana as though they were the words of Bibhlshana, the 
orest gem of devotees. Let not those who are enemies of 
Devatft, of the Veda, and of Dharma, deceive you any longer 
by their talk about Yoga. Like Hanuman, you will practise 
Yoga at the door; but Mahlr&vana will on his part carry 
away from the inner apartment to Rasatala the 8anfitana 
Dharma, whioh is as precious a thing in the temple of your 
heart as was R&machandra to Hanuman.* We know that 
even in that case there is no cause for fear, for in that 
nether world* also Mother Bhadrakall is Herself the 
Saviour. We, however, are afraid, because we do not know 
how long it will be before we shall again see the face of 
Ramachandra. We, however, know this also that if the

1 The brother of R&vana.

* R&vana’s brother, who took the side of R&ma.

’ Rama. ' His brother. * The nether world.

' Nastikas. ' The Hindu religion.

Whilst Hanuman was keeping guard at the door of Rama’s camp 
Mablravana entered into it in the guise of Bibhlshapa, and carried 
away Rama to Patala. * Patala.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

829Whilst Hanuman was keeping guard at the door of Rama’s camp 
Mablravana entered into it in the guise of Bibhlshapa, and carried 
away Rama to Patala. * Patala.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

829

Mother has determined to destroy Mahlrftvana, then there 
is nothing which cannot happen in the kingdom of Maha- 
m&y&, who makes the impossible possible. 1 Still we say, O 
Society! do not forget to be on your guard ; do not bring 
death on yourself by giving shelter to the Dharmarftkshasa * * 
in your house; do not, at this time when Dharma is being 
assailed, yourself attempt to weaken it.

NeoeBBity has compelled us to say even a few words 
more than what is strictly warranted on the subject of 
Gurutattva. In conclusion, we say to the Prabhus and 
Vibhus,' who follow the Guru profession, basing themselves 
on Shastra, that they, too, are slowly approaching the 
condition of the Svayambhus, who compose the third class 
of Gurus. We are servants of the Shftstra, and he who 
destroys its authority is to us an eyesore, however accom¬ 
plished * he may be. To us nothing is of greater authority 
than the words of Bhagavftn, who has Himself said, “ He 
who performs religious acts according to his own will, and 
in violation of the rules laid down in the Shftstra, will not 
merely fail to attain Siddhi, but will go to hell.” Pro¬ 
fessional Gurus, although the root of your profession is the 
Shftstra, its fruit, twig, leaf, flower, and all else are opposed 
to the Shastra.

Whenever you see a Shishya, place, time, and person 
have no effect upon you; but taking him to be your prey, 
you pounoe on his shoulders according to the rule—“ should 
be eaten the moment when received." What Shftstra 
authorizes you to do this ? Even a deadly poisonous snake 
when it has bitten someone remains senseless and feverish

1 That is. perhaps, these Mahlr&vanaa have been only permitted to 
appear and take the sinful path that they may be eventually destroyed ; 
for all is possible to Mah&m&ya.1 That is. perhaps, these Mahlr&vanaa have been only permitted to 
appear and take the sinful path that they may be eventually destroyed ; 
for all is possible to Mah&m&ya.

' Rakshasa, or demon, in the garb of Dharma religion.

* See ante. * Siddh*.

830

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

for a whole week. It is generally at saoh a time that snakes 
are, through their want of power of movement, killed. Simi¬ 
larly, energy passes from the body of the Guru to that of 
Shishya at the time of initiation, even if the former has 
previously greatly performed Tapas. 1 In order to recoup 
himself the loss of this energy, 1 * the Guru has to perform 
for a great length of time Tapas, 1 as also Purashchara?a in 
the form of Japa* of the Mantra, whioh he has given in 
initiation. Thus only he can regain his normal state. 4 But 
you, the incarnations of abnormality,* are in the habit of 
granting initiation at the rate of ten or twenty a day, as 
animals are offered for sacrifice on the great Navaml* day. 
Race of Prabhus, the saviours of the helpless, can you say 
what will be your fate? In you are combined a venomous 
power to bite, and boa-like capacity of eating. You are 
shaking with the fever of delusion and stuffed with food 
up to the throat. O Prabhu; behold and see that the 
Prabhu (Lord) who punished the K&llya Snake* has to-day 
come to test your power and authority. Even now, while 
there is yet time, touch the beauteous feet of the lord of 
Lakshml and say: “Lord of the helpless, friend of the poor,

1 Austerities, worship, and similar preparations undertaken with 
the view to kindle the fire of the Guru in the latter's body, and latter to 
recoup the energy transmitted to the disciple.

* Tejas; the transmission of which is known as ^haktisafich&ra.

' “ Recitation " of the Mantra according to the Kh&strik injunctions. 
This, when done under certain prescribed conditions, is the rite known 
as Pura?hcharapa. 4 Prakriti.

4 Vikriti.' “ Recitation " of the Mantra according to the Kh&strik injunctions. 
This, when done under certain prescribed conditions, is the rite known 
as Pura?hcharapa. 4 Prakriti.

4 Vikriti.

* The Durg& paja begins on the seventh lunar day of the bright 
fortnight, and lasts till the ninth or Navaml day, on which a large 
number of animals are sacrificed.

1 Krishna, who killed KAHya. Thi6 was a demon in the form of a 
snake which lived in a lake. Its presence made the lake so poisonous 
that fish could not live therein, cows could not drink its water, and 
birds flying over it fell dead. Kfishpa jumped into the lake and subdued 
the serpent, and compelled it to return to the sea.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

831SELECTION OF THE GURU

831

I have reaped the consequence of disobedience to Thy com¬ 
mands. Destroy the sins of this sinner, who has sought 
protection at Thy feet, and punish him with the rod of Thy 
grace. Let me be blessed with the touch of Thy beauteous 
feet.” And on your behalf we, too, say: “Bhagavftn, the 
chief purpose of Thy play* * is to lighten the earth of the 
weight of unrighteousness, which oppresses it in India. 
To-day the weight of the Gurus has become a heavy burden. 
All merciful Deva, who but Thee can remove it ? The race 
of Aryyas is sorely oppressed with initiation; the waters of 
the Jumna are terribly poisoned by this deadly snake, which 
is the race of Gurus. O Lord, colour for once the gem on the 
head of this snake with the colour of Thy spotless lotus- 
feet, which are like red lotuses.* With a thrust of Thy feet 
free the earth of the poison fang which is self-seeking and 
drive this snake from Jambudvlpa* to Ramanakadvlpa, 4 
the seat of your everlasting Rasa festivities. Let men and 
women, boys and girls, bathe with faithful hearts in the 
waters of initiation and oool their minds and hearts. Hima- 
van,* Nishadha, Vindhya, Sumeru, Malyavan, and many 
other mountains,* are situated in Jambudvlpa, 7 but, O Lord, 
no mountain is so unbearable* as this Guru profession.* 
We have heard that you held Mount (Giri) Govardhana.

' Lllft.

1 That is, the DevatA is invoked to stand on the snake when the 
red painted soles of the Deva will be reflected in the gem on the head 
of the snake. * India.

* One of the seven islands. The author takes advantage of the 
etymological meaning of Ramanaka, or that which gives pleasure, to 
make reference to the pleasure of the R&salllfi.

* Himalaya. * Giri. 1 See ante.

* Krishna upheld Govarddhana when Indra deluged the surround¬ 
ing country with continuous rain, and thus gave shelter to people and 
the cattle.* Himalaya. * Giri. 1 See ante.

* Krishna upheld Govarddhana when Indra deluged the surround¬ 
ing country with continuous rain, and thus gave shelter to people and 
the cattle.

* Gurugiri; a play on the word Giri, which, as an independent 
word, means mountain, and as suffix in Bengali means profession.

832

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

This makes us hope that some day Thou wilt surely hold 
this profession (Giri) either by Thy foot or by Thy hand, 
for by the ill-fortune of India this profession (Giri) also has 
become Govarddhana, thus fostering the ignorant. 1 Thou 
didst uphold Mount Govarddhana in order to shatter the 
pride of the King of Devas.* * Once again, O Lord! Thou 
wilt have to hold it in order to shatter the pride of the King 
of the Kali Yuga. It was Thou who as Mount Govarddhana 
didst receive the worship of the herdsmen, and Thou Thy¬ 
self must receive worship as Guru Govarddhana (increaser 
of the raoe of Guru). 1 The punishment of K&llya * and the 
upholding of Mount Govarddhana were both Thy play.* 
Now, O Thou who art full of play,* the field has been pre¬ 
pared for both these plays.* It remains only that Thou 
Thyself should incarnate. And to Thee, Daughter of the 
King of Mountains,* we say, O Mother! Thou hast said that 
a Guru who gives Mantra is also Thy father’s Guru, and so 
stands to Thee as Thy grandfather. If for fear of destroying 
the Gurus glory of the mountain-family of Thy father, Thou 
showest indulgence to this Guru profession, then we shall 
be obliged to stand before our Father, the Lord of Bhairavas, 
and the Dakshayajna* is the outstanding proof of the little

1 A play on tho word Govarddhana, which means that which in¬ 
creases (Varddhana) cows (Go). Tho ignorant are spoken of as a race 
of cows, the number of which is increased by these so-called but incom¬ 
petent Gurus. * Indra (see ante.)' Krishna must uphold the race of Gurus as he upheld the moun¬ 
tain. He must raise the race from their depressed condition. Then the 
race of Gurus will be worthy of worship, as was Mount Govarddhana 
after Krishna had raised it. The Gurus are compared to Govarddhana.

* See ante.

* Ltl&.

* The Devi P&rvatl, daughter of Himalaya, the Mountain King.

The sacrifice of Daksha, Shiva’s father-in-law, which the latter 
destroyed on hearing of the death of his spouse, the Devi, as Satl.

838

SELECTION OF THE GURU

forgiveness he accords to the family of his father-in-law. 1 
And then the remedy will surely be attained. But in that 
case, O Mother! a blemish and rebuke will for ever attach 
to Thy father’s family. Hence we pray you as a good 
daughter to find out a remedy for all this while there is yet 
time. Do you yourselves settle in private a question which

concerns you privately ?

“ 0 Guru family! do not attempt to become a Guru in 
order to save Shishyas, but prepare yourselves to become a 
Shishya for your own saving. Then by the grace of Guru 
the world will become your Shishya. Had you yourself 
learnt how to worship a Guru, to-day you would not have 
had to suffer indignities, moving from door to door amongst 
Shisbyas. If a patricide’s son is educated after the notions 
of his father, he is sure to turn out a patricide himself. 
Similarly, by receiving initiation from a Guru like yourself, 
who is estranged from his Guru, your Shishya has to-day 
become ready to ruin you. It is useless to mourn over this, 
for you are reaping the consequence of your own action. 
Had you yourself been Siddha, 1 or, at least, a Sadhaka, 
your Shishya might some day have become a Sadhaka. 
Had you been a servant of your Guru’s house, esteeming 
it to be Vfind&vana or Kashi 4 itself, innumerable men 
and women would to-day have left Kfishi and Yrindavana 
that they might prostrate themselves in the dust at your 
door. But instead of that you are to-day a Guru only‘ A playful threat against the Devi. The author prays that She 
will remedy this evil of the Gurus. If She be unwilling to do so for 
of dest roying the Guru glory of her father's family, well the author 
wm go to Her husband $hiva. who. as the Dakshayajna showed, will 
not scruple to deal with this evil.

* Perfected.

• That is. one seeking such perfection and power of accomplishment.

♦ That is. the town of B r ind&ban. sacred to Kriehpa and the holy

city of Benares.

S3

834

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Perfected.

• That is. one seeking such perfection and power of accomplishment.

♦ That is. the town of B r ind&ban. sacred to Kriehpa and the holy

city of Benares.

S3

834

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in name. Like a servant, you appear at the door of 
your miscreant Shishya to receive your annual due from 
him, only to be driven away like a dog; or you heartily 
approve of his evil practices in the hope of eating the 
remnants of his food. Know that it is the powerful in¬ 
fluence of the Kali Yuga whioh prevents a thunderbolt from 
falling on your head. Even here the sorrowful tale does 
not end. In luxurious feasts, where wine and women of the 
town hold sway, the Guru is to-day engaged in cooking, 
for in the opinion of the Shishya the Guru is an here¬ 
ditary slave bought for nothing. Dharmar&ja, 1 Yamadeva! 
has hell become so full that it cannot afford room to these 
men, whose proper place is there ? Save, O Bhagav&n! 
This current of abominable sin will bring on a great un¬ 
timely dissolution* * and destroy the world.* Gurus! forgive 
us. We shall not draw this pioture of hell any more. 0 
Mother, Jagadambft!* Thou art the Mother of the World. 
Be Thy sons good or bad, all this, O Mother! is Thy play. 
We know that Thou canst never forsake us. Hence with 
tears in our eyes we say, O Mother! what play is this 
of Thine to throw Thy babes in arms in the dust ? 0 
Devi! beauteous with the dark hue of clouds laden with 
water! O merciful Mother! with a copious shower of 
mercy from that three-eyed spring,* the Devi Herself, which 
removes the threefold sorrows* of the three worlds, wash 
away for once the mud of infamy which soils the Guru 
family in India; and showing Thy real self to Thine erring 
children, lift them to Thy bosom with Thy lotus-hands, which

1 A name of Yama. the Ood of Death. * Mah&pralaya.

* SangsAra. * The Devi as mother of the world.

' Her three eyes are compared to a spring of water.1 A name of Yama. the Ood of Death. * Mah&pralaya.

* SangsAra. * The Devi as mother of the world.

' Her three eyes are compared to a spring of water.

' SdhyAtraik. or mental and physical troubles; Adhlbbantik, pro¬ 
duced by the world, other men, animals, eto.; Adhidaivik, or danger 
from Dev&j and Spirits.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

836

bestow blessing and dispel fear. 1 Paint, then, their soiled 
and vice-tainted eyes with the collyrium 5 of Thy love. 0 
Thou, who grantest all desires! 0 Mother f who art the 
highest object of all desires, 1 Thou art all to Shiva and 
the most precious to His heart. If to-day Jlva Thy son is 
able to hold those Beauteous Feet, the treasure which even 
Shiva by His Sadhana seeks to gain, then, O Queen of 
queens of the Universe,* * of what can he be in want ? What 
poverty is it which can then oppress him and drive him 
to take (humble) stand at the door of his Shishya ? O 
Mother! stand forth as Mother taking up Thy son in Thy 
arms. Let all the world touch Thy son s* feet after it has 
first rested at Thy feet. Make the world of Shishyas know 
that in order to understand what a Guru* is, one must 
know Thee first, and that Guru, who is only Thyself in a 
loving form, is weightier 1 than thee. And let them hear 
the most secret and profound converse between Thee the 
Mother and Thy eon, that loving and endearing welcome, 
which is Mantra. To hear and understand this is to 
destroy the discipleship of the Shishya, the Guruhood of the 
Guru, the Mantra-nature* of Mantra, and the strife and 
struggle to attain to Thee. With such destruction all dis¬ 
appears in that unity which is the great fruth that * when 
all is gone Thyself alone remains.’ Let us sink in the unity 
whioh is Gurutattva, Mantratattva, and Thy Tattva. If, 
however, it oauses Thee great pain to destroy these three

' The Devfa hands ore represented making the gestures (mudrft) of 
granting boons (varamudrft) and dispelling fear (abhaya mudrft).' The Devfa hands ore represented making the gestures (mudrft) of 
granting boons (varamudrft) and dispelling fear (abhaya mudrft).

' Afijana, used to clear the vision.

' Paramftrtha svarftpinl. * Rftjrftjejhvari.

* The Guru. If people get faith in the Devi, then they will respect 
the Guru. * gurutattva.

1 Gurutara; a play on the word Guru, which as a noun means 
“spiritual preceptor" and as an adjective “ heavy "—that is, being 
greater. Mantrattva.

836

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Tattvas which are so dear to Thee, then be Thou at least 
graoious to make us understand that 1 which the destroyer 
of K&ma 1 has himself described as follows in the K&m&khy& 
Tantra: ‘ The Devi’s favour must be secured first, and then 
the favour of Shriguru. After this, there is generated single- 
minded devotion to the lotus-feet of the Supreme Devatft, 
through the influence of the great Mantra, which issues 
from the Guru’s mouth. That single-minded devotion 
makes the S&dhana pure ; out of that pure Sadhana arises 
pure knowledge; and that pure knowledge leads to the 
attainment of the highest liberation of Jlva. This is the 
truth. This is the command of Shftstra.’ ”

The Chabacteristics of Disciples*

Nowadays, as there is no one to critioize the editor of 
a newspaper, whilst the latter criticizes the whole world, so 
there is none to critioize the characteristics of Shishyas 
whilst they critioize all Gurus.* Just as no one who stands 
by the side of the sharpened hundred-tongued quill of the 
editor has the right to say anything about him, so the race 
of Gurus when standing before the Shishyas, so heroic in 
speech, can say' nothing. For to the single tongue of the 
Guru there are a hundred of the Shishyas. At the most 
the Guru will perhaps try to explain one or two things to 
the Shishya in a few words in Sanskrit, but then the Shishya 
will most probably drive him away with his ridioule in

1 Literally, the tattva.1 Literally, the tattva.

’ $hiva, who destroyed K&ma, the God of Love, with a flash of fire 
from His third eye when the latter sought to destroy Him from 
His Yoga, that He might unite with His spouse Pftrvatl for the creation 
of a son (KArttikeya). • $hishya.

’ After administering due rebuke to the Gurus for their incompe¬ 
tency, the author proceeds to deal with the failings of the present-day 
disciples.

SELECTION OF THE GURO

837’ After administering due rebuke to the Gurus for their incompe¬ 
tency, the author proceeds to deal with the failings of the present-day 
disciples.

SELECTION OF THE GURO

837

English. The Shishya will test the Guru on the touchstone 
of Sh&stra, but the Guru will stare blankly at the gilt on 
the Shishya, for Jn&na 1 is all that the Guru possesses, 
whilst the Shishya is strong with the weapon of Vi-jnana." 
Society complains that it is no longer possible to obtain a 
Guru such as the Sh&stra indicates. From this it would 
seem that there is now no want of Shishyas, who are com¬ 
petent to be suoh according to the Sh&stra. We are, how¬ 
ever, ourselves at a loss to know whether it is the Guru or 
the Shishya who is the more rare to find. Even to-day it is 
not impossible to find ten good Gurus out of every hundred. 
Bub does one find even a single Shishya out of a thousand 
who is competent to be a disciple according to the Shastra ? 
Whatever is necessary in any fashion, for any purpose or in 
any plaoe in this universe has been provided for even before 
its oreation by the Mother. It is impossible that She who 
has been careful to create the mother's breast with its milk, 
which provides food for the baby after birth, has not created 
competent Gurus for religious-minded Shishyas. As a matter 
of fact, just as competent Gurus are never in want of com¬ 
petent Shishyas, so competent Shishyas are never in want 
of competent Gurus.* * The Shftstra has, therefore, said, “ In 
the matter of DevatA, Tlrtha, 4 Dvija,' Mantra, Daivajna,* 
medioine and Guru, each person achieves results therefrom 
according to his thought; that is to say, one achieves visible 
results in proportion to one’s faith in them. Nowadays 
many people have acquired the habit of despising the race 
of Gurus on the supposition of their being incompetent.

' Spiritual knowledge which produces liberation.

* Scientific and artistio knowledge.' Spiritual knowledge which produces liberation.

* Scientific and artistio knowledge.

* It is a common saying that he who is fit for and truly deserves a 
Guru will surely find one.

4 Place of pilgrimage ; here the efficacy whiob is attributed to it.

1 A twice born : here a Br&hmapa. * Diviner, foreteller.

838

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA4 Place of pilgrimage ; here the efficacy whiob is attributed to it.

1 A twice born : here a Br&hmapa. * Diviner, foreteller.

838

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

But how many of these people consider whether they them¬ 
selves are competent to beoome Shishyas? Considering the 
the amount of competence which you and I possess, it is 
sheer presumption on our part to deem the entire race of 
Gurus to be incompetent. Boys and young men stirred 
by the recent agitation over the subject of the San&tana 
Dharma 1 and whose meagre equipment consists of a know¬ 
ledge of such matters as history, fiction, novel-writing, 
and of acting and the like, are busy in the occupation of 
selecting Gurus. A section of them have come to the 
conclusion that by “ Guru ” is meant “ a prince of Yogis 
sitting with closed eyes in the lotus posture* * on the 
snowolad summit of the Himalaya, or in a solitary’ moun¬ 
tain oave, or in a thatched hut in the midst of some great 
forest outside the pale of human habitation, and surround¬ 
ed by tame * wild animals.” I admit that such a person 
is a good Guru, but of what avail is he to you or me ? 
True that an infinite store of precious gems exists in the 
womb of the unfathomable sea, but of what use is it to you 
or me ? What can you or I expect from him who has 
forgotten the dualistic waves of the ocean, and has sunk 
to its depths wherein is the monistio truth? 4 True that 
I tun thirsty, and am standing on the bank of the river, 
but the water lies at a great depth below the top of the 
bank. I cannot oross that steep mountain-like formidable 
shore and descend into the water, and yet my life cannot 
be saved without it. What is to be done in such a case ? 
Am I to beg water of one who has sunk and lost himself 
in the mid-current of the river, the flow of whose sense

1 The Hindu religion.

' Padm&sona, a common form of Asana in Toga.

* Wild animals do not fear or hurt the Yogi.1 The Hindu religion.

' Padm&sona, a common form of Asana in Toga.

* Wild animals do not fear or hurt the Yogi.

' ^kich is the state of the Yogi. He who ran help the dweller in 
a dualistic world is he who is himself a part of it.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

839

functions have mingled with that ourrent of the river; 
who, though he is “who" to me is no longer “he" to 
himself ? Am I to beg of one who will not deign to 
turn his eyes even if countless Jlvas like myself were to 
break their heads on the bank ? To him it is nothing 
whether the world is safe or the great dissolution 1 * * un¬ 
timely threatens. The entire universe has not the value 
of a straw to him. Can you and I expect to be reckoned 
as even atoms in hiB eyes ? I can get water from the man 
who has crossed the shore and descended into the water, 
but has not yet reached the bottomless stream. Forus-* 
and the ordinary people the Shftstra has therefore said,

“ and a householder who knows the import of all Shastras 
is called a Guru,” and again, “ a Guru for rites relating 
to Devas, Pitjis, or both, should be a house-holder and 
fellow-countryman.” To him who has risen above false 
dualism the relation of Guru and Shishya is nothing but a 
flower in the ether.*

Many people are willing to take initiation only if they 
can get householders like Y&jnavalkya or Va§hishtha for 
their Gurus, otherwise not. But they do not stop to 
consider that in order to obtain such Gurus they them¬ 
selves must be Shishyas, like Rajarshi Janaka," or Bhagavan 
R&machandra. 4 Doubtless everyone has his ambitions, 
but if they exolude the bounds of possibility men call 
them mad. If one proceeds to read Action without under¬ 
standing it, one is reduced to the plight of Duryyodhana

1 Mahftpralaya.

* Ak&$hakusama ; the sanekrit form of the expression " castle in 
the air."

' Sit&’s father ; Rama's father-in-law.

4 Son of Dasaratha, hero of R&m&yana, incarnation of Vishpu.

840

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Sit&’s father ; Rama's father-in-law.

4 Son of Dasaratha, hero of R&m&yana, incarnation of Vishpu.

840

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in the court of Yudhisthira’s 1 Rftjasflya* yajna. To 
fasten one's heart in the mould of novels and fulfil its 
unreasonable desires, and to acquire competence from 
Siddhi and Sadhana by seeking shelter at the feet of Guru, 
are not one and the same thing. Only such a man who 
has gone into the water can do me good as can come out of 
it, and either bring water to me who am on land, or can 
take me w T ifch him from the land to the water. There may 
be countless Siddhas * who are lying submerged in the 
water, but there is no means by whioh I may derive any 
benefit from them. But I shall be gratified if I get a kind- 
hearted person who is half-sunk or almost sunk, or has 
just entered into the water. Hence for all persons belonging 
to the household A$hrama, householders make the best 
Gurus. Some people, again, think that one should not 
take initiation from a Guru without first gauging the extent 
of his knowledge and intelligence. It is difficult to res¬ 
train one’s laughter at this idea. If before going to sohool 
a boy oan measure the extent of his teacher’s knowledge 
and intelligence, then what is the necessity of his going 
to school at all ? One must make an offering of one’s 
ignorance to whomsoever one accepts as one’s Guru. This 
is the natural law in the world of Guru and Shishya. Un¬ 
less one is ignorant, there is no necessity to take a Guru. 
The Shistra therefore says, “ I bow to the Guru by whom

1 When Yudhishthira did the R&jasflya Yajna, a Gandharva pre¬ 
pared for him a carpet, the design on which was so natural that in 
crossing the room in which it was, Duryyodhana took a tank which 
was represented on it to be real water, and tacked ap his clothes lest 
they shoald be wetted, on which all the assembly laughed, to the dis- 
oomflture of Duryyodhana.1 A great sacrifice performed by a universal monarch at the time 
of his coronation as a mark of his undisputed sovereignty.

Perfect men who have attained Siddhi.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

841

is opened with the collyrium-stick 1 of knowledge the eye 
blinded by the darkness of ignorance.” To desire to test 
the knowledge and intelligence of the Guru is tantamount 
to the wish to see that which our parents have done in 
their ohildhood. As notwithstanding that parents have 
at one time been children, they are already youths when 
they become parents; so in spite of a Guru having been 
ignorant at one time, he is already an unfathomable sea of 
knowledge when he initiates you or I; otherwise, if the 
Guru who is to impart knowledge to the Shishya is himself 
ignorant, it is impossible to be initiated by him. I can 
examine only that subject of which I have knowledge. 
But to proceed to examine a subject of which I know noth¬ 
ing is tantamount to exhibiting my own ignorance. Maybe 
that I am a passed degree-holder in many subjects. But 
does this entitle me to be an examiner of a Guru ? Perhaps 
the Guru is not a passed degree-holder like myself, but 
what of that ? I am, despite of my being well educated in 
all subjeots, a perfect ignoramus in the field of S&dhana, 
and the Guru is, notwithstanding his ignorance of all 
subjects, a past master' in Siddhi and S&dhana. What I 
have to learn from him is unknown to me even in dream. 
It is, therefore, the height of impertinence, presumption, 
and foolishness on may part to try, blinded as I am by the 
vanity of worldly knowledge, to test that spiritual know¬ 
ledge which is the possession of the Guru. There is nothing 
which I can teach the Guru, but my own knowledge is so 
little that I can spend a life-time in seeking to increase it.

There is, moreover, another class of men who are charm¬ 
ed by the glamour of love-maddening plays, or by speeoh

1 Afljana, which dears the vision.There is, moreover, another class of men who are charm¬ 
ed by the glamour of love-maddening plays, or by speeoh

1 Afljana, which dears the vision.

* Literally, Mah&mahop&dhy&ya— that is, a great Pa$£it.

842

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

or writing, and are anxious to become Dhruvas * or Prahlft- 
das * ten times every hour. Yoga, Yajna, Tapasya,* and such 
other things, again are eyesores to them. They think in 
their minds : “ I will melt Hari by weeping tears of play, 4 
whether my mind and heart possess even a smack of devo¬ 
tion or not. I will be in the world an ideal devotee, for I 
have heard that a devotee does not require to perform Japa,* 
Tapas,* worship, adoration, or anything of the kind." All 
talk of knowledge is, as it were, forbidden by their Dharma. 
For the fruit of knowledge is liberation, and as Vaishnava 
books say “ Devotion ’ is superior to knowledge, * and 
liberation* is its handmaid," they are devotees, and do 
not want liberation. It is as if liberation were prostrating 
itself in the dust with tears in its eyes before them, praying 
that it be accepted, and with annoyance they say: “Be 
off! We don’t want you!” Nowadays such men are found 
in abundance in quarters where live unbelievers 10 in dis¬ 
guise, who carry the banner of Hinduism, but are actually 
devoid of all Dharma. 1 * Whatever be the acts of unrighte¬ 
ousness they may commit, they are found not guilty, and 
acquitted on their performing SaAklrtanato the accom¬ 
paniment of a Khola** in the evening at the close of every 
week. In their opinion any Mantra or form of worship

1 Baja Utt&nap&da’s son, a great devotee for whom Vishnu made 
the Dhruvaloka. The Pole star is called Dhruva.

' Son of Hirapyaka^hipu, and a great devotee of Vishnu.

* Toga, sacrifice, austerity, etc.

* That is, by feigning weeping.

* Recitation of Mantras (see Introduction).

* See ante. ' Bhakti. * Jnana. * MuktL

* N&stika. 11 That is, who really do not belong to it.* That is, by feigning weeping.

* Recitation of Mantras (see Introduction).

* See ante. ' Bhakti. * Jnana. * MuktL

* N&stika. 11 That is, who really do not belong to it.

" Dancing and singing the name of Hari (Vishnu), as Vaishnavas do.

“ An elongated, drum-shaped, musical instrument used in Sahklr- 
tana. The reference is to Brahtnos, who bold weekly prayer-meetings 
after the manner of the Christians.

843

SELECTION OF THE GURU

other than this “ cry of Hari in a tumult 1 belongs to the 
province of the lowest grade of worshippers. However 
that may be, through the indifference and shortsightedness 
of preachers of religion (Dharma), and the strong forbear¬ 
ance of the Aryya Society, which nothing can mo\e, this 
community is daily receiving such indulgence that the 
creation of Non-Aryya Society—in fact but dubbed with 
the name of Aryya Society—is undoubtedly inevitable. The 
band of these pseudo-Prahladas* * think that all Gurus are 
like Shanda and Amarka,* and cite the case of Prahlada 
to show that there is no necessity to take a Guru. They, 
however, do not stop even once to consider that if everyone 
can be a Prahlada by becoming a devotee in this fashion, 
why then has there been only one Prahl&da during all these 
ages? In the infinite world of moving and unmoving things 
infinite numbers of devotees to Bhagavan have been born. 
But why has there not been born another like Prahlada ? 
Why has not Bhagavftn stood before any other devotee in 
the form of half-man, half-lion? 4 Is devotion to Bhagav&n 
(it is said) so partial towards one party that it cannot 
reveal its own power* to any person other than Prahlada ? 
If the respect that is paid to Prahlftda is due to this sort 
of devotion, then it is difficult to count the number of 
Prahladas which exist in this Sangs&ra.* Herein a little 
knowledge of the truth as told in the Sh&stra is necessary.1 Gole Haribol—slang for doing a thing perfunctorily— e.g., where a 
large number of people cry Hari together, one of them may himself cry 
without care or heart for what he does and without notice-

* See ante.

* Gurus to whom Prahl&da’s father sent him for education, and 
who tried to dissuade Prahlada from worship of Vishnu.

' Vishnu took this form as Nfisingha avat&ra to destroy Prahlada's 
unbelieving father for his persecution of the latter on account of his 
devotion to Vishpu. * Vibhftti.

' That is to say, there are innumerable Prahl&da* in it.

844

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Unable to bear any longer the oppressions of Hira^ya- 
kashipu, Brahm& and other Devaa sought the protection of 
the Lord of Vaiku^tha. Bhagav&n said to them : “ Wait a 
little time more. So long as he does not become the enemy 
of his own self (Atma), the store of his sins will not be full, 
and I, too, shall not be able to destroy him.” The Devaa 
were astonished, and asked: “ Lord, a Jlva never becomes 
an enemy of his own self. How then can this be possible? ” 
Bhagav&n replied: “ You need not be afraid; it is the self 
indeed which is born as a son, 1 and I myself shall take birth 
as his son.” The Devas understood the plan of the crest- 
gem of the ounning 1 and were assured. In order to accom¬ 
plish the purpose of the Devas, Bhagav&n incarnated Him¬ 
self as Prahl&da as a son of the Ring of Daityas* * in the 
womb of Ray&dha. Now, is it not beyond the possibility of 
even a dream that that which happened to Prahl&da, the 
incarnation of Bhagav&n Himself in the form of a devotee, 
should happen to you, me, or anybody else ? Because He 
showed a divinely brilliant example of an unflinching devo¬ 
tion to Himself by His incarnation as a devotee in order to 
oreate a feeling of enmity in Hiragyaka§hipu, is it possible 
that you and I should show the same ? Hari, Hari, Hari! * 
If this could happen, why should He Himself have incar¬ 
nated as Prahl&da?And did He, on being incarnated as Prahl&da, show 
His devotion without first taking a Guru? Those who 
are ignorant of the Sh&stra may easily come to the con¬ 
clusion that Prahl&da had no Guru. But learned men and 
S&dhus conversant with Sh&stra know that when Hiragya- 
ka$hipu was away from home and in war the Ring of

'vThe father is born as the son.

* Chakrt. • Hirapyakaghipu.

* Eqaivalent to the English exclamation '* My God ! "

SELECTION OF THE GURU

845'vThe father is born as the son.

* Chakrt. • Hirapyakaghipu.

* Eqaivalent to the English exclamation '* My God ! "

SELECTION OF THE GURU

845

Dev as 1 stole away Kay&dhfl* * from the unguarded Daitya 
City with the object of destroying her and the child in her 
womb. On the way Nftrada, the Divine Rishi, questioned 
him, saying: “King of Devas! why this wickedness in 
taking away a woman with child?” Indra replied with 
confidence: “ O thou whose wealth is Tapas, 1 the kingdom 
of Devaa is on the point of being utterly destroyed by 
Hiranyakashipu's oppression. If after this the father and 
the son unite to commit oppressions, the three worlds will 
be destroyed. From fear of thiB I have determined to kill 
the Daitya’s Queen along with the child in her womb, for 
I do not see any other means of averting the danger.” The 
Divine Rishi laughed and said: “ King of Devas, stay your 
hand. This child has been conceived, and will be born for 
the very purpose of bringing to an end the oppressions of 
Daityas. You have no need to destroy the child in the 
womb, for this child is destined to reinstate the tutelary 
goddess of good fortune* of the race of 8ura«.” Trusting 
the Rishi's words, the King of Devas released the Daitya 
Queen, and went away to his own place. KayadhO then 
fell at the Rishi’s feet, weeping, and said: “ Lord, seeing 
me helpless, the King of Devas stole me away, and now 
through your grace I am safe from him; but how can I 
now go to the Daitya City ? Even if a chaste woman of 
respectable family thus falls into the hands of an enemy, 
no one believes that she remains inviolate. Moreover, if 
the King of Daityas oomes to know of that which has 
happened, he will most surely abandon me. O Lord ! of 
what use is life to me if it be made unbearable through 
public oalumny, abandonment of my husband, and the

1 Indra. ’ Hiranyakashipu's wife.

• Austerity, devotion, study, self-restraint, etc. (see Introduction),

* Lakshin!.

8461 Indra. ’ Hiranyakashipu's wife.

• Austerity, devotion, study, self-restraint, etc. (see Introduction),

* Lakshin!.

846

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

burden of pregnancy ? But how, on the other hand, can I 
surrender a body whioh bears a child ? Father! save me from 
this terrible dilemma.” Seeing the Daitya Queen to be 
in such great danger, the Divine Rishi said : “ Mother 1 fear 
not that your virtue may be impugned ; for that I am your 
witness. For the present do you stay in My hermitage 
until Hirapyakashipu, your husband, returns. Then you 
will go with him to the Daitya City.” Approving of the 
Divine Rishi’s assuring words, Kay&dhfl stayed in Narada’s 
hermitage, during which time He explained to her, at her 
request, the Yoga of devotion 1 to Bhagavftn. Bhagavftn, 
incarnated as a devotee, took Nftrada, the Guru of Devas, 
as His Guru, and Himself practised the Yoga of devotion 1 
to Himself while still living in the womb. The effect of 
that devotion 1 was the assumption by Bhagavftn of a half¬ 
man, half-lion form.* * Now, seeing that Bhagavftn Himself, 
the treasure which all devotees worship, made His own 
devotee* His Guru, whilst learning devotion to Himself, it 
is the height of ignorance to say to-day that Prabl&da had 
no Guru. Bhagavftn is almighty. It is not possible that 
He who could burst through a crystal column and assume 
a wonderful half-man, half-lion* form, full of brilliance, 
could not preach the Yoga of devotion to Himself without 
instruction from a Guru. But still, in order to uphold 
the honour of Shftstra, the Guru of the three worlds 
became a disciple * Himself, and making His own disoiple 
His Guru whilst He lived in the womb, He issued from it 
as a Siddha.' Now, Sftdhakas should understand that even

* Bhakti.

’ Narasingha, in which He appeared to kill Hirapyaka^bipa.

* N&rada. * Narasingha. * $hishya.

' One who is perfect.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

847* Bhakti.

’ Narasingha, in which He appeared to kill Hirapyaka^bipa.

* N&rada. * Narasingha. * $hishya.

' One who is perfect.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

847

He, devotion to Whom, even when simulated, 1 * * 4 makes ub 
proud, carried out an intricate scheme by making the King 
of Devas into an instrument for upholding the glory of 
Guruhood, and yet to-day we imagine PrahlSda an ordinary 
son of a Daitya, and proceed to quote him as a precedent on 
the supposed ground that he had no Guru.* Marvellous is 
our audacity! Marvellous also are our intelligence and 
education, and marvellous, too, will be our inevitable down¬ 
fall ! Hence we say, do not imagine yourselves to be new 
Prahlfidas, mistaking a play of Daityahood to be one of 
Devahood, and a play of Brabmahood to be one of Jlvahood.* 
Do not thus be foolish according to the wish of Ishvara.* 
Dwarfs that you are, do not stretch out your hands to catch 
the moon ; mere flies that you are, do not jump into a pit 
of flaming fire, where you will be reduced to ashes.

There is also another class of persons who think that 
a man oan never be a man’s Guru; that a man’s Guru is 
I$hvara, and that to obey Him means to follow the teach¬ 
ings which He from time to time gives through the dictates 
of our intelligence and our heart. These people consider 
Nature (Prakriti) to be the Supreme Guru. Mountains,

1 Men pretend to be devoted to Him, and take pride in showing 
themselves off as devotees, so great is the glory of Him to Whom they 
offer their simulated devotion.

* That is, because after His birth there is no mention of His having 
a Guru. But Prahl&da was Vishnu, and had a Guru when in his 
mother's womb—namely, N&rada—for the latter gave the mother in¬ 
structions. which the child heard. So also Abhimanyu, Arjuna’s son, 
learnt the art of warfare in his mother's womb.' That is, do not misunderstand. This was an exceptional case, due 
to the fact that Prahl&da was not a Daitya, but Deva ; and not a mere 
Jlva, but Brahman.

4 All which is done, whether by way of wisdom or folly, is done at 
I$hvara's command. Perhaps the meaning also is that in so far as 
Ishvara is the creator. His desire as such is that men should not follow 
the path of liberation, but maintain the Sangs&ra,

848

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA848

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

woods, groves, olouds, lightning, rivers, seas, and lakes are 
all Gurus according to them. But we hold that a conscious 
human society cannot be built with the aid of such uncon* 
scious things. Unaided Nature 1 can be the Guru of trees, 
creepers, birds, and beasts, but never of men. Immediately 
a cow brings forth a calf, the latter rises up and seeks its 
mother’s udder according to the law of Prakyiti (Nature); 
but on the birth of a human child the loving mother must 
forget the pains of labour, and with her own hand hold her 
breast up to its mouth, otherwise its desire to drink its 
mother’s milk is not gratified. A calf one month old will, 
if thrown into water, easily swim across it according to 
Prakriti’s teaching. But throw a boy of ten or even twenty 
years of age into water, and (unless he has learnt swimming 
from another man) he will founder and die. S&dhakas 
should know that it is the same people who through their 
rejection of a human Guru, and dependence on Nature 1 as 
their guide,* have been reduced to suoh miserable plight in 
the waters of a mere tank, who are prepared to cross the 
ocean of existence ten times every half an hour in the name 
of Prakyiti-Guru, and who also call on others to accompany 
them. If your desire to emulate birds and beasts were one 
which was capable of fulfilment, then, O Shishya of Prakyiti! * 
your body also would have been similarly built. In fact, 
you do not understand Prakyiti, whose Shishya you boast 
yourself to be. This is greatly to be regretted. What Jlva 
is there in this Universe who is not a Shishya of Prakyiti ? 
From the appearance of a Jlva to his reabsorption in Para- 
brahman every faculty or aot of body, speech, and mind is 
regulated according to the law of Prakyiti. It is neither the 
mark of intelligence to say, nor is it the teaching of Sh&stra,

1 Prakriti.

' Disciple of Nature.

* Guru.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

8491 Prakriti.

' Disciple of Nature.

* Guru.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

849

that the four faculties of eating, sleeping, fearing, 1 and of 
sexual intercourse, are alone governed by Prakriti. Bbaga- 
v&n Himself has said to Arjuna: “Jlvas follow their 
individual Prakriti (Nature). How can it be forcibly 
suppressed?* * A person is born in a particular caste accord¬ 
ing to the decree of fate * and the fruits of his action * in 
previous lives. He can only attain Siddhi through the 
Ach&ra* and Mantra in which he has been initiated by 
Prakriti* The Shastra says that he whom Prakriti has 
made a Brfthmana must attain the state of Brahman 
through the Aoh&ra* of a Br&hmana. Just as looking at 
things from their gross aspect it is impossible to turn a 
beast into a man, so also if their subtle aspect be con¬ 
sidered it is impossible to convert a Cband&la into a 
Brahmana. 1 Had Prakriti surrendered all Her claim on 
a Jlva after his birth, then it might have been possible 
some day to bring about such a change of caste. But when 
Prakriti does not release Jlva, but, on the contrary, his 
relationship with Her subsists till the moment immedi¬ 
ately preceding complete liberation, it is by no means 
possible to avoid Her rule. According to the ordinance 
of Guru Prakriti, an unconscious hill or mountain can 
never be the Guru of a conscious man, and thus take the 
place of a conscious human being. But it is also a wonderful

1 Bhaya—this is a common, though to ns a peculiar, classification of 
faculties. Fear is considered inherent in the Jlva's nature, and he can 
no more shake it off than he can shake off the desire to eat and sleep, etc.

' Nigraha. That is. Nature cannot altogether be crushed. It will 
recur. It is only by the slow process of SAdhana that it can be modified.

* Adrishta. That is, the unseen cause of that which makes him

what he is and impels his action. * Karma.* Adrishta. That is, the unseen cause of that which makes him

what he is and impels his action. * Karma.

* The way or practice which he as a member of such caste and 
holding such and such a position in it has to follow.

* That is. Nature has made him AdhikArt for a particular Ach&ra or 
Mantra. Nature here is only the resultant of his previous Karma.

1 That is, from one of the lowest castes into the highest.

M

850

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

freak of Prakriti Herself that one who is himself a man 
can feel ashamed to call another conscious man his Guru, 
but feels not the least shame in calling an unconscious 
hill or mountain such.

Some people, again, conclude that if work is truly done 
by the potency of Mantra, there is no necessity to take a 
Guru. Why should not a Mantra taken by one’s own self 
from the Sh&stra lead to Siddhi ? Although we have in¬ 
directly answered this question while discussing the subject 
of Gurus, yet we ask, Why should not suoh people also 
hold that the potenoy of Mantra 1 is without effeot where 
a Guru is not taken ? For the necessity of taking a Guru 
is as much asserted in the Sh&stra as the potency of a 
Mantra. What sort of faith is it which accepts one part 
of the Sh&stra and rejects another ?The Sh&stra says: “All Japa is based on initiation, 
all Tapasy&* * is based on initiation. It is under the 
shelter of initiation that one should live in Brahmacharyya, 
G&rhastha, and V&naprastha A§hramas.* O Beloved Devi 1 
the performance without previous initiation of Japa, Pflj&,* 
and so forth, is like the sowing of seeds on a rock. As such 
seeds will never bear fruit, nor will such acts. 0 Devi! 
an uninitiate attains neither a good state* nor Siddhi. 
For this reason one should by all means receive initiation 
from a Guru. If a person dies uninitiated, he goes to the 
Raurava Hell. One should therefore take care to receive ' 
initiation from T&ntrik Guru. If a man without being 
initiated by a Guru takes a Mantra which he reads in a 
book, then even a thousand Manvantaras* will not end

1 Mantrashakti. ’ See Introduction and ante.

* See Introduction. * Ceremonial worship.

‘ Sadgati : a better state than that which be possesses.

* A Mnnvantara is the one-fourteenth part of a Kalpa, or day of 
Brahma, which is 4,320,000.000 years.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

851

the sufferings in hell of that worst of men. 0 Queen of 
Devos! initiation taken according to the Sh&stra at once 
consumes lakhs 1 of Bins and crores 1 of greater sins.* * It 
does not become an intelligent person to say that because 
when a lamp is lighted a man can see things for himself 
there is therefore no necessity to light the lamp. If a 
Sadhaka has acquired the necessary ShAstrik competence, 
he can by virtue of Mantrashakti * endow even an un¬ 
conscious image with consciousness.But in order to awaken Mantrashakti * a Guru is, like 
a lamp, necessary. It is true that the work will be done 
by the Mantrashakti, but who but a Guru has the power 
to awaken it? Just as a wick can, when lighted, burn 
and illuminate according to the quantity of its combustible 
substance, but in order to light it another flame is re¬ 
quired, so similarly for the uninitiated a Guru in whom 
there is Divine Power, S&dhana and Siddhi is necessary. 
Such powers, however, exist in conscious beings only, 
and not in unconscious things. Among conscious beings 
also they can exist only in a DevatA who is fully conscious, 
or in a DevatA-like great man. This is why the Sb&stra 
ordains that a Siddha or Sadhaka man should be taken 
as Guru, and not creepers, leaves, hills, or mountains. 
Whatever may be the process, such initiation and Sadhana 
as are spoken of in the ShAstra can never be accomplished 
without a Guru. It is true that the account of a country 
contains descriptions of its roads, but if a person is sud¬ 
denly faced by a danger in the midst of these roads, how 
is he to be saved ? As none but he who is fully acquainted

1 A lakh equals 100,000, and a crore equals 10,000,000.

* Sins are divided into upap&taka (venial sins), pataka (greater 
sins), and Mah&pataka (great sins), though generally the classification 
is into the two last classes.

* The power inherent in. or which more strictly is, Mantra itself.

852

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* The power inherent in. or which more strictly is, Mantra itself.

852

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

with the road oan know how to save him, so, although 
the Shastra contains accounts of S&dhana and Siddhi, yet 
when some superhuman * difficulty arises in the course of 
Sadhana, none but a Guru can save from it. The Shastra 
has therefore said: “ If the Ishtadeva becomes wrathful, 
the Guru can save a Sadhaka; but if the Guru becomes 
angered, neither the Ishtadevata alone nor even all Devat&s 
together can save him.” The meaning of all this will not 
probably be understood in a society without Sadhana, but 
even now in India incidents frequently occur w T bieh reveal 
the truth of these infallible commands which have issued 
from the beauteous month of Bhagavfin Himself. Many 
S&dhakas who have reached a high stage of development 
are yet overthrown by the displeasure of the Guru, not¬ 
withstanding their good equipment of Sadhana, and become 
as low and destitute of lustre as stars which have fallen 
from the firmament. Again, we often see persons without 
Sadhana or purity of body, speech, or mind, without, in 
fact, anything to speak of in the way of Sadhana or 
worship, but who have ever in their mouths the cry, 
“ Victory to Thee, 0 Guru! O Shrlguru! ” both in pros¬ 
perity and in adversity. And yet by the mercy of Her who 
is merciful, that S&dhaka easily acquires by his worship 
of Her in Her aspect as Guru, but for a very short time, 
the fruit which he could not acquire by lifelong worship 
of Her in Her aspect as IshtadevatA. He whose heart con¬ 
stantly rings with the triumphant clarion call to Siddhi* 
through austere Sadhana, whose heroic feet are restlesB to 
dance a leaping * furious dance in the field of battle, full 
of horror and intense darkness, and whose strength of 
Siddhi is ready, and is, as it were, roaring thunder for the

1 Daiva.

' Calling upon Siddhi to come to the S&dhaka.

' Utt&la.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

8531 Daiva.

' Calling upon Siddhi to come to the S&dhaka.

' Utt&la.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

853

shattering of the formidable army of Sangsftra with its six 
divisions, 1 such a man knows that the triumphant and 
heroic son of Bhairavl * * of Victory is unconquerable in the 
three worlds solely by virtue of his possession of the 
Supreme Weapon * of devotion to Guru. He alone who 
is ready to pass through that ordeal of burning fire knows 
that “ the word of Guru is true and everything else is 
false.” The Shftstra says: “ If the Guru gives a command 
which is even contrary to the Tantra Shftstra, that command 
must be considered approved of by the Veda like the words 
of Maharudra.”*

When all earthly means fail: when Shftstra shrinks back 
and Shftstra* is robbed of its power; when even the Devatft, 
with uplifted hand to bless, checks Her indomitable will 
and stands back; when in that terrible and pitiless great 
cremation ground,* where horrors do a frantic dance, there 
is, despite the presence of the all-good Mother, nothing 
in all the infinite world which for our safety we can call 
our own; in that deep darkness of a new-moon night, 
haunted with destructive Bhairavas, Vetftlas, Siddbas, 
Bhutan, Vatukas, and Dftkinls T ; when even the fire of the 
S&dhaka’s austere Tapas* is dimmed, and the firm and

1 Six enemies or sins—lust (Kftma), anger (Krodha). greed (Lobha). 
delusion (Moha). pride (Mada). envy (Mfttsaryya). which are here 
compared to the six divisions of the army, the Sangsftra, which is to 
be conquered.

* The Devi, as spouse of Shiva the formidable (Bhairava).

* Brahm&stra. 4 §hiva.

* There is here a play on the words Shftstra and §hftstra : tb® first 
meaning Scripture, and the second arms, or here religious rites, by 
which the spiritual combat is won.

* Shmaijhana, where corpses are burnt.

* Various terrible spirits whose assaults the Sftdhaka during his 
SAdhana suffers, and resistance to whom proves his worth.* Shmaijhana, where corpses are burnt.

* Various terrible spirits whose assaults the Sftdhaka during his 
SAdhana suffers, and resistance to whom proves his worth.

1 Devotion, austerity, etc. (see Introduction).

854

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

heroic heart of even the great Vlra 1 shakes with fear; when 
even the intricate bonds of the Sadhaka’s posture,* * on the 
baok of the corpse which is awakened by Mantra, is loos¬ 
ened *; when with a fainting heart the Vita 1 feels as he sits 
the earth quake furiously under him; when without means 
of rescue he is about to fall and be crushed; when he is 
overtaken by the swoon of death—if even at such times 
the Sadhaka but freely and with full confidence opens his 
heart but once, and extends his uplifted hands, saying, 
“ Save me, I pray thee, O Gurudeva! ” then the Mother 
of the world, who is Herself the Guru, at once forgets all 
his faults, dispels all his difficulties with Her glance, and 
stretching forth ten hands instead of two, says: “Come, 
my child, there is no more fear,’’ and blesseB the S&dhaka 
by raising him to Her assuring bosom. On that day the 
Sadhaka also puts to its final test the question whether 
Guru is greater or the Mother is greater. 4

Hence 1 say, 0 brother Sadhaka! when will that day 
come to you, the day on which the Guru will merge in the 
Mother’s self, 4 and you will be beside yourself in that mad¬ 
dening joy which is born of that union? 0 All-Merciful 
Mother! turn for once Thy merciful glance, brighten for 
once the fire* in the heart of the S&dhakas of Thy beloved 
Bharata, 1 and grant full success to the S&dhana of Thyself 
as son by appearing before him as his Guru in Thy aspect 
as Father and in Thy aspect as Mother, so that as servants

' Literally, " Hero"; here one who follows the T&ntrik Vlr&chAra.

' Padm&sana, or " lotus-seat,” on the back of the corpse on which 
his 8&dhana is done.

* From fear, or due to the moving of the corpse through force of 
the Mantra.' Padm&sana, or " lotus-seat,” on the back of the corpse on which 
his 8&dhana is done.

* From fear, or due to the moving of the corpse through force of 
the Mantra.

' This idle question will be solved in the realization of their nnity. 
' SvorQpa. • Tejaa. * India

SELECTION OF THE GURU 855

bound to Thee by that grace of Thine we may dance with 
joy and sing:

“ None beseeches Thee, 0 Shyftma1 Thyself fnlfillest 
Thy own desire. Thou weepest also just as Thou laughest 
in the intoxication of Thy happiness.”

There is, however, a class of inquirers into ShfLstra who 
encourage themselves with the notion that they will set 
their minds to Siddhi and Sadhana in old age, after their 
intellect has been matured by knowing, hearing, and as¬ 
similating the views of all Scriptures. From the energy 
which these people display it would seem as if great men, 
such as M&rkan^eya, Dadhlohi, 1 Valir&ja,' and Bhlshma- 
deva, 1 who enjoy eternal life, belong to their community, 
and that death finds no place in their nativity.* * It is with 
an eye to this class that poets have said: It is only 
ignorant boors® who think that they will bathe when there

are no longer waves in the sea."

And for this reason Bhagav&n has, in the discourse 
between the Deva and the Devi in the Kularijata Tantra, 
said: "If Atm& itself does not keep Atma from injury, 
then where in the world is the benefactor who can deliver 
Atma from this sea of Sangsara?(l) He who in this 
world does not undergo treatment for that disease which 
leads to hell, what will he do when with such disease he 
goes to the next world, in which there is no medicine ? (2) 
The supreme truth should be sought so long as this body 
exists. Who is there so perverse as to commence the 
excavation of a well with a view to extinguish a fire which

' Munis.

* Prahl&da's grandson, for whom the V&mana avat&ra took place.

* Hero of the Mahabhflrata. General of the Kaurovas.' Munis.

* Prahl&da's grandson, for whom the V&mana avat&ra took place.

* Hero of the Mahabhflrata. General of the Kaurovas.

* The celestial combinations which are cast upon the horoscope. 
'Varvaras: ignorant, rnstic. The term " barbarian" comes from

this root.

856

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* The celestial combinations which are cast upon the horoscope. 
'Varvaras: ignorant, rnstic. The term " barbarian" comes from

this root.

856

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

has already caught his house ? (8) Like a tigress, old age * 1 
waits with open mouth to swallow the Jlva. As water 
oontinually exudes from a broken vessel, so is the period of 
life being constantly shortened. Diseases constantly inflict 
wounds like enemies laying siege to a house. Hence one 
should as early as possible engage in the working of good 
to oneself® (4). Good work should be done what time there 
is no sorrow or danger, and when the senses are not dis¬ 
abled (5). Time passes in various occupations, but the 
Jlva knows it not. Happiness and sorrow born of the 
Sangsara kill the Jlva, but even then he does not know the 
path of the welfare of Atma (6). How many Jlvas are born, 
fall into dangers, become subject to suffering and sorrow, 
and die ? Even the sight of such does not enlighten the 
Jlva, maddened as he is by drinking the wine of delusion 
as to what is his own good (7). Prosperity is like a dream, 
youth is shortlived like a flower, and life passes like a flash 
of lightning. How can a man feel satisfied who has seen 
all this? (8) The utmost period of a man’s life is a hundred 
years. Half of it is passed in sleep, and the remaining 
half also is made useless to him by childhood, disease, old 
age, sorrow, and other such causes (9). Utterly indifferent 
to the work which ought by all means to be begun, sleep¬ 
ing during the time he should be awake, and fancying 
danger where there should be firm faith—alas ! by what ill- 
fortune is man in this fashion destroyed ? (10) How can 
Jlva, oherishing the fleeting Sangsara so dear to him, live 
without fear in this body as evanescent as a bubble of 
water, and which endures as little as the stay of a bird 
on the branch of a tree ? (11) He seeks benefit from things

1 Jar a (feminine).1 Jar a (feminine).

1 That ia, of coarse, not in the selfish sense, bat in the doing of 
good, which in fact benefits the Self.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

857

which do him injury, thinks the impermanent to be per¬ 
manent, sees his highest good in that whioh is evil, and 
yet does he not see that death is coming upon him ? (1* *2) 
0 Devi! deluded by the great Maya, the Jlva sees and yet 
sees not, hears and yet understands not, reads and yet 
knows not (13). The whole of this world is at each moment 
sinking in the deep sea of time, 1 infested with the great 
alligators of death and disease (14)."

Great is the power of those to make Providence 1 laugh 
who hope to be initiated after they have without aid heard 
and understood, and become learned in that which baffles 
understanding even when understood. To hope to get 
initiated after having studied philosophy, logio, Veda and 
Vedanta, is even more dangerous.

In the Kulfmjava Tantra Bhagavan has said: “ Fools 
bound by the bonds of Pa§hubood 1 fall into the deep well 
of the six systems of philosophy, and fail to know what 
is their highest good * (1). Through ignorance of the 
meaning of the Vedas wrong-headed disputants ever 
wander about scorched by the fire of doubt, knowing not 
that, driven by the waves of time, they live within the 
fearful jaws of death (2). The words of a pandit who is 
well versed in Veda, Agama, and Purapa, but has no 
knowledge of the highest good,* is for others a mere 
infliction. Know his wonjs to be like the croak of a 
crow.* (The nature of the cawing of a crow indicates 
good or bad to men, but the orow itself is ignorant 
of this.') (3) Oppressed by such thoughts as what is

' KAla, which is not translated as death, because death occurs 
below. * Vidhatft, the Dispenser.

1 The Tamasa state of a Pa?hu (see Introduction).

4 Paramartha. * Which may or may not be auspicious.1 The Tamasa state of a Pa?hu (see Introduction).

4 Paramartha. * Which may or may not be auspicious.

* Good or bad fortune may be indicated by the sounds of animals. 
Such a pandit may do good or bad without knowing it. The paren¬ 
thesis is the author’s.

858

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

knowledge and what is knowable, they read Sh&stras day and 
night. But, O Devi! they for ever remain ignorant of the 
supreme truth 1 (4). Many there are who acquire in the 
world a reputation for poetry and rhetoric, but the inner 
life of those fools whose senses are without repose is full 
of care and sorrow (5). The highest good* * is one thing, 
but Jlvas ever strive to picture it as something else. The 
purpose of the Sh&stra is one thing, but they explain it as 
another. They explain with perplexed minds, but do not 
themselves understand what they explain. There are some 
who, without instructions from a Guru, but smitten by 
vanity, read the Vedas and other Sh&stras; but those who 
are possessed of the knowledge of their true meaning are 
very rare. As a ladle does not know the taste of the liquid 
which it serves to stir, and as the head carries flowers," 
but their fragrance is smelt by the nose, so while these 
people read the Sh&stras, the truth they reveal is known 
by good S&dhakas only. Much labour do they give in the 
study of the Sh&stras, but the result of such study is mere 
dispute between themselves (6*9). The foolish Jlva sees 
not the spirit * within himself, but is deluded into study¬ 
ing Sh&stra like the silly herdsman who, carrying the goat 
under his arm, yet thinks he sees it in the shadow which 
it casts in the water of a well (10). Mere verbal knowledge" 
of Sh&stras can never destroy the happiness and sorrow 
which arises from the world of sense any more than the 
rays of light of a pictured lamp can remove the darkness 
of a room (11). Study of Sh&stras by unenlightened" men 
is like seeing by blind men (a parting of the eyelids only).*1 Parnmatattva. * Paramftrthatattva.

a As women and others do, or as the Br&hmana in Paj&puts flowers 
in his tied §hikh&. * Tattva.

* That is, knowledge of the letter and not of the spirit.

* Prnjn&htna. ' Author’s parenthesis.

869

SELECTION OF THE GURU* That is, knowledge of the letter and not of the spirit.

* Prnjn&htna. ' Author’s parenthesis.

869

SELECTION OF THE GURU

0 Devi! to those only who are enlightened are Sh&stras, the 
source of spiritual knowledge (12) Some people stand in 
front, others at the back, some on the left, and others on 
the right of the place where the truth 1 is, and quarrel 
between themselves, saying that the truth is of this kind, 
or of that kind, or of that other kind, and so forth. Even 1 
in the case of a man famous by reason of his education, 
charity, heroism, and other qualities, but who is absent, 
some people say that he is of this kind, some others that 
he is of that kind, and so forth: thus picturing him in 
various ways.* * (In fact, all will admit that the Spirit is 
far from those who dispute whether It is of this kind or 
of that) (13-14).* None has direct knowledge, though there 
are some who have knowledge derived from report (that 
is, to-day men possess that scholastio knowledge which 
enables them to argue with one another as regards the 
various paths spoken of in the Sh&stra. They refrain, 
however, from performing S&dhana, which will give them 
direct and immediate knowledge). 3 O Beloved One ! there 
is no doubt that those who as regard Sh&stra move in the 
dark are indeed far away from its fundamental truths* (16). 
Men desire to know from all Shfistras what is knowledge 
and what is knowable. But, 0 Devi! the Jlva does not 
realize that one cannot reach the end of Shftstras even if 
one were to spend in the pursuit a life of a thousand years, 
much less can they do so in a life of a hundred years (16). 
The Vedas and other Sh&stras are many, but life is very 
short. Moreover, in this life there are millions of hin¬ 
drances. Therefore, one should acquire only the essence of 
all Shastras just as a duok takes the milk out of water with

* Tattva.* Tattva.

* That is, the people may forget the qualities of an ordinary man, 
bat even in the case of a famous one there is dispute, etc.

* Author’s parenthesis. * Mola-tattva.

860

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

whioh it has been mixed 1 (17). An intelligent man should, 
after studying all Shastras, and after acquisition of know¬ 
ledge of their essential principles," abandon them all just as 
one who colleots paddy throws away the husk and straw. As 
he who has been satisfied by a drink of nectar no longer 
cares for food, so one who has known the Spirit * * has no 
longer need of the Sh&stras (18). 0 Lady adored of Vlras *! 
liberation comes from knowledge alone ; liberation cannot 
be had from anything else, neither from a study of the 
Vedas nor from reading of the Shastras. Neither the Vedas 
nor the philosophies are causes of liberation. Similarly, 
no Shastra is such cause. Knowledge alone is the cause 
of liberation. All other branches of knowledge * are (for 
this purpose) fruitless. Better is it to bear even a single - 
life-inspiring * great Mantra taught by Guru than the load 
* of lifeless 1 blocks of wood which are various forms of 
worldly knowledge" (21). Only from the mouth of Guru 
can a Jlva learn the one immutable' Brahman * which has 
been taught by Shiva Himself. Such knowledge cannot be at¬ 
tained through the study of even ten million Sh&stras "(22).

The Shastra not only speaks of the necessity of testing 
the Guru, but also of the need to carefully test the Shishya. 11 
Before initiation a Shishya should live in his Guru's house 
for one, two, three, or four years, according to his caste. 
During these periods the Guru will test the reality of his 
devotion to Gurn and Devata by constantly giving hard 
oommands. Nothing concerning the Shishya’s body, mind,

1 It is able to sip the milk and leave the water, notwithstanding the 
two are together. 1 Tattva pad&rtha. 1 Tattva.

' See ante. * Vidyft. * Sanjlvana.1 It is able to sip the milk and leave the water, notwithstanding the 
two are together. 1 Tattva pad&rtha. 1 Tattva.

' See ante. * Vidyft. * Sanjlvana.

' Literally, " unconscious." * Laukika Vidyfl.

* That is, the Brahman is Nishkriya (activeless), Prakjiti is Sakriya 
(with action). Where there is non-duality there is no action.

“ Advaita-tattva. " Disciple.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

861

and speech should remain unknown to the Guru. During 
these years of residence with their tests the Guru will 
learn all about the Shishya’s whole life. He will test him 
to see whether after Shastrik initiation the Shishya will 
continue in the path of Sadhana as ordained in the Sh&stra. 
We do not know how many Shishyas exist to-day who are 
ready to undergo these tests, or how many are even aware 
of them, nor can we say how many Gurus are capable of 
holding such a test. It appears from the practice pre¬ 
vailing in these days that Gurus and Shishyas have made 
a private agreement between themselves to absolve each 
other of the responsibility of such mutual tests. In con¬ 
sequence of this compact the race of Gurus is to-day being 
exterminated, and the Shishyas, who should properly be 
the ruled, are becoming the rulers. Bhagavan, the Creator 
of all things, has also in the Tantra Sh&stra ordained rules 
for the testing of the Shishya, and has spoken as follows 
of the consequence of their violation:

In the Navaratneshvara it is said : “ A Guru acquires 
fitness to give initiation and a Shishya to receive it, if they 
live together for one year.’’

In the Sarasangraha it is said: “ A good Guru will 
test the Shishya under his care for one year." This test 
is for a Br&hmana Shishya only. In the case of Shishyas 
belonging to the Rlhatriya and other non-Br&hmai^ik 
castes, the test is to be extended over gradually lengthen¬ 
ing periods.In the Rudray&mala it is said: “ Fitness to receive 
initiation iB acquired by a Br&hmana in one year, by a 
Eshatriya in two years, by a Vai§bya in three years, and 
by a ShQdra in four years after, their devotion to Guru has 
been during such period tested.”

In the Kul&rnava and other Tantras it is said: “ If a 
Guru initiates one who is unworthy through desire for

862

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

wealth or through fear, greed, or the like, then the curse 
of Devatft will fall on that Guru, and the initiation given 
by him will be fruitless.

“ It is useless to give initiation to one who is the 
Shishya of another, or who belongs to a bad family, or is 
a knavish, cunning, fraudulent man, 1 or who is vain of 
his learning, or who is disliked by his wife,' or who has 
passed the proper time for initiation, or has any physical 
defect."

“ He who gives initiation improperly, and he who 
receives it improperly, both the giver and receiver are 
cursed by the Devi. Without initiation according to the 
proper method and worship of the lotus-feet of Guru, the 
Shishya will but meet poverty and the Devi’s curse in 
this world."

“ A Guru should first test a Shishya according to the 
rules of Shfistra for the working out of the latter’s Bhoga* * 
and Moksha, 4 and then give him instruction in Mantra, 
otherwise the initiation will be in vain. If through delu¬ 
sion both the Guru and Shishya give and receive instruction 
respectively in Mantra without mutually testing the fitness 
of one another, then both are doomed to the state of a 
Pi§hftcha.‘ Both he who gives instruction contrary to the 
Sh&stra, and he who receives it will, together with twenty- 
one generations above him, go to a terrible hell.”

“ If a foolish Guru gives instruction to one who is 
unpurified,' then all his Mantras are destroyed—that is

1 Dhflrtta.“ If a foolish Guru gives instruction to one who is 
unpurified,' then all his Mantras are destroyed—that is

1 Dhflrtta.

’ Strldvishta. In rites the help of the wife is reqnired, and nothing 
of obo is achieved where there is lack of marital harmony. Moreover, 
his wife to the $hishya should be his house goddess (griha devat&), and 
it is his duty to please her.

* Enjoyment and suffering. * Liberation.

* A low class of unclean spirits.

* Asangskrita. One who has not received the Sangsk&ras.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

863

to say, their potency is lost, just as when paddy-seeds 
are sown in sandy soil their power to germinate is gone. 
As the minister's sin affects the King, or that of a wife 
the husband, so a sin committed by a Shishya affects the 
Guru.” 1

In the Rudray&mala it is said : “ A Guru should forsake 
a Shishya who is ever addicted to vice, lustful,’ given 
over to other passions,' of wicked mind, 4 and evil repute, 
untruthful, laoking in due humility,' wanting in know¬ 
ledge, wisdom, and dull of intellect, neglectful of Vaidik 
duty and of the Ach&ra* * of his A?hrama, ’ irreverent, 
impatient, wrathful, adulterous, of evil mind and thought, 
without devotion, weak-minded, wicked, truthless, who 
does S&dhana with a heart unpurified, full of the defects 
of the Kali age, and spoken ill of by all. 0 Vlra!' if a 
Guru, through hope of wealth or the like, does not abandon 
such a Shishya, then that sinful Guru (more guilty than 
the Shishya) will, as well as the Shishya, be doomed to 
hell. The load of sins earned by that Shishya will, in a 
moment, destroy the Guru’s Siddhi, and at once throw 
him into hell for the undoing of all his deeds. Hence 
let a Guru take Shishyas after careful discrimination ac¬ 
cording to the rules prescribed in the Shastra, otherwise 
he will be doomed to hell for his Shishya’s faults.”

The Time for Initiation

We nowadays find many reputed families of even the 
Br&hmana caste, not to speak of Kshatriya and otherThe Time for Initiation

We nowadays find many reputed families of even the 
Br&hmana caste, not to speak of Kshatriya and other

* The Garu will have to suffer for the $hishya’s sin. ’ Eftmaka.

1 KAm&dipriya. * Eutila, a designing man. ' Avinlta.

* Ach&ra, from the root char (to do)—that is, acts, habits, practice. 
Evil practices are An&ch&ra.

' Stage of life (see Introduction).

* See ante.

864

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

castes whose members, though in no way under the in* 
duence of atheistio 1 principles, and having faith and 
reliance in Dharma," are yet under the impression that 
the command of the Sh&stra in the matter of initiation 
is properly obeyed if a person is initiated some day or 
other of his life, no matter how old ho may then be. It 
is a matter of even greater regret that their Guru families 
labour under the same error. The cause of this is to be 
found in the Guru profession of the Guru families which 
we have described. However that may be, it is admitted 
on all hands that initiation is necessary for the purpose 
of S&dhana, and that its effect is Siddhi. Sadhana is 
performed with the co-operation of the threefold means 
of body, speech, and mind. When bodily functions have 
been fully developed and begun to show themselves in 
the spring shoots, it is then that the wind of the spring of 
initiation has begun to blow. It is to such persons as 
are not initiated at this time that the Sh&stra refers when 
it speaks of persons who have “ passed the proper time for 
initiation " in the above quoted passage, setting forth the 
character of prohibited Shishyas.* The proper time for 
initiation is the age of sixteen. The words of Devi to 
Shrikrishna in the R&dh& Tantra are as follows:“ One should receive initiation with devotion on the 
attainment of the age of sixteen. My Son! for one who 
has not received initiation at that age, even the Sang- 
sk&ra* of taking the name of Hari is fruitless. (It is 
impossible to fully perform Sadhana after the expiry of 
the time for S&dhana, and a Mantra which has not been 
matured by S&dhana does not bear fruit.*) One should, 
therefore, take care to receive initiation at the age of

1 N&stika. ' Religion and doty.

an *e- '" Sacrament." ' Author’s parenthesis.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

865

sixteen, otherwise everything which is done is counted 
but as the work of a Pashu."

For this reason Bhagav&n Maheshvara has said: “0 
Mother of the three worlds! whoever after having travelled 
through eighty-four lakhs 1 of births has received the rare 
human form, yet fails to worship Thee, is like a man who 
rises to the top of a flight of stairs, and then falls down 
again." If a man falls from one of the middle or lower 
steps of the staircase, he probably is wounded; or if he 
falls from one of the higher steps, he is likely to be killed; 
but if he falls from the highest point of the stairoase, he 
cannot escape from being orushed and ground to dust. 
Similarly, if one falls after attaining human birth and 
Br&hma^ahood, which is rarer still, there is no easy escape 
for him.In the Kularnava Tantra it is said: “ What wonder, 
0 Devi! that this earthly body should be destroyed by the 
power of Him by whose power the earth is consumed, 
the Sumeru* is rent, and the Sea is dried up (1). We 
speak of ‘ My son,' ‘ My wife,’ * My wealth,’ ‘ My friend,’ 
but before one has got over this sort of senseless talk 
death seizes the body like a tiger (2). Death seizes a man 
while he is still engaged in doing this thing or that thing, 
or thinking that he will have to do this thing or that 
thing (8). An intelligent man will do to-day the work of 
tomorrow, and in the forenoon the work of the afternoon, 
for death does not wait for the finishing or unfinishing of 
any work (4). Does not Jlva see approaching him before 
his eyes Death’s terrible army of diseases guided by Old 
Age, and with orders from Death himself? (5). Death 
eats man after piercing him with the spit of thirst (desire), 
smearing him with the Ghee of mundane objects,* and

1 A lakh equals 100,000. 
U

' Mountain.

* Viahaya.

$66

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

roasting him in the fire of attachment and dislike (6). 
Death brings all under his rule, both boy or youth, old 
man or child in the womb. The visible world thus remains 
subject to death (7). Brahm&, Vishnu, Maheshvara, and 
other Devas, and all classes of beings, move towards their 
own destruction (disappearance). 1 A Jlva should, there¬ 
fore, be prompt in doing with all his heart such things as 
are calculated to benefit him in this world and hereafter (8).”To him who has faith in such direct statements of the 
Shftstra, and has eyes to see the transiency, under natural 
law, of the physical body, which is but a bubble in the 
visible world of Jlvas, even the sovereignty of the vast 
Universe is as worthless as a blade of grass when compared 
with the value of even half a second of human existence. 
We know not to what benighted region we shall have 
to travel, according to our own Earma, after the disso¬ 
lution of this present body. Even Devas pray to be born 
in Bhftrata-varsha,* * that they may be there liberated by 
birth in a precious human body after forsaking all its 
enjoyments. This is that Bh&ratavarsha, the Aryyft- 
varta, 1 which is the field of liberation and which, as well 
as our human body has been attained, not by our effort, 
but by Her grace. If this time we lose these, who is so 
fortunate amongst us as to dare say that he will surely 
return to this Bh&rata, this Aryy&varta, the land which 
it is hard for even Devas to attain ? Who, too, will dare 
to say that he will also regain this human state and this 
Br&hmapism ? Who can say to what unseen region this 
vaporous cloud will be blown by the wind of some unknown 
fate*? Hence, while there is yet time and the sun shines,

' Author's parenthesis. * India.

' AoT&™rta is the western portion of Northern India. Bh&rata- 
▼arsha is all India, but now commonly used synonymously.

* Adrishta.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

867

the Mother’s son must cease playing, and seek to go to the 
Mother. He must take refuge with all his heart at the 
feet of Guru, that he may find the path in this deep dark¬ 
ness, making himself, according to the command of the 
Sh&stra, the meanest servant of the Guru, in order that he 
may become an object of his mercy.

The Sh&stra itself, the seat of infinite mercy, has 
specified the characteristics which a Shishya must possess 
in order that the desire-fulfilling creeper 1 of Guru’s grace, 
may bear fruit.The Sh&stra itself, the seat of infinite mercy, has 
specified the characteristics which a Shishya must possess 
in order that the desire-fulfilling creeper 1 of Guru’s grace, 
may bear fruit.

For instance, it is said in the Gautamlya Tantra: 
“Born in a noble family: of pure spirit; seeking that 
which is the necessity of Purusha (Purusbarth—the four¬ 
fold object of Dharma, Artha, Kfima, and Moksha* *); learned 
in the Vedas; wise; devoted to the service of parents; 
knower of Dharma* and a doer thereof; attached to the 
personal service of Guru; proficient in Sh&stra; strong of 
body and mind; ever desirous of doing good to Jlvas; 
a doer of acts which bear good fruit in the next world; 
devoted to the service of Guru in speech, mind, body, and 
with his wealth; mindful only of acts the fruit of which 
endure 4 ; with control over the senses; free from sloth; 
free from delusion and vanity; devoted to Guru’s son, wife, 
and so forth as to the Guru himself—of such qualities 
should a Shishya be possessed, otherwise he is but a source 
of trouble for his Guru.”

In the Kul&rnava Tantra it is said: “ O Mother! a Guru 
should not take as his Shishya one who is possessed of 
any of the following or similar faults: He should not

* Kalpnlata

’ Author’s parenthesis—that is religion, wealth, desire, end its 
fulfilment and liberation. ' Religion, duty, etc.

* Not troubling over that which is transient and of no real account.

8C8

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Not troubling over that which is transient and of no real account.

8C8

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

accept one who is born in a family cursed by a Br&hmana 
or almost extinct'; without any good quality on the mater¬ 
nal side; one who has been already initiated by a good 
Guru; an unbeliever* *; imbecile (physically impotent or 
incapable of performing S&dbana)*; with an overweening 
idea of his own learning; having less or more than the 
usual number of or deformed limbs; paralyzed, blind, deaf, 
dirty, diseased, excommunicated, foul-mouthed; careless of 
the rules of dress*; full of faults*; with imperfect limbs, 
gait, and speech; ever inactive; under the influence of sleep 
or drowsiness; lazy and addicted to gambling and similar 
vices; whose appearance does not betoken devotion ; mean- 
minded, wanting in loyalty, and given to exaggerated, 
improper, and obscene talk*; wanting in feeling for others; 
with no will of his own; ready to receive initiation and 
do other acts, not out of any particular desire of his own, 
but at the instigation of others; the mere instigator of 
others (he does not do anything himself, but instigates 
others’); cunning; impure as regards wealth and wife (he 
whose wealth has not been earned in the way prescribed in 
the Shftstra, or whose wife is not married to him according 
to the Sh&stra, or is not chaste)’; given to the perfoim- 
ance of acts prohibited by the §h&stra, and omitting to

1 For this indicates some inherited sin.

1 Pisbanda.

* Author’s parenthesis.

* Svechcbh&veshadhara, who dresses as he likes, neglectful of the 
role* therefor. In $h&stra there are rules for dressing, and for dressing 
at different times and for different S&dhana.

1 Dushita.* Svechcbh&veshadhara, who dresses as he likes, neglectful of the 
role* therefor. In $h&stra there are rules for dressing, and for dressing 
at different times and for different S&dhana.

1 Dushita.

* This is the author’s translation of Vyallkavftdl. By exaggerated 
talk is meant impossible “yarns." It is “improper" where things, 
which may be permissibly said before one person, are not so permissible 
in the case of others— i.g., before parents and women. Achilla is 
obscene.

' Author's parenthesis.

SELECTION OF THE GURU

869

do those which it enjoins; whose habit it is to divulge 
seorets, and to do misohief; of catlike qualities * 1 (as a cat 
takes away an artiole of food from the presence of men and 
eats it in a secluded place) 1 ; self-conoeited; crane-like in 
nature (as a crane appears to be outwardly very calm and 
quiet while all the time it is thinking of destroying others’ 
lives, so this class of man, whilst possessing the external 
appearance of quiet, is yet in his inner self most dan¬ 
gerous) 1 ; a detractor; deceitful; ungrateful; given to spy¬ 
ing into others ’ secrets ; treacherous; rebellious; sinful; 
atatayi (atatayis are criminals of six classes—namely, in¬ 
cendiaries, poisoners, persons who bear arms to injure 
others, who steal others' wealth, or lands, and others ’ 
wives) 1 ; one-eyed; of ill-repute; who bears false witness; 
a deceiver of people; braggart or liar; oruel; indecent in 
speech; talkative; of wrong judgment as regards men or 
things 1 ; quarrelsome; given to rebuking people without 
reason; ignorant; Ch&rv&ka (Nastika or unbeliever) 1 ; a 
bore 1 ; one who slanders people behind their back and 
speaks well of them before their face; or one pretending 
to a knowledge of Brahman which ho does not possess; 
plagiarist; 1 or self-praiser, envious, given to evil-doing, or 
peevish (dissatisfied with his own self through being of an 
excessively angry temperament).”*In the Gandharva Tantra it is said: “ Duly possessed 
of the aforesaid qualities; very sweet of tongue; stainless 
in body and speech ; wearing white doth; pure in habits ’; 
inoapable of speaking ill of others, or of showing disrespect

1 M&rjj&ravpitti. * Author's parenthesis.

* Euvioh&ra, wrongly judging people or things.

* Through his talk. V&gvidamvaka, literally, ” one who punishes 
others by his talk.”

1 Vidy&chaura. * Atmakrodhana; author's parenthesis.

* $hucbi.

870

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

to Devat&s; never covetous of others’ food, wives, and 
land; unwilling to give pain to others; kind to all oreatures; 
sharp-witted ; a master of his senses; a believer 1 * devoted 
to Guru; pure; calm-minded; without avarice, constant 
in his friendships; assiduous to obey the Guru’s words; 
ever firm in devotion to Guru, Mantra, and Devatft; a 
Shishya should be possessed of such qualities, otherwise 
he will surely be a source of trouble to his Guru.”“ A Shishya should, after bowing to this Guru, sit 
beside him, and leave his presence only with his permission. 
He should serve his Guru always with the desire to satisfy 
him, and should obey his orders with pleasure. He should 
never tell a lie or talk idly before his Guru. A Shishya 
should not give way to lust, anger, greed, displeasure,* 
loud laughter, flattery, fickleness, crookedness, remorse, 
before his Guru; nor should he have relations with him by 
way of lending, borrowing, selling, or buying. For Guru 
is Shiva Himself, and any attempt to establish with Him a 
relation other than that of worship with prayer and 
obeisance is likely to lead the Shishya to think of him as a 
mere man. To know that there is no distinction between 
IsbtadevatA and Mantra, between Mantra and Guru, and 
between Guru and Atm&. This, 0 Beloved 1 is the order 
iu which devotion shows itself. He who disregards his 
Guru’s words and performs prayer and worship * according 
to his own notions thereof will never attain Siddhi in 
either Japa 4 of Mantra or worship of Devatfi,. One should 
daily worship one’s Guru according to the Sh&stra by 
Japa or Mantras. The seat, bed, olothes, ornaments, 
shoes, shadow, and wife, and every other thing belonging 
to or connected with the Guru should be worshipped as

1 Astiko. * MAna. . 1 CpAsanA-

Recitation " (see Introduction).

SELECTION OF THE GURU

8711 Astiko. * MAna. . 1 CpAsanA-

Recitation " (see Introduction).

SELECTION OF THE GURU

871

though they were parts of the Guru himself. 1 One should 
never walk aoross the Guru’s bed, seat, shoes, umbrella, 
bathing-water, or shadow. At the sight of Guru one 
should be cheerful and full of great joy, but should regard 
his lotus-feet with awe and cautious eyes. There is not 
room enough in this book to quote even a hundredth part 
of all that is ordained in the Sh&stra as to the duties of a 
Shishya towards his Guru. It will, therefore, be useless to 
go further into that point here. The very faot that in the 
Sh&stra Guru has been spoken of “as Shiva Himself in 
visible form," thus giving to even the lsbtadevat& a 
secondary position, will of itself enable intelligent Sftd- 
hakas to understand what are a Shishya’s duties towards 
that most worshipful Supreme Devat&.

1 Literally. “ as his Vibhfttis ”—that is. as belonging to or connected 
with him; something of him may be said to enter into them. More¬ 
over. true respect is 6hown to a person when all which belongs to or is 
connected with him is respected.

CHAPTER XV

WORSHIP IN GENERAL* *

PCjA*CHAPTER XV

WORSHIP IN GENERAL* *

PCjA*

Many people nowadays in a community which lays claim 
to great wisdom believe that image-worship was introduced 
and is maintained in the Aryya Society for those only 
who are very weak—that is, those who belong to a very 
low order of spirituality. We have little leisure to devote 
our attention to the words of such men as discuss these 
matters from the outside, just as a non-Aryya look at 
the Durg&-pQja festival in an Aryya house from the 
courtyard outside the Chaudimaudapa.* We are servants 
of the Sh&stra, and as such are bound to preach what 
the Sb&stra has clearly established. We shall therefore 
now see what Pdj& (worship) is according to the Sh&stra. 
It is a matter of great regret that even amongst preaohers 
of Sh&strik principles there are many who are under 
the impression that “worship of the Deity with form 4 
or image-worship* is only a means of producing steadi¬ 
ness of mind.* They opine, therefore, that for him who

' S&dh&rana-up&san&tattva.

* Paja is ceremonial worship with articles of worship (upacb&ra), 
generally before images. Up&san& has a wider signification, being 
worship in its widest sense, including spiritual practices of all kinds, 
whilst the S&dhoka is in the realm of dualism.

' Place in the house in which worship of images is performed.

* S&k&ra up&san&. 1 Marti pajft: Marti (form or appearance).

' Manahsthira.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

873' Place in the house in which worship of images is performed.

* S&k&ra up&san&. 1 Marti pajft: Marti (form or appearance).

' Manahsthira.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

873

has acquired such steadiness there is no longer any 
necessity for worship of the Deity with form or image* * 
worship. According to this argument we mu6t suppose 
that there is an arrangement between the Devat& appear¬ 
ing with form or present in an image and the worshipper 
by which the latter’s connection with the former endures 
only so long as his mind is not steadied, and that when it 
is so the Devatfi. ceases to exist for him. At the commence¬ 
ment and end of the worship of the Deity with form 1 the 
S&dhaka forgets himself and offers at His feet everything 
which he calls ‘My’ or *1.’" As regards this worship 
Bhagav&n Himself, the Creator of all things, has in the 
Kul&rnava Tantra said, “ Obeisance to the faith from 
which springs Siddhi in all things and the force of which 
makes even earth, wood, and stone bear real fruits.’ 
Reference is here made to the whole-hearted faith by the 
attraotion of which Devati Himself, who is all conscious¬ 
ness, is drawn towards and made to appear in uncon¬ 
scious images* made of earth, wood, or stone, or in 
Yantras,* and grants real fruits to S&dbakas in the form 
of Siddhi. If, then, worship with form founded on a 
S&dhaka's firm faith is compatible with the belief that 
the Devata with form is false and is merely a means of 
steadying the mind, then I know not what kind of worship 
with form it is. Secondly, from such a wrong conclusion 
contrary to Sb&stra and opposed to all experience, it also 
follows that Poja, Patha, Japa, Homa, Sbfi-nti, Svastya- 
yana,* and the like, are nothing but lost labour, for we are 
told that the only effect of worship of the Deity with

* SAk&ra upAsanA. ' PratimA: Prati * likeness.

* Diagrams (see Introduction).* SAk&ra upAsanA. ' PratimA: Prati * likeness.

* Diagrams (see Introduction).

' That is, ceremonial worship, reading, and recitation of the sacred 
texts, repetition of Mantras, sacrifice into fire, rites for working good 
and dispelling evil.

874

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

form is the establishment of steadiness of mind. We 
need hardly say that it is also lost labour to proceed to 
disprove a conclusion which on examination displays its 
own profound infidelity. Our object, however, in intro¬ 
ducing the subject here is to reveal the mystery of the 
problem as to “ how in course of worship of the corporeal 
the incorporeal is seen."

The Sh&stra says a S&dhaka should engage in medita¬ 
tion 1 by gradually concentrating* his mind on all parts 
of the Ishtadevat&'s body; that is to say, the S&dhaka 
should, by repeatedly fixing his attention on the parts of 
the Ishtadevat&'s body one by one, from the sole of His 
foot to His face or from His face to the sole of His foot, 
acquire such concentration as will during unperturbed 
meditation reveal to his mind's eye the whole body of the 
Devatd at one and the same time. If this be done, 
meditation on the Deity with form will gradually be- 
* come both profound and steady. But remarkable, indeed, 
must be the profundity of meditation and coucentration 
of those who from this come to the conclusion that the 
Formless will appear of itself in the course of meditation 
on the Deity with form in the sense that the Formless * 
will drive away the Deity with form. 4 The Sh&stra has, 
of course, said that when the mind has become steady 
through meditation on the gross image it may meditate 
on the subtle image. When the mind has been perfectly 
centred, then the Devat& is revealed in both Her gross

* Dhy&na ' Dhiraijl. ' Nirikira.* Dhy&na ' Dhiraijl. ' Nirikira.

SaltAra. There are a class of people who think that forma are 
nothing, and, being pnrely imaginary, disappear when the real Formless 
One appears, and are merely useful to prepare the way for this; whereas 
the forms are the real bodies of tho DevaU. just as the physical body 
is the sheath of the &tm&. The DevaUt does really appear in these

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

875

and subtle aspects;’ that is to say, in course of meditation 
on His playful* * image such subtle aspects as omnipresence, 
possession of M&yA, state of being above Mftyft, and so 
forth, are perceived in a subtle form as Shakti of conscious* 
ness, just as such gross aspects as love for devotees, all* 
mercifulness, almightiness, and so forth, instinct with the 
outcome of play, are perceived; and this is whac actually 
happens to a Sudhaka when he attains Siddhi. We are 
unable to make out how it can be concluded from this that 
the Devata with form vanishes and the formless appears. 
It is, of course, not a matter of wonder that to those whose 
meditation on the Deity with form is from the very com¬ 
mencement based on the notion that “ the form is false, 
such form will vanish by the force of their singular devo¬ 
tion ; nor is it impossible that when the form has vanished, 
an incorporeality which is non-existence* itself will be seen 
as a matter of course/ What is to be here regretted is that 
mere men should without hesitation seek to establish as 
Sh&strik this sight of an incorporeal nothing which their 
fate* has made inevitable for them/

In the Shrl m ad bh&ga vat a Bhagav&n fiimself has said 
to Uddhava, the crest-gem of devotees: “Just as gold is 
freed of its dross only by fire, and also gains its own 
(bright) ’ appearance by the heat of that fire, so a Jlva s 
Atm& is cleansed of the filth of Karma and desire by means 
of the Yoga of devotion 8 to Me, and is also transformed

* 1 Sftkshmatattva and Sth&latattva. 1 LU&maya.

* Abh&va. ** 1 Sftkshmatattva and Sth&latattva. 1 LU&maya.

* Abh&va. *

* The author is here satirical. In the case of him who does not 
perceive the Devatfl with form, and thinks it to be nothing, it is quite 
natural that the Formless, whoso form it is, should be nothing.

*■Adrishta.

1 They have not the fortune to bo able to perceive the truth.

* Author’s parenthesis. * Bhakti

876

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA*■Adrishta.

1 They have not the fortune to bo able to perceive the truth.

* Author’s parenthesis. * Bhakti

876

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

into My Brahman aspect by means of that same Bhakti- 
Yoga. Atma becomes purer and purer by hearing and 
uttering sacred hymns* in My praise. The devotee whose 
heart is thus purified by devotion to Me sees with increas¬ 
ing power the supersensual * subtle truth as the physical 
e}e when painted with oollyrium is enabled to perceive very 
minute objects. Just as the heart of a person who con¬ 
stantly thinks of wife, son, and other mundane objects, be¬ 
comes attached to them only, so the heart of him who con¬ 
stantly thinks of Me becomes merged in Myself. Hence, 
0 Uddhava! give up thinking of the objects of the world, 
false and made of Mayd as they are, like objects of desire 
got in dream, and rest your mind, full of thoughts of Me in 
Me.” ^ Again, on the subjeot of meditation* He has said: 
“A Yogi will call to mind within the oirole of fire in the 
lotus of his heart this form* of mine, beneficial in medita¬ 
tion namely, a form full-limbed, calm, of beautiful features, 
with four long* and beautiful arms; a graceful neck and a 
fair forehead; with divine and gracious smile; decked with 
brilliant ear-ornaments * in his two well-shaped ears; dressed 
in yellow or dlep blue; brilliant with the beauty of the 
Shrlvatsa mark r ; bearing a conoh shell, a discus, a club, and 
a lotus in his four hands, and a garland of wild flowers 
on the breast; with lotus-feet shining with the lustre 
of bejewelled anklets*; illumined with the light of the 
Kaustubha gem; ornamented with shining crown, brace¬ 
lets, waist-chain, and armlets; beauteous in all limbs, 
pleasant; his countenance sweet with grace, with tender 
eyes and form fair to look upon. He will meditate on this

] ° 4thA - * AtTndriyn.

t Dhy&na - ' Bflpa. * Long arms are a sign of strength.

^ Makaraa and Kugdalaa, ornaments of the ear.] ° 4thA - * AtTndriyn.

t Dhy&na - ' Bflpa. * Long arms are a sign of strength.

^ Makaraa and Kugdalaa, ornaments of the ear.

’ A lock of hair on the breast of Viahpu

* Nopara*.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

877

plet&ing Brahma-form by fixing hia mind on all its limbs. 
Drawing his senses, such as sound, touch, sight, taste, and 
smell from their objects by means of his mind, 1 and with 
the aid of Buddhi,' the charioteer, the S&dhaka will bathe 
his mind completely in the waters of love for Me. After

that he will draw that mental vision* * hitherto spread over

all my limbs to one place and hold it there. It will not 
then be necessary for the S&dhaka to think of anything 
else.* He will only meditate upon My countenance, on 
which plays a soft and sweet smile. When the mind can 
uninterruptedly and without distraction contemplate that 
countenance, he will withdraw his single-pointed mind 
and fix it in the ether.* Then, after perceiving My (afore¬ 
said) subtle manifestations' in ether, in the mansions, 1 or 
in the whole of the infinite ether, he will draw his mental 
faculty, which has had the entire ether as its object, and 
again rest it in Mo as the Param&tmft. Then it will not 
be necessary to meditate on anything.' The Yog!, thus 
in Sam&dhi,* will see me as the Param&tmft of all Jlvas as 
his own Atraft; as one light mingled with another, and 
not different from it. In a Yog!, who has thns by intense 
meditation attained Samidhi,* the three forms of error 
namely, object of knowledge, knowing, and action "—will 
soon be subdued.”

, A S&dhaka will here understand that Upftsanft 11 exists 
only so long as Dhy&na u exists. In the next stage, which

' Manas. * Intellect * Chittavjritti.

* Previously the mind has been thinking of various attributes of

the DevatA—His person, dress adornments, and so forth: now it 6imply 
gazes on His countenance. Vyoma.

* Vibhfttis. 1 Kaksha—thus a solar system would be such.the DevatA—His person, dress adornments, and so forth: now it 6imply 
gazes on His countenance. Vyoma.

* Vibhfttis. 1 Kaksha—thus a solar system would be such.

* For the mind and all else now becomes one with the ParamitmA.

* Ecstasy, or the fourth Trulya state.

" Bhrama. u Dravya, jnAna, kriyA. ** Worship.

u Meditation.

878

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

» is Sam&dhi or Nirvana, the mental faculty 1 is lost iifthe 
womb of Prakjriti. The Yogi, who has thus lost his mind,* * 
forgets even the Jlv&tm& as something separate from the 
Param&tmft. Who, then, is it who perceives the incorporeal 
aspect in the one and only substance of consciousness at 
the time when even the sense “ I exist ” is lost, when the 
senses, mind, and even the “ I,” do not exist ? It is indeed 
difficult to solve this problem. We call this state not 
“ seeing the incorporeal,” but Videba-Kaivalya.* We may 
admire the energy of those who in the hope of their becom¬ 
ing incorporeal in the circumstances described above, in¬ 
voke the incorporeal, and see shapeless dreams for a hun¬ 
dred births: but to such we would also say that there is 
no need to try to make arrangements to become incorporeal, 
for He who will one day make this entire corporeal universe 
incorporeal will not bide long to make either you or me 
incorporeal when the occasion for doing so arises. But 
• know it for certain, that so long as the Deity with form 
does not appear before you, not even the Devatft without 
form can dissolve your own bodily form and give you 
Kaivalya.* So much about meditation, concentration, and 
trance.*

Next comes the process of PQja.' We have more than 
once shown that there can be no Up&sanft* of anything 
incorporeal. Now, wbat is image-worship ? 1 We must also 
see whether image-worshippers are really fools of a low 
order of spirituality who are led by blind faith. We can¬ 
not call that a criticism of image-worship which comes

* Manovritti * Manas.* Manovritti * Manas.

* Bodiless Kaivalya—that is, Kaivalya in which all trammels of 
body or limitation disappear, or fall liberation.

* Because in such case the worship is of no avail.

* Dhy&na, Dh&ranA. Sam&dhi. * Vide ante.. ' MOrtipOji.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

879* Because in such case the worship is of no avail.

* Dhy&na, Dh&ranA. Sam&dhi. * Vide ante.. ' MOrtipOji.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

879

from those who have no inner knowledge of the subject. 
Rather it is a criticism of what they understand to be 
image-worship; for PQj& and so forth are things of the 
Shastra, which lays down the mode of PQja, and the 
person competent to perform Pflj& is a Sadhaka. On the 
other hand, the critic’s criticism is contrary to what the 
Sh&stra and Sadhaka say—“ It is Sadhana and Siddhi," 
say the Sh&stra and Sadhaka. “ It is play and amuse¬ 
ment,” says the critic. Now, in this conflict of views how 
can we disbelieve the word of those who by their prac¬ 
tice have intimate knowledge of the matter, and believe 
those who have nothing to do with Shastra, Sadhana, or 
Siddhi? Image-worship is not to be understood from out¬ 
side. Only the worshipper understands it. The critic, 
therefore, is nothing but a critic of his own intelligence 
and education. One who does Poja and one who merely 
observes it are not, surely, the same thing. One who 
looks at a sweet-shop can tell us the shape, colour, and 
quantity of the sweets there, as also whether they are 
hot or cold to the touch; but can he tell us whether 
their taste is sweet or bitter, sour or pungent? Howso¬ 
ever clever a man may be, he only can tell us thereof 
who has tasted them with his tongue. Again, one who 
himself knows the taste of a sweet can never, despite his 
personal knowledge, make another who has never tasted 
it realize its taste even by the use of a thousand forms of 
speech or other device. Similarly, how can a man without 
faith know that supersensual truth which a capable S&dhaka 
realizes when he establishes a Devat&'s life in his image by 
the powerful potency 1 of Mantra ? The Shastra has nowhere 
said that one may as one wishes perceive the presence of

1 $bakti.

880

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 $bakti.

880

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Devatft in the street, market, or at the bathing ghftt* * just 
as one desires. It has said, if such and such things are done, 
such and such things will happen. Now I ask, How much 
of those things have you and I done ? The Sh&stra has said

* that it is only when a Sftdhaka has long served his Guru, 
after having been tested and initiated by him in accordance 
with Shftstra, and when he has fully understood the princi¬ 
ples of Sadhana and become able to awaken the potency * of 
Mantra through the preliminary Shftstrik rites, that he be¬ 
comes competent to cause by means of that Mantra the 
appearance of the conscious Devatft in Yantras, images, and 
so forth, made of such unconscious substances as earth,

• stone, and the like. Now, brother critic, tell me truly in 
the name of Dharma, opening for once the door of your 
heart, what have you done of all this ? At the outset you 
are deeply suspicious, a great unbeliever. You have not 
the right even to serve Guru or receive initiation, not to 
speak of performing Sftdhana and worship,* yet such as you 
are you proceed to criticize the worship of Devatft in images, 
which can only be done by competent Sftdhakaa, who have 
knowledge of super-worldly truths. 4 What can be greater 
impudence on your part than this ? Unfortunately, in this 
land of madmen there is none to call a madman mad, and 
so, O brother critic I fortunately for you there is none to 
criticize you. But do not for this reason think to-day that 
the earth is the capital of mad men only.

The subtle criticism of critics and the goodness of 
Dayftnanda’s * party have nowadays given birth to a few

1 The steps leading down to the river or other water down which 
those who go to bathe, etc., descend.

' §hakti. * Bhajana. * Tattva.

* Founder of the “ reformed ” Hinduism known as the ixyya Samlj.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

881' §hakti. * Bhajana. * Tattva.

* Founder of the “ reformed ” Hinduism known as the ixyya Samlj.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

881

new words, 6uch as image-worship, 1 doll-worship,* * and so 
forth. In consequence of the wide currency which has been 
given to such language by the community of unbelievers, 
many senseless Hindus, both illiterate and literate, now 
take pride in publicly calling themselves image-worshippers 
or idolaters. Perhaps they think that these words are 
approved of the Shastra. But how regrettable is this when 
wo consider that such words cannot issue from the mouth 
of a man, the son of Manu, unless he has been born in a 
non-Aryya family with a non-Aryya disposition. The words 
when we consider them reveal a mine of profound infidelity. 
Many authors write, “ The practice of worshipping images 
has been prevalent in the Aryya community from ancient 
times.” One might suppose from this that we had merely 
to do with the worship of images without reference to 
Mantra, Devatft, or Sadhana. Others, fond of far-fetched 
meanings, say that image-worship is like the modern practice 
of showing respect and honour to the lifeless statues raised 
in memory of lamented deceased persons; just as if Devatfis 
were all dead, and we (shameless men who have no faith in 
the next world and yet call ourselves Aryya) were showing 
our gratitude to them before their images. Alas! O Bhaga- 
van! when will the eyes of this class of born-blind educated 
fools be opened ? When will we be saved from all such inter¬ 
pretations? How long will this generation of Ghatotkacbas,* 
sprung from the seed of Bhlma in the womb of Hirfimvft, 
last? Half-castes are governed by the Dharma* of their

1 PratimflpOjfi. or mflrti-pflj&.

1 Pauttalikatl. Pattali means doll.

» Nftstikatft. Because it is not the pratimft or the mfirtT. still less a 
doll, which is worshipped, but the Devnta in the heart, which in the 
prftpapratishtba rite is transferred to the image and worshipped.* Demon R&ksbasa. son of Bhlma (one of § the Pftpdavas), and 
HitfimvA, a B&kshasl. Law.

M

882

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

mothers, therefore is it Bh&rata’s ill fortune that so-called 
religious principles* * propounded in the nineteenth century 
vomit only infidelity. But the matter does not rest even 
here. For is it not said that Aryyas who worship the 
Deity with form are idolaters,* that idolatry is their 
Dharma, or, in other words, that those who worship the 
Deity with form worship idols, images of Devatfts being 
those idols; that worship of the Devatft with form is like 
the play of ignorant children with dolls, and that those 
who perform such worship are as ignorant as such children. 
0 critic ! you consider yourself to be a wise man. Will you 
tell me that those Sftdhakas, crest-gems of the race of the 
wise, worshippers of the Devatft with form, were ignorant 
fools—men who produced* the Vedas, Tantras, Puraijaa, 
systems of Philosophy, Astronomy, Ayurveda * and Dhanur- 
veda ? * Why ! it is the partaking by you of the mere leav¬ 
ings of their food in the pages of books which makes you 
so proud of your knowledge and wisdom.* Is it not to 
invite death for insects like you and I to attempt to-day to 
leap across that sky-kissing untraversable mass of light/ 
whioh they with all the profundity of their knowledge, 
philosophy, and science took this worship to be ? Hari! 
Hari! to call the most worshipful image of Devatft, the 
object of the Sftdhaka's S&dhana an idol.* To call the 
Yantra * (in whioh presides the Devatft who is conscious¬ 
ness itself) unconscious and inert. And yet it is only

1 Adhyfitmika tattva. ' Puttalikfi.

1 That is, in the sense that the 8criptnres are revealed to, and 
through, and spoken by the Itishis, who arranged them. In the higher 
sense the Veda is apaurusheya—that is, without author.

* Medical $h&stra. ' Scripture of warfare ; literally, archery* Medical $h&stra. ' Scripture of warfare ; literally, archery

' What these men have put in their books is regarded as tbeir food. 
So great are they that the so-called critics are proud of a knowledge 
gained second-hand from the leavings of such food.

' Tejas. * Puttali. ' Diagram (see Introduction).

WORSHIP IN GENERAL 883

because an indistinct shadow of that Devata of con¬ 
sciousness is cast upon you that you belie\e \our own 
body to be conscious! When as an ignorant little child 
you sleep you may easily think that you are devoid of 
oonsoiousness. But will a grown-up child also (who can 
call and awaken you * *) think so ? To the Father or the 
Mother of the Universe you and I are similarly ignorant 
children, and hence to us His or Her image appears un¬ 
conscious. But he who can call and awaken Him or Her 
—that is to say, he to whom Mother KulakundalinI the 
Devi, who is eternal wakefulness, has given the power to 
call and awaken Her by awaking Herself in him—to him 
the true image of Her body can never appear unconscious 
for by the grace of Her who is consciousness he himself 
has been transformed into consciousness itself. You and I 
are unconscious * ourselves, and so to us Her image also 
appears unconscious. It is neither Her fault nor the 
fault of Her image. It is the fault of the Karma done by 
us in past lives.

A discussion is impossible on the subject of the diverse 
fruits of worship, for it is difficult to explain the character 1 
of fruits to a person who has no knowledge of the different 
kinds of taste. For this reason we shall endeavour to see 
by a consideration of the mode in which worship is done 
whether the community of Aryya S&dhakas—the worship¬ 
pers of the corporeal,* the worshippers of the Deity with 
form*—are ignorant fools of a low grade of spiritual com¬ 
petency or not.

According to the Shftstra it is the nature* of Asuras T to 
be made dumb' with anger at the very mention of images

1 Author’s parenthesis.According to the Shftstra it is the nature* of Asuras T to 
be made dumb' with anger at the very mention of images

1 Author’s parenthesis.

’ Ja<?a ; not, of course, wholly so. but in the sense that we do not 
possess true consciousness, which perceives the Brahman ifc all things.

' Tattva. * Mttrtimayl. * S&k&ra upfisana. * Dharma.

* The demoniac enemies of the Devas. ’ Literally. “ unconscious."

884

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Tattva. * Mttrtimayl. * S&k&ra upfisana. * Dharma.

* The demoniac enemies of the Devas. ’ Literally. “ unconscious."

884

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of Devatfi. A feeling of enmity against Devatfi can never 
arise in a person’s mind unless there is an Asura dis¬ 
position in bis character and family. Again, without the 
appearance of such a feeling of enmity one is never liberat¬ 
ed from the 6tate of an Asura. Just as according to 
natural laws when fever is about to leave a man his body 
perspires, so when the time comes for liberation from the 
state of an Asura a feeling of enmity against Devatfi is 
6hown, for neither religious merit nor sin bears fruit in this 
world unless it grows enormous. Perhaps you think, “ the 
image is not Devatfi. Why, then, does this body of fools* * 
laugh or weep?” I ask, 0 prince of learned infidels! why, 
then, do you become angry at the mention of images of 
Devatfi, ? It is true that an Asura becomes angry at the 
mention of the names of Devatfi, but according to you an 
image is not Devatfi. Why, then, do you become angry at 
the mere sight of it ? Anger is a Yikfira J as much as laught¬ 
er and weeping are. It may be that the sight of a Devatfi’s 
image causes in you anger, a rfijasa vikfira characteristic of 
a D&nava s state; while it causes in me joy, laughter, or 
tears of joy, Sattvika vikara® * characteristic of manhood. 
Piakfiti, constituted of three Gunn®, is the Mistress of those 
Gugas, and according to the proportions in which they 
occur in different persons She reveals different character¬ 
istics in them. If the sight of a Devat&’s image had not 
produced any Vikara in you, 4 then yon might one day say, 
“ Why do these people laugh or weep ? ” But when you 
are wont to become angry at the sight of an image, you 
would do well to think that that which can make one person

That is, the author and those that think with him.

| Transformation of a thing from that which is its original nature-That is, the author and those that think with him.

| Transformation of a thing from that which is its original nature-

* Tl I at U * transformations due to the action of the Eajaa and 
Sattva Gunaa respectively. J u

‘ That is, had you yourselves been apathetic.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

685

angry can also make another person langh or weep—that in 
the unconscious image there is some such powerful consci¬ 
ousness as makes your eyes (which look upon all other 
persons and things with feelings of love, mercy, and brother- 
liness) red with a feeling of enmity. You, of course, do not 
believe that the image is the Devata.- But just consider 
that if the mere giving the image the name of DevatA can 
cause in you a Vik&ra 1 so contrary to human feelings, what 
a great Vik&ra of joy and felicity ought to be produced in 
those who see in that image the true light* * of DevatA. With 
your physical eyes you see the worship of an image, but he 
who worships sees, with his superhuman vision, the full 
appearance of Her who is consciousness itself in that un¬ 
conscious instrument,* the image. During the period 
extending from the invocation of life* until its final dis¬ 
posal * the earthen image is in the eyes of the Sadhaka, 
which have been cleared by the collyrium paint of Siddhi, 
consciousness itself.* It sheds the light, which is Brahman, 
of the beauty of the Mother of the Universe, the Brahma- 
may!, full of ever new charms.

This is the S&dhaka’s point of view. But if you, with¬ 
out SAdhana and full of scepticism, know and really believe 
the image to be unconscious, then what a mean, hateful, 
cowardly disposition you show in becoming angry with it. 
Why become angry with a thing which you know is 
unconscious and without power ? Why, like Asura Kangsa,

1 Vide ante. * Pratyaksha jyotih.

* Yantra. * Into tbo image by the SAdbnka.1 Vide ante. * Pratyaksha jyotih.

* Yantra. * Into tbo image by the SAdbnka.

* Visarjana ; the withdrawing of the mental image from the objec¬ 
tive image, with the SanghAra (dissolution, Mudra when it is broken 
and thrown away. It must bo disposed of ns a dead body. The root 
Vispja«to abandon, to leave, to give up; and Visarjana is allowing the 
Deity invoked to go from the image at the conclusion of worship.

' As collyrium clears the eye, so Siddhi or success in worship enables 
the SAdhaka to see in the earthen image, Consciousness.

886

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' As collyrium clears the eye, so Siddhi or success in worship enables 
the SAdhaka to see in the earthen image, Consciousness.

886

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

do you proceed to break the image by dashing it against 
the ground ? 1 You want to grasp and dash against the 
ground that whioh even a Prince of Yogis cannot keep 
confined in the temple of his heart! * * You want to des¬ 
troy one whom Kangsa could not subdue! * What can 
be a greater impudence on your part than this ? With 
a frown at insignificant insects like you the Daughter 
of Nanda* will return to the Vindhya mountain in order 
to destroy the conquerors of the three worlds, such as 
Shumbha and Ni$humbha; but in order to crush your 
arrogance She will leave behind that manifestation* of 
Hers,* who descends in Nanda's house in Gokula for play 1 
in the world of men. Had not Kangsa believed that he 
would receive from the eighth ohild of Devakl* the 
punishment he deserved for his sins, would he have pro¬ 
ceeded to destroy her sons and daughters ? This example 
makes us think that it is not that you do not believe 
in the divinity of images, but that it is in the fear of 
having to suffer the cruel torments of hell in repentance 
for your sins that you proceed to break them. This is 
the distinctive characteristic of your faith. From such 
fear you believe in images, but the pity of it is that, like 
the memory of an intoxicated man, this belief leaves you 
the moment you become blinded with a feeling of enmity. 
When under the influence of anger only you proceed to 
break them, you fail to realize whom you are going to 
break. 0 oritio! none can break or make Her. Whom

' This Asura dashed the children of his sister Devaki on a stone, as 
he had been told that one of the children would be bis destroyer.

' So great is the DevatA that even great Yogis cannot hold Her.

' That is, Krishna.' So great is the DevatA that even great Yogis cannot hold Her.

' That is, Krishna.

Devi aB Togam&yft incarnated as daughter of Nanda, who gave 
tier to Vosudeva in exchange for Krishna, who was left with Nanda.

* Vibhati. • That is, Krishna. * LUa.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

887

do you want to frighten by breaking the outer image ? 
We, too, break it after worship. May be that you dispose 
of it within your house while we dispose of it in water. 1 
We dispose of the outer image outwardly and guard the 
inner image in our heart. The light of the image whose 
substance is consciousness, which we brought out from 
within us and attached to the image made of earth, we 
take back into ourselves after we have done with the 
worship of this earthen image. Nothing is thus broken 
and done altogether away with as in your case. As the 
outer temple * * held the brilliance of a beauty filling the 
world, so also does the inner temple hold the grandeur of 
an incomparable beauty. Our Mother is without as She 
is within, and within as She is without. By my thus 
moving Her in thought from within to without and from 
without to within the door of my heart will become fully 
opened. On that day all invocation i and final dismissal* 
into and from the image will cease for ever. The day on 
whioh I shall see the inner image when looking at the 
outer image, and the latter when I look within, when it 
will be the same within as without—on that day the 
Mother will bring my own coming and going* to an end, 
and the restless dancing Kali* will seat Herself and rest 
in peace; unless it be that the blissful DevI, T finding the 
path open both within and without, runs from sheer joy 
hither and thither with even greater activity than before. 
But even if She does, I shall not on that day call or bring 
Her. In Her own joy She will come, go, dance, sing, and 
play of Her own accord. I shall only beat time and dance1 After worship the image is thrown into water, such as the sacred 
Ganges. * Mandapa.

* Av&bana, when the Goddess is called into the image.

' Visarjana, see ante. * In the Sangs&ra. ' Nrityak&ll.

' Anandamayl.

888

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

with Her, crying out, “Victory to Mother." O brother 
critio! thou who art also the Mother's son, by the Mother's 
grace may you not be deprived of this joy. It is She 
whom you know as Mother within who graciously issues 
thereout by Her own power,* * and thus gratifies the 
S&dhaka. Of this power 1 we shall give an account after¬ 
wards. Here we shall say this much, that it is a mistake 
to think that to an Aryya S&dhaka the want of an outer 
image means the want of an image within. On the con¬ 
trary, it is because there is an image within that it has 
been revealed without. It is only after we have the inner 
image that we commence the outer worship. Even in the 
absence of an outer image the S&dhaka is able to carry out 
worship by means of the inner image.

In the Shrlmadbh&gavata Sh&stra Bhogav&n has 6aid: 
“ Images are of eight kinds—namely, of stone, wood, 
iron (metals),* pastes * of clay, and such other substances; 
made of jewels, painted; and mental." In the presence 
of any of the seven kinds of images made of stone and the 
like, the mental imago should be first worshipped with 
mental articles of worship before worship is done of the 
outer image with material articles. But in the absence of 
any of those seven kinds of images, those who do external 
worship must bring from within themselves the inner im¬ 
age and worship it. It is in this connection that R&ma- 
pras&da, 4 the Prince of S&dhakas, has said: “ Pras&da* says,

1 My heart is a mould made of spotless lotuses. Mayest 
Thou dance after Thou hast been cast in that mould and 
made mental.’ ”'

1 §hakti. * Author’s parenthesis.

* Pastes of sandal and the like.

B&mapras&da Sen. the celebrated Bengali poet (born. 1718; died,1 §hakti. * Author’s parenthesis.

* Pastes of sandal and the like.

B&mapras&da Sen. the celebrated Bengali poet (born. 1718; died,

l775 |- * That is, B&maprasAda.

That is. by being moulded in the heart of tho SAdhaka,

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

889

In the KulArgava Tantra, the Lord of Devas has said: 
“ 0 Great Devi! Sadhakas devoted to the KarmakAij<Ja 1 by 
the combined force of Bhakti,’ and Mantra give form to 
Her who is above form* and the supreme Shiva Himself; 
and worship Her between the sacred pit and the sacrificial 
ground, 4 on winnowiDg fans (even now in many places 
Aryya women design images of DevatAs on winnowing fans 
with vermillion sandal and DurvA grass, Atap rice* in 
PQj£s and Vratas of Mafigalachaijdi, Kulacha^dl, 6 and many 
other Devatas);’ on walls (generally amongst Aryyas in 
the north-west images of DevatAs are painted on walls)/ 
in PajA, Vrata, and other religious rites*; in Manilas * 
(Sarvatobhadra and other Maijdalas mentioned in the 
ShAstra), 1 on slabs (metal, wood, or stone slabs),’ in the 
head w and in the heart (1). Although the milk of a cow 
is produoed from the blood which circulates through her 
whole body, it flows only from the teats of her udder; so, 
although the universe-pervading DevatA is present every¬ 
where, Her true aspect 11 is realized in images only (3). If 
an image be in all respects similar to the aspect of DevatA, 
as described in the ShAstra, if the articles of worship 1 * are 
oolleoted with care, and if the Sadhaka has unswerving

I The Scripture dealing with ritual.

' Devotion. * RApAtita. * Sthandila.

' There aro two kinds of rice prepared from paddy. In the first the 
paddy is boiled and the husk is removed. In the other the husk is 
removed without such boiling by exposing the paddy to the sun. This 
is atap. and the other is called " siddha."

' Devla. ’ Author's parenthesis.

' As to Vrataa, see Introduction.' Devla. ’ Author's parenthesis.

' As to Vrataa, see Introduction.

* A geometrical figure frequently drawn or made with various 
colours. The difference between a Mandela and a Ynntia is that the 
former is used in the case of any DevatA, whereas a Yantra is appro¬ 
priate to a specific DevatA only.

“ Brabmarandhra. 11 SvarApa.

II OpachAra, such as water, flower, incense, lights, food, etc.

890

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA“ Brabmarandhra. 11 SvarApa.

II OpachAra, such as water, flower, incense, lights, food, etc.

890

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

faith, then that Devat& is sure to enter that image (4). 
Cream so long as it remains in a cow’s body does not 
nourish anyone, but for those who draw milk from the cow 
and collect the oream from it by their personal exertion in 
the way of boiling and so forth, that cream becomes a cause 
of physical nourishment. Just as in this way only the 
cream becomes a cause of physical nourishment, so, 0 Para- 
me§hvarl! the Devata residing in the body of every person 
becomes the oause of the S&dhaka's liberation in consequence 
of worship only. Without such worship She does not grant 
the desired object to the S&dhaka (5-6). For this reason the 
Devata should be worshipped by invoking into Her image 
Her life, senses, and everything else appertaining to Her, 
and by establishing them in such image with Tantrik 
Mantras ; otherwise, without such establishment of life, 1 * 3 the 
worship will be ineffectual (7). If the establishment of life 
in an image is performed according to the Sh&stra, the 
worship will bear the great fruit of liberation, even if it be 
defective as regards other Mantras and rites.' Such defects 
will be cured by the S&dhaka’s prayer to the Devat& for 
forgiveness (8). Karma* done in violation of the rules 
laid down in the Sh&stra will be wholly fruitless in con¬ 
sequence of the fault known as Karmabhanga* (9). Karmas 
falling short of, or going beyond, the rules laid down in 
the Sh&stra will never bear fruit. The fruits of all good 
Karmas* performed according to the Sh&stra will always 
be as visible as a fruit or other thing held in one’s hand 
(10). Hence, in Japa, Homa, PQj&', and the like, Karma*

1 Pr&papratish{hfi..

That is, other than those relating to the Prapapratiahth& rite.

3 Rites.

Violation of the order of worship. * Rites.

__,. BeP«titicm ' of Mantra, the sacrifice into fire and ceremonialThat is, other than those relating to the Prapapratiahth& rite.

3 Rites.

Violation of the order of worship. * Rites.

__,. BeP«titicm ' of Mantra, the sacrifice into fire and ceremonial

worship fsee Introduction).

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

891

performed in strict conformance with Shastrik rules will 
please the Devata, and secure both the fruits of Bhoga and 
Moksha 1 for the Sadhaka (11). O Spouse of Shambhu ! 
futile is the worship and so forth done by those who do 
not know the nature ' of the Devata, Yantras, and Mantra- 
shakti * * (12). Yantras are all Mantras,' and Devata is the 
Shakti of Mantra itself. Therefore the Devata is at once 
pleased if She is worshipped with Mantras according to 
the Shastra (13). A Yantra is so called because it subdues 
(Niyantraija) lust, anger, and other faults of Jlva and the 
sufferings caused thereby. This Yantra is a source of 
satisfaction to Devata when She is worshipped in it (14). 
As the body is for a Jlva and as oil is for a lamp, so is 
Yantra the seat of eternal play for all Devatas (15). Henoe, 
the principal part 1 of worship* is to adore the Para- 
me$hvarl, after the making of and drawing of Her image and 
Yantra. But, O My Beloved ! the worship should be per¬ 
formed according to the rules, and after the S&dhaka has 
received full instruction therein from Guru (16).”

Wherever Shastra has spoken of images, it has in this 
way similarly referred to the Mantra and Devata. It has 
also said: “ In this way the Sadhaka, who has controlled 
his Prana,’ should, haviug through meditation beheld his 
Ishtadevata in his heart, contemplate upon the unity of 
the image of the Devi both within and without.” The 
process for so doing will be described in its proper place 
later. Here only this much should be understood that it 
is the inner image whioh must be brought out and estab¬ 
lished in the outer image. Our critio will now consider

1 Enjoyment and liberation.

' Svarfipa. ' Potency of Mantra.1 Enjoyment and liberation.

' Svarfipa. ' Potency of Mantra.

4 M&ntramaya. The Yantra is the body of the Devata, who is 
Mantra. „ * Kalpa.

* Phja. ’ That is, his breath by Prftn&y&ma.

892

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

whether it is not the height of folly to try to do away with 
worship of the Deity with form by breaking its image. Be 
the image, mental or material, we break it every day after 
worship. But in spite of so much breaking we cannot 
really break it for a single moment. Whenever or wherever 
I look, within or without, I ever see the Devi, whose sub¬ 
stance is will, as Bhagav&n or Bhagavatl, in whatsoever 
form She is pleased to appear. I see my Mother, the mad, 1 
disordered girl, dancing with gentle movements of her 
body, now taking up the flute instead of the sword, or 
again seizing the sword instead of the flute, or yet again 
at times making both the sword and the flute into one in 
Her band; mingling Her laughter with Her dancing; now 
loosening and now binding up Her hair. If I sleep, she 
awakens me by coming Herself and playing on the flute. 
If I commit any oflenoe, She raises Her sword and, smiling 
gently, threatens me with it. What infidel* * is there who 
can break this image ? Who in the three worlds has the 
power to break the image to which my heart is bound with 
such a deep love ? The outer image with which you are 
concerned is nothing but a reflection of the real one. So 
long as the inner image, which is thus reflected, is not 
broken, what will you gain by breaking its reflection ? The 
fair and transparent moon is reflected in the clear bosom 
of a river. The light of its golden beauty is borne upon 
the innumerable ripples raised by the gentle stirrings of 
the evening wind. If like foolish children you and I 
proceed to strike at the reflection with our sticks, think 
you that we shall thereby break the moon itself ? Mistaken1 Pigla. as already stated (see ante), the English word *' mad " 
fails to convey the meaning of the word “ pflgl&." for in Bengali it is 
tinged with a feeling of tenderness, and persons so called are often 
groatly loved. The term denotes rather a person of eccentric and 
amiable character, and is akin to the Persian Dew&n&.

* Pashatjda (heretic, miscreant).

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

893* Pashatjda (heretic, miscreant).

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

893

as we are, the agitation of the water may lead us to think 
that the moon has been shattered into a hundred or a 
thousand fragments; but, 0 brother! wait but a moment, 
and you will see that when the water has again become 
calm the full moon shines as fully there as ever. Then 
you will understand that the moon which is agitated by 
the waves is only a reflection of and not the moon itself. 
The moon appears in the water because the rays of the 
moon in the heavens have reached it. 0 Brother! you 
energetic child! the moon in the heavens will not be broken 
until the little arms of dwarfs such as you and I can reach 
through the firmament where the moon light plays and 
touch the lunar orb itself. I therefore ask you, 0 brother 1 
what is the use of striking at the reflection if you cannot 
touch that which it reflects? The external image which you 
see before a devotee is not merely such, nor is the image 
(which has risen in the sky of the devotee’s heart) of Her 
who plays on the breast of Shiva and stirs in the hearts 
of devotees a mere outward thing. That image of Brabma- 
mayl, which is reflected in the river of the devotee’s 
love-laden eye, shedding the light 1 of Brahman on the play¬ 
ful lucid waves of feeling; that image of Her who, though 
the one and only Ishvarl, is reflected in multiple innumer¬ 
able waves in the eyes of countless devotees, is not a mere 
outward thing. Were anyone to break that inner image, 
it might become him to say one day: “I shall do away 
with the worship of the Deity with form by breaking Her 
image.” If to-day you and I proceed to break an outer 
image with the cudgel of our own violent infidelity, do 
you think it will be really broken thereby? Never! If, 
however, the eye of the devotee is hurt, sweet tears of devo¬ 
tion will fall from them, the sight of which will stir the 
hearts of all men. But, then, instantly before your eyes

' Jyotih.

894' Jyotih.

894

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the deep waters assume a calm, gentle, and tranquil aspect. 
The agitation of the water does not cause the moon’s re¬ 
flection to disappear, On the contrary, the clear moon-beams 
like garlands of light dance and play on every ripple. 
Similarly, your blow will not drive away the Devat&’s image 
from the devotee's eyes. On the contrary, the great Shakti 
of the mental Devata will play on every ripple in the 
water of the tears of the devotee’s eye. But before your 
own ej T es the consoling peace will shortly descend and 
calm the tears. Then instantly you will see that Brahma- 
mayl, who dwells in the hearts of devotees, has again 
fully appeared without; and then, seeing the displayed and 
fearful nature of Her gentle, sweet laughter in the presence 
of the devotee, and the vanity of our effort to break that 
image, it will seem to you as if the victorious queller of 
Mahisha* is to-day laughing peals of laughter after She 
crushed the pride of Danavas under the toe of Her left 
foot and has bestowed the dominion of heaven * on Devas. 
0 Mother of the world! let me see, O Mother! that day. 
By Thy kindness teach me that unbelief which causes 
Thee, 0 Mother (whom even Princes of Yogins seldom 
attain in meditation),' to appear in person in the field of 
battle with assumption of a visible warrior form. Teach 
me that unbelief which causes Thee in Thy intense love 
to place on the hard neck and shoulder of the restless 
Danava* the beauteous lotus-foot, which is the treasure of 
the heart of Mahe^hvara.' 0 Mother, full of unbounded

' The Asara. ' Sv&rga. * Dhyftna.

* Son of Danu, enemy of the Devos.' The Asara. ' Sv&rga. * Dhyftna.

* Son of Danu, enemy of the Devos.

' It is the Devi’s love which leads her to punish the Asuras. As the 
latter have thns drawn the love of the Devi, even though it takes the 
form of punishment, the author expresses himself to be envious of the 
Asuras, enemies of the Devos, who are thus more fortunate than great 
Yogis (6ee verses 8 and 9 of the Hymn to JagadambikA in Chapter six 
of the Devlbh&gavata Pur&na, translated in A. and E. Avalon's 
Hymns to the Goddess '*).

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

895

meroy! there is nothing in the three worlds to compare 
with this mercy of Thine. It is by reason of this that 
Thou art, O Mother! the Mother of the Universe. What 
better proof of Thy mercy is there than this, that Thou 
hast no enemy in the Sangsftra other than Thy son ? 
Hallowed is the meroiful Mother! Hallowed art Thou, hal¬ 
lowed is Thy mercy, and still more hallowed is Thy inimical 
son ! Brother critic ! as you are my friend, I tell you with 
tears in my eyes that everyone is hallowed in this Sangsara, 
which is the Mother’s dominion. But you and I, unfor¬ 
tunate as we are, seem to be the most unhappy of those who 
are unhallowed. We are neither faithless nor faithful. We 
have neither been able to become enemies nor sons. In 
deep sorrow and with tears, therefore, Bay: Tell me, 
Mother! where am I to stand, Mother ? ”She alone knows where I am to stand. But I am here 
to say what I have heard about the path. I shall, there¬ 
fore, tell you one or two more things to-day. I hear that 
you are given to saying at every word “ image-worshippers 
are worshippers of unconscious matter. * From this it in¬ 
directly follows that you are a worshipper of consciousness 
itself. It is not at all strange, but rather natural, on your 
part for you to say that image-worshippers are worshippers 
of unconscious matter, for “ a person speaks only of that 
whioh he understands,” and no one can blame him for so 
doing. There is, therefore, nothing to say to you on the 
score that you call image-worshippers worshippers of un¬ 
conscious matter. But we shall to-day ask you one or two 
things, because you are a worshipper of Brahman Himself, 
Who is consciousness itself.

You know that the verbal root bpngha means to per¬ 
vade, and that Brahman is the name of Him who pervades

• That is. She looks on them as Her sons, although they are Her 
enemies. * 3*4*-

896

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA• That is. She looks on them as Her sons, although they are Her 
enemies. * 3*4*-

896

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the Universe. You are also in the habit of saying that 
Brahman is consciousness itself. Being a worshipper of 
that Brahman, with what heart, 0 brother! can you call 
an image unconscious matter ? Is it an expression of faith 
on your part to say that He Who pervades the Universe, 
Who pervades everything and exists everywhere, Who is 
equally present everywhere from Heaven to Hell,’ does not 
exist in an image ? It may, to a certain extent, become a 
dualist to say that ‘ unconscious matter and consciousness 
are two different things.’ But being a worshipper of unde- 
finable* Brahman, with what face do you admit the exist¬ 
ence of that which is called “unconscious matter” as 
distinct from consciousness? \ou may, of course, escape 
by saying, be it unconscious matter or consciousness, I 
do not care for worship at all.’ But in that case also you 
are in another way bound to admit that there is nothing 
which can be called unconscious matter. You call these 
things unconscious matter in which you do not see any 
sign of consciousness, as, for instance, earth, water, wood, 
stone, and so forth. Now, I ask, is it because there is really 
no consciousness in these things that you regard them as 
unconscious, or is it because you yourself have not the eye 
to see them otherwise? Many people, again, say that such 
things as plants, trees, shrubs, creepers, and so forth, are 
unconsoious. Perhaps they think that eating, sleeping, 
fearing, and having sexual intercourse, 1 are four inseparable 
marks of Jlvahood, and that all such things as are without 
them are unconscious. The Sbastra, however, says that 
plants, creepers, and so forth, are not unconscious things, 
but unmoving Jlvas. Manu says : “ Through faults arising

1 SvarRa to Naraka.

Nirvi^hceha—that is, to whom no limiting attribute can be given.

’ See ante.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

8971 SvarRa to Naraka.

Nirvi^hceha—that is, to whom no limiting attribute can be given.

’ See ante.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

897

out of the body—that is to say, sins committed by means 
of the body—men become unmoving things (are born as 
plants, shrubs, creepers, and so forth) 1 ; that is to say, 
the punishment for such sins consists in this, that in their 
subsequent birth such men are unable to do any desired 
work by their physical exertion. Through sins commit- » 
ted by speech men are born as birds or beasts; that i6 
to say, the punishment for such sins consists in this, that 
in their subsequent birth these men have not the faculty 
of speech. As the result of sins committed by mind, men 
are born in the lowest castes. The object of such punish¬ 
ment is that in their subsequent birth they may not be 
endowed with broad intelligent* * minds. It is merely in 
order to determine where we stand that we quote this pas¬ 
sage from Manu. In fact, there are many others. Hundreds 
and thousands of reasons and authorities may be given and 
quoted in this connection, but we are afraid of digressing. 
What we want to show by the above passage is that plants, 
creepers, and so forth, are not unconscious or inert, but 
living things, that they, too, are born and die, share happi¬ 
ness, prosperity, and adversity, and so forth, in a remarkable 
degree, with, however, this difference from other living 
things, that while we can clearly observe the changes which 
are caused in the latter by happiness and sorrow, we do not 
perceive similar changes in the case of trees, creepers, and 
so forth. There are two reasons for this difference. First, 
the force of consciousness* which exists as Jlva in a plant 
or creeper is completely overpowered by the force of M&y& 4 . 
and, secondly, the changes which are caused in plants and 
the like by happiness and sorrow are so fine that our senses f 
gross as they are, have not the keenness and subtlety to

1 Author’s parenthesis.1 Author’s parenthesis.

* Their minds are enveloped by the Tamognpa. * Chit$hakti.

4 M&y&$hakti.

<7

898

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

perceive them. Only Rishis, who have attained Siddhi 
by Tapas 1 and see all things, and Devas and Devayonis • 
(Yakshas, Kinnaras, Vidyadharas, and so forth), have the 
power to perceive them. For this reason we read in Pauranik 
and similar stories that whenever some great person has 
through a curse taken birth as a plant or the like, Rishis or 
Devas have, on knowing when the curse comes to an end, 
delivered him from life as an unmoving thing. Shrlkrishna 
Himself bears evidence of this in the incident of the break¬ 
ing of the trees Yamala and Arjuna.* *

Next, as to stones and metals. It is not necessary to 
deal separately with the subject of metals, for metals exist 
in mines in the womb of mountains, and there is no differ¬ 
ence between stones and metals as regards consciousness 
or unconsciousness. A mountain is a great living thing, 
and the greatest * of things that spring out of earth. It is 
in mountains that the earth’s power of bearing burden is 
mainly seated. Hence mountains are called “ supporters of 
the earth.” * Mountains rise, grow, and become decayed. 
They rise by piercing through the earth; they grow by 
extending to the earth ; and, again, during the time of their 
decay they gradually sink into the womb of the earth. As a 
mountain rises by penetrating through the earth, inch by 
inch, in thousands and hundreds of thousands of years, so 
it also disappears into the womb of the earth inch by inch

1 Austerity, devotion, etc. (see Introduction).

* Spirits emanating from the Deva* and the Deva world. Deva eva 
yonib nid&nabhat&t yasya.

'There is a tree called Arjuna. $hrikrishi?a broke a twin Arjuna- 
tree, and two Devayonis sprang forth, who had been cursed by a Rishi. 
The author here speaks of Yamala and Arjuna, but Yamala means twin, 
and it should bo " twin Arjuna trees." * Literally, crest-gem.' Barth is that which is the supporter of everything, and it is 
mainly through the mountains that it is so, for they are the greatest 
masses of earth, and the mountain ranges are thought to be the back¬ 
bone of the earth.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

899

during the same periods. A mountain has also birth and 
death. In a dead tree there remains no vitality. The stones 
of a dead mountain become rough and destitute of moisture, 
like the dry wood of a dead tree ; and as does such wood, 
they break into pieces under light blows. Dealers in stones 
who are versed in the science of the subject unhesitatingly 
admit this. They can also show, on an examination of them, 
which mountain is alive and which is dead. But perhaps 
you are shaking your sides with laughter on hearing that 
mountains have life. But can you say that to-day the 
mountains are not laughing on seeing you laugh in this 
way ? Can you show any substance in the world which 
haB no life, and yet grows and decays ? The longevity of 
a mountain is lakhs of crores * * of years, thousands of 
Yugas, 1 hundreds of Manvantras," while you and I are 
not reckoned as even insignificant bubbles in the vast sea 
of time. How is it possible for us in a single life to probe 
into the question of consciousness or unconsciousness of a 
mountain by observing its birth and death ? Who can say 
how many times 4 you and I are to be re-inoarnated during 
the one life-time of a single mountain ? It does not there¬ 
fore become us to determine the question of consciousness 
or unconsciousness of a mountain, though we cannot see 
its birth and death. We, however, daily see the growth 
and decay of small hills, and from this you can very well 
realize whether a mountain is conscious or unconscious.

Then comes the question of earth. Consciousness of 
earth is still more subtle—indeed, as subtle as any matter

' A lakh equals 100,000, and a crore is 10,000,000.Then comes the question of earth. Consciousness of 
earth is still more subtle—indeed, as subtle as any matter

' A lakh equals 100,000, and a crore is 10,000,000.

* A Yuga or age is a portion of a Kalpa, or day of Brahma of 
4,820,000,000 years (see next note).

* The Kalpa is divided into fourteen Manvantras, which are again

subdivided into seventy-one Mohayuga, each of which is composed of 
Yugas. * Literally, " how many eighty-four lakhs of times.”

900

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRAsubdivided into seventy-one Mohayuga, each of which is composed of 
Yugas. * Literally, " how many eighty-four lakhs of times.”

900

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

can be. It is extremely difficult to discover it with the help 
of physical perception alone. It can be ascertained only 
by means of Divine 1 powers attained by S&dhana. It is 
not therefore capable of explanation. Besides this, even 
if we think that the earth is unconscious, we must consider 
whether it is really so; whether earthly atoms are seats 
of the play of unconscious forces * only, or whether the 
force of consciousness lies in a subtle form within them 
and achieves its purposes by means of these unconscious 
forces which it has made its servants. Let us assume 
that earth is the seat of the play of unconscious forces 
only. But there, where I saw yesterday a stretch of 
barren earth, I see to-day the sprouting of new tender 
shoots. Whence has this vitality of conscious living things 
oome to the inert atoms of unconscious earth ? This is 
the first stage. The subsequent stages are still more 
wonderful. Before our eyes the shoots grow into stalks 
and leaves and gradually bear fruit. When the crop 
becomes ripe, it is eaten by men. beasts, and birds, and 
is digested in the fire of the stomach. The essence of 
the digested crop is then transformed into fat, semen, 
and blood in the body. In the womb again the semen 
and blood are digested and grow into the living, conscious 
ohild in the womb. However learned we may be in various 
Sh&stras, we are unable to realize this directly, the mother 
alone being able to do so. Gradually when, after ten 
months and ten days, the ohild issues from the mother’s 
womb, we then see that the eating of an unconscious crop 
has produced this conscious fruit. If the semen and blood 
had not the force* of consciousness in them, whence has 
consciousness come to the child ? If the orop which has 
been eaten had no consciousness in it, whence did consci¬ 
ousness come in the semen and blood? If the tree had not 
' Daiva (super-physical). * Ja«?a $hokti. * Shakti.WORSHIP IN GENERAL

901

consciousness in it, whence did consciousness come in the 
crop ? And if earth had no consciousness in it, whence did 
consciousness come in the tree? Now, critic, who talks of 
unconsciousness ! tell me, is it the earth which is uncon¬ 
scious, or is it you and I who are so ? Is it not a sign of 
one's own unconsciousness to consider the earth as earthen 
only, when it is thus full of consciousness in a subtle form. 
What can be more idiotic than to hold that the soil of the 
earth is unconscious matter, when men, beasts, birds, 
insects, trees, shrubs, mountains, and all else derive their 
consciousness from the force of consciousness contained in 
every atom of the earth, and to ridicule away with ideas 
that which has puzzled the brains of even philosophers ? 
The philosopher has said :

“ Unconscious semen becomes instinct with conscious¬ 
ness during its stay in the womb. Gradually hands, head, 
and various other organs spring up. Again, that same 
semen which has thus grown into a Jlva takes on success¬ 
ively the attributes 1 of childhood, youth, old age, infirmity, 
and so forth, one after another, and sees, eats, hears, smells, 
and moves about. What greater magio can there be than 
this?”

Here it may be objected that, if worship can be per¬ 
formed with earth, stones, wood, metal, and such other 
things, having regard to the Brahman-consciousness exist¬ 
ing in a subtle form within it, why cannot it be performed 
with the bodies of men, beasts, birds, and so forth, in which 
that consciousness is more manifest ? We ask in reply, Who 
is it who says that worship is not performed in this way ? 
In fact, it is so performed; the worship of the supreme 
Brahman appearing as Guru is done towards the human 
body of the Guru, Kumari* is worshipped in the bodies of

1 Cpftdhi.

' The Devi aa a virgin.

902

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA1 Cpftdhi.

' The Devi aa a virgin.

902

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

virgins. The Spouse of Shiva is worshipped in the animal 
body of jackals, and it is in the form of the Brahmini bird 1 - 
that the daughter of Daksha grants Siddhi to a Sadhaka’s 
Sadhana. All this is worship done with other bodies. But 
a Sadhaka must first of all worship his Ishtadevata in his 
own body, and then he will be entitled to do worship of Her 
in other bodies. Worship with portions 2 of Brahma-chait- 
anya 1 leads to perfection 1 of Brahma-Jn&na* and not to the 
• perfection of Brahman-worship.' For the purpose of Brah¬ 
man-worship it is necessary to worship a form which has 
been assumed by the Devatfi. to show Himself to Sfidhakas 
and to bestow favours on them. This image, again, must 
not be a production of the Sadhaka’s imagination only. 
Such images alone should be worshipped as are images of 
forinB actually assumed by Her. The worship also must 
be performed in the method approved of by the Shastra, and 
then Sadhana performed according to the Shastra is sure to 
lead to Siddhi/ Mantra-Shakti * wields sole authority where¬ 
ver Siddhi is concerned. In Sadhana with Mantra the 
Devata's real form is revealed by the Shakti of the Mantra. 
Hence the only form which I should meditate on is the 
form which is the subject of the Mantra in which I am 
initiated. In my own self I can meditate on that form for 
a very short time only. But so long as this meditation does

1 The Brahmini Rite (Rshemangkarl) is worshipped.

3 Angsha. ' Brahman as consciousness. * Siddhi.

' Brahman knowledge, or spiritual knowledge.

' By worshipping the objects in which the Brahman exists, a man's 
knowledge of Brahman may be perfected ; but, considered as worship, 
it is not tho worship of Brahman in its entirety, which is only accom¬ 
plished in the case of Avat&ras on the earthly or spiritual plane, such 
as the Mabiividy&s.

’ Fruition.

* The potency of Mantra, or rather §hakti as Mantra.

903’ Fruition.

* The potency of Mantra, or rather §hakti as Mantra.

903

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

nofc develop into perfect Sara&dhi, 1 I have not the power to 
hold that true form of Her constantly in my heart. It is 
therefore as an aid to this end that the same form is w 01 - 
shipped outwardly in images. Secondly, unswerving medita¬ 
tion is impossible at the time of worship. 1 am the wor¬ 
shipper, She is the worshipped, and to worship is my duty^ 
No worship is possible without this three-fold knowledge. 
Moreover, when we make our various offerings we are think¬ 
ing of these things. Single-pointed meditation is never 
possible when so many different forms of knowledge crowd 
together in the mind. For this reason there can be no outer 
worship without the establishment of an outer image.

It may, however, be asked, Why should the Shakti, 
which is Her real aspect, appear in the outer image at my 
desire. That is a different question. On the one hand, 
images made of earth, stone, and so forth, are given the 
forms which Mantraghakti has revealed in the Sh&stra, 
so that the condition is immensely favourable, instead of 
being unfavourable to the appearance of that true Shakti 
in them. On the other hand, Mantrashakti will awake 
by its own force and unite the Brahma-tejas in the heart 
of the Sadhaka with the Tejas in the outer form of the 
Devata, and then the two Tejas will together burn like a 
sacrificial fire, accepting the offerings made by the Sadhaka. 
What is there in this for you or I to object to or raok

our brains over ? %

Mantra alone, which is the mediator in the affair, is 
responsible for it. Mantra will, by its own power, bring 
divinity * * to the image; you and I need not be anxious 
about it. It is for this reason that Mantrashakti * is at the

1 Ecstasy.* or tho attainment of the tnrlya consciousness (see 
Introduction).

' That is. of worshipper, worshipped, and duty to worship.

* Devatva. * Sec ante.

904

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Ecstasy.* or tho attainment of the tnrlya consciousness (see 
Introduction).

' That is. of worshipper, worshipped, and duty to worship.

* Devatva. * Sec ante.

904

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

root of all S&dhana. Mantra can, by becoming one only 
Ishvara (that is, supreme over all), cause such events by 
means of its super-worldly power as the three worlds or 
the universe cannot accomplish by their united effort. It 
is because Mantra possesses such wonderful power, that 
you and I, mere men though we be, are able to worship 
Devata. The Shastra has, therefore said: “ If the wor¬ 
shipper has strength of Tapasya 1 (that is to say, if his 
Mantra is conscious), 1 and if there is an abundance of 
offerings (that is to say, if such offerings inspire the 
Sadhaka’s heart with single-pointed devotion to the Devata),’ 
and if the image represents the true form of the Devata 
(that is to say, if at the sight of the image the Sadhaka’s 
mind and eyes sink in the sea of its beauty, sweetness, and 
gracefulness),' then the Devata readily approaches that 
image.’’ In order to gain for oneself the different Shaktis 
which Brahmamayl has put in different Yantras * * in this 
house of the Universe, such as river, sea, mountain, tree, 
shrub, creeper, and so forth, it is necessary to worship Her 
in these Yantras.* This is the ground of Her worship in_ 
jackals, BrAhmiuI kites, cremation grounds,* dead bodies, 
women,* bael-trees, ashvattha trees, aparajita flowers, cows, 
bulls, Brahmanas, places of pilgrimage, fire, and so forth. 
Opportunity offering, we shall try to explain the principles 
of this subject in its proper place. Here this much only

1 See ante.

* Authors own interpretation. ' Instruments.1 See ante.

* Authors own interpretation. ' Instruments.

In order to acquire the §hnkti of Hers, which is manifested as 
rivers, mountains, etc., it is necessary to worship Her under those 
aspects. ^ This refers to minor 8iddhis. Thus it is said that when 
Rima Krishna Parnmahangsa was with another Sadhaka travelling 
to D kkshine?hvara on a dark night, this Sadhaka turned hiB back to 
him. and light issued from it. It would be said that that power was 
gained b> Agni (fire) Sadhana.

* §hma$hanas.

* $haktis.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

905

should be understood, that in whatever Yantra or image 
She may be worshipped, it is the worship of Herself in 
that form. 1 For this reason even Ved&ntik Da^dls,* * who 
take refuge with knowledge only, have said in the Paflcha* 
dashl : “ In the Vi^hvarQpa portion* of the Purusha Stlkta, 4 
it has been said, from Brahma to a blade of grass 
everything is a limb of the vast * macrocosmic body of 
Bhagav&n (1). Ishvara, Sutrfttmft,* Virata, Brahma, Visbiju, 
Rudra, Indra, Agni, Vighna, 1 Bhairava, Mairala, Marika, 
Yaksha, Rakshasa, Br&hmana, Kshatriya, Vai§hya, Shfldra, 
cow, horse, deer, bird, Ashvattha, banian, mango, and 
other trees, barley, paddy grass, and other crops, water, 
stone, earth, wood, axe, spade, and so forth — all are 
Ishvara. When worshipped as I§hvara they grant fruits 
according to the Shaktis, inherent in their respective 
Yantras 8 (2-4). The fruit of the worship will be according 
to the Yantra and the mode in which the worshipper 
performs the worship. The difference in quality which are 
found to exist in these fruits are caused by differences in 
the character of the Yantras of worship and of the worship 
itself, according as it is S&ttvik, Rajasik, or T&masik.* But 
liberation can never be attained without a knowledge of the

1 Svardpa Vibbati— e.g., if a tree be worshipped as Devata, it is not 
the tree which is worshipped, bat the Devi in the form of a tree.

* A sect of ascetics.1 Svardpa Vibbati— e.g., if a tree be worshipped as Devata, it is not 
the tree which is worshipped, bat the Devi in the form of a tree.

* A sect of ascetics.

a Section dealing with the macrocosmic appearance of Bhagavan.

* The Vaidik Sdkta of that name.

1 Virata. The whole Universe is considered to be the body of the 
Devata, its constituent parts being the microcosmic aspect.

* That is, the Atma considered as the continuing thread on which 
the objective world is strung and which it infuses.

* Vighna Devata. Gnnesha is so called as remover of obstruction 
What follows and precedes are Devas, Devayoni*. castes, etc.

1 That is, the Sadhaka acquires the $hakti which is manifested in 
the objects.

* See Introduction, " Mahanirv&qa Tantra."

906

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Brahman, just as we sleep until we awaken ourselves. 
When one attains to knowledge of the non-dualistic Brah¬ 
man, all this Universe of conscious and unconscious things 
in the forms of I§hvara, Jlva, and so forth, appears to be 
nothing but a dream (6-7)."» Three causes operate for the attainment of this know¬ 
ledge of Brahman: (1) Hearing,’ thinking,* * and constant 
meditation,* prescribed in the Vedanta Philosophy; (2) 
practice of Yoga; and (3) Sadhana, consisting of a combi¬ 
nation of the three things—Karma (work), Yoga, and Jnana 
(knowledge), with Bhakti (devotion) as their root.* Of these 
three means the last is the easiest, most pleasant, most 
rapidly effective, and is suited to all the three classes of 
worshippers—namely, those who are given to worldly 
pursuits, those who are dissatisfied with the world, and 
- those who yearn for liberation. In the realm of devotion 
the most worshipful and supreme objects of adoration * are 
those forms only* of the Supreme Devatft Parameshvarl, in 
which She as the central source of all Shaktis has mani¬ 
fested Herself in order to make worship possible. The 
ultimate Siddhi spoken of in the Tantra Shastra dances on 
the palms of the hands 1 of such men as are not satisfied 
with Siddhi acquired from the worship of partial manifesta¬ 
tions * from Brahma to a blade of grass described above as 
Her Virata Vibhuti, but are desirous of attaining single- 
pointed devotion and liberation. They alone are competent 
to worship the Parabrahma aspect spoken of in the Tantra 
Shastra of Her who is Parabrahman. It is for them that

' Shravana. See as to this and two following op. eit. supra. 
' Manana. 1 NididhyAsana.

' Commencement must be made with Bhakti.

* Tattvas. ' Svarilpa.

* That is, " is easily attained by.” * Vibhutis.

WORSHIP IN GENERAL

907

the Mother of the three worlds, who is Turlya conscious¬ 
ness/ has assumed that Brahman aspect, which is massive 
consciousness/ and bliss, and full of play.* * And it is for 
thorn that the Tantra Sh&stra has loudly said: “ Without 
a doubt he who enters upon the great path of Kuladharma 4 
will soon walk into the city of liberation. A man should 
therefore place himself under the direction of a Kaula.”' The fourth state.

* Chidghana—that is, nothing but a moss of consciousness.

' Lila. * Dharma of the T&ntrik Kaulas

CHAPTER XVI

THE PLAY OF GUNAS 1

He as Shiva is sweet of form with infinite Guijas, notwith¬ 
standing that He is the immutable Being above Gunas 
the only Lord and Controller of the Tamas Guna, though 
that is of His substance ;* * self-manifest and luminously 
white, like a silver mountain, though seated on the throne 
of (the dark) Tamas Guga *; the Supreme Guru of spiritual 
knowledge, though His substance is of the Tamas Gupa; 
found in great cremation grounds,* notwithstanding that 
He is the Lord of inconceivable wealth ; an untraversable, 
calm, and solemn ocean,' though He is the Mah&rudra of 
the great dissolution T ; dependent on the bliss of his own 
Sftdhana,' notwithstanding that He is all joy itself; merci¬ 
ful and loving in appearance, in spite of being wrong-eyed*; 
the guide in the path of worship of Himself, though He is 
the worshipped of the three worlds; the owner of half of the 
body of the Daughter of Mountain, 10 even though He is

1 Gunalllft; Guna is Quality" (see as to this Introduction to 
" Mab&nirv&tja Tantra

* Nishkalatattva. or the Tattva without Kala or Prakriti.

' He is tamogunamaya.

' See ante, note. Shiva as such subdues manifestation (sattva).

* Shma^h&nas.

He is both the ocean of peace and the destroyer.

In His form as the great Rudra (Mah&rudra) of the great dissolu¬ 
tion (Mah&pralaya). * Shiva was Himself a great S&dhaka.

* \ ir&p&ksha. His eyes are represented as being in a dreaming,

half-closed, and slanting position, like the eyes of those who have taken 
bhang. He is also, according to some, called Virftp&ksha, because he 
is three-eyed. “ Parvatl.

909

THE PLAY OF GUNAShalf-closed, and slanting position, like the eyes of those who have taken 
bhang. He is also, according to some, called Virftp&ksha, because he 
is three-eyed. “ Parvatl.

909

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

the one eternal unity; the seeker * of the company of Her 
who is His eternal companion, notwithstanding that He 
is companionless *; the destroyer of the passion of desire," 
though He eternally appears in the coupled * form of hus¬ 
band and wife; the grantor unasked of eternal libera¬ 
tion" to all Jlvas in the city of Kftsbl," despite his being 
the Dispenser of all fruits of action to the whole Uni¬ 
verse ; easily appeased, 7 even though he is also formidable 
and wrathful"; blue-throated, though he is also white ; 
the Saviour of the three worlds through his drinking 
deadly poison, 1 ® yet also their Destroyer; taking pleasure 
in adorning Himself with serpents, 1, despite his being the 
Director grey with ashes 11 to the path of everlasting dis- 
passion; crested with the crescent moon, though His head 
is covered with matted hair"; the carrier of trident and 
axe, though He grants blessing and dispels fear prostrate 
under the feet of the Devi with dishevelled hair, notwith¬ 
standing that He is Himself the grantor of liberation to

I S&dhaka. - ’ Nlhsanga. unattached to anything, as are Yogi*.

* Kama. * Yogala. * Kaivalya. * Benares.

’ A^hutosha. This with simplicity is one of the chief qualities 
which make Him lovable to Devotees. TTgra.

* Shiva is represented white as a mountain of silver. The blue 
mark on his throat was caused by his drinking fin order to save the 
world) the poison which issued from the churning of the ocean.

" See last note.

II Sjjhiva is represented as garlanded with Rerpents. and as here 
taking pleasure in the play of such adornment, notwithstanding that 
neither this nor any other worldly thing is of concern to Him who is 
the accomplisher of liberation.

“ §hiva, as do the Yogis, smears His body with ashes.“ §hiva, as do the Yogis, smears His body with ashes.

u JatAjttta worn by ascetics; either their own hair of the hair of 
others bound up in a high twisted and matted mass on the crown 
of the head.

" In His hands He carried the trident (tri$bOla) and axe (rara$hu), 
and with two others makes the gestures (mudr&) called vara and abhaya.

910

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

devotees 1 ; the Mahabhairava,' who drinks the wine* of 
joy, in spite of being perfect joy Himself; the crier of 
“Fear not,”* though He is Himself a Bhairava*; five¬ 
faced,* in spite of being thousand-headed 1 ; three-eyed, even 
though He has eyes which turn towards all things in the 
Universe; clad in space,' notwithstanding that He is 
Himself space; of infinite forms, though of eight forms'; 
the Preceptor of knowledge, though knowledge itself; He 
who brings us liberation, and yet attainable through 
liberation; the Lord of Kail&sa and Kashi," though He is 
the Lord of the world; the Lord of all creatures , 11 though 
also the Master of the Spirit world”; the Lord of crea¬ 
tures," though the destroyer of the bonds of the Pashu 14 ; 
He who upholds Ganga in His plaited hair,” though fire 
is in the eye on His forehead; the Destroyer of Daksha’s 
sacrifice,” though He is the Supreme Lord ” of all Yajnas;

I Shiva is generally represented as $hava (corpse), lying under the 
feet of Devi, for without Her $hokti (power) He is inert.

' A Bhairava is he who follows vlr&ch&ra.

* KArana, a technical term in Tontra for wine.

* Ma bhaih. * That is, formidable and the causer of fear.

* Pafich&nana. 1 Sahasra$hirsha. ' Digamvara, or naked.

* The ashtannlrti of $hiva— vie., Bhava (water), Sarvva (earth), 
Pa?hupati (man the sacrificer), Bhlma (ether), Ugra (air), Rudra (fire), 
Mah&deva (moon), Isjh&na (sun).

M The mountain Kail&sa. His abode (see Introduction), and Benares 
the city sacred to Him.

II Bhutapnti, living on earth as opposed to ghosts which follow.

*’ Bhutan&tha. “ Pashupnti.M The mountain Kail&sa. His abode (see Introduction), and Benares 
the city sacred to Him.

II Bhutapnti, living on earth as opposed to ghosts which follow.

*’ Bhutan&tha. “ Pashupnti.

u The Pa?hu is the unillumined man bound by the bonds (p&$ha), 
which, according to the enumeration of the Kul&rnava Tantra, are pity, 
ignorance, shame, family, custom, and caBtc.

'* §hiva held the Ganges in His hair when it was called down from 
heaven by Bhaglratha, and fire flashes from His third eye.

“ Yajna, according to the well-known legend as to which, see

" Lhvara. $hiva is Yajne^bvara.

911

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

sorely grieved at sight of the play 1 of the Devi’s death,' 
though Himself above all delusion'; the son-in-law of the 
King of Mountains,' notwithstanding that He is beyond 
all relationship; the father of young Heramva,' though 
He is Himself the Parabrahma'; the Linga,’ which is 
the source of the origin of the entire Universe; the eternal 
cause of Yoganidra,' though attainable by Karma, Jnann, 
and Yoga'; the sole Saviour of the world of devotees, 
though also the Destroyer of the three worlds; the con¬ 
stant companion of devotees , 10 and yet also attainable by 
Ju&nls 1 * *; friend of the poor, and yet omnipresent; the Lord 
of the helpless, and yet the Lord of the^three worlds; loving 
towards supplicants, yet also loving towards the whole 
Universe; the sole Lord of Tantrik Mantras, though being 
the object of worship in all Mantras: and Yantras “; the 
eternal King of Kings u on the throne of the devotee’s heart, 
notwithstanding that He is the one Ishvara (Lord) in the 
infinite world.

Again, as Krishna, He is the master-actor, cunning 
and full of deception ,* 4 though Himself undisturbed by the

1 Lila; (or all which Devatfta do is such.

* At the sacrifice of Daksha on hearing Her husband slighted by

the former. ’ Ma > a and moha ;

‘ Shiva’s Spouse Parvatl was the daughter of Himavat (Himalaya).* At the sacrifice of Daksha on hearing Her husband slighted by

the former. ’ Ma > a and moha ;

‘ Shiva’s Spouse Parvatl was the daughter of Himavat (Himalaya).

* Ganesha. * And beyond all causal forms. ' Phallus.

'"Sleep of Yoga." Jlva^hakti produces diversity. YoganidrA

$hakti accomplishes unity — namely, that Shakti of Brahman which 
establishes unity with Him.

' Action, knowledge, and Yoga. " Bhakta.

u (rh ose •* w ho know " and who have acquired spiritual knowledge. 
“ Diagrams of worship (see Introduction). 
u Rajraje9hvara.

*' Kapata shata. Thus He pretended to suck the breast of 
Patana, who was sent to destroy Him, but in doing so He sucked out 
her life (her pranavftyu).

912

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

waves of dualism; the assumer of a sweet form with three¬ 
fold bend , 1 in spite of being above all changes of nature* *; 
beautiful with the dark colour of water-laden clouds,* 
though he is pure Sattva itself 4 ; incarnated as the son of 
the ruler of Braja* for the purpose of relieving the earth 
of her burden, though Himself the Perfect Brahman who 
is existence, consciousness, and bliss; the wearer of gar¬ 
lands of gunja seeds,' and yet possessed in full of the six 
forms of Lordliness *; covered with the dust of Vrindavana,' 
and yet being the adored of the Lakshml of Vaikup^ha *; a 
herdsboy, though the supporter of the three worlds; the 
beggar of food from a Brfthmana Lady, though He is Himself 
the provider of the Universe"; decked with peacock’s feathers, 
in spite of his possession of infinite beauty; the wearer of 
yellow-tinted loin-cloths, though he is beyond the covering 
of Maya "; He who took the help of Balarama," though He 
Himself helps the entire Universe; Who wandered in pas¬ 
tures,'* and yet Who moved in the hearts of great Yogis ; up¬ 
holder of Mount Govarddhana,” though also the upholder of

,. ™ bbftn *?’ fl P° s jtion loved of the Hindu artist. The body makes,. ™ bbftn *?’ fl P° s jtion loved of the Hindu artist. The body makes

out an*d thTli th h »!?, 18 tur ned to one side, the opposite hip isWown 
out. and the limbs below take the direction of the head.

„ Bh * v “ vikara. The tribangba is crooked. His straightness or 
uniformity is contrasted therewith. siruigniness or

* Krishna’s body is a very dark blue.

' The Guna is here thought of as colourless.

* Nanda. Kfishpa’s foster-father.

goldsmiths * 11 ^ * b,ftck Bpot on to P’ n6<?d 88 “ weight by

* • livary y ai 8acl1 M omnipotence, omnipresence, and the like 
^ The city of Bj-indabun. sacred to Krishpa.

ante.^ TlMlaKV ° f th ° beaven of ^nn. as to which see

favour 3 ® ° DCe ^f. t00d ° f a woman in order to show her

“His brother^ " ^

u T _, . _ As a cowherd.

order to save Bpndabun from a great deluge.

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

913

the infinite Universe; the destroyer of the arrogance of 
Eangsa' and K&llya,' and yet the peaceful charmer of 
Madana 1 ; the D&modara , 1 who bolds the Universe in bis 
belly, though appearing in the form of a young herdsboy; the 
charmer of Brahma, though He is Himself Han, Hara, and 
Brahma; out of His love full of fear for Yashoda, notwith¬ 
standing that He is the Fear of Fear itself; ever present in

Vrindavana,* * though also present in every atom of the infi

Universe; the stealer of the clothes of young girls performing 
Katyavani Vrata,’ though He is also the supplier of innumer¬ 
able clothes to DraupadI when oppressed with shame and 
fear for her honour*; rejoicing in the sound of a flute, no 
withstanding that He is the source of Nads, Vindu, Dhvanl, 
and Morcbbana*; ever eager to enjoy the Rasa , of Rusa,

1 Asura King of Mathura, who attempted to destroy Embpa, hi*

• fTWki) son. The serpent destroyed by Him.

4 The God of Love or Desire. He surpasses Madana in attractiveness.1 Asura King of Mathura, who attempted to destroy Embpa, hi*

• fTWki) son. The serpent destroyed by Him.

4 The God of Love or Desire. He surpasses Madana in attractiveness.

• He in whose belly (Udara) all D&maa-tbat is. re^ons lLokas)- 
. o Vishnu is called DAmodara also, because he has Dama. or 
are located- ' '* ^an^ or gelf . mani f e station. In Harivang*ba

self-control, a * P Krishna’s foster-mother, tied a rope round his

a^d tSZS (busking-bo^l) to keep bun out of

mischief while she was doing her household duties.

mucniei wuu . Thfl City of Br indabun.

in the MftbRbbfirata that when Dr.np.dl wjnbroosM

term of gross sound in the form of music, is the seventh oi the grtma

n,»nt7«~n no,.™ re. ...

the European scale—c, d, e, i, g. a, o. ***« iu

,he saatsfafe? SwSrzwEftts.

“nnd^e wUh the three Svara. Cdfitta. Anudatta. and Svarita pronounc- 
Pd from the navel, chest, and bead, and called by the musicians nfibhi 
^aveU bak e sha (chest), kapAla (head). As there are seven tones and 
three puma., there are twenty-one SRrchhanfla.

■ Eaaenceef delight. The Blaa featival.

69

914

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA■ Eaaenceef delight. The Blaa featival.

69

914

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

though He is Himself the great Rdsa'; grieved at R&dhik&’s 
anger of love,* * and yet eternally full of joy; constantly seek¬ 
ing" the company of R&dhika, though He is sought by Her* 
who seeks supreme love; ever bound, as it were by cords, by 
the love of the beauties of Vraja," notwithstanding that 
He is eternally free, unattached, and without attribute; 
proficient in the amorous sorts of women, and yet free of 
all sensuality*; a youth victorious in war with passion,* 
and jet immersed in the midst of waves of passion '; who 
appears separatelj' to each of the innumerable groups of 
innumerable herdswomen," though He is Himself one with¬ 
out a second; restless and mad in His play as Brahman, 
though incarnated by way of play as a man; making Himself 
out to be adulterous to His own wives 1# in order to delude 
unhappy Jlvas devoid of Sadhana ; He who points out the 
subtle course of Sadhana Dharma , 11 despite His being the 
Guard of the bridge of Sangsara Dharma 11 ; the rescuer of 
the triumphant standard of Sadhana Dharma u after defeat 
of Sangsara Dharma , 11 though He is the creator of both these 
Dhaimas; partial towards Dharma, and j’et the dispenser 
of both Dharma and Adharma for the preservation of the

Bliss. AH forms of bliss are from the Brahman, who is Bliss itself 
(rosovai sah). ,

Mftnn, sach as happens between hnsband and wife who are yet 
attached to one another. * S&dhaka.

t Rftdhik A- The herdswomen who loved Bim.

* R&madosha. * Kama.

* Not that He is overcome by it, but exists in the midst of it.

' To gratify the beautiful herdswomen (Gopl). His devotees. He 
appeared to each of them as if she alone was enjoying Him. There 
were thus as many Krisbnas as there were Gopl*.

Rukminl and SatyabhAmft. to whom He appeared to be adulteroas 
owjDg to His companionship with the Gopl*.Rukminl and SatyabhAmft. to whom He appeared to be adulteroas 
owjDg to His companionship with the Gopl*.

.J he J? harnm / * hich , ,end8 maa ° at the SangsAra, as opposed to 
that which keeps, hut regulates, him in the world (SangsAra Dharma).

a Jv, h . ODSh t0 * the Supreme there is no distinction between Dharma 
and Adharma. yet he leans (paksliapAta) to the former.

915

THE PLAY OF gunas

world * 1 ; the constant friend of the PMava 1 family, though 
He has equal care for all things; the all in all to Bbaktaa, 
though also the adored of Karmls,* Yogis, and Jnfinls ; 
the seeker of refuge with devotees, notwithstanding that 
He is Himself the refuge of all who are refugeless.

Again, as Shakti She possesses infinite Guijas, notwith¬ 
standing that She is the sum of all Shakti s above Gunas ; 
She is the establisher of concordance between mutually 
conflicting masses of Gunas in the dualistic world, though 
Herself without a second; the dispeller of the devotees 
fears, yet revelling Herself in battle’; the delight of the 
heart of Shiva, though also the Mother of the trinity of 
Devas *; the beloved daughter ’ of the great Mountain, not¬ 
withstanding that She is the Brahman who is existence, 
consciousness, and bliss; possessed of eternally fresh youth, 
and yet the Mother of the Grandfather 11 of the three worlds; 
beyond the reach of speech and mind, though omnipresent 
in the three worlds; partial towards Dharma, though She is 
above all contraries *; the Destroyer of the Daitya race,*

•He is the Dispenser of uprighteousness (Adbarma) as a so of 
Dharma such evil being necessary for the preservation of the world.

’ The five sons of P&pdu who warred with their cousins, the Kaura- 
vas, as related in the Mah&bharata.

* Those who seek Him through devotion.

* Those who seek Him through Karma or work.

* Those who seek Him through Yoga.

* Those who 6eek Him through Jn&na, or knowledge.* Those who seek Him through devotion.

* Those who seek Him through Karma or work.

* Those who seek Him through Yoga.

* Those who 6eek Him through Jn&na, or knowledge.

I The Dev! is a great warrior contending against the demoniac hosts 
of Asuras. Danava*. and Daitya*.

* Whilst She is the Spouse of Shiva in Her form as Parvati. in Her 
higher aspect o( Shakti. of „hich PirvatT i.but a partial mamfe.tat.oo. 
She is the Mother of Brahma. Vishnu, and Shiva.

* Parvati. " Himalaya. Brahma (see ante.)

u Dharma and Adharma. or righteousness and unrighteousness ; both 
issue from Her. though as Dharma is that which supports the world. 
She is, as its supporter, partial to it.

II Enemies of the Deva*.

910

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

despite Her being the Mother of the Universe; again, the 
Deliverer of the Dinava race, 1 though also its destroyer; the 
DweUer in the sea of milk,' yet moving in ail the seven 
seas’; the Dweller in the Isle of Gems/ though also the 
Mistross of the seven Islands’; the Dweller in the house of 
Chintamapi,’ and yet also above all name and form T ; at¬ 
tached to the Parijftta forest, though Sheis equally at home 
as in the forest; seated under the Kalpa tree,’ though being 
the eterna 1 Kal pa creeper bearing the four-fold fruit of Dharma, 
Artha, Kirna, and Moksha’; seated on a jewelled throne! 
though to Her both ashes and jewels are the same; lying

on the lotus-seat of Sad^hiva, the great Preta, 1 ’ though 
She is the Shakti, the container” of the infinite Universe; 
deeply black like black clouds, yet the giver of light to 
infinite millions of suns, moon, and other fires; blue like a 
mass of crushed collyrium," though full of light” and self- 
mamfest; dark of colour,” and yet the Dispeller glowing 
with existence, consciousness, and bliss of the inner dark¬ 
ness in the world of innumerable devotees; garlanded with

' Sons of Dana; enemies of the Devos. • Kshiro

t 0t milk ’ water ’ ® hee * and bcney, salt and sugar-cane juice.' Sons of Dana; enemies of the Devos. • Kshiro

t 0t milk ’ water ’ ® hee * and bcney, salt and sugar-cane juice.

' ^tfvfpa kee A. Avalon’s “ Mahgnirv&pa Tantra ’’).

,* Jamba ’ P,ak8ha - 9h&lmalr. Kasha, Krattficha. $haka, and Pnshkara. 
Tantra’’J. 8t0ne Whi ° h * rant9 desire8 {see A Avalon’s " Mahftnirvipa

! ° padhi (Umitin * editions). • Desire-gratifvina tree

The Devi, as Kali. Tara, and Chbinnamasta, is

Jyotih.

represented of a

black colour.

917

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

fifty heads, whilst rejoicing in the sounds of fifty letters, 
and of the lute*; the dweller in the Tripancb&ra,* despite 
the fact that She is above all Prapanchas *; crested with 
a orescent moon, yet averse to display; learned in the 
merriments of Kftla (time), though the expert baffler of 
K&la (death); the dweller in great cremation grounds, 
notwithstanding that She is Mistress of the entire Uni* 
verse; whose hair is ever dishevelled for the removal of the 
bonds which bind devotees,* despite the fact that She is 
Herself the Author of the bonds of existence,* the Con¬ 
queror of the right side by putting forth the right foot, 
in spite of Her assuming the form of a woman whose place 
is the left side*; with fearful moving red eyes rolling 
with intoxication,* and yet above all delusion I 11 ; smiling 
sweetly, though having a terrible countenance; the giver 
of blessings and of assurance of safety, yet at the same 
time bearing a sword and a severed head; the most 
shameless of women, 11 and yet Herself_ the author of 
the feeling of shame; clad in space," though pervading 
in infinite space; mad after the delights of Yoga, despite 
of Her being all delight Herself; the beloved of Mahft- 
kftla," though the Mother of all things both moving and 
unmoving.

I Varijas. In Her terrible forms the Devi is garlanded with heads.

As Kund Uinl She is present in the fifty letters existing as Dhvani in 
the Tftttvik centres. * The VlnA.I Varijas. In Her terrible forms the Devi is garlanded with heads.

As Kund Uinl She is present in the fifty letters existing as Dhvani in 
the Tftttvik centres. * The VlnA.

' A Yantra with three times five (Tripaflcha) corners (Anthor's note).

* PrapaAcha is that which is made of the five elements—earth,

water, fire, air, and ether. * §hmu$hAnn«.

* As to the PAjba (bond), see ante. ' Bbavabandhana.

' In the Dhy&nas She is represented as patting forth the right foot.

' Y&mA. which means both female and left side.

* MadabbaragbArpita. 11 M&yft and Moha.

II Nirlajja—withont the physical or other shame of woman. She 
shows Herself naked, dances naked, drinks wine. etc.

“ Naked. 14 §hiva, the great Destroyer.

918

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRAII Nirlajja—withont the physical or other shame of woman. She 
shows Herself naked, dances naked, drinks wine. etc.

“ Naked. 14 §hiva, the great Destroyer.

918

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

0 SiVlhaka! where else will you find such an incom¬ 
parable infinite array of mutually conflicting Gunas in 
one and the same person ? It is as if the infinite number 
of Gunas of Her whose substance is untold Gugas had 
flown away from their centre of attraction and vfere 
moving about the infinite Universe, but have now found 
Her whose Gunas they are, and rest in untroubled sleep, 
in their mother’s arms, like children who, having lost, 
have found again their mother. 0 Sadhaka! in worship* 
the principal place is awarded to the form with attributes. 1 
It is these Gu^as of Her whose substance is Gunas which 
draw the S&dhaka's mind and heart from the Sangsftra, 
thus giving him the enjoyment of incomparable peace in 
the cool shade of the Kalpa tree* of Her beauteous feet. 
It is because that form is the seat of infinite Gunas that 
it is so sweet and charming. Wherever a single Gupa 
establishes its supremacy, it comes into confliot with 
other Gugas. Where pity is supreme, severity is uncared 
for and banished; Gunas are thus naturally conflicting. 
But where no Gu^a is supreme or the ruler, how can any 
one Guria be in conflict with another? Children quarrel 
bitterly over their food only so long as their mother does 
not come and divide it among them, and assign to each of 
them their respective places. Similarly, Gugas quarrel 
with each other only so long as She who is above Gu^as 
does not take them up in Her own boBom, which is itself 
free from all attachment. At the touch of Her beauteous 
self all Gunas disappear. 4 This is why Her Gupas are 
not in mutual conflict; why streams of mercy flow from 
the Mother in the form of furious laughter; why the three

' Up&sanA. » Gaija. * Vide ante,' Up&sanA. » Gaija. * Vide ante,

n laterally. All the Guizot assume Nirguna aspect in spite of being 
aspect Nirgu,?a * 8 the “P® 0 * without Gupa. the Parabrabman

919

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

worlds are deluged with waves of love of the Devi, ^vbo 
rejoices in war; why the Purusha, who is Nirguija and 
always blissful, pours forth His heart and rolls under Her 
feet, drawn thereto by the attraction of Guiias and love of 
Her whose substance is bliss. Marvellous is the play of 
Gunas of Her whose substance is Gunas, a play which is, 
however, above Guijas. Marvellous is the play of Guijas of 
Her who is without Guija. 1 Marvellous is the array of Her 
Gupas in the Sangs&ra which is with Gu?a.

It is because Her Nirgu^a* * aspect cannot exist in the 
Saguna Sangsftra* that She who is above Guijas has 
assumed forms in which we find the full play of Guijas. 
Although in the terrestrial world She resides in the hcait 
of every Jlva, he cannot find room for all Her Gunas. For 
this reason it is ordained that She should be worshipped 
first in the image of unrevealed consciousness, in which 
are reflected infinite Guijas, instead of in a Jlva, who is 
but a part of Her eternal revealed consciousness. When 
at length life is installed* in the image, and Brahma- 
consciousness 1 is infused into it by Mantrasbakti, a 
$hakti which is itself consciousness,' appears in the image, 
earthen though it be, the like of which is never seen in 
the body of a Jiva, however much and with whatever devo¬ 
tion he may worship." Hence, although She is omnipre¬ 
sent, it is easiest to worship Her in an image. Bhagav&n,

' Nirguna. * Sngnija.

* Attributes.. * The world of attributes.

* In Her all opposites meet. Therefore what appear to be Her 
Gopiu are not really Gupa* of Her who is above all Gupos. ^ hut is 
Nirguna cannot exist in the SangsAra.

' At the Prftijapratishtha rite. 1 Brahmnchaitanya.

* Power of Mantra or $hakti as Mantra. * Chinmaya.' At the Prftijapratishtha rite. 1 Brahmnchaitanya.

* Power of Mantra or $hakti as Mantra. * Chinmaya.

* A conscious man is ever imperfect. So that he is not a fitting 
object for the reflection of all Her Gupns in him ; but the image being 
unconscious, it offers through Mantrasbakti the best place for the 
reflection of Her Gupas.

920

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the creator of all things, has therefore said: “ Although 
milk is produced in all parts of a cow’s body, it is obtained 
only from the teats of her udder. Similarly, although 
Devat& is all-pervading, Her true existence' is realized 
only in an image." Should anyone attempt to draw milk 
from the nose, tail, or any other part of a cow’s body, 
on the ground that milk is produced in all parts of her 
body, he is certain to get for his pains only phlegm, dung, 
and other such things. Similarly, if anyone worships 
Her as a Jlva in a human body because She resides there 
as in all other things, he will discover the Jlva and not 
the Brahman.' If, again, Brahman is worshipped in his 
partial aspect as Jlva, all his Shaktis are not revealed in 
suoh Jlva* * body. If, again, for this reason, the limiting 
condition of Jlvahood be put aside and pure conscious¬ 
ness only is sought to be worshipped, what necessity is 
there for a Jlva’s body? If Upadhis are omitted, the 
whole Universe is filled with Her presence. We thus come 
again to Her Nirguija aspeot. When this matter'of the 
Nirguga aspect is realized, there is no longer any necessity 
for worship. In order, therefore, to realize in the Sagu$a 
state the presence of Brahman, who is eternally above

' 8varftpa SattA.' 8varftpa SattA.

Literally, the Jfva-Tattva, and not the Brahma-Tattva. In the 
ordinary case of image-worship the image of onrevealed consciousness 
is selected, as it affords a perfect mirror for the reflection of the 
internal conscious image. It is otherwise in the case of the partial 
revelation of consciousness in a Jlva. If the conscious Jlva as such is 
worshipped as Brahman, there is obviously merely the worship of 
Jlva by Jlva.

* Or title, UpAdhi.

' Tattva. The author here deals with three cases : (1) If a Jlva is 
worshipped as such, then nothing is thereby got. (2) If the Jlva be 
not so worshipped, but as a partial manifestation of the Brahmnn. then 
there is only a partial vision of Divine $hakti. (8J If all DpAdhi is put

body altogeth™ C0a&C,0U(me99 is worshipped. then we have done with

921

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

Gunas, and yet whose substance is eternally Guiias, in 
order to feel the true presence of that Shakti, not by 
imagination, analogy, or example, but truly and directlj b> 
the foroe of Her command and by means of Mantra, there 
is no other means in the matter of worship than to worship 
the forms, full of play, 1 assumed by Her of Her own will. 
This is the oause of the incomparable greatness of images. 
This is why an image is a pillar of support to Her worship. 
This is why an image-worshipper is entitled to Brahma- 
Haivalya 1 itself.

A Yantra also is like an image, the permanent seat of 
Her Brahma-play. But the subject of Yantra* is one 
which should be learnt from a Gurn only. We are unable 
to reveal its solemn secret depths to the public. At most, 
we can say that a Yantra is merely a true manifestation 
of Her Mantra form. None but S&dhakas of a very high 
order of competency can understand the subject of \antrcis. 
A Guru will test his Shishya's condition before disclosing 
it to him. For this reason the Deva of Devas has, in the 
Kul&rpava Tantra, ordained:“ Henoe, the prinoipal part of worship is adoration of 
the Parameghvarl by preparing Her image or drawing Her 
Yantra. But, 0 my beloved 1 the worship should be per¬ 
formed according to the injunctions, after having learnt 
them all from the Guru."

Now, such as consider themselves famous, wise, and of 
great experience, on the ground that they have seen the 
map and read the geography of India, and who inwardly 
entertain the vanity of being accomplished Sftdhakaa, 
full of spiritual knowledge, on the ground of their having 
read the Yogav&ghishtha, RAmftyana, the P&tafijala Stttras, 
and the Pafichadagbl,* will perhaps, after all I have said,

1 Lila. * Supreme liberation.

' Yantra tattva. * Books dealing with the VedAnta and Yoga.

922

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Lila. * Supreme liberation.

' Yantra tattva. * Books dealing with the VedAnta and Yoga.

922

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

oven now reply with their belief in set phraseB, “ What is 
invocation 1 or dismissal* * of that whioh is all pervading ? " 
There is no need to give a reply to all that such people 
objeot. This much only we say: If the notion that “ He 
is omnipresent ” had really a place in your heart, instead 
of being only a word in your mouth, would you in that 
case have spoken of such relativities as “ you and I, that 
man and this man, he and who," and come forward to 
answer my words ? ” Need I say 0 Brother! that the idea 
that “ Ho is omnipresent is contained in your books and 
not in your head ? You have not and cannot have the 
oapaoity to understand the cause of the classification into 
JnAnayoga, Bhaktiyoga, and Karmayoga, or of the distinc¬ 
tions which exist between them. This is why the very 
name of invocation and dismissal* throws you at first 
into a stupor,* and then makes you burst out into a 
loud ory ten times every half an hour.* Had you but the 
' sense to understand that invocation and dismissal of the 
DevatA are nothing but the taking of the DevatA in the 
heart out of the heart and replacing the DevatA of the 
heart in the heart at the close of external worship; bad 
even the germ of the notion that Siddhi in S&dhana is 
but the name given to the appearance of super-worldly 
divine Shakti existed in the impressions you acquired 
in previous births, you could never have asked such a 
question, “ How can there be invocation or dismissal of 
Her?” We doubt whether the sense of understanding 
existed in the seed from whioh all this senseless affair has

' Av&hana (see next note).

* Visarjana. Both refer to invocation and dismissal of the DevatA, 
which is nothing but the rising into existence and the withdrawal of 
the Davatft-consciousae&s in the mind of the Sftdhaka.

* That is. of the Devatft.* That is. of the Devatft.

4 Literally “ into sleep” (Svapna). ' Dap£a—2| dap^as*! hoar.

THE PLAY OF GUNAS 923

sprung, and therefore much less are we likely to find it 
in the flower and fruit. 1 This is no exaggeration on our 
part. What has blossomed in the flower has come out m 
the fruit. Judge yourself from this, the power of the seed.

Raja Ram Mohan Ray says: “0 mind! what is this 
delusion of yours? Whom do you invoke or dismiss ? You 
say 4 come here' to the omnipresent Being who is every¬ 
where! Who are you and whom do you invoke? Wha 
wonderful thing is this? You offer a seat to Him who 
holds the infinite Universe in Himself, and tell Him, seat 
yourself here.’ How absurd this is! And you utter hymns 
in praise of Him who is the master of this Universe, after 
having offered Him all kinds of food. How incongruous

this seems to me!”

We need not ourselves give a reply to this. The reply 
which has been given by high-souled Digamvara Bhatta- 
charyya, whose heart was in S&dhana, is sufficient. He 
says: “ In delusion* * is my peace. What harm does invoca¬ 
tion or dismissal do to anybody? Air fills every place, but 
still when the weather becomes oppressively hot, we say: 
‘Come, air! Come, 0 life-giver!’ The Mother of the Uni¬ 
verse pervades the Universe; but when I am overwhelmed 
with sorrow, I say: ‘Come, O Brahmamayl, save me!’ In 
fact, meditation, knowledge, water, fruit, and all else belong 
to Her whom I worship with living and inanimate things,^ 
What harm does invocation or dismissal do to anybody?’’

1 The meaning is that even Raja Ram Mohan Raj-, who inaugurated 
the new school of "reformed” Hinduism had

invocation and so forth. It is not. therefore, at all likely that his 
followers should have any better notions.

* Possibly, the flower is Raja Ram Mohan Ray's writings, the fruit 
is his followers, and the seed is himself.

• BhrAnti, or error.* Possibly, the flower is Raja Ram Mohan Ray's writings, the fruit 
is his followers, and the seed is himself.

• BhrAnti, or error.

* That is, with various articles of worship, such as animals (in 
sacrifice), water, light, etc.

924

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA• BhrAnti, or error.

* That is, with various articles of worship, such as animals (in 
sacrifice), water, light, etc.

924

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The delusion is not a thing to be shaken off; and if it 
oan be, words or songs are not the means of effecting this. 
Why, then, suffer from all this mental disquietude by 
orying, “Delusion! delusion!” with tears in your eyes? 
The sleep is not to be broken. What, then, is the use of 
brooding over sorrow and distress and seeing the horror 
of bad dreams ? It is, on the contrary, a sign of intelligence 
to think of longed-for happiness instead of sorrow, and to 
enjoy dreams of that happiness during sleep. 1 This is why 
Digamvara was blessed with S&dhana—was indifferent to 
this life, scorched by the fire Sang6&ra, and said: “In 
delusion is my peace. What harm does invocation or dis¬ 
missal do to anybody ? " It does no harm to you, or to me, 
or to Him, who is invoked. Whom, then, does it harm? 
You are not harmed, because it is I who invoke. I am not 
harmed because I find peace in such invocation, nor is She 
whom I invoke harmed in any way. In Her eyes it is not 
I who am invoking, but She who is invoking Herself by 
becoming I. You and I think that you and I are invoking, 
but such invocation is, in fact, unreal. You may, however, 
ask, Why does She make this unreal invocation ? We reply 
that you had better ask Her, instead of a mere Jlva, for 
a reply to this question: “ Why, being Herself Brahman, 
She has become Jlva? Why, being existence,consciousness, 
and bliss, has She become entangled in the world of con¬ 
traries and sorrows?" Full of the bliss of play* is She, 
and play* is Her play* of bliss. If, in this drama of Sang- 
s&ra-play, She intoxicates Herself, with Her own bliss by 
appearing as Jlva and invoking Herself, or She Herself 
enjoys Her own peace by seeing dreams in Her own delu¬ 
sion, what harm does it do Her ? And if, being a Jlva, I,' Get as much happiness as you can even in delusion. 
k Ila - * K&taka, which means drama, etc.

THE PLAY OF GUtfAS

925

considered as a Sangs&rl, 1 invoke Her, that invocation also 
is in accordance with Her command. What question of 
harm to Her can then arise over this? Hence, though 
he knew that this Sangsftra was full of delusion, and 
had awakened from the horrible dream of the sleep of delu¬ 
sion, the cause of which he fully understood, the wild 
and deluded Sadhaka and unerring Tantrika, Digamvara, 
sinking in the sea of peace, has said: “ In delusion is my 
peace." “ You say, come here to the Omnipresent Being, 
who is everywhere. Who are you and whom do you 
invoke? What wonderful thing is this?* There is no 
‘here or there’ for Him who is Omnipresent; how, then, 
can it be said to Him,' Come here ? ’ ”

Had Ray* looked into the matter a little more deeply, 
he would not most probably have said this; for it is uni¬ 
versally admitted that there is no here or there for the 
Omnipresent Brahman. Whose, then, is this “here’’ in 
the phrase “Come here?” It is the Sadhaka who says 
it, and it is his own. Although there is no here or there 
for the Brahman, there is here or there for the Sadhaka, 
He says: “Come to this place of mine." Had I said, 
“ Come to this place of Yours,” I might some day be called 
to account for it. But the Sadbakas “here," which is 
spoken of in the Shastra, has, through deficiency of in¬ 
telligence in the interpreter, become Brahman’s “ here 
and, unfortunately, like one blind man resting on the 
shoulders of another blind man, you and I also have under¬ 
stood that this “ here is in reality Brahman’s “ here." 
If, after this, it is objected that there is no “ here or there " 
for Brahman, how, on being asked to come here, can He

' Inhabitant of the SangsAra—that is, from the point of view of 
Jlva and SangsAra.

• See ante.

' RAja Ram Mohan RAy.

920

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Inhabitant of the SangsAra—that is, from the point of view of 
Jlva and SangsAra.

• See ante.

' RAja Ram Mohan RAy.

920

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

actually come? Should anyone make this objection, we 
would ask him to go a little further. If there is no “ here 
or there" for Brahman, there is also no coming or going 
for Him. Why, then, object to his "coming here ” instead 
of at once objecting to the fundamental matter, the 
"coming" itself? For him for whom there is no coming 
and no going, there is also no eating, no dressing, no 
taking, no giving, and, in short, nothing which can be 
negatived, and not even worship by you or me—nothing, 
nothing, nothing! Everything is thus cleared away and 
dismissed. This is what is called being too intelligent! 
Here Rfty ought to have understood that what he was saying 
belonged to a different province 1 altogether. Its proper 
place is in the sphere of pure knowledge.* * It has no 
place in the sphere of Upfisana,* which is Karma, with 
Jnftna, accomplished by Bhakti. 4 To seek to ridicule a 
matter which belongs to one province* by taking it into 
another is unjustifiable. This is what is called "absence 
of common sense."

R&y again says: “ Who are you ? and whom do you in¬ 
voke? What wonderful thing is this?” The cause of his 
wonder is: "Who are you? whom do you invoke?” This 
"Who are you ? whom do you invoke?" can be explained in 
three ways. First, " Who are you? whom do you invoke?" 
may mean, you are He, for a Jlva is a part of Brahman. This 
assumes a perfect knowledge of Brahman, and is consequent¬ 
ly a repetition of the same blunder above mentioned; and, 
as we have already replied to this phase of the question, we

1 AdhikAra. That is, it was true as regards the BrnbmAn aspect of 
things, but false when applied to the Jlva aspect and his worship, which 
is necessarily dualistic.

* JnAnakAndn. ' Worship.

Action done with knowledge and accompanied by devotion.

' AdhikAra.

927

THE PLAY OF GUNAS* JnAnakAndn. ' Worship.

Action done with knowledge and accompanied by devotion.

' AdhikAra.

927

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

have nothing to say about it here. The second way of in¬ 
terpretation is, “ Who are you? and whom do you invoke?” 
That is to say, when She resides in your own heart, whom 
again do you invoke? We say, wonderful indeed must 
have been’ RAy's knowledge of outer worship if be thought 
that for the purpose of that worship we invoke a Devata 
other than the Devata residing in our heart 1 He ought 
not to have ridiculed or even discussed a matter which he 
did not understand. “ He who worships an outer Devata, 
abandoning the Devata resident in his heart, is like one 
who runs after a heap of ashes, having thrown away the 
gem which he holds in his hand.” (For, unless the 
spirit * 1 of the Devata residing in the heart is communicated 
to the outer image, the worship becomes a worship of 
the image only, and not of the Devata.)* H Ray under¬ 
stood that the worship which was based on these words 
of the Shastra was a worship of an outer Devata, to the 
exclusion of the Devata resident in the heart, then, also, 
he wa 3 greatly mistaken. Finally, the third way of inter¬ 
pretation is, “ What are you ? whom do you invoke ? ” That 
is to say, “ You are a Jlva smaller than the smallest, while 
She is greater than the greatest, boundless and external. 
How, then, is it possible for you to bring Her to you ? ” 
We reply, you and I have no reason to be anxious about 
this, for we do not worship Her according to a method 
devised by ourselves. The Shftstra is Her command, and 
we conduct ourselves according to it. She has Herself 
considered the question how we may bring Her to our¬ 
selves, and it is because She has done so that She has 
assumed forms and manifested Herself as Mantrashakti, 
and Herself made provision for her worship accordingly.

1 Tejas. Force and energy, vitality.

1 Power aa Mantra.

' Author's parenthesis.

928

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Tejas. Force and energy, vitality.

1 Power aa Mantra.

' Author's parenthesis.

928

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Moved by pity for Jlvas, She has (infinite though She is) 
assumed finite forms, sometimes immense and sometimes 
small, because there can be no worship of the infinite and 
the eternal. According to the third way of interpretation, 
also, the passage, “ Who are you? and whom do you invoke? 
What wonderful thing is this ? ” seems to us to be truly 
strange. Now, another thing may be said here. It is this : 
We admit that, although there is no “ here or there ” for 
Brahmau, there is “ here and there ” for the S&dhaka; but 
when it is certain that Brahman is already at the place 
where you would invoke Him, why uselessly make the 
invocation at all ? It is with the view to this objection 
that the S&dhaka, with spiritual perception, has, by an 
analogy, explained this matter of the invocation and appear¬ 
ance of the Devatfi. “ Air fills every place, but still, when 
the weather becomes oppressively hot, we say: * Come, 
air! Come, 0 life-giver!'" In the material Universe the 
air is admittedly all pervading; but when the terrible 
heat of summer almost kills us, who is it who does not 
piteously and from his heart say: “ Come, air, come to 
us"? Why do people say this? Whence will air come? 
Air is everywhere. Had the movement of air been in fact 
stopped, would Jlvas have existed anywhere ? A Jlva lives 
because there is air both within and without him, and 
because he breathes it into and out of himself. Why, then, 
invoke air, saying: “ Come air, come " ? When we look at 
the matter from the point of view of ourselves and not of 
the air, there is a sufficient reason for such invocation. The 
oppressive heat of fiery summer is scorching my mind and 
body; I feel then an acute necessity to invoke air. At such 
a moment, despite the universal presence of air, to me it 
seems to be in fact absent. It is not for respiration that I 
invoke air. I invoke the air to save me from the unbearable 
tortures of heat I suffer inwardly and outwardly—a workTHE PLAY OF GUNAS

929

which cannot be accomplished by subtle air which has not 
taken on distinctive form. For this purpose we want the 
Wind-King, who moves on the breast of the Malay a Hill, 
robs the fragrance of sandal forests, soothes the burning 
of the Universe, and suppresses the rigours of 
This is why, in spite of the universal presence of subtle 
air I then ignore it and invoke the gross air, saying, 
“Come, air! Come, 0 life-giver!” And it is not merely a 
matter of words only; for, as a matter of fact, so long as 
this body of mine is not soothed by cool and refreshing 
waves of wind blowing strongly and with its sweet life- 
inspiring touches, I may search this entire vast Uni¬ 
verse without finding anywhere the relief I seek. Similarly, 
although there is no reason, so far as She is concerned, 
for mv invoking Her, there is ample reason, so far as I 
am concerned, for my doing so. I am a Jlva scorched 
bv the fire of the three forms of sorrows. My mind and 
life are constantly on the rack of the terrible troubles of 
the Sangsfira. Suffering miserably under the influence of 
the poisonous exhalations of the world I cry day and 
night “ Save! save! ” At such a time the fact of Her being 
everywhere does not remove my burning pains. And hence, 
in spite of Her residing in all things as formless substance, 
to me Her presence seems Her absence; and, in spite of my 
knowing that Her substance is consciousness itself Her 
presence with me does not satisfy me. I want Her whose 
presence will remove all my troubles. I am completely 
surrounded by the fearful huge fire of Sangs&ra and have 
no way for escape. Scorched on all sides by the burning 
heat of this circle of fire, I, in despair, throw up my arms, 
and with heart-rending and deeply plaintive voice cry: 
" O Mother of the world ! where art Thou ? I die-I die!

1 Caused by the self, the material, and the spirit world.

09

930

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Caused by the self, the material, and the spirit world.

09

930

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

0 merciful Mother, save me! Come, 0 Mother! Come, 0 
Mother! Come, O Mother, Mother of mine! ” Instantly, 
while these words are yet in my mouth, the Mother, the 
charmer of the heart of Bhairava, 1 grieved on learning of 
Her son’s sorrow, forsakes Her golden throne on Mount 
Kail&sa,* * and, without even staying to arrange Her dress, 
hastens to and stands before me, extending Her ten fear¬ 
dispelling arms in all ten directions,* and crying: “ Fear not! 
fear not! ” Then only will my sins, my diseases, my griefs, 
my troubles, and my pains be for ever at an end. My distress 
will not be relieved without the aid of this merciful and 
gross manifestation, even though I should possess the know¬ 
ledge of Her subtle existence as the all-pervading Devi. 
Digamvara has, therefore, said: “ The Mother of the Uni¬ 
verse pervades the Universe, but still, when I am over¬ 
whelmed with sorrow, I say: ‘Come, 0 Brahraaroayl, save 
me! ’ " That the Mother of the world pervades the Universe 
is known to me as well as it is known to you; but know¬ 
ledge alone without realization will not end our troubles. 
Hence, when we are overwhelmed with sorrow, we say: 
“ Come, 0 Brahmamayl! " True it is that we invoke Her by 
saying, “ Corae,’’ but we invoke * the aspect of Her which 
governs all things, and not that in which She pervades all 
things.*

Rfiy says: “ You utter hymns in praise of Him who is 
the master of this Universe, after having offered Him all 
kinds of food. How incongruous this seems to me ! " One 
is pleased if one gets a thing which one does not possess;

' Shiva. * The abode of Shiva.

’ N., N.E., E., 8.E.. 8.. 8.W., W., N.W., Above, And Below.

* Vibhati.

v * 8 n0 ^ i°voked in Her omnipresent aspect, bat in Her form as

the Mistress of the Universe.

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

931’ N., N.E., E., 8.E.. 8.. 8.W., W., N.W., Above, And Below.

* Vibhati.

v * 8 n0 ^ i°voked in Her omnipresent aspect, bat in Her form as

the Mistress of the Universe.

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

931

but it seems highly incongruous to utter hymns m praise of 
Him whose infinite wealth consists of this entire Uni\erse, 
after offering Him all kinds of food. The offerings belong 
to His Universe, and not to you. Who are you, then, o 
offer Him that which already belongs to Him . Before 
making a gift of a thing you must establish your right o 
ownership to it. If you proceed to establish your righ o 
ownership to things which belong to Him, you will be in a 
manner liable to punishment on a charge of theft; so w a 
you gain by your offering is the punishment for theft. It 
is in reply to this that Digamvara has said: In fact, 
meditation, knowledge, water, fruit, and all things belong 
to Her whom I worship with living and inanimate things.

If one becomes liable to punishment of asserting ones 
own right to things belonging to Her, then we cannot 
avoid punishment; for we ought to have remembered 1 
when we speak of “ my wife, my son, my property, my 
familv ” and so forth, instead of only calling it to mine a 
the time of making offerings in worship.' What have 
you to call "your" in wife, son, house, and family. 
If, for the purpose of your own gratification, you can safely 
enjoy these things as your own, why should you object 
to my offering Her Her own things as though they were 
mine for Her gratification. The punishment for theft will 
be the same for you as for me; not only so, but mv punish¬ 
ment for having made offerings to Her first and then par¬ 
taken of it as Prasada* will most probably be of a different 
nature from that which you will receive for having enjoyedi A theme the author has in other places rightly enlarged open. 
We hue dualism for our own purposes; it is only when we come to the 
nuestion of worship that we conveniently seek to ignore it. ond posit a 
Sophie monism which, though lying in our mouths, is at variance

philosophic 
with all we do.

1 Dedicated food.

932

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

yourself. 1 Digamvara has therefore said that, be it medita¬ 
tion, or knowledge, or water, or fruit, everything belongs 
to Her, whom we worship with living and inanimate things. 
Your body, senses, mind, meditation, knowledge, and all, 
are Hers. If She oannot. be worshipped with offerings be¬ 
longing to Her, how can one pray to Her at all by medita¬ 
tion with a mind belonging to Her, or sing songs in Her name 
with a voice which is Her possession? You call me a thief 
if I offer Her things which are Hers, but She whose things 
they are has said: “ If a man enjoys the things given by 
Devas, such as gold, beasts, grains, and so forth, without 
first offering them to the Devas, he is a thief.” Now say, 
brother, is it I who am a thief for having made my offering, 
or you, who are a thief for not having done so ? It is true 
that this Universe is Hers, but have you and I realized it ? 
Would anything have then remained as “mine”? Many 
people are very quick to understand, as a matter of mere 
knowledge, that the Universe is “ Hers," but they find it ex¬ 
tremely difficult to put this knowledge into practice. On 
that day on which I shall really understand that everything 
is “ Hers " there will be an end of the phrase “ my " and of 
worship as well; but so long as I am incapable of doing 
that, with what face do you ridicule Her worship on the 
ground that it is "by me"? Hence I say, immersed in 
delusion as you are, it is a great blunder on your part to 
call this delusion "delusion.” Undeluded Digamvara has 
therefore said: “ In delusion is my peace. What harm does 
invocation or dismissal do to anybody?" High-souled* That is, it being conceded that all things belong to Her. the 
offence is leas if we first offer what ia Her own, and then partake of that 
which we have acknowledged to be Her own. than if without such 
tribute and worship we take for oar own sensual enjoyment what is 
not oar own.

033

THE PLAT OF GU^AS

D&eharathi Rfty * 1 also, the musical S&dhaka, has preached 
the same dootrine. In his Agamani* he writes :

“The auspicious journey* gave Mountain 4 auspicious 
fruit. On an auspicious day in an auspicious mo¬ 
ment came the Lady of Shailkara.

In haste did Mountain* perform auspicious rites of 
invocation/

On the auspicious seventh moon everything was 
ready for the auspicious worship.

The Tantradhftraka' went reciting Mantras from the

book in his hand.

Mountain began to worship Brahmamayl, knowing 
Her to be Brahman.

He sat* on his seat with a pure mind.

In various places near Cha^dl 1# the sacred book of 
Chanel began to be recited.

In the midst of this he fixed his meditation on 
ChafldI, his daughter.

And putting a flower on his head, 11 he worshipped 
Her with mental offerings.

Restless grew Mountain's mind as he saw Her.

He saw that the infinite Universe was all His Umft's.

' The celebrated Bengali poet, born 1804, died 1857.

*The coming of Dnrgft.

' That ia. the doming of DnrgA to the earth.

• Him&laya, Durga'a father. * $biva.

• Devi a father, to whose honae Devi every year went.

I MftrtgalAcharana.

' One of the priests whose duty it ia to prompt the other priests 
with Mantras from sacred books.

• Literally. " He sat with care "—that ia, he followed out the in¬ 
junctions relating to the place of sitting, the mode of posture, etc.

"The Devi, a title of Durga, §hakti of §biva. as the powerful 
victrix of the demoniac hosts.

II Before worship a flower is put on the head, often inserted in the 
§bikha (crown-lock).

934

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Everything was contained in the Daughter s womb.

The Daughter was no daughter.II Before worship a flower is put on the head, often inserted in the 
§bikha (crown-lock).

934

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Everything was contained in the Daughter s womb.

The Daughter was no daughter.

The world was filled with the Daughter’s daughters 
and sons. Millions of Brahm&s, Vishijus, and of 
Shfllap&ijtis 1 lived under the protection of Her feet. 
The Queen of Shiva was Mistress over all.

Giving up meditating, Mountain said, a hundred 
streams flowing from his eyes :

‘ What have I, 0 ChaijtjLl! with whioh to worship Thy 
feet? I am not in truth the monarch of this 
dominion.

0 Brahmamayl! whose artioles, then, shall I give to 
whom ?

Under the influence of delusion people say, “ My, my! ”

And who is it who lives in the household A§hrama * * 
who is not deluded ?

0 Mah&m&ya! what a Maya (delusion) it is that thou 
hast cast upon me !

I pray Thee accept my offerings.’ ”

Song

“ 0 Umft!* what riches have I that I can give Thee ? 
Shutting my eyes, I see that all things in the Uni¬ 
verse are Thine.

1 A came of Shiva as holder of the trident.

* Stage of life of which there are four— viz., student (Brahmachirl). 
household (grihastha) here spoken of, forest recluse (v&naprastha). and 
wandering beggar (bhikshu). According to the Mah&nirvftpa Tantra 
there are only two Afhramas in the Kaliyuga— vis., the second and 
fourth.

' Spouse of Shiva so called, according to K&lld&sa's Kum&ra- 
sambhavam, because “ By the words ' U, Ml' (‘ oh, not ’) She was thus 
forbidden by Her mother to practise austerity. Thereafter the pure 
XJm& obtained Her name."

935

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

What gems and garments shall I give Thee w en e 
sea, which is the mine of gems, is Thy servant, and

in golden Kashi Thou dost live ? t .

0 Ishvarl Annapfirpft, 1 who can say that Hara is a 
beggar, when Kuvera* is the store-keeper in His 
house? The three worlds ^are beggars at the door 
of Thy three-eyed beggar.” *

Highly pleased, the Devi, with good cheer, said to Her

father: tHighly pleased, the Devi, with good cheer, said to Her

father: t

“ Finish the worship whioh you have resolved on.

True the infinite Universe is all Mine. ^

The wealth I have given You is Your own.

By ChapdTs * * grace Mountain worshipped the feet of

Chandl. , , „

The seventh moon day ended, and night approached.

Ah! how charming! This is truly the Devi’s divine 
message in the heart of the devotee! “ Finish the wor¬ 
ship which you have resolved on. Your mental worship 
is done on your understanding that all things in the 
Universe are Mine. Now finish the outer worship which 
you have resolved on in the notion that it is yours. 
Lest you should say, “What I shall offer you in outer 
worship is also Thine,” the Mother, who dwells m all 
hearts, has said by way of reply: “True, the infinite 
Universe is all mine, but the wealth I have given jou is

1 The Devi as Lady Bountiful—giver of food.

' $hi va. * God of Riches.

• Sangkalpa (see Introduction, “ Mah&nirv&ija Tantra ).

• That is to say. as explained later, the wealth in respect.of which 
; he Devi has given the SAdhaka the illusory notion that it is his own.

• The Devi (see ante).

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

936• That is to say. as explained later, the wealth in respect.of which 
; he Devi has given the SAdhaka the illusory notion that it is his own.

• The Devi (see ante).

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

936

your own.” 1 From whose month, but that of the Mother, 
can I expect such a simple reply in such sweet, simple 
words ? “ Although the Infinite Universe is all Mine, 
the wealth I have given you—that is to say, the wealth 
in regard to which I have given you the sense of ' mine* * 
ness'—is your own; for this sense of ‘mineness,’ which 
you have also, is My gift. Although the title to the sub¬ 
stance of the thing is Mine, the title to its enjoyment 
is yours. To-day you offer this title of yours to Me, and 
in doing so you will finish your worship. Give Me, 0 
father! the burden that is Mine, and be free from care 
yourself. Let Me to-day free you from all burdens by 
taking them on Myself.” 0 Mountain King! this is the 
way in which is accomplished the worship of those who 
see with their eyes that all is Hers instead of merely 
babbling of it with their tongue. Blessed are you as a 
worshipper in this Sangsfira! You are the best of those 
who have worshipped the Mother! You have said: “ Under 
the influence of delusion people say, 4 My, my! ’ And who 
is it who lives in the household Ashrama 7 who is not 
deluded ? ” But we do not know if there was ever in this 
world an undeluded follower of the household A§hrama 
like you.* Millions of great Yogis have been unable to 
master, by means of their undeluded inner worship, what 
you have achieved in the household Ashrama, through 
deluded outer worship. 4

* Though not really so the Sftdhaka's wealth appears to be his own, 
as it is the Devi Himself who is the cause of the delusion that it belongs 
to him. So long as the S&dhaka is under delusion the wealth U really 
his. What is the use of talking about it as ” Her wealth " unless this 
is realized by dispelling the illusion ?

' Vide ante. ' Himalaya, the Den's father.' Vide ante. ' Himalaya, the Den's father.

* " Deluded " is not here used in a condemnatory sense, but in the 
sense that it is dualistic, and like all which is such in a sense delusive.

937

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

Everyone in this world performs outer worship, but 
has the Treasure of the heart ever issued to oonsole anyone 
as She has done for you? Full of Spirit, 1 full of Brah¬ 
man, and full of bliss, is my Mother. Although She is 
the presiding Devata in the heart, She has come to receive 
your outer worship. To whose house does She thus come 
of Her own accord and with loving regard to grant success 
to the S&dhana of the S&dhaka, after having passed an 
anxious year* * in Her jewelled residence in Kail&sa, the 
seat of peace ? Who is so fortunate in this Universe as 
to be able to place before himself the Devata, full of 
Spirit 1 and of Brahman, residing in the heart, as a Devata 
in visible form* at the very beginning of worship? Who 
is so fortunate that She who is the treasure sought in 
Sadhana seeks from him outer worship of Her own accord ? 
Not only have you 4 the glorious title of Gaurls Guru, 
but you are the Guru of the whole world by reason of your 
having initiated it in the worship of Gaurl. It is on being 
initiated in the great Mantra of Gaurls worship received 
from you that this Sangsara, consisting of moving and 
unmoving things, has to-day become entitled to the Durga 
Paja festival. For this reason Durga, the treasure acquired 
by you, through austere Sadhana is your Daughter, despite 
that She is the Mother of the Universe. Who has the 
power to worthily express the blessedness of the Mother ? 
But O Mountain King, the prince of devotees! 0 Siddha 
King, the beloved father of Siddhe§hvarl! * Blessed,

' Jyotih. * In anxiety for her parents. ' Mftrtimayl.

' Bim&laya, the Devi’s father.' Jyotih. * In anxiety for her parents. ' Mftrtimayl.

' Bim&laya, the Devi’s father.

' Gaurl is the Devi. The Devi Parana says: " She who was burned 
by the fire of Toga was again born of Himalaya. As She has the colour 
of the conch, jasmine, and moon, She is called Gaurl.” She is of a 
golden colour.

• The Devi, as mistress of all Siddhi (success). Her father is Siddha, 
as the possessor of it.

938

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

blessed, blessed are you to-day! and blessed are we, the 
inhabitants of the world, in that we have you for our 
maternal grandfather. Hence we say: “ 0 Lord ! we pray 
Thee to make the fountain of the love of your Daughter, 
the charmer of Shiva, to play for once in the desert of the 
hearts of those who are unblessed in the world through 
failure to understand this blessedness of Yours. Let high 
waves of the sweet cry of ‘Mother’ cool their burning, 
stony hearts, and may infinite streams of bliss flow to-day 
through the earth by the grace of its supporter.”*

It is with reference to the above-mentioned notions of 
delusion that Ray 1 has said in another song:

“ Whose are you ? Who is yours ? Whom do you call 
your own ? It is a dream which you have seen in 
the sleep of great delusion.*

Just as a man mistakes a rope for a snake, so this world, 
which isacompound of the five elements, is false. The 
immaculate * One alone being true.

At night all sorts of birds live happily on the same 
tree. When, however, morning comes, they all fly 
away to different places.

Know that advisers, friends, relations, and all will 
similarly pass away in time, and there will be none 
to prevent them doing so.

When cruel death will grasp you, where will your 
flowers be, your sandal paste, jewelled ornaments, 
the men and women you love, your wealth, youth, 
honour, and your pride ? ”

Ray has seen the horrors of delusion in the fearful 
dream of M&y& * sleep in the earthly Sangs&ra. What he

1 The Mountain

' Raj& ItAm Mohan R&y. * Mah&m&yA.Ray has seen the horrors of delusion in the fearful 
dream of M&y& * sleep in the earthly Sangs&ra. What he

1 The Mountain

' Raj& ItAm Mohan R&y. * Mah&m&yA.

' Nirafljana. * The aleep of delusion of worldly life.

939

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

has said is doubtless true, approved of all SbAstras, and 
admitted by everyone ; but even this SangsAra, full of delu¬ 
sion as it is, appears to be the seat of unending peace when 
one hears what high-souled Digamvara has said on experi¬ 
encing the most peaceful dream of that MAyA-sleep, which 
is full of the Mother. Digamvara's reply is:

The Mother is mine, I am the Mother’s, and I call Her 
my own. I see in my dream the Mother who is 
MahAmAyA. 1

When through mistake you think you see a snake in 
what is only a rope, do you then say that both the 
snake and the rope are false ?

After living happily together at night, birds fly away in 
different directions. But they return again as I do.

The coming and going in this SangsAra gives news of 
its permanency and of its truth. The thought of the 
Feet of Her who is made of consciousness is the 
bondage of SangsAra.” * *

What incomparable strength floods in the unswerving 
heart of the devotee who has held the great Shakti in it! 
Immediately he is asked under the infallible authority * of 
the VedAnta Philosophy, “ Whose are you ? Who is yours ? ” 
the world-oonquering devotee replies boldly and proudly, 
“ I am the Mother’s, and the Mother is mine.” Whom do 
you call your own ? ” “I call Her my own.” It is no dream 
which you have seen in the sleep of great delusion. I see 
in my dream the Mother who is MahAmAyA. The dream of 
MAyA frightens you out of your wits. I see in my dream

1 As both the Yielder and the Victrix of Mftyft.

* Life itself is a S&dhana. and every Jlva is willingly or unwillingly 
a Sadhakn. Before he can attain liberation be mu&t accomplish that 
worship for which he is in the world, and until it is accomplished he ia 
bound thereto.' Literally, “ with the force of the infallible weapon."

940

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the Mother who is Mah&m&y& Herself, the Queen over that 
M&y&. How can Maya make him afraid to whom Mother 
Mah&m&y& reveals Herself ?

*' The world which is a compound of five elements is 
false, the Immaculate One 1 (alone) being true.” This is 
true as much for me as for you. But you say that whatever 
is seen in this Sangs&ra, made of M&y&, be it in the earthly 
Sangs&ra or in the Sangs&ra* * of S&dhana, is a dream (just 
as through mistake a man sees a snake in a rope).* From 
this it follows that you are a non-dualist, and have no faith 
in anything whioh is dualistic. It is therefore certain that 
yon have no faith in S&dhana, because it deals with the 
worshipper and the worshipped. Since you have no faith in 
S&dhana, and neither know what it is nor practise it, you 
will not be able to understand this Mfty&-sleep and dream 
even if they be explained to you. It is, therefore, useless to 
discuss them with you. Or perhaps what you have said is 
not intended for the Sangs&ra of S&dhana, in which case also 
there is nothing to say. Now, “ Just as through mistake a 
man sees a snake in a rope, so the world which is a com¬ 
pound of five elements is false.” This also is true. What, 
however, we must here understand is the answer to the 
question, “ When does it become false ? for whom does 
it become false ? and who may and may not say that it 
is false ? ”

Digamvara therefore says: I admit that the seeing of 
a snake in a rope is caused by mistake and is consequently 
false; but “ when through mistake you see a snake in a 
rope, do you then say that both the snake and the rope 
are false ? " When a man is frightened by the sight of a 
tiger in a dream, does he then think that the tiger is false?

1 Nirafijaua.

* Hero the author plays on the word. The sense is the sphere of 
S&dhana. ' Author's parenthesis.

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

9411 Nirafijaua.

* Hero the author plays on the word. The sense is the sphere of 
S&dhana. ' Author's parenthesis.

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

941

If so, would anybody have ever been frightened by the 
sight of a tiger in a dream ? True, it is that the tiger of a 
dream is eventually, seen to be false, but that is after the 
dream passes off. Similarly, by mistake one sees a snake 
in a rope. It is true that the snake is false. But this 
knowledge of falsity is gained when the mistake is dis* 
covered. How, then, can you realize that the Sangs&ra is 
false during such time as you see the Sangs&ra dream in 
the sleep of M&y& ? It is precisely because Jlvas do not 
realize this that the teachings of the M&y& doctrine are 
unheeded by Jlva« in the Sangs&ra.

Another thing: if there is M&y&, whose Mftyft is it ? 
If even whilst living in the midst of M&yft I gain Her from 
whom M&y& comes, then notwithstanding that M&y& is full 
of falsehood, the working of MSya becomes full of truth 
for me. 1 As even in dreams people take real medicines, 
or laugh real laughs in the ecstasy of unreal joy, or really 
weep on seeing the horrors of unreal danger, or are really 
engaged in discussion on reaching unreal places of debate; 
so if in the dream of Sangs&ra in the M&y&-sleep I can 
reach the domain of S&dhana and truly obtain the Mother 
whose substance is truth, then what better dream of happi¬ 
ness or better dream of peace can I have than this M&y& ? 
As people's dreams pass off the moment they receive 
medicine therein,* so if my dream of M&y& also passes off 
in consequence of my receiving the great remedy for the 
disease of existence, then I shall be blessed. If my practice' That is. by true worship the SAdhaka gains the Mother Herself. 
If he succeeds in this, then, in spite of his being in the midst of MAyA, 
he has attained the highest aim of being which is full of truth. Mfty& 
cannot harm the SAdhaka, for the latter possesses the very Devatfl 
from whom MAyA comes and who is its Mistress.

' As where a person with an ailment dteams that medicine is given 
to him by some Do vat A, which dream wakes him up ; as. for instance, 
at the §hiva at T&rakeahvara.

942 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' As where a person with an ailment dteams that medicine is given 
to him by some Do vat A, which dream wakes him up ; as. for instance, 
at the §hiva at T&rakeahvara.

942 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of S&dhana on the dualistio understanding that She is the 
Mother and I am the son, She is the Master and I am the 
servant, secures for me Her grace, then of a surety I shall 
be able to float joyously on the bosom of the sea of monism, 
swimming in the waves of dualism. 1 As undecaying, im¬ 
mortal, and indestructible consciousness I shall flow on 
the current of devotion, instead of sinking in the unfathom¬ 
able depth of liberation, and thus swimming through the 
sea of liberation I shall at length land on that shore which 
is the Feet of the Devi with dishevelled hair. Then waking, 
I shall see that my dream has really brought me to the 
Bhore of KulakundalinI,* * and that in consequence of receiv¬ 
ing the great remedy for the disease of existence the sleep 
of existence has in truth passed away. Digamvara has 
therefore said: It is well that you see a dream in sleep 
and do not awake again. Had you really woken, then 
that awaking would have been happy and peaceful. But 
what you call waking is only a play of wakefulness with¬ 
out awaking, and itself a bad dream. Real waking brings 
happiness and peace, whilst wakefulness without waking 
drives them away, producing want of peace, and the 
lamentation, “Alas! I am lost.” Did all birds when leav¬ 
ing the trees do so for good and all, then the trees would 
have become birdless in a single day. Similarly, had all 
Jlvas passed away for good and all, the Sangs&ra would 
have ended in a single age.* But just as birds fly away 
in the morning and return in the evening, so Jlvaa 
pass away when they die and return when they are born 
again. Hence it follows that what you call transiency 
of the Sangs&ra is in a way nothing but its flowing per¬ 
manence. Moreover, the constant coming and going to1 The motionless sea itself is monism, but the waves with which it 
is agitated are dualism.

* The Devi presiding in the Mftl&db&ra.

* Yuga.

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

943

this and the next world gives news of the permanence and 
truth of the SaDgs&ra. The Sangs&ra therefore is per¬ 
manently permanent in spite of its transiency; 1 and 
thought of the feet of Her whose substance is conscious¬ 
ness is the only permanent chain which binds me to this 
Sangs&ra. I love the permanent Sangs&ra always and 
with all my heart, lest monistio experience should unite 
the Mother and the son into one.* *

I cannot bear this SangsAra, for I am terribly afraid, 
lest falling under the charm of liberation I should loosen 
my hold of the Feet of the Mother with dishevelled hair. 
How can I when liberated rest satisfied unless I have the 
Mother, and can call upon Her ten times every half an 
hour: “Mother, O Mother! 0 Mother! Mother mine! 0 
Um&! 0 Shyamft ! O Mother, Mother ? "

This is why I say that even liberation is not more 
agreeable than being bound by the chain of the Mother’s 
love. And Digamvara has, therefore, said: “ Thought of 
the Feet of Her whose substance is consciousness is the 
bondage of Sangs&ra.” * As to the last few lines of R&y’s 
song, the naked (Digamvara) Sangs&ra of Digamvara * did 
not contain any of the things mentioned in them.' So he 
did not care to give any reply to them.

1 The world may be in flax, bnt the flax is a permanent thing.

' The position here taken iB that of the Bhakta or devotee, whose 
devotion can only And play in a dualistic world which is shattered on 
the attainment of Brahmajn&na. ' Vide ante.

* There is a play on the word Digamvara. The name also means 
" naked."

* Digamvara has answered the other lines of Bam Moban Ray, bnt 
not those at p. 938 about flowers, sandal paste, jewele, etc., which did 
not form part of bis world, and about which therefore he did not 
trouble.

944

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Ray has, again, said :944

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Ray has, again, said :

“ Alas by whom have you been deluded, 0 mind f 
How unfortunate it is that you believe imagination 
to be truth!

You cannot give life to that which is under your 
control and yet desire to attain Him who is the life 
of the world.

Sometimes you give the image ornaments and some¬ 
times good food. At one time you establish it and 
at another destroy.

You make that dance before you, 1 which, neverthe¬ 
less, you believe to be your Lord. Who has ever 
seen so much folly anywhere in this Sangs&ra ? ” 
Digamvara replies:

“ She, the Charmer of the world, has deluded the world 
with Maya. The Mother has revealed Herself, mak¬ 
ing imagination true.

On imagination is She established, in imagination 
I give Her life. But this much I know, that truly 
do I offer myself to Her.

Sometimes I give Her ornaments and sometimes food. 
At one time I establish Her and at another destroy.

I see Her as Mother danoing on the breast of Father, 
and in fear I say: O Thou who art all, save all! ” 
The Sadhaka will here notice what a great difference 
there is between the two. Ray asks, “ Alas ! by whom have 
you been deluded, O mind ? ”

Digamvara replies: “Why mind alone? She, the 
Charmer of the world, has deluded the world with Maya."

Do you think that you will escape being deluded by 
the Maya of Her whose Maya deludes the three worlds ?

Devi in some of Her forme appears as a dancer: one of the 
names of KAU is Nptya-K&ll. or the " dancing KAIL"

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

946Devi in some of Her forme appears as a dancer: one of the 
names of KAU is Nptya-K&ll. or the " dancing KAIL"

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

946

Moreover, what you consider to be a folly in image-worship 
iB also to be found in your worship of Sangs&ra. 1 If in 
spite of the worship of Sangs&ra being false you oonsider 
it to be true, why should you not consider the worship of 
images also to be true ? While you yearn for the company 
of father, mother, wife, son, and so forth, despite the fact 
that your relationship with them is false, why should you 
not also consider Her oompany an event of singular good 
fortune for you ?

Next, had it been my imagination whioh I believed to 
be the truth, then you might say that I was mistaken. 
But it is not so. This imagination is Hers, who has created 
the universe out of Her imagination. She has thus oreated 
wife and son, and we cannot forget them. How oan we, 
then, forget the form * which She has oreated (or imagined) * 
for Herself. Hence, while you say: “How unfortunate 
it is that you believe imagination to be the truth,” we 
say: “ Alas! what a pity that you consider truth to be 
imagination in relation to the domain of S&dhana only, 
and not in relation to the 8angsara also.” This is a sign 
of great self-forgetfulness. You may, however, say: “ Al¬ 
though the Sangs&ra iB an imagination, an image does not 
appear to me to be as true as my parents.” What matters 
it to anybody that it does not ? What matters it to the 
Bun that the owl does not see it ? Moreover, had it been 
possible for us to see whenever one so wished, you might 
perhaps with some reason have said: “ I do not see.” But 
here, She whom I want to see must show Herself before 
I can see.* Henoe I do not wish to affirm of anything that

1 That is, porsait of worldly objects. * Marti : image.

* There is all along a play on the word Kalpanft, which means both 
“ imagination " and ” creation." Moreover, the creation is Ifhvara's 
imagination.* There is all along a play on the word Kalpanft, which means both 
“ imagination " and ” creation." Moreover, the creation is Ifhvara's 
imagination.

* He to whom She shows Herself can alone see.

w

946

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

it is true.' But She, on Her side-gives reality to Her 
imagination (or creation) and presents Herself to view. 
What can you say to this ? If it seems impossible to you 
that She who can give reality to such an imagination as 
is this vast and yet false universe can also (being Herself 
truth personified) give reality to Her own promise, then 
I have nothing more to say, for wonderful indeed is your 
knowledge of truth! As Her image is an imagination, so 
also is Her presidency therein. As the giving of life to 
the image is an imagination, so life also is au imagination; 
as the Sangs&ra is an imagination, so you and I also are 
an imagination; and, last of all, Her imagination (or 
creation) also is an imagination. It is thus a pure futility 
to discuss the point. So long as the imagination (or crea¬ 
tion) of the forms which you and I possess is true, so also 
is Her form, even though imagined by Her, yet, true, true, 
true. On the same day on whioh your “ you-ness " and 
my “ I-ness ” will disappear, Her “ She-ness ” also will 
disappear. For the moment you had better consider your¬ 
self an imagination than call Her such. Hence I make 
that dance before me, which I believe to be my Lord (it 
is not I who cause the dancing).* * I see Her as Mother 
dancing (of her own accord) on the breast of Father, and 
so in fear I say: "O Thou who art all, save all! ” When 
I do not forget the multiple form of Her* who is all, what 
great sin have I committed that I should forget this form 
which is Herself in reality? Her form will ever remain 
an imagination * to such men as do not know Her, but1 Everything is in n sense untrue, but until this is realized it is idle 
to select out one thing from nn illusive Sangsfira as true and reject 
another thing as false.

* Author's parenthesis; but She again it is who is the cause of that 
appearance of dancing to the S&dhalta.

' That is, the world.

* That U, an unreality.

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

947

those who wish to see form and have faith in Her ever 
say : “ The Mother has revealed Herself, making imagina¬ 
tion true.”

In another song Ray says: “ O mind! always do 
S&dhana of Him who, being without Gu^as,' is the seat of 
Gugas, and is without imagination.” Digamvara (the 
S&dhaka), the ohosen son of Digamvara (Shiva), at once 
says in reply: “ Why, then, madman, do you do S&dhana 
of Him, if He is without Gtu?asand without imagination?”'

We have not been able to find a subsequent verse in 
whioh another portion of Digamvara’s reply is contained. 
First of all R&y says: “ Always do S&dhana of Him.” This 
Sadhana is not the S&dhana spoken of in the Sh&stra. It 
is R&y’s own S&dhana. For, in one of the following lines 
he says that Siddhi and suoh other things “ are fancies of 
the mind, impossible of achievement.” (And yet he tells 
us that we are always to do S&dhana of Him!)' Next he 
says: “ Wonderfully is the universe made. See the work 
and believe in its Author. Know only that He exists, 
beyond thoughts.” To this Digamvara replies: “ If you 
know only that He exists, why, then, do you sing songs ? 
On whom do you meditate when dosing your eyes, and 
whom do you think of?' Here Digamvara has proved 
that there is no correspondence between R&y's words and 
his aotions. In another song R&y says: “ What an error it 
is (of yours),* * 0 mind! The eye does not see Him whom you

* See Introduction " MahAnirvApa Tantra." #u6 t-oce “ Guna.”

1 Without KalpanA—the expression here meanB the same thing as 
Nishkriya. or inaction.* See Introduction " MahAnirvApa Tantra." #u6 t-oce “ Guna.”

1 Without KalpanA—the expression here meanB the same thing as 
Nishkriya. or inaction.

' Author’s parenthesis. This is absurd, for §hAstrik SAdhana is 
done to obtain Siddhi. and Siddhi is the result of due Sfldhana.

* How can we think anything of that of which we know nothing, 
except that it is something which exists.

* This parenthesis belongs to the original song.

948

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

wish to see. The ether surrounds the Universe. How is 
it that you consider Him to be like the ether who has made 
it so widespread ? ”

“ What pains you are at to display Him who makes the 
sun, moon, and other planets to move constantly! And we 
want to feed Him who is higher than the highest, who gives 
food to men, birds, beasts, and oreatures of the waters! ”

He who does not see the fruits of a work calls it a folly. 
This is why Ray has said, “ What an error it is! ” But he 
who has reaped its fruits has, with a clear vision, said: 
“ It is not an error, it is not an error. Look there, look. 
There stands my Brahmamayi shedding light in darkness. 
Under Her feet lies Mahesha, prostrate and unable to move. 
Hundreds of thousands of human arms form Her waist- 
ohain. From Her eyes issue the fire of suns and moons. 
Her mouth utters the words * * fear not, fear not.’ She sends 
forth peals of loud laughter. Fearful is She to look upon. 
The Heavens tremble. Victorious is She in battle. Free 
is the laugh She laughs with Her terrible mouth. The earth 
trembles under Her swan-like gait.' Keeping time, grace¬ 
fully She dances, tAthai, tathai." :In the oourse of his reply to another's words, Digam* 
vara has in this place given an aocount of his own work. 
SAdhana has here trampled on argument and carried the 
Sadhaka to the visible temple of Siddhe§hvarI, J and what 
it shows him there makes him speak incessantly words 
whioh depiot his own thought, leaving him no leisure to 
reply to those of others. Just as, if a man meditates on 
some subjeot before he falls asleep an indistinct shadow of

1 A waddling movement in women like that of a duck or swan is 
considered beautiful, for the swaying movements reveal the hips and 
their action.

* An onom&topeeic word to denote the thud of dancing.

* The Devi as Lord of all Siddhi.

949

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

that subjeofc falls on his dreams (even if the dream relates 
to a different matt-er), so the sky, the sun, and the moon, 
which had passed through Digamvara’s mind before he 
composed the song and was considering v ‘ Whether it is a 
mistake,” appeared indistinctly along with the Virata* form 
of the Mother of the World. Digamvara was at that time 
lost in what he saw when he sfl.id,“ Look there, look, or in 
what he saw before he said, “ Look there, look.A Sadhaka will here observe what a difference there is 
between Sadhana and philosophical reasoning a difference 
as great as that between Heaven and Hell. Can the 
bubbles of philosophical and scientific reasoning attraot the 
notice of him who has sunk into the play of the waves of 
the oharming sweetness of the Charmer of the world ? 
Ah, how sweet, how sweet ? What an accomplishment in 
S&dhana! It is as if She who is life itself has thrown 
the gate of life open and plays before the eyes of the 
devotee, and the devoted Sadhaka, clapping his bands, 
fills himself with the sight and then shows it to the world, 
saying: “ Look there, look at my Mother! Free is the 
laugh She is laughing with Her terrible mouth. The earth 
trembles under Her swan-like gait, and keeping time She 
is gracefully dancing, tathai, tathai. * Blessed S&dhaka, 
blessed are you ! blessed is the earth with your blessing !

ADHYiTMIKISM 1

We give a hundredfold praise to the community whioh 
suffers from the mental malady whioh makes them say

* The vast form. 1 Vide ante.

' Adhyfttma and AdhyAtmiltR are adjectives meaning that which 
belongs or relates to the AtmA or Self. When used with Jnftna or 
YidyA it means the inner doctrine such as that taught by the Upani- 
shads. Here the term is used in the sense of a mistaken over-subtlety, 
a false esotericism ; a discovery of imaginary hidden meanings in plain 
statements, which it does not suit the esoteric" interpreter to accept, 
and accordingly resort i6 had to allegory.

950 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA950 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

that the Deity can have no form for having themselves 
afforded us the means by which they can be found out. 
But there is another class of interpreters who suffer from 
a contagious fever, whose mere touch is fatal, and who 
yet oan by no means be so easily found out. These men 
have surpassed the two Adhibhautik and Adhidaivik king- 
doms and entered into the Adhyatmik realm. * 1 * * Hence, 
whatever may be their practice, they are in speech advocates 
of Adhyfttmikism. To them even the visible SangsAra 
formed of the five elements is almost Adhyatmik, not to 
speak of invisible abodes of the Devat&s, Dharma, the next 
world, and so forth.

According to them, Vedas, Tantras, PurAi?a$, Itihasas,* 
are allegorioal; Brahma, Vishpu, and Mahe§hvara, are 
allegorical * persons; and so are Prakriti and Purusha, the 
ten Avat&ras; 4 the ten MahAvidyAs* and all Devas and 
Devls are all allegorical beings; NArada and other Rishis 
are allegorical persons; and bo are Madhu, Kaitabha, Hirap- 
\ftksha, Hirapyaka^hipu, Shumbha, Ni§humbha, Mahi- 
shAsura, RAvana, Kumbhakarpa, Eangsa, Shi^hupAla, 
JarAsandha,* and others; the five PAridavas,’ DraupadI,* 
Duryyodhana,' and others are allegorioal persons ; and so, 
too, are VidyAdharas, Kinnaras, ApsarAs, ChAranas, Sid- 
dhas, Gand harvas, Yakshas," Rakshas,” Bhatas, Pretas, 1 *

The author is here sarcastic, referring to the threefold divisions 
of the world, the Devas. and the self. They give the go by to the 
two former, but suffer the pains of Beif- imagination.

' Historical works. » Rapaka.

' The ten incarnations of Vishpu. as Matsya, Vartha. etc.

q, J T ^ e ^n great appearances (mflrti) of the Devi, as Kali. Tara 
BhOMfhl, Chhinnamasta. Dhamavatl, Bagali. Bhairavl, Kamala, 
Bhubaneshvarl. Matangl. See ante.

I Various Asuras. * Sons of PAp<jlu. • Their wife.

Head of the Kauravas, the cousins of the Papdavae.

" DevayonU of various classes. " Demoniac spirits.I Various Asuras. * Sons of PAp<jlu. • Their wife.

Head of the Kauravas, the cousins of the Papdavae.

" DevayonU of various classes. " Demoniac spirits.

Ghosts, spirits before the performance of the obsequial rites.

951

THE PLAY OF GU^AS

Pi^haohas, 1 Daityas, and D&navas 1 ; the cities Kfisbl, Kafichi, 
Avanti, Ayodhy&, Mathura, Mftyft, Virajft, Dvaraka, Hastina, 
the sun, the moon, the planets, the stars, Svarga, Martya, 
Ras&tala,* * are all allegorical things. Even the ascending 
generations above father and grandfather and the des¬ 
cendants grandson and great-grandson are allegorical. 
In short, whatever we actually see and touch is true, 
everything whioh is invisible is allegorical. We are told 
that fools who are unable to grasp the weighty, solemn, 
and hidden principles of the Sh&stra, perform the Shr&d- 
dha 4 of fourteen generations. But, as a matter of fact 
grandfather, great grandfather, and the like, ba\e hidden 
Adhy&tmik or “scientific” meanings. For instance, the 
word Vang^ha means a duster of bamboos. Father, grand¬ 
father, and so forth, are each a pQra (link) of that 
bamboo. This is why they are called PQrvapurusha* 
(forefathers).* The Aryyan Sh&stra enjoins that every 
year Shr&ddha should be performed for them, and the 
Sh&stra explains the word Shr&ddha as whatever is given 
to Pityis out of Shr&ddha or respect is called Shr&ddha. 
We are, however, told that the injunction that Shr&ddha 
should be performed every year for them means that every 
year a new cluster of bamboos should be planted round 
the house in a reverential spirit. Such men as have 
clusters of bamboos in their houses know this rule very 
well.' This is the seoret Adhy&tmik interpretation of the 
Sh&strik oommand, and this is why the Sh&stra says that 
the Vang^has (lines of descendants) of those who annually 
perform Shr&ddha for PUrvapurushas never die out; that

1 Demoniac spirit.

' Enemies of the Devs*.

* The upper, earthly, and nether worlds.1 Demoniac spirit.

' Enemies of the Devs*.

* The upper, earthly, and nether worlds.

‘ Obsequial rites (see post). * Author's parenthesis.

• This is, of coarse, all sarcasm.

952

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

is to say, their houses never stand in want of bamboos, 
and so on. Similarly, we are to understand that all the 
rules and regulations contained in the Sh&stra concerning 
worship and like matters are equally allegorical. That 
people do not understand them to be so, but take them in 
a different light, is due simply to the laok of discoverers of 
their hidden meanings or Adhy&tmik interpreters.

0 S&dhaka! suoh matters as worship of Devas and 
Devls have also interpretations similar to the interpreta¬ 
tions of Shrftddha you have heard above. These inter¬ 
pretations are nowadays so widely preached to the public 
that we refrain from relating them here. In fact, just as 
when Bhagavan R&ma Chandra, whose life was in J&naki, 1 
had gone in pursuit of M&rloha, the horrible RAkshasa 
Ravana appeared in the garb of a Br&hmana practising 
austerities at the door of the cottage of the Mah&lakshml 1 * 
of the solar race on the pretext of begging alms; so these 
Dhai inarakshasas, seeing that the Arvya society is now¬ 
adays equally masterless, helpless, and desolate, have slowly 
come forth in the garb of beggars and stood at the door of 
Dhannapravptti. 4 By reason of the nature of the present 
age Bhagavan is at a great distance from us. Our only 
course of safety lies in keeping to the rules laid down by 
devoted seekers of the truth concerning Bhagavan. Dharma- 
pravfitti needs, therefore, to be loudly warned to-day lest 
J&nakl cross the circle drawn by Lakshmapa about her.

1 8lta. daughter of RAjA Janaka. wife of R&ma.

Sit®, who was, as it were, the great Lakshmf or tutelar}' goddess 
of the solar race to which her husband Rama belonged.

* Evil spirits, destroyers of true religion.Sit®, who was, as it were, the great Lakshmf or tutelar}' goddess 
of the solar race to which her husband Rama belonged.

* Evil spirits, destroyers of true religion.

* Religious instinct; that inclination (pravyitti) in men which leads 
them to religion.

. a L I ? i,e i - U dr f^ n betwe « n the circumstances of 8ltA , 6 abduction 
and the abduction of Dharmapravyitti by the Dbarmarftkshasas.

THE PLAY OF GUNAS &68

The present band of interpreters have undoubtedly the 
inner natures of R&kshasas however much they may out¬ 
wardly appear as ascetics. It is only until such time as they 
shall get the Dharmapravfitti* of the publio completely in 
their power that they will continue to expound such sweet 
interpretations as herdswomen means sensuous functions'; 
Shrikyishna means Atm&; cloth means shame*; Kadamba 
tree * means Shatchakra*; His blue colour is the sky ! the 
hues of dawn are his yellow doth; the rainbow is his 
oharming diadem, and so on. Later on, when enticed by 
these apparently sweet interpretations, the Dharmapravjitti 1 * * 4 * * 
of the public has said ** Yea ” to them, and stepped beyond 
the bonds prescribed for it,* they will at once throw off 
this ascetio garb, and, revealing their frightful Rftkshasa 
aspect, say that “ Shrlkjish^a ” or “ His Ilia (play) ” are un¬ 
realities, but that, in order to attract the minds of ignorant 
people, the authors of Sh&stras have thus allegorically 
explained the (omnipresence) of formless Brahman. 7 Then, 
oppressed by the demoniac power of the RAkshasaa, our 
Dharmapravritti will go weeping to the other side of 
the sea. On the way it may perhaps meet one or two 
Jat&yus,* but they will not be able to rescue it from the 
R&ksliasas’ hands. We know that Bhagavftn himself is

1 Vide ante. p. 962.

* Referring to the Gopls who worshipped Krishna.

* Referring to the incident when Krishna removed the clothes of 
the bathing Gopls to compel them to appear before him naked.1 Vide ante. p. 962.

* Referring to the Gopls who worshipped Krishna.

* Referring to the incident when Krishna removed the clothes of 
the bathing Gopls to compel them to appear before him naked.

4 Nauolea cadamba. a tree with fragrant orange blossoms under 
which Krishna played.

* The T&ttvik centres, Malftdh&r*. etc. See A. Avalon's “ Serpent 
Power."

* That is, by S&dhakas and Bhakt&s. ’ Nir&k&ra.

* When Havana was carrying away SltA, on the road he met Jatftyu, 
a great bird who was SltA’s father-in-law's friend. JafAyu fought with 
RAvana. bat was killed by him.

954

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

ever solioitous to rescue Dharmapravjitti, which is the 
object of His love. But that is no reason why we should 
willingly invite danger. No one should find time or incli¬ 
nation to discuss the inferences and conclusions of such 
men. Whenever one meets them one should summarily 
dismiss them from the door, saying, “ Begone! ” Of course, 
if one thinks that a guest should not be dismissed without 
a gift, one may give him suoh as he deserves. 1Whatever a mau does is done with a motive. These 
people also have theirs. It is, however, amusing to see 
how they dare expose their beloved Simul cotton-fruit 5 to 
a violent storm—a fruit which, if but slightly touched, 
bursts into a hundred fragments before a thousand eyes. 
The Shastra has, we are told, described the Devatft, the 
Devata’s play,' and the seat of 6uch play,* * allegorically; 
but has also told me that in order to see that holy place 
of pilgrimage of allegory I must travel 60,000 yojanas.* 
I must, then, really waste this real body of mine to a 
skeleton for the allegorical Devata, and for it I am called 
upon to say: “ I must either accomplish my objeot or die 
in the attempt." The Adhyatmik interpreter has, of course, 
explained all this in the Adhyatmik fashion, but I am at 
a loss to make out how I can now give an Adhyatmik 
interpretation of himself. If the facts are not real, but 
imaginary, was it right on the part of Bhagavan and the 
$ishis who promulgated the Shastra to delude the hearts 
of simple folks with allegorioal falsities. The purpose of 
the Shastra is to kindle the light of true knowledge in 
the hearts of men ; and yet we^are asked to say that it is 
that same Shastra whioh throws the world into a deep,

1 Give him some blows.

* When the covering is barst, the cotton within is blown away.

^ * A yojana is eight or nine miles.

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

9661 Give him some blows.

* When the covering is barst, the cotton within is blown away.

^ * A yojana is eight or nine miles.

THE PLAY OF GUNAS

966

dark sea of delusion by its false histories! This same 
ShAstra ever befriends Jlva in this world and hereafter by 
pointing out, with the utmost minuteness, what is good 
and what is bad for him at every moment, and every act 
from his conception in the womb to the tinal rites in the 
oremation ground ; from the mother s womb to the Brahma- 
loka; from Hell 1 to liberation •; and yet they tell us that this 
Shastra it is which plunges the entire world into Rasatala* * 
by means of its falsehoods and fancies! We leave it to such 
to tell us also whether they themselves should be welcomed 
as learned men or avoided as Chatjdalas. How intense must 
be the enmity of these men with ShAstra or BbagavAn 
that, in order to avenge themselves upon it, they should 
lay out jars of Adhy&tmik poison with layers of sweets and 
facile meanings on the top! The Shastra is not a net of 
selfishness spread by human Pi$haohas.*

Its promulgators are He who, leaving Vaikuptha, de¬ 
scended on the earth in order to save the three worlds: 
and they who, in spite of being masters of the eight 
forms of Siddhi * by the force of Tapas/ yet lived in dense 
forests, wearing plaited hair and barks of trees, walked 
upon the topmost heights of discernment and dispassion, 
and were full of meroy, which they shed unsought. They 
have said that it is true, true, thrice true: “ True, true, 
true again; true, there is no doubt.” If to those who, 
intending to serve mean selfish ends, call that firm truth 
falsehood, we give the credit of being truthful men, then 
who are to be counted liars in the world ? It is also

1 Naraka. ' NirvApa. * One of the seven nether worlds.

* One of the lowest castes. ! Low evil spirits.

* The powers known as animA, laghimA, etc.

' Austerity, devotion, etc. (see Introduction).

* Viveka. * VairAgya.

966* One of the lowest castes. ! Low evil spirits.

* The powers known as animA, laghimA, etc.

' Austerity, devotion, etc. (see Introduction).

* Viveka. * VairAgya.

966

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

indeed curious that, while the Ayurveda, the Dbanur- 
veda, the Gandharvaveda,' Astrology, and the Tantra- 
shastra whioh deals with Mantras, are not considered alle¬ 
gorical, only that section of the Vedas which deals with the 
worship is thought to be so. You are at liberty to think it 
allegorical, but when you become ill, why do you not explain 
medicine to be allegorical ? Why do you not take the sun and 
moon as allegorical, and therefore light lamps at noon and 
bathe at night ? The form of composition known as allegory 
is a thing to be understood and enjoyed ; but in what poeti¬ 
cal work have you read that it is also a thing to be practised ? 
Does not your sinful tongue rend itself into a thousand 
parts when you say that the Maharshis,' who, proficient in 
all Shastras, penetrated the depths of Sadhana, lying beyond 
even the keen intelligence of philosophers, and who, attain¬ 
ing Siddhi in that S&dhana, disclosed superworldly Divine 
truths to men as if they were ordinary visible things, could 
yet not find out the allegory you discover, even although 
they could apprehend the Formless One ?

Are all the efforts which accompolished Sadhus, Sadha- 
kas, and learned men have bestowed on Yajna, 1 meditation, 
knowledge, Japa, Tapas,* * worship, study, and the like during 
the successive ages of Satya, Treta, Dvapara, and Kali, a 
mere waste of labour ? Could none of them understand the 
Adhy&tmik meaning based on allegory ? Wonderful, indeed, 
is the power of research which you have acquired by the 
grace of the Lord of the Kali age! The word Adhyatmik 
means that whioh concerns Atm&; but Atmft is devoid of 
form, so that all that concerns it must also be formless. 
Thus the doctrine that the Deity is possessed of form * is1 The Scriptures dealing with the art of medicine, archery (war¬ 
fare), and music.

* Great Seers. * " Sacrifice ’’ (see Introduction).

' Repetition of Mantra : austerities, devotion, etc. Vide ibid.

* S&V&ravftda.

967

TEE PLAY OF GUNAS

about to be explained away. One may kill a serpent without 
breaking one's stiok. 1 Let the doctrine of the Deity, being 
possessed of form, be quietly abandoned, but in such a way 
that sooiety may not be offended. This is the reason why 
we meet with so much unswerving faith in the Adhyatmik 
principles; this is why Adhyatmik interpretations of Shrl- 
madbhagavata, BhagavadgltA, Mah&nirv&na Tantra, and 
other books have nowadays gone abroad and are being sold 
distributed, and discussed in meetings held under the

standard of Aryya^hftstra; this is why hypocritical infidels

are moving about the country preaching the irreligion of 
Adhyatmik interpretation under the pretence of preaohing 
Dharma; this is why unsuspecting honest people who, 
having in good faith collected those sharp weapons with the 
notion that they were Shastrik, are now being wounded 
with them. It is simply because they disguise themselves 
behind the name of Shftstra that these robbers in the field 
of Dharma get shelter from religious men. It is, however, 
good news that the time for appearance of the mercy of Her 
who is full of mercy for the poor has become ripe, and that 
almost everybody has now learnt the lesson of experience. 
Still, according to the rule that well-wishers should, out of 
love, reiterate an advice, even if it is already known, we say 
again : “ Society, beware, beware! ’ It matters not whether 
you fear oholera. small-pox, and malaria or not; but when- 
ever you meet an Adhyatmik teacher, do not forget to make 
a profound bow and take leave of him in feai .We shall most probably have to show in the oourse of 
our discussion of other topics later on how, why, and whence 
this system of Adhyatmik interpretation has been evolved. 
For this reason we desist from further dealing with the

subject here.

1 A Bengali adage meaning : " One may accomplish one s object 
without injury to oneself.” Adharma.

CHAPTER XVII

OUTER WOR8HIP 1

The Mah&nirv&na Tantra says: “ The highest state is that 
in which the presence of Brahman is peroeived in all 
things. The middle state is that of meditation. The 
lowest state is that of hymn and Japa,* * and the state lower 
than the lowest is that of external worship. 1 Yoga is reali¬ 
zation or the accomplishment of Unity between Jlva and 
PararaAtmft. Worship is based on the twofold knowledge 
that He is Ishvara, and I am His servant; but for him who 
has known that everything is Brahman there is neither 
Yoga nor worship.”

The Niruttara Tantra says: *' Mental worship is supe¬ 
rior, and external worship is inferior. By worshipping 
Devatft a S&dhaka is himself honoured. Japa, without a 
doubt, leads to Siddhi in Mantra, and Homa leads to Siddhi 
in all things; for this reason a S&dhaka should perform all 
these three things—namely, Worship, Japa, and Homa. 
“O Kuleahvarl! * S&dhakas following the Vlr&ch&ra and 
Divy&oh&ra 4 are competent for mental worship—that is to 
say, they alone are oompetent to perform mental without 
outer worship.”

That is. external ceremonial worship as opposed to inner mental 
worship. ’ Repetition of Mantra (see Introduction).

' Mistress of the T&ntrik Kan la*.

* The two TAntrik Ach&rai above PafhvAchAra.

OUTER WORSHIP

959' Mistress of the T&ntrik Kan la*.

* The two TAntrik Ach&rai above PafhvAchAra.

OUTER WORSHIP

959

Similarly, other Tantraa also have described external 
worship as being of a lower kind. It is these 9t ‘ t « ment ® 
and authorities whioh have nowadays appeared in the 
sooiety of common people like a mighty oomet threaten¬ 
ing untimely dissolution, and this is why people, proud 
of their philosophical knowledge, are most averse and even 
opposed to external worship. They are strongly of opinion 
that outer worship is worse than the worst, so that its 
performance is degrading, or that the most degraded 
persons only will perform it. Why, then, should they per- 
form it? We, too, admit that outer worship is interim ; but 
we ask, To what is it inferior? Is it inferior to spiritual 
knowledge, or to meditation, or to Japa and hymn, or o 
that whioh they themBelves do, abandoning all these .

It is true that outer worship belongs to the lowest 
order of competence, but what sublimity have you reached 
that vou can turn up your nose at the very mcnt '™ ° 
if To write Ka-Kha’ in a primary Bchool is no doubt the 
lowest stage in education, but do you think you wil become 
a great Rishi, proficient in all Shastras, without having 
first acquired a knowledge of letters? If anyone has 
ever acquired proficiency in all Sh&stmn, 't js because 
of his writing of Ka-Kha under the Guru-Mah&shaya. 
Similarly, if anyone has ever acquired competence in 
spiritual knowledge, know that he has done so by virtue 
of external worship. It is true that the student leaves 
the primary school for the Tol‘ or the college, but it is 
oertain that he does not leave behind him Ka-Kha. 
When Ka-Kha has become firmly and indelibly impressed 
in their minds for all life, it is then that boys enter the

» Thftt is ABC. Ka-Kha being the first two letters of the 8ans 
krit alphabet.' ' ’ The teacher in a primary school.

' Orthodox Sanskrit school.» Thftt is ABC. Ka-Kha being the first two letters of the 8ans 
krit alphabet.' ' ’ The teacher in a primary school.

' Orthodox Sanskrit school.

4 He does not unlearn all that he had learnt before.

360 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

boundless sea of Sh&stra on the craft of that same Ka- 
Kha. Similarly, when, in course of the Sftdhana of the 
lotus-feet of the Supreme DevatA in external worship in 
rhe primary school of the Supreme Guru, meditation and 
concentration become natural to a Sadhaka, it is then 
that he enters the sea of eternal knowledge and crosses to 
the other side of existence with the help of the craft of 
those fear-dispelling Feet. The relation between the 
Sadhana of Mahftvidyft 1 and the worship of the DevatA, 
whose substance is the Mantra given by the Guru, is similar 
to that which exists between the cultivation * * of Vidyft'and 
the writing of Ka-Kha under Guru-Mahft§haya. Whatever 
Shftstra you may attempt to learn, the Mantra of Ka-Kha 
will take you safely through all difficulty. However vast 
the sea of Shastra may be, Ka-Kha will carry you across it. 
Similarly, however vast be the domain of Jnana, Yoga, and 
Samftdhi ’ may be, the great DevatA, who is Mantra, will 
assume form, take you by the hand, and carry' you across it.

I shall see that the Mother, the Tshvari of all, with dis¬ 
hevelled hair, whose substance is bliss, is joyously laughing 
and dancing in Jnana, Yoga, Samftdhi* or in whatever else 
I may think or do, and that such untiring dance is raising 
waves of love in the sea of my knowledge. You are mis¬ 
taken, O brother! From whom have you heard that I have 
anything in this SangsAra, be it SAdhana, prayer,* medi¬ 
tation , 7 knowledge.* enjoyment,* or liberation,'* in which the 
Mother is not? In my Sadhana is the Mother; in the object 
of my Sftdhana is the Mother; in my Siddhi is the Mother; 
and in the object whioh I get by Siddhi is the Mother. She

' Supreme spiritual knowledge. • Sftdhana.' Supreme spiritual knowledge. • Sftdhana.

; Tb e lower knowledge. * Literally. “Of theTattvaof JnAna.” etc. 
Spiritual knowledge. * Bhajana. ' Dhyftnn

* Jn&nR * Bhnkti. ■ Mukti.

OUTER WORSHIP

961

is at the beginning, at the middle, at the end, and beyond 
the end. Know that that whioh remains when all is gone 
is the Mother only. When there are none left to call the 
Mother “ Mother,” know that then, also, there will be the 
Mother only. For the Mother is my Mother as well as my 
son’s Mother, my father’s Mother, my mother’s Mother, and 
even Her own Mother; so that when all else is lost, there 
will remain the Mother, the Mother, the Mother! When 
will that day come on which, losing all we possess, we our¬ 
selves shall be like corpses and see the Mother only ?Nowadays numbers of precedents and authorities are 
being collected for the abolition of external worship. Some¬ 
one writing on the life of Ramapras&da 1 says: “ Did he 
worship the earthen K&ll ? Never.” He said: “ The fierce- 
visaged Devi in the temple of the heart-lotus,” as if R&ma- 
pras&da's Kali was never wont to issue from himself, or as 
if the Kali of those who worship Her earthen image never 
appears in their heart-lotuses. The expression “earthen 
Kali ” itself is ridiculous,* brother critio! Even the earthen 
Kali is of real worth; but it is a matter of lasting regret 
that being a man of flesh and bone you have become earthen 
and of no worth. We know not when Fortune will smile 
on you so that the Mother will show Herself in and through 
earth; when you will understand that although earth is 
earth, there is no lack of the Mother in it! Rumaprasada 
says: “ Hundreds of true Vedas say that my Tfirft is with¬ 
out form.” Out of the thousand songs of R&mapras&da only 
this much has been quoted; not even one whole song, but 
only that portion of it in whioh the word " without form ” 
occurs, as if RamaprasAda says on oath: “ Everything else 
that I have said is falsehood ; only the portion ‘ My Tara

1 The celebrated Bengali poet and Tfintrik.

* For EAll cannot be earthen.

962

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

is without form’ is pure truth” ;&nd, as if the following pas¬ 
sages were mere raving fantasy or senseless talk, the only 
sensible statement being that whioh speaks of the Devi as 
being “without form.”

Song

“0 Mother, how Thou didst dance in battle! 
Incomparable is Thy garment,

Loose is Thine hair,

Naked art Thou on Hara's breast.

How Thou didst dance in battle!

Who is that dark Lady ? 1

Her colour is like crushed collyrium,

Her face is like the circle of the autumnal moon,

Her tresses are loosely flowing,

Her body is splashed with blood ;

She shines like a freshly-formed cloud streaked with 
lightning!Her face is like the circle of the autumnal moon,

Her tresses are loosely flowing,

Her body is splashed with blood ;

She shines like a freshly-formed cloud streaked with 
lightning!

O who is that Charmer of mind—that Charmer of 
mind ?

Like a mass of molten lightning is She.

Her beauty shines like gems and rubieB.

0 who is that Charmer of mind ?

With a swaying gait, who comes there ?

Her tresses are loose, and She is stirred by wine,

She moves fast in battle,

Seizes those who surround me,*

Holds elephants in the hollow of Her hand ;

Ah ! who is that Dark Lady coming there ?

Who is She, young and naked,

And yet devoid of shame ?

1 S?hy6mA.

* Apparently referring to man’s sins.

OUTER WORSHIP

963

She oharms the world.

What unseemly oonduot for a lady of respectable 
family !

Her gait is like that of an elephant,

She is intoxicated with wine,* *

Her tongue is lolling,

Her hair is loose,

The sight of Her makes men and Devas fear Her.

Roaring She crushes Danavas." *Her gait is like that of an elephant,

She is intoxicated with wine,* *

Her tongue is lolling,

Her hair is loose,

The sight of Her makes men and Devas fear Her.

Roaring She crushes Danavas." *

O critic ! wonderful indeed is the impartiality of your 
critioism! Ramaprasada during his lifetime was seldom 
heard to speak of the formless. It was only when, after 
having worshipped the Devi, whose substance is con¬ 
sciousness in her image of Earth in the dead of the new 
moon night, he, on the following morning, went to throw 
that image of the Mother of the world into water, and 
after having plaoed the Mother’s image on the bank of 
the Ganges, descended into the water until it reached his 
waist—it was then that the Mother’s son stood before 
the Mother as “ belonging only to the Mother ”; then, 
keeping his eyes fixed on the Mother’s image without, he 
went into Samadhi,* having made the Sanghara Mudra,* 
and called the Mother within from without. Then im¬ 
mediately the Mother, the treasure of, and dweller in, the 
heart, and subduer of Death, knowing the approaching end 
of the son’s play,* appeared all full of smiles in his heart. 
The fear-dispelling look of the Blissful Devi dispelled the 
fear of existence. The dance of love of the Dancing Kali

1 Asaverivesha. 1 Sons of Danu; enemies of the Devas.

* Trance: ecstasy.

‘ The Mudrft of dissolution which is done when the life is taken 
from the image.

' Lila; here his sojourn on earth.

964

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

opened the door of his heart. His body, tired with the 
overflowing bliss of love, began to lose all self-control. His 
eyes, olosed with bliss, filled with tears; then it was that, 
bringing to an end his beloved Sadhana, the S&dhaka sang 
to his heart’s content for the last time in his life to the 
ringing ohords of his heart:

“ The black cloud rises in the sky within.

With joy the mind-peacock 1 dances and plays.“ The black cloud rises in the sky within.

With joy the mind-peacock 1 dances and plays.

The clouds, with rumbling sound, say, “ Fear not,’ 
The soft smile of the bliss of love is like the beauty 
lightning therein.

Fixed is the S&dhaka’s gaze.

From the eyes tears flow incessantly wherewith 
the thirst and fear of the heart-ch&taka* are soon 
removed.

After this birth oomes the next birth, and then 
many, many births.

But R&mapras&da says: ’There will be no more 
births for him in the womb.’ "

Notwithstanding his achievement he still hankered for 
the Mother. In fact, the oertain knowledge that “ there 
will be no more birth in the womb " increases such hanker¬ 
ing a hundredfold ; and then, feeling unbearable pain at the 
prospect of being separated from the sight of the Mother of 
the world, the S&dhaka, whose life was in the Mother, again 
fell at Her feet and, weeping piteously, said:

“ Will suoh a day come, 0 Tara ! a day on which tears 
will stream from my eyes, when I will ory, ‘ Tftrft, 
T&r&, Tara ! * *

1 Referring to the play of the peacock under cloudy skies.

A bird which is said to live on the raindrop.

’ Title of the Devi as “ Saviour."

OUTER WORSHIP

965

My heart-lotus will be fully blown.

The mind’s darkness will be dispelled, and then I shall 
fall and roll on the earth, and be beside myself, 
crying, ‘ Tara! ’ 1

I shall forsake all distinction.

My mind’s sorrow will be destroyed.

0! hundreds of true Vedas say that my Tara is * with¬ 
out form.’

Shrl Ramaprasada says ‘The Mother dwells in all 
bodies.

0 blinded eye! see, the Mother is in darkness the 
dispeller of darkness.’ ”

0 Tara! when will the day oome on whioh you will be 
without form ? The day on whioh the heart-lotus will be 
fully blown and the mind’s darkness will be dispelled.

Then I shall be beside myself, and falling on the earth, 
ory, “Tara!”Then I shall be beside myself, and falling on the earth, 
ory, “Tara!”

On the day on which I shall forsake all distinctions and 
my mind’s sorrow will be destroyed, on that day hundreds 
of true Vedas will say, “ My Tara is without form, and 
then only will the Vedic saying, “ Tara is without form, 
become true for me.

On the day on which this form of mine will vanish, on 
that same day my Tara also will be formless. Tftra will 
not really be without form, but will be so for me. This is 
what Ramaprasada means to say, because it is the state of 
possession of form by me which leads to my worship of Her.

On the day on which this form of mine will vanish and 
I shall merge in Her great liberation aspect,* whose sub¬ 
stance is consciousness, on that day, as I shall be without 
form, so my Tara also will be without form. Then will be 
the due time for the realization of the truth that Tara is

1 Title of the Devi as “ Saviour."

* Kaivalya.

906 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

without form, according to the teaching of the Veda ; then, 
with the loss of power to perceive uxy own individuality, 
I shall also lose the power to perceive the Tar&hood of Tfirft 
that is, the fact that She is possessed of form or indivi¬ 
duality. If, therefore, there is any possibility of T&rfi, ever 
being to me without form, it will be on that day ; but, so 
long as I possess my own individuality, or so long as I am 
I, my Ts.nl also in undoubtedly Tftra, possessed of form and 
Mother.Now tell me, is Ramaprasada, called T&ra, possessed 
of form or formless ? You want to quote the authority of 
Ramaprasada, but we are greatly sorry that you do not 
feel that it will be long before you can understand what 
RamaprasSda has said. There is another thing which I 
want to ask you: Is it because you look upon Ramapra¬ 
sada as your Guru that you quote his words as authority, 
or because he happened to say something to your liking 
that you are disposed to quote his authority ? or, do you 
want to draw people to your party without understand¬ 
ing and misunderstanding what Ramaprasada has said? 
Do you wish to steal the whole of the beginning and end 
of what Ramaprasada has said, and then to frighten them 
by a quotation from the middle of a single passage, without 
citing that which precedes or follows it ? If you look upon 
Ramaprasada as your Guru and follow his teachings, why, 
out of his thousand sayings, have you quoted only the 
passage, “ Hundreds of true Veda# say my Tarn is form¬ 
less ? From the fact that you have done so, it appears 
that there is a secret connection of some formless * love 
between you and that which is “ without form.” Here you 
have shown yourself to be partial, so that how can you 
escape ! In order to give a judgment as an umpire on any 
' Literally, “ She-ness.”

Nir&k&rfl—undefined. Here unsubstantial, fancied.

OUTER WORSHIP 967Nir&k&rfl—undefined. Here unsubstantial, fancied.

OUTER WORSHIP 967

matter one must be careful to observe the strictest neutral¬ 
ity. How can the interest of the public be safe where your 
actions are guided by selfish motives ? You who seek to 
establish that the Deity is without form! It is a nice 
question which you have raised ; no one objects to it. But 
the question is, How is it that while out of a thousand 
songs you have picked out an expression which occurs only 
once in them, you have yet, out of those thousand songs 
containing thousands of references to the Deity possessing 
form, not selected a single one of such references ? Of 
course, there is no doubt that that which possesses form 
is immensely heavier than that which is without form 1 
and is a burden for most people. How can you alone bear 
the weight of Her whom all the inhabitants of the universe, 
composed of three worlds, have joined together in bearing 
for all time ? As your body is fine, your mind is fine, and 
your worship is fine ; so, by good fortune, the DevatA whom 
you worship is also fine, extremely fine—in fact, destitute 
of form. The weight of such a DevatA is enough for you; 
but still, in spite of the fact that you find the weight of 
a DevatA possessing form to be unbearable, you have not 
done well in suppressing the fact of the existence of that 
unbearable weight. If you could yourself raise it, you 
ought at least to have pointed out that, whilst R&maprasada 
spoke a thousand times of the DevatA as possessing form, 
he only once spoke of the DevatA as being formless; but 
such a saying was not for you and I, or for even RAma- 
prasAda himself. It was for the stage at which the indi¬ 
viduality of RAmaprasAda vanished, and the relation of 
worshipper and worshipped was past.

Shrl Ramaprasada says: “The Mother dwells in all 
bodies. Blinded eyes! see, the Mother is in darkness the

'Here possessed of form™substantial, not posssessed of form= 
unsubstantial.

968Shrl Ramaprasada says: “The Mother dwells in all 
bodies. Blinded eyes! see, the Mother is in darkness the

'Here possessed of form™substantial, not posssessed of form= 
unsubstantial.

968

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

dispeller of darkness.” The Mother is present in all things; 
but it is regrettable that you, whose eyes have been blinded 
by the darkness of ignoranoe, do not see Her for want of 
the sight of knowledge, and it is a matter for great regret 
that, although the Mother is the dispeller of darkness, you 
do not see Her in the darkness. It is true that the sun 
and the moon dispel the darkness of the world, but they 
cannot dispel the darkness which enshrouds a blind man.

Unfortunately, a blind man differs greatly from those 
possessing eyesight. A blind man is himself wanting in 
eyesight, through the fault of the Karma done by him 
in previous births. 1 Had it been darkness from without, 
the sun’s rays could have dispelled it. But the darkness 
inherent in the blind man's eyes is due to the want of 
vital power; no external cause has brought about this 
want. It is an internal cause whioh has induced it in 
me, and the name of this cause is misfortune. If, now, 
I can destroy this misfortune by doing such acts as 
bring good fortune, if, by the grace of DevatA, I get back 
my eyesight, then only I shall first see that the Mother 
is the destroyer of darkness even in the darkness, and 
next, being myself freed from all darkness, I shall see the 
Mother Herself fully. For, just as the 8un cannot be seen 
unless its power of dispelling darkness is seen, or a lamp 
cannot be seen unless its light is seen, or the lightning 
cannot be seen unless its flash is seen; so, despite the fact 
that the Mother is all Shaktis, She cannot be seen unless 
Her Shakti becomes manifest. She is eternal knowledge 
and bliss. Who can perceive Her omnipresence without 
the light of Her knowledge ? True, the Mother is the 
destroyer of darkness, but then I am blind through theC/. the New Testament: " Rabbi, who did sin, this man or his 
parents that he was born blind ? ”

OUTER WORSHIP

969

fault of my Karma. This darkness of mine is not from 
without; it is the inner darkness. The S&dhaka says I 
need not be afraid on this account, for just as this dark¬ 
ness is within, so are the sun and moon which will illu¬ 
mine it. She rises in the inmost recess of that which is 
within, so that that which is inner darkness in respect of 
the outer world is outer darkness in respect to Her who 
is within the inmost recess of the heart, and darkness flees 
afar from the fear-dispelling Shakti of Her refulgent rays. 
In order, therefore, to obtain the protection of the Mother 
of the world, whose glances are like infinite millions of 
suns and moons, we must leave the domain of darkness 
and attain the lunar region; and if one lives even in the 
darkness of Pat&la, 1 the rays of Her mercy make that 
region shine as though it were that of the moon. This 
is why, although you are blind within, you should know 
that even this “ within ” is without when compared with 
the place where She resides. This, too, is why, in spite 
of his knowledge that his eyes are blind, R&mapras4da 
says: “ Blind eyes see the Mother. For although you are 
blind in the dark She is the destroyer of darkness,” and 
the moment his darkness will be destroyed you will sec 
that “ the Mother dwells in all bodies.” In fact, although 
Ramapras&da had been in the past a blind Jiva, he was 
not blind when he said this. It was with reference to 
the blindness of his past life that he says “ blinded eyes.” 
What he sees now elates him with joy, and he gives expres¬ 
sion to it when he says: “ See the Mother is in darkness 
the destroyer of darkness.” There is no more fear of 
darkness. The destroyer of darkness has come. Hence, 
look while there is yet time, “ the Mother dwells in the 
bodies."

1 The nether world.

970

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 The nether world.

970

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ Will suoh a day come, O Tarfi ! ” This piteous prayer 
of RAmaprasada’s heart is to-day being beard and full- 
filled by Tara Herself, who stands before him. Men see 
that R&maprasada has to-day brought the Mother to the 
bank of the Ganges 1 to throw Her away, but the Mother 
sees that Ramaprasada has to-day brought the Mother 
to the bank of the Ganges in order that he may throw 
himself away.* *

In order to bring the worldly play of the worldly 
Ramaprasada to an end, in order that She may take up 
to Her bosom Her most beloved child, and conclude with 
Dakshi^a* the worldly sacrifice of Her devoted son, Lak¬ 
shina 4 Herself has to-day appeared in the visible image. 
Even through that image, which has been abandoned by 
means of Mantra,* Her inner advent has been revealed. 
The waves of light of Her whose substance is light have 
mingled with the waves of the Ganges, and with them 
have swelled the waves of the love of R&mapras&da, who 
has seen V&r&nasi * in water, on land, and in the heavens. 
“ To him who dies in KA§hI,” 4 Shiva says, “ Thou art That. 
Above my ‘Thou art That’ is the Queen of Mahe§ha.” 
“Why should I live in places of pilgrimage?’ Many a GayA, 
Gang&, and VarAnasi* I shall see under Shy&m&’s feet. 
What need have I for Ka?hl ? * The lotus-feet of Kali are 
the equal of innumerable places of pilgrimage.” These old 
sayings have to-day become true.

1 After worship of the image it is thrown into the sacred river.

* In death.

1 The present mode to the officiating priest at the conclusion of 
the sacrifice (Yajna).

* A name of the Devi as the “ favourable one."

* At the conclusion of worship the Devi is let depart from the 
image by the Visarjana Mantra and Sangh&ra Mudrfi.

* K&shI or Benares. 1 Tirtha.

OUTER WORSHIP 071* At the conclusion of worship the Devi is let depart from the 
image by the Visarjana Mantra and Sangh&ra Mudrfi.

* K&shI or Benares. 1 Tirtha.

OUTER WORSHIP 071

“ The day on which tears will stream from my eyes 
as I will ory, ‘ Tara, Tftra, T&rft! ' ” “ Presently I shall be 
beside myself, and, falling, roll on the earth, crying, 
‘ Tara! ’ ” When such a day truly came, by the grace of 
the Mother who is the Saviour of the poor, the refulgent 
light of the black beauty of the cloud-like black Devi, the 
charmer of Kala, * 1 made day and night one and the same. 
The three worlds sank in the playing waves of that beauty. 
The dark son of the dark youthful Mother at last reached 
the shore, which is the Mother's bosom, after having swum 
through the ocean of time. The child of Kali, opening the 
temple of the heart, and bringing therein the Mother from 
without, shaking the bank of the Ganges with the deep and 
loud cry of the name of K&ll, the oonqueror of Kala, 1 and 
offering his life as an oblation in the K&li Poja on the 
illuminated new moon night, at last slept in KiUl s bosom. 
The worship of Bhavanl* ended with R&maprasada’s life- 
play,* and he died without having to perform the ceremony 
in which the image is thrown away. We saj*: ‘Oh, the 
Mother’s blessed beloved son! Truly had you learnt how to 
bid the Mother depart by means of the Sanghftra Mudrfi, * 
after you had worshipped Her! and blessed art Thou, O 
Mother Bengal! Truly good teaching hast Thou given to 
Thy child. A marvellous teaching in the MahAmantra of 
MahAvidyA didst Thou impart to Ramaprasada by the grace 
of which even that which he earned * in the work of throw¬ 
ing away the image became endless, wasteless, and unfail¬ 
ing both in this world and hereafter.

‘ Shiva, death or time.

’ The Devi as spouse of 9hiva in his form &8 Bh&va.

1 Bhavalilft or life.

' The Mudrft, signifying dissolution, used with the Visarjana Mantra. 
' The spiritual merit earned.

972’ The Devi as spouse of 9hiva in his form &8 Bh&va.

1 Bhavalilft or life.

' The Mudrft, signifying dissolution, used with the Visarjana Mantra. 
' The spiritual merit earned.

972

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ To-day hundreds of thousands of the poor who walked 
the road in India enjoy as masters the spiritual wealth of 
these earnings of Ramaprasada. Victory to Thee, 0 Mother! 
Viotory to Thy Prasada! ” 1

The Sadhaka will now understand in what way Rama- 
prasada's T&ra was formless. Ramaprasada called T&ri 
formless at a time and on a day when he himself was no 
longer Ramaprasada. At present it has become very easy 
to the community of Asuras* * to call Tara formless by tak¬ 
ing up the note which Ramaprasada sounded at the time of 
his Samadhi J in Parabrahma. The very mention of the 
name of Tara possessing form makes the hearts of Asuras 
tremble. Their community can find no rest unless Tara 
becomes formless. Nevertheless, the precedent of Rama¬ 
prasada is not acceptable so long as one does not oneself 
realize the Videha Kaivalya 4 whioh Ramaprasada attained. 
Ramaprasada beoame himself formless immediately upon 
his calling Tara formless, whilst the more these men ory 
out, ‘ Without form! Without form! ” day and night, the 
more do their own forms grow. What sort of formlessness 
is this ?

While an effort is being made to prove that Rama* 
prasada’s Tara was without form, and that he did not 
believe in the Deity possessing form, it is also said that, 
as if urged by a presentiment of approaohing death, he 
worshipped Kali, and on the next day, at the time of throw¬ 
ing away the image, he was standing in the Ganges with 
the water reaching to his waist, and was singing the last

M * Prasada may be a shortened form of R&mapra&Ada's name, or may 
be “ grace "—probably the first.

Enemies of the Oods; here inimically disposed men, their types, 
on earth.

* Ecstatic onion with the Brahman.

* Liberation by union with the ParamAtm&.

OUTER WORSHIP

973Enemies of the Oods; here inimically disposed men, their types, 
on earth.

* Ecstatic onion with the Brahman.

* Liberation by union with the ParamAtm&.

OUTER WORSHIP

973

song of his life, when his Brahmarandhra 1 burst open, and 
he died.

People nowadays say that he did not die of any dis¬ 
ease, but that exoess of emotion* caused his death. What 
a strange conclusion this is of the messenger of Kali! 
R&inaprasada did not believe in the Deity possessing 
form, but when he felt the approach of death he wor¬ 
shipped Kali in an image possessing form, and on the 
next day died while preparing to throw away the wor¬ 
shipped image. If he did not believe in the Deity pos¬ 
sessing form, was it through fear of death that he wor¬ 
shipped Kali in the image ? If so, the critic ought to 
have understood that, whether during our lifetime we 
believe or do not believe in the Deity possessing form, we 
should so believe at the time of death, since even such a 
man as Ramaprasada had to believe it then. It was only 
when R&maprasada became fully enabled to feel an un- 
embodied presence that he said only once and from his 
own standpoint: “ My Tara is without form.” Ah! how 
charming! What an incomparable unfailing power does 
the love of Sadhana proceeding from the heart wield, so 
that, even when “without form,” “Tara is mine”! Despite 
being “ without form,” my Tara is still “ Tara ”! It is not 
the intention of the Sadhaka to say that the embodied 
oharaoter of Tara will be lost in Her unembodied presence. 
He means: “ My embodied Tara will then drown me in the 
sea of Her unembodied presence. I shall lose my own self, 
and be completely merged in Hers.” Just as a ohild sleeps 
in its mother's arms under the fold of her dress, so I shall 
be lost in the formless liberating 4 womb of my Mother who

1 Opening in the centre of the crown of the head through which 
the Prana in the Yogi escapes at death.

’ Bb&va. * The Kali age personified. ' Kaivalya.

9741 Opening in the centre of the crown of the head through which 
the Prana in the Yogi escapes at death.

’ Bb&va. * The Kali age personified. ' Kaivalya.

974

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

is possessed of form, and holds the infinite universe within 
Herself. Beyond this, in his state of S&dhana, he did not 
perceive this unembodied presence. On the contrary, he 
has distinctly stated that it is impossible for even Yogis 
(not to speak of himself or common folk) to perceive an 
unembodied presence. Referring to that aspect of Devata 
which is Mantra, Ramapras&da has said:

“ Doubtless Kfila 1 destroys the infinite universe.

But the terrible mouth * * grasps that Kala.

For this reason Thou art called Kali, 0 Narftyani!

And yet Thou art called the Lady of Kala.*

All Jlvas meditate on the Guru in the Brahmarandhra, 4

And Sada§hiva* is a great Yogi through meditation on 
the form of Kali.

Truly the fifty letters* form the substance of Veda 
and Agama.

But it is hard for even a Yogi to contemplate the 
formless aspect.

Thou hast no form, Akshara* is Thy form.

0 Thou whose substance is Guna. 9 ! Thou has taken 
forms according to the different Gui?as.

Veda says that Kaivalya is attained by worshipping 
the formless Deity.

To me, this notion seems wrong, and the effeot of 
lightness of intellect.

Prasada says the mind ever seeks the Black Beauty.

Do as Thou dost wish. Who wants Nirvana ? ” *

' Death, time. ’ Of Kill. • §hiva.

* That is here, the head. * $hiva as the Guru.

' Yarn as. * Written characters.

* See this explained poit. He loves the Mother so much that he 
would rather continue to be Her worshipper than be that which is 
worshipped.

OUTER WORSHIP

976' Yarn as. * Written characters.

* See this explained poit. He loves the Mother so much that he 
would rather continue to be Her worshipper than be that which is 
worshipped.

OUTER WORSHIP

976

At this point the critic opens the chest of his learning 
and intellect, and becomes senseless and restless with 
brimming joy on hearing the verse: “Veda says that 
Kaivalya is attained by worshipping the formless Deity.” 
The words, however, “Veda says that Kaivalya is at¬ 
tained by worshipping the formless Deity,” are not Rima- 
pras&da’s. We have here merely a worthless vooiferation 
of arrogant men wanting in all S&dhana. R&mapras&da 
has, in fact, protested against it, and said: “To me 
this notion seems wrong, the effect of lightness of intel¬ 
lect.” This portion only contains Rftmaprasftda’s own 
view. To those who say that there can be no libera¬ 
tion without absorption 1 in the formless Deity (why to 
them alone, to even Her who grants liberation ?), R&ma- 
prasada replies with a frown: “ Pras&da says, the mind 
ever seeks the Blaok Beauty. Do as Thou dost wish. 
Who wants Nirvana?” If Nirvfi^a liberation cannot be 
attained without a realization of Thy unembodied pre¬ 
sence, never mind. What harm if it is not attained? 
Who wants Nirv&na liberation if he gets Thee? “ Do as 
Thou dost wish.” Thou mayest or mayest not grant 
liberation. The mind, however, will not seek anything 
besides the Black Beauty. Those who eagerly seek their 
liberation without Her have no olaim to Her boundless, 
infinite, unfathomable, deep, and pure love and devotion. 
This is what Ramaprasfida has clearly said in the follow¬ 
ing song:

“ What need have I for Kashi ?

Kali’s lotus-feet are the equal of places of pilgrimage 
innumerable.

When I meditate upon these Feet in the heart-lotus 
I swim in a sea of bliss.

‘ Laya.

976

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Just as fire burns a mass of cotton,

So the name of Kfill destroys all sins.

A headless man can have no headache.‘ Laya.

976

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Just as fire burns a mass of cotton,

So the name of Kfill destroys all sins.

A headless man can have no headache.

Men discharge their debt to the forefathers 1 by offer¬ 
ing pindas * * at Gayfi.

But it makes me laugh to hear of the performance 
of Shraddha * at Gayfi.

For him who has meditated on Kfili,

Death at Ka$hl brings liberation.

True this is Shiva's saying,

But at the root of all is devotion,

And liberation is its maid,

What is gained by liberation ?

Water mingles with water.

I love to eat sugar,

But it is not good to become it.

In amusement PrasAda says,

By the strength of the merciful Devi,

The fourfold fruit * falls into the palms of him who 
contemplates the Devi with dishevelled hair.”

Not merely the seeking of Nirvana liberation, but even 
its attainment, is not desired. He has said: “ I love to 
eat sugar, but it is not good to beoome it.” If by be¬ 
coming sugar itself I am unable to taste sugar, then why 
should I become sugar ? Lest it should be replied that 
this is for the cessation of the sorrows of Sangsfira, Rfima- 
prasfida at once retorts that in the realm in which he 
lives there is neither Sangsfira nor sorrow. Let him who

* PitrU. • Balls of food.

* Obsequial rites done in reverence of the Pitris at the town of 
Gayfi. The meaning is that the worshipper of Kilt gets liberation, and 
therefore it is not necessary for his children to offer §hrfiddha.

* Dharma, Artha, Kama, Moksha (see Introduction).

OUTER WORSHIP

977

is burdened with sorrow seek its cessation. “ Why shall we 
speak of liberation alone ? The fourfold fruit 1 falls into 
the palms of him who contemplates the Devi with dis¬ 
hevelled hair.” Only he who has experienced it knows what 
it is to attain in meditation Her, the mere thought of 
whom brings unasked the fourfold fruit.Another passage on which the critics lay stress is the 
verse: “ But it is hard for even a Yogi to contemplate 
the formless aspect.” R&mapras&da has said it is hard 
to contemplate the formless aspect. The critic gives 
high praise to this, and asks: “ Can it be doubted that 
the higher the form of worship, the more difficult it is ? ” 
meaning thereby that it was because Ramapras&da be¬ 
longed to a low order of worshippers that he found him¬ 
self in such a plight. The matter, however, is not one of 
insinuation only. The critics plainly say: “ It is a pity 
that Ramapras&da did not take the right path (worship 
of the Devata without form) from the very beginning. 
Had he in his S&dhana worked along this path from 
the very beginning, we cannot say what depths he might 
not have attained ” (as the critic has done).* * Ah ! how 
wonderful! The beauty of the temple of formlessness is 
as great as the splendour of the formless steps which lead 
to it 1 But how could R&mapras&da have had such good 
fortune ? When he came to this Sangs&ra, the mine whence 
this gem has come had not yet been discovered. 0 critic 1 
can you for a single moment shake off your heinous and 
hellish malicious propensity and sit still ? If so, I have 
one or two important questions to ask you. Ramapras&da 
has said : “ But it is hard for even a Yogi to contemplate 
the formless aspect.” What does he mean when he says

1 That is, Dhartna, Artba, and Kama besides liberation.

* Author’s parenthesis.

978

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

this, and to what class of worshippers does he refer ? Are 
you able to understand it ? The havoc you have made of 
R&maprasada’s song surpasses description. We shall 
demonstrate in detail that in the sphere of religion the 
preaching of a dootrine which it is not in our competence 
to practise is nothing but a form of covert robbery.

** All Jlvas meditate on the Guru in the Brahma- 
randhra, 1

And Sadftshiva is a great Yogi through meditation on 
the form of K&ll.** All Jlvas meditate on the Guru in the Brahma- 
randhra, 1

And Sadftshiva is a great Yogi through meditation on 
the form of K&ll.

Truly the fifty letters form the substance of Veda and 
Agama,

But it is hard for even a Yogi to contemplate the 
formless aspeot.

Thou hast no form, Akshara 1 is Thy form.

O Thou whose substance is the Gunas! Thou hast 
taken forms according to different Gunas.”

Have you understood the meaning of the above? If 
you had, you would not have made such a mess of it. 
" All Jlvas meditate on the Guru in the Brahmarandhra. 1 
And Sadftshiva is a great Yogi by meditation on the form 
of Kfill.” In order to understand this, it is necessary to 
become initiated and instructed according to Shftstra by 
a Guru. “ Truly the fifty letters form the substance of 
Veda and Agama, but it is hard for even a Yog! to con¬ 
template the formless aspect.'' It will be many ages* 
before you can understand the “ but " between these two 
hemistiches. This formlessness is not the unsightly mis¬ 
shapen formlessness of the nineteenth century. It is the 
formless aspect. This much is the Sfltra.* In the Vriti *

Vide ante. * Written characters.

’ Yugaj. * Aphorism. * Gloss.

• OUTER WORSHIP

979

on this SQtra the poet says: “ Thou hast no form. Ak- 
shara 1 is Thy form ”; and he further makes the comment:' 
" 0 Thou whose substance is the Gunas! Thou hast 
forms according to the different Gunas.” This deep 
super-worldly truth' cannot be understood without special 
power acquired by S&dhana. It is extremely ridiculous for 
you, uninitiated as you are, to try to pass judgment on the 
play of Mantrashakti. It is just as though a child in the 
womb were to make effort to fight a battle !0 critic! had you been initiated according to the 
Sb&stra, instead of being an “ educated ” man of the 
nineteenth century, we might have found a oure for 
your error; but as matters stand, things must remain as 
they are. It is the command issuing from the fair mouth 
of Vi^hvan&tha Himself that this truth 1 must not be 
revealed to those who are not competent to receive it. 
Hence, although R&maprasada's song is in the form of a 
SQtra, we cannot scatter abroad its Vpti,* * Bh&shya,* 
and Tlkft * in the market, the public bathing-place, and 
the fields. This much, however, we tell you: Why do 
you make yourself ridiculous in the world of S&dhakas, 
and bring ruin on the ignorant community by interfering 
(though you have no competence for S&dhana) in matters * 
which can be understood by S&dhana alone, and which, 
without S&dhana, cannot be realized by purely intel¬ 
lectual effort, however strenuous it be ?

R&mapras&da was a seeker of' the supreme object,* and 
the critic seeks his selfish ends. The one is nectar, and the 
other poison ; the one is heaven, 7 and the other hell.* How 
dare you desire to mix the two together ? Covertly you

* Vide ante. * Bh&ehya. * Tattva.

4 Forms of commentary of greater or less degree of elaboration.

* S&dbaka. ' Param&rtha—that is, spiritual life and troth.

* Svarga. * Naraka.

980

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA4 Forms of commentary of greater or less degree of elaboration.

* S&dbaka. ' Param&rtha—that is, spiritual life and troth.

* Svarga. * Naraka.

980

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

have expressed your regret. ** If only R&maprasftda in his 
Sftdhana had worked along the right path from the very 
beginning! ” Oh the arrogance of it befitting an Asura! 
Is it because you have seen your own face in the mirror 
that you have oome to think that Ramapras&da was a Jlva 
from his birth blind, uninitiated, puzzled out of his wits, 
straying in a wrong path, and devoid of knowledge of the 
Sh&stra ? Being a trader in Ramaprasada’s name, and par¬ 
taker of the leavings of his food, how dare you presume to 
show Ramaprasada the right path of Sadhana ? You are 
seeking a means of livelihood for yourself in the Saugsftra. 
Continue to seek that. Why trespass on Sadhana lying 
hidden in the womb of Shastra ? You have been attacked 
with the disease of formlessness ; you may take a leap into 
the air; but why such braggadooio on your part, since Rama- 
prasada himself was not so diseased ? The end of your 
Sftdhana and Bbajana 1 is malice against the Deity with 
form ; but the end of Rftmaprasftda's Sftdhana and Bhajana 
was not malice against the Formless. But why should we 
mention Rftmapras&da alone ? No Sftdhaka can have such a 
motive. It is precisely because Sftdhakas understand form¬ 
lessness that they say that it is impossible to perform 
Sftdhana or Bhajana 1 of the Formless. But those who have 
on merely hearing the name of the Formless, thought it to 
be a Delhi Laddu,' cry out for worship of the Formless with 
flowers growing in the sky. For this reason, Shruti itself 
has said: “ Those who say that they know Brahman, to 
them it is unknown ; and those who say that they have not 
been able to know Brahman, to them it is well known.”

1 Worship.1 Worship.

’ A fabulous form of sweetmeat (Dead Sea apple) of Delhi which, 
while very tempting in appearance, is equally disappointing when 
eaten. It is said that he who has not tasted it is sorry, and he who has 
tasted it is sorry.

OUTER WORSHIP

981

Brahman is undetinable, because its real aspeofc cannot be 
given any particular definition. In fact, it is because the 
name of the Deity possessing form does not strike such 
terror in the heart of Brahman as it does in those of the 
community who are the standard-bearers of the Formless 
Brahman that worshippers of the Deity possessing form can 
entertain no malice against the Formless. However that 
may be, whether R&raapras&da was a worshipper of the 
Formless or of the Deity possessing form, we have no desire 
to hear from the mouth of a dealer in ginger information 
about ships. 1

Ramaprasada was not an African, European, or Ameri¬ 
can. His life's play began and ended in Bengal. We are his 
neighbours. If men, whether at home or abroad, want to hear 
of him, they must come to us for it. We shall never go to 
anybody else to learn about him. The chief part of Rama- 
prasada's Sadhana did not consist of singing in bands to the 
accompaniment of musical instruments, as is the case with 
the weekly-praying community.* * He sank into the depths 
of the ocean of Sadhana, and it was only at intervals of rest 
from Sadhana performed in fixed Asanas * that he was now 
and then moved by the breeze of emotion to sing his songs. 
To-day the miserable plight of the band of critios is due to 
their having fallen into the waves of this ocean in which 
they helplessly struggle. Proofs of RSmaprasada’s Shava- 
sadhana, Chitasadhana, Shaktisadhana, rosary of Maha$han- 
kha, Bilvamula, and Pafichamugda> ami other Asapas,* we

1 A Bengali adage used with reference to a man who speaks on a 
subject of which he can have no knowledge.

' The Brahmos meet for prayer every Snnday in imitation of 
Christian worshippers.1 A Bengali adage used with reference to a man who speaks on a 
subject of which he can have no knowledge.

' The Brahmos meet for prayer every Snnday in imitation of 
Christian worshippers.

* Certain positions (Asana) are assigned for worship.

* Referring to various T&ntrik S&dhan&s ; with a corpse ; on the 
funeral pyre ; with a §hakti; rosary of human bone ; five skulls : under 
a bael-trec ; and other postures (Asana).

982

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

still possess. The community of S&dhakaa is still resound¬ 
ing with the deep trumpet sound eohoing from the sphere 
of spiritual oompetence in which Ramaprasada moved, and 
of the truth 1 for whioh he bore a madly impassioned love. 
If outsiders could realize this truth by the mere hearing 
of one or two simple songs, then thousands of critics 
could have become Ramaprasadas in a single day. Guru 
was his guide, Sh&stra itself was his lamp, the path of 
Sadhana was the path he followed, and the Chint&magi* * 
region of the Mother of the world was that to which it 
led. As in every other work, so in song6 also he followed 
the oommand of Shiva, and took the name of Shiva. Can 
one who does not follow the command of Shiva in practice 
presume to say anything of authority in the name of 
§hiva? Not to believe Shiva, not to believe in Sh&stra, 
not to believe in Guru, not to believe in Sadhana, and not 
to believe in the Devata who is the object of Sadhana, but 
to believe in Ramaprasada and his songs set to music 1 
not to believe in Devata, and yet to be mortally afraid of 
Her as if She were some wandering spirit; * to cut the 
root, and then to pour water on it—such was not the 
art whioh Ramaprasada had learnt. It was because Rama¬ 
prasada served the $h&stra with bowed head and worked 
according to its dictates that the superworldly Shakti 
of Siddhi of whioh the Sh&stra speaks attended him 
constantly.

In another song Ramaprasada says:

“ 0 mind ! you are still labouring under this error/In another song Ramaprasada says:

“ 0 mind ! you are still labouring under this error/

You do not clearly realize what Kali is.

‘ Tattva.

' Etymologically the word means " gem of thought.” According to 
the Bhairavay&mala, the supreme Abode of Devi is built of Chintftmaoi 
stone. This is the supreme region.

* Bhftta, ghost, etc.

' Bhrama.

OUTER WORSHIP

988

Although you know, why do you, 0 mind ! seem not 
to know that the universe, consisting of three 
worlds, is the Mother’s image ?

And you want to worship Her by building images of 
day!

The Mother who decks the three worlds with mea¬ 
sureless gems and gold.

Her you want to deck with worthless tinsel orna¬ 
ments !—the Mother who feeds the world with all 
kinds of food.

With what face do you think to feed Her on Atapa 
rice 1 and soaked peas ? ”*

And so on.

Error is taking a thing to be that which it is not. 
False knowledge or mistake is want of true knowledge. To 
mistake is to understand a thing to be what it is not. Mis¬ 
take is only another name for want of true knowledge. Like 
darkness at sunrise, false knowledge flies of itself at the 
dawning of true knowledge.

It is universally well known that a mistake lasts only 
so long as true understanding is not had, and that when 
it appears there is an end of the mistake; but he who 
says, “ O mind, you are still labouring under this error,” 
understands that it is an error of his mind. Why, then, 
does he express the regret that he is still labouring under 
the error? An error ends the instant we discover it. 
But here, although he says that his mind clearly knows 
it to be an error, he yet, at the same time, regrets that 
the error still exists. Let the critic now understand

1 Rice prepared from paddy without boiling the paddy.

’ Peas are thrown into water and soaked before being offered to 
the Dovatft.

984 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Rice prepared from paddy without boiling the paddy.

’ Peas are thrown into water and soaked before being offered to 
the Dovatft.

984 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

what sort of an error it is. 1 Unlike you and me, Rama- 
prasAda did not jeer at others for worshipping images. 
Before warning outsiders he warned the person within,* 
and addressing his own mind said: “ 0 mind! you are still 
labouring under this error.” Had it been you or me, the 
utmost that we could perhaps have done would have been 
to say, “ 0 Brother! you are still labouring under this 
error,” meaning thereby that “ I am free from it, so that I 
am a much greater man than you are." High-souled 
Digamvara, on whom the merciful Devi showered Her 
supreme mercy, touched the root of the matter when He 
calmly and solemnly said: “ In delusion is my peace.” 
But in the first stage of S&dhana, RSmapras&da, who 
Gould not then touch the root and master this weighty 
and solemn truth,* said with an impatient and restless 
heart, “ 0 mind ! you are still labouring under this error.” 
Ramapras&da is eager and restless to drive away the delusion 
whioh Digamvara carefully cherishes in the inmost recess 
of his mind, and by doing so feels the bliss of the play of 
the Mother of the world. This restlessness on the part of 
R&maprasilda is merely the effect of the immaturity of his 
Sadhana. Because he was at one time thus restless, we 
must not think of him as being a worthless man; for, 
where there is possibility of rising, there is also the possi* 
bility of a fall, as the reverse also is the case. The very 
mention of R&maprasada's name throws some people into 
a frenzy of sentiment. They think that he was a born 
Yogi who had attained Siddbi in a previous birth, and 
consider him to be all in all in the realm of Sadhak&s ; but 
we are not of this opinion. For we first hear what he has 
to say from his own mouth (in his songs),* then ascertain' We may know it in a sense to be MAy&, bat we cannot realize it bo 
long as we are Jlvas, to whom living in a dualistic world it is real.

Himself. ’ Tattva. ' Author’s parenthesis.

OUTER WORSHIP

985

its trustworthiness by comparison with the account of his 
Sadhana as known to the community of Sadhakas, and 
finally test it carefully on the touchstone of the Sh&stra. 
If even a much greater man than Ramapras&da says what 
is opposed to the Shastra, we at once discard it as if it 
were the words of a madman ; for millions of Ramapras&das 
do not count for even so much as the most insignificant 
inseots, if the command of the $hastra (by the grace of 
which Ramapras&da is an authority) is contravened. We 
shall show that the song above quoted was composed by 
Ramaprasada in a very immature state of Sadhana. We 
must first understand that at the time when Ramaprasada 
composed this song he had passed the first and entered the 
middle, and not the last, stage in the domain of knowledge, 
and had only just entered the higher domain of Sadhana. 1 
It was because he wanted to unite Sadhana with Jn&na 
(knowledge), only without reference to Bhakti (devotion), 
that he was led into inconsistency.

“ Although knowing, why do you, 0 mind ! seem not 
to know that the Universe, consisting of three worlds, is 
the Mother's image ? ” The idea expressed in this passage 
belongs wholly to the realm of Jnana (knowledge); but 
the verse, “ You want to worship Her by moulding images 
of clay,” reveals a state of mental restlessness so far as 
Sadhana is concerned. If everything in the three worlds 
is the Mother's image, then who can say that an image 
built of day is not the Mother's image ? If from the 
point of view of Jnana (knowledge) the Universe, con¬ 
sisting of three worlds, is considered the Mother’s image, 
then we must admit, with bowed heads, that an earthen 
image also is Her image. In short, we must not think 
that Ramaprasada, in contravention of the command of1 All seekers and worshippers are Sftdhakos, but here reference is 
made to high T&ntrik S&dhana.

986

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Shastra, is asking people to abstain from moulding images 
of clay. As a matter of faot, he is simply voicing his 
sorrow that, “ although the Mother is omnipresent in the 
three worlds, I have to-day to worship Her in single 
form in an earthen image, beoause I cannot see Her in 
Her Universe-pervading aspect.” And what Sfidhaka 
does not sing the same song of sorrow until he attains 
the final stage of Sadhana preceding Siddhi ? It is in 
order to remove this sorrow that it is necessary to worship 
Her, otherwise, why should one worship Her if from the 
very outset the sorrow ceases, and the Mother is realized 
as existing throughout the Universe? It is hardly neces¬ 
sary to point out what little spiritual competence such 
people possess as actually see earth instead of the world- 
pervading Mother, and yet, taking their cue from Rama- 
pras&da, say: 11 0 mind! you are still labouring under this 
error. You want to adorn with worthless tinsel orna¬ 
ments the Mother who Herself decks the world with count¬ 
less gems and gold.” This, again, is an expression which 
merely indicates an unfulfilled aspiration in the realm of 
devotion. 1 It is foolhardiness on your part to want to 
adorn with tinsel ornaments the Mother, the Rajrftje§hvarl 
of the infinite Universe, who adorns the world with count¬ 
less gold and jewels! From this it does not follow that the 
Mother cannot be adorned or that the Mother does not 
adorn Herself; on the contrary, it proves that the Mother 
can be very well adorned, if one has the power to adorn 
Her.* She is the source of all beauty in the three worlds, 
so that it is the height of presumption to bring tinsel 
ornaments, worthless as grass, near Her fair body. It is 
difficult to restrain one’s laughter at even the thought of 
putting tinsel ornaments on the fair body of Her before

1 Bhakti.1 Bhakti.

' That is. if one is spiritually tit.

OUTER WORSHIP

987

whose feet the countless stores of jewels of even innumer¬ 
able Kuveras 1 disappear as does the light of a lamp before 
the sun. It is because of the pain of the thought of this 
irremediable deficiency that Ramaprasada has said: “ Ah! 
that Mother you wish to adorn with worthless tinsel orna¬ 
ments!” Why, despite of this, Shastra has prescribed that 
She shall be adorned, we shall show later. Here we say 
this much, that a person who proceeds to perform Sadhana 
is bound to satisfy his heart’s desire by adorning the 
Mother. It is the duty of all Sfidhakas, male and female. 
When the heart is immersed in the depths * * of Sadhana, 
that which these depths are overpowers, according to a 
law of Nature, the Brahmatattva of the Mother of the 
world.* To conquer that unconquered power of the 
Sadhana, even She Herself, who is unconquerable, often 
feigns Herself to be incompetent.

Sinking in the sweetness of the Creatrix’s play of love 
for Her devotees, Da§harathi, great depicter of sentiment, 4 
has, in picturing the love of the Mother of the world, well 
displayed this in his poem entitled Agamani. 6 When, for 
the sake of the Sadhana, whioh was the Durgapuja festival 
of the Prince of devotees, the Mountain-King, his Daughter 
appeared as the Destroyer of Mahisha, and stood in the 
courtyard in front of his Ma^^apa* on the evening of the 
sixth lunar day; when Menaka his Queen, whose life was 
in Uma, T ran out with joy to welcome Her at the report of 
Her coming; and wheu startled and made afraid by the

1 Kuvera is God of wealth. ' Rasa.

* When the B&dhaka becomes really fall of devotion, then even the 
Dev! seems to lose her non-dualistic Nirguna aspect, owing to the 
intensity of the SAdhaka's devotion to the manifested aspect.

* BhAvo. ' On the coming—that is, invocation.

' Temple. ' Her daughter, the Devi.

988

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* BhAvo. ' On the coming—that is, invocation.

' Temple. ' Her daughter, the Devi.

988

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

sight of Her martial appearance, the great Sadhika 1 of the 
Daughter * * lost herself at view of this other form *—then, 
on her, Mother Maham&y&, the daughter of old, 4 cast M&y&, 
and assumed a form of surpassing beauty.

Song

“ She appeared as Gaurl, the Two-armed daughter of 
Mountain, Mother of Gage§ha.

Daughter of the Mountain-King,* with the graceful 
gait of an elephant.

Spouse of A§hutosha,* with two little children, held 
on Her two hips.’

Cha^dl appeared as though surrounded by moons.'

The beauty of the moon-faced Uma surpasses that of 
a million moons.

Ten moons shone on the nails of the Mother's feet.

Seeing this, the moon in the sky pales through shame.

Yet, can She be compared to the moon; She, at whose 
feet the moons roll ?

In Autumn, in the Himalayas, it was like a fair of 
autumnal moons.

In receiving the moon-faced Uma, the Queen took, 
as it were, the moon in her hand.

Behind Uma s family of moons' the moon in the sky 
was concealed.

1 Menaka, Her Mother. ' Kanyitattva. 1 Tattva.

* The poem is speaking of Her as Parvati, or Cm&. By " of old " 
reference is made to her previous manifestation as Satl. daughter of 
Daksha.

* Himalaya. * $hiva, the " easily appeased.”

* Children are so carried in the east.

* That is, her children—namely, her two sons, Gapegha and Karti- 
keya, and two daughters, Lakshin! and SarasvatT.

' Her children.

OUTER WORSHIP

989

With Her moonlike mouth the moon-faced Devi called 
out, ' Mother! ’

The Queen replied: * 1 * Is it you, 0 Durgfi! the Dis¬ 
peller of sorrows ?

With weeping, O Tftra, Mother! I have lost the 
pupils (Tfira) of my eyes.

0 Umft! to what a plight have I come since last I 
bid farewell to Thee !

0 Mother! my body remains in the Himalayas and 
my life in Kailasa.*

In Thy absence I lie on the earth as one who is dead.0 Umft! to what a plight have I come since last I 
bid farewell to Thee !

0 Mother! my body remains in the Himalayas and 
my life in Kailasa.*

In Thy absence I lie on the earth as one who is dead.

To-day Thou hast brought life to my body, and with 
it speech.

0 Mother! how is it that Thou dost not remember 
that Thou hast a Mother ?

If Thy mother dies sorrowing for Thee, Thou wilt 
incur the sin of killing Thy mother.

Being sonless, what refuge have I but in my 
Daughter ?

0 Brahmamayl! all my hope is placed on Thee.

Old age comes upon me day by day, and at any 
moment I may die.

0 Tara! wilt thou not seek me when my strength is 
gone?

What Thou doest, O Saviour from existence! makes 
me afraid,

Dest, O Mother! when I send for Thee at the hour of 
death, Thou shouldst refuse to come.’ *

1 What follows is a conversation between the Devi as Uma and her 
Mother Menakfi. Her daughtership to Menaka was one of Her spiri¬ 
tual Avataras. * The Mount and Paradise of $hiva.

1 Blessed, blessed are you. O Dft^harathi, devoted poet! Rightly 
did you arrange to bring Her to you in dne time. It is concerning this 
that there is the saying. “ In men that is cleverness which secures both 
the worlds." (Author’s note.)

990

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

At these words of the Queen, the Queen of Shiva said 
in sorrow:

‘ When did you, 0 Mother! seek me ? Whose father 
is a Ring and whose Mother is a Queen,

What if Her husband has, perchance, become a 
SannyasI ?

The bitter words of women kill me with shame.

We hear them say Thou art a King’s daughter, but 
has Thou no Mother?

Father is of stone and so are you, 0 Mother!

But I cannot conquer my love for you, 1 and so I have 
come of My own accord.

The Queen replied: ‘ 0 Lady of Ishfina ! true it is 
that I am stone,

And,* *0 Mother! for Her* whose daughter Thou art, 
it was best to be of stone.' 1

Saying this the Spouse of mountain 4 greatly wept, 
and in plaintive words again addressed her 
Daughter:And,* *0 Mother! for Her* whose daughter Thou art, 
it was best to be of stone.' 1

Saying this the Spouse of mountain 4 greatly wept, 
and in plaintive words again addressed her 
Daughter:

‘ As the motionless mountain is My husband, how oan 
I get news of you ?'

O gracious Devi! I pray Thee forgive my offence on 
that account.

Many are the people, O Umft! who before me call 
Thee miserable, and as 1 hear them my mind 
burns with fire.

They say to me, O Queen ! your Daughter, a tendril 
of gold, has become pale.

1 Literally. " Maya." which here means attachment.

a That is, Menaka.

* Otherwise, how can 8he hear the pain of separation from Thee ?

(Author’s note.)

* Him&laya, the husband of Menaka and father of Pftrvati,

OUTER WORSHIP

991

Destroyer of Tripura 1 lives by begging.

Beloved Um& is my only treasure, the treasure of 
worship.

I want to keep my Son-in-law in my house, but Tri- 
lochana 1 is not willing that I should do bo.

Then archly and with pride Durgfi said to Menak&,

Who has told you of your Son-in-law's distress ?

My Husband is the Creatorland Destroyer, the Lord 
of the three worlds.

Rather is it you, 0 Mother! who are a poor man's 
wife, but I am a Queen.

My Lord is the Lord of Kashi, 1 and no one can de¬ 
scribe Him.

0 Mother! in the world it is by My Husband’s riches 
that people become rich.

Whoever with devotion begs of My Husband, to Him 
does Trilochana * * give the wealth of liberation at 
a glance.

He is in want of nothing; but such is His nature that 
He yet behaves like some poor helpless man.

He who grasps the meaning* of this is filled with 
feeling, 1 and is saved from the cares of existence.

Will your riches make your Daughter and Son-in- 
law rich ?

Do you want to give riches to Her who holds the 
Universe in Her womb ?

' $hiva. * The three-eyed Deva, $hiva.Will your riches make your Daughter and Son-in- 
law rich ?

Do you want to give riches to Her who holds the 
Universe in Her womb ?

' $hiva. * The three-eyed Deva, $hiva.

* The glory of luminous Ka$hl is much greater than that of all the 
riches of the infinite Universe. This is why Bhuvane$hvara (Lord of 
the world), Parameshvara (Supreme Lord), and other epithets have 
been omitted, and the epithet Lord of K&shr has been used to indicate 
the consort of Kali. The purpose is more elaborately expressed in the 
line, “ He is King of King6 at KAshI, and your Daughter is Queen of 
Queens.” (Author’s note.) ' Vide ante.

' Bhftva ; a play on the word Bhftva, which means both " meaning ” 
and “ feeling."

992

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Can He be poor in whose house j’our Daughter lives?

As AnnapQrna I give food to the world,

And the Ocean, Kuvera 1 and others guard the wealth 
of Shiva.

How great, O Mother ! must have been the religious 
merit * * you have earned

That you were able to give your Daughter to Him !

Such is the power of My Husband that I can make 
you Indranl,'

I am such a Daughter of yours ns is equal to ten 
sons.

It is out of jealousy that neighbours do not speak to 
you of happiness,

But wound you, 0 Mother ! by speaking of sorrow.

The Queen said : ‘ O Brahmamayl! explain this to me.

If Thou hast so much wealth, where is the sign 
of it?

O Shaftkarl! * does not Shiva’B heart yearn to adorn 
Thee?

Why has not my Son-in-law given Thee jewelled 
ornaments ?

Of what use is wealth if the body of Umft-moon is 
unadorned ?

Poorly dressed and on fopt Thou hast come. This is 
what makes me doubtful (of your wealth).'

Playfully and with smiles Umft replies to Menak&:

* 0 Mother! Trilochana* cannot bear to see Me with 
ornaments,

1 God of wealth. ' Punya.

* Consort of the King of the Devae Indra.

' Feminine of $hahkara. a name of $hiva.

* The M three-eyed." or §biva, who in his forehead baa the eye of 
wisdom (Jn&nachoksa).

OUTER WORSHIP

993* Consort of the King of the Devae Indra.

' Feminine of $hahkara. a name of $hiva.

* The M three-eyed." or §biva, who in his forehead baa the eye of 
wisdom (Jn&nachoksa).

OUTER WORSHIP

993

For he says, What ornament is there in thiB world 
which can adorn Thee ?

Tarin!, 1 Thou art My crest-gem. Do gems become 
Thee ?

Will the moon look bright if gems are placed on it ?

My simple dress ever charms Ashutosha's * * mind,

And what Pafich&nana * desires that I do.

If this were not so, innumerable and priceless jewels 
would lie in the dust before Me.’

The Queen said : * Why should not ornaments become 
Thee?

Ivory, when set in gold, becomes more beautiful.

To-day I shall bring all kinds of jewels and see with 
my own eyes

Whether, O Ishanl! they become Thee or not.’

Then in joy of love the Queen of Mountain brought 
jewelled ornaments.

And put them with care on UmA-jewel.

Never, however, can ornaments look well on UmA’s 
body;

She became like the moon in the grasp of RAhu. 4

In grief the Queen became, as it were, dead, and 
stopped the maids,

Saying: 4 Do not bring worthless ornaments any 
more,

And quickly take off those which I have already put 
on UmA.

Let me see the unadorned body of the Mother.

They do not become Thee, O Mother Sbafikarl! Orna¬ 
ments do not become Thee ! ’

1 Epithet of the Devi as Saviour. * Shiva, the “ easily contented."

* Shiva, the " five headed." ' That is, the eclipsed moon,

ea

994

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

What Providence 1 is it which has made Thee, O 
Mother! Spouse of Hara ? *

How beautiful Thou art, O Tfira! 0 Tftrfi, with face 
like the autumnal moon,

I have, O Mother! given the moon the name of T&ra 
as I lost the T&ras (pupils) of my eyes.*

This beauty charms Hara’s mind, and destroys its 
darkness.

Is this the reason, 0 Mother Um& ! why the Three¬ 
eyed Deva * does not allow Thee to be ever out of 
His sight *? ”This beauty charms Hara’s mind, and destroys its 
darkness.

Is this the reason, 0 Mother Um& ! why the Three¬ 
eyed Deva * does not allow Thee to be ever out of 
His sight *? ”

So long as the desire to adorn Her is not done away 
with in this manner, the effort * will not be successful; this 
is why Shastra has made provision for Her adornment. On 
that day on which She sees that I am tired out, discomfort¬ 
ed, and put to shame in my efforts to adorn Her, the merci¬ 
ful Tripurasundarl will, in order to end this trouble of Her 
son, adorn Herself with Her own beauty, and of Her own 
accord take Her seat on the throne of my heart. On the day 
on which when going to adorn the Mother with my orna¬ 
ments, I shall myself be adorned with Her ornaments, on 
that day ray yearning to adorn Her will end for good and 
all. Then I shall throw up my arms in joy and call out to the 
world to see how, although all efforts to adorn the Mother 
fail, he who makes the efforts is himself adorned by virtue 
of the religious merit* he thereby acquires. R&mapras&da

' VidhL * Shiva.

' A play on the word T&rft, which means the saviour " (a name of 
the Devi), and also a “ star " and the “ pupil of the eye.” According to 
the Bengali idiom, " pupils of my eyes " means the * light of my eyes.” 
The sense of the verse is that when Umft left Menaka the latter lost the 
sight of her eye, which is Umft Herself ; and so by mistake gave her the 
name of T&rft (in its sense of star), although her proper name is ” Moon.”

' ?hiva. Her Spouse. * Sftdhunu. ' Puny a.

OUTER WORSHIP

995' ?hiva. Her Spouse. * Sftdhunu. ' Puny a.

OUTER WORSHIP

995

has also told us what sort of an eye is required to be able 
to perceive the beauty and sweetness of that adornment. 
We shall try elsewhere to make this clear. Here we would 
say that, whether it suits the Mother or not, I shall adorn 
the Mother if my own condition requires it, for the Mother 
is as much my Mother as She is the Mother of Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Maheshvara. The Mother’s mother, Menaka, 
proceeded to adorn the Mother because it suited her to 
do so, irrespective as to whether it suited Uma or not. 
But because Menaka thought the ornaments whioh were 
suitable for her to be also suitable for the Mother, the 
Mother refused to be adorned with her ornaments (vanity), 1 
and stood forth adorned with such ornaments only as 
properly belonged to the Mother. And then the divine* * 
beauty of Menaka sank in * the sea of the indescribable 
beauty of Brahmamayl Uma. Then, throwing off the 
ornaments, consisting of the darkness of the vanity of 
individual existence, Menaka herself shone with the light 
of the Sun of the sole existence of the Mother of the 
world, and seeing at once the self-luminous true aspect of 
the Devi, whioh is consciousness, cried out: “ Do not 
bring worthless ornaments any more, and take off quickly 
those which I have already put on Uma. Let me see the 
unadorned body of the Mother.” When, in order to satisfy 
the yearning and effort* of Her Mother, the perfect grace 
of existence, consciousness, and bliss* flowed in streams 
from the fair face to the fair feet of the Mother, all other 
adornments appeared as nothing before that supreme beauty. 
When thus her yearning was satisfied, Menaka eagerly said : 
“ Let me see the Mother’s unadorned body,” for the 
Daughter, although a Daughter in the aspect * She had

1 Ahangk&ra. (Author's parenthesis.)

* That is. dwindled into insignificance. 
' Sat. chit, and &nanda.

* Daiva.

* S&dhana. 
1 Rapa.

996

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Ahangk&ra. (Author's parenthesis.)

* That is. dwindled into insignificance. 
' Sat. chit, and &nanda.

* Daiva.

* S&dhana. 
1 Rapa.

996

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

assumed for play, 1 was then Perfect and Eternal Brahman 
in its aspect/ as the Supreme Unity.

It was the upward flowing current of his spiritual feel¬ 
ing which pained Ramapras&da at the absence of materials 
suitable for the satisfaction of that yearning, and led him 
to say: “ Ah ! you want to adorn Her with worthless tinsel 
ornaments." This does not mean that “ the Mother need 
not be adorned.” The burden of the song of his sorrow 
was that he had not ornaments suitable for the adornment 
of the Mother. This must be so; for is there any such luck¬ 
less son in the world as yearns to call the Mother Mother 
and yet has no desire to adorn Her ?

“ The Mother who feeds the world with all kinds of 
food.

With what faoe do you want to feed Her on Atapa * 
rice and soaked peas > "

He who can adorn others can also be adorned himself. 
He who can feed others can also be fed himself.* He 
who desires to adorn others may also desire to be adorned 
himself. He who desires to feed others may also have 
the wish to eat himself. Either say at once that the Devi 
neither adorns others nor is adorned Herself, neither 
feeds others nor eats Herself; or say that She both adorns 
others and is adorned Herself; both feeds others and Her¬ 
self eats. Even if She is not, according to you, Herself 
adorned in Her aspect with form, yet in the formless 
aspect at least, as you understand and speak of it, She 
appears to undoubtedly adorn others. If so, how do 
you escape from the difficulty ? All Shastras and all

1 Lila, 1 Kaivalya-rdpa. ' See ante.

' The idea of eating is in Her, otherwise She would not have fed the 
world ; and when the idea is in Her, the idea of Herself eating must 
also be in Her. When She is sagaaa. she is so not only to the world, 
bat to Herself also.

OtJTER WORSHIP

997OtJTER WORSHIP

997

people agree that the Formless aspect is eternally attribute- 
less, and that it is impossible for that attributeless aspeot 
to have the desire (whioh is itself an attribute) to adorn 
the world ; but, then, such is the virtue of the nineteenth 
century that nowadays we frequently hear of a Formless 
Deity with attributes. We, however, understand this 
attribute to be an attribute 1 of the worshippers of the 
Formless Deity instead of being really an attribute of 
the Formless Deity; for to admit the presence of an 
attribute in the Attributeless Brahman is tantamount to 
cutting flowers from a garden in the air. Those who speak 
of Brahman as perfectly devoid of attributes admit, in 
order to account for the universe which is made of attri¬ 
butes, the separate existence of Maya, composed of the 
three Gu^as or attributes. Owing to their not being able 
to bear the weight of the deep and solemn mental effort 
whioh is necessary for the admission of the separate exist¬ 
ence of Maya, they are placed in the following dilemmas : 
If, on the one hand, they do not admit the separate exist¬ 
ence of Mftya ; on the other, they see that in the denial of 
all connection of the world with the Formless Brahman it 
is impossible to oall Him “ Merciful Father." If, on the 
one hand, It is addressed with attributes, shame will make 
it diflioult for them to show their faces to worshippers of 
the Deity in His aspeot with form, for in order to possess 
attributes it is necessary to possess form; consequently, 
they have denied perfect attributeness (that part of it 
which necessitates the possession of form) * and present to 
view a queer sort of Brahman, half of which is with attri¬ 
butes and the other attributeless. Formless, yet with 
attributes; with attributes, yet formless. This Brahman 
of theirs is called “existence, consciousness, and bliss,”*1 A mental figment for which the worshippers alone are responsible. 
’ Author’s parenthesis. * Sat, chit, and ftnanda ,

998

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

after the ShAstra; ’ “ Meroiful Father,” after the Bible: 
“ Creator ” (KartA) and “ Lord ” (I§hvara), after the Koran ; 
and the “ Formless One,” throngh the malice whioh non- 
Aryyas bear against Aryyas ; and He is also called “ full of 
love ” at times for the attainment of their selfish ends. 
Because they will not allow their Brahman to be identified 
with the DevatA whom Aryyas worship, it has (despite its 
being, in fact, above name and form) * * name, though not 
form,* otherwise how can It be constantly addressed with 
the exclamation “ 0! " ? However that may be, even if this 
newly discovered Formless Brahman without attributes 
suits their purpose, we are ourselves in no wise bound to 
admit the existence of this novel appearance/ We care 
very little for the Attributeless Brahman if He does not 
appear with form, and much less do we like this Formless 
One with attributes.

Who says that She who can feed others, as She can 
adorn others, cannot or will not Herself eat ? * If the will 
of Her who is will itself eternally exists, that will has as 
muoh relation to feeding as to eating/ If you say that it 
is impossible for Her to eat, we shall say that it is also 
impossible for Her to feed. If you admit the possibility of 
feeding, why should you not admit the possibility of eating ? 
You may say She feeds the world, but who will feed Her ? 
For you may argue that it is impossible to give food to Her 
who gives food to the inBnite universe. To those whom a

1 That is, the Hindu $h Astra. ' NAma Rftpa.

' The Hindu idea is that the Brahman has neither name nor form 
(Nirgnpa Brahman), or has both name and form (Sagupa Brahman). 
These reformers ” put forward a Deity who has name, but no form, 
and is therefore neither Nirgnna nor Sagupa.

* AvatAra.* AvatAra.

‘^ e, l , the SAdhaka eats or thinks of eating. She it is who eats 
or thinks of it. • Vidt anU .

OUTER WORSHIP

999

knowledge of words has robbed of their sense and who can¬ 
not understand the truth,' these words appear very sweet 
and as the final and essential truth; for their mind is 
naturally unwilling to disturb the state of self-intoxioation 
whioh these delusive words produce in them.

“ The Mother who feeds the world with all kinds of 
food,

With what face do you want to feed Her on Atapa ' 
rice and soaked peas ? ’’

Can anything be said after this ? Here, once for all, is 
the most final decision whioh the matter admits of! For 
these people think (in consonanoe with their mental trend)* * 
that it is utterly false that She eats or will eat, the only 
essential truth being that She feeds !

If the Mother cannot be fed simply because She feeds 
the world, the reason for such inability is that if I want to 
feed Her She would demand repayment by me for all the 
food whioh She supplies to the world,* for you ask yourself 
how much She who feeds the world oan Herself eat. I 
say She may feed the world as much as She likes. SVhat 
have I to do with that ? I am bound to give Her only 
what She gives me to eat.

My gratification will be in giving to Her the enjoy* 
ment * with whioh She has provided me and then retiring.

I am not here to make payment of all Her dues. My res¬ 
ponsibility is to pay Her only such dues as I owe Her. 
She is Brahman only so long as 1 am Jlva. She is Mother 
only so long as I am son. She is a Devata only so long as 
I am a man, and my worship of Her lasts only so long as I

1 Tattva. ' Vide ante. ' Author's parenthesis.

* That is, She feeds the world ; but you think that She has such a 
great body that She will not be satisfied with your small offerings.

' Bhoga. There is a play on the word which also means the food 
offered to the DevatA.

1000

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Bhoga. There is a play on the word which also means the food 
offered to the DevatA.

1000

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

am “ I.“ My worship of Her will be at an end the very 
day on whioh my “ I-ness ” will be at an end, or my 
individuality will disappear the very day on which my 
worship of Her will come to a close. So long as I shall 
have to eat Atapa rice 1 and soaked peas, what justification 
have I for eating them without offering them to Her ?

Although She is the Mother of the world, She is also 
my Mother. Although She is Bhagavan of the Universe, 
She is also my Lord.* * “ The food which I shall eat, even 
that food I must offer to Pitris and Devas.” What I shall 
eat even that my Ishtadevata will partake of before me. 
Had She been capable of taking offence like you and 1 
because the food consisted of “ Atapa rice and soaked peas,” 
would She have been worshipped by the three worlds as 
their Mother, meroiful, kind to the poor, Protectress of the 
helpless, easily attainable by devotion and loving to 
devotees ? Had not Shrl Krishna thrown away the food laid 
out by Rukmiijl' Herself (She who was full of supreme love 
and Mah&lakshml), and hurried to Dvaitavana* from 
Dvaraka' in order to eat the remnant of herb in the cook¬ 
ing-pot left over after Draupadl’s meal (when that virtuous 
woman-friend of His, frightened at the prospect of being 
cursed by a Brfthma^a, sought His protection), would He 
have been oalled throughout the three worlds by the 
glorious name of “ Friend of P&i?davas " ? Had not Bhaga¬ 
van, in spite of His being the Master of infinite universes 
and Lord of Vaikin?tha,' assumed the form of young Gop&la 
on being moved thereto by the great devotion of Prahl&da, 
and taken with His own hand the plate of poisoned food

1 Vide ante. * Prabhu.

' Elis wife.

* The forest where the resided for some time daring

their exile. ?hri Krishna’s capital.

' The heaven of VUhoa (see ante.)

OUTER WORSHIP

10011 Vide ante. * Prabhu.

' Elis wife.

* The forest where the resided for some time daring

their exile. ?hri Krishna’s capital.

' The heaven of VUhoa (see ante.)

OUTER WORSHIP

1001

from the hand of Prahlfida, who was grieved to give it to 
Him ; and had He not put that food with the fingers of Hie 
own lotus-hand into His fair mouth, which is wont to 
drink nectar' given by Brahma and other Devaa, would He 
have been known by the beloved title of “ Hari of Prahl&da,” 
in spite of His being the Hari of the world ? Had He not 
joyously taken in the hollow of His hand the grains of rice 
given by the wife (a devoted S&dhika)* * of the poor and 
destitute Brahmana Sud&ma and tasted their sweetness, 
greater than the sweetness of nectar, singing the greatness 
of love, would anybody in this world have called Him 
Friend of the Poor and Merciful Bhagavan? Had not 
the Providence* who dispenses the four-fold fruit to 
Jlva considered sweet the fruits half-eaten by herd-boys, 
would the sweetness of the name “ The joy of Nanda ” * 
have been so much greater than that of “ Sachchi- 
dananda?”* Had not the Mother, the Genetrix of 
Brahm& and other Devaa, left Her bejewelled throne in 
the luminously resplendent region of Kail&sa* and gone to 
the thatched hut of K&laketu, 1 the hunter's son, illumi¬ 
nating the house and the surrounding woods with the light 
of Her beauty; had She not proved the fitness of Her name 
“ Chai?<jU ” by giving the Chagdala’s* son a place on the fair 
lap which is ever sought by Gaha and Gaj&nana;* if Anna¬ 
purna, 10 Charmer of the mind of K&la, u had not blessed 
Kalaketu by feeding him from the breast which even 
Brahma and other Devas hardly gain, and eaten the food 
of a Cba^d&la; had the dispeller of K&laketu's fear of death

' Ampta. 1 Feminine of SAdhaka worshipper. * VidhAtA.

* Nandanandana. * Existence, consciousness, and bliss.

' The mount which is Shiva’s abode.

' An incident in Kavikankan’s Chapel.' Ampta. 1 Feminine of SAdhaka worshipper. * VidhAtA.

* Nandanandana. * Existence, consciousness, and bliss.

' The mount which is Shiva’s abode.

' An incident in Kavikankan’s Chapel.

* The hunter. ' KArttikeya and Gapejha.

* The Devi as Lady Bountiful and giver of food. u $hiva.

1002

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

shrunk from becoming a hunter's mother—would the dis¬ 
tressed Jlvas of the world to-day have wept and cried, 
“ Mother? " Had not the Mother, the Devatft whom Suratha 
and Samadhi 1 sought in Sadhana gratified the two Sadha- 
kas by accepting, in the woods on the bank of a river, their 
worship with fruits and roots and offerings of blood issuing 
from their pierced hearts,* would S&dhakas have staked 
their lives in their determination to perform Sadhana of 
the Mother? Both Shastra and report say that Maharaja 
Suratha and Samadhi the Vai§hya King, whose life was 
itself a great Samadhi,* after establishing the Mother in an 
earthen image daily for three years, inflicted cuts upon their 
breasts with swords, and with the blood issuing therefrom 
made offering in the great worship, that by such intense 
devotion * they might speedily get sight of Her.

This puts me in mind of something. The cutting of 
his own breast by a son in the worship of the Mother 
oannot be a favour of the Mother. And why being Mother 
should She be so cruel ? In my opinion, however, 8uratha 
and Samadhi did not out themselves to their hearts in 
order that by satisfying Her with suoh a sacrifice the 
Mother might appear before them. They had heard from 
their Gurudeva, Maharshi Medhasa, that the Mother dwelt 
and played in the hearts of devotees. Hence they took the 
terrible determination “to see Her by bringing Her out from 
their hearts by importuning, if not by satisfying, Her.” And1 The King Suratha and the Vaigbya Samadhi referred to in Cbapqli 
(Markandeya Parana). When wandering in poverty in the forest 
Rishi Medhasa spoke to them of the Devi whom they afterwards 
worshipped: Suratha in order to become h great King, and Samadhi 
that he might gain Moksha. The Devi granted both boons, Suratha 
is to be the Mann of the Savaroika (the next) Manvantara.

' They pierced their hearts, and blood flowed out, which was then 
offered to the Devi. The Sddhaka sometimes makes offering of his 
blood after making incisions in the body.

* Ecstasy, communion with Brahman.

* Tapasya.

OUTER WORSHIP

1008* Ecstasy, communion with Brahman.

* Tapasya.

OUTER WORSHIP

1008

with suoh intention they inflicted sword-cuts upon them¬ 
selves. Otherwise, what was the necesssity for so intense 
a form of devotion? * 1 People may call the blood which 
issued from their hearts their heart’s blood, but I say that 
it was not merely the blood of the heart, but also attach¬ 
ment. And because this was so, blood flowed from the 
hearts of the Mother's devotees, brimming with love for 
the Mother. The moment such hearts were pierced, streams 
of love flowed copiously from them. But that love is trans¬ 
parent, fair, pure, unsoiled, thiok, deep, and milk-white. 
How, then, did it become blood-red ? How can I tell you ? 
0 devotee! you alone can say whence came that blood. 
To me it seems that the Mother who adorns the throne of 
the Isle of Gems' in the Sea of Milk* lay happily in that 
sea, which is the devotee's heart, so that all blows which 
fell on it fell on the sacred feet of the Devi, who is so 
loving to Her devotees. Then, by the waves thus raised, 
the bright red paint on the lotus-feet of the Mother of the 
world, 4 which Sad&nanda* had lovingly applied with his 
own hand, was washed off, and, mixing with the deep 
attachment of the devotee’s heart, appeared as blood to the 
view of men. Otherwise, when the devotee had already 
offered his body, senses, heart, Atm&, and all he possessed 
at Her feet, what was the necessity of re-offering that heart 
again and again to satisfy Her ? The sea, despite its depth, 
is full of waves. Similarly, notwithstanding that love is 
ever deep, it is constantly restless. Suoh restlessness is 
its natural characteristic. To Him whom I love with all 
my heart, and to whose feet I have offered my all, to Him, 
nevertheless, I desire to offer it again and again, ten times 
every half an hour.

1 TapaByft. * Mapidvlpa. * Kahlra.

' Hindu women paint their feet with red lac.

1 $hiva, the “ ever joyful.”

1004

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 TapaByft. * Mapidvlpa. * Kahlra.

' Hindu women paint their feet with red lac.

1 $hiva, the “ ever joyful.”

1004

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

I know not whether it is a quality of love or of its 
object, whether of the devotee or of the beauteous feet of 
the Mother. But it is a fact, that as often as Suratha and 
Samfidhi, urged by such restlessness, struck their hearts, so 
often did the Mother of the world move Her feet to let them 
know that She was awake, and gave clear evidence thereof 
in ripples of blood raised thereby. At last, fearing lest 
Mahe?hvara Bhould take it to heart were all the dye so 
lovingly and carefully applied by Him washed off (lest 
Shiva's words should prove false by the pain caused to 
the heart of the devoted Sftdhakas were their constant 
offering of attachment to Her spurned and rejected), 1 the 
Daughter of mountain left that comfortable oouch and 
showed Herself to the S&dhaka by awaking, as one who 
is consciousness, in the earthen image, the beauty of which 
gave joy to their eyes. She showed Herself in a manner 
as if She knew nothing of all that had happened thereto¬ 
fore. Her heavy and indolent eyes, like those of one who 
has suddenly awakened from sleep, were stirred by a 
Mother’s love, soothing the hearts of the devotees by 
shedding upon them the nectar of Her serene regard ; and 
smiling softly with Her ruddy lips, She said to Suratha, 
“ Maharftjft, take what you like," and to the Vai§hya also, 
“ Gladdener of Kula (Kulanandana),* take what you like." 
Ah, how sweet! The expression “ Gladdener of Kula " in 
the mouth of the Mother was no mere word of address.1 Author's parenthesis. The passage is obscure. It has been 
already said that the blood was not merely blood, but the attachment 
of the heart, the meaning of which appears to be that the shedding of 
the heart's blood was, as it were, the shedding of the heart's attach¬ 
ment. As this shedding is supposed to be caused by the Devi living 
in the heart, the SAdhaka might think it to be the rejection by Her 
of his offering of attachment. What the words of §hiva are cannot be 
made ont from the context, unless it be the Tantra ShAatra in general.

1 See post.

OUTER WORSHIP

10051 See post.

OUTER WORSHIP

1005

It showed that the gate of Her unbounded love was open. 
The Mother charms with suoh sweet and soft address 
those who seek Her by becoming Hers only. Maharajfi, 
Suratha was an interested 1 Sftdhaka. In spite of having 
been robbed and driven away by sons and relations, the 
bitter thirst of his mind for enjoyment of worldly things 
was not satisfied, so that he worshipped the Mother in 
order to regain his lost kingdom. This was why the Mother 
who dwells in all hearts addressed the Prince as Mab&r&j&. 
As for the Vai^hya, his keen dispassion,* * which had con¬ 
sumed his worldly desires to their very roots, was not to be 
satisfied so long as he did not obtain the Mother, the Mahft- 
m&y&, who is the centre of all this Mftyfi. This was why 
the Mother very fondly and very affectionately used the 
title of “ Gladdener of Kula ” in addressing this son of Hers 
who had lost the Mother. Just as a worldly mother 
affectionately calls her son “ support of his Kula (race), or 
ornament of his Kula (race),” if he be great and glorious; 
so the Mother, in spite of Her being above the world, was, as 
it were, over-powered by Her Maternal affection, and called 
the Vai^hya “ Gladdener of Kula.” O Mother, Thou hast 
none in Thy Kula (race), how, then, could he become glad¬ 
dener of Kula* to Thee ? Perhaps it is because Thou hast 
appeared as Mother that Thy attachment to Kula has so 
greatly increased. That Thou hast none above Thee in 
Thy Kula (race) 4 is no reason why Thou shouldst not have 
descendants. If really Thou hast no descendants in Thy

1 Sak&ma; because be worshipped in order that be might gain the 
material benefit to himself of becoming a great King, whereas bis 
companion was striving for the spiritual end of liberation.

* YairSgya.* YairSgya.

* Kulonandana. The word Nandana means also son. There is 
a play on the “ Kula," which means “ race family.” as well as a form of 
Sftdhana. It also means “ shore " or “ bank." See text. post.

* No one is Her progenitor.

1006

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Kula, then who are we ? Whether Thou hast a Kula or 
not, Thou are the root of Kula, Kulakundalinl 1 II Herself. 
The Kula path,’ 0 Mother! is for him who follows Thy 
path. My desires for Kula 1 have been fully gratified. Now, 
0 Mother! take me out of Kula* into Thy arms, so that 
sitting at the root of Kula* I may penetrate into its mys¬ 
teries. Let the Kulakula sound' of the river of existence * 
cease for ever. 0 Mother! it was because Sam&dhi, Thy son 
immersed in Sam&dhi, 1 gave lustre to this Kula* by passing 
beyond the two Kulas* of this river that Thou didst give 
give him the endearing title of “Gladdener of Kula.” 
Blessed were you devotees, Suratha and Sam&dhi! How 
shall we, Jlvas of the Kali age, penetrate the deep mystery 
of the offering of sacrifice by you ? By you alone was it 
offered, and by the Mother alone was its meaning under¬ 
stood. 0 S&dhaka of the embodied Deity! * be you inter¬ 
ested or disinterested in your S&dhana, u inquire now of 
Suratha and Samadhi what has to be done in order to 
directly perceive “ the appearance of the Mother in an outer 
image. The worship in which men like Suratha and Sama¬ 
dhi wounded their breasts with their own hands in order 
that they might see the Mother of the world in an outer 
image—that worship is called idolatry to-day in the Kali 
age by the community of infidels themselves, confused by 
the “ learning and science ” of the nineteenth century. How

1 The name of the Devi whose abode is in the Mal&dh&ra. There is 
a play on the word Kula.

’ The Tantra.

’ Here " family "—that is. the world. * T&ntrik worship.

I The sound made by running water. Play on the word Kula.

* Bhavanadl. * Ecstasy ; a play on the Vai^bya’s name.’ The Tantra.

’ Here " family "—that is. the world. * T&ntrik worship.

I The sound made by running water. Play on the word Kula.

* Bhavanadl. * Ecstasy ; a play on the Vai^bya’s name.

' Human race. * Banks. “ S&k&ra.

II That is, be the S&dhana done with the desire for personal benefit 
or not, as in the case of Suratha and SamAdhi.

“ Prat yakshakaranam

OUTER WORSHIP

1007

absurd it is to say that Mab&raj&dhirajendra * Suratha, the 
paramount Monarch of this earth, with its oceans, and high- 
souled Samftdhi, whose heart was under the sway of intense 
dispassion* and lighted by the fire of spiritual knowledge* 
rent their hearts and made streams of blood flow therefrom 
in the course of a play with a mere doll. Such oriticism 
against the Savarnika Manu 4 is nothing but a clear sign of 
the influence of the Kali age. However that may be, to 
Her who accepted even heart’s blood as sacrifice from 
Suratha and Samadhi in order to uphold the honour of the 
words of Sh&stra told by Herself, “Atapa rice and soaked 
peas ” cannot be unacceptable; and it is because they are 
not unacceptable to Her that the Sidbaka has with simpli¬ 
city said:

“O Mother! in the Devaloka Devas worship Thee daily 
with nectar. 4 0 Jagadlijhvarl! 4 rulers of the earth worship 
Thee with delicious food. But, 0 Mother! Thou canst not 
for that reason reject my offering of leaves, flowers, fruits, 
and water. O Mother! does fire refuse to accept blades of 
grass because in the sacrificial pit fire is worshipped with 
firewood along with ghee?” Fire is called the “all-eater,' 1 
because by virtue of its power of burning it is capable of 
appropriating to itself all things.Fire accepts and consumes indiscriminately anything 
which is offered to it. Similarly, the merciful Devi, who 
grants all desires, accepts, for the gratification of Sadha- 
kas, anything which is offered in the name of the Al¬ 
mighty, Omniscient, and All-good. This acceptance is 
not to supply any want on Her part, but in order that 
She who bears great love for Her devotees may maintain

1 A compound of the words Mahirajg. Adhiraja. and Indra. The 
word Indra used as a common noun means “ chief."

' Vairtgya, 4 Tattvajnana. 4 Vide ante.

' Amrita. * Mistress of the universe 1 Sarvvabhuk.

1008

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

them and their Vratas. 1 Otherwise, in the dominion of 
Her who is abundance * * ** itself and is plenty* the character 
of things * and power,* there can be really no want.* If there 
be any want it is only the want of want. Just as She has 
no want of “ fitapa rice and soaked peas," so also She has 
no want of sweet-meats, sweet-rice/ and nectar.' What 
cause for sorrow or shame is there, then, in offering Her 
" atapa rice and soaked peas ? ” To Her the store of nectar* 
churned out of the seven seas is as much an atom as “ atapa 
rice and soaked peas " are atoms/ She is as much unattach¬ 
ed to atapa rice and soaked peas as to neotar.* Although 
She is really as free from attachment as the water on a 
lotus-leaf, when playing at the play of SangsAra, full of 
M&y&, She, in order to draw devotees to Herself, merely 
pretends to be delighted by the receipt of all these 
materials. Otherwise, what form of delight does the Devi, 
who is all delight and perfect delight, want that She should 
feel delight in receiving offerings of food.*It is ridioulous to think that offerings of food will give 
delight to the Anandamayl,” who is present in every atom 
of those offerings as consciousness.” Her delight and joy 
of which the Sb&stra speaks in dealing with the subject of 
worship are not Her delight and Her joy, but the play of the 
delight of S&dhana and the joy of S&dbana in the S&dhaka. 
We shall try to explain this point more clearly in its proper

' Vows, religious rites (see Introduction).

' Mahftbhftva. ' Bhftva. * Svnbbftva. * Prabhftva.

* AbhAva is non-existence. Mahabbftva and Bhftva are translated 
os plenty. " because they have been made antitheses of AbhAva or 
want." As for SvabhAva and Prabhftva, the author appears not to have 
been able to resist the temptation of using these words for the sake of 
alliteration.

’ Paramftnna ; rice cooked with milk and sugar. * Amrita.

' Paramftnu. To Her who is Brahmft one is as insignificant as the 
other. “ Naivedya. *' DevT, who is bliss or delight.

** ChiUatta.

OUTER WORSHIP

1009' Paramftnu. To Her who is Brahmft one is as insignificant as the 
other. “ Naivedya. *' DevT, who is bliss or delight.

** ChiUatta.

OUTER WORSHIP

1009

place. Here only we would observe that R&mapras&da sang 
the story of His heart with a mind full of sorrow, a sorrow 
which attacks every S&dhaka so long as the supreme truth 1 
does not dawn in the first stage * * of S&dhana. His sorrowful 
song is not the expression of a decision arrived at in the 
domain of knowledge,* but the indistinct expression of an 
ungratified longing in the domain of devotion. Through 
their senseless interference in matters in which they have 
no competence, the community of undevotees, who are 
ignorant of the truth,* and without experience in these 
matters, put on the airs of wise men before the community 
of infidels' by giving to words belonging to the sphere of 
devotion a queer appearance, coloured by the sphere of 
knowledge. 1 But they failed to see that the sky was over¬ 
clouded, and a single shower was likely to wash off the 
light * colour with which they had painted these pictures. 
It is highly amusing to see people taking the name R&ma¬ 
pras&da and making themselves known to others as his 
followers, yet all the time trying secretly to draw him to 
their own party. We are unable to understand how such 
people as hold so much intelligence in themselves * can have 
room 10 to digest the food left by R&maprasfida. It is during 
life that evidence of men's Sftdhana is seen. But R&ma¬ 
pras&da gave evidence of his S&dhana in death as well as 
in life. By performing worship the night preceding his 
death, and placing the Mother’s image before him even at 
the time of death, the high-souled accomplished S&dhaka 
has given us full proof of his faith in Brahman with form,

* Paratattva. ’ Adhik&ra.

•Jnftna. ‘ Bhakti. * Tattva. * P&shapdM-

' Jnftnak&nda. ' As opposed to fast colour.

• Literally, " in their stomachs a Bengali idiom.

“ In those stomachs. " Slk&ra.

1010•Jnftna. ‘ Bhakti. * Tattva. * P&shapdM-

' Jnftnak&nda. ' As opposed to fast colour.

• Literally, " in their stomachs a Bengali idiom.

“ In those stomachs. " Slk&ra.

1010

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and of his performance of worship of the Deity with form . 1 
During life the Mother with form * * danced constantly in 
his songs and his heart. If after this a man can find it in 
himself to say that “ Raniaprasada did not worship the Deity 
with form," he may as well also say that Ramapras&da had 
no soul.*

We shall quote here another of RAmaprasAda's songs 
of self-resignation. In this it will be seen how even his 
body and senses, not to speak of his mind, heart, and very 
self , 4 were absorbed in the worship of the Mother.

“ Of what use, O brother! is this body if it does not 
melt in love for Dakshina ? 1

Oh, fie, fie, to this tongue if it does not utter the name 
of Kali.

Those eyes are sinful which see not the form' of Kali.

Oh, how wicked is the mind which does not sink 
under Her feet.

May thunder strike those ears which do not hear Her 
sweet name, making copious tears flow from the 
eyes. For what purpose does their existence serve ?

Oh, should we desire to have the hands which fill 
the belly, if they are not joined together to hold 
sandal paste, Java flowers, and bael-leaves ? T

Oh, of what use are the feet, and wholly without 
purpose is the work they do by day and night, if 
they do not willingly and gladly carry us there 
where images of Kali are enshrined ?

If a man’s senses are not under his control, can Devata 
be so ?

1 S&k&ra Up&sanfi. ’ Martimatl. * At in A.

* Afcmatattva. - ' The gracious Deri. * Rapa.

These are offered ijr the two joined palms to the Devi in worship.

OUTER WORSHIP 1011

R&mapras&da asks: * * Does a Babul '-tree ever bear 
mango fruits ?' ”

Let the S&dhaka here ask the critic what kind of Rftma- 
prasftda it was who wrote this song ?OUTER WORSHIP 1011

R&mapras&da asks: * * Does a Babul '-tree ever bear 
mango fruits ?' ”

Let the S&dhaka here ask the critic what kind of Rftma- 
prasftda it was who wrote this song ?

There are, again, many people who, on hearing all this 
infidel talk, think it to be a novel and refined form of 
criticism, whioh the brilliant genius of the nineteenth 
century alone with its constant pursuit of knowledge and 
science has originated. But we say that this iconoclasm is 
not a thing of to-day only when considered as a revolution¬ 
ary principle in the sphere of worship. It has always 
existed since the creation of light and darkness, since the 
beginning of the eternal quarrel between the race of Devas 
and the race of Daityas, and has lasted as long as nectar * 
and poison have existed together in the depth of the sea ; 
as long a9 there have been light and spots in the moon ; 
as long as there have been heaven and hell* sin and 
virtue,* Dharma and obstruction thereof,' Deva and Dfinava,' 
man and Pishacha,’ knowledge and ignorance, faith and 
faithlessness, Sadhua* and libertines, devotees and infidels. 
Even those who go to heaven fall into hell ' when their 
religious merit 10 is spent. Even wise men are led astray 
when the attraction of sin becomes strong, and even 
S&dhus * hanker to eat and drink things injurious to them 
when they become delirious in disease.

Similarly, non-Aryya proclivities, the unhappy result 
of evil deeds in previous births, move and possess the

' A wild tree.

• Amrita. * Svarga and Naraka. * Pftpa and Punya.

• Vigbna. ' Enemies of the divine principle.

’ A low. unclean form of Spirit. ' Pious men.

• To work out the effect of sin. Ordinarily, hell is gone through 
first, then heaven, and then earth.

*' “ Punya.

1012

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA’ A low. unclean form of Spirit. ' Pious men.

• To work out the effect of sin. Ordinarily, hell is gone through 
first, then heaven, and then earth.

*' “ Punya.

1012

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

hearts of Jlvas, in spite of their having been born in the 
Aryya race. This it is which gives rise to the kind of 
criticism under consideration. Eternally ignorant as we 
are of the root principle, we see only the fruit, and think 
that the branch alone is its cause; whilst as a matter of 
fact He it is who is at the root of all fruits—He whose 
command gives sour, bitter, pungent, and sweet tastes 
to the sap of trees from which fruits spring according to 
the seeds from which they grow. We therefore often 
find the hearts of even Cbapd&las, who are devoted to 
Bhagav&n, to be adorned with S&ttvik 1 qualities becom¬ 
ing Brahmanas, whilst even Brahmanas fall into a state 
worse than that of Chapdalas if they become estranged 
from Bhagav&n. When, in spite of being the son of 
Brahm& Himself, and father-in -law of Bhagav&n, who is 
perfect and eternal Brahman, and husband of Bhagavati 
Praj&pat!, Daksha did that whioh became an Asura, and 
lost all devotion to the feet of Bhagav&n and Bhagavati, 
Pa?hupati,* the Destroyer of the Pashu bonds* of the 
three worlds, attached to the headless trunk of His father- 
in-law the head of a goat, the worst of beasts.* On the 
other hand, in the incident on which the Shivar&tri Vrata* 
is based, we see the same Pashupati taking mercy on a 
Nishada* King, a killer of animals, delivering him from

' Good qualities due to the predominance in them of the Sattvagupa.

* $hiva as Lord of creatures.

' Bonds which bind Jlvas : as ropes bind pashas or beasts.

' This was after the sacrifice of Daksha, at which the latter had 
slighted $hiva. Hence Daksha is represented as a man with a goat's 
head.' This was after the sacrifice of Daksha, at which the latter had 
slighted $hiva. Hence Daksha is represented as a man with a goat's 
head.

* On a stormy night a hunter with game on his back got up on a 
bael-tree at the foot of which §hiva and P&rvatl came and sat. As the 
hunter mounted on the tree bael-leaves fell on ?hiva. This satisfied 
him, and he blessed the hunter.

* Ring of NiBhOdas, or Yy&dhas, or Cband&las. who live by bunting; 
regarded as a low and cruel caste.

OUTER WORSHIP

1018

the terrible fear of death, taking him to the abode of 
Kailasa, which great Yogis long to attain, and giving eternal 
peace to that ChandS-la, scorched as he was by the three 
fires, 1 setting him in the cool shade of His feet. The 
Gltftfljali* * therefore says:

Song

“ Ah! the Dispenser of the fourfold fruit sits at the 
root of the bael-tree.

Hence the' Vy&dha’s* hunting has brought the four¬ 
fold fruit to the hollow of his palm.

Various kinds of fruits are borne by trees—so people 
do think.

But it is not the trees, 0 brother! which really bear 
fruits.

Fruits are borne by the energy of its root.

0 Vy&dha! * the tree whioh gave you shelter was no 
ordinary tree, but that which gratifies all desires.*

At the root of that tree was the Guru of the world, in 
consequence of Sidhana performed by you in 
previous births.

Blessed was your initiation in hunting, blessed was 
the training you had received in archery.

In consequence of whioh the Destroyer of K&ma 
accepted bael-leaves from you,

Blessed is the tithi * of Shivarfttri, in which the 
Mother, Protectrix of the world, took a Vy&dha's

* The three sorrows—&dhy&tmik, idhibhautik. and fidhidaivik—due 
to the self, the external material world, and the world of Devaa.

* The author's volume of verses.

' See note, ante.

* Shiva as destroyer of the Lord of Desire-

‘ Kalpa-tree. 
' Lunar day.

1014

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

son into Her arms instead of oasting him away 
as a Chandala. 1' See note, ante.

* Shiva as destroyer of the Lord of Desire-

‘ Kalpa-tree. 
' Lunar day.

1014

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

son into Her arms instead of oasting him away 
as a Chandala. 1

If He who to-day, being born in a Br&hmaga family, 
omits to observe the Vrata, then whom would 
you call a Chaijd&la ?

Above were you, 0 Vyadha Chandala! and under 
you was the Lord of the three worlds.

How can I understand the meaning of this—born 
though I am in a Br&hmana family ?

In order to uphold the honour of a devotee, Bhagavan, 
who is in the power of devotees, took His own 
place below, and raised the devotee on high.

If the devotee falls, it will be difficult to save him.

This was why the Lover of devotees sat at the root 
of the tree, in order that he might hold the devotee 
in His arms.

O hunter! in order to bow to you to-day it is neces¬ 
sary to cross the Lord of the Universe. 1

I therefore bow to your feet. 0 Chandala! from a 
distance.

Bless me, 0 Nishada-King I that I may to-day lose 
my Brahmanahood.

And, making me your younger brother, give me, 0 
brother! a place in Mother ChajjdTs bosom.

You have, O brother! taken me up on the tree of 
Kula. 1 If I now fall, there will be an end of me.

In the name of Shiva, in the name of Shiva, I stretch 
out my hand. Raise me to you.”

1 One of the lowest castes. 1

’ Vishvanatha, “ Cross,” because the Lord of the Universe is 
between the bymnist and the Vyadha, for $hiva was at the foot of the 
tree.

* That is, Eulasadhana.

OUTER WORSHIP 1015

Because such fall is inevitable in human life, the Three- 
eyed Bhagavfin, who peers through the three divisions of 
time,* * has, with a view to the cause of this fall, warned 
the world of Sadhakas beforehand, and Himself said in 
the Yoginl Tantra:*“Many celestial* and terrestrial obstacles appear in 
pilgrimage, construction of palaces, and specially at the 
beginning of any religious act, \rata, or Yajna. The 
Devatas who bring about or preside over these obstacles 
should be worshipped at the very outset with sweetmeats 
and saoritice, otherwise irremediable obstacles will surely 
appear. Besides these outer obstacles, there are other 
obstacles which reside in the body of the operator or 
Sadhaka himself. These inner obstacles possess the minds 
of Jlvas, and are manifested as sins knowingly committed. 
My Beloved! hear an account of these obstacles. 0 Devi! 
some of these mental obstacles appear as restrainers, and 
others as instigators.*” (As a matter of fact, by fighting 
with each other, both these restraining and instigating 
obstacles seem only to waste the S&dhaka s lifetime, so 
that instigating obstacles also should be considered as 
restraining obstacles in a different form; otherwise, an 
inclination ? which instigates work would never have been 
called an obstacle by the ShfLstra. Such instigating incli¬ 
nations are merely ropes from whioh swing cradles of 
doubt. Description of obstacles follows:) “Thought of 
Binful objects, whether they are near or very far off, be the 
distance a thousand or hundred thousand of yojanas: 
detriment to religious work through laziness, grief, delusion,

1 Past, present, and future.

* Second Part, Eighth Patala. 1 Daiva.

* Vow and sacrificial rite (see Introduction).

* Nivarttaka. * Pravarttaka. ’ Vfitti.

* Eight or nine miles-

1016

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Second Part, Eighth Patala. 1 Daiva.

* Vow and sacrificial rite (see Introduction).

* Nivarttaka. * Pravarttaka. ’ Vfitti.

* Eight or nine miles-

1016

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

old age, and disease, whioh destroys youth and wealth (4, 6); 
quarrel with wife ; famine; home difficulties (quarrels with 
relations, quarrels with members of family, and so forth); 
anxiety on acoount of many Vratas 1 ’’ (undertaking many 
Vratas at one and the same time, and then being anxious 
for fear of occurrence of omissions in their performance); 
“ the vanity that ‘lama righteous man ’ (6); sudden sub¬ 
jection to grief, in spite of the absence of the occurrence of 
any sin ’ during the performance of a religious rite; the 
occurrence at the sight of Devatfi, Himself and His mani¬ 
festations' of such perverse ideas as that TulasI leaves' are 
mere leaves of a tree; myrobalans * * are mere fruits of trees; 
Shalagrama * is a mere stone ; images of Devata are mere 
pieces of wood, and a Br&hmaj?a is merely an ordinary 
man ; Svayambhu Shiva 1 is merely a round stone; conch is 
merely a kind of shell, and the horn of rhinoceros' is 
merely flesh in a transformed state. These and such 
other notions as that Tirthas* are merely water, Ganga 
is a mere river, and holy places are mere pieces of land, 
repeatedly appear in the mind of Jlvas as obstacles in 
the form of scepticism, and obstruot the performance 
of a religious rite (7-10). It is only when the mind is 
drawn by the upward attraction of Dharina by virtue of 
merit,* acquired in previous births, strengthened by 
firm faith, and thoroughly purified by instructions from

1 Religions rites (see Introduction).

' Pataka, which most probably here means sin caused by any 
omission or irregularity. 1 VibhQtis.

' Used in worship of Vishnu. The TalsI plant was originally a GopI, 
beloved of Kfishpa, cursed by R&dha. Brahmavaivartta Pur&pa 
Prakfiti Khapda. * Given at sangkalpa rite.' Used in worship of Vishnu. The TalsI plant was originally a GopI, 
beloved of Kfishpa, cursed by R&dha. Brahmavaivartta Pur&pa 
Prakfiti Khapda. * Given at sangkalpa rite.

* Stones of peculiar structure found in the Gapqlnkr River, wor¬ 
shipped as N&r&yana. ’ An&di, or self-sprung Ling&s.

Used in Eastern Bengal in Tarpapa as arghap&tra (offering vessel).

’ Here sacred rivers. “ Pupya.

OUTER WORSHIP

1017

Guru, that it is rendered oapable of crossing this sea of 
obstacles. Again, a wicked mind is the cause of the 
appearanoe of these obstacles. In faot, the mind alone 
oauses man’s bondage, as well as liberation (11).' (Knowing 
the truth about these obstacles, a S&dhaka should at the 
very commencement of a religious work resolve to control 
his mind, and should seek refuge at the lotus-feet of Mah&- 
$hakti, invoking Her that he may gain power and strength 
for himself.)

Now, S&dhakas will see that the prediction of Bhaga- 
v&n in the Sh&stra is a subtle criticism of the present 
time. But seeing we see not, and knowing we know not, 
that there already visibly exists a visible root infinitely 
more subtle than all these subtle fruits. Hence all that 
we can do is to weep plaintively and pray: “ Victory to 
Thee, 0 Three-eyed Mother! Take me out of this deep, 
dark well of one-eyed criticism, and, 0 Mother! give light 
to the eyes of Thy children of darkened vision by painting 
with the eye-paint of Thy beauty, 1 whioh is existence, con¬ 
sciousness, and bliss,* an Afijana better than crushed 
Afijana; so that, looking at that fair countenance of Thine, 
soft with kindness, which, though black, is cool with the 
coolness of a crore * of moons, and is bright as though it 
were a sun, we may, 0 Mother! resign ourselves as the 
Mother’s children to the Mother’s arms.’’

1 The black appearance of the Devi is here called an Afijana (black 
collyriam). with which the eyes are painted.

' Sat, Chit, and Snanda.

' Ten millions.

CHAPTER XVIII1 The black appearance of the Devi is here called an Afijana (black 
collyriam). with which the eyes are painted.

' Sat, Chit, and Snanda.

' Ten millions.

CHAPTER XVIII

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1

Ik the authorities already quoted the Shastra has ordained 
the exorcism of Spirits* * and removal of obstaoles even 
before the commencement of worship, Japa, Yajna,* or suoh 
other thing. The reason for this is that through the 
oppressiveness of BhQtas, Pretaa, Pi?hachas, Daityas, and 
D&navas, 4 even auspicious works become beset with 
obstacles, specially in the Kali age, and the nineteenth 
century therein. This is why we have had to write at 
suoh length in the refutation of the K&ll-daitya * in con¬ 
nection with the subject of worship. Though every matter 
which we have discussed may not be found in the Shastra, 
we have been obliged to deal with them because they are 
relevant to the Shastra of whioh we treat.* In order to 
depict the scenes of the R&mAyana and the Mahabharata, 
it is as much necessary to introduce RAvaga, Kumbhakarna, 
Duryyodhana, and Shakupi,* as it is to present Sugrlva, 
Vibhlshajja, Bhlma, and Arjuna.* Similarly, in establishing

1 Paj&vidh&na. ' Bhfttas.

1 " Recitation *’ of Mantra and sacrifice.

* Ghosts, evil spirits, the demoniac enemies of the Devas.

* The evil genius of the Rail age. * Cp&san&-tattva.

* All bad characters. The two first are brother D&navas. Duryyo¬ 
dhana was the head of the Kauravas. $hakuni was his adviser and 
maternal uncle.

* All good characters. Sugrlva was the Monkey-King ally of Rama- 
chandra. Vihblshapa, though brother of RAvapa, was ally of Ram a. 
Bhlma was brother of Yuddhishthlra, two of the PApijlavaa, and Arjuna 
was their third brother.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1019ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1019

the authority of the rites relating to worship, it is as rnuob 
necessary to introduce the band of wrong-arguers, who are a 
shame to the land of Bharata, the Motherland of Aryyas, as 
it is necessary to present Digamvara, R&mapras&da, and 
D&$harathi 1 who lived in the love of the Mother of the world. 
The errors of the non-Arrva community are daily accepted, 
as though they were the sayings of the Sh&stra and the 
words of S&dhakaa. It is in order to save the guileless 
Aryya community from this terrible, dangerous situation 
in which it is placed that we have been obliged to discuss 
the views of the opposing party, and to show that they 
are not approved of by the Sh&stra. How tortuous is the 
course of time* * when everyone seeks a Dharma* suited to 
his liking. For those who thus seek Dharmas to suit their 
individual tastes, the Sh&stra is an eyesore; for that is 
oalled Sh&stra by which the wayward faculties of the mind 
are brought under control, and which is, in fact, the un¬ 
failing instrument by which the vast dominion of the 
Queen of Queens 4 of the Universe is ruled. It is no wonder 
that the Sh&stra should be an eyesore to unruly subjects 
who dishonour the commands of their Sovereign. Subordina¬ 
tion to the commands of Sh&stra is nowadays considered 
derogatory to freedom, and consequently extremely distaste¬ 
ful. What, however, such persons really think is that 
their Dharma should be subordinate to their command, for 
they consider themselves free men.

Idleness makes people semi-omniscient, for idle people 
eagerly seek opportunities to avoid work; and it is really 
this eagerness to avoid labour which lies at the root of 
their unswerving faith in such Sh&stra as seek to establish

1 Celebrated T&ntriks, S&dhakas, and poets.

* Time has a degenerating effect until the renewal of the world after

dissolution (pralaya). ' Religion, duty, etc.

* Bajr&je?hvarl.

1020

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Time has a degenerating effect until the renewal of the world after

dissolution (pralaya). ' Religion, duty, etc.

* Bajr&je?hvarl.

1020

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

the superiority of Jn&na-k&pda 1 of their unique love for the 
Yoga Va^hishtha, BhagavadgitA, and Upanishads, and of 
their equally unique repugnance for Tantra, Mantra, Yoga, 
Bhajana and S&dhana Shastras. Rising before daybreak, 
bathing early in the morning, performance of the Sandhyfi, 
rite,* * cleansing temples, collecting Ku§ha grass, flowers, 
TulsI-leaves, BaeMeaves, and so forth, fetching water from 
streams,* taking only one meal a day, eating havishya food * 
without flesh, performance or religious rites, Shr&ddha*and 
Tarpana, 1 observing hospilality and oontinence/ lying on 
the ground, keeping up at nights, visiting burning-grounds * 
and places of pilgrimage,* oonstant expenditure of money 
on religious works in the names of Devas and Pitj-is"—all 
these are doubtless troublesome things. Had not S&dhana- 
Shistras prescribed them, we have little doubt but that 
these people would have at once abandoned the Glt& u 
and Upanishads, and sought refuge with Tantra and 
Mantra. At the foot of all this over-insistence of knowledge 
is the desire to avoid work. Those amongst the Vaislnjavas 
who are steeped in lethargy and laziness have for a long 
time been saying: “The Karmak&ijda“ is a jar full of 
poison.” The Shiva community also says, through the 
grace of $ha6karach&ryya: “ Sad&^hiva am I, and con¬ 
sciousness.” 13 The Shftkta community says: “ Bhairava

1 Department of knowledge.

* See Introduction. ' For worship.

4 A pure kind of food made with particular fruits and vegetables, 
and cooked in a particular manner. See my " Mahanirv&oa Tantra.”

* Obsequial ritea. ' Oblation.

' Brahmacharyya. * $hma§h&nas. * Tirtbas.

" Forefathers (see Introduction).

The BbagavadgltA now so widely known and preached. 
u Department of work. " Chinmatra.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1021" Forefathers (see Introduction).

The BbagavadgltA now so widely known and preached. 
u Department of work. " Chinmatra.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1021

am I; Shiva am I.” Those who are initiated and edu¬ 
cated in the polemics of knowledge and science of the 
nineteenth century consider the chief and final decision 
of all Shastras to be that there is no connection between 
Dharma and Karma; 1 but in the Bhagavadglta (which 
is the basis for all the Shastras on the authority of which 
these people seek to establish the superiority of their 
novel, tasteful, and agreeable views) the commands which 
Bhagavan Shrl Krishna Himself gave to Arjuna respecting 
work, when the latter was unable to decide for himself what 
to do, dearly prove that there is no greater sin for a man 
who is attached to the world than to give up work. 1 But 
we need not confine ourselves to ordinary folk attached to 
the world, for the Bhagavadglta says that the Yoga of work 
is the highest duty even of Yogis who are detached from it. 
For instance:

“ In this world there is a twofold path, as I before said, 
O sinless one! that of Yoga, by knowledge of the S&ng- 
khyas ; and that of Yoga by action of the Yogis.”"

“ Man winneth not freedom from aotion by abstaining 
from activity, nor by mere renunciation doth he rise to 
perfection.’’ * *

“ Nor oan anyone, even for an instant, remain really 
aotionless; for helplessly is everyone driven to action by the 
qualities * born of nature. 1 ”'

“ Who sitteth controlling the organs of action, but 
dwelling in his mind on the objects of the senses, that be¬ 
wildered man is called a hypocrite.’ But who, controlling 
the senses by the mind, 0 Arjuna! with the organs of 
aotion without attachment, performeth Yoga by action, he 
iB worthy.” *

1 Karma, action, work.

* Mrs. BeBant's translation is here adopted. ’ III. 4.

* Gupa*. * Prakriti. * III. 6. * III. 6. * III. 7,

1022

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Karma, action, work.

* Mrs. BeBant's translation is here adopted. ’ III. 4.

* Gupa*. * Prakriti. * III. 6. * III. 6. * III. 7,

1022

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ Perform, then, right aotion, for action is superior to 
inaction, and, inactive, even the maintenance of thy body 
would not be possible.” 1

“ The world is bound by action, unless performed for 
the sake of sacrifice.* * For that sake, free from attachment, 
0 son of Kunti! perform thou action.” *

“ He who on earth doth not follow the wheel thus re¬ 
volving, sinful of life and rejoicing in the senses, he, 0 son 
of Prithft ! * liveth in vain.” *

Again: “ Janaka and others, indeed, attained to per¬ 
fection by aotion.”*

“ There is nothing in the three worlds, O P&rtha ! T that 
should be done by Me, nor anything unattained that might 
be attained ; 5 T et I mingle in action.”*

" Who abides ever in this teaching of Mine, full of 
faith and free from cavilling, they, too, are released from 
actions.” *

“ Who carp at My teaohing, and act not thereon, sense¬ 
less, deluded in all knowledge, know thou these mindless 
ones as fated to be destroyed.” 10

“ Even the man of knowledge behaves in oonformity 
with his own nature. Beings follow nature. What shall 
restraint avail ? ” u

“ Better one’s own duty," though destitute of merit, 
than the duty " of another, well discharged. Better death 
in the discharge of one’s own duty." The duty " of another 
is full of danger." "

‘ EH. 8. * Yajna. * m. 8.

* Prithft or Rnnti was mother of the Pftp^ara*. Hence Arjana is

called P&rtha. * III. 16.

* III. 20, first hemistich.

' Prithft or Kunti was mother of the P&ndava*. Hence Arjuna is 
called P&rtha.

* m. 22. • in. si. “ m. 82. » m. 88 .

- u Dbarma. “ m. 85 ,

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1028

In the fourth ohapter it is said:

“ However men approach Me, even so do I welcome 
them, for the path men take from everyside is Mine, O 
P&rtha! ” * *ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1028

In the fourth ohapter it is said:

“ However men approach Me, even so do I welcome 
them, for the path men take from everyside is Mine, O 
P&rtha! ” * *

“ They who long after success in action on earth, wor¬ 
ship the Shining One’s,* for in brief space verily, in this 
world of men, success is born of action.” *

“ The four castes were emanated by Me by the different 
distribution of qualities * and actions. Enow Me to be the 
author of them, though the actionless and inexhaustible." '

“ Nor do actions affect Me, nor is the fruit of action 
desired by Me. He who thus knoweth Me is not bound by 
actions.”'

“ Having thus known, our forefathers, ever seeking 
liberation, performed action. Therefore do thou also per¬ 
form action, as did our forefathers in the olden time.”*

In the fifth chapter it is said:

“ Renunoiation and Yoga by action both lead to the 
highest bliss. Of the two, Yoga by action is verily better 
than renunciation of action.” 1

“ He should be known as a perpetual ascetic * who 
neither hateth nor desireth. Free from the pain of 
opposites,** O Mighty Armed ! he is easily set free from 
bondage.” u

“ Children, not sages, speak of the S&ngkhya and the 
Yoga as different. He who is duly established in one 
obtaineth the fruits of both." '*

“ That place which is gained by the S&ngkhyas is 
reached by the Yogis also. He seeth who seeth that the 
S&ngkhya and the Yoga are one.”"

' IV. 11. * DevatAa. 1 IV. 12. * Gunas.

• IV. 18. ' IV. 14. r IV. 15. * V. 8.

* S&nnyAsl. “ Cold and heat, hunger and plenty, etc.

U V. 8. w V.i. "V, 5.

1024

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

“ He who aoteth, placing all actions in the Eternal, 1 
abandoning attachment, is unaffected by sin as a lotus* * 
leaf by the waters.”*

“ Yogis, having abandoned attachment, perform aotion 
only by the body, by the mind, by the Reason,* and even 
by the senses, for the purification of the self.”*“ Yogis, having abandoned attachment, perform aotion 
only by the body, by the mind, by the Reason,* and even 
by the senses, for the purification of the self.”*

“ Having known Me, as the Enjoyer of sacrifice and of 
austerity, the mighty Ruler of all the worlds, and the 
Lover of all beings, he goeth to peace.”*

In the sixth chapter it is said:

“ He that performeth such action as is duty, indepen¬ 
dently of the fruit of action, he is an ascetio,* he is a 
Yogi; not he that is without fire and without rites.” ,

“ That which is called renunciation, know thou that 
as a Yoga, 0 Papdava! Nor doth anyone become a Yogi 
with the formative will * unrenounced." *

“ For the sage who is seeking Yoga, action is oalled 
the means; for the same sage, when he is enthroned in 
Yoga, serenity is called the means.”"

“ The Yogi is greater than the ascetics. 11 He is thought 
to be greater than even the wise. 1 * The Yogi is greater 
than the men of action, therefore become thou a Yogi, 
0 Arjuna!

“ And among all Yogis, he who, full of faith, with the 
inner self u abiding in Me, adorneth Me, he is considered 
by Me to be the most completely harmonized.”"

' Brahman.

* V. 10; a constant simile denoting the detached aspect of the 
Brahman.

* Bnddhi. ' V. 11. * V. 29. ' Sanny&sl.

1 VI. 1. That is, not he who merely renonnces the household and 
the daily rites.

* Sangbalpa * VI. 2. “ VI. 8. u TapasTl.

“ Jn&nl. “ VI. 46. “ Atm*. “ VI. 47.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1026

In the eighth chapter it is said :

“ He who constantly thinketh upon Me, not thinking 
ever of another, of him I am easily reaohed, O P&rtha! 
of this ever harmonized Yogi." '

Having come to Me, these Mah&tinas come not again 
to birth, the place of pain, non-eternal. They have gone 
to the highest bliss.” 1

14 The worlds, beginning with the world of Brahma, 
they come and go, 0 Arjuna; but he who cometh unto 
me, 0 Kaunteya !* * he knoweth birth no more.” 4

In the ninth chapter it is said:14 The worlds, beginning with the world of Brahma, 
they come and go, 0 Arjuna; but he who cometh unto 
me, 0 Kaunteya !* * he knoweth birth no more.” 4

In the ninth chapter it is said:

“ He who offereth to Me with devotion a leaf, a flower, 
a fruit, water, that I aocept from the striving self, offered 
as it is with devotion.’* s

“ Whatsoever thou doest, whatsoever thou eatest, 
whatsoever thou offerest, whatsoever thou givest, what¬ 
soever thou doest of austerity, 0 Kaunteya ! do thou that 
as an offering unto Me.” 1

“ Thus shalt thou be liberated from the bonds of 
action, yielding good and evil fruits, thyself harmonized 
by the Yoga of renunciation, thou shalt come unto Me 
when set free." 1

44 The same am I to all beings; there is none hateful to 
Me nor dear. They verily who worship Me with devotion, 
they are in Me, and I also in them." 1

44 Even if the most sinful worship Me, with undivided 
heart, he, too, must be accounted righteous, for he hath 
rightly resolved.” 1

44 Speedily he becometh dutiful, and goeth to eternal 
peace. O Kaunteya! know thou for certain that My de¬ 
votee perisheth never.” *

4 Vm. 14. ' VIII. 15. * Son of Kunti, that is. Arjuna.

* VIII. 16. 1 IX. 26. * IX. 27.

4 IX. 28. ' IX. 29. * IX. 80. * “IX. 81.

M

1026

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

" They who take refuge with Me, O Partha ! though of 
the womb of sin, women, Vaishyas, even Shadras, they also 
tread the highest Path.” * *

“ How much rather, then, (do) holy Brahmanas and 
devoted royal saintB; having obtained this transient joy¬ 
less world, worship thou Me.” *

“ On Me fix thy mind ; be devoted to Me; sacrifice to 
Me; prostrate thyself before Me; harmonized thus in the 
Self, thou shalt come unto Me, having Me as thy supreme 
goal.” *

In the twelfth chapter it is said:

“Arjuna said: ‘Those devotees who ever harmonized 
worship Thee, and those also who worship the Indestruc¬ 
tible, the Unmanifested, whether of these is the more 
learned in Yoga ? ’ ” *“Arjuna said: ‘Those devotees who ever harmonized 
worship Thee, and those also who worship the Indestruc¬ 
tible, the Unmanifested, whether of these is the more 
learned in Yoga ? ’ ” *

“ The Blessed Lord said : ‘ They who with mind fixed 
on Me, ever harmonized, worship Me, with faith supreme 
endowed, these, in My opinion, are best in Yoga.’ ” *

“ They who worship the Indestructible, the Ineffable, 
the Unmanifested, Omnipresent, and Unthinkable, the Un- 
ohanging, Immutable, Eternal."'

“ Restraining and subduing the senses, regarding every¬ 
thing equally, in the welfare of all rejoicing, these also 
come unto Me.” T

“ The difficulty of those whose minds are set on the 
Unmanifested is greater; for the path of the Unmanifested 
is hard for the embodied to reaoh."'

“ Those verily whom, renouncing all actions in Me and 
intent on Me, worship, meditating on Me, with whole¬ 
hearted Yoga." *

* IX. 82. * IX. 88. 'IX. 84. ‘ XII. 1.

' XIL 2. ' XII. 8. * XII. 4.

* XII. 6. ' XII. 6

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1027

“ These I speedily lift up from the Ocean of death and 
existence, O Pfi.rtha! their minds being fixed on Me.” 1

“ Place thy mind in Me, into Me let thy Reason * 
enter; then, without doubt, thou shalt- abide in Me 
hereafter.” *

“ And if Thou art not able firmly to fix thy mind on 
Me, then, by the Yoga of praotice, seek to reach Me, 0 
Dhananjaya! ” 4

“ jf also thou art not equal to constant practice, be 
intent on My service; performing actions for My sake,

thou shalt attain perfection.” *

“ if even to do this thou hast not strength, then, taking 
refuge in union with Me, renounce all fruit of action with 
the self-controlled.” *

“ Better, indeed, is wisdom than constant praotice; 
than wisdom meditation is better; than meditation re¬ 
nunciation of the fruit of action ; on renunciation follows 
peace .”'

In the eighteenth chapter it is said:In the eighteenth chapter it is said:

“ Nor, indeed, can embodied beings completely relin¬ 
quish action; verily he who relinquisheth the fruit of 
action, he is said to be a relinquisher.

“ Good, evil, and mixed—threefold is the fruit of action 
hereafter for the non-relinquisher; but there is none ever 
for the renouncer.”"

“ By devotion he knoweth Me in essence, who and 
what I am; having thus known Me in essence he forthwith

entereth into the Supreme." *

“ Though ever performing all actions taking refuge in 
Me, by My grace he obtaineth the eternal indestructible

abode.” 11

* XII. 7.

* Siddhi. XII. 10.

* XVIII. 12.

* Buddhi. * XII. 8. ' XII. 9.

•XII 11. ’XII. 12. * XVIII. ll.

“ XVTII. 65. M XVIII. 56.

1028

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

" Renouncing mentally all works in Me, intent on Me, 
resorting to the Yoga of discrimination, 1 have they thought 
ever on Me.” * *

“ Thinking on Me, thou shalt overcome all obstacles 
by My grace; but if from egoism thou wilt not listen thou 
shalt be destroyed utterly.”*

“Entrenched in egoism, thou thinkest, ‘I will not 
fight.’ To no purpose is thy determination; nature will 
constrain thee." *

“ O son of Ruuti! bound by thine own duty,' born of 
thy own nature, that which from delusion thou desirest 
not to do, even that helplessly thou shalt perform.”*

“ The Lord dwelleth in the hearts of all beings, O Ar* 
juna! by His illusive power 1 causing all things to revolve^ 
as though mounted on a potter's wheel.”*

“ Flee unto Him for shelter with all thy being, O 
Bharata! By His grace thou shalt obtain supreme peace, 
the everlasting dwelling place.”*

“ Thus hath wisdom, more secret than secrecy itself, 
been declared unto thee by Me; having reflected on it fully, 
then act thou as thou listest." 19

“ Listen thou again to My supreme word, most secret 
of all. Beloved art thou of Me and steadfast of heart, there¬ 
fore will I speak for thy benefit." 11“ Listen thou again to My supreme word, most secret 
of all. Beloved art thou of Me and steadfast of heart, there¬ 
fore will I speak for thy benefit." 11

“ Merge thy mind in Me, be My devotee, sacrifice to 
Me, prostrate thyself befere Me, thou shalt come even to 
Me. I pledge thee My troth ; thou art dear to Me.” 11

“ Abandoning all duties,® come unto Me alone for 
shelter. Sorrow not; I will liberate thee from all sins.” M

* Buddhi-Yoga. ' XVIII. 57. * XVIII. 68. * XVIII. 69.

* Karma : quaere duty: rather effects of previous action.

* XVIII. 60. ' Mfiyft. * XVIII. 61.

•XVIII. 62. " XVIII. 68. “ XVIII. 64.

" XVIII. 66. * Dbarma. u XVIII. 66.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1029

Let Sadhakas now see for themselves whether in the 
Git& Bhagav&n has prescribed abandonment of work 1 or 
performance of it. We are not at all astonished or grieved 
to see that a study of Bhagavadgita leads to an abandon¬ 
ment of Karnlaka^da , by sentimental folk who feign de\o- 
tion and who go emotion-mad at the very mention of 
Bhagavadgita, though they have no devotion to Bhagav&n 
Himself. What we are sorry for, is that even such men as 
worship the speaker of this Gita as their Ishtadevata and 
call it Bhagavadgita, on account of its words having issued 
from His fair mouth, say that “ the Karmakinda is a jar of 
poison.” Who can penetrate this mystery ? When the fruit 
appears the flower dries up of itself and falls.But how wonderful must be the intensity of the greed 
and the impatience and hurry of those who, on seeing this, 
understand the flower to be of no use and proceed to destroy 
it the moment it is blown ? What sort of degree-hunting 
malady* * has seized society, that it should cause a mad rush 
to secure the highest degree in every department ? * Even 
in the worship of Devatfi, each one aspires to be the highest 
degree-holder. “In no department shall I be inferior.” This 
intensely devilish idea of the nineteenth century is about 
to become supreme by the defeat of the divine* notions 
which belong to the domain of worship. We cannot say 
when Vaidyanatha,' the destroyer of Tripura, will deliver 
society from the pains of this disease.

* Karma.

’ The department of Scripture dealing with action and ritual.

* Up&dhiroga.

* A very keen observation. Everyone cackles about. Kaivalya, and 
would be a Yogi, not because of any inherent competency, but because 
pride will not allow them to take a lower place. By the expression of 
their view that this is only for the “ignorant." they awing a censer to 
their supposed “ knowledge.”

* 8&ttvik.

' 9biva, who is lord of physicians, for he cure6 all human ill&-

1030 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* 8&ttvik.

' 9biva, who is lord of physicians, for he cure6 all human ill&-

1030 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Had the examination for the degree sought for been 
held at any seat of learning other than that of S&dhana 
of Mah&vidya, the number of learned degree-holders would 
have been so large that it is doubful whether place could 
have been found for them all in Brahmaloka, Vaikuntha, 
and Kail&sa. But we are secure from this danger in that 
Bhagavan Himself, the dweller in all hearts and Creator 
of all things, is the Examiner. Unless He gives the degree 
of service to himself, who is there who can free himself 
of servitude to the Upadhis ? 1 It is the presence of these 
latter pestilential Upadhis which prevents the acquisition 
of the former. These latter Upadhis must be shaken off 
before we can obtain the former Upadhi, or this Upadhi 
must be obtained before the others can be got rid of. 
There might have been a chance of bogus Upadhis (degrees) 
being considered genuine, were it possible to go elsewhere 
after having received them from Bhagavan. But, O pre¬ 
tender to devotion, who art so fond of the Upadhi (title) 
of devotee! all this Universe is the field of work of that 
Rajrajeshvarl alone, who is the sole Mistress of this infinite 
oreation of things moving and unmoving. Where in this 
Universe can you go so that you may escape the all-penetrat¬ 
ing look of Her whose eyes are infinite? Who has told 
you that your bogus * Upadhi will not be caught in the 
net * of Her Maya, in which everything from Brahma to 
a blade of grass is eternally held? Why, then, further 
trouble to create a counterfeit* in the midst of this net? 
He who tries to snap the Karma-threads of this net by

' The UpAdhis (apparently Jimiting conditions) of name and form 
S-®**® of the systems of philosophy. There is a play on the word 
Upadhi, which means also degree " or title." * J&la.

•* ^ wor< l Jila. which as an adjective means, in Bengali,•* ^ wor< l Jila. which as an adjective means, in Bengali,

counterfeit, and as a substantive means “ net.”

8ee last note.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1031

his owu strength knows not that its meshes are there 
only to take him out of the water, and not that he may 
pass into it from the net. The kind of dissatisfaction with 
the Sangs&ra and Karmak&nda 1 which one occasionally feels 
before entry upon the path of spiritual knowledge, 9 is 
cleared, is not true dispassion, 1 but only passion in a 
different guise. Hence the fool who, on feeling such dis¬ 
satisfaction, wants to forsake the SangsAra or Karma, only 
stioks in the meshes of that net, and resting half within 
and half without it loses his life amidst unsufferable 
pains. He neither remains in the net nor passes out 
into the water, but failing both ways, “ falling from this 
and losing that,” becomes untimely subjeot to the grasp 
of death. It therefore becomes an intelligent person not 
to make futile efforts to tear the net, but endeavour 
to move about happily in the water within the net. If 
by the grace of the Devi, who is will, you gain the strength 
which will enable you to dive into deep water, if you 
have grown fit to sink in the fathomless infinite sea of 
the Brahmamayl’s self, then Mahe§hvara, who holds the 
thread of this net, will Himself undo its top-knot. The tie 
of attachment to the Sangsara will be loosened, and then, 
finding his path open, the Jlva, freed from existence,* * will 
leap from the net with the cry, “ Victory, victory, victory 
to Tar&! ” and sink into the sea of the Self of the Mother 
of the world; but to take a leap untimely is but the pre¬ 
liminary to a terrible falL To renounce the Karmakaij<Ja at 
this time is the taking of such an untimely leap. Had the 
talk of renunciation of Karma any reality in it, it would 
not have been necessary to have said so much as to

1 With the world and ritual worship. 
’ Tattvajn&na.

* Jivanmukta.

' Vair&gya.

10321 With the world and ritual worship. 
’ Tattvajn&na.

* Jivanmukta.

' Vair&gya.

1032

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

renunciation of Karma before renouncing it. 1 Just as death 
does not wait for anyone’s permission, so liberation does 
not wait for anyone's comment. Inspiration and expiration 
of breath go on in a Jlva’s body by a natural process. The 
wiseaore who tries to renounce work’ by hanging him¬ 
self, and so interrupting this regular funotion of nature, 
will, whether he loses Karma or not, first lose his body. 
Similarly, in the case of those who are ever eager to re¬ 
nounce the Karmak&trfa prescribed to them individually 
as suited to the respective oastes* * and A§hramas* into 
which they are, according to their Gunas and natural law, 
divided, such men first renounce their Oharma, whether 
they renounce Karma or not. It is difficult to restrain 
one’s laughter on hearing the talk of renunciation of Karma 
nowadays, for this renunciation means renunciation of the 
Sandhyft prayers,® daily and occasional worship of the 
Deity, Shr&ddha 6 of parents, religious festivities, such as 
Dola and Durga PQja, and so forth; but not such things 
as the manitenance of wife and ohildren, earning aud 
spending money, eating and having sexual intercourse. 
The alleged justification for this sort of renunoiation is 
said to rest, firstly in “ doing things which give Him 
pleasure,” and on the faot that a wise man’s actions arc 
“ like water on a lotus-leaf.” Can Sangsara ever bind a 
person who is wise? Men like Janaka’ are examples to 
show that it cannot. Taking this ideal of Janaka, Bengal, 
the playground of religious anarchy, is nowadays giving 
birth to many Rajarshis, ‘Devarshis, Maharshis, and

' They talk of renouncing Karma, and they talk so much of it 
because they cannot in fact renounce it. * Karma.

' Varnaa (see Introduction). ' Stage of life (see Introduction). 
' The rite done three times a day (see Introduction).

* Obsequial rites.' Varnaa (see Introduction). ' Stage of life (see Introduction). 
' The rite done three times a day (see Introduction).

* Obsequial rites.

R&jarshi, King of filitbilA, father of 8lt&, wife of BAmachandra.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 10S3

Uparshis. 1 Although Jauaka or “ progenitor ” was the 
name by which Maharshi Janaka was known, he did not 
make himself sueh in fact. That he and his name might 
correspond, the Mother of the world, whose attachment to 
devotees is great, Herself became his daughter, and made 
him famous in the world by assuming the beloved name of 
Janaki, a name made glorious by the glory of the devotee ; 
but in order to make the present-day Janakas worthy of 
the name, the Mother of the world should rather disappear 
than appear. Being religious heroes,* * they do not intend 
to show cowardice, like Janaka, by abstaining from taking 
wives to themselves on the way to fight the battle of reli¬ 
gion.* Why become afraid of the Sangsara ? They are, 
therefore, in no way inferior to Janaka, but rather, to a 
considerable extent, superior, in the character of Janaka, 
or progenitor, and Rajarshi.* We are rather pleased than 
sorry at this. Our only concern is this: Rajarshi Janaka 
had another name—namely, Videha, or Bodiless*—from 
whioh Janaki got Her name Vaidehl. How long will it 
take these men to become possessed of this name ? How 
long must we wait in this Kali age to find among ourselves 
men like Rajarshi Janaka Videha (bodiless) of the Treta 
age? How long will it be before these men relieve the 
burden of the earth by becoming Videha—that is, bodiless 
—upon it ? *

' The first three arc varioub classes of BUhis (seers), and the last 
moans Psoudo-Rishia. * Dharmavlra.

* Dharmayuddha.

* The people whom the author satirizes claim not only to bo Bishia, 
like Janaka. bnt surpass him in that they becomo progenitors with 
their wives, a simpler and to most a more pleasant affair than the 
search for wisdom.1 Because, though with a body the world did not bind him. He 
was Jlvannuikta.

* Here is a play on the word Videha, which referred in previous 
passages to Mukti and here to death.

1034

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Whether the ideal of Janaka obliges us to renounce 
wealth and wife or not, it does not at any rate require 
us to give ourselves up to worldly enjoyment. Moreover, 
Janaka did not renounce Sandhy& prayers, worship, and 
the Karmak&nda suited to his easte and Ashrama; on 
the contrary, he always took care to perform them as 
enjoined in the Sh&stra. Just as his other actions, such 
as his rule of his kingdom, were not based on egotism 1 
so his Sandhya prayers, worship, and so forth, also were 
not dependent on it. This is the story of the R&jarshi. 
As for the present day Pseudo-Rishis,* they, of course, 
become liberated Sannyasis at times of worship, prayer, 
and so forth, no matter whether they renounce anything 
else or not. Why, brethren, is your love for God so much 
greater than your love for your wives, children, and rela¬ 
tions, that when liberation, whioh loosens all bonds, is so 
near at hand, the bond of prayer will alone frustrate it?* 
How imprudent is the scepticism of those who, blinded by 
the vanity of their knowledge, are keen for every worldly 
pursuit, and yet would renounce Sandhya prayers, worship, 
and so forth, on the ground of their being Karma ? In short, 
it is no easy matter to throw du6t in the eye of Dharma. 4

Bhagavan, who see8 all things, has said: “ Even against 
your will you will be obliged to do Karma.” Under the 
severe pressure of the unrelenting law of nature I am bound 
to serve Karma as a slave, for there is no means of escape 
from its close grasp. Whj', when accepting thi6 slavish 
service of Karma, should I be deprived of the benefit of its

Ahangk&ra * Uparshis.Ahangk&ra * Uparshis.

They say that Up&san& is wrong; on which they are asked 
whether they have risen so high spiritually that they have shaken off 
all bondage other than that of Up&sand, whioh alone stands in the way 
of their gaining Mukti. * True religion.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1036ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1036

fear-dispelling hand ? I would have, with all submissive- 
ness, renounced Karma, had Karma renounced me Since 
I have been born in the land of Karma, in order to perform 
it, I will not renounce Karma so loug as life lasts; but if, 
on the other hand, Karina renounces me, I will not be sorry 
therefore. I am very much afraid of doing my own Karma, 
but why should I be afraid of doing the Karma of my 
Mother, seeing that She is the Dispeller of fear ? I do not 
any longer belong to myself, so that, 0 brother! what 
Karma can there be which I can call iny own ? Karma i6 
Hers, whose I am. I am the Mother and the Mother is 
mine. The glory of Karma with me lies no longer in its 
being Karma, but in the faot of its being the Mother’s 
Karma. So long as the relation of Mother, and son will 
not end for me, this joy of Karma also will not so end. 
Blessed are my birth and life in that, by being born in this 
land of Karma—that is, Bharata 1 —I am to-day going to 
sever the bonds of Karma with the Mother’s Karma-sword. 
Glorious is my Mother’s unbounded mercy that She, who is 
beyond the range of thought and truth itself, and full of 
mercy, and whose Karma approved by Her* is such that 
even Brahma, Vishctu, and Mahe$hvara, find it difficult of 
right performance, has, for my sake, with Her own mouth 
dictated in the Dharma$h&stras that Karma is Her worship, 
replete with Her love and tenderness! What can be a 
greater good fortune for a Jlva in the world than this? We 
know not if there is any other Jiva so unfortunate in the 
world as he who is deprived yf this good fortune. 0 Mother 
of the world! save me, O Mother! Rather may I spend 
millions of lives in fearful Hells than that I should be 
deprived of the loving worship of Thee, 0 Mother! See that 
I, who have been initiated in the great Mantra, the gem of

1 India.

' That is. spoken of in the $b&stra.

1036

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 India.

' That is. spoken of in the $b&stra.

1036

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

spiritual consciousness 1 (which is of rarity to even Brahma 
and other Devas), and who have been upbrought in the 
S&dhana of the great Yantra,* * whioh is the souroe of the 
creation, preservation, and destruction of the three worlds, 
may not become Motherless when Thou art the Mother! 
For what have I come here, if it be not to do the Mother’s 
work ? Bless me, 0 Mother! by answering this, my question 
Thyself! 0 Mother! the earth is too small to hold the bliss 
whioh I feel to-day when I remember that, being a Jlva, I 
have been initiated in thy Mantra as uttered by Shiva Him¬ 
self, O Daughter of the Mountain! Thou art bliss itself. 
Thyself keep to-day Thy own bliss, and at the same time 
take this joyless son of thine up into Thy blissful arms in 
order to make the words of Sad&nanda * true. I have been 
initiated. Now, tell me how I am to be educated ? Thou 
hast Thyself promulgated Thy commands in the form of 
Shastra. Do Thou now Thyself explain the truth concern¬ 
ing Thee 4 by opening in the form of Sadhana the door of 
that Shastra. Tell me, 0 Mother! what have you said in 
the Sh&stra ?

In the Tantra SanghitA it is said : 44 For him who has 
received Mantra—that is, initiation—worship is of two 
kinds, according as it is outer and inner. Inner worship, 
to the exclusion of outer worship, is prescribed for Sannyasts, 
whilst both inner and outer worship are prescribed for all 
others.”

In the Gautamiya Tantra it is said : “ This inner wor¬ 
ship grants liberation to S&dhakas even during their life¬ 
time, but Munis alone who are desirous of liberation * have

1 Tattvachintumani.

1 See Introduction : here used in tho sense that She is the instru¬ 
ment of creation.

* Shira tho " Ever joyful." * Literally, “ explain thy Tattva."

' Mumukshu.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1087* Shira tho " Ever joyful." * Literally, “ explain thy Tattva."

' Mumukshu.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1087

the competence to perform it. Hence, such Sadhakas as are 
unable to perform mental worship in the manner above des¬ 
cribed should do it with the aid of mental elements similar 
to those used in outer worship.” 1

The following are the words of Shiva in the Sanghitft 
quoted by Raghavabhatta: 5 “ 0 Devi! whose face is as the 
moon! by knowledge only and without gifts, * * Homa, and 
other like actions,' a householder can never attain welfare 
either here or hereafter. If even a householder does not 
make gift or perform Homa or worship, as enjoined, then 
who will daily do these things? (2) O fair Devi! a Brama- 
charl' has no right to make gifts (for he is destitute). Who, 
then, will make gifts to Gurus according to their capacity ? 
Those who live in forests' also have not the means to make 
gifts. Moreover, in the Kali Yuga living in forests 1 is dis¬ 
allowed ” (8).

Hence, Parivrajakas* only are able to secure liberation 
from all pain and sorrows by knowledge alone, without 
making gifts and performance of Homa and other ritual 
acts. O Devi! whose face is fair as a lotus, the Pariv- 
rftjaka * who is not averse to the performance of ritual action, 4 
and the householder who is averse (that is, feigns aversion)'

' in outer worship articles (UpachAra) are used, such as lights, 
flowers, incense. In the mental worship here 6poken of ideal offerings 
are made which correspond to the material articles of external worship.

’ The great TAntrik commentator and author of the commentary 
on the ShArndAtilaka.

' DAna. ' Karma. ' The celibate student.

' That is, belong to the third, or Yanaprastha Ashrama.’ The great TAntrik commentator and author of the commentary 
on the ShArndAtilaka.

' DAna. ' Karma. ' The celibate student.

' That is, belong to the third, or Yanaprastha Ashrama.

* The VAnaprastha Ashrama. There were four Aijhramas in other 
ages, but in the Kali Yuga there are only two—tar. the second Garhas- 
thya (that of a householder) and the last Bhikshuka or AvadhAta. See 
“ MahAnirvAna Tantra," chap. viii. 8. Neither the conditions of life 
nor the character, capacity, and powers of the people of this age allow 
of the first and third.

' That is, ascetics: SannyAsI*.

* Author's parenthesis.

1038

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

to it, will both sink into Kumbhipaka 1 (5). Virtuous wives 
of the family and householders desiring their own welfare 
should daily perform worship with auspioious elements, and 
make gifts in the names of Devas, Brfthmaijas, and so 
forth (6). If members of the Vanaprastha Ashrama * * and 
Vatis* daily do works of oharity, and so forth, they will 
never be liberated from the Sangsara. On the contrary, 
they become more and more attached to it. Those who, 
after having adopted the Sanny&sa* or Yanapratha Ashrama,' 
become attached to action, 4 like householders, fall from the 
height which they have reached, and become subject to 
sorrow here and hereafter (7).In fact, such householders as omit outer worship through 
sloth, make pretence to spiritual knowledge, and say “ outer 
worship is useless, and without spiritual significance.' We 
perform mental worship only.” The above-quoted passages 
from the Sh&stra bear strong evidence to the fact that this 
judgment of theirs is wholly opposed to Sh&stra, and the 
result of views which are independent of it. It is with the 
mind that mental worship must be performed ; but so long 
as that mind is not “ under my control," with what shall I 
perform mental worship ? So long as “ I am of the mind,” 
instead of “ the mind being of me,” I have no right to 
do mental worship exclusively. This is very true. If 
through lack of master}’ of my mind I am unable to offer 
mental flowers at Her feet, if I cannot with independence 
settle my mind on that which I desire, then what guar¬ 
antee is there that, when engaged in mental worship, for 
which I have no competence, my mind will not forget to 
contemplate Her feet, and think of the happiness of

* One of the Hells. ' Vide ante.

* Those who have controlled their paesions : ascetics.

* The fourth, ascetic A$hrama.

‘ Laukika, Literally, temporal. * Karma.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1089* One of the Hells. ' Vide ante.

* Those who have controlled their paesions : ascetics.

* The fourth, ascetic A$hrama.

‘ Laukika, Literally, temporal. * Karma.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1089

Sangsara ? Milk is admitted by all to be the most power¬ 
ful of means for the preservation of human life. Curd, 
milk,' butter, ghee, and so forth, are all transformations 
of milk. This is why all things prepared from milk have 
the reputation of being delicious. But if by accident any¬ 
thing sour or bitter falls into milk and turns it, then, 
apart from any other test, even its smell causes nausea, 
and the revulsion which it produces is more lasting 
than that caused by any other thing. The only reason 
for this is that milk is the best of delicious things. 
Had not milk been so good, its corruption would not 
have been so bad. For instance, although sugar, sugar- 
candy, and sweetmeats are prepared from molasses, if 
molasses is not sufficiently boiled and treated so as to 
be converted into any of these things, it will at any rate 
remain what it is—molasses—or become moist sugar. 
And this molasses or moist sugar, if it cannot be used 
in preparing Sandesha * with curd, will at least give sweet¬ 
ness to a sour curry of mango, amrfa,' or plum—a sweet¬ 
ness so attractive that the remembrance of such a sweeten¬ 
ed ourry makes the mouth water, whilst the reraembranoe 
of sweetmeats produces merely a sensation of their absence, 
and nothing else. This is why it has been necessary to give 
a name to this mixed taste, and we accordingly have the 
adjeotive “ sour-sweet." The reason why molasses is not 
altogether spoilt by mixture with something sour is that it 
is not as superior a thing as milk is. If a person lives on 
milk only, he may perchance meet with such a difficulty 
through his supply of milk becoming accidentally spoilt, as 
one who lives on sweetmeats only can never experience. 
Similarly, although all admit that mental worship is the' Kahlra ; that is. milk thickened by boiling.

1 A sweetmeat. * A sour fruit.

1040

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

best of all forms of worship, if the mind with whioh that 
worship is performed becomes corrupt, polluted, or disorder¬ 
ed, with what shall I perform the worship ? When the mind 
is in this state, such a stench issues from it as makes the 
approach of even men, not to speak of Devos, impossible. 
We quite understand that it is necessary to take the cream 
out of milk, but if the milk itself is putrid, whenoe am I to 
get the cream ? If I mix the cream that was in the milk with 
something else, and thus spoil the milk itself, if I mix the 
faculty of devotedness 1 that was in my mind with attach¬ 
ment to wife and ohildren in the Sangsftra, and then try 
to acquire spiritual devotion* * to Bhagavan or Bbagavatl 
with that mind, such an effort will prove as futile both 
here and hereafter, as if we sought to drink milk where 
there is only whey. Hence, so long as I am unable to bind 
at the door of the temple of my heart the All-good Suravi* 
from whom are drawn, and who fulfils, all desires, the only 
way in which I can preserve my life is not to make mysef 
dependent solely on milk, but to use milk, molasses, 
sweetmeats, or any other thing which I can procure at all 
times without difficulty. However sour be the mango or 
amda * you may give me, I shall mix with it the molasses 
of lesser devotion,' and prepare such a sour curry as will 
make the mouths of even Sannyftsls and SAdhus water, and 
will bring back a liking for food even to a sick man, to 
whom it is repugnant, so as to render him again capable 
of eating even sweetmeats and sweet pudding. Of what

* Asaktishakti. Literally, “ attnchment-^bakti." * Pnrubhakti.

' The heavenly cow which is the mother of all cows, and which 
came out of the sea when it was churned. Here used metaphorically 
for the Devi.

* A sour fruit.

* Oaunlbhakti. Literally, secondary, as opposed to Mukbya or 
principal.* A sour fruit.

* Oaunlbhakti. Literally, secondary, as opposed to Mukbya or 
principal.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1041

use is it to tempt me with milk, puddiDg, and sweetmeats 
if I have a dislike for every kind of food ? If my mind is 
not calm, of what use is it to give me, who suffer from the 
disease of Sangsara, instructions in mental worship, which 
is the food for Yogis ? So long as I have a dislike for food,

I am not only unable to eat the food you offer, but am 
likely to suffer an untimely death by starvation. Hence, 
in the dispensary of Vaidyanatha, 1 and according to the 
Tftntrik cult, food for sickness is not the same as food for 
Yogis. Sanny&sls have the privilege of performing mental 
worship only, but as a man of the Sangsara, I may always 
perform both mental and outer worship. First of all, that 
is the most delicious thing for me which will cure my 
dislike for food. If you want to give me milk, give it ; but 
so long as my dislike for food remains, pray do not depend 
on milk alone. For the moment, milk will not give as 
much gratification as sour things will do. To-day I shall 
feel immense joy in outer worship by illumining the 
Mandapa* * and filling it with the delightful fragrance of 
burning incense, making the quarters resound with the 
music of drums, kettle-drums, gongs, and bells, and with 
the heartfelt cry, “ Victory, victory to Thee, Mother Tara! ” 
along with recitation of hymns* which reach the inmost 
recesses of the heart, looking with the pupils (Tara) 4 of 
these two eyes straight into the pupils (Tara) 4 of the eyes 
of the three-eyed Devi, I shall see the Universe all full of 
Tara. But if I proceed to perform mental worship only 
without the necessary competence, therefore I shall, owing 
to the absence of Tara from the heart, despite the power

* The word etymologically means “ Lord of healers ”— epithet of 
$hiva. as the physician of all human ills.

* House of worship. ' Stotras.* The word etymologically means “ Lord of healers ”— epithet of 
$hiva. as the physician of all human ills.

* House of worship. ' Stotras.

* There is here a play on the word T&rfi. which means the pupil of 
the eye. and is also a name of the Devi as Saviour.

104*2 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of sight, 1 see darkness only in the three worlds as I sit in 
this temple, illumined with hundreds of lamps. Can the 
simultaneous appearance of even hundreds of millions of 
suns and moons illumine the place where the Brahma- 
mayi is wanting ? In the infinite firmament of my heart 
infinite numbers of planets, stars, suns, and moons shine 
less than glow-worms if the light of Brahmamayl is there. 
If it is not there, hundreds of thousands of each of such 
lights cannot make up for even a hundredth part of Her 
brilliance. So long as the brilliance of the full moon does 
not permanently exist in my firmament; so long as my 
Mother dwelling in the orb of Mantra, full of pure nectar, 
does not spread the lustre of Her eternally beaming 
smile on the hill of dawn of my heart,* * so long as the 
bright and the dark fortnights * exist for me; so long as 
there are for me the double path of desire * and cessation 
of desire,* Sangsara and S&dhana, adherence to home* 
without and homeless asceticism * within ; so long I must 
(if I would see the moonbeams which charm the mind of 
the Moon-crested Deva) make the moon rise without, 
destroying the darkness within with the light of this 
moon, and with the help of that reflected light discover 
the centre of its emanation. It is almost impossible to 
gaze directly at the sun, yet one may easily and minutely 
examine the solar disc in its reflection in the water of 
some stone or other vessel. In the same way subtle 
manifestations" of Her real self become truly visible with¬ 
out in Yantras,* Mantras, images, and so forth. Pure 
mental worship has been prohibited for householders,1 That is, despite the possession of pupils (Tara) in the eyes.

' Cdayacbala from which the sun is said to rise.

* The month is divided into two halves according to the waxing and 
waning of the moon. * Pravritti. ' Nivritti. * Garhasthya.

' Sannyasa. * Yibhfltis. * Diagrams (see Introduction).

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1043

because they cannot achieve it without outer worship. 
Sangsara Dharma* * is the oonsecrated shrine of human 
worship.* It is impossible for one who is governed by it 
to perfectly accomplish mental worship of the Deity. Just 
as it is not easy to keep uncovered milk fresh in a cow¬ 
shed full of cows’ urine, so also it is difficult to keep the 
mind attached in love to Devata in the Sangsftra, with 
all its attachments and affection for wife and children. 
Hence, so long ns my mind is not controlled, it is wholly 
useless to cry for mental worship.

Not to speak of ordinary folk, even of such a renowned 
and accomplished SadhakA as MaharAja Rama Krishna,* 
the following story is told: At a particular time during the 
first stage of Sadhana, after initiation, when the Maharaja, 
in disregard of his public duties, and with prohibition of 
public access, used to remain constantly immersed in Paja, 
Dhyana, and bo forth, a pair of gold bracelets were ordered 
for his wife, Rani Katyayanl. A few days after the order 
had been given the Raja, seeing the wrists of the Rani 
unadorned, asked her the reason for it, and was told in 
reply that the bracelets had not yet been prepared. Next 
day, when he was engaged in Paja, a SannyasI with matted 
hair appealed at the gate of his palace, and asked the gate¬ 
keeper: “Where is your MaharAja? Tell him that a San¬ 
nyasI* has oome to see him.” They replied with great 
humility: “ Lord! the Maharaja is now in the house of 
worship. No one may go there; and even if we speak to

1 The Dharma of the household life.1 The Dharma of the household life.

* " Worship," in the sense that the performance of duty to fellow- 
men is such. The shrine of such worship is contrasted with that in 
which the Deratft is worshipped.

* A member of the Nstore Raj family—a great S&dhaka.

' Ascetic.

1044

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* A member of the Nstore Raj family—a great S&dhaka.

' Ascetic.

1044

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

him now, there is no chance of getting a reply.” The San¬ 
nyasI laughed and said : “ I tell you, go.” The gate-keeperB 
were afraid of disobeying him, and did as they were told to 
do, but to no effect. Raja Rama Krishna was at that time 
immersed in mental worship of his Ishtadevatfi, and so 
made no reply, notwithstanding the arrival of the SannyasI. 
The gate-keepers came back and told the SannyasI what 
had happened. The SannyasI raised his eyes a little, smiled, 
and said in a deep voice: “ When the Maharaja comes 
out after finishing his worship, tell him that to think of 
the Rani’s bracelets is not to perform mental worship of 
Ishtadevatft.” Saying this, the SannyasI went away hur¬ 
riedly. The gate-keepers did not understand the meaning 
of his words, and did not dare oppose the SannyasI from 
going away, for as an ascetic he was free to come and go. 
Afterwards, on coming out of the house of worship, Raja 
Rama Krishna asked the gate-keepers: “ Where is the San¬ 
nyasI ? ” In fear they told him the Sannyasl's words, and 
of his departure. “ To think of the Rani’s bracelets is not 
to perform mental worship of Ishtadevata.” With the 
quickness of lightning these words entered through the 
Raja’s ears into his mind. He shook with fear at the 
offence which he had committed, and repeated the words, 
“ Where is the SannyasI ? ” in a voice choked with sorrow 
and trembling with fear. The Raja then himself ran into 
the public road to find him, but as he was then in a spiri¬ 
tually unfit state to meet the SannyasI, he was unable to 
discover him. Nevertheless, what the SannyasI had done 
and said made the Raja seclude himself from everybody 
after this incident. No one could say as to where he was 
or what he was doing at any time. He became inattentive, 
his gaze was fixed, and his self ever immersed in a stream 
of continuous Samadhi. 1 Three years passed in this way.1 Ecstasy.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1045

Then one day, when, according to his usual practice, the 
Raja was engaged in worship in his house of worship, the 
same Sannyfcsl again appeared. On seeing him, the gate¬ 
keepers made obeisance at his feet, and respectfully con¬ 
ducted him to the door of the R&ja’s house of worship. On 
that day also the Raja was busy performing mental worship, 
but he found himself in a great difficulty. In order to 
worship the Devi who is mind itself 1 * * * with mental articles 
of worship, the Raja had that day adorned the brow of the 
Devi with dishevelled hair with a high-crested mental 
jewelled crown. He then proceeded to adorn the shell¬ 
shaped neok * of the Devi who bears great love for Her 
devotees with a mental garland of crimson Jaba flowers. 
But as often as he raised his hands to put the garland on 
the Mother’s neck, so often his effort was batfled by the high 
crest of the orown. Having repeatedly failed, he became 
sorrowful and anxious, and thought to himself: “ Perhaps 
to-day I shall not be able to put a garland on the Mother’s 
neok.” In unbounded sorrow his large eyes filled with tears, 
and weeping he cried : “ 0 Mother ! what shall I do '? A 
voice from outside replied : “ Rama Kfishpa ! why do you 
weep ? It is by putting a crown on the Mother's head that 
you have to-day brought about all this trouble.' Take it off, 
and then Garland Her." R&rna Krishna started, left the 
Mother and Her worship, and opened both the outer and 
inner doors of the house of worship. He then saw before 
him a Mahapurusha, 8 a Sanny&sl smeared with ashes and full 
of Teja8.* He recognized him as Punjananda Giri the perfect 
Sadhaka, who had been his companion in Sadhana done by 
them in orem at ion’-grounds in the previous birth. He

1 Manomayl. * Kambu-Kanjhn

’ Scarlet hibiscus used in Tintrik De^Ipuja. * Vide post, p. 1047.

' Great man , ' Spirit, power, spiritual force, and lustre.

' $hma$h&na-s&dhana.

10461 Manomayl. * Kambu-Kanjhn

’ Scarlet hibiscus used in Tintrik De^Ipuja. * Vide post, p. 1047.

' Great man , ' Spirit, power, spiritual force, and lustre.

' $hma$h&na-s&dhana.

1046

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

bowed at his feet, and said “ Brother! this is ray condition 
to-day! The Mother and you know how I have passed these 
three years since you went away, after having done me the 
favour of putting me to shame.' Por^ananda laughed, and 
said : “ Have no fear, brother. It is because I then left that 
I am able to approach you to-day after these three j’ears. 
Being what you were then, the time had not yet come for 
me to see you. Think what a difference there is between 
your former thought of the Radi's bracelets and your present 
difficulty about the garland. It is because the Mother has 
blessed j’ou that I am here again to keep my promise given 
in the previous birth." After this incident Maharaja Rama 
Krishna became a Bhairava and Mahar&nl Katyayanl a 
Bhairavi, and companions of PUnjananda Giri in Mahas- 
hmashana-sadhana, 1 on the banks of the Atreyi at Buxar.*

Now, Sadhakas consider how few fortunate perfect 
S&dhaka Mahapurushas like Maharaja Rama Krishna are 
bom in this Sangsara. How many in this world arc blessed 
with friends of previous birth, such as Purnananda Giri, to 
answer their questions ? How many religious heroes are 
there who, being Princes themselves, have yet the strength 
to turn from royal opulence, splendours, and enjoyments, 
and become Shma^hana-sannyasis ? * To how many Sadhakas 
does the Mother of the world show Herself in the form of 
Guru at the time of their death ? Even such a man as Rama 
Krishna, who had already greatly practised Sadhana in pre¬ 
vious births, in the first stage of his present Sadhana forgot 
the Mother during mental worship, and thought of the

The Sadhana done by Tantriks in the great cremation-grounds.The Sadhana done by Tantriks in the great cremation-grounds.

' I hope some day to be able, by the grace of the All-good Mother, 
to present Sadhakas and Sadhikas with a biography of Maharaja B4ma 
Krishna, in which his history both previous to and following this inci¬ 
dent will be related ” (Author’s note).

Tantrik ascetics who frequent and do Sadhana on the burning 
ground.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1047

bracelets of bis wife. Mental worship being so difficult, does 
it not make one ashamed even to think that you and I, 
steeped in worldliness as we are, have perfect competence 
to perform it? Purnananda Giri came to remind Rama 
Krishna of this. But for you and I it is not necessary that 
a Panjftnanda Giri should so come, for does not the burden 
of this joyless mountain ’ of Sangsara remind us of it. 
Rama Krishna's connection with the Sangsara lasted only 
so long as he did not acquire full competence for mental 
worship, but when, by the grace of the Devi w* *ho is perfeot 
Bliss, he met PQrij&nanda, and acquired such competence, 
from that time his connection with the Sangsara ceased. 
Then was the day on which his mind became self-controlled, 
leaving all thought of the Rai?l and her bracelets. From 
that day began the dance of the waves of joy of the Devi, 
who is mind itself. She revelled in battle, in the broad field 
of his mind, and as a result the mental garland of Jaba 
flowers struck Her crown and was thrown back.*

Can you say that any inoident of such a nature ever 
happened in the course of your or my mental worship? 
We call the Mother into our heart by picturing the image 
of Her whole body in our mind. We then give Her seat, 3 
welcome, 4 water for the washing of her face, * grains of 
paddy and blades of Durva-grass to show the honour we 
pay Her,' water to olcanse tho lips and throat, honey, 
and other things, and water again.* We next bathe the1 Nir&nanda Giri—a pun. The name Parnfimanda Giri etymologic¬ 
ally means " mountain of perfect joy.”

» F rom the day that the Raja withdrew his mind from worldly 
things and settled it on the Devi from that day the Devi began to 
dance with joy in his mind. And this dancing prevented him from 
garlanding Her whilst She had the crown on.

* Asana. ' Svagata. * Padya. * Arghya.

’ Achamanlya. ' Madhuparka.

* ichamaniya is always given twice in worship.

1048

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Asana. ' Svagata. * Padya. * Arghya.

’ Achamanlya. ' Madhuparka.

* ichamaniya is always given twice in worship.

1048

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Mother of the world, and then adorn Her with clothes and 
ornaments. It was at this time of adornment that this 
trouble about Her crown and garland happened to Rama 
Krishna. Can the mind of a Jlva, attached to worldly 
things, remain undistraoted during the time which is 
required to do all this? Not to speak of undiBtraction 
for the whole of this period, is it even steady for the 
length of time which it takes us to say these few words ? 
Hari, Hari! you and I start on journeys to Vaikuuth& 
Kailasa, and Brindavana 1 under the guidance of minds 
which travel to the South Pole from the North Pole at 
every twinkling of the eye ten times every half an hour! 
You and I will be left on the path, and the mind will go 
to its own place.* * Thus, neither home-life nor homeless 
asceticism,* nor Yaikuptha, nor Kailasa will be for me. 
To live at home after that, with life only, but without the 
mind, is to lose all. The learned of ancient times have 
therefore said, “ where there is a chance of losing all, a 
wise man gives up half, - ’ in order that he may save the 
other half. The Shastra, also observing our danger of 
losing all, has counselled the performance of both inner 
and outer sacrifice,* and of both mental and outer worship. 
He who proceeds to perform exclusively mental worship in 
dependence on a mind untrained and unpurihed runs every 
chance of losing all. At such a time I shall deem it a 
great gain if, by abandoning half of mind,* I can save the 
half of outer worship. Hence, until non-dualistio Samadhi *

1 The heaven of Visbpn (see ante), the abode of §hiva and the city 
sacred to Krishna.

' That is, we shall never reach Kailasa, etc. * Sanny&sa.

' Yajna. 8ee as to the extensive meaning of this term A. Avalon’s, 
Introduction to *' Mahftnirv&ija Tantra.”

* That is, mental worship.' That is, we shall never reach Kailasa, etc. * Sanny&sa.

' Yajna. 8ee as to the extensive meaning of this term A. Avalon’s, 
Introduction to *' Mahftnirv&ija Tantra.”

* That is, mental worship.

' Monistic experience in Yoga ecstasy.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1049

is attained, both Sanny&sis and householders must perform 
both inner and outer Sacrifice. A householder in particular 
will be holly ruined unless he does so. A Sannyasl's mind 
may, by dint of his cultivation of discernment* * and dis- 
passion, become some day free from the bond of attachment 
to worldly things, and thus transparent and fair and pure; 
but for a householder, a Jlva ever bound by the ties of 
love to wife, children, and so forth, and thereby rendered 
without understanding,* there is no suoh hope unless, by 
reason of a Sadhana performed in previous births, the 
merciful Devi shows him Her utmost meroy.

In the Gandharva Tantra also Bhagavan, the creator 
of all things, has clearly so commanded after speaking of 
inner sacrifice: * “ O Mahe$hvari! by performing inner 
sacrifice in this manner Sfidhakas become Brahman Itself, 
and it is in this way that I worship Ishvarl. And Yogis 
and Munis also constantly perform worship in this way. 
But a householder can never attain Siddhi by means of 
this inner sacrifice 3 alone. He can attain Siddhi only if 
he performs both outer and inner sacrifice." *

Here Sadhakas should note that Maheshvara Himself 
says: “ It is in this manner that I worship Ishvarl! And 
Yogis and Munis also perform worship in this way.” As 
to His worshipping Himself whether as Shiva or as Shakti, 
we have nothing to say. But speaking of Yogis and Munis 
He says that they worship “ constantly," meaning thereby 
that they, too, are afraid of falling from their station 4 
unless they keep up a practice of constant worship. Now

1 Yiveka ; between the " real ” and ** unreal.”1 Yiveka ; between the " real ” and ** unreal.”

* Literally, " made ja<?a," which means inert, senseless. As true 
understanding is free of such attachments, anything which produces 
them tends to make the mind to that extent jatfa.

’ Yajna; see note ante.

* Adhik&ra: that is, losing their competency.

1060

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA’ Yajna; see note ante.

* Adhik&ra: that is, losing their competency.

1060

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

say, 0 mental worship ! is it not a sign of impending lunacy 
to think that to-day you and I, whose efforts at worship 
are few and far between, are not competent to accomplish 
the form of worship in which Mahe§hvara alone worships 
Himself with full competence, and in which the compe¬ 
tence of Yogis and Munis is made to depend upon the 
constant practice of inner worship ? Had householders been 
altogether free of outer affairs the Sh&stra would never 
have bound them to outer practice, nor should we have 
had to enter into this olose and sifting inquiry on the 
subject for their sake. You, 0 householder! may easily 
consider youself free of all outer activities, but so long as 
you bear the title “ householder ” how can I believe it ? 
The Sangs&ra consists of outer activities, and household 
Dbarma is the Dharma by which the continuance of this 
Sangs&ra is maintained. Who will then believe that a 
person whose title of “ householder ” is based on his con¬ 
nection with this household Dharma has nothing to do 
with matters of outer concern ? As for those householders 
who have acquired detachment, discernment, and dispas- 
sion, whom Bhagavan has called Karmayogls 1 in the Gita, 
and who perform outer work with minds free from egotism, 
such great men are free from attachment to outer concerns, 
but not out of all touch with them.* * We call them unat- 
taohed to aotion because, although they are in the midst 
of action, their mind is not attached to it. The mental 
faculties of a Yog! are for the most part satisfied with 
mental objects, so that he alone is competent to perform 
exclusively mental worship. As for myself, who am steeped 
in worldliness, my mental faculties always seek outer* That is, those who achieve Yoga by means of selfless, unseflsh 
action, by which they become partakers of the universal activity of the 
Brahman for the good of the world.

* Though they do actions, they are not attached to them.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1051

objects, so that it is not possible that I should have the 
competence for exclusively mental worship. A single day’s 
abstention from outer bathing makes my body restless 
with the burning of summer heat; a single day’s fasting 
weakens my physical body; a single night’s waking robs me 
of the power of rising the next day. These causes not only 
make the body unfit, but also exhaust, disturb, and over¬ 
power its mental faculties. When thus my mind cannot 
have peace and comfort for a single moment in the absence 
of outer objects, it is obvious that it cannot rest satisfied 
with the performance of exclusively mental worship. If, 
however, through continuous praotice of inner worship 
along with outer worship I ever sink in the sea of Her 
manifestations 1 —Her form, qualities, name, and love— 
and am overwhelmed by them; if, like a deeply intoxi¬ 
cated man, who, though he rightly and with safety does all 
acts which are matters of daily habit, yet does not perceive 
that it is he himself who does them, I can become intoxi¬ 
cated with the drink of the nectar of love and devotion to 
Her; and though performing the works of Sangsara based 
on habit, yet do not perceive my own agency in suoh 
performance; and if I thus mingle my individual existence 
with Her existence, it is then that I shall be competent to 
give up outer and to perform exclusively mental worship. 
And on that day I shall not only give up outer worship, but 
all outer objects will of themselves be separated from me. 
So long as this does not happen, it must be deemed a great 
sin even to desire to give up outer worship by merely 
personal effort.* * If we suppose that we can constantly and

1 Vibhutij.1 Vibhutij.

* When the Sfldhaka is in a position to give tip outer worship, he 
will give op all other external activities. Before then it is useless to 
give np one and the most important form of such activities—namely, 
outer worship.

1052

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

carefully perform all outer works concerning the body, the 
SangsAra and worldly things, and yet at the time of Her 
worship we can worship purely mentally, and then after 
such worship resume attention to our food and other physi¬ 
cal desires and necessities, then let me tell you that such 
deceit practised on the Deity is but the broad road for a 
journey to hell. It is truly astonishing that according to 
your religion I am to continue to do acts which have the 
effect of tightening the bonds of Karma which lead to 
worldly MayA, attachment, and wrong action, making us 
fall, forgetful of inevitable death, from the true path, 
baffling the purpose of human life, and making us subject to 
the servants of death; but I am to give up acts whioh 
sever the bonds of accumulated Karma and destroy its 
sufferings by the sharp edge of the sword of knowledge, dis- 
passion, and discernment, and the effect of which is to carry 
us through and beyond the Brahmaloka to liberation in the 
eternal abode of Brahmamayl. Just as water is drained 
away by water, or one thorn is drawn out by the aid of 
another, so by Karma are destroyed the bonds of Karma. 
Hence, Bhagav&n Maheshvara, who grants the fruits of all 
Karma, and is the helmsman of the vessel which Grosses 
the sea of Karma, has said with His own mouth in the 
$haktanandatarafigii?1: 1

“ Through Karma Jivas are born, through Karma they 
die. After destruction of body, through Karma they receive 
bodies in rebirth and again become subject to Karma (1).“ Through Karma Jivas are born, through Karma they 
die. After destruction of body, through Karma they receive 
bodies in rebirth and again become subject to Karma (1).

Just as a calf finds out its dam amongst a thousand cows, 
so the good and evil Karma of a Jiva follow their author 
among the infinite millions of Jlv&s. Karma acquired in 
previous births is most powerful in this SangsAra. Who

Ullftsa, discourse on knowledge. A celebrated Tantrik work 
by Pum&nanda Giri.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1053Ullftsa, discourse on knowledge. A celebrated Tantrik work 
by Pum&nanda Giri.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1053

has the power to baffle its course ? (2) A Jlva s body itself is 
made of Karma, and all Karma has its home in his body, so 
that only such pure ordinances should be followed as are 
favourable to Karmayoga (3). O Devi! all things moving 
and unmoving are made of Karma. Karma is mother, 
Karma is father, and Karma itself is the Jlva’s guide in the 
spiritual path in the form of the Supreme Guru. 1 Through 
Karma a Jlva attains heaven or hell 1 (4). Controlled by 
their virtues * and sins, pregnant with happiness and sor¬ 
row respectively, Jlvas receive physical bodies in classes 
determined by such Karma and merely enjoy their fruits (5). 
O P&rvatl! it is only rarely and after passing through 
thousands of births in Sangsara that a Jlva receives a 
human body by virtue of accumulated Karma (6). Eating, 
sleeping, and sexual intercourse—these are common to all 
living creatures. Man's superiority to all Jlvas lies in his 
possession of knowledge. Hence, he who being a man is 
without knowledge is no better than a beast (7). O Mistress 
of Kula! though at the time of death a Jlva loses his 
own body, yet he does not realize the worthlessness of all 
relations with wife, mother, brother, son, and so forth (8). 
A man lives a hundred years; but a very short span of 
life. But even of these hundred years sleep usurps one 
half, and the remaining half is spoiled by ignorance in 
ohildhood, enjoyment in youth, sorrow in old age, and so 
forth (9). Sangsara is the root of sorrow. Whoever is 
in and belongs to this Sangsara is sorrowful. None is 
happy but he who has abandoned the Sangsara (10). Man 
remains ever bound to defecation in the morning; to 
hunger and thirst at midday; and to passion and sleep' All precepts are from the supreme Guru. These precepts are the 
Guru Himself. The Guru is these precepts, and His precepts when 
carried out are Karma. ’ Svarga or naraka. ' Punya.

1054

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in the night (11). He is unwilling to taste the Divine* * 
remedy for this great disease, but constantly partakes of 
all such injurious food as aggravates it, thinking it to be 
sufficient medioine (12). Knowing full well that the body 
exists in order that his own Dharma may be worked out, 
he again performs evil Karma with that body. Being 
the owner of a ‘ cow of plenty,’' the fool seeks the milky 
juice of the akanda plant* (that is to say, existing in a 
human body by the help of which the four-fold object 
of Dharma, Artha, K&ma, and Moksha* may be easily 
attained, he journeys down to perdition through the 
pursuit of worthless worldly happiness) * (18). The body 
is transient, and so is wealth. A Jlva’s death is always 
near him. Hence, in order that he be saved from the 
fear and anxiety caused by that ever accompanying death, 
let him first of all earn religious merit (14). Deluded is 
he who does not earn the permanent wealth of Dharma' 
by means of his transient body, which changes at every 
moment of time (15). Nor father, nor mother, nor son, 
nor any other relation follow a Jiva to the next world 
that they may help him there. Dharma alone accom¬ 
panies him to that inaccessible place to bear evidence of 
his Karma (16). Bound by ties of affection to wife and 
children, a person cannot attain liberation. Death ex¬ 
ercises equal rule over all, be they learned or ignorant, 
strong or weak rich or poor (17). Just as the wealthy 
man lies in constant dread of the King, water, fire, thieves, 
and even wife, children, and relations, so sinners live

' Divya.

’ K&madhenu. the cow which gives that which is desired.

* This jnice looks similar to milk, bat is harmful.

* See Introduction. * Author’s parenthesis.

* Religion and duty.' Divya.

’ K&madhenu. the cow which gives that which is desired.

* This jnice looks similar to milk, bat is harmful.

* See Introduction. * Author’s parenthesis.

* Religion and duty.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 105o

in constant dread of death (that is to say, only such men 
in the world aro fearless by the grace of the fear-dispel¬ 
ling Mother as have prepared themselves to meet death 
by acquiring Dharma) 1 (18). Hence an intelligent man 
should do to-day and in the forenoon what has been set 
to be done to-morrow and in the afternoon, for death does 
not wait to see whether a work has been done or remains 
to be done (19). He alone can attain liberation, severing 
the bonds of Karma by means of Karma, who does such 
Karma with body, mind, and speech, with freedom from

desire for the fruits thereof (20)."

In the Rudray&mala * * it is written : “ A Sadhaka attains 
Siddhi only when the Mother of the world is satisfied. 
To a Sak&ma Sadhaka* She grants happiness and to a 
Nishkama Sadhaka 4 She grants liberation. Let no one 
think that She should be worshipped only at a certain 
period of life, for She is eternal, and Her presence is never 
wanting. It is not also as though She were at a distance, 
and some time must elapse before She can be brought near 
to you, for She lives in all things (1). A S&dhaka should, 
therefore, always adore the daughter of the Mountain- 
King, the Mahamaya, who is eternal and true, He should 
ever sing hymns in Her praise, and worship Her, and ever 
hear and talk of Her name, Her qualities, form, and 
greatness, and so forth (2). A man of sense should, instead 
of wasting time in gambling, and the like useless pursuits, 
spend his life in worship, Japa, Yajna, Stava,* and so forth, 
of the Devata (3). What is achieved by talk of other

1 Author's parenthesis. Dharma is here merit.

1 One of the chief and oldest Tontrik Scriptures.

* That is, a Sadhaka who does action with desire for the frnit.1 Author's parenthesis. Dharma is here merit.

1 One of the chief and oldest Tontrik Scriptures.

* That is, a Sadhaka who does action with desire for the frnit.

* Who acts wholly unselfishly ; who does good not for the sake of 
reward, but for the sake of good.

* Recitation of Mantra, sacrifice hymn.

1056

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

matters but a useless waste of life ? Hence, 0 Devi! a 
Sadhaka will, on receiving knowledge of Mantra, Yantra, 
and so forth, from the mouth of Guru, happily attain libera¬ 
tion from the terrible bonds of the Sangsfira (4).”

The following are Shiva's words in the Kuluraava 1 
Tantra: “O Devi, I shall tell thee what Thou hast 
asked me. Listen. 0 Sliiva-Shasana, 1 a Jlva cannot at¬ 
tain liberation except through initiation (in the Tantrik 
cult)" (1). Attainment of Siddhi in Mantra is impossible 
without loga, and attainment of Siddhi in Yoga is im¬ 
possible without Mantra. Hence, only the form of Yoga, 
in whioh both are practised, leads to attainment of Brahman 
(2). Just as in a dark room one can see everything with the 
help of a light, so a Jlva enshrouded in Maya sees the true 
aspect of Paramatma with the help of Mantra. (3) Hence, 
one should earnestly receive initiation immediately on the 
attainment of his sixteenth year. Just as a piece of iron 
when treated with juices of herbs and Mantras turns into 
gold, so on being bathed in the milk of Guru’s mercy and 
initiated in the great Mantra a Jlva forsakes Jivahood and 
undoubtedly attains Shivahood (4).”

In the Gandharva Tantra it is said: * * “ Atm& is Tripuresh- 
varl * Herself, and is unattached, attributeless, and pure. 
A Sadhaka will in this way meditate on Atma and Ishta- 
devata as inseparable from one another, and become merged 
in Her (1). I am She (my substance is not different 
from Hers). By this thought immersion in Her is attained. 
One should certainly meditate on this that there is nothing

1 2nd Ull&sa.1 2nd Ull&sa.

* She who either instructs or is instructed by §hiva, ns in the case 
of Nigamas and Againae.

* Author’s parenthesis.

* 11th Uilisa section on Dhyftna (meditation).

1 The Devi as mistress of the three (tri) worlds (pnnu).

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSIIIP 1057

in this world save Her (2). The mass of Her spirit, fire, 
and energy 1 fills the entire universe. The thought of 
this will fill the Sadhaka with bliss, He will move freely 
like a Devata while yet on earth (3). There is nothing 
in the world which a Sadhaka who practises the Yoga 
of meditation in this manner should worship, for this 
virtuous great man deserves the worship of all and wor¬ 
ships none (4). Although possessing a human body, this 
wise man who is proficient in, and whose Atma is in, Yoga 
is in reality not a man, but a Devata. Such a man alone 
is a Sannyasl (one who has forsaken Karma).* * Such a 
man alone widens the path of Karma.' The Atma of 
such a man alone is united with the Deity; and suoh a 
man alone is called a Muni by all Sh&stras. There is 
nothing in this world which he cannot do, and he alone is 
an accomplished great Yog! (6). He whose Atma is always 
united with Devata, gratifying and adorning his Atma 
with all pleasing objects of sensuous perception, and 
worshipping the Devata with a sense of Her inseparate¬ 
ness from his Atm&, and whose Atm& is ever united with 
Devata, is himself a Devata (6). A Sadhaka certainly 
will perceive the presence of his Devata in the work, the 
doer, and the work done; in whatever things—such as 
dance, music, and the like—he sees or hears; in whatever 
dresses and ornaments he wears; in whatever animals 
and thingB, be it elephants, horses, carriage, bedstead, and 
so forth, on which he goes and rests; in whatever he eats, 
and, in short, in whatever else he does (7). When in posses¬ 
sion of those objects of desire which a worldly man enjoys

1 Tejas.

* Author's parenthesis—that is, work done for the sake of its fruits.1 Tejas.

* Author's parenthesis—that is, work done for the sake of its fruits.

* That is, the fruit of that Karma is dedicated to the Supreme, and 
is not made to serve petty selfish ends.

67

1058

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

for his own self-gratification, a Sadhaka will perceive the 
Divinity within them, and enjoy them for the gratifica¬ 
tion of the Devat& dwelling in his heart (8). Everything 
that a Sadhaka does, from his awaking in early morning 
to the time of deep sleep in the depth of the night, will 
be done with the sense of the presence of Devat& therein. 
The habit of so doing will arouse a divine disposition 1 in 
the Sadhaka by means of which he will attain Siddhi (9). 
Only he who has such disposition becomes Siddha* * and 
none else (that is to say, another person may have some 
other form of Siddhi, but for want of this disposition 1 that 
Siddhi will not produce liberation). 1 Hence, such persons 
only as Beek Dhyanayoga practice and liberation, and who 
constantly worship Tripurasundarl the Devi, who is blisB 
itself, with devotion 4 will truly attain liberation " (10).

Through the ill-fortune of India, many people have 
nowadays learnt by rote such passages as “ outer worship 
is inferior," “ outer worship is a low form of worship,” and 
“ outer worship is lower than the lowest form of worship ”; 
but most of them do not know for what rank of worship¬ 
pers outer worship is inferior, or low, or lower than the 
lowest, and how these passages should be harmonized w T ith 
their context. And some of them even desist from making 
any inquiry lest they should lose the opportunity of parad¬ 
ing the passages. 4 Bhagav&n, who dwells in all hearts, 
has, however, ordained worship to be of different classes, 
according to differences in the competence of worshippers, 
and clearly said in the Mundamala Tantra: “ Mental wor¬ 
ship, in which pure Sattva 4 alone operates, brings about

1 Divyabhftva. ' Perfect. * Author's parenthesis.1 Divyabhftva. ' Perfect. * Author's parenthesis.

' Liteially, “ with devotion in the Divyabbftva."

* Otherwise by comparison with the context others might be 
disillusioned,

' That is, the Sattva Guna (see Introduction).

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1059* Otherwise by comparison with the context others might be 
disillusioned,

' That is, the Sattva Guna (see Introduction).

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1059

high Siddhi and grants liberation. This form of worship, 
whioh consists of inner sacrifice, * 1 destroys the Jlvahood of 
a Jlva and grants him Shivahood (1). Although outer wor¬ 
ship is Rajas!,* it grants all forms of prosperity, destroys 
all kinds of danger, secures enjoyment in this world and 
liberation hereafter, removes all evils, cures all diseases, 
annihilates all enemies, and severs all bonds (2). Beloved 
one! what I have said as to outer worship being a lower 
form of worship is not intended to apply to Sadhakas 
following Virachara, or Pashv&ch&ra. 3 For Sadhakas fol¬ 
lowing the Divy&chfi.ra* only outer worship is a low form 
of worship ” (3). Here a Sadhaka should observe that 
even for Sadhakas of the Divyachara outer worship, is 
not altogether prohibited. It is merely a lower form 
of worship for them ; that is to say, a person following 
Divyachara has perfect competence for inner worship, 
and therefore outer worship is not a necesssity for him. 
It will not, however, do him any harm if he performs it. 
for a worship of the All-good Devi, in whatever fashion 
it may be performed, cannot possibly injure anybody. A 
Sadhaka of the Divyaohara is, in truth, a permanent source 
of great good, so that the non-performance of outer worship 
doeB not affect him. It is, therefore, immaterial for 
him whether he does or does not perform outer worship. 
It does not matter to the sea whether rivers fall into 
it or not. But j'ou and I who follow the Pashv&ch&ra 
or Virachara are nothing but lakes of water which we 
have dug out ourselves. If we neglect the rivers, the 
result will be that we ourselves shall turn into deserts. 
It is, therefore, nothing but a sign of lunacy to frown 
with displeasure at outer worship, which is not prohibited1 Yajna. * That is. it is the outcome of the rajas guna.

1 See Intr oduction.

1060

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

to, nor worthy the disrespect of, even permanently 
liberated Sodhakas of the Divy&ch&ra. If, however, a 
householder is intently eager to perform exclusively mental 
worship, there is a path for him opened by Bhagavan 
Himself, by which he may fulfil this desire. The Mother 
of the world forbade that anyone should ever travel that 
path in the domain of S&dhana. If, unfortunately, anyone 
must travel it, the following are the conditions which 
have to be observed :

In the Gandharva Tantra 1 it is said : “ If a householder 
lives in a forest, and on any particular day that forest is 
infested with lions and tigers, then on that day he may 
perform mental worship. Or, if he lives in a village or a 
town, and his house is besieged by the army of a foreign 
king, then in suoh time of political disorder he is privi¬ 
leged to perform mental worship. Or, whether he lives in 
a forest or in a village or town, if he is imprisoned by sen¬ 
tence of a law-court, then at such time also he may per¬ 
form mental worship. But even in these three cases the 
Sadhaka is entitled to perform mental worship only if he 
is unable to obtain artioles for outer worship.”

His privilege to perform mental worship in these three 
cases depends on his inability to leave the place where he 
is situated to procure articles for outer worship. For, if 
suoh articles are to his band, and nevertheless he omits to 
perform outer worship, then even in the circumstances 
mentioned he will do wrong, because of his initial incom¬ 
petence for exclusively mental worship. Now, if there be 
anyone who desires to perform outer worship under the 
conditions above described, we think it would be well for 
him were the All-good Mother, who grants all desires, to 
refuse to fulfil this desire on his part.

' 26 th Patala.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1061' 26 th Patala.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1061

In the same Tantra it is said : 1 “ What is the use of 
saying muoh ? This much only I briefly, say, whether it be 
stated in the Shastra or not: A devotee should always 
perform worship with all kinds of both terrestrial and 
aqueous flowers and their leaves. Worship should be done 
with leaves if flowers be wanting; with fruits if leaves be 
wanting; with whole grains of barley where there are no 
fruits; or, at least, with water should there be no whole 
grains of barley. Daily worship should never be neglected. 
If even water is wanting, then only should one have re¬ 
course to exclusively mental worship.”

In the Niruttara Tantra it is said :* * “By virtue of his 
worship of Ishtadevata a Sadhaka himself receives worship 
in the world (for whoever in this world worships Her is 
adored by the world).* By Japa he undoubtedly acquires 
Siddhi (Agima, and so forth),* and by Horn a he attains 
success in all worldly things. Therefore a Sadhaka should 
perform all three: worship, Japa and Homa. O Kulesh- 
varl! * only Sadhakas of Vlrabhava and Divyabhava * are 
competent to perform mental worship.”

In the Pichchila Tantra it is said : “ Even if a Sadhaka 
has received the Mantra of a Mahavidya or Siddhavidyft,* 
that Mantra-vidya injures him if he neglects to perform 
Japa. One can never attain wealth without performing 
Homa, or Siddhi without performing Japa, and, 0 Para- 
me^hvarl! it is impossible to receive worship anywhere 
unless one worships his Ishtadevata.”

In the MuQd& m &l& Tantra it is said :* “ 0 Chaijdl! he 
who worships Kalika with devotion and according to the 
rites attains to the state of §hiva, even though he be a

' Gandbarva Tantra, 14th Panola.

* Author's parenthesis.

' See Introduction.

' 2nd Pat ala.

’ 7th Patala.

* Mistress of Kula.

* See post.

1062

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Gandbarva Tantra, 14th Panola.

* Author's parenthesis.

' See Introduction.

' 2nd Pat ala.

’ 7th Patala.

* Mistress of Kula.

* See post.

1062

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Jiva. This is true, true, undoubtedly true. A Sadhaka 
should always perform the rites. 1 It is by the performance 
of rites that a great Sftdhaka attains the highest Siddhi. 
Hence, one should never renounce rites."

In the Yamal a we read : “ Meditation* is of two kinds, 
according as it is gross or subtle. Subtle meditation is the 
meditation on the Devata’s body, consisting of Mantra, and 
gross meditation is meditation upon Her body, with hands, 
feet, and so forth. The subtle form of Supreme Prakfiti is 
made of pure knowledge. It is not possible for a Jiva to 
meditate on this subtle form. By meditating on the gross 
form does a Jiva attain liberation."

0 Devi! unless worshipped, the Devata never grants 
any fruit. It is only when the Sadhaka, with or without 
knowledge, meditates on, remembers, worships, praises in 
hymns, and pays obeisance to, the Devi that She grants 
liberation to Her worshippers.”

In the Gandharva Tantra Ishvara said: “ He who devot¬ 
edly performs daily worship in this manner becomes like 
Kandarpa* to women, and powerful like Shiva in the world 
of men (1). He is truly fortunate, and an ornament of his 
race. Blessed indeed are his father and his mother (2). The 
Devi appears in him, 4 and, like myself, that person, possessor 
of great knowledge, undoubtedly becomes master of the 
eight-fold Siddhi of Aj?ima * and so forth (3). To his ene¬ 
mies he is destructive like fire, to his friends he is pleasing 
hke the moon. In punishment he is like death, and in 
sanctity he is like fire * (4). In speech he is like V r ihaspati,

Kri *** ' Dbyftna.

Kama, the God of Desire.

" the anggas (part) of the Devi appears in him 
divinity—bat not in its plenitude.

i.e.,

t ® ee < 86 to these powers. Introduction.

* For fire Purifies, and is itself never impure." the anggas (part) of the Devi appears in him 
divinity—bat not in its plenitude.

i.e.,

t ® ee < 86 to these powers. Introduction.

* For fire Purifies, and is itself never impure.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1063

in forbearance like the earth. 1 Sarasvatl is ever present 
on his tongue, and Lakshml in his house.* * All Tirthas 
are permanently established in his body. He therefore has 
no fear of rebirth (5). In wealth he is the Lord of wealth 
(Kuvera),* and in fiery energy 4 he is like the Sun; in 
strength he is like the God of wind, Pavana; in liberality 
he is like Indra;' in singing he is, as it were, Tumvuru 8 
himself. Such is the man who daily worships the All- 
good Devi, who grants all desires (6). 0 Mistress of Devas! 
if the worship of Mahatripurasundarl 1 is omitted for one 
day, the Sadhaka should expiate the sin resulting there¬ 
from. He should fast on the day on which there is thus 
no worship, and perform preliminary rites for the next 
day’s worship. On the day following let him worship first 
the Guru according to the injunctions, and then after he 
has finished the worship of Ishfcadevat&, let him feed virgins 
and Brahmaijas (7-8). Such is the expiation for omission 
of worship for one day. If it is omitted for more than one 
day, the defaulter should be re-initiated and perform Japa 
of his Ishtamantra* a hundred thousand times (9). Who¬ 
ever omits to perform worship for two or three days in the 
Sadhana of Mahatripurasundarl and Yoginls (of any Shakti 
Devata)/ loses all his Siddhi, and is cursed by the Yoginls 
(10). Life, learning, fame, and strength, leave him, and 
the Yoginls destroy his flesh, semen, vital fluid/ and blood, 
and frustrate all his desires (11). Bitter quarrels arise 
with friends, and especially with wives. His sin ruins the

« Vrihaspati is the Guru of the Devos. As the earth bears every 
thing, it is the model of patience.

* He has both wisdom and wealth; two things which generally do« Vrihaspati is the Guru of the Devos. As the earth bears every 
thing, it is the model of patience.

* He has both wisdom and wealth; two things which generally do

not go together. * Author's parenthesm.

* Tejas. * King of the Devas. * A Gandharva.

* The Devi; as to Tripurasundarl, see A. and E. Avalon's Hymns 
to the Goddess.”

' The Mantra in which he was initiated.

* Rasa.

1064

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* The Devi; as to Tripurasundarl, see A. and E. Avalon's Hymns 
to the Goddess.”

' The Mantra in which he was initiated.

* Rasa.

1064

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

crops, and he himself falls into dangers at every step (12). 
Truly, truly he is attacked with diseases, and being im¬ 
poverished, he suffers even in this world the three forms 
of terrible sufferings (adhyatmik, adhibhautik, and adhi- 
daivik, and of body, speeoh, and mind) 1 (13). (Sadhakas 
know that these things constantly happen where the path 
of S&dhana is obstructed).* * Though a Sadhaka cannot, 
owing to bis neglect to act according to the Sbastra, obtain 
liberation, yet by virtue of his initiation in the Mah&« 
mantra, he will go to heaven ; 3 and then, after enjoyment 
of such happiness as is to be had therein, he will fall again 
on earth and become the Lord of an empire. AntTduring 
life here he will have unparalleled devotion to the lotus- 
feet of the Mother of the world by virtue of the initiation 
accomplished in the previous birth. Thereafter he will 
attain to Kaivalya (14), The fool who neglects the worship 
of Ishtadevata and sets himself to meditation on Brahman 
without having first attained the highest fruit of worship 
namely, ohittalaya 4 —is in this world a murderer of 
Brahman (16). If a Sadhaka who is devoted to Japa and 
meditation is at any time unable himself to perform 
worship and so forth by reason of his occupation in some 
work of gain or benefit (that is, acquiring something new 
or safeguarding that whioh has been already acquired), 
he should engage his own Guru to do worship on his 
behalf (16). All forms of Siddhi are in the hands of him 
whose welfare is the subjeot of constant concern to a 
pure-hearted Guru who is proficient in both knowledge 
and work, possessed of superworldly power, and inspired

1 Author's parenthesis. The first three classes of suffering are those 
caused by the self, the outer material world, and the world of Deras.1 Author's parenthesis. The first three classes of suffering are those 
caused by the self, the outer material world, and the world of Deras.

* Author’s parenthesis. ' 8varga.

* That is, the absorption of the Jiva’s chitta in the object of worship 
called Samprajfi&ta Sam&dbi.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1065

with the spirit of all Devas* * (17). Not only in the case 
of worship of Ishfcadevata, but in that of every form of 
religious work prescribed in the Tantra Sh&stra, none 
but the Sadhaka’s Guru, Guru’s wife, and Gurus son 
is competent to perform it if the S&dbaka is unable to do 
so personally.”

In the Pichchila Tantra it is said: “ The Guru per¬ 
sonally has the right to perform worship as prescribed in 
the Tantra. It is well accomplished if performed by Guru, 
Guru’s son, or Guru’s wife. 0 Mistress of Devas! in the 
absence of Guru, a Sadhaka should himself perform wor¬ 
ship and so forth.” (Here by absence of Guru, Guru s son, 
and Guru’s wife, is meant that, though alive, they are not 
available.) *

In the Varada Tantra it is said : 8 “ All the rites pre¬ 
scribed in the Tantra in connection with the worship of 
Ishtadevata should be performed by the Sadhaka himself. 
In case of his inability to personally perform them, he 
should have them carried out by the Guru or his wife, if 
she is a mother (and if the Mantra and Devata of the 
husband and wife are the same).* If performed in any 
other way, everything will be spoiled.’’

In the Guptasadhana Tantra it is said: “ O Mahe$h- 
varl! if worship and so forth through any others, then 
these persons (Guru, his son, or his wife who is a mother)* 
—that is, by any other Tantrik preceptor 4 —then the fruits 
of such worship will fall into the grasp of Yakshas and 
Rakshasas * (]). (Hence, if a person is himself unable to 
perform the worship of his Ishtadevata, his Guru should 
take his place.)* If the Guru, who is an appearance of

1 Sarvadevasvaruptlmayn. 
’ Author's parenthesis.1 Sarvadevasvaruptlmayn. 
’ Author's parenthesis.

* Demoniac spirits.

* 10th Pat ala.

* Achiryya.

1066

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Brahman, performs worship and so forth, then, O Mahe?h- 
vari! such worship will bear a hundred-orore-fold 1 fruit (2). 
Or, O Parame§hvarl! if the Sadhaka performs such worship 
and so forth himself, he should at its conclusion offer to 
the Guru all the things which have been already offered to 
the Devata; for, on being offered to Guru they bear crore* * 
fold 1 fruit (3). 0 Mahe?hvarl! if the Guru’s wife peforms 
the worship and so forth, she should carry out the neces¬ 
sary sacrifice * and the like, but not the Homa. She should, 
after collection of the articles for Homa, place them before 
the Devi, and, by repeating the Mulamantra,* offer them to 
Mahadevl. By doing this only, the purpose of Homa will 
be accomplished. A Sadhaka should never have Homa 
done in fire by his Guru’s wife. 0 Devi! worship of 
Isht&devata, or whatever else is done by a Guru for his 
Shishya is productive of undecaying fruits. The provisions 
in the Sh&stra for the appointment of various persons as 
representatives, such as a Jtitvik’s son and others, where 
the Yajamana 4 is personally incapable, have force only with 
regard to religious rites, prescribed in the Smjiti Shastra. 
Worship prescribed in the Tantra Shastra should never be 
performed by means of such representatives. If a Sadhaka 
engages a Purohita 4 to perform Tantrik worship or other 
rites, not only will all his desires be frustrated, but even 
the ever-merciful Mother of the world, the Beloved of 
Mah&kala, by whose worship our aims are attained, will 
become angry with him.”

1 A crore is ten millions. ' Vali.

* The principal Mantra of the particular DevatA worshipped.

* He who makes the sacrifice.

* Priest. The distinction between the Priest and the Guru is given 
in the text.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1067* He who makes the sacrifice.

* Priest. The distinction between the Priest and the Guru is given 
in the text.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1067

Although the Shastra says that the Sadhaka who 
gets the worship of his Ishtadevata and other rites per¬ 
formed by his Purohita will reap fruits contrary to that 
for which he looks, yet it may be that doubts and ques¬ 
tionings may arise as regards this matter. In truth, how¬ 
ever, such doubts are possible only for those who see 
no difference between a Guru and a Purohita. He, how¬ 
ever, who knows the real nature of the relationship between 
a Guru and a Shishya on the one hand, and between 
a Yajamana and a Purohita on the other, can have no 
such doubt. A Purohita is a fit representative of the 
Yajamana in the performance of religious rites, and may 
further, by the strength of his own devotion, 1 advance the 
well-being of the Yajamana * by his blessing. But a Guru 
is lord over the Shishya’s body, mind, life, and intellect. 
He it is who seoures for the latter shelter at the feet of the 
supreme Devat&. He it is who kindles the beneficial lamp 
of Mantra in the terrible deep darkness of May&, and is the 
only helmsman who can safely steer the vessel to the shore 
across the boundless sea of Sangsara. A Guru can never 
be his Shishya’s representative; for, so far as a Shishya is 
concerned, the three, Guru, Mantra, and DevatA, are one 
and the same. When, however, a Guru himself performs 
the worship, preliminary rites and so forth, which should 
have been performed by his Shishya, what happens is this: 
He performs worship of himself in the matter of the worship 
of the $hishya,* and the Shishya is blessed by making over 
the worship to the care of his Guru, who is visible Brahman. 
This has been clearly explained in the discourse of on Guru- 
tattva.* Now, what we have yet to understand is how the

1 Tapas (see Introduction). ' Vide ante.1 Tapas (see Introduction). ' Vide ante.

' That is, the $hisbya who wishes to worship the Dev at & through 
his Guru causes the Guru to worship himself, because the ^hisbya’s 
Guru and Devatft are the same. * On the Guru.

1068

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1068

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

fruit of worship is increased a millionfold by reason of the 
worship being performed by the Guru himself, and how the 
benefit of such worship is communicated to the person of 
the Shishya. The fruits of the sacrifice, 1 worship, and so 
forth, which a Purohita is empowered by Shastra to perform 
in cases where the Yajamana 1 is unable to do so himself, 
are enjoyable in this world and hereafter. And it is un¬ 
doubted that, whatever is enjoyable, either in this world or 
in heaven, 1 is a subject of sensuous perception ; for all objects 
of enjoyment are apprehended by the senses. From this it 
conclusively follows that the work of a Purohita is fruitful 
only as regards the body, senses, mind, and, and life of the 
Yajamana, 1 whether in this world or hereafter, but has no 
greater effect. But what a Guru does, reaches even the 
Atm& of the Shishya. By virtue of the beneficial work per¬ 
formed by a Purohita, the Yajamana’s Atma. may be carried 
to heaven * * and other regions of the next world; but its 
utmost effect is upon the causal body/ and the Atma itself 
is not directly reached. But the fruit of what a Guru does 
goes beyond the next world, and is the cause of the illumi¬ 
nation of the superworldly supreme truth ' in the ^hishya's 
Atma. These supersensuous truths are the subject of con¬ 
stant realization, and superworldly wonders constantly 
happen in the Shishya’s Atma. At the movement, in every 
Chakra, of Kupd&lini, the Mistress of Chakras who plays in 
the heart of the lotus in the Kula-cave/ and moves along 
the stem of the MQladhara lotus, the S&dhaka’s, Atma rises 
and sinks in the sea of the Brahma-bliss of Brahmamayl 
with the playful dance of the waves of the eight forms of 
Siddhi— viz., Apima and the rest/ It is impossible to

1 Yajua. * Vide, ante.

' Svargti. ' Kftranadeha ; the subtle body.

* Tattvo. • That is, the MttlAdhAra.

As to these powers, see Introduction.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 10691 Yajua. * Vide, ante.

' Svargti. ' Kftranadeha ; the subtle body.

* Tattvo. • That is, the MttlAdhAra.

As to these powers, see Introduction.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1069

explain this by an illustration drawn from the objective 
world. But just as the power of sight of a Yogi, although 
located in his eyes, reaches unchecked the solar orb in com¬ 
pany with the solar rays, and by its keenness penetrates its 
disc and then views the eternal play in the eternal regions 
of Brahmaloka, 1 Vaikuntha,* * and Shivaloka,* so the Atm& of 
a Sftdhaka who has attained Siddhi in Mantra reaches, with 
the help of Mantrashakti the true aspect of the Mother of 
the world, the great Shakti, in whom alone are centred all 
Mantrashaktis, and ever beholds the play of bliss in all the 
regions where Her powers * are ever displayed.

It is only the Shakti by which at the time of initiation 
the Tejas* of the Guru is communicated to the Shishya; 
the Shakti which, like the burning and revealing light, is 
passed from the lamp of the Guru to the wick of the 
Shishya’s body, moi&t with the oil of the Guru’s love; the 
Shakti whioh on issuing from the Guru and entering the 
Shishya brings the two bodies into closer union when 
worship is done; it is that Shakti which alone is able to 
communicate, directly and at once, to the Shishya’s body 
the fruits of the worship and other acts performed by the 
Guru. For it is only the Mantrashakti of the particular 
Devata which passes from the body of a particular Guru to 
that of a particular Shishya which is capable of entering 
from that Guru’s body into the body of that Shishya. To 
no other Shakti is the path of communication open.*

' The three highest of the upper worlds.

’ The heaven of Yishnu (see post). ' The heaven of §hiva.

* Vibhfttia. ' Spiritual energy.' The three highest of the upper worlds.

’ The heaven of Yishnu (see post). ' The heaven of §hiva.

* Vibhfttia. ' Spiritual energy.

• The Guru communicates the Mantrashakti of a particular Devata 
from his own body to the body of the Shishya. It is the Mantrashakti 
of that particular Devata alone which can freely pass from the Guru 
to the Shishya along the path established between the two bodies by 
initiation.

1070

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1070

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Just as no one who is not intimately related to us is 
allowed entry into the inner apartments of our house, so 
the outer fruits of rites performed by another for the 
accomplishment of a Sadhaka’s happiness enjoyable by his 
external senses cannot enter into the inner recesses of his 
heart. They are acquainted with the outside only, and 
outside they remain. For this reason, the effect which is 
achieved by worship and so forth performed by Guru, who 
is visible Brahman, 1 or by the Guru’s wife or their son, 
cannot be accomplished if even ten million Purohitas to¬ 
gether perform them in concert. Nay, even if, as a repre¬ 
sentative of the Yajam&na,* * the Purohita performs the wor¬ 
ship of the same Devata with the same Mantra (as is the 
practice in Bengal in Shyama PQja, Jagaddhatrl PQja, and 
similar other Puj&s),' his worship is powerless to touch 
the Atmfi. of the S&dhaka. For, unlike the Guru, the 
Purohita’s Atmasbakti or Mantrashakti has never passed 
into the Yajamana’s Atinfi, since there can be no such 
passage without initiation. Hence, although a Purohita 
can, at the time of worship, make the Devata approach by 
the force of Mantra, and thus accomplish the worship, the 
Merciful Mother returns in sorrow because She is unable, 
through the fault of the author of the rite, to give him all 
the desired fruits with which She came laden to his house 
of worship, and which She had intended to give him in 
fulfilment of Her promise. 4 To-day the affectionate Mother 
has with all tenderness brought with Her, tied up in her 
cloth,' precious gifts for her son, who ever lives away from

' Sakshat Brahman. * Vide ante.

* The Kfill Pfljft and Pfija of Jagaddhatrl. Author's parenthesis.

* The promise made in the $hastra that such and such worship will 
be productive of such and such fruits.

* After the Indian fashion.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1071* The promise made in the $hastra that such and such worship will 
be productive of such and such fruits.

* After the Indian fashion.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1071

home; but on coming to the son's house She found that he 
is not there, and there cannot make over those gifts to him. 
Worse, however, than this, She sees the son’s presents given 
to Her, not by him personally, but by a representative of 
his. None but a Mother in this world can realize the 
terrible pain which such neglect on a son’s part causes to 
a Mother’s heart. Hence, seeing that the son has gone 
away to distant lands, the Mother sends him a message in 
the pages of Sh&stra, thus:

“ My child! worship Me if you will, give Me presents 
if you will, and I shall be present with joy to receive the 
gifts of My son. But, My ohild, see that you are not yourself 
absent, and do not make your gifts to Me through another. 
Otherwise, your neglect and absence and the sorrow they 
oause will keenly grieve My heart, and tears of sorrow will 
bedew My face, chasing away all smiles of joy. My child, am 
I nobody to you ? Ah, silly child! I am the Mother—I am 
your Mother, the Mother of all the millions of universes. 
What secret can you have from Me who dwell in all things ? 
And why be secret with your Mother, My child ? You may 
desire to keep a thing secret from Me, but I come to know 
of it before it even passes through your mind. Such as 
I am, how can you keep anything secret from Me ? More¬ 
over, the relation between Mother and son is such that 
there can be no seorets between them. But perhaps you 
keep away from Me beoause of your lack of power, un¬ 
worthiness, and impurity. But, My child, have you not 
heard that I am all powers, 1 and am the Saviour of the 
fallen, and Deliverer of the three worlds ? You may be 
lacking in power, but I have all powers in Me. By My 
own Shakti I create universes from particles of dust and 
turn them again to dust. Being as I am the sole Mistress* Shakti.

1072

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

of the store of Sbaktis, am I not able to make you powerful 
by My Shakti ? You may be impure, but I raise the fallen. 
By taking My name Jlvas become pure themselves and 
purify the world. Being what I am, can I not Myself 
make you pure ? How impure can you become that I cannot 
make you pure? Ah, My child! how long does impurity 
last ? Only so long as My name does not enter your ears. 
It is true that Jlvas fall, but that is only so long as I, 
who purify the fallen, do not take them up into My arms. 
\ou shirk My presence on account of your impurity, but 
no one remains impure after he has come to Me. I am 
a Dweller in cremation grounds, 1 because 1 do not wish 
that there should be anything impure in the world. Even 
My dead child is not impure to Me. As for you, you are 
a child vitalized by a great mantra. What should you 
fear ? Hence I say, My child, why have any hesitation 
before your Mother ? Whatever you wish to give Me, bring 
it to Me yourself, saying, “ I am poor and impure,” and 
I shall not only take your gift, but purify you at the 
same time. If only I get you to come before Me, I shall 
give you what I have to give you. This is why I say, 
dear ohild, do not wound your Mother’s feelings by charging 
another person with the care of the Mother. It does not 
matter to me whether My worship is not done. But it is 
a sorrow which I cannot bear that I am unable to give 
you that which I brought for you.”

It is the great pain of this sorrow which makes ‘the 
merciful Devi wrathful. The Tantra Shastra has, there¬ 
fore, said: “ If a Sadhaka engage a Purohita to perform 
T&ntrik worship, all his desires will be frustrated, and 
Kalika* * will become angry.” It is because the Mother’s

^hma$b&na.. Fire purifies all things, and here all bodies are con¬ 
sumed. Her manifestation is great in the horning ground.

* The Devi.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1073^hma$b&na.. Fire purifies all things, and here all bodies are con¬ 
sumed. Her manifestation is great in the horning ground.

* The Devi.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1073

feelings are wounded that all the desires of the Sadhaka 
are frustrated; otherwise, why should the worship of Her 
who grants all desires be productive of such disastrous 
effect ? Why should the ever-meroiful Mother who has 
assumed the Kftla '-subduing name of Kali in order to 
destroy even the Sadhaka’s fear of Kala 1 become angry ? 
It must be understood that this anger is not really suoh, 
but only profound mercy in another form. None, how¬ 
ever, but the Mother’s son who has with his own eyes 
seen the Mother’s play is ever privileged to enjoy the 
intense pleasure of seeing the play of the waves of this 
sweet and yet severe wrath of the Mother. This is why, 
O Mother! we have in the Invocation at the beginning of 
this book begged of Thee Thy anger, which is sweeter 
than the sweetest of things which looks a complex,* * and 
is yet a very simple thing; and this is why we have not 
cared to beg from Thee Thy mercy. O Merciful Devi! 
when wilt Thou show such meroy as to bless me by making 
me tremble at the play on Thy loving face of Thy pre¬ 
tended anger, instead of Thy happy and indulgent smile? 
On that day Thy name of Chandl * will be justified, and 
ray fear of the Rod* will vanish, O Mother! Does one 
who experiences such anger ever desire mercy again ? 
Thy anger is the hidden treasure of the seoluded store 
of love. Thou mayst ask, How many have been so fortu¬ 
nate as to have learnt to become angry* on seeing with 
their own eyes Thy anger ? But, O senseless Child! * dost 
Thou, being the Mother, not even know that the anger of

' Death. ' Kutila—that is, full of designs.

* Derived from Chanda, wrathful: the Devi as wrathful Destructress 
of Demons.

* The emblem of Tama, the God of death.

* That is, to show not common anger, but such anger as the Devi* Derived from Chanda, wrathful: the Devi as wrathful Destructress 
of Demons.

* The emblem of Tama, the God of death.

* That is, to show not common anger, but such anger as the Devi

manifests. * Terms of endearment applied to the Devi.

68

1074

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

one who says, “ I am growing angry,” simply makes one 
laugh ? Glory to Thee, O Merciful Mother! Glory, glory to 
Thy anger! Glory to Thy mercy! Glory to the anger by 
which mercy is conquered !

This wrath of the Mother of the Universe, rare in the 
three worlds, does not easily fall to the lot of even Shiva, 
not to speak of Jlvas.This wrath of the Mother of the Universe, rare in the 
three worlds, does not easily fall to the lot of even Shiva, 
not to speak of Jlvas.

Her anger and satisfaction, of which mention is made 
in the Sh&stra, is not really anger and satisfaction, but a 
mere show of them for the good of the S&dhaka. Secondly, 
such satisfaction and anger have reference to the ordinances 
and prohibitions of the Shastra. Hence we are afraid lest 
we should, by failing to rouse that anger in Her which is 
really satisfaction, call upon ourselves the terrible curse of 
Her pretended anger, and thus bring about our ruin. The 
Sh&stra, therefore, ordains that we should never entrust 
Her worship to another. Entrusting, however, the worship 
to the lotus-feet of Gurudeva is not the same as entrusting 
it to another, for the relation between a Gurudeva and his 
Shishya is similar to that between the sea and the river. 
Although they take their rise from different sources, such 
as mountains, springs, and so forth, yet rivers in the end 
mingle with the sea and become one with it. So the Atmfta 
of Shishyas, although appearing in different bodies, families, 
and races, mingle with the Guru’s Atmft and become one 
with it. Just as the sea passes by the force of the tide 
into the rivers, so, on the rising tide of the bliss of S&dhana 
in the Atmft of the Gurudeva, its nature passes from him 
to the Shishya’s body by the force of his own Shakti. The 
water of the sea does not really increase in volume, but 
merely heaves forward under the influence of the full moon. 
No such heaving is, however, possible in the waters of 
rivers. Similarly, no increase or decrease of bliss is possible 
in the Guru who is full of perfect bliss; but bliss heaves

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1076ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1076

under the influence of the Shakti (force) of S&dhana. But 
(as is the case with the sea) such heaving is possible in the 
body of the Guru, which is full of perfect bliss, so (as is the 
case with rivers) it cannot take place in the bodies of 
Shishyas. What happens in the bodies of Shishyas takes 
place only through the grace of the feet of the Guru, who 
is a sea of existence, consciousness and bliss. 1 Had rivers 
been unconnected with the sea, the flow-tide could never 
have entered into them. Just as notwithstanding the 
water of the sea merely heaves and does not increase, the 
flow caused by the force of such heaving actually increases 
the water of rivers; so, despite the fact that the perfect 
bliss which is in Guru does not really increase through 
the worship which he performs, yet the motion which is 
given to it by the force of the Guru’s mercy actually 
increases the bliss of S&dhana in the body of the Shishya. 
This is why the Shastra says : “ If Guru, who is the visible 
Brahman, performs worship and so forth, then, 0 Ma- 
he?hvari! such action will bear a hundred-orore-fold* 
fruit.” This is why worship by Gurudeva is not, from 
the spiritual point of view, worship by another, not¬ 
withstanding that it is from the ordinary standpoint per¬ 
formed by a person other than the Shishya; for in suoh 
case the presence of the Guru is the presence of the Shishya 
for the purpose of that worship. If worship of the 
Sadhaka’s IshtadevatA is done by a person who, though 
not his Guru, is a Tftntrik teacher, then also such worship 
will be productive of bad fruits; for notwithstanding that 
such a teacher is a T&ntrik, he is in this matter in the 
same position as a Purohita, since in neither case is there 
the relation of Guru and Shishya between the party 
officiating and him for whom the worship is done. The

1 Sat. Chit and Ananda. * A erore is ten millions.

1070

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Sat. Chit and Ananda. * A erore is ten millions.

1070

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Shastra has, therefore, said : “ 0 Maheshvari! if one causes 
worship and the like to be performed not by these persons, 
but by a Tantrik preceptor, then the fruits of suoh worship 
will fall into the grasp of Yaksha* * and Rakshasas.” 1

All the points of difference which have so far been 
shown to exist between the effects flowing from the ap¬ 
pointment of a Guru and a Purohita become operative 
only if worship performed by him is Siddha.* But where 
for want of Shastrik jurisdiction worship performed by a 
Purohita is beyond his competency, it cannot be Siddha.* 
No Tantrik rite, and not merely the worship of Ishta- 
devata, will be Siddha if performed by a Purohita. “ The 
provision in the Shastra for the appointment of various 
persons as representatives, suoh a Ritvik’s son and others, 
have force only in regard to religious rites prescribed 
in the Smnti Shastra. Worship prescribed in the Tantra 
Shastra should never be performed by means of such 
representatives.”* Worship other than that of the Ishta- 
devata will be Siddha if performed by means of any 
Tantrik teacher; but in the absence of Guru, Guru’s wife, 
or Guru’s son, a Sadhaka must himself perform the worship 
of his Ishtadevata, or have it performed by his own wife, 
there being no other course open to him.

The Rudra \amala says: “ Worship is of three kinds— 
namely, daily,* occasional,' and performed for the attain¬ 
ment of a desire.”' Daily worship is that which a Sad¬ 
haka must daily perform on pain of incurring sin, as, 
for instance, Sandhya prayers, worship of Shiva, and worship 
of Ishtadevata. Occasional worship is that the non-per¬ 
formance of which is sinful, but which has to be done

1 Evil spirits.

* Pratinidhi.

* Kaimittika.

Perfect, fruitful, efficacious.

* Nitya.

* Kflmja,

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 10771 Evil spirits.

* Pratinidhi.

* Kaimittika.

Perfect, fruitful, efficacious.

* Nitya.

* Kflmja,

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1077

only on some particular occasion, as, for instance, Durga 
Paj&, the illuminated Shy&ma PfljA Shivaratri Vrata, 
Janmashtaml PQjfL, 1 and the rites which must be performed 
at the time of an eclipse. Worship performed for the 
attainment of a desire is worship, the non-performance 
of which is not sinful, but the performance of which 
produces special fruits, as, for instance, Sh&nti, Svastya- 
yana.* The great difference between daily and occasional 
worship and worship performed for the attainment of 
desire is that, while daily and occasional worship must 
be performed though one may not have any desire to 
satisfy, worship of the third kind need not be performed 
under such circumstances.

The Nila Tantra says: “ A Sadhaka acquires the privi¬ 
lege of performing occasional worship when he performs 
the daily worship of Ishtadevatd, and he acquires the 
privilege of performing worship for the attainment of his 
desire only when he has acquired Siddhi * in occasional 
worship. The ordinance of the §h&stra is that it is only 
when a person becomes accomplished (that is, remains 
constantly engaged)* in the first two forms of worship — 
namely, daily and occasional—that he beoomes competent 
to perform worship undertaken for the attainment of his 
desire.”

1 Durga PajA is the MahAvrata in honour of the Devi, as Durga, so 
greatly celebrated in Bengal ; iJhyAma PfljA is KAll PfljA when there 
are illuminations in honour of Devi, called the Dewali. JanmAshtamI is 
held on Kfishpa’s birthday, and the fJhivarAtri in honour of §hiva.

’ That is. the rites of those names to procure peaoe and auspicious - 
ness. Thus, special worship done with the object of procuring the 
recovery of a sick child would be KAmya. Neglect to perform such 
worship would not in itself be a sin, but if devoutly performed it may 
lead to the result desired.' That is, becomes accomplished.

‘ Author's interpretation ; for it is only by constant practice that 
success in this or any other matter is attained.

1078

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In moat parts of Bengal we find nowadays a olass 
of people who never do daily worship, but who perform 
once every year with great 4clat a ceremony such as the 
Durga Poja, or Shy&m& PQjft, or Jagaddhfttrl Poja, 1 and 
who thereupon think that they have more than suffi¬ 
ciently compensated for the omission to do daily worship 
throughout the year. They ought, however, to open their 
eyes, whioh are closed by vanity, and first consider whether 
they have any right to perform such ceremonies as the 
Durgft Paja. In fact, it is not only impossible that worship 
performed by such men without competence therefor should 
bear the fruit spoken of in the Shastra, but it is tp all 
a matter of daily experience that such performances (con¬ 
trary to the Shastra as they are) produce most baneful 
effects at every step. Through the fault of the performer, 
religious rites bear fruits contrary to that which should 
follow them. But we often hear critics say that the 
enumeration of the effects of religious performances men¬ 
tioned in the Shastra is a tissue of falsehood intended 
to allure people. We, however, reply that had religious 
performances been inoapable of producing any effeot at 
all, why do these oontrary effeots happen ? Whether we 
have the good fortune to be able to see it or not, every 
intelligent man ought to understand that, if the improper 
performance of an act inevitably produces an effeot contrary 
to that spoken of in the Shastra, it is, if properly performed, 
undoubtedly capable of producing, without fail, the effects 
which are promised by that Shastra.

The Gandharva Tantra says: “ A MahapOja,* with all 
the various artioles therefor and complete in all parts,The Gandharva Tantra says: “ A MahapOja,* with all 
the various artioles therefor and complete in all parts,

1 $hy4mft Paja is the Kal! Paja, and in the Jagaddhatrf Paja 
worship is done of the fonr-banded Jagaddhatrl thrice on one day ; 
whereas the Darga Paja is held for three consecutive days.

A great festival. Thus in Bengal the Darga Paja is a MahapOja.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1079A great festival. Thus in Bengal the Darga Paja is a MahapOja.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1079

should be performed every month of every year on auspicious 
days (3). Besides this, worship should be done daily, for 
worship of Ishfcadevatft is a daily work. A Sadhaka may 
perform occasional rites when he is capable of thorough 15 - 
carrying out those of daily obligation. When he thus 
becomes an adept in the performance of both the daily 
and occasional rites, then he may think of performing 
those which are done for the attainment of a particular end 
(2). Performance of occasional rites is more imperative 
than that of those last mentioned, and performances of 
daily rites is more imperative than that of the occasional 
rites. The misguided man who proceeds to perform occasion¬ 
al rites, or rites to obtain some object whilst neglecting 
to perform the daily rites and worship, reaps no fruit 
from the performance thereof (8). To attempt to accomplish 
occasional rites, or those done for the attainment of a 
particular desire whilst neglecting to perform those of 
daily obligation, is as futile as it is to cohabit with a 
barren woman (4). If all the articles for worship are 
not available, worship of Chakra-devatft (one’s Ishtadevatft 
in the midst of the group of five worshipful Devatas— 
namely, Shiva, Silrya, Gane§ha, Vishpu, and Shakti) 1 should 
be performed with flowers, fruits, and such other things 
only. But where the worship is performed in this manner, 
notwithstanding that other articles are available, such 
limbless' worship cannot be productive of full effects for the 
Sadhaka, any more than can a limbless man be the performer 
of a complete Yajfia 1 (6). Meditation, worship, Japa, and 
Homa, are the four hands of the Yajna* * of worship;

1 K&mya.

* Author's parenthesis.

* Angahlna. That is. worship in which all the ordinary articles of 
worship are not used.

* Sacrifice (see Introduction).

1080 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 K&mya.

* Author's parenthesis.

* Angahlna. That is. worship in which all the ordinary articles of 
worship are not used.

* Sacrifice (see Introduction).

1080 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

MatrikA, Shoe?ha, and other NyAsas, 1 form its body; know¬ 
ledge of the real truth as to IshfcarievatA is its Atma; devotion 
is its head ; reverence is its heart; and the art of perform¬ 
ance is its eye. Knowing the body of Yajna* to be com¬ 
posed in this manner, a good Sadhaka should perform it 
in all its limbs, and not divide and make it limbless 
(0). If the Yajuapurusha * iB made limbless, great evil 
is likely to befall the SAdhaka. For this reason, in per¬ 
formance the limbs should not be neglected. If the 
Yajnapurusha * is perfect in all His limbs, He grants 
Siddhi to the Sadhaka in everything. It is by His union 
with the supreme Shakti which arises out of the effort to 
accomplish all those limbs that the Yajnapurusha produces 
Siddhi (7). The omission of limbs is not so reprehensible 
in other worship as it is in that of the perfect Yajna-body 
of Tripurasundari (any Shakti image)' (8). For the attain¬ 
ment of Siddhi and Vibhutis 1 a Sadhaka should perform 
worship according to his means. If this rule is transgressed, 
not only will the worship be defective, but he will incur the 
great sin of murder of Brahman ; since in that oase the body 
of Yajna, which is the body of Brahman itself, is severed 
and thus made limbless. The limbs of the Yajna-body 
should be accomplished as directed in the ShAstra, and 
neither more nor less; for both possession of greater or of a 
less number of limbs by the Yajna produces sin in the 
Sadhaka (9). A great Pilja,’ with abundance of materials

' As to this T&ntrik rite, 6ee Introduction.

' Sacrifice (see Introduction.)

Yajna considered as a person.

| A succe8fal result. 1 Author's parenthesis.

.. rP er f, The powers of the DevatA become, by worship of' Sacrifice (see Introduction.)

Yajna considered as a person.

| A succe8fal result. 1 Author's parenthesis.

.. rP er f, The powers of the DevatA become, by worship of

^ P erata ‘ V l bhat! i of th ® Sadhaka. For when worship is Siddha the 
worshipper and the DevatA are one.

* Vidt ante.

ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 1081

therefore, should be performed on a fourteenth lunar day, 
or an eighth lunar day, or a full moon day, or between two 
months (the day between two months or the last day of a 
month),' or on a Mahabhata’ day (10). If the fourteenth 
day of a dark fortnight be a Tuesday, that day is called a 
MahSbhQta day. Any special performance on this day causes 
Bhutas (beings and things) to come within the control * * of 
the Sadhaka. Again if there is a conjunction of the Pushya 
Nakshatra * on that day, performance on that day is pro¬ 
ductive of countless fruits (11).

* Author’s parenthesis. * See post. ' Va$hikarana.

* One of the twenty-seven '* lunar mansions."

CHAPTER XIX

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP 1

Ik the Gandharva Tantra it is said : “ A man should worship 
a Devatft by becoming a Devatft himself.* One should not 
worship a Devatft without himself becoming a Devatft. If 
a person worships a Devatft without himself becoming a 
Devatft, he will not reap the fruits of that worship."

The Vashistha Rftmftya^a says: “ If a man worships 
Vishjju without himself becoming Vishpu, he will not reap 
the fruits of that worship. If he worships Vishnu by himself 
becoming Vishnu, a Sftdhaka will become Mahftvishpu.”

The Bhftrata says: “ Man should not take the name of 
Vishnu without himself becoming Vishnu, nor worship 
Vishpu without becoming Vishrtu, nor remember Vishiju 
without becoming Vishiju. One cannot attain Vishpu with¬ 
out becoming Vishnu."

The Bhavishya says: * “ A man should not remember 
Rndra without himself becoming Rudra, nor worship 
Rudra without becoming Rudra, nor take the name of

1 Pftja.

‘ Cf. the Rndray&mala:The Bhavishya says: * “ A man should not remember 
Rndra without himself becoming Rudra, nor worship 
Rudra without becoming Rudra, nor take the name of

1 Pftja.

‘ Cf. the Rndray&mala:

“ Ye GupAh santi devasya paftcha-ritya vidhftyinah 
Te gupih s&dhakavare bhavantyeva na chAnyatha.”

The T&ntrik Sadhana is a means of realizing the advaita tattva, and 
the first step towards this accomplishment is the unification of the 
Devata and the worshipper. The NyAsas with other ritual are intended 
to effect this.

Apparently this and the next two references are Paur&pik.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP 108;i

Rudra without becoming Rudra, nor will he attain Rudra 
without becoming Rudra.”

The Agneya says: “ By worshipping Rudra a S&dhaka 
becomes himself Rudra. By worshipping Vishnu he be¬ 
comes Vishiju. By worshipping SQrya he becomes Sfirya. 
By worshipping Shakti be becomes Shakti, and by wor¬ 
shipping Gaj?e?ha he becomes Ganesha.”

The Bhavishya says: “ A man should not take the name 
of a Devi without himself becoming a Devi, nor worship 
a Devi without becoming a Devi. 1 One should worship 
a Devatfi. by becoming the self of that Devata— (that is, 
the Devata * * Herself)—by means of Mantra-Ny&sa.” *

The Gandharva Tantra says: “ It is by becoming a 
Devata that a person should worship a Devata. A person 
should not worship a Devata while he himself is a non- 
Devata. 0 Spouse of Shiva! if Japa is performed without 
Mantra-Nyasa, it is Asurik (non-Daiva) 4 and ineffectual. 
A man should worship a Devata by becoming the self 
of that Devata by means of Ny&sa.* By Pra^ayama,' Dby&na, 
and Nyasa,* a Sadhaka’s body becomes a Deva’s body.”

1 Thus the Icb&rabheda Tantra says: “ Vftm&charo bbavet tatra 
v&m& bhatvft yajet param." The mental attitude is reflected in the 
ceremonial provision of the Bahasya-plljA that the Sfldhaka should 
dress himself, like a young woman, in beautiful « ar “ e “ ts ■ 
head painted with vermilion, and his body perfumed and garlandedwith flowers.

’ DevatAmaya. Author's parenthesis.

* See Introduction. The object and effect of Nyftsa is stated later 
in the text.

* Author's parenthesis.

' See Introduction.

* Breath control and meditation.

1084

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

The Gandharva Tantra says : “ BhUta§huddhi/ Rishyfi- 
diny&sa/ Pltha§haktinyasa, Karany&sa, Afiganyftsa, Mat- 
rikanyfisa, and Vidyfinyasa; 1 0 Mahe$hvarl! by means of 
these Nyftsas a S&dhaka becomes himself full of Devatft.”

Bhava '

If I wish to acquire the burning and lighting Shakti * 
of fire, I must be fire myself;' or if I would possess the 
coolness and the Shakti of sweetness possessed by water, 
I must be full of water myself; or if I want to acquire the 
speed and the Shakti of touch possessed by air, I must be 
full of air myself; or if I wish to have the hardness and 
the Shakti of smell possessed by earth, I must be full of 
earth myself; so if I wish to acquire, even in the least 
degree, the eternal Shakti (the eight forms of Siddhi and 
so forth)/ of Bhagav&n or Bhagavatl, I must be full of 
Him or Her. I must completely sink my individual ex¬ 
istence in the existence of Him or Her whose Shakti is 
to be communioated to me, otherwise it will never be so 
communicated. One person becomes full of another to 
the extent to whioh he loses himself in the Bhftva" of 
that other person; and the Shakti of the latter is com¬ 
municated to him to the extent to whioh he beoomes full

1 Purification of the elements constituting in their Mahflbhflta form 
the gross body (see Introduction, and post).

this Nyfisa there are five Nyftsas, of which the Nyftsa of the 
Rishi ie the first.

8ee as to the various forms of Ny&sa and their meaning, 
A. Avalon’s Introduction to “ Mahftnirvflpa Tantra."

Idea, thought, feeling, sentiment, nature, state. This very import- 
ant term is difficult to define, but the use to which it is put in the 
text will indicate its various shades of meaning to the reader.t Power. ' Agnimaya. ’ Author’s parenthesis.

.. Here nature. And if he has the nature, he has the

thoughts and feelings of that nature.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP 1085

of suoh other. This is the natural law in the domain of 
Shakti. 1 The nature of Bh&va,' by means of which men 
acquire the power of becoming full of another person 
in the Sangs&ra and in S&dhana can only be sensed by 
men of Bh&va.' Others cannot desoribe nor understand 
it. Nay, even Bhagav&n, the oonsort of Bhav&nl and 
creator of all things, has, in trying to find out the nature 
of the play of Bbftva, Himself become overpowered with 
his own Bh&va, and has said: * * The true form of Bh&va 
cannot be explained by words. We have not the power 
to explain what it is. What we can do is to quote what 
the Lord of Shakti has Himself said on the subject.

In the Kaul&vali Tantra,* it is said: “ Bhava is quality* 
of the mind. How can it then be expressed in words? 
It can therefore never be spoken. Words can only point 
out the direction in which it lies. Just as the sweetness 
of molasses can be realized only by the tongue, and can 
never be explained and realized by even thousands of 
words, so Bhava and that which constitutes it* can be 
realized only by the mind, and can never be explained 
by word (1). One single Mahabhava 7 appears in different 
forms (devotion, love, affection, and so forth) * to express 
different conditions.' Again, when Bhava deepens, all 
those differences in it are ultimately lost in the single 
great Bh&va (2).“ It is this Bhava which is the Lord, u in 
whom all bliss is confined and consecrated. It is this 
Bh&va which takes the Form of Prakpti, and it is this 
Bhava which is Atma, the Essence, 11 the Supreme and

' If the Bh&va of A is transformed into the Bh&va of B, it follows 
that the former acquires with such transformation the §hakti of the 
latter. ' Vide ante. * Bh&vuka.

* 11th Ull&sa. ‘ Dharma.

* Vibhftva- its various parts and manifestations as explained in the* 11th Ull&sa. ‘ Dharma.

* Vibhftva- its various parts and manifestations as explained in the

next sentence. ' Great Bh&va. ' Author’s parenthesis.

* Upadhi. “ Mah&bh&va. u Ifhvara. " Rasa.

1086

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Great (8). As Bhftva, this Atmft is a thing to be heard of, 1 
to be thought of, to be constantly meditated on, and to 
be realized by Vlra Sftdhakas by means of various forms 
of S&dhana prescribed in the Tantra Sh&stra (4). It is 
this Atmft whose substance is Bhftva which must be heard 
in the word of Shruti; it is this Bhftva which must be the 
subject of thought.* * It is this Atmft whose substance is 
Bh&va which must be meditated on according to the in¬ 
structions of the Guru (5). When in this way hearing,* 
thinking,* meditation,* S&dhana, and so forth, have been 
performed, then that Atmft which is Bhftva, and which is 
detached from all things, is surely realized. When adorned 
by the multitude of Bhavas, Bhagavftn Paramesvara begins 
to manifest the power of His own play in that body of 
the Sftdhaka matured by S&dhana, then all the Bbftvas of 
the Sadhaka disappear in the body of Bhagavftn leaving 
merely a feeling of the presence of Bhagavftn, whose sub¬ 
stance is one undivided Bhftva and of massive consciousness 
and bliss (6).

“ A cow eats various kinds of grass, but extracts from 
them only one essential thing,® which assumes various 
forms by connection* with the Upftdhis* of milk and so 
forth. In the same way, in whatever of its constituents* 
Bhftva may be cultivated, in the end all Bhftvas are 
converted into a single great Bhftva in the form of the 
Supreme Devatft, whose substance is massive conscious¬ 
ness and bliss (7). It is the essence* which is produced

1 That is, one should live and move in the company of such persons 
as constantly speak of God and study $hruti (revelation) (see post).

* Manana. * $bravana. * Dhy&na.

* Rasa. * Literally, " by communication to it of” (adhy&sa).* Manana. * $bravana. * Dhy&na.

* Rasa. * Literally, " by communication to it of” (adhy&sa).

1 Qualities, apparently limiting conditions.

* Vibh&va—that is, minor Bh&vas, particular manifestations of 
Mahftbh&va.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP 10871 Qualities, apparently limiting conditions.

* Vibh&va—that is, minor Bh&vas, particular manifestations of 
Mahftbh&va.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP 1087

in the body of a cow from grass which ultimately appears 
as the chief essence,* milk, and from that milk is evolved 
that which is but a changed form of it, the essence* of 
curd; from ourd comes ghee, and even from ghee some 
other essence* unnamed. But however numerous the 
varieties may be, such as milk, curd, ghee, and so forth, 
due to difference of conditions under which they are 
formed, the substance of them all is ultimately the 
essence* derived originally from grass; all which subse¬ 
quently appears, being merely the one thing in different 
forms. Similarly, in whatever Bhava His Sfidhana is per¬ 
formed, He is the cause and effect of all Bb&vas and the 
root thereof as Bhava, and in the end nothing remains 
but the substance of perfect bliss and massive conscious¬ 
ness in the form of one single great Bhava.* Viewed 
rightly, there is no cause or effect which is different from 
Him (8-9). As in the field of Sfidhana His play* as 
Bhava is thus diversified, so also in the domain of creation 
is it so. He is the only one Paramatm& who has been 
born, is being born, and will be born in different matrices, 
according to the different bodies to be assumed. After 
having performed the work of creation or manifested Him¬ 
self as Jlva, He, though in reality undifferentiated, is, 
through the effect of sinful and meritorious works, some¬ 
times born, sometimes dead, sometimes bound, sometimes 
liberated, sometimes happy, sometimes male, sometimes 
female, sometimes neuter, and sometimes beyond the 
Upadhis of sex and bodiless, though present in an infinite 
number of bodies (11). In this way the eternal Paramatma, 
who is the essence * and the great Bhava,* plays the play 
of His own diversity in the meditations, consisting of 
different Bhavas of Sadhakas, despite that He is Himself

1 Paramarasa.

’ Rasa.1 Paramarasa.

’ Rasa.

' Mah&bh&va.

* Lilia.

1088

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

one and without a second. In reality the play also of 
Her who is full of play is the Shakti, which is Herself, 
and diversity in that play does not affect Her inherent 
unity (12). The Sadhaka in whom appears the Divyabhava 
or Vlrabhava sees the supreme Tattva or Brahmamayl in 
a single life 1 (18). He who, liberated whilst yet living,’ 
has become Atma in its true form, moves on the earth 
merely to work out the remaining portion of his Karma, 
which has begun to bear fruits * * in his body. It is such 
a Mahatma, son of the Devi, who is called a Bhairava. 
Of the three Bhavas spoken of above, two, the Vlrabhava 
and the Divyabhava, are good 4 Bhavas, and are the essence 
of Kulatattva; and are superior on account of their con¬ 
nection with Kula, and are direct paths to liberation. For 
this reason the nature of * these two paths should not be 
told to all classes of Sadhakas (15). The Sadhaka who 
does not perform Sadhana in the Bhava prescribed for 
him in the Shastra * for ten days continuously, and whose 
worship of Ishtadevata becomes in consequence thereof 
defective, is fallen in the domain of Sadhana (16). To 
such a fallen man the Guru should not give instructions 
in any Bhava or worship. Such a fallen Sadhaka will only 
become pure in Bhava if he receives initiation again from 
a Kaula Guru. For this reason a right-minded Sadhaka 
should perform the worship of his Ishtadevata and such 
other aots with great care and strict adherence to his own 
Bhava »* (17).

1 In other words, realizes Her. As regards these two Tantrik 
Bhavas see Introduction to MahOnirv&na by A. Avalon.

* Jlvanmukta. * Pr&rabdha.

' Literally, “ well established." * Tattva.

* E.g., if a vlra, he most do worship with or in Vlrabhava—that is, 
not only with the particular ritual enjoined, but in the mental and 
devotional state and with the intention prescribed.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1089CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1089

In the Kaul&vall Tantra it is said : “ Just as no Vaidik 
Sangskfira 1 can be fruitful in a twice-born who is devoid 
of Veda; * * or as devotion cannot develop without devotion 
to Vishiju; or as liberation without a knowledge of Sbakti 
is ridiculous; or as competence in the Tantra Shftstra is by 
no means possible without a Guru; or as a woman without 
husband has no right to perform any religious rite; or as 
a Vlrasfidhaka of the Devi or of Myself is not competent 
to perform his own S&dhana without Kulatattva;* so a 
Sadhaka devoid of Bhava has no competency for any form 
of Sadhana or Siddhi. Hence a Sadhaka should always 
adhere to a Bhava. 4 Competence in the Kula Shastra can 
in no way be acquired in the absence of Bhava. Hence 
only a Sadhaka pure in Bhava becomes a true Kaulika.”

In the Kaulavall Tantra it is said: “ I shall explain 
the trae form of Bhava as it has been told in Tantra. 
Bhava is of three kinds—namely, Divya, Vlra, and Pa§hu. 
According to these Bhavas, Gurus also are of three kinds— 
namely, Divya-Guru, Vlra-Guru, and Pa$hu-Guru. Man- 
tra-devata also (Devata presiding over Mantra, Mantra- 
$hakti) * is of three kinds—namely, Divya-mantra, Ylra- 
mantra, and Pasjhu-mantra; that is to say, a Mantra issuing 
from the mouth of a Divya-Guru is a Divya-mantra, a 
Mantra issuing from the mouth of a Vlra-Guru is a Vira- 
mantra, and a Mantra issuing from the mouth of a Pa§hu- 
Guru is a Pa§hu-mantra (1). Of the said three forms of 
Bh&va, the first—that is, the Divya-bhftva—is the source of

* *' Sacrament " (see Introduction).

’ Vedehina: who baa not received instructions in Veda.

* The Kula articles; the Pafichatattva.

* That is, one of the Bh&va prescribed in the $bfistra. such as 
Pa?bubb&va etc. Worship cannot be done as the worshipper pleases 
but according to the injunctions of §hfistra.

* Author's parenthesis.

6fl

1090

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* Author's parenthesis.

6fl

1090

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

great good, and grants all forms of Siddhi. The second— 
that is, the Ylra-bbftva—is middling; and the third—that 
is, the Pashu-bhava—is spoken ill of throughout the world 
(2). Notwithstanding the repeated performance of Japa, 
Homa, and Tapasyft, in the form of numerous physical 
austerities, Tftntrik Mantras will never be fruitful without 
Bhftva (3). A Sftdhaka may perform thousands of Ylra- 
sftdhanas,' discuss the extremely subtle nature of Kula and 
Akula,* * or perform Ptljft, and so forth, in Plfhas; * or feed 
Brftbmaijas, make gifts out of love to his own or other 
families, or have control over his senses, or perform the rites 
of Kulftcbftra ; * but if, despite of adherence to Kulatattva,* 
his Atmft is not pure in Bhftva, all these acts will prove 
useless (4-5).

“It is by virtue of Bhftva that a renunciating (Nish- 
kama) ' Sftdhaka attains liberation. It is by virtue of Bhftva 
that a non-renunciating (Sakftma)' S&dbaka’s family and 
Gotra,’ prosper. It is by virtue of Bhava that the bodies of 
both forms of Sftdhakas are purified (6). What is the use of 
an elaborate performance of Nyasas, or purification of ele¬ 
ments,' or of worship, if there be no Bhftva in the heart of 
the Sftdhaka ? (7). Who is there who does not worship Vidya

1 SAdhana of the Virftchftra. * That is, §hakti and §hiva.

* See Introduction. PlaceB where portions of the body of Devi as 
Satl fell.

* The Aebiira of the Kanina. BhAskararAyn, in his Commentary on 
the words “ worshipped by those devoted to the Kaula path ” in v. 98 
of the LalitA, says that there are three modes of worship of Devi —viat , 
Samnyn (Vaidik, and according to the five Agamaa), Mi$hra (or mixed, 
described in the eight Tantrns, Chandraknla, and others), and Kaula, 
which differ from the above two, and described in other Tantraa.

* Vide ante.

* Author's parenthesis. That is, a SAdbaka who acts selflessly with¬* Vide ante.

* Author's parenthesis. That is, a SAdbaka who acts selflessly with¬

out desire for the fruits of action. The SnkAma SAdhaka is he who 
acts out of interest. ' Clan, lineage.

a That is, Bhftta$huddhi; as to which, see poet.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP 1091

(Devata as Mantra), 1 and make Japa of Her ? It is only 
through want of Bhava that performance is ever fruitless (8).

I shall speak, first of all, of the Divyabhava according to 
Tantra. A Sadhaka of the Divyabhava should meditate on 
the form,* thinking the whole world to be filled with a mass 
of the light * of that worshipped Devatft and of the colour of 
that Devata. Establishing lifo in all limbs of the form of 
that Devata by means of their respective Mantras, 4 let him 
see his whole Atmft and the entire visible world to be con¬ 
stituted of Her. Thus should the Ishtadevata be worshipped

by him (9-10). And so forth.

In the Rudrayamala (6th Pafcala) it is said : “ 0 Sadft- 
$hiva! hear again attentively of the Pashubbftva. Even a 
Pashu 1 can, by acquiring powers similar to those of Nara- 
yana * by means of Sadhana in his own Bhftva, attain such 
Siddhi f as to be able, by the grace of Mahavidya,* to go to 
the City of Vaikuptha' as an embodiment of great Dharma,” 
with a four-armed body, bearing a conch-shell, a discus, a 
olub, and a lotus in his hands, 11 and riding on Garuda 11 (1-2). 
The great Bhava of Pa?hubbftva grants Siddhi in all Bh&vas; 
for it is after first attaining Siddhi in the Pa§hubhftva that 
a Sadhaka should certainly adopt the great and superior 
Bhava of Yirabhava, and subsequenely the very beautiful 
Divyabhava, productive of great fruits (8). Even whilst 
in the Pas?hubhftva a Mantrl can reach Siddhavidya 11 (4). 
If by good fortune a Sadhaka is born in a Kaula family, 
and receives initiation in the great Mantra of the great

* Author’s parenthesis. * Marti. 4 Tejas. and energy.

* That is. the Mantra assigned in Ny&sa to each limb.* Author’s parenthesis. * Marti. 4 Tejas. and energy.

* That is. the Mantra assigned in Ny&sa to each limb.

* See Introduction : the Bh&va in which Tamas predominates.

* Vishpu. * Powers. * The Devi.

* The heaven of Vishpu (see ante). ** Here virtue.

« does Vishpu with whom the Sftdhaka is united.

** The Bird-King, vehicle of Vishpu. " Mantrasiddhi.

1092

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Eaulika Devata worshipped in Eulfich&ra by previous 
successive generations, he will surely attain Siddhi with¬ 
out having recourse to Pa§hubhftva by travelling along the 
path of Eulftch&ra only (5). But if a- Sadhaka of the 
Pashubh&va can fortunately gain the favour (consciousness) 1 
of Vidya (MantraghaktiV then only will he become com¬ 
petent for the Vlrabhava. Subsequently, by the grace of 
the Vlrabhava, he will attain Divyabhava (6). The best of 
men who take refuge in the Divyabhava, and the Vlrabhava 
become undoubtedly masters of desire-gratifying trees and 
creepers (7>. Sadhaka should live in some great Pltha* * as 
an Ashram! (adhering to any of the four A§hramas—namely, 
Brahmacharya, and so forth), 1 devoted to meditation, well 
versed in Mantras and Tantras, and possessed of self- 
oontrol. Such a Sadhaka will command the world of Jlvas 
by virtue of his own power (8). If, fortunately, a Sadhaka 
succeeds in attaining Bhava, Mahabhava, and so forth, it 
is not necessary for him to acquire any other fruits; for 
the moment a man attains to Bhava he knows My Tattva* 
(9). He who has attained Siddhi in Bhava very soon 
attains Siddhi in speech. Sarasvatl constantly dwells 
within him, and Lakshml lives constantly in his house as 
his Mother, forsaking even Nariiyapa 4 in Vaikuptba. 4 My 
perfect grace undoubtedly falls upon him, and then the 
Sadhaka surely attains great Siddhi. 0 Sadashivn! true, 
true is this, and indeed true (11).”In our worldly experience we constantly see that the 
more a man becomes full of Bhava for wife and children, 
the more he loses himself and becomes full of them. The 
Shakti of love of the loved one, in respect of whom such 
depth of Bhava exists, is communicated in an equal

' Author's parenthesis.

* That is, he knows the, or My, troth.

' Seat of the Devi. 
* Vid « ante.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1093' Author's parenthesis.

* That is, he knows the, or My, troth.

' Seat of the Devi. 
* Vid « ante.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1093

measure to the body, senses, and mind of the lover. 
When a lover beoomes restless and mad with such an 
intense love, then only, like one who is overpowered by 
wine, does he lose sight of the Sangs&ra, despite his living 
in it, and become free from all bonds of worldly things, 
despite that he is constantly immersed in them. He loves 
the Sangsfixa because it is necessary for his Sadhana of 
love for his beloved one. Otherwise, why is it that the 
Sangsara which a lover looks at with great endearment 
to-day pierces, as it were, his eyes like a poisoned arrow 
to-morrow if he loses his beloved one ? Why is it that one 
who loves a husband or wife, or a son or a daughter, for 
whom his or her love has reached its full intensity, im¬ 
mediately renounces the Sangsara and becomes a SannyasI, 
or attempts to end the pain of separation from the loved 
one by suioide ? The things of the Sangsara appear full 
of love to a lover because they are connected with the 
object of his love. The dresses and ornaments and even 
playthings of a husband or a wife or a son or a daughter 
who are absent become dear to us because of their con¬ 
nection with the objeots of our love; otherwise, why is 
it that parents keep with great care things belonging to 
their children who live far away from them ? Such articles 
are materials for the perfection 1 of Bhftva in the domain 
of love. The sight of even a piece of cloth worn by a 
deceased son dlls his parents with intense grief. The 
sight of a pair of shoes worn by her deceased husband 
moves a woman to tears. All these are but different 
forms of perfection 1 of Bhftva. Now, let S&dhakas consider 
what sort of a consummation* * of Bh&va there is if this love

1 Siddbi, or consummation.1 Siddbi, or consummation.

* Siddhi. That is, the wife has affection (Bb&va) for her deceased 
husband, and this is brought out and intensified to its fulness by the 
sight of articles which belonged to him. The Bh&va therefore becomes 
Siddha. ' Siddhi.

1094

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

be oentred not in wife and children, who are but, as it 
were, persons seen in a dream in this transient Sangs&ra, 
but in the beauteous feet of the Mother of the world, who 
is the centre of all love in the Brahmfl^da, full of 
love, full of Brahman, and full of bliss ? How intense 
will be the climax of the consummation 1 * * of Bh&va of 
him who has offered at the feet of the Mother all devo¬ 
tion, all love, and all affection for parents, wife, and 
children I Worldly Jlva! if the sight of a toy which belonged 
to a son or a daughter of yours can overpower you with 
Bhava and make you sometimes laugh and sometimes weep, 
just think what is it that a Sadhaka cannot do in the in¬ 
toxication of Bbava whose son’s or daughter’s 5 plaything 
is this entire Universe ? In the sphere of his Bhava there 
is no 6uch thing as Abbava (want of Bh&va).* The sight of 
everything in this world moves him to overflowing Bhava. 
In whatever direction he turns his eyes, on water, land, or 
space, he sees the robes (Amvara) of Her who is robed with 
space (Digamvari). In play the Mad Girl 4 has gone away, 
no one knows where, leaving Her garments behind. This is 
the reason why to-day the sky is full of the Mother’s robes 
and the Universe is full of the Mother's ornaments. Say, 
now, how can a Sadhaka remain unmoved on seeing this ? 
With what heart can a devotee who sees the BrahmamJa * 
form of the Brahmamayl remain unmoved ? Unceasing 
tears of love flow from his eyes in the plenitude of his tender 
feeling. It is only when perfection 1 of such perfect Bhava 
takes plaoe that one begins to directly realize the truth of 
the words of Shiva: “ The Tattva of §hiva and §hakti is the

'Siddhi. . _'Siddhi. . _

' The Devi is here called the son or daughter of the S&dhaka.

* Author's parenthesis. Ordinarily the world means simply want.

' An expression of endearment used for the Devi.

4 Universe.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1095

cause of Tattvajnfina. 1 0 Devi! Nirvfi^a can never be 
attained without knowledge of Shakti." Then only does 
the Sfidhaka see with a Divine vision: “ She exists as Tejas 1 
in vehicles, stones, and minerals. 0 Mistress of Devas! 
after this what need be said about Her presence in living 
beings ? Nothing exists where Mahfim&yfi does not exist.” 
Then only does the wave of Shiva’s song, “ Thou Kfill art 
alone the Dispenser of good Spouse of Girl$ha,* and art all 
things,” penetrate with its flow through the innermost 
recesses of his heart. Worship of the Devi’s playful* eternal 
forms is nothing but Sftdhana for this great Siddhi. When 
by virtue of Siddhi in Sfidhana, by means of the Shakti (all 
full of consciousness), of Mahfimantra, the Sfidhaka sees 
the Tattvas of the play of the Creation, Preservation, and 
Destruction of endless millions of universes shining in Her 
Fair body from Her feet to Her head, then only do the great 
portals, which are the loss of oneself in Mahfibhfiva for Her, 
open before that fortunate Sfidhaka. This is why to the 
Sfidhaka nothing is at that time so effective in awakening 
great love, drawing out the feeling of attachment, soothing 
the eyes, filling the heart with bliss, and pouring nectar 
into the inmost recesses of the heart, as the evidence of 
that vast play manifested as movements of every limb of 
the Mother in the refulgence of Her World-enchanting 
beauty. It is only when the Sfidhaka’s eyes are painted 
with the collyrium of this attachment that the refulgence of 
the beauty, resembling a mass of crushed black collyrium, of 
the Fair Spouse of Mahfikfila shines in every bank of clouds. 
The light of Her who charms the Blue-throated Deva*

1 Spiritual knowledge.1 Spiritual knowledge.

' The luminous energy of the universal consciousness.

. $ biva . * Lll&mayl.

• * Shiva NUakaptha. whose throat is blue from his having swallowed,

to save the world, the poison arising from the ocean. *

1096

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

beams through the blue throat of the peacock, and 
the endless waves of the beauty of Shyftma flow in the 
deeply blue petals of fresh and full-blown blue lotuses, and 
in the soft and bright blue beauty of Aparijita 1 flowers. 
Then it is that the S&dhaka loses himself at sight of the 
mystery of the secret play of Mahflprakj-iti, the Genitrix of 
the Universe, in even the Prak^iti* of the Universe.

Nothing is to me such an object of endearment, pride, 
affeotion and displeasure, 1 as the garments, ornaments, 
pastes for the body, and other things made glorious by the 
glory of the One at Whose feet I have resigned myself. 
At the sight and touch of these signs I remember Him and 
am filled with continuous eostasy. Their absence from the 
body of a man makes him appear to my eyes as the image 
of a Pi§h&cha,‘ and the Sangs&ra as nothing but hell in 
another form. Such signs of the region of Kaivalya,* rare 
even amongst Devas, form the only certain means where¬ 
by I may be drawn out of the sea of Sangs&ra and then 
plunged into the sea of Her existence of consciousness 
and bliss. For this reason in the Sh&stra the Guru of the 
world has Himself commanded that for the attainment 
of the state of self-loss in this Mah&bh&va such signs and 
marks should be worn on the body not merely during 
worship, but at all times. An d it is according to His 
comma n d that five different kinds of dress, forehead marks,' 
and so forth, have been ordained for the five classes 
of worshippers—namely, Shaiva, Vaislmava, Saura, Shakta, 
and Gaijapatya. These are—three lines on the forehead,'

1 A flower sacred to the Devi. ' Nature.

Abhimlua—anger which is felt at neglect by the person one

loves.1 A flower sacred to the Devi. ' Nature.

Abhimlua—anger which is felt at neglect by the person one

loves.

‘ A low spirit—as we should here say " devil." ' Liberation.

Tilaka. ' Tripup^ra—horizontal lines on the forehead.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1097

trident, ashes, matted hair, Rudr&ksha 1 beads, tiger 
skin, Damaru,* * human skull, and so forth, for Shaivas; a 
high line on the forehead,* yellow or white dress, marks 
of oonch-shell, discus, club and lotus, rosary of Tulasl/ 
dots of sandal paste on the face,* and so forth, for 
Vaishnavaa; red ciroular forehead mark, red dress, rosary 
of lotus seeds, and so forth, for Sauras;* yellow or red 
dress, three red lines on the forehead, SarpasQtra,’ Yoga- 
daji<Ja,* and so forth, for G&papatyas'; and crescent-moon¬ 
shaped mark with vermilion Kuiikuma, w red sandal and the 
rest, yantra-shaped forehead mark, dishevelled hair, red 
dress, trident, and so forth, for Sbflktas. All these are nothing 
but instances of ordinances passed in oonformity with the 
great saying, “A Deva alone should worship a Deva.” u 
Whether visibly, or in work, or in body, or in Shakti—in 
short, in every way—a S&dhaka must be full of the power 
and manifestations ° of the Devat& he worships. It is no 
wonder that such men as disparage worship and so forth 
of DevatA should regard forehead marks, three-line marks, 1 * 
ashes, red dress, Tulasl, rosaries of Rudrftksha beads,

1 The seed of a plant used in the worship of Shiva.

’ A small hand-dram.

' Crddhvapun^ra—a single vertical line on the forehead.

' Seed of the TalsI plant sacred to Vishpu.

* Goplchandana; sometimes made with the dost of Brindabnn and

other Yaishnava tirthas. * Son-worshippers.

T A thread made in the form of a serpent used as Cttariya Yastra 
(cloth).

* A staff of Yogis carried as evidence of their YogadlkshA. They 
hold it until they attain Siddhi. As Gapegha is the Garu of the Yogi 
samprad&ya (community), the Gfipapatyas carry this staff.* A staff of Yogis carried as evidence of their YogadlkshA. They 
hold it until they attain Siddhi. As Gapegha is the Garu of the Yogi 
samprad&ya (community), the Gfipapatyas carry this staff.

' Worshippers of Gapefba. “ Saffron.

" In order to aid the worshipper to become like the DevatA he 
worships, he adopts the signs of the latter. This helps him to establish 
the unity of consciousness. So in the Bahaaya Pflj& the S&dhaka 
dresses like a woman. u Vibhfiti. “ Tripup <Jra.

1098

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1098

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

and so forth, as visible marks of hypocrisy. Bat how 
regrettable is it that such as daily perform worship and 
so forth yet often think that the wearing of forehead 
marks, three-line marks, and the like, is only another form 
of accepting flowers, sandal paste, and other things offered 
to the Devata 1 ; so that it is enough to wear them as 
little as possible, and wholly unnecessary to make one¬ 
self ridiculous in the eyes of the educated community by 
deoking oneself out as a master-stripes, with the body 
smeared all over with ashes or sandal paste. Some peo¬ 
ple, again, think that religion or worship of I^hvara are 
matters of the spirit,* * and therefore there is no necessity 
for external marks. Some believe that forehead marks and 
the like are a form of advertisement, in order to tell people 
that “ I have become religious." According to another 
view, the wearing of forehead marks, rosaries, and so forth, 
is but illustration of one’s shamelessness and stupidity. 
Seeing different persons hold such different views, many 
people become, despite their faith, ashamed to wear such 
marks in the view of educated men. We may praise such 
people as become so ashamed on the score of their modesty, 
but we are astonished at the sight of the shamelessness of 
their sense of shame. Or perhaps the sense of shame 
within them is so greatly ashamed that no such shame is 
expressed without. Strange, indeed, are the religious faith 
and devotion to Devata of these who even in the matter of 
the worship of Isbtadevata become afraid or anxious 
because of what other people may think or say about them. 
Why should such shameless men, who have neither the 
strength to bear personally what others say nor to remedy 
it, talk of Siddhi and Sadhana? Or perhaps it is that

1 These are offered first to the Devata, and then accepted by the 
Sadhaka as evidence of the presence of the Devata with him.

* laterally, “ things of the inside."1 These are offered first to the Devata, and then accepted by the 
Sadhaka as evidence of the presence of the Devata with him.

* laterally, “ things of the inside."

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1099

Siddhi and Sfidhana are not their object, and therefore they 
do not perform SandhjA prayers and worship. We do not 
know how to make them understand, but we ourselves 
are anxious to discover how we can understand them. 
Why should they show such weakness? Whom are they 
so much afraid of ? We shall try first of all to understand 
who the people are who frighten them, and why they do so.There are many kinds of wild, ferocious animals which 
frown, grunt, roar, and make all manner of frightful appear¬ 
ances at the sight of meek men. Men are not among the 
oreatures on whom they can satisfy their ferocious instincts. 
Men do not in any way resemble the beasts with which 
they are in constant feud concerning home and food ; and 
yet if they ever accidentally meet a man on their path, they 
put on a frightful aspect. The buffalo’s reddened eyes, and 
terrible glances, are aimed at us, so that he may strike with 
the points of his levelled horns, and his bellowing makes 
the heart tremble. The bull’s curved neck, the horse’s 
kicking, the snake's loud hissing with expanded hood, the 
dog's howling and lashing of the tail, the monkey’s grin¬ 
ning and jumping—what do all these things mean ? Do these 
animals really want to satisfy their ferocious instinct on 
men wherever they meet them ? If so, they must have some 
interest in doing so. But what is this interest ? Whether 
we see it in a gross visible form or not, Nature’s inscrutable 
law is that there must be some interest which underlies 
and prompts action. We cannot, of course, say that this 
law explains their action as a means of satisfying their 
ferocious instinct, but this much we can say—that it is 
an effort at self-defence under the garb of ferooity. Ferocity 
is desire to kill. Among beasts, birds, insects, flies, and 
other lower animals, and even among men of their nature, 
gratification of thiB instinct to kill mostly exists where 
the killed is to be the food of the killer, or where it

1100

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1100

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

is possible that that which is to be killed would, if 
alive, have affected any interest of the killer. Where 
there is no interference with such interest, but there is 
the possibility of personal safety being in jeopardy, there 
also we may see the gratification of such instinct. The 
sight of man inspires birds, beasts, and other lower animals 
with fear for their safety. Even if man does not show 
any intention of doing harm to them, his very presence 
fills their minds with great fear. They therefore try to 
get rid of that fear by frightening him in their turn. 
This is why they leap and jump, grunt and roar, frown 
and fury at his sight. This vast Universe-Kingdom is 
ever governed by the infallible rule of Dharma. 1 Under 
this rule eaoh one is ever engaged in the performance of 
individual duty. Even the heart of the most ferocious 
ruffian, who fears neither the punishment of the King 
nor the community in whioh he lives, nor indeed anybody 
in the world, yet in the end trembles with fear of Dharma. 
Such is the incomparably great and universe-subduing 
power of Dharma that before it this entire universe, com¬ 
posed of Suras and Asuras,* of moving and unmoving 
things, ever bows its head. It is matter for no wonder 
that the rule by whioh even the world of unconscious 
things * is ever imperceptibly governed should also to-day 
govern the educated community. If one man is afraid 
of another, the sight of any sign of the latter naturally 
rouses terror in his mind. He who is a constant server of 
Dharma is pleased by the thought thereof, and is never 
frightened. But he who is certain in his mind, whether 
he admits it to others or not, that he is a sinner against 
Dharma, becomes naturally afraid at the sight of marks 
of Dharma in another. The cause of this fear is the

1 tiaw.

1 Devas and their enemies.

' Jatfa.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

11011 tiaw.

1 Devas and their enemies.

' Jatfa.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1101

thought, “What will be my fate?” Again, such people 
think : " One of my race and form, with hands and feet—a 
man suoh as I am—is about to leave me far behind, and 
to become a traveller on the eternal fear-dispelling path.” 
Jealousy and malice, prompted by this thought, then 
overpower that fear and reveal themselves. The weak 
heart of the unrighteous man then loses all self-control, 
and, knowing he is in the wrong, and yet not having the 
strength to set himself right, thinks himself blessed by 
the service of jealousy and malice. Everyone in the 
Sangs&ra is not unrighteous, whether he is able to serve 
Dharma fully or not. On the contrary, Society and 
Sangsfira are full of men who are truly sorry at their 
inability to duly serve Dharma. In the present state of 
society it is difficult to find among one hundred men even 
ten who duly carry out their religious duties. 1 I may 
not be able to observe these praotioes myself, but if I 
see anyone doing so, as the Shastra enjoins, I respect 
and honour him, while if I find anyone who is, like 
myself, devoid of such practices, I hate him with all my 
heart, as I hate nobody else. In this way practising men * * 
who wear the sacred orown, lock, 1 and thread, 4 fore¬ 
head marks,* carry rosaries, and so forth, rightly occupy 
a high position in sooiety. The arrogant class, devoid of 
such practices, should fall low, and are, as a matter of 
fact, doing so. The true man of practice never, even

1 That is, religious practices, the saying of their prayers, etc.

’ As we say, 11 Catholique pratiquant.”

* A long lock of hair on the top of the head left when the rest is 
shaved or cut. This is as it were the Flagstaff before the royal palace. 
For here in the Brahmarandbra is the abode of the Supreme.

* A cotton thread, with tbreo strands worn slanting across the* A cotton thread, with tbreo strands worn slanting across the

chest, The three strands are KAyadapd®. Vftgdaq^a, and Manodanda— 
that is, controllers of body, speech, and mind. The thread speaks to 
the wearer of the necessity of these. They are also emblematic of the 
three Gui?«. Tilaka (see ante).

1102

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

in his dreams, thinks that his honour and glory should be 
widespread in Society; but the universe-enchanting great 
Shakti of Dharma appears of itself in the body of a 
religious man, and overpowers by its force even beasts 
and birds, not to speak of men and women. Men and 
women bow at his feet of their own accord, and show him 
honour and respect. At the sight of this honour and 
respect the eyes of self-willed men, devoid of good prac¬ 
tice are pierced as if by an arrow. But while, on the 
one hand, Nature's rules cannot be thwarted, on the 
other men of beastly nature cannot bear the sight. It 
is then that, finding no other available means, the com¬ 
munity of self-willed men, proud of their education, 
begins to vituperate, rail at, and ridioule the religious 
man’s forehead marks, rosaries, dress, and so forth. The 
objeot of this railing and vituperation is not really to 
blame Dharma or the marks of Dharma, nor to establish 
their uselessness; what is really unbearable to these 
people is that another person like themselves should 
be honoured in the Sangsfira as a religious man. They 
therefore endeavour to destroy the honour which he 
receives, and to prove his worthlessness by speaking ill 
of Dharma or marks of Dharma. If for fear of banter 
and ridicule a religious man gives up wearing marks of 
Dharma, or, though he does not abandon them, people con¬ 
sider him worthless, then in either case the purpose of the 
railers is served ; for theirs is the victory if “ all brothers ” 
become “ equal.” They are saved from all fear if no one 
by any sign or acts reminds them of Dharma in any way.Now, I ask you, O Sadhaka! do you wish to abandon 
that at whioh you aim in Sadhana out of fear of these great 
heroes ? Do you really count as men the cowards who lick 
the feet of beastly propensities and manifest their meanness 
at every step ? If a beast were to threaten you, would you,

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1103

out of fear, give up the wearing of dresses that befit a 
man ? The difference between a man and a beast is the 
same as that between a Sftdbaka and a man who is devoted 
to the Sangs&ra. It is out of consideration for your human 
state that the Shastra has given you the privilege of as¬ 
cending to the high step of Devahood. If to-day you spurn 
the good fortune which is within the reach of your hand, 
and become a beast in imitation of beasts, then why all this 
trouble to attain that human birth which is rare even for 
Devas ? Why this downfall after receiving initiation in the 
Mantra of the supreme Devata ? Why, being a son of the 
Queen of Queens, do you roam about forests in the company 
of beasts ? True it is that you are afraid of beasts; but 
consider what we have said, and say whether it is really 
you who are afraid of beasts, or the beasts who are sfraid 
of you ? Everyone knows that AkrQra was afraid of 
Kangsa;' but think just for once whether it was really 
Akrura who was afraid of Kangsa, or Kangsa who was 
afraid of AkrQra. It is true that the wearing of forehead 
marks, rosaries, religious dresses, and so forth, by AkrQra 
was insufferable to Kangsa, but what answer would you 
give to the question, Why were they insufferable to him ? 
Had not the daughter' of the King of mountains,* * the sister 
of AcbyQta, 4 declared (as daughter of Nanda, 4 dashed to the

1 Kangsa was King of Mathurfi in the days of the P&pijlnvag. and 
Kyishpa'B ancle. He sought to kill Krishna, bat was slain by the latter. 
AkrQra was his relative, but a very pious man.

' Pfirvatl. * Him&laya. ' Visbpu.' Pfirvatl. * Him&laya. ' Visbpu.

* The Devi Mah&m&yft was born as the daughter of Nanda. She was 
born at Brindabun on the same day as Krishna was born at Mathurft. 
V&sudeva, Krishna's father, took Kyishna to Nanda’s bouse, and chang¬ 
ed him for Nanda's daughter, whilst the household of Nanda was made 
subject to the Devi's mftyft. Vftsudeva made over the daughter to 
Kangsa. who tried to slay her by throwing her on a stone ; but she, 
assuming a heavenly body, went to heaven, and by this exchange the 
life of Krishna was saved from Kangsa, who was led to this action 
because he had learned that a son of his sister would kill him.

1104

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1104

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

ground by the hand of Kangsa) that the son of DevakI, * 1 
who was black a9 a cloud, had descended in the house of 
Nanda in Gokula as death in order to hurl on the head of 
Kangsa the fatal thunderbolt ? Had not Bhagavftn, appear¬ 
ing as a herds-boy,' holding the rod of death, been constant¬ 
ly before the eyes of Kangsa, would the latter have fainted 
out of fear of K&la (death) at the mere mention of Kftla 
(blackness) ? In that case would the terrible order of 
Kangsa * for the oppression of Devas and Br&bma^as and 
the killing of infants been proclaimed in Mathura ? Would 
he have suddenly, looking like a madman, left his throne 
and rushed out, crying: “ Kill 1 kill I ” ? Hence I say, 
think for once whether the frightful appearance which 
Kangsa used to display to Bhagavan and the devotees 
of Bhagavan was intended really to frighten Bhagavan, 
or to save himself from fear of Bhagavan. The Asura * 
knew and yet knew not the Bhagavan,* so that in terror 
befitting an Asura he tried to save himself from his hand. 
Kangsa was an enemy of Bhagavan. Consequently, devotees 
to Bhagavan also became objects of his enmity, for a 
devotee’s body, senses, mind, and heart are marked and 
ornamented with signs of devotion to Bhagavan. The 
sight of these marks used to make the Asura’s heart 
tremble with fear. But did the sight of this fear of Kangsa 
frighten Akrflra, the crest-gem of devotees? In order to 
remove all causes for fear, either from men, Kangsa, or 
existence itself, AkrQra brought Bhagavan, who is the fear 
of fear itself, from Brindaban to the residence of Kangsa,

' Krishna. * Gopa.

' The incident is similar to that of Herod's order of the slaying of 
the innocents.

1 Kangsa was an Asura in human guise.

’ He was in the state of knowing that Krishpa was Bhagavan, but 
could not act on that knowledge.

F

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP 11051 Kangsa was an Asura in human guise.

’ He was in the state of knowing that Krishpa was Bhagavan, but 
could not act on that knowledge.

F

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP 1105

and thus provided the means of freeing Kangsa from all 
fears in this and the next world. 1 Had Akrara been really 
afraid of Kangsa, and had there been any malice against 
Kangsa at the root of this fear on the part of Akrara, 
would he have brought the Friend of the World* * from 
Brindaban to Mathura, and thus performed an act of 
eternal friendship to Kangsa, both here and hereafter ? * 
Kangsa may have entertained malicious feelings against 
forehead marks and rosaries and the name of Krishna, but 
it was because there was at Mathura a person 4 who had 
incurred his displeasure by wearing those marks and 
rosaries, and taking the name of Krishna, that, notwith¬ 
standing that he was Asura, he attained a state rare even 
to Devas.* Hence I say, O Sadhaka! if in the ordinary 
worldly way you look at the community of A suras hostile 
to marks of Dharma, considering them to be objeots of 
enmity, you cannot subdue this feeling of yours towards 
them by ceasing to wear forehead marks and rosaries. If, 
on the other hand, by the grace of Bhagav&n, you have the 
power to do them meroy, then also you will be able to do so 
through the influence of forehead marks and rosaries, and 
in no other way.

Sadhakas will doubtless fully understand from all that 
we have said so far that forehead marks, three lines, and 
other signs of Dharma which the ShAstra ordains to be 
worn by Sadhakas on different parts of their bodies, are 
the chief materials for the attainment* of the state in which 
they are merged in Mahabhava. The wearing or non¬ 
wearing of these outer marks may not matter to the great1 Akrura took Krishna to Brindaban so that He might slay Kangsa 
and thereby save him who had done a Sfldhana of Kj-ishna as his 
enemy. For though opposed to Krishna, Kangsa yet had always his 
mind on him. ' Krishna.

* For Akrara, by getting him slain, was the cause of his being 
saved. * Akrara. • 8iddhi.

70

1106

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

man who has sunk in the depths of Bhftva, but the non¬ 
wearing of them by people whose minds have not been 
matured in Sadhana, or who are about to enter upon its 
path, is undoubtedly the sole obstacle which prevents the 
opening of the door of Mahabhftva for their incoming. It 
is the mature state of this Bh&va which is called the state 
of merger in the object of worship—that is to say, self-for¬ 
getfulness at the sight cf the manifestation of the Self 1 
of the worshipped Devata in one’s mind, heart, body, and 
Atma, and in all the things of this visible Universe. The 
sole cause of the attainment of Siddhi in this state of 
absorption is Mantrashakti.* * Materials of worship, and so 
forth, are all means whereby we may directly realize this 
Mantrasjbakti. Sadhakas acquainted with the principles 
relating to worship of oourse know how perfection of the 
state of merger in Bbava appears in the person of a Sadbaka 
through the influence of Mantrashakti. Nevertheless, 
in order to give some knowledge to those who are eager 
to perform Sadhana, we are here bound to shortly in¬ 
dicate the lines along which the system works.

Entrance into the House of Worship

In the fifth Patala of the Annada Kalpa it is said: 
“ Next (after bathing and wearing of forehead marks, and 
so forth) 3 the Sadhaka should place Samanya Arghya* 
in front of the door of the house in which Ishtadevata is 
worshipped.”

* Svarfipavibh&ti.

* §hakti as Mantra. ' Author’s parenthesis.

* That is. the general and ordinary offering as opposed to the 
Vighesha arghya or special offering.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1107

i* Svarfipavibh&ti.

* §hakti as Mantra. ' Author’s parenthesis.

* That is. the general and ordinary offering as opposed to the 
Vighesha arghya or special offering.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1107

i

In the eighth Patala of the Kamalfi Tantra it is said :

A Sfidhaka should enter the house of Yajna 1 after first 
worshipping the Door-devata* * at the door with a handful* 
of flowers."

In the fourteenth Patala of the Nigamakalpalata it is 
said: “A Sadhaka should worship the Door-devata * with 
devotion first at the eastern door of the house of worship, 
next at its southern door, then at its western door, and 
lastly at its northern door, and then worship his Ishta- 
devata inside the Yantra.” *

In the Gandharva Tantra it is said : “ If the Sadhaka is 
unable to construct a house with four doors or perform 
worship at four doors, he should at one door mentally 
imagine there are four, and there worship the Devata of 
the four doors."

In the Shivarchanaehandrikfi it is said : “ A house of 
Yajna should be entered with the right foot."

In the Meru Tantra it is said: “ A Devata’s house should 
be entered by advancing the right foot first."

In the third Patala of the Samraohana Tantra it is 
said : “ Walking with great care,* a Sfidhaka should enter a 
house of worship with the right foot first."

In the eighth Chapter of the Gautama Tantra it is said: 
“Driving away spirits* and meditating on Yishpu in his 
heart a Sfidhaka should enter into a house of Sfidhana 
with his right foot first and with his head bowed."

1 Literally, sacrifice; here worship in general.

’ The Dv&radevat&—that is, the Devata presiding over the entry. 
' Anjali; offered in the palms of the hands joined together.

* 8ee Introduction.

' The limbs are, out of devotion, kept as close together as possible ; 
there must be no strutting or striding into the place of worship.

*BhQta«.

1108

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* 8ee Introduction.

' The limbs are, out of devotion, kept as close together as possible ; 
there must be no strutting or striding into the place of worship.

*BhQta«.

1108

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In another Tantra it is said: “ A S&dhaka should enter 
a house of worship meditating on the lotus-feet of the 
Devi in his heart, with his left 1 foot first and touching the 
door slightly with his left side; that is to say, leaning 
towards the right side of the door, which is the left side 
of the S&dhaka, instead of passing just through its 
middle.”

In the Tripurftrnava it is said: “ One should enter a 
house of Yajna by advancing the left foot first."

Removal of Obstacles

In the Sb&mbbavl Tantra it is said: “ Next (after 
entering into the house),* the S&dhaka should remove divine* 
obstacles by means of his divine sight,* obstacles in the 
midmost spaces of the sky* by means of water sanctified* 
with the Astra Mantra,* and terrestrial obstacles by three 
taps with the heel of his foot."

In the third Patala of the Sammohana Tantra it is 
said: On entering into the house a good S&dhaka should 
look at the articles for worship and next dispel divine 
obstacles by his divine look, obstacles in the middle spaces 
of the sky by means of water sanctified * with the Astra 
Mantra,* and terrestrial obstacles by three taps on the earth 
with the heel of his foot.”

1 The apparent contradiction is explained post.

1 Author's parenthesis. This is, the room in which worship is to be 
performed.

' Divya. That is. proceeding from Devos. Devayoni, and the spirits.

* Divyadrishti. This steady vision fas to which, see post), is acquired 
by the Hatha Yoga process known as Tr&taka.

* Antarlksha.

' Abhimantrita. That is, on which a Mantra has been put, or which 
has (to coin a word) been Mantra-ized.

’ That is, the “ weapon Mantra " " Phat," which is always used for 
such and similar purposes.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1109’ That is, the “ weapon Mantra " " Phat," which is always used for 
such and similar purposes.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1109

The eighth Pafala of the Gandharva Tantra deals with 
divine vision, and says: “ A S&dhaka will become of good 
mind by looking with an angry look.”

In the second Pafcala of the Vi§hvas&ra Tantra it is 
said “ Divine look 1 is the name given to that steady gaze 
in which there is no twinkling of the eye.”

In the fifth Prak4§ha of the Meru Tantra it is said: 
“ Divine obstacles should be removed by looking obliquely.” * *

Taking these dicta together, we can arrive at the con¬ 
clusion that “ divine look ” is the name for an angry, 
oblique look, without twinkling of the eye.

In the Kalikul&mj-ita Tantra it is said : “ Terrestrial 
obstacles should be removed by three taps with the heel 
of the left foot.”

In Soma§hambhu, quoted by R&ghava Bhatta, * it is 
said: “ Terrestrial obstacles should be removed by three 
taps with the heel of the right foot.”

The two contradictory diota are reconciled in the 
following way: whether in entering the room or stamping 
with the heel, worshippers of Devas should extend the right 
foot first and tap with the heel of the right foot. Wor¬ 
shippers of Devls 4 should extend the left foot first and tap 
with the heel of the left foot.

In the Tantras&ra it is said: 44 After first removing the 
obstacles a S&dhaka should next assume the proper sitting

‘ Divya-dfish;L

' That is, oat of the corners of the eyes.

* The great T&ntrik commentator on the Sb&rad&tilaka.

* The Devi's position is on the left side of the Devatfi, and in the 
Chakra the §hakti« sit on the left of the respective S&dhakas in the 
circle which surrounds the Chakresbvara. Woman generally is the 
left and man the right side.

1110 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

posture, 1 or he may remove the obstaoles on taking his 
seat.”

Seat 41110 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

posture, 1 or he may remove the obstaoles on taking his 
seat.”

Seat 4

In the seventh Patala of the Gandharva Tantra it is 
said : “ Next, the S&dhaka should take a seat neither low 
nor too high. He should never use a seat or an Arghya 
vessel’ whioh is broken.

“ On a seat made of the skin of black deer a S&dhaka 
attains liberation, and on a seat made of tiger skin a 
S&dhaka attains both wealth and liberation. In a rite 
done to attain some desire a woollen seat * is the best—a 
red woollen seat being particularly suited for the attain¬ 
ment of the desired objeot. A seat of Ku§ha grass leads 
to attainment of Siddhi in Mantra, and in rites under¬ 
taken for the purpose of killing’s black woollen seat, and 
in the worship of Trip liras undarl a red wollen seat is the 
best seat. A seat for use in worship must not be more 
than two cubits in length, one and a half oubits in breadth, 
and three fingers in thickness. As regards the seat of 
deer skin and tiger skin which grant Siddhi, as spoken 
above, a S&dhaka may use them in any way he pleases, 
for there is no rule which limits their dimensions. A 
householder, even if he be initiated, should never sit on 
a skin of a black deer (in the Yoginihjidaya it is said that 
Yatis, those belonging to the V&naprastha Ashrama, 
Brahmacharls, and Bihkshus, alone are competent to ait 
on the skin of a black deer).* Earthen seats cause sorrow,

Asana. There are a great number of these (see Introduction), 
but the ordinary position for worshippers is " the loosened lotus seat" 
MuktapadmAsana. 'For offering.

' Kambala. * MArapa.

„ Author's parenthesis. The first and last are ascetics ; literally 
those who have controlled their passions " and religious mendicants, 
ihe second and third are members of the Ashram as of those names.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1111CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1111

and wooden seats bring ill-luck. Seats of the wood of 
mango, Nirava, 1 and Kadamva* trees in particular, bring 
destruction of family. Seats of the wood of Yakula, 
Kingshuka, and Jack-fruit trees, cause loss of all property. 
Seats made of bamboo, briok, wood, earth, grass, and 
twigs, are the cause of poverty, disease, and sorrow. 
Henoe, S&dhakas should never use suoh seats. Nor should 
they use seats out by weapons, worn out, broken, un¬ 
clean, belonging to other persons, or unwashed. Among 
wooden seats, those made of G&mbh&rl wood alone are 
good, all others being inauspicious. In performing wor¬ 
ship a S&dhaka should not take a seat without dis¬ 
crimination. Seats of wood and other materials also 
should be of the dimensions prescribed in the Sh&stra. 
Wooden seats should be twenty-four fingers long, sixteen 
fingers broad, and four fingers high. If both eartbern and 
cloth seats are used together * (from this it appears that 
in the absence of all other kinds of seat earthern scats also 
may be used),* and if wooden and woollen seats are used 
together, S&dhakas not only fail to acquire future religious 
merit,' but also lose all merits acquired in the past. Con¬ 
sidering all this, a S&dhaka should secure as best a seat as 
he can for his use."

In the Hangsa-Mahe?hvara it is said: “ If a S&dhaka 
sits on hair, all his religious merits' are destroyed. The 
very touch of hair instantly spoils Siddhi. A S&dhaka 
should therefore, make his seat of skin denuded of hair."

In the K&lik& Pur&ua it is said : “ One should never use 
seats made of iron, or brass, or lead. In worship it is best 
for a S&dhaka to use a seat of stone, or gems,' or precious

' Neera-tree. ' Kauelea Cadamba.

' That is, if one is spread over the other.

' Author's parenthesis. ' Puijya. “ * Mapi.

1112

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' Neera-tree. ' Kauelea Cadamba.

' That is, if one is spread over the other.

' Author's parenthesis. ' Puijya. “ * Mapi.

1112

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

metals. 1 Worship of Devat&s, even when the S&dhaka is 
in water, should be done when seated on seats, and not in 
a standing posture. In water, seats of stone, Ku§ha grass, 
wood, or metals should be used, and of no other material. 
In the absence of a seat of any of these kinds, one should 
imagine such a seat in the water itself; consecrate it as a 
seat, and then worship the DevatA in the water.”

In the K&madhenu Tantra it is said: “All the Japa, 
worship, and so forth, become fruitless of him who spreads 
a seat in a Tirtha, and performs Japa and so forth sitting 
on it. The statement that the hardness of earth is due to 
the mass of the fat of MahishAsura’s body* * (and is, con¬ 
sequently, unclean),* applies to places other than Tlrthas. 
(Fat of the body of Mahish&sura is most probably a 
olerical error for fat of the bodies of Madhu and Kaitabha, 
or it may have been the fat of Mahish&sure in some other 
Kalpa.) *

In the thirty-first Patala of the same Tantra it is said: 
“A good SAdhaka should never sit on seats in Siddha, 
Plfhaa, and Tlrth&s.* If he does, he will not only reap no 
fruit for having visited such Tlrthas, but will suffer the 
consequence of desertion of Tlrthas.”

“ A seat is called Asana for giving Atmasiddhi (A) 
(Siddhi of the self); preventing Sarvaroga (Sa) (all diseases), 
and giving Navasiddhi (Na) (fresh Siddhi).”

In the Goraksha SanghitA it is said: “ Seated postures 
are as many in number as Jlvas and animals. For every 
one of the eighty-four lakhs* of Jlvas a separate seated

' Batna. Magi and Ratna are generally need synonymously. Batna 
may also mean here precious stones.

1 An Asara slain by the Devi. ' Author'6 parenthesis.

All the Devlpi;h&s and Pithaa, where great S&dhakaa have at¬ 
tained Siddhi and other places of pilgrimage.

* A lakh-100.000.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIPAll the Devlpi;h&s and Pithaa, where great S&dhakaa have at¬ 
tained Siddhi and other places of pilgrimage.

* A lakh-100.000.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1118

posttire has been spoken of. Mahe?hvara alone is aware of 
the particulars of all these postures. Of the aforesaid 
eighty-four lakhs of seated postures, two are the best— 
namely, the Siddha seat (Siddh&sana) first and the lotus 
seat (Kamalasana) next. (As these seats are not used in 
worship and such other rites, we desist from dwelling on 
their characteristic peculiarities here.) 1 ”

R&gbava Bhatta says: “Japa, worship, and so forth, 
should be performed sitting in postures, such as Padma, 
Svastika, Vlra, and so forth,' otherwise they will be in¬ 
effectual.”

In another Tantra quoted by R&ghava Bhatta it is 
said: “ Place the left foot on the right and the right foot 
on the left, gird up the loins and heels, and fix the gaze at 
the tip of the nose. To sit in this way is the Padma seat, 
adored of all S&dhakas (1).”

In the eighth Chapter of the Gautamlya it is said: 
u The two feet should be placed well on the two thighs. 
This is the Padma seat, beloved of Yogis.”

In the second Pafcala of the Sammohana Tantra it is 
said: “ A Yogi should sit with a straight back, crossing 
his feet. 1 This is called Svastika seat (2)."

“ A Yogi should sit with a straight back, keeping one 
of his feet on the ground and placing his other foot on the 
thigh of that foot. This is oalled Vlra seat.” Although 
the Shastrik authority does not say which foot should be 
on the ground, it has been the praotice among successive 
generations of adepts' to keep the left foot down and plaoe 
the right foot on the left thigh (3).

1 Author's parenthesis; but as to the lotus seat, see next passage.

’ These are described post.

* Literally. " putting his feet within the folds of his knees."

* Ach&ryyas.

1114

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA’ These are described post.

* Literally. " putting his feet within the folds of his knees."

* Ach&ryyas.

1114

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In the third Patala of the Sammohana Tantra it is 
said: “ 0 Devi! a S&dhaka should sit on the prescribed 
seat, * 1 arranging his limbs in any of these forms of sitting 
posture. At the time of worshipping a Devatfl, it is not 
proper to place one’s feet in any other way.”

In the YoginI Tantra it is said: “ Plaoing a seat 1 on 
the ground a S&dhaka should sit on it, adopting the 
Svastika or some other form of sitting posture, and cover¬ 
ing his feet with his cloth.”

Rules Relating to Direction in Worship 1

In the Y&mala it is said: “ The space between the 
worshipped (DevatA) and the worshipper (S&dhaka) should 
be on the east. The right side of the S&dhaka should be 
the south, the left side north, and the back west. In every 
case these directions should be adopted in performing 
worship.” That is to say, although the directions are 
fixed according to the rising and the setting sun, the 
direction which the S&dhaka faces in performing worship 
is the east. For there is no such thing as an absolute 
direction in the world, all directions being relative to the 
positions of the individual. The term “ direction ” itself 
proves this sufficiently. “ That which is merely direoted 
or pointed out is called direction." For instance, that 
whioh I call my east will be directed or pointed out as 
west by a person who is to the east of me. Hence it is 
quite plain that direction exists in respeot of an individ¬ 
ual and not absolutely. But, blinded by the vanity of 
philosophic wisdom, some people do not Bee this derivative

. . . t . *

1 Material seat spoken of before. Asana is used in the twofold 
signification of the actual thing on which a S&dhaka sits and the 
posture in which he sits.

’ Dik-nirijaya.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

11151 Material seat spoken of before. Asana is used in the twofold 
signification of the actual thing on which a S&dhaka sits and the 
posture in which he sits.

’ Dik-nirijaya.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1115

meaning of direction, but speak of the existence of abso¬ 
lute directions. Essentially, however, there is no suoh 
thing as direction; but whatever direction is pointed out 
at any time is direction at that time. If directions are 
fixed according to the rising and setting of the sun, they 
are the same for all people, and the pointing out of a 
direction by one person settles it for all.

For the reasons given above, the ShfLstra has said in 
the Bhavachu$LmaaI: “ 0 Devi! according to the desire of 
a S&dhaka the Devatft appears in all directions (for Her 
who is Omnipresent it is impossible that there should be 
either front or baok). Still, one should perform a wor¬ 
ship 1 and other ritual acts at night, facing the north.* * In 
worshipping Shiva in particular, one should always take 
care to face the north, whether during day or in the night. 
As regards worship and so forth relating to Vishnu, it 
is best to face the east, though it is not improper to 
face the north. As regards Shakti, it is best to face the 
north, although it will not be out of order if the S&dbaka 
faceB the east."

In the Vfi.r&hiya it is said: “ Having bathed, one should 
sit for worship, clad in white, having duly done Achamana 1 
and faoing east."

In the Gautamlya it is said : “ A Sfldhaka with well- 
controlled Atmft should sit on the prescribed seat facing 
the east.

“ Bathed, clad in dean, fine, and unsoiled cloth, with 
face, hands, and feet washed, with forehead brightened

1 Literally, " Divine work."

* This actual north will be the ritual east.

’ Bitual sipping of water for the purpose of cleansing the lips, 
mouth, and throat

1116

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Literally, " Divine work."

* This actual north will be the ritual east.

’ Bitual sipping of water for the purpose of cleansing the lips, 
mouth, and throat

1116

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

by a high white line, 1 having duly done Achamana ;* * 
having performed the sacred hand-mudra ;* facing the east, 
properly seated in the Baddbapadmfisana* or Svastika pos¬ 
ture—thus should a Sadhaka worship with joined palms 
his Gurus and Gane§ha.”

In Haribhaktivilfisa it is said: “ A worshipper of 
Shrikrishga should generally sit facing the east during 
day, and in the night a Sadhaka, with composed coun¬ 
tenance, should perform worship and so forth, facing the 
north.

“ Worship and so forth should be performed sitting, 
facing the north or east in front of the image of Devata.” 
That is to say, if the established Devata' is facing the 
west, the Sadhaka should face the east, and if the Devata 
is facing the south, the Sadhaka should face the north.

In the Kfil ikft Purfiija it is said: “ Of all the quarters 
the north pleases the Spouse of Shiva. A Sadhaka should, 
therefore, always sit facing the north in the worship of 
Cha^dika.”

In the ShfiktfinandataranginI it is said: “ Worship of 
Devas should be performed facing the east during the day 
and facing the north in the night, but worship of the Devi 
and worship of Shiva should always be performed facing 
the north.”

Time for Worship

In the twenty-eighth Pafcalaof the Gandharva Tantra 
it is said : “ After receiving initiation from Guru in accord¬ 
ance with the injunctions a good Sadhaka should daily 
worship the Devi in the morning with undivided heart.”

1 UrddhvapuijiJra. 1 Cleansing the lips and throat.

* Kara-mudrft. * See Introduction.

' Pratish;hita Devata ; that is, the permanently fixed Devata.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

11171 UrddhvapuijiJra. 1 Cleansing the lips and throat.

* Kara-mudrft. * See Introduction.

' Pratish;hita Devata ; that is, the permanently fixed Devata.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1117

In the second Pa* *ala of the YoginI Tantra it is said: 
“ He who desires to reap a full crop of fruits from his 
rites should begin them in the morning and finish them 
all by noon.”

In the eleventh Patala of the NigamakalpalatS it is 
said: “ The daily worship should be begun after the pass¬ 
ing of the half of the first Prahara 1 and finished at the end 
of ten Dajjdas.* If Japa and so forth are performed in the 
morning, it is not improper to perform worship at noon.”

In the third Ull&sa of the Mabanirvftija Tantra it is 
said: “ The duties of the morning' should be performed 
in the morning, Sandbya prayers should be said at the 
three divisions of the day, 4 and worship of Ishtadevatft 
should be performed at noon. This is the general rule 
for the initiated in all Mantras.”

Place for Worship

In the seventh Patala of the Gandharva Tantra it is 
said: “It is prohibited to worship Devata and so forth 
in a place which is unclean with hair, insects, and the like, 
cold, very low, very high, jungly, very windy, infested 
with other animals, covered with dust or mud, where 
beasts are near by,* treeless, at a distance from water, 
open on all sides, 4 or unpleasant to the worshipper/ 
Worship should not be performed in even a holy place if 
its soil is saline or infested with insects.” The above is

* The first three hoars of the day. * Four hours after daybreak.

* Pr&tahkritya. * The junctions at morn, noon and even.

* Pashubhirnavilokita. That is. -worship should be done in a rlace 
which cannot be approached by beasts.

' AnftvyitachaturdikBhu.

1 All such circumstances distract from the necessary tronQuility 
of mind.

1118

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' AnftvyitachaturdikBhu.

1 All such circumstances distract from the necessary tronQuility 
of mind.

1118

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

an account of places, the use of which for Yajna is pro¬ 
hibited. Below is given an account of places which are 
recommended for use in Yajna:

“ 0 MahfidevI 1 a place for the performance of Yajna 
by a Sfidhaka should possess the following characteristics: 
It should be near to a tank or well, in a garden of flowers, 
having a beautiful temple* on it, with a clean altar! 
furnished with articles for drinking and eating, perfumed 
with camphor, sandal, incense, and so forth; bright red 
like the rays of the morning sun, pleasant, delightful to 
the mind, containing all the weapons of Devatfi and a 
well-furnished inner house.*

" The be 8t places are holy grounds,* river-sides, caves, 
Tlrthas, summits of mountains, confluences of rivers, holy 
forests, solitary gardens, at the foot of bael-trees, valleys, 
places overgrown with TulasI plants, pasture lands, 
temples of Shiva without a bull, at the foot of A$hvattha,‘ 
Amalaki trees, cowsheds, islands, temples, seashore, one's 
own house, the abode of Guru, places which naturally 
tend to generate single pointedness of mind, places free 
of animals and solitary. If a Sfidhaka performs worship 
in solitude at any place, the Devi Herself accepts the 
leaves, flowers, fruits, and water offered by him. If the 
Sfidhaka has sufficient reverence and devotion, if there 
are sufficient articles for worship, and if the worship is 
performed in solitude, the Mother of the world who is 
attached to Her devotees appears of Her own will at suoh 
a place.”

1 Mandapa,

’ Grib&ntara.

’ Yagabhtimi; where worship is done. 
'PipuL

Emblic Myrobalan.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP 1119

Worship of Shiva1 Mandapa,

’ Grib&ntara.

’ Yagabhtimi; where worship is done. 
'PipuL

Emblic Myrobalan.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP 1119

Worship of Shiva

In the fifth Patala of the To<?ala Tantra it is said: “ A 
Sadhaka, be he a Shaiva, or a Yaishpava, or a Sh&kta, or a 
Saura, or a Gaijapatya, * 1 should worship first Shiva and 
then other Devatfts. If a person worships another Devatft 
after having first worshipped Shiva, the fruits of that 
worship are truly increased a crorefold.* If, however, 
he first worships another Devatft and then worships Shiva, 
all the fruits of that worship are devoured by Yakshas 
and Rftkshasas.”\

Shiva’s words in the sixty-fourth Patala of the Utpatti 
Tantra are as follows: “ How can a Sbftkta, 1 or a Vaish- 
ijava, 1 a Shaiva, 1 or a Gftijapatya, 1 attain Siddhi if he does 
not worship Shiva? 0 Devi! if a person worships another 
Devata without first worshipping Me, that worshipped 
Devata does not accept his worship, but returns to Her 
own seat, having cursed him. 0 Devi 1 O Mahe$hvarl! * 
whatever in the way of flowers, Naivedya * and so forth, 
from even a mountain heap of sweetmeats duly arranged, 
fruits and all sorts of flowers gathered as prescribed, and 
of all kinds of food heaped as high as Mount Sumeru, and 
quantities of curry and so forth as great as great seas, are 
offered without first worshipping Shiva, will be unaccept¬ 
able as excrements. In the Kali age, whoever worships 
another Devatft without first worshipping Shiva is guilty 
of a great sin.”

In the first Patala of the Lifigftrchchana Tantra it is 
said: “ O Parame$hvarl! every one, be he a Sh&kta,

1 Worshippers of 9hiva, Viahpu, Devi, the Sun, and Gape?ha.

1 Ten millions. * Evil spirits.

' The Devi as great Lord of the Universe. ' Offerings of food.

1120

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Worshippers of 9hiva, Viahpu, Devi, the Sun, and Gape?ha.

1 Ten millions. * Evil spirits.

' The Devi as great Lord of the Universe. ' Offerings of food.

1120

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Vaishnava, or Shaiva, should first worship Shiva with 
bael-leaves, then pray for His permission to worship other 
Devatas, and afterwards worship them. Otherwise, Ma- 
he^hvarl! without worship of Shiva everything will be as 
unacceptable as excrements. 0 Parame$hvarl! 1 so long 
as one lives on earth, one should daily worship Shivalifiga, 1 
which is Brahman with supreme devotion."

In the twelfth Patala of the Matyikabheda Tantra it is 
said : “ The Devatas who are within this Universe, as well 
as those who are without it, are all gratified if only Shiva 
is worshipped."

In the Mahalinge?hvara Tantra it is said : “ A Sadhaka, 
whoever he may be, belonging to the three worlds will 
suffer a painful death if he worships Kali, Tara, and 
Tripurasundar! * * without worshipping earthen Shivalifiga."

In the Tripura Kalpa it is said: “ So long as a bad 
Sadhaka does not worship Shivalifiga, neither Tripura* 
Bundarl nor Tara nor Kali accept his worship.”

“ Mabfividyam pfijayitva 
Shivaptljfim samacharet 
Anyathfikaranat devl 
Na pQjaphalamapnuyat." 4

In the Meru Tantra it is said: “ All Brfihmanas, Ksha- 
triyas, Vai?hyas, Shadras, and Anuloma ‘ half-castes, should 
ever worship Shivalifiga with care and with Mantras special 
to its worship."

1 See note 4, ante.

• The phallic form of Shiva. * Forme of the Devi.

‘ No translation of this Sanskrit verse is given in the original, 
which in English runs: Worship of Shiva should be performed after 
worshipping Mali&vidyft ; otherwise. O Devi! the fruits of worship will 
not be reaped."

* Born of father of higher caste and mother of lower caste.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1121* Born of father of higher caste and mother of lower caste.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1121

In the Y&jnavalkya Sanghita it i9 said: “By worship¬ 
ping a single Y&ijalifiga * 1 * a ruan reaps the fruits of wor¬ 
shipping ten million other Lifig&s. Constructing an altar 
(Gaurtpltha)* with copper, crystal, gold, stone, or silver, 
one should establish a Ya^alifiga on the Pltha 3 and then 
worship it. Even liberation, not to speak of worldly gain, 
comes within the grasp of him who worships Y&^ialifiga 
daily with devotion."

In the Vlramitrodaya it is said: “A householder 
should not worship a V&nalifiga which iB very small, or 
very large, or brown. A Y&nalifiga shining and deeply 
dark like a black bee is the best for worship by a house¬ 
holder. A V&ijalifiga, whether it is with Pltha (Gaurlpltba) 4 
or without Pltha, should be worshipped even without 
purification or so forth by means of Mantras. Every 
V&naliflga, whether it exists in a palace or in a Pltha, grants 
Siddhi and liberation to the S&dhaka.

“ 0 great King! none of the Vanalingas existing on 
this earth require Pr&napratishtbfi,* purification,* or the 
invocation or dismissal of Devatfl. 4 (In the eternally 
established Brahmalifiga, Bhagav&n the Creator of all things 
is eternally present, so that both invocation and dismissal 
are impossible in respect of it.) ”

In the first Patala of the Lifigfirchchana Tantra it is 
said : “ Beloved One ! the country in which the Lifiga is 
not always worshipped is as degraded as a trenching- 
ground. If Br&hmapas, Kshatriyas, and Yai^hyas do not

1 A Lifiga formed of stones of a particular oval shape found in the 
GandakI River.

* Author’s note. This is the Yoni which encircles the Lifiga.

* That is, the Gantlpltha. * Vide ante.

* That iB, the life-giving rite. 4 Sangskfira.

1 Avfthana and Visarjjana (see anfe).

71

1122

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* That is, the Gantlpltha. * Vide ante.

* That iB, the life-giving rite. 4 Sangskfira.

1 Avfthana and Visarjjana (see anfe).

71

1122

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

worship the Lifiga, they will at once become Chaijdalaa. 1 
And if ShQdras do not worship Shiva, they will attain 
the state of swine. O Mistress of Devas! the house in 
which Shiva is not worshipped is like a pit of excrements, 
and one should avoid the food and drink of that house 
just as one avoids exorements.”

Order of Worship

In the seventh Chapter of the Gautamlya Tantra it 
is said: “ Worship is of five kinds. Hear from Me the 
difference between them. I shall one after another speak 
of the differences between the five form of worship—namely, 
Abhigamana, Up&d&na, Yoga, Svadhy&ya, and Ijya.* *

“ To go to the house of Devata, cleanse the place where 
the Devata is seated, and remove from the person of the 
image the pastes, flowers, garlands, and so forth attach¬ 
ed to it. This is called Abhigamana. Upadana is the 
name given to the cutting of flowers and the like and the 
collecting of materials such as incense, saudal, and so 
forth. Ijya is the name for the worship of the Ishta* 
devata, with offerings of materials such as Padya * and so 
forth, accompanied by Mantras, according to the Shastra 
after Bhflta^huddhi,* Prfipfiyama,* Nyasa,' mental worship, 
and so forth. Svadhyaya is the name given to the doing of 
Japa according to the Shastra of the great Mantra, con¬ 
sisting of the name * Krishna,’ reading its Stlkta, T Stotra/ 
singing the name of Hari, and studying the spiritual 
Shastra, in their respective order. Yoga is the meditation 
of Ishtadevata in one's mind. 0 man of good deeds! these

' One of the lowest and most unclean castes.

' These are each described post. ' Water for washing the feet.

* Purification of the elements. * Control of breath.

' See Introduction. 1 Hymn.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1123' These are each described post. ' Water for washing the feet.

* Purification of the elements. * Control of breath.

' See Introduction. 1 Hymn.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP

1123

are the five forms of worship. They grant the fruits of 
Samipya, S&rQpya, Sadfishya, and Sayujya in succession: 1 
Abhigamana and Up&dana grant Samipya, Ijya grant 
Sadrishya, Sv&dhySya grants SSrQpya, and Yoga grants 
Sayujya.”

(The Gautamlya Tantra ordains worship of Vishnu. 
Consequently, it speaks of Japa of the Mantra, consisting 
of the name of Krishna, and singing of the name of Hari. 
But this is merely an indication of a Sadbaka’s duty relat¬ 
ing to his Ishtadevata, be he a worshipper of Shakti or of 
Shiva, or of any other Devata. Sadbakas other than 
Vaishnavas will understand the Japa of the name of Kfishi^a, 
and singing the name of Hari to stand for Japa of the 
names of their individual Ishtadevatas, and singing of their 
names.)

1 These are four qualified states (pada) of Mukti. Sadrishya is 
apparently S&lokya, which precede and lead up to Kaivalya, or absolute 
liberation, which is the establishment of the true form (Svarfipa) of 
consciousness.

CHAPTER XX

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Cotitd .)

Purification of the “ Five " 1

In the KulArpava Tantra it is said: “ 0 Devi! so long as a 
Sadhaka does not carry out the five forms of purification, 
how can he perform worship of a Devata ? These are Puri¬ 
fication of self (Atma§huddhi), of place (Stb&na§huddhi), of 
Mantra (Mantrashuddhi), of articles for worship (Dravya- 
shuddhi), and of Devata (Deva$huddhi). Worship without 
purification of the five is intended only for abhichara.*

“ 1. Purification of the self of the Sadbaka consists of 
proper bathing, purification of the elements (Bhfltashuddhi), 
breath-exercises (Prapayama), and so forth, and NyAsa of 
six parts of the body (Sha<7a£lganyasa), and all other forms 
of Nyasa.*“ 2. Purification of place is making the house of wor¬ 
ship as clean as the centre of a mirror by dusting, wiping, 
and so forth, and adorning it with auspicious ornaments, 
such as powders of five colours, with seat, canopy, incense, 
lamp, flowers, garlands, and so forth.

“ 3. Purification of Mantra is the performance of Japa 
of the letters of the alphabet which compose the Matj-i- 
kamantra, once in their regular order (anuloma), and once

1 PaAcbashuddbi.

* See Introduction.

* Rites done for malevolent purposes.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .)

1125

again in the opposite order (viloma), 1 by linking the letters 
of the Millamantra with them.

“4. Purification of articles is the sprinkling on arti¬ 
cles of worship of water sanotified by a recital of the Mtlla- 
mantra and the weapon Mantra,* * and then displaying the 
Dhenumudra (cow-mudra) over them.*

“ 5. Purification of Devata is the placing of the image 
of the Devata on the Pltha,* invoking the Shakti of the 
Devata into it by means of Antramantra Prapamantra* 
and so forth, then bathing it (at least)' thrice along with 
reoital of Mulamantra/ and finally adorning it with gar¬ 
ments, ornaments, and the like, and offering inoense, light, 
and so forth. These five forms of purification must be per¬ 
formed first, and then the worship should be commenced.'’

Purification of the “ Twelve ”'

In the eighth Chapter of the Gautamlya Tantra it is 
said: “ Next is related the method of purification of the 
twelve, as followed by Vaishpavaa. Purification of feet (2)* 
by Vaishjiavas is the use of the feet in suoh blessed acts

1 That is. in the first place from A to Ksha. and in the second from 
Ksba to A.

" That. is. the Astra Mantra " Phat.”1 That is. in the first place from A to Ksha. and in the second from 
Ksba to A.

" That. is. the Astra Mantra " Phat.”

1 This manual gesture resembles the teats of a cow. Dbenu (cow) 
is here Kamadhenu, the celestial cow whose teats exude nectar. By 
displaying the Dhenumudrft the S&dhaka expresses the desire that the 
offerings of food placed before the Devata may be turned into nectar 
(Amrita). * The seat.

* Antra is entrail, intestine. PrApamantra is the life Mantra.

* Author's parenthesis.

’ That is, the principal Mantra of the Devata.

* Dvadasha§huddhi.

* It is by adding the numbers within brackets in the text that the 
number 12 is obtained—ris.. feet 2. hands 2, tongue 1. ears 2, eyes 2. 
head 1, nostrils 2-12.

1126

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* It is by adding the numbers within brackets in the text that the 
number 12 is obtained—ris.. feet 2. hands 2, tongue 1. ears 2, eyes 2. 
head 1, nostrils 2-12.

1126

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

as going to the house of Bhagav&n, following Bhagav&n in 
Yatr&s 1 and festivals, and circling * * round Bhagavan with 
devotion. The purification of hands (2), whioh is done by 
taking leaves, flowers, and so forth, in the hands with 
devotion, for the worship of Bhagavan is better than any 
other form of their purification. Purification of (the tongue 
or) speech (1) is produoed by singing with devotion the 
name, beauty, and qualities of Bhagavan Shrl Kjrishi^a. 
Purification of the ears (2) is caused by hearing recitals of 
Bhagav&n’s play and qualities ; and purification of the eyes 
(2) is produced by the seeing of festivals in honour of His 
name. Purification of the head (1) is caused by placing 
on the head water touched by Bhagavan's foot,* and flowers, 
garlands, and so forth, offered to Bhagavan, and by bowing 
to Bhagavan’s lotus-feet. Purification of the nostrils (2) 
is produoed by smelling the fragrance of offerings, scents, 
flowers, and so forth. Leaves, flowers, and all else offered 
at the lotus-feet of Shrlkyishga purify the three-worlds, so 
that the touch of them instantly purifies a Sadhaka’s body, 
belongings, mind, life, and all else. (Here also, Shaiva, 
Shakta, and other worshippers should understand the above 
as an indication of that which should be done in respect of 
their individual Ishtadevat&s.) ”

In the sixth Ull&sa of the Sh&kt&nandatarafigiijl it is 
said : “ After performing purification of hands with flowers, 
sandal paste, and suoh other things, one should fence 
the quarters * by dapping the hands thrice, higher and

1 Festivals. Some festivals are specially 60 called, such as Ratha 
JfttrA (car festival), Sn&na J&trA (bathing festival), and R&saj&tr& 
(Rasa festival).

* PradakBhipa. The worshipper goes round and ronnd the image.* PradakBhipa. The worshipper goes round and ronnd the image.

' P&dodaka-P&dya is offered as the first article of worship for 
washing the feet of the DovatA. After the feet have been 60 washed 
the worshipper sprinkles the water on his own head. * Digvandana.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .) 1127

higher, 1 * * saying the weapon Mantra,* and snapping the fin¬ 
gers* ten times. Then, aftes having removed all obstacles 
and purified the flowers and so forth, make obeisance to 
the three Gurus 4 on the left side.”

In Tantra it is said :* “One should make obeisance to 
Guru, Parama Guru, and Par&para Guru on the left 
side, to Gape$ha on the right side, and to one’s lshta- 
devata on the head.”

Purification of Elements*

In the Gandharva Tantra it is said: “ It is by virtue 
of purification of elements* IJishi-nyasa, Plfhany&sa, Nyasa 
of six parts of the body, Nyasa of hands, M&tyik&ny&sa, 
and Vidyanyasa, that a Sadhaka becomes full of the Deity, 
and these are the Nyasas 1 which must be performed

1 The palm of the left hand is struck with the forefinger and 
middle finger, and each time the hands are raised to a position higher 
than the last. * Phat."

' The hands are carried in a circle round the person or thing 
fenced and " Pha$ ” is said. A circle is thus established which excludes 
all evil influences.

* That is. Guru, Parama Guru, and Par&para Guru. The Guru, his 
Guru, and the latter’s Guru.

4 No came is given in the text.

4 Bhttta$huddhi. The elements (bhata) are the five Tattvas, 
" ether. ” “air.” “fire,” “water." and "earth,” though the reader 
must not identify these with the meaning of the English words. Thos, 
" earth " (Pjr'thivl) is not common earth, but that universal movement 
(Parthiva v&yu) which gives solidity to matter. Thus, ice, though it is a 
compound of water, is in the P&rthiva or solid state. See Author's 
" Serpent Power.”’ Ny&sa comes from the root " place," and means the placing of the 
tips of the fingers and palms of the right hand on various parts of the 
body accompanied by Mantra. Its object is to infuse each of such 
parts with the life of the Devatft, so that the Sadhaka becomes Deva- 
tAmaya (see Introduction).

1128

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

daily. All other Nyftsas are said to be Nyftsas for the 
attainment of some particular desired end.” 1

In the same Tantra it is again said: “ It is by virtue 
of oontrol of breath,* * meditation,* and Nyftsa, that a Sadbaka 
attains a Divine body. Abundance of Nyftsa makes the 
worship bear abundance of fruits. 0 Maheshvarl; a Jlva’s 
body constituted of five elements, and ever associated 
with faeces and urine, is in its very nature unclean. 
In order that this unclean body may be purified, it is 
dried up by means of Vftyumantra,* and burnt and reduced 
to ashes by means of Agnimantra.*

“ A shower of nectar * is caused by means of Chandra- 
mantra,' and a flooding of water by means of Varuna- 
mantra.* The five elements composing the body must be 
purified by contact with unmanifested Brahman, brought 
about by means of Rechaka, Poraka, and Eumbhaka of 
breath,* with the help of the said Mantras. This is 
called ‘ purification of elements.’ After performing puri* 
fication of elements in this manner, one should place 
Arghyas w and such other things, and next perform Mfttfikft- 
nyftsa, Mantra-nyasa, breath-control,* and Rishinyftsa.” " 
Purification of elements is accomplished by inner 
Yajna** and Prftpftyftma u together. Inner Yajna is ac¬ 
complished in this way. Mother 11 KulakupdalinI, the

That is, the fulfilment of some worldly end. Spiritual desire is 
no desire (Kama). , * Prftnftyama. ' Dhyftna.

' That is, Yang,” the vlja of the Yayu Tattva.

Bang,” the vlja of the Tejas Tattva.

* Amrita. ’ That is Ung. ' That is. the ** water " Mantra

Vang." • That is, expiration, inspiration, and retention of

hreath in Prinayima.Bang,” the vlja of the Tejas Tattva.

* Amrita. ’ That is Ung. ' That is. the ** water " Mantra

Vang." • That is, expiration, inspiration, and retention of

hreath in Prinayima.

'* Offerings. 11 See Introduction. " See poat.

. ,, M to this author's Introduction to " Mahanirvina Tantra '* 
and Serpent Power.”

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .) 1129

World Consciousness 1 living in the womb of the Mfllil- 
dhara lotas, is awakened. She is taken along the Sus- 
humnft path, piercing on the way throughout the six 
Chakras Mdl&dhara, Sv&dhishthana, Manipura, Anahata, 
Vi^huddha, and Ajfia. She and the Jlvatmft residing in 
the heart are united with the supreme Tattva of Parama- 
shiva residing in the petals of the thousand-petalled 
lotus Sahasr&ra. The Mfi-yik elements * * of the phenomenal 
M&yik world are merged in the Parobrahmatattva of 
Shivashakti. The elemental products* are the twenty- 
four Tattvas of earth, water, fire, air, ether, smell, taste, 
sight, touch, sound, nose, tongue, eye, ear, skin, voioe, 
hand, foot, anus, genitals, Manas, Ahangk&ra, Buddhi, 
and Prakyiti. The S&dhaka thinks to himself that in 
their M&yik existence they exist as seed,* and thus 
meditating offers a full Ahuti * of the Brahma^cja 
Brahman Itself. Next, with the help of purified Mind- 
Prakyiti, 1 existing in the form of seed (vlja), Mother Kula- 
kundalinl must, after re-awaking the dualistic Tattvas 
from their supreme union or undifferentiated non-dualistic 
Tattva of Shakti and possessor of Sbakti or Prakyiti and 
Purusha, be re-established in Her own place in the 
womb of the Malftdhara lotus, and there united with 
Svayambhu$hiva.

Next, in order to perform the outer worship of Her as 
Ishtadevatft, a new and purified body must be constructed,

1 Jagachcbaitanya, the vir&ta consciousness, or consciousness oi 
the world as a whole.

* Prapaiicha. 1 Vikftra. Vlja.1 Jagachcbaitanya, the vir&ta consciousness, or consciousness oi 
the world as a whole.

* Prapaiicha. 1 Vikftra. Vlja.

* Parnfthuti—offering in Are in Homa in outer Yajna. But in the 
Tantrik inner Yajna Ahuti is the offering to the Devi residing in the 
body in the form of the Kulakuijdalinl Shakti q T ^hahdn Brahman. So 
when wine is drank in Bahasyapaja, the wine is Ahuti to Her.

' Universe.

’ Manasprakyiti or Prakriti in the form of mind as eensorium.

1130

PRINCIPLES OP TANTRA

composed of Mantra—that is to say, illumined with the 
Brahman-spirit of Mantra§hakti, the substance of which 
is Brahman-vibhQtis 1 only. Finally, the outer worship of 
Ishtadevatft with Ny&sa and so forth on that body must 
be commenced after re-establishing, in their own places as 
ingredients and materials for the worship of the Mother 
of the world, the five elements of earth and so forth, and 
the elemental Shaktis (force), all existing in subtle forms.Though we know that inner Yajna, or penetration of 
the six Chakras, forms a part of purification of elements, 
we do not dare enter into the subject here in this short 
Chapter, whioh explains the principles of worship." Be¬ 
cause, firstly, the subject is so extensive that even another 
treatise of the same volume as this book would be in¬ 
sufficient for even such explanation as a person of such 
insignifioant intellect as we are could by our best efforts 
give. Secondly, it is impossible to make the public 
understand the meaning of the six Chakras, since it is 
not possible for anybody who is not a practising S&dhaka 
to understand them with the help of any amount of in¬ 
terpretation, however great his intellect and learning may 
be. Thirdly, an explanation of the subject of the six 
Chakras should properly be given by a Guru to his Shishya, 
for the Guru has, by communicating from his own body 
a Divine Shakti (power) into his Shishya’6 body, opened 
the path for intercommunication of Shakti between the 
two bodies. It is possible for him alone to make his 
Shishya understand the account of the path of Mother 
Kulakugdalinl’s journey from Mdl&dh&ra to Sahasr&ra and

1 Brahmavibhhtimaya—manifestations of Brahman power.

See A. Avalon's "Serpent Power." being a translation, with 
Introduction and Commentary, of Purn&nanda Sv&mi's Shatchakra- 
nirQpana, itself, forming the sixth Chapter of the ShrTtattv BehintAmnni .

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (Contd.)

1131CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (Contd.)

1131

baok in the Shishya’s body. The combined efforts of even 
thousands of other interpreters will not succeed in explain¬ 
ing even a hundredth part of what a Guru will thus be 
able to teaoh his disciples. And something may be done 
if that hundredth part is preached orally. It is, however, 
not possible to gain success by written teaching. We 
would, however, in spite of the impossibility of such an 
explanation, feel gratified to a certain extent if we could 
give a general description. But that also is impossible, 
for if we were to write an aocount of even the positions 
only of the six lotuses, it would not be possible to deal 
with the matter 1 without mentioning, explaining, and 
showing the necessity for the Mantras and bo forth of the 
Devat&s presiding over the pericarps, centres, filaments, 
stalks, leaves, and so forth, of those lotuses. Acting under 
the command from our Gurudeva, and in accordance with 
my own views, I have never as yet publicly mentioned 
these Vljamantras and so forth, and shall never mention 
them publicly. For this reason we are obliged to desist 
from entering into an explanation, although we would have 
been very glad to do so if we could. Fourthly, even if one 
is to offer an explanation, it will not only in no way render 
anv help to the community of S&dhakas, but will also be 
likely to greatly iujure them both here and hereafter. For 
it is the command of Bhagav&n Bhairavanfttha* * Himself, 
the I^hvara of the Tantra Sh&stra, that whoever advances 
in the path of the six Chakras without the help of the 
shadow of Guru’s fair feet is likely to fall into great danger 
at every step. Knowing all this, we desist from doing a 
thing which will lead to the ruin of both ourselves and 
others. We hope that SAdhakas will realize that we have

1 Tattva.

* $hiva, the Lord of Bbairavas.

1182

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Tattva.

* $hiva, the Lord of Bbairavas.

1182

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

done this for their good also. Of course, one may try to ex¬ 
plain the fundamental principles of Vlja Mantras and so 
forth by hints and suggestions, and using symbolical 
words, signs, and so forth. But, firstly, this is throwing 
dust in the eyes of Dharma; 1 * * and, secondly, it is very 
difficult to say what space such an explanation would 
take. Now that the “ Tantratattva ” has come so near 
its end, it would be sheer madness to undertake so un¬ 
certain and extensive a task. Moreover, we do not 
believe that every subscriber or reader of the “ Tantra¬ 
tattva ” is a true S&dbaka. If we learn that the publi¬ 
cation of such a book is necessary for the Community of 
S&dhakas only who reoeive their information from trust¬ 
worthy sources and successive generations of Gurus; 
and if, by the meroiful glance of the All-good Mother 
suitable arrangements can be made, we shall in time 
prooeed to oarry out our desire of explaining the principle 
of the six Chakras. S&dhakas will pardon me for not 
introducing the subjeot now and in this book. Further, 
according to the advertisement of the “ Tantratattva,” an 
explanation of the subjeot of the six Chakras is necessary 
in connection with that of Kul&ch&ra,' after the Pan- 
chamakfira* and such other things have been explained. 4

In the second Chapter of the Gautamlya Tantra it is 
said: “ Pr&j&yftma is of two kinds, according as it is 
Sagarbha and Nigarbha.* Sagarbhapr&n&y&ma is that

1 Deceiving Dharma, for such a course would be injurious to religion. 
' The way of the Tflntrik Kaulas.

The Paflchatattva, meat, wine, flab, parched grain (Mudra), and 
woman.

‘As these have not been explained, the time has not come for 
dealing with the subject.

, ^ le8e terms literally mean " pregnant and non-pregnant.” In 
the same way cleansing of the Nadis is called either Samanu or Nir- 
manu that is, with or without the use of Vlja., ^ le8e terms literally mean " pregnant and non-pregnant.” In 
the same way cleansing of the Nadis is called either Samanu or Nir- 
manu that is, with or without the use of Vlja.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (Contd.)

1188

whioh is performed along with Japa of Mantra, and 
Nigarbhaprflij&y&ma is that which is performed without 
any Mantra, and only according to counts. 1 0 man of 
good deeds! there is no Tattva, no Tapas, knowledge, 
state, Yoga, treasure, or other thing euperior to Prftna- 
yama* One is sure to meet Brahman by the Yoga, 
which consists of the praotice of Pr&nay&ma continuously 
for one year. It is undoubted that by dint of Pr&p&yfima 
alone all the Mayik envelope of Param&tmft who is con¬ 
sciousness itself, is destroyed. There is no path to 
liberation besides Prfinayftma, so that whatever Sftdhana 
is performed without Pr&ijftyfLma becomes fruitless. It 
is by having recourse to Prapftyftma that Munis have 
attained Siddhi, and a Yogi who is attached to Prana- 
yfima is no mere Yogi, but Shiva Himself. Men learned 
in the Yoga Sh&stra have given the name Pran&yama 
to the process which consists of inspiration, expiration, 
and retention of the vital air. 1 * The word “ Prana " means 
breath, and “ Ay§ma ” means its control. 4 That is Prfina- 
y&ma, the Yogi’s instrument for Yoga, by which the 
Prfinav&yu (vital air) is checked. Yogis practise this 
Praijfiyftma by holding their nostrils at the beginning 
as well as the end of Yoga. Air should be breathed 
out by means of the right nostril, breathed in by means 
of the left nostril, and retained with Japa of Mantra 
thirty-two times, by holding both the nostrils. This 
is called “ Pranayaraa.” By force of this Pragayama a 
Brahmapa can speedily burn all sins, suoh as Brah- 
minicide, drinking of wine, incest, and so forth. Great

1 Matra.

’ Breath-control according to the $h&strik injunctions. Strictly 
speaking, it is the development of Pr&pa through control of the Prftpa-1 Matra.

’ Breath-control according to the $h&strik injunctions. Strictly 
speaking, it is the development of Pr&pa through control of the Prftpa-

vftyu. It is generally described post. ' Prftnavftyu.

' Prftno vftynriti Kby&ta &y&mastannirodhanang.

1184

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

sins, such as foetioide, are destroyed by a praotioe of Pranfi- 
yama for a single month.

The Pranay§ma-practising Yogi who daily practises 
PrfinfiySma sixteen times in the morning and sixteen times 
in the evening destroys all his sins within a short time, 
just as within such time fire oonsumes a heap of cotton. 
Prfinayfima is the expiation for all sins. As when a person 
puts off the coat of mail which he was wearing, his body 
becomes free from discomfort, so by dint of Pranayama a 
Jlva throws off the sheath of nesoience 1 generated by desire 
and Earma, and is converted into immaculate Brahman. 
0 Gautama 1 what is the use of saying much ? Listen to 
my words: there is no path superior to Prfiijayfima for 
Yogis to attain liberation. Hence a Sadhaka should, after 
performing Pranayama in the manner stated above, place 
all the Pltha-shaktis of Ishtadevatft in his own body at the 
time of worship.”

In the Vishuddheshvara it is said: “ A Sadhaka should 
practise Pranayama thrice with Malamantra.’ Of the three, 
Ptlraka, or inspiration, must be made through the Irfa 
nadi* on the left, and with Japa sixteen times; Kumbhaka, 
or retention of breath, must be made in the middle, or 
Sushumna nadi, and with Japa sixty-four times; and 
Rechaka, or expiration, must be made through the Pifigala, 
or the right nadi, with Japa thirty-two times. The exercise 
should then be continued, provided the Sadhaka is capable 
of doing so, in the reverse way—that is to say, Ptlraka 
through Pifigala, Eumbhaka in Sushumna, and Rechaka

1 AvidyiL * The principal Mantra of the Devatft worshipped.1 AvidyiL * The principal Mantra of the Devatft worshipped.

' From the Malftdhftra to the twelve-petalled lotus below the 
Sahasr&ra a Nfi<?i ("nerve”) runs which is called the Sushumnft, 
within which are two others—tie., the Vajra and Chitrinl Nfttfi a. 
On each side of the SashumnA are the I<fA and PiAgalA Nfttfi a, the 
three being " Sun," " Moon," and *' Fire." See Arthur Avalon's 
" Serpent Power.”

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .)

1185

through Ida ; and then again in the opposite way — that is, 
PQraka through Ida, Kumbhaka in Sushumna, and Rechaka 
through Pifigala. The numbers of Japa stated above apply 
to the case of a Sadhaka who is able to do them. A Sadhaka 
who is unable to perform so many Japas will practise 
Prfinayfima with a quarter of these numbers.”

In another Tantra it is said : “ Air should be breathed 
in with Japa done sixteen times; retained with Japa done 
four times this number—that is to say, sixty-four times — 
and breathed out with Japa done half the number of that 
recited in retention—that is to say, thirty-two times. One 
who is unable to do Japa to this extent will practise 
Praij&yama with the quarters of these numbers—that is to 
say, eight * 1 in breathing in, thirty-two in retention and 
sixteen 1 in breathing out. Again, if one is unable to do 
even this much Japa, he will follow quarters of these 
numbers—that is to say, two in inspiration, eight in reten¬ 
tion, and four in expiration.”

The Shastra has thus ordained rules for the practice of 
Pranayama, varying with the capacity of Sadhakas. And 
there are even shorter methods for those who are unable 
to carry out any of the above numbers of Japas.“ Air should be breathed in through Ida, and, with 
Japa of MQlamantra done once, retained in Sushumna, 
with Japa done four times, and breathed out through 
Pifigala, with Japa done twioe. Pranayama should be 
performed thrice by repeatedly practising the above pro¬ 
cess. PQraka is the name given to the aot by which 
the stomach is filled with air from without, and Rechaka 
is the name for the process of 'throwing out air from 
the stomach.” '

1 These are halves and not quarters of the preceding numbers.

1 That is. inspiration and expiration. This is the life of all breath¬ 
ing things, and it is this which PrftnayAma controls.

1136

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In the Jfiftn&rnava it is said : “ Pr&ijfiyftma is the name 
of the process of holding the nostrils with the thumb and 
third and small fingers without the help of the first and 
middle fingers. 0 Devi! without PriLpfiyfLma one is not 
competent to worship a Devata."

NyXsa

BishySdinyasa * 1

“ No Japa or Sadhana will be effectual without Vinyasa, 
or plaoing of Rishi (Seer), Chhanda (metre), and Devata.

“He who has, after receiving instruction from the 
mouth of Mahe$hvara Himself, performed full Sadhana of 
a Mantra of a Devata is the Rishi of that Mantra of that 
Devata. His Nyasa should (on account of his thus having 
the position of Guru) be made on the head. Chhanda 
(metre) is called so on account of its doing Chhadana,* or 
keeping together all the parts of the Mantras. On account 
of its being composed of letters and feet, the Nyasa of 
Chhanda should be made in the mouth. And because Devata 
constantly resides in the heart-lotus of the Sadhaka, Her 
Nyasa should be made on the heart. A Sadhaka cannot reap 
the fruits of a Mantra if its ^tishi and Chhanda are un¬ 
known to him. And for those who do not know the mode 
of application * of the Mantras they practise, those Mantras 
lose their strength."In another Tantra it is said: “ The Nyasa of Rishi 
should be made on the head, that of Chhanda in the mouth, 
that of Devata on the heart, that of Vlja on the anus, that 
of Shakti on the feet, and that of Kllaka on all limbs of the 
body."

1 Ny&sa of $ishi and so forth, as explained in the text.

1 Boot Chhad, to cover. ' Niyoga.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP {Contd.) 1137

Mdtrito-Nyasa 1

In the ShaktanandatarafiginI it is said: "Nyasas 
spoken of in the Tantra-Shflstra should be performed after 
first purifying the materials of worship and so forth. Matrika 
Shakti is of two kinds—namely, Para and Apara. Pard 
Matrika resides within Sushumna, and Apara Matrika 
exists in tb 9 body.” Outer Matrika is but another name 
of Apara Matrika.' The Nyasa of inner Matrika should be 
made on the petals, pericarps, and so forth, of the six 
lotuses comprising the six chakras, and the Nyasa of the 
Mantras of Outer Matrika should be made, in order, on the 
forehead, face, eyes, ears, nostrils, cheeks, lips, teeth, head, 
mouth, hands, feet, joints,' sides, back, navel, belly, heart, 
shoulders, and from heart to hands, from heart to feet, from 
heart to belly, and from heart to face.

If the Matrika Mantras 4 are placed in the reverse order, 
then the Matrika is called Sanghara Matrika ; and if they 
are set forth in the order of the places of their origin from 
Shrl-Kantha* * downwards, then it is called Shrl-Kanthfidi- 
MStrika.

Mudra for Nydsa of Matrika

“The Nyasa should be performed mentally or with 
flowers, or with the thumb and the third finger.”

In the Gautamlya Tantra it is said: “ Matrika is of 
four classes—namely, Kevala (plain) Matrika, Matnkfi ■with

1 Ny&sa of Mfttrika. The external Mfttpkft are the letters and the 
Bound they connote. The inner Mfttrikfl, which they are the mani¬ 
festation. is subtle sound or Jrva§hakti.

* In the text it is Parft. but this i8 an obvious mistake: it should be 
Aparft • Agrabh&ga. 4 Letters of the alphabet.* In the text it is Parft. but this i8 an obvious mistake: it should be 
Aparft • Agrabh&ga. 4 Letters of the alphabet.

' Throat; “ §hri ” is honorific.

78

1138

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Vindu (* *), M&tfika with Visarga (:), and Matrika with both 
Vindu and Visarga. Revala Matrika grants Vidya (learn¬ 
ing), Matrika with both Vindu and Visarga grants Bhoga 
(enjoyment), Matrika with Visarga grants sons, and Matrika 
with Vindu grants Vindu or liberation. Whoever performs 
this Matrika-nyasa, which grants wealth, fame, and longe¬ 
vity, and destroys the evils of the Kali age, acquires the 
VibhQtis 1 of Sadashiva Himself.”

Vidyd-Nydsa *

Nyasa of Vidya should be done on the head, Mala- 
dhara,* heart, three eyes, two ears, mouth, two arms, back, 
knees, and navel. Whoever performs Nyasa in this manner 
attains the state of Pa?hupati, 4 even though he is in the 
body of a Pashu or Jlva.”

Shodhd-Nydsa '

In the Vlra Tantra it is said : “ All the sins of a Sad- 
haka are destroyed if the Shodha-Nyasa, which is the 
principal of all NyOsas, is performed. Shodha-Nyasa over¬ 
comes the poison of snakes, prevents death from accidents, 
and destroys evil Grahas' and diseases. All harmful things 
are destroyed by the force of Shodha-Nyasa, and enemies 
are made thereby friendly.

The poems of a Sadhaka who performs Shodha-Nyasa 
sweetly flow in waves like streams of grape-juice.’ The

* The powers, etc.

* Nyftsft of Vidya, a9 above described.

* The centre, between the anus and root of the genitals.

* $hiva. ' Six kinds of Nyasas.

* Stars or planets ruling the destinies of creatures.

1 Draksharasa.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (< Contd .)

1189* The centre, between the anus and root of the genitals.

* $hiva. ' Six kinds of Nyasas.

* Stars or planets ruling the destinies of creatures.

1 Draksharasa.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (< Contd .)

1189

eight forms of Siddhi—namely, Anima 1 and so forth—lie 
within the hollow of his hands. Contemplation in the 
performance of Shorfha-Nvasa destroys all sins of body, 
speech, and mind. All lesser sins* are destroyed by re¬ 
course to Shorfha-Nyasa. A Sadhaka who has attained 
Siddhi in Shorfha-Nyasa can, if he desires, enter into what¬ 
ever form he sees. The life of him to whom a Sadhaka 
who has done Shorfha-Nyasa bows is shortened.* Even 
Devatas, not to speak of men, tremble with fear at the 
sight of a Sadhaka who performs Sho<7ha-Nyasa.”

Rishyadi-nyasa, Matfika-nyasa, Vidya-nyasa, Tattva- 
Nyasa, Shorfha-Nyasa, Jlva-Nyasa, Anga-Nyasa, Kara- 
Nyasa, Vyapaka-Nyasa, Pltha-NjAsa, and many other 
Nyasas, have been spoken of in many Tantras. It would 
be extremely improper for us to publish their application. 
All that we can do is to refer to the authorities only. We 
therefore desist from referring to their application. These 
things, which can be learnt from Gurus only, Sadbakas 
will learn from their own Gurus. The etymological mean¬ 
ing of the word “ Nyasa ” has been given in the Shastra as 
follows:

“Just as wealth acquired with Nyaya or rectitude, 
when worn on the body in the form of ornaments, becomes 
a source of joy and of security in adversity and prosperity 
to its owner, so the Vljas of Devatas, when laid out on the 
limbs of a Sadhaka’s body, become to him a source of 
Brahma-bliss on the one hand, and of security, both here 
and hereafter, on the other. The word Nyasa is formed 
by the combination of the initial syllables of Nyaya 
(because Nyasa is like wealth acquired with Nyaya or

* The power of becoming very small, very great, etc.

' U pa pataka.

' It is inauspicious to be bowed to by one who is superior to oneself.

1140* The power of becoming very small, very great, etc.

' U pa pataka.

' It is inauspicious to be bowed to by one who is superior to oneself.

1140

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

reotitude), and of Sarvva (on account of its capacity to 
secure Sarvva, or all things).”

There is no means equal to Nyftsa for attaining the 
state of perfect absorption in Bhftva 1 for Devata. The 
chief end of Nyasa is at first by means of particular Nyftsas 
to establish one’s Ishtadevatft as differentiated Mantra 
Shakti * * in all parts of one’s body; and then by means of 
Vyapaka, or comprehensive Nyasa, to feel the presence 
of the Devata as one undivided entity whose substance 
is Mantra all over one’s body from the feet to the crown 
of the head. 1 It is by virtue of Nyasa that Sfidhakas 
have been able to accomplish their desired ends. It is 
by virtue of Nyftsas that Sftdhakas are free and fearless, 
unconquerable in the world of Suras, Asuras, and men. 
Fear itself flies away with fear on hearing the name of the 
Mother uttered with leonine voice. Of whom, then, can a 
Sadhaka be afraid who holds in his heart that Mother 
Abhayft,' the frightener of fear and diRpeller of the fears of 
the three worlds ? How can he fear who sits on Her fear¬ 
dispelling lap ? Who in the regions of Suras and Asuras,' 
moving and unmoving things, Indra, Chanda, Vftyu. Varuna, 
Yama, and Yaksha,' has the power to thwart his purpose 
by any weapon ? The thunderbolt ’ of Indra, the rod * of 
Yama, the serpentchain * of Kuvera, 10 and the club” of Vftyu 
—whioh of these has the power to cope with him ?

1 Vide ante.

' Parichchhinna Mantrashakti. The Devatft, as appearing in a 
particular Mantra, is thought of as defined or embodied in that par¬ 
ticular Mantra. Moreover, the Mantra iB in the first place applied to 
particular parts of the body, and finally by Yv&paka Nyasa application 
is made to the whole body. 1 Brabmarandhra.

* Fear-dispelling Devi. * The Devas and their enemies.* Fear-dispelling Devi. * The Devas and their enemies.

' The Lord of the celestials, the Moon, Air, Waters, and Death 
Devatas, and the class of Devayoni called Yaksha.

' Vajra. * Danda. * Nftgapftsha.

“ Lord of wealth. u Gada.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .)

1141

Does he who has taken the Rijraje^hvari up on hiB lap, 
or who has seated himself on the lap of the Rfijrftje§hvar1, 
fear the soldiers and generals of the State ? This is why a 
S&dhaka oan proceed alone, proudly with a fearless heart, 
to perform Sfidhana over a dead body, or practise Dhy&na 
in a horrible cremation ground 1 in the midst of a dense 
forest. Standing between the world on the one hand and 
the Mother of the world on the other, the S&dhaka unfurls 
the standard of victory, and jumps into the arms of the 
supreme Devi of Victory. 1 “ Fear ” is a term never found 
in the dictionary of him whose life’s motto is “ Victory." 
Hence a Sfidhaka sits in worship of the Mother by covering 
his body with the undestructible armour, 1 consisting of 
Mantra, given by the Mother, enveloping his limbs with the 
spirit and energy * * of the Mother, and becoming full of the 
Mother on the lap of the Mother. The Nyfisa of Mantraa 
on the S&dhaka's body in the course of his worship of the 
Mother is therefore nothing but keeping that whioh is his 
own thing (self-hood) ‘ as a trust (Nyfisa) with the Mother. 
And it is the interest accruing out of this trust estate which 
is the only remaining resource at the last moment in this 
Sangsara of existence.

Seeing this deep and solemn meaning of Nyfisa, Gitafi- 
jali 1 has said :

“ Everything of Brahmamayl is full of Brahman.

“Ola Brahmfifijali T to Her is the seeing Her with the 
eye-Brahman, taking Her to the heart-Brahman and the 
thinking of the foot-Brahman.

“ 1. O ! nor hands, nor feet, nor ears, nor eyes nor any¬ 
thing of Her is made of the elements. The substanoe of

1 §hma$h&na. ’ Jayajayanti. * Kavacha. * Tejas.“ 1. O ! nor hands, nor feet, nor ears, nor eyes nor any¬ 
thing of Her is made of the elements. The substanoe of

1 §hma$h&na. ’ Jayajayanti. * Kavacha. * Tejas.

' Ahangk&ra. * The author's volume of poems of that came.

* Afijali or offering made to Brahman.

1142

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Her form is Brahman. From the toes of Her feet to the 
crown of Her head, and at every place Brahman alone is 
manifest.

“ 2. The nature 1 of Her body is only truly known to 
Vishgu, the pervader of the World, when severed by His 
Sudar^hana Chakra, every part of Her body gave rise to a 
perfeot image of Her in each of the fifty-one Pltha-Chakras.* *

“3. 0! he alone who worships Her knows how Her 
body is formed. After the completion of the chief worship, 
abstruse truth concerning the Brahman is revealed during 
the worship of the six limbs.*

“ 4. The land of Thy birth is Thyself. In Thyself art 
Thou manifested. In Thy heart art Thou Thyself. Thy 
head, Thy crest, Thy Eavacha, Thy eyes, and Thy weapon, 
are all Thyself.

“ 5. Becoming Thyself, with Thyself, the S&dhaka 
sinks His self in Thyself. And again at the conclusion 
of worship bringing out * Thyself ’ and * Myself,' the 
S&dhaka unites Thyself with His self and becomes One.

“6. At the beginning of worship ‘I am He’ and 
at its end * I am He.’ The ‘ Thou ’ which comes in the 
middle is also made of ‘ I'; otherwise how does Ny&sa 
on Thy limbs affect Me or Ny&sa on My limbs affect Thee?*

1 Tatfcva.

' When Shiva, after the death of his spouse Sat! at the Dakaha 
Yajna, was wrought with grief, and the world was thus, by the loss of 
His guiding and ruling power, endangered, Vishpu took the dead body of 
$hiva’s spouse from his arms, and that He might no longer nurse the 
remembrance of Her out it into fifty-one fragments, which fell at 
various places in India called Pl(has, at each of which the Devi is 
worshipped. See p. 8, A. and E. Avalon's " Hymns to the Goddess.”* Referring to the Sha<ianga Ny&sa on the body of the Devatft before 
prApapratishthA.

They are one and the same, and therefore when the Sftdbaka 
does Ny&sa on Himself he doeB Ny&sa on the Devat& also.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (Contd.)

1143

“ 7 . When love awakes, is SAdhana possible between 
Thyself and Myself? 1 For when relation is lost in un¬ 
differentiation, the worshipper of Brahmamayl, intoxi- 
oated with the bliss of love, then becomes all full of 
Brahman.

“ 8. Shiva is disconsolate with weeping at the thought 
that Her beauteous feet no longer touoh His six limbs. 
What a mistake on the part of Shiva! In all Thy limbs 
art Thou, but in Thy feet am I. Hence I say My medita¬ 
tion on those feet is no error on My part.” * *

In Shy&m&rahasya, KAlItatfcva, ShyAmArohana Chan- 
drikA, Kamalft Tantra, Vlra Tantra, MahAnirvAga Tantra, 
AnnadA Kalpa, Todala Tantra, Gautama Tantra, T4ra- 
rahasya, and many other Tantras, there are maiked 
differences of opinion as regards the order in which PrAijA- 
yama, Bh(lta§huddhi, NyAsa, and so forth, should be 
performed. Some Tantraa ordain BhOtashuddhi after Prana- 
yAma, and others PrAijAyAma after BhQta§huddhi. Some 
ordain their performance before placing of Arghya, and 
others after it. In view of the existence of such differences 
of opinion, BhagavAn, the Creator of all things, has, in 
the Svatantra Tantra, decided the question when He 
says “ different Tantras ordain different orders of worship. 
A Sadhaka should follow any one of them.” That is to 
say, one should perform worship and so forth according 
to the rules ordained in that particular Tantra whioh 
is specially concerned with the worship of the particular 
IshtadevatA whom the devotee may worship.

* Love ass times union, and S& dhan a is the state which leads to it.

• The verse refers to Shiva's grief on the death of His sponse Satj.* Love ass times union, and S& dhan a is the state which leads to it.

• The verse refers to Shiva's grief on the death of His sponse Satj.

Shiva was deluded in thinking that He had lost the Devi because Satl 
had gone. For the Devi is everywhere, and not only in the feet of 
Satl. Though the Devi is everywhere, yet the S&dhaka Axes his 
mind on Her feet only. ’ The offering.

1144

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In the Kul&rnava Tantra it is 6aid : “ He who daily 
performs Ny&sa according to rules stated in the Agama 
Sh&stra attains Divine Shakti, and acquires Siddhi in 
Mantra. 0 my beloved ! from the presence of the S&dhaka 
who performs Japa of his Ishta mantra along with Ny&aa, 
Kavacha, and Chhanda, 1 Devat&s of obstruction* * fly just 
as a herd of elephants flies from the presence of a lion. 
The misguided one who does Japa* without performing 
Ny&sa is beset by all manner of obstacles, as a young 
deer is beset by tigers.”

Mental Worship

The Sh&stra ordains Dhy&na * after performance of 
Ny&sa and so forth, and before commencement of mental 
worship. The plain meaning of the word “ Dhy&na ” 
is a single-pointed meditation. The Sh&stra also lays 
down which particular Devat& should be contemplated 
in what particular form. It is merely this description 
of forms which is known as Dhy&na in the society of 
to-day. Treatises on the rituals also give these Dhy&na- 
mantras. The purpose of this is that the remembrance 
of these Mantras greatly helps the meditation of the 
Devata's body from feet to head and from head to feet 
in order. But in course of time this purpose has been 
lost, and Dhy&na has been reduced to a mere recita¬ 
tion of the Dhy&na-mantras. Many people are under the 
impression that whether they aotually meditate on the 
form of Devata or not, Dhy&na is performed if they merely 
recite the Dhy&na-mantra after Pltha-Ny&sa. But the

' The protective Mantra. * Vide ante.

' VighnadevatA. * ** Recitation " of Mantra (see Introduction).' The protective Mantra. * Vide ante.

' VighnadevatA. * ** Recitation " of Mantra (see Introduction).

* Contemplation, vide poet.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (Contd.)

1145

decision of the Sh&stra is otherwise. According to the 
Sh&stra, Dhy&na is performed by really meditating on 
the form of the Devatft, no matter whether the Dhyana- 
mantra is recited or not; for the §h&strik meaning of 
the expression “ Dhy&yet ” is “ should meditate,” and 
not “ should recite the Dhy&na-mantra.” Hence, the 
Dhy&na which is performed by simply reoiting the Dhy&na- 
mantra while the mind is wandering elsewhere is no 
Dhy&na of the Devat&, but is rather a Dhy&na of the 
worshipper himself. We often see that worshippers or 
Purohitas consider the time which is occupied in the 
recitation of the Dhy&na-mantra to be a period of leisure 
for the mind, and utilize it in thinking on any other 
subject. Of course, one’s Siddhi in the worship of Devat& 
depends on the manner of one’s Dhy&na. It is therefore 
needless for us to say anything on the subject. But it 
is a settled fact that worship performed by this mode 
of Dhy&na is no worship at all.

In the Sanatkum&ra Tantra it is said: “ Outer worship 1 
should not be done without first performing mental 
worship, for without inner worship outer worship is 
fruitless.”

In the Bh&ta§huddhi Tantra it is said : “ Inner worship 
is ordained in all outer worship. 0 Mahe^hvarl! a Bingle 
inner worship grants the fruits of a crore 1 of outer worships. 
What necessity is there for outer worship for one who 
has become fully accomplished in inner worship which, 
even if performed but only once, grants the fruits of a 
crore 1 of outer worships ? An effort to perform outer wor¬ 
ship is senseless after inner worship has been perfectly 
accomplished. So also is it where there is want of materials,

1 Worship of the Image, with materials such as flowers, lights, 
sandal, etc.

* Ten million.

1146

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Worship of the Image, with materials such as flowers, lights, 
sandal, etc.

* Ten million.

1146

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

for in the absence of necessary materials outer worship 
is never fruitful.”

In another Tantra it is said: “ Even if all articles 
necessary for outer worship are available, it should be per¬ 
formed after performance of inner worship.” And nowadays 
we often come across the olass of S&dhakaa arrogating to 
themselves a high religious competence of whom we have 
spoken before as the people who consider outer worship as 
“lower than the lowest." They consider it beneath their 
dignity to worship a Devata with outer articles like flowers 
sandal paste, incense, light, and so forth; for, with the 
notion “ I am He,” they perform worship by offering flowers 
of mercy, forbearance, and so on, and sacrificing the beasts 
of lust, anger, and so forth. Moreover, they even say that 
this form of worship only is true worship, or, in other 
words, outer worship is but useless trouble and wanton 
destruction of life. It is not that we accept or reject all 
that these people say. We are bound to accept with all 
submission whatever the Sh&stra approves of. It is there¬ 
fore, necessary to see once and for all what the Shftstra 
says on this subjeot.

In the Mah&nirvflj?a Tantra it is said: “ The S&dhaka 
should, after performing Dhyana of the Ishtadevata in 
this manner, put a flower on his own head, and then 
worship Her with mental articles with great devotion. 
First, he should offer his heart-lotus for Her seat and 
then offer the Amfita 1 flowing from Sahasrara * for the 
washing of Her feet. The mind should be offered as 
Arghya, and the Amyita 1 flowing from Sahasrara for 
Achamana 1 and bathing. The element J Aka§ha,' should

t ^sctar. * The thousand-petalled lotus in the cranium.

The ritual offering.

, Wal:er which is sipped to cleanse the lips, mouth, and throat.

Tattva. ' Ether and the space at which it appears.t ^sctar. * The thousand-petalled lotus in the cranium.

The ritual offering.

, Wal:er which is sipped to cleanse the lips, mouth, and throat.

Tattva. ' Ether and the space at which it appears.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .)

1147

be offered as raiment, the sense of smell as perfume; 
the heart as flower; the five Pr&nas 1 II as incense; the 
element * fire* as light; the sea of nectar* as food offering ; 
An&hata Dhvani" as a bell; the element air’ as a ChS.- 
mara, s and the functions of the ten senses and the rest¬ 
lessness of mind as the dance.* Next, in order to perfect 
self-absorption in the Devata, the Sadhaka should offer 
fifteen handfuls 10 of mental flowers at Her lotus-feet. 
These fifteen handfuls of flowers in the form of Bh&va 
consist of the ten flowers of non-m&y&, non-egotism, non- 
attachment, non-vanity, non-delusion, non-arrogance, non¬ 
enmity, non-perturbance, u non-malice, and non-oovetous- 
ness; and of the five flowers of ahingsft, 1 * control of the 
senses, mercy, forgiveness, and knowledge. Next should 
be offered with the mind 1 ' a sea of a nectar, a mountain 
heap of flesh and fried fish, heaps of fried grain, 1 * with 
clarified butter, sweet rice, Kula-nectar, Kula-flowers, 1 * and 
water used for washing the Pl$ha. lT Next, after offering 
as sacrifices, lust as a goat, and anger as a buffalo, the 
Sadhaka should proceed to perform mental Japa.” In this 
Japa the fifty M&trikfi letters will be the beads of a rosary, 
and Kulakimdalinl Herself will be the thread on whioh

I Prflnn, Ap&na, Vy&na, Ud&na, Sam&na (see Introduction).

’ Tattva. * Tejas Tattva. * Sudha. * Naivedya.

* The subtle sound which is produced in the heart-lotus. Nfida 
(sound) is either Ahata, which is produced by the contact of two sub¬ 
stances. or the Anahata nada, which exists without such contact, or 
the Hang6a itself. At a certain stage of Yoga practice Yogis hear a 
bell-sound in the Anahata Chakra.

* Yayu. * Fly-whisk made of yak's tail.* Yayu. * Fly-whisk made of yak's tail.

* Dancing is done before the Image in worship. 1 Afljali.

" Vide ante. *’ Akshobba—that is. tranquillity of mind.

“ Non-injury. u These are all ideal offerings.

II Mudru. 14 See A. Avalon’s " Mahanirv&pa Tantra."

*» Vide ibid. “ Japa, as to which see Introduction.

1148

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

these beads are strung. After offering Japa in this manner 
and mentally bowing with eight limbs, 1 and thus finishing 
the inner Yajna,* * the S&dhaka should proceed to perform 
outer worship. At the beginning of outer worship there 
is purification* of Special Arghya/ concerning which 
listen to what I say. The mere placing of the Special 
Arghya greatly satisfies the DevatfL On seeing the Arghya 
vessel put in its place, Yoginls 3 and Brahmfi. and other 
Devas and Bhairavas dance with joy, and grant the fruits 
of the consummation of worship.”

It is true that the Shfistra lays down these rules for 
mental worship or inner Yajna, and it is clearly affirmed that 
this worship is more fruitful than orores * of other worship; 
but it must also be understood that inner Yajna or mental 
worship bears crorefold* fruit only if it is thoroughly per¬ 
formed. It is all very well to speak or hear of giving the 
heart-lotus for a seat and the nectar from Sahasr&ra 7 for 
washing the feet; but we must consider how many people 
there are who are able to oarry this out practically. It is a 
terrible thing even to hear for anyone who is not a Sadhaka 
accomplished in the penetration of the six Chakras.* Does 
it not make you ashamed to think of offering the five 
elements Ak&$ha and so forth* as raiment, scent, flower, 
incense, and a light ? It is true that for one who offers 
handfuls of flowers of non-m&y&, non-egotism, non-attach¬ 
ment, non-vanity, non-delusion, non-arrogance, non-enmity,1 AshtAnga prapima, a form of obeisance in which eight parts of 
the body touch the ground, the tips of the toes, the knees, the elbows, 
tip of nose, and forehead. 1 Sacrifice or rite.

* SangskAra. * Offering as distinguished from SAmanya Arghya.

* Avarar.a DevatAs of Kftll, etc.

' Crore“ten million. ’ Vide ante.

‘ Shatchakrabheda (see Introduction and A. Avalon’s " Serpent 
Power.”)

' Space or ether, air, fire, water, earth.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (Contd.) 1149' Crore“ten million. ’ Vide ante.

‘ Shatchakrabheda (see Introduction and A. Avalon’s " Serpent 
Power.”)

' Space or ether, air, fire, water, earth.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (Contd.) 1149

non-perturbance, 1 non-envy, non-greed, non-injury, control 
of the senses, mercy, forgiveness, and knowledge, there is 
no necessity for offering handfuls of real flowers. But 
it is difficult to restrain one’s laughter at the mere thought 
that a Jlva of the Sangsftra who lives in the womb of 
Mayft, and is wholly engrossed in feelings of lust and anger, 
greed and delusion, vanity and envy, will offer non-maya, 
non-attaohment, non-enmity, and so forth, as flowers. 
You have no doubt the right to cull and offer flowers, but 
nothing can be more foolish on your part than to proceed 
to collect and fill your flower-vessel with flowers of a kiud 
of which there iB not even one plant in your garden. There 
is the provision for sacrificing lust as a goat and anger as 
a buffalo. But is it possible for a Jlva attached to the 
Sangs&ra to offer such sacrifices ? Is it not the height of 
presumption on your part to proceed to offer as sacrifice, 
and to boast of having offered, the goat and the buffalo, the 
oppressions and executions of which render you restless, 
and make you flee with fear both day and night ? You are 
given to saying in and out of season that outer offerings of 
leaves, flowers, incense, lights, Naivedya,* * and so forth, are 
nothing. But we ask, Had these things been nothing, 
could you have known anything of that which you consider 
as something? If there were really no such thing as leaves, 
flowers, incense, lights, and so forth, whence, then, has 
come the provision of offering by analogy non-m&ya, non¬ 
arrogance, and so forth, as flowers, and lust, anger, and 
so forth, as goats and buffaloes in sacrifice ? If there is at 
the root really no offering of flowers, whence comes the 
provision for the offering of non-m&ya, non-arrogance, and 
so forth, as flowers ? You say that the external offering of1 Vide ante — tranquillity of mind.

* Food offering.

1150

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 Vide ante — tranquillity of mind.

* Food offering.

1150

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

flowers and so forth is nothing. But I ask, Is the offering 
of flowers of non-mftyft and so forth something real ? Can 
non-mftyft, non-arrogance, and so forth, be ever flowers ? 
Can real flowers have anything to do with the mind ? Do 
plants in a garden ever bear flowers of non-arrogance? 
Does lust ever really move about in the form of a goat ? 
Does anger ever approach you really in the form of a 
buffalo ? Can any of these things be ever an object of offer¬ 
ing ? Now, ponder and say whether it is the outer worship 
or mental worship which is truly real. All that belongs 
to mental worship is but the imagining of an image of 
outer worship, and is a shadow of it. When a Jlva really 
attains the state of non-mfiyfi, does he any longer make any 
distinction between the worshipper and that which is 
worshipped ? What Brahman will he worship, and for what 
purpose, he to whom Brahman is everywhere in the world, 
and who has become Brahman himself? In fact, it is 
because Mftyfi has not disappeared that provision is made 
for offering flowers of non-mftya. The sole purpose of 
mental worship is that haply, in consequence of repeatedly 
thinking of flowers of non-mfiyfi, the bonds of Mftyfi, may 
be snapped in course of time. Otherwise, the Shftstra 
would never have permitted a person who is steeped in 
Mftyfi to offer flowers of non-mftyfi. By such daily prac¬ 
tice of daily meditation and concentration the oloak of 
Mftyfi that covers a jlva is likely to fall off. This is the 
reason why, notwithstanding that worldly Jivas like our¬ 
selves have now no competency for meditation and 
Samfidhi, which is knowledge, there is yet the possibility 
that he may be able by constant practice of outer worship 
to proceed along this path in course of time, by the 
blessing of Guru and the grace of the Supreme Devatfi. 
This is why, in dealing with the subject of a Sftdhaka’s 
effort to achieve the impossible by offering things whioh,CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .) 1151

though he may wish at heart to give, he has really no 
power to give, the Shastra has said i 0 Siidhaka! 
even if you are unable to make an external offering, you 
have at least the right to worship the Devi who is mind 
by seating Her in your mind, to the knowledge and full 
contentment of your mind. Why should you be sorry 
on this account so long as the Mother who is mind exists 
and your mind is your own ? Open for once the door of 
the temple of mind, and, seating the Mother, who is the 
Mind of the mind, on the throne of the mind, worship 
Her with all your mind, all your heart, and all your world. 1 
The full oblation in Her worship is completed with the full 
satisfaction of the mind.' Fulfil the desire of your heart 
by offering in handfuls at the feet of the Devi seated on a 
corpse* * all the worldly objects, desire, enjoyments, and 
aspirations, whioh are yours. Finish the mind’s play 
with the Mother to the satisfaction of your mind. If the 
Mother who is mind itself appropriates to Herself the 
functions of your mind, it will no longer be necessary for 
you to perform even mental, not to speak of outer, worship.

So long as outer worship endures, there is the pro¬ 
vision which requires performance of mental worship also. 
But even where these materials for outer worship are 
wanting, the Shastra ordains that there also mental worship 
makes the Sadhaka’s worship complete. For, She for whom 
worship is ordained is a thing of the heart, and outer 
worship is only an expression of the feelings of that heart.

In the Yamala it is said : “ 0 Mahe§hvarl! where outer 
worship is impracticable, the Spouse of Shiva should be

* The world is considered the S&dhaka's, and the offer of it to Her 
is seeing Her in everything in the world.

' The sense is, worship Her so long as yon are not fully satisfied. 
Because, if you are not satisfied. She is not.

* She is here thought of in §bav&sana.

1152

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA' The sense is, worship Her so long as yon are not fully satisfied. 
Because, if you are not satisfied. She is not.

* She is here thought of in §bav&sana.

1152

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

worshipped in the heart; and from this worship the 
S&dbaka will reap the fruits of all forms of worship."

In the Gandharva Tantra it is said: “ The man who 
offers mental Naivedya 1 to the MahadevI with devotion 
attains longevity and happiness. He who places round 
the neck of the Devi who is mind itself a mental garland 
of a thousand lotuses, lives in the City of the Dev! for 
hundreds and thousands of crores of Kalpas, 1 and then 
(if he has desires) 1 in his next birth acquires sovereignty 
over the entire earth with all its seas. He who mentally 
walks round the MahftdevI has, through the influence of 
such movement round the Dakshiijft, 4 no longer to make 
any journey to the South (Dakshinfi).' Nor will he see 
Hell in the Kingdom of Yama. He who devotedly bows 
to the lotus-feet of Mah&devI conquers this Brahmftnda,' 
oomposed of three worlds, and sinks in Brahma-bliss in the 
eternal abode of the Mother of the world. He who, being 
incapable of such mental action, is restless with the 
thought, ‘ I shall worship Mah&m&ya, the spouse of Mabesh- 
vara, with various kinds of Naivedyas,’ 1 and who under 
the urgent promptings of this thought repeatedly prays,

* O Mother! give me Naivedyas * * according to my mind. 
Let me worship Thee to the satisfaction of my mind by 
offering thee Naivedyas, 1 which are Thine’; or who, being 
himself incapable of making the offering, repeatedly urges 
another to do so, saying, ‘ Offer Naivedya 1 to the Mother,’ 
he, too, conquers the three worlds, and enjoys perfect bliss 
in the Devi’s abode."

* Food offering.

A crore is ten millions. A Ralpa is & period between two world 
dissolutions. ’ Author’s parenthesis.

* A name of the Devi, meaning the Merciful and Gracious One.

* The region of the dead, the Kingdom of Yama.

* Universe.* A name of the Devi, meaning the Merciful and Gracious One.

* The region of the dead, the Kingdom of Yama.

* Universe.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .)

1158

In the sixth Ullfisa of the Shakt&nandatara6gi]?I it is 
said : “ Those who seek the DevatS, without, forsaking the 
DevatS. residing in the heart, are like a man who wanders 
about in the search for glass after throwing away a 
EaustUbha gem * 1 * * which he held in his hand. After seeing 
the Ishtadevata in one’s heart, one should establish Her 
in the image, picture, vessel, or Yantra,* and then worship 
Her. O Parame§hvarl! in the worship of DevatSs one 
should think of the particular ornaments and carriers' 
whioh belong to them individually.”

“ Next, I shall speak of inner Yajna, by virtue of 
whioh Ssdhakas become full of the Divinity. 8itting com¬ 
fortably with the face towards the east or north, a SSdhaka 
should meditate on the Sea of Nectar in his heart, 
In that sea is the Isle of Gems, 4 with sands of gold. It 
is wondrously adorned with Kalpa-trees, 1 laden with flowers, 
and with MandSra, PSrij&ta, and other celestial trees,' 
which are ever in bloom and fruit; fragrant to its farthest 
quarters with the sweet smell of various flowers, over whioh 
hover swarms of black bees, gladdened by the fragrance 
of their gay beauty. The isle resounds throughout with 
the sweet music of singing cuckoos. 7 The lakes of the 
island are brilliant with full-blown lotuses of gold. The 
island is, moreover, adorned with strings of pearls, heaps 
of flowers, garlands, silken draperies, and gates of gold.

1 The Eaustubha is a great gem secured by Vishnu at the churning 
of the ocean.

’The diagram such as the §brTvidy& Yantra on the cover of this 
book. ' V&hana. * Mapidvlpa.

‘ Desire-gratifying trees.

* Trees growing in heaven. These are Mandftra, Pflrijfita, Santfina, 
Harichandana. Kalpavriksha. The first two and the last are here 
mentioned.‘ Desire-gratifying trees.

* Trees growing in heaven. These are Mandftra, Pflrijfita, Santfina, 
Harichandana. Kalpavriksha. The first two and the last are here 
mentioned.

1 Kokila — the Eoel, the black or Indian cuckoo ( Cuculue itidicua )

which, with the spring, black bee. the vernal hreeze. and so forth, are

the companions of the God of Desire.

73

1154

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In that island one should think of a Kalpa-tree. The four 
Vedas of IjMk, Yajus, Sftma and Atharva, characterized by 
the three Gagas of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, are its four 
branches. It bears wonderfully coloured flowers—yellow, 
black, white, red, and of other hues. It is full of singing 
cuckoos, 1 black bees, and many other kinds of birds. Think¬ 
ing thus of the Kalpa-tree, one should next think of an 
Altar of Gems at its foot, and of a large Mandala,’ red 
and full of lustre* * on that altar. This red Mandala is 
surrounded by jewelled steps brilliant as the rising sun, 
and by four gates with flying banners.* It is encircled by 
walls of gems ornamented with every kind of jewel. It is 
presided over by Indra, Yama, V&yu, Varuna, and other 
Lokapalas, 4 in their own respective places. It is in every 
quarter full of Siddhas, Ch&ranas, Gandharvas, Vidy- 
&dharas, § great serpents, playful Kinnaras,* and Apsar&s.* 
There are on all sides fair women of the land of the Im¬ 
mortals dancing and playing musio. It is decorated with 
banners hung with innumerable little bells. It is orna¬ 
mented with gems of ruby* and lapis lazuli* and jewelled 
Chfljnaras,* festooned with garlands of large pearls, and 
coloured and painted with sandal and musk.

“ 0 Devi! the S&dhaka should think that in the midst 
of this Mandala there is an altar made of great rubies.* 
Let him there see in his mind the Devi's four-sided throne 
on this altar tinted with the hue of the rays of newly 
risen suns and moons, and which is the three Devas,1 Kokila—the Koel, the black or Indian cnckoo {Cucultia indicua), 
which, with the spring, black bee. the vernal breeze, and so forth, are 
the companions of the God of Desire.

’ The Yoni Yantra. * Tejas.

* Guardians of Lokas or elemental or other Lords.

* Various classes of Devayoni or Spirits produced from the Devas 
and the Devaa' abode.

' M&nikya. 1 Yaidiryya. ' Fly-whisks made of yak's tail.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (Cotitd.) 1155

Brahma, Vishiju, and Mahe§hvara.‘ O Mahe$hvarl! the 
Sfidhaka should think of a flowery bed on that throne 
and then, after worshipping the PltbadevatiV of the Isbta- 
devata therein according to the injunctions of the res¬ 
pective Tantras, let him meditate on the Parame^hvarl, 
seated in the posture of the lotus-seat * * on Sadfi§hiva the 
Mahapreta, 1 on that flowery bed. Next, the Sfidhaka 
should, after meditating on his Iahtadevatfi with orna¬ 
ments, carrier,* weapons, and family, 4 and offering mental 
jewelled shoes at Her lotus-feet, take Her to the bathing 
room.* There She should be seated on a throne and Her 
body first oleansed with a soented unguent composed of 
camphor, musk, sandal, Gorochanft, T and Kumkuma,* and 
then smeared with scented oil. Next, the Supreme Devata 
should be bathed with water whioh has been stored in 
hundreds of thousands of golden pitchers, and Her body 
should then be towelled with silken oloths. Next, after 
clothing the upper and lower parts of Her body in two 
pieces of cloth, the hair of the Devi with dishevelled hair 
should be oombed and tied with bejewelled silken threads.

1 The altar is four-sided, and the Devas of which it is said to be 
made are in the text three. The four supports are generally given as 
BrahmA, Vishpu, Rudra, I$hOna. The fifth Sadftshiva forms the seat 
of the bed on which the Devi is seated. These five $hivas are known 
as the MahApreta. Hence Devi is called in the LalitA (v. 174) Paficha- 
pretamafichadhish&yinl.' That is, Pflrpa^haila Pltha on the east. Uddly&na Pltha on the 
south, J&landhara on the west, and Kflmarflpa Pltha on the north.

* PadmAeana.

' V&hana—the vehicle which bears the Devi or other Devata as 
the Bird King Garu<7a in the case of Yishpu.

* ParivAra—each Devata has His or Her family. Thus, Durga has 
her sonB KArtikeya, Ganesha, and daughters Laksbml and Sarasvatl.

* SnAna mandira.

' A pigment said to be prepared from the body of the cow.

* Saffron,

1156

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Then mark Her forehead with a Tilaka 1 made of sandal and 
such other things, and paint the parting of Her hair with 
vermilion.* * Next, adorn the fair hands and arms of the 
Charmer of Shangkara with beautiful ivory wristlets, brace¬ 
lets, and armlets; Her lotus-feet and toes with jewelled 
anklets and toe-rings, and Her nostrils with Gajamuktft.* 
The Sftdhaka having to the best of his ability adorned the 
different parts of Her body in this way with ornaments and 
garlands of flowers, should anoint all Her limbs with scent, 
sandal, and perfumed gums. Let him then place a gold- 
embroidered bodice on Her breast.”

“ Meditating thus on the Devi at the time of Samftdhi, 
the Sftdhaka should after performing Bhata§huddhi * and 
Nyfisaa,* worship the Queen of Mahe§hvara residing in his 
heart with the (other) sixteen artioles of worship.* First, 
after offering a throne of gems,* the Sftdhaka should welcome 
Her. 1 Next, he should, after offering water to wash Her 
feet,* plaoe Arghya* on Her head. Let him then give the 
best neotar w for sipping 11 to Her lotus-mouth, and offer Her

* The mark on the forehead worn by pious Hindus.

’ A line worn hy married women.

' A pearl said to be formed in an elephant's head.

* Vide ante.* The mark on the forehead worn by pious Hindus.

’ A line worn hy married women.

' A pearl said to be formed in an elephant's head.

* Vide ante.

* Upachftra. These are—(l) Asann (seat); (2) Sv&gata (welcome); 
(8) Pftdya (water for washing the feet); (4) Arghya (offering of paddy, 
flower, sandal paste, durva grass, etc., in the vessel or Kushi); (5 and 
8) Acharaana (water which iB offered twice and sipped to cleanse the 
lips and mouth); (7) Madhuparka (honey, ghee, milk, and curd); (8) 
Snftna (water for bathing); (9) Vasana (cloth): (10) Abharapa (orna¬ 
ments); (11) Gandha (scent); (12) Pushpa (flowers); (18) Dhupa (in¬ 
cense) ; (14) DTpa (light); (15) Naivedya (food offering); (16) Vandana 
or Namask&ra (prayer). These are the ordinary sixteen Upach&ras, 
but, as appears later at p. 1165, other numbers are given.

' For As&na, see last note. ' Sv&gata. see note 6.

' P&dya (Vide ibid). * Vide ibid.

“ Amrita. “ Achamanlya (vide note 6.)

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .) 1157' For As&na, see last note. ' Sv&gata. see note 6.

' P&dya (Vide ibid). * Vide ibid.

“ Amrita. “ Achamanlya (vide note 6.)

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .) 1157

Madhuparka 1 and then again water for sipping thrice. 
Next, he should mentally offer excellent sweet rice, rice 
mixed with olarified butter, with other food 1 and condi¬ 
ments, a sea of neotar, a mountain-heap of flesh, a mass of 
fish, all kinds of fruits, edibles, and drinks—the whole well 
arranged in golden vessels—and then betel with camphor.* * 
Next, he should, after mentally worshipping the Avarapa 
Devatas* of the Devi, perform mental Japa of Mantra.* 
After performing Japa a thousand times, the fruits of the 
Japa, along with water from the Arghya vessel, should be 
poured on the left hand of the Devi. Brahm&, Vishpu, 
Rudra, and I§hvara, form the support of the bedstead, the 
upper portion of which is SadS,?hiva Himself. 1 On this 
bed, formed of Brahma-vibhfiti,' is spread a milk-white 
coverlet, beautifully strewn with every kind of flowers, and 
on this flowery bed Sure$hvarl* lies in the enjoyment of 
all forms of happiness. Thus should a Yogi S&dhaka 
meditate upon Her. Next, he should entertain Parame$h- 
varl with dances and with singing and playing of music, 
and then perform Homa for the accomplishment of the 
worship in all its parts. I shall now speak of this Homa, 
by means of whioh a Sadhaka becomes all consoiousneBs.

“ The Homa should be performed with the fire of con¬ 
sciousness in the fire-pit n of the Mfilfidhara-lotus. Atmft,

' See note, ante. ’ The second ichamana. See note ante.

* Vyafljana—that is, fish and vegetables boiled in water with spices.

' This is the Naivedya. See note, ante. Vasana, Abharana, Gandha,

Pnshpa, have been already described. Mention does not appear to be 
made of Dhfipa and Dlpa. Now follows Vandana. -

* Attendant Devat&s who form the suite of the Devi.

' See Introduction. ' The Mahftpreta, as to which see ante.* Attendant Devat&s who form the suite of the Devi.

' See Introduction. ' The Mahftpreta, as to which see ante.

* Brahma-power and its manifestation.

' The Devi as Lord of all Devas.

" In the Homa rite, Are is kindled in a pit (Knnda) constructed 
for the purpose, and then the offerings of clarified butter and so forth 
are poured into fire, the "all eater” who carried them in their thns 
purified and subtle form to the Devas. . -

1158

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

AntarAtmA, ParamAtmA, and JnAnAtmA, are the four sides 
of that pit made of consciousness. The half Mfttrft 1 — 
namely, a small Vindu, with three curved lines beneath— 
surrounded by the waist-chain of bliss, forms the Yoni 
Yantra, made of Brahma-bliss. 1 The SAdhaka should daily 
perform the Homa, meditating on ItfA NA<?i on the left, 
PiOgalA on the right, and SushumnA,’ the door to Brahman 
between the two. Dharma and Adharma 1 should be con¬ 
sidered to be the Havis, or offering of the olarified butter, 
in this Homa."

Invocation

The Gandharva Tantra says: “ Next, after performing 
PranAyAma,* * the SAdhaka should take handfuls of flowers. 
The Devi should never be invoked without handfuls of 
flowers. The SAdhaka who has controlled his PrAna* 
will meditate on the Parame§hvarl as above described in 
his heart, and seeing by Her grace that image the sub¬ 
stance of which is consciousness in his heart, let him 
think of the identity between that image manifested within 
and the image without. Next, the energy ’ of conscious¬ 
ness within should be taken without by means of the 
VAyu-vIja 1 with the breath along the nostrils, and infused 
into the handful of flowers.' Thus, issuing with the

1 The Chandravindu, because it is not a fall sound.

' The three curves represent in one sense the trivali.

* See Introduction and A. Avalon's “ Serpent Power."

* Righteousness and Unrighteousness.

* Control of Pr&pa manifesting as breath (see Introduction).* See Introduction and A. Avalon's “ Serpent Power."

* Righteousness and Unrighteousness.

* Control of Pr&pa manifesting as breath (see Introduction).

' The vital airs. The control of these airs (vftyu) manifesting as 
breath actually effects control of the mind.

' Tejas. * The Mantra " Tang.”

* The Karma Mudrft is formed with the flowers within. The hands 
are then lifted to the nostrils. The flower is breathed on through the 
left nostril with the Mantra “ Tang," and the SAdhaka thinks that 
along with that air the OevatA within is brought out and placed in tho 
flowers.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (Contd.) 1159

breath, the Devatft enters into the flowers. The Sftdhaka 
should then establish the Devatft in the image or Yantra 1 
by touohing it with those flowers. So long as the work 
of establishing the Devi in the outer image or Yantra is 
not accomplished, the Sftdhaka should continue to hold 
those flowers of meditation in his hand. If he does not 
hold them, Gandharvas* * avail themselves of the opportunity 
to worship the Devatft inside that flowery Yantra, 1 and 
even if the Sftdhaka thereafter establishes Divinity in the 
image, Yantra, and the like, by contact with those flowers, 
he will not reap the fruits of that worship. For this 
reason the Sftdhaka should, after drawing Her into the 
flowery Yantra* by means of the Trikhap<jla Mudrfi, 
take the Mother of the world, who is all brilliant and 
forceful energy,* out of that flowery Yantra* by the force 
of the invoking Mantra and place Her within the Pl^ha 
(a general name for images, vessels, pictures, and so 
forth).”*Those who oall the Aryya Sooiety idolatrous because 
it worships earthen images, and who ridicule it on these 
grounds, should now open the door of their hearts, and, 
dispelling the darkness of their eyes, consider whether 
the children of the Aryya race who are, as it were, tens 
of millions of Koh-i-noors adorning the heads of the com¬ 
munity of worshippers in the three worlds, really woiship 
a Devi made of earth, or a Devi whose substance is con¬ 
sciousness. What is the need of Mantras, Yantras, Yoga,

' Diagram (see Introduction).

* Devayoni. sons of Brahmft, belonging, together with the Apsaras. 
their wives, to Indras, heaven. Celestial musicians and choristers.

* The flowers which are for the time being the seat of the Devatft. 
' The gesture so called.

* Tejas.

* Author’s parenthesis.

1160 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA* The flowers which are for the time being the seat of the Devatft. 
' The gesture so called.

* Tejas.

* Author’s parenthesis.

1160 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

meditation, concentration, and so forth, if we worship a 
Devi made of earth ? If the earthen image be the Devi 
why invoke into and establish life in it again ? And who in 
the world is such a fool as to invoke earth into earth ? 
Moreover, if Gurus, after thorough investigation into the 
things of the visible world, and who are unequalled in their 
power to display the principles of spiritual life, have 
egiegiously blundered in not recognizing that earth is 
earth, who is there in the world who can rectify such 
blunders? But we say that they realized it to be the 
Mother, and not earth. They made themselves and the 
earth blessed by bringing the Mother into the earth, and 
by themselves seeing and then displaying to others the 
presence of Brahmamayi 1 in every moleoule and atom of 
the Brahmfi^da.' It is therefore with a heart rent with 
soi row that we say that it is the descendants of these 
very men who, through the influence of a pernioious system 
of non-Aryya education, have lost all spiritual insight, and 
are themselves ruined by their thought that Mother 
Brahmamayi, 1 manifest out of grace to devotees, and esta¬ 
blished in the form which She has assumed out of favour 
to Sadhakas, is not Mother, but mere earth. How can 
those who are engrossed in play with earth understand the 
play of the Mother ? 0 Mother of the world ! what trouble 
thou bringest on thy children! Even if, on acoount of this 
trouble, we are unable to understand the truth concerning 
Her by our own independent effort, we have surely the 
privilege to understand the account which She has given of 
Herself in the form of Sh&stra. But of this privilege also 
we are almost deprived through our ill-fortune. Through 
want of instruction from competent Gurus, and of the force

1 The Devi as Brahman Itself.1 The Devi as Brahman Itself.

The Egg of Brahma, or the Universe.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .) 1161

of Sfidhana, we have lost the privilege of understanding 
Her oommands, even while seeming to understand them. 
O follower of the idol theory! how ridioulous it is for you 
to call the Devatfi/s image an idol! The Devi’s substance 
is eternal consciousness appearing in Her earthen form. 
In Her eyes infinite crores 1 of living forms, such as you, 
are as dolls, and of no account. Know it for certain that 
to think of Her as an idol is not an effect of an auspioious 
glanoe from Her. Even if you find it difficult to under¬ 
stand suoh things as devotion, piety, knowledge, or faith, 
you, too, recognize with bowed heads the Shakti of things.* * 
With what heart, then, do you disbelieve the appearance, 
through the operation of Mantra§hakti, of a superworldly 
Shakti, unseen by the senses and minds of men such as you 
and I ? Disease wastes the body, but medicine cures it. 
Medioine defeats the law of Nature according to whioh 
disease destroys the body, and shows its own supernatural 
or superworldly Shakti (power). By the law of Nature 
water is always cool, but when in contact with fire it 
beoomes very hot, and, like fire itself, owing to the com¬ 
munication of the Shakti of heat into it, the same water, 
instead of cooling, causes a terrible burning sensation. 
Here also the law of Nature, according to which water is 
cool, is defeated by the Shakti of the thing we call fire* 
You, too, admit this. How, then, do you disbelieve that, 
under the influence of Mantra$hakti, the Brahmaghakti * 
residing in the heart of a Jlva oomes out with breath, 
and is established in the outer image of Devatft ? Why 
do you disbelieve that, under the influence of the 
Shakti of Mantra, the unconscious state of earth is 
destroyed and divinity is communicated into it as heat

1 A crore is ten millions.

* Vastashakti. ' Brahman as $bakti.

116*2

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA1 A crore is ten millions.

* Vastashakti. ' Brahman as $bakti.

116*2

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

is communicated to water? In faofc, it is one of the 
terrible diseases of the nineteenth century to raise at every 
word the cry, “ The laws of Nature are violated.” It is 
a law of Nature that water is ordinarily cool, and it is 
also a law of Nature that it will become hot in contaot 
with fire. Similarly, it is a law of Nature that earth will 
naturally remain earth, and it is also a law of Nature 
that it will receive divinity 1 under the influence of Mantra- 
shakti. Why, then, raise the objection that the law of 
Nature is violated ? In fact, the root of this objection 
is to be found, not in the nature of the Universe, but in 
the nature of the objector. He has, perhaps, with the 
narrow notions which are the product of his intellect and 
knowledge, understood Nature herself to be very narrow. 
And this is why he understands Nature to consist of a 
few common rules belonging to the small department of 
unconscious things under the great Nature, Mahaprakyiti. 
which is the only source of the Shakti which makes the 
impossible possible. And for this reason they cry out at 
every word that the law of Nature is violated. But, as a 
matter of fact, the law of Nature is one and inviolable, 
and consequently the appearance of the Devi, whose sub¬ 
stance is consciousness in an earthen image, under the 
influence of Mantra, is natural and self-evident. Really 
this appearanoe is but manifestation.* *. For where do you 
And a place in this Brahmanda* which is beyond the 
presence of Brahmamayl ? She has not to come into image, 
Yantra, vessel, picture, flower, leaf, or whatever else you

1 Devattva, the state of Devahood.

* Of that which is already there. It is foolish to talk of any real 
bringing and going in respect of that which is always present, however 
its presence may be, owing to oar own unenlightened consciousness, 
veiled from as.

* Universe. -* Universe. -

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .) 1163

may mention; for She is present in all things, and all 
things are present in Her. But devotees and Sfldhakas 
are not satisfied with Her presence in a subtle form. This 
is why, in order to fulfil the desires of S&dhakas, and in 
order that they may possess Her sometimes as Bhagav&n, 1 
sometimes as Bhagavatl, 1 * sometimes as Father, sometimes 
as Mother, sometimes as Lord,* sometimes as I§hvarl,* and 
so forth ; the Devi, who is will itself, though the one and 
only I§hvara and I$hvarl, appears in different Sftdhanas and 
in different forms of Siddhi, 4 playing different plays in 
different forms—as Shyftma and Shy&mft, as UmSL and 
Rama,* as male and female, as Gajje?ha and Mahe$ha, as 
Lord of wealth and Lord of day, because She is the I§hvarl * 
of the hearts of S&dhakas. This is the reason why, despite 
Her being the I§hvarl, 4 who presides over the Pr&ija§hakti ’ 
of the eternal Universe, Her Prftijapratishthk * is effeoted 
by the S&dhaka’s Prana.* Even though She is the Mother 
of the world, the Sftdhaka worships Her as his own Mother. 
If I perform Sadhana of the Mother, it is not because the 
Mother is wanting, but because I wish to make good the 
wants or deficiencies in myself. Even though all other 
beings of the three worlds perform Sadhana of the 
Mother, that Sadhana does not satisfy me. And the

1 The Brahman as the possessor of all powers (Aiehvaryya) which 
belong to I^hvara, " the personal God." Bhagavatl is the feminine of 
Bhagav&n.

' Ifhvara. 1 Feminine of I$hvara, or Lord.

* That is, particular S&dhanas evoke particnlar forms.

4 That is, in various masculine and feminine forms. It is a vulgar 
error to say, as does Professor Fitzedward Hall in his notes on the 
S&ngkhya, that §hakti is only feminine. Grammatically doubtless it 
is ieminine, but $hakti is, and is the cause of all forms.

* Feminine of I$hvara, or Lord.

* $hakti manifesting as the vital principle.* Feminine of I$hvara, or Lord.

* $hakti manifesting as the vital principle.

' The rite by which establishment of Her life in the image is effected.

' That is, the particular Prftpa or vital principle of the S&dhaka.

1164

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Pranapratish^hft 1 of the Mother is for fulfilling the desire 
of my own heart.

In another Tantra it is said : “ Pr&japratishthi 1 in an 
image of Shiva or Shakti is done by placing the hand on 
its Brahmarandhra,' or forehead, or brow. According to 
some divisions of T&ntrik teachers, Pr&napratishtha should 
be done by placing the hand on the Brahmarandhra,' fore¬ 
head, and brow at one and the same time. Pr&napratishth& 
in an image should be done by touching the heart in the 
case of the Vishnu image, in the case of other Devatfts by 
touching the feet, and in §hivaliftga by touohing the head.”

Articles used and Acts done in Worship* *

In the Sanatkum&ra Tantra it is said: “ The Isbta- 
devatfL should be worshipped daily with sixteen Upach&ras, 4 
or with ten if it is not possible to worship with sixteen, or 
with five Upaob&ras if it is not possible to worship with 
even ten.”

The Jnanamala, quoted by Raghava Bhatta,' says: 
“ The different classes of Upachara in worship are thirty- 
eight—sixteen, twelve, ten, and five.' I shall now relate 
what Upachara are involved in each of these classes, and 
what fruits are gained by the use thereof.

' The rite by which establishment of Her life in the image is effected.

’ That portion of the crown of the head which is called the 
“ fontenelle.”

' Upachara. There are ordinarily sixteen of these, as to which 
vide ante.

* Articles used in worship. The Sanskrit word is kept in the text, 
as the English term "articles " does not correctly describe Upach&ra, 
which includes not only material articles such as flowers and lights, 
but welcome, prayer, etc.

* The great T&ntrik Commentator on the Sb&rad&tilaka.* The great T&ntrik Commentator on the Sb&rad&tilaka.

' As appears from the text which follows, the Upach&ra are given 
in numbers varying from 88 to 8. . .

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .)

1166

“The thirty-eight Upach&ra are—Asana (seat), Avft- 
hana (invocation), Upasthiti (presence), 1 Sftnnidhya’ (near¬ 
ness),* * Abhimukhya (faoing),* Sthirlkyifci (making fast), 4 
Pras&dana (pleasing),* Arghya (offering), Pfidya (water for 
washing the feet), Achamana (water sipped to cleanse the 
lips, mouth, and throat), Madhuparka (honey, ghee, milk, 
and ourd), Aohamana again, Snftna (bathing),' Nlrajana 
(waving of light), 1 Vastra (cloth), Achamana (the third 
time), Upavlta (sacred thread),* Achamana again (the fourth 
time), BhUshapa (ornaments),' Darpanavalokana (looking 
at a mirror),” Gandha (perfume), Pushpa (flower), DbClpa 
(incense), Dipa (light), 11 Naivedya (offerings of food), Panlya 
(offerings of drink), the fifth Achamanlya (water for sipping 
as above), Hastav&sa (napkin), 1 * Tambula (betel), 1 * Anulepana 
(unguent), 14 Pushp&fljali (handful of flowers), Gita (sing¬ 
ing), Yadya (instrumental music), Nyitya (dancing), Stuti 
(reciting hymns in praise), Pradakshipa (walking round), 1 ' 
Pushpanjali (second handful of flowers), and Namaskara 
(obeisance)." These are the thirty-eight Upachara.”

1 That ie, the coming of the Devata after the invocation.

' Her near approach to the worshipper. * Facing the S&dbaka.

* The Sadhaka makes the Devi assume a fixed position before him. 
' The Sadhaka gladdens and propitiates the Devi.

' The Devi is bathed. ’ That is, before the Devi.

* Placing of sacred thread on the image. * The Devi is adorned.

“ A mirror is presented to Her that She may regard Herself 
and toilet.

“ Which is placed before Her and offered with a Mantra, as are 
the rest.

“ After eating and drinking, She cleanses Her mouth, and then a 
napkin is offered that She may wipe Herself therewith.

“ This is always chewed after eating.“ After eating and drinking, She cleanses Her mouth, and then a 
napkin is offered that She may wipe Herself therewith.

“ This is always chewed after eating.

“ Sandal paste, perfumed oil, etc.

u The S&dhaka walks round the image—a sign of reverence.

" Bowing.

1166

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 
Thirty-six Upachdra

In the fifty-fifth Pafcala of Nibandha 1 it is said: “ Asana 
(seat), Dantakftshtha * * (stick for cleansing the teeth), Ud- 
vartana* (anointing the body). Yirflkshapa (rubbing the 
body), 1 Samm&rjana (rubbing off).' Abhyafijana (second 
anointing), Snana (bathing with ghee and so forth), Avfl- 
hana (invocation), P&dya (water for washing the feet), 
Arghya (offering), Achamanlya (water sipped to cleanse 
the mouth), Sn&nlya (water for bathing), Madhuparka 
(mixture of honey, milk, ghee, and curd), Achamanlya again, 
Namaskfira (obeisance), Njitya (dancing), Gita (singing), 
Y&dya (instrumental music and offering of other things) * 
Stuti (reciting hymns in praise), Homa, T Pradakshipa (walk¬ 
ing round), Darpanadarshana (looking at a mirror), Ch&- 
maravySjana (waving of Chamara),* Shayyft (bed),* Anule- 
pana (unguent), Vastra (cloth)'® Alartgk&ra (ornaments), 
Upavlta (sacred thread), Gandha (perfume), Pushpa 
(flowers), DhQpa (incense), Dlpa (light),Yalid£Lna (offering 
of sacrifice)," Tarpana (offering libations of water), Atma- 
samarpana (self-dedication), and Visarjana (dismissal). 
These are the thirty-six Upaoh&ra.”

Eighteen Upachdra

In the third Patala of the Phetk&ripl Tantra, quoted 
in the Sby&m&rahaBya, it is said: “ Asana (seat), Av&hana

' Nibandha Tantra. 1 The Hindus cleanse their teeth with a stick.

' Rubbing the body with perfume and fragrant unguents.

* That is rubbing the unguents in.

* Of the unguent which remains on the body.

* This is in text, and treated as part of V&dya.

’ Sacrifice into fire. ' Fly-whisk made of yak's tail.

* Offering of bed. It iq imagined that the Devi will repose Herself* This is in text, and treated as part of V&dya.

’ Sacrifice into fire. ' Fly-whisk made of yak's tail.

* Offering of bed. It iq imagined that the Devi will repose Herself

thereon. “ Dresses are offered.

" In the case of $h&ktas sacrifice of animals and fruits and vege¬ 
tables, in Vaishpava worship the latter only.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (Contd.)

1167

(invocation), Arghya (offering), Pfidva (water for washing 
the feet), Achamanlya (water sipped to cleanse the 
mouth), Sn&na (bathing), Vastra (cloth), Upavlta (sacred 
thread), BhQshana (ornaments), Gandha (perfume), Pushpa 
(flowers), DhQpa (incense), Dlpa (light), Anna (Naivedya), 1 
Tarpana (offering libations of water), Mftlya (garland), 
Anulepana (unguent), Namask&ra (obeisance), and Visarjana 
(dismissal). A S&dhaka should perform worship with these 
eighteen Upach&ra."

Sixteen Upach&ra

In the Shivftrchana ChandrikA it is said: “ Asana 
(seat), Sv&gata (welcome),* P&dya (water for washing the 
feet), Arghya (offering), Achamanlya (water for sipping 
as above stated), Madhuparka (mixture of honey, milk, 
ghee, and curd), Achamana (cleansing of mouth), Sn&na 
(bathing), Vasana (doth), Abbaran& (ornaments), Gandha 
(perfume), Pushpa (flowers), DhQpa (incense), Dlpa (light) 
Naivedya (offerings of food), and Vandana (prayer with 
hymns in praise). These sixteen Upaoh&ra should be 
used and done in worship.”

Sixteen Upach&ra described in Another Way

In the Mantraratnavali, quoted in the Kjishparchana- 
chandrika, it is said: “ P&dya (water for washing the 
feet), Arghya (offering), Achamanlya (water sipped to 
cleanse the mouth), Sn&na (bathing), Vasana (doth), 
BhQshana (ornaments), Gandha (perfume), Pushpa (flowers), 
DhQpa (incense), Dlpa (light), Naivedya (offerings of food), 
Achamana (water sipped as above), T&mbula (betel), 
Archana-Stotra (hymns of praise), Tarpapa (offering liba¬ 
tions of water), and Namask&ra (obeisance)."

1 Offerings of food. ' The OevI is welcomed as She appears.1 Offerings of food. ' The OevI is welcomed as She appears.

1168 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Twelve Upachara

In the Svatantra Tantra it is said : “ Arghya (offering' 
Pftdya (water for washing the. feet), Achamanlya (wate* 
sipped for cleansing the mouth), Madhuparka (mixture 
of milk, ghee, honey, and curd), Achamana again (see 
above), Gandha (perfume), Pushpa (flowers), Dhflpa (in¬ 
cense), Dlpa (light), Naivedya (offerings of food), Pra- 
dakshiua (walking round), and Namaskara (obeisanoe). A 
Mantrl * should perform worship with these twelve

Upachara.”

Ten Upachara

In the Kftll Tantra, quoted in the Shyamarahasya, it 
is said: “ Arghya (offering), Padya (water for washing 
the feet), Achamanlya (water sipped to cleanse the mouth), 
Madhuparka (mixture of honey, milk, ghee, and curd), 
Achamana (as above second time), Gandha (perfume), 
Pushpa (flowers), DhUpa (incense), Dlpa (light), and 
Naivedya (offering of food). These are the ten Upachara.

Seven Upachara

In the Prayogas&ra, quoted by Raghava Bhatta, it 
is said: “ Arghya (offering), Gandha (perfume), Pushpa 
(flowers), Akshata (barley, or atapa rice), DhUpa (incense), 
Dlpa (light), and Naivedya (offering of food). With these 
is performed seven-limbed worship.

* Offering of paddy or nnhusked rice (which is always fttapa— that 
is, sun-dried), flowers, sandal paste, durvft grass, etc.

’ He who has the Mantra or secret word (Mantroguptabh&shapam 
yasya asti), or Initiated devotee.

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP (Contd.) 1169 
Five Upachara

In the fifty-fifth Pa^ala of the Nibandha Tantra it is 
said: “ Gandha (perfume), Pushpa (flowers), Dhapa (in¬ 
cense), Dlpa (light), and Naivedya (offerings of food). These 
are the five Upachara. A SAdhaka should always use these 
five in worshipping his IshtadevatA.”

Three Upachdra

“ The five Upachara less Dhapa (incense) and Dlpa 
(light)—that is to say, Gandha (perfume), Pushpa (flowers), 
and Naivedya (offerings of food) — are known as the three 
Upaohara.Three Upachdra

“ The five Upachara less Dhapa (incense) and Dlpa 
(light)—that is to say, Gandha (perfume), Pushpa (flowers), 
and Naivedya (offerings of food) — are known as the three 
Upaohara.

“ The different classes of Upachara above enumerated 
oonsist of items varying from thirty-six to three in number. 
The misguided SAdhaka who, for the sake of economy, 
though able to worship with the first named classes, pro¬ 
ceeds to perform worship with the latter, never obtains the 
fruits of the worship as stated in the Shastra."

Rules for Japa*

In the Pichchhila Tantra it is said : “ After perform¬ 
ing Pra^AyAma thrice, one should do the Rishi and other 
NyAsas.* Next, after performing the Nyasa on six limbs, 
one should do the Kulluka Japa.* Next, after performing 
Japa of the Mahasetu * and Setu Mantraa,* one should do

1 Japa is defined as Vidb&nena mantrocbeh&ranam, or tbe repeated 
utterance, mentally or physically, of Mantra according to certain rules. 
It is of three kinds, and is described in the Introdnction.

' Vide ante.

' See Introduction for a short description of this technical aspect 
of Mantra.

1170 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

Japa of the Mulamantra 1 the fixed number of times. After 
this Japa, one should again perform Japa of the Setu and 
Mahasetu Mantras, and then make an offering of the Japas. 
Next, after performing Pr&ij&yama thrioe, one should how¬ 
to Parameshvari, according to the injunctions relating to 
bowing with eight parts of the body and so forth, or b\ 
touching the earth with only the head.’

In the fifth Patala of the Sarasvati Tantra it is said: 
“ I shall now speak of another kind of excellent purifica¬ 
tion of the mouth (purification consisting of Mantra),* with¬ 
out whioh, O high-favoured Devi! Japa and worship will 
be ineffectual. 0 Devi! he who performs Japa with an 
unpurified tongue commits a sin. For this reason one 
should purify one’s mouth with all care."In the Kul&njava it is said: “ At the beginning of 
Japa a S&dhaka is affected by birth uncleanness, and at 
the end of Japa by death unoleanness.* A Mantra affected 
by these two forms of uncleanness is never perfect and 
fruitful. For this reason a Mantra should be cleansed 
of the two forms of uncleanness which attach to the be¬ 
ginning and the end, and then it should be repeated in 
Japa. When freed from those two forms of unoleanness, 
that Mantra grants all forms of Siddhi. 8 Therefore, for 
the attainment of the fourfold fruit * one should perform

1 The primary Mantra of the DevatS.

* Ashtftngaprap&ma—bowing with tips of toes, knees, elbows, nose, 
and forehead touching the ground.

' Author’s parenthesis. This is known as Mukha?hodhana. For 
this and other processes, such as Jibv&$hodhana, etc., processes pre¬ 
liminary to and involved in the right utterance of Mantra, see Intro¬ 
duction.

* As to the “ birth " and “ death " defilements in the case of a

Mantra, see Tantras&ra 75 et seq. * Success or fruit.

' Dharma, Artha. Kama, and Moksha (see Introduction)

CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ( Contd .) 1171

Japa of the Mfilamantra, 1 commencing and ending with the 
Pra$ava,* reciting it one hundred and eight times, or seven 
times at the beginning and at the end of Japa."*

In the YoginI Tantra it is said : “ The Japa which forms 
a part of daily worship should be done with the fingers, 4 
but not so a Japa in a rite undertaken for the attainment 
of some desired object. For, in Japas of the latter kind, 
the rule is that they should be performed with different 
kinds of rosaries, according to the different kinds of desired 
objects. The Shastra does not ordain that such Japas 
should be performed with the fingers. But, 0 Mahe^hvarl! 
if rosaries are wanting, then they may be so performed.”In the Sachchhanda Maheshvara it is said : “ The rosary 
whioh is made of beads of Rudr&ksha, 4 coral, lotus-seeds, 
and joints of Ku§ha grass, is a cause of happiness to the 
three castes of Br&hmapa, Kshatriya, and Vaishya. Women 
and ShQdras using rosaries made of these beads will be 
guilty of sin. Rosaries made of other kinds of beads are 
efficacious for them.

“ Rosaries made of beads of Rudr&ksha, 4 conch-shell, 
lotus-seed, wild olive, 4 pearls, crystals, gems, gold, coral, 
silver, or roots of the Ku§ha grass, are prescribed for house¬ 
holders.”

In the Vlra Tantra it is said: “ One should carefully 
perform Japa with a rosary of Rudr&ksha beads in the night. 
But, 0 great Devi! a rosary of Rudr&ksha beads should 
never be used in Japa during daytime.”

1 Vide ante. * The Mantra Oip.

' The Japa is of the Malamantra only. It is preceded and concluded 
by the recitation mentioned in the text.

' The counting is done with the thumb on each of the three joints 
(technically called *’ yoni ") of the fingers. The order, however, in which 
the joints are touched in counting varies with the Japa and worship.

* The seed of a plant used in the worship of ?hiva.

' Putrafljlva.

1112

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA

In the Rudray&mala it is said : “ A rosary of Rudraksha 
beads should never be used in Japa during the day. But, 
0 fair-faced Devi! the doing of Japa with a rosary of 
Rudraksha beads in the daytime will not be blameable in 
Pura?hcharapa.” 1

In the Yamala it is saidA rosary, which is Ishta- 
devata Herself, should be daily worshipped and daily used 
in Japa; for, if a rosary fasts—that is to say, is not used in 
Japa or worshipped—dangers befall the Sadhaka.”In the KaftgkalamalinI Tantra it is said: “Japa should 
be done one thousand and eight, one hundred and eight, 
fifty and eight, thirty and eight, twenty and eight, ten and 
eight, twelve, ten, and eight times. A Sadhaka who is so 
able should do Japa with the higher numbers, and others 
who are not so capable with the lower numbers. 0 Mahesh- 
varl! know that in worship and other great daily rites dif¬ 
ferent numbers are ordained to meet differences in the 
capacities of Sadhakas.”

1 Aa to this form of S&dhana, see Introduction.

•fT '

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL LIBRARY, 
1 ^ Q NEW DELHI

Isaua h ftgaCtl..--—-- L -

Catalogue No. SalT/Bba/A.ll. -

. . _Principi.es of tantra: 
11 Tantratattva.

. v.>

Date cl Issue

Date of Return

/

“J book (hat is shut is but a block"

c *aeolo G/

v ^ ^ ,

aT GOVT. OF INDIA <s 
Department of Archaeology >

NEW DELHI.

*

%

Please help us to keep the book 
clean and moving.

a.*- us. n.ccihi.

»