ALbto i bK

GROWL

INCLUDING

GEMATRI

BER

HI ROTH

SEPHER

a *

t!

INTRODUCTION BY

ISRAEL REGARD1E

O O

777

AND OTHER

QABALISTIC

WRITINGS

OF

ALEISTER

CROWLEY

Ill

AND OTHER

QABALISTIC WRITINGS

OF

ALEISTER CROWLEY

Including

GEMATRIA SC SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Edited with an Introduction by

ISRAEL REGARDIE

This book has been downloaded from Internet Archive: Digital Library and 
re-digitized for better reading and viewing. I hope this adds to your reading 
pleasure.

SAMUEL WEISER, INC. 
York Beach, Maine

This collection first published as 
The Qabalah of Aleister Crowley, 1973 by 
Samuel Weiser, Inc.

P.O. Box 612 
York Beach, Maine 03910 
© Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1973

Retitled in the fourth printing, 1977 
Reprinted 1979, 1982, 1983

ISBN 0-87728-222-6

Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 73-80056

Printed in the U.S.A. by 
Maple-Vail Book Manufacturing Group 
Binghamton, NY

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

BOOK ONE

GEMATRIA (Extrapolated from Equinox Vol. 1, No. 5)

BOOK TWO

LIBER 111

♦Editorial Preface vii

Preface ix

♦A Brief Essay upon the Nature and Significance of

the Magical Alphabet xvii

♦The Meaning of the Primes from 11 to 97 xxv

Diagram of the Tree of Life xxvii

Six Tables of Correspondences 1

♦Additional Tables 37

♦Various Arrangements 39

♦Explanations of the Attributions in the more

important Columns of Table 45

♦Appendix A. What is Qabalah? 125

♦Appendix B. What is a “Number” or a “Symbol”? 127

Notes to Table of Correspondences 138

Appendix I. The Trigrams and Hexagrams of the

Yi King 147

♦ Indicates material not in the original edition.

BOOK THREE

SEPHER SEPHIROTH (extrapolated from Equinox Vol. 1, No. 8)

-

INTRODUCTIONAppendix I. The Trigrams and Hexagrams of the

Yi King 147

♦ Indicates material not in the original edition.

BOOK THREE

SEPHER SEPHIROTH (extrapolated from Equinox Vol. 1, No. 8)

-

INTRODUCTION

This is a unique collection of Qabalistic texts without 
parallel in the entire history of this vast mystical literature. 
All of them belong to the very early professional career of 
Aleister Crowley; that is they were written before he had 
reached the age of 40 years. As every student of the Crowley 
corpus of writings should know, however, they were used 
constantly and continuously by him throughout his lifetime.

In the obscure footnotes to The Vision and The Voice 
(Sangreal Foundation, Dallas, 1972) which I recently edited, 
it soon became evident that few of those explanatory notes 
of his would make rhyme or reason to the average student 
unless he were exceedingly well-grounded in the material and 
methods delineated in those three books. All three need to be 
studied assiduously over a long period of time before those 
footnotes become intelligible to any degree. Or until the in¬ 
trinsic value of the texts themselves is perceived as being of 
the purest gold.The first of these three texts is actually one of the install¬ 
ments from the Equinox, the fifth, containing a biographical 
serial entitled The Temple of King Solomon. This serial strove 
to present a more or less dynamic picture of the personality 
of Aleister Crowley or Frater Perdurabo, to use his Order 
name, in the course of his progress along the mystical and 
magical path. The first few installments were written by one 
of his major disciples of the first decade of this century. Cap¬ 
tain (later General) J. F. C. Fuller. After a while, these two 
men separated, as narrated in The Confessions of Aleister 
Crowley (Hill & Wang, New York 1970). The result was 
that Crowley being left in the lurch, as it were, wrote the 
fifth installment as a kind of filler, enabling him to find time 
to resume the narrative of his attainment interrupted by Ful¬ 
ler’s departure.

The “filler” has nothing to do. in reality, with the biographi¬ 
cal narrative. It consisted of a set of Qabalistic and prag¬ 
matic notes on Number that Crowley had accumulated over 
the years, and which he now tied together for this purpose.

It consisted of a study of one phase of the Qabalistic 
process which is held in rather poor esteem today, mostly— 
so I believe—because the majority of modern writers have 
not been able to penetrate its mystery. They cannot cope 
with it in any way. They regard it, unfortunately, on a par

with the common practice of numerology and fortune telling, 
thus missing the boat entirely.with the common practice of numerology and fortune telling, 
thus missing the boat entirely.

Gematria, as this process is named, is pronounced as 
g’mut’ree'ah. As a method it reminds me somewhat of the 
mysteries surrounding the usage of the koan in the Rinzai 
sect of Zen. It seems at first sight nothing but perfect non¬ 
sense, this taking liberties with names and letters and num¬ 
bers. But in point of fact, just as the koan is a meaningful but 
not necessarily rational statement made from a mystical level 
of consciousness, so also it may be used to induce a similar 
type of illumination in the determined student who uses it. 
Depending on the spiritual state of the reader, Gematria will 
be perceived either as nonsense of the most grotesque de¬ 
scription, or it will awaken some simulacrum of the mystical 
state originally experienced by its writer.

If you study Crowley’s exposition of the number 418, in 
this second book Gematria, for example, something of this 
high point of view may be perceived. It was not arbitrarily 
chosen as an important or significant number for him, or for 
that matter for anyone else. And so with many other num¬ 
bers. The method does have a definite sphere of usefulness 
and a vital place in Qabalistic exegetical process, but it does 
require to be understood.

Never for one moment suspect Crowley of gullibility or 
naivete. It may seem at first sight as if he were. But read 
the first few pages of the essay on Gematria where you will 
notice his satire, his ridicule, his humor. This should never 
be ignored or minimized. He never had difficulty poking 
fun at himself or the methods he used for different purposes. 
It saved him from gullibility and credulity, the curse of the 
average occult student. Some of his conclusions on his nu¬ 
merical manipulations therefore are entitled, at the very 
least, to some scrutiny and examination, and this in turn 
may lead to respect.For example, I have always been profoundly impressed 
by his handling of the number 913 (Equinox I, No. V, p. 
107). It is the gematria of Berashith, a Hebrew word mean¬ 
ing “the beginning”, the first word of the Book of Genesis. 
He starts with a discussion of the number nine, and reduces 
it by several brilliant permutations and attributions to one, 
stating that “the many being but veils of the One; and the 
course of argument leads one to knowledge and worship of

each number in turn.” In concluding the lengthy analysis, 
he does state explicitly that “9 is not equal to 1 for the 
neophyte. These equivalences are dogmatic, and only true by 
favour of Him in whom All is Truth.”

Any man who can write thus of a subject which is taboo 
because capable of infinite abuse, and which has earned the 
contempt of several reasonable students of the mysteries, is 
worthy of respect and consideration.

Right to the end of his days, Crowley felt that gematria 
was a most useful tool, and tested many of his theoretical 
and intuitive findings relative to The Book of the Law against 
the manipulations and inspirations of gematria. I must say 
that I am in complete accord with him in this respect, as testi¬ 
fied to by my earliest piece of writing A Garden of Pome¬ 
granates, in which there is a chapter on gematria.

The second of these, Liber 777 has been reprinted sev¬ 
eral times in recent years. All of the new editions improved 
on the first one, which is rare nowadays and most expensive, 
by the inclusion of many short essays and commentaries writ¬ 
ten at various times of Crowley, and added skillfully by the 
editor after Crowley’s demise in 1947.This book was first started in 1907 shortly after his return 
from the China expedition. It is humorously referred to in 
the second essay in Konx Om Pax where there are references 
to the Table of Correspondences in preparation. In point 
of fact, these tables of correspondences which comprise Liber 
777 and which were not published until 1909, consist of basic 
information provided originally, piecemeal, in the knowledge 
lectures of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. Predi¬ 
cated on his own further studies and experiences, they were 
enormously expanded by Crowley so that, at first sight, they 
bear little resemblance to the fragmented tables in the Golden 
Dawn.

There is a wealth of valuable material here just waiting 
to be used. Many writers have done so without due acknowl¬ 
edgment.

The book provides a basic system or method of filing new 
information on any topic and subject. The filing system is 
predicated on a mere thirty two categories, the Ten Sephiroth 
of the Tree of Life, and the twenty two letters of the Hebrew 
Alphabet. Once this schema is understood, any new set of 
data of any kind can be referred to it, thus undergoing imme-

diate and spontaneous organization and synthesis within the 
psyche. True, most of the material relates to comparative 
religion and mythology, including precious stones, herbs and 
plants, and a multitude of other matters. Because these com¬ 
prise the basic notions currently employed, one should not 
feel limited only to these topics. At one time, I experimented 
allocating the elements on the atomic scale to this Tree, with 
some modicum of success. Somewhere along the line, in the 
course of my travels, this set of attributions has got lost, and 
I never made another attempt to duplicate it. It is mentioned 
here, though, in the hope that enterprising students will realize 
the enormous potentialities which lie ahead when using the 
Tree of Life in this way.Liber 777 created a new type of literature when it first 
appeared. It was the first of its kind, and Crowley deserves 
credit for that, even if some of the material itself is not orig¬ 
inal. The concept is, and that is all that matters.

In order to get some theoretical idea of the Qabalah as a 
philosophical schema, there are some modern books outside 
the Crowley corpus which could be consulted to considerable 
advantage.

First of all, there is Dion Fortune’s masterpiece The Mysti¬ 
cal Qabalah, which is similarly based on Golden Dawn ma¬ 
terial. Its value lies in the manner in which she has consid¬ 
ered each item and each detail with an exposition which ties 
them all together intelligibly.

Parallel to this is William Gray’s Ladder of Lights, which 
is another elucidation of the Tree from a different viewpoint 
but equally illuminating. Both of these books are limited 
however merely to a study of the Ten Sephiroth, the main 
categories of the Tree. Supplementing these is Gareth Knight’s 
Practical Course in Qabalistic Symbolism which extends the 
scope of the previous two books. By studying these three 
books, good background material should be provided from 
which to learn to appreciate the enormously valuable task 
performed by Crowley in Liber 777 several decades ago. 
The student can accept as much or as little of the philosophy 
described in the above-named books as he wishes. It does not 
matter, so long as the basic schema is understood and applied 
to Liber 777 . I foresee but little difficulty in this task.

The third volume included here is Sepher Sephiroth, which 
means simply the Book of Numbers. It is extrapolated fromThe third volume included here is Sepher Sephiroth, which 
means simply the Book of Numbers. It is extrapolated from

Equinox I, No. 8. Originally, the book was started by Allan 
Bennett, one of the Golden Dawn adepts who took Crowley 
under his wing to ground him in the fundamental processes of 
Magic, Qabalah, and meditation. He must have been a most 
extraordinary man, for his mark on Crowley proved to be 
indelible—and there are few for whom this may be said.

Allan left one or two other pieces of writing which Crow¬ 
ley reproduced in one or other of the several volumes of the 
Equinox', they are worthy of being referred to. A Note on 
Genesis is a brilliant piece of exposition of Qabalistic prin¬ 
ciples demonstrating the whole gamut of Golden Dawn teach¬ 
ings, including some of the Qabalistic methods described here. 
For this reason alone it should be studied. The other was 
written after he had abandoned the Order to become a Budd¬ 
hist monk with the sacramental name of the Bhikkhu Ananda 
Metteya. It is entitled The Training of the Mind, a study of 
how to acquire skill in meditation, one of the fundamentals 
of the Buddhist way of life. Both essays show the fine calibre 
of his mind, demonstrating why Crowley was so profoundly 
impressed by him. Anyway—this book is due in large meas¬ 
ure to his efforts which Crowley continued.

Sepher Sephiroth consists of hundreds of Hebrew words 
selected from several sources that are listed in the front of 
the text. Most of the words are from the Old Testament and 
a couple of non-Zoharic texts translated by McGregor Mathers 
under the title of The Kaballah Unveiled, from the Latin edi¬ 
tion of Knorr von Rosenroth. These words were arranged 
according to their numerical value by Bennett. The process 
and additional words were continued by Crowley after he 
had inherited the book from his mentor.There are some strange gematria combinations to be 
found there, but it is traditionally assumed that if two words 
have the same number value, a connection of some kind may 
be said to exist between them. At first sight, in some instances, 
no such relationship may be perceived, but if the student per¬ 
sists in his study and meditation, he may come to realize 
something of the profundities of these subtle connections and 
associations that are not immediately perceived.

I have taken the liberty of deleting a Table of Factor 
{Equinox I, No. 8, p. viii-xv), which in reality has nothing 
whatsoever to do with Sepher Sephiroth* In my opinion it is

*This table is included by the publisher in the third edition, 1975

one of the occasional examples of Crowley’s exhibitionism. 
Sometimes he just had to demonstrate his erudition. Much the 
same is true of many numbers in the last few pages of the 
text, ( Equinox I, No. 8, p. 68-101) save for a few with their 
corresponding Hebrew words that could be condensed and 
brought closer together. These pages are omitted because 
there are no corresponding Hebrew words listed; for the time 
being they are just a waste of space and paper.

While it is true that the serious student might study other 
Qabalistic texts and in the future discover new Hebrew words 
having a numerical value that corresponds to those that I 
have just now deleted, nevertheless he could make his own 
additions to Sepher Sephiroth, insert a new string of numbers 
to make a place for his newly found words. And that is as it 
should be. There should be nothing fixed or rigid about any 
of these three books. They can be supplemented and expanded 
by the explorations of each student, depending on his own 
judgment and ingenuity. But he must not fall into the pitfall 
of some modern writers who, having no sympathy or under¬ 
standing of the process, decry it and declare it of little value 
in the Qabalistic scheme of things.I am also omitting Crowley’s Preface to the book. It is a 
nasty malicious piece of writing, and does not do justice to 
the system with which he is dealing. Every so often, Crowley 
falls from the heights which he has seen, and swallows some¬ 
one else’s folly—someone whom he has had occasion to 
admire. In this case, Sir Richard Burton, not always a wholly 
reliable authority—outside of The Arabian Nights.

The essay on Gematria and Sepher Sephiroth should be 
studied together. Some of the profundities of the first will 
never be perceived until one has meditated long and often on 
some of the words analyzed in that essay.

I must confess that every now and again during the course 
of my life I have experienced a thoroughgoing revulsion to 
Crowley as a person, resulting in the total rejection and 
neglect of what he has written.

Days, weeks, months or years may elapse. Then “acci¬ 
dentally” I stumble across something he wrote—such as 
Gematria and become so engrossed and enamored of his in¬ 
genuity and inspiration that my revulsion becomes almost 
immediately transcended. This is probably more true of Ge¬ 
matria than either of the other two here included. (I am not

making reference to his other later writings or poetry or holy 
books at this moment. They belong in a class by themselves.) 
The student who has missed the excitement and inner eleva¬ 
tion experienced by Gematria—whether of his own making 
or merely reading Crowley—has missed a very great deal.

One scholar recently suggested to me in a letter that Crow¬ 
ley’s knowledge of Hebrew was most limited. He made a 
very impressive “showing” only. Tn some ways, I am inclined 
to agree. But on the other hand, what little he did know he 
has used extremely effectively and creatively.Anyway, he was not a dull bluffer like Arthur Edward 
Waite who pretended to all sorts of linguistic and scholastic 
skills he in fact never had. Take for example his book The 
Secret Doctrine in Israel, which is a lengthy analysis of the 
Zohar. That book was not written until after a French trans¬ 
lation of the Zohar had been made—and of course long be¬ 
fore the English one had appeared. The footnotes bear ample 
testimony to this conclusion. Yet he pretended years prior 
to that book that his Latin and Hebrew were more than ade¬ 
quate to the task—though they were not. Even his Latin 
translations of many alchemical texts were merely good edit¬ 
ing jobs, the translators having been, amongst others, some 
elderly Anglican priests, preferring to remain if not anony¬ 
mous then in obscurity, who had got mixed up with the 
Golden Dawn and the occult arts in general. They did the 
“donkey work” of translating difficult material, but Waite 
got the glory and the swollen head. Whatever may be said 
of Aleister Crowley’s inflated ego—and I have often said 
perhaps too much about this—he never stooped quite that 
low.

All of this makes this book The Qabalah of Aleister Crow¬ 
ley of greater interest to the average good student whose 
Hebrew may be no better or no worse than that of Crowley. 
It may give him heart to pursue his own personal addenda 
to those books and become as good a Qabalist as was Crowley.

Finally, let me add that the student should own a good 
Hebrew-English lexicon. Perhaps one of the best ways of 
using this is to browse through it at random—casually as it 
were, and then as his interest and excitement mount, look 
for certain words deliberately and methodically.

For example. Open the lexicon at random, and on that 
particular page point carelessly to the first word noticed.For example. Open the lexicon at random, and on that 
particular page point carelessly to the first word noticed.

Transfer the word and its translation to a sheet of paper, and 
then work out its gematria. Then turn to Sepher Sephiroth 
to see if that number and word are represented. If not, add 
them, using page inserts if necessary. Make special entries 
of such words. As time proceeds, certain other words will 
evoke special interest and should be treated in the same 
manner. Try to follow Crowley’s analysis of Berashith in the 
essay Gematria as a model for the management of these 
words, and as the basis for meditation to lead to the highest.

Here are a couple of examples. I opened the lexicon at 
random and selected two words. A variety of Qabalistic 
methods may be used to elaborate on them. Practice will 
produce skill and insight.

The first word selected was one meaning “empty.” In He¬ 
brew, it is spelled Nun, Ayin, Vav, Resh. Thus its gematria 
is: 50, 70, 6, 200 = 326. This is a number that is listed in 
Sepher Sephiroth, and surprisingly is that of Yeheshuah, the 
Redeemer. The word for “vision” also comes within the pur¬ 
view of this number. Our lexicon word “empty” may seem a 
far cry from any of these words just mentioned, but . . . See 
what a little meditation can do, after having followed a sim¬ 
ilar procedure to that used by Crowley relative to Berashith.Another word selected at random is “defect, or want.” 
In Hebrew this is spelled Cheth, Samekh, Resh, Vav. final 
Nun. Its gematria comes to 324 (counting the Nun as 50). 
This, too, is another number already in Sepher Sephiroth. 
But it is worth comparing with the words already given there. 
“Redness”, “darkness”, “roaring”, etc. All three of these 
Qabalistic texts must be consulted to make sense of these 
apparently unrelated words and numbers. The process thus 
becomes a test for one’s Qabalistic knowledge and skill, but 
more importantly the process becomes a stimulus for the 
surrender of the mind to the mystical experience in which 
the One is seen to be All, and vice versa.

There are simply no limits to be set to the applications of 
these numerical processes. It will take only a little practice 
and experience for the sincere and ingenious student to be¬ 
come aware of the possibilities inherent in gematria. And he 
will conclude by developing a fine appreciation for the value 
—individually and collectively—of these three books as¬ 
sembled for the first time as The Qabalnh of A leister Crowley.

Israel Regardie

GEMATRIA

'

GEMATRIA

This is taken verbatim 
from Aleister Crowley’s 
Equinox, Vol. 1, No. 5.

It must first here be spoken of the Exoteric Qabalah to be 
found in books, a shell of that perfect fruit of the Tree of Life. 
Next we will deal with the esoteric teachings of it, as Frater 
P. was able to understand them. And of these we shall give 
examples, showing the falsity and absurdity of the un¬ 
initiated path, the pure truth and reasonableness of the 
hidden Way.

For the student unacquainted with the rudiments of the 
Qabalah we recommend the study of S. L. Mathers’ “ Intro¬ 
duction ” to his translation of the three principal books of the 
Zohar, and Westcott’s “ Introduction to the Study of the 
Qabalah.” We venture to append a few quotations from the

ii

former document, which will show the elementary principles 
of calculation. Dr Westcott’s little book is principally 
valuable for its able defence of the Qabalah as against 
exotericism and literalism.

The literal Qabalah ... is divided into three parts : GMTRIA, Gematria ; 
NVTRIQVN, Notariqon ; and ThMVRH, Temura.

Gematria is a metathesis of the Greek word y pa/x/xaraa. It is based on the 
relative numerical values of words. Words of similar numerical values are 
considered to be explanatory of each other, and this theory is extended to 
phrases. Thus the letter Shin, Sh, is 300, and is equivalent to the number 
obtained by adding up the numerical values of the letters of the words RVCh 
ALHIM, Ruach Elohim, the spirit of Elohim ; and it is therefore a symbol of 
the spirit of Elohim. For R = 200, V = 6, Ch = 8, A= 1, L = 30, H = 5, I = 10, 
M=4o; total = 300. Similarly, the words AChD, Achad, Unity, One, and 
AHBH, Ahebah, love, each= 13 ; for A— 1, Ch = 8, D = 4, total = 13 ; and A = 1, 
H = 5, B = 2, H = 5, total =13. Again, the name of the angel MTTRVN, 
Metatron or Methraton, and the name of the Deity, ShDI, Shaddai, each make 
314; so the one is taken as symbolical of the other. The angel Metatron is 
said to have been the conductor of the children of Israel through the wilderness, 
of whom God says, “ My name is in him.” With regard to Gematria of phrases 
(Gen. xlix. 10), IBA ShILH, Yeba Shiloh, “ Shiloh shall come ” = 358, which is 
the numeration of the word MShICh, Messiah. Thus also the passage, 
Gen. xviii. 2, VHNH ShLShH, Vehenna Shalisha, “ And lo, three men,” equals 
in numerical value ALV MIKAL GBRIAL VRPAL, Elo Mikhael Gabriel Ve- 
Raphael, “These are Mikhael, Gabriel and Raphael ” ; for each phrase = 701. I 
think these instances will suffice to make clear the nature of Gematria.Notariqon is derived from the Latin word notarius, a shorthand writer. Of 
Notariqon there are two forms. In the first every letter of a word is taken from 
the initial or abbreviation of another word, so that from the letters of a word 
a sentence may be formed. Thus every letter of the word BRAShlTH, 
Berashith, the first word in Genesis, is made the initial of a word, and we obtain 
BRAShITh RAH ALHIM ShIQBLV IShRAL ThVRH, Berashith Rahi 
Elohim Sheyequebelo Israel Torah; “In the beginning Elohim saw that Israel 
would accept the law.” In this connection I may give six very interesting 
specimens of Notariqon formed from this same word BRAShITh by Solomon 
Meir Ben Moses, a Jewish Qabalist, who embraced the Christian faith in 1665, 
and took the name of Prosper Rugere. These have all a Christian tendency, 
2

and by their means Prosper converted another Jew, who had previously been 
bitterly opposed to Christianity. The first is, BN RVCh AB ShLVShThM 
IChD ThMIM, Ben, Ruach, Ab, Shaloshethem Yechad Thaubodo: “The 
Son, the Spirit, the Father, ye shall equally worship Their Trinity.” The third 
is BKVRI RAShVNI AShR ShMV IShVO ThOBVDV, Bekori Rashuni 
Asher Shamo Yeshuah Thaubodo: “Ye shall worship My first-born, My first ? 
Whose name is Jesus.” The fourth is, BBVA RBN AShR ShMV IShVo 
ThOBVDV, Beboa Rabban Asher Shamo Yeshuah Thaubodo: “When the 
Master shall come Whose Name is Jesus ye shall worship.” The fifth is, 
BThVLH RAVIH ABChR ShThLD ISh VO ThAShRVH, Bethulh Raviah 
Abachar Shethaled Yeshuah Thashroah : “ I will choose a virgin worthy to 
bring forth Jesus, and ye shall call her blessed.” The sixth is, BOVGTh 
RTzPIM ASThThR ShGVPI IShVO ThAKLV, Beaugoth Ratzephim Asattar 
Shegopi Yeshuah Thakelo: “ I will hide myself in cake (baked with) coals, for 
ye shall eat Jesus, My Body.”

The Qabalistical importance of these sentences as bearing upon the doctrines 
of Christianity can hardly be overrated.The Qabalistical importance of these sentences as bearing upon the doctrines 
of Christianity can hardly be overrated.

The second iorm of the Notariqon is the exact reverse of the first. By this 
the initials or finals, or both, or the medials, of a sentence, are taken to form a 
word or words. Thus the Qabalah is called ChKMH NSThRH, Chokhmah 
Nesethrah, “ the secret wisdom ” ; and if we take the initials of these two words 
Ch and N, we form by the second kind of Notariqon the word ChN> 
Chen, “grace.” Similarly, from the initials and finals of the words MI 
IOLH LNV HShMIMH, Mi laulah Leno Ha-Shamayimah, “Who shall go up 
for us to heaven?” (Deut. xxx. 12), are formed MILH, Milah, “circumcision,” 
and IHVH, the Tetragrammaton, implying that God hath ordained circumcision 
as the way to heaven.

Temura is permutation. According to certain rules, one letter is substituted 
for another letter preceding or following it in the alphabet, and thus from one 
word another word of totally different orthography may be formed. Thus the 
alphabet is bent exactly in half, in the middle, and one half is put over the 
other ; and then by changing alternately the first letter or the first two letters 
at the beginning of the second line, twenty-two commutations are produced. 
These are called the “Table of the Combinations of TzIRVP,” Tziruph. For 
example’s sake, I will give the method called ALBTh, Albath, thus :—

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

*■»

1

K

I

T

Ch

Z

V

II

D

G

B

A

M

N

S

O

P

Tz

Q

R

Sh

Th

L

Each method takes its name from the first two pairs composing it, the system

311

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

*■»

1

K

I

T

Ch

Z

V

II

D

G

B

A

M

N

S

O

P

Tz

Q

R

Sh

Th

L

Each method takes its name from the first two pairs composing it, the system

3

of pairs of letters being the groundwork of the whole, as either letter in a 
pair is substituted for the other letter. Thus, by Albath, from RVCh, Ruach, 
is formed DTzO, Detzau. The names of the other twenty-one methods are: 
ABGTh, AGDTh, ADBG, AHBD, AVBH, AZBV, AChBZ, ATBCh, AIBT, 
AKBI, ALBK, AMBL, ANBM, ASBN, AOBS, APBO, ATzBP, AQSTz, 
ARBQ, AShBR, and AThBSh. To these must be added the modes ABGD 
and ALBM. Then comes the w Rational Table of Tziruph,” another set of 
twenty-two combinations. There are also three “ Tables of the Commutations,” 
known respectively as the Right, the Averse, and the Irregular. To make 
any of these, a square, containing 484 squares, should be made, and the letters 
written in. For the “Right Table’' write the alphabet across from right to 
left; in the second row of squares do the same, but begin with B and end 
with A ; in the third begin with G and end with B ; and so on. For the 
“Averse Table” write the alphabet from right to left backwards, beginning 
with Th and ending with A; in the second row begin with Sh and end 
with Th, &c. The “ Irregular Table ” would take too long to describe. Besides 
all these, there is the method called ThShRQ, Thashraq, which is simply 
writing a word backwards. There is one more very important form called 
the “Qabalah of the Nine Chambers” or AIQ BKR, Aiq Bekar. It is thus 
formed :

300

30

3

20O

20

2

100

10

1

Sh

L

G

R

K

B

Q

I

A

600

60

6

500

50

s

400

40

4

M final

S

V

K final

N

H

Th

M

D

900

90

9

800

80

8

700

70

7

Tz final

Tz

T

P final

P

Ch

N final

O

Z100

10

1

Sh

L

G

R

K

B

Q

I

A

600

60

6

500

50

s

400

40

4

M final

S

V

K final

N

H

Th

M

D

900

90

9

800

80

8

700

70

7

Tz final

Tz

T

P final

P

Ch

N final

O

Z

I have put the numeration of each letter above to show the affinity between 
the letters in each chamber. Sometimes this is used as a cipher, by taking 
the portions of the figure to show the letters they contain, putting one point for 
the first letter, two for the second, &c. Thus the right angle, containing 
AIQ, will answer for the letter Q if it have three dots or points within it. 
Again a square will answer for H, N, or K final, according to whether it 
has one, two, or three points respectively placed within it. So also with 
regard to the other letters. But there are many other ways of employing 
the Qabalah of the Nine Chambers, which I have not space to describe. I 
will merely mention as an example, that by the mode of Temura called

4

AThBSh, Athbash, it is found that in Jeremiah xxv. 26, the word ShShK, 
Sheshakh, symbolises BBL, Babel.

Besides all these rules, there are certain meanings hidden in the shape 
of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet; in the form of a particular letter at 
the end of a word being different from that which it generally bears when 
it is a final letter, or in a letter being written in the middle of a word in a 
character generally used only at the end ; in any letters or letter being written 
in a size smaller or larger than the rest of the manuscript, or in a letter 
being written upside down ; in the variations found in the spelling of certain 
words, which have a letter more in some places than they have in others ; in 
peculiarities observed in the position of any of the points or accents, and 
in certain expressions supposed to be elliptic or redundant.For example the shape of the Hebrew letter Aleph, A, is said to symbolise 
a Vau, V, between a Yod, I, and a Daleth, D ; and thus the letter itself 
represents the word IVD, Yod. Similarly the shape of the letter He, 
H, represents a Daleth, D, with a Yod, I, written at the lower left-hand 
corner, &c.

In Isaiah ix. 6, 7, the word LMRBH, Lemarbah, “for multiplying,” is 
written with the character for M final in the middle of the word, instead of 
with the ordinary initial and medial M. The consequence of this is that the 
total numerical value of the word, instead of being 30 + 40 + 200+2 + 5 = 277, is 
30 + 600 + 200+2 +5 = 837 = by Gematria ThTh ZL, Tet Zal, the profuse Giver. 
Thus by writing the M final instead of the ordinary character, the word is 
made to bear a different qabalistical meaning.

It is to be further noted with regard to the first word in the Bible, 
BRAShITH, that the first three letters, BRA, are the initial letters of the 
names of the three persons of the Trinity: BN, Ben the Son ; RVCH, Ruach, 
the Spirit; and AB, Ab the Father. Furthermore the first letter of the Bible 
is B, which is the initial letter of BRKH, Berakhah, blessing; and not A, which 
is that of ARR, Arar, cursing. Again, the letters of Berashith, taking their 
numerical powers, express the number of the years between the Creation and 
the birth of Christ, thus: B — 2,000, R = 200, A = 1,000, Sh = 300, I = 10, and 
Th = 400; total = 3910 years, being the time in round numbers. Picus de 
Mirandola gives the following working out of BRAShITh, Berashith :—By 
joining the third letter, A, to the first, B, AB, Ab= Father, is obtained. If to 
the first letter B, doubled, the second letter, R, be added, it makes BBR, 
Bebar = in or through the Son. If all the letters be read except the first, it 
makes RAShITh, Rashith = the beginning. If the fourth letter, Sh, the first 
Band the last Th be connected, it makes ShBTh, Shebeth = the end or rest.

55

If the first three letters be taken, they make BRA, Bera = created. If, omitting 
the first, the three following be taken, they make RASh, Rash = head. If, 
omitting the two first, the next two be taken, they give ASh, Ash = fire. If 
the fourth and the last be joined, they give ShTh, Sheth= foundation. Again if 
the second letter be put before the first, it makes RB, Rab = great. If after the 
third be placed the fifth and the fourth, it gives AlSh, Aish = man. If to the 
two first be joined the two last, they give BRITh, Berith = covenant. And if 
the first be added to the last, it gives ThB, Theb, which is sometimes used for 
TVB, Thob = good.There are three qabalistical veils of the negative existence, and in them¬ 
selves they formulate the hidden ideas of the Sephiroth not yet called into 
being, and they are concentrated in Kether, which in this sense is the Malkuth 
of the hidden ideas of the Sephiroth. I will explain this. The first veil of the 
negative existence is the AIN, Ain, Negativity. This word consists of three 
letters, which thus shadow forth the first three Sephiroth or numbers. The 
second veil is the AIN SVP, the limitless. This title consists of six letters, 
and shadows forth the idea of the first six Sephiroth or numbers. The third 
veil is the AIN SVP AVR, Ain Soph Aur, the Limitless Light This again 
consists of nine letters, and symbolises the first nine Sephiroth, but of course in 
their hidden idea only. But when we reach the number nine we cannot 
progress farther without returning to the unity, or the number one, for the 
number ten is but a repetition of unity freshly derived from the negative, as is 
evident from a glance at its ordinary representation in Arabic numerals, where 
the circle O represents the Negative and the I the Unity. Thus, then, the 
limitless ocean of negative light does not proceed from a centre, for it is 
centreless, but it concentrates a centre, which is the number one of the 
Sephiroth, Kether, the Crown, the First Sephira ; which therefore may be said 
to be the Malkuth or the number ten of the hidden Sephiroth. Thus, 
“Kether is in Malkuth and Malkuth is in Kether.” Or as an alchemical 
author of great repute (Thomas Vaughan, better known as Eugenius Philalethes) 
says, apparently quoting from Proclus ; “ That the heaven is in the earth, but 
after an earthly manner; and that the earth is in the heaven, but after a 
heavenly manner.” But inasmuch as negative existence is the subject 
incapable of definition, as I have before shown, it is rather considered by the 
Oabalists as depending back from the number of unity than as a separate 
consideration therefrom ; therefore they frequently apply the same terms and 
epithets indiscriminately to either. Such epithets are “The concealed of the 
Concealed,” “The Ancient of the Ancient Ones,” the “ Most Holy Ancient 
One,” etc.6

I must now explain the real meaning of the terms Sephira and Sephiroth. 
The first is singular, the second is plural. The best rendering of the word is 
“numerical emanation.” There are ten Sephiroth, which are the most abstract 
forms of the ten numbers of the decimal scale— t.e., the numbers I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 
7, 8, 9, 10. Therefore, as in the higher mathematics we reason of numbers in 
their abstract sense, so in the Qabalah we reason of the Deity by the abstract 
forms of the numbers in other words, by the SPIRVTh, Sephiroth. It was 
from this ancient Oriental theory that Pythagoras derived his numerical 
symbolic ideas.Among the Sephiroth, jointly and severally, we find the development of the 
persons and attributes of God. Of these some are male and some female. Now, 
for some reason or other best known to themselves, the translators of the Bible 
have carefully crowded out of existence and smothered up every reference to the 
fact that the Deity is both masculine and feminine. They have translated a 
feminine plural by a masculine singular in the case of the word Elohim. They 
have,however, left an inadvertent admission of their knowledge that it was plural in 
Genesis iv. 26 : “ And Elohim said : Let Us make man.” Again (v. 27), how could 
Adam be made in the image of Elohim, male and female, unless the Elohim were 
male and female also ? The word Elohim is a plural formed from the feminine 
singular ALH, Eloh, by adding IM to the word. But inasmuch as IM is 
usually a termination of the masculine plural and is here added to a feminine 
noun, it gives to the word Elohim the sense of a female potency united to a 
masculine idea, and thereby capable of producing an offspring. Now, we hear 
much of the Father and the Son, but we hear nothing of the Mother in the 
ordinary religions of the day. But in the Qabalah we find that the Ancient of 
Days conforms Himself simultaneously into the Father and the Mother, and thus 
begets the Son. Now, this Mother is Elohim. Again, we are usually told that 
the Holy Spirit is masculine. But the word RVCh, Ruach, Spirit, is feminine, 
as appears from the following passage of the Sepher Yetzirah: “ AChTh RVCh 
ALHIM ChllM, Achath (feminine, not Achad, masculine) Ruach Elohim 
Chiim : One is She the Spirit of the Elohim of Life.”Now, we find that before the Deity conformed Himself thus— i.e. % as male 
and female—that the worlds of the universe could not subsist, or, in the words 
of Genesis, “ The earth was formless and void.” These prior worlds are 
considered to be symbolised by the “ kings who reigned in Edom before there 
reigned a king in Israel,” and they are therefore spoken of in the Qabalah as the 
“ Edomite kings.” This will be found fully explained in various parts of this 
work.

We now come to the consideration of the first Sephira, or the Number One, 
the Monad of Pythagoras. In this number are the other nine hidden. It is

7

indivisible, it is also incapable of multiplication ; divide I by itself and it still 
remains i, multiply i by itself and it is still i and unchanged. Thus it is a 
fitting representative of the unchangeable Father of all. Now this number of 
unity has a twofold nature, and thus forms, as it were, the link between the 
negative and the positive. In its unchangeable one-ness it is scarcely a number ; 
but in its property of capability of addition it may be called the first number 
of a numerical series. Now, the zero, o, is incapable even of addition, just as 
also is negative existence. How, then, if i can neither be multiplied nor divided, 
is another I to be obtained to add to it; in other words how is the number 2 
to be found ? By reflection of itself. For though o be incapable of definition, 
1 is definable. And the effect of a definition is to form an Eidolon, duplicate, 
or image, of the thing defined. Thus, then, we obtain a duad composed of 1 
and its reflection. Now also we have the commencement of a vibration 
established, for the number 1 vibrates alternately from changelessness to 
definition, and back to changelessness again. Thus, then, it is the father of all 
numbers, and a fitting type of the Father of all things.The name of the first Sephira is KThR, Kether, the Crown. The Divine 
Name attributed to it is the Name of the Father given in Exod. iii. 4: AHIH, 
Eheieh, I am. It signifies Existence.

The first Sephira contains nine, and produces them in succession thus:—

The number 2 or the Duad. The name of the second Sephira is ChKMH, 
Chokmah, Wisdom, a masculine active potency reflected from Kether, as I have 
before explained. This Sephira is the active and evident Father, to whom the 
Mother is united, who is the number 3. This second Sephira is represented 
by the Divine Names, IH, Yah, and IHVH ; and the angelic hosts by 
AVPNIM, Auphanim, the Wheels (Ezek. i.). It is also called AB, Ab, the 
Father.

The third Sephira, or triad, is a feminine passive potency, called BINH, 
Binah, the Understanding, who is co-equal with Chokmah. For Chokmah, 
the number 2, is like two straight lines which can never enclose a space, 
and therefore it is powerless till the number 3 forms a triangle. Thus this 
Sephira completes and makes evident the supernal Trinity. It is also called 
AM A, Ama, Mother, and AIM A, Aima, the great productive Mother, who 
is eternally conjoined with AB, the Father, for the maintenance of the universe 
in order. Therefore is she the most evident form in whom we can know the 
Father, and therefore is she worthy of all honour. She is the supernal Mother, 
co-equal with Chokmah, and the great feminine form of God, the Elohim, in 
whose image man and woman are created, according to the teaching of the 
Qabalah, equal before God. Woman is equal with man, and certainly not 
8inferior to him, as it has been the persistent endeavour of so-called Christians 
to make her. Aima is the woman described in the Apocalypse (chap. xii.). 
This third Sephira is also sometimes called the Great Sea. To her are 
attributed the Divine names, ALHIM, Elohim, and IHVH ALHIM; and 
the angelic order, ARALIM, Aralim, The Thrones. She is the Supernal 
Mother as distinguished from Malkuth, the inferior Mother, Bride, and Queen.

The number 4. This union of the second and third Sephiroth produced 
ChSD, Chesed, Mercy or Love, also called GDVLH, Gedulah, Greatness or 
Magnificence; a masculine potency represented by the Divine Name AL, El, 
the Mighty One, and the angelic name, ChShMLIM, Chashmalim, Scintillating 
Flames (Ezek. iv. 4).

The number 5. From this emanated the feminine passive potency GBVRH, 
Geburah, strength or fortitude ; or DIN, Deen, Justice; represented by the Divine 
Names, ALHIM GBVR, and ALH, Eloh, and the angelic name ShRPIM, 
Seraphim (Isa. vi. 6). This Sephira is also called PChD, Pachad, Fear.

The number 6. And from these two issued the uniting Sephira, ThPARTh, 
Tiphereth, Beauty or Mildness, represented by the Divine Name ALVH 
VDOTh, Eloah Va-Daath, and the angelic names, Shinanim, ShNANIM 
(Ps. lxviii. 18), or MLKIM, Melakim, kings. Thus by the union of justice 
and mercy we obtain beauty or clemency, and the second trinity of the 
Sephiroth is complete. This Sephira, or “ Path,” or "Numeration”—for by 
these latter appellations the emanations are sometimes called—together with 
the fourth, fifth, seventh, eighth, and ninth Sephiroth, is spoken of as ZOIR 
ANPIN, Zaur Anpin, the Lesser Countenance, Microprosopus, by way of 
antithesis to Macroprosopus, or the Vast Countenance, which is one of the 
names of Kether, the first Sephira. The six Sephiroth of which Zauir Anpin 
is composed, are then called His six members. He is also called MLK, Melekh 
the King.The number 7. The seventh Sephira is NTzCh, Netzach, or Firmness and 
Victory, corresponding to the Divine Name Jehovah Tzabaoth, IHVH 
TzBAVTh, the Lord of Armies, and the angelic names ALHIM, Elohim, 
gods, and ThRShlShIM, Tharshishim, the brilliant ones (Dan. x. 6 ).

The number 8. Thence proceeded the feminine passive potency HVD, 
Hod, Splendour, answering to the Divine Name ALHIM TzBAVTh, Elohim 
Tzabaoth, the God of Armies, and among the angels to BNI ALHIM, Beni 
Elohim, the sons of the Gods (Gen. vi. 4).

The number 9. These two produced ISVD, Yesod, the Foundation or 
Basis, represented by AL Chi, El Chai, the Mighty Living One, and ShDI, 
Shaddai ; and among the angels by AShIM, Aishim, the Flames (Ps. civ. 4), 
yielding the third Trinity of the Sephiroth.

9

The number io. From this ninth Sephira came the tenth and last, thus 
completing the decad of the numbers. It is called MLVTh, Malkuth, the 
Kingdom, and also the Queen, Matrona, the inferior Mother, the Bride of 
Microprosopus ; and ShKINH, Shekinah, represented by the Divine Name 
Adonai, ADNI, and among the angel hosts by the kerubim, KRVBIM. Now, 
each of these Sephiroth will be in a certain degree androgynous, for it will 
be feminine or receptive with regard to the Sephira which immediately precedes 
it in the sephirotic scale, and masculine or transmissive with regard to the 
Sephira which immediately follows it. But there is no Sephira anterior to 
Kether, nor is there a Sephira which succeeds Malkuth. By these remarks 
it will be understood how Chokmah is a feminine noun, though marking a 
masculine Sephira. The connecting-link of the Sephiroth is the Ruach, spirit, 
Mezla, the hidden influence.I will now add a few more remarks on the qabalistical meaning of the term 
MThQLA, Metheqla, balance. In each of the three trinities or triads of the 
Sephiroth is a duad of opposite sexes, and a uniting intelligence which is the 
result. In this, the masculine and feminine potencies are regarded as the two 
scales of the balance, and the uniting Sephira as the beam that joins them. 
Thus, then, the term balance may be said to symbolise the Triune, Trinity in 
Unity, and the Unity represented by the central point of the beam. But, again, 
in the Sephiroth there is a triple Trinity, the upper, lower, and middle. Now, 
these three are represented thus: the supernal, or highest, by the Crown, 
Kether; the middle by the King, and the inferior by the Queen; which will 
be the greatest trinity. And the earthly correlatives of these will be the 
primum mobile, the sun and the moon. Here we at once find alchemical 
symbolism.

The Sephiroth are futher divided into three pillars—the right-hand Pillar of 
Mercy, consisting of the second, fourth, and seventh emanations; the left-hand 
Pillar of Judgment, consisting of the third, fifth, and eighth; and the middle 
Pillar of Mildness, consisting of the first, sixth, ninth, and tenth emanations.

In their totality and unity the ten Sephiroth represent the archetypal man, 
ADM QDMVN, Adam Qadmon, the Protogonos. In looking at the Sephiroth 
constituting the first triad, it is evident that they represent the intellect; and 
hence this triad is called the intellectual world, OVLM MVShKL, Olahm 
Mevshekal. The second triad corresponds to the moral world, OVLM 
MVRGSh, Olahm Morgash. The third represents power and stability, and is 
therefore called thematerial world, OLVM HMVTHBO, Olahm Ha-Mevethau, 
These three aspects are called the faces, ANPIN, Anpin. Thus is the tree of 
life, OTz ChllM, Otz Chaiim, formed; the first triad being placed above, the

IOIO

second and third below, in such a manner that the three masculine Sephiroth 
are on the right, the three feminine on the left, whilst the four uniting Sephiroth 
occupy the centre. This is the qabalistical “tree of life,” on which all things 
depend. There is considerable analogy between this and the tree Yggdrasil of 
the Scandinavians. I have already remarked that there is one trinity which 
comprises all the Sephiroth, and that it consists of the crown, the king, and the 
queen. (In some senses this is the Christian Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy 
Spirit, which in their highest Divine nature are symbolised by the first three 
Sephiroth, Kether, Chokmah, and Binah.) It is the Trinity which created the 
world ; or, in qabalistical language, the universe was born from the union of 
the crowned king and queen. But according to the Qabalah, before the 
complete form of the heavenly man (the ten Sephiroth) was produced, there were 
certain primordial worlds created, but these could not subsist, as the equilibrium 
of balance was not yet perfect, and they were convulsed by the unbalanced 
force and destroyed. These primordial worlds are called the “ kings of ancient 
time” and the “kings of Edom who reigned before the monarchs of Israel.” 
In this sense, Edom is the world of unbalanced force, and Israel is the balanced 
Sephiroth (Gen. xxxvi. 31). This important fact, that worlds were created 
and destroyed prior to the present creation, is again and again reiterated in the 
Zohar.

Now the Sephiroth are also called the World of Emanations, or the 
Atziluthic World, or the archetypal world, OVLM ATzILVTh, Olahm 
Atziloth; and this world gave birth to three other worlds each containing a 
repetition of the Sephiroth, but in a descending scale of brightness.The second world is the Briatic world, OVLM HBRIAH, Olahm Ha-Briah, 
the world of creation, also called KVRSIA, Khorsia, the throne. It is an 
immediate emanation from the world of Atziloth, whose ten Sephiroth are 
reflected herein, and are consequently more limited, though they are still of the 
purest nature, and without any admixture of matter.

The third is the Jetziratic world, OVLM HITzIRH, Olahm Ha-Yetzirah, 
or world of formation and of angels, which proceeds from Briah, and, though 
less refined in substance, is still without matter. It is in this angelic world 
that reside those intelligent and incorporeal beings who are wrapped in a 
luminous garment, and who assume a form when they appear unto man.

The fourth is the Asiatic world, OVLM HOShIH, Olahm Ha-Asiah, the 
world of action, called also the world of shells, OVLM HQLIPVTh, Olahm 
Ha-Qliphoth, which is this world of matter, made up of the grosser elements of 
the other three. In it is also the abode of the evil spirits, which are called “ the 
shells” by the Qabalah, QLIPVTH, Qliphoth, material shells. The devils are 
also divided into ten classes, and have suitable habitations. (See Tables in 777.)

I II I

The demons are the grossest and most deficient of all forms. Their ten 
degrees answer to the decad of the Sephiroth, but in inverse ratio, as darkness 
and impurity increase with the descent of each degree. The two first are 
nothing but absence of visible form and organisation. The third is the abode 
of darkness. Next follow seven Hells occupied by those demons which 
represent incarnate human vices, and those who have given themselves up to 
such vices in earth-life. Their prince is Samael, SMAL, the angel of poison 
and death. His wife is the harlot, or woman of whoredom, AShTh ZNVNIM, 
Isheth Zenunim ; and united they are called the beast, CHIVA, Chioa. Thus 
the infernal trinity is completed which is, so to speak, the averse and carica¬ 
ture of the supernal Creative One. Samael is considered to be identical with 
Satan.The name of the Deity, which we call Jehovah, is in Hebrew a name of four 
letters, IHVH; and the true pronunciation of it is known to very few. I 
myself know some score of different mystical pronunciations of it. The true 
pronunciation of it is a most secret arcanum, and is a secret of secrets. “ He 
who can rightly pronounce it, causeth heaven and earth to tremble, for it is the 
name which rusheth through the universe.” Therefore when a devout Jew 
comes upon it in reading the Scripture, he either does not attempt to pronounce 
it, but instead makes a short pause, or else he substitutes for it the name 
Adonai, ADNI, Lord. The radical meaning of the word is “to be,” and it is 
thus, like AHIH, Eheieh, a glyph of existence. It is capable of twelve trans¬ 
positions, which all convey the meaning of “to be” ; it is the only word that 
will bear so many transpositions without its meaning being altered. They are 
called the “ twelve banners of the mighty name,” and are said by some to rule 
the twelve signs of the Zodiac, These are the twelve banners:—IHVH, 
IHHV, IVHH, HVHI, HVIH, HHIV, VHHI, VIHH, VHIH, HIHV, 
HIVH, HHVI. There are three other tetragrammatic names, which are 
AHIH, Eheieh, existence; ADNI, Adonai, Lord; and AGLA. This last is 
not, properly speaking, a word, but is a notariqon of the sentence, AThH 
GBVR LOVLM ADNI, Ateh Gebor Le-Olahm Adonai: “Thou art mighty, 
for ever, O Lord ! ” A brief explanation of Agla is this ; A, the one first ; A, 
the one last ; G, the Trinity in Unity; L, the completion of the great work.But IHVH, the Tetragrammaton, as we shall presently see, contains all the 
Sephiroth with the exception of Kether, and specially signifies the Lesser 
Countenance, Microprosopus, the King of the qabalistical Sephirotic greatest 
Trinity, and the Son in His human incarnation, in the Christian acceptation of 
the Trinity. Therefore, as the Son reveals the Father, so does IHVH, Jehovah, 
reveal AHIH, Eheieh. And ADNI is the Queen, by whom alone Tetra- 
12

grammaton can be grasped, whose exaltation into Binah is found in the 
Christian assumption of the Virgin.

The Tetragrammaton IHVH is referred to the Sephiroth, thus: the upper¬ 
most point of the letter Yod, I, is said to refer to Kether ; the letter I itself to 
Chokmah, the father of Microprosopus ; the letter H, or " the supernal He,” to 
Binah, the supernal Mother; the letter V to the next six Sephiroth, which are 
called the six members of Microprosopus (and six is the numerical value of V ) 
the Hebrew Vau); lastly, the letter H, the “ inferior He,” to Malkuth, the tenth 
Sephira, the bride of Microprosopus.

Advanced students should then go to the fountain head, 
Knorr von Rosenroth’s “ Kabbala denudata,” and study for 
themselves. It should not prove easy ; Frater P., after years 
of study, confessed : “ I cannot get much out of Rosenroth ” ; 
and we may add that only the best minds are likely to obtain 
more than an academic knowledge of a system which we 
suspect von Rosenroth himself never understood in any 
deeper sense. As a book of reference to the hierarchical 
correspondences of the Qabalah, of course 777 stands alone 
and unrivalled.

The graphic Qabalah has been already fully illustrated in 
this treatise. See Illustrations 2, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 
24, 27, 28, 29, 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 
51, 61, 63, 64, 65, 66, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 82.By far the best and most concise account of the method 
of the Qabalah is that by an unknown author, which Mr 
Aleister Crowley has printed at the end of the first volume of 
his Collected Works, and which we here reprint in full.

QABALISTIC DOGMA

The Evolution of Things is thus described by the Qabalists,

First is Nothing, or the Absence of Things, which does not and cannot 
mean Negatively Existing (if such an Idea can be said to mean anything), as 
S. Liddell Macgregor Mathers, who misread the Text and stultified the

13

Commentary by the Light of his own Ignorance of Hebrew and Philosophy, 
pretends in his Translation of v. Rosenroth.

Second is Without Limit ppD j'x, i.e., Infinite Space.

This is the primal Dualism of Infinity; the infinitely small and the infinitely 
great. The Clash of these produces a finite positive Idea which happens (see 
nwu, in “The Sword of Song,” for a more careful study, though I must not be 
understood to indorse every Word in our Poet-Philosopher’s Thesis) to be Light, 
UK. This word "iix is most important. It symbolises the Universe immediately 
after Chaos, the Confusion or Clash of the infinite Opposites, x is the Egg of 
Matter; 1 is , the Bull, or Energy-Motion; and *i is the Sun, or organised and 
moving System of Orbs. The three Letters of "HX thus repeat the three Ideas. 
The Nature of "nx is thus analysed, under the figure of the ten Numbers and 
the 22 Letters which together compose what the Rosicrucians have diagram¬ 
matised under the name of Minutum Mundum. It will be noticed that every 
Number and Letter has its “Correspondence" in Ideas of every Sort; so that 
any given Object can be analysed in Terms of the 32. If I see a blue Star, 
I should regard it as a Manifestation of Chesed, Water, the Moon, Salt the 
Alchemical Principle, Sagittarius or What not, in respect of its Blueness—one 
would have to decide which from other Data—and refer it to the XVIIth Key 
of the Taro in Respect of its Starriness.The Use of these Attributions is lengthy and various: I cannot dwell upon 
it: but I will give one Example.

If I wish to visit the Sphere of Geburah, I use the Colours and Forces 
appropriate: I go there: if the Objects which then appear to my spiritual 
Vision are harmonious therewith, it is one Test of their Truth.

So also, to construct a Talisman, or to invoke a Spirit.

The methods of discovering Dogma from sacred Words are also numerous 
and important: I may mention: —

(a) The Doctrine of Sympathies: drawn from the total Numeration of a 
Word, when identical with, or a Multiple or Submultiple of, or a Metathesis of, 
that of another Word.

(d) The Method of finding the Least Number of a Word, by adding (and 
re-adding) the Digits of its total Number, and taking the corresponding Key of 
the Taro as a Key to the Meaning of the Word.

(r) The Method of Analogies drawn from the Shape of the Letters.

{d) The Method of Deductions drawn from the Meanings and Corre¬ 
spondences of the Letters.

( e ) The Method of Acrostics drawn from the Letters. This Mode is only 
valid for Adepts of the highest Grades, and then under quite exceptional and 
rare Conditions.

h

(/) The Method of Transpositions and Transmutations of the Letters, which 
suggest Analogies, even when they fail to explain in direct Fashion.

All these and their Varieties and Combinations, with some other more 
abstruse or less important Methods, may be used to unlock the Secret of a 
Word.

Of course with Powers so wide it is easy for the Partisan to find his 
favourite Meaning in any Word. Even the formal Proof o= I —2 — 3 = 4 = 5 = 
.=n is possible.

But the Adept who worked out this Theorem, with the very Intent to 
discredit the Qabalistic Mode of Research, was suddenly dumfounded by the 
Fact that he had actually stumbled upon the Qabalistic Proof of Pantheism or 
Monism.

What really happens is that the Adept sits down and performs many useless 
Tricks with the Figures, without ResultWhat really happens is that the Adept sits down and performs many useless 
Tricks with the Figures, without Result

Suddenly the Lux dawns, and the Problem is solved.

The Rationalist explains this by Inspiration, the superstitious Man by 
Mathematics,

I give an Example of the Way in which one works. Let us take I AO, one 
of the “ Barbarous Names of Evocation/' of which those who have wished to 
conceal their own Glory by adopting the Authority of Zarathustra have said 
that in the holy Ceremonies it has an ineffable Power.

But what Kind of Power? By the Qabalah we can find out the Force of 
the Name IAO.

We can spell it in Hebrew or The Qabalah will even tell us which 
is the true Way. Let us however suppose that it is spelt inv This adds up 
to 17.

But first of all it strikes us that I, A, and O are the three Letters associated 
with the three Letters n in the great Name of Six Letters, m.TnK, which com¬ 
bines mnx and rnn\ Macroprosopus and Microprosopus. Now these feminine 
Letters n conceal the " Three Mothers ” of the Alphabet, K, ©, and Replace 
these, and we get ntd'px, which adds up to 358, the Number alike of pna, the 
Serpent of Genesis, and the Messiah. We thus look for redeeming Power in 
IAO, and for the Masculine Aspect of that Power.

Now we will see how that Power works. We have a curious Dictionary, 
which was made by a very learned Man, in which the Numbers 1 to 10,000 fill 
the left hand Column, in Order, and opposite them are written all the sacred or 
important Words which add up to each Number.

We take this Book, and look at 17. We find that 17 is the number of 
Squares in the Swastika, which is the Whirling Disc or Thunderbolt. Also 
there is ain, a Circle or Orbit; "NT, to seethe or boil; and some other Words,

r 5r 5

which we will neglect in this Example, though we should not dare to do so if 
we were really trying to find out a Thing we none of us knew. To help our 
Deduction about Redemption, too, we find mn, to brighten or make glad.

We also work in another Way, I is the Straight Line or Central Pillar of 
the Temple of Life ; also it stands for Unity, and for the Generative Force. A 
is the Pentagram, which means the Will of Man working Redemption. O is the 
Circle from which everything came, also Nothingness, and the Female, who 
absorbs the Male. The Progress of the Name shows then the Way from Life to 
Nirvana by means of the Will: and is a Hieroglyph of the Great Work.

Look at all our Meanings ! Every one shows that the Name, if it has any 
Power at all, and that we must try, has the Power to redeem us from the Love 
of Life which is the Cause of Life, by its masculine Whirlings, and to gladden 
us and to bring us to the Bosom of the Great Mother, Death.

Before what is known as the Equinox of the Gods, a little While ago, there 
was an initiated Formula which expressed these Ideas to the Wise. As these 
Formulas are done with, it is of no Consequence if I reveal them. Truth is not 
eternal, any more than God ; and it would be but a poor God that could not and 
did not alter his Ways at his Pleasure.

This Formula was used to open the Vault of the Mystic Mountain of 
Abiegnus, within which lay (so the Ceremony of Initiation supposed) the Body 
of our Father Christian Rosen Creutz, to be discovered by the Brethren with the 
Postulant as said in the Book called Fama Fraternitatis.

There are three Officers, and they repeat the Analysis of the Word as 
follows:—

Chief. Let us analyse the Key Word—I.

2nd. N.

3rd. R.

All. I.

Chief. Yod. '

2nd. Nun. :

3rd. Resh. i

All. Yod. '

Chief. Virgo (n)?) Isis, Mighty Mother.

2nd. Scorpio (TT^) Apophis, Destroyer.

3rd. Sol ( 0 ) Osiris, slain and risen.

All. Isis, Apophis, Osiris, IAO.2nd. Nun. :

3rd. Resh. i

All. Yod. '

Chief. Virgo (n)?) Isis, Mighty Mother.

2nd. Scorpio (TT^) Apophis, Destroyer.

3rd. Sol ( 0 ) Osiris, slain and risen.

All. Isis, Apophis, Osiris, IAO.

All spread Arms as if on a Cross, and say :—

The Sign of Osiris slain !

16

Chief bows his Head to the Left, raises his Right Arm, and lowers his Left 
keeping the Elbow at right Angles, thus forming the Letter L (also the 
Swastika).

The Sign of the Mourning of Isis.

2nd. With erect Head, raises his Arms to form a V (but really to form the 
triple Tongue of Flame, the Spirit), and says :—

The Sign of Apophis and Typhon.

3rd. Bows his Head and crosses his Arms on his Breast (to form the 
Pentagram).

The Sign of Osiris risen.

All give the Sign of the Cross, and say :—

L.V.X.

Then the Sign of Osiris risen, and say:—

Lux, the Light of the Cross.

This Formula, on which one may meditate for Years without exhausting its 
wonderful Harmonies, gives an excellent Idea of the Way in which Qabalistic 
Analysis is conducted.

First, the Letters have been written in Hebrew Characters.

Then the Attributions of them to the Zodiac and to Planets are substituted, 
and the Names of Egyptian Gods belonging to these are invoked.

The Christian Idea of I.N.R.I. is confirmed by these, while their Initials form 
the sacred Word of the Gnostics. That is, I AO. From the Character of the 
Deities and their Functions are deduced their Signs, and these are found to 
signal (as it were) the Word Lux (tin), which itself is contained in the Cross.

A careful Study of these Ideas, and of the Table of Correspondences, which 
one of our English Brethren is making, will enable him to discover a very great 
Deal of Matter for Thought in these Poems which an untutored Person would 
pass by.

To return to the general Dogma of the Qabalists.To return to the general Dogma of the Qabalists.

The Figure of Minutum Mundum will show how they suppose one Quality 
to proceed from the last, first in the pure God-World Atziluth, then in the 
Angel-World Briah, and so on down to the Demon-Worlds, which are however 
not thus organised. They are rather Material that was shed off in the Course 
of Evolution, like the Sloughs of a Serpent, from which comes their Name of 
Shells, or Husks.

Apart from silly Questions as to whether the Order of the Emanations is

17

confirmed by Palaeontology, a Question it is quite impertinent to discuss, there 
is no Doubt that the Sephiroth are types of Evolution as opposed to Cata¬ 
strophe and Creation.

The great Charge against this Philosophy is founded on its alleged Affinities 
with Scholastic Realism. But the Charge is not very true. No Doubt but they 
did suppose vast Storehouses of “ Things of one Kind ” from which, pure or 
mingled, all other Things did proceed.

Since J, a Camel, refers to the Moon, they did say that a Camel and the Moon 
were sympathetic, and came, that Part of them, from a common Principle : 
and that a Camel being yellow brown, it partook of the Earth Nature, to which 
that Colour is given.

Thence they said that by taking all the Natures involved, and by blending 
them in the just Proportions, one might have a Camel.

But this is no more than is said by the Upholders of the Atomic Theory.

They have their Storehouses of Carbon, Oxygen, and such (not in one Place, 
but no more is Geburah in one Place), and what is Organic Chemistry but the 
Production of useful Compounds whose Nature is deduced absolutely from 
theoretical Considerations long before it is ever produced in the Laboratory ?The difference, you will say, is that the Qabalists maintain a Mind of each 
Kind behind each Class of Things of one Kind ; but so did Berkeley, and his 
Argument in that Respect is, as the great Huxley showed, irrefragable. For 
by the Universe I mean the Sensible; any other is Not to be Known ; and the 
Sensible is dependent upon Mind. Nay, though the Sensible is said to be an 
Argument of an Universe Insensible, the latter becomes sensible to Mind as 
soon as the Argument is accepted, and disappears with its Rejection.

Nor is the Qabalah dependent upon its Realism, and its Application to the 
Works magical—but I am defending a Philosophy which I was asked to describe, 
and this is not lawful.

A great Deal may be learned from the Translation of the Zohar by S. 
Liddell Macgregor Mathers, and his Introduction thereto, though for those who 
have Latin and some acquaintance with Hebrew it is better to study the 
Kabbala Denudata of Knorr von Rosenroth, in Despite of the heavy Price ; for 
the Translator has distorted the Text and its Comment to suit his belief in a 
supreme Personal God, and in that degraded Form of the Doctrine of Feminism 
which is so popular with the Emasculate.

The Sephiroth are grouped in various Ways. There is a Superior Triad or 
Trinity; a Hexad ; and Malkuth : the Crown, the Father, and the Mother; 
the Son or King ; and the Bride.

Also, a Division into seven Palaces, seven Planes, three Pillars or Columns, 
and the like.

i8

The Flashing Sword follows the Course of the Numbers; and the Serpent 
Nechushtan or of Wisdom crawls up the Paths which join them upon the Tree 
of Life, namely the Letters.

It is important to explain the Position of Daath or Knowledge upon the 
Tree. It is called the Child of Chokmah and Binah, but it hath no Place. But 
it is really the Apex of a Pyramid of which the three first Numbers form the Base.Now the Tree, or Minutum Mundum, is a Figure in a Plane of a solid 
Universe. Daath, being above the Plane, is therefore a Figure of a Force in 
four Dimensions, and thus it is the Object of the Magnum Opus. The three 
Paths which connect it with the First Trinity are the three lost Letters or 
Fathers of the Hebrew Alphabet.

In Daath is said to be the Head of the great Serpent Nechesh or Leviathan, 
called Evil to conceal its Holiness. (t^ru == 358 = n^D, the Messiah or 
Redeemer, and = 496 = m^D, the Bride.) It is identical with the 
Kundalini of the Hindu Philosophy, the Kwan-se-on of the Mongiplian Peoples^ 
and means the magical Force in Man, which is the sexual Force applied to the 
Brain, Heart, and other Organs, and redeemeth him.

The gradual Disclosure of these magical Secrets to the Poet may be traced 
in these Volumes, which it has been my Privilege to be asked to explain. It 
has been impossible to do more than place in the Hands of any intelligent 
Person the Keys which will permit him to unlock the many Beautiful Chambers 
of Holiness in these Palaces and Gardens of Beauty and Pleasure.

Of the results of the method we possess one flawless gem, 
already printed in the Equinox (Vol. II. pp. 163-185), “A 
Note on Genesis” by V. H. Fra. I.A.

From this pleasant, orthodox, and-so-they-all-lived-happy- 
ever-after view let us turn for a moment to the critical aspect. 
Let us demolish in turn the qabalistic methods of exegesis ; 
and then, if we can, discover a true basis upon which to erect 
an abiding Temple of Truth.

1. Gematria.

The number 777 affords a good example of the legitimate 
and illegitimate deductions to be drawn. It represents the 
sentence AChTh RVCh ALHIM ChllM, “One is the Spirit

19

of the Living God," and also OLAHM H-QLPVTh, “The 
world of the Shells (excrements—the demon-world).”19

of the Living God," and also OLAHM H-QLPVTh, “The 
world of the Shells (excrements—the demon-world).”

Now it is wrong to say that this idea of the unity of the 
divine spirit is identical with this idea of the muddle of chaos 
—unless in that exalted grade in which “The One is the 
Many.” But the compiler of Liber 777 was a great Qabalist 
when he thus entitled his book; for he meant to imply, “ One 
is the Spirit of the Living God,” i.e. I have in this book 
unified all the diverse symbols of the world ; and also, “ the 
world of shells,” i.e. this book is full of mere dead symbols ; 
do not mistake them for the living Truth. Further, he had 
an academic reason for his choice of a number ; for the 
tabulation of the book is from Kether to Malkuth, the course 
of the Flaming Sword ; and if this sword be drawn upon the 
Tree of Life, the numeration of the Paths over which it passes 
(taking j, 3, as the non-existent path from Binah to Chesed, 
since it connects Macroprosopus and Microprosopus) is 777. 
[See Diagrams 2 and 12.]

To take another example, it is no mere coincidence that 
463, the Staff of Moses, is n, d, j, the paths of the Middle 
Pillar; no mere coincidence that 26, nw, is 1+6 + 9+10, 
the Sephiroth of the Middle Pillar. But ought we not to 
have some supreme Name for 489, their sum, the Middle 
Pillar perfect? Yet the Sepher Sephiroth is silent. (We 
find only 489= MShLM GMVL, the avenger. Ed.)

Again, in is Aleph, the Unity, but also APL, thick 
Darkness, and ASN, Sudden Death. This can only be 
interpreted as meaning the annihilation of the individual in 
the Unity, and the Darkness which is the Threshold of the 
Unity; in other words, one must be an expert in Samadhi

2020

before this simple Gematria has any proper meaning. How, 
then, can it serve the student in his research ? The uninitiated 
would expect Life and Light in the One; only by experience 
can he know that to man the Godhead must be expressed by 
those things which most he fears.

We here purposely avoid dwelling on the mere silliness 
of many Gematria correspondences, e.g., the equality of the 
Qliphoth of one sign with the Intelligence of another. Such 
misses are more frequent than such hits as AChD, Unity, 13 
= AHBH, Love, 13.

The argument is an argument in a circle. “ Only an adept 
can understand the Qabalah,” just as (in Buddhism) Sakya- 
muni said, “ Only an Arahat can understand the Dhamma."

In this light, indeed, the Qabalah seems little more than a 
convenient language for recording experience.

We may mention in passing that Frater P. never 
acquiesced in the obvious “ cook ” of arguing: x =y + 1 .. x = 
y, by assuming that x should add one to itself “ for the 
concealed unity.” Why shouldn’t y have a little concealed 
unity of its own ?

That this method should ever have been accepted by any 
Qabalist argues a bankruptcy of ingenuity beyond belief. In 
all conscience, it is easy enough to fake identities by less 
obviously card-sharping methods!

2. Notariqon.

The absurdity of this method needs little indication. The 
most unsophisticated can draw pity and amusement from Mr 
Mathers’ Jew, converted by the Notariqons of “ Berashith." 
True, F.I.A.T. is Flatus, Ignis, Aqua, Terra; showing the 
Creator as Tetragrammaton, the synthesis of the four elements;

21

showing the Eternal Fiat as the equilibrated powers of Nature. 
But what forbids Fecit Ignavus Animam Terrae, or any other 
convenient blasphemy, such as Buddha would applaud ?21

showing the Eternal Fiat as the equilibrated powers of Nature. 
But what forbids Fecit Ignavus Animam Terrae, or any other 
convenient blasphemy, such as Buddha would applaud ?

Why not take our converted Jew and restore him to the 
Ghetto with Ben, Ruach, Ab, Sheol!—IHVH, Thora? Why 
not take the sacred ’Ix^s of the Christian who thought it meant 
’iijo-ous Xpia-7-os ©eov 'Ttos twrqp and make him a pagan with 
“ ’Jo’iSos Xapis (ribjcravpos 'Tiuv Sonias ” ?

Why not argue that Christ in cursing the fig, F.I.G., wished 
to attack Kant’s dogmas of Freewill, Immortality, God?

3. Temurah.

Here again the multiplicity of our methods makes our 
method too pliable to be reliable. Should we argue that 
BBL = ShShK (620) by the method of Athbash, and that 
therefore BBL symbolises Kether (620)? Why, BBL is con¬ 
fusion, the very opposite of Kether.

Why Athbash ? Why not Abshath ? or Agrath ? or any 
other of the possible combinations? V

About the only useful Temurah is Aiq Bkr, given above. 
In this we do find a suggestive reasoning. For example, we 
find it in the attribution of ALHIM to the pentagram which 
gives it. [See Equinox, No. II. p. 184.] Here we write 
Elohim, the creative deities, round a pentagram, and read 
it reverse beginning with b, —, the letter of equilibrium, 
and obtain an approximation to n 3.1415 (good enough 
for the benighted Hebrews), as if thereby the finite square of 
creation was assimilated to the infinite circle of the Creator.

Yes: but why should not Berashith 2, 2, 1, 3, 1, 4, give, 
say, e ? The only answer is, that if you screw it round long 
enough, it perhaps will I 
22

The Rational Table of Tziruph should, we agree with 
Fra. P., be left to the Rationalist Press Association, and we 
may present the Irregular Table of Commutations to Irregular 
Masons.

4. To the less important methods we may apply the same 
criticism.4. To the less important methods we may apply the same 
criticism.

We may glance in passing at the Yetziratic, Tarot, and 
significatory methods of investigating any word. But though 
Frater P. was expert enough in these methods they are hardly 
pertinent to the pure numerical Qabalah, and we therefore 
deal gently with them. The attributions are given in 777. 
Thus k in the Yetziratic world is “ Air,” by Tarot “ the Fool,” 
and by signification “an ox.” Thus we have the famous 
I.N.R.I. = '• i-' = n J. O, " 5 ; the Virgin, the Evil Serpent, 
the Sun, suggesting the story of Genesis ii. and of the Gospel. 
The initials of the Egyptian names Isis, Apophis, Osiris, which 
correspond, give in their turn the Ineffable Name IAO; thus 
we say that the Ineffable is concealed in and revealed by 
the Birth, Death, and Resurrection of Christ; and further 
the Signs of Mourning of the Mother, Triumph of the 
Destroyer, and Rising of the Son, give by shape the letters 
L.U.X., Lux, which letters are (again) concealed in and revealed

by the Cross - L. V ^ the Light of the Cross. Further

examples will be found in “A Note on Genesis.” One of the 
most famous is the Mene, Tekel, Upharsin of Daniel, the 
imaginary prophet who lived under Belshazzar the imaginary 
king.

MNA. The Hanged Man, Death, the Fool = “ Sacrificed 
to Death by thy Folly.”

2 3

ThKL. The Universe, the Wheel of Fortune, Justice = 
“ Thy kingdom’s fortune is in the Balance.”

PRSh. The Blasted Tower, the Sun, the Last Judgment 
= “ Ruined is thy glory, and finished.”

But we cannot help thinking that this exegesis must have 
been very hard work.

We could more easily read

MNA. To sacrifice to death is folly.

ThKL. Thy kingdom shall be fortunate, for it is just.

PRSh. The Tower of thy glory shall endure until the 
Last Day.

There! that didn’t take two minutes; and Belshazzar 
would have exalted us above Daniel.PRSh. The Tower of thy glory shall endure until the 
Last Day.

There! that didn’t take two minutes; and Belshazzar 
would have exalted us above Daniel.

Similarly AL, God, may be interpreted, “ His folly is 
justice,” as it is written: “The wisdom of this world is 
foolishness with God.”

Or, by Yetzirah: “ The air is His balance,” as it is written : 
“ God made the firmament, and divided the waters which 
were under the firmament from the waters which were above 
the firmament.”

Or, by meaning : “ The ox and the goad,” i.e., “ He is both 
matter and motion.”

We here append a sketch MS. by Frater P., giving his 
explanation by Tarot, etc., of the letters of the alphabet spelt 
in full.

Mystic Readings of the Letters of the Alphabet 
(See Tarot Cards, and meditate)

ALP. Folly’s Doom is Ruin.

BITh. The Juggler with the Secret of the Universe.

GML. The Holy Guardian Angel is attained by Self-Sacrifice and Equilibrium. 
24

DLTh. The Gate of the Equilibrium of the Universe. (Note D, the highest 
reciprocal path.)

HH. The Mother is the Daughter ; and the Daughter is the Mother.

VV. The Son is (but) the Son. (These two letters show the true doctrine

of Initiation as given in Liber 418; opposed to Protestant 
Exotericism.)

ZIN. The answer of the Oracles is always Death.

ChITh. The Chariot of the Secret of the Universe.

TITh. She who rules the Secret Force of the Universe.

IVD. The Secret of the Gate of Initiation.

KP. In the Whirlings is War.

LMD. By Equilibrium and Self-Sacrifice, the Gate!

MIM. The Secret is hidden between the Waters that are above and the 
Waters that are beneath. (Symbol, the Ark containing the secret 
of Life borne upon the Bosom of the Deluge beneath the 
Clouds.)

NVN. Initiation is guarded on both sides by death.

SMK. Self-control and Self-sacrifice govern the Wheel.

OIN. The Secret of Generation is Death.

PH. The Fortress of the Most High. (Note P, the lowest reciprocal 
path).

TzDI. In the Star is the Gate of the Sanctuary.OIN. The Secret of Generation is Death.

PH. The Fortress of the Most High. (Note P, the lowest reciprocal 
path).

TzDI. In the Star is the Gate of the Sanctuary.

QVP. Illusionary is the Initiation of Disorder.

RISh. In the Sun (Osiris) is the Secret of the Spirit.

ShlN. Resurrection is hidden in Death.

ThV. The Universe is the Hexagram.

(Other meanings suit other planes and other grades.)

Truly there is no end to this wondrous science; and 
when the sceptic sneers, “ With all these methods one ought 
to be able to make everything out of nothing,” the Qabalist 
smiles back the sublime retort, “ With these methods One 
did make everything out of nothing.”

Besides these, there is still one more method—a method 
of some little importance to students of the Siphra Dzenioutha, 
namely, the analogies drawn from the shapes of letters;

25

these are often interesting enough, n, for example, is a 
i between' and », making 26. Thus nw 26 = n, 1. Therefore 
Jehovah is One. But it would be as pertinent to continue 
26 = 2 x 13, and 13 = Achad = 1, and therefore Jehovah is Two.

This then is an absurdity. Yes; but it is also an 
arcanum!

How wonderful is the Qabalah! How great is its 
security from the profane; how splendid its secrets to the 
initiate!

Verily and Amen! yet here we are at the old dilemma, 
that one must know Truth before one can rely upon the 
Qabalah to show Truth.

Like the immortal burglar :

"Bill wouldn't hurt a baby—he's a pal as you can trust,

He’s all right when yer know 'im ; but yer’ve got to know ’im fust.”

So those who have committed themselves to academic 
study of its mysteries have found but a dry stick: those 
who have understood (favoured of God !) have found therein 
Aaron’s rod that budded, the Staff of Life itself, yea, the 
venerable Lingam of Mahasiva!It is for us to trace the researches of Frater P. in the 
Qabalah, to show how from this storehouse of child’s 
puzzles, of contradictions and incongruities, of paradoxes and 
trivialities, he discovered the very canon of Truth, the 
authentic key of the Temple, the Word of that mighty 
Combination which unlocks the Treasure-Chamber of the 
King.

And this following is the Manuscript which he has left 
for our instruction.

26

AN ESSAY UPON NUMBER

(May the Holy One mitigate His severities toward His servant in respect of 
the haste wherewith this essay hath been composed !

When I travelled with the venerable Iehi Aour in search of Truth, we 
encountered a certain wise and holy man, Shri Parananda. Children I said he, 
for two years must ye study with me before ye fully comprehend our Law.

“ Venerable Sir! ” answered Frater I.A., “the first verse of Our Law contains 
but seven words. For seven years did I study that verse by day and by night ; 
and at the end of that time did I presume—may the Dweller of Eternity 
pardon me!—to write a monograph upon the first word of those seven words/’ 
“Venerable Sir!” quoth I: “that First Word of our law contains but six 
letters. For six years did I study that word by day and by night ; and at the 
end of that time did I not dare to utter the first letter of those six letters.”

Thus humbling myself did I abash both the holy Yogi and my venerable 
Frater I. A. But alas! Tetragrammaton! Alas! Adonai ! the hour of my 
silence is past. May the hour of my silence return ! Amen.)

PART I

THE UNIVERSE AS IT IS

Section I

o. The Negative—the Infinite—the Circle, or the Point.

1. The Unity—the Positive—the Finite—the Line, derived from o by 
extension. The divine Being.

2. The Dyad—the Superficies, derived from i by reflection j , or by

revolution of the line around its end. The Demiurge. The divine Will.

3. The Triad, the Solid, derived from 1 and 2 by addition. Matter. The 
divine Intelligence.revolution of the line around its end. The Demiurge. The divine Will.

3. The Triad, the Solid, derived from 1 and 2 by addition. Matter. The 
divine Intelligence.

4. The Quaternary, the solid existing in Time, matter as we know it. 
Derived from 2 by multiplication. The divine Repose.

5. The Quinary, Force or Motion. The interplay of the divine Will with 
matter. Derived from 2 and 3 by addition.

6. The Senary, Mind. Derived from 2 and 3 by multiplication.

7. The Septenary, Desire. Derived from 3 and 4 by addition. (There is

27

however a secondary attribution of 7, making it the holiest and most perfect of 
the numbers.)

8. The Ogdoad, Intellect (also Change in Stability). Derived from 2 and 3 
by multiplication, 8 = 2 3 .

9. The Ennead, Stability in Change. Derived from 2 and 3 by multiplication, 
9 = 3 2 -

(Note all numbers divisible by nine are still so divisible, however the order 
of the figures is shifted.)

10. The Decad, the divine End. Represents the 1 returning to the O. 
Derived from 14-24-3 + 4.

11. The Hendecad, the accursed shells, that only exist without the divine 
Tree. 1 + 1 = 2, in its evil sense of not being 1.

Section II

o. The Cosmic Egg.

1. The Self of Deity, beyond Fatherhood and Motherhood.

2. The Father.

3. The Mother.

4. The Father made flesh—authoritative and paternal.

5. The Mother made flesh—fierce and active.

6. The Son—partaking of all these natures.

7. The Mother degraded to mere animal emotion.

8. The Father degraded to mere animal reason.

9. The Son degraded to mere animal life.

10. The Daughter, fallen and touching with her hands the shells.

It will be noticed that this order represents creation as progressive degenera¬ 
tion—which we are compelled to think of as evil. In the human organism the 
same arrangement will be noticed.

Section III

O. The Pleroma of which our individuality is the monad : the “All-Self.”

1. The Self—the divine Ego of which man is rarely conscious.Section III

O. The Pleroma of which our individuality is the monad : the “All-Self.”

1. The Self—the divine Ego of which man is rarely conscious.

2. The Ego ; that which thinks " I ”—a falsehood, because to think “ I ” is 
to deny “ not-I ” and thus to create the Dyad.

3. The Soul; since 3 reconciles 2 and 1, here are placed the aspirations to 
divinity. It is also the receptive as 2 is the assertive self.

4-9. The Intellectual Self, with its branches :

4. Memory.

28

5. Will.

6. Imagination.

7. Desire.

8. Reason.

9. Animal being.

6. The Conscious Self of the Normal Man : thinking itself free, and really 
the toy of its surroundings.

9. The Unconscious Self of the Normal Man. Reflex actions, circulation, 
breathing, digestion, etc., all pertain here.

10. The illusory physical envelope ; the scaffolding of the building.

Section IV

Having compared these attributions with those to be found in 777, studied 
them, assimilated them so thoroughly that it is natural and needs no effort to 
think “ Binah, Mother, Great Sea, Throne, Saturn, Black, Myrrh, Sorrow, 
Intelligence, etc. etc. etc.,” in a flash whenever the number 3 is mentioned or 
seen, we may profitably proceed to go through the most important of the higher 
numbers. For this purpose I have removed myself from books of reference ; 
only those things which have become fixed in my mind (from their importance) 
deserve place in the simplicity of this essay.

12. HVA, “He,” a title of Kether, identifying Kether with the Zodiac, the 
“home of 12 stars” and their correspondences. See 777.

13. AChD, Unity, and AHBH Love. A scale of unity; thus 13x1 = 1; 
26 = 13x2 = 2; 91 = 13x7 = 7; so that we may find in 26 and 91 elaborations 
of the Dyad and the Septenary respectively.

14. An “elaboration” of 5 (1+4 = 5), Force; a “concentration” of 86 
(8 + 6=14) Elohim, the 5 elements.

15. IH, jah, one of the ineffable names; the Father and Mother united. 
Mystic number of Geburah : 1+2 +3 + 4+5.15. IH, jah, one of the ineffable names; the Father and Mother united. 
Mystic number of Geburah : 1+2 +3 + 4+5.

17. The number of squares in the Swastika, which by shape is Aleph, N. 
Hence 17 recalls 1. Also IAV, 1 AO, the triune Father. See 32 and 358.

18. Chi, Life. An “elaboration ” of 9.

20. IVD, Yod, the letter of the Father.

21. AHIH, existence, a title of Kether, Note 3x7 = 21. Also IHV, the 
first 3 (active) letters of IHVH. Mystic number of Tiphereth.

22. The number of letters in the Hebrew Alphabet; and of the paths on 
the Tree. Hence suggests completion of imperfection. Finality, and fatal 
finality. Note 2x11 = 22, the accursed Dyad at play with the Shells.

24. Number of the Elders ; and =72 3. 72 is the “ divided Name.”

2 9

26. IHVH. Jehovah, as the Dyad expanded, the jealous and terrible God, 
the lesser Countenance. The God of Nature, fecund, cruel, beautiful, relentless.

28. Mystic number of Netzach, KCh, “Power.”

31. LA, “not”; and AL, “ God.” In this Part I. (“ Nature as it is”) the 
number is rather forbidding. For AL is the God-name of Chesed, mercy ; and 
so the number seems to deny that Name.

32. Number of Sephiroth and Paths, 10 + 22. Hence is completion of 
perfection. Finality: things as they are in their totality. AHIHVH, the 
combined AHIH and IHVH, Macroprosopus and Microprosopus, is here. If 
we suppose the 3 female letters H to conceal the 3 mothers A, M, Sh, we obtain 
the number 358, Messiach, q.v. Note 32 = 2®, the divine Will extended through 
motion. 64 = 2®, will be the perfect number of matter, for it is 8, the first cube, 
squared. So we find it a Mercurial number, as if the solidity of matter was in 
truth eternal change.

35. AGLA, a name of God = Ateh Gibor Le Olahm Adonai. “To Thee be

the Power unto the Ages, O my Lord!” 35 = 5 X7. 7 = Divinity, 5 = Power.

36. A Solar Number. ALH. Otherwise unimportant, but is the mystic 
number of Mercury.the Power unto the Ages, O my Lord!” 35 = 5 X7. 7 = Divinity, 5 = Power.

36. A Solar Number. ALH. Otherwise unimportant, but is the mystic 
number of Mercury.

37. IChIDH. The highest principle of the Soul, attributed to Kether* 
Note 37 = hi - 3.

38. Note 38 x 11 418 q.v. in Part II.

39. IHVH AChD, Jehovah is one. 39=13 X3. This is then the affirma¬ 
tion of the aspiring soul.

40. A “dead" number of fixed law, 4x10, Tetragrammaton, the lesser 
countenance immutable in the heaviness of Malkuth.

41. AM, the Mother, unfertilised and unenlightened.

42. AMA, the Mother, still dark. Here are the 42 judges of the dead in 
Amennti, and here is the 42-fold name of the Creative God. See Liber 418.

44. DM, blood. See Part II. Here 4x11== the corruption of the created 
world.

45. MH, a secret title of Yetzirah, the Formative World. ADM, Adam, man, 
the species (not “the first man ”). A is Air, the divine breath which stirs DM, 
blood, into being.

49. A number useful in the calculations of Dr Dee, and a mystic number of 
Venus.

50. The number of the Gates of Binah, whose name is Death (50 = : =by 
Tarot, “ Death ”).

51. AN, pain. NA, failure. ADVM, Edom, the country of the demon kings. 
There is much in the Qabalah about these kings and their dukes ; it never meant 
much to me, somehow. But 51 is 1 short of 52.

30

52. AIMA, the fertilised Mother, the Phallus (*) thrust into AMA. Also 
BN, the Son. Note 52= 13 X4, 4 being Mercy and the influence of the Father.

60. Samekh, which in full spells 60 x 2 = 120 (q.v.), just as Yod, 10, in full 
spells 10x2 = 20. In general, the tens are “ solidifications ” of the ideas of the 
units which they multiply. Thus 50 is Death, the Force of Change in its final 
and most earthy aspect. Samekh is “ Temperance ” in the Tarot: the 6 has 
little evil possible to it; the worst name one can call 60 is “ restriction.”

61. AIN, the Negative. ANI, Ego. A number rather like 31, q.v.61. AIN, the Negative. ANI, Ego. A number rather like 31, q.v.

64. DIN and DNI, intelligences (the twins) of Mercury. See also 32.

65, ADNI. In Roman characters LXV = LVX, the redeeming light. See 
the 5 0 = 6° ritual and “ Konx om Pax.” Note 65 = 13 x 5, the most spiritual form 
of force, just as 10x5 was its most material form. Note HS, “ Keep silence! ” 
and HIKL, the palace ; as if it were said “ Silence is the House of Adonai.”

67, BINH the Great Mother. Note 6+7= 13, uniting the ideas of Binah 
and Kether. A number of the aspiration.

70. The Sanhedrin and the precepts of the Law. The Divine 7 in its most 
material aspect.

72. ChSD, Mercy. The number of the Shemhamphorasch, as if affirming 
God as merciful. For details of Shemhamphorasch, see 777 and other classical 
books of reference. Note especially I4TH4-IHV4THVH = 72.

73. ChKMH, Wisdom. Also GML, Gimel, the path uniting Kether and 
Tiphereth. But Gimel, “ the Priestess of the Silver Star,” is the Female 
Hierophant, the Moon ; and Chokmah is the Logos, or male initiator. See 
Liber 418 for much information on these points, though rather from the stand¬ 
point of Part 11 .

78. MZLA, the influence from Kether. The number of the cards of the 
Tarot, and of the the 13 paths of the Beard of Macroprosopus. Note 78=13 
x6. Also AIVAS, the messenger. See Part II.

80. The number of a, the “ lightning-struck Tower ” of the Tarot. 8 = Intellect, 
Mercury ; its most material form is Ruin, as Intellect in the end is divided 
against itself.

81. A mystic number of the Moon.

84. A number chiefly important in Buddhism. 84 = 7 x 12.

85. PH, the letter P£. 85 = 5x17: even the highest unity, if it move or

energise, means War.

86. ALHIM. See “A Note on Genesis,” Equinox, No. II.85. PH, the letter P£. 85 = 5x17: even the highest unity, if it move or

energise, means War.

86. ALHIM. See “A Note on Genesis,” Equinox, No. II.

90. Number of Tzaddi, a fishhook = Tanha, the clinging of man to life (9), 
the trap in which man is caught as a fish is caught by a hook. The most 
material aspect of animal life ; its final doom decreed by its own lust. Also 
MIM, Water.

3 1

gi. 9 1 = 7 X 1 3 » most spiritual form of the Septenary. AMN, Amen, the 
holiest title of God ; the Amoun of the Egyptians. It equals IHVH ADNI 
(IAHDVNHI, interlaced), the eight-lettered name, thus linking the 7 ,to the 8 . 
Note that AMN (reckoning N as final, 700) = 741 = AMThSh, the letters of the 
elements ; and is thus a form of Tetragrammaton, a form unveiled.

100. The number of P, the perfect illusion, 10x10. Also *p, Kaph, the 
Wheel of Fortune. The identity is that of matter, fatality, change, illusion. It 
seems the Buddhist view of the Samsara-CJakkram.

106. NVN, Nun, a fish. The number of death. Death in the Tarot bears 
a cross-handled scythe; hence the Fish as the symbol of the Redeemer. 
IX 9 Y£ = Jesus Christ, Son of God, Saviour.

108. Chiefly interesting because 108 = 2 x 2 x 3 X 3 x 3 = the square of 2 
playing with the cube of 3. Hence the Buddhists hailed it with acclamation, 
and make their rosaries of this number of beads.

hi. AChD HVA ALHIM, “ He is One God.”

ALP, Aleph, an ox, a thousand. The redeeming Bull. By shape the 
Swastika, and so the Lightning. “ As the lightning lighteneth out of the East 
even unto the West, so shall be the coming of the Son of Man.” An allusion to 
the descent of Shiva upon Shakti in Samahdi. The Roman A shows the same 
through the shape of the Pentagram, which it imitates.

ASN, ruin, destruction, sudden death. SciL, of the personality in Samadhi.

APL, thick darkness. Cf St John of the Cross, who describes these 
phenomena in great detail.

AOM, the Hindu Aum or Om.ASN, ruin, destruction, sudden death. SciL, of the personality in Samadhi.

APL, thick darkness. Cf St John of the Cross, who describes these 
phenomena in great detail.

AOM, the Hindu Aum or Om.

MHVLL, mad—the destruction of Reason by Illumination.

OVLH, a holocaust. Cf. ASN.

PLA, the Hidden Wonder, a title of Kether.

114. DMO, a tear. The age of Christian Rosencreutz.

120. SMK, Samech, a prop. Also MVSDI, basis, foundation. 120=1x2 
X3x4x5, and is thus a synthesis of the power of the pentagram. [Also 
[-j-2-f. , .-{-15 = 120.] Hence its importance in the 5=6 ritual, q.v. supra 
Equinox, No. III. I however disagree in part; it seems tome to symbolise a 
lesser redemption than that associated with Tiphereth. Compare at least the 
numbers 0.12 and 210 in Liber Legis and Liber 418, and extol their superiority. 
For while the first is the sublime formula of the infinite surging into finity, and 
the latter the supreme rolling-up of finity into infinity, the 120 can symbolise at 
the best a sort of intermediate condition of stability. For how can one proceed 
from the 2 to the o ? 120 is also ON, a very important name of God.

124. ODN, Eden.

131. SMAL, Satan so-called, but really only Saniael, the accuser of the

3 2

brethren, unpopular with the Rabbis because their consciences were not clear 
Samael fulfils a most useful function ; he is scepticism, which accuses intellec- 
ually; conscience, which accuses morally; and even that spiritual accuser upon 
the Threshold, without whom the Sanctuary might be profaned. We must 
defeat him, it is true ; but how should we abuse and blame him, without abuse 
and blame of Him that set him there?

136. A mystic number of Jupiter ; the sum of the first 1 6 natural 
numbers.136. A mystic number of Jupiter ; the sum of the first 1 6 natural 
numbers.

144. A square and therefore a materialisation of the number 12. Hence the 
numbers in the Apocalpyse. 144,000 only means 12 (the perfect number in the 
Zodiac or houses of heaven and tribes of Israel) X 12, i.e. settled X 1000, i.e. on 
the grand scale.

148. MAZNIM, Scales of Justice.

156. BABALON. See Liber 418. This number is chiefly important for 
Part II. It is of no account in the orthodox dogmatic Qabalah. Yet it is 
12X13, ^e most spiritual form, 13, of the most perfect number, 12, HVA, 
[It is TzIVN, Zion, the City of the Pyramids.—Ed.]

175. A mystic number of Venus.

203. ABR, initials of AB, BN, RVCh, the Trinity.

206. DBR, Speech, “the Word of Power.”

207. AVR, Light. Contrast with AVB, 9, the astral light, and AVD, 1 j, the 
Magical Light. Aub is an illusory thing of witchcraft (cf Obi, Obeah); 
Aud is almost —the Kundalini force (“Odic” force). This illustrates well the 
difference between the sluggish, viscous 9, and the keen, ecstastic 1 1.

210. Pertains to Part II. See Liber 418.

214. RVCh, the air, the mind.

220. Pertains to Part II. The number of verses in Liber Legis.

231. The sum of the first 22 numbers, o to 21 ; the sum of the Key-Numbers 
of the Tarot cards; hence an extension of the idea of 22, q.v,

270. I.N.R.I. See 5—6 ritual.

280. The sum of the “ five letters of severity,” those which have a final 
form—Kaph, Mem, Nun, Pe, Tzaddi. Also the number of the squares on the 
sides of the Vault 7x40; see 5-6 ritual. Also RP = terror.

300. The letter tr, meaning “tooth,” and suggesting by its shape a triple 
flame. Refers Yetziratically to fire, and is symbolic of the Holy Spirit, RVCh 
ALHIM = 300. Hence the letter of the Spirit. Descending into the midst of 
IHVH, the four inferior elements, we get IHShVH Jeheshua, the Saviour, 
symbolised by the Pentagram.

301. ASH, Fire.

314. ShDI, the Almighty, a name of God attributed to Yesod.

33301. ASH, Fire.

314. ShDI, the Almighty, a name of God attributed to Yesod.

33

325. A mystic number of Mars. BRTzBAL, the spirit of Mars, and 
GRAPIAL, the intelligence of Mars.

326. IHShVH, Jesus—see 300.

333. ChVRVNZVN, see Liber 418, 10th Aethyr. It is surprising that this 
large scale 3 should be so terrible a symbol of dispersion. There is doubtless a 
venerable arcanum here connoted, possibly the evil of Matter summo. 333 = 37 
X9 the accursed.

340. ShM—the Name.

341. The sum of the “ 3 mothers," Aleph, Mem, and Shin.

345. MShH, Moses. Note that by transposition we have 543, AHIH AShR 
AHIH, “ Existence is Existence,” " I am that I am,” a sublime title of Kether. 
Moses is therefore regarded as the representative of this particular manifestation 
of deity, who declared himself under this special name.

358. See 32. MShICh, Messiah, and NChSh, the serpent of Genesis. The 
dogma is that the head of the serpent (N) is “bruised," being replaced by M, 
the letter of Sacrifice, and God, the letter alike of virginity (' = W) and of original 
deity (' = the foundation or type of all the letters). Thus the word may be read :

“The Sacrifice of the Virgin-born Divine One triumphant (n, the Chariot) 
through the Spirit,” while NChSh reads “Death entering the (realm of the) Spirit.”

But the conception of the Serpent as the Redeemer is truer. See my 
explanation of 5=6 ritual (Equinox, No. III.).

361. ADNI HARTz, the Lord of the Earth. Note 361 denotes the 3 
Supernals, the 6 members of Ruach, and Malkuth. This name of God therefore 
embraces all the 10 Sephiroth.

365. An important number, though not in the pure Oabalah. See “The 
Canon.” MEI 0 PA 2 and ABPAHAE in Greek.

370. Really more important for Part II. OSh, Creation. The Sabbatic 
Goat in his highest aspect. This shows the whole of Creation as matter and 
spirit. The material 3, the spiritual 7, and all cancelling to Zero. Also 
ShLM = peace.400. The letter n, “The Universe.” It is the square of 20, “The Wheel of 
Fortune,” and shows the Universe therefore as the Sphere of Fortune—the 
Samsara-Cakkram, where Karma, which fools call chance, rules.

400 is the total number of the Sephiroth, each of the 10 containing 10 in 
itself and being repeated in the 4 worlds of Atziluth, Briah, Yetzirah, and 
Assiah. These four worlds are themselves attributed to IHVH, which is 
therefore not the name of a tribal fetish, but the formula of a system.

401. ATh, “ the” emphatic, meaning “essence of,” for A and Th are first and 
last letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, as A and Q are of the Greek, and A and 
Z of the Latin. Hence the Word Azoth, not to be confused with Azote

34

(lifeless, azotos), the old name for nitrogen. Azoth means the sum and essence 
of all, conceived as One.

406. ThV, the letter Tau (see 400), also AThH, “Thou.” Note that AHA 
(7), the divine name of Venus (7), gives the initials of Ani, Hua, Ateh—I, He, 
Thou ; three different aspects of a deity worshipped in three persons and in three 
ways: viz. (1) with averted face ; (2) with prostration ; (3) with identification.

418. Pertains principally to Part II., q.v.

419. TITh, the letter Teth.

434. DLTh, the letter Daleth.

440. ThLI, the great dragon.

441. AMTh, Truth. Note 441 = 21x21. 21 is A Hill, the God of Kether,

whose Will is Truth.

450. ThN, the great dragon.

463. MTPI HShQD, Moses’ Wand, a rod of Almond. 3 + 60 + 400, the paths 
of the middle pillar.

474. DVTh, Knowledge, the Sephira that is not a Sephira. In one aspect 
the child of Chokmah and Dinah ; in another the Eighth Head of the Stooping 
Dragon, raised up when the Tree of Life was shattered, and Macroposopus set 
cherubim against Microposopus. See 4 = 7 ritual supra. Also, and very 
specially, Liber 418. It is the demon that purely intellectual or rational 
religions take as their God. The special danger of Hinayana Buddhism.

4S0. LILITh, the demon-queen of Malkuth.4S0. LILITh, the demon-queen of Malkuth.

543. AHI H AShRAHIH+I am that 1 am.”

666. Last of the mystic numbers of the sun. SVRTh, the spirit of Sol. 
Also OMMV SThN, Ommo Satan, the Satanic Trinity of Typhon, Apophis, and 
Besz ; also ShM IHShVH, the name of Jesus. The names of Nero, Napoleon, 
W. E. Gladstone, and any person that you may happen to dislike, add up to 
this number. In reality it is the final extension of the number 6, both because 6 
Xiii (ALPh = 111 = 1 ) = 6 and because the Sun, whose greatest number it is, is 6.

(I here interpolate a note on the “ mystic numbers” of the planets. The 
first is that of the planet itself, eg, . Saturn, 3. The second is that of the number 
of squares in the square of the planet, eg. Saturn 9. The third is that of the 
figures in each line of the “magic square” of the planet, eg. Saturn 15. A 
’magic square” is one in which each file, rank, and diagonal add to the same 
number, eg. Saturn is 816, 357, 492, each square being filled in with the 
numbers from 1 upwards.

The last of the Magic numbers is the sum of the whole of the figures in the 
square, eg. Saturn 45. The complete list is thus:

Saturn 3, 9, 1 5, 45 - 
Jupiter 4, 16, 34, 136.

35

Mars 5, 25, 65, 325.

Sol 6, 36, ill, 666.

Venus 7, 49, 175, 1225.

Mercury 8, 64, 260, 2080.

Luna 9, 81, 369, 3321.

Generally speaking, the first number gives a divine name, the second an 
archangelic or angelic name, the third a name pertaining to the Formative 
world, the fourth a name of a “ spirit ” or “ blind force.” For example, Mercury 
has AZ and DD (love) for 8, DIN and DNI for 64, TIRIAL for 260, and 
ThPThRThRTh for 2080. But in the earlier numbers this is not so well carried 
out. 136 is both IVPhIL, the Intelligence of Jupiter, and HSMAL, the Spirit.

The “mystic numbers” of the Sephiroth are simply the sums of the numbers 
from 1 to their own numbers.

Thus (1) Kether = 1.

(2) Chokmah = 1 +2 = 3.

( 3 ) Binah = 1 +2+3=6.

(4) Chesed = 1+2 + 3 + 4= 10.Thus (1) Kether = 1.

(2) Chokmah = 1 +2 = 3.

( 3 ) Binah = 1 +2+3=6.

(4) Chesed = 1+2 + 3 + 4= 10.

( 5 ) Geburah= i+2 + 3 + 4+5= 15.

(6) Tiphereth = 1+2 + 3 + 4 + 5+ 6 = 21.

(7) Netzach= 1 + 2 + 3 + 4+5 + 6+7 = 28.

(8) Hod= 1 + 2+ 3 + 4+ 5+ 6 + 7 + 8 = 36.

(9) Yesod= 1+2 + 3 + 4 + 5+6 + 7 + 8 + 9 = 45.

(10) Malkuth = 1+2 + 3+4 + 5+6 + 7 + 8 + 9+10 = 55.

The most important attributions of 666, however, pertain to the second part, 
q. v.

671. ThORA the Law, ThROA the Gate, AThOR the Lady of the Path of 
Daleth, ROThA the Wheel. Also ALPH, DLTh, NUN, IVD, Adonai (see 
65) spelt in full.

This important number marks the identity of the Augoeides with the Way 
itself(“ I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life”) and shows the Taro as a key ; 
and that the Law itself is nothing else than this. For this reason the outer 
College of the A. - . A.\ is crowned by this “knowledge and conversation of the 
Holy Guardian Angel.”

This number too is that of the Ritual of Neophyte. See Liber XIII.

741. AMThSh, the four letters of the elements. AMN, counting the N 
final as 700, the supreme Name of the Concealed One. The dogma is that the 
Highest is but the Four Elements; that there is nothing beyond these, beyond 
Tetragrammaton. This dogma is most admirably portrayed by Lord Dunsany 
in a tale called “The Wanderings of Shaun.”

36

777 * Vide supra .

800. QShTh, the Rainbow. The Promise of Redemption (8)—8 as Mercury, 
Intellect, the Ruach, Microprosopus, the Redeeming Son—in its most material 
form.

811. IAH (Greek numeration).

888. Jesus (Greek numeration).

913. BRAShITh, the Beginning. See “A Note on Genesis.” This list* 
will enable the student to follow most of the arguments of the dogmatic 
Qabalah. It is useful for him to go through the arguments by which one can 
prove that any given number is the supreme. It is the case, the many being 
but veils of the One ; and the course of argument leads one to knowledge and 
worship of each number in turn. For example.Thesis. The Number Nine is the highest and worthiest of the numbers.

Scholion a. “The number nine is sacred, and attains the summits of philo¬ 
sophy,” Zoroaster.

Scholion /?. Nine is the best symbol of the Unchangeable One, since by 
whatever number it is multiplied, the sum of the figures is always 9, eg. 9 
X487 = 4383 - 4+3+8 + 3=18. 1+8 = 9.

Scholion y. 9 = D, a serpent. And the Serpent is the Holy Uraeus, upon the 
crown of the Gods.

Scholion S. 9= IX = the Hermit of the Tarot, the Ancient One with Lamp 
(Giver of Light) and Staff (the Middle Pillar of the Sephiroth). This, too, is the 
same Ancient as in o, Aleph.

“The Fool ” and Aleph = 1.

Scholion e. 9= ISVD = 80 = P = Mars= 5 =n-*=

the Mother = Binah = 3

- G = GML = 73 = ChKMII =

= AB = The Father =

= (1 4-2) Mystic Number of Chokmah*

= Chokmah = 2 = B = the Magus = I = 1.

Scholion F. 9 = the Foundation of all things = the Foundation of the 
alphabet = Yod = 10 = Malkuth = Kether = 1.

Scholion f. 9 = IX = The Hermit = Yod = io = X = The Wheel of Fortune = 
K = 20=XX = The Last Judgment = Sh = 300= 30= L = Justice = VIII = 8= Ch 
= The Chariot=VII = 7 = Z*=The Lovers = VI = 6= V (Vau) = Thc Pope = V 
= 5 = H = The Emperor = IV = 4= D = The Empress = 1 11 = 3 = G — The High 
Priestess = 11 = 2 = B = The Magus = I = 1 = A = The Fool = o.

* The complete dictionary, begun by Fra. I. A., continued by Fra. P. and re¬ 
vised by Fra. A. e. G. and others, will shortly be published by authority of the

A.\ A.-.

37

Scholion tj. 9 = Luna = G = 3, etc., as before.

Scholion 0 . 9 = j £^J*° j = Saturn = 3, etc, as before.

There are many other lines of argument. This form of reasoning reminds 
one of the riddle “ Why is a story like a ghost ? ” Answer. " A story’s a tale ; 
a tail’s a brush ; a brush is a broom ; a brougham’s a carriage ; a carriage is a 
gig > a gig’s a tra P ; a trap’s a snare ; a snare’s a gin ; gin’s a spirit ; and a 
spirit’s a ghost.”But our identities are not thus false; meditation reveals their truth. 
Further, as I shall explain fully later, 9 is not equal to 1 for the neophyte. 
These equivalences are dogmatic, and only true by favour of Him in whom All 
is Truth. In practice each equivalence is a magical operation to be carried out 
by the aspirant.

PART II

THE UNIVERSE AS WE SEEK TO MAKE IT

In the first part we have seen all numbers as Veils of the One, emanations 
of and therefore corruptions of the One. It is the Universe as we know it, the 
static Universe.

Now the Aspirant to Magic is displeased with this state of things. He finds 
himself but a creature, the farthest removed from the Creator, a number so 
complex and involved that he can scarcely imagine, much less dare to hope for, 
its reduction to the One.

The numbers useful to him, therefore, will be those which are subversive of 
this state of sorrow. So the number 2 represents to him the Magus (the great 
Magician Mayan who has created the illusion of Maya) as seen in the 2nd 
Aethyr. And considering himself as the Ego who posits the Non-Ego (Fichte) 
he hates this Magus. It is only the beginner who regards this Magus as the 
Wonder-worker—as the thing he wants to be. For the adept such little con¬ 
solation as he may win is rather to be found by regarding the Magus as B = 
Mercury = 8 = Ch = 4i8 = ABRAHADABRA, the great Word, the “Word of 
Double Power in the Voice of the Master ” which unites the 5 and the 6, the Rose 
and the Cross, the Circle and the Square. And also B is the Path from Binah 
to Kether ; but that is only important for him who is already in Binah, the 
“ Master of the Temple.”

He finds no satisfaction in contemplating the Tree of Life, and the orderly 
arrangement of the numbers ; rather does he enjoy the Qabalah as a means of 
juggling with these numbers. He can leave nothing undisturbed; he is the 
Anarchist of Philosophy. He refuses to acquiesce in merely formal proofs of

3838

the Excellence of things, “ He doeth all things well," “ Were the world under¬ 
stood Ye would see it was good,” “ Whatever is, is right," and so on. To him, 
on the contrary, whatever is, is wrong. It is part of the painful duty of a 
Master of the Temple to understand everything. Only he can excuse the 
apparent cruelty and fatuity of things. He is of the supernals ; he sees things 
from above; yet, having come from below, he can sympathise with all. And 
he does not expect the Neophyte to share his views. Indeed, they are not true 
to a Neophyte. The silliness of the New-Thought zanies in passionately 
affirming “ I am healthy ! I am opulent ! I am well-dressed ! I am happy,” 
when in truth they are “ poor and miserable and blind and naked," is not a 
philosophical but a practical silliness. Nothing exists, says the Magister 
Templi, but perfection. True ; yet their consciousness is imperfect. Ergo, it 
does not exist. For the M.T. this is so : he has “ cancelled out " the complexities 
of the mathematical expression called existence, and the answer is zero. But 
for the beginner his pain and another’s joy do not balance ; his pain hurts him, 
and his brother may go hang. The Magister Templi, too, understands why 
Zero must plunge through all finite numbers to express itself; why it must 
write itself as “ n —n " instead of o ; what gain there is in such writing. And 
this understanding will be found expressed in Liber 418 (Episode of Chaos and 
His Daughter) and Liber Legis (i. 28-30).

But it must never be forgotten that everyone must begin at the beginning. 
And in the beginning the Aspirant is a rebel, even though he feel himself to be 
that most dangerous type of rebel, a King Dethroned.*

Hence he will worship any number which seems to him to promise to over¬ 
turn the Tree of Life. He will even deny and blaspheme the One—whom, 
after all, it is his ambition to be—because of its simplicity and aloofness. He 
is tempted to “curse God and die."Atheists are of three kinds.

1. The mere stupid man. (Often he is very clever, as Bolingbroke, Bradlaugb 
and Foote were clever.) He has found out one of the minor arcana, and hugs it 
and despises those who see more than himself, or who regard things from a 
different standpoint. Hence he is usually a bigot, intolerant even of tolerance.

2. The despairing wretch, who, having sought God everywhere, and failed 
to find Him, thinks everyone else is as blind as he is, and that if he has failed— 
he, the seeker after truth !—it is because there is no goal. In his cry there is

* And of course, if his revolt succeeds, he will acquiesce in order. The first 
condition of gaining a grade is to be dissatisfied with the one that you have. 
And so when you reach the end you find order as at first ; but also that the law 
is that you must rebel to conquer.

39

pain, as with the stupid kind of atheist there is smugness and self-satisfaction. 
Both are diseased Egos.

3. The philosophical adept, who, knowing God, says “ There is No God,” 
meaning “ God is Zero," as qabalistically He is. He holds atheism as a philo¬ 
sophical speculation as good as any other, and perhaps less likely to mislead 
mankind and do other practical damage than any other.

Him you may know by his equanimity, enthusiasm, and devotion. 1 again 
refer to Liber 418 for an explanation of this mystery. The nine religions are 
crowned by the ring of adepts whose password is “ There is No God," so 
inflected that even the Magister when received among them had not wisdom to 
interpret it

1. Mr Daw, K.C. : M’lud, I respectfully submit that there is no such creature

as a peacock.

2. Oedipus at Colonus : Alas ! there is no sun ! I, even I, have looked and

found it not.

3. Dixit Stultus in corde suo : “Ain Elohim.”as a peacock.

2. Oedipus at Colonus : Alas ! there is no sun ! I, even I, have looked and

found it not.

3. Dixit Stultus in corde suo : “Ain Elohim.”

There is a fourth kind of atheist, not really an atheist at all. He is but a 
traveller in the Land of No God, and knows that it is but a stage on his 
journey—and a stage, moreover, not far from the goal. Daath is not on the 
Tree of Life; and in Daath there is no God as there is in the Sephiroth, for 
Daath cannot understand unity at all. If he thinks of it, it is only to hate it, 
as the one thing which he is most certainly not (see Liber 418. 10th Aethyr. 
I may remark in passing that this book is the best known to me on Advanced 
Qabalah, and of course it is only intelligible to Advanced Students).

This atheist, not in-being but in-passing, is a very apt subject for initiation. 
He has done with the illusions of dogma. From a Knight of the Royal Mystery 
he has risen to understand with the members of the Sovereign Sanctuary that 
all is symbolic; all, if you will, the Jugglery of the Magician. He is tired of 
theories and systems of theology and all such toys; and being weary and 
anhungered and athirst seeks a seat at the Table of Adepts, and a portion of 
the Bread of Spiritual Experience, and a draught of the wine of Ecstasy.

It is then thoroughly understood that the Aspirant is seeking to solve the 
great Problem. And he may conceive, as various Schools of Adepts in the 
ages have conceived, this problem in three main forms.

1. I am not God. I wish to become God.

This is the Hindu conception.

I am Malkuth. I wish to become Kether.

This is the qabalistic equivalent.

40

2. I am a fallen creature. I wish to be redeemed.

This is the Christian conception.

I am Malkuth, the fallen daughter. I wish to be set upon the throne 
of Binah my supernal mother.

This is the qabalistic equivalent.

3. I am the finite square ; I wish to be one with the infinite circle.

This is the Unsectarian conception.This is the qabalistic equivalent.

3. I am the finite square ; I wish to be one with the infinite circle.

This is the Unsectarian conception.

I am the Cross of Extension ; I wish to be one with the infinite Rose.

This is the qabalistic equivalent.

The answer of the Adept to the first form of the problem is for the Hindu 
" Thou art That ” (see previous chapter, “ The Yogi ”) ; for the Qabalist 
" Malkuth is in Kether, and Kether is in Malkuth,” or “ That which is below is 
like that which is above” or simply “Yod.” (The foundation of all letters 
having the number io, symbolising Malkuth.)

The answer of the Adept to the second form of the problem is for the 
Christian all the familiar teaching of the Song of Songs and the Apocalypse 
concerning the Bride of Christ.*

For the Qabalist it is a long complex dogma which may be studied in the 
Zohar and elsewhere. Otherwise, he may simply answer “ He” (the letter alike 
of mother and daughter in IHVH). See Liber 418 for lengthy disquisitions on 
this symbolic basis.

The answer of the Adept to the third form of the problem is given by x, 
implying that an infinite factor must be employed.

For the Qabalist it is usually symbolised by the Rosy Cross, or by such 
formulae as 5 = 6. That they concealed a Word answering thisproblem is also true. 
My discovery of this word is the main subject of this article. All the foregoing 
exposition has been intended to show why I sought a word to fulfil the 
conditions, and by what standards of truth I could measure things.* This Christian teaching (not its qabalistic equivalent) is incomplete. The 
Bride (the soul) is united, though only by marriage, with the Son, who then 
presents her to the Father and Mother or Holy Spirit. These four then com¬ 
plete Tetragrammaton. But the Bride is never united to the Father. In this 
scheme the soul can never do more than touch Tiphereth and so receive the 
ray from Chokmah. Whereas even St John makes his Son say 14 1 and my 
Father are one.” And we all agree that in philosophy there can never be (in 
Truth) more than one ; this Christian dogma says “ never less than four.” Hence 
its bondage to law and its most imperfect comprehension of any true mystic 
teaching, and hence the difficulty of using its symbols.

41

But before proceeding to this Word, it is first necessary to explain further 
in what way one expects a number to assist one in the search for truth, or the 
redemption of the soul, or the formulation of the Rosy Cross. (I am supposing 
that the reader is sufficiently acquainted with the method of reading a name by 
its attributions to understand how, once a message is received, and accredited, 
it may be interpreted.) Thus if I ask “What is knowledge?” and receive the 
answer “ DOTh,” I read it Daleth the door, O matter, Th darkness, by various 
columns of 777 (To choose the column is a matter of spiritual intuition. 
Solvitur ambulando). But here I am only dealing with the “trying of the 
spirits, to know whether they be of God.”

Suppose now that a vision purporting to proceed from God’ is granted to 
me. The Angel declares his name. I add it up. It comes to 65. An 
excellent number! a blessed angel! Not necessarily. Suppose he is of a 
Mercurial appearance? 65 is a number of Mars.

Then I conclude that, however beautiful and eloquent he may be, he is a 
false spirit. The Devil does not understand the Qabalah well enough to clothe 
his symbols in harmony.Then I conclude that, however beautiful and eloquent he may be, he is a 
false spirit. The Devil does not understand the Qabalah well enough to clothe 
his symbols in harmony.

But suppose an angel, even lowly in aspect, not only knows the Qabalah— 
your own researches in the Qabalah—as well as you do, but is able to show you 
truths, qabalistic truths, which you had sought for long and vainly ! Then you 
receive him with honour and his message with obedience.

It is as if a beggar sought audience of a general, and showed beneath his 
rags the signet of the King. When an Indian servant shows me “chits” signed 
by Colonel This and Captain That written in ill-spelt Babu English, one knows 
what to do. On the contrary the Man Who Was Lost rose and broke the 
stem of his wineglass at the regimental toast, and all knew him for one of 
their own.

In spiritual dealings, the Qabalah, with those secrets discovered by yourself 
that are only known to yourself and God, forms the grip, sign, token and pass¬ 
word that assure you that the Lodge is properly tiled.

It is consequently of the very last importance that these final secrets should 
never be disclosed. And it must be remembered that an obsession, even 
momentary, might place a lying spirit in possession of the secrets of your 
grade. Probably it was in this manner that Dee and Kelly were so often 
deceived.

A reference to this little dictionary of numbers will show that 1, 3, 5, 7, 12, 13, 
17, 21, 22, 26, 32, 37, 45, 52, 65, 67, 73, 78, 91, mi, 120, 207, 231, 270, 300, 326, 
358, 361, 370, 401, 406, 434, 474, 666, 671, 741, 913, were for me numbers of 
peculiar importance and sanctity. Most of them are venerable, referring to or 
harmonious with the One. Only a few— eg. 120—refer to the means. There

42

are many others—any others—just as good; but not for me. God in dealing 
with me would show me the signs which I should have intelligence enough to 
understand. It is a condition of all intellectual intercourse.Now I preferred to formulate the practical problem in this shape; “How 
shall I unite the 5 and the 6, Microcosm and Macrocosm?”

And these are the numbers which seemed to me to bear upon the 
problem.

1. Is the goal, not the means. Too simple to serve a magician’s purpose.

2 . Vide supra .

3. Still too simple to work with, especially as 3=1 so easily. But, and 
therefore, a great number to venerate and desire.

4. The terrible number of Tetragrammaton, the great enemy. The number 
of the weapons of the Evil Magician. The Dyad made Law.

5. The Pentagram, symbol of the squaring of the circle by virtue of 
ALHIM = 3.1415, symbol of man’s will, of the evil 4 dominated by man’s spirit. 
Also Pentagrammaton, Jeheshua, the Saviour. Hence the Beginning of the 
Great Work.

6. The Hexagram, symbol of the Macrocosm and Microcosm interlaced, and 
hence of the End of the Great Work. (Pentagram on breast, Hexagram on 
back, of Probationer’s Robe.) Yet it also symbolises the Ruach, 214, q.v., and 
so is as evil in via as it is good in termino.

7. A most evil number, whose perfection is impossible to attack.

8. The great number of redemption, because Ch = ChITh = 4i8, q.v. This 
only develops in importance as my analysis proceeds. A priori it was of n 
great importance.

9. Most Evil, because of its stability. AVB, witchcraft, the false moon of 
the sorceress.

10. Evil, memorial of our sorrow. Yet holy, as hiding in itself the return to 
the negative.

11. The great magical number, as uniting the antitheses of 5 and 6 etc. 
AVD the magic force itself.

12. Useless. Mere symbol of the Goal.

13. Helpful, since if we can reduce our formula to 13, it becomes 1 without 
further trouble.

17. Useful, because though it symbolises 1, it does so under the form of a 
thunderbolt. “ Here is a magic disk for me to hurl, and win heaven by violence,” 
says the Aspirant.

21. As bad, nearly, as 7.21. As bad, nearly, as 7.

26. Accursed. As bad as 4. Only useful when it is a weapon in your hand ; 
then—"if Satan be divided against Satan,” etc.

43

28. Attainable; and so, useful. “ My victory,” “ My power,” says the 
Philosophus.

30. The Balance—Truth. Most useful.

31. LA the reply to AL, who is the God of Chesed, 4. The passionate denial 
of God, useful when other methods fail.

32. Admirable, in spite of its perfection, because it is the perfection which 
all from 1 to 10 and Aleph to Tau, share. Also connects with 6, through 
AHIHVH.

37. Man’s crown.

44. Useful to me chiefly because I had never examined it and so had

acquiesced in it as accursed. When it was brought by a messenger whose words 
proved true, I then understood it as an attack on the 4 by the 11. “ Without

shedding of blood (DM—44) there is no remission.” Also since the messenger 
could teach this, and prophesy, it added credit to the Adept who sent the 
message.

45. Useful as the number of man, ADM, identified with MH, Yetzirah, the 
World of Formation to which man aspires as next above Assiah. Thus 45 
baffles the accuser, but only by affirmation of progress. It cannot help that 
progress.

52. AIMA and BN. But orthodoxy conceives these as external saviours; 
therefore they serve no useful purpose.

60. Like 30, but weaker. “Temperance” is only an inferior balance. I20> 
its extension, gives a better force.

65. Fully dealt with in “ Konx om Fax,” q.v.

72. Almost as bad as 4 and 26; yet being bigger and therefore further 
from 1 it is more assailable. Also it does spell ChSD, Mercy, and this is 
sometimes useful.

73. The two ways to Kether, Gimel and Chokmah. Hence venerable, but 
not much good to the beginner.

74. LMD, Lamed, an expansion of 30. Reads “ By equilibrium and self- 
sacrifice, the Gate ! ” Thus useful. Also 74= 37 x 2.

So we see 37 x i — 37 Man’s crown, Jechidah, the highest Soul—“ in termino.”

37 X2 —74, The Balance, 2 being the symbol “in via.”So we see 37 x i — 37 Man’s crown, Jechidah, the highest Soul—“ in termino.”

37 X2 —74, The Balance, 2 being the symbol “in via.”

37 x 3 = 111, Aleph, etc., 3 being the Mother, the nurse of the soul.

37 X4= 148, “The Balances,” and so on. I have not yet worked 
out all the numbers of this important scale,

77. OZ, the Goat, sal. of the Sabbath of the Adepts. The Baphomet of the 
Templars, the idol set up to defy and overthrow the false god—though it is 
understood that he himself is false, not an end, but a means. Note the 77 = 7 X 11, 
magical power in perfection.

44

78. Most venerable because MZLA is shown as the influence descending from 
On High, whose key is the Tarot: and we possess the Tarot. The proper 
number of the name of the Messenger of the Most Exalted One. [The account 
of AIVAS follows in its proper place.—Ed.]

85. Good, since 85 = 5 x 17.

86. Elohim, the original mischief. But good, since it is a key of the 
Pentagram, 5 = 1 +4= 14 = 8+6 = 86.

91. Merely venerable.

ill: Priceless, because of its 37x3 symbolism, its explanation of Aleph, 
which we seek, and its comment that the Unity may be found in “ Thick dark¬ 
ness ” and in “Sudden death.” This is the most clear and definite help we have 
yet had, showing Samadhi and the Destruction of the Ego as gates of our final 
victory.

120. See Part I. and references.

124. ODN, Eden. The narrow gate or path between Death and the Devil.

156. BABALON. This most holy and precious name is fully dealt with in 
Liber 418. Notice 12x13=156. This was a name given and ratified by 
Qabalah; 156 is not one of the a priori helpful numbers. It is rather a case of 
the Qabalah illuminating St John’s intentional obscurity.

165. iixXV should be a number Capricorni Pneumatici. Not yet 
fulfilled.165. iixXV should be a number Capricorni Pneumatici. Not yet 
fulfilled.

201. AR, Light (Chaldee). Note 201 = 3 X67, Binah, as if it were said, “ Light 
is concealed as a child in the womb of its mother.” The occult retort of the 
Chaldean Magi to the Hebrew sorcerers who affirmed AVR, Light, 207, a mul¬ 
tiple of 9. But this is little more than a sectarian squabble. 207 is holy enough.

206. DBR, the Word of Power. A useful acquisition = “ The Gateway of the 
Word of Light.”

210. Upon this holiest number it is not fitting to dilate. We may refer 
Zelatores to Liber VII. Cap. I., Liber Legis Cap. I., and Liber 418. But this was 
only revealed later. At first I only had ABRAHA, the Lord of the Adepts. Cf. 
Abraha-Melin.

214. RVCh is one of the most seductive numbers to the beginner. Yet its 
crown is Daath, and later one learns to regard it as the great obstacle. Look 
at its promise 21, ending in the fearful curse of 4! Calamity!

216. I once hoped much from this number, as it is the cube of 6* 
But I fear it only expresses the fixity of mind. Anyhow it all came to 
no good.

But we have DBIR, connected with DBR, adding the Secret Phallic 
Power.

220. This is the number of the verses of Liber Legis. It represents 10x22,

45

i.e. the whole of the Law welded into one. Hence we may be sure that the Law 
shall stand as it is without a syllable of addition.

Note io 22 , the modulus of the universe of atoms, men, stars. See “ Two new 
worlds.*'

222. The grand scale of 2 ; may one day be of value.

256. The eighth power of 2 ; should be useful.

280. A grand number, the dyad passing to zero by virtue of the 8, the 
Charioteer who bears the Cup of Babalon. See Liber 418, 12th Aethyr. See 
also 280 in Part I.

300. Venerable, but only useful as explaining the power of the Trident, and 
the Flame on the Altar. Too stable to serve a revolutionary, except in so far as 
it is fire.

333. See Part I.300. Venerable, but only useful as explaining the power of the Trident, and 
the Flame on the Altar. Too stable to serve a revolutionary, except in so far as 
it is fire.

333. See Part I.

340. Connects with 6 through ShM, the fire and the water conjoined to 
make the Name. Thus useful as a hint in ceremonial.

358. See Part I.

361. See Part I. Connects with the Caduceus; as 3 is the supernal fire, 6 the 
Ruach, 1 Malkuth. See illustration of Caduceus in EQUINOX No. II.

370. Most venerable (see Part I.). It delivers the secret of creation into the 
hand of the Magician. See Liber Capricorni Pneumatici.

400. Useful only as finality or material basis. Being 20x20, it shows 
the fixed universe as a system of rolling wheels (20 = K, the Wheel of 
Fortune).

401. See Part I. But Azoth is the Elixir prepared and perfect ; the Neo¬ 
phyte has not got it yet.

406. See Part I.

414. HGVTh, Meditation, the 1 dividing the accursed 4. Also AIN SVP 
AVR, the Limitless Light.

418. CHITh, Cheth. ABRAHADABRA, the great Magic Word, the 
Word of the Aeon. Note the 11 letters, 5 A identical, and 6 diverse. Thus 
it interlocks Pentagram and Hexagram. BITh HA, the House of H6 the 
Pentagram ; see Idra Zuta Qadisha, 694. “ For H formeth K, but Ch formeth

IVD.” Both equal 20.

Note 4 + 1 + 8= 13, the 4 reduced to 1 through 8, the redeeming force ; and 
4i8 = Ch = 8.

By Aiq Bkr ABRAHADABRA = 1 -\-2 -\-21 H— 5 ~^ “i“ 4 "i~i -p2-f-2-f- 1 = 22. 
Also 418 = 22 x 19 = Manifestation. Hence the word manifests the 22 Keys of 
Rota.

It means by translation Abraha Deber, the Voice of the Chief Seer.

It resolves into Pentagram and Hexagram as follows:—

46

A

/ \

H D

\ /

A—A

B-R

\ /

A

[This is by taking the 5 middle letters.]

The pentagram is 12, HVA, Macroprosopus.

The hexagram is 406, AThH, Microprosopus.

Thus it connotes the Great Work.

Note ABR, initials of the Supernals, Ab, Ben, Ruach.

(2) A

A—A

A R 
/ I

BThe pentagram is 12, HVA, Macroprosopus.

The hexagram is 406, AThH, Microprosopus.

Thus it connotes the Great Work.

Note ABR, initials of the Supernals, Ab, Ben, Ruach.

(2) A

A—A

A R 
/ I

B

[This is by separating the One (Aleph) from the Many 
\ (diverse letters).]

H *\ “ The Vision and the Voice,” a

I BRH = 207, Aur, Light/ phrase which meant much 
DBR = 206, Deber Voice r to me at the moment of dis- 
' covering this Word.

(3) A

/ \

A A

\ '/

R—B

/

B

H

| [By taking each alternate letter.] 
D

R

205 = GBR, mighty. \ , A1 ,

_ Aon? 14. i This shows Abrahadabra as

213 = ABIR, mighty- )

the Word of Double Power, another phrase that meant much to me at the 
time. AAB at the top of the Hexagram gives AB, AIM A, BN, Father, Mother, 
Child.

HDR by Yetzirah gives Horus, Isis, Osiris, again Father, Mother, Child 
This Hexagram is again the human Triad.

Dividing into 3 and 8 we get the Triangle of Horus dominating the 
Stooping Dragon of 8 Heads, the Supernals bursting the Head of Daath.

Also A

R A B

A—B

A—H

The Supernals are supported upon two squares— 
ABAD = DD, Love, 8.

A—D R—A AHRA = AVR, Light, 207.

Now 8 X207= 1656= i8 = ChI, Living, and 207 = 9x23, ChIH, Life. At 
this time “ Licht, Liebe, Leben ” was the mystic name of the Mother-Temple 
of the G . * . D . •.

47

The five letters used in the word are A, the Crown ; B, the Wand; D, the 
Cup; H, the Sword ; R, the Rosy Cross | and refer further to Amoun the 
Father, Thoth His messenger, and Isis, Horus, Osiris, the divine-human triad.

Also 418 = ATh IAV, the Essence of I AO, q.v.

This short analysis might be indefinitely expanded; but always the 
symbol will remain the Expression of the Goal and the Exposition of the Path,Also 418 = ATh IAV, the Essence of I AO, q.v.

This short analysis might be indefinitely expanded; but always the 
symbol will remain the Expression of the Goal and the Exposition of the Path,

419. Teth, the number of the “laughing lion ” on whom BABALON rideth. 
See Liber 418. Note 4194*156=575 = 23x25, occultly signifying 24, which 
again signifies to them that understand the interplay of the 8 and the 3, 
Blessed be His holy Name, the Interpreter of his own Mystery!

434. Daleth, the holy letter of the Mother, in her glory as Queen. She 
saves the 4 by the 7 (D = 4 = Venus = 7), thus connects with 28. Mystic number 
of Netzach (Venus), Victory. Note the 3 sundering the two fours. This is the 
feminine victory ; she is in one sense the Delilah to the divine Samson. Hence 
we adore her from full hearts. It ought to be remembered, by the way, that the 
4 is not so evil when it has ceased to oppress us. The square identified with 
the circle is as good as the circle.

441. Truth, the square of 21. Hence it is the nearest that our dualistic 
consciousness can conceive of 21, AHIH, the God of Kether, 1. Thus Truth 
is our chiefest weapon, our rule. Woe to whosoever is false to himself (or to 
another, since in 441 that other is himself), and seven times woe to him that 
swerves from his magical obligation in thought, word, or deed ! By my side 
as I write wallows in exhaustion following an age of torment one who did not 
understand that it is a thousand times better to die than to break the least 
tittle of a magical oath.

463. Shows what the Wand ought to represent. Not 364 ; so we should 
hold it by the lower end. The Wand is also Will, straight and inflexible, 
pertaining to Chokmah (2) as a Wand has two ends.463. Shows what the Wand ought to represent. Not 364 ; so we should 
hold it by the lower end. The Wand is also Will, straight and inflexible, 
pertaining to Chokmah (2) as a Wand has two ends.

474. See Part I. To the beginner, though, Daath seems very helpful. 
He is glad that the Stooping Dragon attacks the Sanctuary. He is doing it 
himself. Hence Buddhists make Ignorance the greatest fetter of all the ten 
fetters. But in truth Knowledge implies a Knower and a Thing Known, the 
accursed Dyad which is the prime cause of misery.

480. Lilith. See Liber 418. So the orthodox place the legal 4 before the 
holy 8 and the sublime Zero. “ And therefore their breaths stink.”

543. Good, but only carries us back to the Mother.

666. Chosen by myself as my symbol, partly for the reasons given in Part 
L, partly for the reasons given in the Apocalypse. I took the Beast to be the 
Lion (Leo my rising sign) and Sol, 6, 666, the Lord of Leo on which Babalon 
should ride. And there were other more intimate considerations, unnecessary

48

to enter upon in this place. Note however that the Tarot card of Leo, Strength, 
bears the number XI., the great number of the Magnum Opus, and its inter¬ 
change with Justice, VIII. ; and the key of 8 is 418.

This all seemed to me so important that no qabalistic truths were so firmly 
implanted in my mind at the time when I was ordered to abandon the study of 
magic and the Qabalah as these: 8, 11, 418, 666; combined with the pro- 
foundest veneration for 1, 3, 5, 7, 13, 37, 78, 91, in. I must insist on this at 
the risk of tautology and over-emphasis ; for it is the key to my standard of 
Truth, the test-numbers which I applied to the discernment of the Messenger 
from the Sanctuary.That such truths may seem trivial I am well aware ; let it be remembered 
that the discovery of an identity may represent a year’s toil. But this is the 
final test; repeat my researches, obtain your own holy numbers; then, and not 
before, will you fully understand their Validity, and the infinite wisdom of the 
Grand Arithmetician of the Universe.

671. Useful, as shown in Part I.

741. Useful chiefly as a denial of the Unity; sometimes employed in the 
hope of tempting it from its lair.

777. Useful in a similar way, as affirming that the Unity is the Qliphoth. 
But a dangerous tool, especially as it represents the flaming sword that drove 
Man out of Eden. A burnt child dreads the fire. “ The devils also believe, 
and tremble.” Worse than useless unless you have it by the hilt. Also 777 is the 
grand scale of 7, and this is useless to anyone who has not yet awakened the 
Kundalini, the female magical soul. Note 7 as the meeting-place of 3, the 
Mother, and io, the Daughter; whence Netzach is the Woman, married but 
no more.

800. Useful only in 5=6 symbolism, q.v.

888. The grand scale of 8. In Greek numeration therefore IH 20 Y 2 the 
Redeemer, connecting with 6 because of its 6 letters. This links Greek and 
Hebrew symbolism; but remember that the mystic Iesous and Yeheshua have 
no more to do with the legendary Jesus of the Synoptics and the Methodists 
than the mystic IHVH has to do with the false God' who commanded the 
murder of innocent children. The 13 of the Sun and the Zodiac was perhaps 
responsible for Buddha and. his 12 disciples, Christ and his 12 disciples, 
Charlemagne and his 12 peers, &c., &c., but to disbelieve in Christ or 
Charlemagne is not to alter the number of the signs of the Zodiac. Veneration 
for 666 does not commit me to admiration for Napoleon and Gladstone.

I may close this paper by expressing a hope that I may have the indulgence 
of students. The subject is incomparably difficult; it is almost an unworked

49I may close this paper by expressing a hope that I may have the indulgence 
of students. The subject is incomparably difficult; it is almost an unworked

49

vein of thought; and my expression must be limited and thin. It is important 
that every identity should be most thoroughly understood. No mere perusal 
will serve. This paper must be studied line by line, and even to a great extent 
committed to memory. And that memory should already be furnished with 
a thorough knowledge of the chief correspondences of 777. It is hard to 
“ suffer gladly ” the particular type of fool who expects with a twenty-third-rate 
idle brain to assimilate in an hour the knowledge that it has cost me twelve 
years to acquire. I may add that nobody will ever understand this method 
of knowledge without himself undertaking research. Once he has experienced 
the joy of connecting (say) 131 and 480 through 15, he will understand. Further, 
it is the work itself, not merely the results, that is of service. We teach Greek 
and Latin, though nobody speaks either language.

And thus I close: Benedictus sit Dominus Deus Noster qui nobis dedit 
Scientiam Summam.

Amen !

50

777

777 REVISED

VEL

PROLEGOMENA SYMBOLICA AD SYSTEMAM 
SCEPTICO-MYSTICAE VIAE EXPLICANDAE, 
FUNDAMENTUM HIEROGLYPHICUM SANC- 
TISSIMORUM SCIENTIAE SUMMAE

A REPRINT

OF 777 WITH MUCH ADDITIONAL 
MATTER BY THE LATE

ALEISTER CROWLEY

SAMUEL WEISER

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

♦Editorial Preface vii

Preface ix

♦A Brief Essay upon the Nature and Significance of

the Magical Alphabet xvii

♦The Meaning of the Primes from 11 to 97 xxv

Diagram of the Tree of Life xxvii

Six Tables of Correspondences 1

♦Additional Tables 37

♦Various Arrangements 39

♦Explanations of the Attributions in the more

important Columns of Table 45

♦Appendix A. What is Qabalah? 125

♦Appendix B. What is a “Number” or a “Symbol”? 127

Notes to Table of Correspondences 138

Appendix I. The Trigrams and Hexagrams of the

Yi King 147♦Appendix A. What is Qabalah? 125

♦Appendix B. What is a “Number” or a “Symbol”? 127

Notes to Table of Correspondences 138

Appendix I. The Trigrams and Hexagrams of the

Yi King 147

* Indicates material not in the original edition.

EDITORIAL PREFACE

111 is a qabalistic dictionary of ceremonial magic, 
oriental mysticism, comparative religion and symbology. 
It is also a handbook for ceremonial invocation and for 
checking the validity of dreams and visions. It is indis¬ 
pensable to those who wish to correlate these apparently 
diverse studies. It was published privately by Aleister 
Crowley in 1909, has long been out of print and is now 
practically unprocurable.

Crowley, who had a phenomenal memory, wrote it 
at Bournemouth in a week without reference books—or so 
he claimed in an unpublished section of his “Confessions.” 
It is not, however, entirely original. Ninety per cent of the 
Hebrew, the four colour scales, and the order and attribu¬ 
tion of the Tarot trumps are as taught in the Hermetic 
Order of the Golden Dawn with its inner circle of the Rose 
of Ruby and the Cross of Gold (R.R. et A.C.).

This Order is still in existence, though it has changed 
its name and is dormant, for it no longer accepts pro¬ 
bationers. It was the fountain head from which Crowley 
and W. B. Yeats drank in their twenties. In this school 
they learned the traditional Western symbolism which 
coloured so much of their poetry and their thought. In it 
they were taught ceremonial magic, how to skry, and the 
technique for exploring the subtler realms of the mind on 
the so-called “astral plane.”Crowley, however, was not content with the traditional 
qabalistic teaching of this Western Hermetic Order with its 
stress on magic and demonology. He travelled eastwards, 
becoming a fair Arabic scholar and studying the Mahom- 
medan secret tradition under a qualified teacher in Cairo. 
Going on to India he learned the elements of Shaivite Yoga 
at the feet of Sri Parananda, who was Solicitor-General of 
Ceylon before he became a sadhu. In Southern India he 
studied Vedanta and Raja Yoga with “the Mahatma Jnana

vii

EDITORIAL PREFACE

viii

Guru Yogi Sabhapaty Swami.” He was thus qualified to 
equate the Hindu and Qabalistic systems.

Allan Bennett, his friend and teacher in the Golden 
Dawn, had become the Burmese Buddhist bhikkhu Ananda 
Metteya. Crowley studied under him both in Ceylon and 
Burmah, and so was able to add the Hinayana Buddhist 
columns to 111 . Although he walked eastwards into 
China he never found a qualified teacher of Taoism or the 
Yi King. His attributions of the trigrams to the Tree of 
Life and his explanation of the hexagrams in Appendix I 
to 777 were based on Legge’s translation.

Crowley was only 32 when he wrote 111 . Later as his 
knowledge and experience widened he became increasingly 
dissatisfied with it. He planned an enlarged edition which 
would correct a few errors, incorporate much new material, 
and bring the whole into line with The Book of the Law. 
He worked on this in the nineteen twenties, but never com¬ 
pleted it. What he did finish is published here—most of it 
for the first time. The task of editing has been restricted 
for the most part to the omission of incomplete notes.The new material, which is marked with an asterisk in 
the Table of Contents, consists of an essay on the magical 
alphabet, a short note on Qabalah and a new theory on 
number. Then the more important columns in Table I are 
explained. These explanations include a few corrections 
and a number of important additions to the original Table. 
Those who wish to work with these Tables (pp. 2-36) 
should extract the additions from the text, and add them 
to the appropriate lines of the columns concerned. Finally, 
some new columns and “arrangements” have been included 
partly from The Book of Thoth, and partly from holograph 
notes in Crowley’s own 111 . The editor has assumed that 
Crowley intended to incorporate these in the new edition. 
For the few interested in Gematria the numerical values of 
the Greek and Arabic alphabets have been added.

Crowley never completed 111 Revised, but he left 
enough material to justify its posthumous publication.

N /.

Ill

VEL PROLEGOMENA SYMBOLICA AD SYSTEMAM 
SCEPTICO-MYSTICAE VIAE EXPLICANDAE, 
FUNDAMENTUM HIEROGLYPHICUM SANC- 
TISSIMORUM SCIENTIAE SUMMAE

The following is an attempt to systematise alike the data 
of mysticism and the results of comparative religion.

The sceptic will applaud our labours, for that the very 
catholicity of the symbols denies them any objective 
validity, since, in so many contradictions, something must 
be false; while the mystic will rejoice equally that the self¬ 
same catholicity all-embracing proves that very validity, 
since after all something must be true.Fortunately we have learnt to combine these ideas, not 
in the mutual toleration of sub-contraries, but in the 
affirmation of contraries, that transcending of the laws of 
intellect which is madness in the ordinary man, genius in 
the Overman who hath arrived to strike off more fetters 
from our understanding. The savage who cannot conceive 
of the number six, the orthodox mathematician who cannot 
conceive of the fourth dimension, the philosopher who 
cannot conceive of the Absolute—all these are one; all 
must be impregnated with the Divine Essence of the Phallic 
Yod of Macroprosopus, and give birth to their idea. True 
(we may agree with Balzac), the Absolute recedes; we never 
grasp it; but in the travelling there is joy. Am I no better 
than a staphylococcus because my ideas still crowd in 
chains?

But we digress.

The last attempts to tabulate knowledge are the Kabbala 
Denudata of Knorr von Rosenroth (a work incomplete and, 
in some of its parts, prostituted to the service of dogmatic 
interpretation), the lost symbolism of the Vault in which

IX

X

PREFACE

Christian Rosenkreutz is said to have been buried, some 
of the work of Dr. Dee and Sir Edward Kelly, some very 
imperfect tables in Cornelius Agrippa, the “Art” of Ray¬ 
mond Lully, some of the very artificial effusions of the 
esoteric Theosophists, and of late years the knowledge of 
the Order Rosae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis and the 
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. Unluckily, the 
leading spirit in these latter societies found that his prayer, 
“Give us this day our daily whisky, and just a wee drappie 
mair for luck!” was sternly answered, “When you have 
given us this day our daily Knowledge-lecture.”

Under these circumstances Daath got mixed with 
Dewar, and Beelzebub with Buchanan.

But even the best of these systems is excessively bulky; 
modern methods have enabled us to concentrate the sub¬ 
stance of twenty thousand pages in two score.But even the best of these systems is excessively bulky; 
modern methods have enabled us to concentrate the sub¬ 
stance of twenty thousand pages in two score.

The best of the serious attempts to systematise the 
results of Comparative Religion is that made by Blavatzky. 
But though she had an immense genius for acquiring facts, 
she had none whatever for sorting and selecting the 
essentials.

Grant Allen made a very slipshod experiment in this 
line; so have some of the polemical rationalists; but the 
only man worthy of our notice is Frazer of the Golden 
Bough. Here, again, there is no tabulation; for us it is left 
to sacrifice literary charm, and even some accuracy, in 
order to bring out the one great point.

This: That when a Japanese thinks of Hachiman, and a 
Boer of the Lord of Hosts, they are not two thoughts, but 
one.

The cause of human sectarianism is not lack of sym¬ 
pathy in thought, but in speech; and this it is our not 
unambitious design to remedy.

Every new sect aggravates the situation. Especially the 
Americans, grossly and crapulously ignorant as they are 
of the rudiments of any human language, seize like mongrel 
curs upon the putrid bones of their decaying monkey- 
jabber, and gnaw and tear them with fierce growls and 
howls.

PREFACE

xi

The mental prostitute, Mrs. Eddy (for example), having 
invented the idea which ordinary people call “God,” 
christened it “Mind,” and then by affirming a set of pro¬ 
positions about “Mind,” which are only true of “God,” set 
all hysterical, dyspeptic, crazy Amurrka by the ears. Per¬ 
sonally, I don’t object to people discussing the properties 
of four-sided triangles; but I draw the line when they use 
a well-known word, such as pig, or mental healer, or dung- 
heap, to denote the object of their paranoiac fetishism.Even among serious philosophers the confusion is very 
great. Such terms as God, the Absolute, Spirit, have dozens 
and dozens of connotations, according to the time and 
place of the dispute and the beliefs of the disputants.

Time enough that these definitions and their inter¬ 
relation should be crystallised, even at some expense of 
accepted philosophical accuracy.

2. The principal sources of our tables have been the 
philosophers and traditional systems referred to above, as 
also, among many others, Pietro di Abano, Lilly, Eliphaz 
Levi, Sir R. Burton, Swami Vivekananda, the Hindu, 
Buddhist, and Chinese Classics, the Quran and its com¬ 
mentators, the Book of the Dead, and, in particular, 
original research. The Chinese, Hindu, Buddhist, Moslem, 
and Egyptian systems have never before been brought into 
line with the Qabalah; the Tarot has never been made 
public.

Eliphaz Levi knew the true attributions but was for¬ 
bidden to use them.*

All this secrecy is very silly. An indicible Arcanum is 
an arcanum that cannot be revealed. It is simply bad faith 
to swear a man to the most horrible penalties if he betray 
. .., etc., and then take him mysteriously apart and confide 
the Hebrew Alphabet to his safe keeping. This is perhaps 
only ridiculous; but it is a wicked imposture to pretend to 
have received it from Rosicrucian manuscripts which are 
to be found in the British Museum. To obtain money on

* This is probably true, though in agreement with the statement 
of the traducer of Levi’s doctrine and the vilifier of his noble 
personality.

PREFACE

xii

these grounds, as has been done by certain moderns, is 
clear (and I trust, indictable) fraud.PREFACE

xii

these grounds, as has been done by certain moderns, is 
clear (and I trust, indictable) fraud.

The secrets of Adepts are not to be revealed to men. 
We only wish they were. When a man comes to me and 
asks for the Truth, I go away and practise teaching the 
Differential Calculus to a Bushman; and I answer the 
former only when I have succeeded with the latter. But to 
withhold the Alphabet of Mysticism from the learner is 
the device of a selfish charlatan. That which can be taught 
shall be taught, and that which cannot be taught may at last 
be learnt.

3. As a weary but victorious warrior delights to recall 
his battles—Forsitan haec olim meminisse juvabit—we 
would linger for a moment upon the difficulties of our task.

The question of sacred alphabets has been abandoned 
as hopeless. As one who should probe the nature of 
woman, the deeper he goes the rottener it gets; so that at 
last it is seen that there is no sound bottom. All is 
arbitrary;* withdrawing our caustics and adopting a pro¬ 
tective treatment, we point to the beautiful clean bandages 
and ask the clinic to admire! To take one concrete 
example: the English T is clearly equivalent in sound to 
the Hebrew n, the Greek r, the Arabic vu, and the Coptic 
T, but the numeration is not the same. Again, we have 
a clear analogy in shape (perhaps a whole series of 
analogies), which, on comparing the modern alphabets with 
primeval examples, breaks up and is indecipherable.

The same difficulty in another form permeates the 
question of gods.

Priests, to propitiate their local fetish, would flatter him 
with the title of creator; philosophers, with a wider outlook, 
would draw identities between many gods in order toPriests, to propitiate their local fetish, would flatter him 
with the title of creator; philosophers, with a wider outlook, 
would draw identities between many gods in order to

* All symbolism is perhaps ultimately so; there is no necessary 
relation in thought between the idea of a mother, the sound of the 
child’s cry “Ma,” and the combination of lines ma . This, too, is 
the extreme case, since “ma” is the sound naturally just produced 
by opening the lips and breathing. Hindus would make a great 
fuss over this true connection; but it is very nearly the only one. 
All these beautiful schemes break down sooner or later, mostly 
sooner.

PREFACE

xiii

obtain a unity. Time and the gregarious nature of man 
have raised gods as ideas grew more universal; sectarianism 
has drawn false distinctions between identical gods for 
polemical purposes.

Thus, where shall we put Isis, favouring nymph of corn 
as she was? As the type of motherhood? As the moon? 
As the great goddess Earth? As Nature? As the Cosmic 
Egg from which all Nature sprang? For as time and place 
have changed, so she is all of these!

What of Jehovah, that testy senior of early Genesis, that 
lawgiver of Leviticus, that war-god of Joshua, that Phallus 
of the depopulated slaves of the Egyptians, that jealous 
King-God of the times of the Kings, that more spiritual 
conception of the Captivity, only invented when all tem¬ 
poral hope was lost, that mediaeval battleground of cross- 
chopped logic, that Being stripped of all his attributes and 
assimilated to Parabrahman and the Absolute of the 
Philosopher?

Satan, again, who in Job is merely Attorney-General 
and prosecutes for the Crown, acquires in time all the 
obloquy attaching to that functionary in the eyes of the 
criminal classes, and becomes a slanderer. Does any one 
really think that any angel is such a fool as to try to gull 
the Omniscient God into injustice to his saints?Then, on the other hand, what of Moloch, that form 
of Jehovah denounced by those who did not draw huge 
profits from his rites? What of the savage and morose 
Jesus of the Evangelicals, cut by their petty malice from 
the gentle Jesus of the Italian children? How shall we 
identify the thaumaturgic Chauvinist of Matthew with the 
metaphysical Logos of John? In short, while the human 
mind is mobile, so long will the definitions of all our terms 
vary.

But it is necessary to settle on something: bad rules are 
better than no rules at all. We may then hope that our 
critics will aid our acknowledged feebleness; and if it be 
agreed that much learning hath made us mad, that we may 
receive humane treatment and a liberal allowance of 
rubber-cores in our old age.

XIV

PREFACE

4. The Tree of Life is the skeleton on which this body 
of truth is built. The juxtaposition and proportion of its 
parts should be fully studied. Practice alone will enable 
the student to determine how far an analogy may be 
followed out. Again, some analogies may escape a super¬ 
ficial study. The Beetle is only connected with the sign 
Pisces through the Tarot Trump “The Moon.” The Camel 
is only connected with the High Priestess through the 
letter Gimel.

Since all things whatsoever (including no thing) may be 
placed upon the Tree of Life, the Table could never be 
complete. It is already somewhat unwieldy; we have tried 
to confine ourselves as far as possible to lists of Things 
Generally Unknown. It must be remembered that the 
lesser tables are only divided from the thirty-two-fold table 
in order to economise space; e.g. in the seven-fold table the 
entries under Saturn belong to the thirty-second part in the 
large table.We have been unable for the moment to tabulate many 
great systems of Magic; the four lesser books of the Leme- 
geton, the system of Abramelin, if indeed its Qliphothic 
ramifications are susceptible of classification, once we 
follow it below the great and terrible Demonic Triads which 
are under the presidency of the Unutterable Name; the vast 
and comprehensive system shadowed in the Book called 
the Book of the Concourse of the Forces, interwoven as it is 
with the Tarot, being, indeed, on one view little more than 
an amplification and practical application of the Book of 
Thoth.

But we hope that the present venture will attract 
scholars from all quarters, as when the wounded Satan 
leaned upon his spear,

“ Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run 
By angels many and strong,”

and that in the course of time a far more satisfactory 
volume may result.

Many columns will seem to the majority of people to 
consist of mere lists of senseless words. Practice, and

PREFACE

xv

advance in the magical or mystical path, will enable them 
little by little to interpret more and more.

Even as a flower unfolds beneath the ardent kisses of 
the Sun, so will this table reveal its glories to the dazzling 
eye of illumination. Symbolic and barren as it is, yet it 
shall stand for the athletic student as a perfect sacrament, 
so that reverently closing its pages he shall exclaim, “May 
that of which we have partaken sustain us in the search for 
the Quintessence, the Stone of the Wise, the Summum 
Bonum, True Wisdom, and Perfect Happiness.”

So mote it be!

A Brief Essay

Upon The Nature And Significance Of The 
MAGICAL ALPHABET

The book 111 has for its primary object the construction 
of a magical alphabet.So mote it be!

A Brief Essay

Upon The Nature And Significance Of The 
MAGICAL ALPHABET

The book 111 has for its primary object the construction 
of a magical alphabet.

One of the greatest difficulties experienced by the 
student—a difficulty which increases rather than diminishes 
with his advance in knowledge—is this: he finds it impos¬ 
sible to gain any clear idea of the meanings of the terms 
which he employs. Every philosopher has his own mean¬ 
ing, even for such universally used terms as soul; and in 
most cases he does not so much as suspect that other 
writers use the term under a different connotation. Even 
technical writers and those who take the trouble to define 
their terms before using them are too often at variance with 
each other. The diversity is very great in the case of this 
word soul. It is sometimes used to mean Atman, an 
impersonal principle almost synonymous with the 
Absolute—itself a word which has been defined with 
scores of different senses. Others use it to mean the per¬ 
sonal individual soul as distinguished from the over-soul 
or God. Others take it as equivalent to Neschamah, the 
Understanding, the intelligible essence of man, his aspira¬ 
tion; yet others mean the Nephesch, the animal soul, the 
consciousness corresponding to the senses. It has even 
been identified with the Ruach which is really the 
mechanism of the mind. Apart from these major distinc¬ 
tions there are literally hundreds of minor shades of mean¬ 
ing. We find therefore a writer predicating the soul A, B, 
and C, while his fellow student protests vehemently that it 
is none of these things—despite which the two men may 
be in substantial agreement.

xvn

xviii THE MAGICAL ALPHABETxvn

xviii THE MAGICAL ALPHABET

Let us suppose for a moment that by some miracle we 
obtain a clear idea of the meaning of the word. The 
trouble has merely begun, for there immediately arises the 
question of the relations of one term to the others. There 
have been few attempts at constructing a coherent system; 
and those that are coherent are not comprehended.

In view of this Euroclydon of misunderstanding it is 
clearly necessary to establish a fundamental language. I 
saw this fact in my twenties. My extended travels through¬ 
out the world had brought me into contact with religious 
and philosophical thinkers of every shade of opinion: and 
the more I knew the greater became the confusion. I 
understood, with bitter approval, the outburst of the aged 
Fichte: “If I had my life to live again, the first thing I 
would do would be to invent an entirely new system of 
symbols whereby to convey my ideas.” As a matter of 
fact certain people, notably Raymond Lully, have 
attempted this great work.I discussed this question with Bhikkhu Ananda Metteya 
(Allan Bennett) in 1904. He professed himself completely 
satisfied with the Buddhist terminology. I could not con¬ 
cur with this opinion. Firstly, the actual words are bar¬ 
barously long, impossibly so for the average European. 
Secondly, an understanding of the system demands com¬ 
plete acquiescence in the Buddhist doctrines. Thirdly, the 
meaning of the terms is not, as my venerable colleague 
maintained, as clear and comprehensive as could be wished. 
There is much pedantry, much confusion, and much dis¬ 
puted matter. Fourthly, the terminology is exclusively 
psychological. It takes no account of extra-Buddhistic 
ideas; and it bears little relation to the general order of 
the universe. It might be supplemented by Hindu termin¬ 
ology. But to do that would immediately introduce 
elements of controversy. We should at once be lost in 
endless discussions as to whether Nibbana was Nirvana or 
not: and so on for ever.

The system of the Qabalah is superficially open to this 
last objection. But its real basis is perfectly sound. We 
can easily discard the dogmatic interpretation of the

THE MAGICAL ALPHABET

xix

Rabbins. We can refer everything in the Universe to the 
system of pure number whose symbols will be intelligible 
to all rational minds in an identical sense. And the rela¬ 
tions between these symbols are fixed by nature. There is 
no particular point—for most ordinary purposes—in 
discussing whether 49 is or is not the square of 7.

Such was the nature of the considerations that led me 
to adopt the Tree of Life as the basis of the magical 
alphabet. The 10 numbers and the 22 letters of the Hebrew 
Alphabet, with their traditional and rational correspon¬ 
dences (taking into consideration their numerical and 
geometrical interrelations), afford us a coherent systematic 
groundwork sufficiently rigid for our foundation and 
sufficiently elastic for our superstructure.But we must not suppose that we know anything of the 
Tree a priori. We must not work towards any other type 
of central Truth than the nature of these symbols in them¬ 
selves. The object of our work must be, in fact, to dis¬ 
cover the nature and powers of each symbol. We must 
clothe the mathematical nakedness of each prime idea in 
a many-coloured garment of correspondences with every 
department of thought.

Our first task is thus to consider what we are to mean 
by the word number. I have dealt with this in my com¬ 
mentary to Verse 4, Chapter I, of The Book of the Law; 
“Every number is infinite: there is no difference.” (See, 
What is a “number” or a “symbol,” p. 127.)

The student should go very thoroughly into the question 
of transfinite number. Let him consult the “Introduction 
to Mathematical Philosophy” of the Hon. Bertrand 
Russell in a reverent but critical spirit. In particular, in 
the light of my note on number, the whole conception of 
Aleph Zero should give him a fairly clear idea of the 
essential paradoxes of the magical interpretation of the 
idea of number, and especially of the equation 0 = 2 which 
I have devised to explain the universe, and to harmonise 
the antinomies which it presents us at every turn.

Our present state of understanding is far from perfect. 
It is evidently impossible to obtain a clear notion of each

XX

THE MAGICAL ALPHABET

of the primes if only because their number is Aleph Zero.XX

THE MAGICAL ALPHABET

of the primes if only because their number is Aleph Zero.

The numbers 0 to 10, as forming the basis of the decimal 
system, may be considered as a microcosm of Aleph Zero. 
For they are endless, 10 representing the return to Unity 
by the reintroduction of Zero to continue the series in a 
manner progressively complex, each term representing not 
only itself in its relation with its neighbours, but the com¬ 
bination of two or more numbers of the first decad. That 
is, until we reach numbers whose factors are all (except 
unity) greater than 10; as 143 = (11 x 13). But this 
necessity to consider such numbers as altogether beyond 
the first decad is only apparent; each prime being itself an 
elaboration in some sense or other of one or more of the 
original 0 to 10 series.* This at least may be regarded as 
conventionally true for immediate purpose of study. A 
number such as 3299 x 3307 x 3319 may be regarded as 
a distant and not very important group of fixed stars. 
(Thus 13 is a “middle modulus” and 111 the “great 
modulus” of Unity. That is, the multiples of 13 and 111 
explain the coefficients of their scales in terms of a more 
specialised idea of Unity. E.g. 26 = 2 x 13 represents the 
Dyad in a more specially connotated sense than 2 does; 
888 describes the function of 8 in terms of the full meaning 
of 111, which is itself an elaborate account of the nature 
of Unity, including—for instance—the dogmatic mystery 
of the equation 3 — 1.)

By repercussion, again, each larger correlative of any 
number of 0 to 10 expresses an extended idea of that num¬ 
ber which must immediately be included in the fundamental 
conception thereof. For instance, having discovered that 
120 can be divided by 5, we must henceforth think of 5 
as the root of those ideas which we find in 120, as well as 
using our previous ideas of 5 as the key to our investigation 
of 120.On the surface, it would appear that this mode of work¬ 
ing could only lead to baffling contradictions and inextric¬ 
able confusion; but to the mind naturally lucid and well 
trained to discrimination this misfortune does not occur.

* For the meaning of the primes from 11 to 97 see p. xxv.

THE MAGICAL ALPHABET

xxi

On the contrary, practice (which makes perfect) enables 
one to grasp intelligently and class coherently a far vaster 
congeries of facts than could possibly be assimilated by the 
most laborious feats of memorizing. Herbert Spencer has 
well explained the psychology of apprehension. The 
excellence of any mind, considered merely as a storehouse 
of information, may be gauged by its faculty of re-present¬ 
ing any required facts to itself by systematic classification 
into groups and sub-groups.

This present attempt at a magical alphabet is, in fact, 
a projection, both intensive and extensive, of this system to 
infinity. On the one hand, all possible ideas are referred 
by progressive integrations to the pure numbers 0 to 10, 
and thence to 2, 1, and 0. On the other, the connotations 
of 0, 1, and 2 are extended, by progressive definitions, to 
include every conceivable idea on every plane of the 
Universe.

We are now in a position to consider the practical 
application of these ideas. As regards the numbers 0 to 
10 of the Key-Scale, each one is a fundamental idea of a 
positive entity. Its nature is defined by the correspon¬ 
dences assigned to it in the various columns. Thus we may 
say that the God Hanuman, the Jackal, the Opal, Storax, 
Truthfulness and so on are all qualities inherent in the idea 
called 8.With regard to the numbers 11 to 32 of the Key-Scale, 
they are not numbers at all in our sense of the word. They 
have been arbitrarily assigned to the 22 paths by the com¬ 
piler of the Sepher Yetzirah. There is not even any kind 
of harmony: nothing could be much further from the idea 
of 29 than the sign of Pisces. The basic idea had better 
be considered the letter of the Hebrew Alphabet; and the 
correspondence of each with fairly comprehensive defini¬ 
tions such as the Tarot trumps is very close and necessary. 
(It will be noticed that certain Alphabets, especially the 
Coptic, have more than 22 letters. These additional 
symbols fill up the Tree of Life when attributed to the 
Sephiroth.) The numerical value of the letters does how¬ 
ever represent a real and important relation. But these

XXI1

THE MAGICAL ALPHABET

numbers are not quite the same as the original sephirotie 
numbers. For instance, although Beth = 2, = Mercury, 
and Mercury is part of the idea of Chokmah = 2, the one 
2 is not identical with the other. For Mercury, in itself, is 
not a Sephira. It is not a positive emanation in necessary 
sequence in the scale 0 to 10. For Beth is the path which 
joins Kether and Binah, 1 and 3. Zayin = 7 is the path 
joining Binah, 3, and Tiphereth, 6. That is, they are not 
numbers in themselves, but expressions of relations between 
numbers according to a predetermined geometrical pattern.Another class of number is of immense importance. It 
is the series usually expressed in Roman numerals which 
is printed on the Tarot trumps. Here, with two exceptions, 
the number is invariably one less than that of the letters of 
the alphabet, where they are numbered according to their 
natural order from 1 to 22. Thus Gimel, the third letter, 
pertains to trump II, Mem, the thirteenth letter, to No. XII. 
These numbers are very nearly of the same order of idea as 
those of the numerical value of the letters; but they repre¬ 
sent rather the active magical energy of the number than its 
essential being.

To return to the pure Sephiroth, the numbers 0, 1,2, 3, 
5, and 7 are primes, the others combinations of these 
primes. Here we have already the principle of equilibrium 
between the simple and the complex. At the same time 
there is an inherent virtue in these compound numbers as 
such which makes it improper to think of them as merely 
combinations from their mathematical elements. Six is an 
idea in itself, a “Ding an sich.” The fact that 6 = 2x3 
is only one of its properties. Similar remarks apply to the 
numbers above 10, but here the importance of the primes 
as compared to that of the compound numbers is much 
greater. Few compound numbers appear in the present 
state of our knowledge in themselves as distinguished from 
the value of their mathematical elements. We may how¬ 
ever instance 93, 111, 120, 210, 418, 666. But every prime 
is the expression of a quite definite idea. For instance 19 
is the general feminine glyph, 31 the highest feminine 
trinity, a “great modulus” of Zero. 41 is the aspect of the

THE MAGICAL ALPHABET xxiii

feminine as a vampire force, 47 as dynamic and spasmodic, 
53 as hedonogenous, 59 as claiming its complement, and so 
on.THE MAGICAL ALPHABET xxiii

feminine as a vampire force, 47 as dynamic and spasmodic, 
53 as hedonogenous, 59 as claiming its complement, and so 
on.

Each prime number retains its peculiar significance in 
its multiples. Thus the number 23, a glyph of life, exhibits 
the life of the Dyad in 46, etc. The significance of the 
primes has been carefully worked out, with fair accuracy 
in each case, up to 97.* Above 100 only a few primes have 
been thoroughly investigated. This is because, by our 
present methods, such numbers can only be studied through 
their multiples. That is to say, if we wish to determine the 
nature of the number 17 we shall examine the series 34, 51, 
68, etc., to see what words and ideas correspond to them. 
We shall establish a ratio 51 : 34 = 3:2. From our 
knowledge of 3 and 2 we can compare the effect produced 
upon them by the modulus 17. For instance, 82 is the 
number of the Angel of Venus and means a thing beloved; 
123 means war, a plague, pleasure, violation; and 164 has 
the idea of cleaving, also of profane as opposed to sacred. 
The common element in these ideas is a dangerous fascina¬ 
tion; whence we say that 41, the highest common factor, is 
the Vampire.f

But the above considerations, which would extend the 
letters of the magical alphabet to an infinity of symbols, 
are not properly pertinent to this essay. Our main object 
is convenience in communicating ideas. And this would 
be violated if we aimed too high. We can attain all our 
objectives for practical purposes by confining ourselves 
to the traditionally accepted scale of 32 paths, of 10 num¬ 
bers and 22 letters. The only extension necessary is the 
inclusion of the three Veils of the Negative, a matter of 
fundamental importance in the apodeictic structure of the 
Tree given in the structural diagram.J These Veils are 
useful in only a very few positive lists.

♦ See p. xxv.♦ See p. xxv.

t A dictionary giving the meanings by traditional Qabalah of 
the numbers from 1 to 1,000 with a few higher numbers is pub¬ 
lished in The Equinox 1, 8, under the title “Sepher Sephiroth sub 
figura D.”

} See p. xxvii.

XXIV

THE MAGICAL ALPHABET

The numbers 31 and 32 must be duplicated because the 
letter Shin possesses two very distinct branches of idea, one 
connected with the element of Fire, and the other with that 
of Spirit. Also the letter Tau is referred both to the planet 
Saturn and the element Earth. This is a great defect in the 
scheme, theoretically. But the traditional attributions are 
so numerous and well defined that no remedy seems 
feasible. (In practice no serious trouble of any kind is 
caused by the theoretical confusion.)

One further difficulty has arisen owing to the discovery 
of the planets Neptune and Uranus. We have however 
tried to turn this into an advantage by including them with 
Primum Mobile in a Sephirotic arrangement of the planets. 
And the device has justified itself by enabling us to con¬ 
struct a perfectly symmetrical attribution for the rulings 
and exaltations of the Signs of the Zodiac.

For the rest it need only be said, that, as in the case of 
most lines of study, the key to success is the familiarity 
conferred by daily practice.

THE MEANING OF THE PRIMES FROM 11 TO 97

11. The general number of magick, or energy tending to 
change.

13. The scale of the highest feminine unity; easily trans¬ 
formed to secondary masculine ideas by any male 
component; or, the unity resulting from love.

17. The masculine unity. (Trinity of Aleph, Vau, Yod.)

19. The feminine glyph.

23. The glyph of life—nascent life.

29. The magick force itself, the masculine current.

31. The highest feminine trinity—zero through the glyph 
of the circle.

37. The unity itself in its balanced trinitarian manifesta- 
tion.

41. The yoni as a vampire force, sterile.

43. A number of orgasm—especially the male.37. The unity itself in its balanced trinitarian manifesta- 
tion.

41. The yoni as a vampire force, sterile.

43. A number of orgasm—especially the male.

47. The yoni as dynamic, prehensile, spasmodic, etc. 
Esprit de travail.

53. The yoni as an instrument of pleasure.

59. The yoni calling for the lingam as ovum, menstruum, 
or alkali.

61. The negative conceiving itself as a positive.

67. The womb of the mother containing the twins.

71. A number of Binah. The image of nothingness and 
silence which is a fulfilment of the aspiration.

73. The feminine aspect of Chokmah in his phallic 
function.

83. Consecration: love in its highest form: energy, free¬ 
dom, amrita, aspiration. The root of the idea of 
romance plus religion.

89. A number of sin—restriction. The wrong kind of 
silence, that of the Black Brothers.

97. A number of Chesed as water and as father.

XXV

THE TREE OF LIFE

Col. XII. This arrangement is the basis of the whole 
system of this book. Besides the 10 numbers and the 
22 letters, it is divisible into 3 columns, 4 planes, 7 
planes, 7 palaces, etc., etc.

xxvii

TABLE OF 
CORRESPONDENCES

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

VIII.*

Orders of Qliphoth.

.(>) bx’DlXn

.(■) bxoiy

.... (0 bx'ixnxD

.... (3) anbn

.(4) pmjn

.(5) pit aiv

.(6) i>XDD

.(7) bx'boj

.(7) mb'b

[Elements. See Col. LXVIII.) 
. [Planets follow Sephiroth]

* \rrvn

PWIK 
pYtyi&s 
. pnnrpp 
jwan^ 
. pmss

pTTay

jwraw 
. pYtsra 
• tmnjn

pTD'na

11WIW

VII.

English of Col. VI.

VI.

The Heavens of Assiah.

0

Sphere of the Primum Mobile. . .

• D'W’jn n'B'Ni

1

Sphere of the Zodiac or Fixed Stars.

.mb do

2

Sphere of Saturn . . ♦ , . . ,

3

Sphere of Jupiter.......

.P1V

4

Sphere of Mars .......

5

Sphere of Sol.* . *

6

Sphere of Venus .......

7

Sphere of Mercury . . . . . ,

8

Sphere of Luna.

9

Sphere of the Elements. . . . .

10

Air ..

11

Mercury ......... .

[Planets follow Sephiroth, 
corresponding)

12

Luna.* . ♦ * * *

13

Venus .

14

Aries .. .

158

Sphere of Luna.

9

Sphere of the Elements. . . . .

10

Air ..

11

Mercury ......... .

[Planets follow Sephiroth, 
corresponding)

12

Luna.* . ♦ * * *

13

Venus .

14

Aries .. .

15

Taurus .

16

Gemini A ......

17

Cancer V . . . ..

.)D1D

18

Leo A. . . . -

19

Virgo

.nbina

20

Jupiter ...- + * + i ..

21

Libra A . . . ..

. .0 'mo

22

Water.. . . . .

.D'D

23

Scorpio V. . . . 4 . . *

....... mpy

24

Sagittarius A.

25

Capricomus ^ -

.HI

26

Mars..

27

Aquarius A . .

.

28

Pisces V.

29

Sol ..

SO

Fire . . + ..

.

31

32

Earth . . .

.pK

32 his

Spirit..

.*n«

31 his

The asterisks (*) refer to Notes on pp. 138-146.

TABLE I

3

V.*

God-Names in Ass i ah.

IV.*

Consciousness of 
the Adept.

hi.

English of Col. II.

II.*

Hebrew Names 
of Numbers 
and Letters.

i.

Key

Scale.

( Nothing.

.r«l

No Limit.

■ • • pN -

0

\ Limitless L.V.X. . ,

• nxt|)D|'x>

• Kin

Crown.

1

>

f - .

Wisdom

2

■ • D'rbx nwv

Understanding.

3

.

Mercy ........

4

■ • • 'll33

Strength .......

• ■ • *mi33

5

• njni mi>x nin'

Beauty .......

6

• . • nisox nin'

Victory

7

■ nixax O'rfo*

Splendour ......

8

■ • - • *n Ht?

Foundation.

9

- - - ■ 1^>D '31K

Kingdom.

■ - tiid^o

10

* ♦

Ox.

11

■ • ■ • ( 8 ) .13131N

House.

.jva

12

■ • ( 3 i) D’^X («) in

Camel.

. hv:

13

.(7) XHX

Door ........

14

4

Window .......

16

*>

Nail.. ,

...... -n

16

* -

Sword ...... .

.H

17

Fence ........

18

.

* -

Serpent .......

- JTB

19

* *

Hand..

20

(34) 3X ^X (4) X3X

Palm..

.*P

21

Ox Goad .......

.... -.oil

22

. .

Water. .......

23

Fisb..

.|u

24

Prop

.... -|DD

26

Eye.

.rv

26

Mouth..

27

Fish-hook

.nv

28

Back of Head .....

.VP

29

.( 36 ) ni>K

. *

Head.

.t?n

80

Tooth..

81

• • • (•$> n* ( 3 ) ax

Tau (as Egyptian) . .

32

• • • tpXfl) ’3"tX

. ,

* ■ ■ * ..

.in

32 bis

.nns»iT

• • >

, . •

81 bis

4

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

XV.*

XIV.

XIII.

The King Scale of

General AttributionTau (as Egyptian) . .

32

• • • tpXfl) ’3"tX

. ,

* ■ ■ * ..

.in

32 bis

.nns»iT

• • >

, . •

81 bis

4

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

XV.*

XIV.

XIII.

The King Scale of

General Attribution

The Paths of the Sepher

Colour ['].

of Tarot.

Yetzirah.

Brilliance.

The 4 Aces.

Admirable or Hidden Intelligence . .

O

'I

Pure soft blue . . , ,

The 4 Twos—Kings or Knights

Illuminating I..

2

Crimson.

The 4 Threes—Queens . . .

Sanctifying I.

3

Deep violet. . .

The 4 Fours ......

Measuring Cohesive or Receptacular I.

4

Orange ......

The 4 Fives.

Radical I.. .

5

Gear pink rose . . .

The 4 Sixes—Emperors or

I. of the Mediating Influence ....

6

Princes

Amber.*

The 4 Sevens ......

Occult I.

7

Violet purple ....

The 4 Eights.

Absolute or Perfect I.

8

Indigo ..

The 4 Nines.

Pure or Clear 1. ........

9

Yellow.

The 4 Tens—Empresses or

Resplendent I.

io

Bright pale yellow . .

Princesses

The Fool—[Swords] Emperors

Scintillating I. ........

11

or Princes

Yellow ......

The Juggler.

I. of Transparency .......

12

Blue.

The High Priestess ....

Uniting I. ......... -

13

Emerald green . . -

The Empress.

Illuminating I.

14

Scarlet ......

The Emperor ......

Constituting I..

15

Red orange.

The Hierophant.

Triumphal or Eternal One.

16

Orange ......

The Lovers..

Disposing One .........

17

Amber ......

The Chariot . . * . . .

I. of the House of Influence ....

13

Yellow, greenish . . .

Strength..

I. of all the Activities of the Spiritual

19

Green, yellowish . . .

Hermit.

Being

I. of Will.

20

Violet.

Wheel of Fortune. . . . <

I. of Conciliation.. .

21

Emerald gieen . . .

Justice.

Faithful I..

22

Deep blue.

The Hanged Man — [Cups]

Stable I..

23

Queens

Green blue .....

Death.. .

Imaginative I.

24

Blue..

Temperance ......

I. of Probation or Tentative One . .

25

Indigo .....

The Devil.

Renovatiag l. ........ .

26

Scarlet.

The House of God .....

Exciting I..

27

Violet.

The Star .......Temperance ......

I. of Probation or Tentative One . .

25

Indigo .....

The Devil.

Renovatiag l. ........ .

26

Scarlet.

The House of God .....

Exciting I..

27

Violet.

The Star .......

Natural I. ..........

23

Crimson (ultra vfo!et) .

The Moon

Corporeal I. ..

29

Orange.

The Sun.

Collecting I.

30

Glowing orange scarlet .

The Angel or Last Judgment—

Perpetual I. .........

31

[Wands] Kings or Knights

Indigo.

The Universe.

Administrative I. . * . . . . .

32

Citrine, olive, russet, and

Empresses [Coins] ....

+ .

32 bis

black x

White merging into grey

All 22 Trumps ......

31 bis

TABLE I ( continued )

5

XII.*

XL*

X.

The Tree of Life.

Elements (with their 
Planetary Rulers).

Mystic 
Numbers of 
the Sephirotb.

ist Place, Middle Pillar . .

Root of A ...

and Plane, Right Pillar . . .

Root of ...

and Plane, Left Pillar . . .

Root of \7 ...

. . 6 . .

3rd Plane, Right Pillar . . .

. . . V . . .

3rd Plane, Left Pillar . . .

. . . A . . .

4 th Plane. Middle Pillar . .

. . . A . . .

5 th Plane, Right Pillar . . .

. . . A . . .

5th Plane, Left Pillar . . .

. . V . . .

6th Plane, Middle Pillar . .

. . . A . . .

7th Plane, Middle Pillar . .

. . V . . .

Path joins 1 - a.

Hot and moist A

. . 66 . .

.. i -3 .

.

. . 78 .

,, 1-6.

- *-3 .

.. a - 6 .

. . ©A# . .

« a - 4 .... .

?

n 3-6 .

. . ^ A 9 . .

3*5 • * ' * *

. . <*v • • •

. .171. •

m 4 - 5 • • ■ + ■

. . ©A* . .

•1 4*6 ... * *

9

. . 210 . .

» 4*7 ■ * ■ * 1

.. 5*6 .

. . . .

» 5*8 .

Cold and moist ^7 .

. . 276 . .

» 6-7 .....

. . <?v . . .

.. 6-9 . ...

. .©A^ ..

„ 6-8.

7-8 .... .

« 7“9 .

. . >>A<? . .

11 7 - »©.

. . . . .

it 8-9.

II 8-*o.

Hot and dry . .

,, 9-10 .... .

IX.*

The Sword and the 
Serpent.

!l £

sin

p»|

O ja (3 .5

l&ia

S^-sa

hf v

S 9

gfl-

^5 S 
•Is S ' 3

E8|.S

gtf*

?83

C

Sso

1- £ 
j£ w £

w J2 a>

Z~sl

*« :

8.12

V u 4>

5 c'S

— 4> ..

*i«

Js9

S.5 S

O 4>

is 2

SSS

|&5

liTJ

« 3| 
ioZ 
1*3

IcCS^-sa

hf v

S 9

gfl-

^5 S 
•Is S ' 3

E8|.S

gtf*

?83

C

Sso

1- £ 
j£ w £

w J2 a>

Z~sl

*« :

8.12

V u 4>

5 c'S

— 4> ..

*i«

Js9

S.5 S

O 4>

is 2

SSS

|&5

liTJ

« 3| 
ioZ 
1*3

IcC

Tl%

o5r

gs*

^.S^o

SJ21

£ riN)

1

2

3

4

5

6 
7 
S

9

lO

11

12

13

14 
16 
16 
17 
16

19

20 
21

22 
23

24

26

26

27

26

29

30

31 
32

32 bis 
31 bis

6

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

XXI*

The Perfected Man.*

XX.

Complete Practical Attribu¬ 
tion of Egyptian Gods.

XIX*

Selection of Egyptian Gods.

Nu—the Hair . * . * .

Disk (of Ra)—the Face. |

Heru-pa-Kraath . . .

Ptah.

Harpocrates, Amoun, Ninth ....

Ptah, Asar un Nefer, Hadith ....

0

1

* (In Daath, Assi—the^ 
Neck) 1

Isis [As Wisdom] . . ,

Nephthys . . . , r .

Amoun, Thoth, Nuith [Zodiac] . . .

Maut, Isis, Nephthys.

2

3

1

-Neith—the Arms . . /

Amoun.

Amoun, Isis 4 ,

4

) l

Horus .......

Horus, Nephthys.

5

The Mighty and Terrible 
One—the Breast

Ra.

Asar, Ra.. . . , ,

6

1

The Lords of Keraba— f 
• the Reins. Nuit—the<

Hathoor

Hathoor

7

J

Hips and Legs l

Thoth.

Anubis.. , ,

0

Asar and Asi—the Phallus 
and Vulva Sati—theSpine

Shu . • ......

Shu.

9

The Eye of Hoor—the But¬ 
tocks and Anus

Oairis.

Seb. Lower (;'.r. unwedded) Isis and 
Nephthys

10

As 6.. .

Moot........

11

Aupu—the Hips . . . *

Thoth .......

Thoth and Cynocephalus.

12

Hathor—the Left Eye . .

Chomse .......

Chomse ........ + + .

13

Khenti-Khas— the Left 
Nostril

Hathoor.......

Hathoor ..

14

Isis .

Men Thu.. . + ,

15

Ba-Nch-Tattu—the Shoul-

Osiris..

Asar Ameshet Apis.

16

The twin Merti ....

Various twin Deities, Rehkt, Merti, &c.

17

Hormakhu ......

Khephra.

18

As 6.

Horus.

Ra-Hoor-Khuit, Pasht, Sekhet, Mau .

19

Heru-pa-Kraath ....

Isis [as Virgin). ........

20

Apu-t—the Left Ear „ .

Amoun-Ra.. .

21

Maat.

Ma.

22

As 24.

Ir<t>&0¥peo .

Turn Athph Auramoth (as V), Asar 
(as Hanged Man), Hekar, Isis

23

Sckhct —the Belly and

Hammemit.20

Apu-t—the Left Ear „ .

Amoun-Ra.. .

21

Maat.

Ma.

22

As 24.

Ir<t>&0¥peo .

Turn Athph Auramoth (as V), Asar 
(as Hanged Man), Hekar, Isis

23

Sckhct —the Belly and

Hammemit.

Merti goddesses, Tvphon, Apep,

24

Back

fopHouvepir .

Khephra

Nephthys ...

25

As 10, for y means Eye.

Set.

Khem (Set).

26

Khenti-Khas — the Right 
Nostril

Men0u . . . . . . .

Horus.. , . ,

27

The Lords of Keraba—the 
Reins

Nuit.

Ahephii Aroueris.

28

Anubi .......

Khephra (as Scarab in Tarot Trump) .

29

Hathor—the Right Eye .

Ra.

Ra and miny others.

30

[Serget—the Teeth.J As 6

Mau ........

Thoum-aesh-neith, Mau, Kabeshunt 
Horns, Tarpesheth

31

Apu-t—the Right Ear . .

See Note

Sebek, Mako.

32

D"n the Bones.

As 16

Satem, Ahapshi, Nephthys, Ameshel .

32 bis

4 • * * * * * » *

Asar..

31 bis

TABLE I ( continued)

7

XVIII.*

The Empress Scale of

Colour [Hi-

XVII.*

The Emperor Scale of 
Colour [1],

XVL*

The Queen, Scale of 
Colour [rtf.

White, flecked gold.

White brilliance.

White brilliance . . , , .

0

1

White, flecked red, blue, and 
vellow

Blue pearl grey, like mother- 
of-pearl

2

Grey, flecked pink.

Dark brown ......

Black .

3

Deep azure, flecked yellow. . .

Deep purple..

Blue. ■ -t

4

Red, flecked black.

Bright scarlet.

Scarlet red. • ....

6

Gold amber ...... T

Rich salmon ....

Yellow (gold) . ■

6

Olive, flecked gold.

Bright yellow green . .

Emerald .....

7

Yellowish brown, flecked white .

Red-russet ......

Orange.

8

Citrine, flecked azure ....

Very dark purple.

Violet ........

9

Black rayed with yellow . . .

As Queen Scale, but flecked 
with gold

Citrine, olive, russet, and 
black *

10

Emerald, flecked gold ....

Blue emerald green ....

Sky blue.

11

Indigo, rayed violet ....

Grey.. - ■ -

Purple.

12

Silver; rayed sky blue ....

Cold pale blue.

Silver.

13

Bright rose or cerise, rayed pale

Early spring green ....

Sky blue.. .

14

Glowing red.

Red.

10

Rich brown.

Deep warm olive.12

Silver; rayed sky blue ....

Cold pale blue.

Silver.

13

Bright rose or cerise, rayed pale

Early spring green ....

Sky blue.. .

14

Glowing red.

Red.

10

Rich brown.

Deep warm olive.

Deep indigo ......

16

Reddish grey inclined to mauve .

New yellow leather ....

Pale mauve.

17

Dark greenish brown ....

Rich bright russet ....

Maroon.. -

18

Reddish amber ......

Grey ....... r

Deep purple.

19

Plum colour.'

Green grey ......

Slate grey .......

20

Bright blue, rayed yellow . . .

Rich purple.

Blue

21

Pale green.

Deep blue-green . . . , ,

Blue. ..

22

White, flecked purple, like mother*

Deep olive-green.

Sea green .... . .

23

of-pearl

Livid indigo brown (like a black

Very dark brown .....

Dull brown . . ... . .

24

beetle)

Dark vivid blue.

Green..

Yellow.

20

Cold dark grey, approaching black

Blue black ......

Black.. .

26

Bright red, rayed azure or emerald

Venetian red .....

Red.

27

White, tinged purple ....

Bluish mauve.

Sky blue.

28

Slone colour ...

Light translucent pinkish 
brown

Buff, flecked silver-white . .

29

Amber, rayed red.

Rich amber.

Gold yellow ......

80

Vermilion, flecked crimson and

Scarlet, flecked gold....

Vermilion .......

31

emerald

Black, rayed blue.

Blue black.

Black ........

32

Black, flecked yellow ....

Dark brown.

Amber.

32 bis

White, red, yellow, blue, black 
(the latter outside)

The 7 prismatic colours, the 
violet being outside

Deep purpte, nearly black. .

31 bis

8

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

XXXIV.

Some Greek Gods.

XXX1I1.

Some

Scandinavian

Gods.

I

xxv.-xxxn.

XXIV.

Certain of the Hindu and 
Buddhist Results.

Nerodha-samapatti, Nirvikalpa* 
samadhi, Shiva darshana

O

Zeus, Iacchus

Wotan . .

>

r •

Unity with Brahma, Atma 
darshana

1

Athena, Uranus.

Odin . . .

2

Cybele, Demeter, Rhea, Her*.

Frigga . .

. *

3

Poseidon .......

Wotan . .

. .

4

Ares, Hades.

Thor . . .

5

Iacchus, Apollo, Adorns . .

* ■

Vishvarupa-aarshana ....

6Odin . . .

2

Cybele, Demeter, Rhea, Her*.

Frigga . .

. *

3

Poseidon .......

Wotan . .

. .

4

Ares, Hades.

Thor . . .

5

Iacchus, Apollo, Adorns . .

* ■

Vishvarupa-aarshana ....

6

Aphrodite, Nik£.

Freya . .

* «

7

Hermes.

Odin, Lold.

«

V

8

Zeus (as A ), Diana of Ephesus 
(as phallic stone)

•Q

H

cf

9

Persephone, [Adonis] Psyche .

Valkyries .

* ’

rt

f 0

♦ *

Vision of the "Higher Self," the 
various Dhyanas or Jhanas

10

Zeus.. . + +

■ *

P

Vayu-Bhawana.

11

Hermes.* *

S3

e

12

Artemis, Hecate . . . . ,

Freya . .

*s .

to .

■ ■

Vision of Chandra .

13

Aphrodite .

. .

- p

C rt

O

, .

Success in Bhaktiyoga ...

14

Athena . . . * . . * ,

'C'C

^ j* 
8 <

15

[Her*].

<%

■ -

Success in Hathayoga, Asana and 
Frana-yama

16

Castor and Pollux, Apollo the 
Diviner

17

Apollo the Charioteer . . .

wC/J

18

Demeter [borne by lions] . .

18

[Attis] ....... ♦

||

20

Zeus .

*3N

21

Themis, Minos, Aeacus, and 
Rhadamanthus

■ -

■O o

'■g*

■ *

..

22

Poseidon .......

a s

Apo-Bhawana .......

23

Ares .

p

* * -.*

21

Apollo, Artemis (hunters) . .

.£i

'o

tg

25

Pan, Prbpus, [Erect Hermes 
and Bacchus]

p

j

2£

Ares .. ,

Tuisco . .

■ *

>

27

[Athena], Ganymede . . .

J3

28

Poseidon ..

20

Helios, Apollo.

* ■

Vision of SUrya ......

30

Hades . .......

AgnI*Bbawana ......

31

[Athena]..

82

[Demetcr] .......

Prithlvi-Bhawana.

32 bis

Iacchus.

. J

k.. .

Vision of the Higher Self, Prana* j,

yam a J

!

31 bis

TABLE I ( continued )

9

XXIII.*

XXII.

The Forty Buddhist Meditations.

Small Selection of Hindu Deities.

!

(Nothing and Neither P nor p' . . . 
-v Space.

F * "i

F . )

0

V. Consciousness.

Indifference. . *..

S . .

Parabrahm (or any other whom one wishes to 
please)

Shiva, Vishnu (as Buddha avatars), AUasa (as

1

Joy.

2

S

matter), Lingam

Bhavani (all forms of Sakti), Prana (as Force), 
Yoni

Indra, Brahma

3

Comnassion

Friendliness

4

Death.. . , . .Shiva, Vishnu (as Buddha avatars), AUasa (as

1

Joy.

2

S

matter), Lingam

Bhavani (all forms of Sakti), Prana (as Force), 
Yoni

Indra, Brahma

3

Comnassion

Friendliness

4

Death.. . , . .

Vishnu, Varruna-Avatar ........

6

Buddha ..

Vishnu-Hari-Krishna* Rama .......

6

The Godj..

7

Analysis into 4 Elements.

A . .

Hanuwan.. . T

8

Dhamma..

Ganesha, Vishnu (Kurm Avatar) .....

9

(Sangha .

\The Body.

R . \

R . /

Lakshmi, &c. [Kundalini] ........

10

Wind.* . .

The Manits [Vayu]..

11

Yellow.

Hanuman, Vishnu (as Parasa-Rama) . . , *

12

Loathsomeness of Food.

Chandra (as ..

13

Dark Blue.. .

Lalita (sexual aspect of Sakti)

14

Bloody Corpse.

Shiva...

15

Beaten and Scattered Corpse . . . .

1 . ,

Shiva (Sacred Bull).

16

White..

Various twin and hybrid Deities......

17

Worm-eaten Corpse.

18

Gnawed by Wild Beasts Corpse . . .

1 . .

Vishnu (Nara-Singo Avatar).

19

Bloated Corpse . . . * . . . .

The Gopi girls, the Lord of Yoga.

20

Liberality.

Brahma, Indra ..

21

Hacked in Pieces Corpse . , * . .

Yam a...

22

Water..

Soma [apas] ............

23

Skeleton Corpse

Kundalini..

24

Limited Aperture

Vishnu [Horse*Avatar).* , , .

25

Putrid Corpse .........

Lingam, Yoni

26

Blood-red ..........

27

Purple Corpse

28

Conduct . . . * . . , - „ . ,

Vishnu [Matsya Avatar].

29

light............

Surya (as 0).

30

Fire .......... . .

Agni [Tojas], Yams [as God of Last Judgment]

31

Quiescence .........

Brahma ..

32

Earth..

[Prithivi] .............

32 bis

Breathing..

[Akasa].

31 bis

10

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

XL.*

XXXIX.*

XXXVIII.*

Precious Stones.

Plants, Real and Imaginary.

Animals, Real and Imaginary.

Diamond.

Almond in Flower . , , . ,

God.

0

t

Star Ruby, Turquoise . .

Amaranth.

Man ..

2

Star Sapphire, Pearl. . .

Cypress, Opium Poppy . .

Woman.

3

Amethyst and Sapphire

Olive, Shamrock.

Unicom..

4

Ruby.

Oak, Nux Vomica, Nettle . . .

Basilisk..

6

Topaz, Yellow Diamond .2

Star Sapphire, Pearl. . .

Cypress, Opium Poppy . .

Woman.

3

Amethyst and Sapphire

Olive, Shamrock.

Unicom..

4

Ruby.

Oak, Nux Vomica, Nettle . . .

Basilisk..

6

Topaz, Yellow Diamond .

Acacia, Bay, Laurel, Vine . . .

Phoenix, Lion, Child.

C

Emerald.

Rose.

lynx.

7

Opal, especially Fire Opal.

Moly, Anhatonium Lewinii . .

Hermaphrodite, Jackal. . . .

8

Quartz.

[Banyan], Mandrake, Damiana .

Elephant

9

Rock Crystal.

Willow, Lily, Ivy. . . . . .

Sphinx.

10

Topaz, Chalcedony . . .

Aspen.

Eagle or Man (Cherub of A)

11

Opal, Agate.

Vervain, Herb Mercury, Marjo*

Swallow, Ibis, Ape . .

12

lane, Palm

Almond, Mugwort, Hazel (as ^),

Dog..

13

Moonstone, Pearl, Crystal .

Moonwort, Rannnculus

Emerald, Turquoise . . .

Myrtle, Rose, Clover ....

Sparrow, Dove, Swan ....

14

Ruby........

Tiger Lily, Geranium ....

Ram, Owl.. .

IS

Topaz.

Mallow..

Bull (Cherub of V) . . . .

16 i

Alexandrite, Tourmaline,

Hybrids, Orchids. . + , . .

Magpie. Hybrids ......

17

Jceland Spar

18

Amber.

Lotus.

Crab, Turtle, Sphinx ....

Cat’s Eye .... *

Sunflower .

Lion (Cherub of A) ....

19

Peridot.

Snowdrop, Lily, Narcissus . . .

Virgin, Anchorite, any solitary

20

person or animal

21

Amethyst, Lapis Lazuli

Hyssop, Oak, Poplar, Fir; . . .

Eagle.

Emerald.

Aloe.. ■

Elephant.. .

22

Beryl or Aquamarine . .

Lotus, all Water Plants. . , ,

Eagle-snake-scorpion

(Cherub of V) 
Scorpion, Beetle, Lobster or

23

Snakes tone

Cactus..

24

Crayfish, Wolf

Jacinth.* *

Rush...

Centaur, Horse, Hippogriff, Dog

25

Black Diamond ....

Indian Hemp, Orchis Root,

Goat, Ass.

26

Thistle

27

Ruby, any red stone. . .

Absinthe, Rue

Horse, Bear, Wolf.

Artificial Glass ....

[Olive], Cocoanut.

Man or Eagle (Cherub of A),

28

Peacock

29

Pearl........

Unicellular Organisms, Opium .

Fish, Dolphin.

Crysoleth..

Sunflower, Laurel, Heliotrope

Lion, Sparrowhawk.

30

Fire Opal.

Red Poppy, Hibiscus, Nettle . .

Lion (Cherub of A) . . . .

31Unicellular Organisms, Opium .

Fish, Dolphin.

Crysoleth..

Sunflower, Laurel, Heliotrope

Lion, Sparrowhawk.

30

Fire Opal.

Red Poppy, Hibiscus, Nettle . .

Lion (Cherub of A) . . . .

31

Onyx.

Ash, Cypress, Hellebore, Yew, 
Nightshade

Oak, Ivy.- -

Crocodile.

32

Salt.

Bull (Cherub oU^.

32 bis

Almond in flower......

Sphinx (if Swcrded and Crowned)

31 bis

TABLE I ( continued )

11

XXXVII.

XXXVI.

XXXV.

Hindu Legendary

Selection of Christian Gods (io) ; 
Apostles (12), Evangelists (4),

Some Roman Gods.

and Churches of Asia (7).

O

f t

God, the 3 In 1..

Jupiter ........

1

God the Father, God who guides Parliament.

J anus.

2

The Virgin Mary.

Juno, Cybele, Saturn, Hecate,

3

&c.

God the Rain-maker {vide Prayer-book), God

Jupiter ..*.***■

4

the Farmer’s Friend

Christ coining to Judge the World ....

Mars

6

God the Son (and Maker of Fine Weather) .

Apollo ........

e

Messiah, Lord of Hosts {vide Prayer-book, 
R. Kipling, &c.)

God the Holy Ghost (as Comforter and Inspirer

Venus

7

Mercury ........

8

of Scripture), God the Healer of Plagues

God the Holy Ghost (as Incubus) ....

Diana (as ..

9

Ecclesia Xsti, The Virgin Mary . , , . ,

Ceres.........

IO

Matthew.

Jupiter . ..

11

Sardis

Mercury . . . , . + .

12

Laodicea..

Diana

13

Tbyatira.

Venus ^ ■

14

|

[Tlie Disciples arc too indefinite] ....

Mars, Minerva......

its

B

42

Venus .

16

Castor and Pollux, [J anus)

17

► * S <

i

Mercury.

IS

u

id

Venus (repressing the Fire of

10

p

Vulcan)

£

[Attls], Ceres, Adonis . . .

20

Philadelphia ..

Jupiter, [Pluto] .....

21

Vulcan ........

22

John, Jesus as Han^l Man ......

Neptune...... T .

23

Mars..

24

Diana (as Archer).

25

Pan, Vesta, Bacchus . . .

26

*

Pergamos ............

Mars..

27

Juno . . .

28

Neptune..

29

Smyrna

Apollo.

30

Mark...

Vulcan, Pluto ......

31

Saturn.

32

Luke.

Ceres

32 bis

The Holy Ghcst . ..

j. [Liber).

31 bis

12

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

XLVI.*28

Neptune..

29

Smyrna

Apollo.

30

Mark...

Vulcan, Pluto ......

31

Saturn.

32

Luke.

Ceres

32 bis

The Holy Ghcst . ..

j. [Liber).

31 bis

12

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

XLVI.*

System of Taoism.

XLV.

Magical Powers [Western Mysticism].

XLIV.*

Mineral Drugs.

The Tao or Great Extreme

The Supreme Attainment .......

Carbon . . . H *

O

of the Y1 King

Sbang Ti (also the Tao)

Union with God..

Aur. Pot. . . , ,

1

The Yang and Kblen . .

The Vision of God face to face.

Phosphorus . . ,

2

Kwan-se-on, The Yin and

The Vision of Sorrow.. .

Silver.

3

Khwan

The Vision of Love .........

4

The Vision of Power.

Iron, Sulphur . . ,

5

Li.

The Vision of the Harmony of Things (also 
the Mysteries of the Crucifixion)

Arsenic .....

6

* . * - * . * ♦ * -

The Vision of Beauty Triumphant . . , .

7

The Vision of Splendour [Ezekiel] ....

Mercury, . . , ,

8

...... , . .

The Vision of the Machinery of the Universe

Lead..

0

Klian.

The Vision of the Holy Guardian Angel or of 
Adonai

Mag. Sulph, . . .

10

Sun.

Divination.

11

Sun..

Miracles of Healing, Gift of Tongues, Know¬ 
ledge of Sciences

Mercury.....

12

Khan and Khwan . . ,

The White Tincture, Clairvoyance, Divination 
by Dreams

........

13

Tui.

Love-philtres.

14

Power of Consecrating Things - , .

10

The Secret of Physical Strength.

16

Power of being In two or more places at one 
time, and of Prophecy

.... .

17

Power of Casting Enchantments.

18

Power of Training Wild Beasts.

12

Invisibility, Parthenogenesis, Initiation (?) .

20

Li . . . .

Power of Acquiring Political and other A seen- 
dency

Works of Justice and Equilibrium ....

21

22

Tui..

The Great Work, Talismans, Crystal-gazing, 
&c.

Sulphates ....

23

Necromancy ...........

24

Transmutations ..

20

The Witches* Sabbath so-called, the Evil Eye

2G

Kan . . . b p

Works of Wrath and Vengeance. . .. , . '

27

Astrology.

28

Bewitchments, Casting Illusions.

29

U and Kblen.20

The Witches* Sabbath so-called, the Evil Eye

2G

Kan . . . b p

Works of Wrath and Vengeance. . .. , . '

27

Astrology.

28

Bewitchments, Casting Illusions.

29

U and Kblen.

The Red Tincture, Power of Acquiring Wealth

30

K£n . . . , h .

Evocation, Pyromancy.

Nitrates.....

31

Khan..

Works of Malediction and Death ....

Lead.

32

Kan.

Alchemy, Geomancy, Making of Pantacle3 .

Bismuth.....

32 bis

Invisibility, Transformations, Vision of the 
Genius

Carbon . . * * *

31 bis

TABLE I {continued)

13

XLIII.*

Vegetable Drugs.

XLI1.

Perfumes.

XLI.

Magical Weapons.

Elixir Vitce....

Ambergris..

Swastika or Fylfat Cross, Crown

0

1

Hashish.

Musk..

Lingam, the Inner Robe of Glory .

2

Belladonna ....

Myrrh, Civet.

Yoni, the Outer Robe of Conceal¬

3

Opium.

Cedar

ment

The Wand, Sceptre, or Crook . .

4

Nux Vomica, Nettle.

Tobacco..

The Sword, Spear, Scourge, or Chain

5

Stramonium, Alcohol,

Olibanum.

The Lamen or Rosy Cross....

6

Digitalis, Co2cc

Damiana ....

Benzoin, Rose, Red Sandal . . .

The Lamp and Girdle.

7

Anhalonium Lewinii.

Storax .

The Names and Versicles and Apron

8

Orchid Root . . .

Jasmine, Jinseng, all Odoriferous

The Perfumes and Sandals . . .

9

Corn.

Roots

Dittany of Crete . . ■ . . . .

The Magical Circle and Triangle

10

Peppermint . . .

Galbanura.

The Dagger or Fan.

11

All cerebral excitants

Mastic, White Sandal, Mace, Storax,

The Wand or Caduceus ....

12

Juniper, Fennyroyal,

all Fugitive Odours

Menstrual Blood, Camphor, Aloes, all

Bow and Arrow ......

13

& all emmenogogues 
All aphrodisiacs . .

Sweet Virginal Odours

Sandalwood, Myrtle, all Soft Volup¬

The Girdle . ..,

14

All cerebral excitants

tuous Odours

Dragon's Blood .......

The Homs, Energy, the Burin , .

15

Sugar.

Storax ..........

The Labour of Preparation . . .

16

Ergot and ecboilcs .

Wormwood .........

The Tripod ....... „

17

Watercress ....

Oaycha ..........

The Furnace.

18

All carminatives andStorax ..........

The Labour of Preparation . . .

16

Ergot and ecboilcs .

Wormwood .........

The Tripod ....... „

17

Watercress ....

Oaycha ..........

The Furnace.

18

All carminatives and

Olibanum ..-

The Discipline (Preliminary) . . .

19

tonics

All anaphrodislacs .

Narcissus.

The Lamp and Wand (Virile Force

20

Cocaine.

Saffron, all Generous Odours . . .

reserved), the Bread

The Sceptre..

21

Tobacco.

Galbanum ........

The Cross of Equilibrium ....

22

Cascara, all purges .

Onycha, Myrrh.

The Cup and Cross of Suffering, the 
Wine

23

Siamese Benzoin, Opoponax . . .

The Pain of the Obligation . . .

24

Lign-aloes.

The Arrow (swift and straight appli¬

25

Orchis [Satyrion]. .

Musk, civet (also f"? ian Perfumes) .

cation of Force)

The Secret Force, Lamp . . , ,

26

Pepper, Dragon’s Blood, all Hot 
Pungent Odours

Galbanum .........

The Sword. . .

27

AH diuretics . . .

The Censer or Aspergillus ....

28

All narcotics . . .

Ambergris.

The Twilight of the Place and Magio 
Mirror

The Lamen or Bow and Arrow . .

29

Alcohol .....

Olibanum, Cinnamon, all Glorious

30

Odours

Olibanum, all Fiery Odours . . .

The Wand or Lamp, Pyramid of

31

Assafcetida, Scammony, Indigo, Sul¬

A Sickle.

32

phur (all Evil Odours)

Storax, all Dull and Heavy Odours.

The Pantacle or Salt .....

32 bis

31 bis

14

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

LI 11.

LI I.

LI.

L.*

Tbe Greek 
Alphabet.

Tbe Arabic 
Alphabet

The Coptic 
Alphabet.

Transcendental Morality.

[io Virtues (1-10), 7 Sins (Planets),

4 Magick Powers (Elements),]

O

. . .[*]. . .

\ Three Lost (

I Fathers.* "|

. . . T . . . 
<F

Pyrrho-Zoroastrianism (Accomplish* 
meat of Great Work)

Devotion.

1

2

J l

Silence..

3

. . .[c]. . .

. . . & .

H

Obedience

4-

. . .[♦]. . .

. . 4 > . . .

Energy.

5

. , . i . . „

(JO

Devotion to Great Work ....

6

. . .[<]. • •

- » 4 i 4 # F

6

Unselfishness . ..,

7

. . . k . . .

. . .q. . .

Truthfulness.

8

•••£■••

X. . 4 > . . .

Energy.

5

. , . i . . „

(JO

Devotion to Great Work ....

6

. . .[<]. • •

- » 4 i 4 # F

6

Unselfishness . ..,

7

. . . k . . .

. . .q. . .

Truthfulness.

8

•••£■••

X

Independence

9

: ’ • 4 ' • '

. .is. . .

Scepticism.

to

1

A

Noscere.

11

... 8 .. .

Bl

Falsehood, Dishonesty (Envy] . .

12

T

Contentment [Idleness].

13

Unchastity [Lust].

14

4 . . ,

.. .e...

16

Y

16

. j*>. . .

17

18

. . . 6 . . .

, . . k . . .

e

19

1

20

. . . d . . .

K

Bigotry,-Hypocrisy [Gluttony] . .

21

22

JUt

Audere . .

23

It

24

. . .tw . .

■•-2-••

26

o

26

. lJ

n

Cruelty [Wrath] ........

27

. . .'4'. . .

28

.. .x...

29

.■ p...

[Pride] , . ■ ♦.

30

. . ..

Velle.. .

31

. . T . . +

. ^

T '

Envy [Avarice] ..*.♦**

32

. . . V . . .

Tacere

32 bis

31 bis

TABLE I ( continued )

15

XLIX.*

XL VIII.

XLVII.

Lineal Figures of the 
Planets, &c., and 
Geomancv.

Figures related to Pure Number.

Kings and Princes of 
the J inn.

O

1

The Line, also the Cross

The Cross ,

2

/"The Plane, also the Dia* 'J 
< mond, Oval, Circle, and >

The Triangle.

3

\ other Yoni Symbols 1

The Solid Figure ....

Tetrahedron or Pyramid, Cross . .

C

The Tessaract.

The Rose.

rj

Sephirotic Geoman tic

Calvary Cross, Truncated Pyramid,

- - • * u-* 1 *

6

Figures follow the

Cube

Planets. Caput* and 
Cauda Draoonis* are the

A Rose (7 x 7), Candlestick . . .

7

Nodes of the Moon, 
nearly = Neptune and

1 * * + + ■

e

Herschel respectively. 
They belong to Mai-

0

\kuih.

Altar, Double Cube, Calvary Cross .

./

10

Those of Ay Triplicity .

11

Octagram

Calvary Cross.

12

Enneagram.

Greek Cross, Plane, Table of Shew- 
bread

.e"“ eV*

13

Heptagram ♦ . . , .

14

Puer *.

, ..

IS

Amissio

1C

Albus *.

Swastika .........

17

Populus and Via • . . .

13

For tuna Major and For tuna 
Minor •

19

Conjunctio

20

Square and Rhombus . .

21

Puella *.

GreekCrossSolid, the Rose (3+7 + 12)

22

Those of V y Triplicity .

23Populus and Via • . . .

13

For tuna Major and For tuna 
Minor •

19

Conjunctio

20

Square and Rhombus . .

21

Puella *.

GreekCrossSolid, the Rose (3+7 + 12)

22

Those of V y Triplicity .

23

Rubeus •.

24

Acquisitio *.

The Rose (5x5).

25

Career* .......

Calvary Cross of xo, Solid ....

26

Pentagram.

27

Tristitia *...,..

26

Laetitia*

29

Hexagram.

30

Those of Ay Triplicity ,

31

Triangle.

32

Those ofVy Triplicity .

32 bis

31 bis

16

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

LX IV.

LXIII.

LX II.

LX!.

LX.

Secret Names of 
the Four Worlds.

The Four Worlds.

Kings of the 
Elemental 
Cpirits.

A*cel$ of the 
Elements.

The Rulers of 
the Elements.

.HD

Yetzirah, Formative World

Faralda . ,

• • • pri

• • • fonx

11

■.ID

Briah, Creative World . .

Niksa . *

• • • liV^D

• • -D'Bnn

23

. 2V

Atzilutb, Archetypal World

Djin . . .

i>N1X

. . . .epfc»

31

. p

Assiah, Material World . .

Ghob.

- • ■ix'.nia

■ ■ • ana

32 bis

LXXI.

The Court Cards of the Tarot, with the Spheres 
of their Celestial Dominion—Wands.

LXX.

Attribution of 
Pentagram.

LXIX.*

The Alchemical 
Elements.

The Prince of the Chariot of Fire. Rules 20® 23 
to 20° 57,* including most of Leo Minor

Left Upper Point . .

. . . Q . . .

*

n

The Queen of the Thrones of Flame, ao* K to 
r f*, includes part of Andromeda

Right Upper Point

. . . G . . .

23

The Lord of the Flame and the Lightning. The 
King of the Spirits of Fire. Rules ao® IT^to 
ao* X, including part of Hercules

Right Lever Point

31

The Princess cf the Shining Flame. The Rose 
of the Palace of Fire. Rules one Quadrant of 
Heavens round N. Pole

Left Lower Point . ,

. . . 0 . . .

33 bis

The Root of the Powen cf Fire (Ace) ....

Topmost Point . . .

31 bis

LXX VI.

The Five 
Skandhas.

LXXV.

The Five Elements (Tatwas).

LXXIV.

The Court Cards of the Tarot, with the Spheres 
of their Celestial Dominion—Pantaclcs.

Sankhara .

Vayu—the Clue Cirds . . . .The Five 
Skandhas.

LXXV.

The Five Elements (Tatwas).

LXXIV.

The Court Cards of the Tarot, with the Spheres 
of their Celestial Dominion—Pantaclcs.

Sankhara .

Vayu—the Clue Cirds . . . .

The Prince cl the Chariot of Earth. *o® T to 
20* £5

11

Vedana . .

Apas—the Silver Crescent . .

The Queen of the Thrones of Earth. 20* $ to 
20° ft

23

Safina . .

AgnJ or Tejar—the Red Triangle

The Lord of the Wide and Fertile Land. The 
King of the Spirits of Earth. 20* 57, to so® ITf

31

Rupa. . .

Prilhivi—the Yellow Square. .

The Princess of the Echoing Hills. The Lotus 
of tbc Palace of the Earth. Rules a 4 th Quad¬ 
rant of the Heavens about Kether

32 bis

Vinnanam .

Akasa—the Clack Egg....

The Root of the Powers of Earth.

31 bis

TABLE II

17

LIX

LVIII.

LVII.*

Archangels 
of the 
Quarters.

Supreme

Elemental

Kings.

The Four 
Quarters.

. .

Tahoeloj . . -

. (E) mto

TUahebyobeaatan

(W)

btO'O

Ohooohatau . .

. cs) cm

Thahaaotahe . .

. (N) pax

LVI.

LV.

LIV.

The Four 
Rivers.

The Elements 
and Senses.

The Letters 
of the 
Name.

• Smn

^ Air, Smell ,

. . 1 . .

11

V Water, Taste

. .n. .

23

. pSTB

A Fire, Sight .

. . *. .

81

. ■ mu

^ Earth, Touch

. n* •

32 bis

Spirit, Hearing

31 bisj

LXVIII.

LXVil.

LXVI.

L.XV.

The Demon

Kings.

The Part' of 
the Soul.

Spelling of Tetragrammaton 
in the Four Worlds.

Secret Num* 
bers corre* 
spondiog.

Qriens ....

.run

.Nn ini Nn iv

• • 45 • •

11

Ariton.. .

.*n ini *n ni*

. . 63 . .

23

Paimon . . .

.rvn

.... rvn vi rvn iv

. * 72 . .

31

Aznaimon .....

.nn r n nn nv

. . 52 . •

32 biz

31 Lis

LXXIJI.

lxxii.

The Court Cards of the Tarot, vuth the Spheres 
of their Celestial Dominion—Swords.

The Court Cards of the Tarot, with the Spheres 
of their Celestial Dominion—Cups.

Tire Prince of the Chariot of Air. ao° to

The Prince of the Chariot of the Waters. ao° —

11

20°

to 20 0

The Queen of the Thrones of Air. 20* TTF to

The Queen cf the Thrones of the Waters. 20 ° HThe Prince of the Chariot of the Waters. ao° —

11

20°

to 20 0

The Queen of the Thrones of Air. 20* TTF to

The Queen cf the Thrones of the Waters. 20 ° H

23

ao°

to 20 0 Qj 3

The Lord of the Winds and the Prceres. The

The Lord of the Waves and the Waters. The

31

King Of the Spirits of Air, - 20 ° £ "to ao° U

King of the Hosts of the Sea. so 0 C 3 S to 20° X * 
including most of Pegasus

The Princess of the Rushing Winds. The Lotus 
of the Palace of Ail. Rules a 3 rd Quadrant

The Princess cf the Waters. The Lotus of the 
Palace of the Floods. Ruios another 
Quadrant

The Root of the Powers of Water .....

32 bis

The Root of the Powers of Air ......

18 TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

LXXX1I1.

LXXX11.

LXXXI.

LXXX.

The Attribution of 
the Hexagram.

The Noble 
Eightfold Path.

Metals.

Olympic Planetary 
Spirits.

Left Lower Point. . .

Samma Vaca , . .

Mercury .....

Ophiel ......

12

Bottom Point ....

Samma Sankappo

Silver.

Phul.

13

Right Lower Point . .

Samma Rumman to .

Copper .....

Hagith.

14

Right Upper Point . .

Samma Ajivo . . .

Tin.

Bethor......

21

Left Upper Point. . ,

Samma Vayamo . .

1 ron ......

Phalcg....

27

Centre Point . . . ,

Samma Samadhl . .

Gold.

Och.

30

Top Point.

Samma Sati and 
Samaditthi

Lead.

Arathron .....

32

XC.

LXXXIX.*

LXXXV1II.

The 42 -fold Name which 
revolves in the Palaces 
of Yetzirah.

The Revolution of n\“lX 
in Briab.

Translation of Col. LXXXVII.

0

.

.rvriNj

f 1

.

.'nnK>

Palatium Sancti Sanctorum . . .

1 2

■ ■ ■ - • ■ • sn

.nn'K'

l 3

.jiDPinp

.x'nn

P. Amoris.

4

.PDHW

.'t<nn

P. Merhi

6

.’nxn

P. Benevolentiae ......

6

.yiiCDpn

.iTKH

P. Substantiae Coeli ...

7

.nK\n 1

P. Serenitaris..

8

■ - • • 'pt?

.... nrw

|

f 9

r .

Vp. Albedinis Crystaliinae . . -

J

I

.rvy

•.HR.T '

J

UO

TABLE III

19

LXXIX.

Spirits of the 
Planets.*

LXXVII1.

Intelligences of the Planets.

LXXV1I.

The Planets and 
their Numbers.

. (1080) rnmnsn

. (260)

. . 9s..

12I

.rvy

•.HR.T '

J

UO

TABLE III

19

LXXIX.

Spirits of the 
Planets.*

LXXVII1.

Intelligences of the Planets.

LXXV1I.

The Planets and 
their Numbers.

. (1080) rnmnsn

. (260)

. . 9s..

12

• • ( 369 ) ’tmce'n

. ( 33 ai ) D'pnc' nm ijn o'^'enro

. . 'S' 9 • •

13

• • - O 75 ) 5>s<mp

• • . ..( 49 ) ^sran

. . 9 7 . .

14

• • ( 136 ) ^XDDD

.(> 36 )

. . V 4 . .

21

- • ( 3 * 5 ) fwaVTl

. . «J 5 . .

27

• ■ • (666) miD

.(in)

. . © 6 . .

30

. ■ • • (45)S>N)I

.( 45 )

. . h 3 . .

32

TABLE IV

LXXXVII.

Palaces of Briah.

LXXXVI.

Choirs of Angels 
in Briah.

LXXXV.

Angels of Briah.

LXXXIV.

Divine Names 
of Briah.

)

. bnw

0

1

. D'enp enip ^s'n >

.D'3D1K

.

. *\

2

J

.euro

.... isN'ana

J

3

.... nanw

.

• • • • i>K'pnv

. . . (sic) VBVD

4

.... D't^inn

.... t^unn

.nrr

5

.}»n .n

.D'^otyn

.... • inane

.mn*

6

■ • • D’ot? Dxy .n

.Doi*D

.^N’Dl

....

7

.run .n

• • • • D'r6x *J3

• • • • i>K’3DD

.fBVD

8

. . tddh ruai> .n j

.O’tV'

■ ■ • • *iwn'

■ ■ • .wirnM

3

.1

.D’^tnK

.i>tO’D

.)

10

20

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

XCVL*

The Revolution oi nlJV 
in Yetzlrali,

xcv.

Contents oi Col. XCIV.

XCIV.

English of Palaces 
(CoL XCIIL).

0

1

2

3

.. ..*mn

Blessings, ali good things . . .

Piamties.

<1

..'inn

Snow, rain, spirit of life, blessings

Reposltorium.

5

Angels singing in Divine presence

Habitnculum.

6

.* * . .iron

Altar, Mikhael offering souls of

just

Habitaculum.

7

Millstones where manna for just 
is ground for future

Locus communication is . „

8

. nm\

Sol, Luna, planets, stars, and io 
spheres

Firuiomentum +

0

.win

Has no use. Follow 390 heavens,

13,000 worlds, Earth, Eden, 
acd Hell

Velum sive Cortina . . * *

10

CIV.

The Ten Earths 
in Seven Palaces.

CIIL*

The Ten Divisions of the 
Body of God.

C1L*

The Revolution of 
Adonai in Assiah.

CL

English of Col. C.

. }

Cranium.

Holy living creatures

0

1

.... psl

Cerebrum dextrum . . « *

V/heels.

2

. )C1L*

The Revolution of 
Adonai in Assiah.

CL

English of Col. C.

. }

Cranium.

Holy living creatures

0

1

.... psl

Cerebrum dextrum . . « *

V/heels.

2

. )

Cerebrum sinistrum . . . .

Active ones, throne 3

3

■ - . . nDiK

Brachium dextrum ....

Brilliant ones . . .

4

. m

Brachium sinistrum ....

Fiery serpents . .

5

.

Totum corpus a gutture usque

Kings .... *

6

ad mem brum sanctum

Pes dexter.

Gods.*

7

.... «pns

Pes sinister.

Sons of God . . .

8

.... S>arn

Signum foederis sancti . . ,

.3*0*1

Angels of elements .

9

( • • • •

.... *&v

Corolla qUce est Ln Jesod . .

1 • • • •

Flames.

10

1 -

l ■ • '3*i« W

1

TABLE IV (continued)

21

XCIJI.

The Heavens of 
Assiah.

xcn.

The Angelic Functions in tho 
World of Yctrirah.

T\)TV

. P3D

. . py» 
. Vut

• c'pnt?

• -U'pl

• D'Dr \t

Seraphim stabnnt supra illud: sex alas

Son alse

Uni: in dudbus.

VeJabat fades suaa: et duabus vslabat

Pedes suas et.. * .

Due.bus volabat.

I Et claraabat hie ad ilium ct dicebat I 
o S&nctus, sanctuc, sanctus, Dominus J. 
1 E-concilium, pfenitudo totius terra: I 
^ fUoria cjus J

:cci.

The Saints or Adepts 
of the Hebrews.

Mesdas Clius David. 
Moshch. . . ^ >

Enoch

Abraham . . , *

J acob.

Elijah . . ■ . ,

Mosbeb . . • * 4

Aaron «... 
J oseph (J ustus) .

David, Elisha .

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 
9

10

c.*

XCIX,*

XCVIII.

xevn.

Angels of

Assiah.

Archangels of 
Assiab.

English of Col. XCV1I.

Parts of the 
Soul.

• • • cnpnnvn

■ * • • jnaoo

The Self .

0

1

The Life Force.

2

■ ■ • • C'^NTN

....

The Intuition.

3

.... D'i;»i?n

■ Stop-iv

4

.

0

-nn ^

6

.D’D^K

■ ■ iw 3 t<n

The Intellect. *

7

■ ■ -

.^KD'D

8

.D ’313

....

h

9

..... n'C'N

■ 5 iB^n 3 D(jnoeo)

The Animal Soul, which per* 
ceives and feels

10

22

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

CXI.

Sephirotic Colour*

[Dr. Jellinek].

cx.

Elements and Quarter? 
(Sepher Yetnrah).

CIX.*

The Dukes and Kings of Edom.

Concealed Light . . .

• .D'*n nn

0

1

Sky Blue.CXI.

Sephirotic Colour*

[Dr. Jellinek].

cx.

Elements and Quarter? 
(Sepher Yetnrah).

CIX.*

The Dukes and Kings of Edom.

Concealed Light . . .

• .D'*n nn

0

1

Sky Blue.

Air.

2

Yellow . . - . . ■

Water and Earth . . .

3

White.-

Fire .......

Q 331 ' Of rm3 and 9 n 03 '$>nN .

4

Red ... .

Height.

0 * 3 D'n nDt?n 9 . . •

5

White-red.

Depth .....

Q mu Tin 9 p>a. . .

6

W r hitish-red . . .

East .

0 npTBfo aloes' 9 »p . . .

7

Reddish-white . . .

West.

0 n'3m biKB' 9 |»<n . . .

8

White - red -whitish-red- 
reddish-white

South. ...

0 pn 9 and

1 V 3 D

9

The Light reflecting all 
colours

North ......

0 ipD nn 9 Qi'y .

10

CXIX.

CXVII1.

CXVI1.

CXVI.

The Ten Fetters

The Chakkras or Centres

The Soul

Egyptian Attribution of

(Buddhism).

of Prana (Hinduism).

(Hindu).

Parts of the Soul.

i

Hammemit ......

0

Aruparaga ....

Sahasara (above Head) .

Atma ....

Kha. or Yekh . . , i

f

1

VUvfciktfa ....

Ajna (Pineal Gland) . .

Buddhi ■ . .

Khai. or Ka . . . . -j

1

2

Ruparaga ....

Visuddhi (Larynx) . .

Higher Manas .

Ba. or Baie . . . . '

l

3

Silabata Paramesa .

[ .

( .

4

Patigha .

< Anahata (Heart) . .

6

UdaUAa ....

1 .

!l.

Aih .^

6

Mano .

Manipura (Solar Plexus)

Kama ....

7

Sakkya-ditti . . .

Svadistthaua (Navel) .

Prana ....

8

Kama .

Muladbara (Lingam and 
Anus)

Linga Sharira .

Hati .* .

9

Avi^^a ... - -

1 Stbula Sharira .

Kheiht, Khat, Tet, Sahu .

1

10

TABLE IV 0 continued)

23

cvin.•

CVII.

CVI.*

CV.

Some Princes of the 
Qliphoth.

Translation of

Kells.

The Ten Hells 
in Seven Palaces.

English of

CoL CIV.

- * * * ■

0

Satan and Moloch ....

|

1

•.•SsOD

Grave.v

Earth (dry). . -!

2

.dw?

. j

.1

1

3

Lucifuge *.

Perdition.

... tH3N

Red earth . . .

4

.nnnptt

Clay of Death....

Undulating ground

5

Beiphegor .... KVn

Pit of Destruction . .

Pasture ....

6

.

Shadow of Death

* . . mo'w

Sandy earth . .

7

Adramelek ....

Gates of Death . . .

■ • -mo^xUndulating ground

5

Beiphegor .... KVn

Pit of Destruction . .

Pasture ....

6

.

Shadow of Death

* . . mo'w

Sandy earth . .

7

Adramelek ....

Gates of Death . . .

■ • -mo^x

Earth ....

8

*.n>)'^

Hell.'j

... D3.T3

Wet Earth . .

9

.now

. J

l

10

cxv.*

CXiV.

CXIII.

CXI I.

Officers in a Masonic 
Lodge.

Passwords of the 
Grades.

Alchemical Metals <ii.).

Alchemical Tree 
of Life

0

t

\

Silence •. . . .

Metallic Radix

- • • .?-

.... h ... .

<•

2

1

.21

. . . . v ...

. . . .8. . . .

3

W.M.

.... j)... .

.... I> ... .

4

s.w.

5

J.W.. .

. . . . <J . . . .

3

S.D.

.ro

... J....

.... V.

7

j.n..

. - • rta?

. . J . . . .

Q

8

I.G.

.... 9 ... .

.... h... .

0

| T. and Candidate . .

j

.H3

Mcc’Jchn MetaUoruns

Me rear! »;g Philo sophorum

30

24 TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

c::xvi.

cxxv.*

CXXIV.

CXXIII.

Their Inhabitants.

Seven Hells of 
the Arabs.

The Heavenly 
Hexagram.

English of Col. VIII., 
Lines 1-10.

0

|

.... V ... .

Dual Contending Forces

1

Hypocrites. . - . .

Hiwiyah . . r

Hindcrers.

2

1

;

. [ h Daath] .

Concealers .....

3

Pagans or Idolaters. .

Jahim . . . ,

...?... .

Breakers in Pieces . *

4

Guebres......

Sakar.

|- 6 -

Burners.

6

Sabians

Disputers .....

G

Jews.

Hutamah . . .

Dispersing Ravens

7

Christians.

Laza.

Deceivers.

8

)

Obscene Ones . . ♦ .

9

Moslems . . . * ,

Jehannam . . j

The Evil Womart or 
(simply) The Woman

10

CXXXII.

Pairs of Angels ruling

Coins.

CXXXI.

Pairs of Angels ruling 
Swords.

exxx.

Pairs of Angels ruling

Cups.

0

1

.W'N n'un

2

.mn.’ rvnni>

.tanto .von'

3

.iwio

.n’O'D

4

.rvnao i>K'3D

.n'oyn

.rv5>na

5

.

6

.... iwinn 5>to'o

.nnnn

7

.i>K3Di Sxnn’

. n'Sn ivni”

8

.i>N*no

..... n'i>ND iww

9

r ..... rvvnn

. 1

..rp^OT SbtnvO

10

I

1

TABLE IV ( continued)

25

CXXII.

The Ten Plagues 
of Egypt.

CXXI.*

The Grades of the Order.

Death of First 
bom

Locusts . . 
Darkness . 
Hail and Fire 
r Eoils.. 1

..rp^OT SbtnvO

10

I

1

TABLE IV ( continued)

25

CXXII.

The Ten Plagues 
of Egypt.

CXXI.*

The Grades of the Order.

Death of First 
bom

Locusts . . 
Darkness . 
Hail and Fire 
r Eoils.

! Murrain 
| Flics .

Lice .

Frogs

Water turned 
to Blood

10 = 
9* = 
8* = 
‘f — 
6° = 
5° = 
4° —

a O _ 
“

2 ■* =

(S:

x° Ipsissiraus . . 
a a Magus .... 
3 ° Magister Templi 
4 ° Adeptus Exemptu 
5 ° Adeptus Major 
G a Adeptus Minor 
7° Philosophus .

8° Practicus. .

9 ° Theoricus

io° Zelator . \ 
o a Neophyte *

1 » l

cxx.

Magical Images of the 
Sephircth.

Ancient bearded king seen in pro¬ 
file

Almost any male image shows 
i some aspect of Chokraah 
j Almost any female image shows 
some aspect of Binah 
A mighty crowned and enthroned 
king

A mighty warrior in his chariot, 
armed and crowned 
A majestic king, a child, a cru¬ 
cified god

A beautiful naked woman . . , 
An Hermaphrodite.

A beautiful naked man, very 
strong

A young woman crowned and 
veiled

1

2

3

4

5

e

7

8 
9

10

CXXIX.

Pairs of Angels ruling 
Wands.

CXXVIII.

Meaning of Col. CXXVII.

CXXVII.*

Seven Heavens of 
the Arabs.

• - !wni i’N'n

House of Glory, made of pearls . , . . 1-

Dar al-J alal . . . . 1

0

1

£

• wnn rrooy

. !

. 1

3

House of Rest or Peace, made of rubies and

Dar as-Salam . . . , H

A

• • -rmni

jacinths

Garden of Mansions, made of yellow copper.

Jannat al-Maawa . . .

G

• -^ND'D

Garden of Eternity, made of yellow coral

Jannat al-Khuld . . .

6

. n'P.iD

Garden of Delights, made of white diamond .

Jannat al-Naim . . . .

7

| . irnru rvsNn

Garden of Paradise, made of red gold . . .

J annat al-Firdaus . .

8

• l>xm> n'nNB'

. )

t

. i

9

• • ^>K'n

i

Garden of Eden,or Everlasting Abode, made] 
of ltd pearls or pure musk

J annat al-’Adn or al-Karari

10

26

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

CXXXVI.

Titles and Attributions of the

Coin, Disc, or Pantacle Suit [Diamonds].

CXXXV.

Titles and Attributions of the

Sword Suit [Spades].

- * . *

010

26

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

CXXXVI.

Titles and Attributions of the

Coin, Disc, or Pantacle Suit [Diamonds].

CXXXV.

Titles and Attributions of the

Sword Suit [Spades].

- * . *

0

The Root of tho Powers of Earth.

The Root of the Powers of Air ......

1

V in The Lord of Harmonious Change .

^ in — The Lord of Peace restored . . .

2

<J in Material Works.

h in ~ Sorrow..

3

© In ^ Earthly Power

V in ” Rest from Strife.

4

$ in & Material Trouble.-

$ in ^ Defeat.

5

^ in b Material Success .......

9 in *** Earned Success .......

6

H in b Success Unfulfilled.

}) in Unstable Effort .......

7

© in ^1? Prudence , . . ..

V in U Shortened Force .......

8

9 in Material Gain ........

$ in H Despair and Cruelty . + . . .

8

9 in HJ? Wealth..

0 in H Rum.. , .

10

CXLIV.

Angels Lords of the 
Triplicity in the

Signs by Day.

CXLIII.

Twelve Lesser 
Assistant Angels 
in the Signs.

CXLII.

Angels ruling 
Houses.

CXL1.

The Twelve Tribes.

.jtanoD

• • • . i’X'nx'

.i>K'K

13

• • •

.

• - D’KIDK

1Z

.enyD

■ • ■ i>N'N1D

.i>X’J

.

17

.Ynn

.i>X'3D

.

13

.ohjd

.

... . ^Niy

■.min>

19

....

... iix’nta

.!>x'i

.....

20

■ • • i>K'pin

.... $>X.T

. yys

22

pnrr a

- • i>X’S’KD

.VlDlD

. P

24

... ^x'tino

... PXDy’lD

.;D’:n

25

.

• i’K'PDO

■ . • • n'y'ico

. j^inr

26

. yny

■ • • ■ ?N'pC3V

.... iwDJX

« - - . • pi*n

28

.torn

.... bn'321

.^X’^SS

.

29

TABLE IV ( continued)

21

CXXXIV.

Titles and Attributions of the Cup 
or Chalice Suit [Hearts].

CXXXIII.*

Titles and Attributions of tho

Wand Suit [Clubs].

The Root oi the Powers of Water . * , , *

The Root of the Powers of Fire ......

0

1

9 in 223 Love - * *

<$ In T Dotninion..

2

9 In 225 Abundance . . . . «. , * .

© in T Established Strength .... *

3

^ in 225 Pleasure.. ,

9 In T Perfected Work .......

4

(£ In ^1* Loss in Pleasure.

in £L Strife* ..

5

© in Pleasure.. .

V In <f£» Victory. .

6

9 in IUusionary Success ....**

3 in (fti Valour ..

79 In T Perfected Work .......

4

(£ In ^1* Loss in Pleasure.

in £L Strife* ..

5

© in Pleasure.. .

V In <f£» Victory. .

6

9 in IUusionary Success ....**

3 in (fti Valour ..

7

^ In K Abandoned Success

9 in t Swiftness.

8

V in K Material Happiness

I) in t Great Strength.. ,

9

(J in K Perfected Success.

h in t Oppression..

10

TABLE V

CXL.

CXXX1X.

CXXXVII I.*

CXXXVII.

|

Twelve Banners of

The Name.

Planets exalted in 
Col. CXXXVII.

Planets ruling

Col. CXXXVII.

Signs of the 
Zodiac.

ni ,t

...©...

... 6 .. .

. . . T . . .

15

inn'

. . • * * -

... 9 ...

. . 8 . . .

1G

nni'

. . . . «...

. . . 9 . . .

. . . n . . .

17

* * * ■ ■■ .

\mn

. . . v . . .

* • • ^ • •

225 , . ,

IS

■ , i , / • e

n'in

.

. . . © . . .

. . . a . . .

19

■ * ■ » • *

'inn

. . . 9 . . .

. . . nj . . .

20

n'ni

... h . . .

. . . 9 . .

22

»nm

. .

. . . nu . . . :

24

nn'i

.

, . . V . . .

25«

* * * * I i •

m'n

... <? . . .

. . . h . .

.......

26

nrn

. . . h . . .

28

rnn

. . . v . . .

. . . K . . .

29

28

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

CL.

Magical Images of the Decans (Succedcnt).

CXLIX.

Magtcal Images of the Decans (Ascendant).

i

A green-clad woman, with one leg baredrem the 
ankle to the knee

A tall, dark, restless man, wi;h keen flame - 
coloured eyes, bearing a sword

A woman with long and beautiful hair, clad in 
flame-coloured robes

15

A man df like figure (to the ascendant), with 
cloven hoofs like an ox

1C

An eagle'headed man, with a bc'.v end arrow.

A beautiful woman, with her two horses . . .

17

Wears crowned steel helmet

A beautiful woman wreathed with myrtle. She 
holds a lyre and sings of love and gladness

A man with distorted face and hands, a horse’s 
body, white feet, and a girdle of leaves

18

A man crowned with a v/hite myrtle wreath 
holding a bow

i Tall, fair, large man, with him a woman holding 
{ a large black oil jar18

A man crowned with a v/hite myrtle wreath 
holding a bow

i Tall, fair, large man, with him a woman holding 
{ a large black oil jar

A man in sordid raiment, with him a nobleman 
on horseback, accompanied by bears and dogs

19

A virgin clad in linen, with an aople or pome¬ 
granate

20

j A man, dark, yet delicious of oountenar.ee . .

A dark man, in his right hand a spear and laurel 
branch and in his left a book

22

A man riding a camel, with a scorpion in his 
hand

A man with a lance in his right hand, in his left 
a human head

24

A man leading cows, and before him an ape and

A man with 3 bodies —1 black, 1 red, 1 white .

26

bear

A mar* with an ope running before him . . ,

A man holding in his right hand a javelin and 
in his left a iapwing

2 G

A man arrayed like a king, looking with prkle

A man with be wed head and a bag in his hand .

28

and conceit on all around him

A grave man pointing to the sky . . * * .

A man with two bodies, but joining their hands

20

CLVI.

Magical Images of Col. CLV.

CLV.

Geotia Demons of Decans 1

(Ascc-ndan t).

CLIV.

[ Perfumes

(Cadent).

Cat, toad, raan, or ah at once ....

Black Pepper . .

15

Little horse or ass .

• • IU'1.53

Cassia ....

16

(r) Wolf with serpent’s tail. ( 2 ) Man with

• • * • ■ ■

. . .pew

Cypress ....

17

dog's teeth and raven's head

x

j Probably a centaur or archer ....

0

* •

Anise . 1

18

j Ritier cn pale horse, with many musicians.

■ • ns^u

Muces Muscator .

19

(Flaming and poisonous breath]

A soldier in red aoparel and armour . . j

j .

Maslick ....

20

Soldier with ducal crown riding a crocodile i

• -troto

Mortum ....

22

Angel with lion's head, goose's feet, horse's !

1 . . 0 . . . .

. . .

As for Asc . . .

24

tail

A dog with a gryphon's wings . . . . i

Gaxisphilium . .

25

Gold* crowned soldier in red on a red home.

. . mu

Cube! Pepper , .

26

Bad breath

A strong man in human shape ....

. . 9 . . . .

Rhubarb . , .

28Gaxisphilium . .

25

Gold* crowned soldier in red on a red home.

. . mu

Cube! Pepper , .

26

Bad breath

A strong man in human shape ....

. . 9 . . . .

Rhubarb . , .

28

(r) Hart with Scry tail. ( 2 ) Angel . .

. .'UDTtD

SantalAl’o . . .

29

TABLE V ( continued )

29

CXLVIII.

Angels of the Decanates 
(Cadent).

CXLVII.

Angels of the 
Decanates 
(Succedent).

CXLVI.

Angels of the 
Decanates 
(Ascendant).

CXLV.

Angels Lords of the 
Triplicity in the 
Signs by Night.

i.... . .

.*Dnna

15

■ - - • 'fcon:D

.HOID

.nt^o

16

.

.cud

* ■ • ■ ii'Diaiy

17

.'vai’i’N

.p m

■ - • . ntnno

.Saoj;

18

.*ynr

.... -iruDib

• . • • rrmaVr

19

.

- ■ ’ • n*T*n

.... misujN

.K'DD

20 j

-nntr

.p“iHD

.....

. • • pr.YVinN

22

.^xnnni

- - . • mnra

..... }*1D3

.33pnD

24

.pirn

.... ntncD

.... Q’DiaS

20

■ ■ • • iwina’UD'

.rpD'D*

..... J'JDD

.

26

.p-H3N

..... dbdd

.l'K^B

23

.iro«

.

• • . iwnnro

29

CLIII.

Perfumes

(Succedent).

CLII.

Perfumes

(Ascendant).

CLI.

Magical Images of the Dccans (Cadent).

Staznmonia, , » ■

Myrtle ....

A restless man in scarlet robes* with golden bracelets 
on his hands and arms

15

Codamoms ....

Costum . . . +

A swarthy man with white lashes, his body elephantine, 
with long legs; with him, o horse, a stag, and a calf

16

Cinnamon ....

Masticl; ... *

A man in mail, armoured with bow, arrows, and 
quiver

A swift-footed person, with a viper in his hand, lead¬ 
ing dogs

A swarthy hairy man, with a drawn sword and shield

17

Succum.

Camphor , . .

Id

Lyn Balsami . . .

Olibanum . . .

19

Srorus.

SantalFlav. . .

An old man leaning on a staff and wrapped in a mantle

20

Bofor (?] ....

Galbanum . , .

A man riding on an ass, preceded by a wolf ....

22

As for Asc.

Opoponax . . .

A borse and a wolf ...

24

Fol Lori.....

Lign-aloes . . .

A man leading another by his hair and slaying him .

25

Colophoau.n . . .

Assafcctida . . .

A man bolding a book, which he opens and shuts . .

2624

Fol Lori.....

Lign-aloes . . .

A man leading another by his hair and slaying him .

25

Colophoau.n . . .

Assafcctida . . .

A man bolding a book, which he opens and shuts . .

26

St ammonia , , .

Eupfcorbium . .

A small-beaded man dressed like a woman, and with 
him an old man

28

Coxium.

Thyme . .

|

A man of grave and thoughtful face, with a bird in his 
hand, before him a woman and an ass

29

30 TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

CLX.

Magical Images of Col. CL1X.

CLIX.

Goetia Demons, &c. (Cadent).

Like Agaies..

. . V

15

Lion with ass’s head* bellowing.

. . 9

16

Crowned king on dromedary* accompanied by many musicians

. .©

.pD'KD

17

Leopard's head and gryphon’s wings..

. . V

18

A knight with a lance and banner, with a serpent.

. . 9

19

A strong man with a serpent’s tail, on a pale horse ....

. . 9

.rnto

20

Human-faced bull ..* ... *

. . i

»nd 9 . .

22

A black crane with a sore throat—he flutters ......

24

A monster [probably a dolphin].. . , f

. . i

and ^ . . . Oiy-)

25

Sea monster..

26

Like a guide. To be kings ...... H .... .

. . 9

28

Haven . . . . . , * « . * , * .

. . v

29

CLXIV.

As Col. CLVIII. by Night.

As Col.

cLxni.

CLVII. by Night

Stock*dove with sore throat . . a . . + * . . . * .

*

15

Man with gryphon’s wings. . ..* * . .

. . 9 .

16

Stock-dove with sore throat . . . . . . . * , * . *

. w

17

Dromedary.

. . 9 .

18

Cruel ancient, with long white hair and beard, rides a pale horse.

. . 9 .

.*PB

19

with sharp weapons

. . 9 .

(x) Thrush. ( 2 ) Man with sharp sword seemeth to answer in 
burning ashes or coals of fire

Beautiful woman, with duchess crown tied to her waist, riding

.pto

20

■

. . $ .

.11D3

22 ;

great camel

Lion on horse, with serpent’s tail, carries in right hand two

. . .

.pN'Ti

24 .

hissing serpents

Child with angel’s wings rides a two-headed dragon ....

. . 9 .

1

25

Noisy peacock..

26

Two beautiful angels sitting in chariot of fire.

. .O.

28. . .

.pN'Ti

24 .

hissing serpents

Child with angel’s wings rides a two-headed dragon ....

. . 9 .

1

25

Noisy peacock..

26

Two beautiful angels sitting in chariot of fire.

. .O.

28

Man -with many countenances, all men’s and women’s, carries a 
book in right band

. 9 .

.

29

i

TABLE V ( continued )

31

CLVIII.

CLVII.

Magical Images of Col. CLVII.

Goetic Demons, &c. (Succedent).

Old man, riding a crocodile and carrying a goshawk . . + .

. . ?.

15

Great Lion.

. . 9 .

16

Accompanied by 4 noble lang$ and great troops . , + * *

. . 9.

■ enema

17

" Like a Xenopilus” . ..* * , * .

. . $.

18

An archer In green.,.

10

Viper (or) Human, with teeth and 2 horns, and with a sword ,

. . $ and 9 . .

20

Lion-faced man riding a bear, carrying a viper. Trumpeter 
with him

. .O .

22

Man with 3 heads — a serpent's, a man’s (having two stars on his 
brow), and a calf’s. Rides on viper and bears 5rebrand 
Dragon with 3 heads — a dog’s, man's, and gryphon's ....

A

21

25 1

Hurtful angel or infernal dragon, like Berot, with a viper

. . ?.

■ nnr.tyx

i

26

[breath bad]

3 heads (bull, man, ram), snake’s tail, goose’s fccL Rides, with

. .©.

23

lance and banner, on a dragon

Wolf with a gryphon’s wings and serpent’s tail Breathes

29

flames

1

CLXII.

As Col. CLVI. by Night.

CLXI.

As Col. CLV. by Night.

16

16

Soldier with lion's head rides pale horse

17

Monster 1 ...... t . * .

18

Angel... ...

. . 9.

19

Soldier with red leonine face and flaming eyes; rides great horse

. . ?.

20

Horse ....a........,*., ^ .

. . V .

3 unite

22

Flaming fire..

. . 9.

24

Bull with gryphon’s wings .............

• • J364T

25 |

Leopard..

. . 9 .

26

( 1 ) Unicorn. ( 2 ) Dilatory bandmaster..

. . 9.

28

Beautiful man on winged horse ...*** * 1 • * *

. . V .

29 1

32 TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

CLXXI.

CLXX.

CLXIX.

CLXVIII.

CLXVII.

As Col. CLXVII. 
(Cadent).

AsCol. CLXVIII. 
(Succedent).

As Col. CLXVII. 
(Succedent).. . V .

29 1

32 TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

CLXXI.

CLXX.

CLXIX.

CLXVIII.

CLXVII.

As Col. CLXVII. 
(Cadent).

AsCol. CLXVIII. 
(Succedent).

As Col. CLXVII. 
(Succedent).

Egyptian Names 
of Asc. Decaus.

Egyptian Gods 
of Zodiac 
(Asc. Oceans).

Horus ....

Lencher . , .

Anubis ....

Assicean . . .

j Aroucris . . ,

IS

Apophis . .

Virvaso . . .

Helitomenos . .

Asicath ....

Serapis . . . „ ■

16

Titan . . . .

Verasua . . .

Cyclops....

Thescgar . . .

Taautus . . *

17

Meroophta. , .

Syth ....

Hecate ....

Sothis ....

Apoltun . . .

18

Nephthe . - *

Sitlacer . * *

Perseus. , * s

Aphruimis. . ,

Typhon. . , .

19

Cronus ....

Tbopitus , . ,

Pi-Osiris ,

Tbumis....

Isis .....

20

Ophionius . . .

Aterechinis • .

Omphta , . ,

Serucuth . . .

Zeuda ....

22

Pano tragus . .

Tepiseuth. , .

Merota ....

Sentacer , . .

Arimanius , . -

24

Zeraph ....

Sagen «...

Tomras. . . .

Eregbuo . . .

Tolmophta . ,

20

Monupbta. . .

Epima ....

Riruphta . . .

Themeso . . . j

Soda ... *

26

Proteus. . . .

Astiro ....

Vucula .....

Oroasoer . . . •

3rondeus . . „

28

Phallophorus . .

Thopibui . . .

Sourut ....

Archatapias . . !

i

Rephan » . «

29

CLXXIV.

The Mansions of the Moon.

(Hindu, Nakshatra] Arab, Manazil.

T Sharatan (Ram’s bead), Butayn (Ram’s belly), and o°-io 0 Suraya (the Pleiads).

15

& io®- 30 * Suraya, Dabaran (Aldeboran), and o 0 - 2 o° Hak’ah (three stars in head of Orion). . .

16

El 20 ^- 30 * Hak’ah, Han’ah (stars in Orion's shoulder), and Zira'a (two stars above D ). . . .

17

2C Nasrah (Lion's nose), Tarf (Lion's eye), and o^-io 0 Jabhah (Lion’s forehead) ......

18

io°- 30 ° Jabhah, Zubrah (Lion’s mane), and o 0 - 2 o° Sarfah (Cor Leonis) ........

19

A? jo*” 30 ° Sarfah, ’Awwa (the Dog. two stars in ^P), and Simak (Spica VLrginis).

20

— 1 Ghafar (</>, «, and k in foot of ^TP), Zubini (horns of and o°-io° Iklil (the Crown) . . .

2219

A? jo*” 30 ° Sarfah, ’Awwa (the Dog. two stars in ^P), and Simak (Spica VLrginis).

20

— 1 Ghafar (</>, «, and k in foot of ^TP), Zubini (horns of and o°-io° Iklil (the Crown) . . .

22

io*- 30 ° Ikbl, Kalb (Cor Scorpionis), and o^-zo 0 Shaulah (tail of ^U) . . . ♦ , , . . .

24

$ 20 ** 30 * Shaulah, Na’aim (stars in Pegasus), and Baldah (no constellation^.

25

^ Sa’ad al-Zabih (the Slaughterer's Luck), Sa'ad al-Bal'a (Glutton’s Luck), and o°-io* Sa’ad

26

^ al-Sa’ad (Luck of Lucks, stars in tzr*)

io°- 3 o° Sa’ad al-Sa’ad, Sa’ad al-Akhbiyab (Luck of Tents), and o’-zo* Fargh the former (spout

28

_ of the Urn)

K 2 o°- 3 o° Fargh the former, Fargh the latter (hind lip of Urn), and Rishia (navel of Fish's belly)

29

TABLE V (continued)

33

CLXVl

As Col. CLX. by Night.

CLXV.

As Col. CLIX. by Night.

Crow with sore throat r

15

Mermaid . . ...

..?....

16

Lion on black horse carrying viper . . „ . . , . . . „

- . . NW

17

1 Bell with gryphon's wings.

• . r\::vn

18

3 heads < bull, man, ram), snake's tail, flaming eyes. Rides bear

D

u

19

carries goshawk

Warrior with ducal crown rides gryphon. Trumpeter* , . ,

, ? and 3 .

. . dud

20

Leopard.♦ .

22

Lion with gryphon's wings.

24

Angel with raven’s head. Rides black wolf, carries sharp sword

* . . *

25

Warrior on black horse

26

A star in a pentacle.. . . . , „ H , „

28

Man holding great serpent 4 ^

bttomJK

20

CLXX111.*

Genii of the Twelve Hours (Levi).

CLXX1I.

As Col. CLXVlII. 
(Cadent).

Papus, Sinbuck, Rasphuia, Zahun, Heiglot, Mizkun, Haven ....

Asentacer ......

15

Sisera, Torvatus, Nitibus, Hizarbin, Sachluph, Baglis, Labezerin . ,

Aharph..

16

Hahabi, Phlogabitus, Eirneus, Mascarun, Zarobi, Butatar, Cahor . .

Tepistosoa.

17

Phalgus, Thagrinus, Eistibus, Pharzuph, Sislau, Schiekron, Aclabayr .

Thuismis . . . . +

18

Zeima, Tablibik, Tacritau, Suphlatus, Sair, Barcus, Camaysar . . .

Phuonidie .....

19Tepistosoa.

17

Phalgus, Thagrinus, Eistibus, Pharzuph, Sislau, Schiekron, Aclabayr .

Thuismis . . . . +

18

Zeima, Tablibik, Tacritau, Suphlatus, Sair, Barcus, Camaysar . . .

Phuonidie .....

19

Tabris, Susabo, Eirnilus, Nitika, Haatan, Hatiphas, Zaren . . .. ,

Aphut

20

Sialul, Sabrus, Librabis, Mizgitari, Causub, Salilus, Jazer . . . . „

Arepien

22

Nantur, Toglas, Zalburis, Alphun, Tukiphat, Zizupb, Cuniali ....

Senciner

24

Rlsnucb, Suclagus, Kirtabus, Sablil, Schachlil, Colopatiron, Zeflar . .

Chenen ......

25

Sezarbll, Azeuph, Armilus, Kataris, Razanil, Buchaphi, Mastho . . .

Homoth . . - * .

26

Aiglun, Zuphlas, Phaldor, Rosabis, Adjuchas, Zophas, Halacho . . ,

Tepisatras .....

28

Tarab, Misran, Labus, Kalab, Hahab, Marnes, Sellen.,

Atembui......

29

34

TABLE OE CORRESPONDENCES

CLXXXI.

Correct Designs of Tarot Trumps.

CLXXX.

Titles of Tarot Trumps.

A bearded Ancient seen in profile *.....

The Spirit of AtfJrjp

11

A fair youth with winged helmet and heels, equipped

The Magus of Power.. .

12

as a Magician, displays his art*

A crowned priestess sits before the veil ol Isis be*

The Priestess of the Silver Star . . . „

13

tween the pillars of Seth *

Crowned with stars, a winged goddess stands upon

The Daughter of the Mighty Ones . . . . •

14

the moon *

A flame-clad god bearing equivalent symbols* . -

Sun of the Morning, chief among the Mighty.

15

Between the Pillars sits an Ancient • ....

The Magus of the Eternal . ....

16

A prophet, young, and in the Sign of Osiris Risen *

The Children of the Voice * the Oracle of the 
Mighty Gods

The Child of the Powers of the Waters: the 
Lord of the Triumph of Light

17

A young and holy king under the starry canopy * .

18

A smiling woman holds the open jaws oi a fierce and

The Daughter of the Flaming Sword . . .

12

powerful lion

Wrapped in a cloke and cowl, an Ancient walketh,

The Prophet of the Eternal, the Magus of the

20

bearing a lamp and staff •The Daughter of the Flaming Sword . . .

12

powerful lion

Wrapped in a cloke and cowl, an Ancient walketh,

The Prophet of the Eternal, the Magus of the

20

bearing a lamp and staff •

Voice of Power

A wheel of six shafts, whereon revolve the Triad of

The Lord of the Forces of Life.

21

Hermanubis, Sphinx, and Tvphon*

A conventional figure of Justice with scales ar.d

The Daughter of the Lords of Truth. The

22

balances

Ruler of the Balance

The figure of an hanged or crucified man * . .

The Spirit of the Mighty Wateis ....

23

A skeleton with a scythe mowing man. The scythe

The Child of the Great Transformers The

24

handle is a Tau

Lord of the Gate of Death

The Figure of Diana huntress * . . , ...

The Daughter of the Reconcilers, the Bringer- 
forth of Life

25

The figure of Pan cr Priapus * ......

The Lord of the Gates of Matter The Child 
of the Forces of Time

20

A tower struck by forked lightning • ...

The Lord of the Hosts of the Mighty . . .

27

The figure of a water-nymph disporting herself •

The Daughter of the Firmament: the Dweller 
between the Waters

23

The waning moon • ......

The Ruler of Flux and Reflux. The Child of 
the Sons of the Mighty

29

The Sun *. ... ...

The Lord of the Fire of the Wcrld ....

30

Israfel blowing the Last Trumpet. The dead arising

The Spirit of the Primal Fire ... -

31

from their tombs *

Should contain a demonstration of the Quadrature

The Great One of the Night of Time . . *

82

of the Circle *

• .

32 bis

.

31 bis

TABLE Vi

35

CLXXIX.

CLXXVIII.*

CLXXVII*

CLXXVI.

CLXXV.

Numbers printed 
on Tarot Trumps.

Geoman tic 
Intelligences.

Yetziratic 
Attribution of

Col. CLXXV.

Numerical Value 
of Col. CLXXV.

Hebrew

Letters.

.... Sxm

12

13

0

14

. . . T . . ,

15

. . . a . . .

16

• • !>XH3DK

. . . a . . .

17

, . . <2x5 . .

13

. . . ft. . .

. . . V . . .

, . ?o, 500 .

• . 3 T . .

21

. . i. . .

23

. . .V. . .

C3

. . .»l. . .

1 . *u, yoo . ,

• . 3 t ■ •

2116

• • !>XH3DK

. . . a . . .

17

, . . <2x5 . .

13

. . . ft. . .

. . . V . . .

, . ?o, 500 .

• . 3 T . .

21

. . i. . .

23

. . .V. . .

C3

. . .»l. . .

1 . *u, yoo . ,

• . 3 t ■ •

21

. . . M • • ■

- • • bx'apx

. « » C\j * . ■

. . £ • •

1

25

. . . ri. . .

23

. . . «j. . .

. . Bo, Boo . .

• • d n • •

27

. . v r. .

28

. . . X . . .

- ■ ? • •

2i>

30

. . .A. . .

31

. . . T* . . .

j2

...V...

32 bis

.—

31 bis

36 TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

CLXXXIII.

Legendary Orders of Being.

CLXXXII.

The Human Body.

Sylphs.

Respiratory Organs.

11

“Voices," Witches and Wizards .

Cerebral and N ervous System

12

Lemures, Ghosts..

Lymphatic System .....

13

Suecubi ..

Genital System

14

Mania, Erinyes [Eumeuldes] ...........

Head and Face.

16

Gorgons, Minotaurs.

Shoulders and Arms..

16

Ominous Appearances, Banshees.. ,

Lungs ..

17

Vampires...

Stomach

18

Horror, Dragons.

Heart.* * * *

19

Mermaids (and H , its Zodiacal Opposite), Banshees . . .

The Bade.

20

Incubi, Nightmares.

Digestive System.......

21

Fairies, Harpies. .

Liver.. . . .

22

Nymphs and Undines, Nereids, &c.. . ,

Organs of Nutrition

23

Lamiae, Stryges, Witches . ..

Intestines . . . . - * . . ,

24

Centaurs ..

Hips and Thighs T

26

Satyrs and Fauns, Panic-demons..

Genital System .......

26

Furies, Chimaeras, Boars (as in Calydon), &c..

Muscular System

27

Water Nymphs, Sirens, Lorelei, Mermaids (c/. ^1) . . .

Kidneys, Bladder, &c..

28

Phantoms, Were-wolves..

Legs and Feet. , ,

29

Will o' the Wisp.

Circulatory System . . , ,

30

Salamanders..

Organs of Circulation . ...

31

Ghuls, Larvae, Corpse Candles..

Excretory System ......

32

The Dweller of the Threshold, Gnomes.

Excretory Organs, Skeleton . . .

32 bis

[Socratic Genius) .... .. .

Organs of Intelligence . ■ .

31 bis

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

37

TABLE I (< continued )

Key

Scale

CLXXXIV.

Numeration 
of Arabic 
Alphabet 
see Col. LII.

CLXXXV.[Socratic Genius) .... .. .

Organs of Intelligence . ■ .

31 bis

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

37

TABLE I (< continued )

Key

Scale

CLXXXIV.

Numeration 
of Arabic 
Alphabet 
see Col. LII.

CLXXXV.

Greek 
Alphabet 
Numeration 
sec Col. LIII.

CLXXXVL

Diseases

(Typical).

clxxxvii.

Magical Formulae 
see Col. XLI.

0

I

LASTAL. M....M,

1

. , , , , .

. . 31 . .

Death.

2

. . * » * .

. . 200 . .

Insanity.

VIAOV

3

Dementia .... 
(Amnesia)

BABALON

VITRIOL

4

. , 500 . .

Dropsy.

IHVH

5

. . 600 . .

. . 500 . .

Fever .

AGLA

ALHIM

6

. . 700 . .

. . 800 . .

Heart Lesions . .

ABRAHADABRA

IAO : INRI

7

. . 800 . .

Skin Troubles . .

ARARITA

8

. . 900 . .

Nerve Troubles . .

9

. . 1000 . .

. . 600 . .

Impotence ....

ALIM

10

. . 900 . .

Sterility.

VITRIOL

11

♦ , 1

. . 1

Fluxes.

12

. . 2 . .

. . 2 . .

Ataxia.

13

. . 3 . .

. . 3 • •

Menstrual Disorders

ALIM

14

. . 4 . .

. . 4 . .

Syphilis, Gonorrhoea

AGAPE

15

. . 5 . .

* • 5 • *

Apoplexy ....

16

. . 6 . .

. . 6 . .

Indigestion . . .

17

. . 7 . .

* • 7 ■ •

Phthysis, Pneumonia

18

. . 8 . .

. . 8 . .

Rheumatism . . .

ABRAHADABRA

19

. . 9 • •

• . 9 • •

Syncope, etc., Heart

TO MEGA THERION

20

. . 10 . .

. . 10 . .

Spinal weakness 
Paralysis . . .

21

. . 20 . .

. . 20 . .

Gout.

22

• • 30 • •

• ■ 3 ° • ■

Kidney disorders .

23

. . 40 . .

. . 40 . .

Chill.

24

. . 50 . .

• • 5 ° • ■

Cancer .

AUMGN

25

. . 60 . .

. . 60 . .

Apoplexy, Throm¬ 
bosis

ON

26

. . 70 . .

• * 7 ° • •

Arthritis ....

ON

27

. . 80 . .

. . 80 . .

Inflammation . .

28

. . 90 • •

. . 700 . .

Cystitis.

29

. . 100 . .

. . 90 . .

Gout.

30

. . 200 . .

. .100. .

Repletion ....

IAO: INRI

31

. * 3 °o • •

. . 900 . .

Fever .

32

. . 400 . .

• . 300 . .

Arterio Sclerosis .

32 bis

• • 4 °o • •

Sluggishness . . .

31 bis

Death (full In¬ 
sanity) ....

38

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

TABLE II ( continued )

CLXXXVIII.

CLXXXIX.

CXC.

CXCI.Arterio Sclerosis .

32 bis

• • 4 °o • •

Sluggishness . . .

31 bis

Death (full In¬ 
sanity) ....

38

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

TABLE II ( continued )

CLXXXVIII.

CLXXXIX.

CXC.

CXCI.

The Body

Bodily Functions

The Four Truths of 
Buddhism.

11

23

31

32 bis

31 bis

Breath .... 
Chyle, Lymph .

Blood.

Solid structures, 
Tissues

Semen, Marrow .

Speaking . 
Holding . 
Moving . 
Excreting

Generating

Thought . 
Nutrition 
Moving . 
Matter. .

Magick .

Sorrow’s Cause

Sorrow’s Ceasing

Noble Eight-fold Path 
Sorrow

TABLE III (< continued )

CXCII.

The Noble Eight-fold Path. 
See Col. LXXXII.

CXCIII.

Spirits of the 
Planets.

See Col. LXXIX.

CXCIV.

Intelligences of the Planets. 
See Col. LXXVIII.

12

Right Speech.

Taphthartarath

Tiriel

13

Right Aspiration ....

Chasmodai . .

Malkah Be Tarshishim va A’ad 
Be Ruah Shehalim

14

Right Conduct.

Qedemel . . .

Hagiel

21

Right Discipline.

Chismael . . .

Yophiel

27

Right Energy.

Bartzabcl . .

Graphiel

30

Right Rapture.

Sorath ....

Nakhiel

32

Right Recollection (in both 
senses of the word).

Right View-point

Zazel ....

Agiel

VARIOUS ARRANGEMENTS

THE NAPLES ARRANGEMENT

000 Ain = Zero Absolute.

00 Ain Soph = Zero as undefinable.

0 Ain Soph Aur = Zero as basis of possible vibra¬

tion.

1 Kether

= The Point: positive yet indefin¬ 
able.

2 Chokmah

= The Point: distinguishable from 
1 other.

3 Binah

= The Point: defined by relation to 
2 others.

The Abyss

= between Ideal and Actual.

4 Chesed

= The Point: defined by 3 co¬ 
ordinates. Matter.

5 Geburah

6 Tiphereth

= Motion.

= The Point: now self-conscious, 
able to define itself in terms of 
above.

7 Netzach

= The Point’s Idea of Bliss 
(Ananda).

8 Hod

= The Point’s Idea of Knowledge 
(Chit).

9 Yesod

= The Point’s Idea of Being (Sat).

10 Malkuth

= The Point’s Idea of Itself ful¬ 
filled in its complement, as 
determined by 7, 8, and 9.

39

40

VARIOUS ARRANGEMENTS9 Yesod

= The Point’s Idea of Being (Sat).

10 Malkuth

= The Point’s Idea of Itself ful¬ 
filled in its complement, as 
determined by 7, 8, and 9.

39

40

VARIOUS ARRANGEMENTS

SUGGESTIVE CORRESPONDENCES FROM THE 
HEBREW ALPHABET

Aleph

The Holy Ghost — Fool — Knight-Errant. 
Folly’s doom is ruin.

Beth

The Messenger. Prometheus. The Juggler 
with the Secret of the Universe.

Gimel

The Virgin. The Holy Guardian Angel is 
attained by Self-sacrifice and Equilibrium.

Daleth

The Wife. Alchemical Salt. The Gate of the

He

Equilibrium of the Universe.

The Mother is the Daughter, the Daughter is 
the Mother.

Vau

Zain

The Sun. Redeemer. The Son is but the Son. 
The Twins reconciled. The answer of the

Cheth

Oracles is always Death.

The Chariot containing Life. The Secret of the 
Universe. Ark. Sangraal.

Teth

The Act of Power. She who rules the Secret 
Force of the Universe.

Yod

The Virgin Man. Secret Seed of All. Secret of 
the Gate of Initiation.

Kaph

The All-Father in 3 forms. Fire, Air, and Water. 
In the whirlings is War.

Lamed

The Woman justified. By Equilibrium and Self- 
sacrifice is the Gate.

Mem

The Man drowned in the “womb” flood. The 
Secret is hidden between the waters that are 
above and the waters that are beneath.

Nun

The putrefaction in the Athanor. Initiation is 
guarded on both sides by Death.

Samekh

The Womb preserving Life. Self-control and 
Self-sacrifice govern the Wheel.

A’ain

The exalted Phallus. The Secret of generation 
is Death.

Pe

The Crowned and Conquering Children emerg¬ 
ing from the Womb. The Fortress of the Most 
High.

VARIOUS ARRANGEMENTS 41

Tzaddi The Husband. Alchemical Sulphur. The Star 
is the Gate of the Sanctuary.

Qoph The Womb seething is the glamour of physio¬ 
logical upset while the Sun sleeps. Illusionary 
is the Initiator of Disorder.

Resh The Twins shining forth and playing. The 
fighting of Set and Osiris. In the Sun is the 
Secret of the Spirit.Resh The Twins shining forth and playing. The 
fighting of Set and Osiris. In the Sun is the 
Secret of the Spirit.

Shin The Stele. Nuit, Hadit, their God and Man 
twins, as a pantacle. Resurrection is hidden in 
Death.

Tau The Slain God. Universe is the Hexagram.

THE VITAL TRIADS

The Three

Gods I A O ]

' Aleph

O

The Holy Ghost.

Beth

I

The Messenger.

[ Yod

IX

The Secret Seed.

The Three !

r Gimel

II

The Virgin.

Daleth

III

The Wife.

Goddesses

[He

XVII

The Mother.

The Three 1

f Kaph

X

The All Father 3 in 1.

; Tzaddi

IV

The Ruler.

Demiurges

[ Vau

V

The Son (Priest).

" Zain

VI

The Twins Emerging.

The Children

Resh

XIX

The Sun (Playing).

Horus and <

Hoor-pa-kraat

Pe

XVI

The Crowned and Con¬ 
quering Child emerg¬ 
ing from Womb.

The Yoni Gau-

' Cheth

VII

The Graal; Chariot of 
Life.

dens. The

Woman justi- "

Samekh

XIV

The Pregnant Womb 
preserving life.

fied

Lamed

VIII

The Woman justified 
by Yod.

V.

42

VARIOUS ARRANGEMENTS

The Slain Gods

The Lingam, 
The Yoni, The 
Stele. Priest 
Priestess, Cere¬ 
mony

The Pantacle 
of the Whole

'Teth

XI

156 and 666.

Mem

XII

The Redeemer in the

*

Waters.

Qoph

XIII

The Redeeming Belly

which kills XV.

r A’ain

XV

Erect and glad.

Qoph

XVIII

The Witch. Yoni stag¬

-<

nant and waiting.

Shin

XX

God and Man as twins

from Nuit and

Hadit.

Tau

XXI

The System.

Editorial Note.—The Roman numerals refer to the Atus whose 
titles are given in Column CLXXX of Table VI. In this arrange¬ 
ment, which was published in the Book of Thoth, the fourth and 
seventeenth Atus (H£ and Tzaddi) have been interchanged. See 
editorial note to Column CLXXX on p. 124 for the explanation.

THE TRIPLICITIES OF THE ZODIAC

Fire

" Fire of Fire. Aries. Lightning—swift violence, 
of onset.

-< Air of Fire. Leo. Sun—steady force of energy. 
Water of Fire. Sagittarius. Rainbow—fading 
spiritualized reflection of the image.

Water-< Air of Fire. Leo. Sun—steady force of energy. 
Water of Fire. Sagittarius. Rainbow—fading 
spiritualized reflection of the image.

Water

- Fire of Water. Cancer. Rain, Springs, etc.— 
swift passionate attack.

Air of Water. Scorpio. Sea—steady force of 
putrefaction.

Water of Water. Pisces. Pool—stagnant,

spiritualized reflection of images.

VARIOUS ARRANGEMENTS

43

Air

r Fire of Air. Libra. Wind—swift onset (note 
idea of balance as in trade winds).

Air of Air. Aquarius. Clouds—steady con¬ 
veyors of water.

Water of Air. Gemini. Vibrations—bulk

unmoved, spiritualized to reflect Ruach 
(mind).

Earth

Fire of Earth. Capricornus. Mountains—vio¬ 
lent pressure (due to gravitation).

Air of Earth. Taurus. Plains—steady bearing 
< of life.

Water of Earth. Virgo. Fields—quiet,

spiritualized to bear vegetable and animal 
life.

In each case the Cardinal sign represents the Birth of the 
Element, the Kerubic sign its Life, and the Mutable sign its pass¬ 
ing over towards the ideal form proper to it, i.e. to Spirit. So also 
the Empresses in the Tarot are the Thrones of Spirit.

THE TRIPLE TRINITY OF THE PLANETS

Neptune

Sun

Moon

The Spiritual 
The Human 
(Intellectual)* 
The Sensory 
(Bodily)

Self

(ego)

Alchemical Mercury

Herschel

Saturn

Mars

The Spiritual 
The Human 
(Intellectual)* 
The Sensory 
(Bodily)

Will 
of the 
Self

Alchemical Sulphur

Jupiter

Mercury

Venus

The Spiritual r 
The Human Relation

(Intellectual)* J with the

The Sensory j non-ego

(Bodily) I

Alchemical Salt

* For “intellectual” one might say “conscious.”

44

VARIOUS ARRANGEMENTS

Middle Pillar 
Neptune The Spiritual 
Sun The Human

Moon The Automatic

r

i

Consciousness

Pillar of Mercy 
Herschel The Creative 
Jupiter The Paternal 
Venus The Passionate

^ Mode of action on the 
non-ego

Pillar of Severity 
Saturn The Intuitive 
Mars The Volitional 
Mercury The Intellectual

■< Mode of Self-expression

THE GENETHLIAC VALUES OF THE PLANETS^ Mode of action on the 
non-ego

Pillar of Severity 
Saturn The Intuitive 
Mars The Volitional 
Mercury The Intellectual

■< Mode of Self-expression

THE GENETHLIAC VALUES OF THE PLANETS

Neptune The True Self (Zeitgeist). Spiritual environment. 
Herschel The True Will. Spiritual energy.

Saturn The Ego (ahamkara). Skeleton.

Jupiter The Higher Love. Wesenschaund of Krause. 
Mars The Bodily Will. Muscular system.

Sun The Human Will. Vital force. Spiritual con¬

scious self.

Venus The Lower Love.

Mercury The Mind. Cerebral tissues and nerves.

Moon The Senses. Bodily consciousness.

EXPLANATIONS OF THE ATTRIBUTIONS IN THE 
MORE IMPORTANT COLUMNS OF TABLES I—VI.

(See pp. 2-36)

Column I. THE KEY SCALE (see p. 2)

In order to understand thoroughly the Key Scale, the 
student should have mastered the Essay on the Qabalah, 
The Equinox , I, 5 (pp. 72-89), and acquainted him¬ 
self with the use of Liber D (The Equinox , I, 8, Supple¬ 
ment).

It should be sufficient therefore in this place to explain 
simply the significance of the symbols of this scale.

The numbers 000 to 10 are printed in heavy block type. 
They refer to the three forms of Zero and the ten Sephiroth 
or numbers of the decimal scale. The diagram on 
page xxvii shows the conventional geometrical arrangement 
of the symbols 1—10. The numbers 11—32 correspond to 
the 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet. They are attributed 
to the paths which join the Sephiroth. Their arrangement 
is shown in the same diagram. 31 and 32 must be supple¬ 
mented by 31-bis and 32-bis, as those two paths possess a 
definitely double attribution; viz. 31-bis to Spirit as against 
31 to Fire; 32-bis to Earth as against 32 to Saturn.

The numbers 11, 23, 31, 32-bis, 31-bis are printed close 
to the left edge of the column for convenience of reference, 
they referring to the 5 elements.

12, 13, 14, 21, 27, 30, 32 are printed in the centre 
of the column: they refer to the planets.12, 13, 14, 21, 27, 30, 32 are printed in the centre 
of the column: they refer to the planets.

15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29 are printed on 
the right-hand edge of the column. They refer to the signs 
of the Zodiac.

It should be understood that the main object of this 
book is to enable the student to do four things. Firstly, to 
analyze any idea soever in terms of the Tree of Life. 
Secondly, to trace the connection between every class of 
idea referring it thereto. Thirdly, to translate any unknown

45

46

COLUMN I

symbolism into terms of any known one by its means. 
Fourthly, to make a concatenation of any part of any idea 
with the rest by analogy with the similar concatenation of 
the Sephiroth and the paths.

As an extension of this last faculty, he should endea¬ 
vour to treat any given attribution of anything to the 
Sephiroth as part of the connotation of the idea of those 
numbers.

In this connection, observe that the numbers (of this 
column) subsequent to 10 are not to be considered as real 
numbers. The figures have been assigned to them 
arbitrarily for convenience only. Thus there is no special 
sympathy between 11 and the letter Aleph which is 
referred to it. For Aleph is connected chiefly with the 
idea of Zero and Unity, whereas 11 is the number of 
Magick, and its principal alphabetical correspondencies 
are Beth and Teth. Further, the essential definition of a 
path is determined by its position on the Tree of Life as 
conductor of the influence of the Sephiroth which it 
connects.

One great difficulty in constructing this table is caused 
by the intimate correspondency between certain Sephiroth 
and paths. Thus Kether is directly reflected into Chokmah 
according to one mode, and into Tiphereth according to 
another. Further, the creative energy on a still lower plane 
is symbolized in Yesod. In respect of its unity, moreover, 
it has its analogy in the 11th path.*In the case of Chokmah the difficulty is even greater. 
Chokmah, as the creative energy Chiah, is of the same 
nature as Chesed, and even Tiphereth as Vau shows an 
intimate correspondence with the final H6 of Tetragram- 
maton as Chokmah with her mother. Among the paths of 
the Serpent this creative energy is expressed according to 
various modes: by the 11th path, the Wandering Fool, 
who impregnates the King’s Daughter, by the 12th path,

* Editorial Note.—The plate on p. xxvii shows the Key Scale in 
diagrammatic form. 1 to 10 are the ten numbered circles or Sep¬ 
hiroth: 11 to 32 are the twenty-two lines or paths which connect 
the Sephiroth with each other: the whole forms a traditional 
pattern known as the Tree of Life.

COLUMN I

47

which creates Maya, the 15th which is definitely phallic, 
and even the 13th which symbolizes change through putre¬ 
faction. Lastly, he is found in this function in the 27th 
path, which represents Phallum Ejaculentem. Chokmah 
being pre-eminently the causer of change.

Again, Chokmah is the Logos, the messenger, the 
transmitter of the influence from Kether, and this is shown, 
in a lower mode, in the Sephira Hod. He is also implied 
in the 11th path, for the Fool also transmits the essence 
of Kether. He is in the 12th path as the Magician, Mer¬ 
cury, in the 16th as the Magus of the Eternal, in the 17th 
as the Oracle of the Mighty Gods, and in the 20th as the 
Prophet of the Eternal, the Magus of the Voice of Power. 
The idea of the message is also implied in the 13th and 
25th paths, perhaps even in the 32nd. The 18th path, too, 
conveys a certain quintessence although not in a Mer¬ 
curial manner. And it is just these subtle distinctions which 
are vital to the proper understanding of the Tree of Life.The idea of Binah is even more complicated. Her 
darkness is referred to Saturn. As the Great Sea, she gives 
of her nature to all those paths which contain the idea of 
the element of Water. Binah is connected with the Azoth, 
not only because the Azoth is the lower Moon, but because 
the Azoth partakes also of the Saturnian character, being 
the metal lead in one of the Alchemical systems. She is 
also the Great Mother. She is Venus and she is the Moon, 
and in each aspect she sheds her influence into very various 
paths. We need not here go further into the cases of the 
other Sephiroth.

Now from a practical point of view of constructing these 
tables, it will evidently be very difficult in many cases to 
choose on which path to place any given idea. For one 
thing, the ideas themselves are often very far from simple. 
It is obvious, for instance, that the Lotus—which is also a 
Wheel—might be attributed to any path in respect to its 
femininity. In some cases it has been necessary to give 
several attributions to the same thing. Observe in par¬ 
ticular the 12 different aspects of Isis. The student must 
not attempt to use this book as if it were Molesworth. The

48

COLUMN I

whole idea of these tables is to supply him with very varied 
information, in such a form that he can build up in himself 
a scheme of the Universe in an alphabet, at once literary 
and mathematical, which will enable him to obtain a cohe¬ 
rent conception of the Universe in a sufficiently compact 
and convenient form to utilize in both his theoretical and 
practical working.

TABLE I

49

Columns II, III. THE HEBREW NAMES OF NUM¬ 
BERS AND LETTERSTABLE I

49

Columns II, III. THE HEBREW NAMES OF NUM¬ 
BERS AND LETTERS

These columns indicate the principal moral ideas con¬ 
nected with the Sephiroth. The names of the letters indi¬ 
cate rather the pictorial glyph suggested by the shape of the 
letter. But they also conceal a secondary meaning behind 
that of the numerical value and the number of the Tarot 
trump of each. The value of the name of each letter 
modifies that meaning. For example, Aleph, while 
principally significant of Zero and Unity, explains itself 
further by the number 111, the value of the letters ALP. 
That is to say a study of the number 111 enables us to 
analyze the meaning of the number 1. It indicates, for 
instance, the trinitarian equation 1=3.

Note that the letters He and Vau may each be spelt fully 
in four different ways, corresponding to the four worlds 
given in column LXIV.

It is to be thoroughly understood that the titles of the 
Sephiroth make no claim to give anything like a complete 
description of their nature. The glyphs of the 22 letters 
have some times a greater, some times a less, importance 
in elaborating the connotation.

Aleph means an Ox, principally because the shape of 
the letter suggests the shape of a yoke. There 
is also a reference to the mildness and patience 
of Harpocrates: indeed, to his sexual innocence. 
The function of ploughing is clearly the chief 
idea involved: herein lies a paradox—to be 
studied in the last act of Parsifal.

Beth is a House , the letter showing the roof, floor, 
and one wall. It is the dwelling place of man in 
the world of duality and illusion.

Gimel the Camel , reminds us of the position of the 
Path on the Tree of Life as joining Kether and 
Tiphereth, and thus the means of travelling 
through the wilderness of the Abyss.

Daleth a Door , refers to the position of the path as 
joining Chokmah and Binah. It is the gate of

50

COLUMNS II, IIIDaleth a Door , refers to the position of the path as 
joining Chokmah and Binah. It is the gate of

50

COLUMNS II, III

the Supernals. Again, it is the letter of Venus; 
and shows the sexual symbolism. The shape 
suggests the porch of a doorway, or a porched 
tent-flap.

He a Window, reminds us that Understanding (He 
being the letter of the Mother in Tetragram- 
maton) is the means by which the Light reaches 
us. The gap between the two strokes is the 
window.

Vau a Nail (shape directly hieroglyphic) suggests the 
fixation of the Supernals in Tiphereth.

Zayin a Sword , refers to the attribution of the letter 
to Gemini, the sign corresponding to intellectual 
analysis. The Yod above suggests the hilt; 
that below, the blade.

Cheth a Fence . The Cross-bar on the uprights sug¬ 
gests a fence—more properly the Holy Graal.

Teth is a Serpent, as is very obvious from the shape 
of the letter. The symbol of Leo also resembles 
the Uraeus. It being the house of the Sun, the 
idea is to emphasize the identity of the Star and 
the Snake.

Yod a Hand, indicates the means of action. The 
doctrine is that the Universe is set in motion by 
the action of indivisible points (Hadit). The 
Hand being the symbol of creative and directive 
energy, is the polite equivalent of Spermatozoon, 
the true glyph.

Kapi-i the Palm of the hand, is the hub of the wheel 
from which the force of the 5 elements spring. 
The reference is particularly to Jupiter and the 
10th ATU. The regular form may suggest the 
fist: the final, the open hand.

Lamed an Ox-Goad , is once more principally a matter 
of shape. There is, in particular, a reference to 
the relation of Lamed with Aleph, a matter too 
profound to discuss in this place. It must be 
studied personally in the light of The Book of the 
Law and of essays thereon.

COLUMNS II, III

51COLUMNS II, III

51

Mem Water suggests a wave; a breaker by its initial 
or medial form, and still water by its final form. 
In this single case, the actual meaning of the word 
is identical with the Yetziratic attribution of the 
letter. Note that the letter NUN, meaning fish, 
is not attributed to Pisces but to Scorpio.

Nun a Fish, is that which lives and moves in the 
water: which is here a symbol of death. It 
therefore indicates the forces of Scorpio, genera¬ 
tion through putrefaction. The final form sug¬ 
gests a tadpole.

Samech a Prop , refers to the fact that the path connects 
Tiphereth with Yesod and therefore serves to 
connect Microprosopus with his foundation. 
The shape may suggest a pillow, or a stone, to be 
thrust under some object.

A’ain an Eye , refers to the meatus. This explains the 
application of Capricornus to the 15th ATU. The 
shape may suggest the two eyes and the nose.

P£ a Mouth , is explained by the shape of the letter.

The Yod represents the tongue.

Tzaddi a Fish Hook , is also an obvious matter of shape.

Qoph the Back of the Head. The shape is fairly sug¬ 
gestive.

Resh a Head reversed . The seat of the human con¬ 
sciousness, which is Solar, pertaining to 
Tiphereth, is in the head. Resh is the Solar 
letter. In shape it is merely a big Yod, implying 
the brain as the expansion of the Spermatozoon.

Shin a Tooth , plainly exhibits the three fangs of a 
molar. It is also a glyph of the triple tongue of 
flame, the letter being referred to the element of 
Fire. The suggestion of devouring, eating, or 
eating into, is also given. The idea of the ternary 
shown by the three Yods is borne out by the value 
of the letter, 300. Yet the letter being one letter, 
the doctrine of the Trinity is implied. Hence its 
secondary attribution to the element of Spirit. It 
is also a glyph of the God SHU, whose head and

52

COLUMNS II, III52

COLUMNS II, III

arms, separating SEB and NUIT, form the letter. 
This connects it with the fire of the Last Judg¬ 
ment (ATU XX). I may here note that SHU is 
the God of air and not of fire, of the firmament 
that separates Earth and Heaven; so that part of 
the idea of the letter is to establish a link between 
the ideas of fire and air, the two active elements. 
There is a similar connection between Mem and 
Tau. The 12th ATU shows a man hanging from 
a cross, which is the meaning of Tau.

Tau a Tau or Cross symbolizes the element of Earth 
as a solidification of the four elements. There is 
also a phallic meaning, whence Tau is attributed 
not only to Earth, but to Saturn. Tau was 
originally written cruciform.

I may supplement the above remarks by saying that 
they make clear that there is no such apodeictic connection 
between the letters as between the numbers. The meanings 
are in many cases little more than indications of certain 
lines on which meditation may be profitably pushed.

TABLE I

53

Column V. GOD NAMES IN ASSIAH

1. Eheieh. The God names of the Sephiroth refer, for 
the most part, by meaning to their characteristics. 
Thus Eheieh, pure existence, belongs to I. The sound 
of the word represents the indrawn and outdrawn 
breath*

2. Yah gives the title of the Father.

3. Jehovah Elohim gives the full name of the God, as if 
the Supernals were collected in Binah.

4. The name Al is used in many senses. Its deepest sense 
is given by The Book of the Law. The excuse for 
writing it here is that 4 represents Jupiter, the highest 
possible manifestation of Deity.

5. Elohim Gibor. The attribution is natural.

6. Jehovah Eloah Va-Daath. The reference is to 
Tiphereth as the child of Chokmah and Binah, Daath 
(their first child) having failed to find a place on the 
Tree.

7-8. Jehovah Tzabaoth and Elohim Tzabaoth give 
respectively the two principal names of the Demiurge 
expressed in multiplicity and positive action. (Hosts.)7-8. Jehovah Tzabaoth and Elohim Tzabaoth give 
respectively the two principal names of the Demiurge 
expressed in multiplicity and positive action. (Hosts.)

9. Shaddai el Chai. Almighty and Every-living God: 
refers to his function as Pangenetor.

10. Adonai Melekh. “My Lord the King” is the natural 
inhabitant of “The Kingdom.” The attributions of the 
Elemental Gods are somewhat arbitrary. Tetragram- 
maton is given to Air (11), because Jehovah is Jupiter, 
the Lord of Air. Al is given to Water (23), because of 
its attribution to Chesed, the Sephira of Water. 
Elohim is given to Fire (31), because the name of five 
letters represents the active but feminine principle 
Shakti of Geburah, the fiery Sephira. Adonai Ha-Aretz 
is the natural title of Earth (32-bis); and Adonai is the 
name of God particularly referred to man in his 
mortality. It is one title of the Holy Guardian Angel. 
Yeheshua is attributed to Spirit (31-bis) on account of 
the formation of the word from Tetragrammaton by 
the insertion of the letter Shin, thus forming the

54

COLUMN V

Pentagram of the Elements. The planetary names 
refer to the sacred numbers of the planets. The 
Zodiacal signs are not honoured with God-names in 
the Hebrew system. Those referring to the planets 
ruling them may be used.

TABLE I

55

Column VI. THE HEAVENS OF ASSIAH

This column gives the names of the astral or apparent 
phenomena corresponding to Column II. It must be 
understood that in speaking of the sphere of a planet the 
astrological attribution is a minor quasi-accidental and not 
necessarily reliable function. It depends on astrological 
theories. By “Tzedeq” we should understand any function 
of a phenomenon which partakes of the nature of Jupiter. 
At the same time the Heavens of Assiah do not refer 
directly to pure number but indirectly through the astro¬ 
logical and cosmographical conventions.1. Rashith Ha-Gilgalim. The primum mobile—or 
“beginning of whirling motion”—tells us that Kether 
is the point from which we measure motion. The 
Sephiroth might even perhaps be considered as co¬ 
ordinate axes.

2. Masloth. The fixed stars are connected with the idea 
of Hadit as positive interruptions of the negative con¬ 
tinuum Nuit. Neptune is attributed to this sphere as 
being the outpost of the Solar system. Uranus is 
attributed to Daath because of its explosive nature. 
The Abyss is represented in Nature by the Asteroids. 
There is another aspect of Uranus, the Magical Will, 
which is assigned to Chokmah. There is also another 
of Neptune, whose astrological characteristics are 
sympathetic with Neschamah and therefore with Binah. 
It must be remarked that since above the Abyss a thing 
is only true so far as it contains its contradictions in 
itself, the attributions of the planets above the Abyss 
cannot be so definite as those below. Each of them 
can in a way be attributed to any of the Supernals, and 
each may be given to any one for contradictory reasons. 
It cannot be too strongly pointed out to the practical 
Magician that when he comes to work with ideas above 
the Abyss, the whole character of his operations is 
completely changed.

3. Shabatai represents Saturn as the planet of repose, of 
darkness, and perhaps, as the category of Time. Note

56

COLUMN VI

that Saturn is attributed to Daath in the hexagram of 
the planets. This is the creative Saturn, the hidden 
God, and the Daath of the apex of the upper triangle 
of the hexagram is in reality a concentration of the 
Trinity of the Supernals. The hexagram must not be 
like “the Stooping Dragon,’' crowned with a falsity.4. Tzedeq means righteousness; the inexorable law of 
Jupiter. The connection of this with the number 4 
depends on the aspect of 4 as the square of 2, the 
limitation of the Dyad further fixed by self-multiplica- 
tion, the introduction of a new dimension. 4 is thus 
a number of rigidity or materiality. Hence its ideal 
quality is inexorable righteousness.

Yet in connection with this, remember that Chesed 
means Mercy and 4 is Daleth, the letter of Venus, 
Love. Consideration of this is very helpful in under¬ 
standing the way in which a Sephira combines widely 
diverse ideas.

5-9. 5. Madim. 6. Shemesh. 7. Nogah. 8. Kokab. 
9. Levanah.*

10. Cholim Yesodoth. The sphere of the elements is 
attributed to Malkuth. Of course, the elements extend 
through the Sephiroth. But “element” here means the 
composition of Nephesch and sensible matter; which 
pertain to Malkuth.

11. Ruach means air, also breath and mind, thought being 
the expression in expansion of the union of Chokmah 
and Binah in the subconscious. Ruach is also trans¬ 
lated Spirit—Latin Spiritus. There must be no con¬ 
fusion between this “spirit” and that symbolized by 
the letter Shin. The distinctions are of the utmost 
importance, and so manifold and subtle that the sub¬ 
ject demands a complete essay in itself.

23. Maim is Hebrew for Water.

31. Ash is the Hebrew for Fire.

32-bis. Aretz is the Hebrew for Earth.

* Editorial Note.—The explanatory notes on these five heavens

of Assiah were never written. The typescript merely has “Look

up the actual meaning.*’

COLUMNS VI, VII

57

31-bis. Ath. I have myself assigned the word Ath to the 
idea of Spirit as an element, it being the Alpha and 
Omega, or the essence which interpenetrates the other 
elements. It is the unformulated reality common to 
them, by virtue whereof they exist.

The planetary heavens follow their Sephirotic attribu¬ 
tions; e.g. 27, the Heaven of Mars is Madim given above 
against the number 5.The planetary heavens follow their Sephirotic attribu¬ 
tions; e.g. 27, the Heaven of Mars is Madim given above 
against the number 5.

The Zodiacal heavens are simply the Hebrew names of 
the signs.

Column VII. THE ENGLISH OF COLUMN VI

The nature of the entries in this column is to be studied 
in the light of the traditional astrological conception.

58

TABLE I

Column VIII. THE ORDERS OF QLIPHOTH

The titles of the Qliphoth, generally speaking, suggest 
the vice characteristic of the Sephira or other idea to which 
they are attributed. Thus the Thaumiel refer to Kether, 
because their characteristic is to possess two contending 
heads, and so to deny the unity of Kether. So also the 
Golachab are giants like volcanoes, symbolizing energy and 
fire, and their liability to appear as tyranny and aimless 
destruction. Similarly, the Qliphoth of Venus are carrion 
birds, as opposed to the dove, sparrow, etc.

The transliteration and meaning of the Hebrew names 
of the Orders of Qliphoth are as follows: —

{ Qemetiel. Crowd of Gods.

Belia’al. Worthlessness.

A’athiel. Uncertainty.

1. Thaumiel. Twins of God.

2. Ghagiel. Hinderers.

3. Satariel. Hiding.

4. Gha’agsheblah. Smiters.

5. Golachab. Flaming Ones.

6. Thagirion. The Litigation.

7. A’arab Zaraq. The Raven of Dispersion.

8. Samael. The False Accuser.

9. Gamaliel. The Obscene Ass.

10. Lilith. The Woman of Night.

15. Ba’airiron. The Flock.

16. Adimiron. Bloody.

17. Tzalalimiron. Clangers.

1 8. Shichiriron. Black.

19. Shalehbiron. Flaming.

20. Tzaphiriron. Scratchers.

22. A’abiriron. Clayey.

24. Necheshthiron. Brazen.

25. Necheshiron. Snakey.

26. Dagdagiron. Fishy.

28. Bahimiron. Bestial.

29. Nashimiron. Malignant Women.

TABLE I

59

Column X. MYSTIC NUMBERS OF THE SEPHIROTH24. Necheshthiron. Brazen.

25. Necheshiron. Snakey.

26. Dagdagiron. Fishy.

28. Bahimiron. Bestial.

29. Nashimiron. Malignant Women.

TABLE I

59

Column X. MYSTIC NUMBERS OF THE SEPHIROTH

These numbers are obtained by adding together the 
natural numbers up to and including the one in question. 
Thus, the sum of the first ten numbers is fifty-five. Their 
significance has been well worked-out; and is important up 
to the number 13. After that, the numbers 15, 20, 21, 24, 
28, and 31 have repaid the study bestowed upon them.

For the meaning of the primes from 11 to 97 see 
page xxv.

60

TABLE I

Column XI. THE ELEMENTS, WITH THEIR 
PLANETARY RULERS

1 -9. Kether is said to be the root of Air, because of the force 
of air, or the balance of Fire and Water, and, as con¬ 
nected, it is Aleph, with the ideas of Zero and Unity. 
Chokmah is said to be the root of Fire, because of its 
creative nature; Binah of Water, because of its recep¬ 
tive passivity, and its symbolism as the Great Sea. 
The three elements are reflected into the second triad. 
Water being referred to Chesed, partly because it is 
the recipient of the male influence of the Supernals, 
partly because 4 is Daleth, Venus, the feminine or 
watery principle. The energy and mobility of 
Geburah naturally suggests Fire and Air. The third 
member of the triad is Tiphereth, partly for the same 
reason as Kether just cited, partly because Tiphereth 
is Microprosopus, who is Vau in Tetragrammaton, 
Vau being the letter of Air, the result of the union of 
Yod and He, Fire and Water.In the third triad Netzach is Fire, as representing 
the devouring quality of love: Hod, Water, as repre¬ 
senting the reflecting quality of thought: and Yesod, 
Air, on account of the extremely important mystery 
expressed in Liber 418, Aethyr XI (see The Equinox , 
I, 5).* The integrity of the Sephiroth is guaranteed 
by the fact that each one contains its contradictory in 
itself. Yesod, the Foundation, the principle of 
stability, cannot be shaken because it is also the ideal 
of elasticity, and instability.

10. Earth appears for the first time in Malkuth. The three 
active elements are represented in three triads in a 
progressively diluted and impure form. There is a 
progressive admixture of ideas as one descends the 
Tree; but when the descent becomes so gross that they 
can no longer subsist as such, they unite to act as a 
trinity, to reproduce themselves by reflection or

* Also re-issued: The Vision and the Voice, with Introduction 
and Commentary by The Master Therion.

COLUMN XI

61

crystallisation as a fixed form in which their original 
natures are no longer perceptible as such. They merely 
modify the character of the compound. The analogy 
is to chemical elements, which are unable to manifest 
the natural property of the pure state in a compound. 
It is only their subtler qualities which influence the 
nature of the compound. Thus none of the physical 
properties of H. are directly to be observed in its com¬ 
bination with S0 4 . It is only the subtler qualities 
which determine that H 2 S0 4 should be an acid.The attribution of Earth to Malkuth is important as 
explaining the nature of Nephesch and manifested 
matter. It is to be understood that the three active 
elements and the first 9 Sephiroth do not exist at all 
directly for the senses. They are to be apprehended 
only indirectly, by observing their function through 
determining the nature of sensible things. The neces¬ 
sary attributions of the column are extremely important 
as throwing light on the nature of the Heavens of 
Assiah. They must be studied and meditated with 
great care.

Thus the fiery signs Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius 
partake of the nature of Sol and Jupiter, because of 
the active, lordly, creative, paternal, generous, noble, 
and similar qualities. The earthy signs are sympathetic 
with Venus and Luna because of the passive receptivity 
of these planets. Airy signs correspond particularly 
with Saturn and Mercury, because of the connection 
of these planets with thought. Watery signs are sym¬ 
pathetic with Mars with regard to the fact that Water 
possesses the fiery property of breaking up and destroy¬ 
ing solids. The student must be careful to avoid 
expressing himself by inventing false antinomies. 
There is a great danger in arguing backwards in the 
Qabalah, especially in the case of attributions of this 
sort. Thus the explanation of the martial nature of 
water must not be used to argue a watery nature in 
Mars, whose natural sympathy is evidently Fire.

62

COLUMN XI62

COLUMN XI

It would be supremely misleading to try to obtain 
any information about the nature of Mars from this 
column. It is almost impossible to suggest any rule 
for avoiding errors of this sort. The best I can do is 
to recommend the student never to lose sight of the fact 
that all attributions whatsoever have no absolute 
quality. The object is really to remind the student of 
what he already knows about any given idea and its 
relation with the rest. He should therefore determine 
for himself the nature of any idea principally by 
meditation or direct magical investigation, such as 
actual visions. He may accept provisionally the 
validity of correspondences so far as they indicate the 
best methods of invocation and evocation. Having 
thus firmly established in his head the correspondences 
of any symbol, he is less likely to misinterpret it, or to 
assign a new importance to any known correspondence 
such as is found in the latter part of this column. He 
will take the planetary rulers here given as little more 
than suggestions for memorizing minor details of the 
nature of the Zodiac. It would evidently be absurd 
to set up an antinomy between the statement in this 
column that Saturn and Mercury are the rulers of 
Libra with the statement elsewhere that Libra is ruled 
by Venus and Saturn exalted therein. There is, how¬ 
ever, a certain partial sympathy between the columns. 
Thus Sol is exalted in Aries, Luna in Taurus, Mercury 
rules Gemini, and Sol Leo. In the case of Virgo, how¬ 
ever, neither Venus nor Luna appear either as its 
ruler or as exalted therein. A profitable meditation 
might develop in some such way as follows: —Question: Why should Venus and Luna not be 
given as rulers of Virgo? Virgo is suggested 
as the Virgin Isis, Luna as sympathetic with 
solitude, purity, and aptitude for reflection of 
the Hermit, ATU IX. Venus, again, as Binah, 
the recipient of Wisdom, represents one aspect 
of Virgo. So too does the earthy nature of Venus

COLUMN XI

63

in her aspect of Demeter. In this way an attribu¬ 
tion, which at first sight is puzzling, may assist 
the student to harmonize many ideas which 
appear at first sight incompatible.

The case of Venus is germane to the argument.* 
Venus is astrologically used as a synthetic term for 
the feminine aspect of the Deity. She has then many 
parts, Vesta, Ceres, Cybele, Isis, etc. The main dis¬ 
tinction to be borne in mind is that with Luna; and 
the task is all the more difficult in that the symbols 
continually overlap. It is by harmonizing and trans¬ 
cending such difficulties that the student arrives at a 
metaphysical conception which is perfectly positive 
and lucid on the one hand, and on the other emanci¬ 
pated from the bondage of the Laws of Contradiction.

Luna = Gimel = 3. Trivia is one of the titles of 
Diana.Luna = Gimel = 3. Trivia is one of the titles of 
Diana.

The life of woman is naturally divided into three 
parts: before, during, and after the age of menstruation. 
(1) The Virgin, (2) the Wife and Mother, (3) the Hag. 
In (3) the woman can no longer fulfil her natural func¬ 
tions, which therefore turn to the malignity of despair. 
Hence the identification of the Hag with the Witch. 
(1) is represented by Diana, the virgin huntress (legends 
of Atalanta, Endymion, Pan, Actaeon, Persephone, 
etc.), Hebe, Pallas Athene, Pythia and the Sybils, etc. 
The function of the virgin is inspirational. (2) is con¬ 
nected with Venus, Ceres, Cybele, Kwannon or 
Kwanseon, Sekhet, Hathor, Kali, Aphrodite, Astarte, 
Ashtoreth, Artemis of the Ephesians, and many other 
female deities. (3) is a wholly malignant symbol. 
Hecate and Nahema are the principal representatives 
of the idea.

Note that there are certain demons of the nature of 
Venus Aversa, symbolical of the evil caused by dis¬ 
torting or suppressing this principle. Such are

* Note that the symbol of Venus is the only planetary symbol 
which includes all ten Sephiroth.

64

COLUMN XI

Echidna, Lilith, the outraged Aphrodite of the 
Hyppolytus, the Venus of the Horsel in Tannhauser, 
Melusina, Lamia, some aspects of Kali, Kundry, 
possibly the malicious side of Queen Mab and the 
Fairy nature generally.The student is expected to have in mind all such 
symbols and to overcome their incompatibility, not by 
blurring the outline of the different figures, but by 
regarding each of them as representing one phenomenal 
manifestation of the ultimate principle which we name 
Nuit, Teh, Shakti, He, Isis, positive electricity, the 
infinity of space, possibility, etc., in conjunction with 
a particular set of circumstances. The student will 
note that this principle cannot be apprehended in itself, 
but only in combination. Just so we can only under¬ 
stand electricity by observing its effects in lightning, 
magnetism, etc. Some philosophers have attempted 
to construct synthetic symbols to include all aspects 
of this principle. Thus the Egyptians, who were the 
most philosophical of all schools of Theogonists, 
included as many functions of femininity as possible 
in the idea of Isis. Thus she is: —

1. Wisdom, like Pallas Athene.

2. The Physical Moon.

3. The Perpetual Virgin, twin-born with Osiris.

4. Nature (complemented by her final form 
Nephthys—Perfection).

5. The Builder of Cities. (As indicated by her 
head-dress.)

6. The Spouse of Osiris.

7. The Mother of Horus.

8. The Spirit of Corn or food in general.

9. Earth in general.

10. The Goddess of Water or the Nile, and therefore 
of wine in general. She is the soul of intoxica¬ 
tion, this representing the spiritual rapture of 
physical love.

11. The Initiatrix; mistress of secrets. The Teacher.

COLUMN XI

65

12. The Restorer (the earth fertile after winter) as 
shown by her collecting the fragments of Osiris.

The feminine nature is evidently coextensive with a 
moiety of all our ideas; and this fact alone is sufficient to 
account for the complexity of the symbolism. Hence the 
necessity for a course of meditation above indicated and 
for the occasional apparent contradictions.

66

TABLE I

Column XIII. THE PATHS OF THE SEPHER 
YETZIRAH66

TABLE I

Column XIII. THE PATHS OF THE SEPHER 
YETZIRAH

These attributions arise from the description of the 
paths in the Sepher Yetzirah. This is one of the most 
ancient books of the Qabalah; but it is far from clear how 
the ideas correspond with the general scheme of symbolism. 
They seem of no use in practical magical work. It is 
doubtful whether the text of the book is accurate, or 
whether (in any case) the rabbin responsible for the text 
had any sufficient authority.

Column XIV. GENERAL ATTRIBUTIONS OF THE 
TAROT

This column gives merely the actual attributions which 
are to be taken as the basis of any investigation of the 
Tarot. They are the conventional terms and no more.

TABLE I

67

Column XV. THE KING SCALE OF COLOUR

The four scales of colours (Columns XV-XVIII) are 
attributed to the four letters of Tetragrammaton. The 
King Scale represents the root of colour; that is, a relation 
is asserted between the essential significance of colour in 
the Atziluthic world, and that of the path understood as 
well as possible, in the light especially of Columns II, VI, 
and XIV. But the King Scale represents an essence of 
equal depth with the columns mentioned. It is an attribu¬ 
tion of the same order as they; i.e. it is a primary expres¬ 
sion of the essential ideas.

1. Brilliance represents the colourless luminosity of 
Kether.

2. The blue is that of the sky (Masloth).

3. The crimson represents blood. Compare the sym¬ 
bolism of the Scarlet Woman and her Cup in Liber 418.

4. The deep violet is episcopal. It combines 2 and 3, a 
bishop being the manifestation of heavenly or starry 
existence manifested through the principle of blood or 
animal life.

5. The orange suggests the energy as opposed to other 
qualities of the Sun.

6. The rose is that of dawn. The attribution therefore 
asserts the identity of the Sun and Horus and is thus 
implicated with the doctrine of the New Aeon.6. The rose is that of dawn. The attribution therefore 
asserts the identity of the Sun and Horus and is thus 
implicated with the doctrine of the New Aeon.

7. Amber represents the electric voluptuousness of 
Aphrodite. It suggests the tint of the skin of those 
women who are most enthusiastically consecrated to 
Venus.

8. Violet-purple. Should this not be lavender? Meditate.

9. The indigo is that of the Akasa (ether) and of the 
throat of Shiva. It represents the night sky blue of 
the nemyss of Thoth. This nemyss is the mysterious 
yet pregnant darkness which surrounds the generative 
process.

10. The yellow indicates Malkuth as the appearance which 
our senses attach to the solar radiance. In other

68

COLUMN XV

words, Malkuth is the illusion which we make in order 
to represent to ourselves the energy of the Universe.

The Elemental Colours

These may be naturally derived from what has been 
said about Column XI, lines 1-10. Scarlet naturally repre¬ 
sents the activity of Fire, blue the passivity of Water, while 
yellow is the balance between them. Green is the middle 
colour of the spectrum and therefore the balanced recept¬ 
acle of the totality of vibration. Observe that the comple¬ 
mentary of each pair of the colours of the active elements 
is the third. Thus, red and blue make violet, whose com¬ 
plementary is yellow; and so on.

For the citrine, olive, russet, and black of earth, see the 
explanation under 10, Malkuth, in the Queen Scale 
(Column XVI). The pure earth, known to the ancient 
Egyptians in that Equinox of the Gods over which Isis 
presided, was green.

The Planetary AttributionsThe Planetary Attributions

They follow the colours of the spectrum. They are the 
transparent as opposed to the reflected colours. They 
follow the order of the subtlety and spirituality of the 
vibration. Thus the violet of Jupiter is definitely religious 
and creative, while at the end of the scale the red of Mars 
is physical, violent, and gross. Between these we have 
Saturn whose indigo represents the sobriety and deep-sea 
calmness of meditation, Saturn being the eldest of the Gods. 
Luna is blue; representing purity, aspiration and unselfish 
love. The green of Venus suggests the vibration of veget¬ 
able growth. It is the intermediate stage between the 
definitely spiritual and the definitely intellectual and 
emotional type of vibration. In the “rods and cones” 
attribution green is the central colour, the pure passivity 
absorbing all: as Venus combines all the Sephiroth in one 
symbol. The yellow of Mercury suggests the balanced but 
articulate movement of the mind. The orange of Sol is 
the intense but gross physical vibration of animal life.

COLUMN XV

69

The above represents merely one of an indefinitely 
large number of interpretations which may be derived from 
meditation on this attribution.

The Zodiacal Attributions

The Zodiacal colours proceed systematically from the 
Scarlet of Aries to the violet of Aquarius. The colour 
which completes the circle is described as crimson, and is 
attributed to Pisces, the allusion being to the relation of 
Pisces with Binah through the ATU XVIII, the Moon, in 
which also is shown the pool of midnight through which 
Kephra travels in his bark; and this suggests the Night of 
Pan which hangs over the City of the Pyramids.Aries is scarlet, being the House of Mars and the sign 
of the Spring Equinox, where occurs the fiery outburst of 
the new year. Taurus is red-orange, suggesting the red 
earth of which man (who is Taurus, Vau, Microprosopus, 
the Son) is made, the orange indicating the Solar influence 
and the energy of Geburah. Gemini is orange, since ATU 
VI shows the Solar twins Vau He. Cancer is amber, the 
connection being with Netzach, Venus in her less spiritual 
form being the chariot or vehicle through which the 
influence of the Supernal Mother is conveyed to man. In 
this chariot is borne the Sangraal or Cup of Babalon; 
which connects the symbolism with the legend of Parsifal 
and the visions of Liber 413. The ideas of love and 
electricity are implicit in this sign, which is ruled by the 
Moon and in which Jupiter is exalted.

Leo is pure yellow, yet with that tinge of green which 
is characteristic of the purest gold. It suggests the first 
form of the principle of vegetable growth, implicit in the 
nature of the Solar ray.

Virgo has the yellowish green of young grass. The 
connection is evident.

Libra is emerald green, being pre-eminently the house 
of Venus.

Scorpio is the greenish blue—Prussian blue—whose 
psychological effect upon the sensitive mind is to suggest a

70

COLUMN XV

poisonous or putrefactive vibration. It contains the idea 
of life and death interpenetrating each other and reproduc¬ 
ing each other continuously; always with the accompani¬ 
ment of a certain morbid pleasure. It is the identification 
which one finds in Swinburne's best poems: “The Garden 
of Proserpine,*’ “Dolores,” “Illicet,” “Anactoria,” and 
others. The natural correspondence is the blue-green sea.Sagittarius is blue; being the House of Jupiter, which 
is blue in the Queen Scale. It is also the blue of the sky; 
for Sagittarius is the background of the Rainbow sym¬ 
bolism of Q Sh Th. It is further connected with the blue 
of religious aspiration. It continues the path of Gimel. It 
is the aspiration from Yesod to Tiphereth as Gimel is from 
Tiphereth to Kether. Note that the aspiration to Yesod 
from Malkuth is dark blue: it being so low on the Tree its 
purity is to some extent darkened.

Capricornus is indigo. The connection is with the 
colour of Yesod, implying the sexual symbolism of the 
Goat.

Aquarius is violet: this is connected with ATU XVII. 
Cf. The Book of the Law, I, 61-64. The colour violet, 
generally speaking, signifies a vibration which is at the 
same time spiritual and erotic; i.e . it is the most intense of 
the vibrations alike on the planes of Nephesch and 
Neschamah. Compare at the other end of the scale the 
connection between the vibrations of Mars and those of the 
Sangraal.

TABLE I

71

Column XVI. THE QUEEN SCALE

This scale represents the first positive appearance of 
colour: as the King Scale is transparent, the Queen is 
reflected. (Spectra.)

1-3. In this scale, therefore, we read the appearance of the 
32 paths as they are found in Nature. Kether, being 
previously unconditioned brilliance, is now articulate 
as white. The grey of Chokmah refers to the cloudy 
appearance of semen, and indicates the transmission 
of white to black. It is the double nature of the Dyad. 
Binah is black, having the faculty of absorbing all 
colours.

In the three Supernals, therefore, we find the 3 
possible modifications of light, in its wholeness. 
Above the abyss there is no separation into colour.

4. Chesed has the blue 3 ^

of water These being the 3 primary

ci-u L colours of reflected light as

5. Geburah the red of fire y , . ,, . , .

J

opposed to the violet, green 
and red of transparent light.

Tiphereth the yellow of 
airci-u L colours of reflected light as

5. Geburah the red of fire y , . ,, . , .

J

opposed to the violet, green 
and red of transparent light.

Tiphereth the yellow of 
air

The colours of the 3rd triad are derived from those 
of the 2nd by simple admixture.

7. Netzach. Emerald

mingled.

8. Hod. Orange

mingled.

9. Yesod. Violet is Chesed and Geburah mingled.

is Chesed and Tiphereth 
It is also the colour of Venus, 
is Tiphereth and Geburah

Netzach and Hod are naturally the resultant of the two 
Sephiroth which impinge on them respectively, while Yesod 
represents a secondary effect of the conjunction of Chesed 
and Geburah, Tiphereth being the primary. Emerald 
represents the most brilliant aspect of Venus; orange that 
of Mercury. Violet of the very complex formula syn¬ 
thesizes Yesod in the idea of Luna. Note that Sol and 
Luna are direct images of the masculine and feminine 
principles, and much more complete Macrocosms than any 
other planets. This is explained by their symbols in the

72

COLUMN XVI

Yi King, - and = r . Note also that Yesod

appears openly, this being the Queen Scale, in the violet 
robes of the spiritual-erotic vibrations referred to above.72

COLUMN XVI

Yi King, - and = r . Note also that Yesod

appears openly, this being the Queen Scale, in the violet 
robes of the spiritual-erotic vibrations referred to above.

10. Malkuth. Just as the third Triad combines the colours 
of the second Triad by pairs, so does Malkuth in a 
yet more complete manner. Citrine combines blue, 
red and yellow with a predominance of yellow; olive, 
with a predominance of blue; russet, with a predomin¬ 
ance of red; and these represent respectively the airy, 
watery, and fiery sub-elements. Black is the earthy 
part of Earth. But here we observe a phenomenon 
compatible with that found in the Tarot, where the 
four Empresses (symbolical of He final) are the throne 
of the Spirit as well as being the ultimate recipients of 
the force of King, Queen, and Emperor. The black is 
the link between the lowest conception, the climax of 
the degeneration of pure colour in the final assimila¬ 
tion of light, and the black of Binah. It is the lowest 
part of the daughter which contains in darkness the 
identity with the Pure Mother, to set her upon whose 
throne is one definite image of the Great Work. See 
also the 27th Symbol in Liber XXVII;* the ultimate 
of the feminine symbols, the complete dissociation of 
existence, the final disappearance of all positive ideas, 
but this is found to be essentially identical with the 
perfection of the continuum.

The planetary colours are connected chiefly with 
the sacred metals as observed clairvoyantly, or con¬ 
sidered in respect of their astrological and alchemical 
character. Mercury is purple suggesting the irides¬ 
cence of quicksilver and the blue of Mercury vapour. 
Luna is silver, the apparent colour of the Moon in the 
sky, and of the metal to which she is attributed. Venus 
is sky-blue; this is possibly a reference to copper- 
sulphate, an important salt in alchemy; but principally* Note: E=E = is the 27th and last mutation of the Tao with 
the Yin and the Yang. “Therefore was the end of it sorrow; yet 
in that sorrow a sixfold star of glory whereby they might see to 
return unto the Stainless Abode; yea, unto the Stainless Abode.”

COLUMNS XVI, XVII

73

because sky-blue naturally suggests the more frivolous 
aspects of love. The blue of Jupiter refers to the blue 
of the sky, his dominion, and to the appropriate colour 
of religious aspiration. Mars is red on account of the 
colour of rust, and of the use of iron in executing the 
pure will; whether by sword, spear, or machine. Sol 
is yellow, the apparent colour of the sun, and of the 
metal gold. Saturn is black with reference to Binah, 
the sphere of Saturn, to the Night of Pan (see Liber 
418 in Equinox I, 5), to the blackness of oblivion 
(Saturn being Time), and to the blackness of the cor¬ 
ruption of lead (his metal), whose heaviness and dull¬ 
ness confirms the appropriateness of the symbolism. 
It refers further to the blackness of the Tamoguna, 
Saturn representing the inactivity of old age.

Zodiacal colours are less obvious in their attribu¬ 
tion. In fact it will be best to take this part of the 
column for what it may be worth as an uninitiated 
tradition. I am myself unable to attach any serious 
and important meaning to the majority of the symbols. 
At most, one can say that the colour of the scale repre¬ 
sents the degeneration of the Key Scale. E.g . in the 
case of Aries, red represents a mere dulling of the 
previous scarlet. The deep indigo of Taurus suggests 
the laborious sadness of the brute part of man; the 
slate-green of Virgo may refer to the apparent ennui 
or colourless melancholy of the hermit life. The black 
of Capricorn refers to the popular idea of ATU XV; 
while the attribution of Pisces may refer to the actual 
appearance of some fish, or certain phenomena charac¬ 
teristic of the astral plane.

Column XVII. THE EMPEROR SCALEColumn XVII. THE EMPEROR SCALE

The scale of the Emperor is derived from the two 
previous scales by simple admixture, as of colours on a 
palette for the most part.

74

TABLE I

Column XVIII. THE EMPRESS SCALE

The scale of the Empress is, generally speaking, either 
a degeneration from the scale of the Emperor or a com¬ 
plementary attribution. He being the twin of Vau. But in 
each case there is an added brightness whose source must 
be discovered by meditation. This brightness is a pheno¬ 
menon compatible to that described above in connection 
with the Empresses being the thrones of the Spirit, and 
Malkuth being the extreme departure from the perfection 
of the Supernals, and so the link through which the redemp¬ 
tion of the whole complex subterstructure below the Abyss 
may be accomplished.

The colours of the Empress Scale are combinations of 
two or more colours. The best may be considered as 
derived from the three previous scales, and the flecks or 
rays as representative of the bridegroom who is appointed 
to bring the Empress to perfection thus.

1. White flecked gold. The white is a reflection of the 
white brilliance of Kether; but the gold is an ornament, 
and thus indicates the mystery of the Holy Guardian 
Angel, who finds added perfection when invoked by 
his client, the gold of Tiphereth.

2. Red, blue, and yellow are the results of the creative 
energy of Chokmah and their white basis signifies that 
Chokmah has been perfected by fulfilling his function 
in this way. Also, the robe of the perfected Osiris is 
white flecked with red, blue, and yellow.

3. As the grey of Chokmah was perfected to the white of 
Kether, so the black of Binah is perfected to the grey 
of Chokmah. The grey is flecked with the pink of 
Tiphereth. This is the dawn of the child with which 
she is heavy, for this is the symbol of her perfection.4. Deep azure represents Jupiter and Water. It is flecked 
with yellow. This represents religious meditation; the 
yellow flecks are the first marks of ecstasy.

5. Red is the most passive shade of the scarlet of the two 
former scales. The black flecks show that in its per-

COLUMN XVIII

75

fection it receives the influence of Binah, the Supernal 
immediately above it on the Tree.

6. Gold amber suggests the mellowness of harvest, which 
is the perfection of the rose-pink of dawn, the spring of 
the day.

7. There seems a possible reference to Semele; and the 
general idea is that Netzach has been brought to a 
quiet harmonious tone and is receiving the influence of 
Tiphereth. Olive flecked gold.

8. This is a mystery of Mercury, improper to indicate 
clearly. Yellowish brown flecked white.

9. Citrine represents the final modification of Yesod, the 
airy nature at last appearing. The azure flecks are 
derived from Chesed—perhaps through Netzach; or 
from Sagittarius, the path joining it with Tiphereth.

10. Malkuth has been set upon the throne of Binah; and 
the rays of the bridegroom Tiphereth flood her with 
Gold. Black rayed yellow.

The Elements

11. Air has been made fertile, so that the golden flecks of 
the Sun are able to illumine it. Air is naturally barren. 
The green represents the Lotus on which Harpocrates 
is seated, or from which he is born.

23. The perfection of Water is indicated by its iridescence. 
This is the alchemical symbolism.

31. Fire, being pure, retains its original vermilion; but it 
has become capable of being the home of the crimson 
and emerald of Binah and her sphere of joy, Venus. 
It is no longer a destructive element, but the proper 
abode of Love, both in its higher and lower forms.

32-bis. Earth is identical with Malkuth, save that the rays 
are now flecks. The symbolism is similar.32-bis. Earth is identical with Malkuth, save that the rays 
are now flecks. The symbolism is similar.

31-bis. Spirit manifests the scale of five colours as shown 
on the Uraeus Wand. {The Equinox I, 3, p. 211.) Its 
perfection is to complete itself in the Pentagram. The 
mystery is similar to that mentioned in connection with 
1 above.

76

COLUMN XVIII

The Planets

12. Mercury's perfection is to still and concentrate thought, 
until it becomes deep red through which runs the violet 
vibration of spiritual-erotic ecstasy. (Note that the 
great defect of Mercury is its cold-bloodedness.)

13. Luna . The original chastity of the Moon is tinged 
with Love.

14. Venus. The defect of Venus is its tendency to romance 
(rose or cerise)—“External Splendour” Nogah. It is 
perfected by reality and usefulness—the emerald of 
vegetable life and growth.

21. Jupiter. The religious devotion of Jupiter is rewarded 
by the yellow rays of the Holy Guardian Angel.

27. Mars. The energy of Mars has been subdued until it 
is a proper basis for the blue and green rays of veget¬ 
able and spiritual life. (Cf. under “31. Fire,” above.)

30. Sol . The perfection of Sol is its fixation in the amber 
of Cancer by elevation at the summer solstice. In this 
it receives the adornment of pure physical energy. Fire. 
The red is purer than the orange, being of the incor¬ 
ruptible element.

32. Saturn. The perfection of Saturn is its identification 
with Binah. It has, so to speak, made good its position 
above the Abyss. It is adorned with the blue rays of 
the King Scale of Chokmah. The symbol implies that 
Time, the Destroyer, has been transmuted into the 
condition of the operation of the Great Work, i.e. the 
marriage of Chokmah and Binah.

The Zodiac

15. Aries. Controlled fire as in a furnace.

16. Taurus. Rich fertile earth.

17. Gemini is perfected by active thoughts, aimed and 
tinged by spiritual intention.The Zodiac

15. Aries. Controlled fire as in a furnace.

16. Taurus. Rich fertile earth.

17. Gemini is perfected by active thoughts, aimed and 
tinged by spiritual intention.

18. Cancer. See Liber 418 {Equinox I, 5) on the Mysteries 
of Magister Templi. The blood in the Cup of 
Babalon has dried to brown in which the vegetable, 
impersonal, and immortal life lurks.

COLUMN XVIII

77

19. Leo. Fire is infused evenly in the Lion, thus correct¬ 
ing his tendency to impulse.

20. Virgo. The perfection of virginity is fruitfulness.

22. Libra. Retains the love of its ruler Venus, but this is 
purified of its grossness.

24. Scorpio . The vivid watery vibration of putrefaction 
assumes the hue of the beetle Kephra. The perfection 
of Scorpio is to bring corruptibility through its mid¬ 
night.

25. Sagittarius. The virgin huntress is brought from her 
superficiality by becoming the huntress Babalon. The 
deep vivid blue is to be connected with the ideas of 
water (the Great Sea of Binah) and Chesed, the image 
of that sea below the Abyss.

26. Capricornus. The colour combines Chokmah and 
Binah, and is very dark. The Great Attainment is 
symbolized by the marriage.

28. Aquarius is the Kerub of the Man; and his perfection 
is to attain the purity of Kether (white) tinged with 
the purple or violet vibrations explained above.

29. Pisces is the symbol of the Astral Plane. (See ATU 
XVIII.) Its defect is glamour and illusion. It has 
now been brought to a mental equilibrium signifying 
the adaptability of the ether to receive and transmit 
all types of vibration.

MINUTUM MUNDUM

A General Note on Columns XV-XVIII, 
the Four Scales of Colour

You can use the four scales of colour as you choose. 
The only thing to remember is the attribution, the Tetra- 
grammaton.A General Note on Columns XV-XVIII, 
the Four Scales of Colour

You can use the four scales of colour as you choose. 
The only thing to remember is the attribution, the Tetra- 
grammaton.

The Sephiroth are given in the King’s Scale and the 
paths in the Queen’s Scale in accordance with the general 
law of balance. You must never have a masculine sticking 
out by itself without a feminine to equilibrate it.

The Sephiroth are definitely positive ideas. The num¬ 
bers are “Things in Themselves,” much more so than the 
letters of the alphabet. The paths are merely the links 
between the Sephiroth.

Of course the idea of balance is carried into the Sephiroth 
themselves. The number 4 is masculine in its relation 
with number 5, feminine in its relation with number 3.

You cannot go wrong as long as you keep always this 
idea of balance in the forefront of your mind. Whenever 
one thing goes on to another thing, there must always be 
this opposition, and equilibrium. You can apply this to 
every point that comes up in practical working. It is 
always possible to refer any system of symbols to the Tree 
of Life merely by Tetragrammaton, or indeed to any of the 
fundamental systems of classification. It is a very useful 
exercise to practise this type of analysis. Take, for 
example, the letter Daleth, and note all its correspondences. 
For instance you get at once the equation 4 = 7, for the 
numerical value of Daleth is 4, while 7 is of Venus.

The more thoroughly you practise this the nearer you 
will come to the completely automatic subconscious under¬ 
standing of the essence of any given symbol.

78

TABLE I

79

Columns XIX, XX, XXI, XXXIV, XXXV. GENERAL 
REMARKS ON THE GODS78

TABLE I

79

Columns XIX, XX, XXI, XXXIV, XXXV. GENERAL 
REMARKS ON THE GODS

Many of the so-called names of God, such as the 99 
names of Allah and the poetical lists of Hinduism, are not 
really names at all but descriptive titles. By the true name 
of a God we mean that word which represents his Magical 
Formula; the due process of which therefore sets his energy 
in motion. (See J. G. Frazer for numerous legends illus¬ 
trating this idea.) There cannot therefore be more true 
names ultimately than there are distinct sounds. For a 
God with a compound name would represent a complex 
sound, and therefore a complex energy. Such a God would 
lack the simplicity which is the first attribute of Godhead.

Outside the Hebrew and such other names of Gods as 
can be checked and corrected if necessary by the rules of 
Gematria, or the Yetziratic or Tarotic attribution, there is 
no adequate security that corruption has not taken place, 
e.g . Osiris instead of Asar; Jupiter instead of IAO-Pater.

There are numerous dialectic changes, and changes due 
to corruption in the course of time or to deliberate modi¬ 
fication, with such ends in view as the identification of a 
local deity with an important and popular God of similar 
name.

The uncertainty of primitive alphabets is responsible 
for mispronunciations, which are then written down 
phonetically and again mispronounced, so that in course of 
time one finds a form which cannot be recognised; e.g . con¬ 
fusion has arisen from the writing of the sound S with a 
C, pronouncing the C hard and then (to avoid mistakes!) 
replacing it by K. There is also confusion between I or Y 
and J (Dj), soft G and hard G, so that a name originally 
pronounced with a Y ends by appearing with a hard G.The popularity of a Deity leads to his or her identi¬ 
fication with the local interests of each new group of wor¬ 
shippers. Thus a corn goddess might appeal, for one 
reason or another, to town-dwellers, who would then 
acclaim her as especially protectress of cities. The process 
in its widest possibilities is practically universal in the

80

COLUMNS XIX, XX, XXI, XXXIV, XXXV

case of those divinities whose cult covers any considerable 
variety of climates, cultures, economic and social con¬ 
ditions and centuries. Thus a primitive God may be wor¬ 
shipped under a corruption of his original name, and also 
by his original character. The evolution of Gods proceeds 
pari passu with that of their devotees.From the above it will be clear that except in the case 
of the Hebrews and of a few isolated instances, it is almost 
impossible to decide on a satisfactory attribution for any 
given name. It is only where the cult of the god is limited 
so that his symbolic form, attributes, and legend have some 
single or at least predominant characteristic, that one can 
make use even of correctness, much less of completeness. 
Such is Sekhet, who is uniformly represented with a lion’s 
head and described as possessing feline qualities, so that 
we can assign her to Leo without hesitation. But a goddess 
like Isis might be given to Zero as conterminous with 
Nature, to 3 as Mother, to 4 as Venus, to 6 as Harmony, 
to 7 as Love, to 9 as the Moon, to 10 as Virgin, to 13 again 
as the Moon, to 14 as Venus, to 15 as connected with the 
letter He, to 16 as the Sacred Cow, to 18 as Goddess of 
Water, to 24 as Draco, to 28 as Giver of Rain, to 29 as the 
Moon, and to 32 as Lady of the Mysteries (Saturn, Binah). 
In such cases one must be content with a more or less 
arbitrary selection, and make an independent investigation 
in each particular case in reference to the matter 
immediately under consideration. The complementary 
confusion is that Deities of very different nature will appear 
against the same rank of the Key Scale for different reasons. 
For instance, the number 4 includes both Isis and Amoun. 
There is no question of identifying these. The fact of 
their appearing in the same place must be taken to indicate 
that both ideas are necessary to complete the connotation 
of the number 4.

TABLE I

81

Column XIX. SOME EGYPTIAN GODS

0. Against the number Zero Harpocrates is Silence and 
Rest, Amoun is the Concealed. For Nuit and Hadit 
see the Commentary to the Book of the Law.TABLE I

81

Column XIX. SOME EGYPTIAN GODS

0. Against the number Zero Harpocrates is Silence and 
Rest, Amoun is the Concealed. For Nuit and Hadit 
see the Commentary to the Book of the Law.

1. Now in the number 1, Ptah is the Creator, being repre¬ 
sented as a mummy without gestures. It signifies that 
Kether has no attributes. Asar-un-Nefer is the per¬ 
fected Osiris; that is Osiris brought to Kether. Heru- 
Ra-Ha contains the twin forms of the Lord of the 
Aeon. He is Kether to us in this time and place as 
being the highest positive conception of which we are 
capable.

2. Amoun as the creative Chiah, Thoth as the Logos, 
Nuit as connected with Mazloth.

3. Maut the Mother Vulture requiring to be impregnated 
by Air, the Logos. Isis as the Mother. Nephthys as 
the Mother in her dark aspect.

4. Amoun as the Father; Isis as water, and Hathoor the 
Nile Goddess.

5. Horus as the Lord of Force. Nephthys as the Lady of 
Severity balancing the mercy of Isis.

6. Asar, the prototype of man. Ra and On the Sun God. 
Harpocrates is of Tiphereth as being the Child. Also 
he is the centre, as Tiphereth is the centre of the Ruach. 
His body is rose-pink, as in the King Scale of 
Tiphereth. Hrumachis might also be placed here for 
the same reason.

7. Hathoor, the Egyptian Venus.

8. Anubis, the lower form of Thoth, Mercury.

9. Shu, Lord of the Firmament, supporting it as Azoth 
supports the Sephiroth 4—8 of the Tree of Life. Her- 
manubis, the Lord of the Threshold, because he is 
Yesod, the link between Ruach and Nephesch. All 
exclusively phallic Gods might be attributed here.

10. Seb as the Lord of Earth. The lower Isis and 
Nephthys as Virgins, imperfect until impregnated. 
Sphinx, as containing the 4 Elements or Kerubs.

82

COLUMN XIX

The Elements

11. Nu is the Lord of the Firmament, Hoor-pa-kraat is the 
Fool of the Tarot. Air.82

COLUMN XIX

The Elements

11. Nu is the Lord of the Firmament, Hoor-pa-kraat is the 
Fool of the Tarot. Air.

23. Turn as the Sun descending into ocean. Ptah as the 
Mummy. Compare ATU XII. Auramoth, Goddess of 
Water. Asar as ATU XII. Isis as Goddess of Water. 
Hathoor as Goddess of Pleasure. Water.

31. Thoum-aesh-neith, Goddess of Fire. Mau the Lion— 
Sun in the South. Kabeshunt—Kerub of Fire. Horus, 
God of Fire.

32-bis. Ahapshi, Kerub of Earth. Nephthys, Goddess of 
Earth as Isis is of Water. Ameshet, Kerub of Earth.

31-bis. Asar represents Spirit as being the ideal God in the 
normal man.

The Planets

12. Thoth and Cynocephalos, Mercurial gods.

13. Chomse, God of the Moon.

14. Hathoor, Goddess of Love.

21. Amoun-Ra, Jupiter as Creator.

27. Horus as Warrior God.

30. Sun gods.

32. Crocodile gods, devourers.

The Zodiac

15. Men Thu as a martial God.

16. Asar as the Redeemer. Ameshet as Kerub of Earth. 
Apis as Bull.

17. Twin Deities as pertaining to Gemini. Heru-Ra-Ha as 
containing the twin Horus Deities.

18. Kephra perhaps, because Cancer is in the nadir in the 
horoscope when Aries is rising.

19. Babalon and the Beast conjoined. Refers to ATU XI. 
Pasht, Sekhet and Mau are all Lions.

20. Isis is the Virgin.

22. Ma, Goddess of Truth and Justice (ATU VIII).

24. These are all Serpent or Dragon deities. Typhon 
especially Lord of destruction and death.

COLUMNS XIX, XXI, XXII

83

25. Nephthys. Perfection presides over Transmutation.

26. Khem the erect Phallus. Set, see ATU XV. Capri- 
cornus is the House of the Sun at the extreme southern 
declination.

28. Ahephi, Kerub of Air.

29. See ATU XVIII.

Column XXI. THE PERFECTED MAN

These attributions all refer to those parts of the human 
body on the Tree of Life.

Column XXII. SOME HINDU DEITIES

Add the following: 1. Shiva, Brahma. 7. Bhavani, etc. 
18. Krishna. 24. Yama. 27. Krishna. 28. The Maruts.

84

TABLE I

Column XXXIV. SOME GREEK GODSColumn XXII. SOME HINDU DEITIES

Add the following: 1. Shiva, Brahma. 7. Bhavani, etc. 
18. Krishna. 24. Yama. 27. Krishna. 28. The Maruts.

84

TABLE I

Column XXXIV. SOME GREEK GODS

0. Pan is the All which is 0. He has the power of destroy¬ 
ing all positive manifestation.

1. Zeus is the Supreme Unity, not to be confused with 
the Zeus who is the son of Kronos. Iacchus is the 
supreme unity in man reached by ecstasy, when every¬ 
thing else has been winnowed away by the winnowing 
fan.

2. Athena as the Wisdom which springs full-armed from 
the brain of Zeus. Uranus as the Starry Heaven. 
Hermes as the Messenger or Logos.

3. The Goddesses are all Mothers. Psyche is the Nes- 
chamah. Kronos is Saturn, the dark one and the 
limitation of Time.

4. Poseidon, Lord of Water. Zeus, the All-Father.

5. Ares, Lord of War. Hades, God of Fire in the parti¬ 
tion between him and Zeus and Poseidon.

6. Iacchus as the Holy Guardian Angel. Apollo as the 
God of the Sun and male beauty. Adonis, the dying- 
God. Dionysus and Bacchus as different aspects of 
this God.

7. Aphrodite, Goddess of Love. Nike, Goddess of 
Victory. Netzach.

8. Hermes, Mercurial.

9. Zeus, equals Shu, God of Air. Diana as phallic stone 
and Luna. Eros as representing the reproductive 
passion.

10. Persephone, the virgin Earth. See her legend. She is 
Malkuth of Demeter and Binah. Adonis is a doubtful 
attribution, the connection being with Adonai as God 
of Earth. Psyche the unredeemed Soul. Compare 
line 3 above.

The Elements

11. Zeus, God of Air.

23. Poseidon, God of Water.

31. Hades, God of Fire.

COLUMN XXXIV

85

32-bis. Demeter, Goddess of Corn. Gaia, Earth itself. 
31-bis. Iacchus, Spirit, compare line 1 above.

The Planets

12. Hermes, Mercurial.

13. Artemis, the virgin Moon. Hecate, the evil Moon.

14. These are all Deities of Love.

21. Zeus as Jupiter.

27. Ares, God of War, and Athene the Warrior Goddess. 
30. Sun Gods.13. Artemis, the virgin Moon. Hecate, the evil Moon.

14. These are all Deities of Love.

21. Zeus as Jupiter.

27. Ares, God of War, and Athene the Warrior Goddess. 
30. Sun Gods.

32. Athene as the Higher Wisdom. Might also be attri¬ 
buted to line 3. Kronos as Saturn.

The Zodiac

16. Athene pertaining to the head. Here a doubtful attri¬ 
bution, but there may be some connection with the 
Heavenly Cow.

17. Castor and Pollux as Twins. Apollo was the inspirer 
of Oracles. Eros might be added if the topmost 
figure in ATU VI really represents him.

18. Apollo as the Charioteer.

19. Demeter borne by lions.

20. Attis. He is of course a dying-God but is attributed 
here because of his mutilation which corresponds to 
Virgo.

22. Themis, Goddess of Justice.

24. Ares, because Mars rules Scorpio. Apollo the Pythean 
because of his Serpent. Thanatos because of ATU 
XIII.

25. These attributions because Sagittarius is a hunting Sign.

26. Capricornus: these attributions refer to the erect 
phallus.

28. Ganymede, the Cup-bearer, is referred to the Water- 
carrier.

29. Poseidon, because of the watery nature of Pisces. 
Hermes psychopompos, connected with the symbolism 
of Kephra travelling under the earth.

86

TABLE I

Column XXXV. SOME ROMAN GODS

0. The Latin Spirit does not admit other than positive 
ideas.

1. Jupiter as the Supreme Creator.

2. Janus is the Dyad. Mercury as the Messenger.

3. These attributions are given because of their dark 
lunar, limited, or maternal character.

4. Jupiter is the Father. Libitina is connected with the 
amniotic fluid.

5. Mars, the War God.

6. Apollo, the Sun God. Bacchus, the inspirer of Har¬ 
mony and Beauty; also called Aurora, Goddess of 
Dawn, rose-pink of Tiphereth.

7. Venus, Goddess of Love (Ananda).*

8. Mercury, God of Thought (Chit).*

9. Diana, Goddess of the Moon. Terminus, marking the 
boundary. Compare Hermanubis. Jupiter is God of 
Air and as the foundation (Sat).* Arrangement may 
be placed here.9. Diana, Goddess of the Moon. Terminus, marking the 
boundary. Compare Hermanubis. Jupiter is God of 
Air and as the foundation (Sat).* Arrangement may 
be placed here.

10. Ceres, Goddess of Earth.

The Elements

11. Jupiter, Lord of Air. Bacchus connected with ATU 0. 
Juno, Goddess of Air. Aeolus, God of the Winds.

23. Neptune, God of Water. Rhea, Goddess who flows. 
31. These are Gods of Fire.

32-bis. Ceres, Goddess of Earth.

31-bis. Bacchus, as Lord of Ecstasy. Spirit.

The Planets

These attributions are all obvious. It is, in fact, largely 
on the mythological and astrological conception of these 
Gods and Goddesses that the intelligibility of this whole 
Table is based. They represent the fundamental familiar 
ideas.

30. Ops, God of Wealth, which is solar.

vSce The Naples Arrangement, p.

COLUMN XXXV

87

32. Terminus, because Saturn is the end of things. Astraea 
is attributed here in so far as she may be taken to 
represent the central figure in ATU XXI.

The Zodiac

15. Mars, ruler of Aries. Minerva as for Artemis in 
Column XXXIV.

16. Venus, Lady of Taurus. Hymen is given here because 
of its connection with ATU V. See Catullus, Pervi- 
gillium Veneris.

17. Twin Gods. Hymen as relating to ATU VI.

18. Mercury is here attributed because the path of Cancer 
leads from the Supernal Binah to Geburah. This is a 
reference to ATU VII. But this attribution is very 
doubtful. The bearer of the Graal is not Hermes the 
Messenger. The Lares and Penates are given as Gods 
of the Home, Cancer being the sign of receptivity and 
settlement; but again this attribution is not altogether 
satisfactory.

19. ATU XI may be regarded as representing the Fire of 
Vulcan.

20. Vesta, the Virgin Goddess. Ceres, Flora and Adonis 
are given here because of their connection with spring, 
which is suggested by the yellowish-green colour in the 
King Scale.20. Vesta, the Virgin Goddess. Ceres, Flora and Adonis 
are given here because of their connection with spring, 
which is suggested by the yellowish-green colour in the 
King Scale.

22. A Goddess of Justice might be attributed here but in 
the higher sense of the Eighth ATU, the main idea is 
that of the satisfied woman; we might therefore insert 
Venus which rules Libra. Note that Saturn is exalted 
in Libra. Nemesis represents the ultimate automatic 
justice of Nature. ATU VIII may have some connec¬ 
tion with the awakening of the Eld of the All-Father. 
See Liber 418 in The Equinox , I, 5.

24. Mars, as Ruler of Scorpio. Mors, because of ATU 
XIII.

25. Diana, as bearing bow and arrows. Iris, because of the 
rainbow.

83

COLUMN XXXV

26. Vesta is here attributed because of Capricorn being the 
secret flame. The other gods refer to the erect phallus.

28. Juno, Lady of Air. Aeolus, God of the Winds. The 
month of February, when the Sun is in Aquarius, was 
traditionally sacred to Juno.

29. Neptune, because Fisces is a watery sign.

Column XXXVIII. 
IMAGINARY

TABLE I

89

ANIMALS, REAL AND

0. The Dragon represents Draco connected with Nuit 
in the Heaven; Ananta, the great serpent which sur¬ 
rounds the Universe. It devours its own tail, thereby 
reducing it to Zero.

1. The Swan as representing Aum. See Liber LXV, 
Cap. II, 17-25. See also Book of Lies, Cap. XVII. The 
Hawk pertains to Kether, as poised in the ether and 
beholding all things. Remember that Kether is 
primarily the individual point of view. The Soul 
beholds all things and changes the place according to 
its going. Thus in the Egyptian tradition the Hawk is 
the symbol of the highest type of Godhead.

3. The Bee is the traditional attribution of the Yoni.

4. Again, traditional. It is probably connected with the 
erect phallus of Amoun. The Unicorn is also 
Jupiterean, as connected with the horse of Sagittarius.4. Again, traditional. It is probably connected with the 
erect phallus of Amoun. The Unicorn is also 
Jupiterean, as connected with the horse of Sagittarius.

5. The Basilisk represents Geburah on account of its 
power of slaying with the flame of its glance.

6. The Phoenix, on account of its symbolism of the 
5° — 6 3 grade. Lion, as the typical animal of Sol. 
Child, as Vau of Tetragrammaton. The Spider is 
particularly sacred to Tiphereth. It is written that she 
“taketh hold with her hands and is in king’s palaces.” 
(The most characteristic title of Tiphereth is the 
“Palace of the King.”) She has six legs and is in the 
centre of her web exactly as Tiphereth is in the centre 
of the Sephiroth of Ruach.

The Pelican represents the Redeemer feeding its 
children with its own blood, and for this reason it has 
been chosen as the special symbol of the Brethren of 
the R & C.

7. lynx. This attribution is traditional. See Eliphas 
Levi’s design of the pantomorphous lynx. The Raven 
pertains to Netzach because of the qliphotic attribu¬ 
tion in Column VIII. All carrion birds may be

90

COLUMN XXXVIII

attributed here, because of their connection with Vic¬ 
tory. Note that the path of Scorpio connects Tiphereth 
with Netzach. The idea of Venus is intimately con¬ 
nected with that of death, for death is in many import¬ 
ant senses a part of love. Compare the Book of Lies, 
Caps. I, VIII, XV, XVI, and XVIII, etc., etc.8. Hermaphrodite, as representing the dual nature of 
Mercury. Jackal, sacred to Anubis. Twin serpents. 
These represent the Mercurial double current as on the 
Caduceus. See the interpretation given in the 
(unpublished) Paris Working. Monokeros de Astris. 
This animal is given as the symbolical title of a Prac- 
ticus. It is the swiftness of his motion which chiefly 
warrants the attribution. See Liber LXV, Cap. Ill, 
v. 2. He seems to combine the masculine and feminine 
element; on the one hand, the horn and the speed 
symbolism, on the other his white colour, his silver 
collar, and its inscription, linea viridis gyrat universa, 
which refers to Venus as containing the Universe.

9. Elephant, sacred to Ganesha, the god who breaks 
down obstacles. Hence placed in Yesod for the same 
reason as Anubis. Tortoise, as supporting the Ele¬ 
phant, hence equivalent to Atlas. (Compare Book of 
Lies, Cap. XXVI.) Toad, “ugly and venomous, wears 
yet a precious jewel in his head.” This refers to his 
generative force.

10. The Sphinx, as containing the 4th Element, the Child, 
He final, twin of the male child Vau.

The Elements

11. The Eagle, king of the birds. Man as the Kerub of Air. 
Ox—actual meaning of Aleph.

23. The Eagle-Snake-Scorpion trinity is the Kerub of 
Water.

31. The Lion is the Kerub of Fire.

32-bis. The Beast is the Kerub of Earth.

The Planets

12. The Swallow for its swiftness. The Ibis, sacred to

COLUMN XXXVIII

91

Thoth; the Ape, sacred to Thoth. The Cynocephalos 
is the constant companion of Thoth and produces base 
imitations of his Wisdom and Power. The Twin Ser¬ 
pents for the same reason as in line 8. All fish are 
sacred to Mercury because of their swiftness, their 
cold-bloodedness, the gleaming white or iridescent 
colours which are characteristic of their scales, and to 
some extent to their method of reproduction. Hybrids 
may also be attributed here, as to line 17.13. The Dog, as baying at the Moon and the natural com¬ 
panion of the huntress Artemis. The white Stork, per¬ 
haps as traditionally announcing childbirth. The 
Camel as the actual meaning of the letter. It conveys 
travellers across the desert as the path of Gimel 
crosses the Abyss from Tiphereth to Kether. See also 
Book of Lies, Cap. XLII.

14. The Sparrow and Dove are especially sacred to Venus. 
See Catullus’s Ode to Lesbia, Tristram Shandy, 
Sappho’s Ode to Venus, etc. For the Dove see 
Martial’s ode referring to Catullus’s Sparrow, the 
legend of the Virgin Mary, etc. The Dove is also 
Venusian on account of its soft amiability. The Swan, 
for the same reason as above. The Sow, the female 
of the boar of Mars; also because the sensuality of the 
sow suggests the lower type of Venus. All birds are 
primarily sacred to Venus, probably because the 
instinct of love enables a man to rise for a time above 
the earth. Also because of their great beauty of form 
and colour, because their flesh is tender as compared 
to that of animals, and because their speech is of the 
nature of ecstatic song and is devoid of any intellectual 
quality.

21. The Eagle is the sacred bird of Jupiter. The Praying 
Mantis suggests Jupiter by its simulation of a devo¬ 
tional attitude.

27. The Horse is sacred to Mars traditionally on account 
of his spirited nature. The Bear is martial chiefly for 
alchemical reasons and because of his great strength. 
The Wolf is sacred to Mars (see the legend of Rome),

92

COLUMN XXXVIII

also on account of his savage nature. The Boar is 
martial, as shown in the legend of Adonis. There is 
here a mystery of the grade of 6° = 5°, the overawing 
of Tiphereth by Geburah.

30. The Lion is the typically solar animal. The Hawk is 
solar as all-seeing. The Leopard is sacred to the sun 
on account of its black spots.

32. The Crocodile is Saturnian, as the devourer.

The Zodiac32. The Crocodile is Saturnian, as the devourer.

The Zodiac

15. The Ram is Aries by meaning. The attribution refers 
to its method of combatively butting. Note that the 
symbolism of the lamb is by no means the same. It 
pertains rather to Tiphereth in the formula of the Aeon 
of Osiris. This is all probably derived from the fact 
that lamb is the tenderest meat obtainable and there¬ 
fore the priests insisted on lamb being sacrificed for 
their benefit. The true nature of the Lamb would be 
rather Venusian or Lunar, but it would be better to 
cut it altogether out of the symbolic scheme, because 
of the priestly connection which the idea has suffered. 
The Owl is sacred to Aries as the bird of Minerva.

16. The Bull is the Kerub of Earth. All beasts of burden 
and those used in agriculture may be attributed here.

17. AH animals of dual nature in any respect pertain partly 
to Gemini. The Magpie is especially sacred to this 
sign because of its piebald plumage and its power of 
speech. The Parrot is given here for similar reasons. 
The Zebra is here on account of its stripes. All 
hybrids pertain to Gemini, both on account of their 
dual nature and because they are sterile like Mercury. 
The Penguin is here as superficially imitating man.

18. The Crab pertains to Cancer as the translation of the 
word. The Turtle is found among the symbols of the 
Court Cards of the suit of Cups. The Whale suggests 
Cancer because of its power of blowing water, and its 
faculty, in incorrect tradition, of swallowing large 
objects such as prophets. All beasts of transport may 
be attributed here in reference to ATU VII.

COLUMN XXXVIII

93COLUMN XXXVIII

93

19. Leo means Lion and is the Kerub of Fire. The Cat is 
of the Lion family, so also is the Tiger. The Serpent 
is given to Leo because the letter Teth means Serpent. 
There is an important mystery concealed in ATU VIII, 
and Woman may be attributed to Leo in respect to her 
sexual ferocity through which she dominates Man; 
that is, the lower element in Man, especially his courage 
as represented by the Lion.

20. All animals which go solitary are attributed here, as 
also those which refuse to unite with others. This is 
connected not only with ATU IX but with the cold¬ 
bloodedness of Mercury. The Rhinoceros—the single 
horn suggests Mercury, line 8. In the Dhammapada he 
is taken as the emblem of the Hermit.

22. The Elephant is given to Libra because equilibrium is 
the basis of the Universe. The symmetry of any 
animal is of the nature of Libra, and so we may place 
in this group any animals which make symmetrical 
patterns; as, for instance, the Spider (see line 6). But 
even the Spiders which live in the earth build their 
houses with a great regularity.

24. Scorpio means Scorpion. The Beetle is given to 
Scorpio chiefly on account of the peculiar colour (see 
the Empress Scale, Column XVIII) and partly because 
of certain habits, such as its transmutation through 
putrefaction. All reptiles may be placed here for this 
reason. The Lobster and Crayfish are, so to speak, 
water scorpions. The Wolf is naturally appropriate to 
the night house of Mars. The Shark is one of the most 
martial inhabitants of the sea. The Crablouse refers 
to Scorpio both by nature and habitat.25. The Centaur is traditionally connected with Archery, 
besides being partly a horse; the horse itself is con¬ 
nected with the idea of hunting and speed. Note that 
the speed of Sagittarius, which is the flickering of a 
dying fire, is not to be confused with the speed of 
Mercury, which is the speed of thought or electricity. 
The Hippogriff combines the Horse of Mars with the

94

COLUMN XXXVIII

Eagle of Jupiter. The Dog is sacred to the huntress 
Artemis.

26. Capricornus means Goat. The Ass and the Oyster are 
traditionally sacred to Priapus. An animal is sacred 
to Capricorn in respect of its ambition, actual or 
symbolic. It is the leaping of the Goat and its fondness 
for high and barren mountains which connect it with 
Capricorn, the sign which represents the zenith in the 
Zodiac. Note that the sexual instinct should primarily 
be regarded as indicative of the ambition or aspira¬ 
tion of the animal to higher things.28. See line 11 for the first attribution. The Peacock is the 
bird of Juno as Lady of Air and especially Aquarius, 
but the Peacock might also be referred to Tiphereth or 
even to Mercury and Sagittarius on account of its 
plumage. The vision of the Universal Peacock is 
connected with the Beatific Vision, in which the 
Universe is perceived as a whole in every part, as the 
essence of joy and beauty; but in its diversity this is 
connected with the symbolism of the Rainbow, which 
refers to the middle stage in Alchemical working, when 
the Matter of the Work takes on a diversity of flashing 
colours. This, however, is connected not so much with 
the nature of Sagittarius in itself as an isolated con¬ 
stellation, but with its position on the Tree of Life as 
leading from Yesod to Tiphereth. Samekh must 
therefore be regarded in this matter as the threshold 
of Tiphereth, even as Gimel is the threshold of Kether, 
and Tau of Yesod. These three, therefore, constitute 
the three main balanced spiritual experiences in the 
way of attainment.

29. Pisces means Fish, but, as previously indicated, actual 
fish do not belong here so much as to Mercury. The 
Dolphin pertains to Pisces, principally because Venus 
is exalted in the sign, while its ruler, Jupiter, is also 
implied in that attribution of which we see the out¬ 
come in the title of the Heir-apparent to the Crown of 
France. The Beetle is Kephra, the Sun at midnight, 
who is shown travelling through the Pool of Night in

COLUMN XXXVIII

95COLUMN XXXVIII

95

ATU XVIII. Pisces, moreover, is that greatest dark¬ 
ness before the dawn of the year in the parallel sym¬ 
bolism. There is also a mystery in the fact that the 
Beetle rolls up a ball of dung, thus constructing the 
Sun from the excrement of putrefaction. As it is 
written, “It is from the excrement of Choronzon that 
one takes the material for the creation of a God.” The 
Jackal is shown in ATU XVIII. He also feeds on 
excrement. The sign Pisces represents the apparent 
stagnation of the Work, its final decomposition. And 
it is at this moment that it is brought by the Redeemer— 
who has descended into the lowest hell for the purpose 
—across the threshold into the higher sphere. Note 
that it is because of the condition of the experiment 
that the Work necessarily lends itself to every form of 
glamour and illusion. Its nature is certain to be mis¬ 
interpreted even by the Redeemer himself, insofar as 
he is compelled to fix his attention upon the Matter 
of the Work and so to lose sight for the moment of the 
essential Truth which underlies its appearance.

The Dog is attributed to Pisces on account of his 
being sacred to the Moon, the title of ATU XVIII. 
The Dogs baying the Moon, with the accompanying 
assumption of witchcraft and all that type of pheno¬ 
mena which we associate with the treacherous semi¬ 
darkness of the waning moon, are shown in some ver¬ 
sion of the Trumps by artists who did not understand 
the deeper symbolism of Kephra and Anubis. That 
false representation is exactly characteristic of the sort 
of thing that always is to be expected to occur in con¬ 
nection with the work of the Magician in this sign.

96

TABLE I

Column XXXIX. THE PLANTS

0. The Lotus and Rose are attributed to 0 because they 
have traditionally been taken as glyphs of the circle.96

TABLE I

Column XXXIX. THE PLANTS

0. The Lotus and Rose are attributed to 0 because they 
have traditionally been taken as glyphs of the circle.

1. The Almond in flower is connected with Aaron’s Rod 
that budded. The Almond is the proper wood for the 
wand of the White magician, but the attribution should 
really be to the middle pillar as a whole. The branches 
of the Banyan tree take fresh roots where they touch 
the ground and start new main stems: this is connected 
with the special idea of Kether implied in the Philo¬ 
sophy given in the Commentary of the Book of the 
Law. (Part published in The Equinox of the Gods.)

2. The Amaranth is the flower of immortality. It is here 
placed in order to symbolize that quality of the Yod 
of Tetragrammaton, the principle of Chiah. The 
Mistletoe is given for a similar reason. The Bo or 
Pipal tree was the shelter of the Buddha at the moment 
of his enlightenment. Furthermore, its leaves suggest 
the phallus.

3. The Cypress pertains to Saturn. The Opium Poppy is 
connected with sleep, night and understanding. The 
Lotus is the general feminine symbol. The Lily sug¬ 
gests the purity of the Great Mother. The Ivy has dark 
leaves and its clinging nature reminds us of feminine or 
curving growth.

4. The Olive is attributed to Jupiter because of its soft¬ 
ness and richness. Its colour furthermore suggests 
that of the watery part of Malkuth in the Queen Scale 
(Column XVI). The Shamrock of four leaves, a good- 
luck plant, suggests Jupiter. The Opium Poppy is 
Jupiterian as giving relief from pain, quiet, and 
olympian detachment.

5. The Oak and Hickory are attributed here because of 
the hardness of their wood. Nux Vomica, on account 
of its tonic properties and the action of strychnine in 
causing the contraction of muscles with convulsive vio¬ 
lence. The Nettle, on account of its burning sting.

COLUMN XXXIX

97COLUMN XXXIX

97

6. The Oak is also, and more properly, attributed to 
Tiphereth because it was the sacred tree of the Druids, 
the representative in the vegetable kingdom of the Sun. 
Its strength is also taken as harmonious with that 
quality in man. Furthermore, the Acorn is peculiarly 
phallic, and this is properly to be attributed to 
Tiphereth because in this case the phallic symbol con¬ 
tains in itself the essence of the being to be reproduced. 
The Acacia is placed here as a symbol of resurrection 
as in the rituals of Free Masonry. The Bay and Laurel 
are sacred to Apollo, the Vine to Dionysus.

Gorse, the sacred flower of the A A /. was chosen 
as their heraldic emblem to be a symbol of the Great 
Work. Its appearance is that of the Sun in full blaze, 
and suggests the burning bush of Moses. Its branches 
are exceedingly firm, as should be the Will of the 
Adept, and they are covered with sharp spikes, which 
symbolize, on the one hand, the phallic energy of the 
Will and, on the other, the pains which are gladly 
endured by one who puts forth his hand to pluck this 
bloom of sunlight splendour. Note that the Great 
Work is here concentrated in Tiphereth, the attain¬ 
ment of the Grade corresponding to which is in fact 
the critical stage on the path of the Wise. The Ash is 
one of the most important of the solar trees; the wood 
is firm and elastic. The World-Ash represents the 
microcosm in legend. Yggdrasil is itself an Ash. 
Aswata, the World-Fig, should also be attributed here 
as the Tree itself in the microcosm.

7. The Rose has always been a special flower of Venus. 
The Laurel is included because a wreath of these leaves 
is a symbol of victory.7. The Rose has always been a special flower of Venus. 
The Laurel is included because a wreath of these leaves 
is a symbol of victory.

8. Moly is mentioned in Homer as having been given by 
Hermes to Ulysses to counteract the spells of Circe. 
It has a black root and white blossom, which again 
suggests the dual currents of energy. Anhalonium 
Lewinii has for one of its principal characteristics the 
power to produce very varied and brilliant colour 
visions.

98

COLUMN XXXIX

9, The Banyan is given here for the same reason as that 
in line 1. It is, so to speak, the foundation of a system 
of trees as Yesod is the foundation of the branches of 
the Tree of Life. The Mandrake is the typically 
phallic plant. It is peculiarly adapted to use in sexual 
magic, and it does have a direct connection with the 
automatic consciousness which has its seat in Yesod. 
Damiana is reputed a powerful aphrodisiac, and so are 
Ginseng and Yohimba.

10. The Willow is the traditional tree of the neglected 
maiden, Malkuth unredeemed. The Lily suggests that 
maiden’s purity, and the Ivy her clinging and flexible 
nature. All Cereals pertain to Malkuth, Wheat being 
the foundation of the Pentacle which represents 
Nephesch. The Pomegranate is sacred to Proserpine; 
in appearance also it is strongly suggestive of the 
feminine symbol.

The Elements

11. Aspen resembles Air, by its trembling.

23. The Lotus is the traditional plant of Water. Its roots 
are in water and its purity further suggests the action 
of water in lustration.

31. The Red Poppy is given in this place only on account 
of its colour, and the same is true of Hibiscus. All 
scarlet flowers might be equally well placed here. But 
the attribution is not very satisfactory, as the nature 
of flowers in themselves is not usually fiery except as 
their perfume is a stimulant.32-bis. The Oak is given on account of its stability, and 
the Ivy because of the analogy of Earth with Malkuth. 
All Cereals pertain here. Wheat, the typical cereal, 
being the foundation of the Pentacle.

31-bis. For Almond see line 1. It should be generally 
remarked with regard to the elemental attributions in 
this column that the seed should be taken as repre¬ 
senting Spirit with a slight admixture of Fire, the stem 
as Fire, the blossom as Water, the leaf as Air, and the

COLUMN XXXIX

99

fruit as Earth. Note that the fruit usually contains the 
seed of the new generation exactly as the Empresses 
are called the Thrones of Spirit.

The Planets

12. The attributions here given are traditional. The Palm 
is Mercurial, as being hermaphrodite. The Lime or 
Linden tree is Mercurial because of its pale yellow 
fruit with a peculiarly clean-tasting pulp.

13. These attributions are again traditional. The Hazel 
is suitable for the wand of the Black magician whose 
typical deity is the Moon just as that of the White 
magician is the Sun. The Pomegranate is also attri¬ 
buted here as a symbol with reference to menstruation. 
The Alder has a soft spongy wood which gives very 
little heat when burned. It haunts watery spots.

14. These are traditional also. The Fig is Venusian on 
account of its sexual symbolism. The Peach belongs 
to Venus on account of its soft beauty and sweetness, 
the external splendour of its bloom being easily 
brushed off, its tendency to rot and the prussic acid in 
its kernel. The Apple is traditionally appropriate to 
Venus on account of the legend of the Fall. There are 
however various traditions concerning the Tree of 
Knowledge of Good and Evil.21. The Hyssop is Jupiterian on account of its religious 
use in lustration. It might perhaps be more properly 
attributed to Chesed. The Oak is traditionally sacred 
to Jupiter, perhaps because it is the king of the trees 
as Jupiter is king of the gods. The Poplar is given on 
account of its soft and easily swollen wood and because 
of its great height. The Fig is Jupiterian because of its 
soft, swollen and, so to speak, sensual pulp; and also 
perhaps because of its rich purple colour, suggesting 
episcopal vestments. Arnica is attributed to Jupiter 
for its use in relieving pain. Cedar has a traditional 
value in religious work—its perfume is devotional

100

COLUMN XXXIX

according to the testimony of intuition, and it is sup¬ 
posed to preserve things in its neighbourhood from the 
attacks of moths, etc.

27. Absinthe and Rue—these attributions are traditional.

30. The three first attributions are obvious. The Nut is 
solar, as being a microcosm of Life, the fruit being 
also the seed. Galangal is specially sacred to the Sun; 
it is of the ginger family.

32. The Ash is given in connection with the phrase “ashen 
pale.” (The real nature of the tree is more properly 
solar.) In the other cases, in connection with the ideas 
of death, melancholy, poison, etc. The Elm is 
Saturnian on account of its murderous habit of 
dropping boughs without warning. The wood is also 
traditionally the best available for coffins.

The Zodiac

15. The Olive is sacred to Minerva, but Geranium has a 
scarlet variety which is precisely the colour of Aries 
in the King Scale. The Tiger Lily is a traditional 
attribution.

16. Again traditional. We might possibly add giant trees 
of all species to this sign.

17. Hybrids are here for the same reason as in the previous 
column. Orchids might perhaps better be attributed 
to Yesod or to Capricorn for obvious reasons; they 
are found here on account of their duplex 
characteristics.18. The Lotus is the typical flower of Water and the Moon.

19. The Snowdrop and Lily suggest the modest purity of 
the sign. Narcissus refers to the solitary tradition. 
Mistletoe is indicated by the macroscopic appearance 
of semen.

22. This attribution is traditional.

24. The Cactus has watery pulp and poisonous spikes. 
The Nettle is treacherously Martial. All treacherous 
and poisonous plants may be attributed to Scorpio.

25. The Rush is used for making arrows.

COLUMN XXXIX

101

26. Yohimba—see line 9. Thistle is hard, stubborn and 
spikey. Orchis Root is connected with the Cult of Pan. 
Indian Hemp is tough and fibrous, thus used for 
making ropes; but see the Column XLIII dealing with 
vegetable drugs for other properties of the plant.

23. Cocoanut; this attribution is doubtful. There may be 
some connection with Juno as giving milk or with the 
symbol of the Waterbearer, because the tree gives us 
fruit from the air.

29. Opium is given because of its power to produce a 
peaceful dreamy condition which is liable to end in a 
stagnation of the mental faculties. Unicellular 
Organisms are possibly attributed here because they 
are so frequently found in pools. The Mangrove is 
not merely a tree of the swamp, but actually produces 
swamps.

102

TABLE I

Column XL. PRECIOUS STONES

0. These attributions are somewhat bold. The Star 
Sapphire refers to Nuit and the Black Diamond to the 
idea of NOX—Zero. It is invisible yet contains light 
and structure in itself.

1. The Diamond is white brilliance; it is pure carbon, 
the foundation of all living structure. The atomic 
weight is 12, the number of Hua, the title of Kether 
(but this is a reference to the Zodiac which makes the 
connection with Zero, on the one hand, and 2, on the 
other).

2. The Star Ruby represents the male energy of the 
Creator Star. Turquoise suggests Mazloth, so also 
does the Star Sapphire, but this would be the sphere of 
Chokmah not its positive attribution.2. The Star Ruby represents the male energy of the 
Creator Star. Turquoise suggests Mazloth, so also 
does the Star Sapphire, but this would be the sphere of 
Chokmah not its positive attribution.

3. The Star Sapphire suggests the expanse of night with 
the Star appearing in the midst thereof. Note that this 
light is not in the stone itself but is due to the internal 
structure. The doctrine is that the stars are formed in 
the body of night by virtue of the form of that night 
by the impact of the energy of a higher plane. The 
Pearl is referred to Binah on account of its being the 
typical stone of the sea. It is formed by concentric 
spheres of hard brilliant substance, the centre being a 
particle of dust. Thus, that dust which is all that 
remains of the Exempt Adept after he has crossed the 
Abyss, is gradually surrounded by sphere after sphere 
of shining splendour, so that he becomes a fitting orna¬ 
ment for the bosom of the Great Mother.

4. Lapis Lazuli is of the blue violet of the highest form 
of Jupiter. The specks in it may perhaps be taken to 
represent those particles of dust referred to above. 
The Amethyst is the violet of Jupiter. It is the tradi¬ 
tional stone of episcopal rank. Its legendary virtue 
of protecting its bearer from intoxication indicates its 
value in lustration. It is the purity of the Exempt 
Adept which destroys for him the illusion or drunken¬ 
ness of existence, and therefore enables him to take

COLUMN XL

103

the great leap into the Abyss. The Sapphire pertains 
to Chesed because of the blue of water and of Venus 
(Daleth = 4) in the King Scale (Column XV) and of 
Jupiter in the Queen Scale (Column XVI).

5. The Ruby represents flaming energy.

6. The Topaz is of the gold of the Sun. It is also tradi¬ 
tionally associated with Tiphereth. The Yellow 
Diamond suggests the reflection of Kether into 
Tiphereth.

7. The Emerald is of the green of Venus in the King 
Scale.7. The Emerald is of the green of Venus in the King 
Scale.

8. The Opal has the varied colours attributed to Mercury.

9. Quartz refers to the foundation. Note that gold is 
found in Quartz, suggesting the concealed glory of the 
sexual process.

10. Rock Crystal reminds us of the aphorism: Kether is 
in Malkuth and Malkuth in Kether, but after another 
manner.

The Elements

11. Topaz is the pure transparent yellow of Air.

23. The Beryl is the pure transparent blue of Water.

31. The Fire Opal suggests the appearance of fire rising 
from the blackness of the matter which it consumes.

32-bis. Salt is traditionally sacred to Earth.

31-bis. The Black Diamond has the blackness of the 
Akasa: it is composed of carbon, the basis of the 
living elements.

The Planets

12. Opal, see line 8. Agate has the Mercurial yellow, but 
its hardness indicates a strange Saturnian element in 
it. It might indeed be attributed to Geburah for its 
orange tinge and its hardness, but it is not sufficiently 
pure to rank as a precious stone, and must therefore not 
be placed among the Sephiroth.

13. The Moonstone is a direct image of the Moon. Pearl 
and Crystal are given for the suggestion of purity (see 
lines 3 and 10).

104

COLUMN XL

14. Emerald is the colour of Venus in the King Scale 
(Column XV). Turquoise is the blue of Venus in the 
Queen Scale (Column XVI), but its tendency is to fade 
into green. When it does this its value is destroyed, 
and this reminds us of the external splendour and 
internal corruption of Nogah.

21. See line 4.

27. See line 5.

30. Chrysolith, as the name implies, is a golden stone.

32. This attribution is traditional: it is the dullness and 
frequent blackness of Onyx which occasions the 
reference.

The Zodiac

15. Ruby is the scarlet of Aries. It is also one of the 
hardest of precious stones.

16. Topaz refers to the letter Vau. Tiphereth—see line 6.

17. These stones are given here on account of their 
polarization of light.16. Topaz refers to the letter Vau. Tiphereth—see line 6.

17. These stones are given here on account of their 
polarization of light.

18. Amber is of the colour of Cancer in the King Scale: 
were it a precious stone, it might be attributed to 
Chokmah or Binah on account of its electrical pro¬ 
perties.

19. The Cat’s Eye suggests Leo directly.

20. The Peridot is of the colour of Virgo in the King Scale.

22. Emerald is of the colour of Libra in the King Scale.

24. Snakestone suggests Scorpio directly. Greenish Tur¬ 
quoise is attributed here as referring to its putrefaction.

25. Jacinth is Hyacinth, the beautiful boy accidentally 
killed by Apollo with a quoit, the attribution is there¬ 
fore somewhat far-fetched—from the blood of the boy 
to the traditional weapons of his lover.

26. For Black Diamond see line 0 and 32-bis. The 
reference is to the letter A’ain, the eye. The Black 
Diamond reminds us of the pupil of the eye, and this 
eye is the eye of the Most Holy Ancient One; Kether. 
Capricorn is the zenith of the Zodiac as Kether is of the 
Sephiroth.

COLUMN XL

105

28. Artificial Glass pertains to Aquarius, as being the work 
of man, the Kerub of Air. Chalcedony suggests the 
clouds by its appearance.

29. Pearl is referred to Pisces because of its cloudy 
brilliance as contrasted with the transparency of the 
other precious stones. It thus reminds us of the astral 
plane with its semi-opaque visions as opposed to those 
of pure light which pertain to purely spiritual spheres. 
One must not emphasize the connection with water; 
because the Pearl is not found in the type of water 
characteristic of Pisces.

106

TABLE I

Column XLI. MAGICAL WEAPONS

The full meaning of these weapons will be found in 
Book 4, Part II, and in Magick in Theory and Practice. 
Here we can only give brief reasons for their attributions.Column XLI. MAGICAL WEAPONS

The full meaning of these weapons will be found in 
Book 4, Part II, and in Magick in Theory and Practice. 
Here we can only give brief reasons for their attributions.

0. No magical weapons can be attributed here, for they 
are all positive. The reduction of the positive to Zero 
is the goal of magical work.

1. The Crown is the meaning of Kether. It refers to the 
Supreme Divinity which the magician assumes in his 
working. The Swastika symbolizes whirling energy, 
the initiation of all magical force—the Rashith-Ha- 
Gilgalim. There is a great deal of varied symbolism 
in this instrument, notably sexual; it demands a great 
deal of study to appreciate fully the virtue of this 
weapon. The Lamp is not a weapon; it is a light 
shining from above which illuminates the whole work.

2. The Lingam is the symbol of the Chiah, the creative 
energy. The Inner Robe symbolizes the true self of 
the magician, his “unconscious” as the psychoanalysts 
call Chiah. Their description, however, of its 
characteristic is totally incorrect. The Word is the 
intelligible expression of the Will of the creative energy 
of the Magus.

3. The Yoni represents Neschamah. The Outer Robe 
refers to the darkness of Binah. The A.*. A.'. Star 
refers to the aspiration. The Cup receives the influence 
from the Highest. It is the feminine symbol of Under¬ 
standing. It must be distinguished emphatically from 
the wand or hollow tube of Chokmah which transmits 
the influence in its positive form in an intelligible 
manner but without understanding its nature.

4. The Wand is the reflection of the Lingam as the 
paternal power of Chesed in the solidification of the 
male creative energy of Chokmah. The Sceptre is the 
weapon of authority referring to Jupiter (Gedulah— 
magnificence). The Crook is the weapon of Chesed— 
Mercy as opposed to the scourge of Geburah.

COLUMN XLI

107COLUMN XLI

107

5. The Scourge is the weapon of severity as opposed to 
the Crook. This is the explanation of these two 
weapons being crossed in the hands of the risen Osiris. 
The Sword is the weapon of Mars, so also is the Spear. 
These weapons emphasize the fiery energy in the crea¬ 
tive Lingam, The Chain represents the severity of the 
restrictions which must be placed on wandering 
thoughts: it might more properly be attributed to 
Daath. It does not really exist on the magician him¬ 
self. Its function is to bind that which is above all 
Not-He. It is thus the only weapon which does not 
possess a definite unity of form and which has multiple 
units in its composition.

6. The Lamen represents the symbolic form of the Human 
Will and Consciousness of the magician. The Rosy 
Cross is technically pertinent to Tiphereth.

7. The Lamp carried in the hand pertains to Netzach 
because Love must be enkindled by the magician. It 
throws light as required on particular objects. This 
Lamp must in no wise be confused with that of Kether. 
The Girdle is the traditional weapon of Venus. It 
represents the ornament of beauty. When it is untied 
it can be used to bind and blindfold the candidate. 
It thus represents the power of fascination by love.

8. The Names and Versicles are Mercurial. They expand 
the Logos, explain it in three-dimensional (that is, 
material) terms, just as the number 8 is a three-dimen¬ 
sional expansion of the number 2. The Apron conceals 
the Splendour (Hod) of the magician. It also explains 
that splendour by virtue of its symbolic design.9. The Perfumes pertain to Yesod as forming a link be¬ 
tween earth and heaven. This link is material by vir¬ 
tue of the substance of the incense, and spiritual by 
virtue of their action through the olfactory sense upon 
the consciousness. The Sandals enable the magician 
to “travel on the firmament of Nu.” The Sandal-strap 
is the Ankh which represents the mode of going, going 
being the essential faculty of every god. This strap, 
whose form is that of the Rosy Cross, forms a link

108

COLUMN XL!

between the material apparatus of his going and his 
feet; that is to say, the formula of the Rosy Cross 
enables a man to go—or, in other words, endows him 
with Godhead.

The Altar is the foundation of the operation. Its 
characteristic is stability; also it resembles Yesod as 
supporting the Ruach; that is to say, the means of the 
Formative World (Ruach = Yetzirah) through which 
it is proposed to work. The Altar and the sacrifice 
might also as well have been attributed to Tiphereth. 
This would, in fact, be actually better in the case of 
certain types of operation, such as invocations of the 
Holy Guardian Angel, for in this case the human heart 
is the foundation of the work.

10. The Circle and Triangle are the spheres of operation of 
the magician and his work which is in Malkuth, the 
kingdom, the Realm of Assiah. The Triangle being 
outside the Circle, is the place of the Spirit, but it 
belongs not to him for his realm is formlessness. The 
Triangle is the figure into which Choronzon must be 
evoked in order to confer form upon him.

The Elements

11. The Dagger, the characteristic elemental weapon of 
Air. The Fan—this symbolizes the power to direct the 
forces of Air.The Elements

11. The Dagger, the characteristic elemental weapon of 
Air. The Fan—this symbolizes the power to direct the 
forces of Air.

23. The Cross of Suffering refers to the now superseded 
formula of Osiris. See the original emblem of the 
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, a triangle sur¬ 
mounted by a Cross. The Cup is the traditional ele¬ 
mental weapon of Water. The Wine fills the Cup—it is 
the divine ecstasy entering the receptive part of the 
nature of the magician. The Water of Lustration in 
the Cup of the Stolistes balances the Fire in the thurible 
of the Dadouchos.

31. The Wand is the elemental weapon of Fire. It is not 
to be confused with the Wand of Chokmah or Chesed 
any more than the Cup of Water is to be mistaken for

COLUMN XLI

109

that of Binah. The Elemental weapons are but vice¬ 
regents of the true weapons of the Sephiroth. The 
thurible or lamp is borne by the Dadouchos to conse¬ 
crate the candidate with fire. The Pyramid of Fire is 
an altogether minor weapon and is only used in certain 
ceremonies of uncommon type.

32-bis. The Pantacle is the elemental weapon of Earth. 
The platter of bread and salt, or sometimes salt alone, 
is its equivalent, but is used actively to administer to 
the candidate sometimes to seal his obligation, some¬ 
times to nourish him spiritually. Bread and Salt are the 
two principal substances traditionally sacred to Earth.

31-bis. The Winged Egg is symbolical of the spiritualized 
phallic energy. The Egg is Akasa, the source of all 
creation. There are many equivalent symbols.

The Planets31-bis. The Winged Egg is symbolical of the spiritualized 
phallic energy. The Egg is Akasa, the source of all 
creation. There are many equivalent symbols.

The Planets

12. The Wand is that of the Will or Word, the Logos. The 
Caduceus is the legendary wand of Mercury, and to be 
carefully distinguished from the hollow tube of Chok- 
mah. It represents the Middle Pillar crowned by the 
Winged Globe of Kether. It is thus the plumed phallus 
as distinguished from the Phoenix-crowned phallus of 
animal-life creation through the initiation of Fire (see 
line 9), and the flowering phallus of the Lotus-crowned 
Wand of Isis, the wand of vegetable-life creation 
through the initiation of Water (see line 20). The 
Serpents of the Caduceus, the positive and negative 
forms of energy, resume the powers of these two wands.

13. The Bow and Arrow are traditionally the weapons of 
Artemis and Apollo (see line 30).

14. See line 7.

21. See line 4. The Sceptre is not a true weapon. It is the 
symbol of authority, an ornamental reminder of the 
wand which is kept in the background. The Sceptre 
must not be used to strike, it would break: as soon as 
its virtue is challenged, it must be instantly discarded 
for the thunderbolt.

110

COLUMN XLI110

COLUMN XLI

27. This Sword is not to be confused with the Dagger of 
Air. It represents the active and militant energy of the 
magician. Its true form is the flaming sword, the 
lightning flash, which strikes down from Kether 
through the Sephiroth as a zig-zag flash. It destroys by 
dividing the unity of that against which its energies are 
directed. It is ultimately an error to identify the sword 
with the wand as a phallic symbol though this is often 
done. In the Lesser Mysteries of “John” the sword 
and disk represent the Wand and Cup of the Greater 
Mysteries of “Jesus.” In the former, John the Baptist’s 
head is removed by sword (air) and presented on a 
charger, the platter or dish of earth. In the latter, the 
heart of Jesus is pierced by the Spear, the Wand of 
Fire, and the blood collected in the Cup or Graal 
(water). But the Sword and Disk are not sufficiently 
sacred to be truly phallic. This is one of the subtle 
distinctions which afford the key to the finest spiritual 
comprehension.

30. The Lamen is solar, as representing the light of the 
human consciousness—in the Heart (Tiphereth)—of 
the magician to the spirit evoked. It is his statement 
to the spirit of his intention towards it, of the formula 
which he intends to employ; it must in no wise be 
confused with the Pantacle, which is passive as the 
Lamen is active. The one represents the condition of 
things in general, the other his method of dealing with 
that condition. Bow and Arrow—see line 13.

32. The Sickle is the traditional weapon of Saturn. It 
implies the power of time to reap the harvest of man’s 
life and work. It may be used in actual ceremony to 
threaten the spirit that Choronzon will cut short his 
independent existence, that Choronzon will reap his 
Karma, and add it to the treasure of Choronzon’s 
storehouse.

The Zodiac

15. The Horns are those of the Ram: they signify the

COLUMN XLI

111The Zodiac

15. The Horns are those of the Ram: they signify the

COLUMN XLI

111

power of thought, the energy of Minerva. The Burin 
is used for engraving the Lamen, Pantacles, etc. Being 
a Knife, its character is martial, but also it pertains 
especially to Aries because it is used to indicate the 
creative ideas of the magician.

16. The Throne refers to Vau: the Heart must support and 
admit the lordship of the higher consciousness of the 
magician. The Altar may also be attributed to Taurus 
on account of its solidity and its function of bearing the 
higher elements of the magician. There is a mystery 
of Europa and Pasiphae connected with this attri¬ 
bution.

17. The Tripod would appear at first sight to be Lunar; 
but this is wrong. The real connection is with ATU 
VI, the “Oracle of the Mighty Gods.”

18. The Furnace is connected with the energy of the Sun 
in Cancer. The Cup is the Holy Graal.

19. The Phoenix Wand—see line 12.

20. The Lamp and Wand appear in ATU IX as the wea¬ 
pons of the Hermit. This Wand is concealed: it is the 
virile energy reserved. This Lamp has the same 
significance and is not to be confused with other lamps. 
The Bread is the natural product, the fertile earth; it 
conveys sacramentally, “every word that cometh out 
of the mouth of God.” The Lotus Wand—see line 12.

22. The Cross of Equilibrium is implied or expressed in 
every part of the arrangements of the Temple. The 
Balances, or Witnesses, as shown in ATU XI, are in 
actual practice concealed v/ith the Sword. They repre¬ 
sent the complete phallus, the secret weapon, which 
alone can satisfy; that is, do justice to Nature.

24. The Oath is the formula of transmutation. The Ser¬ 
pent is connected with several of the magical weapons, 
and implies the secret kingly power of the magician, the 
essence of the phallic energy as employed in transmu¬ 
tation.25. The Arrow is sacred to the rainbow symbolism. It 
represents especially the spiritualization of the magical 
energy, being a missile sped through the air, no longer

112

COLUMN XLI

connected physically with the material form of the 
magician.

26. Compare line 20.

28. The Censer carries the perfumes as the clouds carry 
the distillation of the water of earth. The Aspergillus 
similarly sprinkles the lustral waters as the clouds shed 
rain.

29. Magical operations are usually performed in an 
artificial twilight; this represents the glamour of the 
astral plane which the magician proposes to illumine 
with the divine light. The natural attribution of this 
idea is evidently ATU XVIII. The Magic Mirror 
reflects astral forms. It is evidently cognate with the 
still waters of Pisces, and the entire symbolism is again 
obviously that of ATU XVIII.

TABLE I

113

Column XLII. PERFUMES

These attributions are founded for the most part upon 
tradition. Some of them are connected with legend, others 
are derived from clairvoyant observation. The rational 
basis of attribution is, therefore, less apparent in this 
column than in those of the Gods, Magical Weapons, etc.

0. No attribution can be made here, 0 being the goal of a 
magical operation by love under will, and any perfume 
will be an expansion of that love under will itself.

1. Ambergris has comparatively little perfume of its own, 
but it has a virtue of bringing out the best of any others 
with which it may be mixed. In the same way, Kether 
cannot be said to have any intrinsic qualities, but its 
influence brings out the highest faculties of those ideas 
which it illuminates.

2. The orchitic origin of Musk indicates Chokmah. This 
is the male aspect of the Work.

3. Civet, “the uncleanly flux of a cat,” corresponds to 
Musk as Binah to Chokmah, its origin being feminine. 
Myrrh is traditionally the odour of sorrow and bitter¬ 
ness; it is the dark and passive side of Binah.“Brothers, I have brought him myrrh.

Sorrow black and sinister 
Shall his name bring to the race.”

“My incense is of resinous woods and gums; 
and there is no blood therein: because of my hair 
the trees of Eternity.”

4. See Column XXXIX.

5. Tobacco. This attribution is due to Fr, D, D. S. (who 
was a chemist). It seems to me not altogether satis¬ 
factory. The idea is presumably that it is the favourite 
perfume for men engaged in severe hard work.

6. The correctness of this should be intuitively perceived 
at once by every magician. Olibanum possesses a 
comprehensive catholic quality such as no other incense 
can boast.

7. The sensuous seductiveness of Benzoin is unmistak¬ 
able. Contrast with line 24. Rose naturally suggests

114

COLUMN XLII

the more physical aspects of the feminine symbol. 
Civet, however, is much more strongly sexual than 
Rose, but this implies a more intense element of 
spirituality. The student must eliminate completely 
from his mind any idea that sex is naturally gross. On 
the contrary, even the lowest manifestations of it in its 
pure form are less material than such ideas as are 
represented by Rose. Demonic, not material, develop¬ 
ments follow the degradation of the instinct. Red 
Sandal is Venusian, intuitively by its smell, and sen¬ 
sibly by its colour. The attribution is further guaran¬ 
teed by the usefulness of its oil as a specific of 
gonorrhoea.

8. Storax is chiefly Mercurial on account of its nonde¬ 
script nature. It is really less valuable as a perfume 
itself than as a menstruum for other perfumes, in the 
same way as Mercury is the basis of amalgams. But 
Storax is really too dark and heavy to be a really 
adequate perfume for Hod.9. Jasmin is traditionally sacred, especially in Persia, to 
the spiritual use of the generative process. Ginseng— 
see Column XXXIX. Roots are sacred to Yesod 
because Yesod is the Root of the Tree of Life exactly 
as the reproductive function is the root of the life of 
man. It is important not to suppose that Malkuth, 
Nephesch, is the root of reality. Malkuth is a pendant 
to the Tree, a sensory illusion which enables it to per¬ 
ceive itself.

10. Dittany of Crete was said by Blavatsky to be the most 
powerful of all magical perfumes. This is true in a 
limited sense. Its smoke is the best basis for material 
magical manifestations of all those menstrua which are 
not animal. It is quite as catholic as Olibanum in 
character but has no positive element in its composi¬ 
tion. Further, its velvet softness and its silvery bloom 
remind one of Betulah. There are many allusions in 
classical traditions to Dittany, which all point to the 
same attribution.

COLUMN XLII

115

The Elements

11. Galbanum represents the element of Air in that exceed¬ 
ingly powerful incense of Tetragrammaton whose in¬ 
vention is ascribed to Moses,

23. Onycha represents Water in the incense of Moses, 
It is now very difficult to obtain, though at one time I 
possessed a supply. Its origin is somehow connected 
with certain shellfish. Myrrh—see line 3.

31. Olibanum is the fiery elemental incense of Moses. 
32-bis. Storax is the earthy elemental incense of Moses.

31-bis. No attribution can be made here. See line 1.

The Planets31. Olibanum is the fiery elemental incense of Moses. 
32-bis. Storax is the earthy elemental incense of Moses.

31-bis. No attribution can be made here. See line 1.

The Planets

At one time or another mediaeval writers on magic have 
attributed every possible incense to every possible planet. 
Tradition, therefore, gives little to us in this investigation, 
while the sense of smell varies enormously. One may 
almost say it is impossible for any two people to agree 
about any given perfume, and when they occur in combina¬ 
tion, the diversity of opinion is even more striking. The 
spiritual bearing of the perception is naturally yet more 
illusive and indeterminate. The attributions given in this 
column may be considered perfectly reliable, being based 
as far as possible upon considerations of essential virtue, 
independent of sensation. Nevertheless, it is incumbent 
upon the student to undertake experimental investigations 
in every case. A proper comprehension of the virtues of 
perfumes is of the utmost importance to the work of the 
Adeptus Major, for they constitute the most vital link 
between the material and astral planes, and it is precisely 
this link which the Adeptus Major most intimately needs.

The method of burning the perfumes is of much greater 
importance than is generally understood. Except for 
material workings, the gross body of the incense should 
not be carbonized. The heat applied should be only that 
sufficient to drive off the essential aromatic substance. In 
many cases it is best to evaporate the essential oil 
previously extracted secundum artem.

116

COLUMN XLII

The thurible should be of the (properly consecrated) 
metal appropriate to the incense; mixed perfumes should be 
burned on silver or gold, preferably gold. Failure to 
obtain the utmost possible perfection in any of these points 
is often sufficient to vitiate the most elaborate ceremony.12. Mastic is pale yellow, and its perfume is singularly 
clean and free from any prejudice (to use a somewhat 
strange term) either for or against any particular moral 
idea. Its action on other perfumes is usually to 
intensify them and quicken their rate of vibration. 
White Sandal is free from the sensuousness of its Red 
twin. Note that the sympathy of Mercury and Venus 
is very strong, but it resembles that of the epicene 
adolescent, the Amazon maiden or the languishing boy, 
as opposed to the definitely sexualized youth in the 
romantic period of rose-coloured spectacles. Nutmeg 
is probably attributed to Mercury on account of its 
yellowish tinge. White Mace, the husk which covers 
it, is Mercurial. Red Mace is probably solar. Storax 
—see line 8. Fugitive odours are Mercurial for the 
obvious reasons.

13. The attribution of Menstrual Fluid to Luna depends 
not only on the periodicity, but on the fact that Luna 
is herself the symbolical vehicle of the solar light. 
Camphor—the white waxen appearance suggests Luna, 
so also the perfume is peculiarly cleanly. It is sup¬ 
posed by some to be useful as a disinfectant. It is in 
fact useful against moths. This is sympathetic with the 
idea of lustration. The Mexican Aloes furnishes an 
alcoholic drink. Pulque, whose cloudy whiteness sug¬ 
gests Luna. Lignum Aloes is a wood in powder, 
whose physical appearance at once suggests purity of 
aspiration to the sensitive observer. The connection 
is therefore directly with the Path of Gimel—see line 
25.

Virginal odours obviously suggest the Virgin Moon. 
Sweet odours are also lunar, because the moon repre¬ 
sents the physical senses and refers to the common 
people. Similarly sugar and sweet things generally are

COLUMN XLII

117COLUMN XLII

117

much liked by children (who are classed under Luna) 
and by that vast herd of mankind, and especially those 
women whose sense of taste is not sufficiently refined 
to appreciate real delicateness. Sweetness masks all 
finer qualities unless they be peculiarly violent: hence 
the use of sugar, chloroform water and similar com¬ 
pounds to conceal the unpleasant taste of certain 
medicines.

14. Sandalwood—see line 7. Myrtle, the traditional plant 
of Venus. Softness and voluptuousness are two of the 
principal qualities of Venus.

21. Saffron has brilliant purple filaments. An orange dye 
is prepared from it which indicates the solar nature. 
But this is sympathetic to Jupiter, and in any case 
refers to a watery element in its nature, whereas this 
column deals with the airy constituents of the substance 
described. The perfume of Saffron is intuitively per¬ 
ceived as generous, rich, and suggesting the sensuous 
enjoyment of devotion.

27. Pepper is evidently Martial owing to its fiery quality 
and its specific action on the mucous membrane of the 
nostrils. Dragon’s Blood gives off a dark red smoke, 
is angry looking, unpleasant to smell, and intuitively 
perceived as smouldering irritability. Heat and 
pungency are two principal qualities of Mars.

30. Olibanum—see line 6. Cinnamon—the appearance is 
decidedly solar; any martial element therein is not con¬ 
firmed by the perfume, which resembles that of a hot 
summer day, in the opinion of many sensitives. It is 
also solar on account of its cordial and carminative 
properties. “Glorious” is the prime epithet of the 
external character of Sol. By “glorious odours” are 
meant those which arouse in the percipient sensations 
of enjoyment of well-being, with possibly the influx of 
a certain quality of pride.32. There is little difficulty in recognizing Saturnian per¬ 
fumes; the difficulty in practice is to find one which is 
at all tolerable to the sense of smell. In magical work 
of the kind which borders upon the material plane.

COLUMN XLII

118

large quantities of incense are necessary and incanta¬ 
tion becomes difficult when the magician is being 
rapidly asphyxiated. The Adeptus Major can indeed 
cut himself off magically from such inconveniences but 
it is otherwise for the beginner. This is one more of 
the many reasons which have caused teachers to warn 
their pupils against attempting to work on the plane of 
Saturn until they are far advanced. Yet this caution 
exposes the disciple to an even worse danger than that 
of being choked, which is to formulate an incomplete 
and unbalanced universe.

Assafoetida—pure samples are not intolerably 
unpleasant. Scammony is repulsive, principally 
because of its suggestion of domestic cookery. Indigo 
furnishes a smoke of the characteristic dark blue of 
Saturn; the smoke is composed of very solid particles; 
and this perfume is accordingly both wholly in keeping 
with the nature of the Planet and pre-eminently suitable 
for material workings. Sulphur. This is the most 
difficult incense with which to work. It is liable to 
provoke fits of coughing, and may even be dangerous, 
but it is certainly the most useful in conjuration of the 
infernal powers. (By “Evil” is meant principally that 
quality which threatens the magician with failure and, 
philosophically speaking, this quality is pre-eminently 
the category of Time, which is Saturn.)

The Zodiac

15. See line 27.

16. It may be doubted whether the indifference of Storax, 
referred to in line 8, is really Mercurial: it might 
almost equally well be the neutrality of dullness, the 
characteristic of the passive laborious earth. The per¬ 
fume of Storax suggests the patience of cattle, and even 
physically the peculiar sweetish scent of a cowshed.17. Wormwood probably pertains to Gemini on account of 
the intellectual stimulation which it affords in such a 
magical preparation as Absinthe.

COLUMN XLII

119

18. See line 23.

19. Olibanum, combining the ideas of fire and Sol, is pre¬ 
eminently suited to Leo, the Kerub of Fire, the house 
of the Sun.

20. See Column XXXIX.

22. See line 11. Galbanum has a peculiar scent which 
intuitively suggests danger or even evil. There is a 
hint of hidden treachery, which is nevertheless seduc¬ 
tive. This refers to the exaltation of Saturn in Libra, 
the house of Venus, which refers to the impregnation 
of the idea of Love by that of Death. It recalls the 
rape of Persephone by Hades; or, more appropriately 
still, that tragic element in love which has formed a 
theme of all great poets, from Aeschylus and Homer 
to Shakespeare and Goethe.

24. Siamese Benzoin is to be distinguished from that found 
in other countries. It has a peculiar odour strongly 
suggestive of the treachery of the snake. It is the hid¬ 
den poison not unlike that of Galbanum. The 
voluptuousness of the perfume is of that type of de¬ 
bauchery whose fascination is directly connected with 
the knowledge of its fatal issue. Opoponax refers even 
more directly to Scorpio than does Siamese Benzoin. 
There is in it even less of the sensuousness of pleasure; 
there is an overpowering richness of the deliciously 
abominable.

25. See line 13. The perfume of Lignum Aloes intui¬ 
tively suggests horsemanship in an airy racecourse, as 
distinguished from charioteering, as if one’s racecourse 
were a rainbow. One experiences the intense amazon 
purity of Atalanta. One’s aspiration becomes winged. 
It is therefore to Sagittarius, not as the house of Jupiter, 
but as the path leading from Yesod to Tiphereth, that 
this perfume applies.26. Musk and Civet are referred here on account of their 
sexual origin, and of their effect upon the aura of the 
magician. The regular Saturnian perfumes would only 
be employed in malefic work and in other of the baser 
aspects of Capricorn.

120

COLUMN XLII

28. See lines 11 and 22. This attribution is not very satis¬ 
factory. There is more in Galbanum than the 
Saturnian and airy elements. Galbanum is too 
exciting to be a truly Aquarian perfume; it is too 
demonic, it lacks the element of humanity. In the 
humanitarianism of Aquarius there is no magician to 
understand that “love is the law, love under will.” It 
is the smug aloofness of the philanthropist. Certain 
schools of late years have written very enthusiastically 
of Aquarius, but their attitude may seem to adherents 
of the true Rosicrucian doctrine as somewhat hypo¬ 
critical and Pharisaical. This is to be explained by 
the fact that in Aquarius the Sun is in his detriment. 
People who wish to reform the world (on a pattern of 
theoretical excellence totally unconnected with human 
nature) are at the very antipodes of solar life and light. 
They fear vitality.29. See line 13. This Luna of ATU XVIII is to be con¬ 
trasted strongly with that of ATU II. The path of 
Gimel leads from Tiphereth to Kether: it is the 
unswerving virginal aspiration of the human heart to 
its divine Lord. The postulant at the gate of the Holy 
of Holies puts off his pride of manhood and offers him¬ 
self passively as a bride of his sublime Master. His 
starting point is the perfection of his human self, and 
his goal the unity of Absolute Truth, above all quantity 
or quality. On the contrary, the path of Qoph leads 
from Malkuth to Netzach. It is the fluctuating craving 
of the animal soul for the sensuous gratifications of 
illusory victory. By the treacherous light of the 
waning Moon, the wanderer stumbles through the 
swamps upon the edge of the black pool of the Abyss, 
along the winding path beset by the hell-hounds, up 
barren slopes to where two “squat turrets, blind as the 
fool’s heart,” guard a pass leading he knows not where. 
His starting point is the illusion of matter, his goal the 
sphere of external splendour and internal corruption. 
The path leads away from the middle pillar, to the 
anarchy of the unbalanced astral wilderness. It is the

COLUMN XLII

121

essence of error. He should rather trust himself to 
the Bark of the Midnight Sun, the Winged Beetle, to 
bear him to the Dawn. He should rather follow the 
path of Tau, passing through the balanced Elements of 
the astral plane, despite their darkness and their terror.The Menstrual Fluid is, however, the medium for 
the one as for the other. But on the path of Qoph 
there is no creative energy to fertilize the ova, no light 
to purify and vitalize their possibilities. The path of 
Qoph is that of witchcraft. The Great Work is not 
accomplished. The Postulant is not the ecstatic bride 
who knows that she will be endowed from on high with 
the great grace of motherhood, but the hag who 
clutches at the false gratifications of hysteria. Instead 
of the human consciousness being thrilled directly by 
the pure light of its One Lord, the animal sensorium is 
agitated by the confused jabberings of those demons 
who personate great souls, human or divine. It is the 
difference between the Knowledge and Conversation 
of the Holy Guardian Angel and the hideous intimacy 
with the debris of decaying minds, momentarily gal¬ 
vanized into manifestation by imbecile or malignant 
entities.

122

TABLE I

Column XLIII. VEGETABLE DRUGS

1. Elixir Vitae—the attribution to Kether is due to its 
omniform virtue.

2. Cocain pertains to Chokmah by its direct action on 
the deepest nervous centres.

3. Soma is said to give understanding and was sacred to 
the highest form of the Moon. Belladonna is here 
because of its virtue to dilate the pupil, thus producing 
a Black Sea; but this attribution seems a little fan¬ 
tastic.

4. Opium—its virtue is to relieve pain and to confer 
philosophic calm,

5. Nux Vomica, Nettle, and Cocain are given here for 
their power of excitation in one way or another. The 
attribution of the last named is doubtful as its 
apparently stimulating action is really due to its func¬ 
tion as a local anaesthetic. Atropine is given here on 
account of its power to balance the influence of 
Morphia.

6. These drugs are all direct cardiac stimulants. Alcohol 
in particular pertains to Bacchus. Further, it is an 
omniform menstruum for the Astral Light.6. These drugs are all direct cardiac stimulants. Alcohol 
in particular pertains to Bacchus. Further, it is an 
omniform menstruum for the Astral Light.

7-8. Cannabis Indica and Anhalonium Lewinii appear to 
act on both these Sephiroth. Their action is very 
similar. They produce in one mood voluptuous visions 
which pertain to Venus, and in another confer the 
power of self-analysis, which is Mercurial.

9. This attribution refers to its alleged aphrodisiac 
action.

10. Corn is the typical stimulant of the Nephesch as such.

TABLE I

123

Column XLV. MAGICAL POWERS

The attributions in this column explain themselves: 
they are direct representations in spiritual or magical 
experience of the natures of the various components of the 
Key Scale.

Add: 0. Vision of No Difference.

2. Vision of Antinomies.

3. Vision of Wonder.

6. Beatific Vision.

25. Vision of Universal Peacock.

32. Travels on the Astral Plane.

Columns LVI-LXVIII, LXXVII-LXXXVI, XCVII 
These attributions are all traditional.

124

TABLE VI

Columns CLXXX and CLXXXI. THE ATUS OF 
THOTH32. Travels on the Astral Plane.

Columns LVI-LXVIII, LXXVII-LXXXVI, XCVII 
These attributions are all traditional.

124

TABLE VI

Columns CLXXX and CLXXXI. THE ATUS OF 
THOTH

Editorial Note.—The fifty-seventh verse of the first 
chapter of The Book of the Law reads: “All the letters of 
my Book are aright, but Tzaddi is not the Star. This also 
is a secret: my prophet shall reveal it to the wise.” As a 
result Crowley decided to transpose Atus IV and XVII, 
making Tzaddi the Emperor and He the Star, a reversal of 
the traditional attributions. In an unpublished Com¬ 
mentary on the Book of the Law, he wrote in 1924: 
“Tzaddi is the letter of the Emperor, the Trump IV, and 
H 6 is the Star, the Trump XVII, Aquarius and Aries are 
therefore counter-changed, revolving on the pivot of Pisces, 
just as the Trumps VIII and XI, Leo and Libra, do about 
Virgo. This last revelation makes the Tarot attributions 
sublimely, perfectly, flawlessly symmetrical. The fact of 
its being so is a most convincing proof of the Superhuman 
Wisdom of the author of the Book to those who have 
laboured years, in vain, to elucidate the problems of the 
Tarot.”

Incidentally, but unknown to Crowley in 1904 when the 
Book of the Law was dictated to him, if the signs of the 
Zodiac are placed on the diagram known as the Moebius 
Ribbon, He and Tzaddi, or the Emperor and the Star, 
change places in fact at the twist in that ribbon.

In his published work Crowley did not transpose He 
and Tzaddi until his edition of The Book of Thoth in 1944. 
The change, therefore, only occurs once in 111 Revised, 
namely in The Vital Triads on p. 41, which are taken from 
The Book of Thoth. Those who accept The Book of the 
Law should therefore alter 15 to 28 and 28 to 15 in the 
Key Scale throughout this book. Their tables will then 
agree with those published in the Book of Thoth, but will 
disagree with the same tables in Magick in Theory and 
Practice .

APPENDIX A 
WHAT IS QABALAH ?

Qabalah is: —APPENDIX A 
WHAT IS QABALAH ?

Qabalah is: —

{a) A language fitted to describe certain classes of 
phenomena, and to express certain classes of ideas which 
escape regular phraseology. You might as well object to 
the technical terminology of chemistry.

(b) An unsectarian and elastic terminology by means of 
which it is possible to equate the mental processes of 
people apparently diverse owing to the constraint imposed 
upon them by the peculiarities of their literary expression. 
You might as well object to a lexicon, or a treatise on 
comparative religion.

(c) A system of symbolism which enables thinkers to 
formulate their ideas with complete precision, and to find 
simple expression for complex thoughts, especially such 
as include previously disconnected orders of conception. 
You might as well object to algebraic symbols.

(d) An instrument for interpreting symbols whose 
meaning has become obscure, forgotten or misunderstood 
by establishing a necessary connection between the essence 
of forms, sounds, simple ideas (such as number) and their 
spiritual, moral, or intellectual equivalents. You might as 
well object to interpreting ancient art by consideration of 
beauty as determined by physiological facts.

(e) A system of classification of omniform ideas so 
as to enable the mind to increase its vocabulary of thoughts 
and facts through organizing and correlating them. You 
might as well object to the mnemonic value of Arabic 
modifications of roots.

(/) An instrument for proceeding from the known to the 
unknown on similar principles to those of mathematics, 
You might as well object to the use of sf -1, x 4 , etc,

125

126

APPENDIX A

(g) A system of criteria by which the truth of correspon¬ 
dences may be tested with a view to criticizing new dis¬ 
coveries in the light of their coherence with the whole body 
of truth. You might as well object to judging character 
and status by educational and social convention.

APPENDIX BAPPENDIX B

WHAT IS A “NUMBER”? OR A “SYMBOL”?

The Book of the Law* I, 4, defines the word “number.” 
It may clarify the subject if we venture to paraphrase the 
text. The statement “Every number is infinite” is, on the 
face of it, a contradiction in terms. But that is only because 
of the accepted idea of a number as not being a thing in 
itself, but merely a term in a series homologous in 
character. All orthodox mathematical argument is based 
on definitions involving this conception. For example, ;t 
is fundamental to admit the identity of 2 plus 1 with 1 plus 
2. The Book of the Law presents an altogether different 
conception of the nature of number.

Mathematical ideas involve what is called a continuum, 
which is, superficially at least, of a different character to 
the physical continuum. For instance, in the physical con¬ 
tinuum, the eye can distinguish between the length of a 
one-inch stick and a two-inch stick, but not between those 
which measure respectively one thousand miles and one 
thousand miles and one inch, though the difference in each 
case is equally an inch. The inch difference is either per¬ 
ceptible or not perceptible, according to the conditions. 
Similarly, the eye can distinguish either the one-inch stick 
or the two-inch stick from one of one inch and a half. But 
we cannot continue this process indefinitely—we can 
always reach a point where the extremes are distinguishable 
from each other, but their mean from neither of the ex¬ 
tremes. Thus, in the physical continuum, if we have three 
terms: A, B, and C, A appears equal to B, and B to C, 
yet C appears greater than A. Our reason tells us that this 
conclusion is an absurdity, that we have been deceived by 
the grossness of our perceptions. It is useless for us to

* Published in The Equinox of the Gods and also in booklet 
form.

127

128

APPENDIX B* Published in The Equinox of the Gods and also in booklet 
form.

127

128

APPENDIX B

invent instruments which increase the accuracy of our 
observations, for though they enable us to distinguish 
between the three terms of our series, and so restore the 
theoretical Hierarchy, we can always continue the process 
of division until we arrive at another series: A 1 , B 1 , C 1 , 
where A 1 and C 1 are distinguishable from each other, but 
where neither is distinguishable from B 1 .

On the above grounds, modern thinkers have 
endeavoured to create a distinction between the mathe¬ 
matical and the physical continua; yet it should surely be 
obvious that the defect in our organs of sense, which is 
responsible for the difficulty, shows that our method of 
observation debars us from appreciating the true nature of 
things by this method of observation.

However, in the case of the mathematical continuum, 
its character is such that we can continue indefinitely the 
process of division between any two mathematical expres¬ 
sions soever, without interfering in any way with the 
regularity of the process, or creating a condition in which 
two terms become indistinguishable from each other. The 
mathematical continuum, moreover, is not merely a 
question of series of integral numbers, but of other types 
of numbers, which like integers, express relation between 
existing ideas, yet are not measurable in terms of that 
series. Such numbers are themselves parts of a continuum 
of their own, which interpenetrates the series of integers 
without touching it, at least necessarily.

For example; the tangents of angles made by the separa¬ 
tion of two lines from coincidence to perpendicularity, 
increase constantly from zero to infinity. But the only 
integral value is found at the angle of 45°, where it is unity.It may be said that there is an infinite number of such 
series, each possessing the same property of infinite 
divisibility. The ninety tangents of angles differing by one 
degree between zero and ninety may be multiplied sixty¬ 
fold by taking the minute instead of the degree as the 
coefficient of the progression, and these again sixty-fold by 
introducing the second to divide the minute. So on ad 
infinitum.

APPENDIX B

129

All these considerations depend upon the assumption 
that every number is no more than a statement of relation. 
The new conception, indicated by the Book of the Law, is 
of course in no way contradictory of the orthodox view; 
but it adds to it in the most practically important manner. 
A statistician computing the birth-rate of the last centuries 
makes no special mention of the birth of Napoleon. This 
does not invalidate his results; but it demonstrates how 
exceedingly limited is their scope even with regard to their 
object, for the birth of Napoleon had more influence on 
the death-rate (and so of the birth-rate) than any other 
phenomenon included in his calculations.

A short digression is necessary. There may be some 
who are still unaware of the fact, but the mathematical and 
physical sciences are in no sense concerned with absolute 
truth, only with the relations between observed phenomena 
and the observer. The statement that the acceleration of 
falling bodies is thirty-two feet per second, is only the 
roughest of approximations at the best. In the first place 
it applies to earth. As most people know, in the Moon the 
rate is only one-sixth as great. But, even on earth, it differs 
in a marked manner between the poles and the equator, 
and not only so, but it is affected by so small a matter as 
the neighbourhood of a mountain.It is similarly inaccurate to speak of “repeating” an 
experiment. The exact conditions never recur. One can¬ 
not boil water twice over. The water is not the same, and 
the observer is not the same. When a man says that he is 
sitting still, he forgets that he is whirling through space 
with vertiginous rapidity.

It is possibly such considerations that led earlier 
thinkers to admit that there was no expectation of finding 
truth in anything but mathematics, and they rashly sup¬ 
posed that the apparent ineluctability of her laws con¬ 
stituted a guarantee of their coherence with truth. But 
mathematics is entirely a matter of convention, no less 
so than the rules of Chess or Baccarat. When we say that 
“two straight lines cannot enclose a space,” we mean no

130

APPENDIX B

more than that we are unable to think of them as doing so. 
The truth of the statement depends, consequently, on that 
of the hypothesis that our minds bear witness to truth. Yet 
the insane man may be unable to think that he is not the 
victim of mysterious persecution. We find that no reason 
for believing him. It is useless to reply that mathematical 
truths receive universal consent, because they do not. It 
is a matter of elaborate and tedious training to persuade 
even the few people whom we teach of the simplest 
theorems in Geometry. There are very few people living 
who are convinced—or even aware—of the more recondite 
results of analysis. It is no reply to this criticism to say 
that all men can be convinced if they are sufficiently 
trained, for who is to guarantee that such training does not 
warp the mind?But when we have brushed away these preliminary 
objections, we find that the nature of the statement itself 
is not, and cannot be, more than a statement of corres¬ 
pondences between our ideas. In the example chosen, we 
have five ideas: those of duality, of straightness, of a line, 
of enclosing, and of space. None of these are more than 
ideas. Each one is meaningless until it is defined as corre¬ 
sponding in a certain manner to certain other ideas. We 
cannot define any word soever, except by identifying it 
with two or more equally undefined words. To define it 
by a single word would evidently constitute tautology.

We are thus forced to the conclusion that all investiga¬ 
tion may be stigmatized as obscurum per obscurius. 
Logically, our position is even worse. We define A as BC, 
where B is DE, and C is FG. Not only does the process 
increase the number of our unknown quantities in Geo¬ 
metrical progression at every step, but we must ultimately 
arrive at a point where the definition of Z involves the term 
A. Not only is all argument confined within a vicious 
circle, but so is the definition of the terms on which any 
argument must be based.

It might be supposed that the above chain of reasoning 
made all conclusions impossible. But this is only true

APPENDIX B

131

when we investigate the ultimate validity of our proposi¬ 
tions. We can rely on water boiling at 100° Centigrade,* 
although, for mathematical accuracy, water never boils 
twice running at precisely the same temperature, and 
although, logically, the term water is an incomprehensible 
mystery.To return to our so-called axioms: two straight lines 
cannot enclose a space. It has been one of the most 
important discoveries of modern mathematics, that this 
statement, even if we assume the definition of the various 
terms employed, is strictly relative, not absolute; and that 
common sense is impotent to confirm it as in the case of 
the boiling water. For Bolyai, Lobatschewsky, and Rie- 
mann have shown conclusively that a consistent system of 
Geometry can be erected on any arbitrary axiom soever. 
If one chooses to assume that the sum of the interior angles 
of a triangle is either greater than, or less than, two right 
angles, instead of equal to them, we can construct two new 
systems of Geometry, each perfectly consistent with itself, 
and we possess no means soever for deciding which of the 
three represents truth.

I may illustrate this point by a simple analogy. We 
are accustomed to assert that we go from France to China, 
a form of expression which assumes that those countries 
are stationary, while we are mobile. But the fact might be 
equally well expressed by saying that France left us and 
China came to us. In either case there is no implication 
of absolute motion, for the course of the earth through 
space is not taken into account. We implicitly refer to a 
standard of repose which, in point of fact, we know not 
to exist. When I say that the chair in which I am sitting 
has remained stationary for the last hour, I mean only 
stationary in respect to myself and the house. In reality, 
the earth’s rotation has carried it over one thousand miles,

* In revising this Comment, I note with amusement that it had 
escaped me that 100° C. is by definition the temperature at which 
water boils! I have seen it boil at about 84° C. on the Baltqro 
Glacier, and determined my height above sea-level by observing 
the boiling-point so often that I had quite forgotten the original 
conditions of Celsius.

132

APPENDIX B132

APPENDIX B

and the earth’s course some seventy thousand miles from 
its previous position. All that we can expect of any state¬ 
ment is that it should be coherent with regard to a series of 
assumptions which we know perfectly well to be false and 
arbitrary.

It is commonly imagined, by those who have not 
examined the nature of the evidence, that our experience 
furnishes a criterion by which we may determine which of 
the possible symbolic representations of Nature is the true 
one. They suppose that Euclidian Geometry is in con¬ 
formity with Nature because the actual measurements of 
the interior angles of a triangle tell us that their sum is in 
fact equal to two right angles, just as Euclid tells us that 
theoretical considerations declare to be the case. They 
forget that the instruments which we use for our measure¬ 
ments are themselves conceived of as in conformity with 
the principles of Euclidian Geometry. In other words, they 
measure ten yards with a piece of wood about which they 
really know nothing but that its length is one-tenth of the 
ten yards in question.

The fallacy should be obvious. The most ordinary 
reflection should make it clear that our results depend upon 
all sorts of conditions. If we inquire, “What is the length 
of the thread of Quicksilver in a thermometer?”, we can 
only reply that it depends on the temperature of the instru¬ 
ment. In fact, we judge temperature by the difference of 
the coefficients of expansion due to heat of the two sub¬ 
stances, glass and mercury.

Again, the divisions of the scale of the thermometer 
depend upon the temperature of boiling water, which is not 
a fixed thing. It depends on the pressure of the earth’s 
atmosphere, which varies (according to time and place) to 
the extent of over twenty per cent. Most people who talk 
of “Scientific accuracy” are quite ignorant of elementary 
facts of this kind.It will be said, however, that having defined a yard as 
the length of a certain bar deposited in the Mint in London, 
under given conditions of temperature and pressure, we are 
at least in a position to measure the length of other objects

APPENDIX B

133

by comparison, directly or indirectly, with that standard. 
In a rough and ready way that is more or less correct. But 
if it should occur that the length of things in general were 
halved or doubled, we could not possibly be aware of the 
fact. The same considerations apply to all the other so- 
called laws of Nature. We have no means soever of deter¬ 
mining even so simple a matter as to whether one of two 
events happens before or after the other.

Let us take an instance. It is well known that the light 
of the sun requires some eight minutes to reach the earth. 
Simultaneous* phenomena in the two bodies would there¬ 
fore appear to be separated in time to that extent; and, 
from a mathematical standpoint, the same discrepancy 
theoretically exists, even if we suppose the two bodies in 
question to be only a few yards one more remote than the 
other. Recent consideration of these facts has shown the 
impossibility of determining the fact of priority, so that it 
may be just as reasonable to assert that a dagger-thrust is 
caused by a wound as vice versa. Lewis Carroll has an 
amusing parable to this effect in Through the Looking- 
Glass ', which work, by the way, with its predecessor, is 
packed with examples of philosophical paradox.t

We may now return to our text, “Every number is

* Simultaneity, closely considered, possesses no meaning soever. 
See A. S. Eddington, Space, Time, and Gravitation , p. 51.We may now return to our text, “Every number is

* Simultaneity, closely considered, possesses no meaning soever. 
See A. S. Eddington, Space, Time, and Gravitation , p. 51.

t If I strike a billiard-ball, and it moves, both my will and its 
motion have causes long antecedent to the act. I may consider 
both my work and its reaction as twin effects of the eternal 
Universe. The moved arm and ball are part of a state of the 
Cosmos which resulted necessarily from its momentarily previous 
state, and so, back for ever.

Thus my Magical Work is only one of the cause-effects neces¬ 
sarily concomitant with the cause-effects which set the ball in 
motion. I may therefore regard the act of striking as a cause- 
effect of my original Will to move the ball, though necessarily 
previous to its motion. But the case of Magical Work is not quite 
analogous. For I am such that I am compelled to perform Magick 
in order to make my Will to prevail; so that the cause of my doing 
the Work is also the cause of the ball’s motion, and therefore is 
no reason, why one should precede the other. See Magick in 
Theory and Practice for a full discussion.

Since writing the above, I have been introduced to Space , Time , 
and Gravitation where similar arguments are adduced.

134

APPENDIX B

infinite.’* The fact that every number is a term in a mathe¬ 
matical continuum is no more an adequate definition than 
if we were to describe a picture as a number so-and-so in 
the catalogue. Every number is a thing in itself* possessing 
an infinite number of properties peculiar to itself.

Let us consider, for a moment, the numbers 8 and 9. 8 
is the number of cubes measuring one inch each way in a 
cube which measures two inches each way; while 9 is the 
number of squares measuring one inch each way in a square 
measuring three inches each way. There is a sort of 
reciprocal correspondence between them in this respect.By adding 1 to 8 we obtain 9, so that we might define 
unity as that which has the property of transforming a 
three-dimensional expansion of two into a two-dimensional 
expansion of three. But if we add unity to 9, unity appears 
as that which has the power of transforming the two- 
dimensional expansion of three aforesaid into a mere 
oblong measuring 5 by 2. Unity thus appears as in posses¬ 
sion of two totally different properties. Are we then to 
conclude that it is not the same unity? How are we to 
describe unity, how know it? Only by experiment can we 
discover the nature of its action on any given number. In 
certain minor respects, this action exhibits regularity. We 
know, for example, that it uniformly transforms an odd 
number into an even one, and vice versa; but that is practi¬ 
cally the limit of what we can predict as to its action.

We can go further, and state that any number soever 
possesses this infinite variety of powers to transform any 
other number, even by the primitive process of addition. 
We observe also how the manipulation of any two numbers 
can be arranged so that the result is incommensurable with 
either, or even so that ideas are created of a character 
totally incompatible with our original conception of num¬ 
bers as a series of positive integers. We obtain unreal and 
irrational expressions, ideas of a wholly different order, by 
a very simple juxtaposition of such apparently comprehen¬ 
sible and commonplace entities as integers.

* I regret to find myself in disagreement with the Hon. Bertrand 
Russell with regard to the conception of the nature of Number.

APPENDIX B

135

There is only one conclusion to be drawn from these 
various considerations. It is that the nature of every num¬ 
ber is a thing peculiar to itself, a thing inscrutable and 
infinite, a thing inexpressible, even if we could understand 
it.In other words, a number is a soul, in the proper sense 
of the term, an unique and necessary element in the 
totality of existence.

We may now turn to the second phrase of the text: 
“there is no difference.” It must strike the student 
immediately that this is, on the face of it, a point blank 
contradiction of all that has been said above. What have 
we done but insist upon the essential difference between 
any two numbers, and shown that even their sequential 
relation is little more than arbitrary, being indeed rather 
a convenient way of regarding them for the purpose of 
coordinating them with our understanding than anything 
else? On a similar principle, we number public vehicles 
or telephones without implication even of necessary 
sequence. The appellation denotes nothing beyond 
membership of a certain class of objects, and is indeed 
expressly chosen to avoid being entangled in considerations 
of any characteristics of the individual so designated 
except that cursory designation.

When it is said that there is no difference between num¬ 
bers (for in this sense I think we must understand the 
phrase), we must examine the meaning of the word 
“difference.” Difference is the denial of identity in the 
first place; but the word is not properly applied to dis¬ 
criminate between objects which have no similarity. One 
does not ask, “What is the difference between a yard and a 
minute?” in practical life. We do ask the difference 
between two things of the same kind. The Book of the 
Law is trying to emphasize the doctrine that each number 
is unique and absolute. Its relations with other numbers 
are therefore in the nature of illusion. They are the forms 
of presentation under which we perceive their semblances; 
and it is to the last degree important to realize that these

136

APPENDIX B136

APPENDIX B

semblances only indicate the nature of the realities behind 
them in the same way in which the degrees on a thermo¬ 
metric scale indicate heat. It is quite unphilosophical to 
say that 50 degrees Centigrade is hotter than 40 degrees. 
Degrees of temperature are similarly conventions invented 
by ourselves to describe physical states of a totally different 
order; and, while the heat of a body may be regarded as an 
inherent property of its own, our measure of that heat in 
no way concerns it.

We use instruments of science to inform us of the nature 
of the various objects which we wish to study but our obser¬ 
vations never reveal the thing as it is in itself. They only 
enable us to compare unfamiliar with familiar experiences. 
The use of an instrument necessarily implies the imposition 
of alien conventions. To take the simplest example: when 
we say that we see a thing, we only mean that our con¬ 
sciousness is modified by its existence according to a par¬ 
ticular arrangement of lenses and other optical instruments, 
which exist in our eyes and not in the object perceived. 
So also, the fact that the sum of 2 and 1 is 3, affords us but 
a single statement of relations symptomatic of the presenta¬ 
tion to us of those numbers.We have, therefore, no means soever of determining the 
difference between any two numbers, except in respect of a 
particular and very limited relation. Furthermore, in view 
of the infinity of every number, it seems not unlikely that 
the apparent differences observed by us would tend to dis¬ 
appear with the disappearance of the arbitrary conditions 
which we attach to them to facilitate, as we think, our 
examination. We may also observe that each number 
being absolute, is the centre of its universe, so that all 
other numbers, so far as they are related to it, are its 
appanages. Each number, is therefore, the totality of the 
Universe, and there cannot be any difference between one 
infinite universe and another. The triangle ABC may look 
very different from the standpoint of A, B, and C respec¬ 
tively; each view is true, absolutely; yet it is the same 
triangle.

APPENDIX B

137APPENDIX B

137

The above interpretation of the text is of revolutionary 
character, from the point of view of science and mathe¬ 
matics. Investigation on the lines here laid down will lead 
to the solution of those grave problems which have so long 
baffled the greatest minds of the world, on account of the 
initial error of attacking them on lines which involve self- 
contradiction. The attempt to discover the nature of things 
by a study of the relations between them is precisely 
parallel with the ambition to obtain a finite value of 77. 
Nobody wishes to deny the practical value of the limited 
investigations which have so long preoccupied the human 
mind. But it is only quite recently* that even the best 
thinkers have begun to recognize that their work was only 
significant within a certain order. It will soon be admitted 
on all hands that the study of the nature of things in them¬ 
selves is a work for which the human reason is incompetent; 
for the nature of reason is such that it must always formu¬ 
late itself in proportions which merely assert a positive or 
negative relation between a subject and a predicate. Men 
will thus be led to the development of a faculty, superior 
to reason, whose apprehension is independent of the hiero¬ 
glyphic representations of which reason so vainly makes 
use.t This then will be the foundation of the true spiritual 
science which is the proper tendency of the evolution of 
man. This science will clarify, without superseding, the 
old; but it will free men from the bondage of mind little by 
little; just as the old science has freed them from the 
bondage of matter.

* This was written in 1924.—Editor.

t See Eleusis , A. Crowley Collected Works, Vol. II, Epilogue.

NOTES TO TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

(See pp. 2 - 36 )

Col. II. —0-10 are the names of the Numbers or 
Emanations; 11-34 the Letters spelt in full.

Line 1.—Some of the common titles of Kether 
are:—

TWO mp: The Small Point.(See pp. 2 - 36 )

Col. II. —0-10 are the names of the Numbers or 
Emanations; 11-34 the Letters spelt in full.

Line 1.—Some of the common titles of Kether 
are:—

TWO mp: The Small Point.

nn The Profuse Giver. 
mp 3 The Primordial Point, 
rrmn Kt?'"l The ""hite Head.

JOK Amen.

N^EIO UN Lux occulta.

Mirum occultum.

DH Inscrutable Height. 
J'D3K yW Long of Nose. 
trDK Long of Face.

J'EV p'ny The Ancient of Days. 
(Also name of seven inferiors!)

;vnN ypn rvnN Existence of Existences. 
I'P'nm up'ny Ancient of Ancient Ones 
K&mp Kp'ny Holy Ancient One.

"11K Tux simplicissima.

I'lDDT HTOO Concealed of the Con* 
ccalcd.

The Head.

'ID'3D UK Lux interna.

]V^y The Most High.

Kin He.

K^H WTI The Head which is Not.

Col. 11. (continued )—

Line 3. —Binah has these additional titles:— 
KDK The dark sterile mother. 
NO'K The bright pregnant mother.

O'iiSn)

Cl

. > Divine Names.

D'n?K mnv

K'DniD Throne.

Line 4 .—Chesed has this additional till* : — 
n^nj Majesty,

Line 6.— Gebutah has these additional titles:—

1*1 Justice.

IHD Fear.

Line 6.— Tiphereth has these additional titles:— 
J'D3K n'yt Lesser Countenance.

King.

S*»r AnptH t |'S3K '1W : ~

D1K Adam.

)3 The Son. 
t^'K The Man.

D13K3^ Spare .Angels.

Line 9 .—Jcsod has this additional title:—

Dbiy-IID^p'nV The Righteous is the 
Foundation of the 
World.

Line —Chokmah has additional titles:— 
now Power of Yetzirah.

' of Tetragrammaton.

3K N3K

It has also the Divine Name, mrV-

Line 10. — Malkuth has these titles (among 
others):—

3yt^ The Gate (by Temnrah, "lj^y « 10 ). 
Kynn The Gate (Chaldee), 
which has same number ( 671 ) as In full—

nv-prnin-t^N

138

NOTES

139

Col. 11. (continued )—

Also—

Gates of Death.

,, ,, Shadow of Death.

,, ,, Tears.

,, ,, Justice.

,, ,, Prayer.

Gate of Daughter of Mighty Ones. 
>. Garden of Eden

Also—

Inferior Mother—

The Daughter.

The Queen.

The Bride. r\\o

The Virgin. nSlDD.,, ,, Tears.

,, ,, Justice.

,, ,, Prayer.

Gate of Daughter of Mighty Ones. 
>. Garden of Eden

Also—

Inferior Mother—

The Daughter.

The Queen.

The Bride. r\\o

The Virgin. nSlDD.

Cou IV.—This column may be equally well sym¬ 
bolised by any single entry, preferably in 0. 
The Monistic and Nihilistic conceptions are con. 
vertible. Hua may be equally named Tao, Iao, 
Noumenon, and the like. All language on this 
subject is necessarily feeble and hieroglyphic. 
It is to name that which by definition has no 
name.

Col. V.—These God*naraes are the "Grand Words" 
of the corresponding grades (see Col. CXXI.), 
except for 5 ° = 6°, whose G.W. is mE^iT-

The Zodiacal Gods are as for the Sephira, which 
corresponds to the Planet ruling. Apparently, in 
the numeration of Azbogah, line 12. only the 
AZ count

That these following are only titles of the One 
Ineffable Name is shown by Koran xvii, no. 
But monotheism is not true for the normal 
consciousness, but only for that of the adept.

eO

king

merciful

compassionate

crP*

he to whom one 
is faithful

peace

holy

M

JU*

cr-H'

le fort

le cher

terrible

• U1 
uj-

jull

i&n

innocent

creator

the proud

A*

>*J1

vainqueur

pardoner

picturer

Col. V. (continued)—

- a -1

J'v'

Vp>Uyi

opener

bountiful

giver

U-Ul

^1*)1

supporter

holder

all-wise

cherisher

exalter

humbler

JjJl

all-seer

all-hearer

hater

Jj-n

consoler

just

judge

great

long-suffering,

gracious

all-knower

exalted

worthy of thanks pardoner.

luU

J**'

exposer

protector

the great

JJ4»

genereux

glorious

numberer

e-y*

vast

hearer of com* 
plaints

beholder of hearts

exalted

reconciler

healer, wise

*

truth

witness of all

sender

solid

strong

advocate

reckoner

worthy of thanks foster-father

giver of life

resurrector

beginner

r^ 1

o-*JI

advocate of all

living

stayer

J*LM

JuJjJ!

sole

most holy

the only one

jM\

Jm-M

most mighty

of power full

unaccompanied

r JAJ>

the ist

retarderresurrector

beginner

r^ 1

o-*JI

advocate of all

living

stayer

J*LM

JuJjJ!

sole

most holy

the only one

jM\

Jm-M

most mighty

of power full

unaccompanied

r JAJ>

the ist

retarder

first of officers, 
hastener

140

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

Col. V. ( continued )—

y.Lii

concealed

manifested

the last

J

J’j"

charitable

highest

fosterer of all

r i^1

V lyjl

pardoner

avenger

turner of hearts

f \p\, JXJ! .i

isttjl ed)L

^\)\

worthy of glory 
and honour

roi de 1* uni vers

who pitieth

j**

L-Jjl

rich

assembler

divider

,U'l

afflicter

refuser

enricher

J^

peace-giver

la lumiere

giver of advant¬ 
ages

inheritor

survivor

inventor

patient

(? beginning)

guide

^1^5) jn

Hua is God ; and there is none other God 
than Hua. Amen.

Col. VI., Lise 34. —Essence, cf, a and «,

Col. VIII.—

Lines 1 - 10 .—Beth Elohim gives a quite different 
ten Qliphoth.

Line 15 .—

In the midst of the Zodiacal Qliphoth are 
and

At SE corner, Man, Serpent, and the elder Lilith 
the wife of Samael.

At NE corner, the Ox and Ass, and Aggereth the 
daughter of Machalath.

At NW corner, the Scorpion and jlD'DR. the 
Unnameable and nQJJD*

At SW angle, the Lion and Horse, and the 
younger Lilith the wife of Asmodai.

Col. XI. —The elements, of whose nature the signs 
of the Zodiac partake, are shown by the symbol 
against them.

Col. XII. —Let 45 be a straight line. On 45 erect the 
equilateral As 45G 450 * From 4 and 5 draw 
Straight lines 247, 358 _L 45 . and the straight

lines 25 X 14, 43 X 15. 48 X 59 . and 57 X 49. 
the points 2, 3, 7, and 8 marking the inter¬ 
sections. Join 19, 12, 13, 23, 78, 79, 89. Let 
6 be the point of intersection of 19, 57. 48. On

78 erect an equilateral A with its apex away 
from I. Produce 19 to 10, join 7-10. 8-10. 
Daath is at the junction of 25, 34. See figure, 
p. xxvii.

Cols. XV.-XVIII.-

Daath—Lavender, Grey-white, Pure violet, Grey 
decked gold.

Herschel—Silver flecked white.Cols. XV.-XVIII.-

Daath—Lavender, Grey-white, Pure violet, Grey 
decked gold.

Herschel—Silver flecked white.

Col. XVI., Line 10. —For A, V, A, and

Col. XIX. —Urim and Thummitn = Auramoth and 
Thoum Mou, Egyptian Gods. They are methods

of divination by A and ^.

Col. XX., Line 32 .—These Gods preside over the 
pieces in " Rosierucian Chess."

A of A Bishop 
V of A Queen 
A of A Kuight 
^ of A Pawn 
W of A Castle 
® ol A King

0UUOYM JUIUUOY

IrgAovpeo

£>ita»OY ckuiHty 
KA&egrtYq 
Ula.Ycx><£>ir 
4*A0Ypuu

A of V Bishop ISjOJItV ©A.

JLKX 10 Y

V of V Queen ©HCJUOYp IT

0AJUUUOY

Col. IX. —The Cup of the Stolistes has its rim in 2 
and 3 and its foot in 10.

The Caduceus is (easily) placed on the Tree and 
divided into fc<, O, and g).

The Waxing Moon in 4 ; Waning in 5 ; Full 
in 6.

A of V Knight CE&A. ^ttOUOY

&AOYp IT ©A. 
AJMJUOY

NOTES

141

Col. XX. (continued)—

^ of V Pawn

^t'UUJUA.ecp

^ of ^7 Castle

HJhcjuey oa iv

® of S7 King

IleA. £)A4>Hrf-

As, of A Bishop

^U> CUAXt

'V 7 of A Queen

£>rtouoY oa.

rie^aT

& ol A Knight

doY

^ of A Pawn

A^6c|>l

V of A Castle

©<xp4>eujY qA.

^ucuoyoa.

ne

$ of A King

<50Y^>Aj0YpiV

A of ^ Bishop

3\p«ujYepir

V of V Queen

Hicev

^ of ^ Knight

gUJUIp

of ^ Pawn

gxxecyEi-

The Pawns refer to J) 35 the House of the

Elements onlv,

not to J-l as v ,

^ of V Castle

HeY<j>OYiev

© of ^ King

Hcyuucopiv

Line 32. — CqftA^JYUlOY

gttOYe. ireoxujuoY 
2vy6c|>i : ^cxjjuiAecJ) : 
&AAejxje' r f- : KA.fiq2rcYq.

Col. XXI. —The perfected Egyptian exclaims, "There 
is no part of me that is not of the Gods.” This 
column gives the attribution in detail. The non- 
cherubic Zodiacal signs are omitted, but follow 
tbeix affinities

Col. XXIII.—Formless State IF) = 4 
Sublime State (S) » 4 
Reflection (R) =■ jo

Kashina (K) ^10

Impurity (I) ■ 10

Analysis (A) - 1

Perception (P) = 1

40Col. XXIII.—Formless State IF) = 4 
Sublime State (S) » 4 
Reflection (R) =■ jo

Kashina (K) ^10

Impurity (I) ■ 10

Analysis (A) - 1

Perception (P) = 1

40

Cols XXXVIII.-XL—The vagueness and extent 
ot these attributions is shown in this table from 
Agrippa, who is too catholic to be quite trust¬ 
worthy

Things under the Sun which are called Solary,

Among stones—

1. The eye of the Sun.

2. Carbuncle.

3. Chrysolite.

4 Iris (stone).

5. Heliotrope (stone).

6. Hyacinth (stone).

7. Pyrophylus (stone).

8. Pantaura.

Among plants—

r. Marigold.

2. Lote-tree.

3. Peony.

4. Sallendine,

5. Balm,

6 Ginger.

7. Gentian.

6 . Dittany.

9. Vervain.

10. Bay-tree.

11. Cedar.

12. Palm-tree.

13. Ash.

14. Ivy.

15. Vine.

16. Mint.

Among animals—

1. Lion.

2. Crocodile.

3. Spotted-wolf.

4. Ram.

Among birds—

1. Phoenix, 
a. Eagle;

3. Vulture.

4. Swan.

Among insects—

1. Glow-worm.

Among fish—

1. Sea-calf.

2. Shell-fish.

3. Pulius.

9. Toparius.

10. Chrysopassus.

11. Rubine.

12. Balagius.

13. Auripigmenturn and

things of a golden 
colour.

17. Mastic.

18. Zedoary.

19. Saffron.

20. Balsam.

21. Amber.

22. Musk.

23. Yellow honey.

24. Lignum aloes.

25. Cloves.

26. Cinnamon.

27. Calamus.

28. Aromaticus.

29 . Pepper.

30. Frankincense.

31. Sweet marjoram,

32 . Libanotis.

5. Boar.

6. Bull.

7. Baboon.

5. Cock.

6. Crow.

7. Hawk.

2 Beetle.

4. Star-fish.

5. Strombi. 
6 Margari.

Among metals—

1 Gold.

142

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

Col. XL — Aaron's breastplate is very doubtful, we 
advise reliance on columns Stones and Tribes, we 
having chosen Stones on bases of physical analogy 
to Signs, Colours, &c.

Cols. XLIII. and XLIV. — And, generally, all drugs 
exciting the parts of the body corresponding. 
See Col. CLXXXI 1 .

Col. XLI 1 . — The following table of sub-elemental 
perfumes is important

© of © Ambergris.Col. XLI 1 . — The following table of sub-elemental 
perfumes is important

© of © Ambergris.

Col. XLVI.—Each Trigram combines with itself and 
the others to make 64 Hexagrams, which partake 
of the combined nature. This attribution is the 
true key to the Yi King. No sinologist has had 
any idea of it, but it is obvious enough now that 
O. M. has solved it

See Appendix I.

A of

©

The Gall of the Rukh.

S7 of

^ of

A of

©

©

0

Onycha.

Musk,

Civet.

Col. XLVII.—

Line 7 .—Has a monkey.

Line 19 .—Said to have a monkey.

© of

A

Lign-aloes.

Col. XLIX.—The Geomantic Figures of the Planets 
are those of the signs which they rule.

A of

A

Galbanum.

•

Lines 3 - 10 . ]

• •

; and :

S7 of

A

Mastick.

4

► • •

V of

A of

A

A

Storax.

Olibanum.

•

Line 15 - # # #

•

•

Line 16 . */

• •

© of

V

Myrrh.

• •

Line 17 .

A of

V

Camphor,

• •

V of

V

Siamese Benzoin.

• •

Lin* 18 . J J

•

and *

^ of

V

Indigo.

• •

•

A of

V

Opoponax.

• •

Link 19 . * # #

•

and *

• •

© of

V

Dittany of Crete.

•

• •

• a

•

A of

V

Assafoetida.

Line 20 . J

Line 22 -

V of

V

Clover.

• •

•

V of

V

Storax.

• •

Line 24.

• •

Link 26 . /,

A of

A

Benzoin.

• •

•

•

• •

© of

A

Saffron.

Link 26. J J

Line 28 . J J

A of

A

Lign-aloes.

•

•

V of

A

Red-sanders.

Line 39 . 1 J

V of

A

Red Sandalwood.

• «

A of

A

Olibanum.

See the "Handbook 
Equinox I: 2, p. 137.

of Geomancy," The

NOTES

143

Col. L.—The Catholic "seven deadly sins" in 
square brackets.

Col. LVII.—Egyptian Quarters.

Cols. LVII., LIX., &c.— Beth Elohim gives-.— 
Michael, Leo, and South to V and V 
Gabriel , and North to A and TV 
Raphael, Man, and West to ^ and ft* 
Uriel, Eagle, and East to A and V

Col. CIII. —Add Daath, Cerebrum medium, cujus 
locus est in parte capitis postica.Col. CIII. —Add Daath, Cerebrum medium, cujus 
locus est in parte capitis postica.

But these have many other attributions, ana 
each is itself divisible : thus, Chesed andGeburah 
of Tiphareth are the breasts; Tiphareth the 
heart; Netzach and Hod the testicles; Jesod 
the membrum virile ; and Malkuth the anus. 
The signs of the Zodiac are variously given, and

the Planets agree with the face: thus, I? and 
V , the ears; <$ and 9 , the nostrils; G) and 
the eyes; and 9 , the mouth. The hand : 
thumb, © ; ist finger, A ; 2nd, V ; 3rd, ^ ; 
4th, A. These, however, vary somewhat.

Col. LX 1 X.—

Sattvas,

Rajas,

and

Tama*,

el

In a close 
analogy.

Col. CV 1 .—These Abodes are enclosed in four circles .- 
the Waters of Weeping, of Creation, of Oceanus, 
and the False Sea. Compaie the classical four 
rivers of Hell,

Col. LXXIX., Line 13 -

Add (3321) jnrw nyonennw, «»e 
Spirit of the Spirits of the Moon. The 
final j is counted as 700, as are the final 
D's in Col. LXXVIII , line 13

Col. LXXXV.— 
Line 6 .—Or 
Line 9 .—Or

Col. CVIlI.—Incomplete and redundant owing to 
unconcentrated nature of Qliphoth.

Line 2 .—Three Evil Forms before Samael are •—

ta’oop

i>tony

The Thaumiel, also called Kerethiel.

Col. LXXXIX — Add Daath, KrPiT

Col. XCI 1 I ., Line 10.—Contains the Earth.

Col. XCVL—Add Daath, HV/I-

Col. XCIX.—Add among Archangels:— 
Azrael. Angel of Death ( 1 ). 
Israfel, of Last Trump

Col. CIX .—0 = King. 9 = Duke.

King ifo of Dukes fifty lOOn,

and T\n\ are all referred to Daath.

Edomite Kings and Dukes are taken e libro 
Maggid. and Gen. 36.

Col. CXIV., Line 1 .— I.e. simple breathing without 
articulation.

Col. C.—Our order of Angelic Choirs is from R. 
Mosheh ben Maimon. R. lshmael and the book 
Pliah prefer:—

1. Cherubim.

2. Chasmalim.

3. Chaioth.

4. Aralim.

5. Seraphim.

6. Tarshishim.

7. Auphanirn.

8. Auphanirn.

9. Aislnm.

10. Taphsarim.

And there are many other schemes.1. Cherubim.

2. Chasmalim.

3. Chaioth.

4. Aralim.

5. Seraphim.

6. Tarshishim.

7. Auphanirn.

8. Auphanirn.

9. Aislnm.

10. Taphsarim.

And there are many other schemes.

Col. CXV.—The furniture, &c., is attributed as told 
in the ritual, here duly h - d, c-d, and n-r 
r-d.

Col. CXXI.—Add the ’* Waiting " Grades of " Lord 
of the Paths in the Portal of the Vault of the 
Adepts’’ between the zst and 2nd Orders ; and 
" Babe of the Abyss" between the 2nd and 3rd.

Col. CXXV.—Burton gives these upside down. 
The true attribution is checked by the Hre- 
Worshippers (Guebres) In 5. Yet, of course, the 
Ketber Hell may be considered as more awful 
than the Malkuth.

Col. CI 1 -— Add Daath. H 3 N-

144

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

Col. CXXV 1 I.—These and many other (rather far¬ 
fetched and irrelevant) attributions of various 
things axe to be found in Burton’s Arabian Nights, 
in the Tale of Abn al-Husn and his Slave-Girl 
Tawaddud.

Col. CXXX 111 .—The symbolic forms and Divination 
meanings of these cards can be readily constructed 
from considerations of their natures as here 
indicated.

Linf 6.—This is the First Decan, and begins from 
Cor Leon is.

Col. CXXXVI 11 .—Astrological symbols are derived 
from the primary forms—Cross, Crescent, Circle

Col. CLXXIII. (continued )—

Angels of the Hours of the Night—

1. Sachiel.

2. Samael.

3. Michael. 
4 Ariael.

5. Raphael, 
ft. Gabriel.

7. Cassiel.

8. Sachiel.

9. Samael.

10. Michael.

11. Anael.

12. Raphael.

Monday.

Angels of the Hours of the Day —

1. Gabriel.

2. Cassiel.

3 Sachiel.

4. Samael.

5. Michael.

6. Anael.

7. Raphael.

8. Gabriel.

9. Cassiel.

10. Sachiel.

11. Samael.

12. Michael.

Col. CLXXIII. — For meaning and special functions 
see original. They should, but do not, accurately 
refer to the divisions of each sign into 7 planetary 
parts.

Pietro di Abano gives .—

Angels of the Hours of the Night—

1. Anael. 7. Michael.

2. Raphael. 8. Anael.

3. Gabriel. 9. RaphaelPietro di Abano gives .—

Angels of the Hours of the Night—

1. Anael. 7. Michael.

2. Raphael. 8. Anael.

3. Gabriel. 9. Raphael

4. Cassiel. 10. Gabriel.

5. Sachiel. 11. Cassiel.

6 Samael. 12. Sachiel.

The Names of the Hours and the Angels 
Ruling them.

The Names of the Hours.

Hours of the Day—

1. Yain.

2. Janor.

3. Nasmia.

4. Salla.

5. Sadedalia. 
6 Thamur

Hours of the Night—

1. Beron.

2. Barol.

3. Thami.

4. Athar, 
3, Methon.-:. 
6. Rana.

7. Ourer.

8 Thamlc.

9. Neron.

10. jayon.

11. Abai.

12. Natalon

7. Netos.

8. Infrac, or Tafrac

9. Sassur.

10. Agio.

11. Calerva.

12. Salam.

Taiiles of the Angels of the Hours according 
io the Course of thi Davs

Sunday.

Angels of the Hours of the Day—

1. Michael.

2. Anael.

3. Raphael.

4. Gabriel.

5. Cassiel.

6. Sachiel.

7. Samael.

8. Michael.

9. Anael.

10. Raphael

11. Gabriel.

12. Cassiel.

Tuesday.

Angels of the Hours of the Day—

1. Samael. 7. Sachiel.

2. Michael. 8. Samael.

3. Anael 9. Michael

4. Raphael. 10. Anael.

5. Gabriel. 11. Raphael

6 Cassiel. 12. Gabriel

Angels of the Hours of the Night —

1. Cassiel. 7. Gabriel.

2. Sachiel. 8. Cassiel.

3. Samael. 9. Sachiel.

4. Michael. 10. Samael.

5. Anael. 11. Michael.

6. Raphael. 12. Anael.

Wednesday.

Angels of the Hours of the Day—

1. Raphael

2. Gabriel.

3. Cassiel-

4. Sachiel.

5. Samael.

6. Michael.

7. Anael.

8. Raphael

9. Gabriel. 
10. Cassiel. 
m. Sachiel. 
12. Samael.

Angels of the Hours of the Night—

1. Michael.

2. Anael.

3 Raphael,

4, Gabriel.

5. Cassiel.

6 Sachiel

7. Samael.

8. Michael.

9. Anael.

10. Raphael.

11. Gabriel.

12. Cassiel.

NOTES

145

Col. CLXX 11 I. (continued)—

Col. CLXX 11 I. (continued)—

Thursday .

Angels of the Hours of the Day—

1. Sachiel.

2. Samael.

3. Michael.

4. Anael.

5. Raphael.

6. Gabriel,

7. Cassiel.

8. Sachiel.

9. Samael.

10. Michael.

11. Anael.

12. Raphael.

Angels of the Hours of the Night—

1. Gabriel.

2. Cassiel.

3. Sachiel.

4. Samael.4. Anael.

5. Raphael.

6. Gabriel,

7. Cassiel.

8. Sachiel.

9. Samael.

10. Michael.

11. Anael.

12. Raphael.

Angels of the Hours of the Night—

1. Gabriel.

2. Cassiel.

3. Sachiel.

4. Samael.

5. Michael.

6. Anael.

7. Raphael.

8. Gabriel.

9. Cassiel. 
xo. Sachiel.

11. Samael.

12. Michael.

Friday.

Angels of the Hours of the Day—

1. Anael.

2. Raphael.

3. Gabriel.

4. Cassiel.

5. Sachiel.

6. Samael.

7. Michael.

8. Anael.

9. Raphael. 
10. Gabriel, 
zi. Cassiel. 
12. Sachiel.

Angels of the Hours of the Night—

t. Samael.

2. Michael.

3. Anael.

4. Raphael, 
3. Gabriel. 
6. Cassiel.

7. Sachiel.

8. Samael.

9. Michael.

10. Anael.

11. Raphael.

12. Gabriel.

The Angels of the Spring : Caracasa, Core, Amatiel, 
Commissoros.

The Head of the Sign of the Spring : Spugliguel. 
The Name of the Earth in the Spring : Amadai. 
The Names of the Sun and Moon in the Spring: 
The Sun, Abrayen ; The Moon, Agusita.

The Angels of the Summer: Gargabel, Tariel. 
Gariel.

The Head of the Sign of the Summer : Tubiel.

The Name of the Earth in the Summer : Festativi. 
The Names of the Sun and Moon in the Summer : 
The Sun, Athemay ; The Moon, Armatus.

The Angels of the Autumn: Tarquam, Gnabarel. 
The Head of the Sign of the Autumn : Torquaret. 
The Name of the Earth in the Autumn : Rabianara. 
The Names of the Sun and Moon in the Autumn : 
The Sun, Commutaff; The Moon, Affaterium.

(No Winter given.)

Col. CLXXVII. — Musulman attribution

Planets:—

b

n

V

D

$

D

0

D and 3

9

1

9

Saturday.

Angels of the Hours of the Day—

1. Cassiel.

2. Sachiel.

3. Samael.

4. Michael.

5. Anael.

6. Raphael,

7. Gabriel.

8. Cassiel.

9. Sachiel.

10. Samael.

11. Michael.

12. Anael.

Angels of the Hours of the Night—

1. Raphael.

2. Gabriel.

3. Cassiel.

4. Sachiel.

5. Samael.

6. Michael.

7. Anael.

8. Raphael,

9. Gabriel.

10. Cassiel.

11. Sachiel.

12. Samael.

*1

Note that D and not 3 is the 7th of the double 
letters.

The Jesuit Kircher gives—5. Samael.

6. Michael.

7. Anael.

8. Raphael,

9. Gabriel.

10. Cassiel.

11. Sachiel.

12. Samael.

*1

Note that D and not 3 is the 7th of the double 
letters.

The Jesuit Kircher gives—

bV<J©99«

s i n 3 3 n 3

The order of the Planets is that of their 
apparent rate of motion., By writing them in 
tluur order round a heptagon, and tracing 
the heptagram unicursally.. the order of the 
days of the week is obtained.

Note ,—The first hour of the day, of every 
country, and in every season whatsoever, is to 
be assigned to the sun-rising, when he first 
appeareth arising in the horizon. And the first 
hour of the night is to be the thirteenth hour, 
from the first hour of the day.

Col. CLXXVIII.—These intelligences are angelic 
in nature, but possessing material and even 
earthy dominion. Hence they preside over 
the geomantic figures, whose nature indeed 
expresses their relation to man.

The Year.

The Spring: Taloi.

The Summer: Casmaran. 
The Autumn: Adarael. 
The Winter: Earlas.

Col. CLXXXI.—

Line 11 .— He laughs; bearing a sphere containing 
Illusion in his left hand, but over his right 
shoulder, and a staff 463 lines long in his right. 
A lion and a dragon are at his feet, but he seems 
unaware of their attacks or caresses.

146

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

Col. CLXXXL ( continued )—

Line 12 —His attitude suggests the shape of the 
Swastika or thunderbolt, the message of God.

Line 13 .—She is reading intently in an open book.

Line 14 .—She bears a sceptre and a shield, whereon 
is figured a dove as symbol of the male and female 
forces.

Line 15 -—His attitude suggests ^ , and he is 
seated upon the Cubical Stone, whose sides show 
the Green Lion and White Eagle.

Line 16 .—He is crowned, sceptred, and blessing, 
all in a threefold manner. Four living creatures 
adore him, the whole suggesting a pentagram by 
its shape.Line 16 .—He is crowned, sceptred, and blessing, 
all in a threefold manner. Four living creatures 
adore him, the whole suggesting a pentagram by 
its shape.

Line 17 .—He is inspired by Apollo to prophesy 
concerning things sacred and profane: repre¬ 
sented by a boy with his bow and two women, 
a priestess and an harlot.

Line 18 -—He drives furiously a chariot drawn by 
two sphinxes. As Levi drew it.

Line 20 .—Before him goeth upright the Royal 
Uraeus Serpent.

Line 21 .— [ ^ * $ , and 0, or Sattva, Rajas, 
and Tamas].

Line 23 .—From a gallows shaped like the letter 
"j hangs by one foot a young fair man. His 
other leg forms a cross with the suspending 
one. His arms, clasped behind his head, form an

upright A, and this radiates light. His mouth 
is resolutely closed.

Line 25 .—A winged and crowned goddess, with 
flashing golden belt, stands, and pours from her 
right hand the flame of a torch upon an Eagle, 
while from her left hand she pours water from 
an horn upon a Lion. Between her feet a moon¬ 
shaped cauldron of silver smokes with perfume.

Col. CLXXXI. (continued)—

Line 26 .—Levi’s Baphomet is sound commentary 
on this Mystery, but should not be found in the 
text.

Line 27 .—Human figures thrown thence suggest 
the letter y by their attitude.

Line 28 -—A woman, naked, and kneeling on her 
left knee, pours from a vase in her right hand 
silver waters into a river, by which grow roses, 
the haunts of coloured butterflies. With her 
left hand she pours golden waters over her head, 
which are lost in her long hair. Her attitude 
suggests the Swastika. Above flames a great 
star of seven rays.

Line 29 .—Below, a path leads between two towers, 
guarded by jackals, from the sea, wherein a Scara- 
baeus marcheth landwards.

Line 30.—Below is a wall, in front of which, in a 
fairy ring, two children wantonly and shamelessly 
embrace.Line 30.—Below is a wall, in front of which, in a 
fairy ring, two children wantonly and shamelessly 
embrace.

Line 31 .—An angel blowing a trumpet, adorned 
with a golden banner bearing a white cross. 
Below a fair youth rises from a sarcophagus in 
the attitude of the god Shu supporting the 
Firmament. On his left a fair woman, her

arms giving the sign of Water—an inverted V 
on the breast. On his right a dark man giving

the sign of Fire—an upright A on the forehead.

Line 32. —An ellipse, composed of 400 lesser 
circles. At the corners of the card a Man, 
an Eagle, a Bull, and a Lion. Within the 
circle a naking shining figure with female 
breasts, with closed eyes in the sign of Earth 
—right foot advanced, right hand advanced 
and raised, left hand lowered and thrown 
back. The hands grip each a ray of dazzling 
light, spiral, the right hand being dextro- 
and the left hand Ixvo-rotary. A red scarf 
conceals the fact of male genital organs, and 
suggests by its shape the letter 3. Such is the 
conventional hieroglyph.

THE TRIGRAMS

147

APPENDIX I

The Trigrams of the Yi King

Attribution 
to Quarters.

Planetary

Attribution.

Hindu

Attribution.

Yetsiratic

Attribution.

Figure.

Name.

Part of 
Body.

Key Scale.

S.

©

Lingam.

+

4

Khien.

Head

2 [and 30].

S.E.

$

Apas.

V

D

II!

Tui

Mouth.

14 [and 23}.

E.

V

Mano

(Prana).

©

T

—S

LL

Eyes.

0 [21 and 30].

N.E.

6

Tejas.

A

C'

"1

il

Kan.

Feet

27 and 31.

s.w

<?

Vayu.

A

N

III

Sun.

Thighs.

11 [an 413 J.

w

Akasa.

a

—

KhilL

Bare

10 [13 and 32}.

N.W

V

Prlthivi

V

n

II

II

Kin.

Hands

32 bia.

N.

Yoni

O

n

III

III

Khwin.

Belly.

3 and IS.

The Trigrams should be considered as Cm symbols which combine these meanings, the Hexagrams as

combinations of these, chosen according 1 to circumstance. Thus is Fire of or Energy of

1*}, and might mean beginning to cbaDge, or force applied to Obstruction, as it actually does.

148

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES1*}, and might mean beginning to cbaDge, or force applied to Obstruction, as it actually does.

148

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

Ill II II III

ill II II III

THE HEXAGRAMS

149

Figure.

Nature.

Name.

Divination and Spiritual Meaning.

A 5{ +

hsiao iku . , ,

Small, restraint

+■ of V

li.

Pleased, satisfaction, treating, attached to, a 
shoe.

O ot *♦"

that . , ■ * *

Spring, free course.

r O

phi.

Decay, patience, obedience, autumn, shutting up, 
restriction

+ oi 0

thuag san

Union (of men)

©

©

+

ta jrO.

Creat havings

O oi V

<ih*en.

Humility

A of O

Y d.

Harmony and satisfaction

mu mu

150

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

Fijuri!

17

IS

19

20

21

22

ft it Lire

Name.

Divination and Spiritual Meaning.

7 ui A

Sui.

Following.

^ of A

Kfl .

Troublesome services, arrest of decay, hard work.

O of V

Ult r . , . „

Approach of authority, inspect, comfort.

A of O

KwSft .

Manifesting, contemplating.

0 ot A

Shit No - , . ,

Union by gnawing, legal constraint

V of ©

Pf * .

Ornament, freewill

^ of O

Po.

Overthrow, couch

Oof A

Fc.

Returning, visit from friends

THE HEXAGRAMS

151

152

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

Figure.

Nature.

Name,

Divination and Spiritual Meaning.

4 - of V

Thun.

Returning, avoiding, retirement.

Violenoe, the Great Ranx

II ii

1 II II

A of +

Ta ^Vang . . ,

© of O

Tzirs . . ■ » . .

To advance (good],

ZZ “

O of ©

Ming l ... .

Intelligence., woundrd.

—

A of ©

Ki* £an , . * .

Household, wilcly duty.

■“ “■

i

© of V

Khwci * . * -

Disunion, family discord.

__ _

— —mm

of ^

A of ©

ATen.

Lameness, immobility, difficulty.

Unravelling (a knot, &c->

II III

II II1

ATeh * * > * *

“ “

THE HEXAGRAMS

153

mi mi

154

TABLE OF CORRESPONDENCES

Figure.

49

60

61

62

65

66

Nature.

Name.

Divination and Spiritual Meaning.

V of CD

Ko, . . . ,

Change

0 01 A

Ting.

* caldron, a concubine, flexibility, quick ear and 
eye

A ot A

Kan . , . , *

Ease, development, moving power, thunder.

V of VV of CD

Ko, . . . ,

Change

0 01 A

Ting.

* caldron, a concubine, flexibility, quick ear and 
eye

A ot A

Kan . , . , *

Ease, development, moving power, thunder.

V of V

Kan

Peace, a mountain

A of V

/Tien . ,

Fortunate marriage, gradual advance, goose

A of V

Kwei mei

Unfortunate marriage (of a younger sister before 
the elder)

A of 0

Fang.

Large, abundant, progress.

Oof V

Lu. . .

Strangers

THE HEXAGRAMS

155

Figure.

Nature.

Name.

Divination and Spiritual Meaning.

07

ill

I i

Ad A

Sun ...

Flexibility, penetration, vacillation, wind, wood, 
&c.

08

— —

V oi V

Tui . ...

Pleasure, help from friends, still water

69

l ll

in

A of ^

H win ....

Dissipation, dispersion, turning to evil.

60

^ of V

Kith .

Joints of body, regular division.

61

==

A of ^

A'ung fu . . . .

Inmost sincerity.

62

ill

ll

A of V

Hsiao Kwo. . •

Non-essential, success of trifles, a wounded bird, 
small divergences.

63

— —

^ of ©

K\ ui.

Help attained, complete success.

61

—

© of

Wei Ut , . ,

Incomplete succok, foolish impulse, failure.

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

SVB FIGVRA

D

(6 dpidpoy >)

EDITORIAL NOTE

HIS dictionary was begun by Allan Bennett (Fra .*. Iehi Aour, now Bhikkhu

J- Ananda Metteya) in the last decade of the nineteenth century since 
^-J.C. It was bequeathed to the present Editor, with many other magical 
MSS., on I.A.’s departure for Ceylon in 1899.

Frater Perdurabo used it, and largely added to it, in the course of his 
Qabalistic workings. With George Cecil Jones (Fra.'. Volo Noscere) he further 
added to it by making it a complete cross-correspondence to the Book dcclxxvii.

It was further revised and checked, re-copied by a Jewish scribe, and again 
checked through, in the year V of the present Era.

The mathematical additions were continued by Fra.*. P. and Fra.*. Lampada 
Tradam; and the MS. finally copied on a specially constructed typewriter by 
Gerald Rae Fraser (Fra .*. yfr) who added yet further mathematical data.This copy has again been checked by Fra.*. P. and Soror N.N. and the 
proofs further by three separate scholars.

The method of employing the dictionary has been fully indicated in The 
Temple of Solomon the King [Equinox V].

None of the editors claim to possess even the smallest degree of scholarship. 
The method of compilation has been to include all words given in Von Rosen- 
roth’s Qabalistic Dictionary, those specially commented on in S.D., I.R.Q., and 
I.Z.Q., those given in 777, and those found by Fratres I.A. and P. Some of 
them are found in texts of the Hebrew Scriptures which appeared to those 
adepts to be of magical importance. Owing to their carelessness, the meaning 
of some few words has been lost, and cannot now be traced.

ABBREVIATIONS, SIGNS, AND

K.D. L.C.K. p.

— - KABBALA DENUDATA cuius Pars Pr

Communes Kabbalisticos.

Dec.

= Decan.

S.P.M.

= Sphere of the Primum Mobile.

S.S.F.

= Sphere of the Fixed Stars.

L.T.N.

= Lesser Angel governing Triplicity by Night.

L.T.D.

= Lesser Angel governing Triplicity by Day.

K.Ch.B.

= Kether—Chokmah—Binah.

(Ch.)

= Chaldee.

S.D.

= Siphra Dtzenioutha.

I.R.Q.

= Idra Rabba Qadisha.

Tet.

= Tetragrammaton.

L.A. Angel

= Lesser Assistant Angel.

I.Z.Q.

= Idra Zuta Qadisha.

M.T.

= Magister Templi.

V

= Shemhamphorasch.

W.

= Wands.

c.

= Cups.

s.

- Swords.

p.

= Pentacles.

K. of S.

- Key of Solomon.

O.P.A.A.

= Oriens—Paimon—Ariton—Amaimon.

FIGURES

continet Locos

V

8

n

225

SI

"l

t

A

Aries.

Taurus.

Gemini.

Cancer.

Leo.

Virgo.

Libra.

Scorpio.

Sagittarius.

Capricomus.

Aquarius.

h

Q

D

6

$

V

?

- Saturn.

= Sun.

= Moon.

= Mars.

= Mercury. 
= Jupiter.

= Venus.

X

= Pisces.

□

enclosing a

number

shows that the number

is a perfect square.

r

before

>»

a a

a squared square.

above

it a

a perfect number.

u

about

a

>> it

a factorial.*

1L

about

>»

it a

a sub*factorial.

R( n )

before

it

a reciprocal (or * amicable ’)

number.>»

a a

a squared square.

above

it a

a perfect number.

u

about

a

>> it

a factorial.*

1L

about

>»

it a

a sub*factorial.

R( n )

before

it

a reciprocal (or * amicable ’)

number.

2 (i—k) is an abbreviation for “the sum of the first k natural numbers." 
* See special table following.

TABLE OF FACTORS

ODD NUMBERS FROM I TO 3321 (5’S EXCLUDED); SHOWING LOWEST FACTORS, 
AND PRIMES (P.). " — ” INDICATES THAT THE NUMBER IS DIVISIBLE BY 3.

m

p.

83

P.

171

—

259

7

347

P.

2

p.

87

—

173

P.

261

—

349

P.

3

p.

89

P.

177

—

263

P.

351

—

5

p.

9 i

7

179

P.

267

—

353

P.

7

p.

93

—

181

P.

269

P.

357

—

0

3 *

97

P.

183

—

271

P.

359

P.

11

P.

99

—

187

11

273

—

\j 6 i\

I 9 a

i 3

P.

IOI

P.

189

—

277

P.

363

—

17

P.

103

P.

191

P.

279

—

367

P.

19

P.

107

P.

193

P.

281

P.

369

—

21

—

109

P.

197

P.

283

P.

37 i

7

23

P.

in

—

199

P.

287

7

373

P.

27

3 s

”3

P.

201

—

I289]

i 7 2

377

13

29

P.

11 7

—

203

7

291

—

379

P.

31

P.

119

7

207

—

293

P.

38 i

—

33

—

r»

u a

209

11

297

—

383

P.

37

P.

123

—

211

P.

299

13

387

—

39

—

127

P.

213

—

301

7

389

P.

41

P.

129

—

217

7

303

—

39 i

17

43

P.

131

P.

219

—

307

P.

393

—

47

P.

133

7

221

13

309

—

397

P.

7 a

137

P.

223

P.

311

P.

399

—

51

—

139

P.

227

P.

313

P.

401

P.

53

P.

141

—

229

P.

317

P.

403

13

57

—

143

11

231

—

319

11

407

11

59

P.

147

—

233

P.

321

—

409

P.

61

P.

149

P.

237

—

323

17

41 I

—

63

—

151

P.

239

P.

327

—

413

7

67

P.

>53

—

241

P.

329

7

417

—

69

—

157

P.

243

3 °

331

P.

419

P.

7 1

P.

159

—

247

13

333

—

421

P.

73

P.

161

7

249

—

337

P.

423

—

77

7

163

P.

251

P.

339

—

427

7

79

P.

167

P.

253

11

341

11

429

—

im 3* - 9 s

QMI

i 3 a

257

P.

343

7

431

P.

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

433

P.

(Hal

23 2

437

19

531

—423

—

77

7

163

P.

251

P.

339

—

427

7

79

P.

167

P.

253

11

341

11

429

—

im 3* - 9 s

QMI

i 3 a

257

P.

343

7

431

P.

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

433

P.

(Hal

23 2

437

19

531

—

439

P.

533

1 3

i4411•

- 21 3

537

—

443

P.

539

7

447

—

54 *

P.

449

P.

543

—

451

11

547

P.

453

—

549

—

457

P.

551

19

459

—

553

7

461

P.

557

—

463

P.

559

*3

467

P.

561

—

469

7

563

P.

47 i

—

567

—

473

11

569

P.

477

—

57 i

P.

479

P.

573

—

481

i 3

577

P.

483

—

579

—

487

P.

581

7

489

—

583

11

49 1

P.

587

P.

493

17

589

*7

497

7

59 i

—

499

P.

593

P.

501

—

597

—

503

P.

599

P.

507

—

601

P.

509

P.

603

—

5 ii

7

607

P.

513

—

609

—

517

11

611

*3

519

—

6i 3

P.

521

P.

-617

P.

523

P.

619

P.

527

17

621

—

7

719

P.

813

—

—

721

7

8.7

*9

*7

723

—

819

—

P.

727

P.

821

P.

—

[729] 3 ‘

=93= 27*

823

P.

7

73 i

*7

827

P.

—

733

P.

829

P.

P.

737

11

831

—

P.

739

P.

833

7

P.

74 i

—

837

—

11

743

P.

839

P.

—

747

—

18411

29 2

P.

749

7

843

—

—

75 i

P.

847

7

P.

753

—

849

P.

757

P.

851

23

—

759

—

853

P.

23

761

P.

857

P.

—

763

7

859

P.

11

767

*3

861

—

P.

769

P.

863

P.

P.

771

—

867

—

7

773

P.

869

11

—

777

—

871

*3

P.

779

*9

873

—

—

781

11

877

P.

*3

783

—

879

—

P.

787

P.

881

P.

—

789

—

883

P.

17

791

7

887

P.

—

793

*3

889

7

P.

797

P.

89I

—

*9

799

i 7

893

*9

7

801

—

897

—

P.

803

11

899

29

—

807

—

901

*7

23

809

9

903

—

—

8ll

P.

907

P.

623

627

629

631

633

637

639

64I

643

647

649

651

653

657

659

661

663

667

669

671

673

677

679

681

683

687

689

69I

693

697

699

701

703

707

709

7 n

7i3

717

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

909

—

1003

17

1099

7

ii 93

P.

1289

P.

9 11

P.

1007

19

I IOI

—

1197

—

1291

P.

913

11

1009

P.

1103

P.

1199

11

1293

—

917

7703

707

709

7 n

7i3

717

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

909

—

1003

17

1099

7

ii 93

P.

1289

P.

9 11

P.

1007

19

I IOI

—

1197

—

1291

P.

913

11

1009

P.

1103

P.

1199

11

1293

—

917

7

IOI 1

—

1107

—

1201

P.

1297

P.

919

P.

1013

P.

1109

P.

1203

—

1299

—

921

—

1017

—

mi

11

1207

17

1301

P.

923

13

1019

P.

111 3

—

1209

—

1303

P.

927

—

1021

P.

1117

P.

1211

7

1307

P.

929

P.

1023

—

1119

—

1213

P.

1309

7

931

7

1027

13

1121

19

1217

P.

1311

—

933

—

1029

—

1123

P.

1219

23

1313

13

937

p.

1031

P.

1127

7

1221

—

1317

—

939

—

1033

P.

1129

P.

1223

P.

1319

P.

941

P.

1037

17

1131

—

1227

—

1321

P.

943

23

1039

P.

ii 33

11

1229

P.

1323

—

947

P.

1041

—

1137

—

1231

P.

1327

P.

949

13

1043

7

1139

17

1233

—

1329

—

9 Si

—

1047

—

1141

7

1237

P.

i 33 i

11

953

P.

1049

P.

1143

—

1239

—

1333

3 i

957

—

1051

P.

1147

3 i

1241

1 7

1337

7

959

7

1053

—

1149

—

1243

11

1339

13

\W\

3 i 2

1057

7

1151

P.

1247

29

i 34 i

—

963

—

1059

—

1153

P.

1249

P.

1343

17

967

P.

1061

P.

1157

13

1251

—

1347

—

969

—

1063

P.

1159

19

1253

7

1349

19

971

P.

1067

11

1161

—

1257

—

i 35 i

7

973

7

1069

P.

1163

P.

1259

P.

13 53

—

977

P.

1071

—

1167

—

1261

13

1357

23

979

11

1073

29

1169

7

1263

—

1359

—

981

—

1077

—

1171

P.

1267

7

1361

P.

983

P.

1079

13

1173

—

1269

—

1363

29

987

—

1081

23

1177

11

1271

3 i

1367

P.

989

23

1083

—

1179

—

1273

19

113691

37 Q

991

P.

1087

P.

1181

P.

1277

P.

1371

—

993

—

110891

“ 33 s

1183

7

1279

P.

1373

P.

997

P.

1091

P.

1187

P.

1281

—

1377

—

999

—

1093

P.

1189

29

1283

P.

1379

7

1001

7

1097

P.

1191

—

1287

—

1381

P.

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1383

—

1479

—

1573

11

1669

P.

1763

41

138;

19

1481

P.

1577

19

1671

—

1767

—

1389

—

1483

P.

1579P.

1379

7

1001

7

1097

P.

1191

—

1287

—

1381

P.

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1383

—

1479

—

1573

11

1669

P.

1763

41

138;

19

1481

P.

1577

19

1671

—

1767

—

1389

—

1483

P.

1579

P.

1673

7

1769

29

1391

13

1487

P.

1581

—

1677

—

1771

7

1393

7

1489

P.

1583

P.

1679

23

1773

1397

11

1491

—

1587

—

[ 7 M 7 ]

4 1 *

1 777

P.

1399

P.

1493

P.

1589

7

1683

—

1779

—

1401

—

1497

—

1591

37

1687

7

1781

13

1403

23

1499

P.

1 593

—

1689

—

1783

P.

140;

—

1501

19

1597

P.

1691

19

1787

P.

1409

P.

1503

—

1599

—

1693

P.

1789

P.

1411

17

1507

II

1601

P.

1697

P.

1791

—

1413

—

1509

—

1603

7

1699

P.

1793

11

1417

13

1511

P.

1607

P.

1701

—

1797

—

1419

—

1513

17

1609

P.

1703

13

1799

7

1421

7

1517

37

16x1

—

1707

—

1801

P.

1423

P.

1519

7

1613

P.

1709

P.

1803

—

1427

P.

[T52T]

- 39 a

1617

—

1711

29

1807

13

1429

P.

1523

P.

1619

P.

1713

—

1809

—

i 43 i

—

1527

—

1621

P.

1717

17

x 811

P.

1433

P.

1529

11

1623

—

1719

—

1813

7

1437

—

1531

P.

1627

P.

1721

P.

1817

23

1439

P.

1533

—

1629

—

i 7 2 3

P.

1819

1 7

1441

11

1537

29

1631

7

1727

11

1821

—

1443

—

1539

—

1633

23

1729

7

1823

P.

1447

P.

i 54 i

23

1637

P.

i 73 i

—

1827

—

1449

—

1543

P.

1639

11

1733

P.

1829

3 i

1451

P.

1547

7

1641

—

1737

—

1831

P.

1453

P.

1549

P.

1643

3 i

1739

37

1833

—

1457

3 i

i 55 i

—

1647

—

1741

P.

1837

11

1459

P.

1553

P.

1649

17

1743

—

1839

—

1461

—

1557

—

1651

13

1747

P.

1841

7

1463

7

1559

P.

1653

—

1749

—

1843

19

1467

—

1561

7

1657

P.

1751

1 7

1847

P.

1469

13

1563

—

1659

—

1753

P.

Ll 849 l

43 a

1471

P.

1567

P.

1661

11

1757

7

1851

—

1473

—

1569

—

1663

P.

1759

P.

00

Ul

17

1477

7

1571

P.

1667

P.

1761

—

1 857

—

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1859

11

1953

—

2049

~

2 >43

P.

22391567

P.

1661

11

1757

7

1851

—

1473

—

1569

—

1663

P.

1759

P.

00

Ul

17

1477

7

1571

P.

1667

P.

1761

—

1 857

—

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

1859

11

1953

—

2049

~

2 >43

P.

2239

P.

1861

P.

*957

*9

2051

7

2147

*9

2241

—

1863

—

1959

—

2053

P.

2149

7

2243

P.

1867

P.

1961

37

2057

11

2151

—

2247

—

1869

—

1963

*3

2059

29

2153

P.

2249

13

1871

P.

1967

7

2061

—

2157

—

2251

P.

1873

P.

1969

11

2063

P.

2159

*7

2253

—

18 77

P.

1971

—

2067

—

2161

P.

2257

37

1879

P.

1973

P.

2069

P.

2163

—

2259

—

l88l

—

1977

—

2071

*9

2167

11

2261

7

1883

7

1979

P.

2073

—

2169

—

2263

3 *

1887

—

1981

7

2077

3 i

2171

*3

2267

P.

I889

P.

1983

—

2079

—

2173

4 i

2269

P.

I89I

3 *

1987

P.

2081

P.

2*77

7

2271

—

1893

—

1989

—

2083

P.

2179

P.

2273

P.

1897

7

199 *

11

2087

P.

2181

—

2277

—

1899

—

*993

P.

2089

P.

2183

37

2279

43

1901

P.

* 997

P.

2091

—

2187

3 7

2281

P.

1903

11

1999

P.

2093

7

2189

11

2283

—

1907

P.

2001

—

2097

—

2191

7

2287

P.

1909

23

2003

P.

2099

P.

2193

—

2289

—

191 I

—

2007

—

2101

11

2197

*3

2291

29

1913

P.

2009

7

2103

—

2199

—

2293

P.

1917

—

2011

P.

2107

7

2201

3 *

2297

P.

1919

*9

2013

—

2109

—

2203

P.

2299

11

1921

*7

2017

P.

211 I

P.

2207

P.

2301

—

1923

—

2019

—

2113

P.

|2209|

47 2

2303

7

1927

41

2021

43

2117

29

2211

—

2307

—

1929

—

2023

7

21 19

*3

2213

P.

2309

P.

1931

P.

2027

P.

2121

—

2217

—

2311

P.

1933

P.

2029

P.

2123

11

2219

7

23*3

—

1937

13

2031

—

2127

—

2221

P.

23*7

7

*939

7

2033

*9

2129

P.

2223

—

23*9

—

1941

—

2037

—

2131

P.

2227

17

2321

11

*943

29

2039

P.

2133

—

2229

—

2323

23

*947

—

2041

*3

2137

P.

2231

23

2327

*3

*949

P.

2043

—

2139

—

2233

11

2329

17

1951

P.

2047

23

2141

P.

2237

P.

233 *

—11

*943

29

2039

P.

2133

—

2229

—

2323

23

*947

—

2041

*3

2137

P.

2231

23

2327

*3

*949

P.

2043

—

2139

—

2233

11

2329

17

1951

P.

2047

23

2141

P.

2237

P.

233 *

—

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2333

P.

2429

7

2523

—

2619

—

2713

P.

2337

—

2431

I I

2527

7

2621

P.

2717

11

2339

P.

2433

—

2529

—

2623

43

2719

P.

234 *

P.

2437

P.

2531

P.

2627

37

2721

—

2343

—

2439

—

2533

*7

2629

11

2723

7

2347

P.

2441

P.

2537

43

2631

—

2727

—

2349

—

2443

7

2539

P.

2633

P.

2729

P.

2351

P.

2447

P.

2541

—

2637

—

2731

P.

2353

*3

2449

3 *

2543

P.

2639

7

2733

—

2357

P.

2451

—

2547

—

2641

*9

2737

7

2359

7

2453

11

2549

P.

2643

—

2739

—

2361

—

2457

—

2551

P.

2647

P.

2741

P.

2363

*7

2459

P.

2553

—

2649

—

2743

*3

2367

—

2461

23

2557

P.

2651

11

2747

4 i

2369

23

2463

—

2559

—

2653

7

2749

P.

2371

P.

2467

P.

2561

13

2657

P.

2751

—

2373

—

2469

—

2563

11

2659

P.

2753

P.

2377

P.

2471

7

2567

*7

2661

—

2757

—

2379

—

2473

P.

2569

7

2663

P.

2759

3 i

2381

P.

2477

P.

2571

—

2667

—

2761

11

2383

P.

2479

37

2573

3 *

2669

*7

2763

—

2387

7

248l

—

2577

—

2671

P.

2767

P.

2389

P.

2483

13

2579

P.

2673

—

2769

—

2391

—

2487

—

2581

29

2677

P.

2771

*7

2393

P.

2489

*9

2583

—

2679

—

2773

47

2397

—

2491

47

2587

*3

2681

7

2 777

P.

2399

P.

2493

—

2589

—

2683

P.

2779

7

1240117*

II

2497

11

2591

P.

2687

P.

2781

—

2403

—

2499

—

2593

P.

2689

P.

2783

11

2407

29

2501

4 i

2597

7

2691

—

2787

—

2409

—

2503

P.

2599

23

2693

P.

2789

P.

241 I

P.

2507

23

|2601|

- 5 i 2

2697

—

2791

P.

2413

*9

2 509

13

2603

*9

2699

P.

2793

—

2417

P.

25 I I

—

2607

—

2701

37

2797

P.

24*9

4 *

25*3

7

2609

P.

2703

—

2799

—

2421

—

2517

—

2611

7

2707

P.

2801

P.

2423

P.

2519

11

2613

—*9

2699

P.

2793

—

2417

P.

25 I I

—

2607

—

2701

37

2797

P.

24*9

4 *

25*3

7

2609

P.

2703

—

2799

—

2421

—

2517

—

2611

7

2707

P.

2801

P.

2423

P.

2519

11

2613

—

2709

—

2803

P.

2427

—

2521

P.

2617

P.

2711

P.

2807

7

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

f 28091

53 *

2903

p.

2999

P.

3093

—

3189

—

2811

—

2907

—

3001

P.

3097

19

3191

P.

2813

29

2909

p.

3003

—

3099

—

3193

3 i

2817

—

2911

41

3007

3 i

3101

7

3197

23

2819

P.

2913

—

3009

—

3103

29

3199

7

2821

;

2917

p.

3011

P.

3 io 7

13

3201

—

2823

—

2919

—

3013

23

3109

P.

3203

P.

2827

11

2921

23

3017

7

3111

—

3207

—

2829

—

2923

37

3019

P.

3**3

11

3209

P.

2831

19

2927

p.

3021

—

3 1 17

—

3211

13

2833

p.

2929

29

3023

P.

3 ii 9

P.

3213

—

2837

p.

2931

—

3027

—

3121

P.

3217

P.

2839

17

2933

7

3029

13

3123

—

3219

—

2841

—

2937

—

3031

7

3127

53

3221

P.

2843

p.

2939

p.

3033

—

3129

—

3223

11

2847

—

2941

17

3037

P.

3 i 3 i

3 i

3227

7

2849

7

2943

—

3039

—

3133

13

3229

P.

2851

p.

2947

7

3041

P.

3137

P.

3231

—

2853

—

2949

—

3043

17

3139

43

3233

53

2857

p.

2951

13

3047

11

3 i 4 i

—

3237

—

2859

—

2953

p.

3049

P.

3143

7

3239

41

286 r

p.

2957

p.

3051

—

3147

—

3241

7

2863

7

2959

11

3053

43

3149

47

3243

—

2867

47

2961

—

3057

—

3 i 5 i

23

3247

17

2869

19

2963

p.

3059

7

3153

—

[3249]

- 57 2

2871

—

2967

—

3061

P.

3157

7

3251

P.

2873

13

2969

p.

3063

—

3159

—

3253

P.

28 77

—

2971

P.

3067

P.

3161

29

3257

P.

2879

p.

2973

—

3069

—

3*63

P.

3259

P.

2881

43

2977

13

3071

37

3167

P.

3261

—

2883

—

2979

—

3073

7

3169

P.

3263

13

2887

p.

2981

11

3077

17

3 i 7 i

—

326;

—

2889

—

2983

19

3079

P.

3^73

19

3269

7

2891

7

2987

29

3081

—

3177

—

3271

P.

2893

11

2989

7

3083

P.

3179

11

3273

—

28972887

p.

2981

11

3077

17

3 i 7 i

—

326;

—

2889

—

2983

19

3079

P.

3^73

19

3269

7

2891

7

2987

29

3081

—

3177

—

3271

P.

2893

11

2989

7

3083

P.

3179

11

3273

—

2897

p.

2991

—

3087

—

3181

P.

3277

29

2899

13

2993

4 i

3089

P.

3183

—

3279

—

2901

—

2997

—

3091

11

3187

P.

3281

1 7

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

3283

7

3293

37

330 i

P.

3309

—

3317

3 i

3287

19

3297

—

3303

—

33 ii

7

3319

P.

3289

3291

11

3299

P.

3307

P.

3313

P.

332 i

The first dozen factorials , and stib - factorials ; and the ratios they bear to 
one another ; note that |_n_/||n = e

N

|N

UN

|N + ILN

U!L + In

1

I

0

CO

OOOOOOO

2

2

I

2*000000

0*500000

3

6

2

3*000000

0'333333

4

24

9

2*666666

0*375000

5

120

44

2*727272

0*366666

6

720

265

2*716981

0*368055

7

5040

1854

2*718446

0-367857

8

4O32O

14833

2*718262

0*367881

9

362880

133496

2*718283

0-367879

10

3628800

1334961

2*718281

0-367879

11

39916800

14684570

2*718281

0-367879

12

479001600

176214841

2*718281

0-367879

Factorial or |«, is the continued product of all the whole numbers from i to « inclusive and is 
the number of ways in which n different things can be arranged.

Sub-factorial «, or J|«, is the nearest whole number to [»-:-<?, and is the number of ways in which a row 
of n elements may be so deranged, that no element may have its original position.

Thus |»=ix*x3x...x»,

and

1 x 2 x 3 X...XW

1 ^=^ 778 ^ 788^7

where h is the smaller decimal fraction less than unity by which the fraction — ” differs from a

2*7 I020I ...

whole number, and is to be added or subtracted as the case may be.—The most useful expression for 
112 is:

h , n. n{n- 1) . n (n ~ 1) (n - 2) .

\\ns «-- «-!+—-- \n-7 ----- 1

Li_ L— 1 I- I . 2 \ - I.2.3

« - 3 + etc.

e=, + li + li + U +

. to 00

^2*71828188....

to («+1) terms.

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Names

Figures

Value

English equivalents

of the letters

of the lettersLi_ L— 1 I- I . 2 \ - I.2.3

« - 3 + etc.

e=, + li + li + U +

. to 00

^2*71828188....

to («+1) terms.

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Names

Figures

Value

English equivalents

of the letters

of the letters

of the letters

of the letters

(M) Aleph

X

1

A

(D) Beth

n

2

B

(D) Gimel

j

3

G

(D) Daleth

n

4

D

(S) Heh

n

5

H(E)

(S) Vau

6

V (U)

(S) Zayin

T

7

z

(S) Kheth (Cheth) n

8

Ch

(S) Teth

£2

9

T

(S) Yodh

1 1

10

Y (I or J)

(D) Kaph

1

20 500

K

(S) Lamed

3 °

L

(M) Mem

D D

40 600

M

(S) Nun

3 l

50 700

N

(S) Samekh

D

60

S

(S) Ay in

y

70

0 (A’a or Ng)

(D) Peh

s ci

80 800

P

(S) Tzaddi

x y

90 900

Tz

(S) Qoph

p

100

Q

(D) Resh

200

R

(M) Shin

v

3 °°

S Sh

(D) Tau

n

400

T Th

When written large,

the Value of a

Hebrew letter is

increased to one thousand

times its ordinary value.

A large Aleph

is counted 1000

: a large Beth, 2000: and

so on.

Note that A, I, O, U, H, are really consonants, mere bases for the vowels. These 
vowels are not here given, as they have no importance in Gematria.

M, D, and S before the names of the letters shews their division into Mothers, 
Double and Single letters, referred respectively to active Elements, Air, Water, Fire, 
Planets, and Signs. But £> and H also serve to signify the Elements of Spirit and 
of Earth. See Liber 777.

1 1. |1 g. The Mystic Number ir J 1

of Kether. S. P. M.

lii Hi SSF -

IT 2

[Abbreviation for 422,

:n:n

J'BJN *pN, q-v.]

2 (i—2). T7. The Mystic *-3

Number of Chokmah

Father

3N

To come, go

Na

The Number of Abra-Melin J~4

Princes. 1 /. 2 a

Father

N3N

Hollow ; a vein

aa

Proud

NJ

&

*5

Mist, vapour

IK

Back

ja

2(1—3). 0 . The Mystic 6

Number of Binah

To gather, collect

NaJ

Gog, the giant whose partner is

U

Magog

A bear

an

A window

Nil

?

*■7

Lost, ruined

naN

A name of GOD attributed to

NHN

Venus. Initials of Adonai

ha-Aretz

Desire ; either, or

IK

Gad, a Tribe of Israel; good *73 
fortune 
Was wearyan

A window

Nil

?

*■7

Lost, ruined

naN

A name of GOD attributed to

NHN

Venus. Initials of Adonai

ha-Aretz

Desire ; either, or

IK

Gad, a Tribe of Israel; good *73 
fortune 
Was weary

Riches, power fc$^7

Fish JT 7

2 8 . The Number of Abra-Melin ^“8 
Sub-Princes, and of the Servi-

tors of Oriens, $

To will, intend

naN

Desired, beloved

artK

NIK

Then

IK

The entrance, threshold

nKa

To be anxious, grieve

JK1

Love; beloved, breast; pleasures *7*7

of love

Nqn. Zauir Anpin 478 q.v.

KT

ll± 3 a - h- D

Ventriloquus: the special ‘fire’

aiK

of black magic, whence Obi,

Obeah. Cf. 11 and 207

He kindled

KTK

Brother

nN

A garment

•na

Became powerful, grew high

HK3

Middle

u

Splendour; cf. 15

nn

2 (i—4). The Mystic Number of

Chesed. Elementorum Sphaera. 
The Number of Abra-Melin Servi¬ 
tors of Amaimon and Ariton

Enchanter tOK

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 185] ftQ

I

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Elevated, exalted, high

naa

Flew, soared

nxT

Two

H

Window

nn

A wolf

3N?

A hidden place; bosom

an

Ahah

7

nnN

Firebrand, volcanic fire : the

hn

special ‘fire’ or ‘ light J of the

Sacred Magic of Light, Life, 
and Love; hence “Odic

Force ” &c. Cf. 9 and 207

Where

'N

When

Niaa

To tear, cut, attack

TU

Gold (Ch.)

am

Proud, haughty

nr

To conceal

xan

A circularity of form or motion

; an

a feast

He longed for, missed

mN

He departed, went forth

n?N

A little book, pamphlet, letter

; Da

tools

To multiply

nn

A city of Edom

nan

HE. [H is referred to Mater,

Nin

) to Pater, X to Corona]

Vau ; hook, nail, pin

))

This, that

m

To penetrate, be sharp; (Ch.) one in

A small bundle, bunch

mjN

Beloved; Love |

nanN

Unity

nnN

Hated

a'N

Emptiness

pa

Raised up

nna

Chokmah, 42-fold Name in

*a

Yetzirah. (See 777)

Anxiety

hjnt

A fisher

an

Thunder; to meditate; he re- njfl

moved

A city of Edom

nn

Here; this

11

A locust

aan

He shall come

Na*

Rhamnus ; a thorn, spine

ntoN

Rising ground; Earth of

N’Jhjnt

A fisher

an

Thunder; to meditate; he re- njfl

moved

A city of Edom

nn

Here; this

11

A locust

aan

He shall come

Na*

Rhamnus ; a thorn, spine

ntoN

Rising ground; Earth of

N’J

Geburah. (See 777)

Sacrifice v. & s. (Ch.). (?)

nan

Love, beloved; David

nn

Give, give! [Vide

an an

no. 17, an']

To grind, direct, stretch out

mn

Gold

am

Hand

r

S(i— s). 2{I— (3 X 3)} +

3. The

Mystic Number of Geburah. The

Number of Abra-Melin Servitors

of Asmodee and Magot, and of

Paimon

Angel of 3 rd Dec. t

NniaN

The month of Exodus and

a’aN

Passover

Steam, vapour

TN

Pride; a carrying out; ex-

nwa

altation

2

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Splendour, the Eighth Sephira Tin 
Overflowing, abounding 21 T

He who impels; to force HI

to hide nan

The Monogram of the Eternal fV

The Number of Abra-Melin J~ *f~ 16 
Servitors of Asmodee

Hyssopus

aitN

He seized, cleaved to

int<

Elevated, exalted, high

niaa

(Verb, subst.) Injury, war, lust; Jiin

fell

She

nvi

Alas ! —Woe

*i

Like, equal to

in

Nuts

1UK

Ah !— Alas!

'IN

Capricornus

*nj

Nerve, sinew, [Gen. xxxii.

T3

*5 & 3 *]

Narrative, subtle discourse

irm

K.D. L.C.K. p. 267

Ninn

To dream, rave

nin

A fly

ant

Sacrificed

nat

To seethe, boil

nit

To brighten, make joyful

mn

A circle, orbit

ain

Good

ana

To give, place

an'

My favourite, my beloved

*anN

Hatred

na*N

The antique Serpent

Non

Living

'n

Notariqon of Yehi Aur, etc.

NIN'

Angel L.T.D. off

nnN

An enemy

a'iN

Job

at'N

Was black

rm

Chavvah; to manifest, shew

nin

forth; Eve

The Number of Abra-Melin

Servitors of Amaimon

Fraternity

mnN

Black liquid

in

It was

n'n

The breast; a vision; a prophet

; ntn

to gaze

Jobab, an Edomite King

aav

The hand

TV

2 (i—6). The Mystic Number

of Tiphareth

Existence, Being, the Kether-

n'nN

name of GOD

But, yet, certainly

Deep meditation

ran

Ah !—Alas !

'in

Purity, innocence

int

Vide Sepher Yetzirah

in*of Tiphareth

Existence, Being, the Kether-

n'nN

name of GOD

But, yet, certainly

Deep meditation

ran

Ah !—Alas !

'in

Purity, innocence

int

Vide Sepher Yetzirah

in*

The Number of Abra-Melin 
Servitors of Ariton 
With his hand; Night Demon VTa

of i st Dec. £25

By Yodh T 5

Hearer in secret; Angel n'RRPl

of 8 W.

The state of puberty JW

A magical vision (Ch.) NVh

3

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Wheat

ntsn

Good

naita

Notariqon of “Tet. Elohim

N'N'

Tet. Achad.”

Unity

in'

Parted, removed, separated

«■ 23

nnt

Joy

nnn

A thread

am

Life

nm

[4. The Number of the *

Elders ’ 24

in the Apocalypse

He whom I love

'am#

He who loves me

'anix

A Mercurial GOD. His

miam

essence is 8

Substance; a body

n'U

A pauper

V

Angel of 2 C.

n'aan

Abundance

n

A water-pot, a large earthen-

na

ware vessel

5*

To break

ton

The Beast

xvn

Jehewid, GOD of Geburah

*rin'

of Binah

Let there be

m*

Will be separated

nr

Thus

na

The Numbers of the Sephiroth of 26 
the Middle Pillar; 1 + 6 + 9 + 10

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 273] nVl 
Seeing, looking at JITIPI

Sight, vision

nun

TETRAGRAMM ATON,

nm'

“Jehovah,” the Unutterable

Name, the Lost Word

Kebad, husband of the impure

naa

Lilith. [K.D. L.C.K. 464]

3 *

sT *7

Wept, mourned

naa

Purity

T

A parable, enigma, riddle

mm

2 (1—7), The Mystic Number 28

of Netzach

Clay

Union, unity

nm'

Power

na

Is broken, [Ps. x. 10]

n 29

nan

To break down, overturn

-pn

A party to an action at law;

3 °

a"n

defendant, plaintiff. [Note

S = 30 = — = * Justice ’]

judah min*

It will be

nm'

How?

"•31

T

GOD of Chesed, and of Kether

7 N

of Briah

To go

^n

A beating, striking, collision HKOH

And there was. [Vide S.D.I.

mu

par. 31]

K, ofS. Fig. 31

Not

ah

4

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

2®. The Number of Abramelin $ 32 
Servitors of Astarot

Coalescence of n'HN and mJTPlN

JtirV Macroprosopus and 
Microprosopus. This is 
symbolized by the Hexa¬ 
gram. Suppose the 3 H’s 
conceal the 3 MothersCoalescence of n'HN and mJTPlN

JtirV Macroprosopus and 
Microprosopus. This is 
symbolized by the Hexa¬ 
gram. Suppose the 3 H’s 
conceal the 3 Mothers

D & & and we get

358 q-v.

Lord

•a

Angel of 5 W,

mm

Copula Maritalis

jmn

Was pure

nor

Zig-zag, fork-lightning

rtn

Unity K.D. L.C.K. p. 432

TIT

Glory

T33

Mind, heart

aS

Sorrow ; wept, mourned

Day Demon of i st Dec. T

To destroy (Ch.); (?) a King

xSa

of Edom

Spring, fountain

2 {i-( 4 * 4 )} + 4 . %

“ GOD the Father,” divine

name attributed to Jupiter

To ransom, avenge, pollute

?K2I

To reveal

xSj

A pauper

fn

A common person ; un-

firm

educated, ignorant

Angel of 7 C.

mnn

Agla, a name of GOD; 
notariqon of Ateh Gibor 
le-Olahm Adonai

Boundary, limit

35

He will go

V'

6* = 2 (i—8). ©. The Mystic ^“36

Number of Hod

Tabernaculum

Snx

How ? (Vide Lamentations)

n yx

Duke of Geburah in Edom ;

nSx

to curse; name of GOD

attributed to $

To remove, cast away

xSn

Confession

Leah

nxS

Perhaps, possibly; would that ! y?

*37

Angel of 8 P.

rrxax

GOD (Ch.)

xnSx

Behold!

iSx

Perished, grew old

nSa

To grow great

Sta

Banner

Sjh

Tenuity, breath, vanity; in vain;

Abel. [I.Z.Q., “the Super-

nal Breathers.”]

Night Demon of 2 nd Dec. }

Ski

Profession

St

Jechidah, the Atma of Hindu

ftTTP

philosophy

Flame

anS

(?) Devotion of force

tS

5

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Night Demon of 2 nd Dec. ozs

He departed

Gehazi, servant of Elisha

nm

A City in the Mountains of

rbi

Judah

Innocent

’tot

The palate

T n

To make a hole, hollow; to

Sn

violate

Green

rb

To abide, dwell

Dew

Sd

The Eternal is One 7 FIK PlIIT

Angel of 3 P.

im

Metathesis of ni?V

1TD

He cursed

tsf?

Bildad

Tlfe

Liberator; a title of Jesod

SttU

To cut off

bn

A rope; ruin; to bind

San

Milk

aSn

The Hand of the Eternal plln 1 T

To me, to mine

b

Fecundity

aSntt

Ram; force; hence = a hero

S’tt

Night Demon of i st Dec. T1J

ibn

My GOD

’Stt

Mother

Dtt

To fail, cease

SeaMilk

aSn

The Hand of the Eternal plln 1 T

To me, to mine

b

Fecundity

aSntt

Ram; force; hence = a hero

S’tt

Night Demon of i st Dec. T1J

ibn

My GOD

’Stt

Mother

Dtt

To fail, cease

Sea

Divine Majesty

Sttito

Terminus

Siaa

To burn

Sm

Terror

Sin

To go round in a circle

Sin

[Vide Ps. cxviii. & I.R.Q,

nm’ tv

778]

The Number of the letters of a great

name of GOD terrible and strong,

and of the Assessors of the Dead

Angel of V

StPK

Eloah, a name of GOD

niStt

The Supernal Mother, un¬

nm

fertilized; see 52

Terror, calamity

nnSa

Loss, destruction

’Sa

To cease

Sm

The World, Earth of Malkuth 77n

My glory

’-naa

Great

Sm

To rejoice

S’)

Challah; to make faint.

nSn

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 346]

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 15]

:; N’aS

see no. 340]

Hazel, almond

ib

Hi 220 + s

Drops

bin

A pool, pond ; sorrow

D 3 K

Captive, captivity

nSu

Angel ruling LF

ban

6

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Aquarius

Blood

D"l

Sand : also horror. See

Sin

Scorpion Pantacle in K. of S.

and 10 th Aethyr

A ram; V

nb

Tet in ? World. Nn 11 N"l "IV

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 151]

Flame

bn?

2 (1—9). The Mystic Number

of Jesod

Intelligence of

Smn

Adam

DIN

The Fool

TDN

Redemption, liberation

blNJ

To grow warm

on

Heaven of Tiphareth

*7131

Hesitated. [Vide no. 405]

bn

Spirit of h

bn

She who ruins

nbn

Tet. in Yetzirah NH INI Nn "IV

Greatly, strongly

"IN»

Yetzirah’s 1 Secret Nature ’

na

[Vide I.R.Q. xxxiv.J

A name of GOD

'nb

A female slave; cubitus

n»N

Tin, the metal of 'll

Sid

A dividing, sundering,

nban

separation

Angel of 7 S.

bnn."i

A miner

bin

Angel ruling b

bits

Levi, Levite

b

Foolish, silly. (Stultus)

. »47

TIN

A weeping

T'33

Cloud; high place; waves;

naa

fortress

Angel ruling Tl}?

* 7 NV

To clutch, hold

ab

48

Mercy

nbn

Angel of 2 W.

*?Nim

A woman [vide K.D. L.C.K.

bn

p. 3 20]; strength; an army

To grow warm; heat, fire; black; Bn

Ham, the son of Noah

Jubilee

bv

A star, planet; Sphere of $48

Mercy

nbn

Angel of 2 W.

*?Nim

A woman [vide K.D. L.C.K.

bn

p. 3 20]; strength; an army

To grow warm; heat, fire; black; Bn

Ham, the son of Noah

Jubilee

bv

A star, planet; Sphere of $

3313

[Vide Ps. xciii. & Prov. viii. 22]

The Number of Abra-Melin V ~49

Servitors of Beelzebub. 7*.

■ 9

The Living GOD

'n b

Qliphoth of Geburah

anSu

Resembled; meditated;

ran

silent

Intelligence of $

ban

Drooping, being sick

bin

Strength

Nbn

Heat, fury (Ch.)

Nan

A bringing forth, birth, nativity HT 7

A measuring, measure

nna

Solve. [Vide no. 103]

aia

The Rod of Aaron

aa

7

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Red earth, the soil; Earth of 
Chesed

Closed, shut up

DDN

Angel of 9 P.

nnbx

Jonah's Whale

n

To ferment

nan

Pains, sorrows

'ban

Unclean, impure

«aa

58 th &

b"

2 nd g?

The sea

D»

All, every

ba

To thee

V

What ?— Which ?

*a

Edom

DHK

Terrible; Day Demon of

2 ml Q*£

Dec. TT^

Ate; devoured

bott

Pain

Tumultuously (vide no. 451);

to harass, perturb

Angel of 8 S. [Vide K. of S.,

fig- 52]

Failure

tU

Father and Mother XfiNI N 3 X 
Supernal Mother ND'K

Elihu = Eli Hua, “ He is my vrbx 
GOD,” who is the Holy 
Guardian Angel of Job in 
the Allegory

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 134]

A mare; brute animal, beast

nana

Day Demon of 2 nd Dec. t

D'3

From all, among^all

baa

The Son: Assiah’s “ Secret

p

Nature”

Meditation, imagination, sin

nar

A desirable one; to desire

•tan

A husband’s brother

aa*

Angel of Kether of Binah,

bxin’

and of Jesod of Binah

Tet. in Assiah f|PI 11

nn nv

A dog

aba

Angel of 4 C., and of 10 P.

nnxb

The Number of Abra-Melin Servitors

of Astarot and Asmodee

The stone that slew Goliath;

pH

a stone, rock

Elihu. (Vide 52)

Kin'bx

The garden

p

Angel of 9 P.

bx'tn

To defend, hide; a wall; the

sun; fury

The spleen

bina

A lover i

nanxa

A basin, bowl, vessel.

px

[Ex. xxiv. 6]

Rest

*en

A Tribe of Israel; to judge, rule. H

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 37]

Pertaining to summer

Din

8sun; fury

The spleen

bina

A lover i

nanxa

A basin, bowl, vessel.

px

[Ex. xxiv. 6]

Rest

*en

A Tribe of Israel; to judge, rule. H

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 37]

Pertaining to summer

Din

8

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

My flame; enchantments

A bed; stick, rod

non

To remove

•u

2 (i - io). The Mystic Number of

Malkuth

Thief; stole

a33

Robbery, pillage

If

nT*

u

Silence. [For name of Angels, fiftH

see Sohar Sch. V. Cap. 18]

A footstool

DHPl

To swell, heave. [Vide no. 51] BVl

To walk

T*

Knuckle; member, limb

The bride

rfa

Noon; midday

aa

Ornament

nj

Dread, terror

He suffered

ruN

Angel of 4 C.

Day

DV

Beautiful

nto

Rim

pas

Consuming

Wealth, an age, Time; Night

px

Demon of i st Dec.

Formidable, terrible

DVR

We

A breaking down, subversion,

*>us*a

destruction

Built

rua

K- [Fish (pi.); vide 7]

D'n

Angel of 8 C.

Angel of 5 C.

mi 1 ?

Altar

nato

The laying-by, making secret fcOiftib

[Vide no. 499]

D*ans

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 69.]

An ptf

ear

Night Demon of i sl Dec. f

ntn

My strength, power, might

Love, kindness, grace; notariqon Jfi

of Chokmah Nesethrah, the

Secret Wisdom

Ruler of Water

Angel of 6 S.

Sxr

Angel of 3 P.

n'nnS

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 69]

ru

Brethren. [Referred to Lilith

71

DTIN

& Samael—K.D. L.C.K.

P- 54 ]

Heathen

tru

A wall

nia'in

Menstruata

m3

Tried by fire; a watch-tower

pa

Excellence, sublimity, glory,

ptt 3

pride

Constitution, tradition

naSn

To behold

A basket

tOD

Angel of 8 C.

n'n 1 ?*

9

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Vision

ntno

The Southern district

Master, Lord, Adon

pnx

IT 6l

The Negative, non-existent ;

not j'X

Towards, to thee

yba

I, myself

'JX

The belly

pa

Angel of 10 S.

main

Wealth

, P

Angel of 6 C.

7 X"'

Habitaculum

PM

Healing

XDX

62

Angel of 2 nd Dec. V

'anna

The sons

'ja

To commit; healing

naT

Abaddon, the Hell of Chesed

pnax

63

Dregs, roll; faeces (globular)

; bbi

dung

Fed

The nose

cam

Fervour

na'n

Tet. in Briah VI 1 X 1 ’PI IV'anna

The sons

'ja

To commit; healing

naT

Abaddon, the Hell of Chesed

pnax

63

Dregs, roll; faeces (globular)

; bbi

dung

Fed

The nose

cam

Fervour

na'n

Tet. in Briah VI 1 X 1 ’PI IV

Briah’s “ Secret Nature ”

JD

8 a = 4 * = 2*. $ ,

64

A sigh, groan, deep breath

nmx

Justice P

(Din and Doni are twin Mercurial 
Intelligences in Gemini)

The golden waters

an? '0

[I.R.Q. xl. 996]

anra

Prophecy

nxiaa

Sphere of 9

naia

Noach

PM

2 f 1 “ (5 x 5)} 5* The Number of

Abra-Melin Servitors of Magot

and Kore

Adonai

’J*TX

Weasels and other terrible

D'rnx

animals

The Palace

Va'n

Shone, gloried, praised

^n

To keep silence

cn

Defective. [Vide K.D. L.C.K. |TPI

p- 339]

a 0 - &

rbb

A door post

nmo

A beating, striking

naa

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 563]

’n 3

The Mystic Number of the Qliphoth,

and of the Great Work.

5(i—n)

Food, victuals

n^ax

The Lord thy GOD (is a con

• vnW

suming Fire). [Deut. iv. 2

4 ]

A ship

nox

A trial, an experiment

pna

A wheel. [Called “ Cognomen

Schechinae ”]

A City of Edom

nann

65

66

IO

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 57]

The Understanding 
Night Demon of 3 rd Dec. n fcO'') 
Zayin 
Debased

To embalm tan

Angel of 3 C. H'/M’

7 T 67

£

(A proper name)

Hush, be silent 
Wine 
Night

[Vide Ps. xxv. 14.] The Secret "PD

68

Wise.—Intelliget ista? P'i

To be wise ton

Emptiness SSn

To pity Dn

Ramus Tabernacularis

A manger, stable; an enclosure DHX 
Myrtle D HH

L.A. Angel of X

69

70

rmN

nan

I"

9 ?

Thy terror

Nothing; an apparition, image 
Silence; silent trw

Night Demon of i 5t Dec. “ -|n»N

Lead, the metal of Saturn; a 1* 
plummet-line, level, water- 
level

’ 7 1

Vision

A dove, pigeon 
A dove

Plenitude, fullness

pin

nav

mv

kSo

[72x3 = 216, H'lN; vide K.D. 72 
L.C.K. p. 151.] There are 
72 quinaries (spaces of 5°) in 
the Zodiac. The Shemham- 
phorasch or ‘divided name’ of 
GOD consists of 72 triliteral 
names, which by adding fl* or

gi y e 72 angels. Vide Lib.gi y e 72 angels. Vide Lib.

DCCLXXVII

Adonai, transliterated as by 'JOHN 
Lemegeton, etc.

Geomantic Intelligence Snohn 
of t

In, so, thus, then p3

In the secret mD 3

And they are excellent, finished ) 
Kindness, mercy "1DH

Tet. in Atziluth *p| V) \*1 IV 
Maccabee

Atziluth's “Secret Nature ay

thickness, cloud; Aub

Demon-King of Hod, and 
Night Demon of 2 nd Dec.

*73

Gimel

bix

The Wise One

naan

To trust in, shelter in

HDH

A day of feast

ao dv

A leader, chief, judge

P

74

II

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Worn-out (? shameless) Beggars E07

The breaker, dream

cbn

Ox-goad

itb

To pity

bon

A circuit; roundabout

To initiate

-pn

All the way, constantly

U

Angel of 2 S.

b«bv

75

Angel of i st Dec. d

Hues, colours, complexions

UTU

11

Bread (Ps. lxxviii. 2s) = D*?n, DPlS

Lucifer, the Herald Star

by metathesis. [K.D, L.C.K.

[Vide K. of S., fig. 53]

Strn*

?. 500]

A lamenting, wailing

rhh'

Angel of 2 S.

Staaa

The Pleiades

The Influence from Kether

Night; by night

rb'b

Salt

rhb

NUIT, THE STAR GODDESS

The name of a Giant

wy

76

7T

Secret, put away; a hiding-

JV3PI

Boaz, one of the Pillars of the W3

place

Temple of Solomon

Rest, peace

nn’j

Die

jm

Slave, servant

my

Angel of S S.

^taai

77

Jachin, one of the Pillars of

pnx’

Prayed

nyn

the Temple of Solomon

The river Gihon. [Gen. ii. 1

3 ] pn’3

3 rd tP

to'D

Overflowing. [Ps. cxxiv. 5]

pn

Conjunction, meeting, union

my

Towers, citadels

j

Union; an assembling

ijn

The Influence from Kether

Sra

GOD of Jesod-Malkuth of

Strength; a he-goat

ry

Briah

There are 78 cards in the Tarot.

78

Foundation

n©’

2(i—12). The Mystic Number

Universal, general

of Kether as Hua. The sum of

Throne. [Exod. xvii. 16]

D3

the Key-Numbers of the Super-

nal Beard

DD

Angel of 10 W.

9* = 3‘- 5

>rr

Angel of Ra Hoor Khuit

DNVfct

GODS

Briatic Palace of Chesed ["DPlS 73'Pl

I. [Ex. xxiii. 20]

©JR

Angel of $

Anger, wrath; also nose

12

SEPHER SEPHIROTHDD

Angel of 10 W.

9* = 3‘- 5

>rr

Angel of Ra Hoor Khuit

DNVfct

GODS

Briatic Palace of Chesed ["DPlS 73'Pl

I. [Ex. xxiii. 20]

©JR

Angel of $

Anger, wrath; also nose

12

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Hearer of Cries; Angel of b«b« 
6 P., and of 5 W.

Night Demon of 2 nd Dec. TTJJ J'fcO 
Throne NM

Here, hither NB

Angel of $ SWK

A prayer (Ch.)

Briatic Palace of Hod jUflJ 
Kindly, righteous, holy TDfi

Laban; white

The beloved thing; res grata H 1 IT 3

82

Abbreviatura quatuor syste- 
matum

tt 83

The drops of dew. St 3

[Job xxxviii. 28]

Benajahu, son of Jehoiada

See 73 Sa'J

A flowing, wave D’Si

Person, self; (Ch.) wing Cp

Consecration; dedicated roan

Angel of a P. b«vb

To flee, put one's things in 
safety. [Jerem. vi. 1]

7x12; or (2 3 + 3) (2* x 3)—hence 84

esteemed by some

A wing (army), squadron; a 
chosen troop

[i.z.q. 699] yrnN

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 71] JFllTK

Was silent D&T

A dream

Enoch

■pri

Knew

jrr

Boaz (is referred to Hod)

TJTD

A flower, cup

jraa

Put in motion, routed

nan

Circumcision

nS’a

The mouth; the letter

ns

A name of GOD, as- ITHN

serting the identity of

Kether and Malkuth

Elohim. [Note masc. pi. of

D’n*?R

fern, sing.]

Hallelu-Jah

rrbbn

A rustling of wings

n*?ian

Geomantic Intelligence of V*

, ban

[Vide I.R.Q. 778] D 1 K

rwr rv

A cup: hence Pudendum

DID

Muliebre

A blemish, spot, stain

did

Angel of 10 C.

Wa

Plenitude

n^a

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p, 114]

\)ba

A cup

“1 m

Angel of i st Dec. K

’aSna

Blasphemed

fP J

Standards, military ensigns

D ,l ?an

Determined

oar

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

White Storks

nTDn

Whiteness; frankincense;

n:nS

Sphere of J

Redness; sparkling

Sbn

To be hot

nan

Darkness

-jd n

A duke of Edom

nxnja

Roaring, seething; burning

Shut up

V

Body

W

Silence

naan

Angel of 9 S.

Sx'na

Very silent

non

The Pillar, Jachin

P'

Water

n*a

Kings

Wicker-basket

bo

Night Demon of 2 nd Dec. SI

ma

5 (i—13). The Mystic Number of

Kether as Achad. The NumberAngel of 9 S.

Sx'na

Very silent

non

The Pillar, Jachin

P'

Water

n*a

Kings

Wicker-basket

bo

Night Demon of 2 nd Dec. SI

ma

5 (i—13). The Mystic Number of

Kether as Achad. The Number

of Paths in the Supernal Beard ;

according to the number of the

Letters, 3 = 11, etc.

A tree

f^'X

Amen, [Cf. 741]

jax

The Ephod

max

The “TlX nin'”, inter- YljnnX'

laced

Angel of 4 S.

Sx'Sa

Archangel of Geburah

Food, fare

Angel

Daughter, virgin, bride, Kore xa^a

Manna XJ 3

A hut, tent H 31 D

Pekht, ‘extension’ nHNfi

L 9 *

Angel of 5 S. TX'JX

Mud

(Deut. xxviii. 58.) yrbx mn' 
[Vide no. 572]

Terror, a name of Geburah nns

A duke of Edom. [Vide 
also Ezekiel xxiii.]

The sons of (the merciful) 
GOD

*?X 'M

Incense

miaS

A disc, round shield

Possession

nbn

Arduous, busy; an army

X3X

Corpse

new

The valley of vision

pnn'a

To extinguish

T»

Destruction. [Ps. 1. 20]

'an

A shore

tpn

A window

pSn

A drop

naa

Children

D'n'r

93

94

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

The great Stone

nS-u px

Angel of 2 W.—Daniel

Sx'n

Angel of 10 P.

rrynn

The waters

dw

Multitude, abundance; Haman pH

Zabulon

Angel of 2 nd Dec. £1

'pm

6

anxa

Journey

nSna

Queen

naVa

Selah. [Ps. xxxii. 5, 6, etc.] rpD

A name of GOD

'J1X Sx

Chaldee form of DVlSx

pnSx

By day

aav

Praiseworthy; Angel of 7 W. 7 KH 7 7

Work

roxVa

The secret (counsel) of

nvr "hd

the Lord [Ps. xxv. 14]

71-97

Breeder, rearer; Day Demon 
of i st Dec. n

Changeless, constant; the GOD pDtf

Amon

The Son of Man Q7X p

Archangel of Netzach bxoxn 
The appointed time pj

To seize suddenly (rapere) PJCDPI

A hand-breadth, palm. fiSfcO

[1 Kings vii. 26—Ex. xxv. 25]

A brick, tile

A building; an architect

n»a

Aquae EL Boni.

[“Quicksilver,” K.D. 
L.C.K. p. 442]

Sx 'a

A name of GOD D'hSk KID

98

Temporary dwelling.

[Ex. xxxiii. 11]

war

Image; hid, concealed— 
pertains to Sol and the 
Lingam-Yoni

}an

To consume, eat

Son

White

rre

The pangs of childbirth HtS

9998

Temporary dwelling.

[Ex. xxxiii. 11]

war

Image; hid, concealed— 
pertains to Sol and the 
Lingam-Yoni

}an

To consume, eat

Son

White

rre

The pangs of childbirth HtS

99

The Vault of Heaven; an 
inner chamber; wedlock, 
nuptial

nsin

Clay of Death, Infernal 
Abode of Geburah

pwe

Cognition, knowledge

njPT

io a

J-

100

A day; the seas; the times. 
[Vide no. 1100]

D'a'

Vases, vessels

D'Sd

The palm; the letter Kaph

*P

An effort,exertion. [I.R.Q. 995] p*7j£

Mitigation of the one Sxaa 'na 
by the other

7r 101

Swallowed, destroyed

pSx

A storehouse

DDK

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 147]

j*

Angel of 4 C.

rraia

15

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Archangel of © and A; SiO'D 
Angel of 7 S.; Angel of 
Malkuth of Briah, etc.

Kingdom; a virgin princess; nyhts 
esp. THE Virgin Princess,

i.e. Ecclesia

Gut; gut-string

XD'3

A white goose Tllfrt

Trust, truth, faith

niiox

Bela, a King of Edom ; to

^3

possess; lands, government

Concupiscibilis

■tom

Grace, pride, fame, glory; a

'3¥

wild goat

Dust

IT

MX

To guard, protect

P

Loathed

Food, meat (Ch.)

ym

Oblation

nma

Prophets

D'X33

A calf

Father of the mob, or of pfin

the multitude

Quarrel, dispute

JHO

Personal (belongings), small

7X?K D

private property

Sodom

mo

Giving up, presenting, re-

nSio

mitting

Trade; a fish-hook

hx

Z02

7T IO 3

I04

S(i-M)

To subvert, ruin, change

Desert land : Earth of Netzach n'¥

io 5

106

Attained 
Angel of 7 C.

Fish; the letter Nun 
Angel of 9 C.

Stibium

Line, string, linen thread 
An egg

Angel of Netzach of Briah 
Angel ruling ft

T»

V

IT 107

rrc '3 
Sk'm 
bwy

2 tJ x 3*: hence used as the number of 108 
beads on a rosary by some sects

The ears D'DTX

The fruit of a deep valley Sron '2x3 
Hell of Jesod-Malkuth DJT 3

A wall

To force, do wrong to DBn

To love very much pn

To shut up, obstruct DDn

The middle

To measure out; a decree; pn

tall. (Masc. gender.) Cf. 113

Angel L.T.D. of ft BUD

A Giant: “ the lust of GOD ” SxiS?

ir 109To love very much pn

To shut up, obstruct DDn

The middle

To measure out; a decree; pn

tall. (Masc. gender.) Cf. 113

Angel L.T.D. of ft BUD

A Giant: “ the lust of GOD ” SxiS?

ir 109

Day-demon of 2 nd Dec.

Lightning TM

16

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Quiet 
Music 
Angel of ty 
Circle, sphere

nnuo

paa

^x’no

buy

xt-iv

no

Father of Faith iTJl&Kfl iK

Tectum coeli fabrilis sub nsmn a

quo desponsationes con- 
iugum hunt

Resemblance, likeness

p , on

Cherubic Signs—TTL replaced 
by T

pea

To embrace

pan

At the end of the days; the 
right hand

A sign, flag, standard

Angel of 6 W.

DJ

bxEVD

Kinsman

oy

The Number of Abra-Melin Servitors r i r 
of O.P.A.A. 3 {r— (6x6)}-s-6. O

Red. [Vide Gen. xxv. 25] XJIOTX 
A name of GOD DTlSx XIH TIN 
A thousand; Aleph *)bx

Ruin, destruction, sudden death JDK

aum dj;k

Thick darkness bax

Passwords of. UTX HW TV

Mad bbma

Angel of © bx'aj

Common holocaust; an ascent nbiy 
A Duke of Edom mby

Title of Kether. (Mirum xSs

occultum)

Angel of 2 C. bxy’x

A structure; mode of building 
Was angry DJi

Sharpness pin

Jabok. [Gen. xxxii. 22.] pi'

Note 112 = 4 x 28

The Lord GOD Q'nbx HIT' 
Ebal bl’y

Likewise; the same. (Fern, 
gender.) Cf. 108

A giving away, remitting 
A stream, brook

npn

nn ,l ?D

hs>

Qliphoth of Jesod 
Tear (weeping)

Gracious, obliging, indulgent J*)Jp| 
Science jnis

Brains pfTlO

114

bx'boi

yai

Geomantic Intelligence of nj 
Here am I 'JJfi

The heat of the day DVH

To make strong; vehement, p?n 
eager

”5

Doves

Heaven of Chesed 
The munificent ones

DUV

pao

17

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Primordial

Fog, darkness 
Guide; Duke

rwby

Win

117

To pass, renew, change 
To ferment yan

Strength; Chassan, Ruler of Air JDH 
The High Priest jMD

Lydian-stone jnn

Beelzebub, the Fly-GOD 3 'QT 7 y 3 
Weeping (subst.) nya-i

Night Demon of 2 n<1 Dec. T ejVfctn 
Abominable bus

(S_= 2 (r—15):—M being the 
5 th Path

njna 
paa

n8

“9

Master

Foundation, basis 
The time of the decree 
StrengtheningNight Demon of 2 n<1 Dec. T ejVfctn 
Abominable bus

(S_= 2 (r—15):—M being the 
5 th Path

njna 
paa

n8

“9

Master

Foundation, basis 
The time of the decree 
Strengthening

Prophetic sayings, or decrees: 
“His days shall be”;—hence 
Abra-Melin

Velum

Prop; the letter Samekh 
A name of GOD

Ipb

ty

II J J~

Vain idols u¥x

PTermination of Abr-ameiim? dS’ox 
A n end, extremity DSX

Emanated from

Of whirling motions

D'*?a*?an

Nocturnal vision

h mrn

Angel ruling as

Snjd

It is filled

Angel L.T.N. of as

v

Vi compressa

HDUN

Revolutiones (Animarum)

D'W?a

A name of GOD, Q'n^N Min' nHN

implying Kether—Chokmah—

Binah, 3, 4, & 5 letters

War

nar6a

A blow, plague

Pleasure, delight

Laesio aliqualis, violatio

oas

An oak; hardness

join

Pleasure, delight; Eden

. py

Qliphoth of Chokmah

Snot?

5 s

V

Night Demon of 2 nd Dec. X

^aa-t

[Vide S.D. v. 16]

H 3 W

Angel of 4 P.

Wiaa

A widow

naaSt*

Darkness

nS’Sx

Day Demon of i st Dec. d

p*a*a

A name of GOD N 7 JN 'HN nW

Hospitality

pba

123

124

126

18

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Horse DID

On, a name of GOD [see 120], py 
penalty of iniquity ; “ being 
taken away ”

7T127

Material

Angel of 5 P. Wis

2 T ^"128 
Eliphaz TS’Sn

Angel ruling s= SiOaJK

To deliver, loose

Robustus gratia. [Vide K.D. pDll 
L.C.K. p. 399]

GOD, the Eternal One WriSt* HW

129

Pleasure [Gen. xviii. 12] JTnj? 
Delight, pleasure J^y

Deliverance

rtan

The Angel of re¬ 
demption

Decrees, prophetic sayings p7ft

Eye y the letter Ayin

ry

The Pillars

niay

Destitute

A staircase, ladder

nbo

Angel of 5 C.

n'Sns

* 3 °

He was angry 
Nose 
Turn, roll 
Title of Kether

tptt

D'SX

HD1DD

Angel of 6 C.

btvb:

Samael ; Qliphoth of Hod

Skjod

Angel L.T.N. of np

R'DD

Humility

may

To make waste

pb 132

Angel of 4 W.

Snnd

To receive

Sap

133

[Vide I.Z.Q. 699J

pa*a

Vine

1“

Angel of 5 S.

rvayn

The salt sea

rtSan D’

Burning

l 134 
? bi

« 3 S

Day Demon of 2 nd Dec. az5 JVDU

Geomantic Intelligence

bumbo

of TSap

133

[Vide I.Z.Q. 699J

pa*a

Vine

1“

Angel of 5 S.

rvayn

The salt sea

rtSan D’

Burning

l 134 
? bi

« 3 S

Day Demon of 2 nd Dec. az5 JVDU

Geomantic Intelligence

bumbo

of T

A destitute female

rray

The congregation. [Vide

bnp

no. 161]

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 673] nbp

2(i-i 6). If

136

Spirit of 7 /

Intelligence of %

Sx'srr

The Avenging Angel “JX^D

Fines, penalties

paa

A voice

"■137

A wheel

)S1N

19

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

The belly, gullet. XaaitDDX

[? Hebrew: vide K.D.

L.C.K. p. 138]

An image, a statue.

raxa

[Gen. xxviii, 22]

A receiving; the Qabalah

rrap

The Son of GOD DVlSx J 3

To smoothe, divide

pSn

To leaven, ferment

pan

To pollute

Libanon. [Cant. iv. n, 15]

paV

He shall smite

pa

Forehead

nxa

Hiddekel, the eastern river

7 T

ViTtn

of Eden

Kings; Angels of Tiphareth

of Assiah, and of Netzach 
of Briah

Robust; oaken

Gathered, collected

S)DX

Angel of 4 P.

rrpa

Precept

mxa

Trusty, steady

jaxj

L.A. Angel of cb

Prima

xap

Geomantic Intelligence SkHI&DK

of b

Wickedness, destruction

A stranger; Balaam

Night Demon of 3 rd Dec. ft dSjd

Delights (A & V) DHOnO

The unshoeing ItX'Sl"!

Running waters. [Cant. iv. 15] D'SllJ

143

I2 S J 144

A sandal Sro

Anterius; the East; days first D*lp 
of the first

The numerical value of the 13 Paths 145 
of the Beard of Microprosopus

The Staff of GOD. DTl^XH nDfi 
[Ex. xvii. 9]

Inscrutable 
Angel of 6 P. 
A feast

n^a

rvaaj

rniyo

The First Gate. [Vide 
K.D. L.GK. p. 184]

Limit, end; boundless 
The world; an adult

146

xap km 
WD

nby

The Four Names in the Lesser 147 
Ritual of the Pentagram;

viz.: rvnx 'nx nvr

A name of DTl^X IHTV IT iTTlX

GOD

Angels of Hod in Assiah d\-6x »a 
and Briah

Glutton and drunkard KH 1 D 1 SSlT 
[Deut. xxi. 20]

To withdraw, retire pfin

148

20

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Scales; — 
Victory 
Flour, meal

D'JTNd

nw

nop

The living GODS. D’Tl D'Stf 
[Cf. * 54 ]

A beating of the breast ; a ISDPl

noisy strikingTo withdraw, retire pfin

148

20

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Scales; — 
Victory 
Flour, meal

D'JTNd

nw

nop

The living GODS. D’Tl D'Stf 
[Cf. * 54 ]

A beating of the breast ; a ISDPl

noisy striking

Ariolus. [K.D. L.C.K. p. 53]

A walking shoe to

Thine eye. [Vide I.R.Q. 652]

Nest }p

■149

15 °

*■15*

rvnx spelt in full nn nv nn s|*?n 
“ tetra- nnx nm dvi^n nin*

GRAMMATON of the GODS is 
One TETRAGRAMMATON ”

Night Demon of 3 rd Dec. T

The Fountain of Living ffipD

Waters. [Jer. xvii. 13]

A standing upright, stature HDlp

Jealous NJp

152

Benjamin p'xx

The Bringing-forth One 
Residence, station

5(r—i7) *53

L.A. Angel of Sx’pin

Elohim of Lives.

[Cf. 149]

L 155

Adonai the King ^76 'ilN

The faithful friend J&fcO 11*1

The beard (correct). [S.D, fcOpI 
ii. 1, et seq.]

Letters of the Cherubic ¥ ♦ 3 I fcD J 1 
signs

Angel of 2 nd Dec. n*D*D*

“The Concealed and n'o^y

Saving”; Angel of 6 W.

A seed nap

12 x 13, the number of letters in each 156 
* tablet of Enoch'

The Tabernacle of the 7 yiD 
congregation. [Lev. i. 1]

A viper nysx

BABALON, THE VIC- wSfctttO 
TORIOUS QUEEN.

[Vide XXX Aethyrs:

Liber cdxviii]

Angel of Hod of Briah

Joseph [referred to Jesod] tpv

Angel of I s * Dec. H\_ VISS

SlJN

A bird Spy

“Crying aloud”; the name of tyfl 
a King of Edom

Zion pnt

Limpid blood Ww

v *57

The setting of the 
Sun

Was angry, enraged; anger

nan wion

21

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Lingam

F

The beard. [Vide S.D. ii. 467, jpf 
and no. 22]

Occult

xSfi'ia

Female; Yoni

mpa

Angel of 9 S.

bxiay

A Duke of Edom

rap

Arrows

D'x'n

To suffocate

pan

Balances. [Ch.]

parxa

Surpassing Whiteness.

[Vide 934]

Point

mpa

[Vide I.R.Q. 652]

Angel of 3 S.

rrapn

Silver

AM

Fell down. Decidit

Ssa

A rock, stone

ybD

A tree

rv

A Duke of Edom

P'S

Lay, fell. [Ez. iii. 8]

Tas

Image

Cain

rp

The heavenly man;

nxS'y six

lit. the ‘primordial’ 
or ‘ exalted * man

The Congregation of the plIPl* Snp

Eternal

K3'p

Nine Paths of the Inferior Beard;Tas

Image

Cain

rp

The heavenly man;

nxS'y six

lit. the ‘primordial’ 
or ‘ exalted * man

The Congregation of the plIPl* Snp

Eternal

K3'p

Nine Paths of the Inferior Beard;

14 + 15 + ... + 22 = 162

Son of the Right Hand ; 
pr. n. of Benjamin

Day Demon of I st Dec. f VdSdk'm 
A ngel ruling VlDlD

[Vide no. 361, a XI PI

numerical Temurah of 163]

Woman, wife

napia

inn

Ye shall cleave

D'pann

Outer; civil, as opposed 
to sacred. [Vide K.D. 
L.C.K. p. 342]

The Pillars

DHDJ?

Strength. [Ez. iii. 8 ]

D'prn

“To make them know.” 
[Ps. xxv. 14]

Bjmnk

Nehema

naya

NEMO. [Name of M.T.]

n'aay

Angel of 3 W.

An assembly

pray

A King of Edom

lanSya

Reus mulctae. [Vide 
K.D. L.C.K. p. 498]

paa a”n

Heaven of Geburah

jrya

Night Demon of 3 rd Dec.

Native land of Job

The Most High

py

163

164

165

166

22

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

The Unnameable One 
(a demon)

7T 167

pO'DK

Fetters, [Job xxxvi. 8]

D'p'l

Parentes Superni ntfS’y XfiXl X 3 X

* 3 *

•r

The accentuator

D'OyCO

The Wand; (David’s) Staff

Spa

Cloud

1*

26(i—18)

Principium emittens

S’xxa

Emanating from

SwO

Angel L.T.N. of

pxSb

“The Face of God”; name

Sms

of an angel

Cut, divided

ypn

He affected. [Not written]

asjr

Clusters; grapes

The heel, the end. [Mic. vii. 20]

Jacob

Lighten mine eyes

7 r

'37 Sj

Day Demon of 3 rd Dec. ss

s *P“

Torches

cn'sb

Splendor ei per cir-

)b run

cuitum

2 {1 — (7 x 7 )} + 7 -

?

Suction

np’ 3 1

Duplicity

nSsaa

A slipping, falling

nS’B 3

168

170

171

172

173

174

Spirit of <? Sxanp

An advisor, counselling pm*

To eternity wish

Illegitimate SlDS

I76

177

Dominus Domino- D'jyiKn jm 
rum

The Garden of Eden py JJj

To cry out for help pyr

Angel L.T.D. of KS 
Plenitude of plenitudes *iSan nSe

The lower part, the loins mcSn

Good pleasure, choice, decision, Vgn 
will

Quicksilver

7 T

Ligatio mjv

178

7TI79

180

A spring, fountain. [Cant. pJflQ

• v - »s]

The front part 
Vicious, faulty

D'JS

hSidb

•181

182Good pleasure, choice, decision, Vgn 
will

Quicksilver

7 T

Ligatio mjv

178

7TI79

180

A spring, fountain. [Cant. pJflQ

• v - »s]

The front part 
Vicious, faulty

D'JS

hSidb

•181

182

Deus Zelotes fcOp

Outcry, clamour nprr

Layer of snares, supplanter;

Jacob

King of the Gods OVlSttH *]xSa 
Passive fas opposed to

Sapna = active]

23

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

183

Ancient time; eastward

184

mpj

18s

186

A stone of stumbling; a

fp: pN

rock to fail over. [Is.viii. 14]

An increase

epio

Praefecti

D'iioa

A place

Dipb

Back of the Head; an ape;

■TP

the letter Qoph

187

Angels of Chokmah, and of

D'JSIN

Chokmah of Briah

Lifted up

[K. of S., Fig. 52]

,

Sn'sid

188

Jaacob. [Vide K.D. L.C.K.

P- 443]

The Master of the Nose DDinPl

Fons obseratus. [Cant, 
iv. 11]

The Ancient among pDn K 3 D 
the ancient

2(i—19) 190

Ubi perrexit Angelus 
Internal

Corona florida prominens 
The side or flank; rib

First devil. V. Porta 
Coelorum Fig. XVI

The end, appointed time.

[Dan. xii. 13.] [Vide no. 305]

pf

&

J?

Countenance

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 143]

Night Demon of i st Dec. T 
A box, chest; a repository

Poisonous wind, Simoon

Ye shall cleave in ffl»*V 3 D'p^nH 
TETRAGRAMMATON.

[Vide no. 220]

** *93 
194

Righteousness, equity, justice: p*TC 
the Sphere of If. [Vide

K. D. L.C.K. p. 656]

A flock 
Visitation

Mare Soph. [Vide K.D.

L. C.K. p. 435]

The crown, summit, point 
El Supemus

[vide k.d. nrn oy x&n wk

L.C.K. p. 71]

198

Victories D'nw

IT 199

A giving freely; 'EKtrj/ioirwri HpTX

rtjpo

mips

J~ 196

P|1D D*

rv

v 191

J’BW

D'DSR

pNB

nsip

nsy^i

192

Alae. [Vide K.D. L.C.K.

P- 483]

A branch

200

D'SM

24

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

A bone

Archetypal

panp

Belonging to the Spring

TP

A sling; a casting-net

Divination

DDp

Light (Ch.)

“IN

To make empty

pp 3

Pure; afield; son

“D

Elevatio

ns’pt

Apertures

D’ 3 p 3

L.A. Angel of

Many, much

an

Initials of the Trinity:

T 3 K

rm:p:aK

Passed away, perished; feather,“IN

To make empty

pp 3

Pure; afield; son

“D

Elevatio

ns’pt

Apertures

D’ 3 p 3

L.A. Angel of

Many, much

an

Initials of the Trinity:

T 3 K

rm:p:aK

Passed away, perished; feather,

wing; (it. membrum et quid.

genitale)

To lie in wait

ana

A well, spring

nxa

Created

N“I 3

Exotic, foreign

“U

Commencement of the name 
Abra-Melin

Foreign resident; race S.; an

age (Ch.)

The righteous

pnx

Day Demon of 2 od Dec. T

“ItON

Splendrous

TIN

Mighty; hero

naa

Mountain

n.n

Assembly; area

NY1N

Hail

nna

Spake; word; cloud

nan

They of the World

ofw

1Tb, a scorpion

axnjN

Lord of the Universe

thy pnx

Light. Cf. 9 and ii. Aur is “IIK

the balanced Light of open

day

Limitless

pN

Ate

ma

Walled, fenced

TU

That which cuts. [Vide no. 607]

The Elders. [Deut. xxi.

19] D’apr

Melt, fuse

PP T

The Crown of the Ark

“IT

Grow great

nan

Feather

nnax

A cistern

ma

Bowed

nna

To make strife, contend

nnj

Hagar

nn

To kill

nn

Abominable

tru

Jizchak. [Vide K.D. L.C.K. pHX'

p. 266 ]

Multitude

an

2 5

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

209

Chief Seer or Prophet J 1 X 12 X

(hence Abra-Melin)

Reward, profit, prize H 13 X

To delay, tarry; behind (prep.) 1 PIX 
Way ) 1 * 1 X

10 th Spirit of Goetia. 1 X 12

Dispersed 1J3

Sojourned, dwelt 1 ))

Honour; a King of Edom; HI 
the Supernal Benignity

Oppressed 21 T

2(i—20) 210

Adam Primus. [Vide no. HlX 
607]

Day Demon of i st Dec. as 1 XT 2 
Choice 1 PI 2

Pass on, fly 11*12

To decide, determine 1 U

To dwell; circle, cycle; gene- * 1)1 
ration

To conceive HID

A joining of words; incanta- 1211 
tions; to conjoin; a brother

A sword 22PI

Angel of i st Dec. H

Naaman

[Vide 0 EAHMA] f J t 3

Punctata DHlp 3

IT 211

[Worthy] 1 I 12 X

A lion ' 2 X

Strong 1)23

A flash; lightning DlXTl

a girdle ian

A flood; Jeor IX*

“Fear,” the fear of the JTjfp X*V

(i.e. wonderment)

212

Great Voice

■ton

Night Demon of i st Dec. Vi

•nun

Splendour; to enlighten

mi

To spread out; harlot; golden

miA flood; Jeor IX*

“Fear,” the fear of the JTjfp X*V

(i.e. wonderment)

212

Great Voice

■ton

Night Demon of i st Dec. Vi

•nun

Splendour; to enlighten

mi

To spread out; harlot; golden

mi

To enclose; secret chamber

Tin

Strong, powerful, mighty

Calx

"M

[I.R.Q. 234 (?)]

rnn

Slaughter

rum

Loaded

nn

To be strange; a stranger

in

The Supernal StO T\iib]}

Mercy of GOD

non

Nubes Magna pj?

A girdle

•niK

Angel of i st Dec. T

HI

Whiteness

Hn

Came down

TY

Air; Spirit; wind; Mind

nn

Eminent; a Prince.

TIN

[Ps. viii. 1]

A path, narrow way

mix

Posterior; the reversed part

iinx

A rising; to rise “as the Sun,

” mi

give light

213

214

215

26

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

To encompass. [Vide K.D. ~|‘n

L.C.K. p. 340]

6 s f/~ 216

Night Demon of i st Dec. — 3 ' 50 “N

Lion H’TN

The middle Gate. N33

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. 
p. 184]

Courage

mn:

Oracle

■V3“i

Blood of grapes

D'3ty d-i

Dread, fear

nsi*

Profound. [Ps. xcii. 6]

poiy

Anger, wrath

un

Latitude

arm

The air

•m

Temple, palace

m*a

Food

ma

A bee

rrnan

The navel

T13LD

Angel ruling t

Sndjpio

Angel L.T.N. of

ajpre

Controversia Domini

nan

Ether. [Vide K.D. L.C.K. tf-plN 
P- 55 ]

The Creative World

nN'“i3

The benignity of Time

tfoy non

The Moon

rrv

Multitude

Arcana

Odour, a smell m

219

Mundatio, mundities HTlb

The Number of Verses in Liber R 220 
Legis

The Elect

Heroina; Augusta; Domina 
Ye shall cleave PfirvS D'p^n

unto TETRAGRAMMATON.

[Not written]

Clean, elegant

Giants. [Fully written only D'S'fiJ 
in Num. xiii. 33]

Left-handed Svastika, drawn on the 221 
square of <$ given by Agrippa.

Cf. 231

Long

Angel of 10 S.

T*

Urias

mix

u Unto the Place.” 
[Ex. xxiii. 20]

Dipan Ss

Whiteness

mnn

Goodly mountain.

[Ex. iii. 25]

31D in

Now, already; K’bar, “the 
river Khebar”; Day Demon 
of 3 rd Dec.

I will chase

n"iN“i

7 r

Male (Ch.)

“131

Walk, journey; The PATH

Principia emanandi

'ppm

27

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Effigurata

♦pipn

Union

*nrvI will chase

n"iN“i

7 r

Male (Ch.)

“131

Walk, journey; The PATH

Principia emanandi

'ppm

27

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Effigurata

♦pipn

Union

*nrv

* 5 *

J ■■

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 234]

x’-nn

Profound, hidden; the North.

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 666]

Long, tall

TT

1 nx

A piscine, pond ; [Blessing,

Prov. x. 22]

Remember ; male (sacred

73T

Phallus—Vide S.D. ii. p. 467)

Damna. [Vide K.D. L.C.K. Pp'TJ

P* 569 ]

First-born

“VD3

Blessed !

Ruler of Earth

The Tree of Life

D"n py

tr

Astonishment

man

[Vide K.D. L.C.K. p. 153]

'll*

Fasciata

DHipy

Angel of 2 nd Dec. TTJ

rrrx-i

Hod, 42-fold Name in

pisVr

Yetzirah. [Vide Liber

P

777, Col. xc. p. 18]

2 (1—21). Right-handed Svastika,

226

227

228

229

230

drawn on Sq. of 6 
Prolonged; grew long 
Male

Sum of the Four Ways of spelling 232 
TETRAGRAMMATON in the 
Four Worlds

Geomantic Intelligence Vx’X’JfiX 
of X

Ruler of Fire Vx-ix

Equivalent to "TIN 'TV, 
Fiat Lux. [Vide K.D. 
L.C.K. p. 55]

Let there be Light! The 
Mystic Name of Allan 
Bennett, a Brother of 
the Cross and Rose, who 
began this Dictionary.

tin rr

IIX w

Memento

* 2 33 
“VDT

The Tree of Life. [Vide 
no. 228]

D"nn py

Night Demon of 3 rd

Dec. css

234

3 xnx:n

. 2 35

Archangel of Chesed, and 7 K'jT 1 ¥ 
Angel of Chesed of Briah

Angel L.T.N. of T

A handful

236

IXfiyBD

r»p

Angel of 3 C.

237

7X71X1

238

Doniinus Mirabilium n^X^S3TI JHX 
Rachel Vri 7

Azrael, the Angel of Death

Iron

The lot

Sxitx

*?na

T239

-px

x-iim

28

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

Angel of 3 rd Dec. d

Myrrh

na

Plagae Filiorum 
Hominum. [I.e. Succubae,

K.D. L.C.K. p. 562]

240

Prima Germina

Angel of i st Dec. sso

DODO

Cash; counted out, paid 
down

D’-npe

High, lofty

tn

L.A. Angel of V%

w 241

TN’pOD

Ariel, Angel of Air

242

Win

Recollection

jrvat

Abram. [Vide 248]

243

D13K

Created (he them).

[Gen. v. 2]

DN“Q

Learned, complete. To finish, *02) 
bring to pass (Ch.)

A bone; to destroy

D*U

Angel of 7 P.

. 244

bwmRecollection

jrvat

Abram. [Vide 248]

243

D13K

Created (he them).

[Gen. v. 2]

DN“Q

Learned, complete. To finish, *02) 
bring to pass (Ch.)

A bone; to destroy

D*U

Angel of 7 P.

. 244

bwm

To be insensible; in deep 
sleep, in trance. [Vide 
no. 649]

DTI

2 45

Adam Qadmon DHN

Gall, bile

Spirit of God

mo

Sxnn

Angel of 3 S.

, 246

Myrrh

“110

Vision, aspect

Angel L.T.D. of d 
Height, altitude

Angel L.T.N. of

To overwhelm (Ps. Ixxvii. 18); 
a flood

A light TlXD

Night Demon of i 5t Dec. d DW*"I 
Sensus symbolicus TD*1

nwio

jna

Stmn

on

-nSx

247

Abraham. [Vide 243 and DIT 13 N 
505, 510. Discussed at 
length in Zohar]

The Three that bear wit- 
ness, above and beneath, 
respectively. the

Spirit, the Water, and the 
Blood; X being Air 
(Spiritus), 1 standing for 
Blood, and ft being 
both Water and the in¬ 
itial of D'ft, water. For 
X*Q see 203

Uriel or Auriel, archangel of SxniK 
Earth, and angel of Netzach;

= “ The light of God”

In vision. [Vide K.D. HNIM

L.C.K. p. 553]

Gematria fHDJl

Wine; bitumen; an ass (from 
“ to disturb ”)

Mercy; womb DITI

A lance nS"!

248

29

SEPHER SEPHIROTH

L.A. Angel of b Sn’T-ir

Night Demon of 2 nd Dec. =^= yit 22 
Fear, terror

249

The living GOD of D'&Styn 
the Worlds; or, 
of the Ages

[The South.] Midday DWl

Habit, action (Ch.)

Fir, cedar

The angel Uriel: “Vrihl,” 
i.e. Magical Force. [Vide 
Lytton’s “Coming Race,” 
andAbra-Melin—forehead 
Lamen]

7T25I

Merciful DIH^

255

Night Demon of 3 rd Dec. f 
Burdensome; with difficulty fcOftlPf 
The East fllTO

A river, stream. [Gen. ii. 10] ^2

Cantatio elata ,-|Tl

16* = 4 4 = 2 8 = 256 ^“^“256

Aaron pMX

Tidings (Ps. lxviii. 12); a 
saying, speech. [Vide

K. D. L.C.K. p. 128]

The Sons of the Righteous '22

[See no. 705] [Vide K.D.

L. C.K. p. 20]

The Spirit of the Mother