Author: Abraham of Worms
Source: https://archive.org/details/TheSacredMagicOfAbramelinTheMageBook2

The Sacred Magic
of
Abramelin the Mage
Book II
Translated by
S.L. Mac Gregor Mathers
The Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage
Book II
This Adobe Acrobat edition contains the complete and unaltered text of the
corresponding sections in the second (1900) edition published by John M. Watkins,
London.
Prepared and typeset by Benjamin Rowe, December 16, 1998.
41
THE Second BOOK
OF THE
HOLY MAGIC,
WHICH GOD GAVE UNTO MOSES, AARON, DAVID, SOLOMON, AND OTHER
SAINTS, PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS; WHICH TEACHETH
THE TRUE DIVINE WISDOM.
BEQUEATHED BY ABRAHAM UNTO LAMECH HIS SON.
TRANSLATED FROM THE HEBREW.
.
The Sacred Magic
42
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE SACRED MAGIC.
Prologue.
HE Wisdom of the Lord is an inexhaustible fountain, neither hath there
ever been a man born who could penetrate its veritable origin and
foundation. The Sages and Holy Fathers have drunk long draughts
thereof, and have been fully satisﬁed therewith. But with all this, not one
among them hath been able to comprehend or know the Radical Principles,
because the Creator of all things reserveth that unto Himself; and, like a
jealous God, He hath indeed wished that we should enjoy the fruit thereof,
but He hath not wished to permit us to touch either the Tree or its Root. It is
then not only proper, but further also we are compelled to conform ourselves
unto the Will of the Lord, walking in that Path, by the which also our
predecessors went, without seeking out through a vain curiosity how it is that
God reigneth and governeth in His Divine Wisdom; because such would be a
very great presumption and a bestial conceit. Let us then content ourselves
with only knowing how many blessings He hath granted unto us Sinners, and
what extent of power He hath given unto us mortals over all things, and in
what way it is permitted unto us to use them. Let us then content ourselves
with this, laying aside all other, curiosity, observing without any comment that
which shall be set down in this Book with ﬁdelity. And if ye do follow my
advice, ye shall be infallibly comforted thereby.
1
7
Of Abramelin the Mage
43
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
what and how many be the forms of veritable magic.
HOSO should wish to recount all the Arts and Operations which in
our times be reputed and preached abroad as Wisdom and Magical
Secrets; he should as well undertake to count the waves and the
sands of the Sea; seeing that the matter hath come to such a pass that every
trick of a buﬀoon is believed to be Magic, that all the abominations of impious
Enchanters, all Diabolical Illusions, all Pagan Idolatries, all Superstitions,
Fascinations, Diabolical Pacts, and lastly all that the gross blindness of the
World can touch with its bands and feet is reckoned as Wisdom and Magic!
The Physician, the Astrologer, the Enchanter, the Sorceress, the Idolater, and
the Sacrilegious, is called of the common People a Magician! Also he who
draweth his Magic whether from the Sun, whether from the Moon, whether
from the Evil Spirits, whether from Stones, Herbs, Animals, Brutes, or lastly
from thousand divers sources, so that the Heaven itself is astonished thereat.
There be certain who draw their Magic from Air, from Earth, from Fire, from
Water, from Physiognomy, from the Hand, from Mirrors, from Glasses, from
Birds, from Bread, from Wine, and even from the very excrements themselves;
and yet, however, all this is reputed as Science!
I exhort you, ye who read, to have the Fear of God, and to study Justice,
because infallibly unto you shall be opened the Gate of the True Wisdom
which God gave unto Noah and unto his descendants Japhet, Abraham, and
Ishmael; and it was His Wisdom that delivered Lot from the burning of
Sodom. Moses learned the same Wisdom in the desert, from the Burning
Bush, and he taught it unto Aaron his brother. Joseph, Samuel, David,
Solomon, Elijah, and the Apostles, and Saint John particularly (from whom
we hold a most excellent book of Prophecy
2) possessed it. Let every one then
know that this, this which I teach, is that same Wisdom and Magic, and which
is in this same Book, and independent of any other Science, or Wisdom, or
Magic, soever. It is, however, certainly true that these miraculous operations
have much in common with the Qabalah; it is also true that there be other
Arts which have some stamp of Wisdom; the which alone would be nothing
worth were they not mingled with the foundation of the Sacred Ministry,
whence later arose the Mixed Qabalah. The Arts are principally twelve. Four in
number, , , , , among the numbers in the Mixed Qabalah. The second is
the most perfect one, the which operateth by Sign and Visions. Two of the
even numbers, namely  and , which operate with the Stars and the Celestial
Courses which we call Astronomy. Three consisteth in the Metals, and  in the
Planets.
3 As to all these Arts, the which be conjoined and mingled together
:
The Sacred Magic
44
with the Sacred Qabalah; both he who maketh use of these same, either alone,
or mingled with other things which be in no way from the Qabalah; and he
who seeketh to exercise himself in performing operations with these Arts; is
alike liable to be deceived by the Demon; seeing that of themselves they
possess no other virtue than a natural property; and they can produce no other
thing than probable
4 eﬀects, and they have absolutely no power in spiritual and
supernatural things; but if, however, on certain occasions they
5 cause you to
behold any extraordinary eﬀect, such is only produced by impious and
diabolical Pacts and Conjurations, the which form of Science ought to be
called Sorcery.
Finally, let us conclude that from the Divine Mystery are derived these
three kinds of Qabalah, viz.: the Mixed Qabalah, and the True Wisdom, and
the (True) Magic. We will, therefore, show forth this last, and the manner of
becoming its possessors in the Name of God and of His Celestial Court!
Of Abramelin the Mage
45
THE SECOND CHAPTER.
what we should consider before undertaking this
operation.
E
6 have already said what is the Science which I
7 am to teach you,
that is to say, that it is neither in any way human nor diabolical, but
(that it is) the True and Divine Wisdom and Magic, which has been
handed down by our predecessors unto their successors as a hereditary
treasure. In like manner as I myself at present, so even should ye think, before
entering into this matter,
8 and before taking possession of so great a treasure,
how much this Gift is sublime and precious, and how vile and base are ye
yourselves who be about to receive it. This is wherefore I say unto ye that the
beginning of this Wisdom is the Fear of God and of justice. These be the
Tables of the Law, the Qabalah, and the Magic; they should serve unto ye for a
rule. It is necessary that ye should begin to attach yourselves unto the very
beginning, if ye truly do wish to have the Veritable Wisdom; and thus shall ye
walk in the right Path, and be able to work; all the which is contained in this
Book, and all the which is therein prescribed. For to undertake this Operation
with the simple intention of using it unto dishonest, impious, and wicked
ends, is neither just nor reasonable; for it is absolutely necessary to perform
this Operation unto the praise, honour, and glory of God; unto the use,
health, and well-being of your neighbour, whether friend or enemy; and
generally for that of the whole earth. Furthermore, it is also necessary to take
into consideration other matters, which though less important be still
necessary; namely, whether ye be capable, not only of commencing, but also of
carrying through the Operation unto its end; this being a necessary point to
consider before coming unto a ﬁnal determination upon the matter; because in
this case we are not negotiating with men, but with God, by the
intermediation of His Holy Angels, and with all Spirits, both good and evil.
I am not here intending to play the Saint and Hypocrite, but it is
necessary to have a true and loyal heart. Ye have here to do with the Lord,
Who not only beholdeth the outer man, but Who also penetrateth the inmost
recesses of the heart. But having taken a true, ﬁrm, and determined resolution,
relying upon the Will of the Lord, ye shall arrive at your desired end, and shall
encounter no diﬃculty. Often also man is changeable, and while beginning a
thing well, ﬁnisheth it badly, being in no way ﬁrm and stable in resolution.
Ponder the matter then well before commencing, and only begin this
Operation with the ﬁrm intention of carrying it out unto the end, for no man
can make a mock of the Lord with impunity.
:
The Sacred Magic
46
Furthermore it is likewise necessary to think and consider whether your
goods and revenue be suﬃcient for this matter; and, further, whether if your
quality or estate be subject unto others, ye may have time and convenience to
undertake it; also whether wife or children may hinder you herein; these being
all matters worthy of observation, so as not to commence the matter blindly.
The chief thing that ye should consider is whether ye be in good health,
because the body being feeble and unhealthy, it is subject to divers inﬁrmities,
whence at length result impatience and want of power to operate and pursue
the Operation; and a sick man can neither be clean and pure, nor enjoy
solitude; and in such a case it is better to cease.
Consider then the safety of your person, commencing this Operation in a
place of safety, whence neither enemies nor any disgrace can drive you out
before the end because ye must ﬁnish where ye begin.
But the ﬁrst part of this chapter is the most important, and see that ye
keep well in mind the necessity of observing the same, because as regardeth the
other disadvantages, they may perhaps be remedied. And be ye sure that God
doth aid all those who put their conﬁdence in Him and in His Wisdom, and
such as wish to live rightly, making use with honour of the deceitful world,
which ye shall hold in abomination, and see that ye make no account of its
opinion when ye shall be arrived at the perfection of the work, and that ye
shall be possessors of this Sacred Magic.
Of Abramelin the Mage
47
THE THIRD CHAPTER.
of the age and quality of the person who wisheth to
undertake this operation.
N order to describe the aforesaid and other considerations in the best
possible manner; I will here make a general recapitulation; mentioning also
ﬁrst what may bring hindrance unto the matter.
It is, then, necessary that such a man
9 give himself up unto a tranquil life,
and that his habits be temperate; that he should love retirement; that he
should be given neither unto avarice nor usury (that he should be the
legitimate child of his parents is a good thing, but not as necessary as for the
Qabalah, unto which no man born of a clandestine marriage
10 can attain); his
age ought not to be less than twenty-ﬁve years nor more than ﬁfty; he should
have no hereditary disease, such as virulent leprosy; whether he be free or
married importeth little; a valet, lackey, or other domestic servant, can with
diﬃculty arrive at the end required, being bound unto others and not having
the conveniences at disposal which are necessary, and which this Operation
demandeth. Among women, there be only Virgins who are suitable; but I
11
strongly advise that so important a matter should not be communicated to
them, because of the accidents that they might cause by their curiosity and
love of talk.
,
The Sacred Magic
48
THE FOURTH CHAPTER.
that the greater number of magical books are false and
vain.
LL the Books which treat of Characters, Extravagant Figures, Circles,
Convocations, Conjurations, Invocations, and other like matters, even
although any one may see some eﬀect thereby, should be rejected, being
works full of Diabolical Inventions;
12 and ye should know that the Demon
maketh use of an inﬁnitude of methods to entrap and deceive mankind. This I
have myself proved, because when I have operated with the Veritable Wisdom,
all the other enchantments which I had learned have ceased, and I could no
longer operate with them, and I made a very careful trial of those which I had
learned with the Rabbin Moses; the cause of which is that the deceit and
fraud of the Demon can never appear where the Divine Wisdom is.
Furthermore, the most certain mark of their falsity is the election of certain
days; since there be those which God hath expressly commanded to sanctify,
we can freely operate on all other days, and at all times. And whenever ye shall
see tables which do mark the days and their diﬀerences, the Celestial Signs,
and other like matters,
13 pay no attention thereto, because herein is a very great
sin
14 hidden, and a deceit of the Demon; it being one of his many methods of
endeavouring to confound the True Wisdom of the Lord with evil matters.
Because this True Wisdom of the Lord can operate and perform its eﬀects
every day, and at any moment and second. The Gates of His Grace are daily
open, He wisheth, and it is pleasing unto Him to aid us, as well on this day as
on the morrow; and in no way could it be true that He desireth to be
subjected to the day and hour which men would wish to prescribe for Him;
seeing that He is the Master to elect such days as He Himself wisheth, and also
may they be sanctiﬁed! Flee also all such Books as those whose Conjurations
include extravagant, inexplicable, and unheard-of words,
15 and which be
impossible to understand, and which be truly the inventions of the Devil and
of wicked men.
It is well also to recall that which I have said in the First Book, viz., that in
the greater part of their Conjurations there was not the slightest mention made
of God Almighty, but only of Invocations of the Devil, together with very
obscure Chaldean words. Surely it would be a rash thing of a man who should
deal with God by the intermediary of His Holy Angels, to think that he ought
to address Him in a jargon, neither knowing what he saith nor what he
demandeth. Is it not an act of madness to wish to oﬀend God and His Holy
Angels! Let us then walk in the right way, let us speak before God with heart
and mouth alike opened, in our own maternal language,
16 since how can ye
$
Of Abramelin the Mage
49
pretend to obtain any Grace from the Lord, if ye yourselves know not what ye
ask? Yet, however, the number of those who lose themselves utterly in this
vanity is inﬁnite; many say that the Grecian language is more agreeable unto
God, it may be true that it was perhaps at one time, but how many among us
to-day understand it perfectly, this is the reason why it would be the most
senseless thing to employ it.
I repeat then:– Let each one speak his own language, because thus
understanding what it is that ye are demanding of the Lord, ye will obtain all
Grace. And if ye demand a thing which is unjust, it will be refused unto you,
and ye will never obtain it.
The Sacred Magic
50
THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
that in this operation it is not necessary to regard the
time, nor the day, nor the hours.
HERE be no other days (to be observed) than those which God hath
ordained unto our Fathers, viz., All Saturdays, which be the days of the
Sabbath; Passover; and the of Tabernacles; of which the former is the
Fifteenth Day of the First of our Months, and the latter (beginneth on) the
Fifteenth Day of the Seventh Month.
17 Now for this Operation, any person of
whatever Law
18 he may be, provided that he confesseth that there is One
God,
19 may observe these feasts. However, the true time of commencing this
Operation is the ﬁrst day after the Celebration of the Feasts of Easter, and this
was ordained unto Noah, being the most convenient time, and the end falleth
just at the (Feast of) Tabernacles.
20 Our predecessors have thus observed it, and
the Angel
21 also hath approved it; and also it is more advisable to follow good
counsel and example, than to be obstinate and follow one’s own caprice; and
also to treat the election of a particular day as a Pagan idea, paying no regard.
whatever either to Time nor to the Elements; but only (having respect) unto
Him Who granteth such a period. Thus then will we be found men in the
ﬁttest condition of Grace and reconciled with God, and purer than at another
period; and this being an essential point ye ought well to consider the same.
It is, however, quite true that the Elements and the Constellations do
perform of themselves certain operations
22 but this is to be understood of
natural things, as it happeneth that one day is diﬀerent unto another; but such
a diﬀerence hath not operation in things Spiritual and Supernatural, being
thus useless for (higher) Magical Operations. The Election of Days is still more
useless, the Election of Hours and Minutes whereof the ignorant make so
much, is further a very great error.
Wherefore I have resolved to write this particular chapter, in order that
this error might appear more plainly evident unto him who readeth it, and
that he may draw proﬁt therefrom so as to operate with judgment.
7
Of Abramelin the Mage
51
THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
concerning the planetary hours and other errors of the
astrologers.
T is true that the Wise in Astrology do write of the Stars and of their
movements, and that these attaining thereto do produce divers eﬀects in
inferior and elemental things; and such are, as we have already said, natural
operations of the Elements; but that they should have power over the Spirits,
or force in all supernatural things, that is not, neither can ever be. But it will
instead be found that by the permission of the Great God it is the Spirits who
govern the ﬁrmament. What foolishness then would it be to implore the
favour of the Sun, of the Moon, and of the Stars, when the object would be to
have converse with Angels and with Spirits. Would it not be an extravagant
idea to demand from the wild beasts the permission to go hunting? But what
else is it, when they
23 have elected a certain day, when they have divided it up
into many false divisions such as hours, minutes, etc. “Here,” they say, “we
have the Planetary Hours, and the Planet appropriate to each Hour.” O what
Planets! O what ﬁne order! Tell me, I pray you, what advantage you get by this
division. You will reply: “A very great one, because it shows us in all things,
either good or bad fortune!” I tell you, and I repeat absolutely, that this is in
no way true; that they produce thus a change of the time and of the Air, I in
part concede; but do me the grace to tell me how ye do divide the Planetary
Hours. I know that ye begin the ﬁrst hour of the day with the Planet which
itself giveth the name unto the day, as Sunday is ascribed to the Sun, Monday
to the Moon, Tuesday to Mars, Wednesday to Mercury, Thursday to Jupiter,
Friday to Venus, and Saturday to Saturn; then ye divide the length of the Day
into twelve equal portions which ye call Hours, and to each Hour ye assign its
planet; and ye do the same thing with the Night, according to whether the
days be long or short. Thus do the Hours become long or short. As for
example, suppose that on a Sunday the Sun riseth at  o'clock and setteth at 
o'clock in the evening, its course will be ten Hours, the which ye divide up
into twelve equal parts, so that each Hour is of ﬁfty minutes length. I say,
therefore, that the ﬁrst Planetary Hour is of the Sun, and is ﬁfty minutes long;
that the second is of Venus; the third of Mercury; and so on of the others; at
last the eighth Hour returneth unto the Sun; the ninth unto Venus; the tenth
unto Mercury; and so the Day ﬁnisheth. Then cometh the Night, which is
longer, that is to say, fourteen Hours, and each Planetary Hour of this Night
will be seventy minutes, and in order to continue the regular succession as we
have begun, the ﬁrst Hour of the Night will be of Jupiter; the second of Mars;
the third of the Sun; and so on until Monday, whose ﬁrst Hour will be
,
The Sacred Magic
52
(according to this rule) of the Moon. Now tell me, I pray you, doth it always
happen that when the Day of Monday commenceth, that is to say, when the
Sun riseth in its horizon, that the Moon riseth also together with him, and that
she setteth also together with him? They cannot answer this. Wherefore then
do they apportion unto the second day of the week and unto its ﬁrst hour the
Moon? They can tell you no reason, except a likeness to the name (of the
Day).
24
O! how gross an error! Hear and tell me when it is that a Planet hath the
greatest force in the Elements; whether when it is above or when it is below
your Horizon or Hemisphere? We must however avow that it is more powerful
when it is above, because being below it hath no power save according unto
the Will of God. Why then, even further than this, should we attribute unto a
Planet a Day and Hour, if during the whole period of such Day it appeareth
not above the Horizon!
Abramelin as a most excellent Master in natural things taught unto me
a very diﬀerent form of classiﬁcation (which also well examine, and see
whether it be not more surely founded than the aforesaid rule of the
Astrologers), and made me to comprehend what should be the true Planetary
Hours. When the Planet beginneth to appear upon the Horizon then doth its
Day begin (whether it be Light or Dark, Black or White), and until it bath
passed its elevation
25 its Day lasteth until it riseth anew, and after that it hath
set its Night endureth; so that as well in the Days of the Sun as in those of the
Moon and of the others, the Days of all the Planets be mingled, only that one
commenceth sooner than another, according to which nature they be mingled
together in the Celestial Signs. Now it is requisite that I should tell unto you
what be the Planetary Hours! Know then that each Planet hath only an hour
during the which it is very powerful, being over you and above your head, that
is to say when it is in the Meridian. Then, naturally, will sometimes arrive the
Hours of two Planets together and beginning at the same moment; they then
produce an eﬀect according unto the nature, quality, and complexion of these
stars.
26 But all this only hath power in natural things. Here have I declared and
proved unto you the errors of the (common) Astrologers; keep yourselves
carefully from the insensate follies of their Days and Hours, because if ye make
use of these as do the false Magicians and Enchanters, God will chastise you;
and in order to chastise you will pay but little attention unto the awaiting of
the Hour of Saturn or of Mars.
I therefore now conclude this chapter, having suﬃciently treated of the
false and useless method employed by the Astrologers in the Election of Days
and of Hours.
Of Abramelin the Mage
53
THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
regarding what it is necessary to accomplish during the
first two moons of the beginning of this veritable and
sacred magic.
E who commenceth this Operation should consider with care that
which we have before said, and should pay attention unto that which
followeth; and the thing being of importance, I shall leave alone for the
present all other considerations, so that we may begin with the Operation
which we should perform on the ﬁrst morning after the celebration of the
Feast of Easter (or Passover).
Firstly: Having carefully washed one’s whole body and having put on
fresh clothing: precisely a quarter of an hour before Sunrise ye shall enter into
your Oratory, open the window, and place yourselves upon your knees before
the Altar, turning your faces towards the window; and devoutly and with
boldness ye shall invoke the Name of the Lord, thanking Him for all the grace
which He hath given and granted unto you from your infancy until now; then
with humility shall ye humble yourselves unto Him, and confess unto Hirn
entirely all your sins; supplicating Him to be willing to pardon you and remit
them. Ye shall also supplicate Him that in the time to come He may be willing
and pleased to regard you with pity and grant you His grace and goodness to
send unto you His Holy Angel, who shall serve unto you as a Guide, and lead
you ever in His Holy Way and Will; so that ye fall not into sin through
inadvertence, through ignorance, or through human frailty.
In this manner shall ye commence your Oration, and continue thus every
morning during the ﬁrst two Moons or Months.
Meseemeth here that now some may say: “Wherefore dost thou not write
down the words or form of prayer the which I should employ, seeing that, as
for me, I am neither suﬃciently learned, nor devout, nor wise?”
Know ye that although in the beginning your prayer be but feeble, it will
suﬃce, provided that ye understand how to demand the Grace of the Lord
with love and a true heart, whence it must be that such a prayer cometh forth.
Also it serveth nothing to speak without devotion, without attention, and
without intelligence; nor yet to pronounce it with the mouth alone, without a
true intent; nor yet to read it as do the ignorant and the impious. But it is
absolutely necessary that your prayer should issue from the midst of your
heart, because simply setting down prayers in writing, the hearing of them will
in no way explain unto you how really to pray.
27 This is the reason that I have
not wished to give unto you any special form of prayers and orations, so that
ye yourselves may learn from and of yourselves how to pray, and how to invoke
the Holy Name of God, our Lord; and for that reason I have not been willing
+
The Sacred Magic
54
that ye should rely upon me in order to pray. Ye have the Holy and Sacred
Scripture, the which is ﬁlled with very beautiful and potent prayers and actions
of grace. Study then herein, and learn herefrom, and ye shall have no lack of
instructions how to pray with fruit. And although in the commencement your
prayer may be weak, it suﬃceth that your heart be true and loyal towards God,
Who little by little will kindle in you His Holy Spirit, Who will so teach you
and enlighten your Spirit, that ye shall both know and have the power to pray.
When ye shall have performed your orations, close the window, and go
forth from the Oratory; so that no one may be able therein to enter; and ye
shall not yourselves enter again until the evening when the Sun shall be set.
Then shall ye enter therein afresh, and shall perform your prayers in the same
manner as in the morning.
For the rest, ye shall govern yourselves each day as I shall tell you in the
following instructions.
Concerning the Bed Chamber and the Oratory, and how they should be
arranged, I will tell hereafter in the Eleventh Chapter.
28
It is requisite that ye shall have a Bed Chamber near the Oratory or else
your ordinary habitation, which it is necessary ﬁrst to thoroughly clean out
and perfume, and see that the Bed be both new and clean. Your whole
attention must be given to purity in all things; because the Lord hath in
abomination all that is impure. You shall sleep in this said Chamber, and you
shall continue therein during the day, there transacting the matters which
belong unto your business; and those which you can dispense with, leave
alone. You may sleep with your Wife in the bed when she is pure and clean;
but when she hath her monthly courses you shall not allow her to enter the
bed, nor even the Chamber. Every Sabbatheve it is necessary to change the
sheets of the bed, and all the linen. Every Saturday you shall perfume the
Chamber. And ye shall not allow any dog, cat, or other animal to enter into
nor dwell therein; so that they may in no way be able to render it unclean. As
regardeth the matrimonial obligation, it is chastity, and the duty that of
engendering children; but the whole should be done in the Fear of God, and,
above all things, in such case see that your Wife be not impure. But during the
following four Moons ye shall ﬂee sexual intercourse as ye would the Plague.
Even if ye have children, endeavour to send them away unto another place
before (commencing the Operation), so that they may not be an hindrance
from being about you; except the eldest-born of the family, and infants at the
breast.
As regardeth the regimen of your life and actions, ye shall have regard
unto your status and condition. If you be your own Master, as far as lieth in
your power, free yourself from all your business, and quit all mundane and
vain company and conversation; leading a life tranquil, solitary and honest. If
aforetime you have been a wicked, debauched, avaricious, luxurious and proud
Of Abramelin the Mage
55
man, leave and ﬂee from all these Vices. Consider that this was one of the
principal reasons why Abraham, Moses, David, Elijah, John, and other holy
men retired into desert places, until that they had acquired this Holy Science
and Magic; because where there are many people, many scandals do arise; and
where scandal is, Sin cometh; the which at length oﬀendeth and driveth away
the Angel of God, and the Way which leadeth unto Wisdom becometh closed
unto ye. Fly as far as you can the conversation of men, and especially of such
as in the past have been the companions of your debauches; or who have led
you into sin. Ye shall therefore seek retirement as far as possible; until that ye
shall have received that Grace of the Lord which ye ask. But a Domestic
Servant
29 who is compelled to serve a Master cannot well have these
conveniences (for working and performing the Operation).
Take well heed in treating of business, in selling or buying, that it shall be
requisite that you never give way unto anger, but be modest and patient in
your actions.
You shall set apart two hours each day after having dined, during the
which you shall read with care the Holy Scripture and other Holy Books,
because they will teach you to be good at praying, and how to fear the Lord;
and thus day by day shall ye better know your Creator. The other exercises
which be free and permitted unto you, are hereafter set forth and principally in
the Eleventh Chapter.
As for eating, drinking and sleeping, such should be in moderation and
never superﬂuous. It is especially necessary to shun drunkenness, and ﬂee
public dinners. Content yourself with eating at your own house, with your
family, in the peace and quiet which God hath granted unto you. You should
never sleep during the day, but you may in the morning, for after that you
have performed your devotions you may if you wish again go to bed to rest
yourself. And if it happeneth by chance that you do not rise suﬃciently early,
that is to say before sunrise, it doth not greatly matter (provided that it be not
done of evil intent), and you shall perform your ordinary morning prayer;
30
but you should not accustom yourself to be slothful, it being always better to
pray unto God at an early hour.
concerning clothing and family.
Your dress should be clean but moderate, and according to custom. Flee
all vanity. You shall have two dresses, in order that you may be able to change
them; and you shall change them the eve of each Sabbath, wearing the one one
week, and the other the next brushing and perfuming them always
beforehand.
As for that which regardeth the family, the fewer in number, the better;
also act so that the servants may be modest and tranquil. All these pieces of
advice be principal points which it is well to observe. As for the rest, you have
The Sacred Magic
56
only to keep before your eyes the Tables of the Law during all this time, and
also afterwards; because these Tables should be the rule of your life.
Let your hand be ever ready to give alms and other beneﬁts to your
neighbour; and let your heart be ever open unto the poor, whom God so
loveth that one cannot express the same.
And in the case that during this period you should be attacked by some
illness, which would not permit you to go unto the Oratory, this need not
oblige you to abandon your enterprise at once; but you should govern yourself
to the best of your ability; and in such case you shall perform your orations in
your bed, entreating God to restore you to health, so that you may be enabled
to continue your undertaking, and make the sacriﬁces which be due, and so
with the greater strength be able to work to obtain His Wisdom.
And this is all that we should do and observe during these two Moons.
Of Abramelin the Mage
57
THE EIGHTH CHAPTER.
concerning the two second moons.
HE two ﬁrst Moons being ﬁnished; the two second Moons follow,
during the which ye shall make your prayer, morning and evening at the
hour accustomed; but before entering into the Oratory ye shall wash
your hands and face thoroughly with pure water. And you shall prolong your
prayer with the greatest possible aﬀection, devotion and submission; humbly
entreating the Lord God that He would deign to command His Holy Angels
to lead you in the True Way, and Wisdom, and Knowledge, by studying the
which assiduously in the Sacred Writings there will arise more and more
(Wisdom) in your heart.
The use of the rights of Marriage is permitted, but should scarcely if at all
be made use of (during this period).
You shall also wash your whole body every Sabbath Eve.
As to what regardeth commerce and manner of living, I have already
given unto you suﬃcient instruction.
Only it is absolutely necessary to retire from the world and seek retreat;
and ye shall lengthen your prayers to the utmost of your ability.
As for eating, drinking and clothing, ye shall govern yourselves in exactly
the same manner as in the two ﬁrst Moons; except that ye shall fast (the
Qabalistical fast) every Sabbath Eve.
Note Well: The Sabbath is for the Jews, who are accustomed to observe
the same every Saturday, but for Christians the Sabbath is the Sunday, and
they
31 ought to consider the Saturday as its Eve.
7
The Sacred Magic
58
THE NINTH CHAPTER.
concerning the two last moons which must be thus
commenced.
ORNING and Noon ye shall wash your hands and your face on
entering the Oratory;
32 and ﬁrstly ye shall make Confession of all your
sins; after this, with a very ardent prayer, ye shall entreat the Lord to
accord unto you this particular grace, which is, that you may enjoy and be able
to endure
33 the presence and conversation of His Holy Angels, and that He
may deign by their intermission to grant unto you the Secret Wisdom, so that
you may be able to have dominion over the Spirits and over all creatures.
Ye shall do this same at midday before dining, and also in the evening; so
that during these two last Moons ye shall perform the prayer three times a day,
and during this time ye shall ever keep the Perfume upon the Altar. Also
towards the end of your Oration, ye shall pray unto the Holy Angels,
supplicating them to bear your sacriﬁce before the Face of God, in order to
intercede for you, and that they shall assist you in all your operations during
these two Moons.
The man who is his own master
34 shall leave all business alone, except
works of charity towards his neighbour. You shall shun all society except that
of your Wife and of your Servants. Ye shall employ the greatest part of your
time in speaking of the Law of God, and in reading such works as treat wisely
thereof; so that your eyes may be opened unto that which from past time even
unto the present ye have not as yet seen, nor thought of, nor believed.
Every Sabbath Eve shall ye fast, and wash your whole body, and change
your garment.
Furthermore, ye shall have a Vest and Tunic of linen, which ye shall put
on every time that ye enter into the Oratory, before ye commence to put the
Perfume in the Censer, as I shall tell ye more fully hereafter
Also ye shall have a basket or other convenient vessel of copper ﬁlled with
Charcoal to put inside the Censer when necessary, and which ye can take
outside the Oratory, because the Censer itself should never be taken away from
the place. Note well that after having performed your prayer, you ought to
take it
35 out of the Oratory, especially during the Two last Moons, and ye
should inter it in a place which cannot well be made unclean, such as a garden.
0
Of Abramelin the Mage
59
THE TENTH CHAPTER.
concerning what things a man may learn and study during
these two moons.
LTHOUGH the best counsel which I can give is that a man should go
into retirement in some desert or solitude, until the time of the Six
Moons destined unto this Operation be fulﬁlled, and that he shall have
obtained that which he wisheth; as the Ancients used to do; nevertheless now
this is hardly possible; and we must accommodate ourselves unto the era (in
which we live); and being unable to carry it out in one way, we should
endeavour to do so in another; and attach ourselves only unto Divine Things.
But there be certain who cannot even do this thoroughly, notwithstanding
they may honestly wish the same; and this because of their divers employments
and positions which will not permit them to act in accordance with their
desires, so that they are compelled to carry on their worldly occupations.
In order then that such may know what occupations and business they
can follow out without prejudice to this Operation, I will here state the same
in few words.
We may then exercise the profession of Medicine, and all arts connected
with the same; and we may perform all operations which tend unto charity
and mercy towards our neighbour purely and simply. As for what concerneth
the liberal arts ye may interest yourselves in Astronomy, etc., but ﬂee all arts
and operations which have the least tincture of Magic and Sorcery, seeing that
we must not confound together God and Belial: God wisheth to be alone;
unto Him pertain all honour and glory. All the above matters are however
permitted during the two ﬁrst and the two second Moons.
You may walk in a garden for recreation; but you shall do no servile work;
and amidst the ﬂowers and the fruits you can also meditate upon the
greatness
36 of God. But during the two third and last Moons ye shall quit every
other matter only permitting your recreation to consist in things Spiritual and
Divine. If ye wish to be participators in the Conversation of the Angels, and in
the Divine Wisdom, lay aside all indiscreet
37 things, and regard it as a pleasure
when ye can spare two or three hours to study the Holy Scripture, because
hencefrom ye shall derive incredible proﬁt; and even the less ye are learned, so
much the more will ye become wise and clever. It suﬃceth that in the
performance of your Orisons ye shall not give way unto sleep, and that ye shall
fail in nowise in this operation through negligence and voluntarily.
$
The Sacred Magic
60
THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.
38
concerning the selection of the place.
E should make the Selection of the Place (for the Operation) before
commencing it, and prior to the celebration of the Passover, in order
that we may decide upon the same without hindrance, and it is
necessary that all things should be prepared.
He who commenceth this Operation in solitude can elect a place
according unto his pleasure; where there is a small wood, in the midst of which
you shall make a small Altar, and you shall cover the same with a hut (or
shelter) of ﬁne branches, so that the rain may not fall thereon and extinguish
the Lamp and the Censer. Around the Altar at the distance of seven paces you
shall prepare a hedge of ﬂowers, plants, and green shrubs, so that it may divide
the entrance
39 into two parts; that is to say, the Interior where the Altar and
Tabernacle will be placed after the manner of a Temple; and the part Exterior,
which with the rest of the place will be as a Portico thereunto.
Now if you commence not this Operation in the Country, but perform it
in a Town, or in some dwellingplace, I will show unto ye what shall be
necessary herein.
40
Ye shall choose an Apartment which hath a Window, joined unto the
which shall be an uncovered Terrace (or Balcony), and a Lodge (or small room
or hut) covered with a roof, but so that there may be on every side windows
whence you may be able to see in every direction, and whence you may enter
into the Oratory. In the which place
41 the Evil Spirits shall be able to appear,
since they cannot appear within the Oratory itself In the which place, beside
the Oratory towards the quarter of the North, you shall have a rooted or
covered Lodge, in the which and from whence one may be able to see the
Oratory. I myself also had two large windows made in my Oratory, and at the
time of the Convocation of the Spirits, I used to open them and remove both
the shutters and the door, so that I could easily see on every side and constrain
them
42 to obey me.
The Oratory should always be clear and clean swept, and the ﬂooring
should be of wood, of white pine; in ﬁne, this place should be so well and
carefully prepared, that one may judge it to be a place destined unto prayer.
The Terrace and the contiguous Lodge where we are to invoke the Spirits
we should cover with river sand to the depth of two ﬁngers at the least.
The Altar should be erected in the midst of the Oratory; and if any one
maketh his Oratory in desert places, he should build it
43 of stones which have
never been worked or hewn, or even touched by the hammer.
:
Of Abramelin the Mage
61
The Chamber
44 should be boarded with pine wood, and a Lamp full of
Oil Olive should be suspended therein, the which every time that ye shall have
burned your perfume and ﬁnished your orison, ye shall extinguish. A
handsome Censer of bronze, or of silver if one hath the means, must be placed
upon the Altar, the which should in no wise be removed from its place until
the Operation be ﬁnished, if one performeth it in a dwelling-house; for in the
open country one cannot do this. Thus in this point as in all the others, we
should rule and govern ourselves according unto the means at our disposal.
The Altar, which should be made of wood, ought to be hollow within
after the manner of a cupboard, wherein you shall keep all the necessary
things, such as the two Robes, the Crown or Mitre, the Wand, the Holy Oils,
the Girdle or Belt, the Perfume; and any other things which may be necessary.
45The second habiliments will be a Shirt or Tunic of linen, large and
white, with well and properly made sleeves. The other Robe will be of
Crimson or Scarlet Silk with Gold, and it should not be longer than just unto
the knees, with sleeves of similar stuﬀ. As for these vestments, there is no
particular rule for them; nor any especial instructions to be followed; but the
more resplendent, clean, and brilliant they are the better will it be. You shall
also make a Girdle of Silk of the same colour as the Tunic, wherewithal you
shall be girded. You shall have upon your head a beautiful Crown or woven
Fillet of Silk and Gold. You shall prepare the Sacred Oil in this manner: Take
of myrrh
46 in tears, one part; of ﬁne cinnamon, two parts; of galangal,
47 half a
part; and the half of the total weight of these drugs of the best oil olive. The
which aromatics you shall mix together according unto the Art of the
Apothecary, and shall make thereof a Balsam, the which you shall keep in a
glass vial which you shall put within the cupboard (formed by the interior) of
the Altar. The Perfume shall be made thus: Take of Incense in tears
48 one part;
of Stacte
49 half a part; of Lign Aloes a quarter of a part; and not being able to
get this wood you shall take that of cedar, or of rose, or of citron, or any other
odoriferous wood. You shall reduce all these ingredients into a very ﬁne
powder, mix them well together and keep the same in a box or other
convenient vessel. As you will consume a great deal of this perfume, it will be
advisable to mix enough on the eve of the Sabbath to last the whole week.
You shall also have a Wand of Almond-tree wood, smooth and straight, of
the length of about from half an ell to six feet
50 And ye shall keep the aforesaid
things in good order in the cupboard
51 of the Altar, ready for use in the proper
time and place.
Here followeth the manner of ordering oneself and of operating.
The Sacred Magic
62
THE TWELFTH CHAPTER.
how one should keep oneself in order to carry out this
operation well.
HIS Operation being truly Divine, it is necessary once more to treat of
and distinguish the present Consecration into diﬀerent periods of time.
You shall then understand that during the two ﬁrst and two second
Moons, no other Consecration must be performed, than that of which we have
already spoken in the Seventh and Eighth foregoing Chapters,
52 unto the
which I refer you, so as not to be too prolix. And I only say unto you, that
during the course of the two ﬁrst and two second Moons, every Saturday when
ye perform the Orison, ye shall also burn the Perfume as well in the morning
as in the evening; and in the two third and last Moons ye shall make the Prayer
and the Perfume thrice daily.
Now here hath the last part of the time arrived here therefore open ye
your eyes and be attentive, and govern yourselves in everything and every place
in the way which I have written unto you. Have conﬁdence in God, because if
even until then ye have faithfully observed mine instructions which I have
given unto you, and if your Orisons shall have been made with a righteous
heart and with devotion, there is no manner of doubt that all things will
appear easy unto you, and your own spirit and your understanding will teach
you the manner in which you should conduct yourself in all points; because
your Guardian Angel is already about you, though Invisible, and conducteth
and governeth your heart, so that you shall not err. The two Moons being
ﬁnished, in the morning ye shall commence all that is commanded in the
Ninth Chapter,
53 and further observe this present Chapter.
When ﬁrst ye shall enter into the Oratory, leave your shoes without, and
having opened the window,
54 ye shall place the lighted coals in the Censer
which
55 you shall have brought with you, you shall light the Lamp, and take
from the Cupboard of the Altar your two Vestments, the Crown, the Girdle
and the Wand, placing them upon the Altar. Then take the Sacred Oil in your
left hand, cast some of the Perfume upon the Fire, and place yourself upon
your knees,
56 praying unto the Lord with fervour.
the orison.
“O Lord God of Mercy; God, Patient, Most Benign and Liberal; Who
grantest Thy Grace in a thousand ways, and unto a thousand generations;
Who forgettest the iniquities, the sins, and the transgressions of men; in
Whose Presence none is found innocent; Who visitest the transgressions of the
father upon the children and nephews unto the third and fourth generation; I
7
Of Abramelin the Mage
63
know my wretchedness, and that I am not worthy to appear before Thy
Divine Majesty, nor even to implore and beseech Thy Goodness and Mercy
for the least Grace. But, O Lord of Lords, the Source of Thy Bounty is so
great, that of Itself It calleth those who are ashamed by reason of their sins and
dare not approach, and inviteth them to drink of Thy Grace. Wherefore, O
Lord my God, have pity upon me, and take away from me all iniquity and
malice; cleanse my soul from all the uncleanness of sin; renew within me my
Spirit, and comfort it, so that it may become strong and able to comprehend
the Mystery of Thy Grace, and the Treasures of Thy Divine Wisdom. Sanctify
me also with the Oil of Thy Sanctiﬁcation, wherewith Thou hast sanctiﬁed all
Thy Prophets; and purify in me therewith all that appertaineth unto me, so
that I may become worthy of the Conversation of Thy Holy Angels and of
Thy Divine Wisdom, and grant unto me the Power which Thou hast given
unto Thy Prophets over all the Evil Spirits. Amen. Amen.”
This is the Prayer which I myself made use of in my Consecration; the
which I give not here to conﬁne you (to a certain form), nor to oblige you to
employ the same, nor to tell it you over as I would to a parrot whom I should
wish to teach to talk; but only and solely to give unto you an idea of the
manner in which we should pray.
Having ﬁnished your Orison, rise from your knees, and anoint the
centre
57 of your forehead with a little of the Sacred Oil; after this dip your
ﬁnger into the same Oil, and anoint therewith the four upper corners of the
Altar. Touch also with this Holy Oil the Vestments, the Girdle, the Crown,
and the Wand, on both sides. You shall also touch the Doors and the Windows
of the Oratory. Then with your ﬁnger dipped in the Oil you shall write upon
the four sides of the Altar these words, so that they may be perfectly clearly
written on each side:–
“In whatever place it may be wherein Commemoration of My Name shall
be made, I will come unto you and I will bless you.”
This being done the Consecration is ﬁnished, and then ye shall put the
White Tunic and all the other things into the Cupboard of the Altar. Then
kneel down and make your ordinary prayer, as is laid down in the Third
Chapter;
58 and be well ware to take no consecrated thing out of the Oratory;
and during the whole of the ensuing period ye shall enter the Oratory and
celebrate the Oﬃce with naked feet.
The Sacred Magic
64
THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER.
concerning the convocation of the good spirits.
E are now arrived at a point at which ye shall be able to see clearly,
having duly followed out and observed the instructions which I
have given unto you, and having during all this time served God
your Creator with a perfect heart. We are now arrived at the term, wherefore
the following morning rise betimes, neither wash yourselves at all nor dress
yourselves at all in your ordinary clothes; but take a Robe of Mourning; enter
the Oratory with bare feet; go unto the side of the Censer, take the ashes
therefrom and place them upon your head; light the Lamp; and put the hot
coals into the Censer; and having opened the windows, return unto the door.
There prostrate yourself with your face against the ground, and order the
Child
59 to put the Perfume upon the Censer, after which he is to place himself
upon his knees before the Altar; following in all things and throughout the
instructions which I have given unto you in the last chapter of the First Book,

[... Truncated at 50,000 characters. Full text available in original PDF. Total extracted: 176792 chars]
