UlMlvtrtSI l Y OF
ILLINOIS LIBRARY
AT URSANA-CHAMPAIGN
STACKS

CENTRAL CIRCULATION BOOKSTACKS

The person charging this material is re¬
sponsible for its return to the library from
which it was borrowed on or before the
Latest Date stamped below.

Theft, mutilation, and underlining of books are reasons
for disciplinary action and may result in dismissal from
the University.

TO RENEW CALL TELEPHONE CENTER, 333-8400
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN

OCT 0 5 1933

OCT M J993

When renewing by phone, write new due date below
previous due date. L162

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2020 with funding from
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

https://archive.org/details/sacredbooksofeas01unse

Jof

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

[3]

HENRY FROWDE, M.A.

PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD

LONDON, EDINBURGH, AND NEW YORK

THE

JDIVERSITY OP !£XJsMO*t> IM

\

TRANSLATED

BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS

AND EDITED BY

F. MAX MULLER

VOL. I

< Bytov'S

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

1900

[A ll rights reserved J

Oxford

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

BY HORACE HART, M.A.

PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY

THE UPANISHADS

tiNIVERSITV’ of WJJWOIS us;, u

MAY j jo ^

TRANSLATED BY

• F. MAX MULLER

PART I

THE AY7ANDOGYA-UPANISHAD
THE TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD
THE AITAREYA-ARAA^YAKA
THE KAUSHITAKI-BRAHMAiYA-UPANISHAD

AND

THE VAGASANEYI-SAi¥HITA-UPANISHAD

(©jcfortr

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

1900

[ All rights reserved ]

*? :■ n
(/• I s/ Wl

h °o \

CONTENTS,

PACK

Preface to the Sacred Books of the East ix

Program of a Translation of the Sacred Books of the

East ......... xxxix

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets . . . xlviii

Approximate Pronunciation of the Roman Letters as

representing the Sanskrit Alphabet lv

Introduction to the Upanishads ..... lvii

A7*andogya-upanishad ...... lxxxvi

Talavakara-upanishad ...... lxxxix

Aitareya-ara;zyaka ....... xci

Kaushitaki-brahmawa-upanishad..... xcviii

Vagasaneyi-sa?;zhita-upanishad ..... c

Translation of the IO/andogya-upanishad ... i

Translation of the Talavakara-upanishad . . .147

Translation of the Aitareya-araatyaka . . . 157

Translation of the Kaushitaki-brahmaA’a-upanishad . 271

Translation of the Vagasaneyi-saiuhita-upanishad . 311

'

TO

THE EIGHT HONOURABLE THE MARQUIS OF SALISBURY, K.G.

CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,

LATELY SECRETARY OF STATE FOR INDIA,

SIR HENRY J. S. MAINE, K.O.S.I.

MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL OF INDIA,

AND

THE VERY REV. H. G. LIDDELL, D.D.

DEAN OF CHRIST CHURCH,

TO WHOSE KIND INTEREST AND EXERTIONS

THIS ATTEMPT TO MAKE KNOWN TO THE ENGLISH PEOPLE

THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST
IS SO LARGELY INDEBTED,

I NOW DEDICATE THESE VOLUMES
WITH SINCERE RESPECT AND GRATITUDE,

F. MAX MULLER.

a

[3]

The general inclinations which are naturally implanted in my
soul to some religion, it is i)npossible for me to shift off: but there
being such a multiplicity of religions in the world, I desire now
seriously to consider with my self which of them all to restrain these
my general inclinations to. And the reason of this my enquiry is
not, that I am in the least dissatisfied with that religion I have
already embracedj but because ’tis natural for all men to have an
overbearing opinion and esteem for that particular religion they are
born and bred-up in. That, therefore, I may not seem biassed by the
prejudice of education, I am resolved to prove and examine them all;

that I may see and hold fast to that which is best .

‘ Indeed there was never any religion so barbarous and diabolical,
but it was preferred before all other religions whatsoever, by them that

did profess it; otherwise they would not have professed it .

1 And why, say they, onay not you be mistaken as well as we ? Espe¬
cially when there is, at least, six to one against your Christian religion;
all of which think they serve God aright; and expect happiness thereby

as well as you . And hence it is that hi my looking out for the

truest religion, being conscious to my self how great an ascendant
Christianity holds over one beyond the rest, as being that religion
whereinto I was born and baptized, that which the supreme authority
has e?ijoined and my parents educated one in; that which eveoy one
I ooieet withal highly appo'oves of, aoid which I ony self have, by a looig
cooitioiued professiooi, onade almost natural to ooie : I am resolved to be
more jealous aoid suspicious of this religion, than of the rest, aoid be
suo'e oiot to coiteodaioi it aoiy looiger without being cooivioiced by solid aoid
substaoitial aoguonents, oj the truth aoid ceo'taioity of it. That, therefore,
I ooiay ooiake diligeoit aoid ionpao'tial eoiquioy ioito all religions aoid so be
sure to find out the best, I shall for a time, look upooi ony self as ooie not
at all ioiterested in aoiyparticular religiooi whatsoever, much less in the
Christian religiooi; but only as one who desires, ioi geoteral, to seowe and
obey Him that onade ooie, ioi a right onanoier, aoid thereby to be made
partaker of that happioiess ooiy oiature is capable off

Bishop Beveridge (1636-1707).

Private Thoughts on Religion, Part I, Article 2.

PREFACE

TO

THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

I must begin this series of translations of the
Sacred Books of the East with three cautions:—
the first, referring to the character of the original
texts here translated; the second, with regard to the
difficulties in making a proper use of translations;
the third, showing what is possible and what is im¬
possible in rendering ancient thought into modern
speech.

Readers who have been led to believe that the
Vedas of the ancient Brahmans, the A vesta of the
Zoroastrians, the Tripi/aka of the Buddhists, the
Kings of Confucius, or the Koran of Mohammed
are books full of primeval wisdom and religious

enthusiasm, or at least of sound and simple moral

*

teaching, will be disappointed on consulting these
volumes. Looking at many of the books that have
lately been published on the religions of the ancient
world, I do not wonder that such a belief should
have been raised; but I have long felt that it was
high time to dispel such illusions, and to place the
study of the ancient religions of the world on a
more real and sound, on a more truly historical
basis. It is but natural that those who write on

X

PREFACE TO THE

ancient religions, and who have studied them from
translations only, not from original documents,
should have had eyes for their bright rather than
for their dark sides. The former absorb all the
attention of the student, the latter, as they teach
nothing, seem hardly to deserve any notice. Scholars
also who have devoted their life either to the
editing of the original texts or to the careful in¬
terpretation of some of the sacred books, are more
inclined, after they have disinterred from a heap of
rubbish some solitary fragments of pure gold, to
exhibit these treasures only than to display all the
refuse from which they had to extract them. I do
not blame them for this, perhaps I should feel that I
was open to the same blame myself, for it is but
natural that scholars in their joy at finding one or
two fragrant fruits or flowers should gladly forget
the brambles and thorns that had to be thrown aside
in the course of their search.

But whether I am myself one of the guilty or not,
I cannot help calling attention to the real mischief
that has been done and is still being done by the
enthusiasm of those pioneers who have opened the
first avenues through the bewildering forest of the
sacred literature of the East. They have raised
expectations that cannot be fulfilled, fears also that,
as will be easily seen, are unfounded. Anyhow they
have removed the study of religion from that whole¬
some and matter-of-fact atmosphere in which alone
it can produce valuable and permanent results.

The time has come when the study of the ancient
religions of mankind must be approached in a dif¬
ferent, in a less enthusiastic, and more discrimi¬
nating, in fact, in a more scholarlike spirit. Not

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XI

that I object to dilettanti, if they only are what by
their name they profess to be, devoted lovers, and not
mere amateurs. The religions of antiquity must
always be approached in a loving spirit, and the dry
and cold-blooded scholar is likely to do here as
much mischief as the enthusiastic sciolist. But true
love does not ignore all faults and failings : on the
contrary, it scans them keenly, though only in order
to be able to understand, to explain, and thus to
excuse them. To watch in the Sacred Books of
the East the dawn of the religious consciousness
of man, must always remain one of the most
inspiring and hallowing sights in the whole history
of the world; and he whose heart cannot quiver
with the first quivering rays of human thought
and human faith, as revealed in those ancient docu¬
ments, is, in his own way, as unfit for these studies
as, from another side, the man who shrinks from
copying and collating ancient MSS., or toiling
through volumes of tedious commentary. What we
want here, as everywhere else, is the truth, and the
whole truth; and if the whole truth must be told,
it is that, however radiant the dawn of religious
thought, it is not without its dark clouds, its chilling
colds, its noxious vapours. Whoever does not
know these, or would hide them from his own sight
and from the sight of others, does not know and
can never understand the real toil and travail of the
human heart in its first religious aspirations ; and
not knowing its toil and travail, can never know the
intensity of its triumphs and its joys.

In order to have a solid foundation for a com¬
parative study of the religions of the East, we must
have before all things complete and thoroughly

Xll

PREFACE TO THE

faithful translations of their sacred books. Extracts
will no longer suffice. We do not know Germany,
if we know the Rhine ; nor Rome, when we have
admired St. Peters. No one who collects and pub¬
lishes such extracts can resist, no one at all events,
so far as I know, has ever resisted, the temptation
of giving what is beautiful, or it may be what is
strange and startling, and leaving out what is com¬
monplace, tedious, or it may be repulsive, or, lastly,
what is difficult to construe and to understand. We
must face the problem in its completeness, and I
confess it has been for many years a problem to
me, aye, and to a great extent is so still, how the
Sacred Books of the East should, by the side of so
much that is fresh, natural, simple, beautiful, and
true, contain so much that is not only unmeaning,
artificial, and silly, but even hideous and repellent.
This is a fact, and must be accounted for in some
way or other.

To some minds this problem may seem to be no
problem at all. To those (and I do not speak of
Christians only) who look upon the sacred books of
all religions except their own as necessarily the out¬
come of human or superhuman ignorance and de¬
pravity, the mixed nature of their contents may
seem to be exactly what it ought to be, what they
expected it would be. But there are other and
more reverent minds who can feel a divine afflatus
in the sacred books, not only of their own, but of
other religions also, and to them the mixed character
of some of the ancient sacred canons must always
be extremely perplexing.

I can account for it to a certain extent, though
not entirely to my own satisfaction. Most of the

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

Xlll

ancient sacred books have been handed down by
oral tradition for many generations before they were
consigned to writing. In an age when there was
nothing corresponding to what we call literature,
every saying, every proverb, every story handed
down from father to son, received very soon a kind
of hallowed character. They became sacred heir¬
looms, sacred, because they came from an unknown
source, from a distant age. There was a stage in
the development of human thought, when the dis¬
tance that separated the living generation from their
grandfathers or great-grandfathers was as yet the
nearest approach to a conception of eternity, and
when the name of grandfather and great-grandfather
seemed the nearest expression of God 1 . Hence,
what had been said by these half-human, half-divine
ancestors, if it was preserved at all, was soon looked
upon as a more than human utterance. It was
received with reverence, it was never questioned
and criticised.

Some of these ancient sayings were preserved
because they were so true and so striking that they
could not be* forgotten. They contained eternal
truths, expressed for the first time in human lan¬
guage. Of such oracles of truth it was said in India
that they had been heard, 6Tuta, and from it arose
the word ^ruti, the recognised term for divine
revelation in Sanskrit.

But besides those utterances which had a vitality
of their own, strong enough to defy the power of

1 Bishop Callaway, Unkulunkulu, or the Tradition of Creation,
as existing among the Amazulu and other tribes of South Africa,
p. 7 .

XIV

PREFACE TO THE

time, there were others which might have struck
the minds of the listeners with great force under
the peculiar circumstances that evoked them, but
which, when these circumstances were forgotten, be¬
came trivial and almost unintelligible. A few verses
sung by warriors on the eve of a great battle would,
if that battle ended in victory, assume a charm
quite independent of their poetic merit. They
would be repeated in memory of the heroes
who conquered, and of the gods who granted
victory. But when the heroes, and the gods, and
the victory were all forgotten, the song of victory
and thanksgiving would often survive as a relic

o o

of the past, though almost unintelligible to later
generations.

Even a single ceremonial act, performed at the
time of a famine or an inundation, and apparently
attended with a sudden and almost miraculous
success, might often be preserved in the liturgical
code of a family or a tribe with a superstitious awe
entirely beyond our understanding. It might be
repeated for some time on similar emergencies, till
when it had failed again and again it survived only
as a superstitious custom in the memory of priests
and poets.

Further, it should be remembered that in ancient
as in modern times, the utterances of men who had
once gained a certain prestige, would often receive
attention far beyond their merits, so that in many
a family or tribe the sayings and teachings of one
man, who had once in his youth or manhood uttered
words of inspired wisdom, would all be handed
down together, without any attempt to separate
the grain from the chaff.

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XV

Nor must we forget that though oral tradition,
when once brought under proper discipline, is a
most faithful guardian, it is not without its dangers
in its incipient stages. Many a word may have been
misunderstood, many a sentence confused, as it was
told by father to son, before it became fixed in the
tradition of a village community, and then resisted
by its very sacredness all attempts at emendation.

Lastly, we must remember that those who handed
down the ancestral treasures of ancient wisdom,
would often feel inclined to add what seemed useful
to themselves, and what they knew could be pre¬
served in one way only, namely, if it was allowed to
form part of the tradition that had to be handed
down, as a sacred trust, from generation to genera¬
tion. The priestly influence was at work, even
before there were priests by profession, and when
the priesthood had once become professional, its
influence may account for much that would other¬
wise seem inexplicable in the sacred codes of the
ancient world.

These are some of the considerations which may
help to explain how, mixed up with real treasures of
thought, we meet in the sacred books with so many
passages and whole chapters which either never had
any life or meaning at all, or if they had, have, in the
form in which they have come down to us, com¬
pletely lost it. We must try to imagine what the Old
Testament would have been, if it had not been kept
distinct from the Talmud; or the New Testament,
if it had been mixed up not only with the spurious
gospels, but with the records of the wranglings of
the early Councils, if we wish to understand, to some
extent at least, the wild confusion of sublime truth

XVI

PREFACE TO THE

with vulgar stupidity that meets us in the pages of
the Veda, the Avesta, and the Tripi^aka. The idea
of keeping the original and genuine tradition separate
from apocryphal accretions was an idea of later
growth, that could spring up only after the earlier
tendency of preserving whatever could be preserved
of sacred or half-sacred lore, had done its work, and
wrought its own destruction.

In using, what may seem to some of my fellow-
workers, this very strong and almost irreverent lan¬
guage with regard to the ancient Sacred Books of
the East, I have not neglected to make full allow¬
ance for that very important intellectual parallax
which, no doubt, renders it most difficult for a
Western observer to see things and thoughts under
exactly the same angle and in the same light as they
would appear to an Eastern eye. There are Western
expressions which offend Eastern taste as much as
Eastern expressions are apt to offend Western taste.
A symphony of Beethoven’s would be mere noise to
an Indian ear, an Indian Sangita seems to us with¬
out melody, harmony, or rhythm. All this I fully
admit, yet after making every allowance for national
taste and traditions, I still confidently appeal to the
best Oriental scholars, who have not entirely for¬
gotten that there is a world outside the four walls
of their study, whether they think that my con¬
demnation is too severe, or that Eastern nations
themselves would tolerate, in any of their classical
literary compositions, such violations of the simplest
rules of taste as they have accustomed themselves to
tolerate, if not to admire, in their sacred books.

But then it might no doubt be objected that books
of such a character hardly deserve the honour of

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XVI1

being translated into English, and that the sooner
they are forgotten, the better. Such opinions have
of late been freely expressed by some eminent
writers, and supported by arguments worthy of the
Khalif Omar himself. In these days of anthropo¬
logical research, when no custom is too disgusting
to be recorded, no rules of intermarriage too com¬
plicated to be disentangled, it may seem strange
that the few genuine relics of ancient religion which,
as by a miracle, have been preserved to us, should thus
have been judged from a purely aesthetic, and not from
an historical point of view. There was some excuse for
this in the days of Sir William Jones and Colebrooke.
The latter, as is well known, considered ‘the Vedas
as too voluminous for a complete translation of the
whole,’ adding that ‘ what they contain would hardly
reward the labour of the reader; much less that of
the translator 1 .’ The former went still further in
the condemnation which he pronounced on Anquetil
Duperron’s translation of the Zend-avesta. Sir W.
Jones, we must remember, was not only a scholar,
but also a man of taste, and the man of taste some¬
times gained a victory over the scholar. His con¬
troversy with Anquetil Duperron, the discoverer of
the Zend-avesta, is well known. It was carried on
by Sir W. Jones apparently with great success, and
yet in the end the victor has proved to be the
vanquished. It was easy, no doubt, to pick out from
Anquetil Duperron’s translation of the sacred writings
of Zoroaster hundreds of passages which were or
seemed to be utterly unmeaning or absurd. This
arose partly, but partly only, from the imperfections

1 Colebrooke’s Miscellaneous Essays, 1873, vol. ii, p. 102.

[3] b

XV111

PREFACE TO THE

of the translation. Much, however, of what Sir W.
Jones represented as ridiculous, and therefore un¬
worthy of Zoroaster, and therefore unworthy of being
translated, forms an integral part of the sacred code of
the Zoroastrians. Sir W. Jones smiles at those who
‘ think obscurity sublime and venerable, like that of
ancient cloisters and temples, shedding,’ as Milton
expresses it, ‘a dim religious light 1 .’ ‘ On posse-
dait deja,’ he writes in his letter addressed to
Anquetil Duperron, and composed in very good
and sparkling French, ‘plusieurs traites attribuds a
Zardusht ou Zeratusht, traduits en Persan moderne;
de pretendues conferences de ce legislateur avec
Ormuzd, des prieres, des dogmes, des lois religieuses.
Quelques savans, qui ont lu ces traductions, nous ont
assure que les originaux etaient de la plus haute
antiquitd, parce qu’ils renfermaient beaucoup de plati¬
tudes, de bevues, et de contradictions: mais nous
avons conclu par les memes raisons, qu’ils etaient
tres-modernes, ou bien qu’ils n’etaient pas d’un
homme d’esprit, et d’un philosophe, tel que Zoroastre
est peint par nos historiens. Votre nouvelle tra¬
duction, Monsieur, nous confirme dans ce juge-
ment: tout le college des Guebres aurait beau
nous l’assurer; nous ne croirons jamais que le
charlatan le moins habile ait pu ecrire les fadaises
dont vos deux derniers volumes sont remplis 2 .’
He at last sums up his argument in the following
words: ‘ Ou Zoroastre n’avait pas le sens commun,
ou il n’ecrivit pas le livre que vous lui attribuez:
s’il n’avait pas le sens commun, il fallait le laisser
dans la foule, et dans l’obscurite ; s’il n’ecrivit pas

1 Sir W. Jones’s Works, vol. iv, p. 113.

2 lb., vol. x, p. 408.

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XIX

ce livre, il 6tait impudent de le publier sous son
nom. Ainsi, ou vous avez insult^ le gout du public
en lui presentant des sottises, ou vous Tavez trompe
en lui donnant des faussetds : et de chaque cot6 vous
meritez son mepris V

This alternative holds good no longer. The
sacred code of Zoroaster or of any other of the
founders of religions may appear to us to be full of
absurdities, or may in fact really be so, and it may
yet be the duty of the scholar to publish, to translate,
and carefully to examine those codes as memorials
of the past, as the only trustworthy documents in
which to study the growth and decay of religion.
It does not answer to say that if Zoroaster was what
we believe him to have been, a wise man, in our
sense of the word, he could not have written the
rubbish which we find in the Avesta. If we are
once satisfied that the text of the Avesta, or the
Veda, or the Tripi/aka is old and genuine, and
that this text formed the foundation on which,
during many centuries, the religious belief of millions
of human beings was based, it becomes our duty,
both as historians and philosophers, to study these
books, to try to understand how they could have
arisen, and how they could have exercised for ages
an influence over human beings who in all other
respects were not inferior to ourselves, nay, whom
we are accustomed to look up to on many points as
patterns of wisdom, of virtue, and of taste.

The facts, such as they are, must be faced, if the
study of the ancient religions of the world is ever
to assume a really historical character; and having

1 Works, vol. x, p. 437.
b 2

XX

PREFACE TO THE

myself grudged no praise to what to my mind is really
beautiful or sublime in the early revelations of reli¬
gious truth, I feel the less hesitation in fulfilling the
duty of the true scholar, and placing before historians
and philosophers accurate, complete, and unembel¬
lished versions of some of the sacred books of the
East. Such versions alone will enable them to form
a true and just estimate of the real development of
early religious thought, so far as we can still gain a
sight of it in literary records to which the highest
human or even divine authority has been ascribed
by the followers of the great religions of antiquity.
It often requires an effort to spoil a beautiful sen¬
tence by a few words which might so easily be
suppressed, but which are there in the original,
and must be taken into account quite as much
as the pointed ears in the beautiful Faun of the
Capitol. We want to know the ancient religions
such as they really were, not such as we wish they
should have been. We want to know, not their
wisdom only, but their folly also ; and while we must
learn to look up to their highest points where they
seem to rise nearer to heaven than anything we were
acquainted with before, we must not shrink from
looking down into their stony tracts, their dark
abysses, their muddy moraines, in order to compre¬
hend both the heighth and the depth of the human
mind in its searchings after the Infinite.

I can answer for myself and for those who have
worked with me, that our translations are truthful,
that we have suppressed nothing, that we have
varnished nothing, however hard it seemed some¬
times even to write it down.

There is only one exception. There are in ancient

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XXI

books, and particularly in religious books, frequent
allusions to the sexual aspects of nature, which,
though perfectly harmless and innocent in them¬
selves, cannot be rendered in modern language with¬
out the appearance of coarseness. We may regret
that it should be so, but tradition is too strong on
this point, and I have therefore felt obliged to leave
certain passages untranslated, and to give the ori¬
ginal, when necessary, in a note. But this has been
done in extreme cases only, and many things which
we should feel inclined to suppress have been left in
all their outspoken simplicity, because those who
want to study ancient man, must learn to study him
as he really was, an animal, with all the strength
and weaknesses of an animal, though an animal that
was to rise above himself, and in the end discover his
true self, after many struggles and many defeats.

After this first caution, which I thought was due
to those who might expect to find in these volumes
nothing but gems, I feel I owe another to those
who may approach these translations under the
impression that they have only to read them in
order to gain an insight into the nature and character
of the religions of mankind. There are philosophers
who have accustomed themselves to look upon reli¬
gions as things that can be studied as they study the
manners and customs of savage tribes, by glancing
at the entertaining accounts of travellers or mis¬
sionaries, and then classing each religion under such
wide categories as fetishism, polytheism, monotheism,
and the rest. That is not the case. Translations
can do much, but they can never take the place of the
originals, and if the originals require not only to be

XXII

PREFACE TO THE

read, but to be read again and again, translations of
sacred books require to be studied with much greater
care, before we can hope to gain a real under¬
standing of the intentions of their authors or venture
on general assertions.

Such general assertions, if once made, are difficult
to extirpate. It has been stated, for instance, that
the religious notion of sin is wanting altogether in
the hymns of the Rig-veda, and some important con¬
clusions have been based on this supposed fact. Yet
the gradual growth of the concept of guilt is one of
the most interesting lessons which certain passages
of these ancient hymns can teach us 1 . It has been
asserted that in the Rig-veda Agni, fire, was adored
essentially as earthly sacrificial fire, and not as an
elemental force. How greatly such an assertion has
to be qualified, may be seen from a more careful
examination of the translations of the Vedic hymns
now accessible 2 . In many parts of the A vesta
fire is no doubt spoken of with great rever¬
ence, but those who speak of the Zoroastrians
as fire-worshippers, should know that the true fol¬
lowers of Zoroaster abhor that very name. Again,
there are certainly many passages in the Vedic
writings which prohibit the promiscuous communi¬
cation of the Veda, but those who maintain that
the Brahmans, like Roman Catholic priests, keep
their sacred books from the people, must have for-

1 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, second edition,
1859, P- 540 seq.

2 Ludwig, Rig-veda, iibersetzt, vol. iii, p. 331 seq. Muir, Sanskrit
Texts, vol. v, p. 199 seq. On the later growth of Agni, see a
very useful essay by Holtzmann, ‘Agni, nach den Vorstellungen des
Mahabharata/ 1878.

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XXlii

gotten the many passages in the Brahmazzas, the
Sfitras, and even in the Laws of Manu, where the
duty of learning the Veda by heart is inculcated for
every Brahmaz/a, Kshatriya, Vabya, that is, for every
man except a .Sudra.

These are a few specimens only to show how
dangerous it is to generalise even where there exist
complete translations of certain sacred books. It is
far easier to misapprehend, or even totally to mis¬
understand, a translation than the original; and it
should not be supposed, because a sentence or a
whole chapter seems at first sight unintelligible in
a translation, that therefore they are indeed devoid
of all meaning.

What can be more perplexing than the beginning
of the iOandogya-upanishad ? ‘ Let a man medi¬

tate/ we read, or, as others translate it, ‘ Let a man
worship the syllable Om/ It may seem impossible
at first sight to elicit any definite meaning from
these words and from much that follows after.
But it would be a mistake, nevertheless, to con¬
clude that we have here vox et prseterea nihil.
Meditation on the syllable Om consisted in a long-
continued repetition of that syllable with a view
of drawing the thoughts away from all other sub¬
jects, and thus concentrating them on some higher
object of thought of which that syllable was made to
be the symbol. This concentration of thought, eka-
grata or one-pointedness, as the Hindus called it, is
something to us almost unknown. Our minds are
like kaleidoscopes of thoughts in constant motion ;
and to shut our mental eyes to everything else, while
dwelling on one thought only, has become to most
of us almost as impossible as to apprehend one

XXIV

PREFACE TO TIIE

musical note without harmonics. With the life we
are leading now, with telegrams, letters, newspapers,
reviews, pamphlets, and books ever breaking in upon
us, it has become impossible, or almost impossible,
ever to arrive at that intensity of thought which the
Hindus meant by ekagrata, and the attainment of
which was to them the indispensable condition of all
philosophical and religious speculation. The loss may
not be altogether on our side, yet a loss it is, and if we
see the Hindus, even in their comparatively mono¬
tonous life, adopting all kinds of contrivances in
order to assist them in drawing away their thoughts
from all disturbing impressions and to fix them on
one subject only, we must not be satisfied with
smiling at their simplicity, but try to appreciate the
object they had in view.

When by means of repeating the syllable Om,
which originally seems to have meant ‘that/ or * yes/
they had arrived at a certain degree of mental tran¬
quillity, the question arose what was meant by this
Om, and to this question the most various answers
were given, according as the mind was to be led
up to higher and higher objects. Thus in one
passage we are told at first that Om is the beginning
of the Veda, or, as we have to deal with an Upanishad
of the Sama-veda, the beginning of the S&ma-veda,
so that he who meditates on Om, may be supposed
to be meditating on the whole of the Sama-veda.
But that is not enough. Om is said to be the essence
of the Sama-veda, which, being almost entirely taken
from the Rig-veda, may itself be called the essence
of the Rig-veda. And more than that. The Rig-veda
stands for all speech, the Sama-veda for all breath
or life, so that Om may be conceived of again as the

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XXV

symbol of all speech and all life. Om thus becomes
the name, not only of all our physical and mental
powers, but especially of the living principle, the
Pra;/a or spirit. This is explained by the parable
in the second chapter, while in the third chapter,
that spirit within us is identified with the spirit in
the sun. He therefore who meditates on Om, medi¬
tates on the spirit in man as identical with the spirit
in nature, or in the sun ; and thus the lesson that
is meant to be taught in the beginning of the
A7/andogya-upanishad is really this, that none of the
Vedas with their sacrifices and ceremonies could
ever secure the salvation of the worshipper, i.e.
that sacred works, performed according to the rules
of the Vedas, are of no avail in the end, but that
meditation on Om alone, or that knowledge of
what is meant by Om alone, can procure true salva¬
tion, or true immortality. Thus the pupil is led on
step by step to what is the highest object of the
Upanishads, viz. the recognition of the self in man
as identical with the Highest Self or Brahman.
The lessons which are to lead up to that highest
conception of the universe, both subjective and
objective, are no doubt mixed up with much that
is superstitious and absurd ; still the main object is
never lost sight of. Thus, when we come to the
eighth chapter, the discussion, though it begins with
Om or the Udgitha, ends with the question of the
origin of the world; and though the final answer,
namely, that Om means ether (aka^a), and that
ether is the origin of all things, may still sound to
us more physical than metaphysical, still the descrip¬
tion given of ether or alcana, shows that more is
meant by it than the physical ether, and that ether

XXVI

PREFACE TO THE

is in fact one of the earlier and less perfect names
of the Infinite, of Brahman, the universal Self.
This, at least, is the lesson which the Brahmans
themselves read in this chapter 1 ; and if we look
at the ancient language of the Upanishads as re¬
presenting mere attempts at finding expression for
what their language could hardly express as yet,
we shall, I think, be less inclined to disagree with
the interpretation put on those ancient oracles by
the later Vedanta philosophers 2 , or, at all events,
we shall hesitate before we reject what is difficult to
interpret, as altogether devoid of meaning.

This is but one instance to show that even behind
the fantastic and whimsical phraseology of the sacred
writings of the Hindus and other Eastern nations,
there may be sometimes aspirations after truth
which deserve careful consideration from the student
of the psychological development and the historical
growth of early religious thought, and that after
careful sifting, treasures may be found in what at
first we may feel inclined to throw away as utterly
worthless.

And now I come to the third caution. Let it
not be supposed that a text, three thousand
years old, or, even if of more modern date, still
widely distant from our own sphere of thought,
can be translated in the same manner as a book

1 The Upanishad itself says: 4 The Brahman is the same as the
ether which is around us; and the ether which is around us, is the
same as the ether which is within us. And the ether which is
within, that is the ether within the heart. That ether in the heart
is omnipresent and unchanging. He who knows this obtains
omnipresent and unchangeable happiness/ Kh. Up. Ill, 12, 7-9.

2 Cf. Vedanta-shtras I, 1, 22.

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XXVll

written a few years ago in French or German.
Those who know French and German well enough,
know how difficult, nay, how impossible it is, to
render justice to certain touches of genius which
the true artist knows how to give to a sen¬
tence. Many poets have translated Heine into
English or Tennyson into German, many painters
have copied the Madonna di San Sisto or the so-
called portrait of Beatrice Cenci. But the greater
the excellence of these translators, the more frank
has been their avowal, that the original is beyond
their reach. And what is a translation of modern
German into modern English compared with a trans¬
lation of ancient Sanskrit or Zend or Chinese into
any modern language ? It is an undertaking which,
from its very nature, admits of the most partial
success only, and a more intimate knowledge of the
ancient language, so far from facilitating the task
of the translator, renders it only more hopeless.
Modern words are round, ancient words are square,
and we may as well hope to solve the quadrature of
the circle, as to express adequately the ancient
thoughts of the Veda in modern English.

We must not expect therefore that a translation
of the sacred books of the ancients can ever be more
than an approximation of our language to theirs,
of our thoughts to theirs. The translator, however,
if he has once gained the conviction that it is
impossible to translate old thought into modern
speech, without doing some violence either to the
one or to the other, will hardly hesitate in his choice
between two evils. He will prefer to do some
violence to language rather than to misrepresent
old thoughts by clothing them in words which do

XXV111

PREFACE TO THE

not fit them. If therefore the reader finds some
of these translations rather rugged, if he meets with
expressions which sound foreign, with combinations
of nouns and adjectives such as he has never seen
before, with sentences that seem too long or too
abrupt, let him feel sure that the translator has had
to deal with a choice of evils, and that when the
choice lay between sacrificing idiom or truth, he has
chosen the smaller evil of the two. I do not claim,
of course, either for myself or for my fellow-workers,
that we have always sacrificed as little as was
possible of truth or idiom, and that here and there
a happier rendering of certain passages may not be
suggested by those who come after us. I only wish
to warn the reader once more not to expect too
much from a translation, and to bear in mind that,
easy as it might be to render word by word, it is
difficult, aye, sometimes impossible, to render thought
by thought.

I shall give one instance only from my own
translation of the Upanishads. One of the most
important words in the ancient philosophy of the

A A

Brahmans is Atman, nom. sing. Atma. It is
rendered in our dictionaries by ‘ breath, soul, the
principle of life and sensation, the individual soul,
the self, the abstract individual, self, one's self, the
reflexive pronoun, the natural temperament or dis¬
position, essence, nature, character, peculiarity, the
person or the whole body, the body, the understand¬
ing, intellect, ‘the mind, the faculty of thought and
reason, the thinking faculty, the highest principle
of life, Brahma, the supreme deity or soul of the
universe, care, effort, pains, firmness, the sun, fire,
wind, air, a son/

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XXIX

This will give classical scholars an idea of the
chaotic state from which, thanks to the excellent
work done by Boehtlingk, Roth, and others, Sanskrit
lexicology is only just emerging. Some of the mean¬
ings here mentioned ought certainly not to be
ascribed to itman. It never means, for instance,
the understanding, nor could it ever by itself be
translated by sun, fire, wind, air, pains or firmness.
But after deducting such surplusage, there still
remains a large variety of meanings which may,
under certain circumstances, be ascribed to atm an.

When atman occurs in philosophical treatises,
such as the Upanishads and the Vedanta system
which is based on them, it has generally been trans¬
lated by soul, mind, or spirit. I tried myself to use
one or other of these words, but the oftener I
employed them, the more I felt their inadequacy,
and was driven at last to adopt self and Self as
the least liable to misunderstanding.

No doubt in many passages it sounds strange in
English to use self, and in the plural seifs instead
of selves ; but that very strangeness is useful, for
while such words as soul and mind and spirit pass
over us unrealised, self and seifs will always ruffle
the surface of the mind, and stir up some reflection
in the reader. In English to speak even of the
I and the Non-I, was till lately considered harsh ;
it may still be called a foreign philosophical idiom.
In German the Ich and Nicht-ich have, since the
time of Fichte, become recognised and almost
familiar, not only as philosophical terms, but as
legitimate expressions in the literary language of
the day. But while the Ich with Fichte expressed
the highest abstraction of personal existence, the

XXX

PREFACE TO THE

corresponding word in Sanskrit, the Ah am or
A hank a ra, was always looked upon as a secondary
development only, and as by no means free from all
purely phenomenal ingredients. Beyond the A ham
or Ego, with all its accidents and limitations, such
as sex, sense, language, country, and religion, the
ancient sages of India perceived, from a very early
time, the Atman or the self, independent of all such
accidents.

The individual atm an or self, however, was with
the Brahmans a phase or phenomenal modification
only of the Highest Self, and that Highest Self
was to them the last point which could be reached
by philosophical speculation. It was to them what
in other systems of philosophy has been called by
various names, to oV, the Divine, the Absolute. The
highest aim of all thought and study with the
Brahman of the Upanishads was to recognise his
own self as a mere limited reflection of the Highest
Self, to know his self in the Highest Self, and
through that knowledge to return to it, and regain
his identity with it. Here to know was to be, to

A A

know the Atman was to be the Atman, and the
reward of that highest knowledge after death was
freedom from new births, or immortality.

That Highest Self which had become to the
ancient Brahmans the goal of all their mental ef¬
forts, was looked upon at the same time as the
starting-point of all phenomenal existence, the root
of the world, the only thing that could truly be said
to be, to be real and true. As the root of all that
exists, the Atman was identified with the Brahman,
which in Sanskrit is both masculine and neuter, and
with the Sat, which is neuter only, that which is,

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XXXI

or Satya, the true, the real. It alone exists in the
beginning and for ever ; it has no second. What¬
ever else is said to exist, derives its real being from
the Sat. How the one Sat became many, how
what we call the creation, what they call emanation
( 7 TpooSos), constantly proceeds and returns to it, has
been explained in various more or less fanciful ways
by ancient prophets and poets. But what they
all agree in is this, that the whole creation, the
visible and invisible world, all plants, all animals,
all men are due to the one Sat, are upheld by it,
and will return to it.

If we translate Atman by soul, mind, or spirit,
we commit, first of all, that fundamental mistake
of using words which may be predicated, in place of
a word which is a subject only, and can never be¬
come a predicate. We may say in English that
man possesses a soul, that a man is out of his mind,
that man has or even that man is a spirit, but we
could never predicate at man, or self, of anything
else. Spirit, if it means breath or life ; mind, if it
means the organ of perception and conception ;
soul, if, like >£aitanya, it means intelligence in
general, all these may be predicated of the Atman,
as manifested in the phenomenal world. But
they are never subjects in the sense in which the
Atman is ; they have no independent being, apart
from Atman. Thus to translate the beginning of the
Aitareya-upanishad, Atma va idam eka evagra
asit, by ‘ This (world) verily was before (the creation
of the world) soul alone ’ (Roer); or, ‘ Originally
this (universe) was indeed soul only ’ (Colebrooke),
would give us a totally false idea. M. Regnaud
in his ‘ Materiaux pour servir a 1 histoire de la philo-

XXX11

PREFACE TO THE

sophie de l’lnde* (vol. ii, p. 24) has evidently felt
this, and has kept the word atman untranslated,

‘ Au commencement cet univers n’6tait que batman/
But while in French it would seem impossible to
find any equivalent for atman, I have ventured to
translate in English, as I should have done in
German, ‘Verily, in the beginning all this was
Self, one only.’

Thus again when we read in Sanskrit, ‘ Know the
Self by the self/ atmanam atmana pasya, tempt¬
ing as it may seem, it would be entirely wrong to
render it by the Greek yvc 061 o-eavTov, The Brahman
called upon his young pupil to know not himself,
but his Self, that is, to know his individual self as
a merely temporary reflex of the Eternal Self.
Were we to translate this so-called atmavidya,
this self-knowledge, by knowledge of the soul, we
should not be altogether wrong, but we should never¬
theless lose all that distinguishes Indian from Greek
thought. It may not be good English to say to know
his self, still less to know our seifs, but it would be
bad Sanskrit to say to know himself, to know our¬
selves ; or, at all events, such a rendering would
deprive us of the greatest advantage in the study
of Indian philosophy, the opportunity of seeing in
how many different ways man has tried to solve the
riddles of the world and of his soul.

I have thought it best therefore to keep as close
as possible to the Sanskrit original, and where I
could not find an adequate term in English, I have
often retained the Sanskrit word rather than use a
misleading substitute in English. It is impossible, for
instance, to find an English equivalent for so simple
a word as Sat, to 6V. We cannot render the Greek to

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XXX111

ov and to fir ) ov by Being or Not-being, for both are
abstract nouns; nor by ‘the Being/ for this would
almost always convey a wrong impression. In Ger¬
man it is easy to distinguish between das Sein,
i.e. being, in the abstract, and das Seiende, to ov.
In the same way the Sanskrit sat can easily be ren¬
dered in Greek by to oV, in German by das Seiende,
but in English, unless we say ‘ that which is,’ we are
driven to retain the orimnal Sat.

O

From this Sat was derived in Sanskrit Sat-ya,
meaning originally ‘ endowed with being,’ then ‘ true.’
This is an adjective ; but the same word, as a neuter,
is also used in the sense of truth, as an abstract;
and in translating it is very necessary always to dis¬
tinguish between Satyam, the true, frequently the
same as Sat, to oV, and Satyam, truth, veracity.
One example will suffice to show how much the
clearness of a translation depends on the right ren¬
dering of such words as atman, sat, and satyam.

In a dialogue between Uddalaka and his son
Svetaketu, in which the father tries to open his son’s
mind, and to make him see man’s true relation to
the Highest Self (TG^andogya-upanishad VI), the
father first explains how the Sat produced what we
should call the three elements 1 , viz. fire, water, and
earth, which he calls heat, water, and food. Having
produced them (VI, 2, 4), the Sat entered into them,
but not with its real nature, but only with its ‘ living
self’ (VI, 3, 3), which is a reflection (abhasamatram)
of the real Sat, as the sun in the water is a reflection

1 Devatas, literally deities, but frequently to be translated by
powers or beings. Mahadeva Moreshvar Kunte, the learned editor
of the Vedanta-sutras, ought not (p. 70) to have rendered devata,
in Kh. Up. I, 11, 5, by goddess.

[ 3 ]

c

XXXIV

PREFACE TO THE

of the real sun. By this apparent union of the Sat
with the three elements, every form (rhpa) and
every name (naman) in the world was produced ;
and therefore he who knows the three elements is
supposed to know everything in this world, nearly
in the same manner in which the Greeks imagined
that through a knowledge of the elements, every¬
thing else became known (VI, 4, 7). The same
three elements are shown to be also the constituent
elements of man (VI, 5). Food or the earthy ele¬
ment is supposed to produce not only flesh, but
also mind; water, not only blood, but also breath ;
heat, not only bone, but also speech. This is more
or less fanciful; the important point, however, is
this, that, from the Brahmanic point of view, breath,
speech, and mind are purely elemental, or external
instruments, and require the support of the living
self, the ^ivatman, before they can act.

Having explained how the Sat produces pro¬
gressively heat, how heat leads to water, water to
earth, and how, by a peculiar mixture of the three,
speech, breath, and mind are produced, the teacher
afterwards shows how in death, speech returns to
mind, mind to breath, breath to heat, and heat to
the Sat (VI, 8, 6). This Sat, the root of every¬
thing, is called para devata, the highest deity, not
in the ordinary sense of the word deity, but as
expressing the highest abstraction of the human
mind. We must therefore translate it by the
Highest Being, in the same manner as we translate
devata, when applied to heat, water, and earth, not
by deity, but by substance or element.

The same Sat, as the root or highest essence
of all material existence, is called awiman, from

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XXXV

anu, small, subtile, infinitesimal, atom. It is an
abstract word, and I have translated it by subtile
essence.

The father then goes on explaining in various
ways that this Sat is underlying all existence,
and that we must learn to recognise it as the root,
not only of all the objective, but likewise of our
own subjective existence. ‘ Bring the fruit of a
Nyagrodha tree,’ he says, ‘break it, and what do
you find?’ ‘The seeds,’ the son replies, ‘almost
infinitesimal.’ ‘ Break one of them, and tell me
what you see.’ ‘ Nothing,’ the son replies. Then
the father continues: ‘ My son, that subtile essence
which you do not see there, of that very essence
this great Nyagrodha tree exists.’

After that follows this sentence: ‘ Etad&tmyam
ida^ sarvam, tat satyam, sa atma, tat tvam asi
■Svetaketo.’

This sentence has been rendered by Rajendralal
Mitra in the following way : ‘ All this universe has
the (Supreme) Deity for its life. That Deity is
Truth. He is the Universal Soul. Thou art He,
O 6vetaketu V

This translation is quite correct, as far as the
words go, but I doubt whether we can connect any
definite thoughts with these words. In spite of the
division adopted in the text, I believe it will be
necessary to join this sentence with the last words
of the preceding paragraph. This is clear from
the commentary, and from later paragraphs, where
this sentence is repeated, VI, 9, 4, &c. The division

1 Anquetil Duperron translates: ‘Ipso hoc modo (ens) illud est
subtile: et hoc omne, unus atma est: et id verum et rectum est,
0 Sopatkit, tatoumes, id est, ille atma tu as/ ;

XXXVI

PREFACE TO THE

in the printed text (VI, 8, 6) is wrong, and VI, 8, 7
should begin with sa ya esho ’;dma, i. e. that which
is the subtile essence.

The question then is, what is further to be said
about this subtile essence. I have ventured to
translate the passage in the following way :

‘ That which is the subtile essence (the Sat, the
root of everything), in it all that exists has its self,
or more literally, its self-hood. It is the True (not
the Truth in the abstract, but that which truly and
really exists). It is the Self, i. e. the Sat is what is
called the Self of everything 1 .’ Lastly, he sums up,
and tells .SVetaketu that, not only the whole world,
but he too himself is that Self, that Satya, that
Sat.

No doubt this translation sounds strange to
English ears, but as the thoughts contained in the
Upanishads are strange, it would be wrong to
smoothe down their strangeness by clothing them
in language familiar to us, which, because it is
familiar, will fail to startle us, and because it fails
to startle us, will fail also to set us thinking.

To know oneself to be the Sat, to know that all
that is real and eternal in us is the Sat, that all came
from it and will, through knowledge, return to it,
requires an independent effort of speculative thought.
We must realise, as well as we can, the thoughts of
the ancient AYshis, before we can hope to translate
them. It is not enough simply to read the half-reli¬
gious, half-philosophical utterances which we find in

1 The change of gender in sa-for tad is idiomatic. One could
not say in Sanskrit tad atma, it is the Self, but sa atma. By sa,
he, the Sat, that which is, is meant. The commentary explains
sa atma by tat sat, and continues tat sat tat tvam asi (p. 443).

SACKED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XXXV11

the Sacred Books of the East, and to say that they
are strange, or obscure, or mystic. Plato is strange,
till we know him ; Berkeley is mystic, till for a time
we have identified ourselves with him. So it is with
these ancient sages, who have become the founders
of the great religions of antiquity. They can never
be judged from without, they must be judged from
within. We need not become Brahmans or Bud¬
dhists or Taosze altogether, but we must for a time,
if we wish to understand, and still more, if we are
bold enough to undertake to translate their doc-
trines. Whoever shrinks from that effort, will see
hardly anything in these sacred books or their
translations but matter to wonder at or to laugh at;
possibly something to make him thankful that he is
not as other men. But to the patient reader these
same books will, in spite of many drawbacks, open a
new view of the history of the human race, of that
one race to which we all belong, with all the fibres
of our flesh, with all the fears and hopes of our soul.
We cannot separate ourselves from those who be¬
lieved in these sacred books. There is no specific
difference between ourselves and the Brahmans, the
Buddhists, the Zoroastrians, or the Taosze. Our
powers of perceiving, of reasoning, and of believing
may be more highly developed, but we cannot claim
the possession of any verifying power or of any
power of belief which they did not possess as well.
Shall we say then that they were forsaken of God,
while we are His chosen people? God forbid!
There is much, no doubt, in their sacred books
which we should tolerate no longer, though we must
not forget that there are portions in our own sacred
books, too, which many of us would wish to be absent,

XXXV111

PREFACE TO THE

which, from the earliest ages of Christianity, have
been regretted by theologians of undoubted piety,
and which often prove a stumblingblock to those
who have been won over by our missionaries to the
simple faith of Christ. But that is not the question.
The question is, whether there is or whether there is
not, hidden in every one of the sacred books, some¬
thing that could lift up the human heart from this
earth to a higher world, something that could make
man feel the omnipresence of a higher Power, some¬
thing that could make him shrink from evil and in¬
cline to good, something to sustain him in the short
journey through life, with its bright moments of hap¬
piness, and its long hours of terrible distress.

If some of those who read and mark these trans¬
lations • learn how to discover some such precious
grains in the sacred books of other nations, though
hidden under heaps of rubbish, our labour will not
have been in vain, for there is no lesson which at
the present time seems more important than to learn
that in every religion there are such precious grains ;
that we must draw in every religion a broad distinction
between what is essential and what is not, between
the eternal and the temporary, between the divine
and the human ; and that though the non-essential
may fill many volumes, the essential can often be
comprehended in a few words, but words on which
1 hang all the law and the prophets.’

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

XXXIX

PROGRAM OF A TRANSLATION

OF

THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

I here subjoin the program in which I first put
forward the idea of a translation of the Sacred
Books of the East, and through which I invited the
co-operation of Oriental scholars in this undertaking.
The difficulty of finding translators, both willing
and competent to take a part in it, proved far
greater than I had anticipated. Even when I had
secured the assistance of a number of excellent
scholars, and had received their promises of prompt
co-operation, illness, domestic affliction, and even
death asserted their control over all human affairs.
Professor Childers, who had shown the warmest
interest in our work, and on whom I chiefly de¬
pended for the Pali literature of the Buddhists, was
taken from us, an irreparable loss to Oriental scholar¬
ship in general, and to our undertaking in particular.
Among native scholars, whose co-operation I had
been particularly desirous to secure, Rajendralal Mitra,
who had promised a translation of the Vayu-pura;/a,
was prevented by serious illness from fulfilling his
engagement. In other cases sorrow and sickness have
caused, at all events, serious delay in the translation
of the very books which were to have inaugurated
this Series. However, new offers of assistance have
come, and I hope that more may still come from
Oriental scholars both in India and England, so
that the limit of time which had been originally

xl

PREFACE TO THE

assigned to the publication of twenty-four volumes
may not, I hope, be much exceeded.

The Sacred Books of the East, Translated, with Introduc¬
tions and Notes, by various Oriental Scholars, and Edited
by F. Max Muller.

Apart from the interest which the Sacred Books of all religions
possess in the eyes of the theologian, and, more particularly, of the
missionary, to whom an accurate knowledge of them is as indispen¬
sable as a knowledge of the enemy’s country is to a general, these
works have of late assumed a new importance, as viewed in the
character of ancient historical documents. In every country where
Sacred Books have been preserved, whether by oral tradition or by
writing, they are the oldest records, and mark the beginning of
what may be called documentary, in opposition to purely tradi¬
tional, history.

There is nothing more ancient in India than the Vedas; and, if
we except the Vedas and the literature connected with them, there
is again no literary work in India which, so far as we know at
present, can with certainty be referred to an earlier date than that
of the Sacred Canon of the Buddhists. Whatever age we may
assign to the various portions of the Avesta and to their final
arrangement, there is no book in the Persian language of greater
antiquity than the Sacred Books of the followers of Zarathu^tra,
nay, even than their translation in Pehlevi. There may have been
an extensive ancient literature in China long before Khung-fu-^ze
and Lao-^ze, but among all that was rescued and preserved of it,
the five King and the four Shu claim again the highest antiquity.
As to the Koran, it is known to be the fountain-head both of the
religion and of the literature of the Arabs.

This being the case, it was but natural that the attention of the
historian should of late have been more strongly attracted by these
Sacred Books, as likely to afford most valuable information, not
only on the religion, but also on the moral sentiments, the social
institutions, the legal maxims of some of the most important nations
of antiquity. There are not many nations that have preserved
sacred writings, and many of those that have been preserved have
but lately become accessible to us in their original form, through
the rapid advance of Oriental scholarship in Europe. Neither
Greeks, nor Romans, nor Germans, nor Celts, nor Slaves have
left us anything that deserves the name of Sacred Books. The

SACRED ROOKS OF THE EAST.

xli

Homeric Poems are national Epics, like the Ramaya;za and the
Nibelunge, and the Homeric Hymns have never received that
general recognition or sanction which alone can impart to the
poetical effusions of personal piety the sacred or canonical cha¬
racter which is the distinguishing feature of the Vedic Hymns.
The sacred literature of the early inhabitants of Italy seems to have
been of a liturgical rather than of a purely religious kind; and
whatever the Celts, the Germans, the Slaves may have possessed
of sacred traditions about their gods and heroes, having been
handed down by oral tradition chiefly, has perished beyond all
hope of recovery. Some portions of the Eddas alone give us an
idea of what the religious and heroic poetry of the Scandinavians
may have been. The Egyptians possessed Sacred Books, and
some of them, such as the Book of the Dead, have come down to
us in various forms. There is a translation of the Book of the
Dead by Dr. Birch, published in the fifth volume of Bunsen’s
Egypt, and a new edition and translation of this important work
may be expected from the combined labours of Birch, Chabas,
Lepsius, and Naville. In Babylon and Assyria, too, important
fragments of what may be called a Sacred Literature have lately
come to light. The interpretation, however, of these Hieroglyphic
and Cuneiform texts is as yet so difficult that, for the present, they
are of interest to the scholar only, and hardly available for histo¬
rical purposes.

Leaving out of consideration the Jewish and Christian Scriptures,
it appears that the only great and original religions which profess
to be founded on Sacred Books l , and have preserved them in
manuscript, are:—

1. The religion of the Brahmans.

2. The religion of the followers of Buddha.

3. The religion of the followers of Zarathu^tra.

4. T he religion of the followers of Khung-fu-^ze.

5. The religion of the followers of Lao-^ze.

6. The religion of the followers of Mohammed.

A desire for a trustworthy translation of the Sacred Books of
these six Eastern religions has often been expressed. Several have
been translated into English, French, German, or Latin, but in
some cases these translations are difficult to procure, in others they
are loaded with notes and commentaries, which are intended for

1 Introduction to the Science of Religion, by F. Max Muller
(Longmans, 1873), p. 104.

xlii

PREFACE TO THE

students by profession only. Oriental scholars have been blamed
for not having as yet supplied a want so generally felt, and so fre¬
quently expressed, as a complete, trustworthy, and readable transla¬
tion of the principal Sacred Books of the Eastern Religions. The
reasons, however, why hitherto they have shrunk from such an
undertaking are clear enough. The difficulties in many cases of
giving complete translations, and not selections only, are very great.
There is still much work to be done in a critical restoration of the
original texts, in an examination of their grammar and metres, and
in determining the exact meaning of many words and passages.
That kind of work is naturally far more attractive to scholars than
a mere translation, particularly when they cannot but feel that,
with the progress of our knowledge, many a passage which now
seems clear and easy, may, on being re-examined, assume a new
import. Thus while scholars who are most competent to under¬
take a translation, prefer to devote their time to more special
researches, the work of a complete translation is deferred to the
future, and historians are left under the impression that Oriental
scholarship is still in so unsatisfactory a state as to make any
reliance on translations of the Veda, the Avesta, or the Tao-te
King extremely hazardous.

It is clear, therefore, that a translation of the principal Sacred
Books of the East can be carried out only at a certain sacrifice.
Scholars must leave for a time their own special researches in
order to render the general results already obtained accessible to
the public at large. And even then, really useful results can be
achieved viribus unitis only. If four of the best Egyptologists
have to combine in order to produce a satisfactory edition and
translation of one of the Sacred Books of ancient Egypt, a much
larger number of Oriental scholars will be required for translating
the Sacred Books of the Brahmans, the Buddhists, the Zoroastrians,
the followers of Khung-fu-^ze, Lao-^ze, and Mohammed.

Lastly, there was the most serious difficulty of all, a difficulty
which no scholar could remove, viz. the difficulty of finding the
funds necessary for carrying out so large an undertaking. No
doubt there exists at present a very keen interest in questions
connected with the origin, the growth, and decay of religion. But
much of that interest is theoretic rather than historical. How
people might or could or should have elaborated religious ideas, is
a topic most warmly discussed among psychologists and theolo¬
gians, but a study of the documents, in which alone the actual
growth of religious thought can be traced, is much neglected.

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

xliii

A faithful, unvarnished prose translation of the Sacred Books of
India, Persia, China, and Arabia, though it may interest careful
students, will never, I fear, excite a widespread interest, or com¬
mand a circulation large enough to make it a matter of private
enterprise and commercial speculation.

No doubt there is much in these old books that is startling by
its very simplicity and truth, much that is elevated and elevating,
much that is beautiful and sublime; but people who have vague
ideas of primeval wisdom and the splendour of Eastern poetry will
soon find themselves grievously disappointed. It cannot be too
strongly stated, that the chief, and, in many cases, the only interest
of the Sacred Books of the East is historical; that much in them is
extremely childish, tedious, if not repulsive; and that no one but
the historian will be able to understand the important lessons which
they teach. It would have been impossible to undertake a trans¬
lation even of the most important only of the Sacred Books of the
East, without the support of an Academy or a University which
recognises the necessity of rendering these works more generally
accessible, on the same grounds on which it recognises the duty of
collecting and exhibiting in Museums the petrifactions of bygone
ages, little concerned whether the public admires the beauty of
fossilised plants and broken skeletons, as long as hard-working
students find there some light for reading once more the darker
pages in the history of the earth.

Having been so fortunate as to secure that support, having also
received promises of assistance from some of the best Oriental
scholars in England and India, I hope I shall be able, after the
necessary preparations are completed, to publish about three
volumes of translations every year, selecting from the stores of the
six so-called ‘ Book-religions ’ those works which at present can be
translated, and which are most likely to prove useful. All trans¬
lations will be made from the original texts, and where good
translations exist already, they will be carefully revised by compe¬
tent scholars. Such is the bulk of the religious literature of the
Brahmans and the Buddhists, that to attempt a complete translation
would be far beyond the powers of one generation of scholars.
Still, if the interest in the work itself should continue, there is no
reason why this series of translations should not be carried on,

even after those who commenced it shall have ceased from their

✓

labours.

What I contemplate at present, and I am afraid at my time of
life even this may seem too sanguine, is no more than a Series

xliv

PREFACE TO THE

of twenty-four volumes, the publication of which will probably
extend over eight years. In this Series I hope to comprehend the
following books, though I do not pledge myself to adhere strictly
to this outline:—

1. From among the Sacred Books of the Brahmans I hope to
give a translation of the Hymns of the Rig-veda. While I shall
continue my translation of selected hymns of that Veda, a traduc¬
tion raisonnde which is intended for Sanskrit scholars only, on
the same principles which I have followed in the first volume \
explaining every word and sentence that seems to require elucida¬
tion, and carefully examining the opinions of previous commen¬
tators, both native and European, I intend to contribute a freer
translation of the hymns to this Series, with a few explanatory
notes only, such as are absolutely necessary to enable readers who
are unacquainted with Sanskrit to understand the thoughts of the
Vedic poets. The translation of perhaps another Sawhita, one or
two of the Brahmazzas, or portions of them, will have to be included
in our Series, as well as the principal Upanishads, theosophic trea¬
tises of great interest and beauty. There is every prospect of an
early appearance of a translation of the Bhagavad-gita, of the most
important among the sacred Law-books, and of one at least of the
Purazzas. I should have wished to include a translation of some of
the Gain books, of the Granth of the Sikhs, and of similar works
illustrative of the later developments of religion in India, but there
is hardly room for them at present.

2. The Sacred Books of the Buddhists will be translated chiefly
from the two original collections, the Southern in Pali, the
Northern in Sanskrit. Here the selection will, no doubt, be most
difficult. Among the first books to be published will be, I hope,
Sutras from the Digha Nikaya, a part of the Vinaya-pi/aka, the
Dhammapada, the Divyavadana, the Lalita-vistara, or legendary
life of Buddha.

3. The Sacred Books of the Zoroastrians lie within a smaller
compass, but they will require fuller notes and commentaries in
order to make a translation intelligible and useful.

4. The books which enjoy the highest authority with the fol¬
lowers of Khung-fu-^ze are the King and the Shu. Of the former
the Shft King or Book of History; the Odes of the Temple and

1 Rig-veda-sanhita, The Sacred Hymns of the Brahmans, trans¬
lated and explained by F. Max Muller. Vol. i. Hymns to the
Maruts or the Storm-Gods. London, 1869.

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

xlv

the Altar, and other pieces illustrating the ancient religious views
and practices of the Chinese, in the Shih King or Book of Poetry;
the YI King; the Li KV, and the Hsiao King or Classic of Filial
Piety, will all be given, it is hoped, entire. Of the latter, the Series
will contain the Aung Yung or Doctrine of the Mean; the Ta Hsio
or Great Learning; all Confucius' utterances in the Lun Yii or Con-
fucian Analects, which are of a religious nature, and refer to the
principles of his moral system ; and Mang-^ze’s Doctrine of the
Goodness of Human Nature.

5. For the system of Lao-^ze we require only a translation of
the Tao-teh King with some of its commentaries, and, it may be,
an authoritative work to illustrate the actual operation of its
principles.

6. For Islam, all that is essential is a trustworthy translation of
the Koran.

It will be my endeavour to divide the twenty-four volumes which
are contemplated in this Series as equally as possible among the
six religions. But much must depend on the assistance which I
receive from Oriental scholars, and also on the interest and the
wishes of the public.

F. MAX MULLER.

Oxford, October, 1876.

The following distinguished scholars, all of them
occupying the foremost rank in their own special
departments of Oriental literature, are at present
engaged in preparing translations of some of the
Sacred Books of the East: S. Beal, R. G. Bhan-
darkar, G. Btihler, A. Burnell, E. B. Cowell, J.
Darmesteter, T. W. Rhys Davids, J. Eggeling,
V. Fausboll, H. Jacobi, J. Jolly, H. Kern, F. Kiel-
horn, J. Legge, H. Oldenberg, E. H. Palmer, R.
Pischel, K. T. Telang, E. W. West.

The works which for the present have been
selected for translation are the following :

I. Ancient Vedic Religion.

Hymns of the Azg-veda.

The Satapatha-brahmazza.

xlvi

PREFACE TO THE

The Upanishads.

The Grzhya-sutras of Hira/zyake^in and others.

II. Law-books in prose.

The Sutras of Apastamba, Gautama, Baudhayana,
Vasish///a, Vishzzu, &c.

III. Law-books in verse.

The Laws of Manu, Yajmavalkya, &c.

IV. Later Brahmanism.

The Bhagavad-giti.

The Vayu-purazza.

V. Buddhism,

i. Pali Documents.

The MahaparinibMna Sutta, the Te i^*a Sutta,
the Mahasudassana Sutta, the Dhamma/£akkappa-
vattana Sutta; the Suttanipata; the Mahavagga,
the Aullavagga, and the Patimokkha.

2. Sanskrit Documents.

The Divyavadana and Saddharmapuzzdarika.

3. Chinese Documents.

The Phh-yao King, or life of Buddha.

4. Prakrit 6mna Documents.

The A/£aranga Sutra, Da^avaikalika Sutra, Sutra-
krztariga, and Uttaradhyayana Sfttra.

VI. Parsi Religion.

1. Zend Documents.

The Vendldad.

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

xlvii

2. Pehlevi and Parsi Documents.

The BundahB, Bahman Yasht, Shayast-la-shayast,
Dadistani Dini, Mainydi Khard.

VII. Mohammedanism.

The Koran.

VIII. Chinese Religion,
i. Confucianism.

The Shu King, Shih King, Hsiao King, Yi King,
Li Ki, Lun Yu, and Mang-^ze.

2. Taoism.

The Tao-teh King, Afwang-$ze, and Kan Ying
Phien.

xlviii

PREFACE TO THE

TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL

ALPHABETS.

The system of transcribing Oriental words with
Roman types, adopted by the translators of the
Sacred Books of the East, is, on the whole, the
same which * I first laid down in my Proposals for
a Missionary Alphabet, 1854, and which afterwards
I shortly described in my Lectures on the Science
of Language, Second Series, p. 169 (ninth edition).
That system allows of great freedom in its appli¬
cation to different languages, and has, therefore,
recommended itself to many scholars, even if they
had long been accustomed to use their own system
of transliteration.

It rests in fact on a few principles only, which
may be applied to individual languages according to
the views which each student has formed for him¬
self of the character and the pronunciation of the
vowels and consonants of any given alphabet.

It does not differ essentially from the Standard
Alphabet proposed by Professor Lepsius. It only
endeavours to realise, by means of the ordinary
types which are found in every printing office, what
my learned friend has been enabled to achieve, it
may be in a more perfect manner, by means of
a number of new types with diacritical marks, cast
expressly for him by the Berlin Academy.

The general principles of what, on account of its
easy application to all languages, I have called the
Missionary Alphabet, are these:

1. Np letters are to be used which do not exist
in ordinary founts.

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

xlix

2. The same Roman type is always to represent
the same foreign letter, and the same foreign letter
is always to be represented by the same Roman
type.

3. Simple letters are, as a rule, to be represented
by simple, compound by compound types.

4. It is not attempted to indicate the pronuncia¬
tion of foreign languages, but only to represent
foreign letters by Roman types, leaving the pro¬
nunciation to be learnt, as it is now, from gram¬
mars or from conversation with natives.

5. The foundation of every system of translitera¬
tion must consist of a classification of the typical
sounds of human speech. Such classification may
be more or less perfect, more or less minute, accord¬
ing to the objects in view. For ordinary purposes
the classification in vowels and consonants, and of
consonants again in gutturals, dentals, and labials
suffices. In these three classes we distinguish hard
(not-voiced) and sonant (voiced) consonants, each
being liable to aspiration; nasals, sibilants, and
semivowels, some of these also being either voiced
or not-voiced.

6. After having settled the typical sounds, we
assign to them, as much as possible, the ordinary
Roman types of the first class.

7. We then arrange in every language which
possesses a richer alphabet, all remaining letters,
according to their affinities, as modifications of the
nearest typical letters, or as letters of the second
and third class. Thus linguals in Sanskrit are treated
as nearest to dentals, palatals to gutturals.

8. The manner of expressing such modifications
is uniform throughout. While all typical letters of

[ 3 ] d

1

PREFACE TO THE

the first class are expressed by Roman types, modi¬
fied letters of the second class are expressed by
italics, modified letters of the third class by small
capitals. Only in extreme cases, where another class
of modified types is wanted, are we compelled to
have recourse either to diacritical marks, or to a
different fount of types.

9. Which letters in each language are to be
considered as primary, secondary, or tertiary may,
to a certain extent, be left to the discretion of
individual scholars.

10. As it has been found quite impossible to
devise any practical alphabet that should accurately
represent the pronunciation of words, the Missionary
Alphabet, by not attempting to indicate minute
shades of pronunciation, has at all events the
advantage of not misleading readers in their pro¬
nunciation of foreign words. An italic t> for instance,
or a small capital t, serves simply as a warning that
this is not the ordinary t, though it has some affinity
with it. How it is to be pronounced must be learnt
for each language, as it now is, from a grammar
or otherwise. Thus t in Sanskrit is the lingual t.
H ow that is to be pronounced, we must learn from
the PratEakhyas, or from the mouth of a highly
educated Srotriya. We shall then learn that its
pronunciation is really that of what we call the
ordinary dental t, as in town, while the ordinary
dental t in Sanskrit has a pronunciation of its own,
extremely difficult to acquire for Europeans.

11. Words or sentences which used to be printed
in italics are spaced.

of the Sacred Books of the East

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. li

V

G

•* S * *

DO

• •

v

u

v

n n ^ n n

n % n c

.C

rC

•O

*■ — U oJ’L)

^•txJ

c

rt

P*

D

: 'S> : -

— kJ oJ‘U

id

oJ

•5?

o

2

u

p

■d

0

V

N

<^^2, < 2 J Oj

3 :

0 /

x) *

•c

I

§

<0

h

«

P3

<

s

cu

•J

«<

erf

<

o

M

V)

S

u

8

u

cri

h

55

<

O

co

55

O

o

If £ r p

ft> iu/

 T IF J3T

-« o«i

^ S ^ "§D ^

bo

c

rP 43

GO

o

*c 3

§

O

•

P

•

•

DO

•

•

•

4^>

P

•

•

C3

4^

P

73

3

•

P4

CO

•

• r—•

CP

p

r—I

•

P

•

DO

P

1

o

CO
• *—«

73

CO

CO

p

•*

•H

*-•

p

4^>

«4^>

C

a j

CN

<D

•N

P

P

H

rH

<M

CO

TT«

o

AO

£

CO

<l>

CU

CO

P

DO

CQ

DO

*£

<l>

•

•

•

•

•

•

1

•

•

»

•

•

DO

CO

CO

p

c3

5-P

4- 1

o

P

P

P

P

o

p

o

• r—*

d-J

-p

<4h

C^-H

CD

CO

OJ

r5

Pi

CO

CO

03

OJ

p

CO

p

4^>

P

o

CO

*

s

<u

»N *N •*

£ ^

O

o3

te

cp) o
o „

S CO

o

M fS

3 t#

e8 ri

S OT

ft

4 ^> N —'

g

o

P

4^

03

P-.

CO

P

P

4 ^>

P

£■«

‘P.

CO

P

CO

”p

CO

03

52 ,

oooo

<M

GO

P

‘P

P

•>

^5

O)

«s

OJ

H

s

CO

Tt<

iO

CO

b-

1-H

i-H

I—«

d 2

Ill PREFACE TO THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

liii

• • • •

• •

• •

• •

•

•

• • •

, • • • •

• • w

• 'S •

P

ph

•

•

• s £

• U-<

• • •

• • • •

• •

• •

• •

•

•

• • •

• • •

• •

• • •

• •

• •

• •

3 • • •

• • •

. r •

• •

• • •

• • •

ci ci n n

. n .

• •

• •

• •

• •

a -jj •

•

• •

• *> •

• •

• • •

• • •

• • •

• • •

* 3* *

• • •

• •

• C. •

• •

•1

•

• •

•

• •

• •

a •

• •

• •

. ^ ♦

• •

• • •

• • •

• • •

> • 3- :

• •

•

• t— •

• •

: 1

•

• •

•> •

• •

• • •

• • ^ •

'■? ■

• •

• \D •

* 5)

• •

<J . .

• • •

• <S *

• 1 •

• •

•

* *

• • •

: :*r :

:

: 8- :

• •

*» :n :

•

: «>'8

•

•

• • •

v ^

«

• • •

•

• •

• •

•

•

•

K> K> fw h?

E * •

•

• •

• P“ •

• •

p" & nr *

• •

. tr .

• •

• •

• •

• •

P-T &

. . . .

• • • •

• • •

• •

♦ • •

as * *

• • • •

• • • •

• • • •

• • •

• • •

• • •

• •

• •

• •

• • *

* • •

• • •

** ^ "8 ^

•

S * ^

•

• • •

• • •

• • •

• • • •

• • • •

• • • •

• •

&« • #

• •

• •

• •

• •

•

• S <i

•

• • • •

• • • •

• • • •

• •

• U •

• •

nG ^G

CO N

•

a, ^ ,o jg

. g £ £ «*-

•

• •

>

• •

c3

c3

c 5

o

o

•

•

a

~4—>

a

•

•

c8

-i-j

c3

•

•

•

o

'S

CO

•

©H

•

•

• H

a#

•

CO

•

c3

c3

o

CO

c3

CO

• rH
r—<

O

>

«>k

k

3

G

<D

•*

^3

(D

r>

c3

CO

ce

s

CD

—i

xn

DO

CD

o

i-H

co

Tfl

lO

?0

CO

*-f

o

Oh

CO

c3

CO

CO

CO

’2

CD

CQ

CD

F““I

c 3

• rH

rO

c 3

Hi

ce

rt

s-»

*s<

CO

c 3

c5

-4->

cJ

* 5 x,

CO

o3

s

c

<d

.5

*3

CD

C 3

2

*53

CO

*

G

a

<D

PH

Sh

co

fl3

c3

CO

cS

CO

»

"2

a

©

CD

a>

j-i

CD

CO

C 3

a

<D

T 00
©

‘EH

p

CG

C 3

<3

rv CO

^ ©
a

^ >

c 3

c 3

a/

ooo)OHNco^iocosooa

liv

PREFACE TO THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.

Iv

Approximate Pronunciation of the Roman Letters

AS REPRESENTING THE SANSKRIT ALPHABET.

Vowels.

li

>T as in new

a

as in

sam

y

* „

yet

/N

a

3?

psalm

s

si „

sharp

i

33

knit

Dentals.

i

33

neat

t

rf as in tin {{^boneTthl^)

ri

33

fiery

til

V „

lanthorn

ri

3 3

■ ■

d

din

li

33

friendly

dh

^ „

landholder

it

33

'

n

nay

u

full

1

<5 „

33

let

q

fool

l

35 „

5 3

—

e

4 4

date

1 /

aisle

s

R" „

grass

ai

✓ 3

Linguals.

0

^rt

note

o

au

wi

33

4 4

proud

t

Z as in

f mxrn ton & ue strife-'

tuwn ^ing alveolar region

3 3

th

* „

outhouse

d

S „

done

Consonants.

dh

„

rodhook

Gutturals.

n

W „

no

k

m as in

kite

r

* „

red

kh

33

inkhorn

sh

* „

shim

%

33

gate

Labials.

gh

TI

33

springhead

P

*1 as in pan

h (n

g)*

33

sing

ph

topheavy

h

33

hear

b

* „

bed

Palatals.

bh

* „

clubhouse

h

^ as in

church

m

* »

mill

kh

33

church-history

V

^ „

live

<J

33

jolly

to

* 33

Anus vara

gh

33

bridge-house

h

w: „

Visarga (*£$&,)

Proper names have frequently been left in their ordinary spelling, e.g.
Rajendra, instead of Rm/endra. In words which have almost become
English, the diacritical marks have often been omitted, e.g. Rig-veda.
instead of jR/g-veda; Brahman, instead of Brahman a; Confucius.
Zoroaster, Koran, &c.

INTRODUCTION

TO

THE UPANISHADS.

First Translation of the Upanishads.

Dara Shukoh, Anquetil Duperron, Schopenhauer.

The ancient Vedic literature, the foundation of the
whole literature of India, which has been handed down
in that country in an unbroken succession from the earliest
times within the recollection of man to the present day,
became known for the first time beyond the frontiers of
India through the Upanishads. The Upanishads were
translated from Sanskrit into Persian by, or, it may be, for
Dara Shukoh, the eldest son of Shah Jehan, an enlightened
prince, who openly professed the liberal religious tenets of
the great Emperor Akbar, and even wrote a book intended
to reconcile the religious doctrines of Hindus and Moham¬
medans. He seems first to have heard of the Upanishads
during his stay in Kashmir in 1640. He afterwards in¬
vited several Pandits from Benares to Delhi, who were to
assist him in the work of translation. The translation was
finished in 1657. Nearly three years after the accomplish¬
ment of this work, in 1659, the prince was put to death by
his brother Aurangzib 1 , in reality, no doubt, because he
was the eldest son and legitimate successor of Shah Jehan,
but under the pretext that he was an infidel, and dangerous
to the established religion of the empire.

When the Upanishads had once been translated from
Sanskrit into Persian, at that time the most widely read
language of the East and understood likewise by many
European scholars, they became generally accessible to

1 Elphinstone, History of India, ed. Cowell, p. 610.

lviii

UPANISHADS.

all who took an interest in the religious literature of
India. It is true that under Akbar’s reign (1556— 1 5^6)
similar translations had been prepared x , but neither these
nor the translations of Dara Shukoh attracted the attention
of European scholars till the year 1 775 * that year
Anquetil Duperron, the famous traveller and discoverer
of the Zend-avesta, received one MS. of the Persian trans¬
lation of the Upanishads, sent to him by M. Gentil, the
French resident at the court of Shuja ud daula, and brought
to France by M. Bernier. After receiving another MS.,
Anquetil Duperron collated the two, and translated the
Persian translation 2 3 into French (not published), and into
Latin. That Latin translation was published in 1801 and
1802, under the title of ‘Oupnek’hat, id est, Secretum tegen-
dum: opus ipsa in India rarissimum, continens antiquam et
arcanam, seu theologicam et philosophicam doctrinam, e
quatuor sacris Indorum libris Rak baid, Djedjer baid, Sam
baid, Athrban baid excerptam; ad verbum, e Persico
idiomate, Samkreticis vocabulis intermixto, in Latinum
conversum: Dissertationibus et Annotationibus diffici-
liora explanantibus, illustratum : studio et opera Anquetil
Duperron, Indicopleustas. Argentorati, typis et impensis
fratrum Levrault, vol. i, i8or ; vol. ii. 1802 V

This translation, though it attracted considerable interest
among scholars, was written in so utterly unintelligible a
style, that it required the lynxlike perspicacity of an intre-

1 M. M., Introduction to the Science of Religion, p. 79.

2 Several other MSS. of this translation have since come to light ; one at
Oxford, Codices Wilsoniani, 399 and 400. Anquetil Duperron gives the following
title of the Persian translation : ‘ Hanc interpretationem twv Oupnekhathai quo-
rumvis quatuor librorum Eeid, quod, designatum cum secreto magno (per
secretum magnum) est, et integram cognitionem luminis luminum, hie Fakir
sine tristitia (Sultan) Mohammed Dara Schakoh ipse, cum significatione recta,
cum sinceritate, in tempore sex mensium (postremo die, secundo tov Schonbeh,
vigesimo) sexto mensis tov Ramazzan, anno 1067 tov Hedjri (Christi, 1657) in
urbe Delhi, in mansione nakhenoudeh, cum absolutione ad finem fecit pervenire.’
The MS. was copied by Atma Ram in the year 1767 a.d. Anquetil Duperron
adds : ‘ Absolutum est hoc Apographum versionis Latinae twv quinquaginta
Oupnekhatha, ad verbum, e Persico idiomate, Samskreticis vocabulis inter-
mixto, factae, die 9 Octobris, 1796, iS Brumaire, anni 4, Reipublic. Gall.
Parisiis.’

3 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, second edition, p. 325.

INTRODUCTION.

lix

pid philosopher, such as Schopenhauer, to discover a thread
through such a labyrinth. Schopenhauer, however, not only
found and followed such a thread, but he had the courage to
proclaim to an incredulous age the vast treasures of thought
which were lying buried beneath that fearful jargon.

As Anquetil Duperron’s volumes have become scarce, I
shall here give a short specimen of his translation, which
corresponds to the first sentences of my translation of the
AV&ndogya-upanishad (p. i):—‘Oum hoc verbum (esse)
adkit ut sciveris, sic to maschghouli fac (de eo medi-
tare), quod ipsum hoc verbum aodkit est; propter illud
quod hoc (verbum) oum, in Sam Beid, cum voce alta,
cum harmonia pronunciatum fiat.

‘Adkiteh porro cremor (optimum, selectissimum)
est: quemadmodum ex (prae) omni quieto (non moto).
et moto, pulvis (terra) cremor (optimum) est; et e (prae)
terra aqua cremor est; et ex aqua, comedendum (victus)
cremor est; (et) e comedendo, comedens cremor est; et e
comedente, loquela (id quod dicitur) cremor est; et e
loquela, aiet rov Beid, et ex aifet, to siam, id est, cum har¬
monia (pronunciatum); et e Sam, to adkit, cremor est;
id est, oum, voce alta, cum harmonia pronunciare, aokit,
cremor cremorum (optimum optimorum) est. Major, ex
(prae) adkit, cremor alter non est.’

Schopenhauer not only read this translation carefully,
but he makes no secret of it, that his own philosophy is
powerfully impregnated by the fundamental doctrines of
the Upanishads. He dwells on it again and again, and it
seems both fair to Schopenhauer’s memory and highly
important for a true appreciation of the philosophical value
of the Upanishads. to put together what that vigorous
thinker has written on those ancient rhapsodies of truth.

In his ‘Welt als Wille und Vorstellung,’ he writes,
in the preface to the first edition, p. xiii:

‘ If the reader has also received the benefit of the Vedas, the
access to which by means of the Upanishads is in my eyes
the greatest privilege which this still young century (1818)
may claim before all previous centuries, (for I anticipate
that the influence of Sanskrit literature will not be less pro-

lx

UPANISHADS.

found than the revival of Greek in the fourteenth century.)—if
then the reader, I say, has received his initiation in primeval
Indian wisdom, and received it with an open heart, he will
be prepared in the very best way for hearing what I have
to tell him. It will not sound to him strange, as to many
others, much less disagreeable; for I might, if it did not
sound conceited, contend that every one of the detached
statements which constitute the Upanishads, may be de¬
duced as a necessary result from the fundamental thoughts
which I have to enunciate, though those deductions them¬
selves are by no means to be found there.’

And again 1 :

c If I consider how difficult it is, even with the assistance of
the best and most carefully educated teachers, and with all
the excellent philological appliances collected in the course
of this century, to arrive at a really correct, accurate, and
living understanding of Greek and Roman authors, whose
language was after all the language of our own predecessors
in Europe, and the mother of our own, while Sanskrit, on
the contrary, was spoken thousands of years ago in distant
India, and can be learnt only with appliances which are as
yet very imperfect;—if I add to this the impression which
the translations of Sanskrit works by European scholars,
with very few exceptions, produce on my mind, I cannot
resist a certain suspicion that our Sanskrit scholars do not
understand their texts much better than the higher class of
schoolboys their Greek. Of course, as they are not boys,
but men of knowledge and understanding, they put together,
out of what they do understand, something like what the
general meaning may have been, but much probably creeps
in ex ingenio. It is still worse with the Chinese of our
European Sinologues.

c If then I consider, on the other hand, that Sultan
Mohammed Dara Shukoh, the brother of Aurangzib, was
born and bred in India, was a learned, thoughtful, and
enquiring man, and therefore probably understood his
Sanskrit about as well as we our Latin, that moreover

1 Schopenhauer, Parerga, third edition, II, p. 426.

INTRODUCTION.

lxi

he was assisted by a number of the most learned Pandits,
all this together gives me at once a very high opinion of
his translation of the Vedic Upanishads into Persian. If,
besides this, I see with what profound and quite appro¬
priate reverence Anquetil Duperron has treated that
Persian translation, rendering it in Latin word by word,
retaining, in spite of Latin grammar, the Persian syntax,
and all the Sanskrit words which the Sultan himself had
left untranslated, though explaining them in a glossary,
I feel the most perfect confidence in reading that transla¬
tion, and that confidence soon receives its most perfect
justification. For how entirely does the Oupnekhat breathe
throughout the holy spirit of the Vedas! How is every
one who by a diligent study of its Persian Latin has
become familiar with that incomparable book, stirred by
that spirit to the very depth of his soul! How does every
line display its firm, definite, and throughout harmonious
meaning! From every sentence deep, original, and sublime
thoughts arise, and the whole is pervaded by a high and
holy and earnest spirit. Indian air surrounds us, and ori¬
ginal thoughts of kindred spirits. And oh, how thoroughly
is the mind here washed clean of all early engrafted Jewish
superstitions, and of all philosophy that cringes before those
superstitions ! In the wdiole world there is no study, except
that of the originals, so beneficial and so elevating as that
of the Oupnekhat. It has been the solace of my life, it
will be the solace of my death!

c Though 1 I feel the highest regard for the religious and
philosophical works of Sanskrit literature, I have not been
able to derive much pleasure from their poetical composi¬
tions. Nay, they seem to me sometimes as tasteless and
monstrous as the sculpture of India.

‘ In 2 most of the pagan philosophical writers of the first
Christian centuries we see the Jewish theism, which, as
Christianity, was soon to become the faith of the people,
shining through, much as at present we may perceive
shining through in the writings of the learned, the native

1 Loc. cit. II, p. 425.

2 Loc. cit. I, p. 59.

lxii

UPANISHADS.

pantheism of India, which is destined sooner or later to
become the faith of the people. Ex oriente lux.’

This may seem strong language, and, in some respects,
too strong. But I thought it right to quote it here, be¬
cause, whatever may be urged against Schopenhauer, he
was a thoroughly honest thinker and honest speaker, and
no one would suspect him of any predilection for what has
been so readily called Indian mysticism. That Schelling
and his school should use rapturous language about the
Upanishads, might carry little weight with that large class
of philosophers by whom everything beyond the clouds
of their own horizon is labelled mysticism. But that
Schopenhauer should have spoken of the Upanishads as
e products of the highest wisdom ’ (Ausgeburt der hochsten
Weisheit) 1 , that he should have placed the pantheism
there taught high above the pantheism of Bruno, Male-
branche, Spinoza, and Scotus Erigena, as brought to light
again at Oxford in 1681 2 , may perhaps secure a more con¬
siderate reception for these relics of ancient wisdom than
anything that I could say in their favour.

Rammohun Roy.

Greater, however, than the influence exercised on the
philosophical thought of modern Europe, has been the
impulse which these same Upanishads have imparted to
the religious life of modern India. In about the same year
(1774 or 1775) when the first MS. of the Persian translation
of the Upanishads was received by Anquetil Duperron,
Rammohun Roy 3 was born in India, the reformer and
reviver of the ancient religion of the Brahmans. A man
who in his youth could write a book ‘Against the Idolatry
of all Religions/ and who afterwards expressed in so many
exact words his ‘belief in the divine authority of Christ 4 /
was not likely to retain anything of the sacred literature of
his own religion, unless he had perceived in it the same

1 Loc. cit. II, p. 428.

2 Loc. cit. I, p. 6. These passages were pointed out to me by Professor Noire.

3 Born 1774? died at 2.30 a.m., on Friday, 28th September, 1833.

4 Last Days of Rammohun Roy, by Mary Carpenter, 1866, p. 135.

INTRODUCTION.

lxiii

divine authority which he recognised in the teaching of
Christ. He rejected the Pura^as, he would not have been
swayed in his convictions by the authority of the Laws of
Manu, or even by the sacredness of the Vedas. He was
above all that. But he discovered in the Upanishads and
in the so-called Vedanta something different from all the
rest, something that ought not to be thrown away, some¬
thing that, if rightly understood, might supply the right
native soil in which alone the seeds of true religion, aye, of
true Christianity, might spring up again and prosper in India,
as they had once sprung up and prospered from out the
philosophies of Origen or Synesius. European scholars
have often wondered that Rammohun Roy, in his defence
of the Veda, should have put aside the Sa/z^hitas and the
Brahmaz^as, and laid his finger on the Upanishads only, as
the true kernel of the whole Veda. Historically, no doubt,
he was wrong, for the Upanishads presuppose both the
hymns and the liturgical books of the Veda. But as the
ancient philosophers distinguished in the Veda between the
Karma-kazz^a and the Unana-kazzda, between works and
knowledge; as they themselves pointed to the learning of
the sacred hymns and the performance of sacrifices as a
preparation only for that enlightenment which was* re¬
served as the highest reward for the faithful performance
of all previous duties 1 , Rammohun Roy, like Buddha and
other enlightened men before him, perceived that the time
for insisting on all that previous discipline with its minute
prescriptions and superstitious observances was gone, while
the knowledge conveyed in the Upanishads or the Vedanta,
enveloped though it may be in strange coverings, should
henceforth form the foundation of a new religious life 2 .
He would tolerate nothing idolatrous, not even in his
mother, poor woman, who after joining his most bitter
opponents, confessed to her son, before she set out on her

1 M. M., His'tory of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 319.

2 ‘ The adoration of the invisible Supreme Being is exclusively prescribed
by the Upanishads or the principal parts of the Vedas and also by the Vedant.’
Rammohun Roy, Translation of the Kena-upanishad, Calcutta, 1816, p. 6.
M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 320.

lxiv

UPANISHADS.

last pilgrimage to Juggernaut, where she died, that f he was
right, but that she was a weak woman, and grown too old
to give up the observances which were a comfort to her/ It
was not therefore from any regard of their antiquity or
their sacred character that Rammohun Roy clung to the
Upanishads, that he translated them into Bengali, Hindi,
and English, and published them at his own expense. It
was because he recognised in them seeds of eternal truth,
and was bold enough to distinguish between what was
essential in them and what was not,—a distinction, as he
often remarked with great perplexity, which Christian
teachers seemed either unable or unwilling to make h
The death of that really great and good man during his
stay in England in 1833, was one of the severest blows that
have fallen on the prospects of India. But his work has not
been in vain. Like a tree whose first shoot has been killed
by one winter frost, it has broken out again in a number of
new and more vigorous shoots, for whatever the outward
differences may be between the Adi Brahmo Samaj of De-
bendranath Tagore, or the Brahmo Samaj of India of
Keshub Chunder Sen, or the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj,
the common root of them all is the work done, once for all,
by Rammohun Roy. That work may have disappeared
from sight for a time, and its present manifestations may
seem to many observers who are too near, not very
promising. But in one form or another, under one name
or another, I feel convinced that work will live. ‘ In India/
Schopenhauer writes, c our religion will now and never strike
root: the primitive wisdom of the human race will never be
pushed aside there by the events of Galilee. On the con¬
trary, Indian wisdom will flow back upon Europe, and
produce a thorough change in our knowing and thinking.’
Here, again, the great philosopher seems to me to have
allowed himself to be carried away too far by his enthu¬
siasm for the less known. He is blind for the dark sides
of the Upanishads, and he wilfully shuts his eyes against
the bright rays of eternal truth in the Gospels, which even

1 Last Days, p. 11.

INTRODUCTION.

lxv

Rammohun Roy was quick enough to perceive behind the
mists and clouds of tradition that gather so quickly round
the sunrise of every religion.

Position of the Upanishads in Vedic Literature.

If now we ask what has been thought of the Upanishads
by Sanskrit scholars or by Oriental scholars in general, it
must be confessed that hitherto they have not received at
their hands that treatment which in the eyes of philo¬
sophers and theologians they seem so fully to deserve.
When the first enthusiasm for such works as Sakuntala
and Gita-Govinda had somewhat subsided, and Sanskrit
scholars had recognised that a truly scholarlike study of
Indian literature must begin with the beginning, the exclu¬
sively historical interest prevailed to so large an extent
that the hymns of the Veda, the Brahma^as, and the
Sutras absorbed all interest, while the Upanishads were
put aside for a time as of doubtful antiquity, and there¬
fore of minor importance.

My real love for Sanskrit literature was first kindled by
the Upanishads. It was in the year 1844, when attending
Schelling’s lectures at Berlin, that my attention was drawn
to those ancient theosophic treatises, and I still possess my
collations of the Sanskrit MSS. which had then just arrived
at Berlin, the Chambers collection, and my copies of com¬
mentaries, and commentaries on commentaries, which I
made at that time. Some of my translations which I
left with Schelling, I have never been able to recover,
though to judge from others which I still possess, the
loss of them is of small consequence. Soon after leaving
Berlin, when continuing my Sanskrit studies at Paris under
Burnouf, I put aside the Upanishads, convinced that for a
true appreciation of them it was necessary to study, first of
all, the earlier periods of Vedic literature, as represented by
the hymns and the Brahma^as of the Vedas.

In returning, after more than thirty years, to these
favourite studies, I find that my interest in them, though
it has changed in character, has by no means diminished.

[3]

e

Ixvi

UPANISIIADS.

It is true, no doubt, that the stratum of literature
which contains the Upanishads is later than the Saz/z-
hitas, and later than the Brahma;zas, but the first germs
of Upanishad doctrines go back at least as far as the
Mantra period, which provisionally has been fixed between
1000 and 800 B. C. Conceptions corresponding to the
general teaching of the Upanishads occur in certain hymns
of the Rig-veda-saz/zhita, they must have existed there¬
fore before that collection was finally closed. One hymn
in the Saz/zhita of the Rig-veda (I, 191) was designated
by Katyayana, the author of the Sarvanukramazzika, as
an Upanishad. Here, however, upanishad means rather
a secret charm than a philosophical doctrine. Verses
of the hymns have often been incorporated in the Upa¬
nishads, and among the Oupnekhats translated into Persian
by Dara Shukoh we actually find the Purusha-sukta,
the 90th hymn of the tenth book of the Rig-veda 1 ,
forming the greater portion of the Bark’heh Soukt. In the
Sazzzhita of the Ya£*ur-veda, however, in the Va£*asaneyi-
j-akha, we meet with a real Upanishad, the famous l^a or
l^avasya-upanishad, while the .Sivasazzzkalpa, too, forms part
of its thirty-fourth book 2 . In the Brahmazzas several Upani¬
shads occur, even in portions which are not classed as

a

Arazzyakas, as, for instance, the well-known Kena or Tala-
vakara-upanishad. The recognised place, however, for the

A

ancient Upanishads is in the Arazzyakas, or forest-books,
which, as a rule, form an appendix to the Brahmazzas, but
are sometimes included also under the general name of
Brahmazza. Brahmazza, in fact, meaning originally the
sayings of Brahmans, whether in the general sense of
priests, or in the more special of Brahman-priest, is a name
applicable not only to the books, properly so called,
but to all old prose traditions, whether contained in the
Sazzzhitas, such as the Taittiriya-sazzzhita, the Brahmazzas,

A

the Arazzyakas, the Upanishads, and even, in certain cases,
in the Sutras. We shall see in the introduction to the
Aitareya-arazzyaka, that that Arazzyaka is in the beginning

1 See Weber, Indische Studien, IX, p. 1 seq.

2 See M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 317.

INTRODUCTION.

lxvii

a Brahmaz/a, a mere continuation of the Aitareya-brah-
maz/a, explaining the Mahavrata ceremony, while its last
book contains the Sutras or short technical rules explain¬
ing the same ceremony which in the first book had been
treated in the style peculiar to the Brahma^as. In the same
Aitareya-ara//yaka, III, 2, 6, 6, a passage of the Upanishad
is spoken of as a Br&hma/za, possibly as something like a
Brahma//a, while something very like an Upanishad occurs

A

in the Apastamba-sutras, and might be quoted therefore
as a Sutra 1 . At all events the Upanishads, like the

A

Araz/yakas, belong to what Hindu theologians call Sruti,
or revealed literature, in opposition to Smrfti, or traditional
literature, which is supposed to be founded on the former,
and allowed to claim a secondary authority only; and the
earliest of these philosophical treatises will always, I be¬
lieve, maintain a place in the literature of the world, among
the most astounding productions of the human mind in any
age and in any country.

Different Classes of Upanishads.

The ancient Upanishads, i. e. those which occupy a

A

place in the Sa7/ffiitas, Brahma/^as, and Ara/zyakas, must
be, if we follow the chronology which at present is com¬
monly, though, it may be, provisionally only, received
by Sanskrit scholars, older than 6oo B. C., i. e. anterior
to the rise of Buddhism. As to other Upanishads, and
their number is very large, which either stand by them¬
selves, or which are ascribed to the Atharva-veda, it is
extremely difficult to fix their age. Some of them are,
no doubt, quite modern, for mention is made even of
an Allah-upanishad ; but others may claim a far higher
antiquity than is generally assigned to them on internal
evidence. I shall only mention that the name of Atharva-
.riras, an Upanishad generally assigned to a very modern
date, is quoted in the Sutras of Gautama and Baudhayana 2 ;

1 Apastamba, translated by Buhler, Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, p. 75.

2 Gautama, translated by Biihler, Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, p. 272,
and Introduction, p. lvi.

lxviii

UPANISHADS.

that the Xvetlsvatara-upanishad, or the Sveta-yvatarawam
Mantropanishad, though bearing many notes of later periods
of thought, is quoted by .Sankara in his commentary on
the Vedanta-sutras 1 ; while the Nrzsiwhottarat&paniya-
upanishad forms part of the twelve Upanishads explained
by Vidyara//ya in his Sarvopanishad-arthanubhuti-prakcLra.
The Upanishads comprehended in that work are:

1. Aitareya-upanishad.

2. Taittiriya-upanishad.

3. AVandogya-upanishad.

4. Mu?z<Aika-upanishad.

5. Pra^na-upanishad.

6 . Kaushitaki-upanishad.

7. Maitrayamya-upanishad.

8. Ka/Z^avalli-upanishad.

9. ^veta^vatara-upanishad.

10. B/Aiad-ara^yaka-upanishad.

11. Talavakara (Kena)-upanishad.

12 . Nrzsb/zhottaratapaniya-upanishad 2 .

The number of Upanishads translated by Dara Shukoh
amounts to 50 ; their number, as given in the Mahavakya-
muktavali and in the Muktika-upanishad, is 108 3 . Pro¬
fessor Weber thinks that their number, so far as we know
at present, may be reckoned at 235 4 . In order, however,
to arrive at so high a number, every title of an Upanishad
would have to be counted separately, while in several cases
it is clearly the same Upanishad which is quoted under dif¬
ferent names. In an alphabetical list which I published in
1865 (Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesell-
schaft XIX, 137-158), the number of real Upanishads
reached 149. To that number Dr. Burnell 5 in his Catalogue

1 Vedanta-sutras I, I, n.

A A

2 One misses the La or Lavasya-upanishad in this list. The Upanishads
chiefly studied in Bengal are the Brzhad-arazzyaka, Aitareya, AVzandogya, Taitti-
riya, £ra, Kena, Ka 7 /za, Pram a, Muzzz/aka, and Mazzz/ukya, to which should be
added the Avetarvatara. M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 325.

3 Dr. Burnell thinks that this is an artificial computation, 10S being a sacred
number in Southern India. See Kielhorn in Gough’s Papers on Ancient Sanskrit
Literature, p. 193.

4 Weber, History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 155 note.

6 Indian Antiquary, II, 267.

INTRODUCTION.

lxix

(p. 59 ) added 5, Professor Haug (Brahma und die Brah-
manen) 16, making a sum total of 170. New names, however,
are constantly being added in the catalogues of MSS. pub¬
lished by Biihler, Kielhorn, Burnell, Rajendralal Mitra, and
others, and I shall reserve therefore a more complete list of
Upanishads for a later volume.

Though it is easy to see that these Upanishads belong to
very different periods of Indian thought, any attempt to fix
their relative age seems to me for the present almost hopeless.
No one can doubt that the Upanishads which have had
a place assigned to them in the Sa;;diitas, Brahma//as, and

A

Ara?/yakas are the oldest. Next to these we can draw a
line to include the Upanishads clearly referred to in the
Vedanta-sutras, or explained and quoted by .Sankara, by
Saya/za, and other more modern commentators. We can
distinguish Upanishads in prose from Upanishads in mixed
prose and verse, and again Upanishads in archaic verse from
Upanishads in regular and continuous Anush/ubh vSlokas.
We can also class them according to their subjects, and, at
last, according to the sects to which they belong. But
beyond this it is hardly safe to venture at present. Attempts
have been made by Professor Weber and M. Regnaud to
fix in each class the relative age of certain Upanishads, and
I do not deny to their arguments, even where they conflict
with each other, considerable weight in forming a preliminary
judgment. But I know of hardly any argument which is
really convincing, or which could not be met by counter
arguments equally strong. Simplicity may be a sign of
antiquity, but it is not so always, for what seems simple,
may be the result of abbreviation. One Upanishad may
give the correct, another an evidently corrupt reading,
yet it does not follow that the correct reading may not be
the result of an emendation. It is quite clear that a large
mass of traditional Upanishads must have existed before
they assumed their present form. Where two or three or
four Upanishads contain the same story, told almost in the
same words, they are not always copied from one another,
but they have been settled independently, in different locali¬
ties, by different teachers, it may be, for different purposes.

lxx

UPANISHADS.

Lastly, the influence of 5akhas or schools may have told
more or less on certain Upanishads. Thus the Maitrayazziya-
upanishad, as we now possess it, shows a number of irregular
forms which even the commentator can account for only as
peculiarities of the Maitrayazziya-j-akha 1 . That Upanishad,
as it has come down to us, is full of what we should call
clear indications of a modern and corrupt age. It contains
in VI, 37, a j-loka from the Manava-dharma-ffistra, which
startled even the commentator, but is explained away by
him as possibly found in another .Sakha, and borrowed from
there by Manu. It contains corruptions of easy words which
one would have thought must have been familiar to every
student. Thus instead of the passage as found in the Khkn-
dogya-upanishad VIII, J, i, ya atmapahatap&pma vi^aro
vimrztyur vijoko ’vi^ighatso 5 pipasa/z, &c., the text of the
Maitrayazziya-upanishad (VII, 7) reads, atmapahatapapma
vi c ^aro vimzTtyur vijoko ’vi/Hkitso Vipa^a/z. But here again
the commentator explains that another .Sakha reads Vigd-
ghatsa, and that avipa^a is to be explained by means of
a change of letters as apipasa. Corruptions, therefore, or
modern elements which are found in one Upanishad, as
handed down in one .Sakha, do not prove that the same
existed in other .Sakhas, or that they were found in the
original text.

All these questions have to be taken into account before
we can venture to give a final judgment on the relative age
of Upanishads which belong to one and the same class.
I know of no problem which offers so many similarities
with the one before us as that of the relative age of the
four Gospels. All the difficulties which occur in the Upa¬
nishads occur here, and no critical student who knows the
difficulties that have to be encountered in determining the

o

relative age of the four Gospels, will feel inclined, in the
present state of Vedic scholarship, to speak with confidence
on the relative age of the ancient Upanishads.

1 They are generally explained as Zviandasa, but in one place (Maitr. Up.
II, 4) the commentator treats such irregularities as etaA^akhasahketapaMa/;, a
reading peculiar to the Maitrayamya school. Some learned remarks on this point
may be seen in an article by Dr. L. Schroeder, Uber die Taitrayam Sa/zdiita.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxi

Critical Treatment of the Text of the

Upanishads.

With regard to a critical restoration of the text of the Upa¬
nishads, I have but seldom relied on the authority of new
MSS., but have endeavoured throughout to follow that text
which is presupposed by the commentaries, whether they are
the work of the old Sankara/£arya, or of the more modern
Sankarananda, or Saya/za, or others. Though there still
prevails some uncertainty as to the date of Sankara/£&rya,
commonly assigned to the eighth century A. D., yet I doubt
whether any MSS. of the Upanishads could now be found
prior to 1000 A. D. The text, therefore, which Sankara
had before his eyes, or, it may be, his ears, commands, I
think, a higher authority than that of any MSS. likely to
be recovered at present.

It may be objected that Sankara’s text belonged to one
locality only, and that different readings and different
recensions may have existed in other parts of India.
That is perfectly true. We possess various recensions of
several Upanishads, as handed down in different Sakhas of
different Vedas, and we know of various readings recorded
by the commentators. These, where they are of import¬
ance for our purposes, have been carefully taken into
account.

It has also been supposed that Sankara, who, in writing
his commentaries on the Upanishad, was chiefly guided by
philosophical considerations, his chief object being to use
the Upanishads as a sacred foundation for the Vedanta
philosophy, may now and then have taken liberties with
the text. That may be so, but no stringent proof of
it has as yet been brought forward, and I therefore
hold that when we succeed in establishing throughout
that text which served as the basis of Sankara’s com¬
mentaries, we have done enough for the present, and have
fulfilled at all events the first and indispensable task in a
critical treatment of the text of the Upanishads.

But in the same manner as it is easy to see that the text

Ixxii

UPANISHADS.

of the Rig-veda, which is presupposed by Sayazza’s com¬
mentary and even by earlier works, is in many places
palpably corrupt, we cannot resist the same conviction with
regard to the text of the Upanishads. In some cases the
metre, in others grammar, in others again the collation of
analogous passages enable us to detect errors, and pro¬
bably very ancient errors, that had crept into the text
long before .Sankara composed his commentaries.

Some questions connected with the metres of the Upani¬
shads have been very learnedly treated by Professor Gilde-
meister in his essay, ‘Zur Theorie des Sloka.’ The lesson
to be derived from that essay, and from a study of the
Upanishads, is certainly to abstain for the present from
conjectural emendations. In the old Upanishads the same
metrical freedom prevails as in the hymns; in the later
Upanishads, much may be tolerated as the result of con¬
scious or unconscious imitation. The metrical emendations
that suggest themselves are generally so easy and so
obvious that, for that very reason, we should hesitate before
correcting what native scholars would have corrected long
ago, if they had thought that there was any real necessity
for correction.

It is easy to suggest, for instance, that in the Va^asaneyi-
saz/zhita-upanishad, verse 5, instead of tad antar asya sar-
vasya tadu sarvasyasya bahyata/z, the original text may have
been tad antar asya sarvasya tadu sarvasya bahyata h ; yet
^Sankara evidently read sarvasyasya, and as the same
reading is found in the text of the Va^asaneyi-saz/zhitS.,
who would venture to correct so old a mistake ?

Again, if in verse 8, we left out yathatathyata/^, we
should get a much more regular metre,

Kavir manishi paribhu/z svyambhu/z

- - Ww - - V - - \_/ - -

arthan vyadadha£ y^/zasvatibhya/z samabhya/z.

W w

Here vyada forms one syllable by what I have proposed
to call synizesis *, which is allowed in the Upanishads as
well as in the hymns. All would then seem right, except

1 Rig-veda, translated by M. M., vol. i, Preface, p. cxliii.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxiii

that it is difficult to explain how so rare a word as yatha-
tathyata h could have been introduced into the text.

In verse io one feels tempted to propose the omission of
eva in anyad ahur avidyaya, while in verse xi, an eva inserted
after vidya in kz would certainly improve the metre.

In verse 15 the expression satyadharmaya drz’sh/aye is
archaic, but perfectly legitimate in the sense of ‘ that we
may see the nature of the True,’ or ‘ that we see him whose
nature is true.’ When this verse is repeated in the Maitr.
Up. VI, 35, we find instead, satyadharmaya vish//ave, ‘ for
the true Vish//u.’ But here, again, no sound critic would
venture to correct a mistake, intentional or unintentional,
which is sanctioned both by the MSS. of the text and by
the commentary.

Such instances, where every reader feels tempted at once
to correct the textus receptus, occur again and again,
and when they seem of any interest they have been men¬
tioned in the notes. It may happen, however, that the
correction, though at first sight plausible, has to be sur¬
rendered on more mature consideration. Thus in the
Va^asaneyi-samhita-upanishad, verse 2, one feels certainly
inclined to write eva in tve nanyatheto ’sti, instead of eva m
tvayi nanyatheto ’sti. But tve, if it were used here, would
probably itself have to be pronounced dissyllabically, while
tvayi, though it never occurs in the Rig-veda, may well
keep its place here, in the last book of the Va^asaneyi-
saz/zhita, provided we pronounce it by synizesis, i.e. as one
syllable.

Attempts have been made sometimes to go beyond
.Sankara, and to restore the text, as it ought to have been
originally, but as it was no longer in .Sankara’s time. It is
one thing to decline to follow .Sankara in every one of his
interpretations, it is quite another to decline to accept the
text which he interprets. The former is inevitable, the
latter is always very precarious.

Thus I see, for instance, that M. Regnaud, in the Errata
to the second volume of his excellent work on the Upani-
shads (Materiaux pour servir a l’histoire de la philosophic
de l’lnde, 1878) proposes to read in the Brzhad-ara^yaka-

lxxiv

UPANISHADS.

upanishad IV, 3, 1-8, sam anena vadishya iti, instead of sa
mene na vadishya iti. Sankara adopted the latter reading,
and explained accordingly, that Ya^navalky a went to king
(kanaka, but made up his mind not to speak. M. Regnaud,
reading sam anena vadishya iti, takes the very opposite
view, namely, that Ya^navalkya went to king (Sanaka,
having made up his mind to have a conversation with him.
As M. Regnaud does not rest this emendation on the author¬
ity of any new MSS., we may examine it as an ingenious
conjecture ; but in that case it seems to me clear that, if
we adopted it, we should have at the same time to omit
the whole sentence which follows. Sankara saw clearly
that what had to be accounted or explained was why the
king should address the Brahman first, samraV eva purvaw
papra^//a; whereas if Yag'navalkya had come with the
intention of having a conversation with the king, he, the
Brahman, should have spoken first. This irregularity is
explained by the intervening sentence, in which we are re¬
minded that on a former occasion, when Uanaka and Ya^na-
valkya had a disputation on the Agnihotra, Ya^navalkya
granted (Sanaka a boon to choose, and he chose as his boon
the right of asking questions according to his pleasure.
Having received that boon, (Sanaka was at liberty to
question Ya^navalkya, even though, he did not like it,
and hence kanaka is introduced here as the first to ask a
question.

All this hangs well together, while if we assume that
Ya^iiavalkya came for the purpose of having a conversation
with (kanaka, the whole sentence from £ atha ha ya^^anaka^r
£a’ to ‘purvam papra££/;a’ would be useless, nor would there
be any excuse for (kanaka beginning the conversation, when
Ya^navalkya came himself on purpose to question him.

It is necessary, even when we feel obliged to reject an
interpretation of .Sankara’s, without at the same time
altering the text, to remember that .Sankara, where he is
not blinded by philosophical predilections, commands the
highest respect as an interpreter. I cannot help thinking
therefore that M. Regnaud (vol. i, p. 59) was right in trans¬
lating the passage in the 7 l 7 /and. Up. V, 3, 7, tasmad u

INTRODUCTION.

lxxv

sarveshu lokeshu kshattrasyaiva pra^asanam abhut, by c que
le kshatriya seul l’a enseignee dans tous les mondes.’ For
when he proposes in the ‘Errata’ to translate instead, ‘ c’est
pourquoi l’empire dans tous les mondes fut attribud au
kshatriya seulement,’ he forgets that such an idea is foreign
to the ordinary atmosphere in which the Upanishads move.
It is not on account of the philosophical knowledge possessed
by a few Kshatriyas, such as kanaka or Pravaha;/a, that the
privilege of government belongs everywhere to the second
class. That rests on a totally different basis. Such excep¬
tional knowledge, as is displayed by a few kings, might be
an excuse for their claiming the privileges belonging to the
Brahmans, but it would never, in the eyes of the ancient

A

Indian Aryas, be considered as an argument for their claim¬
ing kingly power. Therefore, although I am well aware that
pranas is most frequently used in the sense of ruling, I have
no doubt that .Sankara likewise was fully aware of that,
and that if he nevertheless explained pra.rasana here in the
sense of pra^astrftva;^ .rishya/zam, he did so because this
meaning too was admissible, particularly here, where we
may actually translate it by proclaiming, while the other
meaning, that of ruling, would simply be impossible in the
concatenation of ideas, which is placed before us in the
Upanishad.

It seems, no doubt, extremely strange that neither the
last redactors of the text of the Upanishads, nor the com¬
mentators, who probably knew the principal Upanishads by
heart, should have perceived how certain passages in one
Upanishad represented the same or nearly the same text
which is found in another Upanishad, only occasionally
with the most palpable corruptions.

Thus when the ceremony of offering a mantha or mash
is described, we read in the AV/andogya-upanishad V, 2, 6,
that it is to be accompanied by certain words which on the
whole are intelligible. But when the same passage occurs
again in the Brzhad-ara/zyaka, those words have been
changed to such a degree, and in two different ways in the
two vSakhas of the Madhyandinas and Ka/zvas, that, though
the commentator explains them, they are almost unintel-

lxxvi

UPANISHADS

ligible. I shall place the three passages together in three
parallel lines:

I. AV/andogya-upanishad V, 2, 6 :

II. B rih. a d - a razz yak a, Madhyandina-Vikha, XIV, 9, 3, 10:

III. B/vhad-ara/zyaka-upanishad, K&z/va-j-akha, VI, 3, 5 :

I. Amo namasy ama hi te sarvam ida m sa \\\ gyesh.tha.Ji

II. amo '’sy ama in hi te mayi sa hi

III. amawsy ama/z/hi te mahi sa hi

I. -rresh///o ra^adhipati/z sa ma ^yaislV/zya/zz Trai¬

ll. ra^es&no ’dhipati/z sa ma ra^esctno

III. ra^e^ano

I. sh.thya.in ra^yam &dhipatya//z gamayatv aham eveda in

II. ’dhipati in karotv iti.

III. ’dhipati?// karotv iti.

I. sarvam asaniti.

II.

III.

The text in the AVzandogya-upanishad yields a certain
sense, viz. ‘Thou art Ama by name, for all this together
exists in thee. He is the oldest and best, the king, the
sovereign. May he make me the oldest, the best, the king,
the sovereign. May I be all this.’ This, according to the
commentator, is addressed to Pra/za, and Ama, though a
purely artificial word, is used in the sense of Pra/za, or
breath, in another passage also, viz. Brzhad-ara/zyaka-up. I,
3, 22. If therefore we accept this meaning of Ama, the
rest is easy and intelligible.

But if we proceed to the IVz’had-ara/zyaka, in the Madhyan-
dina-jakha, we find the commentator proposing the fol¬
lowing interpretation : ‘ O Mantha, thou art a full knower,
complete knowledge of me belongs to thee.’ This meaning
is obtained by deriving ama h from a + man, in the sense of
knower, and then taking amam, as a neuter, in the sense of
knowledge, derivations which are simply impossible.

Lastly, if we come to the text of the Ka/zva-j-akha, the
grammatical interpretation becomes bolder still. .Sankara
does not explain the passage at all,' which is strange, but
Anandagiri interprets amaz/zsi tvam by ‘ Thou knowest

INTRODUCTION.

lxxvii

(all),’ and amawhi te mahi, by ‘ we know thy great
(shape)/ which are again impossible forms.

But although there can be little doubt here that the
reading of the AT/zandogya-upanishad gives us the original
text, or a text nearest to the original, no sound critic
would venture to correct the readings of the Brzhad-
ara 72 yaka. They are corruptions, but even as corrup¬
tions they possess authority, at all events up to a certain
point, and it is the fixing of those certain points or chrono¬
logical limits, which alone can impart a scientific character
to our criticism of ancient texts.

In the Kaushitaki-brahma;za-upanishad Professor Cowell
has pointed out a passage to me, where we must go beyond
the text as it stood when commented on by the Sarikara-
nanda. In the beginning of the fourth adhyaya all MSS.
of the text read savasan, and this is the reading which
the commentator seems anxious to explain, though not
very successfully. I thought that possibly the commentator
might have had before him the reading sa vasan, or so Va-
san, but both would be very unusual. Professor Cowell in
his Various Readings, p. xii, conjectured sawvasan, which
would be liable to the same objection. He now, however,
informs me that, as B. has sa;//tvan, and C. satvan, he
believes the original text to have been Satvan-Matsyeshu.
This seems to me quite convincing, and is borne out by the
reading of the Berlin MS., so far as it can be made out
from Professor Weber’s essay on the Upanishads, Indische
Studien I, p. 419. I see that Boehtlingk and Roth in
their Sanskrit Dictionary, s. v. satvat, suggest the same
emendation.

The more we study the nature of Sanskrit MSS., the
more, I believe, we shall feel convinced that their proper
arrangement is one by locality rather than by time. I have
frequently dwelt on this subject in the introductions to the
successive volumes of my edition of the Rig-veda and its
commentary by Saya/zaMrya, and my convictions on this
point have become stronger ever since. A MS., however
modern, from the south of India or from the north, is
more important as a check on the textus receptus of

lxxviii

UPANISHADS.

any Sanskrit work, as prevalent in Bengal or Bombay,
than ever so many MSS., even if of greater antiquity,
from the same locality. When therefore I was informed
by my friend Dr. Biihler that he had discovered in
Kashmir a MS. of the Aitareya-upanishad, I certainly ex¬
pected some real help from such a treasure. The MS. is
described by its discoverer in the last number of the Journal
of the Bombay Asiatic Society, p. 34 1 , and has since been
sent to me by the Indian Government. It is written on
birch bark (bhur^a), and in the alphabet commonly called
Aarada. The leaves are very much injured on the margin,
and it is almost impossible to handle them without some
injury. In many places the bark has shrunk, probably on
being moistened, and the letters have become illegible.
Apart from these drawbacks, there remain the difficulties
inherent in the Aarada alphabet which, owing to its nu¬
merous combinations, is extremely difficult to read, and
very trying to eyes which are growing weak. However,
I collated the Upanishad from the Aitareya-arazzyaka,
which turned out to be the last portion only, viz. the
Saz/zhita-upanishad (Ait. Ar. Ill, 1-2), or, as it is called
here, Sazzzhitarazzya, and I am sorry to say my expectations
have been disappointed. The MS. shows certain graphic
peculiarities which Dr. Biihler has pointed out. It is particu¬
larly careful in the use of the sibilants, replacing the Visarga
by sibilants, writing s + s and s + s instead of h + s and
h + s\ distinguishing also the Aihvamuliya and Upadhma-
niya. If therefore the MS. writes antastha, we may be
sure that it really meant to write so, and not anta/zstha, or,
as it would have written, antasstha. It shows equal care in
the use of the nasals, and generally carries on the sandhi
between different paragraphs. Here and there I met with
better readings than those given in Rajendralal Mitra’s
edition, but in most cases the commentary would have been
sufficient to restore the right reading. A few various read¬
ings, which seemed to deserve being mentioned, will be found

1 Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1877. Extra
Number, containing the Detailed Report of a Tour in search of Sanskrit MSS.,
made in Kasmir, Rajputana, and Central India, by G. Biihler.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxix

in the notes. The MS., though carefully written, is not
free from the ordinary blunders. At first one feels inclined
to attribute some importance to every peculiarity of a new
MS., but very soon one finds out that what seems peculiar,
is in reality carelessness. Thus Ait. Ar. Ill, j, 5, 2, the
Kashmir MS. has purvam akshara?/z rupam, instead of
what alone can be right, purvarupam. Instead of pra^yaya
pa^ubhi/^ it writes repeatedly pra^aya pa^ubhi//, which
is impossible. In III, 2, 2, it leaves out again and again
manomaya between £/zandomaya and vanmaya ; but that
this is a mere accident we learn later on, where in the same
sentence manomayo is found in its right place. Such cases
reduce this MS. to its proper level, and make us look with
suspicion on any accidental variations, such as I have
noticed in my translation.

The additional paragraph, noticed by Dr. Btihler, is very
indistinct, and contains, so far as I am able to find out,
j'anti verses only.

I have no doubt that the discovery of new MSS. of the
Upanishads and their commentaries will throw new light
on the very numerous difficulties with which a translator
of the Upanishads, particularly in attempting a complete
and faithful translation, has at present to grapple. Some of
the difficulties, which existed thirty years ago, have been
removed since by the general progress of Vedic scholar¬
ship, and by the editions of texts and commentaries and
translations of Upanishads, many of which were known at
that time in manuscript only. But I fully agree with M.
Regnaud as to the difficultes considerables que les
meilleures traductions laissent subsister, and which
can be solved only by a continued study of the Upanishads,
the Ara/zyakas, the Brahmawas, and the Vedanta-sutras.

Meaning of the word Upanishad.

How Upanishad became the recognised name of the
philosophical treatises contained in the Veda is difficult to
explain. Most European scholars are agreed in deriving

lxxx

UPANISHADS.

upa-ni-shad from the root sad, to sit down, preceded by
the two prepositions ni, down, and up a, near, so that it
would express the idea of session, or assembly of pupils
sitting down near their teacher to listen to his instruction.
In the Trika;/^/a^esha, upanishad is explained by samipasa-
dana, sitting down near a person h

Such a word, however, would have been applicable, it
would seem, to any other portion of the Veda as well as to
the chapters called Upanishad, and it has never been ex¬
plained how its meaning came thus to be restricted. It is
still more strange that upanishad, in the sense of session or
assembly, has never, so far as I am aware, been met with.
Whenever the word occurs, it has the meaning of doctrine,
secret doctrine, or is simply used as the title of the philo¬
sophic treatises which constitute the^hanakaz^a, the know¬
ledge portion, as opposed to the karmaka/^a, the work or
ceremonial portion, of the Veda.

Native philosophers seem never to have thought of deriv¬
ing upanishad from sad, to sit down. They derive it either
from the root sad, in the sense of destruction, supposing
these ancient treatises to have received their name because
they were intended to destroy passion and ignorance by
means of divine revelation 1 2 , or from the root sad, in the
sense of approaching, because a knowledge of Brahman
comes near to us by means of the Upanishads, or because
we approach Brahman by their help. Another explanation
proposed by .Sankara in his commentary on the Taittiriya-
upanishad II, 9, is that the highest bliss is contained in the
Upanishad (paraz/2 ireyo ’syaw nishaw/am).

These explanations seem so wilfully perverse that it is
difficult to understand the unanimity of native scholars.
We ought to take into account, however, that very
general tendency among half-educated people, to ac¬
quiesce in any etymology which accounts for the most
prevalent ^meaning of a word. The Ara;/yakas abound in

1 Panini I, 4, 79, has upanishatkrztya.

2 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 318 ; Colebrooke, Essays,
I, 92 ; Regnand, Materiaux, p. 7.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxxi

such etymologies, which probably were never intended as
real etymologies, in our sense of the word, but simply as
plays on words, helping to account somehow for their
meaning. The Upanishads, no doubt, were meant to
destroy ignorance and passion, and nothing seemed more
natural therefore than that their etymological meaning
should be that of destroyers b

The history and the genius of the Sanskrit language
leave little doubt that upanishad meant originally session,
particularly a session consisting of pupils, assembled at a
respectful distance round their teacher.

With upa alone, sad occurs as early as the hymns of the
Rig-veda, in the sense of approaching respectfully 2 :—

Rig-veda IX, u, 6. Namasa it upa sidata, ‘approach
him with praise.’ See also Rig-veda X, 73, 11 ; I, 65, 1.

In the iV^andogya-upanishad VI, 13, 1, a teacher says
to his pupil, atha ma pratar upasidatha/^, c come to me (for
advice) to-morrow morning.’

In the same Upanishad VII, 8, 1, a distinction is made
between those who serve their teachers (pari^arita), and
those who are admitted to their more intimate society
(upasatta, comm, samipaga//, antaranga//, priya/z).

Again, in the W//andogya-upanishad VII, 1, we read of
a pupil approaching his teacher (upasasada or upasas^da),
and of the teacher telling him to approach with what he
knows,' i. e. to tell him first what he has learnt already
(yad vettha tena mopasida 3 ).

In the Sutras (Gobhiliya Grzhya-sutra II, 10, 38) upasad
is the recognised term for the position assumed by a pupil
with his hands folded and his eyes looking up to the
teacher who is to instruct him.

It should be stated, however, that no passage has yet
been met with in which upa-ni-sad is used in the sense of
pupils approaching and listening to their teacher. In the

1 The distinction between possible and real etymologies is as modern as
that between legend and history.

2 See M. M.’s History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 318.

3 See also A 7 *and. Up. VI, 7, 2.

[3]

f

lxxxii

UPANISHADS.

only passage in which upanishasada occurs (Ait. Ar. II, 2,
1), it is used of Indra sitting down by the side of VUva-
mitra, and it is curious to observe that both MSS. and
commentaries give here upanishasasada, an entirely irre¬
gular form.

The same is the case with two other roots which are
used almost synonymously with sad, viz. as and vis. We
find upa + as used to express the position which the pupil
occupies when listening to his teacher, e.g. Pa n. Ill, 4, 7 2 -
up&sito gurum bhavan, ‘thou hast approached the Guru, 5 or
upasito gurur bhavata, ‘ the Guru has been approached by
thee. 5 We find pari + upa + as used with regard to relations
assembled round the bed of a dying friend, AV/and. Up.
VI, 15 ; or of hungry children sitting round their mother,
and likened to people performing the Agnihotra sacrifice
(AT/zand. Up. V, 24, 5). But I have never met with upa-ni-as
in that sense.

We likewise find upa-vU used in the sense of sitting
down to a discussion (AT/zand. Up. 1,8, 2), but I have never
found upa + ni+vU as applied to a pupil listening to his
teacher.

The two prepositions upa and ni occur, however, with
pat, to fly, in the sense of flying down and settling near a
person, Kh and. Up. IV, 7, 2 ; IV, 8, 2. And the same pre¬
positions joined to the verb jri, impart to it the meaning of
sitting down beneath a person, so as to show him respect:

A

Brfli. Ar. I, 4, 11. ‘Although a king is exalted, he sits
down at the end of the sacrifice below the Brahman,’
brahmaivantata upanLsrayati.

Sad, with upa and ni, occurs in upanishadin only, and
has there the meaning of subject, e.g. Aatap. Brahm. IX, 4,
3, 3, kshatraya tad vUam adhastad upanishadini/;/ karoti,
‘ he thus makes the Vis (citizen) below, subject to the
Kshatriya. 5

Sometimes nishad is used by the side of upanishad, and so
far as we can judge, without any difference of meaning 1 .

All we can say therefore, for the present, is that upani-

Mahabharata, .Santiparva, 1613.

I

INTRODUCTION.

lxxxiii

shad, besides being the recognised title of certain philo¬
sophical treatises, occurs also in the sense of doctrine and
of secret doctrine, and that it seems to have assumed this
meaning from having been used originally in the sense of
session or assembly in which one or more pupils receive
instruction from a teacher.

Thus we find the word upanishad used in the Upanishads
themselves in the following meanings:

1. Secret or esoteric explanation, whether true or false.

2. Knowledge derived from such explanation.

3. Special rules or observances incumbent on those who
have received such knowledge.

4. Title of the books containing such knowledge.

I. Ait. Ar. Ill, 1, 6, 3. c For this Upanishad, i.e. in order
to obtain the information about the true meaning of Sa in-
hita, Tarukshya served as a cowherd for a whole year.’

Taitt. Up. I, 3. ‘We shall now explain the Upanishad of
the Sa^hita.’

A

Ait. Ar. Ill, 2,5,1. ‘Next follows this Upanishad of the
whole speech. True, all these are Upanishads of the whole
speech, but this they declare especially.’

Talav. Up. IV, 7. ‘ As you have asked me to tell you the
Upanishad, the Upanishad has now been told you. We
have told you the Brahmi Upanishad/ i.e. the true meaning
of Brahman.

In the W//and. Up. Ill, 11, 3, after the meaning of
Brahman has been explained, the text says : ‘To him who
thus knows this Brahma upanishad (the secret doctrine of
Brahman) the sun does not rise and does not set.’ In the
next paragraph brahma itself is used, meaning either
Brahman as the object taught in the Upanishad, or, by a
slight change of meaning, the Upanishad itself.

Khk nd. Up. I, 13,4. ‘Speech yields its milk to him who
knows this Upanishad (secret doctrine) of the Samans in
this wise.’

Kh&nd. Up. VIII, 8, 4. When Indra and Viro^ana had
both misunderstood the teaching of Pra^apati, he says :
‘They both go away without having perceived and without
having known the Self, and whoever of these two, whether

f 2

lxxxiv

UPANISHADS.

Devas or Asuras, will follow this doctrine (upanishad), will
perish.’

II. In the Af//and. Up. I. i, after the deeper meaning of
the Udgitha or Om has been described, the advantage of
knowing that deeper meaning is put forward, and it is said
that the sacrifice which a man performs with knowledge,
with faith, and with the Upanishad, i. e. with an under¬
standing of its deeper meaning, is more powerful.

III. In the Taittiriya-upanishad, at the end of the second
chapter, called the Brahmanandavalli, and again at the end
of the tenth chapter, the text itself says : Ity upanishad,
‘ this is the Upanishad, the true doctrine.’

IV. In the Kaushitaki-upanishad II, i, 2, we read : ‘Let
him not beg, this is the Upanishad for him who knows this.’
Here upanishad stands for vrata or rahasya-vrata, rule.

Works on the Upanishads.

Anquetil Duperron, Oupnek’hat, 1801, 1802. See page
clii.

Rammohun Roy, Translation of Several Principal Books,
Passages, and Texts of the Veds. Second edition. London,
1832.

Translation of the Moonduk-Oopunishud of the Uthurvu Ved, p. 23.

Translation of the Cena Upanishad, one of the Chapters of the Sama Veda,
p. 41*

Translation of the Kut’h-Oopunishud of the Ujoor-Ved, p. 55.

Translation of the Ishopanishad, one of the Chapters of the Yajur Veda, p. 81.

H. T. Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, in three volumes,

1873-

K. J. H. Windischmann, Die Philosophic im Fortgange
der Weltgeschichte, 1827-34.

F. W. Windischmann, Sancara, seu de theologumenis
Vedanticorum, 1833.

E. Roer, The Taittiriya, Aitareya, Svetslrvatara, Kena
tsa, Ka///a, Pra^na, Mu;/<^aka, and Maz^ukya Upanishads
translated; Bibliotheca Indica. Calcutta, 1853.

Rajendralal Mitra, The AV/andogya Upanishad, with
extracts from the commentary of Sankara; Bibliotheca
Indica. Calcutta, 1862.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxxv

E. B. Cowell, The Kaushitaki - brahma;/a - upanishad,
edited with an English translation; Bibliotheca Indica.
Calcutta, 1861.

E. B. Cowell, The Maitri Upanishad, edited with an
English translation; Bibliotheca Indica. Calcutta, 1870.

A. Weber, Die Va^rasu^i des A^vaghosha. Berlin, i860.

A. Weber, Die Rama-tapaniya Upanishad. Berlin, 1864.

A. Weber, Analyse der in Anquetil du Perron’s Uber-
setzung enthalten Upanishad; Indische Studien, vol. i,
p. 247 et seq.

A. E. Gough, The Philosophy of the Upanishads ; Cal¬
cutta Review, CXXXI.

P. Regnaud, Materiaux pour servir a l'histoire de la Phi¬
losophic de l’lnde. Paris, 1876.

Editions of the Upanishads, their commentaries and
glosses have been published in the Tattvabodhini patrika,
and by Poley (who has also translated several Upani¬
shads into French), by Roer, Cowell, Rajendralal Mitra,
Hara^andra Vidyabhusha;/a, VUvanatha Sastri, Rama-
maya Tarkaratna, and others. For fuller titles see Gilde-
meister, Bibliotheca Sanscrita, and E. Haas, Catalogue of
Sanskrit and Pali Books in the British Museum, s. v. Upa¬
nishads.

lxxxvi

UPANISHADS.

I.

THE AV/ANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

The AT/zandogya-upanishad belongs to the Sama-veda.
Together with the B/'zhad-araz/yaka, which belongs to the
Ya^ur-veda, it has contributed the most important ma¬
terials to what may be called the orthodox philosophy of
India, the Vedanta 1 , i.e. the end, the purpose, the highest
object of the Veda. It consists of eight adhyayas or lec¬
tures, and formed part of a AV^andogya-brahmaz/a, in which
it was preceded by two other adhyayas. While MSS. of
the AVandogya-upanishad and its commentary are fre¬
quent, no MSS. of the whole Brahma;/a has been met with
in Europe. Several scholars had actually doubted its ex¬
istence, but Rajendralal Mitra 2 , in the Introduction to his
translation of the ATMndogya-upanishad, states that in
India ‘ MSS. of the work are easily available, though as
yet he has seen no commentary attached to the Brahma^a
portion of any one of them.’ ‘ According to general accep-

1 Vedanta, as a technical term, did not mean originally the last portions of
the Veda, or chapters placed, as it were, at the end of a volume of Vedic
literature, but the end, i. e. the object, the highest purpose of the Veda.
There are, of course, passages, like the one in the Taittiriya-ararcyaka (ed-
Rajendralal Mitra, p. 820), which have been misunderstood both by native and
European scholars, and where vedanta means simply the end of the Veda:—yo
vedadau svara/z prokto vedante /’a pratishMita/z, ‘ the Om which is pronounced
at the beginning of the Veda, and has its place also at the end of the Veda.’
Plere vedanta stands simply in opposition to vedadau, and it is impossible to
translate it, as Saya/m does, by Vedanta or Upanishad. Vedanta, in the sense of
philosophy, occurs in the Taittiriya-arawyaka (p. 817), in a verse of theNarayamya-
upanishad, repeated in the MiwaTaka-upanishad III, 2, 6, and elsewhere,
vedantavi^nanasuniiAitartha/z, ‘ those who have well understood the object of the
knowledge arising from the Vedanta,’ not ‘ from the last books of the Veda;’
and Avet&yvatara-up. VI, 22, vedante paramaw guhyam, ‘the highest mystery in
the Vedanta.’ Afterwards it is used in the plural also, e. g. Kshurikopanishad,
10 (Bibl. Ind. p. 210), puw^ariketi vedanteshu nigadyate, ‘ it is called puw^arika
in the Vedantas,’i. e. in the A 7 zandogya and other Upanishads, as the com¬
mentator says, but not in the last books of each Veda. A curious passage is
found in the Gautama-sutras XIX, 12, where a distinction seems to be made
between Upanishad and Vedanta. Sacred Books, vol. ii, p. 272.

2 AVmndogya-upanishad, translated by Rajendralal Mitra, Calcutta, 1S62,
Introduction, p. 17.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxxvii

tation,’ he adds, ‘ the work embraces ten chapters, of which
the first two are reckoned to be the Brahmazza, and the rest
is known under the name of AT/zandogya-upanishad. In
their arrangement and style the two portions differ greatly,
and judged by them they appear to be productions of very
different ages, though both are evidently relics of pretty
remote antiquity. Of the two chapters of the Af/z&ndogya-
brahma/za 1 , the first includes eight suktas (hymns) on the
ceremony of marriage, and the rites necessary to be ob¬
served at the birth of a child. The first sukta is intended
to be recited when offering an oblation to Agni on the
occasion of a marriage, and its object is to pray for pros¬
perity in behalf of the married couple. The second prays
for long life, kind relatives, and a numerous progeny. The
third is the marriage pledge by which the contracting
parties bind themselves to each other. Its spirit may be
guessed from a single verse. In talking of the unanimity
with which they will dwell, the bridegroom addresses his
bride, “ That heart of thine shall be mine, and this heart of
mine shall be thine 2 .” The fourth and the fifth invoke
Agni, Vayu, ATandramas, and Surya to bless the couple and
ensure healthful progeny. The sixth is a mantra for
offering an oblation on the birth of a child ; and the seventh
and the eighth are prayers for its being healthy, wealthy,
and powerful, not weak, poor, or mute, and to ensure a
profusion of wealth and milch-cows. The first sukta of the
second chapter is addressed to the Earth, Agni, and Indra,
with a prayer for wealth, health, and prosperity; the
second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth are mantras for offer¬
ing oblations to cattle, the manes, Surya, and divers minor
deities. The seventh is a curse upon worms, insects, flies,
and other nuisances, and the last, the concluding mantra of
the marriage ceremony, in which a general blessing is
invoked for all concerned/

After this statement there can be but little doubt that

1 It begins, Om, deva savita/f, pra Suva ya^nam pra suva ya^napatim
bhagaya. The second begins, ya h pra£ya m dm sarpara^a esha te bali//.

2 Yad etad dhr/daya/// tava tad astu hr/dayam mama, Yad ida m hr/d ay am
mama tad astu hr/dayar/ tava.

lxxxviii

UPANISHADS.

this Upanishad originally formed part of a Brahma^a.
This may have been called either by a general name,
the Brahma//a of the W//andogas, the followers of the
Sama-veda, or, on account of the prominent place occupied
in it by the Upanishad, the Upanishad-brahmawa h In
that case it would be, one of the eight Brahma^as of the
Sama-veda, enumerated by Kumarila Bha//a and others 1 2 ,
and called simply Upanishad, scil. Brahma^a.

The text of the Upanishad with the commentary of
Sankara and the gloss of Anandagiri has been published in
the Bibliotheca In die a. The edition can only claim the
character of a manuscript, and of a manuscript not always
very correctly read.

A translation of the Upanishad was published, likewise
in the Bibliotheca Indica, by Rajendralal Mitra.

It is one of the Upanishads that was translated into
Persian under the auspices of D&ra Shukoh 3 , and from
Persian into French by Anquetil Duperron, in his Oup-
nekhat, i. e. Secretum Tegendum. Portions of it were
translated into English by Colebrooke in his Mis¬
cellaneous Essays, into Latin and German by F. W.
Windischmann, in his Sankara, seu de theologumenis
Vedanticorum (Bonn, 1833), and in a work published
by his father, K. J. H. Windischmann, Die Philosophic
im Fortgang der Weitgeschichte (Bonn, 1827-34).
Professor A. Weber has treated of this Upanishad in his
Indische Studien I, 254 ; likewise M. P. Regnaud in his
Materiaux pour servir a l’histoire de la philosophic de
l’lnde (Paris, 1876) and Mr. Gough in several articles on
‘ the Philosophy of the Upanishads/ in the Calcutta
Review, No. CXXXI.

I have consulted my predecessors whenever there was a
serious difficulty to solve in the translation of these ancient
texts. These difficulties are very numerous, as those know

1 The same name seems, however, to be given to the adhyaya of the Talava-
kara-brahmawa, which contains the Kena-upanishad.

2 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 348. Most valuable
information on the literature of the Sama-veda may be found in Dr. Burnell’s
editions of the smaller Brahmawas of that Veda.

3 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 325.

INTRODUCTION.

lxxxix

best who have attempted to give complete translations of
these ancient texts. It will be seen that my translation
differs sometimes very considerably from those of my pre¬
decessors. Though I have but seldom entered into any
controversy with them, they may rest assured that 1 have
not deviated from them without careful reflection.

II.

THE TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD.

This Upanishad is best known by the name of Kena-
upanishad, from its first word. The name of br&hmi-
upanishad (IV, 7) can hardly be considered as a title. It
means ‘the teaching of Brahman, 5 and is used with reference
to other Upanishads also h .Sankara, in his commentary,
tells us that this Upanishad forms the ninth adhyaya of
a Brahma//a, or, if we take his words quite literally, he says,
‘the beginning of the ninth adhyaya is “the Upanishad
beginning with the words Keneshitam, and treating of how
the Highest Brahman has to be taught. 55 5 In the eight
preceding adhyayas, he tells us, all the sacred rites or
sacrifices had been fully explained, and likewise the medi¬
tations (upasana) on the pra;/a (vital breath) which belongs
to all these sacrifices, and those meditations also which
have reference to the fivefold and sevenfold Samans.
After that followed Gayatra-saman and the Va?^a, the
genealogical list. All this would naturally form the subject
of a Sama-veda-brahma7/a, and we find portions corres¬
ponding to the description given by .Sankara in the Khdin-
dogya-upanishad, e.g. the fivefold Saman, II, 2; the seven¬
fold Saman, II, 8; the Gayatra-saman, III, 12, 1.

Ananda^nana tells us that our Upanishad belonged to
the .Sakha of the Talavakaras.

All this had formerly to be taken on trust, because
no Brahma7/a was known containing the Upanishad. Dr.
Burnell, however, has lately discovered a Brahma7/a of the
Sama-veda which comes very near the description given by
.Sankara. In a letter dated Tanjore, 8th Dec. 1878, he

1 See before, p. lxxxiii.

xc

UPANISHADS.

writes: 4 It appears to me that you would be glad to know
the following about the Kena-upanishad, as it occurs in my
MS. of the Talavakara-brahma7/a.

4 The last book but one of this Brahma;/a is termed
Upanishad-brahma//a. It consists of 145 kha/^as treating
of the Gayatra-saman, and the 134th is a Va;;wa. The
Kena-upanishad comprises the 135—145 kha/z^as, or the
tenth anuvaka of a chapter. The 139th section begins : a.sa.
va idam agra asit, &c.

4 My MS. of the Talavakara-brahmaz/a agrees, as regards
the contents, exactly with what Sankara says, but not in
the divisions. He says that the Kena-upanishad begins the
ninth adhyaya, but that is not so in my MS. Neither
the beginning nor the end of this Upanishad is noticed
particularly.

4 The last book of this Brahmaz/a is the Arsheya-brah-
ma7/a, which I printed last February.

‘Among the teachers quoted in the Brahma7/a I have
noticed both T&idya. and Satyayani. I should not be
surprised to find in it the difficult quotations which are
incorrectly given in the MSS. of Saya77a’s commentary on
the Rig-veda. The story of Apala, quoted by Saya7/a in
his commentary on the Rig-veda, VIII, 80, as from the
Va/yayanaka, is found word for word, except some trivial
var. lectiones, in sections 220-221 of the Agnish/oma book
of the Talavakara-brahma7/a. The Va/yayanins seem to
be closely connected with the Talavakara-^akha.’

From a communication made by Dr. Burnell to the
Academy (1 Feb. ’79), I gather that this Talavakara-brah-
ma 7 /a is called by those who study it 4 Vaiminiya-brahnw/a,’
after the Vakha of the Sama-veda which they follow. The
account given in the Academy differs on some particulars
slightly from that given in Dr. Burnell’s letter to me. He
writes: 4 The largest part of the Brahma7/a treats of the
sacrifices and the Samans used at them. The first chapter
is on the Agnihotra, and the Agnishfoma and other rites
follow at great length. Then comes a book termed
Upanishad-brahma 7 /a. This contains 145 sections in four
chapters. It begins with speculations on the GcLyatra-

INTRODUCTION.

XC1

saman, followed by a Va;/zsa; next, some similar matter
and another Va;/2.ra. Then (§§ 135-138) comes the Kena-
upanishad (Talavakara). The last book is the Arsheya.
The Upanishad forms the tenth anuvaka of the fourth
chapter, not the beginning of a ninth chapter, as ^Sankara
remarks.’

The Kena-upanishad has been frequently published and
translated. It forms part of Dara Shukoh’s Persian, and
Anquetil Duperron’s Latin translations. It was several times
published in English by Rammohun Roy (Translations of
Several Principal Books, Passages, and Texts of the Veda,
London, 1832, p. 41), in German by Windischmann, Poley,
and others. It has been more or less fully discussed by
Colebrooke, Windischmann, Poley, Weber, Roer, Gough,
and Regnaud in the books mentioned before.

Besides the text of this Upanishad contained in the
Brahmaz/a of the Sama-veda, there is another text, slightly
differing, belonging to the Atharva-veda, and there are
commentaries on both texts (Colebrooke, Misc. Essays,
1873, II, p. 80).

III.

THE AITAREYA-ARAWYAKA.

In giving a translation of the Aitareya-upanishad, I found
it necessary to give at the same time a translation of that
portion of the Aitareya-arawyaka which precedes the Upani¬
shad. The Ara^yakas seem to have been from the begin¬
ning the proper repositories of the ancient Upanishads,
though it is difficult at first sight to find out in what relation
the Upanishads stood to the Arazzyakas. The Araz^yakas
are to be read and studied, not in the village (grame), but
in the forest, and so are the Upanishads. But the subjects
treated in the Upanishads belong to a very different order
from those treated in the other portions of the Ara;/yakas,
the former being philosophical, the latter liturgical.

The liturgical chapters of the Ara;/yakas might quite as
well have formed part of the Brahma;/as, and but for the
restriction that they are to be read in the forest, it is diffi¬
cult to distinguish between them and the Brahmaz^as. The

xcu

UPANISHADS.

first chapter of the Aitareya-ara/zyaka is a mere continua¬
tion of the Aitareya-brcLhmazza, and gives the description
of the Mahavrata, the last day but one of the Gavama-
yana, a sattra or sacrifice which is supposed to last a whole
year. The duties which are to be performed by the Hotrz
priests are described in the Aitareya-arazzyaka ; not all,
however, but those only which are peculiar to the Maha¬
vrata day. The general rules for the performance of the
Mahavrata are to be taken over from other sacrifices, such
as the VLrva^it, A’aturvizzz.ya, &c., which form the type
(prakrzti) of the Mahavrata. Thus the two ^astras or recita¬
tions, called a^ya-praiiga, are taken over from the Vuva^it,
the ^astras of the Hotrakas from the 7 ifaturviz/z.ya. The
Mahavrata is treated here as belonging to the Gavamayana
sattra, which is described in a different 6'akha, see Tait-
tiriya Saz/zhita VII, 5, 8, and partly in other Vedas. It is
the day preceding the udayaniya, the last day of the sattra.
It can be celebrated, however, by itself also, as an ek&ha or
ahina sacrifice, and in the latter case it is the tenth day of
the Ekada^aratra (eleven nights’ sacrifice) called Puzzz/arika.

S 4 yazza does not hesitate to speak of the Aitareya-
arazzyaka as a part of the Brahmazza 1 ; and a still earlier
authority, Sankara, by calling the Aitareya-upanishad by
the name of BahvrzTa-brahmazza-upanishad 2 , seems to

A

imply that both the Upanishad and the Arazzyaka may be
classed as Brahmazza.

The Aitareya-arazzyaka appears at first sight a miscella¬
neous work, consisting of liturgical treatises in the first,

A

fourth, and fifth Arazzyakas, and of three Upanishads, in
the second and third Arazzyakas. This, however, is not
the case. The first Arazzyaka is purely liturgical, giving
a description of the Mahavrata, so far as it concerns the
Hotrz priest. It is written in the ordinary Brahmazza style.
Then follows the first Upanishad, Arazzyaka II, 1—3, showing

1 Aitareyabrahmawe ’sti kaw^am arawyakabhidham (introduction), a remark
which he repeats in the fifth Ara^yaka. He also speaks of the Ara//yaka-
vratarupam brahmawam; see p. cxiv, 1. 24.

2 In the same manner the Kaushitaki-upanishad is properly called Kaushitaki-
brahmawa-upanishad, though occurring in the Ara^yaka ; see Kaushitaki-brah-
mawa-upanishad, ed. Cowell, p. 30.

INTRODUCTION.

XC111

how certain portions of the Mahavrata, as described in the
first Arazzyaka, can be made to suggest a deeper meaning,
and ought to lead the mind of the sacrificer away from the
purely outward ceremonial to meditation on higher subjects.
Without a knowledge of the first Arazzyaka therefore the
first Upanishad would be almost unintelligible, and though
its translation was extremely tedious, it could not well
have been omitted.

The second and third Upanishads are not connected
with the ceremonial of the Mahavrata, but in the fourth

A

and fifth Arazzyakas the Mahavrata forms again the prin¬
cipal subject, treated, however, not as before in the style
of the Brahmazzas, but in the style of Sutras. The fourth

A

Arazzyaka contains nothing but a list of the Mahanamni
hymns 1 , but the fifth describes the Mahavrata again, so
that if the first Arazzyaka may be looked upon as a portion
of the Aitareya-brahmazzas, the fifth could best be classed
with the Sutras of Aivalayana.

To a certain extent this fact, the composite character of
the Aitareya-arazzyaka, is recognised even by native scholars,
who generally do not trouble themselves much! on such
questions. They look both on the Aitareya-brahmazza
and on the greater portion of Aitareya-arazzyaka as the
works of an inspired i^zshi, Mahidasa Aitareya 2 * * * * * 8 , but they
consider the fourth and fifth books of the Arazzyhka as
contributed by purely human authors, such as A^val^yana
and Saunaka, who, like other Sutrakaras, took in verses
belonging to other Sakhas, and did not confine their rulks
to their own Sakha only.

There are many legends about Mahidasa, the reputed

A

author of the Aitareya-brahmazza and Arazzyaka. He is

1 See Boehtlingk and Roth, s. v. ‘Neun Vedische Verse die in ihrem voll-

standigen Wortlaut aber noch nicht nachgewiesen sind.’ Weber, Indische Studien

VIII, 68. How these hymns are to be employed we learn from the Axvalayana-
sfitras VII, 12, io, where we are told that if the Udgatrzs sing the Aakvara

Saman as the Pr/shZ/jastotra, the nine verses beginning with Vida maghavan,

and known by the name of Mahanamni, are to be joined in a peculiar manner.

The only excuse given, why these Mahanamnis are mentioned here, and not in

the Brahmawa, is that they are to be studied in the forest.

8 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, pp. 177, 335.

XC1V

UPANISHADS.

a

quoted several times as Mahidasa Aitareya in the Ara^yaka
itself, though not in the Br 4 hma;/a. We also meet his
name in the W/^andogya-upanishad (III, 16, 7), where we
are told that he lived to the age of 116 years 1 . All this,
however, would only prove that, at the time of the compo¬
sition or collection of these Araz/yakas and Upanishads,
a sage was known of the name of Mahidasa Aitareya,
descended possibly from Itara or Itara, and that one text
of the Brahma^as and the Ara^yakas of the BahvrzTas was
handed down in the family of the Aitareyins.

Not content with this apparently very obvious explana¬
tion, later theologians tried to discover their own reasons for
the name of Aitareya. Thus Saya//a, in his introduction
to the Aitareya-brahma^a 2 , tells us that there was once
a Rishi who had many wives. One of them was called
Itara, and she had a son called Mahidasa. His father
preferred the sons of his other wives to Mahidasa, and once
he insulted him in the sacrificial hall, by placing his other
sons on his lap, but not Mahidasa. Mahidasa’s mother,
seeing her son with tears in his eyes, prayed to her tutelary
goddess, 'the Earth (sviyakuladevata BhumM), and the
goddess fin her heavenly form appeared in the midst of
the assembly,, placed Mahidasa on a throne, and on account
of his learning, gave him the gift of knowing the Brahma?^a,
consisting of forty adhyayas, and, as Saya?/a calls it, another
Brahma/^a, ‘treating of the Ara^yaka duties’ (ara;/yakavra-
tarupam brahmazzam).

Without attaching much value to the legend of Itara,
we see at all events that Saya/^a considered what we call
the Aitareyara/^yaka as a kind of Br&hma/za, not however

A

the whole of it, but only the first, second, and third Ara-
7/yakas (atha mahavratam ltyadikam a£arya a£arya ityan-
tam). How easy it was for Hindu theologians to invent
such legends we see from another account of Mahidasa,

A

given by Anandatirtha in his notes on the Aitareya-upani-

1 Not 1600 years, as I printed by mistake ; for 24 + 44 + 48 make 116 years.
Rajendralal Mitra should not have corrected his right rendering 116 into 1600.
Ait. Ar. Introduction, p. 3.

2 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 336.

INTRODUCTION.

XCV

shad. He, as C'olebrooke was the first to point out, takes
Mahidasa ‘ to be an incarnation of Naraya/za, proceeding
from VLrala, son of Ab^a,’ and he adds, that on the sudden
appearance of this deity at a solemn celebration, the whole
assembly of gods and priests (suraviprasangha) fainted, but
at the intercession of Brahma, they were revived, and after
making their obeisance, they were instructed in holy science.
This avatara was called Mahidasa, because those venerable
personages (mahin) declared themselves to be his slaves
(dasa ) 1 .

In order properly to understand this legend, we must

A

remember that Anandatirtha, or rather VEve.svaratirtha,
whose commentary he explains, treated the whole of the
Mahaitareya-upanishad from a Vaish/zava point of view, and
that his object was to identify Mahidasa with Narayazza.
He therefore represents Naraya/za or Hari as the avatara
of VUala, the son of Brahman (ab^asuta), who appeared
at a sacrifice, as described before, who received then and
there the name of Mahidasa (or Mahidasa), and who taught
this Upanishad. Any other person besides Mahidasa would
have been identified with the same ease by Vii'vei'vara-
tirtha with Vish/zu or Bhagavat.

A third legend has been made up out of these two by
European scholars who represent Mahidasa as the son of
VEala and Itara, two persons who probably never met
before, for even the Vaish/zava commentator does not
attempt to take liberties with the name of Aitareya, but
simply states that the Upanishad was called Aitareyi, from
Aitareya.

Leaving these legends for what they are worth, we may
at all events retain the fact that, whoever was the author of
the Aitareya-brahma/za and the first three books of the
Aitareya-ara/zyaka, was not the author of the two con¬
cluding Ara/zyakas. And this is confirmed in different
ways. Saya/za, w r hen quoting in his commentary on the
Rig -veda from the last books, constantly calls it a Sutra of

A

vSaunaka, while the fourth Ara/zyaka is specially ascribed

1 Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, 1873, II, p. 42.

XCV1

UPANISHADS.

to A^valayana, the pupil and successor of .Saunaka 1 . These

A

two names of 6aunaka and A-svalayana are frequently in¬
termixed. If, however, in certain MSS. the whole of the
A itareya-arazzyaka is sometimes ascribed either to A^vala-
yana or Saunaka, this is more probably due to the colophon

A

of the fourth and fifth Arazzyakas having been mistaken for
the title of the whole work than to the fact that such MSS.

A

represent the text of the Arazzyaka, as adopted by the

A

school of Ai'valayana.

The Aitareya-arazzyaka consists of the following five
Arazzyakas:

The first Arazzyaka has five Adhyayas:

1. First Adhyaya, Atha mahavratam, has four Khavas, 1-4. ^

2. Second Adhyaya, A tva ratham, has four Khavas, 5-8.

3. Third Adhyaya, Hinkarezza, has eight 2 Khazzrfas, 9-16.

4. Fourth Adhyaya, Atha sudadoha/z, has three KhazzaTas, 17-19.

5. Fifth Adhyaya, Vasaz/z saz/zsati, has three Khazzz/as, 20-22.

d

r n

G

d

a.

d

d

43

m

G

d

a,

p

d

<u

d

<

The second Arazzyaka has seven Adhyayas:

6. First Adhyaya, Esha pantha^,has eight Khazzz/as, 1-8.

7. Second Adhyaya, Esha imazzz lokam, has four Khazz^/as, 9-12.

8. Third Adhyaya, Yo ha va atmanam, has eight (not three)

Khazzdas, 13-20.

9. Fourth Adhyaya, Atma va idam, has three Khazzz^as, 21-23.

10. Fifth Adhyaya, Purushe ha va, has one Khazzz/a, 24.

11. Sixth Adhyaya, Ko ’yam atmeti, has one Khazzz/a, 25.

12. Seventh Adhyaya, Van me manasi, has one Khazzz/a, 26.

The third Arazzyaka has two Adhyayas :

13. First Adhyaya, Athata^ sazzzhitaya upanishat, has six Khazzz/as,

1-6.

14. Second Adhyaya, Prazzo vazzzxa iti sthavira/^ Aakalya/z, has six

Khazz</as, 7-12.

A

The fourth Arazzyaka has one Adhyaya :

15. First Adhyaya, Vida maghavan, has one Khazz^/a (the Maha-

A At \

namni s).

A

The fifth Arazzyaka has three Adhyayas:

16. First Adhyaya, Mahavratasya pan^avizzz^atim, has six Khazzz/as,

1-6.

17. Second Adhyaya, (Griva/z) Yasyedam, has five Khazzz/as, 7—11.

18. Third Adhyaya, (Uru) Indragni, has four Khazzz/as, 11-14.

1 M.M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 235.

2 Not six, as in Rajendralal Mitra’s edition.

INTRODUCTION.

XCV11

With regard to the Upanishad, we must distinguish
between the Aitareya-upanishad, properly so-called, which
fills the fourth, fifth, and sixth adhyayas of the second
Ara/zyaka, and the Mahaitareya-upanishad l , also called by
a more general name Bahvrz^a-upanishad, which comprises
the whole of the second and third Ara^yakas.

The Persian translator seems to have confined himself to

A

the second Ara/^yaka 2 , to which he gives various titles,
Sarbsar, Asarbeh, Antrteheh. That Antrteheh is a

misreading of was pointed out long ago by Burnouf,

and the same explanation applies probably to asar¬

beh, and if to that, then to Sarbsar also. No explanation
has ever been given why the Aitareya-upanishad should
have been called Sarvasara, which Professor Weber thinks
was corrupted into Sarbsar. At all events the Aitareya-
upanishad is not the Sarvasara-upanishad, the Oupnek'hat
Sarb, more correctly called Sarvopanishatsara, and ascribed
either to the Taittiriyaka or to the Atharva-veda 3 .

The Aitareya-upanishad, properly so called, has been
edited and translated in the Bibliotheca Indica by Dr.
Roer. The whole of the Aitareya-ara^yaka with Saya/^a’s
commentary was published in the same series by Rajen-
dralal Mitra.

Though I have had several MSS. of the text and com¬
mentary at my disposal, I have derived little aid from
them, but have throughout endeavoured to restore that
text which Sankara (the pupil of Govinda) and Sayawa
had before them. Saya//a, for the Upanishad portion, fol¬
lows Sankara’s commentary, of which we have a gloss by
Ananda^nana.

Colebrooke in his Essays (vol. ii, p. 42) says that he

1 This may have been the origin of a AYshi Mahaitareya, by the side of the
AYshi iUtareya, mentioned in the Arvalayana Grzhya-sutras III, 4 (ed. Stenzler).
Professor Weber takes Aitareya and Mahaitareya here as names of works, but
he admits that in the Aankhayana Grfhya-sutras they are clearly names of
AYshis (Ind. Stud. I, p. 389).

2 He translates II, i-II, 3, 4, leaving out the rest of the third adhyaya ;
afterwards II, 4-II, 7.

3 Bibliotheca Indica, the Atharva«a-upanishads, p. 394.

[3] g

XCV111

UPANISHADS.

possessed one gloss by Nar&ya/zendra on Sankara’s com¬
mentary, and another by Anandatirtha on a different gloss
for the entire Upanishad. The gloss by Narayaz/endra \
however, is, so Dr. Rost informs me, the same as that of
Ananda^nana, while, so far as I can see, the gloss contained
in MS. E. I. H. 2386 (also MS. Wilson 401), to which Cole-
brooke refers, is not a gloss by Anandatirtha at all, but a

/V

gloss by VUve.yvaratirtha on a commentary by Anandatir-
thabhagavatpadaMrya, also called Punzapra^na/farya, who
explained the whole of the Mahaitareya-upanishad from a
Vaish;/ava point of view.

IV.

the kaushItaki-brAhmaaa-upanishad.

The Kaushitaki-upanishad, or, as it is more properly
called, the Kaushitaki-brahma;2a-upanishad, belongs, like
the Aitareya-upanishad, to the followers of the Rig-veda. It
was translated into Persian under the title of Kokhenk, and
has been published in the Bibliotheca Indica with Sanka-
rananda’s commentary and an excellent translation by
Professor Cowell.

Though it is called the Kaushitaki-brahmazza-upanishad,
it does not form part of the Kaushitaki-brahma7/a in 30
adhyayas which we possess, and we must therefore account

A

for its name by admitting that the Ara//yaka, of which it
formed a portion, could be reckoned as part of the Brah-
ma;/a literature of the Rig-veda (see Aitareya-araz/yaka,
Introduction, p. xcii), and that hence the Upanishad might
be called the Upanishad of the Brahmazza of the Kaushi-
takins 1 2 .

From a commentary discovered by Professor Cowell
it appears that the four adhyayas of this Upanishad

1 A MS. in the Notices of Sanskrit MSS., vol. ii, p. 133, ascribed to Abhi-
navanarftyazzendra, called Atmasha/kabhashya/ika, begins like the gloss edited
by Dr. Roer, and ends like Sdyazza’s commentary on the seventh adhyaya, as
edited by Rajendralal Mitra. The same name is given in MS. Wilson 94,
Anmatkaivalyendrasarasvatipu^yapadarishya-jnmadabhinavanarayazzendrasara-
svati.

2 A Mahft-kaushitaki-brahmawa is quoted, but has not yet been met with.

INTRODUCTION.

XC1X

were followed by five other adh3/ayas, answering, so far as
we can judge from a few extracts, to some of the adhyayas
of the Aitareya-ara/^yaka, while an imperfect MS. of an
Ara^yaka in the Royal Library at Berlin (Weber, Catalogue,
p. 20) begins, like the Aitareya-ara^yaka, with a descrip¬
tion of the Mahavrata, followed by discussions on the uktha
in the second adhyaya ; and then proceeds in the third
adhyaya to give the story of Witra Gangyayani in the same
words as the Kaushitaki-upanishad in the first adhyaya.
Other MSS. again adopt different divisions. In one MS.
of the commentary (MS. A), the four adhyayas of the
Upanishad are counted as sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth
(ending with ityara/^yake navamo ’dhyaya/z) ; in another
(MS. P) the third and fourth adhyayas of the Upanishad
are quoted as the fifth and sixth of the Kaushitakyara;/yaka,
possibly agreeing therefore, to a certain extent, with the
Berlin MS. In a MS. of the Sankhayana Ara^yaka in
the Royal Library at Berlin, there are 15 adhyayas, 1 and 2
corresponding to Ait. Ar. 1 and 5; 3-6 containing the Kau¬
shitaki-upanishad ; 7 and 8 corresponding to Ait. Ar. 3 1 .
Poley seems to have known a MS. in which the four
adhyayas of the Upanishad formed the first, seventh,
eighth, and ninth adhyayas of a Kaushitaki-brahma;/a.

As there were various recensions of the Kaushitaki-brah-
ma//a (the .Sankhayana, Kauthuma, &c.), the Upanishad
also exists in at least two texts. The commentator, in
some of its MSS., refers to the various readings of the
Sakhas, explaining them, whenever there seems to be
occasion for it. I have generally followed the text which is
presupposed by Sankarananda’s Dipika, and contained in
MSS. F, G (Cowell, Preface, p. v), so far as regards the
third and fourth adhyayas. According to Professor Cowell,
Vidyara/zya in his Sarvopanishadarthanubhutiprakai'a fol¬
lowed the text of the commentary, while vSankara^arya,
if we may trust to extracts in his commentary on the
Vedanta-sutras, followed the other text, contained in MS.
A (Cowell, Preface, p. v).

1 See Weber, History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 50.

c

UPANISHADS.

The style of the commentator differs in so marked a
manner from that of 5 ahkara£arya, that even without the
fact that the author of the commentary on the Kaushitaki-
upanishad is called .Sankarananda, it would have been
difficult to ascribe it, as has been done by some scholars,
to the famous vSankar&^arya. 6ankarananda is called the
teacher of Madhav&£arya (Hall, Index, p. 98), and the dis¬
ciple of Anandatma Muni (Hall, Index, p. 116).

I have had the great advantage of being able to consult
for the Kaushitaki-upanishad, not only the text and com¬
mentary as edited by Professor Cowell, but also his excellent
translation. If I differ from him in some points, this is but
natural, considering the character of the text and the many
difficulties that have still to be solved, before we can hope
to arrive at a full understanding of these ancient philoso¬
phical treatises.

V.

the vA^asaneyi-sa^hitA-upanishad.

The Va^asaneyi-sa;//hita-upanishad, commonly called
from its beginning, lja or li'avasya, forms the fortieth and
concluding chapter of the Sawhita of the White Ya^ur-veda.
If the Sawhitas are presupposed by the Brahmawas, at
least in that form in which we possess them, then this
Upanishad, being the only one that forms part of a
Sa;//hit&, might claim a very early age. The Sawhita of
the White Ya^ur-veda, however, is acknowledged to be of
modern origin, as compared with the Sa7//hita of the Black
Ya^ur-veda, and it would not be safe therefore to ascribe
to this Upanishad a much higher antiquity than to those
which have found a place in the older Brahma;/as and
Ara//yakas.

There are differences between the text, as contained in
the Ya^ur-veda-sawhita, and the text of the Upanishad by
itself. Those which are of some interest have been men¬
tioned in the notes.

In some notes appended to the translation of this
Upanishad I have called attention to what seems to me

INTRODUCTION.

Cl

its peculiar character, namely, the recognition of the
necessity of works as a preparation for the reception of
the highest knowledge. This agrees well with the position
occupied by this Upanishad at the end of the Sa;;/hita, in
which the sacrificial works and the hymns that are to
accompany them are contained. The doctrine that the
moment a man is enlightened, he becomes free, as taught
in other Upanishads, led to a rejection of all discipline
and a condemnation of all sacrifices, which could hardly
have been tolerated in the last chapter of the Ya^ur-veda-
sa///hita, the liturgical Veda par excellence.

Other peculiarities of this Upanishad are the name lx,
lord, a far more personal name for the highest Being than
Brahman; the asurya (demoniacal) or asurya (sunless)
worlds to which all go who have lost their self; MatarBvan,
used in the sense of pra/^a or spirit; asnaviram, without
muscles, in the sense of incorporeal; and the distinction
between sambhuti and asambhuti in verses 12-14.

The editions of the text, commentaries, and glosses, and
the earlier translations may be seen in the works quoted
before, p. Ixxxiv.

AT/AN DOGYA-U PAN I SHAD.

KHAN DOGYA-U PAN I SHAD.

FIRST PRAPA7ZrAKA.

First Khayda 1 .

i . Let a man meditate on the syllable 2 Om,
called the udgitha ; for the udgitha (a portion of the
Sama-veda) is sung, beginning with Om.

The full account, however, of Om is this :—

2. The essence 3 of all beings is the earth, the
essence of the earth is water, the essence of water

1 The AT^andogya-upanishad begins with recommending medi¬
tation on the syllable Om, a sacred syllable that had to be pro¬
nounced at the beginning of each Veda and of every recitation of
Vedic hymns. As connected with the Sama-veda, that syllable Om
is called udgitha. Its more usual name is pra^ava. The object
of the Upanishad is to explain the various meanings which the
syllable Om may assume in the mind of a devotee, some of them
being extremely artificial and senseless, till at last the highest
meaning of Om is reached, viz. Brahman, the intelligent cause of
the universe.

2 Akshara means both syllable and the imperishable, i.e. Brahman.

s Essence, rasa, is explained in different ways, as origin, sup¬
port, end, cause, and effect. Rasa means originally the sap of
trees. That sap may be conceived either as the essence extracted
from the tree, or as what gives vigour and life to a tree. In the
former case it might be transferred to the conception of effect, in
the latter to that of cause. In our sentence it has sometimes the
one, sometimes the other meaning. Earth is the support of all
beings, water pervades the earth, plants arise from water, man lives
by plants, speech is the best part of man, the Rig-veda the best
part of speech, the Sama-veda the best extract from the Rik,
udgitha, or the syllable Om, the crown of the Sama-veda.

[3] B

2

A’tfANDOG YA-UPANISH A D.

the plants, the essence of plants man, the essence
of man speech, the essence of speech the Rig-veda,
the essence of the Rig-veda the Sama-veda 1 , the
essence of the Sama-veda the udgitha (which is
Om).

3. That udgitha (Om) is the best of all essences,
the highest, deserving the highest place 2 , the
eighth.

4. What then is the Rik f What is the Saman ?
What is the udgitha ? This is the question.

5. The Rik indeed is speech, Saman is breath,
the udgitha is the syllable Om. Now speech and
breath, or Rik and Saman, form one couple.

6. And that couple is joined together in the
syllable Om. When two people come together,
they fulfil each other’s desire.

7. Thus he who knowing this, meditates on the
syllable (Om), the udgitha, becomes indeed a ful-
filler of desires.

8. That syllable is a syllable of permission, for
whenever we permit anything, we say Om, yes.
Now permission is gratification. He who knowing
this meditates on the syllable (Om), the udgitha,
becomes indeed a gratifier of desires.

9. By that syllable does the threefold know¬
ledge (the sacrifice, more particularly the Soma-
sacrifice, as founded on the three Vedas) proceed.
When the Adhvaryu priest gives an order, he
says Om. When the Hot ri priest recites, he says
Om. When the Udgatrz priest sings, he says Om,

1 Because most of the hymns of the Sama-veda are taken from
the Rig-veda.

2 Parardhya is here derived from para, highest, and ardha, place.
The eighth means the eighth or last in the series of essences.

I PRAPATTfAKA, I K HAND A, IO.

0

—all for the glory of that syllable. The threefold
knowledge (the sacrifice) proceeds by the greatness
of that syllable (the vital breaths), and by its essence
(the oblations ) 1 .

io. Now therefore it would seem to follow, that
both he who knows this (the true meaning of the
syllable Om), and he who does not, perform the
same sacrifice 2 . But this is not so, for knowledge
and ignorance are different. The sacrifice which
a man performs with knowledge, faith, and the
Upanishad 3 is more powerful. This is the full
account of the syllable Om.

1 These are allusions to sacrificial technicalities, all intended to
show the importance of the syllable Om, partly as a mere word,
used at the sacrifices, partly as the mysterious name of the Highest
Self. As every priest at the Soma-sacrifices, in which three classes
of priests are always engaged, has to begin his part of the cere¬
monial with Om, therefore the whole sacrifice is said to be de¬
pendent on the syllable Om,and to be for the glory of that syllable,
as an emblem of the Highest Self, a knowledge of whom is the
indirect result of all sacrifices. The greatness of the syllable Om
is explained by the vital breaths of the priest, the sacrificer, and his
wife ; its essence by rice, corn, &c., which constitute the oblations.
Why breath and food are due to the syllable Om is explained by the
sacrifice, which is dependent on that syllable, ascending to the sun,
the sun sending rain, rain producing food, and food producing
breath and life.

2 He who simply pronounces the syllable Om as part of his
recitation at a sacrifice, and he who knows the hidden meaning of
that syllable, both may perform the same sacrifice. But that per¬
formed by the latter is more powerful, because knowledge is better
than ignorance. This is, as usual, explained by some comparisons.
It is true that both he who knows the quality of the hantaki and he
who does not, are purged alike if they take it. But on the other hand,
if a jeweller and a mere clod sell a precious stone, the knowledge of
the former bears better fruit than the ignorance of the latter.

3 Upanishad is here explained by yoga, and yoga by devatadi-
vishayam upasanam, meditation directed to certain deities. More

B 2

4

STtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Second Khan\da k

1. When the Devas and Asuras * 1 2 struggled toge¬
ther, both of the race of Pra^apati, the Devas took
the udgitha 3 (Om), thinking they would vanquish
the Asuras with it.

2. They meditated on the udgitha 3 (Om) as
the breath (scent) in the nose 4 , but the Asuras
pierced it (the breath) with evil. Therefore we smell
by the breath in the nose both what is good¬
smelling and what is bad-smelling. For the breath
was pierced by evil.

3. Then they meditated on the udgitha (Om) as
speech, but the Asuras pierced it with evil. There¬
fore we speak both truth and falsehood. For
speech is pierced by evil.

4. Then they meditated on the udgitha (Om) as
the eye, but the Asuras pierced it with evil. There-

likely, however, it refers to this very upanishad, i.e. to the udgitha-
vidyd, the doctrine of the secret meaning of Om, as here explained.

1 A very similar story is told in the Brz’had-drazzyaka I, 1, 3, 1.
But though the coincidences between the two are considerable,
amounting sometimes to verbal identity, the purport of the two
seems to be different. See Vedanta-shtra III, 3, 6.

8 Devas and Asuras, gods and demons, are here explained by
the commentator as the good and evil inclinations of man; Pra-
^•apati as man in general.

3 Udgitha stands, according to the commentator, for the sacri¬
ficial act to be performed by the Udgatrz’, the Sama-veda priest,
with the udgitha hymns; and as these sacrificial acts always form
part of the Gyotish/oma &c., these great Soma-sacrifices are really
intended. In the second place, however, the commentator takes
udgitha in the sense of Udgatrz’, the performer of the udgitha,
which is or was by the Devas thought to be the breath in the
nose. I have preferred to take udgitha in the sense of Om, and
all that is implied by it.

4 They asked that breath should recite the udgitha. Comm.

I PRAPA THAKA, 2 KHANDA, 9.

0

fore we see both what is sightly and unsightly. For
the eye is pierced by evil.

5. Then they meditated on the udgitha (Om) as
the ear, but the Asuras pierced it with evil. There¬
fore we hear both what should be heard and what
should not be heard. For the ear is pierced by
evil.

6. Then they meditated on the udgitha (Om) as
the mind, but the Asuras pierced it with evil.
Therefore we conceive both what should be con¬
ceived and what should not be conceived. For
the mind is pierced by evil.

7. Then comes this breath (of life) in the mouth k
They meditated on the udgitha (Om) as that breath.
When the Asuras came to it, they were scattered,
as (a ball of earth) would be scattered when hitting
a solid stone.

8. Thus, as a ball of earth is scattered when hit¬
ting on a solid stone, will he be scattered who wishes
evil to one who knows this, or who persecutes him;
for he is a solid stone.

9. By it (the breath in the mouth) he distinguishes
neither what is good nor what is bad-smelling, for
that breath is free from evil. What we eat and
drink with it supports the other vital breaths (i.e.
the senses, such as smell, &c.) When at the time
of death he 1 2 does not find that breath (in the

1 Mukhya praraa is used in two senses, the principal or vital
breath, also called jresh/^a, and the breath in the mouth, also called
asanya.

2 According to the commentator, the assemblage of the other
vital breaths or senses is here meant. They depart when the
breath of the mouth, sometimes called sarvambhari, all-supporting,
does no longer, by eating and drinking, support them.

6

A'tfANDOGY A-U PANIS HAD.

mouth, through which he eats and drinks and lives),
then he departs. He opens the mouth at the time
of death (as if wishing to eat).

10. Angiras 1 meditated on the udgitha (Om) as
that breath, and people hold it to be Angiras, i.e.
the essence of the members (angana;/z rasa Ji) ;

11. Therefore Brzhaspati meditated on udgitha
(Om) as that breath, and people hold it to be B ri-
haspati, for speech is brzhati, and he (that breath) is
the lord (pati) of speech ;

12. Therefore Ayasya meditated on the udgitha
(Om) as that breath, and people hold it to be
Ayasya, because it comes (ayati) from the mouth
(asya) ;

13. Therefore Vaka Dalbhya knew it. He was
the Udgatrz (singer) of the Naimishiya-sacrificers,
and by singing he obtained for them their wishes.

14. He who knows this, and meditates on the
syllable Om (the imperishable udgitha) as the breath
of life in the mouth, he obtains all wishes by singing.
So much for the udgitha (Om) as meditated on with
reference to the body 2 .

1 The paragraphs from 10 to 14 are differently explained
by Indian commentators. By treating the nominatives ah girts,
brz'haspatis, and ayasyas(here the printed text reads ayasyam)
as accusatives, or by admitting the omission of an iti after them,
they connect paragraphs 9, 10, and 11 with paragraph 12, and thus
gain the meaning that Vaka Dalbhya meditated on the breath in the
mouth as Angiras, Brz'haspati, and Ayasya, instead of those saints
having themselves thus meditated; and that he, knowing the secret
names and qualities of the breath, obtained, when acting as Udgatrf
priest, the wishes of those for whom he sacrificed. Ten a is diffi¬
cult to explain, unless we take it in the sense of tenanu.rish/a/7,
taught by him.

2 Adhyatma means with reference to the body, not with refer¬
ence to the self or the soul. Having explained the symbolical

I PRAPAFtfAKA, 3 KHAiVDA, 4 .

7

Third Kha.v.da.

1. Now follows the meditation on the udgitha
with reference to the gods. Let a man meditate
on the udgitha (Om) as he who sends warmth (the
sun in the sky). When the sun rises it sings as
Udg&trz for the sake of all creatures. When it rises
it destroys the fear of darkness. He who knows this,
is able to destroy the fear of darkness (ignorance).

2. This (the breath in the mouth) and that (the
sun) are the same. This is hot and that is hot.
This they call svara (sound), and that they call pra¬
tyasvara * 1 (reflected sound). Therefore let a man
meditate on the udgitha (Om) as this and that (as
breath and as sun).

3. Then let a man meditate on the udgitha
(Om) as vyana indeed. If we breathe up, that is
pra;2a, the up-breathing. If we breathe down, that
is apana, the down-breathing. The combination of
pra^a and apana is vyana, back-breathing or holding
in of the breath. This vyana is speech. Therefore
when we utter speech, we neither breathe up nor
down.

4. Speech is Rik , and therefore when a man utters
a Rik verse he neither breathes up nor down.

meaning of Om as applied to the body and its organs of sense, he
now explains its symbolical meaning adhidaivatam, i.e. as applied
to divine beings.

1 As applied to breath, svara is explained by the commentator
in the sense of moving, going out; pratyasvara, as applied to the
sun, is explained as returning every day. More likely, however,
svara as applied to breath means sound, Om itself being called
svara ( Kh . Up. I, 4, 3), and prasvara in the Rig-veda-pr&tuakhya,
882. As applied to the sun, svara and pratyasvara were probably
taken in the sense of light and reflected light.

8

A’tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Rik is S&man, and therefore when a man utters a
Saman verse he neither breathes up nor down.

Saman is udgitha, and therefore when a man
sings (the udgitha, Om) he neither breathes up
nor down.

5. And other works also which require strength,
such as the production of fire by rubbing, running
a race, stringing a strong bow, are performed with¬
out breathing up or down. Therefore let a man
meditate on the udgitha (Om) as vyana.

6. Let a man meditate on the syllables of the
udgitha, i.e. of the word udgitha. Ut is breath
(pra^a), for by means of breath a man rises (ut-
tish/^ati). Gi is speech, for speeches are called
gira/L Tha is food, for by means of food all
subsists (sthita).

7. Ut is heaven, gi the sky, tha the earth. Ut
is the sun, gi the air, tha the fire. Ut is the
Sama-veda, gi the Ya^ur-veda, tha the Rig-veda 1 .

1 The commentator supplies explanations to all these fanciful
etymologies. The heaven is ut, because it is high; the sky is gi,
because it gives out all the worlds (girawat); earth is tha, because it
is the place (sthana) of living beings. The sun is u t, because it is
high. The wind is gi, because it gives out fire, &c. (girawat) ; fire
is tha, because it is the place (sthana) of the sacrifice. The Sama-
veda is ut, because it is praised as svarga: the Ya^ur-veda is
gi, because the gods take the oblation offered with a Ya^us; the
Rig-veda is tha, because the Sama verses stand in it. All this is
very childish, and worse than childish, but it is interesting as
a phase of human folly which is not restricted to the Brahmans
of India. I take the following passage from an interesting article,
‘ On the Ogam Beithluisnin and on Scythian Letters/ by Dr. Charles
Graves, Bishop of Limerick. ‘ An Irish antiquary/ he says, ‘writing
several hundred years ago, proposes to give an account of the
origin of the names of the notes in the musical scale.

* “ It is asked here, according to Saint Augustine, What is chant¬
ing, or why is it so called ? Answer. From this word canialena ;

I PRAPA77fAK A, 3 KHAA r DA, 7 .

9

Speech yields the milk, which is the milk of speech
itself 1 , to him who thus knowing meditates on those

and cantalena is the same thing as lenis cantus, i.e. a soft, sweet
chant to God, and to the Virgin Mary, and to all the Saints.
And the reason why the word puincc (piinctci ) is so called is be¬
cause the points (or musical notes) ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la, hurt the
devil and puncture him. And it is thus that these points are to be
understood: viz. When Moses the son of Amram with his people
in their Exodus was crossing the Red Sea, and Pharaoh and his
host were following him, this was the chant which Moses had to
protect him from Pharaoh and his host—these six points in praise
of the Lord :—

‘ “ The first point of these, i.e. ut: and ui in the Greek is the
same as liberat in the Latin; and that is the same as saer in
the Gaelic; i.e. O God, said Moses, deliver us from the harm
of the devil.

‘ “ The second point of them, i.e. re: and re is the same as saer;
i. e. O God, deliver us from everything hurtful and malignant.

‘ “ The third point, i.e. mi: and mi in the Greek is the same as
militum in the Latin; and that is the same as ridere (a knight) in
the Gaelic; i.e. O God, said Moses, deliver us from those knights
who are pursuing us.

‘“The fourth point, i .e.fa: and fa in the Greek is the same as
famulus in the Latin; and that is the same as mug (slave) in the
Gaelic; i.e. O God, said Moses, deliver us from those slaves who
are pursuing us.

‘“The fifth point, i.e. sol: and sol is the same as grian (sun);
and that is the same as righteousness; because righteousness and
Christ are not different; i.e. O Christ, said Moses, deliver us.

“‘The sixth point, i.e. la, is the same as lav ; and that is the
same as indail (wash); i.e. O God, said Moses, wash away our
sins from us.

‘ “ And on the singing of that laud Pharaoh and his host were
drowned.

‘“Understand, O man, that in whatever place this laud, i.e. this
chant, is sung, the devil is bound by it, and his power is extirpated
thence, and the power of God is called in.”

‘We have been taught that the names of the first six notes

1 The milk of speech consists in rewards to be obtained by the
Rig-veda, &c. Or we may translate, Speech yields its milk to him
who is able to milk speech.

IO

tfffANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

syllables of the name of udgitha, he becomes rich
in food and able to eat food.

8. Next follows the fulfilment of prayers. Let
a man thus meditate on the Upasara^as, i. e. the
objects which have to be approached by meditation :
Let him (the Udgatrz) quickly reflect on the Saman
with which he is going to praise ;

9. Let him quickly reflect on the Rik in which
that Saman occurs ; on the Ri shi (poet) by whom
it was seen or composed ; on the Devata (object)
which he is going to praise ;

10. On the metre in which he is going to praise; on
the tune with which he is going to sing for himself;

11. On the quarter of the world which he is going
to praise. Lastly, having approached himself (his
name, family, &c.) by meditation, let him sing the
hymn of praise, reflecting on his desire, and avoiding
all mistakes in pronunciation, &c. Quickly * 1 will the
desire be then fulfilled to him, for the sake of which he
may have offered his hymn of praise, yea, for whic h
he may have offered his hymn of praise 2 .

in the gamut were suggested by the initial syllables of the first
six hemistichs in one of the stanzas of a hymn to St. John :

Ut queant laxis
i?<?sonare fibris
Mix2i gestorum
Ahmuli tuorum,

Solve polluti
Labn reatum,

Aancte /oannes/

1 Abhyajo ha yat, lit. depend on it that it will be fulfilled, but
always explained by quickly. See Kh. Up. II, 1, 4; III, 19, 4;
V, 10, 7. Frequently, but wrongly, written with a dental s.

2 The repetition of the last sentence is always an indication
that a chapter is finished. This old division into chapters is of
great importance for a proper study of the Upanishads.

I PRAPATtfAKA, 4 KHA2VDA, 5.

1 I

Fourth Khanka.

t. Let a man meditate on the syllable Om, for
the udgitha is sung beginning with Om. And this
is the full account of the syllable Om :—

2. The Devas, being afraid of death, entered
upon (the performance of the sacrifice prescribed
in) the threefold knowledge (the three Vedas). They
covered themselves with the metrical hymns. Be¬
cause they covered (k/tad) themselves with the
hymns, therefore the hymns are called Mandas.

3. Then, as a fisherman might observe a fish in
the water, Death observed the Devas in the Rik,
Ya^us,and Saman-(sacrifices). And the Devas seeing
this, rose from the Rik , Ya^us, and Saman-sacrifices,
and entered the Svara 1 , i. e. the Om (they meditated
on the Om).

4. When a man has mastered the Rig-veda, he
says quite loud Om; the same, when he has mas¬
tered the Saman and the Ya^us. This Svara is the
imperishable (syllable), the immortal, free from fear.
Because the Devas entered it, therefore they be¬
came immortal, and free from fear.

5. He who knowing this loudly pronounces (pra-
;zauti) 2 that syllable, enters the same (imperish¬
able) syllable, the Svara, the immortal, free from
fear, and having entered it, becomes immortal, as
the Devas are immortal.

1 Cf. I, 3, 2.

2 Praraauti, he lauds, i.e. he meditates on. Comm.

AAANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

I 2

Fifth Khaada.

1. The udgitha is the pra^avah the pra/zava is
the udgitha. And as the udgitha is the sun 1 2 , so is
the pra^ava, for he (the sun) goes sounding Om.

2. ‘ Him I sang praises to, therefore art thou my
only one,’ thus said Kaushitaki to his son. ‘ Do thou
revolve his rays, then thou wilt have many sons.’
So much in reference to the Devas.

3. Now with reference to the body. Let a man
meditate on the udgitha as the breath (in the mouth),
for he ^oes sounding Om 3 .

4. ‘Him I sang praises to, therefore art thou my.
only son/ thus said Kaushitaki to his son. ‘ Do thou
therefore sing praises to the breath as manifold, if
thou wishest to have many sons/

5. He who knows that the udgitha is the pra-
/zava, and the pra^ava the udgitha, rectifies from
the seat of the Hot ri priest any mistake committed
by the Udgatrz priest in performing the udgitha,
yea, in performing the udgitha.

Sixth Khaada.

1. The Rik (veda) is this earth, the Saman (veda)
is fire. This Saman (fire) rests on that Rik (earth) 4 .
Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik.

1 Prawava is the name used chiefly by the followers of the Rig-
veda, udgitha the name used by the followers of the Sama-veda.
Both words are intended for the syllable Om.

2 Cf. Kh. Up. I, 3, 1.

8 The breath in the mouth, or the chief breath, says .Om, i.e.
gives permission to the five senses to act, just as the sun, by
saying Om, gives permission to all living beings to move about.

4 The Sama verses are mostly taken from the Rig-veda.

I PRAPA777AKA, 6 KHAiVDA, 8.

13

Sa is this earth, ama is fire, and that makes
Sama.

2. The Rik is the sky, the Saman air. This
Saman (air) rests on that Rik (sky). Therefore the
Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is the sky,
ama the air, and that makes Sama.

3. Rik is heaven, Saman the sun. This Sdman
(sun) rests on that Rik (heaven). Therefore the
Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is heaven,
ama the sun, and that makes Sama.

4. Rik is the stars, Saman the moon. This
Saman (moon) rests on that Rik (stars). Therefore
the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is the
stars, ama the moon, and that makes Sama.

5. Rik is the white light of the sun, Saman the
blue exceeding darkness 1 (in the sun). This Saman
(darkness) rests on that Rik (brightness). There¬
fore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik.

6. Sa is the white light of the sun, ama the blue
exceeding darkness, and that makes Sama.

Now that golden 2 person, who is seen within the
sun, with golden beard and golden hair, golden
altogether to the very tips of his nails,

7. Whose eyes are like blue lotus’s 3 , his name is
ut, for he has risen (udita) above all evil. He also
who knows this, rises above all evil.

8. Rik and Saman are his joints, and therefore
he is udgltha. And therefore he who praises him

1 The darkness which is seen by those who can concentrate
their sight on the sun.

2 Bright as gold.

3 The colour of the lotus is described by a comparison with the
Kapy&sa, the seat of the monkey (kapiprzsh/Zzanto yena upavBati).
It was probably a botanical name.

H

OfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

(the ut) is called the U d-gat^* 1 (the out-singer). He
(the golden person, called ut) is lord of the worlds
beyond that (sun), and of all the wishes of the Devas
(inhabiting those worlds). So much with reference
to the Devas.

Seventh Khanda.

1. Now with reference to the body. Rik is speech,
Saman breath 2 . This Saman (breath) rests on that
Rik (speech). Therefore the Saman is sung as
resting on the Rik. Sa is speech, ama is breath,
and that makes Sam a.

2. Rik is the eye, Saman the self 3 . This Saman
(shadow) rests on that Rik (eye). Therefore the
Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is the
eye, ama the self, and that makes Sam a.

3. Rik is the ear, Saman the mind. This Saman
(mind) rests on that Rik (ear). Therefore the
Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is the
ear, ama the mind, and that makes Sam a.

4. Rik is the white light of the eye, Saman the
blue exceeding darkness. This Saman (darkness)
rests on the Rik (brightness). Therefore the S&man
is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is the white light
of the eye, ama the blue exceeding darkness, and
that makes Sam a.

5. Now the person who is seen in the eye, he is
Rik , he is Saman, Uktha 4 , Ya^us, Brahman. The
form of that person (in the eye) is the same 5 as the

1 Name of the principal priest of the Sama-veda.

2 Breath in the nose, sense of smelling. Comm.

3 The shadow-self, the likeness or image thrown upon the eye;
see Kh. Up. VIII, 9, 1.

4 A set of hymns to be recited, whereas the Saman is sung, and
the Ya^us muttered.

5 Cf. Kh. Up. I, 6, 6.

I PRAPAPAAKA, 8 KHAADA, 2.

15

form of the other person (in the sun), the joints of the
one (Rik and Saman) are the joints of the other, the
name of the one (ut) is the name of the other.

6. He is lord of the worlds beneath that (the
self in the eye), and of all the wishes of men.
Therefore all who sing to the vina. (lyre), sing him,
and from him also they obtain wealth.

7. He who knowing this sings a Saman, sings to
both (the adhidaivata and adhyatma self, the person
in the sun and the person in the eye, as one and
the same person). He obtains through the one,
yea, he obtains the worlds beyond that, and the
wishes of the Devas;

8. And he obtains through the other the worlds
beneath that, and the wishes of men.

Therefore an Udgat^z priest who knows this, may
say (to the sacrificer for whom he officiates);

9. ‘What wish shall I obtain for you by my
songs ?’ For he who knowing this sings a Saman
is able to obtain wishes through his song, yea,
through his song.

Eighth Khaada.

1, There were once three men, well-versed in
udgitha 1 , >Silaka 6alavatya, iTaikitayana Dalbhya,
and Pravaha^a (Taivali. They said : ‘We are well-
versed in udgitha. Let us have a discussion on
udgitha/

2. They all agreed and sat down. Then Prava-
ha;za (Taivali 2 said: ‘ Sirs, do you both speak first,

1 Cognisant of the deeper meanings of udgitha, i.e. Om.

2 He, though not being a Brahma^a, turns out to be the only
one who knows the true meaning of udgitha, i.e. the Highest
Brahman.

16 JsTtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAL).

for I wish to hear what two Brahma^as 1 have to
say/

3. Then Yilaka Yal&vatya said to ATaikitayana
Dalbhya : ‘ Let me ask you/

‘ Ask/ he replied.

4. ‘What is the origin of the Saman?’ ‘Tone
(svara)/ he replied.

‘What is the origin of tone?’ ‘Breath/ he
replied.

‘What is the origin of breath?’ ‘Food/ he
replied.

‘What is the origin of food?’ ‘Water/ he

replied.

5. ‘What is the origin of water?’ ‘That world

(heaven)/ he replied.

‘And what is the origin of that world?’—

He replied: ‘ Let no man carry the S&man

beyond the world of svarga (heaven). We place
(recognise) the Saman in the world of svarga, for
the Saman is extolled as svarga (heaven)/

6. Then said Yilaka Yalavatya to Aaikitayana
Dalbhya: ‘ O Dalbhya, thy Saman is not firmly
established. And if any one were to say, Your
head shall fall off (if you be wrong), surely your
head would now fall/

7. ‘ Well then, let me know this from you, Sir,’
said Dalbhya.

‘ Know it,’ replied Yilaka Yalavatya.

‘What is the origin of that world (heaven) ?’
‘ This world,’ he replied.

‘And what is the origin of this world ?’—

He replied: ‘ Let no man carry the Yaman be¬
yond this world as its rest. We place the Saman

J In V, 3, 5, Pravahawa (raivali is distinctly called a ra^anyabandhu.

I PRAPAFJTAKA, 9 KHAiVDA, 4.

17

in this world as its rest, for the Saman is extolled
as rest.’

8. Then said Pravaha^a Yaivali to Yilaka Yala-
vatya: ‘Your Saman (the earth), O Yalavatya, has
an end. And if any one were to say, Your head
shall fall off (if you be wrong), surely your head
would now fall/

‘ Well then, let me know this from you, Sir,' said
Yalavatya. : '

‘ Know it/ replied (Yaivali.

Ninth Khanda.

1. ‘ What is the origin of this world ?’ ‘Ether 1 /
he replied. For all these beings take their rise
from the ether, and return into the ether. Ether
is older than these, ether is their rest.

2. He is indeed the udgitha (Om = Brahman),
greater than great (parovariyas), he is without end.

He who knowing this meditates on the udgitha,
the greater than great, obtains what is greater than
great, he conquers the worlds which are greater
than great.

3. Atidhanvan Yaunaka, having taught this udgi¬
tha to U dara-saWilya, said: ‘As long as they will
know in your family this udgitha, their life in this
world will be greater than great.

4. ‘ And thus also will be their state in the other
world/ He who thus knows the udgitha, and
meditates on it thus, his life in this world will be
greater than great, and also his state in the other
world, yea, in the other world.

1 Ether, or we might translate it by space, both being intended,
however, as names or symbols of the Highest Brahman. See
Vedanta-sutra I, 1,22.

[ 3 ]

C

i8

isTtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Tenth Khaa^da.

1. When the Kurus had been destroyed by (hail)
stones 1 , Ushasti Afakraya/za lived as a beggar with
his virgin 2 3 wife at Ibhyagrama.

2. Seeing a chief eating beans, he begged of

him. The chief said: ‘ I have no more, except

those which are put away for me here/

3. Ushasti said: ‘Give me to eat of them/ He
gave him the beans, and said : ‘ There is something
to drink also/ Then said Ushasti: ‘ If I drank of
it, I should have drunk what was left by another,
and is therefore unclean/

4. The chief said: ‘Were not those beans also
left over and therefore unclean ? ’

‘No/ he replied; ‘for I should not have lived,
if I had not eaten them, but the drinking of water
would be mere pleasure V

5. Having eaten himself, Ushasti gave the re¬
maining beans to his wife. But she, having eaten
before, took them and put them away.

6. Rising the next morning, Ushasti said to
her: ‘ Alas, if we could only get some food, we
might gain a little wealth. The king here is going
to offer a sacrifice, he should choose me for all the
priestly offices/

1 When they had been killed either by stone weapons, or by a
shower of stones, which produced a famine in the land. Comm.

2 A/ikt is not the name of the wife of Ushasti, nor does it mean
strong enough to travel. .Sankara explains it as anupa^atapayo-
dharadistrfvyan^ana, and Anandagiri adds, Svairasawkare ’pi na
vyabhikara^anketi darjayitum atikyeti vijesha/zam. She was so
young that she was allowed to run about freely, without exciting
any suspicion. Another commentator says, Grth. ad bahirgantu-
marha anupa^atapayodharl.

3 Or, according to the commentator, 1 water I can get whenever
I like/

I PRAPA^AKA, I I KHAiVDA, 2.

19

7. His wife said to him: ‘ Look, here are those
beans of yours.’ Having eaten them, he went to
the sacrifice which was being performed.

8. He went and sat down on the orchestra near
the Udgatrzs, who were going to sing their hymns of
praise. And he said to the Prastotrz (the leader):

9. ‘ Prastot riy if you, without knowing 1 the deity
which belongs to the prastava (the hymns &c. of
the Prastotrz), are going to sing it, your head will
fall off.’

10. In the same manner he addressed the Udgat; f:

‘ Udgatrz*, if you, without knowing the deity which
belongs to the udgitha (the hymns of the Udgatrz),
are going to sing it, your head will fall off’

11. In the same manner he addressed the Pra-
tihartrz: ‘ Pratihart/V, if you, without knowing the
deity which belongs to the pratih&ra (the hymns of
the Pratihartrz), are going to sing it, your head will
fall off’

They stopped, and sat down in silence.

Eleventh Kha.zv.da.

1. Then the sacrificer said to him: ‘ I should
like to know who you are, Sir.’ He replied : 4 1 am
Ushasti Aakrayazza.’

2. He said: ‘I looked for you, Sir, for all these
sacrificial offices, but not finding you 2 , I chose
others.’

1 The commentator is at great pains to show that a priest may
officiate without knowing the secret meanings here assigned to
certain parts of the sacrifice, and without running any risk of
punishment. Only, if another priest is present, who is initiated,
then the uninitiated, taking his place, is in danger of losing his
head.

2 Should it be avittvd, as in I, 2, 9 ?

20 A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

3. ‘ But now, Sir, take all the sacrificial offices.’

Ushasti said : ‘ Very well; but let those, with my

permission, perform the hymns of praise. Only as
much wealth as you give to them, so much give
to me also/

The sacrificer assented.

4. Then the Prastotrz approached him, saying:

‘ Sir, you said to me, “ Prastotrz, if you, without
knowing the deity which belongs to the prastava,
are going to sing it, your head will fall off,'—which
then is that deity ? ’

5. He said : ‘ Breath (pra#a). For all these beings
merge into breath alone, and from breath they arise.
This is the deity belonging to the prastava. If,
without knowing that deity, you had sung .forth
your hymns, your head would 1 have fallen off, after
you had been warned by me.’

6. Then the Udg&trz approached him, saying:
‘Sir, you said to me, “ Udgat/V, if you, without
knowing the deity which belongs to the udgitha,
are going to sing it,„ your head will fall off,”—
which then is that deity ? ’

7. He said: ‘The sun (aditya). For all these
beings praise the sun when it stands on high. This
is the deity belonging to the udgitha. If, without
knowing that deity, you had sung out your hymns,
your head would have fallen off, after you had been
warned by me/

8. Then the Pratihartrz approached him, saying:

Sir, you said to me, “ Pratihart;V, if you, without

knowing the deity belonging to the pratihara, are
going to sing it, your head will fall off/'—which
then is that deity ? ’

9. He said : ‘ Food'(anna). For all these beings

I PRAPA 77 /AKA, 12 KHAiVDA, 5. 2 1

live when they partake of food This is the deity
belonging to the pratihara. If, without knowing
that deity, you had sung your hymns, your head
would have fallen off, after you had been warned
by me V

Twelfth Khatvda.

1. Now follows the udgitha of the dogs. Vaka
Dalbhya, or, as he was also called, Glava Maitreya,
went out to repeat the Veda (in a quiet place).

2. A white (dog) appeared before him, and other
dogs gathering round him, said to him : ‘ Sir, sing
and get us food, we are hungry.’

3. The white dog said to them: ‘ Come to me
to-morrow morning.’ Vaka Dalbhya, or, as he was
also called, Glava Maitreya, watched.

4. The dogs came on, holding together, each dog
keeping the tail of the preceding dog in his mouth,
as the priests do when they are going to sing praises
with the Vahishpavamana hymn 1 2 . After they had
settled down, they began to say Hin.

5. ‘ Om, let us eat! Om, let us drink ! Om, may
the divine Vanma, Pra^apati, Savitrf 3 bring us food !
Lord of food, bring hither food, bring it, Om ! ’

1 There are certain etymological fancies for assigning each
deity to a certain portion of the Sama-veda ceremonial. Thus
pra 7 za is assigned to the prastava, because both words begin
with pra. Aditya is assigned to the udgitha, because the sun
is ut. Anna, food, is assigned to the pratihara, because food
is taken, pratihrzyate, &c.

2 This alludes to a ceremony where the priests have to walk
in procession, each priest holding the gown of the preceding
priest.

3 The commentator explains Varuwa and Pra^&pati as epithets
of Savitrf, or the sun, meaning rain-giver and man-protector.

22

JsTHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Thirteenth Khanka 1 .

1. The syllable Hau 2 is this world (the earth),
the syllable Hai 3 the air, the syllable Atha the
moon, the syllable I ha the self, the syllable t 4 is
Agni, fire.

2. The syllable tj is the sun, the syllable E is the
Nihava or invocation, the syllable Auhoi 5 6 is the
VEve Devas, the syllable Hin is Pra^apati, Svara ,:
(tone) is breath (pra^a), the syllable Ya is food, the
syllable Vag 7 is Vira£\

3. The thirteenth stobha syllable, viz. the indis¬
tinct syllable Hun, is the Undefinable (the Highest
Brahman).

4. Speech yields the milk, which is the milk of
speech itself to him who knows this Upanishad
(secret doctrine) of the S&mans in this wise. He
becomes rich in food, and able to eat food 8 ,—yea,
able to eat food.

1 The syllables here mentioned are the so-called stobhaksha-
ras, sounds used in the musical recitation of the Saman hymns,
probably to fill out the intervals in the music for which there were
no words in the hymns. These syllables are marked in the MSS.
of the Sama-veda, but their exact character and purpose are not
quite clear.

2 A stobha syllable used in the Rathantara Saman.

3 Used in the Vamadevya Saman.

4 The Saman addressed to Agni takes the syllable i as nidhana.

5 The stobha syllables used in the Saman addressed to the
Vijve Devas.

6 See Kh. Up. I, 4, 4.

7 The commentator takes vag as a stobha, as a syllable
occurring in hymns addressed to Vira^ - , and as implying either
the deity Vira^- or food.

8 I.e. wealthy and healthy.

II PRAPATAAKA, 2 KHAADA, 2.

23

SECOND PRAPAtWAKA.

First Khaada.

1. Meditation on the whole 1 of the Saman is
good, and people, when anything is good, say it is
Saman ; when it is not good, it is not Saman.

2. Thus they also say, he approached him with
Saman, i.e. becomingly; and he approached him
without Saman, i.e. unbecomingly.

3. And they also say, truly this is Saman for us,
i. e. it is good for us, when it is good; and truly
that is not Saman for us, i.e. it is not good for
us, when it is not good.

4. If any one knowing this meditates on the
Saman as good, depend upon it all good qualities
will approach quickly, aye, they will become his
own 2 .

Second K hand a.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman 3
as the five worlds. The hinkara is the earth, the
prastava the fire, the udgitha the sky, the pratihara
the sun, the nidhana heaven; so in an ascending
line.

2. In a descending line, the hinkara is heaven,

1 Hitherto meditation on certain portions only of the Sama-
veda and the Sama-sacrifice had been enjoined, and their deeper
meaning explained. Now the same is done for the whole of the
Saman.

2 Cf. Kh. Up. Ill, 19, 4.

8 The five forms in which the S&man is used for sacrificial
purposes. The S&man is always to be understood as the Good,
as Dharma, and as Brahman.

24

MANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

the prastava the sun, the udgitha the sky, the
pratihara the fire, the nidhana the earth.

3. The worlds in an ascending and in a descend¬
ing line belong to him who knowing this meditates
on the fivefold Saman as the worlds \

Third Khaa t da.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman
as rain. The hinkara is wind (that brings the
rain); the prastava is, c the cloud is come ; ’ the
udgitha is, ‘ it rains ; 5 the pratihara, c it flashes, it
thunders ; 5

2. The nidhana is, ‘ it stops. 5 There is rain for
him, and he brings rain for others who thus knowing
meditates on the fivefold Saman as rain.

Fourth Kha;vz)a.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman
in all waters. When the clouds gather, that is the
hink&ra ; when it rains, that is the prastava; that
which flows in the eastthat is the udgitha; that
which flows in the west 1 2 3 , that is the pratihara; the
sea is the nidhana.

2. He does not die in water 4 , nay, he is rich in

1 The commentator supplies some fanciful reasons why each of
the five Samans is identified with certain objects. Earth is said to
be the hinkara, because both always come first. Agni is prastava,
because sacrifices are praised in the fire (prastftyante). The sky is
udgitha, because it is also called gagana, and both words have the
letter g in common. The sun is pratihara, because everybody
wishes the sun to come towards him (prati). Heaven is nidhana,
because those who depart from here are placed there (nidhi-
yante), &c.

2 The Ganges, &c. Comm.

3 The Narmada, &c. Comm.

4 The commentator adds, ‘unless he wishes to die in the
Ganges/

II PRAPA THAKA, 7 KHANZ>A, 2. 25

water who knowing this meditates on the fivefold
Saman as all waters.

Fifth Khanda.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman as
the seasons. The hinkara is spring, the prastava
summer (harvest of yava, &c.), the udgitha the
rainy season, the pratihara autumn, the nidhana
winter.

2. The seasons belong to him, nay, he is always
in season (successful) who knowing this meditates
on the fivefold Saman as the seasons.

r

Sixth Khato.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman in
animals. The hinkara is goats, the prastava sheep,
the udgitha cows, the pratihara horses, the nidhana
man.

2. Animals belong to him, nay, he is rich in
animals who knowing this meditates on the fivefold
Saman as animals.

. Seventh Khanda.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman,
which is greater than great, as the pr4;zas (senses).
The hinkara is smell 1 (nose), the prastava speech
(tongue), the udgitha sight (eye), the pratihara
hearing (ear), the nidhana mind. These are , one
greater than the other.

2. What is greater than great belongs to him,
nay, he conquers the worlds which are greater than

1 Prawa is explained by ghrawa, smell; possibly ghra/za may
have been the original reading. Anyhow, it cannot be the mukhya
prawa here, because it is distinctly represented as the lowest sense.

26

XtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

great, who knowing this meditates on the fivefold
Saman, which is greater than great, as the pranas
(senses).

Eighth Khaa^da.

1. Next for the sevenfold S&man. Let a man
meditate on the sevenfold Saman in speech.
Whenever there is in speech the syllable hun 1 ,
that is hinkara, pra is the prastava, a is the adi,
the first, i.e. Om,

2. Ud is the udgitha, pra the pratihara, upa the
upadrava, ni the nidhana.

3. Speech yields the milk, which is the milk of
speech itself, to him who knowing this meditates on
the sevenfold Saman in speech. He becomes rich in
food, and able to eat food.

Ninth Khaat)a.

1. Let a man meditate on the sevenfold Saman
as the sun. The sun is Saman, because he is
always the same (sama); he is Saman because he
is the same, everybody thinking he looks towards
me, he looks towards me 2 .

2. Let him know that all beings are dependent
on him (the sun). What he is before his rising,
that is the hinkara. On it animals are dependent.
Therefore animals say hin (before sunrise), for they
share the hinkara of that Saman (the sun).

3. What he is when first risen, that is the pra¬
stava. On it men are dependent. Therefore men
love praise (prastuti) and celebrity, for they share
the prastava of that Saman.

1 These are again the stobh&ksharas, or musical syllables used
in the performance of the Saman hymns; see p. 22.

2 Cf. Kh. Up. II, 2, 2. Comm.

II PRAPA777AKA, 9 KHA2VDA, 8.

27

4- What he is at the time of the sangava 1 , that
is the adi, the first, the Om. On it birds are de¬
pendent. Therefore birds fly about in the sky
without support, holding themselves, for they share
the adi 2 (the Om) of that Saman.

5. What he is just at noon, that is the udgitha.
On it the Devas are dependent (because they are
brilliant). Therefore they are the best of all the
descendants of Pra^apati, for they share the udgi¬
tha of that Saman.

6. What he is after midday and before afternoon,
that is the pratihara. On it all germs are depend¬
ent. Therefore these, having been conceived (pra-
tihma), do not fall, for they share the pratihara of
that Saman.

7. What he is after the afternoon and before
sunset, that is the upadrava. On it the animals
of the forest are dependent. Therefore, when they
see a man, they run (upadravanti) to the forest as
a safe hiding-place, for they share the upadrava of
that Saman.

8. What he is when he first sets, that is the
nidhana. On it the fathers are dependent. There¬
fore they put them 3 down (nidadhati), for they
share the nidhana of that Saman. Thus a man
meditates on the sevenfold Saman as the sun.

1 When the sun puts forth his rays, and when the cows are
together with their calves, i.e. as Rajendralal Mitra says, after
the cows have been milked and are allowed by the cowherds to
suckle their young.

2 The tertium comparationis is here the a of adi and the
a of adaya, i.e. holding. The d might have been added.

3 The cakes for the ancestral spirits, or the spirits themselves.

28

A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Tenth Khajvda.

1. Next let a man meditate on the sevenfold
Saman which is uniform in itself 1 and leads beyond
death. The word hinkara has three syllables, the word
prastava has three syllables : that is equal (sama).

2. The word adi (first, Om) has two syllables,
the word pratihara has four syllables. Taking one
syllable from that over, that is equal (sama).

3. The word udgitha has three syllables, the
word upadrava has four syllables. With three and
three syllables it should be equal. One syllable being
left over, it becomes trisyllabic. Hence it is equal.

4. The word nidhana has three syllables, there¬
fore it is equal. These make twenty-two syllables.

5. With twenty-one syllables a man reaches the
sun (and death), for the sun is the twenty-first 2 from

f

here; with the twenty-second he conquers what is
beyond the sun: that is blessedness, that is freedom
from grief.

6. He obtains here the victory over the sun
(death), and there is a higher victory than the
victory over the sun for him, who knowing this
meditates on the sevenfold Saman as uniform in
itself, which leads beyond death, yea, which leads
beyond death.

Eleventh K hand a 3 .

1. The hinkara is mind, the prastava speech, the
udgitha sight, the pratihara hearing, the nidhana

1 Atmasammita is explained by the commentator either as
having the same number of syllables in the names of the different
Samans, or as equal to the Highest Self.

2 There are twelve months, five seasons, three worlds, then
follows the sun as the twenty-first. Comm.

3 After having explained the secret meaning of the whole Sama-

II PRAPA 77? AKA, I 3 KHAiVDA, 2.

29

breath. That is the Gayatra Saman, as interwoven
in the (five) pranas * 1 .

2. He who thus knows this Gayatra interwoven
in the pranas, keeps his senses, reaches the full life,
he lives long 2 , becomes great with children and
cattle, great by fame. The rule of him who thus
meditates on the Gayatra is, ‘ Be not high-minded.’

Twelfth Khaal>a.

1. The hinkara is, he rubs (the fire-stick) ; the
prastava, smoke rises ; the udgitha, it burns; the
pratihara, there are glowing coals ; the nidhana, it
goes down ; the nidhana, it is gone out. This is
the Rathantara Saman as interwoven in fire 3 .

2. He who thus knows this Rathantara inter¬
woven in <fire, becomes' radiant 4 5 and strong. He
reaches the full life* he lives lono- becomes i>reat
with children and. cattle, great by fame. The rule
is, ‘ Do not rinse the mouth or spit before the fire.’

^ i •

Thirteenth Khanka.

1,2. Next follows the Vamadevya as interwoven
in generation 6 . '

veda ceremonial, as it is to be understood by meditation only
(dhyana), he proceeds to explain the secret meaning of the same
ceremonial, giving to each its proper name in proper succession
(gayatra, rathantara, &c.), and showing the hidden purport of
those names.

1 Cf. Kh. Up^ II, 7, i, where prarca is explained differently.
The Gayatri itself is sometimes called pra/za. *

2 The commentator generally takes £yok in the sense of bright.

3 The Rathantara is used for the ceremony of producing fire.

4 Brahmavanfcasa is the ‘ glory of countenance' produced by
higher knowledge, an inspired look. Ann&da, lit. able to eat,
healthy, strong.

5 Upamantrayate sa hinkaro, gnapayate sa prastava/z, striya saha

30

ATHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Fourteenth Khaivda.

i. Rising, the sun is the hinkara, risen, he is the
prast&va, at noon he is the udgitha, in the afternoon
he is the pratihara, setting, he is the nidhana. That
is the Brzhat Saman as interwoven in the sun * 1 .

8. He who thus knows the Brzhat as interwoven
in the sun, becomes refulgent 2 and strong, he
reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great
with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule
is, f Never complain of the heat of the sun.’

Fifteenth Kha^da.

1. The mists gather, that is the hinkara ; the
cloud has risen, that is the prastava ; it rains, that
is the udgitha; it flashes and thunders, that is the
pratihara; it stops, that is the nidhana. That is
the Vairftpa Saman, as interwoven in Par^anya, the
god of rain.

2. He who thus knows the Vairhpa as interwoven
in Par^anya, obtains all kinds of cattle (virftpa), he
reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great
with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule
is, ‘ Never complain of the rain.’

Sixteenth Kha;vz>a.

i. The hinkara is spring, the prastava summer,
the udgitha the rainy season, the pratihara autumn,

jete sa udgitha^, pratistrt saha sete sa pratihara^, kalam ga^/^ati
tan nidhanam, para m g&kkh&ti tan nidhanam. Etad v&madevyam
mithune protam. 2. Sa ya evam etad vamadevyam mithune pro-
taw veda, mithunt bhavati, mithunan mithunat pra^ayate, sarvam
ayur eti, gyog ^tvati, mahan pra^ayd pajubbir bhavati, mahan
kirttya. Na kaw^ana pariharet tad vratam.

1 The sun is br/hat. The Brfhat Saman is to be looked upon
as the sun, or the Brzhat has Aditya for its deity.

2 The same as brahmavar^asin.

II PRAPA77/AKA, 18 KHAiVDA, 2.

31

the nidhana winter. That is the Vaira^a Saman,
as interwoven in the seasons.

2. He who thus knows the Vaira^a, as interwoven
in the seasons, shines (vira^ati) through children,
cattle, and glory of countenance. He reaches the
full life, he lives long, becomes great with children
and cattle, great by fame. His rule is, ‘ Never
complain of the seasons.’

Seventeenth K hand a.

1. The hinkara is the earth, the prastava the sky,
the udgitha heaven, the pratihara the regions, the
nidhana the sea. These are the .Sakvari Samans,
as interwoven in the worlds \

2. He who thus knows the 6akvaris, as inter¬
woven in the worlds, becomes possessed of the
worlds, he reaches the full life, he lives long, be¬
comes great with children and cattle, great by fame.
H is rule is, ‘ Never complain of the worlds.’

Eighteenth Khajvm.

1. The hinkara is goats, the prastava sheep,
the udgitha cows, the pratihara horses, the nidhana
man. These are the Revati Samans, as interwoven
in animals.

2. He who thus knows these Revatis, as inter¬
woven in animals, becomes rich in animals 1 2 , he
reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great
with children and cattle, great by fame. His rul e
is, ‘ Never complain of animals .’

1 The .Sakvaris are sung with the Mahanamnis. These are said
to be water, and the worlds are said to rest on water.

2 Re vat means rich.

32

KH A N DOG Y A-U PAN IS 11 A D.

Nineteenth KhAada.

1. The hinkara is hair, the prastava skin, the
udgitha flesh, the pratih&ra bone, the nidhana
marrow. That is the Ya^haya^hiya Saman, as
interwoven in the members of the body.

2. He who thus knows the Ya^naya<niiya, as
interwoven in the members of the body, becomes
possessed of strong limbs, he is not crippled in any
limb, he reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes
great with children and cattle, great by fame. His
rule is, ‘ Do not eat marrow for a year,’ or ‘ Do
not eat marrow at all.’

Twentieth Khaada.

1. The hinkara is fire, the prastava air, the ud¬
githa the sun, the pratihara the stars, the nidhana
the moon. That is the Ra^ana Saman, as inter¬
woven in the deities.

2. He who thus knows the Ra^ana, as inter¬
woven in the deities, obtains the same world, the
same happiness, the,same company as the gods, he
reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great
with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule
is,‘ Do not speak evil of the Brahma^as.’

Twenty-first Khaada.

1. The hinkara is the threefold knowledge, the
prastava these three worlds, the udgitha Agni (fire),

A

Vayu (air), and Aditya (sun), the pratihara the stars,
the birds, and the rays, the nidhana the serpents,
Gandharvas, and fathers. That is the Saman, as

Q

interwoven in everything.

2. He who thus knows this Saman, as interwoven
in everything, he becomes everything.

II PRAPA 7 V 7 AKA, 22 KIIANDA, 2.

33

3. And thus it is said in the following verse:

‘ There are the fivefold three (the three kinds of
sacrificial knowledge, the three worlds &c. in their
fivefold form, i.e. as identified with the hiiikara, the
prastava. &c.), and the other forms of the Saman.
Greater than these there is nothing else besides.’

4. He who knows this, knows everything. All
regions offer him gifts. His rule is, ‘ Let him
meditate (on the Saman), knowing that he is
everything, yea, that he is everything 1 .’

Twenty-second Khaata 2 .

1. The udgitha, of which a poet said, I choose
the deep sounding note of the Saman as good for
cattle, belongs to Agni; the indefinite note belongs
to Pra^apati, the definite note to Soma, the soft and
smooth note to Vayu, the smooth and strong note to
Indra, the heron-like note to Brzhaspati, the dull
note to Varu;za. Let a man cultivate all of these,
avoiding, however, that of Yaru^a.

2. Let a man sing 3 , wishing to obtain by his
song immortality for the Devas. ‘ May I obtain by
my song oblations (svadha) for the fathers, hope
for men, fodder and water for animals, heaven for
the sacrificer, food for myself,’ thus reflecting on
these in his mind, let a man (Udgatrf priest) sing
praises, without making mistakes in pronuncia¬
tion, &c.

: Here ends the Samopasana.

2 These are lucubrations on the different tones employed in
singing the Saman hymns, and their names, such as vinardi, ani-
rukta, nirukta, mr/du jlakshwa, jlakshwa balavad, kraun^a, apa-
dhvanta.

3 It would be better if the first ity agayet could be left out.
The commentator ignores these words.

o

[3]

D

34

tftfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

3. All vowels (svara) belong to Indra, all sibilants
(ushman) to Pra^apati, all consonants (sparsa) to
Mrztyu (death). If somebody should reprove him
for his vowels, let him say, ‘ I went to Indra as
my refuge (when pronouncing my vowels) : he will
answer thee.’

4. And if somebody should reprove him for his
sibilants, let him say, ‘ I went to Pra^apati as my
refuge: he will smash thee/ And if somebody
should reprove him for his consonants, let him say,
‘ I went to Mrztyu as my refuge : he will reduce
thee to ashes/

5. All vowels are to be pronounced with voice
(ghosha) and strength (bala), so that the Udgatrz
may give strength to Indra. All sibilants are to be
pronounced, neither as if swallowed (agrasta)nor
as if thrown out (nirasta) 1 2 , but well opened 3 (vivz^'ta),
so that the Udgatz^z may give himself to Pra^a-
pati. All consonants are to be pronounced slowly,
and without crowding them together 4 , so that th e
Udgatrz may withdraw himself from Mrzty u.

1 Grasa, according to the Rig-veda-pratLrakhya 766, is the
stiffening of the root of the tongue in pronunciation.

2 Nirasa, according to the Rig-veda-prathakhya 760, is the with¬
drawing of the active from the passive organ in pronunciation.

3 The opening, vivrz’ta, may mean two things, either the opening
of the vocal chords (kha), which imparts to the hshmans their
surd character (Rig. Pr&t. 709), or the opening of the organs
of pronunciation (karazza), which for the ushmans is asprzsh/am
sthitam (Rig. Prat. 719), or vivrzta (Ath. Prat. I, 31; Taitt. Prat,
n, 5 )-

4 Anabhinihita, for thus the commentaries give the reading, is
explained by anabhinikshipta. On the real abhinidhana, see Rig.
Prat. 393. The translation does not follow the commentary. The
genitive pra^apate/^ is governed by paridadani.

II PRAPA 7 WAKA, 24 KHAiVDA, I.

35

Twenty-third Khaada.

1. There are three branches of the law. Sacrifice,
study, and charity are the first 1 ,

2. Austerity the second, and to dwell as a Brail-
ma/£arin in the house of a tutor, always mortifying
the body in the house of a tutor, is the third. All
these obtain the worlds of the blessed; but the
Brahmasa^stha alone (he who is firmly grounded
in Brahman) obtains immortality.

3. Pra^&pati brooded on the worlds. From them,
thus brooded on, the threefold knowledge (sacrifice)
issued forth. He brooded on it, and from it, thus
brooded on, issued the three syllables, Bhu h, Bhuva/2,
Sva k.

4. He brooded on them, and from them, thus
brooded on, issued the Om. As all leaves are
attached to a stalk, so is all speech (all words)
attached to the Om (Brahman). Om is all this,
yea, Om is all this.

Twenty-fourth Khajvda.

1. The teachers of Brahman (Veda) declare, as
the Prata/^-savana (morning-oblation) belongs to the
Vasus, the Madhyandina-savana (noon-libation) to

1 Not the first in rank or succession, but only in enumerating
the three branches of the law. This first branch corresponds to the
second stage, the a^rama of the householder. Austerity is meant
for the Vanaprastha, the third ajrama, while the third is intended
for the BrahmaMrin, the student, only that the naish/^ika or per¬
petual BrahmaHrin here takes the place of the ordinary student.
The Brahmasawstha would represent the fourth ajrama, that of
the Sanny&sin or parivra^, who has ceased to perform any works,
even the tapas or austerities of the V&naprastha.

D 2

A7/AND0GYA-UPANISHAD.

36

the Rudras, the third Savana (evening-libation) to
the Adityas and the Vi sve Devas,

2. Where then is the world of the sacrificer ? He
who does not know this, how can he perform the
sacrifice ? He only who knows, should perform it l .

3. Before the beginning of the Prataranuvaka
(matin-chant), the sacrificer, sitting down behind the
household altar (garhapatya), and looking towards
the north, sings the Saman, addressed to the
Vasus:

4. ‘ Open the door of the world (the earth), let
us see thee, that we may rule (on earth).’

5. Then he sacrifices, saying: ‘ Adoration to

Agni, who dwells on the earth, who dwells in the
world! Obtain that world for me, the sacrificer!
That is the world for the sacrificer!’

6. ‘ I (the sacrificer) shall go thither, when this life
is over. Take this! (he says, in offering the liba¬
tion.) Cast back the bolt!’ Having said this,
he rises. For him the Vasus fulfil the morning-
oblation.

7. Before the beginning of the Madhyandina-
savana, the noon-oblation, the sacrificer, sitting down

A

behind the Agnidhriya altar, and looking towards
the north, sings the Saman, addressed to the
Rudras :

8. ‘ Open the door of the world (the sky), let us
see thee, that we may rule wide (in the sky).’

9. Then he sacrifices, saying: ‘ Adoration to

1 The commentator is always very anxious to explain that
though it is better that a priest should know the hidden meaning
of the sacrificial acts which he has to perform, yet there is nothing
to prevent a priest, who has not yet arrived at this stage of know¬
ledge, from performing his duties.

II PRAPATifAKA, 24 KHA2VJDA, 1 6 .

37

Vayu (air), who dwells in the sky, who dwells in
the world. Obtain that world for me, the sacri¬
ficer ! That is the world for the sacrificer P

10. ‘I (the sacrificer) shall go thither, when this
life is over. Take this! Cast back the bolt!’
Having said this, he rises. For him the Rudras
fulfil the noon-oblation.

11. Before the beginning of the third oblation,

A

the sacrificer, sitting down behind the Ahavaniya
altar, and looking towards the north, sings the
Saman, addressed to the Adityas and VFve
Devas :

12. ‘Open the door of the world (the heaven),
let us see thee, that we may rule supreme (in
heaven)/ This is addressed to the Adityas.

13. Next the Saman addressed to the Vbve
Devas : ‘ Open the door of the world (heaven),
let us see thee, that we may rule supreme (in
heaven)/

14. Then he sacrifices, saying: Adoration to
the Adityas and to the VFve Devas, who dwell in
heaven, who dwell in the world. Obtain that world
for me, the sacrificer!!

15. ‘That is the world for the sacrificer! I
(the sacrificer) shall go thither, when this life is
over. Take this! Cast back the bolt!’ Having
said this, he rises.

16. For him the Adityas and the VFve Devas
fulfil the third oblation. He who knows this,
knows the full measure of the sacrifice, yea, he
knows it.

MANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

THIRD PRAPAT 77 AKA.

First Khaada 1 .

1. The sun is indeed the honey 2 of the Devas.
The heaven is the cross-beam (from which) the sky
(hangs as) a hive, and the bright vapours are the
eggs of the bees 3 .

2. The eastern rays of the sun are the honey-
cells in front. The Rik verses are the bees, the
Rig-veda (sacrifice) is the flower, the water (of the
sacrificial libations) is the nectar (of the flower).

3. Those very Rik verses then (as bees) brooded
over the Rig-veda sacrifice (the flower); and from it,
thus brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame,
glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health 4 .

4. That (essence) flowed forth and went towards
the sun 5 . And that forms what we call the red
(rohita) light of the rising sun.

1 After the various meditations on the Sama-veda sacrifice, the
sun is next to be meditated on, as essential to the performance of
all sacrifices.

2 Everybody delights in the sun, as the highest reward of all
sacrifices.

3 I am not certain whether this passage is rightly translated.
Rajendralal Mitra speaks of an arched bamboo, whence the atmo¬
sphere hangs pendant like a hive, in which the vapours are the
eggs. Apupa means a cake, and may mean a hive. In order to
understand the simile, we ought to have a clearer idea of the con¬
struction of the ancient bee-hive.

4 Annadya, explained as food, but more likely meaning power
to eat, appetite, health. See III, 13, 1.

5 The commentator explains: The Rik verses, on becoming
part of the ceremonial, perform the sacrifice. The sacrifice (the
flower), when surrounded by the Rik verses (bees), yields its essence,
the nectar. That essence consists in all the rewards to be obtained
through sacrifice, and as these rewards are to be enjoyed in the

Ill PRAPAT/fAKA, 4 KHAiVDA, I.

?9

Second Khaada.

1. The southern rays of the sun are the honey-
cells on the right. The Ya^ris verses are the bees,
the Ya^ur-veda sacrifice is the flower, the water (of
the sacrificial libations) is the nectar (of the flower).

2. Those very Ya^us verses (as bees) brooded
over the Ya^ur-veda sacrifice (the flower); and from it,
thus brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame,
glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health.

3. That flowed forth and went towards the sun.
And that forms what we call the white (mkla) light
of the sun.

Third Kha^a.

1. The western rays of the sun are the honey-
cells behind. The Saman verses are the bees, the
Sctma-veda sacrifice is the flower, the water is the
nectar.

2. Those very Saman verses (as bees) brooded
over the S&ma-veda sacrifice; and from it, thus
brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame,
glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health.

3. That flowed forth and went towards the sun.
And that forms what we call the dark (krzshzza)
light of the sun.

Fourth Khazvda.

1. The northern rays of the sun are the honey-
cells on the left. The (hymns of the) Atharvangiras
are the bees, the Itihasa-pura^a * 1 (the reading of th e
old stories) is the flower, the water is the necta r.

next world and in the sun, therefore that essence or nectar is said
to ascend to the sun.

1 As there is no Atharva-veda sacrifice, properly so-called, we
have corresponding to the Atharva-veda hymns the so-called fifth

40

AV/ANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

2. Those very hymns of the Atharvaiigiras (as
bees) brooded over the Itihasa-pura/za ; and from it,
thus brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame,
glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health.

3. That flowed forth, and went towards the sun.
And that forms what we call the extreme dark
(para>& kWshwam) light of the sun.

Fifth Khaav)a.

1. The upward rays of the sun are the honey-
cells above. The secret doctrines are the bees,
Brahman (the Om) is the flower, the water is the
nectar.

2. Those secret doctrines (as bees) brooded over
Brahman (the Om) ; and from it, thus brooded on,
sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame, glory of coun¬
tenance, brightness, vigour, strength, and health.

3. That flowed forth, and went towards the sun.
And that forms what seems to stir in the centre of
the sun.

4. These (the different colours in the sun) are
the essences of the essences. For the Vedas are
essences (the best things in the world); and of them
(after they have assumed the form of sacrifice)
these (the colours rising to the sun) are again the
essences. They are the nectar of the nectar. For
the Vedas are nectar (immortal), and of them these
are the nectar.

Veda, the Itihasa-purawa. This may mean the collection of legends
and traditions, or the old book of traditions. At all events it is
taken as one Pura^a, not as many. These ancient stories were
repeated at the Ajvamedha sacrifice during the so-called Pairiplava
nights. Many of them have been preserved in the Brahmawas;
others, in a more modern form, in the Mahabharata. See Weber,
Indische Studien, I, p. 258, note.

Ill PRAPA THAKA, 7 KHAiVDA, 3. 4 I

Sixth Khaa^da.

1. On the first of these nectars (the red light,
which represents fame, glory of countenance, vigour,
strength, health) the Vasus live, with Agni at their
head. True, the Devas do not eat or drink, but
they enjoy by seeing the nectar.

2. They enter into that (red) colour, and they
rise from that colour 1 .

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one
of the Vasus, with Agni at their head ; he sees the
nectar and rejoices. And he, too, having entered
that colour, rises again from that colour.

4. So long as the sun rises in the east and sets
in the west 2 , so long does he follow the sovereign
supremacy of the Vasus.

Seventh Khaatda.

1 On the second of these nectars the Rudras live,
with Indra at their head. True, the Devas do not
eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the nectar.

2. They enter into that white colour, and they rise
from that colour.

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one
of the Rudras, with Indra at their head ; he sees the

1 This is differently explained by the commentator. He takes
it to mean that, when the Vasus have gone to the sun, and see
that there is no opportunity for enjoying that colour, they rest;
but when they see that there is an opportunity for enjoying it,
they exert themselves for it. I think the colour is here taken
for the colour of the morning, which the Vasus enter, and from
which they go forth again.

2 1. East: Vasus: red: Agni. 2. South: Rudras: white:
Indra. 3. West: Aditya: dark: Varu;/a. 4. North: Marut: very
dark : Soma. 5. Upward : Sadhya: centre: Brahman.

42

AV2AND0GYA-UPANISHAD.

nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered that
colour, rises again from that colour.

4. So long as the sun rises in the east and sets
in the west, twice as long does it rise in the south
and set in the north ; and so long does he follow
the sovereign supremacy of the Rudras.

Eighth Khaiyda.

A

1. On the third of these nectars the Adityas
live, with Varu/za at their head. True, the Devas
do not eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the
nectar.

2. They enter into that (dark) colour, and they
rise from that colour.

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one
of the Adityas, with Varu^a at their head; he sees
the nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered
that colour, rises again from that colour.

4. So long as the sun rises in the south and sets
in the north, twice as long does it rise in the west
and set in the east; and so long does he follow the

A

sovereign supremacy of the Adityas.

Ninth Ki-ianda.

1. On the fourth of these nectars the Maruts live,
with Soma at their head. True, the Devas do not
eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the nectar.

2. They enter in that (very dark) colour, and they
rise from that colour.

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one
of the Maruts, with Soma at their head ; he sees the
nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered that
colour, rises again from that colour.

4. So long as the sun rises in the west and sets

Ill PRAPA7V/AKA, 10 KHAiVZ)A, 4 .

43

in the east, twice as long does it rise in the north
and set in the south; and so long does he follow the
sovereign supremacy of the Maruts.

Tenth Khaa^da.

1. On the fifth of these nectars the Sadhyas live,
with Brahman at their head. True, the Devas do
not eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the
nectar.

2. They enter into that colour, and they rise from
that colour.

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one
of the Sadhyas, with Brahman at their head ; he sees
the nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered
that colour, rises again from that colour.

4. So long as the sun rises in the north and sets
in the south, twice as long does it rise above, and
set below ; and so long does he follow the sovereign
power of the Sadhyas h

1 The meaning of the five Khavas from 6 to 10 is clear, in so
far as they are intended to show that he who knows or meditates
on the sacrifices as described before, enjoys his reward in different
worlds with the Vasus, Rudras, &c. for certain periods of time, till at
last he reaches the true Brahman. Of these periods each succeed¬
ing one is supposed to be double the length of the preceding one.
This is expressed by imagining a migration of the sun from east
to south, west, north, and zenith. Each change of the sun marks
a new world, and the duration of each successive world is com¬
puted as double the duration of the preceding world. Similar ideas
have been more fully developed in the Purawas, and the commen¬
tator is at great pains to remove apparent contradictions between
the Pauramk and Vaidik accounts, following, as Ananda^nanagiri
remarks, the Dravk/a/fcarya (p. 173, 1. 13).

44

A'AANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Eleventh Khaada.

1. When from thence he has risen upwards, he
neither rises nor sets. He is alone, standing in the
centre. And on this there is this verse :

2. ‘Yonder he neither rises nor sets at any time.
If this is not true, ye gods, may I lose Brahman.’

3. And indeed to him who thus knows this Brah-
ma-upanishad (the secret doctrine of the Veda) the
sun does not rise and does not set. For him there
is day, once and for all k

4. This doctrine (beginning with III, 1, 1) Brah¬
man (m. Hiraz^yagarbha) told to Pra^apati (Vira^),
Pra^apati to Manu, Manu to his offspring (Iksh-
vaku, &c.) And the father told that (doctrine of)

A

Brahman (n.) to Uddalaka Aru;zi.

5. A father may therefore tell that doctrine of
Brahman to his eldest son 1 2 , or to a worthy pupil.

But no one should tell it to anybody else, even if
he gave him the whole sea-girt earth, full of treasure,
for this doctrine is worth more than that, yea,
it is worth more.

Twelfth Khanda.

1. The Gayatri 3 (verse) is everything whatsoever
that here exists. Gayatri indeed is speech, for speech

1 Cf. Kh. Up. VIII, 4, 2.

2 This was the old, not the present custom, says Anandagiri.
Not the father, but an a^arya, has now to teach his pupils.

3 The Gayatri is one of the sacred metres, and is here to be
meditated on as Brahman. It is used in the sense of verse, and
as the name of a famous hymn. The Gayatri is often praised as
the most powerful metre, and whatever can be obtained by means
of the recitation of Gayatri verses is described as the achievement
of the Gayatri. The etymology of gayatri from gai and trd is, of
course, fanciful.

Ill VRAFATHAKA, 12 KIIAIVDA, 6 . 45

sings forth (gaya-ti) and protects (traya-te) every¬
thing that here exists.

2. That Gayatri is also the earth, for everything
that here exists rests on the earth, and does not eo

7 o

beyond.

3. That earth again is the body in man, for in
it the vital airs (pranas 1 , which are everything)
rest, and do not go beyond.

4. That body again in man is the heart within
man, for in it the pranas (which are everything)
rest, and do not go beyond.

5. That Gayatri has four feet 2 and is sixfold 3 .
And this is also declared by a Rik verse (Rig-veda

x, 90, 3)

6. ‘ Such is the greatness of it (of Brahman,
under the disguise of Gdyatri 4 ); greater than it is
the Person 5 (purusha). His feet are all things.
The immortal with three feet is in heaven (i.e. in
himself).’

1 The prawas may be meant for the five senses, as explained in
Kh. I, 2, 1; II, 7, 1; or for the five breathings, as explained im¬
mediately afterwards in III, 13, 1. The commentator sees in
them everything that here exists {Kh. Up. Ill, 15, 4), and thus
establishes the likeness between the body and the Gayatri. As
Gayatri is the earth, and the earth the body, and the body the
heart, Gayatri is in the end to be considered as the heart.

2 The four feet are explained as the four quarters of the Gayatri
metre, of six syllables each. The Gayatri really consists of three
feet of eight syllables each.

8 The Gayatri has been identified with all beings, with speech,
earth, body, heart, and the vital airs, and is therefore called sixfold.
This, at least, is the way in which the commentator accounts for
the epithet ‘ sixfold/

4 Of Brahman modified as Gdyatri, having four feet, and being
sixfold.

5 The real Brahman, unmodified by form and name.

46

M-ANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

7. The Brahman which has been thus described
(as immortal with three feet in heaven, and as Gaya-
tri) is the same as the ether which is around us ;

8. And the ether which is around us, is the same
as the ether which is within us. And the ether
which is within us,

9. That is the ether within the heart. That ether
in the heart (as Brahman) is omnipresent and un¬
changing. He who knows this obtains omnipresent
and unchangeable happiness.

Thirteenth Khanda 1 .

1. For that heart there are five gates belonging
to the Devas (the senses). The eastern gate is the
Pra^a (up-breathing), that is the eye, that is Aditya
(the sun). Let a man meditate on that as brightness
(glory of countenance) and health. He who knows
this, becomes bright and healthy.

2. The southern gate is the Vyana (back-
breathing), that is the ear, that is the moon. Let
a man meditate on that as happiness and fame.
He who knows this, becomes happy and famous.

3. The western gate is the Apana (down¬
breathing), that is speech, that is Agni (fire). Let
a man meditate on that as glory of countenance
and health. He who knows this, becomes glorious
and healthy.

4. The northern gate is the Samana (on-
breathing), that is mind, that is Par^anya (rain).
Let a man meditate on that as celebrity and beauty.

1 The meditation on the five gates and the five gate-keepers
of the heart is meant to be subservient to the meditation on
Brahman, as the ether in the heart, which, as it is said at the end,
is actually seen and heard by the senses as being within the heart.

Ill PRAPArtfAKA, 13 KHAADA, 8.

47

He who knows this, becomes celebrated and beau¬
tiful.

5. The upper gate is the Udana (out-breathing),
that is air, that is ether. Let a man meditate on
that as strength and greatness. He who knows
this, becomes strong and great.

6. These are the five men of Brahman, the door¬
keepers of the Svarga (heaven) world. He who
knows these live men of Brahman, the door-keepers
of the Svarga world, in his family a strong son is
born. He who thus knows these five men of
Brahman, as the door-keepers of the Svarga world,
enters himself the Svarga world.

7. Now that light which shines above this
heaven, higher than all, higher than everything,
in the highest world, beyond which there are no
other worlds, that is the same light which is
within man. And of this we have this visible
proof 1 :

8. Namely, when we thus perceive by touch the
warmth here in the body 2 . And of it we have this
audible proof: Namely, when we thus, after stopping
our ears, listen to what is like the rolling of a car¬
riage, or the bellowing of an ox, or the sound of a
burning fire 3 (within the ears). Let a man meditate
on this as the (Brahman) which is seen and heard.

1 The presence of Brahman in the heart of man is not to rest
on the testimony of revelation only, but is here to be established
by the evidence of the senses. Childish as the argument may
seem to us, it shows at all events how intently the old Brahmans
thought on the problem of the evidence of the invisible.

2 That warmth must come from something, just as smoke comes
from fire, and this something is supposed to be Brahman in
the heart.

3 Cf. Ait. Ar. Ill, 2, 4, 11-13.

48

A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

He who knows this, becomes conspicuous and cele¬
brated, yea, he becomes celebrated.

Fourteenth Khan da.

1. All this is Brahman (n.) Let a man medi¬
tate on that (visible world) as beginning, ending,
and breathing 1 in it (the Brahman).

Now man is a creature of will. According to
what his will is in this world, so will he be when he
has departed this life- Let him therefore have this
will and belief:

2. The intelligent, whose body is spirit, whose
form is light, whose thoughts are true, whose nature
is like ether (omnipresent and invisible), from whom
all works, all desires, all sweet odours and tastes
proceed; he who embraces all this, who never
speaks, and is never surprised,

3. He is my self within the heart, smaller than a
corn of rice, smaller than a corn of barley, smaller
than a mustard seed, smaller than a canary seed or the
kernel of a canary seed. He also is my self within the
heart, greater than the earth, greater than the sky,
greater than heaven, greater than all these worlds.

4. He from whom all works, all desires, all sweet
odours and tastes proceed, who embraces all this,
who never speaks and who is never surprised, he,
my self within the heart, is that Brahman (n.) When
I shall have departed from hence, I shall obtain him
(that Self). He who has this faith 2 has no doubt;
thus said 6a/z^ilya 3 , yea, thus he said.

1 (ralan is explained by,ga, born, la, absorbed, and an, breathing.
It is an artificial term, but fully recognised by the Vedanta school,
and always explained in this manner.

2 Or he who has faith and no doubt, will obtain this.

3 This chapter is frequently quoted as the *Sa?zVilya-vidya,
Vedantasara, init; Vedanta-sfitra III, 3, 31.

Ill PRAPArtfAKA, 15 KHAADA, 5.

49

Fifteenth Khajvda 1 .

1. The chest which has the sky for its circum¬
ference and the earth for its bottom, does not
decay, for the quarters are its sides, and heaven
its lid above. That chest is a treasury, and all
things are within it.

2. Its eastern quarter is called 6oihu, its southern
Sahamana, its western Ra^ni, its northern Subhuta 2 3 .
The child of those quarters is Vayu, the air, and
he who knows that the air is indeed the child of
the quarters, never weeps for his sons. ‘ I know the
wind to be the child of the quarters, may I never
weep for my sons.’

3. ‘ I turn to the imperishable chest with such

and such and such V ‘ I turn to the Pra;za (life)
with such and such and such.’ ‘ I turn to Bhu/z

with such and such and such.’ ‘ I turn to Bhuva h

with such and such and such/ ‘ I turn to Sva h

with such and such and such/

4. * When I said, I turn to Pra;za, then Pra/za
means all whatever exists here—to that I turn/

5. ‘When I said, I turn to Bhu/£, what I said
is, I turn to the earth, the sky, and heaven/

1 The object of this section, the Ko^avi^h&na, is to show how
the promise made in III, 13, 6, ‘that a strong son should be born
in a man’s family/ is to be fulfilled.

2 These names are explained by the commentator as follows:
Because people offer libations (^uhvati), turning to the east, therefore
it is called Gaihu. Because evil doers suffer (sahante) in the town
of Yama, which is in the south, therefore it is called Sahamana.
The western quarter is called Ra^ni, either because it is sacred
to king Varutfa (r&^an), or on account of the red colour (raga)
of the twilight. The north is called Subhuta, because wealthy
beings (bhfitimat), like Kuvera &c., reside there.

3 Here the names of the sons are to be pronounced.

[3] E

5 °

A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

6. ‘ When I said, I turn to Bhuva h y what I said
is, I turn to Agni (fire), Vayu (air), Aditya (sun).’

7. ‘When I said, I turn to Sva h y what I said is,
I turn to the Rzg-ve da, Ya c ^ur-veda, and Sama-veda.
That is what I said, yea, that is what I said.’

Sixteenth Khaada 1 .

1. Man is sacrifice. His (first) twenty-four years
are the morning-libation. The Gayatri has twenty-
four syllables, the morning-libation is offered with
Gayatri hymns. The Vasus are connected with
that part of the sacrifice. The Pranas (the five
senses) are the Vasus, for they make all this to
abide (vasayanti).

2. If anything ails him in that (early) age, let him
say : ‘Ye Pr&zzas, ye Vasus, extend this my morning-
libation unto the midday-libation, that I, the sacrificer,
may not perish in the midst of the Pranas or Vasus.’
Thus he recovers from his illness, and becomes whole.

3. The next forty-four years are the midday-
libation. The Trish/ubh has forty-four syllables,
the midday-libation is offered with Trish/ubh hymns.
The Rudras are connected with that part of it.
The Pranas are the Rudras, for they make all
this to cry (rodayanti).

4. If anything ails him in that (second) age, let
him say: ‘Ye Pranas, ye Rudras, extend this my
midday-libation unto the third libation, that I, the
sacrificer, may not perish in the midst of the
Pranas or Rudras.’ Thus he recovers from his ill¬
ness, and becomes whole.

5. The next forty-eight years are the third

1 The object of this Khanda, is to show how to obtain long
life, as promised before.

Ill PRAPA7WAKA, 17 KHANDA, 5 .

51

libation. The (^agati has forty-eight syllables, the
third libation is offered with £agati hymns. The
Adityas are connected with that part of it. The
Pranas are the Adityas, for they take up all this
(adadate).

6. If anything ails him in that (third) age, let him
say: ‘Ye Pranas, ye Adityas, extend this my third
libation unto the full age, that I, the sacrificer, may

A

not perish in the midst of the Pranas or Adityas.’
Thus he recovers from his illness, and becomes whole.

7. Mahidasa Aitareya (the son of Itara), who
knew this, said (addressing a disease): ‘ Why dost
thou afflict me, as I shall not die by it ? ’ He lived
a hundred and sixteen years (i.e. 24 + 44 + 48). He,
too, who knows this lives on to a hundred and six¬
teen years.

Seventeenth Khaa^da 1 .

1. When a man (who is the sacrificer) hungers,
thirsts, and abstains from pleasures, that is the
Diksha (initiatory rite).

2. When a man eats, drinks, and enjoys pleasures,
he does it with the Upasadas (the sacrificial days on
which the sacrificer is allowed to partake of food).

3. When a man laughs, eats, and delights him¬
self, he does it with the Stuta-i'astras (hymns sung
and recited at the sacrifices).

4. Penance, liberality, righteousness, kindness,
truthfulness, these form his Dakshi/zas (gifts be¬
stowed on priests, &c.).

5. Therefore when they say, ‘ There will be a

1 Here we have a representation of the sacrifice as performed
without any ceremonial, and as it is often represented when
performed in thought only by a man living in the forest.

E 2

5 2

iTffANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

birth/ and ‘there has been a birth ’ (words.used at
the Soma-sacrifice, and really meaning, ‘ He will
pour out the Soma-juice/ and ‘ he has poured out
the Soma-juice’), that is his new birth. His death
is the Avabhmha ceremony (when the sacrificial
vessels are carried away to be cleansed).

A

6. Ghora Angirasa, after having communicated
this (view of the sacrifice) to Krfsh/^a, the son of
Devaki 1 —and he never thirsted again (after other
knowledge)—said: ‘Let a man, when his end ap-

1 The curious coincidence between Krzshzza Devakiputra, here
mentioned as a .pupil of Ghora Angirasa, and the famous Krzshzza,
the son of Devaki, was first pointed out by Colebrooke, Miscell.
Essays, II, 177. Whether it is more than a coincidence, is difficult
to say. Certainly we can build no other conclusions on it than
those indicated by Colebrooke, that new fables may have been
constructed elevating this personage to the rank of a god. We
know absolutely nothing of the old Krzshzza Devakiputra except
his having been a pupil of Ghora Angirasa, nor does there seem
to have been any attempt made by later Brahmans to connect
their divine Krzsh/za, the son of Vasudeva, with the Krzshzza
Devakiputra of our Upanishad. This is all the more remarkable
because the author of the -SazzYilya-sfitras, for instance, who is
very anxious to find a .rrauta authority for the worship of KzYshzza
Vasudeva as the supreme deity, had to be satisfied with quoting
such modern compilations as the Narayazzopanishad, Atharvajiras,
VI, 9, brahmazzyo devakiputro brahma/zyo madhusfadana/z (see
.Sazzz/ilya-s&tras, ed. Ballantyne, p. 36, translated by Cowell, p. 51),
without venturing to refer to the Krzshzza Devakiputra of the
AVzandogya-upanishad. The occurrence of such names as Krzshzza,
Vasudeva, Madhusfidana stamps Upanishads, like the Atmabodha-
upanishad, as modern-(Colebrooke, Essays, I, 101), and the same
remark applies, as Weber has shown, to the Gopalatapani-upani-
shad (Bibliotheca Indica, No. 183), where we actually find such
names as .Srikz'zshzza Govinda, Gopi^anavallabha, Devakyam gfazh.
(p. 38), &c. Professor Weber has treated these questions very
fully, but it is not quite clear to me whether he wishes to go
beyond Colebrooke and to admit more than a similarity of name
between the pupil of Ghora Angirasa and the friend of the Gopis.

Ill PRAPA777AKA, 18 KHAADA, 2.

53

proaches, take refuge with this Triad 1 : “Thou art
the imperishable/’ “ Thou art the unchangeable,”
“ Thou art the edge of Pra^a.” ’ On this subject
there are two Rik verses (Rig-veda VIII, 6, 30) :—
7. ‘ Then they see (within themselves) the ever¬
present light of the old seed (of the world, the Sat),
the highest, which is lighted in the brilliant (Brah¬
man).’ Rig-veda I, 50, 10 :—

‘ Perceiving above the darkness (of ignorance)
the higher light (in the sun), as the higher light
within the heart, the bright source (of light and
life) among the gods, we have reached the highest
light, yea, the highest light 2 .’

Eighteenth Khaada 3 .

1. Let a man meditate on mind as Brahman (n.),
this is said with reference to the body. Let a
man meditate on the ether as Brahman (n.), this is
said with reference to the Devas. Thus both the
meditation which has reference to the body, and the
meditation which has reference to the Devas, has
been taught.

o

2. That Brahman (mind) has four feet (quarters).

1 Let him recite these three verses.

2 Both these verses had to be translated here according to their
scholastic interpretation, but they had originally a totally different
meaning. Even the text was altered, diva being changed to divi,
sva h to sve. The first is taken from a hymn addressed to Indra,
who after conquering the dark clouds brings back the light of
the sun. When he does that, then the people see again, as
the poet says, the daily light of the old seed (from which the sun
rises) which is lighted in heaven. The other verse belongs to
a hymn addressed to the sun. Its simple meaning is: * Seeing
above the darkness (of the night) the rising light, the Sun, bright
among the bright, we came towards the highest light/

3 This is a further elucidation of Kh. Up. Ill, 14, 2.

54

2sT# ANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Speech is one foot, breath is one foot, the eye is one
foot, the ear is one foot—so much with reference to
the body. Then with reference to the gods, Agni
(fire) is one foot, Vayu (air) is one foot, Aditya (sun)
is one foot, the quarters are one foot. Thus both
the worship which has reference to the body, and
the worship which has reference to the Devas, has
been taught.

3. Speech is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman.
That foot shines with Agni (fire) as its light, and
warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through
his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance.

4. Breath is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman.
That foot shines with Vayu (air) as its light, and
warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through
his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance.

5. The eye is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman.

A

That foot shines with Aditya (sun) as its light, and
warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through
his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance.

6. The ear is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman.
That foot shines with the quarters as its light, and
warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through
his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance.

Nineteenth Khan-da.

A

i. Aditya (the sun * 1 ) is Brahman, this is the doc¬
trine, and this is the fuller account of it:—

In the beginning this was non-existent 2 . It be-

A.

1 Aditya, or the sun, had before been represented as one of
the four feet of Brahman. He is now represented as Brahman,
or as to be meditated on as such.

2 Not yet existing, not yet developed in form and name, and
therefore as if not existing.

IV PRAPA7V/AKA, I KHAiVDA, I.

55

came existent, it grew. It turned into an egg 1 .
The egg lay for the time of a year. The egg
broke open. The two halves were one of silver,
the other of gold.

2 The silver one became this earth, the golden
one the sky, the thick membrane (of the white) the
mountains, the thin membrane (of the yoke) the
mist with the clouds, the small veins the rivers, the
fluid the sea.

3. And what was born from it that was Aditya,
the sun. When he was born shouts of hurrah arose,
and all beings arose, and all things which they de¬
sired. Therefore whenever the sun rises and sets,
shouts of hurrah arise, and all beings arise, and all
things which they desire.

4. If any one knowing this meditates on the sun
as Brahman, pleasant shouts will approach him and
will continue, yea, they will continue.

FOURTH PRAPAtWAKA.

First Khaatda 2 .

1. There lived once upon a time Uanamiti Pau-
traya/za (the great-grandson of (^ana^ruta), who was
a pious giver, bestowing much wealth upon the

1 Knddi instead of a«</a is explained as a Vedic irregularity.
A similar cosmogony is given in Manu’s Law Book, I, 12 seq.
See Kellgren, Mythus de ovo mundano, Helsingfors, 1849.

2 Vayu (air) and Pra;/a (breath) had before been represented
as feet of Brahman, as the second pair. Now they are repre¬
sented as Brahman, and as to be meditated on as such. This
is the teaching of Raikva. The language of this chapter is very
obscure, and I am not satisfied with the translation.

56

tftfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

people, and always keeping open house. He built
places of refuge everywhere, wishing that people
should everywhere eat of his food.

2. Once in the night some Hawsas (flamingoes)
flew over his house, and one flamingo said to an¬
other : ‘ Hey, Bhallaksha, Bhallaksha (short-sighted
friend). The light (glory) of (^anasruti Pautrayazza
has spread like the sky. Do not go near, that it
may not burn thee.’

3. The other answered him : ‘ How can you speak
of him, being what he is (a ra^anya, noble), as if he
were like Raikva with the car 1 ?’

4. The first replied : ‘ How is it with this Raikva
with the car of whom thou speakest ?’

The other answered: ‘ As (in a game of dice) all
the lower casts 2 belong to him who has conquered
with the Krzta cast, so whatever good deeds other
people perform, belong to that Raikva. He who
knows what he knows, he is thus spoken of by me.’

5. (Sanamiti Pautraya/za overheard this conversa¬
tion, and as soon as he had risen in the morning, he
said to his door-keeper (kshattrz) : ‘Friend, dost thou
speak of (me, as if I were) Raikva with the car ?’

He replied: ‘ How is it with this Raikva with the
car ?’

6. The king said: ‘As (in a game of dice), all the
lower casts belong to him who has conquered with
the Krzta cast, so whatever good deeds other people
perform, belong to that Raikva. He who knows
what he knows, he is thus spoken of by me.’

1 Sayugvan is explained as possessed of a car with yoked
horses or oxen. Could it have meant originally, ‘yoke-fellow,
equal/ as in Rig-veda X, 130, 4? Anquetil renders it by ‘semper
cum se ipso camelum solutum habens/

2 Instead of adhareya/^, we must read adhare 'ya h.

IV PRAPA77/AKA, 2 KPJAiVDA, 5.

57

7. The door-keeper went to look for Raikva, but
returned saying, ‘ I found him not/ Then the king
said : ‘ Alas ! where a Brahma^a should be searched
for (in the solitude of the forest), there go for him/

8. The door-keeper came to a man who was
lying beneath a car and scratching his sores 1 . He
addressed him, and said : ‘ Sir, are you Raikva with
the car ?’

He answered: ‘ Here I am/

Then the door-keeper returned, and said : T have
found him/

Second Kha2V£>a.

1. Then ^anamiti Pautraya^a took six hundred
cows, a necklace, and a carriage with mules, went
to Raikva and said :

2. ‘ Raikva, here are six hundred cows, a neck¬
lace, and a carriage with mules ; teach me the deity
which you worship/

3. The other replied : ‘ Fie, necklace and carriage
be thine, O /mdra, together with the cows/

Then (Ganasruti Pautraya^a took again a thou¬
sand cows, a necklace, a carriage with mules, and his
own daughter, and went to him.

4. He said to him : ‘ Raikva, there are a thou¬
sand cows, a necklace, a carriage with mules, this
wife, and this village in which thou dwellest. Sir,
teach me V

5. He, opening her mouth 2 , said: ‘You have

1 It is curious that in a hymn of the Atharva-veda (V, 22, 5, 8)
takman, apparently a disease of the skin, is relegated to the Maha-
vn'shas, where Raikva dwelt. Roth, Zur Literatur des Veda, p. 36.

2 To find out her age. The commentator translates, ‘ Raikva,
knowing her mouth to be the door of knowledge, i.e. knowing
that for her he might impart his knowledge to Gana^ruti, and that

58

A'i/ANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

brought these (cows and other presents), O ^fidra,
but only by that mouth did you make me speak.’

These are the Raikva-parzza villages in the country
of the Mahavrzshas (mahapuzzyas) where Raikva
dwelt under him \ And he said to him :

Third Khaatda.

1. ‘Air (vayu) is indeed the end of all * 1 2 3 . For
when fire goes out, it goes into air. When the sun
goes down, it goes into air. When the moon goes
down, it goes into air.

2. ‘When water dries up, it goes into air. Air
indeed consumes them all. So much with reference
to the Devas.

3. ‘ Now with reference to the body. Breath
(prazza) is indeed the end of all. When a man sleeps,
speech goes into breath, so do sight, hearing, and
mind. Breath indeed consumes them all.

4. ‘ These are the two ends, air among the Devas,
breath among the senses (prazza/z).’

5. Once while Saunaka Kapeya and Abhipra-
tarin Kakshaseni were being waited on at their
meal, a religious student begged of them. They
gave him nothing.

6. He said: ‘One god—who is he?—swallowed
the four great ones :>> , he, the guardian of the world.

(zana^ruti by bringing such rich gifts had become a proper receiver
of knowledge, consented to do what he had before refused.’

1 The commentator supplies adat, the king gave the villages
to him.

2 Sawvarga, absorption, whence sa;//vargavidya, not sa;;/sarga.
It is explained by sa;/zvarg-ana, sa;;/graha;za, and sa/;/grasana, in
the text itself by adana, eating.

3 This must refer to Vayu and Pra//a swallowing the four, as
explained in IV, 3, 2, and IV, 3, 3. The commentator explains

IV PRAPA777AKA, 3 KHAiVDA, 8 . 59

O Kapeya, mortals see him not, O Abhipratarin,
though he dwells in many places. He to whom this
food belongs, to him it has not been given V

7. 6aunaka Kapeya, pondering on that speech,
went to the student and said : ‘ He is the self of the
Devas, the creator of all beings, with golden tusks,
the eater, not without intelligence. His greatness
is said to be great indeed, because, without being
eaten, he eats even what is not food * 1 2 . Thus do we,
O Brahma/£arin, meditate on that Being.’ Then he
said : ‘ Give him food.’

8. They gave him food. Now these five (the
eater Vayu (air), and his food, Agni (fire), Aditya
(sun), Aandramas (moon), Ap (water)) and the
other five (the eater Pra^a (breath), and his food,
speech, sight, hearing, mind) make ten, and that
is the Krz’ta (the highest 3 ) cast (representing the
ten, the eaters and the food). Therefore in all
quarters those ten are food (and) K/Vta (the highest
cast). These are again the Vira^* 4 (of ten syllables)

it by Pra^apati, who is sometimes called Ka. In one sense
it would be Brahman, as represented by Vayu and Pra/za.

1 The food which you have refused to me, you have really
refused to Brahman.

2 iSaunaka wishes the student to understand that though ‘ mortals
see him not/ he sees and knows him, viz. the god who, as
Vayu, swallows all the gods, but produces them again, and who,
as pra/za, swallows during sleep all senses, but produces them
again at the time of waking.

3 The words are obscure, and the commentator does not throw
much light on them. He explains, however, the four casts of
the dice, the Kn’ta=4, the Treta = 3, the Dvapara=2, the Kali=i,
making together 10, the Krz'ta cast absorbing the other casts,
and thus counting ten.

4 Vira^, name of a metre of ten syllables, and also a name
of food. One expects, c which is the food and eats the food/

6o

ATtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

which eats the food. Through this all this becomes
seen. He who knows this sees all this and becomes an
eater of food, yea, he becomes an eater of food.

Fourth Khajvm k

1. Satyakama, the son of (Gabala, addressed his
mother and said: ‘ I wish to become a Brahma/6arin
(religious student), mother. Of what family am I ? ’

2. She said to him : ‘ I do not know, my child,
of what family thou art. In my youth when I had
to move about much as a servant (waiting on the
guests in my father’s house), I conceived thee. I do
not know of what family thou art. I am Gabala by
name, thou art Satyakama (Philalethes). Say that
thou art Satyakama Gabala.’

3. He going to Gautama Haridrumata said to
him, ‘I wish to become a Brahma/£arin with you,
Sir. May I come to you, Sir ? ’

4. He said to him : ‘ Of what family are you, my
friend ? ’ He replied : ‘ I do not know, Sir, of what
family I am. I asked my mother, and she answered :
“ In my youth when I had to move about much as
a servant, I conceived thee. I do not know of what
family thou art. I am Gabala by name, thou art
Satyakama,” I am therefore Satyakama Gabala, Sir.’

5. He said to him : ‘ No one but a true Brah-
ma//a would thus speak out. Go and fetch fuel,
friend, I shall initiate you. You have not swerved
from the truth.’

Having initiated him, he chose four hundred
lean and weak cows, and said : ‘ Tend these, friend.’

1 This carries on the explanation of the four feet of Brahman,
as first mentioned in III, 18, 1. Each foot or quarter of Brahman
is represented as fourfold, and the knowledge of these sixteen parts
is called the Shod'a.rakalavidya.

IV PRAPATi/AKA, 6 KHAiVDA, I.

6 I

He drove them out and said to himself, ' I shall not
return unless I bring back a thousand.’ He dwelt a
number of years (in the forest), and when the cows
had become a thousand,

Fifth Khaada.

1. The bull of the herd (meant for Vayu) said to
him : ‘ Satyakama ! ’ He replied : 'Sir!’ The bull
said : 'We have become a thousand, lead us to the
house of the teacher ;

2. ' And I will declare to you one foot of Brahman.’

‘ Declare it, Sir/ he replied.

He said to him : ‘ The eastern region is one quar¬
ter, the western region is one quarter, the southern
region is one quarter, the northern region is one
quarter. This is a foot of Brahman, consisting of
the four quarters, and called Praka^avat (endowed
with splendour).

3. ‘He who knows this and meditates on the foot
of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the name
of Praka^avat, becomes endowed with splendour in
this world. He conquers the resplendent worlds,
whoever knows this and meditates on the foot of
Brahman, consisting of the four quarters, by the
name of Prakasavat.

Sixth Khaada.

1. ' Agni will declare to you another foot of
Brahman.’

(After these words of the bull), Satyakama, on
the morrow, drove the cows (towards the house of
the teacher). And when they came towards the
evening, he lighted a fire, penned the cows, laid
wood on the fire, and sat down behind the fire,
looking to the east.

o

62

A’tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

2. Then Agni (the fire) said to him : ‘ Satyakama ! ’
He replied : ‘Sir.’

3. Agni said : ‘ Friend, I will declare unto you
one foot of Brahman.’

‘ Declare it, Sir,’ he replied.

He said to him : ‘ The earth is one quarter, the
sky is one quarter, the heaven is one quarter, the
ocean is one quarter. This is a foot of Brahman,
consisting of four quarters, and called Anantavat
(endless).

4. ‘He who knows this and meditates on the foot
of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the name
of Anantavat, becomes endless in this world. He
conquers the endless worlds, whoever knows this
and meditates on the foot of Brahman, consisting of
four quarters, by the name of Anantavat.

Seventh Khanda.

1. ‘A Ha;?zsa (flamingo, meant for the sun) will
declare to you another foot of Brahman.’

(After these words of Agni), Satyakama, on the
morrow, drove the cows onward. And when they
came towards the evening, he lighted a fire, penned
the cows, laid wood on the fire, and sat down behind
the fire, looking toward the east.

2. Then a Ha^sa flew near and said to him :
‘ Satyakama.’ He replied : ‘ Sir.’

3. The Ha;;zsa said : ‘ Friend, I will declare unto
you one foot of Brahman.’

‘ Declare it, Sir,’ he replied.

He said to him : ‘Fire is one quarter, the sun
is one quarter, the moon is one quarter, lightning is
one quarter. This is a foot of Brahman, consisting
of four quarters, and called (^yotishmat (full of light).

IV PR A PA TH AKA, 8 Iv BAA'D A, 3 .

63

4 ‘He who knows this and meditates on the
foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the
name of £yotishmat, becomes full of light in this
world. He conquers the worlds which are full of
light, whoever knows this and meditates on the
foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the
name of ^yotishmat.

Eighth Khaada.

1. ‘A diver-bird (Maagu, meant for Pra/za) will
declare to you another foot of Brahman.’

(After these words of the Ha;/zsa), Satyakama, on
the morrow, drove the cows onward. And when they
came towards the evening, he lighted a fire, penned
the cows, laid wood on the fire, and sat down be¬
hind the fire, looking toward the east.

2. Then a diver flew near and said to him:
‘Satyakama.’ He replied: ‘Sir/

3 The diver said: ‘Friend, I will declare unto
you one foot of Brahman.’

‘ Declare it, Sir,’ he replied.

He said to him : ‘ Breath is one quarter, the eye
is one quarter, the ear is one quarter, the mind is
one quarter. This is a foot of Brahman, consisting

A

of four quarters, and called Ayatanavat (having a
home).

‘ He who knows this and meditates on the foot
of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the

A

name of Ayatanavat, becomes possessed of a home
in this world. He conquers the worlds which offer
a home, whoever knows this and meditates on the
foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the

A

name of Ayatanavat.’

64

JsTff ANDOGYA-UPANIS HAD.

Ninth Khamda.

t. Thus he reached the house of his teacher.
The teacher said to him : ‘ Satyakama/ He re¬
plied : ‘ Sir.’

2. The teacher said: * Friend, you shine like
one who knows Brahman. Who then has taught
you 1 ?’ He replied: 'Not men. But you only,
Sir, I wish, should teach me 2 ;

3. ‘ For I have heard from men like you, Sir,
that only knowledge which is learnt from a teacher
(A/t’arya), leads to real good.’ Then he taught him
the same knowledge. Nothing was left out, yea,
nothing was left out.

Tenth Rha-yda 3 .

1. Upakosala Kamalayana dwelt as a Brahma-
/£arin (religious student) in the house of Satyakama
Gabala. He tended his fires for twelve years. But
the teacher, though he allowed other pupils (after
they had learnt the sacred books) to depart to their
own homes, did not allow Upakosala to depart.

2. Then his wife said to him : ‘ This student, who
is quite exhausted (with austerities), has carefully
tended your fires. Let not the fires themselves blame
you, but teach him.’ The teacher, however, went
away on a journey without having taught him.

3. The student from sorrow was not able to eat.

1 It would have been a great offence if Satyakama had accepted
instruction from any man, except his recognised teacher.

2 The text should be, bhagavaws tv eva me kame brftyat (me
kame = mame/bfc/zayam).

3 The Upakojala-vidya teaches first Brahman as the cause, and
then in its various forms, and is therefore called atmavidya and
agnividya.

IV PRAPA7WAKA, II KHAiVDA, I.

65

Then the wife of the teacher said to him : ‘ Student,
eat! Why do you not eat?’ He said: ‘There are
many desires in this man here, which lose themselves
in different directions. I am full of sorrows, and
shall take no food.’

4. Thereupon the fires said among themselves :
‘ This student, who is quite exhausted, has carefully
tended us. Well, let us teach him.’ They said to
him :

5. ‘ Breath is Brahman, Ka (pleasure) is Brahman,
Kha (ether) is Brahman.’

He said : ‘ I understand that breath is Brahman,
but I do not understand Ka or Kha V

They said: .‘What is Ka is Kha, what is Kha is
Ka 2 .’ They. therefore taught him Brahman as
breath, and as the ether (in the heart) 3 .

Eleventh Khanda.

1. After that the Garhapatya fire 4 taught him:
‘ Earth, fire, food, and the sun (these are my forms, or

1 I do not understand, he means, how Ka, which means pleasure,
and is non-eternal, and how Kha, which means ether, and is not
intelligent, can be Brahman.

2 The commentator explains as follows :—Ka is pleasure, and
Kha is ether, but these two words are to determine each other
mutually, and thus to form one idea. Ka therefore does not
mean ordinary pleasures, but pleasures such as belong to Kha,
the ether. And Kha does not signify the ordinary outward ether,
but the ether in the heart, which alone is capable of pleasure.
What is meant by Ka and Kha is therefore the sentient ether
in the heart, and that is Brahman, while Prawa, breath, is Brahman,
in so far as it is united with the ether in the heart.

3 And as its ether, i.e. as the ether in the heart, the Brahman,
with which prawa is connected. Comm.

4 The household altar.

[ 3 ]

F

66

AtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

forms of Brahman). The person that is seen in
the sun, I am he, I am he indeedh

2. ‘ He who knowing this meditates on him,
destroys sin, obtains the world (of Agni Garha-
patya), reaches his full age, and lives long; his
descendants do not perish. We guard him in this
world and in the other, whosoever knowing this
meditates on him.’

Twelfth Khaajda.

1. Then the Anvaharya fire 1 2 taught him:
‘ Water, the quarters, the stars, the moon (these
are my forms). The person that is seen in the
moon, I am he, I am he indeed.

2. ‘ He who knowing this meditates on him,
destroys sin, obtains the world (of Agni Anva¬
harya), reaches his full age, and lives long; his
descendants do not perish. We guard him in this
world and in the other, whosoever knowing this
meditates on him.’

Thirteenth Khanda.

A

i. Then the Ahavaniya 3 fire taught him : ‘ Breath,
ether, heaven, and lightning (these are my forms).
The person that is seen in the lightning, I am he,
I am he indeed.

1 Fanciful similarities and relations between the fires of. the three
altars and their various forms and manifestations are pointed out
by the commentator. Thus earth and food are represented as
warmed and boiled by the fire. The sun is said to give warmth
and light like the fire of the altar. The chief point, however, is
that in all of them Brahman is manifested.

2 The altar on the right. Anvaharya is a sacrificial oblation,
chiefly one intended for the manes.

A

3 The Ahavaniya altar is the altar on the eastern side of the
sacrificial ground.

IV PRAPA77/AKA, 1 5 KHAATDA, I.

67

2. 4 He who knowing this meditates on him,
destroys sin, obtains the world (of Agni Ahava-
niya), reaches his full age, and lives long; his
descendants do not perish. We guard him in this
world and in the other, whosoever knowing this
meditates on him.’

Fourteenth Kha^da.

1. Then they all said: 4 Upakosala, this is our
knowledge, our friend, and the knowledge of the
Self, but the teacher will tell you the way (to
another life)/

2. In time his teacher came back, and said to
him: 4 Upakosala/ He answered: 4 Sir/ The
teacher said : 4 Friend, your face shines like that of
one who knows Brahman. Who has taught you ? ’

4 Who should teach me, Sir?’ he said. He denies,
as it were. And he said (pointing) to the fires:
i Are these fires other than fires ? ’

The teacher said : 4 What, my friend, have these
fires told you ?*

3. He answered : 4 This’ (repeating some of what
they had told him).

The teacher said: 4 My friend, they have taught
you about the worlds, but I shall tell you this ; and
as water does not cling to a lotus leaf, so no evil
deed clings to one who knows it/ He said: 4 Sir,
tell it me/

Fifteenth Khaa 7 da.

1. He said : 4 The person that is seen in the eye,
that is the Self. This is the immortal, the fearless,
this is Brahman \ Even though they drop melted

1 This is also the teaching of Pra^-apati in VIII, 7, 4.

68

, A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

butter or water on him, it runs away on both
sides V

2. ‘ They call him Sawyadvama, for all blessings
(vama) go towards him. (sawyanti). All blessings
go towards him who knows this.

3. ‘He is also Vamani, for he leads (nayati) all
blessings (vama). He leads all blessings who
knows this.

4. ‘He is also Bhamani, for he shines (bhati)
in all worlds. He who knows this, shines in all
worlds.

c

5. ‘ Now (if one who knows this, dies), whether
people perform obsequies for him or no, he goes
to light (ar/£is) 1 2 , from light to day, from day to
the light half of the moon, from the light half of
the moon to the six months during which the sun
goes to the north, from the months to the year,
from the year to the sun, from the sun to the moon,
from the moon to the lightning. There is a person
not human,

v> _

6. ‘He leads them to Brahman. This is the path
of the Devas, the path that leads to Brahman.
Those who proceed on that path, do not return
to the life of man, yea, they do not return.’

Sixteenth Khaata 3 .

* r

1. Verily, he who purifies (Vayu) is the sacrifice,
for he (the air) moving along, purifies everything.

1 It does so in the eye, and likewise with the person in the eye,
who is not affected by anything. Cf. Kh. Up. IV, 14, 3.

" The commentator takes light, day, &c. as persons, or devatas.
Cf. Kh. Up. V, 10, 1.

3 If any mistakes happen during the performance of a sacri¬
fice, as described before, they are remedied by certain interjectional

IV PRAPArtfAKA, 16 KHAiVDA, 5. 69

Because moving along he purifies everything, there¬
fore he is the sacrifice. Of that sacrifice there are
two ways, by mind .and by speech.

2. The Brahman priest performs one of them
in his mind * 1 , the Hot ri, Adhvaryu, and Udgat ri
priests perform the other by words. When the
Brahman priest, after the Prataranuvaka ceremony
has begun, but before the recitation of the Paridha-
niya hymn, has (to break his silence and) to speak,

3. He performs perfectly the one way only (that
by words), but the other is injured. As a man
walking on one foot, or a carriage going on one
wheel, is injured, his sacrifice is injured, and with
the injured sacrifice the sacrificer is injured; yes,
having sacrificed, he becomes worse.

4. But when after the Prataranuvaka ceremony
has begun, and before the recitation of the Paridha-
niya hymn, the Brahman priest has not (to break
his silence and) to speak, they perform both ways
perfectly, and neither of them is injured.

5. As a man walking on two legs and a carriage
going on two wheels gets on, so his sacrifice gets on,
and with the successful sacrifice the sacrificer gets
on; yes, having sacrificed, be becomes better.

syllables (vyahrzti), the nature of which is next described. All this
is supposed to take place in the forest.

1 While the other priests perform the sacrifice, the Brahman
priest has to remain silent, following the whole sacrifice in his
mind, and watching that no mistake be committed. If a mistake
is committed, he has to correct it, and for that purpose certain
corrective penances (praya^itta) are enjoined. The performance
of the Brahman priest resembles the meditations of the sages in
the forest, and therefore this chapter is here inserted.

70

tfi/ANDOGYA-UPANISHAI).

Seventeenth Kiiaa^da.

1. Pra^apati brooded over the worlds, and from
them thus brooded on he squeezed out the essences,
Agni (fire) from the earth, Vayu (air) from the sky,
Aditya (the sun) from heaven.

2. He brooded over these three deities, and
from them thus brooded on he squeezed out the
essences, the Rik verses from Agni, the Ya^us
verses from Vayu, the Saman verses from Aditya.

3. He brooded over the threefold knowledge
(the three Vedas), and from it thus brooded on he
squeezed out the essences, the sacred interjection
Bhfis from the Rik verses, the sacred interjection
Bhuvas from the Ya^us verses, the sacred inter¬
jection Svar from the Saman verses.

4. If the sacrifice is injured from the A^-veda
side, let him offer a libation in the Garhapatya fire,
saying, BhM, Svaha ! Thus does he bind together
and heal, by means of the essence and the power
of the Rik verses themselves, whatever break the
Rik sacrifice may have suffered.

5. If the sacrifice is injured from the Ya^ur-veda
side, let him offer a libation in the Dakshbza fire,
saying, Bhuva/£, Svaha! Thus does he bind together
and heal, by means of the essence and the power
of the Ya^us verses themselves, whatever break the
Ya^us sacrifice may have suffered.

6. If the sacrifice is injured by the Sama-veda
side, let him offer a libation in the Ahavaniya fire,
saying, Sva h y Svaha! Thus does he bind together
and heal, by means of the essence and the power
of the Saman verses themselves, whatever break the
Saman sacrifice may have suffered.

IV PRAPA THAK A, I 7 KHAiVDA, 9.

7 I

7. As one binds (softens) gold by means of
lavazza 1 (borax), and silver by means of gold, and
tin by means of silver, and lead by means of tin,
and iron (loha) by means of lead, and wood by
means of iron, or also by means of leather,

8. Thus does one bind together and heal any
break in the sacrifice by means of (the Vyahrztis or
sacrificial interjections which are) the essence and
strength of the three worlds, of the deities, and of
the threefold knowledge. That sacrifice is healed 2

in which there is a Brahman priest who knows this.

9. That sacrifice is inclined towards the north

(in the right way) in which there is a Brahman priest
who knows this. And with regard to such a Brah¬
man priest there is the following Gatha 3 : ‘ Where-
ever it falls back, thither the man 4 goes/—viz. the
Brahman only, as one of the Rztvig priests. ‘ He saves
the Kurus as a mare ’ (viz. a Brahman priest who

1 Lavaca, a kind of salt, explained by kshara and /anka or
/ankana. It is evidently borax, which is still imported from the
East Indies under the name of tincal, and used as a flux in chemi¬
cal processes.

2 Bhesha^akr/ta, explained by bhesha^ena ’iva krz'ta/z sa/zzskrzta^,
and also by ^ikitsakena su^ikshitena ‘esha ya^no bhavati/ which
looks as if the commentator had taken it as a genitive of
bhesha^akr/t.

3 This Gatha (or, according to Aankara, Anugatha) is probably
a Gayatri, though Anandagiri says that it is not in the Gayatri
or any other definite metre. It may have been originally ‘ yato
yata avartate, tattad ga^Mati manava-6, kurun a-rvabhirakshati/
This might be taken from an old epic ballad, ‘ Wherever the army
fell back, thither the man went; the mare (mares being preferred
to stallions in war) saves the Kurus/ That verse was applied to the
Brahman priest succouring the sacrifice, whenever it seemed to waver,
and protecting the Kurus, i.e. the performers of the sacrifice.

4 Manava, explained from mauna, or manana, but possibly ori¬
ginally, a descendant of Manu.

72

isT/f ANDOGYA-UP AN IS HAD.

knows this, saves the sacrifice, the sacrifices and all
the other priests). Therefore let a man make him
who knows this his Brahman priest, not one who
does not know it, who does not know it.

FIFTH PRAPA 777 AKA 1 .

First Khatvda.

1. He who knows the oldest and the best be¬
comes himself the oldest and the best. Breath
indeed is the oldest and the best.

2. He who knows the richest, becomes himself
the richest. Speech indeed is the richest.

3. He who knows the firm rest, becomes himself
firm in this world and in the next. The eye indeed
is the firm rest.

4. He who knows success, his wishes succeed,
both his divine and human wishes. The ear indeed
is success.

5. He who knows the home, becomes a home
of his people. The mind indeed is the home.

6. The five senses quarrelled together 2 , who was
the best, saying, I am better, I am better.

1 The chief object is to show the different ways on which people
proceed after death. One of these ways, the Devapatha that leads
to Brahman and from which there is no return, has been described,
IV, 15. The other ways for those who on earth know the
conditioned Brahman only, have to be discussed now.

2 The same fable, the prazzasazzzvada or prazzavidya, is told in
the Brz'hadarazzyaka VI, 1, 1-14, the Aitareya Ar. II, 4, the Kaush.
Up. Ill, 3, and the Prama Up. II, 3. The last is the simplest
version of all, but it does not follow therefore that it is the oldest.
It would be difficult to find two fables apparently more alike, yet
in reality differing from each other more characteristically than this
fable and the fable told to the plebeians by Menenius Agrippa.

V PRAPATOAKA, I KHAiVDA,. 12.

73

7. They went to their father Pra^apati and said :

‘ Sir, who is the best of us ? ’ He replied : ‘ He by
whose departure the body seems worse than worst,
he is the best of you/

8. The tongue (speech) departed, and having
been absent for a year, it came round and said :
‘How have you been able to live without me?
They replied : ‘ Like mute people, not speaking, but
breathing with the breath, seeing with the eye,
hearing with the ear, thinking with the mind. Thus
we lived.’ Then speech went back.

9. The eye (sight) departed, and having been
absent for a year, it came round and said : ‘ How
have you been able to live without me?’ They
replied: ‘ Like blind people, not seeing, but breath¬
ing with the breath, speaking with the tongue,
hearing with the ear, thinking with the mind. Thus
we lived.’ Then the eye went back.

10. The ear (hearing) departed, and having been
absent for a year, it came round and said: ‘ How
have you been able to live without me ? ’ They
replied : ‘ Like deaf people, not hearing, but breath¬
ing with the breath, speaking with the tongue,
thinking with the mind. Thus we lived.’ Then
the ear went back.

11. The mind departed, and having been absent
for a year, it came round and said : ‘ How have
you been able to live without me ?’ They replied :
‘ Like children whose mind is not yet formed, but
breathing with the breath, speaking with the tongue,
seeing with the eye, hearing with the ear. Thus we
lived.’ Then the mind went back.

12. The breath, when on the point of departing,
tore up the other senses, as a horse, going to start,

74

ATtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

might tear up the pegs to which he is tethered 1 2 .
They came to him and said : ‘ Sir, be thou (our lord);
thou art the best among us. Do not depart from us!’

13. Then the tongue said to him : ‘ If I am the
richest, thou art the richest.’ The eye said to him :
‘If I am the firm rest, thou art the firm rest V

14. The ear said to him : ‘ If I am success, thou
art success.’ The mind said to him: ‘ If I am the
home, thou art the home.’

15. And people do not call them, the tongues,
the eyes, the ears, the minds, but the breaths
(pra;za, the senses). For breath are all these.

Second Khaada.

1. Breath said: ‘What shall be my food?’

They answered: ‘ Whatever there is, even unto

dogs and birds.’ Therefore this is food for Ana
(the breather). His name is clearly Ana 3 . To
him who knows this there is nothing that is not
(proper) food.

2. He said: ‘What shall be my dress?’ They
answered : ‘ Water.’ Therefore wise people, when
they are going to eat food, surround their food be¬
fore and after with water 4 . He (pra;^a) thus gains
a dress, and is no longer naked 5 .

1 Pa^vija, fetter, nedrj, pedica, a word now well known, but
which Burnouf (Commentaire sur le Ya5na, Notes, CLXXIV)
tried in vain to decipher.

2 Burnouf rightly preferred pratish/Msi to pratishMo ’si, though
the commentary on the corresponding passage of the Brz’hadara-
wyaka seems to favour tatpratish/Z^o ’si.

3 Ana, breather, more general than pra-ana=pra?/a, forth-
breather, and the other more specified names of breath.

4 They rinse the mouth before and after every meal.

5 We expect, ‘He who knows this’ instead of pra;/a, but as

V PRAPA7VTAKA, 2 KHAiVDA, 6.

75

3* Satyakama Gabala, after he had communi¬
cated this to Gomiti Vaiyaghrapadya, said to him :
‘ If you were to tell this to a dry stick, branches
would grow, and leaves spring from it/

4. If * 1 a man wishes to reach greatness, let him
perform the Diksha 2 (preparatory rite) on the day of
the new moon, and then, on the night of the full
moon, let him stir a mash of all kinds of herbs
with curds and honey, and let him pour ghee on the
fire (avasathya laukika), saying, ‘ Svaha to the oldest
and the best/ After that let him throw all that
remains (of the ghee) 3 into the mash.

5. In the same manner let him pour ghee on
the fire, saying, ‘ Svaha to the richest/ After that
let him throw all that remains together into the

o

mash.

In the same manner let him pour ghee on the fire,
saying, ‘ Svaha to the firm rest/ After that let him
throw all that remains together into the mash.

In the same manner let him pour ghee on the
fire, saying, ‘ Svaha to success/ After that let him
throw all that remains together into the mash.

6. Then going forward and placing the mash

pra^a may apply to every individual pra;za, the usual finishing
sentence was possibly dropt on purpose.

1 The oblation here described is called mantha, a mortar, or
what is pounded in a mortar, i.e. barley stirred in some kind of
gravy. See Gaim. N. M. V. p. 406.

2 Not the real diksha, which is a preparatory rite for great
sacrifices, but penance, truthfulness, abstinence, which take the
place of diksha with those who live in the forest and devote
themselves to upasana, meditative worship.

3 What is here called sampatam avanayati is the same as

A

sawsravam avanayati in the Bnh. Ar. VI, 3, 2. The commentator
says : Sruvavalepanam agyam mantham sawsravayati.

76

JsTtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

in his hands, he recites: ‘Thou (Pra;^a) art Ama 1 2
by name, for all this together exists in thee. He
is the oldest and best, the king, the sovereign.
May he make me the oldest, the best, the king,
the sovereign. May I be all this.’

7. Then he eats with the following Rik verse at
every foot: £ We choose that food’—here he swal¬
lows—‘ Of the divine Savitrf (pra^a) ’—here he
swallows—‘ The best and all-supporting food ’—here
he swallows—‘ We meditate on the speed of Bhaga
(Savitrz, prazza)’—here he drinks all.

8. Having cleansed the vessel, whether it be a
kaz/zsa or a /famasa, he sits down behind the fire on
a skin or on the bare ground, without speaking or
making any other effort. If in his dream he sees a
woman, let him know this to be a sign that his
sacrifice has succeeded.

9. On this there is a Sloka : ‘ If during sacri¬
fices which are to fulfil certain wishes he sees in
his dreams a woman, let him know success from
this vision in a dream, yea, from this vision in
a dream.’

Third Khaada'-.

1. Yvetaketu Aru/zeya went to an assembly 3 of
the Pah/£alas. Pravahazza GTivali 4 said to him:
‘Boy, has your father instructed you?’ ‘Yes, Sir,’
he replied.

2. 1 Do you know to what place men go from
here?’ ‘No, Sir,’ he replied.

1 Cf. Brzh. Ar. I, 1, 3, 22.

2 This story is more fully told in the B/'z'hadarazzyaka VI, 2,
.Satapatha-brahmazza XIV, 8, 16.

3 Samiti, or parishad, as in the Brz'h. Ar.

4 He is the same Kshatriya sage who appeared in I, 8, 1, silencing
the Brahmans.

V PRAPA 77/AKA, 3 KHAZVDA, 6 . 77

‘Do you know how they return again?/ ‘No,
Sir/ he replied.

‘ Do you know where the path of Devas and the
path of the fathers diverge ? ’ ‘No, Sir/ he replied.

3. ‘ Do you know why that world 1 never becomes
full ? ’ ‘No, Sir/ he replied.

‘ Do you know why in the fifth libation water is
called Man 2 ? ’ ‘ No, Sir/ he replied.

4. £ Then why did you say (you had been) in¬
structed ? How could anybody who did not know
these things say that he had been instructed ?’
Then the boy went back sorrowful to the place of his
father, and said: ‘ Though you had not instructed

r

me, Sir, you said you had instructed me.

1 o

5. ‘ That fellow of a Ra^anya asked me five

questions, and I could not answer one of them/
The father said: ‘ As you have told me these

questions of his, I do not know any one of them 3 .
If I knew these questions, how should I not have
told you 4 ? ’

6. Then Gautama went to the king’s place, and
when he had come to him, the king offered him
proper respect. In the morning the king went out
on his way to the assembly 5 . The king said to him :

1 That of the fathers. Comm.

2 Or, according to others, why the water has a human voice;
purushavsUa/z in Brz'h. Ar. XIV, 9, 3.

3 I doubt whether the elliptical construction of these sentences
is properly filled out by the commentator. In the Brz’hadarazzyaka
the construction is much easier. ‘ You know me w r ell enough to
know’ that whatever I know, I told you.’

4 I read avedishyam, though both the text and commentary
give avadishyam. Still viditavan asmi points to an original
avedishyam, and a parallel passage, VI, 1, 7, confirms this
emendation.

5 Cf. Kh. Up. V, 11,5.

7 $

ATtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

‘ Sir, Gautama, ask a boon of such things as men
possess.’ He replied : ‘ Such things as men possess
may remain with you. Tell me the speech which
you addressed to the boy.’

7. The king was perplexed, and commanded
him, saying: ‘ Stay with me some time.’ Then he
said : ‘As (to what) you have said to me, Gautama,
this knowledge did not go to any Brahma^a before
you, and therefore this teaching belonged in all
the worlds to the Kshatra class alone. Then he
began:

Fourth Khaada 1 .

1. ‘The altar (on which the sacrifice is supposed
to be offered) is that world (heaven), O Gautama ;
its fuel is the sun itself, the smoke his rays, the
light the day, the coals the moon, the sparks the
stars.

2. ‘On that altar the Devas (or pranas, repre¬
sented by Agni, &c.) offer the iraddha libation
(consisting of water). From that oblation rises
Soma, the king 2 (the moon).

Fifth Kiiaada.

1. ‘ The altar is Par^anya (the god of rain), O
Gautama; its fuel is the air itself, the smoke
the cloud, the light the lightning, the coals the
thunderbolt, the sparks the thunderings 3 .

1 He answers the last question, why water in the fifth libation
is called Man, first.

2 The sacrifices themselves rise through their oblations to
heaven, and attain as their reward a Soma-like nature.

3 Hraduni, generally explained by hail, but here by stanayitnu-
j'abda^, rumblings.

V PRAPA77ZAKA, 9 KHAiVDA, 2.

79

2. ‘ On that altar the Devas offer Soma, the king
(the moon). From that oblation rises rain 1 .

Sixth Khajvda.

1. ‘The altar is the earth, O Gautama; its fuel
is the year itself, the smoke the ether, the light
the night, the coals the quarters, the sparks the
intermediate quarters.

2. ‘ On that altar the Devas (pra/zas) offer rain.
From that oblation rises food (corn, &c.)

Seventh Kha^da.

1. ‘The altar is man, O Gautama; its fuel
speech itself, the smoke the breath, the light the
tongue, the coals the eye, the sparks the ear.

2. ‘ On that altar the Devas (prazzas) offer food.
From that oblation rises seed.

Eighth Kha^da.

1. ‘ The altar is woman, O Gautama 2 .

2. ‘ On that altar the Devas (prazzas) offer seed.
From that oblation rises the germ.

Ninth Kha2vda.

1. ‘For this reason is water in the fifth oblation
called Man. This germ, covered in the womb, having
dwelt there ten months, or more or less, is born.

2. ‘ When born, he lives whatever the length of
his life may be. When he has departed, his friends
carry him, as appointed, to the fire (of the funeral
pile) from whence he came, from whence he sprang.

1 The water, which had assumed the nature of Soma, now
becomes rain.

2 Tasyd upastha eva samid, yad upamantrayate sa dhfimo,
yonir ar£ir, yad anta^ karoti te ’ngara abhinanda vishphulinga^.

8 o

ATifANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

» f

Tenth Kha^a.

1. ‘Those who know this 1 (even though they
still be grzhasthas, householders)'and those who in
the forest follow faith and austerities (the vana-
prasthas, and of the parivra^akas those who do not
yet know the Highest Brahman) go 2 to light (an£is),
from light to day, from day to the light half of the
moon, from the light half of the moon to the six
months when the sun goes to the north, from the
six months when the sun goes to the north to the
year, from the year to the sun, from the sun to the
moon, from the moon to the lightning. There is
a person not human 3 ,—

2. ‘ He leads them to Brahman (the conditioned
Brahman). This is the path of the Devas.

3. ‘ But they who living in a village practise (a life
of) sacrifices, works of public utility, and alms, they
go to the smoke, from smoke to night, from night
to the dark half of the moon, from the dark half of
the moon to the six months when the sun goes to
the south. But they do not reach the year.

4. ‘ From the months they go to the world of the
fathers, from the world of the fathers- to the ether,
from the ether to the moon. That is Soma, the
king. Here they are loved (eaten) by the Devas,
yes, the Devas love (eat) them 4 .

1 The doctrine of the five fires, and our being born in them,
i.e. in heaven, rain, earth, man, and woman.

2 Cf. Kh. Up. IV, 15, 5.

s Instead of manava, human, or amanava, not human, the B nh.

A

Ar. reads manasa, mental, or created by manas, mind.

4 This passage has been translated, ‘ They are the food of the
gods. The gods do eat it.’ And this is indeed the literal meaning
of the words. But bha^- (to enjoy) and bhaksh (to eat) are often

V PRAPArtfAKA, IO KHAiVDA, 6.

8 I

5. ‘ Having dwelt there, till their (good) works
are consumed, they return again that way as they
came to the ether, from the ether to the air. Then
the sacrificer, having become air, becomes smoke,
having become smoke, he becomes mist,

6. ‘ Having become mist, he becomes a cloud,
having become a cloud, he rains down. Then he
is born as rice and corn, herbs and trees, sesamum
and beans. From thence the escape is beset with
most difficulties. For whoever the persons may be
that eat the food, and beget offspring, he hence¬
forth becomes like unto them.

used by theosophical writers in India, in the more general sense of
cherishing or loving, and anna in the sense of an object of desire,
love, and protection. The commentators, however, as the use of
bhaksh in this sense is exceptional, or as it has no support in
the use of the ancients, warn us here against a possible mis¬
understanding. If those, they say, who have performed sacrifices
enter at last into the essence of Soma, the moon, and are eaten by
the Devas, by Indra, &c., what is the use of their good works ?
No, they reply, they are not really eaten. Food (anna) means
only what is helpful and delightful; it is not meant that they
are eaten by morsels, but that they form the delight of the Devas.
Thus we hear it said that men, women, and cattle are food for
kings. And if it is said that women are loved by men, they are, in
being loved, themselves loving. Thus these men also, being loved
by the Devas, are happy and rejoice with the Devas. Their body,
in order to be able to rejoice in the moon, becomes of a watery
substance, as it was said before, that the water, called the AYaddha
libation, when offered in heaven, as in the fire of the altar, becomes
Soma, the king ( Kh . Up. V, 4, 1). That water becomes, after
various changes, the body of those who have performed good
works, and when a man is dead and his body burnt {Kh. Up. V,
9, 2), the water rises from the body upwards with the smoke, and
carries him to the moon, where, in that body, he enjoys the fruits
of his good works, as long as they last. When they are consumed,
like the oil in a lamp, he has to return to a new round of
existences.

1 But only to a certain point.

[3]

G

82 A’HANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

7. ‘ Those whose conduct has been good, will
quickly attain some good birth, the birth of a Brah-
ma^a, or a Kshatriya, or a Vaisya. But those whose
conduct has been evil, will quickly attain an evil
birth, the birth of a dog, or a hog, or a Kandala..

8. ‘ On neither of these two ways those small crea¬
tures (flies, worms, &c.) are continually returning of
whom it may be said, Live and die. Theirs is a
third place.

‘ Therefore that world never becomes full 1 (cf.

v, 3 , A _

1 In this manner all the five questions have been answered.
First, why in the fifth oblation water is called man; secondly, to
what place men go after death, some by the path of the Devas,
others by the path of the fathers, others again by neither of these
paths; thirdly, how they return, some returning to Brahman, others
returning to the earth; fourthly, where the paths of the Devas and
the fathers diverge, viz. when from the half-year the path of the
Devas goes on to the year, while that of the fathers branches off
to the world of the fathers; fifthly, why that world, the other
world, does never become full, viz. because men either go on to
Brahman or return again to this world.

Many questions are raised among Indian philosophers on the
exact meaning of certain passages occurring in the preceding para¬
graphs. First, as to who is admitted to the path of the Devas?
Householders, who know the secret doctrine of the five fires
or the five libations of the Agnihotra, as described above, while
other householders, who only perform the ordinary sacrifices, with¬
out a knowledge of their secret meaning, go by the path of the
fathers. Secondly, those who have retired to the forest, and whose
worship there consists in faith and austerities, i.e. Vanaprasthas
and Parivra^akas, before they arrive at a knowledge of the true
Brahman. The question then arises, whether religious students
also enter the path of the Devas? This is affirmed, because
Purawas and Smrftis assert it, or because our text, if properly
understood, does not exclude it. Those, on the contrary, who
know not only a conditioned, but the highest unconditioned Brah¬
man, do not proceed on the path of the Devas, but obtain Brahman
immediately.

Again, there is much difference of opinion whether, after a man

V PRAPATtfAKA, IO KHAAZ>A, 9. 83

‘ Hence let a man take care to himself 1 ! And thus
it is said in the following .Sloka 2 :—

9. ‘A man who steals gold, who drinks spirits,

has been in the moon, consuming his works, he can be born again.
Birth is the result of former works, and if former works are alto¬
gether consumed, there can be no new birth. This, however, is
shown to be an erroneous view, because, besides the good sacrificial
works, the fruits of which are consumed in the moon, there are
other works which have to be enjoyed or expiated, as the case
may be, in a new existence.

The great difficulty or danger in the round of transmigration
arises when the rain has fructified the earth, and passes into herbs
and trees, rice, corn, and beans. For, first of all, some of the rain
does not fructify at once, but falls into rivers and into the sea, to be
swallowed up by fishes and sea monsters. Then, only after these
have been dissolved in the sea, and after the sea water has been
attracted by the clouds, the rain falls down again, it may be on
desert or stony land. Here it may be swallowed by snakes or
deer, and these may be swallowed by other animals, so that the
round of existence seems endless. Nor is this all. Some rain
may dry up, or be absorbed by bodies that cannot be eaten.
Then, if the rain is absorbed by rice, corn, &c., and this be
eaten, it may be eaten by children or by men who have renounced
marriage, and thus again lose the chance of a new birth. Lastly,
there is the danger arising from the nature of the being in whom
the food, such as rice and corn, becomes a new seed, and likewise
from the nature of the mother. All these chances have to be met
before a new birth as a Brahma^a, Kshatriya, or VaLya can be
secured.

Another curious distinction is here made by -Sankara in his
commentary. There are some, he says, who assume the form of
rice, corn, &c., not in their descent from a higher world, as described
in the Upanishad, but as a definite punishment for certain evil
deeds they have committed. These remain in that state till the
results of their evil deeds are over, and assume then a new body,
according to their work, like caterpillars. With them there is also
a consciousness of these states, and the acts which caused them to

1 Let him despise it. Comm.

2 Evidently an old Trish/ubh verse, but irregular in the third

line. See Manu XI, 54.

I

1

G 2

8 4

A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

who dishonours his Guru’s bed, who kills a Brah¬
man, these four fall, and as a fifth he who associates
with them.

io. ‘ But he who thus knows the five fires is not
defiled by sin even though he associates with them.
He who knows this, is pure, clean, and obtains the
world of the blessed, yea, he obtains the world
of the blessed.’

Eleventh Ruanda 1 .

1. Pra/£ina 5 ala Aupamanyava, Satyayagnia Paulu-
shi, Indradyumna Bhallaveya, £ana 6arkarakshya,

A

and Bu^ila Asvatarajrvi, these five great house¬
holders and great theologians came once together
and held a discussion as to What is our Self, and
what is Brahman 2 .

2. They reflected and said : ‘ Sirs, there is that

A

Udd&laka Aru/n, who knows at present that Self,

assume this or that body, leave impressions behind, like dreams.
This is not the case with those who in their descent from the
moon, pass, as we saw, through an existence as rice, corn, &c.
They have no consciousness of such existences, at least not in their
descent. In their ascent to the moon, they have consciousness, as
a man who climbs up a tree knows what he is about. But in their
descent, that consciousness is gone, as it is when a man falls down
from a tree. Otherwise a man, who by his good works had de¬
served rewards in the moon, would, while corn is being ground, suffer
tortures, as if he were in hell, and the very object of good works,
as taught by the Veda, would be defeated. As we see that a man
struck by a hammer can be carried away unconscious, so it is in
the descent of souls, till they are born again as men, and gain
a new start for the attainment of the Highest Brahman.

1 The same story is found in the .Satapatha-brahmarca X, 6, i, i.

2 Atman and Brahman are to be taken as predicate and subject.

I

35

V PRAPA77TAKA, II KHAWDA, 7.

called VaEvanara. Well, let us go to him.’ They
went to him.

3. But he reflected : ‘ Those great householders
and great theologians will examine me, and I shall
not be able to tell them all; therefore I shall
recommend another teacher to them/

4. He said to them: ‘Sirs, A-svapati Kaikeya
knows at present that Self, called VaBvanara. Well,
let us go to him/ They went to him.

5. When they arrived (the king) ordered proper
presents to be made separately to each of them.
And rising the next morning 1 he said: ‘In my
kingdom there is no thief, no miser, no drunkard,
no man without an altar in his house, no ignorant
person, no adulterer, much less an adulteress. I 2
am going to perform a sacrifice, Sirs, and as much
wealth as I give to each Ritvig priest, I shall give
to you, Sirs. Please to stay here/

6. They replied : ‘ Every man ought to say for
what purpose he comes. You know at present that
VaLsvanara Self, tell us that/

7. He said: ‘ To-morrow I shall give you an
answer/ Therefore on the next morning they ap¬
proached him, carrying fuel in their hands (like
students), and he, without first demanding any pre¬
paratory rites 3 , said to them :

1 The commentator explains that the king, seeing that they would
not accept his presents, and thinking that they did not consider him
worthy of bestowing presents on them, made these remarks.

2 When they still refused his presents, he thought the presents
he had offered were too small, and therefore invited them to a
sacrifice.

3 He was satisfied with the humility of the Brahmans, who, being
Brahmans, came to him, who was not a Brahman, as pupils. Gene-

86

AV2AND0GYA-UPANISHAD.

Twelfth Khaada.

1. ‘ Aupamanyava, whom do you meditate on as
the Self?’ He replied: ‘Heaven only, venerable
king.’ He said : ‘ The Self which you meditate on
is the Vaisvanara Self, called Sute^as (having good
light). Therefore every kind of Soma libation is
seen in your house b

2. ‘You eat food, and see your desire (a son, &c.),
and whoever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self,
eats food, sees his desire, and has Vedic glory (arising
from study and sacrifice) in his house. That, how¬
ever, is but the head of the Self, and thus your
head would have fallen (in a discussion), if you had
not come to me.’

Thirteenth Khaada.

1. Then he said to Satyaya^na Paulushi: 4 O Pra-
/cinayogya, whom do you meditate on as the Self?'
He replied: ‘The sun only, venerable king.’ He
said: ‘ The Self which you meditate on is the Vaisva-
nara Self, called Visvarupa (multiform). Therefore
much and manifold wealth is seen in your house.

2 . ‘ There is a car with mules, full of slaves and
jewels. You eat food and see your desire, and who¬
ever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats
food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in
his house.

‘ That, however, is but the eye of the Self, and
you would have become blind, if you had not come
to me.

rally a pupil has first to pass through several initiatory rites before
he is admitted to the benefit of his master's teaching.

1 Soma is said to be suta in the Ekaha, prasuta in the Ahina,
asuta in the Sattra-sacrifices.

V PRAPATAAKA, 1 6 KHAADA, 1.

87

Fourteenth Khaada.

1. Then he said to Indradyumna Bhallaveya : ‘ O
Vaiyaghrapadya, whom do you meditate on as the
Self? ’ He replied : ‘ Air only, venerable king.’ He
said: ‘The Self which you meditate on is the Vai-
^vanara Self, called Prfthagvartman (having various
courses). Therefore offerings come to you in various
ways, and rows of cars follow you in various ways.

2. ‘You eat food and see your desire, and who¬
ever thus meditates on that Vabvanara Self, eats
food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in
his house.

‘ That, however, is but the breath of the Self, and
your breath would have left you, if you had not
come to me.’

Fifteenth Khaada.

1. Then he said to ( 7 ana .Sarkarakshya: ‘Whom
do you meditate on as the Self ? * He replied : ‘ Ether
only, venerable king.’ He said: ‘The Self which
you meditate on is the Vabvanara Self, called Bahula
(full). Therefore you are full of offspring and wealth.

2. ‘You eat food and see your desire, and who¬
ever thus meditates on that VaLsvanara Self, eats
food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in
his house.

‘ That, however, is but the trunk of the Self, and
your trunk would have perished, if you had not
come to me.’

Sixteenth Khaada.

1. Then he said to Burtfila Arvataraivi, ‘ O Vaiya¬
ghrapadya, whom do you meditate on as the Self? ’
He replied : ‘Water only, venerable king.’ He said :

88

JsTtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

‘ The Self which you meditate on is the Vabv&nara
Self, called Rayi (wealth). Therefore are you
wealthy and flourishing.

2. ‘You eat food and see your desire, and who¬
ever thus meditates on that Vabvanara Self, eats
food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in
his house.

‘ That, however, is but the bladder of the Self, and
your bladder would have burst, if you had not come
to me/

Seventeenth Khanda.

1. Then he said to Auddalaka Aruni: ‘O Gau¬
tama, whom do you meditate on as the Self?’ He
replied: ‘ The earth only, venerable king/ He said :

‘ The Self which you meditate on is the Vabvanara
Self, called Pratish/^a (firm rest). Therefore you
stand firm with offspring and cattle.

2. ‘You eat food and see your desire, and who¬
ever thus meditates on that Vabvanara Self, eats
food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in his
house.

‘ That, however, are but the feet of the Self, and
your feet would have given way, if you had not
come to me/

Eighteenth K hand a.

i. Then he said to them all: ‘You eat your
food, knowing that Vaisvanara Self as if it were
many. But he who worships the Vabvanara Self
as a span long, and as 1 identical with himself, he eats
food in all worlds, in all beings, in all Selfs.

1 The two words prade^amatra and abhivimana are doubtful.
The commentator explains the first in different ways, which are all
more or less fanciful. He is measured or known (matra) as Self,

V PRAPATHAKA, 19 KHANDA, 2.

89

2. ‘ Of that Vaisvanara Self the head is Sute^as
(having good light), the eye Vbvarupa (multiform),
the breath Pmhagvartman (having various courses),
the trunk Bahula (full), the bladder Rayi (wealth),
the feet the earth, the chest the altar, the hairs the
grass on the altar, the heart the Garhapatya fire,
the mind the Anvaharya fire, the mouth the Ahava-
niya fire.

Nineteenth Khaa^da.

1. ‘Therefore 1 the first food which a man may
take, is in the place of Homa. And he who offers
that first oblation, should offer it to Pr 4 ^a (up-
breathing), saying Svaha. Then Pra;za (up-breath¬
ing) is satisfied,

2. ‘If Pra/za is satisfied, the eye is satisfied, if the
eye is satisfied, the sun is satisfied, if the sun is
satisfied, heaven is satisfied, if heaven is satisfied,
whatever is under heaven and under the sun is satis¬
fied. And through their satisfaction he (the sacri-
ficer or eater) himself is satisfied with offspring,
cattle, health, brightness, and Vedic splendour.

by means of heaven as his head and the earth as his feet, these being
the prade^as; or, in the mouth and the rest, which are instruments,
he is known as without action himself; or, he has the length from
heaven to earth, heaven and earth being called prade^a, because
they are taught. The interpretation, supported by the Gabala-
miti, that pradeja is the measure from the forehead to the chin,
he rejects. Abhivimana is taken in the same meaning as abhimana
in the Vedanta, seeing everything in oneself. Vaiwanara is taken
as the real Self of all beings, and, in the end, of all Selfs, and as
thus to be known and worshipped.

1 The object now is to show that to him who knows the Vaii'va-
nara Self, the act of feeding himself is like feeding Vauvanara, and
that feeding Vakvanara is the true Agnihotra.

90

ATtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Twentieth Khanda.

1. 4 And he who offers the second oblation, should
offer it to Vyana (back-breathing), saying Svaha.
Then Vyana is satisfied,

2. 4 If Vydna is satisfied, the ear is satisfied, if the
ear is satisfied, the moon is satisfied, if the moon is
satisfied, the quarters are satisfied, if the quarters
are satisfied, whatever is under the quarters and
under the moon is satisfied. And through their
satisfaction he (the sacrificer or eater) himself is
satisfied with offspring, cattle, health, brightness,
and Vedic splendour.

Twenty-first Khanda.

1. ‘And he who offers the third oblation, should
offer it to Apana (down-breathing), saying Sv&ha.
Then Apana is satisfied. If Apana is satisfied, the
tongue is satisfied, if the tongue is satisfied, Agni
(fire) is satisfied, if Agni is satisfied, the earth is
satisfied, if the earth is satisfied, whatever is under
the earth and under fire is satisfied.

2. ‘ And through their satisfaction he (the sacri¬
ficer or eater) himself is satisfied with offspring,
cattle, health, brightness, and Vedic splendour.

Twenty-second Kiiaatda.

1. ‘And he who offers the fourth oblation, should
offer it to Samana (on-breathing), saying Svaha.
Then Samana is satisfied,

2. ‘ If Samana is satisfied, the mind is satisfied,
if the mind is satisfied, Par^anya (god of rain) is
satisfied, if Par^anya is satisfied, lightning is satisfied,
if lightning is satisfied, whatever is under Par^anya
and under lightning is satisfied. And through their

V PRAPATAAKA, 24 KHAAAA, 4 .

91

satisfaction he (the sacrificer or eater) himself is
satisfied with offspring, cattle, health, brightness,
and Vedic splendour.

Twenty-third Khaaaa.

1. ‘And he who offers the fifth oblation, should
offer it to Udana (out-breathing), saying Svaha.
Then Udana is satisfied,

2. ‘If Udana is satisfied, Vayu (air) is satisfied, if
Vayu is satisfied, ether is satisfied, if ether is satis¬
fied, whatever is under Vayu and under the ether
is satisfied. And through their satisfaction he (the
sacrificer or eater) himself is satisfied with offspring,
cattle, health, brightness, and Vedic splendour.

Twenty-fourth Khaada.

1. ‘If, without knowing this, one offers an Agni-
hotra, it would be as if a man were to remove the
live coals and pour his libation on dead ashes.

2. ‘ But he who offers this Agnihotra with a full
knowledge of its true purport, he offers it (i.e. he
eats food) 1 in all worlds, in all beings, in all Selfs.

3. ‘ As the soft fibres of the Ishika reed, when
thrown into the fire, are burnt, thus all his sins
are burnt whoever offers this Agnihotra with a full
knowledge of its true purport.

4. ‘ Even if he gives what is left of his food to a
isfa/z^ala, it would be offered in his (the Aa^ala’s)
VaBvanara Self. And so it is said in this Sloka:—

‘ As hungry children here on earth sit (expect¬
antly) round their mother, so do all beings sit round
the Agnihotra, yea, round the Agnihotra.’

1 Cf. V, 18, 1.

92

A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

SIXTH PRAPATTVAKA.

First Khaivda.

i. Hari/z, Om. There lived once 6Vetaketu

A _

Aru/zeya (the grandson of Aru^a). To him his
father (Uddalaka, the son of Aru^a) said: ‘ 6Veta-
ketu, go to school; for there is none belonging to
our race, darling, who, not having studied (the
Veda), is, as it were, a Brahma^a by birth only.’

4. Having begun his apprenticeship (with a
teacher) when he was twelve years of age 1 , .SVeta-
ketu returned to his father, when he was twenty-
four, having then studied all the Vedas,—conceited,
considering himself well-read, and stern.

3. His father said to him: ‘ SVetaketu, as you
are so conceited, considering yourself so well-read,
and so stern, my dear, have you ever asked for
that instruction by which we hear what cannot be
heard, by which we perceive what cannot be per¬
ceived, by which we know what cannot be known ?’

4. ‘What is that instruction, Sir?’ he asked.
The father replied: ‘ My dear, as by one clod of

clay all that is made of clay is known, the dif¬
ference 2 being only a name, arising from speech,
but the truth being that all is clay;

5. ‘And as, my dear, by one nugget of gold 3

1 This was rather late, for the son of a Brahman might have
begun his studies when he was seven years old. Apastamba-sutras
I, 1, 18. Twelve years was considered the right time for mastering
one of the Vedas.

2 Vikara, difference, variety, change, by form and name, develop¬
ment, cf. VI, 3, 3.

3 The commentator takes lohamam here as suvai7zapi;z</a.

VI PRAPA THAKA , 2 KHA2VDA, 3. 93

all that is made of gold is known, the difference
being only a name, arising from speech, but the
truth being that all is gold ?

6. ‘ And as, my dear, by one pair of nail-scissors
all that is made of iron (karsh^ayasam) is known,
the difference being only a name, arising from
speech, but the truth being that all is iron,—thus,
my dear, is that instruction.’

7. The son said : ‘ Surely those venerable men
(my teachers) do not know that. For if they had
known it, why should they not have told it me ?
Do you, Sir, therefore tell me that.’ ‘ Be it so,’
said the father.

Second KttAivnA h

1. ‘In the beginning,’ my dear, ‘there was that
only which is (to op ), one only, without a second.
Others say, in the beginning there was that only
which is not (to fir) 6p) y one only, without a second;
and from that which is not, that which is was
born.

2. ‘But how could it be thus, my dear?’ the
father continued. ‘ How could that which is, be
born of that which is not ? No, my dear, only that
which is, was in the beginning, one only, without a
second.

3. ‘It thought 1 2 , may I be many, may I gro w
forth. It sent forth fire 3 .

1 Cf. Taitt. Up. II, 6.

2 Literally, it saw. This verb is explained as showing that the
Sat is conscious, not unconscious (bewusst, nicht unbewusst).

3 In other Upanishads the Sat produces first aka^a, ether, then
vayu, air, and then only te^as, fire. Fire is a better rendering
for te^as than light or heat. See Jacobi, Zeitschrift der Deutschen
Morgenl. Gesellschaft, XXIX, p. 242. The difficulties, however, of

94

A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

‘ That fire * 1 thought, may I be many, may I grow
forth. It sent forth water 2 .

‘ And therefore whenever anybody anywhere is
hot and perspires, water is produced on him from
fire alone.

4. ‘ Water thought, may I be many, may I grow
forth. It sent forth earth 3 (food).

c Therefore whenever it rains anywhere, most
food is then produced. From water alone is eatable
food produced.

Third Khaada.

1. ‘Of all living things there are indeed three
origins only 4 , that which springs from an egg
(oviparous), that which springs from a living being
(viviparous), and that which springs from a germ.

2. ‘ That Being 5 (i. e. that which had produced
fire, water, and earth) thought, let me now enter those
three beings 5 (fire, water, earth) with this living

accurately translating te^as are not removed by rendering it by
fire, as may be seen immediately afterward in VI, 4, 1, where
te^as is said to supply the red colour of agni, the burning fire,
not the god of fire. See also VI, 8, 6. In later philosophical
treatises the meaning of te^as is more carefully determined than
in the Upanishads.

1 Really the Sat, in the form of fire. Fire is whatever burns,
cooks, shines, and is red.

2 By water is meant all that is fluid, and bright in colour.

3 By anna, food, is here meant the earth, and all that is heavy,
firm, dark in colour.

4 In the Ait. Up. four are mentioned, aw^/a^a, here a^a^a, ^aru^a
(i.e. g-arayu^a), here ^lva^a, sveda^a, and udbhigg-a, sveda^a, born
from heat, being additional. Cf. Atharva-veda I, 12, 1.

5 The text has devata, deity; here used in a very general sense.
The Sat, though it has produced fire, water, and earth, has not yet
obtained its wish of becoming many.

VI PRAPATDAKA, 4 K HAND A, 4.

95

Sdf (^iva atma ) l * * , and let me then reveal (develop)
names and forms.

3. ‘ Then that Being having said, Let me make
each of these three tripartite (so that fire, water,
and earth should each have itself for its principal
ingredient, besides an admixture of the other two),
entered into those three beings (devata) with this
living self only, and revealed names and forms.

4. ‘ He made each of these tripartite; and how
these three beings become each of them tripartite,
that learn from me now, my friend!

Fourth Khanda.

1. 4 The red colour of burning fire (agni) is the
colour of fire, the white colour of fire is the colour
of water, the black colour of fire the colour of earth.
Thus vanishes what we call fire, as a mere variety,
being a name, arising from speech. What is true
(satya) are the three colours (or forms).

2. ‘ The red colour of the sun (aditya) is the
colour of fire, the white of water, the black of earth.
Thus vanishes what we call the sun, as a mere
variety, being a name, arising from speech. What
is true are the three colours.

3. ‘ The red colour of the moon is the colour
of fire, the white of water, the black of earth. Thus
vanishes what we call the moon, as a mere variety,
being a name, arising from speech. What is true
are the three colours.

4. ‘The red colour of the lightning is the colour
of fire, the white of water, the black of earth. Thus

1 This living self is only a shadow, as it were, of the Highest Seif;

and as the sun, reflected in the water, does not suffer from the

movement of the water, the real Self does not suffer pleasure or

pain on earth, but the living self only.

96

AtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

vanishes what we call the lightning, as a mere variety,
being a name, arising from speech. What is true
are the three colours.

5. ‘ Great householders and great theologians of
olden times who knew this, have declared the same,
saying, “No one can henceforth mention to us any¬
thing which we have not heard, perceived, or known 1 .”
Out of these (three colours or forms) they knew all.

6. ‘ Whatever they thought looked red, they knew
was the colour of fire. Whatever they thought
looked white, they knew was the colour of water.
Whatever they thought looked black, they knew
was the colour of earth.

7. ‘ Whatever they thought was altogether un¬
known, they knew was some combination of those
three beings (devata).

‘ Now learn from me, my friend, how those three
beings, when they reach man, become each of them
tripartite.

Fifth Khajvm.

1. ‘ The earth (food) when eaten becomes three¬
fold ; its grossest portion becomes feces, its middle
portion flesh, its subtilest portion mind.

2. f Water when drunk becomes threefold ; its
grossest portion becomes water, its middle portion
blood, its subtilest portion breath.

3. ‘Fire (i.e. in oil, butter, &c.) when eaten be¬
comes threefold ; its grossest portion becomes bone,
its middle portion marrow, its subtilest portion
speech 2 .

1 This reminds one of the Aristotelian 8ui yap ravra m\ €< rovroiv
raWa yvu>pi£trai, dXX’ ov ravra 81a rto v viroKapevoov.

2 Food, water, and fire are each to be taken as tripartite; hence
animals which live on one of the three elements only, still share in
some measure the qualities of the other elements also.

VI PRAPATNAKA, 7 K HAND A, 3. 9 7

4. ‘For truly, my child, mind comes of earth,
breath of water, speech of fire/

‘ Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son.

‘ Be it so, my child/ the father replied.

Sixth K hand a.

1. ‘That which is the subtile portion of curds,
when churned, rises upwards, and becomes butter.

2. ‘In the same manner, my child, the subtile
portion of earth (food), when eaten, rises upwards,
and becomes mind.

3. ‘ That which is the subtile portion of water,
when drunk, rises upwards, and becomes breath.

4. 4 That which is the subtile portion of fire, when
consumed, rises upwards, and becomes speech.

5. ‘For mind, my child, comes of earth, breath
of water, speech of fire.’

‘ Please, Sir, inform me still more/ said the son.

‘ Be it so, my child,’ the father replied.

Seventh K hand a.

1. ‘Man (purusha), my son, consists of sixteen
parts. Abstain from food for fifteen days, but
drink as much water as you like, for breath comes
from water, and will not be cut off, if you drink
water.’

2. Yvetaketu abstained from food for fifteen days.
Then he came to his father and said : ‘ What shall I
say?’ The father said: ‘Repeat the Rik , Ya^us,
and Saman verses.’ He replied : ‘ They do not occur
to me, Sir/

3. The father said to him : ‘ As of a great lighted
fire one coal only of the size of a firefly may be left,
which would not burn much more than this (i.e. very

[3] H

98

tfffANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

little), thus, my dear son, one part only of the sixteen
parts (of you) is left, and therefore with that one part
you do not remember the Vedas. Go and eat!

4. ‘ Then wilt thou understand me.’ Then Sve-
taketu ate, and afterwards approached his father.
And whatever his father asked him, he knew it all
by heart. Then his father said to him :

5. ‘ As of a great lighted fire one coal of the
size of a firefly, if left, may be made to blaze up
again by putting grass upon it, and will thus burn
more than this,

6. 4 Thus, my dear son, there was one part of the
sixteen parts left to you, and that, lighted up with
food, burnt up, and by it you remember now
the Vedas/ After that, he understood what his
father meant when he said : ‘ Mind, my son, comes
from food, breath from water, speech from fire.’ He
understood what he said, yea, he understood it 1 .

Eighth Khawda.

A

I. Uddalaka Arum said to his son 6Vetaketu:
4 Learn from me the true nature of sleep (svapna).
When a man sleeps here, then, my dear son, he
becomes united with the True 2 , he is gone to his

1 The repetition shows that the teaching of the Trivritkarawa,
the tripartite nature of things, is ended.

2 The deep sushupta sleep is meant, in which personal con¬
sciousness is lost, and the self for a time absorbed in the Highest
Self. Sleep is produced by fatigue. Speech, mind, and the senses
rest, breath only remains awake, and the ^iva, the living soul, in
order to recover from his fatigue, returns for a while to his true
Self (atma). The Sat must be taken as a substance, nay, as the
highest substance or subject, the Brahman. The whole purpose
of the Upanishad is obscured if we translate sat or satyam by truth,
instead of the True, the true one, to 6Ww? ov.

VI PRAPATtffAKA, 8 KHAJVDA, 4.

99

own (Self). Therefore they say, svapiti, he sleeps,
because he Is gone (apita) to his own (sva ) 1 .

2. ‘ As a bird when tied by a string flies first
in every direction, and finding no rest anywhere,
settles down at last on the very place where it is
fastened, exactly in the same manner, my son, that
mind (the ^iva, or living Self in the mind, see VI,
3, 2), after flying in every direction, and finding no
rest anywhere, settles down on breath 2 ; for indeed,
my son, mind is fastened to breath.

3. ‘ Learn from me, my son, what are hunger

and thirst. When a man is thus said to be

hungry, water is carrying away (digests) what has
been eaten by him. Therefore as they speak of
a cow-leader (go-naya), a horse-leader (arva-naya), a
man-leader (purusha-nclya), so they call water (which
digests food and causes hunger) food-leader (a^a-
naya). Thus (by food digested &c.), my son, know
this offshoot (the body) to be brought forth, for
this (body) could not be without a root (cause).

4. ‘ And where could its root be except in food

(earth) 3 ? And in the same manner, my son, as

1 This is one of the many recognised plays on words in the
Upanishads and the Vedanta philosophy. Svapiti, he sleeps, stands
for sva (his own), i.e. the self, and apita, gone to.

2 The commentator takes pra;/a here in the sense of Sat, which
it often has elsewhere. If so, this illustration would have the same
object as the preceding one. If we took pra^a in the sense of
breath, breath being the result of water, this paragraph might be
taken to explain the resignation of the living Self to its bondage to
breath, while on earth.

3 That food is the root of the body is shown by the commen¬
tator in the following way: Food when softened by water and
digested becomes a fluid, blood (jonita). From it comes flesh,
from flesh fat, from fat bones, from bones marrow, from marrow
seed. Food eaten by a woman becomes equally blood (lohita),

II 2

IOO

A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

food (earth) too is an offshoot, seek after its root,
viz. water. And as water too is an offshoot, seek
after its root, viz. fire. And as fire too is an off¬
shoot, seek after its root, viz. the True. Yes, all
these creatures, my son, have their root in the 'True,
they dwell in the True, they rest in the True.

5. ‘ When a man is thus said to be thirsty, fire
carries away what has been drunk by him. There¬
fore as they speak of a cow-leader (go-naya), of a
horse-leader (asva-naya), of a man-leader (purusha-
naya), so they call fire udanya, thirst, i.e. water-
leader. Thus (by water digested &c.), my son,
know this offshoot (the body) to be brought forth:
this (body) could not be without a root (cause).

6. ‘ And where could its root be except in
water ? As water is an offshoot, seek after its
root, viz. fire. As fire is an offshoot, seek after its
root, viz. the True. Yes, all these creatures, O son,
have their root in the True, they dwell in the True,
they rest in the True.

‘ And how these three beings (devata), fire, water,
earth, O son, when they reach man, become each of
them tripartite, has been said before (VI, 4, 7). When
a man departs from hence, his speech 1 is merged

and from seed and blood combined the new body is produced.
We must always have before us the genealogical table :—

Sat, TO OV.

I

Te^-as (fire) = Va/£ (speech).

Ap (water) = Pra/za (breath).

1

Anna (earth) = Manas (mind).

1 If a man dies, the first thing which his friends say is, He
speaks no more. Then, he understands no more. Then, he
moves no more. Then, he is cold.

VI PR.APAr.ffAKA, 9 KHAffDA, 4.

IOI

in his mind, his mind in his breath, his breath in
heat (fire), heat in the Highest Being.

7. ‘Now that which is that subtile essence (the
root of all), in it all that exists has its self. It is the
True. It is the Self, and thou, O Jfvetaketu, art it.’

‘ Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son.

‘ Be it so, my child,’ the father replied.

Ninth Khaa t z?a.

1. ‘As the bees 1 , my son, make honey by col¬
lecting the juices of distant trees, and reduce the
juice into one form,

2. ‘ And as these juices have no discrimination,
so that they might say, I am the juice of this tree
or that, in the same manner, my son, all these crea¬
tures, when they have become merged in the True
(either in deep sleep or in death), know not that
they are merged in the True.

3. ‘ Whatever these creatures are here, whether
a lion, or a wolf, or a boar, or a worm, or a midge,
or a gnat, or a musquito, that they become again
and again.

4. ‘ Now that which is that subtile essence, in it
all that exists has its self. It is the True. It is
the Self, and thou, O 6Vetaketu, art it.’

‘ Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son.

‘ Be it so, my child,’ the father replied.

1 At the beginning of each chapter the commentator supplies
the question which the son is supposed to have asked his father.
The first is: All creatures falling every day into deep sleep (su-
shupti) obtain thereby the Sat, the true being. How is it then
that they do not know that they obtain the Sat every day ?

102

IsTtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Tenth Khaada 1 .

1. ‘ These rivers, my son, run, the eastern (like the
Ganga) toward the east, the western (like the Sindhu)
toward the west. They go from sea to sea (i.e. the
clouds lift up the water from the sea to the sky, and
send it back as rain to the sea). They become indeed
sea. And as those rivers, when they are in the sea,
do not know, I am this or that river,

2. ‘In the same manner, my son, all these crea¬
tures, when they have come back from the True,
know not that they have come back from the True.
Whatever these creatures are here, whether a lion,
or a wolf, or a boar, or a worm, or a midge, or a
gnat, or a musquito, that they become again and
again.

3. ‘ That which is that subtile essence, in it all
that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the
Self, and thou, O SVetaketu, art it.’

‘ Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son.

‘ Be it so, my child,’ the father replied.

Eleventh Khaada 2 .

1. ‘ If some one were to strike at the root of this
large tree here, it would bleed, but live. If he were
to strike at its stem, it would bleed, but live. If he
were to strike at its top, it would bleed, but live.

1 The next question which the son is supposed to have asked is:
If a man who has slept in his own house, rises and goes to another
village, he knows that he has come from his own house. Why
then do people not know that they have come from the Sat?

2 The next question is : Waves, foam, and bubbles arise from the
water, and when they merge again in the water, they are gone.
How is it that living beings, when in sleep or death they are
merged again in the Sat, are not destroyed ?

VI PRAPA77IAKA, I I KHAiVDA, 3 .

103

Pervaded by the living Self that tree stands firm,
drinking in its nourishment and rejoicing;

2. ‘ But if the life (the living Self) leaves one of
its branches, that branch withers; if it leaves a
second, that branch withers; if it leaves a third, that
branch withers. If it leaves the whole tree, the
whole tree withers 1 . In exactly the same manner,
my son, know this.’ Thus he spoke :

3. ‘ This (body) indeed withers and dies when the
living Self has left it; the living Self dies not.

‘ That which is that subtile essence, in it all that
exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self,
and thou, ^SVetaketu, art it/

‘ Please, Sir, inform me still more/ said the son.

‘ Be it so, my child/ the father replied.

1 The commentator remarks that according to the Veda, trees
are conscious, while Buddhists and followers of Kawada hold them
to be unconscious. They live, because one sees how their sap
runs and how it dries up, just as one sees the sap in a living body,
which, as we saw, was produced by food and water. Therefore
the simile holds good. The life, or, more correctly, the liver, the
living Self, pervades the tree, as it pervades man, when it has
entered the organism which produces breath, mind, and speech.
If any accident happens to a branch, the living Self draws himself
away from that branch, and then the branch withers. The sap
which caused the living Self to remain, goes, and the living Self goes
away with it. The same applies to the whole tree. The tree dies
when the living Self leaves it, but the living Self does not die; it
only leaves an abode which it had before occupied. Some other
illustrations, to show that the living Self remains, are added by the
commentator: First, with regard to the living Self being the same
when it awakes from deep sleep (sushupti), he remarks that we
remember quite well that we have left something unfinished before
we fell asleep. And then with regard to the living Self being the
same when it awakes from death to a new life, he shows that crea¬
tures, as soon as they are born take the breast, and exhibit terror,
which can only be explained, as he supposes, by their possessing a
recollection of a former state of existence.

104

AAANDOGYA-UPANISIiAD.

Twelfth Khaada 1 .

1. ‘ Fetch me from thence a fruit of the Nyagrodha
tree.’

‘ Here is one, Sir.’

‘ Break it.’

‘ It is broken, Sir/

‘ What do you see there ? ’

‘ These seeds, almost infinitesimal/

‘ Break one of them/

‘ It is broken, Sir/

‘ What do you see there ? ’

‘ Not anything, Sir/

2. The father said : ‘ My son, that subtile essence
which you do not perceive there, of that very
essence this great Nyagrodha tree exists.

3. ‘ Believe it, my son. That which is the subtile
essence, in it all that exists has its self. It is the
True. It is the Self, and thou, O SVetaketu, art it/

‘ Please Sir, inform me still more/ said the son.

‘ Be it so, my child/ the father replied.

Thirteenth Khaada 2 .

1. ‘ Place this salt in water, and then wait on me
in the morning/

The son did as he was commanded.

The father said to him : ‘ Bring me the salt, which
you placed in the water last night/

1 The question which the son is supposed to have asked is:
How can this universe which has the form and name of earth &c.
be produced from the Sat which is subtile, and has neither form
nor name ?

2 The question here is supposed to have been: If the Sat is the
root of all that exists, why is it not perceived ?

VI PR APA TV/AKA, 1 4 KHANDA, I. IO

The son having looked for it, found it not, for,
of course, it was melted.

2. The father said: ‘Taste it from the surface
of the water. How is it ?

The son replied : ‘ It is salt/

‘ Taste it from the middle. How is it ? ’

The son replied : ‘ It is salt/

‘ Taste it from the bottom. How is it ?

The son replied : ‘ It is salt/

The father said : ‘ Throw it away 1 and then wait
on me/

He did so; but salt exists for ever.

Then the father said : ‘ Here also, in this body,
forsooth, you do not perceive the True (Sat), my
son; but there indeed it is.

3. ‘ That which is the subtile essence, in it all that
exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self,
and thou, O />Vetaketu, art it/

‘ Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son.

‘ Be it so, my child/ the father replied.

Fourteenth Khaa^da 2 .

1. ‘As one might lead a person with his eyes
covered away from the Gandharas 3 , and leave him

1 Read abhiprasya, which is evidently intended by the com¬
mentary : abhiprayasya paritya^ya. See B. R. Sanskrit Dic¬
tionary, s. v.

2 The question here asked is: The salt, though no longer per¬
ceptible by means of sight or touch, could be discovered by taste.
Then how can the Sat be discovered, although it is imperceptible
by all the senses ?

3 The Gandharas, but rarely mentioned in the Rig-veda and
the Ait. Brahma^a, have left their name in Kaudapoi and Candahar.
The fact of their name being evidently quite familiar to the author
of the Upanishad might be used to prove either its antiquity or its
Northern origin.

Cm

io6

A'i/ANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

then in a place where there are no human beings ;
and as that person would turn towards the east, or
the north, or the west, and shout, “ I have been
brought here with my eyes covered, I have been
left here with my eyes covered,”

2. ‘ And as thereupon some one might loose his
bandage and say to him, “ Go in that direction, it
is Gandhara, go in that direction; ” and as there¬
upon, having been informed and being able to judge
for himself, he would by asking his way from village
to village arrive at last at Gandhara,—in exactly the
same manner does a man, who meets with a teacher
to inform him, obtain the true knowledge h For him

1 Tedious as the commentator is in general, he is sometimes almost
eloquent in bringing out all that is implied or supposed to be implied
in the sacred text. He explains the last simile as follows: A man
was carried away by robbers from his own country. After his eyes
had been covered, he was taken to a forest full of terrors and dangers
arising from tigers, robbers, &c. Not knowing where he was, and
suffering from hunger and thirst, he began to cry, wishing to be de¬
livered from his bonds. Then a man took pity on him and removed
his bonds, and when he had returned to his home, he was happy.
Next follows the application. Our real home is the True (Sat), the
Self of the world. The forest into which we are driven is the
body, made of the three elements, fire, water, earth, consisting of
blood, flesh, bones, &c., and liable to cold, heat, and many other
evils. The bands with which our eyes are covered are our desires
for many things, real or unreal, such as wife, children, cattle, &c.,
while the robbers by whom we are driven into the forest are our
good and evil deeds. Then we cry and say: ‘ I am the son of so
and so, these are my relatives, I am happy, I am miserable, I am
foolish, I am wise, I am just, I am born, I am dead, I am old,
I am wretched, my son is dead, my fortune is gone, I am undone,
how shall I live, where shall I go, who will save me? ’ These and
hundreds and thousands of other evils are the bands which blind
us. Then, owing to some supererogatory good works we may
have done, we suddenly meet a man who knows the Self of
Brahman, whose own bonds have been broken, who takes pity
on us and shows us the way to see the evil which attaches to all

VI PRAPA77ZA.KA, 15 K HAiVD A, I.

IO 7

there is only delay so long as he is not delivered
(from the body); then he will be perfect * 1 .

3. 'That which is the subtile essence, in it all
that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the
Self, and thou, O 6Vetaketu, art it.’

‘ Please, Sir, inform me still more/ said the son.

' Be it so, my child/ the father replied.

Fifteenth Kha^da 2 .

1. 'If a man is ill, his relatives assemble round
him and ask: " Dost thou know me ? Dost thou
know me?” Now as long as his speech is not

that we love in this world. We then withdraw ourselves from all
worldly pleasures. We learn that we are not mere creatures of
the world, the son of so and so, &c., but that we are that which is
the True (Sat). The bands of our ignorance and blindness are
removed, and, like the man of Gandhara, we arrive at our own
home, the Self, or the True. Then we are happy and blessed.

1 The last words are really—* for him there is only delay so long
as I shall not be delivered; then I shall be perfect.’ This requires
some explanation. First of all, the change from the third to the
first person, is best explained by assuming that at the point where
all individuality vanishes, the father, as teacher, identifies himself
with the person of whom he is speaking.

The delay (the &ra or kshepa) of which he speaks is the time
which passes between the attainment of true knowledge and death,
or freedom from the effects of actions performed before the at¬
tainment of knowledge. The actions which led to our present
embodiment must be altogether consumed, before the body can
perish, and then only are we free. As to any actions performed
after the attainment of knowledge, they do not count; otherwise
there would be a new embodiment, and the attainment of even true
knowledge would never lead to final deliverance.

2 The question supposed to be asked is: By what degrees a man,
who has been properly instructed in the knowledge of Brahman,
obtains the Sat, or returns to the True. To judge from the text
both he who knows the True and he who does not, reach, when they
die, the Sat, passing from speech to mind and breath and heat (fire).
But whereas he who knows, remains in the Sat; they who do not

I 08 tftfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

merged in his mind, his mind in breath, breath in
heat (fire), heat in the Highest Being (devata), he
knows them.

2. ‘ But when his speech is merged in his mind,
his mind in breath, breath in heat (fire), heat in the
Highest Being, then he knows them not.

‘ That which is the subtile essence, in it all that
exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self,
and thou, O .Svetaketu, art it/

*' Please, Sir, inform me still more/ said the son.

‘ Be it so, my child/ the father replied.

Sixteenth K rand a * 1 .

i. ‘ My child, they bring a man hither whom they
have taken by the hand, and they say: “He has
taken something, he has committed a theft.” (When

know, return again to a new form of existence. It is important to
observe that the commentator denies that he who knows, passes at
his death through the artery of the head to the sun, and then to the
Sat. He holds that with him who knows there is no further cause
for delay, and that as soon as he dies, he returns to the Sat.

1 The next question is: Why does he who knows, on obtaining
the Sat, not return, while he who does not know, though obtaining
the Sat in death, returns? An illustration is chosen which is
intended to show how knowledge produces a material effect. The
belief in the efficacy of ordeals must have existed at the time, and
appealing to that belief, the teacher says that the man who knows
himself guilty, is really burnt by the heated iron, while the man
who knows himself innocent, is not. In the same manner the man
who knows his Self to be the true Self, on approaching after death
the true Self, is not repelled and sent back into a new existence,
while he who does not know, is sent back into a new round of
births and deaths. The man who tells a falsehood about himself,
loses his true Self and is burnt; the man who has a false concep¬
tion about his Self, loses likewise his true Self, and not knowing
the true Self, even though approaching it in death, he has to suffer
till he acquires some day the true knowledge.

VII PRAPA7VTAKA, I KHAZVjDA, 2 .

109

he denies, they say), “ Heat the hatchet for him.”
If he committed the theft, then he makes himself to
be what he is not Then the false-minded, having-
covered his true Self by a falsehood, grasps the
heated hatchet—he is burnt, and he is killed.

2. ‘ But if he did not commit the theft, then he
makes himself to be what he is. Then the true-
minded, having covered his true Self by truth,
grasps the heated hatchet—he is not burnt, and he
is delivered.

‘ As that (truthful) man is not burnt, thus has all
that exists its self in That. It is the True. It is
the Self, and thou, O Yvetaketu, art it.’ He under¬
stood what he said, yea, he understood it.

SEVENTH PRAPATWAKA.

First Khaada.

1. Narada approached Sanatkumara and said,

‘ Teach me, Sir ! 1 Sanatkumara said to him : ‘ Please
to tell me what you know ; afterward I shall tell you
what is beyond/

2. Narada said: ‘I know the i?zg-veda, Sir, the

A

Ya^ur-veda, the Sama-veda, as the fourth the Athar-
vazza, as the fifth the Itihasa-purazza (the Bharata) ;
the Veda of the Vedas (grammar); the Pitrya (the
rules for the sacrifices for the ancestors); the Rad
(the science of numbers); the Daiva (the science of
portents) ; the Nidhi (the science of time) ; the
Vakovakya (logic) ; the Ekayana (ethics) ; the Deva-
vidya (etymology); the Brahma-vidya (pronunciation,
dksha, ceremonial, kalpa, prosody, ^/zandas); the
Bhuta-vidya (die science of demons); the Kshatra-

I IO

A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

vidya (the science of weapons); the Nakshatra-vidy&
(astronomy); the Sarpa and Deva^ana-vidya (the
science of serpents or poisons, and the sciences of
the genii, such as the making of perfumes, dancing,
singing, playing, and other fine arts) 1 . All this
I know, Sir.

3. ‘ But, Sir, with all this I know the Mantras only,
the sacred books, I do not know the Self. I have
heard from men like you, that he who knows the
Self overcomes grief. I am in grief. Do, Sir, help
me over this grief of mine.’

Sanatkumara said to him : ‘ Whatever you have
read, is only a name.

4. ‘ A name is the iYg-veda, Ya^ur-veda, Sama-
veda, and as the fourth the Atharva;/a, as the fifth
the Itihasa-pura^a, the Veda of the Vedas, the
Pitrya, the Ra^i, the Daiva, the Nidhi, the Vako-
vakya, the Ekayana, the Deva-vidyi, the Brahma-
vidya, the Bhuta-vidyd, the Kshatra-vidya, the Na-
kshatra-vidya, the Sarpa and Deva^ana-vidya. All
these are a name only. Meditate on the name.

5. * He who meditates on the name as Brahman 2 ,

1 This passage, exhibiting the sacred literature as known at the
time, should be compared with the Brfhadara/zyaka, II, 4, 10. The
explanation of the old titles rests on the authority of Sankara,
and he is not always consistent. See Colebrooke, Miscellaneous
Essays, 1873, H p* 10.

2 Why a man who knows the Veda should not know the Self,
while in other places it is said that the Veda teaches the Self, is
well illustrated by the commentary. If a royal procession ap¬
proaches, he says, then, though we do not see the king, because
he is hidden by flags, parasols, &c., yet we say, there is the king.
And if we ask who is the king, then again, though we cannot see
him and point him out, we can say, at least, that he is different
from all that is seen. The Self is hidden in the Veda as a king
is hidden in a royal procession.

VII PRAPA77/AKA, 2 K HAND A, 2.

I I I

is, as it were, lord and master as far as the name
reaches—he who meditates on the name as Brah¬
man.’

‘Sir, is there something better than a name ?’

‘ Yes, there is something better than a name.’

‘ Sir, tell it me.’

Second K hand a.

1. ‘ Speech is better than a name. Speech makes
us understand the ^zg-veda, Ya^ur-veda, Sama-veda,
and as the fourth the Atharvazza, as the fifth the
Itihasa-purazza, the Veda of the Vedas, the Pitrya,
the Rad, the Daiva, the Nidhi, the Vakovakya, the
Ekayana, the Deva-vidya, the Brahma-vidya, the
Kshatra-vidya, the Nakshatra-vidya, the Sarpa and
Deva^ana-vidya; heaven, earth, air, ether, water,
fire, gods, men, cattle, birds, herbs, trees, all
beasts down to worms, midges, and ants ; what is
right and what is wrong; what is true and what
is false ; what is good and what is bad; what is
pleasing and what is not pleasing. For if there
were no speech, neither right nor wrong would be
known 1 f neither the true nor the false, neither the
good nor the bad, neither the pleasant nor the
unpleasant. Speech makes us understand all this.
Meditate on speech.

2. ‘He who meditates on speech as Brahman, is,
as it were, lord and master as far as speech reaches—
he who meditates on speech as Brahman.’

‘ Sir, is there something better than speech ? ’

‘ Yes, there is something better than speech.’

‘ Sir, tell it me.’

1 The commentator explains vya^-napayishyat by avi^fiatam
abhavishyat. Possibly hrz'daya^rio stands for hrfdaya^nam.

I I 2

^tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Third Khaada.

1. ‘Mind (manas) is better than speech. For as
the closed fist holds two amalaka or two kola or two
aksha fruits, thus does mind hold speech and name.
For if a man is minded in his mind to read the
sacred hymns, he reads them ; if he is minded in
his mind to perform any actions, he performs them ;
if he is minded to wish for sons and cattle, he
wishes for them; if he is minded to wish for this
world and the other, he wishes for them. For mind
is indeed the self 1 , mind is the world, mind is Brah¬
man. Meditate on the mind.

2. ‘ He who meditates on the mind as Brahman,
is, as it were, lord and master as far as the mind
reaches—he who meditates on the mind as Brahman.’

‘Sir, is there something better than mind ?’

‘Yes, there is something better than mind.’

‘ Sir, tell it me.’

Fourth Khaada.

1. ‘Will 2 (sankalpa) is better than mind. For
when a man wills, then he thinks in his mind, then
he sends forth speech, and he sends it forth in a
name. In a name the sacred hymns are contained,
in the sacred hymns all sacrifices.

2. ‘ All these therefore (beginning with mind and

1 The commentator explains this by saying that, without the
instrument of the mind, the Self cannot act or enjoy.

2 Sankalpa is elsewhere defined as a modification of manas.
The commentator says that, like thinking, it is an activity of the
inner organ. It is difficult to find any English term exactly corres¬
ponding to sankalpa. Rajendralal Mitra translates it by will, but it
implies not only will, but at the same time conception, determina¬
tion, and desire.

VII PRAPAT/fAKA, 5 KHAiVDA, I.

113

ending in sacrifice) centre in will, consist of will,
abide in will. Heaven and earth willed, air and
ether willed, water and fire willed. Through the
will of heaven and earth &c. rain wills ; through
the will of rain food wills; through the will of food
the vital airs will; through the will of the vital airs
the sacred hymns will; through the will of the sacred
hymns the sacrifices will; through the will of the
sacrifices the world (as their reward) wills; through
the will of the world everything wills \ This is will.
Meditate on will.

3. f He who meditates on will as Brahman, he,
being himself safe, firm, and undistressed, obtains
the safe, firm, and undistressed worlds which he has
willed; he is, as it were, lord and master as far as
will reaches—he who meditates on will as Brahman.’

‘ Sir, is there something better than will ? ’

‘ Yes, there is something better than will.’

‘ Sir, tell it me.’

Fifth Khavda.

1. ‘ Consideration (/£itta) 2 is better than will. For
when a man considers, then he wills, then he thinks
in his mind, then he sends forth speech, and he

1 This paragraph is obscure. The text seems doubtful, for
instance, in samak/zpatam, samakalpetam, and samakalpatam.
Then the question is the exact meaning of sazzzk/zptyai, which
must be taken as an instrumental case. What is intended is that,
without rain, food is impossible &c. or inconceivable; but the text
says, c By the will of rain food wills/ &c. Will seems almost to be
taken here in the sense in which modern philosophers use it, as a
kind of creative will. By the will of rain food wills, would mean,
that first rain wills and exists, and afterwards the vital airs will
and exist, &c.

2 Witta, thought, implies here consideration and reflection.

[3] I

114

tfi/ANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

sends it forth in a name. In a name the sacred
hymns are contained, in the sacred hymns all
sacrifices.

2. ‘ All these (beginning with mind and ending
in sacrifice) centre in consideration, consist of con¬
sideration, abide in consideration. Therefore if a
man is inconsiderate, even if he possesses much
learning, people say of him, he is nothing, whatever
he may know; for, if he were learned, he would not be
so inconsiderate. But if a man is considerate, even
though he knows but little, to him indeed do people
listen gladly. Consideration is the centre, considera¬
tion is the self, consideration is the support of all
these. Meditate on consideration.

3. ‘ He who meditates on consideration as Brah¬
man, he, being himself safe, firm, and undistressed,
obtains the safe, firm, and undistressed worlds which
he has considered; he is, as it were, lord and master
as far as consideration reaches—he who meditates
on consideration as Brahman.’

4 Sir, is there something better than consideration?’

'Yes, there is something better than considera¬
tion.’

‘ Sir, tell it me.’

Sixth Khaatda.

1. 'Reflection (dhyana) 1 is better than considera¬
tion. The earth reflects, as it were, and thus does
the sky, the heaven, the water, the mountains, gods
and men. Therefore those who among men obtain

1 Reflection is concentration of all our thoughts on one object,
ekagrata. And as a man who reflects and meditates on the highest
objects acquires thereby repose, becomes firm and immovable, so
the earth is supposed to be in repose and immovable, as it were, by
reflection and meditation.

VII PRAPATtfAKA, 7 KHAiVDA, 2. I 1 5

greatness here on earth, seem to have obtained a
part of the object of reflection (because they show
a certain repose of manner). Thus while small and
vulgar people are always quarrelling, abusive, and
slandering, great men seem to have obtained a part
of the reward of reflection. Meditate on reflection.

2. ‘He who meditates on reflection as Brahman,
is lord and master, as it were, as far as reflec¬
tion reaches—he who meditates on reflection as
Brahman.’

‘ Sir, is there something better than reflection ? ’

‘ Yes, there is something better than reflection/

( Sir, tell it me/

Seventh Khawda.

1. ‘ Understanding (vi^n&na) is better than reflec¬
tion. Through understanding we understand the
Rzg-ve da, the Ya^ur-veda, the Sama-veda, and as

A

the fourth the Atharva^a, as the fifth the Itihasa-
pura^a *, the Veda of the Vedas, the Pitrya, the
Rad, the Daiva, the Nidhi, the Vakovakya, the
Ekayana, the Deva-vidya, the Brahma-vidya, the
Bhuta-vidya, theKshatra-vidya,the Nakshatra-vidya,
the Sarpa and Deva^ana-vidya, heaven, earth, air,
ether, water, fire, gods, men, cattle, birds, herbs, trees,
all beasts down to worms, midges, and ants ; what is
right and what is wrong; what is true and what is
false ; what is good and what is bad; what is pleas¬
ing and what is not pleasing; food and savour, this
i world and that, all this we understand through under¬
standing. Meditate on understanding.

2. ‘He who meditates on understanding as Brah¬
man, reaches the worlds where there is understanding

1 See before, p. 109.

A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

116

and knowledge 1 ; he is, as it were, lord and master
as far as understanding reaches—he who meditates
on understanding as Brahman.’

‘ Sir, is there something better than understanding?
‘ Yes, there is something better than understanding.’
‘ Sir, tell it me.’

Eighth Kiianda.

1. ‘Power (bala) is better than understanding.
One powerful man shakes a hundred men of under¬
standing. If a man is powerful, he becomes a rising
man. If he rises, he becomes a man who visits
wise people. If he visits, he becomes a follower of
wise people. If he follows them, he becomes a
seeing, a hearing, a perceiving, a knowing, a doing,
an understanding man. By power the earth stands
firm, and the sky, and the heaven, and the moun¬
tains, gods and men, cattle, birds, herbs, trees, all
beasts down to worms, midges, and ants ; by power
the world stands firm. Meditate on power.

2. ‘ He who meditates on power as Brahman,
is, as it were, lord and master as far as power
reaches—he who meditates on power as Brahman.’

‘ Sir, is there something better than power ? ’

‘ Yes, there is something better than power.’

‘ Sir, tell it me.’

Ninth K hand a.

i. ‘ Food (anna) is better than power. Therefore
if a man abstain from food for ten days, though he
live, he would be unable to see, hear, perceive,
think, act, and understand. But when he obtains

1 The commentator takes vi^iiana here as understanding of
sacred books, ^nana as cleverness with regard to other subjects.

VII PRAPA7VTAKA, II KHAiVDA, I.

II 7

food, he is able to see, hear, perceive, think, act,
and understand. Meditate on food.

2. ‘He who meditates on food as Brahman,
obtains the worlds rich in food and drink; he is,
as it were, lord and master as far as food reaches—
he who meditates on food as Brahman.’

‘ Sir, is there something better than food ? ’

‘ Yes, there is something better than food.’

‘ Sir, tell it me/

Tenth Khaatda.

1. ‘Water (ap) is better than food. Therefore if
there is not sufficient rain, the vital spirits fail from
fear that there will be less food. But if there is
sufficient rain, the vital spirits rejoice, because there
will be much food. This water, on assuming dif¬
ferent forms, becomes this earth, this sky, this
heaven, the mountains, gods and men, cattle, birds,
herbs and trees, all beasts down to worms, midges,
and ants. Water indeed assumes all these forms.
Meditate on water.

2. ‘He who meditates on water as Brahman,
obtains all wishes, he becomes satisfied ; he is, as
it were, lord and master as far as water reaches—
he who meditates on water as Brahman/

‘ Sir, is there something better than water ? ’

‘ Yes, there is something better than water.’

‘ Sir, tell it me.’

Eleventh Kha^a.

i. ‘Fire (te^as) is better than water. For fire
united with air, warms the ether. Then people say,
It is hot, it burns, it will rain. Thus does fire, after
showing this sign (itself) first, create water. And

118

JYtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

thus again thunderclaps come with lightnings, flash¬
ing upwards and across the sky. Then people say,
There is lightning and thunder, it will rain. Then
also does fire, after showing this sign first, create
water. Meditate on fire.

2. ‘He who meditates on fire as Brahman,
obtains, resplendent himself, resplendent worlds,
full of light and free of darkness ; he is, as it were,
lord and master as far as fire reaches—he who
meditates on fire as Brahman.’

‘ Sir, is there something better than fire ? ’

‘ Yes, there is something better than fire/

‘ Sir, tell it me.’

Twelfth Kha^da.

1. ‘Ether (or space) is better than fire. For in
the ether exist both sun and moon, the lightning,
stars, and fire (agni). Through the ether we call,
through the ether we hear, through the ether we
answer 1 . In the ether or space we rejoice (when
we are together), and rejoice not (when we are
separated). In the ether everything is born, and
towards the ether everything tends when it is born 2 .
Meditate on ether.

2. ‘ He who meditates on ether as Brahman,
obtains the worlds of ether and of light, which are
free from pressure and pain, wide and spacious 3 ;
he is, as it were, lord and master as far as ether
reaches—he who meditates on ether as Brahman.’

‘ Sir, is there something better than ether ? ’

1 Cf. Kh. Up. IV, 5, i.

2 The seed grows upwards towards the ether; not downwards.

3 Cf. Ka//^. Up. II, n.

VII .PRAPATtfAKA, 14 KHAiV.DA, 2.

! 19

‘Yes, there is something better than ether/

‘ Sir, tell it me/

Thirteenth Khaatda.

1. ‘ Memory 1 (smara) is better than ether. There¬
fore where many are assembled together, if they
have no memory, they would hear no one, they
would not perceive, they would not understand.
Through memory we know our sons, through
memory our cattle. Meditate on memory.

2. ‘He who meditates on memory as Brahman,
is, as it were, lord and master as far as memory
teaches—he who meditates on memory as Brahman/

‘ Sir, is there something better than memory ? ’

‘ Yes, there is something better than memory.’

‘ Sir, tell it me/

Fourteenth Khaatda.

1. ‘Hope (a^a) is better than memory. Fired
by hope does memory read the sacred hymns, per¬
form sacrifices, desire sons and cattle, desire this
world and the other. Meditate on hope.

2. ‘ He who meditates on hope as Brahman, all
his desires are fulfilled by hope, his prayers are
not in vain; he is, as it were, lord and master
as far as hope reaches—he who meditates on hope
as Brahman/

‘ Sir, is there something better than hope ? ’

‘ Yes, there is something better than hope/

‘ Sir, tell it me/

1 The apparent distance between ether and memory is bridged
over by the commentator pointing out that without memory every¬
thing would be as if it were not, so far as we are concerned.

I 20

JsTtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Fifteenth Khaota,

1. * Spirit 1 (pra/za) is better than hope. As the
spokes of a wheel hold to the nave 2 , so does all
this (beginning with names and ending in hope) hold
to spirit. That spirit moves by the spirit, it gives
spirit to the spirit. Father means spirit, mother
is spirit, brother is spirit, sister is spirit, tutor is
spirit, Brahma/za is spirit.

2. ‘For if one says anything unbecoming to a
father, mother, brother, sister, tutor or Brahma/za,
then people say, Shame on thee! thou hast offended
thy father, mother, brother, sister, tutor, or a
Brahma^a.

4. ‘ But, if after the spirit has departed from
them, one shoves them together with a poker, and
burns them to pieces, no one would say, Thou of-
fendest thy father, mother, brother, sister, tutor, or
a Brahma;za.

4. ‘Spirit then is all this. He who sees this,
perceives this, and understands this, becomes an
ativadin 3 . If people say to such a man, Thou

1 Pra;za is used here in a technical sense. It does not mean
simply breath, but the spirit, the conscious self (pra°-natman)
which, as we saw, enters the body in order to reveal the whole
variety of forms and names. It is in one sense the mukhya pra?/a.

2 The commentary carries the simile still further. The felloe,
he says, holds to the spokes, the spokes to the nave. So do the
bhutamatras hold to the pra^framatras, and these to the pra^a.

3 One who declares something that goes beyond all the declara¬
tions made before, beginning with the declaration that names are
Brahman, and ending with the declaration that hope is Brahman;—
one who knows that pra;za, spirit, the conscious self, is Brahman.
This declaration represents the highest point reached by ordinary
people, but Narada wishes to go beyond. In the Mu;^aka, III,
1, 4, an ativadin is contrasted with one who really knows the
highest truth.

VII PRAPA7NAKA, 18 K HAND A, I.

I 2 I

art an ativadin, he may say, I am an ativadin; he
need not deny it/

Sixteenth Khanda 1 .

i. ‘ But in reality he is an ativadin who declares
the Highest Being to be the True (Satya, TO OUTC09

OV),

‘ Sir, may I become an ativadin by the True ? ’

‘ But we must desire to know the True.’

‘ Sir, I desire to know the True/

Seventeenth Khanda.

i. ‘When one understands the True, then one
declares the True. One who does not understand
it, does not declare the True 2 . Only he who under¬
stands it, declares the True. This understanding,
however, we must desire to understand/

‘ Sir, I desire to understand it/

Eighteenth Khanda.

i. ‘When one perceives, then one understands.
One who does not perceive, does not understand.
Only he who perceives, understands. This percep¬
tion, however, we must desire to understand/

‘ Sir, I desire to understand it/

1 As Narada asks no further, whether there is anything better,
higher, truer than pra^a, he is supposed to be satisfied with his
belief that prawa is the Highest Being. Sanatkumara, however,
wishes to lead him on to a still higher view; hence the paragraphs
which follow from 16 to 26.

2 He would, for instance, call fire real, not knowing that fire is
only a mixture of the three elements (cf. VI, 4), the rupatraya, a
mere variety (vikara), and name (naman).

122

JTtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Nineteenth Khaa t da.

i. ‘When one believes, then one perceives. One
who does not believe, does not perceive. Only he
who believes, perceives. This belief, however, we
must desire to understand.’

‘ Sir, I desire to understand it.’

Twentieth Khaa^a.

i. ‘When one attends on a tutor (spiritual guide),
then one believes. One who does not attend on
a tutor, does not believe. Only he who attends,
believes. This attention on a tutor, however, we
must desire to understand.’

‘ Sir, I desire to understand it.’

Twenty-first Khaatda.

i. ‘When one performs all sacred duties 1 , then
one attends really on a tutor. One who does not
perform his duties, does not really attend on a tutor.
Only he who performs his duties, attends on his
tutor. This performance of duties, however, we
must desire to understand.’

‘ Sir, I desire to understand it.’

Twenty-second Khaa^a.

i. ‘When one obtains bliss (in oneself), then one
performs duties. One who does not obtain bliss,
does not perform duties. Only he who obtains bliss,
performs duties. This bliss, however, we must
desire to understand.’

‘ Sir, I desire to understand it.’

1 The duties of a student, such as restraint of the senses, concen¬
tration of the mind, &c.

VII PRAPA777AKA, 2$ KHANDA, I.

123

Twenty-third Khaa^a.

1. * The Infinite (bhuman) 1 2 is bliss. There is no
bliss in anything finite. Infinity only is bliss. This
Infinity, however, we must desire to understand.’

* Sir, I desire to understand it.’

Twenty-fourth Khaa^a.

1. ‘Where one sees nothing else, hears nothing
else, understands nothing else, that is the Infinite.
Where one sees something else, hears something
else, understands something else, that is the finite.
The Infinite is immortal, the finite is mortal.’

‘ Sir, in what does the Infinite rest ? ’

‘In its own greatness—or not even in greatness V

2. ‘In the world they call cows and horses,
elephants and gold, slaves, wives, fields and houses
greatness. I do not mean this/ thus he spoke;
‘ for in that case one being (the possessor) rests
in something else, (but the Infinite cannot rest in
something different from itself.)

Twenty-fifth Khanda.

i. ‘ The Infinite indeed is below, above, behind,
before, right and left—it is indeed all this.

‘ Now follows the explanation of the Infinite as

1 Bhfiman is sometimes translated by grandeur, the superlative,
the akme. It is the highest point that can be reached, the infinite
and the true.

2 This phrase reminds one of the last verse in the No sad asid
hymn, where, likewise, the expression of the highest certainty is
followed by a misgiving that after all it may be otherwise. The
commentator takes yadi va in the sense of, If you ask in the
highest sense, then I say no; for the Infinite cannot rest in any¬
thing, not even in greatness.

KHAN DOGYA-UPANISHAD.

I 24

the I: I am below, I am above, I am behind, before,
rmht and left—I am all this.

o

2. ‘Next follows the explanation of the Infinite
as the Self: Self is below, above, behind, before,
right and left—Self is all this.

‘ He who sees, perceives, and understands this,
loves the Self, delights in the Self, revels in the
Self, rejoices in the Self—he becomes a Svara^,
(an autocrat or Self-ruler); he is lord and master
in all the worlds.

‘ But those who think differently from this, live
in perishable worlds, and have other beings for their
rulers.

Twenty-sixth K hand a.

1. ‘To him who sees, perceives, and understands
this b the spirit (pra?/a) springs from the Self, hope
springs from the Self, memory springs from the
Self; so do ether, fire, water, appearance and dis¬
appearance 1 2 , food, power, understanding, reflection,
consideration, will, mind, speech, names, sacred
hymns, and sacrifices—aye, all this springs from
the Self.

2. ‘There is this verse, “He who sees this,
does not see death, nor illness, nor pain; he who
sees this, sees everything, and obtains everything
everywhere.

He is one (before creation), he becomes three

1 Before the acquirement of true knowledge, all that has been
mentioned before, spirit, hope, memory, &c., on to names, was
supposed to spring from the Sat, as something different from one¬
self. Now he is to know that the Sat is the Self.

2 In the preceding paragraphs appearance and disappearance
(birth and death) are not mentioned. This shows how easy it was
in these treatises either to omit or to add anything that seemed
important.

VIII PRAPA 7 WAKA, I KHAiVDA, I.

J 25

' -—

(tire, water, earth), he becomes five, he becomes
seven, he becomes nine ; then again he is called the
eleventh, and hundred and ten and one thousand
and twenty 1 .”

‘ When the intellectual aliment has been purified,
the whole nature becomes purified. When the
whole nature has been purified, the memory becomes
firm. And when the memory (of the Highest Self)
remains firm, then all the ties (which bind us to
a belief in anything but the Self) are loosened.

‘The venerable Sanatkumara showed to Narada,
after his faults had been rubbed out, the other side
of darkness. They call Sanatkumara Skanda, yea,
Skanda they call him.’

EIGHTH PRAPA 7 WAKA.

First Kha2vda 2 .

i. Hari^, Om. There is this city of Brahman
(the body), and in it the palace, the small lotus (of

1 This too is meant as a verse. The commentary says that the
various numbers are intended to show the endless variety of form
on the Self after creation. Cf. Mait. Up. V, 2.

2 The eighth Prapa//£aka seems to form a kind of appendix to
the Upanishad. The highest point that can be reached by specu¬
lation had been reached in the seventh Prapa/^aka, the identity
of our self and of everything else with the Highest Self. This
speculative effort, however, is too much for ordinary people. 1 hey
cannot conceive the Sat or Brahman as out of space and time, as
free from all qualities, and in order to help them, they are taught
10 adore-the Brahman, as it appears in space and time, an object
endowed with certain qualities, living in nature and in the human
heart. The Highest Brahman, besides which there is nothing, and
which can neither be reached as an object, nor be considered as

ATtfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

I 26

the heart), and in it that small ether. Now what
exists within that small ether, that is to be sought
for, that is to be understood.

2. And if they should say to him : ‘ Now with

regard to that city of Brahman, and the palace in it,
i.e. the small lotus of the heart, and the small ether
within the heart, what is there within it that deserves
to be sought for, or that is to be understood ? *

3. Then he should say : ‘ As large as this ether
(all space) is, so large is that ether within the heart.
Both heaven and earth are contained within it, both
fire and air, both sun and moon, both lightning and
stars ; and whatever there is of him (the Self) here
in the world, and whatever is not (i.e. whatever has
been or will be), all that is contained within it V

4. And if they should say to him : ‘If everything
that exists is contained in that city of Brahman, all
beings and all desires (whatever can be imagined
or desired), then what is left of it, when old age
reaches it and scatters it, or when it falls to pieces ?’

5. Then he should say : ‘ By the old age of the
body, that (the ether, or Brahman within it) does
not age; by the death of the body, that (the ether,
or Brahman within it) is not killed. That (the Brah-

an effect, seems to ordinary minds like a thing which is not.
Therefore while the true philosopher, after acquiring the know¬
ledge of the Highest Sat, becomes identified with it suddenly, like
lightning, the ordinary mortal must reach it by slow degrees, and
as a preparation for that higher knowledge which is to follow, the
eighth Prapa///aka, particularly the first portion of it, has been
added to the teaching contained in the earlier books.

1 The ether in the heart is really a name of Brahman. He is
there, and therefore all that comes of him when he assumes bodily
shapes, both what is and what is not, i. e. what is no longer or not
yet; for the absolute nothing is not intended here.

VIII PRAPATHAKA, 2 KHAiVDA, 2 .

I27

man) is the true Brahma-city (not the body 1 ). In
it all desires are contained. It is the Self, free from
sin, free from old age, from death and grief, from
hunger and thirst, which desires nothing but what
it ought to desire, and imagines nothing but what it
ought to imagine. Now as here on earth people
follow as they are commanded, and depend on the
object which they are attached to, be it a country or
a piece of land,

6. ‘ And as here on earth, whatever has been ac¬
quired by exertion, perishes, so perishes whatever is
acquired for the next world by sacrifices and other
good actions performed on earth. Those who de¬
part from hence without having discovered the
Self and those true desires, for them there is no
freedom in all the worlds. But those who depart
from hence, after having discovered the Self and
those true desires 2 , for them there is freedom in all
the worlds.

Second K hand a.

1. ‘Thus he who desires the world 3 of the fathers,
by his mere will the fathers come to receive him,
and having obtained the world of the fathers, he is
happy.

2. ‘And he who desires the world of the mothers,
by his mere will the mothers come to receive him,

1 I translate this somewhat differently from the commentator,
though the argument remains the same.

2 True desires are those which we ought to desire, and the ful¬
filment of which depends on ourselves, supposing that we have
acquired the knowledge which enables us to fulfil them.

3 World is the nearest approach to loka: it means life with the
fathers, or enjoying the company of the fathers.

128

tftfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

and having obtained the world of the mothers, he is
happy.

3. ‘And he who desires the world of the brothers,
by his mere will the brothers come to receive him,
and having obtained the world of the brothers, he is
happy.

4. ‘And he who desires the world of the sisters,
by his mere will the sisters come to receive him,
and having obtained the world of the sisters, he is
happy.

5. ‘And he who desires the world of the friends,
by his mere will the friends come to receive him,
and having obtained the world of the friends, he is
happy.

6. ‘And he who desires the world of perfumes and
garlands (gandhamalya), by his mere will perfumes
and garlands come to him, and having obtained the
world of perfumes and garlands, he is happy.

7. ‘ And he who desires the world of food and
drink, by his mere will food and drink come to him,
and having obtained the world of food and drink, he
is happy.

8. ‘ And he who desires the world of song and
music, by his mere will song and music come to him,
and having obtained the world of song and music,
he is happy.

9. ‘And he who desires the world of women, by
his mere will women come to receive him, and
having obtained the world of women, he is happy.

‘Whatever object he is attached to, whatever
object he desires, by his mere will it comes to him,
and having obtained it, he is happy.

VIII PRAPAraAKA, 3 KHAjVDA, 4.

I29

Third Khaada.

1. ‘These true desires, however, are hidden by
hat is false; though the desires be true, they have

a covering which is false. Thus, whoever belonging
to us has departed this life, him we cannot gain
back, so that we should see him with our eyes.

2. ‘ Those who belong to us, whether living or
departed, and whatever else there is which we wish
for and do not obtain, all that we find there (if
we descend into our heart, where Brahman dwells,
in the ether of the heart). There are all our true
desires, but hidden by what is false b As people who
do not know the country, walk again and again over
a gold treasure that has been hidden somewhere in
the earth and do not discover it, thus do all these
creatures day after day go into the Brahma-world
(they are merged in Brahman, while asleep), and yet
do not discover it, because they are carried away by
untruth (they do not come to themselves, i.e. they
do not discover the true Self in Brahman, dwelling
in the heart).

3. ‘ That Self abides in the heart. And this is the
etymological explanation. The heart is called hrid-
ayam, instead of h/'zdy-ayam, i.e. He who is in the
heart. He who knows this, that He is in the heart,
goes day by day (when in sushupti, deep sleep) into
heaven (svarga), i.e. into the Brahman of the heart.

4. ‘Now that serene being 2 which, after having

1 All the desires mentioned before are fulfilled, if we find their
fulfilment in our Self, in the city of Brahman within our heart.
There we always can possess those whom we have loved, only we
must not wish to see them with our eyes; that would be a false
covering to a true desire.

2 Cf. Kh . Up. VIII, 12, 3.

[3]

K

130

A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

risen from out this earthly body, and having reached
the highest light (self-knowledge), appears in its true
form, that is the Self,’ thus he spoke (when asked
by his pupils). This is the immortal, the fearless,
this is Brahman. And of that Brahman the name
is the True, Satyam.

5. This name Sattyam consists of three sylla¬
bles, sat-ti-yam 1 . Sat signifies the immortal, t, the
mortal, and with yam he binds both. Because he
binds both, the immortal and the mortal, therefore
it is yam. He who knows this goes day by day
into heaven (svarga).

Fourth Kha^jda.

1. That Self is a bank 2 , a boundary, so that these
worlds may not be confounded. Day and night do
not pass that bank, nor old age, death, and grief;
neither good nor evil deeds. All evil-doers turn back
from it, for the world of Brahman is free from all evil.

2. Therefore he who has crossed that bank, if
blind, ceases to be blind; if wounded, ceases to be
wounded; if afflicted, ceases to be afflicted. There¬
fore when that bank has been crossed, night becomes
day indeed, for the world of Brahman is lighted up
once for all 3 .

3. And that world of Brahman belongs to those

1 We ought probably to read Sattyam, and then Sat-ti-yam.
The i in ti would then be the dual of an anubandha 1. Instead of
yaddhi, I conjecture yatti. See Ait. Arawyaka II, 5, 5.

2 Setu, generally translated by bridge, was originally a bank of
earth (mrzdadimaya), thrown up to serve as a pathway (pons)
through water or a swamp. Such banks exist still in many places,
and they serve at the same time as boundaries (maryada) between
fields belonging to different properties. Cf. Mait. Up. VII, 7;
Ka th. Up. Ill, 2 ; Talav. Up. comm. p. 59; Mu nd. Up. II, 2, 5.

3 Kh. Up. Ill, 11,3.

VIII PRAPA7V7AKA, 5 KHA2V.DA, 3 . I 3 I

only who find it by abstinence—for them there is
freedom in all the worlds.

Fifth Khaa t da.

1. What people call sacrifice (ya^na), that is really
abstinence (brahma^arya). For he who knows,
obtains that (world of Brahman, which others obtain
by sacrifice), by means of abstinence.

What people call sacrifice (ish/a), that is really
abstinence, for by abstinence, having searched (ish-
/va), he obtains the Self.

2. What people call sacrifice (sattraya;za), that is
reallv abstinence, for by abstinence he obtains from
the Sat (the true), the safety (tra^a) of the Self.

What people call the vow of silence (mauna), that
is really abstinence, for he who by abstinence has
found out the Self, meditates (manute).

3. What people call fasting (an£. 9 ak&yana), that
is really abstinence, for that Self does not perish
(na naiyati), which we find out by abstinence.

What people call a hermit’s life (ara#yayana\ that
is really abstinence. Ara 1 and Wya are two lakes in
the world of Brahman, in the third heaven from hence;
and there is the lake Airammadiya, and the A.9vattha
tree, showering down Soma, and the city of Brahman
(Hira^yagarbha) Apara^ita 2 , and the golden Prabhu-
vimita (the hall built by Prabhu, Brahman).

Now that world of Brahman belongs to those who
find the lakes Ara and Wya in the world of Brahman
by means of abstinence; for them there is freedom
in all the worlds 3 .

1 In the Kaush. Br. Up. I, 3, the lake is called Ara, at least
according to the commentator.

2 In the Kaush. Br. Up. Apara^ita is not pM, but ayatanam.

3 The fifth kha«</a is chiefly meant to recommend brahma^arya

K 2

i3 2

MANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Sixth Kha-zvda.

i. Now those arteries of the heart consist of a
brown substance, of a white, blue, yellow, and red

or abstinence from all worldly enjoyments, enjoined on the brah-
ma/’arin, the student, as a means of obtaining a knowledge of
Brahman. But instead of showing that such abstinence is indis¬
pensable for a proper concentration of our intellectual faculties, we
are told that abstinence is the same as certain sacrifices; and this
is shown, not by arguments, but by a number of very far-fetched
plays on words. These it is impossible to render in any transla¬
tion, nay, they hardly deserve being translated. Thus abstinence
is said to be identical with sacrifice, yagha, because yo ^nata,
‘he who knows/ has a certain similarity with ya^na. Ishz'a,
another kind of sacrifice, is compared with eshazza, search; sattra-
yazza with Sat, the True, the Brahman, and trayazza, protection;
mauna, silence, with manana, meditating (which may be right);
ana^akayana, fasting, with na.r, to perish, and arazzyagana, a
hermit's life, with ara, zzya, and ayana, going to the two lakes
Ara and A/ya, which are believed to exist in the legendary world
of Brahman. Nothing can be more absurd. Having once struck
the note of Brahmanic legends, such as we find it, for instance, in
the Kaushitaki-brahmazza-upanishad, the author goes on. Besides
the lakes Ara and iVya (in the Kaushitaki-brahmazza-upanishad we
have only one lake, called Ara), he mentions the Airammadiya
lake, and explains it as air a (ira annam, tanmaya airo mazz^as,
tena purzzam airam) and madiya, delightful. The Asvattha tree,
which pours down Soma, is not tortured into anything else, except
that Soma is explained as the immortal, or nectar. Apara^ita
becomes the city of Brahman, because it can be conquered by no
one except those who have practised abstinence. And the hall
which elsewhere is called Vibhu-pramita becomes Prabhu-
vimitam,orPrabhu-vinirmita, made by Prabhu, i.e.Brahman.
All the fulfilled desires, as enumerated in khazz^as 2-5, whether
the finding again of our fathers and mothers, or entering the
Brahmaloka with its lakes and palaces, must be taken, not as
material (sthula), but as mental only (manasa). On that account,
however, they are by no means considered as false or unreal, as
little as dreams are. Dreams are false and unreal, relatively only,
i.e. relatively to what we see, when we awake; but not in them¬
selves. Whatever we see in waking, also, has been shown to be

VIII PRAPAFtfAKA, 6 KHAiVDA, 5. 133

substance, and so is the sun brown, white, blue,
yellow, and red.

2. As a very long highway goes to two places, to
one at the beginning, and to another at the end, so
do the rays of the sun go to both worlds, to this
one and to the other. They start from the sun,
and enter into those arteries; they start from those
arteries, and enter into the sun.

3. And when a man is asleep, reposing, and at
perfect rest, so that he sees no dream * 1 2 , then he has
entered into those arteries. Then no evil touches
him, for he has obtained the light (of the sun).

4. And when a man falls ill, then those who sit
round him, say, ‘ Do you know me ? Do you know
me ? ’ As long as he has not departed from this
body, he knows them.

5. But when he departs from this body, then he
departs upwards by those very rays (towards the
worlds which he has gained by merit, not by know¬
ledge) ; or he goes out while meditating on Om -
(and thus securing an entrance into the Brahma-

false ; because it consists of forms and names only; yet these
forms and names have a true element in them, viz. the Sat. Before
we know that Sat, all the objects we see in waking seem true; as
dreams seem true in dreaming. But when once we awake from
our waking by true knowledge, we see that nothing is true but the
Sat. When we imagine we see a serpent, and then discover that
it is a rope, the serpent disappears as false, but what was true in
it, the rope, remains true.

1 Svapna in Sanskrit is both soranus and somnium. Hence
one might translate also, ‘ so that he is not aware that he is asieep/
which in some respects would seem even more appropriate in our
passage; cf. VIII, 11, 1.

2 According to the explanation given of the Om in the Upani-
shads, and more particularly in the Dahara-vidya contained in this
PrapaMaka.

134

tftfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

loka). And while his mind is failing, he is going to
the sun. For the sun is the door of the world (of
Brahman). Those who know, walk in ; those who
do not know, are shut out. There is this verse 1 :

‘ There are a hundred and one arteries of the heart;
one of them penetrates the crown of the head;
moving upwards by it a man reaches the immortal;
the others serve for departing in different directions,
yea, in different directions 2 .’

Seventh Khaav)a 3 .

1. Pra^apati said: ‘ The Self which is free from sin,
free from old age, from death and grief, from hunger
and thirst, which desires nothing but what it ought
to desire, and imagines nothing but what it ought to
imagine, that it is which we must search out, that it
is which we must try to understand. He who has
searched out that Self and understands it, obtains
all worlds and all desires.’

2. The Devas (gods) and Asuras (demons) both
heard these words, and said : ‘ Well, let us search
for that Self by which, if one has searched it out,
all worlds and all desires are obtained.’

Thus saying Indra went from the Devas, Viro/6ana
from the Asuras, and both, without having com¬
municated with each other, approached Pra^apati,

1 Prama Up. II, i.

2 The same verse occurs in the Ka//za 6, 16, and is frequently
quoted elsewhere, for instance, Mait. comm. p. 164. For vishvann,
the right reading would seem to be vishvak. In the Mait. Up. VI,
30, the Trish/ubh are reduced to Anush/ubh verses. See also
Prajna Up. Ill, 6-7; M.wid. Up. II, 2.

3 Here the highest problem is treated again, the knowledge of
the true Self, which leads beyond the world of Brahma (masc.), and
enables the individual self to return into the Highest Self.

135

VIII PRAPA777AKA, 7 LUANDA, 3.

holding fuel in their hands, as is the custom for
pupils approaching their master.

3. They dwelt there as pupils for thirty-two
years. Then Pra^apati asked them: ‘For what
purpose have you both dwelt here ?’

They replied: 'A saying of yours is being re¬
peated, viz. “ the Self which is free from sin, free
from old age, from death and grief, from hunger
and thirst, which desires nothing but what it ought
to desire, and imagines nothing but what it ought to
imagine, that it is which we must search out, that it
is which we must try to understand. He who has
searched out that Self and understands it, obtains all
worlds and all desires.” Now we both have dwelt
here because we wish for that Self.’

Pra^apati said to them: ‘ The person that is seen
in the eye \ that is the Self. This is what I have
said. This is the immortal, the fearless, this is
Brahman/

They asked : ‘ Sir, he who is perceived in the
water, and he who is perceived in a mirror, who
is he ?’

He replied: ‘ He himself indeed is seen in all
these V

1 The commentator explains this rightly. Pra^apati means by
the person that is seen in the eye, the real agent of seeing, who is
seen by sages only, even with their eyes shut. His pupils, however,
misunderstand him. They think of the person that is seen, not of
the person that sees (Yoga-sutras II, 6). The person seen in the
eye is to them the small figure imaged in the eye, and they go on
therefore to ask, whether the image in the water or in a mirror is
not the Self.

2 The commentators are at great pains to explain that Pra^apati
told no falsehood. He meant by purusha the personal element in
the highest sense, and it was not his fault that his pupils took
purusha for man or body.

136

-K77ANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Eighth Khanda.

1. ‘Look at your Self in a pan of water, and
whatever you do not understand of your Self 1 ,
come and tell me.’

They looked in the water-pan. Then Pra^apati
said to them : ‘ What do you see ?’

They said: ‘We both see the self thus altogether,
a picture even to the very hairs and nails.’

2. Pra^apati said to them : ‘ After you have

adorned yourselves, have put on your best clothes
and cleaned yourselves, look again into the water-
pan.’

They, after having adorned themselves, having
put on their best clothes and cleaned themselves,
looked into the water-pan.

Pra^apati said : ‘ What do you see ?’

3. They said: ‘Just as we are, well adorned,
with our best clothes and clean, thus we are both
there, Sir, well adorned, with our best clothes and
clean.’

Pra^apati said: ‘ That is the Self, this is the im¬
mortal, the fearless, this is Brahman.’

Then both went away satisfied in their hearts.

4. And Pra^apati, looking after them, said: ‘They
both go away without having perceived and without
having known the Self, and whoever of these two 2 ,
whether Devas or Asuras, will follow this doctrine
(upanishad), will perish.’

Now Viro/£ana, satisfied in his heart, went to the
Asuras and preached that doctrine to them, that the
self (the body) alone is to be worshipped, that the

1 I take atmana^ as a genitive, governed by yad, not as an
accusative plural.

2 The commentator reads yatare for yata/i

VIII PRAPA THAKA, 9 KHAiVZ)A, 2.

137

self (the body) alone is to be served, and that he
who worships the self and serves the self, gains
both worlds, this and the next.

5. Therefore they call even now a man who does
not give alms here, who has no faith, and offers no
sacrifices, an Asura, for this is the doctrine (upani-
shad) of the Asuras. They deck out the body of
the dead with perfumes, flowers, and fine raiment by
way of ornament, and think they will thus conquer
that world h

Ninth Khaa^a.

1. But Indra, before he had returned to the
Devas, saw this difficulty. As this self (the shadow
in the water) 1 2 is well adorned, when the body is
well adorned, well dressed, when the body is well
dressed, well cleaned, if the body is well cleaned,
that self will also be blind, if the body is blind,
lame, if the body is lame 3 , crippled, if the body is
crippled, and will perish in fact as soon as the body
perishes. Therefore I see no good in this (doctrine).

2. Taking fuel in his hand he came again as a
pupil to Pra^apati. Pra^apati said to him : ‘ Ma-
ghavat (Indra), as you went away with Viro/fana,
satisfied in your heart, for what purpose did you
come back ?’

1 This evidently refers to the customs and teaching of tribes
not entirely conforming to the Brahmanic system. Whether the
adorning of the dead body implies burial instead of burning, seems
doubtful.

2 The commentator remarks that though both Indra and Viro-
£ana had mistaken the true import of what Pra,gapati said, yet
while Viro/’ana took the body to be the Self, Indra thought that
the Self was the shadow of the body.

3 Srama, lame, is explained by the commentator as one-eyed,
ekanetra.

tfffANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

He said : ‘ Sir, as this self (the shadow) is well
adorned, when the body is well adorned, well dressed,
when the body is well dressed, well cleaned, if the
body is well cleaned, that self will also be blind, if
the body is blind, lame, if the body is lame, crippled,
if the body is crippled, and will perish in fact as
soon as the body perishes. Therefore I see no
good in this (doctrine).’

3. ‘ So it is indeed, Maghavat,’ replied Pra^apati;
‘ but I shall explain him (the true Self) further to
you. Live with me another thirty-two years.’

He lived with him another thirty-two years, and
then Pra^apati said:

Tenth Khawda.

1. ‘ He who moves about happy in dreams, he is
the Self, this is the immortal, the fearless, this is
Brahman.’

Then Indra went away satisfied in his heart. ' But
before he had returned to the Devas, he saw this
difficulty. Although it is true that that self is not
blind, even if the body is blind, nor lame, if the
body is lame, though it is true that that self is not
rendered faulty by the faults of it (the body),

2. Nor struck when it (the body) is struck, nor
lamed when it is lamed, yet it is as if they struck
him (the self) in dreams, as if they chased him h

1 I have adopted the reading vi/£X^ayayanti, because it is the
most difficult, and therefore explains most easily the various cor¬
ruptions, or it may be emendations, that have crept into the text.
.Sankara explains viMMdayanti by vidravayanti, and this shows
that he too must have read viMMyayanti, for he could not have
explained vi/^adayanti, which means they uncover or they deprive
of their clothing, by vidravayanti, they drive away. It is true that
vi/’Mayayanti may be explained in two ways; it may be the causa¬
tive of khz, to cut, but this meaning is not very appropriate here,

VIII PRAPA7VTAKA, IO KHAAZ>A, 4 .

139

He becomes even conscious, as it were, of pain, and
sheds tears. Therefore I see no good in this.

3. Taking fuel in his hands, he went again as a
pupil to Pra^apati. Pra^apati said to him: ‘ Ma-
ghavat, as you went away satisfied in your heart, for
what purpose did you come back ?’

He said: ‘Sir, although it is true that that self
is not blind even if the body is blind, nor lame, if the
body is lame, though it is true that that self is not
rendered faulty by the faults of it (the body),

4. Nor struck when it (the body) is struck, nor
lamed when it is lamed, yet it is as if they struck
him (the self) in dreams, as if they chased him.
He becomes even conscious, as it were, of pain, and
sheds tears. Therefore I see no good in this.’

‘ So it is indeed, Maghavat,’ replied Pra^apati ;

‘ but I shall explain him (the true Self) further to
you. Live with me another thirty-two years.’

He lived with him another thirty-two years. Then
Pra^apati said :

and quite inadmissible in another passage where vi/££Myayati
occurs, whereas, if derived from wkh (oiyo^ai) in a causative sense,
Vankara could hardly have chosen a better explanation than vidra-
vayanti, they make run away. The root vi kh, vi/£/£Myayati is

recognised in Pamni III, 1, 28, and in the DhatupaMa 28, 129,

but it has hitherto been met with in this passage only, and in

B/ 7 hadarawyaka Up. IV, 3, 20. Here also the author speaks of

a man who imagines that people kill him or do him violence, or
that an elephant chases him, or that he falls into a pit. Here we
have hastiva viXV^ayayati, and ^Sankara, at least as printed by
Dr. Roer, explains this by vi/^Mpayati, vi^Mdayati, vidravayati;
dhavatity artha^. Much better is Dvivedaganga's commentary, as
published by Dr. Weber, *Satap. Brahm. p. 1145, Kada^id enaw
hasti vi^Myayativa vidravayativa; \\kha. gatau, gupudhupaviMi-
pawipanibhya aya iti (Paz/. Ill, 1, 28) svartha ayapratyaya^. In the
Dictionary of Boehtlingk and Roth the derivation from khz, to
cut, is preferred; see Nachtrage, s.v. kh&.

140

MANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Eleventh Khanda.

1. ‘When a man being asleep, reposing, and at
perfect rest 1 , sees no dreams, that is the Self, this is
the immortal, the fearless, this is Brahman.’

Then Indra went away satisfied in his heart. But
before he had returned to the Devas, he saw this
difficulty. In truth he thus does not know himself
(his self) that he is I, nor does he know anything
that exists. He is gone to utter annihilation. I see
no good in this.

2. Taking fuel in his hand he went again as a
pupil to Pra^apati. Prajyapati said to him: ‘ Ma-'
ghavat, as you went away satisfied in your heart,
for what purpose did you come back ? ’

He said: ‘ Sir, in that way he does not know
himself (his self) that he is I, nor does he know
anything that exists. He is gone to utter annihila¬
tion. I see no good in this.’

3. ‘So it is indeed, Maghavat,’ replied Pra^apati;

‘ but I shall explain him (the true Self) further to
you, and nothing more than this 2 . Live here other
five years.’

He lived there other five years. This made in all
one hundred and one years, and therefore it is said
that Indra Maghavat lived one hundred and one
years as a pupil with Pra^apati. Pra^apati said to
him :

Twelfth Kha^a.

1. ‘Maghavat, this body is mortal and always
held by death. It is the abode of that Self which is

1 See Kh. Up. VIII, 6, 3.

2 .Sankara explains this as meaning the real Self, not anything
different from the Self.

VIII PRAPA777AKA, 12 KHA2VDA, 3* I zj. I

immortal and without body 1 . When in the body (by
thinking this body is I and I am this body) the Self
is held by pleasure and pain. So long as he is in
the body, he cannot get free from pleasure and pain.
But when he is free of the body (when he knows
himself different from the body), then neither pleasure
nor pain touches him 2 .

2. ‘The wind is without body, the cloud, light¬
ning, and thunder are without body (without hands,
feet, &c.) Now as these, arising from this heavenly
ether (space), appear in their own form, as soon as
they have approached the highest light,

3. ‘ Thus does that serene being, arising from this
body, appear in its own form, as soon as it has
approached the highest light (the knowledge of
Self 3 ). He (in that state) is the highest person
(uttama purusha). He moves about there laughing
(or eating), playing, and rejoicing (in his mind), be it
with women, carriages, or relatives, never minding
that body into which he was born 4 .

1 According to some, the body is the result of the Self, the
elements of the body, fire, water, and earth springing from the
Self, and the Self afterwards entering them.

2 Ordinary, worldly pleasure. Comm.

3 The simile is not so striking as most of those old similes are-
The wind is compared with the Self, on account of its being for a
time lost in the ether (space), as the Self is in the body, and then
rising again out of the ether and assuming its own form as wind-
The chief stress is laid on the highest light, which in the one case
is the sun of summer, in the other the light of knowledge.

4 These are pleasures which seem hardly compatible with the
state of perfect peace which the Self is supposed to have attained.
The passage may be interpolated, or put in on purpose to show
that the Self enjoys such pleasures as an inward spectator only,
without identifying himself with either pleasure or pain. He sees
them, as he says afterwards, with his divine eye. The Self per-

142

A'i/ANDOGVA-UPANISHAD.

‘ Like as a horse attached to a cart, so is the
spirit * 1 (pra;za, pra^natman) attached to this body.

4. ‘ Now where the sight has entered into the
void (the open space, the black pupil of the eye),
there is the person of the eye, the eye itself is the
instrument of seeing. He who knows, let me smell
this, he is the Self, the nose is the instrument of
smelling. He who knows, let me say this, he is the
Self, the tongue is the instrument of saying. He
who knows, let me hear this, he is the Self, the ear
is the instrument of hearing.

5. ‘He who knows, let me think this, he is the
Self, the mind is his divine eye 2 . He, the Self,
seeing these pleasures (which to others are hidden
like a buried treasure of gold) through his divine
eye, i.e. the mind, rejoices.

‘ The Devas who are in the world of Brahman
meditate on that Self (as taught by Pra^apati to
Indra, and by Indra to the Devas). Therefore all
worlds belong to them, and all desires. He who
knows that Self and understands it, obtains all
worlds and all desires/ Thus said Pra^apati, yea,
thus said Pra^apati.

ceives in all things his Self only, nothing else. In his commentary
on the Taittinya Upanishad (p. 45) .Sankara refers this passage
to Brahman as an effect, not to Brahman as a cause.

1 The spirit, the conscious self, is not identical with the body,
but only joined to it, like a horse, or driving it, like a charioteer.
In other passages the senses are the horses; buddhi, reason, the
charioteer; man as, mind, the reins. The spirit is attached to the
cart by the £etana ; cf. Ananda^nanagiri.

2 Because it perceives not only what is present, but also what
is past and future.

VIII PRAPA777AKA, 14 KHAiVDA, I.

H3

Thirteenth Khajvda 1 ,

1. From the dark (the Brahman of the heart) I
come to the nebulous (the world of Brahman), from
the nebulous to the dark, shaking off all evil, as a
horse shakes his hairs, and as the moon frees herself
from the mouth of Rahu 2 . Having shaken off the
body, I obtain, self made and satisfied, the uncreated
world of Brahman, yea, I obtain it.

Fourteenth Khaa^a.

1. He who is called ether 3 (aka^a) is the revealer
of all forms and names. That within which these
forms and names are contained is the Brahman, the
Immortal, the Self.

I come to the hall of Pra^apati, to the house ; I
am the glorious among Brahmans, glorious among
princes, glorious among men 4 . I obtained that
glory, I am glorious among the glorious. May I
never go to the white, toothless, yet devouring,
white abode 5 6 ; may I never go to it.

1 This chapter is supposed to contain a hymn of triumph.

2 Rahu, in later times a monster, supposed to swallow the sun
and moon at every solar or lunar eclipse. At first we only hear of
the mouth or head of Rahu. In later times a body was assigned to
him, but it had to be destroyed again by Visb;zu, so that nothing
remained of him but his head. Rahu seems derived from rah, to
separate, to remove. From it raksh, to wish or strive to remove,
to keep off, to protect, and in a different application raksbas, a
tearing away, violence, rakshas, a robber, an evil spirit.

3 Aka^-a, ether or space, is a name of Brahman, because, like
ether, Brahman has no body and is infinitely small.

4 Here the three classes, commonly called castes, are clearly

marked by the names of brahma^a, ragan, and vlt.

6 YonBabditam pra^-ananendriyam.

144

A'tfANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

Fifteenth Khaada.

i. Brahma (Hira;z)/agarbha or Parame^vara) told
this to Pra^apati (Ka.syapa), Pra^apati to Manu (his
son), Manu to mankind. He who has learnt the
Veda from a family of teachers, according to the
sacred rule, in the leisure time left from the duties
to be performed for the Guru, who, after receiving
his discharge, has settled in his own house, keeping
up the memory of what he has learnt by repeating
it regularly in some sacred spot, who has begotten
virtuous sons, and concentrated all his senses on
the Self, never giving pain to any creature, except
at the tirthas 1 (sacrifices, &c.), he who behaves thus
all his life, reaches the world of Brahman, and does
not return, yea, he does not return.

1 The commentator says that even travelling about as a mendi¬
cant causes pain, but that a mendicant is allowed to importune
people for alms at tirthas, or sacred places. Others explain this
differently.

TALAVAKARA

OR

KENA-UPANISHAD.

[ 3 ]

L

talavakAra-upanishad.

First Khaota.

1. The Pupil asks: ‘At whose wish does the
mind sent forth proceed on its errand ? At whose
command does the first breath go forth ? At whose

wish do we utter this speech ? What god directs
the eye, or the ear ?’

2. The Teacher replies : ‘ It is the ear of the ear,
the mind of the mind, the speech of speech, the
breath of breath, and the eye of the eye. When
freed (from the senses) the wise, on departing from
this world, become immortal k

3. The eye does not go thither, nor speech, nor
mind. We do not know, we do not understand, how
any one can teach it.

4. ‘ It is different from the known, it is also
above the unknown, thus we have heard from those
of old, who taught us this 2 .

5. ‘ That which is not expressed by speech and

This verse admits of various translations, and still more various
explanations. Instead of taking vakam, like all the other words,
as a nominative, we might take them all as accusatives, governed
by atimu/fya, and sa u prawasya pranafi as a parenthetical sen¬
tence. What is meant by the ear of the ear is very fully explained
by the commentator, but the simplest acceptation would seem to
take it as an answer to the preceding questions, so that the ear of
the ear should be taken for him who directs the ear, i.e. the Self,
or Brahman. This will become clearer as we proceed.

2 Cf. Isa Up. 11; 13.

L 2

TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD.

I48

by which speech is expressed, that alone know as
Brahman, not that which people here adore.

6. ‘That which does not think by mind, and
by which, they say, mind is thought 1 , that alone
know as Brahman, not that which people here

adore.

7. ‘ That which does not see by the eye, and by
which one sees (the work of) the eyes, that alone
know as Brahman, not that which people here

adore.

8. ‘ That which does not hear by the ear, and by
which the ear is heard, that alone know as Brahman,

not that which people here adore.

9. ‘ That which does not breathe by breath, and

by which breath is drawn, that alone know as Brah¬
man, not that which people here adore.

Second K hand a.

1. The Teacher says: ‘If thou thinkest I know
it well, then thou knowest surely but little, what is
that form of Brahman known, it may be, to thee 2 ? .

2. The Pupil says: 1 1 do not think I know it
well, nor do I know that I do not know it. He

1 The varia lectio manaso matam (supported also by the com¬
mentary) is metrically and grammatically easier, but it may be, for

that very reason, an emendation.

2 In order to obtain a verse, we must leave out the words tvam

yad asya deveshv atha nu mimawsyam eva. They were probab y
inserted, as an excuse for the third kha«</a treating of the 1 elation
of Brahman to the Devas. There is considerable variety in the
text, as handed down in the Sama-veda and in the Atharva-veda, j
which shows that it has been tampered with. Daharam for dabhram
may be the older reading, as synizesis occurs again and again in j

the Upanishads.

Ill KHAiVDA, I.

149

among us who knows this, he knows it, nor does he
know that he does not know it h

3. ‘ He by whom it (Brahman) is not thought, by
him it is thought; he by whom it is thought, knows
it not. It is not understood by those who under¬
stand it, it is understood by those who do not
understand it.

4. ‘ It is thought to be known (as if) by awaken¬
ing, and (then) we obtain immortality indeed. By
the Self we obtain strength, by knowledge we obtain
immortality.

5. ‘Ifa man know this here, that is the true (end
of life) ; if he does not know this here, then there is
great destruction (new births). The wise who have
thought on all things (and recognised the Self in
them) become immortal, when they have departed
from this world.’

Third Khavda 1 2 .

1. Brahman obtained the victory for the Devas.
The Devas became elated by the victory of Brah-

1 This verse has again been variously explained. I think the
train of thought is this: We cannot know Brahman, as we know
other objects, by referring them to a class and pointing out their
differences. But, on the other hand, we do not know that we know
him not, i.e. no one can assert that we know him not, for we want
Brahman in order to know anything. He, therefore, who knows
this double peculiarity of the knowledge of Brahman, he knows
Brahman, as much as it can be known; and he does not
know, nor can anybody prove it to him, that he does not know
Brahman.

2 This khawefa is generally represented as a later addition, but
its prose style has more of a Brahma/za character than the verses
in the preceding kha;zdas, although their metrical structure is
irregular, and may be taken as a sign of antiquity.

TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD.

*50

man, and they thought, this victory is ours only,

this greatness is ours only.

2. Brahman perceived this and appeared to them.
But they did not know it, and said : ‘ What sprite

(yaksha or yakshya) is this ?’

3. They said to Agni (fire): ‘O ^atavedas, find
out what sprite this is.’ ‘ Yes/ he said.

4. He ran toward it, and Brahman said to him :
‘Who are you?' He replied: ‘I am Agni, I am
(Gatavedas.'

5. Brahman said: c What power is in you ?' Agni
replied: ‘ I could burn all whatever there is on
earth.'

6. Brahman put a straw before him, saying:

‘ Burn this.' He went towards it with all his might,
but he could not burn it. Then he returned thence
and said: ‘ I could not find out what sprite this is.’

7. Then they said to Vayu (air): ‘O Vayu, find
out what sprite this is.' ‘ Yes,' he said.

8. He ran toward it, and Brahman said to him :
‘Who are you?' He replied: ‘I am Vayu, I am
MatarLsvan.’

9. Brahman said: ‘What power is in you?’ Vayu
replied : ‘ I could take up all whatever there is on
earth.’

10. Brahman put a straw before him, saying:
‘Take it up.’ He went towards it with all his
might, but he could not take it up. Then he re¬
turned thence and said: ‘ I could not find out what
sprite this is.’

11. Then they said to Indra : ‘ O Maghavan, find
out what sprite this is.’ He went towards it, but it
disappeared from before him.

12. Then in the same space (ether) he came

IV KHAiVDA, 4.

!5I

towards a woman, highly adorned: it was Umd,, the
daughter of Himavat 1 . He said to her: ‘Who is
that sprite ? ?

Fourth Kha^da.

1. She replied: ‘ It is Brahman. It is through
the victory of Brahman that you have thus become
great/ After that he knew that it was Brahman.

2. Therefore these Devas, viz. Agni, Vayu, and
Indra, are, as it were, above the other gods, for they
touched it (the Brahman) nearest 2 .

3. And therefore Indra is, as it were, above the
other gods, for he touched it nearest, he first
knew it.

4. This is the teaching of Brahman, with regard
to the gods (mythological): It is that which now

1 Uma may here be taken as the wife of -Siva, daughter of
Himavat, better known by her earlier name, Parvatt, the daughter
of the mountains. Originally she was, not the daughter of the
mountains or of the Himalaya, but the daughter of the cloud, just
as Rudra was originally, not the lord of the mountains, girBa, but
the lord of the clouds. We are, however, moving here in a secon¬
dary period of Indian thought, in which we see, as among Semitic
nations, the manifested powers, and particularly the knowledge and
wisdom of the gods, represented by their wives. Uma means originally
flax, from va, to weave, and the same word may have been an old
name of wife, she who weaves (cf. duhitrf, spinster, and possibly
wife itself, if O.H.G. wib is connected with O.H.^G. weban). It is
used almost synonymously with ambika, Taitt. Ar. p. 839. If we
wished to take liberties, we might translate uma haimavati by an
old woman coming from the Himavat mountains; but I decline all
responsibility for such an interpretation.

2 The next phrase was borrowed from § 3, without even changing
the singular to the plural. As Indra only found out that it was
Brahman, the original distinction between Indra and the other gods,
who only came near to it, was quite justified. Still it might be
better to adopt the var. lect. sa hy etat in § 2.

l S 2

TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD.

flashes forth in the lightning, and now vanishes
again.

5. And this is the teaching of Brahman, with re¬
gard to the body (psychological): It is that which
seems to move as mind, and by it imagination
remembers again and again 1 .

6. That Brahman is called Tadvana 2 , by the
name of Tadvana it is to be meditated on. All
beings have a desire for him who knows this.

7. The Teacher: ‘As you have asked me to
tell you the Upanishad, the Upanishad has now

1 I have translated these paragraphs very differently from San¬
kara and other interpreters. The wording is extremely brief, and
we can only guess the original intention of the Upanishad by a
reference to other passages. Now the first teaching of Brahman,
by means of a comparison with the gods or heavenly things in
general, seems to be that Brahman is what shines forth suddenly
like lightning. Sometimes the relation between the phenomenal
world and Brahman is illustrated by the relation between bubbles
and the sea, or lightning and the unseen heavenly light (Mait. Up.
VI, 35). In another passage, Kh . Up. VIII, 12, 2, lightning, when
no longer seen, is to facilitate the conception of the reality of things,
as distinct from their perceptibility. I think, therefore, that the first
simile, taken from the phenomenal world, was meant to show that
Brahman is that which appears for a moment in the lightning, and
then vanishes from our sight.

The next illustration is purely psychological. Brahman is proved
to exist, because our mind moves towards things, because there is
something in us which moves and perceives, and because there is
something in us which holds our perceptions together (sankalpa),
and revives them again by memory.

1 give my translation as hypothetical only, for certainty is ex¬
tremely difficult to attain, when we have to deal with these enigma¬
tical sayings which, when they were first delivered, were necessarily
accompanied by oral explanations.

2 Tadvana, as a name of Brahman, is explained by ‘the desire of
it/ and derived from van, to desire, the same as van kh.

IV K HAND A, 9.

I 5 3

been told you. We have told you the Brahmi
U panishad.

8 . The feet on which that Upanishad stands are
penance, restraint, sacrifice ; the Vedas are all its
limbs 1 , the True is its abode.

9 * * He who knows this Upanishad, and has
shaken off all evil, stands in the endless, uncon¬
querable 2 world of heaven, yea, in the world
of heaven.’

1 It is impossible to adopt -Sankara’s first rendering, ‘ the Vedas
and all the Angas/ i.e. the six subsidiary doctrines. He sees
himself that sarvangani stands in opposition to pratish/^a and
ayatana, but seeing Veda and Anga together, no Brahman could
help thinking of the Vedangas.

2 Might we read agyeye for gyeye? cf. Vatap. Brahm. XI, 5, 7, 1.

AIT A R E Y A-A R ANYA K A.

I

I

I

I

aitareya-Ara/vyaka.

FIRST ARATYAKA.

FIRST ADHYAYA.

First Kha^a.

1. Now follows the Mahavrata ceremony.

2. After having killed Wztra, Indra became
reat. When he became great, then there was

the MahAvrata (the great work). This is why the
Mahavrata ceremony is called Mahavrata.

3. Some people say : ‘ Let the priest make two
(recitations with the offering of the) a^ya (ghee) on
that day/ but the right thing is one 1 .

4. He who desires prosperity should use the
hymn, pra vo devayagnaye (Rv. Ill, 13, 1).

5. He who desires increase should use the hymn,
viso vLo atithim (Rv. VIII, 74, 1).

1 That it should be one only is proved from the types, i.e. from
other sacrifices, that have to be followed in the performance of the
Mahavrata. The first type is the Agnish/oma, where one jastra is
enjoined as agy&rastra, viz. pra vo devayagnaye. In the VAvao-it,
which has to follow the Agnish/oma, another hymn is put in its
place, viz. agniw naro didhitibhi/^. In the Mahavrata, which has
to follow the VAva^it, some people recommend the use of both
these hymns. But that is wrong, for there must be in the sacri¬
fices which follow the Agnish/oma twelve .rastras altogether; and
if there were two here, instead of one, we should get a total of
thirteen.

AITAREYA-ARAiVY AKA.

158

6. The people (vlsa/^) indeed are increase 1 , and
therefore he (the sacrificer) becomes increased.

7. But (some say), there is the word atithim (in
that hymn, which means a guest or stranger, asking
for food). Let him not therefore take that hymn.
Verily, the atithi (stranger) is able 2 to go begging.

8. ‘ No/ he said, ‘ let him take that hymn.

9. ‘ For he who follows the good road and obtains

distinction, he is an atithi (guest) 3 .

10. ‘They do not consider him who is not so,

worthy to be (called) an atithi (guest).

11. ‘Therefore let him by all means take that

hymn/

12. If he takes that hymn, let him place the
(second) tristich, aganma vr/trahantamam, ‘ we came

near to the victorious/ first.

13. For people worship the whole year (perform¬
ing the Gavamayana sacrifice) wishing for this day
(the last but one)—they do come near.

14. The (next following) three tristichs begin
with an Anush/ubh 4 . Now Brahman is Gayatri,
speech is Anush/ubh. He thus joins speech with
Brahman.

15. He who desires glory should use the hymn,
abodhy agni/£ samidha ^ananam (Rv. V, 1, 1).

1 The word visah, which occurs in the hymn, means people.
The commentator says that because the Taisyas or tradespeople
increase their capital, therefore they are called inciease.

2 Able, or liable; cf. Ait. Ar. II, 3, 5 , 7 -

3 Atithi is here explained by yo bhavati, and bhavati is explained
as walking on the good road. One expects yo va atati. The
obtaining of distinction is probably derived from ati, above, in
atithi.

4 In the first and second the Anush/ubh is followed by two
Gayatns.

I ARAAYAKA, I ADHYAYA, 2 KHAiVDA, 5 .

J 59

16. He who desires offspring and cattle should
use the hymn, hota^anish/a £etana/z (Rv. II, 5, 1).

Second Khaaz>a.

1. He who desires proper food 1 should use the
hymn, agnim naro didhitibhi/2 (Rv. VII, 1, 1) 2 .

2. Verily, Agni (fire) is the eater of food.

In the other (recitations accompanying the) offer¬
ings of a^ya (where Agni is likewise mentioned) the
worshippers come more slowly near to Agni (because
the name of Agni does not stand at the beginning
of the hymn). But here a worshipper obtains proper
food at once, he strikes down evil at once.

3. Through the words (occurring in the second
foot of the first verse), hasta/£yuti ^anayanta, ‘ they
caused the birth of Agni by moving their arms,’ the
hymn becomes endowed with (the word) birth.
Verily, the sacrificer is born from this day of the
sacrifice, and therefore the hymn is endowed with
(the word) birth.

4. There are four metrical feet (in the Trish/ubh
verses of this hymn). Verily, cattle have four feet,
therefore they serve for the gaining of cattle.

5. There are three metrical feet (in the Vira^*
verses of this hymn). Verily, three are these three-

1 Annadyam is always explained as food, here as annajw tad
adya m ka. It must be so translated here and elsewhere (I, 2, 10),
though it is often an abstract of annada, an eater of food, a healthy
man.

2 This hymn is prescribed in the Vijva^it sacrifice, and taken
over to the Mahavrata, according to rule. It is used, however,
both as obligatory and as optional at the same time, i.e. it is an
essential part of the sacrifice, and at the same time to be used by
those who wish for proper food.

i6o

AITAREYA-ARANYAKA.

fold worlds. Therefore they serve for the concjuest
of the worlds.

6. These (the Trish/ubh and Vira^ verses of the
hymn) form two metres, which form a support (pra-
tish//za). Verily, man is supported by two (feet),
cattle by four feet. Therefore this hymn places the
sacrificer who stands on two feet among cattle which
stand on four.

7. By saying them straight on there are twenty-
five verses in this hymn. Man also consists of
twenty-five. There are ten fingers on his hands,
ten toes on his feet, two Hgs, two arms, and the
trunk (atman) the twenty-fifth. He adorns that
trunk, the twenty-fifth, by this hymn.

8. And then this day (of the sacrifice) consists of
twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day con¬
sists of twenty-five 1 (verses) ] it becomes the same
through the same. Therefore these two, the day

and the hymn, are twenty-five 2 .

9. These twenty-five verses, by repeating the
first thrice and the last thrice, become thirty less
one. This is a Vira^ verse (consisting of thirty
syllables), too small by one. Into the small (heart)
the vital spirits are placed, into the small stomach
food is placed 3 , therefore this Vira/, small by one,
serves for the obtainment of those desires.

10. He who knows this, obtains those desires.

11. The verses (contained in the hymn agnim
naro didhitibhi/z) become the Brzhati 4 metre and

1 Cf. Ait. Ar. I, 1, 4, 21 II, 3, 4> 2 -

2 The plural after the dual is explained by the fact that the
hymn means the twenty-five verses.

3 Cf. I, 3, 1 , 5 -

4 The hymn consists of eighteen Vira^ and seven Trish/ubh

the Viraf metre, (they become) the perfection which
belongs to that day (the mahavrata). Then they
also become Anush/ubh ', for the offerings of ao-ya
(ghee) dwell in Anush/ubhs 2 .

Third Khaa/da 3 .

i . Some say : ‘ Let him take a Gayatri hymn for
the Pra-uga. Verily, Gayatri is brightness and glory
of countenance, and thus the sacrificer becomes
bright and glorious. 5

2. Others say: f Let him take a Ushmh hymn for

the Pra-uga.- Verily, Ushmh is life, and thus the
sacrificer has a long life.’

Others say : ‘ Let* him take an Anush/ubh hymn

verses. Therefore the eighteen Vintg verses remain what they
are, only that the first is repeated three times, so that we have
twenty Vira^ verses. The seven Trish/ubhs, by repeating the last
three times, become nine. We then take eight syllables away from
each verse, thus changing them into nine Br/hati verses. The
nine times eight syllables, which were taken off, give us seventy-

two-syllables, and as each Br/hati consists of thirty-six syllables
two Br/hatis.

1 The change of the first verse, which is a Vira^- of thirty-three
syllables, into an Anush/ubh is produced by a still easier process.
The first Vii%; consists here • of thirty-three syllables, the Anu¬
sh/ubh should have thirty-two. But one or two syllables more
or less does not destroy a metre, according to the views of native
metricians. The Vira^ itself, for instance, should have thirty syl¬
lables, and here has thirty-three. Therefore if changed into an

Anush/ubh, it simply has one syllable over, which is of no conse¬
quence. Comm.

2 Cf. Ait. Ar. I, i, i, 4.

Thus far the'hymn which has to be recited by the Hot ri
pnest, after the eating of the rztugrahas, has been considered.
What follows next is the-so-called Pra-uga hymn, consisting of
seven tr/kas, which the Hotr/ has to recite after the Vijvedeva-
graha. Different Aakhas recommend hymns of different metres
our Aakha fixes on the Gayatri.

[3] M

AITAREY A-AR AiVY AK A.

for the Pra-uga. V^ril^nushtobh is valour, and

it serves for obtaining valour.

Others say: ‘ Let him take a Br/hati hymn for

the Pra-uga. Verily, Brfhati is fortune, and thus

the sacrificer becomes fortunate.’

Others say: ‘ Let him take a Pankti hym
the Pra-uga. Verily, Pankti is food, and thus the

sacrificer becomes rich in food.’

Others say : ‘ Let him take a Trish/ubh hymn or
the Pra-uga. Verily, Trish/ubh is strength, and thus

the sacrificer becomes strong.

Others say: ‘ Let him take a Gagati hymn for the

Pra-uga. Verily, cattle is 6agati-hke, and thus t e

sacrificer becomes rich in cattle.

3. But we say: ‘ Let him take a Gayatri hym
only. Verily, Gayatri is Brahman, and that ay
(the mahavrata) is (for the attainment of) Brahman.

Thus he obtains Brahman by means of

4 . «And it must be a Gayatri hymn by Madhu-

, ‘ For Madhu/fMandas is called Madhu/f-Mandas,

because he wishes (^andati) for honey (madhu)

the Ri shis. 11

6. ‘Now food verily is honey, all is honey,

desires are honey, and thus if he recites the hymn
of Madhu/f'Mandas, it serves for the attainment of

all desires. . , . ,

7. ‘ He who knows this, obtains all desires.

This (Gayatri pra-uga), according to the one-day
(ekaha) ceremonial’, is perfect inform*. On that day
(th e mahavrata) much is done now and then whic h

1 It is copied from the Vhva^it, and that from the Agnish/oma
* Nothing is wanting for its performance, if one only follow

rules given in the Agnish/oma.

I ARAAYAKA, I ADHYAYA, 4 KHAATDA, 4.

I63

has to be hidden \ and has to be atoned for (by reci¬
tation of hymns). Atonement (*4nti) is rest, the
one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year
(on the last day but one of the sacrifice that lasts

a whole year) the sacrifices rest on this atonement
as their rest.

8. He who knows this rests firm, and they also

for whom a Hotn priest who knows this, recites
this hymn.

Fourth Khaahja 2 .

1. Rv. I, 2, 1-3. Vayav 4 yahi daryateme somd
ara m kma/£, ‘Approach, O Vayu, conspicuous, these
Somas have been made ready.’ Because the word
ready occurs in these verses, therefore is this day
(of the sacrifice) ready (and auspicious) for the
sacrificer and for the gods.

2. Yes, this day is ready (and auspicious) to him
who knows this, or for whom a Wotri priest who
knows this, recites.

3 * Rv. I, 2, 4~d. Indravayu ime suta, a yatam
upa nishkrztam, ‘ Indra and Vayu, these Somas are
prepared, come hither towards what has been pre¬
pared. By nishkrzta, prepared, he means what has
been well prepared (sa^skrfta),

4. Indra and Vayu go to what has been prepared
by him who knows this, or for whom a Hot ri priest
who knows this, recites.

a 1 Dasinrztya - bahubhfitamaithuna - brahmaHripum/folisamprava-
dadikam. See Rajendralal Mitra, Introduction to his edition of the
Aitareya-arawyaka, p. 25. It might be better to join ekSha/^ with
jantyam, but even then the argumentation is not quite clear.

2 Next follows a list of the verses which form the seven trz’^as
(groups of three verses) of the Pra-uga hymn, with occasional
remarks on certain words.

M 2

164

AITAREYA-AR A 2 VY AK A.

5. Rv. I, 2, 7. Mitrawhuve pfitadaksham, dhiyaw
ghrfta&w sadhanta, ‘ I call Mitra .of holy strength ;
(he and Varuwa) they fulfil the prayer accompanied
with clarified butter.’ Verily, speech is the prayer

accompanied with clarified butter.

6. Speech is given to him who knows this, or for
whom a Hotrf priest who knows this, recites.

7. Rv. I, 3, 1. Aivina ya/varlr isha/z, 1 O

Asvinau, (eat) the sacrificial offerings.’ Verily, the
sacrificial offerings are food, and this serves for the

acquirement of food.^ ( _

8. Rv. I, 3, 3. A yata m rudravartani, ‘ Come

hither, ye Rudravartani/

9. The Asvinau go to the sacrifice of him who

knows this, or for whom a Horn priest who knows

this, recites. . , „

10. Rv. I, 3, 4-6. IndrS. yahi ritrabhano, indra

yahi dhiyeshita/i, indra yahi tutufana, ‘ Come hither,
Indra, of bright splendour, Come hither, I ndra, called
by prayer, Come hither, Indra, quickly! Thus he

recites, Come hither, come hither.

ix. Indra comes to the sacrifice of him who
knows this, or for whom a Hot ri priest who knows

this recites.

12. Rv. I. 3, 7. Omasar /farshamdhrfto visve
devasa a gata, ‘ Virve Devas, protectors, supporters
of men, come hither ! ’

13. Verily, the Visve Devas come to the call of
him who knows this, or for whom a Ho in priest
who knows this, recites.

14. Rv. I, 3, 7. DcUva??2so dasusha/z sutam,
< Come ye givers to the libation of the giver! By
dasusha/* he means dadusha h, i. e. to the libation
of every one that gives.

1 ARAJVYAKA, I ADHYAYA, 4 KHAADA, 21. 165

J 5 - The gods fulfil his wish, with whatever wish
he recites this verse,

16. (The wish of him) who knows this, or for
whom a Hot ri priest who knows this, recites.

17* Rv. I, ,3, 10. Pavaka na^ sarasvati ya^na ih
vashAi dhiyavasiH, ' May the holy Sarasvati accept
our sacrifice, rich in prayer! ’ Speech is meant by
‘rich in prayer/

18. Speech is given to him who knows this, or
for whom a Hot;^ priest who knows this, recites.

19* And when he says, ‘ May she accept our
sacrifice ! ’ what he means is, ‘ May she carry off our
sacrifice ! ’

20. If these verses are recited straight on, they
are twenty-one. Man also consists of twenty-one.
There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his
feet, and the trunk the twenty-first. He adorns that
trunk, the twenty-first, by this hymn.

21. By repeating the first and the last verses
thrice, they become twenty-five. The trunk is the
twenty-fifth, and Pra^apati is the twenty-fifth. There
are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet,
two legs, two arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth.
He adorns that trunk, the twenty-fifth, by this
hymn \

Now this day consists of twenty-five, and the
Stoma hymn of that day consists of twenty-five : it
becomes the same through the same. Therefore
these two, the day and the hymn, are twenty-five,
yea, twenty-five.

\

Cf. I, 1, 2, 7 > I, 3> 5> 7*

i66

AIT ARE Y A-ARAN Y AKA,

SECOND ADHYAYA.

First Khanda 1 .

1. The two trz/£as, Rv. VIII, 68, i — 3 > a tva
rathaw yathotaye, and Rv. VIII, 2, 1-3, ida m vaso
sutam andha//, form the first (pratipad) and the
second (anu^ara) of the Marutvatiya hymn.

2. Both, as belonging to the one-day ceremonial 2 >
are perfect in form. On that day much is done
now and then which has to be hidden, and has to
be atoned for. Atonement is rest, the one-day
sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year the
sacrifices rest on this atonement as their rest. He
who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom
a Hot ri priest who knows this, recites this hymn 3 .

3. In the second verse of (the Pragatha 4 ), indra
nediya ed ihi, pra su tira sai ibhir ye ta ukthina/*
(Rv. VIII, 53, 5, 6), there occurs the word ukthina A,
reciters of hymns 5 . Verily, this day (the mahavrata)
is an uktha (hymn), and as endowed with an uktha,

the form of this day is perfect.

4. In the first verse (of another Pragatha) the
word vira, strong, occurs (Rv. I, 40, 3), and as
endowed with the word vira, strong, the form of
this day is perfect.

1 In the first adhyaya the two hymns to be recited by the Hotrz
priest at the morning-libation (the agya and pra-uga jastra) have
been considered. Now follows the Marutvatiya hymn, to be
recited by the Hotrz priest at the noon-libation.

2 Taken from the Agnish/oma.

3 Cf. I, 1, 3, 7-8.

4 All these Pragathas consist of two verses expanded into a
trz'^a.

5 Hotradaya ukthina^ jastrizza^.

t

I ARAATYAKA, 2 ADHYAYA, I KHANDA, 12. l6j

5. In the second verse (of another Pragatha) the
word suviryam, strength, occurs (Rv. I, 40, 1), and
as endowed with the word suvirya, strength, the
form of this day is perfect.

6. In the first verse (of another Pragatha) the
word ukthyam, to be hymned, occurs (Rv. I, 40, 5).
Verily, this day is an uktha, and as endowed with an
uktha, the form of this day is perfect.

7. In the (Dhayya) verse agnir neta (Rv. Ill, 20,
4) the word vntraha, killer of Vntra, occurs. The
killing of V ritra. is a form (character) of Indra, this
day (the mahavrata) belongs to Indra, and this is
the (perfect) form of that day.

8. In the (Dhayya) verse tva m soma kratubhi/^
sukratur bh u/i (Rv. I, 91, 2) the word vri sha \
powerful, occurs. Powerful is a form (character) of
Indra, this day belongs to Indra, and this is the
(perfect) form of that day.

9. In the (Dhayya) verse pinvanty apa h (Rv. I,
64, 6) the word va^inam, endowed with food, occurs.
Endowed with food is a form (character) of Indra,
this day belongs to Indra, and this is the (perfect)
form of that day.

10. In the same verse the word stanayantam,
thundering, occurs. Endowed with thundering is a
form (character) of Indra, this day belongs to Indra,
and this is the (perfect) form of that day.

11. In (the Pragatha) pra va indraya brfhate (Rv.
VIII, 89, 3) (the word brz’hat occurs). Verily, b^/hat
is mahat (great), and as endowed with mahat, great,
the form of this day (mahavrata) is perfect.

12. In (the Pragatha) brehad indriya gayata (Rv.

1 Cf. I, 2, 2, 14.

aitareya-araayaka.

168

VIII, 89,1) (the word brzhat occurs). Verily, brzhat
is mahat (great), and as endowed with mahat, the

form of this day is perfect.

13. In (the Pragatha) naki h sudaso ratham pary
asa na riramad (Rv. VII, 32, 10) the words paryasa
(he moved round) and na riramad (he did not enjoy)
occur, and as endowed with the words paryasta and

ranti the form of this day is perfect k

He recites all (these) Pragathas, in order to obtain
all the days (of the sacrifice), all the Ukthas 1 2 , all
the PrfshZ/zas 3 , all the .Sastras 4 5 , all the Pra-ugas ,
and all the Savanas (libations).

Second Khaa t da 6 .

1. He recites the hymn, asat su me^arita/z sabhi-
vega/z (Rv. X, 27, 1), (and in it the word) satya-
dhvrztam, the destroyer of truth. Verily, that day

1 Because the performance of the Mahavrata sacrifice moves the
worshipper round to another world and gives him enjoyment.
Comm. It is difficult to surpass the absurdity of these explana¬
tions. Na riramat means no one stopped the chariot of Sudas.
But even if it meant that no one rejoiced through the chariot of
Sudas, it would be difficult to see how the negative of enjoyment,
mentioned in the hymn, could contribute to the perfection of a
sacrifice which is to confer positive enjoyment on the worshipper.

2 The stotras following after the Yagirayagfiiya Saman, serving
for the ukthya-kratus.

3 The stotras of the noon-libation, to be performed with the
Rathantara, Br/hat, and other Samans.

4 The jastras, recitations, accompanying the oblations of a^ya.

5 The pra-ugas, a division of .rastras, described above.

6 The type after which the Marutvatiya-^astra is to be pei formed
is the -Afaturviwsa day. Hitherto (from a tva ratham to naki//
sudasa^), all that is taken over from the type to the modification,
i.e. the Marutvatiya, has been explained. Now follow the verses
which are new and peculiar to the Marutvatiya of the Mahavrata.

I ARAOTAKA, 2 ADHYAYA, 2 KHAiVDA, 8. I 69

is truth, and as endowed with the word satva, truth,
the form of this day is perfect \

2. That hymn is composed by Vasukra. Verily,
\ asukra is Brahman, and that, day is Brahman. Thus
he obtains Brahman by means of Brahman 1 2 .

3* Here they say: ‘Why then is that Marutvatiya
hymn completed by the hymn of Vasukra ?' Surely
because no other ./felii but Vasukra brought out a
Marutvatiya hymn, or divided it properly 3 . There-
iore that Marutvatiya hymn is completed by the
hymn of Vasukra.

4 - That hymn, asat su me, is not definitely ad¬
dressed to any deity, and is therefore supposed to be
addressed to Pra^apati. Verily, Pra^apati is indefinite,
and therefore the hymn serves to win Pra^apati.

5* Once in the hymn (Rv. X, 27, 22) he defines
Indra (indraya sunvat); therefore it does not fall off
from its form, as connected with Indra.

6. He recites the hymn (Rv. VI, 17, 1) piba
somam abhi yam ugra tarda/b

7- In the verse urvam gavyam mahi grin ana
indra the word mahi, great, occurs. Endowed with
the word mahat, the form of this day is perfect.

8. That hymn is composed by Bharadvajya, and
bharadva^ya was he who knew most, who lived
longest, and performed the greatest austerities among
the i^zshis, and by this hymn he drove away evil.
Therefore if he recites the hymn of Bharadva^a,

1 The commentator endeavours to make the meaning more
natural by taking in the word prahanta, he who kills the destroyer
of truth. But considering the general character of these remarks,
this is hardly necessary.

2 Cf. I, 1, 3, 3.

3 By separating the first trika. from the second, and so forth.

AIT ARE Y A-AR A 2 V Y AKA.

then, after having driven away eyil, he becomes
learned, long-lived, and full of austerities.

9. He recites the hymn kaya suhhk savayasa/i

sanila^ (Rv. I, 165, 1).

10. In the verse a 5asate prati haryanty uktha
(Rv I 165, 4) the word uktha occurs. Verily, that
day (the mahavrata) is uktha (hymn). Endowed with
the word uktha, the form of this day becomes perfect.

11. That hymn is called Kayasubhiya h Verily,
that hymn, which is called Kayaiubhiya, is mutual
understanding and it is lasting. By means of yt
Indra, Agastya, and the Maruts came to a mutua
understanding. Therefore, if he recites the Kaya-
.mbhiya hymn, it serves for mutual understanding.

12 The same hymn is also long life. Therefore, \
if the sacrificer is dear to the Hot ri, let him recite \

the Kayasubhiya hymn for him. I

13. He recites the hymn marutvaw indra vrzshabo I

rawaya (Rv. Ill, 47 . A . . , n I

14. In it the words indra vrzshabha (powerful) 'l

occur. Verily, powerful is a form of Indra 2 , this
day belongs to Indra, and this is the perfect form -

of that day. .

15. That hymn is composed by Vuvamitra. Verily,

Visvamitra was the friend (mitra) of all (visva).

16. Everybody is the friend of him who knows
this, and for whom a Hotrf priest who knows this,

recites this hymn.

17. The next hymn, ^anishMa ugra/z sahase tu-
raya (Rv. I, 73 > 0 > forms a Nividdhana 3 , and,

1 Cf Ait Rrahm V 16. 2 Cf. Ait. Ar. II, 2, 1, 8.

3 The hymn consists of eleven verses. In the middle, after the
sixth verse, nivids or invocations, such as indro marutvan, are in- \
serted, and therefore it is called a nividdhana hymn.

I ARAATYAKA, 2 ADHYAyA, 2 KHAJVDA, 18 .

171

according to the one-day (ekiha) ceremonial, is perfect
in form. On that day much is done now and then
which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for
(by recitation of hymns). Atonement is rest, the
one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year
(on the last day but one of the sacrifice that lasts a
whole year) the sacrificers rest on this atonement as
their rest.

He who knows this rests firm, and they also for
whom a Hot ri priest who knows this, recites this
hymn \

18. These, if recited straight on, are ninety-seven
verses 2 . The ninety are three Viraf, each consisting
of thirty, and then the seven verses which are over.
Whatever is the praise of the seven, is the praise of
ninety also.

1 With this hymn the Marutvatiya-^astra is finished. All the
hymns from a tva ratham to asat su me ^aritar are simply taken
over from the Afaturvima ceremonial, the rest are peculiar to the
Mahavrata day, the day preceding the Udayaniya or final day of
the Gavamayana sattra. All this is more fully described in the fifth
Arawyaka (V, 1, 1, 8) containing the Sutras or rules of -Saunaka,
while the earlier Arawyakas are reckoned as Brahma^as, and are
therefore mixed up with matters not actually required for the per¬
formance of the sacrifice.

2 The first Stotriya and Anurupa

trzkas = .... 6 (I, 2, 1, 1).

The six Pragathas, each of 2 verses
raised to 3 (but the text gives
seven Pragathas) = .

Three Dhayyas =

Asat su=.

Piba somam = . . . .

Kaya jubha = . . .

Marutva^ indra =

Granish/M ugra^

*8 (1,2, i, 3; 4; 5; 6; 11; 12; 13).
3 ( r . 2, 1, 7; 8; 9).

24 (I, 2, 2, 1).

15(1, 2, 2, 6).

15 (I, 2, 2, 9).

5 (I, 2, 2, 13).

II (I, 2, 2, 17).

97

AITAREYA-ARA 2 VYAKA.

1 72

19. By repeating the first and last verses three
times each, they become one hundred and one
verses.

20. There are five fingers, of four joints each, two
pits (in the elbow and the arm), the arm, the eye, the
shoulder-blade ; this makes twenty-five. The other
three parts have likewise twenty-five each b That
makes a hundred, and the trunk is the one hundred

and first.

21. Hundred is life, health, strength, brightness.
The sacrificer as the one hundred and first rests in
life, health, strength, and brightness.

22. These verses become Trish^ubh 1 2 , for the
noonday-libation consists of Trish^ubh verses.

Third Khaa^da 3 * .

1. They say: ‘What is the meaning of prenkha,
swing? 5 Verily, he is the swing, who blows (the
wind). He indeed goes forward (pra + inkhate) in
these worlds, and that is why the swing is called
prenkha.

2. Some say, that there should be one plank,
because the wind blows in one way, and it should

be like the wind.

3. That is not to be regarded.

4. Some say, there should be three planks, be¬
cause there are these three threefold worlds, and it
should be like them.

1 The left side as well as the right, and then the left and right
side of the lower body. Thus we have twenty joints of the five toes,
a thigh, a leg, and three joints, making twenty-five on each side.

2 Approach the Trish/ubh metre of the last hymn. Comm.

3 After having considered the Marutvatiya, he proceeds to con¬

sider the Nishkevalya. This has to be recited by the Hotn while

sitting on a swing.

*73

I ARAAYARA, 2 ADHYAYA, 4 K HA ADA, 3.

5. That is not to be regarded.

6. Let there be two, for these two worlds (the
earth and heaven) are seen as if most real, while the
ether (space) between the two is the sky (antariksha).
Therefore let there be two planks.

7. Let them be made of Udumbara wood. Verily,
the Udumbara tree is sap and eatable food, and thus
it serves to obtain sap and eatable food.

8. Let them be elevated in the middle (between
the earth and the cross-beam). Food, if placed in
the middle, delights man, and .thus he places the
sacrificer in the middle of eatable food.

9. There are two kinds of rope, twisted towards
the right.and twisted towards the left. The right
ropes serve for some animals,, the left ropes „ for
others. If there are both kinds of rope, they serve
for the attainment of both kinds of cattle.

10. Let them be made of Darbha (Ku<ra grass), for
among plants Darbha is free from evil, therefore
they should be made of Darbha grass.

Fourth Khaada.

1. Some say: ‘Let the swing be one ell (aratni)
above the ground, for by that measure verily the
Svarga worlds are measured.’ That is not to be
regarded.

2. Others say: ‘ Let it be one span (prade^a), for
by that measure verily the vital airs were measured.’
That is not to be regarded l .

3. Let it be one fist (mush/i), for by that measure
verily all eatable food is made, and by that measure

1 They rise one span above the heart, and they proceed one
span from out the mouth. Comm.

174

AITAREYA-ARA2VYAKA.

all eatable food is taken ; therefore let it be one fist
above the ground.

4. They say: ‘ Let him mount the swing from
east to west, like he who shines; for the sun
mounts these worlds from east to west.’ That is
not to be regarded.

3. Others say: ‘ Let him mount the swing side¬
ways, for people mount a horse sideways \ thinking
that thus they will obtain all desires.’ That is not
to be regarded.

6. They say: ‘ Let him mount the swing 1 2 from
behind, for people mount a ship from behind, and
this swing is a ship in which to go to heaven.
Therefore let him mount it from behind.

7. Let him touch the swing with his chin (k/m-
buka). The parrot puka) thus mounts a tree, and
he is of all birds the one who eats most food.
Therefore let him touch it with his chin.

8. Let him mount the swing with his arms 3 . The
hawk swoops thus on birds and on trees, and he is of
all birds the strongest. Therefore let him mount

with his arms.

9. Let him not withdraw one foot (the right or
left) from the earth, for fear that he may lose his

hold. ttj a •

10. The Ho tri mounts the swing, the Udgat ri

the seat made of Udumbara wood. The swing is
masculine, the seat feminine, and they form a union.
Thus he makes a union at the beginning of the
uktha in order to get offspring.

1 Here we have clearly riding on horseback.

2 While the swing points to the east, let him stand west, and

thus mount. A

3 The fore-arms, from the elbow to the end, the aratm. Comm.

I ARAOTAKA, 2 ADHYAYA, 4 KHAiVDA, 1 7. I 75

11. He who knows this, gets offspring and
cattle.

12. Next the swing is food, the seat fortune.
Thus he mounts and obtains food and fortune.

13. The Hotrakas (the Pra^astrf, Brahma^a-
tikkamsm, Pot ri, Nesh/ri, Agnidhra, and Kkkhkv&kz)
together with the Brahman sit down on cushions
made of grass, reeds, leaves, &c.

14. Plants and trees, after they have grown up,
bear fruit. Thus if the priests mount on that day
altogether (on their seats), they mount on solid and
fluid as their proper food. Therefore this serves
for the attainment of solid as proper food \

15. Some say: ‘Let him descend after saying
vasha^V That is not to be regarded. For, verily,
that respect is not shown which is shown to one
who does not see it 1 2 3 .

16. Others say: ‘Let him descend after he has
taken the food in his hand/ That is not to be re¬
garded. For, verily, that respect is not shown
which is shown to one after he has approached
quite close.

17. Let him descend after he has seen the food.
For, verily, that is real respect which is shown to
one when he sees it. Only after having actually

1 One expects isha^ before ftr^a^, but it is wanting in both text
and commentary, and in other MSS. also.

2 The word by which the Hotrz' invites the Adhvaryu to offer
the oblation to the gods. The descending from the swing belongs,
of course, to a later part of the sacrifice.

3 It is supposed that the Hotrz' rises from the swing to show
respect to the sacrificial food, when it is brought near. But as it
is not brought near, immediately after the Hotrz has finished his
part with the word vasha/, the food could not see the Hotrz' rise, and
this mark of respect, intended for the food, would thus be lost.

!y6 : AITAREYA-ARAOTAKA.

seen the food (that is brought to the sacrifice), let

him descend from the swing*

18. Let him descend turning towards the .east,

for in the east the seed of the gods springs up 1 .
Therefore let him rise turning towards the east,
yea, turning towards the east.

THIRD ADHYAYA.

First Khaada.

1. Let him begin this day 2 with singing ‘Him,
thus they say.

2. Verily, the sound Him is Brahman, that day
also is Brahman. He who knows this, obtains

Brahman even by Brahman.

3. As he begins with the, sound Him, surely
that masculine sound of Him and the feminine
Rik (the verse) make a couple. Thus he makes
a couple at the beginning of the hymn in order
to get offspring 3 . He who knows this, gets cattle

and offspring.

4. Or, as he begins with the sound Him, surely
like a wooden spade, so the sound Him serves to.
dig up Brahman (the sap of the Veda). And as a
man wishes to dig up any, even the hardest soil,
with a spade, thus he digs up Brahman.

5. He who knows this digs up, by means of the
sound Him, everything he may desire.

6. If he begins with the sound Him, that sound
is the holding apart of divine and human speech.

1 Should it be devareta^ sampra^ayate, or devaretasam pra^ayate?

2 . The Nishkevalya-^astra, of the noon-libation; cf. I, 2, 2, 1.

3 Cf. I, 2, 4, 10.

I ARAZYYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, 2 KHAAZ>A, 9.

1 77

Therefore, he who begins, after having uttered the
sound Him, holds apart divine and human speech l .

Second Khaatda.

1. And here they ask : ‘ What is the beginning
of this day ?’ Let him say : ‘ Mind and speech V

2. All desires dwell in the one (mind), the other
yields all desires.

3. All desires dwell in the mind, for with the
mind he conceives all desires.

4. All desires come to him who knows this.

5. Speech yields all desires, for with speech he
declares all his desires.

6. Speech yields all desires to him who knows this.

7. Here they say: ‘Let him not begin this day
with a Rtk } a Ya^us, or a Sdman verse (divine
speech), for it is said, he should not start with a
Rik, a Ya^us, or a Saman V

8. Therefore, let him say these Vyahrztis (sacred
interjections) first.

9. These interjections Bhus, Bhuvas, Svar are
the three Vedas, Bhus the A^-veda, Bhuvas the
Ya^ur-veda, Svar the Sama-veda. Therefore (by

1 Human speech is the ordinary speech, divine speech that of
the Veda. Thus between the hymns, or the divine speech, and
the ordinary language of conversation the sound Him is inter¬
posed as a barrier.

2 Mind, to think about the hymns which have to be recited ;
speech, to recite them without a flaw.

3 It is doubtful whether neyad rik&h and apaga^Met can have
this meaning. However, what is intended is clear, viz. that the
priest, even after having uttered the sound Him, should not imme¬
diately begin with verses from the Vedas, but should intercalate
the three syllables bhur bhuva h svar, or, if taken singly, bhus,
bhuvas, svar.

[ 3 ]

N

aitareya-araayaka.

1

intercalating these) he does not begin simply with a
Rik, Yafus, or Saman verse, he does not start with

a Rik, Yafus, or Saman verse.

Third Khavda.

i He begins with tad, this, (the first word of the
first hymn, tad id asa)- Verily ‘ this, this’ is food,

and thus he obtains food.

2. Prayapati indeed uttered this as the first word,

consisting of one or two syllables, viz. tata and tata
(or tat)'. And thus does a child, as soon as he
begins to speak, utter the word, consisting °f one
or two syllables, viz. tata and tata (or tat). Wit i
this very word, consisting of tat or tatta, he begins.

3. This has been said by a Afshi (Rv. X, 71, i) 1 2 :—

4. ‘O Brfhaspati, the first point of speech;’—for

this is the first and highest point of speech.

5. ‘That which you have uttered, making it a
name -/—for names are made by speech.

1 Tata and tata are used both by children in addressing their
parents, and by parents in addressing their children. If tat is
called the very same word, eva is used in the sense o lva.

2 The verse is cited to confirm the meaning of tat, the first word
of the first hymn (tad id dsa) as explained before. It was said
that tat was the first name applied to a child. Now, according to
Arvalayana Grrhya-shtra I, 16, 8, a name is given to a child at the
time of its birth, a name which no one knows except father anc
mother, till the time when he is initiated by a Guru. This is cal ec
the abhivadamya name. In allusion to this custom it is said here
that tata is the secret name of the child, which becomes publicly
known at a later time only. Of course the interpretation of the
verse in that sense is unnatural, but quite in keeping with the
general character of the Arawyaka. I doubt whether even the com¬
mentator understood what was intended by the author, and whether
the gods who enter the body are supposed to know the name, or
whether the name refers to these gods, or, it may be, to ta , t e
Brahman.

I ARAAYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, 4 KHAADA, 9.

I79

6. That (name) which was the best and without
a flaw—for this is the best and without a flaw.

7. ‘ That which was hidden by their love, is made
manifest, for this was hidden in the body, viz. those
deities (which enter the body, Agni as voice, entering
the mouth, &c.) ; and that was manifest among the

gods in heaven. This is what was intended by the
verse.

Fourth Khaada 1 .

1. He begins with: ‘That indeed was the oldest
in the worlds 2 * ; for that (the Brahman) is verily the
oldest in the worlds.

2. Whence was born the fierce one, endowed
with brilliant force —for from it was born the fierce
one, who is endowed with brilliant force.

3* ‘ When born he at once destroys the enemies;’—
for he at once when born struck down the evil one.

4. ‘ He after whom all friends rejoice;’—verily all
friends are the creatures, and they rejoice after him,
saying, ‘ He has risen, he has risen V

5. ‘ Growing by strength, the almighty 4 ;’—for he
(the sun) does grow by strength, the almighty.

6. ‘He, as enemy, causes fear to the slave;’—for
everything is afraid of him.

7. ‘Taking the breathing and the not-breathing;’—
this means the living and the lifeless.

8. ‘ Whatever has been offered at feasts came to
thee;’—this means everything is in thy power.

9. ‘All turn their thought also on thee 5 ;’—this

1 He now explains the first hymn of the Nishkevalya, which is
called the Ra^ana.

2 Rv. X, 120, 1.

4 Rv. X, 120, 2.

N 2

3 The sun and the fire.
6 Rv. X, 120, 3.

AlTAREYA-ARAiVYAKA.

180

means all these beings, all minds, all thoughts also

turn to thee. ,

10. ‘When these two become three protectors;

i.e. when these two united beget offspring.

11. He who knows this, gets offspring and cattle.

12. ‘Join what is sweeter than sweet (offspring)
with the sweet (the parents);’—for the couple (father
and mother) is sweet, the offspring is sweet, and he
thus joins the offspring with the couple.

13. ‘ And this (the son, when married) being very
sweet, conquered through the sweet; i. e. the couple
is sweet, the offspring is sweet, and thus through

the couple he conquers offspring .

14. This is declared by a RisYd 2 : ‘ Because he
(Prarapati) raised his body (the hymn tad id asa
or the Veda in general) in the body (of the sacri¬
ficed ’ (therefore that Nishkevalya hymn is praised);
—i.e. this body, consisting of the Veda, in that cor¬
poreal form (of the sacrificer).

15. ‘Then let this body indeed be the medicine

of that body;’—i.e. this body, consisting of the Veda,
of that corporeal form (of the sacrificer).

16. Of this (the first foot of Rv. X, 120, 1) the
ei°bt syllables are Gayatri, the eleven syllables are
Trish/ubh, the twelve syllables are 6'agati, the ten
syllables are Virag. The Viraf, consisting of ten

syllables, rests in these three metres 3 .

17. The word purusha, consisting of three sylla¬
bles, that indeed goes into the Vira^ . _

1 All these are purely fanciful interpretations.

2 Not to be found in our .Sakha of the Rig-veda.

» These metres are obtained by a purely arbitrary counting
of syllables in the hymn tadidasa, which really consists of 11-

sh/ubh verses. - , .,

4 If we simply count syllables, the first and second fee

I ARAAYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, 5 KHAADA, 2 .

181

18. Verily, these are all metres, these (Gayatri,
Trish/ubh, 6agati) having the Vira^* as the fourth.
In this manner this day is complete in all metres to
him who knows this.

Fifth Khaada.

1. He extends these (verses) by (interpolating)
the sound 1 . Verily, the sound is purusha, man.
Therefore every man when he speaks, sounds loud,
as it were.

2. At the end of each foot of the first verse of
the hymn tad id asa, he inserts one foot of the
second verse of hymn Rv. VIII, 69, nadazz^ va
odatinam, &c. Thus the verse is to be recited as
follows :

Tad id asa bhuvaneshu ^yesh/Zzam pu
nadazzz va odatinam,

Yato gagna ugras tveshanrzmzzo ru
nadazzz yoyuvatinam,

Sadyo ^a^nano ni rizzati ^atrun
patizzz vo aghnyanam,

Anu yazzz vbve madanti uma h sho

dhenunam ishudhyasi.

first verse consist of ten syllables only, the fourth of nine or ten.
In order to bring them to the right number, the word purusha
is to be added to what is a Virag, i.e. to the first, the second,
and fourth feet. We thus get:

tad id asa bhuvaneshu gyesh/^am pu
yato ^a^-ha ugras tveshanrfm;zo ru
sadyo ^a^nano ni rbzati jatrun
anu ya m vlrve madanti fima^ sha^.

Cf. Ait. Ar. V, 1, 6.

1 The sound, nada, is really a verse beginning with nadam,
and which is interpolated after the syllables pu ru sha^.

182

AITAREYA-ARAAYAKA.

In nadaw va odatinam (Rv. VIII, 69, 2), odati
are the waters in heaven, for they water all this ,
and they are the waters in the mouth, for they
water all good food.

3. In nada^ yoyuvatinam (Rv. VIII, 69, 2), yo-
yuvati are the waters in the sky, for they seem to
inundate; and they are the waters of perspiration, for

they seem to run continually.

4. In pati;/z vo aghnyanam (Rv. VIII, 69, 2),
aghnya are the waters which spring from the smoke
of fire, and they are the waters which spring from

the organ.

5. In dhenunam ishudhyasi (Rv. VIII, 69, 2),
the dhenu (cows) are the waters, for they de¬
light all this; and ishudhyasi means, thou art

food.

6. He extends a Trish/ubh and an AnushAibh 1 2 .
Trish/ubh is the man, Anush/ubh the wife, and
they make a couple. Therefore does a man,
after having found a wife, consider himself a more
perfect man.

7. These verses, by repeating the first three times,
become twenty-five. The trunk is the twenty-fifth,
and Pra^apati is the twenty-fifth 3 . There are ten
fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs,
two arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth. He adorns
that trunk as the twenty-fifth. Now this day con¬
sists of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that
day consists of twenty-five : it becomes the same

1 The nasal pluta on iti is explained as padapratikagraha;/e
’tyantamadarartha^. Cf. Ait. Ar. II, 1, 4 ) 3 *

2 Tad id asa is a Trish/ubh, nada m va h an Anush/ubh.

** Cf. I, 1, 2, 7, I, 1, 4,

21.

I ARA2VYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, 7 KUANDA, 5 . 183

through the same. Therefore the two, the day and
the hymn, are twenty-five \

Sixth K hand a.

This is an exact repetition of the third khaWa.
According to the commentator, the third kha/fc/a
was intended for the glory of the first word tad,
while the sixth is intended for the glory of the
whole hymn.

Seventh Khanda.

1. He begins with the hymn, Tad id asa bhuva-
neshu ^yesh/^am (Rv. X, 120). Verily, ^yesh/z^a,
the oldest, is mahat, great. Endowed with mahat
the form of this day is perfect.

2. Then follows the hymn, Ta m su te kirtim
maghavan mahitva (Rv. X, 54), with the auspicious
word mahitvi.

3. Then follows the hymn, Bhuya id vavrfdhe
viryaya (Rv. VI, 30), with the auspicious word
virya.

4. Then follows the hymn, N rinam u tva n ri-
t 3 .ma.rn gobhir ukthai/^ (Rv. I, 51, 4), with the aus¬
picious word uktha.

5. He extends the first two padas, which are too
small, by one syllable (Rv. X, 120, 1 a, and Rv. VIII,
69, 2 a) 2 . Into the small heart the vital spirits are
placed, into the small stomach food is placed. It

1 The number is obtained as follows:

1. Tad id asa (Rv. X, 120) =

2. Ta m su te kirtim (Rv. X, 54 )—*

3. Bhuya id vavrzdhe (Rv.VI, 30) =

4. Nrz'nam u tva (Rv. I, 51, 4) =

9 verses
6 „

5 »

3

2 Cf. I, I, 2, 9.

23 + 2 = 25

184

A 1 TAREYA-ARA 2 VYAKA.

serves for the attainment of these desires. He who
knows this, obtains these desires.

6. The two feet, each consisting of ten syllables
(Rv. X, 120, 1 a, b), serve for the gaining of both
kinds of food \ of what has feet (animal food), and
what has no feet (vegetable food).

7. They come to be of eighteen syllables each 1 2 .
Of those which are ten, nine are the pranas (openings
of the body) 3 , the tenth is the (vital) self. This
is the perfection of the (vital) self. Eight syllables
remain in each. He who knows them, obtains what¬
ever he desires.

Eighth Khaa^a.

1. He extends (these verses) by (interpolating)
the sound 4 . Verily, breath (pri^a) is sound. There¬
fore every breath when it sounds, sounds loud, as it
were.

2. The verse (VIII, 69, 2) nadaw va odatinam,
&c., is by its syllables an Ushmh 5 , by its feet an
AnushAibh 6 . Ushmh is life, AnuslVubh, speech. He
thus places life and speech in him (the sacrificer).

3. By repeating the first verse three times, they

1 Because Virag - , a foot of ten syllables, is food.

2 Rv. X, 120, 1 a= . . 10

Rv. VIII, 69, 2 a= . . 7

Syllable pu= . . 1

18

3 Seven in the head and two in the body; sapta vai sirshawya^
prawa dvav avaft£av iti.

4 Cf. I, 3, 5, 1.

6 Each pada has seven syllables, the third only six; but a
seventh syllable is gained by pronouncing the y as i. Comm.

6 Because it has four padas.

I ARAiVYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, 8 KHAZVDA, 8. 1 85

become twenty-five. The trunk is the twenty-fifth,
and Pra^apati is the twenty-fifth. There are ten
fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs,
two arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth. He
adorns that trunk as the twenty-fifth. Now this day
consists of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that
day consists of twenty-five : it becomes the same
through the same. Therefore the two, the day and
the hymn, are twenty-five. This is the twenty-fifth
with regard to the body.

4. Next, with regard to the deities: The eye, the
ear, the mind, speech, and breath, these five deities
(powers) have entered into that person (purusha),
and that person entered into the five deities. He is
wholly pervaded there with his limbs to the very
hairs and nails. Therefore all beings to the very
insects are born as pervaded (by the deities or
senses) b

5. This has been declared by a AYshi (Rv. X,

114, 8):—

6. ‘A thousandfold are these fifteen hymns ;—for
five arise from ten 1 2 3 .

7. ‘ As large as heaven and earth, so large is
it;’—verily, the self (^ivatman) is as large as heaven
and earth.

8. ‘A thousandfold are the thousand powersV—

1 The commentator takes this in a different sense, explaining
atra, there, as the body pervaded by the person, yet afterwards
stating that all beings are born, pervaded by the senses.

2 The commentator explains uktha, hymns, as members or organs.
They are the five, and they spring from the ten, i.e. from the five
elements (earth, water, fire, wind, and ether), forming part of the
father and mother each, and therefore called ten, or a decade.
Dajata/^ is explained by bhutadarakat.

3 The application of the senses to a thousand different objects.

i 86

aitarey a- a rajvy aka.

by saying this the poet pleases the hymns (the

senses), and magnifies them.

o. ‘As far as Brahman reaches, so far reaches

speech—wherever there is Brahman, there is a

word; and wherever there is a word, there is Brav

man, this was intended.

10. The first of the hymns among all those
hymns has nine verses. Verily, there are nine
prawas (openings), and it serves for t eir ene .

11. Then follows a hymn of six verses. Ven y,
the seasons are six, and it serves to obtain them.

12. Then follows a hymn of five verses. Vert y,
the Pankti consists of five feet. Verily, Pankti is
food, and it serves for the gaining of proper food.

13. Then follows a tristich. Three are these
threefold worlds, and it serves to conquer them

14 These verses become Brzhatis \ that me re
being immortal, leading to the world of the Devas.
That body of verses is the trunk (of the lr repre
sented by the whole 5astra), and thus it is. He w o
knows this comes by this way (by making the verses
the trunk of the bird) near^to the immortal belt,

yea, to the immortal Self 2 .

1 Each foot of the Trish/ubh has eleven syllables, to which seven

are added from the Nada hymn. This gives

each pada. Two padas therefore give thirty-six sylla ,

is a Bnhatt. In this manner the twenty-three verses of the y

yield forty-six Bnhatis. Comm. Maha-

* He obtains a birth among the gods by means of this Maha

vrata ceremonial, if performed with meditation and a n D

standing of its hidden meaning.

I ARANYAKA, 4 ADHYAYA, I KH AND A, 4.

FOURTH ADHYAYA.

First Khanda.

1. Next comes the Sfldadohas 1 verse. Suda-
dohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with
breath.

2. Next follow the neck verses. They recite
them as Ush^ih, according 1 to their metre 2 .

3 - Next comes (again) the Sudadohas verse.
Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints
with breath.

4- Next follows the head. That is in Gayatri
verses. The Gayatri is the beginning of all metres 3 ;
the head the first of all members. It is in Arkavat
verses (Rv. I, 7, 1—9) 4 . Arka is Agni. They are
nine verses. The head consists of nine pieces. He
recites the tenth verse, and that is the skin and the
hairs on the head. It serves for reciting one verse

more than (the nine verses contained in) the Stoma 5 .

’ “ ---

The Nishkevalya-^astra is represented in the shape of a
bird, consisting of trunk, neck, head, vertebrae, wings, tail, and
stomach. Before describing the hymns which form the neck,
another hymn has to be mentioned, called Sudadohas, which has
to be recited at the end of the hymns, described before, which form
the trunk. Sudadohas is explained as c yielding milk/ and because
that word occurs in the verse, the verse is called Sudadohas. It
follows on the Nada verse, Rv. VIII, 69, 3. Cf. Ait. Ar. I, 5, 1, 7.

2 They occur in another jakha, and are to be recited such as
they ^are, without any insertions. They are given by Aaunaka,
Ait. Ar. V, 2, 1.

3 It was created from the mouth of Pra^apati.

4 They are called so, because the word arka occurs in them.

5 The chanters of the Sama-veda make a Trivrc't Stoma of
this hymn, without any repetitions, leaving out the tenth verse.
The reciters of the Rig-veda excel them therefore by reciting a
tenth verse. This is called atixawsanam (or -na).

AITAREYA-ARAOTAKA.

188

These form the Trivnt Stoma and the Gayatri
metre, and whatever there exists, all this is pro
duced after the production of this Stoma and this
metre. Therefore the recitation of these head-

hymns serves for production.

5. He who knows this, gets offspring and cattle.

6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Verily,
Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints

with breath.

7 Next follow the vertebrae 1 (of the bird).
These verses are Vira? (shining). Therefore man
says to man, ‘ Thou shinest above usor to a stiff
and proud man, ‘ Thou carriest thy neck stiff. r
because the (vertebrae of the neck) run close t°g e '
ther, they are taken to be the best food. For Virar

is food, and food is strength.

8. Next comes the Shdadohas verse. Sudadohas
is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with breath.

1 Vipavas may be a singular, and the commentator seems to
take it as such in his first explanation. The text, tS virago bha-
vanti, proves nothing, because it could not be sa virago bhavanti,
nor even sa vir to bhavati. Possibly the word may occur in both
forms, vigv, plural vi^ava//, and vig-avaA. In a somewhat similar
way we find griva and griva/i, folia and la feuille. On p. 109,
the commentator speaks of vigavabhaga, and again, p. no, pa
kshamfilarupa vi^ava abhihitfi/ 5 . He, however, explains its meaning
rightly, as the root of the wings, or rather the lower bones of t le
neck. Gri vU, plural, were originally the vertebrae of the nec .
The paragraph, though very empty, contains at least some inter¬
esting forms of language. First vi^u, vertebrae, then the partici¬
ples duta and sambaMatama, and lastly the verb pratya/i, the last
probably used in the sense of to bring near, to represent, with the
superlative adverb annatamam (Paw. V, 4, n), i.e. they are repre-
sented as if they brought the best food.

I ARAAYAKA, 4 ADHYAYA, 2 KHAA'JDA, 3. 189

Second Khaada.

1. Next follows the right wing. It is this
world (the earth), it is this Agni, it is speech, it is
the Rathantara 1 , it is Vasish^a, it is a hundred 2 .
These are the six powers (of the right wing) 3 . The
Sampata hymn (Rv. IV, 20) serves indeed for ob¬
taining desires and for firmness. The Pankti verse
(Rv. I, 80, 1) serves for proper food.

2. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
is breath, thereby he joins all joints with breath.

3. Next follows the left wing. It is that world
(heaven), it is that sun, it is mind, it is the Brz'hat, it

1 Rathantara is the name of the whole number of hymns to
be recited at this part of the sacrifice. It was made by Vasish/^a,
and consists of one hundred verses.

2 1. Stotriya, abhi tva jAra nonuma^ (Rv. VII, 32, 22) 2 (3)

2. Anurfipa, abhi tva pfirvapitaye (Rv.VIII, 3, 7) 2 (3)

3. Indrasya nu (Rv. I, 32) .... 15

4. Tve ha (Rv. VII, 18, 1-15) . . . r5

5. Yas tigma (Rv. VII, 19) . . . . n

6. Ugro ^a^ne (Rv. VII, 20) ro

7. Ud u (Rv.VII, 2 ).6

8. A te maha/$ (Rv. VII, 25) .... 6

9. Na soma/6 (Rv.VII, 26) .... 5

10. Indra;;z nara/£ (Rv. VII, 27) ... 5

rr. Brahma na.h (Rv.VII, 28) .... 5

12. Aya;/z soma/z (Rv. VII, 29) ... 5

13. A na indra h (Rv. IV, 20) . . . . 11

98 (100)

T4. Ittha hi (Rv. I, 80, 1) . . . . r

99 (101)

These hymns and verses are given Ait. Ar. V, 2, 2, r. Here we
also learn that hymn Rv. IV, 20, is called Sampata, and that the
last verse is a Pankti.

3 The six powers are earth, Agni, speech, Rathantara, VasishMa,
and a hundred.

AITAREYA-ARAAYAKA.

190

is Bharadva^a, it is a hundred l 11 . These are the
six powers (of the left wing). The Sampata hymn
(Rv. IV, 23) serves indeed for obtaining desires
and for firmness. The Pahkti verse (Rv. I, 81, 1)
serves for proper food.

4. These two (the right and the left wings) are
deficient and excessive 2 . The Bnhat (the left wing)
is man, the Rathantara (the right wing) is woman.
The excess belongs to the man, the deficiency to the
woman. Therefore they are deficient and excessive.

5. Now the left wing of a bird is verily by one
feather better, therefore the left wing is larger by
one verse.

1 The hundred verses are given Ait. Ar. V, 2, 2, 5.

1. Stotriya, tvam id dhi (Rv. VI, 46 , 1) • .2 (3)

2. Anurfipa, tva in hy ehi (Rv. VIII, 61, 7) • 2 (3)

3. Tam u sh/uhi (Rv. VI, 18) . • • *5

4. Suta it tvam (Rv. VI, 23) • • .10

5. Vr/sha mada^ (Rv. VI, 24) . . • .10

6. Ya ta ftti/z (Rv. VI, 25) 9

7. Abhur eka/2 (Rv. VI, 31 • • -5

8. Apurvya (Rv. VI, 32) . • • *5

9. Ya ogvshth&h (Rv. VI, 33) 5

10. Saw /£a tve (Rv. VI, 34) . • • • 5

11. Kada bhuvan (Rv. VI, 35) 5

12. Satra madasa/2 (Rv. VI, 36) . ... 5

13. Arvag ratham (Rv. VI, 37) 5

14. Apad (Rv. VI, 38) 5

15. Katha mahan (Rv. IV, 23) . . • 11_

99 ( IO 0

16. Indro madaya (Rv. I, 81, 1) . • • _

100 (102)

Though there are said to be 100 verses before the Pahkti
(No. 16), I can get only 99 or 101. See the following note.

2 The right wing is deficient by one verse, the left wing exceeds
by one verse. I count 99 or 101 verses in the right, and 100 or 102
in the left wing.

I ARAiVYAKA, 4 ADHYAYA, 2 KHAAV)A, IT. 191

6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with
breath.

7. Next follows the tail. They are twenty-one
Dvipada verses * 1 . For there are twenty-one back¬
ward feathers in a bird.

8. Then the Ekavb/wa is the support of all
Stomas, and the tail the support of all birds 2 3 4 .

9. He recites a twenty-second verse. This is
made the form of two supports. Therefore all birds
support themselves on their tail, and having sup¬
ported themselves on their tail, they fly up. For
the tail is a support.

10. He (the bird and the hymn) is supported by
two decades which are Vira£\ The man (the sacri-
ficer) is supported by the two Dvipadas, the twenty-
first and twenty-second. That which forms the bird
serves for the attainment of all desires; that which
forms the man, serves for his happiness, glory,
proper food, and honour.

11. Next comes a Sudadohas verse, then a
Dhayya, then a Sudadohas verse. The Sudadohas
is a man, the Dhayya a woman, therefore he recites
the Dhayya as embraced on both sides by the Suda¬
dohas. Therefore does the seed of both, when it is
effused, obtain oneness, and this with regard to the

1 These verses are given Ait. Ar.V, 2. 2, 9.

1. Ima nu kam (Rv. X, 157) .... 5

2. A yahi (Rv. X, 172).4

3. Pra va indraya &c. (not in the Aakalya-sawhita) 9

4. Esha brahma &c. (not in the Aakalya-sawhita) 3

21

2 The other Stomas of the Agnish/oma are the Trivn’t, Pan/v’a-
da^a, Saptada^a, the Ekavima being the highest. Cf. I, 5, 1, 3.

192

AITAREYA-A K AiVYAK A.

woman only. Hence birth takes place in and from
the woman. Therefore he recites that Dhayya in

that place 1 2 .

Third Kha2v\da.

x. He recites the eighty tristichs of Gayatns .
Verily, the eighty Gayatri tristichs are this world
(earth). Whatever there is in this world of glory,
greatness, wives, food, and honour, may I obtain it,

may I win it, may it be mine.

2. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
verily is breath. He joins this world with breath.

3. He recites the eighty tristichs of Brzhatis.
Verily, the eighty Brfhati tristichs are the world of
the sky. Whatever there is in the world of the sky
of glory, greatness, wives, food, and honour, may I

obtain it, may I win it, may it be mine.

4. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
verily is breath. He joins the world of the sky
with breath.

5. He recites the eighty tristichs of Ush/dh. Ve¬
rily, the eighty Ush/dh tristichs are that world, the
heaven. Whatever there is in that world of glory,
greatness, wives, food, and honour, also the divine
being of the Devas (Brahman), may I obtain it, may
I win it, may it be mine.

6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas
verily is the breath. He joins that world with
breath, yea, with breath.

1 Asmin vi^avabhage. Comm.

2 These and the following verses form the food of the bird.
Comm. The verses themselves are given by Saunaka in the fifth

Ara/zyaka.

I ARAAWAKA, 5 ADHYAYA, I KHANDA, 7.

FIFTH ADHYAYA.

First Khaatda.

1. He recites the Va^a hymn 1 , wishing, May
everything be in my power.

2. They (its verses) are twenty-one 2 , for twenty-
one are the parts (the lungs, spleen, &c.) in the belly.

3* Then the Ekavi^i'a is verily the support of all
Stomas, and the belly the support of all food.

4 - They consist of different metres. Verily, the
intestines are confused, some small, some large.

5’ He recites them with the pra/zava 3 , according
to the metre 4 , and according to rule 5 . Verily, the
intestines are according to rule, as it were ; some
shorter, some longer.

6. Next comes the Stidadohas verse. Sudadohas
verily is breath. He joins the joints with breath.

7. After having recited that verse twelve times he

------

Having recited the verses which form the body, neck, head,
wings, and tail of the bird, also the food intended for the bird,
he now describes the Vara hymn, i.e. the hymn composed by
Vara, Rv. VIII, 46. That hymn takes the place of the stomach,
which receives the food intended for the bird. Cf. Ait. Ar. V, 2, 5’
In I, 5, 2, 4 it is called a Nivid.

2 Verses 1-20 of the Vara hymn, and one Sfidadohas.

Pra/zavam means ‘with pra/rava/ i.e. inserting Om in the
proper places.

According^as the metres of the different verses are fixed by
Aaunaka, Ait. Ar. V, 2, 5, who says that verse 15 is Dvipada, and
that the last four words, nfinam atha, form an Ekapada.
a 6 According to rule, i.e. so that they should come right as
Araalayana has prescribed the recitation of Dvipada and Eka¬
pada verses. In a Dvipada there should be a stop after the first
foot, and Om at the end of the second. In an Ekapada there
should be Om at the beginning and at the end.

[ 3 ] O

194

AITAREYA-AR AJVY AKA.

leaves it off there. These prawas are verily twelve¬
fold, seven in the head, two on the breast, three
below. In these twelve places the pra«as are con¬
tained, there they are perfect. Therefore he leaves

it off there . ttttt

8. The hymn indragn! yuva m su naA (Rv. V1U,

40) forms the two thighs (of the bird) belonging to
Indra and Agni, the two supports with broad bones.

9. These (verses) consist of six feet, so that they
may stand firm. Man stands firm on two feet,
animals on four. He thus places man (the sacn-
ficer), standing on two feet, among four- ootec

cattle.

10. The second verse has seven feet, and he
makes it into a Gayatr'i and AnushAibh. Gayatri is
Brahman, AnushAibh is speech ; and he thus puts

together speech with Brahman.

11. He recites a TrishAibh at the end. TnshAibh
is strength, and thus does he come round animals
by strength. Therefore animals come near where
there is strength (of command, &c.); they come to
be roused and to rise up, (they obey the commands

of a strong shepherd.)

Second YLhanda.

1. When he recites the Nishkevalya hymn ad-
dressed to Indra (Rv. X, 50), pra vo mahe, he inserts
a Nivid 1 2 (between the fourth and fifth verses). Thus
he clearly places strength in himself (in the 5astra,

in the bird, in himself).

2. They are Trish^ubhs and G-agatis.

1 He repeats the SCidadohas verse no more. Comm

2 Sentences like indro deva h somam pibatu.

I AKAAWAKA, 5 ADHYAYA, 2 KUANDA, 8. 195

There they say: ‘Why does he insert a Nivid
among mixed Trish/ubhs and ^agatis 1 ?’ But surely
one metre would never support the Nivid of this
day, nor fill it: therefore he inserts the Nivid
among mixed Trish/ubhs and £agatis.

4. Let him know that this day has three Nivids :
the Va^a hymn is a Nivid, the Vdlakhilyas 2 are a
Nivid, and the Nivid itself is a Nivid. Thus let
him know that day as having three Nivids.

5. Then follow the hymns vane na vi (Rv. X,
29) and yo ^ata eva (Rv. II, 12). In the fourth
verse of the former hymn occur the words anne
samasya yad asan manisha/£, and they serve for the
winning of proper food.

6. Then comes an insertion. As many Trish/ubh
and (Tagati verses 3 , taken from the ten Masalas
and addressed to Indra, as they insert (between the
two above-mentioned hymns), after changing them
into B/Vhatis, so many years do they live beyond
the (usual) age (of one hundred years). By this
insertion age is obtained.

7. After that he recites the Sa^aniya hymn,

wishing that cattle may always come to his off¬
spring.

8 . Then he recites the Tarkshya hymn 4 . Tar-
kshya is verily welfare, and the hymn leads to wel¬
fare. Thus (by reciting the hymn) he fares well 5 .

Accoiding to the Prak/vti of the Agnish/oma they ought to
be all Trish/ubhs. Comm.

2 These hymns occur in the eighty Bn'hati tristichs.

From the Sawhita, which consists of ten thousand verses.
Comm.

Rv. X, 178. Tarksha Garm/a being the deity of the hymn
it is called Tarkshya.

5 Cf. I, 5, 3, 13.

0 2

196

AIT ARE Y A-AR A2V Y AK A.

9. Then he recites the Ekapada (indro viivaw
vi rdgati), wishing, May I be everything at once,
and may I thus finish the whole work of metres

10. In reciting the hymn indra m vbva avi vri-
dhan (Rv. 1 ,11) he intertwines the first seven verses
by intertwining their feet 1 2 . There are seven priwas
(openings) in the head, and he thus places seven
prawas in the head. The eighth verse (half-verse)
he does not intertwine 3 . The eighth is speech,
and he thinks, May my speech never be intertwined
with the other prawas. Speech therefore, though
dwelling in the same abode as the other pra«as, is

not intertwined with them.

11. He recites the Vira^* verses 4 . Verily, Vira^
verses are food, and they thus serve for the gaining

of food.

12. He ends with the hymn of Vasish/^a 5 ,

wishing, May I be Vasish//za!

13. But let him end with the fifth verse, esha
stomo maha ugraya vahe, which, possessing the

word mahat, is auspicious.

14. In the second foot of the fifth verse the word

dhuri occurs. Verily, dhu/i (the place where the
horse is fastened to the car) is the end (of the car).
This day also is the end (of the sacrifice which lasts
a whole year) 6 . Thus the verse is fit for the day.

1 The Ekapada forms the last metre in this ceremony.

2 The first and last half-verses of the hymn are not to be
intertwined. Of the remaining fourteen half-verses he joins, foi
instance, the fourth foot of the first verse with the second foot
of the second verse, and so on. Comm.

3 Because nothing more follows. Comm.

4 Rv. VII, 22, i-6.

6 The last day is the udayanfyatiratra. Comm.

Rv. VII, 24.

I ARAiVYAKA, 5 ADHYAYA, 3 KHAiVDA, 3.

*97

15* In the third foot the word arka is auspicious.

16. The last foot is: ‘Make our glory high as
heaven over heaven.’ Thus wherever Brahmanic
speech is uttered, there his glory will be, when he
who knows this finishes with that verse. Therefore
let a man who knows this, finish (the Nishkevalya)
with that verse.

Third Kha2vda j .

1. Tat savitur vwdmahe (Rv. V, 82, 1-3) and
adya no deva savitar (Rv. V, 82, 4-6) are the
beginning (pratipad) and the next step (anuiara) of
the Vabvadeva hymn, taken from the Ekaha cere-
monial and therefore proper 1 2 .

2. On that day 3 much is done now and then
which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for.
Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore
at the end of the year the sacrificers rest on this
atonement as their rest. He who knows this rests
firm, and they also for whom a Hot ri priest who
knows this, recites this hymn.

3. Then (follows) the hymn addressed to Savi-
t r h ta d devasya savitur varyam mahat (Rv. IV, 53).
Verily, mahat, great, (in this foot) is the end 4 .

This day too is the end. Thus the verse is fit for
the day.

1 After finishing the Nishkevalya of the noon-libation, he explains
the vahvadevajastra of the third libation.

The norm of the IVIahavrata is the Vhva^it, and the norm
of that, the Agnish/oma Ekaha. The verses to be used for the
Vaijvadeva hymn are prescribed in those normal sacrifices, and
are here adopted.

3 Cf. Ait. Ar. I, 2, 1, 2.

Nothing higher than the great can be wished for or obtained.
Comm.

198

AITAREYA-ARAiVYAKA.

4. The hymn katara phrva katara parayo h (Rv.

I, 185), addressed to Dyavaprzthivi, is one in which
many verses have the same ending. Verily, this day
also (the mahavrata) is one in which many receive
the same reward b Thus it is fit for the day.

5. The hymn ana<rvo gtto anabhteur ukthya h (Rv.
IV, 36) is addressed to the Rthhus.

6. In the first verse the word tri (/£akra/z) occurs,
and trivat 1 2 is verily the end. This day also is the
end (of the sacrifice). Thus the verse is fit for the

day.

y. The hymn asya vamasya palitasya hotu h (Rv.

I, 164), addressed to the VEvedevas, is multiform.
This day also is multiform 3 . Thus the verse is fit
for the day.

8. He recites the end of it, beginning with gaurir
mimaya (Rv. I, 164, 41).

9. The hymn a no bhadra h kratavo yantu vEvata/z
(Rv. I, 89), addressed to the VLsvedevas, forms the
Nividdhana, taken from the Ekaha ceremonial, and
therefore proper.

10. On that day much is done now and then
which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for.
Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore
at the end of the year the sacrificers rest on this
atonement as their rest. He who knows this rests
firm, and they also for whom a Hotrz priest who

knows this, recites this hymn.

11. The hymn vabvanaraya dhishazzam Wta-

1 All who perform the ceremony obtain Brahman. Cf. § 12.

2 The third wheel, in addition to the usual two wheels, forms
the end of a carriage, as before the dhu^, cf. I, 5, 2, 14. This
day also is the end.

3 Consisting of Vedic hymns and dances, &c. Comm.

I ARA 2 VYAKA, 5 ADHYAYA, 3 KRANDA, 1 4 .

l 99

vrzdhe (Rv. Ill, 2) forms the beginning of the
Agnim&ruta. Dhishazza, thought, is verily the end,
this day also is the end. Thus it is fit for the
day.

12. The hymn prayafyavo maruto bhr^adrfsh/a-
ya h (Rv. V, 55), addressed to the Maruts, is one in
which many verses have the same ending. Verily,
this day also is one in which many receive the same
reward. Thus it is fit for the day \

13. He recites the verse ^atavedase sunavama
somam (Rv. I, 99, 1), addressed to £atavedas, before
the (next following) hymn. That verse addressed to
6atavedas is verily welfare, and leads to welfare.
Thus (by reciting it) he fares well 2 .

14. The hymn ima m stomam arhate ^atavedase
(Rv. I, 94), addressed to 6-atavedas, is one in which
many verses have the same ending. Verily, this day
also (the mahavrata) is one in which many receive
the same reward. Thus it is fit for the day, yea, it
is fit for the day.

1 Cf. § 4.

Cf. I, 5, 2, 8.

SECOND ARAjVYAKA.

FIRST ADHYAYA.

First Khaada.

With the second Arazzyaka the Upanishad begins. It comprises
the second and third Arazzyakas, and may be said to consist of
three divisions, or three Upanishads. Their general title is Bahvz'zX’a-
upanishad, sometimes Mahaitareya-upanishad, while the Upanishad
generally known as Aitareya-upanishad comprises the 4th, 5th, and
6th adhyayas only of the second Arazzyaka.

The character of the three component portions of the Upanishad
can best be described in .Sankara's own words (Ar. Ill, 1, 1, Introd.
p. 306): ‘There are three classes of men who want to acquire
knowledge. The highest consists of those who have turned away
from the world, whose minds are fixed on one subject and col¬
lected, and who yearn to be free at once. For these a knowledge
of Brahman is intended, as taught in the Ait. Ar. II, 4-6. The
middle class are those who wish to become free gradually by
attaining to the world of Hirazzyagarbha. For them the knowledge
and worship of Prazza (breath and life) is intended, as explained in
the Ait. Ar. II, 1-3. The lowest class consists of those who do
not care either for immediate or gradual freedom, but who desire
nothing but offspring, cattle, &c. For these the meditative worship
of the Sazzzhita is intended, as explained in the third Arazzyaka.
They cling too strongly to the letter of the sacred text to be able to
surrender it for a knowledge either of Prazza (life) or of Brahman.’

The connexion between the Upanishad or rather the three
Upanishads and the first Arazzyaka seems at first sight very slight.
Still we soon perceive that it would be impossible to understand
the first Upanishad, without a previous knowledge of the Maha-
vrata ceremony as described in the first Arazzyaka.

On this point too there are some pertinent remarks in .Sankara’s
commentary on the Arazzyaka II, 1, 2. ‘Our first duty,’ he says,
‘ consists in performing sacrifices, such as are described in the first
portion of the Veda, the Sazzzhit&s, Brahmazzas, and, to a certain
extent, in the Arazzyakas also. Afterwards arises a desire for
knowledge, which cannot be satisfied except a man has first attained

II ARAAYAKA, I ADHYAYA, I KHAiVDA, 2.

201

complete concentration of thought (ekfigratfi). In order to acquire

ti h on , C ° nCent . rat ' 0n ’ tbe P er f° r man Ce of certain upfisana* or medita-
ions is enjoined, such as we find described in our Upanishad, vis. in

n - 1 ' J -‘-J 1-3.

t JSr d r i0 : ° T l “ U * Sometimes translated, worship is of

Ssanl or mSr * rah “ 0 P” ana or Ptatfkopfisana. Brahmo-
p sana or meditation on Brahman consists in thinking of him as

distinguished by certain qualities. Pratikopasana or meditation

on symbols consists in looking upon certain worldly objects as if

hey were Brahman, in order thus to withdraw the mind from the

too powerful influence of external objects.

These objects, thus lifted up into symbols of Brahman, are of
two kinds, either connected with sacrifice or not. In our Upanishad

tio'ns ofth 0 M ea n' With the f0mler daS$ ° nly - Viz ' with certain por
ions of the Mahavrata, as described in the first Aranyaka. In order

hat the mind may not be entirely absorbed by the sacrifice, it is

lifted up during the performance from the consideration of these

sacnfical objects to a meditation on higher objects, leading up at
last to Brahman as prarca or life. 5 P

™ IS , ™ ditlti0 ” is t0 be Performed by the priests, and while they
meditate they may meditate on a hymn or on a single word of it as
meaning something else, such as the sun, the earth, or the sky but
not viceversa. And ifinone .Sakha, as in that of the Aitareyins for
instance, a certain hymn has been symbolically explained, the slme
explanation may be adopted by another .Sakha also, such as that of
e Kaushitakins. It is not necessary, however, that every part of
the sacrifice should be accompanied by meditation, but it is left
optional to the priest in what particular meditation he wishes to
engage, nor is even the time of the sacrifice the only right time
or him to engage in these meditations.

1. This is the path : this sacrifice, and this Brah-
man. This is the true 1 .

2. Let no man swerve from it, let no man trans¬
gress it.

1 ^ t The Path 1S tw6fold > consisting of works and know-

tl g n ° r S ° r sacnfices h ave been described in the Sawhit£,
the Brahman, and the first Ara;/yaka. Knowledge of Brahman

orms the subject of the second and third Ara^yakas. The true
path is that of knowledge.

202

AITAREYA-ARA 2 VY AKA.

3. For the old (sages) did not transgress it, and

those who did transgress, became lost. vm

4. This has been declared by a i?zshi (Rv. VI11,

101 14): ‘Three (classes of) people transgressed,
others settled down round about the venerable
(Agni, fire); the great (sun) stood in the midst o
the worlds, the blowing (Vayu, air) entered the
Harits (the dawns, or the ends of the earti).

5 When he says: ‘Three (classes of) people trans¬
gressed,’ the three (classes of) people who trans¬
gressed are what we see here (on earth, born again)

as birds, trees, herbs, and serpents \

6 When he says: ‘ Others settled down round

about the venerable/ he means those who now sit

down to worship Agni (fire).

7 . When he says : 1 The great stood in the midst

of the worlds/ the great^ one in the midst of the

world is meant for this Aditya, the sun.

8. When he says: ‘ The blowing entered the
Harits/ he means that Vayu, the air, the purifier,
entered all the corners of the earth 2 .

Second Kuanda.

1. People say: ‘ Uktha, uktha/ hymns, hymns!
(without knowing what uktha, hymn 3 , means.) 1 he

1 Vanga/r is explained by vanagal 4 vnksha/i; avagadha/; is ex¬
plained by vrthiyavfidy& oshadhayaA; trapes explained by ura -
padd* sarpa*. Possibly they are all old ethnic names, likei Vang*

Afera, &c. In Anandatirtha’s commentary vayams, are explamed

by Pirafei, Vangavagadhas by Rakshasa, and liapadas y

2 Three classes of men go to Naraka (hell); the fourt c ass,

of faith and desirous of reaching the highest world, worships Agm,

Vayu, and other gods. Comm.

s The Comm, explains uktha as that from whence t e a
of the gods arises, uttishAaty anena devatiprasada lti vyutpatte 1.

II ARAiVYAKA, I ADHYAYA, 2 KHAIYBA, II. 20 ’
___ o

hymn is truly (to be considered as) the earth, for
from it all whatsoever exists arises.

2. The object of its praise is Agni (fire), and the
eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means
of food one obtains everything.

3- The hymn is truly the sky, for the birds fly
along the sky, and men drive following the sky.
The object of its praise is Vdyu (air), and the eighty
verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of food
one obtains everything’.

4 - The hymn is truly the heaven, for from its gift
(rain) all whatsoever exists arises. The object of its
praise is Aditya (the sun), and the eighty verses are
food, for by means of food one obtains everything.

5 - So much with reference to the gods (mytholo¬
gical) , now with reference to man (physiological).

6. The hymn is truly man. He is great, he is
Fra^apati. Let him think, I am the hymn.

7. The hymn is his mouth, as before in the case
of the earth.

8. The object of its praise is speech, and the
eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means
of food he obtains everything.

9. The hymn is the nostrils, as before in the
case of the sky.

10. The object of its praise is breath, and the
eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means
of food he obtains everything.

11. The slight bent (at the root) of the nose is, as

it were, the place of the brilliant (Aditya, the sun).

-- - - -----

The ^object is now to show that the uktha or hymn used at the
Mahavrata ceremony has a deeper meaning than it seems to have,
and that its highest aim is Brahman; not, however, the highest
Brahman, but Brahman considered as life (pra;za).

204

AITAREYA-ARAtfYAKA.

12. The hymn is the forehead, as before m the
case of heaven. The object of its praise is the
eye, and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food,
for by means of food he obtains everything.

13 . The eighty verses (of the hymn) are alike
food with reference to the gods as well as with
reference to man. For all these beings breathe and
live by means of food indeed. By food (given in
alms, &c.) he conquers this world, by food (given
in sacrifice) he conquers the other. Therefore the
eighty verses (of the hymn) are alike food, with refer¬
ence to the gods as well as with reference to man.

14. All this that is food, and all this that con¬
sumes food, is only the earth, for from the earth

arises all whatever there is.

15. And all that goes hence (dies on earth),
heaven consumes it all; and all that goes thence
(returns from heaven to a new life) the earth con¬
sumes it all.

16. That earth is thus both food and consumer.

He also (the true worshipper who meditates on

himself as being the uktha) is both consumer and
consumed (subject and object’). No one possesses
that which he does not eat, or the things which do

not eat him 1 2 .

1 As a master who lives by his servants, while his servants live
by him. Comm.

2 I have translated these paragraphs, as much as possible, accorc -
ing to the commentator. I doubt whether, either in the original or
in the interpretation of the commentator, they yield any very definite
sense. They are vague speculations, vague, at least, to us, thoug
intended by the Brahmans to give a deeper meaning to certain
ceremonial observances connected with the Mahavrata. The ukt a,
or hymn, which is to be meditated on, as connected with the
sacrifice, is part of the Mahavrata, an important ceremony, to be

II AKAJVYAKA, I ADHYAYA, 3 KHAiVDA, 2 .

205

Third Khaiyda.

1. Next follows the origin of seed. The seed

of Ptyapati are the Devas (gods). The seed of

tibe Devas is rain. The seed of rain are herbs.

The seed of herbs is food. The seed of food is

seed. The seed of seed are creatures. The seed

of creatures is the heart. The seed of the heart

is the mind. The seed of the mind is speech (Veda).

The seed of speech is action (sacrifice). The action

done (in a former state) is this man, the abode of
Brahman.

2. He (man) consists of food (ira), and because
he consists of food (iramaya), he consists of gold
(hirawmaya 1 ). He who knows this becomes golden
in the other world, and is seen as golden (as the
sun) for the benefit of all beings.

peifoimed on the last day but one (the twenty-fourth) of the
Gavamayana sacrifice. That sacrifice lasts a whole year, and
Its performance has been fully described in the Brahmanas and
rawyakas. But while the ordinary performer of the Mahavrata
as simply to recite the uktha or nishkevalya-rastra, consisting of
eighty verses (tn*a) in the Gayatri, Brfhatl, and Ushmh metres
the more advanced worshipper (or priest) is to know that this
uktha has a deeper meaning, and is to meditate on it as beino-
t e earth, sky, heaven, also as the human body, mouth, nostrils
an forehead. The worshipper is in fact to identify himself by
meditation with the uktha in all its senses, and thus to become
the universal spirit or Hirawyagarbha. By this process he becomes
the consumer and consumed, the subject and object, of everything
while another sacrifice^ not knowing this, remains in his limited
in ividual sphere, or, as the text expresses it, does not possess
w at he cannot eat (perceive), or what cannot eat him (perceive
im). The last sentence is explained differently by the com¬
mentator, but in connexion with the whole passage it seems to

me to become more intelligible, if interpreted as I have proposed
to interpret it. 1 1

1 Play on words. Comm.

206

aitarey a- ar any ak a.

Fourth Khayda.

i Brahman (in the shape of pra«a, breath) entered
into that man by the tips of his feet and because
Brahman entered (prapadyata) into that man by
the tips of his feet, therefore people call them t e
tips of the feet (prapada), but hoofs and claws m

other animals.

2. Then Brahman crept up higher, and therefore

they were (called) 1 the thighs (urh).

3 . Then he said: ‘Grasp wide,’ and that was

(called) the belly (udara). , , . „

4. Then he said: ‘ Make room for me, and tha

was (called) the chest (uras). ..

c The .Sarkarakshyas meditate on the belly as

Brahman, the Aruwis on the heart 2 . Both (these

places) are Brahman indeed 3 .

6. But Brahman crept upwards and came to the
head, and because he came to the head, therefore

the head is called head 4 . , ,

7. Then these delights alighted in the head,

sicdit, hearing, mind, speech, breath.

\ Delights alight on him who thus knows, why

the head is called head.

9. These (five delights or senses) strove to¬
gether, saying: ‘ I am the uktha (hymn), I am the
uktha 6 .’ ‘ Well, ’ they said, ‘ let 11s all go out rom

1 These are all plays on words. Comm.

2 This does not appear to be the case either in the Kh. Up. ,

k; 17, or in the .Satapatha-brahmaHa X, 6, 1.

3 The pluti in taji is explained as rastriyaprasiddhyartha.

< All puns, as if we were to say, because he hied up to the hea ,

therefore the head was called head.

5 Each wished to be identified with the uktha, as it was

before that the human body, mouth, nostrils, forehea were o

identified with the uktha. Cf. Kaush. Up. Ill, 3 -

II ARAiVYAKA, I ADHYAYA, \ KHAiVDA, I 7.

207

this body ; then on whose departure this body shall
fall, he shall be the uktha among 1 us V

10. Speech went out, yet the body without
speaking remained, eating and drinking.

Sight went out, yet the body without seeing re¬
mained, eating and drinking.

Hearing went out, yet the body without hearing
remained, eating and drinking.

Mind went out, yet the body, as if blinking, re¬
mained, eating and drinking.

Breath went out, then when breath was gone out,
the body fell.

11. It was decayed, and because people said, it
decayed, therefore it was (called) body (^arira).
That is the reason of its name.

12. If a man knows this, then the evil enemy
who hates him decays, or the evil enemy who hates
him is defeated.

13. They strove again, saying: ‘ I am the uktha,

I am the uktha.’ ‘Well,’ they said, ‘let us enter
that body again; then on whose entrance this body
shall rise again, he shall be the uktha among us.’

14. Speech entered, but the body lay still. Sight
entered, but the body lay still. Hearing entered,
but the body lay still. Mind entered, but the body
lay still. Breath entered, and when breath had
entered, the body rose, and it became the uktha.

15. Therefore breath alone is the uktha.

16. Let people know that breath is the uktha
indeed.

17. The Devas (the other senses) said to breath :

‘ Thou art the uktha, thou art all this, we are thine,
thou art ours.’

1 Cf. Kh. Up. V, 1; Br/h. Up. VI, 1; Kaush. Up. II, 12-14;
III, 2 ; Pra^na Up. II, 1.

208

AITAREYA-ARAiVYAKA.

18. This has also been said by a Rishi (Rv.
VIII, 92, 32): ‘Thou art ours, we are thine.

Fifth Khaatda.

j Then the Devas carried him (the breath)
forth, and being carried forth, he was stretched out,
and when people said, ‘ He was stretched out,’ then
it was in the morning; when they said, ‘ He is gone
to rest,’ then it was in the evening. Day, therefore,
is the breathing up, night the breathing down b

2. Speech is Agni, sight that Aditya (sun), mind
the moon, hearing the D'is (quarters): this is the
prahitawz sawyoga 2 , the union of the deities as sent
forth. These deities (Agni, &c.) are thus in the
body, but their (phenomenal) appearance yonder is
among the deities—this was intended.

3. And Hira/ryadat Vaida also, who knew this
(and who by his knowledge had become Hirawya-
o-arbha or the universal spirit), said: ‘Whatever
they do not give to me, they do not possess them¬
selves.’ I know the prahitaw sawyoga, the union of
the deities, as entered into the body 3 . This^s it.^

> All these are plays on words, pAtar being derived from
prat&yi, stiyam from samagM. The real object, however, is to
show that breath, which is the uktha, which is the worshipper, is
endowed with certain qualities, viz. time, speech, &c.^

1 The meaning is, that the four deities, Agni, Aditya, Moon,
and the Dir proceed from their own places to dwell together in
the body of man, and that this is called the prahitam samyoga 1.
Prahit is explained as prahita, placed, sent. It is probably orme
from hi, not from dha. PrahitoA sarnyo^-anam is the name of a
Saman, Ind. Stud. Ill, 225. As Devas or gods they appear each
in its own place. The whole passage is very obscure.

’ All. this is extremely obscure, possibly incorrect. For yam,
unless it refers to some other word, we expect yan. For dadyu
one expects dadyat. What is intended is that Hira«yadat had

II ARA 1 VYAKA, I ADHYAYA, 6 KHA2VDA, 4. 209

4 - To him who knows this all creatures, without
being constrained, offer gifts.

o- That breath is (to be called) sattya (the true)
? rSa f ‘® re ath, ti is food, yam i s t he sun l . This is
hreefold, and threefold the eye also may be called
^ be,n g white, dark, and the pupil. He who knows
why true ,s true (why sattya is sattya), even if he
& ould speak falsely, yet what he says is true.

Sixth Kha2vz>a.

knote^Tl! 1 iS K hl 't- the breath ’ S) r ° pe ’ the names

_ ° - Z h T hy hls s P eech as by a rope, and by his

mes as by knots, all this is bound. For all this are
names indeed, and with speech he calls everythin*.

2. People carry him who knows this, as if they
were bound by a rope. 7

th 3 n°, f b ° dy ° f the breath thus meditated on
the Ush«.h verse forms the hairs, the Gayatri the

, e Tnsh/ubh the flesh, the Anushffibh the
muscles, the Gagati the bone, the Pankti the mar¬
row the B^hati the breath • (pra.a). He is covered
e verses (Pandas, metres). Because he is
hus covered with verses, therefore they call them
Pandas (coverings, metres).

maU knows the reason why Pandas are
ca led Pandas, the verses cover him in whatever
place he likes against any evil deed.

thIf U ft, h ™ ed “f 10n ac 4 uired identity with the universal spirit and

2 dtrrer.ltf Say that Whatever was n0t rendered;

Brahm. Ill 6 ^ g t0 an) ’ b ° dy ' ° n Hirara >' adat > see Ait.

1 Cf. Kh. Up. VIII, 3 , g.

n The r ° Pe iS su PP° sed t0 b « 'he chief rope to which various
a er ropes are attached for fastening animals.

Here conceived as the air breathed, not as the deity. Comm.

[3] P

210

AITAREYA-AR AAY AKA.

s. This is said by a Ah'shi (Rv. I, 164, 13) •

6 ’. ‘ I saw (the breath) as a guardian, never tiring
coming and going on his ways (the arteries) ta
breath (in the body, being identified with the sun
amonc the Devas), illuminating the principal an
intermediate quarters of the sky, is returning con¬
stantly in the midst of the worlds.

He says: ‘I saw a guardian, because he,

breath, is a guardian, for he guards everyt ing.

7. He says: c Never tiring,’ because the breath

8 . He says: ‘ Coming and going on his ways,
because the breath comes and goes on. his ways _

a He says: 1 Illuminating the principal and in¬
termediate,’ because he illuminates these only, the
principal and intermediate quarters of the sky.

10 He says: ‘He is returning constantly m the
midst of the worlds,’ because he returns indeed
constantly in the midst of the worlds.

11. And then, there is another verse (Rv. A, 55,
•81): ‘They are covered like caves by those who

make them,’ , ,

12. For all this is covered indeed by breath.

1. This ether is supported by breath as Bn ati,
JVte ether is supported by bread, as Brrha.b
so one should know that all things, not excep ing
ants, are supported by breath as Brzhati.

Seventh Khanba.

1. Next follow the powers of that Person h

2. B y his speech earth and fire were create ^

1 The purusha, as described before in the second chapter, is^the

Sby meditation. The manifestations of his power consist in
creating the earth, fire, the sky, the air, heaven, the sun.

II ARAiVYAKA, I ADHYAYA, 7 KHAiVDA, 6.

21 I

Herb s are produced on the earth, and Ao-ni (fire)
makes them ripe and sweet. ‘Take this take this’

speech aying d ° earth firC SGrVe their Parent’,

3 - As far as the earth reaches, as far as fire

the C world 0 of r the° e e S arth "T and “ l0 " g aS

VI 1 U 01 tne earth and fire does not decav so

thifpoww of speech. ^ ^ thuS knows

4 - By breath (in the nose) the sky and the air

r„: zt , p r p ! e foiiow the ^ and c

a“ air r ve ,h ' ir p*™. £ ^

S far as the sky reaches, as far as the air

ztzZTS d “r and as ^“

VI me sKy and the air does not decav so
power ?££* deCay Wh ° * hl ' S k ”“ ' hk

H ea vJ givJhimZTn “ZZZwhZ

causes his light to shine. Thus do the heaven and
the sun serve their parent, the eye

As far as heaven reaches and as far as the sun

aZhet 'mZ h, ' S "° rld « K ” d - “<1 as
as he world of heaven and the sun does not decay

Z poZ d ”f S ,hZye rld n °' d “ ay Wh ° ,h " S k “"

created 5, F* ' li", quarters a " d the moon were

““ frl JZ ' q “ ar " rS ' he >' com ' *» 1>™.

nd from all the quarters he hears, while the moon

,rX o( h ™ 1”' b "' ^:h 1 , “ d th ' dark halves for
and the „„„„ serve their par

S far as the quarters reach and as far as the

P 2

2 12

AITAREYA-ARAiVYAKA.

moon reaches, so far does his world extend, and as
loner as the world of the quarters and the moon does
not & decay, so long does his world not decay who

thus knows the power of the ear.

7. By his mind the water and Varuwa were

created. Water yields to him faith (being used for
sacred acts), Varu«a keeps his offspring within the
law. Thus do water and Varuwa serve their parent,

the mind.

As far as water reaches and as far as Varuwa
reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long
as the world of water and Varuwa does not decay,
so long does his world not decay who thus knows

the power of the mind.

Eighth Khanda 1 .

1. Was it water really? Was it water? Yes,
all this was water indeed. This (water) was the root
(cause), that (the world) was the shoot (effect). He
(the person) is the father, they (earth, fire, &c.) are
the sons. Whatever there is belonging to the son,
belongs to the father; whatever there is belonging to
the father, belongs to the son. This was intended 2 .

2. Mahidasa Aitareya, who knew this, said: 1

know myself (reaching) as far as the gods, and I
know the gods (reaching) as far as me. For t ese

1 Having described how Prawa, the breath, and his companions
or servants created the world, he now discusses the question ot
the material cause of the world out of which it was created
Water, which is said to be the material of the world, is explainer
by the commentator to mean here the five elements.

s Cause and effect are not entirely separated, therefore water,
as the elementary cause, and earth, fire, &c., as its effect, are one;
likewise the worshipper, as the father, and the earth, fire, &c. as his
cons, as described above. Mfila and tfila, root and shoot are evi¬
dently chosen for the sake of the rhyme, to signify cause and effect.

u ARAiVYAKA, I ADIIYAYA, 8 KHANDA, 12 . 213

gods receive their gifts from hence, and are sup-
ported from hence.’ *

3 ' i™ 8 A the mountain Hz. eye, ear, mind
br “ th - They —«

4 - He who knows this, throws down the evil

enemy who hates him; the evil enemy who hates
him is defeated.

5 - He (the Pra»a, identified with Brahman) is the
1 e, the breath ; he is being (while the ^ivatman

remains), and not-bemg (when the^ivatrnan departs).

6. he Devas (speech, & c .) worshipped him
(pra«a) as Bhuti or being, and thus they became
great eings. And therefore even now a man who
sleeps, breathes like bhurbhuA

7 - The Asuras worshipped him as Abhuti or not-
being, and thus they were defeated.

8 He who knows this, becomes great by himself,
while the evil enemy who hates him, is defeated

9- He (the breath) is death (when he departs)
and immortality (while he abides).

JO. And this has been said by a Afshi (R v I

164,38):— V ’

11. ‘ Downwards and upwards he (the wind of the
reat ) goes, held by food;’—for this up-breathino-
eing held back by the down-breathing, does not

move forward (and leave the body altogether).

12. ‘ The immortal dwells with the mortal •’_f or

through him (the breath) all this dwells together
the bodies bemg clearly mortal, but this being (the
breath), being immortal.

PIW is called the girtf, because it is swallowed or hidden by

( r" ,) ', 4s,i " * “«*■'">' °‘

medioL " ,,k ' “ “ bt

AITAREYA-ARAAYAKA.

2 14

13. ‘ These two (body and breath) go for ever in
different directions (the breath moving the senses of
the body, the body supporting the senses of the
breath : the former going upwards to another world,
the body dying and remaining on earth). They
increase the one (the body), but they do not increase
the other,’ i. e. they increase these bodies (by food),
but this being (breath) is immortal.

14. He who knows this becomes immortal in that
world (having become united with Hira^yagarbha),
and is seen as immortal (in the sun) by all beings,
yea, by all beings.

SECOND ADHYAYA 1 .

First Khanda.

1. He (the sun), who shines, honoured this world
(the body of the worshipper, by entering into it), in
the form of man 2 (the worshipper who meditates on
breath). For he who shines (the sun) is (the same
as) the breath. He honoured this (body of the
worshipper) during a hundred years, therefore there
are a hundred years in the life of a man. Because
he honoured him during a hundred years, therefore
there are (the poets of the first IVla^/f/ala of the Rig
veda, called) the Yatar/ftn, (having honour for a

1 In the first adhyaya various forms of meditating on Uktha,
conceived as Prawa (life), have been declared. In the second some
other forms of meditation, all extremely fanciful, are added. The)
are of interest, however, as showing the existence of the hymns
of the Rig-veda, divided and arranged as we now possess them,
at the time when this Ara;/yaka was composed.

2 The identity of the sun and of breath as living in man has
been established before. It is the same power in both, conceived
either adhidaivatam (mythological) or adhyatmam (physiological).

II ARAAYAKA, 2 ADHYAYA, I KHAAZM, 6. 2 I 5

hundred years.) Therefore people call him who is
really Prawa (breath), the -Satariin poets

2. He (breath) placed himself in the midst of all

w atsoever exists. Because he placed himself in

ie midst of all whatsoever exists, therefore there

are (die poets of the second to the ninth MaWala of

e lg-veda, called) the Madhyamas. Therefore

people call him who is really Pra«a (breath), the
lViadhyama poets.

3 - He as up-breathing is the swallower (gmsa), as
down-breathing he is delight (mada). Because as
up-breathing he is swallower (gmsa) and as down¬
breathing delight (mada), therefore there is (the
poet of the second hWala of the Rig-veda, called)
Gmsarnada. Therefore people call him who is
really Pra«a (breath), Grftsarnada.

c • 4 j ^' m (breath) this whatsoever was a
nend. Because of him all (vBvam) this whatsoever
was a friend (m.tram), therefore there is (the poet of
6 ir d MawTala of the Rig-veda, called) Vijva-
m.tra. 7 herefore people call him who is really
ra/^a (breath), Vi^vamitra.

, 5 ' f ,T h< ; u DeVaS (speech ’ &c -) sa *d to him (the
reath) . He is to be loved by all of us.’ Because

the Devas said of him, that he was to be loved

(varna) by all of them, therefore there is (the poet

o t e ourth MawTala of the Rig-veda, called) Vama-

deya. Therefore people call him who is really
1 raua (breath), Vdmadeva.

6 . He (breath) guarded all this whatsoever from
evil. Because he guarded (atrayata) all this whatso-

1 The real ground for the name is that the poets of the first
verses?^ C ° mp ° Sed 011 an avera S e each a bout a hundred Rik

216

AlTAREYA-ARAiVYAKA.

ever from evil, therefore there are (the poets of the
fifth Masala of the Rig-veda, called) Atraya h.
Therefore people call him who is really Pra^a
(breath), AtrayaA

Second Khanka.

1. He (breath) is likewise a Bibhradva^a (bringer
of offspring). Offspring is va^a, and he (breath)
supports offspring. Because he supports it, there¬
fore there is (the poet of the sixth Masala of the
Rig-veda, called) Bharadva^a. Therefoie people
call him who is really Pra^a (breath), Bharadva^a.

2. The Devas (speech, &c.) said to him : ‘ He it
is who chiefly causes us to dwell on earth. Because
the Devas said of him, that he chiefly caused them
to dwell on earth, therefore there is (the poet of the
seventh Masala of the Rig-veda, called) Vasish//^a.
Therefore people call him who is really Pra;^a
(breath), Vasish/^a 1 .

3. He (breath) went forth towards 2 all this what¬
soever. Because he went forth toward all this what¬
soever, therefore there are (the poets of the eighth
Masala of the Rig-veda, called) the Pragathas.
Therefore people call him who is really Pra;/a
(breath), the Pragathas.

4. He (breath) purified all this whatsoever. Be¬
cause he purified all this whatsoever, therefore there

1 I translate in accordance with the commentator, and probably
with the intention of the author. The same etymology is repeated
in the commentary on II, 2, 4, 2. It would be more natural to
take vasish//2a in the sense of the richest.

2 This is the interpretation of the commentator, and the pre¬
position abhi seems to show that the author too took that view
of the etymology of pragatha.

II ARAiVYAKA, 2 ADHYAYA, 2 KHAACDA, 8. 2 I 7

(bre^Hhe" Paths' ^ ^ ***

5 - He (breath) said: ‘Let me be everythin^

;:. a r ver - sma11 ( kshudr a) and great (mahat) and
this became the Kshudrashktas and Mahasuktas
Therefore there were (the hymns and also th poe s
of the tenth Masala of the Rig-veda called^ the

Mahasuktas). Therefore people
call him who is really Pri« a (breath), the Kshu-
rasuktas (and Mahasuktas).

6. ( breath ) said once: ‘ You have said what

(hymn) Th U ' U f ^ *^ eed " This became a Sukta
( y )■ Therefore there was the Sukta. There-

fore t people call him who is really Pra.a (breath),

7 - He (breath) is a Rik (verse), for he did
Because heVdh b6mgS (b> ' enterin & in to them).

was the R't n °^ t0 bdngS ’ theref ° re there

TreaI v Pr "T PG ° pk CaU him who

is really Pra«a (breath), Rik.

8 He (breath) is an ArdhaiTa (half-verse) for he
did honour to all places (ardha)<. Because he did

dharla ^Th P / CeS ' therefore was the Ar-

aHa Therefore people call him who is really

Pra«a (breath), ArdlWa. }

Brahmans^The The'ninTh M ° f ‘ he

I \ ^ anslate according to the commentator.

Ardha means both half and place.

2I g AITAREYA-ARA2VYAKA.

9. He (breath) is a Pada (word) \ for he got into
all these beings. Because he got (pad!) into all
these beings, therefore there was the Pada (word).
Therefore people call him who is really Prawa

(breath), Pada.

10. He (breath) is an Akshara (syllable), for le
pours out (ksharati) gifts to all these beings, and
without him no one can pour out (atiksharati) gifts.
Therefore there was the Akshara (syllable). There
fore people call him who is really Piawa (bieath),

Akshara ^

n. Thus all these Rik verses, all Vedas, all
sounds 1 2 3 are one word, viz. Prawa (breath). Let
him know that Prawa is all Rik verses.

Third Khmba.

1. While VLvamitra was going to repeat the
hymns of this day (the mahavrata), Indra sat down
near him 4 . Vuvamitra (guessing that Indra wanted
food) said to him, ‘This (the verses of the hymn) is
food,’ and repeated the thousand Brdiati verses 5 .

1 It may also be intended for pada, foot of a verse.

2 The Prawa (breath) is to be meditated on as all hymns, all

poets, all words, &c. Comm.

3 All aspirated sonant consonants. Comm.

4 Upanishasasada, instead of upanishasada. The mistake is
probably due to a correction, sa for sha; the commentator, how -
ever, considers it as a Vedic license. Sakaro 'dhikaj MandasaA.

5 These are meant for the Nishkevalya hymn recited at t e
noon-libation of the Mahavrata. That hymn consists of ten
parts, corresponding, as we saw, to ten parts of a biid, viz. its
body, neck, head, root of wings, right wing, left wing, tail, belly,
chest, and thighs. The verses corresponding to these ten parts,
beginning with tad id asa bhuvaneshu ^yeshMam, are given m the
first Arawyaka, and more fully in the fifth Arawyaka by Sauna 'a.

U ARAiVVAl CA, 2 ADHYAYA, 3 KHAMA, 4. 2Ig

l“ dra'svaS'” 5 “ ‘ h ' deUsh ' ful hc "“ ° f

m 2 ‘, I r d !;V S , a ! d t0 him: <A ' shi - thou hast come to
my delightful home. AVshi, repeat a second hymn V

uvarmtra (guessing that Indra wanted food) said

T , hlS (the V6rSeS ° f the hymn) is food/ and
repeated the thousand B/Yhati verses. By means

of this he went to the delightful home If Indra
(Svarga).

3 ‘, I ! Kl . ra . S ^ i t0 him : ‘^shi, thou hast come to
y elightful home. Ahshi, repeat a third hymn.’
iwamnni (guessing that Indra wanted food) said
im. This (the verses of the hymn) is food,’ and.
repeated the thousand Brfhatl verses. By means

(°Svar!l) he WCnt t0 thS deIi - l5tful home of Indra

Vr d uV aid t0 h ' m: £ hou hast come to

•. .. I grant thee a boon.’ VBva-

mitra said: ‘May I know thee.’ Indra said: ‘lam

ra«a (breath), O Azshi, thou art Pra«a, all things
are Pra«a. For it is Pra«a who shines as the sun,
an here pervade all regions under that form.’

is 00 of mine (the hymn) is my friend and my
support (dakshi«a). This is the food prepared by
wvamitra. I am verily he who shines (the sun).’

slllnhf 11 u ey COnSiSt ° f many metres ’ yet ‘ when one counts the
thirty-six syuJZ" * th ° USand Vei ' SeS ’ eaCh COnsistin S of

1 Although the Nishkevalya is but one hymn consisting of

rt/T, h pr ”” ed **

r fY h / m y fir£t as e '8 hl i Glyatt! lY/'Yr’rY/

B^hati tn/’as, lastly as eighty Ush;/ih tr^as. ° 7

220

AITAREYA-ARA 2 VYAKA.

Fourth Khaada.

1. This then becomes perfect as a thousand of
Brzhati verses. Its consonants 1 form its body, its
voice 2 (vowels) the soul 3 , its sibilants 4 the air of

the breath.

2. He who knew this became Vasish//za, he took

this name from thence 5 6 7 .

3. Indra verily declared this to Visvamitra, and
Indra verily declared this to Bharadva?a. There¬
fore Indra is invoked by him as a friend 8 .

4. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brzhati
verses \ and of that hymn perfect with a thousand
Brfhati verses, there are 36,000 syllables 8 . So
many are also the thousands of days of a hundred
years (36,000). With the consonants they fill the

nights, with the vowels the days.

5. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brfhati
verses. He who knows this, after this thousand of
Brfhatis thus accomplished, becomes full of know¬
ledge, full of the gods, full of Brahman, full of the
immortal, and then goes also to the gods.

6. What I am (the worshipper), that is he (sun) ;

what he is, that am I.

1 Vyafrg'anani, explained by kadini.

2 Ghosha, explained by aspirated sonant consonants.

3 Atma, explained by madhya^anram.

4 QocboQciViQ^ rinmrn

5 He became Prarca, and because Pra/za causes all to dwell, or
covers all (vasayati), therefore the 7 ^'shi was called VasishMa.
Comm. Cf. Ait. Ar. II, 2, 2, 2.

6 At the Subrahma;zya ceremony in the Soma sacrifices, t e
invocations are, Indra a gakkka, hariva a gakkha.

7 Cf. Ait. Ar. II, 3, 8, 8.

8 Each Bn’hati has thirty-six syllables.

II ARAAYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, I ICHAiYDA, 4. 22 1

7 - This has been said by a Ashi (R v . I, 115, i) :
The sun is the self of all that moves and rests.’

8. Let him look to that, let him look to that!

THIRD ADHYAYA 1 .

First Khaada.

1. He who knows himself as the fivefold hymn
(uktha), the emblem of Prana, (breath), from whence
all this springs 2 , he is clever. These five are the
earth, air, ether, water, and fire (^yotis). This is
the self, the fivefold uktha. For from him all this
springs, and into him it enters again (at the dissolu¬
tion of the world). He who knows this, becomes
the refuge of his friends.

2. And to him wdio knows the food (object) and
the feeder (subject) in that uktha, a strong son is
born, and food is never wanting. Water and earth
are food, for all food consists of these two. Fire
and air are the feeder, for by means of them * man
eats all food. Ether is the bowl, for all this is
poured into the ether. He who knows this, be¬
comes the bowl or support of his friends.

3. To him who knows the food and the feeder
in that uktha, a strong son is born, and food is
never wanting. Herbs and trees are food, animals
the feeder, for animals eat herbs and trees.

4 - Of them again those who have teeth above

1 In thls adh yay» some more qualities are explained belon<dn»
1° the Mahavrata ceremonial and the hymns employed at it, which
can be meditated on as referring to Pra^a, life.

2 Because the world is the result or reward for performing a
meditation on the uktha. Comm.

The digestive fire is lighted by the air of the breath. Comm.

222

A1TAREYA-ARANY AKA.

and below, shaped after the likeness of man, are
feeders, the other animals are food. Therefore
these overcome the other animals, for the eater is

over the food.

5. He who knows this is over his friends.

Second Khan-da 1 .

1. He who knows the gradual development of
the self in him (the man conceived as the uktha),

obtains himself more development.

2. There are herbs and trees and all that is ani¬
mated, and he knows the self gradually developing
in them. For in herbs and trees sap only is seen 2 ,
but thought (/f’itta) in animated beings.

3. Among animated beings again the self de¬
velops gradually, for in some sap (blood) is seen
(as well as thought), but in others thought is not

Se 4!* And in man again the self develops gradually,
for he is most endowed with knowledge. He says
what he has known, he sees what he has known 3 .
He knows what is to happen to-morrow, he knows
heaven and hell. By means of the mortal he desires

the immortal—thus is he endowed.

5. With regard to the other animals hunger and
thirst only are a kind of understanding. But they
do not say what they have known, nor do they see

1 This treats of the gradual development of life in man, parti¬
cularly of the development of a thinking soul (/foitanya).

* In stones there is not even sap, but only being, satta. Comm.

3 What he has known yesterday he remembers, and is able
to say before men, I know this. And when he has known a
thing he remembers it, and goes to the same place to see it again.

Comm.

II ARAVYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, 3 KHA.VDA, 5.

223

what they have known. They do not know what
is to happen to-morrow, nor heaven and hell. They
go so far and no further, for they are born according
owled^ e (in a former life).

Third K hand a,

. *• ^ * lat man (conceived as uktha) is the sea.
rising beyond the whole world 1 . Whatever he
reaches, he wishes to go beyond 2 . If he reaches the
sky, he wishes to go beyond.

2. If he should reach that (heavenly) world he
would wish to go beyond.

3 - That man is fivefold. The heat in him is fire ;
the apertures (of the senses) are ether; blood, mucus,'
and seed are water; the body is earth; breath is air.

4 - That air is fivefold, viz. up-breathing, down-
. rea tliing-, back-breathing, out-breathing, on-breath-
mg. The other powers (devatSs), viz. sight, hearing,
mind, and speech, are comprised under up-breathing

and down-breathing. For when breath departs, they
also depart with it.

5 • That man (conceived as uktha) is the sacrifice,
which is a succession now of speech and now of
thought. That sacrifice is fivefold, viz. the Agni-
hotra, the new and full moon sacrifices, the four-
monthly sacrifices, the animal sacrifice, the Soma
sacrifice. The Soma sacrifice is the most perfect of
sacrifices, for in it these five kinds of ceremonies
are seen: the first which precedes the libations (the
Diksha, &c.), then three libations, and what follows
(the Avabhmha, &c.) is the fifth.

1 Bhfiloka. Comm.

2 Should it not be aty enan manyate ?

224

AITAREYA-AR AA'YAKA.

Fourth Khaada.

1. He who knows one sacrifice above another,
one day above another, one deity above the others,
he is clever. Now this great uktha (the nishke-
valya-^rastra) is the sacrifice above another, the day
above another, the deity above others b

2. This uktha is fivefold. With regard to 1 s
being performed as a Stoma (chorus), it is Trivrzt,
Panz&adasa, Saptada^a, Ekavi»«a, and Pan/favi^a.
With regard to its being performed as a Saman
(song), it is Gayatra, Rathantara, Eb zhat, Phadra,
and Rafana. With regard to metre, it is Gayatri,
Ush^ih, Brzhati, Trish/ubh, and Dvipada. And the
explanation (given before in the Ara^yaka) is that it
is the head, the right wing, the left wing, the tail,
and the body of the bird 2 .

1 The uktha is to be conceived as prawa, breath or life, and
this prawa was shown to be above the other powers (devatas),
speech, hearing, seeing, mind. The uktha belongs to the Maha-
vrata day, and that is the most important day of the Soma
sacrifice. The Soma sacrifice, lastly, is above all other sacrifices.

2 All these are technicalities connected with the singing and
reciting of the uktha. The commentator says: The stoma is
a collection of single Rik verses occurring in the tn'X’as which
have to be sung. The Trivn't stoma, as explained in the Sama-
brahmawa, is as follows: There are three Suktas, each connsting
of three verses, the first being upasmai gayata, S. V. UttaraHika

I} i-Rv.IX, n. The Udgatrf first sings the first three verses a
in each hymn. ’ This is the first round. He then sings the three
middle verses in each hymn. This is the second round. He
lastly sings the last three verses in each hymn. This is the third

round. This song is called Udyati.

The Paft/fcadasa stoma is formed out of one Sukta only, con¬
sisting of three verses. In the first round he sings the fiist verse

a Hinkrf with dative is explained as gai with accusative.

n

O’

He performs the Prastava in five wavs he
Infor ms the Udgitha in five ways, he performs’the

fg* the middleTeTsf ZZZmesln the”third^^ **

The S?n ! eet,meS '. This *ong is called Vish/uti.

1 ne ^ptada^a stoma is formed in th* *

in the first round he sino-s ihe fi , , 6 manner ' onl y that

the middle verse three / h ^ T' 6 ^ dmes ’ in the Second
verses three times Thi 7’ ^ r0Und the middle and last

i"” S "ZdT s “ "r 1 ; ““

,i« ,L“«, t Z; ?“ "* “»• “ *'

other verses are each r m ' ddle Verse once - wh 'l e ‘he

Saptasaptint ^ three times ' This *ong * called

that in the firsTroun!^ 1 f ° rm ® d m dle same manner, only

second four dL “h e las' Z** ^ *? ^ ^ l ™ es ’ th "

once, the second ihree times the third IZT* r ° Und ** firSt
round the first five tin,. 77’ 7 d f ° Ur times 1 ln the third

or he sines in the 77 ® T ° nCe ’ the last three *»>«;

second twice, the last Leges' 116 ^ ^ ^ ^ the

o \ the Ait - Ar - ,akes the

verses, while he says that , ^ mns ’ each consisting of three
one hymn only! B and R s ° the ;. St ° maS are fo ™ ed out of
consists of verses i' 4 ! f !' o ™?’ ^ ‘ hat this stoma

hymn TV tt k f ' t' ’ 5 ’ 8; and 3 ’ 6 > 9 of the R iR-veda

the first verses of the^tSe^SaHa^u^’ ^ St ° ma C ° nSI ' StS <*> of
and pavamanasya at the bemW

( 2 ) of the second h) of th 1 ^ Sama-veda-Uttar^r^ika,

Mahidhara (Yv X o) takes the VerSCS ^ Z S3me three h} ’ mns '
to have left out’the 7 ! he same Vlew - though the MSS. seem
Sfivatta in 7 the des cription of the second paryaya, while
oaj a;/a in his commentary to the TiWvs hrlh F y }

support the opinion of B and R Th * ahma;za seem s to

in the printed tex! of the ' S “ ° miSSi ° n - however >

pnmea text of the commentary, which makes if Him n

to see the exact meaning of Sayatta. * “ d ‘ ftcuIt

II ? e f a “ adMa s ‘° ma is we H described by Sayatta, T««*a Br
, 4- Taking the Sukta agna & yahi (Uttarfir^ika I r 4 -R v Vi’

6, 10 - 12 ), he shows the stoma to consist of (i) verse tZ, 2 !’■

Thffive 2 S 7 3 ’ 3 5 <3 ^ VerSe h 2)3 x 3-

amans are explained by the commentator. The
I3J Q

226

ait areya-ar any ak a.

Pratihara in five ways, he performs the Upadrava in
five ways, he performs the N ldhana in five ways 1 .
All this together forms one thousand Stobhas, or

musical syllables 2 .

4. Thus also are the Rik verses, contained m the
Nishkevalya, recited (by the Hot ri) in five orders.
What precedes the eighty Xrikas, that is one order,
then follow the three sets of eighty trikas each, an
what comes after is the fifth order 3 .

Gayatra is formed out of the Rik (III, 62, to) tat savitur vare»yam.
The Rathantara is formed out of the Rik (VII, 32, 22) a 1 v
ihra nonuma. The B/'/hat is formed out of the Rik (VI,■ 4 <>,\)
tvam id dhi havSmahe. The Bhadra is formed out of the Rik
(X, 157, I) ima nu kam. The Ra?ana is formed out of the

Rik (VII, 27, 1) indraw naro nemadhita.

The metres require no explanation.

In identifying certain portions of the Nishkevalya hymn wit a
bird, the head of the bird corresponds to the hymns mdram 1
gathina/5, &c.; the right wing to the hymns abhi tva rura &c.,
the left wing to the hymns tvam id dhi, &c.; the tail to the hymns
imd nu kam, &c.; the body to the hymns tad id asa, &c. All

this was explained in the first Arazzyaka.

^ The Samagas sing the R^ana at the Mahavrata, and mthat

Saman there are, as usual, five parts, the Prastava, U git a ,
Pratihara, Upadrava, and Nidhana. The Prastotn, when^singing
the Prastava portions, sings them five times. The Udgatn and
Pratihartn sing their portions, the Udgitha and Pratihara, ve
times. The Udgatrz again sings the Upadrava five times. An
all the Udgatrzs together sing the Nidhana five times.

2 The Stobha syllables are syllables without any meaning, added
when verses have to be sung, in order to have a support for the
music. See Kh. Up. I, 13. singing the five Samans each five
times, one thousand of such Stobha syllables are required.

3 There are in the Nishkevalya hymn, which the Hotrz has to
recite, three sets of eighty trz'/Sas each. The first, consisting o
G&yatris, begins with maha n indro ya o^asa. The second, consist¬
ing of Bnhatis, begins with m& ^id anyad. The third, consisting of
Ushmhs, begins with ya indra somapatama. These three sets form
the food of the bird, as the emblem of the jastra. The hymns

II ARArtYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, 5 KHA iTOA, 5. 227

5 - This (the hymns of this .Sastra) as a whole fif
properiy counted with the Stobha syllables) comes to
°ne thousand (of B^hati verses). That (thousand)
is the whole, and ten, ten is called the whole. For
number is such (measured by ten). Ten tens are a
hundred ten hundreds are a thousand, and that is
e w ole. These are the three metres (the tens
pervading everything). And this food also (the

,/ ee f S , e ] tS of h >' nlns bein g represented as food) is
t , n ; ( f ld : linking, and chewing. He obtains

that food by those (three numbers, ten, hundred, and
thousand, or by the three sets of eighty tr/ias)

-TIFTH KhAATJA.

1. This (ntshkevalya-yastra) becomes perfect as a
thousand of Bz'zhati verses.

2. Some teachers (belonging to a different Sakha)
recognise a thousand of different metres (not of Bri¬
ans only) They say: ‘Is another thousand (a

ousand of other verses) good ? Let us say it is
good. J

3 - Some say, a thousand of Trish/ubh verses

0t c thousand of <Tagati verses, others a thou-
sand of Anush/ubh verses.

4 - bhis has been said by a Ri shi (Rv. X, 124 9) •_

5 - ‘ Poets through their understanding’discovered
Indra dancing an AnushAibh.’ This is meant to
* a} ' : , J ? e y discovered (and meditated) in speech
(called AnushAibh) at that time (wh en the/wor-

which precede these, form the body, head, and wings of the bird

Th, s ls o n e order. Then follow the three sets of eigh[y tS

’ and Iastl y. tbe fifth order, consisting of the hymns which
form the belly and the legs of the bird. ^

Q 2

228

AITAREY A-A R A A Y AKA.

shipped the uktha)—the Pr&«a (breath) connected
with Indra.

6. He (who takes the recited verses as Anush-
/ubhs) is able to become celebrated and of good

report.

7. No! he says; rather is such a mail liable to
die before his time. For that self (consisting of
Anush/ubhs) is incomplete. For if a man confines
himself to speech, not to breath, then driven by his
nnnd, he does not succeed with speech .

8. Let him work towards the B/vhati, for the

Brfhati (breath) is the complete self.

9. That self (^ivatman is surrounded on all sides
by members. And as that self is on all sides sur¬
rounded by members, the Brfhati also is on all sides
surrounded by metres 1 2 .

10. For the self (in the heart) is the middle of
these members, and the Bfzhati is the middle of the

metres.

11. * He is able to become celebrated and of good

1 This passage is obscure, and probably corrupt. I have
followed the commentator as much as possible. He says: ‘If
the Hotrf priest proceeds with reciting the jastra, looking to the
Anush/ubh, which is speech, and not to the thousand of Bnhatis
which are breath, then, neglecting the Bnhati (breath), an
driven by his mind to the Anush/ubh (speech), he does not by his
speech obtain that jastra. For in speech without breath the Hotrz
cannot, through the mere wish of the mind, say the jastra, the
activity of all the senses being dependent on breath/ The com¬
mentator therefore takes vagabhi for va/him abhi, or for some old
locative case formed by abhi. He also would seem to have reac
pra tie na. One might attempt another construction, though it is
very doubtful. One might translate, ‘ For that self, which is speech,
is incomplete, because he understands if driven to the mind by

breath, not (if driven) by speech.’

2 Either in the jastra, or in the list of metres, there being some

that have more, others that have less syllables.

229

II ARAAYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, 6 KHAA'DA, 7.

report, but (the other) able to die before his time/
thus he said. For the BzVhati is the complete self,
therefore let him work towards the Br/hati (let him
reckon the ^astra recitation as a thousand Brzhatis).

Sixth Khanda.

This (nishkevalya-i'astra) becomes perfect as
a thousand of Br/hati verses. In this thousand of
Brzhatis there are one thousand one hundred and

twenty-five Anush/ubhs. For the smaller is con¬
tained in the larger.

2. This has been said by a 7 ?/shi (Rv. VIII, 76,
12)

o-

A speech of eight feet; ’—because there are
eight feet of four syllables each in the Anush/ubh.

4 - ‘Of nine corners ; —because the Brzhati be¬
comes nine-cornered (having nine feet of four sylla¬
bles each).

5. Touching the truth;’—because speech (Anu¬
sh/ubh) is truth, touched by the verse (B/Vhati) k

6. ‘ He (the Hot ri) makes the body out of Indra; ’—
for out of this thousand of Brzhati verses turned
into Anush/ubhs, and therefore out of Praz/a as
connected with I ndra 2 , and out of the Brzhati (which

is Prazza), he makes speech, that is Anush/ubh, as a
body 3 .

7. This Mahaduktha is the highest development

1 VaZ, speech, taking the form of Anush/ubh, and being joined
with the Rik, or the Br/hati, touches the true, i.e. Pra;/a, breath,
which is to be meditated on under the form of the Br/hati. Comm'
* Cf. Ait. Ar. II, 2 , 3 , 4 .

8 Because the Anush/ubh is made out of the Br/hati, the Br/hati
being breath, therefore the Anush/ubh is called its body.

230

AITAREYA-ARAAYAKA.

of speech, and it is fivefold, viz. measured, not mea¬
sured, music, true, and untrue.

8. A Rik verse, a gatha l , a kumbya 2 are mea¬
sured (metrical). A Ya^us line, an invocation, and
general remarks 3 , these are not measured (they are
in prose). A Saman, or any portion (parvan) of it, is
music. Om is true, Na is untrue.

9. What is true (Om) is the flower and fruit of
speech. He is able to become celebrated and of
good report, for he speaks the true (Om), the flower
and fruit of speech.

10. Now the untrue is the root 4 of speech, and as
a tree whose root is exposed dries up and perishes,
thus a man who says what is untrue exposes his
root, dries up and perishes. Therefore one should
not say what is untrue, but guard oneself from it.

11. That syllable Om (yes) goes forward (to the
first cause of the world) and is empty. Therefore if
a man says Om (yes) to everything, then that (which
he gives away) is wanting to him here 5 . If he says
Om (yes) to everything, then he would empty him¬
self, and would not be capable of any enjoyments.

12. That syllable Na (no) is full for oneself 6 . If
a man says No to everything, then his reputation

1 A gatha is likewise in verse, for instance, prata/z pratar
anr/ta/W te vadanti.

2 A kumbya is a metrical precept, such as, brahma&iryasyapo-
janaz# karma kuru, diva ma svapsi/^, &c.

3 Such as arthavadas, explanatory passages, also gossip, such as
is common in the king’s palace, laughing at people, &c.

4 As diametrically opposed to the flowers and fruits which
represent the true. Comm.

5 Then that man is left empty here on earth for that enjoyment.
Comm.

6 He who always says No, keeps everything to himself.

II ARAAYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, 7 KHAADA, I.

231

would become evil, and that would ruin him even
here.

* 3 * Therefore let a man give at the proper time
only, not at the wrong time. Thus he unites the
true and the untrue, and from the union of those
two he grows, and becomes greater and greater.

14* He who knows this speech of which this (the
mahaduktha) is a development, he is clever. A is the
whole of speech, and manifested through different
kinos of contact (mutes) and of wind (sibilants), it
becomes manifold and different.

15. Speech if uttered in a whisper is breath, if
spoken aloud, k is body. Therefore (if whispered)
it is almost hidden, for what is incorporeal is almost
hidden, and breath -is incorporeal. But if spoken
aloud, it is body, and therefore it is perceptible, for
body is perceptible.

Seventh Kiiaada.

1. This (nishkevalya-i'astra) becomes perfect as
a thousand of Brzhatis. It is glory (the glorious
Brahman, not the absolute Brahman), it is Indra.
Indra is the lord of all beings. He who thus knows
Indra as the lord of all beings, departs from this
world by loosening the bonds of life 1 —so said Mahi-
dasa Aitareya. Having departed he becomes Indra
(or Hira^yagarbha) and shines in those worlds 2 .

1 The commentator explains visrasa by ‘ merging his manhood
in the identity with all/ and doing this while still alive. Visras
is the gradual loosening of the body, the decay of old age, but
here it has the meaning of vairagya rather, the shaking off of all
that ties the Self-to this body or this life.

The fourteen worlds in the egg of Brahman. Comm. Some
hold that he who enters on this path, and becomes deity, does not

232

AITAREYA-ARAA'YAKA.

2. And with regard to this they say: ‘ If a man
obtains the other world in this form (by meditating
on the pra?2a, breath, which is the uktha, the hymn
of the mahavrata), then in what form does he obtain
this world * 1 ?’

3. Here the blood of the woman is a form of
Agni (fire); therefore no one should despise it. And
the seed of the man is a form of Aditya (sun);
therefore no one should despise it. This self (the
woman) gives her self (skin, blood, and flesh) to
that self (fat, bone, and marrow), and that self
(man) gives his self (fat, bone, and marrow) to this
self (skin, blood, and flesh 1 ). Thus 2 these two grow
together. In this form (belonging to the woman
and to fire) he goes to that world (belonging to the
man and the sun), and in that form (belonging to
man and the sun) he gees to this world (belonging
to the woman and to fire 3 ).

Eighth Khayda.

1. Here (with regard to obtaining Hirawagarbha)
there are these .Tlokas:

arrive at final liberation. Others, however, show that this identifica¬
tion with the uktha, and through it with the pra?za (breath) and
Hiraz/yagarbha, is provisional only, and intended to prepare the
mind of the worshipper for the reception of the highest knowledge
of Brahman.

1 The last line on page 246 should, I think, be the penultimate
line of page 247.

2 The body consists of six elements, and is hence called sha/-
kaufika. Of these, three having a white appearance (fat, bone,
and marrow), come from the sun and from man; three having
a red appearance, come from fire and from the woman.

8 It is well therefore to shake off this body, and by meditating
on the uktha to obtain identity with Hira;/yagarbha. Comm.

_ 11 ARAiVYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, 8 KHAiVBA, 6. 233

2. The fivefold body into which the indestructible
(prina, breath) enters, that body which the harnessed
orses (the senses) draw about, that body where the
true of the true (the highest Brahman) follows after,
in that body (of the worshipper) all gods 1 become

3 - That body into which goes the indestructible
(the breath) which we have joined (in meditation)
proceeding from the indestructible (the highest
Brahman), that body which the harnessed horses
(the senses) draw about, that body where the

true of the true follows after, in that body all gods
become one. &

4 - After separating themselves from the Yes and
No of language, and of all that is hard and cruel,
poets have discovered (what they sought for); de¬
pendent on names they rejoiced in what had been
revealed 2 .

5- That in which the poets rejoiced (the revealed
nature of pr&ua, breath), in it the gods exist all
joined together. Having driven away evil by means
of that Brahman (which is hidden in prana), the
enlightened man goes to the Svarga world (becomes
one with Hira»yagarbha 3 * , the universal spirit).

6. No one wishing to describe him (prana, breath)

by speech, describes him by calling him ‘woman’

' neither woman nor man,’ or ‘ man ’ (all such names

applying only to the material body, and not to pra«a
or breath).

he worshipper identifies himself by meditation with prawa
breath, which comprehends all gods. These gods (Agni and the’
test) appear in the forms of speech, &c. Comm.

2 The prfifta, breath, and their identity with it through meditation

or worship. Comm.

s Sarvahammant hirawyagarbha iti rrute//. Comm.

aitareya-Araivyaica.

234

7. Brahman (as hidden beneath prawa) is called
the A; and the I (ego) is gone there (the worshipper
should know that he is uktha and prawa).

8. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brthati
verses, and of that hymn, perfect with a thousand
Brfhati verses, there are 36,000 syllables. So many
are also the thousands of days of human life h By
means of the syllable of life (the a) alone (which is
contained in that thousand of hymns) does a man
obtain the day of life (the mahavrata day, which com¬
pletes the number of the days in the Gavamayana
sacrifice), and by means of the day of life (he

obtains) the syllable of life-

9. Now there is a chariot of the god (pra«a)
destroying all desires (for the worlds of Indra, the
moon, the earth, all of which lie below the place of
Hirawyagarbha). Its front part (the point of the
two shafts of the carriage where the yoke is fastened)
is speech, its wheels the ears, the horses the eyes,
the driver the mind. Pra«a (breath) mounts that
chariot (and on it, i.e. by means of meditating on
Prawa, he reaches Hirawyagarbha).

xo. This has been said by a A’/shi (Rv. X, 39,12):—
11. ‘Come hither on that which is quicker than
mind,’ and (Rv. VIII, 73, 2) ‘ Come hither on that
which is quicker than the twinkling of an eye, yea,
the twkvkling of an eye 1 2 .

1 Cf. II, 2, 4, 4. .

2 The commentator remarks that the worship and meditation on

the uktha as pra«a, as here taught, is different from the pra«avtdya,
the knowledge of pra«a, taught in the AT/randogya, the Bir a aia
«yaka, &c., where praraa or life is represented as the object oi
meditation, without any reference to the uktha or other portions
of the Mahavrata ceremony. He enjoins that the meditation on

II ARAAYAKA, 3 ADHYAYA, 8 KUANDA.

235

the uktha as prawa should be continued till the desired result, the
identification of the worshipper with pra«a, is realised, and 'that
it should afterwards be repeated until death, because otherwise the
impiession might vanish, and the reward of becoming a god, and
going to the gods, be lost. Nor is the worship to be confined to the
time of the sacrifice, the Mahavrata, only, but it has to be repeated
mentally during life. There are neither certain postures required for
it, nor certain times and places. At the time of death, however, he
who has become perfect in this meditation on uktha, as the emblem
of prawa, will have his reward. Up to a certain point his fate will be
the same as that of other people. The activity of the senses will
be absorbed in the mind, the activity of the mind in breath, breath
in the activity of life, life with breath in .the five elements, fire, &c.,
and these five elements will be absorbed up to their seed in the
Paramatman or Highest .Self. This ends the old .birth. But then
the subtile body, having been absorbed in the Highest Self, rises
again in the lotus of ,the heart, and passing out by the channel of
the head, reaches a ray of the sun, whether by day or by night,
and goes at the northern or southern .course of the sun to °the
road of AHis or light. That Ar^is, light, and other powers carry
him on, and led by these he reaches the Brahma-loka, where he
creates to himself every kind of enjoyment, according to his wish.
He may create for himself a material body and enjoy all sorts
of pleasures, as if in a state of waking, or he may, without such
a body, enjoy all pleasures in mind only, as if in a dream. And as
he creates these various bodies according to his wish, he creates
also living souls in each, endowed with the internal organs of
mind, and moves about in them, as he pleases. In fact this world
is the same for the devotee (yogin) and for the Highest Self,
except that creative power belongs truly to the latter only. At
last the devotee gains the highest knowledge, that of the Highest
Self in himself, and then, at the dissolution of the Brahma-toka,
he obtains complete freedom with Brahman.

236

AITAREY A-ARA 2 VY AKA.

FOURTH ADHYAYA.

First Khajvda.

With this adhyaya begins the real Upanishad, best known under
the name of the Aitareya-upanishad, and often separately edited,
commented on, and translated. If treated separately, what we
call the fourth adhyaya of the second Arawyaka, becomes the first
adhyaya of the Upanishad, sometimes also, by counting all adhyayas
from the beginning of the Aitareya-arawyaka, the ninth,
divisions adopted by Saya/n, who explains the Upanishad as part
of the Arawyaka, and by -Sankara, who explains it independently,
vary, though Sayawa states that he follows in his commentary on
the Upanishad the earlier commentary of .Sankara. I have given
the divisions adopted by Sdyawa, and have marked those of Sankara s
by figures in parentheses, placed at the end of each paragraph.
The °difference between this Upanishad and the three preceding
adhyayas is easily perceived. Hitherto the answer to the question,
Whence this world ? had been, From Pra;/a, pra;za meaning breath
and life, which was looked upon for a time as a sufficient explana¬
tion of all that is. From a psychological point of view this prawa
is the conscious self (pra-natman); in a more mythological form it
appears as Hirawyagarbha, ‘the golden germ/ sometimes even, as
Indra. It is one of the chief objects of the prawavidya, or life-
knowledge, to show that the living principle in us is the same as
the living principle in the sun, and that by a recognition of their
identity and of the true nature of pr&wa, the devotee, or he who has
rightly meditated on pra;za during his life, enters after death into
the world of Flirawyagarbha.

This is well expressed in the Kaushitaki-upanishad III, 2, where
Indra says to Pratardana: ‘I am Pra;/a; meditate on me as the
conscious self (pra^natman), as life, as immortality. Life is pra;/a,
prawa is life. Immortality is pra^a, prawa is immortality. By
pra;/a he obtains immortality in the other world, by knowledge
(pra^na) true conception. Prawa is consciousness (pragma), con¬
sciousness is prawa/

This, however, though it may have satisfied the mind of the
Brahmans for a time, was not a final solution. That final solution
of the problem not simply of life, but of existence, is given in the
Upanishad which teaches that Atman, the Self, and not Piazza,
Life, is the last and only cause of everything. In some places this

II ARAAYAKA, 4 ADHYAYA, I KHAiVDA, 4. 237

doctrine is laid down in all its simplicity. Our true self, it is said,
has its true being in the Highest Self only. In other passages,
however, and nearly in the whole of this Upanishad, this simple
doctrine is mixed up with much that is mythological, fanciful, and
absurd, arthavada, as the commentators call it, but as it might
often be more truly called, anarthavada, and it is only towards the
end that the identity of the self-conscious self with the Highest
Self or Brahman is clearly enuntiated.

Adoration to the Highest Self. Hari, Om !

1. Verily, in the beginning 1 all this was Self, one
only; there was nothing else blinking 2 whatsoever.

2. He thought: ‘Shall I send forth worlds ?’ (i)
He sent forth these worlds,

3. Ambhas (water), Marini (light), Mara (mortal),
and Ap (water).

4. That Ambhas (water) is above the heaven, and
it is heaven, the support. The Mariiis (the lights) are
the sky. The Mara (mortal) is the earth, and the
waters under the earth are the Ap world 3 . (2)

1 Before the creation. Comm.

2 Blinking, mishat, i.e. living; cf. Rv. X, 190, 2, vuvasya mishato
va.n, the lord of all living. Saya^a seems to take mishat as a
3rd pers. sing.

3 The names of the four worlds are peculiar. Ambhas means
water, and is the name given to the highest world, the waters above
the heaven, and heaven itself. Marinis are rays, here used as a
name of the sky, antariksha. Mara means dying, and the earth
is called so, because all creatures living there must die. Ap is
water, here explained as the waters under the earth. The usual
division of the world is threefold, earth, sky, and heaven. Here it
is fourfold, the fourth division being the water round the earth, or,
as the commentator says, under the earth. Ambhas was probably
intended for the highest heaven (dyaus), and was then explained
both as what is above the heaven and as heaven itself, the support.
If we translate, like *Sankara and Colebrooke, ‘the water is the
region above the heaven which heaven upholds/ we should lose
heaven altogether, yet heaven, as the third with sky and earth, is
essential in the Indian view of the world.

238

AITAREYA-ARAiVYAKA.

5. He thought: ‘ There are these worlds ; shall I

send forth guardians of the worlds ?

He then formed the Purusha (the person) 1 , taking

him forth from the water 2 . (3)

6. He brooded on him 3 , and when that person had
thus been brooded on, a mouth burst forth 4 like an
egg. From the mouth proceeded speech, from

speech Agni (fire) 5 .

Nostrils burst forth. From the nostrils pro¬
ceeded scent (pra^a) 6 , from scent Vayu (air).

Eyes burst forth. From the eyes proceeded

sight, from sight Aditya (sun).

Ears burst forth. From the ears proceeded hear¬
ing, from hearing the D is (quarters of the world).

Skin burst forth. From the skin proceeded hairs
(sense of touch), from the hairs shrubs and trees.

The heart burst forth. From the heart proceeded
mind, from mind Afandramas (moon).

The navel burst forth. From the navel proceeded
the Apana (the down-breathing) 7 , from Apana death.

1 Purusha; an embodied being, Colebrooke; a being of human
shape, Roer; purushakaram vira/pi»dam, Sayawa.

2 According to the commentator, from the five elements, begin¬
ning with water. That person is meant for the Vira^.

3 °Tap, as the commentator observes, does not mean here and in
similar passages to perform austerities (tapas), such as the Krikkkra,
the Aandrayarca, &c., but to conceive and to will and to create by
mere will. I have translated it by brooding, though this expresses
a part only of the meaning expressed by tap.

4 Literally, was opened.

5 Three things are always distinguished here—the place of each
sense, the instrument of the sense, and the presiding deity of the
sense.

6 Prawa, i.e. ghra^endriya, must be distinguished from the
prawa, the up-breathing, one of the five prawas, and likewise from
the prawa as the principle of life.

7 The Apana, down-breathing, is generally one of the five vital airs

II ARANYAKA, 4 ADHYAYA, 2 KHAiVZ)A, 4. 239

~ —_ ____

The generative organ burst forth. From the
organ proceeded seed, from seed water. (4)

Second Khanda.

1. Those deities (devata), Agrii and the rest, after
they had been sent forth, fell into this great ocean 1 .

Then he (the Self) besieged him, (the person)
with hunger and thirst.

2. The deities then (tormented by hunger and
thirst) spoke to him (the Self: ‘ Allow us a place
in which we may rest and eat food 2 .’ (i)

He led a cow towards them (the deities). They
said : 4 This is not enough.’ He led a horse towards
them. They said : ‘ This is not enough/ (2)

He led man 3 towards them. Then they said: ‘Well
done 4 , indeed/ Therefore man is well done.

3. He said to them : ‘ Knter, each according to
his place/ (3)

4. Then Agni (fire), having become speech, en¬
tered the mouth. Vayii (air), having become scent,
entered the nostrils. Aditya (sun), having become
sight, entered the eyes. The Dkr (regions), having
become hearing, entered the ears. The shrubs and
trees, having become hairs, entered the skin. K an-
dramas (the moon), having become mind, entered

which are supposed to keep the body alive. In our place, however,
apana is deglutition and digestion, as we shall see in II, 4, 3, 10.

1 They fell back into that universal being from whence they had
sprung, the first created person, the Virag. Or they fell into the
world, the last cause of which is ignorance.

2 To eat food is explained to mean to perceive the objects which
correspond to the senses, presided over by the various deities.

3 Here purusha is different from the first purusha, the universal
person. It can only be intended for intelligent man.

Sukrzta, well done, virtue; or, if taken for svakrfta, self-made.

240

AITAREYA-ARA2VYAKA.

the heart. Death, having become down-breathing,
entered the navel. The waters, having become
seed, entered the generative organ. (4)

5. Then Hunger and Thirst spoke to him (the
Self): ‘ Allow us two (a place).’ He said to them :

‘ I assign you to those very deities there, I make
you co-partners with them.’ Therefore to whatever
deity an oblation is offered, hunger and thirst are
co-partners in it. (5)

Third Khawda.

1. He thought: ‘There are these worlds and the
guardians of the worlds. Let me send forth food
for them.’ (1)

He brooded over the water 1 . From the water
thus brooded on, matter 2 (murti) was born. And
that matter which was born, that verily was
food 3 . (2)

2. When this food (the object matter) had thus
been sent forth, it wished to flee 4 , crying and turn¬
ing away. He (the subject) tried to grasp it by
speech. He could not grasp it by speech. If he
had grasped it by speech, man would be satisfied by
naming food. (3)

He tried to grasp it by scent (breath). He could
not grasp it by scent. If he had grasped it by scent,
man would be satisfied by smelling food. (4)

He tried to grasp it by the eye. He could not

1 The water, as mentioned before, or the five elements.

2 Mfirti, for mfirtti, form, Colebrooke; a being of organised form,
Roer; vrihiyavadirupa mushakadirupa ka murti/^, i.e. vegetable food

for men, animal food for cats, &c.

3 Offered food, i.e. objects for the Devatas and the senses in

the body.

4 Atya^gighawsat, atisayena hantu m gantum vakkhaX. Sayawa.

II ARANYAKA, 4 ADHYAYA, 3 K HAND A, 6. 241

grasp it by the eye. If he had grasped it by the
eye, man would be satisfied by seeing food. U)

He tried to grasp it by the ear. He could not
grasp it by the ear. If he had grasped it by the ear
man would be satisfied by hearing food. (6)

He tried to grasp it by the skin. He could not
grasp it by the skin. If he had grasped it by the
skin, man would be satisfied by touching food. (7)

He tried to grasp it by the mind. He could not
grasp it by the mind. If he had grasped it by the
mind, man would be satisfied by thinking food. (8)

He tried to grasp it by the generative organ.
He could not grasp it by the organ. If he had

grasped it by the organ, man would be satisfied by
sending forth food. (9)

He tried to grasp it by the down-breathing (the
breath which helps to swallow food through the

mouth and to carry it off through the rectum, the
payvindriya). He got it.

3. Thus- it is Vayu (the getter') who lays hold of
food, and the Vayu is verily Annayu (he who gives
life or who lives by food). (10)

4- He thought: ‘How can all this be without me?’

5- And then he thought: ‘ By what way shall I
get there 2 ?’

6. And then he thought: ‘If speech names, if

scent smells, if the eye sees, if the ear hears, if the

skin feels, if the mind thinks, if the off-breathing

digests, if the organ sends forth, then wha^
am I ? ’ (n)

attem Pt to derive vayu from vi, to get.
from 0 ,^ ' Vh ‘f ‘7 "' ayS Sh A" 1 S et in > ‘he one way being

Jr-S/Tw foot (cf - Ait - Ar - n> '• <•*>. the

[3]

R

aitareya-aranyaka.

7. Then opening the suture of the skull, he got

in bv that door. .

8 . That door is called the Vidnti (tearing asun

der), the Nandana (the place of bliss).

o There are three dwelling-places for hi ,
dreams; this dwelling-place (the eye), this dwell¬
ing-place (the throat), this dwelling-place (

h 7 a When born (when the Highest Self had en¬
tered the body) he looked through all things, m
order to see whether anything wished to proc aim
here another (Self). He saw this person only (him¬
self) as the widely spread Brahman. I saw it,

he said 2 ; (13) . , . \

Therefore he was Idaw-dra (seeing is).

11 Beino- Idawdra by name, they call him lndra
mysteriously. For the Devas love mystery, yea,
they love mystery. (14)

alwayThaverequireFan" oral interpreta-

tion but k is by no means certain that the explanation given m
the commentaries represents really the old traditional mterpretotmn.
Sayawa explains the three dwelling-places as the rig ) »
of waking; as the throat, in a state of dreaming; as the heart in a
state of profound sleep. •Sankara explains them as the rig y >
the inner mind, and the ether in the heart. Saya»a allows another
interpretation of the three dwelling-places being the bo ^ 0 ^

father the body of the mother, and one s own body. T
dreams or sleeps he explains by waking, dreaming and pmfound
sleep and he remarks that waking too is called a dream 1 as ^
pared with the true awakening, which is the knowledge o Brahman
£ the last sentence the speaker, when repeating three Pmesjns
dwelling-place,’ is supposed to point to his ng ) > j

and the heart. This interpretation is supported by a pass 0
the Brahma-upanishad, Netre ^garita OT vidyat ka«Me svapnaw

samadhet, sushuptaw hndayasya tu.

. In this passage, which is very obscure, Ankara fail us, either

because, as Ananda^na says, he thought the text was too ea y to

require any explanation, or because the writers of the MSS. left

II ARAOTAKA, 5 ADHYAYA, I KUANDA, 4.

243

FIFTH ADHYAYA.

First Kha^a.

1. Let the women who are with child move away * 1 !

2. Verily, from the beginning he (the self) is in
man as a germ, which is called seed.

3 - This (seed), which is strength gathered from
all the limbs of the body, he (the man) bears as self
in his self (body). When he commits the seed to
the woman, then he (the father) causes it to be
born. That is his first birth, (i)

4 - That seed becomes the self of t he woman, as

the passage. Ananda^fiana explains: ‘He looked through all
creatures, he identified himself with them, and thought he was
a man, blind, happy, &c.; or, as it is elsewhere expressed, he
developed forms and names. And how did this mistake arise ?
Because he did not see the other, the true Self;’ or literally, ‘Did
he see the other Self? ’ which is only a figure of speech to convey
the meaning that he did not see it. The particle iti is then to
be taken m a causal sense, (i.e. he did so, because what else could
he have wished to proclaim?) But he allows another explanation,
viz. ‘ He considered all beings, whether they existed by themselves
or not, and after having considered, he arrived at the conclusion,
What shall I call different from the true Self?’ The real difficulties,
however, are not removed by these explanations. First of all, we
expect vavadisham before iti, and secondly, unless anyam refers to
atmanam, we expect anyad. My own translation is literal, but

I am not certain that it conveys the true meaning. One might
understand it as implying that the Self looked about through °all
things, in order to find out, ‘ What does wish to proclaim here
another Self?’ And when he saw there was nothing which did
not come from himself, then he recognised that the Purusha, the
person he had sent forth, or, as we should say, the person he’had
created,^ was the developed Brahman, was the Atman, was him¬
self. Sayazza explains vavadishat by vadishyami, but before iti the
third person cannot well refer to the subject of vyaikshat.

Some MSS. begin this adhyaya with the sentence apakra-
mantu garbhi;zya/£, may the women who are with child walk away!

It is counted as a paragraph.

R 2

244

AITAREYA-ARA 2 VYAKA.

if one of her own limbs. Therefore it does not
injure her.

5. She nourishes his (her husbands) self (the
son) within her. (2) She who nourishes, is to be

nourished.

6 . The woman bears the germ. He (the father)
elevates the child even before the birth, and imme¬
diately after 1 .

7. When he thus elevates the child both before
and after his birth, he really elevates his own self,

8. For the continuation of these worlds (men).
For thus are these worlds continued.

9. This is his second birth. (3)

10. He (the son), being his self, is then placed in

his stead for (the performance of) all good works.

it. But his other self (the father), having done
all he has to do, and having reached the full

measure of his life, departs.

12. And departing from hence he is born again.

That is his third birth.

13. And this has been declared by a 7 ?zshi (Rv.

IV, 27, 1): (4) T ,

14. ‘While dwelling in the womb, I discovered

all the births of these Devas. A hundred iron
strongholds kept me, but I escaped quickly down

like a falcon/

15. Vamadeva, lying in the womb, has thus de-
dared this. (5)

And having this knowledge he stepped forth,
after this dissolution of the body, and having ob¬
tained all his desires in that heavenly world, became
immortal, yea, he became immortal. (6) _

1 By nourishing the mother, and by performing certain cere¬
monies both before and after the birth of a child.

2 45

II ARAiVYAKA, 6 ADHYAYA, I KHAiVDA, 6.

SIXTH ADHYAYA.

First Kha nda.

1. Let the women go back to their place.

2. Who is he whom * 1 we meditate on as the Self?
Which 2 is the Self?

3. That by which we see (form), that by which
we hear (sound), that by which we perceive smells,
that by which we utter speech, that by which we
distinguish sweet and not sweet, (1) and what comes
Irom the heart and the mind, namely, perception,
command, understanding, knowledge, wisdom, seeing - ,
holding, thinking, considering, readiness (or suffer-
i^f>)> remembering, conceiving, willing, breathing,
loving, desiring ?

4. No, all these are various names only of know¬
ledge’(the true Self). (2)

5. And that Self, consisting of (knowledge) > is
Brahman (m.) 3 , it is Indra, it is Pra^apati 4 . All
these Devas, these five great elements, earth, air,
ether, water, fire, these and those which are, as
it were, small and mixed 5 , and seeds of this kind
and that kind, born from eggs, born from the womb,
born from heat, born from germs 6 , horses, cows,
men, elephants, and whatsoever breathes, whether
walking or flying, and what is immoveable—all that
is led (produced) by knowledge (the Self).

6. It rests on knowledge (the Self). The world

1 I read ko yam instead of ko ’yam.

2 Or, Which of the two, the real or the phenomenal, the nirupa-
dhika or sopadhika ?

3 Hirawyagarbha. Comm. 4 Virag. Comm.

5 Serpents, &c., says the commentary.

Cf. Kh . Up. VI, 3, 1, where the sveda^a, born from heat or

perspiration, are not mentioned.

246

AITAREYA-ARAATYAKA.

is led (produced) by knowledge (the Self). Know¬
ledge is its cause 1 .

7. Knowledge is Brahman. (3)

8 . He (Vamadeva), having by this conscious self
stepped forth from this world, and having obtained
all desires in that heavenly world, became immortal,
yea, he became immortal. Thus it is, Om. (4)

SEVENTH ADHYAYA 2 .

First Khaada.

1. My speech rests in the mind, my mind rests in
speech 3 . Appear to me (thou, the Highest Self)!
You (speech and mind) are the two pins 4 (that hold
the wheels) of the Veda. May what I have learnt
not forsake me 5 . I join day and night with what I
have learnt 6 . I shall speak of the real, I shall speak
the true. May this protect me, may this protect
the teacher! May it protect me, may it protect the
teacher, yea, the teacher!

1 We have no words to distinguish between pra^fia, state of
knowing, and pra^nana, act of knowing. Both are names of the
Highest Brahman, which is the beginning and end (pratishMa) of

everything that exists or seems to exist. ^

2 This seventh adhyaya contains a propitiatory prayer (jantikaro
mantra^). It is frequently left out in the MSS. which contain the
Aitareya-upanishad with .Sankara’s commentary, and Dr. Roer has
omitted it in his edition. Sayawa explains it in his commentary on
the Aitareya-arawyaka; and in one MS. of .Sankara s commentary
on the Aitareya-upanishad, which is in my possession, the seventh
adhyaya is added with the commentary of Madhavamatya, the
A^napalaka of Virabukka-maharaja.

3 The two depend on each other.

4 Am, explained by the commentator as anayanasamartha.

5 Cf. Kh. Up. IV, 2, 5.

6 I repeat it day and night so that I may not forget it.

THIRD ARA^YAKA 1 ,

FIRST ADHYAYA,

First Khaav)a.

1. Next follows the Upanishad of the Sa^hita 2 .

2. The former half is the earth, the latter half
the heaven, their union the air 3 , thus says Ma;^u-
keya; their union is the ether, thus did Makshavya
teach it.

3. That air is not considered 4 independent 5 ,
therefore I do not agree with his (Manuka’s)
son.

4. Verily, the two are the same, therefore air is

1 This last portion of the Upanishad is found in the MS. dis¬
covered by Dr. Buhler in Kashmir, and described by him in the
Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1877,
p. 36. I have collated it, so far as it was possible to read it,
many lines being either broken off altogether, or almost entirely
obliterated.

2 Sawhita is the sacred text in which all letters are closely
joined. The joining together of two letters is called their sawhita;
the first letter of a joined group the phrvarupa (n.), the second the
uttararupa. For instance, in agnim i/e the m is purvarupa, the
i uttararupa, and mi their -sawhita or union.

3 As in worshipping the Aalagrama stone, we really worship
Vishwu, so we ought to perceive the earth, the heaven, and the air
when we pronounce the first and the second letters of a group,
and that group itself.

4 Mene has here been taken as 3rd pers. sing. perf. passive. The
commentator, however, explains it as an active verb, nb&tavan.

5 Because it is included in the ether, not the ether in the air.
Comm.

248

AITAREVA-ARAiVYAKA.

considered independent, thus says Agastya. For it
is the same, whether they say air or ether 1 2 3 .

5. So far with reference to deities (mythologically);
now with reference to the body (physiologically):

6. The former half is speech, the latter half is
mind, their union breath (pra^a), thus says Suravira -
Ma/z^ukeya.

7. But his eldest son said: The former half is
mind, the latter half speech. For we first conceive
with the mind indeed 5 , and then we utter with speech.
Therefore the former half is indeed mind, the latter
half speech, but their union is really breath.

8. Verily, it is the same with both, the father
(MaWukeya) and the son 4 .

9. This (meditation as here described), joined 5
with mind, speech, and breath, is (like) a chariot
drawn by two horses and one horse between them
(prashdvahana).

10. And he who thus knows this union, becomes
united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of coun¬
tenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his
full aoe.

o

11. Now all this comes from the Ma;^ukeyas.

Second Khan da .

1. Next comes the meditation as taught by
Sakalya.

1 Both views are tenable, for it is not the actual air and ether
which are meditated on, but their names, as declared and explained
in this peculiar act of worship. We should read aka^a^eti, a reading
confirmed both by the commentary and by the Kashmir MS.

2 The man among heroes. Comm.

3 The Kashmir MS. reads manasaivagre.

4 Both views are admissible. Comm.

c Prawasawhita/;, Kashmir MS.

Ill ARAAYAKA, I ADHYAYA, 2 KHAADA, 9. 249

2. The first half is the earth, the second half
heaven, their uniting the rain, the uniter Par^anya k

3. And so it is when he (Par^anya) rains thus
strongly, without ceasing, day and night 2 ,

4* Then they say also (in ordinary language),

Heaven and earth have come together/

5. So much with regard to the deities; now with
regard to the body : —

6. Every man is indeed like an egg 3 . There are
two halves 4 (of him), thus they say T ‘ This half is
the earth, that half heaven/ And there between
them is the ether (the space of the mouth), like the
ether between heaven and earth. In this ether there
(in the mouth) the breath is fixed, as in that other
ether the air is fixed. And as there are those three
luminaries (in heaven), there are these three lumi¬
naries in man.

7. As there is that sun in heaven, there is this
eye in the head. As there is that lightning in the
sky, there is this heart in the body; as there is that
fire on earth, there is this seed in the member.

8. Having thus represented the self (body) as
the whole world, 6akalya said : This half is the
earth, that half heaven.

9* He who thus knows this union, becomes
united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of coun-

1 If i is followed by a, the i is changed to y, and both are united
as ya. Here a is the cause which changes i into y. Thus Par-

^anya, the god of rain, is the cause which unites earth and heaven
into rain. Comm.

. 2 When it rains incessantly, heaven and earth seem to be one in
rain.

3 Andam, a/zdasadmam. Comm.

T he one half from the feet to the lower jaw, the other half
lrom the upper jaw to the skull. Comm.

2 50

AIT ARE Y A-AR A A Y AKA.

tenance

age.

, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full

Third Khazvda 1 * 3 4 5 6 .

1. Next come the reciters of the Nirbhufa

2. Nirbhufa abides on earth, Pramwwa in heaven,

the Ubhayamantarewa in the sky.

, Now, if any one should chide him who recites

the Nirbhu^a, let him answer: ‘Thou art fallen from
the two lower places V If any one should chide
him who recites the Pratrwwa, let him answer
< Thou art fallen from the two higher places . . u
he who recites the Ubhayamantarewa, there is no

chidine him. . . ,

a For when he turns out the Sandhi (the union

of words), that is the form of Nirbhufa*; and when
he pronounces two syllables pure (without modifica¬
tion), that is the form of Pratwma "• This comes

1 Cf. Rig-veda-pratisakhya, ed. Max Muller, p. iii, and Nach

‘^Nh’btwn) is the recitation of the Veda without intervals
therefore the same as Samhita. Pratrmwa is the recitation of eac
word by itself (pada-pi^a) ; Ubhayamantare«a,^ the between he
two is the intertwining of SamhitS. and Pada-pa/ia, t e so ca e
Krarna-pa/Zia. By reciting the Savihitd inattentively, one may use
forms which belong to the Pada-text; and by wetting the Pada in¬
attentively one may use forms which belong to the Samhita-text.
“«ain 8 Krama both .ha Sa.hM >»4 Pad. ™

used together, and therefore mistakes are less likely to happe .

3 From earth and sky. Cf. Kh . Up. II, 22, 3.

4 From the sky and from heaven.

5 Nirbhu^a may mean without arms, as if the arms o
words were taken away, or with two arms stretched out, t
words forming, as it were, two arms to one body.

6 Pratn/wa means cut asunder, every word being separa e

the others.

Ill ARAiVYAKA, I ADHYAYA, 3 KHAiVDA, IO. 25 I

first 1 . By the Ubhayamantara (what is between
the two) both are fulfilled (both the sandhi and the
pada).

5. Let him who wishes for proper food say the
Nirbhu^a; let him who wishes for S varga, say the
YxzXrinivdi ; let him who wishes for both say the
U bhayamantare/za.

6 . Now if another man (an enemy) should chide
him who says the Nirbhu^a, let him say to him:
* Thou hast offended the earth, the deity; the earth,
the deity, will strike thee.’

If another man should chide him who says the
Pratrmna, let him say to him: ‘ Thou hast offended
heaven, the deity; heaven, the deity, will strike
thee.’

If another man should chide him who says the
Ubhayamantare^a, let him say to him : ‘ Thou hast
offended the sky, the deity; the sky, the deity, will
strike thee.’

7. And whatever the reciter shall say to one who
speaks to him or does not speak to him, depend
upon it, it will come to pass.

8. But to a Brahma^a let him not say anything
except what is auspicious.

9. Only he may curse a Brahma;za in excessive
wealth 2 .

10. Nay, not even in excessive wealth should he
curse a Brahma/za, but he should say, ‘ I bow before
Brahma/zas,’—thus says 6uravira Ma^ukeya.

The words were first each separate, before they were united
according to the laws of Sandhi.

2 He may curse him, if he is exceeding rich; or he may wish
him the curse of excessive wealth; or he may curse him, if some¬
thing great depends on it.

AITAREYA-ARAiVYAK A.

252

Fourth Khanda.

j Next follow the imprecations 1 .

2. Let him know that breath 2 is the beam (on
which the whole house of the body lests).

3. If any one (a Brahma^a or another man)
should chide him, who by meditation has become that
breath as beam 3 , then, if he thinks himself strong,
he says: ‘ I grasped the breath, the beam, well;
thou dost not prevail against me who have grasped
the breath as the beam.’ Let him say to him:

‘ Breath, the beam, will foisake thee.

4. But if he thinks himself not strong, let him
say* to him: ‘Thou couldst not grasp him who
wishes to grasp the breath as the beam. Breath,

the beam, will forsake thee.’

5. And whatever the reciter shall say to one who

speaks to him or does not speak to him, depend
upon it, it will come to pass. But to a Brahman
let him not say anything except what is auspicious.
Only he may curse a Brahmawa in excessive wealth.
Nay, not even in excessive wealth should he curse a
Brahma^a, but he should say, ‘ I bow before Brah-
ma#as/—thus says 6uravira MaWukeya.

1 The commentator explains anuvyahara, not as imprecations,
but as referring to those who teach or use the imprecations, such
imprecations being necessary to guard against the loss of the
benefits accruing from the meditation and worship heie descnbed,
such teachers say what follows.

2 Breath, the union of mind and speech, as explained before.

This is the opinion of Sthavira .Sakalya, cf. Ill, 2 , 1 , 1 .

3 If he should tell him that he did not meditate on breath

properly.

Ill ARAAYAKA, I ADHYAYA, 5 K HA AY) A, 6.

2 53

Fifth Khaada.

1. Now those who repeat the Nirbhu^*a say :

2. ‘The former half 1 is the first syllable, the latter
half the second syllable, and the space between the
first and second halves is the Sa/Hiita (11111011)/

3. He who thus knows this Sa^hita (union), be¬
comes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives
his full age.

4. Now Hrasva Ma^ukeya says: ‘We reciters
of Nirbhu^a say, “Yes, the former half is the first
syllable, and the latter half the second syllable, but
the Sa;^hita is the space between the first and
second halves in so far as by it one turns out the
union (sandhi), and knows what is the accent and
what is not 2 , and distinguishes what is the mora
and what is not/’ 5

5. He who thus knows this Sawhitd (union), be¬
comes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives
his full age.

6. Now his middle son, the child of his mother
Pratibodhi 3 * , says : ‘One pronounces these two syl ¬
lables letter by letter, without entirely separati ng

1 As spoken of before, III, 1, 1, 1.

2 In agnim i/e, l/e by itself has no accent, but as joined by
sandhi with agnim, its first syllable becomes svarita, its second
pra&ta, In tava it, the vowel i is a short mora or matra; but
if joined with va, it vanishes, and becomes long e, tavet. Comm.

3 Pratibodhiputra, the son of Pratibodhi, she being probably one
out of several wives of Hrasva. Another instance of this metro¬

nymic nomenclature occurred in Kr/sh^a Devakiputra, Kh. Up.

HI, 6. The Kashmir MS. reads Pratibodhi, but Pratibodha is
a recognised name in Gawa Vidadi, and the right reading is
probably Pratibodhi. The same MS. leaves out putra aha.

2 54

AITAREYA-ARAAYAKA.

them, and without entirely uniting them 1 . Then
that mora between the first and second halves, which
indicates the union, that is the Saman (evenness,
sliding). I therefore hold Saman only to be the
Sa?;zhit& (union).

This has also been declared by a T^zshi (Rv.
11,23,16):—

8. ‘ O Brfhaspati, they know nothing higher than
Saman.’

9. He who thus knows this Sawhita (union), be¬
comes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives
his full age.

Sixth Khaada.

1. Tarukshya 2 said: ‘The Sawhit&(union)is formed
by means of the B/'zhat and Rathantara 3 Samans.

2. Verily, the Rathantara Saman is speech, the
Brfhat Saman is breath. By both, by speech and

breath, the Sa^hita is formed 4 .

3. For this Upanishad (for acquiring from his
teacher the knowledge of this Sa^hita of speech
and breath) Tarukshya guards (his teacher’s) cows
a whole year.

4. For it alone Tarukshya guards the cows a

whole year. ____

1 So that the e in tavet should neither be one letter e, nor two
letters a + i, but something between the two, enabling us to hear
a + i in the pronunciation of e.

2 The Kashmir MS. reads Tarkshya, a name used before as the
title of a hymn (Ait. Ar. I, 5, 2, 8 )- Here Tarukshya seems prefer-
able, see Pa/z.^IV, i, 105.

3 See Ait. Ar. I, 4, 2, 1-4.

4 These two, the Brz'hat and Rathantara, are required for the
Pnsh/^astotra in the Agnish/oma, and they are to remind the wor¬
shipper., that speech and breath are required for all actions.

Ill ARAiVYAKA, I ADHYAYA, 6 KHA2VDA, 1 3. 255

5. This has also been declared by a A’zshi (Rv.
X, 181, 1; and Rv. X, 181, 2):—

6. ‘Vasish//£a carried hither the Rathantara; ’

‘ Bharadva^a brought hither the BzVhat of Agni.’

7. He who thus knows this Sazzzhita (union), be¬
comes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives
his full age.

8. Kau/z//£aravya said: ‘ Speech is united with
breath, breath with the blowing air, the blowing air
with the VBvedevas, the VBvedevas with the hea¬
venly world, the heavenly world with Brahman.
That Saz^hita is called the gradual Sazzzhita.’

9. He who knows this gradual Saz^hita (union),
becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga, in exactly the
same manner as this Sazzzhita, i.e. gradually.

10. If that worshipper, whether for his own sake or
for that of another, recites (the Sazzzhita), let him know
when he is going to recite, that this Sazzzhita went up
to heaven, and that it will be even so with those who
by knowing it become Devas. May it always be so !

11. He who thus knows this Sazzzhita (union), be¬
comes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives
his full age.

12. Pan/§ala/§azzz/a said: ‘The Sazzzhita (union,
composition) is speech.’

13. Verily, by speech the Vedas, by speech the
metres are composed. Friends unite through speech,
all beings unite through speech ; therefore speech is
everything here h

1 Everything can be obtained by speech in this life and in the
next. Comm.

256

AITAREYA-ARAiVY AKA.

14. With regard to this (view of speech being
more than breath), it should be borne in mind that
when we thus repeat (the Veda) or speak, breath is
(absorbed) in speech ; speech swallows breath. And
when we are silent or sleep, speech is (absorbed) in
breath; breath swallows speech. The two swallow
each other. Verily, speech is the mother, breath
the son.

15. This has been declared also by a 7?2shi (Rv.

x, 114,4) •—

16. ‘ There is one bird ; (as wind) he has entered
the sky; (as breath or living soul) he saw this whole
world. With my ripe mind I saw him close to me
(in the heart); the mother (licks or) absorbs him
(breath), and he absorbs the mother (speech).’

17. He who thus knows this Samhita (union),
becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his
full age.

18. Next follows the Pra/apati-Sa;;diita.

19. The former half is the wife, the latter half
the man; the result of their union the son; the act
of their union the begetting; that Sawhita is Aditi
(indestructible).

20. For Aditi (indestructible) is all this whatever
there is, father, mother, son, and begetting.

21. This has also been declared by a Akshi (Rv.

I, 189, 10) :—

22. ‘ Aditi is mother, is father, is son.’

21 . He who thus knows this Sawhita (union),
becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of
countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives
his full age.

Ill ARA 2 YYAKA, 2 ADHYAYA, I KHAA 7 )A, 5. 257

SECOND ADHYAYA 1 .

First Khavda.

1. Sthavira Yakalya said that breath is the beam 2 ,
and as the other beams rest on the house-beam, thus
the eye, the ear, the mind, the speech, the senses,
the body, the whole self rests on this 3 breath.

2. Of that self the breathing is like the sibilants,
the bones like the mutes, the marrow like the
vowels, and the fourth part, flesh, blood, and the

rest, like the semivowels 4 ,—so said Hrasva Ma^il-
keya.

3 * To us it was said to be a triad only 5 .

4 * Of that triad, viz. bones, marrow, and joints,
there are 360 (parts) on this side (the right), and 360
on that side (the left). They make J20 together,
and 720 6 are the days and nights of the year. Thus
that self which consists of sight, hearing, metre,
mind, and speech is like unto the days.

5. He who thus knows this self, which consists of
sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, as like unto
the days, obtains union, likeness, or nearness with
the days, has sons and cattle, and lives his full age.

1 In the first adhyaya meditations suggested by sawhita, pada,
and krama have been discussed. Now follow meditations sug¬
gested by certain classes of letters.

2 Ait. Ar. Ill, i, 4.

8 The Kashmir MS. reads etasmin pr sine. The self here is
meant for the body, and yet it seems to be different from jarira.

The Kashmir MS. writes antastha without visarga, while it is
otherwise most careful in writing all sibilants.

Aakalya, as we saw, told his disciples that there were three

classes only, not four. Comm. The Kashmir MS. reads trayaw
tv eva na ltyetat proktam.

6 The Kashmir MS. reads sapta vimatn ia .ratani.

[ 3 ] S

AITAREYA-ARA2VYAKA.

Second Khaada.

i Next comes Kau^Aaravya :

2’. There are 360 syllables (vowels), 360 sibilants

(consonants), 360 groups.

What we called syllables are the days, what

we called sibilants are the nights, what we cale

groups are the junctions of days and nights. So tar

with regard to the gods (the days).

4 Now with regard to the body. The syllables

which we explained mythologically, are physiologi¬
cally the bones; the sibilants which we explaine
mythologically, are physiologically the marrow.

, Marrow is the real breath (life), for marrow is
seed, and without breath (life) seed is not sown. r
when it is sown without breath (life), it will decay, 1

will not grow. i i • n

6. The groups which we explained mythologically,

are physiologically the joints. .

7. Of that triad, viz. bones, marrow, and joints,

there are 540 (parts) on this side (the right), and
540 on that side (the left). They make 1080 to-
o-ether, and 1080 are the rays of the sun. They
make the BWhati verses and the day (of the IN a-

havrata) 1 . . ,

8 Thus that self which consists of sight, hearing,

metre, mind, and speech is like unto the syllables.

9. He who knows this self which consists ot

sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, as like unto

syllables, obtains union, likeness, or nearness with

the syllables, has sons and cattle, and lives his tu

age. ____

1 There are in the Mahavrata eighty tristichs of Bnhalis, and as
each Bnhati is decreed to consist of thirty-six syllables, ten wou
give 360 syllables, and three times ten, 1080. Comm.

Ill ARAiVYAKA, 2 ADHYAYA, 3 KHAiVDA, IO.

2 59

Third Khaada.

1* Badhva 1 says, there are four persons (to be
meditated on and worshipped).

2. The person of the body, the person of the

metres, the person of the Veda, and the Great
person.

3. What we call the person of the body is this
corporeal self. Its essence is the incorporeal con¬
scious self.

4 - What we call the person of the metres is this
collection of letters (the Veda). Its essence is the
vowel a.

5. What we call the person of the Veda is (the
mind) by which we know the Vedas, the jRzg-ve da,

Ya^ur-veda, and Sama-veda. Its essence is Brah¬
man 2 (m.)

6. Therefore let one choose a Brahman-priest who
is full of Brahman (the Veda), and is able to see any
flaw in the sacrifice.

7. What we call the Great person is the year,
which causes some beings to fall together, and causes
others to grow up. Its essence is yonder sun.

8. One should know that the incorporeal con¬
scious self and yonder sun are both one and the
same. Therefore the sun appears to every man
singly (and differently).

9 - This has also been declared by a J?zshi (Rv

I, 1x5,1):—

1 o» ‘ The bright face of the gods arose, the eye of
Mitra, Varu/za, and Agni; it filled heaven and earth

Instead of Badhya, the commentary and the Kashmir MS. read
Badhva.

Hirazzyagarbha, with whom he who knows the Veda becomes
identified. Comm.

26 o

AITAREY A-AR ANY AK A.

and the sky,— the sun is the self of all that rests

and moves/

u < This I think to be the regular Sawhita as

conceived by me,’ thus said Badhva.

12 For the Bahvrf/£as consider him (the sell)
in the orreat hymn (mahad uktha), the Adhvaryus in
the sacrificial fire, the Kh andogas in the Mahavrata
ceremony. Him they see in this earth, in heaven,
in the air, in the ether, in the water, in herbs, in
trees, in the moon, in the stars, in all beings. im

alone they call Brahman.

That self which consists of sight, hearing,

metre, mind, and speech is like unto the year.

14. He who recites to another that self which
consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech,
and is like unto the year,

Fourth Khanda.

1. To him the Vedas yield no more milk, he has
no luck in what he has learnt (from his Guru) ; he

does not know the path of virtue. .

2. This has also been declared by a Ri shi (Rv.

y •_

3. ‘He who has forsaken the friend (the Veda),
that knows his friends, in his speech there is no luck.
Though he hears, he hears in vain, for he does not

know the path of virtue.

4. Here it is clearly said that he has no luck in
what he has learnt, and that he does not know the

path of virtue.

5. Therefore let no one who knows this, lay t e
sacrificial fire (belonging to the Mahavrata) for an¬
other, let him not sing the Samans of the Mahavrata

Ill AR A A 7 YAK A, 2 ADHYAYA, 4 KHAYDA, IO. 26 I

for another, let him not recite the Yastras of that
day for another.

6. However, let him willingly do this for a father
or for an A/£arya; for that is done really for
himself.

7. We have said that the incorporeal conscious
self and the sun are one k When these two become
separated 1 2 , the sun is seen as if it were the moon 3 ;
no rays spring from it; the sky is red like madder ;
the patient cannot retain the wind, his head smells
bad like a raven’s nest:—let him know then that his
self (in the body) is gone, and that he will not live
very long 4 .

8. Then whatever he thinks he has to do, let
him do it, and let him recite the following hymns :
Yad anti ya/£ ka. durake (Rv. IX, 67, 21-27) >’ Ad it
pratnasya retasa/^ (Rv. VIII, 6, 30) ; Yatra brahma
pavamana (Rv. IX, 113, 6-11); Ud vaya m tamasas
pari (Rv. I, 50, 10).

9. Next, when the sun is seen pierced, and seems
like the nave of a cart-wheel, when he sees his own
shadow pierced, let him know then that it is so (as
stated before, i.e. that he is going to die soon).

10. Next, when he sees himself in a mirror or in
the water with a crooked head, or without a head 5 , or
when his pupils are seen inverted 6 or not straight,
let him know then that it is so.

1 Ait. Ar. Ill, 2, 3, 8.

2 This separation of the self of the sun and the conscious self
within us is taken as a sign of approaching death, and therefore
a number of premonitory symptoms are considered in this place.

3 jpuoy fjujvoeidfjs, Xen. Hist. gr. 4, 3, 10.

4 The Kashmir MS. reads ^1 vayishyati.

B The Kashmir MS. reads ^ihma^irasaw vaxariram atmanam.

6 A white pupil in a black eye-ball. Comm.

262

AITAREY A-ARAiVY AK A.

11. Next, let him cover his eyes and watch, then
threads are seen as if falling together h But if he
does not see them, let him know then that it is so.

12. Next, let him cover his ears and listen, and
there will be a sound as if of a burning fire or of a
carriage 1 2 . But if he does not hear it, let him know

then that it is so.

13. Next, when fire looks blue like the neck of a
peacock 3 , or when he sees lightning in a cloudless
sky, or no lightning in a clouded sky, or when he
sees as it were bright rays in a dark cloud, let

him know then that it is so.

14. Next, when he sees the ground as if it were

burning, let him know that it is so.

15. These are the visible signs (from 7-14)-

16. Next come the dreams 4 5 .

17. If he sees a black man with black teeth, and
that man kills him ; or a boar kills him; a monkey
jumps on 6 him; the wind carries him along quickly,
having swallowed gold he spits it out 6 ; he eats
honey; he chews stalks; he carries a red lotus; he
drives with asses and boars; wearing a wreath of
red flowers (naladas) he drives a black cow with

a black calf, facing the south 7 ,

18. If a man sees any one of these (dreams), let

1 The Kashmir MS. reads ba/irakam sampatantiva.

3 See Kh. Up. Ill, 13, 8. The Kashmir MS. and the com¬
mentary give the words rathasyevopabdis, which are left out in the
printed text.

3 The Kashmir MS. reads mayuragriva ameghe.

4 The Kashmir MS. reads svapna^.

5 The Kashmir MS. reads askandati.

6 The Kashmir MS. reads avagirati.

7 The commentator separates the last dream, so as to bring
their number to ten.

Ill ARAiVYAKAj 2 ADHYAYA, 5 KHANDA, 4. 263

him fast, and cook a pot of milk, sacrifice it, accom¬
panying each oblation with a verse of the Ratri
hymn (Rv. X, 127), and then, after having fed the
Brahma^as, with other food (prepared at his house)
eat himself the (rest of the) oblation.

19. Let him know that the person within all
beings, not heard here \ not reached, not thought,
not subdued, not seen, not understood, not classed,
but hearing, thinking, seeing, classing, sounding,
understanding, knowing, is his Self.

Fifth Khayda 1 2 .

1. Now next the Upanishad of the whole speech.

True all these are Upanishads of the whole speech,

but this they call so (chiefly).

2. The mute consonants represent the earth, the
sibilants the sky, the vowels heaven.

The mute consonants represent Agni (fire), the
sibilants air, the vowels the sun.

The mute consonants represent the 7 ?zg-veda, the
sibilants the Yafur-veda, the vowels the Sama-veda.

The mute consonants represent the eye, the sibi¬
lants the ear, the vowels the mind.

The mute consonants represent the up-breathing,
the sibilants the down-breathing, the vowels the
back-breathing.

3. Next comes this divine lute (the human body,
made by the gods). The lute made by man is an
imitation of it.

4. As there is a head of this, so there is a head
of that (lute, made by man). As there is a stomach

1 The Kashmir MS. reads sa yataj .sruto.

2 After having inserted the preceding chapter on omina and
the concluding paragraph on the highest knowledge, he now
returns to the meditation on the letters.

264

AITAREY A-A R AiVY AK A.

of this, so there is the cavity 1 (in the board) of that.
As there is a tongue of this, so there is a tongue 2
in that. As there are fingers of this, so there are
strings of that 3 . As there are vowels of this, so
there are tones of that. As there are consonants
of this, so there are touches of that. As this is
endowed with sound and firmly strung, so that is
endowed with sound and firmly strung. As this
is covered with a hairy skin, so that is coveied with
a hairy skin.

5. Verily, in former times they covered a lute with
a hairy skin.

6. He who knows this lute made by the Devas
(and meditates on it), is willingly listened to, his
glory fills the earth, and wherever they speak Aryan

languages, there they know him.

7. Next follows the verse, called vagrasa, the es¬
sence of speech. ^Vhen a man reciting or speaking in
an assembly does not please, let him say this verse .

8. ‘ May the queen of all speech, who is covered,
as it were, by the lips, surrounded by teeth, as if
by spears, who is a thunderbolt, help me to speak
well/ This is the vagrasa, the essence of speech.

Sixth Khanda.

1. Next Krishna. Harita 4 confided this Brahma^a 5
concerning speech to him (his pupil):

1 The Kashmir MS. reads udara evam, &c.

2 Vadanam, what makes the instrument speak, hastena. Comm.

3 Here the order is inverted in the text.

4 One of the sons of Harita, who was dark. Comm.

5 Brahmawa, in the sense of Upanishad, this secret doctrine or
explanation. It forms an appendix, like the svish/aknt at the end
of a sacrifice. < Iva/ which the commentator explains as restrictive
or useless, may mean, something like a Brahma/za.

Ill ARAWYAKA, 2 ADHYAYA, 6 KHAiVDA, 8. 265

2. Pra^apati, the year, after having sent forth all
creatures, burst. He put himself together again by
means of Pandas (Vedas). Because he put himself
together again by means of Pandas, therefore (the
text of the Veda) is called Sa;;zhita (put together).

3- Of that Sawhita the letter n is the strength,
the letter sh the breath and self (atman).

4- He who knows the Rik verses and the letters
11 and sh for every Sa^hita, he knows the Sa^hita
with strength and breath. Let him know that this
is the life of the Sa^hitfi.

5- If the pupil asks, ‘ Shall I say it with the
letter n or without it ? ’ let the teacher say, ‘ With
the letter n.' And if he asks, ‘Shall I say it with
the letter sh or without it?’ let the teacher say,
‘With the letter sh

6. Hrasva Ma^ukeya said: ‘ If we here recite
the verses according to the Sa^hita (attending to
the necessary changes of n and s into n and sh * 2 ),
and if we say the adhyaya of Maw^ukeya (Ait. An
HI, i), then the letters n and sh (strength and
breath) have by this been obtained for us/

7. Sthavira Sakalya said: ‘If we recite the verses
according to the Sawhita, and if we say the adhyaya
of Ma^ukeya, then the letters n and sh have by
this been obtained for us/

Here the A’zshis, the Kavasheyas 3 , knowing

The letters n and sh refer most likely to the rules of rcatva and
shatva, i.e. the changing of n and s into n and sh.

2 If we know whenever n and s should be changed to n and sh
in the Sazrchita.

3 The Kavasheyas said that, after they had arrived at the highest
knowledge, of Brahman (through the various forms of meditation
and worship that lead to it and that have been described in the
Upanishad) no further meditation and no further sacrifice could be

266

AITAREYA-ARAAYAKA.

this, said: ‘Why should we repeat (the Veda),
why should we sacrifice? We offer as a sacrifice
breath in speech, or speech in breath. What is
the beginning (of one), that is the end (of the

other).’ , A . A

9. Let no one tell these Sawhitas (Ait. Ar. Ill, 1

Ill, 2) to one who is not a resident pupil, who has

not been with his teacher at least one year, and who

is not himself to become an instructor * 1 2 . Thus say

the teachers, yea, thus say the teacheis. _

required. Instead of the morning and evening stoma they o er
breath in speech, whenever they speak, or speech m breath, w en
they are silent or asleep. When speech begins, breathing ceases ;

when breathing begins, speech ceases.

1 The strict prohibition uttered at the end of the third Aiawya 'a,
not to divulge a knowledge of the Sawhita-upanishad (Ait. Ar.
HI i_2), as here explained, is peculiar. It would have seemed
self-evident that, like the rest of the *ruti or sacred literature the
Arawyaka too, and every portion of it, could have been learnt 10m
the mouth of a teacher only, and according to rule (myamena), i.e-
by a pupil performing all the duties of a student (brahma&uin ),
so that no one except a regular pupil (antevasin) could possibly
gain access to it. Nor can there be any doubt that we oug
to take the words asawvatsaravasin and apravakt n as limitations,
and to translate, ‘ Let no one tell these Sa,/zhitas to any pupil who
has not at least been a year with his master, and who does not

mean to become a teacher in turn.’

That this is the right view is confirmed by similar injunctions

given at the end of the fifth Araayaka. Here we have first some
rules as to who is qualified to recite the Mahavrata. No one is
permitted to do so, who has not passed thiough the Di vs a,
initiation for the Agnish/oma. If the Mahavrata is performed as a
Sattra, the sacrificer is a Hot n priest, and he natuially has passe
through that ceremony. But if the Mahavrata is performed as an
Ekaha or Ahina ceremony, anybody might be the sacrificer, and
therefore it was necessary to say that no one who is adikshita, un¬
initiated, should recite it for another person; nor should he do so,

2 Apastamba-sutras, translated by Biihler, p. iS.

Ill ARAAYAKA, 2 ADHYAYA, 6 KHAiVDA.

when the Mahavrata is performed without (or with) an altar, or if it
does not last one year. In saying, however, that one should not
lecite the Mahavrata for another person, parents and teachers are

not to be understood as included, because what is done for them,
is done for ourselves.

After these restrictions as to the recitation of the Mahavrata,
follow other restrictions as to the teaching of it, and here we read’
as at the end of the Upanishad :

4. Let no one teach this day, the Mahavrata, to one who is
not a regular pupil (antevasin), and has been so for one year, cer¬
tainly not to one who has not been so for one year; nor to one who
is not a brahma/fcarin and does not study the same Veda \ certainly

not to one who does not study the same Veda; nor to’ one who
does not come to him.

5- Let the teaching not be more than saying it once or twice
twice only.

6. One man should tell it to one man, so says G&tukarwya,

7- ‘ Not to a child, nor to a man in his third stage of life.

8. ‘ The teacher and pupil should not stand, nor walk, nor lie

down, nor sit on a couch; but they should both sit on the
ground.

9. The pupil should not lean backward while learning, nor
lean forward. He should not be covered with too much clothing,
nor assume the postures of a devotee, but without using any of the
apparel of a devotee, simply elevate his knees. Nor should he
learn, when he has eaten flesh, when he has seen blood, or a
coipse, or when he has done an unlawful thing 1 2 3 ; when he has
anointed his eyes, oiled or rubbed his body, when he has been
shaved or bathed, put colour on, or ornamented himself with flower-
wreaths, when he has been writing or effacing his writing s .

10. ‘ Nor should he finish the reading in one day, so says <2atu-
kareya, while according to Galava, he should finish it in one day.
Agnivejyayana holds that he should finish all before the Trfklritis 4 ,*
and then rest in another place finishing it.

11. ‘And in the place where he reads this, he should not read

1 Se A e Gautama-sfitras XIV, 21, and Biihler’s note.

2 Navratyam akramya is explained by the commentator by
uA^ish/adyakramawa.

3 This, if rightly translated, would seem to be the earliest mention
of actual writing in Sanskrit literature.

4 See Ait. Ar. I, 4, 3, i- 4 .

268

AIT AREY A-ARAN YAK A.

anything else, though he may read this (the Mahivrata) where he

has read something else. , , , ,

12 ‘No one should bathe and become a snataka who does not

read 'this. Even if he has read many other things, he should not

become a sn&taka if he has not read this.

13 . ‘Nor should he forget it, and even if he should forget any-

thing else, he should not forget this.

14. ‘No, he should never forget this.

,5. . If he does not forget this, it will be enough for himself (or

for acquiring a knowledge of the Self).

16. ‘It is enough, let him know this to be true.

17. ‘Let him who knows this not communicate, nor dine, nor

amuse himself with any one who does not know it.’

Then follow some more rules as to the reading o t le e a

cr eneral : . , . c L •

18. ‘When the old water that stood round the roots of bees

dried up (after about the month of Pausha, January to February ) e
should not read; nor (at any time) in the morning or in the after¬
noon, when the shadows meet (he should begin at sunrise so soon
as the shadows divide, and end in the evening before they fall to¬
gether). Nor should he read 5 when a cloud has risen; and when
there is an unseasonable rain (after the months of Havana and Bha-
drapada, August and September *) he should stop his Vedic reading
for three nights. Nor should he at that time tell stories, not even
during the night, nor should he glory in his knowledge.

IQ. ‘This (the Veda thus learnt and studied) is the name of tha
Great Being; and he who thus knows the name of that Great Being,
he b ecomes Brahman, yea, he becomes Brahman. _

1 Apastamba-sutras, translated by Biihler, p. 92 (I, 2, 30, 4).

2 Apastamba-sutras, translated by Biihler, p. 33 (I, 3 > 9 > 1 2 * 4 )-

* Apastamba-shtras, translated by Biihler, p. 44 {l 3 , 3 G-

4 Apastamba-sutras, translated by Biihler, p. 33 (I, 3 > 9 > x )*

KAUSHITAKI-BRAHMAAA-

UPANISHAD.

I

KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD.

First Adhyaya.

i. Attra Gangyayani \ forsooth, wishing to per¬
form a sacrifice, chose Arum (Uddalaka 1 2 , to be his
chief priest). But Arum sent his son, Avetaketu,
and said: ‘ Perform the sacrifice for him/ When
5 Vetaketu 3 had arrived, Antra asked him : c Son of
Gautama 4 , is there a hidden place in the world
where you are able to place me, or is it the other
way, and are you going to place me in the world
to which it (that other way) leads 5 ?’

1 It is difficult to determine whether K\ tra’s name was Gangya-
yani or Gargyayam. Professor Weber adopted first Gargyayam
(Indische Studien I, p. 395), afterwards Gangyayani (ibid. II, 395).
Professor Cowell adopts Gangyayani, but he tells us that the Telugu
MS. reads Gargyayam throughout, and the other MSS. B, C do so
occasionally. The commentator explains Gangyayani as the
descendant (yuvapatyam) of Gangya. I confess a preference for
Gargyayam, because both Ganga and Gangya are names of rare
occurrence in ancient Vedic literature, but I admit that for that
very reason the transition of Gangyayani into Gargyayam is perhaps
more intelligible than that of Gargyayam into Gangyayani.

2 Cf. Kh. Up. V, 1 r, 2 ; Bnh. Ar. VI, 2, 1.

* Cf - Kh ' u p- 3; vi, 1. - 4 ^ VI? ^

The question put by Witra to Vvetaketu is very obscure, and

was probably from the first intended to be obscure in its very
wording. What Witra wished to ask we can gather from other
passages in the Upanishads, where we^ see another royal sage, Pra-
vaha^a Gaivali (Kh. Up. V, 3; Brzh. Ar. VI, 2), enlightening Vveta-
ketu on the future life. That future life is reached by two roads ]

272

KAUSHiTAKI-UPANISHAD.

He answered and said: ‘I do not know this.
But, let me ask the master.’ Having approached
his father, he asked: ‘ Thus has -ATitra asked me,
how shall I answer?’

one, the Devapatha, leading to the world of Brahman (the con¬
ditioned), beyond which there lies one other stage only, represented
by knowledge of and identity with the unconditioned Brahman ,
the other leading to the world of the fathers, and from thence,
after the reward of good works has been consumed, back to a
new round of mundane existence. There is a third road foi
creatures which live and die, worms, insects, and creeping thin 0 s,
but they are of little consequence. Now it is quite clear that the
knowledge which king Antra possesses, and which Nvetaketu does
not possess, is that of the two roads after death, sometimes called
the right and the left, or the southern and northern roads. These
roads are fully described in the AMndogya-upanishad and in the
Brz'had-arawyaka, with certain variations, yet on the whole with the
same purpose. The northern or left road, called also the path of
the Devas, passes on from light and day to the bright half of the
moon; the southern or right road, called also the path of the
fathers, passes on from smoke and night to the dark half of the
moon. Both roads therefore meet in the moon, but diverge after¬
wards. While the northern road passes by the six months when
the sun moves towards the north, through the sun, (moon,) and the
lightning to the world of Brahman, the southern passes by the six
months when the sun moves towards the south, to the world of the
fathers, the ether, and the moon. The great difference, however,
between the two roads is, that while those who travel on the former
do not return again to a new life on earth, but reach in the end
a true knowledge of the unconditioned Brahman, those who pass
on to the world of the fathers and the moon return to earth to be
born again and again.

The question therefore which Aitra addresses to Avetaketu can
refer to these two roads only, and though the text is very corrupt,
and was so evidently even at the time when the commentary was
written, we must try to restore it in accordance with the teaching
imparted by Antra in what follows. I propose to read: Gautamasya
putra, asti sawvntaw loke yasmin ma dhasyasy anyatamo vadhva
tasya (or yasya) ma loke dhasyasi, ‘ Is there a hidden place in the
world where you (by your sacrificing and teaching) are able to

I ADHYAYA, 2.

2 73

Arum said : ‘ I also do not know this. Only after
having learnt the proper portion of the Veda in
itras own dwelling, shall we obtain what others
give us (knowledge). Come, we will both go.’

Having said this he took fuel in his hand (like
a pupil), and approached ATitra Gaiigydyani, say¬
ing: 'May I come near to you?’ He replied-
You are worthy of Brahman >, O Gautama, because

you were not led away by pride. Come hither, I
shall make you know clearly/

2 ' Artra said: All who depart from this
world (or this body) go to the moon 2 . In the former,
(the bright) half, the moon delights in their spirits;
in the other, (the dark) half, the moon sends them on

place me, or is it the other way, and will you place me in the
world to which it leads?’ Even thus the text is by no means
satisfactory, but it is better than anyam aho v^dhvS, adopted by the
commentator and explained by him : Is there a hidden place in that
world in which you will place me as another, i.e. as different from
e whole world or identical with the whole world, and, if as dif¬
ferent, then having bound me (vadhvd=baddhva) and made me a
ifferent person ? We may read anyataro for anyatamo vadhva The
commentator sums up the question as referring to a hidden or not
idden place, where .ffltra should be placed as another person
or not another person, as bound or not bound; or, as Professor
owe renders it, ‘ O son of Gautama, is there any secret place in
the world where thou canst set me unconnected, having fixed me
there (as wood united with glue); or is there some other place
where thou canst set me?’ The speculations on the fate of the
soul after death seem to have been peculiar to the royal families of
India, while the Brahmans dwelt more on what may be called the
s orter cut, a knowledge of Brahman as the true Self. To know

, , them > was t0 be > and > af ter the dissolution of the body they

looked forward to immediate emancipation, without any further
wanderings. J

brah/ 01 ^ 7 t0 /T V Brahman > or > as the commentator, who reads
urahmargha, thinks, to be honoured like Brahman.

Both roads lead to the moon, and diverge afterwards
[ 3 ] T

to be born again k Verily, the moon is the door of
the Svarga world (the heavenly world). Now, if a
man objects to the moon (if one is not satisfie wi 1
life there) the moon sets him free 1 2 * . But 1 a man
does not object, then the moon sends him down as
rain upon this earth. And according to his deeds
and according to his knowledge he is born again
here as a worm, or as an insect, or as a fish, or as a
bird, or as a lion, or as a boar, or as a serpent or
as a tiger, or as a man, or as something else in dif¬
ferent places 4 * . When he has thus returned to the.
earth, some one (a sage) asks: ‘ Who art thou .
And he should answer : ‘ From the wise moon, who
orders the seasons 6 , when it is born consisting o
fifteen parts, from the moon who is the home of our
ancestors, the seed was brought. This seed, even
me they (the gods mentioned in the PanAigmvidya ‘)
gathered up in an active man, and through an active

1 I should like to read aparapakshe pra°-anayati, instead of
aparapakshewa, or aparapakshe na. The negative is ■ out t o e
nueslion for pra^anayati, he sends into a new life, is exactly iihat
die moon does to those who do not proceed on the Devapalha to
the Brahmaloka. Therefore if the read.ng aparapaksheraa must b
retained, it should be rendered by ‘the moon with the dark half
sends them into a new life.

This is supposed to be the hidden place, or rathei the way to
it, when the departed leave the moon, and pass on to lightning
and to the world of Brahman. This is in fact the Devayana
opposed to the Ktriyfina, described in the A'fendogya-upamshad.

» Parana, dandariikavkesha/i. There is no authority for trans-
lating it by dog; cf. Indische Studien I, 396.

4 This might even include naraka or hell.

> If rrtavaA is here the genitive of rAu, its meaning would be
the ordainer of the seasons; cf. Hibbert Lectures, p. 247. 1 a ‘

kshawa is applied to the moon ^again, II, 9. * nd the throne 0
Brahman also is called vtfakshaHti, I, 3 -

« Kh. Up. V, 4-8.

I ADHYAYA, 3.

2 75

man they brought me to a mother. Then I, growing
up to be born, a being living by months, whether
twelve or thirteen, was together with my father, who
also lived by (years of) twelve or thirteen months,
that I might either know it (the true Brahman) or
not know it. Therefore, O ye seasons *, grant that
may attain immortality (knowledge of Brahman).
By this my true saying, by this my toil (beginning
with the dwelling in the moon and ending with my
nth on earth) I am (like) a season, and the child
of the seasons.’ ‘ Who art thou ? ’ the sage asks

again ‘ I am thou,’ he replies. Then he sets him
tree (to proceed onward).

., 3 ' H . e , the time of death), having reached
the path of the gods, comes to the world of Agni

(re), to the world of Vayu (air), to the world of
Varava, to the world of Indra, to the world of
rafapati (Vir&g), to the world of Brahman (Hira-
i «yagarbha). In that world there is the lake Ara 3 ,

! * he mo ments called YeshZiha 4 , the river Vigani
(age-less), the tree Ilya 3 , the city -Salayya, the palace
Aparayita (unconquerable), the door-keepers Indra

The commentator takes retavab as an accusative. I take it as

eJtW tlV f’AT d “ T d “ a 361136 anal °g° us t0 Zend ratu, an
epithet of Ahura. Darmesteter, Ormazd, p. 12, n. 3.

2 If a person fears heaven (svarga) as much as hell, because

ledie^/ru fina ‘ ^ erati0n ’ then he is fit to Proceed to a know-
ed„e of Brahman. It would seem that after this, this person is in

' ff me P ° Sltl ° n as the other who » objecting to remain in the
moon, was set free at once.

Kh {j°" Vm S ° f aH - S ’ enemieS ’ SUCh “ ,0Ve ’ an S er > &c ‘ In ‘he
K l ' U P- 5 > 3 > is called Ara.

hesire X £ al irlman mean ’ ki " in§ ^ wMch COnsistS a

The same as the awattha/z somasavana^ in Kh. Up. VIII, 5, 3.

KAUSHiTAKI-UPANISHAD.

and Pra^apati, the hall of Brahman, called Vibhu^
(built by vibhu, egoism), the throne Vi/£aksha«a
(buddhi, perception), the couch Amitau/as (endless
splendour), and the beloved Manasi (mind) and er
image /dakshushi (eye), who, as if taking dowers, are
weaving the worlds, and the Apsaras, the AmMs
(iruti, sacred scriptures), and Ambayavis (buddhi,
understanding), and the rivers Ambayas (leading
to the knowledge of Brahman). To t is wor e
who knows this (who knows the Paryanka-vidya)
approaches. Brahman says to him : ‘ Run towar s
him (servants) with such worship as is due to myse .
He has reached the river Vifara (age-less), he will

never age/

4 . Then five hundred Apsaras go towards him, one
hundred with garlands in their hands, one hundred
with ointments in their hands, one hundred with per¬
fumes in their hands, one hundred with garments in
their hands, one hundred with fruit 2 in their han s.
They adorn him with an adornment worthy of Brah¬
man, and when thus adorned with the adornment o
Brahman, the knower of Brahman moves towards
Brahman (neut.) 3 . He comes to the lake Ara, and e
crosses it by the mind, while those who come to it
without knowing the truth 4 , are drowned. He comes
to the moments called Yeshdha, they flee from him.

1 Vibhunamakam pramitaw sabhasthalam.

2 Some MSS. read phawahasta^, and the commentator exp am

phawa by abharawa. . . ,

s Though Brahman is used here as a neuter, it refers to the

conditioned Brahman. . A A .

4 Samprativid is here explained as brahmav.dyarhnya, ignorant,

while in other places (Ait. Ar. II, 3, 0 * stands for samyagabhi^na.
If the latter is the true meaning, we might read here tam itvasam-

prativido.

I ADHYAYA, 5.

277

He comes to the river Vi^ara, and crosses it by the
mind alone, and there shakes off his good and evil
deeds. His beloved relatives obtain the good, his
unbeloved relatives the evil he has done. And as a
man, driving in a chariot, might look at the two
wheels (without being touched by them), thus he
will look at day and night, thus at good and evil
deeds, and at all pairs (at all correlative things, such
as light and darkness, heat and cold, &c.). Being
freed from good and freed from evil he, the knower
of Brahman (neut.), moves towards Brahman.

5. He approaches the tree Ilya, and the odour
of Brahman reaches him. He approaches the city
Sala^ya, and the flavour of Brahman reaches him.
He approaches the palace Apara^ita, and the splen¬
dour of Brahman reaches him. He approaches the
door-keepers Indra and Prafapati, and they run
away from him. He approaches the hall Vibhu, and
the glory of Brahman reaches him (he thinks, I am
Brahman). He approaches the throne VL£aksha?za.
The Saman verses, Brzhad and Rathantara, are the
eastern feet of that throne 1 ; the Saman verses, Syaita
and Naudhasa, its western feet; the Saman verses,
Vairupa and Vairafa, its sides lengthways (south
and north); the Saman verses, Sakvara and Raivata,
its sides crossways (east and west). That throne is Pra¬
sha, knowledge, for by knowledge (self-knowledge) he
sees clearly. He approaches the couch Amitau^as.
That is Pra;za (speech). The past and the future are
its eastern feet; prosperity and earth its western feet;
the Saman verses, B/Thad and Rathantara, are the
two sides lengthways of the couch (south and north);

Cf. Atharva-veda XV; Aufrecht, in Indische Studien I, p. 122.

2J&

kaushJtaki-upanishad.

the Siman verses, Bhadra and Ya^naya^hiya, are
its cross-sides at the head and feet (east and west);
the Rik and Saman are the long sheets 1 (east and
west); the Ya^us the cross-sheets (south and north);
the moon-beam the cushion; the Udgitha the (white)
coverlet; prosperity the pillow 2 . On this couch sits
Brahman, and he who knows this (who knows him¬
self one with Brahman sitting on the couch) mounts
it first with one foot only. Then Brahman says to
him : ‘ Who art thou ?’ and he shall answer :

6 . ‘ I am (like) a season, and the child of the
seasons, sprung from the womb of endless space,
from the light (from the luminous Brahman). The
light, the origin of the year, which is the past, which
is the present, which is all living things, and all ele¬
ments, is the Self 3 . Thou art the Self. What thou
art, that am I.’

Brahman says to him : ‘ Wko am I ? He shall
answer : ‘ That which is, the true ’ (Sat-tyam).

Brahman asks: ‘What is the true? He says to
him: ‘What is different from the gods and from
the senses (pra/za) that is Sat, but the gods and the

1 Sheets or coverings seem more applicable here than mere
threads forming the woof and warp; cf. Aufrecht, Indische Studien
I, p. 131.

2 I read udgitha upam//, srir upabarhawam. The Atharva text
has udgitho 'pajraya&

3 This passage is corrupt, and the various readings and various
interpretations of the commentators do not help us much. One
view, which I have followed as far as possible, is that it had to be
explained how the same being could be the child of the seasons,
or living from year to year, and, at the same time, born of the
light. The answer is, Because light is the seed or cause of the
year, and the year the cause of everything else. I take no respon¬
sibility for this view, and I see no way of discovering the original <
reading and the original meaning of these sentences.

I ADHYAYA, 7.

279

senses are Tyam. Therefore by that name Sat-
tya (true) is called all this whatever there is. All
this thou art.’

7. This is also declared by a verse : ‘ This great
Xzshl, whose belly is the Ya^us, the head the Saman,
the form the Rik , is to be known as being imperish¬
able, as being Brahman.’

Brahman says to him : ‘ How dost thou obtain
my male names ?’ He should answer : ‘ By breath
(pra;za/£).’

Brahman asks : ‘ How my female names ?’ He
should answer: ‘ By speech (va/§).’

Brahman asks : ‘ How my neuter names ?’ He
should answer: ‘ By mind (manas).’

‘How smells?’ ‘By the nose.’ ‘How forms?’
‘By the eye.’ ‘How sounds?’ ‘By the ear.’
k How flavours of food ?’ ‘By the tongue.’ ‘ How
actions ?’ ‘ By the hands.’ ‘ How pleasures and

pain ?’ ‘ By the body.’ ‘ How joy, delight, and

offspring ?’ f By the organ.’ ‘How journeyings ?’

1 By the feet.’ ‘ How thoughts, and what is to be
known and desired ?’ ‘By knowledge (pra^na) alone/

Brahman says to him : ‘ Water indeed is this my
world 1 , the whole Brahman world, and it is thine.’

Whatever victory, whatever might belongs to
Brahman, that victory and that might he obtains
who knows this, yea, who knows this 2 .

1 It sprang from water and the other elements. Comm. Pro¬
fessor Weber proposes to translate apa/z by Erlangungen, acquisi¬
tions, with reference to a p nos hi, ‘how dost thou acquire my
names ?' in what precedes.

2 Who knows the conditioned and mythological form of Brah¬
man as here described, sitting on the couch.

28 o

k aushItaki-upanishad.

Second Adhyaya.

i. Pra^a (breath) 1 is Brahman, thus says Kau-
shitaki. Of this pra#a, which is Brahman, the mind
(manas) is the messenger, speech the housekeeper,
the eye the guard, the ear the informant. He who
knows mind as the messenger of pra^a, which is
Brahman, becomes possessed of the messenger. He
who knows speech as the housekeeper, becomes
possessed of the housekeeper. He who knows the
eye as the guard, becomes possessed of the guard.
He who knows the ear as the informant, becomes

possessed of the informant.

Now to that pra/za, which is Brahman, all these
deities (mind, speech, eye, ear) bring an offering,
though he asks not for it, and thus to him who
knows this all creatures bring an offering, though he
asks not for it. For him who knows this, there is
this Upanishad (secret vow), ‘ Beg not!’ As a man
who has begged through a village and got nothing
sits down and says, * I shall never eat anything
given by those people/ and as then those who for¬
merly refused him press him (to accept their alms),
thus is the rule for him who begs not, but the
charitable will press him and say, ‘ Let us give to
thee.’

2. Pra/za (breath) is Brahman, thus says Paingya.
And in that pra^a, which is Brahman, the eye

1 In the first chapter it was said, ‘ He approaches the couch
Amitau^as, that is prawa, breath, spirit, life. Therefore having
explained in the first adhyaya the knowledge of the couch (of
Brahman), the next subject to be explained is the knowledge of
prawa, the living spirit, taken for a time as Brahman, or the last
cause of everything.’

28 x

II ADHYAYA, 3.

stands firm behind speech, the ear stands firm
behind the eye, the mind stands firm behind the
ear, and the spirit stands firm behind the mind \
To that pra/^a, which is Brahman, all these deities
bring an offering, though he asks not for it, and
thus to him who knows this, all creatures bring an
offering, though he asks not for it. For him who
knows this, there is this Upanishad (secret vow),
Beg’ not! As a man who has begged through a
village and got nothing sits down and says, ‘ I shall
never eat anything given by those people/ and as
then those who formerly refused him press him
(to accept their alms), thus is the rule for him who
begs not, but the charitable will press him and say,

‘ Let us give to thee.’

3. Now follows the attainment of the highest
treasure (scil. pra/za, spirit 2 ). If a man meditates
on that highest treasure, let him on a full moon or
a new moon, or in the bright fortnight, under an
auspicious Nakshatra, at one of these proper times,
bending his right knee, offer oblations of ghee with
a ladle (sruva), after having placed the fire, swept
the ground 3 , strewn.the sacred grass, and sprinkled
water. Let him say: ‘ The deity called Speech is

1 I translate vakparastat, X’akshu/zparastat, mana/^parastat as
compounds, and read jrotraparastat. The commentator requires
this. He says that speech is uncertain, and has to be checked
by the eye. The eye is uncertain, taking mother of pearl for
silver, and must be checked by the ear. The ear is uncertain, and
must be checked by the mind, for unless the mind is attentive,
the ear hears not. The mind, lastly, depends on the spirit, for
without spirit there is no mind. The commentator is right in
reading rundhe or runddhe instead of rundhate.

2 The vital spirits are called the highest treasure, because a man
surrenders everything to preserve his vital spirits or his life.

3 Cf. Bnh. At. VI, 3, 1.

282

KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD.

the attainer, may it attain this for me from him (who
possesses and can bestow what I wish for). Svaha

to it! .

< The deity called prawa (breath) is the attainer,

may it attain this for me from him. Svaha to it!

‘The deity called the eye is the attainer, may it

attain this for me from him. Svaha to it!

< The deity called the ear is the attainer, may it

attain this for me from him. Svdha to it!

‘ The deity called mind (manas) is the attainer 01 it,

may it attain this for me from him. Svaha to it.

‘The deity called pra^M (knowledge) is the
attainer of it, may it attain this for me from him.

Svaha to it! 7 ,

Then having inhaled the smell of the smoke, and

havino- rubbed his limbs with the ointment of ghee,

walking on in silence, let him declare his wish, or

let him send a messenger. He will surely obtain

his wish. .

4. Now follows the Daiva Smara, the desire to

be accomplished by the gods. If a man desires to

become dear 1 to any man or woman, or to any men

or women, then at one of the (fore- mentioned)

proper times he offers, in exactly the same manner

(as before), oblations of ghee, saying. I offer t y

speech in myself, I (this one here 2 ), Svaha.’ ‘ I offer

thy ear in myself, I (this one here), Svaha. I o er t iy

1 As dear as pra/za or life.

2 The commentator explains these mysterious utterances y •
‘I offer, I throw, in the fire, which is lit by the fuel of thy in 1 er
ence or dislike, in myself, being the object of thy love, speec ,
the organ of speech, of thee, who art going to love me.

one, i.e. I myself, or my love, may prosper. Sv&ha, my speec ,
tnay g^nt approval to the oblation of me, the lover.

II ADHYAYA, 6.

283

mind in myself, I (this one here), Svaha.’ ‘ I offer thy
pra^*na(knowledge) in myself, I (this one here), Svaha.’
Then having inhaled the smell of the smoke, and
having rubbed his limbs with the ointment of ghee,
walking on in silence, let him try to come in contact
or let him stand speaking in the wind, (so that the
wind may carry his words to the person by whom he

desires to be loved). Surely he becomes dear, and
they think of him.

5. Now follows the restraint (sawyamana) insti¬
tuted by Pratardana (the son of Divodasa) : they
call it the inner Agni-hotra. So long as a man
speaks, he cannot breathe, he offers all the while
his pra/za (breath) in his speech. And so long as a
man breathes, he cannot speak, he offers all the
while his speech in his breath. These two endless
and immortal oblations he offers always, whether
waking or sleeping. Whatever other oblations
there are (those, e.g. of the ordinary Agnihotra,
consisting of milk and other things), they have an
end, for they consist of works (which, like all works,
have an end). The ancients, knowing this (the best
Agnihotra), did not offer the (ordinary) Agnihotra.

6 . Uktha 1 is Brahman, thus said Yushkabhrzn-
gara. Let him meditate on it (the uktha) as the
same with the Rik , and all beings will praise him
as the best. Let him meditate on it as the same
with the Ya^us, and all beings will join before him

Uktha, a Vedic hymn, has been identified with pra«a, breath, in
the Ka/zva and other Vakhas (Brih. At. V, 13, 1; Ait. Ar. II, 1/2).
Here uktha, i.e. the prawa of the uktha, is further identified with
Brahman. As uktha (the hymn) is pra«a, and as the sacrifice is
performed with hymns, the sacrifice, too, is uktha, and therefore
prarca, and therefore Brahman. Comm.

284

KAUSI 1 ITAKI-UPANISHAD.

as the best. Let him meditate on it as the same
with the Saman, and all beings will bow before
him as the best 1 . Let him meditate on it as the
same with might, let him meditate on it as the same
with glory, let him meditate on it as the same with
splendour. For as the bow is among weapons the
mightiest, the most glorious, the most splendid, thus
is he who knows this among all beings the mightiest,
the most glorious, the most splendid. The Adhvaryu
conceives the fire of the altar, which is used for the
sacrifice, to be himself. In it he (the Adhvaryu)
weaves the Vafus portion of the sacrifice.. And in
the Ya/us portion the Hotrf weaves the Rik portion
of the sacrifice. And in the Rik portion the Ud-
g&t ri weaves the Saman portion of the sacrifice.
He (the Adhvaryu or prdwa) is the self of the
threefold knowledge; he indeed is the self of it
(of prawa). He who knows this is the self of it

(becomes prawa 2 ).

1 The verbs ar£, yu g, and sannam are not used idiomatically,
but with reference to the words vik , ya^us, and saman.

2 The commentator explains this somewhat differently. He
takes it to be the object of the last paragraph to show that the
Praz/a-vidya can ultimately produce final liberation, and not on y
temporal rewards. The Adhvaryu priest, he says, takes what is
called uktha, and has been identified with Rik, Ya^us, and Saman
hymns, all contained in the mouth, as being outwardly the sacri¬
ficial fire of the altar, because that fire cannot be lighted without
such hymns. Thus the self of the Adhvaryu priest becomes iden¬
tified, not only with the uktha, the hymns, but also with the sacrificial
fire, and he meditates on himself as fire, as hymn (uktha),^and as
breath (piazza). I read sa esha sarvasyai trayyai vidyaya atma,
esha u evasyatma. Etadatma bhavati ya eva m veda. But if we
read asyatma, we cannot with the commentator explain it by asya
uktayas trayya atma, but must refer asya to prazza, breath, life,
which is here to be identified with Brahman.

II ADHYAYA, 8.

2 85

7 * Next follow the three kinds of meditation of
the all-conquering (sarva^it) Kaushitaki. The all-
conquering Kaushitaki adores the sun when rising,
having put on the sacrificial cord 1 * * , having brought
water, and having thrice sprinkled the water-cup,
saying; ‘ Thou art the deliverer, deliver me from
sin. In the same manner he adores the sun when
m the zenith, saying i Thou art the highest de¬
liverer, deliver me highly from sin.’ In the same
manner he adores the sun when setting, saying:
‘Thou art the full deliverer, deliver me fully from
sin/ Thus he fully removes whatever sin he com¬
mitted by day and by night. And in the same
manner he who knows this, likewise adores the sun,
and fully removes whatever sin he committed by day
and by night.

8. Then (secondly) let him worship every month
(in the year) at the time of the new moon, the moon
as it is seen in the west in the same manner (as
before described with regard to the sun), or let him
send forth his speech toward the moon with two
green blades of grass, saying: ‘ O thou who art
mistress of immortal joy, through that gentle heart
of mine which abides in the moon, may I never
weep for misfortune concerning my children.’

The children of him (who thus adores the moon)
do not indeed die before him. Thus it is with a man
to whom a son is already born.

Now for one to whom no son is born as yet. He
mutters the three Rik verses. 4 Increase, O Soma!
may vigour come to thee’ (Rv. I, 91, 16 ; IX, 31, 4).

1 (v This is one of the earliest, if not the earliest mention of the

)'a^nopavita, the sacred cord as worn over the left shoulder for

sacrificial purposes; cf. Taitt. Brahm. Ill, 10, 19, 12.

286

KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD.

‘May milk, may food go to thee’ (Rv. I, 91, iB) ;

‘ That ray which the Adityas gladden/

Having muttered these three Rik verses, he says:

‘ Do not increase by our breath (pra/za), by our off¬
spring, by our cattle; he who hates us and whom we
hate, increase by his breath,, by his offspring, by his
cattle. Thus I turn the turn of the god, I return
the turn of Aditya 1 / After these words, having
raised the right arm (toward Soma), he lets it go
again 2 .

1 This refers to movements of the arm, following the moon and
the sun.

2 It is extremely difficult to translate the Vedic verses which are
quoted in the Upanishads. They are sometimes slightly changed
on purpose (see §11), frequently turned from their original purpoit
by the authors of the Upanishads themselves, and then again sub¬
jected to the most fanciful interpretations by the various commen¬
tators on the Upanishads. In our paragraph (§ 8 ) the text followed
by the commentator differs from the printed text. The commen¬
tator seems to have read \ Yat te susimaw hrzdayam adhi Z’andra-
masi jrc'tam, tenamrffatvasyejane maham pautram aghaw rudam.
I have translated according to the commentator, at least up to
a certain point, for, as Professor Cowell remarks, there is an under¬
current in the commentator’s explanation, implying a comparison
between the husband as the sun or fire, and the wife as the moon,
which it would be difficult to render in an English translation.
The same or a very similar verse occurs in § 10, while other modi¬
fications of it may be seen in Ajval. Gn hya-sutras 1 ,13> V? an< ^ e ^ se "
where. The translation of the verses in full, of three of which the
Upanishad gives the beginnings only, would be according to the
commentator: ‘ (O goddess of the moon) who hast obtained im¬
mortal joy through that which is a beautiful (portion of the sun)
placed in the moon, and filling thy heart (with pleasure), may
I never weep for misfortune concerning my children.’

Rv. I, 91, 16; IX, 31, 4. c O goddess of the moon, increase!
may the vigour from everywhere (from every limb of the fire or the
sun) go to thee! Help us in the attainment of food/ Rv. I, 91,
18. ‘O goddess of the moon, may the streams of thy milk go
well to our sons, those streams of milk which are invigorating, and

II ADHYAYA, IO.

287

9. Then (thirdly) let him worship on the day of
the full moon the moon as it is seen in the east in
the same manner, saying: ‘ Thou art Soma, the
king, the wise, the five-mouthed, the lord of crea¬
tures. The Brahma^a is one of thy mouths; with
that mouth thou eatest the kings (Kshatriyas);
make me an eater of food by that mouth! The
king is one of thy mouths ; with that mouth thou
eatest the people (VaLsyas) ; make me an eater of
food by that mouth! The hawk is one of thy
mouths; with that mouth thou eatest the birds;
make me an eater of food by that mouth ! Fire is
one of thy mouths; with that mouth thou eatest this
world; make me an eater of food by that mouth !
In thee there is the fifth mouth ; with that mouth
thou eatest all beings; make me an eater of food by
that mouth ! Do not decrease by our life, by our
offspring, by our cattle; he who hates us and whom
we hate, decrease by his life, by his offspring, by his
cattle. Thus I turn the turn of the god, I return
the turn of Aditya.’ After these words, having
raised the right arm, he lets it go again.

10. Next (having addressed these prayers to
Soma) when being with his wife, let him stroke her

help to conquer the enemy. O Soma-goddess, increasing for im¬
mortal happiness (for the birth of a son), do thou place the highest
glory (the streams of thyynilk) in the sky/ ‘ That ray (sushumraa)
which (as a woman) the Adityas gladden, that Soma which as im¬
perishable the imperishable Adityas drink, may the guardian of

the world (Pra,gapati), Brz'haspati, and king Varuwa gladden us
by it/

The translations are made by the commentator regardless of
grammar and sense: yet they command a certain authority, and
must be taken into account as throwing light on the latest develop¬
ment of Indian mysticism.

288

KAUSHITAKI-UPAN1SHAD.

heart, saying: ‘O fair one, who hast obtained
immortal joy by that which has entered thy heart
through Prafapati, mayest thou never fall into sor¬
row about thy children Her children then do not
die before her.

ii. Next, if a man has been absent and returns
home, let him smell (kiss) his sons head, saying:

< Thou springest from every limb, thou art born from
the heart, thou, my son, art my self indeed, live thou
a hundred harvests.’ He gives him his name,
saying: ‘ Be thou a stone, be thou an axe, be thou
solid 1 2 gold; thou, my son, art light indeed, live thou
a hundred harvests.’ He pronounces his name.
Then he embraces him, saying: ‘As Pra^apati (the
lord of creatures) embraced his creatures for their
welfare, thus I embrace thee,’ (pronouncing his name.)
Then he mutters into his right ear, saying : ‘O thou,
quick Maghavan, give to him’ (Rv. Ill, 36, 10 3 ).

‘ O Indra, bestow the best wishes’ (Rv. II, 21, 6),
thus he whispers into his left ear. Let him then
thrice smell (kiss) his head, saying: ‘ Do not cut off
(the line of our race), do not suffer. Live a hun¬
dred harvests of life; I kiss thy head, O son, with
thy name.’ He then thrice makes a lowing sound
over his head, saying: ‘ I low over thee with the
lowing sound of cows.

12. Next follows the Daiva Parimara 4 , the dying
around of the gods (the absorption of the two

1 Cf. Ajvalayana Gr/hya-sutras I, 13, 7.

2 Widely scattered, everywhere desired. Comm. Professor
Cowell proposes unscattered, hoarded, or unconcealed.

3 The original has asme, to us, not asmai, to him.

4 Cf. Taitt. Up. Ill, 10, 4; Ait. Bvahm. V, 28; Colebrooke,

Miscellaneous Essays (1873), II. p. 39.

II ADHYAYA, 13.

289

classes of gods, mentioned before, into prazza or
Brahman). This Brahman shines forth indeed
when the fire burns, and it dies when it burns not.
Its splendour goes to the sun alone, the life (prazza,
the moving principle) to the air.

This Brahman shines forth indeed when the sun
is seen, and it dies when it is not seen. Its splendour
goes to the moon alone, the life (prazza) to the air.

This Brahman shines forth indeed when the moon
is seen, and it dies when it is not seen. Its splen¬
dour goes to the lightning alone, its life (prazza) to
the air.

This Brahman shines forth indeed when the
lightning flashes, and it dies when it flashes not.

Its splendour goes to the air, and the life (prazza)
to the air.

Thus all these deities (i.e. fire, sun, moon, light¬
ning), having entered the air, though dead, do not
vanish ; and out of the very air they rise again. So
much with reference to the deities (mythological).

Now then with reference to the body (physiolo¬
gical).

13. This Brahman shines forth indeed when one
speaks with speech, and it dies when one does not
speak. His splendour goes to the eye alone, the life
(prazza) to breath (prazza).

This Brahman shines forth indeed when one sees
with the eye, and it dies when one does not see. Its
splendour goes to the ear alone, the life (prazza) to
breath (prazza).

This Brahman shines forth indeed when one hears
with the ear, and it dies when one does not hear.
Its splendour goes to the mind alone, the life (prazza)
to breath (prazza).

[3] u

290

KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD.

This Brahman shines forth indeed when one
thinks with the mind, and it dies when one does

not think. Its splendour

alone, and the life (pra«a) to breath (prawa)

Thus all these deities (the senses, &c.), having
entered breath or life (prawa) alone, though dead, do
not vanish ; and out of very breath (prh#a) they rise
again. And if two mountains, the southern and
northern, were to move forward trying to crush him
who knows this, they would not crush him. But
those who hate him and those whom he hates, they

die around him.

14. Next follows the Ni/breyasadana 1 2 (the accept¬
ing of the pre-eminence of pr 4 «a (breath or life)
by the other gods). The deities (speech, eye, ear,
mind), contending with each for who was the best,
went out of this body, and the body lay without
breathing, withered, like a log of wood Then
speech went into it, but speaking by speec , it ay
still. Then the eye went into it, but speaking by
speech, and seeing by the eye, it lay still. Then the
ear went into it, but speaking by speech, seeing by
the eye, hearing by the ear, it lay still. 1 hen mind
went into it, but speaking by speech, seeing by the
eye, hearing by the ear, thinking by the mind, it lay
still. Then breath (prawa, life) went into it, and thence
it rose at once. All these deities, having recognised
the pre-eminence in prawa, and having comprehended
prawa alone as the conscious self (prafnatman) \ went
out of this body with all these (five different kinds o

1 For other versions of this story see Kh. Up. V, i, note 2 ; Ait
Ar. II, 1, 4, 9; Br/h. Ar. VI, 1, 1-14 5 and Kaush. Up. Ill, 3 -

2 Cf. Kh. Up. VII, 15, note.

II ADHYAYA, 15.

291

pra/^a), and resting in the air (knowing that pra^a
had entered the air), and merged in the ether (alcana)
they went to heaven. And in the same manner he
who knows this, having recognised the pre-eminence
m prawa, and having comprehended prawa alone as
the conscious self (pra^atman), goes out of this
body with all these (does no longer believe in
this body), and resting in the air, and merged in
the ether, he goes to heaven, he goes to where those
gods (speech, &c.) are. And having reached this
he, who knows this, becomes immortal with that
immortality which those gods enjoy.

15- Next follows the father’s tradition to the son,
and thus they explain it'. The father, when going
to depart, calls his son, after having strewn the
house with fresh grass, and having laid the sacrificial
fire, and having placed near it a pot of water with a
jug (full of rice), himself covered with a new cloth,
and dressed in white. He places himself above his
son, touching his organs with his own organs, or he
may deliver the tradition to him while he sits before
him. Then he delivers it to him. The father says :

‘ Let me P^ce my speech in thee.’ The son says:

‘ 1 take th y speech in me.’ The father says : ‘ Let
me place my scent (prawa) in thee.’ The son says :

‘ I take thy scent in me.’ The father says: ‘ Let
me place my eye in thee.’ The son says: ‘ I take
thy eye in me.’ The father says: ‘ Let me place
my ear in thee.’ The son says: ‘I take thy ear in me.’
The father says : ‘ Let me place my tastes of food in
thee.’ , The son says: ‘ I take thy tastes of food
in me.’ The father says : ‘ Let me place my actions

1 Cf. B/Yhad-ara/zyaka I, 5, 17.
U 2

292

KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD.

in thee.’ The son says : ‘ I take thy actions m me
The father says: ‘ Let me place my pleasure an
pain in thee.’ The son says : ‘ I take thy pleasure
and pain in me.’ ■ The father says: ‘ Let me place
happiness, joy, and offspring in thee.’ The son says.

< I take thy happiness, joy, and offspring m n . _

father says: ‘ Let me place my walking m thee.
The son says: ‘ I take thy walking in me -
father says : ‘ Let me place my mind in thee,
son says: ‘I take thy mind in me.’ The father says:

‘ Let me place my knowledge (prafna) m t ee e
son says : ‘ I take thy knowledge in me But if the
father is very ill, he may say shortly : Let me place
my spirits (prawas) in thee, and the son.

th Then the son walks round his father keepmg h^s
right side towards him, and goes away. The father
calls after him: ‘May fame, glory of countenance an

honour always follow thee. Then t e °* e b ° .

back over his left shoulder, covering himself with his
hand or the hem of his garment, saying : Obtain
the heavenly worlds (svarga) and all desires

If the father recovers, let him be under the
authority of his son, or let him wander about (as
an ascetic). But if he departs, then let the^
despatch him, as he ought to be despatch , y .

as he ought t o be despatched 1 2 . ___ —

1 Another sakha adds here dhiya h, the thoughts (active), vu, ha

warn, their object, and kama^, desires.

O I have taken samapayali in the sense of J

duties towards a dead person, thoug con es
narallel passage in which samapayati occurs m that sens .

duly to receive the tradition, as the tradition is to be given. J
text itself varies, for the reading presupposed by the commenta.oi
is enatn (putram) samapayati, instead of ena« samapayeyuA.

Ill ADHYAYA, I.

293

Third Adhyaya 1 .

1. Pratardana, forsooth, the son of Divodasa
(king of K&si), came by means of fighting and
strength to the beloved abode of Indra. Indra said
to him : ‘ Pratardana, let me give you a boon to
choose.’ And Pratardana answered : ‘ Do you your¬
self choose that boon for me which you deem most
beneficial for a man.’ Indra said to him: ‘ No one
who chooses, chooses for another; choose thyself.’
Then Pratardana replied: ‘ Then that boon to

choose is no boon for me.’

Then, however, Indra did not swerve from the
truth, for Indra is truth. Indra said to him: ‘Know
me only; that is what I deem most beneficial for man,
that he should know me. I slew the three-headed
son of Tvash tri\ I delivered the Arunmukhas, the
devotees, to the wolves (s&law'zka); breaking many
treaties, I killed the people of Prahlada in heaven,
the people of Puloma in the sky, the people of Kala-
kan^a on earth 2 . And not one hair of me was
harmed there. And he who knows me thus, by no
deed of his is his life harmed, not by the murder of

1 The object now is to explain the true Brahma-vidya, while the
first and second chapters are only introductory, treating of the
worship of the couch (paryankopasana) and of the worship of
prazza.

2 This refers to heroic deeds performed by Indra, as represented
in the hymns of the Rig-veda. See Rig-veda V, 34, 4, and Sayazza's
commentary; Ait. Brahm. VII, 28. Weber, Indische Studien I,
410-418, has tried to discover an original physical meaning in the
heroic deeds ascribed to Indra. A curious remark is made by
the commentator, who says that the skulls of the Arunmukhas were
turned into the thorns of the desert (karira) which remain to
this day,—a very common phase in popular tradition.

294

KAUSHLTAKI-UPANISHAD.

his mother, not by the murder of his father, not by
theft, not by the killing of a Brahman. If he is
going to commit a sin, the bloom 1 does not depart

from his face.’

2. Indra said: ‘I am prawa, meditate on me as
the conscious self (pra^natman), as life, as immor¬
tality. Life is prawa, prawa is life. Immortality is
prawa, prawa is immortality. As long, as prawa
dwells in this body, so long surely there is life. By
prawa he obtains immortality in the other world, by
knowledge true conception. He who meditates on
me as life and immortality, gains his full life in this
world, and obtains in the Svarga world immortality
and indestructibility/

(Pratardana said): ‘ Some maintain here, that the
prawas become one, for (otherwise) no one could at
the same time make known a name by speech, see
a form with the eye, hear a sound with the ear,
think a thought with the mind. After having
become one, the prawas perceive all these together,
one by one. While speech speaks, all prawas speak
after it. While the eye sees, all prawas see after it.
While the ear hears, all prawas hear after it. While
the mind thinks, all prawas think after it. While the
prawa breathes, all prawas breathe after it.

< Thus it is indeed,’ said Indra, ‘ but nevertheless
there is a pre-eminence among the prawas 2 .

3. Man lives deprived of speech, for we see dumb
people. Man lives deprived of sight, for we see

1 Professor Cowell compares Taittiriya-Sawhita III, i, 1 , nasya
nita m na haro vyeti.

2 Prawas, in the plural, is supposed to stand for the five senses
as modifications of breath. It would be better if we could read
prawasya ni/z-sreyasam. See before, II, 14-

Ill ADHYAYA, 3. 295

blind people. Man lives deprived of hearing, for
we see deaf people. Man lives deprived of mind,
for we see infants. Man lives deprived of his arms,
deprived of his legs, for we see it thus. But prazza
alone is the conscious self (pra^natman), and having
laid hold of this body, it makes it rise up. There¬
fore it is said, Let man worship it alone as uktha h
What is prazza, that is pra^na (self-consciousness) ;
what is pra^na (self-consciousness), that is prazza, for
together they (pragma and prazza) live in this body,
and together they go out of it. Of that, this is the
evidence, this is the understanding. When a man,
being thus asleep, sees no dream whatever, he be¬
comes one with that prazza alone 1 2 . Then speech
goes to him (when he is absorbed in prazza) with
all names, the eye with all forms, the ear with all
sounds, the mind with all thoughts. And when
he awakes, then, as from a burning fire sparks
proceed in all directions, thus from that self the
prazzas (speech, &c.) proceed, each towards its place;
from the prazzas the gods (Agni, &c.), from the gods
the worlds.

Of this, this is the proof, this is the understanding.
When a man is thus sick, going to die, falling into
weakness and faintness, they say: ‘ His thought has
departed, he hears not, he sees not, he speaks not,
he thinks not/ Then he becomes one with that
prazza alone. Then speech goes to him (who is
absorbed in prazza) with all names, the eye with all

1 Uktha, hymn, is artificially derived from ut-thapayati, to raise
up, and hence uktha, hymn, is to be meditated on as pra?za, breath,
which likewise raises up the body. See Ait. Ar. II, 1, 15.

2 He is absorbed in prarca. Or should it be pram/i as
nominative ?

296

KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD.

forms, the ear with all sounds, the mind with all
thoughts. And when he departs from this body, he

departs together with all these k

4. Speech gives up to him (who is absorbed in
pr&^a) all names, so that by speech he obtains all
names. The nose gives up to him all odours/ so
that by scent he obtains all odours. The eye gives
up to' him all forms, so that by the eye he obtains^
all forms. The ear gives up to him all sounds, so
that by the ear he obtains all sounds. The mind
gives up to him all thoughts, so that by the mind he
obtains all thoughts. This is the complete absorp
tion in pra^a. And what is pra^a is pragma (self-
consciousness), what is pra^na (self-consciousness) is
pra^a. For together do these two live in the body,

and together do they depart.

Now we shall explain how all things become one

in that pra^*na (self-consciousness).

5. Speech is one portion taken out 1 2 of prafna
(self-conscious knowledge), the word is its object,
placed outside. The nose is one portion taken out
of it, the odour is its object, placed outside. The
eye is one portion taken out of it, the form is its
object, placed outside. The ear is one portion taken
out of it, the sound is its object, placed outside. The
tongue is one portion taken out of it, the taste of
food is its object, placed outside. The two hands

1 According to another reading we might translate, ‘ Speech
takes away all names from that body; and prawa, in which speech
is absorbed, thus obtains all names/

2 I read udu/^am or udu^am, instead of adh^am, explained
by the commentator as adtiduhat. Professor Cowell translates,
‘ Speech verily milked one portion thereof/ which may have been
the original purport of the writer.

Ill ADHYAYA, 7.

297

are one portion taken out of it, their action is their
object, placed outside. The body is one portion
taken put of it, its pleasure and pain are its
object, placed outside. The organ is one portion
taken out of it, happiness, joy, and offspring are its
object, placed outside. The two feet are one portion
taken out of it, movements are their object, placed
outside.‘Mind is one portion taken out of it, thoughts
and desires are its object, placed outside.

6. Having by pra^M (self-conscious knowledge)
taken possession of speech, he obtains by speech all
words. Having by prafM taken possession of the
nose, he obtains all odours. Having by prayna
taken possession of the eye, he obtains all forms.
Having by pra^na taken possession of the ear, he -
obtains all sounds. Having by pra^na taken posses¬
sion of the tongue, he obtains all tastes of food.
Having by pra^vfa taken possession of the two
hands, he obtains all actions. Having by pra^na
taken possession of the body, he obtains pleasure
and pain. Having by pra^na taken possession of
the 'organ, he obtains happiness, joy, and offspring.
Having by prayna taken possession of the two feet,
he obtains all movements. Having by pra^na taken
possession of mind, he,obtains all thoughts.

7 - bor without pragma (self-consciousness) speech
does not make known (to the self) any word 1 . ‘ My

1 Professor Cowell has translated a passage from the com- ’
mentary which is interesting as showing that its author and the
author of the Upanishad too had a clear conception of the
correlative nature of knowledge. ‘ The organ of sense/ he says,
cannot exist without pra^M (self-consciousness), nor the objects
o sense be obtained without the organ, therefore—on the princi-
p e that when one thing cannot exist without another, that thing is
said to be identical with the other—as the cloth, for instance, being

KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD.

mind was absent,’ he says, ‘ I did not perceive that
word’ Without pragma the nose does not make
known any odour. ‘ My mind was absent,’ he. says,

. I did not perceive that odour.’ Without pragma
the eye does not make known any form. My min ,
was absent,’ he says, ‘ I did not perceive that form.
Without pragma the ear does not make known any
sound ‘ My mind was absent,’ he says, ‘ I did not
perceive that sound.’ Without pragma the tongue
does not make known any taste. ‘ My mind was
absent,’ he says, ‘ I did not perceive that taste.
Without pragma the two hands do not make known
anv act ‘ Our mind was absent,’ they say, ‘ we did
Z perceive any «t' Without pray™ the body
does not make known pleasure or pain. My min
was absent.’ he says, ‘ I did not perceive that
pleasure or pain.’ Without pragma the organ does
not make known happiness, joy, or offspring. y
mind was absent,’ he says, ‘ I did not perceive that
happiness, joy, or offspring.’ Without pragma the
two feet do not make known any movement. Uur
mind was absent,’ they say, ‘we did not perceive
that movement.’ Without pragma no thought suc¬
ceeds, nothing can be known that is to be known.

8 . Let no man try to find out what speech is, let
him know the speaker. Let no man try to find out
what odour is, let him know him who smells. Let no
man try to find out what form is, let him know the
seer. Let no man try to find out what sound is, let

never perceived without the threads, is identical with them, or t e
(false perception of) silver being never found without the mother ot
pearl is identical with it, so the objects of sense being never oun
without the organs are identical with them, and the organs eing
never found without pra^ha (self-consciousness) are identical with it.

Ill ADHYAYA, 8.

299

him know the hearer. Let no man try to find out
the tastes of food, let him know the knower of
tastes. Let no man try to find out what action is,
let him know the agent. Let no man try to find
out what pleasure and pain are, let him know the
knower of pleasure and pain. Let no man try to
find out what happiness, joy, and offspring are, let
him know the knower of happiness, joy, and offspring.
Let no man try to find out what movement is, let him
know the mover. Let no man try to find out what
mind is, let him know the thinker. These ten objects
(what is spoken, smelled, seen, &c.) have refer¬
ence to pra^na (self-consciousness), the ten subjects
(speech, the senses, mind) have reference to objects.
If there were no objects, there would be no subjects ;
and if there were no subjects, there would be no
objects. For on either side alone nothing could be
achieved. But that (the self of pra^na, conscious¬
ness, and prana., life) is not many, (but one.) For as
in a car the circumference of a wheel is placed on
the spokes, and the spokes on the nave, thus are
these objects (circumference) placed on the subjects
(spokes), and the subjects on the pra/za. And that
Pra^a (breath, the living and breathing power) in¬
deed is the self of pra^na (the self-conscious self),
blessed, imperishable, immortal. He does not in¬
crease by a good action, nor decrease by a bad
action. For he (the self of prana and pra^na) makes
him, whom he wishes to lead up from these worlds,
do a good deed ’ and the same makes him, whom
he wishes to lead down from these worlds, do a bad
deed 1 . And he is the g uardian of the world, he is

1 The other text says, ‘ whom he wishes to draw after him; and
whom he wishes to draw away from these worlds/ Ramatirtha, in

300

KAUSHITAKl-U DANISH AD.

the kina of the world, he is the lord of the universe,-
and he is my (Indra’s) self, thus let it be known,

yea, thus let it be known!

Fourth Adhyaya 1 .

i There was formerly Gargya Balaki 2 , famous as
a man of great reading; for it was said of him that
he lived among the Udnaras, among tie ava^
Matsyas, the ICuru-PanHlas, the Kad-V»dehas
Having gone to A^atasatru, (the <mg) o v ^ 51 ’
said to him: ‘Shall I tell you Brahman? Afata-

yatru said to him : 'We

that speech (of yours), for verily all people run away,
saying, “ Ganaka (the king of Mithila) is our father

(patron).” ’

2. 4 BRIHAD-ARAiVYAKA-
UPANISHAD.

i. Aditye purusha/z.
atish tfckh sarvesham

KaushItaki-brahmaaa-

UPANISHAD.

Id.

l.

brzhat pawrfaravasa

his commentary on the Mait Up. 3 , 2, quotes the text as translated

ab ° V m*a, breath of life, has been explained in the preceding
chapter But this prawa is not yet the highest point tha as
be reached. Pra«a, life, even as united with pra^ra, -sc-ousness
is only a covering of something else, viz. the Self, and this Hi 0

Self has now to be explained.

2 The same story is told in the Br? had-ara«yaka , i s q.,

with important variations. i

3 I take iti to depend on sawspash/a, and read satvanmatsyes ,

though the commentary seems to have read so ’vasan, or sa vasan,

for savasan. See Introduction, p. lxxvii. f

4 The second paragraph forms a kind of table of conten s
the discussion which is to follow. I have given instead a fuller
table of contents, taken from the Bnhad-Sra*yaka II, as compared
with the Kaushitaki-upanishad in its two texts. The variations 0
text A are given in small letters. In text B, the table o conten s
is o-iven at the end of the discussion, in § 18.

IV ADHYAYA, 2,

301

bhutdnam murdha
ra^a.

o

ii. A^andre purushaA
brzbat pazzz/aravasa/z
somo ra^a. (Na-
syannaz^ kshlyate,
is the reward.)
iii. Vidyuti purusha/z.

te^asvi.

0

A

iv. Aka^e purushaA
pur/zam apravarti.

v. Vayau purusha^.
indro vaiku^//£o ’pa¬
rtita sena.

vi. Agnau purusha/£.
vishasahiA

vii. Apsu purusha h.
pratirulpaA

A

viii. Adarse purushaA
ro/Hsh/zuA

ix. Yantam pa^a/^ /£/zab-
ddik.
asu/£.

(panduravasa) atish-

th&h sarvesham
bhutanam mftrdha.
ii. Aandramasi.

somo ra^a, annasya-
tma. Only annasydtmd.

iii. Id.

te^asy atma. satya -

syatma.

iii b . stanayitnau puru-
shaA

^abdasyatma.

iv. Id. (5)

pumam apravarti
brahma. apravritti.

v. Id. (4)

Id.

vi. Id.
id.

vii. Id.

namnasyatma tegasa

atma.

Viii. Id.

pratirftpa/z.
viii b . pratkrutkayam pu-
rushaA (9)
dvitiyo ’napaga/z. a -

suh.

ix. Ya h s&hddik purus-
hamanveti. (10 )sabde.
Id. mrityvh.

302

kaushJtaki-upanishad.

x. Dikshu purusha/2.
dvitiyo ’napaga/i

xi. AVzayamaya/z puru-

sha h.
mrztyu/2.

xii. Atmani purusha//.
atmanvi.

x. Deest.

x. A7zayapurusha/i (8 b )

kb ay ay am.

Id. dvitiyo ’napagah.

xi. .SariraA purusha/i.

(12) s arire purusha h.

pra^apati/ 4 .

xii. Ya h pragma atma,

yenaitat supta 4

svapnaya >£arati.
Yamo ra^a (n) pnru-

shah svapnaya k arati

yamo raga.

xiii. Dakshi/ze ’kshan pu-

rusha/^.

namna ( vaka ) atma,
agner atma, ^yoti-
sha atma.

xiv. Savye ’kshan puru-
sha/z.

satyasyatma, vidyuta
atma, te^asa atma.

3. Bal&ki said: ‘The person that is in the sun,

on him I meditate (as Brahman).

A^atasatru said to him: ‘No, no! do not chal¬
lenge me (to a disputation) on this 1 . I meditate on
him who is called great, clad in white raiment , the
supreme, the he ad of all beings. Whoso meditates

1 The king means to say that he knows this already, and that he
can mention not only the predicates of the person in the sun thus
meditated on as Brahman, but also the rewards of such meditation.

2 This is properly a predicate of the moon, and used as such in
the Brfhad-arawyaka-upanishad, in the second paragraph of the
dialogue.

IV ADHYAYA, 8.

303

on him thus, becomes supreme, and the head of all
beings/

4. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the moon,
on him I meditate.’

Afata^atru said to him: ‘ Do not challenge me on
this. I meditate on him as Soma, the king, the self,
(source) of all food. Whoso meditates on him thus,
becomes the self, (source) of all food/

5. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the
lightning, on him I meditate/

A^atasatru said to him: ‘ Do not challenge me on
this. I meditate on him as the self in light. Whoso
meditates on him thus, becomes the self in light/

6. Balaki said: ‘ The person that is in the
thunder, on him I meditate/

A^ata^atru said to him : e Do not challenge me
on this. I meditate on him as the self of sound 1 .

Whoso meditates on him thus, becomes the self of
sound/

7. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the ether,
on him I meditate/

A^ata^atru said to him : ‘Do not challenge me
on this. I meditate on him as the full, quiescent
Brahman. Whoso meditates on him thus, is filled
with offspring and cattle. Neither he himself nor
his offspring dies before the time/

8. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the air,
on him I meditate.’

A^ata^atru said to him : ‘ Do not challenge me
on this. I meditate on him as Indra Vaiku;z4£a, as
the unconquerable army. Whoso meditates on him
thus, becomes victorious, unconquerable, conquering
his enemies/

1 This is not mentioned in the Brz'had-arawyaka.

3°4

kaushitaki-upanishad.

9. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the fire,
on him I meditate.’

Afatasatru said to him : ‘ Do not challenge me
on this. I meditate on him as powerful. Whoso
meditates on him thus, becomes powerful among

others 1 .’ . . .

10. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the

water, on him I meditate.

Aratasatru said to him: ‘ Do not challenge me on
this. I meditate on him as the self of the name.
Whoso meditates on him thus, becomes the self
of the name.’ So far with regard to deities (my¬
thological) ; now with regard to the body (physio-

logical). . .

11. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the

mirror, on him I meditate.’

A^atasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me on
this. I meditate on him as the likeness. Whoso
meditates on him thus, to him a son is born in his
family who is his likeness, not one who is not his

likeness.

12. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the

echo, on him I meditate.

Afatasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me on
this. I meditate on him as the second, who never
aoes away. Whoso meditates on him thus, he gets
a second from his second (his wife), he becomes

doubled 2 .’

13. Balaki said: ‘The sound that follows a

man, on that I meditate.

Aj^atasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me on

1 Instead of anyeshu, the second text, as printed by Piofe»soi
Cowell, has anv esha.

2 This paragraph does not occur in the Bn had-ara;/yaka.

IV ADHYAYA, 18.

305

this I meditate on him as life. Whoso meditates
°n him thus, neither he himself nor his offspring
W ‘U faint before the time.’ &

14- Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the
shadow, on him I meditate.'

A^ata^atru said to him: ' Do not challenge me on
this. I meditate on him as death. Whoso medi¬
tates on him thus, neither he himself nor his off-
spring will die before the time.’

15. Balaki said: ‘The person that is em¬
bodied, on him I meditate.’

Afata.satru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me
on this. I meditate on him as Lord of creatures.

Whoso meditates on him thus, is multiplied in off¬
spring and cattle.’

16. Balaki said: ‘The Self which is conscious
(pra^na), and by whom he who sleeps here, walks
about in sleep, on him I meditate.’

not challenge me on
this. I meditate on him as Yama the king. Whoso

meditates on him thus, everything is subdued for
his excellencies.’

17. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the
right eye, on him I meditate.’

Ab'ataj'atru said to him: ‘ Do not challenge me on

this. I meditate on him as the self of the name, as

the self of fire, as the self of splendour. Whoso

meditates on him thus, he becomes the self of
these.’

18. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the
left eye, on him I meditate.’

A^ata-s-atru said to him: ‘ Do not challenge me
on this. I meditate on him as the self of the true,
as the self of lightning, as the self of light. Whoso’

[3] x

„ o6 kaushitaki-upanxshad.

meditates on him thus, he becomes the self of

th To e '’ After this Baliki became silent. A^taratru
said to him: ‘Thus far only (do you now ,

Baliki>’ 'Thus far only, replied Balaki.

Then Aihtara.ru said to him: 'Vainly did you

challenge me, saying. Sha J h ns

O Balaki, he who is the maker ot tli P

(whom you mentioned), he of w om a

work, he alone is to be known. . , ,

Thereupon Balaki came, carry.ng fuel ini hish. .

savins * ‘ May I come to you as a pupil. A*

Jru said to him: ‘ I deem it improper that a

Kshatriya should initiate a Brahman Come I
*all make you know clearly.’ Then taking him b*
the hand he went forth. And the two together

came ,o a' person who was asleep.

called him, saying: ' Thou great one, clad in w

raiment, Soma, King'.' But he remained ljun

-re did this person. here sW » - £

Whence came he thus DacK.

And A^tasatru said to him: ‘Where this per¬
son here slept, where he was whence he thus^came
back, is this: The arteries of the heart callec H
extend from the heart of the person towards the
surrounding body. Small as a hair divided a thou
sand times, they stand full of a thin fluid o van °us
colours, white, black, yellow, red. In these the
person is when sleeping he sees no dream.

1 See § 3 iniu

IV ADHYAYA, 20.

307

Then he becomes one with that prana alone.
T hen speech goes to him with all names, the eye
with all forms, the ear with all sounds, the mind
with all thoughts. And when he awakes, then, as
from a burning fire, sparks proceed in all directions
thus from that self the pranas (speech, &c.) proceed,’
each towards its place, from the pranas the gods,
from the gods the worlds. And as a razor might
be fitted in a razor-case, or as fire in the fire-place
(the arani on the altar), even thus this conscious
self enters the self of the body (considers the body
as himself) to the very hairs and nails. And the
other seifs (such as speech, &c.) follow that self, as
his people follow the master of the house. And
as the master feeds with his people, nay, as his
people feed on the master, thus does this conscious
self feed with the other seifs, as a master with his
people, and the other seifs follow him, as his people
follow the master. So long as Indra did not under¬
stand that self, the Asuras conquered him. When
he understood it, he conquered the Asuras and
obtained the pre-eminence among all gods, sove-
reignty, supremacy. And thus also he who knows
this obtains pre-eminence among all beings, sove-
reignty, supremacy,—yea, he who knows^this.

vAgasaneyi-saa/hitA-

UPANISHAD,

SOMETIMES CALLED

ISAVASYA or I\A-

UPANISHAD.

!

vAgasaneyi-saj/h itA-

UPANISHAD.

1. All this, whatsoever moves on earth, is to
be hidden in the Lord (the Self). When thou hast
surrendered all this, then thou mayest enjoy. Do
not covet the wealth of any man!

2. Though a man may wish to live a hundred
years, performing works, it will be thus with him ;
but not in any other way: work will thus not cling
to a man.

3. There are the Worlds of the Asuras 1 covered
with blind darkness. Those who have destroyed
their self (who perform works, without having ar¬
rived at a knowledge of the true Self), go after
death to those worlds.

4. That one (the Self), though never stirring, is
swifter than thought. The Devas (senses) never
reached it, it walked 2 before them. Though
standing still, it overtakes the others who are
running. MatarLvan (the wind, the moving spirit)
bestows powers 3 on it.

1 Asurya, Va§\ Sawhila; asurya, Upan. Asurya in the Upanishads
in the sense of belonging to the Asuras, i. e. gods, is exceptional.
I should prefer asurya, sunless, as we find asurye tamasi in the
Rig-veda, V, 32, 6.

2 Purvam arrat, Va£\ Sa^h.; purvam arshat, Upan. Mahidhara
suggests also anrat as a contraction of a-ruat, not perishing.

3 Apas is explained by karmam, acts, in which case it would be
meant for apas, opus. But the Va^-. Sawhita accentuates apas, i.e.

3 12

VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-U FANIS HAD.

5. It stirs and it stirs not; it is far, and likewise
near * 1 . It is inside of all this, and it is outside of
all this.

6. And he who beholds all beings in the Self, and
the Self in all beings, he never turns away from it 2 .

7. When to a man who understands, the Self has
become all things, what sorrow, what trouble can
there be to him who once beheld that unity ?

8. He 3 (the Self) encircled all, bright, incor¬
poreal, scatheless, without muscles, pure, untouched
by evil; a seer, wise, omnipresent, self-existent, he
disposed all things rightly for eternal years.

9. All who worship what is not real knowledge
(good works), enter into blind darkness: those who
delight in real knowledge, enter, as it were, into
greater darkness.

10. One thing, they say, is obtained from real
knowledge; another, they say, from what is not
knowledge. Thus we have heard from the wise
who taught us this 4 .

11. He who knows at the same time both know¬
ledge and not-knowledge, overcomes death through
not-knowledge, and obtains immortality through
knowledge.

12. All who worship what is not the true cause,

aquas, and Anandagiri explains that water stands for acts, because
most sacrificial acts are performed with water.

1 Tad v antike, Vag. Sa?;zh.; tadvad antike, Upan.

2 Vi&kitsati, Vag. Sa;;zh.; vigugupsate, Upan.

3 .Sankara takes the subject to be the Self, and explains the
neuter adjectives as masculines. Mahtdhara takes the subject to
be the man who has acquired a knowledge of the Self, and who
reaches the bright, incorporeal Brahman, &c. Mahidhara, however,
likewise allows the former explanation.

4 Cf. Talavak. Up. I, 4; vidy&ya/$, avidyaya/z, Vag. Saz/zh.; vidyaya,
avidyayS, Upan.

V A GA S A N E YI - S Ailf HIT A- UPANISHAD.

enter into blind darkness: those who delight in the
true cause, enter, as it were, into greater darkness.

13 * 0ne thin £> the y say, is obtained from (know-
edge of) the cause; another, they say, from (know-
edge of) what is not the cause. Thus we have
leard from the wise who taught us this.

14* He who knows at the same time both the
cause and the destruction (the perishable body),
overcomes death by destruction (the perishable
body), and obtains immortality through (knowledge
of) the true cause.

The door of the True is covered with a
golden disk 1 . Open that, O Pushan, that we may
see the nature of the True 2 .

16. O Pushan, only seer, Yama (judge), Surya
(sun), son of Pra^apati, spread thy rays and gather
them! The light which is thy fairest form, I see it.

I am what He is (viz. the person in the sun) 3 .

17- Breath 4 to air, and to the immortal! Then
this my body ends in ashes. Om! Mind, remem¬
ber! Remember thy deeds! Mind, remember!
Remember thy deeds 5 6 !

18. Agni, lead us on to wealth (beatitude) by a
good path, thou, O God, who knowest all things !

1 Mahidhara on verse 17 : ‘The face of the true (purusha in the
sun) is covered by a golden disk/

2 Cf. Maitr. Up. VI, 35.

Asau purusha/^ should probably be omitted.

4 These lines are supposed to be uttered by a man in the hour

of death.

6 The Va^asaneyi-sa^zhita reads : Om, krato smara, k/z'be smara,
kntam smara. Uva/a holds that Agni, fire, who has been wor¬
shipped in youth and manhood, is here invoked in the form of
mind or that kratu is meant for sacrifice. ‘ Agni, remember me !
I hmk of the world ! Remember my deeds ! ’

VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPAN1SHAD.

Keep far from us crooked evil, and we shall offer
thee the fullest praise! (Rv. I, 189. ! -)

This Upanishad, though apparently simple and mtellg ^

reality one of the most difficult to understand properly. Coming

u the end of the V^asaneyi-sawhita, in which the sacrifices and

the hymns to be used by the officiating priests have been

it begins by declaring that all has to be surrendered to the Lord.

in- than Atman, Self, or Brahman, the usual names given ny
Upanishads to what is the object of the highest knowtedge.^ ^
Next follows a permission to continue t le per
fices provided that all desires have been surrendered And here
occurs our first difficulty, which has perplexed ancient

m fran C try m first t of all, to justify my own translation. I hold that
the Upanishad wishes to teach the uselessness by ^

good works, Whether we call them saerffic®1, leg*> > ^ the

yet, at the same time to recognise, .^ d thet are performed without

harmlessness of good works, provided they are p a

any selfish motives, without any desire of reward, but s ply
preparation for higher knowledge, as a means, ^t ^ subdum
all passions, and producing that serenity of mm c

man is incapable of receiving the highest knowledge Jrom that

point of view the Upanishad may we say, e a only

here his appointed time, let him even perform al wo k . It y

he knows that all must be surrendered to the Lord, then the wo
done by him will not cling to him. It will not work on an

effect after effect, nor will it involve him m a « ® o «
births in which to enjoy the reward of his works, but it wiU leave
free to enjoy the blessings of the highest knowledge. *
served as a preparation for that higher knowledge ^th^Upani
shad imparts, and which secures freedom from lurt •

The expression ‘na karma lipyate nare seems to me to ad ^

of this one explanation only, viz. that wor one oe similar

»». r—* ■»

expressions occur again and again, i-ip > n<

originally of evil deeds which became, as it were, en S ral "^ ’

but afterwards of all work, even of good work if don w.ffi a
desire of reward. The doctrine of the Upamshads is throughout
that orthodoxy and sacrifice can procure a hmi e

VAGASANEYI-SAil/HITA-UPANISHAD.

and that they are a hindrance to real salvation, which can be
obtained by knowledge alone. In our passage therefore we can
recognise one meaning only, viz. that work does not cling to man

or stain him, if only he knows, i.e. if he has been enlightened by
the Upanishad. *

Sankara, in his commentary on the Vedanta-sfitras III, 4, 7;
13; J 4 , takes the same view of this passage. The opponent of
Badarayawa, in this case, Gaimini himself, maintains that karma,
work, is indispensable to knowledge, and among other arguments'
he says, III, 4, 7, that it is so ‘ Niyamat,’ ‘Because it is so laid
down by the law/ The passage here referred to is, according to
Sankara, our very verse, which, he thinks, should be translated as
follows: ‘Let a man wish to live a hundred years here (in this
body) performing works; thus will an evil deed not cling to thee,
while thou art a man; there is no other way but this by which to
escape the influence of works/ In answer to this, Badaraya;za says,
first of all, III, 4, 13, that this rule may refer to all men in general^
and not to one who knows; or III, 4, 14, if it refers to a man who
knows, that then the permission to perform works is only intended
to exalt the value of knowledge, the meaning being that even to a
man who performs sacrifices all his life, work does not cling, if
only he knows; such being the power of knowledge.

The same .Sankara, however, who here sees quite clearly that
this verse refers to a man who knows, explains it in the Upanishad
as referring to a man who does not know (itarasyanatma^fiatayat-
magraha;za^aktasya). It would then mean : ‘ Let such a one, while
performing works here on earth, wish to live a hundred years. In
this manner there is no other way for him but this /the performance
of sacrifices), so that an evil deed should not.Le engrained, or so
that he should not be stained by such a reed/ The first and
second verses of the Upanishad would thus represent the two paths
of life, that of knowledge and that of works, and'! he following verses
would explain the rewards assigned to each. -• v

Mahidhara, in his commentary on the Va^asaneyi-sawhita, steers
at first a middle course. He would translate: ‘ Let one who per¬
forms the Agnihotra and other sacrifices, without any desire of
reward, wish to live here a hundred years. If thou do so, there
will be salvation for thee, not otherwise. There are many roads that
lead to heaven, but one only leading to salvation, namely, perform¬
ance of good works, without any desire of reward, which produces
a pure heart. Work thus done, merely as a preparation for salvation,
does not cling to man, i.e. it produces a pure heart, but does not

V A (? A S A N EYI “ S A itf HIT A - U PANISHAD.

316

entail any further consequences/ So far he agrees with Uva/a s
explanation 1 . He allows, however, another explanation also, so
that the second line would convey the meaning: * If a man lives thus
(performing good works), then there is no other way by which an
evil deed should not be engrained; i.e. in order to escape the
power of sin, he must all his life perform sacred acts.

Next follows a description of the lot of those who, immersed m
works, have not arrived at the highest knowledge, and have not
recovered their true self in the Highest Self, or Brahman. That
Brahman, though the name is not used here, is then described, an
salvation is promised to the man who beholds all things in the be
and the Self in all things.

The verses 9-14 are again full of difficulty, not so muc m
themselves as in their relation to the general system of thought
which prevails in the Upanishads, and forms the foundation o t e
Vedanta philosophy. The commentators vary considerably m their
interpretations. Sankara explains avidya,mot-knowledge by good V
works, particularly sacrifice, performed with a hope of reward;
vidya, or knowledge, by a knowledge of the gods, but not, as yet
of the highest Brahman. The former is generally supposed to lead
the sacrificer to the pitn'loka, the world of the fathers, from whence
he returns to a series of new births; the latter to the devaloka, the
world of the gods, from whence he may either proceed to Brahman,
or enter upon a new round of existences. The question then
arises, how in our passage the former could be said to lead to
blind darkness, the latter to still greater darkness. But for that
statement, I have no doubt that all the commentators would, as
usual, have taker; vidyfi for the knowledge of the Highest Brahman,
and avidya for o*>odox belief in the gods and good works, the
former securing immortality in the sense of freedom from new
births, while the reward of the latter is blessedness in heaven lor
a limited period, (jut without freedom from new births.

This antithesis between vidya and avidya seems to me s °
established that I cannot bring myself to surrender it here. Though
this Upanishad has its own very peculiar charactei, >et its object is,
after all, to impart a knowledge of the Highest Self, and not to
inculcate merely a difference between faith in the ordinaly go
and good works. It was distinctly said before (ver. 3), that those
who have destroyed their self, i.e. who perform works ony,

1 Uva/a explains g'igishivishe^ for ^igivishet as a puiusha
vyataya^.

VAGASANEYTSAMHITA-UPANISHAD.

317

and have not arrived at a knowledge of the true Self, go to the
worlds of the Asuras, which are covered with blind darkness. If
then the same blind darkness is said in verse 9 to be the lot of those
who worship not-knowledge, this can only mean those who have
not discovered the true Self, but are satisfied with the performance
of good works. And if those who perform good works are opposed
to. others who delight in true knowledge, that knowledge can be
the knowledge of the true Self only.

The difficulty therefore which has perplexed -Sankara is this,
how, while the orthodox believer is said to enter into blind dark¬
ness, the true disciple, who has acquired a knowledge of the true
Self, could be said to enter into still greater darkness. While
Aankara in this case seems hardly to have caught the drift of the
Upanishad, Uva/a and Mahidhara propose an explanation which is
far more satisfactory. They perceive that the chief stress must be
laid on the words ubhaya^z saha, c both together/ in verses 11 and
14. The doctrine of certain Vedanta philosophers was that works,
though they cannot by themselves lead to salvation, are useful as a
preparation for the highest knowledge, and that those who imagine
that they can attain the highest knowledge without such previous
preparation, are utterly mistaken. From this point of view there¬
fore the author of the Upanishad might well say that those who
give themselves to what is not knowledge, i.e. to sacrificial and
other good works, enter into darkness, but that those who delight
altogether in knowledge, despising the previous discipline of works,
deceive themselves/and enter into still greater darkness.

Then follows the next verse, simply stating that, according to
the teaching of wise people, the reward of knowledge is one thing,
the reward of ignorance, i.e. trust in sacrifice, another. Here
Mahidhara is right again by assigning the pitrdoka, the world of
the fathers, as the reward of the ignorant; the devaloka, the
world of the gods, as the reward of the enlightened, provided that
from the world of th^ gods they pass on to the knowledge of the
Highest Self or Brahman.

_ f

The third verse contains the strongest confirmation of Mahi-
dhara’s view. Here it is laid down distinctly that he only who
knows both together, Bpth what is called ignorance and what is
called knowledge, can be saved, because by good works he over¬
comes death, here explained. by natural works, and by knowledge
he obtains the Immortal, here explained by oneness with the gods,
the last step that leads on to oneness with Brahman.

Uva/a, who takes the same view of these verses, explains at once,

<2 I 8 VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD.

and even more boldly than Mahidhara 1 , vidya, or knowledge, by
brahmavi^fiana, knowledge of Brahman, which by itself, and if not
preceded by works, leads to even greater darkness than what is
called ignorance, i.e. sacrifice and orthodoxy without knowledge.

The three corresponding verses, treating of sambhfiti and asam¬
bhfiti instead of vidya and avidya, stand first in the Va^asaneyi-
sawhita. They must necessarily be explained in accordance with
our explanation of the former verses, i.e. sambhfiti must correspond
to vidya, it must be meant for the true cause, i.e. for Brahman,
while asambhfiti must correspond with avidya, as a name of what
is not real, but phenomenal only and perishable.

Mahidhara thinks that these verses refer to the Bauddhas, which
can hardly be admitted, unless we take Buddhist in a very general
sense. Uva/a puts the Lokayatas in their place 2 . It is curious
also to observe that Mahidhara, following Uva/a, explains
asambhfiti at first by the denial of the resurrection of the body,
while he takes sambhfiti rightly for Brahman. I have chiefly fol¬
lowed Uva/as commentary, except in his first explanation of
asambhfiti, resurrection 3 . In what follows Uva/a explains sam¬
bhfiti rightly by the only cause of the origin of the whole world,
i.e. Brahman 4 * , while he takes vina^a, destruction, as a name of
the perishable body 6 .

.Sankara sees much more in these three verses than Uva/a. He
takes asambhfiti as a name of Praknti, the undeveloped cause, sam¬
bhfiti as a name of the phenomenal Brahman or Hirawyagarbha.
From a worship of the latter a man obtains supernatural powers,
from devotion to the former, absorption in Prakn'ti.

Mahidhara also takes a similar view, and he allows, like Sankara,
another reading, viz. sambhutim avina^a/^ >£a, and avinaj'ena m vi-
tyu m tirtva. In this case the sense would be: ‘He who knows
the worship both of the developed and the undeveloped, overcomes

1 Mahidhara decides in the end that vidya and amr/tam must
here be taken in a limited or relative sense, tasmad vidyopasana-
varixam ^apekshikam iti dik, and so agrees on the whole with
Sankara, pp. 25-27.

2 Sha d anush/ubha/z, lokayatika/z prastfiyante yesham etad
darranam.

3 Mr/tasya sata// puna^ sambhavo nasti, ata^ janragrahwad
asmakam muktir eva.

4 Samastasya ^agata/j sambhavaikahetu brahma.

6 VimLraw vina^i £a vapu^ jariram.

VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD.

319

death, i.e. such evil as sin, passion, &c., through worship of the
undeveloped, while he obtains through worship of the developed,
i.e. of Hirawyagarbha, immortality, absorption in Prakr/ti.’

All these forced explanations to which the commentators have
recourse, arise from the shifting views held by various authorities
with regard to the value of works. Our Upanishad seems to
me to propound the doctrine that works, though in themselves
useless, or even mischievous, if performed with a view to any
present'or future rewards, are necessary as a preparatory discipline.
This is or was for a long time the orthodox view. Each man was
required to pass through the a^ramas, or stages of student and
householder, before he was admitted to the freedom of a Sannyasin.
As on a ladder, no step was to be skipped. Those who attempted
to do so, were considered to have broken the old law, and in some
respects they may indeed be looked upon as the true precursors
of the Buddhists.

Nevertheless the opposite doctrine, that a man whose mind had
become enlightened, might at once drop the fetters of the law,
without performing all the tedious duties of student and house¬
holder, had strong supporters too among orthodox philosophers.
Cases of such rapid conversion occur in the ancient traditions, and
Badarayaz/a himself was obliged to admit the possibility of freedom
and salvation without works, though maintaining the superiority of
the usual course, which led on gradually from works to enlighten¬
ment and salvation 1 . It was from an unwillingness to assent to
the decided teaching of the Lra-upanishad that -Sankara attempted
to explain vidya, knowledge, in a limited sense, as knowledge of the
gods, and not yet knowledge of Brahman. He would not admit
that knowledge without works could lead to darkness, and even to
greater darkness than works without knowledge. Our Upanishad
seems to have dreaded libertinism, knowledge without works, more
even than ritualism, works without knowledge, and its true object was
to show that orthodoxy and sacrifice, though useless in themselves,
must always form the preparation for higher enlightenment.

How misleading .Sankara’s explanation may prove, we can see
from the translation of this Upanishad by Rammohun Roy. He
followed -Sankara implicitly, and this is the sense which he drew
from the text:—

‘ 9. Those observers of religious rites that perform only the
worship of the sacred fire, and oblations to sages, to ancestors.

Vedanta-sfitras III, 4, 36-39.

1

VAGASANEYI-SAM HITA-U PANISHA D.

to men, and to other creatures, without regarding the worship of
celestial gods, shall enter into the dark region: and those practisers
of religious ceremonies who habitually worship the celestial gods
only, disregarding the worship of the sacred fire, and oblations to
sages, to ancestors, to men, and to other creatures, shall enter into

a region still darker than the former.

‘ io. It is said that adoration of the celestial gods produces one
consequence; and that the performance of the worship of sacred
fire, and oblations to sages, to ancestors, to men, and to oth( 1
creatures, produce another: thus have we heard from learned men,
who have distinctly explained the subject to us.

'ii. Of those observers of ceremonies whosoever, knowing that
adoration of celestial gods, as well as the worship of the sacred
fire, and oblations to sages, to ancestors, to men, and to other
creatures, should be observed alike by the same individual, per¬
forms them both, will, by means of the latter, surmount the
obstacles presented by natural temptations, and will attain the state
of the celestial gods through the practice of the former.

‘12. Those observers of religious rites who worship Praknti
alone (Praknti or nature, who, though insensible, influenced by the
Supreme Spirit, operates throughout the universe) shall enter into the
dark region: and those practisers of religious ceremonies that are
devoted to worship solely the prior operating sensitive particle,
allegorically called Brahma, shall enter into a region much more
dark than the former.

‘13. It is said that one consequence may be attained by the
worship of Brahma, and another by the adoration of Praknti.
Thus have we heard from learned men, who have distinctly ex¬
plained the subject to us.

‘14. Of those observers of ceremonies, whatever person, know¬
ing that the adoration of Praknti and that of Brahma should be
together observed by the same individual, perforins them both,
wifi by means of the latter overcome indigence, and will attain the
state of Praknti, through the practice of the foimer.

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

[ T 5]

a

henry frowue, m.a

PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD

LONDON, EDINBURGH, AND NEW YORK

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

TRANSLATED

BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS

AND EDITED BY

F. MAX MULLER

VOL. XV

©I’ fo itl

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

IQOO

[All rights reserved J

O^forb

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

BY HORACE HART, M.A.

PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY

THE UPANISHADS

TRANSLATED BY

F. MAX MULLER

PART II

THE K A 777 A-UP AN IS HAD
THE M U ND AKA-UPANISHAD
THE TAITTIRIYAICA-UPANISHAD
THE BA’/HADARAA'YAKA-UPANISHAD
THE 5 VETA 5 VATARA-UPANISHAD
THE PRAiTVA-UPANISHAD
THE M AITR A YAiVA-BR A HMAiVA-UPA NIS H AD

©jrfoili

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

1900

[ All rights reserved ]

CONTENTS.

Introduction .

KaMa-upanishad
Miwdaka-upanishad .
Taittiriyaka-upanishad
Brzhadarawyaka-upanishad .
Avetajvatara-upanishad
Praj/za-upanishad
Maitraya/za-brahmazza-upanishad .

PACK

ix

xxi

xxvi

xxvii

xxx

xxxi
xlii
xliii

Translation of the Kat/za-upanishad
Translation of the Muatdaka-upanishad
Translation of the Taittiriyaka-upanishad .
Translation of the B/jjhadaraayaka-upanishad
Translation of the Avetasvatara-upanishad .
Translation of the Pra-swa-upanishad .

Translation of the Maitrayaalv-brahmaaa-upanishad

i

2 7

45

73

231

271

287

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Trans¬
lations of the Sacred Books of the East . . -347

INTRODUCTION.

This second volume completes the translation of the
principal Upanishads to which Sankara appeals in his
great commentary on the Vedanta-Sutras \ viz.:

1. iT/zandogya-upanishad,

2. Talavakara or Kena-upanishad,

3. Aitareya-upanishad,

4. Kaushitaki-upanishad,

5. Va£*asaneyi or Ij-a-upanishad,

6 . Ka^a-upanishad,

7 - Mu/zzfaka-upanishad,

8. Taittiriyaka-upanishad,

9. BrzTiadarazzyaka-upanishad,

10. ►Svetaj'vatara-upanishadj

11. PrajTza-upanishad.

These eleven have sometimes * 2 been called the old and
genuine Upanishads, though I should be satisfied to call
them the eleven classical Upanishads, or the fundamental
Upanishads of the Vedanta philosophy.

Vidyarazzya 3 , in his ‘Elucidation of the meaning of all
the Upanishads/ Sarvopanishadarthanubhuti-prakaja, con¬
fines himself likewise to those treatises, dropping, however,
the Ij-a, and adding the Maitrayazza-upanishad, of which
I have given a translation in this volume, and the N ri-
sizzzhottara-tapaniya-upanishad, the translation of which
had to be reserved for the next volume.

See Deussen, Vedanta, Einleitung, p. 38. .Sankara occasionally refers also
to the Paingi, Agnirahasya, Uabala, and Narayazziya Upanishads.

2 Deussen, loc. cit. p. 82.

1 state this on tlle authority of Professor Cowell. See also Fitzedward

Hall, Index to the Bibliography of the Indian Philosophical Systems, pp. 116
and 236. ™

X

UPANISHADS.

It is more difficult to determine which of the Upanishads
were chosen by Sankara or deserving the honour of a special
commentary. We possess his commentaries on the eleven
Upanishads mentioned before \ with the exception of the
Kaushitaki 1 2 -upanishad. We likewise possess his commen¬
tary on the Ma^ukya-upanishad, but we do not know for
certain whether he left commentaries on any of the other
Upanishads. Some more or less authoritative statements
have been made that he wrote commentaries on some of the
minor Upanishads, such as the Atharva^iras, Atharva-^ikha,
and the Nrzsiz/zhatapani 3 . But as, besides Aankara£arya, the
disciple of Govinda, there is Aankarananda, the disciple of
Anandatman, another writer of commentaries on the Upa¬
nishads, it is possible that the two names may have been

confounded by less careful copyists 4 .

With regard to the Nrzshzzhatapani all uncertainty might
seem to be removed, after Professor Ramamaya Tarka-
ratna has actually published its text with the commentary
of vSankara^arya in the Bibliotheca Indica, Calcutta, 1871.
But some uncertainty still remains. While at the end of
each K.handa of the Nrzsiz/ffia-purvatapani we read that
the Bhcishya was the work of the Paramahaz/zsa-parivra-
gakakarya Sri-Aankara, the pupil of Govinda, we have no
such information for the Nrzsizzzha-uttaratapani, but are
told on the contrary that the words Ari-Govindabhagavat
&c. have been added at the end by the editor, because he
thought fit to do so. This is, to say the least, very suspicious,
and we must wait for further confirmation. There is another
commentary on this Upanishad by Narayazzabhaz^a, the son
of Bha//a Ratnakara 5 , who is well known as the author of
Dipikas on several Upanishads.

1 They have been published by Dr. Roer in the Bibliotheca Indica. ^

2 Dr. Weber’s statement that Aankara wrote a commentary on the Kaushitaki-
upanishad has been corrected by Deussen, loc. cit. p. 39.

3 See Deussen, loc. cit. p. 39.

4 A long list of works ascribed to .Sankara may be seen in Regnaud, Philo¬
sophic de l’lnde, p. 34, chiefly taken from Fitzedward Hall’s Index of Indian

Philosophical Systems.

5 See Tarkaratna’s Vigwapana, p. 3,1. 5.

INTRODUCTION.

XI

I subjoin a list of thirty of the smaller Upanishads, pub¬
lished by Professor Rdmamaya Tarkaratna in the Biblio¬
theca Indica, with the commentaries of Narayazzabhaz'/a.
i. vSira-upanishad,pp. i-io; Dipika by Narayazza,pp.42-60.

1 1 i 4 «

Garbha-upanishad, pp. 11-15;

3. Nadavindu-upanishad, pp. 15-17;

4. Brahmavindu-upanishad, pp. 18-20;

5. Amrztavindu-upanishad, pp. 21-25;

6. Dhyanavindu-upanishad, pp. 26-28;

7. Te^-ovindu-upanishad, pp. 29-30;

8. Yoga^ikha-upanishad, pp. 31-32;

9. Yogatattva-upanishad, pp. 33-34;

10. Sannyasa-upanishad, pp. 35-39;

11. Aruzzeya-upanishad, pp. 39-41 ;

12. Brahmavidyd-upanishad, pp. 197-203

13. Kshurika-upanishad, pp. 203-218;

14. ATulika-upanishad, pp. 219-228;

15. Atharva.rikhd-upanishad, pp. 229-238;

16. Brahma-upanishad, pp. 239-259;

17. Pra/zdgnihotra-upanishad ; pp. 260-271

18. Nilarudra-upanishad, pp. 272-280;

19. KazzZ'^a.sTUti-upanishad, pp. 281- 294;

20. Pizzz/a-upanishad, pp. 295-298;

21. Atma-upanishad, pp. 299-303;

22. Ramapurvatapaniya-upanishad,

PP- 3 0 4 - 358 ;

23. Ramottaratapaniya-upanishad,

PP- 359 - 3 8 4 ;

24. Hanumadukta-Rama-upanishad,

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

5 55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

pp. 60-73.
pp. 73-78.
pp. 78-82.
pp. 83-101.
pp. 102-114.
pp. 114-118.
pp. 118-122.
pp. 122-127.
pp. 128-184.
pp. 184-196.
ibidem.

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

55

pp- 385-393;

25. Sarvopanishat-sara/z, pp. 394-404; „

26. Haz/zsa-upanishad, pp. 404-416; „

27. Paramahazzzsa-upanishad, pp. 417-436; „

28. Gabala-upanishad, pp. 437-455; „

29. Kaivalya-upanishad, pp. 456-464; „

Kaivalya-upanishad, pp. 465-479; Dipika by

6 ankarananda,

30. Garuda-upanishad, pp. 480 seq.; Dipika by

Ndrayazza,

• •
Xll

UPANISHADS.

We owe to the same editor in the earlier numbers of the
Bibliotheca the following editions :

Nr/siwzhapurvatapanl-upanishad, with commentaiy.
N/Tsb/zhottaratapam-upanishad, with commentary.
Sha/^akra-upanishad, with commentary by Nar&ya/za.
Lastly, Hara^andra Vidyabhusha^a and Vbvanatha .Sastri
have published in the Bibliotheca Indica an edition of the
Gopalatapani-upanishad, with commentary by Visvesv ara.

These editions of the text and commentaries of the
Upanishads are no doubt very useful, yet theie aie many
passages where the text is doubtful, still more where the

commentaries leave us without any help.

Whatever other scholars may think of the difficulty
of translating the Upanishads, I can only repeat what I
have said before, that I know of few Sanskrit texts pre¬
senting more formidable problems to the translator than
these philosophical treatises. It may be said that most of
them had been translated before. No doubt they have
been, and a careful comparison of my own translation with
those of my predecessors will show, I believe, that a small
advance, at all events, has now been made towards a truer
understanding of these ancient texts. But I know full well
how much still remains to be done, both in restoring a cor¬
rect text, and in discovering the original meaning of the
Upanishads; and I have again and again had to translate
certain passages tentatively only, or following the com¬
mentators, though conscious all the time that the meaning
which they extract from the text cannot be the right one.

As to the text, I explained in my preface to the first
volume that I attempted no more than to restore the text,
such as it must have existed at the time when Saiikaia
wrote his commentaries. As .Sankara lived duiing the
ninth century A.D. 1 , and as we possess no MSS. of so early
a date, all reasonable demands of textual criticism would
thereby seem to be satisfied. Yet, this is not quite so.
We may draw such a line, and for the present keep within
it, but scholars who hereafter take up the study of the

1 India, What can it teach us ? p. 360.

INTRODUCTION.

♦ » •
Xlll

Upanishads will probably have to go beyond. Where I had
an opportunity of comparing other commentaries, besides
those of Sankara, it became quite clear that they often
followed a different text, and when, as in the case of the
Maitraya/za-brahma/^a-upanishad, I was enabled to collate
copies which came from the South of India, the opinion
which I have often expressed of the great value of Southern
MSS. received fresh confirmation. The study of Grantha
and other Southern MSS. will inaugurate, I believe, a new
period in the critical treatment of Sanskrit texts, and the
text of the Upanishads will, I hope, benefit quite as much

as later texts by the treasures still concealed in the libraries
of the Dekhan.

The rule which I have followed myself, and which I have
asked my fellow translators to follow, has been adhered to
in this new volume also, viz. whenever a choice has to be
made between what is not quite faithful and what is not
quite English, to surrender without hesitation the idiom
rather than the accuracy of the translation. I know that
all true scholars have approved of this, and if some of our
critics have been offended by certain unidiomatic expres¬
sions occurring in our translations, all I can say is, that we
shall always be most grateful if they would suggest trans¬
lations which are not only faithful, but also idiomatic. For
the purpose we have in view, a rugged but faithful trans¬
lation seems to us more useful than a smooth but mis¬
leading one.

Howevei, we have laid ourselves open to another kind
of censure also, namely, of having occasionally not been
literal enough. It is impossible to argue these questions
in general, but every translator knows that in many cases
a literal translation may convey an entirely wrong meaning-
I shall give at least one instance.

My old friend, Mr. Nehemiah Goreh—at least I hope he
will still allow me to call him so—in the ‘ Occasional
Papers on Missionary Subjects,’ First Series, No. 6 , quotes,
on P- 39 > a passage from the .Oandogya-upanishad, trans¬
lates it into English, and then remarks that I had not
translated it accurately. But the fault seems to me to lie

XIV

UPANISHADS.

entirely with him, in attempting to translate a passage
without considering the whole chapter of which it forms
a part. Mr. Nehemiah Goreh states the beginning of the
story rightly when he says that a youth by name Gveta-
ketu went, by the advice of his father, to a teacher to
study under him. After spending twelve years, as was
customary, with the teacher, when he returned home he
appeared rather elated. Then the father asked him.

Uta tarn ad&sam apraksho 1 yenlsrutaiw srutam bhavaty
amatam matam avi^zzatazzz vi^Vzatam iti ?

I translated this: 4 Have you ever asked for that instruc¬
tion by which we hear what cannot be heard, by which we
perceive what cannot be perceived, by which we know what

cannot be known ? ’

Mr. Nehemiah Goreh translates: ‘ Hast thou asked (of
thy teacher) for that instruction by which what is not heard
becomes heard, what is not comprehended becomes com¬
prehended, what is not known becomes known?’

I shall not quarrel with my friend for translating man by
to comprehend rather than by to perceive. I prefer my
own translation, because manas is one side of the common
sensory (anta/^kara/za), buddhi, the other , the original diffei
ence between the two being, so far as I can see, that the
manas originally dealt with percepts, the buddhi with con¬
cepts 2 * . But the chief difference on which my critic lays
stress is that I translated a^rutam, amatam, and avi^zzatam
not by 4 not heard, not comprehended, not known,’ but by
‘what cannot be heard, what cannot be perceived, what

cannot be known.’

Now, before finding fault, why did he not ask himself
what possible reason I could have had for deviating fiom
the original, and for trans lating avigTzata by unknowable or

1 Mr. Nehemiah Goreh writes aprakshyo, and this is no doubt the reading
adopted by Roer in his edition of the AfBndogya-upanishad m the Bibliot eca
Indica, p. 384. In .Sankara’s commentary also the same form is given. 1

grammar requires apraksho. .

2 The Pa;l£adaA (I, 20) distinguishes between manas and buddhi, by saying,

mano vimaivarupaw syad buddhi/* syan ni^ayatmika, which places the difference
between the two rather in the degree of certainty, ascribing deliberation to

manas, decision to buddhi.

INTRODUCTION.

XV

what cannot be known, rather than by unknown, as every one
would be inclined to translate these words at first sight ? If
he had done so, he would have seen in a moment, that with¬
out the change which I introduced in the idiom, the trans¬
lation would not have conveyed the sense of the original, nay,
would have conveyed no sense at all. What could Vveta-
ketu have answered, if his father had asked him, whether
he had not asked for that instruction by which what is not
heard becomes heard, what is not comprehended becomes
comprehended, what is not known becomes known ? He
would have answered, ‘Yes, I have asked for it; and from
the first day on which I learnt the 5iksha, the ABC,
I have every day heard something which I had not heard
before, I have comprehended something which I had not
comprehended before, I have known something which I had
not known before.’ Then why does he say in reply, ‘ What
is that instruction?’ Surely Mr. Nehemiah Goreh knew
that the instruction which the father refers to, is the instruc¬
tion regarding Brahman, and that in all which follows the
father tries to lead his son by slow degrees to a knowledge
of Brahman h Now that Brahman is called again and again
‘that which cannot be seen, cannot be heard, cannot be per¬
ceived, cannot be conceived,’ in the ordinary sense of these
words ; can be learnt, in fact, from the Veda only 2 . It was
in order to bring out this meaning that I translated a^rutam
not by ‘not heard,’ but by ‘not hearable,’ or, in better English,
by ‘ what cannot be heard 3 .’

1 In the Vedanta-Sara, Sadananda lays great stress on the fact that in this very
chapter of the A 7 zandogya-upanishad, the principal subject of the whole chapter
is mentioned both in the beginning and in the end. Tatra prakarazzaprati-
padyasyarthosya tadadyantayor upadanam upakramasazzzharam. Yatha A7zan-
dogyashashMaprapai/zake prakarazzapratipadyasyadvitiyavastuna ekam eva-
dvitiyam (VI, 2, 1) ityadav aitadatmyam idazzz sarvam (VI, 16, 3) ity ante £a
pratipadanam. ‘ The beginning with and ending with’ imply that the mattdf
to be declared in any given section is declared both at the beginning and at the
end thereof:—as, for instance, in the sixth section of the A7zandogya-upanishad,
‘ the Real, besides which there is nought else ’—which is to be explained in
that section—is declared at the outset in the terms, * One only, without a second/
and at the end in the terms 1 All this consists of That.’

Vedanta-Sara, No. 118, tatraivadvitiyavastuno manantaravisha/ikarazzam.

See Mu nd. Up. I, 1, 6, adreJyam agrahyam.

XVI

UPANISHADS.

Any classical scholar knows how often we must translate
invictus by invincible, and how Latin tolerates even
invictissimus, which we could never render in English by
£ the most unconquered,’ but 1 * * 4 the unconquerable. English
idiom, therefore, and common sense required that avi^/zata
should be translated, not by inconceived, but by inconceiv¬
able, if the translation was to be faithful, and was to give
to the reader a correct idea of the original.

Let us now examine some other translations, to see whethei
the translators were satisfied with translating liteially, 01
whether they attempted to translate thoughtfully..

Anquetil Duperron’s translation, being in Latin, cannot
help us much. He translates : 4 Non auditum, auditum fiat;
et non scitum, scitum ; et non cognitum, cognitum.

Rajendralal Mitra translates: 4 Have you enquired of your
tutor about that subject which makes the unheard-of heaid,
the unconsidered considered, and the unsettled settled?

He evidently knew that Brahman was intended, but his

rendering of the three verbs is not exact.

Mr. Gough (p. 43) translates : 4 Hast thou asked for that
instruction by which the unheard becomes heard, the un¬
thought thought, the unknown known ?

But now let us consult a scholar who, in a very marked
degree, always was a thoughtful translator, who felt a real
interest in the subject, and therefore was never satisfied with
mere words, however plausible. The late Dr. Ballantyne, in
his translation of the Vedanta-Sara \ had occasion to trans¬
late this passage from the V/zandogya-upanishad, and how
did he translate it? ‘The eulogizing of the subject is the
glorifying of what is set forth in this or that section (of the
Veda); as, for example, in that same section, the sixth
chapter of the RT/zandogya-upanishad, the glorifying of the
Real, besides whom there is nought else, in the following
terms: “Thou, O disciple, hast asked for that instiuction
whereby the unheard-of becomes heard, the inconceiv-

1 Lecture on the Vedanta, embracing the text of the Vedanta-Sara, ^AlH-

habad, 1S51, p. 69. Vedantasara, with Nr/siwha-Sarasvati’s Subodhim, and

Ramatirtha’s Vidvanmanorawgint, Calcutta, 1S60, p. S9. Here we find the

right reading, apraksha/j.

INTRODUCTION.

xvii

able becomes conceived, and the unknowable becomes
thoroughly known.” ’

Dr. Ballantyne therefore felt exactly what I felt, that in
oui passage a strictly literal translation would be wrong,
would convey no meaning, or a wrong meaning; and
Mi. Nehemiah Goreh will see that he ought not to express
blame, without trying to find out whether those whom he
blames for want of exactness, were not in reality more
sciupulously exact in their translation than he has proved
himself to be.

Mi. Nehemiah Goreh has, no doubt, great advantages in
inteipieting the Upanishads, and when he writes without
any theological bias, his remarks are often very useful.
Thus he objects rightly, I think, to my translation of a
sentence in the same chapter of the /T/^andogya-upanishad,
where the father, in answer to his son’s question, replies:
Sad eva, Somya, idam agra asid ekam evadvitiyam.’ I
had ti ied several translations of these words, and yet I see
now that the one I proposed in the end is liable to be mis¬
understood. I had translated: ‘In the beginning, my dear,
there was that only which is, one only, without a second.’
The more faithful translation would have been: ‘ The being
alone was this in the beginning.’ But ‘ the being ’ does not
mean in English that which is, to oV, and therefore, to avoid
any misunderstanding, I translated ‘ that which is.’ I might
have said, however, ‘ The existent, the real, the true (satyam)
was this in the beginning,’ just as in the Aitarcya-upani-
shad we read: ‘ The Self was all this, one alone, in the
beginning V But in that case I should have sacrificed the
gender, and this in our passage is of great importance,
being neuter, and not masculine.

What, however, is far more important, and where Mr.
Nehemiah Goreh seems to me to have quite misapprehended
the original Sanskrit, is this, that sat, to ov , and atma, the
Self, are the subjects in these sentences, and not predicates.
Now Mr. Nehemiah Goreh translates: ‘This was the ex¬
istent one itself before, one only without a second; ’ and he

[i5]

1 Atma v& idam eka evagra asit.

b

xviu

UPANISHADS.

explains: ‘ This universe, before it was developed in the

present form, was the existent one, Brahma, itself. This
cannot be. If ‘ idam,’ this, i.e. the visible world, weie the
subject, how could the Upanishad go on and say, ta
aikshata bahu syam pra^ayeyeti tat Ugo sr/^ata a
thought, may I be many, may I grow forth. It sent fo th
fire’ This can be said of the Sat only, that is, e
Brahman ’. Sat, therefore, is the subject, not idam for
a Vedantist may well say that Brahman is tne world, or
sent forth the world, but not that the world, which is a
mere illusion, was, in the beginning, Brahman.

This becomes clearer still in another passage, 1 ai r. p.
VI 17, where we read: Brahma ha va idam agia asi e 'O
’nanta/i, ■ In the beginning Brahman was all this. He was
one and infinite.’ Here the transition from the neuter to
the masculine gender shows that Brahman only can e t ic
subject, both in the first and in the second sentence.

In English it may seem to make little difference whether
we say, ‘ Brahman was this,’ or ‘ this was Brahman. In
Sanskrit too we find, Brahma khalv idam vava sarvam,

■ Brahman indeed is all this’ (Maitr. Up. IV, 6),and Saiyaw
khalv idam Brahma, ‘ all this is Brahman indeed {Khan .
TJo III 14 1). But the logical meaning is always that

5 5 ii fu; c ; P all that we see now.. Brahman

Brahman was all this, l. e. ail mat we sec nu ,

being the subject, idam the predicate. Brahman becomes

idam, not idam Brahman.

Thus the Pa«£adarf, I, 18, says:

Ekadarendriyair yuktya jrastrewapy avagamyate
Yavat kiw/feid bhaved etad idawwabdoditaw ^agat,
which Mr. A. Venis (Pandit, V, p. 667) translates: ‘What¬
ever may be apprehended through the eleven organs, y
argument and revelation, i.e. the world of phenomena is
expressed by the word idam, this.’ The PatfJadan then

Ida in sarvam pura srzshfcr ekam evadvitiyakam
Sad evasin namarupe nastam ity Aru«er vaka/i.

This Mr. Venis t ranslates: Previous to ^reation. all this

i 5ankara says (p. 398,1- 5) : ekam evadvitiyam paramarthata buddhi-

kale ’pi tat sa(i aikshata.

INTRODUCTION.

XIX

was the existent (sat), one only without a second : name and
form were not:—this is the declaration of the son of Aru«ad

This is no doubt a translation grammatically correct, but
from the philosophical standpoint of the Vedanta, what is
really meant is that, before the srish.fi (which is not crea¬
tion, but the sending forth of the world, and the sending
foith of it, not as something real, but as a mere illusion),
the Real alone, i.e. the Brahman, was, instead of this, i. e.
instead of this illusory world. The illusion was not, but the
Real, i.e. Brahman, was. What became, or what seemed to
change, was Biahman, and therefore the only possible
subject, logically, is Brahman, everything else being a pre¬
dicate, and a phenomenal predicate only.

If I were arguing with a European, not with an Indian
scholar, I should venture to go even a step further, and try to
piove that the idam, in this and similar sentences, does not
mean this, i. e. this world, but that originally it was intended
as an adverb, meaning now, or here. This use of idam,
unsuspected by native scholars, is very frequent in Vedic
literature, and instances may be seen in Boehtlingk’s Dic¬
tionary. In that case the translation would be: c The real
(to ov), O friend, was here in the beginning.’ This meaning
of idam, however, would apply only to the earliest utterances
of ancient Brahmavadins, while in later times idam was used
and understood in the sense of all that is seen, the visible uni¬
verse, just as iyam by itself is used in the sense of the earth.

However, difficulties of this kind may be overcome, if
once we have arrived at a clear conception of the general
drift of the Upanishads. The real difficulties are of a very
different character. They consist in the extraordinary
number of passages which seem to us utterly meaningless
and irrational, or, at all events, so far-fetched that we can
hardly believe that the same authors who can express the
deepest thoughts on religion and philosophy with clearness,
nay, with a kind of poetical eloquence, could have uttered in
the same breath such utter rubbish. Some of the sacrificial
technicalities, and their philosophical interpretations with
which the Upanishads abound, may perhaps in time assume
a clearer meaning, when we shall have more fully mastered

XX

UPANISHADS.

the intricacies of the Vedic ceremonial. But there will
always remain in the Upanishads a vast amount of what
we can only call meaningless jargon, and for the presence
of which in these ancient mines of thought I, for my own
part, feel quite unable to account. ‘ Yes,’ a friend of mine
wrote to me, after reading some of the Sacred Books of
the East, £ you are right, how tremendously ahead of othei
sacred books is the Bible. The difference strikes one as
almost unfairly great.’ So it does, no doubt. But some
of the most honest believers and admirers of the Bible
have expressed a similar disappointment, because they had
formed their ideas of what a Sacred Book ought to be,
theoretically, not historically. The Rev. J. M. Wilson, in
his excellent Lectures on the Theory of Inspiration, p. 32,
writes: ‘ The Bible is so unlike what you would expect;
it does not consist of golden sayings and rules of life , give
explanations of the philosophical and social problems of
the past, the present, and the future ; contain teachings
immeasurably unlike those of any other book ; but it con¬
tains history, ritual, legislation, poetry, dialogue, prophecy,
memoirs, and letters; it contains much that is foreign to
your idea of what a revelation ought to be. But this is not
all. There is not only much that is foreign, but much that
is opposed, to your preconceptions. The Jews tolerated
slavery, polygamy, and other customs and cruelties of
imperfect civilisation. There are the vindictive psalms, too,
with their bitter hatred against enemies,—psalms which
we chant in our churches. How can we do so? There are
stories of immorality, of treachery, of crime. How can we
read them? ’ Still the Bible has been and is a truly sacred,
because a truly historical book, for theie is nothing moie
sacred in this world than the history of man, in his search
after his highest ideals. All ancient books which have once
been called sacred by man, will have their lasting place in
the history of mankind, and those who possess the courage,
the perseverance, and the self-denial of the true miner, and
of the true scholar, will find even in the darkest and dustiest
shafts what they are seeking for,—real nuggets of thought,
and precious jewels of faith and hope.

INTRODUCTION.

XXI

I.

THE KA 777 A-UPANISHAD.

The K a ///a-upanishad is probably more widely known
than any other Upanishad. It formed part of the Persian
translation, was rendered into English by Rammohun Roy,
and has since been frequently quoted by English, PTench,
and German writers as one of the most perfect specimens
of the mystic philosophy and poetry of the ancient Hindus.

It was in the year 1845 that I first copied at Berlin the
text of this Upanishad, the commentary of .Sankara (MS. 127
Chambers 1 ], and the gloss of Gopalayogin (MS. 224 Cham¬
bers). The text and commentary of Sankara and the gloss
of Anandagiri have since been edited by Dr. Roer in the
Bibliotheca Indica, with translation and notes. There are
other translations, more or less perfect, by Rammohun Roy,
Windischmann, Poley, Weber, Muir, Regnaud, Gough, and
others. But there still remained many difficult and obscure
portions, and I hope that in some at least of the passages
where I differ from my predecessors, not excepting Sankara,

I may have succeeded in rendering the original meaning of
the author more intelligible than it has hitherto been.

The text of the Ka//za-upanishad is in some MSS. ascribed
to the Ya^ur-veda. In the Chambers MS. of the com¬
mentary also it is said to belong to that Veda 2 , and in the
Muktikopanishad it stands first among the Upanishads of
the Black Ya^ur-veda. According to Colebrooke (Miscel¬
laneous Essays, I, 96, note) it is referred to the Sama-veda
also. Generally, however, it is counted as one of the

A

Atharva//a Upanishads.

The reason why it is ascribed to the Yagmr-veda, is
probably because the legend of NaCiketas occurs in the
Brahma//a of the Taittiriya Ya^ur-veda. Here we read
(HI, 1,8):

Va^a^ravasa, wishing for rewards, sacrificed all his

1 MS. 133 is a mere copy of MS. 127.

2 Ya^urvede Ka^avallibhashyam.

XXLl

UPANISHADS.

wealth. He had a son, called Na&ketas. While he was
still a boy, faith entered into him at the time when the
cows that were to be given (by his father) as presents to
the priests, were brought in. He said : ‘ Father, to whom
wilt thou give me?’ He said so a second and third time.
The father turned round and said to him: ‘ To Death, I

give thee.’

Then a voice said to the young Gautama, as he stood
up: ‘ He (thy father) said, Go away to the house of Death,

1 give thee to Death.’ Go therefore to Death when he is
not at home, and dwell in his house for three nights with¬
out eating. If he should ask thee, ‘ Boy, how many nights
hast thou been here?’ say, ‘ Three.’ When he asks thee,
‘What didst thou eat the first night?’ say, ‘Thy off¬
spring.’ ‘What didst thou eat the second night?’ say,

< Thy & cattle.’ ‘What didst thou cat the third night?’
say, ‘Thy good works.’

He went to Death, while he was away from home, and
he dwelt in his house for three nights without eating. When
Death returned, he asked : ‘ Boy, how many nights hast
thou been here?’ He answered: ‘Three. What didst
thou eat the first night?’ ‘ Thy offspring.’ ‘ What didst thou
eat the second night ? ’ ‘ Thy cattle.’ ‘ What didst thou eat

the third night ? ’ ‘ Thy good works.

Then he said: ‘My respect to thee, O venerable sir!

Choose a boon.’

‘ May I return living to my father/ he said.

‘ Choose a second boon.’

‘ Tell me how my good works may never perish.’

Then he explained to him this Na/fiketa fire (sacrifice),
and hence his good works do not perish.

‘ Choose a third boon.’

‘ Tell me the conquest of death again.’

Then he explained to him this (chief) Na^iketa file
(sacrifice), and hence he conquered death again 1 .

This story, which in the Brahma;/a is told in order to
explain the name of a certain sacrificial ceremony called

1 The commentator explains punar-mrztyu as
the present inevitable death.

the death that follows after

INTRODUCTION.

XX111

Na^iketa, was used as a peg on which to hang the doctrines
of the Upanishad. In its original form it may have constituted
one Adhyaya only, and the very fact of its division into two
Adhyayas may show that the compilers of the Upanishad
were still aware of its gradual origin. We have no means,
however, of determining its original form, nor should we even
be justified in maintaining that the first Adhyaya ever existed
by itself, and that the second was added at a much later
time. Whatever its component elements may have been
before it was an Upanishad, when it was an Upanishad it
consisted of six Vallis, neither more nor less.

The name of valli, lit. creeper, as a subdivision of a
Vedic work, is important. It occurs again in the Taittiriya
Upanishads. Professor Weber thinks that valli, creeper, in
the sense of chapter, is based on a modern metaphor, and
was primarily intended for a creeper, attached to the .yakh&s
or branches of the Veda 1 . More likely, however, it was
used in the same sense as parvan, a joint, a shoot, a
branch, i. e. a division.

Various attempts have been made to distinguish the
more modern from the more ancient portions of our Upani¬
shad 2 . No doubt there are peculiarities of metre, gram¬
mar, language, and thought which indicate the more
primitive or the more modern character of certain verses.
There are repetitions which offend us, and there are
several passages which are clearly taken over from other
Upanishads, where they seem to have had their original
place. Thirty-five years ago, when I first worked at this
Upanishad, I saw no difficulty in re-establishing what I
thought the original text of the Upanishad must have
been. I now feel that we know so little of the time and
the circumstances when these half-prose and half-metrical
Upanishads were first put together, that I should hesitate

1 History of Indian Literature, p. 93, note ; p. 157.

2 Though it would be unfair to hold Professor Weber responsible for his
remarks on this and other questions connected with the Upanishads published
many years ago (Indische Studien, 1853, p. 197), and though I have hardly ever
thought it necessary to criticise them, some of his remarks are not without their
value even now.

XXIV

UPANISHADS.

before expunging even the most modern-sounding lines
from the original context of these Vedantic essays 1 .

The mention of Dhat ri, creator, for instance (Ka th. Up.
II, 20), is certainly startling, and seems to have given rise
to a very early conjectural emendation. But dhat ri and
vidhat ri occur in the hymns of the Rig-veda (X, 82, 2),
and in the Upanishads (Maitr. Up. VI, 8); and Dhat ri,
as almost a personal deity, is invoked with Pra^apati in
Rig-veda X, 184, 1. Deva, in the sense of God (Ka th. Up.
II, 12), is equally strange, but occurs in other Upanishads
also (Maitr. Up. VI, 23 ; Sveta^v. Up. I, 3). Much might
be said about setu, bridge (Ka th. Up. Ill, 2; Mu nd. Up.
II, 2,5), adansa, mirror (Ka th. Up. VI, 5), as being character¬
istic of a later age. But setu is not a bridge, in our sense of
the word, but rather a wall, a bank, a barrier, and occurs
frequently in other Upanishads (Maitr. Up. VII, 7 ; AVand.
Up. VIII, 4; Brih. Up. IV, 4, 22, &c.), while adar^as, or
mirrors, are mentioned in the Brzhadara/zyaka and the
Srauta-sutras. Till we know something more about the
date of the first and the last composition or compilation of
the Upanishads, how are we to tell what subjects and what
ideas the first author or the last collector was familiar with ?
To attempt the impossible may seem courageous, but it is
hardly scholarlike.

With regard to faulty or irregular readings, we can never
know whether they are due to the original composers, the
compilers, the repeaters, or lastly the writers of the Upani¬
shads. It is easy to say that adre^ya (M mid. Up. I, i, 6)
ought to be ad/Vsya ; but who would venture to correct that
form ? Whenever that verse is quoted, it is quoted with
adre^-ya, not ad/Vsya. The commentators themselves tell
us sometimes that certain forms are either Vedic or due to
carelessness (pramadapaV/a); but that very fact shows that
such a form, for instance, as samiyata (X 7 /and. Up. I, 12, 3)
rests on an old authority.

No doubt, if we have the original text of an author, and
can prove that his text was corrupted by later compilers

1 See Regnaud, Le Pessimisme Brahmanique, Annales du Mnsee Guimet,
1880; tom. i, p. 101.

I

INTRODUCTION.

XXV

01 copyists or printers, we have a right to remove those
later alteiations, whether they be improvements or corrup¬
tions. But where, as in our case, we can never hope to gain
access, to original documents, and where we can only hope,
by pointing out what is clearly more modern than the rest
01, it may be, faulty, to gain an approximate conception
of what the original composer may have had in his mind,
before handing his composition over to the safe keeping
of oral tradition, it is almost a duty to discourage, as
much as lies in our power, the work of reconstructing an

old. text by so-called conjectural emendations or critical
omissions.

I have little doubt, for instance, that the three verses
16-18 in the first Valli of the Ka///a-upanishad are later
additions, but x should not therefore venture to remove
them. Death had granted three boons to Na/^iketas, and
no more. In a later portion, however, of the Upanishad
(II, 3), the expression srm ka vittamayi occurs, which I have
translated by ‘the road which leads to wealth. 5 As it is
said that Na>£iketas did not choose that srznka, some reader
must have supposed that a srznka was offered him by Death.
Srziika, however, meant commonly a string or necklace, and
hence arose the idea that Death must have offered a neck¬
lace as an additional gift to Na/fiketas. Besides this, there
was another honour done to Na/fiketas by MTztyu, namely,
his allowing the sacrifice which he had taught him, to be
called by his name. This also, it was supposed, ought to have
been distinctly mentioned before, and hence the insertion
of the three verses 16-18. They are clumsily put in, for
after punar evaha, ‘he said again, 5 verse 16 ought not to have
commenced by tarn abravit, ‘ he said to him. 5 They contain
nothing new, for the fact that the sacrifice is to be called
after Na/Hketas was sufficiently indicated by verse 19, ‘ This,

O Na/fiketas, is thy fire which leads to heaven, which thou
hast chosen as thy second boon. 5 But so anxious was the
interpolator to impress upon his hearers the fact that the
sacrifice should in future go by that name, that, in spite

°f the metre, he inserted tavaiva, ‘of thee alone, 5 in
verse 19.

XXVI

UPANTSHADS.

II.

THE MUAC 9 AKA-UPANISH AD.

This is an Upanishad of the Atharva-veda. It is a
Mantra-upanishad, i.e. it has the form of a Mantra. But,
as the commentators observe, though it is written in
verse, it is not, like other Mantras, to be used for sacri¬
ficial 5 purposes. Its only object is to teach the highest
knowledge, the knowledge of Brahman, which cannot
be obtained either by sacrifices or by worship (upasana),
but by such teaching only as is imparted in the
Upanishad. A man may a hundred times restrain his
breath, &c., but without the Upanishad his ignorance
does not cease. Nor is it right to continue for ever in the
performance of sacrificial and other good works, if one
wishes to obtain the highest knowledge of Brahman. The
Sannyasin alone, who has given up everything, is qualified
to know and to become Brahman. And though it might
seem from Vedic legends that Gr/hasthas also who con¬
tinued to live with their families, performing all the duties
required of them by law, had been in possession of the highest
knowledge, this, we are told, is a mistake. Works and know¬
ledge can be as little together as darkness and light.

This Upanishad too has been often translated since it
first appeared in the Persian translation of Dara Shukoh.
My own copy of the text and Sankara’s commentary from
the MS. in the Chambers Collection was made in October
1844. Both are now best accessible in the Bibliotheca
Indica, where Dr. Roer has published the text, the com¬
mentary by Sankara, a gloss by Ananda^ana, and an

English translation with notes.

The title of the Upanishad, Mu/^aka, has not yet been
explained. The Upanishad is called Muw^aka-upanishad,
and its three chapters are each called Mu/^fakam. Native
commentators explain it as the shaving Upanishad, that is,
as the Upanishad which cuts off the errors of the mind, like
a razor. Another Upanishad also is called Kshuiika, the
razor, a name which is explained in the text itself as

INTRODUCTION.

XXVll

meaning an instrument for removing illusion and error.
The title is all the more strange because Muzzz/aka, in its
commonest acceptation, is used as a term of reproach for
Buddhist mendicants, who are called ‘ Shavelings,’ in oppo¬
sition to the Brahmans, who dress their hair carefully, and
often display by its peculiar arrangement either their family
or their rank. Many doctrines of the Upanishads are, no
doubt, pure Buddhism, or rather Buddhism is on many points
the consistent carrying out of the principles laid down in
the Upanishads. Yet, for that very reason, it seems im¬
possible that this should be the origin of the name, unless
we suppose that it was the work of a mail who was, in one
sense, a Mu/zz/aka, and yet faithful to the Brahmanic law.

III.

THE TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD.

The Taittiriyaka-upanishad seems to have had its original
place in the Taittiriya-Ara/zyaka. This Arazzyaka consists,
as Rajendralal Mitra has shown in the Introduction to his
edition of the work in the Bibliotheca Indica, of three por¬
tions. Out of its ten PrapaVzakas, the first six form the
Arazzyaka proper, or the Karma-kazzz/a, as Sayazza writes.
Then follow PrapaVzakas VII, VIII, and IX, forming the
Taittiriyaka-upanishad ; and lastly, the tenth PrapaVzaka,
the Ya^zziki or Mahanarayazza-upanishad, which is called
a Khila, and was therefore considered by the Brahmans
themselves as a later and supplementary work.

oankara, in his commentary on the Taittiriyaka-upani¬
shad, divides his work into three Adhyayas, and calls the
fiist Yiksha-valli, the second the Brahmananda-valli, while
he gives no special name to the Upanishad explained in the
third Adhyaya. This, however, may be due to a mere
accident, for whenever the division of the Taittiriyaka-upani¬
shad into Vallis is mentioned, we always have three 3 , the

1 Sankara Jed. Roer, p. 141) himself speaks of two Vallis, teaching the
paramatma^vlana (the Aiksha-valli has nothing to do with this), and Anquetil
has Anandbli = Ananda-valli, and Bharkbli = Blmgu-valli.

xxviii

UPANISHADS.

Siksha-valli, the Brahmananda-valli, and the Bhrzgu-valli .
Properly, however, it is only the second Anuvaka of the
seventh Prapa//;aka which deserves and receives in the text
itself the name of Sikshadhyaya, while the rest of the first
Valli ought to go by the name of Saw/hita-upanishad or
Saz/zhiti-upanishad.

Sayawa 1 2 3 4 , in his commentary on the Taittiriya-ara«yaka,
explains the seventh chapter, the Sikshadhyaya (twelve
anuvakas), as Sawhiti-upanishad. His commentary, how¬
ever, is called Siksha-bhashya. The same Saya«a treats the
eighth and ninth Prapa/Z-akas as the Varurcy-upanishad

The Ananda-valli and Bhrfgu-valli are quoted among the

Upanishads of the Atharvazza 5 . *

At the end of each Valli there is an index of the Anu¬
vakas which it contains. That at the end of the first Valli
is intelligible. It gives the Pratikas, i.e. the initial words,
of each Anuvaka, and states their number as twelve.^ At t e
end of the first Anuvaka, we have the final words ‘ satyam
vadishyami,’ and pazzzh. £a, i.e. five short paragraphs at t e
end. At the end of the second Anuvaka, where we expect
the final words, we have the initial, i.e. jiksham, and then
pazz£a, i.e. five sections in the Anuvaka. At the end of the
third Anuvaka, we have the final words, but no number of
sections. At the end of the fourth Anuvaka, we have the
final words of the three sections, followed by one para¬
graph ; at the end of the fifth Anuvaka, three final words,
and two paragraphs, though the first paragraph belongs
clearly to the third section. In the sixth Anuvaka, we
have the final words of the two Anuvakas, and one paia-
graph. In the seventh Anuvaka, there is the final word

1 The third Valli ends with Bhrfgur ity upanishat.

2 See Taittiriyaka-upanishad, ed. Roer, p. 12.

3 See M. M., Alphabetisches Verzeichniss der Upanishads, p. 144-

4 The Anukramam of the Atreyi school (see Weber, Indische Stu len, ,
p. 208) of the Taittiriyaka gives likewise the name of Varum to t e eig an
ninth Prapa^aka, while it calls the seventh Pra P aMaka the Samhiti, and
tenth PrapaMaka the Ya^iki-upanishad. That Anukraniam presupposes, how¬
ever, a different text, as may be seen both from the number of A nuv ^

from the position assigned to the Ya^mkl as between the Sawhiti and \ an

Upanishads.

5 See M. M., Alphabetisches Verzeichniss der Upanishads.

INTRODUCTION.

XXIX

sarvam, and one paragraph added. In the eighth Anuvaka,
we have the initial word, and the number of sections, viz.
ten. In the ninth Anuvaka, there are the final words of one
section, and six paragraphs. In the tenth Anuvaka, there
is the initial word, and the number of paragraphs, viz. six.
In the eleventh Anuvaka, W e have the final words of four
sections, and seven paragraphs, the first again formino- an
integral portion of the last section. The twelfth Anuvaka
has one section, and five paragraphs. If five, then the rdnti
would here have to be included, while, from what is said
afteiwaids, it is clear that as the first word of the Valli is
^am na/i!, so the last is vaktaram.

In the second Valli the index to each Anuvaka is given
at the end of the Valli.

Jst Anuvaka: pratika: brahmavid, and some other catch-
v/ords, idam, ayam, idam. Number of sections, 21.
2nd Anuvaka: pratika: annad, and other catchwords;
last word, pu££//a. Sections, 26.

3rd Anuvaka: pratika: pra//am, and other catchwords;

last word, Qwkkhz.. Sections, 22.

4th Anuvaka: pratika: yata//, and other catchwords;

last word, pu££//a. Sections, 18.

5th Anuvaka: pratika: vi^anam, and other catchwords •
last word, puA^a. Sections, 22.

6th Anuvaka: pratika: asanneva, then atha (deest in
Taitt. Ar. 7). Sections, 28.

7th Anuvaka: pratika: asat. Sections, i<5.

8th Anuvaka: pratika: bhishasmat, and other catch¬
words ; last word, upasankramati. Sections, 51.

9th Anuvaka: pratika: yata//—kutax£ana; then tarn
(deest in Taitt. Ar.). Sections, 11.

In the third Valli the Anukrama//i stands at the end.

1. The first word, bhr/gu//, and some other catchwords.
Sections, 13.

The first word, annam. Sections, 12.

3- The first word, pr4//am. Sections, 12.

4- The first word, mana//. Sections, 12.

5. The first word, vi^v/anam, and some other words. Sec¬
tions, 12.

XXX

UPANISHADS.

6. The first word, ananda, and some other words. Sec-
tions, io.

7 The first words, anna in na nindyat, prana/i, j-anram.

Sections, n. . ^

8. The first words, anna in na pari/fcakshita, apo gyoti i.

S ctions, ii. A

9. The first words, annam bahu kurvita prz'thivim aka^a.

Sections, it. .

10. The first words, 11a katana. Sections 61. T he as
words of each section are given for the tenth Anu-

vaka.

IV.

THE B^/H AD ARA WYAKA-UP AN ISH AD.

This Upanishad has been so often edited and discussed
that it calls for no special remarks. It forms part of the
Satapatha-brahma^a. In the Madhyandina-^akha of that
Brahmawa, which has been edited by Professor Weber,
the Upanishad, consisting of six adhyayas, begins witi
the fourth adhyaya (or third prap&Maka) of the fourteenth

book. , . , ,

There is a commentary on the Brzhadara/zyaka-upamsha

by Dviveda^rinarayawasunu Dvivedaganga, which has been *

carefully edited by Weber in his great edition of the

Natapatha-brahma^a from a MS. in the Bodleian Libraiy,

formerly belonging to Dr. Mill, in which the Upanishad is

called Madhyandiniya-brahma7*a-upanishad.

In the ICa/wa-J-akha the B/'zhadara/zyaka-upanishad forms
the seventeenth book of the Satapatha-br&hmawa, consisting

of six adhyayas. A

As Sankara’s commentary and the gloss of Anandatirtha,

edited by Dr. Roer in the Bibliotheca Indica, follow the
Kawva-rakha, I have followed the same text in my trans-

lation. ,

Besides Dr. Roer’s edition of the text, commentary, and

gloss of this Upanishad, there is Poley’s edition of the text.

There is also a translation of it by Dr. Roer, with large

extracts from Sankara’s commentary.

INTRODUCTION

XXXI

v.

THE YVETA-SVATARA-UPANISHAD.

The .SVeta.svatara-upan ishad has been handed down as
one of the thiity-three Upanishads of the Taittiriyas, and
though this has been doubted, no real argument has ever
been brought forward to invalidate the tradition which

represents it as belonging to the Taittiriya or Black Ya^ur-
veda.

It is sometimes called NvetaAvatara//am Mantropanishad
(p. 274), and is frequently spoken of in the plural, as Nveta-
jvataropanishada//. At the end of the last Adhyaya we read
that .Svetaj'vatara told it to the best among - the hermits,
and that it should be kept secret, and not be taught to any
one except to a son or a regular pupil. It is also called
Nvetlyva \ though, it would seem, for the sake of the metre
only. The Nvetlyvataras are mentioned as a Nakha 1 2 ,
suboidinate to the Aarakas ; but of the literature belonging
to them in particular, nothing is ever mentioned beyond
this Upanishad.

.Sveta^vatara means a white mule, and as mules were
known and prized in India from the earliest times, Nveta-
Avatara, as the name of a person, is no more startling than
Svetasva, white horse, an epithet of Arguna. Now as no
one would be likely to conclude from the name of one of
the celebrated Vedic Ris his, Nyavlsva, i.e. black horse,
that negio influences might be discovered in his hymns, it
is hardly necessary to say that all speculations as to Chris¬
tian influences, or the teaching of white Syro-Christian
missionaries, being indicated by the name of Nvetaj-vatara,
are groundless 3 .

The Nvetlyvatara-upanishad holds a very high rank
among the Upanishads. Though we cannot say that it
is quoted by name by I 3 adaraya//a in the Vedanta-sutras,

1 Va&aspatyam, p. 1222.

2 Catal. Bodl. p. 271 a; p. 222 a.

3 See Weber, Ind. Stud. I, pp. 400, 421.

UPAN1SHADS.

XXXU

it is distinctly referred to as rruta or revealed 1 . It is one
of the twelve Upanishads chosen by Vidyarawya in his

Sarvopanishad-arthanabhutiprakara, and it was singled out

by Sankara as worthy of a special commentary.

" The Svetlrvatara-upanishad seems to me one of t e
most difficult, and at the same time one of the most
interesting works of its kind. Whether on that and on
other grounds it should be assigned to a more ancient or to
a more modern period is what, in the present state of our
knowledge, or, to be honest, of our ignorance of minute
chronology during the Vedic period, no true scholar would
venture to assert. We must be satisfied to know that as
a class, the Upanishads are presupposed by the Kalpa-
sutras, that some of them, called Mantra-upamshads, form
part of the more modern Sawhitas, and that there are
portions even in the Rig-veda-sawhita 2 for which the
name of Upanishad is claimed by the Anukramams. « e
find them most frequent, however, during the Brahmawa-
period, in the Brahma;/as themselves, and, more especia y,
in those portions which are called Arawyakas, while a large
number of them is referred to the Atharva-veda. That,
in imitation of older Upanishads, similar treatises were
composed to a comparatively recent time, has, of course,
long been known 3 .

But when we approach the question whether among the
ancient and genuine Upanishads one may be older than
the other, we find that, though we may guess much we
can prove nothing. The Upanishads belonged to Panshads
or settlements spread all over India. There is a stock of
ideas even of expressions, common to most of them,
the ideas collected in the Upanishads cannot all have grown
up in one and the same place, still less in regular succes¬
sion. They must have had an independent growth, deter¬
mined by individual and local influences, and opinions
which in one village might seem far advanced, would in
another be looked upon as b ehind the world. We may

1 See Deussen, Vedanta, p. 24 ; Ved. Sutra I, 1, 11 > b 4 » ^ > ^b 3 ?

3 See Sacred Books of the East, vol. i, p. lxvi.

3 Loc. cit. p. lxvii.

INTRODUCTION.

xxxiii

admire the ingeniousness of those who sometimes in this,
sometimes in that peculiarity see a clear indication of the
modern date of an Upanishad, but to a conscientious
scholar such arguments are really distasteful for the very
sake of their ingeniousness. He knows that they will
convince many who do not know the real difficulties ; he
knows they will have to be got out of the way with no
small trouble, and he knows that, even if they should prove
true in the end, they will require very different support
fiom what they have hitherto received, before they can be
admitted to the narrow circle of scientific facts.

While fully admitting therefore that the VvetiAvatara-
upanishad has its peculiar features and its peculiar difficul¬
ties, I must most strongly maintain that no argument that
has as yet been brought forward, seems to me to prove, in
any sense of the word, its modern character.

It has been said, for instance, that the Svetlsvatara-
upanishad is a sectarian Upanishad, because, when speak¬
ing of the Highest Self or the Highest Brahman, it applies
such names to him as Hara (I, to), Rudra (II, 17 ; HI, 2 ; 4;
IV, 12 21 ; 22), Siva (III, 14; IV, 10J, Bhagavat (III, 14),

Agni, Aditya, Vayu, &c. (IV, 2). But here it is simply
taken for granted that the idea of the Highest Self was
developed first, and, after it had reached its highest purity,
was lowered again by an identification with mythological and
personal deities. The questions whether the conception of
the Highest Self was formed once and once only, whether
it was formed after all the personal and mythological deities
had first been merged into one Lord (Pra^apati), or whether
it was discovered behind the veil of any other name in the
mythological pantheon of the past, have never been mooted.
Why should not an ancient Az'shi have said: What we
have hitherto called Rudra, and what we worship as Agni,
or Viva, is in reality the Highest Self, thus leaving much of
the ancient mythological phraseology to be used with a
new meaning ? Why should we at once conclude that late
sectarian worshippers of mythological gods replaced again
the Highest Self, after their fathers had discovered it,
by their own sectarian names? If we adopt the former
[15] c

XXXIV

UPANISHADS.

view the Upanishads, which still show these rudera of
the ancient temples, would have to be considered as more
primitive even than those in which the idea of the Bi<
man or the Highest Self has reached its utmost purity.

It has been considered a very strong argument in sup¬
port of the modern and sectarian character of the Svet -
jvatara-upanishad, that ‘ it inculcates what is called Bhakti ,
or implicit reliance on the favour of the deity worshippec.
Now it is quite true that this Upanishad possesses a very
distinct character of its own, by the stress which it lays on
the personal, and sometimes almost mythical character of
the Supreme Spirit; but, so far from inculcating bhakti
in the modern sense of the word, it never mentions that
word, except in the very last verse, a verse which, if neces¬
sary, certain critics would soon dispose of as a palpable
addition. But that verse says no more than this: If these
truths (of the Upanishad) have been told to a high-minded
man, who feels the highest devotion for God and for his
Guru as for God, then they will shine forth indeed. . Does
that prove the existence of Bhakti as we find it in the

vSa;/^ilya-sutras 2 ? .

Acrain, it has been said that the Nvetarvatara-upamshad

is sectarian in a philosophical sense, that it is in fact an
Upanishad of the Sankhya system of philosophy, and not
of the Vedanta. Now I am quite willing to admit that, in
its origin, the Vedanta philosophy is nearer to the \ edic
literature than any other of the six systems of philosophy,
and that if we really found doctrines, peculiar to the ban-
khya, and opposed to the Vedanta, in the .Svetaryatara-
upanishad, we might feel inclined to assign to our L pam-
shad a later date. But where is the proof of this ?

No doubt there are expressions in this Upanishad whic
remind us of technical terms used at a latci time in t e
Sankhya system of philosophy, but of Sankhya doctrines,
which I had myself formerly suspected in this Upamsha ,

1

2

iber, Ind. Stud. I, 4 «! and History of Indian Literature, p. a 3 S
e Aphorisms of 5 ai«filya, or the Hindu Doctrine of Faith, transla y

E. B. Cowell, Calcutta, 1878.

INTRODUCTION.

XXXV

I can on. closer study find very little. I think it was
Mr. Gough who, in his Philosophy of the Upanishads, for
the first time made it quite clear that the teaching of our
Upanishad is, in the main, the same as that of the other
Upanishads. ‘ The SVeta.rvatara-upanishad teaches/ as he
says, the unity of souls in the one and only Self; the
unreality of the world as a series of figments of the self-
feigning world-fiction; and as the first of the fictitious
emanations, the existence of the Demiurgos or universal
soul present in every individual soul, the deity that projects
the world out of himself, that the migrating souls may find
the recompense of their works in former lives/

I do not quite agree with this view of the Irvara, whom
Mr. Gough calls the Demiurgos, but he seems to me per¬
fectly right when he says that the SVetlrvatara-upanishad
propounds in Sankhya terms the very principles that the
Sankhya philosophers make it their business to subvert.
One might doubt as to the propriety of calling certain
terms Sankhya terms in a work written at a time when
a Sankhya philosophy, such as we know it as a system,
had as yet no existence, and when the very name sankhya
meant something quite different from the Sankhya system
of Kapila. Sankhya is derived from sankhya, and that
meant counting, number, name, corresponding very nearly
to the Greek Aoyos. Sankhya, as derived from it, meant
originally no more than theoretic philosophy, as opposed
to yoga, which meant originally practical religious exer¬
cises and penances, to restrain the passions and the senses
in geneial. All other interpretations of these words, when
they had become technical names, are of later date.

But even in their later forms, whatever we may think of
the coincidences and differences between the Sankhya and
Vedanta systems of philosophy, there is one point on which
they are diametrically opposed. Whatever else the San¬
khya may be, it is dualistic; whatever else the Vedanta
may be, it is monistic. In the Sankhya, nature, or whatever
else we may call it, is independent of the purusha; in the
Vedanta it is not. Now the Avetlrvatara-upanishad states
distinctly that nature, or what in the Sankhya philosophy

C 2

XXXVI

UPANISHADS.

is intended by Pradhana, is not an independent power, but
a power (^akti) forming the very self of the Deva. ‘ Sages,
we read, ‘devoted to meditation and concentration, have
seen the power belonging to God himself, hidden in its own
qualities.’

What is really peculiar in the Svetajvatara-upanishad is
the strong stress which it lays on the personality of the
Lord, the tavara. Deva, in the passage quoted, is perhaps
the nearest approach to our own idea of a peisonal God,
though without the background which the Vedanta alwa) s
retains for it. It is God as creator and lulei of the woild,
as favara, lord, but not as Paramatman, or the Highest Self.
The Paramatman constitutes, no doubt, his real essence,
but creation and creator have a phenomenal character
only 1 . The creation is maya, in its original sense of work,
then of phenomenal work, then of illusion. The cieatoi
is mayin, in its original sense of worker or makei, but
again, in that character, phenomenal only 2 . The Gu;/as
or qualities arise, according to the Vedanta, from prak/vti
or maya, within, not beside, the Highest Self, and this
is the very idea which is here expressed by ‘ the Self-power
of God, hidden in the gu;/as or determining qualities.’ How
easily that .sakti or power may become an independent
being, as Maya, we see in such verses as:

Sarvabhuteshu sarvatman ya ^aktir aparabhava

Gu//a^raya namas tasyai .sa.s'vatayai parejvara 3 .

But the important point is this, that in the SVeta.svatara-
upanishad this change has not taken place, dhtoughout
the whole of it we have one Being only, as the cause of
everything, never two. Whatever Sankhya philosophers
of a later date may have imagined that they could discover
in that Upanishad in support of their theories 4 , there is not
one passage in it which, if rightly interpreted, not by itself,
but in connection with the whole text, could be quoted in

1 Prathamam trvaratmana mayirupe«avatish^/?ate brahma ; see p. 280, 1 . 5.

2 Mayi srz^ate sarvam etat.

3 See p. 279, 1 . 5. Sarvatman seems a vocative, like parejvara.

* See Sarvadarjanasarigraha, p. 152.

INTRODUCTION.

XXXVII

support of a dualistic philosophy such as the Sarikhya, as
a system, decidedly is.

we want to understand, what seems at first sight contra¬
dictory, the existence of a God, a Lord, a Creator, a Ruler,
and at the same time the existence of the super-personal
Brahman, we must remember that the orthodox view of
the Vedanta 1 is not what we should call Evolution, but
Illusion. Evolution of the Brahman, or Parkama, is hete¬
rodox, illusion or Vivarta is orthodox Vedanta. Brahman
is a concept involving such complete perfection that with it
evolution, or a tendency towards higher perfection, is im¬
possible. If therefore there is change, that change can
only be illusion, and can never claim the same reality as
Biahman. To put it metaphorically, the world, according
to the orthodox Vedantin, does not proceed from Brahman
as a tree from a germ, but as a mirage from the rays of the
sun. The world is, as we express it, phenomenal only, but
whatever objective reality there is in it, is Brahman, ‘das
Ding an sich,’ as Kant might call it.

Then what is tsv ara or Deva, the Lord or God ? The
answers given to this question are not very explicit. His¬
torically, no doubt, the idea of the Ij’vara, the personal
God, the creator and ruler, the omniscient and omnipotent,
existed before the idea of the absolute Brahman, and
after the idea of the Brahman had been elaborated, the
difficulty of effecting a compromise between the two ideas,
had to be overcome. tavara, the Lord, is Brahman, for what
else could he be ? But he is Brahman under a semblance,
the semblance, namely, of a personal creating and govern¬
ing God. He is not created, but is the creator, an office
too low, it was supposed, for Brahman. The power which
enabled l^vara to create, was a power within him, not inde¬
pendent of him, whether we call it Devatmajakti, Maya,
or Prakrzti. That power is really inconceivable, and it
has assumed such different forms in the mind of different
Vedantists, that in the end Maya herself is represented as
the creating power, nay, as having created tsv ara himself.

1 VedaDtaparibhasha, in the Pandit, vol. iv, p. 496.

UPANISHADS.

xxxviii

In our Upanishad, however, Ijvara is the creatoi, and
though, philosophically speaking, we should say that he was
conceived as phenomenal, yet we must never forget that
the phenomenal is the form of the real, and l-yvaia theie-
fore an aspect of Brahman 1 . ‘This God/ says Pramada
Dasa Mitra 2 , £ is the spirit conscious of the universe.
Whilst an extremely limited portion, and that only of the
material universe, enters into my consciousness, the whole
of the conscious universe, together, of course, with the
material one that hangs upon it, enters into the conscious¬
ness of God.’ And again, ‘Whilst we (the ^ivatmans)
are subject to Maya, M&y& is subject to Ijvara. If we
truly know li’vara, we know him as Brahman; if we truly
know ourselves, we know r ourselves as Biahman. This
being so, we must not be surprised if sometimes we find
tjvara sharply distinguished from Brahman, whilst at othei
times 1 .s'vara and Brahman are interchanged.’

Another argument in support of the sectarian chaiacter
of the GVeta-svatara-upanishad is brought forward, not by
European students only, but by native scholars, namely,
that the very name of Kapila, the reputed foundei of the
Sankhya philosophy, occurs in it. Now it is quite true
that if we read the second verse of the fifth Adhyaya by
itself, the occurrence of the word Kapila may seem startling.
But if we read it in connection with what precedes and fol¬
lows, we shall see hardly anything unusual in it. It says:

‘It is he who, being one only, rules over every germ
(cause), over all forms, and over all germs; it is he who,
in the beginning, bears in his thoughts the wise son, the
fiery, whom he wished to look on while he was born.’

Now 7- it is quite clear to me that the subject in this veise
is the same as in IV, 11, where the same words are used,
and where yo yoni in yonim adhitishV^aty eka/z refeis cleaily
to Brahman. It is equally clear that the prasuta, the son,
the offspring of Brahman, in the Vedanta sense, can only
be the same person who is elsewhere called Hirawyagarbha,

1 SavLresham Brahma, or jabalam Brahma.

2 Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 187S, p. 40.

INTRODUCTION.

XXXIX

the personified Brahman. Thus we read before, III, 4,

He the creator and supporter of the gods, Rudra, the great
seer (maharshi), the lord of all, formerly gave birth to
Hira;/yagarbha; and in IV, 11, we have the very expres¬
sion which is used here, namely, ‘that he saw Hira«ya-
garbha being born. Unfortunately, a new adjective is
applied in our verse to Hira^yagarbha, namely, kapila,
and this has called forth interpretations totally at variance
with the general tenor of the Upanis'had. If, instead of
kapilam, reddish, fiery 1 , any other epithet had been used
of Hira/zyagarbha, no one, I believe,, would have hesitated
for a moment to recognise the fact that our text simply
repeats the description of Hira^yagarbha in his relation
to Brahman, for the other epithet rzshim, like maharshim,
is too often applied to Brahman himself and to Hira#ya-
garbha to require any explanation.

But it is a well known fact that the Hindus, even as early
as the Brahmaz/a-period, were fond of tracing their various
branches of knowledge back to Brahman or to Brahman
Svayambhu and then through Pra^apati, who even in the
Rig-veda (X, 121, 10) replaces ,Hira;7yagarbha, and some¬
times through the Devas, such as Mrztyu, Vayu, Indra
Agni 2 , &c., to the various ancestors of their ancient families.

In the beginning of the Mu^akopanishad we are told
that Brahman told it to Atharvan, Atharvan to Angir,
Angir to Satyavaha Bharadva^a, Bharadva^a to Angiras,
Angiras to Aaunaka. Manu, the ancient lawgiver, is called
both Haira^yagarbha and Svayambhuva, as descended from
Svayambhu or from Hira/^yagarbha 3 . Nothing therefore
was more natural than that the same tendency should have
led some one to assign the authorship of a great philoso¬
phical system like the Satikhya to Hira^yagarbha, if not
to Brahman Svayambhu. And if the name of Hira;vya-
garbha had been used already for the ancestors of other
sages, and the inspirers of other systems, what could be
more natural than that another name of the same Hira/zya-

1 Other colours, instead of kapila, are nila, harita, lohitaksha; see IV, i ; 4.

2 See Va?/«a-brahma«a, ed. Burnell, p. 10 ; Brz’hadara^yaka-up. pp. 185, 224.

3 See M. M., India, p. 372.

xl

UPANISHADS.

garbha should be chosen, such as Kapila. If we are told
that Kapila handed his knowledge to Asuii, Asuri to Pa?7-
yfotrikha, this again is in perfect keeping with the character
of literary tradition in India. Asuri occurs in the Vawjas
of the 5atapatha-br£hma7/a (see above, pp. 187, 226) ; Pa;^a-
j'ikha 1 , having five tufts, might be either a general name or
a proper name of an ascetic, Buddhist or otherwise. He is
quoted in the Sankhya-sutras, V, 32 ; VI, 68.

But after all this was settled, after Kapila had been
accepted, like Hirawyagarbha, as the founder of a great
system of philosophy, there came a reaction. I eople had
now learnt to believe in a real Kapila, and when looking out
for credentials for him, they found them wherever the word
Kapila occurred in old writings. The question whether
there ever was a real historical person who took the name
of Kapila and taught the Sankhya-sutras, does not concern
us here. I see no evidence for it. What is instructive is
this, that our very passage, which may have suggested at
first the name of Kapila, as distinct from Hirawyagarbha
Kapila, was later on appealed to to prove the primordial
existence of a Kapila, the founder of the Sankhya philo¬
sophy. However, it requires but a very slight acquaintance
with Sanskrit literature and very little reflection in order
to see that the author of our verse could never have dreamt
of elevating a certain Kapila, known to him as a gieat
philosopher, if there ever was such a man, to a divine rank 2 3 .
Hilaryagarbha kapila may have given birth to Kapila, the
hero of the Sankhya philosophers, but Kapila, a real human
person, was never changed into Hira?yagarbha kapila.

Let us see now what the commentators say. vSankara
first explains kapilam by kanakas J kapilavaiv/am . . . .
Hira/zyagarbham. Kapilo ’gra^a iti pura/zava^anat. Ka-
pilo Hira/zyagarbho va nirdbyate. But he afterwards quotes
some verses in support of the theory that Kapila was a

1 For fuller information on Paw^ajikha, Kapila, &c., see F. Flails Preface
to Sankhya-pravaAxna-bhashya, p. 9 seq.; Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 433*

2 Weber, Hist, of Indian Literature, p. 236.

3 This ought to be Kanakavaroam, and I hope will not be identified with the
name of Buddha in a former existence.

INTRODUCTION.

xli

Paramarshi, a portion of Vishnu, intended to destroy error

in the 5 r ! ta Yllga ’ a teacher of the Sankhya philosophy.

Vi^v/anatman explains the verse rightly, and without any
leference to Kapila, the Sankhya teacher.

Sankarananda goes a step further, and being evidently
fully aware of the misuse that had been made of this
passage, even in certain passages of the Mahabharata
(XII, 13254, 13703), and elsewhere, declares distinctly that
kapila cannot be meant for the teacher of the Sankhya
(na tu sankhyapra/zeta kapila//, iHmamatrasamyena tad-
giaha/ze syad atiprasanga/z). He is fully aware of the true
interpretation, viz. avyakrz’tasya prathamakaryabhuta///
kapila/// vi^itravar/za/// ^//anakriya.yaktyatmaka/// Hira/zya-
garbham ityartha//, but he yields to another temptation,
and seems ^to prefer another view which makes Kapila
Vasudevasyavatarabhuta/// Sagaraputra//a//z dagdharam, an
Avatara of Vasudeva, the burner of the sons of Sagara.
What vast conclusions may be drawn from no facts, may
be seen in Webers Indische Studien, vol. i, p. 430, and even
in his History of Indian Literature, published in 1878.

. Far more difficult to explain than these supposed allu¬
sions to the authors and to the teaching of the Sankhya
philosophy are the frequent references in the SVetlsvatara-
upanishad to definite numbers, which are supposed to point
to certain classes of subjects as arranged in the Sankhya
and other systems of philosophy. The Sankhya philosophy
is fond of counting and arranging, and its very name is
sometimes supposed to have been chosen because it num¬
bers (sankhya) the subjects of which it treats. It is certainly
true that if we meet, as we do in the Xvetlyvatara-upani-
shad, with classes of things \ numbered as one, two, three,
five, eight, sixteen, twenty, forty-eight, fifty and more, and
1 some of these numbers agree with those recognised in
the later Sankhya and Yoga systems, we feel doubtful as to
whether these coincidences are accidental, or whether, if not
accidental, they are due to borrowing on the part of those
later systems, or on the part of the Upanishads. I feel

1 See I, 4; 5; VI, 3.

xlii

UPANISHADS.

it impossible to come to a decision on this point. Even so
early as the hymns of the Rig-veda we meet with these
numbers assigned to days and months and seasons, rivers
and countries, sacrifices and deities. They clearly piove the
existence of a considerable amount of intellectual laboui
which had become fixed and traditional before the com¬
position of certain hymns, and they prove the same m the
case of certain Upanishads. But beyond this, foi the
present, I should not like to go; and I must say that
the attempts of most of the Indian commentators at ex¬
plaining such numbers by a reference to later systems of
philosophy or cosmology, are generally very forced and
unsatisfactory.

One more point I ought to mention as indicating the age
of the SvetiDvatara-upanishad, and that is the obscurity of
many of its verses, which may be due to a corruption of the
text, and the number of various readings, recognised as
such, by the commentators. Some of them have been
mentioned in the notes to my translation.

The text of this Upanishad was printed by Dr. Roer in
the Bibliotheca Indica,with Sankara’s commentary. I have
consulted besides, the commentary of Vi^wanatman, the

pupil of Paramahawsa-parivra^akaHrya-^rima^-S^anotta-

maMrya, MS. I. O. 1133; and a third commentary, by

Sankarananda, the pupil of Paramahawsa-parivra^akaHr-

yanandatman, MS. I. O. 1878. These were kindly lent me
by Dr. Rost, the learned and liberal librarian of the India

Office.

VI.

PRAS/VA-UPANISHAD.

This Upanishad is called the Pra^; 7 a or Sha/-pra^a-
upanishad, and at the end of a chapter we find occasionally
iti pra.s77aprativa/£anam, i.e. thus ends the answer to the
question. It is ascribed to the Atharva-veda, and occa¬
sionally to the Pippalada-i'akha, one of the most important
j-akhas of that Veda. Pippalada is mentioned in the
Upanishad as the name of the principal teacher.

Sankara, in the beginning of his commentary, says:

INTRODUCTION. xliii

Mantroktasyarthasya vistaranuvadidam Brahma/?am ara-
bhyate, which would mean ‘this Brahma^a is commenced
as moie fully repeating - what has been declared in the
Mantra.’ This, however, does not, I believe, refer to a
Mantra or hymn in the Atharva-veda-sa/;zhita, but to the
Mu;^aka-upanishad, which, as written in verse, is some¬
times spoken of as a Mantra, or Mantropanishad. This
is also the opinion of Anandagiri, who says, c one might
think that it was mere repetition (punarukti), if the
essence of the Self, which has been explained by the
Mantras, were to be taught here again by the Brahma/za.’
For he adds, ‘by the Mantras “Brahma devanam,” &c.,’
and this is evidently meant for the beginning of the
Miw^aka-upanishad, ‘ Brahma devanam.’ Anandagiri refers
again to the Mu;/^aka in order to show that the Prajwa is
not a mere repetition, and if .Sankara calls the beginning
of it a Brahma/za, this must be taken in the more general
sense of‘what is not Mantra 1 .’ Mantropanishad is a name
used of several Upanishads which are written in verse, and
some of which, like the ts£, have kept their place in the
Sawhitas.

VII.

MAITRAYAfFA-BRAHMAiFA-UPANISHAD.

In the case of this Upanishad we must first of all attempt
to settle its right title. Professor Cowell, in his edition and
tianslation of it, calls it Maitri or Maitraya^iya-upanishad,
and states that it belongs to the Maitraya^iya-^akha of the
Black S agur-veda, and that it formed the concluding por¬
tion of a lost Brahma/za of that 5 akh 4 , being preceded by
the sacrificial (karma) portion, which consisted of four books.

In his MSS. the title varied between Maitry-upanishad
and Maitri-jakha-upanishad. A Poona MS. calls it Maitra-
ya/ziya-^akha-upanishad, and a MS. copied for Baron von
Eckstein, Maitrayamyopanishad. I myself in the Alpha¬
betical List of the Upanishads, published in the Journal of

1 Mantra vyatiriktabhage tu brahma/mabda-#, Rig-veda, Saya^a’s Introduction,
vol 1, p. 23.

xliv

UPANISHADS.

the German Oriental Society, called it, No. 104, Maitrayazza
or Maitri-upanishad, i.e. either the Upanishad of the MaitrS.-
yazzas, or the Upanishad of Maitri, the principal teacher.

In a MS. which I received from Dr. Burnell, the title of
our Upanishad is Maitrayazzi-br&hmazza-upanishad, varying
with Maitrayazzi-brahmazza-upanishad, and •Snya^u.s'sakha-
yam Maitrayazziya-brahmazza-upanishad.

The next question is by what name this Upanishad is
quoted by native authorities. \ idyarazzya, in his Sarvo-
panishad-arthanubhutiprakas-a 1 , v. 1, speaks of the Maitra-
yazziyanamni ya^ushi jakha, and he mentions Maitra (not
Maitri) as the author of that Sakha (vv. 55, 15°)-

In the Muktika-upanishad 2 we meet with the name of
Maitrayazzi as the twenty-fourth Upanishad, with the
name of Maitreyi as the twenty-ninth; and again, in the
list of the sixteen Upanishads of the Sama-veda, we find
Maitrayazzi and Maitreyi as the fourth and fifth.

Looking at all this evidence, I think we should come to
the conclusion that our Upanishad derives its name from
the Sakha of the Maitrayazzas, and may therefore be called
Maitr&yazza-upanishad or Maitrayazzi Upanishad. Maitra-
yazza-brahmazza-upanishad seems likewise correct, and
Maitrayazzi - brahmazza-upanishad, like Kaushitaki - brah-
mazza-upanishad and Va^asaneyi-saz/zhitopanishad, might
be defended, if Maitrayanin were known as a further deri¬
vative of Maitrayazza. If the name is formed from the
teacher Maitri or Maitra, the title of Maitri-upanishad
would also be correct, but I doubt whether Matri-upani-
shad would admit of any grammatical justification 3 .

Besides this Maitrayazza-brahmazza-upanishad, however,
I possess a MS. of what is called the Maitreyopanishad,
sent to me likewise by the late Dr. Burnell. It is very
short, and contains no more than the substance of the first
Prapa//zaka of the Maitrayazza-brahmazza-upanishad. I give

1 See Cowell, Maitr. Up. pref. p. iv.

2 Calcutta, 1791 (1869), p. 4; also as quoted in the Mahavakya-ratnavali^p. i •
5 Dr. Burnell, in his Tanjore Catalogue, mentions, p. 35 a Maitra.) am-

brahmawopanishad, which can hardly be a right title, and p. 3 ^ b a Maitra-
yamya and Maitreyibrahmawa.

INTRODUCTION.

xlv

the text of it, as far as it can be restored from the one MS.
in my possession:

Hari// Om. Brzhadratho vai nama r&gA vaii%ye putra m
nidhapayitvedam a^vatam manyamana/z sarlxam vaira-
gyam upeto Yazzyazzz nir^agdma. Sa tatra paramam tapa 1
adityam udikshama/za urdhvas tish//zaty. Ante sahasrasya
muner antikam ^agama 2 Atha Brzhadratho brahmavit-
pravaram munindraz/z sampfgya stutva bahusa/i pra/zamam
a arot. . So 'bravid agnir ivadhumakas te^asa nirdahann
i vat in avid Bhagava/z k/iakayanya , uttish//zottish//za varaz/z
vrz/zishveti ra^anam abravit 3 . Sa tasmai punar namaskrz-
tyovaka, Bhagavan na(ha)matmavit tvazzz tattvavi^ khw-
svumo vayam ; sa tvazzz no bruhity etad vratam purastad
.^am ma. yrikkka prajwam Aikshvakanyan kaman
w/zlshveti Sakayanya/z. Sanrasya sa rire (sic) kaxanav
abhi m nsy a m a no i%emazzz gatha zzz ^agada. i

Bhag-avann, . asthi^armasnayuma^-amazzzsaj'uklai-o/zita-
ireshma^rudashikavizzmutrapittakaphasaz/zghate durgandhe

ni/zsare smizz khaxixxt kizzz kamabhogaiA %

Kamakrodlialobhamohabhayavishadersheshz'aviyoganish-
/asamprayogakshutpipasa^-aramrztyurogaj'okadyair abhiha-

te smizz k/iaxiYQ kizzz kamabhogai/z. 3
Sarvazzz kedam kshayishzzu pa^yamo yatheme damsama-
^akadayas tnuavan 4 nasyata yodbhutapradhvazzzsina/z. 4
Atha kim etair va pare ’nye dhamartharlr (sic) /fakra-

vartina h Sudyumnabhuridyumnakuvalayajvayauvanajva-

vaddhrzya^vavvapati/z ^abindur hari^andro ’zzzbarisho
nanukastvayatir yayatir azzarazzyokshasenadayo maruta-
bharataprabhrztayo ra-ano mishato bandhuvargasya ma-
hatizzz snyam tyaktvasmal lokad arauz/z lokam prayanti. 5.
Atha kim etair va pare ’nye gandharvasurayaksharaksha-
hutagazzapua^oragrahddinaz/z nirodhanam paj-yama/z. 6
Atha kim etair vanyana;« roshay/aw mahar«avana»2

1 One expects asthaya.

c ^, A Thlsseems bet ter than the Maitrayawa text. He went near a Muni, viz
^akayanya. ;

3 This seems unnecessary.

reader t T ° lder reacling hidden in this > from which arose the
hhfltapradhva«sinaT aKa ^ U ' t ”” aVanaS P ata )' odbMta P^ d ‘‘va2«sina/ ; , or yo

xlvi

UPANISHADS.

.dkhari/zam prapatanazzz dhruvasya pra^alana in vataruzza/zz
pz^zthivya/z sthanapasaiazzazzz suiazzam.

’ham ity etadvidhe ’smin sazzzsare ki in kamopabhogair yair
evcLmtasya sakrid avartana m drAyata ity uddhartum arhasi
tyandodapanabheka ivaham asmin sa in Bhagavas tvazzz gatis
tva in no gatir iti. 7

Ayam 1 agnir vaAvanaro yo ’yam anta h purushe yenedam
annam pa^yate yad idam adyate tasyaisha ghosho bhavati
yam etat karzzav apidhaya srinoti, sa yadotkramishyan 2
bhavati nainazzz ghoshazzz srinotl 8

Yatha 3 nirindhano vahni/z svayonav upa^amyati. 9 4

Sa siva/i so ’nte vaAvanaro bhutva sa dagdhva sarvazzi
bhutani przthivyapsu praliyatc 5 , apas te^asi liyante 6 , tego
vayau praliyate 7 , vayur aka^e viliyate 8 , aka^am indriyeshv,
indriyazzi tanmatreshu, tanmatrazzi bhutadau viliyante 9 ,
bhutadi mahati viliyate 10 , mahan avyakte viliyate n , avyak-
tam akshare viliyate 12 , aksharam tamasi viliyate 13 , tama
ekibhavati parasmin, parastan na 14 san nasan 11a sad ityetan
nirvctzzam aniuasanam iti vedanu.?asanam.

We should distinguish therefore between the large Maitra-
yazza-brahmazza-upanishad and the smaller Maitreyopani-
shad. The title of Maitreyi-brahmazza has, of course, a
totally different origin, and simply means the Brahmazza
which tells the story of Maitreyi 15 .

As Professor Cowell, in the Preface to his edition and
translation of the Maitrayazza-brahmazza-upanishad, has
discussed its peculiar character, I have little to add on that
subject. I agree with him in thinking that this Upanishad
has grown, and contains several accretions. The Sanskrit
commentator himself declares the sixth and seventh chap¬
ters to be Khilas or supplementary. Possibly the Mai-
treya-upanishad, as printed above, contains the earliest
framework. Then we have traces of various recensions.
Professor Cowell (Preface, p. vi) mentions a MS., copied

1 Maitr. Up. II, 6; p. 32. 2 kramishyan, m. 3 Yadha, m.

4 Maitr. Up. VI, 34; p. 178. 5 lipyate. 6 lipyante. 7 liyyate.

* liyyate. 9 liyante. 30 liyyate. 11 lipyate. 12 liyyate.

13 liyyate. 14 tanasanna. 15 See A 7 and. Up. p. 623.

INTRODUCTION. xlvii

for Baron Eckstein, apparently from a Telugu original,
which contains the first five chapters only, numbered as
four. The verses given in VI, 34 (p. 177), beginning with
atreme j'loka bhavanti, aie placed after IV, 3* In my own
MS. these verses are inserted at the beginning of the fifth
chapter 1 . Then follows in Baron Ecksteins MS. as IV, 5,
what is given in the printed text as V, i, 3 (pp. 69-76). ’in
my own MS., which likewise comes from the South, the
Upanishad does not go beyond VI, 8, which is called the
sixth chapter and the end of the Upanishad.

We have in fact in our Upanishad the first specimen of
that peculiar Indian style, so common in the later fables
and stories, which delights in enclosing one story within
another. The kernel of our Upanishad is really the dialogue
between the Valakhilyas and Pra^apati Kratu. This is
called by the commentator (see p. 331, note) a Vyakhyana,
i.e. a fuller explanation of the Sutra which comes before,
and which expresses in the few words, ‘ He is the Self, this
is the immortal, the fearless, this is Brahman,’ the gist of
the whole Upanishad.

This dialogue, or at all events the doctrine which it was
meant to illustrate, was communicated by Maitri (or Maitra)
to Sakayanya, and by Sakayanya to King Brzhadratha
Aikshvaka, also called Marut (II, 1 ; VI, 30). This dialogue
might seem to come to an end in VI, 29, and likewise the
dialogue between Vakayanya and Brzhadratha ; but it is
carried on again to the end of VI, 30, and followed after¬
wards by a number of paragraphs which may probably be
considered as later additions.

But though admitting all this, I cannot bring myself to
follow Professor Cowell in considering, as he does, even
the earlier portion of the Upanishad as dating from a late
period, while the latter portions are called by him com¬
paratively modern, on account of frequent Vaish/zava quo¬
tations. What imparts to this Upanishad, according to my
opinion, an exceptionally genuine and ancient character,
is the preservation in it of that peculiar Sandhi which,

1 See p. 303, note 1 ; p. 305, note 1; p. 312, note 1.

1 * * *
xlvm

U PAN IS H ADS.

thanks to the labours of Dr. von Schroeder, we now know
to be characteristic of the Maitrayawa-^akha. In that Vakha
final unaccented as and e are changed into a, if the next word
begins with an accented vowel, except a. Before initial a,
however, e remains unchanged, and as becomes o, and the
initial a is sometimes elided, sometimes not. Some of these
rules, it must be remembered, run counter to Pa/dni, and
we may safely conclude therefore that texts in which they
are observed, date from the time before Pa/nni. In some
MSS., as, for instance, in my own MS. of the Maitraya^a-
brahmawa-upanishad, these rules are not observed, but this
makes their strict observation in other MSS. all the more
important. Besides, though to Dr. von Schroeder belongs,
no doubt, the credit of having, in his edition of the
Maitraya n\ Sawhita, first pointed out these phonetic pecu¬
liarities, they were known as such to the commentators,
who expressly point out these irregular Sandhis as dis¬
tinctive of the Maitraya/n ^akha. Thus we read Maitr. Up.
II, 3 (P- *8), that tigmate^asa urdhvaretaso, instead of
tigmate^asa, is evawvidha eta^^^akhasanketapaMaj kh<\.w-
dasa/; sarvatra, i.e. is throughout the Vedic reading indica¬
tory of that particular Sakha, namely the Maitrayam.

A still stranger peculiarity of our Sakha is the change of
a final t before initial ^ into n. This also occurs in our
Upanishad. In VI, 8, we read sv&n Jarirad ; in VI, 127, ya«
yarirasya. Such a change seems phonetically so unnatural,
that the tradition must have been very strong to perpetuate
it among the Maitraya^as.

Now what is important for our purposes is this, that these
phonetic peculiarities run through all the seven chapters of
our Upanishad. This will be seen from the following list:

I. Final as changed into a before initial vowel 1 :

II, 3, tigmatega^a urdhvaretaso (Comm. eta/TVakha-
sanketapa//^aj /^andasa/2 sarvatra).

II, 5, vibodha evam. II, 7 ) avasthita iti.

1 I have left out the restriction as to the accent of the vowels, because
they are disregarded in the Upanishad. It should be observed that this peculiar
Sandhi occurs in the Upanishad chiefly before iti.

INTRODUCTION.

xlix

II.

instance

ctaii abhibhuta iti. [V, i, vidyata iti.

VI, 4, prazzava iti; bhumyddaya eko.

VI, 6, aditya iti; ahavaniy^ iti; suryd iti ; ahankara
iti, vyana iti. VI, bharga iti.

VI, 7, sannivish/a iti. VI, 23, deva onkaro.

VI, 30, prayata iti. VI, 30, vinirgata iti.

Kina! e befoie initial vowels becomes a. Kor

I, 4, drzkyata iti. II, 2, nishpadyata iti.

III, 2, apadyata iti. Ill, 2, pushkara iti.

IV, 1, vidyata iti. VI, 10, bhunkta iti.

VI, 20, a^nuta iti. VI, 30, eka ahur.

Even pragrzhya e is changed to a in—

VI, 23, eta upasita, i. e. ete uktalakshazze brahma/d.

^ 3 T » instead of te etasya, the commentator seems to

have read te va etasya.

Final as before a, 11, and au becomes a, and is then
contracted. For instance:

I, 4 ) vanaspatayodbhuta, instead of vanaspataya
udbhuta. (Comm. SandhF ^//andaso va, ukaro
vatra lupto drash/avya/z.)

II, 6, devaush/zyam, instead of deva aush/zyam.
(Comm. SandhE /£/zandasa/z.)

VI, 24, atamavish/am, instead of atama-avish/am
(Comm. SandhF Mandasa/z); cf. AVzand. Up.
VI, 8, 3, a^anayeti (Comm, visar^aniyalopa/z).

IV. Final e before i becomes a, and is then contracted.
For instance:

VI, 7, atma ^aniteti for ^anita iti. (Comm, ^anite,
^anati.)

VI, 28, avaz'aiva for avata iva. (Comm. Sandhi-
vrzddhi /^/zandase.)

V. Final au before initial vowels becomes a. For in¬
stance :

II, 6, yena va eta anugrzhM iti.

VI, 22, asa abhidhyata.

On abhibhuyamanay iva, see p. 295, note 2.
V, 2, asa atma (var. lect. asav atma).

[15] d

1

UPANISHADS.

VI. Final o of atho produces elision of initial a. For
instance:

III, 2, atho ’bhibhutatvctt. (Comm. Sandhis Man-
dasa/z.) Various reading, ato ’bhibhutatvat.

VI, i ) so antar is explained as sa u.

VII. Other irregularities:

VI, 7, apo pyayanat, explained by pyayanat and
apyayanat. Might it be, apo ’py ayanat ?

VI, 7, atmano tma neta.

II, 6, so tmanam abhidhyatva.

VI, 35, dvidharmondham for dvidharmandham.
(Comm. Mandasa.)

VI, 35, te^asendham, i.e. te^asa-iddhan. (In explain¬
ing other irregular compounds, too, as in I, 4, the
commentator has recourse to a Mandasa or pra-
madika licence.)

VI, i, hira/zyavasthat for hira?/yavasthat. Here
the dropping of a in avasthat is explained by
a reference to Bhaguri (vash/i Bh&gurir allopam
avapyor upasargayo//). See Vopadeva III, 1 7 1 *

VIII. VLdish/apatha:

VII, 2, brahmadhiyalambana. (Comm. vulislVa-
patha^ Mandasa/j.)

VI, 35, apyay ankura for apy ankura. (Comm,
yakara// pramadapaVdta//.)

On the contrary VI, 35? vliyante for viliyante.

If on the grounds which we have hitherto examined there
seems good reason to ascribe the Maitrayawa-biahma;/a-
upanishad to an early rather than to a late period, possibly
to an ante-Pa/dnean period, we shall hardly be peisuaded to
change this opinion on account of supposed references to
Vaishz/ava or to Bauddha doctrines which some scholars

have tried to discover in it.

As to the worship of Vishnu, as one of the many mani¬
festations of the Highest Spirit, we have seen it alluded to
in other Upanishads, and we know from the Brahma^as
that the name of Vish/zu was connected with many of the
earliest Vedic sacrifices.

INTRODUCTION.

li

! to Bauddha doctrines, including the very name of
i irva«a (p. xlvi, 1. 19), we must remember, as I have often
remarked, that there were Bauddhas before Buddha. Brzha-
spati, who is frequently quoted in later philosophical writings
as the author of an heretical philosophy, denying the au-
thority of the Vedas, is mentioned by name in our Upanishad.
(VII, 9), but we are told that this Bnhaspati, having become
-Sukra, promulgated his erroneous doctrines in order to mis¬
lead the Asuras, and thus to insure the safety of Indra, i.e of
the old faith.

The fact that the teacher of King Brfhadratha in our
Upanishad is called Sakayanya, can never be used in sup¬
port of the idea that, being a descendant of 6aka \ he must
have been, like 5 akyamuni, a teacher of Buddhist doctrines.
He is the very opposite in our Upanishad, and warns his
hearers against such doctrines as we should identify with
the doctrines of Buddha. As I have pointed out on several
occasions, the breaking through the law of the Ananias is
the chief complaint which orthodox Brahmans make against
Buddhists and their predecessors, and this is what 6aka-
yanya condemns. A Brahman may become a Sannyasin,
which is much the same as a Buddhist Bhikshu, if he has
first passed through the three stages of a student, a house¬
holder, and a Vanaprastha. But to become a Bhikshu
without that previous discipline, was heresy in the eyes of
the Brahmans, and it was exactly that heresy which the
Bauddhas preached and practised. That this social laxity
was gaining ground at the time when our Upanishad was
wiitten is clear (see VII, 8). We hear of people who wear red
dresses (like the Buddhists) without having a right to them ;
we even hear of books, different from the Vedas, against
which the true Brahmans are warned. All this points to
times when what we call Buddhism was in the air, say the
sixth century B. C., the very time to which I have always
assigned the origin of the genuine and classical Upanishads.
The Upanishads are to my mind the germs of Buddhism,

l f^ ka y an ya means a grandson or further descendant of Saha ; see Gawaratna-
vah (Baroda, 1874), P- 57 A .

d 2

Hi

UPANISHADS.

while Buddhism is in many respects the doctrine of the
Upanishads carried out to its last consequences, and, what is
important, employed as the foundation of a new social
system. In doctrine the highest goal of the Vedanta, the
knowledge of the true Self, is no more than the Buddhist
Samyaksambodhi ; in practice the Sannyasin is the Bhikshu,
the friar, only emancipated alike from the tedious discipline
of the Brahmanic student, the duties of the Brahmanic
householder, and the yoke of useless penances imposed on
the Brahmanic dweller in the forest. The spiritual freedom
of the Sannyasin becomes in Buddhism the common pro¬
perty of the Sangha, the Fraternity, and that Fraternity is
open alike to the young and the old, to the Brahman and
the Sudra, to the rich and the poor, to the wise and the
foolish. In fact there is no break between the India of
the Veda and the India of the Tripi/aka, but there is an
historical continuity between the two, and the connecting
link between extremes -that seem widely separated must
be sought in the Upanishads 1 .

F. MAX MULLER.

Oxford, February, 1884.

1 As there is room left on this page, I subjoin a passage from the Abhi-
dharma-kosha-vyakhya, ascribed to the Bhagavat, but which, as far as style and
thought are concerned, might be taken from an Upanishad : Uktazzz I11 Bhaga-
vata : Pr/thivi bho Gautama kutra pratishz'Zzita ? Prrthivi Brahmazza abmazzz/ale
pratishz'Zzita. Abmazzz/alam bho Gautama kva pratish/Zzitam ? Vayau pratish-
/Zzitam. Vayur bho Gautama kva pratishZZzitaZz ? Akaje pratish/ZzitaZz. Aka jam
bho Gautama kutra pratish/Zzitam ? Atisarasi Mahabrahmazza, atisarasi Maha¬
brahmazza. Akamm BrahmazzapratishZZzitam, analambanam lti vistaraZz. Tas-
mad asty akajam iti VaibhashiknA (See Brzhad-Ar. Up. HI, 6, 1. Burnonf,

Introduction a l’histoire du Buddhisme, p. 449 -) }>

‘ For it is said by the Bhagavat: “ O Gautama, on what does the earth rest?

“ The earth, O Brahmazza, rests on the sphere of water.” “ O Gautama, on

what does the sphere of water rest ? ” “ It rests on the air. “ O Gautama, on

what does the air rest?” “ It rests on the ether (akaja). “O Gautama, on

what does the ether rest?” “Thou goest too far, great Brahmazza ; thou

goest too far, great Brahmazza. The ether, O Brahmazza, does not rest. It
has no support.” Therefore the Vaibhashikas hold that there is an ether/ &c.

K A77/A-U PAN I SHAD.

KA77/A-UPANISHAD.

first adhyAya.

First Valli.

1. Vagasravasa desirous (of heavenly rewards),
surrendered (at a sacrifice) all that he possessed. He
had a son of the name of Na/f’iketas.

2 . When the (promised) presents were being given
(to the priests), faith entered into the heart of Naii-
ketas, who was still a boy, and he thought:

O' Unblessed 2 , surely, are the worlds to which
a man goes by giving (as his promised present at a
sacrifice) cows which have drunk water, eaten hay,
given their milk 3 , and are barren/

4- He (knowing that his father had promised
to give up all that he possessed, and therefore his
son also) said to his father: ‘ Dear father, to whom
wilt thou give me ? ’

Va^-ajravasa is called Aru/d Auddalaki Gautama, the father of
a/eiketas. The father of Avetaketu, another enlightened pupil
(see island. Up. VI, i, i), is also called Arum (Uddalaka, comm.

. aush * U P* h j) Gautama. Avetaketu himself is called Aruweya,
ne. the son of Arum, the grandson of Aru^a, and likewise Audda-
laki. Auddalaki is a son of Uddalaka, but -Sankara (Ka th. Up. I, 11)

takes Auddalaki as possibly the same as Uddalaka. See Brih. Ar
Up. Ill, 6, i.

2 As to ananda, unblessed, see Brfh. Ar. Up. IV a i i • Vap-as
Samh. Up. 3 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. i, p. 311).

Anandagiri explains that the cows meant here are cows no
onger able to drink, to eat, to give milk, and to calve.

05] - B

KATHA-UPANISHAD.

He said it a second and a third time. Then the

father replied (angrily):

‘ I shall give thee 1 unto Death.

(The father, having once said so, though in haste,

had to be true to his word and to sacrifice his son.)

r The son said: ‘ I go as the first, at the head
of many (who have still to die); I go in the midst
of many (who are now dying). What will be the
work of Yama (the ruler of the departed) which

to-day he has to do unto me 2 ?

1 Dadami, I give, with the meaning of the future. Some MSS.

W " te i'lranslate these verses freely, i.e. independently of the commen-
tator, not that I ever despise the-traditional interpretation which e
commentators have preserved to us, but because I t in - a ,
having examined it, we have a right to judge for ourselves Sankara
says that the son, having been addressed by his fat er u o n 0 ,
was sad, and said to himself: ‘ Among many pupils I am the first,
among many middling pupils I am the middlemost, but nowhere am
I the last. Yet though I am such a good pupil, my father has said
that he will consign me unto death. What duty has he to fulfil toward
Yama which he means to fulfil to-day by giving me to him ? 1 here
may be no duty, he may only have spoken in haste. Yet a father s
word must not be broken.’ Having considered this, the son com¬
forted his father, and exhorted him to behave like his forefathers, and
to keep his word. I do not think this view of Sankara s could hare
been the view of the old poet. He might have made the son say that
he was the best or one of the best of his father s pupi s, u ai y
that he was also one of his middling pupils, thus implying that he
never was among the worst. That would be out of keeping " lth
character of Nal-iketas, as drawn by the poet himself. Na^ike as
full of faith and wishes to die, he would be the last to timt o
excuses why he should not die. The second half o t. e verse may
be more doubtful. It may mean what Sankara thinks it means, on y
that we should get thus again an implied complaint of Naliketa
against his father, and this is not in keeping with his character. e
mind of Naiiketas is bent on what is to come, on what he wil see
after death, and on what Yama will do unto him. 1 What has Yama
to do ’ he asks, ‘what can he do, what is it that he will to-day do unto

I ADHYAYA, I VALli, 9.

3

6. ‘ Look back how it was with those who came
before, look forward how it will be with those who
come hereafter. A mortal ripens like corn, like
corn he springs up again V

(Naiiketas enters into the abode of Yama Vai-
vasvata, and there is no one to receive him.
Thereupon one of the attendants of Yama is sup¬
posed to say:)

7. ‘ Fire enters into the houses, when a Brahma^a
enters as a guest * 1 2 . That fire is quenched by this
peace-offering;—bring water, O Vaivasvata 3 !

8. ‘ A Brahma^a that dwells in the house of a
foolish man without receiving food to eat, destroys
his hopes and expectations, his possessions, his
righteousness, his sacred and his good deeds, and
all his sons and cattle 4 .’

(Yama, returning to his house after an absence
of three nights, during which time Na/§iketas had
received no hospitality from him, says :)

9. ‘ O Brahma^a, as thou, a venerable guest, hast

dwelt in my house three nights without eatino-

0 >

me?’ This seems to me consistent with the tenor of the ancient story,
while Sankara’s interpretations and interpolations savour too much
of the middle ages of India.

1 Sasya, corn rather than grass; eia, rj'iov, Ben fey; Welsh haidd,
according to Rhys; different from .rash-pa, ces-pes, Benfey.

2 Cf. Vasish//*a XI, 13 ; Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p. 51.

3 Vaivasvata, a name of Yama, the ruler of the departed. Water
is the first gift to be offered to a stranger who claims hospitality.

4 Here again some words are translated differently from -Sankara.
He explains a.r& as asking for a wished-for object, pratiksha as look¬
ing forward with a view to obtaining an unknown object. Sangata
he takes as reward for intercourse with good people ; sunHta, as
usual, as good and kind speech; ish/a as rewards for sacrifices ;
purta as rewards for public benefits.

B 2

4

KA77/A-UPANISHAD.

\

therefore choose now three boons. Hail to thee!
and welfare to me !’

10. NaZ’iketas said: ‘ O Death, as the first of the
three boons I choose that Gautama, my father, be
pacified, kind, and free from anger towards me; and
that he may know me and greet me, when I shall

have been dismissed by thee.’

11. Yama said: ‘Through my favour Auddalaki
Arum, thy father, will know thee, and be again towards
thee as he was before. He shall sleep peacefully
through the night, and free from anger, after having

seen thee freed from the mouth of death.

12. Na/£iketas said : ‘ In the heaven-world there is
no fear; thou art not there, O Death, and no one is
afraid on account of old age. Leaving behind both
hunger and thirst, and out of the reach of sorrow, all

rejoice in the world of heaven/

13. ‘Thou knowest, O Death, the fire-sacrifice

which leads us to heaven ; tell it to me, for I am
full of faith. Those who live in the heaven-world
reach immortality,—this I ask as my second boon.

14. Yama said : ‘ I tell it thee, learn it from me,
and when thou understandest that fire-sacrifice which
leads to heaven, know, O Na/£iketas, that it is the
attainment of the endless worlds, and their firm sup¬
port, hidden in darkness 1 /

15. Yama then told him that fire-sacrifice, the

beo-innino- of all the worlds 2 , and what bucks are

£> _

1 The commentator translates: ‘ I tell it thee, attend to me who
knows the heavenly fire/ Here the nom. sing, of the paiticiple
would be very irregular, as we can hardly refer it to bravimi. Then,
‘ Know this fire as a means of obtaining the heavenly world, know
that fire as the rest or support of the world, when it assumes the
form of Virag, and as hidden in the heart of men/

2 -Sankara: the first embodied, in the shape of S irag.

I ADHYAYA, I VALLI, 2 1.

5

required for the altar, and how many, and how they
are to be placed. And Na/dketas repeated all as it
had been told to him. Then Mrztyu, being pleased
with him, said again :

16. The generous 1 * , being satisfied, said to him:

‘ 1 S ive thee now another boon; that fire-sacrifice
shall be named after thee, take also this many-
coloured chain V

1 7 - * He who has three times performed this NaTi-
keta rite, and has been united with the three (father,
mother, and teacher), and has performed the three
duties (study, sacrifice, almsgiving) overcomes birth
and death. When he has learnt and understood
this fire, which knows (or makes us know) all that is
born of Brahman 3 , which is venerable and divine,
then he obtains everlasting peace.’

18. ‘ He who knows the three Na/£iketa fires, and
knowing the three, piles up the Na^iketa sacrifice, he,
having first thrown off the chains of death, rejoices
in the world of heaven, beyond the reach of grief.’

19* This, O Na/£iketas, is thy fire which leads
to heaven, and which thou hast chosen as thy second
boon. That fire all men will proclaim 4 . Choose now,
O Na^iketas, thy third boon.’

20. Na/fiketas said : ‘ There is that doubt, when a
man is dead,—some saying, he is; others, he is not.
This I should like to know, taught by thee; this is
the third of my boons.’

2 1. Death said: ‘On this point even the gods

1 Verses 16-18 seem a later addition.

This arises probably from a misunderstanding of verse II q.

3 (Yatavedas.

4 Tavaiva is a later addition, caused by the interpolation of
verses 15-18.

6

KATHA-UPANISHAD.

have doubted formerly ; it is not easy to understand.
That subject is subtle. Choose another boon, O
Na/dketas, do not press me, and let me off that

boon/ ,

22. Na/dketas said : ‘ On this point even the gods

have doubted indeed, and thou, Death, hast declared
it to be not easy to understand, and another teacher
like thee is not to be found -.—surely no other boon

is like unto this/

23. Death said : c Choose sons and grandsons who
shall live a hundred years, herds of cattle, elephants,
gold, and horses. Choose the wide abode of the
earth, and live thyself as many harvests as thou

desirest/

24 ‘ If you can think of any boon equal to that,
choose wealth and long life. Be (king), Na/fciketas,
on the wide earth 1 . I make thee the enjoyer of

all desires/

25. ‘ Whatever desires are difficult to attain among
mortals, ask for them according to thy wish these
fair maidens with their chariots and musical instru
ments,— suc h are indeed not to be obtained by
men,—be waited on by them whom I give to thee,

but do not ask me about dying/

26. Na/dketas said: ‘These things last till to¬
morrow, O Death, for they wear out this vigour of
all the senses. Even the whole of life is short. Keep
thou thy horses, keep dance and song for thyself/

27. ‘No man can be made happy by wealth. Shall
we possess wealth, when we see thee ? Shall we live,

1 Mahabhumau, on the great earth, has been explained also by
maha bhumau, be great on the earth. It is doubtful, however,
whether maha for mahan could be admitted in the Upanishads, an
whether it would not be easier to write mahan bhumau.

I ADHYAYA, I VALLf, 29.

7

as long as thou rulest ? Only that boon (which I
have chosen) is to be chosen by me.’

28. ‘ What mortal, slowly decaying here below, and
knowing, after having approached them, the freedom
from decay enjoyed by the immortals, would delight
in a long life, after he has pondered on the pleasures
which arise from beauty and love 1 ? ’

29. ‘No, that on which there is this doubt, O Death,
tell us what there is in that great Hereafter. Na/§i-
ketas does not choose another boon but that which
enters into the hidden world/

1 A very obscure verse. -Sankara gives a various reading kva
tadastha/^ for kvadha/zstha//, in the sense of‘given to these pleasures/
which looks like an emendation. I have changed a.gfryatam into
a^aryatam, and take it for an ace. sing., instead of a gen. plur.,
which could hardly be governed by upetya.

8

ItATtfA-UPANISHAD.

Second Valli.

X. Death said : ‘The good is one thing, the pleasant
another; these two, having different objects, chain
a man. It is well with him who clings to the good ;
he who chooses the pleasant, misses his end/

2. ‘ The good and the pleasant approach man :
the wise goes round about them and distinguishes
them. Yea, the wise prefers the good to the
pleasant, but the fool chooses the pleasant through
greed and avarice/

3. 4 Thou, O Na/Cdketas, after pondering all plea¬
sures that are or seem delightful, hast dismissed
them all. Thou hast not gone into the road 1 that
leadeth to wealth, in which many men perish/

4. ‘ Wide apart and leading to different points are
these two, ignorance, and what is known as wisdom.

I believe Na^iketas to be one who desires know¬
ledge, for even many pleasures did not tear thee *
away 2 /

5. ‘ Fools dwelling in darkness, wise in their own
conceit, and puffed up with vain knowledge, go
round and round, staggering to and fro, like blind
men led by the blind 3 /

6. ‘ The Hereafter never rises before the eyes of
the careless child, deluded by the delusion of wealth.

“ This is the world,” he thinks, “ there is no other— j
thus he falls again and again under my sway/

7. ‘ He (the Self) of whom many are not even able

1 Cf. I, 16.

2 The commentator explains lolupanta/z by vikMedam kntavan-
ta h. Some MSS. read lolupante and lolupanti, but one expects
either lolupyante or lolupati.

3 Cf. Mu nd. Up. II, 8 .

I ADIIYAYA, 2 VALLf, II.

9

to hear, whom many, even when they hear of him

do not comprehend; wonderful is a man, when found’

who is able to teach him (the Self); wonderful is

he who comprehends him, when taught by an able
teacher V

8. ‘ That (Self), when taught by an inferior man,

is not easy to be known, even though often thought

upon , unless it be taught by another, there is no

way to it, for it is inconceivably smaller than what
is small V

9- That doctrine is not to be obtained 3 4 5 by argu¬
ment, but when it is declared by another, then O
dearest, it is easy to understand. Thou hast obtained
it now 6 ; thou art truly a man of true resolve. May
we have always an inquirer like thee 6 !’

10 . Na/fiketas said : ‘ I know that what is called a
treasure is transient, for that eternal is not obtained
by things which are not eternal. Hence the NUii-
keta fire (-sacrifice) has been laid by me (first); then,
by means of transient things, I have obtained what
is not transient (the teaching of Yama) V

11. Yama said: ‘Though thou hadst seen the
fulfilment of all desires, the foundation of the world,
the endless rewards of good deeds, the shore where

3 g Eha S- GIta n > 2 9- 2 Cf. Mu nd. Up. II, 4 .

I read a;mprama7*at. Other interpretations : If it is taught by
one who is identified with the Self, then there is no uncertainty. If
it has been taught as identical with ourselves, then there is no per¬
ception of anything else. If it has been (aught by one who is
Identified with it, then there is no failure in understanding it (agati).

5 A P ane ya; should it be apanaya, as afterwards suy/fanava ?
Because you insist on my teaching it to thee.

6 Unless no is negative, for Yama, at first, does not like to com-
mumcate his knowledge.

The words in parentheses have been added in order to remove
the otherwise contradictory character of the two lines.

IO

KAFtfA-UPANISHAD.

there is no fear, that which is magnified by praise,
the wide abode, the rest 1 , yet being wise thou hast

with firm resolve dismissed it all.’

12. ‘ The wise who, by means of meditation on his
Self, recognises the Ancient, who is difficult to be
seen, who has entered into the dark, who is hidden
in the cave, who dwells in the abyss, as God, he

indeed leaves joy and sorrow far behind 2 3 /

13. ‘ A mortal who has heard this and embiaced
it, who has separated from it all qualities, and has
thus reached the subtle Being, rejoices, because he
has obtained what is a cause for rejoicing. The
house (of Brahman) is open, I believe, O Na/’iketas.

14. Na/dketas said: ‘That which thou seest as
neither this nor that, as neither effect nor cause, as
neither past nor future, tell me that.

15. Yama said: ‘That word (or place) which all
the Vedas record, which all penances proclaim, which
men desire when they live as religious students, that

word I tell thee briefly, it is Om V

16. ‘ That (imperishable) syllable means Brahman,
that syllable means the highest (Brahman), he who
knows that syllable, whatever he desires, is his.

17. ‘ This is the best support, this is the highest
support; he who knows that support is magnified
in the world of Brahma/

18. ‘The knowing (Self) is not born, it dies not;
it sprang from nothing, nothing sprang from it. The

1 Cf. XMnd. Up. VII, 12, 2.

2 Yama seems here to propound the lower Brahman only, not }et
the highest. Deva, God, can only be that as what the Old, i. e. the
Self in the heart, is to be recognised. It would therefore mean, be
who finds God or the Self in his heart. See afterwards, verse 21.

3 Cf. -SVet. Up. IV, 9; Bhag. Gita VIII, n.

I ADHYAYAj 2 VALLI, 25.

I I

Ancient is unborn, eternal, everlasting; he is not
killed, though the body is killed 1 /

19. ‘If the killer thinks that he kills, if the killed
thinks that he is killed, they do not understand; for
this one does not kill, nor is that one killed/

20. The Self 2 , smaller than small, greater than
great, is hidden in the heart of that creature. A
man who is free from desires and free from grief, sees
the majesty of the Self by the grace of the Creator 3 /

2 1 • ‘ Though sitting still, he walks far; though lying
down,he goes everywhere 4 . Who, save myself, is able
to know that God who rejoices and rejoices not ?’

22. ‘ The wise who knows the Self as bodiless
within the bodies, as unchanging among changing
things, as great and omnipresent, does never grieve/

23. ‘That Self 5 cannot be gained by the Veda,
nor by understanding, nor by much learning. He
whom the Self chooses, by him the Self can be
gained. The Self chooses him (his body) as his own/

24. But he who has not first turned away from
his wickedness, who is not tranquil, and subdued,
or whose mind is not at rest, he can never obtain
the Self (even) by knowledge/

, - 5 * * Who then knows where He is, He to whom

the Brahmans and Kshatriyas are (as it were) but
food 6 , and death itself a condiment ?’

1 As to verses 18 and 19, see Bhag. Gita II, 19, 20.

Cf. *Svet. Up. Ill, 20; Taitt. Ar. X, 12, 1.

3 The commentator translates ‘ through the tranquillity of the
senses/ i. e. dhatuprasadat, taking prasada in the technical sense
of samprasada. As to kratu, desire, or rather, will, see Brih. Ar.
IV > 4 , 5 .

4 Cf. Tal. Up. 5.

^ Cf. I, 7-9; Mwtd. Up. Ill, 2, 3; Bhag. Gita I, 53.

In whom all disappears, and in whom even death is swallowed up.

1

I 2

KA 7 WA-UPANISHAD.

Third Valli.

1. ‘There are the two 1 2 3 , drinking their reward in
the world of their own works, entered into the cave
(of the heart), dwelling on the highest summit (the
ether in the heart). Those who know Brahman call
them shade and light; likewise, those householders
who perform the TrHaHketa sacrifice.

2. ‘May we be able to master that NaXdketa rite

which is a bridge for sacrificers ; also that which is l
the highest, imperishable Brahman for those who
wish to cross over to the fearless shore V . i

3. f Know the Self to be sitting in the chariot,
the body to be the chariot, the intellect (buddhi)
the charioteer, and the mind the reins V

4. ‘ The senses they call the horses, the objects of ,

the senses their roads. When he (the Highest Self)
is in union with the body, the senses, and the mind,
then wise people call him the Enjoyer. . :

5. ‘ He who has no understanding and whose mind

1 The two are explained as the higher and lower Brahman, the
former being the light, the latter the shadow. Hit a is explained
as reward, and connected with sukrzta, lit. good deeds, but fre
quently used in the sense of svakrzta, ones own good and e\il.
deeds. The difficulty is, how the highest Brahman can be said to
drink the reward (rztapa) of former deeds, as it is above all woiks and ^
above all rewards. The commentator explains it away as a meta¬
phorical expression, as we often speak of many, when w e mean one.,
(Cf. Mu nd. Up. Ill, 1, 1.) I have joined sukn'tasya with loke, loka
meaning the world, i.e. the state, the environment, which we made
to ourselves by our former deeds.

2 These two verses may be later additions. ;

3 The simile of the chariot has some points of similarity with the
well-known passage in Plato’s Phaedros, but Plato did not boirow
this simile from the Brahmans, as little as Xenophon need have
consulted our Upanishad (II, 2) in writing his prologue of Prodikos.

I ADHYAYA, 3 VALLI, 14.

13

(the reins) is never firmly held, his senses (horses) are
unmanageable, like vicious horses of a charioteer/

6. ‘ But he who has understanding and whose mind
is always firmly held, his senses are under control,
like good horses of a charioteer/

7. ‘ He who has no understanding, who is unmind¬
ful and always impure, never reaches that place but
enters into the round of births/

8. ‘ But he who has understanding, who is mindful
and always pure, reaches indeed that place, from
whence he is not born again/

9. ‘ But he who has understanding for his cha¬
rioteer, and who holds the reins of the mind, he

reaches the end of his journey, and that is the
highest place of Vishmi/

j 10. ‘Beyond the senses there are the objects, beyond
the objects there is the mind, beyond the mind there
is the intellect, the Great Self is beyond the intellect/
n. ‘ Beyond the Great there is the Undeveloped,
beyond the Undeveloped there is the Person

(purusha). Beyond the Person there is nothing_

this is the goal, the highest road/

12. That Self is hidden in all beings and does not
shine forth, but it is seen by subtle seers through
their sharp and subtle intellect/

13. A wise man should keep down speech and
;rnincl 1 ; he should keep them within the Self which
is knowledge; he should keep knowledge within the
‘Self which is the Great; and he should keep that
(the Great) within the Self which is the Quiet/

14* ‘Rise, awake! having obtained your boons 2 ,

2 ^ ai ^ ara interprets, he should keep down speech in the mind.
Comm., excellent teachers.

KAra'A-UPANISHAD.

understand them! The sharp edge of a razor is
difficult to pass over; thus the wise say the path (to

the Self) is hard. . #

15. ‘ He who has perceived that which is without

sound, without touch, without form, without decay,
without taste, eternal, without smell, without begin¬
ning, without end, beyond the Great, and unchange¬
able, is freed from the jaws of death.

16. ‘ A wise man who has repeated or heard the

ancient story of NaTiketas told by Death, is magni¬
fied in the world of Brahman.

17. ‘And he who repeats this greatest mystery in 1

an assembly of Brahmans, or full of devotion at the
time of the .Sraddha sacrifice, obtains thereby infinite
rewards.'

II adhyaya, 4 VALLI, 6.

J 5

SECOND ADHYAYA.

Fourth VallL

i. Death said: ‘ The Self-existent pierced the

openings (of the senses) so that they turn forward :
therefore man looks forward, not backward into
himself. Some wise man, however, with his eyes

closed and wishing for immortality, saw the Self
behind/

2.. ‘ Children follow after outward pleasures, and
fall into the snare of wide-spread death. Wise men
only, knowing the nature of what is immortal, do

not look for anything stable here among th’ino-s
unstable.’ &

3. ‘ That by which we know form, taste, smell,
sounds, and loving touches, by that also we know

what exists besides. This is that (which thou hast
asked for)/

4 - ‘ The wise, when he knows that that by which
he perceives all objects in sleep or in waking is the
great omnipresent Self, grieves no more/

5. ‘ He who knows this living soul which eats
honey (perceives objects) as being the Self, always
near, the Lord of the past and the future, hence¬
forward fears no more. This is that/

6. ‘ He who (knows) him 1 who was born first from

1 The first manifestation of Brahman, commonly called Hira/*ya-
garbha, which springs from the tapas of Brahman. Afterwards only
water and the rest of the elements become manifested. The text of
these verses is abrupt, possibly corrupt. The two accusatives,
tishAfantam and tish/^antim, seem to me to require veda to be
supplied from verse 4.

16

K A TH A- U P AN IS H A D.

the brooding heat 1 (for he was born before the water),
who, entering into the heart, abides therein, and was
perceived from the elements. This is that.’

‘(J-Jg who knows) Aditi also, who is one with
all deities, who arises with Prawa (breath or Hirawya-
garbha), who, entering into the heart, abides therein,
and was born from the elements. This is that.

8. ‘ There is Agni (fire), the all-seeing, hidden in
the two fire-sticks, well-guarded like a child (in the
womb) by the mother, day after day to be adored by
men when they awake and bring oblations. 1 his

is that.’

9. ‘ And that whence the sun rises, and whither
it o-oes to set, there all the Devas are contained, and

O 7 J

no one goes beyond. This is that".

10. ‘What is here (visible in the world), the same
is there (invisible in Brahman); and what is there,
the same is here. He who sees any difference here
(between Brahman and the world), goes from death

to death.’

11. ‘Even by the mind this (Brahman) is to be
obtained, and then there is no difference whatsoever.
He goes from death to death who sees any difference

here.’

12. ‘ The person (purusha), of the size of a thumb 3 ,
stands in the middle of the Self (body ?), as lord of
the past and the future, and henceforward fears
no more. This is that.

13. ‘That person, of the size of a thumb, is like
a light without smoke, lord of the past and the
future, he is the same to-day and to-morrow. This
is that/

1 Cf. snsh/ikrama.

3 -SVet. Up. Ill, 13.

2 Cf. V, 8.

II ADHYAYA, 4 VALLi, 15.

14. As rain-water that has fallen on a mountain-
ridge runs down the rocks on all sides, thus does he,

who sees a difference between qualities, run after
them on all sides.’

15. ‘As pure water poured into pure water remains

the same, thus, O Gautama, is the Self of a thinker
who knows/

C

1 8

KATtfA-UPANISHAD.

Fifth Valli.

i . ‘ There is a town with eleven 1 gates belonging
to the Unborn (Brahman), whose thoughts are never
crooked. He who approaches it, grieves no more,
and liberated (from all bonds of ignorance) becomes
free. This is that.’

2. ‘ He (Brahman) 2 is the swan (sun), dwelling in the
bright heaven; he is the Vasu (air), dwelling in the
sky; he is the sacrihcer (fire), dwelling on the hearth;
he is the guest (Soma), dwelling in the sacrificial jar,
he dwells in men, in gods (vara), in the sacrifice {i its.),
in heaven; he is born in the water, on earth, in the
sacrifice (^zta), on the mountains ; he is the True
and the Great/

3. ‘He (Brahman) it is who sends up the breath
(pra^a), and who throws back the breath (apana).
All the Devas (senses) worship him, the adorable (or
the dwarf), who sits in the centre/

4. ‘ When that incorporated (Brahman), who dwells
in the body, is torn away and freed from the body,
what remains then ? This is that.

5. ‘ No mortal lives by the breath that goes up and
by the breath that goes down. We live by another,

in whom these two repose.

6. ‘Well then, O Gautama, I shall tell thee this
mystery, the old Brahman, and what happens to the
Self, after reaching death/

1 Seven apertures in the head, the navel, two below, and the one
at the top of the head through which the Self escapes. Cf. *SVet.
Up. Ill, 18 ; Bhag. Gita V, 13.

2 Cf. Rig-veda IV, 40, 5.

II ADHYAYA, 5 VALLI, 13.

19

7. ‘ Some enter the womb in order to have a body,
as organic beings, others go into inorganic matter,
according to their work and according to their
knowledge V

8. He, the highest Person, who is awake in us
while we are asleep, shaping one lovely sight after
another, that indeed is the Bright, that is Brahman,
that alone is called the Immortal. All worlds are
contained in it, and no one goes beyond. This
is that V

9. ‘ As the one fire, after it has entered the world,
though one, becomes different according to whatever
it burns, thus the one Self within all things becomes
different, according to whatever it enters, and exists
also without V

10. As the one air, after it has entered the world,
though one, becomes different according to whatever
it enters, thus the one Self within all things becomes
different, according to whatever it enters, and exists
also without/

11. ‘ As the sun, the eye of the whole world, is not
contaminated by the external impurities seen by the
eyes, thus the one Self within all things is never
contaminated by the misery of the world, being
himself without V

12. c There is one ruler, the Self within all things,
who makes the one form manifold. The wise who
perceive him within their Self, to them belongs
eternal happiness, not to others 5 /

13. ‘There is one eternal thinker, thinking non-

1 Cf. Brih. Ar. II, 2, 13. 2 Cf. IV, 9; VI, 1.

8 Cf. Bnh. Ar. II, 5, 19. . 4 Cf. Bhag. Gita XIII, 52.

6 Cf. *$Vet. Up. VI, 12.

20

KA 777 A-UPANISHAD.

eternal thoughts, who, though one, fulfils the desires
of many. The wise who perceive him within their
Self, to them belongs eternal peace, not to others 1 .

14. ‘They perceive that highest indescribable
pleasure, saying, This is that. How then can I
understand it? Has it its own light, or does it

reflect light?’

15. ‘ The sun does not shine there, nor the moon
and the stars, nor these lightnings, and much less
this fire. When he shines, everything shines after
him ; by his light all this is lighted 2 .’

1 Cf. Xvet. Up. VI, 13.

2 Cf. Svet. Up. VI, 14 ; Mu nd. Up. II, 2, 10 ;

Bhag. Gita XV, 6.

II ADHYAYA, 6 VALLI, 4.

2 1

Sixth Valli.

1. There is that ancient tree 1 , whose roots grow
upward and whose branches grow downward ;—that 2
indeed is called the Bright 3 , that is called Brahman,
that alone is called the Immortal 4 . All worlds are

contained in it, and no one goes beyond. This
is that/

2. ‘ Whatever there is, the whole world, when gone
forth (from the Brahman), trembles in its breath 5 .
That Brahman is a great terror, like a drawn sword.
Those who know it become immortal/

3. From terror of Brahman fire burns, from terror
the sun burns, from terror Indra and Vayu, and
Death, as the fifth, run away 6 7 /

4 - If a man could not understand it before the
falling asunder of his body, then he has to take body
again in the worlds of creation V

1 The fig-tree which sends down its branches so that they strike
root and form new stems, one tree growing into a complete forest

2 Cf. Bhag. Gita XV, 1-3. 3 c [ v? 8> '

4 The commentator says that the tree is the world, and’its root

is Brahman, but there is nothing to support this view in the original,
■where tree, roots, and branches are taken together as representing
the Brahman in its various manifestations.

5 According to the commentator, in the highest Brahman

6 Cf. Taitt. Up. II, 8, 1.

7 The commentator translates: ‘ If a man is able to understand
(Biahman), then even before the decay of his body, he is liberated.
If he is not able to understand it, then he has to take body again
in the created worlds/ I doubt whether it is possible to supply so
much, and should prefer to read iha £en nlrakad, though I find it

nfficult to explain how so simple a text should have been mis¬
understood and corrupted.

22

KATtfA-UPANISHAD.

5. ‘As in a mirror, so (Brahman may be seen clearly)
here in this body ; as in a dream, in the world of
the Fathers; as in the water, he is seen about in the
world of the Gandharvas ; as in light and shade ', in
the world of Brahma.’

6 . ‘ Having understood that the senses are distinct 1 2 3 * 5
(from the Atman), and that their rising and setting
(their waking and sleeping) belongs to them in their
distinct existence (and not to the Atman), a wise
man grieves no more.’

7. ‘Beyond the senses is the mind, beyond the
mind is the highest (created) Being", higher than
that Being is the Great Self, higher than the Great,

the highest Undeveloped.’

8. ‘ Beyond the Undeveloped is the Person, the

all-pervading and entirely imperceptible. Every
creature that knows him is liberated, and obtains
immortality/

9. ‘His form is not to be seen, no one beholds
him with the eye. He is imagined by the heart,
by wisdom, by the mind. Those who know this, are

immortal V

10. ‘When the five instruments of knowledge stand
still together with the mind, and when the intellect
does not move, that is called the highest state.

11 ‘This, the firm holding back of the senses, is
what is called Yoga. He must be free from thought¬
lessness then, for Yoga comes and goes J .

1 Roer: ‘ As in a picture and in the sunshine.

2 They arise from the elements, ether, &c.

3 Buddhi or intellect, cf. Ill, 10.

1 Much better in Svet. Up. IV, 20 : ‘ Those who know him by the
heart as being in the heart, and by the mind, are immortal.’

5 Sankara explains apyaya by apaya.

II ADHYAYA, 6 VALLt, 17.

23

12. He (the Self) cannot be reached by speech,
by mind, or by the eye. How can it be apprehended
except by him who says : “ He is ? ” ’

13. ‘By the words “He is,” is he to be apprehended,
and by (admitting) the reality of both (the invisible
Brahman and the visible world, as coming from
Brahman). When he has been apprehended by the
words “ He is,” then his reality reveals itself.’

14. 'When all desires that dwell in his heart cease,
then the mortal becomes immortal, and obtains
Brahman.’

I 5* ‘When all the ties 1 2 of the heart are severed
here on earth, then the mortal becomes immortal—
here ends the teaching V

16. ‘ There are a hundred and one arteries of the
heart 3 , one of them penetrates the crown of the head 4 .
Moving upwards by it, a man (at his death) reaches
the Immortal 5 ; the other arteries serve for departing
in different directions/

17. ‘ The Person not larger than a thumb, the inner
Self, is always settled in the heart of men 6 . Let a
man draw that Self forth from his body with steadi-

1 Ignorance, passion, &c. Cf. Mu nd. Up. II, 1, 10; II, 2, 9.

2 The teaching of the Vedanta extends so far and no farther.
(Cf. Prama Up. VI, 7.) What follows has reference, according to the
commentator, not to him who knows the highest Brahman, for he
becomes Brahman at once and migrates no more; but to him who
does not know the highest Brahman fully, and therefore migrates to
the Brahmaloka, receiving there the reward for his partial knowledge
and for his good works.

3 Cf. WMnd. Up. VIII, 6 , 6 .

4 It passes out by the head.

The commentator says : He rises through the sun (Mu nd. Up.

I, 2, 11) to a world in which he enjoys some kind of immortality.

6 *SVet. Up. Ill, 13.

24

KA77JA-UPANISHAD.

ness, as one draws the pith from a reed \ Let
him know that Self as the Bright, as the Immortal;
yes, as the Bright, as the Immortal 1 2 .’

18. Having received this knowledge taught by
Death and the whole rule of Yoga (meditation),
Na/£iketa became free from passion 3 and death, and
obtained Brahman. Thus it will be with another
also who knows thus what relates to the Self.

19. May He protect us both! May He enjoy us
both ! May we acquire strength together ! May our
knowledge become bright! May we never quarrel 4 !
Om ! Peace! peace ! peace !' Hari h, Om !

1 Roer : ‘ As from a painter’s brush a fibre.’

2 This repetition marks, as usual, the end of a chapter.

3 Virata, free from vice and virtue. It may have been vi^ara,
free from old age. See, however, Mu nd. Up. I, 2, n.

4 Cf. Taitt. Up. Ill, 1; III, 10, note.

MUAAAKA-UPANISHAD.

MUATAAKA-UPANISHAD.

FIRST MUZVZ 7 AKA.

First Khaada.

1. Brahma was the first of the Devas, the maker
of the universe, the preserver of the world. He
told the knowledge of Brahman, the foundation of
all knowledge, to his eldest son Atharva k

2. Whatever Brahma told Atharvan, that know¬
ledge of Brahman Atharvan formerly told to Arigir ;
he told it to Satyavaha Bharadva^a, and Bharadva^a
told it in succession to Arigiras.

3. .Saunaka, the great householder, approached
Ahgiras respectfully and asked : ‘ Sir, what is that
through which, if it is known, everything else becomes
known ? ’

4. He said to him : ‘ Two kinds of knowledge must

o

be known, this is what all who know Brahman tell us,
the higher and the lower knowledge/

o o

5. ‘ The lower knowledge is the Akg-veda, Ya^'ur-
veda, Sama-veda, Atharva-veda, Siksha (phonetics) }
Kalpa (ceremonial), Vyakarazza (grammar), Nirukta
(etymology), AVzandas (metre), ^yotisha (astronomy)

1 The change between Atharva and Atharvan, like that between
NaX’iketas and Na/bketa, shows the freedom of the phraseology of
the Upanishad, and cannot be used for fixing the date of the con¬
stituent elements of the Upanishad.

2 Other MSS. add here itihasa -purazza-nyaya-mimazzzsa-dharma-
fastraz/i.

28

MU2VDAKA-UPANISHAD.

but the higher knowledge is that by which the
Indestructible (Brahman) is apprehended.’

6. ‘ That which cannot be seen, nor seized, which
has no family and no caste 1 , no eyes nor ears, no
hands nor feet ? the eternal, the omnipresent (all-
pervading), infinitesimal, that which is imperishable,
that it is which the wise regard as the source of
all beings.’

7. ‘As the spider sends forth and draws in its
thread, as plants grow on the earth, as from every
man hairs spring forth on the head and the body, thus
does everything arise here from the Indestructible.

8. ‘ The Brahman swells by means of brooding
(penance) 2 ; hence is produced matter (food); from
matter breath 3 , mind, the true 4 , the worlds (seven),
and from the works (performed by men in the
worlds), the immortal (the eternal effects, rewards,
and punishments of works).

1 I translate varzza by caste on account of its conjunction with
gotra. The commentator translates, ‘ without origin and without
qualities/ We should say that which belongs to no genus or
species.

2 I have translated tap as by brooding, because this is the only

word in English which combines the two meanings of warmth and
thought. Native authorities actually admit two roots, one tap,
to burn, the other tap, to meditate; see commentary on Para-
^ara-smrzti, p. 39 ^ (MS. Podl.), I apa/z a/’andiayazzadirh-

pezzahara var^anam. Nanu Vyasena tapo nyatha smaiyate, tapa/z
svadharma-vartitvazzz ^au^azzz sahganibarhazzam iti; nayazzz dosha^,
krzM/zrader api svadharmavheshat. Tapa sazzztapa ity asmad dhator
utpannasya tapa/z-sabdasya deha^oshazze vz'zttir mukhya.. . . Yat
tu tatraivoktazzz, ko , y am moksha/z kathazzz tena sazzzsaram prati-
pannavan ity filo&mam artha^zzas tapa^ .razzzsanti pazz^fita iti so nya
eva tapa/z^abda/z, tapa alo/fcana ity asmad dhator utpanna/z.

3 Hirazzyagarbha, the living world as a whole. Comm.

4 Satya, if we compare Ka//z. VI, 7 and III, 10, seems to mean
buddhi. Here it is explained by the five elements.

I MUM AKA, I KHAMA, 9.

9 - ‘From him who perceives all and who knows
all, whose brooding- (penance) consists of knowledo- e
from him (the highest Brahman) is born that Brah¬
man ', name, form 1 2 , and matter (food).’

1 Hirawyagarbha. Comm.

- NSmarftpam, a very frequent concept in Buddhistic literature.

MUiVDAKA-UPANISHAD.

30

Second Khawda.

1 This is the truth 1 : the sacrificial works which
they (the poets) saw in the hymns (of the Veda)
have been performed in many ways in the 1 reta
aae 2 Practise 3 them diligently, ye lovers of truth
this is your path that leads to the world of good

2 When the fire is lighted and the flame flickers,
let a man offer his oblations between the two por¬
tions of melted butter, as an offering with faith

If a man s Agnihotra sacrifice 5 is not followe

n

O'

> In the beginning of the second Kha^a the lower knowledge
is first described, referring to the performance of sacrifices and
other good deeds. The reward of them is perishable, and iheiefo

a desire is awakened after the higher knowledge.

2 The Treta age is frequently mentioned as the age of sacn ces.

I should prefer, however, to take treta in the sense of trayi
vidya, and santata as developed, because the idea that the T.eta
ao-e was distinguished by its sacrifices, seems to me of later ongin
Even the theory of the four ages or yugas, though known m the A..
Brahmana, is not frequently alluded to in the older Upan,shads.

See Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 283. .

2 The termination tha for ta looks suspiciously Buddhistic; see

• Sanskrit Texts discovered in Japan,’ J. R. A. S. 1880, p_ l 8 °-
4 Svakrna and suknta are constantly interchanged. They mean
the same, good deeds, or deeds performed by oneself and believe

^Aftht Agnihotra, the first of all sacrifices, and the type of
many others, two portions of tgya. are sacrificed on the nght a„
left side of the Ahavanlya altar. The place between the two s
called the Avapasthfina, and here the oblations to the gods a.e to
be offered. There are two oblations m the morning to uiya
Pra^apati, two in the evening to Agm and Pra^apati. L er sac
fices, such as the Danra and Phnzamasa, and those mentioned
verse 3, are connected with the Agnihotra.

I MUJVBAKA, 2 KHAOTA, 7.

by the new-moon and full-moon sacrifices, by the
four-months’ sacrifices, and by the harvest sacrifice,
if it is unattended by guests, not offered at all, or
without the Vairvadeva ceremony, or not offered
according to rule, then it destroys his seven worlds 1

4- Kali (black), Karali (terrific), Mano-ava (swift
as thought), Sulohita (very red), Sudhumravami
(purple), Sphulingmi (sparkling), and the brilliant
Virvarupi 1 (having all forms), all these playing about
are called the seven tongues (of fire).

5. If a man performs his sacred works when these
flames are shining, and the oblations follow at the
right time, then they lead him as sun-rays to where
the one Lord of the Devas dwells.

6. Come hither, come hither! the brilliant obla¬
tions say to him, and carry the sacrificer on the rays
of the sun, while they utter pleasant speech and
praise him, saying: ‘ This is thy holy Brahma-world
(bvarga), gained by thy good works/

7- But frail, in truth, are those boats, the sacri¬
fices, the eighteen, in which this lower ceremonial
has been told 3 . Fools who praise this as the highest

good, are subject again and again to old age and
death.

Th e seven worlds form the rewards of a pious sacrificer, the
first is Bhu/r, the last Satya. The seven worlds may also be ex-

LT 6 , S . lll ° worlds of ‘he father, grandfather, and great-grand-
sacrifikr himse S lf. n ’ ^ SnmdSOn ’ and S reat -g™dson, and of the

Or VirvanUi, if there is any authority for this reading in Mahi-
_aia s commentary to the Va^as. Sar»hita XVII, 79 . The Rajah
esmah s edition has vuvaruki, which is also the reading adopted
by Rammohun Roy, see Complete Works, vol. i, p. 579.

the J •« COmmentator takes the eighteen for the sixteen priests,

a satisf" and h ‘ S Wlfe ' But SUch an ex P Ianat ion hardly yields
actory meaning, nor does plava mean perishable.

MUiVDAKA-UPANISHAD.

8. Fools dwelling in darkness, wise in their own
conceit, and puffed up with vain knowledge, go round
and round staggering to and fro, like blind men le

by the blind 1 . .

9. Children, when they have long lived in igno¬
rance, consider themselves happy. Because those
who depend on their good works are, owing to their
passions, improvident, they fall and become miserab e
when their life (in the world which they had gained

by their good works) is finished.

10. Considering sacrifice and good works as the
best, these fools know no higher good, and having
enjoyed (their reward) on the height of heaven
trained by good works, they enter again this world

or a lower one. ,

11. But those 2 3 who practise penance and laitn

in the forest, tranquil, wise, and living on alms,
depart free from passion through the sun to where
that immortal Person dwells whose nature is impe-

rishable

12. Let a Brahmawa, after he has examined all
these worlds which are gained by works, acquire
freedom from all desires. Nothing that is eterna
(not made) can be gained by what is not eternal
(made). Let him, in order to understand this, take

1 Cf. Ka ih. Up. II, 5. r .

2 According to the commentator, this verse refers to those who
know the uselessness of sacrifices and have attained to a knowlec1 e
of the qualified Brahman. They live in the forest as Vanaprasthas
and Samnyasins, practising tapas, i.e. whatever is proper or
state, and rraddhfi, i. e. a knowledge of Hira«yagarbha. The wise
are the learned Gnhasthas, while those who live on alms aie tho

who have forsaken their family. . , .. ..

3 That person is Hira/zyagarbha. His immortality is re

only, it lasts no longer than the world (sawsara).

33

I MUJVDAKA, 2 KHAJfflA, I 3.

fuel in his hand and approach a Guru who is learned
and dwells entirely in Brahman.

13. To that pupil who has approached him re¬
spectfully, whose thoughts are not troubled by any
desires, and who has obtained perfect peace, the
wise teacher truly told that knowledge of Brah¬
man through which he knows the eternal and true
Person.

[15]

D

34

M \JND AK A-U P AN ISH AD.

SECOND MUJVZ 7 AKA.

First YLhanda.

, This is the truth. As from a blazing tire sparks,
beino- like unto fire 1 , fiy forth a thousandfold, thus are
various beings brought forth from the Imperishable,

my friend, and return thither also.

2. That heavenly Person is without body, he is
both without and within, not produced, without
breath and without mind, pure, higher than the higi

Imperishable' 2 . .

3. From him (when entering on creation) is born

breath, mind, and all organs of sense, ether, air, light,

water, and the earth, the support of all.

4. Fire (the sky) is his head, his eyes the sun and
the moon, the quarters his ears, his speech the Vedas
disclosed, the wind his breath, his heart the universe;
from his feet came the earth ; he is indeed the inner

Self of all things 3 . ,

5. From him comes Agni (fire) 1 , the sun being the

fuel; from the moon (Soma) comes rain (I arcanya),
from the earth herbs; and man gives seed unto the
woman. Thus many beings are begotten from the

Person (purusha).

6. From him come the Rik ,, the Saman, the

1 Cf. Brz'h. Ar. II, 1, 20. _

2 The high Imperishable is here the creative, the higher the non-
creative Brahman.

3 Called Vishnu and Vii% by the commentators.

< There are five fires, those of heaven, rain, earth, man, and

woman. Comm.

II MUNDAKA, I K HAND A, TO.

35

Ya^ush, the Diksha (initiatory rites), all sacrifices
and offering's of animals, and the fees bestowed on
priests, the year too, the sacrificer, and the worlds,
in which the moon shines brightly and the sun.

7 * From him the many Devas too are begotten,
the Sadhyas (genii), men, cattle, birds, the up and
down breathings, rice and corn (for sacrifices), penance,
faith, truth, abstinence, and law.

8 . The seven senses (pra;/a) also spring from him,
the seven lights (acts of sensation), the seven kinds
of fuel (objects by which the senses are lighted), the
seven sacrifices (results of sensation), these seven
worlds (the places of the senses, the worlds deter¬
mined by the senses) in which the senses move,
which rest in the cave (of the heart), and are placed
there seven and seven.

9 - Hence come the seas and all the mountains,
from him flow the rivers of every kind ; hence come
all herbs and the juice through which the inner Self
subsists with the elements.

to. The Person is all this, sacrifice, penance, Brah¬
man, the highest immortal ; he who knows this hidden
in the cave (of the heart), he, O friend, scatters the
knot of ignorance here on earth.

D 2

MUiVDAKA-UPANISlIAD.

Second Khaat>a.

1. Manifest, near, moving in the cave (of the heart)
is the great Being. In it everything is centred which
ye know as moving, breathing, and blinking, as being
and not-being, as adorable, as the best, that is beyond

the understanding of creatures.

2. That which is brilliant, smaller than small, that
on which the worlds are founded and their inhabit¬
ants, that is the indestructible Brahman, that is the
breath, speech, mind ; that is the true, that is the
immortal. That is to be hit. Hit it, O friend!

3. Having taken the Upanishad as the bow, as
the o-reat weapon, let him place on it the arrow,
sharpened by devotion! Then having drawn it with
a thought directed to that which is, hit the mark, O
friend, viz. that which is the Indestructible!

4. Om is the bow, the Self is the arrow, Brahman
is called its aim. It is to be hit by a man who is
not thoughtless; and then, as the arrow (becomes one
with the target), he will become one with Brahman.

5. In him the heaven, the earth, and the sky are
woven, the mind also with all the senses. Know
him alone as the Self, and leave off other words!

He is the bridge of the Immortal.

6. He moves about becoming manifold within
the heart where the arteries meet, like spokes
fastened to the nave. Meditate on the Self as
Om! Hail to you, that you may cross beyond (the
sea of) darkness!

7. He who understands all and who knows all, he
to whom all this glory in the world belongs, the
Self, is placed in the ether, in the heavenly city of

II MUiVDAKA, 2 KHA2V.DA, II.

37

Brahman (the heart). He assumes the nature of
mind, and becomes the guide of the body of the
senses. He subsists in food, in close proximity to
the heart. The wise who understand this, behold
the Immortal which shines forth full of bliss.

8 . The fetter of the heart is broken, all doubts
are solved, all his works (and their effects) perish
when He has been beheld who is high and low (cause
and effect ) 1 .

9 - In the highest golden sheath there is the
Brahman without passions and without parts. That
is pure, that is the light of lights, that is it which they
know who know the Self.

JO. The 2 sun does not shine there, nor the moon
and the stars, nor these lightnings, and much less
this fire. When he shines, everything shines after
him; by his light all this is lighted 3 .

11. That immortal Brahman is before, that Brah¬
man is behind, that Brahman is right and left. It
has gone forth below and above; Brahman alone is
all this, it is the best.

1

Cf. K-di/ 1 . Up. VI, 15.

3 Svet. Up. VI, 14; Bhag.

2 Ka//S. Up. V, 15.
Gita IX, 15, 6.

MU2VDAKA-UPANISHAD.

third muwz>aka.

First Khawda.

1. Two birds, inseparable friends, cling to the same
tree. One of them eats the sweet fruit, the other

looks on without eating 1 .

2 . On the same tree man sits grieving, immersed,
bewildered by his own impotence (an-bra). But when
he sees the other lord (15a) contented and knows his

glory, then his grief passes away 2 .

3. When the seer sees the brilliant maker and
lord (of the world) as the Person who has his source
in Brahman, then he is wise, and shaking off good
and evil, he reaches the highest oneness, free from
passions ;

4. For he is the Breath shining forth in all beings,
and he who understands this becomes truly wise,
not a talker only. He revels in the Self, he delights
in the Self, and having performed his works (truth¬
fulness, penance, meditation, &c.) he rests, firmly
established in Brahman, the best of those who know

Brahman 3 .

1 Cf. Rv. I, 164, 20; Nir. XIV, 30; Svet Up. IV, 6; Ka//z. Up.
Ill, 1.

2 Cf. »Svet. Up. IV, 7.

3 The commentator states that, besides atmarati// kriyavan, theie
was another reading, viz. atmaratikriyavan. This probably owed
its origin to a difficulty felt in reconciling kriyavan, performing
acts, with the brahmavidd;;z varish/Z/a/z, the best of those who know
Brahman, works being utterly incompatible with a true knowledge
of Brahman. Kriyavan, however, as ‘S'ahkara points out, may
mean here simply, having performed meditation and other acts
conducive to a knowledge of Brahman. Probably truthfulness,

Ill MUiVDAKA, I KHAiVM, IO.

39

5. By truthfulness, indeed, by penance, right know¬
ledge, and abstinence must that Self be gained ; the
Self whom spotless anchorites gain is pure, and like
a light within the body.

6. The true prevails, not the untrue ; by the true
the path is laid out, the way of the gods (devayana/z),
on which the old sages, satisfied in their desires,
proceed to where there is that highest place of the
True One.

7. That (true Brahman) shines forth grand, divine
inconceivable, smaller than small; it is far beyond
what is far and yet near here, it is hidden in the
cave (of the heart) among those who see it even
here.

8. He is not apprehended by the eye, nor by
speech, nor by the other senses, not by penance or
good works 1 . When a man's nature has become
purified by the serene light of knowledge, then he
sees him, meditating on him as without parts.

9. That subtle Self is to be known by thought
(>£etas) there where breath has entered fivefold;
for every thought of men is interwoven with the
senses, and when thought is purified, then the Self
arises.

10. Whatever state a man whose nature is puri¬
fied imagines, and whatever desires he desires (for
himself or for others) 2 , that state he conquers and

penance, &c., mentioned in the next following verse, are the kriyas
or works intended. For grammatical reasons also this reading is
preferable. But the last foot esha brahmavida-w varish/Z/a^ is
clearly defective. If we examine the commentary, we see that
-Sankara read brahmanish/Zza/z, and that he did not read esha, which
would give us the correct metre, brahmanish/^o brahmavidaw
varish/ZzaZz.

Cf. Ka th. Up. VI, 12.

1

2 Cf. B/'/h. Ar. I, 4, 15.

40

MUiVDAKA-UPANISHAD.

those desires he obtains. Therefore let every man
who desires happiness worship the man who knows
the Self 1 .

Second Khajvda.

1. He (the knower of the Self) knows that high¬
est home of Brahman 2 , in which all is contained and
shines brightly. The wise who, without desiring
happiness, worship that Person 3 , transcend this seed,
(they are not born again.)

2. He who forms desires in his mind, is born again
through his desires here and there. But to him

o

whose desires are fulfilled and who is conscious of
the true Self (within himself) all desires vanish, even
here on earth.

3. That Self 4 cannot be gained by the Veda, nor
by understanding, nor by much learning. He whom
the Self chooses, by him the Self can be gained.
The Self chooses him (his body) as his own.

4. Nor is that Self to be gained by one who is
destitute of strength, or without earnestness, or
without rioht meditation. But if a wise man strives

O

after it by those means (by strength, earnestness,
and right meditation), then his Self enters the home
of Brahman.

5. When they have reached him (the Self), the
sages become satisfied through knowledge, they are
conscious of their Self, their passions have passed

1 All this is said by the commentator to refer to a knowledge of
the conditioned Brahman only.

2 See verse 4.

3 The commentator refers purusha to the knower of the Self.

4 Ka/A Up. II, 23.

Ill MUiVDAKA, 2 KHAiVDA,

IO.

41

away, and they are tranquil. The wise, havino-
reached Him who is omnipresent everywhere, df-
voted to the Self, enter into him wholly.

6 . Having well ascertained the object of the know¬
ledge of the Vedanta 1 , and having purified their nature
by the Yoga* of renunciation, all anchorites, enjoyino-
the highest immortality, become free at the time of
the great end (death) in the worlds of Brahma.

7 - Their fifteen parts 3 enter into their elements,
their Devas (the senses) into their (corresponding)
Devas 4 . Their deeds and their Self with all his

knowledge become all one in the highest Imperish-
able.

8 . As the flowing rivers disappear in the sea 5 ,
losing their name and their form, thus a wise man,

freed from name and form, goes to the divine Person,
who is greater than the great 6 .

9. He who knows that highest Brahman, becomes
I even Brahman. In his race no one is born ignorant

of Brahman. He overcomes grief, he overcomes

evil; free from the fetters of the heart, he becomes
immortal.

10. And this is declared by the following Rik-
verse: Let a man tell this science of Brahman to
those only who have performed all (necessary) acts,
who are versed in the Vedas, and firmly established
m (the lower) Brahman, who themselves offer as

‘ Cf * J aitt ir - X > I2 > 3; Svet. Up. VI, 22; Kaiv. Up. 3; see

Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 288.

2 By the Yoga system, which, through restraint (yoga), leads a
man to true knowledge.

ICf. Prama Up. VI, 4. < The eye into the sun, & c .

Cf. Pram a Up. VI, 5.

Gi eater than the conditioned Brahman. Comm.

4 2

MU iVD AKA-UP AN I SHAD.

an oblation the one A/shi (Agm), full of faith anc
by whom the rite of (carrying fire on) the head
has been performed, according to the rule (of the

Atharvawas).’ .

ii The Afshi Angiras formerly told this true

(science 1 ); a man who has not performed the

(proper) rites, does not read it. Adoration to the

highest Afshis! Adoration to the highest Azshis .

1 To .Saunaka, cf. I, i, 3 -

TAITTIRlYAKA-
U PAN IS HAD.

I

TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD.

FIRST VALLf,

Or, the Chapter on 6iksha (pronunciation).

First Anuvaka 1 .

i. Hard?, Om! May Mitra be propitious to us,
and Varu/za, Aryaman also, Indra, Brzhaspati, and
the wide-striding Vishnu 2 .

Adoration to Brahman! Adoration to thee, O
Vayu (air)! Thou indeed art the visible Brahman.
I shall proclaim thee alone as the visible Brahman.

I shall proclaim the right. I shall proclaim the true
(scil. Brahman).

(1-5) 3 May it protect me! May it protect the
teacher 1 yes, may it protect me, and may it protect
the teacher! Om ! Peace ! peace ! peace !

A 1 This invocation is here counted as an Anuvaka; see Taitt.
Ar., ed. Rajendralal Mitra, p. 725.

2 This verse is taken from Rig-veda-sawhita I, 90, 9. The deities
are variously explained by the commentators: Mitra as god of the
Pra;/a (forth-breathing) and of the day; Varurca as god of the
Apana (off-breathing) and of the night. Aryaman is supposed to
represent the eye or the sun; Indra, strength; Bnhaspati, speech
01 intellect; Vish//u, the feet. Their favour is invoked, because
it is only if they grant health that the study of the highest wisdom
can proceed without fail.

3 Five short sentences, in addition to the one paragraph. Such

sentences occur at the end of other Anuvakas also, and are counted
separately.

taittiriyaka-upanishad.

Second Anuvaka.

i. Om>! Let us explain -Siksha, the doctrine of
pronunciation, viz. letter, accent, quantity effort (in
the formation of letters), modulation, and union of
letters (sandhi). This is the lecture on -Slksha.

Third Anuvaka.

i May Mory come to both of us (teacher and pupil)
together ! ° May Vedic light belong to both of us !

Now let us explain the Upanishad (the secret
meaning) of the union (sa«hit 4 )«, under five heads
with regard to the worlds, the heavenly lig its, now
ledge, offspring, and self (body). Peop e ca tiese

the great Sa^zhitas. .

First, with regard to the worlds. The earth is

the former element, heaven the latter, ether t eir

union; , _ TA , . x

2. That union takes place through Vayu (air).

much with regard to the worlds.

Next, with regard to the heavenly lights. Agni
(fire) is the former element, Aditya (the sun) t e
latter, water their union. That union takes pace
through lightning. So much with regard to the

heavenly lights.

Next, with regard to knowledge. The teacher is
the former element,

3. The pupil the latter, knowledge their union.
That union takes place through the recitation of the

Veda. So much with regard to knowledge.

Next, with regard to offspring. The mot ter is

1 Cf. Rig-veda-pratisakhya, ed. M. M., p. iv seq.

^ Cf. Aitareya-arawyaka III, 1, 1 (Sacred Books, vol. 1, p. *4 ,)■

I VALLi, 4 ANUVAKA, 2 .

47

the former element, the father the latter, offspring
their union. That union takes place through pro¬
creation. So much with regard to offspring.

4. Next,, with regard to the self (body). The
lower jaw is the former element, the upper jaw the
latter, speech their union. That union takes place
through speech. So much with regard to the Self.
These are the great Sawdiitas. He who knows
these Sa^hitas (unions), as here explained, becomes
united with offspring, cattle, Vedic light, food, and
with the heavenly world.

Fourth Anuvaka.

1. May he 1 who is the strong bull of the Vedas,
assuming all forms, who has risen from the Vedas,
from the Immortal, may that Indra (lord) strengthen
me with wisdom ! May I, O God, become an upholder
of the Immortal!

May my body be able, my tongue sweet, may
I hear much with my ears! Thou (Om) art the
shrine (of Brahman), covered by wisdom. Guard
what I have learnt 2 .

She (.Sri, happiness) brings near and spreads,

2. And makes, without delay, garments for herself,
cows, food, and drink at all times; therefore bring
that Sri (happiness) hither to me, the woolly, with

The next verses form the prayer and oblation of those who
wish for wisdom and happiness. In the first verse it is supposed
that the Om is invoked, the most powerful syllable of the Vedas,

t f e essence extl *acted from all the Vedas, and in the end a name
of Brahman. See K 1 A nd. Up. p. i seq.

Here end the prayers for the attainment of wisdom, to be fol-
owed by oblations for the attainment of happiness.

4 8

taittirIyaka-upanishad.

her cattle 1 ! Svdha 2 ! May the Brahman-students
come to me, Svaha! May they come from all
sides, Svaha ! May they come forth to me, Svaha.
May they practise restraint, Svaha! May they enjoy

peace, Svaha! . A/r

^ May I be a glory among men, Svaha. 1 lay

I be better than the richest, Svaha! May I enter
into thee, O treasure (Om), Svaha! Thou, 0
treasure 3 , enter into me, Svaha! In thee, con¬
sisting of a thousand branches, in thee, O treasure,
I am cleansed, Svaha! As water runs downward, as
the months go to the year, so, O preserver, of the
world, may Brahman-students always come to me

from all sides, Svaha ! ,

(i) Thou art a refuge! Enlighten me! 1 ake

possession of me!

Fifth Anuvaka.

i. Bhu, Bhuvas, Suvas 4 , these are the three sacred
interjections (vyahmi). MahaAtmasya taught a
fourth, viz. Mahas, which is Brahman, which is tie
Self. The others (devatas) are its members. . j

Bhu is this world, Bhuvas is the sky, Suvas is ,

the other world. • .

2 Mahas is the sun. All the worlds are increased

by the sun. Bhu is Agni (fire), Bhuvas is Vtyii

(air), Suvas is Aditya (sun). Mahas is the moon. A

the heavenly lights are increased by the moon.

1 The construction is not right. Woolly, lornasa, is explained.

as ‘ possessed of woolly sheep/ ^ #

2 With the interjection Svaha each oblation is ottered.

3 Bhaga, here explained as bhagavat. A

4 The text varies between Bhu, Bhuvas, Suvas, Ma as, an 1

Bhuvar, Suvar, Mahar.

I VALLi, 6 ANUVAKA, 2.

49

BM is the AVAverses, Bhuvas is the Saman-verses
Suvas is the Ya^ris-verses.

3 - Mahas is Brahman. All the Vedas are increased
by the Brahman.

(1-2) Bhu is Pra«a (up-breathing), Bhuvas is
Apana (down-breathing), Suvas is Vy^na (back-

breathing). Mahas is food. All breathing are
increased by food. °

Thus there are these four times four, the four and
four sacred interjections. He who knows these,

(1-2) Knows the Brahman. All Devas brino-
offerings to him. s

Sixth Anuvaka.

1. There is the ether within the heart, and in it
there is the Person (purusha) consisting of mind,
immortal, golden.

. Betw een the two palates there hangs the uvula,
like a nipple that is the starting-point of Indra (the
lord) 1 . Where the root of the hair divides, there
he opens the two sides of the head, and saying Bhu,

he enters Agni (the fire); saying Bhuvas, he enters
V 4 yu (air) ;

2 . Saying Suvas, he enters Aditya (sun); saying
Mahas, he enters Brahman. He there obtains lord-
ship, he reaches the lord of the mind. He becomes
lord of speech, lord of sight, lord of hearing, lord of
knowledge. Nay, more than this. There is the
Brahman whose body is ether, whose nature is true,
rejoicing in the senses (prawa), delighted in the mind,
perfect in peace, and immortal.

TO) Worship thus, O Pr&iinayogya!

[io]

TAITTIRIYAKA- U P AN IS HAD.

50

Seventh Anuvaka.

1 . ‘The earth, the sky, heaven, the four quarters,
and the intermediate quarters,’—' Agni (fire), Vayu
■ air), Aditya (sun), Wandramas (moon) ; and the
stars,’—‘ Water, herbs, trees, ether, the universal Self
(viraf),’— so much with reference to material objects

(bhuta). . _ A

Now with reference to the self (the body) : Pra«a

(up-breathing), Apana (down- Dr eathing),k tana x back

breathing), Udana (out-breathing), and Samawa (on-

breathing)''—' The eye, the ear, mind, speech, and

touch,’—' The skin, flesh, muscle, bone, and marrow.

Having dwelt on this (fivefold arrangement of the

worlds? the gods, beings, breathings, senses, and

elements of the body), a> Rishi said: ‘Whatever

exists is fivefold (pankta) k

( 1 ) By means of the one fivefold set (that reternng

to the body) he completes the other fivefold set.

Eighth Anuvaka.

1 Om means Brahman. 2 . Om means all this.
Om means obedience. When they have been
told. ‘Om, speak,’ they speak. 4- Alter 0m the >’
sina Samans. 5- After Om they recite hymns.
6. After Om the Adhvaryu gives the response.
-. After Om the Brahman-priest gives orders.
8 After Om he (the sacrificed) allows the perform¬
ance of the Agnihotra. 9 . When a Brahman is
croing to begin his lecture, he says, 10 . ‘ Om, may
I acquire Brahman (the \ eda). He thus acquires

the Veda.

Cf. Brill. Ar. Up. I, 4. H

1

I VALLI, IO ANUVAKA, 3.

0

I

Ninth Anuvaka 1 .

1. (What is necessary ?) The right, and learning
and practising the Veda. The true, and learning and
practising the Veda. Penance, and learning and prac¬
tising the Veda. Restraint, and learning and practising
the Veda. Tranquillity, and learning and practising
the Veda. The fires (to be consecrated), and learning
and practising the Veda. The Agnihotra sacrifice,
and learning and practising the Veda. Guests (to
be entertained), and learning and practising the Veda.
Man’s duty, and learning and practising the Veda.
y arnin^, and practising the Veda.

(1—6) Marriage, and learning and practising the
Veda. Children s children, and learning and prac¬
tising the Veda.

Satyava/£as Rathitara thinks that the true only
is necessary. Taponitya Paura<rishd thinks that
penance only is necessary. Naka Maudgalya thinks
that learning and practising the Veda only are neces¬
sary, for that is penance, that is penance.

Tenth Anuvaka.

1. ‘I am he who shakes the tree (i.e. the tree of
the world, which has to be cut down by knowledge).

2. My glory is like the top of a mountain. 3. I, whose
pure light (of knowledge) has risen high, am that
which is truly immortal, as it resides in the sun.

This chapter is meant to show that knowledge alone, though
it secures the highest object, is not sufficient by itself, but must be
preceded by works. The learning of the Veda by heart and the
practising of it so as not to forget it again, these two must always
have been previously performed.

E 2

5 2

taittirIyaka-upanishad.

4 I am the brightest treasure. 5. I am wise, im¬
mortal, imperishable 1 .’ 6. This is the teaching of
the Veda, by the poet Trisanku.

Eleventh Anuvaka.

1. After having taught the Veda, the teacher in¬
structs the pupil 1 ‘ Say what is true! Do thy duty.
Do not neglect the study of the Veda! After
havino- brought to thy teacher his proper reward,
do not cut off the line of children! Do not swerve
from the truth ! Do not swerve from duty! Do not
neglect what is useful! Do not neglect greatness!
Do not neglect the learning and teaching of the

Veda !

2. ‘Do not neglect the (sacrificial) works due to the
Gods and Fathers! Let thy mother be to thee like
unto a god! Let thy father be to thee like unto a
god ! Let thy teacher be to thee like unto a god!
Let thy guest be to thee like unto a god!
Whatever actions are blameless, those should be
regarded, not others. Whatever good works have
been performed by us, those should be observed by

thee,—

3. ‘ Not others. And there are some Brahmawas
better than we. They should be comforted by thee by
giving them a seat. Whatever is given should be
given with faith, not without faith,—with joy, with
modesty, with fear, with kindness. If there should

1 This verse has been translated as the commentator wishes it
to be understood, in praise of that knowledge of Self which is only
to be obtained after all other duties, and, more particularly, the
study of the Veda, have been performed. The text is probably

corrupt, and the interpretation fanciful.

1 VALLI, 12 ANUVAKA, 5

be any doubt in thy mind with regard to any sacred
act or with regard to conduct,_

4. ‘ In that case conduct thyself as Brahmawas who

possess good judgment conduct themselves therein,

whether they be appointed or not >, as long as they

are not too severe, but devoted to duty. And with

regard to things that have been spoken against

as Brahma«as who possess good judgment conduct

themselves therein, whether they be appointed or

not, as long as they are not too severe, but devoted
to duty,

(* 7 ) Thus conduct thyself. ‘ This is the rule.
This is the teaching. This is the true purport
tUpamshad) of the Veda. This is the command.

Thus should you observe. Thus should this be
observed.’

Twelfth Anuvaka.

1. May Mitra be propitious to us, and Varu»a,
Aryaman also, Indra, Br/haspati, and the wide-
striding Vish«u ! Adoration to Brahman ! Adora¬
tion to thee, O Vayu! Thou indeed art the visible

Brahman. I proclaimed thee alone as the visible
Brahman.

(1-5) I proclaimed the right. I proclaimed the
true. It protected me. It protected the teacher.
Yes, it protected me, it protected the teacher. Om!
Peace! peace! peace!

' Aparaprayukta iti svatantra/i. For other renderings see Weber
Ind. Stud. II, p. 21 6.

54

TAITTIRIY AKA-UP A NISH AD.

SECOND VALLt,

I

Or, the Chapter on Ananda (bliss).

HariA Om! May it (the Brahman) protect us
both (teacher and pupil) ! May it enjoy us both!
May we acquire strength together! Ma^ our
knowledge become bright! May we never quarrel!
Peace! peace! peace 1 !

a

First Anuvaka.

He who knows the Brahman attains the highest
(Brahman). On this the following verse is recorded:

< He who knows Brahman, which is (i. e. cause,
not effect), which is conscious, which is without
end, as hidden in the depth (of the heart), in the ,
highest ether, he enjoys all blessings, at one with ,

the omniscient Brahman. ^ 1

From that Self 2 (Brahman) sprang ether (akdsa,
that through which we hear) ; from ether air (that
through which we hear and feel); from air file (that ,
through which we hear, feel, and see); from fire water ,
(that through which we hear, feel, see, and taste),
from water earth (that through which we hear, feel,
see, taste, and smell). From earth herbs, from herbs
food, from food seed, from seed man. Man thus
consists of the essence of food. This is his head,

' Not counted here as an Anuvaka. The other Anuvakas are

divided into a number of small sentences. ^ a

- Compare with this s/Ysh/ikrama, AT/zand. Up. \ I, 2 , Ait. r.

II, 4 , i-

55

II VALLI, 2 ANUVAKA.

this his right arm, this his left arm, this his trunk
(atman), this the seat (the support) 1 2 .

On this there is also the following /floka:

Second Anuvaka.

From food “ are produced all creatures which
dwell on earth. Then they live by food, and in the
end they return to food. For food is the oldest of
all beings, and therefore it is called panacea (sar-
vaushadha, i. e. consisting of all herbs, or quieting
the heat of the body of all beings)/

They who worship food as Brahman 3 , obtain all
food. For food is the oldest of all beings, and
therefore it is called panacea. From food all crea¬
tures are produced; by food, when born, they grow.
Because it is fed on, or because it feeds on beino-s

o 1

therefore it is called food (anna).

Different from this, which consists of the essence
of food, is the other, the inner Self, which consists
of breath. The former is filled by this. It also
has the shape of man. Like the human shape
of the former is the human shape of the latter.
Pra/£a (up-breathing) is its head. Vyana (back-
breathing) is its right arm. Apana (down-breathing)
is its left arm. Ether is its trunk. The earth
the seat (the support).

On this there is also the following- Aloka :

1 The text has ‘the tail, which is his support/ But pratish//;a
seems to have been added, the Anuvaka ending originally with
pu/b(Aa, which is explained by nabher adhastad yad angam. In the
Persian translation the different members are taken for members
of a bird, which is not unlikely.

2 Anna is sometimes used in the more general sense of matter.

3 Worship consisting in the knowledge that they are born of
food, live by food, and end in food, which food is Brahman.

56

TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD.

Third Anuvaka.

< The Devas breathe after breath (pra^a), so do
men and cattle. Breath is the life ol beings, there¬
fore it is called sarvayusha (all-enlivening).

They who worship breath as Brahman, obtain
the full life. For breath is the life of all beings, and
therefore it is called sarvayusha. The embodied
Self of this (consisting of breath) is the same as that

of the former (consisting of food).

Different from this, which consists of breath, is the
other, the inner .Self, which consists of mind. The
former is filled by this. It also has the shape of
man. Like the human shape of the former is the
human shape of the latter. Ya^us is its head. RiL
is its right arm. Saman is its left arm. d he doctrine
(adesa, i.e. the Brahma;m) is its trunk. The Athar-
vangiras (Atharva-hymns) the seat (the support).

On this there is also the following Sloka :

Fourth Anuvaka 1 .

‘ He who knows the bliss of that Brahman, from
whence all speech, with the mind, turns away unable
to reach it, he never fears.’ The embodied Self of
this (consisting of mind) is the same as that of the

former (consisting of breath).

Different from this, which consists of mind, is the
other, the inner Self, which consists of understanding.
The former is filled by this. It also has the shape
of man. Like the human shape of the former is the
human shape of the latter. Faith is its head. What
is right is its right arm. What is true is its left arm.

o o

1 Cf. II, 9.

II VALLI, 6 ANUVAKA.

57

■-- ---

Absorption (yoga) is its trunk. The great (intellect ?)
is the seat (the support).

On this there is also the following- Sloka :

Fifth Anuvaka.

‘ Understanding performs the sacrifice, it performs
all sacred acts. All Devas worship understanding
as Brahman, as the oldest. If a man knows
understanding as Brahman, and if he does not

! swerve from ^ leaves all evils behind in the
body, and attains all his wishes/ The embodied Self
of this (consisting of understanding) is the same as
that of the former (consisting of mind).

Different from this, which consists of understand¬
ing, is the other inner Self, which consists of bliss.
Ihe former is filled by this. It also has the shape
of man. Like the human shape of the former is the
human shape of the latter. Joy is its head. Satisfac¬
tion its right arm. Great satisfaction is its left arm.
Bliss is its trunk. Brahman is the seat (the support).

On this there is also the following Aloka :

Sixth Anuvaka.

He who knows the Brahman as non-existing,
becomes himself non-existing. He who knows the
Brahman as existing, him we know himself as exist-
ing. The embodied Self of this (bliss) is the same
as that of the former (understanding).

Thereupon follow the questions of the pupil
j ‘Does any one who knows not, after he has departed
‘ ^ 1S ever go to that world ? Or does he who
knows, after he has departed, go to that world 1 ?’

1 As he who knows and he who knows not, are both sprung
hom Brahman, the question is supposed to be asked by the pupif
whether both will equally attain Brahman.

53

TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD.

The answer is : He wished, may I be many ,
may I grow forth. He brooded over himself (like
a man performing penance). After he had thus
brooded, he sent forth (created) all, whatever there
is. Having sent forth, he entered into it. Having
entered it, he became sat (what is manifest) and
tyat (what is not manifest), defined and undefined,
supported and not supported, (endowed with) know¬
ledge and without knowledge (as stones), real and
unreal 1 2 3 . The Sattya (true) became all this what¬
soever, and therefore the wise call it (the Brahman)

Sat-tya (the true).

On this there is also this .Sloka :

Seventh Anuvaka.

< l n the beginning this was non-existent (not yet
defined by form and name). From it was born what
exists. That made itself its Self, therefore it is .
called the Self-made : V T hat which is Self-made is
a flavour 4 (can be tasted), for only after perceiving a i
flavour can any one perceive pleasure. Who could
breathe, who could breathe forth, if that bliss (Brah-

1 In the AAandogya-upanishad VI, 2, i, where a similar account i
of the creation is given, the subject is spoken of as tad, neuter.

is said there: c In the beginning there was that only which is, one
only, without a second. It willed, may I be many, &c. (Cf. B/ zh.

Ar. Up. vol. ii, p. 52.) .. .

2 What appears as real and unreal to the senses, not the rea y

real and unreal.

3 Cf. Ait. Up. I, 2, 3.

4 As flavour is the cause of pleasure, so Brahman is the cause
of all things. The wise taste the flavour of existence, and know
that it proceeds from Brahman, the Self-made. See Kaushitaki-
upanishad I, 5; Sacred Books, vol. i, p« 277.

II VALlJ, 8 ANUVAKA, 2.

59

man) existed not in the ether (in the heart) ? For
he alone causes blessedness.

When he finds freedom from fear and rest in that
which is invisible, incorporeal, undefined, unsup¬
ported, then he has obtained the fearless. For if
he makes but the smallest distinction in it, there
is fear for him 1 . But that fear exists only for

one who thinks himself wise 2 , (not for the true
sage.)

On this there is also this Aloka :

Eighth Anuvaica.

(i) ‘ From terror of it (Brahman) the wind blows,
from terror the sun rises; from terror of it Agni
and Inclra, yea Death runs as the fifth 3 . *

Now this is an examination of (what is meant by)
Bliss (ananda):

Let there be a noble young man, who is well
read (in the Veda), very swift, firm, and strong, and
let the whole world be full of wealth for him, that is
one measure of human bliss.

One hundred times that human bliss (2) is one
measure of the bliss of human Gandharvas (genii),

1 Fear arises only from what is not ourselves. Therefore, as
soon as there is even the smallest distinction made between our Self
and the real Self, there is a possibility of fear. The explanation
ud = api, aram —alpam is very doubtful, but recognised in the
schools. It could hardly be a proverbial expression, ‘ if he makes
another stomach ' meaning as much as, ‘ if he admits another person/
According to the commentator, we should translate, ‘ for one who
knows (a difference), and does not know the oneness/

I read manvanasya, the commentator amanvanasya.

3 Ka th. Up. VI, 3.

6o

taittirIyaka-upanishad

and likewise of a great sage (learned in the Vedas)
who is free from desires.

One hundred times that bliss of human Gan-
dharvas is one measure of the bliss of divine
Gandharvas (genii), and likewise of a great sage
who is free from desires.

One hundred times that bliss of divine Gandharvas
is one measure of the bliss of the Fathers, enjoying
their Ions;' estate, and likewise of a great sage who is

o 7

free from desires.

One hundred times that bliss of the Fathers is
one measure of the bliss of the F)evas, born in the
A^ana heaven (through the merit of their lawful
works), (3) and likewise of a great sage who is free 1

from desires.

One hundred times that bliss of the Devas born
in the A^ana heaven is one measure of the bliss of
the sacrificial Devas, who go to the Devas by means
of their Vaidik sacrifices, and likewise of a great

sage who is free from desires.

One hundred times that bliss of the sacrificial
Devas is one measure of the bliss of the (thirty-three)
Devas, and likewise of a great sage who is free from
desires.

One hundred times that bliss of the (thirty-three) !
Devas is one measure of the bliss of Indra, (4) and
likewise of a great sage who is free from desires.

One hundred times that bliss of Indra is one-
measure of the bliss of B/vhaspati, and likewise of
a great sage who is free from desires.

One hundred times that bliss of Brzhaspati is one
measure of the bliss of Pra^apati, and likewise of.
a great sage who is free from desires. j

One hundred times that bliss of Pra^apati is one

II VALLI, 8 ANUVAKA, 5.

measure of the bliss of Brahman, and likewise of
a great sage who is free from desires.

(5) He 1 who is this (Brahman) in man, and he who
is that (Brahm an) in the sun, both are one 2 .

1 Cf. Ill, 10, 4. ~

it 2 In gl y ing the vanous degrees of happiness, the author of the
Upanishad g.ves us at the same time the various classes of human
and divine beings which we must suppose were recognised in his
Ume We have Men, human Gandharvas, divine Gandhi
Fatheis (pitarar /'iralokaloka/;), born Gods (aganaga deva/n Gods
by merit (karmadeva/t), Gods, Indra, Bnhaspati, Pmgapati, BraS
man. Such a list would seem to be the invention of an individual
rather than the result of an old tradition, if it did not occur in a very
similar form in the Xatapatha-brahmazza, Madhyandina-Hkha XIV
7,1, 31, Ka/jva-^akha (Brfh. Ar. Up.IV, 3,32). Here, too, the highest
1 m< ; asure of happiness is ascribed to the Brahmaloka, and other
beings are supposed to share a certain measure only of its supreme
happiness. The scale begins in the Madhyandina-jakha with men,
who are followed by the Fathers (pitaro ^italoka/z), the Gods by
merit (karmadev^), the Gods by birth (a^nadevtU, with whom
the Xrotriya is joined), the world of Gods, the world of Gandharvas,
the world of Pra^apati, the world of Brahman. In the Brzhad-
arazzyaka-upanishad we have Men, Fathers, Gandharvas, Gods by
merit, Gods by birth, Pra^apati, and Brahman. If we place the
three lists side by side, we find—

» TAITTIRlYA-UPAN.
Men

Human Gandharvas
(and Xrotriya)
Divine Gandharvas
Fathers (/hraloka)

Gods by birth
Gods by merit

Gods
Indra
Bnhaspati
Pra^apati
Brahman
The

aatapatha-brAh.

Men

Fathers (^italoka)

Gods by merit
Gods by birth
(and Xrotriya)
Gods

Gandharvas

B^/HADARAAVUPAN.

Men

Fathers (^italoka)
Gandharvas
Gods by merit
Gods by birth
(and Xrotriya)

Pra^apati

Brahman.

Xankara on the Taitti-

Pra^-apati
Brahman
commentators do not help us much.

62

TAITTIRIY Alt A-U PANISIl AD.

He who knows this, when he has departed this
world, reaches and comprehends the Self which con¬
sists of food, the Self which consists of breath, the
Self which consists of mind, the Self which consists
of understanding, the Self which consists of bliss.

On this there is also this 61 oka :

riyaka-upanishad explains the human Gandharvas as men who
have become Gandharvas, a kind of fairies; divine Gandharvas, as
Gandharvas by birth. The Fathers or Manes are called Wiraloka,
because they remain long, though not for ever, in their world. The
fmaiwa Gods are explained as born in the world of the Devas
through their good works (smarta). while the Karmadevas ^ex¬
plained as born there through their sacred works (vaidika). The
Gods are the thirty-three, whose lord is Indra, and whose teacher
Brfhaspati. Pra^apati is Virag, Brahman Hirawyagarbha. Dvive-
daganga, in his commentary on the Xatapatha-brahma^a, explains
the Fathers as those who, proceeding on the Southern path, have
conquered their world, more particularly by having themselves
offered in their life sacrifices to their Fathers. The Karmadevas,
according to him, are those who have become Devas by sacred
works (srauta), the Aganadevas those who were gods before there
were men. The Gods are Indra and the rest, while the Gandharvas
are not explained. Pra 6 -apati is Vii%, Brahman is Hira^yagarbha.
Lastly, Sankara, in his commentary on the Bnbadara/jyaka-
upanishad, gives nearly the same explanation as befoie, only t at
he makes a^anadeva/z still clearer, by explaining them as O o s

aganata/2, i. e. utpattita/L from their birth.

The arrangement of these beings and their worlds, one rising
above the other, reminds us of the cosmography of the Buddhists,
but the elements, though in a less systematic form, existed evident)
before. Thus we find in the so-called Gargi-brahma;za (Satapatha-
brahmawa XIV, 6, 6, 1) the following succession : Water, air, ether*
the worlds of the sky 13 , heaven, sun, moon, stars, gods, Gandhanas “,
Pra^apati, Brahman. In the Kaushitaki-upanishad I, 3 (Sacre
Books of the East, vol. i, p. 275) there is another series, the worlds
of Agni, Vayu, Varu»a, Indra, Pra^apati, and Brahman. See W eber,

Ind. Stud. II, p. 224.

a Deest in Kawva-^akha. ., *

* Between sky and sun, the Kawva-Jakhi places the Gandharvaloka (Bnh. At.

Up. Ill, 6, I, p. 609). A

c Instead of Gandharvas, the Brz'h. Ar. Up. places Indra.

II VALLI, 9 ANUVAKA.

Ninth AnuvAka 1 .

‘ He who knows th e bliss of that Brahman, from
whence all speech, with the mind, turns away unable
to reach it, he fears nothing 2 .’

He does not distress himself with the thought,
Why did I not do what is good? Why did I do
what is bad ? He who thus knows these two (good
and bad), frees himself. He who knows both, frees
himself 3 . This is the Upanishad 4 .

1 Cf. II, 4.

Even if there is no fear from anything else, after the knowledge
of Self and Brahman has been obtained, it might be thought that
fear might still arise from the commission of evil deeds, and the

omission of good works. Therefore the next paragraphs have been
added.

The constiuction of these two sentences is not clear to me.

4 Here follows the Anukramarci, and in some MSS. the same
invocation with which the next Valli begins.

64

taittirIyaka-upanishad.

THIRD VALLl,

Or, the Cpiapter of Bplrjgu.

Har ih, Om ! May it (the Brahman) protect us
both! May it enjoy us both! May we acquire strength
together! May our knowledge become bright! May
we never quarrel! Peace ! peace ! peace 1 !

First Anuvaka.

Bh/vgu Varu ri\ went to his father Variwa, saying:

< Sir, teach me Brahman.’ He told him this, viz.
Food, breath, the eye, the ear, mind, speech.

Then he said again to him : ‘ That from whence
these beings are born, that by which, when born,
they live, that into which they enter at their death,
try to know that. This is Brahman.

He performed penance. Having performed

penance—

Second Anuvaka.

He perceived that food is Brahman, for from food
these beings are produced ; by food, when born, they
live ; and into food they enter at their death.

Having perceived this, he went again to his father
Varuzza, saying : ‘ Sir, teach me Brahman. He said
to him: ‘Try to know Brahman by penance, for
penance is (the means of knowing) Brahman.

He performed penance. Having performed

penance—

1 The same paragraph, as before (II, i), occurs at the end of the
Ka/Zza-upanishad, and elsewhere.

HI VALLi, 5 ANUVAKA.

65

Third Anuvaka.

breath ^ erCd r d ** brCathl is Brahman - for from
breath these beings are born; by breath, when born,

they live ; into breath they enter at their death.

"\ 7" „ . ^ # again to his father

Varu« a , saying: ‘Sir, teach me Brahman.' He said

o him. Try to know Brahman by penance, for
penance is (the means of knowing) Brahman.’

e per ormed penance. Having performed
penance—

Fourth Anuvaka.

He perceived that mind (manas) is Brahman for

from mind these beings are born; by mind, when

born, they live ; into mind they enter at their death.

aving perceived this, he went again to his father

Vanina, saying: ‘ Sir, teach me Brahman.’ He said

to him: ‘Try to know Brahman by penance, for

penance is (the means of knowing) Brahman.’

e performed penance. Having performed
penance—

Fifth Anuvaka.

He perceived that understanding (vi^ana) was
Brahman, for from understanding these beings are
born ; by understanding, when born, they live & ; into
understanding they enter at their death.

Having perceived this, he went again to his father
Varu»a, saying: ‘ Sir, teach me Brahman.’ He said
to him : ‘ Try to know Brahman by penance, for
penance is (the means of knowing) Brahman.’

1 Or life; see Br/h. Ar. Up. IV ; i } 3.

F

[15]

66

TAITTIRIlYAKA-UPANISHAD.

He performed penance. Having performed
penance—

Sixth Anuvaka.

He perceived that bliss is Brahman, for from bliss
these beings are bom; by bliss, when born, they
live; into bliss they enter at their death.

This is the knowledge of Bhrfgu and Varuwa ,
exalted in the highest heaven (in the heart). He
who knows this becomes exalted, becomes rich in
food, and able to eat food (healthy), becomes great
by offspring, cattle, and the splendour of his know¬
ledge (of Brahman), great by fame.

Seventh Anuvaka.

Let him never abuse food, that is the rule.

Breath is food 1 2 , the body eats the food. 1 he
body rests on breath, breath rests on the body. This
is the food resting on food. He who knows this
food resting on food 3 , rests exalted, becomes rich
in food, and able to eat food (healthy), becomes
great by offspring, cattle, and the splendour of his
knowledge (of Brahman), great by fame.

Eighth Anuvaka.

Let him never shun food, that is the rule. Water
is food, the light eats the food. The light rests on
water, water rests on light. This is the food resting

1 Taught by Varu?za, learnt by Bhngu Varum.

2 Because, like food, it is inside the body. .

3 The interdependence of food and breath. The object o 1us
discussion is to show (see ^Sankaras commentary, p. *35) that
world owes Us origin to there being an enjoyer (subject) and what is
enjoyed (object), but that this distinction does not exist in the be .

Ill VALLI, IO ANUVAKA, 2.

67

on food 1 . He who knows this food resting on food

o y

rests exalted, becomes rich in food, and able to eat
food (healthy), becomes great by offspring, cattle, and
the splendour of his knowledge (of Brahman), great
by fame.

Ninth Anuvaka.

Let him acquire much food, that is the rule. Earth
is food, the ether eats the food. The ether rests
on the earth, the earth rests on the ether. This is
the food resting on food. He who knows this food
resting on food, rests exalted, becomes rich in food,
and able to eat food (healthy), becomes great by
offspring, cattle, and the splendour of his knowledge
(of Brahman), great by fame.

Tenth Anuvaka.

1 . Let him never turn away (a stranger) from his
house, that is the rule. Therefore a man should
by all means acquire much food, for (good) people
say (to the stranger): ‘ There is food ready for him/
If he gives food amply, food is given to him amply.
If he gives food fairly, food is given to him fairly.
If he gives food meanly, food is given to him
meanly.

2 . He who knows this, (recognises and worships
Brahman 2 ) as possession in speech, as acquisition
and possession in up-breathing (pra^a) and down¬
breathing (apana); as action in the hands; as walking
in the feet; as voiding in the anus. These are the
human recognitions (of Brahman as manifested in
human actions). Next follow the recognitions (of

1 The interdependence of water and light.

2 Brahma//a upasanaprakara/ 2 .

F 2

68

TAITTIRIyAKA-UPANISHAD.

Brahman) with reference to the Devas, viz. as satis¬
faction in rain ; as power in lightning;

3. As glory in cattle ; as light in the stars, as
procreation, immortality, and bliss in the member,
as everything in the ether. Let him worship that
(Brahman) as support, and he becomes supported.
Let him worship that (Brahman) as greatness (maha/i),
and he becomes great. Let him worship that (Brah¬
man) as mind, and he becomes endowed with mind.

4. Let him worship that (Brahman) as adoration,
and' all desires fall down before him in adoration.
Let him worship that (Brahman) as Brahman, and
he will become possessed of Brahman. Let him
worship this as the absorption of the gods 1 in Brah¬
man, and the enemies who hate him will die all
around him, all around him will die the foes whom
he does not love.

He 2 who is this (Brahman) in man, and he who is
that (Brahman) in the sun, both are one.

5. He who knows this, when he has departed this
world, after reaching and comprehending the Self
which consists of food, the Self which consists of
breath, the Self which consists of mind, the Sel
which ’consists of understanding, the Self which con¬
sists of bliss, enters and takes possession of these
worlds, and having as much food as he likes, and
assuming as many forms as he likes, he sits down
singing this Sam an (of Brahman). Havu, havu,

havu!

1 Cf. Kaush. Up. II, 12. Here the absorption of the gods of fire,
sun, moon, and lightning in the god of the air (vayu( is described.
Sankara adds the god of rain, and shows that air is identical wit

ether.

2 Cf. II, 8.

Ill VALli, IO ANUVAKA, 6.

69

6 . ‘Iam food (object), I am food, I am food ! I am
the eater of food (subject), I am the eater of food,
I am the eater of food! I am the poet (who joins
the two together), I am the poet, I am the poet!
I am the first-born of the Right (ma). Before the
Devas I was in the centre of all that is immortal.
He who gives me away, he alone preserves me : him
who eats food, I eat as food.

I overcome the whole world, I, endowed with
golden light h He who knows this, (attains all this).’
This is the Upanishad 1 2 .

1 If we read suvarea^yoti/r. The commentator reads suvar wa
gyolih, i. e. the light is like the sun.

2 After the Anukrama/A follows the same invocation as in the
beginning of the third Vallt, ‘ May it protect us both,’ &c.

Bi?/HADARA;VYAKA-

UPANISHAD.

i

C

'

\

1

1

i'

BA/HADAraAYAKA-

UPANISHAD.

FIRST ADHYAYA \

First Brahmaaa.

i. Verily * 2 the dawn is the head of the horse which
is fit for sacrifice, the sun its eye, the wind its breath
the mouth the Vawvanara 3 fire, the year the body
o the sacrificial horse. Heaven is the back, the sky
the belly, the earth the chest 4 , the quarters the two
sides, the intermediate quarters the ribs, the members
the seasons, the joints the months and half-months
the feet days and nights, the bones the stars, the

Jpanishad* 16 Ac,ll - ya} ' a of the Ara«yaka, but the first of the

2 This Brahmawa is found in the MMhyandina text of the .Sata-
«tha, ed. Weber, X, 6, 4. Its object is there explained by the
ommentary to be the meditative worship of Vi%, as represented
letaphoncally in the members of the horse. SAyaua dispenses with
s explanation, because, as part of the Brfhadarawyaka-upanisliad
tcord.ng to the Ka*va-rakM, it had been enlarged on by the’
arttikakara and explained.

nature ^ ^ aS peiVading evei 7 thin & as universally present
Pa^asya is doubtful. The commentator suggests pad-asya, the

im C 0 1 v 1#e * the h °°^ The Greek PegaS 0 S, Or imroi 7 rrjyot,

1 vs no ig t on the word. The meaning of hoof would hardly

appropriate here, and I prefer chest on account of uras in
2 , 3* Deussen (Vedanta, p. 8) translates, die Erde seiner Fiisse

emel; but we want some part of the horse.

74

BjR/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

flesh the clouds. The half-digested food is the sand,
the rivers the bowels \ the liver and the lungs 1 2 3 the
mountains, the hairs the herbs and trees. As tie
sun rises, it is the forepart, as it sets, the hindpart o
the horse. When the horse shakes itself 2 , then it
lightens ; when it kicks, it thunders ; when it makes i.

water, it rains ; voice 4 is its voice.

2. Verily Day arose after the horse as the (golden)

vessel 5 , called Mahiman (greatness), which (at the
sacrifice) is placed before the horse. Its place is in
the Eastern sea. The Night arose after the horse
as the (silver) vessel, called Mahiman, which (at tie
sacrifice) is placed behind the horse. Its place is in.
the Western sea. Verily, these two vessels (or great¬
nesses) arose to be on each side of the horse..

As a racer he carried the Devas, as a stallion the
Gandharvas, as a runner the Asuras, as a horse men.
The sea is its kin, the sea is its birthplace.

Second Brahmaaa 6 .

X. In the beginning there was nothing (to be per

1 Guda, being in the plural, is explained by narfi, channel, anc
sirS/i • for we ought to read sira or hiragrahawe for lira, p. 22, . i

2 Klomana// is explained as a plurale tantum (nityam bahuva
ianam ekasmin), and being described as a lump below the heat
on the opposite side of the liver, it is supposed to be the lungs.

3 ‘ When it yawns.’ Anandagiri.

* Voice is sometimes used as a personified power of thundf
and other aerial sounds, and this is identified with the voice of tb

5 Two vessels, to hold the sacrificial libations, are placed a

A^vamedha before and behind the horse, the former made of go
the latter made of silver. They are called Mahiman in the tecinic
language of the ceremonial. The place in^which these vesse s a (
set, is called their yoni. Cf. Vagas. Sawhita XXIII, 2. . . \

6 Called the Agni-brahma«a, and intended to teach the origin

I ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMAAA, 3.

75

ceived) here whatsoever. By Death indeed all this
was concealed, by hunger; for death is hunger.
Death (the first being) thought, ‘ Let me have a
body. Then he moved about, worshipping. From
him thus worshipping water was produced. And he
said . Verily, there appeared to me, while I wor¬
shipped (ariate), water (ka).’ This is why water is
called ar-ka . Surely there is water (or pleasure)

for him who thus knows the reason why water is
called arka.

2. Verily water is arka. And what was there as
the froth of the water, that was hardened, and became
the earth. On that earth he (Death) rested, and from
him, thus resting and heated, Agni (Vii%) proceeded,
full of light.

3. That being divided itself threefold, Aditya (the
sun) as the third, and Vayu (the air) as the third * 1 2 .
That spirit (pra/^a) 3 became threefold. The head was
the Eastern quarter, and the arms this and that quarter

, Agni, the fire, which is here used for the Horse-sacrifice. It is
found in the Vatapatha-brahmazza, Madhyandina-jakha X, 6, 5, and
there explained as a description of Hirazzyagarbha.

1 We ought to read arkasyarkatvam, as in Poley's edition, or
ark-kasyarkkatvam, to make the etymology still clearer. The com¬
mentator takes arka in the sense of fire, more especially the sacri¬
ficial fire employed at the Horse-sacrifice. It may be so, but the
more natural interpretation seems to me to take arka here as water,
from which indirectly fire is produced. For water springs the
earth; on that earth he (Mz'z'tyu or Pra^apati) rested, and from
him, while resting there, fire (Virttg) was produced. That fire
assumed three forms, fire, sun, and air, and in that threefold form
it is called prazza, spirit.

2 As Agni, Vayu, and Aditya.

3 Here Agni (Vira^) is taken as representing the fire of the altar
at the Horse-sacrifice, which is called Arka. The object of the
whole Brahmazza was to show the origin and true character of that
fire (arka).

76

B2WHADARA2VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

(i.e. the N. E. and S. E., on the left and right sides).
Then the tail was the Western quarter, and the two
legs this and that quarter (i.e. the N. W. and S. W.).
The sides were the Southern and Northern quarteis,
the back heaven, the belly the sky, the dust the
earth. Thus he (Mrztyu, as arka) stands firm in
the water, and he who knows this stands firm wher¬
ever he goes.

4. He desired 1 2 , ‘Let a second body be born of
me/ and he (Death or Hunger) embraced Speech
in his mind. Then the seed became the year.
Before that time there was no year. Speech bore
him so long as a year, and after that time sent
him forth. Then when he was born, he (Death)
opened his mouth, as if to swallow him. He cried

Bha n ! and that became speech 3 .

5. He thought, ‘ If I kill him, I shall have but little
food/ He therefore brought forth by that speech
and by that body (the year) all whatsoever exists,
the Rik, the Yafus, the Saman, the metres, the

sacrifices, men, and animals.

And whatever he (Death) brought forth, that
he resolved to eat (ad). Verily because he eats
everything, therefore is Aditi (Death) called Aditi.
He who thus knows why Aditi is called Aditi,
becomes an eater of everything, and everything
becomes his food 4 .

1 He is the same as what was before called mr/tyu, death, who,
after becoming self-conscious, produced water, earth, fire, &c.
now wishes for a second body, which is the year, or the annual
sacrifice, the year being dependent on the sun (Aditya).

2 The commentator understands the father, instead of Speech, the

mother.

3 The interjectional theory.

4 All these are merely fanciful etymologies of awamedha and aika.

I ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMAiVA, J.

77

< 5 . He desired to sacrifice again with a greater
sacrifice. He toiled and performed penance. And
wide he toiled and performed penance, glorious
power 1 went out of him. Verily glorious power
means the senses (pra«a). Then when the senses

a gone out, the body took to swelling (jva-yitum)
and mind was in the body. h

7 - He desired that this body should be fit for sacri¬
fice (medhya), and that he should be embodied by it
Then he became a horse (suva), because it swelled
(a.svat), and was fit for sacrifice (medhya ); and this
is why the horse-sacrifice is called Afva-medha.

Verily he who knows him thus, knows the Ayva-
medha. Then, letting the horse free, he thought 2 ,
and at the end of a year he offered it up for himself
while he gave up the (other) animals to the deities!
herefore the sacrifices offered up the purified

horse belonging to Pra^apati, (as dedicated) to all
the deities.

Verily the shining sun is the A^vamedha-sacri-
fice, and his body is the year; Agni is the sacrificial
nre (arka), and these worlds are his bodies. These
two are the sacrificial fire and the Ajvamedha-sacri-
fice, and they are again one deity, viz. Death. He
(who knows this) overcomes another death, death
does not reach him, death is his Self, he becomes
one of those deities.

Or glory (senses) and power. Comm.

2 He considered himself as the horse. Roer.

78

BiWHADARAiVYAKA-UPANISLIAD.

Third Brahmaiya 1 .

1 There were two kinds of descendants of Pra^a-
pati the Devas and the Asuras 2 3 . Now the Devas >
were indeed the younger, the Asuras the elder ones 2 .
The Devas, who were struggling in these worl s,
said: ‘ Well, let us overcome the Asuras at the sacn-
fices (the Ayotish/oma) by means of the udgitha.

2 They said to speech (Va/£) : ‘ Do thou sing out
for us (the udgitha).’ ‘Yes,’ said speech, and sang
(the udgitha). Whatever delight there is in speec ,
that she obtained for the Devas by singing (the three
pavamanas); but that she pronounced well (in the

other nine pavamanas), that was for herself. The

Asuras knew: ‘Verily, through this singer they wil ;
overcome us.’ They therefore rushed at the singer i
and pierced her with evil. That evil which consists

in saying what is bad, that is that evil.

■5. Then they (the Devas) said to breath (scent). j
‘ Do thou sing out for us.’ ‘ Yes,’ said breath, an
saner. Whatever delight there is in breath (smell), .
that he obtained for the Devas by singing ; but that
he smelled well, that was for himself. The Asuras
knew: ‘ Verily, through this singer they will over¬
come us.’ They therefore rushed at the singer, and •

1 Called the Udgitha-br&hma«a. In the M&dhyandina-rakM,

the Upanishad, which consists of six adhyayas, begins wi ,

Brahmawa (cf. Weber’s edition, p. 1047 i Commentary, p. II 0 9 )-

2 The Devas and Asuras are explained by the commen
as the senses, inclining either to sacred or to worldly o jec s,

good or evil. , „

3 According to the commentator, the Devas were the ess

numerous and less strong, the Asuras the more numeious
more powerful.

I ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMAAA, 7 .

79

pierced him. with evil. That evil which consists in
smelling what is bad, that is that evil.

4. Then they said to the eye : ‘ Do thou sing out
for us.’ ‘Yes/ said the eye, and sang. Whatever
delight there is in the eye, that he obtained for the
Devas by singing; but that he saw well, that was
for himself. The Asuras knew : ‘Verily,through this
singer they will overcome us.’ They therefore rushed
at the singer, and pierced him with evil. That evil
which consists in seeing what is bad, that is that evil.
< 5 * Then they said to the ear : ‘ Do thou sing out
for us. ‘ Yes, said the ear, and sang. Whatever
delight there is in the ear, that he obtained for the
Devas by singing; but that he heard well, that was
for himself. The Asuras knew: ‘Verily, through this
singer they will overcome us.’ They therefore rushed
at the singer, and pierced him with evil. That evil
which consists in hearing what is bad, that is that evil.

6 . Then they said to the mind : 4 Do thou sing out
for us.’ ‘Yes/ said the mind, and sang. Whatever
delight there is in the mind, that he obtained for the
Devas by singing ; but that he thought well, that
was for himself. The Asuras knew : ‘Verily, through
this singer they will overcome us.’ They therefore
rushed at the singer, and pierced him with evil. That

evil which consists in thinking what is bad, that is
that evil.

Thus they overwhelmed these deities with evils,
thus they pierced them with evil.

7 * Then they said to the breath in the mouth 1 :

‘ Do thou sing for us.’ ‘Yes,’ said the breath, and
sang. The Asuras knew: ‘Verily, through this singer

This is the chief or vital breath, sometimes called mukhya.

1

8 o

BR/H AD AR AiVY AK A-U P ANISH AD.

they will overcome us.’ They therefore rushed at
him and pierced him with evil. Now as a ball of
earth will be scattered when hitting a stone, thus
they perished, scattered in all directions. Hence
the Devas rose, the Asuras fell. He who knows
this, rises by his self, and the enemy who hates

him falls.

8. Then they (the Devas) said *. Where was he
then who thus stuck to us 1 ?’ It was (the breath)
within the mouth (asye ’ntar 2 ), and therefore called
Ayasya; he was the sap (rasa) of the limbs (anga),

and therefore called Angirasa.

9. That deity was called Dur, because Death was
far (duran) from it. From him who knows this,

Death is far off.

10. That deity, after having taken away the evil
of those deities, viz. death, sent it to where the
end of the quarters of the earth is. There he
deposited their sins. Therefore let no one go to
a man, let no one go to the end (of the quarters
of the earth 3 ), that he may not meet there with

evil, with death.

11. That deity, after having taken away the evil of
those deities, viz. death, carried them beyond death.

12. He carried speech across first. When speech
had become freed from death, it became (what it
had been before) Agni (fire). That Agni, after
having stepped beyond death, shines.

13. Then he carried breath (scent) across. When
breath had become freed from death, it became

1 Asakta from sa ng, to embrace; cf. Rig-veda I, 33, 3 - Fere
it corresponds to the German anhanglich.

2 See Deussen, Vedanta, p. 359.

3 To distant people.

I ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMA NA, 18.

8 I

Vayu

death,

^blows That V4yU ’ after haV ‘ ng ste PP ed beyond

't J h u en he c / rried the eye across. When the
eye had become freed from death, it became Aditya

K J ha ‘ Ad,,ya ' afKr ^

15- Then he carried the ear across. When the
ear had become freed from death, it became the
charters (space). These are our quarters (space),
which have stepped beyond death.

16. Then he carried the mind across. When the
mmd had become freed from death, it became the
moon (Aandramas). That moon, after having stepped
beyond death, shines. Thus does that deity carry
him, who know this, across death.

17. Then breath (vital), by singing, obtained for
himself eatable food. For whatever food is eaten
is eaten by breath alone, and in it breath rests

The Devas said : ‘ Verily, thus far, whatever food
ttere is, thou hast by singing acquired it for thyself.

ow therefore give 11s a share in that food.’ He
said : ‘ You there, enter into me.’ They said Yes, and
entered all into him. Therefore whatever food is
eaten by breath, by it the other senses are satisfied.

18. If a man knows this, then his own relations
come to him in the same manner; he becomes their

supporter, their chief leader, their strong ruler * 2 . And
if ever any one tries to oppose 3 one who is possessed
of such knowledge among his own relatives, then he

This is done by the last nine Pavamanas, while the first three
were used for obtaining the reward common to ail the pranas.

f „ f . Cre an , nfida is wel1 explained by andmayavin, and vyadhirahita,
iree iiom sickness, strong.

3 Read pratiprati/r; see Poley, and Weber, p. nSo
[15] G

82

BRI HADARAiVYAKA“UPANISHAD.

will not be able to support his own belongings. But
he who follows the man who is possessed oi such
knowledge, and who with his permission wishes to
support those whom he has to support, he indeed
will be able to support his own belongings.

19. He was called Ayasya Angirasa, for he is the
sap (rasa) of the limbs (anga). Verily, breath is
the sap of the limbs. Yes, breath is the sap of the
limbs. Therefore from whatever limb breath goes
away, that limb withers, for breath verily is the sap

of the limbs.

20. He (breath) is also Brz'haspati, for speech is
Brzhati (Rig-veda), and he is her lord ; therefore he

is Brfhaspati. . .

21. He (breath) is also Brahma^aspati, for speech

is Brahman (Ya^ur-veda), and he is her lord; there¬
fore he is Brahma^aspati.

He (breath) is also Saman (the Udgitha), for
speech is Saman (Sama-veda), and that is both
speech (sa) and breath (ama) \ This is why Saman
is called Saman.

22. Or because he is equal (sama) to a grub, equa
to a gnat, equal to an elephant, equal to these three
worlds, nay, equal to this universe, therefore he is
Saman. He who thus knows this Saman, obtains

union and oneness with Saman.

23. He (breath) is Udgitha 1 2 . Breath verily is Ut

for by breath this universe is upheld (uttabdha) ; an
speech is Githa, song. And because he is ut and
githa, therefore he (breath) is Udgitha.

1 Cf. Kirk nd. Up. V, 2, 6. ,

2 Not used here in the sense of song or hymn, but as an ac

worship connected with the Saman. Comm.

I ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMAiVA, 2 7 . 8^

_ ' o

24. And thus Brahmadatta Afaikitaneya (the

grandson of /Tikitana), while taking Soma (ra^an),
said : ‘ May this Soma strike my head off, if Ayasya
Angirasa sang another Udgitha than this. He sang
it indeed as speech and breath.’ *

25. He who knows what is the property of this
Saman, obtains property. Now verily its property
is tone only. Therefore let a priest, who is going to
perform the sacrificial work of a Sama-singer, desire
that his voice may have a good tone, and let him
perform the sacrifice with a voice that is in good
tone. Therefore people (who want a priest) for a
sacrifice, look out for one who possesses a good
voice, as for one who possesses property. He who
thus knows what is the property of that Saman,
obtains property.

26. He who knows what is the gold of that
Saman, obtains gold. Now verily its gold is tone
only. He who thus knows what is the gold of that
Saman, obtains gold.

27. He who knows what is the support of that
Saman, he is supported. Now verily its support

< speech only. For, as supported in speech, that
breath is sung as that Saman. Some say the
support is in food.

Next follows the Abhyaroha 1 (the ascension) of
the Pavamana verses. Verily the Prastotrz beoins
to sing the Saman, and when he begins, then let him
(the sacrificer) recite these (three Ya^us-verses):

‘ Lead me from the unreal to the real! Lead me

1 The ascension is a ceremony by which the performer reaches
the gods, or becomes a god. It consists in the recitation of three
Ya^-us, and is here enjoined to take place when the Prastotrf priest
begins to sing his hymn.

G 2

8 4

bjwhadAraotaka-upanishad.

from darkness to light! Lead me from death to
immortality! ’

Now when he says, ‘ Lead me from the unreal to
the real,’ the unreal is verily death, the real immor¬
tality. He therefore says, ‘Lead me from death to

immortality, make me immortal. . ^

When he says, ‘Lead me from darkness to light,
darkness is verily death, light immortality. He
therefore says, ‘ Lead me from death to immortality,

make me immortal.’

When he says, ‘ Lead me from death to immor¬
tality,’ there is nothing there, as it were, hidden

(obscure, requiring explanation ) * 1 .

28. Next come the other Stotras with which the
priest may obtain food for himself by singing them.
Therefore let the sacrificer, while these Stotras are
being sung, ask for a boon, whatever desire he may
desire. An Udgatrf priest who knows this obtains ,
by his singing whatever desire he may desire either
for himself or for the sacrificer. This (knowledge) in¬
deed is called the conqueror of the worlds. He who
thus knows this Saman 2 , for him there is no fear of 1

his not being admitted to the worlds 3 . 1

_-— -- — - ■- '

1 See Deussen, Vedanta, p. 86.

2 He knows that he is the Prazza, which Pra/za is the Saman.
That Prazza cannot be defeated by the Asuras, 1. e. by the senses
which are addicted to evil; it is pure, and the five senses finding
refuge in him, recover there their original nature, fire, &c. I
Prazza is the Self of all things, also of speech (^zg-ya^u/z-s&nmdgitha,, <
and of the Saman that has to be sung and well sung. The Pra;/a
pervades all creatures, and he who identifies^ himself with t at
Prazza, obtains the rewards mentioned in the Brahmazza. Comm. 1

3 In connection with loka^it, lokyata is here explained, and
may probably have been intended, as worthiness to be admitted to
the highest world. Originally lokyata and alokyata meant right .
and wrong. See also I, 5 , 17.

I ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMA A A, 3.

Fourth Brahman a \

1* beginning this was Self alone, in the shape

of a person (purusha). He looking round saw nothing
but his Self. He first said, ‘ This is I ; ’ therefore
he became I by name. Therefore even now, if a
man is asked, he first says, ‘This is 1/ and then
pronounces the other name which he may have. And
because before (purva) all this, he (the Self) burnt
down (ush) all evils, therefore he was a person
(pur-usha). Verily he who knows this, burns down
every one who tries to be before him.

2. He feared, and therefore any one who is lonely
fears. He thought, ‘ As there is nothing but myself,
why should I fear ? ’ Thence his fear passed away.

For what should he have feared ? Verily fear arises
from a second only.

3 - But he felt no delight. Therefore a man who
is lonely feels no delight. He wished for a second.
He was so large as man and wife together. He then
made this his Self to fall in two (pat), and thence
arose husband (pati) and wife (patni). Therefore
Ya^Tzavalkya said : ‘We two 1 2 3 are thus (each of us)
like half a shell V Therefore the void which was

1 Called Purushavidhabrahmarca (Mddhyandina-j'akha, p. 1050).
See Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, vol. i, p. 24.

2 The Comm, explains sva h by atmana h, of himself. But see
Boehtlingk, Sanskrit Chrestomathie, p. 357.

3 Roer translates : ‘Therefore was this only one half of himself, as
a split pea is of a whole/ Br/gala is a half of anything. Muir
(Ong. Sansk. Texts, vol. i, p. 25) translates : ‘ Ya^avalkya has said
that this one’s self is like the half of a split pea/ I have translated
the sentence according to Professor Boehtlingk's conjecture (Chres¬
tomathie, 2nd ed. p. 357), though the singular after the dual (sva/d
is irregular.

B.R/HADARA2VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

there, is filled by the wife. He embraced her, and
men were born.

4. She thought, ‘ How can he embrace me, alter
having produced me from himself? I shall hide

myself.’

She then became a cow, the other became a
bull and embraced her, and hence cows were born.
The one became a mare, the other a stallion; the
one a male ass, the other a female ass. He em¬
braced her, and hence one-hoofed animals were born.
The one became a she-goat, the other a he-goat;
the one became a ewe ’, the other a ram. He em¬
braced her, and hence goats and sheep were born.
And thus he created everything that exists in paiis,

down to the ants.

5 He knew, *1 indeed am this cieation, for
created all this.’ Hence he became the creation,
and he who knows this lives in this his creation.

6. Next he thus produced fire by rubbing. From
the mouth, as from the fire-hole, and from the hands
he created fire 1 2 . Therefore both the mouth and the
hands are inside without hair, for the fire-hole is
inside without hair.

And when they say, ‘Sacrifice to this or sacrifice to
that god,’ each god is but his manifestation, for he

is all gods.

Now, whatever there is moist, that he created
from seed; this is Soma. So far verily is this uni¬
verse either food or eater. Soma indeed is food,
Ao-ni eater. This is the highest creation of Brah-

1 The reading avir itaro, i.e. itara u, is not found in the I a;Aa

text. See Boehtlingk, Chrestomathie, p. 357 *

2 He blew with the mouth while he rubbed with the hands.

87

I ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAM, 7 .

man, when he created the gods from his better part 1
and when he, who was (then) mortal 2 3 , created the im¬
mortals. Therefore it was the highest creation. And
he who knows this, lives in this his highest creation.

7. Now all this was then undeveloped. It became
developed by form and name, so that one could say,
* He, called so and so, is such a one V Therefore at
present also all this is developed by name and form, so
that one can say, ‘ He, called so and so, is such a one/

He (Brahman or the Self) entered thither, to the
very tips of the finger-nails, as a razor might be
fitted in a razor-case, or as fire in a fire-place 4 .

He cannot be seen, for, in part only, when breath-
ing, he is breath by name; when speaking, speech
by name ; when seeing, eye by name ; when hearing,
ear by name; when thinking, mind by name. All
these are but the names of his acts. And he who
worships (regards) him as the one or the other, does
not know him, for he is apart from this (when quali¬
fied) by the one or the other (predicate). Let men
worship him as Self, for in the Self all these are one.
This Self is the footstep of everything, for through
it one knows everything 5 . And as one can find
again by footsteps what was lost, thus he who knows
this finds glory and praise.

1 Or, when he created the best gods.

2 As man and sacrificer. Comm.

3 The Comm, takes asau-nama as a compound, instead of ida m-
nama. I read asau nama, he is this by name, viz. Devadatta, &c.
Dr. Boehtlingk, who in his Chrestomathie (2nd ed. p. 31) had
accepted the views of the Commentator, informs me that he has
changed his view, and thinks that we should read asau nama.

4 Cf. Kaush. Br. Up. VI, 19.

0 ‘ As one finds lost cattle again by following their footsteps, thus
one finds everything, if one has found out the Self/ Comm.

88

B7?/HAD AR AiVYAK A-UPANIS HAD.

8. This, which is nearer to us than anything, this
Self, is dearer than a son, dearer than wealth, dearer
than all else.

And if one were to say to one who declares an¬
other than the Self dear, that he will lose what is dear
to him, very likely it would be so. Let him worship
the Self alone as dear. He who worships the Self
alone as dear, the object of his love will never perish 1 .

9. Here they say: ‘If men think that by know¬
ledge of Brahman they will become everything, what
then did that Brahman know, from whence all this
sprang ? ’

10. Verily in the beginning this was Brahman, that
Brahman knew (its) Self only, saying, ‘ I am Brah¬
man/ From it all this sprang. Thus, whatever
Deva was awakened (so as to know Brahman), he
indeed became that (Brahman); and the same with
Rishis and men. The Ri shi Vamadeva saw and
understood it, singing, ‘I was Manu (moon), I was the
sun/ Therefore now also he who thus knows that
he is Brahman, becomes all this, and even the Devas
cannot prevent it, for he himself is their Self.

Now if a man worships another deity, thinking
the deity is one and he another, he does not know.
He is like a beast for the Devas. For verily, as
many beasts nourish a man, thus does every man
nourish the Devas. If only one beast is taken
away, it is not pleasant; how much more when many
are taken! Therefore it is not pleasant to the
Devas that men should know this.

11. Verily in the beginning this was Brahman, one

1 On rudh, to lose, see Taitt. Sawh. II, 6, 8, 5, pp. 765, 771, as
pointed out by Dr. Boehtlingk. On Dvaro (yat) tathaiva, syat, see
Boehtlingk, s.v.

I ADHVAYA, 4 BRAHMAiVA, 14.

89

only. That being one, was not strong enouo-h It
crea K < s„U farter the most exc J e „, £ h J

fc 1 r, Ksha ' ras ^ong ,he

Devas, Indra, Varuaa. Soma, Rndra, Parganya
Yama Mmyu tana. Therefore there is tithing
beyond the Kshatra, and therefore at the Rayusuy!
sacn ce the Brahma«a sits down below the Kshatriya
He confers that gloryon the Kshatra alone. But Brah
man ,s (nevertheless) the birth-place of the Kshatra.
Therefore though a king is exalted, he sits down at
the end (of the sacrifice) below the Brahman, as his
birth-place. He who injures him, injures his own
birth-place. He becomes worse, because he has
injured one better than himself.

t2. He 1 was not strong enough. He created the
Vir (people), the classes of Devas which in their
different orders are called Vasus, Rudras, Adityas
Visve Devas, Maruts.

13. He was not strong enough. He created the
u ra colour (caste), as Pushan (as nourisher). This
earth verily is Pushan (the nourisher); for the earth
nourishes all this whatsoever.

14- He was not strong enough. He created still
urther the most excellent Law (dharma). Law is
the Kshatra (power) of the Kshatra*, therefore there
is nothing higher than the Law. Thenceforth even
a weak man rules a stronger with the help of the
Law, as with the help of a king. Thus the Law is
what is called the true. And if a man declares what
is true, they say he declares the Law; and if he

eclares the Law, they say he declares what is true,
i nus both are the same.

2 ^ bserve the change from tad, it, to sa, he.

' More powerful than the Kshatra or warrior caste. Comm.

9 o

BJWHADARA2VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

it. There are then this Brahman, Kshatra, Vis,
and .Sudra. Among the Devas that Brahman existed
as Agni (fire) only, among men as Brahmawa, as
Kshatriya through the (divine) Kshatnya, as Vauya
through the (divine) Vaitya, as Audra through tie
(divine) .Sudra. Therefore people wish for then-
future state among the Devas through Agni (the
sacrificial fire) only; and among men through the
Brahmawa, for in these two forms did brahman

^Now if a man departs this life without having
seen his . true future life (in the Self), then that
Self not being known, does not receive an ess
him,’ as if the Veda had not been read, or as il a
o-oocl work had not been done. Nay, even if one
who does not know that (Self), should perform here
on earth some great holy work, it will perish for
him in the end. Let a man worship the Self on y
as his true state. If a man worships the Self only as
his true state, his work does not perish, for whatever

he desires that he gets from that Self.

16. Now verily this Self (of the ignorant man) is
the world 1 of all creatures. In so far as man sacri¬
fices and pours out libations, he is the world of the
Devas; in so far as he repeats the hymns, &c., he is
the world of the AVshis; in so far as he offeis cas.es
to the Fathers and tries to obtain offspring, he is the
world of the Fathers ; in so far as he gives shelter an
food to men, he is the world of men; m so far as e
finds fodder and water for the animals, he is theworl
of the animals ; in so far as quadrupeds, birds, an
even ants live in his houses, he is their world. And
as every on e wishes his own world not to be mjuie ^

1 Is enjoyed by them fill- Comm.

I ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMAAA, I.

91

thus all beings wish that he who knows this should

not be injured. Verily this is known and has been
well reasoned.

1 7. In the beginning this was Self alone, one only.
He desired, ‘ Let there be a wife for me that I may
have offspring, and let there be wealth for me that I
may offer sacrifices.’ Verily this is the whole desire,
and, even if wishing for more, he would not find it.
Therefore now also a lonely person desires, * Let
there be a wife for me that I may have offspring, and
let there be wealth for me that I may offer sacrifices.’
And so long as he does not obtain either of these
things, he thinks he is incomplete. Now his com¬
pleteness (is made up as follows): mind is his self
(husband).; speech the wife; breath the child; the
eye all worldly wealth, for he finds it with the eye ;
the ear his divine wealth, for he hears it with the
ear. The body (atman) is his work, for with the
body he works. This is the fivefold 1 sacrifice, for
fivefold is the animal, fivefold man, fivefold all this
whatsoever. He who knows this, obtains all this.

Fifth Braiimaaa 2 .

1. When the father (of creation) had produced by
knowledge and penance (work) the seven kinds of
food, one of his (foods) was common to all beings,
two he assigned to the Devas, (i)

Three he made for himself, one he gave to the
f animals. In it all rests, whatsoever breathes and
breathes not. (2)

1 Fivefold, as consisting of mind, speech, breath, eye, and ear.
SeeTaitt. Up. I, 7, 1.

2 Madhyandina text, p. 1054.

9 2

B-R/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

‘ Why then do these not perish, though they are
always eaten ? He who knows this imperishable

one, he eats food with his face. (3)

< He o-oes even to the Devas, he lives on

strength.’ (4)

2. When it is said, that f the father produced by
knowledge and penance the seven kinds of food,’ it
is clear that (it was he who) did so. When it is
said, that ‘ one of his (foods) was common,’ then that
is that common food of his which is eaten. He who
worships (eats) that (common food), is not removed
from evil, for verily that food is mixed (property) .
When it is said, that ‘ two he assigned to the Devas,’
that is the huta, which is sacrificed in fire, and the ;
prahuta, which is given away at a sacrifice. But
they also say, the new-moon and full-moon sacrifices
are here intended, and therefore one should not offer

them as an ish/i or with a wish.

When it is said, that ‘one he gave to animals,’
that is milk. For in the beginning (in their infancy)
both men and animals live on milk. And therefore
they either make a new-born child lick ghrzta
(butter), or they make it take the breast. And
they call a new-born creature ‘ atrz;zada, i. e. not
eating herbs. When it is said, that ‘ in it all rests,
whatsoever breathes and breathes not, we see that
all this, whatsoever breathes and breathes not, rests
and depends on milk.

And when it is said (in another Brahma^a), that
a man who sacrifices with milk a whole year 1 2 , over¬
comes death again, let him not think so. No, on

1 It belongs to all beings.

2 This would imply 360 sacrificial days, each with two oblations,
i.e. 720 oblations.

I ADHYA\A, 5 BRAHMAiVA, 3.

93

the very day on which he sacrifices, on that day he
overcomes death again; for he who knows this,
offers to the gods the entire food (viz milk)

When it is said, ‘ Why do these not perish, though
they are always eaten,’ we answer, Verily, the Person

is the imperishable, and he produces that food a-ain
and again 1 .

When it is said, ‘ He who knows this imperishable

one, then, verily, the Person is the imperishable

one, for he produces this food by repeated thought

and whatever he does not work by his works, That
perishes.

When it is said, that ‘he eats food with his face,’

then face means the mouth, he eats it with his
mouth.

When it is said, that ‘he goes even to the Devas
he lives on strength,’ that is meant as praise.

3.^ When it is said, that ‘ he made three for him¬
self,’ that means that he made mind, speech, and
breath for himself. As people say, ‘ My mind was
e sewhere, I did not see; my mind was elsewhere,

I did not hear,’ it is clear that a man sees with his
mind and hears with his mind 2 . Desire, representa¬
tion, doubt, faith, want of faith, memory 3 * , forgetful¬
ness, shame, reflexion, fear, all this is mind. There¬
fore even if a man is touched on the back, he knows
it through the mind.

Whatever sound there is, that is speech. Speech

indeed is intended for an end or object, it is nothino-
by itself. &

2 ? ose ' v,1 ° en joy the food, become themselves creators. Comm.

See Deussen, Vedanta, p. 358.

Firmness, strength. Comm.

94

B#/HADARA2VYAKA~U pantshad.

The up-breathing, the down-breathing, the back-
breathing, the out-breathing, the on-breathing, a
that is breathing is breath (prawa) only. en y
that Self consists of it; that Self consists of speech,

mind, and breath. .

4. These are the three worlds: earth is speech,

skv mind, heaven breath.

c These are the three Vedas: the Rig-veda is
speech, the Yafur-veda mind, the Sama-veda breath.

6 These are the Devas, Fathers, and men : t e
Devas are speech, the Fathers mind, men breath

7. These are father, mother, and child: the father
is mind, the mother speech, the child breath.

8. These are what is known, what is to be known,

and what is unknown.

What is known, has the form of speech, for speech
is known. Speech, having become this, protects

q. What is to be known, has the form of mind,
for mind is what is to be known. Mind, having

become this, protects man.

10 What is unknown, has the form of breath, tor

breath is unknown. Breath, having become this,

protects man 1 2 . , r ^

11 Of that speech (which is the food of Pra^a-

pati) earth is the body, light the form, viz. this fire.

And so far as speech extends, so far extends the

earth, so far extends fire.

12. Next, of this mind heaven is the body, igi

the form, viz. this sun. And so far as this nun

1 ‘ The food (speech), having become known, can be consumed.

C ° This was adhibhautika, with reference to bhfttas, beings. Next
follows the adhidaivika, with reference to the devas, gods. omm.

1 ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMAiVA, 16.

95

extends, so far extends heaven, so far extends the
sun. If they (fire and sun) embrace each other, then
wind is born, and that is Indra, and he is without a

rival. Verily a second is a rival, and he who knows
this, has no rival.

13. Next, of this breath water is the body, light

the foim, viz. this moon. And so far as this breath

extends, so far extends water, so far extends the
moon.

T. hese are all alike, all endless. And he who wor¬
ships them as finite, obtains a finite world, but he who
worships them as infinite, obtains an infinite world.

14. That Pra^apati is the year, and he consists of
sixteen digits. The nights 1 indeed are his fifteen
digits, the fixed point 2 his sixteenth digit. He is
increased and decreased by the nights. Having on
the new-moon night entered with the sixteenth part
into everything that has life, he is thence born again
in the morning. Therefore let no one cut off theHfe

! of any living thing on that night, not even of a lizard,
in honour (pfi^artham) of that deity.

15- Now verily that Pra^apati, consisting of six¬
teen digits, who is the year, is the same as a man
who knows this. His wealth constitutes the fifteen
digits, his Self the sixteenth digit. He is increased
and decreased by that wealth. His Self is the nave,
his wealth the felly. Therefore even if he loses
everything, if he lives but with his Self, people say,
he lost the felly (which can be restored again).

16. Next there are verily three worlds, the world
of men, the world of the Fathers, the world of the

1. Devas. The world of men can be gained by a son

I --—--—

1 Meant for nychthemera.

2 When he is just invisible at the new moon.

BRI HADARA 2 VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

96

only, not by any other work. By sacrifice the world
of the Fathers, by knowledge the world of the Devas
is gained. The world of the Devas is the best of
worlds, therefore they praise knowledge.

17. Next follows the handing over. When a man
thinks he is going to depart, he says to his son:

< Thou art Brahman (the Veda, so far as acquired by
the father); thou art the sacrifice (so far as performed
by the father); thou art the world.’ The son answers:

‘ I am Brahman, I am the sacrifice, I am the world.
Whatever has been learnt (by the father) that, taken
as one, is Brahman. Whatever sacrifices there are,
they, taken as one, are the sacrifice. Whatever
worlds there are, they, taken as one, are the woild.
Verily here ends this (what has to be done by a
father, viz. study, sacrifice, &c.) ‘ He (the son), being

all this, preserved me from this* world 1 ,’ thus he
thinks. Therefore they call a son who is instructed
(to do all this), a world-son (lokya), and therefore
they instruct him.

When a father who knows this, departs this woild,
then he enters into his son together with his own
spirits (with speech, mind, and breath). If there is
anything done amiss by the father, of all that the son
delivers him, and therefore he is called Putra, son .
By help of his son the father stands firm in this
world 3 . Then these divine immortal spirits (speech,
mind, and breath) enter into him. __

1 Roer seems to have read sawnaya,‘ all this multitude.’ I read,

etan ma sarvazzz sann ayam ito ’bhuna^ad iti.

2 The Comm, derives putra from pu (pur), to fill, and tra (tra), to
deliver, a deliverer who fills the holes left by the fathei, a stop¬
gap. Others derive it from put, a hell, and tra, to protect, cf.

Manu IX, 138.

3 ‘ The manushya-loka, not the pitn-loka and deva-loka.’ Comm.

I ADIHAYA, 5 BRAhmawa, 21.

97

18. From the earth and from fire, divine speech
enters into him. And verily that is divine speech
whereby, whatever he says, comes to be.

into 9 h, Fr0m A h !. aVen i and the SUn ’ divine mind enters
nto him. And verily that is divine mind whereby

he becomes joyful, and grieves no more

20 From water and the moon, divine breath
(spirit) enters into him. And verily that is divine
reath which, whether moving or not moving, does
not tire and therefore does not perish. He who
knows this, becomes the Self of all beings. As that
deity (Hira«yagarbha) is, so does he become. And
as all beings honour that deity (with sacrifice, &c.),
so do all beings honour him who knows this.

Whatever grief these creatures suffer, that is
all one (and therefore disappears). Only what is

fhTDevas 03 ^ 63 ^ ’ Ver ' ly ’ ^ d ° eS n0t a PP roach

2i. Next follows the consideration of the observ¬
ances 2 (acts). Prayapati created the actions (active
senses). When they had been created, they strove
among themselves. Voice held, I shall speak; the
ey e held, I shall see; the ear held, I shall hear;
and thus the other actions too, each according to its
own act. Death, having become weariness, took
t em and seized them. Having seized them, death
held them back (from their work). Therefore
speech grows weary, the eye grows weary, the ear
grows weary. But death did not seize the central
reath. Then the others tried to know him, and

1 ‘ Individuals suffer, because one causes grief to another. But

are neutS ~ ** ^ings

2 The upasana or meditative worship.

C r 5 ] H

B2?/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISH AD.

98

said • ‘ Verily, he is the best of us, he who, whether
moving or not, does not tire and does not perish.
Well, let all of us assume his form. Thereupon
they all assumed his form, and therefore they are

called after him ‘breaths’ (spirits).

In whatever family there is a man who knows

this they call that family after his name. And e
who strives with one who knows this, withers away
and finally dies. So far with regard to the body.

20. Now with regard to the deities.

Ao-ni (fire) held, I shall burn; Aditya (the sun)
held, I shall warm ; Aandramas (the moon) held,

I shall shine; and thus also the other deities, eac
according to the deity. And as it was with the
central breath among the breaths, so d was witi
Vayu, the wind among those deities. The other
deities fade, not Vayu. Vayu is the deity that

never sets.

23. And here there is this 61 oka :

< He from whom the sun rises, and into whom it
sets’ (he verily rises from the breath, and sets in

the breath)

• Him the Devas made the law, he only is to-day,
and he to-morrow also ’ (whatever these Devas de¬
termined then, that they perform to-day also').

Therefore let a man perform one observance only,
let him breathe up and let him breathe down, that
the evil death may not reach him. And when he
performs it, let him try to finish it. Then he o
tains through it union and oneness with that deity

(with pra^a).

1 The pi awa-vrata and vayu-vrata. Comm.

99

I ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMAAA, 3 .

Sixth Brahmaaa 1 .

nf 1 . VenIy th ' S IS a triad > name > form - and work.

nf,u eS /t nameS ’ thatwhich is called Speech is the
Uktha (hymn, supposed to mean also origin), for

from it all names arise. It is their Saman (sono-

supposed to mean also sameness), for it is the same

as a names. It is their Brahman (prayer, supposed

o mean also support), for it supports all names.

2 Next, of the forms, that which is called Eye is

the Uktha (hymn), for from it all forms arise. It is

their Saman (song), for it is the same as all forms. It

is their Brahman (prayer), for it supports all forms.

3. Next, of the works, that which is called Body is

the Uktha (hymn), for from it all works arise. It is

their Saman (song), for it is the same as all works. It

is their Brahman (prayer), for it supports all works.

That being a triad is one, viz. this Self; and the

Self, being one, is that triad. This is the immortal,

covered by the true. Verily breath is the immortal,

name and form are the true, and by them the im-
mortal is covered.

3 Madhyandina text, p. 1058.

IOO

bjwhadAraatytaka-upanishad.

SECOND ADHYAYA 1 .

First Brahmana 2 .

i There 3 was formerly the proud Gargya Balaki 4 5 ,
a man of great reading. He said to A^tayatru of
Kasi, ‘ Shall I tell you Brahman ? ’ Afataratru said :
‘We give a thousand (cows) for that speech (of
yours), for verily all people run away, saying, Canaka
(the king of Mithila) is our father (patron) 6 .’

2. Gargya said: ‘The person that is in the sun 0 ,
that I adore as Brahman.’ Afatasatru said to him .
< No, no! Do not speak to me on this. I adore him

1 Madhyandina text, p. 1058. .

2 Whatever has been taught to the end of the third (according

to the counting of the Upanishad, the first) Adhyaya, re eis
avidya, ignorance. Now, however, vidya, the highest knowledge,
is lo be taught, and this is done, first of all, by a dialogue between
Gfirgya DnptaMUUa and king A^ataratru, the former, though a
Brahma»a, representing the imperfect, the latter, though a Kshatnya,
the perfect knowledge of Brahman. While Gfirgya worships the
Brahman as the sun, the moon, &c., as limited, as active and passive,

Airataratru knows the Brahman as the Self.

3 Compare with this the fourth Adhyaya of the Kaushitaki-

upanishad, Sacred Books of the East, vol. i, p. 3 °° i Gou S h >
Philosophy of the Upanishads, p. 144 -

4 Son of Balakaj of the race of the Gargyas.

5 Ganaka, known as a wise and liberal king. There is a pa)
on his name, which means father, and is understood in the sense
of patron, or of teacher of wisdom. The meaning is obscure; and
in the Kaush. Up. IV. i, the construction is still more difficu .
What is intended seems lo be lhat A^taratru is willing to oftei
any reward to a really wise man, because all the wise men are

running after Ganaka and settling at his court.

0 The commentator expatiates on all these answers and brings
them more into harmony with Ved&nta doctrines. Thus he a s
that the person in the sun is at the same time the person m the eye,
who is both active and passive in the heart, &c.

II ADHYAYA, I BRAHMA1VA, 6.

IOI

verily as the supreme, the head of all beings, the

1 . oso ac ores thus, becomes supreme,
the head of all being's, a king/

3 - Gargya said : ‘ The person that is in the moon
(and in the mind), that I adore as Brahman.’ A^d-
taiatru said to him : ‘ No, no 1 Do not speak to me
on this. I adore him verily as the great, clad in
white raiment, as Soma, the king.’ Whoso adores
him thus, Soma is poured out and poured forth for
him day by day, and his food does not fail \

4. Gargya said: ‘ The person that is in the light¬
ning (and in the heart), that I adore as Brahman.’
A^ataratru said to him : ‘ No, no ! Do not speak to
me on this. I adore him verily as the luminous.’
Whoso adores him thus, becomes luminous, and his
offspring becomes luminous.

5. Gargya said : ‘ The person that is in the ether
(and in the ether of the heart), that I adore as Brah¬
man.’ A^ataratru said to him : ‘ No, no 1 Do not
speak to me on this. I adore him as what is full,
and quiescent.’ Whoso adores him thus, becomes
filled with offspring and cattle, and his offspring does
not cease from this world.

6. Gargya said : ‘ The person that is in the wind
(and in the breath), that I adore as Brahman/ A^a-
ta^atru said to him : 4 No, no ! Do not speak to me
on this. I adore him as Indra Vaiku;z//£a, as the
unconquerable army (of the Maruts)/ Whoso adores
him thus, becomes victorious, unconquerable, con¬
quering his enemies.

We miss the annasyatma, the Self of food, mentioned in the
Kaush. Up., and evidently referred to in the last sentence of our
paragraph. Suta and prasuta, poured out and poured forth, are
explained as referring to the principal and the secondary sacrifices.

102

BR/HADARAAYAKA-TJPANISHAD.

7 Garsrya said: ‘ The person that is in the fire (and
in the heart), that I adore as Brahman.’ A^tasatru
said to him: ‘ No, no! Do not speak to me on this 1
adore him as powerful’ Whoso adores him thus, be¬
comes powerful, and his offspring becomes powerful.

8 . G&rgya said : ‘ The person that is in the water
(in seed, and in the heart), that I adore as Brahman
Afata satru said to him: ‘ No, no ! Do not spea
to me on this. I adore him as likeness. W hoso
adores him thus, to him comes what is likely (or
proper), not what is improper; what is born from

him, is like unto him'. .

o. Gargya said: ‘The person that is in the

mirror, that I adore as Brahman.’ A/atasatru said

to him : ‘ No, no! Do not speak to me on this.

I adore him verily as the brilliant.’ Whoso adores

him thus, he becomes brilliant, his offspring becomes

brilliant, and with whomsoever he comes together,

he outshines them.

10. Gargya said : ‘ The sound that follows a man
while he moves, that I adore as Brahman.’ AAta-
mtru said to him: ‘ No, no! Do not speak to me
on this. I adore him verily as life.’ Whoso adores
him thus, he reaches his full age in this world, breath

does not leave him before the time.

11. Gargya said: ‘The person that is in space,

that I adore as Brahman.’ Afatamtru said to him:
‘ No, no! Do not speak to me on this. I adore
him ’ verily as the second who never leaves us.

Here the Kaush. Up. has the Self of the name, instead of
pratirhpa, likeness. The commentator thinks that they both mean
the same thing, because a name is the likeness of a thing. Ano e

text of the Kaush. Up. oives here t ?

the sense of likeness comes in later in the Kaush. Up., § n.

II ADHYAYA, I BRAHMAiYA, 15.

IO3

Whoso adores him thus, becomes possessed of a
second, his party is not cut off from him.

12. Gargya said : ‘ The person that consists of the
shadow, that I adore as Brahman.’ A^ata-satru said
to him : No, no! Do not speak to me on this
I adore him verily as death/ Whoso adores him
thus, he reaches his whole age in this world, death
does not approach him before the time.

13 . Gargya said : £ The person that is in the body 1 ,
that I adore as Brahman. A^atasatru said to him :

‘ No > no ! Do n °t speak to me on this. I adore him
verilyas embodied/ Whoso adores him thus, becomes
embodied, and his offspring becomes embodied 2 .

Then Gargya became silent.

14 . A^ata^atru said : ‘ Thus far only ? ’ ‘ Thus far
only/ he replied. A^ata^atru said : ‘ This does not
suffice to know it (the true Brahman)/ Gargya
replied : ‘ Then let me come to you, as a pupil/

I 5 * A^ata^atru said: ‘Verily, it is unnatural that
a Brahma;za should come to a Kshatriya, hoping
that he should tell him the Brahman. However, I
shall make you know him clearly/ thus saying he
took him by the hand and rose.

And the two together came to a person who was
asleep. He called him by these names, ‘Thou,
great one, clad in white raiment, Soma, King 3 / He

1 ' In the Atman, in Pra^apati, in the Buddhi, and in the heart/
Comm.

It is difficult to know what is meant here by atman and &tman-
vm. In the Kaush. Up. A^ataratru refers to Pra^apati, and the
commentator here does the same, adding, however, buddhi and
hnd. Gough translates atmanvin by ‘having peace of mind/
Deussen, p. 195, passes it over.

0 These names are given here as they occur in the Kaushitaki-
upanishad, not as in the Bnhadara^yaka-upanishad, where the

104

Btf/HADARAOTAKA-UPANISHAD.

did not rise. Then rubbing him with his hand, he
woke him, and he arose.

16. A^atasatru said: ‘When this man was thus
asleep, where was then the person (purusha), the in¬
telligent ? and from whence did he thus come back ?

Gargya did not know this ?

17. A^atasatru said: ‘When this man was thus
asleep, then the intelligent person (purusha), having-
through the intelligence of the senses (prawas) ab¬
sorbed within himself all intelligence, lies in the
ether, which is in the heart b When he takes in
these different kinds of intelligence, then it is said
that the man sleeps (svapiti) * 1 2 . Then the breath
is kept in, speech is kept in, the ear is kept in, the
eye is kept in, the mind is kept in.

18. But when he moves about in sleep (and
dream), then these are his worlds. He is, as it were,
a great king 5 he is, as it were, a great Brahma/^a , he
rises, as it were, and he falls. And as a great king
might keep in his own subjects, and move about,
according to his pleasure, within his own domain,
thus does that person (who is endowed with intel¬
ligence) keep in the various senses (pranas) and move
about, according to his pleasure, within his own body
(while dreaming).

19. Next, when he is in profound sleep, and knows

first name was atish/MA sarvesham bhutanam murdha vagL This
throws an important light on the composition of the Upanishads.

1 The ether in the heart is meant for the real Self. He has
come to himself, to his Self, i. e. to the true Brahman.

2 Svapiti, he sleeps, is explained as sva, his own Self, and
apiti for apyeti, he goes towards, so that ‘he sleeps must be
interpreted as meaning ‘ he comes to his Self/ In another passage
it is explained by svam apito bhavati. See ^Sankara’s Commentary
on the Brzh. Ar. Up. vol. i, p. 372.

II ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMAATA, 2.

!°5

nothing, there are the seventy-two thousand arteries
called Hita, which from the heart spread through
the body 1 . Through them he moves forth and rests
in the surrounding body. And as a young man, or a
great king, or a great Brahma^a, having reached the
summit of happiness, might rest, so does he then rest.

20. As the spider comes out with its thread, or as
small sparks come forth from fire, thus do all senses,
all worlds, all Devas, all beings come forth from that
Self. The Upanishad (the true name and doctrine)
of that Self is ‘ the True of the True.’ Verily the
senses are the true, and he is the true of the true.

Second Brahmaa t a 2 .

1. Verily he who knows the babe 3 with his place 4 ,
his chamber 6 , his post 6 , and his rope 7 , he keeps off
the seven relatives 8 who hate him. Verily by the
young is meant the inner life, by his place this
(body) 9 , by his chamber this (head), by his post the
vital breath, by his rope the food.

2. Then the seven imperishable ones 10 approach
him. There are the red lines in the eye, and by
them Rudra clings to him. There is the water

1 ‘ Not the pericardium only, but the whole body.’ Comm.

2 Madhyandina text, p. 1061.

The lingatman, or subtle body which has entered this body in
five ways. Comm.

4 The body. 5 The head. 6 The vital breath.

' Food, which binds the subtle to the coarse body.

8 The seven organs of the head through which man perceives

and becomes attached to the world.

9 The commentator remarks that while saying this, the body

and the head are pointed out by touching them with the hand
(pa;zipeshapratibodhanena).

See before, I, 5, 1, 2. They are called imperishable, because
they produce imperishableness by supplying food for the pra//a,
here called the babe.

io6

B^/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

in the eye, and by it Par^anya clings to him. There
is the pupil, and by it Aditya (sun) clings to him.
There is the dark iris, and by it Agni clings to him.
There is the white eye-ball, and by it Indra clings to
him. With the lower eye-lash the earth, with the
upper eye-lash the heaven clings to him. He who
knows this, his food does never perish.

3. On this there is this ^Sloka *.

< There 1 is a cup having its mouth below and its
bottom above. Manifold glory has been placed into
it. On its lip sit the seven Rishis, the tongue as
the eighth communicates with Brahman. What is
called the cup having its mouth below and its bottom
above is this head, for its mouth (the mouth) is
below, its bottom (the skull) is above. When it is
said that manifold glory has been placed into it,
the senses verily are manifold glory, and he there¬
fore means the senses. When he says that the
seven Rishls sit on its lip, the A^shis are verily the
(active) senses, and he means the senses. And
when he says that the tongue as the eighth com¬
municates with Brahman, it is because the tongue,

as the eighth, does communicate with Brahman.

4. These two (the two ears) are the Rishis Gau¬
tama and Bharadva^a; the right Gautama, the left (
Bharadva^a. These two (the eyes) are the Rt shis ,
-Vkvamitra and Gamadagni; the right VBvamitra, ,
the left (Tamadagni. These two (the nostrils) are
the Ris his Vasish^a and Kayyapa; the right Va- j
sish/^a, the left Kayyapa. The tongue is Atri, for
with the tongue food is eaten, and Atri is meant for ,
Atti, eating. He who knows this, becomes an eater
of everything, and everything becomes his food.

1 Cf. Atharva-veda-sawh. X, 8, 9.

II ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMAiYA, 6.

IO7

Third Brahmaaa 1 ,

r. There are two forms of Brahman, the material
and the immaterial, the mortal and the immortal, the
solid and the fluid, sat (being) and tya (that), (i. e.
sat-tya, true) 2 .

2. Everything except air and sky is material, is
mortal, is solid, is definite. The essence of that
which is material, which is mortal, which is solid,
which is definite is the sun that shines, for he is the
essence of sat (the definite).

3. But air and sky are immaterial, are immortal,
are fluid, are indefinite. The essence of that which
is immaterial, which is immortal, which is fluid, which
is indefinite is the person in the disk of the sun, for
he is the essence of tyad (the indefinite). So far with
regard to the Devas.

4* Now with regard to the body. Everything
except the breath and the ether within the body is
material, is mortal, is solid, is definite. The essence
of that which is material, which is mortal, which is
solid, which is definite is the Eye, for it is the essence
of sat (the definite).

5* But breath and the ether within the body are
immaterial, are immortal, are fluid, are indefinite.
The essence of that which is immaterial, which is
immortal, which is fluid, which is indefinite is the
person in the right eye, for he is the essence of tyad
(the indefinite).

6. And what is the appearance of that person ?
Like a saffron-coloured raiment, like white wool,

1 M&dhyandina text, p. 1062.

2 Sat is explained by definite, tya or tyad by indefinite.

io8

BRZHADARAAYAKA-UPANISHAD.

like cochineal, like the flame of fire, like the white
lotus, like sudden lightning. He who knows this,
his glory is like unto sudden lightning.

Next follows the teaching (of Brahman) by No,
no 1 ! for there is nothing else higher than this (if
one says): ‘It is not so/ Then comes the name
‘the True of the True/ the senses being the True,
and he (the Brahman) the True of them.

Fourth Brahmajva 2 .

1. Now when Ya^avalkya was going to enter
upon another state, he said : ‘ Maitreyi 3 , verily I am
going away from this my house (into the forest 4 ).
Forsooth, let me make a settlement between thee
and that Katyayani (my other wife)/

2. Maitreyi said: ‘ My Lord, if this whole earth,
full of wealth, belonged to me, tell me, should I be
immortal by it 5 ?’

1 See III, 9, 26 ; IV, 2, 4; IV, 4, 22 ; IV, 5, 15.

2 Madhyandina text, p. 1062. To the end of the third Brahmawa
of the second Adhyaya, all that has been taught does not yet impart
the highest knowledge, the identity of the personal and the true Self,
the Brahman. In the fourth Brahmawa, in which the knowledge
of the true Brahman is to be set forth, the Sa//7nyasa, the retiring
from the world, is enjoined, when all desires cease, and no duties
are to be performed (Sawnyasa, parivragya). The story is told again
with slight variations in the B/Yhadaraz/yaka-upanishad U , 5* The
more important variations, occurring in IV, 5, are added here, marked
with B. There are besides the various readings of the Madhyandina-
jakha ofthe Yatapatha-brahma/ja. See also Deussen, Vedanta, p. 185.

3 In Brfh. Up. IV, 5, the story begins: YagYavalkya had two wives,
Maitreyi 1 and Katyayani. Of these Maitreyi was conversant with
Brahman, but Katyayani possessed such knowledge only as women
possess.

4 Instead of udyasyan, B. gives pravra,gishyan, the more
technical term.

5 Should I be immortal by it, or no ? B.

II ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAiVA, 5.

‘ No >’ re P lied Ya^avalkya; ‘ like the life of rich
people will be thy life. But there is no hope of
immortality by wealth.’

3- And Maitreyi said: ‘What should I do with
that by which I do not become immortal ? What my
Lord knoweth (of immortality), tell that to me 1 .’

4. Ya ? -«avalkya replied : ‘ Thou who art truly dear
to me, thou speakest dear words 2 . Come, sit down,

I will explain it to thee, and mark well what I say.’

5. And he said : ‘ Verily, a husband is not dear, that
you may love the husband; but that you may love
the Self, therefore a husband is dear.

Verily, a wife is not dear, that you may love the

wife; but that you may love the Self, therefore a
wife is dear.

‘Verily, sons are not dear, that you may love

the sons; but that you may love the Self, therefore
sons are dear.

‘Verily, wealth is not dear, that you may love

wealth ; but that you may love the Self, therefore
wealth is dear 3 .

\ ‘ Venl Y> the Brahman-class is not dear, that you

may love the Brahman-class; but that you may love
the Self, therefore the Brahman-class is dear,
s Verily, the Kshatra-class is not dear, that you
may love the Kshatra-class; but that you may love
the Self, therefore the Kshatra-class is dear.

Verily, the worlds are not dear, that you may
love the worlds; but that you may love the Self,
therefore the worlds are dear.

1 Tell that clearly to me. B.

2 Thou who art dear to me, thou hast increased what is dear (to
me in this). B.

B. adds, Verily, cattle are not dear, &c.

I IO

B.R/H AD AR AiVYAK A-UP ANIS HAD.

‘Verily, the Devas are not dear, that you may
love the Devas ; but that you may love the Self,

therefore the Devas are dear 1 .

‘ Verily, creatures are not dear, that you may love
the creatures ; but that you may love the Self, there¬
fore are creatures dear.

‘ Verily, everything is not dear that you may love
everything ] but that you may love the Self, there¬
fore everything is dear.

‘Verily, the Self is to be seen, to be heard, to
be perceived, to be marked, O Maitreyi! When
we see, hear, perceive, and know the Self 2 , then
all this is known.

6. ‘ Whosoever looks for the Brahman-class else¬
where than in the Self, was 3 abandoned by the
Brahman-class. Whosoever looks for the Kshatra-
class elsewhere than in the Self, was abandoned by !
the Kshatra-class. Whosoever looks for the worlds (
elsewhere than in the Self, was abandoned by the
worlds. Whosoever looks for the Devas elsewhere
than in the Self, was abandoned by the Devas 4 .
Whosoever looks for creatures elsewhere than in the
Self, was abandoned by the creatures. Whosoever
looks for anything elsewhere than in the Self, was
abandoned by everything. This Brahman-class, this
Kshatra-class, these worlds, these Devas 5 , these 6
creatures, this everything, all is that Self.

7. ‘ Now as 7 the sounds of a drum, when beaten, .

1 B. inserts, Verily, the Vedas are not dear, &c.

2 When the Self has been seen, heard, perceived, and known. B. ,

3 The commentator translates, ‘ should be abandoned.

4 B. inserts, Whosoever looks for the Vedas, &c.

5 B. adds, these Vedas. 6 B. has, all these creatures.

7 I construe sa yatha with evam vai in § 12, looking upon

II ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAiVA, 12. m

cannot be seized externally (by themselves), but the

sound is seized, when the drum is seized or the beater
of the drum;

8. ‘And as the sounds of a conch-shell, when
blown, cannot be seized externally (by themselves),

but the sound is seized, when the shell is seized or
the blower of the shell ;

9. ‘ And as the sounds of a lute, when played,
cannot be seized externally (by themselves), but the

sound is seized, when the lute is seized or the
player of the lute ;

10. ‘As clouds of smoke proceed by themselves
out of a lighted fire kindled with damp fuel, thus,
verily, O Maitreyi, has been breathed forth from
this great Being what we have as A^g-veda, Ya^yur-
veda, Sama-veda, Atharvangirasas, Itihasa (legends),
Purina (cosmogonies), Vidya (knowledge), the Upa-
nishads, Ylokas (verses), Sutras (prose rules), Anu-
vyakhyanas (glosses), Vyakhyanas (commentaries) 1 .
From him alone all these were breathed forth.

11. ‘As all waters find their centre in the sea,
all touches in the skin, all tastes in the tongue, all
smells in the nose, all colours in the eye, all sounds
in the ear, all percepts in the mind, all knowledge in
the heart, all actions in the hands, all movements in
the feet, and all the Vedas in speech,—

12. ‘As a lump of salt 2 , when thrown into water,
becomes dissolved into water, and could not be taken

§ 11 as probably a later insertion. The sa is not the pronoun, but
a particle, as in sa yadi, sa k& t, &c.

1 B. adds, what is sacrificed, what is poured out, food, drink, this
world and the other world, and all creatures.

2 See ZMnd. Up. VI, 13.

I I 2

BimiADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

out again, but wherever we taste (the water) it is
sa l t> —thus verily, O Maitreyi, does this great Being,
endless, unlimited, consisting of nothing but know¬
ledge 1 , rise from out these elements, and vanish again
in them. When he has departed, there is no more
knowledge (name), I say, O Maitreyi.’ Thus spoke
Ya^avalkya.

13. Then Maitreyi said: ‘Here thou hast be¬
wildered me, Sir, when thou sayest that having
departed, there is no more knowledge 2 /

But Ya^avalkya replied: ‘ O Maitreyi, I say nothing
that is bewildering. This is enough, O beloved, for
wisdom 3 .

‘ For when there is as it were duality, then one
sees the other, one smells the other, one hears the
other 4 , one salutes the other 5 , one perceives the
other 6 , one knows the other ; but when the Self only
is all this, how should he smell another 7 , how should
he see 8 another 9 , how should he hear 10 another, how
should he salute 11 another, how should he perceive
another 12 , how should he know another ? How
should he know Him by whom he knows all this ?

1 As a mass of salt has neither inside nor outside, but is altogether
a mass of taste, thus indeed has that Self neither inside nor outside,
but is altogether a mass of knowledge. B.

2 ‘ Here, Sir, thou hast landed me in utter bewilderment. Indeed,
I do not understand him.’ B.

3 Verily, beloved, that Self is imperishable, and of an inde¬
structible nature. B.

4 B. inserts, one tastes the other.

5 B. inserts, one hears the other.

6 B. inserts, one touches the other. 7 See, B.

8 Smell, B. 9 B. inserts taste.

10 Salute, B. 11 Hear, B.

12 B. inserts, how should he touch another ?

II ADHyAya, 5 BRAHMAiVA, 2.

How, O beloved, should he
Knower 1 ? ;

know (himself), the

Fifth Brahmawa 2 .

11 eart ^ ls t ^ le koney 3 (madhu, the effect) of

are ,h t ^

Der con in th' / kewise this bright, immortal

l22Z 7 ean u T 1 tHat bHght immortal Person

• , ^ . e ln t le body (both are madhu) He

eed is the same as that Self, that Immortal that
brahman, that AH. ’

2. This water is the honey of all beings and all

br'T T ' 'I'’"' 5 ' ° f ' his Waler ' Lik ™“

S'. ,n “" ortal p«'»» in this water, and that
(bo* a an person, existing as seed in the body

Sd thi: ,T \ ind “ d IS ,h ' *“”<= » the"

belt, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

Instead of the last line, B. adds (IV e tcV <Thor c if
be described by No no! tt • • ' ’ 5 ’ That Self is to

be comprehended he^s L “P^nsibie, for he cannot
unflitarl.A/1 r ' unpenshable, for he cannot perish • he is

**** "•

Knowerf Thus O M?°T’ ° be] ° Ved > shouId he know the
far goes immortality.’ Harin’o- 'sirid so^Ysl 6 ' ‘"?. tlUCted ' Thus

“■ ““ “"d % v,"‘ y

s Madhyandina text, p. 1064. *

thin^vhth k T y u SeemS l ° be taken here as an ’ ns tance of some-

srvfr - r r::

::r?

£rs zTStssrjrsf-- In,h '-»

dependent living k ■ g ° oked u P on as mutually

epenaent, Jiving beings presuppos ng the earth ,„d ,h ,

presupposing livin* beiiws Thk n ’ d he earth

trenerol la <• V ° S 1 hls at aI1 event s seems to be the

wWch Dad! / ‘ IS Ca]l6d theMadhuvid ^- ‘he science of honey

wmch JJadhya^ communicated to the A.rvins 7 ’

[ J 5] i

BA/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

114

3. This fire is the honey of all beings, and all
beings are the honey of this fire. Likewise this
bright, immortal person in this fire, and that bright,
immortal person, existing as speech in the body (both
are madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self,
that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

4. This air is the honey of all beings, and all
beings are the honey of this air. Likewise this
bright, immortal person in this air, and that bright,
immortal person existing as breath in the body (both
are madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self,
that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

5. This sun is the honey of all beings, and all
beings are the honey of this sun. Likewise this
bright, immortal person in this sun, and that bright,
immortal person existing as the eye in the body
(both are madhu). He indeed is the same as that
Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

6. This space (dba/;, the quarters) is the honey of
all beings, and all beings are the honey of this
space. Likewise this bright, immortal person in this
space, and that bright, immortal person existing as
the ear in the body (both are madhu). He indeed
is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brah¬
man, that All.

7. This moon is the honey of all beings, and all
beings are the honey of this moon. Likewise this
bright, immortal person in this moon, and that bright,
immortal person existing as mind in the body (both
are madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self,
that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

8. This lightning is the honey of all beings, and
all beings are the honey of this lightning. Likewise
this bright, immortal person in this lightning, and

II ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMAiVA, 13.

1 X 5

that bright, Immortal person existing as light in the
body (both are madhu) . He indeed is the same as
that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

9 - is thunder 1 is the honey of all beings, and all
beings are the honey of this thunder. Likewise this
bright, immortal person in this thunder, and that
bright, immortal person existing as sound and voice
m the body (both are madhu). He indeed is the

tha^AJl” tHat SClf ’ that Imm ° rtaI ’ that Brahman,

10. This ether is the honey of all beings, and all
beings are the honey of this ether. Likewise this
bright, immortal person in this ether, and that brio-ht
immortal person existing as heart-ether in the body
( oth are madhu). He indeed is the same as that
sell, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

1 r. This law (dharma/r) is the honey of all beings,
and all beings are the honey of this law. Likewise
t is bright, immortal person in this law, and that
right, immortal person existing as law in the body
(both are madhu). He indeed is the same as that
belf, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

12. This true 2 (satyam) is the honey of all beings,
and all beings are the honey of this true. Likewise
this bright, immortal person in what is true, and that
bright, immortal person existing as the true in the
body (both are madhu). He indeed is the same as
that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

13. This mankind is the honey of all beings, and
all beings are the honey of this mankind. Likewise

Par^a!iya ayitnU ’ thUnder ’ ’ S ex P ,ained h Y *e commentator as
truth Satyam ’ the trU6 ’ the real ' n0t ’ aS ‘ S 8 eneial l v translated, the

116

b/?ih ad ar an y ak a- u p an is h ad .

this bright, immortal person in mankind, and that
bright, immortal person existing as man in the body
(both are madhu). He indeed is the same as that
Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All.

14. This Self is the honey of all beings, and all
beings are the honey of this Self. Likewise this
bright, immortal person in this Self, and that blight,
immortal person, the Self (both are madhu). He
indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that

Brahman, that All.

15. And verily this Self is the lord of all beings,
the king of all beings. And as all spokes are con¬
tained in the axle and in the felly of a wheel, all
beings, and all those seifs (of the earth, water, &c.)

are contained in that Self.

16. Verily Dadhya/6 Atharva;za proclaimed this

honey (the madhu-vidya) to the two Alvins, and a

A’zshi, seeing this, said (Rv. I, 116, 12) :

< O ye two heroes (Alvins), I make manifest that
fearful deed of yours (which you performed) for the
sake of gain \ like as thunder 1 2 makes manifest the
rain. The honey (madhu-vidya) which Dadhya/6
Atharva/za proclaimed to you through the head of
a horse,’ ...

17. Verily Dadhya^ Atharva^a 3 proclaimed this
honey to the two Alvins, and a ./foshi, seeing this,
said (Rv. I, 117, 22) :

1 O Alvins, you fixed a horse s head on Atharva^a
DadhyaA and he, wishing to be true (to his promise),

1 The translation here follows the commentary.

2 Tanyatu, here explained as Par^anya.

3 Sankara distinguishes here between Atharvawa and Athaiva^a,
if the text is correct.

II ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMAiVA, 19.

II?

proclaimed to you the honey, both that of Tvash tri 1

and that which is to be your secret, O ve strono-
ones.’ b

18. Verily Dadhya /5 Atharvawa proclaimed this

honey to the two Alvins, and a -foshi, seeing this,
said :

‘He (the Lord) made bodies with two feet, he
made bodies with four feet. Having first become
a bird, he entered the bodies as purusha (as the
person).’ This very purusha is in all bodies the puri-
^aya, i.e. he who lies in the body (and is therefore
called purusha). There is nothing that is not
covered by him, nothing that is not filled by him.

19. Verily Dadhyai Atharva/za proclaimed this
honey to the two Alvins, and a seeino- this,

said (Rv. VI, 47, 18):

‘ He (the Lord) became like unto every form 2 , and
this is meant to reveal the (true) form of him (the
Atman). Indra (the Lord) appears multiform through
the Mayas (appearances), for his horses (senses) are
yoked, hundreds and ten.’

This (Atman) is the horses, this (Atman) is the
ten, and the thousands, many and endless. This is
the Brahman, without cause and without effect, with¬
out anything inside or outside; this Self is Brahman,
omnipresent and omniscient. This is the teaching
(of the Upanishads).

1 .Sankara explains Tvash/rz'as the sun, and the sun as the head
of the sacrifice which, having been cut off, was to be replaced by
the pravargya rite. The knowledge of this rite forms the honey
of Tvash/rz. The other honey which is to be kept secret is the
knowledge of the Self, as taught before in the Madhu-brahma;za.

2 He assumed all forms, and such forms, as two-footed or four-
footed animals, remained permanent. Comm.

118

BR/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

Sixth Brahma^a.

1. Now follows the stem 1 :

1. Pautimashya from Gaupavana,

2. Gaupavana from Pautimashya,

3. Pautimashya from Gaupavana,

4. Gaupavana from Kausika,

5. Kaudka from KauWinya,

6. KauWinya from SandWya,

7. SaWilya from Kaudka and Gautama,

8. Gautama

2. from Agnive-sya,

9. Agnivesya from 6aWilya and Anabhimlata,

10. SandWya and Anabhimlata from Anabhimlata,

11 . Anabhimlata from Anabhimlata,

12. Anabhimlata from Gautama,

13. Gautama from Saitava and Pra/6inayogya,

14. Saitava and Pra/6inayogya from Para^arya,

15. Para^arya from Bharadvafa,

16. Bharadva^a from Bharadva^a and Gautama?

17. Gautama from Bharadva^a,

1 The line of teachers and pupils by whom the Madhuka;«/a
(the fourth Brahmaraa) was handed down. The Madhyandina-^akha
begins with ourselves, then 1. Aaurpawayya, 2. Gautama, 3. Vatsya,
4. Vatsya and Para^arya, 5. Sankntya and Bharadva^a, 6. Auda-
vahi and SzndWyz, 7. Vai^avapa and Gautama, 8 . Vai^ava P ayana
and Vaish/apureya, 9. Adilya and Rauhi/myana, 10. Aaunaka,
Atreya, and Raibhya, n. Pautimashyaya/m and Kau^inyay ana,
12. Kauwafinya, 13. KauWinya, 14. Kauw^inya and Agnivesya,
15. Saitava, 16. Par^arya, 17. Gatukarwya, 18. Bharadva^a, 19. Bha-
radva^a, Asumyawa, and Gautama, 20. Bharadv^a, 21. Vai^avapa-
yana. Then the same as the Kawvas to Gatukarwya, who learns
from Bharadvag-a, who learns from Bharadva^a, Asuiayawa, and
Yaska. Then Traivawi &c. as in the Kawva-vama.

II ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMAZVA, 3. m

18. Bharadva^fa from Para^arya,

19* Parai'arya from Vai^avapayana,

20. Vai^avapayana from Kaiuik&yam,

21 1 . Kaudkayani
3. from GhzVtakau^ika,

22. Ghrztakaudka from Para^aryaya/za,

23. Parararyaya/za from Parasarya,

24. Para^arya from (Satukarzzya 2 ,

2 5 * f^atukarzzya from Asurayazza and Yaska 3 ,

26. Asurayazza and Yaska from Traivazzi,

27. Traivazzi from Aupa^andhani,

28. Aupa^andhani from Asuri

29. Asuri from Bharadva^a,

30. Bharadva^a from Atreya,

31. Atreya from Mazz/i,

32. Mazz/i from Gautama,

33* Gautama from Gautama,

34. Gautama from Vatsya,

35- Vatsya from Yazzz/ilya,

36. Yazzz/ilya from Kai^orya Kapya,

37- Kaii'orya Kapya from Kumaraharita,

38. Kumaraharita from Galava,

39. Galava from Vidarbhi-kauzzz/inya,

40. Vidarbhi - kauzzz/inya from Vatsanapat Ba-

bhrava,

41. Vatsanapat Babhrava from Pathi Saubhara,

42. Pathi Saubhara from Ayasya Angirasa,

43. Ayasya Angirasa from Abhuti Tvash/ra,

44. Abhuti Tvash/ra from VLsvartipa Tvash/ra,

45. VBvarupa Tvash/ra from A^vinau,

1 From here the Varna agrees with the Vamsa at the end of
IV, 6.

2 Bharadva^a, in Madhyandina text.

3 Bharadva^-a, Asuraya;za, and Yaska, in Madhyandina text.

I 20

BR/HADARA 2 VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

46. Asvinau from Dadhya^ Atharva/za,

47. Dadhya/£ Atharva^a from Atharvan Daiva,

48. Atharvan Daiva from MWtyu Pradhva?;zsans,

49. MWtyu Pradhva^sana from Pradhva^sana,

50. Pradhvawsana from Ekarshi,

51. Ekarshi from Vipra&tti 1 ,

52. Vipra/£itti from Vyash^i,

53. Vyash^i from Sanaru,

54. Sanaru from Sanatana,

55. Sanatana from Sanaga,

56. Sanaga from Paramesh/Ain,

57. Paramesh/^in from Brahman,

58. Brahman is Svayambhu, self-existent.
Adoration to Brahman 2 .

1 Vipra^itti, in Madhyandina text.

2 Similar genealogies are found Br/h. Ar. Up. IV, 6, and VI, 5.

Ill ADHYAYA, I BRAHMAiVA, 2.

I 2 I

THIRD ADHYAYA.

First Brahmaaa

Adoration to the Highest Self (Paramatman)!

1. Ganaka Vaideha (the king of the Videhas) sacri¬
ficed with a sacrifice at which many presents were
offered to the priests of (the A^vamedha). Brahmawas
of the Kurus and the Paulas had come thither,
and Ganaka Vaideha wished to know, which of those
Brahmawas was the best read. So he enclosed a
thousand cows, and ten padas (of gold ) 1 2 were fastened
to each pair of horns.

2. And d/an aka spoke to them : ‘ Ye venerable
Brahma^as, he who among you is the wisest, let
him drive away these cows/

Then those Brahma^as durst not, but Ya^avalkya
said to his pupil: * Drive them away, my dear/

He replied : f O glory of the Saman 3 / and drove
them away.

The Brahma^as became angry and said : ‘ How
could he call himself the wisest among us ? ’

Now there was A^vala, the Hot ri priest of d/anaka
Vaideha. He asked him: ‘Are you indeed the

1 Madhyandina text, p. 1067.

Pala/£atuibhaga^ pada^ suvarzzasya. Comm.

P ne ex P ects iti after uda^-a, but Samajravas is applied to
a^zavalkya, and not to the pupil. Ya^wavalkya, as the com¬
mentator observes, was properly a teacher of the Ya^ur-veda, but
s the pupil calls him Samaj'ravas, he shows that YagTzavalkya
knew all the four Vedas, because the Samans are taken from the
Rig-veda, and the Atharva-veda is contained in the other three
Vedas. Regnaud, however, refers it to the pupil, and translates,

O toi qui apprends le Sama-veda.’

122

B-R/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

wisest among us, O Ya^v/avalkya ?’ He replied : ‘ I
bow before the wisest (the best knower of Brahman),
but I wish indeed to have these cows.’

Then A^vala, the Hot ri priest, undertook to
question him.

3. ‘ Ya^avalkya,’ he said, ‘ everything here (con¬
nected with the sacrifice) is reached by death, every¬
thing is overcome by death. By what means then
is the sacrifker freed beyond the reach of death ? ’

Ya^avalkya said : ‘ By the Hot ri priest, who is
Agni (fire), who is speech. For speech is the Hot ri
of the sacrifice (or the sacrificer), and speech is
Agni, and he is the Hot ri. This constitutes free¬
dom, and perfect freedom (from death).’

4. ‘ Ya^avalkya,’ he said, ‘ everything here is
reached by day and night, everything is overcome by
day and night. By what means then is the sacrificer
freed beyond the reach of day and night ? ’

Ya^Tzavalkya said : ‘ By the Adhvaryu priest, who
is the eye, who is Aditya (the sun) 1 . For the eye is
the Adhvaryu of the sacrifice, and the eye is the sun,
and he is the Adhvaryu. This constitutes freedom,
and perfect freedom.’

5. ‘ Ya^avalkya,’ he said, ‘everything here is
reached by the waxing and waning of the moon,
everything is overcome by the waxing and waning
of the moon. By what means then is the sacrificer
freed beyond the reach of the waxing and waning
of the moon ? ’

Ya^avalkya said: ‘By the Udgatrz priest, who
is Vayu (the wind), who is the breath. For the

1 One expects adityena ^akshusha, instead of /fcakshushadityena,
but see § 6.

Ill ADHYAYA, I BRAHMAJVA, 8.

123

breath is the Udgatrz* of the sacrifice, and the breath
is the wind, and he is the Udgat/Y. This constitutes
freedom, and perfect freedom/

6. ‘ Ya^avalkya/ he said, c this sky is, as it were,
without an ascent (staircase). By what approach
does the sacrificer approach the Svarga world ? ’

Ya^avalkya said : ‘ By the Brahman priest, who
is the mind (manas), who is the moon. For the
mind is the Brahman of the sacrifice, and the mind
is the moon, and he is the Brahman. This consti¬
tutes freedom, and perfect freedom. These are the
complete deliverances (from death)/

Next follow the achievements.

7. ‘ Ya^avalkya/ he said, ‘how many Rik verses
will the Hot ri priest employ to-day at this sacrifice ?’

‘ Three/ replied Ya^/zavalkya.

‘ And what are these three ? ’

‘ Those which are called Puronuvakya, Yafya, and,
thirdly, Yasya Y

‘ What does he gain by them ? ’

‘ All whatsoever has breath/

8. ‘ Ya^a valkya/ he said, ‘how many oblations
(ahuti) will the Adhvaryu priest employ to-day at
this sacrifice ? ’

‘Three/ replied Ya^#avalkya.

f And what are these three ? ’

‘ Those which, when offered, flame up; those which,
when offered, make an excessive noise ; and those
which, when offered, sink down Y

1 The Puronuvakyas are hymns employed before the actual
sacrifice, the Y%yas accompany the sacrifice, the -Sasyas are used
for the iSastra. All three are called Stotriyas.

2 These oblations are explained as consisting of wood and oil,
of flesh, and of milk and Soma. The first, when thrown on the

BR/HADARA 2 VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

I 24

‘ What does he gain by them ? *

* By those which, when offered, flame up, he gains
the Deva (god) world, for the Deva world flames
up, as it were. By those which, when offered, make
an excessive noise, he gains the Vitrz (father) world,
for the Pit ri world is excessively (noisy) * 1 . By those
which, when offered, sink down, he gains the Manu-
shya (man) world, for the Manushya world is, as it
were, down below/

9. ‘ Ya^avalkya/ he said, ‘ with how many deities
does the Brahman priest on the right protect to-day
this sacrifice ? ’

‘ By one/ replied Ya^avalkya.

‘ And which is it ? ’

* The mind alone; for the mind is endless, and the
Vbvedevas are endless, and he thereby gains the
endless world/

10. ‘ Ya/yzavalkya/ he said, ‘how many Stotriya
hymns will the Udgatr/ priest employ to-day at this
sacrifice V

‘Three/ replied Ya^avalkya.

‘ And what are these three ? ’

‘ Those which are called Puronuvakya, Ya^ya, and,
thirdly, Yasya/

‘And what are these with regard to the body
(adhyatmam) ? *

‘ The Puronuvakya is Pra^a (up-breathing), the
Ya^ya the Apana (down-breathing), the Yasya the
Vyana (back-breathing)/

fire, flame up. The second, when thrown on the fire, make a
loud hissing noise. The third, consisting of milk, Soma, &c., sink
down into the earth.

1 On account of the cries of those who wish to be delivered out
of it. Comm.

HI ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMAAA, 7. 125

‘ What does he gain by them?’

He gains the earth by the Puronuvakyi, the sky
by the Ya^ya, heaven by the Yasya/

After that A^vnla held his peace.

Second Brahmawa 1 .

1* Then 6aratkarava Artabhaga 2 asked. ‘ Ya^vza-
valkya, he said, how many Grahas are there, and
how many Atigrahas 3 ?’

( Eight Grahas, he replied, 'and eight Atigrahas/

‘And what are these eight Grahas and eight
Atigrahas ?’

2. Pra.ua. (breath) is one Graha, and that is seized
by Apana (down-breathing) as the Atigraha 4 , for one
smells with the Apana/

3. ‘ Speech (vU) is one Graha, and that is seized-
by name (naman) as the Atigraha, for with speech
one pronounces names/

4 - The tongue is one Graha, and that is seized
by taste as the Atigraha, for with the tongue one
perceives tastes/

5 - The eye is one Graha, and that is seized by form
as the Atigraha, for with the eye one sees forms/

6 . * The ear is one Graha, and that is seized by sound
as the Atigraha, for with the ear one hears sounds/

7 * The mind is one Graha, and that is seized by

1 Madhyandina text, p. 1069.

2 A descendant of i?ztabhaga of the family of £aratkaru.

3 Graha is probably meant originally in its usual sacrificial sense,
as a vessel for offering oblations. But its secondary meaning^
in which it is here taken, is a taker, a grasper, i. e. an organ of

sense, while atigraha is intended for that which is grasped, i. e. an
object of sense.

Here the a is long, ^andasatvat.

BjR/HADARAiVYAK A-U PANISH AD.

I 26

desire as the Atigraha, for with the mind one desires
desires.’

3. ‘ The arms are one Graha, and these are seized
by work as the Atigraha, for with the arms one
works work.’

9. ‘ The skin is one Graha, and that is seized by
touch as the Atigraha, for with the skin one per¬
ceives touch. These are the eight Grahas and the
eight Atigrahas.’

10. ‘ Ya^avalkya,’ he said, ‘ everything is the food
of death. What then is the deity to whom death is

food ?’

< Fire (agni) is death, and that is the food of water.

Death is conquered again.’

11. ‘ Ya^avalkya,’ he said, ‘ when such a person
(a sage) dies, do the vital breaths (pranas) move out
of him or not ?

‘ No,’ replied Ya^avalkya; ‘they are gathered up
in him, he swells, he is inflated, and thus inflated the
dead lies at rest.’

12. ‘ Ya^avalkya,’ he said, ‘when such a man

dies, what does not leave him ?

‘ The name,’ he replied ; ‘ for the name is endless,
the Vbvedevas are endless, and by it he gains the
endless world.’

13. ‘Ya^avalkya,’ he said, ‘when the speech of
this dead person enters into the fire 1 , breath into the
air, the eye into the sun, the mind into the moon,
the hearing into space, into the earth the body, into
the ether the self, into the shrubs the hairs of the
body, into the trees the hairs of the head, when the

1 The commentator explains purusha here by asamyagdanin,
one who does not know the whole truth. See also Deussen,
Vedanta, p. 405, and p. 399, note.

Ill ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMAAA, 2. 127

blood and the seed are deposited in the water, where
is then that person ?’

Ya^avalkya said : ‘ Take my hand, my friend.
We two alone shall know of this; let this question
of ours not be (discussed) in public.’ Then these
two went out and argued, and what they said was
karman (work), what they praised was karman ’,
viz. that a man becomes good by good work, and

bad by bad work. After that Ciratkdrava Arta-
bhfiga held his peace.

Third Brahmaaa 2 .

1. Then Bhu^yu Lahyiyani asked. ‘ Ya^/zavalkya,’
he said, ‘we wandered about as students 3 , and came to
the house of Pata;*/£ala Kapya. He had a daughter
who was possessed by a Gandharva. We asked
him, Who art thou?’ and he (the Gandharva) replied :

I am Sudhanvan, the Angirasa.’ And when we
asked him about the ends of the world, we said to
him, ‘Where were the Parikshitas 4 ? Where then
were the Parikshitas, I ask thee, Ya^avalkya, where
were the Parikshitas?’

2. YagTzavalkya said : ‘He said to thee, I suppose,
that they went where those go who have performed
a horse-sacrifice V

He said : And where do they go who have per¬
formed a horse-sacrifice ?’

What is intended is that the sawsara continues by means of
karman, while karman by itself never leads to moksha.

Madhyandina text, p. 1070.

Phe commentator explains /(’araka^ as adhyayanarthaw vrata-
/faraka^, adhvaryavo va. See Professor R. G. Bhandarkar,
in Indian Antiquary, 1883, P- x 45-

An old royal race, supposed to have vanished from the earth.

B-R/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

I 28

Ya^avalkya replied : ‘ Thirty-two journeys of the
car of the sun is this world. The earth surrounds
it on every side, twice as large, and the ocean
surrounds this earth on every side, twice as large.
Now there is between 1 them a space as large as the
edge of a razor or the wing of a mosquito. Indra^
having become a bird, handed them (through the
space) to Vayu (the air), and Vayu (the air), holding
them within himself, conveyed them to where they
dwell who have performed a horse-sacrifice. Some¬
what in this way did he praise Vayu indeed. There¬
fore Vayu (air) is everything by itself, and Vayu is
all things together. He who knows this, conquers
death/ After that Bhu^yu Lahyayani held his
peace.

Fourth Brahmaaa/ 2 .

1. Then U shasta W 4 kraya;za asked. ‘Yaf/iaval-
kya/ he said, ‘ tell me the Brahman which is visible,
not invisible 3 , the Self (atman), who is within all.’

Ya^avalkya replied: ‘"lhis, thy Self, who is
within all.’

‘ Which Self, O Ya^vzavalkya, is within all ?’

Ya^avalkya replied : ‘He who breathes in the
up-breathing, he is thy Self, and within all. He who
breathes in the down-breathing, he is thy Self, and
within all. He who breathes in the on-breathing,
he is thy Self, and within all. He who breathes in

1 The commentator explains that this small space or hole is
between the two halves of the mundane egg.

2 Madhyandina text, p. 1071. It follows after what is here
the fifth Brahma^a, treating of Kaho</a Kaushitakeya.

3 Deussen, Vedanta, p. 163, translates, ‘das immanente, nicht
transcendente Brahman/ which is right, but too modern.

Ill ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMAiVA, I.

I29

the. out-breathing - , he is thy Self, and within all.
This is thy Self, who is within all.’

2. Ushasta Aakrayawa said: ‘As one might say,
this is a cow, this is a horse, thus has this been
explained by thee. Tell me the Brahman which is
visible, not invisible, the Self, who is within all.’

Ya^Iavalkya replied: ‘This, thy Self, who is
within all/

‘Which Self, O Ya^avalkya, is within all ?’

Ya^avalkya replied: ‘Thou couldst not see the
(true) seer of sight, thou couldst not hear the (true)
hearer of hearing, nor perceive the perceiver of per¬
ception, nor know the knower of knowledge. This
is thy Self, who is within all. Everything also is of
evil. After that Ushasta Aakraya/za held his peace.

Fifth Brahmaaa 1 .

1. Then Kahola Kaushitakeya asked. ‘Ya^/za-
valkya, he said, ‘tell me the Brahman which is visible,
not invisible, the Self (atman), who is within all/

Ya^a valkya replied: ‘ This, thy Self, who is
within all/

‘Which Self, O Ya^avalkya, is within all?’

Ya^avalkya replied : ‘ He who overcomes hunger
and thirst, sorrow, passion, old age, and death.
When Brahma;zas know that Self, and have risen
above the desire for sons 2 , wealth, and (new) worlds 3 ,
they wander about as mendicants. For a desire for
sons is desire for wealth, a desire for wealth is desire
for worlds. Both these are indeed desires. There¬
fore let a Brihma^a, after he has done with learning,

] Madhyandina text,p. 1071,standing before the fourth Brahmarca.

2 See Brih. Ar. Up. IV, 4, 22.

3 Life in the world of the Fathers, or in the world of the Gods.

[15] K

130

Bimi ADAR A 2 V Y A It A-U PANIS H AD.

wish to stand by real strength 1 ; after he has done
with that strength and learning, he becomes a Muni
(a Yogin); and after he has done with what is not
the knowledge of a Muni, and with what is the
knowledge of a Muni, he is a Brahma/za. By what¬
ever means he has become a Brahma/za, he is such
indeed 2 . Everything else is of evil. After that
Kahola Kaushltakeya held his peace.

Sixth Brahma^a 3 .

i. Then Gargi Va/kaknavi asked. ‘ Ya^zzavalkya,
she said, ‘ everything here is woven, like warp and
woof, in water. What then is that in which water is
woven, like warp and woof?’

‘ In air, O Gargi/ he replied.

‘ In what then is air woven, like warp and woof?

‘ In the worlds of the sky, O Gargi, he replied.

‘ In what then are the worlds of the sky woven,
like warp and woof?’

‘In the worlds of the Gandharvas, O Gargi,’ he
replied.

1 Knowledge of the Self, which enables us to dispense with all
other knowledge.

2 Mr. Gough proposes as an alternative rendering: ‘ Let a

Brahmazza renounce learning and become as a child; and after
renouncing learning and a childlike mind, let him become a
quietist; and when he has made an end of quietism and non¬
quietism, he shall become a Brahmazza, a Brahmazza indeed.
Deussen takes a similar view, but I doubt whether c the knowledge
of babes ’ is not a Christian rather than an Indian idea, in spite of
.Sankara’s remarks on Ved. Sutra, III, 4, 50, which are strangely at
variance with his commentary here. Possibly the text may be cor¬
rupt, for tish//zaset too is a very peculiar form. We might conjecture
balyena, as we have abalyam, in IV, 4, 1. In Kaush. Up. Ill, 3,
abalyam stands for abalyam, possibly for abalyam. The construc¬
tion of kena syad vena syat tenedrzja eva, however, is well known.

3 Madhyandina text, p. 1072.

Ill ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMAiVA, I. I3I

In what then are the worlds of the Gandharvas
woven, like warp and woof?’

In the worlds of Aditya (sun), O Gargi/ he replied.

In what then are the worlds of Aditya (sun)
woven, like warp and woof?’

‘ In the worlds of Sandra (moon), O Gargi/ he
replied.

‘ In what then are the worlds of A/andra (moon)
woven, like warp and woof?’

In the worlds of the Nakshatras (stars), O Gargi/
he replied.

‘ In what then are the worlds of the Nakshatras
(stars) woven, like warp and woof?’

‘ In the worlds of the Devas (gods), O Gargi/ he
replied.

‘ In what then are the worlds of the Devas (gods)
woven, like warp and woof?’

In the worlds of Indra, O Gargi/ he replied.

In what then are the worlds of Indra woven, like
warp and woof?’

‘ In the worlds of Pra^apati, O Gargi/ he replied.

‘ In what then are the worlds of Pra^apati woven,
like warp and woof?’

‘ In the worlds of Brahman, O Gargi/ he replied.

In what then are the worlds of Brahman woven,
like warp and woof?’

Yag^avalkya said: ‘O Gargi, Do not ask too
much, lest thy head should fall off. Thou askest
too much about a deity about which we are not to
ask too much 1 . Do not ask too much, O Gargi.’
After that Gargi Va/faknavi held her peace.

Accoiding to the commentator questions about brahman are
to be answered from the Scriptures only, and not to be settled by
argument.

I3 2

br/hadAraavaka-upanishad.

Seventh Brahmana h

i. Then Uddalaka Arum 52 asked. ‘Ya^avalkya/
he said, ‘ we dwelt among the Madras in the houses
of Patamfcila K&pya, studying the sacrifice. His
wife was possessed of a Gandharva, and we asked
him: “Who art thou ?” He answered: “I am
Kabandha Atharva^a.” And he said to Pata;^ala
Kapya and to (us) students: “Dost thou know, Kapya,
that thread by which this world and the other world,
and all beings are strung together ? ” And Pata; 2 /£ala
Kapya replied: “I do not know it, Sir.” He said
again to Patamfcala Kapya and to (us) students:
“"host thou know, Kapya, that puller (ruler) within
(antaryamin), who within pulls (rules) this world and
the other world and all beings ? And Patail/^ala
Kapya replied: “ I do not know it, Sir.” He said
again to Pata^ala Kapya and to (us) students:
‘‘ He, O Kapya, who knows that thread and him who
pulls (it) within, he knows Brahman, he knows the
worlds, he knows the Devas, he knows the Vedas,
he knows the Bhutas (creatures), he knows the Self,
he knows everything.” Thus did he (the Gandharva)
say to them, and I know it. If thou, O Ya^avalkya,
without knowing that string and the puller within,
drivest away those Brahma-cows (the cows offered
as a prize to him who best knows Brahman), thy
head will fall off/

Ya^vlavalkya said : ‘ O Gautama, I believe I know
that thread and the puller within/

1 Madhyandina text, p. 1072.

2 Afterwards addressed as Gautama; see before, p. 1, note.

Ill ADHYAYA, 7 BRAHMAiVA, 7.

133

The other said: ‘ Anybody may say, I know, I
know. Tell what thou knowest.’

2. Ya^/lavalkya said: ‘Vayu (air) is that thread,
O Gautama. By air, as by a thread, O Gautama,
this world and the other world, and all creatures are
strung together. Therefore, O Gautama, people say
of 3 - dead person that his limbs have become unstrung *
for by air, as by a thread, O Gautama, they were
strung together.’

The other said: ‘ So it is, O Ya^avalkya. Tell
now (who is) the puller within/

3 * Ya^avalkya said : ‘He who dwells in the earth,
and within the earth 1 , whom the earth does not
know, whose body the earth is, and who pulls (rules)
the earth within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler)
within, the immortal.’

4. ‘He who dwells in the water, and within the
water, whom the water does not know, whose body
the water is, and who pulls (rules) the water within,
he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’

5. ‘He who dwells in the fire, and within the fire,
whom the fire does not know, whose body the fire
is, and who pulls (rules) the fire within, he is thy
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’

6. ‘He who dwells in the sky, and within the
sky, whom the sky does not know, whose body the
sky is, and who pulls (rules) the sky within, he is thy
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’

7. ‘ He who dwells in the air (vayu), and within the
air, whom the air does not know, whose body the

3 I translate antara by ‘ within/ according to the commentator,
who explains it by abhyantara, but I must confess that I should
prefer to translate it by ‘different from/ as Deussen does, 1. c. p. 160,
particularly as it governs an ablative.

134

BR/HADAR 2VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

air is, and who pulls (rules) the air within, he is thy
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’

8. ‘He who dwells in the heaven (dyu), and within
the heaven, whom the heaven does not know, whose
body the heaven is, and who pulls (rules) the heaven
within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the
immortal.’

9. ‘He who dwells in the sun (aditya), and within
the sun, whom the sun does not know, whose body
the sun is, and who pulls (rules) the sun within, he
is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’

10. ‘He who dwells in the space ( disa./i ), and
within the space, whom the space does not know,
whose body the space is, and who pulls (rules) the
space within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within,
the immortal.’

11. ‘He who dwells in the moon and stars ((’an-
dra-tarakam), and within the moon and stars, whom .
the moon and stars do not know, whose body the
moon and stars are, and who pulls (rules) the moon
and stars within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler)
within, the immortal.’

12. ‘He who dwells in the ether (akasa), and
within the ether, whom the ether does not know,
whose body the ether is, and who pulls (rules) the
ether within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within,
the immortal.’

13. ‘ He who dwells in the darkness (tamas), and
within the darkness, whom the darkness does not
know, whose body the darkness is, and who pulls
(rules) the darkness within, he is thy Self, the puller
(ruler) within, the immortal.’

14. c He who dwells in the light (te^as), and within
the light, whom the light does not know, whose

Ill ADHYAYA, 7 BRAHMA 2 VA, 2T.

135

body the light is, and who pulls (rules) the light
within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the
immortal/

So far with respect to the gods (adhidaivatam) ;
now with respect to beings (adhibhtitam).

15. Ya^avalkya said: ‘He who dwells in all
beings, and within all beings, whom all beings do
not know, whose body all beings are, and who pulls
(rules) all beings within, he is thy Self, the puller
(ruler) within, the immortal/

16. ‘He who dwells in the breath (pra^a), and
within the breath, whom the breath does not know,
whose body the breath is, and who pulls (rules) the
breath within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within,
the immortal/

17. ‘He who dwells in the tongue (va/£), and
within the tongue, whom the tongue does not know,
whose body the tongue is, and who pulls (rules) the
tongue within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within,
the immortal/

18. ‘He who dwells in the eye, and within the
eye, whom the eye does not know, whose body the
eye is, and who pulls (rules) the eye within, he is thy
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal/

19. ‘He who dwells in the ear, and within the
ear, whom the ear does not know, whose body the
ear is, and who pulls (rules) the ear within, he is thy
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal/

20. ‘He who dwells in the mind, and within the
mind, whom the mind does not know, whose body
the mind is, and who pulls (rules) the mind within,
he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal/

21. ‘He who dwells in the skin, and within the
skin, whom the skin does not know, whose body the

136

BR/HADAR ANY AKA-UP AN IS HAD.

skin is, and who pulls (rules) the skin within, he is
thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal’

22. ‘He who dwells in knowledge 1 , and within
knowledge, whom knowledge does not know, whose
body knowledge is, and who pulls (rules) knowledge
within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the
immortal.’

23. ‘He who dwells in the seed, and within
the seed, whom the seed does not know, whose
body the seed is, and who pulls (rules) the seed
within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within,
the immortal ; unseen, but seeing; unheard, but
hearing ; unperceived, but perceiving; unknown, but
knowing. There is no other seer but he, there
is no other hearer but he, there is no other per-
ceiver but he, there is no other knower but he.
This is thy Self, the ruler within, the immortal.
Everything else is of evil.’ After that Uddalaka
Arum held his peace.

Eighth Brahmana 2 .

1. Then Va/£aknavi 3 said : ‘Venerable Brahma^as,
I shall ask him two questions. If he will answer
them, none of you, I think, will defeat him in any
argument concerning Brahman.’

Ya^avalkya said: ‘Ask, O Gargi.’

2. She said: ‘O Ya^avalkya, as the son of a
warrior from the Ka^is or Videhas might string his
loosened bow, take two pointed foe-piercing arrows
in his hand and rise to do battle, I have risen to

1 Self, i. e. the individual Self, according to the Madhyandina
school; see Deussen, p. 161.

2 Madhyandina text, p. 1075.

3 Gargi, not the wife of Ya^wavalkya.

HI ADHYAYA, 8 BRAHMAYA, 8.

*37

fight thee with two questions. Answer me these
questions.

Ya^wavalkya said : ‘Ask, O Gargi.’

3 - She said; ‘ O Ya^avalkya, that of which they
say at it is above the heavens, beneath the earth
embracing heaven and earth', past, present,and future,’
ell me in what is it woven, like warp and woof?’

4 - Ydpavalkya said: ‘That of which they say
at it is above the heavens, beneath the earth

embracing heaven and earth, past, present, and

T re ’/M a V, S W ° Ven ’ hke Warp and woof > in the

ether (akfoa).’

5 - She said : ‘ I bow to thee, O Yaf«avalkya, who

hast solved me that question. Get thee ready for
the second.’ J

Ya^«avalkya said 2 : ‘ Ask, O Gargi.’

6 . She said : ‘ O Y%-wavalkya, that of which they

say that it is above the heavens, beneath the earth

embracing heaven and earth, past, present, and future,’

tell me in what is it woven, like warp and woof? ’

7 - Ya^avalkya said : ‘ That of which they say

t at it is above the heavens, beneath the earth,

embracing heaven and earth, past, present, and future,’

that is woven, like warp and woof, in the ether.’

Gargi said : ‘ In what then is the ether woven like
warp and woof? ’

Said: ‘° Gar ^' Brahmans call this
the Akshara (the imperishable). It is neither coarse

n ° r a 6 ’ , ne ‘. ther short nor Ion .?> neither red (like fire)
nor uid (like water); it is without shadow, with-

Out darkness, without air, without ether, without

Deussen, p. 143, translates, ‘ between heaven and earth , hut
that would be the antariksha. th ’ bUt

This repetition does not occur in the Madhyandina text.

B-RfHADARAlVY AK A'UP ANISH A D.

133

attachment’, without taste, without smell, without
eyes, without ears, without speech, without mind,
without light (vigour), without breath, without a
mouth (or door), without measure, having no within
and no without, it devours nothing, and no one

devours it.’ . .

9. ‘ By the command of that Akshara (the im¬
perishable), O Gargi, sun and moon stand apart 1 2 3 .
By the command of that Akshara, O argi,
heaven and earth stand apart. By the command of
that Akshara, O Gargi, what are called moments
(nimesha), hours (muhurta), days and nights, half¬
months, months, seasons, years, all stand apart.
By the command of that Akshara, O Gargi, some
rivers flow to the East from the white mountains,
others to the West, or to any other quarter. By
the command of that Akshara, O Gargi, men praise
those who give, the gods follow the sacrificer, the

fathers the Darvi-offering.’

10. 4 Whosoever, O Gargi, without knowing that
Akshara (the imperishable), offers oblations in this
world, sacrifices, and performs penance for a thou¬
sand years, his work will have an end. Whosoever,
O Gargi, without knowing this Akshara, departs this
world, he is miserable (like a slave) 3 . But he, 0
Gargi, who departs this world, knowing this Akshara,

he is a Brahma^a.’

11. ‘That Brahman,’ O Gargi, ‘ is unseen, but
seeing; unheard, but hearing; unperceived, but per
ceiving ; unknown, but knowing. There is not an &

1 Not adhering to anything, like lac or gum.

2 Each follows its own course. . . . ,

3 ‘ He stores up the effects from work, like a miser is

Roer. ‘ He is helpless/ Gough.

Ill ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMAiYA, I.

_ 139

that sees but it, nothing that hears but it, nothing

., la . P erc ^ Ives but ib nothing that knows but it. In
hat Akshara then, O Gargi, the ether is woven,
like warp and woof.’

12. Then said Gargi: ‘Venerable Brahmans, you
may consider it a great thing, if you get off by bowing
before him. No one, I believe, will defeat him in

any argument concerning Brahman.' After that
\ a/eaknavi held her peace.

Ninth Brahmawa'.

1. Then Vidagdha Yakalya asked him 1 2 3 : ‘ Howmany

gods are there O Ya^avalkya ? ’ He replied with

this very Nivid»: ‘As many as are mentioned in the

Nivid of the hymn of praise addressed to the Vij-

ve evas, viz. three and three hundred, three and
three thousand 4 .’

‘ Y u eS ’’ he said > and ask ed again : ' How many o- 0 ds
are there really, O Yaf«avalkya ? ’ &

Thirty-three,’ he said.

1 Madhyandina text, p. 1076.

occu^ln f r tat , i0n r bet "’ een and V W«gdha .Sakalya

occurs in a simpler form in the .Salapatha-brahmaKa, XI, p. 87a.

whom ^“‘1 35 the firSt Wh ° defieS Ya ^avalkya, and
h . a ^ alkya asks at once , whether the other Brahmans
had made him the ulmukavakshayatta, the cat’s paw, literally one

, 'A t0 lake a burning piece of wood out of the fire (ardha-

ara/ 5 ). The end, however, is different, for on asking the nature

asked f ^ T Pra " a ’ he is told b - v W;favalkya that he has

and thi Wha , he 0Ught n °‘ t0 ask > and that therefore he will die

3 ^ leves Wlli carr 7 away his bones.

This would make 3306 devat^s.

j BU/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

< Yes,’ he said, and asked again ‘ How many gods
are there really, O Yay/lavalkya ? ’

‘ Six,’ he said.

< Yes,’ he said, and asked again W How many gods
are there really, O Y 4 fwavalkya ? ’

‘ Three,’ he said.

‘ Yes,’ he said, and asked again \ ‘ How many gods
are there really, O Ya^wavalkya ? ’

‘ Two,’ he said.

< Yes,’ he said, and asked again : ‘ How many gods

are there really, O Yagwavalkya ?

‘ One and a half (adhyardha),’ he said.

■ Yes,’ he said, and asked again : ‘ How many gods

are there really, O Yafwavalkya ?

‘ One,’ he said.

«Yes,’ he said, and asked: ‘ Who are these three
and three hundred, three and three thousand ? ’

2 Y aywavalkya replied: ‘They are on y t e
various powers of them, in reality there are only
thirty-three gods V

He asked : ‘Who are those thirty-three ?
YaOiavalkya replied: ‘The eight Vasus, the eleven
Rudras, the twelve Adityas. They make thirty-one,
and Indra and Prafapati make the thirty-three 1 2 .

3. He asked: ‘Who are the Vasus.’

Yaywavalkya replied: ‘ Agni (fire), Pmhivi
(earth), Vayu (air), Antariksha (sky), Aditya (sun),
Dyu (heaven), Aandramas (moon), the Nakshatras
(stars), these are the Vasus, for in them all that
dwells (this world) 3 rests; and therefore they are

called Vasus.’ __

1 ‘ The glories of these are three and thirty.’ Gough, p. i 7 2 -

2 Trayastrh/wau, i.e. trayastriwwata// phrawau.

3 The etymological explanation of Vasu is not quite clear, an

HI ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMAiYA, 8.

X 4 r

4- He asked : ‘ Who are the Rudras >’

, r Y ^T lkya repH . ed: ‘ These te » vital breaths
a«as, e senses, i. e. the five t f«anendriyas, and

Whe J th d endr T S) ’ and AtmanI ’ aS the deVenth -

When they depart from this mortal body, they make

us cry (rodayanti), and because they make us cry
they are called Rudras.’ y

5- He asked: ‘Who are the Adityas
Ya^avalkya replied : ‘ The twelve months of the

year and they are Adityas, because they move along

(yanti), taking up everything 2 (adaddna/A Because

they move along, taking up everything, therefore
they are called Adityas.’

d. He asked: ‘And who is Indra, and who is
Pra^apati ? ’

Yayvzavalkya replied : ‘ Indra is thunder, Pragapati
is the sacrifice.’ r

He asked : ‘ And what is the thunder >’

Ya^avalkya replied : ‘ The thunderbolt.’

He asked : ‘And what is the sacrifice >’

Ya^avalkya replied : ‘ The (sacrificial) animals.’

7- He asked : ‘Who are the six?’

Ya^lavalkya replied : ‘Agni (fire), Pmhivl (earth),

Vayu (air) Antariksha (sky), Aditya (sun), Dyu

( eaven), they are the six, for they are all 3 this
the six. ’

8. He asked : ‘ Who are the three gods ?’
the commentator hardly explains our text. Perhaps vasu is meant

owws 6 r Z "Vi' d n el 'r therein ‘ The m ° re USUal ex P la «^ion

tadvJa ’a ^ P ’ Brah ’ P> 1077 ’ ete hMaw sarva « vasayante
dyad idaw sarva m vSsayante tasmad vasava iti; or on p 874

where we read te yad ida OT sarvam &c. P ‘ 74 ’

I Atman is here explained as manas, the common sensory.

3 1 he llXe oX men » and the fruits of their work.

They are the thirty-three gods.

142

BR/H ADARA 2 VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

Y^«avalkya replied : ‘ These three worlds, for in

them all these gods exist. >

He asked : ‘ Who are the two gods ?

Yafwavalkya replied : ‘Food and breath. ,

He asked : ‘Who is the one god and a half ?
YaWsavalkya replied : ‘ He that blows.

9. Here they say: ‘ How is it that he who blows
like one only, should be called one and a half (adhyar-
dha) ?’ And the answer is : ‘ Because, when the win
was blowing, everything grew (adhyardhnot).’

He asked: ‘Who is the one god ?’

Yafwavalkya replied: ‘ Breath (prawa), and he is
Brahman (the Sutratman), and they call him That

(tyacl).’

10. 6akalya said 1 : ‘Whosoever knows that person
(or god) whose dwelling (body) is the earth, whose
sight (world) is fire 2 , whose mind is light, the pnn

1 I prefer to attribute this to Sakalya, who is still the questioner,
and not Ya^wavalkya; but I am not quite satisfied that I am rig t
in this, or in the subsequent distribution of the parts, assigned o
each speaker. If .Sakalya is the questioner, then the sentence, ve a
va aha m tarn purushaw sarvasyatmanaA paraya 112m yam attha, mus
belong to Ya^avalkya, because he refers to the words of another
speaker. Lastly, the sentence vadaiva has to be taken as addressed
to Sakalya. The commentator remarks that, he being^the ques¬
tioner, one expects p rikkh*. instead of vada. But Ya^avalkya
may also be supposed to turn round on Yakalya and ask him a
question in turn, more difficult than the question addressed by
■Sakalya to Y%«avalkya, and in that case the last sentence must
be taken as an answer, though an imperfect one, of .Sakalva s.
The commentator seems to think that after Yag-wavalkya to
Sakalya to ask this question, .Sakalya was frightened and aske
it, and that then Yagwavalkya answered in turn.

2 The Madhyandina text varies considerably. It has the first
time, /fcashur loka// for agnir loka h. I keep to the same construc¬
tion throughout, taking mano ^yoti^, not as a compound, but we
agnir loko yasya, as a sentence, i.e. mano ^yotir yasya.

HI ADIIYAYA, 9 BRAHMAiVA, 13.

14

Sdt h ' ind “ d is a

• y a<? 7 f Valkya said : ‘ 1 know that person, the prin-

corporearH * ’ ° f Wh ° m th ° U S P eakest - This

te/me* enal > « arthy ) pers ° n , “ he is he.” But
me , Yakalya, who is his devata 2 (deitv) ?’

oakalya replied : • The Immortal 2 .’

11. .Sakalya said: ‘Whosoever knows that person

w' f V s 'T (a body

), hose sight is the heart, whose mind is liaht —

se,t he indeed is a ^

• ■ 1 * ^ that person, the

principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. This

love-made (loving) person, “ he is he.’’ But tell me
oakalya, who is his devata ?’

Oakalya replied: ‘The women 1 .’

12. Yakalya said : ‘Whosoever knows that person
w ose dwelling are the colours, whose sight is the
eye, whose mind is light,-the principle of every self
he indeed is a teacher, O Ydcwavalkya.’

Yayiavalkya re P k ed: ‘ I know that person, the

principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. That

person in the sun, “ he is he.” But tell me, Yakalya
who is his devata ?’ y ’

Yakalya replied : ‘ The True 5 .’

13- Yakalya said : ‘Whosoever knows that person

1 Ask me. Comm.

! T hat h ° m Which he is P’-oduced, that is his devata. Comm

„ rn , CC0, ™8I t0 'he commentator, the essence of food which

Sr b 00c ;: from , 'he germ receives life and become,t
embiyo and a living being.

I ,^ cause ‘hey ^cite the fire of love. Comm.

t he sun owesT ntat ° r Sa ‘ ya ’ the trUe > b * the e y e - because

e sun 0Wes Jt s origin to the eye.

144

B.R/HADARA 2 VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

whose dwelling is ether, whose sight is the ear, whose
mind is light,—the principle of every self, he indeed

is a teacher, O Yafwavalkya.’

Yaf«avalkya replied : ‘ I know that person, the

principle of every self, of whom thou speakest., The
person who hears 1 and answers, “he is he.” But
tell me, .Sakalya, who is his devata ?

-Sakalya replied : ‘ Space.’

14. .Sakalya said: ‘Whosoever knows that person
whose dwelling is darkness, whose sight is the heart,
whose mind is light—the principle of every self, he

indeed is a teacher, O Ydfwavalkya.’

Ya^wavalkya replied: ‘ I know that person, the
principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. The
shadowy 2 person, “ he is he.” But tell me, Sakalya,

who is his devata ?

.Sakalya replied : ‘ Death.

15. .Sakalya said: ‘Whosoever knows that person
whose dwelling are (bright) colours, whose sight is
the eye, whose mind is light,—the principle o( every
self, he indeed is a teacher, O Ya^avalkya.’

Ya^avalkya replied: ‘ I know that person, the
principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. The
person in the looking-glass, “he is he.” But tel
me, .Sakalya, who is his devata ?

.Sakalya replied: ‘Vital breath (asu).

16. .Sakalya said: ‘Whosoever knows that person
whose dwelling is water, whose sight is the heart,
whose mind is light,—the principle of every self, he
indeed is a teacher, O Ya^/iavalkya.

3 Read jrautra instead of jrotra; see Brzh. Ai. Up. II, 5> ^

2 Shadow, Maya, is explained here by a^T/ana, ignorance, no

by g? 7 ana, knowledge.

Ill ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMAiYA, 19.

Ya^avalkya replied: ‘ I know that person, the

principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. The

person in the water, “he is he.” But tell me, .Sakalya
who is his devati ? ’

■Sakalya replied : ‘ Varu«a.’

1 7 - Yakalya said : ‘ Whosoever knows that person
w ose dwelling is seed, whose sight is the heart
w ose mind is light,—the principle of every self, he
mdeecl 1S a teacher, O Y%%avalkya.’

Ya^wavalkya replied: ‘ I know that person, the
principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. The

filial person, “ he is he.” But tell me, .Sakalya, who
is his devatd ? ’

■Sakalya replied : ‘ Pra^apati.’

18. Yaf«avalkya said : ' .Sakalya, did those Br&h-

ma f as (who themselves shrank from the contest)
make thee the victim 1 ? ’

.Sakalya said. Ya^viavalkya, because thou hast
decried the Brahma»as of the Kuru-Pa££alas, what 2
brahman dost thou know ? ?

19 - Ya f «avalkya said : ‘ I know the quarters with
their deities and their abodes.’

Angaravaksha)ra*a is explained as a vessel in which coals are
extinguished, and Anandagiri adds that YV*avalkya, in saying that
.Sakalya was made an angaravakshayarca by his fellow Brahmans
meant that he was given up by them as a victim, in fact that
he was being burnt or consumed by Y%wavalkya. I should prefer
to take angaravakshayawa in the sense of ulmukSvakshayarca an
instrument with which one takes burning coals from the fire to
extinguish them, a pair of tongs. Read sandama instead of sandesa.

Shi with ava means to remove, to take away. We should call

an angaravakshayawa a cat’s paw. The Brfihma«as used .Sakalya
as a cat s paw. J

2 It seems better to take kim as the interrogative pronoun than
as an interrogative particle.

[i5]

L

B#/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

.Sakalya said: ‘ If thou knowest the quarters with

their deities and their abodes,

20. ‘ Which is thy deity in the Eastern quarter .

Yaywavalkya said : ‘ Aditya (the sun).

.Sakalya said: ‘ In what does that Aditya abide .
Yafwavalkya said : ‘ In the eye-’

•Sakalya said: ‘ In what does the eye abide ?
Yaywavalkya said : ‘ In the colours, for with the

eye he sees the colours/

.Sakalya said: ‘ And in what then do the colours
cibidc ^ *

Yaywavalkya said: ‘ In the heart >, for we know
colours by the heart, for colours abide in the heart 1 2 .
Ydkalya said : ‘ So it is indeed, O Yaywavalkya.'

21. .Sakalya said: ‘Which is thy deity in the

Southern quarter ? ’

Yafwavalkya said : ‘ Yama.’

•Sakalya said: ‘ In what does that Yama abide ?
Yafwavalkya said : ‘ In the sacrifice.’

•Sakalya said : ‘ In what does the sacrifice abide ?
Yaywavalkya said : ‘ In the Dakshiwa (the gifts to

be given to the priests). _ ^

•Shkalya said : ‘ In what does the Dakshiwa abide.
Yaywavalkya said: ‘ In .S’raddha (faith), for if a

man believes, then he gives Dakshiwa, and Dakshiwa

truly abides in faith. #

Sakalya said: ‘And in what then does faith abide.

Y^avalkya said : ‘ In the heart, for by the heart
faith knows, and therefore faith abides in the heart.
Yakalya said : ‘ So it is indeed, O Yaf^avalkya.

1 Heart stands here for buddhi and manas together. Comm.

2 In the text, published by Dr. Roer in the Bibliotheca Indica, a
sentence is left out, viz. hrfdaya ity uva£a, hrzdayena hi rupam
o-anati, hrfdaye hy eva rupam pratishMitani bhavantity.

147

III ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMAATA, 24.

22. Sakalya said: ‘Which is thy deity in the
Western quarter ?’

Ya^avalkya said : ‘ Varu^za/

said . In what does that Varu^a abide ?’
Ya^/zavalkya said : f In the water/

‘Sakalya said : ‘ In what does the water abide ? ’
Yaf«avalkya said : ‘ In the seed.’

Sakalya said : ‘And in what does the seed abide?’
Yafwavalkya said : ‘ In the heart. And therefore
also they say of a son who is like his father, that he
seems as if slipt from his heart, or made from his
heart; for the seed abides in the heart/

■Sakalya said : ‘ So it is indeed, O Yayylavalkya.’

23. Sakalya said: ‘Which is thy deity in the
Northern quarter?’

Yaf/iavalkya said : ‘ Soma.’

Sakalya said : ‘ In what does that Soma abide ? ’
Yfiyv 7 avalkya said : ‘ In the Diksha V
Sakalya said : ‘ In what does the Diksha abide ? ’
Yay/iavalkya said: ‘In the True; and therefore
they say to one who has performed the Diksha,

Speak what is true, for in the True indeed the
Diksha abides.’

Sakalya said : ‘ And in what does the True abide ? ’

YayVmvalkva said: ‘In the heart, for with the heart

do we know what is true, and in the heart indeed
the True abides.’

Sakalya said : ‘ So it is indeed, O Yaywavalkya.’

24. SSkalya said: ‘Which is thy deity in the
zenith ? ’

1 Diksha is the initiatory rite for the Soma sacrifice. Having
sacrificed with Soma which has to be bought, the sacrificer becomes

endowed with wisdom, and wanders to the North, which is the
quarter of Soma.

L 2

148

BiWHADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

Ya^avalkya said : ‘ Agni/

Yakalya said : ‘In what does that Agni abide ?
Ya^avalkya said : ‘ In speech/

Yakalya said : ‘ And in what does speech abide ?
Ya^avalkya said : ‘ In the heart/

Sakalya said : ‘And in what does the heart abide?’

25. Ya^vlavalkya said: ‘O Ahallika 1 , when you
think the heart could be anywhere else away from
us, if it were away from us, the dogs might eat it,
or the birds tear it/

26. S &kalya said: ‘ And in what dost thou (thy
body) and the Self (thy heart) abide ? 5

Ya^avalkya said : ‘ In the Pra;*a (breath)/
Yakalya said : ‘ In what does the Pra/za abide ? ’
Ya^vzavalkya said: ‘In the Apana (down¬
breathing) 2 /

Yakalya said : ‘ In what does the Ap&na abide ? ’
Y a^vzavalkya said: ‘ In the V yana (back-breathing) 3 .
Yakalya said : ‘ In what does the Vyana abide ? ’
Ya^avalkya said: ‘In the Udana (the out-breath -

ing) 4 / .

•Sakal ya said : ‘In what does the Udana abide ?
Ya^avalkya said: ‘ In the Samana ’. That Self

1 A term of reproach, it may be a ghost or preta, because ahani
liyate, it disappears by day.

2 Because the prawa would run away, if it were not held back by
the apana.

3 Because the apana would run down, and the prawa up, if they

were not held back by the vy&na.

4 Because all three, the prfiwa, aptna, and vyana, would run
away in all directions, if they were not fastened to the udana.

5 The Samana can hardly be meant here for one of the five
prcbzas, generally mentioned before the udana, but, as explained by
Dvivedaganga, stands for the Sutratman. "1 his Sutratman abides
in the Antaryamin, and this in the Brahman (Ku/astha), which is

149

V

III ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMAJVA, 28.

(atman) is to be described by No, no 1 ! He is in¬
comprehensible, for he cannot be (is not) compre-
en e , he is imperishable, for he cannot perish ; he
is unattached, for he does not attach himself; unfet¬
tered, he does not suffer, he does not fail.’

These are the eight abodes (the earth, &c.), the
eight worlds (fire, &c.), the eight gods (the immortal
ood, &c.), the eight persons (the corporeal, &c.).
He who after dividing and uniting these persons 2
went beyond (the Samina), that person, taught in
the Upamshads, I now ask thee (to teach me)

If thou shalt not explain him to me, thy h"d
will fall.

■SSkalya did not know him, and his head fell, nay.

thieves took away his bones, mistaking them for
something else.

2 7 * Then Ya^/zavalkya said: ‘Reverend Brah-
ma«as, whosoever among you desires to do so, may
now question me. Or question me, all of you. Or
' whosoever among you desires it, I shall question
him, or I shall question all of you.

i But those Brdhmawas durst not (say anything).

28. Then Ya^wavalkya questioned them with
these Ylokas:

1. ‘Asa mighty tree in the forest, so in truth is

i man, his hairs are the leaves, his outer skin is
the bark.

] 2. ‘From his skin flows forth blood, sap from

the skin (of the tree); and thus from the wounded

therefore described next. Could SarnSna be here the same as in
IV , 3, 7 ?

® ee j before ’ n > 3. also IV, a, 4 ; IV, 4 , 22; IV, 5 , , 5 .
Dividing them according to the different abodes, worlds, and
persons, and uniting them at last in the heart.

BRIHADARAAYAKA-UPANISHAD.

150

man 1 comes forth blood, as from a tree that is
struck

3. ‘ The lumps of his flesh are (in the tree) the
layers of wood, the fibre is strong* like the ten¬
dons 2 . The bones are the (hard) wood within, the
marrow is made like the marrow of the tree.

4. ‘But, while the tree, when felled, grows up
again more young from the root, from what root,
tell me, does a mortal grow up, after he has been
felled by death ?

5. ‘ Do not say, “from seed,” for seed is produced
from the living 3 ; but a tree, springing from a grain,

clearly 4 rises again after death 5 .

6. ‘ If a tree is pulled up with the root, it will not
grow again ; from what root then, tell me, does a
mortal grow up, after he has been felled by death ?

7. ‘ Once born, he is not born (again) ; for who
should create him again 6 ?’

1 In the Madhyandina-jakha, p. 1080, tasmat tadatunnat, instead
of tasmat tadatrzVmat.

2 .Sankara seems to have read snavavat, instead of snava tat

sthiram, as we read in both Vakhas.

3 Here the Madhyandinas (p. 1080) add,^ata eva na^ayate, ko
nv enaw ^anayet puna^, which the Kawvas place later.

4 Instead of arc^asa, the Madhyandinas have anyata/h

5 The Madhyandinas have dhanaruha u vai, which is better than
iva vai, the iva being, according to .Sankaras own confession, use¬
less. The thread of the argument does not seem to have been
clearly perceived by the commentators. What the poet wants to
say is, that a man, struck down by death, does not come to life
again from seed, because human seed comes from the living onl),
while trees, springing from grain, are seen to come to life after the
tree (which yielded the grain or the seed) is dead. Pretya-sam-
bhava, like pretya-bh&va, means life after death, and pretyasam-
bhava, as an adjective, means coming to life after death.

6 This line too is taken in a different sense by the commentator.
According to him, it would mean : ‘ If you say, He has been born

Ill ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMA2VA, 28.

I 5 I

Brahman, who is knowledge and bliss, he is the
principle, both to him who gives gifts 1 , and also to
him who stands firm, and knows. 5

(and there is an end of all questioning), I say, No; he is born
again, and the question is, How ? * This is much too artificial. The
order of the verses in the Mfidhyandina-^khfi is better on the
whole, leading up more naturally to the question, ‘From what root
then does a mortal grow up, after he has been felled by death ? ’
When the Brahmans cannot answer, Ya^avalkya answers, or the
.Sruti declares, that the root from whence a mortal springs again,
after death, is Brahman.

^Sankara explains ratir datu^ as rater datu^, a reading adopted
by the Madhyandinas. He then arrives at the statement that
Brahman is the principle or the last source, also the root of a new
life, both for those who practise works and for those who, having
relinquished works, stand firm in knowledge. Regnaud (II, p. 138)
translates: ‘Cest Brahma (qui est) r'intelligence, le bonheur, la
richesse, le but supreme de celui qui offre (des sacrifices), et de
celui qui rdside (en lui), de celui qui connait.’

i5 2

BR/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

FOURTH ADHYAYA.

First BrAhmaaa.

1. When Ganaka Vaideha was sitting (to give
audience), Ya^wavalkya approached, and Uanaka
Vaideha said: ‘ Ya^wavalkya, for what object did
you come, wishing for cattle, or for subtle ques-
tions 1 ?’

Ya^avalkya replied: ‘For both, Your Majesty ;

2. ‘ Let us hear what anybody may have told you.

kanaka Vaideha replied: ‘ £itvan Yailini told me

that speech (va>£) is Brahman.’

Ya^/avalkya said: ‘As one who had (the benefit
of a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so
did Yailini 2 tell you, that speech is Brahman; for
what is the use of a dumb person ? But did he tell
you the body (ayatana) and the resting-place (pra-
tish/M) of that Brahman ?’

kanaka Vaideha said: ‘ He did not tell me.

Ya^avalkya said : ‘ Your Majesty, this (Brahman)
stands on one leg only 3 .’

(kanaka Vaideha said: ‘Then tell me, Ya^avalkya.

1 Awv-anta, formed like Sfitranta, Siddhanta, and probably Ve¬
danta, means subtle questions.

2 Roer and Poley give here *Sailina; Weber also (pp. 1080 and
1081) has twice <Sailina (-Silinasyapatyam).

3 This seems to mean that (ritvan’s explanation of Brahman is
lame or imperfect, because there are four padas of that Brahman,
and he taught one only. The other three are its body, its place,
and its form of worship (pra^etiyam upanishad brahma/m X’atur-
tha^ pada^). See also Maitr. Up. VII, p. 221.

IV ADHYAYA, I BRAHMAiVA, 3. 150

Ya^avalkya said : ‘ The tongue is its body, ether
its place, and one should worship it as knowledge ’

kanaka Vaideha said : ‘What is the nature of that
knowledge?’

Ya^avalkya replied: ‘Your Majesty, speech itself
(is knowledge). For through speech, Your Majesty,
a nend is known (to be a friend), and likewise the
Atzg-veda, Ya^ur-veda, Sama-veda, the Atharvaiicd-
rasas, the Itihasa (tradition), Pura/za-vidya (know¬
ledge of the past), the Upanishads, ^lokas (verses),
Sutras (rules), Anuvyakhyanas and Vyakhyanas
(commentaries b &c.) ; what is sacrificed^ what is
poured out, what is (to be) eaten and drunk, this
"world and the other world, and all creatures. By
speech alone, Your Majesty, Brahman is known, speech
indeed, O King, is the Highest Brahman. Speech
does not desert him who worships that (Brahman)
with such knowledge, all creatures approach him,
and having become a god, he goes to the gods.’
kanaka Vaideha said: ‘ I shall give you (for

this) a thousand cows with a bull as big as an
elephant.’

Ya^avalkya said : ‘My father was of opinion that
one should not accept a reward without having fully
instructed a pupil.’

o* Ya^avalkya said : ‘ Let us hear what anybody
may have told you.’

kanaka Vaideha replied: ‘ Udanka 6aulbayana
told me that life (prtoa) * 2 is Brahman.’

Yd^avalkya said : ‘As one who had (the benefit of
a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so did

See before, II, 4, 10; and afterwards, IV, 5, n.

2 See Taitt. Up. Ill, 3.

i54

B-R/HAD ARAiVY AKA-UPANISH AD.

Udanka Yaulbayana tell you that life is Brahman;
for what is the use of a person without life ? But
did he tell you the body and the resting-place of
that Brahman ? ’

Ganaka Vaideha said; ‘ He did not tell me.’

Yaf#avtdkya said : ‘ Your Majesty, this (Brahman)

stands on one leg only.

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘Then tell me, Yaf«a-
valkya/

Ya^avalkya said : ‘ Breath is its body, ether its
place, and one should worship it as what is dear/

Ganaka Vaideha said : ‘What is the nature of that

which is dear ?’

Ya^avalkya replied: ‘Your Majesty, life itself
(is that which is dear); because for the sake of life,
Your Majesty, a man sacrifices even for him who is
unworthy of sacrifice, he accepts presents from him
who is not worthy to bestow presents, nay, he goes
to a country, even when there is fear of being hurt 1 ,
for the sake of life. Life, O King, is the Highest
Brahman. Life does not desert him who worships
that (Brahman) with such knowledge, all creatures
approach him, and having become a god, he goes to
the gods/

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘ I shall give you (for this)
a thousand cows with a bull as big as an elephant.

Ya^/z a valkya said : ‘My father was of opinion that
one should not accept a reward without having fully
instructed a pupil/

4. Ya^ a valkya said : ‘ Let us hear what anybody
may have told you/

1 Or it may mean, he is afraid of being hurt, to whatever country
he goes, for the sake of a livelihood.

IV ADHYAYA, I BRAHMAiVA, 5.

*55

kanaka Vaideha replied : ‘ Barku Varsh^a told me
that sight (iakshus) is Brahman/

Ya^avalkya said : 4 As one who had (the benefit
of a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so
did Barku Varsh/za tell you that sight is Brahman;
for what is the use of a person who cannot see ?
But did he tell you the body and the resting-place
of that Brahman ? ’

kanaka Vaideha said : ‘ He did not tell me/

Ya^avalkya said : ‘Your Majesty, this (Brahman)
stands on one leg only/

Ganaka Vaideha said : ‘ Then tell me, YcH%a-
valkya/

Ya^avalkya said : 4 The eye is its body, ether its
place, and one should worship it as what is true/

Ganaka Vaideha said : ‘ What is the nature of that
which is true ? ’

Ya^avalkya replied: ‘Your Majesty, sight itself
(is that which is true); for if they say to a man who
sees with his eye, “ Didst thou see ? ”and he says, “I
saw,” then it is true. Sight, O King, is the Highest
Brahman. Sight does not desert him who worships
that (Brahman) with such knowledge, all creatures
approach him, and having become a god, he goes to
the gods/

kanaka Vaideha said : ‘ I shall give you (for this)
a thousand cows with a bull as big as an elephant/

Ya^avalkya said : ‘My father was of opinion that
one should not accept a reward without having fully
instructed a pupil/

5. Ya^avalkya said : ‘ Let us hear what anybody
may have told you/

Ganaka Vaideha replied: ‘ Gardabhivibhita Bha-
radva^a told me that hearing (yrotra) is Brahman/

BRJHADARAAYAKA-UPANISHAD.

Ya^avalkya said: ‘As one who had (the benefit
of a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so
did Gardabhivibhita Bharadva^a tell you that hear¬
ing is Brahman; for what is the use of a person who
cannot hear ? But did he tell you the body and the
resting-place of that Brahman ?’

6anaka Vaideha said : ‘He did not tell me.’

Ya^Tzavalkya said : ‘ Your Majesty, this (Brahman)
stands on one leg only.’

6fanaka Vaideha said: ‘Then tell me, Ya^Tza-
valkya.’

Ya^Vzavalkya said : ‘ The ear is its body, ether its
place, and we should worship it as what is endless.’

kanaka Vaideha said : ‘ What is the nature of that
which is endless?’

Ya^Tzavalkya replied: ‘ Your Majesty, space

( di\S2ih ) itself (is that which is endless), and therefore
to whatever space (quarter) he goes, he never comes
to the end of it. For space is endless. Space indeed,
O King, is hearing 1 , and hearing indeed, O King, is
the Highest Brahman. Hearing does not desert
him who worships that (Brahman) with such know¬
ledge, all creatures approach him, and having become
a god, he goes to the gods.’

GTnaka Vaideha said : ‘ I shall give you (for this)
a thousand cows with a bull as big as an elephant.’

Yaj^avalkya said : ‘ My father was of opinion that
one should not accept a reward without having fully
instructed a pupil.’

6. Y^a^avalkya said : ‘ Let us hear what anybody
may have told you.’

1 Dvivedaganga states, digbhago hi parthivadhish/Mnava^^in-
na h .yrotram ity u^yate, atas tayor ekatvam.

IV ADHYAYA, I BRAHMAiVA, J. j 57

kanaka Vaideha replied : ‘ Satyakama Cabala told
me that mind 1 (manas) is Brahman.’

Yafwavalkya said : ‘ As one who had (the benefit
of a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so
did Satyakama Cabala tell you that mind is Brah¬
man ; for what is the use of a person without mind?

But did he tell you the body and the resting-place of
that Brahman ? ’

Canaka Vaideha said: ‘ He did not tell me.’

Ya ? -#avalkya said : ‘Your Majesty, this (Brahman)
stands on one leg only.’

kanaka Vaideha said: ‘ Then tell me,Y^avalkya.’
Ya^avalkya said: ‘ Mind itself is its body, ether
its place, and we should worship it as bliss.’

kanaka Vaideha said: ‘What is the nature of bliss ?’
Ya^Tzavalkya replied : ‘ Your Majesty, mind itself;
for with the mind does a man desire a woman, and
a like son is born of her, and he is bliss. Mind
indeed, O King, is the Highest Brahman. Mind
does not desert him who worships that (Brahman)
with such knowledge, all creatures approach him, and
having become a god, he goes to the gods.’

kanaka Vaideha said : ‘ I shall give you (for this)
a thousand cows with a bull as big as an elephant.’

Ya^/zavalkya said : ‘ My father was of opinion that
one should not accept a reward without having fully
instructed a pupil.’ **

7 * Ya^zzavalkya said : ‘ Let us hear what anybody
may have told you.’

kanaka Vaideha replied : ‘ Vidagdha Yakalya told
me that the heart (hrz’daya) is Brahman.’

Ya^zzavalkya said: ‘ As one who had (the benefit

1 See also Taitt. Up. Ill, 4.

B jR/HAD ARA 2 VYAKA-UPANISH AD.

158

of a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so
did Vidagdha Yakalya tell you that the heart is
Brahman; for what is the use of a person without a
heart ? But did he tell you the body and the resting-

place of that Brahman ? ’

(kanaka Vaideha said: ‘ He did not tell me.

Ya^Tzavalkya said : ‘Your Majesty, this (Brahman)
stands on one leg only/

kanaka Vaideha said: ‘ Then tell me, Ya^avalkya.’

Ya^dzavalkya said: ‘The heart itself is its body,
ether its place, and we should worship it as certainty
(sthiti)/

kanaka Vaideha said : ‘ What is the nature of
certainty ?'

Ya^'//avalkya replied : ‘ Your Majesty, the heart
itself; for the heart indeed, O King, is the body of
all things, the heart is the resting-place of all things,
for in the heart, O King, all things rest. The heart
indeed, O King, is the Highest Brahman. The
heart does not desert him who worships that (Brah¬
man) with such knowledge, all creatures approach
him, and having become a god, he goes to the gods.

kanaka Vaideha said: ‘ I shall give you (for this)
a thousand cows with a bull as big as an elephant.

Ya^avalkya said: ‘My father was of opinion
that one should not accept a reward without having
fully instructed a pupil/

Second Brahmaaa.

1. dranaka Vaideha, descending from his throne,
said : ‘ I bow to you, O Ya^/iavalkya, teach me/

Ya^/avalkya said : ‘Your Majesty, as a man who
wishes to make a long journey, would furnish him¬
self with a chariot or a ship, thus is your mind well

IV ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMAiVA, 3.

*59

furnished by these Upanishadsk You are honour¬
able, and wealthy, you have learnt the Vedas and
been told the Upanishads. Whither then will you
go when departing hence ? ’

kanaka Vaideha said : ‘Sir, I do not know whither
I shall go.’

Ya^avalkya said: ‘Then I shall tell you this,
whither you will go.’

kanaka Vaideha said : ‘ Tell it, Sir/

2. Ya^vzavalkya said : ‘ That person who is in the
right eye * 2 , he is called Indha, and him who is Indha
they call indeed 3 * Indra mysteriously, for the gods love
what is mysterious, and dislike what is evident.

3. ‘ Now that which in the shape of a person is in
the right eye, is his wife, Vira^k Their meeting-
place 5 is the ether within the heart, and their food
the red lump within the heart. Again, their
covering 6 is that which is like net-work within the
heart, and the road on which they move (from sleep
to waking) is the artery that rises upwards from the
heart. Like a hair divided into a thousand parts, so
are the veins of it, which are called Hita 7 , placed

This refers to the preceding doctrines which had been commu¬
nicated to (ranaka by other teachers, and particularly to the upasanas
of Brahman as knowledge, dear, true, endless, bliss, and certainty.

2 See also Maitr. Up. VII, p. 216.

The Madhyandinas read parokshe/zeva, but the commentator
explains iva by eva. See also Ait. Up. I, 3, 14.

Mndra is called by the commentator VaBvanara, and his wife
Vira£\ This couple, in a waking state, is Vi™; in sleep, Taigasa.

Sazzzstava, lit. the place where they sing praises together, that
is, where they meet.

Pravarazza may also mean hiding-place, retreat.

7 ^Hita, a name frequently given to these nadis; see IV, 3, 20;

yMnd. Up. VI, 5, 3, comm.; Kaush. Up. IV, 20. See also Ka//;a
Up. VI, 16.

i6o

B£/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

firmly within the heart. Through these indeed that
(food) flows on flowing, and he (the Tai/asa) receives
as it were purer food 1 than the corporeal Self (the
Vaisvanara).

4. ‘ His (the Tai^asa’s) Eastern quarter are the
pranas (breath) which go to the East;

‘ His Southern quarter are the pranas which go
to the South;

‘ His Western quarter are the pranas which go to
the West;

‘ His Northern quarter are the pranas which go to
the North ;

‘ His Upper (Zenith) quarter are the pri^as which
go upward;

‘ His Lower (Nadir) quarter are the pranas which
go downward;

‘ All the quarters are all the pranas. And he (the
Atman in that state) can only be described by No 2 ,
no ! He is incomprehensible, for he cannot be com¬
prehended ; he is undecaying, for he cannot decay;
he is not attached, for he does not attach himself;
he is unbound, he does not suffer, he does not perish.
O Uanaka, you have indeed reached fearlessness,’—
thus said Ya^avalkya.

Then Uanaka said: ‘ May that fearlessness come
to you also who teachest us fearlessness. I bow to
you. Here are the Videhas, and here am I (thy
slave).’

1 Dvivedaganga explains that food, when it is eaten, is first of
all changed into the coarse food, which goes away downward, and
into the subtler food. This subtler food is again divided into the
middle juice that feeds the body, and the finest, which is called
the red lump.

2 See Bnh. Up. II, 3, 6; IV, 9, 26.

IV ADHyAya, 3 BRAHMAN, I.

161

Third Brahma^a.

i. Ya^avalkya came to Ganaka Vaideha, and he
did not mean to speak with him But when formerly

as \^S r t1^°“T^^ r ? eCU,iar

Seha td gr ° U *; dw0rk of ‘he UpTnishads^fenaka

Y^avS: mJ^ZjrZ fd s 1 "' ™ ^ ^

was the first to address him (£rv am pZ 7 Z Th

dently considered not quite conect and an ’ WaS . eV “

fhat /^o^ i j 7 ■» • i. * 2,ncl an explanation is driven

valkva h^ 3 °° a h 'u. ' berty because on a former occasion Y^«a-
alkya had granted h.m permission to address questions to him

Iooks e v V e e ry michl'-k * “H* b ? ° bjeCted that such » explanation
T ^ i e an after-thought, and we find indeed that in

cultybvdi T 6 °[ ^ ia ‘ er COmmentators tried to avoid the diffi-
cuky by dividing the words sa mene na vadisbya iti, into sam enena

to r >a l'"’ S ° ' h o We Sh0 '’ l<, have 10 tran5 ote,' Y^/tttvalkya came
, . , ? ^ •) This is, no doubt, a very ingenious conjecture

-■nr ^ -r »ir«,op.L wrs

K ^ The aCC6ntS decide noth ing, because they are changed

pLafT 1 W u terS ’ aCCOrdin S t0 their different views of what fhe
Pada text ought to be. What made me prefer the reading which

supported by Sankara and Dvivedaganga, though the latter

vadishye, does not occur again, while sa mene is a common phrase
But the most interesting point, as I remarked before, is that this
mer disputation between Ganaka and Ya^avalkya and the per-
tssion granted to the King to ask any question he liked, is not a
mere invention to account for the apparent rudeness by which

buflct n 73 15 Ced t0 en ‘ er ° n 3 discussi °n against his will
but actually occurs in a former chapter. In Yatap. Br. XI 6 2 10

ve lead: tasmai ha Y%l?avalkyo varaw dadau; sa hovaia,’kama-

C' 5 ] M

BR/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

6'anaka Vaideha and Ya?; 2 avalkya had a disputation
on the Agnihotra, Ya-«avalkya had granted him a
boon, and he chose (for a boon) that he mig.it ~ e
free to ask him any question he liked. Yafwa-
valkya granted it, and thus the King was the first to

ask him a question.

2. ‘ Yaywavalkya,’ he said, ‘what is the light of

m 3, n ^ ? y

YayVavalkya replied: ‘ The sun, O King; for,
having the sun alone for his light, man sits, moves

about, does his work, and returns.

kanaka Vaideha said : ‘ So indeed it is, O Yagna-

valkya.’

3. kanaka Vaideha said : ‘ When the sun has set,
O Yafwavalkya, what is then the light of man ?

Yafwavalkya replied: ‘The moon indeed is his
light; for, having the moon alone for his light, man
sits, moves about, does his work, and returns.

Ganaka Vaideha said : ‘ So indeed it is, O Ya"#a-

valkya.’

4. (ranaka Vaideha said : ‘ When the sun has set,
O Yafwavalkya, and the moon has set, what is the

light of man ?’

Yapvlavalkya replied : ‘ Fire indeed is his light;

prama eva me tvayi Y^avalkv&sad iti tato brahma Ganakaasa.
This would show that Ganaka was considered almost like a Bra
matta, or at all events enjoyed certain privileges which were sup¬
posed to belong to the first caste only. See, for a different view,
Deussen, Vedanta, p. 203 ; Regnaud (Mat< 5 riaux pour servir a 1 hts-
toire de la philosophie de l’Inde), Errata; and Sacred Books ot

the East, vol. i. p. lxxiii.

1 Read kiwgyotir as a Bahuvrihi. Purusha is difficult to trans¬
late. It means man, but also the true essence of man, the sou ,
as we should say, or something more abstract still, the person, as
1 generally translate it, though a person beyond the Ego.

IV ADHYAYA, 3 BRAIIMAiYA, 8.

I0 3

for, having fire ateTTiTi^an site, ^
about, does his work, and returns/

5^ kanaka Wkleha said: « When the sun has set

aguava kya, and the moon has set, and the fire
is gone out what is then the Hght of man? ,

Ya^avalkya replied : «Sound indeed is his light •

for, having sound alone for his light, man sits, moves’

out, does his work, and returns. Therefore, O

mg when one cannot see even one’s own hand

ye w en a sound is raised, one goes towards it.’

oranaka Vaideha said : ‘So indeed it is, O Yama-
valkya/ s

n tfT*? Vaideha sai d : ‘ When the sun has set,
Va^avalkya, and the moon has set, and the fire

is gone out, and the sound hushed, what is then the
hght of man ?’

Ya^avalkya said : ‘ The Self indeed is his light
for, having the Self alone as his light, man sits
moves about, does his work, and returns/

7. d/anaka Vaideha said : ‘ Who is that Self?’
Yag«avalkya replied: ‘He who is within the
heart, surrounded by the Pranas’ (senses), the person
0 'ght. consisting of knowledge. He, remaining the
same, wanders along the two worlds 2 , as if 3 thinking,
as if moving. During sleep (in dream) he tran¬
scends this world and all the forms of death (all that
falls under the sway of death, all that is perishable).

8. ‘ On being born that person, assuming his body,

1 Sainipyalakshawa saptami, Dvivedaganga. See Brih. Ud IV

4, 22. • F* >

* In this world, while awake or dreaming; in the other world
while in deep sleep. ’

The world thinks that he thinks, but in reality he does not he
only witnesses the acts of buddhi, or thought.

M 2

B22/HADARA2VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

becomes united with all evils; when he departs and

dies, he leaves all evils behind.

9. ‘ And there are two states for that person, the
one here in this world, the other in the other world,
and as a third 1 an intermediate state, the state of
sleep. When in that intermediate state, he sees
both those states together, the one here in this
world, and the other in the other world. Now what¬
ever his admission to the other world may be,
having gained that admission, he sees both the evils

and the blessings 2 .

4 And when he falls asleep, then after having
taken away with him the material from the whole
world, destroying 3 and building it up again, he
sleeps (dreams) by his own light. In that state the

person is self-illuminated.

10. ‘ There are no (real) chariots in that state, no

horses, no roads, but he himself sends forth (creates)
chariots, horses, and roads. There are no blessings
there, no happiness, no joys, but he himself sends
forth (creates) blessings, happiness, and joys. There

1 There are really two sthanas or states only; the place where
they meet, like the place where two villages meet, belongs to both
but it may be distinguished as a third. Dvivedaganga (p. 114 1 )
uses a curious argument in support of the existence of another
world. In early childhood, he says, our dreams consist of the
impressions of a former world, later on they are filled with the
impressions of our senses, and in old age they contain visions o a

world to come.

2 By works, by knowledge, and by remembrance of former
things; see Brfh. Up. IV, 4, 2.

3 Dividing and separating the material, i.e. the impressions
received from this world. The commentator explains matra as a
portion of the impressions which are taken away into sleep.
< Destroying ’ he refers to the body, which in sleep becomes sense¬
less, and £ building up ’ to the imaginations of dreams.

IV ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMAA'A, 14.

j 65

are no tanks there, no lakes, no rivers, but he him¬
self sends forth (creates) tanks, lakes, and rivers.
He indeed is the maker.

11. ‘ On this there are these verses :

After having subdued by sleep all that belongs

to the body, he, not asleep himself, looks down

upon the sleeping (senses). Having assumed light

he goes again to his place, the golden person 1 the
lonely bird, (i)

12. ‘Guarding with the breath (pra/za, life) the
lower nest, the immortal moves away from the nest;
that immortal one goes wherever he likes, the o- 0 lden
person, the lonely bird. (2)

r 3- ‘Going up and down in his dream, the god
makes manifold shapes for himself, either rejoicing
together with women, or laughing (with his friends)!
or seeing terrible sights. (3)

14* People may see his playground 2 , but himself
no one ever sees. Therefore they say, “ Let no one
wake a man suddenly, for it is not easy to remedy,
if he does not get back (rightly to his body).”

‘Here some people (object and) say: “No, this
(sleep) is the same as the place of waking, for what
he sees while awake, that only he sees when asleep 3 .”

The Madhyandinas read paurusha, as an adjective to ekaha^sa,
but Dvivedaganga explains paurusha as a synonym of purusba,
which is the reading of the Karcvas.

2 Cf. Smruta III, 7, 1.

3 I have translated this according to the commentator, who says :
* Therefore the Self is self-illuminated during sleep. But others
say the state of waking is indeed the same for him as sleep; there
is no other intermediate place, different from this and from the
other world. . . . And if sleep is the same as the state of waking,
then is this Self not separate, not cause and effect, but mixed with
them, and the Self therefore not self-illuminated. What he means

i66

BR/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANlSHAD.

No, here (in sleep) the person is self-illuminated (as
we explained before).’

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘I give you, Sir, a thousand.
Speak on for the sake of (my) emancipation.’

15. Ya^avalkya said : ‘ That (person) having en¬
joyed himself in that state of bliss (samprasada, deep
sleep), having moved about and seen both good and
evil, hastens back again as he came, to the place
from which he started (the place of sleep), to dream 1 .
And whatever he may have seen there, he is not
followed (affected) by it, for that person is not
attached to anything.’

(Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘So it is indeed, Vala¬

is that others, in order to disprove the self-illumination, say that this
sleep is the same as the state of waking, giving as their reason that
we see in sleep or in dreams exactly what we see in waking. But
this is wrong, because the senses have stopped, and only when the
senses have stopped does one see dreams. Therefore there is no
necessity for admitting another light in sleep, but only the light
inherent in the Self. This has been proved by all that went before.
Dr. Roer takes the same view in his translation, but Deussen (Ve¬
danta, p. 205) takes an independent view, and translates: ‘There¬
fore it is said: It (sleep) is to him a place of waking only, for
what he sees waking, the same he sees in sleep. Thus this spit it
serves there for his own light/ Though the interpretations of
.Sankara and Dvivedaganga sound artificial, still Dr. Deussen s
version does not remove all difficulties. If the purusha saw in
sleep no more than what he had seen before in waking, then the
whole argument in favour of the independent action, or the inde¬
pendent light of the purusha, would go; anyhow it would be no
argument on Ya^vzavalkya’s side. See also note to paragraph 9,
before.

1 The Madhyandinas speak only of his return from svapnanta
to buddhanta, from sleep to waking, instead of his going from
samprasada (deep sleep) to svapna (dream), from svapna to bud¬
dhanta, and from buddhanta again to svapnanta, as the Iva;was
have it. In § 18 the Ka;zvas also mention svapnanta and buddhanta
only, but the next paragraph refers to sushupti.

IV ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMAAA, 20 .

167

valkya. I give you, Sir, a thousand. Speak on for
the sake of emancipation.’

16. Ya^v/avalkya said : ‘ That (person) having - en¬
joyed himself in that sleep (dream), having moved
about and seen both good and evil, hastens back
again as he came, to the place from which he started,
to be awake. And whatever he may have seen
there, he is not followed (affected) by it, for that
person is not attached to anything.’

kanaka Vaideha said: ‘So it is indeed, Ya^a-
valkya. I give you, Sir, a thousand. Speak on for
the sake of emancipation.’

17. Ya^avalkya said : ‘ That (person) having en¬
joyed himself in that state of waking, having moved
about and seen both good and evil, hastens back
again as he came, to the place from which he started,
to the state of sleeping (dream).

18. ‘In fact, as a large fish moves along the two
banks of a river, the right and the left, so does that
person move along these two states, the state of
sleeping and the state of waking.

19. ‘And as a falcon, or any other (swift) bird,
after he has roamed about here in the air, becomes
tired, and folding his wings is carried to his nest, so
does that person hasten to that state where, when
asleep, he desires no more desires, and dreams no
more dreams.

20. ‘ There are in his body the veins called Hita,
which are as small as a hair divided a thousandfold,
full of white, blue, yellow, green, and red 1 . Now

1 Dvivedaganga explains that if phlegm predominates, qualified
by wind and bile, the juice in the veins is white; if wind predomi¬
nates, qualified by phlegm and bile, it is blue ; if bile predominates,
qualified by wind and phlegm, it is yellow. if wind and phlegm

i 68

B^/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

when, as it were, they kill him, when, as it were,
they overcome him, when, as it were, an elephant
chases him, when, as it were, he falls into a well,
he fancies, through ignorance, that danger which he
(commonly) sees in waking. But when he fancies
that he is, as it were, a god, or that he is, as it
were, a king * 1 , or “ I am this altogether,” that is his
highest world 2 .

21. ‘This indeed is his (true) form, free from
desires, free from evil, free from fear 3 . Now as a
man, when embraced by a beloved wife, knows
nothing that is without, nothing that is within, thus
this person, when embraced by the intelligent (pra^vla)
Self, knows nothing that is without, nothing that is
within. This indeed is his (true) form, in which
his wishes are fulfilled, in which the Self (only) is

predominate, with little bile only, it is green; and if the three ele¬
ments are equal, it is red. See also Anandagiri’s gloss, where
Sujruta is quoted. Why this should be inserted here, is not quite
clear, except that in sleep the purusha is supposed to move about
in the veins.

1 Here, again, the commentator seems to be right, but his inter¬
pretation does violence to the context. The dangers which a man
sees in his sleep are represented as mere imaginations, so is his
idea of being a god or a king, while the idea that he is all this
(aham evedazzz sarva-6, i.e. ida m sarvam, see -Sankara, p. 873, 1 . n)
is represented as the highest and real state. But it is impossible to
begin a new sentence with aham evedazzz sarvam, and though it is
true that all the preceding fancies are qualified by iva, I prefer to
take deva and ragan as steps leading to the sarvatmatva.

2 The Madhyandinas repeat here the sentence from yatra supto
to pa^yati, from the end of § 19.

3 The Kazzva text reads atiX’X 7 zanda apahatapapma. -Sankara
explains atiXvbfonda by atiX’X 7 zandam, and excuses it as svadhyaya-
dharma/z paMa/z. The Madhyandinas read atiX 7 /zando, but place
the whole sentence where the Kazzvas put aptakamam &c., at the
end of § 21.

IV ADIIYAYA, 3 IJRAHMAJVA, 23. j 6 g

h,S Wlsh ’ ln which no wi sh is left,—free from anv
sorrow J . y

22 <T hen a father is not a father, a mother not
a mother, the worlds not worlds, the gods not gods
the Vedas not Vedas. Then a thief is not a thief, a
murderer not a murderer* a AWala 8 not a AWala
a I aulkasa« not a Paulkasa, a .SVama^a« not a .Sra-
ma/^a, a Tapasa * * 3 * 5 6 not a Tapasa. He is not followed
by good not followed by evil, for he has then over¬
come all the sorrows of the heart 7 .

23. ‘ And when (it is said that) there (in the
Sushupti) he does not see, yet he is seeing, though
he does not see 8 . For sight is inseparable from the

’ y e KaOTas read -fokantaram, the Madhyandinas arokantaram
U e commentators arrive at the same result, namely, that it

“f"* '!° kaffiny f m > free from g rief - Sankara says: rokantara;«
•roka/bbMram rokarunyam ityeta*, Wokamadhyaman iti va- sar-

vathapy arokam. Dvivedaganga says: na vidyate roko ’mare
madhye yasya tad arokantara/« (ra, Weber) jokajftnyam.

Bhruzzahan, varish/^abrahmahanta.

3 The son of a Audra father and a Brahma/za mother.

\ The son of a ^udra father and a Kshatriya mother.

5 A mendicant.

A \ anaprastha, who performs penances.

I^have translated as if the text were ananvagatam pu/zyena
ananvagata/2 papena. We find anvagata used in a similar way in
$$ i 0 , 16, &c. But the Ka^vas read ananvagatam pu;zyena anan-
vagatam papena, and Aahkara explains the neuter by referring it
to rupam (rtipaparatvan napu^sakalihgam). The Madhyandinas if
we may trust Weber's edition, read ananvagata/2 pu^yenanv^ga-
ta^ papena. The second anvagata^ may be a mere misprint, but
vivedaganga seems to have read ananvagatam, like the Kazzvas,
or e sa} s . ananvagatam iti rupavishayo napu^sakanirde^a^.

Q . Th,s 1S £he old Upanishad argument that the true sense is the
-ell, and not the eye. Although therefore in the state of profound
s eep, where the eye and the other senses rest, it might be said
that the purusha does not see, yet he is a seer all the time, thou-h
he does not see with the eye. The seer cannot lose his character

B/^/I IA DA R AN V A IvA-U PANTS H AD.

IJO

seer, because it cannot perish. But there is then
no second, nothing else different from him that he
could see.

24. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the
Sushupti) he does not smell, yet he is smelling, though
he does not smell. For smelling is inseparable from
the smeller, because it cannot perish. But there is
then no second, nothing else different from him that
he could smell.

25. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the
Sushupti) he does not taste, yet he is tasting, though
he does not taste. For tasting is inseparable from
the taster, because it cannot perish. But there is
then no second, nothing else different from him that
he could taste.

26. ‘ And when (it is said that) there (in the

Sushupti) he does not speak, yet he is speaking,
though he does not speak. For speaking is inse¬
parable from the speaker, because it cannot perish.
But there is then no second, nothing else different

from him that he could speak.

27. ‘ And when (it is said that) there (in the

Sushupti) he does not hear, yet he is hearing, though

he does not hear. For hearing is inseparable from
the hearer, because it cannot perish. But there is
then no second, nothing else different from him that
he could hear.

28. ‘ And when (it is said that) there (in the

Sushupti) he does not think, yet he is thinking,
though he does not think. For thinking is inse¬
parable from the thinker, because it cannot perish.

of seeing, as little as the fire can lose its character of burning, so
long as it is fire. The Self sees by its own light, like the sun, even
where there is no second, no object but the Self, that could be seen.

IV ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMAiVA, 33. 1 y L

But there is then no second, nothing - else different
from him that he could think.

29. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the
Sushupti) he does not touch, yet he is touching,
though he does not touch. For touching - is inse¬
parable from the toucher, because it cannot perish.
But there is then no second, nothing else different
from him that he could think.

30. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the
Sushupti) he does not know, yet he is knowing,
though he does not know. For knowing - is inse¬
parable from the knower, because it cannot perish.
But there is then no second, nothing else different
from him that he could know.

31. ‘When (in waking and dreaming) there is, as
it were, another, then can one see the other, then
can one smell the other, then can one speak to the
other, then can one hear the other, then can one
think the other, then can one touch the other, then
can one know the other.

32. ‘An ocean 1 is that one seer, without any
duality; this is the Brahma-world 2 , O King.’ Thus
did Ya^vzavalkya teach him. This is his highest
goal, this is his highest success, this is his highest
world, this is his highest bliss. All other creatures
live on a small portion of that bliss.

33. ‘ If a man is healthy, wealthy, and lord of
others, surrounded by all human enjoyments, that

1 Salila is explained as salilavat, like the ocean, the seer being
one like the ocean, which is one only. Dr. Deussen takes salila as
a locative, and translates it ‘ In dem Gewoge,’ referring to *SVeta-
•rvatara-upanishad VI, 15.

2 Or this seer is the Brahma-world, dwells in Brahman, or is
Brahman.

BRIHADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

I 72

is the highest blessing of men. Now a hundred
of these human blessings make one blessing of the
fathers who have conquered the world (of the fathers).
A hundred blessings of the fathers who have con¬
quered this world make one blessing in the Gan-
dharva world. A hundred blessings in the Gandharva
world make one blessing of the Devas by merit
(work, sacrifice), who obtain their godhead by merit.
A hundred blessings of the Devas by merit make
one blessing of the Devas by birth, also (of) a
Yrotriya 1 who is without sin, and not overcome by
desire. A hundred blessings of the Devas by birth
make one blessing in the world of Pra^apati, also
(of) a Yrotriya who is without sin, and not overcome
by desire. A hundred blessings in the world of
Pra^apati make one blessing in the world of Brah¬
man, also (of) a .Srotriya who is without sin, and
not overcome by desire. And this is the highest
blessing 2 .

‘ This is the Brahma-world, O king,’ thus spake
Y a£ 7 /avalkya.

kanaka Vaicleha said : ‘ I give you, Sir, a thousand.
Speak on for the sake of (my) emancipation.’

Then Yaf/2a valkya was afraid lest the King,
having become full of understanding, should drive
him from all his positions 3 .

34. And Ya^avalkya said: ‘That (person), having
enjoyed himself in that state of sleeping (dream),

1 An accomplished student of the Veda.

2 See Taitt. Up. II, 8, p. 59 ; A 7 zand. Up. VIII, 2, 1—10; Kaush.
Up. I, 3 - 5 ; Regnaud, II, p. 33 seq.

3 -Sankara explains that Ya^v/avalkya was not afraid that his
own knowledge might prove imperfect, but that the king, having
the right to ask him any question he liked, might get all his know¬
ledge from him.

IV ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAiVA, I. 173

having moved about and seen both good and bad,
hastens back again as he came, to the place from
which he started, to the state of waking 1 .

35 * Now as a heavy-laden carriage moves along
groaning, thus does this corporeal Self, mounted by
the intelligent Self, move along groaning, when a
man is thus going to expire 2 .

36. ‘And when (the body) grows weak through
old age, or becomes weak through illness, at that
time that person, after separating himself from his
members, as an Amra (mango), or Udumbara (fig)
or Pippala-fruit is separated from the stalk, hastens
back again as he came, to the place from which he
started, to (new) life.

37. ‘And as policemen, magistrates, equerries,
and governors wait for a king who is coming back,
with food and drink, saying, “He comes back, he
approaches, thus do all the elements wait on him
who knows this, saying, “ That Brahman comes, that
Brahman approaches/'

38. ‘And as policemen, magistrates, equerries, and
governors gather round a king who is departing,
thus do all the senses (pranas) gather round the Self
at the time of death, when a man is thus going to
expire/

Fourth Brahmaaa.

1. Ya^avalkya continued : ‘ Now when that Self,
having sunk into weakness 3 , sinks, as it were, into

1 See § 17, before.

.Sankara seems to take xahkhv^si as a noun. He writes 1
yatraitad bhavati; etad iti kriyavwesha^am urdhvo^vWasi yatror-
dhvo/(’/ 72 vasitvarn asya bhavatityartha^.

In the Kaush. Up. Ill, 3, we read yatraitat purusha arto

1 74

BK/HADARA 2 VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

unconsciousness, then gather those senses (pranas)
around him, and he, taking with him those elements
of light, descends into the heart. When that person
in the eye * 1 turns away, then he ceases to know any
forms.

2. ‘ “ He has become one,” they say, “he does not
see 2 .” “He has become one,” they say, “he does
not smell.” “ He has become one,” they say, “he
does not taste.” “ He has become one,” they say,
“he does not speak.” “ He has become one,” they
say, “ he does not hear.” “ He has become one,” they
say, “he does not think.” “He has become one,”
they say, “he does not touch.” “He has become
one ” they say, “ he does not know.” The point of his
heart 3 becomes lighted up, and by that light the self
departs, either through the eye 4 , or through the
skull 5 , or through other places of the body. And
when he thus departs, life (the chief pra/za) departs
after him, and when life thus departs, all the other

marishyan abalyam etya sammohati. Here abalyam should cer¬
tainly be abalyam, as in the commentary; but should it not be
abalyam, as here. See also Brzh. Up. Ill, 5, 1, note.

1 Wakshusha purusha is explained as that portion of the sun
which is in the eye, while it is active, but which, at the time of
death, returns to the sun.

2 Ekibhavati is probably a familiar expression for dying, but it
is here explained by -Sankara, and probably was so intended, as
meaning that the organs of the body have become one with the
Self (lingatman). The same thoughts are found in the Ivaush. Up.
Ill, 3, prazza ekadha bhavati.

3 The point where the na^/is or veins go out from the heart.

4 When his knowledge and deeds qualify him to proceed to the
sun. -Sankara.

5 When his knowledge and deeds qualify him to proceed to the
Brahma-world.

IV ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAAA, 4. I 75

vital spirits (pranas) depart after it. He is conscious,
and being conscious he follows 1 and departs.

Then both his knowledge and his work take hold
of him, and his acquaintance with former things 2 3 /

3. ‘ And as a caterpillar, after having reached the
end of a blade of grass, and after having made another

(^0 another blade) 0 , draws itself together
towards it, thus does this ^>elf, after having thrown
off this body 4 and dispelled all ignorance, and after
making another approach (to another body), draw
himself together towards it.

4. ‘And as a goldsmith, taking a piece of gold,
turns it into another, newer and more beautiful shape,
so does this Self, after having thrown off this body

This is an obscure passage, and the different text of the
Madhyandinas shows that the obscurity was felt at an early time.
The Madhyandinas read: Sawg/zanam anvavakramati sa esha git&h
savigzzano bhavati. This would mean, ‘ Consciousness departs
aftei. He the knowing (Self) is self-conscious/ The Ivazzvas read :
Savigzzano bhavati, savigzzanam evanvavakramati. Roer translates :

• It is endowed with knowledge, endowed with knowledge it departs; 7
and he explains, with Sankara, that the knowledge here intended is
such knowledge as one has in a dream, a knowledge of impressions
referring to their respective objects, a knowledge which is the
effect of actions, and not inherent in the self. Deussen translates:

‘ Sie (die Seele) ist von Erkenntnissart, und was von Erkenntnissart
ist, ziehet ihr nach/ The Persian translator evidently thought that
self-consciousness was implied, for he writes : ‘ Cum quovis corpore
addictionem sumat .... in illo corpore ah am est, id est, ego sum/

2 This acquaintance with former things is necessary to explain
the peculiar talents or deficiencies which we observe in children.
The three words vidya, karman, and purvapra^zza often go toge¬
ther (see Sankara on Brz'h. Up. IV, 3, 9). Deussen’s conjecture,
apurvapra^zza, is not called for.

3 See Brzh. Up. IV, 3, 9, a passage which shows how difficult
it would be always to translate the same Sanskrit words by the
same words in English ; see also Brahmopanishad, p. 245.

4 See Brzh. Up. IV, 3, 9, and IV, 3, 13.

Btf/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

and dispelled all ignorance, make unto himself an¬
other, newer and more beautiful shape, whether it be
like the Fathers, or like the Gandharvas, or like the
Devas, or like. Pra^*apati, or like Brahman, or like
other beings.

5. ‘ That Self is indeed Brahman, consisting of
knowledge, mind, life, sight, hearing, earth, water,
wind, ether, light and no light, desire and no desire,
anger and no anger, right or wrong, and all things.
Now as a man is like this or like that 1 , according as
he acts and according as he behaves, so will he be :—
a man of good acts will become good, a man of bad
acts, bad. He becomes pure by pure deeds, bad by
bad deeds.

‘ And here they say that a person consists of
desires. And as is his desire, so is his will; and as is
his will, so is his deed; and whatever deed he does,
that he will reap.

6. ‘And here there is this verse: “To whatever
object a man’s own mind is attached, to that he goes
strenuously together with his deed; and having
obtained the end (the last results) of whatever deed
he does here on earth, he returns again from that
world (which is the temporary reward of his deed) to
this world of action.”

‘ So much for the man who desires. But as to
the man who does not desire, who, not desiring,
freed from desires, is satisfied in his desires, or
desires the Self only, his vital spirits do not depart
elsewhere,—being Brahman, he goes to Brahman.

7. ‘ On this there is this verse : “When all desires

1 The iti after adomaya is not clear to me, but it is quite clear
that a new sentence begins with tadyadetat, which Regnaud, II>
p. 101 and p. 139, has not observed.

IV ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAIVA, I I.

177

which once entered his heart are undone, then does

the mortal become immortal, then he obtains Brah-
man.

And as the slough of a snake lies on an ant-hill,
ead and cast away, thus lies this body; but that dis¬
embodied immortal spirit (pra«a, life) i s Brahman
only, is only light.’

Ganaka Vaideha said : ‘ Sir, I give you a thousand.’
o 1 . On this there are these verses :

‘ The small > old Path stretching far away 3 has been
found by me. On it sages who know Brahman move

on to the Svarga-loka (heaven), and thence hio-her
on, as entirely free 3 .

9 - On that path they say that there is white, or
blue, or yellow, or green, or red 4 ; that path was found
by Brahman, and on it goes whoever knows Brahman,
and who has done good, and obtained splendour.

10. ‘All who worship what is not knowledge
(avidya) enter into blind darkness : those who delight
in knowledge, enter, as it were, into greater darkness 5 .

11. There are 0 indeed those unblessed worlds,

1 This may be independent matter, or may be placed again into
the mouth of Yagizavalkya.

Instead of vitata/£, which perhaps seemed to be in contradiction
uith a7zu, there is a Madhyandina reading vitara, probably intended
originally to mean leading across. The other adjective ma?^-
sprzsh/a I cannot explain. Yankara explains it by ma m spmh/a/2
maya labdha h,

3 That this is the true meaning, is indicated by the various
readings of the M&dhyandinas, tena dhira apiyanti brahmavida
utkramya svargaw iokam ito vimukta/i The road is not to lead
to Svarga only, but beyond.

4 See the colours of the veins as given before, IV, 3, 20.

5 See Vag. Up. 9. Yankara in our place explains avidya by
works, and vidya by the Veda, excepting the Upanishads.

6 See Vag. Up. 3; KaMa Up. I, 3.

C T 5 ] N

Btf/HADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD.

1 78

covered with blind darkness. Men who are ignorant
and not enlightened go after death to those worlds.

12. * If a man understands the Self, saying, “ I am
He,” what could he wish or desire that he should
pine after the body 1 .

13. * Whoever has found and understood the Self
that has entered into this patched-together hiding-
place 2 , he indeed is the creator, for he is the maker
of everything, his is the world, and he is the world

itself 3 .

14. ‘ While we are here, we may know this; if not,

I am ignorant 4 , and there is great destruction. Those
who know it, become immortal, but others suffer pain
indeed.

15. ‘ If a man clearly beholds this Self as God,
and as the lord of all that is and will be, then he is
no more afraid.

16. ‘He behind whom the year revolves with the
days, him the gods worship as the light of lights, as
immortal time.

17. ‘He in whom the five beings 5 and the ether
rest, him alone I believe to be the Self, I who

1 That he should be willing to suffer once more the pains
inherent in the body. The Madhyandinas read jariram anu
saw^aret, instead of sa;7gvaret.

2 The body is meant, and is called deha from the root dih, to
knead together. Roer gives sa;;/dehye gahane, which Sankara
explains by saw/dehe. Poley has sawdeghe, which is the right
Ka/zva reading. The Madhyandinas read sa;;/dehe. Gahane might
be taken as an adjective also, referring to sawdehe.

3 Sankara takes loka, world, for atma, self.

4 I have followed Sankara in translating avedi/; by ignorant, but
the text seems corrupt.

5 The five ^anas, i. e. the Gandharvas, Pitrfs, Devas, Asuras, and
Rakshas; or the four castes with the Nishadas; or breath, eye,
ear, food, and mind.

IV ADIIYAYA, 4 BRAIJMAATA, 22 .

179

know, believe him to be Brahman; I who am im-
morbil, believe him to be immortal.

18. I hey who know the life of life, the eye of the
eye, the ear of the ear, the mind of the mind, they
have comprehended the ancient, primeval Brahman'.

19. ‘By the mind alone it is to be perceived 1 2 ,
there is in it no diversity. He who perceives therein
any diversity, goes from death to death.

2 °- This eternal being that can never be proved,
is to be perceived in one way only; it is spotless,
beyond the ether, the unborn Self, great and eternal.

21. ‘ Let a wise Brahma^a, after he has discovered
him, practise wisdom 3 . Let him not seek after many
words, for that is mere weariness of the tongue.

22. And he is that great unborn Self, who consists
of knowledge, is surrounded by the Prawas, the ether
within the heart 4 . In it there reposes the ruler of all.
the lord of all, the king of all. He does not become
greater by good works, nor smaller by evil works.
He is the lord of all, the king of all things, the pro¬
tector of all things. He is a bank 5 and a boundary,
so that these worlds may not be confounded. Brah-
ma«as seek to know him by the study of the Veda, by
sacrifice, by gifts, by penance, by fasting, and he who
knows him, becomes a Muni. Wishing for that

world (for Brahman) only, mendicants leave their
homes.

‘ Knowing this, the people of old did not wish for
offspring. What shall we do with offspring, they said,

1 See Talavak. Up. I, 2.

2 See Kabfa Up. IV, 10-11.

Let him practise abstinence, patience, &c., which are the means

of knowledge.

‘ See Brzh. Up. IV, 3, 7.

5 See Kha nd. Up. VIII, 4.

1 SO BRI H A D A R A A T Y AK A- U P A KIS H A D.

we who have this Self and this world (of Brahman) 1 ?
And they, having risen above the desire for sons,
wealth, and new worlds, wander about as mendicants.
For desire for sons is desire for wealth, and desire
for wealth is desire for worlds. Both these are indeed
desires only. He, the Self, is to be described by No,
no 2 ! He is incomprehensible, for he cannot be com¬
prehended ; he is imperishable, for he cannot perish;
he is unattached, for he does not attach himself;
unfettered, he does not suffer, he does not fail. Him
(who knows), these two do not overcome, whether
he says that for some reason he has done evil, or for
some reason he has done good—-he overcomes both,
and neither what he has done, nor what he has
omitted to do, burns (affects) him.

23. ‘This has been told by a verse (Rik) : “This
eternal greatness of the Brahma^a does not grow
larger by work, nor does it grow smaller. Let man
try to find (know) its trace, for having found (known)
it, he is not sullied by any evil deed.”

‘ He therefore that knows it, after having become
quiet, subdued, satisfied, patient, and collected 3 , sees
self in Self, sees all as Self. Evil does not overcome
him, he overcomes all evil. Evil does not burn him,
he burns all evil. Free from evil, free from spots,
free from doubt, he becomes a (true) Brahma;/a ; this
is the Brahma-world, O King,’—thus spoke Yaf^a-
valkya.

(kanaka Vaideha said : ‘ Sir, I give you the Videhas,
and also myself, to be together your slaves.’

24. This 4 indeed is the great, the unborn Self, the

1 Cf. BrA. Up. Ill, 5, 1. 2 See Brih. Up. Ill, 9, 2 6; IV, 2, 4.

3 See Deussen, Vedanta, p. 85.

4 As described in the dialogue between Ganaka and Ya^v/avalkya.

IV ADHYAYA, 5 BRAIIMAiVA, 5.

l8l

strong , the giver of wealth. He who knows this
obtains wealth.

25. This great, unborn Self, undecaying, undying,
immortal, fearless, is indeed Brahman. Fearless is

Brahman, and he who knows this becomes verily the
fearless Brahman.

Fifth Brahmaa^a 1 2 .

1. Ya^Vzavalkya had two wives, Maitreyi and
Katyayani. Of these Maitreyi was conversant with
Brahman, but Katyayani possessed such knowledge
only as women possess. And Ya^avalkya, when
he wished to get ready for another state of life (when

he wished to give up the state of a householder, and
retire into the forest),

2. Said, ‘Maitreyi, verily I am going away from
this my house (into the forest). Forsooth, let me
make a settlement between thee and that Katyayani/

3 - Maitreyi said: ‘ My Lord, if this whole earth,
full of wealth, belonged to me, tell me, should I be
immortal by it, or no ?’

‘No,’ replied Ya^;/avalkya, ‘like the life of rich
people will be thy life. But there is no hope of
immortality by wealth/

4. And Maitreyi said: ‘ What should I do with
that by which I do not become immortal ? What

my Lord knoweth 3 (of immortality), tell that clearly
to me/

5. Ya^/zavalkya replied: ‘Thou who art truly dear
to me, thou hast increased what is dear (to me in

1 Annada is here explained as ‘ dwelling in all beings, and eating
all food which they eat/

2 See before, II, 4.

3 The Ka;zva text has vettha instead of veda.

182

Bi?/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

thee) 1 . Therefore, if you like, Lady, I will explain it
to thee, and mark well what I say/

6 . And he said: ‘Verily, a husband is not dear,
that you may love the husband ; but that you may
love the Self, therefore a husband is dear.

‘ Verily, a wife is not dear, that you may love the
wife ; but that you may love the Self, therefore a
wife is dear.

‘Verily, sons are not dear, that you may love the
sons ; but that you may love the Self, therefore sons
are dear.

c Verily, wealth is not dear, that you may love
wealth; but that you may love the Self, therefore
wealth is dear.

‘Verily, cattle 2 are not dear, that you may love
cattle ; but that you may love the Self, therefore
cattle are dear.

f Verily, the Brahman-class is not dear, that you
may love the Brahman-class; but that you may love
the Self, therefore the Brahman-class is dear.

‘Verily, the Kshatra-class is not dear, that you
may love the Kshatra-class; but that you may love
the Self, therefore the Kshatra-class is dear.

‘Verily, the worlds are not dear, that you may

love the worlds; but that you may love the Self,

therefore the worlds are dear.

‘ Verily, the Devas are not dear, that you may

love the Devas; but that you may love the Self,

therefore the Devas are dear.

1 The Ka;zva text has avr/dhat, which Sankara explains by
vardhitavati nirdharitavaty asi. The Madhyandinas read avrztat,
which the commentator explains by avartayat, vartitavaty asi.

2 Though this is added here, it is not included in the summing
up in § 6.

IV ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMAAA, 8. 1 83

Verily, the Vedas are not dear, that you may
love the Vedas ; but that you may love the Self,
therefore the Vedas are dear.

Verily, creatures are not dear, that you may love
the creatures ; but that you may love the Self, there¬
fore are creatures dear.

Verily, everything - is not dear, that you may love
everything ; but that you may love the Self, there¬
fore everything is dear.

‘ Verily, the Self is to be seen, to be heard, to be
perceived, to be marked, O Maitreyi! When the
Self has been seen, heard, perceived, and known,
then all this is known.

7 * ‘ Whosoever looks for the Brahman-class else¬
where than in the Self, was abandoned by the
Brahman-class. Whosoever looks for the Kshatra-
class elsewhere than in the Self, was abandoned by
the Kshatra-class. Whosoever looks for the worlds
elsewhere than in the Self, was abandoned by the
worlds. Whosoever looks for the Devas elsewhere
than in the Self, was abandoned by the Devas.
Whosoever looks for the Vedas elsewhere than in
the Self, was abandoned by the Vedas. Whosoever
looks for the creatures elsewhere than in the Self,
was abandoned by the creatures. Whosoever looks
for anything elsewhere than in the Self, was aban¬
doned by anything.

‘ This Brahman-class, this Kshatra-class, these
worlds, these Devas, these Vedas, all these beings,
this everything, all is that Self.

8 . ‘ Now as the sounds of a drum, when beaten,
cannot be seized externally (by themselves), but the
sound is seized, when the drum is seized, or the
beater of the drum ;

184

BR/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

9. ‘And as the sounds of a conch-shell, when blown,
cannot be seized externally (by themselves), but the
sound is seized, when the shell is seized, or the blower
of the shell;

10. ‘ And as the sounds of a lute, when played,
cannot be seized externally (by themselves), but the
sound is seized, when the lute is seized, or the player
of the lute;

11. ‘As clouds of smoke proceed by themselves
out of lighted fire kindled with damp fuel, thus
verily, O Maitreyi, has been breathed forth from
this great Being what we have as iWg-veda, Ya^ur-
veda, Sama-veda, Atharvangirasas, Itihasa, Pura/za,
Vidya, the Upanishads, Ylokas, Sutras, Anuvya-
khyanas, Vyakhyanas, what is sacrificed, what is
poured out, food, drink 1 , this world and the other
world, and all creatures. From him alone all these
were breathed forth.

12. ‘ As all waters find their centre in the sea,
all touches in the skin, all tastes in the tongue, all
smells in the nose, all colours in the eye, all sounds
in the ear, all percepts in the mind, all knowledge in
the heart, all actions in the hands, all movements in
the feet, and all the Vedas in speech,—

13. ‘ As a mass of salt has neither inside nor
outside, but is altogether a mass of taste, thus indeed
has that Self neither inside nor outside, but is alto¬
gether a mass of knowledge; and having risen from
out these elements, vanishes again in them. When
he has departed, there is no more knowledge (name),
I say, O Maitreyi,’—thus spoke Ya^avalkya.

1 Explained by annadananimittam and peyadananimittaw dhar-
ma^atam. See before, IV, 1, 2.

IV ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMAIVA, I.

___ 185

14. Then Maitreyi said: ‘ Here, Sir, thou hast

landed me in utter bewilderment. Indeed, I do not
understand him.’

But he replied : ‘ O Maitreyi, I say nothing that is
ewildermg Verily, beloved, that Self is imperish¬
able, and of an indestructible nature.

1 5 - ‘ For when there is as it were duality, then
one sees the other, one smells the other, one tastes
the other, one salutes the other, one hears the other
one perceives the other, one touches the other, one
knows the other; but when the Self only is all this,
how should he see another, how should he smell
another, how should he taste another, how should
he salute another, how should he hear another, how
should he touch another, how should he know
another? How should he know Him by whom he
knows all this ? That Self is to be described by No,
no ! He is incomprehensible, for he cannot be
comprehended; he is imperishable, for he cannot
perish , he is unattached, for he does not attach
imse f, unfettered, he does not suffer, he does not
ail. How, O beloved, should he know the Knower ?
Thus, O Maitreyi, thou hast been instructed. Thus
far goes immortality.’ Having said so, Ya^avalkya
went away (into the forest).

1.

Sixth Brahmaiva.

Now follows the stem 2 :

1. (We) from Pautimashya,

2. Pautimashya from Gaupavana,

Gaupavana from Pautimashya,

See B rih. Up. Ill, 9 , 26; IV, 2, 4; IV, 4 , 22 .

The line of teachers and pupils by whom the Ya^avalkya-

Btf/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

I 86

4. Pautimashya from Gaupavana,

5. Gaupavana from Kaudka,

6. Kaudka from Kauwafinya,

7. Kauwafinya from Sa^ilya,

8. Sa/^ilya from Kausika and Gautama,

9. Gautama

A

2. from Agnivesya,

10. Agnivesya from Gargya,

11. Gargya from Gargya,

12. Gargya from Gautama,

13. Gautama from Saitava,

14. Saitava from Parasaryayarca,

15. ParasaryayaTza from Gargyaya^a,

16. Gargyaya^a from Uddalakayana,

17. Uddalakayana from Uabalayana,

18. Uabalayana from Madhyandinayana,

19. Madhyandinayana from Saukaraya^a,

20. Saukaraya^a from Kashaya^a,

21. Kashaya/za from Sayakayana,

22. Sayakayana from Kaudkayani

23. Kaudkayani

3. from Ghrztakaudka,

24. Ghrztakaiuika from Parasaryaya^a,

kanda was handed down. From 1-10 the \ r a?nsa agrees with the
Yam S 3 , at the end of II, 6.

The Madhyandina text begins with vayam, we, and proceeds to
1. ^aurpawayya, 2. Gautama, 3. Aatsya, 4. Para^arya, Szc.,as in the
Madhukdwtfa, p. 118, except in 10, where it gives Gaivantayana for
Atreya. Then after 12. Kam^inyayana, it gives 13. 14- the two
Kau«</inyas, 15. the Aurwavabhas, 16. Kauwrfinya, 17. Kauwafinya,
18. Kauwdinya and Agnive^ya, 19. Saitava,^20. PaHUarya, 21. G'atu-
karwya, 22. Bharadva^a, 23. Bharadva^a, Asuraya«a, and Gautama,
24. Bharadvaga, 25. Valakakaunka, 26. Kashaya;m, 27. Saukara-
ya;?a, 28. Traiva;/i, 29. Aupa^andhani, 30. Sayakayana, 31. Kami
kayani, &c., as in the Kawva text, from No. 22 to Brahman.

1 From here the Vaw^a agrees again with that given at the end

of II, 6.

IV ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMAiVA, 3. 18'

25. Parajary&ya^a from Paraiurya,

26. Paia^arya from G-atukar/zya,

27. Gatukamya from Asurayazza and Yaska 1 ,

28. Asurayazza from Travazzi,

29. Travazzi from Aupafandhani,

30. Aupafandhani from Asuri,

31. Asuri from Bharadva^a,

32. Bharadva^a from Atreya,

33. Atreya from Ma^/i,

34 * Mazz/i from Gautama,

35. Gautama from Gautama,

36. Gautama from Vatsya,

37. Vatsya from Yazzz/ilya,

3 8* Yazzz/ilya from KaBorya Kapya,
j 9 * K a Borya Kapya from Kumaraharita,

40. Kumaraharita from Galava,

41. Galava from Vidarbhi-kauzzz/inya,

42. Vidarbhi - kauzzzzinya from Vatsanapat Ba-

bhrava,

43 - Vatsanapat Babhrava from Pathi Saubhara,
44 * Pathi Saubhara from Ayasya Arigirasa,

45 * Ayasya Arigirasa from Abhuti Tvash/ra,

46. Abhuti Tvash/ra from VBvarupa Tvash/ra,

47 - VBvarupa Tvash/ra from Asvinau,

48. A^vinau from Dadhya^ Atharvazza,

49. Dadhya/& Atharvazza from Atharvan Da va,

50. Atharvan Daiva from MVztyu Pradhvazzzsana,

51. Mzvtyu Pradhvazzzsana from Pradhvazzzsana,

52. Pradhvazzzsana from Ekarshi,

53. Ekarshi from Vipra/§itti 2 ,

54* Vipra^itti from Vyash/i,

A 1 T he Madhyandina text has, 1. Bharadva^a, 2. Bharadva^a,
Asuraya/za, and Yaska.

2 Vipra^-itti, Madhyandina text.

BR/H AD AR A AY AKA-UP ANTS HAD.

188

55 * Vyash/i from Sanaru,

56. Sanaru from Sanatana,

57. Sanatana from Sanaga,

58. Sanaga from Paramesh//dn,

59. Paramesh/Ain from Brahman,

60. Brahman is Svayambhu, self-existent.
Adoration to Brahman.

V ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMAAA, 2.

189

fifth adhyAya.

First Brahmmva 1 .

1. That (the invisible Brahman) is full, this (the
visible Brahman) is full 2 . This full (visible Brah¬
man) proceeds fi om that full (invisible Brahman).
On grasping the fulness of this full (visible Brah¬
man) there is left that full (invisible Brahman) 3 .

Om (is) ether, (is) Brahman 4 . ‘ There is the old

ether (the invisible), and the (visible) ether of the
atmosphere,’ thus said ICauravyayawiputra. This
(the Om) is the Veda (the means of knowledge)
thus the Brahma7/as know. One knows through it
all that has to be known.

Second Brahmaaa.

1. The threefold descendants of Pra^apati, gods,
men, and Asuras (evil spirits), dwelt as Brahma/£a-
nns (students) with their father Pra^apati. Having
finished their studentship the gods said : ‘ Tell us
(something), Sir. He told them the syllable Da.
Then he said : ‘ Did you understand ? ’ They said :

We did understand. You told us “ Damyata,” Be
subdued.’ ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘you have understood.’

2. 1 hen the men said to him : ‘Tell us somethin^

---— __ £> *

1 This is called a Khila, or supplementary chapter, treating of
various auxiliary means of arriving at a knowledge of Brahman?

2 Full and filling, infinite.

3 On perceiving the true nature of the visible world, there remains,
i.e. there is perceived at once, as underlying it, or as being it, the
invisible world or Brahman. This and the following parao-raph
are called Mantras.

This is explained by Sankara as meaning, Brahman is Kha, the
ether, and called Om, i.e. Om and Kha are predicates of Brahman.

190

BR/HADARAAYAKA-UPANISHAD.

Sir.’ He told them the same syllable Da. Then he
said : ‘ Did you understand ? ’ They said : ‘ We did
understand. You told us, “ Datta, Give. Yes, he

said, ‘ you have understood.’

3. Then the Asuras said to him: ‘ Tell us some¬
thing, Sir.’ He told them the same syllable Da.
Then he said : ‘ Did you understand ? ’ They said :

1 We did understand. You told us, “ Dayadham, Be
merciful/ 4 Yes, he said, 4 you have understood.

The divine voice of thunder repeats the same,
Da Da Da, that is, Be subdued, Give, Be merciful.
Therefore let that triad be taught, Subduing, Giving,
and Mercy-

Third Brahma2ya.

1. Pra^apati is the heart, is this Brahman, is all this.
The heart, hr/day a, consists of three syllables. One
syllable is h ri, and to him who knows this, his own
people and others bring offerings 1 . One syllable is
da, and to him who knows this, his own people and
others bring gifts. One syllable is yam, and he who
knows this, goes to heaven (svarga) as his world.

Fourth Brahmaaa.

1. This (heart) indeed is even that, it was indeed
the true 2 (Brahman). And whosoever knows this
oreat glorious first-born as the true Brahman, he
conquers these worlds, and conquered likewise may
that (enemy) be 3 ! yes, whosoever knows this great

1 Sankara explains that with regard to the heart, i. e. buddhi, the
senses are ‘its own people/ and the objects of the senses ' the otheis.

2 The true, not the truth; the truly existing. The commentator
explains it as it was explained in II, 3, 1, as sat and tya, containing
both sides of the Brahman.

3 An elliptical expression, as explained by the commentator.
‘May that one (his enemy) be conquered, just as that one was

v ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMAiVA, 2.

191

gloiious first-born as the true Brahman; for Brahman
is the true.

Fifth Brahmaaa.

1. In the beginning this (world) was water.
Water produced the true \ and the true is Brahman.
Brahman produced Pra^apati * 2 , Pra^apati the Devas
(gods). The Devas adore the true (satyam) alone.
This satyam consists of three syllables. One syl¬
lable is sa, another t(i), the third 3 yam. The first
and last syllables are true, in the middle there is the
untrue 4 . This untrue is on both sides enclosed by
the true, and thus the true preponderates. The
untrue does not hurt him who knows this.

2. Now what is the true, that is the Aditya (the
sun), the person that dwells in yonder orb, and the
person in the right eye. These two rest on each
other, the former resting with his rays in the latter,
the latter with his pra;/as (senses) in the former.
When the latter is on the point of departing this life,
he sees that orb as white only, and those rays (of the
sun) do not return to him.

conquered by Brahman. If he conquers the world, how much
more his enemy! It would be better, however, if we could take

* lta in the sense of varikr/ta or danta, because we could then o- 0
on with ya eva m veda.

] Here explained by the commentator as Putratmaka Hira/zyagarbha.

2 Here explained as Vi rag.

3 Satyam is often pronounced satiam, as trisyllabic. Sankara, how¬
ever, takes the second syllable as t only, and explains the i after it as
an anubandha. The Kawva text gives the three syllables as sa, ti, am
winch seems preferable; cf. KMnd. Up. VIII, 3,5; Taitt. Up. II, 6. ’

\ This is explained by a mere play on the letters, sa and ya
having nothing in common with mr/tyu, death, whereas t occurs in
mntyu and anr/ta. Dvivedaganga takes sa and am as true, be¬
cause they occur in satya and amr/ta, and not in mr/tyu, while ti
is untrue, because the t occurs in m;7tyu and anr/ta.

j 92 B22 JHAdArA2VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

3. Now of the person in that (solar) orb Bhu/^ is
the head, for the head is one, and that syllable is
one; Bhuva/; the two arms, for the arms are two,
and these syllables are two ; Svar the foot, for the
feet are two, and these syllables are two 1 . Its
secret name is Ahar (day), and he who knows this,
destroys (hanti) evil and leaves (^ahati) it.

4. Of the person in the right eye Bhu h is the head,
for the head is one, and that syllable is one; Bhuva h
the two arms, for the arms are two, and these sylla¬
bles are two ; Svar the foot, for the feet are two, and
these syllables are two. Its secret name is Aham
(ego), and he who knows this, destroys (hanti) evil
and leaves (^ahati) it.

Sixth Brahmaaa.

1. That person, under the form of mind (manas),
being - light indeed 2 , is within the heart, small like a
grain of rice or barley. He is the ruler of all, the
lord of all—he rules all this, whatsoever exists.

Seventh Brahmaaa.

1. They say that lightning is Brahman, because
lightning (vidyut) is called so from cutting off
(vidanat) 3 . Whosoever knows this, that lightning
is Brahman, him (that Brahman) cuts off from evil,
for lightning indeed is Brahman.

1 Svar has to be pronounced suvar.

2 Bha//satya must be taken as one word, as the commentator
says, bha eva satya//j sadbhava^ svarftpaw yasya so ’yam bha/zsatyo
bhasvara/h

3 From do, avakha/^ane, to cut; the lightning cutting through the
darkness of the clouds, as Brahman, when known, cuts through
the darkness of ignorance.

V ADHYAYA, IO BRAHMAiVA, I.

193

Eighth Brahmana.

1. Let him meditate on speech as a cow. Her
four udders are the words Svaha, Vasha/, Hanta
and Svadha h The gods live on two of her udders,’
the Svaha and the Vasha/, men on the Hanta, the
fathers on the Svadha. The bull of that cow is
breath (prdwa), the calf the mind.

Ninth Brahma^a.

1. Agni Vabvanara is the fire within man by
which the food that is eaten is cooked, i.e. digested.
Its noise is that which one hears, if one covers one’s
ears. When he is on the point of departing this
life, he does not hear that noise.

Tenth Brahmana.

1. When the person goes away from this world,
he comes to the wind. Then the wind makes room
for him, like the hole of a carriage wheel, and
through it he mounts higher. He comes to the sun.
Then the sun makes room for him, like the hole
of a Lambara 1 2 , and through it he mounts higher.
He comes to the moon. Then the moon makes
room for him, like the hole of a drum, and through
it he mounts higher, and arrives at the world where

there is no sorrow, no snow 3 . There he dwells
eternal years.

1 There are two udders, the Svaha and Vasha/, on which the
gods feed, i.e. words with which oblations are given to the gods.
With Hanta they are given to men, with Svadha to the fathers.

2 A musical instrument.

3 The commentator explains hima by bodily pain, but snow is
much more characteristic.

[ 15 ]

O

194

BR/HADARAAYAKA-UPANISHAD.

Eleventh Brahmaaa.

i. This is indeed the highest penance, if a man,
laid up with sickness, suffers pain h He who knows
this, conquers the highest world.

This is indeed the highest penance, if they carry
a dead person into the forest 1 2 . He who knows this,
conquers the highest world.

This is indeed the highest penance, if they place a
dead person on the fire 3 . He who knows this, con¬
quers the highest world.

Twelfth Brahmaaa.

i. Some say that food is Brahman, but this is not
so, for food decays without life (pra^a). Others say
that life (pra;/a) is Brahman, but this is not so, for life
dries up without food. Then these two deities (food
and life), when they have become one, reach that
highest state (i.e. are Brahman). Thereupon Pra-
t;Tda said to his father: ‘ Shall I be able to do any
good to one who knows this, or shall I be able to do
him any harm 4 ? ’ The father said to him, beckoning
with his hand: ‘Not so, O Pratrzda ; for who could
reach the highest state, if he has only got to the
oneness of these two ?’ He then said to him : ‘ Vi;

1 The meaning is that, while he is suffering pain from illness, he
should think that he was performing penance. If he does that,
he obtains the same reward for his sickness which he would have
obtained for similar pain inflicted on himself for the sake of pei-
forming penance.

2 This is like the penance of leaving the village and living in
the forest.

3 This is like the penance of entering into the fire.

4 That is, is he not so perfect in knowledge that nothing can
harm him ?

V ADHYAYA, 13 BRAHMAiVA, 4.

verily, food is Vi, for all these beings rest (vish/ani)

on food.’ He then said : * Ram ; verily, life is Ram,

for all these beings delight (ramante) in life. All

beings rest on him, all beings delight in him who
knows this.’

Thirteenth Brahma.va.

1. Next follows the Uktha 1 . Verily, breath (prawa)
is Uktha, for breath raises up (utthapayati) all this
From him who knows this, there is raised a wise son,'

knowing the Uktha ; he obtains union and oneness
with the Uktha.

2. Next follows the Yayus. Verily, breath is
Ya vus, for all these beings are joined in breath 2 .
For him who knows this, all beings are joined to

procure his excellence; he obtains union and one-
ness with the Ya^us.

3 * Next follows the Saman. Verily, breath is the
Saman, for all these beings meet in breath. For him
who knows this, all beings meet to procure his excel¬
lence ; he obtains union and oneness with the Saman.

4. Next follows the Kshatra. Verily, breath is
the Kshatra, for breath is Kshatra, i.e. breath pro¬
tects (trayate) him from being hurt (kshamtxvfc).
He who knows this, obtains Kshatra (power), which

requires no protection; he obtains union and one¬
ness with Kshatra 3 .

1 Meditation on the hymn called uktha. On the uktha, as the
principal part in the Mahavrata,seeKaush. Up. Ill, 3; Ait. Ar. II, 1, 2.
The uktha, ya^us, saman, &c. are here represented as forms under
which pra/za or life, and indirectly Brahman, is to be meditated on.

2 Without life or breath nothing can join anything else; there¬
fore life is called ya^-us, as it were yugus.

3 Instead of Kshatram atram, another Aakh&, i.e. the Madhyan-
dina, reads Kshatramatram, which Dvivedaganga explains as, he

O 2

BR/HADARA2VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

Fourteenth Brahma^a.

1. The words Bhumi (earth), Antariksha (sky), and
Dyu * 1 (heaven) form eight syllables. One foot of the
Gayatri consists of eight syllables. This (one foot)
of it is that (i. e. the three worlds). And he who thus
knows that foot of it, conquers as far as the three

worlds extend.

2. The i^zkas, the Yajfuzzzshi, and the Samani form
eight syllables. One foot (the second) of the Gayatri
consists of eight syllables. This (one foot) of it is
that (i.e. the three Vedas, the Rig-ve da, Ya^ur-veda,
and Sama-veda). And he who thus knows that foot
of it, conquers as far as that threefold knowledge

extends.

3. The Pra/za (the up-breathing), the Apana (the
down-breathing), and the Vyana (the back-breathing)
form eight syllables. One foot (the third) of the
Gayatri consists of eight syllables. This (one foot)
of it is that (i.e. the three vital breaths). And he who
thus knows that foot of it, conquers as far as there
is anything that breathes. And of that (Gayatri,
or speech) this indeed is the fourth (turiya), the
bright (dar^ata) foot, shining high above the skies 2 .
What is here called turiya (the fourth) is meant for
/vaturtha (the fourth); what is called darsatam
padam (the bright foot) is meant for him who is
as it were seen (the person in the sun) ; and what
is called parora^as (he who shines high above the

obtains the nature of the Kshatra, or he obtains the Kshatia which

protects (Kshatram atram).

1 Dyu, nom. Dyaus, must be pronounced Diyaus.

2 Parora^as, masc., should be taken as one word, like paroksha,
viz. he who is beyond all ra^as, all visible skies.

19 7

V ADHYAYA, 14 BRAHMAZVA, 5.

skies) is meant for him who shines higher and higher
above every sky. And he who thus knows that foot
of the Gayatri, shines thus himself also with hap¬
piness and glory.

4. That Gayatri (as described before with its three
feet) rests on that fourth foot, the bright one, high
above the sky. And that again rests on the True (sa-
tyam), and the True is the eye, for the eye is (known
to be) true. And therefore even now, if two persons
come disputing, the one saying, I saw, the other,
I heard, then we should trust the one who says, I
saw. And the True again rests on force (balam),
and force is life (pra/za), and that (the True) rests on
life k Therefore they say, force is stronger than the
True. Thus does that Gayatri rest with respect to
the self (as life). That Gayatri protects (tatre) the
vital breaths (gayas); the gayas are the prazzas
(vital breaths), and it protects them. And because
it protects (tatre) the vital breaths (gayas), therefore
it is called Gayatri. And that Savitri verse which
the teacher teaches 1 2 , that is it (the life, the prazza, and
indirectly the Gayatri) ; and whomsoever he teaches,
he protects his vital breaths.

5. Some teach that Savitri as an AnushAibh 3 verse,
saying that speech is Anush/ubh, and that we teach

1 *Sankara understood the True (satyam) by tad, not the balam,
the force.

2 The teacher teaches his pupil, who is brought to him when
eight years old, the Savitri verse, making him repeat each word,
and each half verse, till he knows the whole, and by teaching him
that Savitri, he is supposed to teach him really the prazza, the life,
as the self of the world.

3 The verse would be, Rig-veda V, 82, 1 :

Tat savitur vrmimahe vayazzz devasya bho^anam
-SreshMazzz sarvadhatamazzz turam bhagasya dhimahi.

198

BR/flADARAAYAKA-UPANISlIAD.

that speech. Let no one do this, but let him teach
the Gayatri as Savitri \ And even if one who knows
this receives what seems to be much as his reward
(as a teacher), yet this is not equal to one foot of the
Gayatri.

6. If a man (a teacher) were to receive as his fee
these three worlds full of all things, he would obtain
that first foot of the Gayatri. And if a man were to
receive as his fee everything as far as this threefold
knowledge extends, he would obtain that second
foot of the Gayatri. And if a man were to receive
as his fee everything whatsoever breathes, he would
obtain that third foot of the Gayatri. But ‘ that fourth
bright foot, shining high above the skies 1 2 ', cannot
be obtained by anybody—whence then could one
receive such a fee ?

7. The adoration 3 of that (Gayatri) :

‘ O Gayatri, thou hast one foot, two feet, three
feet, four feet 4 . Thou art footless, for thou art not
known. Worship to thy fourth bright foot above
the skies.' If 5 one (who knows this) hates some

1 Because Gayatri represents life, and the pupil receives life when
he learns the Gayatri.

2 See before, § 2.

3 Upasthana is the act of approaching the gods, npoa-KvvrjaLs,
Angehen, with a view of obtaining a request. Here the application
is of two kinds, abhi/harika, imprecatory against another, and
abhyudayika, auspicious for oneself. The former has two formulas,
the latter one. An upasthana is here represented as effective, if
connected with the Gayatri.

4 Consisting of the three worlds, the threefold knowledge, the
threefold vital breaths, and the fourth foot, as described before.

5 I have translated this paragraph very freely, and differently
from .Sankara. The question is, whether dvishyat with iti can be
used in the sense of abhi/rara, or imprecation. If not, I do not see
how the words should be construed. The expression yasma upa-

V ADHYAYA, 1 5 BRAHMA2VA, 2 . 199

one and says, ‘ May he not obtain this/ or ‘ May this
wish not be accomplished to him/ then that wish is
not accomplished to him against whom he thus prays,
or if he says, ‘ May I obtain this/

8. And thus kanaka Vaideha spoke on this point
to Bu^ila Ai'vatara^'vi * 1 : ‘ How is it that thou who
spokest thus as knowing the Gayatri, hast become
an elephant and carriest me ?’ He answered : ‘ Your
Majesty, I did not know its mouth. Agni, fire, is
indeed its mouth ; and if people pile even what seems
much (wood) on the fire, it consumes it all. And
thus a man who knows this, even if he commits what
seems much evil, consumes it all and becomes pure,
clean, and free from decay and death.’

Fifteenth Brahma^a.

1. 2 The face of the True (the Brahman) is covered
with a golden disk 3 . Open that, O Pushan 4 , that we
may see the nature of the True 5 .

2. O Pushan, only seer, Yama (judge), Surya (sun),
son of Pra^apati 6 , spread thy rays and gather them !

tish/^ate is rightly explained by Dvivedaganga, yadartham evam
upatish//;ate.

1 A^vatarasyajvasyapatyam, .Sankara.

2 These verses, which are omitted here in the Madhyandina
text, are found at the end of the Vagasaneyi-upanishad 15-18*
They are supposed to be a prayer addressed to Aditya by a dying
person.

3 Mahidhara on verse 17 : ‘ The face of the true (purusha in the
sun) is covered by a golden disk/ -Sankara explains here mukha,
face, by mukhyaw svarupam, the principal form or nature.

4 Pushan is here explained as a name of Savitrz, the sun; like¬
wise all the names in the next verse.

5 Cf. Maitr. Up. VI, 35.

6 Of Lrvara or Hira/zyagarbha.

200 BRIHADARA2VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

The light which is thy fairest form, I see it. I am
what he is (viz. the person in the sun).

3. Breath to air and to the immortal! Then this
my body ends in ashes. Om! Mind, remember!
Remember thy deeds ! Mind, remember! Remem¬
ber thy deeds 1 !

4. Agni, lead us on to wealth (beatitude) by a good
path 2 , thou, O God, who knowest all things! Keep
far from us crooked evil, and we shall offer thee the
fullest praise! (Rv. I, 189, 1.)

1 The Vag-asaneyi-sazzzhita reads: Om, krato smara, k//be smara,
krz'tazzz smara. Uva/a holds that Agni, fire, who has been wor¬
shipped in youth and manhood, is here invoked in the form of
mind, or that kratu is meant for sacrifice. * Agni, remember me !
Think of the world ! Remember my deeds ! * K/zb>e is explained
by Mahidhara as a dative of k/zp, k/z'p meaning loka, world, what
is made to be enjoyed (kalpyate bhogaya).

2 Not by the Southern path, the dark, from which there is a
fresh return to life.

201

VI ADHYAYA, I BRAHMAAA, 5.

SIXTH ADHYAYA.

First Brahmaaa * 1 * Ill, .

1. Hari/z, 0 m. He who knows the first and
the best, becomes himself the first and the best
among- his people. Breath is indeed the first and
the best. He who knows this, becomes the first
and the best among* his people, and among whom¬
soever he wishes to be so.

2. He who knows the richest 2 , becomes himself
the richest among his people. Speech is the richest.
He who knows this, becomes the richest among his
people, and among whomsoever he wishes to be so.

3. He who knows the firm rest, becomes himself
firm on even and uneven ground. The eye indeed
is the firm rest, for by means of the eye a man
stands firm on even and uneven ground. He who
knows this, stands firm on even and uneven ground.

4. He who knows success, whatever desire he
desires, it succeeds to him. The ear indeed is suc¬
cess. For in the ear are all these Vedas successful.
He who knows this, whatever desire he desires, it
succeeds to him.

5. He who knows the home, becomes a home
of his own people, a home of all men. The mind

1 This Brahmawa, also called a Khila (p. 1010, 1. 8; p. 1029,

1 . 8), occurs in the Madhyandina-^akha XIV, 9, 2. It should be

compared with the AfMndogya-upanishad V, 1 (Sacred Books of
the East, vol. i, p. 72); also with the Ait. Ar. II, 4; Kaush. Up.

Ill, 3; and the Prasua Up. II, 3.

2 Here used as a feminine, while in the Khand.. Up. V, 1, it is
vasish/^a.

202

B RI H A D AR ANY AK A- U PANTS HAD.

indeed is the home. He who knows this, becomes
a home of his own people and a home of all men.

6. He who knows generation 1 , becomes rich in
offspring and cattle. Seed indeed is generation. He
who knows this, becomes rich in offspring and cattle.

7. These Pranas (senses), when quarrelling toge¬
ther as to who was the best, went to Brahman 2
and said : ‘ Who is the richest of us ? * He replied :
‘He by whose departure this body seems worst, he
is the richest/

8. The tongue (speech) departed, and having
been absent for a year, it came back and said:
‘How have you been able to live without me?’
They replied; ‘ Like unto people, not speaking with
the tongue, but breathing with breath, seeing with
the eye, hearing with the ear, knowing with the
mind, generating with seed. Thus we have lived.’
Then speech entered in.

9. The eye (sight) departed, and having been
absent for a year, it came back and said: ‘How
have you been able to live without me ? ’ They re¬
plied : ‘ Like blind people, not seeing with the eye,
but breathing with the breath, speaking with the
tongue, hearing with the ear, knowing with the
mind, generating with seed. Thus we have lived/
Then the eye entered in.

10. The ear (hearing) departed, and having been
absent for a year, it came back and said: ‘ How
have you been able to live without me ? ’ They re¬
plied : ‘ Like deaf people, not hearing with the ear,

1 This is wanting in the jOand.Up. RoerandPoley read Pra^-apati
for pra«-ati. MS. I. O. 375 has pra^ati, MS. I. O. 1973 pra^apati.

2 Here we have Pra^-apati, instead of Brahman, in the ^and.
Up.; also jresh/Zza instead of vasish/Z^a.

VI ADHYAYA, I BRAHMAiVA, 14.

203

but breathing with the breath, speaking with the
tongue, seeing with the eye, knowing with the mind,
generating with seed. Thus we have lived.’ Then
the ear entered in.

if* The mind departed, and having been absent
foi a year, it came back and said; ‘ How have you
been able to live without me ?’ They replied : ‘ Like
fools, not knowing with their mind, but breathing
with the breath, seeing with the eye, hearing with
the ear, generating with seed. Thus we have lived/
Then the mind entered in.

12. The seed departed, and having being absent
for a year, it came back and said : ‘ How have you
been able to live without me?’ They replied:

‘ Like* impotent people, not generating with seed,
but breathing with the breath, seeing with the eye,
hearing with the ear, knowing with the mind. Thus
we have lived.’ Then the seed entered in.

13. The (vital) breath, when on the point of de¬
parting, tore up these senses, as a great, excellent
horse of the Sindhu country might tear up the peos
to which he is tethered. They said to him: ‘Sir,
do not depart. We shall not be able to live without
thee.’ He said: ‘Then make me an offering.’
They said: ‘ Let it be so.’

14. Then the tongue said: ‘ If I am the richest,
then thou art the richest by it.’ The eye said :

If I am the firm rest, then thou art possessed of
firm rest by it.’ The ear said : ‘ If I am success,
then thou art possessed of success by it.’ The mind
said : If I am the home, thou art the home by
it.’ The seed said: ‘If I am generation, thou art
possessed of generation by it.’ He said : ‘ What shall
be food, what shall be dress for me ?’

204

BR/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

They replied: ‘Whatever there is, even unto dogs,
worms, insects, and birds 1 , that is thy food, and water
thy dress. He who thus knows the food of Ana (the
breath) 2 , by him nothing is eaten that is not (proper)
food, nothing is received that is not (proper) food.
Yrotriyas (Vedic theologians) who know this, rinse
the mouth with water when they are going to eat, and
rinse the mouth with water after they have eaten,
thinking that thereby they make the breath dressed
(with water)/

Second Brahmajva 3 .

1. Yvetaketu Aru^eya went to the settlement of
the Pa^/£alas. He came near to Pravaha/za drai-
vali 4 5 , who was walking about (surrounded by his
men). As soon as he (the king) saw him, he said:

‘ My boy!’ Yvetaketu replied : ‘ Sir!’

Then the king said : ‘ Have you been taught by
your father ?’ ‘ Yes/ he replied.

2. The king said : ‘ Do you know how men, when
they depart from here, separate from each other ?

‘ No/ he replied.

‘ Do you know how they come back to this
world ?’ ‘ No/ he replied 6 .

1 It may mean, every kind of food, such as is eaten by dogs,
worms, insects, and birds.

2 We must read, with MS. I. O. 375 > anasyannam, not annasyan-
nam, as MS. I. O. 1973, Roer, and Poley read. Weber has the right
reading, which is clearly suggested by Khk nd. Up. V, 2, 1.

8 See WMnd. Up. V, 3; Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, I, 433;
Deussen, Vedanta, p. 390. The commentator treats this chapter as
a supplement, to explain the ways that lead to the pitrzloka and
the devaloka.

4 The MSS. I. O. 375 and 1973 gi ve dhivali, others (zaibali.
He is a Kshatriya sage, who appears also in W/zand. Up. I, 8, 1, as
silencing Brahmawas.

5 The same question is repeated in Roer’s edition, only substi-

VI ADIIYAYA, 2 BRAHMAAA, 4.

205

Do you know how that world does never become
full with the many who again and again depart
thither ?’ ‘ No/ he replied.

‘ Do you know at the offering of which libation
the waters become endowed with a human voice
and rise and speak ?’ ‘ No/ he replied.

Do you know the access to the path leading to
the Devas and to the path leading to the Fathers,
i.e. by what deeds men gain access to the path lead-
mg to the Devas or to that leading to the Fathers ?
For we have heard even the saying of a Rishi : “ I
heard of two paths for men, one leading to the
Fathers, the other leading to the Devas. On those
paths all that lives moves on, whatever there is be¬
tween father (sky) and mother (earth)/ 7 7

Yvetaketu said : ‘ I do not know even one of all
these questions. 7

3. Then the king invited him to stay and accept
his hospitality. But the boy, not caring for hospi¬
tality, ran away, went back to his father, and said:

Thus then you called me formerly well-instructed!’
The father said : ‘ What then, you sage ? 7 The son
replied: ‘ That fellow of a Ra^anya asked me five
questions, and I did not know one of them. 7

‘What were they ? 7 said the father.

‘ These were they, 7 the son replied, mentioning
the different heads.

4. The father said: ‘You know me, child, that
whatever I know, I told you. But come, we shall
go thither, and dwell there as students/

‘ You may go, Sir, 7 the son replied.

tuting sampadyante for apadyante. The MSS. I. O. 375 and 1973
do not support this.

206

B7?/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

Then Gautama went where (the place of) Prava-
ha;/a (^aivali was, and the king offered him a seat,
ordered water for him, and gave him the proper
offerings. Then he said to him : ‘ Sir, we offer a

o

boon to Gautama/

5. Gautama said: ‘ That boon is promised to
me ; tell me the same speech which you made in
the presence of my boy/

6. He said : ‘ That belongs to divine boons, name
one of the human boons/

7. He said : ‘You know well that I have plenty of
gold, plenty of cows, horses, slaves, attendants, and
apparel; do not heap on me 1 what I have already in
plenty, in abundance, and superabundance/

The king said: ‘ Gautama, do you wish (for in¬
struction from me) in the proper way ? *

Gautama replied: f I come to you as a pupil.

In word only have former sages (though Brah¬
mans) come as pupils (to people of lower rank), but
Gautama actually dwelt as a pupil (of Pravaha na.,
who was a Ra^anya) in order to obtain the fame of
having respectfully served his master 2 .

1 Abhyavadanya is explained as niggardly, or unwilling to give,
and derived from vadanya, liberal, a-vadanya, illiberal, and abhi,
towards. This, however, is an impossible form in Sanskrit.
Vadanya means liberal, and stands for avadanya, this being
derived from avadana, lit. what is cut off, then a morsel, a gift. In
abhyavadanya the original a reappears, so that abhyavadanya
means, not niggardly, but on the contrary, liberal, i.e. giving more
than is required. Avadanya has never been met with in the sense
of niggardly, and though a rule of Pacini sanctions the formation of
a-vadanya, it does not say in what sense. Abhyavada in the sense
of cutting off in addition occurs in *Satap. Br. II, 5, 2, 40 ; avadanaw
karoti, in the sense of making a present, occurs Maitr. Up. VI, 33.

2 The commentator takes the opposite view. In times of
distress, he says, former sages, belonging to a higher caste, have

VI ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMAiVA, II.

207

8 . The king said: ‘ Do not be offended with us,
neither you nor your forefathers, because this know¬
ledge has before now never dwelt with any Brah-

ma^a * 1 . But I shall tell it to you, for who could
refuse you when you speak thus ?

9. ‘The altar (fire), O Gautama, is that world
(heaven) 2 ; the fuel is the sun itself, the smoke his
rays, the light the day, the coals the quarters, the
sparks the intermediate quarters. On that altar
the Devas offer the Yraddha libation (consisting of

water 3 ). From that oblation rises Soma, the king
(the moon).

icx The altar, O Gautama, is Pargyanya (the god
of rain); the fuel is the year itself, the smoke the
clouds, the light the lightning, the coals the thunder¬
bolt, the sparks the thunderings. On that altar the
Devas offer Soma, the king (the moon). From that
oblation rises rain.

11. The altar, O Gautama, is this world 4 ; the
fuel is the earth itself, the smoke the fire, the light
the night, the coals the moon, the sparks the stars.
On that altar the Devas offer rain. From that
oblation rises food.

submitted to become pupils to teachers of a lower caste, not, how¬
ever, in order to learn, but simply in order to live. Therefore
Gautama also becomes a pupil in name only, for it would be
against all law to act otherwise. See Gautama, Dharma-sutras
VII, 1, ed. Stenzler; translated by Btihler, p. 209.

1 Here, too, my translation is hypothetical, and differs widely
from Sankara.

2 Cf. Khi nd. Up. V, 4.

3 Deussen translates: ‘In diesem Feuer opfern die Gotter den
Glauben/

Here a distinction is made between aya?/z loka, this world, and
pnthivi, earth, while in the Kh and. Up. aya m loka is the earth,
asau loka the heaven.

208

Bi?/HADARA2VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

12. ‘The altar, O Gautama, is man; the fuel the
opened mouth, the smoke the breath, the light the
tongue, the coals the eye, the sparks the ear. On
that altar the Devas offer food. From that oblation
rises seed.

13. ‘The altar, O Gautama, is woman 1 . On that
altar the Devas offer seed. From that oblation
rises man. He lives so long as he lives, and then
when he dies,

14. ‘They take him to the fire (the funeral pile),
and then the altar-fire is indeed fire, the fuel fuel,
the smoke smoke, the light light, the coals coals, the
sparks sparks. In that very altar-fire the Devas
offer man, and from that oblation man rises, brilliant
in colour.

15. ‘ Those who thus know this (even Grfhasthas)>
and those who in the forest worship faith and the
True 2 (Brahman Hira/zyagarbha), go to light (ar-
/£is), from light to day, from day to the increasing
half, from the increasing half to the six months
when the sun goes to the north, from those six
months to the world of the Devas (Devaloka), from
the world of the Devas to the sun, from the sun to the
place of lightning. When they have thus reached the
place of lightning a spirit 3 comes near them, and leads
them to the worlds of the (conditioned) Brahman.
In these worlds of Brahman they dwell exalted for
ages. There is no returning for them.

1 Tasya upastha eva samil, lomani dhftmo, yonir ar£ir, yad
anta/zkaroti te ’ngara, abhinanda visphulinga/z.

2 .Sankara translates, ‘those who with faith worship the True,
and this seems better.

8 ‘A person living in the Brahma-world, sent forth, i.e. created,
by Brahman, by the mind,’ .Sankara. ‘Der ist nicht wie ein
Mensch/ Deussen, p. 392.

VI ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMAiYA, I. 2 Og

I 16. ‘But they who conquer the worlds (future

states) by means of sacrifice, charity, and austerity,
go to smoke, from smoke to night, from night to the
decreasing half of the moon, from the decreasing
half of the moon to the six months when the sun
goes to the south, from these months to the world
of the fathers, from the world of the fathers to the
moon. Having reached the moon, they become food,
and then the Devas feed on them there, as sacrificers
feed on Soma, as it increases and decreases 1 . But
when this (the result of their good works on earth)
ceases, they return again to that ether, from ether
to the air, from the air to rain, from rain to the
earth. And when they have reached the earth, they
become food, they are offered again in the altar-fire,
which is man (see $ n), and thence are born in the
fire of woman. Thus they rise up towards the worlds,
and go the same round as before.

Those, however, who know neither of these two
paths, become worms, birds, and creeping things/

Third Brahmaa^a 2 .

1. If a man wishes to reach greatness (wealth for
performing sacrifices), he performs the upasad rule
during twelve days 3 (i. e. he lives on small quantities
of milk), beginning on an auspicious day of the light
half of the moon during the northern progress of the
sun, collecting at the same time in a cup or a dish

1 See note 4 on Khz nd. Up. V, 10, and Deussen, Vedanta, p. 393.
Sankara guards against taking apyayasvapakshiyasva as a Mantra.

A similar construction is^ayasva mr/yasva, see A7/and. Up. V, 10, 8.

2 Madhyandina text, p. 1103; cf. Khznd. Up. V, 2, 4-8 : Kaush.

! Up. II, 3.

Yasmin pu;zye 'nukiile ’hni karma /’ikirshati tata h prak pu//ya-
ham evarabhya dvadaraham upasadvratt.

[15] P

2 10

BRJHADARA2VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

made of Udumbara wood all sorts of herbs, includ¬
ing fruits. He sweeps the floor (near the house-
altar, avasathya), sprinkles it, lays the fire, spreads
grass round it according to rule 1 , prepares the clari¬
fied butter (afya), and on a day, presided over by a
male star (nakshatra), after having properly mixed
the Mantha 2 (the herbs, fruits, milk, honey, &c.)>
he sacrifices (he pours a^fya into the fire), saying .

‘ O dfatavedas, whatever adverse gods there are in
thee, who defeat the desires of men, to them I offer
this portion; may they, being pleased, please me

with all desires.’ Svaha !

‘That cross deity who lies down 4 , thinking that
all things are kept asunder by her, I worship thee
as propitious with this stream of ghee. Svaha!

2, He then says, Svaha to the First, Svaha to
the Best, pours ghee into the fire, and throws what

remains into the Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Svaha to Breath, Svaha to her who
is the richest, pours ghee into the fire, and throws
what remains into the Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Svaha to Speech, Svaha to the
Support, pours ghee into the fire, and throws what

remains into the Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Svaha to the Eye, Svaha to Success,
pours ghee into the fire, and throws what remains

into the Mantha (mortar).

Fie then says, Svaha to the Ear, Svaha to the

1 As the whole act is considered smarta, not nauta, the older to
be observed (avr/t) is that of the sthalipaka.

2 Dravadravye prakshipta mathita/z saktava^ is the explanation

of Mantha, given in Gaimin. N. M. V. p. 406.

8 These verses are not explained by Aankara, and they are

absent in the A 7 zand. Up. V, 2, 6, 4.

4 The Madhyandinas read nipadyase.

VI ADIIYAYA, 3 BRAHMAA T A, 3. 211

Home, pours ghee into the fire, and throws what
remains into the Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Svaha to the Mind, Svahd to Off¬
spring, pours ghee into the fire, and throws what
remains into the Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Svaha to Seed,pours ghee into the fire,
and throws what remains into the Mantha (mortar).

3. He then says, Svaha to Agni (fire), pours ghee
into the fire, and throws what remains into the
Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Svaha to Soma, pours ghee into

the fire, and throws what remains into the Mantha
(mortar).

He then says, Bhu h (earth), Svaha, pours ghee
into the fire, and throws what remains into the
Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Bhuva/z (sky), Svaha, pours ghee
into the fire, and throws what remains into the
Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Sva/£ (heaven), Svaha, pours ghee
into the fire, and throws what remains into the
Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Bhur, Bhuva/z, Sva/z, Svaha, pours
ghee into the fire, and throws what remains into the
Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Svaha to Brahman (the priesthood),
pours ghee into the fire, and throws what remains
into the Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Svaha to Kshatra (the knighthood),
pours ghee into the fire, and throws what remains
into the Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Svaha to the Past, pours ghee into
the fire, and throws what remains into the Mantha
(mortar).

2 I 2

Bi2/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISEIAD.

He then says, Svaha to the Future, pours ghee
into the fire, and throws what remains into the
Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Svaha to the Universe, pours ghee
into the fire, and throws what remains into the
Mantha (mortar).

He then says, Svaha to all things, pours ghee into
the fire, and throws what remains into the Mantha
(mortar).

He then says, Svaha to Pra^apati, pours ghee
into the fire, and throws what remains into the
Mantha (mortar).

4. Then he touches it (the Mantha, which is dedi¬
cated to Pra;/a, breath), saying : ‘ Thou art fleet (as
breath). Thou art burning (as fire). Thou art full
(as Brahman). Thou art firm (as the sky). Thou
art the abode of all (as the earth). Thou hast been
saluted with Hin (at the beginning of the sacrifice
by the prastotrf). Thou art saluted with Hin (in
the middle of the sacrifice by the prastot n). Thou
hast been sung (by the udgatrz at the beginning of
the sacrifice). Thou art sung (by the udgatrf in the
middle of the sacrifice). Thou hast been celebrated
(by the adhvaryu at the beginning of the sacrifice).
Thou art celebrated again (by the agnidhra in the
middle of the sacrifice). Thou art bright in the wet
(cloud). Thou art great. Thou art powerful Thou
art food (as Soma). Thou art light (as Agni, fire,
the eater). Thou art the end. Thou art the ab¬
sorption (of all things)/

5. Then he holds it (the Mantha) forth, saying:
‘ Thou 1 knowest all, we know thy greatness. He is

1 These curious words a mawsi a ma-whi te mahi are not
explained by -Sankara. Anandagiri explains them as I have trans-

VI ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMAiYA, 7 213

indeed a king, a ruler, the highest lord. May that
king, that 1 uler make me the highest lord/

6. Then he eats it, saying: ‘Tat savitur vare-
«yam * 1 (We meditate on that adorable light)—The
winds drop honey for the righteous, the rivers drop

honey, may our plants be sweet as honev! BhuA
(earth) Svaha!

‘ Bhargo devasya dhimahi (of the divine
Savitrf) May the night be honey in the morning,
may the air above the earth, may heaven, our father,’
be honey ! Bhuva/* (sky) Svaha !

Dhiyo yo na h pro/&odayat (who should rouse
our thoughts)—May the tree be full of honey, may
the sun be full of honey, may our cows be sweet like
honey! Sva/* (heaven) Svaha ! ’

He repeats the whole Savitrl verse, and all the
verses about the honey, thinking, May I be all this!
Bhur, Bhuva/£, Sva h, Svaha! Having thus swal¬
lowed all, he washes his hands, and sits down behind
the altar, turning his head to the East. In the
morning he worships Aditya (the sun), with the
hymn, Thou art the best lotus of the four quarters,
may I become -the best lotus among men/ Then
returning as he came, he sits down behind the altar
and recites the genealogical list 2 .

7. Uddalaka Arum told, this (Mantha-doctrine) to
his pupil Va^asaneya Ya^/iavalkya, and said: ‘If
a man were to pour it on a dry stick, branches would
grow, and leaves spring forth/

lated them. They correspond to < amo namasy ama hi te sarvam
idam’ m the Khi. nd. Up. V, 2, 6, 6. The Madhyandinas read :
amo sy ama in hi te mayi, sa hi ra^a, &c. Dvivedaganga translates:
‘thou art the knower, thy knowledge extends to me.’

1 Rv. Ill, 62, 10.

This probably refers to the list immediately following.

214

BK/HADARAtfYAKA-UPANISIIAD.

8. Va^asaneya Ya^vlavalkya told the same to his
pupil Madhuka Paingya, and said : ‘ If a man were to
pour it on a dry stick, branches would grow, and
leaves spring forth/

9. Madhuka Paingya told the same to his pupil
Aula Bhagavitti, and said: ‘ If a man were to pour
it on a dry stick, branches would grow, and leaves
spring forth/

10. ATila Bhagavitti told the same to his pupil
Canaki Ayasthima, and said : ‘ If a man were to
pour it on a dry stick, branches would grow, and
leaves spring forth/

11. Canaki Ayasthuwa told the same to his pupil
Satyakama Gabala, and said: ‘ If a man were to
pour it on a dry stick, branches would grow, and
leaves spring forth/

1 2. Satyakama Gabala told the same to his pupils,
and said : ‘ If a man were to pour it on a dry stick,
branches would grow, and leaves spring forth/

Let no one tell this 1 to any one, except to a son
or to a pupil 2 .

13. Four things are made of the wood of the
Udumbara tree, the sacrificial ladle (sruva), the cup
(iamasa), the fuel, and the two churning sticks.

There are ten kinds of village (cultivated) seeds,
viz. rice and barley (brihiyavas), sesamum and kidney-
beans (tilamashas), millet and panic seed (a/mpriyan-
gavas), wheat (godhumas), lentils (masuras), pulse
(khalvas), and vetches (khalakulas 3 ). After having

1 The Mantha-doctrine with the prawadanrana. Comm.

2 It probably means to no one except to one’s own son and
to one’s own disciple. Cf. -SVet. Up. VI, 22.

3 I have given the English names after Roer, who, living in India,
had the best opportunity of identifying the various kinds of plants
here mentioned. The commentators do not help us much, bankara

VI ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAiVA, 2. 2 15

ground these he sprinkles them with curds (dadhi),
honey, and ghee, and then offers (the proper por¬
tions) of clarified butter * 1 (afya).

Fourth Brahmava 2 .

1. The earth is the essence of all these things,
water is the essence of the earth, plants of water,
flowers of plants, fruits of flowers, man of fruits,
seed of man.

2. And Pra^apati thought, let me make an abode
for him, and he created a woman (^atarupa).

Tara 3 srashA/adha upasta, tasmat striyam adha
upasita. Sa etam prarafara grava^am atmana eva
samudaparayat, tenainam abhyasra’fat.

says that in some places Priyangu (panic seed or millet) is called
Kahgu; that Khalva, pulse, is also called Nishpava and Valla, and
Khalakula, vetches, commonly Kulattha. Dvivedaganga adds that
Azzu is called in Guzerat Moriya, Priyangu Kahgu, Khalva, as
nishpava, Valla, and Khalakula Kulattha.

1 According to the rules laid down in the proper GzYhy a-sutras.

2 This Brahmazza is inserted here because there is supposed
to be some similarity between the preparation of the Arimantha
and the Putramantha, or because a person who has performed the
Arimantha is fit to perform the Putramantha. Thus Aankara
says: Prazzadamna/z mmanth?izzz karma krztavata/z putramanthe
’dhikara/z. Yada putramanthazzz X’ikirshati tada mmanthazzz kzYtva
z z’tukalazzz patnya h (brahma/£arye;za) pratikshata iti.

3 I have given those portions of the text which did not admit of
translation into English, in Sanskrit. It was not easy, however, to
determine always the text of the Kazzva-sakha. Poley’s text is not
always correct, and Roer seems simply to repeat it. Aankara’s com¬
mentary, which is meant for the Kazzva text, becomes very short
towards the end of the Upanishad. It is quite sufficient for the pur¬
pose of a translation, but by no means always for restoring a correct
text. MS. Wilson 369, which has been assigned to the Kazzva-^akha,
and which our Catalogue attributes to the same school, gives the
Madhyandina text, and so does MS. Mill 108. I have therefore col¬
lated two MSS. of the India Office, which Dr. Rost had the kindness
to select for me, MS. 375 and MS. 1973, which I call A. and B.

Btf/HADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

2 I 6

3. Tasya vedir upastho, lomani barhis, /£arm&-
dhishava/^e, samiddho 1 madhyatas, tau mushkau.
Sa yavan ha vai va^apeyena ya^amanasya loko
bhavati tavan asya lqko bhavati ya eva m vidvan
adhopahasaw /£araty a sa 2 striu&m sukrtta.m vrmkte
’tha ya idam avid van adhopahasa;?z ^araty asya
striya/^ sukrzta m vring&te.

4. Etad dha sma vai tadvidvan Uddalaka Anmir
ahaitad dha sma vai tadvidvan Nako Maudgalya ahai-
tad dha sma vai tadvidvan Kumaraharita aha, bahavo
marya brahma^ayana 3 nirindriya visukrzto ’smal lokat
prayanti 4 ya idam avidvaMso ’dhopahasaw /^arantiti.
Bahu va 5 ida;/z suptasya va^agrato va reta/^ skandati,

5. Tad abhimrAed anu va mantrayeta yan me
’dya reta h pmhivirn askantsid yad oshadhir apy
asarad yad apa h, idam aha m tad reta adade punar
mam aitv indriyam punas te^a/^ punar bhaga/^, punar
agnayo 6 7 dhish/zya yathasthana^ kalpantam, ity
anamikangush/^abhyam adayantare^a stanau va
bhruvau va mmringy&.t' 1 .

6. If a man see himself in the water 8 , he should

1 Roer reads samidho, but -Sankara and Dvivedaganga clearly
presuppose samiddho, which is in A. and B.

2 Roer has asa m sa stnzzam, Poley, A. and B. have asazzz stnzzam.
•Sankara (MS. Mill 64) read a sa strmam, and later on asya striya/z,
though both Roer and Poley leave out the a here too (a asyeti Afeda/z).

3 Brahma^ayana-^, the same as brahmabandhava-^, i. e. Brahmans
by descent only, not by knowledge.

4 Narakaw gaM/zantityarthaA Dvivedaganga.

5 Bahu va svalpazzz va.

c The Madhyandina text has agnayo, and Dvivedaganga explains
it by dhishzzya agnaya/z .rarfrasthitaA. Poley and Roer have punar
agnir dhishzzya, and so have A. and B.

7 Nirmrz^yat, A.; nimrzVTgyat, B.

8 Dvivedaganga adds, retoyonav udake reta/zsU’as tatra sva/bl’/za-
yadar^ane praya^ittam aha.

VI ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAiVA, IO.

recite the following verse: ‘May there be in me
splendour, strength, glory, wealth, virtue.’

She is the best of women whose garments are
pure . Therefore let him approach a woman whose

garments are pure, and whose fame is pure, and
address her.

7- If she do not give in 1 2 , let him, as he likes, bribe
her (with presents). And if she then do not give in,
let him, as he likes, beat her with a stick or with his
hand, and overcome her 3 , saying: ‘With manly
strength and glory I take away thy glory,’—and
thus she becomes unglorious 4 .

8. If she give in, he says: ‘With manly strength

and glory I give thee glory,’—and thus they both
become glorious.

9 - Sa yam lkMet kamayeta meti tasydm arthaz/z
nish/aya 5 6 mukhena mukha m sandhayopastham asya
abhimrzvya ^aped angadangat sambhavasi hrzdayad
ad hi ^ayase, sa tvam angakashayo c si digdhavid-
dham 7 iva madayemam a mum mayiti 8 .

10. Atha yam Ikkken na garbhaz/z dadhiteti 9 tas-
yam arthaz/z nish/aya mukhena mukhazzz sandhaya-
bhiprazzyapanyad indriyezza te retasa reta adada ity
areta 10 eva bhavati.

1 Triratravrata m kruva /faturtha ’hni snatam.

Instead of connecting kamam with dadyat, Dvivedagano'a

explains it by yatha^akti.

Atikram, scil. maithunaya. 4 Bandhya durbhaga.

Nish/aya, A. B.; nish/^aya, Roer, Poley; the same in § 10.

6 Sa tvam ahganam kashayo raso ’si.

7 Vishalipta^araviddham mr/gim iva.

Madayeti is the reading of the Madhyandina text. Poley, Roer,
and B. read madayemam amum mayiti. Anandagiri has mrigim
ivamum madiyaw striyam me madaya madva s&m kurv ityartha/z.
Dvivedaganga explains madayeti.

9 Rupabhrazzz.rayauvanahanibhayat.

10 Agarbhim.

BR/H ADA RAiVY AKA-UP ANISH AD.

2 18

11. Atha yam ikfc/ied garbha in dadhiteti tasyam
arthaw nish/aya mukhena mukhaw saudhayapa-
nyabhipra^yad indriye^a te retasa reta adadhamiti
garbhmy eva bhavati.

12. Now again, if a man’s wife has a lover and
the husband hates him, let him (according to rule) 1
place fire by an unbaked jar, spread a layer of arrows
in inverse order 2 3 , anoint these three arrow-heads
with butter in inverse order, and sacrifice, saying.

‘ Thou hast sacrificed in my fire, I take away thy up
and down breathing, I here 4 .’

< Thou hast sacrificed in my fire, I take away thy

sons and cattle, I here.

‘ Thou hast sacrificed in my fire, I take away thy
sacred and thy good works, I here/

‘ Thou hast sacrificed in my fire, I take away thy
hope and expectation, I here/

He whom a Brahma^a who knows this curses, de¬
parts from this world without strength and without
good works. Therefore let no one wish even for
sport with the wife of a Wotriya 5 who knows this, for
he who knows this, is a dangerous enemy.

13. When the monthly illness seizes his wife, she

1 Avasathyagnim eva pra^valya.

2 Pa^imagraw dakshi/zagraz/z va yatha syat tatha.

3 Tisra^ is left out by Roer and Poley, by A. and B.

4 I have translated according to the Ka;zva text, as far as it could
be made out. As there are four imprecations, it is but natural that
tisra h should be left out in the Kazzva text. It is found in the
Madhyandina text, because there the imprecations are only three in
number, viz. the taking away of hope and expectation, of sons and
cattle, and of up and down breathing. Instead of asav iti, which is
sufficient, the Madhyandina text has asav iti nama gnlwati, and both
Anandagiri and Dvivedaganga allow the alternative, atmana/z ^atroi
va nama grz'hzzati, though asau can really refer to the speaker only.

5 Roer reads dvarezza; Poley, A. and B. dare;za; the Madhyan-

VI ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAAA, 1 8.

2 19

should for three days not drink from a metal vessel,
and wear a fresh dress. Let no Wzshala or Wfshali
(a vS’udra man or woman) touch her. At the end of
the three days, when she has bathed, the husband
should make her pound rice * 1 .

14. And if a man wishes that a white son should
be born to him, and that he should know one Veda,
and live to his full age, then, after having prepared
boiled rice with milk and butter, they should both
eat, being fit to have offspring.

15. And if a man wishes that a reddish 2 son with
tawny eyes should be born to him, and that he
should know two Vedas, and live to his full age,
then, after having prepared boiled rice with coagu¬
lated milk and butter, they should both eat, being-
fit to have offspring.

16. And if a man wishes that a dark son should
be born to him with red eyes, and that he should
know three Vedas, and live to his full age, then, after
having prepared boiled rice with water and butter,
they should both eat, being fit to have offspring.

1 7. And if a man wishes that a learned daughter
should be born to him, and that she should live to
her full age, then, after having prepared boiled rice
with sesamum and butter, they should both eat,
being fit to have offspring.

18. And if a man wishes that a learned son should
be born to him, famous, a public man, a popular
speaker, that he should know all the Vedas, and that

dinas guyaya. ^Sankara, according to Roer, interprets dvdre^a, but
it seems that darezza is used here in the singular, instead of the
plural. See Paraskara Gn'hya-sutras I, 11.

1 To be used for the ceremony described in § 14 seq.

2 Kapilo van/ata^ pingala/^ pingaksha^.

2 20 B/miADARAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

he should live to his full age, then, after having pre¬
pared boiled rice with meat and butter, they should
both eat, being fit to have offspring. The meat
should be of a young or of an old bull.

19. And then toward morning, after having, ac¬
cording to the rule of the Sthalipaka (pot-boiling)^
performed the preparation of the A^ya (clarified
butter 1 ), he sacrifices from the Sthalipaka bit by bit,
saying : ‘ This is for Agni, Svaha ! This is for Anu-
mati, Svaha ! This is for the divine Savitri, the true
creator, Svaha !’ Having sacrificed, he takes out the
rest of the rice and eats it, and after having eaten,
he gives it to his wife. Then he washes his hands,
fills a water-jar, and sprinkles her thrice with it,
saying: ‘ Rise hence, O Viwavasu 2 , seek another
blooming girl, a wife with her husband.’

20. Then he embraces her, and says : ‘ I am Ama
(breath), thou art Sa (speech) 3 . Thou art Sa (speech),
I am Ama (breath). I am the Saman, thou art the
Rik 4 . I am the sky, thou art the earth. Come, let
us strive together, that a male child may be
begotten 5 .’

1 ATaru/// .srapayitva.

2 Name of a Gandharva, as god of love. See Rig-veda X, 85, 22.
Dvivedaganga explains the verse differently, so that the last words
imply, I come together with my own wife.

3 Because speech is dependent on breath, as the wife is on the
husband. See Kh& nd. Up. I, 6, 1.

4 Because the Sama-veda rests on the Rig-veda.

6 This is a verse which is often quoted and explained. It occurs
in the Atharva-veda XIV, 71, as ‘amo Tam asmi sa tva ??i, sama-
ham asmy rik tva/;/, dyaur aham przthivi tvam; tav iha sam
bhavava pra^am a .ganayavahai/

Here we have the opposition between ama^ and sa, while in
the Ait. Brahma//a VIII, 27, we have amo Tam asmi sa tvam,
giving ama^ in opposition to sa. It seems not unlikely that this

VI ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAiYA, 23.

21. Atha.sya uru vihapayati, viyihitha/zz dyavaprz-
thivi lti tasyam arthazzz nish/aya mukhena mukhawz
sandhaya tnr enam anulomam 1 anumarshZi, Vishzzur
yomm kalpayatu, Tvash/a rupazzi pb/watu, asizA-atu
Pra^apatir Dhata garbha;/* dadhatu te. Garbha m
dhehi Sinivali, garbhazzz dhehi pmhushZuke, garbhazzz
te A^vinau devav adhattam pushkarasrayau.

22. Hirazzmayi arazzi yabhy km nirmanthatam 2 asvi-
nau 3 , ta m te garbhazzz havamahe 4 darame masi
sutave. Yathagnigarbha pmhivl, yatha dyaur in-
dre«a garbhizzl, vayur di s&m yatha garbha eva m
garbhazzz dadhami te ’sav iti 5 .

23. Soshyantim 6 adbhir abhyukshati. Yatha vayu/A
pushkarizzizzz sarnizzyayati sarvata/z, eva te garbha
cyatu sahavaitu ^yarayuzza. Itidrasyayazzz vraya/J
knta/i sarga/a/z 8 * sapari^raya/z' J , tam indra niryahi
garbhe/*a savara//* 10 saheti.

was an old proverbial formula, and that it meant originally no more
than I am he, and thou art shed But this meaning was soon for¬
gotten. In the Rha nd. Up. I, 6, 1, we find sa explained as earth,
ama as fire (Sacred Books of the East, vol. i, p. 13). In the Ait.
Brahma/za sa is explained as Rik, ama as Saman. I have therefore
m our passage also followed the interpretation of the commentary,

instead of rendering it, ‘ I am he, and thou art she; thou art she
and I am he.’ ’

Anulomam, murdhanam arabhya padantam.

Nirmathitavantau. 3 Ajvinau devau, Madhyandina text.

4 Dadhamahe, Madhyandina text. Instead of sutave, A. has
sfiyate, B. sutaye.

5 Iti nama gr/lmati, Madhyandina text. Aankara says, asav iti

tasyaU ^ Anandagiri says, asav iti patyur va nirde^a/2; tasya nama
gr 2 'h 72 atiti purvez/a sambandha/2. Dvivedaganga says, ante bharta-
sav aham iti svatmano nama gr/h/zati, bharyaya va.

See Paraskara Grfhya-sutra I, 16 seq. 7 Vata/z, M.

8 Arga^aya nirodhena saha vartamana/z sarga^, Dvivedaganga.

^ Sapaifriaya^, pari^rayezza parivesh/anena ^arayuzza sahita/z,
Dvivedaganga.

10 Savaram is the reading given by Poley, Roer, A. and B.

222

B.R/HADA RAiVYAKA-UPANISHAD.

24 1 . When the child is born, he prepares the fire,
places the child on his lap, and having poured p ri-
shad&fya, i.e. dadhi (thick milk) mixed with ghr/ta
(clarified butter) into a metal jug, he sacrifices bit by
bit of that pr/shada^ya, saying: ‘May I, as I in¬
crease in this my house, nourish a thousand! May
fortune never fail in his race, with offspiing and
cattle, Svaha!’

‘ I offer to thee in my mind the vital bieaths which
are in me, Svaha!’

< Whatever 2 in my work I have done too much,
or whatever I have here done too little, may the wise
Agni Svish/akrft make this right and proper for us,
Svaha!’

25. Then putting his mouth near the child s
right ear, he say s thrice, Speech, speech M After

Anandagiri explains: garbhani/tearazzanantarazzz ya mawsapeji
nirga/l’Mati savara, taw £a nirgamayety artha h. Dvivedaganga (ed.
Weber) writes: nirgamyamanamawsapeji sa-avara^abdava^ya, tazzz
savarazzz /’a nirgamaya.

1 These as well as the preceding rules refer to matters generally
treated in the Grz'hya-sutras; see Asvalayana, Grzhya-sfitras I,
13 seq.; Paraskara, Grz'hya-sutras I, 11 seq.; Sankhayana, Grzhya-
sfitras I, 19 seq. It is curious, however, that Asvalayana I, 13, 1,
refers distinctly to the Upanishad as the place where the puwsavana
and similar matters were treated. This shows that the Upanishads
were known before the composition of the Grz'hya-sutras, and
explains perhaps, at least partially, why the Upanishads were con¬
sidered as rahasya. Asvalayana says, ‘ Conception, begetting of a
boy, and guarding the embryo are to be found in the Upanishad.
But' if a man does not read the Upanishad, let him know that he
should feed his wife/ &c. Ndrayazza explains that Asvalayana here
refers to an Upanishad which does not exist in his own^akha, but
he objects to the conclusion that therefore the garbhadhana and
other ceremonies need not be performed, and adds that some hold
it should be performed, as prescribed by Saunaka and others.

2 Asvalayana, Grzhya-sfttra I, 10, 23.

s Trayilakshazza Vcik tvayi pravbatv iti ^apato bhipraya^.

VI ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMAAA, 28. 22"

that he pours together thick milk, honey, and clari¬
fied buttei, and feeds the child with (a ladle of)
pure gold , saying: I give thee Bhu/£, I give thee
Bhuva h, I give thee Sva^ 1 2 . Bhur, Bhuva/£, Sva h, I
give thee all 3 4 .’

26b Then he gives him his name, saying: ‘Thou
art Veda; 5 but this is his secret name 5 .

27. Then he hands the boy to his mother and
gives him her breast, saying: ‘ O Sarasvati, that
breast of thine which is inexhaustible, delightful,
abundant, wealthy, generous, by which thou cherishes!
all blessings, make that to flow here 6 7 .’

28b Then he addresses the mother of the boy:

1 Cf. Paraskara Gz'z'hya-sutras I, 1 6 , 4, anamikaya suvarzzantar-
hitaya; Yankhayana, GzYhy a-sutras I, 24, pnuayeg gatarupezza.

2 Bhur bhuva/z sva h are explained by Dvivedaganga as the Rig-
veda, Yagur-veda, and Sama-veda. They might also be earth, air,
and heaven. See Yankhayana, Gz'z'hya-sutras I, 24 ; Bhur rzgvedazzz
tvayi dadhami, &c.

3 The Madhyandinas add here another verse, which the father
recites while he strokes his boy: ‘Be a stone, be an axe, be pure
gold. Thou art my Self, called my son; live a hundred harvests/
The same verse occurs in the Ajvalayana Grz'hya-sutras I, 15, 3.

4 The two ceremonies, here described, are the ayushya-karman
and the medhaganana. They are here treated rather confusedly.
Paraskara (Gz'z'hya-sutras I, 16, 3) distinguishes the medhaganana
and the ayushya. He treats the medhaganana first, which consists
in feeding the boy with honey and clarified butter, and saying to
him bhus tvayi dadhami, &c. The ayushya consists in repeating
certain verses in the boy’s ear, wishing him a long life, &c. In
Aj-valayana’s Grz'hya-sutras, I, 15, 1 contains the ayushya, I, 15, 2
the medhaganana. Yankhayana also (I, 24) treats the ayushya first,
and the medhaganana afterwards, and the same order prevails in
the Madhyandina text of the Bz'z'hadarazzyaka-upanishad.

5 In the Madhyandina text these acts are differently arranged.

6 Rig-veda I, 164, 49.

7 These verses are differently explained by various commentators.
Anandagiri explains i/a as stutya, bhogya. He derives Maitravaruzzl

224

BR/HADARA2VYAKA-UPANISHAD.

‘Thou art I/a Maitravarimi: thou strong woman
hast born a strong boy. Be thou blessed with
strong children thou who hast blessed me with a
strong child/

And they say of such a boy: ‘Ah, thou art better
than thy father; ah, thou art better than thy grand¬
father. Truly he has reached the highest point in
happiness, praise, and Vedic glory who is born as
the son of a Brahma^a that knows this.

Fifth Brahmaiva.

i. Now follows the stem * 1 :

i. Pautimashiputra from Katyayaniputra,

from Maitravaruzza, i. e. VasishMa, the son of Mitravaruzzau, and
identifies her with Arundhati. Dvivedaganga takes \d& as bhogya,
or iz/apatri, or prz'thivirupa, and admits that she may be called
Maitravaruzzi, because born of Mitravaruzzau. Yire is rightly taken
as a vocative by Dvivedaganga, while Anandagiri explains it as a
locative, mayi nimittabhute. One expects agigana/z instead of
agiganat, which is the reading of A. and B. The reading of the
Madhyandinas, agiganatha/z, is right grammatically, but it offends
against the metre, and is a theoretical rather than a real form.
If we read agiganat, we must also read akara k, unless we aie
prepared to follow the commentator, who supplies bhavati.

1 The Madhyandinas begin with vayam, we, then i. Bharadvagi-
putra, 2. Vatsimazzz/aviputra, 3. Parasariputra, 4. Gargiputra, 5. Pa-
nDari-kauzz^iniputra, 6. Gargiputra, 7. Gargiputra, 8. Baafeyiputra,
9. Maushikiputra, 10. Harikarzziputra, n. Bharadvagiputra, 12.
Paingiputra, 13. Aaunakiputra, 14. Ka^yapi-balakya-ma/Zzariputra,
15. Kautsiputra, 16. Baudhiputra, 17^. Salankayaniputra, i8.Varsha-
gazziputra, 19. Gautamiputra, 20. Atreyiputra, 21. Gautamiputra,
22. Vatsiputra, 23. Bharadvagiputra, 24. Pararariputra, 25. Varka-
ruzziputra; then from No. 20 as in the Kazzva text.

This stem is called by -Sankara, SamastapravaX’anavazzz^a/z, and
Anandagiri adds, purvau vazzz^au purushavbeshitau, tz'ztiyas tu
striviseshita/z, stripradhanyat. Dvivedaganga writes, putramantha-
karmazza^ strisazzzskarathatvenoktatvat tatsannidhanad ayazzz vazzz^a/z
stripradhanyenoXyate.

VI ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMAiVA, 2. 2 2 :

2. Katyayaniputra from Gotamiputra,

3 * Gotamiputra from Bharadva^iputra,

4 * Bharadva^iputra from Pira^ariputra,

5 * Para^ariputra from Aupasvatiputra,

6. Aupasvatiputra from Para^ariputra,

7. Para^ariputra from Katyayaniputra,

8. Katyayaniputra from Kaudkiputra,

9 . Kauiikiputra from Alambiputra and Vaiyd-

ghrapadiputra,

10. Alambiputra and Vaiyaghrapadiputra from

Ka/zviputra,

11. Kawiputra from Kapiputra,

12. Kapiputra

2. from Atreyiputra,

I 3 * Atreyiputra from Gautamiputra,

14- Gautamiputra from Bharadva^iputra,

I 5 ‘ Bharadva^iputra from Parajariputra,

16. Para^ariputra from Vatsiputra,

1 7 * Vatsiputra from Parajariputra,
i8 l . Para^ariputra from Varkaruzziputra,

19* Varkaruzziputra from Varkaruzziputra,

20. yarkarum A putra from Artabhagiputra,

21. Artabhagiputra from «5aungiputra,

22. vSaungiputra from Sarikrztiputra,

2 3 2 - Sahkzvtiputra from Alambayaniputra,

24. Alambayaniputra from Alambiputra,

25. Alambiputra from (Sayantiputra,

26. 6^ayantiputra from Ma/^ukayaniputra,

27. Ma^hkayaniputra from Ma^hkiputra,

28. Ma/^ukiputra from Sa;^iliputra,

29. 6a/zdiliputra from Rathitariputra,

30 3 . Rathitariputra from Bhalukiputra,

M. has only one. 2 M invertg 23 an(j ^

3 Deest in M.

[ r 5 ] Q

1

226

B.R/H ADARAiVYAKA-UPANISH AD.

31. Bhalukiputra from Krauw/^ikiputrau,

32. Krauwi’ikiputrau from Vai//abhatiputra

33. Vai//abhatiputra from Ivaiavakeyiputra 2 ,

34. Karrakeyiputra from Pra/Hnayoglputra,

35. Pr&kinayogiputra from Saw^iviputra 3 ,

46. Sawfiviputra from Pra5«iputra Asurivasin,

37. Priswlputra Asurivasin from Asurayawa,

38. Asur&yawa from Asuri,

A #

39. Asun

3. from Ya^avalkya,

40. Yag^avalkya from Uddalaka,

41. Uddalaka from Aru/*a,

42. Aruwa from Upaved,

43. Upaved from Kusri,

44. Kiuri from Va^ravas,

43. Va^asravas from Uihvavat Vadhyoga,

46* Uihvavat Vadhyoga from Asita Varshaga^a,

47. Asita Varshaga^a from Harita Kasyapa,

48. Harita Ka^ryapa from Yilpa Kasyapa,

49. Yilpa Ka<ryapa from Kasyapa Naidhruvi,

50. Kasyapa Naidhruvi from Va/£,

51. V&k from Ambhbd,

52. Ambhi/d from Aditya, the Sun.

As coming from Aditya, the Sun, these pure 4
Ya^us verses have been proclaimed by Ya^wa
valkya Vagasaneya.

1 Vaidabhr/ttputra, M. 2 Bhalukiputra, M.

8 Kar^akeyiputra after 35 in M.

4 They are called juklani, white or pure, because they are not
mixed with Brahmawas, avyamhram brahmawena (doshair asankir-
«ani, paurusheyatvadoshadvarabhavad ityartha h). Or they are aya-
tayam^ni, unimpaired. Anandagiri adds, ^ Pra^apatim ara ya
Sa/^iviputraparyantaw (No. 36) Va^asaneytrakhasu sarvasv e '°
vaww ityaha samanam iti. Dvivedagahga says: Va^i^khavaMm-

VI ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMAiVA, 4. 227

4 . The same as far as Sa^iviputra (No. 36), then
j 6 . Sa;^iviputra from 1VT a 7/^11 k ay a n i,

37 - Ma^ukayani from Ma;/davya,

38. Ma;^ 7 avya from Kautsa,

39* Kautsa from Mahitthi,

40. Mahitthi from Vamakakshaya?/a,

41. Vamakakshaya^a from Ya/^ilya,

42. S&ndWya. from Vitsya,

43. Vatsya from Kauri,

44. Karri from Ya^ava/^as Ra£astambayana,

45. Ya^ava^as Ra^astambayana from Tura

Kavasheya,

46. Tura Kavasheya from Pra^apati,

47. Pra^apati from Brahman,

48. Brahman is Svayambhu, self-existent.
Adoration to Brahman!

_

nana;/^ya^usha/^ Suryewopadish/atvaw Ya«£avalkyena praptatvam
/’a pura;/eshu prasiddham.

This last paragraph is wanting in the Madhyandina text, but a
very similar paragraph occurs in Xatapatha-brahmaz/a X, 6, 5, 9,
where, however, Vatsya comes before SaWilya.

Q 2

svetAsvatara-

UPANISHAD.

svetAsvatara-

UPANISHAD.

FIRST ADHYAYA.

i. The Brahma-students say: Is Brahman the
cause 1 ? Whence are we born? Whereby do we
live, and whither do we go ? O ye who know
Brahman, (tell us) at whose command we abide,
whether in pain or in pleasure ?

1 This translation seems the one which -Sankara himself prefers,
for on p. 277, when recapitulating, he says, kim brahma karawam
ahosvit kaladi. In comparing former translations, whether by
Weber, Roer, Gough, and others, it will be seen that my own differs
considerably from every one of them, and differs equally from
‘Sankara’s interpretation. It would occupy too much space to criti¬
cise former translations, nor would it seem fair, considering how
long ago they were made, and how imperfect were the materials
which were then accessible. All I wish my readers to understand
is that, if I differ from my predecessors, I do so after having care¬
fully examined their renderings. Unfortunately, Roer’s edition of
both the text and the commentary is often far from correct.
Thus in the very first verse of the -SVetffrvatara-upanishad, I think
we ought to read sampratish//ja/j, instead of sampratish//nta/z. In
the commentary the reading is right. Vyavasyam is a misprint for
vyavastham. In the second verse we must separate kala h and
svabhavaA Yad rikklA, no very unusual word, meaning chance,
was formerly taken for a name of the moon ! Instead of na tvatma-
bhavat, both sense and metre require that we should read
anatmabhavat, though the commentators take a different view.
They say, because there is a self, and then go on to say that even
that would not suffice. Such matters, however, belong to a critical
commentary on the Upanishads rather than to a translation, and I
can refer to them in cases of absolute necessity only, and where the
readings of the two MSS., A. and B, seem to offer some help.

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

o / ''>
- J “

2. Should time, or nature 1 , or necessity, or chance,
or the elements be considered as the cause, or he
who is called the person (purusha, vi^anatma) ? It
cannot be their union either, because that is not self-
dependent 2 , and the self also is powerless, because
there is (independent of him) a cause of good and
evil 3 .

3. The sages, devoted to meditation and concen¬
tration, have seen the power belonging to God
himself 4 , hidden in its own qualities (gu/za). He,
being one, superintends all those causes, time, self,
and the rest 5 .

4 6 . We meditate on him who (like a wheel) has
one felly with three tires./Sixteen ends, fifty spokes,

with twenty counter-spokes, and six sets of eight;

____ ' ^ ■ L -

1 Svabhava, their own nature,or, 1 independent character.

2 Union presupposes a uniter.* *'•

s Atma is explained by .Sankara as the giv&h, the living self, and
as that living self is in his present state determined by karman,
work belonging to a former existence, it cannot be thought of as
an independent cause.

4 Devatma^akti is a very important term, differently explained
by the commentators, but meaning a power belonging to the Deva,
the Irvara, the Lord, not independent of him, as the Sankhyas
represent Praknti or nature. Herein lies the important distinction
between Vedanta and Sankhya.

5 Kalatmabhyaw yuktani, kalapurushasawyuktani svabhavadini.

A

Atman is here taken as synonymous with purusha in verse 2.

6 It is difficult to say whether this verse was written as a summing
up of certain technicalities recognised in systems of philosophy exist¬
ing at the time, or whether it is a mere play of fancy. I prefer the
former view, and subjoin the explanation given by -Sankara, though
it is quite possible that on certain points he may be mistaken. The
ifvara or deva is represented as a wheel with one felly, which
would seem to be the phenomenal world. It is called trivr/t, three¬
fold, or rather having three tires, three bands or hoops to bind the
felly, these tires being intended for the three guwas of the prakrni,
the Sattva, Ra^as, and Tamas. In the Brahmopanishad (Bibl. Ind.

I ADHYAYA, 4.

233

whose one rope is manifold, who proceeds on three
different roads, and whose illusion arises from two
causes.

p. 251) the trivrzt sutram is mentioned. Next follows sho<^a«rantam,
ending in the sixteen. These sixteen are differently explained.
They may be meant for the five elements and the eleven indriyas
or organs (the five receptive and the five active senses, together with
manas, the common sensory) • or for the sixteen kalas, mentioned
in the Praw/opanishad, VI, 1, p. 283. Then follows a new inter¬
pretation. The one felly may be meant for the chaos, the unde¬
veloped state of things, and the sixteen would then be the two
products in a general form, the Vii% and the Sutratman, while the
remaining fourteen would be the individual products, the bhuvanas
or worlds beginning with Bhfi/z.

Next follows Jatardharam, having fifty spokes. These fifty
spokes are supposed to produce the motion of the mundane wheel,
and are explained by -Sankara as follows:

1. The five Viparyayas, misconceptions, different kinds of igno¬
rance or doubt, viz. Tamas, Moha, Mahamoha, Tamisra, Andhata-
misra, or, according to Pata/z§-ali, ignorance, self-love, love, hatred,
and fear (Yoga-shtras I, 8; II, 2; Sankhya-sutras HI, 37 )-

2. The twenty-eight A^aktis, disabilities, causes of misconception.
(See Sankhya-shtras III, 38.)

3. The nine inversions of the Tush/is, satisfactions. (Sankhya-
sfttras III, 39.)

4. The eight inversions of the Siddhis, perfections. (Sankhya-
sutras III, 40.)

These are afterwards explained singly. There are 8 kinds of
Tamas, 8 kinds of Moha, 10 kinds of Mahamoha, 18 kinds of
Tamisra, and 18 kinds of Andhatamisra, making 62 in all. More
information on the A^aktis, the Tush/is, and Siddhis may be found
in the Sankhya-shtras III, 37-45; Sankhya-karika 47 seq.; Yoga-
sutras II, 2 seq.

Then follow the 20 pratyaras, the counter-spokes, or wedges to
strengthen the spokes, viz. the 10 senses and their 10 objects.

The six ash/akas or ogdoads are explained as the ogdoads of
Prakrzti, of substances (dhatu), of powers (aBvarya), of states
(bhava), of gods (deva), of virtues (atmagu/za).

The one, though manifold cord, is love or desire, Kama, whether
of food, children, heaven or anything else.

1 he three paths are explained as righteousness, unrighteousness,

234

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

5 * 1 . We meditate on the river whose water con¬
sists of the five streams, which is wild and winding
with its five springs, whose waves are the five vital
breaths, whose fountain head is the mind, the course
of the five kinds of perceptions. It has five whirl¬
pools, its rapids are the five pains; it has fifty kinds
of suffering, and five branches.

6. In that vast Brahma-wheel, in which all things
live and rest, the bird flutters about, so long as he
thinks that the self (in him) is different from the
mover (the god, the lord). When he has been
blessed by him, then he gains immortality 2 .

7. But what is praised (in the Upanishads) is the

and knowledge, and the one deception arising from two causes is
ignorance of self, produced by good or bad works.

1 Here again, where the Lvara is likened to a stream, the
minute coincidences are explained by -Sankara in accordance with
certain systems of philosophy. The five streams are the five recep¬
tive organs, the five springs are the five elements, the five waves
are the five active organs. The head is the manas, the mind, or
common sensory, from which the perceptions of the five senses
spring. The five whirlpools are the objects of the five senses, the
five rapids are the five pains of being in the womb, being born,
growing old, growing ill, and dying. The next adjective pa; 7 /£a-
jadbhedam is not fully explained by .Sankara. He only mentions
the five divisions of the klej-a (see Yoga-sfitras II, 2), but does not
show how their number is raised to fifty. Dr. Roer proposes to
read pa;X£akle.ra-bhedam, but that would not agree with the metre.
The five parvans or branches are not explained, and may refer to
the fifty kinds of suffering (kle^a). The whole river, like the
wheel in the preceding verse, is meant for the Brahman as karya-
kara^atmaka, in the form of cause and effect, as the phenomenal,
not the absolutely real world.

2 If he has been blessed by the Irvara, i.e. when he has been
accepted by the Lord, when he has discovered his own true self in
the Lord. It must be remembered, however, that both the Irvara, the
Lord, and the purusha, the individual soul, are phenomenal only,
and that the Brahma-wheel is meant for the prapa; 7 £a, the manifest,
but unreal world.

I ADHYAYA, TO.

2 35

Highest Brahman, and in it there is the triad 1 . The
Highest Brahman is the safe support, it is imperish¬
able. The Brahma-students 2 , when they have known
what is within this (world), are devoted and merged
in the Brahman, free from birth 3 .

8. The Lord (Ba) supports all this together, the
perishable and the imperishable, the developed and
the undeveloped. The (living) self, not being a lord,
is bound 4 , because he has to enjoy (the fruits of
works) ; but when he has known the god (deva), he
is freed from all fetters.

9. There are two, one knowing (Bvara), the other
not-knowing (^iva), both unborn, one strong, the
other weak 5 ; there is she, the unborn, through
whom each man receives the recompense of his
works 6 ; and there is the infinite Self (appearing)
under all forms, but himself inactive. When a man
finds out these three, that is Brahma 7 .

10. That which is perishable 8 is the Pradhana 9
(the first), the immortal and imperishable is Hara 10 .

1 The subject (bhoktrf), the object (bhogya), and the mover
(preritrz), see verse 12.

2 B. has Vedavido, those who know the Vedas.

8 Tasmin praliyate tv atma samadhi/z sa udahrz’ta/z.

4 Read badhyate for budhyate.

5 The form UanUau is explained as Mandasa; likewise brah-
mam for brahma.

6 Cf. Wet. Up. IV, 5, bhuktabhogyam.

7 The three are (1) the lord, the personal god, the creator and
ruler; (2) the individual soul or souls; and (3) the power of creation,
the devatnmakti of verse 3. All three are contained in Brahman;
see verses 7, 12. So 'pi mayi parame^varo mayopadhisannidhes
tadvan iva.

8 See verse 8.

9 The recognised name for Prakrz’ti, or here Devatma.?akti, in
the later Sankhya philosophy.

10 Hara, one of the names of Viva or Rudra, is here explained as

236

SVETASYATARA-UPANIS HAD.

The one god rules the perishable (the pradhana) and
the (living) self * 1 . From meditating on him, from
joining him, from becoming one with him there is
further cessation of all illusion in the end.

11. When that god is known, all fetters fall off,
sufferings are destroyed, and birth and death cease.
From meditating on him there arises, on the disso¬
lution of the body, the third state, that of universal
lordship 2 ; but he only who is alone, is satisfied 3 .

12. This, which rests eternally within the self,
should be known ; and beyond this not anything has
to be known. By knowing the enjoyer 4 , the enjoyed,
and the ruler, everything has been declared to be
threefold, and this is Brahman.

13. As the form of fire, while it exists in the
under-wood 5 , is not seen, nor is its seed destroyed,

avidyader harawat, taking away ignorance. He would seem to be
meant for the bvara or deva, the one god, though immediately after¬
wards he is taken for the true Brahman, and not for its phenomenal
divine personification only.

1 The self, atman, used here, as before, for purusha, the indi¬
vidual soul, or rather the individual souls.

A blissful state in the Brahma-world, which, however, is not
yet perfect freedom, but may lead on to it. Thus it is said in the
Aivadharmottara:

Hhyanad ab vary am atulam abvaryat sukham uttamam,

Gwanena tat paritya^ya videho muktim apnuyat.

5 This alone-ness, kevalatvam, is produced by the knowledge
that the individual self is one with the divine self, and that both the
individual and the divine self are only phenomenal forms of the
true Self, the Brahman.

Bhokta, possibly for bhoktra, unless it is a jOandasa form.
It was quoted before, Bibl. Ind. p. 292, 1 . 5* The enjoyer is the
purusha, the individual soul, the subject; the enjoyed is prakn'ti,
nature, the object; and the ruler is the bvara, that is, Brahman, as
god. I take brahmam etat in the same sense here as in verse 9.

This metaphor, like most philosophical metaphors in Sanskrit,

237

I ADHYAYA, I 6.

but it has to be seized again and again by means of
the stick and the under-wood, so it is in both cases,
and the Self has to be seized in the body by means
of the pra^ava (the syllable Om).

14* By making his body the under-wood, and the
syllable Om the upper-wood, man, after repeating
the drill of meditation, will perceive the bright god,
like the spark hidden in the wood * 1 .

15. As oil in seeds, as butter in cream, as water
in (dry) river-beds 2 , as fire in wood, so is the Self
seized within the self, if man looks for him by truth¬
fulness and penance 3 ;

16. (If he looks) for the Self that pervades every¬
thing, as butter is contained in milk, and the roots
whereof are self-knowledge and penance. That is
the Brahman taught by the Upanishad.

is rather obscure at first sight, but very exact when once under¬
stood. Fire, as produced by a fire drill, is compared to the Self.
It is not seen at first, yet it must be there all the time; its linga
or subtle body cannot have been destroyed, because as soon as the
stick, the indhana, is drilled in the under-wood, the yoni, the fire
becomes visible. In the same way the Self, though invisible during
a state of ignorance, is there all the time, and is perceived when
the body has been drilled by the Pra?zava, that is, after, by a con¬
stant repetition of the sacred syllable Om, the body has been sub¬
dued, and the ecstatic vision of the Self has been achieved.

Indhana, the stick used for drilling, and yoni, the under-wood, in
which the stick is drilled, are the two arams, the fire-sticks used for
kindling fire. See Tylor, Anthropology, p. 260.

1 Cf. Dhyanavindupan. verse 20; Brahmopanishad, p. 256.

2 Srotas, a stream, seems to mean here the dry bed of a stream,
which, if dug into, will yield water.

3 The construction is correct, if we remember that he who is
seized is the same as he who looks for the hidden Self. But the
metre would be much improved if we accepted the reading of the
Brahmopanishad, evam atma atmani gn'hyate ’sau, which is con¬
firmed by B. The last line would be improved by reading, satye-
nainaw ye "nupa^yanti dhir

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

SECOND ADHYAYA.

i 1 . Savit ri (the sun), having first collected his
mind and expanded his thoughts, brought Agni (fire),
when he had discovered his light, above the earth.

2 2 . With collected minds we are at the command of
the divine Savitrz, that we may obtain blessedness.

1 The seven introductory verses are taken from hymns addressed
to Savitrz' as the rising sun. They have been so twisted by -Sankara,
in order to make them applicable to the teachings of the Yoga
philosophy, as to become almost nonsensical. I have given a few
specimens of Sankara’s renderings in the notes, but have translated
the verses, as much as possible, in their original character. As
they are merely introductory, I do not understand why the collector
of the Upanishad should have seen in them anything but an invo¬
cation of Savitrz’.

These verses are taken from various Sazzzhitas. The first yuzzgana^
prathamarn is from Taitt. Sazzzh. IV, i, i, i, i ; Vag. Sazzzh. XI, i;
see also Sat. Br. VI, 3, 1, 12. The Taittiriya-text agrees with the
Upanishad, the Vagasaneyi-text has dhiyam for dhiya/z, and agne^
for agnim. Both texts take tatvaya as a participle of tan, while the
Upanishad reads tattvaya, as a dative of tattva, truth. I have
translated the verse in its natural sense. Sankara, in explaining
the Upanishad, translates: ‘At the beginning of our meditation,
joining the mind with the Highest Self, also the other prazzas, or
the knowledge of outward things, for the sake of truth, Savitrz’,
out of the knowledge of outward things, brought Agni, after
having discovered his brightness, above the earth, in this body.’ He
explains it: ‘ May Savitrz', taking our thoughts away from outward
things, in order to concentrate them on the Highest Self, produce
in our speech and in our other senses that power which can lighten
all objects, which proceeds from Agni and from the other favour¬
able deities.’ He adds that ‘ by the favour of Savitrz’, Yoga may
be obtained.’

2 The second verse is from Taitt. Sazzzh. IV, 1,1,1, 3; Vag. Sazzzh.
XI, 2. The Vagasaneyi-text has svargyaya for svargeyaya,and ^aktya
for j-aktyai. *Sankara explains: ‘ With a mind that has been joined

II ADHYAYA, 4 .

239

3 * 1 . May Savitrz, after he has reached with his
mind the gods as they rise up to the sky, and with
his thoughts (has reached) heaven, grant these gods
to make a great light to shine.

4 2 . The wise sages of the great sage collect their
mind and collect their thoughts. He who alone
knows the law (Savit ri) has ordered the invocations ;
great is the praise of the divine Savit ri.

by Savitrz’ to the Highest Self, we, with the sanction of that Savitrz’,
devote ourselves to the work of meditation, which leads to the
obtainment of Svarga, according to our power.’ He explains
Svarga by Paramatman. Sayazza in his commentary on the Taitti-
liya-sazzzhita explains svargeyaya by svargaloke giyamanasyagne/^
sampadanaya; -Sankara, by svargapraptihetubhutaya dhyanakar-
mazze. -S’aktyai is explained by .Sankara by yathasamarthyam; by
Sayazza, by ^akta bhuyasma. Mahidhara explains .raktya by svasa-
marthyena. I believe that the original reading was svargyaya
^aktyai, and that we must take ^aktyai as an infinitive, like ityai,
construed with a dative, like drz’^aye sfiryaya, for the seeing of the
sun. The two attracted datives would be governed by save, £ we
are under the command of Savitrz’/ svargyaya jaktyai, 1 that we
may obtain svargya, life in Svarga or blessedness.’

1 The third verse is from Taitt. Sazzzh. IV, 1, 1, 1, 2; Vag. Saz/zh.
XI, 3. The Taittiriyas read yuktvaya manasa; the Va^asaneyins,
yuklvaya savita. Sankara translates: ‘ Again he prays that Savitz'z’,
having directed the devas, i.e. the senses, which are moving towards
Brahman, and which by knowledge are going to brighten up the
heavenly light of Brahman, may order them to do so; that is, he
prays that, by the favour of Savitrz’, our senses should be turned
away from outward things to Brahman or the Self.’ Taking the
hymn as addressed to Savitrz’, I have translated deva by gods, not
by senses, suvaryata/z by rising to the sky, namely, in the morning.
The opposition between manasa and dhiya is the same here as in
verse 1, and again in verse 4.

2 This verse is from Taitt. Sazzzh. IV, 1, 1, 1, 4; 1, 2, 13, 1, 1 ;
Va^. Sazzzh. V, 14; XI, 4; XXXVII, 2; Rig-veda V, 81, 1; Sat.
Br. Ill, 5, 3, 11; VI, 3, 1, 16. .Sankara explains this verse again in
the same manner as he did the former verses, while the Xatapatha-
brahmazza supplies two different ritual explanations.

240

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

5 1 . Your old prayer has to be joined 2 with praises.
Let my song go forth like the path of the sun ! May
all the sons of the Immortal listen, they who have
reached their heavenly homes.

6. Where the fire is rubbed 3 , where the wind is
checked, where the Soma flows over, there the mind
is born.

1 For this verse, see Taitt. Sazzzh. IV, 1, 1, 2, 1; Vag\ Sazzzh. XI, 5 ;
Atharva-veda XVIII, 3, 39; Rig-veda X, 13, 1. The Vagasaneyins
read vi doka etu for vi doka yanti; sure^ for sura/i ; srinv antu for
srinv anti; and the Rig-veda agrees with them. The dual vam is
accounted for by the verse belonging to a hymn celebrating the
two .rakatas, carts, bearing the offerings (havirdhane); most likely,
however, the dual referred originally to the dual deities of heaven
and earth. I prefer the text of the Rig-veda and the Va^asaneyins
to that of the Taittinyas, and have translated the verse accordingly.
In the Atharva-veda XVIII, 39, if we may trust the edition, the
verse begins with svasasthe bhavatam indave na^, which is really
the end of the next verse (Rv. X, 13, 2), while the second line is,
vi doka eti pathyeva suri^ srinv antu vi sve amrztasa etat. I see no
sense in pathyeva sftra/z. *Sankara explains pathyeva by pathi san-
marge, athava pathya kfrti^, while his later commentary, giving
srinv antu and putra^ suratmano hirawyagarbhasya, leads one to sup¬
pose that he read sure^z srinv antu. Sayazza (Taitt. Sazzzh. IV, 1, 1,
2) explains pathya sura iva by girvazzamarga antarikshe suryara-
j-mayo yalha prasaranti tadvat. The same, when commenting on
the Rig-veda (X, 13, 1), says: pathya-iva sure/z, yatha stotu-^ sva-
bhula pathya parizzamasukhavahahutir vijvan devan prati vividhazzz
gaH’^ati tadvat. Mahidhara (Vag. Sazzzh. XI, 5) refers sure^
(pazz^fitasya) to doka/z, and explains pathyeva by patho ’napeta
pathya ya^g/zamargapravrzttahutiA

2 Yu^ cannot stand for yu/ 7 ^e, as all commentators and trans¬
lators suppose, but is a datival infinitive. Neither can yuzz^ate in
the following verse stand for yuiikte (see Boehtlingk, s. v.), or be
explained as a subjunctive form. A. reads adhirudhyate, B. abhi-
rudhyate, with a marginal note abhinudyate. It is difficult to say
whether in lighting the fire the wind should be directed towards it,
or kept from it.

3 That is, at the Soma sacrifice, after the fire has been kindled
and stirred by the wind, the poets, on partaking of the juice, are

II ADHYAYA, IO.

24I

7 * Let us love the old Brahman by the grace of
Savit n ; if thou make thy dwelling there, the path
will not hurt thee * 1 .

8 . If a wise man hold his body with its three erect
parts (chest, neck, and head) even 2 , and turn his
senses with the mind towards the heart, he will then

in the boat of Brahman 3 cross all the torrents which
cause fear.

9. Compressing his breathings let him, who has
subdued all motions, breathe forth through the nose
with gentle breath 4 . Let the wise man without fail
restrain his mind, that chariot yoked with vicious
horses 5 .

10. Let him perform his exercises in a place 6

inspirited for new songs. .Sankara, however, suggests another expla¬
nation as more appropriate for the Upanishad, namely, ‘Where the
fire, i. e. the Highest Self, which burns all ignorance, has been kindled
(in the body, where it has been rubbed with the syllable Om), and
where the breath has acted, i.e. has made the sound peculiar to the
initial stages of Yoga, there Brahman is produced/ In fact, what
was intended to be taught was this, that we must begin with sacri¬
ficial acts, then practise yoga, then reach samadhi, perfect know¬
ledge, and lastly bliss.

1 We must read krz’/zavase, in the sense of ‘do this and nothing
will hurt thee/ or, if thou do this, thy former deeds will no longer
hurt thee.

2 Cf. Bhagavadgita VI, 13. Sama m kayajirogrivazzz dharayan.
.Sankara says: trizzy unnatany urogrivajirazzzsy unnatani yasmin
jarire.

3 Explained by .Sankara as the syllable Om.

4 Cf. Bhagavadgita V, 27. Prazzapanau samau krztva nasabhyan-
tara ^arizzau. See Telang's notes, Sacred Books of the East, vol. viii,
p. 68 seq.

5 A similar metaphor in Ka//z. Up. Ill, 4-6; Sacred Books of
the East, vol. xv, p. 13.

6 The question is whether •rabda^ala.rrayadibhi^ should be referred
to mano 'nukule, as I have translated it, or to vivargite, as .Sankara
seems to take it, because he renders jabda, sound, by noise, and

[15] R

242

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

level, pure, free from pebbles, fire, and dust, delightful
by its sounds, its water, and bowers, not painful to
the eye, and full of shelters and caves.

11. When Yoga is being performed, the forms
which come first, producing apparitions in Brahman,
are those of misty smoke, sun, fire, wind, fire-flies,
lightnings, and a crystal moon * 1 .

12. When, as earth, water, light, heat, and ether
arise, the fivefold quality of Yoga takes place 2 ,
then there is no longer illness, old age, or pain 3 for
him who has obtained a body, produced by the fire
of Yoga.

13. The first results of Yoga they call lightness,
healthiness, steadiness, a good complexion, an easy
pronunciation, a sweet odour, and slight excretions.

14. As a metal disk (mirror), tarnished by dust,
shines bright again after it has been cleaned, so
is the one incarnate person satisfied and free from
grief, after he has seen the real nature of the
self 4 . ■

axraya by maz/^apa, a booth. See Bhagavadgita VI, 11. In the
Maitr. Up. VI, 30, Ramatirtha explains m£au dese by girinadi-
pulinaguhadi^uddhasthane. See also Asv. Grzhya-sutras III, 2, 2.

1 Or, it may be, a crystal and the moon.

2 The Yogaguwa is described as the quality of each element,
i. e. smell of the earth, taste of water, &c. It seems that the per¬
ception of these guzzas is called yogapravmti. Thus by fixing the
thought on the tip of the nose, a perception of heavenly scent is
produced ; by fixing it on the tip of the tongue, a perception of
heavenly taste; by fixing it on the point of the palate, a heavenly
colour ; by fixing it on the middle of the tongue, a heavenly touch ;
by fixing it on the roof of the tongue, a heavenly sound. By means
of these perceptions the mind is supposed to be steadied, because
it is no longer attracted by the outward objects themselves. See
Yoga-sfitras I, 35.

3 Or no death, na mr/tyu/z, B.

4 Paresham pa thz tadvat sa tattvam prasamikshya dehiti.

II ADHYAYA, I 7.

243

15 - And when by means of the real nature of his
self he sees, as by a lamp, the real nature of Brah¬
man, then having known the unborn, eternal god,

who is beyond all natures 1 , he is freed from all
fetters.

16. He indeed is the god who pervades all regions:
he is the first-born (as Hira/zyagarbha), and he is in
the womb. He has been born, and he will be born 2 .
He stands behind all persons, looking everywhere.

17* The god 3 who is in the fire, the god who is
in the water, the god who has entered into the whole
world, the god who is in plants, the god who is in
trees, adoration be to that god, adoration!

Sarvatattvaii avidyatatkaryair vBuddham asazzzsprzsh/am.

2 This verse is found in the V%. Sazzzh. XXXII, 4; Taitt. Ar. X,
Ij 3 > with slight modifications. The Vag-asaneyins read esho ha (so
do A. B.) for esha hi; sa eva g&tah (A. B.) for sa vi^ata/z; ^anas
(A.B.) for ^anazzzs. The Ara/zyaka has sa vi^ayamana^ for sa vi^ata/z.
pratyanmukhas for pratyazzganaz/zs, and vBvatomukha^ for sarvato-
mukha/z. Colebrooke (Essays, I, 57) gives a translation of it.
If we read ganafi, we must take it as a vocative.

B. (not A.) reads yo rudro yo ’gnau.

R 2

244

-SVETA-SVATARA-UPANISHAD.

THIRD ADHYAYA 1 .

1. The snarer 2 who rules alone by his powers,
who rules all the worlds by his powers, who is one
and the same, while things arise and exist 3 ,—they
who know this are immortal.

2. For there is one Rudra only, they do not allow
a second, who rules all the worlds by his powers.
He stands behind all persons 4 , and after having
created all worlds he, the protector, rolls it up 5 at
the end of time.

3 6 . That one god, having his eyes, his face, his
arms, and his feet in every place, when producing
heaven and earth, forges them together with his
arms and his wings 7 .

1 This Adhyaya represents the Highest Self as the personified
deity, as the lord, Ira, or Rudra, under the sway of his own creative
power, prakrz'ti or maya.

2 -Sankara explains ^ala, snare, by maya. The verse must be
corrected, according to Sankara's commentary :

ya eko gulav&n faata uanibhi^
sarvan llokan ljata iranibhi^.

3 Sambhava, in the sense ofVergehen, perishing, rests on no
authority.’

4 Here again the MSS. A. B. read ^anas, as a vocative.

5 I prefer sa^uko/’a to sa-w/mkopa, which gives us the meaning
that Rudra, after having created all things, draws together, i. e.
takes them all back into himself, at the end of time. I have trans¬
lated saz/zsrz^ya by having created, because Boehtlingk and Roth
give other instances of svunsrig with that sense. Otherwise,‘ having
mixed them together again,' would seem more appropriate. A. and
B. read sawX’uko^’a.

6 This is a very popular verse, and occurs Rig-veda X, 8i, 3;
V&g. Sa;;zh. XVII, 19; Ath.-veda XIII, 2, 26 ; Taitt. Sawh. IV, 6,

/v

2, 4; Taitt. Ar. X, 1, 3.

7 -Sankara takes dhamati in the sense of sazzzyo^ayati, i. e. he
joins men with arms, birds with wings.

hi adhyAya, 9.

245

4. He 1 , the creator and supporter of the gods,
Rudra, the great seer, the lord of all, he who
formerly gave birth to Hira/zyagarbha, may he
endow us with good thoughts.

5 2 . O Rudra, thou dweller in the mountains, look
upon us with that most blessed form of thine which
is auspicious, not terrible, and reveals no evil!

6 3 . O lord of the mountains, make lucky that arrow
which thou, a dweller in the mountains, holdest in
thy hand to shoot. Do not hurt man or beast!

7. Those who know beyond this the High Brah¬
man, the vast, hidden in the bodies of all creatures,
and alone enveloping everything, as the Lord, they
become immortal 4 .

8 5 . I know that great person (purusha) of sunlike
lustre beyond the darkness 6 . A man who knows him
truly, passes over death; there is no other path
to go 7 .

9. This whole universe is filled by this person
(purusha), to whom there is nothing superior, from
whom there is nothing different, than whom there is

1 See IV, 12.

2 See Vag. Sa/zzh. XVI, 2; Taitt. Sazrah. IV, 5, 1, 1.

3 See Va g. Sazzzh. XVI, 3; Taitt. Sazzzh. IV, 5, 1, 1; Nilarudropan.
p. 274.

4 The knowledge consists in knowing either that Brahman is
La or that La is Brahman. But in either case the gender of the
adjectives is difficult. The .SVetLvatara-upanishad seems to use brz-
hanta as an adjective, instead of brz'hat. I should prefer to translate :
Beyond this is the High Brahman, the vast. Those who know La,
the Lord, hidden in all things and embracing all things to be this
(Brahman), become immortal. See also Muir, Metrical Transla¬
tions, p. 196, whose translation of these verses I have adopted with
few exceptions.

5 Cf. Va g. Sazzzh. XXX, 18; Taitt. Ar. Ill, 12, 7; III, 13, 1.

6 Cf. Bhagavadgita VIII, 9. 7 Cf. Svet. Up. VI, 15.

246

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

nothing smaller or larger, who stands alone, fixed
like a tree in the sky 1 .

10. That which is beyond this world is without
form and without suffering. They who know it,
become immortal, but others suffer pain indeed 2 .

11. That Bhagavat 3 exists in the faces, the heads,
the necks of all, he dwells in the cave (of the heart)
of all beings, he is all-pervading, therefore he is the
omnipresent .Siva.

12. That person (purusha) is the great lord; he
is the mover of existence 4 , he possesses that purest
power of reaching everything 5 , he is light, he is
un decaying.

13 6 . The person (purusha), not larger than a thumb,

1 Divi, the sky, is explained by *Sankara as dyotanatmani sva-
mahimni.

2 The pain of sazrasara, or transmigration. See Brz'had. Up. IV,
3, 20 (p. 178).

3 I feel doubtful whether the two names Bhagavat and Viva should
here be preserved, or whether the former should be rendered by
holy, the latter by happy. The commentator explains Bhagavat by

auvaryasya samagrasya viryasya ya^asa/z jriya/z
Uzzanavairagyayoj /fcaiva shazzzzam bhaga itirazza.

Wilson, in his Essay on the Religious Sects of the Hindus,
published in 1828, in the Asiatic Researches, XVI, p. 11, pointed
out that this verse and another (Wet. Up. II, 2) were cited by the
Vaivas as Vedic authorities for their teaching. He remarked that
these citations would scarcely have been made, if not authentic, and
that they probably did occur in the Vedas. In the new edition of
this Essay by Dr. Rost, 1862, the references should have been added.

4 Yankara explains sattvasya by anta/zkarazzasya.

5 I take prapti, like other terms occurring in this Upanishad, in
its technical sense. Prapti is one of the vibhhtis or a Wary as, viz.
the power of touching anything at will, as touching the moon with
the tip of one's finger. See Yoga-sutras, ed. Rajendralal Mitra,
p. 121.

G Cf. Taitt. Ar. X, 71 (Anuv. 38, p. 858). I\a//z. Up. IV, 12-13;

above, p. 16.

Ill ADHYAYA, 18.

247

dwelling within, always dwelling in the heart of man,
is perceived by the heart, the thought 1 , the mind ;
they who know it become immortal.

14 2 . The person (purusha) with a thousand heads,
a thousand eyes, a thousand feet, having compassed
the earth on every side, extends beyond it by ten
fingers’ breadth.

15. That person alone (purusha) is all this, what
has been and what will be; he is also the lord of
immortality; he is whatever grows by food 3 .

16. Its 4 hands and feet are everywhere, its eyes
and head are everywhere, its ears are everywhere,
it stands encompassing all in the world 5 .

17. Separate from all the senses, yet reflecting
the qualities of all the senses, it is the lord and ruler
of all, it is the great refuge of all.

18. The embodied spirit within the town with
nine gates 6 , the bird, flutters outwards, the ruler of

1 The text has manvLa, which -Sankara explains by ^wane^a.
But Weber has conjectured rightly, I believe, that the original text
must have been manisha. The difficulty is to understand how so
common a word as manisha could have been changed into so un¬
usual a word as manvBa. See IV, 20.

2 This is a famous verse of the Rig-veda, X, 90, 1 ; repeated in
the Atharva-veda, XIX, 6, 1; Vag. Sa//ffi. XXXI, 1; Taitt. Ar. Ill,
12, 1. -Sankara explains ten fingers' breadth by endless; or, he
says, it may be meant for the heart, which is ten fingers above
the navel.

/\

3 Saya?za, in his commentary on the Rig-veda and the Taitt. Ar.,
gives another explanation, viz. he is also the lord of all the im¬
mortals, i.e. the gods, because they grow to their exceeding state
by means of food, or for the sake of food.

4 The gender changes frequently, according as the author thinks
either of the Brahman, or of its impersonation as La, Lord.

5 Sankara explains loka by nikaya, body.

6 Cf. Ka th. Up. V, 1.

248

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

the whole world, of all that rests and of all that
moves.

19. Grasping without hands, hasting without feet,
he sees without eyes, he hears without ears. He
knows what can be known, but no one knows him ;
they call him the first, the great person (purusha).

20 1 . The Self, smaller than small, greater than
great, is hidden in the heart of the creature. A man
who has left all grief behind, sees the majesty, the
Lord, the passionless, by the grace of the creator
(the Lord).

21 2 . I know 3 this undecaying, ancient one, the self
of all things, being infinite and omnipresent. They
declare that in him all birth is stopped, for the
Brahma-students proclaim him to be eternal 4 .

1 Cf. Taitt. Ar. X, 12 (10), p. 800; Ka/A Up. II, 20; above,
p. 11. The translation had to be slightly altered, because the
Xvetajvataras, as Taittiriyas, read akratum for akratu^, and tram
for atmanaA

2 Cf. Taitt. Ar. Ill, 13, 1; III, 12, 7.

3 A. reads vedarh^am, not B.

4 A. and B. read brahmavadino hi pravadanti.

IV ADHYAYA, 4.

249

FOURTH ADHYAYA.

1. He, the sun, without any colour, who with set
purpose 1 by means of his power (<rakti) produces
endless colours 2 , in whom all this comes together in
the beginning, and comes asunder in the end—may
he, the god, endow us with good thoughts 3 .

2. That (Self) indeed is Agni (fire), it is Aditya
(sun), it is Vayu (wind), it is Afandramas (moon); the
same also is the starry firmament 4 , it is Brahman
(Hira^yagarbha), it is water, it is Pra^apati (Vira^).

3. Thou art woman, thou art man ; thou art youth,
thou art maiden ; thou, as an old man, totterest 5

along on thy staff; thou art born with thy face turned
everywhere.

4 - Thou art the dark-blue bee, thou art the green

Nihitartha, explained by Sankara as gn'hitaprayogana/i svartha-
nirapeksha^. This may mean with set purpose, but if we read
agrzhitaprayo^ana^ it would mean the contrary, namely, without
any definite object, irrespective of his own objects. This is pos¬
sible, and perhaps more in accordance with the idea of creation as
propounded by those to whom the devatma^akti is maya. Nihita
would then mean hidden.

Colour is intended for qualities, differences, &c.

This verse has been translated very freely. As it stands, vi
<£aiti /’ante vi^vam adau sa deva^, it does not construe, in spite of
all attempts to the contrary, made by Sankara. What is intended
is yasminn idam sam ka vi ^aiti sarvam (IV, n); but how so
simple a line should have been changed into what we read now, is
difficult to say.

4 This is the explanation of Sankara, and probably that of the
Yoga schools in India at his time. But to take jukram for dip-
timan nakshatradi, brahma for Hira;zyagarbha, and Pra^apati for
Vira^ - seems suggested by this verse only.

0 Va^ayasi, an exceptional form, instead of va#/£asi (A. B.).

25O SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

parrot with red eyes, thou art the thunder-cloud, the
seasons, the seas. Thou art without beginning
because thou art infinite, thou from whom all worlds
are born.

5 1 2 . There is one unborn being (female), red, white,
and black, uniform, but producing manifold offspring.
There is one unborn being (male) who loves her
and lies by her ; there is another who leaves her,
while she is eating what has to be eaten.

1 We see throughout the constant change from the masculine
to the neuter gender, in addressing either the lord or his true
essence.

2 This is again one of the famous verses of our Upanishad,
because it formed for a long time a bone of contention between
Vedanta and Sankhya philosophers. The Sankhyas admit two
principles, the Purusha, the absolute subject, and the Praknti,
generally translated by nature. The Vedanta philosophers admit
nothing but the one absolute subject, and look upon nature as due
to a power inherent in that subject. The later Sankhyas therefore,
who are as anxious as the Vedantins to find authoritative passages
in the Veda, confirming their opinions, appeal to this and other
passages, to show that their view of Prakrzti, as an independent
power, is supported by the Veda. The whole question is fully
discussed in the Vedanta-sutras I, 4, 8. Here we read rohita-
krzshzza-juklam, which seems preferable to lohita-krzshzza-varzzam,
at least from a Vedanta point of view, for the three colours, red,
black, and white, are explained as signifying either the three guzzas,
ra^as, sattva, and tamas, or better (A 7 zand. Up. VI, 3, 1), the three
elements, te,gas (fire), ap (water), and anna (earth). A. reads
rohitamklakz'z'shzzam; B. lohita.mklakrish;za (sic). We also find
in A. and B. bhuktabhogam for bhuktabhogyam, but the latter
seems technically the more correct reading. It would be quite
wrong to imagine that a^a and a,ga are meant here for he-goat
and she-goat. These words, in the sense of unborn, are recognised
as early as the hymns of the Rig-veda, and they occurred in our
Upanishad I, 9, where the two a,gas are mentioned in the same
sense as here. But there is, no doubt, a play on the words, and
the poet wished to convey the second meaning of he-goat and
she-goat, only not as the primary, but as the secondary intention.

IV ADHYAYA, 9. 25 I

6 l . Two birds, inseparable friends, cling - to the
same tree. One of them eats the sweet fruit, the
other looks on without eating.

7. On the same tree man sits grieving, immersed,
bewildered, by his own impotence (an-M). But
when he sees the other lord (Ba) contented, and
knows his glory, then his grief passes away.

8 2 . He who does not know that indestructible
being of the Ag-veda, that highest ether-like (Self)
wherein all the gods reside, of what use is the

Tfog-veda to him ? Those only who know it, rest
contented.

9* That from which the maker (mayin 3 ) sends
forth all this—the sacred verses, the offering's, the
sacrifices, the panaceas, the past, the future, and all

1 The same verses occur in the Muzzdhka Up. Ill, 1.

It is difficult to see how this verse comes in here. In the

A

Taitt. Ar. II, 11, 6, it is quoted in connection with the syllable Om,
the Akshara, in which all the Vedas are comprehended. It is
similarly used in the Nrzsffizha-purva-tapani, IV, 2; V, 2. In our
passage, however, akshara is referred by Aankara to the paramat-
man, and I have translated it accordingly. Rik&h is explained as
a genitive singular, but it may also be taken as a nom. plur., and in

that case both the verses of the Veda and the gods are said to

reside in the Akshara, whether we take it for the Paramatman or
for the Om. In the latter case, parame vyoman is explained by
utkrzsh/e and rakshake.

3 It is impossible to find terms corresponding to maya and
mayin. Maya; means making, or art, but as all making or creat-
ing, so far as the Supreme Self is concerned, is phenomenal only
or mere illusion, maya conveys at the same time the sense of
illusion. In the same manner mayin is the maker, the artist, but
also the magician or juggler. What seems intended by our verse is
that from the akshara, which corresponds to brahman, all proceeds,
whatever exists or seems to exist, but that the actual creator or the
author of all emanations is La, the Lord, who, as creator, is acting
through maya or devatnmakti. Possibly, however, anya, the other,
may be meant for the individual purusha.

252

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

that the Vedas declare—in that the other is bound
up through that maya.

10. Know then Prakrfti (nature) is Maya (art), and
the great Lord the Mayin (maker) ; the whole world
is filled with what are his members.

11. If a man has discerned him, who being one
only, rules over every germ (cause), in whom all
this comes together and comes asunder again, who
is the lord, the bestower of blessing, the adorable
god, then he passes for ever into that peace.

12 k He, the creator and supporter of the gods,
Rudra, the great seer, the lord of all, who saw 1 2
Hira/zyagarbha being born, may he endow us with
good thoughts.

13. He who is the sovereign of the gods, he in
whom all the worlds 3 rest, he who rules over all two-
footed and four-footed beings, to that god 4 let us
sacrifice an oblation.

14. He who has known him who is more subtile
than subtile, in the midst of chaos, creating all things,
having many forms, alone enveloping everything 5 ,
the happy one (Siva), passes into peace for ever.

1 See before, III, 4.

2 .Sankara does not explain this verse again, though it differs
from III, 4. Vigvzanatman explains pajyata by apa^yata, and quali¬
fies the Atmanepada as irregular.

3 B. reads yasmin deva^, not A.

4 I read tasmai instead of kasmai, a various reading mentioned
by Vi^zzanatman. It was easy to change tasmai into kasmai,
because of the well-known line in the Rig-veda, kasmai devaya
havisha vidhema. Those who read kasmai, explain it as a dative
of Ka, a name of Pra^apati, which in the dative should be kaya,
and not kasmai. It would be better to take kasmai as the dative
of the interrogative pronoun. See M. M., History of Ancient
Sanskrit Literature, p. 433; and Vitana-sutras IV, 22.

5 Cf. Ill, 7.

IV ADHYAYA, 20 .

2 53

15. He also was in time 1 the guardian of this
world, the lord of all, hidden in all beings. In him
the Brahmarshis and the deities are united 2 , and he
who knows him cuts the fetters of death asunder.

16. He who knows .Siva (the blessed) hidden in
all beings, like the subtile film that rises from out
the clarified butter 3 , alone enveloping everything,—
he who knows the god, is freed from all fetters.

I 7* That god, the maker of all things, the great
Self 4 , always dwelling in the heart of man, is per¬
ceived by the heart, the soul, the mind 5 ;—they who
know it become immortal.

18. When the light has risen 6 , there is no day, no
night, neither existence nor non-existence 7 ; Siva
(the blessed) alone is there. That is the eternal,
the adorable light of Savitrz 8 ,—and the ancient
wisdom proceeded thence.

19. No one has grasped him above, or across, or
in the middle 9 . There is no image of him whose
name is Great Glory.

20. His form cannot be seen, no one perceives
him with the eye. Those 10 who through heart and

1 In former ages, Sankara.

2 Because both the Brahmarshis, the holy seers, and the deities
find their true essence in Brahman.

3 We should say, like cream from milk.

4 Or ihe high-minded.

5 See III, 13.

6 Atamas, no darkness, i.e. light of knowledge.

7 See on the difficulty of translating sat and asat, ro op and to m
op, the remarks in the Preface.

8 Referring to the Gdyatrf, Rig-veda III, 62, 10; see also Svet,
Up. V, 4.

9 See Muir, Metrical Translations, p. 198; Maitr. Up. VI, 17.

10 B. reads hrzda mamsha manasabhik/zpto, yat tad vidur;
A. hndi hndistham manasaya enam eva m vidur.

254

SVETASVATARA-U PANISH AD.

mind know him thus abiding in the heart, become
immortal.

21. ‘Thou art unborn/ with these words some
one comes near to thee, trembling. O Rudra, let
thy gracious 1 face protect me for ever!

22 2 . O Rudra! hurt us not in our offspring and
descendants, hurt us not in our own lives, nor in our
cows, nor in our horses! Do not slay our men in
thy wrath, for, holding oblations, we call on thee
always.

1 Dakshi/za is explained either as invigorating, exhilarating, or
turned towards the south.

2 See Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, I, p. 141 ; Rig-veda I,
114, 8; Taitt. Sazzzh. IV, 5, 10, 3; Vag. Sazzzh. XVI, 16. The
various readings are curious. Ayushi in the -SVet. Up., instead of
ayau in the Rig-veda, is supported by the Taitt. Sazzzh. and the
Vag. Sazzzh.; but Vigzzanatman reads ayau. As to bhamito, it seems
the right reading, being supported by the Rig-veda, the Taitt. Sazzzh.,
and the -SVet. Up., while bhavito in Roers edition is a misprint.
The Vag. Sazzzh. alone reads bhamino, which Mahidhara refers to
viran. The last verse in the Rig-veda and Vag. Sazzzh. is havishman-
ta h sadam it tva havamahe ; in the Taitt. Saz/zh. havishmanto namasa
vidhema te. In the *SVet. Up. havishmanta^ sadasi tva havamahe, as
printed by Roer, seems to rest on -Sankara's authority only. The
other commentators, Vankarananda and Vigzzanatman, read and
interpret sadam it.

V ADHYAYA, 3.

2 55

FIFTH ADHYAYA.

T * imperishable and infinite Highest

Brahman , wherein the two, knowledge and ignorance,
are hidden * 2 , the one, ignorance, perishes 3 , the other,
knowledge, is immortal; but he who controls both,
knowledge and ignorance, is another 4 .

2. It is he who, being one only, rules over every
germ (cause), over all forms, and over all germs; it
is he who, in the beginning, bears 5 in his thoughts
the wise son, the fiery, whom he wishes to look on 6
while he is born 7 .

3 8 . In that field 9 in which the god, after spreading-
out one net after another 10 in various ways, draws it
together again, the Lord, the great Self 11 , having

«Sankaia explains Brahmapare by brahma/zo hirazzyagarbhat
pare, or by parasmin brahma/zi, which comes to the same. Viy/za-
natman adds /iAandasa^ paranipata^. As the termination e may
belong to the locative singular or to the nom. dual, commentators
vary in referring some of the adjectives either to brahman or to
vidyavidye.

Gu dhe, lokair Saturn ajakye, Aankarananda.

3 Aankara explains ksharam by saz/zsrztikarazzam, amrz’tam by
mokshahetu^.

Aankara explains that he is different from them, being only the
sakshin, oi witness. *Sahkarananda seems to have read Somya,
i.e. Somavatpriyadawana, as if Aveta^ vat vara addressed his pupil.

5 Like a mother, see I, 9. 6 Like a father.

7 See on this verse the remarks made in the Introduction.

8 The MSS. read yasmin for asmin, and patayas for yatayas,

which the commentator explains by pattn.

9 The world, or the mulaprakrz'ti, the net being the sa/zzsara.

10 .Sankara explains ekaikam by pratyekam, i.e. for every crea¬
ture, such as gods, men, beasts, &c.

I doubt whether mahatma should be translated by the great

256

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

further created the lords * 1 , thus carries on his lord-
ship over all.

4. As the car (of the sun) shines, lighting up all
quarters, above, below, and across, thus does that
god, the holy, the adorable, being one, rule over all
that has the nature of a germ 2 .

5. He, being one, rules over all and everything,
so that the universal germ ripens its nature, diversi¬
fies all natures that can be ripened 3 , and determines
all qualities 4 .

6 5 . Brahma (Hira^yagarbha) knows this, which
is hidden in the Upanishads, which are hidden in
the Vedas, as the Brahma-germ. The ancient gods

Self, or whether great would not be sufficient. The whole verse is
extremely difficult.

1 From Hira^yagarbha to insects; or beginning with Marini.

2 Cf. IV, 11; V, 2.

3 MS. B. has praXyan, and explains it by phrvotpann^n.

4 This is again a very difficult verse. I have taken vuvayoni/j
as a name for Brahman, possessed of that devatmasakti which was
mentioned before, but I feel by no means satisfied. The com¬
mentators do not help, because they do not see the difficulty of the
construction. If one might conjecture, I should prefer pa£et for
pa^ati, and should write parbzamayed yat, and viniyo^ayed yat,
unless we changed ya/b£a into yaj ka.

5 This verse admits of various translations, and requires also
some metrical emendations. Thus Vi^; 7 anatman explains vedagu-
hyopanishatsu very ingeniously by the Veda, i.e. that part of it
which teaches sacrifices and their rewards; the Guhya, i.e. the
Ara;zyaka, which teaches the worship of Brahman under various
legendary aspects; and the Upanishads, which teach the knowledge
of Brahman without qualities. These three divisions would corre¬
spond to the karmakaw^a, yogakawda, and gnctnaktinda. (Gaimini,
Pata#gali, Badaraya^a). See Deussen, Vedanta, p. 20. Mr. Gough
and Dr. Roer take Brahmayoni as * the source of the Veda,’ or as
the source of Hirawyagarbha. The irregular form vedate may be
due to a corruption of vedante.

V ADHYAYA, II.

2 57

and poets who knew it, they became it and were
immortal.

7 1 . But he who is endowed with qualities, and
performs works that are to bear fruit, and enjoys
the reward of whatever he has done, migrates
through his own works, the lord of life, assuming
all forms, led by the three Gu;/as, and following the
three paths 2 .

8 3 . That lower one also, not larger than a thumb,
but brilliant like the sun, who is endowed with per¬
sonality and thoughts, with the quality of mind and
the quality of body, is seen small even like the point
of a goad.

9. That living soul is to be known as part of the
hundredth part of the point of a hair 4 , divided a
hundred times, and yet it is to be infinite.

10. It is not woman, it is not man, nor is it
neuter; whatever body it takes, with that it is
joined 5 (only).

11 6 . By means of thoughts, touching, seeing, and

1 Here begins the description of what is called the tvam (thou),
as opposed to the tat (that), i. e. the living soul, as opposed to the
Highest Brahman.

, 2 The paths of vice, virtue, and knowledge.

3 Both MSS. (A. and B.) read aragramatro hy avaro ’pi d ri-
sh/a-A

4 An expression of frequent occurrence in Buddhist literature.

5 A. and B. read yugyate. A. explains yu^yate by sambadh-
yate. B. explains adyate bhakshyate tirobhhta^ kriyate. -Sankara
explains rakshyate, sawrakshyate, tattaddharman atmany adhyasya-
bhimanyate.

6 The MSS. vary considerably. Instead of mohair, A. and B.
read homair. They read grasambuvrzsh/ya, Mtma. A. reads
atmavivrz'ddhi^anma, B. atmanivrz'ddha^anma. A. has abhisam-
prapadye, B. abhisamprapadyate. My translation follows -Sankara,
who seems to have read atmavivrz’ddhiganma, taking the whole line

[15] s

2 5 8

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

passions the incarnate Self assumes successively in
various places various forms * 1 , in accordance with his
deeds, just as the body grows when food and drink
are poured into it.

12. That incarnate Self, according to his own
qualities, chooses (assumes) many shapes, coarse or
subtile, and having himself caused his union with
them, he is seen as another and another 2 , through
the qualities of his acts, and through the qualities of
his body.

13 3 . He who knows him who has no beginning
and no end, in the midst of chaos, creating all things,
having many forms, alone enveloping everything, is
freed from all fetters.

14. Those who know him who is to be grasped
by the mind, who is. not to be called the nest (the
body 4 ), who makes existence and non-existence, the

as a simile and in an adverbial form. Vigzzanatman, however, differs
considerably. He reads homai/z, and explains homa as the act of
throwing oblations into the fire, as in the Agnihotra. This action
of the hands, he thinks, stands for all actions of the various mem¬
bers of the body. Grasambuvrzsh/i he takes to mean free distri¬
bution of food and drink, and then explains the whole sentence by
‘he whose self is born unto some states or declines from them
again, namely, according as he has showered food and drink, and
has used his hands, eyes, feelings, and thoughts.’ -Sankarananda
takes a similar view, only he construes sankalpanam and spaivanam
as two drzsh/is, te eva dzYsh/i, tayor atmagnau prakshepa lioma/z;
and then goes on, na kevalam etai h, him tv asmin sthane jarire
grasambuvrzsh/ya /’a. He seems to read atmavivz'zddhaganma, but
aftewards explains vivzYddhi by vividha vz'z'ddhi/z.

1 Forms as high as Hirazzyagarbha or as low as beasts.

2 Instead of aparo, B. reads avaro, but explains aparo.

3 Cf. Ill, 7; IV, 14, 16.

4 Nk/a is explained as the body, but .Sankarananda reads anila-
khyam, who is called the wind, as being prazzasya prazzam, the
breath of the breath.

V ADHYAYA, 14. 259

happy one (■Siva), who also creates the elements 1 ,
they have left the body.

' Sankara explains kalasargakaram by he who creates the sixteen
kalas, mentioned by the Atbarvarcikas, beginning with prarca, and
ending with naman; see Prar«a Up. VI, 4. Vi^antitman suggests
two other explanations, 1 he who creates by means of the kala,
1. e. his inherent power; ’ or ‘he who creates the Vedas and other
sciences. The sixteen kalas are, according to .Sahkartoanda,
pra»a, rraddha, kha, vSyu, gyotiA, ap, pmhivi, indriya, mana/r, anna
urya, tapa/2, mantra, karman, kala (?), naman. See also before, I, 4.

26 o

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

SIXTH ADHYAYA.

i 1 . Some wise men, deluded, speak of Nature, and
others of Time (as the cause of everything 2 ); but it
is the greatness of God by which this Brahma-wheel
is made to turn.

2. It is at the command of him who always
covers this world, the knower, the time of time 3 ,
who assumes qualities and all knowledge 4 , it is at
his command that this work (creation) unfolds itself,
which is called earth, water, fire, air, and ether;

^ 5 . He who, after he has done that work and
rested again, and after he has brought together one
essence (the self) with the other (matter), with one,
two, three, or eight, with time also and with the
subtile qualities of the mind,

4. Who, after starting 6 the works endowed with
(the three) qualities, can order all things, yet when,
in the absence of all these, he has caused the de¬
struction of the work, goes on, being in truth 7
different (from all he has produced) ;

1 See Muir, Metrical Translations, p. 198.

2 See before, I, 2.

3 The destroyer of time. Vi^wanatman reads kalakalo, and ex¬
plains it by kalasya niyanta, upaharta. -Sankarananda explains kala h
sarvavinaj-akari, tasyapi vinaj-akara/z. See also verse 16.

4 Or sarvavid ya h.

5 Instead of vinivartya, Vi^; 7 anatman and -Sankarananda read
vinivrftya.

6 Aruhya for arabhya, -Sankarananda.

7 These two verses are again extremely obscure, and the expla¬
nations of the commentators throw little light on their,real, original
meaning. To begin with Sankara, he assumes the subject to be the
same as he at whose command this work unfolds itself, and explains

VI ADHYAYA, 5.

26 I

5. He is the beginning, producing the causes
which unite (the soul with the body), and, being

tattvasya tattvena sametya yogam by atmano bhumyadina yogaw
sa-wgamayya. As the eight Tattvas he gives earth, water, fire, air,
ethei, mind, thought, personality, while the Atmagu;/as are, according
to him, the affections of the mind, love, anger, &c. In the second verse>
however, Aankara seems to assume a different subject. ‘ If a man/
he says, ^having done works, infected by qualities, should transfer
them on Irvara, the Lord, there would be destruction of the works
foimeily done by him, because there would be no more connection
with the self/ Something is left out, but that this is -Sankara's idea,
appears from the verses which he quotes in support, and which are
intended to show that Yogins, transferring all their acts, good,
bad, or indifferent, on Brahman, are no longer affected by them.

That person, «Sankara continues, ‘ his works being destroyed and
his nature purified, moves on, different from all things (tattva), from
all the results of ignorance, knowing himself to be Brahman/
‘ Or/ he adds, * if we read anyad, it means, he goes to that Brahman
which is different from all things/

Aankarananda takes a different view. He says ' ‘ If a man has
performed sacrifices, and has finished them, or, has turned away
from them again as vain, and if he has obtained union with that
which is the real of the (apparently) real, &c/ The commentator
then asks what is that with which he obtains union, and replies,
‘the one, i.e. ignorance; the two, i.e. right and wrong; the three,
i.e. the three colours, red, white, and black; and the eight, i.e. the five
elements, with mind, thought, and personality; also with time, and
with the subtile affections of the mind/ He then goes on, ‘ If that
man, after having begun qualified works, should take on himself
all states (resulting from ignorance), yet, when these states cease,
there would be an end of the work, good or bad, done by him, and
when his work has come to an end, he abides in truth (according to
the Veda); while the other, who differs from the Veda, is wrong/
Aankarananda, however, evidently feels that this is a doubtful inter¬
pretation, and he suggests another, viz. ‘ If the Lord himself,’ he says,
‘determined these states (bhava), it would seem that there would
be no end of sawsara. He therefore says, that when these states,
ignorance &c., cease, the work done by man ceases; and when the
work done ceases, the living soul gets free of sa-wsara, being in
truth another, i. e. different from ignorance and its products/

^ i^anatman says: ‘ If a man, having done work, turns away

262

SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD.

above the three kinds of time (past, present, future),
he is seen as without parts * l , after we have first wor¬
shipped that adorable god, who has many forms,
and who is the true source (of all things), as dwelling
in our own mind.

6 . He is beyond all the forms of the tree 2 (of the
world) and of time, he is the other, from whom this
world moves round, when 3 one has known him who

from it, and obtains union of one tattva (the tvam, or self) with the
real tattva (the tat, or the Lord);—and how ? By means of the one,
i.e. the teaching of the Guru; the two, i.e. love of the Guru and of the
Lord; the three, i.e. hearing, remembering,and meditating; the eight,
i.e. restraint, penance, postures, regulation of the breath, abstrac¬
tion, devotion, contemplation, and meditation (Yoga-sfitras II, 29);
by time, i. e. the right time for work; by the qualities of the self, i. e.
pity, &c.; by the subtile ones, i. e. the good dispositions for know¬
ledge, then (we must supply) he becomes freed And this he ex¬
plains more fully in the next verse. ‘ If, after having done qualified
works, i.e. works to please the Lord, a Yati discards all things,
and recognises the phenomenal character of all states, and traces
them back to their real source in Mulaprakrz’ti and, in the end,
in the Sa/Hidananda, he becomes free. If they (the states) cease,
i. e. are known in their real source, the work done ceases also in its
effects, and when the work has been annihilated, he goes to free¬
dom, being another in truth; or, if we read anyat, he goes to what
is different from all these things, namely, to the Lord; or, he goes
to a state of perfect lordship in truth, having discovered the highest
truth, the oneness of the self with the Highest Self/

I think that, judging from the context, the subject is really the same
in both verses, viz. the Lord, as passing through different states, and
at last knowing himself to be above them all. Yet, the other explana¬
tions may be defended, and if the subject were taken to be different
in each verse, some difficulties would disappear.

1 Vig/lanatman and Yankarananda read akalo ’pi, without parts,
and ‘Sankara, too, presupposes that reading, though the text is
corrupt in Roer’s edition.

2 Explained as sazzzsaravrzksha, the world-tree, as described in
the Ka/ 7 za Up. VI, 1.

3 It seems possible to translate this verse in analogy with the
former, and without supplying the verb either from yati, in verse 4,

VI ADHYAYA, II.

263

brings good and removes evil, the lord of bliss, as
dwelling within the self, the immortal, the support
of all.

7. Let us know that highest great lord of lords * 1 ,
the highest deity of deities, the master of masters,
the highest above, as god, the lord of the world, the
adorable.

8. d here is no effect and no cause known of him,
no one is seen like unto him or better; his hio-h
power is revealed as manifold, as inherent, acting-
as force and knowledge.

9. There is no master of his in the world, no ruler
of his, not even a sign of him 2 . He is the cause,
the lord of the lords of the organs 3 , and there is of
him neither parent nor lord.

10. d hat only god who spontaneously covered
himself, like a spider, with threads drawn from
the first cause (pradhana), grant us entrance into
Brahman 4 .

3 i. He is the one God, hidden in all beings, all-

7 o *

or from vidama, in verse 7. The poet seems to have said, he is
that, he is seen as that, when one has worshipped him, or when
one has known him within oneself.

1 -Sankara thinks that the lords are Vaivasvata &c.; the deities,
Indra &c.; the masters, the Pra^apatis. Vi^v/anatman explains the
lords as Brahman, Vish-vu, Rudra, &c.; the deities as Indra, &c.;
the masters as Hira^yagarbha, &c. -Sankarananda sees in the lords
Hira;zyagarbha &c., in the deities Agni &c., in the masters the
Pra^-apatis, such as Karyapa.

2 If he could be inferred from a sign, there would be no neces¬
sity for the Veda to reveal him.

3 Karawa, instrument, is explained as organ of sense. The lords
of such organs would be all living beings, and their lord the true
Lord.

4 Besides brahmapyayam, i. e. brahma;/y apyayam, ekibhavam,
another reading is brahmavyayam, i.e. brahma ^avyaya m ka..

264 -SVETA-SVATARA-UPANISHAD.

pervading, the self within all beings, watching over
all works, dwelling in all beings, the witness, the
perceiver 1 , the only one, free from qualities.

t 2 2 . He is the one ruler of many who (seem to
act, but really) do not act 3 ; he makes the one seed
manifold. The wise who perceive him within their
self, to them belongs eternal happiness, not to others.

13 4 . He is the eternal among eternals, the thinker
among thinkers, who, though one, fulfils the desires
of many. He who has known that cause which is
to be apprehended by Yankhya (philosophy) and
Yoga (religious discipline), he is freed from all
fetters.

1 All the MSS. seem to read /’eta, not X’etta.

2 See Ka//za-upanishad V, 12-15.

5 -Sankara explains that the acts of living beings are due to their
organs, but do not affect the Highest Self, which always remains
passive (nishkriya).

4 I have formerly translated this verse, according to the reading
nityo 'nityanaw X’etanaj X’etananam, the eternal thinker of non¬
eternal thoughts. This would be a true description of the Highest
Self who, though himself eternal and passive, has to think (^ivat-
man) non-eternal thoughts. I took the first Z’etana/z in the sense
of /fcetta, the second in the sense of X’etanaz/z. The commentators,
however, take a different, and it may be, from their point, a more
correct view. -Sankara says: 1 He is the eternal of the eternals,
i. e. as he possesses eternity among living souls (giv as), these living
souls also may claim eternity. Or the eternals may be meant for
earth, water, &c. And in the same way he is the thinker among
thinkers/

-Sankarananda says : ‘ He is eternal, imperishable, among eternal,
imperishable things, such as the ether, &c. He is thinking among
thinkers/

\ igzfanatman says: { The Highest Lord is the cause of eternity
in .eternal things on earth, and the cause of thought in the thinkers
on earth/ But he allows another construction, namely, that he is
the eternal thinker of those who on earth are endowed with eter¬
nity and thought. In the end all these interpretations come to

VI ADHYAYA, 18 .

265

14. The 1 sun does not shine there, nor the moon
and the stars, nor these lightnings, and much less
this fire. When he shines, everything shines after
him; by his light all this is lightened.

15. He is the one bird 2 in the midst of the world ;
he is also (like) the fire (of the sun) that has set in
the ocean. A man who knows him truly, passes
over death 3 ; there is no other path to go.

16. He makes all, he knows all, the self-caused,
the knower 4 , the time of time (destroyer of time),
who assumes qualities and knows everything, the
master of nature and of man 5 , the lord of the three
qualities (guna), the cause of the bondage, the exist¬
ence, and the liberation of the world 6 .

17. He who has become that 7 , he is the immortal,
remaining the lord, the knower, the ever-present
guardian of this world, who rules this world for ever,
for no one else is able to rule it.

18. Seeking for freedom I go for refuge to that
God who is the light of his own thoughts 8 , he who

the same, viz. that there is only one eternal, and only one thinker,
from whom all that is (or seems to be) eternal and all that is
thought on earth is derived.

1 See Ka th. Up. V, 15 ; Mu nd. Up. II, 2, 10; Bhagavadgita XV, 6.

2 Hawsa, frequently used for the Highest Self, is explained here
as hanty avidyadibandhakara/zam iti haz/zsa/z.

3 Cf. Ill, 8.

4 Again the MSS. read kalakalo, as in verse 2. They also agree
in putting gn&h before kalakalo, as in verse 2.

5 Pradhanam avyaktam, kshetra^zzo vigzzanatma.

6 He binds, sustains, and dissolves worldly existence.

7 He who seems to exist for a time in the form of kshetra^wa
and pradhana.

8 The MSS. vary between atmabuddhiprakaxam and atmabuddhi-
prasadam. The former reading is here explained by Xahkarananda
as svabuddhisakshizzam.

266

-SVETA-SVATARA-U PANISHAD.

first creates Brahman (m.) 1 and delivers the Vedas
to him ;

19. Who is without parts, without actions, tran¬
quil, without fault, without taint 2 , the highest bridge
to immortality—like a fire that has consumed its
fuel.

20. Only when men shall roll up the sky like
a hide, will there be an end of misery, unless God
has first been known 3 .

21. Through the power of his penance and
through the grace of God 4 5 has the wise Weta^va-
tara truly 6 proclaimed Brahman, the highest and
holiest, to the best of ascetics 6 , as approved b y
the company of A’fshi s.

1 Explained as Hira/zyagarbha.

2 Nirazzganazzz nirlepam.

3 Aankarananda reads tada .nvam avi^/zaya du/zkhasyanto bhavi-
shyati; VigTzanatman retains devam, but mentions dvam as a various
reading. Both have anto, not antam, like Roer. -Sankara seems
to have found na before bhavishyati, or to have read du/zkhanto na
bhavishyati, for he explains that there will be no end of misery,
unless God has first been known. It is possible, however, that the
same idea may be expressed in the text as we read it, so that it
should mean, Only when the impossible shall happen, such as the
sky being rolled up by men, will misery cease, unless God has been
discovered in the heart.

4 The MSS. read devaprasadat, which is more in keeping with
the character of this Upanishad.

5 Sarnyak may be both adverb and adjective in this sentence,
kakakshinyayena.

fi AtyWramin is explained by -Sankara as atyantam pugyatama-
jramibhya/z; and he adds, /foiturvidha bhikshavaj ia bahudakaku/i-
-f’akau, Haz;z$a/z paramahazzzsaj' -(’a yo ya/z pax£at sa uttama/z. Weber
(Indische Studien, II, 109) has himself corrected his mistake of
reading antylrramibhya/z, and translating it by neighbouring
hermits.

1 hese four stages in the life of a Sannyasin are the same to-day as
they were in the time of the Upanishads, and Dayananda Sarasvati

2 6 y

VI ADHYAYA, 23.

22. This highest mystery in the Vedanta, delivered
in a fotmer age, should not be given to one whose
passions have not been subdued, nor to one who is
not a son, or who is not a pupil \

23* If these truths have been told to a high-minded
man, who feels the highest devotion for God, and for
his Guru as for God, then they will shine forth,—then
they will shine forth indeed.

describes them in his autobiography, though in a different order:
1. Ku/i/fcika, living in a hut, or in a desolate place, and wearing a
red'ochre coloured garment, carrying a three-knotted bamboo rod,
and wearing the hair in the centre of the crown of the head, having
the sacied thread, and devoting oneself to the contemplation of
Parabiahma. 2. Bahudaka, one who lives quite apart from his family
and the world, maintains himself on alms collected at seven houses,
and weais the same kind of reddish garment. 3. Hawsa, the same
as in the preceding case, except the carrying of only a one-knotted
bamboo. 4. Paramahawsa, the same as the others ) but the ascetic
wears the sacred thread, and his hair and beard are quite long.
This is the highest of all orders. A Paramahawsa who shows him¬
self worthy is on the very threshold of becoming a Dikshita.

1 Cf. Brzh. Up. VI, 3, 12 ; Maitr. Up. VI, 29.

PRAvSWA-U PANISH AD.

PRAS^A-UPANISHAD.

First Question.

Adoration to the Highest Self! Hari/j, Om !

1. Suke^as 1 Bharadva^ya 2 , and Taivya Satyakama,
and Sauryayamn 3 Gargya, and Kausalya 4 5 A^vala-
yana, and Bhargava Vaidarbhi 6 , and Kabandhin
Ivatyayana, these were devoted to Brahman, firm in
Brahman, seeking for the Highest Brahman. They
thought that the venerable Pippalada could tell them
all that, and they therefore took fuel in their hands
(like pupils), and approached him.

2. That Ri shi said to them : ‘ Stay here a year
longer, with penance, abstinence, and faith; then
you may ask questions according to your pleasure,
and if we know them, we shall tell you all/

3 - Then G Kabandhin Katyayana approached him
and asked : ‘ Sir, from whence may these creatures
be born ?'

Sukej'as seems better than Suke.yan, and he is so called in the
sixth Pra.raa, in MS. Mill 74.

2 Bharadvaga, Aaivya, Gargya, A^valayana, Bhargava, and Katya¬
yana are, according to Aankara, names of gotras or families.

Suryasyapatyaw Saurya^, tadapatya;;* Aaury&ya/zi^. Dirgha/2
sulopaj ka. /U^andasa iti sa eva Sauryaya/zi.

4 Kausalyo namata^, kosalayam bhavo va.

5 Vaidarbhi is explained as vidarbhe^ prabhava/^, or Vidarbheshu
prabhava/2. Vidarbha, a country, south of the Vindhya mountains,
with Ku/^ina as its capital. Vaidarbha, a king of the Vidarbhas, is
mentioned in the Ait. Brahm. VII, 34. Vaidarbhi is a patronymic
of Vidarbha. See B. R. s. v.

6 After the year was over.

PRASiVA-UPANISHAD.

4. He replied : ‘ Pra^apati (the lord of creatures)
was desirous of creatures (prafa/z). He performed
penance 1 , and having performed penance, he pro¬
duces a pair, matter (rayi) and spirit (pr&zza), think¬
ing that they together should produce creatures for
him in many ways.

5 2 . The sun is spirit, matter is the moon. All
this, what has body and what has no body, is matter,
and therefore body indeed is matter.

6. Now Aditya, the sun, when he rises, goes
toward the East, and thus receives the Eastern
spirits into his rays. And when he illuminates the
South, the West, the North, the Zenith, the Nadir,
the intermediate quarters, and everything, he thus
receives all spirits into his rays.

7. Thus he rises, as Vahvanara, (belonging to all
men,) assuming all forms, as spirit, as fire. This
has been said in the following verse:

8 3 . (They knew) him who assumes all forms, the
golden 4 , who knows all things, who ascends highest,
alone in his splendour, and warms us; the thousand-
rayed, who abides in a hundred places, the spirit of
all creatures, the Sun, rises.

9. The year indeed is Pra^apati, and there are
two paths thereof, the Southern and the Northern.
Now those who here believe in sacrifices and pious
gifts as work done, gain the moon only as their

1 Or he meditated; see Upanishads, vol. i, p. 238, n. 3.

2 -Sankara explains, or rather obscures, this by saying that the
sun is breath, or the eater, or Agni, while matter is the food,
namely, Soma.

3 Cf. Maitr. Up. VI, 8.

4 Harb/am is explained as ramimantam, or as harati sarvesham
pramnam ayuwshi bhauman va rasan iti hari«aA I prefer to take
it in the sense of yellow, or golden.

I QUESTION, 15.

273

(future) world, and return again. Therefore the
^shis who desire offspring, go to the South, and
that path of the Fathers is matter (rayi).

10. But those who have sought the Self by
penance, abstinence, faith, and knowledge, gain by
the Northern path Aditya, the sun. This is the
home of the spirits, the immortal, free from danger,
the highest. From thence they do not return, for
it is the end. Thus says the ^loka 1 :

11. Some call him the father with five feet (the
five seasons), and with twelve shapes (the twelve
months), the giver of rain in the highest half of
heaven; others again say that the sage is placed in
the lower half, in the chariot 2 with seven wheels
and six spokes.

12. The month is Pra^apati ; its dark half is
matter, its bright half spirit. Therefore some i^z’shis

perform sacrifice in the bright half, others in the
other half.

13. Day and Night 3 are Pra^apati; its day is
spirit, its night matter. Those who unite in love
by day waste their spirit, but to unite in love by
night is right.

14. Food is Prajfapati. Hence proceeds seed,
and from it these creatures are born.

15* Those therefore who observe this rule of
Pra^apati (as laid down in ^ 13), produce a pair,
and to them belongs this Brahma-world here 4 . But

Rig-veda I, 164, 12. We ought to read upare vi^aksha/zam.

Sapta^akre, i.e. rathe. The seven wheels are explained as the
rays or horses of the sun; or as half-years, seasons, months, half¬
months, days, nights, and muhurtas.

3 Taken as one, as a Nychthemeron.

4 In the moon, reached by the path of the Fathers.

[15] T

274 PRASNA-UPANISHAD.

those in whom dwell penance, abstinence, and
truth,

16. To them belongs that pure Brahma-world,
to them, namely, in whom there is nothing crooked,
nothing false, and no guile.’

Second Question.

1. Then Bhargava Vaidarbhi asked him: ‘Sir,
How many gods 1 keep what has thus been created,
how many manifest this 2 , and who is the best of
them ?'

2. He replied : ‘The ether is that god, the wind,
fire, water, earth, speech, mind, eye, and ear. These,
when they have manifested (their power), contend
and say: We (each of us) support this body and
keep it 3 .

3 4 . Then Pra^a (breath, spirit, life), as the best,
said to them : Be not deceived, I alone, dividing
myself fivefold, support this body and keep it.

4. They were incredulous; so he, from pride, did
as if he were going out from above. Thereupon,

1 Deva h, powers, organs, senses.

2 Their respective power.

3 This is .Sankara's explanation, in which ba«a is taken to mean
the same as jarira, body. But there seems to be no authority for
such a meaning, and Anandagiri tries in vain to find an etymological
excuse for it. Ba«a or Vawa generally means an arrow, or, parti¬
cularly in Brahma«a writings, a harp with many strings. I do not
see how an arrow could be used as an appropriate simile here, but
a harp might, if we take avash/abhya in the sense of holding the
frame of the instrument, and vidh&rayama// in the sense of stretch¬
ing and thereby modulating it.

4 On this dispute of the organs of sense, see Brfh. Up. VI, 1
p. 201 ; AfMnd. Up. V, 1 (S. B. E., vol. i, p. 7 2 )-

II QUESTION, IO.

2 75

as he went out, all the others went out, and as he
returned, all the others returned. As bees go out
when their queen 1 goes out, and return when she
returns, thus (did) speech, mind, eye, and ear; and,
being satisfied, they praise Pra^a, saying:

5 * Agni (fire), he shines as Surya (sun),

he is Par^anya (rain), the powerful (Indra), he is
Vayu (wind), he is the earth, he is matter, he is

he is what is and what is not, and what
is immortal.

6. As spokes in the nave of a wheel, everything
is fixed in Pra;za, the verses of the jRzg-ve da, Ya^yur-

veda, Sama-veda the sacrifice, the Kshatriyas, and
the Brahmans.

7. As Pra^apati (lord of creatures) thou movest
about in the womb, thou indeed art born again.
To thee, the Pra;^a, these creatures bring offerings,
to thee who dwellest with the other pranas (the
organs of sense).

8. Thou art the best carrier for the Gods, thou
art the first offering 2 to the Fathers. Thou art the
true work of the iffshis 3 , of the Atharvangiras.

9. O Pra;za, thou art Indra by thy light, thou art
Rudra, as a protector ; thou movest in the sky, thou
art the sun, the lord of lights.

10. When thou showerest down rain, then, O Pra^a,
these creatures of thine are delighted 4 , hoping that
there will be food, as much as they desire.

1 In Sanskrit it is madhukararaga, king of the bees.

2 When a niddha is offered to the Pitr/s.

3 Explained as the eye and the other organs of sense which the
chief Prarca supports; but it is probably an old verse, here applied
to a special purpose.

4 Another reading is prawate, they breathe.

T 2

276

PRASNA-UPANISHAD.

11. Thou art a Vratya 1 , O Pra^a, the only Ris hi 2 ,
the consumer of everything, the good lord. We are
the givers of what thou hast to consume, thou, O
MatarLva 3 , art our father.

12. Make propitious that body of thine which
dwells in speech, in the ear, in the eye, and which
pervades the mind; do not go away!

13. All this is in the power of Pra^a, whatever
exists in the three heavens. Protect us like a
mother her sons, and give us happiness and wisdom/

Third Question.

1. Then Kausalya A^valayana asked : ‘ Sir, whence
is that Pra;/a (spirit) born ? How does it come
into this body ? And how does it abide, after it
has divided itself? How does it go out? How
does it support what is without 4 , and how what is
within ?’

2. He replied: e You ask questions more difficult,
but you are very fond of Brahman, therefore I shall
tell it you.

3. This Pra;za (spirit) is born of the Self. Like
the shadow thrown on a man, this (the pra^a) is

1 A person for whom the sa7/zskaras, the sacramental and initiatory
rites, have not been performed. Aankara says that, as he was the
first born, there was no one to perform them for him, and that he
is called Vratya, because he was pure by nature. This is all very
doubtful.

2 Agni is said to be the ivhshi of the Atharvawas.

3 Instead of the irregular vocative Mfitarkva, there is another
reading, Matamvana/;, i.e. thou art the father of Mataruvan, the
wind, and therefore of the whole world.

4 All creatures and the gods.

Ill QUESTION, 6.

2 77

spread out over it (the Brahman) 1 * . By the work of
the mind- does it come into this body.

4 - As a king- commands officials; saying to them :
Rule these villages or those, so does that Prazza
(spirit) dispose the other pr&zzas, each for their
separate work.

5- The Apana (the down-breathing) in the organs
of excretion and generation; the Pra/za himself
dwells in eye and ear, passing through mouth and
nose. . In the middle is the Samana 3 (the on-
breathing) ; it carries what has been sacrificed as

food equally (over the body), and the seven lights
proceed from it.

6. The Self 4 5 is in the heart. There are the 101
arteries, and in each of them there are a hundred
(smaller veins), and for each of these branches
there are 72,000 s . In these the Vyana (the back-
breathing) moves.

Over Brahman, i.e. the Self, the parama purusha, the akshara,
the satya. The prazza being called a shadow, is thereby implied to
be unreal (anzYta). *Sahkara.

Manokz'zta is explained as an arsha sandhi. It means the good
or evil deeds, which are the work of the mind.

3 I keep to the usual translation of Samana by on-breathing, though
it is here explained in a different sense. Samana is here supposed
to be between prazza and apana, and to distribute the food equally,
samam, over the body. The seven lights are explained as the two
eyes, the two ears, the two nostrils, and the mouth.

4 Here the Lingatma or (rivatmd.

5 A hundred times 101 would give us 10,100, and each multiplied
by 72,000 would give us a sum total of 727,200,000 veins, or, if we
add the principal veins, 727,210,201. Anandagiri makes the sum
total, 72 ftofis, 72 lakshas, six thousands, two hundred and one,
where the six of the thousands seems to be a mistake for dajasa-
hasram. In the Brzhadar. Upanishad II, r, 19, we read of 72,000
arteries, likewise in Yag/zavalkya III, 108. See also Brzh. Up. IV,

278 PR AS 7 V A- U P ANIS H AD.

7. Through one of them, the Udana (the out-
breathing) leads (us) upwards to the good world by
good work, to the bad world by bad work, to the
world of men by both.

8. The sun rises as the external Prazza, for it
assists the Prazza in the eye * 1 . The deity that exists
in the earth, is there in support of man’s Apana
(down-breathing). The ether between (sun and
earth) is the Samana (on-breathing), the air is Vyana
(back-breathing).

9. Light is the Udana (out-breathing), and there¬
fore he whose light has gone out comes to a new
birth with his senses absorbed in the mind.

10. Whatever his thought (at the time of death)
with that he goes back to Prazza, and the Pra/za,
united with light 2 , together with the self (the^ivatma)
leads on to the world, as deserved.

11. He who, thus knowing, knows Pra/za, his
offspring does not perish, and he becomes immortal.
Thus says the Aloka :

12. He who has known the origin 3 , the entry,
the place, the fivefold distribution, and the internal
state 4 of the Pra/za, obtains immortality, yes, obtains
immortality.’

3, 20; JMnd. Up. VI, 5, 3, comm.; Kaush. Up. IV, 20; Ka//za
Up. VI, 16.

1 Without the sun the eye could not see.

2 With Udana, the out-breathing.

3 This refers to the questions asked in verse 1, and answered in
the verses which follow.

4 The adhy&tma, as opposed to the v&hya, mentioned in verse 1.
Ayati instead of ayati is explained by /Uz&ndasaz/z hrasvatvam.

IV QUESTION, 3.

279

Fourth Question.

1. Then Sauryayamn Gargya asked: ‘Sir, What
are they that sleep in this man, and what are they
that are awake in him ? What power (deva) is it
that sees dreams ? Whose is the happiness ? On
what do all these depend ? ’

2. He replied : ‘ O Gargya, As all the rays of the
sun, when it sets, are gathered up in that disc of
light, and as they, when the sun rises again and
again, come forth, so is all this (all the senses)
gathered up in the highest faculty (deva) 1 , the mind.
Therefore at that time that man does not hear, see,
smell, taste, touch, he does not speak, he does not
take, does not enjoy, does not evacuate, does not
move about. He sleeps, that is what people say.

3. The fires of the pranas are, as it were 2 , awake
in that town (the body). The Apana is the Garha-
patya fire, the Vyana the Anvaharyapa/£ana fire; and
because it is taken out of the Garhapatya fire, which
is fire for taking out 3 , therefore the Pra^a is the

A

Ahavaniya fire 4 .

1 See note to verse 5. 2 We ought to read agnaya iva.

3 Prazzayana, prazziyate ’smad iti prazzayano garhapatyo 'gniA

4 The comparison between the prazzas and the fires or altars is
not very clear. As to the fires or altars, there is the G&rhapatya,
placed in the South-west, the household fire, which is always kept
burning, from which the fire is taken to the other altars. The
Anv^Mryapa^ana, commonly called the Dakshizza fire, placed in
the South, used chiefly for oblations to the forefathers. The
Ahavaniya fire, placed in the East, and used for sacrifices to the
gods.

Now the Ap&na is identified with the Garhapatya fire, no reason
being given except afterwards, when it is said that the Prdzza is
the Ahavaniya fire, being taken out of the Garhapatya, here called

2 SO PRASiVA-UPANISHAD.

4. Because it carries equally these two oblations,
the out-breathing and the in-breathing, the Samana
is he (the Hot ri priest) * 1 . The mind is the sacri¬
fice^ the Udana is the reward of the sacrifice, and
it leads the sacrificer every day (in deep sleep) to
Brahman.

5. There that god 2 (the mind) enjoys in sleep
greatness. What has been seen, he 2 sees again ;
what has been heard, he hears again ; what has been
enjoyed in different countries and quarters, he enjoys
again; what has been seen and not seen, heard and
not heard, enjoyed and not enjoyed, he sees it all;
he, being all, sees.

6. And when he is overpowered by light 3 , then
that god sees no dreams, and at that time that
happiness arises in his body.

7. And, O friend, as birds go to a tree to roost;
thus all this rests in the Highest Atman,—

8. The earth and its subtile elements, the water
and its subtile elements, the light and its subtile
elements, the air and its subtile elements, the ether
and its subtile elements ; the eye and what can be

pra^ayana, in the same manner as the prawa proceeds in sleep
from the apana. The Vyana is identified with the Dakshwagni,
the Southern fire, because it issues from the heart through an
aperture on the right.

1 The name of the Hotn' priest must be supplied. He is sup¬
posed to carry two oblations equally to the Ahavaniya, and in the
same way the Vyana combines the two breathings, the in and out
breathings.

2 The ^ivatman under the guise of manas. The Sanskrit word
is deva, god, used in the sense of an invisible power, but as a
masculine. The commentator uses manodeva-6, p. 212, 1. 5. I
generally translate deva, if used in this sense, by faculty, but the
context required a masculine. See verse 2.

3 In the state of profound sleep or sushupti.

V QUESTION, 2.

28l

seen, the ear and what can be heard, the nose and
what can be smelled, the taste and what can be
tasted, the skin and what can be touched, the voice
and what can be spoken, the hands and what can
be grasped, the feet and what can be walked, the
mind and what can be perceived, intellect (buddhi)
and what can be conceived, personality and what
can be personified, thought and what can be thought,
light and what can be lighted up, the Pra/za and
what is to be supported by it.

9. For he it is who sees, hears, smells, tastes,
perceives, conceives, acts, he whose essence is know¬
ledge 1 , the person, and he dwells in the highest,
indestructible Self,—

10. He who knows that indestructible being, obtains
(what is) the highest and indestructible, he without
a shadow, without a body, without colour, bright,—
yes, O friend, he who knows it, becomes all-knowino-

o 7

becomes all. On this there is this Sloka :

11. He, O friend, who knows that indestructible
being wherein the true knower, the vital spirits
(pra/zas), together with all the powers (deva), and
the elements rest, he, being all-knowing, has pene¬
trated all.’

Fifth Question.

1. Then 6aivya Satyakama asked him: ‘ Sir, if some
one among men should meditate here until death
on the syllable Om, what would he obtain by it ?’

2. He replied : ‘ O Satyakama, the syllable Om
(A U M) is the highest and also the other Brahman ;

Buddhi and the rest are the instruments of knowledge, but
there is the knower, the person, in the Highest Self.

282

PRASiVA-UPANISIIAD.

therefore he who knows it arrives by the same
means 1 at one of the two.

3. If he meditate on one Matra (the A) 2 , then,
being enlightened by that only, he arrives quickly
at the earth 3 . The Rik-ve .rses lead him to the
world of men, and being endowed there with penance,
abstinence, and faith, he enjoys greatness.

4. If he meditate with 4 two Matras (A + U) he
arrives at the Manas 5 , and is led up by the Ya^us-
verses to the sky, to the Soma-world. Having enjoyed
greatness in the Soma-world, he returns again.

5. Again, he who meditates with this syllable
AUM of three Matras, on the Highest Person, he
comes to light and to the sun. And as a snake is
freed from its skin, so is he freed from evil. He
is led up by the Saman-verses to the Brahma-
world 6 ; and from him, full of life (Hira^yagarbha,
the lord of the Satya-loka 7 ), he learns 8 to see the
all-pervading, the Highest Person. And there are
these two Ylokas:

6. The three Matras (A + U + M), if employed
separate, and only joined one to another, are mortal 9 ;

1 Ayatanena, alambanena.

2 Dipikayazzz Va/£aspatinaivakaramatram ityeva vyakhyatam.

3 Sampadyate prapnoti ^anmeti .resha/z.

4 -Srutau trztiya dvitiyarthe.

5 Literally the mind, but here meant for the moon, as before.
It is clear that manasi belongs to sampadyate, not, as the Dipika
and Roer think, to dhyayita. Some take it for svapnabhimani
Hirazzyagarbha/z.

6 The world of Hirazzyagarbha^, called the Satyaloka.

7 On a later addition, bringing in the Om as consisting of three
Matras and a half, see Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 453; Roer, p. 138.

8 Tadupade^eneti yavat.

9 Because in their separate form, A, U, M, they do not mean
the Highest Brahman.

VI QUESTION, 4.

283

but in acts, external, internal, or intermediate, if
well performed, the sage trembles not 1 2 .

7. Through the ^Z/£-verses he arrives at this
world, through the Ya^us-verses at the sky, through
the Saman-verses at that which the poets teach,—he
arrives at this by means of the Onkara; the wise
arrives at that which is at rest, free from decay, from
death, from fear,—the Highest.’

Sixth Question.

1. Then Sukei'as Bharadva^a asked him, saying:

‘ Sir, Hira/zyanabha, the prince of Kosala 3 , came to
me and asked this question: Do you know the
person of sixteen parts, O Bharadva^a ? I said to
the prince : I do not know him; if I knew him,
how should I not tell you ? Surely, he who speaks
what is untrue withers. away to the very r root;
therefore I will not say what is untrue. Then he
mounted his chariot and went away silently. Now
I ask you, where is that person ?’

2. He replied : ‘ Friend, that person is here within
the body, he in whom these sixteen parts arise.

3. He reflected : What is it by whose departure
I shall depart, and by^ whose staying I shall stay ?

4. He sent forth (created) Pra/^a (spirit) 3 ; from

1 The three acts are explained as waking, slumbering, and deep
sleep; or as three kinds of pronunciation, tara-mandra-madhyama.
They are probably meant for Yoga exercises in which the three
Matras of Om are used as one word, and as an emblem of the
Highest Brahman.

2 .Sankara explains Kausalya by Kosalayam bhava h. Ananda-
tirtha gives the same explanation. Kosala is the capital, generally
called Ayodhya. There is no authority for the palatal .r.

3 .Sankara explains pra;za by sarvapra;zo Hirawyagarbha (sarva-
pramkara/zadharam antaratmanam).

PRASWA-UPANISHAD.

Prana Yraddha (faith) 1 , ether, air, light, water, earth,
sense, mind, food ; from food came vigour, penance,
hymns, sacrifice, the worlds, and in the worlds the
name 2 also.

5. As these flowing rivers 3 that go towards the
ocean, when they have reached the ocean, sink into
it, their name and form are broken, and people speak
of the ocean only, exactly thus these sixteen parts of
the spectator that go towards the person (purusha),
when they have reached the person, sink into him,
their name and form are broken, and people speak
of the person only, and he becomes without parts
and immortal. On this there is this verse :

6. That person who is to be known, he in whom
these parts rest, like spokes in the nave of a wheel,
you know him, lest death should hurt you.’

7. Then he (Pippalada) said to them : ‘ So far do
I know this Highest Brahman, there is nothing
higher than it.’

8. And they praising him, said : ‘ You, indeed, are
our father, you who carry us from our ignorance to
the other shore.’

Adoration to the highest Rzs his!

Adoration to the highest AVshis!

Tat sat. Hari/z, Om !

Faith is supposed to make all beings act rightly.

Nama stands here for namarupe, name (concept) and form.
See before, p. 259.

3 Cf. Mu nd. Up. IV, 2, 8; X/iand. Up. VIII, 10.

MAITRAYAAA-BRAhMAAA

UPANISHAD.

MAITRAYAYA-BRAHMAYA-

UPANISHAD.

First Prapa^aka.

1. The laying of the formerly-described sacrificial
fires 1 is indeed the sacrifice of Brahman. Therefore
let the sacrificer, after he has laid those fires, medi¬
tate on the Self. Thus only does the sacrificer
become complete and faultless.

But who is to be meditated on ? He who is
called Prazza (breath). Of him there is this story :

2. A King, named Bz^zhadratha, having established
his son in his sovereignty 2 , went into the forest,
because he considered this body as transient, and
had obtained freedom from all desires. Havino-
performed the highest penance, he stands there, with
uplifted arms, looking up to the sun. At the end
of a thousand (days) 3 , the Saint .Aakayanya 4 , who
knew the Self, came near 5 , burning with splendour,

1 The performance of all the sacrifices, described in the Maitra-
yawa-brahma/za, is to lead up in the end to a knowledge of Brahman,
by rendering a man fit for receiving the highest knowledge. See
Manu YI, 82: ‘All that has been declared (above) depends on medi¬
tation; for he who is not proficient in the knowledge of the Self
reaps not the full reward of the performance of rites/

2 Instead of vira^-ye, a doubtful word, and occurring nowhere
else, m. reads vaira^-ye.

3 Or years, if we read sahasrasya instead of sahasrahasya.

4 The descendant of -Sakayana. Saint is perhaps too strong ; it
means a holy, venerable man, and is frequently applied to a Buddha.

5 Both M. and m. add mune/$ before antikam, whereas the com¬
mentary has Y&gnzh.

288

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

like a fire without smoke. He said to the King :
‘ Rise, rise ! Choose a boon !’

The King, bowing before him, said : ‘ O Saint, I
know not the Self, thou knowest the essence (of the
Self). We have heard so. Teach it us.’

Sakayanya replied : ‘ This was achieved of yore ;
but what thou askest is difficult to obtain 1 . O
Aikshvaka, choose other pleasures.’

The King, touching the Saint’s feet with his head,
recited this Gatha :

3. ‘ O Saint, What is the use of the enjoyment of
pleasures in this offensive, pithless body—a mere
mass of bones, skin, sinews, marrow 2 , flesh, seed,
blood, mucus, tears, phlegm, ordure, water 3 , bile,
and slime! What is the use of the enjoyment of
pleasures in this body which is assailed by lust,
hatred, greed, delusion, fear, anguish, jealousy, sepa¬
ration from what is loved, union with what is not
loved 4 , hunger, thirst, old age, death, illness, grief,
and other evils!

4. And we see that all this is perishable, as these
flies, gnats, and other insects, as herbs and trees 5 ,

1 Though the commentator must have read etad vrz'ttam purastad
dufoakyam etat praszzam, yet pra^am as a neuter is very strange.
M. reads etad vrz’ttam purastat, duwakama pri/V’/za pra^z/am ;
m. reads etad vratam purastad asakyam ma prz'/’/za pra^/zam
aikshvaka, &c. This suggests the reading, etad vrzttam purastad
duAs-akam ma przM/za prajvzam, i.e. this was settled formerly, do
not ask a difficult or an impossible question.

2 Read m% 4 . 3 M. adds vata before pitta; not m.

4 An expression that often occurs in Buddhist literature. See

also Manu VI, 62: 'On their separation from those whom they
love, and their union with those whom they hate; on their strength
overpowered by old age, and their bodies racked with disease/

5 The Sandhi vanaspatayodbhuta for vanaspataya udbhuta is
anomalous. M. reads vanaspatayo bhutapradhvazzzsina/z.

T PRAPArtfAKA, 4.

289

growing and decaying. And what of these ? There
are other great ones, mighty wielders of bows, rulers
of empires, Sudyumna, Bhuridyumna, Indradyumna,
Kuvalaya«?va, Yauvana^va, Vadhryai'va, A^vapati l ,
Sasabindu, Hari^andra, Ambarisha 2 , Nahusha,
Ananata, Yaryati, Yayati, Anara^ya 3 , Ukshasena 4 ,
&c., and kings such as Marutta, Bharata (Daush-
yanti), and others, who before the eyes of their whole
family surrendered the greatest happiness, and
passed on from this world to that. And what of
these ? There are other great ones. We see the
destruction 5 of Gandharvas, Asuras 6 , Yakshas, Ra-
kshasas, Bhutas, Ga;/as, PBa/§as, snakes, and vam¬
pires. And what of these ? There is the drying
up of other great oceans, the falling of mountains,
the moving of the pole-star, the cutting of the wind-
ropes (that hold the stars), the submergence of the
earth, and the departure of the gods (suras) from
their place. In such a world as this, what is the
use of the enjoyment of pleasures, if he who has
fed 7 on them is seen 8 to return (to this world) again

1 M. carries on a^vapatij-ajabinduharu^andrambarisha.

After Ambarisha, M. reads Nabhushananutu^ayyatiyayatyanara-
zzyakshasenadayo. Nahusha (Naghusba?) is -the father of Naryati ;
Nabhaga, the father of Ambarisha. These names are so care¬
lessly written that even the commentator says that the text is
either Mandasa or pramadika. Ananata is a mere conjecture. It
occurs as the name of a Ri shi in Rig-veda IX, in.

3 Anarazzya, mentioned in the Mahabharata, I, 230.

4 M. reads anara/zyakshasena.

5 M. and m. read nirodhanam. 6 M. adds Apsarasas.

7 M. and m. read djritasya, but the commentator explains aji-

tasya.

8 Here we have the Maitrayazza Sandhi, dmyata iti, instead
of dmyata iti; see von Schroeder, Maitraya/zi Sazzzhita, p. xxviii.
M. and m. read dmyata.

[i 5 ]

U

29 °

M AITR AY AiVA-BRA H M AiVA-UPANIS H AD.

and aeain! Dei^n therefore to take me out! In

o o

this world I am like a frog in a dry well. 0 Saint,
thou art my way, thou art my way.’

Second Prapa 777 aka.

r. Then the Saint Sakayanya, well pleased, said
to the King : ‘ Great King Br/hadratha, thou banner
of the race of Ikshvaku, quickly obtaining a know¬
ledge of Self, thou art happy, and art renowned by
the name of Marut, the wind h This indeed is thy
Self 1 2 /

‘ Which 3 , O Saint,’ said the King.

Then the Saint said to him :

2. ‘He 4 who, without stopping the out-breathing 5 ,
proceeds upwards (from the sthula to the sukshma
^arira), and who, modified (by impressions), and yet
not modified 6 7 , drives away the darkness (of error),
he is the Self. Thus said the Saint Maitri V And
Aakayanya said to the King EWhadratha : ‘He who
in perfect rest, rising from this body (both from
the sthula and sukshma), and reaching the highest

1 Pz'zshadafva in the Veda is another name of the Maruts, the
storm gods. Afterwards the king is called Marut, VI, 30.

2 This sentence is called a Sutra by the commentator to VI, 32.

3 M. reads Kathaya me katamo bhavan id.

4 M. leaves out atha.

5 One might read avish/ambhanena, in the sense of while pre¬
venting the departure of the vital breath, as in the Brz'h. Ar. VI, 3,
prazzena rakshann avaram kulayam.

6 M. reads vyathamano ’vyathamanas.

7 M. leaves out Maitri/z-ity evaz n hyaha. The commentator ex¬
plains Maitrir by mitraya apatyam rzshir maitrir maitreya. In a later
passage (II, 3) M. reads Bhagavata Maitrezza, likewise the Anubhuti-
praka^a.

II PRAPA7WAKA, 4-

291

light 1 , comes forth in his own form, he is the Self 2
(thus said ^dkayanya); this is the immortal, the
fearless, this is Brahman.’

3 - ‘ Now then this is the science of Brahman, and
the science of all Upanishads, O King, which was
told us by the Saint Maitri 3 . I shall tell it to thee :

We hear (in the sacred records) that there were
once the Valakhilyas 4 , who had left off all evil, who
were vigorous and passionless. They said to the Pra-
^apati Kratu : “ O Saint, this body is without intel¬
ligence, like a cart. To what supernatural being
belongs this great power by which such a body has
been made intelligent ? Or who is the driver ?
What thou knowest, O Saint, tell us that 5 .” ’ Pra^a-
pati answered and said :

4. ‘He who in the Nruti is called “Standing
above,” like passionless ascetics 6 amidst the objects
of the world, he, indeed, the pure, clean, undeveloped,
tranquil, breathless, bodiless 7 , endless, imperishable,
firm, everlasting, unborn, independent one, stands in
his own greatness, and by him has this body been
made intelligent, and he is also the driver of it.’

1 M. adds svayam gy otir upasampadya.

2 M. reads esha for ity esha, which seems better.

3 M. reads Maitrezza vyakhyata.

4 M. M., Translation of Rig-veda, Preface, p. xxxiv.

5 M. adds : bruhiti te ho/£ur Bhagavan katham anena vasya/zz yat
Bhagavan vetsy etad asmaka m bruhiti tan hova/£eti.

6 The commentator allows urdhvaretasasa^ to be taken as a
vocative also.

7 Niratma is explained by the commentator as thoughtless, with¬
out volition, &c. But atma is frequently used for body also, and
this seems more appropriate here. M., however, reads annatma,
and this is the reading explained in the Anubhutiprakaj'a, p. 228,
ver. 60. This might mean the Atman-which has not yet assumed
the quality of a personal god. See VI, 28; VI, 31.

U 2

292

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISIIAD.

They said : ‘ O Saint, How has this been made
intelligent by such a being as this which has no
desires 1 , and how is he its driver?’ He answered
them and said:

5. ‘ That Self which is very small, invisible, in¬
comprehensible, called Purusha, dwells of his own
will here in part 2 ; just as a man who is fast asleep
awakes of his own will 3 . And this part (of the Self)
which is entirely intelligent, reflected in man (as the
sun in different vessels of water), knowing the body
(kshetra^a), attested by his conceiving, willing, and
believing 4 , is Pra^apati (lord of creatures), called
Vffva. By him, the intelligent, is this body made
intelligent, and he is the driver thereof.’

They said to him : ‘ O Saint 5 6 , if this has been
made intelligent by such a being as this, which has
no desires, and if he is the driver thereof, how was
it ? ’ He answered them and said :

6. ‘In the beginning Pra^apati (the lord of
creatures) stood alone. He had no happiness, when
alone. Meditating G on himself, he created many

1 The reading anish//zena is explained by the commentator as free
from any local habitation or attachment. He also mentions the
various readings anish/ena, free from wishes, and a/zisb/Xena, the
smallest. M. reads aniZZXena, and this seems better than anish/ena.
The Anubhutipraka-ra reads likewise aniZXXasya.

2 I read buddhipurvam, and again with M. suptasyeva buddhi¬
purvam. I also read azzz^ena without iti, as in M. The simile seems
to be that a man, if he likes, can wake himself at any time of
night, and this ‘ if he likes * is expressed by buddhipurvam. See
Anubhutiprak&ra, vv. 67, 68.

3 M. reads vibodhayati, atha.

4 See Maitr. Up. V, 2; Cowell's Translation, pp. 246, 256;
Vedantaparibhasha, ed. A. Venis, in the Pandit, IV, p. no.

5 M. adds: bhagavann idrAasya katham aftuena vartanam iti tan
hovaXa.

6 M. reads abhidhyayan.

II PRAPA71HAKA, 6.

293

creatures. He looked on them and saw they were,
like a stone, without understanding, and standing
like a lifeless post. He had no happiness. He
thought, I shall enter 1 within, that they may awake.
Making himself like air (vayu) 2 he entered within.
Being one, he could not do it. Then dividing him¬
self fivefold, he is called Pra/za, Apana, Samana,
Udana, Vyana. Now that 3 air which rises up¬
wards, is Prazza. That which moves downwards,
is Apana. That by which these two are supposed
to be held, is Vyana. That 4 which carries the
grosser material of food to the Apana, and brings
the subtler material to each limb, has the name
Samana. [After these (Prazza, Apana, Samana) comes
the work of the Vyana, and between them (the Prfizza,
Apana, and Samana on one side and the Vyana on
the other) comes the rising of the Udana.] That
which brings up or carries down 5 what has been
drunk and eaten, is the Udana 6 .

Now the Upazzzsu-vessel (or prazza) depends on
the Antaryama-vessel (apana) and the Antaryama-

1 It is better to read with M. vbaniti.

2 M. vayum iva. 3 M. Atha yo yam.

4 M. reads: yo ’yaw sthavish/^am annaw dhatum annasyapane

sthapayaty azzishz^azzz /hinge ’nge sawnayati esha vava sa samano
’tha yo ’yam. Leaving out annam, this seems the right reading.
The whole sentence from uttaram to udanasya is left out in M.

5 M. nigirati /£aisho vava sa udano ’tha yenaitas sira anuvy&pta
esha vava sa vyana/z.

6 The views of these five kinds of wind differ considerably.
Here the commentator explains that the prazza and apana, the up-
breathing and down-breathing, keep the bodily warmth alive, as
bellows keep up a fire. The food cooked in it is distributed by
the Samana, so that the coarse material becomes ordure, the middle
flesh, the subtle material mind (manas). The udana brings up
phlegm, &c., while the Vyana gives strength to the whole body.

294

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

vessel (apana) on the Upa;;mi-vessel 1 (prajtfa), and
between these two the self-resplendent (Self) pro¬
duced heat 2 . This heat is the purusha (person),
and this purusha is Agtii Vakrvanara. And thus
it is said elsewhere 3 : “ Agni Vakrvanara is the fire
within man by which the food that is eaten is cooked,
i.e. digested. Its noise is that which one hears, if
one covers one’s ears. When a man is on the point
of departing this life, he does not hear that noise.”

Now he 4 , having divided himself fivefold, is
hidden in a secret place (buddhi), assuming the
nature of mind, having the pranas as his body, re¬
splendent, having true concepts, and free like ether 5 6 .
Feeling even thus that he has not attained his object,
he thinks from within the interior of the heart G ,
“ Let me enjoy objects.” Therefore, having first
broken open these five apertures (of the senses), he
enjoys the objects by means of the five reins. This
means that these perceptive organs (ear, skin,
eye, tongue, nose) are his reins; the active organs
(tongue (for speaking), hands, feet, anus, generative
organ) his horses; the body his chariot, the mind
the charioteer, the whip being the temperament.
Driven by that whip, this body goes round like the

1 Two sacrificial vessels (graha) placed on either side of the stone
on which the Soma is squeezed, and here compared to the Pra;/a
and Apana, between which the Self (^aitanyatma) assumes heat.

2 M. reads tayor antara/e /f’aush^yam prasuvat.

3 See Br/hadara;zyaka Up. V, 9; A 7 zand. Up. Ill, 13, 8.

The Vauvanara or purusha, according to the commentator, but
originally the Pra^apati, who had made himself like air, and divided
himself into five vital airs.

Thus the atma, with his own qualities and those which he
assumes, becomes a living being.

6 M. reads esho 'sya hrzdantare tishMann.

Ill PRAPArtfAKA, I.

295

wheel driven by the potter. This body is made
intelligent, and he is the driver thereof.

This 1 is indeed the Self, who seeming to be filled
with desires, and seeming to be overcome 2 by bright
or dark fruits of action, wanders about in every
body (himself remaining free). Because he is not
manifest, because he is infinitely small, because he
is invisible, because he cannot be grasped, because
he is attached to nothing, therefore he, seeming to
be changing, an agent in that which is not (prakrzti),
is in reality not an agent and unchanging. He is
pure, firm, stable, undefiled 3 , unmoved, free from
desire, remaining a spectator, resting in himself.
Having concealed himself in the cloak of the three
qualities he appears as the enjoyer of rzta, as the
enjoyer of ri ta (of his good works).’

Third Prapatvtaka.

1. The Valakhilyas said to Pra^apati Kratu:
* O Saint, if thou thus showest the greatness of that
Self, then who is that other different one, also called
Self 4 , who really overcome by bright and dark
fruits of action, enters on a good or bad birth ?

1 M. reads : Sa va esha atmeti hcwann iva sitasitai/z. This seems
better than luanti kavaya/^, which hardly construes.

2 M. reads abhibhuyamanay iva, which again is better than ana-
bhibhuta iva, for he seems to be overcome, but is not, just as he
seems to be an agent, but is not. See also III, 1.

3 M. has alepo.

4 The pure Self, called atma, brahma, £inmatram, pra^zzanagha-
nam, &c., after entering what he had himself created, and no longer
distinguishing himself from the created things (bhuta), is called
Bhutatma.

296

MAITRAYAAA-BRAHMAWA-UPANISHAD.

Downward or upward is his course \ and overcome
by the pairs (distinction between hot and cold, plea¬
sure and pain, &c.) he roams about V

2. Pra^apati Kratu replied : ‘ There is indeed that
other 1 2 3 different one, called the elemental Self (Bhu-
tatma), who, overcome by bright and dark fruits of
action, enters on a good or bad birth : downward or
upward is his course, and overcome by the pairs he
roams about. And this is his explanation : The five
Tanmatras 4 5 (sound, touch, form, taste, smell) are
called Bhuta ; also the five Mahabhutas (gross ele¬
ments) are called Bhuta. Then the aggregate 6 of all
these is called ^arira, body °. And lastly he of whom
it was said that he dwelt in the body 7 , he is called
Bhutatma, the elemental Self. Thus his immortal
Self 8 is like a drop of water on a lotus leaf 9 , and
he himself is overcome by the qualities of nature.
Then 10 11 , because he is thus overcome, he becomes
bewildered, and because he is bewildered, he saw
not the creator, the holy Lord, abiding within
himself. Carried along by the waves of the quali¬
ties n , darkened in his imaginations, unstable, fickle,

1 reads here and afterwards avakam urdhva m va gatidvandvai/z.

2 M. adds at the end, paribhramatiti katama esha iti, tan hova/teti,

and leaves it out at the end of § 2.

M. here reads avara. 4 M. reads tanmatrazzi.

5 M. reads teshazzz samudayas talariram.

The commentator distinguishes between linga-^arira, consisting
of prazzas, indriyas, the anta^karazza, and the shkshmabhutas; and
the sthula-jarira, consisting of the five Mahabhutas.

M. reads jariram ity uktam.

M. reads athasti tasya^ bindur iva.

It sticks to it, yet it can easily run off again.

M. leads Ato, and the commentator explains atho by ata/z
kara7/at, adding sandhis ^andasa/^.

11 See VI, 30.

Ill PRAPAT77AKA, 3 .

297

crippled, full of desires, vacillating, he enters into
belief, believing “ I am he,” c ‘ this is mine 1 ; ” he binds
his Self by his Self, as a bird with a net, and over¬
come afterwards by the fruits of what he has done,
he enters on a good and bad birth * downward or
upward is his course, and overcome by the pairs he
roams about/

They asked : Which is it ? ’ And he answered
them :

3 * This also has elsewhere been said ! He who
acts, is the elemental Self; he who causes to act by
means of the organs 2 , is the inner man (anta/^puru-
sha). l\ow as even a ball of iron, pervaded (over¬
come) by fire, and hammered by smiths, becomes
manifold (assumes different forms, such as crooked,
round, large, small 3 ), thus the elemental Self, per¬
vaded (overcome) by the inner man, and hammered
by the qualities, becomes manifold 4 . And the four
tribes (mammals, birds, &c.), the fourteen worlds
(Bhur, &c.), with all the number of beings, multi¬
plied eighty-four times 5 , all this appears as manifold¬
ness. And those multiplied things are impelled by
man (purusha) as the wheel by the potter 6 . And as
when the ball of iron is hammered, the fire is not
overcome, so the (inner) man is not overcome, but
the elemental Self is overcome, because it has united
itself (with the elements).

1 M. reads aha m so mamedam. 2 M. anta/ikaranai/i.

3 See commentary, p. 48, 1. 7.

4 M. reads upety atha trigunam /eatur^alam.

5 M. reads /fcaturajitilakshayoniparitfatam. See also Anubhuti-
prakaj-a, ver. 118.

c Mmyava seems an impossible word, though the commentator
twice explains it as kulala, potter. M. reads Z’akri^eti, which seems
preferable. Weber conjectures mr/tpa^a.

298 M AITR A Y AN A-B RAH M AiVA-U P A NIS H AD.

4. And it has been said elsewhere 1 : This body-
produced from marriage, and endowed with growth 2
in darkness, came forth by the urinary passage, was
built up with bones, bedaubed with flesh, thatched
with skin, filled with ordure, urine, bile, slime, mar¬
row, fat, oil 3 , and many impurities besides, like a
treasury full of treasures 4 .

5. And it has been said elsewhere: Bewilder¬
ment, fear, grief, sleep, sloth, carelessness, decay,
sorrow, hunger, thirst, niggardliness, wrath, infi¬
delity, ignorance., envy, cruelty 5 , folly, shameless¬
ness, meanness 6 , pride, changeability 7 , these are the
results of the quality of darkness (tama//) 8 .

1 Part .of this passage has been before the mind of the author of
the Manava-dharmarastra, when writing, VI, 76, 77 : asthisthhwaw
snayuyutam ma;;2saro;ntalepanam, ^armavanaddhaw durgandhi pur-
«am mutrapurishayo/z, gararokasaniavish/aw rogayatanam aturam
ragasvalam anitya;# fa bhutavasam ima m tyaget. The same verses
occur in the Mahabharata XII, 12463^4, only with tyaga at the
end, instead of tyaget. The rendering of asthibhir f’itam by asthi-
sthu^am shows that k \ta was understood to mean piled or built up,
i.e. supported by bones.

2 Instead .of sawvmldhyupetam M. reads sawviddhyapetam.

3 M. adds snayu after vasa, and instead ,of amayai h reads malai/2.
This reading, malai/2, would seem preferable, though Manu’s roga¬
yatanam might be quoted in support .of amayai^. The exact
meaning of vasd is given in the Aryavidyasudhakara, p. 82, 1 . 9.

4 Therefore should wise people not identify their true Self with
the body. M. reads vasuneti.

5 M. reads vaikaruftyam.

6 Instead of nirakr/titvam M. reads nikr/tatvam, which is de¬
cidedly preferable. We may take it to mean either meanness, as
opposed to uddhatatvam, overbearing, or knavery, the usual
meaning of nikr/ti.

7 M. reads asatvam, possibly for asattvam.

8 M. reads tamasanvitai//, and afterwards ragasanvitai//; also
trfshfta instead of antastr/shuza.

IV PRAPAT 7 /AKA, 2.

299

Inward thirst, fondness, passion, covetousness,
unkindness, love, hatred, deceit 1 , jealousy, vain rest¬
lessness, fickleness 2 , unstableness, emulation, greed,
patronising of friends, family pride, aversion to dis¬
agreeable objects, devotion to agreeable objects,
whispering 3 , prodigality, these are the results of the
quality of passion (ra^as). „

By these he is filled, by these he is overcome,
and therefore this elemental Self assumes manifold
forms, yes, manifold forms/

Fourth PRApAr^AKA.

1. The Valakhilyas, whose passions were subdued,
approached him full of amazement and said; ‘ O
Saint, we bow before thee; teach thou, for thou
art the way, and there is no other for us. What
process is there for the elemental Self, by which,
after leaving this (identity with the elemental body),
he obtains union 4 with the (true) Self?’ Pra^apati
Kratu said to them :

2. It has been said elsewhere : Like the waves
in large rivers, that which has been done before, can¬
not be turned back, and, like the tide of the sea, the
approach of death is hard to stem. Bound 5 by the
fetters of the fruits of good and evil, like a cripple ;
without freedom, like a man in prison ; beset by many
fears, like one standing before Yama (the judge of

1 M. reads vyavartatvam. 2 It should be /£a/z/£alatvam.

3 M. reads mattasvaro.

4 Instead of the irregular sayogyam, M. always reads sayugyam.

5 It is not quite clear what is the subject to which all these ad¬
jectives refer. M. reads baddho for baddham, but afterwards
agrees with the text as published by Cowell.

300

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

the dead); intoxicated by the wine of illusion, like
one intoxicated by wine; rushing about, like one
possessed by an evil spirit; bitten by the world, like
one bitten by a great serpent; darkened by passion,
like the night; illusory, like magic; false, like a
dream; pithless, like the inside of the Kadali;
changing its dress in a moment, like an actor 1 ; fair
in appearance, like a painted wall, thus they call
him ; and therefore it is said :

Sound 2 , touch, and other things are like nothings ;
if the elemental Self is attached to them, it will not
remember the Highest Place 3 .

3. This is indeed the remedy for the elemental
Self: Acquirement of the knowledge of the Veda,
performance of one’s own duty, therefore conformity
on the part of each man to the order to which he
happens to belong. This 4 is indeed the rule for
one’s own duty, other performances are like the
mere branches of a stem 5 6 . Through it one obtains
the Highest above, otherwise one falls downward 0 .
Thus is one’s own duty declared, which is to be found
in the Vedas. No one belongs truly to an order (a^ra-
ma) who transgresses his own law 7 . And if people
say, that a man does not belong to any of the orders,
and that he is an ascetic 8 , this is wrong, though, on

1 M. reads na/avat.

2 M. reads ye ’rtha anartha iva te sthita/2, esham.

3 M. reads na smaret paramam padam.

4 3 \I. reads svadharma eva sarva;w dhatte, stambha^akhevetaram.

6 The commentator considers the other sacrificial performances
as hurtful, and to be avoided.

6 M. reads anyathadha/z pataty, esha.

The rules of the order to which he belongs.

8 A 1 apasvin is free from the restrictions of the preceding a .fra-

IV PRAPA7WAK A, 4. 30 I

the other hand, no one who is not an ascetic brings
his sacrificial works to perfection or obtains know¬
ledge of the Highest Self 1 . For thus it is said:

By ascetic penance goodness is obtained, from
goodness understanding is reached, from understand-
ing the Self is obtained, and he who has obtained
that, does not return 2 .

4 - Brahman is, thus said one who knew the
science of Brahman ; and this penance is the door
to Brahman, thus said one who by penance had
cast off all sin. The syllable Om is the mani¬
fest greatness of Brahman, thus said one who
well grounded (in Brahman) always meditates on
it. Therefore by knowledge, by penance, and by
meditation is Brahman gained. Thus one goes
beyond 3 Brahman (Hira^yagarbha), and to a divinity
higher than the gods ; nay, he who knows this, and
worships Brahman by these three (by knowledge,
penance, and meditation), obtains bliss imperishable,
infinite, and unchangeable. Then freed from those
things (the senses of the body, &c.) by which he
was filled and overcome, a mere charioteer 4 , he
obtains union with the Self.’

mas, but he must have obeyed them first, before he can become a
real Tapasvin.

M. reads a^rameshv evavasthitas tapasvi kety u/tyata ity, etad apy
uktam, &c. This would mean, ‘ For it is said that he only who has
dwelt in the dramas is also called a Tapasvin, a real ascetic; and
this also has been said, that no one obtains self-knowledge except
an ascetic/ This is not impossible, but the commentator follows
the text as printed by Cowell. M. reads atma^z/anenadhigama^,
karma^uddhi.

2 M. reads manasa prapyate tv atma hy atmaptya na nivartata iti.

8 M. reads pura eta, which may be right.

Rathita/^ is a very strange word, but, like everything else, it is

302 MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAzYA-UPANISHAD.

5. The Valakhilyas said : ‘ 0 Saint, thou art the
teacher, thou art the teacher k What thou hast said,
has been properly laid up in our mind. Now answer
us a further question: Agni, Vayu, Aditya, Time
(kala) which is Breath (pra;za * 1 2 ), Food (anna), Brahma 3 ,
Ruclra, Vishmi, thus do some meditate on one, some
on another. Say which of these is the best for us/
He said to them :

6. ‘ These are but the chief manifestations of the
highest, the immortal, the incorporeal Brahman. He
who is devoted to one, rejoices here in his world
(presence), thus he said. Brahman indeed is all this,
and a man may meditate on, worship, or discard also
those which 4 are its chief manifestations. With these
(deities) he proceeds to higher and higher worlds,
and when all things perish, he becomes one with the
Purusha, yes, with the Purusha/

explained by the commentator, viz. as ratham prapito rathitva;;z /'a
prapita iti yavat. Nevertheless the reading of M. seems to me pre¬
ferable, viz. atha yai^ paripunzo ’bhibhfito 'ya m tathaitab /£a, tai h
sarvair vimukta svatmany eva sayugyam upaiti. I should prefer
vimuktas tv atmany eva, and translate, ‘ But then, freed from all
those things by which he was filled and likewise was overcome by
them, he obtains union with the Self/

1 M. reads the second time abhivady asrniti, which is no improve¬
ment. It might have been ativadyasiti.

2 M. reads Yama^ pra;zo.

3 This is, of course, the personal Brahma of the Hindu triad. To
distinguish this personal Brahma from the impersonal, I sometimes
give his name in the nom. masc., Brahma, and not the grammatical
base, Brahman.

4 M. reads ya va asya. The commentator explains ya vasya/2 by
vasayogya^; or ya va ya h by ka^X’it, admitting a Vedic irregularity
which is not quite clear.

V PRAPA7WAKA, 2.

303

Fifth Prapatwaka 1 .

i. Next follows Kutsayana’s hymn of praise :

Thou art Brahma, and thou art Vishnu, thou
art Rudra, thou Pra^apati 2 , thou art Agni, Varu/za,
Vayu, thou art Indra, thou the Moon.

Thou art Anna 3 (the food or the eater), thou art
Yama, thou art the Earth, thou art All, thou art
the Imperishable. In thee all things exist in many
forms, whether for their natural or for their own
(higher) ends.

Lord of the Universe, glory to thee! Thou art
the Self of All, thou art the maker of All, the
enjoyer of All; thou art all life, and the lord of all
pleasure and joy 4 . Glory to thee, the tranquil, the
deeply hidden, the incomprehensible, the immeasur¬
able, without beginning and without end.’

2. ‘ In the beginning 5 darkness (tamas) alone was
this. It was in the Highest, and, moved by the High¬
est, it becomes uneven. Thus it becomes obscurity

1 At the beginning of the fifth Prapa/^aka my MS. gives the
Alokas which in the printed edition are found in VI, 34, p. 178,
Atreme jloka bhavanti, yatha nirindhano vahnir, &c., to nirvishayaw

smmam. Then follows as § 2, Atha yathedaw Kautsyayanistutis,
tvam, &c.

2 The commentator explains Brahma by Hirawyagarbha and
Pra,gapati by Virag.

3 M. reads tvam Manus, tva^z Yanm /’a tvam, prfthivi tvam atha-
kyui&h, which is so clearly the right reading that it is difficult to
understand how the mistakes arose which are presupposed by the
commentary. See Taitt. Up. II, 2.

4 M. reads vAvakriVarati/2 prabhu/^, which seems better.

M. reads tamo va idam ekam asta tat paro syat tat pareweritam.
It may have been tat pare 'sthat.

304

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD .

(ra^yas ) l . Then this obscurity, being moved, becomes
uneven. Thus it becomes goodness (sattva). Then
this goodness, being moved, the essence flowed forth 2 .
This is that part (or state of Self) which is entirely
intelligent, reflected in man (as the sun is in different
vessels of water), knowing the body (kshetra^a),
attested by his conceiving, willing, and believing, it is
Pra^apati, called Vbva. His manifestations have
been declared before 3 . Now that part of him which
belongs to darkness, that, O students 4 , is he who is
called Rudra. That part of him which belongs to
obscurity, that, O students, is he who is called
Brahma. That part of him which belongs to good¬
ness, that, O students, is he who is called Vishnu.
He being one, becomes three, becomes eight 5 6 , be¬
comes eleven G , becomes twelve, becomes infinite.
Because 7 he thus came to be, he is the Being (neut.),
he moves about, having entered all beings, he has
become the Lord of all beings. He is the Self
within and without, yes, within and without.’

1 M. reads etad vai ra^aso rupam, which is better, or, at least,
more in accordance with what follows.

2 M. reads sattvam everitarasas sa m prasn'vat.

3 A reference to Maitr. Up. II, 5, would have saved the com¬
mentator much trouble. M. has a better text. It leaves out vhveti
or vhvakhyas after pra^&pati, which may be wrong, but then goes
on : tasya prokta agryas tanavo brahma rudro vishzzur iti. In enu¬
merating the three agryas tanava/^, however, M. is less consistent,
for it begins with ra,gas or Brahma, then goes on to tamas or
Rudra, and ends with sattva or Vishzzu. The Anubhutipraka^a,
verse 142, has the right succession.

4 This vocative, brahmaMrino, is always left out in M.

5 The five pra/zas, the sun, moon, and asterisms.

6 The eleven organs of sense and action, which, by dividing
manas and buddhi, become twelve.

7 M. reads aparimitadha ^odbhhtatvad bhfiteshu £arati pravish/a^
sarvabhutanam.

VI PRAPA777AKA, I.

305

Sixth Prapatoaica \

1. He (the Self) bears the Self in two ways 2 , as
he who is Prawa (breath), and as he who is Aditya
- . e _ sun )- Therefore there are two paths for him 3 ,
within and without, and they both turn back in a
day and night. The Sun is the outer Self, the inner
Self is Breath. Hence the motion of the inner Self

is inferred from the motion of the outer Self 4 . For
thus it is said :

‘ He who knows, and has thrown off all evil, the
overseer of the sen ses 5 , the pure-minded, firmly

1 The commentator describes the sixth and seventh chapters as
v da supplementary, and does not think that they are closely con¬
nected with the chief object of the Upanishad. This chief object was
to show that there is only one thinking Self (adStmS) to be known,
an that the same is to be meditated on as manifested in the different
forms of Rudra Brahma, Vish«u, &c. Thus the highest object of
those who wish for final liberation has been explained before, as
well as the proper means of obtaining that liberation. What
0 ows are statements of the greatness of the various manifestations
ol the Atman, and advice how to worship them. My MS. gives the
beginning of the sixth Prapd/^aka, but ends with the end of the
eighth paragraph. The verses in paragraph 34, as mentioned before,
are given in my MS. at the end of the fourth Prapa/zhka. My
translation deviates considerably from the commentary. The text
is obscure and not always correct. My rule has been throughout
to begin a new sentence with evazzz hy dha, ‘for thus it is said/
which introduces proofs of what has been said before. The passages
thus quoted as proofs from the Veda are often difficult to under¬
stand, nor do they always consist of a complete sentence. My
translation therefore is often purely tentative.

2 M. reads dvitiyd for dvidha.

3 M. reads dvau vd etdv asya pa^adha namantar bahis /£ahoratre
tau vyavartete.

4 While the sun goes round Meru in a day and a night, the
breath performs 21,000 breathings, or, more exactly, 21,600/ M
reads bahiratmagatya.

5 M. reads adhyaksha, not akshddhyaksha.

[>5] X

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISIIAD.

grounded (in the Self) and looking away (from
all earthly objects), he is the same/ Likewise the
motion of the outer Self is inferred from the motion
of the inner Self. For thus it is said :

‘ He who within the sun is the golden person, who
looks upon this earth from his golden place, he is the
same who, after entering the inner lotus of the heart J ,
devours food (perceives sensuous objects, &c.)/

2. And he who having entered the inner lotus of
the heart, devours food, the same, having gone to
the sky as the fire of the sun, called Time, and being
invisible, devours all beings as his food.

What is that lotus and of what is it made ? (the
Valakhilyas ask 1 2 .)

That lotus is the same as the ether; the four
quarters, and the four intermediate points are its
leaves 3 .

These two, Breath and the Sun, move on near
to each other (in the heart and in the ether). Let
him worship these two, with the syllable Om, with
the Vyahr/ti words (bhu/6, bhuva/^, svar), and with
the Savitri hymn.

3. There are two forms of Brahman 4 , the material
(effect) and the immaterial (cause). The material
is false, the immaterial is true. That which is true
is Brahman, that which is Brahman is light, and that
which is liofht is the Sun 5 . And this Sun became
the Self of that Om.

1 M. reads sa esho ’nta^ pushkare hrz'tpushkare vamto.

2 The commentator ascribes the dialogue still to the Valakhilyas
and Pra^apati Kratu.

3 M. reads dalasaz;zsth£ asur vagnlft parata etai/z prazzadityav eta*

4 See Brzh. Up. II, 3, 1.

5 Professor Cowell, after giving the various readings of his MSS.,
says, £ the true reading would seem to be yat satya m tad brahma,

VI PRAPA777AKA, 4 -

307

He divided himself threefold, for Om consists of
three letters, a 4 - u -f m. Through them all this * 1 is con-
tamed in him as warp and woof. For thus it is said :

Meditate on that Sun as Om, join your Self (the
breath) with the (Self of the) Sun.’

4 ' And thus it has been said elsewhere: The
Udgitha (of the Sama-veda) is the Prawava 2 (of the
/Ug-veda), and the Prawava is the Udgitha, and thus

the Sun is Udgitha, and he is Prawava or Om. For
thus it is said 3 :

The Udgitha, called Prawava, the leader (in the
performance of sacrifices), the bright 4 , the sleepless,
free from old age and death, three-footed 5 , consisting
of three letters (a + u + m), and likewise to be known

as fivefold (five pra«as) placed in the cave.’ And it
is also said :

T he three-footed Brahman has its root upward 6 ,
the branches are ether, wind, fire, water, earth, &c.
This one Ayvattha 7 by name, the world, is Brahman,
and of it that is the light which is called the Sun’
and it is also the light of that syllable Om. There¬
fore let him for ever worship that (breath and sun,
as manifestations of Brahman) with the syllable Om.’

He al one enlightens us. For thus it is said :

yad brahma tag^yotir, yad ^yotis sa aditya^.' This is exactly the
reading of my own MS.

1 M. reads /faivasminn ity eva m hyaha.

2 The mystic syllable Om.

s See bandog opanishad I, 5; Maitr. Up. VI, 25.

4 M. reads namarupam.

The three feet of the pra/za are waking, slumber, and deep
sleep; the three feet of the sun, the three worlds, bhM, bhuva h
svar, as in VII, n. See also Kkk nd. Up. Ill I2

6 Cf. Ka/A. Up. VI, 1.

A^vattha, lit. fig-tree, then frequently used metaphorically as a
name of the world. Here explained as ‘ it will not stand till to-morrow.’

X 2

308

MAITRAYAiVA-PJRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

* This alone is the pure syllable, this alone is the
highest syllable; he who knows that syllable only,
whatever he desires, is his V

5. And thus it has been said elsewhere : This Om 2
is the sound-endowed body of him (Pra^adityatman).
This is his gender-endowed body, viz. feminine,
masculine, neuter. This is his light-endowed body,
viz. Agni, Vayu, Aditya. This is his lord-endowed
body, viz. Brahma, Rudra, Vishnu. This is his mouth-
endowed body, viz. Garhapatya, Dakshhzagni, Ahava-
niya 3 . This is his knowledge-endowed body,viz. Ri/£,
Ya^us, Saman. This is his world-endowed body, viz.
Bhti/z, Bhuva^, Svar. This is his time-endowed body,
viz. Past, Present, Future. This is his heat-endowed
body, viz. Breath, Fire, Sun. This is his growth-
endowed body, viz. Food, Water, Moon. This is
his thought-endowed body, viz. intellect, mind, per¬
sonality. This is his breath-endowed body, viz. Pra;/a,
Apana, Vyana. Therefore by the aforesaid syllable
Om are all these here enumerated bodies praised and
identified (with the Pra^adityatman). For thus it
is said 4 * :

‘ O Satyakama, the syllable Om is the high and
the low Brahman.’

6. This 6 (world) was unuttered 6 . Then forsooth
Pra^apati, having brooded, uttered it in the words
Bhti/z, Bhuva/^, Svar. This is the grossest body of
that Pra^apati, consisting of the three worlds 7 . Of
that body Svar is the head, Bhuva/£ the navel, BhM

1 Ka th. Up. II, 16. 2 M. reads tanftr yom iti.

3 The fires on the three altars.

4 Praj-wa Up. V, 2. 6 M. reads atha vyattam.

6 So far the pra7zava or Om has been explained; now follows

the explanation of the Vyahrztis; cf. VI, 2. Vyahrzti is derived
from vyahar, and means an utterance.

7 Cf. VI, 5.

VI PRAPA 7/7AKA, J.

309

the feet, the sun the eye. For in the eye is fixed
mans great measure, because with the eye he makes
all measurements. The eye is truth (satyam), for
the person (purusha) dwelling in the eye proceeds to
all things (knows all objects with certainty). There¬
fore let a man worship with the Vyahrztis, Bhu/z,
Bhuva h, Svar, for thus Pra^apati, the Self of All, is
worshipped as the (sun, the) Eye of All 1 . For
thus it is said :

‘This (the sun)is Pra^apatfs all-supporting body,for
in it this all 2 is hid (by the light of the sun); and in this
all it (the light) is hid. Therefore this is worshipped 3 /

7. (The Savitri begins 4 :) Tat Savitur vare/zyam,
i.e. this of Savitrz, to be chosen/ Here the Aditya
(sun) is Savitrz, and the same is to be chosen by the
love(r) of Self, thus say the Brahma-teachers.

(Then follows the next foot in the Savitri): Bhargo
devasya dhimahi, i.e. ‘the splendour of the god we
meditate on/ Here the god is Savitrz, and therefore
he who is called his splendour, him I meditate on,
thus say the Brahma-teachers.

1 M. reads vUvata^akshur.

2 Pra^-apati, according to the commentator, is identified with
Satya, the true, because sat means the three worlds, and these (bhu/z,
bhuva^, svar) are said to be his body. Hence probably the inser¬
tion of Satyam before Pra^apati at the beginning of the paragraph.
Thyn he argues, as the eye has been called satya, and as the eye
is Aditya, therefore Pra^apati also, being Satya, is Aditya, the sun-
And again, if the sun is worshipped (by the vyahrztis) then, like the
sun, the eye of all, Pra^apati also, the self of all, is worshipped.

3 Eshopasita is impossible. We must either read, with the com¬
mentator, etam upasita, or with M. eshopasiteti.

4 He now proceeds to explain the worship of the Savitri verse,
which had been mentioned in VI, 2, after the Om and the Vyahrztis,
as the third mode of worshipping Prazza (breath) and Aditya (sun),
these being two correlative embodiments of the Self. The Savitri
is found in Rig-veda III, 62, 10, but it is here explained in a purely
philosophical sense. See also Brz'h. Up. VI, 3, 6.

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

310

(Then follows the last foot): Dhiyo yo na h pra/£o-
dayat, i.e. 'who should stir up our thoughts.’ Here
the dhiya/k are thoughts, and he should stir these up
for us, thus say the Brahma-teachers.

(He now explains the word bhargas). Now he
who is called bhargas is he who is placed in yonder
Aditya (sun), or he who is the pupil in the eye 1 .
And he is so called, because his going (gati) is by
rays (bhabhi/z); or because he parches (bhar^ayati)
and makes the world to shrivel up. Rudra is called
Bhargas, thus say the Brahma-teachers. Or bha
means that he lights up these worlds ; ra, that he
delights these beings, ga that these creatures go to
him and come from him ; therefore beine a bha-ra-o-a
he is called Bhargas.

Surya 2 (sun) is so called, because Soma is con¬
tinually squeezed out (su). Savitrf (sun) is so called,
because he brings forth (su). Aditya (sun) is so
called, because he takes up (ada, scil. vapour, or
the life of man). Pavana 3 is so called, because he
purifies (pu). Apas, water, is so called, because it
nourishes (pya).

And it is said:

‘ Surely the Self (absorbed in Pra^a, breath), which
is called Immortal 4 , is the thinker, the perceiver, the
goer, the evacuator 5 , the delighter, the doer, the
speaker, the taster, the smeller, the seer, the hearer,
and he touches. He is Vibhu (the pervader), who
has entered into the body.’ And it is said :

1 M. reads tarake ’kshzzi.

2 Sfirya is considered as the daily performer of the Prata/zsavana,
&c., the sacrifice at which Soma is squeezed out as an offering.

3 M. reads pavamanat pavamanat.

4 M. reads amrz'takhyaj /’etakhyaj /’eta.

5 M. reads ganta srzsh/a.

VI PRAPATtfAKA, 8.

3 ii

‘ When the knowledge is twofold (subjective and ob¬
jective), then he hears, sees, smells, tastes, and touches
(something), for it is the Self that knows everything.’

But when the knowledge is not twofold (subjective
only), without effect, cause, and action \ without a
name, without a comparison, without a predicate 1 2 —
what is that ? It cannot be told 3 4 .

8. And the same Self is also called Hana (lord),
Sambhu, Bhava, Rudra (tamasa) ; Pra^apati (lord
of creatures), VBvasrf^ (creator of all), Hira/zya-
garbha, Satyam (truth), Pra;za (breath), Ha^sa
(rat/asa); 6astrz (ruler), Vishnu, Naraya/za (sat-
tvika); Arka, Savit ri, Dhat ri (supporter), Vidha-
tri 4 (creator), Samra^* (king), Indra, Indu (moon).
He is also he who warms, the Sun, hidden by the
thousand-eyed golden egg, as one fire by another.
He is to be thought after, he is to be sought after.
Having said farewell to all living beings, having
gone to the forest, and having renounced all sen¬
suous objects, let man perceive the Self 5 from his
own body.

‘ (See him) 6 who assumes all forms, the golden,
who knows all things, who ascends highest, alone in
his splendour, and warms us; the thousand-rayed,

1 M. reads karyakara^akarmavinirmuktam.

2 Nirupakhyam, rightly translated by Cowell by ‘ without a
predicate/ and rendered by the commentator by apramaya, i. e. not
to be measured, not to be classed, i.e. without a predicate.

8 I have translated this in accordance with a well-known passage,
quoted by the commentator from the Bn'hadara^yaka, rather than
in accordance with his own interpretation.

4 M. leaves out vidhata.

5 Instead of the peculiar Maitrayam reading, sva# .rarirad, M.
reads sva^ ^arirad.

6 The oneness of the Sun and the Breath is proclaimed in the
following verse of the Prajwa Upanishad I, 8.

3 I 2 MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

who abides in a hundred places, the spirit of all
creatures, the Sun, rises V

9. Therefore he who by knowing this has become
the Self of both Breath and Sun, meditates (while
meditating on them) on his Self, sacrifices (while sacri¬
ficing to them) to his Self—this meditation, the mind
thus absorbed in these acts, is praised by the wise.

Then let him purify the contamination of the mind
by the verse UA£/dsh/opahatam, &c. 2 : ‘ Be it food
left, or food defiled by left food, be it food given by
a sinner, food coming from a dead person, or from
one impure from childbirth, may the purifying power
of Vasu, may Agni, and the rays of Savitrf, purify
it, and all my sin V

First (before eating) he surrounds (the offered
food) with water (in rinsing his mouth 4 ). Then
saying, Svaha to Pra^a, Svaha to Apana, Svaha
to Vyana, Svaha to Samana, Svaha to Udana, he
offers (the food) with five invocations (in the fire
of the mouth). What is over, he eats in silence,
and then he surrounds (the food) once more after¬
wards with water (rinsing the mouth after his meal).
Having washed let him, after sacrificing to himself,
meditate on his Self with these two verses, Pra/zo
gn'1/1 and VLsvo si, viz. ‘ May the Highest Self as
breath, as fire (digestive heat), as consisting of the

Here ends the M. manuscript, with the following title: iti
jiiya^u^akhayam Maitrayazziyabrahmazzopanishadi shashMa/z pra-
pa//zaka/z. Samapta.

In the following paragraphs the taking of food is represented
as a sacrifice offered by the Self to the Self (atmaya^anarupam
bho^-anam, p. 106, 1. 13).

Several words have been inserted in this verse, spoiling the
metre.

4 See K/mnd. Up. V, 2.

VI PKAPATtfAKA, IO.

313

five vital airs, having entered (the body), himself
satisfied, satisfy all, he who protects all/ ‘ Thou
art Viwa (all), thou art Vaivvanara (fire), all that is
born is upheld by thee ; may all offerings enter into
thee ; creatures live where thou grantest immortality
to all. He who eats according to this rule, does
not in turn become food for others.

10. There is something else to be known. There
is a further modification of this Self-sacrifice (the
eating), namely, the food and the eater thereof. This
is the explanation. The thinking Purusha (person),
when he abides within the Pradhana (nature), is the
feeder who feeds on the food supplied by Prakrzti
(nature). The elemental Self 1 is truly his food, his
maker being Pradhana (nature 2 ). Therefore what
is composed of the three qualities (gu;zas) is the food,
but the person within is the feeder. And for this the
evidence is supplied by the senses. For animals
spring from seed, and as the seed is the food, there¬
fore it is clear that what is food is Pradhana (the
seed or cause of everything). Therefore, as has
been said, the Purusha (person) is the eater, Pra-
krzti, the food; and abiding within it he feeds. All
that begins with the Mahat 3 (power of intellect) and
ends with the Viveshas (elements 4 ), being developed
from the distinction of nature with its three qualities,
is the sign (that there must be a Purusha, an intel-

1 See before, III, 3.

2 This is very doubtful, in fact, unintelligible. The commentator
says, asya bhutatmana^ karta pradhana// purvokta/^, so 'pi bhopra
ity artha^.

3 Technical terms, afterwards adopted by the Sankhya philo¬
sophers.

Professor Cowell observes that the term vuesha, as here applied
to the five gross elements, occurs in the Sankhya-karika, ver. 38.

3H

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

ligent subject). And in this manner the way with
its fourteen steps has been explained 1 . (This is
comprehended in the following verse): ‘ This world
is indeed the food, called pleasure, pain, and error
(the result of the three qualities); there is no laying
hold of the taste of the seed (cause), so long as there
is no development (in the shape of effect)/ And in
its three stages also it has the character of food, as
childhood, youth, and old age; for, because these
are developed, therefore there is in them the cha¬
racter of food 2 .

And in the following manner does the perception
of Pradhana (nature) take place, after it has become
manifest:—Intellect and the rest, such as determina¬
tion, conception, consciousness, are for the tasting (of
the effects of Pradhana). Then there are the five
(perceptive organs) intended for the (five) objects of
senses, for to taste them. And thus are all acts of
the five active organs, and the acts of the five Pranas
or vital airs (for the tasting of their corresponding
objects). Thus what is manifest (of nature) is food,
and what is not manifest is food. The enjoyer of it
is without qualities, but because he has the quality
of being an enjoyer, it follows that he possesses
intelligence.

As Agni (fire) is the food-eater among the gods,
and Soma the food, so he who knows this eats food
by Agni (is not defiled by food, as little as Agni, the
sacrificial fire). This elemental Self, called Soma
(food), is also called Agni, as having undeveloped
nature for its mouth (as enjoying through nature,
and being independent of it), because it is said, ‘ The

1 Five receptive, five active organs, and four kinds of consciousness.

2 Its very development proves it to be food. Cowell.

VI PRAPAFtfAKA, 13. 315

Purusha (person)- enjoys nature with its three quali¬
ties, by the mouth of undeveloped nature.’ He who
knows this, is an ascetic, a yogin, he is a performer
of the Self-sacrifice (see before). And he who does
not touch the objects of the senses when they intrude
on him, as no one would touch women intruding; into
an empty house, he is an ascetic, a yogin, a performer
of the Self-sacrifice.

11. This is the highest form of Self, viz. food, for
this Pra/za (this body) subsists on food. If it eats
not, it cannot perceive, hear, touch, see, smell, taste,
and it loses the vital airs 1 . For thus it is said :

If it eats, then in full possession of the vital airs,
it can perceive, hear, touch, speak, taste, smell, see/
And thus it is said:

‘From food are born all creatures that live on
earth; afterwards they live on food, and in the end
(when they die) they return to it 2 .’

12. And thus it is said elsewhere : Surely all these
creatures run about day and night, wishing to catch
food. The sun takes food with his rays, and by it
he shines. These vital airs digest, when sprinkled
with food. Fire flares up by food, and by Brahma
(Pra^apati), desirous of food, has all this been made.
Therefore let a man worship food as his Self. For
thus it is said:

‘ From food creatures are born, by food they grow
when born; because it is eaten and because it eats
creatures, therefore it is called food (annam).’

13. And thus it is said elsewhere: This food is
the body of the blessed Vishmi, called Viwabhm
(all-sustaining). Breath is the essence of food, mind
of breath, knowledge of mind, joy of knowledge. He

1 Kkk nd. Up. VII, 9, 1.

2 Taitt. Up. II, 2.

31 6 MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

who knows this is possessed of food, breath, mind,
knowledge, and joy. Whatever creatures here on
earth eat food, abiding in them he, who knows this,
eats food. Food has been called undecaying, food has
been called worshipful ; food is the breath of animals,
food is the oldest, food has been called the physician.

14. And thus it has been said elsewhere : Food
is the cause of all this, time of food, and the sun is
the cause of time 1 . The (visible) form of time is
the year, consisting of twelve months, made up of
Nimeshas (twinklings) and other measures. Of the
year one half (when the sun moves northward)
belongs to Agni, the other to Vanma (when the
sun moves southward). That which belongs to
Agni begins with the asterism of Magha and ends
with half of the asterism of .5ravish/M, the sun
stepping down northward. That which belongs to
Soma (instead of Varima) begins with the asterism
(of A^lesha), sacred to the Serpents, and ends with
half of the asterism of Sravish/^a, the sun stepping
up southward. And then there (are the months)
one by one, belonging to the year, each consisting
of nine-fourths of asterisms (two asterisms and a
quarter being the twelfth part of the passage of the
sun through the twenty-seven Nakshatras), each
determined by the sun moving together with the
asterisms. Because time is imperceptible by sense,
therefore this (the progress of the sun, &c.) is its
evidence, and by it alone is time proved to exist.
Without proof there is no apprehension of what is
to be proved; but even what is to be proved can
become proof, for the sake of making itself known,

As food depends on time, therefore time is praised, which again
depends on the sun, which is a form of the Self.

VI PR APAT77AKA, 1 6 .

317

if the parts (the twinklings, &c.) can be distinguished
from the whole (time *). For thus it is said :

As many portions of time as there are, through
them the sun proceeds : he who worships time as
Brahman, from him time moves away very far.’ And
thus it is said:

‘ From time all beings flow, from time they grow;
in time they obtain rest ; time is visible (sun) and
invisible (moments).

15. There are two forms of Brahman, time and
non-time. That which was before the (existence of
the) sun is non-time and has no parts. That which
had its beginning from the sun is time and has
parts. Of that which has parts, the year is the
form, and from the year are born all creatures
when produced by the year they grow, and go again
to rest in the year. Therefore the year is Pra^a-
pati, is time, is food, is the nest of Brahman, is Self.
Thus it is said:

‘ Time ripens and dissolves all beings in the great
Self, but he who knows into what time itself is dis¬
solved, he is the knower of the Veda.’

16. This manifest time is the great ocean of
creatures. He who is called Savit^f (the sun, as be¬
getter) dwells in it, from whence the moon, stars,
planets, the year, and the rest are begotten. From
them again comes all this, and thus, whatever of
good or evil is seen in this world, comes from them.
Therefore Brahman is the Self of the sun, and a
man should worship the sun under the name of time.
Some say the sun is Brahman, and thus it is said :

1 Thus, the commentator says, the existence of the lamp can be
proved by the light of the lamp, as the existence of time is proved
by what we see, the rising of the sun. All this is very obscure.

3 i8

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAJVA-UPANISHAD.

‘ The sacrifices the deity that enjoys the sacrifice,
the oblation, the hymn, the sacrifice, Vish;zu, Pra^a-
pati, all this is the Lord, the witness, that shines in
yonder orb.’

17* the beginning Brahman was all this 1 . He
was one, and infinite; infinite in the East, infinite in
the South, infinite in the West, infinite in the North,
above and below and everywhere infinite. East and
the other regions do not exist for him, nor across, nor
below, nor above. The Highest Self is not to be
fixed, he is unlimited, unborn, not to be reasoned
about, not to be conceived. He is like the ether
(everywhere), and at the destruction of the universe,
he alone is awake. Thus from that ether he wakes
all this world, which consists of thought only, and
by him alone is all this meditated on, and in him it
is dissolved. His is that luminous form which
shines in the sun, and the manifold light in the
smokeless fire, and the heat which in the stomach
digests the food. Thus it is said :

‘ He who is in the fire, and he who is in the heart,

and he who is in the sun, they are one and the
same.’

He who knows this becomes one with the one.

18. This is the rule for achieving it (viz. concen¬
tration of the mind on the object of meditation):
restraint of the breath, restraint of the senses, medi¬
tation, fixed attention, investigation, absorption, these
are called the sixfold Yoga 2 . When beholding by

Brahman used as neuter, but immediately followed by eko
’nanta^, &c.

After having explained the form of what is to be meditated on
and the mode of meditation, the Upanishad now teaches the Yoga
which serves to keep our thoughts in subjection, and to fix our
thoughts on the object of meditation. See Yoga-Sfitras II, 29.

VI FRAPAFtfAKA, 20.

319

this Yoga, he beholds the gold-coloured maker, the
lord, the person, Brahman, the cause, then the sage,
leaving behind good and evil, makes everything
(breath, organs of sense, body, &c.) to be one in
the Highest Indestructible (in the pratyagatman or
Brahman). And thus it is said :

‘ As birds and deer do not approach a burning
mountain, so sins never approach those who know
Brahman/

19. And thus it is said elsewhere : When he who
knows has, while he is still Pra^a (breath), restrained
his mind, and placed all objects of the senses far
away from himself, then let him remain without any
conceptions. And because the living person, called
Pra^a (breath), has been produced here on earth
from that which is not Pra^a (the thinking Self),
therefore let this Pra^a merge the Pra;za (himself)
in what is called the fourth 1 2 . And thus it is said :

‘ What is without thought, though placed in the
centre of thought, what cannot be thought, the
hidden, the highest—let a man merge his thought
there: then will this living being (linga) be without
attachment V

20. And thus it has been said elsewhere : There
is the superior fixed attention (dhara;za) for him,
viz. if he presses the tip of the tongue down the
palate and restrains voice, mind, and breath, he sees

1 The fourth stage is meant for the thinking Self, the earlier
stages being waking, slumbering, and sleep.

2 Professor Cowell offers two renderings of this difficult passage :
‘ This which is called pra/za, i.e. the individual soul as characterised
by the subtil body, will thus no longer appear in its separate indi¬
viduality from the absence of any conscious subject; or, this subtil
body bearing the name of intellect will thus become void of all
objects/

320

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

Brahman by discrimination (tarka). And when,
after the cessation of mind 1 , he sees his own Self,
smaller than small, and shining, as the Highest Self 2 ,
then having seen his Self as the Self, he becomes
Self-less, and because he is Self-less, he is without
limit, without cause, absorbed in thought. This is
the highest mystery, viz. final liberation. And thus
it is said :

‘ Through the serenity of the thought he kills all
actions, good or bad ; his Self serene, abiding in the
Self, obtains imperishable bliss.’

21. And thus it has been said elsewhere: The
artery, called Sushumna, going upwards (from the
heart to the Brahmarandhra), serving as the passage
of the Pra^a, is divided within the palate. Through
that artery, when it has been joined by the breath
(held in subjection), by the sacred syllable Om, and
by the mind (absorbed in the contemplation of Brah¬
man), let him proceed upwards 3 , and after turning
the tip of the tongue to the palate, without 4 5 using
any of the organs of sense, let greatness perceive
greatness °. From thence he goes to selflessness,
and through selflessness he ceases to be an enjoyer
of pleasure and pain, he obtains aloneness (kevalatva,
final deliverance). And thus it is said :

1 The commentator remarks that this process is called Lambika-
} a > and the state produced by it Unmani or Unmanibhava; see
amambhSva, in VI, 34, ver. 7.

I should have preferred to translate atmanam atmana pajyati
by he sees his Self by his Self/ but the commentator takes a slightly

different view, and says: itthambhave tntiya; paramatmarupe/za
payyati.

* Cf - Ka/ ^ a U P- VI, 16; Pnuffa Up. Ill, 6 (p. 277).

If we lead sa 7 ; 2 yo^ya we must follow the commentator in trans¬
lating by uniting the senses with the pra/ia and the manas/

5 Let the Self perceive the Self.

321

VI PRAPAYtfAKA, 2 2.

‘ Having successively fixed the breath, after it had
been restrained, in the palate, thence having crossed
the limit (the life), let him join himself afterwards

to the limitless (Brahman) in the crown of the
head.’

22. And thus it has been said elsewhere : Two
Brahmans have to be meditated on, the word and
the non-word. By the word alone is the non-word
revealed. Now there is the word Om. Moving
upward by it (where all words and all what is meant
by them ceases), he arrives at absorption in the
non-word (Brahman). This is the way, this is the
immortal, this is union, and this is bliss. And as
the spider, moving upward by the thread, gains free
space, thus also he who meditates, moving upward
by the syllable Om, gains independence.

Other teachers of the word (as Brahman) think
otherwise. They listen to the sound of the ether
within the heart while they stop the ears with the
thumbs. They compare it to seven noises, like
rivers, like a bell, like a brazen vessel, like the
wheels of a carriage, like the croaking of frogs, like
rain, and as if a man speaks in a cavern. Having
passed beyond this variously apprehended sound, and
having settled in the supreme, soundless (non-word)?
unmanifested Brahman, they become undistinguished
and undistinguishable, as various flavours of the
flowers are lost in the taste of honey. And thus
it is said :

‘ Two Brahmans are to be known, the word-Brah-
man and the highest Brahman; he who is perfect in
the word-Brahman attains the highest Brahman V

Cf. Mahabharata XII, 854°; Sarvadarrana-sangraha, p.147;
Cowell’s Translation, p. 271.

[ 15 ]

Y

322

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

23. And thus it has been said elsewhere : The
syllable Om is what is called the word. And its end
is the silent, the soundless, fearless, sorrowless, joy¬
ful, satisfied, firm, unwavering, immortal, immovable,
certain (Brahman), called Vishnu. Let him worship
these two, that he may obtain what is higher than
everything (final deliverance). For thus it is said :

‘He who is the high and the highest god 1 , by
name Om-kara, he is soundless and free from all
distinctions : therefore let a man dwell on him in
the crown of his head.’

24. And thus it has been said elsewhere : The
body is the bow, the syllable Om is the arrow, its
point is the mind. Having cut through the dark¬
ness, which consists of ignorance 2 , it approaches that
which is not covered by darkness 3 . Then having
cut through that which was covered (the personal
soul), he saw Brahman, flashing like a wheel on fire,
bright like the sun, vigorous, beyond all darkness,
that which shines forth in yonder sun, in the moon,
in the fire, in the lightning 4 . And having seen
him, he obtains immortality. And thus it has been
said:

‘ Meditation is directed to the highest Being
(Brahman) within, and (before) to the objects (body,
Om, mind); thence the indistinct understanding be¬
comes distinct.

And when the works of the mind are dissolved,

1 The commentator takes deva as deva/2, though the accent is
against it; see Schroeder, Uber die Mai tray am Sawhita, p. 9, 1 . 11.

2 Should it not be, ‘ darkness is the mark ?'

3 Atamavish/a, explained as an irregular compound, atama-avish-
/am, tama-ave^anarahitam.

4 Cf. Bhagavadgita XV, 12.

VI PRAPAFtfAKA, 26 .

323

then that bliss which requires no other witness, that
is Brahman (Atman), the immortal, the brilliant, that
is the way, that is the (true) world.’

25. And thus it has been said elsewhere: He
who has his senses hidden as in sleep, and who.
while in the cavern of his senses (his body), but no
longer ruled by them, sees, as in a dream, with the
purest intellect, Him who is called Pra^ava (Om),
the leader 1 , the bright, the sleepless, free from old
age, from death, and sorrow, he is himself also
called Pra^ava, and becomes a leader, bright, sleep¬
less, free from old age, from death, and sorrow.
And thus it is said :

‘ Because in this manner he joins the Pra;^a
(breath), the Om, and this Universe in its manifold
forms, or because they join themselves (to him),
therefore this (process of meditation) is called Yoga
(joining).

The oneness of breath, mind, and senses, and
then the surrendering of all conceptions, that is
called Yoga.’

26. And thus it has also been said elsewhere :
As a sportsman, after drawing out the denizens of
the waters with a net, offers them (as a sacrifice)
in the fire of his stomach, thus are these Pranas
(vital airs), after they have been drawn out with the
syllable Om, offered in the faultless fire (Brahman) 2 .

Hence he is like a heated vessel (full of clarified
butter); for as the clarified butter in the heated
vessel lights up, when touched with grass and sticks,
thus does this being which is called Not-breath
(Atman) light up, when touched by the Pranas (the

1 Cf. VI, 4.

2 Cf. dVetawatara-upanishad III, 10.

3^4

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISIIAD.

vital airs) 1 . And that which flares up, that is the
manifest form of Brahman, that is the highest place
of Vishmi 2 , that is the essence of Rudra. And this,
dividing his Self in endless ways, fills all these
worlds. And thus it is said :

‘ As the sparks from the fire, and as the rays from
the sun, thus do his Pranas and the rest in proper order
again and again proceed from him here on earth V

27. And thus it has also been said elsewhere:
This is the heat of the highest, the immortal, the
incorporeal Brahman, viz. the warmth of the body.
And this body is the clarified butter (poured on it,
by which the heat of Brahman, otherwise invisible, is
lighted up). Then, being manifest, it is placed in
the ether (of the heart). Then by concentration they
thus remove that ether which is within the heart, so
that its light appears, as it were 4 . Therefore the
worshipper becomes identified with that light with¬
out much delay. As a ball of iron, if placed in the
earth, becomes earth without much delay, and as,
when it has once become a clod of earth, fire and
smiths have nothing more to do with that ball of
iron, thus does thought (without delay) disappear,
together with its support 5 . And thus it is said :

1 As the fire which exists invisibly in a heated vessel becomes
visible when the heated vessel is touched with sticks dipped in
butter, thus the Atman in the body appears only when the Prawas
are diffused in it. Or, as the clarified butter, heated together with
the vessel, lights up grass that comes in contact with it, so does this

/N

Atman (called Not-breath), by heating its two bodies which are
pervaded by the reflections of the thinker, light up everything
brought in contact with it, viz. the world.

2 See A r a///a Up. Ill, 9. 3 See VI, 31; Br/h. Up. II, 1, 10.

4 The light was always there, but it seems then only to appear.

6 The commentator explains this differently. Pie says that the

VI PRAPA 777 AKA, 28 .

3^5

‘ The shrine which consists of the ether in the
heart, the blissful, the highest retreat, that is our
own, that is our goal, and that is the heat and bright¬
ness of the fire and the sun.’

28. And thus it has been said elsewhere : After
having left behind the body, the organs of sense, and
the objects of sense (as no longer belonging to us),
and having seized the bow whose stick is fortitude
and whose string is asceticism, having struck down
also with the arrow, which consists in freedom from
egotism, the first guardian of the door of Brahman—
(for if man looks at the world egotistically, then,
taking the diadem of passion, the earrings of greed
and envy, and the staff of sloth, sleep, and sin, and
having seized the bow whose string is anger, and
whose stick is lust, he destroys with the arrow
which consists of wishes, all beings)—having there¬
fore killed that guardian, he crosses by means of the
boat Om to the other side of the ether within the
heart, and when the ether becomes revealed (as
Brahman), he enters slowly, as a miner seeking
minerals in a mine, into the Hall of Brahman.
After that let him, by means of the doctrine of his
teacher, break through the shrine of Brahman, which
consists of the four nets (of food, breath, mind, know¬
ledge, till he reaches the last shrine, that of blessed¬
ness and identity with Brahman). Thenceforth pure,

similes are intended to show how, as soon as the impediment is
removed, the worshipper obtains his true form, i.e. becomes Brah¬
man. Afterwards he explains /fcittam, thought, by the individual
thinker, and declares that he vanishes together with the thought,
which forms the a.rraya, the place, or the upadhi, the outward form.
Or again, he says that the /£itta, the mind, vanishes with its outward
sign, viz. the thoughts and imaginations.

326 MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAA T A-UPANISHAD.

clean, undeveloped, tranquil, breathless, bodiless,
endless, imperishable, firm, everlasting, unborn and
independent, he stands on his own greatness 1 , and
having seen (the Self), standing in his own greatness,
he looks on the wheel of the world as one (who has
alighted from a chariot) looks on its revolving wheel.
And thus it is said :

‘If a man practises Yoga for six months and is
thoroughly free (from the outer world), then the
perfect Yoga (union), which is endless, high, and
hidden, is accomplished.

But if a man, though well enlightened (by instruc¬
tion), is still pierced by (the gu^as of) passion and
darkness, and attached to his children, wife, and
house, then perfect Yoga is never accomplished 2 .'

29. After he had thus spoken (to Brzhadratha),
Yakayanya, absorbed in thought, bowed before him,
and said: ‘ O King, by means of this Brahma-know¬
ledge have the sons of Pra^*apati (the Valakhilyas)
gone to the road of Brahman. Through the practice
of Yoga a man obtains contentment, power to endure
good and evil, and tranquillity. Let no man preach
this most secret doctrine to any one who is not his
son or his pupil 3 , and who is not of a serene mind.
To him alone who is devoted to his teacher only,
and endowed with all necessary qualities, may he
communicate it 4 .

1 See Maitr. Up. II, 4; VI, 31.

2 This would seem to have been the end of the dialogue between
Pra^apati and the Valakhilyas, which, as related by Vakayanya to
King Brzhadratha, began in II, 3. See, however, VII, 8.

3 *Svet. Up. VI, 22 (p. 267); Brih. Up. VI, 3, 12.

4 Here may have been the end of a chapter, but the story of
Vakayanya and Br/hadratha is continued to VI, 30.

VI PRAPA 277 AKA, 30. 327

30. Om! Having settled down in a pure place
let him, being pure himself, and firm in goodness,
study the truth, speak the truth, think the truth,
and offer sacrifice to the truth 1 . Henceforth he has
become another; by obtaining the reward of Brah¬
man his fetters are cut asunder, he knows no hope,
no fear from others as little as from himself, he
knows no desires; and having attained imperishable,
infinite happiness, he stands blessed in the true
Brahman, who longs for a true man 2 . Freedom
from desires is, as it were, the highest prize to be
taken from the best treasure (Brahman). For a
man full of all desires, being possessed of will,
imagination, and belief, is a slave ; but he who is
the opposite, is free.

Here some say, it is the Gu/za 3 (i.e. the so-called
Mahat, the principle of intellect which, according to
the Sankhyas, is the result of the Gu^as or qualities),
which, through the differences of nature (acquired in
the former states of existence), goes into bondage to
the will, and that deliverance takes place (for the Gu^a)
when the fault of the will has been removed. (But this
is not our view), because (call it guna., intellect, buddhi,
manas, mind, ahankara, egotism, it is not the mind
that acts, but) he sees by the mind (as his instru¬
ment), he hears by the mind; and all that we call

1 The truth or the true are explained by, (1) the book which
teaches the Highest Self; (2) by Brahman, who is to be spoken
about; (3) by Brahman, who is to be meditated on; (4) by Brah¬
man, who is to be worshipped in thought.

2 I have translated this according to the commentary, but I should
prefer to read satyabhilashbzi.

3 The passages within brackets had to be added from the com¬
mentary in order to make the text intelligible, at least according to
Ramatirtha's views.

328 MAITRAYA 2 VA-BRAHMA 2 VA-UPANISHAD.

desire, imagination, doubt, belief, unbelief, certainty,
uncertainty, shame, thought, fear, all that is but
mind (manas). Carried along by the waves of the
qualities, darkened in his imaginations, unstable,
fickle, crippled, full of desires, vacillating, he enters
into belief, believing I am he, this is mine, and he
binds his Self by his Self, as a bird with a net 1 .
Therefore a man, being possessed of will, imagina¬
tion, and belief, is a slave, but he who is the oppo¬
site is free. For this reason let a man stand free
from will, imagination, and belief—this is the sign of
liberty, this is the path that leads to Brahman, this
is the opening of the door, and through it he will go
to the other shore of darkness. All desires are there
fulfilled. And for this they quote a verse :

‘‘When the five instruments of knowledge stand
still together with the mind, and when the intellect
does not move, that is called the highest state 2 /”

Having thus said, Sakayanya became absorbed in
thought. Then Marut (i.e. the King Brzhaclratha) 3 ,
having bowed before him and duly worshipped him,
went full of contentment to the Northern Path 4 , for
there is no way thither by any side-road. This is
the path to Brahman. Having burst open the
solar door, he rose on high and went away. And
here they quote:

‘There are endless rays (arteries) for the Self
who, like a lamp, dwells in the heart: white and
black, brown and blue, tawny and reddish 5 .

1 See III, 2. 2 See the same verse in Ka///a Up. VI, 10.

3 See before, II, 1.

4 See Pra.y/ 7 a Up. I, 10, ‘But those who have sought the Self by
penance, abstinence, faith, and knowledge, gain by the Northern
Path Aditya, the sun.’

5 See A 7 /and. Up. VIII, 6, 1.

VI PRAPA 7 WAKA, 3 I. 329

One of them (the Sushumna) leads upwards,
piercing the solar orb : by it, having stepped beyond
the world of Brahman, they go to the highest path.

The other hundred rays 1 rise upwards also, and
on them the worshipper reaches the mansions be-
longing to the different bodies of gods.

But the manifest rays of dim colour which lead
downwards, by them a man travels on and on help¬
lessly, to enjoy the fruits of his actions here.’

Therefore it is said that the holy Aditya (sun) is
the cause of new births (to those who do not worship
him), of heaven (to those who worship him as a god),
of liberty (to those who worship him as Brahman) 2 .

31. Some one asks: ‘Of what nature are those
organs of sense that go forth (towards their ob¬
jects) ? Who sends them out here, or who holds
them back V

Another answers : ‘ Their nature is the Self; the
Self sends them out, or holds them back; also the
Apsaras (enticing objects of sense), and the solar
rays (and other deities presiding over the senses)/

Now the Self devours the objects by the five rays
(the organs of sense); then who is the Self?

He who has been defined by the terms pure, clean,
undeveloped, tranquil 3 , &c., who is to be apprehended
independently by his own peculiar signs. That sign
of him who has no signs, is like what the pervading

1 A similar verse, but with characteristic variations, occurs in the
Khz nd. Up. VIII, 6, 6, and in the Ka/$a Up. VI, 16.

2 Here ends the story of -Sakayanya, which began I, 2, and was
carried on through chap. VI, though that chapter and the seventh
are called Khilas, or supplements, and though the MS. M. also ends,
as we saw, with the eighth paragraph of the sixth chapter.

3 See before, II, 4; VI, 28.

33 ° M A IT RAY AiV A-B R A H M ANA- U P AN IS H AD.

heat is of fire, the purest taste of water; thus say
some 1 . It is speech, hearing, sight, mind, breath;
thus say others 2 . It is intellect, retention, remem¬
bering, knowledge; thus say others 3 . Now all these
are signs of the Self in the same sense in which here
on earth shoots are the signs of seed, or smoke, light,
and sparks of fire. And for this they quote 4 :

‘ As the sparks from the fire, and as the rays from
the sun, thus do his Pranas and the rest in proper
order again and again proceed from him here on
earth.’

32. From this very Self, abiding within his Self,
come forth all Pranas (speech, &c.), all worlds, all
Vedas, all gods, and all beings ; its Upanishad (revela¬
tion) 5 is that it is ‘the true of the true.’ Now as from a
fire of green wood, when kindled, clouds of smoke come
forth by themselves (though belonging to the fire),
thus from that great Being has been breathed forth
all this which is the AFg-veda, the Ya^ur-veda, the
Sama-veda, the Atharvahgirasas (Atharva-veda), the
Itihasa (legendary stories), the Pura^a (accounts of
the creation, &c.), Vidya (ceremonial doctrines), the
Upanishads, the Alokas (verses interspersed in the
Upanishads, &c.), the Sutras (compendious state¬
ments), the Anuvyakhyanas (explanatory notes), the
Vyakhyanas (elucidations) G —all these things are his.

1 See *SVet. Up. VI, 13. 2 See Ken. Up. 2.

3 See Ait. Up. Ill, 2. Here we find dhn'ti (holding), smnti

(remembering), prag-^anam (knowledge), but not buddhi. Pra-
^/lanam seems the right reading, and is supported by M.

4 See before, VI, 26.

5 Revelation is here the rendering of Upanishad, upanigama-
yitrztvat sakshadrahasyam, and the true (sattya) is explained first by
the five elements, and then by that which is their real essence.

G See AVand. Up. VI, 1. The explanations given of these literary

VI PRAPAFtfAKA, 33.

331

33. This fire (the Garhapatya-fire) with five
bricks is the year. And its five bricks are spring,
summer, rainy season, autumn, winter ; and by them
the fire has a head, two sides, a centre, and a tail.
This ' earth (the Garhapatya-fire) here is the first
sacrificial pile for Pra^apati, who knows the Purusha
(the Vira^y). It presented the sacrificer to Vayu
(the wind) by lifting him with the hands to the sky.
That Vayu is Pra^a (Hira/zyagarbha).

Pra/^a is Agni (the Dakshbzagni-fire), and its bricks
are the five vital breaths, Pra;/a, Vyana, Apana,
Samana, Udana; and by them the fire has a head,
two sides, a centre, and a tail. This sky (the
Dakshi/zagni-fire) here is the second sacrificial pile
for Pra^apati, who knows the Purusha. It pre¬
sented the sacrificer to Indra, by lifting him with
the hands to heaven. That Indra is Aditya, the
sun.

That (Indra) is the Agni (the Ahavaniya-fire),
and its bricks are the Rik , the Ya^ush, the Saman,
the Atharvangirasas, the Itihasa, and the Pura^a ;
and by them the fire has a head, two sides, a tail,

A

and a centre. This heaven (Ahavaniya-fire) is the
third sacrificial pile for Pra^'apati, who knows the

titles are on the whole the same as those we had before in similar
passages. What is peculiar to Ramatirtha is that he explains
Upanishad by such passages as we had just now, viz. its Upanishad
is that it is the true of the true. The -Slokas are explained as
verses like those in VI, 19, a^itta7;z Xattamadhyastham. The
Sutras are explained as comprehensive sentences, such as II, 2,
aya;;z vava khalv atma te, Anuvyakhyanas are taken as explana¬
tions following on the Sutra in II, 2, beginning with atha ya
esho/t^vasavish/ambhanena. The Vyakhyanas are taken as fuller
statements of the meaning contained in the Sutra, such as the
dialogue between the Valakhilyas and Kratu.

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISH AD.

3

2

Purusha. With the hands it makes a present of
the sacrificer to the Knower of the Self (Pra^apati) ;
then the Knower of the Self, lifting him up, pre¬
sented him to Brahman. In him he becomes full
of happiness and joy.

34. The earth is the Garhapatya-fire, the sky the
Dakshka-fire, the heaven the Ahavaniya-fire; and
therefore they are also the Pavamana (pure,) the
Pavaka (purifying), and the Su&i (bright) \ By this
(by the three deities, Pavamana, Pavaka, and Si\£i)
the sacrifice (of the three fires, the Garhapatya,
Dakshka, and Ahavaniya) is manifested. And be¬
cause the digestive fire also is a compound of the
Pavam&na, Pavaka, and 6u/£i, therefore that fire is
to receive oblations, is to be laid with bricks, is to
be praised, and to be meditated on. The sacrificer,
when he has seized the oblation, wishes * 2 to perform
his meditation of the deity :

‘ The gold-coloured bird abides in the heart, and
in the sun—a diver bird, a swan, strong in splendour ;
him we worship in the fire.’

Having recited the verse, he discovers its mean-
ing, viz. the adorable splendour of Savit ri (sun) is to
be meditated on by him who, abiding within his
mind, meditates thereon. Here he attains the place
of rest for the mind, he holds it within his own Self.
On this there are the following verses :

(1) As a fire without fuel becomes quiet in its

Epithets of Agni, the sacrificial-fire, pavamana applying to
the Garhapatya-fire, pavaka to the Dakshhza-fire, and ju/’i to the
Ahavaniya-fire. The construction of the sentence, however, is
imperfect.

2 This means, he ought to perform it.

VI PRAPA7V/AKA, 34 -

place l , thus do the thoughts, when all activity ceases,
become quiet 2 in their place.

(2) Even in a mind which loves the truth 3 and has
gone to rest in itself there arise, when it is deluded
by the objects of sense, wrongs resulting from former
acts 4 .

(3) For thoughts alone cause the round of births 5 ;
let a man strive to purify his thoughts. What a man
thinks, that he is : this is the old secret 6 .

(4) By the serenity of his thoughts a man blots out
all actions, whether good or bad. Dwelling within
his Self with serene thoughts, he obtains imperish¬
able happiness.

(5) If the thoughts of a man were so fixed on
Brahman as they are on the things of this world,
who would not then be freed from bondage ?

(6) The mind, it is said, is of two kinds, pure or
impure; impure from the contact with lust, pure
when free from lust 7 .

(7) When a man, having freed his mind from
sloth, distraction, and vacillation, becomes as it were
delivered from his mind 8 , that is the highest point.

(8) The mind must be restrained in the heart till
it comes to an end ;—that is knowledge, that is
liberty: all the rest are extensions of the ties 9 (which
bind us to this life).

1 Dies in the fireplace. 2 M. reads uparamyati twice.

3 M. reads satyakamina^.

4 The commentator inserts a negative.

6 M. reads sawsara^.

6 This is very like the teaching of the Dhammapada, I, i.

7 Cf. Ind. Stud. II, 6o. Brahmavindu Up. v. i, where we read
kamasankalpam, as in MS. M.

8 See note to VI, 20.

9 M. reads moksha^a and j-eshas tu. The commentator says that

334

MAITRAYA 2 VA-BRAHMAAA-UPANISHAD.

(9) That happiness which belongs to a mind which
by deep meditation has been washed * 1 clean from all
impurity and has entered within the Self, cannot be
described here bywords ; it can be felt by the inward
power only 2 .

(10) Water in water, fire in fire, ether in ether, no
one can distinguish them ; likewise a man whose
mind has entered (till it cannot be distinguished
from the Self), attains liberty.

(11) Mind alone is the cause of bondage and
liberty for men ; if attached to the world, it becomes
bound ; if free from the world, that is liberty 3 .

Therefore those who do not offer the Agnihotra
(as described above), who do not lay the fires (with
the bricks, as described above), who are ignorant (of
the mind being the cause of the round of births), who
do not meditate (on the Self in the solar orb) are
debarred from remembering the ethereal place of
Brahman. Therefore that fire is to receive obla¬
tions, is to be laid with bricks, is to be praised, to
be meditated on.

35k Adoration to Agni, the dweller on earth, who
remembers his world. Grant that world to this thy
worshipper!

Adoration to Vayu, the dweller in the sky, who
remembers his world. Grant that world to this thy
worshipper!

this line is easy, but it is so by no means. Professor Cowell translates
granthavistara^ by book-prolixity, but this sounds very strange in an
Upanishad. I am not satisfied with my own translation, but it may
stand till a better one is found. M. reads grz'ndhavistara^. The
granthis are mentioned in KJA nd. Up. VII, 26 ; Ka ih. Up. VI, 15.

1 M. reads nirdhuta. 2 M> reads kara;2eti

8 M. reads vishayasaktam muktyai.

4 Next follow invocations to be addressed to the deities.

VI PRAPArtfAKA, 35. 335

A

Adoration to Aditya, the dweller in heaven, who
remembers his world. Grant that world to this thy
worshipper !

Adoration to Brahman, who dwells everywhere,
who remembers all. Grant all to this thy wor¬
shipper !

The mouth of the true (Brahman) is covered with
a golden lid; open that, O Pushan (sun), that we may
go to the true one, who pervades all (Vishmi) 1 .

He who is the person in the sun, I am he 2 .

And what is meant by the true one is the essence
of the sun, that which is bright, personal, sexless 3 ;
a portion (only) of the light which pervades the
ether; which is, as it were, in the midst of the sun,
and in the eye, and in the fire. That is Brahman,
that is immortal, that is splendour.

That is the true one, a portion (only) of the light
which pervades the ether, which is in the midst of
the sun, the immortal, of which Soma (the moon)
and the vital breaths also are offshoots: that is
Brahman, that is immortal, that is splendour.

That is the true one, a portion (only) of the light
which pervades the ether, which in the midst of the
sun shines as Ya^us, viz. as Om, as water, light,
essence, immortal, Brahman, Bh t/i, Bhuva h, Svar,
Om.

4 The eight-footed 4 , the bright, the swan, bound

1 The verse occurs in a more original form in Tal. Up. 15.

2 The commentator adds iti after aham.

3 ^TMnd. Up. I, 6, 6; -SVet. Up. V, 10.

4 The eight feet are explained as the eight regions, or aroga and
the rest. The swan is the sun. The three threads are the three
Vedas; see Ku\. Up. I, 1; Ind. Stud. IX, 11—ash/apada^ ju&r
hawsazfl trisutram mawim avyayam, dvivartamanaw tai^-asaiddhaw

336 MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

with three threads, the infinitely small, the imperish¬
able, blind for good and evil, kindled with light—he
who sees him, sees everything.’

A portion (only) of the light which pervades the
ether, are the two rays rising in the midst of the
sun. That is the knower * 1 (the Sun), the true one.
That is the Ya^us, that is the heat, that is Agni
(fire), that is Vayu (wind), that is breath, that is
water, that is the moon, that is bright, that is im¬
mortal, that is the place of Brahman, that is the ocean
of light. In that ocean the sacrificers are dissolved 2
like salt, and that is oneness with Brahman, for all
desires are there fulfilled. And here they quote :

‘ Like a lamp, moved by a gentle wind, he who
dwells within the gods shines forth. He who knows
this, he is the knower, he knows the difference (be¬
tween the high and the highest Brahman) ; having
obtained unity, he becomes identified with it.

They who rise up in endless number, like spray
drops (from the sea), like lightnings from the light
within the clouds in the highest heaven, they, when
they have entered into the light of glory (Brahman),
appear like so many flame-crests in the track of fire.’

36. There are two manifestations of the Brahma-
light : one is tranquil, the other lively. Of that which
is tranquil, the ether is the support; of that which is
lively, food. Therefore (to the former) sacrifice must
be offered on the house-altar with hymns, herbs,
ghee, meat, cakes, sthalipaka, and other things; to
the latter, with meat and drinks (belonging to the
great sacrifices) thrown into the mouth, for the mouth

sarva/2 pa^yan na pajyali. Here the eight feet are explained as the
five elements, manas, buddhi, and ahankara.

1 Savit for savitrf. 2 Vliyante for viliyante.

VI PRAPA 777 AKA, 37 *

337

is the Ahavaniya-fire ; and this is done to increase
our bodily vigour, to gain the world of purity, and
for the sake of immortality. And here they quote :

1 Let him who longs for heaven, offer an Agni-
hotra. By an Agnish/oma he wins the kingdom
of Yama; by Uktha, the kingdom of Soma; by
a Sho^asin-sacrifice, the kingdom of Surya ; by an
Atiratra-sacrifice, the kingdom of Indra; by the
sacrifices beginning with the twelve-night sacrifice
and ending with the thousand years’ sacrifice, the
world of Pra^apati.

As a lamp burns so long as the vessel that holds
the wick is filled with oil, these two, the Self and the
bright Sun, remain so long as the egg (of the world)
and he who dwells within it hold together/

37. Therefore let a man perform all these cere¬
monies with the syllable Om (at the beginning). Its
splendour is endless, and it is declared to be three¬
fold, in the fire (of the altar), in the sun (the deity),
in the breath (the sacrificer). Now this is the channel
to increase the food, which makes what is offered in
the fire ascend to the sun. The sap which flows
from thence, rains down as with the sound of a
hymn. By it there are vital breaths, from them
there is offspring. And here they quote :

‘ The offering which is offered in the fire, goes to
the sun ; the sun rains it down by his rays ; thus food
comes, and from food the birth of living beings.’

And thus he said :

‘ The oblation which is properly thrown on the
fire, goes toward the sun ; from the sun comes rain,
from rain food, from food living beings 1 .’

1 See Manu III, 76.
Z

MAITRAYA2VA-BRAHMA7VA-UPANISHAD.

3

8

38. He who offers the Agnihotra breaks through the
net of desire. Then, cutting through bewilderment,
never approving of anger, meditating on one desire
(that of liberty), he breaks through the shrine of
Brahman with its four nets, and proceeds thence to
the ether. For having there broken through the
(four) spheres of the Sun, the Moon, the Fire, and
Goodness, he then, being purified himself, beholds
dwelling in goodness, immovable, immortal, inde¬
structible, firm, bearing the name of Vish/m, the
highest abode, endowed with love of truth and om¬
niscience, the self-dependent Intelligence (Brahman),
standing in its own greatness. And here they quote :

‘ In the midst of the sun stands the moon, in
the midst of the moon the fire, in the midst of fire
goodness, in the midst of goodness the Eternal/

Having meditated on him who has the breadth
of a thumb within the span (of the heart) in the
body, who is smaller than small, he obtains the
nature of the Highest; there all desires are fulfilled.
And on this they quote :

‘ Having the breadth of a thumb within the span
(of the heart) in the body, like the flame of a lamp,
burning twofold or threefold, that glorified Brahman,
the great God, has entered into all the worlds. Om !
Adoration to Brahman ! Adoration !’

Seventh Prapat^aka.

1. Agni, the Gayatra (metre), the Triv^zt (hymn),
the Rathantara (song), the spring, the upward breath
(prazza), the Nakshatras, the Vasus (deities)—these
rise in the East; they warm, they rain, they praise 1

Other MSS. read sruvanti, which seems better.

VII PRAPA777AKA, 4-

339

(the sun), they enter again into him (the sun), they
look out from him (the sun). He (the sun) is incon¬
ceivable, without form, deep, covered, blameless,
solid, unfathomable, without qualities, pure, brilliant,
enjoying the play of the three qualities, awful, not
caused, a master-magician 1 , the omniscient, the
mighty, immeasurable, without beginning or end,
blissful, unborn, wise, indescribable, the creator of
all things, the self of all things, the enjoyer of all

things, the ruler of all things, the centre of the centre
of all things.

2. Indra, the Trish/ubh (metre), the Pa^ada^a
(hymn), the Brzhat (song), the summer, the through-
going breath (Vyana), Soma, the Rudras—these rise
in the South ; they warm, they rain, they praise, they
enter again into him, they look out from him. He
(the sun) is without end or beginning, unmeasured,
unlimited, not to be moved by another, self-depend¬
ent, without sign, without form, of endless power,
the creator, the maker of light.

3. The Maruts, the ^agati (metre), the Saptada^a
(hymn), the Vairupa (song), the rainy season, the
downward breath (apana), Aukra, the Adityas—these
rise in the West; they warm, they rain, they praise,
they enter again into him, they look out from him.
That is the tranquil, the soundless, fearless, sorrow¬
less, joyful, satisfied, firm, immovable, immortal,
eternal, true, the highest abode, bearing the name
of Vish/zu.

4. The Vrsve Devas, the AnushAibh (metre), the
Ekavimsa (hymn), the Vaira^a (song), the autumn,
the equal breath (samana), Varima, the Sadhyas—
these rise in the North; they warm, they rain, they

1 See VII, 11, abhidhyatur vistn'tir iva.

Z 2

340

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

praise, they enter again into him, they look out from
him. He is pure within, purifying, undeveloped,
tranquil, breathless, selfless, endless.

5. Mitra-Varuzzau, the Pankti (metre), the Tri^a-
vatrayastrizz^a (hymns), the Sakvara-raivata (songs),
the snowy and dewy seasons, the out-going breath
(udana), the Angiras, the Moon—these rise above ;
they warm, they rain, they praise, they enter again
into him, they look out from him—who is called
Prazzava (Om), the leader, consisting of light, without
sleep, old age, death and sorrow.

6. Yani (Saturn), Rahu and Ketu (the ascending
and descending nodes), the serpents, Rakshas, Yak-
shas, men, birds, iarabhas, elephants, &c.—these rise
below; they warm, they rain, they praise, they enter
again into him, they look out from him—he who is
wise, who keeps things in their right place, the centre
of all, the imperishable, the pure, the purifier, the
bright, the patient, the tranquil.

7. And he is indeed the Self, smaller (than small)
within the heart, kindled like fire, endowed with
all forms. Of him is all this food, within him all
creatures are woven. That Self is free from sin 1 ,
free from old age, from death and grief, from hunger
and thirst, imagining nothing but what it ought to
imagine, and desiring nothing but what it ought
to desire. He is the highest lord, he is the supreme
master of all beings, the guardian of all beings, a
boundary keeping all things apart in their right
places 2 . He the Self, the lord, is indeed Yambhu,
Bhava, Rudra, Pra c ^apati, the creator of all, Hirazzya-

1 See Jf/iand. Up. VIII, 7, 1.

2 See ATMnd. Up. VIII, 4, 1, where we find setur vidhntir esha;#
lokanam.

VII PRAPA777AKA, 8.

341

garbha, the true, breath, the swan, the ruler, the
eternal, Vishnu, Naraya^a. And he who abides in
the fire, and he who abides in the heart, and he who
abides in the sun, they are one and the same. To
thee who art this, endowed with all forms, settled in
the true ether, be adoration !

8 . Now follow the impediments in the way of know¬
ledge, O King 1 ! This is indeed the origin of the net
of bewilderment, that one who is worthy of heaven
lives with those who are not worthy of heaven. That
is it. Though they have been told that there is a
grove before them, they cling to a small shrub. And
others also who are always merry, always abroad,
always begging, always making a living by handi¬
work ; and others who are begging in • towns, per¬
forming sacrifices for those who are not allowed to
offer sacrifices, who make themselves the pupils of
Yudras, and Yudras who know the sacred books;
and others who are malignant, who use bad language,
dancers, prize-fighters, travelling mendicants, actors,
those who have been degraded in the king s service;
and others who for money pretend that they can lay
(the evil influences) of Yakshas, Rakshasas, ghosts,
goblins, devils, serpents, imps, &c. ; and others who
falsely wear red dresses 2 , earrings, and skulls; and
others who wish to entice by the jugglery of false
arguments, mere comparisons and paralogisms, the
believers in the Veda—with all these he should not

1 This king is not meant for Brfhadratha.

This refers to people who claim the privileges and licence of
Sannyasins without having passed through the discipline of the
preceding dramas. As this was one of the chief complaints made
against the followers of dakyamuni, it might refer to Buddhists,
but it ought to be borne in mind that there were Buddhists before
Buddha.

342

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

live together. They are clearly thieves, and unworthy
of heaven. And thus it is said :

‘ The world unsettled by the paralogisms of the
denial of Self, by false comparisons and arguments,
does not know what is the difference between Veda
and philosophy 1 /

9. EWhaspati, having become Sukra, brought forth
that false knowledge for the safety of Indra and for
the destruction of the Asuras. By it they show that
good is evil, and that evil is good. They say that we
ought to ponder on the (new) law, which upsets the
Veda and the other sacred books 2 . Therefore let no
one ponder on that false knowledge: it is wrong, it
is, as it were, barren. Its reward lasts only as long
as the pleasure lasts, as with one who has fallen from
his caste. Let that false science not be attempted,
for thus it is said :

(1) Widely opposed and divergent are these two,
the one known as false knowledge, the other as
knowledge. I (Yama) believe Na/£iketas to be
possessed by a desire of knowledge; even many
pleasures do not move thee 3 .

(2) He who knows at the same time both the
imperfect (sacrifice, &c.) and the perfect knowledge
(of the Self), he crosses death by means of the
imperfect, and obtains immortality by means of the
perfect knowledge 4 .

(3) Those who are wrapped up 5 in the midst of

If we translate thus, the use of vidya for vrz’tha vidya is
unusual; if we follow the commentary, we should have to trans¬

late, he does not know the Veda and the other knowledge.

All this may refer to Buddhists, but not by necessity, for there
were heretics, such as Brzhaspati, long before *Sakyamuni.

* See Ka th. Up. II, 4. 4 See Up> Ix

5 Vesh/yamana/;, instead of vartamana//.

VII PRAPATVfAKA, II.

343

*

imperfect knowledge, fancying themselves alone wise
and learned, they wander about floundering and de¬
ceived, like the blind led by the blind b

10. The gods and the demons, wishing to know
the Self, went into the presence of Brahman (their
father, Pra^apati) 1 2 . Having bowed before him, they
said : ‘ O blessed one, we wish to know the Self,
do thou tell us.’ Then, after having pondered a
long while, he thought, these demons are not yet
self-subdued 3 ; therefore a very different Self was
told to them (from what was told to the gods). On
that Self these deluded demons take their stand,
clinging to it, destroying the true means of salva¬
tion (the Veda), preaching untruth. What is untrue
they see as true, as in jugglery. Therefore, what is
taught in the Vedas, that is true. What is said in
the Vedas, on that the wise keep their stand.
Therefore let a Brahman not read what is not of
the Veda, or this will be the result.

11 . This is indeed the nature of it (the Veda), the
supreme light of the ether which is within the heart.
This is taught as threefold, in the fire, in the sun,
in the breath. This is indeed the nature of it, the
syllable Om, of the ether which is within the heart.
By it (by the Om) that (light) starts, rises, breathes
forth, becomes for ever the means of the worship and
knowledge of Brahman. That (light, in the shape of

1 See Ka//b Up. II, 5.

2 Cf. KJA nd. Up. VIII, 8.

3 I prefer ayatatmana^, though it is the easier (sugama) reading^
as compared with anyatatmana^, those who seek for the Self else¬
where, namely, in the body. It seems to me to refer to those who,
without having subdued the passions of their body, wish to obtain
the knowledge of the Highest Self. Possibly, however, the author
may have intended a climax from anyatatmana/2 to anyatamam.

344

MAITRAYAiVA-BRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

Om), when there is breathing, takes the place of the
internal heat, free from all brightness 1 . This is like
the action of smoke; for when there is a breath of
air, the smoke, first rising to the sky in one column,
follows afterwards every bough, envelopes it and takes
its shape 2 . It is like throwing salt (into water), like
heating ghee 3 . The Veda comes and goes like the
dissolving view of a master-magician 4 . And here
they quote :

‘ Why then is it called “ like lightning ?” Because
as soon as it comes forth (as Om) it lights up the
whole body. Therefore let a man worship that
boundless light by the syllable Om.’

(1) The man in the eye who abides in the right eye,
he is Indra, and his wife abides in the left eye 5 .

(2) The union of these two takes place in the cavity
within the heart, and the ball of blood which is there,
that is indeed the vigour and life of these two.

(3) There is a channel going from the heart so far,
and fixed in that eye ; that is the artery for both of
them, being one, divided into two.

1 This seems to be the meaning adopted by the commentator;
but may it not be, sending forth brightness ?

The simile is not very clear. The light of Brahman is below
the sphere of fire in the body. That sphere of fire becoming
heated, the light of Brahman becomes manifest. When the fire
has been fanned by the wind of sonant breath, then the light of
Brahman, embodying itself in the wind and the fire, manifests itself
first in the mere sound of Om, but afterwards, checked by throat,
palate, &c., it assumes the form of articulate letters, and ends by
becoming the Veda in its many branches.

8 As these are outwardly changed, without losing their nature,
thus the light of Brahman, though assuming the different forms of
the Veda, remains itself.

4 See before, VII, 1.

5 See Brzh. Up. IV, 2, 2, 3, where Indra is explained as Indha.

VII PRAPA THAKA, II.

345

(4) The mind excites the fire of the body, that fire
stirs the breath, and the breath, moving in the chest,
produces the low sound.

(5) Brought forth by the touch of the fire, as with
a churning-stick, it is at first a minim, from the
minim it becomes in the throat a double minim ;
on the tip of the tongue know that it is a treble
minim, and, when uttered, they call it the alphabet

(c TTOL-^eiaj k

(6) He who sees this, does not see death, nor dis¬
ease, nor misery, for seeing he sees all (objectively,
not as affecting him subjectively); he becomes all
everywhere (he becomes Brahman).

(7) There is the person in the eye, there is he
who walks as in sleep, he who is sound asleep, and
he who is above the sleeper : these are the four
conditions (of the Self), and the fourth is greater
than all 1 2 .

(8) Brahman with one foot moves in the three,
and Brahman with three feet is in the last.

1 A comparison of this verse with A 7 zand. Up. VII, 26, shows
the great freedom with which the wording of these ancient verses
was treated. Instead of—

Na pa^yan mntyum payyati na rogazzz nota du/zkhatam,
Sarvaz/z hi payyan payyati sarvam apnoti sarva^a/z,
the A 7 zandogya Up. reads :

Na pa^-yo mrztyum payyati na rogazzz nota drAkhatam,
Sarvazzz ha pas-ya/z payyati sarvam apnoti sarva^a/z.

" The conditions here described are sometimes called the Vkva
(Vakvanara), Tai^asa, Pra^zza, and Turiya. In the first state the
Self is awake, and enjoys the world; in the second he sees every¬
thing as in a dream; in the third the two former states cease, and
he is absorbed in sleep; in the fourth he becomes again the pure
Self. In the first state the Self has the disguise of a coarse material
body; in the second of a subtle material body; in the third its
disguise is potential only; in the fourth it has no disguise, either
potential or realised.

346

MAITRAYAiVA-RRAHMAiVA-UPANISHAD.

It is that both the true (in the fourth condition)
and the untrue (in the three conditions) may have
their desert, that the Great Self (seems to) become
two, yes, that he (seems to) become two \

‘ By reason of the experience of the false and the true, the great
Soul appears possessed of duality.’ Cowell.

1 RANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL /ALPHABETS ADOPTED FOR THE 1 RANSLATIONS

of the Sacred Books of the East.

transliteration of oriental alphabets.

347

aJ

s

G

2

u

CO

C\

*

Vi

x>

u

S

m n ^ ^ n.

n % c ^ c:

rt

*0

*• — u tfJ'U

b)-aJ

4>

PU

o

2

u

PU

U

:\) :..

*° — l) <xJ 'kJ

ti)

3 «10vJ

il :

•d

a

u

N

*C

in

CO

U ts? tr py

 v> lie/

nr IS* IF ITT

&

n

X

a,

i-i

<

&

£

o

►»*

w

CO

3

G

CO

3

u

3

u

-«S -C*

^ ^ ^ o,

M J

*> 'So

be

G

jjCj ^ rP i-G

r w r\

H

£

£

O

to

O

u

DQ

<D

r-H

C3

I

o

la

.53

Oi

to

c3

CO

• H

p

p

<U

c3

• r*H

* 'S

CO

ca p3

C3

C3 • ^
?h

• r-l *“3

o< J 5

to I
ca o

Ph

P

* jla
" P
O

CO

la

to

ca

Ph

CD

O.

to

ca

to

£

• H

.£3

Cl,

CQ

DQ

i H

fl

_D

CO

. r-t CO

il S3
2 S
J 3

CD CO
X • 1—4

P* c

§ J

CO

p

la

o

• rH

*4-*

<D

a.

CO

ca

to

P

la

o

to

> H

S3

<D

o

03

"c8

O

eel o
o ~

S OT

<D

sl

■3

Sj CO

3 ft

1

$

ca

la
?-»

• r*^

a.

CO

ca

ca

• r—l

5 1^3
* D

ca

la

• *-H

P 4

to

ca

to

>

la

CO

ca

&

H N M ^ W CO N 00 O) o H N

DQ

• H

P

P

<D

Eh

CO ^ CD N

TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS

348

1"0R the sacred books of the east.

349

ce

- 4-3

• M

Oh

GO

a

a

• r-H

CU

co

c 3

-G JC

co N

• •

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

• •

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

• •

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

• •

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

• •

c3

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

• •

• o3

03

*-4-3

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

g3

-4-3

•

-4-3

. c3
o

* £

*£

o

.5

^3

•

•

•

•

•

GQ

O

H

<P

• ^-1

•

•

•

•

c3

-4-3

•

•

•

•

CJ

IS

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

£h

’a,

CO

•

•

CO

’5

G

03

CO

<L>

G

•N CO

* ce

55

CO

'g

o

O

>
• i-H

s

03

CG

ft G

^ -4-3

CO

<lJi co

a. •£

§ j

CO

c 3

hi

«4H >

60

’2

G

03

Eh

Oh

CO

o3

c5

£ ^

03

S

Oh

CO

c3

ct

co

co

• r**

G

G

03

CO

13

CO

c 3

CO

• i-H

03

o

>

03

53 m
Qh *S

S «

C3 r—<

COCiOi-HCNcOrfftocOK*

Eh ^ W

GO

G

CX,

CO

cS

?-i

<a3

>

rs CO

- £

G

>

c3

b£>

ctf

co

COCiOH(Mco^lOCDNOOOi

^^loioioioioioioioioio

350 TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS,

o

C

15

u

cj

u

<D

X

c 3 «

i' i- i-i-

<a>

3 <3 a> <a> <K j ^

*a>

I-* ^ I s * I s

° * <§

l-i

:3

u

15

rt

>1 x .

*1

• b

\1

°

c

cd

Ph

>1 :j > y,

-1^

«b

\ 1

o*\

>

4)

15

4>

Pu

• -4-3

c •£

Cfl .s q

— 3

<5 •

T3

e

4?

N

QJ

3 3 i ^

2/ •

<KT

2 o •

CO ^ *

s»

«s

l

ti

cs

in

CJ

D

s

u

(/>

tf)

rt

0

u £ m-«t ie is" if ii> is

IV /IV

*> 'f

3

Q

o ->0> 50 c 3 <CC «

V*

•<?*

w

p <3 ®

* l—I *%H ^3

•— w )0

<0 w N-"

<a;

a>

^ S P

~ <rt 3 5

*° cu o

:c5

:o

to

P

w

£

o

>

05

r—I

ci

•4-3

3

<D

CO

CO

CO

• l-H

C3

•

•

•

•

CO

•

•

13

r2

13

Ph

1

3h

3

P

cS

>

a

$-•

CO

• r—i

bO

C

JD

GO

>

CO

?H

rO

longa

CO

• iH
>
<D

longa

• 1—4
>
<D

Fh

P

2

long£

GO

• m
>
<D

P

longa

o

bO

13

00

CO

13

CO

G

3

*3

c3

3

f—H

C3

&

C3

•N

-4-3

-4-3

3

r>

ws

-4-3

c3

13

r>

-4-3

p

O)

r>

bO

C
•»—<

C3

O

p.

Q

04

CO

to

CO

00

Ci

o

iH

<M

CO

GO

>

<L>

J-H

P>

GO

13

-J-3

r^2

13

p<

i

o

?-»

3

-»-3

-»-3

3

o

c3

bo

3

o

GO

• • .—<

c3

1

13

Ph

i

o

3

-1-3

"§

bo

GO

3

bO

3

o

rP

p3

Qh

* *

S

03
• »-h

>

©

*h

rO

GO

ii

c3

I

O

*h

3

-1-3

-M

3

a

N 00 P

3

bO

.2

1

i

O

3 £

i

3

bO

GO

3
bO
•s 3
* O

rP

-fr3

rP

Ph

c3

+3

o

c3

2

*3

3

3

a

c 3

-1-3

O

c3

£

CO

c3

- 4-3

O

c3

„?h

<4h

Xi 03

c 3

*4-3

13

c 3

£
c 3
. 1

O rH ca CO rf*

ca ca <m ca ca

tO CD
04 <M

t

^OUNO
