Wilhelm Reich
THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY
OF FASCISM
TRANSLATED BY VINCENT R. CARFAGNO

The Mass Psychology of Fascism
Love, work and knowledge are the well-springs of our life. They
should also govern it.
Wll.HELM REICH

ALSO BY WILHELM REICH
The Bioelectrical Investigation of Sexuality and Anxiety
The Bion Experiments
The Cancer Biopathy
Character Analysis
Children of the Future
Early Writings, Volume One
Ether, God and Devil/Cosmic Superimposition
The Function of the Orgasm
Genitality
The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality
Listen, Little Man!
The Murder of Christ
Passion of Youth
People in Trouble
Record of a Friendship
Reich Speaks of Freud
Selected Writings
The Sexual Revolution

WILHELM REICH
The Mass Psycholog
y
of
FASCISM
Edited by Mary Higgins
and Chester M. Raphael, M.D.
The
Noonday Press
Straus Giroux
Farrar, and
New
York

Copyright © 1970 by Mary Boyd Higgins as Trustee of the Wilhelm Reich
Infant Trust Fund
A new translation from the revised German manuscript, Die Massenpsychologie
des Faschismus, copyright © 1969 by Mary Boyd Higgins as Trustee of the
Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund
Earlier translation copyright © 1946 by Mary Boyd Higgins as Trustee of the
Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund
Library of Congress catalog card number: 78-113776
Tenth printing, 1993
All rights reserved
Published in Canada by HarpcrCollinsCanadaLtd
Printed in the United States of America

CONTEN TS
Foreword
IX
Preface to the Third Edition Xl
Glossary XXIX
I. IDEOLOGY AS A MATERIAL FORCE • 3
The cleavage
Economic and ideological structure
of the German society, 192 8-193 3
How mass psychology sees the problem
The social function of sexual repression
II. THE AUTHORITARIAN IDEOLOGY OF THE FAMILY
IN THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FA SeISM • 34
Fuhrer and mass structure
Hitler's background
On the mass psychology of the lower middle class
Family ties and nationalistic feelings
Nationalistic self-confidence
The "domestication" of the industrial workers
vContents
III. THE RACE THEORY • 75
Its contents
The objective and subjective functions of ideology
Racial purity, blood poisoning, and mysticism
IV. THE SYMBOLISM OF THE SWASTIKA • 98
V. THE SEx-EcONOMIC PRESUPPOSITIONS OF THE
AUTHORITARIAN FAMILY • 104
VI. ORGANIZED MYSTICISM AS AN INTERNATIONAL
ANTI-SEXUAL ORGANIZATION • 115
The interest in the church
The fight against "cultural Bolshevism"
The appeal to mystical feelings
The goal of the cultural revolution
in the light of fascist reaction
VII. SEx-EcONOMY IN THE FIGHT
AGAINST MYSTICISM • 143
The three basic elements of religious feeling
Anchoring of religion by means of sexual anxiety
Healthy and neurotic self-confidence
VIII. SOME QUESTIONS OF SEX-POLITICAL PRACTICE • 170
Theory and practice
The struggle against mysticism until now
Sexual happiness contra mysticism
The individual uprootment of the religious feeling
The practice of sex-economy and objections to it
The nonpolitical man
IX. THE MASSES AND THE STATE • 205
1936: Speak the truth-but how & when?
"What takes place in. the masses of people?"
viContents
The "socialist yearning"
The "withering away of the state"
The program of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union (Eighth Party Congress, 1919)
The "introduction of Soviet democracy"
The development of the apparatus of the authori­
tarian state from rational social relationships
The social function of state capitalism
X. BIOSOCIAL FUNCTION OF WORK • 285
The problem of "voluntary work discipline"
XI. GIVE RESPONSIBILITY TO VITALLY
NECESSARY WORK! • 310
What is "work-d.emocracy"?
What is new in work-democracy?
XII. THE BIOLOGIC MISCALCULATION IN THE HUMAN
STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM • 316
Our interest in the development of freedom
Biologic rigidity, incapacity for freedom, and me­
chanical authoritarian view of life
The arsenal of human freedom
XIII. ON NATURAL \VORK-DEMOCRACY • 360
Investigation of the natural social forces for the pur-
pose of overcoming the emotional plague
Work in contrast to politics
Notes on objective criticism and irrational caviling
Work is inherently rational
Vitally necessary and other work
Index 397
viiFOREWORD
In the first English-language edition of The Mass Psychology of Fas­
cism, which appeared in 1946, Reich stated that his sex-economic
theory, applied to the study of fascism, had "stood the test of time."
Now, almost forty years after the publication of the first edition in
German, this new, more exact, translation is being presented with every
indication that it is not merely a work of historical interest but that it
continues to "stand the test of time." Actually, in the violent struggle
that is taking place today between the forces of repression and natural
self-regulation, there is clear evidence that the validity of Reich's con­
cepts is more firmly rooted than ever before. Any attempt at a refutation
of their essential correctness must now contend with the knowledge of
the physical orgone energy, the common functioning principle applica­
ble to all biological and social phenomena. As extravagant as that may
sound, and as fanciful as the discovery itself may appear, it can be
predicted that it will continue to resist irrational rejection derived from
rumoring, disinterest, and mechanistic misinterpretation, as well as
equally irrational mystical acceptance or fragmentary selection, which
arbitrarily draws the line between what is or is not desirable. The latter
problem is particularly troublesome because of the rampant tendency to
judge Reich's work on the basis of one's own narrow interests and
prejudices, without any capacity to follow into unknown realms of
knowledge. For example, there is much evidence that the dissident
young, despite Reich's warning not to use his discoveries politically, are
eager to grasp certain portions of his early work for their own purposes,
while simultaneously discounting its logical development into the biolog-
ixForeword
ical and physical realm. It is no more possible to separate Reich's
early work in the mental hygiene movement and his study of human
character structure from his later, crucial discovery of the Life Energy
than it is to separate the animal man from life itself. If The Mass
Psychology of Fascism is ever to be understood and utilized in a practi­
cal way, if "thwarted" life is ever to free itself and peace and love to
become more than empty slogans, the existence and functioning of the
Life Energy must be acknowledged and understood. No matter how
much it is ridiculed and railed at, it cannot be ignored if man is ever to
come to grips with the hitherto mysterious forces within himself.
In this particular work Reich has applied his clinical knowledge of
human character structure to the social and political scene. He firmly
repudiates the notion that fascism is the ideology or action of a single
individual or nationality; or of any ethnic or political group. He also
denies a purely socio-economic explanation as advanced by Marxian
ideologists. He understands fascism as the expression of the irrational
character structure of the average human being whose primary, biologi­
cal needs and impulses have been suppressed for thousands of years. The
social function of this suppression and the crucial role played in it by
the authoritarian family and the church are carefully analyzed. Reich
shows how every form of organized mysticism, including fascism, relies
on the unsatisfied orgastic longing of the masses.
The importance of this work today cannot be underestimated. The
human character structure that created organized fascist movements still
exists, dominating our present social conflicts. If the chaos and agony of
our time are ever to be eliminated, we must tum our attention to the
character structure that creates them; we must understand the mass
psychology of fascism.
MARY HIGGINS, TRUSTEE
The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund
New York, 1970
xPREF ACE
to the Third Edition,
Revised and Enlarged
Extensive and painstaking therapeutic work on the human character has
led me to the conclusion that, as a rule, we are dealing with three
different layers of the biopsychic structure in the evaluation of human
reactions. As I demonstrated in my book Character-Analysis, these layers
of the character structure are deposits of social development, which
function autonomously. On the surface layer of his personality the
average man is reserved, polite, compassionate, responsible, conscien­
tious. There would be no social tragedy of the human animal if this
surface layer of the personality were in direct contact with the deep
natural core. This, unfortunately, is not the case. The surface layer of
social cooperation is not in contact with the deep biologic core of one's
selfhood; it is borne by a second, an intermediate character layer, which
consists exclusively of cruel, sadistic, lascivious, rapacious, and envious
impulses. It represents the Freudian "unconscious" or "what is re­
pressed"; to put it in the language of sex-economy, it represents the sum
total of all so-called "secondary drives."
Orgone biophysics made it possible to comprehend the Freudian
unconscious, that which is antisocial in man, as a secondary result of the
repression of primary biologic urges. If one penetrates through this
destructive second layer, deeper into the biologic substratum of the
human animal, one always discovers the third, deepest, layer, which we
call the biologic COTe. In this core, under favorable social conditions,
man is an essentially honest, industrious, cooperative, loving, and, if
motivated, rationally hating animal. Yet it is not at all possible to bring
about a loosening of the character structure of present-day man by
xiPreface to the Third Edition
penetrating to this deepest and so promising layer without first eliminat­
ing the nongenuine, spuriously social surface. Drop the mask of cultiva­
tion, and it is not natural sociality that prevails at first, but only the
perverse, sadistic character layer.
It is this unfortunate structuralization that is responsible for the
fact that every natural, social, or libidinous impulse that wants to spring
into action from the biologic core has to pass through the layer of
secondary perverse drives and is thereby distorted. This distortion trans­
forms the original social nature of the natural impulses and makes it
perverse, thus inhibiting every genuine expression of life.
Let us now transpose our human structure into the social and
political sphere.
It is not difficult to see that the various political and ideological
groupings of human society correspond to the various layers of the
structure of the human character. We, however, decline to accept the
error of idealistic philosophy, namely that this human structure is im­
mutable to all eternity. After social conditions and changes have trans­
muted man's original biologic demands and made them a part of his
character structure, the latter reproduces the social structure of society
in the form of ideologies.
Since the breakdown of the primitive work-democratic form of
social organization, the biologic core of man has been without social
representation. The "natural" and "sublime" in man, that which links
him to his cosmos, has found genuine expression only in great works of
art, especially in music and in painting. Until now, however, it has not
exercised a fundamental influence on the shaping of human society, if
by society we mean the community of mankind and not the culture of a
small, rich upper class.
In the ethical and social ideals of liberalism we recognize the
advocacy of the characteristics of the surface layer of the character,
which is intent upon self-control and tolerance. This liberalism lays
stress upon its ethics for the purpose of holding in suppression the
"monster in man," our layer of "secondary drives," the Freudian "un­
conscious." The natural sociability of the deepest third layer, the core
layer, is foreign to the liberal. He deplores the perversion of the human
character and seeks to overcome it by means of ethical norms, but the
social catastrophes of the twentieth century show that he did not get
very far with this approach.
xiiPretace to tbe Third Edition
Everything that is genuinely revolutionary, every genuine art and
science, stems from man's natural biologic core. Thus far, neither the
genuine revolutionary nor the artist nor scientist has won favor with
masses of people and acted as their leader, or if he has, he has not been
able to hold them . in the sphere of vital interest for any length of
time.
The case of fascism, in contrast to liberalism and genuine revolu­
tion, is quite different. Its essence embodies neither the surface nor the
depth, but by and large the second, intermediate character layer of
secondary drives.
When this book was first written, fascism was generally regarded as
a "political party," which, as other "social groups," advocated an orga­
nized "political idea." According to this appraisal "the fascist party was
instituting fascism by means of force or through 'political maneuver.' "
Contrary to this, my medical experiences with men and women of
various classes, races, nations, religious beliefs, etc., taught me that
"fascism" is only the organized political expression of the structure of
the average man's character, a structure that is confined neither to
certain races or nations nor to certain parties, but is general and inter­
national. Viewed with respect to man's character, "fascism" is the basic
emotional attitude of the suppressed man of our authoritarian machine
civilization and its mechanistic-mystical conception of life.
It is the mechanistic-mystical character of modern man that pro­
duces fascist parties, and not vice versa.
The result of erroneous political thinking is that even today fascism
is conceived as a specific national characteristic of the Germans or the
Japanese. All further erroneous interpretations follow from this initial
erroneous conception.
To the detriment of genuine efforts to achieve freedom, fascism was
and is still conceived as the dictatorship of a small reactionary clique.
The tenacity with which this error persists is to be ascribed to our fear of
recognizing the true state of affairs: ·fascism is an international phe­
nomenon, which pervades all bodies of human society of all nations.
This conclusion is in agreement with the international events of the past
fifteen years.
My character-analytic experiences have convinced me that there is
not a single individual who does not bear the elements of fascist feeling
xiiiPreface to tbe Tbird Edition
and thinking in his structure. As a political movement fascism differs
from other reactionary parties inasmuch as it is borne and championed
by TTUlSses of people.
I am fully conscious of the enormous responsibility involved in
making such an assertion. And in the interest of this lacerated world I
should like the toiling masses to be just as clear about their responsibil­
ity for fascism.
A sharp distinction must be made between ordinary militarism and
fascism. Wilhelmian Germany was militaristic, but it was not fascistic.
Since fascism, whenever and wherever it makes its appearance, is a
movement borne by masses of people, it betrays all the characteristics
and contradictions present in the character structure of the mass indi­
vidual. It is not, as is commonly believed, a purely reactionary move­
ment-it represents an amalgam between rebellious emotions and
reactionary social ideas.
If we conceive of being revolutionary as the rational rebellion
against intolerable conditions in human society, the rational will "to get
to the root of all things" ("radical" = "radic" = "root") and to improve
them, then fascism is never revolutionary. It can of course appear in the
guise of revolutionary emotions. But it is not the physician who tackles a
disease with reckless invectives whom we call revolutionary, but the one
who examines the causes of the disease quietly, courageously, and pains­
takingly, and fights it. Fascist rebelliousness always accrues where a
revolutionary emotion, out of fear of the truth, is distorted into illusion.
In its pure form fascism is the sum total of all the irrational reac­
tions of the average human character. To the obtuse sociologist who
lacks the mettle to recognize the supreme role played by irrationality in
the history of man, the fascist racial theory appears to be nothing more
than an imperialistic interest, or, more mildly speaking, a "prejudice."
The same holds true for the irresponsible glib politician. The scope and
widespread dissemination of these "racial prejudices" are evidence of
their origin in the irrational part of the human character. The racial
theory is not a product of fascism. On the contrary: it is fascism that is
a product of racial hatred and is its politically organized expression. It
follows from this that there is a German, Italian, Spanish, Anglo-Saxon,
Jewish, and Arabian fascism. Race ideology is a pure biopathic expres­
sion of the character structure of the orgastically impotent man.
The sadistically perverse character of race ideology is also betrayed
xivPreface to the Third Edition
in its attitude toward religion. Fascism is supposed to be a reversion to
paganism and an archenemy of religion. Far from it-fascism is the
supreme expression of religious mysticism. As such, it comes into being
in a peculiar social form. Fascism countenances that religiosity that
stems from sexual perversion, and it transforms the masochistic char­
acter of the old patriarchal religion of suffering into a sadistic religion.
In short, it transposes religion from the "other-worldliness" of the phi­
losophy of suffering to the "this worldliness" of sadistic murder.
Fascist mentality is the mentality of the "little man," who is en­
slaved and craves authority and is at the same time rebellious. It is no
coincidence that all fascist dictators stem from the reactionary milieu of
the little man. The industrial magnate and the feudal militarist exploit
this social fact for their own purposes, after it has evolved within the
framework of the general suppression of life-impulses. In the form of
fascism, mechanistic, authoritarian civilization reaps from the sup­
pressed little man only what it has sown in the masses of subjugated
human beings in the way of mysticism, militarism, automatism, over the
centuries. This little man has studied the big man's behavior all too
well, and he reproduces it in a distorted and grotesque fashion. The
fascist is the drill sergeant in the colossal army of our deeply sick, highly
industrialized civilization. It is not with impunity that the hullabaloo of
high politics is made a show of in front of the little man. The little
sergeant has surpassed the imperialistic general in everything: in martial
music; in goose-stepping; in commanding and obeying; in cowering
before ideas; in diplomacy, strategy, and tactic; in dressing and parad­
ing; in decorating and "honorating." A Kaiser Wilhelm was a miserable
duffer in all these things compared with the famished civil servant's son,
Hitler. When a "proletarian" general pins his chest full of medals, he
gives a demonstration of the little man who will not be "outclassed" by
the "genuine" big general.
An extensive and thorough study of the suppressed little man's
character, an intimate knowledge of his backstage life, are indispensable
prerequisites to an understanding of the forces fascism builds upon.
In the rebellion of vast numbers of abused human animals against
the hollow civilities of false liberalism (not to be mistaken with genuine
liberalism and genuine tolerance), it was the character layer, consisting
of secondary drives, that appeared.
The fascist madman cannot be made innocuous if he is sought,
xvPreface to the Third Edition
according to the prevailing political circumstances, only in the German
or the Italian and not in the American and the Chinese man as well; if
he is not tracked down in oneself; if we are not conversant with the
social institutions that hatch him daily.
Fascism can be crushed only if it is countered objectively and prac­
tically, with a well-grounded knowledge of life's processes. In political
maneuver, acts of diplomacy and making a show, it is without peer. But
it has no answer to the practical questions of life, for it sees everything
merely in the speculum of ideology or in the shape of the national
uniform.
When a fascist character, regardless of hue, is heard sermonizing
about the "honor of the nation" (instead of talking about the honor of
man) or the "salvation of the sacred family and the race" (instead of
the community of toiling mankind); when he is seen puffing himself up
and has his chops full of slogans, let him be asked quietly and simply in
public:
"What are you doing in a practical way to feed the nation, without
murdering other nations? What are you doing as a physician to combat
chronic diseases, what as an educator to intensify the child's joy of
living, what as an economist to erase poverty, what as a social worker to
alleviate the weariness of mothers having too many children, what as an
architect to promote hygienic conditions in living quarters? Let's have
no more of your chatter. Give us a straightforward, concrete answer or
shut up!"
It follows from this that international fascism will never be over­
come by political maneuver. It will fall victim to the natural organiza­
tion of work, love, and knowledge on an international scale.
In our society, love and knowledge still do not have the power at
their disposal to regulate human existence. In fact, these great forces of
the positive principle of life are not conscious of their enormity, their
indispensability, their overwhelming importance for social existence. It is
for this reason that human society today, one year after the military
victory over party fascism, still finds itself on the brink of the abyss. The
fall of our civilization is inevitable if those who work, the natural scien­
tists of all living (not dead) branches of knowledge and the givers and
receivers of natural love, should not become conscious of their enormous
responsibility quickly enough.
xviPreface to the Third Edition
The life-impulse can exist without fascism, but fascism cannot exist
without the life-impulse. Fascism is the vampire leeched to the body of
the living, the impulse to murder given free rein, when love calls for
fulfillment in spring.
Will individual and social freedom, will the self-regulation of our
lives and of the lives of our offspring, advance peacefully or violently? It
is a fearful question. No one knows the answer.
Yet, he who understands the living functions in an animal and in a
newborn babe, he who knows the meaning of devoted work, be he a
mechanic, researcher, or artist, knows. He ceases to think with the
concepts that party manipulators have spread in this world. The life­
impulse cannot "seize power violently," for it would not know what to
do with power. Does this conclusion mean that the life-impulse will
always be at the mercy of political gangsterism, will always be its victim,
its martyr? Does it mean that the would-be politician will always suck
life's blood? This would be a false conclusion.
As a physician it is my job to heal diseases. As a researcher I must
shed light upon unknown relationships in nature. Now if a political
windbag should come along and try to force me to leave my patients in
the lurch and to put aside my microscope, I would not let myself be
inconvenienced. I would simply throw him out, if he refused to leave
voluntarily. Whether I have to use force against intruders to protect my
work on life does not depend on me or on my work, but on the in­
truders' degree of insolence. But just imagine now that all those who are
engaged in vital living work could recognize the political windbag in time.
They would act in the same way. Perhaps this simplified example con­
tains some intimation of the answer to the question how the life-impulse
will have to defend itself sooner or later against intruders and destroyers.
The Mass Psychology of Fascism was thought out during the Ger­
man crisis years, 1930-33. It was written in 1933; the first edition
appeared in September of 1933 and the second edition in April of 1934,
in Denmark.
Ten years have elapsed since then. The book's exposure of the
irrational nature of the fascist ideology often received a far too enthusi­
astic acclaim from all political camps, an acclaim that was not based on
accurate knowledge and did not lead to appropriate action. Copies of
the book--sometimes pseudonymously--crossed the German border in
xviiPreface to tbe Tbird Edition
large numbers. The illegal revolutionary movement in Germany ac­
corded it a happy reception. For years it served as a source of contact
with the German anti-fascist movement.
The fascists banned the book in 1935, together with all literature
on political psychology.l Excerpts from it were printed in France, Amer­
ica, Czechoslovakia, Scandinavia, and other countries, and it was dis­
cussed in detailed articles. Only the party Socialists, who viewed
everything from an economic point of view, and the salaried party
officials, who were in control of the organs of political power, did not
and still do not know what to make of it. In Denmark and in Norway,
for instance, it was severely attacked and denounced as "counterrevolu­
tionary" by the leadership of the Communist party. It is significant, on
the other hand, that the revolution-oriented youth from fascist groups
understood the sex-economic explanation of the irrational nature of the
racial theory.
In 1942 an English source suggested that the book be translated
into English. Thus I was confronted with the task of examining the
validity of the book ten years after it was written. The result of this
examination exactly reflects the stupendous revolution in thinking that
had taken place over the course of the last decade. It is also a test of the
1 Deutsches Reichsgesetzblatt (an official gazette announcing new laws), No.
213, April 13, 1935. According to the VO* of February 4, 1933, the publica·
tion "What Is Class Consciousness" by Ernst Parell**; "Dialectical Materialism
and Psychoanalysis" by Wilhelm Reich; No. 1 and No. 2 of the politico·
psychological series of the publishers for sexual politics, Copenhagen-Prague­
Zurich, as wen as all other publications scheduled to appear in this series, are
to be confiscated and withdrawn from circulation by the Prussian police, as
they constitute a danger to public security and order.
41230/35 112 B 1 Berlin
9/4/35 Gestapo
No. 2146, May 7, 1935. According to the VO of the President of the State
issued on February 28, 1933, the distribution of all foreign publications of the
politico-psychological series of the publishers for sexual politics (Publishers for
Sexual Politics, Copenhagen, Denmark, also Prague, Czechoslovakia, and Zu­
rich, Switzerland) is prohibited in the State until further notice.
III P. 3952 53. Berlin
6/5/35 R.M.dJ.
* Vo = Verordnung = decree.
** A fictitious name used by Reich.
xviiiPreface to the Third Edition
tenableness of sex-economic sociology and its bearing on the social revo­
lutions of our century. I had not had this book in my hands for a
number of years. As I began to correct and enlarge it, I was stunned by
the errors in thinking that I had made fifteen years before, by the
revolutions in thought that had taken place, and by the great strain the
overcoming of fascism had put on science.
To begin with, I could well afford to celebrate a great triumph. The
sex-economic analysis of fascist ideology had not only held its own
against the criticism of the time-its essential points were more than
confirmed by the events of the past ten years. It outlived the downfall of
the purely economic, vulgar conception of Marxism, with which the
German Marxist parties had tried to cope with fascism. That a new
edition is called for some ten years after its initial publication speaks in
favor of Mass Psychology. None of the Marxist writings of the 1930's,
whose authors had denounced sex-economy, could make such a claim.
My revision of the second edition reflects the revolution that had
taken place in my thinking.
Around 1930 I had no idea of the natural work-democratic relations
of working men and women. The inchoate sex-economic insights into
the formation of the human structure were inserted into the intellectual
framework of Marxist parties. At that time I was active in liberal,
socialist, and communist cultural organizations and was regularly forced
to make use of the conventional Marxist sociologic concepts in my
expositions on sex-economy. Even then the enormous contradiction be­
tween sex-economic sociology and vulgar economism was brought out
in embarrassing disputes with various party functionaries. As I still
believed in the fundamental scientific nature of the Marxist parties,
it was difficult for me to understand why the party members attacked
the social effects of my medical work most sharply precisely when
masses of employees, industrial workers, small businessmen, students,
etc., thronged to the sex-economic organizations to obtain knowledge
of living life .. I shall never forget the "Red professor" from Moscow
who was ordered to attend one of the lectures in Vienna in 1928, to
advocate the "party line" against me. Among other things, this professor
declared that "the Oedipus complex was all nonsense," such a thing did
not exist. Fourteen years later his Russian comrades bled to death under
the tanks of the fuhrer-enslaved German machine-men.
One should certainly have expected parties claiming to fight for
xixPreface to the Third Edition
human freedom to be more than happy about the effects of my political
and psychological work. As the archives of our institute convincingly
show, the exact opposite was the case. The greater the social effects of
our work on mass psychology, the harsher were the countermeasures
adopted by the party politicians. As early as 1929-30, Austrian Social
Democrats barred the doors of their cultural organizations to the lec­
turers from our organization. In 1932, notwithstanding the strong pro­
test of their members, the socialist as well as communist organizations
prohibited the distribution of the publications of the "Publishers for
Sexual Politics," which was located in Berlin. I myself was warned that I
would be shot as soon as the Marxists came to power in Germany. That
same year the communist organizations in Germany closed the doors of
their assembly halls to physicians advocating sex-economy. This too was
done against the will of the organizations' members. I was expelled from
both organizations on grounds that I had introduced sexology into soci­
ology, and shown how it affects the formation of human structure. In
the years between 1934 and 1937 it was always Communist patty func­
tionaries who warned fascist circles in Europe about the "hazard" of sex­
economy. This can be documentarily proven. Sex-economic publications
were turned back at the Soviet Russian border, as were the throngs of
refugees who were trying to save themselves from German fascism.
There is no valid argument in justification of this.
These events, which seemed so senseless to me at that time, became
completely clear while revising The Mass Psychology of Fascism. Sex­
economic-biologic knowledge had been compressed into the terminology
of vulgar Marxism as an elephant into a foxhole. As early as 1938, while
revising my "youth" book, * I noticed that every sex-economic word had
retained its meaning after eight years, whereas every party slogan I had
included in the book had become meaningless. The same holds true for
the third edition of The Mass Psychology of Fascism.
It is generally clear today that "fascism" is not the act of a Hitler or
a Mussolini, but that it is the expression of the irrational structure of
mass man. It is more clear today than it was ten years ago that the race
theory is biologic mysticism. We also have far more knowledge at our
• This is a reference to DeT Sexuelle Kampf deT Tugend (The Sexual Fight of
Youth).
xxPrelace to the Third Edition
disposal, which enables us to understand man's orgastic yearnings, and
we have already begun to divine that fascist mysticism is orgastic yearn­
ing, restricted by mystic distortion and inhibition of natural sexuality.
The sex-economic statements about fascism are more valid today than
they were ten years ago. On the other hand the Marxist party concepts
used in this book had to be completely eliminated and replaced by new
concepts.
Does this mean that the Marxist economic theory is fundamentally
false? I should like to answer this question with an illustration. Is the
microscope of Pasteur's time or the water pump constructed by Leo­
nardo da Vinci, "false"? Marxism is a scientific theory of economy,
which originated in the social conditions at the beginning and middle of
the nineteenth century. But the social process did not stop there; it
continued into the totally different process of the twentieth century. In
this new social process we find all the essential features that existed in
the nineteenth century, just as we rediscover the basic construction of
the Pasteurian microscope in the modem microscope, or da Vinci's basic
principle in modem water supply. Yet neither the Pasteurian microscope
nor Leonardo da Vinci's pump would be of any use to anybody today.
They have become outdated as a result of the totally new processes and
functions corresponding to a totally new conception and technology.
The Marxist parties in Europe failed and came to naught (I don't
derive any malicious joy from saying that!) because they tried to com­
prehend twentieth-century fascism, which was something completely
new, with concepts belonging to the nineteenth century. They lost their
impetus as social organizations because they failed to keep alive and
develop the vital possibilities inherent in every scientific theory. I have
no regrets about the many years I spent as a physician iri Marxist
organizations. My knowledge of society does not derive from books;
essentially it was acquired from my practical involvement in the fight of
masses of people for a dignified and free existence. In fact, my best sex­
economic insights were gained from the errors in thinking of these same
masses of people, i.e., the very errors that made them ripe for the fascist
plague. As a physician I got to know the international working man and
his problems in a way that no party politician could have known him.
The party politician saw only "the working class," w4ich he wanted "to
infuse with class consciousness." 1 saw man as a creature who had come
under the domination of the worst possible social conditions, conditions
xxiPreface to the Third Edition
he himself had created and bore within himself as a part of his character
and from which he sought to free himself in vain. The gap between the
purely economic and bio-sociologic views became unbridgeable. The
theory of "class man" on the one hand was set against the irrational
nature of the society of the animal "man" on the other hand.
Everyone knows today that Marxist economic ideas have more or
less infiltrated and influenced the thinking of modem man, yet very
often individual economists and sociologists are not conscious of the
source of their ideas. Such concepts as "class," "profit," "exploitation,"
"class conflict," "commodity," and "surplus value," have become com­
mon knowledge. For all that, today there is no party that can be re­
garded as the heir and living representative of the scientific wealth of
Marxism, when it comes to the actual facts of sociological development
and not to the slogans, which are no longer in agreement with their
original import.
In the years between 1937 and 1939 the new sex-economic concept
"work-democracy" was developed. The third edition of this book in­
cludes an exposition of the principal features of this new sociologic
concept. It comprises the best, still valid, sociologic findings of Marxism.
It also takes into account the social changes that have taken place in the
concept "worker" in the course of the last hundred years. I know from
experience that it is the "sole representatives of the working class" and
the former and emerging "leaders of the international proletariat" who
will oppose this extension of the social concept of the worker on grounds
that it is "fascist," "Trotskyian," "counterrevolutionary," "hostile to
the party," etc. Organizations of workers that exclude Negroes and
practice Hitlerism do not deserve to be regarded as creators of a new and
free society. Hitlerism, however, is not confined to the Nazi party or to
the borders of Germany; it infiltrates workers' organizations as well as
liberal and democratic circles. Fascism is not a political party but a
specific concept of life and attitude toward man, love, and work. This
does not alter the fact that the policies pursued by the prewar Marxist
parties are played out and have no future. Just as the concept of sexual
energy was lost within the psychoanalytic organization only to reappear
strong and young in the discovery of the orgone, the concept of the
international worker lost its meaning in the practices of Marxist parties
only to be resurrected within the framework of sex-economic sociology.
For the activities of sex-economists are possible only within the frame-Preface to the Third Edition
work of socially necessary work and not within the framework of reac­
tionary, mystified, nonworking life.
Sex-economic sociology was born from the effort to hannonize
Freud's depth psychology with Marx's economic theory. Instinctual and
socio-economic processes detennine human existence. But we have to
reject eclectic attempts to combine "instinct" and "economy" arbitrar­
ily. Sex-economic sociology dissolves the contradiction that caused
psychoanalysis to forget the social factor and Marxism to forget the
animal origin of man. As I stated elsewhere: Psychoanalysis is the
mother, sociology the father, of sex-economy. But a child is more than
the sum total of his parents. He is a new, independent living creature;
he is the seed of the future.
·
In accord with the new, sex-economic comprehension of the con­
cept of "work," the following changes were made in the book's tenni­
nology. The concepts "communist," "socialist," "class consciousness,"
etc., were replaced by more specific sociologic and psychologic tenns,
such as "revolutionary" and "scientific." '\That they import is a "radical
revolutionizing," "rational activity," "getting to the root of things."
This takes into account the fact that today it is not the Communist
or the Socialist parties but, in contradistinction to them, many non­
political groups and social classes of every political hue that are becom­
ing more and more revolutionary, i.e., are striving for a fundamentally
new, rational social order. It has become part of our universal social
consciousness-and even the old bourgeois politicians are saying it­
that, as a result of its fight against the fascist plague, the world has
become involved in the process of an enonnous, international, revolu­
tionary upheaval. The words "proletariat" and "proletarian" were
coined more than a hundred years ago to denote a completely defrauded
class of society, which was condemned to pauperization on a mass scale.
To be sure, such categories still exist today, but the great grandchildren
of the nineteenth-century proletariat have become specialized, techni­
cally highly developed, indispensable, responsible industrial workers who
are conscious of their skills. The words "class consciousness" are
replaced by "consciousness of one's skills" or "social responsibility."
In nineteenth-century Marxism "class consciousness" was restricted
to manual laborers. Those who were employed in other vital occupa­
tions, i.e., occupations without which society could not function, were
labeled "intellectuals" or "petty bourgeois" and set against the "manualPreface to the Third Edition
labor proletariat." This schematic and no longer applicable juxtaposition
played a very essential part in the victory of fascism in Germany. The
concept "class consciousness" is not only too narrow, it does not at all
tally with the structure of the class of manual workers. For this reason,
"industrial work" and "proletariat" were replaced by the terms "vital
work" and "the working man." These two terms include all those who
perform work that is vital to the existence of the society. In addition to
the industrial workers, this includes the physician, teacher, technician,
laboratory worker, writer, social administrator, farmer, scientific worker,
etc. This new conception closes a gap that contributed in no small way
to the fragmentation of working human society and, consequently, led
to fascism, both the black and red variety.
Owing to its lack of knowledge of mass psychology, Marxist sociol­
ogy set "bourgeois" against "proletariat." This is incorrect from a
psychological viewpoint. The character structure is not restricted to the
capitalists; it is prevalent among the working men of all occupations.
There are liberal capitalists and reactionary workers. There are no "class
distinctions" when it comes to character. For that reason, the purely
economic concepts "bourgeoisie" and "proletariat" were replaced by the
concepts "reactionary" and "revolutionary" or "free-minded," which
relate to man's character and not to his social class. These changes were
forced upon us by the fascist plague.
The dialectical materialism Engels outlined in his Anti-Diihring
went on to become an energetic functionalism. This forward develop­
ment was made possible Ly the discovery of the biological energy, the
orgone (1936-38). Sociology and psychology acquired a solid biological
foundation. Such a development could not fail to exercise an influence
on our thinking. Our extension of thought brings about changes in old
concepts; new ones take the place of those that have ceased to be valid.
The Marxist word "consciousness" was replaced by "dynamic struc­
ture"; "need" was replaced by "orgonotic instinctual processes"; "tradi­
tion" by "biological and characterological rigidity," etc.
The vulgar Marxist concept of "private enterprise" was totally
misconstrued by man's irrationality; it was understood to mean that the
liberal development of society precluded every private possession. Natu­
rally, this was widely exploited by political reaction. Quite obviously,
social development and individual freedom have nothing to do with the
xxivPreface to the Third Edition
so-called abolishment of private property. Marx's concept of private
property did not refer to man's shirts, pants, typewriters, toilet paper,
books, beds, savings, houses, real estate, etc. This concept was used
exclusively in reference to the private ownership of the social means of
production, i.e., those means of production that determine the general
course of society. In other words: railroads, waterworks, generating
plants, coal mines, etc. The "socialization of the means of production"
became such a bugbear precisely because it was confounded to mean the
"private expropriation" of chickens, shirts, books, residences, etc., in
conformity with the ideology of the expropriated. Over the course of the
past century the nationalization of the social means of production has
begun to make an incursion upon the latter's private availability in all
capitalist countries, in some countries more, in others less.
Since the working man's structure and capacity for freedom were
too inhibited to enable him to adapt to the rapid development of social
organizations, it was the "state" that carried out those acts that were
actually reserved for the "community" of working man. As for Soviet
Russia, the alleged citadel of Marxism, it is out of the question to speak
of the "socialization of the means of production." The Marxist parties
simply confused "socialization" with "nationalization." It was shown in
this past war that the government of the United States also has the
jurisdiction and the means of nationalizing poorly functioning indus­
tries. A socialization of the means of production, their transfer from the
private ownership of single individuals to social ownership, sounds a lot
less horrible when one realizes that today, as a result of the war, only a
few independent owners remain in capitalist countries, whereas there are
many trusts that are responsible to the state; when one realizes, more­
over, that in Soviet Russia the social industries are certainly not
managed by the people who work in them, but by groups of state
functionaries. The socialization of the social means of production will
not be topical or possible until the masses of working humanity have
become structurally mature, i.e., conscious of their responsibility to
manage them. The overwhelming majority of the masses today is neither
willing nor mature enough for it. Moreover, a socialization of large
industries, which would place these industries under the sole manage­
ment of the manual laborer, excluding technicians, engineers, directors,
administrators, distributors, etc., is sociologically and economically
xxvPreface to the Third Edition
senseless. Today such an idea is rejected by the manual laborers them­
selves. If that were not the case, Marxist parties would already have
conquered power everywhere.
This is the most essential sociological explanation of the fact that
more and more the private enterprise of the nineteenth century is
turning into a state-capitalist planned economy. It must be clearly stated
that even in Soviet Russia state socialism does not exist, but a rigid state
capitalism in the strict Marxian sense of the word. According to Marx,
the social condition of "capitalism" does not, as the vulgar Marxist
believed, derive from the existence of individual capitalists, but from the
existence of the specific "capitalist modes of production." It derives, in
short, from exchange economy and not from use economy, from the
paid labor of masses of people and from surplus production, whether
this surplus accrues to the state above the society, or to the individual
capitalists through their appropriation of social production. In this strict
Marxian sense the capitalist system continues to exist in Russia. And it
will continue to exist as long as masses of people are irrationally moti­
vated and crave authority as they are and do at present.
The sex-economic psychology of structure adds to the economic
view of society a new interpretation of man's character and biology. The
removal of individual capitalists and the establishment of state capital­
ism in Russia in place of private capitalism, did not effect the slightest
change in the typical, helpless, subservient character-structure of masses
of people.
Moreover, the political ideology of the European Marxist parties
was based on economic conditions that were confined to a period of
some two hundred years, from about the seventeenth to the nineteenth
century, during which the machine was developed. Twentieth-century
fascism, on the other hand, raised the basic question of man's character,
human mysticism and craving for authority, which covered a period of
some four to six thousand years. Here, too, vulgar Marxism sought to
ram an elephant into a foxhole. The human structure with which sex­
economic sociology is concerned did not evolve during the past two
hundred years; on the contrary, it reflects a patriarchal authoritarian
civilization that goes back thousands of years. Indeed, sex-economy goes
so far as to say that the abominable excesses of the capitalist era of the
past three thousand years (predatory imperialism, defraudation of the
working man, racial subjugation, etc.) were possible only because the
xxviPreface to the Third Edition
human structure of the untold masses who had endured all this had
become totally dependent upon authority, incapable of freedom and
extremely accessible to mysticism. That this structure is not native to
man but was inculcated by social conditions and indoctrination does not
alter its effects one bit; but it does point to a way out, namely restruc­
turization. If being radical is understood to mean "getting to the root of
things," then the point of view of sex-economic biophysics is, in the
strict and positive sense of the word, infinitely more radical than that of
the vulgar Marxist.
It follows from all this that the social measures of the past three
hundred years can no more cope with the mass pesti1ence of fascism
than an elephant (six thousand years) can be forced into a foxhole
(three hundred years).
Hence, the discovery of natural biological work-democracy in inter­
national human intercourse is to be considered the answ�r to fascism.
This would be true, even if not a single contemporary sex-economist,
orgone biophysicist, or work-democrat should live to see its complete
realization and victory over irrationality in social life.
WILHELM REICH
MAINE, AUGUST 1942
xxviiG L O S S ARY
BIONS. Vesicles representing transitional stages between non-living and
living substance. They constantly form in nat'Jre by a process of dis­
integration of inorganic and organic matter, which process it has been
possible to reproduce experimentally. They are charged with orgone
energy and develop into protozoa and bacteria.
BIOPATHY. A disorder resulting from the disturbance of biological
pulsation in the total organism. It comprises all those disease processes
that occur in the autonomic life apparatus. The central mechanism is a
disturbance in the discharge of biosexual excitation.
CHARACTER ANALYSIS. A modification of the customary psychoanalytic
technique of symptom analysis, by the inclusion of the character and
character resistance into the therapeutic process.
CHARACTER STRUCTURE. An individual's typical structure, his stereo­
type manner of acting and reacting. The orgonomic concept of char­
acter is functional and biological, and not a static psychological or
moralistic concept.
ORGASM ANXIETY. Sexual anxiety caused by an external frustration of
instinctual gratification and anchored internally by the fear of dammed
up sexual excitation. It forms the basis of the general pleasure anxiety
that is an integral part of the prevailing human structure.
ORGASTIC IMPOTENCE. The absence of orgastic potency, i.e., the inca­
pacity for complete surrender to the involuntary convulsion of the orga-
xxixGlossary
nism and complete discharge of the excitation at the acme of the
genital embrace. It is the most important characteristic of the average
human of today, and-by damming up biological (orgone) energy in
the organism-provides the source of energy for all kinds of biopathic
symptoms and social irrationalism.
ORGONE ENERGY. Primordial Cosmic Energy; universally present and
demonstrable visually, thermically, electroscopically, and by means of
Geiger-Mueller counters. In the living organism: Bioenergy, Life En­
ergy. Discovered by Wilhelm Reich between 1936 and 1940.
ORGONOMIC (ENERGETIC) FUNCTIONALISM. The functional thought
technique that guides clinical and experimental orgone research. The
guiding principle is that of the identity of variations in the common
functioning principle (CFP). This thought technique grew in the
course of the study of human character formation and led to the dis­
covery of the functional organismic and cosmic orgone energy, thereby
proving itself to be the correct mirroring of both living and nonliving
basic natural processes.
SEX-ECONOMY. The term refers to the manner of regulation of biologi­
cal energy, or, what is the same thing, of the economy of the sexual
energies of the individual. Sex-economy means the manner in which an
individual handles his biological energy; how much of it he dams up and
how much of it he discharges orgastically. The factors that influence this
manner of regulation are of a sociological, psychological, and biological
nature. The science of sex-economy consisted of that body of knowledge
that was derived from a study of these factors. This term was applicable
to Reich's work from the time of his refutation of Freud's cultural
philosophy to the discovery of the orgone when it was superseded by
orgonomy, the science of the Life Energy.
SEX POLITICS. The term "sex politics" or "sex political" refers to the
practical application of the concepts of sex-economy on the social scene
on a mass basis. This work was done within the mental hygiene and
revolutionary freedom movements in Austria and Germany from 1927
to 1933.
SEXPOL. The name of the German organization concerned with mass
sex political activities.
xxxGlossary
VEGETOTHERAPY. With the discovery of the muscular armor, the char­
acter analytic therapeutic process was modified to liberate the bound up
vegetative energies, thereby restoring to the patient his biophysical
motility. The combining of character analysis and vegetotherapy was
known as character analytic vegetotherapy. The later discovery of orga­
nismic orgone energy (bioenergy) and the concentration of atmospheric
orgone energy with an orgone energy accumulator necessitated the
further development of character analytic vegetotherapy into an inclu­
sive, biophysical orgone therapy.
WORK-DEMOCRACY: Work-democracy is not an ideological system. Nor
is it a "political" system, which could be imposed upon human society
by the propaganda of a party, individual politicians, or any group
sharing a common ideology. Natural work-democracy is the sum total of
all functions of life governed by the rational interpersonal relations that
have come into being, grown and developed in a natural and organic
way. What is new in work-democracy is that for the first time in the
history of sociology, a possible future regulation of human society is
derived not from ideologies or conditions that must be created, but from
natural processes that have been present and have been developing from
the very beginning. Work-democratic "politics" is distinguished by the
fact that it re;ects all politics and demagogism. Masses of working men
and women will not be relieved of their social responsibility. They will
be burdened with it. Work-democrats have no ambition to be political
fuhrers. Work-democracy consciously develops formal democracy, which
is expressed in the mere election of political representatives and does not
entail any further responsibility on the part of the electorate, into a
genuine, factual, and practical democracy on an international scale. This
democracy is borne by the functions of love, work, and knowledge and is
developed organically. It fights mysticism and the idea of the totalitarian
state not through political attitudes but through practical functions of
life, which obey their own laws. In short, natural work-democracy is a
newly discovered bio-sociologic, natural and basic function of society. It
is not a political program.
:xxxiThe Mass Psychology of Fascism

I
Ideology as a Material Force
THE eLEAV AGE
The German freedom movement prior to Hitler was inspired by
Karl Marx's economic and social theory. Hence, an understanding
of German fascism must proceed from an understanding of
Marxism.
In the months following National Socialism's seizure of power
in Germany, even those individuals whose revolutionary firmness
and readiness to be of service had been proven again and again,
expressed doubts about the correctness of Marx's basic conception
of social processes. These doubts were generated by a fact that,
though irrefutable, was at first incomprehensible: Fascism, the most
extreme representative of political and economic reaction in both its
goals and its nature, had become an international reality and in
many countries had visibly and undeniably outstripped the socialist
revolutionary movement. That this reality found its strongest
expression in the highly industrialized countries only heightened the
problem. The rise of nationalism in all parts of the world offset the
failure of the workers' movement in a phase of modern history in
which, as the Marxists contended, "the capitalist mode of produc­
tion had become economically ripe for explosion." Added to this
was the deeply ingrained remembrance of the failure of the
Workers' International at the outbreak of World War I and of the
crushing of the revolutionary uprisings outside of Russia between
3THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
1918 and 1923. They were doubts, in short, which were generated
by grave facts; if they were justified, then the basic Marxist concep­
tion was false and the workers' movement was in need of a decisive
reorientation, provided one still wanted to achieve its goals. If,
however, the doubts were not justified, and Marx's basic conception
of sociology was correct, then not only was a thorough and extensive
analysis of the reasons for the continual failure of the workers'
movement called for, but also-and this above all-a complete
elucidation of the unprecedented mass movement of fascism was
also needed. Only from this could a new revolutionary practice
result.1
A change in the situation was out of the question unless it could
be proven that either the one or the other was the case. It was clear
that neither an appeal to the "revolutionary class consciousness" of
the working class nor the practice a la Coue-the camouflaging of
defeats and the covering of important facts with illusions-a prac­
tice that was in vogue at that time, could lead to the goal. One
could not content oneself with the fact that the workers' movement
was also "progressing," that here and there resistance was being
offered and strikes were being called. What is decisive is not that
progress is being made, but at what tempo, in relation to the inter­
national strengthening and advance of political reaction.
The young work-democratic, sex-economic movement is inter­
ested in a thorough clarification of this question not only because it
is a part of the social liberation fight in general but chiefly because
the achievement of its goals is inextricably related to the achieve­
ment of the political and economic goals of natural work-democ­
racy. For this reason we want to try to explain how the specific sex­
economic questions are interlaced with the general social questions,
seen from the perspective of the workers' movement.
In some of the German meetings around 1930 there were intel-
1 Cf. Preface.
4Ideology as a Material Force
ligent, straightforward, though nationalistically and mystically
oriented, revolutionaries-such as Otto Strasser, for example-who
were wont to confront the Marxists as follows: "You Marxists like to
quote Marx's theories in your defense. Marx taught that theory is
verified by practice only, but your Marxism has proved to be a
failure. You always come around with explanations for the defeat of
the Workers' International. The 'defection of the Social Demo­
crats' was your explanation for the defeat of 1914; you point to their
'treacherous politics' and their illusions to account for the defeat of
1918. And again you have ready 'explanations' to account for the
fact that in the present world crisis the masses are turning to the
Right instead of to the Left. But your explanations do not blot out
the fact of your defeats! Eighty years have passed, and where is the
concrete confirmation of the theory of social revolution? Your basic
error is that you reject or ridicule soul and mind and that you don't
comprehend that which moves everything." Such were their argu­
ments, and exponents of Marxism had no answer. It became more
and more clear that their political mass propaganda, dealing as it did
solely with the discussion of ob;ective socio-economic processes at a
time of crisis (capitalist modes of production, economic anarchy,
etc.), did not appeal to anyone other than the minority already
enrolled in the Left front. The playing up of material needs and of
hunger was not enough, for every political party did that much,
even the church; so that in the end it was the mysticism of the
National Socialists that triumphed over the economic theory of
socialism, and at a time when the economic crisis and misery were
at their worst. Hence, one had to admit that there was a glaring
omission in the propaganda and in the overall conception of social­
ism and that, moreover, this omission was the source of its "political
errors." It was an error in the Marxian comprehension of political
reality, and yet all the prerequisites for its correction were contained
in the methods of dialectical materialism. They had simply never
been turned to use. In their political practice, to state it briefly at
the outset, the Marxists had failed to take into account the character
structure of the masses and the social effect of mysticism.
5THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
Those who followed, and were practically involved in the
revolutionary Left's application of Marxism between 1917 and 1933,
had to notice that it was restricted to the sphere of ob;ective
economic processes and governmental policies, but that it neither
kept a close eye on nor comprehended the development and contra­
dictions of the so-called "subjective factor" of history, i.e., the
ideology of the masses. The revolutionary Left failed, above all, to
make fresh use of its own method of dialectical materialism, to keep
it alive, to comprehend every new social reality from a new perspec­
tive with this method.
The use of dialectical materialism to comprehend new histori­
cal realities was not cultivated, and fascism was a reality that neither
Marx nor Engels was familiar with, and was caught sight of by
Lenin only in its beginnings. The reactionary conception of reality
shuts its eyes to fascism's contradictions and actual conditions.
Reactionary politics automatically makes use of those social forces
that oppose progress; it can do this successfully only as long as
science neglects to unearth those revolutionary forces that must of
necessity overpower the reactionary forces. As we shall see later, not
only regressive but also very energetic progressive social forces
emerged in the rebelliousness of the lower middle classes, which
later constituted the mass basis of fascism. This contradiction was
overlooked; indeed, the role of the lower middle classes was alto­
gether in eclipse until shortly before Hitler's seizure of power.
Revolutionary activity in every area of human existence will
come about by itself when the contradictions in every new process
are comprehended; it will consist of an identification with those
forces that are moving in the direction of genuine progress. To be
radical, according to Karl Marx, means "getting to the root of
things." If one gets to the root of things, if one grasps their contra­
dictory operations, then the overcoming of political reaction is
assured. If one does not get to the root of things, one ends, whether
one wants to or not, in mechanism, in economism, or even in
metaphysics, and inevitably loses one's footing. Hence, a critique
6Ideology as a Material Force
can only be significant and have a practical value if it can show
where the contradictions of social reality were overlooked. What
was revolutionary about Marx was not that he wrote this or that
proclamation or pointed out revolutionary goals; his major revolu­
tionary contribution is that he recognized the industrial productive
forces as the progressive force of society and that he depicted the
contradictions of capitalist economy as they relate to real life. The
failure of the workers' movement must mean that our knowledge of
those forces that retard social progress is very limited, indeed, that
some major factors are still altogether unknown.
As so many works of great thinkers, Marxism also degenerated
to hollow formulas and lost its scientific revolutionary potency in
the hands of Marxist politicians. They were so entangled in every­
day political struggles that they failed to develop the principles of a
vital philosophy of life handed down by Marx and Engels. To con­
firm this, one need merely compare Sauerland's book on "Dialecti­
cal Materialism" or any of Salkind's or Pieck's books with Marx's
Dos Kapital or Engels' The Development of Socialism from Utopia
to Science. Flexible methods were reduced to formulas; scientific
empiricism to rigid orthodoxy. In the meantime the "proletariat" of
Marx's time had developed into an enormous class of industrial
workers, and the middle-class shopkeepers had become a colossus of
industrial and public employees. Scientific Marxism degenerated to
"vulgar Marxism." This is the name many outstanding Marxist
politicians have given to the economism that restricts all of human
existence to the problem of unemployment and pay rates.
It was this very vulgar Marxism that maintained that the
economic crisis of 1929-33 was of such a magnitude that it would of
necessity lead to an ideological Leftist orientation among the
stricken masses. While there was still talk of a "revolutionary re­
vival" in Germany, even after the defeat of January 1933, the reality
of the situation showed that the economic crisis, which, according
to expectations, was supposed to entail a development to the Left in
the ideology of the masses, had led to an extreme development to
7THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
the Right in the ideology of the proletarian strata of the population.
The result was a cleavage between the economic basis, which de­
veloped to the Left, and the ideology of broad layers of society,
which developed to the Right. This cleavage was overlooked; conse­
quently, no one gave a thought to asking how broad masses living in
utter poverty could become nationalistic. Explanations such as
"chauvinism," "psychosis," "the consequences of Versailles," are
not of much use, for they do not enable us to cope with the
tendency of a distressed middle class to become radical Rightist;
such explanations do not really comprehend the processes at work in
this tendency. In fact, it was not only the middle class that turned
to the Right, but broad and not always the worst elements of the
proletariat. One failed to see that the middle classes, put on their
guard by the success of the Russian Revolution, resorted to new and
seemingly strange preventative measures (such as Roosevelt's "New
Deal"), which were not understood at that time and which the
workers' movement neglected to analyze. One also failed to see that,
at the outset and during the initial stages of its development to a
mass movement, fascism was directed against the upper middle class
and hence could not be disposed of "merely as a bulwark of big
finance," if only because it was a mass movement.
Where was the problem?
The basic Marxist conception grasped the facts that labor was
exploited as a commodity, that capital was concentrated in the
hands of the few, and that the latter entailed the progressive
pauperization of the majority of working humanity. It was from this
process that Marx arrived at the necessity of "expropriating the
expropriators." According to this conception, the forces of produc­
tion of capitalist society transcend the limits of the modes of
production. The contradiction between social production and pri­
vate appropriation of the products by capital can only be cleared up
by the balancing of the modes of production with the level of the
forces of production. Social production must be complemented by
the social appropriation of the products. The first act of this
8Ideology as a Material Force
assimilation is social revolution; this is the basic economic principle
of Marxism. This assimilation can take place, it is said, only if the
pauperized majority establishes the "dictatorship of the proletariat"
as the dictatorship of the working majority over the minority of the
now expropriated owners of the means of production.
According to Marx's theory the economic preconditions for a
social revolution were given: capital was concentrated in the hands
of the few, the growth of national economy to a world economy was
completely at variance with the custom and tariff system of the
national states; capitalist economy had achieved hardly half of its
production capacity, and there could no longer be any doubt about
its basic anarchy. The majority of the population of the highly
industrialized countries was living in misery; some fifty million
people were unemployed in Europe; hundreds of millions of
workers scraped along on next to nothing. But the expropriation of
the expropriators failed to take place and, contrary to expectations,
at the crossroads between "socialism and barbarism," it was in the
direction of barbarism that society first proceeded. For the inter­
national strengthening of fascism and the lagging behind of the
workers' movement was nothing other than that. Those who still
hoped for a revolution to result from the anticipated second World
War, which in the meantime had become a reality-those, in other
words, who counted on the masses to turn the weapons thrust into
their hands against the inner enemy-had not followed the de­
velopment of the new techniques of war. One could not simply
reject the reasoning to the effect that the arming of the broad
masses would be highly unlikely in the next war. According to this
conception, the fighting would be directed against the unarmed
masses of the large industrial centers and would be carried out by
very reliable and selected war-technicians. Hence, a reorientation of
one's thinking and one's evaluations was the precondition of a new
revolutionary practice. World War II was a confirmation of these
expectations.
9THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
ECONOMIC AND IDEOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE
1928-1933
GERMAN SOCIETY,
Rationally considered, one would expect economically wretched
masses of workers to develop a keen consciousness of their social
situation; one would further expect this consciousness to harden
into a determination to rid themselves of their social misery. In
short, one would expect the socially wretched working man to revolt
against the abuses to which he is subjected and to say: "After all, I
perform responsible social work. It is upon me and those like me
that the weal and ill of society rests. I myself assume the responsi­
bility for the work that must be done." In such a case, the thinking
("consciousness") of the worker would be in keeping with his social
situation. The Marxist called it "class consciousness." We want to
call it "consciousness of one's skills," or "consciousness of one's
social responsibility." The cleavage between the social situation of
the working masses and their consciousness of this situation implies
that, instead of improving their social position, the working masses
worsen it. It was precisely the wretched masses who helped to put
fascism, extreme political reaction, into power.
It is a question of the role of ideology and the emotional atti­
tude of these masses seen as a historical factor, a question of the
repercussion of the ideology on the economic basis. If the material
wretchedness of the broad masses did not lead to a social revolution;
if, objectively considered, contrary revolutionary ideologies resulted
from the crisis, then the development of the ideology of the masses
in the critical years thwarted the "efflorescence of the forces of
production," prevented, to use Marxist concepts, the "revolutionary
resolution of the contradictions between the forces of production of
monopolistic capitalism and its methods of production."
The composition of the classes in Germany appears as follows.
Quoted from Kunik: "An Attempt to Establish the Social Com­
position of the German Population," Die Internationale, 1928,
edited by Lenz: "Proletarian Policies," Internationaler Arbeiter­
verlag, 1931.
10Ideology as a Material Force
wage earners with families
IN THOUSANDS IN MILLIONS
Industrial workers2 21,789 40.7
Urban middle class 6,157 10.7
Lower-and middle-class farmers 6,598 9.0
Bourgeoisie
(including property owners and big
farmers) 718 2.0
Population
(excluding children and wives) 34,762 total 62.4
2 "The proletariat" according to Marx.
DISTRIBUTION OF URBAN MIDDLE CLASS
IN THOUSANDS
Lower strata of small tradesmen
(Home industries, tenant farmers, shops operated by
one person, shops operated by less than three persons) 1,196
Small shops having three or more employees 1,403
White-collar workers and civil servants 1,763
Professional people and students 431
People with small independent means and small property
owners 644
total 6,157
DISTRIBUTION OF THE WORKING CLASS
Workers in industry, trade, commerce, etc. 11,826
Agricultural workers 2,607
Home workers 138
Domestics 1,326
Social security recipients 1,717
Lower white-collar workers (less than 250 marks per
month) 2,775
Lower civil servants (and pensioners) 1,400
total 21,789
11THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
THE RURAL MIDDLE CLASS
Small farmers and tenant farmers
(less than 5 hectare) 2,366
Middle-class farmers
(between 5 and 50 hectare) 4,232
total 6,598
These figures are taken from the German census of 1925.
It is necessary to point out, however, that they represent the
distribution solely according to the socio-economic position; the
ideological distribution is different. Thus, socio-economically
viewed, the Germany of 1925 comprised:
wage earners including families
Workers 21,789,000 40,700,000
Middle Classes 12,755,000 19,700,000
On the other hand, a rough estimate of the ideological structure
showed the following distribution:
Workers in industry, trade, commerce, etc.
and agricultural workers 14,433,000
Lower middle class 20,111,000
Home workers (individual production) 138
Domestics 1,326
Social security recipients 1,717
Lower category of white-collar workers
(employed in big industries, e.g., "Nord-
stern," Berlin) 2,775
Lower category of civil servants (e.g., tax
auditors, post office employees) 1,400
7,356
( of economic
"proletariat")
Urban Middle Class 6,157
Rural Middle Class 6,598
total 20,111
12Ideology as a Material Force
No matter how many middle-class employees may have voted for
left-wing parties and how many workers may have voted for right­
wing parties, it is nonetheless striking that the figures -af the ideo­
logical distribution, arrived at by us, agree approximately with the
election figures of 1932: Taken together the Communists and the
Social Democrats received twelve to thirteen million votes, while
the NSDAP* and the German Nationalists received some nineteen
to twenty million votes. Thus, with respect to practical politics, it
was not the economic but the ideological distribution that was
decisive. In short, the political importance of the lower middle class
is greater than had been assumed.
During the rapid decline of the German economy, 1929-32, the
NSDAP jumped from 800,000 votes in 1928 to 6,400,000 in the fall
of 1930, to 13,000,000 in the summer of 1932 and 17,000,000 in
January of 1933. According to Jager's calculations ("Hitler" Roter
Aufbau, October 1930) the votes cast by the workers made up
approximately 3,000,000 of the 6,400,000 votes received by the
National Socialists in 1930. Of these 3,000,000 votes, some 60 to 70
percent came from employees and 30 to 40 percent from workers.
To my knowledge it was Karl Radek who most clearly grasped
the problematic aspect of this sociological process as early as 1930,
following the NSDAP's first upsurge. He wrote:
Nothing similar to this is known in the history of political
struggle, particularly in a country with firmly established political
differentiations, in which every new party has had to fight for any
position held by the old parties. There is nothing more character­
istic than the fact that, neither in bourgeois nor in socialist litera­
ture, has anything been said about this party, which assumes the
second place in German political life. It is a party without history
which suddenly emerges in German political life, just as an island
suddenly emerges in the middle of the sea owing to volcanic forces.
-"German Elections," Roter Aufbau, October, 1930
We have no doubt that this island also has a history and follows
an inner logic.
* Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei.
13THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
The choice between the Marxist alternative: "fall to barbarism"
or "rise to socialism," was a choice that, according to all previous
experience, would be determined by the ideological structure of the
dominated classes. Either this structure would be in keeping with
the economic situation or it would be at variance with it, as, for
instance, we find in large Asian societies, where exploitation is
passively endured, or in present-day Germany, where a cleavage
exists between economic situation and ideology.
Thus, the basic problem is this: What causes this cleavage, or to
put it another way, what prevents the economic situation from
coinciding with the psychic structure of the masses? It is a problem,
in short, of comprehending the nature of the psychological structure
of the masses and its relation to the economic basis from which it
derives.
To comprehend this, we must first of all free ourselves from
vulgar Marxist concepts, which only block the way to an under­
standing of fascism. Essentially, they are as follows:
In accordance with one of its formulas, vulgar Marxism com­
pletely separates economic existence from social existence as a
whole, and states that man's "ideology" and "consciousness" are
solely and directly determined by his economic existence. Thus, it
sets up a mechanical antithesis between economy and ideology,
between "structure" and "superstructure"; it makes ideology rigidly
and one-sidedly dependent upon economy, and fails to see the
dependency of economic development upon that of ideology. For
this reason the problem of the so-called "repercussion of ideology"
does not exist for it. Notwithstanding the fact that vulgar Marxism
now speaks of the "lagging behind of the subjective factor," as
Lenin understood it, it can do nothing about it in a practical way,
for its former conception of ideology as the product of the economic
situation was too rigid. It did not explore the contradictions of
economy in ideology, and it did not comprehend ideology as a
historical force.
In fact, it does everything in its power not to comprehend the
structure and dynamics of ideology; i� brushes it aside as "psycho1-
14Ideology as a Material Force
ogy," which is not supposed to be "Marxistic," and leaves the
handling of the subjective factor, the so-called "psychic life" in his­
tory, to the metaphysical idealism of PQ.1itical reaction, to a
Gentile and a Rosenberg, who make "mind" and "soul" solely
responsible for the progress of history and, strange to say, have
enormous success with this thesis. The neglect of this aspect of
sociology is something Marx himself criticized in the materialism of
the eighteenth century. To the vulgar Marxist, psychology is a
metaphysical system pure and simple, and he draws no distinction
whatever between the metaphysical character of reactionary psy­
chology and the basic elements of psychology, which were furnished
by revolutionary psychological research and which it is our task to
develop. The vulgar Marxist simply negates, instead of offering
constructive criticism, and feels himself to be a "materialist" when
he rejects facts such as "drive," "need," or "inner process," as being
"idealistic." The result is that he gets into serious difficulties and
meets with one failure after another, for he is continually forced to
employ practical psychology in political practice, is forced to speak
of the "needs of the masses," "revolutionary consciousness," "the
will to strike," etc. The more the vulgar Marxist tries to gainsay
psychology, the more he finds himself practicing metaphysical psy­
chologism and worst, insipid Coueism. For example, he will try to
explain a historical situation on the basis of a "Hitler psychosis," or
console the masses and persuade them not to lose faith in Marxism.
Despite everything, he asserts, headway is being made, the revolu­
tion will not be subdued, etc. He sinks to the point finally of
pumping illusionary courage into the people, without in reality
saying anything essential about the situation, without having com­
prehended what has happened. That political reaction is never at a
loss to find a way out of a difficult situation, that an acute economic
crisis can lead to barbarism as well as it can lead to social freedom,
must remain for him a book with seven seals. Instead of allowing his
thoughts and acts to issue from social reality, he transposes reality in
his fantasy in such a way as to make it correspond to his wishes.
Our political psychology can be nothing other than an investi-
15THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
gation of this "subjective factor of history," of the character struc­
ture of man in a given epoch and of the ideological structure of
society that it forms. Unlike reactionary psychology and psychologis­
tic" economy, it does not try to lord it over Marxist sociology by
throwing "psychological conceptions" of social processes in its teeth,
but gives it its proper due as that which deduces consciousness from
existence.
The Marxist thesis to the effect that originally "that which is
materialistic" (existence) is converted into "that which is ideologi­
cal" (in consciousness), and not vice versa, leaves two questions
open: (1) how this takes place, what happens in man's brain in this
process; and (2) how the "consciousness" (we will refer to it as
psychic structure from now on) that is formed in this way reacts
upon the economic process. Character-analytic psychology fills this
gap by revealing the process in man's psychic life, which is deter­
mined by the conditions of existence. By so doing, it puts its finger
on the "subjective factor," which the vulgar Marxist had failed to
comprehend. Hence, political psychology has a sharply delineated
task. It cannot, for instance, explain the genesis of class society or
the capitalist mode of production (whenever it attempts this, the
result is always reactionary nonsense-for instance, that capitalism is
a symptom of man's greed). Nonetheless, it is political psychol­
ogy-and not social economy-that is in a position to investigate
the structure of man's character in a given epoch, to investigate how
he thinks and acts, how the contradictions of his existence work
themselves out, how he tries to cope with this existence, etc. To be
sure, it examines individual men and women only. If, however, it
specializes in the investigation of typical psychic processes common
to one category, class, professional group, etc., and excludes indi­
vidual differences, then it becomes a mass psychology.
Thus it proceeds directly from Marx himself.
The presuppositions with which we begin are not arbitrary
presuppositions; they are not dogmas; they are real presuppositions
from which one can abstract. only in fancy. They are the actual
16Ideology as a Material Force
individuals, their actions and the material conditions of their lives,
those already existing as well as those produced by action.
-
German Ideology
"Man himself is the basis of his material production, as of
every other production which he achieves. In other words, all condi­
tions affect and more or less modify all of the functions and activ­
ities of man-the subject of production & the creator of material
wealth, of commodities. In this connection it can be indeed proven
that all human conditions and functions, no matter how and when
they are manifested, influence material production and have a more
or less determining effect on them" [My italics, WR].
-Theory of Surplus Value
Hence, we are not saying anything new, and we are not revising
Marx, as is so often maintained: "All human conditions," that is,
not only the conditions that are a part of the work process, but also
the most private and most personal and highest accomplishments of
human instinct and thought; also, in other words, the sexual life of
women and adolescents and children, the level of the sociological
investigation of these conditions and its application to new social
questions. With a certain kind of these "human conditions," Hitler
was able to bring about a historical situation that is not to be
ridiculed out of existence. Marx was not able to develop a sociology
of sex, because at that time sexology did not exist. Hence, it now
becomes a question of incorporating both the purely economic and
sex-economic conditions into the framework of sociology, of destroy­
ing the hegemony of the mystics and metaphysicians in this domain.
When an "ideology has a repercussive effect upon the economic
process," this means that it must have become a material force.
When an ideology becomes a material force, as soon as it has the
ability to arouse masses, then we must go on to ask: How does this
take place? How is it possible for an ideologic factor to produce a
materialistic result, that is, for a theory to produce a revolutionary
effect? The answer to this question must also be the answer to the
question of reactionary mass psychology; it must, in other words,
elucidate the "Hitler psychosis."
17THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
The ideology of every social formation has the function not
only of reflecting the economic process of this society, but also and
more significantly of embedding this economic process in the
psychic structures of the people who make up the society. Man is
subject to the conditions of his existence in a twofold way: directly
through the immediate influence of his economic and social posi­
tion, and indirectly by means of the ideologic structure of the
society. His psychic structure, in other words, is forced to develop a
contradiction corresponding to the contradiction between the influ­
ence exercised by his material position and the influence exercised
by the ideological structure of society. The worker, for instance, is
subject to the situation of his work as wen as to the general ideology
of the society. Since man, however, regardless of class, is not only
the object of these influences but also reproduces them in his activ­
ities, his thinking and acting must be just as contradictory as the
society from which they derive. But, inasmuch as a social ideology
changes man's psychic structure, it has not only reproduced itself in
man but, what is more significant, has become an active force, a
material power in man, who in turn has become concretely changed,
and, as a consequence thereof, acts in a different and contradictory
fashion. It is in this way and only in this way that the repercussions
of a society's ideology on the economic basis from which it derives is
possible. The "repercussion" loses its apparent metaphysical and
psychologistic character when it can be comprehended as the func­
tioning of the character structure of socially active man. As such, it
is the object of natural scientific investigations of the character.
Thus, the statement that the "ideology" changes at a slower pace
than the economic basis is invested with a definite cogency. The
basic traits of the character structures corresponding to a definite
historical situation are formed in early childhood, and are far more
conservative than the forces of technical production. It results from
this that, as time goes on, the psychic structures lag behind the
rapid changes of the social conditions from which they derived, and
later come into conflict with new forms of life. This is the basic trait
18Ideology as a Material Force
of the nature of so-called tradition, i.e., of the contradiction be­
tween the old and the new social situation.
HOW MASS PSYCHOLOGY SEES THE PROBLEM
We begin to see now that the economic and ideologic situations
of the masses need not necessarily coincide, and that, indeed, there
can be a considerable cleavage between the two. The economic
situation is not directly and immediately converted into political
consciousness. If this were the case, the social revolution would have
been here long ago. In keeping with this dichotomy of social condi­
tion and social consciousness, the investigation of society must
proceed along two different lines. Notwithstanding the fact that the
psychic structure derives from the economic existence, the economic
situation has to be comprehended with methods other than those
used to comprehend the character structure: the former has to be
comprehended socio-economically, the latter biopsychologically. Let
us illustrate this with a simple example: When workers who are
hungry, owing to wage-squeezing, go on strike, their act is a direct
result of their economic situation. The same applies to the man who
steals food because he is hungry. That a man steals because he is
hungry, or that workers strike because they are being exploited,
needs no further psychological clarification. In both cases ideology
and action are commensurate with economic pressure. Economic
situation and ideology coincide with one another. Reactionary
psychology is wont to explain the theft and the strike in terms of
supposed irrational motives; reactionary rationalizations are invari­
ably the result. Social psychology sees the problem in an entirely
different light: what has to be explained is not the fact that the man
who is hungry steals or the fact that the man who is exploited
strikes, but why the majority of those who are hungry don't steal
and why the majority of those who are exploited don't strike. Thus,
social economy can give a complete explanation of a social fact that
serves a rational end, i.e., when it satisfies an immediate need and
reflects and magnifies the economic situation. The social economic
19THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
explanation does not hold up, on the other hand, when a man's
thought and action are inconsistent with the economic situation, are
irrational, in other words. The vulgar Marxist and the narrow­
minded economist, who do not acknowledge psychology, are help­
less in the face of such a contradiction. The more mechanistically
and economistically oriented a sociologist is, the less he knows about
man's psychic structure, the more he is apt to fall prey to superficial
psychologism in the practice of mass propaganda. Instead of prob­
ing and resolving the psychic contradictions in the individuals of the
masses, he has recourse to insipid COllt?ism or he explains the
nationalistic movement on the basis of a "mass psychosis."3 Hence,
the line of questioning of mass psychology begins precisely at the
point where the immediate socio-economic explanation hits wide of
the mark. Does this mean that mass psychology and social economy
serve cross purposes? No. For thinking and acting on the part of the
masses contradictory to the immediate socio-economic situation, i.e.,
irrational thinking and acting, are themselves the result of an
earlier, older socio-economic situation. One is wont to explain the
repression of social consciousness by so-called tradition. But no
investigation has been made as yet to determine just what "tradi­
tion" is, to determine which psychic elements are molded by it.
Narrow-minded economy has repeatedly failed to see that the most
essential question does not relate to the workers' consciousness of
social responsibility (this is self-evident!) but to what it is that
inhibits the development of this consciousness of responsibility.
Ignorance of the character structure of masses of people invari­
ably leads to fruitless questioning. The Communists, for example,
said that it was the misdirected policies of the Social Democrats
that made it possible for the fascists to seize power. Actually this
explanation did not explain anything, for it was precisely the Social
3 In view of the fact that the economist neither knows nor acknowledges the
existence of psychic processes, the words "mass psychosis" do not mean to him
what they mean to us, namely a social circumstance of enormous historical
importance; to him it is a matter of no social significance whatever.
20Ideology as a Material Force
Democrats who made a point of spreading illusions. In short, it did
not result in a new mode of action. That political reaction in the
form of fascism had "befogged," "corrupted," and "hypnotized"
the masses is an explanation that is as sterile as the others. This is
and will continue to be the function of fascism as long as it exists.
Such explanations are sterile because they fail to offer a way out.
Experience teaches us that such disclosures, no matter how often
they are repeated, do not convince the masses; that, in other words,
social economic inquiry by itself is not enough. Wouldn't it be
closer to the mark to ask what was going on in the masses that they
could not and would not recognize the function of fascism? To say
that "The workers have to realize . . ." or "We didn't understand
. . :' does not serve any purpose. Why didn't the workers realize,
and why didn't they understand? The questions that formed the
basis of discussion between the Right and the Left in the workers'
movements are also to be regarded as sterile. The Right contended
that the workers were not predisposed to fight; the Left, on the
other hand, refuted this and asserted that the workers were revolu­
tionary and that the Right's statement was a betrayal of revolu­
tionary thinking. Both assertions, because they failed to see the
complexities of the issue, were rigidly mechanistic. A realistic ap­
praisal would have had to point out that the average worker bears a
contradiction in himself; that he, in other words, is neither a clear­
cut revolutionary nor a clear-cut conservative, but stands divided.
His psychic structure derives on the one hand from the social situa­
tion (which prepares the ground for revolutionary attitudes) and on
the other hand from the entire atmosphere of authoritarian society
-the two being at odds with one another.
It is of decisive importance to recognize such a contradiction
and to learn precisely how that which is reactionary and that which
is progressive-revolutionary in the workers are set off against one
another. Naturally, the same applies to the middle-class man. That
he rebels against the "system" in a crisis is readily understandable.
However, notwithstanding-the fact that he is already in an eco­
nomically wretched position, the fact that he fears progress and
21THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
becomes extremely reactionary is not to be readily understood from
a socio-economic point of view. In short, he too bears a contradic­
tion in himself between rebellious feelings and reactionary aims and
contents.
We do not, for instance, give a full sociological explanation of a
war when we analyze the specific economic and political factors that
are its immediate cause. In other words, it is only part of the story
that the German annexation ambitions prior to 1914 were focused
on the ore mines of Briey and Longy, on the Belgian industrial
center, on the extension of Germany's colonial possessions in the
Near East; or that Hitler's imperial interests were focused on the oil
wells of Baku, on the factories of Czechoslovakia, etc. To be sure,
the economic interests of German imperialism were the immediate
decisive factors, but we also have to put into proper perspective the
nutss psychological basis of world wars; we have to ask how the
psychological structure of the masses was capable of absorbing the
imperialistic ideology, to translate the imperialistic slogans into
deeds that were diametrically opposed to the peaceful, politically
disinterested attitude of the German population. To say that this
was due to the "defection of the leaders of the Second Interna­
tional" is insufficient. Why did the myriad masses of the freedom­
loving and anti-imperialistic oriented workers allow themselves to be
betrayed? The fear of the consequences involved in conscientious
objection accounts only for a minority of cases. Those who went
through the mobilization of 1914 know that various moods were
evident among the working masses. They ranged from a conscious
refusal on the part of a minority to a strange resignedness to fate (or
plain apathy) on the part of very broad layers of the population, to
the point of clear martial enthusiasm, not only in the middle classes
but among large segments of industrial workers also. The apathy of
some as well as the enthusiasm of others was undoubtedly part of
the foundations of war in the structure of the masses. This function
on the part of the psychology of the masses in both world wars can
be understood only from the sex-economic point of view, namely
that the imperialistic ideology concretely changed the structures of
22Ideology as a Material Force
the working masses to suit imperialism. To say that social catastro­
phes are caused by "war psychoses" or by "mass befogging" is
merely to throw out phrases. Such explanations explain nothing.
Besides it would be a very low estimation of the masses to suppose
that they would be accessible to mere befogging. The point is that
every social order produces in the masses of its members that struc­
ture which it needs to achieve its main aims.4 No war would be
possible without this psychological structure of the masses. An
essential relation exists between the economic structure of society
and the mass psychological structure of its members, not only in the
sense that the ruling ideology is the ideology of the ruling class, but,
what is even more important for the solving of practical questions
of politics, the contradictions of the economic structure of a society
are also embedded in the psychological structure of the subjugated
masses. Otherwise it would be inconceivable that the economic laws
of a society could succeed in achieving concrete results solely
through the activities of the masses subjected to them.
To be sure, the freedom movements of Germany knew of the so­
called "subjective factor of history" (contrary to mechanistic mate­
rialism, Marx conceived of man as the subject of history, and it was
precisely this side of Marxism that Lenin built upon); what was
lacking was a comprehension of irrational, seemingly purposeless
actions or, to put it another way, of the cleavage between economy
and ideology. We have to be able to explain how it was possible for
mysticism to have triumphed over scientific sociology. This task can
4 "In every epoch the ideas of the ruling class are the ruling ideas, i.e., the class
which is the ruling material power of the society also constitutes that society's
ideological power. The class which has the means of material production at its
disposal also has the means of ideological 'production' at its disposal, so that
those who lack the means of ideological production are thereby on the average
subject to those who have. The ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal­
istic expression of the ruling material conditions, that is to say, the ruling mate­
rial conditions expressed as ideas; the conditions which enabled the one class
to become the ruling class or, to put it another way, the ideas of their ruler­
ship [Marx]."
23THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
be accomplished only if our line of questioning is such that a new
mode of action results spontaneously from our explanation. If the
working man is neither a clear-cut reactionary nor a clear-cut revolu­
tionary, but is caught in a contradiction between reactionary and
revolutionary tendencies, then if we succeed in putting our finger on
this contradiction, the result must be a mode of action that offsets
the conservative psychic forces with revolutionary forces. Every
form of mysticism is reactionary, and the reactionary man is mysti­
cal. To ridicule mysticism, to try to pass it off as "befogging" or as
"psychosis," does not lead to a program against mysticism. If mysti­
cism is correctly comprehended, however, an antidote must of
necessity result. But to accomplish this task, the relations between
social situation and structural formation, especially the irrational
ideas that are not to be explained on a purely socio-economic basis,
have to be comprehended as completely as our means of cognition
allow.
THE SOCIAL FUNCTION OF SEXUAL REPRESSION
Even Lenin noted a peculiar, irrational behavior on the part of
the masses before and in the process of a revolt. On the soldiers'
revolt in Russia in 1905, he wrote:
The soldier had a great deal of sympathy for the cause of the
peasant; at the mere mention of land, his-eyes blazed with passion.
Several times military power passed into the hands of the soldiers,
but this power was hardly ever used resolutely. The soldiers
wavered. A few hours after they had disposed of a hated superior,
they released the others, entered into negotiations with the author­
ities, and then had themselves shot, submitted to the rod, had
themselves yoked again.
-Ueber Religion p. 65
Any mystic will explain such behavior on the basis of man's
eternal moral nature, which, he would contend, prohibits a rebellion
against the divine scheme and the "authority of the state" and its
24Ideology as a Material Force
representatives. The vulgar Marxist simply disregards such phenom­
ena, and he would have neither an understanding nor an explana­
tion for them because they are not to be explained from a purely
economic point of view. The Freudian conception comes consider­
ably closer to the facts of the case, for it recognizes such behavior as
the effect of infantile guilt-feelings toward the father figure. Yet it
fails to give us any insight into the sociological origin and function
of this behavior, and for that reason does not lead to a practical
solution. It also overlooks the connection between this behavior and
the repression and distortion of the sexual life of the broad masses.
fy
To help clari our approach to the investigation of such irra­
tional mass psychological phenomena, it is necessary to take a
cursory glance at the line of questioning of sex-economy, which is
treated in detail elsewhere.
Sex-economy is a field of research that grew out of the sociology
of human sexual life many years ago, through the application of
functionalism in this sphere, and has acquired a number of new
insights. It proceeds from the following presuppositions:
Marx found social life to be governed by the conditions of
economic production and by the class conflict that resulted from
these conditions at a definite point of history. It is only seldom that
brute force is resorted to in the domination of the oppressed classes
by the owners of the social means of production; its main weapon is
its ideological power over the oppressed, for it is this ideology that is
the mainstay of the state apparatus. We have already mentioned
that for Marx it is the living, productive man, with his psychic and
physical disposition, who is the first presupposition of history and of
politics. The character structure of active man, the so-called "sub­
jective factor of history" in Marx's sense, remained uninvestigated
because Marx was a sociologist and not a psychologist, and because
at that time scientific psychology did not exist. Why man had
allowed himself to be exploited and morally humiliated, why, in
short, he had submitted to slavery for thousands of years, remained
25THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
unanswered; what had been ascertained was only the economic
process of society and the mechanism of economic exploitation.
Just about half a century later, using a special method he called
psychoanalysis, Freud discovered the process that governs psychic
life. His most important discoveries, which had a devastating and
revolutionary effect upon a large number of existing ideas (a fact
that garnered him the hate of the world in the beginning), are as
follows:
Consciousness is only a small part of the psychic life; it itself is
governed by psychic processes that take place unconsciously and are
therefore not accessible to conscious control. Every psychic experi­
ence (no matter how meaningless it appears to be), such as a
dream, a useless performance, the absurd utterances of the psychi­
cally sick and mentally deranged, etc., has a function and a "mean­
ing" and can be completely understood if one can succeed in tracing
its etiology. Thus psychology, which had been steadily deteriorating
into a kind of physics of the brain ("brain mythology") or into a
theory of a mysterious objective Geist, entered the domain of natural
science.
Freud's second great discovery was that even the small child
develops a lively sexuality, which has nothing to do with procrea­
tion; that, in other words, sexuality and procreation, and sexual and
genital, are not the same. The analytic dissection of psychic proc­
esses further proved that sexuality, or rather its energy, the libido,
which is of the body, is the prime motor of psychic life. Hence, the
biologic presuppositions and social conditions of life overlap in the
mind.
The third great discovery was that childhood sexuality, of which
what is most crucial in the child-parent relationship ("the Oedipus
complex") is a part, is usually repressed out of fear of punishment
for sexual acts and thoughts (basically a "fear of castration"); the
child's sexual activity is blocked and extinguished from memory.
Thus, while repression of childhood sexuality withdraws it from the
influence of consciousness, it does not weaken its force. On the
contrary, the repression intensifies it and enables it to manifest itself
26Ideology as a Material Force
in various pathological disturbances of the mind. As there is hardly
an exception to this rule among "civilized man," Freud could say
that he had all of humanity as his patient.
The fourth important discovery in this connection was that, far
from being of divine origin, man's moral code was derived from the
educational measures used by the parents and parental surrogates in
earliest childhood. At bottom, those educational measures opposed
to childhood sexuality are most effective. The conflict that originally
takes place between the child's desires and the parent's suppression
of these desires later becomes the conflict between instinct and
morality within the person. In adults the moral code, which itself is
unconscious, operates against the comprehension of the laws of
sexuality and of unconscious psychic life; it suppo�ts sexual repres­
sion ("sexual resistance") and accounts for the widespread resis­
tance to the "uncovering" of childhood sexuality.
Through their very existence, each one of these discoveries (we
named only those that were most important for our subject) consti­
tutes a severe blow to reactionary moral philosophy and especially to
religious metaphysics, both of which uphold eternal moral values,
conceive of the world as being under the rulership of an objective
"power," and deny childhood sexuality, in addition to confining
sexuality to the function of procreation. However, these discoveries
could not exercise a significant influence because the psychoanalytic
sociology that was based on them retarded most of what they had
given in the way of progressive and revolutionary impetus. This is
not the place to prove this. Psychoanalytic sociology tried to analyze
society as it would analyze an individual, set up an absolute antithe­
sis between the process of civilization and sexual gratification,
conceived of destructive instincts as primary biological facts govern­
ing human destiny immutably, denied the existence of a matriarchal
primeval period, and ended in a crippling skepticism, because it
recoiled from the consequences of its own discoveries. Its hostility
toward efforts proceeding on the basis of these discoveries goes back
many years, and its representatives are unswerving in their opposi­
tion to such efforts. All of this has not the slightest effect on our
27THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
determination to defend Freud's great discoveries against every
attack, regardless of origin or source.
Sex-economic sociology's line of questioning, which is based on
these discoveries, is not one of the typical attempts to supplement,
replace, or confuse Marx with Freud or Freud with Marx. In an
earlier passage we mentioned the area in historical materialism
where psychoanalysis has to fulfill a scientific function, which social
economy is not in a position to accomplish: the comprehension of
the structure and dynamics of ideology, not of its historical basis. By
incorporating the insights afforded by psychoanalysis, sociology at­
tains a higher standard and is in a much better position to master
reality; the nature of man's structure is finally grasped. It is only the
narrow-minded politician who will reproach character-analytic struc­
ture-psychology for not being able to make immediate practical
suggestions. And it is only a political loudmouth who will feel called
upon to condemn it in total because it is afflicted with all the
distortions of a conservative view of life. But it is the genuine
sociologist who will reckon psychoanalysis' comprehension of child­
hood sexuality as a highly significant revolutionary act.
It follows of itself that the science of sex-economic sociology,
which builds upon the sociological groundwork of Marx and the
psychological groundwork of Freud, is essentially a mass psychologi­
cal and sex-sociological science at the same time. Having rejected
Freud's philosophy of civilization,5 it begins where the clinical
psychological line of questioning of psychoanalysis ends.
Psychoanalysis discloses the effects and mechanisms of sexual
suppression and repression and of their pathological consequences
in the individual. Sex-economic sociology goes further and asks: For
what sociological reasons is sexuality suppressed by the society and
repressed by the individual? The church says it is for the sake of
salvation beyond the grave; mystical moral philosophy says that it is
a direct result of man's eternal ethical and moral nature; the
G In which, despite all its idealism, more truth is found about living life than
in all sociologies and some Marxist psychologies tlJken together.
28Ideology as a Material Force
Freudian philosophy of civilization contends that this takes place in
the interest of "culture." One becomes a bit skeptical and asks how
is it possible for the masturbation of small children and the sexual
intercourse of adolescents to disrupt the building of gas stations and
the manufacturing of airplanes. It becomes apparent that it is not
cultural activity itself which demands suppression and repression of
sexuality, but only the present forms of this activity, and so one is
willing to sacrifice these forms if by so doing the terrible wretched­
ness of children and adolescents could be eliminated. The question,
then, is no longer one relating to culture, but one relating to social
order. If one studies the history of sexual suppression and the
etiology of sexual repression, one finds that it cannot be traced back
to the beginnings of cultural development; suppression and repres­
sion, in other words, are not the presuppositions of cultural de­
velopment. It was not until relatively late, with the establishment of
an authoritarian patriarchy and the beginning of the division of the
classes, that suppression of sexuality begins to make its appearance.
It is at this stage that sexual interests in general begin to enter the
service of a minority's interest in material profit; in the patriarchal
marriage and family this state of affairs assumes a solid organiza­
tional form. With the restriction and suppression of sexuality, the
nature of human feeling changes; a sex-negating religion comes into
being and gradually develops its own sex-political organization, the
church with all its predecessors, the aim of which is nothing other
than the eradication of man's sexual desires and consequently of
what little happiness there is on earth. There is good reason for all
this when seen from the perspective of the now-thriving exploita­
tion of human labor.
To comprehend the relation between sexual suppression and
human exploitation, it is necessary to get an insight into the basic
social institution in which the economic and sex-economic situation
of patriarchal authoritarian society are interwoven. Without the
inclusion of this institution, it is not possible to understand the
sexual economy and the ideological process of a patriarchal society.
The psychoanalysis of men and women of all ages, all countries, and
29THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
every social class shows that: The interlacing of the socio-economic
structure with the sexual structure of society and the structural
reproduction of society take place in the first four or five years and
in the authoritarian family. The church only continues this function
later. Thus, the authoritarian state gains an enormous interest in the
authoritarian family: It becomes the factory in which the state's
structure and ideology are molded.
We have found the social institution in which the sexual and
the economic interests of the authoritarian system converge. Now
we have to ask how this convergence takes place and how it oper­
ates. Needless to say, the analysis of the typical character structure
of reactionary man (the worker included) can yield an answer only
if one is at all conscious of the necessity of posing such a question.
The moral inhibition of the child's natural sexuality, the last stage
of which is the severe impairment of the child's genital sexuality,
makes the child afraid, shy, fearful of authority, obedient, "good,"
and "docile" in the authoritarian sense of the words. It has a crip­
pling effect on man's rebellious forces because every vital life­
impulse is now burdened with severe fear; and since sex is a
forbidden subject, thought in general and man's critical faculty also
become inhibited. In short, morality's aim is to produce acquiescent
subjects who, despite distress and humiliation, are adjusted to the
authoritarian order. Thus, the family is the authoritarian state in
miniature, to which the child must learn to adapt himself as a
preparation for the general social adjustment required of him later.
Man's authoritarian st ru cture - this must be clearly established-is
basically produced by the embedding of sexual inhibitions and fear
in the living substance of sexual impulses.
We will readily grasp why sex-economy views the family as the
most important source for the reproduction of the authoritarian
social system when we consider the situation of the average con­
servative worker's wife. Economically she is just as distressed as a
liberated working woman, is subject to the same economic situation,
but she votes for the Fascist party; if we further clarify the actual
difference between the sexual ideology of the average liberated
30Ideology as a Material Force
woman and that of the average reactionary woman, then we recog­
nize the decisive importance of sexual structure. Her anti-sexual,
moral inhibitions prevent the conservative woman from gaining a
consciousness of her social situation and bind her just as firmly to
the church as they make her fear "sexual Bolshevism." Theoreti­
cally, the state of affairs is as follows: The vulgar Marxist who
thinks in mechanistic terms assumes that discernment of the social
situation would have to be especially keen when sexual distress is
added to economic distress. If this assumption were true, the
majority of adolescents and the majority of women would have to
be far more rebellious than the majority of men. Reality reveals an
entirely different picture, and the economist is at a complete loss to
know how to deal with it. He will find it incomprehensible that the
reactionary woman is not even interested in hearing his economic
program. The explanation is: The suppression of one's primitive
material needs compasses a different result than the suppression of
one's sexual needs. The former incites to rebellion, whereas the
latter-inasmuch as it causes sexual needs to be repressed, with­
draws them from consciousness and anchors itself as a moral
defense-prevents rebellion against both forms of suppression. In­
deed, the inhibition of rebellion itself is unconscious. In the con­
sciousness of the average nonpolitical man there is not even a trace
of it.
The result is conservatism, fear of freedom, in a word, reaction­
ary thinking.
It is not only by means of this process that sexual repression
strengthens political reaction and makes the individual in the
masses passive and nonpolitical; it creates a secondary force in man's
structure-an artificial interest, which actively supports the authori­
tarian order. When sexuality is prevented from attaining natural
gratification, owing to the process of sexual repression, what hap­
pens is that it seeks various kinds of substitute gratifications. Thus,
for instance, natural aggression is distorted into brutal sadism,
which constitutes an essential part of the mass-psychological basis of
those imperialistic wars that are instigated by a few. To give another
31THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
instance: From the point of view of mass psychology, the effect of
militarism is based essentially on a libidinous mechanism. The
sexual effect of a uniform, the erotically provocative effect of
rhythmically executed goose-stepping, the exhibitionistic nature of
militaristic procedures, have been more practically comprehended
by a salesgirl or an average secretary than by our most erudite politi­
cians. On the other hand it is political reaction that consciously
exploits these sexual interests. It not only designs flashy uniforms
for the men, it puts the recruiting into the hands of attractive
women. In conclusion, let us but recall the recruiting posters of war­
thirsty powers, which ran something as follows: "Travel to foreign
countries-join the Royal Navy!" and the foreign countries were
portrayed by exotic women. And why are these posters effective?
Because our youth has become sexually starved owing to sexual
suppression.
The sexual morality that inhibits the will to freedom, as well as
those forces that comply with authoritarian interests, derive their
energy from repressed sexuality. Now we have a better comprehen­
sion of an essential part of the process of the "repercussion of
ideology on the economic basis": sexual inhibition changes the
structure of economically suppressed man in such a way that he
acts, feels, and thinks contrary to his own material interests.
Thus, mass psychology enables us to substantiate and interpret
Lenin's observation. In their officers the soldiers of 1905 uncon­
sciously perceived their childhood fathers (condensed in the con­
ception of God), who denied sexuality and whom one could neither
kill nor want to kill, though they shattered one's joy of life. Both
their repentance and their irresolution subsequent to the seizure of
power were an expression of its opposite, hate transformed into pity,
which as such could not be translated into action.
Thus, the practical problem of mass psychology IS to actIvate
the passive majority of the population, which always helps political
reaction to achieve victory, and to eliminate those inhibitions that
run counter to the development of the will to freedom born of the
socio-economic situation. Freed of its bonds and directed into the
32Ideology as a Material Force
channels of the freedom movement's rational goals, the psychic
energy of the average mass of people excited over a football game or
laughing over a cheap musical would no longer be capable of being
fettered. The sex-economic investigation that follows is conducted
from this point of view.
33

II
The Authoritarian Ideology of the
Family in the Mass Psychology of Fascism
FUHRER AND MASS STRUCTURE
If, at some future date, the history of social processes would
allow the reactionary historian time to indulge in speculations on
Germany's past, he would be sure to perceive in Hitler's success in
the years between 1928 and 1933 the proof that a great man makes
history only inasmuch as he inflames the masses with "his idea." In
fact, National Socialist propaganda was built upon this "fuhrer
ideology." To the same limited extent to which the propagandists of
National Socialism understood the mechanics of their success, they
were able to comprehend the historical basis of the National Social­
ist movement. This is very well illustrated by an article published at
that time entitled, "Christianity and National Socialism," written by
the National Socialist Wilhelm Stapel. He stated: "For the very
reason that National Socialism is an elementary movement, it
cannot be gotten at with 'arguments.' Arguments would be effective
only if the movement had gained its power by argumentation."
In keeping with this peculiarity the rally speeches of the
National Socialists were very conspicuous for their skillfulness in
operating upon the emotions of the individuals in the masses and of
avoiding relevant arguments as much as possible. In various passages
in his book Mein Kampf Hitler stresses that true mass psychological
tactics dispense with argumentation and keep the masses' attention
fixed on the "great final goal" at all times. What the final goal
looked like after the seizure of power can easily be shown by Italian
34The Authoritarian Ideology
fascism. Similarly, Goring's decrees against the economic organiza­
tions of the middle classes, the rebuff to the "second revolution,"
which was expected by the partisans, the failure to fulfill the
promised socialist measures, etc., revealed the reactionary function
of fascism. The following view shows just how little Hitler himself
understood the mechanism of his success:
This broadness of outline from which we must never depart, in
combination with steady, consistent emphasis, allows our final
success to mature. And then, to our amazement, we shall see what
tremendous results such perseverance leads to-to results that are
almost beyond our understanding [my italics, WR] .1
Hitler's success, therefore, could certainly not be explained on the
basis of his reactionary role in the history of capitalism, for this role,
had it been openly avowed in his propaganda, would have achieved
the opposite of that which was intended. The investigation of
Hitler's mass psychological effect has to proceed from the presuppo­
sition that a fiihrer, or the champion of an idea, can be successful
(if not in a historical, then at least in a limited perspective) only if
his personal point of view, his ideology, or his program bears a
resemblance to the average structure of a broad category of indi­
viduals. This leads to the question: To what historical and socio­
logical situation do these mass structures owe their genesis? And so
the line of questioning of mass psychology is shifted from the
metaphysics of the "fuhrer idea" to the reality of social life. Only
when the structure of the fUhrer's personality is in harmony with
the structures of broad groups can a "fuhrer" make history. And
whether he makes a permanent or only a temporary impact on
history depends solely upon whether his program lies in the direc­
tion of progressive social processes or whether it stems them. Hence
one is on the wrong scent when one attempts to explain Hitler's
success solely on the basis of the demagogy of the National Social-
1 Mein Kampf by Adolf Hitler, translated by Ralph Manheim, Houghton Mif­
flin Company, Boston, 1943, p. 185.
35THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
ists, the "befogging of the masses," their "deception," or to apply
the vague, hollow term "Nazi psychosis," as the Communists and
other politicians did later. For it is precisely a question of under­
standing why the masses proved to be accessible to deception,
befogging, and a psychotic situation. Without a precise knowledge
of what goes on in the masses, the problem cannot be solved. To
assert that the Hitler movement was a reactionary movement is not
enough. The NSDAP's mass success is inconsistent with this sup­
posed reactionary role, for why would millions upon millions affirm
their own suppression? Here is a contradiction that can be explained
only by mass psychology-and not by politics or economics.
National Socialism made use of various means in dealing with
various classes, and made various promises depending upon the
social class it needed at a particular time. In the spring of 1933, for
example, it was the revolutionary character of the Nazi movement
that was given particular emphasis in Nazi propaganda in an effort
to win over the industrial workers, and the first of May was "cele­
brated," but only after the aristocracy had been appeased in Pots­
dam. To ascribe the success solely to political swindle, however,
would be to become entangled in a contradiction with the basic idea
of freedom, and would practically exclude the possibility of a social
revolution. What must be answered is: Why do the masses allow
themselves to be politically swindled? The masses had every possi­
bility of evaluating the propaganda of the various parties. Why
didn't they see that, while promising the workers that the owners of
the means of production would be disappropriated, Hitler promised
the capitalists that their rights would be protected?
Hitler's personal structure and his life history are of no impor­
tance whatever for an understanding of National Socialism. It is
interesting, however, that the lower middle-class origin of his ideas
coincide in the main with the mass structures, which eagerly
accepted these ideas.
As is done in every reactionary movement, Hitler relied upon
the various strata of the lower middle class for his support. National
Socialism exposes all the contradictions that characterize the mass
psychology of the petty bourgeois. Now it is a question of (1)
36The Authoritarian Ideology
comprehending the contradictions themselves, and (2) getting an
insight into their common origin in the conditions of imperialistic
production. We will restrict ourselves to questions of sex ideology.
,
HITLER S BACKGROUND
The fuhrer of the German middle classes in revolt was himself
the son of a civil servant. He tells of a conflict which is especially
characteristic of a middle-class mass structure. His father wanted
him to become a civil servant; but the son rebelled against the
paternal plan, resolved "on no account" to obey, became a painter,
and fell into poverty in the process. Yet alongside this rebellion
against the father, a respect for and acceptance of his authority
continued to exist. This ambivalent attitude toward authority­
rebellion against it coupled with acceptance and submission-is a
basic feature of every middle-class structure from the age of puberty
to full adulthood and is especially pronounced in individuals stem­
ming from materially restricted circumstances.
Hitler speaks of his mother with great sentimentality. He as­
sures us that he cried only once in his life, namely when his mother
died. His rejection of sex and his neurotic idolization of mother­
hood are clearly evident in his theory on race and syphilis (see next
chapter) .
As a young nationalist who lived in Austria, Hitler resolved to
take up the fight against the Austrian dynasty, which had aban­
doned the "German fatherland to Slavization." In his polemics
against the Hapsburgs, the reproach that there were several syphi­
litics among them assumes a conspicuous position. One would not
pay any further attention to this factor if it were not that the idea of
the "poisoning of the nation" and the whole attitude toward the
question of syphilis are brought up again and again, and later, after
the seizure of power, constitute a central part of his domestic
policies.
In the beginning Hitler sympathized with the Social Demo­
crats, because they led the fight for universal suffrage, and this
might have brought about a weakening of the "Haps burger re-
37THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
gime," which he despised. But Hitler was repelled by Social Democ­
racy's emphasis on class differences, their negation of the nation, the
authority of the state, the private ownership of the social means of
production, of religion and morals. What finally caused him to turn
away from the Social Democrats was the invitation to join the
union. He refused and justified his refusal with his first insight into
the role of Social Democracy.
Bismarck becomes his idol, because it was he who had brought
about the unification of the German nation and had fought against
the Austrian dynasty. The anti-Semite Lueger and the German
national SchOnerer play a decisive role in shaping Hitler's further
development. From now on his program is based on nationalistic­
imperialistic aims, which he intends to compass with different, more
suited means than those used by the old "bourgeois" nationalists.
The means he chooses are determined by his recognition of the
effectiveness of organized Marxism's power, by his recognition of
the importance of the masses for every political movement.
. . . Not until the international world view-politically led by
organized Marxism-is confronted by a folkish world view, organ­
ized and led with equal unity, will success, supposing the fighting
energy to be equal on both sides, fall to the side of eternal truth.
-Op. cit. p. 384
. What gave the international world view success was its
representation by a political party organized into storm troops; what
caused the defeat of the opposite world view was its lack up to now
of a unified body to represent it. Not by unlimited freedom to
interpret a general view, but only in the limited and hence integrat­
ing form of a political organization can a world view fight and
conquer.
-Op. cit. p. 385
Hitler soon recognized the inconsistency of the Social Demo­
cratic policies and the powerlessness of the old bourgeois parties,
including the German National party.
38The Authoritarian Ideology
All this was only the necessary consequence of the absence of a
basic new anti-Marxist philosophy endowed with a stormy will to
conquer.
-Op. cit. p. 173
The more I occupied myself with the idea of a necessary change
in the government's attitude toward Social Democracy as the
momentary embodiment of Marxism, the more I recognized the lack
of a serviceable substitute for this doctrine. What would be given
the masses, if, just supposing, Social Democracy had been broken?
There was not one movement in existence which could have been
expected to succeed in drawing into its sphere of influence the great
multitudes of workers grown more or less leaderless. It is senseless
and more than stupid to believe that the international fanatic who
had left the class party would now at once join a bourgeois party, in
other words, a new class organization.
-Op. cit. p. 173
The "bourgeois" parties, as they designated themselves, will
never be able to attach the "proletarian" masses to their camp, for
here two worlds oppose each other, in part naturally and in part
artificially divided, whose mutual relation can only be struggle. The
younger will be victorious-and this is Marxism.
-Op. cit. p. 174
National Socialism's basic anti-Soviet attitude was evident al­
most from the beginning.
. . . If land was desired in Europe, it could be obtained by and
large only at the expense of Russia, and this meant that the new
Reich must again set itself on the march along the road of the
Teutonic Knights of old, to obtain by the German sword sod for
the German plow and daily bread for the nation.
-Op. cit. p. 140
Hitler saw himself confronted with the following questions:
How is the National Socialist idea to be carried to victory? How is
Marxism to be combatted effectively? How is one to get to the
masses?
39THE M�SS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
These questions in mind, Hitler appeals to the nationalistic
feelings of the masses, decides, however, to develop his own tech­
nique of propaganda and to employ it consistently, thus organizing
on a mass basis, as Marxism had done.
Hence, what he wants-and it is openly admitted-is to imple­
ment nationalistic imperialism with methods he has borrowed from
Marxism, including its technique of mass organization. But the
success of this mass organization is to be ascribed to the masses and
not to Hitler. It was man's authoritarian freedom-fearing structure
that enabled his propaganda to take root. Hence, what is important
about Hitler sociologically does not issue from his personality but
from the importance attached to him by the masses. And what
makes the problem all the more complex is the fact that Hitler held
the masses, with whose help he wanted to carry out his imperialism,
in complete contempt. Instead of giving many examples in substan­
tiation of this, let one candid confession suffice: ". . . the mood of
the people was always a mere discharge of what was funneled into
public opinion from above lop. cit. p. 128]."
How were the structures of the masses constituted that they
were still capable of imbibing Hitler's propaganda, despite all this?
ON THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF THE LOWER MIDDLE CLASS
We have stated that Hitler's success is to be ascribed neither to
his "personality" nor to the objective role his ideology played in
capitalism. Nor, for that matter, is it to be ascribed to a mere
"befogging" of the masses who followed him. We put our finger on
the core of the matter: What was going on in the masses that they
followed a party whose leadership was objectively as well as subjec­
tively in diametrical opposition to the interests of the working
masses?
In answering this question, we must first of all bear in mind
that, in its first successful onset, the National Socialist movement
relied upon the broad layers of the so-called middle classes, i.e., the
millions of private and public officials, middle-class merchants and
40The Authoritarian Ideology
lower and middle-class farmers. From the point of view of its social
basis, National Socialism was a lower middle-class movement, and
this was the case wherever it appeared, whether in Italy, Hungary,
Argentina, or Norway. Hence, this lower middle class, which was
formerly on the side of the various bourgeois democracies, must
have gone through an inner transformation causing it to change its
political position. The social situation and its corresponding psycho­
logical structure in the lower middle classes offer an explanation of
the basic similarities as well as differences between the ideology of
the liberal bourgeoisie and the fascists.
Fascism's lower middle class is the same as liberal democracy's
lower middle class, only in a different historical epoch of capitalism.
In the election years of 1930 to 1932, National Socialism polled its
new votes almost exclusively from the German National Party and
the smaller faction parties of the German Reich. Only the Catholic
center maintained its position, even in the Prussian election of 1932.
It wasn't until the later election that National Socialism also suc­
ceeded in making an incursion into the masses of industrial workers.
The middle class was and continued to be the mainstay of the
swastika. And it was this class, championing the cause of National
Socialism, which stepped onto the political tribunal and halted the
revolutionary reconstruction of society during the most severe eco­
nomic convulsion the capitalist system had experienced (1929-32).
Political reaction's assessment of the middle class's import�nce was
absolutely correct. In a leaflet of the German National Party of
April 8, 1932, we read: "The middle class is of decisive importance
for the existence of a state."
After January 30, 1933, the question of the social importance of
the middle class was widely discussed by the Left. Until then the
middle class was given far too little attention, partly because all
interests were focused on the development of political reaction and
the authoritarian leadership of the state, and partly because a line of
questioning based on a psychology of the masses was foreign to· the
politicians. From now on, the "rebellion of the middle class" was
given more and more prominence in various places. In following the
41THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
discussion of this question, one noted two principal views: the one
contended that fascism was "nothing other" than the party guard of
the upper middle class; the other did not overlook this fact but
stressed "the rebellion of the middle classes," with the result that
the exponents of this view were accused of obliterating the reaction­
ary role of fascism. In substantiation of this accusation, one cited
the nomination of Thyssen as economic dictator, the dissolution of
the middle-class economic organizations, the rebuff to the "second
revolution"; in short, fascism's unadulterated reactionary character,
which, from about the end of June 1933, became more and more
evident and pronounced.
Certain obscurities were evident in these very heated discus­
sions. The fact that, after the seizure of power, National Socialism
showed itself more and more to be an imperialistic nationalism,
which was intent upon eliminating everything "socialistic" from the
movement and preparing for war with every available means, did
not contradict the other fact that fascism, viewed with respect to its
mass basis, was actually a middle-class movement. Had he not
promised to take up the fight against big business, Hitler would
never have won the support of the middle classes. They helped him
to achieve victory because they were against big business. Owing to
the pressure they exerted, the authorities were forced to adopt anti­
capitalist measures, just as the authorities were later forced to
abandon them under the pressure applied by big business. If the
subjective interests in the mass basis of a reactionary movement are
not distinguished from the objective reactionary function-the two
contradict one another but were reconciled in the totality of the
Nazi movement in the beginning-it is not possible to reach an
understanding. The former pertains to the reactionary interests of
the fascist masses, while the latter pertains to the reactionary role of
fascism. All its contradictions originate in the antithesis of these two
sides of fascism, just as their reconciliation in the one form, "Na­
tional Socialism," characterizes the Hitler movement. Insofar as
National Socialism was forced to stress its character as a middle-class
movement (before the seizure of power and right afterward), it was
42The Authoritarian Ideology
in fact anti-capitalist and revolutionary. However, since it did not
deprive big business of its rights and had to consolidate and hold on
to the power it had secured, its capitalistic function was brought
more and more into the foreground until finally it became an ex­
treme advocate and champion of imperialism arid the capitalist
economic order. In this respect it is wholly immaterial whether and
how many of its leaders had an honest or dishonest socialist orienta­
tion (in their sense of the word!), and it is just as immaterial
whether and how many were out-and-out deceivers and power­
mongers. A radical anti-fascist policy cannot be based on these con­
siderations. Everything necessary for an understanding of German
fascism and its ambivalence could have been learned from the
history of Italian fascism, for the latter also showed these two strictly
contradictory functions reconciled in a totality.
Those who either deny the function of the mass basis of fascism
or fail to give it its proper due are stupefied by the fact that the
middle class, since it neither possesses the principal means of pro­
duction nor works with them, cannot really be a permanent motive
force in history, and for that reason must oscillate between capital
and the workers. They fail to see that the middle class can be and is
"a motive force in history," if not permanently then at least tempo­
rarily, as we learn from Italian and German fascism. By this we
mean not only the crushing of the workers' organizations, the
countless sacrifices, the eruptions of barbarism; over and above this,
it prevents the economic crisis from developing into a political up­
heaval, into a social revolution. Clearly: The greater the extent and
the importance of a nation's middle-class strata, the more decisive is
their significance as an effective social force. From 1933 to 1942 we
are confronted with the paradox that fascism was able to outstrip
social revolutionary internationalism as an international movement.
The Socialists and the Communists were so certain about the
progress of the revolutionary movement in relation to that of politi­
cal reaction that they committed outright political suicide, even if
motivated by the best of intentions. This question deserves the
greatest of attention. The process that has taken place in the middle-
43THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
class strata of all countries during the last decade deserves far greater
attention than the banal, all-too-well-known fact that fascism con­
stitutes extreme political reaction. The mere fact of fascism's reac­
tionary nature is no basis for an effective counter political policy, as
was amply shown by the events between 1928 and 1942.
The middle class got caught up in the movement and made its
appearance as a social force in the form of fascism. Therefore, it is
not a question of Hitler's or Goring'S reactionary purpose, but a
question of the social interests of the middle-class strata. Owing to
its character structure, the middle class has a social power far in
excess of its economic importance. It is the class that preserves
nothing less than several thousand years of patriarchy and keeps it
alive with all its contradictions.
That a fascist movement exists at all is doubtlessly the social
expression of nationalistic imperialism. However, that this fascist
movement could become a mass movement, indeed, could seize
power (only then fulfilling its imperialistic function), is to be as­
cribed to the full backing it received from the middle class. Only by
taking these antitheses and contradictions into account, each in its
turn, can the phenomena of fascism be comprehended.
The social position of the middle class is determined by (1) its
position in the capitalist production process, (2) its position in the
authoritarian state apparatus, (3) its special family situation, which
is directly determined by its position in the production process and
is the key to an understanding of its ideology. There are indeed
differences in the economic situation of the small farmers, the
bureaucrats, and the middle-class businessmen, but the basic nature
of their family situation is the same.
The rapid development of capitalist economy in the nineteenth
century, the continuous and rapid mechanization of production, the
amalgamation of the various branches of production in monopo­
listic syndicates and trusts, form the basis of the progressive pauper­
ization of the lower middle-class merchants and tradesmen. Not
capable of competing with the cheaper and more economically
44The Authoritarian Ideology
operating large industries, the small enterprises go to ruin, never to
recover.
"The middle class has nothing but ruthless annihilation to
expect from this system. This is the issue: Whether we shall all sink
into the great grey bleakness of proletarian ism where we shall all
have the same thing, namely nothing, or whether energy and dili­
gence shall again put the individual in a position to acquire property
by hard work. Middle class or proletarian! That is the issue!"- so the
German Nationals warned before the election of the president of
the republic in 1932. The National Socialists were not so blunt; they
were careful not to create a wide gap between the middle class and
the body of industrial workers in their propaganda, and they were
more successful with their approach.
The fight against the large department stores played a large role
in the propaganda of the NSDAP. The contradiction between the
role played by National Socialism for big business and the interests
of the middle class, from which it derived its main support, was
expressed in Hitler's talk with Knickerbocker:
"We will not make German-American relations dependent
upon a haberdasher shop [the reference is to the fate of the W0 01-
worth store in Berlin1 . . . the existence of such enterprises are an
encouragement of Bolshevism. . . . They destroy many small en­
terprises. For that reason, we will not sanction them, but you can
rest assured that your enterprises of this nature in Germany will be
dealt with no differently than similar German enterprises."2
Private business debts to foreign countries were an enormous burden
to the middle class. Since his foreign policy was dependent upon the
fulfillment of foreign claims, Hitler was for the payment of these
private debts. His followers, however, demanded that they be an­
nulled. Thus the lower middle class rebelled "against the system,"
2 Following the seizure of power in the months of March and April, masses of
people plundered the department stores, but the NSDAP leadership soon put
a stop to this. (Interdiction against autocratic interference in the economy, dis­
solution of middle-class organizations, etc.).
45THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
by which it understood the "Marxist regime" of Social Democracy.
As much as these lower middle-class strata were urged, under
the stress of the crisis, to form organizational alliances, the eco­
nomic competition of the small enterprises nonetheless operated
against the establishment of a feeling of solidarity corresponding to
that of the industrial workers. As a consequence of his social situa­
tion the lower middle-class man could join forces neither with his
social class nor, for that matter, with the industrial workers; not
with his own class because competition is the rule there, not with
the industrial workers because it is precisely proletarianization that
he fears most of all. And yet the fascist movement brought about an
alliance of the lower middle class. What was the basis of this al­
liance in the psychology of the masses?
The answer to this is supplied by the social position of the lower­
and middle-class public and private officials. The economic position
of the average official is worse than that of the average skilled
industrial worker; this poorer position is partially compensated by
the meager prospect of a career, and in the case of the government
official by a lifelong pension. Thus dependent upon governmental
authority, a competitive bearing toward one's colleagues prevails in
this class, which counteracts the development of solidarity. The
social consciousness of the official is not characterized by the fate he
shares with his coworkers, but by his attitude to the government
and to the "nation." This consists of a complete identification with
the state power;8 in the case of the company employee, it consists of
an identification with the company. He is just as submissive as the
industrial worker. Why is it that he does not develop a feeling of
solidarity as the industrial worker does? This is due to his inter­
mediate position between authority and the body of manual laborers.
8 By identification, psychoanalysis understands the process whereby a person
begins to feel at one with another person, adopts that person's characteristics
and attitudes, and in his fantasy puts himself in the other's place; this process
entails an actual change in the identifying person, inasmuch as the latter "in­
ternalizes" characteristics of his model.
46The Authoritarian Ideology
While subordinate to the top, he is to those below him a repre­
sentative of this authority and enjoys, as such, a privileged moral
(not material) position. The arch personification of this type in the
psychology of the masses is to be found in the army sergeant.
Butlers, valets, and other such employees of aristocratic families
are a flagrant example of the power of this identification. By adopt­
ing the attitudes, way of thinking, and demeanor of the ruling class,
they undergo a complete change and, in an effort to minimize their
lowly origin, often appear as caricatures of the people whom they
serve.
This identification with authority, firm, state, nation, etc.,
which can be formulated "[ am the state, the authority, the firm,
the nation," constitutes a psychic reality and is one of the best
illustrations of an ideology that has become a material force. At
first it is only the idea of being like one's superior that stirs the
mind of the employee or the official, but gradually, owing to his
pressing material dependence, his whole person is refashioned in
line with the ruling class. Always ready to accommodate himself to
authority, the lower middle-class man develops a cleavage between
his economic situation and his ideology. He lives in materially re­
stricted circumstances, but assumes gentlemanly postures on the
surface, often to a ridiculous degree. He eats poorly and insuffi­
ciently, but attaches great importance to a "decent suit of clothes."
A silk hat and dress coat become the material symbol of this char­
acter structure. And nothing is more suited for a first-impression
appraisal of the mass psychology of a people than its dress. It is its
accommodating attitude that specifically distinguishes the structure
of the lower middle-class man from the structure of the industrial
worker.4
How deep does this identification with authority go? We know
already that such an identification exists. The question, however, is
how-apart from economic existential conditions, which affect him
4 This applies only to Europe. The adaptation of lower middle·class habits by
the industrial worker in America obliterates the boundary between the two.
47THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
directly-emotional factors reinforce and consolidate the lower
middle-class man's attitude to such an extent that his structure does
not waver in times of crisis or even in times in which unemploy­
ment destroys the immediate economic base.
We stated above that the economic positions of the various
strata of the lower middle class are different but that the basic
features of their family situation are the same. It is in this family
situation that we have the key to the emotional foundation of the
structure that we described earlier.
FAMILY TIES AND NATIONALISTIC FEELINGS
In the beginning the family situation of the various strata of the
lower middle class is not differentiated from the immediate eco­
nomic position. The family-those of officials excluded-also con­
stitutes an economic enterprise on a sman scale. The members of a
sman merchant's family work in his business, thus eliminating the
expense of outside help. On small and medium farmsteads the
coinciding of family and mode of production is even more pro­
nounced. The economy of the great patriarchs (the Zagruda, for
instance) is essentially built upon this practice. In the close interlac­
ing of family and economy lies the key to the question why the
peasantry is "bound to the earth," "traditional," and for that reason
so accessible to the influence of political reaction. This does not
mean to say that it is solely the economic mode of existence that
determines the attachment to the earth and tradition, but that the
farmer's mode of production entails a strict family tie of an mem­
bers of the family and that this tie presupposes a far-reaching sexual
suppression and repression. It is from this double base, then, that
the typical peasant way of looking at things arises. Its core is formed
by patriarchal sexual morality. Elsewhere I described the difficulties
encountered by the Soviet government in the collectivization of
agriculture; it was not only the "love of the soil," but first and
foremost the family tie conditioned by the soil that created such
difficulties.
48The Authoritarian Ideology
For one thing, the possibility of preserving a healthy peasant
class as a foundation for a whole nation can never be valued highly
enough. Many of our present-day sufferings are only the conse­
quence of the unhealthy relationship between rural and city popula­
tion. A solid stock of small and middle peasants has at all times
been the best defense against social ills such as we possess today.
And, moreover, this is the only solution which enables a nation to
earn its daily bread within the inner circuit of its economy. Industry
and commerce recede from their unhealthy leading position and
adjust themselves to the general framework of a national economy
of balanced supply and demand.
-Mein Karry.Pf, p. 138
That was the position taken by Hitler. As senseless as it was
economically speaking, as little as political reaction could ever suc­
ceed in checking the mechanization of big agriculture and the dis­
solution of agriculture on a small scale, this propaganda was
nonetheless significant from the standpoint of mass psychology, for
it had an effect on the close-knit family structure of the lower
middle-class strata.
The close interrelation between family tie and rural forms of
economy was finally expressed by the NSDAP after the seizure of
power. Since, with respect to its mass basis and ideological structure,
the Hitler movement was a lower middle-class movement, one of its
first measures-intended to secure the middle classes-was the edict
issued on May 12, 1933, on the "New Order of AgriCUlture Owner­
ship," which reverted to age-old legal codes based on the "indis­
soluble unity of blood and soil."
A few characteristic passages are appended here:
This indissoluble unity of blood and soil is the indispensable
presupposition for a nation's health. In Germany rural legislation of
past centuries also gave legal guarantees to this tie born of a
nation's natural feelings of life. The farmstead was the unsaleable
inheritance of the ancestral peasant family. Later non-native legisla­
tion was imposed and destroyed the legal basis of this rural
constitution. In many parts of the country, nonetheless, the Ger-
49THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
man peasant, having a healthy sense of his people's basic concep­
tion of life, persevered in the old custom, handing down the
fannstead from generation to generation.
It is the imperative duty of the government of an awakened
people to guarantee the national awakening by legal regulation of
the indissoluble unity of blood and soil preserved by German
custom through the law of entail.
The owner of a farmstead or forestry who is registered as the
heir to entailed property in the competent district court must pass
on his property in accordance with the law of entail. The owner of
this inherited farm is called a farmer. A farmer cannot own more
than one farm inherited under this law. Only one of the farmer's
children is allowed to take over the inherited farm. He is the legal
inheritor. The co-inheritors will be provided for by the farmstead
until they are economically independent. If through no fault of
their own they fall into straitened circumstances, they also have the
right to seek refuge at the farmstead in later years. The transfer of a
non-registered farmstead, which is nonetheless qualified for registra­
tion, is governed by the law of entail.
An entail-inherited farmstead can be owned only by a farmer
who is a German citizen and of German blood. Only he who has no
one among his male ancestry or other ancestry of Jewish or colored
origin for four generations is of German blood. Clearly, however,
every Teuton is of German blood according to the letter of this law.
A marriage with a person of non-German blood permanently ex­
cludes the offspring of this marriage from being the owner of a
fannstead inherited under this law.
The purpose of this law is to protect the farmsteads against
heavy indebtedness and harmful fragmentation in the process of
inheritance, and to preserve it as the permanent inheritance of the
families of free farmers. At the same time the law aims at a healthy
distribution of the agricultural land. A large number of self-suffi­
cient small and medium farmsteads spread throughout the country
as evenly as possible is necessary for the preservation of a state's and
people's health.
What tendencies are expressed in this law? It was at variance
with the interests of big agriculture, which was intent upon absorb-
50The Authoritarian Ideology
ing the medium and small farmsteads and creating an ever widening
division between landowner and propertyless rural proletariat. But
the frustration of this intent was amply compensated by the preser­
vation of the rural middle class, in which big agriculture had a
considerable interest in view of the fact that it represented the mass
basis of its power. It is not only as a private owner of property that
the small landowner is identified with the large landowner. By itself
this would not mean very much. What is important here is the
preservation of the ideologic atmosphere of the small and medium
property owners, that atmosphere, namely, that exists in small
enterprises operated by a family unit. It is this atmosphere that is
known to produce the best nationalistic fighters and to imbue the
women with nationalistic fervor. And this explains why political
reaction is always prattling about the "morality-preserving influence
of the peasantry." However, this is a sex-economic question.
This interlacing of individualistic modes of production and
authoritarian family in the lower middle class is one of the many
sources of the fascist ideology of the "large family." This question
will return later in another context.
The economic pitting of the small businesses against one an­
other corresponds to the family encapsulation and competition
typical of the lower middle class, notwithstanding the fascist ideol­
ogy "common welfare comes before personal welfare" and "cor­
porate idea." The basic elements of fascist ideology, "fiihrer
principle," family policy, etc., have an individu�listic character.
What is collective in fascism stems from the socialistic tendencies in
the mass basis, as the individualistic elements stem from the inter­
ests of big business and the fascist leadership.
In view of man's natural organization, this economic and family
situation would break down, if it were not secured by a specific
relationship between man and woman, a relationship we designate
as patriarchal, and a mode of sexuality derived from this specific
rela tionship.
Economically, the urban middle-class man is not in a better
position than the manual laborer. Thus, in his efforts to differen-
51THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
tiate himself from the laborer, he must rely essentially on his family
and sexual modes of life. His economic deprivations have to be
compensated for in a sexual moralistic way. In the case of the
official, this motive is the most effective element of his identification
with the ruling power. Since one is not on a plane with the upper
middle class but is nonetheless identified with it, the sex-moralistic
ideologies have to compensate for the economic limitations. Essen­
tially, the sexual modes of life and the cultural modes of life
dependent upon them serve to differentiate him from the lower
classes.
The sum total of these moralistic attitudes, which cluster
around one's attitude toward sex and are commonly designated as
"philistine," culminate in notions of-we say notions of, not acts
of-honor and duty. The effect of these two words on the lower
middle class must be correctly assessed, otherwise it will not serve
much purpose to concern ourselves with them. They appear again
and again in the fascist dictator-ideology and race theory. Actually it
is precisely the lower middle class's way of life, its business practices,
that impose a completely opposite behavior. A touch of dishonesty
is part of the very existence of private merchandizing. When a
peasant buys a horse, he runs it down in every possible way. If he
sells the same horse a year later, it will have become younger, better,
and stronger. One's sense of "duty" is molded by business interests
and not by national character traits. One's own commodity will
always be the best-the other person's always the worst. Depreca­
tion of one's competitors-a deprecation that is usually devoid of all
honesty-is an essential tool of one's "business." The small busi­
nessman's obsequious and deferential behavior toward his custom­
ers, testifies to the fierce pressure of economic existence, which has
to warp the best character in the long run. Nevertheless the
concepts of "honor" and "duty" play a very decisive role in the life
of the lower middle class. This cannot be explained solely on the
basis of efforts to conceal one's crude materialistic background. For,
despite all hypocrisy, the ecstasy derived from the notions of
"honor" and "duty" is genuine. It is merely a question of its source.
52The Authoritarian Ideology
This ecstasy stems from sources of unconscious emotional life.
One does not pay much attention to these sources at first, and one
is only too happy to overlook their relation to the above ideology.
However, an analysis of lower middle-class people leaves no doubt
about the importance of the relation between sexual life and the
ideology of "duty" and "honor."
For one thing, the political and economic position of the father
is reflected in his patriarchal relationship to the remainder of the
family. In the figure of the father the authoritarian state has its
representative in every family, so that the family becomes its most
important instrument of power.
The authoritarian position of the father reflects his political role
and discloses the relation of the family to the authoritarian state.
Within the family the father holds the same position that his boss
holds toward him in the production process. And he reproduces his
subservient attitude toward authority in his children, particularly in
his sons. Lower middle-class man's passive and servile attitude
toward the fuhrer-figure issues from these conditions. \-Vithout
really divining it, Hitler was huilding upon this lower middle-class
attitude when he wrote:
The people in their overwhelming majority are so feminine by
nature and attitude that sober reasoning determines their thoughts
and actions far less than emotion and feeling.
And this sentiment is not complicated, but very simple and all
of a piece. It does not have multiple shadings; it has a positive and a
negative; love or hate, right or wrong, truth or lie, never half this
way and half that way, never partially, or that kind of thing.
-Op. cit. p. 183
This is not a question of an "inherent disposition," but of a
typical example of the reproduction of an authoritarian social
system in the structures of its members.
What this position of the father actually necessitates is the
strictest sexual suppression of the women and the children. While
women develop a resigned attitude under lower middle-class lll-
53THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
fluence-an attitude reinforced by repressed sexual rebellion-the
sons, apart from a subservient attitude toward authority, develop a
strong identification with the father, which forms the basis of the
emotional identification with every kind of authority. How it comes
about that the psychic structures of the supporting strata of a
society are so constructed that they fit the economic framework and
serve the purposes of the ruling powers as precisely as the parts of a
precision machine will long remain an unsolved riddle. At any rate,
what we describe as the structural reproduction of a society'S eco­
nomic system in the psychology of the masses is the basic mecha­
nism in the process of the formation of political ideas.
It is only much later that the attitude of economic and social
competition contributes to the development of the structure of the
lower middle class. The reactionary thinking that is shaped at this
stage is a secondary continuation of psychic processes that reach
back into the first years of a child raised in an authoritarian family
atmosphere. For one thing there is the competition between the
children and the grown-ups, but of more far-reaching consequence,
there is the competition among children of the same family in their
relationship to the parents. In childhood this competition, which
later in adulthood and in the life outside the family is predomi­
nantly an economic one, is mainly operative in the strong emotional
love-hate relationships among members of the same family. This is
not the place to pursue these relationships in detail. This is a field
of study by itself. Let it suffice to say here: the sexual inhibitions
and debilitations that constitute the most important prerequisites
for the existence of the authoritarian family and are the most essen­
tial groundwork of the structural formation of the lower middle­
class man are compassed with the help of religious fears, which are
infused with sexual guilt-feelings and deeply embedded in the
emotions. Thus we arrive at the problem of the relation of religion
to the negation of sexual desire. Sexual debility results in a lowering
of self-confidence. In one case it is compensated by the brutalization
of sexuality, in the other by rigid character traits. The compulsion to
control one's sexuality, to maintain sexual repression, leads to the
54The Authoritarian Ideology
development of pathologic, emotionally tinged notions of honor
and duty, bravery and self-control.5 But the pathology and emo­
tionality of these psychic attitudes are strongly at variance with the
reality of one's personal behavior. The man who attains genital
satisfaction, is honorable, responsible, brave, and controlled, with­
out making much of a fuss about it. These attitudes are an organic
part of his personality. The man whose genitals are weakened,
whose sexual structure is full of contradictions, must continually
remind himself to control his sexuality, to preserve his sexual
dignity, to be brave in the face of temptations, etc. The struggle to
resist the temptation to masturbate is a struggle that is experienced
by every adolescent and every child, without exception. All the
elements of the reactionary man's structure are developed in this
struggle. It is in the lower middle classes that this structure is rein­
forced most strongly and embedded most deeply. Every form of
mysticism derives its most active energy and, in part, also its content
from this compulsory suppression of sexuality. Insofar as the various
categories of industrial workers are subject to the same social influ­
ences, they too develop corresponding attitudes; yet, owing to the
distinct difference in their way of life compared with the lower
middle class, sex-affirming forces are far more pronounced in them
and also more conscious. The affective anchoring of these structures
by means of unconscious anxiety, their concealment by character
traits that appear completely asexual, are responsible for the fact
that these deep layers of the personality cannot be reached with
rational arguments alone. What importance this statement has for
practical sex-politics will be discussed in the last chapter.
To what extent the unconscious struggle against one's own
sexual needs gives rise to metaphysical and mystical thinking cannot
be discussed in detail here. We will mention only one example,
which is typical of the National Socialist ideology. Again and again
we run across series such as this: personal honor, family honor,
Ii Die Moral der Kraft by the National Socialist Ernst Mann is an especially
informative book for the recognition of these relationships.
55THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
racial honor, national honor. This sequence is consistent with the
various layers in the individual structure. However, it fails to include
the socio-economic basis: capitalism, or rather patriarchy; the insti­
tution of compulsive marriage; sexual suppression; personal struggle
against one's own sexuality; personal compensatory feeling of honor;
etc. The highest position in the series is assumed by the ideology of
"national honor," which is identical with the irrational core of na­
tionalism. To understand this, however, it is necessary to turn aside
from our main theme again.
Authoritarian society's fight against the sexuality of children
and adolescents, and the consequent struggle in one's own ego,
takes place within the framework of the authoritarian family, which
has thus far proven to be the best institution to carry out this fight
successfully. Sexual desires naturally urge a person to enter into all
kinds of relations with the world, to enter into close contact with it
in a vast variety of forms. If they are suppressed, they have but one
possibility: to vent themselves within the narrow framework of the
family. Sexual inhibition is the basis of the familial encapsulation of
the individual as well as the basis of individual self-consciousness.
One must give strict heed to the fact that metaphysical, individual,
and familial sentimental behavior are only various aspects of one
and the same basic process of sexual negation, whereas reality­
oriented, nonmystical thinking moves along with a loose attitude
toward the family and is at the very least indifferent to ascetic sexual
ideology. What is important in this connection is that the tie to the
authoritarian family is established by means of sexual inhibition;
that it is the original biological tie of the child to the mother and
also of the mother to the child that forms the barricade to sexual
reality and leads to an indissoluble sexual fixation and to an inca­
pacity to enter into other relations.6 The tie to the mother is the
6 Hence, the "Oedipus complex," which Freud discovered, is not so much a
cause as it is a result of the sexual restrictions imposed upon the child by
society. Yet, wholly unconscious of what they are doing, the parents carry out
the intentions of authoritarian society.
56The Authoritarian Ideology
basis of all family ties. In their subjective emotional core the notions
of homeland and nation are notions of mother and family. Among
the middle classes the mother is the homeland of the child, just as
the family is the "nation in miniature." This will enable us to
understand why the National Socialist Goebbels chose the following
words as the motto for his ten commandments in the National
Socialist almanac of 1932, doubtlessly without knowledge of its
deeper connotation: "Never forget that your country is the mother
of your life." On the occasion of "Mother's Day," 1933, Angriff
stated:
Mother's Day. The national revolution has swept away every­
thing petty! Ideas lead again and lead together-family, society,
nation. The idea of Mother's Day is perfectly suited to honor that
which the German idea symbolizes: The German Mother! Nowhere
does this importance devolve upon the wife and the mother as it
does in new Germany. She is the protectress of the family life from
which sprout the forces which will again lead our nation forward.
She-the German mother-is the sole bearer of the idea of the
German nation. The idea of "Mother" is inseparable from the idea
of "being German." Is there anything which can lead us closer
together than our mutual honoring of the mother?
No matter how false these sentences are economically and so­
cially speaking, they are true from the point of view of the human
structure. Thus, nationalistic sentiments are the direct continuation
of the family tie and are likewise rooted in the fixated7 tie to the
mother. This cannot be explained biologically. For this tie to the
mother, insofar as it develops into a familial and nationalistic tie, is
itself a social product. In puberty it would make room for other
attachments, i.e., natural sexual relations, if sexual restrictions
would not cause it to be eternalized. It is as this socially motivated
eternalization that it becomes the basis of nationalist feelings in the
adult; it is only at this stage that it becomes a reactionary social
T I.e., unresolved, unconsciously rooted.
57THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
force. If the nationalist sentiments of the industrial worker are far
less pronounced than those of the lower middle-class worker, it is to
be ascribed to the different social life and consequent looser family
ties of the former.
Now I hope no one will get upset and reproach us with wanting
to "biologize" sociology, for we know perfectly well that the differ­
ence in the industrial worker's family life is also determined by his
position in the production process. The question must be asked,
nonetheless, why it is that the industrial worker is clearly accessible
to internationalism, whereas the lower middle-class worker has such
a strong leaning toward nationalism. In the objective economic
situation this factor of diversity can be ascertained only when the
above-described connection between the industrial worker's eco­
nomic and familial situation is taken into account. It cannot be
ascertained in any other way. The strange refusal on the part of
Marxist theorists to regard family life as a factor of equal impor­
tance as far as the anchoring of the social system is concerned,
indeed to regard it as the decisive factor in the formation of the
human structure, is to be traced back to their family ties. The fact
that the family tie is the most intense and the most emotional,
cannot be overrated.8
8 He who has not freed himself from his own tie to his family and to his
mother, or who has not at least clarified and excluded their influence from his
judgments, should not seek to investigate the formation of ideology. He who
would want to dismiss these facts as "Freudian" would only give proof of his
scientific cretinism. One should argue and not chatter, without possessing
special knowledge. Freud discovered the Oedipus complex. Revolutionary fam·
ily politics would be impossible without this discovery. But Freud is just as far
from such an assessment and sociological interpretation of the family forma·
tion as the mechanistic economist is from a comprehension of sexuality as a
social factor. Let it be proven that dialectical materialism has been incorrectly
used, but facts that every worker knew before Freud discovered the Oedipus
complex, would not be refuted. And fascism is to be destroyed, not with slogans
but with knowledge. Errors are possible and can be corrected, but scientific
obtuseness is reactionary.
58The Authoritarian Ideology
The essential connection between familial and nationalistic
ideology can be pursued further. Families are just as cut off from
and opposed to one another as nations are. In both cases the
ultimate basis for this separation and opposition is an economic one.
The lower middle-class family (those of officials, lower-income
white-collar workers, etc.) is continually harassed by food and other
material worries. Hence the large lower middle-class family's expan­
sion tendencies also reproduce an imperialistic ideology: "The
nation needs space and food." It is for this reason that the lower
middle-class man is especially accessible to imperialistic ideology. He
is capable of fully identifying with the personified conception of the
nation. It is in this way that familial imperialism is ideologically
reproduced in national imperialism.
Goebbels' statement printed in the brochure Die verfluchten
Hakenkreuzler (Eher Verlag, Munich, p. 16 and 18) is of interest in
this connection. It was written in answer to the question whether a
Jew is a man.
If someone cracks a whip across your mother's face, would you
say to him, Thank you! Is he a man too!? One who does such a
thing is not a man-he is a brute! How many worse things has the
Jew inflicted upon our mother Germany [italics mine, WR] and
still inflicts upon her! He [the Jew] has debauched our race, sapped
our energy, undermined our customs and broken our strength. . . .
The Jew is the graphic demon of decay . . . begins his criminal
butchery of people.
One has to know the importance of the idea of castration as
punishment for sexual pleasure; one has to comprehend the sexual­
psychological background of fantasies of ritual murder as well as the
background of anti-Semitism as such; and moreover, one has to
appraise correctly the sexual guilt-feelings and sexual anxieties of the
reactionary man, to be able to judge just how such unconsciously
written sentences impinge upon the unconscious emotionality of
the average reader. It is in such statements and their unconscious
59THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
emotional impact that we find the psychological roots of National
Socialism's anti-Semitism. They were supposed to be nothing but
"befogging." Certainly, befogging also. But it was overlooked that,
ideologically, fascism was the resistance of a sexually as well as
economically deadly sick society to the painful but resolute revolu­
tionary tendencies toward sexual as well as economic freedom, a
freedom the very thought of which instills the reactionary man with
mortal terror. That is to say: the establishment of economic free­
dom goes hand in hand with the dissolution of old institutions
(particularly those governing sexual policies), to which the reac­
tionary man and also the industrial worker, insofar as he is a
reactionary, are not immediately equal. More than anything else it is
the fear of "sexual freedom," conceived of as sexual chaos and
sexual dissipation in the mind of the reactionary thinker, which has
a retarding effect upon the yearning to be free of the yoke of eco­
nomic exploitation. This will be the case only as long as this miscon­
ception of sexual freedom prevails. And it can continue to prevail
only in consequence of the lack of clarity surrounding these very
decisive questions in masses of people. It is precisely for this reason
that sex-economy must play an essential role in the ordering of
social relations. The more extensively and deeply the reactionary
structure has taken hold of the toiling masses, the more decisive is
the importance of the sex-economic work of educating the masses of
the people to assume social responsibility.
In this interplay between economic and structural factors, it is
the authoritarian family that represents the foremost and most
essential source of reproduction of every kind of reactionary think­
ing; it is a factory where reactionary ideology and reactionary
structures are produced. Hence, the "safeguarding of the family,"
i.e., of the authoritarian and large family, is the first cultural precept
of every reactionary policy. This is what is essentially concealed
behind the phrase "safeguarding of the state, culture, and civili­
zation."
An NSDAP election proclamation for the presidential election
of 1932 (Adolf Hitler: Mein Programm) stated:
60The Authoritarian Ideology
By virtue of her nature and destiny, woman is man's mate.
Thus both man and woman are companions in life as well as
companions in work. Just as the economic development over the
centuries has changed man's sphere of work, it is only logical that it
has also changed woman's sphere. Over and above the necessity of
working together, it is man's and woman's duty to preserve man
himself. In this most noble mission of the sexes, we also discover
the basis of their individual talents, which Providence, in its eternal
wisdom, gave to both of them immutably. Thus, it is the highest
task to make the founding of a family possible to the mates in life
and companions in work. Its final destruction would mean the end
of every form of higher humanity. No matter how far woman's
sphere of activity can be stretched, the ultimate aim of a truly
organic and logical development must always be the creation of a
family. It is the smallest but most valuable unit in the complete
structure of the state. Work honors both man and woman. But the
child exalts the woman.
Under the heading "Preservation of the Peasantry Means the
Preservation of the German Nation," the same proclamation states:
"In the preservation and encouragement of a healthy peasantry, I
further see the best safeguard against social woes as well as against
the racial decay of our people."
In this respect the traditional family tie of the peasantry must
not be forgotten if one does not want to make an error. It con­
tinues:
It is my belief that, to build up its resistance, a people must not
live solely in accordance with rational principles; it also needs spiri­
tual and religious support. The poisoning and disintegration of the
national body by the events of our cultural Bolshevism are almost
more disastrous than the effect of political and economic com­
munism.
As a party that, as Italian fascism, owed its initial success to the
interests of big landowners, the NSDAP had to win over the small
and medium farmers, had to establish a social basis for itself in
them. In this, naturally, it could not openly promote the interests of
61THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
big landowners in its propaganda, but had to direct its appeal to the
small farmers, specifically to the structures produced in them by the
overlapping of the family and economic situation. Only with respect
to this element of the lower middle class is the sentence valid that
man and woman are companions in work. It does not apply to the
body of industrial workers. Even to the peasant it applies only
formally, for in reality the peasant's wife is the peasant's servant.
The prototype and realization of the fascist ideology of the hier­
archic organization of the state is to be found in the hierarchic
organization of the peasant family. The peasant family is a nation in
miniature, and every member of this family is identified with this
miniature nation. Thus, the groundwork for the absorption of a
grand imperialistic ideology is present in the peasantry and in the
lower middle class where an entire family is engaged in a small
enterprise. The idolization of motherhood is conspicuous in both
cases. How is this idolization related to reactionary sexual politics?
NATIONALISTIC SELF-CONFIDENCE
In the individual structures of the masses of the lower middle
class, national and familial ties coincide. These ties are especially in­
tensified by a process that not only runs parallel to it but is actually
derived from it. From the standpoint of the masses, the national­
istic fuhrer is the personification of the nation. Only insofar as
this fuhrer actually personifies the nation in conformity with the
national sentiments of the masses does a personal tie to him
develop. Insofar as he knows how to arouse emotional family ties in
the individuals of the masses, he is also an authoritarian father
figure. He attracts all the emotional attitudes that at one time were
meant for the strict but also protecting and impressive father
(impressive in the child's eyes). In discussions with National Social­
ist enthusiasts about the untenability and contradictoriness of the
NSDAP program, one often heard it said that Hitler understood all
of that much better-"he would manage everything all right." Here
we have a clear expression of the child's need for the protective
62The Authoritarian Ideology
attitude of the father. In terms of social reality it is this need for
protection on the part of the masses of the people that enables the
dictator "to manage everything." This attitude on the part of
masses of people impedes social self-administration, i.e., rational
independence and cooperation. No genuine democracy can or
should build upon it.
Even more essential, however, is the identification of the indi­
·
viduals in the masses with the "fuhrer." The more helpless the
"mass-individual" has become, owing to his upbringing, the more
pronounced is his identification with the fuhrer, and the more the
childish need for protection is disguised in the form of a feeling at
one with the fuhrer. This inclination to identify is the psychologi­
cal basis of national narcissism, i.e., of the self-confidence that indi­
vidual man derives from the "greatness of the nation." The re­
actionary lower middle-class man perceives himself in the fuhrer, in
the authoritarian state. On the basis of this identification he feels
himself to be a defender of the "national heritage," of the "nation,"
which does not prevent him, likewise on the basis of this identifica­
tion, from simultaneously despising "the masses" and confronting
them as an individual. The wretchedness of his material and sexual
situation is so overshadowed by the exalting idea of belonging to a
master race and having a brilliant fuhrer that, as time goes on, he
ceases to realize how completely he has sunk to a position of insig­
nificant, blind allegiance.
The worker who is conscious of his skills-he, in short, who has
rid himself of his submissive structure, who identifies with his work
and not with the fuhrer, with the international working masses and
not with the national homeland-represents the opposite of this.
He feels himself to be a leader, not on the basis of his identification
with the fuhrer, but on the basis of his consciousness of performing
work that is vitally necessary for society's existence.
What are the emotional forces that are at work here? This is
not difficult to answer. The emotions by which this fundamentally
different mass-psychological type is motivated are the same as those
that are to be found in the nationalists. It is merely the content of
63THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
that which excites the emotions that is different. The need to
identify is the same, but the objects of identification are different,
namely fellow workers and not the fiihrer, one's own work and not
an illusion, the working men of the earth and not the family. In
short, international consciousness of one's skills is opposed to mysti­
cism and nationalism. But this certainly does not imply a neglect of
the liberated worker's self-confidence; it is the reactionary man who
begins to rave about "service to the community," and "general
welfare comes before personal welfare," at a time of crisis. It merely
implies that the self-confidence of the liberated worker is derived
from the consciousness of his skills.
During the past fifteen years we have been confronted with a
fact which is difficult to comprehend: Economically, society is
divided into sharply defined social classes and occupations. Accord­
ing to the purely economic point of view, the social ideology is
derived from the specific social situation. It follows from this that
the specific ideology of a class would more or less have to corre­
spond to the socio-economic situation of that class. In keeping with
their collective working habits, the industrial workers would have to
develop a stronger collective feeling, while the small businessmen
would have to· develop a stronger individualis�. The employees of
large concerns would have to have a collective feeling similar to that
of the industrial workers. But we have already seen that psychic
structure and social situation seldom coincide. We draw a distinc­
tion between the responsible worker who is conscious of his skills
and the mystical-nationalistic reactionary subject. We meet with
both types in every social and professional class. There are millions
of reactionary industrial workers and there are just as many teachers
and physicians who are conscious of their skills and champion the
cause of freedom. Hence, there is no simple mechanistic connection
between social situation and character structure.
The social situation is only the· external condition that has an
influence on the ideological process in the individual. The instinc­
tual drives through which the various social influences gain exclusive
64The Authoritarian Ideology
control over the emotions are now to be investigated. To begin
with, this much is clear: Hunger is not one of them; at least, it is
not the decisive factor. If it were, the international revolution
would have followed upon the world crisis of 1929-33. This is a
sound statement, no matter how dangerous it may be to antiquated,
purely economic points of view.
When psychoanalysts unversed in sociology try to explain social
revolution as an "infantile revolt against the father," they have in
mind the "revolutionary," who comes from intellectual circles. This
is indeed the case there. But it does not apply to the industrial
workers. The paternal suppression of children among the working
class is not less severe, indeed, it is sometimes more brutal than it is
among the lower middle class. This is not the issue. That which
specifically distinguishes these two classes is found in their modes of
production and the attitude toward sex which derives from these
modes. The point is this: Sexuality is suppressed by the parents
among the industrial workers also. But the contradictions to which
the children of industrial workers are subjected don't exist in the
lower middle class. Among the lower middle class it is only sexuality
that is suppressed. The sexual activity of this class is a pure expres­
sion of the contradiction between sexual drive and sexual inhibition.
This is not the case among the industrial workers. Along with their
moralistic ideology the industrial workers have their own-in some
cases more and in others less pronounced-sexual views, which are
diametrically opposed to the moralistic ideology. Moreover, there is
the influence exercised by their living conditions and their close
association in their work. All of this runs counter to their moralistic
sexual ideology.
Accordingly, the average industrial worker differs from the
average lower middle-class worker by his open and untrammeled
attitude toward sexuality, no matter how muddled and conservative
he might be otherwise. He is incomparably more accessible to sex­
economic views than the typical lower middle-class worker is. And it
is precisely the absence of those attitudes that are central to national
6STHE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
socialistic and clerical ideology that makes him more accessible:
identification with the authoritarian state-power, with the "supreme
fiihrer," with the nation. This, too, is proof of the fact that the
basic elements of National Socialist ideology have a sex-economic
origin.
Owing to his individualistic economy and to the extreme isola­
tion of his family situation, the small farmer is very accessible to the
ideology of political reaction. This is the reason for the cleavage
between social situation and ideology. Characterized by the strictest
practice of patriarchy and the morality corresponding to it, the
small farmer nonetheless develops natural-even if distorted­
forms in his sexuality. Just as in the case of the industrial workers­
in contrast to the lower middle-class workers-farm youths begin to
have sexual intercourse at an early age; owing to the strict patri­
archal education, however, the youth is sexually very disturbed or
even brutal; sexuality is practiced in secret; sexual frigidity is the rule
among girls; sexual murder and brutal jealousy, as well as enslave­
ment of the women, are typical sexual occurrences among the
peasantry. Hysteria is nowhere so rampant as it is in the country.
Patriarchal marriage is the final aim of rural upbringing, rigidly
dictated by rural economy.
An ideologic process has begun to take shape among the indus­
trial workers during the last decades. The material manifestations of
this process are most evident in the pure culture of the workers'
aristocracy, but they are also to be noted among the average indus­
trial worker. The industrial workers of the twentieth century are not
the nineteenth-century proletariat of Karl Marx's time. To a very
large extent they have accepted the conventions and views of the
bourgeois layers of society. To be sure, formal bourgeois democracy
did not eliminate economic class distinctions any more than it did
away with racial prejudices. Yet the social tendencies that are
gaining ground within its compass have obliterated the structural
and ideologic boundaries among the various social classes. The
industrial workers of England, America, Scandinavia, Germany, are
66The Authoritarian Ideology
becoming more and more bourgeois. To understand how fascism
infiltrates the working classes, this process has to be traced from
bourgeois democracy to the "emergency powers act" to the suspen­
sion of parliament to open fascist dictatorship.
" "
THE DOMESTICATION OF THE INDUSTRIAL WORKERS
Fascism infiltrates workers' groups from two sides: the so-called
"lumpen proletariat" (an expression to which everyone takes excep­
tion) by means of direct material corruption and from the "workers'
aristocracy," also by means of material corruption, as well as
ideological influencing. In its political unscrupulousness, German
fascism promised everybody everything. In an article by Dr. Jarmer,
"Capitalism" (Angriff, Sept. 24, 1931), we find:
At the German National Party rally in Stettin, Hugenberg
spoke out against international capitalism with refreshing distinct­
ness. At the same time, however, he stressed the necessity of a
national capitalism.
In so doing he once again clearly demarcated the German
Nationals from the National Socialists; for the latter know only too
well that the capitalist economic order which is in the process of
breaking down throughout the world has to be replaced by a
different order, because even in national capitalism there can be no
justice.
That sounds almost communistic. Here we have an example of
fascist propaganda appealing directly and with a consciously fraudu­
lent intention to the revolutionary ardor of the industrial workers.
But the crucial question was why the National Socialist industrial
workers failed to see that fascism promised everybody everything. It
was known that Hitler negotiated with industrial magnates, received
financial support from them and promised an injunction against
striking. Thus, it must have been due to the psychological structure
of the average worker that such contradictions were not squarely
faced, despite the intensive work on the part of revolutionary
67THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
organizations to make him conscious of them. In his interview with
the American journalist Knickerbocker, Hitler had this to say about
the recognition of private debts to foreign countries:
I am convinced that international bankers will soon realize
that, under a National Socialist government, Germany will be a
secure place of investment, that a rate of interest of about 3% will
be most willingly paid for credit.
-Deutschland so oder so p. 211
If it were revolutionary propaganda's cardinal task "to unde­
ceive the proletariat," this could not have been done solely by
appealing to their "class consciousness," nor solely by constantly
impressing upon them the objective economic and political situa­
tion, and certainly not by constantly exposing the frauds that had
been practiced on them. The first and foremost task of revolu­
tionary propaganda should have been to give the contradictions in
the workers the most sympathetic consideration, to grasp the fact
that it was not a clear revolutionary will that was concealed or
befogged, but that the revolutionary impulse in the psychic struc­
ture of the proletariat was partially undeveloped and partially
interfused with contrary reactionary structural elements. The dis­
tillation of the revolutionary sentiments of the broad masses is
undoubtedly the basic task in the process of awakening their social
responsibility.
In times of "quiet" bourgeois democracy two fundamental
possibilities are open to the industrial worker: identification with
the bourgeoisie, which holds a higher position in the social scale, or
identification with his own social class, which produces its own anti­
reactionary way of life. To pursue the first possibility means to envy
the reactionary man, to imitate him, and, if the opportunity arises,
to assimilate his habits of life. To pursue the second of these
possibilities means to reject the reactionary man's ideologies and
habits of life. Due to the simultaneous influence exercised by both
social and class habits, these two possibilities are equally strong. The
revolutionary movement also failed to appreciate the importance of
68The Authoritarian Ideology
the seemingly irrelevant everyday habits, indeed, very often turned
them to bad account. The lower middle-class bedroom suite, which
the "rabble" buys as soon as he has the means, even if he is
otherwise revolutionary minded; the consequent suppression of the
wife, even if he is a Communist; the "decent" suit of clothes for
Sunday; "proper" dance steps and a thousand other "banalities,"
have an incomparably greater reactionary influence when repeated
day after day than thousands of revolutionary rallies and leaflets can
ever hope to counterbalance. Narrow conservative life exercises a
continuous influence, penetrates every facet of everyday life;
whereas factory work and revolutionary leaflets have only a brief
effect. Thus, it was a grave mistake to cater to the conservative
tendencies in the workers by giving banquets "as a means of getting
at the masses." Reactionary fascism was much more expert at this.
The budding revolutionary modes of life were not cultivated. There
was more truth about the reactionary structure of the workers in the
"evening dress" bought by the wife of a worker for such a "ban­
quet" than in a hundred articles. The evening dress or at-home beer
parties were, of course, only external manifestations of a process in
the worker, a testimony of the fact that the groundwork for the
reception of National Socialist propaganda was already there.
When, added to this, the fascist promised the "abolition of the
proletariat" and was successful with this promise, it was the evening
dress and not the economic program that accounted for success in
ninety of one hundred cases. We must pay more, much more,
attention to these details of everyday life. It is around these details
that social progress or its opposite assume concrete forms, not
around the political slogans that arouse temporary enthusiasm only.
There is important and fruitful work waiting here. In Germany the
revolutionary work for the masses was restricted almost exclusively
to propaganda "against hunger." The basis of this propaganda, as
important as it was, proved to be too narrow. There are thousands
of different things taking place behind the scenes in the life of the
individuals of the masses. For instance, the young worker has a
thousand sexual and cultural problems, which plague him as soon as
69THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
he has appeased his hunger to a small degree. The fight against
hunger is of primary importance, but the hidden processes of
human life must also be placed under the fierce light of this monkey
show, in which we are spectator and actor at one and the same
time; and this must be done without restraint and without fear of
consequences.
The working man would undoubtedly show himself to be infi­
nitely creative in his attempts to develop his own conceptions of life
and natural way of viewing things. The mastering of everyday social
problems would give invincible impetus to the reactionary-infested
masses. A detailed, concrete, and germane study of these problems
is indispensable. It will accelerate and secure the victory of the
revolution. And please don't raise the threadbare objection that
such proposals are utopian. Only by stressing all possibilities of a
work-democratic way of life, by taking a militant stance toward
reactionary thinking and militantly developing the seed of a living
culture of masses of people, can lasting peace be secured. As long as
reactionary social irresponsibility predominates over social responsi­
bility, the worker will also be fairly closed to revolutionary, i.e.,
rational behavior. This is also another reason psychological work
among the masses is so imperative.
The degradation of manual labor (which is a basic element of
the inclination to imitate the reactionary white-collar worker) con­
stitutes the psychological basis upon which fascism relies as soon as
it begins to infiltrate the working classes. Fascism promises the
abolition of the classes, that is to say, the abolition of proletarian
status, and in this way it plays upon the social inferiority felt by the
manual laborer. As long as peasants were still migrating to the city
to become workers, they brought along a fresh rural family ideology,
which, as we have already shown, is the best soil for the fostering of
an imperialistic-nationalistic ideology. In addition to this, there is an
ideological process in the workers' movement, which, in the assess­
ment of the chances of a revolutionary movement in countries
having a highly developed industry as well as in those countries
whose industry was still undeveloped, has been accorded much too
little attention.
70The Authoritarian Ideology
Kautsky noted that, politically, the worker in highly industrial­
ized England was less developed than the worker in industrially
undeveloped Russia (Soziale Revolution, 2nd edition, pp. 59-60).
The political events in the various countries of the world during the
past thirty years have clearly shown that revolutionary revolts take
place more readily in industrially undeveloped countries, such as
China, Mexico, and India, than in countries such as England,
America, and Germany. And this is the case, notwithstanding the
existence of disciplined, well-organized workers' movements rooted
in old traditions in the latter countries. If bureaucratization, which
is itself a pathological symptom, is abstracted from the workers'
movement, the question arises as to the exceptional entrenchment
of conservatism in Social Democracy and in the trade unions in
Western countries. From the standpoint of the psychology of the
masses, Social Democracy is based on the conservative structures of
its followers. As in the case of fascism, the problem here lies not so
much in the policies pursued by the party leadership as it does in
the psychological basis in the workers. I want to point out only a
few relevant facts, which, however, may well solve a riddle or two.
Here are the facts:
In early capitalism, besides the sharp economic division be­
tween bourgeoisie and proletariat, there was an equally sharp ideo­
logic division, and particularly a structural division. The absence of
any kind of social policy, the emasculating sixteen-, indeed eighteen­
hour workday, the low standard of living of the industrial workers­
classically described in Engels' "Condition of the Working Classes
in England" -precluded any structural assimilation of the prole­
tariat to the bourgeoisie. The structure of the nineteenth-century
proletariat was characterized by a meek submission to fate. The
psychological mood of this proletariat, including the peasantry, was
one of indifference and apathy. Bourgeois thinking was lacking;
consequently, this apathy did not hinder the sudden outbreak of
revolutionary sentiments, if suitable occasions arose and did not
prevent these sentiments from developing to an unexpected inten­
sity and resoluteness. In later stages of capitalism, on the other
hand, it was different. If an organized workers' movement had
71THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
succeeded in winning socio-political improvements-as shorter
working hours, franchise, social security-this had the effect of
strengthening the working class; but at the same time a contrary
process set in: With the raising of the standard of living, there was
a structural assimilation to the middle class. With the elevation of
one's social position, "one's eyes turned upward." In times of pros­
perity this adaptation of middle-class habits was intensified, but the
subsequent effect of this adaptation, in times of economic crisis, was
to obstruct the full unfolding of revolutionary sentiments.
The strength of the Social Democracies during the crisis years
shows just how completely the workers had been infected with this
conservatism. Thus, this strength was not to be explained on purely
political grounds. It is now important to comprehend its basic
elements. Two facts stand out: the emotional tie to the fiihrer, that
is to say, the unshakableness of the faith in the infallibility of the
political leadership9 (notwithstanding all the criticism, which never
materialized into action), and the sex-moralistic assimilation to the
conservatism of the lower middle class. This assimilation to the
middle class was energetically encouraged by the upper middle
class everywhere. The Social Democrats should have literally swung
9 Following a congress in Leipzig, in 1932, I spoke with Social Democrat work·
ers who had attended the congress about the political crisis. They were in
accord with all the arguments against the "way to socialism" propagandized by
Social Democracy, but otherwise hardly drew a distinction between themselves
and the Communist. I asked one of them why they did not proceed accord­
ingly and detach themselves from their leaders. His answer staggered me­
that's how inconsistent it was with his previously expressed views: "Our lead­
ers surely know what they are doing." This was an all-too-clear expression of
the contradiction in which the Social Democrat worker found himself: the tie
to the leader, which prevented criticism of his policies from materializing into
action. In view of this it is easier to understand the grave error that was com­
mitted when attempting to win over the Social Democrat worker by reviling his
leaders. Since he identified with his leaders, he could only be repelled by such
insults. The inner rottenness of German Social Democracy was clearly brought
out in the arrest of Severing, the Social Democrat minister of the interior, by
a few armed men, shortly before. Hitler's seizure of power. Twelve million
Social Democrats did not prevent it.
72The Authoritarian Ideology
their cudgels, in the beginning, at a time when fascism had not yet
attained victory. Instead, they held them in reserve and used them
only against the revolutionary workers. For the masses who were
Social Democrats, they had a far more dangerous expedient: con­
servative ideology in all areas.
When, then, the Social Democrat worker found himself in the
economic crisis which degraded him to the status of a coolie, the
development of his revolutionary sentiments was severely retarded
by the conservative structuralization that had been taking shape in
him for decades. Either he remained in the camp of the Social
Democrats, notwithstanding his criticism and rejection of their
policies, or he went over to the NSDAP in search of a better re­
placement. Irresolute and indecisive, owing to the deep contradic­
tion between revolutionary and conservative sentiments, disap­
pointed by his own leadership, he followed the line of least
resistance. Whether he would give up his conservative tendencies
and arrive at a complete consciousness of his actual responsibility in
the production process, i.e., at a revolutionary consciousness, de­
pended solely on the correct or incorrect leadership of the revolu­
tionary party. Thus the communist assertion that it was the Social
Democrat policies that put fascism in the saddle was correct from a
psychological viewpoint. Disappointment in Social Democracy, ac­
companied by the contradiction between wretchedness and con­
servative thinking, must lead to fascism if there are no revolution­
ary organizations. For example, following the fiasco of the Labor
party's policies in England, in 1930-31, fascism began to infiltrate
the workers who, then, in the election of 1931, cut away to the
Right, instead of going over to communism. Democratic Scandi­
navia was also severely threatened by such a development.1o
10
To a large extent, the breakdown of the Norwegian government in 1940
was to be traced back to the same influence exercised by Social Democrat con­
servatism. For example, the Social Democrat government had prohibited mili­
tary units from holding parades. But in 1939 the Norwegian fascists were the
only ones who still marched through the streets and held exercises. Quisling's
betrayal was greatly encouraged by such "liberalism."
73THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
Rosa Luxemburg took the view that a revolutionary fight was
not possible with "coolies," (Ges. W. Bd. 4, p. 647). What kind of
a coolie are we dealing with: the coolie before or after he has gone
through conservative structuralization? Beforehand we are dealing
with a coolie who has an almost impenetrable dullness, but also a
great capacity for revolutionary action. Afterward we are dealing
with disappointed coolies. Would it not be more difficult to rouse
their revolutionary inclinations? How long can fascism exploit the
masses' disappointment in Social Democracy and their "rebellion
against the system" for its own narrow purposes? As difficult as it
may be to answer this momentous question, one thing is certain:
the international revolutionary movement will have to tackle it, if it
wants to deal fascism its death blow.
74III
The Race Theory
ITS CONTENTS
The race theory is German fascism's theoretical axis. In fascist
ideology the economic program of the so-called twenty-five points
figures solely as an expedient intended "to improve the Germanic
race genetically and to protect it against racial interbreeding" which,
according to the National Socialists, always entails the decline of the
"higher race." Indeed, it is their contention that even the decline of
a culture is to be traced back to miscegenation. Hence, "keeping the
blood and the race pure" is a nation's noblest task, in the fulfillment
of which one must be prepared to make any sacrifice. In Germany
and the German-occupied countries, no means were spared in putting
this theory into practice in the form of the persecution of the
Jews.
The race theory proceeds from the presupposition that the
exclusive mating of every animal with its own species is an "iron
law" in nature. Only exceptional circumstances, such as captivity,
are capable of causing a violation of this law and of leading to racial
interbreeding. When this occurs, however, nature revenges itself
and uses every means at its disposal to oppose such infringements,
either by making the bastard sterile or by limiting the fertility of
later offspring. In every crossbreeding of two living creatures of
different "levels," the offspring will of necessity represent something
intermediate. But nature aims at a higher breeding of life; hence
7STHE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
bastardization is contrary to the will of nature. Natural selection
also takes place in the daily struggle for survival, in which the
weaker, i.e., racially inferior, perish. This is consistent with the "will
of nature," for every improvement and higher breeding would cease
if the weak, who are in the majority, could crowd out the strong,
who are in the minority. Hence, nature subjects the weaker speci­
mens to more severe conditions of life as a means of limiting their
number; on the other hand, it does not allow the rest to multiply
indiscriminately; they are subjected to a ruthless selection on the
basis of energy and health.
The National Socialist went on to apply this supposed law in
nature to peoples. Their line of reasoning was something as follows:
Historical experience teaches that the "intermixing of Aryan blood"
with "inferior" peoples always results in the degeneration of the
founders of civilization. The level of the superior race is lowered,
followed by physical and mental retrogression; this marks the
beginning of a progressive "decline."
The North American continent would remain strong, Hitler
states, "as long as he [the German inhabitant] does not fall a
victim to defilement of the blood,"l that is to say, as long as he does
not interbreed with non-Germanic peoples.
"To bring about such a development is, then, nothing else but
to sin against the will of the eternal creator."2 These views are
unmistakably mystical; nature "regulates" and "wills" "according to
reason." They are the logical culmination of biological metaphysics.
According to Hitler, humanity is to be divided into three races:
the founders of civilization, the upholders of civilization, and the
destroyers of civilization. Only the Aryan race is considered as the
founder of civilization, for it built the "foundation and walls of
human creation." The Asian peoples, the Japanese3 and the Chi-
1 Mein Kampf, op. cit., p. 286.
2 Op. cit. 286.
3 Political irrationalism was clearly expressed in the later military alliance be­
tween a supenor race and an inferior race.
76The Race Theory
nese, for example, merely took over the Aryan civilization and
translated it into their own form. Thus, they are upholders of
civilization. The Jewish race, however, is a destroyer of civilization.
The existence of "inferior human beings" is the chief prerequisite
for the establishment of a higher civilization. Man's first civilization
rested upon the use of inferior human races. In olden times it was
the vanquished who were made to pull the plow, which only much
later was pulled by the horse. As conqueror, the Aryan subjugated
the inferior masses and regulated their activity in accordance with
Aryan needs to compass Aryan ends. However, as soon as the
subjugated peoples began to learn the language and to adopt the
customs of the "masters," and the clear-cut demarcation between
master and slave was obliterated, the Aryan relinquished the purity
of his blood and lost "his sojourn in paradise." Through this, he also
lost his cultural genius. We are not forgetting that Adolf Hitler
represents the flowering of civilization.
Blood mixture and the resultant drop in the racial level is the
sole cause of the dying out of old cultures; for men do not perish as
a result of lost wars, but by the loss of that force of resistance which
is contained only in pure blood.
-Op. cit. 296
An objective and technical refutation of this basic idea is out of
the question here. It borrows an argument from Darwin's hypothe­
sis of natural selection, some elements of which are as reactionary as
his proof of llie origin of species from lower organisms is revolution­
ary. Moreover, this idea conceals the imperialist function of fascist
ideology. For if the Aryans are the sole founders of civilization,
then, by virture of their divine destiny, they can lay claim to world
dominion. And, in fact, one of Hitler's principal claims was the
expansion of the borders of the German empire, especially "toward
the East," i.e., into Soviet Russian territory. Thus, we can see that
the glorification of an imperialist war lay wholly within the compass
of this ideology .
. . . The aim for which we were fighting the War was the
loftiest, the most overpowering, that man can conceive: it was the
77THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
freedom and independence of our nation, the security of our future
food supply, and-our national honor;
-Op. cit. 177
Here we are solely interested in the irrational origin of these
ideologies, which, objectively viewed, were in conformity with the
interests of German imperialism; most of all we are interested in the
contradictions and incongruities existing in the race theory. Race
theorists who refer to a biological law in support of their theory
overlook the fact that racial breeding of animals is an artifact. It is
not a question whether dog and cat have an "instinctive aversion"
to interbreeding, but whether collie and greyhound, German and
Slav, have the same aversion.
Race theorists, who are as old as imperialism itself, want to
achieve racial purity in peoples whose interbreeding, as a result of
the expansion of world economy, is so far advanced that racial
purity can have a meaning only to a numbskull. We do not want to
enter into the other absurdities here-as if racial circumscription
and not its opposite, promiscuous mating within the same species,
were the rule in nature. In the present examination we are not
concerned with the rational content of the race theory, a theory
that, instead of proceeding from facts to valuations, proceeded from
valuations to a distortion of the facts. Nor will arguments be of any
use against a fascist who is narcissistically convinced of the supreme
superiority of his Teutonism, if only because he operates with irra­
tional feelings and not with arguments. Hence, it would be hopeless
to try to prove to a fascist that black people and Italians are not
racially "inferior" to the Teutons. He feels himself to be "superior,"
and that's the end of it. The race theory can be refuted only by
exposing its irrational functions, of which there are essentially two:
that of giving expression to certain unconscious and emotional cur­
rents prevalent in the nationalistically disposed man and of conceal­
ing certain psychic tendencies. Only the latter function will be
discussed here. We are especially interested in the fact that Hitler
speaks of "incest" when an Aryan interbreeds with a non-Aryan,
78The Race Theory
whereas it is usually sexual intercourse among those who are related
by blood that is designated as incest. How are such stupidities to be
explained in a "theory" that presumed to be the basis of a new
world, a "third Reich"? When we bear in mind that in the final
analysis the irrational, emotional basis of such a hypothesis owes its
existence to definite existential factors; when we free ourselves of
the notion that the discovery of such irrational sources of views of
life, which have come into being on a rational basis, means a shift­
ing of the question into the sphere of metaphysics, then we open
the way to the source of metaphysics itself. We comprehend not
only the historical conditions under which metaphysical thinking
arises, but also its material substance. Let the results speak for
themselves.
THE OBJECTIVE AND SUBJECTIVE FUNCTIONS OF IDEOLOGY
The failure to differentiate between the objective and subjective
functions of an ideology frequently results in a misunderstanding of
the relation of an ideology to its historical function. At the outset, a
dictator's views are to be understood solely in terms of the economic
basis from which they originated. Thus the fascist race theory and
nationalistic ideology in general have a concrete relation to the
imperialistic aims of a ruling class that is attempting to solve diffi­
culties of an economic nature. The German and the French
nationalism of World War I appealed to the "Greatness of the
Nation," behind which were concealed the economic expansion
tendencies of German and French big business. These economic
factors do not constitute what is substantial in the corresponding
ideology, but only the social soil in which they germinate; in short,
they constitute the conditions that are indispensable to the genesis
of such ideologies. At times nationalism is not at all socially repre­
sented with respect to its substance; nor for that matter can it be
brought into line with racial points of view. In Austria-Hungary of
former days, a nationalism did not coincide with race, but with the
"homeland" Austria-Hungary. In 1914, when Bethmann-Hollweg
79THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
invoked "Teutonism against Slavism," if he had wanted to be con­
sistent, he would have had to proceed against Austria, this predomi­
nantly Slavic state. Thus we see that, while the economic conditions
of an ideology give us an insight into its material basis, they offer us
no immediate knowledge of its irrational core. It is man's character
structure that directly constitutes this core. Subject to the specific
economic conditions of a society, man reproduces the historical
economic process in his ideology. By forming ideologies, man re­
shapes himself; man's material core is to be sought in the process by
which he forms ideologies. Thus, ideology appears to have a twofold
material basis: the economic structure of society and the typical
structure of the people who produce it, a structure that is itself
determined by the economic structure of society. Thus it is clear
that the irrational formation of an ideology also makes man's
structure irrational.
The structure of fascism is characterized by metaphysical think­
ing, unorthodox faith, obsession with abstract ethical ideals, and
belief in the divine predestination of the fuhrer. These basic fea­
tures are linked with a deeper layer, which is characterized by a
strong authoritarian tie to the fuhrer-ideal or the nation. The belief
in a "master race" became the principal mainspring of the tie to the
"fuhrer" on the part of the National Socialist masses, as well as the
foundation of their voluntary acceptance of slavish submission. In
addition to this, however, the intensive identification with the
fuhrer had a decisive effect, for it concealed one's real status as an
insignificant member of the masses. Notwithstanding his vassalage,
every National Socialist felt himself to be a "little Hitler." Now,
however, we want to turn our attention to the characterological
basis of these attitudes. We must seek out the dynamic functions
that, while they themselves are determined by education and the
social atmosphere as a whole, remold human structures to such an
extent that tendencies of a reactionary-irrational nature are capable
of taking shape in them; to such an extent that, completely en­
veloped in their identification with the "fuhrer," the masses are
immune to the insult heaped upon them by the label "inferior."
80The Race Theory
If we shut our eyes to the dazzling effect of ideologic phraseol­
ogy, if we focus our attention on its irrational content, and if we
know how to show its proper bearing upon the sex-economic aspects
of the process of ideologic formation, then the stereotype equating
of "racial poisoning" and "blood poisoning" is immediately con­
spicuous. What does this mean?
RACIAL PURITY, BLOOD POISONING, AND MYSTICISM
". . . running parallel to the political, ethical, and moral con­
tamination of the people, there had been for many years a no less
terrible poisoning of the health of the national body . . . [through]
syphilis. . . ."4 The principal cause of this was to be sought in the
prostitution of love:
. . . The cause lies, primarily, in our prostitution of love. Even
if its results were not this frightful plague, it would nonetheless be
profoundly injurious to man, since the moral devastations which
accompany this degeneracy suffice to destroy a people slowly but
surely. This Jewification of our spiritual life and mammonization of
our mating instinct will sooner or later destroy our entire off­
spring . . . .
-Mein Kampf, p. 247
Hitler sums up his position as follows:
Blood sin and desecration of the race are the original sin in this
world and the end of a humanity which surrenders to it.
-Mein Kampf, p. 249
Thus, according to this view, racial interbreeding leads to blood
interbreeding and in turn to the "blood poisoning of the national
body."
. . . The most visible results of this mass contamination [by
syphilis] can be found . . . i n our�hildren. They in particular
are the sad product of the irresistibly spreading contamination of
4 Op. cit., p. 246.
81THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
our sexual life; the vices of the parents are revealed in the sicknesses
of the children.
-Mein Kampf, p. 248
In this connection, "vices of the parents" can only refer to their
interbreeding with racially alien blood, i.e., especially with Jewish
blood, whereby the Jewish "world plague" finds ingress into "pure"
Aryan blood. It is remarkable how closely this theory of blood
poisoning is related to the political thesis of the poisoning of
Teutonism by the "world Jew, Karl Marx." The irrational fear of
syphilis constitutes one of the major sources of National Socialism's
political views and its anti-Semitism. It follows, then, that racial
purity, that is to say, purity of blood5 is something worth striving
for and fighting for with every available means.
Ii The following story appeared in the London Times on August 23, 1933: "The
son and daughter of the United States Ambassador in Berlin were among the
foreigners who were in Nuremberg on Sunday, August 13, and saw a girl led
through the streets with her head shaved and her shorn plaits pinned to a
placard suspended from her shoulders which bore the words 'I have offered
myself to a Jew.' ..
Several other foreigners were eye-witnesses of this spectacle. There are at
all times foreign tourists in Nuremberg, and the parade of the girl was carried
out in such a manner that few people in the center of the town could have
failed to see it. The girl who is described by one of them as being small, fragile,
and, in spite of her shaven head and condition, obviously pretty, was marched
in and out of the ring of international hotels by the station, through the main
streets, where the traffic was blocked by the crowds, and from cabaret to
cabaret. Her escort was formed of storm troopers, and a crowd estimated by a
trustworthy observer at some. 2,000 people followed her about. She occasion­
ally stumbled and was replaced on her feet by the stalwart brownshirts, who
sometimes held her aloft in order that more distant onlookers might see her,
and on these occasions she was hooted and derided by the crowd and jocularly
invited to make a speech.
For not rising when the Horst Wessel song was played a girl at Neu-Rup­
pin, near Berlin, was led through the streets of the town flanked by storm
troopers and wearing two placards hung from her neck. The inscription read: "I,
shameless creature that 1 am, dared to remain seated when the Horst Wessel
song was sung, thus mocking the victims of the National Socialist revolution."
Later in the day the girl was again led through the streets. The time of the
"spectacle" had been announced in the local newspaper so that large crowds
should gather.
82The Race Theory
Hitler repeatedly stressed that one could not get at the masses
with arguments, proofs, and knowledge, but only with feelings and
beliefs. In the language of National Socialism, in that of Keyserling,
Driesch, Rosenberg, Stapel, etc., the nebulous and the mystical are
so conspicuous that an analysis of this peculiarity will certainly
prove profitable.
What was it in the mysticism of fascism that so fascinated the
masses?
The answer is supplied by the analysis of the "proofs" that
Rosenberg (My thus des 20. Jahrhunderts) offers in substantiation
of the fascist race theory. Right at the outset Rosenberg writes:
The values of a race's soul, i.e., those values which are the
motor forces of the new conception of the world, have not yet
become a part of living consciousness. Soul, however, means race
seen from within. Conversely, race is the outer world of the soul.
-Myth us, p. 22
Here we have an example of one of the many typical National
Socialist phrases, which, on first impression, doesn't seem to mean
anything, indeed, seems intentionally to disguise its meaning, per­
haps from the author himself. To understand the political-irrational
impact of precisely such statements, one has to be familiar with and
recognize the importance of the effect they have on the structure of
the masses. Rosenberg goes on to say:
Hence, the history of race is the history of nature and soul
mysticism at one and the same time; but the history of the religion
of the blood is, conversely, the great world history of the rise and
fall of peoples, of their heroes and thinkers, their inventors and
artists.
The recognition of this fact leads to the realization that the
"fight of the blood" and the "intuitive mysticism of existential
phenomena" are not two separate things, but one and the same
thing represented in different ways. "Fight of the blood," "intuitive
mysticism of existential phenomena," "rise and fall of peoples,"
"blood poisoning," "Jewish world plague," are all part and parcel of
the same line, which begins with "fight of the blood" and ends with
83THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
the bloody terror against the "Jewish materialism" of Marx and the
genocide of the Jews.
The cause of freedom is not advanced by merely ridiculing this
mysticism; it must be unmasked and reduced to its basic irrational
content. The greater part of this mysticism and what is most impor­
tant about it is a biological energy process, an extreme expression of
reactionary sexual ideology, irrationally and mystically conceived.
The creed of the "soul" and its "purity" is the creed of asexuality,
of "sexual purity." Basically, it is a symptom of the sexual repression
and sexual shyness brought about by a patriarchal authoritarian
society.
"Coming to grips with blood and environment, with blood and
blood, is for us the last attainable reality, behind which it is no
longer granted us to search and to investigate," Rosenberg states.
He errs. We are immodest enough to want to investigate and not
only to expose, without sentimentality, the living process "between
blood and blood," but also to demolish a pillar of the National
Socialist creed.
We shall let Rosenberg himself prove that the core of the
fascist race theory is a mortal fear of natural sexuality and of its
orgasm function. Using the ancient Greeks as an example, Rosen­
berg seeks to prove the validity of the thesis that the rise and fall of
peoples is to be traced back to racial interbreeding and "blood
poisoning." According to his theory the Greeks were originally the
representatives of Nordic racial purity. The gods Zeus and Apollo
and the goddess Athene were "symbols of the most devout piety,"
guardians and protectors of "the noble and the joyous," "keepers of
order, teachers of the harmony of inner power and of artistic
values." Homer, he claims, had not the least interest in the "ec­
static." Of Athene, he writes that she was:
. . . t he symbol of life-consuming lightning, the wise and
thoughtful virgin, sprung from the head of Zeus: protectress of the
Hellenic people and faithful shield of its battles.
These very pious creations of the Greek soul are proof of the
pure, untrammeled inner life of the Nordic people; in the highest
84The Race Theory
sense of the word, they are religious confessions and expressions of
confidence in their own species.
-My thus, p. 41 ff
These gods, which are said to symbolize purity, sublimity, and
religiosity, are then contrasted to the gods of the Near-Eastern
peoples:
While the Greek gods were heroes of light and heaven, the
gods of the non-Aryan Near Easterners are imbued with earthly
characteristics.
Rosenberg contends that Demeter and Hermes were the or­
ganic offspring of these "souls of race." Dionysus, the god of
ecstasy, sensual pleasure, unbridled maenadism, constituted the
"intrusion of the foreign race of the Etruscans and marked the
beginning of the decline of Hellenism."
In a far-fetched effort to support his thesis of the soul of a race,
Rosenberg quite arbitrarily separates the gods into two categories:
those that represent the "positive" process of Hellenistic cultural
development, he labels Greek; while the others, which also origi­
nated in Hellenism, are described as foreign gods. Rosenberg asserts
that historical research, which "racially falsifies" and erroneously
interprets Hellenism, is responsible for our misunderstanding of
Greek history.
In awe and veneration, the great German romantics sense how
ever darker veils enshroud the bright gods of heaven, and they
plunge ever deeper into the instinctual, amorphous, demonic, sex­
ual, ecstatic, ch thonic, in to a veneration of the mother [my italics
WR]. And all of this was still supposed to be characteristic of the
Greeks.
-My thus, p. 43
. All forms of idealistic philosophy fail to investigate the condi­
tions under which the "ecstatic" and "instinctual" come into
existence in certain cultural epochs; instead they get entangled in
the abstract evaluation of these phenomena from the point of view
85THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
of that cultural outlook that, elevating itself so far above the
"earthly" (natural), comes to naught as a result of that very eleva­
tion. We, too, arrive at an evaluation of such phenomena, but it is
an evaluation based on the conditions of a social process that appear
as the symptoms of "decline" of a civilization. In this way we are
able to recognize the forces that impel forward and those that
retard, and to comprehend the phenomenon of decline as a histori­
cal event, and, last but not least, to seek out the seed of the new
cultural form and to assist its germination. When Rosenberg-in
view of the decline of twentieth-century authoritarian civilization­
reminds us of the fate of the Greeks, he puts himself on the side of
conservative historical tendencies, despite his protestations of a
"revival" of Teutonism. If we can succeed in understanding the
standpoint of political reaction, we shall have gained a significant
insight into the attitude toward cultural revolution and its sex­
economic core. For the reactionary cultural philosopher there are
only two possibilities: resignation and skepticism, or the turning
back of the wheel of history by "revolutionary" means. But if one
has shifted the focal point of one's cultural outlook, has recognized
in the collapse of an ancient civilization, not the fall of civilization
altogether but merely the fall of a certain civilization, namely the
authoritarian, then a natural shifting also takes place in one's
assessment of those cultural elements previously appraised as posi­
tive or negative. One realizes that the old form is "laboring with"
the new form of civilization, one based on genuine freedom. It is
mainly a question of understanding the attitude that the revolution
takes toward those phenomena regarded as symptoms of decline by
political reaction. It is indicative, for example, that the latter de­
clares itself in favor of the patriarchal theory in ethnology, whereas
the former declares itself in favor of the matriarchal theory. Apart
from the objective historical factors, there are interests at work in
these two contrary sociological currents, interests that correspond to
the previously unknown processes of sex-economy. Matriarchy,
which is a historically demonstrated system, is not only in accord
with the organization of natural work-democracy, but also with the
86The Race Theory
society organized on a natural, sex-economic basis.6 Patriarchy, on
the other hand, not only has an authoritarian economy, its sex­
economic organization is catastrophic.
Long after the Church lost its hold on scientific research, it
continued to promulgate the metaphysical doctrine of "man's moral
nature," and of his monogamous disposition, etc. It was for this
reason that Bachofen's findings threatened to make hay of tradition.
The amazing thing about matriarchy is not so much its wholly
different consanguinity, but the natural self-regulation of sexuality
that it entails. The social means of production are not privately
owned in a matriarchy, as Morgan and Engels recognized. As a
fascist ideologist, Rosenberg had no other choice than to deny the
descent of ancient Greek culture from matriarchal beginnings (a
proven fact) and to seize upon the hypothesis that "in this phase
[the Dionysian] the Greeks assumed characteristics which were
both physically and spiritually alien to their culture."
In contrast to Christian ideology (as we shall see later), fascist
ideology separates man's orgastic yearning from the human struc­
ture produced under authoritarian patriarchy and relates it to
various races: Nordic is equated to bright, ma;estic, heavenly,
asexual, pure, whereas "Near Eastern" is equated to instinctual,
demonic, sexual, ecstatic, orgastic. This explains why Bachofen's
"intuitive and romantic" investigations were rejected as the theory
of that which only "appears to be" ancient Greek life. In the fascist
race theory the orgasm anxiety of the man subjugated to authority
appears in an absolute form, eternalized as the "pure" and con­
trasted with the animal-like and orgastic. Thus, "what is Greek"
and "what is racial" become an emanation of "what is pure," what
is "asexual"; while "what is racially alien," "the Etruscan," is related
to "what is animal" and therefore "inferior." In keeping with this
line of reasoning, patriarchy is taken as the source of the human
history of the Aryans:
6 See Morgan's Ancient Society; Engels' Origin of the Family; Malinowsky's
The Sexual Life of Savages and Reich's Der Einbruch der Sexualmoral.
87THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
The first great historically decisive battle between racial values
was carried out on Greek soil, a battle decided in favor of the
Nordic nature. From this point on man approaches life from day­
light, from life itself; everything which we call Greek culture and
our great heritage from antiquity, originated from the law of light
and of heaven, from the spirit and nature of the father.
-Rosenberg
The patriarchal authoritarian sexual order that resulted from
the revolutionary processes of latter-day matriarchy (economic inde­
pendence of the chief's family from the maternal gens, a growing
exchange of goods between the tribes, development of the means of
production, etc.) becomes the primary basis of authoritarian ideol­
ogy by depriving the women, children, and adolescents of their
sexual freedom, making a commodity of sex and placing sexual
interests in the service of economic subjugation. From now on,
sexuality is indeed distorted; it becomes diabolical and demonic and
has to be curbed. In terms of patriarchal demands, the innocent
sensuousness of matriarchy appears as the lascivious unchaining of
dark powers. The Dionysian becomes "sinful yearning," which
patriarchal culture can conceive of only as something chaotic and
"dirty." Surrounded by and imbued with human sexual structures
that have become distorted and lascivious, patriarchal man is
shackled for the first time in an ideology in which sexual and dirty,
sexual and vulgar or demonic, become inseparable associations.
Secondarily, however, this evaluation also has a rational justifi­
cation.
With the imposition of chastity, women become unchaste
under the pressure of their sexual demands; the sexual brutality on
the part of the male, and the corresponding conception on the part
of the female that for her the sexual act is something disgraceful,
takes the place of natural orgastic sensuousness. Extramarital sexual
intercourse, to be sure, is not done away with anywhere. With the
shifting of the valuation and the abolition of the institutions that
previously protected and sanctioned it in a matriarchal society, it
becomes involved in a conflict with official morality and is forced to
88The Race Theory
lead a clandestine existence. The change in the social attitude
toward sexual intercourse also effects a change in the inner experi­
ence of sexuality. The conflict that is now created between the
natural and "sublime morality" disturbs the individual's ability to
gratify his needs. The feeling of guilt now associated with sexuality
cleaves the natural, orgastic course of sexual coalescence and pro­
duces a damming up of sexual energy, which later breaks out in
various ways. Neuroses, sexual aberrations, and antisocial sexuality
become permanent social phenomena. Childhood and adolescent
sexuality, which were given a positive value in the original matri­
archal work-democracy, fall prey to systematic suppression, which
differs only in form. As time goes on, this sexuality, which is so
distorted, disturbed, brutalized, and prostituted, advocates the very
ideology to which it owes its origin. Those who negate sexuality can
now justifiably point to it as something brutal and dirty. That this
dirty sexuality is not natural sexuality but merely patriarchal sexu­
ality is simply overlooked. And the sexology of latter-day capitalistic
patriarchy is no less affected by this evaluation than the vulgar
views. This condemns it to complete sterility.
Later we shall see how religious mysticism becomes the organ­
ized center of these evaluations and ideologies. For the present we
must merely bear in mind that religious mysticism denies the sex­
economic principle altogether and condemns sexuality as a sinful
phenomenon of humanity, from which only the Hereafter can
deliver us. Nationalistic fascism, on the other hand, transfers sexual
sensuality to the "alien race," which is relegated to an inferior status
in this way. From now on, the depreciation of the "alien race"
coincides organically with latter-day patriarchal imperialism.
In Christian mythology, God never appears without his
counterpart the Devil, as the "God of the Underworld," and the
victory of the divine God over the infernal God becomes the
symbol of human elevation. This confrontation is also depicted in
Greek mythology by the struggle between orgastic biosexuality and
strivings that demand chastity. To the abstract moralist and to the
mystifying philosopher, this confrontation appears as the wrestling
89THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
of two essences or "human ideas," one of which is regarded as
vulgar from the outset, while the other is looked upon as the "truly
human" or "superhuman." However, if this "struggle of essences"
as well as the valuations attached to them are traced to their mate­
rial fountainhead, if they are arranged in their proper place in the
sociological fabric and sexuality is given its due as a historical factor,
we arrive at the following facts: every tribe that developed from a
matriarchal to a patriarchal organization had to change the sexual
structure of its members to produce a sexuality in keeping with its
new form of life. This was a necessary change because the shifting
of power and of wealth from the democratic gens to the authori­
tarian family of the chief was mainly implemented with the help of
the suppression of the sexual strivings of the people. It was in this
way that sexual suppression became an essential factor in the divi­
sion of society into classes.
Marriage, and the lawful dowry it entailed, became the axis of
the transformation of the one organization into the other.7 In view
of the fact that the marriage tribute of the wife's gens to the man's
family strengthened the male's, especially the chief's, position of
power, the male members of the higher ranking gens and families
developed a keen interest in making the nuptial ties permanent. At
this stage, in other words, only the man had an interest in marriage.
In this way natural work-democracy's simple alliance, which could
be easily dissolved at any time, was transformed into the permanent
and monogamous marital relationship of patriarchy. The permanent
monogamous marriage became the basic institution of patriarchal
society-which it still is today. To safeguard these marriages,
however, it was necessary to impose greater and greater restrictions
upon and to depreciate natural genital strivings. This applied not
only to the "lower" class, which was subjected to greater and greater
exploitation. It was precisely those classes that until then had not
7 Proof of this is to be found in: Der Einbruch der Sexualmoral.
90The Race Theory
known any cleavage between morality and sexuality that were now
forced to experience this ever deepening conflict. But let it not be
assumed that this compulsive morality had an external effect only;
its full force is not felt until it has become internalized, until it has
become a sexual inhibition anchored in the structure. Different
aspects of the conflict will predominate during different stages of
this process. In the initial stages, it is sexual need that wins the
upper hand; later it is the compulsive moral inhibition that prevails.
When the entire social organization is plunged into a state of politi­
cal upheaval, the conflict between sexuality and compulsive morality
will of necessity reach an acute peak. Some will view this state of
affairs as moral degeneration, while others will see it as a "sexual
revolution." In any event, it is the breakthrough of natural sexuality
that is looked upon as "cultural degeneration." This breakthrough is
felt to be a "degeneration" only because it constitutes a threat to
compulsive morality. Viewed objectively, it is only the system of
sexual dictatorship that breaks down, a system devised to preserve
compulsive moralistic values in the individual in the interest of
authoritarian marriage and family. Among the ancient Greeks,
whose written history does not begin until patriarchy had reached a
state of full development, we find the following sexual organization:
male supremacy, hetaerae for the upper classes and prostitution for
the middle and lower classes; and along with this the wives leading
an enslaved and wretched existence and figuring solely as birth
machines. The male supremacy of the Platonic era is entirely
homosexuaI.B
The sex-economic contradictions of latter-day Greece appeared
at a time when the affairs of the Greek state were politically and
economically on the downgrade. To the fascist Rosenberg, the
"chthonian" becomes intermixed with the "apollonian" in the
Dionysian era, and they perish together. The phallus, Rosenberg
8 The same principle governs the fascist ideology of the male strata of leaders
(Bliiher, Roehm, etc.).
91THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
writes, becomes the symbol of the latter-day Greek conception of
the world. For the fascists, therefore, the return of natural sexuality
is viewed as a sign of decadence, lasciviousness, lechery, and sexual
filth. This, however, is not merely fascist fantasy; it corresponds to
the actual situation created by the burning contradiction in the
mode of experience of the people of such an epoch. The "Dionysian
feasts" correspond to the masquerades and costume bans of our
reactionary classes. However, one must know exactly what occurs at
such feasts not to fall prey to the common deception of seeing in
this "Dionysian" happening the epitome of sexual experience.
Nowhere are the indissoluble contradictions between dissolute sex­
ual yearnings and a capacity for experience debilitated by morality
more glaringly exposed than at such feasts. "Dionysos' law of limit­
less sexual gratification means uninhibited racial interbreeding be­
tween Greeks and Asiatics of all tribes and varieties [Myt hus, p.
52]." Just imagine a historian of the year 4000 representing the
sexual feasts of the twentieth century as the uninhibited interbreed­
ing of the Germans with the blacks and the Jews "of all tribes and
varieties" I
In this we clearly recognize the meaning of the idea of racial
interbreeding. It is a defense against the Dionysian, a defense
rooted in patriarchal society'S economic interest in marriage. Hence,
even in the story of Jason, compulsive marriage figures as the
bulwark against hetaerism.
"Hetaerae" are women who refuse to submit to the yoke of
compulsive marriage and insist on their right to determine their
own sex life. However, this demand gets involved in a conflict with
early childhood education, which incapacitated the organism's
capacity for sexual experience.
Hence, the hetaera plunges herself into one adventure after the
other to escape her homosexuality, or she lives a disturbed and
disintegrated existence in both directions at once. Hetaerism is
supplemented by male homosexuality. Owing to their compulsive
marital life, the men flee to the hetaerae and voluptuaries in an
effort to restore their capacity for sexual experience. Understand-
92The Race Theory
ably, the sexual structure of the fascists, who affirm the most severe
form of patriarchy and actually reactivate the sexual life of the
Platonic era in their familial mode of living-i.e., "purity" in
ideology, disintegration and pathology in actual practice-must bear
a resemblance to the sexual conditions of the Platonic era. Rosen­
berg and Bliiher recognize the state solely as a male state organized
on a homosexual basis. It is very curious to see how the view of the
worthlessness of democracy emerges from this ideology. Pythagoras
is rejected because he came out as the prophet of the equality of all
people, as the "herald of democratic Tellurism, of the community
of goods and females." This idea of the inner association of the
"community of goods and females" plays a central role in the
antirevolutionary fight. The democratization of Roman patrician
rule, which provided three hundred senators from three hundred
aristocratic families until the fifth century, is traced back to the fact
that intermarriages between patricians and plebeians were per­
mitted from the fifth century on, and that this led to a "racial
deterioration." Thus, even the democratization of a political system
brought about through intermarriages is interpreted as a sign of
racial decline. It is here that the reactionary character of the race
theory is thoroughly exposed, for now sexual intercourse between
Greeks and Romans belonging to different classes is looked upon as
ruinous racial interbreeding. Members of the suppressed class are
equated with those who are racially alien. At another point Rosen­
berg speaks of the workers' movement as the "ascending of the
asphalt-humanity of the big cities with all the refuse of Asianism
[Myt hus, p. 66]." Thus, behind the idea of the interbreeding with
alien races lies the idea of sexual intercourse with members of the
suppressed class. And operating at an even deeper level is the
tendency of political reaction to draw lines of demarcation, which
are rigid from an economic viewpoint, but are completely nonexis­
tent from a sexual-moralistic viewpoint owing to the sexual restric­
tions imposed upon middle-class women. At the same time,
however, sexual interbreeding between classes means an undermin­
ing of class rule; it creates the possibility of a "democratization,"
93THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
that is to say, the possibility of the proletarianization of the "aristo­
cratic" youth. For the lower social strata of every social order
develop sexual conceptions and habits that constitute a serious
threat to the rulers of every authoritarian order.9
If, in the final analysis, it is the idea of the interbreeding of
members of the ruling class with members of the ruled class that lies
at the root of the idea of racial interbreeding, then we obviously
have here the key to the question as to the role played by sexual
suppression in class society. In this connection we can differentiate
several functions. We know, for instance, that material suppression
relates solely to the lower classes; but on no account can we assume
that the same holds true for sexual suppression. The relations of
sexual suppression to class society are much more complicated. At
this time we want to single out only two of these functions:
1. Since sexual suppression has its origin in the economic inter­
est of marriage and the law of inheritance, it begins within the
ruling class itself. At first the morality of chastity applies most
rigidly to the female members of the ruling class. This is intended
to safeguard those possessions that were acquired through the ex­
ploitation of the lower classes.
2. In early capitalism and in the large feudal societies of Asia
the ruling class is not yet interested in a sexual suppression of the
enslaved classes. It is when the materially suppressed classes begin to
organize themselves, begin to fight for socio-political improvements
and to raise the cultural level of the broad masses, that sexual­
moralistic inhibitions set in. Only then does the ruling caste begin
to show an interest in the "morality" of the suppressed classes.
Thus, parallel to the rise of the organized working class, a contrary
process sets in, namely the ideological assimilation to the ruling
class.
Their own sexual habits are not relinquished in this process,
9 Cf. the appraisal of the "impure caste" in the Indian patriarchal society.
94The Race Theory
however; they continue to exist alongside the moralistic ideologies,
which, from now on, become more and more entrenched. This
results in the previously described contradiction in the human struc­
ture between reactionary and freedom-aspiring tendencies. Histori­
cally, the development of this contradiction in the structure of the
masses coincides with the loosening of feudal absolutism through
bourgeois democracy. To be sure, exploitation has merely undergone
a change in form; but this change entails a change in the character
structure of the masses. These are the facts to which Rosenberg
gives a mystical interpretation when he writes that the primordial
god of the earth, Poseidon, repelled by Athene the goddess of
asexuality, rules in the form of a serpent in the ground beneath her
temple, in the same way as the "Pelasgic python dragon" rules
beneath the temple of Apollo in Delphi. "But the Nordic Theseus
did not kill the Asiatic brutes everywhere; as soon as Aryan blood
begins to slumber, the foreign monster springs up again and again­
that Asiatic mongrelism and physical robustness of Eastern man."
It is clear what is meant by "physical robustness." It is that
remnant of sexual spontaneity that distinguishes the members of
the suppressed classes from the ruling class, that same spontaneity,
namely, that is gradually blunted in the course of "democratization"
but is never completely lost. Psychologically, the serpent Poseidon
and the Python dragon represent genital sensuality symbolized as
the phallus. Genital sensuality has been suppressed, has become
subterranean in both society's and man's structure, but it is still
alive. The feudal upper class, which has a direct interest in the
renunciation of natural sexuality (d. Japan), feels itself threatened
by the more elemental sexual habits of the suppressed classes, all the
more so because it itself has not only not mastered its own sensu­
ality, but sees it, on the contrary, reappearing in its own class in a
distorted and perverse form. Thus, the sexual customs of the masses
constitute not only a psychological but also a social danger to the
ruling class; above all, the latter senses a threat to its institution of
the family. As long as the ruling castes are economically strong and
95THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
in the ascendancy, it is not difficult for them to maintain a total
sexual-moralistic separation from the masses. An example of this
was the English bourgeoisie around the middle of the nineteenth
century. In periods when their rulership is shaken, and particularly
when there is an outright crisis (as has existed, for example, in
Central Europe and England since the beginning of the twentieth
century), the moral restrictions imposed on sexuality are loosened
within the ruling class itself. The disintegration of sexual moralism
begins with the liquidation of family ties. At first the middle and
lower middle classes, in complete identification with the upper class
and its morals, become the real champions of the official, strongly
defended anti-sexual morality. It is precisely when the economy of
the lower middle classes shows signs of breaking down that natural
sexuality must appear as a particular threat to the continued exis­
tence of sexual institutions. Since the lower middle class is the
mainstay of the authoritarian order, the latter attaches special
importance to its "morality" and to its "remaining uncontami­
nated" by the "influence of inferior races." If the lower middle class
would lose its moralistic attitude toward sex to the same extent that
it loses its intermediate economic position between the industrial
worker and the upper class, this would constitute a very grave threat
to any dictator. For the "python dragon" is also lurking among the
lower middle class, ever ready to shatter its shackles and, conse­
quently, its reactionary tendencies. It is for this reason that, in times
of crisis, a dictatorial power always steps up its propaganda for
"morality" and the "strengthening of the bonds of marriage and the
family." For it is the authoritarian family that constitutes the bridge
from the wretched social situation of the lower middle class to
reactionary ideology. If the compulsive family is undermined by
economic crises, proletarianization of the middle class and wars,
then the authoritarian system, which is so firmly entrenched in the
structure of the masses, is also seriously threatened. We shall have
to enter into this question more thoroughly. Thus, we have to agree
with Leng, the National Socialist biologist and race theorist from
96The Race Theory
Munich, who asserted that the authoritarian family was the core of
cultural politics. He made this statement at a meeting of the
National Socialist society "Deutscher Staat" in 1932. We can add
that it is the core of reactionary as well as of revolutionary cultural
politics, for these observations have far-reaching social consequences.
97

IV
The Symbolism of the Swastika
We have satisfied ourselves that fascism is to be regarded as a
problem of the masses and not as a problem of Hitler as a person or
the politics of the National Socialist party. We have demonstrated
how it is possible for an impoverished mass of people to turn to an
arch reactionary party in such a tumultuous way. In order now to
proceed step by step to the practical consequences that derive from
this investigation for sexual political work, it is first of all necessary
to turn our attention to the symbolism that the fascists made use of
to put the comparatively uninhibited structures of the masses into
reactionary fetters. The fascists were not conscious of their tech­
nique.
It did not take National Socialism long to rally workers, most of
whom were either unemployed or still very young, into the SA.* To a
large extent, however, these workers were revolutionary in a dull
sort of way and still maintained an authoritarian attitude. For this
reason National Socialist propaganda was contradictory; its content
was determined by the class for which it was intended. Only in its
manipulation of the mystical feelings of the masses was it clear and
consistent.
In talks with followers of the National Socialist party and espe­
cially with members of the SA, it was clearly brought out that the
* Sturm-Angriff (Stormtrooper).
98The Symbolism of the Swastika
revolutionary phraseology of National Socialism was the decisive
factor in the winning over of these masses. One heard National
Socialists deny that Hitler represented capital. One heard SA men
warn Hitler that he must not betray the cause of the "revolution."
One heard SA men say that Hitler was the German Lenin. Those
who went over to National Socialism from Social Democracy and
the liberal central parties were, without exception, revolutionary
minded masses who were either nonpolitical or politically undecided
prior to this. Those who went over from the Communist party were
often revolutionary elements who simply could not make any sense
of many of the German Communist party's contradictory political
slogans. In part they were men upon whom the external features of
Hitler's party, its military character, its assertiveness, etc., made a
big impression.
To begin with, it is the symbol of the flag that stands out
among the sym boIs used for purposes of propaganda.
Wir sind das Heer vom Hakenkreuz
Hebt hoch die roten Fahnen,
Der deutschen Arbeit wollen wir
Den Weg zur Freiheit bahnen.1
With respect to its emotional content, this text is clearly revolu­
tionary. National Socialists made conscious use of revolutionary
melodies, to which they sang reactionary lyrics. The hundreds of
political formulations appearing in Hitler's newspapers were also
constructed along these lines. For example:
The political bourgeoisie is about to make its exit from the
stage of historical dramatization. It is the hitherto suppressed class,
the producing people of fist and brow, the working class, which now
enters upon the stage to fulfil its historical mission.
1
We are the army of the swastika
Raise the red bannc:rs high,
For the German worker
The way to freedom we shall pave.
99THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
This is a clear echo of communist propaganda. The revolu­
tionary character of the National Socialist masses clearly stands out
in the clever design of the flag, about which Hitler wrote:
As National Socialists, we see our progmm in our flag. In
. . •
Ted we see the social idea of the movement, in white the national­
istic idea, in the swastika the mission of the struggle for the victory
of the Aryan man, and, by the same token, the victory of the idea
of creative work, which as such always has been and always will be
anti-Semitic.
-Mein KamPf, p. 496£
The red and the white are suggestive of man's contradictory
structure. What is still not clear is the role played by the swastika in
the emotional life. Why is this symbol so suitable to evoke mystical
feelings? Hitler contended that it was a symbol of anti-Semitism.
But the swastika took on this meaning only much later. And, as far
as that goes, the question as to the irrational content of anti­
Semitism is still open. It is the misrepresentation of natural sexual­
ity as something which is "dirty and sensual" that explains the
irrational content of the race theory. In this regard the Jew and the
black man are not differentiated in the mind of the fascist. This
holds true for the American fascist also. In America the racial fight
against the black man takes place predominantly in the sphere of
sexual defense. The black man is thought of as a sensuous pig who
rapes white women. With reference to the occupation of the Rhein­
land by black troops, Hitler wrote:
Only in Fmnce does there exist today more than ever an inner
unanimity between the intentions of the Jew-controlled stock ex­
change and the desire of the chauvinist-minded national statesmen.
But in this very identity there lies an immense danger for Germany.
For this very reason, France is and remains by far the most terrible
enemy. This people, which is basically becoming more and more
negrified, constitutes in its tie with the aims of Jewish world
domination an enduring danger for the existence of the white race
in Europe. For the contamination by Negro blood on the Rhine in
100The Symbolism of the Swastika
the heart of Europe is just as much in keeping with the perverted
sadistic thirst for vengeance of this hereditary enemy of our people
as the ice-cold calculation of the Jew thus to begin bastardizing the
European continent at its core and to deprive the white race of the
foundations for a sovereign existence through infection with lower
humanity.
-Op. cit. p. 624
We must get into the habit of paying strict attention to 'pre­
cisely what the fascist has to say and not to dismiss it as nonsense or
hogwash. Now we have a better understanding of the emotional
content of this theory, which sounds like a persecution mania when
it is considered together with the theory of the poisoning of the
nation. The swastika also has a content capable of stirring the
deepest reaches of one's emotions, but in a way completely different
from what Hitler could ever have dreamed.
To begin with, the swastika was also found among the Semites,
namely, in the Myrtle court of the Alhambra at Granada. Herta
Heinrich found it in the synagogue ruins of Edd-Dikke in East
Jordania on the Lake of Gennesaret. Here it had the following
form:2
The swastika is often found together with a facet, the former
being the symbol of the male principle, the latter of the female
principle. Percy Gardner found it· in Greece, where it was called
Hemera and was the symbol of the sun, again representing the male
principle. Lowenthal describes a fourteenth-century swastika, which
he discovered in the altar cloth of Maria zur Wiese in Soest; here
2 Herta Heinrich: Hakenkreu%, Vierkke und Granatapfel (Zeitschrift fuer Sex­
ualwissenschaft, 1930, p. 42).
101THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
the swastika is embellished with vulva and a double cross. In this
instance the swastika appears as the symbol of a stormy sky, the
facet as the symbol of the fertile earth. Smigorski discovered a
swastika in the form of the Indian swastika-cross, a four-pronged
lightning with three dots at the end of each prong:8
•
. :[0
.� .
.
•
Lichtenberg found swastikas with a skull in place of the three
dots. Thus the swastika was. originally a sexual symbol. In the course
of time it assumed various meanings including that of a millwheel,
the symbol of work. From an emotional point of view, work and
sexuality were originally the same. This explains the inscription on
the swastika discovered by Bilmans and Pengerots on the miter of
St. Thomas a Becket, dating back to Indo-Germanic times:
"Hail to thee earth, 0 mother of man. May you thrive in God's
embrace. Overflow with fruit for man's benefit."
Here fertility is sexually represented as the sexual act of Mother­
Earth with God-Father. According to Zelenin, old Indian lexicog­
raphers referred to both the cock and the voluptuary as swastikas,
i.e., the hooked cross as the symbol of sexual instinct.
If we now have another look at the swastikas on the preceding
page, we see that they are the schematic but nonetheless clearly
recognizable representations of two interlocked human figures. The
swastika on the left represents a sexual act lying down; the one on
the right, a sexual act in standing position. Thus, the swastika repre­
sents a basic living function.
The effect of the swastika on one's unconscious emotionality
3 From John Lowenthal's Zur Hakenkreuzsymbolik (Zeitschrift fuer Sexual·
wissenschaft, 1930, p. 44).
102The Symbolism of the Swastika
does not account for the success of fascism's mass propaganda, but
it certainly contributes to it. Random tests with men and women of
different ages and social positions show that very few people fail to
recognize the meaning of the swastika; most people divine its mean­
ing sooner or later if they look at it for awhile. Thus we can assume
that this symbol depicting two interlocked figures acts as a powerful
stimulus on deep layers of the organism, a stimulus that proves to
be that much more powerful, the more dissatisfied, the more burn­
ing with sexual desire, a person is. If, in addition, the symbol is
presented as the emblem of honorableness and faithfulness, it can
be accepted more readily. In this way allowances are made for the
defensive strivings of the moralistic ego. Let it not be assumed,
however, that by exposing its sexual meaning we want to depreciate
the effect of this symbol. First, we certainly do not want to depreciate
the sexual act; and second, we would meet with strong opposition,
for the moralistic disguise would operate as a resistance to the
acceptance of our attempts. Sex-economic mental hygiene has
something else in mind.
103v
The Sex-Economic Presuppositions
of the Authoritarian Family
Since authoritarian society reproduces itself in the individual
structures of the masses with the help of the authoritarian family, it
follows that political reaction has to regard and defend the authori­
tarian family as the basis of the "state, culture, and civilization." In
this propaganda it can count on deep irrational factors in the
masses. The reactionary politician cannot divulge his real intentions
in his propaganda. The German masses would not have responded
to a slogan calling for the "conquest of the world." In political
propaganda, which is a question of producing a psychological effect
on the masses, one is not dealing directly with economic processes
but with human structures. This consideration dictates a definite
approach in the work of mental hygiene, and failure to make use of
this approach can lead to errors in mass psychology. Consequently,
revolutionary sexual politics must do more than just point out the
objective basis of the authoritarian family. If it is to have an effect
on the psychology of the masses, it must appeal to man's yearning
for happiness in both life and love.
From the point of view of social development, the family
cannot be regarded as the basis of the authoritarian state, but only
as one of the most important institutions that supports it. We,
however, have to look upon it as political reaction's germ ceU, the
most important center fot the production of reactionary men and
104Tbe Sex-Economic Presuppositions
women. Originating and developing from definite social processes, it
becomes the most essential institution for the preservation of the
authoritarian system that shapes it. In this regard, the findings of
Morgan and Engels are as valid today as they were then. However,
we are not interested in the history of the family. What concerns us
is an important contemporary sex-political question, namely: How
can sex-economy most effectively counter reactionary sexual and
cultural politics in which the authoritarian family plays such a
decisive role? A precise discussion of the basis and effects of the
authoritarian family is vitally necessary, especially in view of the lack
of clarity on this question that exists even in revolutionary circles.
The authoritarian family contains a contradiction which must
be understood in all of its details if we are to have an effective sex­
economic mass hygiene.
More than the economic dependency of the wife and children
on the husband and father is needed to preserve the institution of
the authoritarian family. For the suppressed classes, this depen­
dency is endurable only on condition that the consciousness of
being a sexual being is suspended as completely as possible in
women and in children. The wife must not figure CIS a sexual being,
but solely CIS a child-bearer. Essentially, the idealization and deifica­
tion of motherhood, which are so flagrantly at variance with .the
brutality with which the mothers of the toiling masses are actually
treated, serve as means of preventing women from gaining a sexual
consciousness, of preventing the imposed sexual repression from
breaking through and of preventing sexual anxiety and sexual guilt­
feelings from losing their hold. Sexually awakened women, afJirmed
and recognized CIS such, would mean the complete collapse of the
authoritarian ideology. Conservative sexual reform has always made
the mistake of merely making a slogan of "the right of woman to
her own body," and not clearly and unmistakably regarding and
defending woman as a sexual being, at least as much as it regards
and defends her as a mother. Furthermore, conservative sexual re­
form based its sexual policies predominantly on the function of
procreation, instead of undermining the reactionary view that
105THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
equates sexuality and procreation. It is for this reason that it was not
able to counter mysticism with sufficient force.
The ideology extolling the "blessings of large families" is neces­
sary for the preservation of the authoritarian family. It is necessary
not only in the interest of warlike imperialism; its most essential
purpose is to obscure woman's sexual function as opposed to her
function as a child-bearer. The drawing of a clear-cut distinction
between "mother" and "prostitute" as we find, for example, in the
writings of the philosopher Weininger, corresponds to the distinc­
tion that the reactionary man draws between sexual desire and
procreation. According to this view, to have sex for the pleasure of it
degrades the woman and mother; a "prostitute" is a woman who
affirms pleasure and lives for it. The notion that sexuality is moral
only in the service of procreation, that what lies outside the pale of
procreation is immoral, is the most important feature of reactionary
sexual politics. This notion is no less reactionary when represented
by Communists such as Salkind and Stoliarov.
Agrg essive imperialism dictates that women be nothing but
child-bearing machines and it brooks no rebellion against this func­
tion. In short, this means that sexual gratification must not interfere
with her function of reproduction. Apart from this, however, a
woman who is conscious of her sexuality would never willingly heed
the reactionary slogans, which have her enslavement in mind. This
antithesis between sexual gratification and procreation applies only
to authoritarian society, not to work-democracy. It is a question of
the social conditions under which women are to bear children:
under favorable, socially guaranteed conditions, or conditions that
do not provide adequate protection for the mother and child. In
other words, if women are to bear children without any kind of
social protection, without social guarantees for the rearing of their
offspring; if, moreover, they are not allowed to determine for them­
selves how many children they will have and are to accept this
function willingly and unquestionably-then motherhood, as op­
posed to woman's sexual function, has to be idealized.
If we are to comprehend the fact that Hitler's party, just as the
106The Sex-Economic Presuppositions
center parties, relied chiefly upon women's votes, we must compre­
hend irrationalism. The irrational mechanism at work here is the
setting up of an antithesis between woman as child-bearer and
woman as a sexual being. With this in mind we shall be in a better
position to understand fascist attitudes such as the following:
The preservation of the already existing large families is a
matter of social feeling; the preservation of the form of the large
family is a matter of biologic conception and national character.
The large family is to be preserved not because it is hungry; it is to
be preserved as a valuable, indispensable part of the German
people. Valuable and indispensable not only because it alone
guarantees the preservation of the population in the future [objec­
tively speaking, this is its imperialistic function, WR], but because
national morality and national culture find their strongest support
in it. . . . The preservation of the existing large families amalga­
mated with the preservation of the form of the large family, for
these two problems are inseparable. . . . The preservation of the
form of the large family is a matter of national, cultural and politi­
cal necessity . . . . Th is view is also strictly opposed to the repeal of
paragraph 218, and it holds pregnancy to be inviolable. The
termination of pregnancy is at variance with the meaning of the
family, whose task is precisely the education of the coming genera­
tion-apart from the fact that the termination of pregnancy would
mean the final destruction of the large family.
This is how the Volkischer Beobachter put it on October 14,
1931. Thus, political reactions's family politics are the key to the
question of the termination of pregnancy also, far more so than the
factors that had previously been pushed into the foreground-indus­
trial reserve army and cannon fodder for imperialist wars. The
argument in support of an industrial reserve army almost completely
lost its relevance in the years of the economic crisis, when there
were many millions of unemployed workers in Germany, and some
forty million throughout the world in 1932. When political reaction
tells us again and again that the preservation of the abortion law is
107THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
necessary in the interest of the family and "moral order," when the
social hygienist Grothjan, who was a Social Democrat, argues along
the same lines as the National Socialists in this regard, then we
must agree with them that "authoritarian family" and "moralistic
ethics" are decisively important reactionary forces. We must not
brush them aside as unimportant. It is a matter of binding the
women to the authoritarian family by means of suppressing their
sexual needs; it is a matter of the reactionary influence exercised by
these women on their husbands; it is a matter of safeguarding the
effect that reactionary sexual propaganda has on millions of women
who are suppressed and who tolerate their suppression. From a
revolutionary point of view it is imperative to follow political re­
action wherever its effects are felt. It must be routed wherever it
defends its system. Thus, the interest in the authoritarian family as
an institution intended to "preserve the state" takes priority in all
questions of reactionary sexual politics. It coincides with the similar
interests of all members of the middle class who operate small
businesses, for whom the family constitutes, or at least used to
constitute, an economic unity. It is from this point of view that
fascist ideology sees state and society, economics and politics. It is
also from this point of view, determined as it is by the old mode of
economy of the lower middle class, which prompts reactionary
sexology to promulgate the state as an "organic whole." For the
wage earner of modern civilization there is no longer any direct
correlation between family and social mode of existence. The family
is not economically anchored. Hence, the modern wage earner is in
a position to look upon the state as a coercive institution of society;
the "biologic" view that the state is an "organic whole" is not valid
for his sexology and sex-economy. If the working man proves to be
accessible to this reactionary view, it is to be ascribed to the authori­
tarian family education that he received. And the small farmer and
the lower middle-class man would be more accessible to an insight
into their social responsibility if their family situation were not
organically bound up with their economic situation.
In the economic world crisis it was shown that this connection
lOBTbe Sex-Economic Presuppositions
between family and economy was loosened as a result of the eco­
nomic ruin of small enterprises. Subsequently, the essential features
of the oft-mentioned tradition of the lower middle class, namely its
authoritarian familial tie, still had an effect. Hence it was much
more accessible to the fascist ideology of the "large family" than it
was to the revolutionary ideology of birth control, mainly because
the revolutionary movement failed to elucidate this question and to
give it top priority.
As clear as all this is, we would err if we failed to assess it in
relation to other factors which are contradictory to it. Our assess­
ment would of necessity be false if we failed to take into account
the contradictions that exist in the life of the sexually inhibited
man. To begin with, the contradiction between sexual moralistic
thinking and feeling on the one hand and the concrete sexual mode
of existence on the other hand is decisive. An example: in Western
Germany there were a large number of birth control groups of a
predominantly "socialist" nature. In the Wolf-Kienle campaign of
1931 the abortion law was put to a vote. It turned out that the same
women who cast their vote for the center parties or the NSDAP
were for the repeal of this law, while their parties were passionately
opposed to its repeal. These women voted for sex-economic birth
control in an effort to secure sexual gratification. At the same time
they voted for the center and NSDAP parties, not because they had
no knowledge of the reactionary intentions of these parties, but
because they were still imbued with the reactionary ideology of
"pure motherhood," of the antithesis between motherhood and
sexuality; but most of all they were still under the influence of
authoritarian ideology itself. While these women knew nothing of
the sociological role of the authoritarian family in a dictatorship,
they were nonetheless under the influence of political reaction's
sexual politics: They affirmed birth control, but they feared the
responsibility imposed upon them by the revolutionary world.
Sexual reaction made no bones about using any means whatever
to exploit sexual anxiety for its own purposes. Since there was no
corresponding sex-economic counterpropaganda from the revolu-
109THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
tionary side, the wife of the average worker or lower middle-class
woman who held Christian or nationalistic views, had to be im­
pressed by the following kind of propaganda.
In 1918 the Vereinigung zur Bekiimpfung des Bolschewismus
(Alliance for the Fight against Bolshevism) printed posters having
the following text:
German Women!
Have you any idea what Bolshevism has in store for you?
Bolshevism wants the socialization of women:
1. The right of possession of women between 17 and 32 years of
age is being abolished.
2. All women are the property of the people.
3. The former owners retain a priority on their wives.
4. Every man who wants to use a specimen of the people's property
must have a permit from the workers' committee.
5. No man has the right to avail himself of a woman more than
three times per week and longer than three hours.
6. Every man is required to report a woman who resists him.
7. Every man who does not belong to the working class has to pay a
monthly fee of 100 rubles for the right to use this public property.
The sordidness of such propaganda is as evident as its men-
dacity, but the first reaction of the average woman is to shrink back
in horror, while the reaction of a progressive woman will be some­
thing as follows:
I admit that for us, the workers, there is only one way out of
the present misery, and that way is socialism. But it has to remain
within certain moderate limits, and not reject everything that was as
wrong and unnecessary. Otherwise this wil1lead to a brutalization of
customs, which would be even worse than the present sad material
situation. And unfortunately, it is a very important and a high ideal
that is attacked by socialism: marriage. Complete freedom, com­
plete licentiousness, is being demanded, to a certain extent sexual
Bolshevism. Every one is supposed to live one's life to the full, to
have one's fling-freely, without inhibitions. Man and wife are no
longer to belong together, instead one is together with this woman
110Tbe Sex-Economic Presuppositions
today and tomorrow with that one, just as one's mood happens to
be. This is called freedom, free love, the new sex morality. But these
beautiful names cannot gloss over the fact that grave dangers are
lurking here. Man's highest and noblest feelings would be degraded
by such practices: love, faithfulness, sacrifice. That a man or
woman can love many other men or women at the same time is
wholly impossible-it is contrary to nature. The result would be a
terrible brutalization which would destroy culture. I have no idea
how these things look in the Soviet Union, but either the Russians
are peculiar people or they really haven't allowed this absolute free­
dom and certain sanctions still exist there. . . . Thus, as beautiful
as the socialist theory is, and as much as I am in agreement with
you on all economic questions, I don't follow you when it comes to
sexual matters, and because of this I often have doubts about the
whole thing.
-Letter to the editor from a working woman
This letter clearly reflects the conflict with which the average
person is faced: He is made to believe that he must choose between
compulsive sexual morality on the one hand and ·sexual anarchy on
the other hand. The average person has no knowledge of the sex­
economic regulation of sexuality, which is as far from compulsive
morality as it is from anarchy. He reacts to the imposed severe
compulsion with promiscuous impulses; he defends himself against
both. Morality is a burden, and instinct appears as a tremendous
danger. The man reared under and bound by authority has no
knowledge of the natural law of self-regulation; he has no confi­
dence in himself. He is afraid of his sexuality because he never
learned to live it naturally. Thus, he declines all responsibility for
his acts and decisions, and he demands direction and guidance.
The revo.lutionary movement has not yet had any success with
its sexual politics gauged against the success that consistent revolu­
-
tionary sexual politics could have achieved-because it failed to
react with appropriate weapons against political reaction's successful
attempts to exploit man's suppressed sexual powers. If sexual re­
action had publicized only its political thesis on population, it
HITHE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
would not have poked a single cat from under the bed. But it
exploited the sexual anxiety in women and girls, and to this it owes
its success. It was skillful in linking its population aims with the
compulsive moralistic inhibitions of the people, at all levels of
society as a matter of fact. The hundreds of thousands of organized
Christian workers are proof of this.
Here is another example of the propaganda methods used by
political reaction:1
In their devastating campaign against the entire bourgeois
world, the Bolsheviks were from the very beginning particularly
fixed on the family, "this especially strong remnant of the con­
founded old regime." As early as June 10, 1924, the plenary
assembly of the Comintem declared: "The revolution is powerless
as long as the old idea of the family and family relationships
continues to exist." In consequence of this attitude, a violent fight
against the family broke out immediately. Bigamy and polygamy
were not prohibited and therefore permissible. The Bolsheviks'
attitude toward marriage is characterized by the following definition
of the marital tie, proposed by Professor Goichbarg: "Marriag� is
an institution for the gratification of sexual needs in a less danger­
ous and more convenient way." How far family and marriage
disintegrated under such conditions is indicated by the statistics of
the general census of 1927. Izvestia writes: "In Moscow, the census
revealed numerous cases of polygamy and polyandry. Frequently,
two or even three women designated the same man as their spouse."
There is no need for surprise when the German Professor Selheim
describes family relationships in Russia in the following way: "It is
a complete regression to the sexual order of prehistoric times, from
which marriage and a usable sexual order was developed in the
course of time."
Compulsive marital and familial1ife are also attacked; complete free­
dom of sexual intercourse has been proclaimed. The well-known
1 Welt vor dem Abgrund, Der Einfluss des russischen Kulturbolschewismus auf
die anderen Volker. Deutscher Volkskalender, p. 47, 1932.
112The Sex-Economic Presuppositions
female Communist Smidowitsch worked out a scheme of sexual
morality,2 according to which most boys and girls act. The scheme
runs something as follows:
1. Every student of the workers' faculty, even if he is a minor, is
entitled and obliged to gratify his sexual needs.
2. When a young girl, whether she is a university student, a
worker, or just a schoolgirl, is desired by a man, she is obliged to
yield to this desire, otherwise she will be looked upon as a bourgeois
girl who cannot pretend to be a genuine Communist.
Pravda wrote quite openly: "Among us there are only sexual
relations between man and woman. We do not recognize the exis­
tence of love. Love is to be looked down upon as something psycho­
logical. Among us only physiology has a right to exist." In conse­
quence of this communist attitude, every woman and every girl is
obliged to gratify the sexual drive of the male. In view of the fact
that this certainly does not always happen in an entirely voluntary
way, the rape of women in Soviet Russia has become a veritable
plague.
Such lies on the part of political reaction cannot be set aside
simply by exposing them for what they are, lies; nor, for that matter,
by protestations to the effect that one is just as "moral" as they are,
or that the revolution does not destroy the authoritarian family and
moralism, etc. The truth of the matter is that sexuality changes in
the course of the revolution, that the old compulsive regimentation
is loosened. This cannot be disavowed. Nor can the correct sex­
economic position be ascertained, if ascetic attitudes on these ques­
tions are tolerated in one's own camp and are allowed to be opera­
tive. We will have to inquire into this matter very carefully later.
The sexual politics of those who strive to achieve a genuine
freedom in this sphere failed to explain-not once, twice, but again
and again-and to establish a sex-economic regulation of sexual life.
They failed to comprehend and to allay woman's fear of sexual
2 Smidowitsch's remarks were actually meant to be ironical, and were intended
as a criticism of adolescent sexuality.
113THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
health. More than anything else, however, they failed to establish
clarity in their own ranks by constantly and consistently pointing
out the disparity between the reactionary and the sex-economic
conception of sexuality. Experience shows that the average person
accepts sex-economic regulation of sexuality if it is made sufficiently
clear to him.
The anti-revolutionary movement originates from political re­
action's creeds, which are held together by the lower middle class's
economic mode of existence and by ideologic mysticism. The core
of political reaction's cultural politics is the sexual question. Accord­
ingly, the core of revolutionary cultural politics must also be the
sexual question.
It is sex-economy that gives the political answer to the chaos
that was created by the contradiction between compulsive morality
and sexuallibertinism.
114VI
Organized Mysticism as an International
Anti-Sexual Organization
THE INTEREST IN THE CHURCH
To clarify the tasks of sex-economic mental hygiene, we have to
pay close attention to the way political reaction attacks and defends
itself on the cultural political front. We decline to dismiss political
reaction's mystical figures of speech as "red herrings." As we have
already pointed out, when political reaction is successful with a
certain ideological propaganda, this cannot be ascribed solely to
befogging. It is our contention that a problem of mass psychology
must lie at the root of each instance of its success. Something that
we still haven't grasped is going on in the masses, and it is that
"something" that enables them to think and to act against their
own vital interests. The question is decisive, for without this atti­
tude on the part of the masses, political reaction would be wholly
powerless. It is the willingness of the masses to absorb these ideas­
what we call a dictator's "soil of mas s psychology"-that constitutes
fascism's strength. Thus, it is imperative to seek a complete under­
standing of this.
As the economic pressure on the toiling masses increases,
compulsive moralistic pressure is also wont to become more rigid.
This can only have the function of precluding a rebellion on the
part of the working masses against the social pressure by intensify­
ing their sexual guilt-feelings and their moral dependency on the
existing order. How does this come about?
115THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
Since mystical contagion is the most important psychological
precondition for the assimilation of fascist ideology by the masses,
an understanding of the psychological effect of mysticism in general
is an indispensable part of an investigation of fascist ideology.
\Vhen the Papen government! carne into power in the spring
of 1932, following the ousting of Bruning, one of its first acts was
to proclaim its intention to carry out a "more strict moral education
of the nation." The Hitler government stepped up this program.2
An edict relating to the education of the youth stated:
Youth will be able to cope with its difficult lot and with the
high demands of the future only when it has learned to be ruled by
the principles of the people and of the state . . . that, however,
means to learn to be responsible to and to be capable of making
sacrifices for the whole. Softness and exaggerated consideration of
every individual inclination are misplaced in dealing with a youth
which must be prepared to face many hardships in life. Youth will
be fully prepared for its service to the people and to the state only
when it has learned to work objectively, to think clearly, to fulfill its
obligation; when it has become accustomed to conforming to the
regulations of the educational community in a disciplined and
obedient way and of voluntarily submitting to its authority. . . .
The teaching of the youth to have a genuine feeling for the state
must be supplemented and deepened by a German education based
on the historical and cultural values of the German people . . . by
submersion in our epic national heritage . . The teaching of the
. .
youth to appreciate the value of the state and of the community,
derives its strongest inner power from the truths of Christianity.
1 Papen paved the way for Hitler and later played a significant role as a fascist
diplomat.
2 The following is a news item, dated Hamburg, Augnst 1933: Concentration
Camp for "Immoral" Aquatic Athletes. Hamburg. "The Hamburg police depart­
ment has instructed its force to keep a sharp eye on the behavior of aquatic
athletes who often 'fail to observe the simple rules of public morals.' The police
department gives public notice to the fact that it intends to take drastic steps
against rowboaters who violate its regulations, and to put them in concen­
tration camps so that they can learn decency and morality."
116Organized Mysticism
. Loyalty and responsibility toward the people and the father­
land are most deeply anchored in Christian faith. For this reason it
will always be my special duty to safeguard the right and free
development of the Christian school and the Christian fundamen­
tals of all education.
What is the source of this glorification of the strength of mysti­
cal belief? That is what we want to know now. Political reaction is
absolutely correct in asserting that the teaching of "loyalty to the
state" derives its strongest inner power from the "truths of Chris­
tianity." Before we give proof of this, however, we must briefly
summarize the differences existing within the political reactionary
camp regarding the conception of Christianity.
The basis of National Socialism's mass psychology differs from
that of Wilhelmian imperialism in that the former had a pauper­
ized middle class, whereas the German empire had a prosperous
middle class as its mass basis. Thus, the Christianity of Wilhe1mian
imperialism had to be different from the Christianity of National
Socialism. For all that, the ideological modifications did not under­
mine the fundamentals of the mystical world view in the least;
rather they intensified its function.
To begin with, National Socialism rejected the Old Testament
as being "Jewish"-that, at least, was the position of its well-known
exponent, Rosenberg, who belonged to the right wing. In the same
way the internationalism of the Roman Catholic Church was re­
garded as "Jewish." The international church was to be replaced by
the "German national church." Following the seizure of power, the
church was indeed brought into line. This limited its political scope,
but very much extended its ideological sphere of power.
Surely, some day the Gennan people also will find a fonn for its
perception and experience of God, a fonn dictated by its Nordic
blood. Surely, only then will the trinity of blood, faith and state be
complete.
-Gottfried Feder: Das Programm der NSDAP und seine welt­
anschaulichen Grundlagen, p. 49
117THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
An identification of the Jewish God with the Holy Trinity had
to be avoided at all cost. The fact that Jesus himself was a Jew
caused some embarrassment, but Stapel quickly found a way out of
this dilemma: Since Jesus was a son of God, he could not be con­
sidered a Jew. Jewish dogmas and traditions were to be replaced by
the "experience of one's own conscience"; indulgence was to be
replaced by the "idea of personal honor."
The belief in the transmutation of the soul after death is re­
jected as the "hocus-pocus of the South Sea Islanders." The Virgin
Mary's immaculate conception is rejected on the same basis. On
this subject, Scharnagel writes:
He [Rosenberg] confuses the dogma of the immaculate con­
ception of the Blessed Virgin, i.e., her freedom from original sin,
with the dogma of the virginal birth of Jesus ("who was conceived
by the Holy Spirit") . . .
The extensive success of religious mysticism is to be ascribed to
the fact that it is centrally rooted in the doctrine of original sin as a
sexual act for the sake of pleasure. National Socialism retains this
motif and makes full use of it with the help of another ideology,
one in keeping with its own purpose:
The crucifix is the allegory of the doctrine of the sacrificial
lamb, an image which impresses upon us the breakdown of all
forces, and through its . . . horrific representation of pain, dis­
tresses and makes us humble, as the power-thirsty churches intend.
. . . A German church would replace little by little the symbol of
the crucifixion in the churches assigned to it by the instructive spirit
of fire, personifying the hero in the highest sense.
-My thus, p. 577
In short, it is a matter of substituting one fetter for another:
The sadistic-narcissistic mysticism of nationalism is to take the place
of masochistic, international, religious mysticism. From now on-it1s
a question of
. . . recognizing German national honor as the supreme
standard of behavior in order to live for it . . . . I t [the state] will
118Organized Mysticism
allow every religious conviction free scope; it will allow moral
teachings of various forms to have their say, on condition that they
do not get in the way of the assertion of national honor.
We have already seen how the ideology of national honor
derives from authoritarian ideology and the latter from the sex­
negating regulation of sexuality. Neither Christianity nor National
Socialism attacks the institution of compulsive marriage: for the
former, apart from its function of procreation, marriage is a "com­
plete, life-long union"; for the National Socialists it is a biologically
rooted institution for the preservation of racial purity. Outside of
compulsive marriage, there is no sexuality for either of them.
Furthermore, National Socialism does not want to maintain
religion on a historical basis, but on a "topical" basis. This change is
to be explained in terms of the disintegration of Christian sexual
morality, which can no longer be upheld solely on the basis of
historical demands.
The ethnical racial state must one day still discover its deepest
roots in religion. Not until our belief in God ceases to be related to
a specific event in the past, but is again and again, through everlast­
ing experience, intricately interwoven with the native activity and
life of a people and of a state, as well as of the individual, will our
world be firmly reestablished.
-Ludwig Haase: Nationalsozialistische Monatshefte I, Nr. 5,
p. 213
Let us not forget that "native activity and life" mean "moral"
life, i.e., sexual negation.
It is precisely in that which prompted the National Socialists to
differentiate themselves from the Church and in that which repre­
sents their common points of reference that what is unessential for
the reactionary function of religion can be distinguished from what
is actually effective.3
3 It is true that the National Socialists rejected the Bavarian concordat of July
15, 1930, and the Prussian concordat of July 1, 1929. However, this rejection
pertained merely to the endowment of 1931, which amounted to 4,122,370
119THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
The historical factors, the dogmas, some violently defended
articles of faith become, as is shown, meaningless, if one can suc­
ceed in replacing them in their function by something else that is
RM. The increase of the priests' salary in Bavaria from 5.87 million RM in
1914 to 19.7 million in 1931 (severe crisis yearl), was not attacked. We ex­
tract the following data on the Bavarian concordat from an article by Robert
Boeck: Konkordate sehen Dich an. According to the concordat of January 25,
1925, the Church was granted the following rights:
1. The priests are state officials.
2. The state admits that the secularization of 1817 (disappropriation of Church
property) inflicted a severe injustice upon the Church and the state puts it into
the hands of the Church to reclaim its property, or its money-value of 60 mil­
lion goldmarks.
3. The state must spend almost 50% of its revenue from the Bavarian state
forestry to be able to pay a part of its assessment to the church; therefore, it
has mortgaged, as it were, the revenues of the forestry to the Church.
4. The Church is entitled, on the basis of civil tax registers, to levy taxes
(church taxes).
5. The Church is entitled to acquire new property and to have it as its posses­
sion; this property is imprescriptible and will be protected by the state.
6. The state is obliged to provide Church dignitaries with "living quarters in
keeping with their dignity and rank."
7. The Church, its priests and 28,000 monks shall enjoy unlimited freedom in
the exercise of their religious industrial activities (the manufacture of books,
beer, and schnaps) .
8. A professor of philosophy and a professor of history must be appointed to the
universities of Munich and of Wiirzburg; these professors must enjoy the con­
fidence of the Church, and their lectures must bear out ecclesiastical teachings.
9. The state guarantees the teaching of religion in primary schools, and the
bishop or one whom he appoints has the right to take exception to and to de­
mand redress from the state authorities for grievances in the public religious life
of Catholic pupils and their detrimental or improper (I) influence.
According to conservative estimates, the Catholic Church in Bavaria was
guaranteed, by the concordat, funds-i.e., cash remittances, commodity values,
exemption from real estate and commercial taxation and individual earnings-­
amounting to one billion marks.
The Bavarian state paid the Catholic Church 13 million marks in 1916;
28,468,400 marks in 1929; and 26,050,250 marks in 1931.
Obviously, the Church's service to the state must be profitable. The con­
clusion of the concordat between the German Reich and the Vatican in July
of 1933 did not bring about any !Jasically new relationships between church
and state (nothing that was decisive for mass psychology). The basic economic
functions of the Church remained inviolable.
120Organized Mysticism
equally effective. National Socialism wants "religious experience." In
fact, that is its sole concern; it merely wants to give it a different
basis. What is this "everlasting experience"?
u "
THE FIGHT AGAINST CULTURAL BOLSHEVISM
Nationalistic and familial sentiments are intimately interlaced
with religious feelings, which are vague and mystical to a lesser or
greater extent. There is no end to the literature on this subject. A
detailed academic critique of this field is out of the question-for
the time being at least. We want to pick up the thread of our main
problem. If fascism relies so successfully on the mystical thinking
and sentiments of the masses, then a fight against it can be effective
only if mysticism is comprehended and if the mystical contagion of
the masses is tackled through education and hygiene. It is not
enough that the scientific view of the world gains ground, for it
moves much too slowly to keep pace with the rapid spread of
mystical contagion. The reason for this can lie only in our incom­
plete comprehension of mysticism itself. Scientific enlightenment of
the masses was mainly concerned with the exposing of the corrupt
practices of church dignitaries and church officials. The overwhelm­
ing majority of the masses was left in the dark. Scientific elucida­
tion appealed only to the intellect of the masses-not to their
feelings. If, however, a man has mystical feelings, he is impervious
to the unmasking of a church dignitary, no matter how artfully
done. He is no more impressed by the detailed exposure of how the
state uses the workers' pennies to support the church than he is by
Marx's and Engels' historical analysis of religion.
To be sure, atheist movements also tried to employ emotional
means in their efforts to enlighten the masses. For example, the
youth initiation festivals of the German free thinkers were dedi­
cated to this kind of work. Despite all this the Christian youth
organizations had approximately thirty times as many members as
the Communist and Social Democrat parties taken together. In the
years 1930-32, Christian youth organizations had approximately one
and a half million members as opposed to the fifty thousand mem-
121THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
bers of the Communist party and the sixty thousand members of
the Socialist party. According to its own statistics, National Social­
ism had some forty thousand youth in its organization in 1931. We
extract detailed figures from the Proletarische Freidenkerstimme
of April, 1932. According to this newspaper the distribution ran as
follows:
The Catholic Young Men's Association of Germany 386,879
The Central Association of Catholic maidens . . . . . . 800,000
The Association of Catholic bachelors . . , ' . . . . , ' . . 93,000
The South German Youth Alliance of Catholic fe-
males . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25,000
The Association of Bavarian Catholic Book Clubs . . 35,220
The Association of Catholic Students of Institutions
of Higher Learning ("New Germany") . . . . . . . 15,290
.
Catholic Youth Alliance of Germany's Working Girls 8,000
National Association of German Windhorst Clubs . . 10,000
[These figures are taken from the Handbuch der Jugendver­
b iinde, 1931]
The social composition is what is important. The Catholic
Young Men's Association of Germany had the following distribu­
tion:
Workers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45.6%
Skilled workers . . . . . . . . 21.6%
Rural youth . . . . . . . . . . . 18.7%
Business men . . . . . . . . . . 5.9%
Students . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.8%
Officials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.3%
The proletarian element constituted the overwhelming major­
ity. In 1929 the composition according to age was:
14-17 years . . . . . . . . . . . . 51.0%
17-21 years . . . . . . . . . . . . 28.3%
21-25 years . . . . . . . . . . . . 13.5%
over' 25 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.1%
122Organized Mysticism
Thus, four-fifths of the members were at the age of puberty or
post-puberty!
While the Communists, in their efforts to win over these young
people, gave prominence to the question of class, as opposed to the
question of creed, the Catholic organization took up its position
precisely on the cultural and philosophic front. The Communist
wrote:
If our work is clear and consistent, the question of class mem­
bership will prove to be stronger than the impeding questions of
creed, among the young Catholics also. . . . We must not give
prominence to the question of creed, but to the question of class
membership, to the misery which binds us and is our common
lot.
The leadership of the Catholic youth, on the other hand, wrote
in Jungarbeiter No. 17, 1931:
The greatest and most likely the gravest danger of the Com­
munist Party is the fact that it gets its hands on the young workers
and the children of workers at a very early age. We are very pleased
that the government . . . i s strongly opposed to the subversive
Communist Party. Above all, however, we expect the German
government to deal sharply with the fight of the communists
against church and religion.
Representatives of eight Catholic organizations held positions
on the Berlin examining board for the "Protection of Youth against
Filth and Obscenity." In 1932 a proclamation of the Center Youth
stated:
We demand that the state use every available means to protect
our Christian heritage against the poisonous influence of a filthy
press, obscene literature, and erotic films-aU of which degrade and
falsify national sentiments. . . .
Thus, the church defended its mystical function, not where it
was attacked by the communist movement, but at an entirely differ­
entplace.
"It is the task of the non-orthodox proletarian youth," the
123THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
aforementioned Freidenkerstimme states, to show "the young work­
ing Christians the role of the church and of their organizations in
the implementation of fascist measures and their advocation of
crisis bills and economic measures." Why, as it turned out, did the
masses of the young Christian workers offer resistance to this attack
on the church? The Communists expected the Christian youth to
see for themselves that the church was serving a capitalist function.
Why did they fail to see this? Evidently, it was because this
function had been concealed from them and because their authori­
tarian upbringing had made them credulous and incapable of
criticism. Nor could it escape one's notice that the representatives
of the church in the youth organizations spoke out against capital­
ism, so that the antithesis between the social positions assumed by
the Communists and the priests was not readily perceptible to the
youth. At first it appeared as if a clear-cut demarcation existed only
in the sphere of sexuality. It seemed as if the Communists, as
opposed to the church, had taken a positive attitude toward adoles­
cent sexuality. However, it soon turned out that the Communist
organizations not only allowed this decisive area to lie fallow, but
even felt themselves to be in accord with the church in their con­
demnation and inhibition of adolescent sexuality. The measures
adopted by the Communists against the German Sexpol, which
never hesitated to raise the question of adolescent sexuality and to
attempt to solve it, were no less severe than those of some clerical
representatives. The fact that the Communist pastor Salkind, who
was also a psychoanalyst, was an authority in the field of sexual
negation in Soviet Russia, speaks for itself.
It was not enough to point out that the authoritarian state was
in control of and could exploit the parental home, the church, and
the school as a means of binding the youth to its system and its
world of ideas. The state used its entire power apparatus to keep
these institutions intact. Hence, nothing short of a social revolution
would have been capable of abolishing them. And yet, an under­
mining of their reactionary influence was one of the most essential
preconditions of the social revolution and therefore the presupposi-
124Organized Mysticism
tion of their abolition. Many Communists considered this the main
task of the "Red cultural front." To accomplish this task, it was of
decisive importance to comprehend the ways and means with the
help of which the authoritarian parental home, the school, and the
church could exercise so much influence, and to discover the process
that took hold of the youth as a result of these influences. Generali­
zations such as "enslavement" or "brutalization" did not offer an
adequate explanation. "Brutalization" and "enslavement" were the
results. What we wanted to know were the processes that enable
dictatorial interests to gain a foothold in the structure of the masses.
Der sexuelle Kampf der Tugend was an attempt to show the role
played by the suppression of adolescent sexuality in this process. In
the present work we want to investigate the basic elements of politi­
cal reaction's cultural aims, and to ascertain the emotional factors
on which revolutionary work has to be based. Here, too, we have to
adhere to the principle of paying strict attention to everything to
which cultural reaction gives prominence; for that to which it gives
prominence is not incidental, nor is it a means of "distracting" one's
attention. It is the central arena in which the fight between revolu­
tionary and reactionary world philosophy and politics is to take
place.
We are forced to avert an encounter in the philosophic and
cultural sphere, the center of which is the sexual question, as long as
we do not possess the necessary knowledge and the required training
to engage in such a clash successfully. However, if we can succeed in
gaining a firm foothold in the cultural question, we have everything
necessary to pave the way for work-democracy. For let it be stated
once again: Sexual inhibition prevents the average adolescent from
thinking and feeling in a rational way. We must see to it that
mysticism is countered with appropriate means. To this end a
knowledge of its mechanism is urgently necessary.
Let us quote from one of the many typical works on this sub­
ject: Der Bolschewismus als Todfeind und Wegbereiter der Revolu­
tion, 1931, written by the pastor Braumann. We could quote from
any other work just as well. The essential points of their arguments
125THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
are the same, and minor differences in detail are of no importance
here.
Every religion is liberation from the world and its powers
through unification with Godhood. Therefore, Bolshevism will
never be able to enchain man completely as long as there is still
something of religion in him.
-Braumann, p. 12
Here, to be sure, mysticism's function is clearly articulated: to
divert attention from daily misery, "to liberate from the world," the
purpose of which is .to prevent a revolt against the real causes of
one's misery. But scientific findings on the sociological function of
mysticism will not take us very far. First and foremost, it is the rich
experience gained from discussions between scientifically and mysti­
cally oriented youth· that has a practical value for our work against
mysticism. Such discussions give us a clue to an understanding of
mysticism, and hence to the mystical feelings of the individuals in
the masses.
A workers' youth organization invited a Protestant pastor to a
discussion on the economic crisis. He came, followed and sheltered
by some twenty Christian youths between eighteen and twenty-five
years of age. In his talk he made the following points, although it
was his shifting from partially correct statements to mystical points
of view that was most striking: The causes of the existing misery, he
explained, were the war and the Young plan. The world war was an
expression of man's depravity and of his meanness, an injustice and
a sin. Capitalistic exploitation was also a grave sin. (By assuming an
anti-capitalist attitude and thus anticipating the anti-capitalist feel­
ings of the Christian youth, he made it difficult to undo his
influence.) Capitalism and socialism, he went on to say, were essen­
tially the same. The socialism of the Soviet Union was also a form
of capitalism. Socialism entailed disadvantages for some classes just
as capitalism entailed disadvantages for other classes. Every form of
capitalism should "be given a good kick in the pants." Bolshevism's
126Organized Mysticism
fight against religion was a criminal act; religion was not responsible
for misery. It was capitalism's abuse of religion that was at fault.
(This was a decidedly progressive pastor.) What were the conclu­
sions to be drawn from this presentation? Since man was vile and
wicked, the wretchedness of his situation was not at all to be done
away with; it had to be endured, coped with. The capitalist was not
happy either. Man's inner anguish, which lay at the root of all
anguish, would not disappear even after the fulfillment of the third
five-year plan of the Soviet Union.
A number of revolutionary youths tried to represent their point
of view. They pointed out that it was not a question of individual
capitalists, but a question of "the system." It was a question of
whether the majority or a dwindling minority was suppressed. To
say that wretchedness had to be endured did not help matters at all
and only benefited political reaction. And so on and so forth. In the
end it was agreed that a reconciliation of the opposing views was
not possible, that no one went away with a conviction different
from the one with which he had come. The young attendants of the
pastor hung on the words of their leader. Their material situation
appeared to be just as indigent as that of the Communists, and yet
each one of them acquiesced in the opinion that there was no
escape from misery and that one had to make the best of it and
"have faith in God."
Following the discussion, I asked a number of communist
youths why they had not entered into the main issue, namely the
church's insistence on sexual abstinence. They replied that this
subject would have been too ticklish and too difficult, that it would
have had the effect of a bomb, and finally that it was not customary
to speak about such matters at political discussions.
Some time prior to this a mass rally had been held in one of
Berlin's western districts, at which representatives of the church and
representatives of the Communist party explained their respective
viewpoints. A good half of the 1,800 people attending the rally were
Christians and lower middle-class people. As the principal speaker, I
summarized the sex-economic position in several questions:
127THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
1. The church contends that the use of contraceptives is con­
trary to nature, as is any interference with natural procreation. If
nature is so strict and so wise, why did it produce a sexual apparatus
that does not impel one to engage in coitus only as often as one
wants to procreate children, but on the average of two to three
thousand times in a lifetime?
2. Would the representatives of the church who were present
state openly if they engaged in sexual intercourse only when they
wanted to procreate children? (They were Protestant pastors.)
3. Why had God produced two kinds of glands in one's sexual
apparatus: one for sexual excitation and one for procreation?
4. How did they explain the fact that even small children de­
veloped a sexuality, long before the procreation function begins?
The clerical representatives' embarrassed answers evoked peals
of laughter. When I began to explain the role played within the
framework of authoritarian society by the church's and reactionary
science's denial of the pleasure function, that the suppression of
sexual gratification was intended to produce humility and general
resignation in economic areas also, I had the entire audience on my
side. The mystics had been beaten.
Extensive experience at mass rallies shows that the political
reactionary role of mysticism in connection with the suppression of
sexuality is readily comprehended when the right to sexual gratifica­
tion is medically and socially explained in a clear and direct fashion.
This fact requires thorough elucidation.
THE APPEAL TO MYSTICAL FEELINGS
"Bolshevism," so we hear it stated by "anti-Bolshevik" propa­
ganda, is supposed to be the "arch enemy of every religion,"
especially of "spiritually valuable" religion. In consequence of its
"materialism," Bolshevism recognizes only material goods and is
only interested in producing material goods. It has not the least
understanding for spiritual values and psychic riches.
What are these spiritual values and psychic riches anyhow?
128Organized Mysticism
Faithfulness and faith are often named; as for the rest, the phrase­
ology is lost in a vague concept of "individuality."
Because Bolshevism wants to stifle everything individual, it
destroys the family which has always given man an individual
character. For that reason it hates all national strivings. All peoples
are to become as homogeneous as possible and be submissive to
Bolshevism . . . . B ut all efforts to stifle one's personal life will be
futile as long as there is still a trace of religion in man, because in
religion personal freedom from the outside world breaks through
again and again.
When the mystic speaks of "Bolshevism," he does not mean
the political party founded by Lenin. He has no notion of the
sociological controversies that took place at the turn of the century.
"Communist," "Bolshevist," "Red," etc., became reactionary slo­
gans, which have nothing to do with politics, parties, economics,
etc. These words are just as irrational as the word "Jew" in the
mouth of the fascists. They are expressive of the anti-sexual attitude
that relates to the mystical-reactionary structure of authoritarian
man. Thus, Roosevelt was labeled a "Jew" and a "Red" by the
fascists. The irrational content of these slogans always refers to what
is sexually alive, even when the person who is so labeled is far
removed from any kind of affirmation of childhood and adolescent
sexuality. The Russian Communists were even less affirmative to
sexuality than many middle-class Americans. One will have to learn
to comprehend the irrationalism of slogans if one wants to counter
mysticism, the primary cause of all political reaction. Wherever we
read "Bolshevism" in what follows, "orgasm anxiety" is also to be
thought of.
The reactionary man who is also a fascist assumes an intimate
relation between family, nation, and religion. This fact had been
wholly neglected by sociological research. To begin with, the sex­
economic diagnosis is confirmed: what religion calls freedom from
the outside world really means fantasized substitute gratification for
actual gratification. This fits in perfectly with the Marxist theory
129THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
that religion is the opium of the people. This is more than just a
metaphor. Vegetotherapy was able to prove that mystical experience
actually sets the same process going in the autonomic living appa­
ratus as a narcotic does. These processes are excitations in the sexual
apparatus that cause narcoticlike conditions and that crave for
orgastic gratification.
First of all, however, we have to obtain more exact information
on the relationship between mystical and familial sentiments. Brau­
mann writes in a way that is typical for reactionary ideology:
But Bolshevism has still another way of annihilating religion,
namely, through the systematic destruction of marital and familial
life. It knows only too well that the great forces of religion stem
from the family. It is for this reason that marriage and divorce are
facilitated to such a degree that Russian marriages border on free
love.
With reference to the "culture-destroying" effect of the Soviet
Russian five-day week, we read:
This serves to destroy familial life as well as religion. . . .
What is most disturbing is the havoc which Bolshevism spreads in
the sexual sphere. By its destruction of marital and familial life, it
fosters every kind of immoral dissipation to the extent of allowing
unnatural intercourse between brothers and sisters, parents and
children. [This is a reference to the abolition of punishment for
acts of incest in the Soviet Union.) Bolshevism recognizes no moral
inhibitions whatever.
Instead of countering such reactionary attacks with an exact
presentation of natural sexual processes, Soviet literature often
made the attempt to defend itself. It is not at all true, it contended,
that sexual life in the Soviet Union is "immoral"; marriages are
becoming consolidated again. Such attempts at defense were not
only ineffective politically; they did not correspond to the facts.
From a Christian point of view, sexuality in the Soviet Union was
indeed immoral. It was out of the question to speak of a consolida-
130Organized Mysticism
tion of marriages, for the institution of marriage in the authoritarian
and mystical connotation of the word had been abolished. Until
about 1928 the most popular form of marriage in the Soviet Union
was something equivalent to what we call common-law marriage in
the United States; it was both legal and practical. Thus Russian
communism had loosened compulsive marital and familial ties and
had done away with moralism.* It was merely a matter of making
masses of people conscious of their contradiction, namely that while
they secretly and urgently yearned for precisely that which the social
revolution had accomplished, they also consented to moralism. To
accomplish this task, however, clarity on the relationship between
compulsive family, mysticism, and sexuality is necessary.
We showed earlier that nationalistic sentiments are a direct
continuation of the sentiments of the authoritarian family. But
mystical feelings are also a source of nationalistic ideology. Hence,
patriarchal family attitudes and a mystical frame of mind are the
basic psychological elements of fascism and imperialistic national­
ism in the masses. In short, it is psychologically confirmed on a mass
basis that a mystical upbringing becomes the foundation of fascism
when a social catastrophe sets the masses in motion.
In The New York Times of August 14, 1942, Otto D. Tolischus
wrote as follows on the imperialistic ideology of the Japanese. (One
could almost have the feeling that he had studied our Mass Psychol­
ogy of Fascism. )
A startling revelation of the Japanese war mind, as well as the
ambitions prevalent not only in the military and ultra-nationalist
cliques now dominating the Japanese Government but also among
the intelligentsia, is contained in a booklet issued in Tokyo in
February of this year by Professor Chikao Fujisawa, one of the
leading exponents of Japan's political thought and philosophy.
* However, since about 1934, old anti-sexual and moralistic concepts have re­
appeared indicative of the failure of the sexual revolution in Russia, including
the reversion to compulsive marriage and reactionary sexual legislation. Cf. The
Sexual Revolution.
131THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
According to this booklet, which was made up for widest distri­
bution, Japan, as the original motherland of the human race and
world civilization, is fighting a holy war to reunite warring mankind
into one universal family household in which each nation will take
its proper place under the divine sovereignty of the Japanese
Emperor, who is a direct descendant of the Sun Goddess in the
"absolute cosmic life-center," from which the nations have strayed
and to which they must return.
In its general argument the booklet merely summarizes, sys­
tematizes and applies to the present war the ideas derived from
Shinto mythology that Japanese politicians under the leadership of
Yosuke Matsuoka developed into an imperialistic dogma to justify
Japan's expansion policy. But for that very reason it appeals to all
the religious, racial and national ideas and emotions most deeply
ingrained in the Japanese nature. In that sense Professor Fujisawa is
a sort of Japanese Nietzsche and Wagner and his pamphlet
becomes the Japanese equivalent of Adolf Hitler's Mein KamPf.
As was the case with Mein Kampf, the outside world has paid
little attention to this trend in Japanese thought, which is either
regarded as pure phantasy or relegated to the field of theology. But
for years it has furnished the ideological background for Japan's
expansion policy, which led to the present war, and the last Japa­
nese notes to the United States cannot be understood without
reference to it.
The authoritative nature of the booklet is indicated by the fact
Professor Fujisawa has been a permanent representative on the
secretariat of the League of Nations and professor of political
science in Kyushu Imperial University and has published numerous
works in various languages on Japanese political science. He is now
director of the research department of the Imperial Rule Associa­
tion, created to organize the Japanese people for war, and is charged
with making such ideas effective throughout the world.
The flavor of the booklet is amply illustrated by the first few
paragraphs, which read:
"Japan is often called in our poetic language 'Sumera Mikuni,'
which conveys somewhat the meaning of divine clime, all-integrat­
ing and all-embracing. By keeping in mind its philosophic implica­
tions one will be able to grasp the keynote of the imperial rescript
132Organized Mysticism
issued Sept. 27, 1939, at the time of the conclusion of the Tri­
partite pact. Therein our gracious Tenno proclaimed solemnly that
the cause of great justice should be extended to the far ends of the
earth so as to tum the world into one household and thus enable all
nations to secure their due places. This significant passage in the
rescript will clarify the very character of our august sovereign, ever
anxious to act as head of an all-embracing universal family, in the
bosom of which to all nations shall be allotted their respective posts
in a dynamic order of harmony and cooperation.
"It is incumbent upon our Tenno to do his best to restore the
'absolute cosmic life-center' and reconstruct the fundamental verti­
cal order once prevalent among nations in remote antiquity; by so
doing he wishes to transform the present-day lawless and chaotic
world, where the weak are left to fall prey to the strong, into one
large family community in which perfect concord and consummate
harmony shalll'revail.
"This is the objective of the divine mission that Japan has been
called on to fulfill from time immemorial. In a word, it is to per­
meate the whole world and earth with the cosmic vitality embodied
in our divine sovereign, so that all segregated national units may be
led to reunite themselves spiritually with the sincere feeling of
brothers sharing the same blood.
"Only in this way will all nations of the world be induced to
abandon their individualistic attitude, which finds expression first of
all in current international law."
This, says Professor Fujisawa, is "the way of the gods," and,
after explaining this in mystical terms, he continues:
"In this light one can well understand that capitalistic indi­
vidualism prevalent in the United States runs counter to the cosmic
truth, for it ignores the all-embracing life-center and deals exclu­
sively with rampancy and unbridled ego. Dictatorial communism,
elevated to an official doctrine by Soviet Russia, proves likewise
irreconcilable with the cosmic truth, since it tends to disregard
personal initiative and merely exercises drastic bureaucratic control
of the State.
"It is noteworthy that the guiding principle of National Social­
ist Germany and Fascist Italy have much in common with Musubi
principle, one of many distinguishing these Axis powers from the
133THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
democracies and the Soviet Union. It is because of this spiritual
solidarity that Japan, Germany and Italy have been prompted to
present a common front against . . . those powers defending the
old order."
Sumera Mikuni, Professor Fujisawa explains, is at war with the
administrations of President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Chur­
chill, which have been eager for realization of their "inordinate
ambition" to dominate the Orient. But thanks to the earnest
prayers offered by Sumera Mikoto (the Japanese Emperor) day and
night to the spirit of the Sun Goddess, divine power has at last
mobilized to deal a thoroughgoing blow to those revolting against
the inviolable cosmic law.
In fact, Professor Fujisawa writes, "the present Greater East
Asia is virtually a second descent of the grandchild [of the Sun
Goddess, the mythological ancestor of the Japanese dynasty], who
perpetuates himself in the everlasting life of Sumera Mikoto."
Wherefore, Professor Fujisawa concludes:
"The holy war launched by Sumera Mikuni will sooner or later
awaken all nations to the cosmic truth that their respective national
lives issued forth from one absolute life-center embodied by Sumera
Mikoto and that peace and harmony cannot be realized otherwise
than by reorganizing them into one all-embracing family system
under the guidance of Sumera Mikoto."
Piously Professor Fujisawa adds:
"This noble idea should not be considered in any sense in the
light of imperialism, under which weak nations are mercilessly
subjugated."
Startling as these ideas may appear, even more startling is
Professor Fujisawa's "scientific" basis for them. Although aU Japa­
nese chronicles and histories admit that at the foundation of the
Japanese Empire, which the Japanese Government has put at 2600
B.C. but which historians date around the beginning of the Chris­
tian era, the inhabitants of the Japanese isles were still primitive
savages, some of whom were "men with tails" living in trees, Pro­
fessor Fujisawa blandly advances the claim that Japan is the
motherland of the entire human race and its civilization.
Recent discoveries and rare archives in Japan, supplemented by
the writings of some Western authorities, Professor Fujisawa ex-
134Organized Mysticism
plains, prove "the wondedul fact that in the prehistoric age man­
kind formed a single worldwide family system with Sumera Mikoto
as its head, and Japan was highly respected as the land of parents
while all other lands were called lands of children or branch lands."
As proof of this the professor cites a world map prepared by "a
certain Hilliford in 1280" on which "East is located on top and the
space occupied by the Japanese is named 'Kingdom of Heaven.' "
Professor Fujisawa continues:
"Eminent scholars preoccupied with thoroughgoing researches
regarding the prehistoric chronicles of Japan are unanimous in
concluding that the cradle of mankind was neither the Pamir
Plateau nor the banks of the Tigris and the Euphrates, but the
middle mountainous region of the Japanese mainland. This new
theory concerning the origins of humanity is attracting the keen
attention of those who confidently look to Japan's divine mission
for the salvation of disoriented mankind."
According to this professorial thesis, the Sumerians, who are
believed to have founded Babylonian civilization, from which all
other civilizations, including those of Egypt, Greece and Rome,
blossomed, are identical with the early Japanese settlers at Erdu,
and this, says Professor Fujisawa, explains the correspondence
between the prehistoric accounts of Japan and the Old Testament.
The same, he says, is true of the Chinese, who, he insists, were
civilized by Japan, instead of the other way around. Yet Japanese
histories record that the Japanese did not learn to read or write till
the Koreans and Chinese taught them, around 400 A.D.
Unfortunately, says the professor, "the world order, with Japan
functioning as its absolute unifying center, collapsed in consequence
of repeated earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, floods, tidal waves and
glaciers, and due to these tremendous cataclysms all mankind
became estranged geographically and spiritually from the parent
land of Japan."
But, it seems, Sumera Mikuni "was immune miraculously from
all these natural catastrophes, and its divine sovereigns, Sumera
Mikoto, enjoying lineage unbroken for ages eternal, have appointed
to themselves the sacred mission of remolding this floating dismem­
bered mankind into a large family community such as existed in
prehistoric ages."
135THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
"Obviously," Professor Fujisawa adds, "none is better qualified
than Sumera Mikoto to accomplish this divine work of saving
humanity."
Tolischus does not comprehend the phenomena that he de­
scribes. He believes that it is a conscious mystical veiling of rational
imperialism. However, his report clearly demonstrates that sex­
economy is correct in its judgment that all forms of fascistic,
imperialistic, and dictatorial mysticism can be traced back to the
mystical distortion of the vegetative sensations of life, a distortion
that results from a patriarchal and authoritarian organization of the
family and the state.
While national feeling is derived from the maternal tie (home
feeling), mystical sentiments originate in the anti-sexual atmosphere
that is inseparably bound to this familial tie. The authoritarian
familial tie presupposes the inhibition of sensuous sexuality. With­
out exception, all children brought up in a patriarchal society are
subject to this sensuous inhibition. No sexual activity, no matter
how showy and "free" it appears to be, can delude the expert as to
this deeply rooted inhibition. In fact, it is precisely this inhibition of
the capacity for orgastic experience that lies at the bases of many
pathological manifestations that occur in later sexual life, such as
indiscriminate choice of partners, sexual restlessness, proclivity to
pathological extravagances, etc. The inevitable result of this inhibi­
tion ("orgastic impotence") characteristic of every authoritarian
upbringing and experienced as unconscious guilt-feelings and sexual
anxiety, is an insatiable unconscious intense orgastic longing, which
is accompanied by physical sensations of tension in the region of the
solar plexus. The proverbial localization of sensual yearning in the
breast and abdomen has its physiological meaning.4
To begin with, the continuous tension in the psychophysical
organism constitutes the basis of daydreaming in small children and
4 See my clinical presentation in The Function of the Orgasm, 1942.
136Organized Mysticism
young adolescents. This daydreaming is very easily converted into
and developed as sentiments of a mystical, sentimental, and reli­
gious nature. The atmosphere of the mystical authoritarian man is
infused with all these sentiments. Thus, the average child acquires a
structure that is practically compelled to absorb the mystical influ­
ences of nationalism, mysticism, and superstitions of all kinds. The
gruesome fairy tales of early childhood, the detective stories that
follow later, the mysterious atmosphere of the church, only prepare
the ground for the later susceptibility of the biopsychic apparatus to
military and fatherland consecrations. Whether the mystical man
appears rough or even brutal on the surface, is not of importance in
assessing the effect of mysticism. The processes that take place far
beneath the surface are of importance. The sentimentality and
religious mysticism of a Matuschka, Haarmann, or Kiirten are
intimately related to their sadistic cruelty. These contrary senti­
ments owe their origin to one and the same source: The insatiable
vegetative yearning produced by sexual inhibition and barred from
natural gratification. On the one hand, therefore, this intense
yearning is very accessible to muscular sadistic discharges, and on
the other hand (owing to the existing guilt-feelings) finds expres­
sion in mystical religious experiences. The fact that the child­
murderer Kiirten was sexually disturbed was made clear by the
testimony of his wife; that this was the case had not occurred to our
psychiatric clinical "experts." The cohesion of sadistic brutality and
mystical sentiments is usually to be met with wherever the normal
capacity to experience orgasm is disturbed. And this is true of a
mass murderer of our time as it was of the inquisitors of the Middle
Ages or the brutality and mysticism of Philip II of Spain.5 If a
hysteria does not stifle unresolved excitation in nervous impotence,
or a compulsive neurosis does not stifle the same excitation in futile
and grotesque compulsive symptoms, the patriarchal-authoritarian
Ii In this connection see De Coster's Till Eulenspiegel, a masterpiece, which,
as far as I am concerned, has remained without peer in its liberal humanity.
137THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
compulsive order offers sufficient opportunity for sadistic-mystical
discharges.6 The social rationalization of such behavior effaces its
pathological character. It would be worthwhile to make a thorough
study of the various mystical sects in America, the Buddhist ide­
ology in India, the various theosophic and anthroposophical trends,
etc., as socially important manifestations of patriarchal sexual econ­
omy. Let it suffice to say here that mystical groups merely represent
a concentration of facts that we find in a more diffuse, less tangible,
but, for all that, no less clear form, in all layers of the population.
There is a direct correlation between mystical, sentimental, and
sadistic sentiments on the one hand and the average disturbance of
the natural orgastic experience on the other hand. There is more to
be learned about this problem by observing the behavior of the
audience at a third-rate musical than by reading a hundred text­
books on sexology. As different and as diverse as the contents and
directions of this mystical experience are, their sex-economic basis is
universal and typical. Compare this with the realistic, unsenti­
mental, vital experience of the genuine revolutionary, the dedicated
natural scientist, healthy adolescents, etc.
At this point the obvious objection makes itself heard, namely,
that the primitive who led a natural life in a matriarchal order also
had mystical feelings. A very thorough proof is needed to show that
there is a fundamental difference between the matriarchal man and
the patriarchal man. Above all, this can be proven by the fact that
religion's attitude toward sexuality underwent a change in patri­
archal society. Originally, it was a religion of sexuality; later it
became an anti-sexual religion. The "mysticism" of the primitives
who were members of a sexually affirmative society is partially direct
orgastic experience and partially animistic interpretation of natural
processes.
6 Morphia addicts are always orgastically impotent; therefore they attempt to
get rid of their excitations artificially, but they are never completely successful.
Usually, they are sadistic, mystical, vain, homosexual, and tortured by consum·
ing anxiety, which they attempt to work off by brutal behavior.
138Organized Mysticism
THE GOAL OF THE CULTURAL REVOLUTION
IN THE LIGHT OF FASCIST REACTION
The social revolution concentrates all of its forces on the
elimination of the social basis of human suffering. The priority
given to the necessity of revolutionizing the social order obscures
the sex-economic goals and intentions. The revolutionary is com­
pelled to put off the solution of very urgent questions until the most
urgent task, the establishment of the preconditions for the practical
solution of these questions, is accomplished. The reactionary, on the
other hand, spares no effort in assailing precisely the ultimate
cultural goals of the revolution, which are obscured by the prelimi­
nary and immediate tasks.
Cultural Bolshevism aims at the destruction of our existing
culture and wants to so reconstruct it as to serve man's earthly
happiness. . . . [Sic!]
That's how Kurt Hutten put it in his call to arms, Kulturbolschewis­
mus, published by the Volksbundes, 1931. Does political reaction's
accusation relate to that which the cultural revolution really has in
mind, or does it, for demagogic reasons, impute goals to the revolu­
tion that definitely do not lie within its compass? In the former case
a defense and clear elucidation of the necessity of these goals would
be indispensable. In the latter, the proof of false imputation would
be sufficient, that is to say, a denial of that which political reac­
tion imputes to the revolution.
How does political reaction itself appraise the antithesis be­
tween earthly happiness and religion? Kurt Hutten writes:
To begin with: Cultural Bolshevism's most fierce fight is di­
rected against religion. For religion, as long as it is alive, constitutes
the strongest bulwark against its goals. . . . R eligion subordinates
all of human life to something supernatural, and eternal authority.
It demands denial, sacrifice, renunciation of one's own wishes. It
imbues human life with responsibility, guilt, judgment, eternity. It
inhibits an unbridled exhaustion of human drives. The revolution of
139THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
culture is the cultural revolution of man, is the subjugation of all
spheres of life to the pleasure principle [my italics, WR].
Here we have a clear articulation of the reactionary rejection of
earthly happiness. The reactionary leader senses a threat to the
anchoring of imperialistic mysticism ("culture"). He is much more
keenly aware of this threat than the revolutionary is aware of his
goal, for the latter must first concentrate his energy and knowledge
on the changing of the social order. The reactionary leader recog­
nizes the danger that the revolution constitutes to the authoritarian
family and mystical moralism, long before the average revolutionary
has the least notion that the revolution will entail such conse­
quences. In this respect, indeed, the social revolutionary himself is
very often prepossessed. The reactionary leader stands for heroism,
the acceptance of affliction, the abiding of privation, absolutely and
eternally; hence, he represents the interests of imperialism, whether
he wants to or not (d. Japan). To this end, however, he needs
mysticism, that is to say, he needs sexual abstinence. To him happi­
ness is essentially sexual gratification, and he is right in this ap­
praisal. The revolutionary also demands a great deal of restraint,
duty, renunciation, for the possibilities of happiness must first be
fought for. In his practical work for the masses, the revolutionary
easily forgets-and sometimes likes to forget that the real goal is
-
not work (social freedom brings about a continuous reduction of
the working day), but sexual play and life in all of its forms, from
orgasm to the highest accomplishments. Work is and remains the
basis of life, but within the social framework, work is transferred
from man to the machine. That is the essence of the economy of
work.
Sentences such as the following are to be found in many mysti­
cal and reactionary writings, even if they are not always so clearly
formulated as in the case of Kurt Hutten:
Cultural Bolshevism is not a recent thing. It takes as its basis a
striving that was planted in man's breast in primeval times: The
intense longing for happiness. It is the primordial nostalgia for
140Organized Mysticism
paradise on earth. . . . T he religion of faith is replaced by the
religion of pleasure.
We, however, want to know: Why shouldn't we have happi­
ness on earth? Why shouldn't pleasure be the substance of life?
Let the masses vote on this question! No reactionary conception
of life would stand the test.
To be sure, the reactionary leader perceives the relation of
mysticism to compulsive marriage and compulsive family in a mysti­
cal way, but he perceives it correctly.
To fulfill this responsibility (for the consequences of pleasure),
human society has founded the institution of marriage which, as a
life-long partnership, is intended to represent the protective frame­
work for the sexual relationship.
And the complete register of "cultural values," which fits into
the fabric of reactionary ideology as parts into a machine, is imme­
diately appended:
Marriage as a tie, family as a duty, fatherland as a value in
itself, morality as authority, religion as an obligation deriving from
eternity.
The rigidity of the human plasma could not be more accurately
described!
All reactionary types condemn sexual pleasure (not without
impunity, however) because it attracts and repulses them at one
and the same time. They cannot resolve the contradiction between
sexual demands and moralistic inhibitions in themselves. The revo­
lutionary negates perverse and pathological pleasure because it is not
his pleasure, is not the sexuality of the future, but the pleasure born
of the contradiction between morality and instinct; it is the pleasure
of a dictatorial society, debased, sordid, pathological pleasure. Only
when he himself is not clear, he makes the mistake of condemning
pathological pleasure, instead of opposing it with his own positive
sex-economy. If, as a result of his own sexual inhibitions, he does
not fully comprehend the goal of a social organization founded on
141THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
freedom, he is apt to repudiate pleasure altogether, become an
ascetic and thereby lose all possibility of establishing contact with
the youth. In the otherwise excellent film The Road to Life, the
sexual practices of disreputable people (in the tavern scene) are
contrasted not with the sexual practices of people who are free but
with ascetism and anti-sexuality. The sexual problem of adolescents
is completely set aside. This is wrong and confuses the issue instead
of solving it. The disintegration of moralistic codes in the sexual
sphere is initially expressed as sexual rebellion; but at the outset it
remains pathological sexual rebellion, from which the sex-economist
rightly flees. The task, however, is to give a rational form to this
rebellion, to lead it into a sex-economic channel, just as freedom of
life was once born of convulsions of life.
142VII
Sex-Economy in the Fight
Against Mysticism
At a mass rally in Berlin in January of 1933, the National So­
cialist Otto Strasser asked his opponent, the sociologist and sinolo­
gist Wittfogel, a question which was so penetrating that it had a
disconcerting effect. Those who were present were given the impres­
sion that Wittfogel's reply could have meant mysticism's doom.
Strasser accused the Marxists of underestimating the importance of
psychic life and religious feeling. His argument ran as follows: If
religion, according to Marx, were really only the flower on the chain
of the exploitation of toiling humanity, then how was it to be ex­
plained that religion had held up for thousands of years-the Chris­
tian religion, indeed, almost unchanged for two thousand years­
especially in view of the fact that in the beginning its survival had
demanded more sacrific than all revolutions taken together. The
question was not answered, but it fits in very well with the material
under discussion. It had to be admitted that the question was
justified. It was time for natural science to take stock of itself to
determine whether its comprehension of mysticism and the means
of its anchoring in the human structure was as thorough and as
complete as it could be. The answer had to be in the negative:
natural science had not yet succeeded in comprehending the power­
ful emotional content of mysticism. The exponents of mysticism
had dealt with all sides of the question and given practical answers
in their writings and sermons. The sex-political nature of every form
143THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
of mysticism is evident. Yet it was as completely overlooked by the
freethinkers as the equally evident sexuality of children had been
overlooked by the most famous educators. It is clear that mysticism
has a hidden bulwark at its disposal and that it has been defending
this bulwark against natural science with every means at its com­
mand. Science is only beginning to divine its existence.
THE THREE BASIC ELEMENTS OF RELIGIOUS FEELING
I do not want at this point to make a thorough investigation of
religious feeling. I would like merely to summarize what is already
known. At a certain point there is a correlation between the phe­
nomena of orgastic excitation and the phenomena of religious exci­
tation, ranging from the simplest pious surrender to total religious
ecstasy. The idea of religious excitation is not to be confined to the
sensations that are wont to arise in deeply religious people while
attending a religious service. We have to include all excitations that
are characterized by a definite psychic and somatic state of excita­
tion. In other words, we also have to include the excitation experi­
enced by submissive masses when they open themselves to a beloved
leader's speech, and the excitation one experiences when one allows
oneself to be overwhelmed by impressive natural phenomena. Let
us begin by summarizing what was known about religious phe­
nomena before sex-economic research.
Sociological research was able to show that religious forms and
also the contents of various religions were dependent upon the stage
of development of socio-economic conditions. For example, animal
religions correspond to the mode of life of primitive peoples who
lived from hunting. The way in which people conceive of a divine
supernatural being is always determined by the level of the economy
and of the culture. Another very important sociological factor in
determining religious conceptions is man's ability to master natural
and social difficulties. Helplessness in the face of natural forces and
elemental social catastrophes is conducive to the development of
religious ideologies in cultural crises. Thus, the sociological explana-
144Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
tion of religion refers to the socio-economic soil from which religious
cults spring. It has nothing to say about the dynamics of religious
ideology, nor does it give us any clue as to the psychic process that
takes place in the people who come under the influence of this
ideology.
Thus, the formation of religious cults is not dependent upon
the will of the individual. They are sociological formations, which
originate from the interrelations between man and man and the
relation of man to nature.
The psychology of the unconscious added a psychological inter­
pretation to the sociological interpretation of religion. The depen­
dency of religious cults upon socio-economic factors was understood.
Now one began to study the psychological process in the people
who came under the influence of these objective religious cults.
Thus, psychoanalysis was able to show that our idea of God is
identical with our idea of father, that the idea of the Mother of
God is identical with the mother of every religious individual. The
triangle of father, mother, and child is directly reflected in the
trinity of the Christian religion. The psychic content of religion is
drawn from early childhood familial relationships.
Thus, psychological research enabled us to interpret the content
of religious cults, but it gave us no insight into the energy process by
means of which this content became embedded in man's structure.
Above all, no insight was given into the fanaticism and the high
degree of emotionality of religious conceptions. Why the ideas of
the all-powerful father and the benevolent mother became mystical
ideas, and what relation they have to the sexual life of the individ­
ual, was also vague.
Many sociologists have established that some patriarchal reli­
gions have an orgastic character. It has also been established that
patriarchal religions are always of. a political reactionary nature.
They always serve the interests of the ruling power of every class
society and preclude, to all intents and purposes, the elimination of
mass misery by ascribing it to God's will and by putting off claims to
happiness with fine words about the Beyond.
145THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
To the existing knowledge on religion, sex-economic research
now adds the following questions:
1_ How do the idea of God, the ideology of sin, and the ideol­
ogy of punishment-which are produced by society and reproduced
in the family-become embedded in the individual? In other
words: \Vhy is it that man does not feel these basic conceptions of
religion as a burden? What is it that compels him not only to accept
them but to affirm them fervently, indeed, compels him to defend
and preserve them at the sacrifice of his most fundamental interests
of life?
2_ When do these religious conceptions become embedded in
man?
3_ What energy is used to accomplish this?
It is clear that until these three questions are answered, it may
indeed be possible to give a sociological and psychological interpre­
tation of religion, but it will not be possible to effect a real change
in man's structure. For if religious feelings are not imposed on man,
but are embedded and retained in his structure, opposed as they are
to his own vital interests, then what is needed is an energetic change
in man's structure.
The basic religious idea of all patriarchal religions is the nega­
'
tion of sexual need. There are no exceptions, if we disregard the
sexually affirmative primordial religions, in which the religious and
the sexual experience were still a unity. In the transition of society
from a matriarchal organization based on natural law to a patriarchal
organization based on the division of classes, the unity of the reli­
gious and sexual cult was split. The religious cult became the an­
tithesis of the sexual cult. At this juncture the sexual cult ceases to
exist and is replaced by the barbarism of brothels, pornography, and
clandestine sexuality. No additional proof is required to show that
at that moment when sexual experience ceased to constitute a unity
with the religious cult and indeed became its antithesis, religious
excitation also had to become a substitute for the socially affirmed
sensuality that was lost. It is only on the basis of this contradiction
in religious excitation, which is anti-sexual and a substitution for
146Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
sexuality at one and the same time, that the strength and tenacity of
religions can be comprehended.
The emotional structure of the genuinely religious man can be
briefly described as follows: biologically, he is subject to sexual ten­
sions just as all other human beings and creatures. Owing, however,
to his assimilation of sex-negating religious conceptions, and espe­
cially to the fear of punishment that he has acquired, he has com­
pletely lost his ability to experience natural sexual tension and
release. Consequently, he suffers from a chronic state of physical
excitation, which he is continuously compelled to master. He is not
only shut off from earthly happiness-it does not even appear de­
sirable. Since he expects to be rewarded in the Beyond, he succumbs
to a feeling of being incapable of happiness in this world. In view of
the fact that he is a biologic creature and cannot under any circum­
stances forego happiness, release, and gratification, he seeks illusion­
ary happiness. This he can obtain from the forepleasure of religious
tensions, i.e., the vegetative somatic currents and excitations with
which we are familiar. Together with his fellow believers, he will
arrange entertainments and create institutions that alleviate this
state of physical excitation and are also capable of disguising the real
nature of this excitation. His biologic organism prompts him to
construct a musical instrument, an organ, the sound of which is
capable of evoking such currents in the body. The mystical darkness
of the church intensifies the effect of a superpersonal sensibility to
one's own inner life and to the sounds of a sermon, a chorale, etc.,
intended to achieve this effect.
In reality, the religious man has become completely helpless. As
a result of the suppression of his sexual energy, he has lost his
capacity for happiness as well as the aggressiveness necessary to deal
with life's difficulties. The more helpless he becomes, the more he is
forced to believe in supernatural forces that support and shelter
him. Thus, it is not difficult to understand that in some situations
he is also capable of developing an incredible power of conviction,
indeed, a passive indifference toward death. He draws this power
from his love of his own religious conviction, which, as we said, is
147THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
borne by highly pleasurable physical excitations. Naturally, he be­
lieves that this power stems from "God." In reality, therefore, his
intense longing for God is the longing that derives from his excita­
tions of sexual forepleasure and clamors for release. Deliverance is
and can be nothing other than the deliverance from the unbearable
physical tensions, which can be pleasurable only as long as they are
lost in a fantasized unification with God, i.e., with gratification and
release. The tendency of fanatically religious people to injure them­
selves and to behave masochistically, etc., confirms what we have
said. Clinical experience in sex-economy shows that the desire to be
beaten or to castigate oneself corresponds to the instinctual desire
for relRase without incurring guilt. There is no physical tension that
will not evoke fantasies of being beaten or of being tortured as soon
as the person concerned feels that he himself is incapable of bring­
ing about the release. Here we have the root of the passive ideology
of suffering of all genuine religions.
The need to be· consoled, supported, and helped by others,
especially in the struggle against one's own evil impulses-"sins of
the flesh," as they are called-stems from one's actual helplessness
and intense physical suffering. If a religious person becomes more
and more excited under the influence of religious conceptions, the
state of vegetative irritation increases with the physical excitation
and reaches a point of near gratification without, however, bringing
about an actual physical release. It is known from the treatment of
mentally sick priests that an involuntary ejaculation often occurs at
the height of religious ecstasy. Normal orgastic gratification is re­
placed by a general condition of physical excitation, which excludes
the genitals and, as if by accident, brings about a partial release
against one's will.
Originally and naturally, sexual pleasure was the good, the beau­
tiful, the happy, that which united man with nature in general.
When sexual feelings and religious feelings became separated from
one another, that which is sexual was forced to become the bad, the
infernal, the diabolical.
Elsewhere I attempted to show the etiology and mechanism of
148Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
the pleasure anxiety, i.e., the fear of sexual excitation. Let me briefly
summarize: As time goes on, people who are incapable of release
must begin to sense sexual excitations as torturous, burdensome,
destructive. In fact, sexual excitation is destructive and torturous if
it is not allowed to achieve release. Thus, we see that the religious
conception of sex as an annihilating, diabolical force, predisposing
'
one for final doom, is rooted in actual physical processes. As a
result the attitude toward sexuality is forced to become divided:
The typical religious and moralistic valuations "good"- "bad,"
"heavenly"- "earthly," "divine" -"diabolical," etc., become the sym­
bols of sexual gratification on the one hand and the punishment
thereof on the other hand.
The deep longing for redemption and release-consciously from
"sins," unconsciously from sexual tensions-is warded off. States of
religious ecstasy are nothing other than conditions of sexual excita­
tion of the vegetative nervous system, which can never be released.
Religious excitation cannot be comprehended and therefore cannot
be mastered, without first understanding the contradiction by which
it is ruled. It is not only anti-sexual, but to a large extent sexual as
well. It is not only moralistic; it is altogether unnatural. From a sex­
economic point of view, it is unhygienic.
In no social class do hysteria and perversions flourish to such an
extent as they do in the ascetic circles of the church. One should
not conclude from this, however, that these ascetics should be
treated as perverse criminals. In talking with religious people it is
often found that they have a very good understanding of their own
condition. As everyone else, their personalities are divided into a
public and a private side. Officially, they regard sexuality as a sin;
privately, they know only too well that they cannot exist without
their substitute gratifications.-Indeed, many of them are accessible
to the sex-economic resolution of the contradiction between sexual
excitation and morality. If one does not reject them as human
beings and succeeds in winning their confidence, one finds they
understand very well that that which they describe as union with
God is the feeling of relatedness to the process of nature as a whole,
149THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
that their selfhood is a part of nature. As all human beings, they too
feel themselves to be a microcosm in a macrocosm. It has to be ad­
mitted that their deep conviction has a true core. What they believe
is really true, namely the vegetative currents of their bodies and the
states of ecstasy to which they can rise. Especially in the case of men
and women who come from poor social strata, religious feeling is
absolutely genuine. It loses its genuineness only insofar as it rejects
and veils from itself its origin and the unconscious desire for gratifi­
cation. It is in this way that that attitude of priests and religious
people that has a contrived goodness about it comes into being.
This presentation is incomplete. Summarizing the basic points,
however, we can say:
1. Religious excitation is vegetative excitation whose sexual
nature is disguised.
2. Through the mystification of the excitation, the religious
individual negates his sexuality.
3. Religious ecstasy is a substitute for orgastic vegetative excita­
tion.
4. Religious ecstasy does not produce a sexual release; at best, it
produces a muscular and mental fatigue.
5. Religious feeling is subj€ctively genuine and has a physio­
logical basis.
6. The negation of the sexual nature of this excitation causes
one's character to lose its genuineness.
Children do not believe in God. It is when they have to learn to
suppress the sexual excitation that goes hand in hand with mastur­
bation that the belief in God generally becomes embedded in them.
Owing to this suppression, they acquire a fear of pleasure. Now they
begin to believe in God in earnest and to develop a fear of him. On
the one hand they fear him as an omniscient and omnipotent being,
and on the other hand they invoke his protection against their own
sexual excitation. All of this has the function of avoiding masturba­
tion. Thus, it ·is in early childhood that religious ideas become
embedded. However, the idea of God would not be able to bind the
child's sexual energy if it were not also associated with the actual
ISOSex-Economy versus Mysticism
figures of father and mother. He who does not honor the father is
sinful. In other words, he who does not fear the father and indulges
in sexual pleasure is punished. The strict father, who denies the
fulfillment of the child's desires, is God's representative on earth
and, in the fantasy of the child, is the executioner of God's will. If
the respect for the father is shaken by a clear insight into his weak­
nesses and human inadequacies, this does not lead to his rejection
by the child. He continues to exist in the figure of the abstract
mystical conception of God. In a patriarchal social organization an
appeal to God is really an appeal to the actual authority of the
father. When a child invokes "God," he is really invoking his actual
father. In the structure of the child, sexual excitation, idea of father,
and idea of God constitute a unity. In treatment we meet this unity
as a palpable condition of genital muscular spasm. With the elimi­
nation of the spastic condition in the genital musculature, the idea
of God and the fear of the father always lose ground. Hence, the
genital spasm not only represents the physiological anchoring of
religious fear in the human structure, but at the same time it also
produces the pleasure anxiety that becomes the core of every reli­
gious morality.
I have to leave it to later investigations to work out the very
complicated and detailed interrelations among the different kinds of
cults, socio-economic social organization, and human structure.
Genital shyness and pleasure anxiety remain the energetic core of all
anti-sexual patriarchal religions.
ANCHORING OF RELIGION BY MEANS OF SEXUAL ANXIETY
Religiosity that is hostile to sex is the product of patriarchal
authoritarian society. The son-father relationship, which we find in
every patriarchal religion, is only the inevitable socially determined
content of religious experience. The experience itself, however,
derives from the patriarchal suppression of sexuality. The function
that religion comes to serve in the course of time, the bearing of
obedience toward authority and renunciation, is also only a secon-
151THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
dary function of religion. It can build upon a solid foundation: the
structure of patriarchal man molded by means of sexual suppression.
It is the negation of the pleasures of the body that serves as the
living source of the religious view, and is the axis of every religious
dogma. This is especially evident in the religions of Christianity and
Buddhism.
Anchoring of Mysticism in Childhood
Lieber Gott, nun schlaf ich ein,
Schicke mir ein Engelein.
Vater, lass die Augen Dein,
Ueber meinem Bette sein.
Hab ich Unrecht heut getan,
Sieh es, Heber Gott, nicht an.
Vater, hab mit mir Geduld
Und vergib mir meine Schuld.
AIle Menschen, gross und klein
Mogen Dir befohlen sein.
[Dear God, now I go to sleep,
Send me a little angel.
Father, may your eyes
Rest upon my bed.
If today I have transgressed
Overlook it, dear God.
Father, be patient with me
And forgive my trespasses.
Mayall men, big and small,
Be recommended to your Mercy.]
This is one of the many typical prayers that children have to
recite before going to sleep. The content of such texts is ignored.
And yet these texts are a concentrated form of the substance and
emotional content of mysticism. In the first couplet, we have a plea
for protection; in the second, a repetition of this plea made directly
152Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
to the "father"; in the third, a plea for forgiveness for a committed
sin: may the God-Father overlook our trespasses. What does this
guilt-feeling refer to? What is it that God is supposed to overlook?
The guilt experienced from the pla),ing with one's sexual organs
stands at the top of the list of forbidden deeds.
The forbidding of the child to play with his sexual organs would
be ineffective if it were not reinforced by the idea that God sees
everything, and therefore the child has to be "good" even when the
parents are away. Those who feel inclined to dismiss this association
as a stretch of the imagination may be convinced by the following
impressive story. It gives a very clear picture of the anchoring of the
mystical idea of God by means of sexual anxiety.
A girl of some seven years of age who was consciously brought up
without any idea of God suddenly developed a compulsion to pray.
It was compulsive because she really didn't want to pray and felt it
to be against her better judgment. The background of this compul­
sion to pray is as follows: The child was in the habit of masturbat­
ing before going to sleep every night. One night, for some reason,
she was afraid to do so; instead she had the impulse to kneel down
in front of her bed and to recite a prayer similar to the one quoted
above. "If I pray, I won't be afraid." It was on the day she re­
nounced masturbation for the first time that fear appeared.
Whence this self-renunciation? She told her father, who had her
complete confidence, that a few months earlier she had had an
unpleasant experience while on vacation. As so many children, she
and a boy had played at having sexual intercourse ("had played
Mommy and Daddy"). Another boy had suddenly come upon
them and had shouted "shame" at them. Though she had been
told by her parents that there was nothing wrong with such games,
she felt ashamed and, in place of the game, masturbated be­
fore going to sleep. One evening, shortly before the appearance of
the compulsion to pray, she had walked home from a house party
with several other children. Along the way they had sung revolu­
tionary songs. An old woman passed them who reminded her of the
witch in Hansel and Gretel. This old woman had called out to
153THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
them: "May the Devil take you-you band of atheistsl" That eve­
ning, when she wanted to masturbate again, it struck her for the
first time that perhaps there really was a God who sees and pun­
ishes. Unconsciously, she had associated the old woman's threat with
the experience with the boy. Now she too began to struggle against
masturbation, became afraid, and to allay her fear began to pray
Prayer had taken the. place of sexual gratification.
compulsively.
Nonetheless, the fear did not give way completely. She began to
have frightful nocturnal fantasies. From that time on she was afraid
of a supernatural being who could punish her for her sexual
offenses. Hence, she recommended herself to His care. This consti­
tuted a reinforcement of her struggle against the temptation to
masturbate.
This is not to be looked upon as an isolated occurrence. It is
typical of the process whereby the idea of God becomes embedded in
the overwhelming majority of the children of religious cultural
circles. As we have learned from the analytic study of fairy tales, the
Hiinsel and Gretel,
same function is served by such fairy tales as in
which there is a concealed-but for the unconscious of the child
unambiguous-threat of punishment for masturbation. We cannot
at this point enter into the details of the genesis of the child's
mystical thinking from such fairy tales and the relation between
mystical thinking and sexual inhibition. In all cases treated by char­
acter analysis, it was clearly shown that mystical sentiments develop
from the fear of masturbation in the form of a general feeling of
guilt. It is difficult to understand how this fact could have been
overlooked by analytic research until now. One's own conscience.
the internalized admonitions and threats of the parents and teach­
ers, are objectified in the idea of God. Scientific research has made
this clear. It is less clear that faith and fear of God are energetic
sexual excitations that have exchanged their goal and content. Ac­
cordingly, the religious feeling is the same as the sexual feeling,
except that it is imbued with a mystical, psychic content. This
explains the frequency with which sexual elements appear in many
1"54Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
ascetic practices, e.g., the delusion of some nuns that they are the
brides of Christ. It is not very likely that such ideas attain to genital
consciousness. In most cases they revert to other sexual paths, e.g.,
masochistic martyrdom.
Let us return to our little girl. The compulsion to pray disap­
peared when she was made aware of the origin of her fear; this
awareness made it possible for her to masturbate again without
feelings of guilt. As improbable as this incident may appear, it is
pregnant with meaning for sex-economy. It shows how the mystical
contagion of our youth could be prevented. Several months after
the disappearance of the compulsion to pray, the little girl wrote a
letter to her father from a summer camp:
Lieber Karli, there is a cornfield here and we have set up our
hospital on the edge of it (only pretending of course). We always
play doctor there (we are five girls). If one of us has a hurt on our
ding-dong, then he goes there, where we have salves and creams and
cotton. We swiped all that.
Who will deny that this is sexual cultural revolution. Sexual
revolution, yes-but cultural revolution? The girl is in the same
class with children who are an �verage of one to two years older
than she, and her teachers bear witness to her diligence and talents.
In politics and general knowledge she is far ahead of other girls her
age, and she has a very lively interest in reality. Twelve years later,
she was sexually healthy, intellectually outstanding, and socially
liked.
The Anchoring of Mysticism in Adolescents
Using the little girl as an example, I attempted to show how
religious fear becomes anchored in a small child. Sexual anxiety is
the main vehicle in the anchoring of the authoritarian social order
in the child's structure. Now we want to pursue this function of
sexual anxiety into the puberty period. Let us have a look at one of
the typical anti-sexual pamphlets.
155THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
To Land or to Strand
Nietzsche: Their souls are steeped in mire, and woe unto us if
the mire is imbued with intellect.
KirkeglUlrd: If Reason alone is baptized, the passions remain pagan.
Two rocks are placed in the life of each man. He can land on
them or be stranded on them, set himself right or be dashed to
pieces: God and-the opposite sex. Countless young men are
stranded or fail in life, not because they did not learn enough, but
because they fail to gain clarity about God and because they cannot
cope with the instinct which can bring man ineffable happiness, but
also unfathomable misery: the sexual instinct.
There are so many men who never achieve full manhood be­
cause they are dominated by their instincts. Actually, strong in­
stincts alone are no reason to be grieved. On the contrary, they
constitute wealth and intensity of life. They are the rousing cry to a
strong personality. But the instinct becomes a burden to itself and a
sin against the Creator, when man ceases to keep it under control,
loses his authority over it and becomes its slave. In man, it is either
the spiritual or the instinctual, i.e., bestial that predominates. The
two are incompatible with one another. Thus, every thoughtful man
is one day faced with the imponderable question: Do you want to
know the real meaning of your life, to illuminate it, or do you want
to be consumed in the fiery "furnace of your unbridled drives?
Do you want to live your life as an animal or as a man of God?
The process of attaining manhood-which is what we are
concerned with here-is the problem of the hearth-fire. Tempered
and controlled, the fire illuminates and warms the room, but­
mercy upon us, if the fire leaps forth from the hearth! Mercy upon
us if the sexual instinct so dominates the whole man that it be­
comes the master of all his thoughts, acts and endeavors!
We live in sick times. In earlier times, one demanded that eros
be disciplined and made responsible. Today we are of the opinion
that modern man no longer has need of discipline. In this regard,
however, we fail to see that present-day man living in the big city is
much more nervous and weaker of will and therefore requires more
discipline.
156Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
Cast your eyes around you: It is not mind that rules in our
fatherland. Unbridled drives have the upperhand, and among our
youth it is chiefly the undisciplined sexual drive, which degenerates
into immorality. In the factory and in the office, on the stage and in
public life, it is the spirit of the half-world that holds sway; obscen­
ity is the order of the day. And who can say how much joyous
youthful pleasure goes to ruin in the plague-palaces of the big city,
in the dance-halls and cabarets, pin-ball galleries and obscene
movies! The young man of today considers himself pretty clever
when he adheres to the hedonist theory. In truth, however, the
words of Goethe's Mephistopheles apply to him:
"He calls it Reason, using light celestial
Just to outdo the beasts in being bestial."
Two things, yes, two things render difficult the process of
attaining manhood: the metropolis with its abnormal conditions
and the demon in ourselves. The young man who comes to the
metropolis alone for the first time, perhaps from a well-sheltered
home, see·s himself surrounded by a wealth of new impressions.
Unceasing noise, exciting sights, erotic books and magazines, bad
air, alcohol, movies, theaters, and provocatively dressed females
everywhere he turns. \\Tho can stand up to such a concentrated
onslaught? And to the external temptation, the internal demon is
only too happy to give his assent. For Nietzsche was right, "the soul
is steeped in mire." In all men "the wild hounds are howling in the
cellar," waiting to be set free.
Many fall prey to the compulsion of immorality because the
dangers were not explained to them at the proper time. Such men
will be grateful for an open word of warning and advice enabling
them to escape and turn back.
Usually, one is first exposed to immorality in the form of
masturbation. Scientific investigations show that this is usually
begun at a frightfully early age. It is true, the consequences of this
bad habit are often exaggerated. Yet, the judgment· of respected
physicians must give everyone pause for thought. Professor Dr.
Hartung, long time senior physician of dermatology at the Aller­
heiligen-Hospital in Breslau, has this to say on this matter: "There
is no doubt that an excessive indulgence of this propensity is
157THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
severely harmful to the body, and that it is precisely in later life
that disturbances result from the indulgence of this vice. They are
usually manifested in form of general nervousness, mental incapac­
ity for work and physical prostration."
He also stresses the fact that the young man who practices
masturbation does something dirty in his consciousness; he also
loses his self-respect and his clear brow. The continual consciousness
of a loathsome secret which has to be concealed from others,
morally degrades him in his own eyes. He goes on to say that those
young people who indulge in this vice become indolent and sloppy,
lose their desire to work, and that all kinds of nervous and irritable
conditions weaken their memory and their efficiency. Other re­
spected physicians who have written on this subject agree with Dr.
Hartung.
But masturbation not only fouls the blood, it does away with
spiritual forces and inhibitions which are necessary for the process
of attaining manhood. It deprives the soul of its resoluteness. If it
becomes habitual, it has the effect of a gnawing worm.
However, the consequences of immorality with the opposite sex
are much worse. It is certainly not by chance that man's most
terrible scourge-venereal disease-is a result of this transgression.
It is only astounding how incredibly foolish people are in this area,
people who otherwise tend to be sensible.
Dr. Paul Lazarus, Professor at the University of Berlin, painted
a shocking picture of the deep psychic and physical illness of our
people caused by venereal disease.
Syphilis must be designated as one of the most effective grave­
diggers of our national energy.
But also gonorrhea, which many young men are foolish enough
to take lightly, is a serious and dangerous disease. And the very fact
that it is not possible for medical science to cure it with certainty
should be enough to banish all levity on the subject.
Professor Binswanger had this to say about venereal disease: "It
is remarkable that cases of infection which appear to be very minor
lead to severe suffering, that often many years elapse between the
original infection and the outbreak of an incurable nervous com­
plaint, and that more than 60% of the cases of that disease, which
158Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
occurs so frequently today and is called a softening of the brain by
laymen, can be traced back to earlier sexual infections."
Is it not a thought which shakes us to our innermost core that,
owing to such sins of our youth, those who will one day be closest
to us-wife and child-may have to suffer such terrible illnesses?
But I have to mention one other aberration, which is far more
rife today than some would imagine: homosexuality. Let us make
this much clear at the outset: We want to extend our warmest
sympathy and understanding to all those who, owing to inclination
or heredity in this area, wage a quiet and often desperate struggle in
an effort to maintain their purity. Hail to those who achieve a
victory, for they wrestle with God on their side. But just as Jesus
loved the individual sinner and helped everyone who wanted to be
helped, yet countered sin itself with holy earnestness, so we too
have to counter the phenomenon of homosexuality which corrupts
our youth and our people as a whole. There was already a time in
which the world was on the verge of drowning in a flood of per­
versity. At that time it was the gospel that vanquished the culture
so engulfed in the putrefaction of these repulsive offenses and
lewdness, and established a new culture. Speaking of the slaves and
victims of these sins, Paul wrote to the Romans: " . . . a nd the
men likewise gave up natural relations with women and were
consumed with passion for one another. Men committed shameless
acts with men. . . . For this reason God gave them up. . . ."
Romans 1:27 & 26. Homosexuality is the mark of Cain, of a godless
and soulless culture which is sick to the core. It is the consequence
of the prevailing view of the world and of life, the highest aim of
which is love of pleasure. Professor Foerster has rightfully stated in
his Sexualethik: "Where spiritual heroism is made fun of and the
sowing of one's wild oats is glorified, everything which is perverse,
demonic and vile plucks up courage to manifest itself openly;
indeed, it scoffs at the healthy as an illness and sets itself up as the
standard of life."
We see today things which man fears to admit in his most
hidden depravity. Completely different things will come to light,
and then one will understand that only a great spiritual power-the
gospel of Jesus Christ--can be of help here.
However, some will raise objections to what has been said. "Are
159THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
we not dealing," you will say perhaps, "with a natural instinct
which has to be satisfied?"-Unchained passions are not something
natural, but something highly unnatural. In almost all cases it is
only through one's own guilt or through the guilt of others that the
wicked desire is sowed, ignited and fed. Take an alcoholic or a drug
addict: Is his craving for alcohol or morphine something natural?
Only by indulging this vice repeatedly does it become an unnatural
craving. The instinct implanted in us by God for marriage and the
preservation of mankind is in itself good and not at all too difficult
to curb. Thousands of men are successful in controlling it in the
right way.
"But isn't it harmful for a mature man to abstain from these
things?" Professor Dr. Hartung, whom we should like to quote
again, says literally: "I will answer you short and clear: No, it is
not. If anyone ever told you that a healthy man could get sick from
chastity and abstinence in the broad sense of the words, he put you
on the wrong track altogether. And if that person had really
thought over what he told you, then he was either an ignorant or
wicked man."
One must be urgently warned against the use of contraceptives.
The only sure protection is abstinence until marriage.
I have made an honest and truthful attempt to open your eyes
to the consequences of immorality. You have seen the ruin of both
body and spirit of those who indulge in these sins. Added to this,
however, is also the harm which results to the soul from this vice. I
swear to you in holy earnestness: Unchastity is a crime against God.
It deprives one of one's peace of mind and prevents one from
obtaining true foy and serenity. It is written: "For he who sows to
"
his own flesh will from the flesh reap corruption . . ." Gal. 6:8.
The spirit of the half-world moves in with inevitable necessity
wherever the connection to the over-world is lost.
For all those, however, who do not want to be or do not want
to remain the victims of immorality, I want to add a few words of
advice and encouragement. One must make a complete break with
the sins of immorality in thought, word and deed. This is what
must be heeded by those who do not want to become its slave.
Obviously, places of corruption and sin must not be sought out,
indeed, everything must be avoided as much as possible which
160Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
would in any way assist corruption. Thus, association and inter­
course with immoral young men and women are to be avoided at all
cost; the reading of obscene books, the viewing of vile pictures and
the visiting of dubious performances must also be avoided. In short,
you have to seek out good associates, through whom you will be
preserved and elevated. Everything is to be recommended which
hardens the body and eases the fight against immorality, such as
gymnastics, sports, swimming, hikes and getting up as soon as one
wakes up. Moderation in the consumption of food and above all of
beverages. Alcohol is to be avoided. All this, however, is not enough,
for many men, even when they follow this advice, are forced to
make the painful discovery that the unchained instinct is much too
strong.
Where are we to find the firmness so necessary to resistance:
the energy needed for victory, if we are not to lose what is best in
us, our personality? When temptation comes to us in glowing
allurement, when the blazing fire of sensual pleasure shoots forth,
we find that education alone does not help. Energy, vital energy­
that is what we need to master our drives and to subdue the vile
forces in us and outside of us. There is only one who gives us this
energy: Jesus. Through his bloody expiatory death, he not only
procured remission for us-so that we can find peace from the
indictment of our conscience-he is also the vital energy of a new,
pure life for us, through his very spirit. Through him, even a will
paralyzed in the service of sin can become firm again and be resur­
rected to freedom and to life, and successfully stand the test in the
difficult struggle with sin.
Let him who wants to achieve real freedom come to the living
savior, who has deprived sin of its power and has abounding energy
and help for everyone. This is not Christian theory, but a fact
which many sorely troubled young men have tried and experience
daily. Whenever possible, unbosom yourself to a sincere Christian
and true friend, who can counsel and help you in your struggle. For
there will be a struggle, but a struggle which promises victory.
And now, in conclusion, let me address this question to you
personally: How are things with you, my friend, and what do you
intend to do with this admonition?
Do you want to ruin yourself to please frivolous and unprin-
161THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
cipled people? Or do you want to join forces with pure, noble men,
whose company will elevate your soul and harden your will to
struggle against everything vile? Do you want to be a man who,
through his words, his example and his being, is a curse to himself
and others, or do you want always more intensely to be a man who
is a blessing to his fellowman?
Do you want, for the sake of a few moments of transitory
pleasure, to ruin your body, character and soul-now and forever­
or be saved, as long as there is still time?
I beg you-answer these questions honestly and have the
courage to do what God has made clear to your conscience!
Choose honestlyl Half-world or Over-world? Animal or Man of
Spirit? Land OT Strand?
In this pamphlet, youth is given the alternative: God or sexu­
ality. To be sure, "full manhood" as well as "super-manhood" re­
quires more than asexuality, but this is its first prerequisite. The
setting up of "animal" and "man of spirit" as opposites, follows
from the setting up of "sexual" and "spiritual" as opposites. It is the
antithesis that always forms the basis of every theosophical moral
philosophy. It has been unassailable until now because its basis, the
negation of sex, was not impugned.
From early childhood on, the average youth is faced with the
acute conflict between sexuality and fear, the heritage of the au­
thoritative parental home. A pamphlet such as the one quoted
above forces the youth in the direction of mysticism-without, how­
ever, getting rid of the difficulties. The Catholic church circumvents
this difficulty by periodically absolving the youth's masturbation in
confession. By so doing, however, it entangles itself in another
difficulty. The church maintains its basis in the masses by two kinds
of measures: It binds the masses to itself by means of sexual anxiety,
and it stresses its anti-capitalistic position. It condemns the life of
the big city with its many opportunities of leading young men and
women astray, for it must fight against the revolutionary sexual
force that is awakened in the youth by big-city life. On the other
hand, the sexual life of the masses concentrated in big cities is
162Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
characterized by an acute contradiction between a pressing sexual
need and minimal material and structural possibilities for gratifica­
tion. Essentially, the nature of this contradiction is that the very
family authority that has been destroyed by the economic crises and
by sexual anguish is again defended by every available means. The
recognition of such contradictions is very important, for it opens
broad possibilities of assailing political reaction's ideological ap­
paratus in its weakest spot.
Where is it that the youth is to seek the energy to subdue his
genital titillations? In faith in Jesus! As a matter of fact, he does
derive an enormous power against his sexuality from his faith in
Jesus. What is the basis of its mechanism? The mystical experience
puts him in a state of vegetative excitation, which never culminates
in natural orgastic gratification. The youth's sexual drive develops in
a passive homosexual direction. In terms of the drive's energy, pas­
sive homosexuality is the most effective counterpart of natural
masculine sexuality, for it replaces activity and aggression by pas­
sivity and masochistic attitudes, that is to say, by precisely those
attitudes that determine the mass basis of patriarchal authoritarian
mysticism in the human structure. At the same time, however, this
implies unquestioning loyalty, faith in authority, and ability to adapt
to the institution of patriarchal compulsive marriage. In short, reli­
gious mysticism pits one sexual drive against another. It even avails
itself of sexual mechanisms to achieve its goals. These nongenital
sexual stimuli, which it has partially set in motion and partially
brought to a peak, determine in turn the mass psychology of the
followers: moralistic masochism (often with distinct physical mani­
festations) and passive subordination. Religion draws its power from
the suppression of genital sexuality, which, on a secondary level,
entails a regression along the line .of passive and masochistic homo­
sexuality. Thus, in terms of the dynamics of the drive, religion is
based on genital anxiety and on the substitution of genitality by
secondary impulses that are no longer natural to the adolescent. Sex­
economy's task among religious-mystical adolescents is to pit the
natural genital demands against the secondary (homosexual) and
163THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
mystical drives. It is in complete accord with the objective line of
development of social progress in the sex-economic sphere: elimina­
tion of genital negation and aflinnation of adolescent genital sex­
uality.
However, the question is not exhausted solely by disclosing the
mechanism by which the masses are infected. The cult of the!! Virgin
Mary assumes an especially important position in this. Let us have a
look at another typical pamphlet.
Veneration of the Virgin Mary and the Young Man
by Gerhard Kremer, Dr. of Theol.
Catholic youths who are genuinely pious will always feel a
sincere affection for the ideal of the Virgin Mary. It is not as if the
veneration of the Virgin Mary would detract from a warm and
strong devotion to Christ. On the contrary, a true veneration of the
Virgin Mary must lead to Christ and a moral code of life. We do
not want to dispense with the ideal of the Virgin Mary for the
moral and religious education of our youth.
Youth is the age of becoming, of external and internal struggle.
Passions awaken, there is a fermenting and wrestling in man, a
turbulent urging and awakening. To meet this distress, the youth
must have an ideal, strong and powerful, an illuminating shining
ideal, which will not be shaken by the urging and fermenting. This
ideal must elevate the wavering mind and rouse the wavering heart.
Its radiance will eclipse the ignoble and vile. Such an ideal is the
Virgin Mary, for it is she who embodies an all-radiant purity and
beauty. "It is said that there are women whose very presence edu­
cates us; whose very behavior banishes sordid thoughts, prevents all
questionable words from crossing our lips. The Virgin Mary is the
epitome of such a woman. A young knight devoted to her service is
incapable of vulgarity. But if-forgetting her presence-he should
nonetheless slip, the remembrance of her will cause inconsolable
anguish of soul and at the same time help the noble mind to regain
its authority [P. Schilgen S. J.]."
To the young man, the Virgin Mary stands out as unrivaled
grace, loftiness and dignity, the like of whom is not to be found in
164Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
nature, art and the world of man. Why have artists and painters
devoted their skill and creativity to the Madonna again and again?
It is because they perceive in her the most sublime beauty and
dignity. It is a dignity and beauty which never disappoints. Here we
have a mistress and queen, "to serve whom, for whom to exist, must
be the highest honor for the young man. Here we have an exalted
woman and bride of the spirit, to whom you can give yourself with
the full power of the love which gushes from your youthful heart,
without having to fear degradation and desecration."
The ideal of the Virgin Mary should inspire young men. Espe­
cially in an age which takes pleasure in darkening the radiant and
dragging what is lofty into the mire, the ideal of the Virgin Mary
should shine forth as a salvation and power. In this ideal the young
man will perceive that ther-:: is indeed something great and elevated
in beauty and chastity. Here he will find the strength to walk the
steep path, even if all the others lose their best in the depths. The
ideal of the Virgin Mary will fortify him who wavers, lift up and
strengthen him who stumbles. Indeed, it will so overwhelm him
who has fallen that he will be rehabilitated with new courage. The
Virgin Mary is that radiant star which will illuminate the passion of
the young individual in the dark night, that star which calls forth
what is noble in him when everything appears to be shattered in
him.
Look up, 0 young men, you who have your ideal meaning and
wrestle for holy virtues, look up to your mistress and queen. How
can a young man look up to her without being filled with holy
idealism? How can he address her in Ave Maria, without feeling a
keen longing for chastity? How can he sing the glorious songs about
the Virgin Mary without feeling the courage to fight? How could a
young man who has grasped the ideal of the Virgin Mary, deprive a
woman of her chastity? How can he call her mother and queen and
then acquire a taste for female indignity? When the ideal of the
Virgin Mary is taken seriously, it becomes a strong incentive for
every young man, a mighty summons to chastity and manliness.
"Gazing upon her, her image locked in your heart, must you not
become chaste, no matter how hard you must wrestle?"
The young man's attitude toward girls and toward women is
decisive for his moral behavior.
165THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
"In former days when knights were dubbed, the knight had to
give his solemn promise to protect defenseless women. That was
when cathedrals were built in honor of the queen of heaven [Po
Gemmel S. J.]." There is an intimate relation between courtship of
the Virgin Mary and true chivalry toward the female sex. The man
who is inspired by the ideal of the Virgin Mary must of necessity
bear within himself that knightly dub which stems from reverent
respect for female dignity and majesty. Therefore, the dubbing of
the knight in the Middle Ages bound the young man to holy
Minnedienst, as well as to the protection of a woman's honor. The
symbols of this knighthood no longer exist: but what is worse is
that, more and more, shy reverence for woman is dying out among
the male youth and is giving way to a frivolous and vile robber­
knighthood. Just as the knights of old in arinor and arms protect
and shelter frail femininity and innocence, so should and must the
true man of today feel himself to be in the debt of the honor and
innocence of woman. True manliness and real nobility of heart will
become known to the female sex most easily and most beautifully.
Lucky the young man who has girded his passion with this armor!
Lucky the girl who has found the love of such a young man!
"Inflict no wrong on a girl and remember that your mother too was
once a girl."
The young man of today is the husband of tomorrow. How will
the husband and man be able to protect womanhood and assure
female respect, if the young man and fiance has desecrated love and
engagement! Engagement is to be a time of undesecrated love. How
many men's fate would be happier, if the ideal of the Virgin Mary
were more keenly alive in the world of youth. How much suffering
and grief could be avoided, if young men would not play shameless
games with the love of a girl's soul. Hear me, 0 young people, let
the radiant light of the ideal of the Virgin Mary illuminate your
love, so that you don't trip and fall.
The ideal of the Virgin Mary can mean a great deal to our
young men. It is precisely for this reason that we have unfurled the
banner of the Virgin Mary in our youth clubs and congregations.
0, that our young Catholic men would rally around this banner!
-Katholisches Kirchenblatt, No. 18, May 3, 1931
166Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
The cult of the Virgin Mary is drawn upon very successfully as
a means of inculcating chastity. Again we must inquire into the
psychological mechanism that is capable of assuring the success of
these intentions. It is a problem of the masses of young men and
women who are subjected to this influence. It is chiefly a matter of
overpowering genital drives. Just as the Jesus cult mobilizes passive
homosexual forces against the genitals, the cult of the Virgin Mary
also mobilizes sexual forces, this time from the heterosexual sphere
itself. "Inflict no wrong on a girl and remember that your mother
too was once a girl." Thus, in the emotional life of Christian
youths, the Mother of God assumes the role of one's own mother,
and the Christian youth showers upon her all the love that he had
for his own mother at one time, that very ardent love of his first
genital desires. But the incest prohibition cleaves his genital desires
into an intense longing for orgasm on the one hand and asexual
tenderness on the other hand. The intense longing for orgasm has
to be repressed, and its energy intensifies one's tender strivings and
molds them into an almost indissoluble tie to the mystical experi­
ence. This intense longing offers violent resistance, not only to the
incestuous desire, but to every natural genital relationship with a
woman. The same vital energy and enormous love that a healthy
young man puts forth in an orgastic experience with his loved one is
used by the mystical man to support the mystical cult of the Virgin
Mary, after genital sensuality has been suppressed. This is the
source from which mysticism draws its forces. Being unsatisfied
forces, they should not be underestimated. They make intelligible
the age-old power of mysticism over man and the inhibitions that
operate against the responsibility of the masses.
In this regard it is not a matter of the veneration of the Virgin
Mary or of any other idol. It is a matter of producing a mystical
structure in the masses in every new generation. But mysticism is
nothing other than unconscious longing for orgasm (cosmic plas­
matic sensations). The orgastically potent, healthy man is capable
of great veneration of historical figures. But there is no correlation
between his appreciation of man's primordial history and his sexual
167THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
happiness. He does not have to become mystical, reactionary, or a
slave to metaphysics to appreciate historical phenomena. Healthy
adolescent sexuality would not necessarily have to stifle a veneration
for the Jesus legend. The Old and the New Testament can be
appreciated as stupendous achievements of the human mind, but
this appreciation should not be used to suppress sexuality. My
medical experience has taught me that adolescents who are sexually
sick have an unhealthy appreciation of the legend of Jesus.
HEALTHY AND NEUROTIC SELF-CONFIDENCE
For the sexually mature young man who has a sex-economic
structure, the orgastic experience with a woman constitutes a grati­
fying bond; it elevates the partner and effaces any tendency to
degrade the woman who has shared the experience. In the case of
orgastic impotence, only the psychic forces of defense can come
into play, nausea and disgust at genital sensuality. These defense
forces draw their energy from several sourtes. To begin with, the
defensive force is at least as strong as the genital yearning that is
being resisted. And the fact that it has not been satisfied has only
intensified it, nor does it make the least difference that it is uncon­
scious. In addition, the actual brutalization of sexuality in modern
man offers some justification for the disgust at sexual intercourse.
This brutalized sexuality becomes the prototype of sexuality in
general. Thus, compulsive morality produces precisely that to which
it later appeals to justify its existence ("sexuality is asocial"). A
third emotional source of the defense forces is the sadistic concep­
tion of sexuality that the children of all patriarchal cultural circles
acquire in early childhood. Since every inhibition of genital gratifi­
cation intensifies the sadistic impulse, the entire sexual structure
becomes sadistic. Since, moreover, genital claims are replaced by
anal claims, the reactionary sexual slogan that a woman is degraded
by sexual intercourse strikes a chord in the adolescent structure. In
short, it is owing to the already existing perversity in the adolescent
structure that the slogan can be effective. It is from his own per-
168Sex-Economy versus Mysticism
sonal experience that the adolescent has developed a sadistic con­
ception of sexual intercourse. Thus, here too we find a confirmation
of the fact that man's compulsive moralistic defense forces consti­
tute the basis of political reaction's power. Ever more sharply, the
relation between mystical sentiments and sexual "morality" is
brought into focus. Regardless of the content of the mystical experi­
ence, it is essentially the negation of genital strivings. It is essentially
sexual defense, and it takes place with the help of nong enital sexual
.
excitations. The difference between the sexual response and the
mystical response is that the latter does not allow the perception of
sexual excitation and precludes orgastic release, even in cases of so­
called religious ecstasy.
Perception of sexual desire excluded and orgasm precluded,
mystical excitation is forced to effect a permanent change in the bio­
psychic apparatus. The sexual act itself is experienced as something
degrading. There is never a complete natural experience. The ward­
ing off of orgastic desire forces the ego to form compulsive concep­
tions of "purity" and "perfection." Healthy sensuousness and the
ability to gratify one's desires produces natural self-confidence. The
defensive formations in the mystical man result in a pathological
self-confidence that is rotten at the core. Just as the self-confidence
of the nationalist, the self-confidence of the mystical man is drawn
from the defensive attitudes. Even on the surface, however, the self­
confidence of the mystical man differs from the self-confidence that
derives from natural genital gratification. The former is exaggerated,
lacks naturalness in behavior, and is characterized by feelings of
sexual inferiority. This explains why the man who has been incul­
cated with mystical or nationalistic "ethics" is so accessible to
political reactionary catchwords, such as honor, purity, etc. He is
continually forced to remind himself to be honorable and pure. The
genital character is spontaneously pure and honorable-he does not
have to be constantly reminded.
169VIII
Some Questions of Sex-Political Practice
THEORY AND PRACTICE
Reactionary academic research postulates a "separation between
that which is and that which should be," between "cognition and
execution." Therefore, it imagines itself to be "nonpolitical," to be
divorced from politics. Logic, indeed, contends that what should be,
can never be deduced from what is. We recognize a restriction here,
the purpose of which is to enable the academician to devote himself
to research, without obligating himself to draw the consequences
that are inherent in every serious scientific insight. Such conse­
quences are always progressive, very often revolutionary. For us,
the development of theoretical views is dictated by the neces­
practical
sities of vital life, by the need to solve problems. Our
theoretical views must lead to new, better, more suitable action and
the mastering of practical tasks. Our theory is of value only insofar
as it is confirmed in and by practice. Everything else, we leave to the
intellectual jugglers, to the guardians of the hierarchy of "values."
First of all, we have to correct the basic error of theology, which
stagnates in academic expositions and therefore cannot show us a
rational way out. We concur with the opinion of many researchers
that all forms of religious mysticism mean mental darkness and
narrow-mindedness. We know that over the centuries man's reli­
giousness has become an instrument of power. In this, too, we are in
agreement with some academic researchers. We differ from them
170Questions of Sex-Political Practice
only in terms of our serious determination to combat mysticism and
superstition successfully, and to convert our knowledge into hard
practice. In the struggle between natural science and mysticism, we
wonder whether natural science has exhausted all the possibilities at
its disposal. We have to answer in the negative. Mysticism, on the
other hand, keeps the masses of the people blindly imprisoned. Yet,
before we continue, let us briefly summarize the history of this
struggle.
THE STRUGGLE AGAINST MYSTICISM UNTIL NOW
Four general phases can be distinguished in the development of
mysticism and the struggle against it. The first phase is character­
ized by a complete lack of natural scientific views; animistic views
rule in their place. Fearing that which appears incomprehensible,
the primitive has a strong urge to find an explanation for natural
phenomena. On the one hand he must give his life a sense of
security, and on the other hand he seeks protection against the
overpowering forces of nature. He acquires the one as well as the
other (subjectively, not objectively) through mysticism, supersti­
tion, and animistic views of natural processes, his inner and psychic
processes included. He believes, for example, that he can increase
the fertility of the soil by erecting phallic sculptures or that he can
get rid of a period of drought by urinating. The principal features of
this situation remain unchanged among all peoples of the earth,
until at the close of the Middle Ages rudimentary efforts toward a
scientific comprehension of nature, efforts prompted by several
technical discoveries, assume a serious character. These efforts con­
stitute more and more of a threat to mysticism. In the process of
the great bourgeois revolution, an intense struggle breaks out against
religion and for enlightenment. The period approaches in which
science would be able to replace mysticism's explanation of nature,
and technology would be able to assume a much more significant
role in dealing with the human needs for protection (second
phase). But now that the revolutionaries are in power, they are no
171THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
longer revolutionary. They make an about-face and create a contra­
diction in the cultural process. On the one hand they promote
scientific research with every available means, because it helps
economic development. On the other hand, however, they encour­
age mysticism and turn it into the most powerful instrument for the
purpose of suppressing millions of wage earners (third phase). This
contradiction finds tragicomic expression in scientific films such as
Nature and Love,
in which each part carries two headings. The first
heading reads something like this: "The earth was developed over
millions of years as a result of cosmic mechanical and chemical
processes." Below it, we read something like this: "On the first day
God created Heaven and Earth." And highly respected scholars,
astronomers, and chemists sit in the stalls and quietly look at this
ironic union, convinced that "religion too has its good side." Could
the separation between theory and practice be depicted more
graphically! The methodical withholding of scientific findings from
the masses of the population, and "monkey trials" such as we find
in the United States, encourage humility, lack of discrimination,
voluntary renunciation and hope for happiness in the Beyond, belief
in authority, recognition of the sacredness of asceticism, and the
unimpeachableness of the authoritarian family. The workers and
the bourgeois elements that are intimately connected with them
constitute the freethinkers' movement, which the liberal bourgeoisie
allows to go its own way as long as it does not transgress certain
limits. Whereas the resources of the freethinkers are confined to
intellectual arguments, the church enjoys the help of the state
power-apparatus and plays upon the strongest emotional forces in
the psychology of the masses, sexual anxiety, and sexual repression.
This great power in the emotional sphere is not countered by a
commensurate emotional force. Insofar as the freethinkers employ
sex policies at all, they are either intellectualized or confined to
questions of population politics. At best they include the demand
for economic equality for women. This, however, cannot have any
mass effect on the powers of mysticism, for in most women the will
to economic independence is unconsciously checked by the fear of
172Questions of Sex-Political Practice
sexual responsibility, which goes hand in hand with economic
independence.
The difficulties involved in overcoming these emotional factors
force the revolutionary freethinkers' movement to push the so-called
philosophic questions into the background, for one often achieves
the opposite of what one intends in this regard. Since mysticism
cannot be countered by a commensurate emotional power, this
point of view is certainly justified.
The Rassian Revolution raises the struggle against religion to an
unprecedentedly high level (fourth phase).1 The power apparatus
is no longer in the hands of the church and big business, but in the
hands of the executive committees of the Soviets. The anti-religious
movement obtains a firm foundation, the reorganization of the
economy on a collective basis. For the first time it becomes possihle
to replace religion with natural science on a mass scale, to replace
the feeling of protection offered by superstition with an ever
growing technology, to destroy mysticism itself with sociological
elucidation of the functions of mysticism. Essentially, there are
three ways in which the fight against religion takes place in the
USSR: by the elimination of the economic basis, i.e., in a direct
economic way; by anti-religious propaganda, i.e., in a direct ideologi­
cal way; and by the raising of the cultural level of the masses, i.e., in
an indirect ideological way.
The enormous importance of the power apparatus of the
church can be seen from some statistics, which shed light upon the
1 Literature on the religious question in the Soviet Union. "Schule und Kirche
in Sowjetrussland," Siiddeutsche Arbeiteruitung of Sept. 9, 1927; "Kirche und
Staat in der Sowjetrepublik" by Stepanow, Jhrb. f. P. u. W. 23-24; "Kirche und
Staat" by Jaroslawski, ibid., 1925-26; "Die Freidenkerbewegung in Russland,"
by Muzak, Der Freidenker, No. 6; "Das Verhaltnis von Kirche und Staat im
neuen Russland" by Jakoby Weimar, Neue Bahnen, 1928; "Uber die Religion"
by Lenin, Bd N der kleinen Lenin-Bibl.; "Die Kulturrevolution in der Sow­
jetunion" by A. Elgers, Verlagsanstalt proleiarischer Freidenker, 1931; "Die
sozialistische Kulturrevolution im 5-Jahresplan" by A. Kurella, Intemationaler
Arbeiterverlag; "Antireligiose Propaganda im Dorf' by Deodorow; "Sozial­
istischer Aufbau des Dorfes und die Religion" by Wogan.
173THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
conditions that existed in old Russia. In 1905 the Russian church
possessed 2,611,000 desjatines of land, i.e., about 2 million hectares.
In 1903, 908 houses belonged to the parish churches in Moscow;
146 belonged to the monasteries. The annual income of the metro­
politans amounted to 84,000 rubles in Kiev; 259,000 rubles in
Petersburg; 81,000 rubles in Moscow; 307,000 rubles in Nishni­
Novgorod. The earnings in kind and fees received for every indi­
vidual religious performance cannot even be estimated. Two hun­
dred thousand persons were in the service of the church, at the
expense of mass taxation. The Troitskaya Lavra monastery, which is
visited by an average of a hundred thousand pilgrims annually,
possesses sacred vessels valued at some 650 million rubles.
Backed by its economic power, the church was able to exercise
considerable ideologic influence. Needless to say, an schools were
denominational and subject to the control and domination of the
priesthood. The first article of the constitution of czarist Russia
stated: "The sovereign of an Russians is an autocratic and absolute
monarch and God Himself enjoins voluntary subordination to his
supreme power." We already know what "God" represents, and on
which infantile feelings in the human structure such claims to
power can rest. Hitler refashioned the church in Germany in pre­
cisely the same way. He extended its absolute power and granted it
the pernicious right to make the school children's emotions ripe for
the reception of reactionary ideologies. The task of raising "moral
standards" holds top priority for Hitler, who executes the will of our
most holy God. Let us return to old Russia.
In the theological seminaries and academies there were special
academic chairs for the fight against the revolutionary movement.
On January 9, 1905, a clerical proclamation appeared in which the
rebelling workers were accused of having been bribed by the Japa­
nese. The February Revolution of 1917 brought about only minor
changes. All churches were put on an equal footing, but the long­
awaited separation of church and state failed to materialize. The
large landowner Prince Lvov became head of the church adminis-
174Questions of Sex-Political Practice
tration. At a church council in October of 1917 the Bolsheviks were
excommunicated; the patriarch Tikhon declared war on them.
On January 23, 1918, the Soviet government issued the follow­
ing decree:
With respect to religion, the Russian Communist Party is not
content to accept the already decreed separation of the church from
the state and the school. In short, it is not content with measures
which also appear in the programs of bourgeois democracies, which
have never been able to carry them through to the end anywhere in
the world owing to the numerous factual connections between
capital and religious propaganda.
It is the conviction of the Russian Communist Party that only
the realization of methodicalness and consciousness in the entire
social and economic life of the masses will effect the complete
withering away of religious prejudices. The Party is working toward
a complete elimination of all the connections between the exploit­
ing classes and the organization of religious propaganda. It has
organized a comprehensive scientific propaganda of an instructive
and anti-religious nature. This propaganda contributes in a factual
way toward the liberation of the working masses from religious
prejudices. However, every effort must be made not to offend the
feelings of the faithful, for this would only lead to an intensification
of religious fanaticism.
It follows from this that local ordinances which would restrict
the freedom of conscience or create privileges for members of a
particular confession on the territory of the Republic are prohibited
[paragraph 2 of the decree].
Every citizen can profess whichever religion he chooses or no
religion whatever. All previous curtailments of rights in this regard
are annulled.
Any reference to a citizen's religious denomination or absence
of denomination is to be removed from all official documents [para­
graph 3 of the decree] .
The activities of all public and other official and social institu­
tions will take place without any religious customs and ceremonies
[paragraph 4].
The free exercise of religious customs is guaranteed, provided
175THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY 0 F FASCISM
they do not entail any disturbance of the public order and do not
infringe upon the rights of citizens of the Soviet Union. In such
cases where disturbances occur or rights are infringed upon, the
local authorities are entitled to take all measures necessary to restore
peace and order.
No one has the right to evade his civic obligations on the basis
of his religious views.
Exceptions to this are allowed only on the basis of a decision of
the people's court in each individual case, and on condition that
one civic duty is replaced by another [paragraph 6].
The religious oath is abolished. If need be, a formal declaration
can be made [paragraph 7].
Civil status records will be kept solely by civil authorities,
namely, by the registration office for marriages and births [para­
graph 8].
The school is separated from the church.
The propagation of religious confession is prohibited at all state
and public as well as private institutions of learning which follow a
curriculum of general education [paragraph 9].
All clerical and religious societies are subject to the general
regulations which govern private societies and associations, and they
shall not enjoy any privileges or subsidies from the state or an
autonomous local self-administrative organ [paragraph 10].
The exaction of taxes from members for the benefit of clerical
or religious societies is prohibited [paragraph 11].
Clerical and religious societies have no private property rights,
nor do they have the rights of a corporate body [paragraph 12].
All property of clerical and religious societies in Russia is
declared to be the property of the people.
Edifices and objects necessary for divine services are put at the
disposal of the various religious societies free of charge on the basis
of special regulations of the local and central authorities [paragraph
13].
Priests, monks and nuns enjoy neither an active nor a passive
right to vote because they do not perform productive work.
As early as December 18, 1917, the keeping of the civil status
records was handed over to the Soviet authorities. In the Commis-
176Questions of Sex-Political Practice
sariat for Justice, a liquidation department was established, which
began with the liquidation of church possessions. In the Troitski
Lavra monastery, for example, an academy for the electro-technical
division of the Red army and a training school for teachers were
established. Workers' pools and communes were set up on the
grounds of the monastery. The churches themselves were gradually
converted into workers' clubs and reading rooms. The anti-religious
propaganda began with the exposure of the clerical hierarchy's
direct deception of the people. The holy fountain in the Sergius
Church turned out to be a simple pump. The brow of many a saint
proved to be nothing other than a cleverly arranged piece of leather.
Permission to kiss a saint's brow had to be bought. The effect of this
exposure in the presence of masses of people was prompt and radi­
cal. It goes without saying that the godless propaganda flooded city
and country with millions of elucidative brochures and newspapers.
The establishment of anti-religious natural science museums made
it possible to contrast the scientific and superstitious views of the
world.
Notwithstanding all this, I was told in Moscow in 1929 that the
only organized and firmly rooted counterrevolutionary groups were
the religious sects. The relationship of the religious sects to the
sexual life of the sect members, as well as to the sexual structure of
the society as a whole, was grievously neglected in the Soviet Union,
both theoretically and practically. This neglect had serious con­
sequences.
Thus, the assertion that the church in Soviet Russia was
"annihilated" is incorrect. One was free to profess and practice the
religion of one's choice. It was only its social and economic hegem­
ony that the church lost. It was no longer possible for it to force
people outside its circle of adherents to believe in Cod. Science and
atheism had finally succeeded in acquiring the same social rights as
mysticism. No clerical hierarchy could any longer decide that a
natural scientist should be exiled. That is all. But the church was
not satisfied. Later, when the sexual revolution disintegrated (from
1934 on), it won masses of people back into its fold.
177THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
SEXUAL HAPPINESS CONTRA MYSTICISM
The undermining of the church's power over and above its
immediate sphere of influence only meant that the church's worst
encroachments were done away with. This measure has no effect
whatever on its ideological power, which rests upon the sympathetic
feelings and superstitious structure of the average individual in the
masses. For this reason the Soviets began to exercise scientific
influence. However, natural scientific enlightenment and the un­
masking of religion merely place an intellectual, though very power­
ful, force alongside religious feelings and leave the rest to the
struggle between man's intellect and mystical sentiments. This
struggle succeeds in favor of science only in men and women who
have already begun to mature on a different basis. That it can fail
even in such persons is shown by the not infrequent cases in which
clear-cut materialists yield to their religious sentiments in this or
that form, i.e., are compelled to pray. From this a clever advocate of
religion will seek to win an argument in his favor; he will assert that
this is proof of the everlastingness and ineradicableness of religious
feeling. He is nonetheless in the wrong, for this only proves that,
while the power of the intellect is pitted against religious feelings,
the source of religious feelings is not touched. One could rightfully
conclude that the foundation of mystical sentiments would be
completely undermined if the social hegemony of the church were
not only eliminated and an intellectual force were pitted against
them but over and above this the feelings that nourish mystical
sentiments were made conscious and given free rein. Clinical ex­
perience shows incontestably that religious sentiments result from
inhibited sexuality, that the source of mystical excitation is to be
sought in inhibited sexual excitation. The inescapable conclusion of
all this is that a clear sexual consciousness and a natural regulation
of sexual life must foredoom every form of mysticism; that, in other
words, natural sexuality is the arch enemy of mystical religion. By
carrying on an anti-sexual fight wherever it can, making it the core
178Questions of Sex-Political Practice
of its dogmas and putting it in the foreground of its mass propa­
ganda, the church only attests to the correctness of this inter­
pretation.
To begin with, I am only attempting to reduce very compli­
cated facts to their simplest formula when I say that sexual con­
sciousness is the end of mysticism. We will soon see that, as simple
as this formula is, its actual basis and the conditions for its practical
implementation are extremely complicated, and that we shall need
the entire scientific apparatus at our disposal and the deepest
conviction of the necessity of carrying out an inexorable fight
against mysticism, if we are to counter successfully the cunning
apparatus of superstition. But the final result will one day repay all
our efforts.
To form an accurate estimation of the difficulties to be en­
countered in the practical implementation of this simple formula, a
number of fundamental facts in the psychic structure of people who
have been subjected to a sexually repressive upbringing have to be
thoroughly comprehended. When a number of cultural organiza­
tions in the western part of Germany, which is predominantly
Catholic, rejected the sex-economic fight against mystical contagion
because they had allegedly not had any success with it, this did not
invalidate my contention, but only testified to the timidity, fear of
sexuality, and sex-economic inexperience of those who undertook
the fight. More than anything else it testified to a lack of patience
and willingness to adapt to the complicated state of affairs, to
understand and master it. If I were to tell a Christian woman who is
sexually frustrated that her suffering is of a sexual nature and that
only through sexual happiness can her psychic suffering be relieved,
she would be right in throwing me out. We are faced with two
difficulties: (1) Every individual bears contradictions in himself,
which have to be individually understood; and (2) the practical
aspects of the problem differ from locality to locality and country to
country and therefore have to be solved in a different way. But
surely, the more extensive our sex-economic experience becom�s, the
more easily we will be able to deal with the obstacles. However, it is
179THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
solely through practice that these difficulties can be eliminated.
Before any headway can be made, we must agree on the correctness
of our basic formula, and we must comprehend the true nature of
the difficulties. In view of the fact that mysticism has ruled hu­
manity for thousands of years, the least it can ask of novices like us is
that we do not underestimate it and that we grasp it correctly. It
will be up to us to prove ourselves wiser, more subtle, and more
knowledgeable than its advocates.
THE INDIVIDUAL UPROOTING OF THE RELIGIOUS FEELING
Guidelines for mass mental hygiene can be obtained from the
comprehension of the bio-psychic anchoring of mysticism. The
changes that take place in the mystical man in the course of charac­
ter-analytic treatment are of decisive importance. The insights we
gain from character-analytic treatment cannot be applied directly to
the masses, but they reveal the contradictions, forces, and counter­
forces in the average individual.
I have already described how mystical ideas and feelings become
anchored in the human structure. Let us now attempt to trace the
principal features in the process of the uprooting of mysticism.
As might be expected, the mystical attitude operates as a power­
ful resistance to the uncovering of unconscious psychic life, espe­
cially to repressed genitality. It is significant that mysticism tends to
ward off natural genital impulses, especially childhood masturba­
tion, more so than it tends to ward off pregenital infantile impulses.
The patient clings to his ascetic, moralistic, and mystical views and
sharpens the philosophically unbridgeable antithesis between "the
moral element" and "the animal element" in man, i.e., natural
sexuality. He defends himself against his genital sexuality with the
help of moralistic deprecation. He accuses those around him of not
having an understanding for "spiritual values" and of being "crude,
vulgar, and materialistic." In short, to one who knows the argu­
mentation of the mystics and fascists in political discussions, and of
the characterologists and "scholars" in natural scientific discussions,
180Questions of Sex-Political Practice
all this sounds all too familiar. It is one and the same thing. Charac­
teristically, the fear of God and the moralistic defense are immedi­
ately strengthened when one succeeds in loosening an element of
sexual repression. If one succeeds in getting rid of the childhood
fear of masturbation and as a result thereof genitality demands
gratification, then intellectual insight and sexual gratification are
wont to prevail. To the same extent to which the fear of sexuality or
the fear of the old parental sexual prohibition disappears, mystical
sentiments also vanish. What has taken place? Prior to this the
patient had made use of mysticism to hold his sexual desires in
suppression. His ego was too deeply steeped in fear, his own sexu­
ality too deeply estranged, to enable him to master and to regulate
the powerful natural forces. On the contrary, the more he resisted
his sexuality, the more imperative his desires became. Hence, his
moralistic and mystical inhibitions had to be applied more rigidly.
In the course of treatment the ego was strengthened and the infan­
tile dependencies on parents and teachers were loosened. The
patient recognized the naturalness of genitality and learned to dis­
tinguish between what was infantile and no longer usable in the
instincts and what was suited to the demands of life. The Christian
youth will soon realize that his intensive exhibitionistic and perverse
inclinations refer partly to a regression to early infantile forms of
sexuality and partly to an inhibition of genital sexuality. He will also
realize that his desires for union with a woman are wholly in keep­
ing with his age and his nature, that indeed it is necessary to gratify
them. From now on he no longer has need of the support offered by
the belief in an all-powerful God, nor does he have need of moral­
istic inhibition. He becomes master of his own house and learns to
regulate his own sexual economy. Character-analysis liberates the
patient from the infantile and slavish dependency upon the author­
ity of the father and father surrogates. The strengthening of the ego
dissolves the infantile attachment to God, which is a continuation
of the infantile attachment to the father. These attachments lose
their force. If vegetotherapy subsequently enables the patient to
take up a satisfying love life, then mysticism loses its last hold. The
181THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
case of clerics is especially difficult, for a convincing continuation of
their profession, whose physical consequences they have felt on
their own body, has become impossible. The only course open to
many of them is to replace their priesthood with religious research
or teaching.
It is only the analyst who does not understand the genital dis­
turbance of his patients who will not be able to confirm these
processes in the mystical man. Nor, however, will they be confirmed
by the well-known psychoanalyst and pastor who is of the opinion
that one "may sink the plummet of psychoanalysis into the uncon­
scious only so far as ethics permit." We want to have as little to do
with such "nonpolitical," "objective" science as with that science
that not only goes all out in its fight against the revolutionary
consequences of sex-economy as "politics," but even advises mothers
to fight the erections of small boys by teaching them exercises in
holding their breath. In such cases the problem lies in the process
that allows the physician's conscience to accept this line of reason­
ing and to become a pastor, without however rehabilitating him in
the eyes of political reaction. He acts very much as the German
SPD members of parliament who sang the German national an­
them at the last sitting of parliament enthusiastically and plead­
ingly, and stilI ended up in concentration camps as "Socialists."
We do not discuss the existence or nonexistence of God-we
merely eliminate the sexual repressions and dissolve the infantile
ties to the parents. The destruction of mysticism is not at all a part
of the therapeutic intention. It is merely treated as every other
psychic fact that functions as a support of sexual repression and saps
one's natural energies. Thus, the sex-economic process does not
consist of a contrasting of the mystical view of life with the "mate­
rialistic," "anti-religious" view. This is intentionally avoided, for it
would not effect any change whatever in the biopathic structure.
The process consists rather in the unmasking of the mystical atti­
tude as an anti-sexual force; the energy that nourishes it is utilized
for other purposes. The man whose ideology is moralistic to an
exaggerated degree, while perverse, lascivious, and neurotic in re-
182Questions of Sex-Political Practice
ality, is freed of this contradiction. Along with his moralism, he also
loses the antisocial character and immorality of his sexuality in the
sex-economic sense of the words. Inadequate moralistic and mystical
inhibition is replaced by sex-economic regulation of sexual needs.
From its point of view, therefore, mysticism is right when, to
preserve and reproduce itself in man, it takes such a strong stand
against sexuality. It merely errs in one of its premises and in its most
important justification: It is its "morality" that produces that
sensuality, the moral mastery of which it feels itself called upon to
accomplish. It is the abolition of this "morality" that is the pre­
condition of the abolition of immorality, which it seeks to eliminate
in vain. This is the harsh tragedy of every form of morality and
mysticism. The uncovering of the sex-economic processes, which
nourish religious mysticism, will lead sooner or later to its practical
elimination, no matter how often the mystics run for tar and
feathers.
Sexual consciousness and mystical sentiments cannot coexist.
Natural sexuality and mystical sentiments are the same in terms of
their energy, so long as the former is repressed and can be easily
transformed into mystical excitation.
These sex-economic facts necessarily yield a number of conse­
quences for mass mental hygiene. These we will set forth after we
have answered some obvious objections.
THE PRACTICE OF SEX-ECONOMY AND OB JECTIONS TO IT
In sex-economic practice one is used to seeing the political
economist appear as the opponent of the so-called "overemphasis
and exaggeration of the sexual question." At the slightest difficulty,
which is to be expected in this new area, he immediately tries to
dismiss the whole field. To begin with, these opponents of sex­
economy must be told that their jealousy is unfounded. Sex­
economic cultural work does not constitute an encroachment upon
their own domain of economy or a restriction of their sphere of
work. It aims at a comprehension of an extremely important area of
183THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
the cultural process, an area that has been totally neglected until
now. The sex-economic fight is a part of the total fight of those who
are exploited and suppressed against those who exploit and suppress.
At present, to decide just how important this fight is and what place
it assumes within the workers' movement would be to engage in
scholastic hair-splitting. In discussing the role and importance of sex­
economy, instead of basing one's appraisal on what has been
accomplished in a practical way, one has been inclined to set up a
rivalry between economic and sexual policies. We must not waste
any time with such discussions. If all the experts of the various
branches of knowledge would do their utmost to subdue dictatorial
forms, if each of them would completely master his own field, then
all discussions about rank and role would be superfluous. The social
importance of the individual branches would follow of itself. It is
merely important to stick to the basic conception, namely that the
economic form also determines the sexual form and that the sexual
form cannot be changed unless the economic and social forms are
changed.
There are many slogans that stick fast like lice; they can be
removed only by the use of radical means. One often meets with the
dull objection that sex-economy is "individualistic" and therefore of
no use socially. To be sure, the method that is used to obtain
knowledge about sex-economy is "individualistic." But doesn't social
suppression of sexuality concern all the members of our society?
Isn't sexual distress a collective thing? Is the social fight against
tuberculosis individualistic because the study of tuberculosis is
carried out on individual patients? The revolutionary movement has
always committed the grave error of regarding sexuality as a "private
matter." It is not a private matter for political reaction, which
always rides on two tracks at the same time: on that of economic
policies and that of "moral renewal." Until now, the freedom
movement has traveled on one track only. What is needed, there­
fore, is to master the sexual question on a social scale, to transform
the shadowy side of personal life into social mental hygiene, to
make the sexual question a part of the total campaign, instead of
184Questions ot Sex-Political Practice
confining oneself to the question of population politics. The free­
dom movement has always made the mistake of mechanically
transferring the political slogans from the area of trade-unionism
and political struggle to all the other areas of social life, instead of
developing a view for each area of human life and activity appropri­
ate to that area and that area alone. Among other things it was this
mistake that contributed to its defeat. Thus, in 1932 leading
functionaries of the German sex-political organization wanted to
exclude the sexual question and "to mobilize" the masses in the
sexual area with the slogan "against hunger and cold." They con­
trasted the sexual question with the "social question," as if the
sexual question were not a part of the whole complex of social
questions!
The population politics to which sexual reform restricts itself do
not in the strict sense of the word have a sex-political nature. They
are not concerned with the regulation of sexual needs, but only with
the increase of the population, to which naturally the sexual act is
related. Apart from this, however, it has nothing to do with sexu­
ality in the social and biologic sense. Nor do the masses have the
slightest interest in questions of population politics; they don't care
a hoot about them. The abortion law is of interest to them, not for
political reasons, but because of the personal distress that hinges
upon it. Insofar as the abortion law causes distress, death, and grief,
it is a question of general social politics. Not until, and only when,
it is clearly and explicitly understood that people violate the law
because they have to have intercourse even if they don't want to
have children will the question of abortion become a sex-political
question. This has passed unnoticed until now, despite the fact
that it is emotionally the most important point of the question.
If a reactionary social politician should take it upon himself to
tell the people: "You complain that the abortion law demands
so many sacrifices in health and human life! You don't have
to have sexual intercourse," then there would be an end to the
approach that is concerned solely with population politics. The
question is meaningful only when one clearly and openly speaks up
185THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
for the necessity of a satisfactory sex life. To give prominence to the
sexual needs that continually beset the men and women of all social
classes would have far more relevance than to enumerate the deaths
caused by the abortion law. Everyone has a personal interest in
sexual needs, but an interest in the abortion law presupposes a
certain level of social conscience and fellow-feeling, which cannot
always be assumed in modern man. In propaganda about the provi­
sion of food, it is personal need and not unrelated social and politi­
cal facts that are appealed to. The same should hold true for
propaganda in the sex-economic field. In short, the sexual question
is a question that applies to all of us, a top-priority question of social
life and mass mental hygiene.
'The objection that could be raised by a psychoanalyst is more
serious. His objection might run something like this: It is altogether
utopian to suppose that man's sexual misery could be used "politi­
cally" in the same way that his material distress is used. In psycho­
analytic treatment it takes months and years of arduous work to
make a patient conscious of his sexual desires. The moralistic
inhibitions are just as deeply anchored as the sexual demands, and
they have the upper hand. How do you propose to overcome sexual
repression in the masses in view of the fact that a technique
comparable to the one used in individual analysis does not exist?
This objection has to be taken seriously. In the beginning, if I had
allowed such. objections to deter me from engaging in practical sex­
economic work among the masses and gathering experience, then I
too would have to agree with those who push aside sex-economy as
an individualistic question and wait for the coming of a second
Jesus to solve it. A very close associate once told me that my
attempts constituted only a superficial elucidation, which failed to
grasp the deeply-rooted sex-repressive forces. If a psychiatrist could
make such an accusation, it might prove of value to discuss the
difficulty in more detail. In the beginning of my work, I would not
have known an answer to this question. However, practical experi­
ence revealed it.
To begin with, we have to make it clear that in sex-economic
186Questions of Sex-Political Practice
mass hygiene, we are faced with a task different from the one we are
faced with in individual vegetotherapeutic treatment. In the latter
we have to eliminate repression and to restore biologic health. This
is not the task of sex-economic sociology; here it is a matter of
making conscious the contradiction and suffering in subjugated
man. One knows that one is moralistic; but that one has a sexual
drive that has to be gratified is either not conscious or one's con­
sciousness of it is so weak that it cannot operate properly. Here the
additional objection could be raised that the making conscious of
sexual needs also entails individual analytic work. Again practical
experience gives the answer. When I talk to a sexually inhibited
woman in my office about her sexual needs, I am confronted with
her entire moralistic apparatus. It is difficult for me to get through
to her and to convince her of anything. If, however, the same
woman is exposed to a mass atmosphere, is present, for instance, at
a rally at which sexual needs are discussed clearly and openly in
medical and social terms, then she doesn't feel herself to be alone.
After all, the others are also listening to "forbidden things." Her
individual moralistic inhibition is offset by a collective atmosphere
of sexual affirmation, a new sex-economic morality, which can
paralyze (not eliminate!) her sexual negation because she herself
has had similar thoughts when she was alone. Secretly, she herself
has mourned her lost joy of life or yearned for sexual happiness. The
sexual need is given confidence by the mass situation; it assumes a
socially accepted status. When the subject is broached correctly, the
sexual demand proves to have far more appeal than the demand for
asceticism and renunciation; it is more human, more closely related
to the personality, unreservedly affirmed by everyone. Thus, it is not
a question of helping, but of making suppression conscious, of
dragging the fight between sexuality and mysticism into the light of
consciousness, of bringing it to a head under the pressure of a mass
ideology and translating it into social action. At this point the objec­
tion might be raised that this would be a diabolical attempt, for it
would precipitate people into a state of dire distress, would really
make them sick if they were not already sick, without being able to
187THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
help them. One is reminded of Pallenberg's witty saying in Der
brave Sunder: "What a poor wretch man is. Fortunately he doesn't
know it. If he did, what a poor wretch he'd bel" The answer is that
political reaction and mysticism are infinitely more diabolical. Basi­
cally speaking, of course, the same objection applies to the distress
of hunger. The Indian or Chinese coolie who bears the burden of
his fate unconsciously, resigned and unquestioning, suffers less than
the coolie who is aware of the hideous order of things, who, in
short, consciously rebels against slavery. Who would try to make us
believe that the real cause of his suffering should be concealed from
the coolie for humanitarian reasons? Only a mystic, the coolie's
fascist employer or some Chinese professor for social hygiene would
try to make us believe such nonsense. This "humanity" is the per­
petuation of inhumanity and its simultaneous concealment. Our
"inhumanity" is the fight for that about which the good and the
righteous prattle so much, and then allow themselves to be immedi­
ately snared in the trap of fascist reaction. Hence, we admit: Con­
sistent sex-economic work gives a tongue to silent suffering and
creates new contradictions while intensifying the contradictions that
exist already. It puts man in a position where he is no longer able to
tolerate his situation. At the same time, however, it provides a
means of liberation, namely the possibility of a fight against the
social causes of suffering. It is true that sex-economic work touches
the most sensitive, most exciting, most personal area of human life.
But isn't it also true that the mystical contagion of the masses does
the same thing? What is important is the purpose that is served by
the one and the purpose that is served by the other. He who has
once seen the intense eyes and faces at sex-economic assemblies; he
who has heard and has had to answer the hundreds of questions
relating to the most personal sphere of human existence-that man
has also arrived at the unshakable conviction that social dynamite
lies buried here, dynamite capable of bringing this self-destructive
world to its senses. However, if this w�rk is to be carried out by
revolutionaries who vie with the church in the asseveration and
advocacy of moralistic mysticism, who view the answering of the
188Questions of Sex-Political Practice
sexual question as being beneath the "dignity of revolutionary
ideology," who dismiss childhood masturbation as a "bourgeois
invention," who, in short-for all their "Leninism" and "Marx­
ism" -are reactionary in an important corner of their personalities,
then it would be easy to offer proof that my experiences cannot be
right. For in the hands of such revolutionaries, the masses would
immediately react negatively toward sex.
We must still persist for awhile in our discussion of the role of
moralistic resistance which we encounter in our work . .I stated that
the individual moralistic inhibition, which, in contrast to sexual
demands, is reinforced by the entire sex-negating atmosphere of
authoritarian society, can be made ineffective by the creation of a
counter sex-affirmative ideology. People could become receptive to
sex-economic knowledge and thereby be made immune to the influ­
ence of mysticism and reactionary forces. It is clear that such an
atmosphere of sexual affirmation can be created only by a powerful
international sex-economic organization. It was impossible to con­
vince the leaders of political parties that this was one of their main
tasks. In the meantime, politics as such has been exposed as re­
actionary irrationalism. We can no longer rely on any political
party. The task lies within the framework of natural work-demo­
cratic development.
Until now we have mentioned only the quiet and mute needs
of the individuals in the masses, those needs upon which we could
base our work. However, they would not be enough. From the turn
of the century until World War I these needs and their suppression
were also present, yet at that time a sex-economic movement would
have had little prospect of success. Since then a number of objective
social preconditions for sex-economic work have come into being.
These must be thoroughly known if one wants to set to work cor­
rectly. The very fact that so many sex-economic groups having
various forms and directions carne into being in Germany between
1931-33 indicates that a new social view is taking hold in the social
process. One of the most important social preconditions of social
sex-economy was the creation of gigantic industries employing
189THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
armies of workers and officials. The two central pillars of the
moralistic and anti-sexual atmosphere, the small enterprise and the
family, were shaken. World War II accelerated this process appre­
ciably. The women and girls working in factories developed freer
conceptions of sexual life than they would have developed if they
had remained confined to the authoritarian households of their
parents. Since the industrial workers were accessible to sexual
affirmation at all times, the disintegration process of authoritarian
moralism began to spread among the lower middle classes also. If the
lower middle-class youth of today is compared with the lower
middle-class youth of 1910, it will be readily seen that the gap
between real sexuality and the social ideology still prevailing has
become wide and unbridgeable. The ideal of an ascetic girl has
become a thing of shame, and certainly the same holds true for the
ideal of the sexually weak, ascetic man. Even among the lower
middle class, more open attitudes toward compulsive faithfulness in
marriage have begun to appear more and more frequently. The
mode of production of big industry made it possible for the contra­
diction of reactionary sexual policies to come out into the open.
There can no longer be any talk of a return to the old consonance
between real life and ascetic ideology, as was still pretty much the
case before the turn of the century. As a sex-economist, one gains
deep insights into the secrets of human existence and can ascertain
a total disintegration of the moralistic ascetic modes of life, which
are still so loudly advocated. The collectivization of adolescent life
has not only undermined-even if it has not eliminated-the re­
strictive power of the authoritarian household but has also
awakened a desire in modern youth, a desire for a new philosophy
and for scientific knowledge about the fight for sexual health, sexual
consciousness, and freedom. Around the tum of the century it
would have been out of the question for a Christian woman to
belong to a birth-control group. Today it is more and more the rule.
This process was not interrupted by the fascist seizure of power in
Germany, but merely forced to go underground. What remains
190Questions 01 Sex-Political Practice
questionable is how the process will continue to take shape, if fascist
murder and barbarism last longer than we fear.
An additional objective factor, which is closely related to the
above, is the rapid increase of neurotic and biopathic illnesses as an
expression of disturbed sexual economy, and the intensification of
the contradiction between real sexual demands on the one hand and
old moralistic inhibitions and child education on the other hand.
The increase of biopathies means that one is more prepared to
acknowledge the sexual cause of so many sicknesses.
Political reaction's powerlessness in the face of practical sex­
economic work is the strongest point in sex-economy's favor. It is
well known that, owing to the lack of scientific literature on sex, it is
mostly sexual tripe that is read in the public libraries. If sex­
economic work could succeed in directing this enormous interest
into scientific and rational channels, this would provide a measure
of the importance of the sex-economic question. The fascists are
able to deceive the submissive and mystically contaminated masses
for a long time by pretending to represent the rights of work and
the worker. It is different in the sex-economic sphere. Political
reaction could never succeed in opposing revolutionary sex-economy
with a reactionary sex-political program that would be anything
other than complete suppression and negation of sexuality. Such a
program would immediately alienate the masses, with the exception
of a politically unimportant circle of old women and hopelessly
dense creatures. It is the youth that matters! And they-this much
is certain-are no longer accessible to a sex-negating ideology on a
mass scale. This is our strong point. In 1932 sex-economic groups in
Germany succeeded in winning over industries that were and had
been completely closed to the subject of "Red trade-unionism." It is
clear that, when all is said and done, sex-economic mental hygiene
must join forces with the general social freedom movement. And in
actual practice this is precisely what it did. However, we have to
have a clear eye for facts such as this: Fascist workers and employ­
ees, indeed students, are in complete accord with the revolutionary
191THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
affirmation of sexuality, an affirmation that brings them into conflict
with their leadership. And what could this leadership do if one
could succeed in resolving this conflict altogether? It would be
forced to use terror. But to the same extent to which it used terror,
it would lose its influence. Let me stress once more that the objec­
tive loosening of the reactionary shackles placed on sexuality cannot
under any circumstances be retightened. This is our greatest
strength. If revolutionary work fails to make headway in this area,
the result will be that the youth will continue as before to live a re­
stricted life in secret, without being conscious of the causes and
consequences of such a life. However, if sex-economic work is
carried out consistently, political reaction would have no answer and
no counterideology. Its ascetic teachings are tenable only as long as
sexual affirmation in the masses is secret and fragmentary, only as
long as it is not collectively organized and directed against political
reaction's asceticism.
German fascism made an all-out effort to anchor itself in the
psychic structures of the masses and therefore placed the greatest
emphasis upon the inculcation of the adolescents and children. It
had no other means at its disposal than the rousing and cultivation
of slavery to authority, the basic precondition of which is ascetic, sex­
negating education. The natural sexual strivings toward the other
sex, which seek gratification from childhood on, were replaced in
the main by distorted and diverted homosexual and sadistic feelings,
and in part also by asceticism. This applies, for instance, to the so­
called esprit de corps that was cultivated in the Labor Conscription
Camps as well as to the so-called "spirit of discipline and obedi­
ence," which was preached everywhere. The hidden motive behind
these slogans was to unleash brutality and make it ready for use in
imperialistic wars. Sadism originates from ungratified orgastic yearn­
ings. The facade is inscribed with such names as "comradeship,"
"honor," "voluntary discipline." Concealed behind the facade, we
find secret revolt, depression to the point of rebellion, owing to the
hindrance of every expression of personallife, especially of sexuality.
A consistent sex-economy must cast a dazzling light on the great
192Questions of Sex-Political Practice
sexual privation. If it does, it will be able to reckon with the most
lively echo on the part of youth. At first this will produce bewilder­
ment and perplexity among the fascist leaders. It is not difficult to
see that the average boy or girl can easily be made conscious of his
or her sexual privation. Contrary to the assertions of such youth
leaders who have never attempted it practically, the experience
gained from working with young people shows that the average
adolescent, especially the adolescent female, takes to his or her
social responsibility much more quickly, more effectively, and more
willingly, when it is made intelligible by means of bringing sexual
suppression into consciousness. It is merely a question of correctly
comprehending the sexual question and of showing its application
to the general social situation. There are a thousand proofs in
support of the above statement. One should not allow oneself to be
scared off by threadbare objections, but ought to be guided solely by
sex-economic practice.
What answers would political reaction have to some questions
posed by German adolescents?
The conscription of German boys and girls in labor camps has
seriously impinged upon their private and sexual life. Urgent ques­
tions await an explanation and solution, for serious and menacing
abuses have resulted. The situation is complicated by the general
shyness and timidity of the adolescents to open a discussion on their
personal, burning questions, added to which is the fact that the
camp authorities forbid all talk on such questions. But it is a matter
of the physical and psychic health of boys and girls!!!
What is the sexual life of the boys and girls in the Conscription
Labor Camps?
On the average, the boys and girls in Conscription Labor
Camps are at the age of budding sexuality. Most of the boys were
previously in the habit of gratifying their natural sexual needs with
their girlfriends. To be sure, the sexual life of these boys and girls
was hindered even before they entered the labor camps by the
absence of suitable possibilities of engaging in a healthy love life
(housing problem of the youth), by a lack of money to buy contra­
ceptives, by the hostility of the state authorities and reactionary
193THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
circles to a healthy adolescent love life, one in accordance with their
needs. This lamentable situation was made even worse by the Labor
Conscription! For instance:
No possibility of coming together with girls or of preserving
and cultivating former liaisons.
Being forced to choose between abstinence and self-gratifi­
cation.
This leads to the brutalization and dissipation of erotic life, the
proliferation of sexual obscenity and dirty jokes, disintegrating
fantasies (rape, lascivious greed, beatings), which also paralyze
one's will and energy.
Nocturnal involuntary emissions, which undermine one's health
and offer no gratification.
Development of homosexual tendencies and the forming of
relationships between boys who had never thought of such things;
severe annoyances from homosexual comrades.
Increase of nervousness, irritability, physical complaints, and
various psychic disturbances.
Ominous consequences for the future.
All adolescents, especially those between 17 and 25, who do not
have a gratifying sexual life are threatened with a future disturbance
of their potency and severe psychic depression, which always entails
a disturbance of one's work capacity. If an organ or a natural
function is not used over a period, it later fails to operate. Nervous
and psychic illnesses, perversions (sexual aberrations) are usually
the result.
What is our position with regard to the measures and regula­
tions adopted by OUT leaders on these questions?
Until now, the leaders have called for a "moral strengthening
of the youth" in very general statements. To us it is still not clear
what is meant by this. Over the past years the German youth have
engaged in a hard struggle with their parental homes and the big
wheels of the system and were gradually beginning to win their
right to a healthy sexual life, despite the fact that they were not
able to reach their goal under the existing social conditions. But
their idea was clear in broad circles: The youth had to carry on a
bitter fight against sexual bigotry, sexual obscenity and hypocrisy,
the consequences of the youth's sexual subjugation. It was their idea
194Questions of Sex-Political Practice
that boys and girls should have a happy intellectual and sexual
relationship with one another. Their idea was that it was society's
responsibility to regulate and alleviate the conditions of their lives.
What is the government's position toward this?
The ordinances it has issued so far are in sharp contradiction to
the views of youth. The purchase of contraceptives has been made
impossible by prohibiting their public sale. The measures employed
by the Hamburg police against the aquatic athletes on moral
grounds, the threat that those who "offend customs and decency"
will be put into concentration camps, are backed up by the law. Is it
an offense to decency if a boy sleeps with his girlfriend in a tent
camp?
We ask the leadership of the German youth: What is to be the
�exuallife of the youth?
There are only four possibilities.
1. Abstinence: Shall the youth live an abstinent life, i.e., con­
tain every form of sexual activity until marriage?
2. Self-gratification: Shall the youth gratify its sexual needs by
masturbation?
3. Homosexual gratification: Shall the German youth engage in
sexual activity with members of the same sex? If so, how? By
mutual masturbation or anal intercourse?
4. Natural love and sexual intercourse between boys and girls:
Shall the German youth affirm and encourage natural sexuality? If
so:
Where is intercourse to take place (housing problem)?
How and with what is conception to be prevented?
When is this intercourse to take place?
Is the adolescent allowed to do the same thing as the fuhrer?
Similar questions concern work with children. It may sound
strange-to some incomprehensible-but the fact remains: In the
main, revolutionary work with children can only be sex-economic
work. Overcome your astonishment and listen patiently. Why is it
that children in the pre-pubertal stage can be directed by sexual
education in the best and easiest way?
1. Childhood in all social classes, even in those in which hunger
and privations are suffered, is filled with sexual interests, more so
I9STHE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
than later stages of life. In addition, we have to bear in mind that
hunger to the point of physical deterioration concerns only a num­
ber of children, whereas sexual suppression concerns every child of
every class without exception. This extends the social field of attack
enormously.
2. The usual methods employed by the freedom movement to
organize children are the same as those employed by the reaction­
aries in their work with children: marching, singing, dressing up,
group games, etc. Unless he stems from exceptionally liberated
parents-which of course is not very often the case-the child does
not distinguish between the content of reactionary and revolu­
tionary forms of propaganda. To see to it that reality is not glossed
over is only the first commandment of anti-fascist education. It is
our contention that children and adolescents will march just as
happily to fascist music tomorrow as they march to liberal music
today. Moreover, political reaction can mold the forms of group
propaganda among children incomparably better than the anti­
fascist movement. In this regard the latter was always behind. In
Germany, for instance, the socialist movement, in contrast to the
reactionary movement, was extremely weak in its work with
children.
3. While it is true that political reaction is far superior in its
organizational work with children, there is one thing that it cannot
do: It cannot impart sexual knowledge to children; it cannot give
them sexual clarity, nor can it dispel their sexual confusion. Only
the revolutionary movement can do this. First of all because it has
no interest in the sexual suppression of children. (On the contrary.
it is precisely the sexual freedom of children that it has in mind.)
Second of all because the revolutionary camp has always been the
advocate of a consistent and natural education of children. This
powerful weapon was never put to use in Germany. And it was
those in charge of child organizations who offered the strongest
resistance to the proposal that the usual individual treatment of sex
education be turned into sex education on a mass scale. It was both
tragic and comical that these opponents of sex-economic work
196Questions of Sex-Political Practice
among children called upon Marx and Lenin in their defense.
Naturally, neither in Marx's nor in Lenin's writings do we find
anything about sex-economy. And yet the fact remained that chil­
dren fell to political reaction's share en masse. Notwithstanding
the enormous difficulties involved, unexpected possibilities arise of
developing child education on a sex-economic basis. The most
important of these possibilities is the ardent interest of the children
themselves. If we could once succeed in engaging the sexual inter­
ests of children and adolescents on a mass scale, then reactionary
contamination would be faced with a tremendous counterforce-and
political reaction would be powerless.
To those who doubt, resist, and are otherwise worried about the
"purity" of the children, we will cite only two examples from our
practical experience. They are typical of many others.
First: The church is not so squeamish. A fifteen-year-old boy
who transferred to a communist youth group from a fascist organiza­
tion told us that in his former organization the priest was in the
habit of calling the boys aside one by one and asking them about
their sexual behavior. They were always asked whether they had
masturbated, which was naturally always the case and shamefully
admitted. "That is a great sin, my boy; but you can atone for it if
you work diligently for the church and distribute these leaflets
tomorrow." That's how mysticism practices politics with sex. We,
however, are "modest"; we are "pure"; we want nothing to do
"with such things." And then we are surprised that mysticism is in
control of the majority of the adolescents.
Second: The sex-economic work-group in Berlin had resolved to
make its first attempt at sex-economic education of children, and
had collectively put together a story for this purpose: The Chalk
Triangle, Group for the Study of Adult Secrets. Before having it
printed, this little story was first discussed with leaders of child
groups. It was resolved to read the booklet to a group of children
and to see how they reacted to it. One wished that an those who
shrugged their shoulders derogatively at the mention of social sex­
economy would have been present. To begin with, seventy children
197THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
were present, instead of the usual twenty or so. Contrary to the
usual indifferent attentiveness following the reports of the func­
tionaries-it was always difficult to establish quiet-the children
hung on the speaker's words, their eyes glowed, their faces formed
one single bright spot in the auditorium. At some points, the
reading was interrupted by bursts of enthusiasm. At the end the
children were asked to express their opinions and criticism. Many
raised their hand for permission to speak. One had to blush at one's
own prudery and embarrassment in front of these children. The
teachers who had edited this story had decided not to include the
question of contraception and also to omit the subject of childhood
masturbation. Promptly the question was asked: "Why don't you
say anything about how not to get children?" "We know that
anyhow," a boy interjected laughing. "What's that, a tart?" a third
boy asked, "there was nothing said about that in the story."
"Tomorrow we'll go to the Christians," they stated enthusiastically.
"They always talk about such things-we'll get them!" "When is
the book coming out? How much will it cost? Will it be cheap
enough for us to buy it and also to sell it?" The first part that had
been read dealt almost exclusively with sex education. It was the
group's intention, however, to supplement the first volume with a
second volume, which was supposed to show the social implications
of these questions. The children were told this. "When is the
second volume coming out? Will it also be so funny?" When has a
group of children ever asked for a social booklet so enthusiastically?
By affirming their
Shouldn't this be a lesson to us? Yes, it should.
sexual interests and gratifying their thirst for knowledge, children
must be educated to take an interest in social matters. They have to
become firmly convinced that this is something political reaction
cannot give them.
And they will be won over in large numbers, be
immunized against reactionary influence in all countries and-what
is most important-they will be firmly bound to the revolutionary
freedom movement. At present, however, it is not only political
reaction that obstructs the realization of this goal, but also the
"moralists" in the camp of the freedom movement.
198Questions 01 Sex-Political Practice
An additional important area of sex-economic work is the
elucidation of the sexual situation that recently resulted in Germany
from the fact that women were pushed from industry back into the
kitchen. This work can be accomplished only by imbuing the con­
sexual
cept of woman's freedom with the contents of freedom. It
must be pointed out that it is not her material dependency on the
man in the family that is a nuisance to a woman. Essentially, it is
the sexual restriction that goes with this dependency that is a
burden. The proof of this is that those women who have succeeded
in completely suppressing their sexuality not only endure this
economic dependency easily and unresistingly, but even affirm it.
To make these women conscious of their suppressed sexuality and
to stress the unpleasant consequences of an ascetic life are the most
important preconditions for the political fertilization of the material
dependency on man. If sex-economic· organizations fail to accom­
plish this work, then the new wave of sexual suppression of women
in fascism will immure the consciousness of her material enslave­
ment. In Germany and other highly industrialized countries, all the
objective social preconditions are present for a forceful rebellion of
the women and the adolescents against sexual reaction. If inexo­
rable, consistent, unflinching sexual policies were applied to this
area, we would be rid once and for all of a question that has occu­
pied freethinkers and politicians time and again, without yielding an
answer: Why is it that women and adolescents are always far more
willing to listen to political reaction? No other field exposes so
clearly the social function of sexual suppression, the intimate con­
nection between sexual repression and political reactionary views.
In conclusion, let me mention one further objection made by a
psychiatrist after reading this section. It is not easily countered.
There is no doubt, he said, that the broad masses have the keenest
interest in the sexual question. They are well nigh obsessed with it,
but does this necessarily lead to the conclusion that their interest
can be exploited politically to further the social revolution, which
demands so many privations and sacrifices? Once they have grasped
the idea of sex-economy, what will keep the masses from wanting to
199THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
cash in on sexual freedom immediately? When we are engaged in
difficult work, we have to listen to every objection very attentively,
consider its validity and express our view on it. We have to be on
our guard against allowing our wishful revolutionary thinking to get
the best of us and regarding as a realistic possibility that which is
only right "as such." The success or failure of the fight against
hunger will not be decided by the fact that one wants to eliminate it
at all cost, but by the presence or absence of the objective precondi­
tions necessary for its elimination. Can, in other words, the sexual
interest and sexual distress of the masses of all countries be trans­
lated into social action against the social system that causes this
distress, as is done with primitive material interest? We have cited
the practical experiences and the theoretical considerations that
indicate that what succeeds in individual groups and in individual
meetings must also be possible on a mass scale. We have merely
neglected to mention several additional preconditions, which are
indispensable. To accomplish the task of putting social sex-economy
into effective operation, it is first of all necessary to have a united
workers' movement. Without this precondition sex-economic work
can only be of a preparatory nature. Furthermore, it is absolutely
necessary to establish a tight international sex-economic organiza­
tion, which would have the task of carrying out and securing the
actual work. The final indispensable precondition is a cadre of
thoroughly disciplined leaders of the movement. For the rest, it is
not advisable to try to solve every individual problem in advance.
That would be confusing and stagnating. It is practice itself that
will yield new and more detailed practice. This book will not be
burdened with such details.
THE NONPOLITICAL MAN
Finally, we arrive at the question of the so-called nonpolitical
man. Hitler not only established his power from the very beginning
with masses of people who were until then essentially nonpolitical;
he also accomplished his last step to victory in March of 1933 in a
200Questions 01 Sex-Political Practice
"legal" manner, by mobilizing no less than five million nonvoters,
that is to say, nonpolitical people. The Left parties had made every
effort to win over the indifferent masses, without posing the ques­
tion as to what it means "to be indifferent or nonpolitical."
If an industrialist and large estate owner champions a rightist
party, this is easily understood in terms of his immediate economic
interests. In his case a leftist orientation would be at variance with
his social situation and would, for that reason, point to irrational
motives. If an industrial worker has a leftist orientation, this too is
by all means rationally consistent-it derives from his economic and
social position in industry. If, however, a worker, an employee, or an
official has a rightest orientation, this must be ascribed to a lack of
political clarity, i.e., he is ignorant of his social position. The more a
man who belongs to the broad working masses is nonpolitical, the
more susceptible he is to the ideology of political reaction. To be
nonpolitical is not, as one might suppose, evidence of a passive
psychic condition, but of a highly active attitude, a defense against
the awareness of social responsibility. The analysis of this defense
against consciousness of one's social responsibility yields clear in­
sights into a number of dark questions concerning the behavior of
the broad nonpolitical strata. In the case of the average intellectual
"who wants nothing to do with politics," it can easily be shown that
immediate economic interests and fears related to his social posi­
tion, which is dependent upon public opinion, lie at the basis of his
noninvolvement. These fears cause him to make the most grotesque
sacrifices with respect to his knowledge and convictions. Those
people who are engaged in the production process in one way or
another and are nonetheless socially irresponsible can be divided
into two major groups. In the case of the one group the concept of
politics is unconsciously associated with the idea of violence and
physical danger, i.e., with an intense fear, which prevents them
from facing life realistically. In the case of the other group, which
undoubtedly constitutes the majority, social irresponsibility is based
on personal conflicts and anxieties, of which the sexual anxiety is the
predominant one. When a young female employee who would have
201THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
sufficient economic reason to be conscious of her social responsi­
bility is socially irresponsible, then in ninety-nine out of one hun­
dred cases it is due to her so-called love story, or, to be more specific,
it is due to her sexual conflicts. The same holds true for the lower
middle-class woman who has to muster all her psychic forces to
master her sexual situation so as not to fall to pieces altogether.
Until now the revolutionary movement has misunderstood this
situation. It attempted to awaken the "nonpolitical" man by mak­
ing him conscious solely of his unfulfilled economic interests.
Experience teaches that the majority of these "nonpolitical" people
can hardly be made to listen to anything about their socio-economic
situation, whereas they are very accessible to the mystical claptrap of
a National Socialist, despite the fact that the latter makes very little
mention of economic interests. How is this to be explained? It is
explained by the fact that severe sexual conflicts (in the broadest
sense of the word), whether conscious or unconscious, inhibit
rational thinking and the development of social responsibility.
They make a person afraid and force him into a shell. If, now, such
a self-encapsulated person meets a propagandist who works with
faith and mysticism, meets, in other words, a fascist who works with
sexual, libidinous methods, he turns his complete attention to him.
This is not because the fascist program makes a greater impression
on him than the liberal program, but because in his devotion to the
fUhrer and the fuhrer's ideology, he experiences a momentary
release from his unrelenting inner tension. Unconsciously, he is able
to give his conflicts a different form and in this way to "solve"
them. Finally, this orientation enables him on occasion to see the
fascists as revolutionaries and Hitler as the German Lenin. One
does not have to be a psychologist to understand why the erotically
provocative form of fascism offers a kind of gratification, however
distorted, to a sexually frustrated lower middle-class woman who has
never thought about social responsibility, or to a young salesgirl who
could not arrive at social consciousness owing to an intellectual
deficiency caused by sexual conflicts. One has to know the hidden
202Questions of Sex-Political Practice
life of these five million indecisive, "nonpolitical," socially-sup­
pressed men and women to understand the role that private life,
that is to say essentially sexual life, plays quietly and subterraneanly
in the hubbub of social life. This is not to be grasped statistically;
nor, for that matter, are we partisans of the sham exactness offered
by statistics, which bypass the real facts of life, while Hitler con­
quers power with his negation of statistics and by making use of the
dregs of sexual misery.
The socially irresponsible man is the man absorbed in sexual
conflicts. To want to make him conscious of his social responsibility
by excluding sexuality, as was the case until now, is absolutely
hopeless. Moreover, it is the surest way of delivering him into the
hands of political reaction, which makes no bones about exploiting
the consequences of his sexual misery. Upon simple calculation we
see that one and only one approach is possible: the comprehension
of his sexual life from a social point of view. At one time I myself
would have shied away from such a conclusion, considering how
banal it seems. I can understand, therefore, that the seasoned politi­
cal economist will look upon such an interpretation as the brain­
child of a dry, politically inexperienced, sedentary scholar. However,
one who has attended sex-economic meetings knows that the over­
whelming majority are people who had never attended a political
meeting before. Nonaffiliated and nonpolitical men and women
make up the overwhelming majority of the sex-economic organiza­
tions in western Germany. Just how presumptuous the seasoned
political economists are in their judgment is most graphically proven
by the fact that the international organization of mysticism has held
an impressive sex-political meeting in its sense of the word in every
small nest of the world at least once a week for the past thousands
of years. For the Sunday meetings and r�tuals of the Moham­
medans, Jews, etc., are nothing other than sex-political meetings. In
view of the experience with sex-economic work and knowledge on
the relationship between mysticism and sexual suppression that we
already have, a neglect or denial of these facts constitutes an
203THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
inexcusable reactionary support of the domination of Middle Ages'
mentality and economic slavery.
Finally, I want to deal with a fact that extends far beyond the
everyday task: the biologic rigidity of the human or ganism and its
relationship to the fight for social and individual freedom.
204

IX
The Masses and the State
When groups of settlers got lost in the American backwoods,
they tried to find the path on which they had come in order once
again to push forward into unknown terrain from known terrain.
They did not form political parties to do this, nor did they engage
in endless disputes about the unknown terrain. They did not knock
one another's heads off or ceaselessly bother one another to draft a
program on settlements. They acted in a natural work-democratic
way on the basis of the given situation. They made a united effort
to regain known terrain and then made a fresh effort to push on
from there.
When a vegetotherapist loses himself in a maze of irrational
reactions while treating a patient, he does not begin to argue with
his patient on the "existence or nonexistence of God." He does not
become neurotic and irrational, but reviews the situation and
attempts to form a lucid picture of the previous course of the
treatment. He goes back to the last point of development at which
he was still clear about the course of the treatment.
Every living creature will naturally attempt to discover and
eliminate the cause of a catastrophe in which it finds itself involved.
It will not repeat actions that brought about the catastrophe in the
first place. This is how difficulties are surmounted by experience.
Our politicians are far removed from such natural reactions. It
would not be farfetched to say that it is in the nature of a politi-
205THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
cian that he does not learn anything from experience. The Austrian
monarchy triggered the first world war in 1914. At that time, it
fought against American democrats with weapons in its hands. In
1942, during World War II, it entered a claim, which was backed
by American diplomats, to reestablish the Habsburg dynasty "to
avert" new wars. This is irrational political nonsense.
In World War I "the Italians" were the friends and allies of
the Americans. In 1942, during World War II, they were arch
enemies, and in 1943, friends again. In World War I, 1914, "the
I talians" were the arch enemies of "the Germans," "hereditary
enemies" from way back, as it were. In World War II, 1940, "the
Italians" and "the Germans" were blood brothers, "again on
grounds of heredity." In the next world war, let's say in 1963, "the
Germans" and "the French" will have switched from "racial heredi­
tary enemies" to "racial hereditary friends."
This is the emotional plague. It's something like this: A Coper­
nicus comes along in the sixteenth century and asserts that the earth
revolves around the sun; in the seventeenth century one of his
pupils comes along and asserts that the earth does not revolve
around the sun, and in the eighteenth century this man's pupil
again asserts that it does revolve around the sun. In the twentieth
century, however, the astronomers assert that both Copernicus and
his pupils were right, for the earth revolves around the sun and
remains still at the same time. When dealing with a CoperniCUS, we
are ready with the stake. When dealing with a politician, however, a
politician who tells a people that the most incredible nonsense is
true, who in 1940 holds up to be true precisely the opposite of what
be held up to be true in 1939, then millions of people lose all
bounds and assert that a miracle has taken place.
It is a rule of good science not to put forth a new theory as long
as the old theories work wel1. If, however, the old theories prove to
be inadequate or erroneous, then one proceeds to ferret out their
errors, to subject them to a critique and to develop new views on
the basis of fresh data. Such natural procedures are alien to the
politician. No matter how many new facts are added to the old; no
206The Masses and the State
matter how many errors are exposed; the old theories continue to
exist as slogans, and the new facts are concealed or passed off as
illusions. The democratic formalities have disappointed millions of
people in Europe, and thus opened the road to fascist dictatorship.
The democratic politicians fail to go back to the starting points of
democratic principles, to correct them in keeping with the radical
changes that have taken place in social life and to give them a useful
direction. Fresh votes are held on formalities, on precisely those
formalities that were dethroned so ingloriously in Europe.
One wants to think out and to plan a system of peace and to
put it to a vote. It is clear that one shrinks back from this system
even before the planning begins. The basic elements of peace and of
human cooperation are physically present in man's natural work
relationships, and they provide the basis for the development of
guarantees of peaceableness. They must not be "introduced"-they
are already there. A good physician does not "introduce" a "new
health" into a critically sick organism. He finds out which elements
of health are spontaneously present in the sick organism. When he
finds them, he plays them off against the process of sickness. The
same holds true for the sick social organism when one approaches it
through social science and not with political programs and ideas. It
is only possible to develop the actual conditions of freedom that are
present and to eliminate the obstacles that thwart this development.
But this must be done organically. One cannot impose legally
guaranteed freedoms on a sick social organism.
The relationship of the masses to the state can be best illus­
trated by using the Soviet Union as an example. The reasons for this
are as follows: The groundwork for the social revolution of 1917 was
prepared by a sociological theory that had been tested over a period
of ten years. The Russian Revolution made use of this theory.
Millions of people took part in the social upheaval, endured it,
rejoiced in it and passed it on. What became of the sociological
theory and of the masses in the "proletarian state" in the course of
twenty years?
The development of the Soviet Union cannot be ignored if one
207THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
is seriously concerned with the question of democracy. What is its
nature, can it be realized, and how? The difference between work­
democratic mastering of difficulties on the one hand and formal
democratic politicizing on the other hand was very clearly shown in
the attitude of the various political and economic organizations to
the Soviet Union.
1936: SPEAK THE TRUTH-BUT HOW AND WHEN?
The Italian-Abyssinian war had broken out; one event followed
another precipitately. No one knew or could know how the world
would change in the following months and years. The organized
workers' movement did not intervene in the events. It was inter­
nationally split. It was mute, to all intents and purposes, or it fol­
lowed this or that political view in a very desultory manner. It has
to be admitted that the Soviet Union did fight for peace in Geneva
through Litvinov, but it was a total failure as a social pioneer. New,
undreamed-of catastrophes were to be expected. One had to prepare
oneself for them. A new solution to the social chaos could result
from them; but they could also slip past without anything being
made of them, as in 1918 and 1933 in Germany. One had to make
sure that one was structurally prepared for social upheavals. One
had to be especially careful not to get entangled in the drag rope of
the many confusing and contradictory political everyday views. It
was necessary to isolate oneself from the daily political tumult and
yet to maintain a close contact with the social processes. It seemed
more important than ever to stick to one's work on the problem of
human structure. Most of all it was necessary to establish clarity on
the development of the Soviet Union. Millions upon millions of
working men and women in Germany, England, America, China,
and elsewhere anxiously followed every step taken by the Soviet
Union. Those versed in mass psychology knew that if a disappoint­
ment in the Soviet Union were added to the catastrophe in
Germany, then a hard struggle for clarity would be the first pre­
condition to survive a new war scientifically.
208The Masses and the State
The European war, i.e., the second world war in one generation,
was impending. There was still time to reflect upon what changes
this second world war might bring about. It was still possible for
human thought-even if no longer possible for human action-to
come to grips with the new massacre and to arrive at an understand­
ing of the war psychosis, an understanding that would be deadly to
the warmongers. Those who knew this had a hard time keeping
their heads clear and their blood calm. But it had to be accom­
plished, for this Second World War, which had begun in Africa,
and was soon to encompass the whole planet, would also have to
end someday. Then the answer would have to be: "Death to the
warmongers" and "Annihilation of the causes of war." But no one
had any idea how this answer would look in practice.
In 1935 it was clear that the development of the Soviet Union
was about to be stricken with a severe misfortune. The democratic
politicians in Germany, Scandinavia, and other countries did not try
to trace this misfortune to its source, though they spoke about it a
great dea1. They failed to go back to the genuinely democratic
efforts of Engels and Lenin, to refresh their knowledge on the
sociological points of departure of the Soviet society, and to proceed
from there to an understanding of its later development. In Europe
it was not possible to ignore these pioneers of genuine democracy,
any more than it is possible for a genuinely democratic American to
ignore the American constitution and the basic ideas of American
pioneers, such as Jefferson, Lincoln, and others. Engels was the
most outstanding exponent of German democracy, as Lenin was of
Russian democracy. They had not got stuck in formalities; they had
gone to the core of democracy. They were avoided. It makes no
difference whether they were avoided because one was afraid of
being labeled a Communist or because one was afraid of losing
one's academic or political position. Engels was a well-to-do factory
owner and Lenin was a wel1-to-do son of an official. They were de­
scendents of the "ruling class," who sought to develop a system of
genuine democracy from Marxist social economy (which, inci­
dental1y, was also born in "bourgeois circles") .
209THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
Engels' and Lenin's democratic framework of ideas fell into
neglect. Its demands on the conscientiousness of the Europeans
were too high and, as it was later shown, on the Russian politicians
and sociologists as well. It was too much for them.
Today [1944] natural work-democracy cannot be described
without reviewing the forms that it assumed in the socio-political
ideas of Engels and Lenin from 1850 to 1920. We must also review
the forms it assumed in the early developmental process in the
Soviet Union from 1917 to around 1923. The Russian Revolution
was an act of extraordinary social significance. For that very reason
the importance of its retardation is enormous from a sociological
point of view; it is a tremendous lesson for every genuinely demo­
cratic effort. Practically speaking, there is not much to hope for
from the purely emotional enthusiasm for Russia's deeds of heroism
in her war against Hitler. In 1943 the motives of this enthusiasm,
which was absent between 1917 and 1923, are of a very dubious
nature. They are dictated far more by egoistic war interests than by
the will to achieve genuine democracy.
The following examination of the development of the Soviet
Union was first written in 1935. One will ask why it was not pub­
lished at that time. This requires a brief explanation. In Europe,
where it was impossible to engage in practical work on mass psy­
chology outside of the parties, one who carried out scientific investi­
gations undeterred by political interests and made predictions that
were at variance with party politics, was very apt to be excluded
from the organizations and thereby deprived of one's contact with
the masses. All parties were of one opinion on this point. It is in the
nature of a political party that it does not orient itself in terms of
truth, but in terms of illusions, which usually correspond to the
irrational structure of the masses. Scientific truths merely interfere
with the party politician's habit of wriggling himself out of diffi­
culties with the help of illusions. To be sure, the illusions are of no
use in the long run, as was demonstrated so graphically in Europe
itself from 1938 on. In the long run, scientific truths are the only
reliable guidelines for social life, but these truths pertaining to the
210The Masses and the State
Soviet Union were still nothing more than germs, which would have
been incapable of stirring public opinion, let alone mass enthusi­
asm. They were nothing more than pricks of conscience. It was
reserved for the Second World War to intensify on a broad scale
the receptiveness for facts and above all to reveal to broad circles of
working humanity the basic irrational nature of all politics.
When one establishes a fact, one is not concerned whether it is
welcome or not, but only whether it applies. Thus, one always gets
involved in a sharp conflict with politics, which is not concerned
whether a fact is applicable or not, but solely whether it interferes
with this or that political group. Hence, the scientific sociologist has
no easy time of it. On the one hand it is his task to discover and to
describe the actual process; on the other hand he has to remain in
contact with the vital social movement. In publishing embarrassing
factual material, therefore, he must consider very carefully what
effect his correct statements will have on the masses of people who
are predominantly under the influence of political irrationalism. A
social scientific view having some intellectual range can push
through and become social practice only if it is spontaneously
absorbed by the masses in life itself. Outdated political systems of
thought and institutions inimical to freedom must be totally ex­
hausted politically before rational views on the vital necessities of
society can be generally and spontaneously assimilated. But the
perceptible to
exhaustion of these systems and institutions must be
everyone.
In the United States, for example, the fuming and fussing
of the politicos has popularized the general, not at all very scien­
tifically comprehended knowledge that the politician constitutes a
cancerous growth on the social body. In the Europe of 1935 one was
far removed from this knowledge. It was the politician who deter­
mined what was to be regarded as true and what. as false.
Usually an important social awareness begins to assume a more
or less clear form among the population long before it is expressed
and represented in an organized way. Today, 1944, the hatred of
politics, a hatred based on concrete facts, has undoubtedly become
general. If, now, a group of social scientists has made correct
211THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
observations and formulations, i.e., observations and formulations
that clearly reflect the objective social processes, then the "theory"
must of necessity be in agreement with the vital feelings of the
masses of people. It is as if two independent processes moved in a
convergent direction and came together at one point, a point at
which the social process and the will of the masses became one with
sociological knowledge. This seems to hold true for important social
processes everywhere. The American emancipation from England in
1776 followed this process, just as the emancipation of the Russian
society from the czarist state followed it in 1917. The absence of
correct sociological work can have a catastrophic effect. In such a
case, the objective process and the will of the masses have reached a
point of maturity; but if there is no simple scientific principle to
consolidate them, this maturity is lost again. That is what happened
in Germany in 1918 when the kaiserdom was overthrown but no
genuine democracy developed.
The fusion of the scientific and social processes into the unity of
a fundamentally new social order fails to result if the process of
scientific awareness does not grow out of the old views just as
organically as the social process grows out of the misery of practical
life. I say, to grow out of, organically, because it is not possible to
"contrive," "think out," or "plan" a new order. It has to grow
organically, in close connection with the practical and theoretical
facts of the human animal's life. It is for this reason that all at­
tempts "to get at the masses politically," to impose "revolutionary
ideas" on them, fail and lead only to noisy and harmful fuming and
fussing.
The awareness of the peculiar nature of fascism, which could
not be explained by any purely economic view of social life, and the
awareness of the authoritarian and nationalistic structure of the
Soviet Union of 1940 developed spontaneously everywhere; no
political party had anything to do with it. It was general, latent
knowledge that fascism had as little to do with the class rule of the
"bourgeoisie" as the "Soviet democracy" of Stalin had to do with
the social democracy of Lenin. It was noted everywhere that the old
212The Masses and the State
concepts were no longer applicable to the new processes. Those who
were directly involved with man's vital life, those who-as physi­
cians and educators-had acquired an exact knowledge of men and
women of all walks of life and various nationalities were not easily
taken in by political slogans. Those who had always been nonpoliti­
cal and had lived solely for their work were in an especially good
position. It was precisely these "nonpolitical" circles in Europe,
men and women who were totally absorbed by their work, who were
accessible to important social insights; whereas those who had been
economically and ideologically identified with this or that party
apparatus at one time or another were rigid and inaccessible to every
new insight. As a rule, they defended themselves with irrational
hatred against every attempt to elucidate the fundamentally new
phenomenon of the authoritarian, "totalitarian," dictatorial regime.
When one also takes into consideration that all the party organiza­
tions, regardless of their tendencies, had a purely economic orienta­
tion, whereas the dictators based their policies not on economic
processes but on the irrational attitudes of the masses, then it is
easily understood that a social scientist working in the field of mass
psychology was forced to proceed with the utmost caution and
circumspection. All he could do was to register conscientiously
whether the social development was confirming or refuting his bio­
,
psychic insights. It confirmed them! Many physicians, educators,
writers, social workers, adolescents, industrial workers, and others
became more and more convinced that political irrationalism would
one day gallop itself to death, and that the demands of natural
work, love, and knowledge would become part of mass conscious­
ness and mass action. There would be no need to carry out a
propaganda campaign to sell the theory. However, it was impossible
to know just how great a catastrophe political irrationalism would
have to cause before it was arrested by the natural feelings for life of
the toiling masses, to know how long it would take before it was
choked by it own acts.
Following the German catastrophe in 1933, the Soviet Union
regressed rapidly to authoritarian and nationalistic forms of social
213THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
leadership. It was clear to a large number of scientists, journalists,
and workers' functionaries that it was a regression to "nationalism."
It was not clear whether it was nationalism patterned after fascism.
The word fascism is not a word of abuse any more than the
word capitalism is. It is a concept denoting a very definite kind of
mass leadership and mass influence: authoritarian, one-party system,
hence totalitarian, a system in which power takes priority over
objective interests, and facts are distorted for political purposes.
Hence, there are "fascist Jews," just as there are "fascist Demo­
crats."
If one had published such observations at that time, the Soviet
government would have cited them as an example of "counter­
revolutionary tendencies" and "Trotskian fascism." The masses of
the Soviet population were still enjoying the impetus of the 1917
Revolution. Their material situation was still improving, and there
was no unemployment to speak of. The population enjoyed the
reintroduction of sports for everybody, the theater, literature, and
other things. Those who had experienced the German catastrophe
knew that these so-called cultural enjoyments of a people do not tell
us much about the nature and development of its society. In short,
they did not tell us anything about the Soviet society. Going to the
movies, visiting the theater, reading books, playing sports, brushing
one's teeth, and attending school are of course important, but they
do not constitute a difference between a dictatorial state and a
genuinely democratic society. "Culture is enjoyed" in the one as
wen as in the other. It has been a typical and basic error on the part
of Socialists and Communists to extol an apartment building, a
public transportation system, or a new school as "socialistic"
achievements. Apartment houses, public transportation, and schools
tell us something about the technical development of a society.
They do not tell us whether the members of that society are sup­
pressed subjects or free workers, whether they are rational or irra­
tional men and women.
Since the Soviet Russians extolled every technical innovation as
a "specifically communist" achievement, the Soviet population got
214The Masses and the State
the impression that such things did not exist in the capitalist
countries. Therefore, it was not to be expected that the population
would understand the deterioration of Soviet democracy to na­
tionalism, or become aware of this deterioration on its own. It is
one of mass psychology's basic tenets that it does not proclaim an
"objective truth" simply because it is a truth. It first asks itself how
the average person of the working population will react to an
objective process.
This approach automatically precludes political abuse. If,
namely, someone feels that he has discovered a truth, he is obliged
to wait until it has been objectively and independently manifested.
If this manifestation does not take place, then his truth was not a
truth after all, and it is better remaining as a possibility in the
background.
The catastrophic regression in the Soviet Union was anxiously
followed in Europe and elsewhere. Thus, only about one hundred
copies of this examination of the relationship between "the masses
and the state" were sent to various friends of sex-economy and mass
psychology in Europe, Russia, and America. The prediction in 1929
that Soviet democracy would deteriorate into a totalitarian dic­
tatorship was based on the fact that the sexual revolution in the
Soviet Union had not only been checked, but almost intention­
ally suppressed.1 Sexual suppression serves, as we know, to mecha­
nize and enslave the masses. Thus, wherever we encounter authori­
tarian and moralistic suppression of childhood and adolescent
sexuality, a suppression backed up by the law, we can infer with
certainty that there are strong authoritarian-dictatorial tendencies in
the social development, regardless of which slogans the ruling
politicians use. On the other hand we can infer genuine demo­
cratic social tendencies wherever we encounter a sympathetic,
life-affirmative attitude on the part of the important social institu­
tions toward the sexuality of children and adolescents; but only to
the extent to which such attitudes are present. Thus, as early as
1 Cf. Reich, The Sexual Revolution.
215THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
1929, when reactionary sexual attitudes became more and more
prevalent in the Soviet Union, one was justified in drawing the
conclusion that an authoritarian, dictatorial development in the
social leadership was in progress. I went into this very thoroughly in
The Sexual Revolution. My predictions were confirmed by the
ofliciallegislation passed from 1934 on, i.e., by the reintroduction of
reactionary sexual laws.
At that time I did not know that a new attitude toward sex­
economic questions had developed in the United States, an attitude
that would later facilitate the acceptance of sex-economy.
We requested the friends to whom we had sent copies of this
unofficial pamphlet to think it over carefully and, if they agreed
with it on the whole, to pass it on to other sociologists in their
immediate vicinity who were in a position to understand the
contradiction in the development of the Soviet Union. In no case
whatever were the contents of this pamphlet to be printed in any
newspaper or read at a mass meeting. The events themselves would
determine when it was to be discussed in public. Between 1935 and
1939 the cause of the regression to authoritarian forms in the Soviet
Union was understood from the point of view of mass psychology
by an increasing number of leading sociological circles. This under­
standing replaced the fruitless indignation one felt about the "re­
gression"; one learned to understand that the Soviet Union's further
development foundered on the authority-craving structures of the
masses of people, a fact that was not discerned by the Soviet leader­
ship. This was an enormously important insight.
"
"WHAT TAKES PLACE IN THE MASSES OF PEOPLE?
The question as to "how" a new social order is to be imple­
mented wholly coincides with the question as to the character
structure of the broad masses, the nonpolitical, irrationally influ­
enced working segment of the population. Thus, at the bottom of
the failure to achieve a genuine social revolution lies the failure of
the masses of people: They reproduce the ideology and fortns of life
216The Masses and the State
of political reaction in their own structures and thereby in every
new generation, despite the fact that they sometimes succeed in
shattering this ideology and these forms within the social frame­
work. At that time the question "How do the broad masses of the
nonpolitical segment of the population think, feel, and react?" was
neither raised nor understood. Hence, there was little possibility of
mastering it in a practical way. A great deal of confusion existed. On
the occasion of the plebiscite held in the Saar in 1935, the Vienna
sociologist Willi Schlamm wrote the following:
In truth, the epoch is gone in which we had the impression
that the masses of society could be guided by reason and by insights
into their situation of life to achieve social improvement with their
own strength. In truth, the days are gone in which the masses have
a function in shaping society. It has been shown that the masses
can be completely molded, that they are unconscious and capable of
adapting themselves to any kind of power or infamy. They have no
historical mission. In the 20th century, in the century of tanks and
radios, they have no mission-the masses have been excluded from
the process of social formation.
Schlamm was right, but in a sterile way. He failed to ask how
such an attitude on the part of the masses could arise, whether it
was innate or capable of being changed. If I have understood him
correctly, he had no hope, not even as a general principle.
It has to be clearly understood that such observations were not
only unpopular but often mortally dangerous, because the Social
Democratic and Liberal parties in the countries that were still not
fascist lived precisely in the illusion that the masses as such, just as
they are, were capable of freedom and liberalism, and that paradise
on earth would be assured if only those wicked Hitlers were not
around. As was shown again and again in both personal and public
discussions, the democratic politicians and, quite particularly, the
Social Democratic and Communist politicians had not the least
understanding of the simple fact that the masses-owing to their
century-long suppression-could not be other than incapable of
217THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
freedom. They were not only unwilling to admit this fact, but often
reacted in a restless and threatening way when it was mentioned. In
reality, however, everything that had taken place in the sphere of
international politics since the Russian Revolution of 1917 con­
firmed the correctness of the assertion that the masses were in­
capable of freedom. Without this insight it was altogether impos­
sible to understand the fascist deluge.
In the years between 1930 and 1933 my perception of the true
state of affairs became more and more crystallized, and I found
myself involved in serious conflicts with well-disposed liberal, social­
ist, and Communist politicians. Nonetheless, the time seemed right
for publication, so in 1933 I wrote the first edition of the present
volume. In a pamphlet entitled Was ist Klassenbewusstsein?, Ernst
Parell showed the implications of my insights for socialist politics.
Actually, my diagnosis could easily have led to a state of hope­
lessness, for if all social events are dependent upon the structure and
behavior of the masses, and if it is true that the masses are incapable
of freedom, then the victory of the fascist dictatorship would have
to be definitive. But this diagnosis was not absolute and not without
implications. It is fundamentally altered by two additional con­
siderations:
1. The incapacity for freedom on the part of masses of people is
not innate. People were not always incapable of freedom. Hence,
fundamentally speaking, they can become capable of freedom.
2. As was thoroughly demonstrated by sex-economic sociology,
with the help of clinical experience, the mechanism that makes
masses of people incapable of freedom is the social suppression of
genital sexuality in small children, adolescents, and adults. This
social suppression is not part of the natural order of things. It
developed as a part of patriarchy and, therefore, is capable of being
eliminated, fundamentally speaking. If, however, social suppression
of natural sexuality in the masses is capable of being eliminated, and
if it is the central mechanism of a character structure incapable of
freedom, then-and this is the conclusion-it is not hopeless. The
218The Masses and the State
road is clear for society to master all the social conditions we call
the "emotional plague."
Schlamm's error, and the error of many other sociologi�ts as
well was that while he confirmed the fact of the incapacity for
freedom on the part of masses of people, he failed to draw the
practical consequences from sex-economic sociology, with which he
was well familiar, and to advocate them. More than any of the
others, it was Erich Fromm2 who later managed to disregard
completely the sexual problem of masses of people and its relation­
ship to the fear of freedom and craving for authority.3 I was never
able to understand this, for I had no reason to doubt the basic
honesty of Fromm's position. But sexual negation in both social and
personal life plays many a trick that is inaccessible to rational
understanding.
The reader will have noticed just how much the emphasis has
shifted from sociological investigations of political and economic
factors to the investigation of factors pertaining to mass psychology,
sex-economy, and character structure. The diagnosis that the masses
of people are incapable of freedom, that the suppression of natural
sexuality is the chief mechanism that is used to produce the im­
prisonment of the character and, above all, the shifting of the
responsibility from individual organizations or politicians to the
freedom-incapacitated masses themselves were enormous readjust­
ments in thinking and, consequently, also in the practical handling
of social problems. One was in a better position to understand the
ceaseless complaints of the various political parties that "one still had
not succeeded in reaching the working masses." One understood
why the masses "can be completely molded, that they are uncon­
scious and capable of adapting themselves to any kind of power or
2 In his publications Authority and Family and Escape from Freedom.
S Earlier he had written a favorable review of Der Einbruch der Sexualmoral
in the Zeitschrift fUr Sozialforschung. This hook deals with the incursion of
sexual morality in primitive societies and therewith the incursion of character­
ological slavery.
219THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
infamy." Above all, one understood the fascist intoxication of the
masses with racism. One understood the helplessness and powerless­
ness of those sociologists and politicians whose orientation was
purely economic, understood their helplessness in the face of the
catastrophic events of the first half of the twentieth century. Now it
was possible to trace back every form of political reaction to the
emotional plague, which had become more and more anchored in
the structures of the masses of people since the incursion of
authoritarian patriarchy.
Now the genuine democratic revolutionary movement can have
no other task than to guide (not "lead" from the top!) the human
masses that have become apathetic, incapable of discrimination,
biopathic and slavish as the result of the suppression of their vital
life over thousands of years; to guide them in such a way that they
sense every suppression immediately and learn to shake it off
promptly, finally, and irrevocably. It is easier to prevent a neurosis
than it is to cure it. It is easier to keep an organism healthy than it is
to rid it of an infirmity. It is also easier to keep a social organism
free of dictatorial institutions than it is to eliminate such institu­
tions. It is the task of genuine democratic guidance to make the
masses leap over themselves, as it were. But a mass of people can
surpass itself only when it develops in its own ranks social organiza­
tions that do not compete with diplomats in political algebra, but
think out and articulate for the masses of people that which they
cannot think out and articulate for themselves, owing to their dis­
tress, lack of training, bondage to the fuhrer idea and the plague of
irrationalism. In short, we hold the masses of people responsible for
every social process. We demand that they be responsible and we
fight against their irresponsibility. We impute the fault to them,
but we do not accuse them as one would accuse a criminal.
There is more to a new and genuine social order than the
elimination of dictatorial-authoritarian social institutions. There is
also more to it than the establishment of new institutions, for these
new institutions will also inevitably degenerate into a dictatorial­
authoritarian form if the authoritarian absolutism anchored in the
220The Masses and the State
character structures of the 71UlSses of the people is not also elimi­
nated through education and social hygiene. It is not as if we had
revolutionary angels on the one side and reactionary devils on the
other side, avaricious capitalists as opposed to generous workers. If
sociology and mass psychology are to have a practical function as
genuine sciences, then every effort must be made to free them of
the political way of seeing everything as either black or white. They
have to go to the core of the contradictory nature of the man raised
in an authoritarian manner and help to search out, articulate, and
remove political reaction in the behavior and in the structure of the
working masses of people. It should not have to be particularly
stressed that these genuine sociologists and mass psychologists must
not exclude themselves from this process. By now it will have
become clear that a nationalization or socialization of production
cannot by itself effect the slightest change in human slavery. The
piece of ground one buys to build a house in which to live and work
is only a precondition of life and work; it is not this life and work
itself. To regard the economic process of a society as the essence of
the bio-social process of the human animal's society is the same as
equating the piece of ground and the house with the rearing of
children, or of equating hygiene and work with dancing and music.
But it was precisely this purely economic view of life (a view that
Lenin had strongly opposed even in his time) that forced the Soviet
Union to regress to an authoritarian form.
The economic process introduced by the Soviets was also sup­
posed to change the people-that was the expectation around 1920.
The elimination of illiteracy and the transformation of an agrarian
country into an industrial country are, to be sure, tremendous
achievements, but they cannot be passed off as specifically socialistic
achievements, for they had been attained in the same way and often
more extensively by ultra-capitalistic governments.
Since 1917 the basic question of mass psychology has been:
Will the culture that originated from the social upheaval in Russia
in 1917 develop a human community that is fundamentally and
essentially different from the overthrown czarist-authoritarian social
221THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
order? Will the new socio-economic order of the Russian society
reproduce itself in man's character structure, and how will it repro­
duce itself? Would the new "Soviet man" be free, nonauthoritarian,
rational, self-governing, and would he transmit these capacities to
his children? Would the freedom developed in such a way in the
human structure make every form of authoritarian social leadership
unnecessary, indeed impossible? The existence or nonexistence of
authoritarian dictatorial institutions in the Soviet Union would
have to become clear-cut standards for the nature of the develop­
ment of the Soviet man.
It is understandable that the entire world followed the Soviet
Union's development with tense expectation-in some parts of the
world, apprehensively; in other parts, elatedly. But the attitude
toward the Soviet Union was none too rational on the whole. Some
defended the Soviet system just as uncritically as others attacked it.
There were groups of intellectuals who took the position that "the
Soviet Union had a thing or two to boast of, too." This sounded
just like the Hitlerite who said that "there are also decent Jews."
Such emotional judgments were both senseless and valueless. In a
word, they were sterile. And the leaders of the Soviet Union right­
fully complained that people did not really do anything in a practi­
cal way for the Russian society, but merely caviled about it.
The struggle continued between the rational and progressive
forces of social development on the one hand and the reactionary
forces of obstruction and regression on the other hand. Thanks to
Marx, Engels, and Lenin, the economic conditions of forward
development were appreciably better understood than those forces
that acted as a brake. No one thought to raise the question of the
irrationalism of the masses. Hence, the development toward free­
dom, which was so promising in the beginning, carne to a standstill
and then regressed to an authoritarian form.
It was more fruitful to understand the mechanism of this
regression than to deny it, as was done by the European Communist
parties. By piously, religiously, and fanatically defending everything
that took place in the Soviet Union, they deprived themselves of
222The Masses and the State
every practical possibility of solving the social difficulties. And yet it
is certain that the natural scientific elucidation of the irrational
contradictions of the human character structure will, in the long
run, do more for the development of the Soviet Union than any
stupid hullabaloo about salvation. Such a scientific approach may be
unpleasant and painful, but in reality it is prompted by far deeper
feelings of friendship than political slogans are. The Soviet Russians
who are engaged in everyday practical work know this very well. I
can only affirm that at that time the sex-economic physicians and
educators were as concerned as the champions of Sovietism were.
This concern was certainly justified. In the industrial plants, the
original "triumviral directorship" and the democratic economic
production advisers were replaced by authoritarian "responsible"
management.
In the schools, the first attempts at self-government (Dalton
plan, etc.) had failed; and the old authoritarian school regulations,
however disguised by formal student organizations, were reintro­
duced.
In the army the original, straightforward, and democratic officer­
system was replaced by a rigid order of rank. At first the "Marshal
of the Soviet Union" was an incomprehensible innovation. Then it
seemed dangerous. It had overtones of "czar" and "kaiser."
Indications of a regression to authoritarian and moralistic views
and laws accumulated in the field of sex-economic sociology. This is
thoroughly described in Part II of my book Die Sexualitiit im
Kulturkampf, 1936.*
In human intercourse, suspicion, cynicism, contrivance, and
byzantine obedience became more and more rife. If in 1929 the
mood of the average Soviet Russian was still imbued with heroic
sacrifice for the five-year plan and full of high hopes for the success
of the Revolution, around 1935 one sensed an evasive, unsteady,
and embarrassed oscillation in the feelings and thinking of the
* Published in English under the title The Sexual Revolution.
223THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
population. One sensed cynicism, disappointment, and that certain
kind of "worldly wiseness," which is incompatible with serious
social aims.
It was not only that the cultural revolution in the Soviet Union
had failed. In the course of a few years the regression in the cultural
process stifled the enthusiasm and hope of an entire world.
It is not the fault of a social leadership if a social regression
takes place. But this social leadership consolidates regression if it:
( 1) tries to pass off the regression as progress, (2) proclaims itself to
be the savior of the world, and (3) shoots those who remind it of its
duties.
Sooner or later it will have to give way to a different social
leadership, one that adheres to the generally valid principles of
social development.
" "
THE SOCIALIST YEARNING
There were socialist movements and a socialist yearning long
before there was scientific knowledge on the social preconditions of
socialism. The fight of the disappropriated against their oppressors
has been raging for thousands of years. It was these fights that
provided the scientific knowledge of the freedom aspirations of the
suppressed and not vice versa, as the fascist character believes. It
cannot be denied that it was precisely between 1918 and 1938, i.e.,
years of enormous social magnitude, that the socialists suffered very
serious defeats. Precisely at a time that should have offered living
proof of the maturity and rationality of the socialist freedom
movement, the workers' movement split up and became bureau­
cratic, became more and more separated from the thirst for freedom
and truth from which it had originally sprung.
The socialist yearning of the millions was an intense desire for
freedom from every form of suppression. But this intense desire for
freedom was coupled with a fear of responsibility and thus appeared
in the form of a compromise. The fear of social responsibility on the
part of the masses of people brought the socialist movement into
224The Masses and the State
the political sphere. However, in the scientific sociology of Karl
Marx, who worked out the economic conditions of social indepen­
dence, we find no mention of the state as the goal of socialist
freedom. The "socialist" state is an invention of party bureaucrats.
And now, it, "the state," was supposed to introduce freedom: not
the masses of the people, you see, but the state. It will be my object
in what follows to show that the socialist idea of the state not only
had nothing to do with the theory of the early socialists, but, on the
contrary, represented a distortion of the socialist movement. How­
ever unconsciously it may have been brought about, this distortion
is to be imputed to the structural helplessness of the masses of
people, who were nonetheless imbued with an intense desire for
freedom. An intense desire for freedom on the one hand, coupled
with a structural fear of the responsibility of self-government on the
other hand, produced in the Soviet Union a form of state that was
less and less in accord with the original program of the Communists
and eventually assumed an authoritarian, totalitarian, and dicta­
torial form.
Let us attempt to sketch the basic socialist character of the most
important social movements toward freedom.
The early Christian movement is often and rightfully desig­
nated as "socialist." The founders of socialism also regarded the
slave revolts of antiquity and the peasant wars of the Middle Ages
as precursors of the socialist movement of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. It was the lack of development of the industrial
conditions and the international means of communication, as well
as the lack of a sociological theory, that precluded their success.
According to the sociology of its founders, "socialism" was conceiv­
able only on an international scale. A national or even nationalistic
socialism (National Socialism = fascism) is sociological nonsense. In
the strictest sense of the word it is mass deception. Imagine that a
physician discovers a medicine to fight a certain disease and calls it
"serum." Now a clever profiteer comes along who wants to make
money on people's illnesses. He concocts a poison that produces
this sickness, which in turn evokes an intense desire in man to get
225THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
well again, and he calls this poisonous agent a "healing agent." He
would be the national socialist heir of this physician, just as Hitler,
Mussolini, and Stalin became the national socialist heirs of Karl
Marx's international socialism.
To be correct, the profiteer who wants to get rich on illnesses
should call his poison a "toxin." However, he calls it a "serum,"
because he knows very well that he would not be able to sell toxin
as a medicine. The very same thing applies to the words "social"
and "socialist."
Words that have been stamped with a very definite meaning
cannot be used arbitrarily without causing hopeless confusion. The
concept "socialism" was inextricably related to the concept "inter­
national." The theory of socialism presupposed a definite degree of
maturity in international economy. The imperialistic struggle for
markets, natural resources, and centers of power will have to have
assumed the character of rapacious wars. Economic anarchy will
have to have become the chief obstacle to the further development
of social productivity. The chaos of economy will have to have
become clear to everyone, for example: the destruction of excess
goods to check a sudden drop in prices, while masses of people are
hungry and starving. The private appropriation of collectively pro­
duced goods will have to have come into sharp conflict with the
needs of the society. International trade will have to have begun to
feel that the tariff boundaries of the national states and the market
principle are insurmountable barriers.
The objective socio-economic preconditions of an international
attitude and orientation on the part of the inhabitants of the earth
have developed enormously since 1918. The airplane lessened the
distances between peoples and bridged the expanses that formerly
preserved differences in degrees of civilization that were equivalent
to thousands of years. With ever-increasing rapidity, international
traffic has begun to obliterate the civilization gaps of earlier cen­
turies. There was an infinitely greater gap between the Arab of the
nineteenth century and the Englishman of the nineteenth century
than there is between the Arab and Englishman of the middle of
226The Masses and the State
the twentieth century. More and more curbs were placed upon
capitalistic adventurers. In short, the socio-economic preconditions
of internationalism increased by leaps and bounds.4 However, this
economic ripening of internationalism was not accompanied by a
corresponding development in man's structure and ideology. While
the idea of internationalism continued to develop along economic
lines, it made little headway in man's structure and ideology. This
was shown not only in the workers' movement, but also in the
development of nationalistic dictators in Europe: Hitler in Ger­
many, Mussolini in Italy, Doriot and Laval in France, Stalin in
Russia, Mannerheim in Finland, Horthy in Hungary, etc. No one
could have anticipated this cleavage between socio-economic prog­
ress and a regression in manrs structure. The degeneration of the
Workers' International to a chauvinistic national socialism was
more than a collapse of the old freedom movement, which had
always been nothing but international. It was an unprecedented
outbreak of the emotional plague on an enormous scale in the very
midst of the suppressed social strata, in which great minds had
placed hopes that they would one day create a new order in the
world. A nadir of this "national socialist" degeneration was the
racial hatred felt by the white workers against the black workers in
the United States and the loss of all socio-political initiative and
perspective in many a large union. When the freedom idea is seized
upon by the mentality of sergeants, then freedom is in a bad plight.
Old and brutal injustice revenged itself upon those masses who had
nothing to sell but their working power. Unscrupulous exploitation
and irresponsibility on the part of powerful capitalists struck back
like a boomerang. Since the idea of internationalism had failed to
take root in man's structure, the national socialist movements took
the wind out of its sails by exploiting the intense desire for inter­
national socialism. Under the leadership of "sergeants" who had
risen from the ranks of the suppressed, the international socialist
4 This process was tremendously accelerated by World War II.
227THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
movement split up into nationally confined, isolated, mutually
hostile mass movements, which merely gave the appearance of being
revolutionary. To make matters worse, a number of these rigidly
nationalistic mass movements became international movements, no
doubt owing to the effect of the old international orientation of
their followers. Italian and German National Socialism became
international fascism. In the strict sense of the word it attracted
masses on an international scale in the form of a perverse "national­
istic internationalism." In this form it crushed genuine democratic
revolts in Spain and in Austria. The heroic fight of the genuine
revolutionaries who had been isolated by the masses of the people
(1934-36), was another Thermopylae.
In all of this the irrationalism of the mass structure, as well as
politics in general, was clearly expressed. For years the German
working inasses had resisted the program of a revolutionary inter­
nationalism. And yet, from 1933 on, they endured an the suffering
that a genuine social revolution would have entailed, without,
however, enjoying a single fruit that a genuine social revolution
would have brought them. They had grossly deceived themselves
and were defeated by their own irrationalism, i.e., their fear of social
responsibility.
These facts were hardly comprehensible. Yet, let us make an
honest endeavor to understand them, despite their seeming incom­
prehensibility.
Since the entry of the United States into World War II an
international and generally human orientation has gained more and
more ground. Yet it is to be feared that even more fantastic irra­
tional mass reactions and even more deadly social catastrophes wi1l
result someday, if the responsible sociologists and psychologists fail
to put off their grandiloquent academicism before it is too late, take
an active part in the course of events and make an honest effort to
help clarify them. There has been a fundamental shift in the line of
questioning of sociology from economics to the structure of the
masses of people. We no longer ask if the economic preconditions
of work-democratic internationalism have reached maturity. Now
228Tbe Masses and tbe State
we are faced with a question of greater magnitude: Assuming fully
matured international socia-economic conditions, what obstacles
could again prevent the idea of internationalism from taking root
and developing in man's structure and ideology? How can the social
irresponsibility and propensity for authority on the part of the
masses be overcome before it is too late? How can this second
international war, which is rightfully referred to as a war in which
ideological rather than economic issues are at stake, be prevented
from decaying into a new, even more brutal, even more deadly
nationalistic, chauvinistic, fascistic-dictatorial nationalism? Political
reaction lives and operates within the human structure and in the
thinking and acting of the suppressed masses in the form of charac­
ter armor, fear of responsibility, incapacity for freedom, and, last
but not least, as an endemic crippling of biologic functioning. These
are grave facts. The fate of future centuries depends upon our
ability or inability to cope with them in a natural scientific way. All
leading circles have an enormous responsibility. Not a single one of
these decisive tasks can be solved with political chatter and formal­
ities. Our basic slogan, "Enough! No more politics! Let's get down
to the vital social issues!" is not a play on words. Nothing is more
staggering than the fact that a world population of two billion
people does not muster the energy to eliminate a handful of sup­
pressors and biopathic warmongers. Man's intense desire for free­
dom fails to become a reality owing to the many views as to how
freedom can be best achieved without also assuming the direct
responsibility for the painful readjustment of the human structure
and its social institutions.
The anarchists (i.e., the syndicalists) strove to achieve social
self-government, but they refused to take cognizance of the pro­
found problem of the human incapacity for freedom, and they
rejected all guidance of social development. They were utopians and
they went down in Spain. They saw only the intense desire for
freedom, but they confounded this intense desire with the actual
capacity to be free and the ability to work and live without
authoritarian leadership. They rejected the party system, but they
229THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
were at a loss to say how the enslaved masses of people were to learn
to govern their lives by themselves. Not much is accomplished by
solely hating the state. Nor with nudist colonies. The problem is
deeper and more serious.
The international Christians preached peace, brotherhood,
compassion, mutual help. Ideologically, tl:Iey were anti-capitalist,
and they conceived of human existence in international terms.
Basically, their ideas were in accord with international socialism,
and they called themselves, e.g., in Austria, Christian Socialists. Yet,
concretely speaking, they rejected and continue to reject every step
of social development that moves precisely toward that goal that
they have proclaimed to be their ideal. Catholic Christianity in
particular has long since divested itself of the revolutionary, i.e.,
rebellious, character of the primitive Christian movement. It se­
duces its millions of devotees into accepting war as an act of fate, as
a "punishment of sin." Wars are indeed the consequences of sins,
but entirely different sins from those conceived of by Catholicism.
For the Catholics, peaceful existence is possible only in heaven. The
Catholic Church preaches the acceptance of distress in this world
and thereby systematically ruins man's ability to achieve the goal of
freedom, to fight for it in an honest way. It does not protest when its
rival churches, the Greek Orthodox churches, are bombed; but it
importunes God and culture when bombs fall on Rome. Catholi­
'
cism produces structural helplessness in masses of people with the
result that, instead of relying upon their own strength and self­
confidence when they are in distress, they call upon God for help.
Catholicism makes the human structure both incapable and afraid
of pleasure. A good portion of human sadism derives from this.
German Catholics give their blessings to German weapons and
American Catholics give their blessings to American weapons. One
and the same God is supposed to lead two arch enemies to victory
in war. The irrational absurdity of this is conspicuous.
Social Democracy, which followed the Bernsteinian adaptation
of Marxian sociology, also failed on the question of mass structure.
It lived, as did Christianity and anarchy, on the compromise of the
230The Masses and the State
masses between strivings after happiness and irresponsibility. Thus
it offered the masses a hazy ideology, an "education in socialism,"
which was not backed up by a strong and genuine tackling of con­
crete life-tasks. They dreamed of social democracy, but they refused
to understand that the structure of masses of people would have to
undergo basic changes to become capable of being social democratic
and of living in a "social democratic" way. In actual practice it had
no inkling of the idea that the public schools, trade schools, kinder­
gartens, etc., had to operate on a self-regulatory basis. Moreover, it
failed to realize that every reactionary tendency-including those in
one's own camp-had to be countered sharply and objectively, that,
finally, the term "freedom" had to be imbued with a concrete
content to bring about social democracy. It would be far more
sensible to use all one's forces against fascist reaction while one is in
power than to develop the courage to do so only after one has
relinquished it. In many European countries Social Democracy had
all the necessary power at its disposal to dethrone the patriarchal
power in and outside of man, a power that had been accumulating
over thousands of years and finally celebrated its most bloody
triumph in the fascist ideology.
Social Democracy made the fatal mistake of assuming that
those who had been crippled by thousands of years of patriarchal
power were capable of democracy without any further preliminaries
and were capable of governing themselves. Officially, it rejected the
rigorous scientific efforts-those of Freud, for instance-to compre­
hend man's complicated structure. Hence, it was forced to assume
dictatorial forms within its own ranks and to make compromises
outside of them. We can understand a compromise in the good
sense of the word, i.e., the awareness that the viewpoint of the other
person, the opponent, has to be understood and agreed with where
it is superior to one's own viewpoint; but there is no justification for
a compromise in which principles are sacrificed for fear of precipi­
tating a confrontation. In the latter, rash efforts are often made "to
get along" with an arch enemy bent on murder. Unadulterated
Chamberlainism existed in the camp of socialism.
231THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
In ideology, Social Democracy was radical; in actual practice, it
was conservative. A phrase such as "His Royal Highness and
Majesty's socialist opposition" shows how ludicrous its position
often was. Without intending to, it helped fascism, for the fascism
of the masses is nothing other than disappointed radicalism plus
nationalistic "petty bourgeoisism." Social Democracy foundered on
the contradictory structure of the masses, a structure that it did not
understand.
It cannot be denied that the bourgeois governments of Europe
had a democratic orientation, but in practice they were conservative
administrative bodies, which were averse to freedom efforts based
on fundamental scientific knowledge. The enormous influence of
the capitalist market economy and of profit interests far exceeded all
other interests. The bourgeois democracies of Europe separated
themselves from their original revolutionary character of the 1848
years much more quickly and thoroughly than Christianity sepa­
rated itself from its revolutionary character. Liberal measures were a
kind of decorum, a voucher that one was after all "democratic."
None of these governments would have been able to state how the
enslaved masses of people were to be extricated from their condition
of blind acceptance and craving for authority. They had all the
power in their hands, but social self-government and self-regulation
was a book with seven seals to it. In such government circles it was
impossible even to hint at the basic problem, i.e., the sexual ques­
tion of the masses. The extolling of the Austrian Dollfuss govern­
ment as a model of democratic administration bears witness to a
complete lack of social awareness.
The powerful capitalists who emerged from the bourgeois revo­
lution in Europe had a great deal of social power in their hands.
They had the influence to determine who should govern. Basically,
they acted in a short-sighted and self-damaging way. With the help
of their power and their means, they could have spurred human
society to unprecedented social achievements. I am not referring to
the building of palaces, churches, museums, and theaters. I mean
the practical realization of their concept of culture. Instead, they
232The Masses and the State
completely alienated themselves from those who had but one
commodity to sell, their working power. In their hearts they held
"the people" in contempt. They were petty, limited, cynical, con­
temptuous, avaricious, and very often unscrupulous. In Germany
they helped Hitler to obtain power. They proved themselves to be
completely unworthy of the role society had relegated to them.
They abused their role, instead of using it to guide and educate the
masses of people. They were not even capable of checking the
dangers that threatened their own cultural system. As a social class
they deteriorated more and more. Insofar as they themselves were
familiar with the processes of work and achievement, they under­
stood the democratic freedom movements. But they did nothing to
help them. It was ostentation and not knowledge that they encour­
aged. The encouragement of the arts and sciences was once in the
hands of the feudal lords, whom the bourgeoisie later dethroned.
But the bourgeois capitalists had far less of an objective interest in
art and science than the leading aristocracy had had. While in 1848
the sons of the bourgeois capitalists bled to death at the barricades,
fighting for democratic ideals, the sons of the bourgeois capitalists
between 1920 and 1930 used the university platforms to deride
democratic demonstrations. Later, they were the elite troops of
fascist chauvinism. To be sure, they had fulfilled their function of
opening up the world economically, but they stifled their own
accomplishment with the institution of tariffs and they had not the
least notion of what to do with the internationalism that originated
from their economic accomplishment. They aged rapidly, and as a
social class they became senile.
This assessment of the so-called economic magnates does not
derive from an ideology. I come from these circles and know them
well. I am happy to have rid myself of their influence.
Fascism grew out of the conservatism of the Social Democrats
on the one hand and the narrow-mindedness and senility of the
capitalists on the other hand. It did not embody those ideals that
had been advocated by its predecessors in a practical way, but solely
in an ideological way (and this was the only thing that mattered to
233THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
the masses of people whose psychic structures were ridden with
illusions). It included the most brutal political reaction, the same
political reaction that had devastated human life and property in
the Middle Ages. It paid tribute to so-called native tradition in a
mystical and brutal way, which had nothing to do with a genuine
feeling for one's native country and attachment to the soil. By
calling itself "socialist" and "revolutionary," it took over the unful­
filled functions of the socialists. By dominating industrial magnates,
it took over capitalism. From now on, the achievement of "social­
ism" was entrusted to an all-powerful fuhrer who had been sent by
God. The powerlessness and helplessness of the masses of people
gave impetus to this fuhrer ideology, which had been implanted in
man's structure by the authoritarian school and nourished by the
church and compulsive family. The "salvation of the nation" by an
all-powerful fuhrer who had been sent by God was in complete
accord with the intense desire of the masses for salvation. Incapable
of conceiving of themselves as having a different nature, their
subservient structure eagerly imbibed the idea of man's immutabil­
ity and of the "natural division of humanity into the few who lead
and the many who are led." Now the responsibility rested in the
hands of a strong man. In fascism or wherever else it is encountered,
this fascist fuhrer ideology rests upon the mystical hereditary idea
of man's immutable nature, upon the helplessness, craving for
authority, and incapacity for freedom of the masses of people.
Admitted that the formula, "Man requires leadership and disci­
pline," "authority and order," can be justified in terms of man's
present antisocial structure, the attempt to eternalize this structure
and to hold it to be immutable is reactionary. The fascist ideology
had the best of intentions. Those who did not recognize this subjec­
tive honesty failed altogether to comprehend fascism and its attrac­
tion for the masses. Since the problem of the human structure was
never brought up or discussed, let alone mastered, the idea of a
nonauthoritarian, self-regulatory society was looked upon as
chimerical and utopian.
234The Masses and the State
It was precisely at this point, in the period between 1850 and
1917, that the critique and constructive policies of the founders of
the Russian revolution made a start. Lenin's standpoint was this:
Social Democracy had failed; the masses cannot achieve freedom
spontaneously on their own volition. They need a leadership that is
constructed along hierarchical lines and acts authoritatively on the
surface, but at the same time has a strict democratic structure inter­
nally. Lenin's communism is always conscious of its task: The
"dictatorship of the proletariat" is that social form that leads from
an authoritarian society to a nonauthoritarian, self-regulatory social
order requiring neither police force nor compulsive morality.
Basically, the Russian Revolution of 1917 was a politico­
ideological revolution and not a purely social revolution. It was
based on political ideas which derived from politics and economics
and not from the science of man. We have to have a thorough
comprehension of Lenin's sociological theory and his accomplish­
ment to understand the weak spots that later made possible the
authoritarian totalitarian technique of the Russian mass leadership.
It is necessary to stress that the founders of the Russian Revolution
had no inkling of the biopathic nature of the masses of people. But
then no reasonable person expects that social and individual free­
dom lie ready-made in the desk drawer of the revolutionary thinker
and politician. Every new social effort is based on the errors and
omissions of earlier sociologists and revolutionary leaders. Lenin's
theory of the "dictatorship of the proletariat" embodied a number
of preconditions for the establishment of a genuine social democ­
racy-but by no means all of them. It pursued the goal of a self­
governing human society. It held the view that present-day man is
not capable of achieving social revolution without an organization
constructed along hierarchical lines and that the enormous social
tasks cannot be accomplished without authoritarian discipline and
loyalty. As Lenin conceived it, the dictatorship of the proletariat
was to become the authority that had to be created to abolish every
kind of authority. In the beginning it was fundamentally different
235THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
from the fascist ideology of dictatorship in that it set itself the task
of undermining itself, that is to say, of replacing the authoritarian
government of society by social self-regulation.
In addition to establishing the economic preconditions for
social democracy, the dictatorship of the proletariat had the task of
effecting a basic change in man's structure by means of a complete
industrialization and technicalization of production and commerce.
Granted that Lenin himself did not speak of it in these terms, the
effecting of basic change in man's structure was an essential and
integral part of his sociological theory. According to Lenin's concep­
tion the social revolution had the task not only of eliminating
surface formality and actual conditions of servitude, but also, and
essentially, of making men and women incapable of being exploited.
The creation of the economic preconditions of social democ­
racy, i.e., socialist-planned economy, proved in the course of time to
be a trifle compared with the task of effecting a basic change in the
character structure of the masses. To understand the victory of
fascism and the nationalistic development of the Soviet Union, one
must first comprehend the full magnitude of this problem.
The first act of Lenin's program, the establishment of the
"dictatorship of the proletariat," was a success. The state apparatus
that developed consisted entirely of the sons of workers and peas­
ants. Descendents of the former feudal and upper classes were
excluded.
The second and most important act, the replacement of the
proletarian state apparatus by social self-administration failed to
materialize. In 1944, twenty-seven years after the victory of the
Russian Revolution, there is still no sign that points to the imple­
mentation of the second, genuinely democratic act of the Revolu­
tion. The Russian people are ruled by a dictatorial one-party system
with an authoritarian fi.ihrer at the top.
How was this possible? Had Stalin "defrauded," "betrayed," the
Leninian revolution-had he "usurped power"?
Let us see what happened.
236The Masses and the State
(I "
THE WITHERING AWAY OF THE STATE
The pursuance of a socially and historically impossible goal is at
variance with the scientific view of the world. It is not the task of
science to concoct systems and to chase after fantastic dreams of a
"better future," but solely to comprehend development as it really
takes place, to recognize its contradictions, and to help those forces
that are progressive and revolutionary to achieve victory, to solve
difficulties, and to make it possible for human society to become
master of the conditions of its existence. The "better future" can
become a reality only when its social preconditions are present and
the structure of the masses of people is capable of utilizing these
conditions to its own best advantage, i.e., is capable of assuming
social responsibility.
Let us begin by summarizing Marx's and Engels' views on the
development of a "communist society." In this we will follow the
basic writings and expositions on Marxism that Lenin published in
the period between March of 1917 and the October Revolution in
State and Revolution.
ENGELS AND LENIN ON SELF-GOVERNMENT
In his most popular work, The Origin of the Family, Private
Property, and the State, Engels destroyed the belief in the "absolute
and eternal state" -in our context, the belief in the indispensability
of the authoritarian leadership of society. On the basis of investiga­
tions made by Lewis Morgan on the organization of the pagan
society, Engels came to the conclusion: The state was not here from
all eternity. There have been societies that functioned without it,
that had no trace of state and state power. When society began to
split up into classes, when the opposition between the emerging
classes threatened to undermine the existence of the society as a
whole, a state power developed of necessity. Society rapidly ap­
proached a stage of development in production at which the exis-
237THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
tence of classes not only ceased to be a necessity but, over and above
this, became a direct hindrance to the development of production.
"They (the classes) will disappear just as inevitably as they once
appeared. With them, the state will also disappear inevitably. That
society that reorganizes production on the basis of free and equal
association of those who produce will relegate the entire machinery
of the state to where it belongs: the museum of antiquity, beside
the spinning wheel and the bronze axe [my italics, WR]."
Voluntary association and self-government of social life prevail
in pagan society.5 The state came into being with the emergence of
classes "to keep the opposition between classes in check" and to
safeguard the continuation of society. Soon and "as a rule" the state
entered the service of the "most powerful, economically superior
class, which, owing to this, also became the ruling class politically,"
and thereby acquired new means of dominating and exploiting the
suppressed classes. What will take the place of state, authoritarian
leadership from above and obedience from below, if the social
revolution is victorious?
Engels gives us a picture of the transition to a new social order.
To begin with "the proletariat seizes state power" and transforms
the means of production into state property. In so doing, it annuls
itself as a proletariat, annuls the opposition between classes and
"also the state as a state." Until then the state was the official
representative of the society as a whole, its condensation in a visible
body; but it was this only insofar as it was the state of that class that
acted as the representative of society as a whole for its time. In
antiquity it was the state of slave-owning citizens; in the Middle
Ages, the state of the feudalists, and later that of the bourgeoisie. If
the state should one day really become the representative of society
as a whole, then it makes itself superfluous. Engels' formulation is
easily understood if the state is regarded as that which it had
become. It was no longer a bond that held together the class society,
5 See Malinowski's report on the work-discipline in the matriarchal Trobriand·
ersj elucidated in Der Einbruch der Sexualmoral, 2nd edition, 1934.
238The Masses and the State
but an instrument used· by the economically superior class to
dominate the economically weaker class. As soon as there is no
longer any social class to be held in suppression and as soon as class
rule and the struggle for individual existence-a struggle that
originates in the anarchy of production-are eliminated along with
the resulting excesses and clashes, there is no longer anything to be
suppressed that would necessitate a special suppressive power such
as the state. The first act in which the state appears as the repre­
sentative of the society as a whole, namely the take-over of the
means of production in the name of the society, is also its last
independent act as a "state." From now on, "the intervention of a
state power in social relations . . . will become superfluous in one
sphere after the other until it dies out by itself." The government
over people is replaced by the administration of things and the
management of production processes. The state is not "abolished";
"
it "withers away.
Lenin elucidated this idea in State and Revolution and stressed
it again and again: In the beginning the capitalist state (state
apparatus) will not merely be taken over or only changed. It will be
"annihilated," and the capitalist state apparatus, the capitalist
police, capitalist officialdom and bureaucracy, will be replaced by
the "power apparatus of the proletariat" and the peasants and
workers allied with it. This apparatus is still a suppressive apparatus,
but now a majority of producers will no longer be suppressed by a
minority of those in possession of capital. Instead, the minority,
those who had formerly wielded power, will be held in check by the
majority, the working people. This is what is known as: "dictator­
ship of the proletariat."
Thus, the withering away of the state described by Engels is
preceded by the abolition of the capitalist state apparatus and the
establishment of the "revolutionary-proletarian state apparatus."
Lenin also went into great detail to point out why this transition in
the form of the dictatorship of the proletariat is "necessary" and
"indispensable," and why a direct realization of a nonauthoritarian,
free society and "true social democracy" is not possible. The social
239THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
democratic slogan "free republic" was criticized as claptrap by both
Engels and Lenin. The proletarian dictatorship serves as a transition
from the previous social form to the desired "communist" form.
The character of the transitional phase can be comprehended only
in terms of the final goals toward which the society aspires. These
final goals are capable of being compassed only insofar as they have
already become visibly developed in the womb of the old society.
Examples of such final goals in the organization of a communist
society are "voluntary respect" for the rules of social cohabitation,
the establishment of a free "community" in place of the state (of
the proletarian state also) as soon as the function of the latter has
been fulfilled; in addition, efforts are made to achieve "self­
administration" in industries, schools, factories, transportation or­
ganizations, etc. In short, what is aimed at is the organization of a
"new generation" which, reared under new, free social conditions,
will be capable of jettisoning the entire trumpery of the state . . .
"the democratic-republican included [Engels]." To the extent to
which the state "withers away," a "free organization" derives from
it in which, as Marx postulated, "the free development of each
individual" becomes the basic condition of the "free development
of everyone."
In this connection two very important questions arose for the
Soviet Union:
1. The "organization of a free generation in a free self-adminis­
trative community," cannot be "created." It has to "grow out" of
the "dictatorship of the proletariat" (in the form of the "gradual
withering away of the state"), must reach a state of development
and ripeness in this transitional phase, in the same way that the
"dictatorship of the proletariat" developed out of the dictatorship
of the bourgeoisie-the "democratic" bourgeoisie included-as a
temporary form of state. Was there a "withering away of the state"
and a gradual realization of a free, self-administrative community in
the Soviet Union between 1930 and 1944-and how was this
evident?
240The Masses and the State
2. If so, what was the nature of this "withering away of the
state," and what were the concrete, tangible, and guidable indica­
tions of the "development of the new generation"? If this was not
the case: Why didn't the state wither away? How were the forces
that sustained the "proletarian state" related to the other forces
that represented the withering away of the state? What kept the
state from withering away?
Neither in Marx's nor in Engels' and Lenin's writings are these
possible outcomes dealt with. In 1935 they were urgent questions.
They demanded an immediate answer. Is the state in the Soviet
Union in the process of withering away? If not, why not?
In contrast to the authoritarian order of the state, the essence of
work-democracy can be described as social self-government. Quite
obviously, a society that is to consist of "free individuals," to consti­
tute a "free community" and to administrate itself, i.e., "govern
itself," cannot be suddenly created by decrees. It has to evolve
organically. And it can create all the preconditions for the desired
condition in an organic way only when it has succeeded in creating a
freedom of movement, that is to say, when it has freed itself of
those influences that are in opposition to such a condition. The first
precondition toward this end is a knowledge of the natural organi­
zation of work, the biologic and sociologic preconditions of work­
democracy. The founders of socialism were not aware of the bio­
logic preconditions. The social preconditions were related to a
period (1840 to around 1920) in which there was only capitalistic
private enterprise on the one hand and masses of wage earners on
the other hand. There was still no politically oriented middle class
to speak of, no development toward state-capitalism, and there were
no masses to be joined together in a reactionary way to carry
National Socialism to victory. Hence, the picture that emerged was
rela ted more to 1850 than it was to 1940.
In Engels' writing, the difference between the "seizure of power
by the proletariat," i.e., the establishment of the "proletarian state,"
and the "cessation of the state altogether," is not clearly worked out
241THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
as it is in Lenin's writings. This is understandable, for Engels,
unlike Lenin, was not faced with the immediate task of making a
sharp distinction between the two stages. In 1917, on the threshold
of the seizure of power, Lenin had to attach a greater importance to
the "period of transition" than Engels had. Lenin determined the
tasks of the period of transition more definitively.
To begin with, he demanded that the institution of the "bour­
geois" state be replaced by the proletarian state, i.e., a "funda­
mentally different kind" of state leadership. What was fundamen­
tally "different" about the proletarian state? With the abolition of
the bourgeois state, Lenin said, it will be necessary to convert the
bourgeois form of democracy into a proletarian democracy with the
"greatest conceivable completeness and consistency," to convert the
state as a special power for the purpose of suppressing a certain class
into an institution "which is no longer a real state." When the
majority of the population suppresses its own suppressors, then a
special repressive power is no longer necessary. In short, Lenin was
not content with a sham, purely formal democracy. He wanted the
people to determine production, distribution of products, social
regulations, increase of population, education, sex, international
relations, etc., in a living and concrete way. And this was the essence
of that which Lenin, in accordance with Marx and Engels, so force­
fully and repeatedly stressed as the "withering away of the state."
"In place of special institutions," Lenin wrote, "in place of a
minority having special privileges (officials, staff of command of the
standing army), the majority itself will take care of these things,
and the greater the entire people's share in the carrying out of the
functions of the state power, the less it has need of this power."
Lenin did not equate "state" and "bourgeoisie rule" in any way,
otherwise he would not have been able to speak of a "state" after
the "defeat of the bourgeoisie." Lenin conceived of the state as the
sum of "institutions," which had been in the service of the ruling
class, the monied bourgeoisie, but now disappeared from their posi­
tion "above the society" to that extent to which the majority of the
people themselves took care of the business of social administration
242The Masses and the State
("self-administration"). Thus, the withering away of the state, the
evolution toward social self-government, is to be measured by the
extent to which those organizations that have become autonomous
and stand above the society are gradually abolished, and the extent
to which the masses, the majority of the population, are included in
the administration, i.e., "self-government of the society."
The Communes will replace the corrupt and rotten parlia­
mentarianism of the bourgeois society by public bodies in which
freedom of opinion and discussion do not degenerate into decep­
tion, for the members of parliament have to do their own work,
implement their own laws, and check the results themselves. Repre­
sentative bodies continue to exist, but parliamentarianism as a
special system, as a division between legislative and executive
activity, as a privileged position for members of parliament, does
not exist here. Without representative bodies, we cannot conceive
of a democracy [i.e., the phase preceding communism J, not even
proletarian democracy. We can and must conceive of it without
parliamentarianism. If our criticism of bourgeois society is not to be
a hollow phrase; if our efforts to overthrow the bourgeoisie rulership
is to be honest and serious-and not just an "election" slogan to
catch the workers' votes . . . .
-State and Revolution
Hence, we see that a sharp distinction is drawn between "repre­
sentative bodies" and "parliaments." The former are affirmed and
the latter are rejected. Nothing is said about what these bodies
represent and how they represent. We will see that it was this
crucial lacuna in Lenin's theory of the state that enabled latter-day
"Stalinism" to establish its state power.
The representative bodies, called "Soviets" in the Soviet Union,
which had evolved from the workers', peasants', and soldiers'
councils, were supposed, on the one hand, to take over the function
of the bourgeois parliament by transforming it from a "chatter
hovel" (Marx's term) into a working body. It is evident from
Lenin's train of thought that this very transformation of the charac­
ter of the representative bodies implies a change in the representa-
243THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
tive himself. He ceases to be a "chatterbox" and becomes a
functionary who works out and carries out plans and is responsible
to the people. On the other hand, they are not stagnant institutions.
They are constantly growing. More and more members of the
population are included in the functions of social administration.
And this self-administration of the society, i.e., the performing of
the social functions by the people themselves, will be that much
more complete, the greater the number of people who participate in
it. At the same time this means that the less the Soviets are elected
"representatives," the more the total population takes over those
functions that determine and carry out social planning. For until
then the Soviets themselves are still more or less isolated from the
society as a whole, notwithstanding the fact that they are organs and
bodies that evolved from the society itself. It is also clear from
Lenin's conception that the proletarian representative bodies serve
transitional functions. They are conceived of as mediators between
the "proletarian state power," which is still necessary, still in opera­
tion, but already withering, and the self-government of society,
which is not yet an accomplished fact, not yet fully capable of
functioning by itself. It is a self-government which still has to be
fully developed. The Soviets can either coincide more and more
with the society as a whole, which is developing toward self­
government, or they can become mere appendages and executive
organs of the proletarian state power. They operate between two
forces: one power that is still a state power and a new social system
of self-government. What is it that determines whether the Soviets
fulfill their progressive revolutionary function, or whether they
deteriorate into hollow, purely formalistic fabrics of a state adminis­
trative body? Apparently, it is determined by the following:
1. Whether the proletarian state power remains true to its
function of gradually eliminating itself;
2. Whether the Soviets regard themselves not only as the
helpmates and executive organs of the proletarian state power, but
also as its surveillant and as that institution, so heavily saddled with
244The Masses and the State
responsibility, that transfers the function of social leadership more
and more from the proletarian state power to the society as a whole;
3. Whether the individual members of the masses increasingly
measure up to their tasks of gradually and continually taking over
the functions of the still operative state apparatus as well as those of
the Soviets, insofar as the latter are only "representatives" of the
masses.
This third point is the decisive one, for upon its fulfillment
depends the "withering away of the state" in the Soviet Union, as
well as the take-over of the functions of the Soviets by the working
masses of people.
Hence, the dictatorship of the proletariat is not intended as a
permanent condition but as a process, which is to begin with the
destruction of the authoritarian state apparatus and the establish­
ment of the proletarian state and to end with total self-administra­
tion, the self-government of the society.
To arrive at an accurate appraisal of the course of the social
process, one has to study the function and development of the
Soviets. The course of this process cannot be concealed by any
illusions if one considers the following: It is not a question whether
90 percent of the population participates in the elections of the
Soviet bodies, as compared with 60 percent formerly, but whether
the Soviet voters (not the Soviet representatives) also assume more
and more of an actual part in social leadership. A "90 percent
election turnout" is not proof of a progressive development toward
social self-government, if only because it tells us nothing about the
substance of the activity of the masses, and, moreover, is not solely
characteristic of the Soviet system. The bourgeois democracies,
indeed even the fascist "plebiscites" showed "election turnouts of
90 percent and more." It is an essential part of work-democracy to
assess the social maturity of a community, not in terms of quantity
of votes but in terms of the actual, tangible substance of its social
activity.
Thus, we always come back to the cardinal question of every
245THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
social order: What is taking place in the masses of the population?
How do they experience the social process to which they are sub­
ject?
Will the working population become capable, and how will it
become capable of causing the withering away of the authoritarian
state, which rises above and against the society, and taking over its
functions, i.e., developing social self-government organically?
Apparently, this is the question Lenin had in mind when he
made it clear that a complete elimination of bureaucracy in all
spheres all at once was impossible, but that the old, bureaucratic
apparatus would certainly have to be replaced by a new one, "which
gradually makes every bureaucracy superfluous and abolishes it."
"This is not a utopia," Lenin wrote, "this is borne out by the
experience of the commune. It is the immediate task of the revolu­
tionary proletariat." Lenin did not discuss why the "abolition of
bureaucracy" was not a utopian aspiration, nor how life without
bureaucracy, without leadership "from above," was not only by all
means possible and necessary but, what was more, was the "im­
mediate task of the revolutionary proletariat."
Lenin's emphasis can be understood only if one bears in mind
man's (and most of his leaders') deeply ingrained, seemingly in­
eradicable belief in the infantilism of the masses, above all, the
belief in the impossibility of getting along without authoritarian
leadership. "Self-administration," "self-government," "nonauthori­
tarian discipline," -such new concepts, in view of fascism, only
evoked an indulgent smile of contempt! The dreams of anarchists!
Utopian! Chimerical! Indeed, these shouters and sneerers could
even point to the Soviet Union, to Stalin's statement that the aboli­
tion of the state was out of the question, that, on the contrary, the
power of the proletarian state had to be strengthened and extended.
Lenin had been wrong after all, then! Man is and remains a sub­
servient being. Without authority and coercion he will not work,
but merely "indulge his pleasures and be lazy." Don't waste your
time and energy with empty chimera! But if this was so, then an
246The Masses and the State
official correction of Lenin's ideas was to be demanded from the
state leadership of the Soviet Union. It would have to show that
Lenin had erred when he wrote the following:
We are not utopians. We do not "dream" about how we can
get along without any administration, without any subordination all
at once. These anarchistic dreams, which are based on a misunder­
standing of the tasks of the dictatorship of the proletariat, are
foreign to the nature of Marxism. In reality, they merely serve to
put off the socialist revolution to a time when men will have be­
come different. No, we have to carry out the socialist revolution
with people as they are now, that is to say, with people who will not
be able to get along without subordination, control, "managers and
bookkeepers". . . . But one has to subordinate oneself to the
anned avant-garde of all those who have been exploited, to the
workers, the proletariat. What is specifically "bureaucratic" in gov­
ernment offices can and must be replaced by the simple functions of
"managers and bookkeepers." Work on this must begin immedi­
ately, from one day to the next. . . . Workers, we ourselves shall
organize the large industries; we shall organize them on the basis of
our own experience; we shall take over where capitalism left off; we
shall create a strict, iron discipline, which will be maintained by the
state power of the armed workers; we shall convert the state officials
into simple executors of our instructions; we shall convert them into
responsible, replaceable, modestly paid "managers and book­
keepers" . . . that is our proletarian task. With this we can and
must begin the implementation of the proletarian revolution. Such
a beginning on the basis of large industries will automatically lead
to a gradual withering away of every fonn of bureaucracy, to the
gradual creation of a new order without quotation marks, an order
which will have nothing to do with wage-slavery [my italics, WR].
We will create an order in which the functions of management and
rendering of accounts will become more and more simplified and
will be perfonned by the people themselves on a rotation basis. As
time goes on, these functions will become a habit and finally dis­
appear altogether as special functions of a special class of people.
-State and Revolution
247THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
Lenin failed to see the dangers of the new state bureaucracy.
Apparently, he believed that the proletarian bureaucrats would not
abuse their power, would stick to the truth, would teach the work­
ing people to be independent. He failed to take into account the
abysmal biopathy of the human structure. Indeed, he had no notion
of it.
Sociologic literature has paid far too little regard to the fact that
in his main work on the revolution, Lenin did not devote most of
his attention to the "overthrow of the bourgeoisie" but to the subse­
quent tasks: the replacement of the capitalistic state apparatus by a
proletarian apparatus and the replacement of the proletarian dic­
=
tatorship (social democracy proletarian democracy) by the self­
government of the society, which was supposed to be the outstand­
ing characteristic of communism. If one paid special heed to Soviet
literature from 1937 on, one saw that it was the strengthening (not
the loosening) of the power of the proletarian state appartus that
took priority over all other efforts. There was no longer any talk of
the necessity of its eventual replacement by self-administration. To
understand the Soviet Union, however, it is precisely this point that
is of decisive importance. Obviously, Lenin had good reason for
discussing it in detail in his main work on the Revolution. It was, is,
and will continue to be the living nerve system of every genuine
social democracy. It was not and is not mentioned by any politician.
THE PROGRAM OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF THE
( 1919)
SOVIET UNION EIGHTH PARTY CONGRESS,
Under Lenin, Russian despotism was transformed into Russian
"social democracy." The program of the Communist party of the
Soviet Union of 1919, two years after the Revolution, is proof of the
genuine democratic character of its efforts. It demands a state
power, which is to ward off a return of despotism and is to guaran­
tee the establishment of the free, self-administration of the masses
of people. But it contains no hint of the nature of the incapacity for
freedom of the tnlsl ses of people. It has no knowledge of the
248The Masses and the State
biopathic degeneration of man's sexual structure. The revolutionary
sexual laws that were enacted between 1917 and 1920 were in the
right direction, i.e., they were a recognition of man's biologic func­
tions. But they got stuck in legal formalism. I made an effort to
demonstrate this in Part II of my book Die Sexualitiit im Kultur­
kampf (1936). It was on this issue that the reconstruction of the
human structure foundered, and with it the fulfillment of the
democratic program. This catastrophe of an enormous social effort
should be a lesson to every new democratic revolutionary effort: No
program advocating freedom has any chance of success unless a
basic change is also effected in man's present biopathic sexual
structure.
The following is an excerpt from the program of the 8th Party
Congress of the Communist party of the Soviet Union. *
1. A bourgeois republic, even the most democratic, sanctified
by such watchwords as "will of the people," "will of the nation,"
"no class privilege," remains in fact, owing to the existence of
private property in land and other means of production, the dic­
tatorship of the bourgeoisie, an instrument for exploitation and
oppression of the broad masses of workers by a small group of
capitalists. In opposition to this, proletarian or Soviet democracy
transformed mass organizations precisely of the classes oppressed by
capitalism, of proletarian and poorest peasantry or semi-proletarian,
i.e., the vast majority of the population, into a single and perma­
nent basis of the state apparatus, local and central. By this act, the
Soviet State realized among other things local and regional auton­
omy without the appointment of authorities from above, on a much
wider scale than is practised anywhere.6 The aim of the Party is to
exert the greatest efforts in order to realize fully this highest type of
.. The English translation of the program of the 8th Party Congress of the
Soviet Union is quoted from Soviet Communism: Programs and Rules, edited
by Jan. F. Triska (Chandler Publishing Co., San Francisco, 1962). All italics
are by Wilhelm Reich.
6 In this connection: cf. the principle of local self·government in the United
States after the emancipation of 1776.
249THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
democracy, which to function accurately requires a continually
rising standard of culture, organization and activity on the part of
the masses.
2. In contrast to bourgeois democracy, which concealed the
class character of the state, the Soviet authority openly acknowl­
edges that every state must inevitably bear a class character7 until
the division of society into classes has been abolished and all gov­
ernment authority disappears. By its very nature, the Soviet state
directs itself to the suppression of the resistance of the exploiters,
and the Soviet constitution does not stop short of depriving the
exploiters of their political rights, bearing in mind that any kind of
freedom is a deception if it is opposed to the emancipation of labor
from the yoke of capital. The aim of the Party of the proletariat
consists in carrying on a determined suppression of the resistance of
the exploiters, in struggling against the deeply rooted prejudices
concerning the absolute character of bourgeois rights and freedom,
and at the same time explaining that deprivation of political rights
and any kind of limitation of freedom are necessary as temporary
measures in order to defeat the attempts of the exploiters to retain
or to reestablish their privileges. With the disappearance of the
possibility of the exploitation of one human being by another, the
necessity for these measures will also gradually disappear and the
Party will aim to reduce and completely abolish them.
3. Bourgeois democracy has limited itself to formally extending
political rights and freedom, such as the right of combination,
freedom of speech, freedom of press, equality of citizenship. In
practice, however, particularly in view of the economic slavery of
the working masses, it was impossible for the workers to enjoy these
rights and privileges to any great extent under bourgeois democracy.
Proletarian democracy on the contrary, instead of formally
proclaiming those rights and freedoms, actually grants them first of
all to those classes which have been oppressed by capitalism, i.e., to
7 This important democratic point of view was later lost. One stressed the
"state," but failed to add that "class rule" was an essential character of every
state apparatus. For if there were no classes, ruling and suppressed, there would
be no state apparatus, but merely a simple apparatus of social administration
[WR].
250The Masses and the State
the proletariat and to the peasantry. For that purpose the Soviet
state expropriates premises, printing offices, supplies of paper, etc.,
from the bourgeoisie, placing 'these at the disposal of the working
masses and their organizations. The aim of the All-Russian Com­
munist Party is to encourage the working masses to enjoy demo­
cratic rights and liberties, and to offer them every opportunity for
.
doing so.
4. Bourgeois democracy through the ages proclaimed equality
of persons, irrespective of religion, race or nationality and the
equality of the sexes, but capitalism prevented the realization of this
equality and in its imperialist stage developed race and national
suppression. The Soviet Government, by being the authority of the
toilers, for the first time in history could in all spheres of life realize
this equality, destroying the last traces of woman's inequality in the
sphere of marriage and the family. At the present moment the work
of the Party is principally intellectual and educational with the aim
of abolishing the last traces of former inequality and prejudices,
especially among the backward sections of the proletariat and
peasantry.
The Party's aim is not to limit itself to the formal proclamation
of woman's equality, but to liberate woman from all the burdens of
antiquated methods of housekeeping, by replacing them by house­
communes, public kitchens, central laundries, nurseries, etc.
5. The Soviet Government, guaranteeing to the working
masses incomparably more opportunities to vote and to recall their
delegates, in the most easy and accessible manner, than they pos­
sessed under bourgeois democracy and parliamentarian ism, at the
same time abolishes all the negative features of parliamentarianism,
especially the separation of legislative and executive powers, the
isolation of the representative institutions from the masses, etc.
In the Soviet state not a territorial district, but a productive
unit (factory, mill) forms the electoral unit and the unit of the
state. The state apparatus is thus brought near to the masses.
The aim of the Party consists in endeavoring to bring the
Government apparatus into still closer contact with the masses, for
the purpose of realizing democracy more fully and strictly in prac­
tice, by making Government officials responsible to, and placing
them under the control of the masses.
251THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
6. The Soviet state includes in its organs-the Soviets-work­
men and soldiers on a basis of complete equality and unity of
interests, whereas bourgeois democracy, in spite of all its declara­
tions, transformed the army into an instrument of the wealthy
classes, separated it from the masses, and set it against them,
depriving the soldiers of any opportunity of exercising their political
rights. The aim of the Party is to defend and develop this unity of
the workmen and soldiers in the Soviets and to strengthen the
indissoluble ties between the armed forces and the organizations of
the proletariat and semi-proletariat.
7. The urban industrial proletariat, being the more concen­
trated, united and educated section of the toiling masses, hardened
in battle, played the part of leader in the whole Revolution. This
was evidenced while the Soviets were being created, as well as in the
course of development of the Soviets into organs of authority. Our
Soviet Constitution reflects this in certain privileges it confers upon
the industrial proletariat, in comparison with the more scattered
petty-bourgeois masses in the village.
The All-Russian Communist Party, explaining the temporary
character of these privileges, which are historically connected with
difficulties of socialist organization of the village, must try undeviat­
ingly and systematically to use this position of the industrial prole­
tariat in order closer to unite the backward and the scattered masses
of the village proletarians and semi-proletarians, as well as the
middle-class peasantry, as a counter-balance to narrow craft profes­
sional interests, which were fostered by capitalism among the
workmen.
8. The proletarian revolution, owing to the Soviet organization
of the state, was able at one stroke to destroy the old bourgeois,
official and judicial state apparatus. The comparatively low standard
of culture of the masses,s the absence of necessary experience in
S "The comparatively low standard of culture of the masses" is a rationalistic
conception of the biopathic structure. It shows not the least comprehension
of the fact that slave mentality is deeply rooted in the body itself, has become
a second nature, as it were, so that the masses o t people pass on their suppres­
sion from generation to generation [WR].
252The Masses and the State
state administration on the part of responsible workers who are
elected by the masses, the pressing necessity, owing to the critical
situation of engaging specialists of the old school, and the calling up
to military service of the more advanced section of city workmen,
all this led to the partial revival of bureaucratic practices within the
Soviet system.9
The All-Russian Communist Party, carrying on a resolute
struggle with bureaucratism, suggests the following measures for
overcoming the evil:
( 1) Every member of the Soviet is obliged to perform a certain
duty in state administration.
( 2) These duties must change in rotation, so as gradually to
embrace all the branches of administrative work.
( 3) All the working masses without exception must be gradu­
ally induced to take part in the work of state administration.
The complete realization of these measures will carry us in
advance of the Paris Commune, and the simplification of the work
of administration, together with the raising of the level of culture of
the masses, will eventually lead to the abolition of state authority.
The following points of the program are singled out as being
characteristic of Soviet democracy:
1. Local and regional self-administration without the appoint­
ment of authorities from above.
2. Activity on the part of the masses.
3. Deprivation of political rights and limitation of freedom as a
temporary measure to defeat the exploiters.
4. Not a formal, but an actual granting of an rights and
freedom to all noncapitalistic classes of the population.
5. Immediate, simple, and direct franchise.
6. The right to elect and recall delegates.
7. Elections not according to districts but according to produc­
tive units.
9 The intimate connection between bureaucracy and the human incapacity for
freedom is clearly seen here [WR J.
253THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
8. The responsibility and obligation of those in office to render
an account of their activities to the workers' and peasants' councils.
9. Rotation of members of the Soviet in the administrative
branches.
10. Gradual inclusion of the entire working population in the
work of the administration of the state.
11. Simplification of the administrative functions.
12. Abolition of the state power.
There is one thought that struggles to gain clarity among these
historically decisive principles, namely: How can social life be
simplified in actual practice? Struggle as it may, however, it remains
stuck in formal political thinking. The nature of the politics of state
is not described. Admitted that the masses themselves are given the
scope of freedom, yet they are still not set any practical social tasks.
It is not stated that the masses of the people, as they are today,
cannot take over state and (later) social functions. The present
political thinking related to the state was derived from the first
hierarchical representatives of the state and was always directed
against the masses. Politically, we are still stuck in the systems of
thought of the Greek and Roman slave states, no matter how much
we rant about "democracy." If social self-administration is to be­
come a reality, it is not only the form of the state that has to be
changed. Social existence and its management must be changed in
accordance with the tasks and needs of the masses of people. Social
self-administration must gradually replace the state apparatus or
take over its rational function.
" . "
THE INTRODUCTION OF SOVIET DEMOCRACY
The Eighth Party Congress of the Communist party of the
Soviet Union founded Soviet democracy in 1919. In January of
1935, the Seventh Soviet Congress announces the "introduction of
Soviet Democracy." What is the meaning of this nonsense?
We want to tell a little story to illustrate the process that led to
254The Masses and the State
the "introduction of Soviet democracy" in 1935, sixteen years after
the introduction of Soviet democracy.
In the course of his studies, a student of criminal jurisprudence
realizes that man's antisocial acts are not to be looked upon as
crimes, but as sicknesses; therefore, they should not be punished.
They should be healed, and efforts should be made to prevent their
recurrence. He gives up his study of law and turns to the study of
medicine. He replaces formal ethical activities with practical and
pertinent activities. After awhile, he further realizes that his medical
work will require the use of some nonmedical methods. For ex­
ample, he would like to dispense with the use of straitjackets as a
method of treatment for mental patients and replace their use by
preventive educational measures. Despite his better judgment, how­
ever, he is forced to make use of the straitjacket-there are just too
many mental patients. He cannot cope with all of them, so he has
to continue to use antiquated and poor methods, but always bearing
in mind that they must be replaced someday by better methods.
As time goes by the task becomes more than he can handle. He
is not equal to it. Too little is known about mental sicknesses.
There are too many of them; education produces them by the
thousands every day. As a physician he has to protect society from
mental illnesses.
He cannot carry out his good intentions. On the contrary, he
has to revert to the old methods, the very methods he had formerly
condemned so severely and had wanted to replace with better ones.
He makes use of straitjackets more and more. His educational plans
come to naught. His efforts to become a physician who prevents
sicknesses, instead of one who has to cure them, also fail. He has
no choice but to revert to the old laws. His effort to treat criminals
as patients does not bear fruit. He is forced to have them locked up
again.
But he doesn't admit his fiasco, neither to himself nor to others.
He doesn't have the courage. Perhaps he isn't even aware of it. Now
he asserts the following nonsense: "The introduction of strait;ackets
255THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
and prisons for criminals and people who are mentally ill represents
an enormous step forward in the application of my medical art. It is
the true medical art; it constitutes the attainment of my original
goal!"
This story applies in the minutest detail to the "introduction of
Soviet democracy," sixteen years after the "introduction of Soviet
democracy." It becomes comprehensible only when it is assessed
against the basic conception of "social democracy" and the "aboli­
tion of the state" as set forth by Lenin in State and Revolution.
The explanation for this measure given by the Soviet government is
not so important here. Only one sentence from the explanation,
printed in the Rundschau, 1935, no. 7, p. 331, shows that with this
act, whether justified or not, Lenin's conception of social democracy
was annulled. It is stated:
The proletarian dictatorship has always been the only true
power of the people. It has successfully fulfilled both of its main
tasks: the destruction of the exploiters as a class, their expropriation
and suppression, and the socialist education of the masses. The
proletarian dictatorship continues to exist undeterred. . .
.
If the exploiters have been destroyed as a class and the socialist
education of the masses has been a success, and yet the dictatorship
continues to exist "undeterred," we see just how nonsensical the
whole idea is. If the preconditions have been fulfilled, then why
does the dictatorship continue to exist undeterred? Against whom
or what is it directed if the exploiters have been crushed and the
masses have already been educated to assume responsibility for
social functions? Such a ridiculous formulation always conceals an
all-tao-true meaning: The dictatorship continues, but now it is no
longer directed against the exploiters of the old school, but against
the masses themselves.
The Rundschau continues: "This higher socialist phase, the
alliance between workers and peasants, gives the proletarian dic­
tatorship, as the democracy of the workers, a new and higher
256The Masses and the State
content. This new content also requires new forms, i.e., . . . the
transition to equal, direct, and secret ballots for the workers."
We don't want to engage in any hairsplitting: The proletarian
dictatorship (which in time was supposed to give way to the self­
administration of masses of people) exists simultaneously with the
"most democratic" democracy. This is sociologic nonsense, a confu­
sion of all sociologic concepts. We are concerned here with one
central question: Was the main goal of the social revolutionary
movement of 1917, the abolition of the state and the introduction
of social self-administration, actually achieved? If so, then an essen­
tial difference must exist between the "Soviet democracy" of 1935
and the "proletarian dictatorship" of 1919 on the one hand, and the
bourgeois parliamentary democracies of England and America on
the other hand.
Mention is made of the "further democratization" of the Soviet
system. How is this possible? We were under the impression that, in
terms of its nature, the conception of its founders, and also as it
actually was in the beginning, the "proletarian dictatorship" is
completely identical with social democracy (= proletarian democ­
racy). If, however, the dictatorship of the proletariat is the same as
social democracy, then a Soviet democracy cannot be introduced
sixteen years after the establishment of social democracy, nor can
there be a "further democratization." The "introduction of democ­
racy" certainly implies-and there can be no doubt about this-that
social democracy had not existed previously and that the dictator­
ship of the proletariat was not identical with social democracy.
Quite apart from this, it is absurd to say that social democracy is the
"most democratic" system. Is bourgeois democracy only "a little"
democratic, while social democracy is "more" democratic? What
does "a little" and what does "more" mean? In reality, bourgeois
parliamentary democracy is a formal democracy; masses of people
elect their representatives, but they do not govern themselves
through their own workers' organizations. And Lenin's social de­
mocracy was supposed to be a qualitatively completely different
257THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
form of social regulation and not merely a kind of quantitative
improvement of formal parliamentarianism. It was supposed to re­
place the proletarian dictatorship of the state by the actual and
practical self-administration of the workers. The parallel existence
of the "dictatorship of the proletariat" and the self-administration
of the working masses, is an impossibility. As a political demand it is
confusing and nonsensical. In actual fact it is a dictatorship of party
bureaucracy that rules over the masses under the guise of a formal
democratic parliamentarianism.
We must never lose sight of the fact that Hitler always built
upon the justified hate of masses of people against sham democracy
and the parliamentary system-and with great success! In view of
such political maneuvers on the part of Russian Communists, fas­
cism's potent slogan, "unity of Marxism and parliamentary bour­
geois liberalism," must have been very impressive! Around 1935 the
hope that broad masses of people throughout the world had placed
on the Soviet Union began to dwindle more and more. Actual
problems cannot be solved with political illusions. One has to have
the guts to face difficulties squarely. Clearly established social con­
cepts cannot be confused with impunity.
In the establishment of "Soviet democracy," the participation
of the masses in the administration of the state was stressed, the
protectorate of the industries over the respective branches of the
government was made explicit and the fact that workers' and peas­
ants' councils have a voice "in" the people's commissariats was ex­
tolled. However, this is not the issue. It is the following that is
important:
1. How do the masses actually participate in the administration
of the state? Is this participation an increasing take-over of adminis­
trative functions, as is called for by social democracy? What is the
form of this "participation"?
2. A formal protectorate of an industry over a branch of the
government is not self-administration. Does the government branch
control the industry or vice versa?
3. Councils having a voice "in" the people's commissariat
258The Masses and the State
means that they are appendages or, at best, executive organs of the
commissariat, whereas Lenin's demand reads: Replacement of all
official bureaucratic functions by Soviets, which spread more and
more among the masses.
4. If Soviet democracy is "introduced" at the same time that
the dictatorship of the proletariat continues to be "consolidated,"
this can only mean that the goal, the continuous withering away of
the proletarian state and the proletarian dictatorship, has been
given up.
On the basis of the available facts and the assessment of these
facts, the introduction of "Soviet democracy" sixteen years after the
introduction of Soviet democracy means that: The transition from
authoritarian state government to self-administration of society was
not possible. This transition failed to materialize because the bio­
pathic structure of the masses and the means of effecting a basic
change in this structure were not recognized. There can be no ques­
tion that the disappropriation and curbing of individual capitalists
was a complete success; but the education of the masses, the at­
tempt to make them capable of abolishing the state, which was only
an oppressor to them, to effect its "withering away" and to take
over its functions, was not a success. It was for this reason that the
social democracy that had begun to develop during the first years of
the Revolution had to die out little by little. It was also for this
reason that the state apparatus, which had not been replaced by
anything, had to be consolidated to secure the existence of society.
Besides a shifting of the political emphasis to the masses of the
kolkhoz peasants, the "introduction of universal suffrage" in 1935
meant the reintroduction of formal democracy. In essence, it meant
that the bureaucratic state apparatus, which was becoming more
and more powerful, granted a meaningless parliamentary right to a
mass of people who had not been able to destroy this apparatus and
had not learned to administrate its own affairs. There is no indica­
tion whatever in the Soviet Union that the slightest effort is being
made to prepare the working masses to take over the administration
of society. It is certainly necessary to teach people to read and write,
259THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
to be sanitary, and to understand the technique of motors, but this
has nothing to do with social self-administration. Hitler does as
much.
The development of Soviet society was characterized by the
formation of a new autonomous state apparatus, which had become
strong enough to give the mass of the population the illusion of
freedom without endangering its own position in any way, in pre­
cisely the same way as Hitler's National Socialism had done. The
introduction of Soviet democracy was not a step forward, but a step
backward, one of many regressions to old forms of social life. What
guarantees are there that the state apparatus of the Soviet Union
will abolish itself by educating the masses to administrate their own
affairs? Sentimentality serves no purpose here: The Russian Revolu­
tion encountered an obstacle, of which it had no knowledge and
which was therefore shrouded in illusions. The obstacle was man's
human structure, a structure that had become biopathic in the
course of thousands of years. It would be absurd to set the "blame"
down to Stalin or anyone else. Stalin was only an instrument of
circumstances. Only on paper does the process of social develop­
ment appear as easy and as pleasant as taking a stroll through the
woods. In hard reality it encounters new and unrecognized difficul­
ties one after the other. Regressions and catastrophes result. One
has to learn to recognize, investigate, and master them. However,
one reproach remains: The veracity of a promising social plan has
to be examined again and again. It must be honestly decided
whether the plan is true or false, and whether anything has been
overlooked in its development. Only in such a way can the plan be
consciously changed and improved, and its development more effec­
tively mastered. It may often be necessary to mobilize the thinking
of many people to overcome those forces that obstruct the develop­
ment toward freedom. But to befog the masses with illusions is a
social crime. When an honest leader of the masses reaches an im­
passe and knows that he cannot make any headway, he resigns and
makes room for others. If a better leader does not appear, the
present leader honestly tells the community exactly where it stands,
260The Masses and the State
and he waits with them to see whether a solution cannot be found
after aU, either from the course of events themselves or from an
individual insight. But the politician is afraid of such honesty.
In defense of the international workers' movement, it must be
pointed out that its fight for a real and genuine democracy-not a
mere rhetorical one-was made incredibly difficult. One always
sided with those who declared: "The dictatorship of the proletariat
is a dictatorship like any other dictatorship. This has become clear,
for why is it only now that democracy is 'introduced'?" There was
no reason to be happy about the praise given to the Soviet Union
("introspective," "democracy," "finally") by the Social Democrats.
It was a bitter pill, a formality. An objective regression in the course
of a development is often necessary and has to be accepted, but to
shroud such a regression in illusions by the fascist method of lying
cannot be justified. When Lenin introduced the "New Economic
Policy" (NEP) in 1923, he did not say: "We have advanced from a
lower phase of proletarian dictatorship to a higher phase. The intro­
duction of the NEP constitutes an enormous step forward toward
communism." Such a statement would have immediately under­
mined confidence in Soviet leadership. When Lenin introduced the
NEP, he said:
It is sad and cruel, but there is no way of getting around it
right now. The economy imposed upon communism by the war has
confronted us with unforeseen difficulties. We have .to go back a
step in order to proceed that much more securely. True, we are
giving private enterprise a bit of freedom-we have no other
choice-but we know exactly what we are doing.
In the case of the "introduction of Soviet democracy," such self­
evident perception and frankness were missing. In 1935 they were
more necessary than ever before. Such a direct and honest approach
would have won millions of friends throughout the world. It would
have made people think. It might even have averted the pact with
Hitler, the responsibility for which was shoved off on the Trots-
261THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
kians. As it was, however, a new Russian nationalism was super­
imposed on Lenin's social democracy.
The Leningrad Red Times, the central organ of the Russian
Bolsheviks, stated on February 4, 1935:
All our love, our faithfulness, our strength, our hearts, our
heroism, our life-everything for you, take it, 0 great Stalin, every­
thing is yours, 0 leader of our great homeland. Command your
sons. They can move in the air and under the earth, in water and in
the stratosphere.lO Men and women of all times and all nations will
remember your name as the most magnificent, the strongest, the
wisest, the most beautiful. Your name is written on every factory, on
every machine, in every comer of the world, in every human heart.
When my beloved wife bears me a child, the first word I will teach
him will be "Stalin."
In Pravda of March 19, 1935 (quoted in the Rundschau, No.
15, p. 787, 1935), we find an article entitled "Soviet Patriotism," in
which "Soviet patriotism" begins to vie with "fascist patriotism":
Soviet patriotism-that flaming feeling of boundless love, un­
conditional devotion to one's native country, deepest responsibility
for its fate and for its defense-surges forth from the deepest
depths of our people. Never before has heroism in the fight for
one's own country reached such stupendous heights. The unparal­
leled and glorious history of the Soviet Union shows what the
working people are capable of when it is a question of their home­
land. The immortal song of our dear, liberated and new-formed
country resounds from the illegal work, the barricades, the storming
and sweeping of Budenny's crack mounted army, the grape-shot fire
of the imperishable army of the revolution, the harmony of the
plants and factories of socialist industries, the rhythm of work
between city and town, and the activity of the Communist Party.
Soviet Russia, the country bred and reared by Lenin and Stalin!
How it is caressed by the rays of Spring, which began with the
10 As if the sons of the "great German homeland" or of the United States
couldn't do the same!
262The Masses and the State
October revolution! Streams swelled up, dammed-up currents broke
forth, all the forces of the working people began to move and to
pave the way for new historical developments. The grandeur of the
Soviet Union, the splendor of its fame and its power shone forth
from every comer of the country. The seeds of a rich life and a
socialist culture sprang up rapidly. We have raised the Red banner
of Communism to new heights and far into blue distant skies.
Soviet patriotism is the love of our people for the land, the land
which we have wrung from the capitalists and landowners with
blood and sword. It is the attachment to the beautiful life which
our great people have created. It is the militant and powerful g�ard
in West and East. It is the dedication to the great cultural heritage
of human genius which has blossomed so perfectly in our country
and in OUT country only [my italics, WR]. Is it surprising, then,
that foreigners come to the borders of the Soviet Union, people
with different educational backgrounds, to bow reverently to the
haven of culture, to the state of the Red flag?
Soviet Union-the fountainhead of mankind! The name of
Moscow rings forth to the workers, peasants, to all honest and
cultured people the world over, rings forth like a bell in the fog at
sea, a hope for a brighter future and for the victory over fascist
barbarism.
. . . In our socialist country, the interests of the people cannot
be separated from the interests of the country and its government.
Soviet patriotism derives its inspiration from the fact that the
people themselves, under the leadership of the Soviet Party, have
shaped their own life. It derives its inspiration from the fact that
only now, under Soviet power, has our beautiful and rich country
been opened to the working people. And the natural attachment to
one's native country, one's native soil, to the skies under which one
first saw the light of this world, grows and becomes a powerful pride
in one's socialist country, in one's great Communist Party, in one's
Stalin. The ideas of Soviet patriotism breed and rear heroes, knights
and millions of brave soldiers who, like an all-engulfing avalanche,
are ready to hurl themselves upon the enemies of the country and
obliterate them from the face of the earth. With the milk from
their mothers, our youth are imbued with love for their country. It
is our obligation to educate new generations of Soviet patriots, for
263THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
whom the interests of their country will mean more than anything
else, even more than life itself. . .
.
. . . Th e great invincible spirit of Soviet patriotism is nurtured
with the greatest care, skill and creativity. Soviet patriotism is one
of the outstanding manifestations of the October revolution. How
much strength, boldness, youthful vigor, heroism, pathos, beauty
and movement it containsl
In our country, Soviet patriotism glows like a powerful flame. It
drives life forward. It heats the motors of our storm tanks, our
heavy bombers, our destroyers, and loads our cannons. Soviet
patriotism guards our borders, where vile enemies, doomed to
perish, threaten our peaceful life, our power and our glory . . . .
This is the emotional plague of politics. It has nothing to do
with the natural love of one's native country. It is the maudlin
raving of a writer who knows of no objective means of stirring
people's enthusiasm. It is comparable to the erection of an impotent
man, forcefully brought about by the use of yohimbine. And the
social effects of such patriotism are comparable to the reaction of a
healthy woman to a sexual embrace made possible by yohimbine.
Perhaps this "Soviet patriotism," in view of the extinction of
revolutionary enthusiasm, was a necessary preparation for the later
fight against the "Wotan patriotism." Work-democracy has nothing
to do with such "patriotism." Indeed, one can safely infer that
rational social leadership has failed when such yohimbine patriotism
begins to crop up. The love of a people for its country, attachment
to the earth and devotion to the community speaking the same
language, are human experiences, which are too deep and too
serious to be made the objects of political irrationalism. Such yo­
himbine forms of patriotism do not solve a single objective problem
of the human society of the working man; they have nothing to do
with democracy. Outbreaks of sentimental pathos always point to
fear on the part of those who are responsible. We want to have
nothing to do with it.
When a genuine democratic, i.e., work-democratic effort is
made to effect a basic change in the· structure of masses of people, it
264The Masses and the State
is easy to appraise the progress or lack of progress that is being
made. For instance, when masses of people begin to clamor for
super-dimensional pictures of their "fUhrer," then they are on their
way to becoming irresponsible. In Lenin's time, a spoonfed fiihrer­
cult did not exist, and there were no sky-high pictures of the fiihrer
of the proletariat. It is known that Lenin wanted no part of such
things.
The attitude taken toward technical achievements is also indic­
ative of a peoples' progress or lack of progress toward genuine
freedom. In the Soviet Union the construction of the airliner
"Gorki" was extolled as a "revolutionary achievement." But wherein
lies the essential difference between the construction of this air­
liner and those of Germany or America? The construction of
airplanes is indispensable in order to provide the broad industrial
basis necessary for modem work-democracy. This much is clear, and
there should be no arguing about it. What is important is whether
the broad masses of workers identify with the construction of air­
planes in an illusionary nationalistic-chauvinistic way, i.e., derive a
feeling of superiority toward other nations on the basis of the con­
struction of these airplanes, or whether the construction of airplanes
serves to bring about a closer human relationship among the various
nations and nationalities, i.e., serves to promote internationalism. In
other words, as far as man's character structure is concerned, the
construction of airplanes can serve a reactionary or work-democratic
purpose. Under the management of power-thirsty politicians, the
construction of airplanes can easily be exploited to create nationalis­
tic chauvinism. But airliners can also be used to transport Germans
to Russia, Russians to China and Germany, Americans to Germany
and Italy, and Chinese to America and Germany. In this way the
German worker would have a chance to see for himself that he is
not essentially different from the Russian worker, and the English
worker would be able to learn that the Indian worker is not to be
looked upon as a born object of exploitation.
Here again we see clearly that the technical development of a
society is not identical with its cultural development. The structure
265THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
of the human character represents a social power in itself, a power
that can be directed toward reactionary or international goals, even
when the technical basis is one and the same. The tendency to see
everything in terms of economy is catastrophic. Every effort must be
made to correct this tendency.
It boils down to this: The working masses of people must refuse
to be content with illusionary gratifications, which always end in a
kind of fascism, and to insist upon the real gratification of the
necessities of life and to bear the responsibility for it.
The Social Democratic organization of Viennese workers re­
garded the introduction of the trolley system by the Social Demo­
cratic community of Vienna as a specifically social democratic
achievement. The communist workers of Moscow, that is to say,
workers who were fundamentally hostile toward the Social Demo­
cratic party, regarded the subway constructed by the communist city
administration of Moscow as a specifically communist achievement.
And the German workers regarded the planned Baghdad railroad as
a specifically German achievement. These examples are evidence of
the plaguelike nature of the illusionary gratification fostered by
political irrationalism. Such irrationalism conceals the simple fact
that a German railroad and a Viennese railroad and a Moscow
railroad are based on precisely the same internationally valid prin­
ciples of work, which the Viennese, Berlin, and Moscow workers
follow in precisely the same way. These workers of various nationali­
ties don't say to themselves: "We are all related to one another by
the principle of our work and accomplishment. Let us get to know
one another and also consider how we can teach the Chinese worker
to make use of our principles." No! The German worker is firmly
convinced that his railroad is different and better, let us say more
Wotanistic, than the Russian railroad. Thus, it never enters his
mind to help the Chinaman to build a railroad. On the contrary,
hypnotized by his illusionary nationalistic gratification, he follows
some plague-ridden general or another, who wants to deprive the
Chinese of whatever railroad they have. In this way the emotional
plague of politics engenders division and deadly hostility within the
266The Masses and the State
same class; in this way it engenders envy, boastfulness, unprincipled
conduct, and irresponsibility. The elimination of illusionary gratifi­
cation and its replacement by the genuine gratification derived from
a genuine interest in and relationship to work and the establishment
of international cooperation among workers are indispensable pre­
conditions for the uprooting of the craving for authority in the
character structure of the workers. Only then will the working
masses of people be able to develop the forces necessary to adapt
technology to the needs of the masses.
In an essay printed in the Europiiische Heften of November
22, 1934, Hinoy reached the conclusion: " . . . Th e workers [in the
Soviet Union 1 do not feel themselves to be the direct rulers of their
country, nor do the youth. The state is the ruler, but the youth look
upon this state as their own creation, and it is from this conception
that it derives its patriotism."
Such statements were common at that time, and they left no
room for doubt that, no matter how one appraised it, the society of
the Soviet Union of the 1930s had nothing whatever to do with the
original program of the Communist party, a program that called for
the gradual abolition of the state. This is an ob;ective and factual
statement and not a political program against the Soviet Union. I
call upon the KGB* agents in Europe and America to take cogni­
zance of this. The murdering of those who make such statements
will not change the facts of the case in the least.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE APPARATUS OF THE AUTHORI­
TARIAN STATE FROM RATIONAL SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS
World War II has reconfirmed what has been general knowl­
edge from time immemorial: The fundamental difference between
the reactionary politician and the genuine democrat is revealed in
their attitude toward state power. A man's social character can be
ob;ectively appraised on the basis of this attitude, regardless of his
• The Soviet secret service.
267THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
political party. It follows from this that there are genuine democrats
among the fascists and pure fascists among the party democrats.
Just as the character structure, this attitude toward state power is
not confined to any one class or political group. Here, too, to paint
everything in black and white colors is wrong and inadmissible from
a sociological point of view. Mental attitudes and political parties
cannot be mechanically equated.
It is typical of the reactionary to advocate the supremacy of the
state over society; he advocates the "idea of the state," which leads
in a straight line to dictatorial absolutism, whether it is embodied in
a royal, ministerial, or open fascist fonn of state. The genuine
democrat, who acknowledges and advocates natural work-democracy
as the natural basis of international and national cooperation,
always aims at overcoming the difficulties of social cooperation by
eliminating the social causes of these difficulties. It is this aim that
characterizes him as a genuine democrat! This requires a thorough
discussion of the development and the rational function inherent in
the authoritarian state. It is fruitless and senseless to fight an irra­
tional social institution, without first asking oneself how it is pos­
sible that, despite its irrationality, this institution is capable of
surviving and even appearing necessary. From our study of the Rus­
sian state apparatus we learned that this state apparatus became
necessary in the course of time. And it was not difficult to see that,
notwithstanding all its irrationality, it very definitely had the ra­
tional function of holding together and leading the Russian people,
after the masses had failed to achieve social self-government.
We would not hesitate to call a mother's behavior irrational if
she were to treat her neurotic child in a strict and authoritarian
manner. We will readily understand that it is this strictness that
makes the child sick, but we must not overlook the fact-and this is
the cardinal point in the fighting of authoritarian education-that a
child who has become a neurotic, and is living in a neurotic family
situation, cannot be held in check in any other way than with
authoritarian means. In other words, although it is not fundamen­
tally rational, the mother's strictness has a rational side, however
268The Masses and the State
conditional and circumscribed it may be. We will have to concede
this conditional rational function if we ever hope to convince the
educator, who adheres to the authoritarian principle from sheer
necessity, that it can be eliminated by preventing the child from
becoming neurotic.
This conditional and circumscribed rational character also ap­
plies to the authoritarian state, as reluctant as we are to admit it,
knowing how dangerous such a statement could become in the
hands of a mystical dictator. He would be capable of saying: "Do
you hear! Even the liberal work-democrats admit the necessity and
rationality of an authoritarian leadership." We know now that it is
the irrational character structure of masses of people that offers a
"justification" for authoritarian leadership. Only in this way can a
dictatorship be comprehended, and this comprehension is the only
hope of eliminating it from man's life. The recognition of the irra­
tionality in the structure of the masses gives us a social basis from
which to overcome this irrationality and, with it, dictatorship
itself-to overcome it, not with illusions, but objectively and scien­
tifically. When social cooperation is disrupted, state power is always
strengthened. This is in keeping with the moralistic-authoritarian
method of dealing with the difficulties superficially. This approach
does not of course really remove the social evil, but merely pushes it
into the background, from which it later breaks forth much more
violently and extensively. If there are no other means of dealing
with rape murders than the execution of the murderer, then one
uses this method. This is the approach followed by the authoritarian
state. Work-democracy, however, goes to the core of the matter and
asks: How can we eliminate the phenomena of rape and murder
altogether? Only when we comprehend the compulsion of execution
and simultaneously condemn it is the problem of elimination
brought into sharp focus. Undoubtedly, the elimination of social
evils is one of the chief means of causing the authoritarian state to
wither away_ In all probability moralistic-authoritarian social leader­
ship will continue to function only so long as and insofar as it
cannot be superseded by the methods of self-government. This ap-
269THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
plies to the state in general, as well as to all other areas of social
life.
True enough, the authoritarian state is essentially a suppressive
apparatus, but it is not exclusively so. At the same time, and indeed
originally, before it became a suppressive apparatus of the society, it
was an aggregate of autonomous social relations. Originally, the
state was identical with society. In the course of time it detached
itself from the society and became more and more alien to it, even­
tually assuming the form of a raging force above and against it.
As long as there was a social organization (such as in the clan
society) that was not driven by serious inner contradictions, there
was no need for a special power having the task of holding the social
organisms together. The nature of society is such that it requires a
power to prevent its disintegration, its decline, and its dissolution
when it is riven by powerful opposing interests and difficulties of
life. Among other things it was the schism of German society
caused by the many different and hostile political parties that en­
abled German fascism to achieve power. Fascism's rapid and power­
ful rise to power clearly shows that, for masses of German people,
the promise that the society would be held together by means of the
state was more essential than the individual party programs. But
this does not change the fact that ideas and political ideologies
cannot eliminate the inner schisms of society, and it makes no
difference whether this political idea is totalitarian or nontotalitari·
an. The fascists were not the only ones who played up the idea of
the state. They merely did so more urgently and more effectively
than the social democratic government, the Communists, and the
liberals. And it was precisely for this reason that they were victori­
ous. Thus, it is the political schism of a society that gives birth to
the idea of the state, and vice versa, the idea of the state that creates
social schism. It is a vicious cycle from which one can extricate
oneself only if both the schism and the idea of the state are traced
to their source and given a common denominator. As we already
know, this common denominator is the irrational character struc­
ture of masses of people. Neither those who advocated the idea of
270The Masses and the State
the state nor those having other political programs had any inkling
of this common denominator. The assertion that this or that dicta­
tor imposed himself upon a society against its will and from the
outside was one of the gravest errors made in the assessment of
dictatorships. In reality, every dictator in history did nothing more
than bring already existing ideas of the state to a head. He had
merely to seize upon this idea and to exclude all nonrelated ideas to
achieve power.
The rational and irrational dual function of the state and of the
idea of the state was clearly assessed by Friedrich Engels in the last
century:
Hence, the state is definitely not a power imposed upon society
from the outside. Nor, for that matter, is it "the reality of the
moral idea," "the image and reality of reason," as Hegel claimed. It
is the product of society at a certain stage of its development. It is
the admission that a society has become entangled in an insoluble
contradiction with itself, has split up into irreconcilable opposing
interests, which it is powerless to cope with. To prevent these oppo­
sitions, these classes with conflicting economic interests, from con­
suming themselves and society in a fruitless fight, a power which
apparently stands above society becomes necessary, a power which is
supposed to have the function of checking the conflict and keeping
it within the limits of "order." This power which originates from
society but, placing itself above it, becomes more and more alien to
it, is the state.
This sociological elucidation of the concept of the state by the
industrialist and German sociologist Friedrich Engels completely
undermined all philosophies of the state, which in one way or an­
other were derived from Plato's abstract and metaphysical idea.
Friedrich Engels' theory does not trace the apparatus of the state
from higher values and nationalistic mysticism; in a very simple way
it gives a picture of the state's dual nature. Inasmuch as it clarifies
the social basis of the state apparatus and at the same time points
out the contradiction between state and society, it offers the shrewd
statesman-one, for instance, having the stature of Masaryk or
271THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
Roosevelt-as well as each individual working man of the world, a
powerful means with which to comprehend the schism of society
and the consequent necessity of a state apparatus . . . and the
means to eliminate it.
Let us try to elucidate the genesis of the dual nature of the state
with a simple example:
In the initial stages of human civilization the social tasks of
living and working together presented no problem. Hence, the rela­
tionship between man and man was also simple. We can study this
factor in the remnants of the old and simple civilizations which
have continued intact into our own times. Once again let us illus­
trate our point with the well-known organization of the Trobri­
anders. They have a natural economy, i.e., a use economy.
Whatever market economy they practice is of no account. One clan
catches fish, another grows fruit. The one clan has too many fish
and the other has too much fruit. Hence, they exchange fish for
fruit and vice versa. Their economic relationships are very simple.
Besides the economic relationships there is a definite familial
relationship among the members of the clan. Since marriage is
exogamous, the Trobriander adolescents of one clan form sexual
relations with adolescents of another clan. If by a social interper­
sonal relationship we understand every relationship that serves to
gratify a basic biologic need, then the sexual relationship coexists
on an equal par with the economic relationship. The more work
itself becomes separated from the gratification of a need, whereby
the needs themselves become more complicated, the less is the indi­
vidual member of the society capable of fulfilling the manifold
functions that fall to his share. For example:
Let us transplant the Trobriander society and its natural econ­
omy to any place in Europe or Asia. This is an admissible supposi­
tion, for all nations of the earth were formed from tribes, and the
tribes were originally formed from groups of clans. In the same way,
market economy and exchange economy were developed from
natural economy. Let us now assume that in one of these small
communities, consisting of two to three hundred people, the need
272The Masses and the State
arises to establish contact with other small communities. This need
is very small. Only one of the two hundred members of the com­
munity has something to tell a member of another community. He
gets on his horse and rides to the other community and delivers his
message. The art of writing has made a beginning and the need for
social contact with other communities grows little by little. Until
this time everyone delivered his own mail, but now the rider is
requested to deliver several letters. In the meantime the communi­
ties have grown and now comprise as many as two to five thousand
members. The need to enter into a correspondence with members
of other communities also grows. Already hundreds of people are
exchanging letters. With the development of commerce, the writing
of letters ceases to be a rare curiosity. The delivery of letters be­
comes a daily, vitally necessary task, which is more and more
difficult to solve in the old way. One community discusses the
matter and decides to employ a "letter carrier." It relieves one of its,
still nondescript, members from all other duties, guarantees him a
definite income and charges him to take care of the community's
mail. This first letter carrier is the human embodiment of the inter­
personal relationship between letter writing and letter delivery. In
this way a social organ comes into being, the sole function of which
is to deliver letters. Our letter carrier is a primitive type of social
administrator, whose vitally necessary work is still very definitely and
solely in the service of the social community.
Let us further assume that in the course of many years the
primitive communities have grown into small towns of, let us say,
fifty thousand inhabitants each. Among other things the growth of
these communities is to be ascribed to the new function of letter
writing and the social intercourse related to it. One letter carrier is
no longer enough; one hundred letter carriers are needed now. They
require their own administration; therefore, one of them is given
the job of chief letter carrier. He is a letter carrier who has been
relieved of his former duties. In place of these he has assumed the
more extensive duty of organizing the work of the one hundred
letter carriers in the most practical way possible. As yet, he does not
273THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
"supervise," and he does not give orders. He does not stand above
the community of letter carriers. He merely facilitates their work; he
decides when the letters will be picked up and when they will be
delivered. He now gets the idea of producing postage stamps, which
simplify the entire function.
In this way a very simple and vitally necessary function has
become autonomous. "The postal system" has become an "appa­
ratus" of the society; it has grown out of the society for the purpose
of improving its coordination. It still does not set itself up against
this society as a superior power.
How is it possible for such an administrative apparatus of so­
ciety to become a suppressive apparatus? It does not become a
suppressive power on the basis of its original function. The adminis­
trative apparatus retains these social functions, but it gradually
develops characteristics other than those related to its vitally neces­
sary activity. Let us now assume that in our large community,
conditions of authoritarian patriarchy have begun to develop,
wholly independent of the postal system. For example, there are
already "aristocratic" families, which have developed from the origi­
nal tribal chiefs. By accumulating dowries, they have developed a
twofold power: first of all the power that is inherent in property,
and second of all the power to forbid their own children to have
sexual intercourse with the less well-to-do strata of the community.
In the development of economic and sexual slavery these two power
functions always go hand in hand. The authoritarian patriarch who
becomes more and more powerful wants to prevent other, weaker
members of the community from maintaining contact with other
communities. He also wants to make it impossible for his daughters
to exchange love letters with whomever they please. It is of interest
to him that his daughters form relations only with certain well-to­
do men. His interests in sexual and economic suppression cause him
to seize upon those autonomous social functions that were originally
managed by the society as a whole. On the basis of his growing
influence, our patriarch will introduce a new regulation forbidding
the post office to deliver all letters without distinction. Under the
274The Masses and the State
new regulation, fOr example, love letters in general and certain
business letters will not be delivered. To fulfill this novel function,
the post office charges one of its letter carriers with the task of
"censoring the mtlil."
In this way the social administration of mail
authori­
service takes on a second function, one which makes it an
tarian power
separated from and above society. This constitutes the
first step toward the development of an authoritarian state appa­
ratus from a social administrative apparatus. Letter carriers still
continue to deliver letters, but already they have begun to poke
their noses into the contents of the letters and to determine who is
allowed and who is not allowed to write letters and what one can
write about and what one cannot write about. To this the social
community reacts in one of two ways: toleration or protest. The
first gap in the social community has been created, whether it is
called "class conflict" or something else. It is not a question of
words, but of the differentiation between a social function which is
vital and one which curtails freedom. From now on, arbitrary prac­
tices have a free hand. For instance, Jesuits can exploit the postal
censorship for their own purposes. The security police might make
use of the existing postal censorship to increase their own power.
Without distorting things, this simplified example can be easily
applied to the complicated machinery of present-day society. It ap­
plies to our banking system, our police, and our school system, the
administration of food distribution, and certainly to the bearing of
society toward other nations. We begin to make order of chaos if, in
the evaluation of any state function, we consistently ask ourselves
what part of it relates to its original function of executing social
tasks, and what part of it relates to the later-acquired function of
suppressing the freedom of the members of the society. Originally,
the police of New York, Berlin, or any other city had the task of
protecting the community from murder and theft. Insofar as they
still perform this task, they are a useful and autonomous function of
society. But when the police take it upon themselves to prohibit
harmless games in private homes, to prescribe whether a man or
woman can receive a member of the opposite sex in his or her
275THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
apartment alone, to determine when they have to get up and when
they have to go to bed, then we have a picture of a tyrannical and
authoritarian state power, a state power above and against society.
It is one of work-democracy's inherent tendencies to eliminate
those functions of social administration that operate above and/or
against society. The natural work-democratic process tolerates only
those administrative functions that serve to promote the unity of
society and to facilitate its vital operations. It clearly follows from
this that one cannot be "against" or "for" the "state" in a mechani­
cal and rigid way. One has to distinguish between its original social
functions and its suppressive functions. It is also clear that the state
apparatus will become and will have to become the executive organ
of society when, in fulfilling its natural work functions, it operates
in the interest of society as a whole. When this happens, however, it
ceases to be a "state apparatus." It divests itself of those very char­
acteristics that alienate it from society, place it above and against
society, and thus implant in it the seed of authoritarian dictator­
ships. This constitutes the genuine withering away of the state, i.e.,
a withering away of its irrational functions. The rational functions
are vitally necessary and they continue.
This distinction makes it possible to examine every vitally
necessary administrative function to see whether it is attempting to
place itself above and against society, to see whether it is beginning
to become a new authoritarian instrument of the state. As long as it
is in the service of society, it is also a part of society. It is desirable,
necessary, and it belongs in the sphere of vitally necessary work. If,
however, the state apparatus sets itself up to be the master and
tyrant of society, if it claims autonomous power for itself, then it
becomes the arch enemy of society and must be dealt with accord­
ingly.
It is clear that a modern and complicated social organism could
not exist without an administrative apparatus. It is equally clear that
it is no easy task to eliminate the tendency of the administrative
apparatus to deteriorate into a "state apparatus." Here is a vast field
of research for sociologists and social psychologists. After the author-
276The Masses and the State
. itarian state has been overthrown, the task still remains of prevent­
ing administrative functions from becoming autonomous powers
again. However, in view of the fact that authoritarian autonomy is
the direct result of the inability of working masses of people to
regulate, administrate, and control their own affairs, the problem of
the authoritarian state can no longer be dealt with and mastered
independently of the problem of man's structure, and vice versa.
This leads directly to the question of so-called "state capital­
ism," which was still unknown in the nineteenth century and did
not begin to develop until World War 1, 1914-18.
THE SOCIAL FUNCTION OF STATE CAPITALISM
Until around the end of World War I in Russia and until the
worldwide economic crisis around 1930 in the United States, the
relationship between the system of private capitalism and the
system of the state was a simple one. For Lenin and his contempo­
raries the "capitalist state" was simply the power instrument of the
"class of private capitalists." The simplicity of this relationship was
depicted somewhat as follows in Russian revolutionary films:
The private owner of a factory attempts to depress wages; the
workers demand higher wages. The capitalist refuses to comply with
this demand, whereupon the workers go on strike to push through
their demand. The capitalist telephones the police commissioner
and charges him "to reestablish order." In this case, the police
commissioner figures as a public tool of the capitalist, and as such
merely attests to the fact that the state is a "capitalist state." The
police commissioner orders his force to the factory and has the
"ringleaders" arrested; the workers are without leadership. After
awhile they begin to feel the pangs of hunger and willingly or
unwillingly return to their jobs. The capitalist has won. This de­
mands better and stricter organization of the workers. In the opin­
ion of the sociologists who took the part of the workers, this film
reflected the relationship between state and capitalism in America.
But the enormous social readjustments of the past twenty years
277THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
have effected changes which no longer coincide with this simple
conception. More and more corporations, which were generally
described as "state-capitalistic," grew out of the private capitalist
system. The Russian society replaced private capitalism with the
unlimited power of the state. It makes no difference what it is
called, but in the strict Marxist sense state capitalism has taken the
place of private capitalism. As we already pointed out, the concept
of capitalism is not determined by the existence of individual capi­
talists, but by the existence of market economy and wage labor.
As a result of the worldwide economic crisis 1929-33, social
processes that tended toward state capitalism also set in in Germany
and America. The state as an organization above society also began
to assume an autonomous position toward the system of private
capitalism. In part, it took over functions that had formerly been
left to private capitalists: for instance, the replacement of philan­
thropy by social security. The state also imposed wage controls on
private capitalism, in some areas more and in others less. All of this
was brought about by the pressure exerted by masses of wage
laborers and employees. It was in this way that they exercised their
social influence: not by a direct take-over of administrative social
functions by their organizations, but in a fundamentally different
way, namely by exerting the necessary pressure upon the state ap­
paratus to force it to restrict the interests of private capitalism and
to safeguard the rights of the laborers and the employees.
In other words: As a result of the revolutionary events in the
Soviet Union and the economic slumps in other large societies,
which had a more gradual effect, severe crises had been created and
with them also the need to mobilize the existing state apparatus to
prevent disintegration. "The state" as an autonomous social power
again stressed its original function of holding society together at all
costs.
This process was very evident in Germany. The need for cohe­
sion in the acute crisis years 1929-39 was so great that the totalitar­
ian and authoritarian idea of the state had hardly any difficulty in
gaining wide acceptance. Admitted that the society was held to-
278The Masses and the State
gether, the fact remains that the problems that had precipitated the
social crisis were not solved. This is easily understood, for the
ideology of the state is incapable of dealing with opposing interests
in a factual and practical way. Many of the anti-capitalistic measures
adopted by fascism are to be explained on the basis of this process,
measures that seduced some sociologists into looking upon fascism
as a revolutionary social movement. But fascism was anything but a
revolutionary movement. It was merely a precipitant change from
the autocracy of private capitalism to state capitalism. In the
Goring industries, state capitalism and private capitalism merged
into one. Since anti-capitalistic tendencies had always been strong
among German workers and employees, this change could be
effected only by the use of anti-capitalistic propaganda. It was pre­
cisely this contradiction that made the victorious campaign of fas­
cism the prototype of social irrationalism and, consequently, so
difficult to grasp. Since fascism promised the masses of people a
revolution against private capitalism and at the same time promised
private capitalism salvation from the revolution, its moves could be
nothing but contradictory, incomprehensible, and sterile. This also
accounts to a large extent for the compulsion that drove the Ger­
man state apparatus into an imperialistic war. There was no possi­
bility of regulating the conditions within the German society in an
objective way. The use of police clubs and pistols to create the
semblance of peace can hardly be called a "solution of social prob­
lems." The "unification of the nation" had been brought about in
an illusionary way. We have learned to ascribe just as great, if not a
greater, effectiveness to processes that are based on illusions as to
processes that are based on hard reality. The effect of the church
hierarchy has been an incontestable proof of this for thousands of
years. Even though not a single factual problem of social life had
been actually solved, the illusionary unification of the state created
the impression that it was a fascist achievement. The untenability of
such a solution was clearly brought out in the course of time. Social
discord was greater than it had ever been, yet the illusionary cohe­
sion of the state was sufficient to keep the German society from
279THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
formal collapse for ten years. The factual solution of the existing
discord was reserved for different and more fundamental processes.
Whether we are concerned with a capitalist state or a proletar­
ian state, the function of effecting a unity of social discords is the
same. Still we must bear in mind the difference in the original
intention: In fascism the authoritarian state becomes the fixed
prototype of the idea of the state, which means that masses of
people are relegated to the status of permanent subjects. Lenin's
proletarian state had the intention of undermining itself continu­
ously and of establishing self-administration. In both cases, how­
ever, the core is given by the "state control of consumption and
production."
Let us return to our common denominator, the inability on the
part of working masses of people to administrate society themselves.
We will then have a better understanding of the logicality of the
development of private capitalism to state capitalism which has
taken place during the past twenty-five years. In Russia the working
masses of people were capable of overthrowing the old czarist state
apparatus and replacing it by a state apparatus whose leaders
stemmed from their own ranks. But they were not capable of going
on to self-administration and of assuming the responsibility them­
selves.
In other countries the working masses of people who were
highly organized formally were not capable of advancing and put­
ting into practice the self-administration that was a part of the
ideology of their own organizations. Hence, the state apparatus was
forced to take over more and more functions that actually devolved
upon the masses. It took them over in their stead, as it were, for
instance, in Scandinavia and in the United States.
As basically different as the state control of social production
and consumption was in Russia, Germany, Scandinavia, and the
United States on the basis of their historical development, there was
still a common denominator, the incapacity on the part of masses of
people to administrate society themselves. And the danger of au­
thoritarian dictatorships follows logically and simply from this
280The Masses and the State
common basis of a development toward state capitalism. Whether a
state functionary has democratic orientation or whether he is an
authoritarian representative of the state is purely accidental. Viewed
from the perspective of the structure and ideology of the working
masses of people, there is in reality not a single concrete guarantee
that a dictatorship will not develop from state capitalism. It is pre­
cisely for this reason that, in the fight for genuine democracy and
social self-administration, it is of decisive importance to single out
and stress the role of man's character structure and the shifting of
man's responsibility to the processes of love, work, and knowledge.
As painful and embarrassing as it may be, the fact remains that
we are confronted with a human structure that has been shaped by
thousands of years of mechanistic civilization and is expressed in
social helplessness and an intense desire for a fUhrer.
The German and Russian state apparatuses grew out of despo­
tism. For this reason the subservient nature of the human character
of masses of people in Germany and in Russia was exceptionally
pronounced. Thus, in both cases, the revolution led to a new despo­
tism with the certainty of irrational logic. In contrast to the German
and Russian state apparatuses, the American state apparatus was
formed by groups of people who had evaded European and Asian
despotism by fleeing to a virgin territory free of immediate and
effective traditions. Only in this way can it be understood that, until
the time of this writing, a totalitarian state apparatus was not able
to develop in America, whereas in Europe every overthrow of the
government carried out under the slogan of freedom inevitably led
to despotism. This holds true for Robespierre, as well as for Hitler,
Mussolini, and Stalin. If we want to appraise the facts impartially,
then we have to point out, whether we want to or not, and whether
we like it or not, that Europe's dictators, who based their power on
vast millions of people, always stemmed from the suppressed classes.
I do not hesitate to assert that this fact, as tragic as it is, harbors
more material for social research than the facts related to the despo­
tism of a czar or of a Kaiser Wilhelm. By comparison, the latter
facts are easily understood. The founders of the American Revolu-
281THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
tion had to build their democracy from scratch on foreign soil. The
men who accomplished this task had all been rebels against English
despotism. The Russian Revolutionaries, on the other hand, were
forced to take over an already existing and very rigid government
apparatus. Whereas the Americans were able to start from scratch,
the Russians, as much as they fought against it, had to drag along
the old. This may also account for the fact that the Americans, the
memory of their own flight from despotism still fresh in their
minds, assumed an entirely different-more open and more acces­
sible-attitude toward the new refugees of 1940, than Soviet Russia,
which closed its doors to them. This may also explain why the
attempt to preserve the old democratic ideal and the effort to de­
velop genuine self-administration was much more forceful in the
United States than anywhere else. We do not overlook the many
failures and retardations caused by tradition, but in any event a
revival of genuine democratic efforts took place in America and not
in Russia. It can only be hoped that American democracy will
thoroughly realize, and this before it is too late, that fascism is not
confined to any one nation or any one party; and it is to be hoped
that it will succeed in overcoming the tendency toward dictatorial
forms in the people themselves. Only time will tell whether the
Americans will be able to resist the compulsion of irrationality or
whether they will succumb to it.
I want to stress that we are not concerned with the question of
guilt or evil will, but solely with the elucidation of developments on
the basis of definite, already existing conditions.
Let us briefly summarize the connections between the structure
of the masses and the form of the state.
The influence of the character structure of masses of people is
decisive in determining the form that the state assumes, whether
this structure is expressed passively or actively. It is the structure
of the masses that tolerates imperialism. It is this structure that
actively supports it. By the same token it is the structure of masses
of people that is capable of overthrowing despotism, even though
it does not have the ability to prevent the emergence of new
282The Masses and the State
despotism. It is this structure that promotes and supports genuine
democratic efforts when the state operates in this direction. It is this
structure that gives rise to national revolutionary movements when
the genuine democratic international freedom movement fails. It is
this structure that takes refuge in the illusionary unity of family,
people, nation, and state when democracy fails; but it is also this
structure that passes on and develops the process of love, work, and
knowledge. Hence, only this structure is capable of imbibing the
genuinely democratic tendencies of a state administration by taking
over the administrative functions "above it" piecemeal and learning
to execute them through its own work organizations. It is beside the
point, i.e., it is not of crucial importance, whether the change from
state administration to self-administration takes place quickly or
slowly. It is better for everyone if it takes place organically and
without bloodshed. But this is possible only if the representatives of
the state above society are fully conscious of the fact that they are
nothing but the delegated executive organs of the working human
community; that, in the strictest sense of the word, they are execu­
tive organs from necessity, i.e., they are executive organs made ne­
cessary by the ignorance and wretchedness in which millions of
people live. Strictly speaking, they have the tasks of good educators,
namely the task of making self-reliant adults of the children en­
trusted to their care. A society that is striving to achieve genuine
democracy must never lose sight of the principle that it is the task
of the state to make itself more and more superfluous, just as an
educator becomes superfluous when he has done his duty toward
the child. If this principle is not forgotten, bloodshed can be and
will be avoided. Only to the extent to which the state clearly and
unequivocally abolishes itself is it possible for work-democracy to
develop organically; conversely, to the same extent to which the
state tries to eternalize itself and to forget its educational task, it
provokes human society to remind it that it came into being from
necessity and must also disappear from necessity. Thus, the respon­
sibility rests upon the state as well as upon masses of people, a
responsibility in the good and not the bad sense of the word. It is
283THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
the state's duty not only to encourage the passionate yearning for
freedom in working masses of people; it must also make every effort
to make them capable of freedom. If it fails to do this, if it sup­
presses the intense longing for freedom or even misuses it and puts
itself in the way of the tendency toward self-administration, then it
shows clearly that it is a fascist state. Then it is to be called to
account for the damages and dangers that it caused by its dere­
liction.
284

x
Biosocial Function of Work
" "
THE PROBLEM OF VOLUNTARY WORK DISCIPLINE
Work is the basis of man's social existence. This is stressed by
that
every social theory. In this respect, however, the problem is not
work is the basis of human existence. The problem relates to the
opposition harmony
nature of work: Is it in to or in with the
biologic needs of masses of people? Marx's economic theory proved
that everything that is produced in the way of economic values
living
comes about through the expenditure of man's working
not dead
power, and through the expenditure of material.
Hence, as the sole force that produces values, human working
power deserves the greatest interest and care. In a society under the
compulsion of market economy and not use economy, it is out of
the question to speak of the care and careful treatment of human
working power. Just as any other commodity, this working power is
bought and used by the owners of the means of production (the
state or individual capitalists). The "wage" received by the working
man corresponds approximately to the minimum of what he needs
to reproduce his working power. Profit economy has no interest in
sparing labor power. As a result of the progressive mechanization
and economization of work, so much labor power is made superflu­
ous that there is always a ready replacement for expended labor
power.
private state
The Soviet Union abolished but not profit econ-
285THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
omy. Its original intent was to transform the capitalist "economiza­
tion" of work into a socialist "economization" of work. It liberated
the productive forces of the country and shortened working hours in
general; in this way it succeeded in getting through the acute eco­
nomic crisis of 1929-32 without unemployment. There can be no
doubt that the Soviet Union's economizing measures, which were
partially socialistic in the beginning, enabled it to satisfy the needs
of society as a whole. However, the basic problem of a genuine
democracy, a work -democracy, is more than just a problem of econ­
omy of labor. More than anything else it is a matter of changing the
nature of work so that it ceases to be an onerous duty and becomes
a gratifying fulfillment of a need.
The character-analytic investigation of the human function of
work (an investigation that is by no means finished) offers us a
number of clues which make it possible to solve the problem of
alienated work in a practical way. Two basic types of human work
can be differentiated with satisfying exactness: work that is compul­
sive and does not give any pleasure and work that is natural and
pleasurable.1
To comprehend this differentiation, we must first of aU free
ourselves of several mechanistic "scientific" views of human work.
Experimental psychology considers only the question of which
methods lend themselves to the greatest possible utilization of the
human labor power. When it speaks of the joy of work, it means
the joy an independent scientist or artist derives from his accom­
plishments. Even the psychoanalytic theory of work makes the
mistake of solely and always orienting itself on the model of intel­
lectual accomplishments. The examination of work from the point
of view of mass psychology correctly proceeds from the relationship
of the worker to the product of his work. This relationship has a
socio-economic background and relates to the pleasure the worker
derives from his work. Work is a basic biologic activity, which, as
life in general, rests on pleasurable pulsation.
1 Cf. Reich, Character·Analysis.
286Biosocial Function of Work
The pleasure an "independent" researcher derives fom his work
cannot be set up as the yardstick of work in general. From a social
point of view (any other view would have nothing to do with
sociology) the work of the twentieth century is altogether ruled by
the law of duty and the necessity of subsistence. The work of hun­
dreds of millions of wage earners throughout the world does not
afford them the least bit of pleasure or biologic gratification. Essen­
tially it is based on the pattern of compulsory work. It is character­
ized by the fact that it is opposed to the worker's biologic need of
pleasure. It ensues from duty and conscience, in order not to go to
pieces, and is usually done for others. The worker has no interest in
the product of his work; hence, work is onerous and devoid of
pleasure. Work that is based on compulsion, regardless of what kind
of compulsion, and not on pleasure, is not only non fulfilling bio­
logically, but not very productive in terms of economy.
The problem is momentous and not very much is known about
it. To begin with, let us try to get a general picture. It is clear that
mechanistic, biologically unsatisfying work is a product of the wide­
spread mechanistic view of life and the machine civilization. Can
the biologic function of work be reconciled with the social function
of work? This is possible, but firmly entrenched ideas and institu­
tions must be radically corrected first.
The craftsman of the nineteenth century still had a full rela­
tionship to the product of his work. But when, as in a Ford factory,
a worker has to perform one and the same manipulation year in and
year out, always working on one detail and never the product as a
whole, it is out of the question to speak of satisfying work. The
specialized and mechanized division of labor, together with the
system of paid labor in general, produce the effect that the working
man has no relationship to the machine.
At this point one will demur that there is indeed a need to
work, a "natural" gratification in work, which is inherent in the act
of work itself. True, there is a biologic gratification in activity, but
the forms into which this activity is pressed in the market economy
kill the pleasure of work and the urge to work, and prevent them
287THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
from manifesting themselves. Doubtless, it is one of work-democ­
racy's most urgent tasks to harmonize the conditions and forms of
work with the need to work and the pleasure of work, in short, to
eliminate the antithesis between pleasure and work. Here a vast new
field is opened for human thought: Would it be possible and how
would it be possible to retain the economization and mechanization
of work and still not kill the pleasure of work? It is definitely
conceivable that the worker can have a relationship to the finished
product of work of which he performs only a part, without eliminat­
ing the division of labor. The joy of life received from working is an
essential, indispensable element of man's restructuralization from
the slave of work to the master of production. If man could again
have a direct relationship to the product of his work, he would also
be happy to bear the responsibility for his work, a responsibility that
today he does not have or refuses to have.
One could cite the Soviet Union and say: "You work-democrats
are utopians and visionaries, though you pride yourselves on viewing
reality unsentimentally. In the workers' paradise of the Soviet
Union, where is the abolition of the division of labor? Where is the
pleasure of work? Where is the abolition of the wage system and
market economy? Can't you see from the results of the workers'
revolution itself just how impossible and illusionary your epicurean
views of work are?"
The answer to this argument is: In 1944 the mysticism of the
masses is stronger than ever before, notwithstanding the progress of
natural science. This is indisputable; but when one fails to achieve a
goal toward which one strives-in this case, the rationality of masses
of people-this in itself does not mean that it cannot be achieved.
The fundamental question remains: Is the goal of pleasurable work
a realistic goal or is it a utopian goal? If it is a realistic goal, if it is
intensely desired by everyone, then we must ask what is obstructing
its realization. This question applies to the field of technology as
well as it applies to the field of science. If it has not yet been
possible to climb to the peak of Mount Everest, that does not mean
288Biosocial Function of Work
that it is an impossible feat. It is a question of the last eight hun­
dred meters!
It is precisely on this point that the antithesis between work­
democracy and politics is clearly and simply disclosed: Our news­
papers are full of political discussions which fail to take into
consideration a single difficulty of the work process of masses of
people. This is understandable, for the politician knows nothing
whatever about work. Now let us imagine that a work-democratic
community would exclude all irrationalism from its newspapers and
would dedicate itself to the discussion of the conditions of pleasur­
able work. Working masses of people would immediately come
forth with a flood of suggestions and proposals which would pre­
clude any kind of politicizing once and for all. Just imagine how
pleased a boss, an engineer, a specialist, would be to describe every
aspect and step of the work process and to offer suggestions and
advice for improvement. They would argue and compete with one
another. There would be hot debates. How wonderful this would
be. It took centuries before one hit upon the idea of building fac­
tories like recuperation homes and not like prisons, to build them
with lots of light, good ventilation, and washrooms and kitchens,
etc. The pressure of the war economy caused radio music to be
introduced into factories. It is incalculable how far this process
would continue if the working people and not the politicians were
in control of the press.
In the first five years of the Soviet economy there were signs of
work-democracy. For example, one-sided specialized training of the
emerging generation was avoided and every effort was made to give
young men and women an all-round preparation for professional
life. In this way an attempt was made to offset the damages of the
division of labor. The gap between "mental" and "physical" work
was narrowed. The youth received such an all-round mental and
physical preparation for their later professional life that any member
of society could be employed in any other place of the work process.
For example, employees in large firms were periodically changed
289THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
from one job to another. Employees of different firms were ex­
changed. When well-trained specialists became part of the man­
agement of the firm, they were sent back to the machines after
awhile to prevent them from losing contact with their work and
becoming administrative bureaucrats.
self-administration of firms
The was expressed in the establish­
ment of the so-called "triumviral directorship." Every firm was
managed by employees who were elected for this purpose by the
firm as a whole. In this way the entire body of employees partici­
pated directly in the management. Special "production confer­
ences" were held. These and many other facts showed that an effort
was made to reestablish the unity of pleasure and work. At this
point the opponents of work-democracy will take pleasure in point­
ing out that most of these improvements could not be maintained,
that, for example, the production conferences of the firm's body of
employees degenerated into mere formalities in the course of time or
were completely eliminated. To this we answer: Didn't the Wright
brothers make flying possible, though Daedalus and Icarus in an­
tiquity and Leonardo da Vinci in the Middle Ages failed in their
The first attempts at a work-democratic management
efforts to fly?
of the firms in the Soviet Union failed because the reorganization of
the firm's management did not go hand in hand with the restruc­
turalization of the human structure.
This was a lesson and the next
time it can be done better.
triumviral directorship self-administration of firms
The and the
single director
were abolished when a manager became the of a firm,
assumed individual responsibility, and advanced to an independent
position of leadership. True enough, this "director" still stemmed
from the workers, i.e., from the body of workers of the individual
autonomous
firm, but this manager of the firm was soon forced to
develop all the characteristics of an overseer, bureaucrat, or ruler
who was no longer a part of the mass of working people. Indeed, it
is here that we find the roots of the Soviet Union's "ruling class."
But this does not refute the fact that every work process is by nature
work-democratic process.
and of necessity a The self-regulation of
290Biosocial Function of Work
work is spontaneously present. It is a matter of changing the struc­
ture of the working man in such a way as to liberate this natural
work-democracy from the encumbrances of bureaucracy and to help
it to develop its own forms and organizations. The work-democrat
who is familiar with work processes does not deny the difficulties; on
the contrary, he focuses all his energies on them because it is impor­
tant for him to comprehend and overcome all difficulties. He does
not derive any pleasure from the fact that there are difficulties,
setbacks, and failures. Only the politician, who builds his power
over masses of people upon these difficulties, etc., sees reason to
triumph here. The work-democrat does not use these failures to try
to show that use economy is impossible and that man is immutable;
it is precisely from his failures that he learns to do it better. One
who is lame can easily laugh when a runner misses a hurdle.
One of the major difficulties the Soviet government encoun­
tered very early was the fact that precisely the skilled and interested
workers showed little enthusiasm for politics. Let it suffice to quote
the statement of one functionary in support of this: "The love of
one's occupation," he said,
is what is most important. Qualified workers are the Party's best
reserve. They are always gratified by their occupation and are always
looking for new ways of improving their work. They are very con­
scious. When one converses with them and asks why they do not
join the Party, the answer is that they don't have the time. "I am
interested," they say, "in finding ways to improve steel and mixing
concrete." Then they invent something of their own, a tool, etc. It
is precisely in such workers that we are interested, but we have still
not found a way of engaging their political interests; nevertheless,
they are the best and the most developed workers. They are always
busy and are always looking for ways of improving their production
[italics are mine, WR].
This functionary touched upon one of the basic questions of
the relationship between politics and work. In Germany, too, one
often heard it said: "Those of us who strive for freedom are surely
on the right track and the workers understand us, but they want
291THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
nothing to do with politics; we have the same difficulty with the
industrial workers." Apart from the political disappointments that
alienated the German industrial workers from the Communist party
in the years after 1923, there was a very important circumstance
which one repeatedly overlooked or could not comprehend. As a
group, politicians understood nothing whatever about, technical
problems, and they were completely isolated from the domain of
concrete work. The worker who had a keen interest in the techni­
cal problems of his work had "to attune himself to politics" if he
listened to a party politician in the evening. The politicians were
not capable of developing social revolutionary attitudes and ideas
from the work process itself; they simply knew nothing at all about
work. And yet they tried to get around the workers with abstract
ideas about high politics, which was of no interest to the workers.
However, every detail of work-democracy can be organically devel­
oped from the technical aspects of work. How are we going to set
up our firm when we have to administrate it? What difficulties will
we have to overcome? What measures are we going to adopt to
make our work easier? What do we still have to learn to run our
firm in a better way? What arrangements are we going to make
about living quarters, meals, child care, etc.?" Such questions will
imbue all those who perform responsible work with the feeling:
This firm is our problem child. The alienation of the worker from
his work can be overcome only if the workers themselves learn to
master the technical aspects of their firm, which, after all, they keep
going to all intents and purposes. In this way the gap between
skilled work and social responsibility, which is the ruination of so­
ciety, is closed. Skilled work and social responsibility must go hand
in hand, then the antithesis between work that gives pleasure and
the mechanical conditions of work will be eliminated. Under fas­
cism in Germany, the worker was not the least bit interested in the
work process. He was a "guided," irresponsible subject who had to
obey the orders of the firm manager who bore all the responsibility.
Or he had the nationalistic illusion that he represented the firm as a
"German," not as a socially responsible producer of use values, but
292Biosocial Function of Work
as a "German." This illusionary, nationalistic attitude was charac­
teristic of the entire NSBO* work in Germany, which made every
effort to conceal the worker's very evident lack of interest in his
work by the illusionary identification with the "state." Well now,
society is society and machine is machine, whether in Germany,
America, or Honolulu. As work itself, society and machine are
international facts. "German work" is nonsense! Natural work­
democracy eliminates lack of interest. It does not conceal it by an
illusionary identification with the "state," hair color, or nose shape;
it eliminates lack of interest by making it possible for the workers to
feel a real responsibility for their product and have the feeling:
"This firm is ours." It is not a matter of having a formal "class
consciousness" or of belonging to a specific class, but of having a
technical interest in one's occupation, of having an objective rela­
tionship to one's work, a relationship that replaces nationalism and
class consciousness by a consciousness of one's skills. Only when one
is objectively and intimately related to one's work is one capable of
comprehending just how destructive the dictatorial and formal
democratic forms of work are, not only for work itself but also for
the pleasure of work.
When a man takes pleasure in his work, we call his relationship
to it "libidinous." Since work and sexuality (in both the strict and
broad senses of the word) are intimately interwoven, man's rela­
tionship to work is also a question of the sex-economy of masses of
people. The hygiene of the work process is dependent upon the way
masses of people use and gratify their biologic energy. Work and
sexuality derive from the same biologic energy.
The political revolution that was borne by the workers failed to
inculcate the feeling that the workers themselves are responsible for
everything. This failure resulted in a regression to authoritarian
measures. Almost from the very beginning, the government of the
Soviet Union had to cope with the difficulty that the workers had
,. Nationalsozialistische Betriebszellen-Organization (a Betriebszelle is an ad­
ministrative subdivision of the German Labor Service).
293THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY O F FASCISM
no respect for their tools. There was no end to the complaints about
desertions from places of work and enormous turnover of workers in
the various firms, etc. Borsen of May 22, 1934, carried a thorough
report on the "unsatisfactory" conditions existing in the coal dis­
tricts, especially in the very important "Donb as" district. The report
stated that it was only by adopting extraordinary measures, namely
by taking supernumerary engineers and technicians from their
offices and sending them into the mines that they succeeded in
raising the daily production from 120 to 148 thousand tons in Janu­
ary of that year; but even then not all of the machines were in
operation, and in March of 1934 the daily output again fell to 140
thousand tons. One of the chief causes of this production slump
was the "negligence" shown in the treatment of the machinery.
Another cause was that, "with the approach of Spring," 1TUlny
workers sought to get away from the mines. According to the press,
this was due to "lack of interest." In the months of January and
February, 33,000 (I) workers left the mines and 28,000 new work­
ers were employed. One is inclined to believe that this large migra­
tion could have been averted if the management had provided
better living conditions for the workers and recreational possibilities
for their leisure hours.
To the asceticism and human alienation of the pure economist,
this was like a bee in his bonnet. Certainly "leisure time" is in­
tended for amusement and the partaking of the joy of life. To be
sure, clubs, theaters, and other recreational facilities were set up in
the firms. Thus, one sensed the importance of enjoyment for the
hygiene of the work process. But officially, and especially in social
ideology, "work" was defined as "the substance of life" and declared
to be the antithesis of sexuality.
In the film The Way to Life, a revolt breaks out in spring in a
factory operated and administrated by juvenile delinquents. They
smash the machines and refuse to work. In the film this outbreak
was ascribed to the fact that a rail line had been flooded, thus
preventing the delivery of work material. That is to say, the "explo­
sion" was attributed to the "absence of work material." It was clear,
294Biosocial Function of Work
however, that the young men, who lived on their collectives without
girls, had spring fever, which was merely released but not caused by
the absence of work. Ungratified sexuality is readily transformed
into rage. "Prison explosions" are outbreaks of sadism resulting
from the absence of sexual gratification. Hence, when 33,000 work­
ers leave their employment site all at once precisely in spring, there
can be no doubt that the unsatisfying sex-economic conditions in
the Soviet Union are the cause. By "sex-economic conditions" we
mean more than just the possibility of a regulated and satisfying
love life; over and above this we mean everything that is related to
pleasure and the joy of life in one's work. However, Soviet politi­
cians practiced a kind of work therapy against sexual needs. Such
practices are sure to backfire. In the course of more than a decade,
during which I have been reading official Soviet literature, I have
not encountered a single hint of such decisive biologic relations.
The relationship between the worker's sexual life and the per­
formance of his work is of decisive importance. It is not as if work
diverted sexual energy from gratification, so that the more one
worked the less need one would have for sexual gratification. The
opposite of this is the case: The more gratifying one's sexual life is,
the more fulfilling and pleasurable is one's work, if all external
conditions are fulfilled. Gratified sexual energy is spontaneously
converted into an interest in work and an urge for activity. In con­
trast to this, one's work is disturbed in various ways if one's sexual
need is not gratified and is suppressed. Hence, a basic principle of
the work hygiene of a work-democratic society is: It is necessary to
establish not only the best external conditions of work, but also to
create the inner biologic preconditions to allow the fullest unfolding
of the biologic urge for activity. Hence, the safeguarding of a com­
pletely satisfying sexual life for the working masses is the most
important precondition of pleasurable work. In any society the de­
gree to which work kills the joy of life, the degree to which it is
represented as a duty (whether to a "fatherland," the "proletariat,"
the "nation," or whatever other names these illusions may have), is
a sure yardstick on which to measure the anti-democratic character
295THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
of the ruling class of this society. Just as "duty," "state," "discipline
and order," "sacrifice," etc., are intimately related to one another, so
too "joy of life," "work-democracy," "self-regulation," "pleasurable
work," "natural sexuality," belong together inseparably.
In academic philosophy there is a lot of barren hair-splitting
over whether or not there is a biologic need to work. Here, as in
many other areas, the lack of vital experience precludes the solution
of the problem. The urge for activity originates in the organism's
biologic sources of excitation; therefore, it is a natural urge. But the
forms of work are not biologically but socially determined. Man's
urge for activity, which is both natural and effortless, fulfills itself
spontaneously with objective tasks and aims and enters the service
of the gratification of social and individual needs. Applied to work
hygiene: Work must be arranged in such a way that the biologic
urge for activity is developed and gratified. This function excludes
every form of moralistic-authoritarian work performed under the
compulsion of duty, for it brooks no bossiness. It requires:
1. The establishment of the best external conditions of work
(protection of labor, reduction of working hours, variety in the
work function, establishment of a direct relationship of the worker
to his product) .
2. The liberation of the natural urge for activity (the preven­
tion of the formation of rigid character armoring).
3. The creation of the preconditions that will enable sexual
energy to be converted into an interest in work. To this end, sexual
energy must
4. be capable of being gratified and actually gratified. This re­
quires the safeguarding of all the preconditions that are necessary
for a completely satisfying, sex-economic, socially affirmed sexual life
of all working men and women (decent living quarters, contracep­
tion, affirmative sex-economy in the governing of childhood and
adolescent sexuality) .
The regressions in the Soviet Union must be comprehended
objectively, then we shall see that: The difficulties involved in
changing the structure of the masses were incorrectly assessed. It
296Biosocial Function of Work
was believed that one was dealing with a secondary, merely "ideo­
logic" factor. That which was more or less moralistically condemned
as "old traditions," "indolence," "proclivity for lower middle-class
habits," etc., was, as it turned out, a problem that was far more
complex and difficult to solve than the mechanization of industry.
Threatened by belligerent imperialistic powers, the Soviet govern­
ment was forced to implement industrialization with all possible
haste. To do this, it reverted to authoritarian methods. The initial
efforts toward social self-administration were neglected and even
dropped.
Above all, the effort to convert compulsive, authoritarian work
into voluntary, biologically pleasurable work, failed. Work was still
performed under the pressure of rigid competition or under the
illusionary identification with the state. As Stalin noted at the
Seventeenth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
a "depersonalization of work" set in, an "indifference toward the
material" with which one worked and the products intended for
consumers. The workers' and peasants' inspectorate, which was set
up in the Central Committee in 1917 to act as a control on the
Central Committee, proved to be inadequate, despite the fact that
it was a fully democratic organization. Stalin stated:
According to its organization, the workers' and peasants' in­
spectorate cannot adequately control the execution of the work. A
few years ago, when our work in the economic sphere was simpler
and less satisfactory and one was able to reckon with the possibility
of an inspection of the work of aU commissars and all industrial
organizations, the workers' and peasants' inspectorate was in order.
But now that our work in the economic sphere has grown and
become more complex and there is no longer any necessity or possi­
bility of supervising it from a central position, the workers' and
peasants' inspectorate has to be changed. Now we have no need of
supervision, but a surveillance of the implementation of the deci­
sions of the Central Committee. Now we need a control over the
implementation of the decisions of the central courts. Now we have
need of an organization which, without setting itself the unpleasant
297THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
goal of supervising everything, is capable of concentrating its entire
attention on the task of controlling and checking the implementa­
tion of the decisions of the central institutions. Such an organiza­
tion can only be the Soviet Control Commission of the Council of
the Commissariat of the Soviet Union. This Commissariat shall be
responsible to the Council of Commissars and shall have local
representatives who are independent of the local organizations.
However, to insure that it shall have sufficient authority and shall
be in the position, if the need arises, to call any responsible func­
tionary to account, it is necessary that the candidates for the
members of the Soviet Control Commission be appointed by the
Party Congress and ratified by the Council of the Commissars and
the Central Committee of the USSR. It is my belief that only such
an organization will be capable of strengthening Soviet control and
Soviet discipline. . . .
It is necessary that the members of this organization shall be
appointed and dismissed only by the highest organ, the Party Con­
gress. There can be no doubt that such an organization will really
be capable of safeguarding the control over the execution of the
decision of the central Party organs and of strengthening Party
discipline [all italics are mine, WR].
Here we have a clear articulation of the shifting of the self­
administration of firms in the direction of authoritarian control.
The workers' and peasants' inspectorate, which originally had the
function of controlling the state leadership, disappeared completely
and was replaced by organs appointed by the state having the func­
tion of controlling the work assigned to the workers and peasants.
The workers and peasants said nothing; the fiasco of social democ­
racy was complete. The incapacity for freedom on the part of
masses of people was neither named nor perceived.
This shift had become necessary in the interest of holding the
Russian society together. The self-administration that had been
aimed at had not developed or had not developed enough. It could
not develop because the Communist party, though proclaiming the
principle of self-administration, did not recognize the means of
allowing this self-administration to unfold itself. Whereas, in the
298Biosocial Function of Work
beginning the workers' and peasants' inspectorate had the task of
controlling and supervising all the Soviet commissariats and eco­
nomic organizations as the elected representatives of the Soviet
Congress; whereas, in other words, masses of working people, who
of course elected the Soviet, once had control of the party and the
economy, this function was now transferred to the party and its
organs, which were independent of the local Soviet organizations. If
the workers' and peasants' inspectorate was an expression of the
social tendency toward the self-regulation and self-administration of
the masses, the new "Control Commission" was the expression of
the authoritarian implementation of party decisions. In short, it was
only one of the many regressions from the intention of self-govern­
ment to authoritarian control of society and its economy.
Could this step be regarded as a consequence of the question­
able nature of the Soviets? The answer is: It was not the Soviets, as
the representatives of working men and women, that were a fiasco,
but the manipulation of these Soviets by politicians. At all events,
the Soviet government had to cope with the problems of economy
and those of work discipline. In view of the failure of the principle
of self-government, the reemergence of the authoritarian principle
was inevitable. This does not mean that we condone the authori­
tarian principle. On the contrary, if we stress this catastrophic
regression, we do so because we want to know the reasons for this
setback in order, then, to eliminate the difficulties and help self­
government to achieve victory after all. The responsibility for this
failure falls heavily upon the working masses of people themselves.
Unless they learn to eliminate their own weaknesses with their own
ingenuity, they cannot hope to rid themselves of authoritarian
forms of government. No one can help them; they and they alone
are responsible. This and this alone is true and affords hope. The
Soviet government cannot be reproached for reverting to authori­
tarian and moralistic methods of control; it had no other choice if it
did not want to endanger everything. It is to be reproached for
neglecting self-government, for blocking its future development,
and for not creating its preconditions. The-Soviet government is to
299THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
be reproached for forgetting that the state has to wither away. It is
to be reproached for neglecting to make the failure of the self­
government and self-regulation of the masses the point of departure
for new and greater efforts; for trying to make the world believe
that, despite everything, this self-regulation was developing and that
"complete socialism" and genuine democracy prevailed. Illusions
always prevent that which they pretend to be from really materializ­
ing. Hence, it is clear that the first duty of every genuine democrat
is to recognize such difficulties of development, to expose them, and
to help to overcome them. Open confession of dictatorship is far
less dangerous than sham democracy. One can defend oneself
against the former; the latter is like a creeper attached to the body
of a drowning man. The Soviet politicians cannot escape the
reproach of dishonesty. They did more harm to the development of
genuine democracy than Hitler did. This is a heavy reproach, but it
is unavoidable. It is useless merely to talk about self-criticism. As
painful as it may be, one must also exercise it.
The failure of self-administration and self-government in the
Soviet Union led to an organization of work discipline, which was
clearly manifested in the militaristic display of the first five-year
plan. The science of economics was a "fortress," and it was youth's
objective to "capture" it. The press carried reports on the "cam­
paign" and "fronts" as at a time of war; armies of workers "fought
battles"; brigades stormed "narrow passes." "Iron battalions" took
"combat sectors under heavy fire." "Cadre" was appointed. "De­
serters" were exposed to public ridicule; "maneuvers" were held;
people were "alarmed" and "mobilized." The "light cavalry" took
possession of "commando outposts" in dangerous "attacks."
These examples from Soviet literature suffice to show that the
implementation of the gigantic five-year plan was possible only with
the help of an ideology borrowed from a climate of war and creating
a climate of war. The concrete fact of the masses' incapacity for
freedom was at the basis of all this. The acceleration of industriali­
zation served to build up the military power of the country. Since
the social revolution in the West failed to materialize, and since,
300Biosocial Function of Work
above all, the self-administration of the Soviet society had not
developed, the situation in Soviet Russia was indeed comparable to
a state of war. The Soviet diplomacy of that time had the difficult
task of delaying every military confrontation, especially the con­
frontation with Japan over' the East Chinese railroad and Man­
churia. And yet, owing to the objective developmental circum­
stances of that time, that which was unavoidable and also
immediately useful-insofar as it did actually enable the Soviet
Union to arm itself against imperialistic attacks-had two devastat­
ing aftereffects:
1. If a country having a population of 160 million is held in a
climate of war for years on end and is imbued with a militaristic
ideology, this inevitably has an influence on the formation of the
human structure, even if the purpose of this war ideology is at­
tained. The militaristic structure of the mass leadership received
autonomous powers. "Selfless devotion," held up as the ideal of life
in the education of the masses, gradually shaped the mass psychol­
ogy that made it possible to carry out the dictatorial processes of
purges, executions, and coercive measures of all kinds. In view of all
this, it is clear that the role of biopsychology in the development
toward a free society should not be underestimated.
2. If a government that feels itself to be surrounded by belliger­
ent powers exercises a definite kind of militaristic-ideologic influence
on the masses for years on end and forgets its own task in the
turmoil of solving the most difficult immediate tasks, then it can
easily come about that it will maintain this atmosphere and con­
tinue to intensify it, even after, its purpose fulfilled, it has become
superfluous. The masses of people are and remain alien, stand apart,
vegetate, or go beyond their needs into irrational chauvinism.
The authoritarian regulation of the work process fits in perfectly
with the militaristic atmosphere in which the Soviet man lived.
There was and could be no thought of converting the methods of
work into self-administration. As far as that goes, the heroism,
especially the heroism displayed by the Comsomol in the struggle to
build up industry, was worthy of admiration. And yet, how is the
301THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
nature of the Comsomol's heroism to be differentiated from that of
the Hitler youth or an imperialistic warrior? What about the fight
for human (not national) freedom? It is deceptive to think that the
heroism of an English or German soldier in the world wars was
inferior to the heroism of a Coms om ol youth in the building up of
Soviet industry. If we fail to make a sharp and clear distinction
between the emotion of heroism and the goal of freedom, we easily
fall into a rut which no longer has anything to do with the pursuit
of the goal (self-administration!). Okay, the heroism was "neces­
sary," but the effort to effect a basic change in the structure of
masses of people failed to bear fruit and, as a consequence thereof,
the establishment of that social state, for which generations of
freedom-fighters had given the best of their minds and their lives,
also failed to materialize. Since the worker no longer had a "per­
sonal" interest in his work, it was necessary to revert to his "drive
for acquisition." The bonus system was reintroduced. Workers were
assessed according to the value of their working power; those who
did more were given better nourishment and living quarters. But
this was not the worst of it: The most rigid form of the competitive
wage system was reintroduced. All of this was "necessary," but it
should have been clear that it was diametrically opposed to the
original goal.
The fact that "locks" were made use of to keep the workers from
leaving their work sites was also a clear indication of the moralistic,
authoritarian regulation of work. For instance, the workers had to
commit themselves to remain until the end of the five-year plan.
At that time about 40 percent of the industry of the Soviet Union
was producing war materials. This meant that the work in indus­
tries producing consumer goods had to be considerably stepped
up to keep it at the same level. 'Work evenings" were introduced
for the purpose of spurring ambition. On such "evenings" com­
petitions were held to see who could set type the fastest, who
could wrap confetti the fastest, etc. Black and red bulletin boards
were introduced in various factories. The names of the "lazy"
workers were put on the black bulletin boards and the names
302Biosocial Function of Work
of the "good and diligent" workers were put on the red bulletin
boards. Nothing was learned about the effect the moral elevation of
some and the moral degradation of others had on character forma­
tion. But from all that we know about the use of such measures, it
can be safely concluded that the effect on the formation of the
human structure was disastrous. Those whose names appeared on
the black bulletin boards could not help but have a feeling of
shame, envy, inferiority, indeed, bitter hatred; whereas those whose
names appeared on the red bulletin board could triumph over their
competitors, could feel themselves to be winners, could give vent to
their brutality and allow their ambition to overstep all natural
bounds. For aU that, those who lost out in such a competition were
not necessarily the "inferior" ones. On the contrary, we can assume
that, with respect to their structures, some of the "blacks" were
freer human beings, even if more neurotic. And those who came out
on top did not necessarily have to be free human beings, for we
know that the traits that were spurred in them are precisely those
traits we find in the overambitious man, the go-getter, the show-off,
in short, the plague-ridden man.
Just how little one still thought about the withering away of the
state and the transferring of its functions to man is shown by a
poem that was used as a means of spurring work discipline.
Es braucht der Staat fiir die Ko1chose
zahllose stahlerne Agitatoren.
Yom Pazifik bis Minsk, von Wjatka bis Krim
harrt fetter Ackerboden der Traktoren.
Es ruft der Staat!
Voran, voran! Mann fiir Mann!
Tretetan!
Den Hammer Nacht und Tag
schwingen wir Schlag auf Schlag,
bauen taglich hundertmal
dem Land ein neues Ross aus Stahl.
303THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
[The state needs for the kolkhozes
A host of agitators made of steeL
From the Pacific to Minsk, from Vyatka to the Crimea
Rich soil awaits the tractors.
The state calls you!
Forwardl Forward! One and all!
Form ranksl
Day and night the hammer
We swing, blow by blow,
And a hundred times each day we build
A steed of steel for our land.]
"The state needs" -instead of "We need." Such distinctions
may mean nothing to the politician who sees everything in terms of
economy, but they are of decisive importance for the restructurali­
zation of man's character.
The so-called Stakhanov movement was a glaring indication of
the misery of the work function. Those workers whose productivity
was far above average were called Stakhanovists. Stakhanov was the
first industrial worker to set a record in the performance of his work.
It is clear that the lack of interest of masses of workers in their work
lay at the basis of Stakhanovism. Pretense to superiority has little
meaning here. The Soviet Union was forced to step up its produc­
tion. Since the workers as a whole failed to meet production quotas
voluntarily, the Soviet government was forced to adopt measures
intended to exploit the workers' ambition to excel. It was also
forced to introduce rigid pay scales. But we must not allow the
necessity of this process to divert us from the main problem: A
minimal increase in the individual worker's interest and ability in
his work would have made the Stakhanov movement superfluous. In
turn, this would have required a complete reversal in the sexual
policies and sexual education of the Russian society. The knowledge
and the will needed to accomplish this was lacking.
304Biosocial Function 01 Work
The relapse into. Stakhanovism had disastrous effects on the
formation of man's character structure. Only those who are inordi­
nately ambitious and brutal are capable of excelling at competitive
piecework. The great majority of the workers either fall far behind
or leave off altogether. A gap arises between the majority of average
workers and a small minority of work-athletes, who readily develop
into a new ruling class. As long as the vast majority of workers have
no enthusiasm for their work and no consciousness of persona.l
responsibility about it, it is out of the question to speak of a change
from coercive discipline to pleasurable work. Complaints will con­
tinue about the workers, poor production, absenteeism, and negli­
gent handling of machinery. This new gap produces envy and
ambition among the weaker workers and presumption and racial
arrogance among the stronger workers. A collective feeling of be­
longing and working together cannot emerge. Denunciations and
reactions characteristic of the emotional plague will prevail.
The way in which National SoCialism or fascist ideologists
appraise the democratic or nondemocratic character of a process is a
good standard. When nationalistic, chauvinistic, militaristic, im­
perialistic disciplinary politicians lavish praise on something, one has
to be on the alert. For example, this is what Mehnert has to say:
It very often happens that the Comsomols who come to a
factory to help boost production are not received very cordially, for
the methods which they use to incite the workers to achieve greater
production are not, as a rule, very considerate. Especially hated are
the workers' correspondents who drag everything into the open and
print it in their newspapers. The lack of tools and raw materials, the
living conditions, which are usually bleak, the passive resistance of
many workers, are often too much for the Comsomols. There have
been times when they have come singing victorious songs and have
had to depart with tears of desperation.
So much for the factual report. And now follows fascist praise
of the Soviet spirit:
305THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
TIlis myth is simple and clear. In our time, which is so devoid
of and hungry for myths, it has a fascinating effect. And as every
myth, it has created an ethos, an ethos which millions of people
today bear in themselves and which seizes others every year. To the
Russians, this ethos means: "Our need is great and the goals we
have set ourselves are far off. We can achieve them only by strug­
gling against the whole world, which fears and hates us, against
enemies around us and in our own ranks. To the degree that we
approach socialism, our distress will be lessened. But we can be
victorious only if we all stand up for one and one stands up for all.
We are all responsible to one another. When a plant produces poor
weapons in a time of war, it commits a crime against the nation as a
whole, not only against the soldiers who lose their lives because of
them. \Vhen a plant produces poor machinery today, it commits a
crime against socialism, against all of us who are fighting to build it.
Desertion from the front at a time of war is not an offense against
an officer, but a betrayal of one's comrades. Desertion from the
front of the five-year plan and from socialism is not a strike against
an employer, but a crime against each and every one of us. For this
is our country, our factories and our future!
The human structure that is formed from such a "disciplina­
tion" of work is also infused with religious fanaticism and dull
passive resistancc. It has always been the case that the "ethos" of
the few, with their discipline, leads to the incompetence of the large
majority of people. Myth and ethos may be heroic, but they are
always dangerous, undemocratic, and reactionary measures. It is a
question of the character, the will, the conviction, ;oy of assuming
responsibility, and enthusiasm of the broad masses of working men
and women. They themselves must be willing and capable of
sticking up for their own lives and insisting on the wealth of their
own experience. An ethos based on the misery of masses and
demanding such great sacrifices and discipline that only a few are
capable of measuring up to it, an ethos that is so severe and con­
tinues to be so severe that even those who support it cannot keep
the pace, may have an elevating effect; but it will never solve a
single objective problem of the social community. A genuine demo-
306Biosocial Function of Work
crat, a work-democrat, who cannot get to the masses owing to such
an ethos, will simply exclaim: To hell with this ethos!
Was the authoritarian, nationalistic regulation of work in the
Soviet Union necessary?
Yes I
Was it capable of arming the country?
Yes!
Was this regulation a progressive measure intended to establish
the self-administration of the Russian society?
No!
Did it solve any of the mounting social problems, or pave the
way to their solution? Did it, and what did it, contribute to the
satisfaction of society?
Nothing!
On the contrary, it produced a human nature imbued with and
confined in nationalism, thus laying the foundation for the Red one­
man dictatorship.
The military power of a society plays no role whatever in
assessing the structure and tendencies of that society with respect to
its freedom. The conducting of war, the building of industry, the
waving of banners, the holding of parades, are child's play compared
with the task of creating a human species that is free. Friend and
foe readily come to terms where militarism and chauvinistic patri­
otism prevail. But the babble of Babylon was nothing compared
with the confusion surrounding the concept "freedom." We want
to find our bearings again on a statement made by a military disci­
plinarian, a man who would fight with the same subjective honesty
and conviction for an America striving for democracy as he would
fight for an America regressing toward fascism.
In 1943 Captain Rickenbacker paid an official visit to the Soviet
Union. Following his return, a detailed article on his impressions
appeared in the August 18 issue of The New York Times. I quote:
. . . Captain Rickenbacker remarked that whereas for the last
several years Russia has been moving to the right, the United
States, at the same time, has been "tending to the left."
307THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
"If they keep going on as they are you'll find Russia coming out
of this war the greatest democracy in the world, while if we keep
going on the way we are we'll be where they were twenty-five years
ago," he declared.
"Do you mean to suggest that Russia is moving toward capi­
talism while we are moving toward bolshevism?" Captail). Ricken­
backer was asked.
"Yes, in a sense," he replied.
. . . Among the things he was particularly impressed with in
Russia was the iron discipline in industrial plants, severe punish­
ment for chronic absenteeism, to the extent of removal from the job
to the bread line, incentive pay, compulsory overtime work and "no
labor difficulties." The Russians, Captain Rickenbacker said, work
eight hours a day, six days a week, with an additional three hours a
day overtime at time and one-half . . . .
". . . Bolshevism in Russia is not what we have been led to
believe by communistic enthusiasts in this country. They have been
constantly turning to the right, as evidenced in many ways, during
the last twelve months. Nowhere in the world have I seen so much
respect for progressive rank in the Army as I witnessed in Russia
from the bottom to the top, which is in the direction of capitalism
and democracy. Officers' uniforms have in great measure been
copied from the old Czaristic design, and the press is selling pre­
revolutionary heroes to the people."
We have learned to listen to conservative voices, to compre­
hend them and to admit the validity of their factual statements
when they coincide with the truth. We have also learned to under­
stand that conservative facts and reactionary developments issue
from the biopathy of masses of people. We differ from an authori­
tarian such as Rickenbacker in that we do not feel any sense of
triumph over the discovery of unpleasant facts. We simply ferret
out the natural processes, for it is when these processes are blocked
that the disciplinarian's views are correct. If that which Ricken­
backer understands by democracy prevails in the Soviet Union, then
we want nothing to do with it. "Capitalism" and "democracy"
cannot be equated. Freedom cannot be inferred from military
308Biosocial Function of Work
fitness. To praise the Soviet Union of today and to reject the
development of social democracy in Russia during Lenin's time is to
eliminate every possibility of establishing clarity. Statements as
ridiculous as the one quoted above are possible only if the history of
a country and its bitter fight for liberation from slavery are not
known. Rickenbacker recommended the Soviet Union of 1943 as a
model for America. He recommended it because he was annoyed by
the absenteeism in American factories. He was impressed by the
facility with which the dictatorship appears to be capable of coping
with social difficulties. But if that is the case, what is all the fuss
about freedom, liberation war, the new world? This Babylonian
babble is a consequence of "politicalism." In conclusion, I should
like to add this word of warning while there is still time: If things
continue as they have, there is a very real possibility that America
will soon be at war with Russia. The Soviet Union will tolerate
neither a genuinely democratic America nor a genuinely democratic
Germany. One of the many reasons for this will be the bad con­
science that weighs heavily upon the leadership of a state that
started out to conquer freedom for the world and ended in an anti­
quated chauvinism, so bitterly fought against by its founders.
309XI
Give Responsibility to Vitally
Necessary Work!
Social conditions throughout the world have recently fallen into
a state of flux. The capitulation of the fuhrer of Italian political
irrationalism set this process in motion. Sooner or later it will be
followed by the capitulation of German political irrationalism. The
process of social reconstruction in Europe will begin with a vacuum
in social life, which will be chiefly characterized by political chaos.
To cope with this social chaos, the working men and women of all
vitally necessary occupations and organizations must be made con­
scious of the importance of fulfilling their social obligation of work.
It cannot be assumed that anyone of the old or any newly founded
political party will be capable of engineering a factual and rational
reorganization of social conditions. Hence, as soon as circumstances
permit, it is necessary that the most outstanding, most perceptive
and politically unattached representatives of all vitally necessary
spheres of work get together at national and international confer­
ences to discuss and solve in work-democratic cooperation the
practical tasks of individual and social life for which they are
responsible. Once such nonpolitical and strictly practical work
conferences have begun to function, their activity will develop with
the logic and consistency that are characteristic of objective and
rational work. It has been clear for some time that the responsibility
for all future developments rests upon the vitally necessary work of
all occupations. In short, it rests upon the shoulders of the repre-
310Give Responsibility to Necessary Work!
sentatives of these occupations, and not upon any one body having
a purely ideologic orientation. This is a conclusion that has been
arrived at independently in various countries of Europe and in
America.
" "
WHAT IS WORK-DEMOCRACY ?
Work-democracy is the natural process of love, work, and
knowledge that governed, governs, and will continue to govern
economy and man's social and cultural life as long as there has been,
is, and will be a society. Work-democracy is the sum total of all
functions of life governed by the rational interpersonal relations
that have come into being, grown, and developed in a natural and
organic way.
Work-democracy is not an ideological system. Nor is it a
"political" system which could be imposed upon human society by
the propaganda of a party, individual politicians, or any group
sharing a common ideology. There is no single, formal political
measure by means of which work-democracy could be "introduced."
Work-democracy cannot be introduced in the same way as a repub­
lic or a totalitarian dictator is introduced. There is a very simple
reason for this: Natural work-democracy is always present and is
always functioning, whether this or that political party or ideological
group know of its existence or not. The process of natural work­
democracy can be in diametrical opposition to social institutions or
it can be more or less in accord with them. Wherever it functions,
however, this work-democratic process demands that the social
ideologies and institutions be brought into line with natural needs
and interpersonal relations, in the same way as it is clearly expressed
in natural love, vitally necessary work, and natural science. These
vital social functions can be thwarted or they can be encouraged;
working men and women can be conscious or unconscious of them.
But they can never be destroyed. Hence, they form the solid basis of
every rational social process.
Ideological political systems are based on views of the natural
311THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
process of life. They can further or thwart the natural process of
life. However, these systems are not part of the foundation of
human society. They can be democratic, in which case they advance
the natural process of life; or they can be authoritarian and dicta­
torial, in which case they become involved in a deadly conflict with
this process.
Work-democracy cannot be imposed upon people as a political
system. Those who perform vitally necessary work either are con­
scious of their responsibility for social processes or this consciousness
evolves organically, as a tree or the body of an animal. This growth
of the consciousness of social responsibility is the most important
precondition to prevent political systems from proliferating like
tumors on the social organism, political systems that sooner or later
have to lead to social chaos. Moreover, the consciousness of social
responsibility on the part of the working men and women of all
occupations is the most important precondition for the gradual
harmonizing of the institutions of human society with the natural
functions of work-democracy. Political systems come and go, with­
out any essential change taking place in the foundation of social life.
Nor does social life cease to function. But the pulse of human
society would stop once and for all if the natural functions of love,
work, and knowledge would cease even for just a day.
Natural love, vitally necessary work, and natural science are
rational functions of life. By their very nature, they cannot be
anything but rational. Hence, they are arch enemies of any form of
irrationalism. Political irrationalism, which plagues, disfigures, and
destroys our life, is, in the true psychiatric sense of the word, a
perversion of social life, a perversion brought about by the failure to
recognize the natural functions of life and by the exchlsion of these
functions from the regulation and determination of social life.
Every form of totalitarian-authoritarian rulership is based on
the irrationalism inculcated in masses of people. Every dictatorial
political view, regardless who is its exponent, hates and fears its arch
enemy, the functions of love, work, and knowledge. They cannot
coexist. Dictatorship is capable only of suppressing the natural
312Give Responsibility to Necessary Workl
functions of life or of exploiting them for its narrow purposes; it can
never promote and protect these functions or perform them itself.
In doing so, it would destroy itself.
From this it follows that:
1. It is not necessary and would only be catastrophic to intro­
duce newly conceived political systems. What is needed is the
coordination of the natural functions of life with the regulation of
future social processes. It is not necessary to create anything new;
we must merely remove the obstacles that thwart the natural social
functions, no matter in what form these obstacles turn up.
2. The representatives of these natural functions of life are
those who perform the best work in all vitally necessary occupations.
It is not their political inclinations that enable them to function in
a work-democratic way, but solely their activity as industrial
workers, farmers, teachers, physicians, child educators, writers, ad­
ministrators, technicians, scientists, researchers, etc. If the repre­
sentatives of vitally necessary work would form an international
organization having concrete social and legal authority, such an
organization would be invincible. It would foredoom international
political irrationalism.
3. Social production and consumption are naturally and or­
ganically interlaced with one another. The establishment of organiza­
tions giving practical and formal expression to this natural nexus
would be a strong social guarantee against further catastrophes
brought about by irrationalism. The responsibility for the course of
the gratification of human needs would rest exclusively on the pro­
ducers and consumers; it would not have to be imposed upon them,
against their will and protest, by an authoritarian state administra­
tion. This assuming of responsibility for one's own fate, represented
in the already existing (i.e., not to be newly created) organizations
of producers and consumers in all fields, would be a decisive step
toward the establishment of the work-democratic self-administration
of society. Since all work processes are dependent upon one another;
since, moreover, consumption determines production, a naturally
evolved and organically functioning organization is given in the social
313THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
basis, which is alone in a position to assume the responsibility for
Europe's further social development.
4. Politically, work-democracy is oriented neither toward the
"Left" nor toward the "Right." It includes everyone who performs
vitally necessary work; hence, it is oriented solely toward the future.
It is not part of its inherent intention to be against ideologies, nor
against political ideologies. But, if it is to function at all, it must of
necessity and in terms of its nature be sharply opposed to every
ideological orientation and certainly to every political party that
obstructs it in an irrational way. At bottom, however, work­
democracy is not "against," as is usually the case in politics. It is for
the concrete formulation and solution of problems.
WHAT IS NEW IN WORK-DEMOCRACY?
Neither the idea that democracy is the best possible form of
social cohabitation nor the idea that work and consumption are the
natural foundation of social existence is new; neither its anti­
dictatorial attitude nor its determination to fight for the natural
rights of all working men and women of all the nations of this
planet is new. All of these demands, ideals, programs, etc., have
been advocated in the liberal, socialist, early communist, Christian
Socialist, and other political organizations for centuries.
But this much is new: The representatives of work-democracy
neither established political parties as a means of pushing through a
work-democratic organization nor did they merely reiterate the old
demands, ideals, and programs and let it go at that. In a genuinely
scientific way, work-democrats asked themselves why it has been
that until now all democratic demands, programs, and ideals have
met with so many failures and, in Europe and in Asia, have had to
give way to reactionary dictators.
For the first time in the history of sociology, a possible future
regulation of human society is derived not from ideologies or condi­
tions that must be created, but from natural processes that have
been present and have been developing from the very beginning.
314Give Responsibility to Necessary Work!
'Work-democratic "politics" is distinguished by the fact that it
rejects all politics and demagogism. Masses of working men and
women will not be relieved of their social responsibility. They will
be burdened with it. Work-democrats have no ambition to be
political fuhrers, nor will they ever be permitted to develop such an
ambition. Work-democracy consciously develops formal democracy,
which is expressed in the mere election of political representatives
and does not entail any further responsibility on the part of the
electorate, into a genuine, factual, and practical democracy on an
international scale. This democracy is borne by the functions of
love, work, and knowledge and is developed organically. It fights
mysticism and the idea of the totalitarian state, not through politi­
cal attitudes, but through practical functions of life, which obey
their own laws. All this is new in work-democracy.
Work-democracy adds a decisive piece of knowledge to the
scope of ideas related to freedom. The masses of people who work
and bear the burden of social existence on their shoulders neither
are conscious of their social responsibility nor are they capable of
assuming the responsibility for their own freedom. This is the result
of the century-long suppression of rational thinking, the natural
functions of love, and the scientific comprehension of the living.
Everything related to the emotional plague in social life can be
traced back to this incapacity and lack of consciousness. It is work­
democracy's contention that, by its very nature, politics is and has to
be unscientific, i.e., that it is an expression of human helplessness,
poverty, and suppression.
In short, work-democracy is a newly discovered bio-sociologic,
natural, and basic function of society. It is not a political program.
I alone bear the responsibility for this brief summary and
statement.
315XII
The Biologic Miscalculation in the
Human Struggle for Freedom
OUR INTEREST IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF FREEDOM
This chapter will deal with the biologic miscalculation that, as
history proves, all freedom movements have made. It is a mis­
calculation that nipped freedom efforts in the bud or frustrated
satisfactory regulations of social life, which had already been at­
tained. This endeavor is prompted by the conviction that only work­
democracy can create the basis of genuine freedom. My experiences
in social discussions lead me to believe that the exposure of this
miscalculation will very likely be taken amiss. It imposes the highest
demands upon the will-to truth of each and every one of us. In
actual practice it implies a great burden in the daily struggle for
existence, for it transfers all social responsibility to the working men
and women in factories, on farms, in clinics, offices, laboratories,
etc.
We have found that facts of a fundamental nature, i.e., facts
that, over and above the political hubbub of everyday life, relate to
the ancient history of the human species, relate, indeed, to man's
biologic constitution, are rejected with various arguments. At bot­
tom, however, the motive is always irrational. When peace reigns,
when everything is proceeding at a leisurely pace, then it is said:
"Everything is quite all right as it is; the League of Nations is a
guarantee of peace; our diplomats settle conflicts in a peaceful way;
the generals are only decorations. So why pose questions that would
316The Human Struggle tor Freedom
be relevant only in the event of a war? We have just ended a war to
end all wars-there is no need to get excited." Then, when it is
shown that such arguments were based on illusions, when the
League of Nations and the diplomats have given ample testimony
of their inability to cope with pressing problems, when a new war
rages-this time one that is worldwide and more brutal than any­
thing known in history, then all attention is concentrated on
"winning the war." Then it is said: "We have to win the war first.
This is no time for profound truths. We will need those when the
war has been won, for then we will also have to secure peace."
Thus, a clear-cut distinction is made between the conduct of war
and the winning of the war, between the termination of hostilities
and the conclusion of peace. Only after the war has been won and
the peace concluded, does one want to proceed to secure peace. One
fails to see that it is precisely in the heat of the war that those deep
social convulsions take place that destroy old institutions and
remold man, that, in other words, the seeds of peace germinate in
the devastations of war. Man's intense longing for peace is never so
strong as it is at a time of war. Hence, in no other social circum­
stance are there so many strong impulses intent on changing the
conditions that produce war. Man learned to construct dams when
he suffered from floods. Peace can be hammered out only at a time
of war, then and only then.
Instead of learning the lessons of war on the spot, so that a new
world can be built immediately, important decisions are put off
until diplomats and statesmen are so involved in peace treaties and
reparations that again there is no time for "basic facts." In the
transition period from the cessation of hostilities to the conclusion
of a sham peace, we hear statements like this: "First the damages of
war must be repaired; the war production has to be converted to
peace production; our hands are full. Before dealing with these basic
facts, let us arrange everything peacefully." In the meantime the
lessons of war have been forgotten; once again everything has been
arranged in such a way that in the course of one generation a new,
even more horrible war has broken out. Once again there is "no
317THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
time" and one is "too busy" to concern oneself with "basic truths."
The emotions of wartime rapidly give way to the old rigidity and
emotional apathy.
If someone, as I myself, has gone through this procrastination
of essential questions and heard these same arguments for the
second time in forty-five years of life; if he recognizes in the new
catastrophe all the characteristics of the old catastrophe; he has to
admit, however reluctantly, that no essential change has taken place
since the first catastrophe (unless one considers the improvement of
the means of destruction and a more widespread development of
human sadism as essential changes). Slowly and surely the convic­
tion takes shape in such a man that: For some curious reason or
another, masses of people do not want to get to the root of the
secret of war. They fear the truths that could bring them a painful
cure.
People like to think of war as a "social thunderstorm." It is said
that it "purifies" the atmosphere; it has its great benefits-it
"hardens the youth" and makes them courageous. As far as that
goes, people say, we have always had and will always have wars.
They are biologically motivated. According to Darwin, the "struggle
for existence" is the law of life. Why, then, were peace conferences
organized? Nor have I ever heard that bears or elephants split up
into two camps and annihilate one another. In the animal kingdom
there are no wars within the same species. Like sadism, war among
one's own kind is an acquisition of "civilized man." No, for some
reason or another, man shies away from putting his finger on the
causes of war. And there can be no doubt that better ways than war
exist of making youth fit and healthy, namely, a satisfying love life,
pleasurable and steady work, general sports, and freedom from the
malicious gossip of old maids. In short, such arguments are hollow
chatter.
What is this fact anyhow?
Why do people fear it?
Is it possible that in his inmost self every man knows this fact,
but is afraid to admit it to himself and to his neighbor?
318The Human Struggle for Freedom
a result of thousands of years of social
It boils down to this: As
and educational distortion, masses of people have become biologi­
cally rigid and incapable of freedom. They are not capable of
establishing peaceful coexistence.
As cynical and hopeless as these two succinct sentences may
sound, they contain the answer to the three above questions. No
one wants to acknowledge the truth they contain, or even listen to
them. No democratic statesman would know what to make of it.
Every honest man knows it. All dictators have built their power on
the social irresponsibleness of masses of people.
They have made no
bones about consciously exploiting this fact. For years on end, far
more than half the civilized German people heard the assertion that
the masses merely regurgitate what has been funneled into them.
They reacted to this with slavish loyalty. They themselves brought
about this ignominious situation. It is ridiculous to contend that the
psychopathic general was capable of oppressing seventy million
by himself.
people all
"How's that?" the suave politician and philanthropist will ask.
"You say that the Americans are incapable of freedom? And what
of the heroic rebels of Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, the British
Commandos, the martyrs in Norway, the armies in Soviet Russia?
How can you dare to cast a slur upon democracies!"
We do not mean military groups, governments, minorities,
individual scientists or thinkers! But genuine social freedom is more
The trend of society is determined solely
than a question of groups.
by the overwhelming ma;ority of working men and women,
whether they passively tolerate or actively support tyranny. Are the
masses themselves
capable of administering society without their
statesmen or parties telling them what to do and how to do it? They
given
are, to be sure, capable of enjoying freedoms, of performing
assigned
work, of being against war and for peace. Thus far,
however, they have not been capable of safeguarding work against
abuse, regulating it through their own organizations, promoting
rapid development, preventing wars, mastering their own irra­
tionalism, etc.
319THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
The masses cannot do these things because until now they have
never been in the position to acquire and practice this ability. The
self-administration of society by the masses, their administration of
the organizations in charge of production and consumption, can be
the only possible answer to this war. One who takes the masses
seriously demands their full responsibility, for tliey alone are peace­
fully disposed. The responsibility and the capacity to be free must
now be added to the love of peace.
As .bitter as it may be, the fact remains: It is the irresponsible­
ness of masses of people that lies at the basis of fascism of all
countries, nations, and races, etc. Fascism is the result of man's
distortion over thousands of years. It could have developed in any
country or nation. It is not a character trait that is confined
specifically to the Germans or Italians. It is manifest in every single
individual of the world. The Austrian saying "Da kann man halt nix
machen" expresses this fact just as the American saying "Let
George do it." That this situation was brought about by a social
development which goes back thousands of years does not alter. the
fact itself. It is man himself who is responsible and not "historical
developments." It was this shifting of the responsibility from living
man to "historical developments" that caused the downfall of the
socialist freedom movements. However, the events of the past
twenty years demand the responsibility of the working masses of
people.
If we take "freedom" to mean first and foremost the responsi­
bility of each individual to shape personal, occupational, and social
existence in a rational way, then it can be said that there is no
greater fear than the fear of the creation of general freedom. Unless
this basic problem is given complete priority and solved, there will
never be a freedom capable of lasting more than one or two genera­
tions. The solution to this problem will require more thought, more
decency, more conscientiousness, more of an economic, educational,
and social readjustment in the social life of masses of people than all
the efforts which were made in former wars (and will have to be
made in wars still to come) and postwar reconstruction programs
320The Human Struggle for Freedom
taken together. This one problem and its solution contain every­
thing that the most audacious and most agonized thinkers of history
have tried to grasp by the idea of international social revolution.
We are the protagonists and bearers of a stupendous revolutionary
upheaval. If one must indeed suffer, then "blood, sweat, and tears"
should at least have a rational goal, namely: the responsibility of the
working masses of people for social life! This conclusion follows
with hard logic from the following statements:
1. Every social process is determined by the attitude of the
masses.
2. The masses are incapable of freedom.
3. When the masses achieve the capacity to be free through
their own efforts, this will be genuine social freedom.
What prompts me to depart from the usual policy of veiling
such generally known facts, especially as I make no claim to political
leadership?
There are several motives. For years I demurred from pursuing
them, simply because I feared the consequences. Again and again I
hesitated to put my ideas down on paper. I tried to extricate myself
from this perplexity by telling myself that I of course was not a
politician and that political events were no concern of mine. Or I
evaded the issue by persuading myself that I had more than enough
to keep me busy with my orgone biophysics and saw no reason why
I should burden myself with an embarrassing, thankless basic social
question, which seemed hopeless for the time being anyhow. I tried
to make myself believe that it was my secret political ambition that
was prompting me to get involved in the turmoil of irrational politi­
cal ideologies. I demurred to give in to such an ambition. The
responsible politicians and statesmen were bound to come out with
these facts sooner or later!
After years of painful and harassing oscillations and attempts to
fight shy of these facts, I had finally to yield to the pressure exerted
on me as well as on all of my coworkers by our investigation of the
phenomena of life. A researcher has an allegiance to truth, over
which no other allegiance, however highly esteemed, can take
321THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
precedence. What makes it particularly difficult to fulfill this al­
legiance is the fact that communications of truth, instead of being
looked upon as natural, have a highly dangerous potential as things
now stand.
Basically speaking, this is merely a summary of facts, which, in
an isolated way, have been well known to us for a long time:
1. Mankind is biologically sick.
2. Politics is the irrational social expression of this sickness.
3. Whatever takes place in social life is actively or passively,
voluntarily or involuntarily, determined by the structure of masses
of people.
4. This character structure is formed by socia-economic proc­
esses and it anchors and perpetuates these processes. Man's bio­
pathic character structure is, as it were, the fossilization of the
authoritarian process of history. It is the biophysical reproduction of
mass suppression.
5. The human structure is animated by the contradiction be­
tween an intense longing for and fear of freedom.
6. The fear of freedom of masses of people is expressed in the
biophysical rigidity of the organism and the inflexibility of the
character.
7. Every form of social leadership is merely the social expression
of the one or the other side of this structure of masses of people.
8. It is not a question of the Versailles Peace Treaty, the oil
wells of Baku or two to three hundred years of capitalism, but a
question of four to six thousand years of authoritarian mechanistic
civilization, which has ruined man's biologic functioning.
9. Interest in money and power is a substitute for unfulfilled
happiness in love, supported by the biologic rigidity of masses of
people.
10. The suppression of the natural sexuality of children and
adolescents serves to mold the human structure in such a way that
masses of people become willing upholders and reproducers of
mechanistic authoritarian civilization.
II. Thousands of years of human suppression are in the process
of being eliminated.
322The Human Struggle for Freedom
These are more or less the results of our research on the charac­
ter and its relationship to social processes.
We have a threefold interest in the development of a free
world: personal, objective, and social.
1. The personal interest is determined by the threat to our
existence as members of this mortally sick society. Those, like
myself, who lost their home, family, and possessions, who experi­
enced three and a half years of murder in war at first hand, who saw
many friends die and go to pieces, who witnessed mass migrations
and destruction of property, etc., in World War I, understand what
millions upon millions of men and women are going through on
this planet today. We want an end to this ignominy! It is ignomini­
ous that a handful of Prussian crooks and perverse neurotics,
functioning as the "fuhrer" of one thing or another, are able to
exploit the social helplessness of hundreds of millions of industrious
and decent men and women. The ignominy is all the more poignant
in view of the fact that these same millions of men and women
unwittingly and naively allowed themselves to be taken in by these
political swindlers (and this was the case not only in Germany, but
elsewhere also). All we want is to be able to perform our work in
peace, to love our wives or husbands without danger, to raise our
children free of the miasma of the plague. In short, we do not want
to be bothered, deceived, and led around by the nose by a handful
of political swindlers in this short life of ours. Our lives have been
crushed by politics long enough! We want an end of it! Once and
for all!!
2. The protagonists of the fascist plague have looked through
the incapacity for freedom of masses of people and have declared
that it is an absolute biologic fact. They have put alluring irrational
race theories into the world, have divided mankind into biologically
immutable superior and inferior races, and have conferred upon
themselves, who are the most sick and most vicious, the biologic
title of "superman." We have the answer to this fraud: The race
theory is a mystical view of life. Man's natural happiness in love and
security in life will be the doom of this view.
323THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
3. Our institute is faced with a momentous task. We have to
prepare ourselves for two basically different possibilities:
a. In the event that this Second World War will force the
answer to social chaos to the surface and into social consciousness,
we will be called upon to deal with great tasks. We will have to
assume an enormous responsibility. We have to prepare ourselves
for this possibility in advance. We must have a clear conception of
our tasks. Our knowledge of human reactions and the effects of the
fascist pestilence will have to be clearly organized if we do not want
to fail. Our tasks can be fulfilled only within the framework of the
general struggle for the establishment of genuine freedom. If we
cherish the illusion that man's structure is immediately capable of
freedom and self-administration, that, in other words, we need
merely eliminate the plague of party fascism to make it possible for
social freedom to function, to put justice before injustice, truth
before falsehood, decency before meanness, then we too will be
doomed together with everything else that is based on such illu­
sions. This much is clear. The development of freedom requires
that one be ruthlessly free of illusions, fOT only then will one
succeed in rooting out irrationalism from masses of people to open
the way to responsibility and freedom. To idealize masses of people
and to commiserate with them will only produce fresh misfortunes.
The various freedom organizations in Europe treated this sick­
ness on the part of masses of people as a quack might treat a
paralyzed patient, namely by persuading him that he was not really
paralyzed and would surely be able to dance a polka if it were not
for the bad wolf (in 1914, the war industrialists; in 1942, the
psychopathic generals) . A paralyzed patient may like to hear such a
consolation and rejoice in it, but he still won't be able to walk. The
decent physician would proceed "ruthlessly"; he would be very
careful not to arouse any false hopes in the patient. He -would use
every means at his disposal to determine the nature of the paralysis
and to decide whether it is curable or not. If, fundamentally, it is
curable, then he will find the means of curing it.
The fascist dictator declares that the masses of people are
324The Human Struggle for Freedom
biologically inferior and crave authority, that, basically, they are
'
slaves by nature. Hence, a totalitarian authoritarian regime is the
only possible form of government for such people. It is significant
that all dictators who today plunge the world into misery stem from
the suppressed masses of people. They are intimately familiar with
this sickness on the part of masses of people. What they lack is an
insight into natural processes and development, the will to truth
and research, so that they are never moved by a desire to want to
change these facts.
On the other hand, the formal democratic leaders made the
mistake of assuming that the masses of people were automatically
capable of freedom and thereby precluded every possibility of
establishing freedom and self-responsibility in masses of people as
long as they were in power. They were engulfed in the catastrophe
and will never reappear.
Our answer is scientific and rational. It is based on the fact that
masses of people are indeed incapable of freedom, but it does not­
as racial mysticism does-look upon this incapacity as absolute,
innate, and eternal. It regards this incapacity as the result of former
social conditions of life and, therefore, as changeable.
Two important tasks follow from this:
i. The investigation and elucidation of the forms in which
man's incapacity for freedom expresses itself;
ii. The investigation of the medical, pedagogic, and social tools
necessary to establish the capacity for freedom in a more and more
thorough and more and more extensive way.
At this point the "mistakes" made by democratic governments
will be recalled: pacts with plague-ridden dictators, the many acts of
treachery committed against democratic allies (England-Spain; Rus­
sia-Czechoslovakia, etc.), the priority given to business interests
over principles (Russian oil for Italy during the Ethiopian war;
Mexican oil for Germany during the Spanish anti-fascist fight;
Swedish steel for Nazi Germany; American steel, American coal,
etc., for Japan; English behavior in Burma and India; the religious­
mystical faith of the socialists and Communists, etc.). But the
325THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
gravity of these "mistakes" diminishes when compared with the
mistakes of masses of people, their social apathy, passivity, craving
for authority, etc. The ineluctable fact remains: The working
masses of men and women, they and they alone, are responsible for
everything that takes place, the good things and the bad things.
True enough, they suffer most from a war, but it is their apathy,
craving for authority, etc., that is most responsible for making wars
possible. It follows of necessity from this responsibility that the
working masses of men and women, they and they alone, are
capable of establishing lasting peace. The quintessence of this
accomplishment can be nothing but the elimination of the incapac­
ity for freedom. Only the masses of people themselves can accom­
plish this. To become capable of freedom and of securing peace,
masses of people who are incapable of freedom will have to have
social power. This is the contradiction and its solution.
b. In the event that the outcome of this war will not bring the
basic facts to the surface of social consciousness and that the old
illusions continue to exist, it is to be assumed that our present
position will not change much. If such is the case, we will not be
able to escape the conclusion that the illusionary "pills," the formal
freedoms, the formal joys and formal democracies, will soon give
birth to new dictators and a new war. In such a case we will con­
tinue to be "isolated" and in opposition to this social misery; our
task will be no less difficult. Within this general framework of
illusions we will have to maintain a subjective and objective hon­
esty. We will have to make every effort to keep our insights into the
nature of man unadulterated, and at the same time to deepen them.
It will not be easy for the workers in the field of orgone biophysics,
structure psychology, and sex-economy to elude the influences of
illusions and to preserve their knowledge in a pure and crystal clear
form for future generations. Their knowledge must be practically
applicable if the insight into the psychic mass plague should still
have to be asserted after the sixth, twelfth, or twentieth world war.
In this case we will not pass on to our descendants deeds of
heroism, war decorations, "heroic remembrances," and front-line
326The Human Struggle for Freedom
experiences, but a modest, unobtrusive, unostentatious knowledge,
pregnant with the seed of the future. This task can be accomplished
even under the worst social conditions. When the time is ripe to
overcome the emotional plague, we do not want that generation to
make any unnecessary mistakes, and we do not want it to have to
cast about for answers to the arguments of the plague. We want it
to be able to fall back on old, though neglected, truths and to be
able to shape its life more honestly and more decently than the
generation of 1940.
At this point, some friend or other may well feel prompted to
ask: "For Christ's sake, why don't you fight for social power to push
through the important truths you have perceived? Isn't it cowardly
of you to sit there, politically passive, though you claim to be in
possession of vital facts. Damn it, fight for positions as ministers of
health, ministers of education, statesmen, etc.!"
We understand this argument. Many of us have set it forth
again and again. There were many sleepless nights because of it.
The dilemma is this:
Without the power to put them into practice, truths are of no
use. They remain academic.
Power, no matter what kind of power it is, without a founda­
tion in truth, is a dictatorship, more or less and in one way or
another, for it is always based on man's fear of the social responsi­
bility and personal burden that "freedom" entails.
Dictatorial power and truth do not go together. They are
mutually exclusive.
It is a historical fact that truth has always died when its
protagonists have gained social power. "Power" always means the
subjugation of others. However, truthful facts can never be put into
practice by subjugation, but only by persuasion. We learned this
from the French and Russian revolutions. Not a single one of their
truths survived more than a few decades at the most. Jesus pro­
claimed a truth which was stupendous at his time. It died in the
Christian world when he was replaced by the popes. Deep insights
into human misery of two thousand years ago gave way to formulas;
327THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
the simple cowl gave way to the gold-draped ornament; the re­
bellion against suppression of the poor gave way to consolations of
happiness beyond the grave. The truths of the great French Revolu­
tion died in the French Republic and ended in political power­
mongering, in the ignorance of a Petain and the business dealings of
a Laval. The truths of Marxian economy died in the Russian
Revolution when the word "society" was replaced by the word
"state" and the idea of an "international mankind" was replaced by
nationalistic patriotism and the pact with Hitler. They died in
Germany, Austria, and Scandinavia, notwithstanding the fact that
the heirs of the great European freedom-fighters had all the social
power in their hands. Almost one hundred years after the birth of
the truths of 1848, the muck, which goes back thousands of years,
still prevails. Power and truth do not go together. This too is a
bitter, unfortunate truth.
It is true that those of us who have political experience could
wrestle for power just as any other politician. But we have no time;
we have more important things to do. And there is no doubt that
the knowledge we hold to be sacred would be lost in the process. To
acquire power, millions of people have to be fed illusions. This too
is true: Lenin won over millions of Russian peasants, without whom
the Russian Revolution would have been impossible, with a slogan
which was at variance with the basic collective tendencies of the
Russian party. The slogan was: "Take the land of the large land­
owners. It is to be your individual property." And the peasants
followed. They would not have offered their allegiance if they had
been told in 1917 that this land would one day be collectivized. The
truth of this is attested to by the bitter fight for the collectivization
of Russian agriculture around 1930. In social life there are degrees
of power and degrees of falsity. The more the masses of people
adhere to truth, the less power-mongering there will be; the more
imbued with irrational illusions the masses of people are, the more
widespread and brutal individual power-mongering will be.
It would be stupid to try to win over masses of people with the
assertion that they themselves and not individual psychopaths are
328Tbe Human Struggle for Freedom
responsible for social misery. that they themselves and not one of
their elected or acclaimed leaders bear the responsibility for their
fate. that they alone are responsible for everything that happens in
the world. This is completely at variance with what they have
always been told and what they have imbibed. It would be stupid to
try to acquire power with such truths.
On the other hand, it is definitely conceivable that the world
catastrophe will reach a stage at which the masses of people will be
forced to get an insight into their social attitudes, be forced to
change themselves and to assume the heavy burden of social respon­
sibility. But in such a case. they themselves will acquire power and
will rightfully reject groups who "conquer" power "in the interest of
the people." Hence. there is no reason for us to fight for power.
We can be assured that the masses of people will need us. will
call upon us and will entrust us with important functions, if they
should ever get in a position to transform themselves in a rational
direction. We will be a part of these masses. not their leaders, not
their elected representatives, not their "custodians." Then, as was
the case in Austria and Germany many years ago, masses of people
will throng to our clinics, schools, lectures, and demonstrations of
scientific facts to get answers to basic questions of life. (They will
not demand or expect us to tell them how to solve their life tasks.)
But they will throng to us only if we shall have remained honest.
Then, when masses of people will have to bear the responsibility for
social existence themselves, they will inevitably run against their
own weaknesses, against the heritage of a vicious past. In short. they
will run against those facts in their structures, thoughts, and feelings
that we include under the term "incapacity for freedom." And as a
social institution, together with thousands of friends. we will expose
the mechanism of the incapacity for freedom and all the obstruc­
tions to the development of freedom to help masses of people to
achieve genuine freedom.
For this we need no power. The confidence of men and
women-of all ages. all occupations, every color of skin and every
view of life-in our absolute integrity as physicians, researchers.
329THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
teachers, social workers, biologists, physicists, writers, technicians,
etc., will be far more enduring than any power ever acquired by a
politician. This confidence will be that much greater, the more our
scientific and practical activity reflects reality. This confidence can­
not be conquered; it comes about of itself when one adheres to
one's work honestly. In no case should we want to adapt our
insights to the masses' present way of thinking for the purpose "of
winning influence." Widespread confidence in our activities can
proceed only from the deepening of our general knowledge about
the nature of the plague.
When we are called upon, it will be a sign that self-administra­
tion in social life is indeed taking hold, that the will to "profound
truth," to fruitful self-criticism, is awakening in the working masses
of men and women. Since our organization is the only organization
that sees through the irrationality of politics and the old ideologies,
it cannot be any other way. Conversely, if we continue to remain in
the "opposition," it will be a sure sign that society is not ready to
see through and eliminate the irrationality in its mechanism. In
such a case, however, no power would be of any help to us, and we
ourselves would only degenerate into irrationality.
Don't let this conscious renunciation of power cause anyone to
underestimate our work. We do not play the role of "humble,"
"unassuming" scientists. Our work is accomplished at the source of
life, in line with fundamental natural science. False modesty here
would be tantamount to self-destruction. It is true that, beside
"Dneprostroi Dam," "orgastic potency" sounds small; "character
armoring," insignificant, compared with "blackout"; "orgone," aca­
demic beside "Bataan and Tobruk." It seems this way from a
contemporary point of view. But compared with Kepler's laws, what
remains of Alexander the Great? What remains of Caesar compared
with the laws of mechanics? What of Napoleon's campaigns com­
pared with the discovery of micro-organisms or unconscious psychic
life? And what will remain of the psychopathic generals compared
with cosmic orgone? Renunciation of power does not mean renunci­
ation of rational regulation of human existence. It is the effect that is
330The Human Struggle for Freedom
different: long-sighted, deep, and revolutionary, true and life­
securing. It does not matter whether we feel the effects tomorrow or
the day after tomorrow. It will be up to working masses of men and
women to pick the fruits of new knowledge today and not the day
after tomorrow. The responsibility they bear for their life and activ­
ity is no less than the responsibility the individual shoemaker bears
for the shoe, the physician for the patient, the researcher for his
statements, the architect for his constructions. We do not strive to
be people's benefactors or commiseraters. We take people seriously!
When they need us, they will call us. Then we shall be there. For
my part, I reject the struggle for power with the intent of obtruding
my knowledge.
BIOLOGIC RIGIDITY, INCAPACITY FOR FREEDOM, AND
MECHANICAL AUTHORITARIAN VIEW OF LIFE
We are confronted with the incontrovertible fact: At no time
in the history of human society did masses of people succeed in
preserving, organizing, and developing the freedom and peace that
they had achieved in bloody battles. We mean the genuine freedom
of personal and social development, the freedom to face life without
fear, freedom from all forms of economic suppression, freedom
from reactionary inhibitions of development; in short, the free self­
administration of life. We have to rid ourselves of all illusions. In
the masses of people themselves there is a retarding power which is
both reactionary and murderous and which thwarts the efforts of
the freedom-fighters again and again.
This reactionary power in masses of people appears as a general
fear of responsibility and fear of freedom. These are not moralistic
evaluations. This fear is deeply rooted in the biologic constitution of
present-day man. However, this constitution is not, as the typical
fascist believes, native to man; it has become that way in the course
of history and is therefore changeable, fundamentally speaking. It is
not easy to give a brief and lucid exposition of the social role of the
fear of freedom. Perhaps it would be best to begin with a report by
331THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
James Aldridge, which appeared in The New York Times of June
24, 1942, under the title, "British in Africa Lack Killer Urge." I
quote:
The German Afrika Corps defeated the Eighth Army because
it had speed, anger, virility and toughness. As soldiers in the tradi­
tional sense, the Germans are punk, absolutely punk. But Marshal
Erwin Rommel and his gang are angry men, they are tough to the
point of stupidity. They are virile and fast, they are thugs with little
or no imagination. They are practical men, taken from a most
practical and hard life to fight practically: Nazis trained to kill. The
German commanders are scientists, who are continually experiment­
ing with and improving the hard, mathematical formula of killing.
They are trained as mathematicians, engineers and chemists facing
complicated problems. There is no art in it, there is no imagination.
War is pure physics to them. The German soldier is trained with a
psychology of the daredevil track rider. He is a professional killer,
with no distractions. He believes he is the toughest man on earth.
Actually, he cracks very easily and is not so tough, and can be
beaten soundly and quickly by a foe using the same ruthless speedy
methods he uses. . . . The British soldier is the most heroic on
earth, but do not confuse that with military toughness. He has the
toughness of determination but he has not the toughness which
makes him SCientifically kill his enemy.
This is the best description of mechanical militarism that I have
ever read. It discloses at one blow the complete identity of mecha­
nistic natural science, mechanical human structure, and sadistic
murder. This identity found its highest and most consummate
expression in the totalitarian dictatorship-ideology of German im­
perialism. This mechanical trinity is set in relief against that view of
life that regards man not as a machine, the machine not as the
master of man, and militarism not as his greatest asset. This living
functional view has found its last refuge in the Western democ­
racies. It remains to be seen whether it will survive the chaos.
As strange as it may sound to the ears of a general, I maintain
332The Human Struggle for Freedom
that the defeats of the democraci�s, as tragic and dangerous as they
were, were imbued with a deep humanity, which is diametrically
opposed to mechanical automatism: the appreciation of human life.
Aldridge is wrong in reproaching the democratic commanders-in­
chief for attempting to spare human life, instead of imitating the
human robots. He is wrong in demanding that the anti-fascist
fighters learn to kill even more mechanically, more automatically,
more scientifically, than the Prussian automatons. Those who at­
tempt to beat the mechanical automatons with their own methods
will only jump out of the frying pan and into the fire, i.e., in their
efforts to become more efficient scientific killers, they will transform
themselves into mechanical automatons and perpetuate the process
their opponents have set in motion. In such a case the last vestiges
of all living hope for a different kind of human society, a perma­
nently peaceful one, will vanish altogether.
Our conception of the anti-fascist fight is different. It is a clear,
relentless recognition of the historical and biological causes that lead
to such murders. The deracination of the fascist plague will come
about solely from such a recognition, and not by imitating it. One
cannot vanquish fascism by imitating and subduing it with its own
methods, without becoming a fascist oneself. The way of fascism is
the way of the automaton, death, rigidity, hopelessness. The way of
the living is fundamentally different; it is more difficult, more
dangerous, more honest, more hopeful.
Let us strip the matter of all current political interests and
concentrate on the one question: How does such a complete func­
tional identity of machine, man, and scientific murder come about?
This question may not bear any relevance to such questions as
whether ship-building is keeping pace with ship-sinking or whether
the mechanical monstrosity will reach the oil wells of Baku or not.
We do not fail to appreciate the importance of these current
questions. If my house should suddenly catch fire, naturally I would
first try to extinguish the fire and to save what could still be saved of
'
important manuscripts, books, and apparatus. But sooner or later I
shall have to build a new house, and I shall give considerable
333THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
thought to what it was that caused the fire in the old house, so that
I can prevent a repetition of the misfortune.
MAN IS FUNDAMENTALLY AN ANIMAL. In contrast to man, ani­
mals are not mechanical or sadistic, and their societies (within
the same species) are incomparably more peaceful than man's
societies. The basic question runs: What caused the human animal
to deteriorate and become robotlike?
When I use the word "animal," I do not mean something
vicious, terrible, or "inferior," but a biologic fact. However, man
developed the peculiar idea that he was not an animal; he was a
"man," and he had long since divested himself of the "vicious" and
the "brutal." Man takes great pains to disassociate himself from the
vicious animal and to prove that he "is better" by pointing to his
culture and his civilization, which distinguish him from the animal.
His entire attitude, his "theories of value," moral philosophies, his
"monkey trials," all bear witness to the fact that he does not want
to be reminded that he is fundamentally an animal, that he has
incomparably more in common with "the animal" than he has with
that which he thinks and dreams himself to be. The theory of the
German superman has its origin in man's effort to disassociate
himself from the animal. His viciousness, his inability to live
peacefully with his own kind, his wars, bear witness to the fact that
man is distinguished from the other animals only by a boundless
sadism and the mechanical trinity of an authoritarian view of life,
mechanistic science, and the machine. If one looks back over long
stretches of the results of human civilization, one finds that man's
claims are not only false, but are peculiarly contrived to make him
forget that he is an animal. Where and how did man get these
illusions about himself?
Man's life is dichotomized: One part of his life is determined
by biologic laws (sexual gratification, consumption of food, related­
ness to nature); the other part of his life is determined by the
machine civilization (mechanical ideas about his own organization,
his superior position in the animal kingdom, his racial or class atti­
tude toward other human groups, valuations about ownership and
334The Human Struggle for Freedom
nonownership, science, religion, etc.). His being an animal and his
not being an animal, biologic roots on the one hand and technical
development on the other hand, cleave man's life and thought. All
the notions man has developed about himself are consistently
derived from the machine that he has created. The construction of
machines and the use of machines have imbued man with the belief
that he is progressing and developing himself to something "higher,"
in and through the machine. But he also invested the machine
with an animal-like appearance and mechanics. The train engine has
eyes to see with and legs to run with, a mouth to consume coal with
and discharge openings for slag, levers, and other devices for making
sounds. In this way the product of mechanistic technology became
the extension of man himself. In fact, machines do constitute a
tremendous extension of man's biologic organization. They make
him capable of mastering nature to a far greater degree than his
hands alone had enabled him. They give him mastery over time and
space. Thus, the machine became a part of man himself, a loved
and highly esteemed part. He dreams about how these machines
make his life easier and will give him a great capacity for enjoyment.
The enjoyment of life with the help of the machine has always been
his dream. And in reality? The machine became, is, and will con­
tinue to be his most dangerous destroyer, if he does not differentiate
himself from it.
The advance of civilization which was determined by the de­
velopment of the machine went hand in hand with a catastrophic
misinterpretation of the human biologic organization. In the con­
struction of the machine, man followed the laws of mechanics and
lifeless energy. This technology was already highly developed long
before man began to ask how he himself was constructed and
organized. When, finally, he dared very gradually, cautiously and
very often under the mortal threat of his fellow man to discover his
own organs, he interpreted their functions in the way he had
learned to construct machines many centuries before. He inter­
preted them in a mechanistic, lifeless, and rigid way. The mecha­
nistic view of life is a copy of mechanistic civilization. But living
335THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
functioning is fundamentally different; it is not mechanistic. The
specific biologic energy, orgone, obeys laws which are neither me­
chanical nor electrical. Trapped in a mechanistic picture of the
world, man was incapable of grasping the specifically living, non­
mechanistic functioning. Man dreams about one day producing a
homunculus a la Frankenstein or at least an artificial heart or
artificial protein. The notions of homunculus, which man has
developed in his fantasy, project a picture of a brutal monster,
manlike, but mechanically stupid, angular, and possessing powerful
forces, which, if they are set loose, will be beyond control and will
automatically cause havoc. In his film Fantasia Walt Disney bril­
liantly captured this fact. In such fantasies of himself and his
organization, we miss every expression of that which is vitally alive,
kind, social, and related to nature. On the other hand, it is striking
that man invests the animals he portrays precisely with those traits
he misses in himself and does not give to his homunculus figures.
This, too, is excellently brought out in Disney's animal films.
In his fantasies, man appears as a mechanical, vicious, overbear­
ing, heartless, inanimate monster, while the animal appears as a
social, kind, and fully alive creature, invested with all the human
strengths and weaknesses. We have to ask: Does man reflect a
reality in these fantasies? The answer is: Yes. He very vividly por­
trays his inner biologic contradiction:
1. In ideology: vicious animal-majestic man;
2. In reality: kind, free animal-brutal robot.
Thus, the machine has had a mechanical, mechanistic, "dull­
ing," and "rigidifying" effect on man's conception of his own
organization. This is how man conceives of himself: The brain is
the "most consummate product of development." His brain is a
"control center," which gives the individual organs commands and
impulses just as the "ruler" of a state orders his "subjects" about.
The organs of the body are connected with the master, the "brain,"
by telegraph wires, the nerves. (A complete misconception natu­
rally, for the organs of the organism had an expedient biologic
function long before there was a brain in billions of organisms. And
as physiology has experimentally proven, the essential functions of
336The Human Struggle tor Freedom
life continue for some time in a dog or chicken from which the
brain has been removed.) Infants have to drink a precise quantity
of milk at fixed intervals and have to sleep a precise number of
hours. Their diet has to have exactly x ounces of fat, y ounces of
protein and z ounces of carbohydrates. Until the day of marriage, a
man does not have a sex drive; it begins to operate precisely on this
day. God created the world in exactly six days and rested on the
seventh, as man rests from his. machines .. Children have to study x
hours of mathematics, y hours of chemistry, z hours of zoology, all
exactly the same, and all of them have to acquire the same amount
of wisdom. Superior intelligence is equal to one hundred points,
average intelligence to eighty points, stupidity to forty points. With
ninety points one gets a Ph.D., with eighty-nine, one does not.
Even in our own time, psychic life itself is only something
nebulous and mysterious to man, or at best a secretion of the brain,
which, as it were, is neatly stored away in individual compartments.
It has no greater significance than the excreta that are discharged
from the bowels. For centuries man has not only denied the existence
of a soul; what is worse is that he repudiated every attempt to com­
prehend sensations and psychic experiences. At the same time, how­
ever, he devised mystical conceptions which embodied his emo­
tional life. Those who questioned his mystical conceptions of life
were persecuted and punished with death, whether it was the
"saints," "racial purity," or the "state" that was questioned. In
this way man developed mechanistic, mechanical, and mystical con­
ceptions of his organization at one and the same time. Thus, his
understanding of biology remained far behind his dexterity in con­
structing machines, and he abandoned the possibility of compre­
hending himself. The machine he had created sufficed to explain
the performances of his organism.1
1 The tragic duality between biologic and technical organization, between what
is vitally alive and what is automatic and mechanical in man, is clearly expressed
in the following fact. Not a single one of the individuals who make up the
masses of this world wanted the war. All of them, without exception, have
fallen prey to it, hopelessly, as to a monstrous automaton. But it is rigid man
himself who is this monstrosity.
337THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
Is this gap between outstanding industrial dexterity and biologic
understanding only the result of a lack of knowledge? Or can we
assume that there is an unconscious intention, an, as it were, uncon­
scious arbitrary banishment of the insight into one's own organiza­
tion? (In the experimental studies of the orgone, I never cease to
marvel that atmospheric orgone was so completely overlooked by
tens of thousands of outstanding researchers.)
The irrefutable answer is: The lagging behind of our under­
standing of the living, its mechanistic misinterpretation, and the
overestimation of the machine were and are unconscious intentions.
There is no reason whatever why man could not have constructed
machines mechanistically and at the same time comprehended the
living, non mechanical in a living way. A thorough consideration of
human behavior in important life situations betrays the nature of
this intention.
For man the machine civilization constituted not only an im­
provement of his animal existence; over and above this it had the
subjectively far more important, but irrational, function of con­
stantly stressing that he was not an animal, that he was funda­
mentally different from the animal. The next question is this:
'\Vhat interest does man have in constantly crying out, whether in
his science, his religion, his art or his other expressions of life, that
he is indeed a man and not an animal; that the highest task of
human existence is the "slaying of his animal side" and the cultiva­
tion of "values"; that the child has to be transformed from a "little
wild animal" into -a "higher man"? How is it possible, we have to
ask, that man should want to cut himself off from the biologic
branch on which he grew and of which he is inveterately a part?
How is it possible, we must ask further, that he does not see the
damages (psychic illnesses, biopathies, sadism, and wars) to his
health, culture, and mind that are caused by this biologic renuncia­
tion? Is it possible for human intelligence to admit that human
misery can be done away with only if man fully acknowledges his
animal nature? Doesn't man have to learn that that which distin­
guishes him from the other animals is merely an improvement of
338The Human Struggle tor Freedom
the security factor of life, and that he has to give up the irrational
renunciation of his true nature?
"Away from the animal; away from sexuality!" are the guiding
principles of the formation of all human ideology. This is the case
whether it is disguised in the fascist form of racially pure "super­
men," the communist form of proletarian class honor, the Christian
'
form of man's "spiritual and ethical nature," or the liberal form of
"higher human values." All these ideas harp on the same monoto­
nous tune: "We are not animals; it was we who discovered the
machine-not the animal! And we don't have genitals like the
animals!" All of this adds up to an overemphasis of the intellect, of
the "purely" mechanistic; logic and reason as opposed to instinct;
culture as opposed to nature; the mind as opposed to the body;
work as opposed to sexuality; the state as opposed to the individual;
the superior man as opposed to the inferior man.
How is it to be explained that of the millions of car drivers,
radio listeners, etc., only very few know the name of the inventor of
the car and the radio, whereas every child knows the name of the
generals of the political plague?
Natural science is constantly drilling into man's consciousness
that fundamentally he is a worm in the universe. The political
plague-monger is constantly harping upon the fact that man is not
an animal, but a "zoon politikon," i.e., a non-animal, an upholder of
values, a "moral being." How much mischief has been perpetuated
by the Platonic philosophy of the state! It is quite clear why man
knows the politicos better than the natural scientists: He does not
want to be reminded of the fact that he is fundamentally a sexual
animal. He does not want to be an animal.
Viewed in this way, the animal has no intelligence, but only
"wicked instincts"; no culture, but only "base drives"; no sense of
values, but only "material needs." It is precisely the human type
who sees the whole of life in the making of money who likes to
stress these "differences." If a war as murderous as the present one
has any trace of a rational function, then it is the function of
exposing the abysmal irrationality and mendacity of such ideas.
339THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
Man would have good reason to be happy if he were as free from
sadism, perversions, and meanness, and as filled with a natural
spontaneity, as any one of the animals, whether an ant or an ele­
phant. As vain as man's assumption was that the earth is the center
of the universe or the sole inhabited planet, even so unreal and
pernicious was his philosophy that represented the animal as a
"soulless" creature devoid of any morals, indeed, as morally repul­
sive. If, while professing myself to be a benevolent saint, I should
take an ax and crack my neighbor's skull, there would be good
reason for putting me in a mental institution or in the electric chair.
But this juxtaposition exactly reflects the contradiction in man be­
tween his ideal "values" on the one hand and his actual behavior on
the other hand. His expressing of this contradiction in high-sound­
ing sociological formulas such as "the century of wars and revolu­
tions," or "elevating experiences at the front," or "the highest
development of military strategy and political tactics," does not in
the least alter the fact that it is precisely with respect to his
biological and social organization that man gropes in the dark and is
so hopelessly confused.
It is clear that this frame of mind did not evolve naturally; it is
the result of the development of the machine civilization. It is easy
to prove that, when the patriarchal organization of society began to
replace the matriarchal organization, suppression and repression of
genital sexuality in children and adolescents were the principal
mechanisms used to adapt the human structure of the authoritarian
order. The suppression of nature, of "the animal" in the child, was
and has remained the principal tool in the production of mechani­
cal subjects.2 Society's socio-economic development has continued
its mechanical course until today in an independent way. The basis
of an ideologic and cultural formations developed and branched out
hand in hand with the socio-economic development: "Away from
genitality" and "away from the animal." Man's effort to disassociate
2 This socio-economic process and its effects on the formation of human
ideology and human structure are described in Der Einbruch der Sexualmoral.
340The Human Struggle for Freedom
himself from his biological origin became more and more pro­
nounced and comprehensive in the course of these two processes, the
social and the psychological. Sadistic brutality in business and war,
mechanicalness in his nature, ambiguity in his facial expression,
armoring against feelings, perverse and criminal tendencies, all of
these became more and more pronounced and comprehensive.
It hasn't been too long since we began to take cognizance of the
devastating effects of this devious biological development. One is
easily tempted to look upon the state of affairs too optimistically.
One could argue as follows: There can be no doubt that man went
astray when he interpreted his own nature in terms of the machine
civilization. Now that we recognize this error, it will be easy to
correct it. Civilization has to be mechanical, but man's mechanistic
attitude toward life can easily be converted into an attitude based
on functional living processes. An astute minister of education
could issue appropriate edicts for the purpose of reshaping educa­
tion. The error would be corrected in one or two generations. That's
the way some clever men spoke at the time of the Russian Revolu­
tion, 1917-23.
This argument would indeed be correct if the mechanical view
of life were merely an "idea" or "attitude." However, the character
analysis of the average man in all social situations brought a fact to
light which we cannot afford to underestimate. It turned out that
the mechanical view of life was not merely a "reflection" of the
social processes in man's psychic life, as Marx had assumed, but
much more than that:
Over the course of thousands of years of mechanical develop­
ment, the mechanistic view of life has become more and more
ingrained in man's biological system, continuously from generation
to generation. In the process of this development, man's function­
ing was actually changed in a mechanical way. Man became plas­
matically rigid in the process of killing his genital function. He
armored himself against the natural and spontaneous in himself and
lost contact with the function of biological self-regulation. Now he
is filled with mortal fear of the living and the free.
341THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
This biologic rigidity is essentially manifested in a general stiff­
ening of the organism and in a demonstrable reduction of plasmatic
mobility: Intelligence is impaired; the natural social sense is
blocked; psychosis is rampant. I gave a thorough exposition of the
facts that support this assertion in The Function of the Orgasm. So­
caned civilized man actually did become angular and mechanical,
and he lost his spontaneity, i.e., he developed into an automaton
and "brain machine." Thus, he not only believes that he functions
as a machine, but he actually does function automatically, mecha­
nistically, and mechanically. He lives, loves, hates, and thinks more
and more mechanically. With his biological stiffening and the loss
of his native function of self-regulation, he acquired an the charac­
terological attitudes, which culminated in the outbreak of the
dictatorship plague: a hierarchical view of the state, a mechanical
administration of society, fear of responsibility, an intense longing
for a fiihrer and craving for authority, insistence upon commands,
mechanistic thinking in natural science, mechanical killing in war.
It is no coincidence that the Platonic idea of the state was born in
the Greek slave society. Nor is it a coincidence that it has continued
to exist into the present day: serfdom was replaced by inner slavery.
The question of the fascist plague has led us deeply into man's
biologic organization. It relates to a development that goes back
thousands of years, and not, as those who view society in purely
economic terms believed, to the imperialistic interests of the past
two hundred years or even past twenty years. On no account, there­
fore, can the present war be confined to the imperialistic interests in
the oil wells of Baku or the rubber plantations in the Pacific. The
Treaty of Versailles plays the same role in World War II as the
wheel of a machine in the transmission of the energy of coal to the
steam piston. The purely economic view of life, as much as it may
have been of service, is totally unsuited to cope with the convulsive
processes of our life.
The biblical legend of the creation of man as an image of God,
of his dominion over the animals, clearly reflects the repressive
action man carried out against his animal nature. But he is re-
342The Human Struggle for Freedom
minded of his true nature every day by his body functions, procrea­
tion, birth and death, sexual urge, and dependency upon nature. His
efforts to fulfill his "divine" or "national" "calling" become more
and more strenuous; the deeply rooted hatred of all genuine natural
sciences, i.e., sciences that are not concerned with the construction
of machines, stems from this source. It took several thousand years
before a Darwin succeeded in unmistakably proving man's animal
descendancy. It took just as long until a Freud discovered the fact,
banal as it is, that the child is altogether, and above all, sexual. And
what a fuss the animal, man, made when he heard such things!
There is a direct connection between the "dominion" over
animals and racial "dominion" over the "black man, the Jew, the
Frenchman, etc." It is clear that one prefers to be a gentleman than
an animal.
To disa�sociate himself from the animal kingdo::n, the human
animal denied and finally ceased to perceive the sensations of his
organs; in the process he became biologically rigid. It is still a dogma
of mechanistic natural science that the autonomous functions are
not experienced and that the autonomous nerves of life are rigid.
This is the case, notwithstanding the fact that every three-year-old
child knows very well that pleasure, fear, anger, yearning, etc., take
place in the belly. This is the case, notwithstanding the fact that
the experience of oneself is nothing but the total experience of one's
organs. By losing the sensation of his organs, man lost not only the
intelligence of the animal and the ability to react naturally, but he
ruined his own chances of overcoming his life problems. He re­
placed the natural self-regulatory intelligence of the body plasma by
a goblin in the brain, which he invested with both metaphysical and
mechanical characteristics in a way that was metaphysical in every
respect. Man's body sensations did indeed become rigid and me­
chanical.
In his education, science, and philosophy of life, man is con­
stantly reproducing the mechanical organism. Under the slogan
"Away from the animal" this biologic deformity celebrates the most
amazing triumphs in the fight of the "superman against the lower-
343THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
man" (is equal to abdominal man) and in scientific, mathematical,
and mechanical killing. But more than mechanistic philosophies
and machines are needed to kill. This is where sadism comes in, this
secondary drive which is the offspring of suppressed nature and is
the only important trait differentiating man's structure from that of
the animal.
However, this tragic mechanical-mechanistic development, dis­
torted as it is, did not eradicate its opposite. At the bottom of his
nature, man still remains an animal creature. No matter how
immobile his pelvis and back may be; no matter how rigid his neck
and shoulders may be; or how tense his abdominal muscles may be;
or how high he may hold his chest in pride and fear-at the inner­
most core of his sensations he feels that he is only a piece of living
organized nature. But as he denies and suppresses every aspect of
this nature, he cannot embrace it in a rational and living way.
Hence, he has to experience it in a mystical, other-worldly, and
supernatural way, whether in the form of religious ecstasy, cosmic
unification with the world soul, sadistic thirst for blood, or "cosmic
seething of the blood." It is known that such an impotent monster
senses his strongest urges to kill in the spring. The Prussian military
parades betray all the characteristics of a mystical and mechanical
man.
Human mysticism, which thus represents the last traces of
vitality, also became the fountainhead of mechanical sadism in
Hitlerism. From the deepest sources of biologic functioning still
,
remaining, the cry for "freedom" wins through again and again,
notwithstanding all the rigidity and enslavement. There is not a
single social movement that could advocate the "suppression of life"
as part of its program and hope to win over masses of people. Every
single one of the many different social movements that suppress the
self-regulation of life energy, advocates "freedom" in one form or
another: freedom from sin; redemption from the "earthly"; the
freedom of lebensraum; the freedom of the nation; the freedom of
the proletariat; the freedom of culture; etc., etc. The various cries
for freedom are as old as the ossification of the human plasma.
344The Human Struggle for Freedom
The cry for freedom is a sign of suppression. It will never cease
as long as man feels himself to be trapped. No matter how different
the cries for freedom may be, at bottom they always express one ·and
the same thing: the intolerableness of the organism's rigidity and
the mechanical institutions of life, which are sharply at variance
with the natural sensations of life. If there should ever be a society
in which all the cries for freedom fade away, then man will have
finally overcome his biological and social deformity and have
achieved genuine freedom. Not until man acknowledges that he is
fundamentally an animal, will he be able to create a genuine culture.
Man's "upward strivings" are nothing but the biologic devel­
opment of vital powers. Such strivings are conceivable only within
the framework of the laws of biologic development and not in
opposition to them. The will to freedom and the capacity for free­
dom are nothing but the will and the capacity to recognize and
promote the unfolding of man's biologic energy (with the aid of the
machine). It is out of the question to talk about freedom if man's
biologic development is choked and feared.
Under the influence of politicians, masses of people tend to
ascribe the responsibility for wars to those who wield power at any
given time. In World War I it was the munitions industrialists; in
World War II it was the psychopathic generals who were said to be
guilty. This is passing the buck. The responsibility for wars falls
solely upon the shoulders of these same masses of people, for they
have all the necessary means to avert war in their own hands. In
part by their apathy, in part by their passivity, and in part actively,
these same masses of people make possible the catastrophes under
which they themselves suffer more than anyone else. To stress this
guilt on the part of masses of people, to hold them solely respon­
sible, means to take them seriously. On the other hand, to com­
miserate masses of people as victims, means to treat them as small,
helpless children. The former is the attitude held by the genuine
freedom-fighters; the latter the attitude held by the power-thirsty
politicians.
345THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
THE ARSENAL OF HUMAN FREEDOM
Kings and emperors always inspect their troops. Money mag­
nates keep a sharp eye on the sums of money that give them power.
All fascist dictators measure the degree of irrationality in human
reactions, for it is this irrationality that makes it possible for them to
win and maintain their power over masses of people. The natural
scientist measures the degree of knowledge and the methods of
research. But thus far no freedom organization has taken stock of
the biologic arsenal in which the weapons necessary to establish and
maintain human freedom are to be found. Despite the exactness of
our social machinery, there is still no natural scientific definition of
the word freedom. No other word is so abused and so misunder­
stood as this one is. To define freedom is to define sexual health.
But no one wants to state it openly. One often has the impression
that the advocacy of personal and social freedom is associated with
fear and guilt feelings. As if to be free were a forbidden sin, or at
least not quite decent. Sex-economy comprehends this guilt feeling:
Freedom without sexual self-regulation is a contradiction in itself.
According to the prevailing human structure, however, to be sexual
means to be "sinful" or guilty. There are only a few people who
experience love without feelings of guilt. "Free love" became a
defamatory word and lost the meaning given to it by the old free­
dom-fighters. In films, to be a criminal and to have a strong sexual­
ity are represented as the same thing. It is not surprising, therefore,
that the ascetic and the reactionary man are more highly esteemed
than the amorous peoples of the South Seas; that a high social
position is incompatible with natural behavior in. sex; that, officially,
"authority" is not supposed to have a "private life"; that a great re­
searcher such as De La Mettrie could be defiled and persecuted; that
any perverse moralist can insult a happy couple with impunity; that
adolescents can be imprisoned for having sexual intercourse, etc.
In this chapter we set out to show the miscalculation that all
freedom-fighters until now have made: The social incapacity for
346The Human Struggle for Freedom
freedom is sexual-physiologically anchored in the human organism.
It follows from this that the overcoming of the physiologic incapac­
ity for freedom is one of the most important basic preconditions of
every genuine fight for freedom. It cannot be the aim of this
chapter to give an exposition of those elements of freedom that are
generally known and advocated, i.e., freedom of expression, freedom
from economic suppression and exploitation, freedom of assembly
and coalition, freedom of scientific research, etc. For us it is essen­
tial to focus upon and elucidate the most powerful obstacles to all
these efforts.
We understand why the general characterological incapacity for
freedom on the part of masses of people has never been a subject of
public debate. This fact is too dark, too depressing, and too unpopu­
lar to be discussed openly. It demands that the overwhelming
majority subject themselves to a self-criticism, which is sure to prove
embarrassing, and to undertake an enormous reorientation in their
total approach to life. It dcmands that the responsibility for an social
events be shifted from minorities and islands of society to the over­
whelming majority, on whose work society is dependent. This
working majority has never managed the affairs of society. The best
that they were able to attain so far was the entrusting of the leader­
ship of their lives to decent and not mean individuals. The "parlia­
mentary" form of "government" could not stand up to the pressure
of facts, for other social groups and majorities invested brutal sadists
and imperialists with power over their fates. The danger is too great
that a formal democratic social organization will deteriorate into a
dictatorial organization when it is forced to defend itself against the
authoritarian dictator of its life. Since the working masses of people
themselves do not determine their life in a factual and practical
way, the germ of oppression is already present in the course of
the chance makeup of the government. This seems to be a gen­
erally known fact. It is heard more and more clearly from all sides
that one can no longer count on a return of the old and that a
fundamentally new world order has to be put together. This is
absolutely correct, but concrete words are missing. What is missing
347THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
is the burdening of the working majority of the population, which
until now has assumed only a passive social role, with the full
responsibility for their future fate. It is as if there were a widespread
secret fear of shifting the responsibility from the shoulders of a
democratic and well-meaning government to the shoulders of those
who had until now been only electors, but not responsible support­
ers of society. This fear does not relate to evil-minded ness or a
wicked orientation, but to the knowledge of the given biopsychic
structure of masses of people. The Russian Revolution, which began
in the direction of mass responsibility, fell to pieces and ended in a
dictatorship precisely for this reason. Nonetheless, social revolution
by means of transforming formal democracy to a complete, factual
democracy is the most essential conclusion to be drawn from this
war and everything that led to it. I want to repeat the inevitable
conclusion to be drawn from the above facts:
1. Masses of people are incapable of freedom.
2. A general capacity for freedom can be acquired only in the
daily struggle for the free formation of life.
3. Hence: Masses of people who are incapable of freedom at
present have to have the social power to become capable of being
free and of establishing freedom.
I should like to illustrate the present practical task with an
example from plant life. For some time I have been observing the
effect of weeds on the growth of fir seedlings. Those seedlings that
are not surrounded by many weeds grow fully on all sides; hardly
above the ground, the stem shoots forth far-reaching branches. The
needles are full and sappy. The plant strives upward toward the sun
free of any hindrances; it is "healthy"; its development is "free."
But if the fir seed has chanced to fall on a spot where there are a lot
of weeds, then it develops, hemmed in by weeds, a needleless,
crooked stem. It does not develop full branches; the needles are
shriveled, others don't develop at all. Many such seedlings are not
capable of pushing their way up through the weeds. The influence
of the weeds is directly manifested in the deformity of the plant. It
has to fight a hard battle to get to the sun, and it is distorted in the
348Tbe Human Struggle for Freedom
process. If such a seedling is freed of its weeds, it grows better,
develops more fully; but the early influence of the weeds cannot be
eradicated. The growth of the fir is stunted, its stem will be crooked
and its needles will not be full and sappy. Yet every new seed that
falls on a patch of earth free of weeds develops freely and fully from
the start.
I think that we can definitely compare the free development of
a society to the fir seedling that is free of weeds; the dictatorship
society to the stem hedged in by weeds; and that formal democracy
which is at the mercy of pressure groups can be compared to the
stem that, though it fights its way through, is biologically distorted
in the process of its growth. At the present time there is no demo­
cratic society that can develop according to natural, free, self-regula­
tory laws, i.e., free of the deforming influence of dictatorial-authori­
tarian conditions within or outside of the society. The experience of
fascism has put at our disposal numerous means of recognizing
inchoative Hitlerism within or outside of its own borders. Bio­
psychically viewed, Hitlerism is nothing other than the consummate
form of mechanical mechanism plus mystical irrationalism in masses
of people. The crippling of individual and social life is nothing
other than the accumulated secular influence of all authoritarian
and irrational institutions on present-day man. Fascism did not
create these conditions anew; it merely exploited and perfected the
old conditions which were used to suppress freedom. The genera­
tion that bears the remnants of an age-old authoritarian order in its
nature can only hope to be able to breathe more freely. Even after
the weeds have been uprooted, i.e., after the fascist machine has
been smashed, it will not be able to live and grow according to the
natural laws of a fir tree.
In other words: The biologic rigidity of the present generation
can no longer be eliminated, but the living forces that are still
operative in it can attain space to develop in a better way. However,
new human beings are born every day, and in the course of thirty
years the human race will have been biologically renewed; it will
come into the world without any trace of fascist distortion. It is a
349THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
question of the conditions under which and in which this new
generation will be born; will they be conditions safeguarding free­
dom or will they be authoritarian? From this, the task of social
hygiene and social legislation is clear and emphatic:
Every effort must be made and all means employed to guard
future generations against the influence of the biologic rigidity of
the old generation.
German fascism was born of the biologic rigidity and deformity
of the preceding German generation. With its mechanical disci­
pline, its goose-stepping, and its "stomach in, chest out," Prussian
militarism was an extreme expression of this rigidity. German fas­
cism was able to rely on the biologic rigidity and deformity of
masses of people in other countries. This accounts for its interna­
tional success. In the course of a single generation it succeeded in
uprooting the last vestiges of the biologic will to freedom in the
German society and in remolding the new generation into rigid,
robotlike, war-machine automatons in a little more than a decade.
Hence, this much is clear: Social freedom and self-regulation are
inconceivable with biologically rigid, mechanized human beings.
The principal weapon in the arsenal of freedom is each new genera­
tion's tremendous urge to be free. The possibility of social freedom
rests essentially upon this weapon and not upon anything else.
Let us assume that the formal democracies will be victorious in
this war. Let us further assume that in the struggle for freedom they
will overlook or refuse to admit the social importance of the biologic
miscalculation, i.e., the general biologic rigidity of masses of people.
In such a case, each new generation will reproduce this rigidity of
necessity. They will produce new life-fearing, authoritarian views of
life in this or that form. Though bitterly fought for, the freedoms
achieved under such conditions will be full of loopholes and gaps
and their functioning will be biologically hampered. Masses of peo­
ple will never be capable of developing full responsibility for social
existence. Thus, those who have no interest in the self-regulation of
society, need only prevent each new generation from liberating itself
350The Human Struggle for Freedom
from the pressure of the old generation's rigidity, using any one of
the power means of money, position, or force.
The task consists of social, medical, and educational acts:
Socially, it is a matter of seeking out all the sources of man's
biologic desolation and of enacting appropriate laws to safeguard
free development. General formulations such as "freedom of the
press, assembly, and expression," etc., are obvious, but they are not
enough by a long shot. Under these laws the irrational man has the
same rights as the free man. Since weeds always proliferate and grow
more rapidly than a sturdy tree, the Hitlerite would have to win out
in the long run. It will be a question of realizing that "Hitlerism" is
not confined to those who bear the overt insignia of fascism, a
question of seeking it out and fighting it in everyday life in a scien­
tific and human way. Only in this process of weeding out fascism in
everyday life will the appropriate laws against it be formulated as a
matter of course.
Let one example suffice: A person who wants to drive a car has
to pass a driver's test; this is a necessary requirement to guarantee
the safety of others. A person who owns a bigger house than he can
afford is forced to rent or buy a smaller house. A person who wants
to open a shoe store must show proof of his ability to do so. But in
this twentieth century of ours, there is no law to protect the newly
born against the parents' inability to bring them up and the parents'
neurotic influence. Scores of children can, indeed should, according
to the fascist ideology, be put into the world; but no one asks
whether they can be nourished properly and whether they can be
educated in keeping with the highly extolled ideals. The senti­
mental slogan about the large family is typical of fascism, no matter
who propagates it.3
With respect to medicine and education, the deplorable fact
will have to be corrected that hundreds of thousands of physicians
and teachers hold the weal and ill of every new generation in their
3 Unfortunately, it appeared in the progressive Beveridge Plan in England, 1942.
351THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
hands, though they know nothing about the laws pertaining to the
biosexual development of the small child. And this is still the case
forty years after the discovery of childhood sexuality. Fascist mental­
ity is hourly and daily inculcated in millions upon millions of chil­
dren and adolescents owing to the ignorance of educators and
physicians. Two demands shoot into the foreground at this point.
First: Every physician, educator, and social worker etc., who is to
deal with children and adolescents will have to prove that he him­
self or she herself is healthy from a sex-economic point of view and
that he or she has acquired exact knowledge on human sexuality
between the ages of one and about eighteen. In other words, the
education of the educators in sex-economy must be made manda­
tory. The formation of sexual views must not be subject to the
hazard, arbitrariness, and influence of neurotic compulsive morality.
Second: The child's and adolescent's natural love of life must be
protected by clearly defined laws. These demands may sound radical
and revolutionary. But every one will admit that the fascism that
grew out of the frustration of childhood and adolescent sexuality
has had a far more radical and revolutionary effect, in the negative
sense of the words, than the social protection of nature ever could
have in a positive respect. Every modern democratic society is full
of individual attempts to effect a change in this area. But these
islands of understanding perish in the swath of the plague spread by
the biologically rigid, moralistic educators and physicians who stand
above the society as a whole.
There is not much sense in going into detail here. Each indi­
vidual measure will result spontaneously, if only the basic principle
of sexual affirmation and the social protection of childhood and
adolescent sexuality is adhered to.
With respect to economy, only natural relationships of work,
i.e , men's natural economic dependencies upon one another, are
.
capable of creating the framework and basis for the biologic restruc­
turalization of masses of people.
We call the sum total of all natural work relationships, work­
democracy; it is the form of the natural organization of work. In
352The Human Struggle for Freedom
terms of their nature, these work relationships are functional and
not mechanical. They cannot be arbitrarily organized; they ensue
spontaneously from the work process itself. The reciprocal depen­
dency between a carpenter and a blacksmith, a natural scientist and
a glass grinder, a painter and a paint manufacturer, an electrician
and a metal worker, is determined by the interrelationships of the
work functions. One cannot conceive of an arbitrary law that could
change these natural work relationships. The man who works with a
microscope cannot be made independent of the glass grinder. The
nature of lenses is solely dictated by the laws of light and technol­
ogy, just as the form of induction spools is dictated by the laws of
electricity and the activities of man are dictated by the nature of his
needs. The natural functions of the work process are divorced from
every kind of human-mechanistic and authoritarian arbitrariness.
They function freely and are free in the strict sense of the word.
They alone are rational; hence they alone can determine social
existence. Even the psychopathic generals are dependent upon
them. Love, work, and knowledge embrace everything that is im­
plied in the concept work-democracy.
Though it is true that the natural functions of work, love, and
knowledge can be abused and stifled, they regulate themselves by
virtue of their nature. This has always been the case from the very
beginning of human work, and they will continue to regulate them­
selves as long as there is a social process. They constitute the factual
basis (not the "demand") of work-democracy. The concept work­
democracy is not a political program; it is not an intellectual antici­
pation of an "economic plan," nor is it a "New Order." Work­
democracy is a fact that has eluded human perception until now.
Work-democracy cannot be organized any more than freedom can
be organized. The growth of a tree, an animal, or a man cannot be
organized. By virtue of its biologic function, the growth of an orga­
nism is free in the strictest sense of the word. The same applies to
the natural growth of a society. It is self-regulating and requires no
legislation. To repeat, it can only be hindered or abused.
The problem lies in the fact that it is the function of all forms
353THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
of authoritarian rulership to hinder the natural self-regulatory func­
tions. Hence, the task of a genuinely free order must be to eliminate
all hindrances to natural functions. Strict laws are needed to ac­
complish this. In this way, a democracy that has a serious and
genuine intent is a direct manifestation of the natural self-regula­
tion of love, work, and knowledge. And dictatorship, in other words
man's irrationality, is a direct manifestation of the obstruction of
this natural self-regulation.
It clearly follows from this that the fight against dictatorship
and the irrational craving for authority on the part of masses of
people can consist only in one fundamental deed:
Those forces in the individual and in the society that are natu­
ral and vital must be clearly separated from all the obstacles that
operate against the spontaneous functioning of this natural vitality.
The former have to be promoted, the latter have to be elimi­
nated.
The human regulation of social existence can never relate to the
natural functions of work. Civilization in the positive sense of the
word can have no other meaning than to create the best conditions
for the unfolding of the natural functions of love, work, and knowl­
edge. Though freedom is not capable of being organized, since any
organization is contrary to freedom. the conditions that are to clear
the way to the free unfolding of the life forces can, indeed must, be
organized.
We do not tell those who work with us how or what they
should think. We do not "organize" their thinking. But we demand
that every worker in our field free himself or herself from the false
ways of thinking and acting that he or she acquired through his or
her upbringing. In this way, his or her ability.to react spontaneously
and in a rational way is set free.
lt is ridiculous to conceive of freedom to mean that a lie has the
same right as a truth before a court of law. A genuine work-democ­
racy will not accord mystical irrationality the same right as truth;
nor will it allow the suppression of children the same scope as it
allows their freedom. It is ridiculous to argue with a murderer about
354The Human Struggle for Freedom
his right to murder. But this ridiculous mistake is made again and
again in dealing with fascists. Fascism is not comprehended as state­
organized irrationality and meanness; it is regarded as a "state form"
having equal rights. The reason for this is that everyone bears fas­
in himself.
cism Naturally, even fascism is right "sometimes." The
same is true of the mental patient. The trouble is that he doesn't
know when he is right.
Viewed in this way, freedom becomes a simple, easily compre­
hensible and easily manageable fact. Freedom does not have to be
It the
achieved-it is spontaneously present in every life function. is
elimination of all obstacles to freedom that has to be achieved.
Viewed in this way, the arsenal of human freedom is enormous
and has an abundance of means at its disposal, both biological and
mechanical. Nothing extraordinary has to be fought for. The living
must merely be set free. When reality is comprehended, the age-old
dream can become reality. In this arsenal of freedom, we find:
A living, spontaneous knowledge of the natural laws of life, a
knowledge that men and women of all ages, every social situation,
and every color of skin have. What has to be eliminated is the
thwarting and distortion of this knowledge by hard, rigid mechani­
cal-mystical views and institutions, which are hostile to life.
The natural work relationships of men and women and their
natural pleasure in work
are full of energy and promise. What has
to be eliminated is the thwarting of natural work-democracy by
arbitrary, authoritarian restrictions and regulations, which are hos­
tile to life.
Natural sociability and morality are present in
men and women.
What has to be eliminated is the disgusting moralization which
thwarts natural morality and then points to the criminal impulses,
which it itself has brought into being.
As no other war, the present war is eliminating many obstacles
to natural self-regulation, the elimination of which appeared incon­
ceivable in times of peace, e.g., the authoritarian relegation of the
woman to the kitchen, wild business dealings, rank exploitation,
artificial national boundaries, etc. We do not belong to those who
355THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
contend that wars are necessary for the development of human
culture. It is like this: The mechanical, mystical, and authoritarian
organization of human society and of the human structure con­
stantly precipitates the mechanical destruction of human lives in
war. That which is living and free in man and in society rebels
against this. Since· the biological crippling of man and society sur­
passes all bounds in war, that which is truly alive is forced to make
efforts it would not have been capable of making under less vicious
circumstances, for it had not previously comprehended itself.
At this point a justified objection will be raised, namely:
We admit that for the past thousands of years man has allowed
his body to become more and more like a machine and his thinking
to become more and more irrational, especially since he fell under
the influence of machine production. But we fail to see how it is
possible to undo the mechanical degeneration of the organism and
to liberate man's self-regulatory forces, if masses of people continue
to live under the pressure and influence of the machine. No reason­
able person will demand or expect us to abolish the machine civili­
zation. The biologically destructive influences of machine technol­
ogy are not offset by any significant counterbalance. Facts more
tangible than scientific expositions are needed to rid man of his
biologic rigidity. It is more likely that this war, by making human
activity more rigid and more thoughtless, will increase, not elimi­
nate, biologic rigidity.
This objection is entirely correct. With man's present technical
means, there is indeed no prospect of undoing the devious biologic
development of the race of animals called man. In fact it took me a
long time to decide to publish the insight I had obtained into the
biologic reproduction of the machine civilization. I told myself that
it could serve no purpose to proclaim truths that could have no
practical effect.
The way out of this painful dilemma offered itself sponta­
neously when I asked myself how I had arrived at the functional
formulations in psychiatry, sociology, and biology, formulations that
so successfully succeeded in clarifying the mechanization and the
356The Human Struggle for Freedom
mysticism in these three fields and were capable of replacing this
mechanization and mysticism. I do not regard myself as some sort
of exceptional superman. I am not much different from the average
man. How, then, did I manage to hit upon the solution that had
eluded others. Gradually it became clear that my professional
involvement with the problem of biologic energy over several
decades had forced me to free myself from mechanistic and mystical
views and methods. If I had not freed myself from these views and
methods, I would not have been able to perform my work on the
living organism. In short, my work forced me to learn to think
functionally. If I had cultivated solely the mechanical-mystical
structure that my education had inculcated in me, I would not have
discovered a single fact of orgone biophysics. However, the hidden
path to the discovery of the orgone was discerned the moment I set
foot in the prohibited domain of orgastic plasma contraction. In
retrospect, I saw that I had got past any number of critical pointsln
this development which could have diverted me from the living,
functional way of looking at things to the mechanical-mystical view
of the world. I have no idea how I managed to escape the pitfalls. It
is certain that the functional view of life, which contains so many
essential answers to the present chaos, was nourished by my work
with biologic energy, i.e., orgone energy.
The ignorance of the laws of biological functioning was respon­
sible for mechanization and the substitution of mysticism for living
reality. However, cosmic orgone, i.e., the specific biologic energy in
the universe, does not function mechanistically, and it is not
mystical. This orgone energy follows its own specifoc functional
laws, which cannot be comprehended materially, mechanistically, or
rigidly, nor in concepts of positive and negative electric fluids. It
obeys functional laws, such as attraction, disassociation, expansion,
contraction, radiation, pulsation, etc. I doubt that orgone energy is
suited for any kind of killing, and hence of any use to the mecha­
nistic technique of murder. This war or the next war will enor­
mously increase the need of life-securing functions. The orgonotic
radiation is no mean contribution on the part of sex-economy to the
357THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
further development of the human race. Sooner or later, larger and
larger groups and circles will familiarize themselves with the func­
tions of orgone. In the process of working with the cosmic life
energy, men and women will be forced to learn to think in func­
tional, living terms in order to be able to master cosmic orgone. In
the same way, they learned to think in psychological terms when the
doors to the knowledge of childhood sexuality were opened and to
think in economic terms when the economic laws were discovered.
In the process of comprehending and mastering the mechanistic
laws of inanimate nature, man himself was forced to become me­
chanically rigid. In the same way, as each new generation masters
the orgonotic functions of life to an ever-increasing degree, it will
comprehend the living and learn to love, protect, and develop it.
This analogous conclusion is definitely justified.
Therefore, I ask you not to confuse this line of reasoning with
the proclamation of messianism. As I have stressed again and again
in many of my writings, I regard myself as a "worm in the universe"
and as the mere tool of a certain scientific logic. That great delusive
characteristic that helps the plague-ridden general to accomplish his
criminal deeds is definitely missing in my case. I lack the conviction
of being a superman, and it follows from this that I also lack the
conviction that the masses are facially inferior. The far-reaching
conclusion I drew from the discovery of orgone for the social prob­
lem of man's biological desolation is a modest but true conclusion,
comparable perhaps to the conclusion that the earth's force of
gravity can be overcome by filling a balloon with a gas specifically
lighter than air. I do not, as many of my friends expect, have a
remedy which would enable us to effect immediate political changes.
Facts such as "biologic and natural self-regulation," "natural work­
democracy," "cosmic orgone," "genital character," etc., are weapons
that sex-economy has put at the disposal of the human race for the
purpose of eradicating enslaving conditions, such as "biologic rigid­
ity," "character and muscular armoring," "pleasure anxiety," "orgas­
tic impotence," "formal authority," "enslavement to authority,"
"social irresponsibility," "incapacity for freedom," etc. It is of the
358The Human Struggle lor Freedom
very nature of this work that it was done with pleasure, pleasure in
research and discovery, pleasure in the perception of nature's spon­
taneous decency and wisdom. It was not done in the expectation of
medals, riches, academic recognition, and popularity, and certainly
not from any sadistic pleasure in torture, suppression, the procrea­
tion of lies and deception, the conduct of war, and the killing of
life. That's all!
359

XIII
On Natural Work-Democracy
INVESTIGATION OF THE NATURAL SOCIAL FORCES FOR THE
PURPOSE OF OVERCOMING THE EMOTIONAL PLAGUE
The material I want to present in this chapter is general and
spontaneous human knowledge, a knowledge that is not socially
organized and, therefore, has not yet been able to evolve and have a
practical effect on the general public.
Social events have once again been caught up in the flux of
enormous convulsions. The world over, people are asking: Where
do we go from here? What's to be done now? Which party, which
cabinet, what kind of political group, will assume the responsibility
for the future fate of European society? I have no answer to these
questions, which are on everyone's lips. Nor is it the intent of this
chapter to offer political suggestions. Its sole intent is to draw atten­
tion to a concrete, practical, and rational fact, which will not be
referred to in the many political debates on how the world is to be
organized after the war. It is the fact that has been designated as
natural work-democracy. Now I want to describe what natural work­
democracy is; please note, what it is and not what it should be.
In 1937, i.e., two years before the outbreak of World War II, as
the storm clouds were gathering over Europe, a pamphlet entitled
"The natural organization of work in work-democracy," appeared in
Scandinavia. It did not bear the name of its author. It was merely
stated that it had been written by a laboratory worker with the
360On Natural Work-Democracy
consent of other men and women engaged in practical work in this
field. It appeared in German, not in a printed form, but merely
mimeographed. Later it was translated into English. It was not
widely circulated, for it was not backed up by any political propa­
ganda apparatus and had no political pretensions. But it was
acclaimed wherever it was read. It was circulated in small circles in
Paris, Holland, Scandinavia, Switzerland, and Palestine. Several
dozen copies were also smuggled across the German border. It was
reviewed only once, in a German Socialist weekly in Paris; other­
wise, it did not cause the slightest stir. Far from playing a revolu­
tionary role in the political events of that time, it was soon lost in
the turmoil. Nor, for that matter, was it a political pamphlet; quite
the contrary, it was a pamphlet against politics, written by a work­
ing man. Yet, somehow two things stuck in one's mind, and they
were brought up again and again en passant, one might almost
-
say-in discussions among men and women of various political
orientations and occupations. One thing was the word "work-democ­
racy." The other was two sentences. They sounded unworldly,
alienated from politics, utopian, and, at bottom, hopeless: "Enough,
let's have done with politics once and for all! Let's get down to the
practical tasks of real life!"
Strangely enough, the political newspaper, which accorded the
pamphlet a long article, also centered its critique around the word
"work-democracy" and around those sentences that read like a
slogan. The article took a sympathetic attitude toward work-democ­
racy, but flatly rejected the slogan. This contradiction showed those
who were familiar with the pamphlet that it had not been really
understood. Apparently, the pamphlet had been written by a former
socialist. It clearly detached itself from all Socialist party methods
and concerns. In contradiction to its basic slogan, however, it was
full of political formulations and political discussions.
In spite of its deficiencies and its lack of clarity, it was enthusi­
astically read by a German socialist and smuggled into Germany. In
the ensuing six years of war, nothing more was to be heard about it.
In 1941, however, a continuation of this first pamphlet appeared
361THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
under the title, "Additional problems of work-democracy." Like its
predecessor, it too was smuggled into several European countries,
and was even "intercepted" by the American secret police, the FBI.
The word work-democracy gained a permanent footing in the
circles of the entirely informal sex-economists and vegetotherapists.
The word began a life of its own. It was used more and more
frequently; one spoke of work-democratic institutions, "work-fam­
ily," etc., and one began to think about these things in a serious
way. In the middle of the chaos of war, a letter arrived from an
occupied European country; in this letter, a sex-economist wrote
that the pamphlet had been translated and was ready for immediate
circulation as soon as circumstances allowed.
In the course of the last four years of the war, I delved into the
conceptual content of work-democracy. I made an effort to compre­
hend and elaborate on the content of the word. In this effort I
relied upon discussions which I had had in Norway with friends of
various occupations. The more I immersed myself in this concept,
the more clearly I saw its outlines, the more completely and force­
fully I perceived its substance, and finally I had a picture that
coincided perfectly with a large number of neglected but decisive
sociological facts.
As weB as T can, T want to describe what this picture purports. I
have no intention of engaging in any kind of propaganda for it. Nor
do I have the intention of engaging in time-consuming debates
about it.
What follows is what I have come to understand by natural
work-democracy.
WORK IN CONTRAST TO POLITICS
A medical student who wants to be admitted to the medical
profession must offer satisfactory proof of his practical and theoreti­
cal knowledge of medicine. On the other hand, a politician who
takes it upon himself to determine the fate, not of hundreds, as the
medical student, but of millions of working men and women, is not
required in our society to prove his qualifications and knowledge.
362On Natural Work-Democracy
It is this circumstance that seems to be one of the essential
causes of the social tragedy that has pockmarked the society of
human animals for thousands of years with individual acute out­
breaks. Let us pursue this briefly described contradiction as well and
as far as we can.
The man who performs practical work in any field whatever,
whether he comes from a rich or poor family, has to go through a
definite schooling. He is not elected by "the people." Experienced
workers whose ski11s have been tested over a long period must
determine in a more or less thorough way whether the apprentice in
their field is qualified to perform his or her job professiona11y. This
is the demand, even if it often runs ahead of the facts. It gives the
direction in any event. In America, this demand has been carried to
such an extreme that a salesgirl in a department store has to have a
university education. As exaggerated and as socially unjust as this
demand may be, it shows clearly just how much social pressure is
exerted on the simplest work. Every shoemaker, cabinet-maker,
turner, mechanic, electrician, stone mason, construction worker,
etc., has to fulfill strict requirements.
A politician, on the other hand, is free of any such demands.
One need merely possess a good dose of cunning, neurotic ambition
and will to power, coupled with brutality, in order to take over the
highest positions of human society when suitable chaotic social
conditions arise. In the past 25 years we have witnessed how a
mediocre journalist was capable of brutalizing the fifty million
strong Italian nation and finally reducing it to a state of misery. For
twenty-two years there was a great fuss about nothing, coupled with
much blood and thunder, until one day the hubbub faded out
without a flourish. And one was overcome by the feeling: And all to
no avail! What remained of this great tumult, which had made the
world hold its breath and had torn many nations out of their accus­
tomed life? Nothing-not a single, permanent thought; not a single
useful institution; not even a fond memory. Facts such as this show
more clearly than anything else the social irrationalism that periodi­
cally brings our life to the brink of the abyss.
363THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
A young house painter who fails miserably in his choice of
profession is capable, also for a period of twenty years, of having
.
himself talked about the world over, without having accomplished a
single, useful, objective, practical piece of work. In this case, also, it
is a tremendous noise that one day quietly fades away into an "all to
no avail." The world of work continues on its calm, quiet, vitally
necessary course. Of the great tumult, nothing remains but a
chapter in falsely oriented history books, which are only a burden to
our children.
If one takes the trouble to ferret them out, one will find un­
precedented consequences for practical social life in this clear-cut
antipathy between work and politics, this antipathy that is intelli­
gible to everyone and that every working man and woman has long
since been aware of. First and foremost, these consequences relate
to the system of political parties that determines the ideologic and
structural formation of the human animal everywhere on this earth.
It is not our purpose here to enter into the question of how the
present system of political parties developed from the first patri­
archal-hierarchal European and Asian systems of government. What
is important here is solely the effect of the system of political parties
on the development of society. The reader will have already divined
that natural work-democracy is a social system that already exists. It
does not have to be established, and it bears the same relationship
to the system of political parties as water bears to fire.
The contradiction between work and politics leads us on as
follows: The elucidation and elimination of chaotic conditions,
whether in a social, animal, or dead organism, require lengthy scien­
tific work. Without going into details, let us briefly designate
as scientific that man who performs some kind of vitally necessary
work that requires the comprehension of facts. In this sense of the
word a lathe operator in a factory is scientific, for his product is
based on the fruits of his own work and research as well as the work
and research of others. Now let us contrast this scientific man with
the mystic, including the political ideologist.
Every scientific person, whether he is an educator, lathe opera-
364On Natural Work-Democracy
tor, technician, physician, or something else, has to fulfill and safe­
guard the social work process. Socially, he has a very responsible
position: He has to prove each one of his assertions in a practical
way. He has to work industriously, to think, to seek out new ways of
improving his work, to recognize errors. As a researcher he has to
examine and refute false theories. Whenever he succeeds in accom­
plishing something fundamentally new, he has to contend with
human viciousness and fight his way through. He has no need of
power, for no motors can be constructed with political power, no
sera can be produced with it, no children can be brought up, etc.
The working, scientific man lives and operates without weapons.
Compared with the working man and woman, the mystic and
political ideologist have an easy social position. No one demands
proof for their assertions. They can promise to bring down God
from Heaven, to raise the Devil from Hell, and to establish paradise
on earth from their ministerial buildings, and in all this they know
very well that they will not be called to account for fraud. Their
wild assertions are protected by the inviolable democratic right of
free speech. If we think about it very carefully, we find that there
must be something wrong with the concept of "free speech," when
it is possible for a foiled painter to use this right to conquer in a
completely legal way and in the course of a few years a position in
the world that has never in human history fallen to the share of the
great pioneers of science, art, education, and technology. It clearly
follows from this that our thinking in social matters is catastrophi­
cally wrong in a certain area and requires radical correction. On the
basis of careful sex-economic clinical investigations, we know that it
is the authoritarian upbringing of little children, the teaching
them to be fearful and submissive, that secures for the political
power monger the slavery and the gullibility of millions of adult
industrious men and women.
Let us pursue the contradiction between work and politics in
another direction.
The following motto always appears on the title page of the
Orgone Institute's official publication: "Love, work and knowledge
365THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
are the source of human existence. They should also govern it!"*
Without the function of natural love between husband and wife,
mother and child, coworkers, etc., without work and without
knowledge, human society would fall to pieces overnight. It is not
incumbent upon me as a physician to make allowances for some
political ideology or another or for some current diplomatic neces­
sity, no matter how important it may appear. It is my task solely to
elucidate important but unknown facts. And it is a fact, however
embarrassing it may be, that none of the three basic functions of
social life is affected by universal suffrage and the secret ballot, or
ever had an effect in the history of parliamentary democracy. On
the other hand, political ideologies, which have nothing to do with
the functions of natural love, work, or knowledge, enjoy unhamp­
ered and unlimited access to every kind of social power on the basis
of universal suffrage and the party system. Let me hasten to make it
clear that I am and have always been for universal suffrage. This
does not alter the firmly established fact that the social institution
of universal suffrage of parliamentary democracy in no way coin­
cides with the three basic functions of social existence. It is left to
chance whetl.-:r the basic social functions are safeguarded or dam­
aged by parliamentary vote. There is no stipulation in the legislation
of parliamentary democracy that accords love, work, and knowledge
any kind of prerogative in the regulation of the fate of society. This
dichotomy between democratic suffrage and basic social functions
has catastrophic repercussions on the basis of social processes.
I want only to mention the many institutions and laws that
explicitly hamper these functions. I don't think that any scientific or
political group has ever clearly and sharply pointed out this basic
contradiction in a way that would be intelligible to everyone. And
yet, it constitutes the core of the bio-social tragedy of the human
animal. The system of political parties does not at all fulfill the
* This motto has appeared in the various publications in the following transla­
tion: "Love, work and knowledge are the well-springs of our life. They should
also govern it."
366On Natural Work-Democracy
conditions, tasks, and aims of human society. This is clearly and
plainly shown by the fact, one of many, that a shoemaker cannot
simply decide to be a tailor, a physician to be a mining engineer,
and a teacher to be a cabinet-maker. On the other hand, a Republi­
can in America can become a Democrat from one day to the next
without undergoing any objective change in his thinking; and in
Germany before Hitler, a Communist could simply become a Fas­
cist, a Fascist a Communist, a Liberal a Communist or Social
Democrat, and a Social Democrat a German National or Christian
Socialist. Such changes were capable of strengthening or weakening
the ideology of the party program of any of the respective parties; in
short, they were capable of deciding the fate of a whole nation in
the most unconscionable way.
This clearly shows politics' irrational nature and its antithesis to
work. I do not want to go into the question whether the political
parties ever had an objective and rational basis in the social body. It
has no relevance here. The political parties of today have nothing
concrete to say. The practical and positive events of a society have
nothing to do with party boundaries or party ideologies. Something
like Roosevelt's New Deal is a proof of this. So-called party coali­
tions are makeshifts in default of an objective orientation, a bridg­
ing of difficulties without really solving anything. Firmly established
realities cannot be mastered with opinions, which are changed as
one changes one's shirt.
These initial steps in the clarification of the concept of work­
democracy have already yielded a number of important insights into
the social chaos. This obligates us to follow up our train of thought
on natural work-democracy. It would be an inexcusable omission
not to do so. For no one can foresee where and when human
thinking will disclose the answer to the chaos produced by politics.
Thus, we shall follow the path we have taken, as one might look for
a suitable settlement site in a primeval forest.
Even this attempt to orient oneself in social chaos must be
regarded as a piece of practical and rational work. Since natural
work-democracy is based on work and not on politics, it is possible
367THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
that this "work on the social organism" might lead to a practical
and applicable result. It would be the first time that work got
control of social problems. And this work would be work-demo­
cratic, insofar as it might induce other sociologists, economists,
psychologists, to work on the social organism. Since this work
attacks politics as a principle and as a system, there can be no doubt
that it will be countered with political ideologies. It will be interest­
ing and important to see how work-democratic sociology will stand
up in practice. Work-democracy, as far as I understand it, counters
political ideologies with the point of view of social function and
social development, in short, with facts and possibilities. It does not
counter them with another political view. It follows an approach
similar to the one followed in the field of morality: Sex-economy
deals with the damages caused by compulsive morality, not, as is
politically customary, with another kind of morality, but with con­
crete knowledge and practical data on the natural function of
sexuality. In other words, work-democratic socio-economy will have
to prove itself in practical life, just as the assertion that steam
contains energy is proven by the locomotion of engines. Thus, we
have no reason whatever to engage in ideological or political argu­
ments concerning the existence or nonexistence of work-democracy,
its practical applicability or nonapplicability, etc.
The working men and women who think and act in a work­
democratic way do not come out against the politician. It is not his
fault or his intention that the practical result of his work exposes
the illusionary and irrational character of politics. Those who are
engaged in practical work, regardless what field they are in, are
intensely concerned with practical tasks in the improvement of life.
Those who are engaged in practical work are not against one thing
or another. It is only the politician who, having no practical tasks, is
always against and never for something. Politics in general is charac­
terized by this "being against" one thing or another. That which is
productive in a practical way is not accomplished by politicians, but
by working men and women, whether it is in accord with the
politicians' ideologies or not. Years of experience have clearly dem-
36BOn Natural Work-Democracy
onstrated that the men and women who perform practical work
always come into conflict with the politician. Thus, those who work
for living functioning are and operate against politics, whether they
want to or not. The educator is for the objective upbringing of
small children; the farmer is for the machines necessary in agricul­
ture; the researcher is for proofs for scientific findings. One can
easily satisfy oneself that wherever a working man or woman is
against this or that achievement, he or she is not speaking up as a
worker, but under the pressure of political or other irrational influ­
ences.
It sounds improbable and exaggerated to say that a positive
accomplishment of work is never against, but always for something.
The reason for this is that our work life is interfused with irration­
ally motivated expressions of opinion, which are not differentiated
from objective evaluations. For instance, the farmer is against the
worker and the worker is against the engineer. This or that physi­
cian is against this or that drug. It will be said that democratic free
speech means that one is "fqr" .. and "against." It is my contention,
on the other hand, that it was precisely this formalistic and nonob­
jective comprehension of the concept of free speech that was chiefly
responsible for the failure of the European democracies. Let us take
an example: A physician is against the use of a certain drug. There
can be one of two reasons for this:
Either the drug is really harmful and the physician is conscien­
tious. In this case, the manufacturer of the drug did poor work. His
work was not crowned with success and, evidently, he was not
motivated by strong objective interests to produce an effective and
harmless drug. The manufacturer did not have the function of the
drug in mind, but was motivated, let us say, by pecuniary interests,
i.e., was irrationally motivated. The motive did not suit the purpose.
In this case the physician acted in a rational way. He spoke up in
the interest of human health, that is to say, he was automatically
against a bad drug because he is for health. He acted rationally, for
the goal of work and the motive of the expression of opinion are in
accord with one another.
369THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
Or the drug is a good one and the physician is unscrupulous. If
this physician is against a good drug, his action is not motivated by
an interest in human health. Perhaps he has been paid by a rival
firm to advertise a different drug. He does not fulfill his work func­
tion as a physician; the motive for the expression of his opinion has
no more to do with its content than it has to do with any work
function. The physician speaks out against the drug because secretly
he is for profzt and not for health. But profiteering is not the pur­
pose of a physician's work. Hence, he speaks out strongly "against"
something and not "for" it.
We can apply this example to any other field of work and any
kind of expression of opinion. We can easily satisfy ourselves that it
is an inherent part of the rational work process always to be for
something. The "being against" something ensues not from the
work process itself, but from the fact that there are irrational func­
tions of life. It follows from this that: In terms of its nature, every
rational work process is spontaneously against irrational functions of
life.
The attentive reader who is not unfamiliar with the ways of the
world will readily agree that this clarification of the concept of free
speech invests the democratic movement with a new and better
point of view. The principle: What is harmful to the interests of
life is poor work, hence not work at all imbues the concept of work­
democracy with a rational meaning, a meaning that is lacking in the
concept of formal or parliamentary democracy. In formal democracy
the farmer is against the worker and the worker is against the engi­
neer because political and not objective interests predominate in the
social organization. If responsibility is shifted from the politician,
not to the working men and women, but to work, then cooperation
between farmer and worker automatically takes the place of political
opposition.
We shall have to pursue this idea further, for it is of decisive
importance. To begin with, we want to dwell upon the question of
so-called democratic criticism, which also rests upon the democratic
right of free speech.
370On Natural Worle-Democracy
NOTES ON OBJECTIVE CRITICISM AND IRRATIONAL CAVILINC
The work-democratic way of life insists upon the right of every
working man and woman to free discussion and criticism. This
demand is justified, indispensable, and should be inviolable. If it is
not fulfilled, the source of human productivity is easily dried up.
Owing to the effects of the general emotional plague, however,
"discussion" and "criticism" become more or less grave jeopardies
to serious work. We want to illustrate this with an example:
Let us imagine an engineer who is having a difficult time repair­
ing a defective motor. It is a complicated piece of work; the engi­
neer must exercise every bit of his intelligence and energy to master
the difficulty. He sacrifices his leisure hours of pleasure and works
until late in the night. He grants himself no rest until he has fin­
ished his job. After awhile an unconcerned man comes along, looks
on for a bit, then picks up a stone and smashes the conducting
wires. That morning his wife had nagged him at the breakfast table.
Another completely unconcerned man comes along; he derides
the engineer. He tells him that he, the engineer, knows nothing
about motors, otherwise he would have had it repaired long ago.
And just look at how filthy he is-his body is literally covered with
sweat and grease. And that isn't all. He is an immoral man also, for
otherwise he would not leave his family at home alone. Having
insulted the engineer to his heart's content, he moves on. That
morning he had received a letter from his firm informing him that
he is being dismissed from his job as an electrical engineer. He is
not a very good worker in his field.
A third totally unconcerned man comes along, spits in the
engineer's face and moves on. His mother-in-law, who has a special
talent for torturing people, had just given him a hard time.
The intent of these examples is to illustrate the "criticism" of
unconcerned passers-by, who, like highwaymen, wantonly disturb
honest work, a piece of work about which they know nothing,
which they do not understand and which does not concern them.
371THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
These examples are typical of a good portion of what is known as
"free discussion" and the "right of criticism" in wide sectors of
society. The attacks of the hereditary school of psychiatrists and
cancer theoreticians on the, at that time, still-embryonic bion re­
search was of this nature. They were not interested in helping and
improving, but merely in wantonly disrupting a difficult job. They
of course did not betray their motives. Such "criticism" is harmful
and socially dangerous. It is prompted by motives that have nothing
to do with the matter being criticized, and it has nothing to do with
objective interests.
Genuine discussion and genuine criticism are different. Again we
want to illustrate this with an example:
Another engineer passes by the garage where the first engineer
is working on the motor. With his wealth of experience in this field,
he immediately sees that the first engineer has his hands full. He
takes off his jacket, rolls up his sleeves, and attempts, first of all, to
comprehend any mistakes in his approach. He points out an impor­
tant place the first engineer had overlooked; they both consider the
error that may have been made in the work. He gives the first engi­
neer a hand, discusses and criticizes the work, and heJps to do it bet­
ter. He is not motivated by the nagging of his mother-in-law or his
failure in his own profession, but by an objective interest in the
success of the work.
The two kinds of criticism described above are often difficult to
distinguish from one another. Irrational caviling is often very cun­
ningly disguised behind a sham objectiveness. These two kinds of
criticism, which are so different from one another, are usually in­
cluded under the one concept "scientific criticism."
In the strict objective and scientific sense of the word, only so­
called immanent criticism is admissible, that is to say, the person
exercising criticism must first fulfill a number of demands before
assuming the right to criticize:
1. He himself must have a complete grasp of the field of work
that he criticizes.
372On Natural Work-Democracy
2. He must know this field at least as well as, if not better than,
the one whom he criticizes.
3. He must have an interest in seeing the work succeed-not in
seeing it fail. If he is merely intent upon disrupting the work, if he
is not motivated by objective interests, then he is a neurotic grum­
bler, bllt not a critic.
4. He has to exercise his criticism from the point of view of the
field of work under criticism. He cannot criticize from an alien
point of view, i.e., from a point of view that has nothing to do with
the field of work. Depth psychology cannot be criticized from the
point of view of surface psychology, but surface psychology can be
criticized from the point of view of depth psychology. The reason
for this is simple. Depth psychology is forced to include surface
psychology in its investigations. Hence, it is conversant with it.
Surface psychology, on the other hand, is precisely that, surface
psychology; it does not look for biologic motives behind psychic
phenomena.
We cannot criticize an electric machine from the point of view
of a machine that has the function of heating a room. The thermal
theory plays a part in the electric machine only insofar as it enables
the electrical engineer to prevent the overheating of the electric
motor. And in this respect, the helpful suggestions of a thermal
theorist are definitely welcomed by the electrical engineer. But it
would be ridiculous to blame the electromachine for not being able
to heat a room.
It follows from this that sex-economy, which wants to liberate
the natural sexuality of children, adolescents, and adults from
neuroses, perversions and criminality, cannot be criticized from the
point of view of anti-sexual moralism, for the moralist wants to
suppress and not to liberate the natural sexuality of children and
adolescents. A musician cannot criticize a miner, and a physician
cannot criticize a geologist. Our feelings about a particular kind of
work may be pleasant or unpleasant, but that does not affect the
nature or usefulness of that work.
373THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
The sole purpose of these observations on criticism and caviling
has been to alleviate the position of young sex-economists and
orgone biophysicists toward critics.
WORK IS INHERENTLY RATIONAL
The analysis of the concept of work-democracy has, as we see,
led us into a sphere of human life that, though it has been ascribed
enormous importance for thousands of years, has been looked upon
as overwhelming and beyond mastery. It is the complicated and vast
sphere of so-called "human nature." That which philosophers,
poets, superficial politicians, but also great psychologists, desig­
nate and bemoan with the sentence "That's the way human nature
is" completely coincides with sex-economy's clinical concept, emo­
"
tional plague." We can define it as the sum total of all irrational
functions of life in the human animal. If "human nature," which is
conceived of as immutable, is identical with the emotional plague,
and if, in turn, the emotional plague is identical with the sum total
of all irrational functions of life in the human animal; if, moreover,
the functions of work, in themselves and independent of man, are
rational, then we are confronted with two enormous fields of
human activity, which are mortally opposed to one another: vitally
necessary work as the rational function of life on the one hand and
the emotional plague as the irrational function of life on the other
hand. It is not difficult to divine that work-democracy views as being
a part of the emotional plague all politics that is not based upon
knowledge, work, and love and that, therefore, is irrational. This is
work-democracy's answer to the timeless and age-old question of how
we could finally come to grips with our "notorious" human nature in
a simple way: Education, hygiene, and medicine, which have been
grappling with the problem of human nature since time began with­
out achieving satisfactory results, find in the rational function of
vitally necessary work a powerful ally in the fight against the emo­
tional plague.
To follow work-democracy's train of thought to the end, we
374On Natural Work-Democracy
must first of all wholly free ourselves from conventional political
and ideological thinking. Only in this way is it possible to compare
the fundamentally different train of thought that springs from the
world of love, work, and knowledge to the train of thought that
springs from the world of pomp and circumstance, of diplomatic
and political conferences.
The politician thinks in terms of "state" and "nation"; the
working man lives "sociably" and "socially." The politician thinks
in terms of "discipline" and "law and order"; the average working
man experiences "pleasure of work" and "order of work," "regula­
tion" and "cooperation of work." The politician thinks in terms of
"morals" and "duty"; the working man experiences or would like to
experience "spontaneous decency" and a "natural feeling for life."
The politician speaks of the "ideal of the family"; the working man
enjoys or would like to enjoy the "love of husband, wife, and chil­
dren." The politician speaks of the "interests of the economy and
the state"; the simple working man wants "gratification of needs and
an untrammeled food supply." The politician speaks of the "free
initiative of the individual" and thinks of "profit"; the simple
working man wants the freedom to try things on his own, the
freedom to become what he is or could be.
In an irrational way, the politician holds sway over precisely
those spheres of life that the working man copes or could cope with
in a rational way, if he were not severely hampered by political
irrationalism. Though the irrational and rational labels relate to the
same spheres of life, they are diametrically opposed to one another;
they are not words that could be substituted for one another. In
actual practice they are mutually exclusive. This is borne out by the
fact that, throughout the history of human society, the authori­
tarian discipline of the state has always thwarted natural sociability
and the pleasure of work; the state has thwarted society; the com­
pulsive sacredness of the family has thwarted the love of husband,
wife, and children; compulsive morality has thwarted the natural
decency that springs from the joy of life; and the politician has
continually thwarted working men and women.
375THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
Fundamentally, our society is ruled by concepts-by political­
irrational concepts, let it be noted-that exploit human labor to
compass irrational goals by force. Effective institutions are needed
to secure freedom of action and development for the life activity of
masses of people. The social basis for these institutions cannot be
any old arbitrary, interchangeable political orientation or ideology; it
can be only the social function of vitally necessary work as it results
naturally from the interlacing of the various vitally necessary fields
of work in the sphere of work as a whole.
Let us pursue work-democracy's train of thought a step further
into the thicket of entangled rational and irrational functions of
life. In this pursuit we want to stick strictly to the logical sequence
of thoughts and to exclude our personal interests as much as pos­
sible. To reach an applicable conclusion, we have to put ourselves,
even in these considerations of the concept of work-democracy, in
its position, i.e., we have to act as if we wanted to burden natural
work-democracy with the responsibility for social existence. In short,
we have to test its tenability from all angles in a strictly objective
way. If we should allow our personal interests in some unnecessary
activity or another to influence us, we would automatically exclude
ourselves from the framework of this discussion.
If there were nothing but the emotional plague in its various
forms, the human species would have met its doom long ago.
Ne ither political ideology nor mystical ritual, the military power
apparatus nor diplomatic discussions, would be able, by themselves,
to provide the population of any country with food, even for just an
hour, to keep the traffic system running smoothly, provide living
quarters, cure diseases, safeguard the rearing of children, ferret out
nature's secrets, etc. According to the work-democratic concept,
political ideologies, mystic rituals, and diplomatic maneuvers are
necessary only within the framework of social irrationalism. They
are not necessary in the factual sphere of life, which is ruled by love,
work, and knowledge. These vitally necessary functions obey their
own self-generated laws; they are not accessible to any irrational
ideology. Love, work, and knowledge are not "ideas," "cultural
376On Natural Work-Democracy
values," "political programs," "mental attitudes," or "confessions of
creed." . They are concrete realities, without which human society
could not exist for a day.
If human society were rationally organized, the priority of love,
work, and knowledge would be unquestioned; they, and not un­
necessary institutions, would have the right to determine social
existence. In accordance with the work-democratic conception, in­
dividual groups could arm themselves and kill one another; other
groups could glory in mystical rituals, and still other groups could
take delight in the discussion of ideologies. But they would not be
able to dominate, exploit, and lay claim to the basic biologic func­
tions of society for their own selfish purposes. Moreover, they would
not be able to deprive them of every right to exercise a determining
influence.
The social irrationalism in the attitude toward these two
spheres of human activity is enormous:
A politician is in a position to deceive millions of people, e.g.,
he can promise to establish freedom without actually having to do
so. No one demands proof of his competence or of the feasibility of
his promises. He can promise one thing today and the exact oppo­
site tomorrow. Without let or hindrance, a mystic can imbue
masses of people with the belief that there is a life after death-and
he need not offer the least trace of proof. Let us now compare the
rights of a politician or a mystic to the rights of a railroad engineer.
The latter would be immediately put in jail or a mental institution
if he would try to persuade as few as two dozen people who wanted
to travel from one town to another that he could fly to the moon.
Let us further imagine that this same railroad engineer, armed with
a gun now, insisted that his assertions were true and that he would
have the waiting passengers locked up if they refused to believe
him. The railroad engineer has to transport people from one place
to another; he has to do so as practically and as safely as possible if
he wants to hold his job.
It is wholly immaterial whether an architect, physician, teacher,
lathe operator, educator, etc., is a Fascist, Communist, liberal, or
377THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
Christian when it comes to building a school, curing the sick, mak­
ing a piece of furniture, or taking care of children. No one of these
workers can hold long speeches or make fantastic promises; he has
to perform concrete, practical work. He has to place one brick upon
another and, before he begins, he must give careful thought to and
draw blueprints of the number of rooms a school is to have, where
the ventilation and exits are to be placed, where the windows are to
be, and where the administration office and kitchen are to be
placed. Liberal, social democratic, religious, fascist, or communist
ideologies are of no use whatever when it comes to performing
practical work. No worker can afford to fritter away his time in idle
chatter. Each worker must know what he has to do, and he must do
it. But an ideologist can go on giving free rein to his fantasy, with­
out ever performing one piece of solid work. Long after a group of
politicians has completely bankrupted some country or another, it
continues its threadbare ideologic debates in some other country.
Real processes are totally foreign to the politician. Actually, there
would be nothing to object to in this if the politicians would con­
tent themselves with debating among themselves and not try to
impose their ideology on others, or even to determine the fate of
nations.
I once made the attempt of testing the above exemplified
system of thought of work-democracy on myself. In 1933, when I
began to divine the existence of a universal biologic energy as a
hypothesis, if I had openly asserted that such an energy really did
exist, that it was capable of destroying cancerous tumors, I would
only have confirmed the diagnosis of schizophrenia that overzealous
psychoanalysts had passed around and would have been confined to
a mental institution. On the basis of my research in the field of
biology, I could have promulgated any number of ideologies and
could have founded a political party, let us say, a work-democratic
freedom party. There is no doubt that I could have done this as well
as others who had less practical experience. By virtue of my influ­
ence on people, it would have been an easy matter to surround
myself with my own SS and to have thousands of people provided
378On Natural Work-Democracy
with work-democratic insignia. All of this would not have brought
me one step closer to the problem of cancer or to a comprehension
of the cosmic or oceanic feeling of the human animal. I would have
firmly established a work-democratic ideology, but the naturally
present, but as yet unperceived, process of work-democracy would
have remained undiscovered. For years on end, I had to work very
hard, to make observations, to correct mistakes, to overcome my
own irrationalism as well as I could, to comprehend why biology is
both mechanistic and mystical at the same time. I did not complain.
I had to read books, to dissect mice, to deal with various materials in
a hundred different ways, until I actually discovered orgone, until I
was able to concentrate it in accumulators and make it visible. Only
after this had been accomplished was I able to pose the practical
aspect of the question, namely whether orgone contained curative
effects. In this I was guided by the organic development of the work
process. This means that every vitally necessary and practical work is
a rational, organic development in itself, and it cannot be sur­
mounted or circumvented in any way whatever. This formulation
contains an essential biologic principle, which we call "organic
development." A tree must first have reached the height of one yard
before it can reach the height of two yards. A child must first learn
to read before he can find out what other people are saying in their
writings. A pnysician must first study anatomy before he can under­
stand pathology. In all these cases the development ensues from the
organic progress of a work process. Working men and women are
the functional organs of this work. He or she can be a good or poor
functioning organ, but the work process itself does not undergo any
fundamental change. Whether a man or woman is a good or poor
functioning organ depends essentially upon the degree of irrational­
ism in his or her structure.
As might be expected, this "law of organic development" is
absent in irrational functions. In such functions the goal is there as
an idea from the very beginning, long before any practical work is
begun. The activity follows a fixed, preconceived plan; by its very
nature, therefore, it has to be irrational. This is clearly and plainly
379THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
shown by the fact that, of the world-famous irrationalists, literally
nothing remains behind that could be put to use by posterity.
Over thousands of years the law of organic development has
been clearly manifested in all technical and scientific arts. Galileo's
achievements originated in the criticism of the Ptolemaic system
and extended the work of Copernicus. Kepler took up the work of
Galileo, and Newton took up the work of Kepler. Many generations
of working and searching men and women were developed from
each of these functional organs of objective natural processes. Of
Alexander, the so-called Great, Caesar, Nero, Napoleon, on the
other hand, nothing whatever remains behind. Nor do we find any
trace of a continuity among the irrationalists, unless the dream of a
Napoleon to become a second Alexander or Caesar is regarded as a
continuity.
In these men, irrationalism is completely exposed as a nonbio­
logic and nonsocial, indeed anti-biologic and anti-social, function of
life. It lacks the essential characteristics of the rational functions of
life, such as germinption, development, continuity, nondeviation of
'
process, interlacing with other functions, fragmentation, and pro­
ductivity.
Now let us apply these insights to the question whether the
emotional plague can be fundamentally overcome. The answer is in
the affirmative. No matter how sadistic, mystical, gossipy, unscrupu­
lous, fickle, armored, superficial, and given to idle chatter human
naturally predisposed to be rational in
animals may be, they are
their work functions.
Just as irrationalism vents and propagates
itself in ideological processes and mysticism, man's rationality is
confirmed and propagated in the work process. It is an inherent part
of the work process and, therefore, an inherent part of man that he
cannot irrational
be in his work function. By his very nature and by
forced
the nature of work itself, he is to be rational. Irrationalism
disrupts
automatically excludes itself by virtue of the fact that it the
work process and makes the goal of work unattainable. The sharp
and irreconcilable opposition between the emotional plague and the
work process is clearly expressed in the following: As a working man
380On Natural Work-Democracy
or woman, one can always come to an understanding with any
technician, industrial worker, physician, etc., in a discussion on work
functions. As soon as the conversation shifts to ideology, however,
the understanding falls to pieces. It is indicative of so many dicta­
tors and politicians that they regularly give up their work when they
enter the province of politics. A shoemaker who loses himself in
mystical ecstasy and begins to think of himself as a savior of the
people, sent by God, will inevitably cut the s()l�s the wrong way and
mess up his stitches. As time goes on, he will be faced with starva­
tion. It is precisely by this process, on the other hand, that the
politician becomes strong and rich.
Emotional irrationalism is capable only of disrupting work; it is
never capable of accomplishing work.
Let us examine this work-democratic train of thought from its
own point of view. Are we dealing here with an ideology, a glorifica­
tion or idealization "of work"? I asked myself this question in view
of my task to teach physicians and educators. It is incumbent upon
me as a physician, researcher, and teacher to differentiate between
vitally necessary, rational work and unnecessary, irrational ideology,
i.e., to ascertain the rational and rationally effective character of
work. I cannot help one of my students of vegetotherapy to over­
come a practical difficulty in his own structure or in his work with
patients by feeding him hopes of a better Beyond or by appointing
him "Marshal of Vegetotherapy." The title of Marshal of Vegeto­
therapy would not make him the least bit more capable of dealing
with difficulties. By appointing him Marshal of Vegetotherapy, I
would only endanger him and possibly even precipitate a disaster. I
must tell him the whole truth about his weaknesses and shortcom­
ings. I have to teach him to recognize them by himself. In this I am
guided by the course of my own development and my practical
experience. I do not have an ideology that compels me to be
rational for ethical or other reasons. Rational behavior is imposed
upon me by my work in an objective way. I would starve if I did not
strive to act rationally. I am immediately corrected by my work if I
try to cover up difficulties with illusions, for I cannot eliminate a
381THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
biopathic paralysis with illusions any more than a machinist, an
architect, a farmer or teacher, can perform his work with illusions.
Nor do I demand rationality. It is objectively present in me,
independent of what I am and independent of the emotional
plague. I do not order my students to be rational, for that would
serve no purpose. I teach them and advise them, in their own
interest and in the light of practical work processes, to distinguish
the rational from the irrational in themselves and in the world. I
teach them to promote the former and to check the latter. It is a
basic feature of the emotional plague in social life to escape the
difficulties of responsibility and the actualities of everyday life and
work by seeking refuge in ideology, illusion, mysticism, brutality, or
a political party.
This is a fundamentally new position. It is not the rationality of
work that is new, nor its rational effect on working men and
women, but the fact that work is rational and has a rational effect in
itself and of itself, whether I know it or not. It is better if I know it.
Then I can be in harmony with the rational organic development.
This is also a new position for psychology and sociology. It is new
for sociology because, until now, sociology has looked upon society's
irrational activities as rational; and it is new for psychology because
psychology did not doubt society's rationality.
VITALLY NECESSARY AND OTHER WORK
The deeper one delves into the nature of natural work-democ­
racy, the more villainy one discovers in human thinking, villainy
caused by political ideologies. Let us try to elucidate this statement
by examining the content of the concept of work.
Thus far we have contrasted work and political ideology, equat­
ing work with "rationality" and political ideology with "irrational­
ity." But vital life is never mechanical. Thus, we catch ourselves
setting up a new irrational black-white dichotomy. But this blunt
dichotomization is justified insofar as politics is indeed essentially
irrational and, compared with it, work is essentially rational. For
382On Natural Work-Democracy
instance, is the construction of a casino work? This example forces
us to differentiate vitally necessary work from work that is not
vitally necessary. Under the heading of "vitally necessary work," we
have to list every kind of work that is indispensable to the main­
tenance of human life and the social machinery. Hence, that work is
vitally necessary the absence of which would be harmful to or would
inhibit the living process. That work, on the other hand, the
absence of which would not change the course of society and
human life is not vitally necessary. We have to designate as
nonwork that activity that is detrimental to the life process.
For centuries on end it has been precisely vitally necessary work
that the political ideology of the ruling but nonworking classes has
depreciated. On the other hand, it has represented nonwork as a
sign of noble blood. All socialist ideologies reacted to this appraisal
with a mechanistic and rigid reversal of valuations. The socialists
conceived of "work" as relating solely to those activities that had
been looked down upon in feudalism, i.e., essentially to manual
labor; whereas the activity of the ruling classes was represented as
nonwork. To be sure, this mechanical reversal of ideologic valua­
tions was wholly in keeping with the political concept of the two
economically and personally sharply demarcated social classes, the
ruling and the ruled. From a purely economic point of view, society
could indeed be divided into "those who possessed capital" and
"those who possessed the commodity, working power." From the
point of view of bio-sociology, however, there could be no clear-cut
division between one class and another, neither ideologically nor
psychologically, and certainly not on the basis of work. The dis­
covery of the fact that the ideology of a group of people does not
necessarily have to coincide with its economic situation, indeed,
that economic and ideologic situation are often sharply opposed to
one another, enabled us to understand the fascist movement, which
had remained uncomprehended until then. In 1930 it became clear
that there is a "cleavage" between ideology and economy, and that
the ideology of a certain class can develop into a social force, a social
force that is not confined to that one class.
383THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
It was first shown in connection with the suppression of the
natural sexuality of children and adolescents that there are funda­
mental biologic functions of the human animal that have nothing
to do with the economic distribution of the classes and that class
boundaries overlap and cut across one another. The suppression of
sexuality relates not only to all strata and classes of every patriarchal
society; it is precisely in the ruling classes that this suppression is
often most pronounced. Indeed, sex-economy was able to show that
a large part of the sadism made use of by the ruling class to suppress
and exploit other classes is to be ascribed chiefly to the sadism that
stems from suppressed sexuality. The connection between sadism,
sexual suppression, and class suppression i.s excellently expressed in
De Coster's famous Till Eulenspiegel.
The real social functions of work also overlap and cut across the
politico-ideological class boundaries. In the socialist parties there
were many leading politicians who had never performed vitally
necessary work and who knew nothing about the work process. A
worker usually gave up his job when he became a political func­
tionary. On the other hand, the classes that political socialism
designated as the "ruling nonworking" classes, as opposed to the
workers, comprised essential bodies of workers. There is probably
nothing more suited to demonstrate the blindness to reality of the
typical political ideologies than the fact that the leading members of
the political reaction, in Austria for example, were recruited from
the circles of the University of Technology. These technicians were
engineers in the coal mines, constructors of locomotives, airplanes,
bridges, public buildings, etc.
Now let us apply work-democracy's criticism to the concept of
the capitalist. In political ideology, the capitalist was either the
"leader of economy" or the "nonworking parasite." Both concep­
tions were mechanical, ideological, politically unrealistic, and un­
scientific. There are capitalists who work, and there are capitalists
who do not work. There are capitalists whose work is vitally neces­
sary and others whose work is unnecessary. A capitalist's political
orientation or ideology is wholly immaterial in this respect. The
384On Natural Work-Democracy
contradiction between work and politics relates to the capitalist as
well as the wage earner, in one and the same person. Just as a
stonemason can be a fascist, a capitalist can be a socialist. In short,
we have come to realize that it is not possible to orient oneself in
the social chaos on the basis of political ideologies. The possibility
of a concrete reorientation is offered by work-democracy's scope of
ideas, which is based on a realistic appraisal of the concept of work.
Accordingly, with respect to vitally necessary work, the political class
of capitalists is divided into two groups, which are not only opposed
but often antagonistic to one another: One group comprises those
who possess capital and who neither work nor plan but make others
work for their profit. A Henry Ford may hold this or that political
view; ideologically, he may be an angel or a noxious person; but this
does not alter the fact that he was the first American to construct an
automobile and totally change the technical face of America. Politi­
cally and ideologically, Edison was undoubtedly a capitalist; but one
would like to meet the political functionary of a workers' movement
who would not use the incandescent lamp, which Thomas Edison
took great pains to invent, or who would dare to state publicly that
Edison was a nonworking parasite of society. From the point of
view of work-democracy, the same applies to the Wright Brothers,
Junkers, Reichert, Zeiss. There are any number of names that could
be added to this list. 111ere is a clear distinction between these
capitalists, who perform objective work, and the nonworking capi­
talists, who merely exploit the fact that they possess capital. With
respect to work, the latter do not constitute a special class type, for
they are fundamentally identical to any socialist party bureaucrat
who sits in this or that office, from which he determines "the
policies of the working class." We have had our fill of the cata­
strophic effects of the nonworking possessors of capital and the
nonworking political functionaries. We know better than to orient
ourselves on ideologic concepts; we have to orient ourselves on
practical activities.
From the point of view of vitally necessary work, many deeply
ingrained political concepts, and the "political sciences" dependent
385THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
upon them, are supplemented and changed. The concept of "the
worker" has to be extended. The concept of economic classes is
supplemented by the fact of the human structure, whereby the
social importance of the economic classes is extremely reduced.
In what follows, the essential changes are to be brought forward
that have obtruded themselves upon concepts as a result of the
fundamentally new social events and the discovery of the fact of
natural work-democracy. I have no illusions about how these
changes will be received: This and that political ideology will raise a
loud, very dignified, and high-sounding cry. But this will not have
any effect upon the reality of the facts and processes, whether force
is applied or not. No matter how far-reaching a political process is,
no matter how many hundreds of "ists" are executed, the fact re­
mains that a physician or a technician, educator or farmer, in
America, India, Germany, or elsewhere, performs vitally necessary
work. In practical everyday life, moreover, they accomplish far
more, for better or for worse, for the course of life processes than
the Com intern as a whole even remotely accomplished since 1923.
There was no change in the life of man when the Comintern was
dissolved in 1943. But let us imagine that China or America would
exclude all teachers or all physicians from the social process on a
certain day!
The history of the past twenty years leaves no doubt that the
party ideologies advocating the "elimination of class differences,"
"the establishment of national unity," etc., not only did not effect
any change in the existence of class differences, in the' fragmentation
of the human community, and in the suppression of freedom and
decency; they merely brought matters to a head, indeed to a
catastrophic degree. Hence, the natural scientific solution of the
social tragedy of the human animal must begin with the clarification
and correction of those ideologic party concepts that perpetuate the
fragmentation of human society.
Work-democracy does not limit the concept of "the worker" to
the industrial worker. To avoid any misunderstanding, work-democ-
386On Natural Work-Democracy
racy calls everyone who performs vitally necessary social work a
worker. The concept of the "working class," a concept that was
politically and ideologically limited to the body of industrial work­
ers, estranged the industrial worker from the technician and educa­
tor, and it created a hostility among the representatives of the
various vitally necessary work processes. Indeed, this ideology caused
the medical and teaching professions to be subordinated to the
"revolutionary proletariat"; they were designated as the "servants of
the bourgeoisie." Not only the medical and teaching professions,
but also the industrial proletariat, objected to such a relegation.
This is understandable, for the objective and factual relationship
and cooperation between the physician and the workers in an
industrial center are much deeper and more serious than the rela­
tionship between the industrial workers and those who wield politi­
cal power. Since the working community and the interlacing of the
various branches of vitally necessary work derive from the natural
processes and are nourished by natural interests, they alone are in a
position to counter political fragmentation. It is clear that when a
vitally necessary group of industrial workers degrades an equally
vital group of physicians, technicians, or teachers to the status of
"servants" and elevates itself to the status of "masters," then the
teachers, physicians, and technicians fly into the arms of those who
preach racial superiority because they do not want to be servants,
not even "servants of the revolutionary proletariat." And the "rev­
olutionary proletariat" flies into the arms of a political party or
trade union, which does not burden them with any responsibility
and imbues them with the illusion that they are the "leading class."
This does not alter the fact that this "leading class," as has been
clearly shown, is not in a position to assume social responsibility and
that it even goes so far as to practice racial hatred, as in America,
where unions of white workers deny membership to black workers.
All of this is the result of deeply ingrained ideological party
concepts, under whose sway the community, which is produced by
work, is suffocated. Hence, it is only the new concept of the worker,
387THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
i.e., as a person who performs vitally necessary work, which is in a
position to bridge the gap and to bring the social bodies into line
with the organizations of vitally necessary work.
There can be no doubt that this clarification of concepts will
not be welcomed by the party ideologists. We can be just as certain
that in the attitude toward this clarification of concepts, the ideo­
logic chaff will be clearly and spontaneously separated from the
practical wheat, this or that power apparatus notwithstanding.
Those who affirm and advocate the natural work community, the
basis for which is given by the interlacing of all vitally necessary
work, will be practical wheat. On the other hand, those to whom
party ideologies and concepts, i.e., ideologies and concepts that
obstruct and hamper our society on all sides, are more important
than the community of all working men and women, will make a
big fuss under one pretext or another, and thus prove themselves to
be chaff. But the clarification of these concepts will fall in with the
naturally present knowledge surrounding these relationships and,
therefore, with the need to arrange social life in accordance with the
interrelation of all branches of work.
In this discussion of the concept of the worker, I have merely
followed the logic imposed on me by work-democratic thinking. I
had to arrive at the above results, whether I wanted to or not. There
is a very simple reason for this. Just at the time I was writing these
pages, I had to have some signs and placards made up for Orgo­
non. * I am not a carpenter, and therefore I am not able to make
the placards myself. Nor am I a painter, so I cannot produce neat
lettering. But we needed placards for our laboratory. Hence, I was
forced to put myself in contact with a carpenter and a painter and,
on terms of equality, discuss the best way of making and lettering
the placards. I would not have been able to deal with this need
without their experience and practical counsel. It was wholly im­
material whether or not I regarded myself as a very erudite academi-
.. Reich's home and research laboratory in Rangeley, Maine.
388On Natural Work-Democracy
dan and natural scientist; and it was just as immaterial whether the
painter or carpenter held this or that "view" on fascism or the New
Deal. The carpenter could not regard me as the "servant of the
revolutionary proletariat," nor could the painter regard me as a
highly superfluous "intellectua1." The work process made it neces­
sary for us to exchange knowledge and experience with one another.
For instance, if the painter wanted to do a good job, he had to
understand our symbol of the functional method of research. As it
turned out, he glowed with enthusiasm for his work when he
learned its meaning. From the painter and the carpenter, on the
other hand, I learned a great deal about the arrangement of letters
and the placards themselves, which had the purpose of correctly
expressing the function of the Institute to the outside world.
This example of the objective and rational interlacing of
branches of work is clear enough to make more comprehensible the
abysmal irrationalism that governs the formation of public opinion
and thus burkes the natural process of work. The more concretely I
sought to visualize the course of my work in relationship to other
branches of work, the better I was able to comprehend work-democ­
racy's scope of thought. There was no doubt about it: The work
process went well when I allowed myself to be instructed by
microscope manufacturers and electrical engineers, and when they,
in turn, allowed me to instruct them on the function of a lens or an
electrical apparatus in their special orgone-physical use. I would not
have been able to proceed a single step in orgone research without
the lens grinder and the electrical engineer. In turn, the electrical
engineer and the lens grinder struggle hard with the unsolved prob­
lems of the theory of light and electricity, some aspects of which can
hope for clarification by the discovery of orgone.
I have described this obvious fact of the interrelation of the
various branches of work at some length and in an intentionally
primitive way because I had good reason to know that, as simple as
all this is, it nonetheless appears to be strange and new to working
men and women. To be sure, this sounds hard to believe, but it is
true and it is understandable: The fact of the natural interrelation-
389THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
ship and indissoluble interdependence of all work processes is not
clearly and plainly represented in the thinking and feeling of work­
ing men and women. True enough, every working man and woman
is automatically familiar with this interrelationship on the basis of
his or her practical work, but it sounds strange when they are told
that society could not exist without their work or that they are
responsible for the social organization of their work. This gap be­
tween vitally necessary activity and the consciousness of one's
responsibility for this activity was created and perpetuated by the
political system of ideologies. These ideologies are responsible for
the hiatus between practical activity and irrational orientation in
working men and women. This assertion also sounds peculiar and
strange. But one can easily convince oneself of its veracity by pick­
ing up and studying very carefully any newspaper in Europe, Asia,
or anywhere else, regardless of date. It is only seldom and as if by
chance that one finds anything about the basic principles and
nature of the processes of love, work, and knowledge, their vital
necessity, their interrelationship, their rationality, their seriousness,
etc. On the other hand, the newspapers are full of high politics,
diplomacy, military and formal events, which have no bearing upon
the real process of everyday life. In this way the average working
man and woman are imbued with the feeling that actually they are
of little significance, compared with the elevated, complicated, and
"clever" debates on "strategy and tactics." The average working
man and woman get the feeling that they are small, inadequate,
superfluous, oppressed, and not much more than an accident in life.
The veracity of this assertion with respect to mass psychology can
easily be tested. I have often carried out such tests and have always
attained the same result:
1. Some worker comes up with a good idea, which enables him
to effect a considerable improvement in his work. We ask him to
put his small or big discovery down in writing and to publish it.
When we do so, we meet with a peculiar reaction. It is as if the
worker, whose work is important and indispensable, wanted to creep
into a shell. It is as if he wanted to say-and often he puts it into
390On Natural Work-Democracy
precisely these words-"Who am I to write an article? My work
doesn't count." This attitude on the part of the worker toward his
work is a typical phenomenon of mass psychology. I described it
very simply here, but this is its essence, and anyone can easily
persuade himself that it is so.
2. Now let us approach the editor of any newspaper. We'll
suggest that he reduce the formal, strictly political "questions of
strategy and tactics" to two pages of the newspaper and that he
reserve the first and second pages of the newspaper for extensive
articles on practical everyday questions of technology, medicine,
education, mining, agriculture, factory work, etc. He will gaze at us
devoid of all understanding and in complete perplexity, and he will
have doubts about our state of mind.
These two basic attitudes, i.e., that of masses of people and that
of the molders of public opinion, supplement and determine one
another. The nature of public opinion is essentially political, and it
has a low estimation of the everyday life of love, work, and knowl­
edge. And this is in keeping with the feeling of social insignificance
experienced by those who love, work, and have knowledge.
However, a rational reassessment of the social conditions is out
of the question as long as political irrationalism contributes 99 per­
cent, and the basic functions of social life contribute only 1 percent,
toward the formation of public opinion and, therefore, toward the
formation of the human structure. A complete reversal of the rela­
tionship would be the minimal requirement if one wants to deprive
political irrationalism of its power and to achieve the self-regulation
of society. In other words: The factual process of life must also have
an emphatic voice in the press and in the forms of social life, and it
must coincide with them.
In this extension and correction of political concepts, we en­
counter an argument that is difficult to counter. It runs as follows:
Political ideologies cannot be simply eliminated, for workers, farm­
ers, technicians, etc., determine the trend of society not only
through their vitally necessary work, but also through their political
ideologies! The Peasants' War of the Middle Ages was a political
391THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
revolt that had a revolutionizing social effect. The Communist party
in Russia changed the face of Russia. One cannot, it is stated,
prohibit or prevent "politicizing" and the formation of political
ideologies. They too are human needs and have social effects, just as
love, knowledge, and work. These arguments are to be countered as
follows:
1. Work-democracy's scope of thought does not want to pro­
hibit or prevent anything. It is directed exclusively to the fulfillment
of the biologic life functions of love, work, and knowledge. When it
is backed by some political ideology, then natural work-democracy is
only promoted. But if a political ideology with irrational claims and
assertions gets in the way, then work-democracy will act just as a
lumberman would act who, in the process of felling a tree, is at­
tacked by a poisonous snake. He will kill the snake to be able to
continue his work unobstructed. He will not give up his lumber­
man's job because there are poisonous snakes in the woods.
2. It is true that political ideologies are facts that also have
actual social effects and that they cannot be simply dismissed or
talked away. However, it is work-democracy's point of view that it is
precisely these facts that constitute a terrible portion of the tragedy
of the human anima1. The fact that political ideologies are tangible
realities is not a proof of their vitally necessary character. The
bubonic plague was an extraordinarily powerful social reality, but
no one would have regarded it as vitally necessary. A settlement of
human beings in a primeval forest is a vitally important matter and
a real and tangible social fact. But a flood is also such a fact. Who
would equate the destructive force of a flood to the activities of the
human settlement only because both of them have social effects?
Yet, it was precisely our failure to differentiate between work and
politics, between reality and illusion; it was precisely our mistake of
conceiving of politics as a rational human activity comparable to the
sowing of seeds or the construction of buildings that was responsible
for the fact that a painter who failed to make the grade was able to
plunge the whole world into misery. And I have stressed again and
392On Natural Work-Democracy
again that the main purpose of this book-which, after all, was not
written merely for the fun of it-was to demonstrate these cata­
strophic errors in human thinking and to eliminate irrationalism
from politics. It is an essential part of our social tragedy that the
farmer, the industrial worker, the physician, etc., do not influence
social existence solely through their social activities, but also and
even predominantly through their political ideologies. For political
activity hinders objective and professional activity; it splits every
profession into inimical ideologic groups; creates a dichotomy in the
body of industrial workers; limits the activity of the medical profes­
sion and harms the patients. In short, it is precisely political activity
that prevents the realization of that which it pretends to fight for:
peace,. work, security, international cooperation, free objective
speech, freedom of religion, etc.
3. It is true that political parties sometimes change the face of a
society. However, from the point of view of work-democracy we
maintain that these are compulsive achievements. Originally, when
Karl Marx began his critique of political economy, he was not a
politician, nor was he a member of a party. He was a scientific
economist and sociologist. It was the emotional plague in masses of
people that prevented him from being heard; it was the emotional
plague that caused him to fall into poverty and wretchedness; it was
the emotional plague that forced him to found a political organiza­
tion, the notorious "Communist Alliance," which he himself dis­
solved after a short time. It was the emotional plague that turned
scientific Marxism into a Marxism of political parties, which no
longer had anything to do with scientific Marxism and even bears a
large share of the responsibility for the emergence of fascism.
Marx's exclamation that he was "not a Marxist" is a precise
confirmation of this fact. He would never have resorted to the
founding of a political organization if rational, and not irrational,
thinking were the rule in masses of people. True, political machin­
ery was often a necessity, but it was a compulsive measure made
necessary by human irrationalism. If work and social ideology were
393THE MASS PSYCHOLOGY OF FASCISM
in accord with one another, if needs, the gratification of needs, and
the means of gratifying needs were identical with the human struc­
ture, there would be no politics, for then politics would be superflu­
ous. When one does not have a house, one might be forced to live
in a hollow tree trunk. A tree trunk may be better or worse than a
house, but it is not a house. A decent home remains the goal, even
if one is forced for a time to live in a tree. The elimination of
politics and of the state from which it springs was precisely the goal
that was forgotten by the founders of socialism. I know that it is
embarrassing to be reminded of such things. It requires too much
thought, honesty, knowledge, self-criticism, for a physician to regard
the main goal of his activity as the prevention of those diseases from
the cure of which he makes a living. We shall have to regard as
objective and rational sociologists those politicians who help human
society to expose the irrational motivations of the existence of
politics and its "necessity" so completely that every form of politics
becomes superfluous.
This work-democratic critique of politics does not stand alone.
In America the hatred of political power mongering and the insights
into its social harmfulness is widespread. From the Soviet Union we
hear that there too the technocrats are prevailing more and more
against the politicians. Perhaps, even the execution of leading Rus­
sian politicians by politicians has a social meaning that is concealed
from all of us, despite the fact that we have learned to look upon
these executions as the manifestation of political irrationalism and
sadism. The politics of the European dictators was unrivaled for a
whole decade. If one wants to recognize effortlessly the essence of
politics, let one reflect upon the fact that it was a Hitler who was
able to make a whole world hold its breath for many years. The fact
that Hitler was a political genius unmasks the nature of politics in
general as no other fact can. With Hitler, politics reached its high­
est stage of development. We know what its fruits were, and we
know how the whole world reacted to them. In short, it is my belief
that, with its unparalleled catastrophes, the twentieth century marks
394On Natural Worle-Democracy
the beginning of a new social era, free of politics. Of course, it is
impossible to foresee how much of a role politics itself will still play
in the uprooting of the political emotional plague, and how much
of the role will be played by the consciously organized functions of
love, work, and knowledge.
395

I N D E X
Aldridge, James, 332, 333 "Class consciousness," xxiii, xxiv, 10
Alexander the Great, 330, 380 Communist or Communists, 13, 20,
Anti-Semitism, 59, 82, 100 43, 99, 123-24, 214, 217, 222
Authoritarian family, x, 30, 34, 56, leadership of party, xviii
60, 96, 104, 131, 136, 140, 172 organizations, xx, xxiii
Program of the party, 1919, 248
Bachofen, 87 Copernicus, 380
Bethmann-Hollweg,79
Bilmans, 102
Dalton Plan, 223
Biologic core, xi, xii, xiii
Biopathic structure, 259 Darwin, Charles, 77, 318, 343
Bismarck, Otto von, 38 De Coster, 137, 384
Bliiher, 91 fn., 93 De La Mettrie, 346
Boeck, Robert 120 fn. Dialectical materialism, xxv, 6, 58 En.
Braumann, 125, 126, 130 "Dictatorship of the Proletariat,"
Bruning, Heinrich, 116 235-36, 239,245, 247, 258
Disney, Walt, 336
Caesar, 330, 380 Doriot, 227
Capitalists, 232-33 Driesch,83
Catholic Christianity, 230
Character structure, xi, xii, xiv, xxiv, 5,
Edison, Thomas, 385
17-18, 30, 440, 216, 221, 222,
Emotional plague, 374, 380, 382,
265, 269, 270, 281, 282, 305,
322 393
of fascism, 80 Emotional structure, 147
See also human character structure, Energetic functionalism, xxiv
emotional structure, biopathic Engels, xxiv, 6, 7, 71, 87, 105, 112,
structure 209-10,222,237, 271
397INDEX
Fascism, 233 Human character structure or human
definitions, xiii, xiv, xxi, xxii, 214 structure, x, xi, 151, 163, 229,
erroneous conceptions of, xiii 234, 248, 249, 260, 290, 303,
as a political movement, xiv 306, 322, 340, 391, 394
rebelliousness, xiv Hutten, Kurt, 139, 140
race ideology, xiv
as religious mysticism, xv, xxi Identification, 46 fn., 54, 63, 68
fuhrer ideology, 234
Feder, Gottfried, 117 Jager, 13
Ford, Henry, 385 Jarmer,67
Freud, Sigmund, 26, 28, 58 fn., 231, Jefferson, Thomas, 209
343 Jesus, 118, 159, 161, 163, 327
his depth psychology, xxiii cult, 167, 168
Freudian "unconscious", xi, xii Junkers, 385
See also "Secondary drives"
Fromm, Erich, 219 Kaiser Wilhelm, xv, 281
Fuhrer, 35, 62, 72, 80, 202, 234, 265, Kepler, Johannes, 330, 380
281, 323 Keyserling, Hermann, 83
fuhrer·figure, 53 Knickerbocker, Diedrich, 45, 68
identification with, 63 Kunik, 10
Kurten, 137
Galileo, 380
Gardner, Percy, 101 Laval, Pierre, 227, 328
Genital spasm, 151 Leng, 96
Goebbels, 57, 59 Lenin, 6, 14, 23, 24, 33, 129, 197,
Goring, Hermann, 35, 44 209-10, 212, 221, 222, 235,
Grothjan, 108 246, 256, 261, 328
Lenz, 10
Haase, Ludwig, 119 Leonardo da Vinci, xxi
Hapsburgs, 37 Liberalism, xii
Heinrich, Herta, 10 1 false, xv
Hitler, Adolf, xv, xx, 17, 34, 37, 49, libido, 26
53, 62, 67, 76, 83, 98, 174, 201, Lichtenberg, 102
226,258,281, 394 Life energy, x
imperial interests, 22 See also Orgone
movement, 36 Life-impulse, xvii
the German Lenin, 99 Lincoln, 209
Hitlerism, xxii, 349, 351 "Little Man," xv
Homer, 84 Litvinov, 208
Horthy, Mik16s, 227 Lowenthal, John, 101
398INDEX
Lueger,38 Oedipus Complex, xix, 26, 56 En.
Luxemburg, Rosa, 74 58 £n.
Orgastic
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 87 £n., 238 fn. excitation, 144
Mann, Ernst, 55 £n. longing, x, 136
Mannerheim, 227 impotence, xxix, 136, 168
Marx, Karl, xxvi, 3,6, 7, 8, 16-17, 23, Orgone, xxx, 330, 336, 338, 357,
25, 28, 82, 121, 143, 197, 222, 358, 379, 389
224, 341, 393 discovery of the, xxiii, xxiv, 357
economic theory, xxiii Orgone Biophysics, xi, 321, 326, 357
concept of private property, xxv
Marxism, xxii, xxiii, 3, 8-9, 38, 237, Pallenberg, 188
393 Papen, Franz von, 116
vulgar, xix, xx, xxi, xxv, 7, 14 Pasteur, Louis, xxi
Marxist, xix, xx, xxi Petain, Henri Philippe, 328
economic ideas, xxii Philip II, 137
sociology, xxiv Pieck,7
vulgar, 31 Plato, 271
theorists, 58 Platonic Philosophy of the State,
theory about religion, 130 339, 342
Masaryk, Jan, 271 Pleasure Anxiety, 149, 151
Morgan, Lewis, 87, 105, 237 Psychoanalysis, xxiii, 26, 28, 145
Morphia addicts, 1 39 £n. Psychoanalytic Sociology, 27
Mussolini, Benito, xx, 226, 281
Mysticism, xv, 5, 25, 55, 84, 89, 167, Quisling, Vidkun, 73
169, 171, 344
organized, x, 115, 203 Reichert, 385
biologic, xx Religion, 163
development of sentiments of, 154 Religious ecstasy, 149
character-analytic treatment of, Rickenbacker, Eddie, 307-9
180-182 Robespierre, 281
Roehm, 91 £n.
Natural Work-Democracy, xxvii, 4, Rommel, Erwin, 332
86,90, 355, 360, 382 Roosevelt, Franklin, 129, 134,272
See also Work-Democracy his "New Deal," 8, 367
Napoleon, 330, 380 Rosenberg, Alfred, 83-87, 91, 93, 95,
Nero, 380 117
Newton, 380
Nietzsche, 156, 157 Sadism, 192, 344, 384
NSDAP, 13, 36, 45, 49, 60, 61, 62, Salkind, 7, 106, 124
73, 109 Sauerland, 7
399INDEX
Scharnagel, 118 Socialists, xviii, xx, xxiii, 43, 214, 383
Schlamm, Willi, 217, 219, 236 "Socialist Yearning," 224
SchOnerer, 38 Stalin, Josef, 212, 226, 227, 246, 260,
Secondary Drives, xi, xii, xiii, xv 262,281,297
See also Freudian "unconscious" Stapel, Wilhelm, 34, 83, U8
Self-Regulation, xvii State Capitalism, 277
Severing, 72 fn. Stoliarov, 106
Sex-Economic, xviii, xix, xxi Strasser, Otto, S, 143
biophysics, xxvii
conditions, 295 Thyssen, Fritz von, 42
organizations, xix Tolischus, Otto D., 131
publications, xx
research on religion, 146 Virgin Mary cult, 164-67
sociology, xix, xxiii, 28, 187
structure, 168 Weininger, 106
Sex-Economy, xxx, 25, 60, 114, 136, Wittfogel, Karl, 143
148, 183, 357, 368, 373 Work-Democracy, xxii, xxxi, 106, 125,
its task among religious-mystical 241, 245, 265, 268, 269, 276,
adolescents, 163-64 282, 286, 288, 311-15, 316, 353,
Sexpol, xxx, 124 354, 374, 392
Sex-Politics or Sexual Politics, xxx, Work-Democratic,
55, 104, 111, 113 form of social organization, xii
Smigorski, 102 way of life, 371
Social Democracy, 71, 72-74, 99, Wright Brothers, 385
230-32
Social Democrats, 13, 20, 37, 72, 217 Zagruda,48
Austrian, xx Zeiss, 385
Socialism, S, 225, 395 Zelenin, 102
400$18.00
WILHELM REICH
TH E MASS PSYCHOLOGY
FASCISM
OF
.
The only authorized edition, newly translated
from the original German
Wilhelm Reich's classic study is a unique contribution to the
understanding of one of the crucial phenomena of our times­
fascism. Reich firmly repudiates the concept that fascism is the
ideology or action of a single individual or nationality, or of any
ethnic or political group. He also denies a purely socio-economic
explanation as advanced by Marxian ideologists. He understands
·
fascism as the expression of the irrational character structure of the
average human being whose primary biological needs and impulses
have been suppressed for thousands of years. The social function
of this suppression and the crucial role played in it by the authori­
tarian family and the church are carefully analyzed. Reich shows
how every form of organized mysticism, including fascism, relies
on the unsatisfied orgastic longing of the masses.
?
Symbol of orgonomic functionalism
The Noonday Press
A division of Farrar, Straus and Giroux / 19 Union Square West / New York 10003
ISBN 0-374-50884-4
I
9 780374 508845