The  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  Described  and  Examined.

YOGA   SASTRA:

THE  YOGA  SUTRAS  OF  PATANJALI  EXAMINED;
WITH  A  NOTICE

OP

SAV^^MI  VIVEK:^IsrA.2SrD^'S

YOGA  PHILOSOPHY.


"  From.the  Unreal  lead  me  to  the  Real,
From  Darkness  lead  me  to  Iii^ht,
From  Seatli  lead.me  to  Immortality."

lirihadlAranya  JJpanishad,


FIllST  EDITION,  3,000  COPIES.


THE    CHRISTIAN    LITERATDEK    SOCIETY    FOB   INDIA
LONDON    AND    MADEA8.

B

132  1897.

Y6P264

■t  g«^7  Price,  2^  Ann2s ;  Post-free,  3  Annas,  fpfl

c.  1  izziiziii=:i:^iiii:zizzzzzi

ROBA


o


:^3i


V.


m


■E--«K-:-^;^-'g.--is«at;«Brr;ir;j^€;i.^j?-; i ■■-  ■' . ■■>^v--  - v';!?ry?fajkL*r>a8ti-a;r-: ■'■


ri"l''i1lltliHIH!!Ht':n'i^WWW!!mt!i|l!'Ht!l"m


S^'|]!l!!!|''fm!ini)^lj'!ll!i,',(|||j|||!!H|l)!!|1


yrv-


£^£2/h--^^


The  Madras  Brahman  who  claimed  to  sit  in  tlic  air  by  Yoga  powers.
REWARD  Oi'  Rs.    1,000.

The  aboVG  sum  is  offered  to  any  one  who,  by  yoga  powers,  will
raise  himself  three  foet  from  the  ground,  and  remain  suspended
for  ten  minutes.     For  conditions,  see  page  38.


The  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  Described  and  Examined.

YOGA    SASTRA:

THE  YOGA  SUTRAS  OF  PATANJALI  EXAMINED;
WITH  A  NOTICE

OF

SAVA.MI  'VI'VEK.A.NA.JSrDA.'S

YOGA  PHILOSOPHY.


BA|}/CH   ON   YOCtA,   EXEKCIS^S  :       ^X

"Conscientiously  observed,  they  can  only  issue  in  folly  and  idiocy."

Religions  of  India,  p.  83^

"  Ring  onfc  the  old,  ring  in  the  new,
Ring  out  the  false,  ring  in  the  true.

Tennyson,


FIRST  EDITION,  3,000  COPIES.


THE    CHRISTIAN    LITERATURE    SOCIETY   FOB   INDIA
LONDON   AND   MADRAS.


1897.


PEEFAOE.


It  has  been  tbe  unhappy  lot  of  India  to  have  had  for  thou-
sands of  years  a  succession  of  teachers  who  palmed  off  their
crude  ideas  as  inspired.  The  result  has  been,  in  the  words  of
Sir  H.-  S.  Maine,  "  false  morality,  false  history,  false  philosophy,
false  physics."

All  educated  Hindus  will  admit  that  the  history,  geography^
and  astronomy  of  the  Hindu  sacred  books  are  egregiously  wrong.
In  the  following  pages  it  is  shown  that  belief  in  Yoga  powers  and
charms  is  equally  mistaken.  Marvellous  power  may  indeed  be
acquired,  but  not  by  Yoga.

The  reader  is  advised  to  follow  the  course  pointed  out  at
page  58.

"  Awakened  India,''  instead  of  adopting  the  Fowl  or  Tortoise
Upset  Posture,  with  his  eye  fixed  on  the  tip  of  his  nose  and  seeking
"the  suppression  of  the  transformations  of  the  thinking  principle,"
should  rather  endeavour  to  have  his  muscles  braced  like  those  of
Prince  Ranjitsinhji,  his  faculties  of  observation  cultivated  like
those  of  Professor  Bose,  his  ability  to  weigh  evidence  developed
like  that  of  Dr.  Bhandarkar.  Instead  of  a  dreamy  pessimism,
let  there  be  active  benevolence.  Thus  would  India  advance  in
civilization  with  a  speed  before  unknown.

"  Above  all,  let  the  deep  religious  feeling  of  the  Hindu  mind  be
wisely  directed.  Let  the  Bhahti  Yoga  have  for  its  object  the
loftiest  ideal  of  majesty,  wisdom,  goodness  and  purity.  Such  is
the  great  Creator  and  Lord  of  the  Universe."

J.  Murdoch.


CONTENTS;


Page
Introduction  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...      1

The  Sankhya  System  ...  ...  1

The  QEEAT  Aim  OP  Hindu  Philosophy  ...  ...       3

YooA  Sastra  ...  ...  ...  4

Vrifcti,  6;  The  Suppression  of  Transformations.  6;  Iswara,  6;
Repefcifcion  of  Om.  7:  "Obstacles"  to  Proorress,  7;  Our  Feelings
towards  others,  8;  Kriydyoga.  8;  The  Five  "Distractions."  8;
Distractions,  the  Cause  of  Misery,  9; 'All  is  Misery  to  the
Discriminating,  10;

The  Eight  Accessories  OP  Yoga         ...  ...  •••     10

1,  Yama  11;  2.  ISTivama.  11:  3.  j^'sana,  12;  4.  Triniy&ma.,  IB;
.5.  Pratyahfira,  14;  6.  Dh^ranS,  15;  7.  Dhydna,  15 ;  8.  Saradkdhi,  16;

Samyama  ...  ...  ..  16

Occult  Powers  resulting  from  Samyama,  16 ;  How  the  Siddhis  may  be
acquired,  21  ;  Yogins  are  not  bound  by  their  Actions,  21  ;  How  things
are  known  to  the  Mind,  21  ;  Cessation  of  Desire,  21 ;  The  "  Cloud  of
Virtue"  and  the  End,  22 ;  The  Supi-eme  End  to  bo  attained  by
Yoga,  22.

The  Characteristics  op  the  Hindu  Mind  ...  ...     23

False  Geography  of  the  Sastras,  29 ;  False  Astronomy  of  the
Sastras,  29  ;  False  accounts  of  the  Body,  29 ;  Inference  from  the
foregoing  Statements,  30 ;

Examination  OP  THE  Yoga  Sutras  ...  31

Object  of  Patanjali,  31;  Means  of  Attainment,  32;  Yama,  32;
Niyama,  32;  Asana,  33;  Prin^v^ma  35:  Supposed  Occult  Powers,
37:  Reward  of  Rs.  1,000,  38;  Hindu  Pessimism  and  False  View
of  Life,  38 ;  Brief  Examination  of  the  Sinkhya  System,  39 ;

The  True  Yoga  Sastba     ...                 ...  ...                 ...  41

Disbelief  in  Occult  Powers       ...  ...  43

Eppobts  TO  ACQUIRE  True  Knowledge  ...  ...                ...  48

The  True  Bhakti  Yoga  ...  ...  49

Concluding  Appeal          ...                ...  ...                ...  56

Appendix  ...  ...  ....  60

Remarks  on  the  Lectubes  and  Yoga  Philosophy  op  Swami

Yivekananda                 ...                ...  ...                ...  60

List  op  Publications  ...  ...  67


YOGA  SASTRA.


Introduction.


Nations,  as  well  as  individuals,  have  their  peculiar  dispo-
sitions. The  English  are  fond  of  what  is  practical,  bearing  upon
the  concerns  of  life.  Hence  they  have  made  great  improvements
in  the  arts  ;  as  railway  travelling,  steam  navigation,  &c.  Hindus,
on  the  contrary,  have  paid  little  attention  to  these  things,  but
have  shown  a  great  inclination  to  discuss  abstract  philosophical
questions  or  mystical  religious  speculations.  There  are  six  prin-
cipal Davftanas,  or  schools  of  Hindu  philosophy  :  viz.,

1.  The  Nydya,  founded  by  Gotama.

2.  The  Vaiseshika,  by  Kanada.

3.  The  Sdnkhya,  by  Kapila.

4.  The  Yoga,  by  Patanjali.

5.  The  Mimdnsd,  by  Jaimini.

6.  The  Veddnta  by  Bddardyana  or  Vyasa.

An  account  of  the  whole  is  given  in  Philosophic  Hinduism.''^
The  Sankhya  system  will  first  be  briefly  explained,  as  it  is  inti-
mately connected  with  the  Yoga.

The  Sankhya  System.

As  already  stated,  this  is  attributed  to  Kapila,  a  supposed
irascible  Rishi,  who  reduced  to  ashes  the  60,000  sons  of  king
Sagara.  To  attract  attention,  it  was  a  common  practice  among
Hindus  to  claim  some  renowned  rislii  as  the  author  of  a  treatise.

The  chief  exponents  of  the  system  are  the  Sdnkhya  Kariha
and  the  Sdnkhya  Pravachana.  The  former  has  been  translated
into  English  by  Mr.  Davies ;  the  latter  by  Dr.  Ballantyne.  The
Sdnkhya  Pravachana  consists  of  six  books  and  526  sutras.  The
Sdnkhya,  says  Mr.  Manilal,  "  starts  with  the  propositions  that  the
world  is  full  of  miseries  of  three  kinds,  physical,  (ddhibhautika)
supernatural  {ddhidaivika) ,  and  corporeal  (ddhydtmika)  ;  and  that
these  are  the  results  of  the  properties  of  matter  (prakrti),  and  not
of  its  inseparable  correlate  of  intelligence  of  consciousness  {purusa)^

The  grand  object  of  the  system  is  set  forth  in  the  1st  aphorism  :
"Well,  the  complete  cessation  of  pain,  (which  is)  of  three  kinds  is
the  complete  end  of  man."


*  Sold  by  Mr.  A.  T.  Scott,  Tract  Dep6t,  Madras,  8vo,  72  pp.  2k  As.      Post-free,
3  As.  fTlte  Yocja  Sutra  of  Fatanjali,  p.  iii.


^  YOGA   SASTRA.

The  immediate  cause  of  the  bondage  of  the  soul  is  the  con-
junction of  Pralcriti  and  the  soul.  The  remedy  is  the  liberation
of  the  soul  by  knowledge.

According  to  the  S^nkhya,  there  are  two  eternally  existing
entities,  Prakriti  and  souls.

Prakiiti  denotes  that  which  produces  or  brings  forth  every
thing  else.  It  is  sometimes  not  very  accurately  rendered  "Nature."*
Monier  Williams  says,  that  ''producer,  originator,  would  more
nearly  express  the  meaning."  From  the  absence  of  a  root  in  the
root,  the  root  of  all  thing  is  rootless.

Prakriti  is  supposed  to  be  made  up  of  three  principles,  called
Gunas,  or  cords,  supposed  to  bind  the  soul.  They  are  Sattva,
Rajas,  Tamas ;  or  Truth,  Passion,  and  Darkness.  These  princi-
ples enter  into  all  things ;  and  on  the  relative  quantity  of  each  in
any  object  depends  the  quality  of  the  object.

Souls  {Purush)  are  countless  in  number ;  individual,  sensitive,
eternal,  unchangeable.  All  that  is  done  by  Prakriti  is  done  on
behalf  of  soul.  In  its  own  nature  soul  is  without  qualities,  until
united  with  Prakriti.  The  union  of  the  two  is  compared  to  a  lame
man  mounted  on  a  blind  man^s  shoulders ;  the  pair  are  then  both
(as  it  were)  capable  of  perception  and  movement.

Beginning  from  the  original  rootless  germ  Prakriti,the  Sdnkhya
counts  up  {san-khydtij  synthetically  (whence  its  name  of  'synthetic
enumeration')  twenty-three  other  Tattwas  or  entities — all  produc-
tions of  the  first  and  evolving  themselves  spontaneously  out  of  it,  as
cream  out  of  milk,  or  milk  out  of  a  cow, — while  it  carefully  distin-
guishes them  all  from  a  twenty-fifth,  Purusha,  the  soul,  which  is
wholly  in  its  own  nature  destitute  of  Gunas,  though  liable  to  be
bound  by  the  Gunas  of  Prakriti.

According  to  the  Sdnkhya  system,  the  five  grosser  elements
(»na7iafe7i'itia)with  their  distinguishing  properties  and  corresponding
organs  of  sense  are  the  following :

Distinguishing  Property.     Organ  of  Sense.

1.  Akdsa,  ether  Sound  The  Ear

2.  Vdyu,  air,  Tangibility  The  Skin

3.  Tejaa,  fire,  light,  Colour  The  Eye

4.  Apas,  water,  Taste  The  Tongue

5.  Prithivi,  earth  Smell  The  Nose

There  are  eleven  organs  produced  by  Ahanlcdra,  the  five  organs
of  sense,  ear,  skin,  eye,  tongue,  nose ;  and  five  orgwns  of  ac-
tions, largest  (the  throat),  hand,  foot,  and  excretory  and  generative
organs,  and  an  eleventh  organ  standing  between  them  viz.,  Manas,
*  the  mind '  which  is  regarded  as  an  internal  organ  of  perception,
volition,  and  action.

The   liberation  of   Purusha,  or  soul,  from  the  fetters    which

*  Mr.  Manilal  translates  it  "Matter"  p.  iii.


THE    GKEAT   AIM   OF   HINDU    rHILOSOPHY.  d

bind  it  in  consequence  of  its  union  with  Prakriti  is  done  by  con-
veying the  correct  knowledge  of  the  24  constituent  principles  of
creation,  and  rightly  discriminating  tlie  soul  from  them.*

Mr.  Manila!  says  :  ''  The  inseparable pra/mifi  and  purusha  are
enough  in  themselves  to  account  for  the  whole  of  the  phenomena
of  the  universe,  and  the  idea  of  a  Creator  is  looked  upon  by
the  Sdnkhyasasamere  redundant  phantom  of  philosophy."  It  is
therefore  known  among  Hindus  by  the  name  of  Nirisvara  SdnJchya,
or  the  Sdiikhya  without  Isvara.

The  Yoga  is  commonly  regarded  as  a  branch  of  the  Sankhya;
bat  as  it  nominally  acknowledges  the  existence  of  God,  it  is  called
Sesvara  8dnkhya,  Sdnlchya  with  Isvara.  Such  was  the  popularity
of  the  Sankhya  and  Yoga,  that  the  Mahdblidrata,  Sdntiparvam,
says:  "There  is  no  knowledge  equal  to  the  Sankhya,  and  no
power  equal  to  the  Yoga.'^

Before  describing  the  Yoga  system,  an  important  question
will  first  be  considered.

The  great  Aim  of  Hindu  Philosophy.

The  hymns  of  the  Rig  Veda  take  a  cheerful  view  of  life.  The
early  Aryans  had  come  from  a  cold  bracing  climate,  encouraging
labour.  The  doctrine  of  transmigration  was  then  unknown.  The
usual  petitions  in  the  Rig  Veda  are  for  long  life,  sons,  and  abund-
ance of  cows.  "  The  good  went  at  death  to  the  happy  abode  of
Yama,  and  as  pitris  became  quasi  divinities  themselves.^'

After  the  Aryans  had  settled  in  India  for  some  time,  they
began  to  feel  theiufluence  of  the  hot,  enervating  climate.  Labour
was  a  burden;  undisturbed  repose  seemed  the  highest  bliss.  A
belief  in  transmigration  also  arose,  and  swayed  the  minds  of
the  Hindus  with  tremendous  power.  The  series  of  births  is
virtually  endless;  the  common  statement  is  that  it  rises  to  84
lakhs.  According  to  the  merit  or  demerit  of  a  human  being,
he  is  born  afresh  into  the  body  of  a  man,  or  a  beast,  or  a
bird,  or  a  fish,  or  a  plant  or  a  stone.  "  Ah  this  fearful  round
of  births!"  said  the  Marathi  poet  Tukaram,  "this  weary  coming
and  going  ;  when  will  it  all  end  V  "  With  the  Upanishads  com-
mences that  great  wail  of  sorrow  which,  for  countless  ages,  has
in  India  been  rising  up  to  heaven."  It  was  intensified  by  Buddha.
The  first  of  the  "  four  noble  truth,"  which  he  professed  to  have
discovered  is,  that  "  Existence  is  suffering."  As  a  devout  Bud-
dhist counts  his  beads,  he  mutters  Anitya,  Dukha,  Anatta,
"Transience,  Sorrow,  Unreality."  In  the  Vishnu  Purana  Book
VI.  Chapter  5,  the  evils  of  existence  are  described.  It  may  be
thus  very  briefly  summarised  :

*  Abridged  from  Hindumn,  by  Monier  Williams,  S.P.CK.  25,  6d,


4  YOGA   8&STKA.

Bodily  paia  is  of  many  kinds;  as  fever,8pleeo,dysentory,  leprosy*
Mental  sufferings  are  anger,  fear,  hate,  jealousy,  envy,  and  many
other  passions.  Affliction  is  multiplied  iu  thousands  of  shapes  in
the  progress  of  conception,  birth,  decay,  disease,  death,  and  hell.
But  not  in  hell  alone  do  the  souls  of  the  deceased  undergo  pain  ;
there  is  no  cessation  even  in  heaven  ;  for  its  temporary  inhabitant
is  ever  tormented  with  the  prospect  of  descending  again  to  earth.
Again  is  he  liable  to  conceptiou,  birth,  youth,  manhood,  old  age,
and  death.

The  body  is  described  as  a  liithy  receptacle  of  worms.  The
grand  inquiry  therefore  is,  how  to  "  cut  short  the  eighty-four,"
how  to  get  rid  of  the  curse  of  existence  ?  Miikti,  liberation  from
future  births,  is  the  grand  aim  of  Hindu  philosophy.  Different
means  are  prescribed  for  the  attainment  of  Muhti ;  but  remarks
will  here  be  conliued  to  tiiose  enjoiued  by  the  Yoga.


YOGA  SASTRA.

Founder.— The  Yoga  system  is  attributed  to  I'atanjali.  \'ery
little  is  known  of  some  of  the  greatest  Indian  philosophers  and
authors.  There  is  a  very  learned  commentary,  called  the  Mahii-
hhdshya  on  the  Grammar  of  P^nini,  by  an  author  called  Patanjali  ;
but  though  the  names  are  the  same,  they  were  probably  different
men.  Of  the  former  nothing  is  known.  PatauJHli  describes  the
system,  of  which  he  maybe  merely  the  compiler,  in  195  sutras;
divided  into  four  Books.  Like  most  other  sutras,  they  are  obscure,
and  require  commentaries.

Objects.— The  word  Yoija  now  usually  means  union  :  and  it  is
generally  understood  to  teach  how  the  human  soul  may  attain  com-
plete union  with  the  Supreme  Soul.  But  Patanjali  gives  it  a
different  meaning  :

•'  Yorja  is  the  suppression  of  the  transformations  of  the  tliiuking
principle."     I.  2.*

Monier  Williams  interprets  this  as  the  "  act  of  fixing  or  con-
centrating the  mind  in  abstract  meditation,  and  this  is  said  to  be
effected  by  preventing  the  modifications  of  the  thinking  principle."t

Mr.  li.  C.  Bose  thus  explains  what  is  meant  by  the  "  trans-
formations of  the  thinking  principle  :"

"One  of  the  universally  admitted  maxims  of  Hindu  philosophy  is
that  the  mind  assumes  the  form  of  whioh  it  perceives;  and  therefore  it
necessarily  becomes,  really  not  figarafcivoly,  a  tree,  a  tank,  an  animal,
a  sweet  mango,  a  musical  pipe,  an  odoriferous  flower,  or  a  hard  stono  :
Not  only  so,  it  is  changed  into  the  grotesque  forms  and  shapes  conjured

*  Translation  by  Manilul  Nabhubbai  Dvividi,  p.  1.
f  Indian  Tfisclofji,  pp.  92,  03.


YOOA   SASTKA.  O

up  by  fancy  either  when  we  are  awake  or  when  we  are  asleep,  or  into  the
ideas,  equally  subjective,  exhumed  by  memory  from  the  vaults  of  its  own
mausoleum.  Who  can  form  an  adequate  idea  of  its  volability  its  fickle-
ness, its  restlessness  ?  Who  can  number  the  varieties  of  mutations  and
transformations  througli  which  it  passes  in  the  course  of  the  day,  not  to
say  a  year,  a  decade,  or  the  coarse  of  a  long  life  ?  To  destroy  this
ftcklenes?.  this  changeableness,  this  restlessness,  to  lead  the  mind  to  wade,
so  to  speak,  through  these  innumerable  transformations  to  its  original
state  of  serene  repose — such  is  the  object  pi-oposed  by  the  Yoga  Philoso-
phy.    The  idea  of  union  with  God  is  a  later  graft.*

Mr.  Manila],  thus  explains  this  "  transformation  :"

"Knowledge  or  perception  is  a  kind  of  transformation  (pariitdma)
of  the  thinking  principle  into  anything  which  is  the  subject  of  external
or  internal  presentation.  All  knowledge  is  of  the  kind  of  transforma-
tions of  the  thinking  principle.  Even  the  Will,  which  is  the  very
first  essential  of  Yoga,  is  a  kind  of  such  transformation.  Yoga  is  a  com-
plete suppression  of  the  tendency  of  the  thinking  principle  to  transform
itself  into  objects,  thoughts,  &c."t

Hindus  generally  regard  Yoga  chiefly  as  the  means  by  which
occult  powers  are  considered  to  be  attainable.  They  are  thus  de-
scribed by  the  Rev.  Krishna  Mobuu  Banerjea :

\X  *'  By  abstracting  the  corporeal  senses  from  their  ordinary  media  of
communication,  the  Yoga  is  endowed  with  heavenly  senses.  He  may
not  see  or  hear  what  passes  around, — he  may  be  insensible  to  external
impressions, — but  he  has  intuitions  of  things  which  his  neighbours
cannot  see  or  hear.  He  becomes  so  buoyant,  or  rather  so  sublimated  by
his  Yoga,  that  gravitation,  or  as  Bhaskaracharya  calls  it,  the  attractite
power  of  the  earth,  has  no  influence  over  him.  He  can  walk  and  ascend
in  the  sky,  as  if  he  were  suspended  under  a  balloon.  He  can,  by  this
intuitive  process,  inform  himself  of  the  mysteries  of  astronomy  and
anatomy — of  all  things  in  fact  that  may  be  found  in  any  of  the  different
worlds.  He  may  call  to  recollection  the  events  of  a  previous  life.  He
may  attain  an  insight  into  the  past  and  future.  He  may  discern  the
thoughts  of  others,  himself  vanish  at  pleasure,  and  if  he  chose  to  do  so,
enter  into  his  neighbour's  body,  and  thus  take  possession  of  his  living
skin."+

When  Madame  Blavatsky  came  to  India,  she  claimed  to  possess
some  of  these  Yoga  powers.  She  is  said  to  have  discovered  a  lost
lady's  ornament,  to  have  created  a  cup  and  saucei',  to  have
doubled  a  ring,  to  have  repaired  a  broken  China  tray,  to  know
what  happened  in  distant  places,  to  send  letters  through  the  air  to
Tibet,  &c.  In  the  hope  of  acquiring  such  occult  powers,  many
Hindus  paid  an  initiation  fee  of  ten  rupees.  la  time  it  was
discovered  that  Madame  Blavatsky's  pretended  wonders  were
mere  juggler's  tricks.

*  flindxh  I'h'doanphy ,  p.  160-.

t  The  Yoga  Sastra  of  Putanjali,  p.  2.

X  Dialofjues  on  Hindu  rhitosophij,  pp.  (J9,  70,


6  YOGA   SA8TKA.

The  occult  powers  "supposed  to  be  acquired  by  Yoga  will
be  more  fully  described  hereal'ter.

At  present  also  only  the  means  to  be  employed  for  the  suppres-
sion of  the  transformations  of  the  thinking  principle  will  be
discussed.

Vbitti  {Transformations).

The  act  of  the  mind  taking  the  shape  of  objects  presented  to  it
is  called  vritti,  transformations.     It  is  thus  explained  by  Patanjali  :

"  The  transformations  are  fivefold,  and  they  are  either  painful  or
not  painful.  (They  are)  Right  notions,  misconception,  fancy,  sleep,
and  memory.  Elight  notions  are  perception,  inference,  testimony.  Mis-
conception  is  incorrect  notion,  or  a  notion  which  abides  in  a  form  which
is  not  that  of  its  object.  Fancy  is  a  notion  founded  on  knowledge  con-
veyed by  words,  but  of  which  there  is  no  object  corresponding  in  reality.
Sleep  is  that  transformation  of  the  thinking  principle  which  has  for
its  object  the  conception  of  nothing.  Memory  is  the  not  letting  go  of  an
object  that  has  been  recognised."     Book  T.  5-11.*

These  five  transformations  of  the  thinking  principle  are  the
sources  of  its  changeableness.  Right  notions  of  the  objects  around
us  are  obtained,  according  to  the  Sankhya  School,  by  perception,
inference,  and  testimony.  Misconception  or  wrong  notion  arises
from  error,  as  when  we  mistaken  rope  for  serpent.  Fancy,  vikalpa,
is  a  notion  to  which  there  is  nothing  corresponding  in  nature,  as
the  horns  of  a  hare.  In  a  sleep  we  have  often  dreams.  Memory
recalls  past  impressions,  producing  restlessness.

Tbb  Suppression  of  Transformations.

Sutra  12,  Book  I.  says  that  the  suppression  of  the  transforma-
tions of  the  mind  {mmddhi)  is  to  be  secured  by  exercise  and
non-attachment  {vairdgya.)

Exercise  is  the  steady  effort  to  attain  that  state  in  which  the
mind  stands  unmoved,  like  the  flame  of  a  lamp  in  a  place  not  ex-
posed to  the  wind.  lidya,  attachment,  is  that  which  attracts  the
mind,  and  makes  it  assume  different  forms,  as  passions,  sensations,
&c. ;  vairdgya  is  the  absence  of  all  attachment.

Is  WAR  A.

Iswara  is  thus  defined  by  Patanjali  :

"  Iswara  is  a  particular  soul,  which  is  untouched  by  affliction,  works,
deserts,  and  desires.  In  him  the  seed  of  the  omniscient  attains  infinity.
Being  not  limited  by  time,  he  is  the  greatest  of  the  great.  His  indicator
is  the  Pranava,  Om,  the  word  of  glory."    Book  I.    24—27.


*  Trauslatiou  of  Mr,  Munilal  aud  Dr.  11.  Mitra.


"OBSTACLES      TO   PROGRESS.  7

On  account  of  tlie  odium  incurred  by  the  Sankhya  system  from
its  non-recognition  of  Iswara,  Patanjali  added  him  to  the  th
elements  of  Kapila.     Mr.  E.  C.  Bose  says  :

*'  The  entity  brought  in  to  satisfy  a  popular  clamour  or  to  humour
current  superstition,  is  as  thoroughly  a  nonentity  as  the  soul  is.  God,
like  the  soul,  is  perfectly  quiescent,  and  inactive.  He  does  not  create,
does  not  preserve,  does  not  destroy — these  important  functions  being  all
discharged  by  Prakriti,  the  active  principle  which  .exists  independently
of  him,  and  over  the  evolutions  of  which  He  has  only  a  nominal  rather
than  a  real  control.

"  The  being  called  Isvara  posited  by  the  Yoga  school,  is  a  nonentity
rather  than  an  entity,  devoid  of  moral  qualities  as  well  as  of  natural
properties,  and  devoid  therefore  of  all  those  phenomena  by  which  alone
existence  can  manifest  itself."    pp.  163,  164.

Repetition  of   Om.

In  Sutra  27,  Om  is  called  the  "word  of  glory."  The  next
Sutra  says  :  "  Its  constant  repetition  ijapa)  and  intent  meditation
on  its  meaning  (should  be  practised)."     Book  I.

Mr.  Manila!  says  :  "  All  sacred  books,  from  the  Veda  to  the
Purana,  teach  that  this  mystic  syllable  is  the  secret  of  secrets,  and
the  source  of  all  power."*  It  is  thus  explained  in  the  Mundaka
Upanishad :

"  The  sacred  word  (Om)  is  called  the  bow,  the  arrow  the  soul,  and
Brahma  its  aim  ;  he  shall  be  pierced  by  him  whose  attention  does  not
swerve.  Then  he  will  be  of  the  same  nature  with  him  (Brahma),  as  the
arrow  (becomes  one  with  the  aim  when  it  has  pierced  it)."    II.  4.

The  repetition  should  be  accompanied  by  meditation  on  the
meaning.

"  Obstacles"  to  Progress.

These  are  enumerated  as  follows  :

**  Disease,  languor,  doubt,  carelessness,  idleness,  worldly-minded-
ness,  mistaken  notions,  missing  the  point,  and  instability  ;  these,  causing
distractions,  are  the  obstacles."     Book  I.  33.

Doubt  refers  to  the  usefulness  of  meditation.  Worldly  minded-
ness  denotes  attachment  to  the  things  of  the  world.  Mistaken
notions  are  illustrated  by  mistaking  mother-of-pearl  for  silver.
Missing-  the  point  is  going  astray  from  the  real  point,  Samddhi.
These  things  distract  the  mind,  and  are  hindrances  to  Yoga.

The  next  Sutra  states  that  "  Pain,  distress,  trembling,  inspi-
ration and  expiration,  are  the  accompaniments  of  the  causes  of
distraction."


*  Yoga  Sutra  of  Patanjali.  p.   17.


o  yoga  sastba.

Our  Feklings  towards  Othkrr.

Sutra  xxxiii,  says :

*'  The  mind  (becomes)  even  by  the  practice  of  vsympathy,  com-
passion, complacency,  and  indifference,  respectively  towards  happiness,
misery,  virtue,  and  vice."     Book  I.

The  feelings  are  those  most  favourable  to  yoga.  Sympathy  is
a  fellow-feeling  with  others,  rejoicing  with  the  happy,  and  com-
passionating the  miserable.  At  the  sight  of  virtue,  we  should  bo
pleased;  but  for  vice  indifference  is  the  best  attitude  for  one  who
aims  at  8amddM,  (Mr.  Manilal.)


BOOK   II.
Kriyayoga.


Kriydyoga,  or  Preliminary  Yoga,  denotes  the  exercises  which
are  useful  as  preparatory  to  Samddhi.     They  are  thus  stated :

"Kriyayoga  (consists  of)  mortiBcation,  study,  and  meditation  on
Isvara.  (They  are  practised)  for  acquiring  habitual  Saniddhi  a,nd  for
lessening  distractions."     Book  IT.  1,  2.

Mortification  denotes  fasts,  penances,  &c. ;  Study,  the  repeti-
tion of  Om  &c.  or  the  reading  of  religious  books.  The  distracti(>ns
whose  causes  should  be  lessened  are  mentioned  in  the  next  Sutra.

The  Five  "  Distractions.^'
Sutra  3  says  :

Ignorance,  egoism,  desire,  aversion,  and  attachment  are  the  five  dis-
tractions.    Book  II.

All  distraction  is  misery.  Dr.  E.  Mitra  renders  '^  distractions"
by  "  afflictions."     The  grand  cause  is  ignorance.

Ignorance  is  the  source  of  those  that  follow,  whether  thoy  be  dor-
mant, weak,  intercepted  or  simple.  IL  4.

Ignorance  {avidyd)  is  thus  defined  :

Ignorance  is  taking  the  non-eternal,  impure,  painful,  and  non-son),
to  be  eternal,  pure,  joyous,  and  soul.  II.  5.

It  is  thus  explained  by  Mr.  R.  C.  Bose  :

'  Igqorance  is  according  to  this,  as  to  every  other  system  of  Hindu
philosophy,  the  ultimate  cause  of  that  bondage  from  which  deliverance
18  to  be  ardently  desired.  Ignorance  of  what  ?  Not  of  God  and  His
attributes  ;  nor  of  the  teaching  in  His  revelation  ;  but  of  the  essential
and  everlasting  difference  between  soul  and  non-soul.  The  characteris-
tics of  the  soul  are  in  marked  antitheses  to  the  properties  and  qualities


DI3TEACT10NS  THE  CAUSR  OF  MISERY.  0

of  matter  and  its  evolutes.  The  soul  is  eternal,  pure,  and  joyous;  while
matter,  in  at  least  its  present  forms,  is  non-eternal,  impure,  and  painful.
But  we  are  labouring  uuder  the  hallucination  that  the  soul  is  impu.re  and
miserable,  while  the  fact  is  that  impurity  atid  pain  belong  to  matter,  and
cannot  possibly  appertain  to  soul.  And  the  consequence  of  this  ignor-
ance is  that  we  wish  to  see  the  connection  of  the  pure  spirit  with
impure  and  painful  matter,  perpetuated  rather  than  dissolved."  p.  171.

According  to  the  Vedanta,  ignorance  denotes  ignorance  of  the
"  great  sentence/'  Tat  tiram  asi,  "  It  thou  art.''

Egoism  is  thus  defined  :

"  Egoism  is  the  identifying  of  the  power  that  sees  with  the  power
of  seeing.     II.  6.

Ahmikdra,  is  rendered  egoism  by  Dr.  Mitra.  Egoism  comes
from  ego,  I.  Mr.  Manilal  translate  it  "  the  sense  of  being."  "  Self-
consciousness"  is  another  rendering.     Mr.  R.  C.  Bose  says  :

''  Ignorance  begets  egoism,  by  which  the  seer  is  identified  with  the
seeing  faculty,  the  enjoyer  is  confounded  with  the  instrument  of  enjoy-
ment, and  the  soul  is  declared  to  be  nothing  more  or  less  than  one  of  its
own  material  organs."     p.  171.

The  other   "  distractions"  are  thus  explained :

"  Desire  (rnga)  is  dwelling  on  pleasure.  Aversion  (dvesa)  is  dwelling
on  pain.  Attachuaent  (ahhinivesa)  is  the  strong  desire  for  life  seen  even  in
the  wise  and  sustained  by  its  own  force."     II.  1 — 9.

Mr.  R.  0.  Bose  says  :

"  From  egoism  proceed  a  longing  for  pleasure,  and  a  recoil  from
pain  ;  and  these  instincts  give  birth  to  tenacity  of  life,  or  an  aversion  to
that  dissolution  of  the  soul  with  the  material  organs  on  which  true
emancipation  hinges."    p.  172.

Mr.  Manilal  says :

"  Desire  for  life  is  indeed  the  cause  of  attachment  of  every  de-
scription, and  the  real  cause  at  the  bottom  of  every  misery  of  which  the
world  is  full."    p.  32.

Instead  of  "  the  desire  for  life"  being  the  cause  of  all  the
misery  in  the  world,  it  is  a  vvise  instinct  implanted  by  the  Creator
in  every  living  being  for  its  preservation.  Without  it,  the  world
would  soon  be  a  lifeless  void.  It  is  the  desire  of  life,  which  makes
people  work  to  obtain  food,  or  the  sick  to  take  medicine  for  a  cure.

DiSTEf ACTIONS    THE    CaUSB    OF   MiSERY.

Sutras  12-14  are  as  follows :

"  The  results  of  works  have  their  root  in  distractions,  and  are  felt
either  in  this  manifested  birth  or  in  the  unmanifested  one.  The  root
existing,  the  deserts  are  class  (jati),  age,  and  experience.  They  have  joy
or  suffering  for  their  fruit  according  as  their  cause  is  virtue  or  vice."
Book  II.

2


10  YOGA   SASTRA-.

Distractions  are  said  to  be  the  cause  of  misery  ;  for  all  harmas
arise  from  them,  and  lead  to  happiness  or  misery.  The  results  of
karma  are  felt  either  in  this  life  or  some  other  incarnation.  The
fruits  determine  our  position  in  society,  the  length  or  shortness  of
our  life,  the  pleasantness  or  the  reverse  of  our  experiences.

''All  is  Miseey  to  the  Disceiminating."

Sutra  15  says :

"  To  the  discriminating  all  is  misery,  on  account  of  the  opposition  of
the  actions  of  the  three  qualities,  and  on  account  of  consequences,  anxiety,
and  impressions."    Book  II.

"  The  discriminating"  are  those  who  have  made  some  pro-
gress in  yoga,  and  are  able  to  distinguish  between  what  really
exists  and  the  illusive.  To  them  every  existence  is  not  only  full
of  misery,  but  misery  itself.  For  this  four  reasons  are  assigned.
The  struggle  between  the  three  gunas  must  lead  to  disorder  and
misery.  Pleasure  is  always  followed  by  pain.  It  is  also  accom-
panied by  anxiety.  Every  experience  leaves  an  impression  which
creates  a  desire  for  enjoyment,  leading  in  the  end  to  misery.

According  to  the  Hindu  pessimistic  dogma,  "  existence  is
suffering"  and  the  sooner  it  is  extinguished  the  better.  The
Christian  doctrine  is  that,  rightly  employed,  "  existence  is  happi-
ness."


THE  EIGHT  ACCESSORIES  OF  YOGA.

Sutras  28,  29  are  as  follows  :

"  On  the  decay  of  impurity  through  the  practice  of  the  accessories
of  yoga,  there  is  illumination  of  the  understanding  till  discriminative
knowledge  results.

"  Restraint  (i/a?3ia),  obligation  (niyama),  posture  (dsana),  reernlation
of  the  breath,  (prdndydma),  abstraction  (pratydhdra),  devotion,  {dlidrand.)
contemplation  (dhydna),  and  samddhi  are  the  eight  accessories  of
yoga."  II.

Mr.  Manilal  says  that  Sutra  28  points  out  the  way  to  the
enlightenment  leading  to  discrimination,  by  the  destruction  of
impurity,  i.e.,  causes  of  distraction.

Mr.  R.  C.  Bose  remarks  :

"  These  eight  means  of  Yoga  are  called  its  members  as  well  as  its
accessories.  The  first  five  the  outer,  and  the  last  three  the  inner  members  ;
and  they  indicate  the  varied  stages,  incipient  as  well  as  advanced,  of  that
laborious  and  painful  exercise  which  terminates  in  the  extinction  of  the
thinking  principle.  It  being  necessary  to  draw  particular  attention  to
them,  they  are  set  forth  one  after  another,  in  the  order  in  which  they
appear  in  the  above  extracts,  with  elucidating  comments."    pp.  175,    17(3.


NIYAMA.  11

1.  Yama  {Restraint).

Sutra  30  says  :

"  Yama  includes  abstinence  from  slaughter,  falsehood,  theft,   inconti-
nence, and  avarice."      II.

It  is  thus  explained  by  Mr.  R.  0.  Bose :

"  Restraint  is  the  first  step  in  all  schemes  of  reformation,  meaning  as
it  does,  abstinence  from  gross  sins  and  sinful  dispositions.  The  word
slaughter  (Jiimsd)  as  used  in  the  aphorism  bearing  upon  it  has  a  twofold
meaning.  It  means  religious  sacrifices  well  as  murder.  The  Yogi  Phi-
losophy is  as  thoroughly  opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  sacrifice  as  Buddhism  ;
and  it  brings  forward  veracity  as  a  substitute  for  the  bloody  rites,
enjoined  in  the  Vedas,  while  it  promises  'jewels  from  all  sides,'  to
him  '  who  is  confirmed  in  abstinence  from  theft,'  and  represents  attainment
of  vigour  as  insepai-ably  connected  with  '  continence."  It  prohibits  avarice
not  only  in  the  sense  in  which  the  word  is  ordinarily  used,  but  in  a  sense
unknown  perhaps  to  all  but  students  of  Hindu  Philosophy.  The  avari-
cious longing  for  fresh  bodies  and  fresh  births,  of  which  we  are  supposed
to  be  conscious,  is  condemned  as  well  as  cupidity  in  the  ordinary  sense  of
the  term.  The  first  step  of  Yoga  is  renunciation  of  sin  in  act,  word,  and
even  thought.     So  far  it  is  worthy  of  commendation."     p.  176.

Mr.  Manilal,  in  his  commentary,  also  considers  that  the  restraint
refers  to  thoughts  as  well  as  outward  acts.  Himsd  prohibits  the
wishing  evil  to  any  being ;  continence  forbids  lustful  thoughts.
The  restraint  of  such  is  far  more  difl&cult  than  of  outward  acts.

2.  NiYAMA  {Obligation.)
Sutra  32  says :

"  The  obligations  are  purity,  contentment,  penance,  study,  and  devo-
tion to  Is  vara."    II.

Mr.  Manilal  remarks:  "The  duties  hitherto  described  are
negative  or  of  the  kind  of  omission ;  those  enjoined  here  are  posi"
tive  or  of  commission."

The  effect  of  "  Study"  is  thus  defined  :

"  By  study  (is  produced)  communion  with  the  desired  deity."  II.  44.

Mr.  Manilal  explains  it  as  ''  the  constant,  silent,  and  devoted
repetition  of  certain  formulae."     page  49.

Mr.  R.  C.  Bose  thus  comments  on  the  Sutra  :

"  The  second  step  is  the  cultivation  of  right  dispositions  within  us
by  strict  conformity  to  the  commandments  and  ordinances  of  religion.
A  careful  study  of  the  Vedas,  certain  prescribed  austerities  and
devotion  to  the  Lord,  are  fitted  to  purify  the  soul  from  all  its  base
desires,  and  breed  contentment  in  it.  There  would  be  no  objection  to  this
statement,  if  by  '  devotion  to  Isvara'  were  meant  something  more  than
muttering  mechanically  the  two  words  Frunava  aud    Om,   which   arc


12  YOGA    SASTRA.

represented  as  his  symbols.  It  is  affirmed  that  the  frequent  repetition
of  these  symbols,  or  of  some  select  verses  from  the  Vedas,  such  as  the
Gayatri,  leads  to  God-vision.  Through  muttering^  results  vision,  as
explained  by  Bhoj  Raja,  of  the  desiderated  deity.  But  God-visiou
according  to  this  philosophy  is  tantamount  to  nothing-vision — the  God
posited  being  a  nonentity  I"    pp.  176,  177.

3.     AfciANA  [Posture),

The  third  accessory  is  thus  explained :

"  Posture  is  that  which  is  firm  and  pleasant.  By  mild  effort  atid
meditation  on  the  endless.  Then  no  assaults  from  the  pairs  of  oppositcs."
II.  46-48.

Mr,  R.  0.  Bose  says  that  "  Vasistha,  Yajnavalkya,  and  other
sages  of  the  Vedic  and  post-Vedic  age  fixed  the  number  of  postures
at  84,  stating  that  these  had  been  prescribed  and  described  by
Siva,  tlie  father  of  Indian  Yogis.  Gorakshindiha,  a  Yogi  of  a  later
date,  disgusted  with  their  paucity,  sv^relled  their  number  to  84
lakhs."     p.  177.

Dr.  R.  L.  Mitra  makes  the  following  introductory  remarks,
quoted  by  Mr.  Bose  :

"Treating  of  a  system  of  philosophy,  Patanjala  has  not  thought
proper  to  enter  into  details  i^egarding  age,  sex,  caste,  food,  dwelling,  etc.,
as  bearing  upon  Yoga  ;  but  other  works  supply  information  about  them  to
a  considerable  extent.  A  few  notes  derived  thei'efrom  may  not  be  unfitly
added  here.XThe  first  question  that  would  arise  would  be.  Who  are  fit  to
perform  the  Yoga  ?  On  this  subject  tlie  Hatha  DipiJai  fixes  no  limit.
It  says,  '  By  the  practice  of  Yoga,  every  one  may  attain  perfection,
whether  he  be  youthful,  or  old  or  very  old,  or  diseased  or  decrepid.'
The  next  point  in  the  selection  of  a  proper  place.  '  A  small  monastery,  a
dwelling  not  larger  than  a  cube  of  six  feet,  situated  in  a  out-ofthe-way
place,  where  there  is  no  danger,  within  a  circuit  of  a  bow,  of  hail,  fire,
and  water,  in  a  country  abounding  in  food,  and  free  from  danger  of  wars
and  the  like,  where  religion  prevails  in  a  thriving  kingdom,'  is  the  most
appropriate.  The  cell,  or  mathil-a,  should  have  a  small  door,  and  no
window;  it  should  be  free  from  holes,  cavities,  inequalities,  high  steps,
and  low  descents.  It  should  be  smeared  with  cow-dung,  not  infested
by  vermin,  with  a  terrace  in  front,  a  good  well,  and  the  whole  surround-
ed by  a  wall.  Dwelling  in  such  a  place,  avoiding  all  anxieties,  the  Yogi
should  follow  the  path  pointed  out  by  his  teachers  in  the  exercise  of  the
Yoga.  He  should  avoid  all  excess  of  food,  violent  exertions,  and  vain
disputations.  His  food  should  consist  of  wheat,  sali  rice,  barley,  shasti
rice  (or  that  which  matures  in  six  days),  the  syama  and  the  nivcira
grains,  milk,  clarified  butter,  coarse  or  candied  sugar,  butter,  honey,
ginger,  palval,  fruits,  five  kind  of  greens,  mung  pulse,  and  water,  and  all
soothing  sweet  things  in  a  moderate  quantity,  avoiding  flesh-meat  and
too  much  salt,  acids,  and  all  stale  putrid,  .decomposed,  or  acrid  sub-
stances. The  quantity  of  food  taken  should  be  such  as  to  leave  one-
fourth  of  his  appetite  unappeased."  p.  110.


PRANAYAMA.  13

AsANA    {Postures.)

Of  tlio  84  postures  ten  are  considered  as  the  more  important.
The  following  are  some  of  them  as  translated  by  Dr.  R.  L.  Mitra:

"  PadmiUima.  The  right  foot  should  be  placed  ou  the  left  thigh,  and
the  left  foot  ou  the  right  thigh;  the  hands  should  be  crossed,  aud  tue
two  great  toes  should  be  firmly  held  thereby ;  the  chin  should  be  bent
down  on  the  chest ;  and  on  this  posture  the  eyes  should  be  directed  to  the
tip  of  the  nose.  It  is  called  Padmasana  (lotus-posture),  aud  is  highly
beneficial  in  overcoming  all  diseases.

"  GoviuJcha,  Put  the  right  ankle  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  and
similarly,  the  left  ankle  on  the  right  side,  and  the  posture  will  be  Gomu-
kha,  or  the  shape  of  a  cow's  mouth.

'*  Fowl  Posture.  Having  established  the  lotus- posture,  if  the  hand
be  passed  between  the  thigh  and  the  knees,  and  placed  over  the  earth  so
as  to  raise  the  body  aloft,  it  will  produce  the  fowl-seat.

"  The  Tortoise  Upset  Posture.  Having  assumed  the  fowl  posture,
should  the  two  hands  be  placed  on  the  sides  of  the  neck,  it  will  make  the
posture  like  that  of  the  tortoise  upset ;  it  is  called  tortoise  upset  posture.

^^  Bow  Posture.  Hold  the  great  toes  with  the  hands,  and  draw
them  to  the  ears  as  in  drawing  a  bowstring,  and  this  is  called  the  bow
posture."    p.  104.

Mr.  Manilal  quotes  the  following  additional  postures  from  the
Mathajjrad-qnicd  :

"  Svastikasana.  Sit  with  the  body  perfectly  straight  after  placing
the  riglit  foot  in  the  cavity  between  the  left  thigh  aud  the  calf,  and  the
left  foot  in  the  cavity  between  the  right  thigh  and  the  calf.

"  Siddhdsana.  Having  pressed  the  perinseum  with  the  end  of  the
.left  foot,  place  the  right  foot  on  the  spot  exactly  above  the  penis.  Then
fix  the  chin  steadily  on  the  heart,  and  remaining  unmoved  like  a  post,
direct  the  eyes  to  the  spot  in  the  middle  of  the  brows."     Appendix,  p.  ii.

Benefits  of  Posturing. — Sutra  48  says,  ''There  no  assaults
from  the  pairs  of  opposites."    Mr.  Manilal  explains  this  as  follows  :

"The  pairs  of  opposites  are  heat  and  cold,  pleasure  and  pain,  love
and  sorrow,  &c.,  constituting  the  whole  of  our  worldly  experience.
When  one  proper  posture  is  fully  mastered,  effects  of  the  '  pairs  of
opposites'  ai-e  not  at  all  felt.  It  is  necessary  to  obtain  such  mastery  over
any  one  posture  before  proceeding  further."     p.  51.

4.     Pkanayama.     {Regulation  of  the  Breath.)

Prdndydma,  is  an  important  part  of  Yoga.      The  process  con-
sists of  inspiratiob,  expiration,  and  retention  of   the  breath  accord-
lingto  fixed  rules.     Patanjali's  three  Sutras  on  the  subject  are  thus
1  translated  by  Mr.  Manilal :

"The  (posturing)  being  {nQcomplished) ,  prdndydnia  (follows, — the
cutting  off  of  the  course  of  inspiration  and  expiration  (.of  the  breath).     (It


14  YOGA   SASTEA.

is)  external,  internal  or  steady ;  regulated  by  place,  time,  and  number  ;  and
is  long  or  short.  The  fourth  is  that  which  has  reference  to  the  internal
and  external  subject."    II.  49-51.

The  expiration  of  the  breath  is  called  rechaka  ;  its  inspiration
puraka  ;  its  suspension  kumhhaka.     Mr.  Manilal,  says  :

"  Prdndydmaf  has  as  its  chief  object  the  mixing  of  prmia,  the  upper
breath,  and  apdna,  the  lower  breath,  and  raising  them  upwards,  by
degrees  and  stages,  till  they  subside  in  the  head.  The  practice  awakens
a  peculiar  force  which  is  dormant  about  the  navel,  and  is  called
Ktindalini.  It  is  this  force  which  is  the  source  of  all  occult  powers."
p.  52.

Mr.  Manilal  quotes  the  following  directions  from  the  Hatha-
pradipikd  :

"  So  long  as  the  Nddis,  the  vehicles  of  prdna,  are  obstructed  by
abnoi-mal  humours,  there  is  no  possibility  of  the  prdna  running  in  the
middle  course  (sasumud)  and  of  accomplishing  the  unmami  mudra.
Hence  pranajaraa  should  be  practised,  in  the  first  instance,  for  the
clearance  of  these  humours.  The  prdndydma  for  this  purpose  is  as
follows.  Having  assumed  the padmdsana  posture,  the  yogin  should  inhale
at  the  left  nostril,  and  having  retained  the  breath  for  a  time  he  easily
can,  should  let  it  off  at  the  opposite  nostril;  and  repeat  the  same  process  "
beginning  witti  the  nostril  where  he  exhales.  This  will  make  one  prdnd'
ydma.  These  should  be  practised  4  times  in  24  hours,  in  the  morning,
at  noon,  in  the  evening  at  midnight,  and  should  be  slowly  carried  to  80
each  time."      Appendix,  pp.  iii,  iv.

Other  exercises  are  mentioned  :

"  Uddiydna  consists  in  drawing  in  the  navel  and  the  parts  above  and
below  it.  Mulabandha  consists  is  drawing  in  the  parts  of  the  anus,  and
in  mentally  exerting  as  if  to  draw  the  apdaa  upward  towards  the  navel.
The  jdlandhara  consists  in  pressing  the  chin  to  the  heart."  III.  58,  27.
Appendix  v.

Dr.  R.  L.  Mitra  says  :

"  The  time  devoted  to  inspiration  is  the  shortest,  and  to  retention
the  longest.  A  Vaishnava  in  his  ordinary  daily  prayer  repeats  the  Vij-
mantra  (containing  specific  mystic  syllables)  once  when  expiring,  seven
times  while  inspiring,  and  twenty  times  when  retaining.  A  Shakta
repeats  the  mantra  IG  times  while  inspiring,  64  times  while  retaining,  and
32  times  while  expiring.  These  periods  are  frequently  modified.  As  f
rule  it  may  be  said  that  the  longer  the  retention,  the  more  proficient  i
the  Yogi.*"

Pranajama  will  be  further  noticed  under  another  head.

5.     Peatyahaba    fA  hstractionj .

Mr.  Manilal  thus  translate  the  Sutra  in  which  this  is  explainea
"  Abstraction  is,  as  it  were,  the  imitating  by  the  senses,  the  thinkin
principle,  by  withdrawing  themselves  from  their  objects."  II.    54.

#  Quoted  by  Mr.  11.  C.  Bobo,  pp.  179,  180.


DHYANA.  15

Mr.  R.  C.  Bose  has  the  following  remarks  on  this  means :
"  Abstraction  of  the  senses  is  effected  by  their  withdrawal  from  the
objects  toward  which  they  are  attracted  almost  irresistibly,  and  by  their
concentration  on  the  thinking  principle.  The  senses  cannot  be  extin-
guished so  long  as  the  body  of  which  they  are  inseparable  organs  contin-
ues ;  but  their  natural  tendency  may  not  merely  be  counteracted  bub  com-
pletely neutralized.  Their  natural  tendency  is  to  go  outward  toward  the
varieties  of  tempting  objects  in  which  the  world  abounds ;  and  where  they
have  their  full  play  unrestrained,  they  prove  sources  of  ceaseless  change
to  the  mind,  and  through  it  to  the  other  internal  organs  and  the  soul.
Their  natural  action  must  therefore  be,  not  only  restrained  and  circum-
scribed, but  completely  paralyzed  or  rather  annihilated,  and  an  action  to
•which  they  are  naturally  averse  substituted  in  its  place.  The  mind  must
draw  them  in  as  a  tortoise  withdraw  its  limbs  within  its  shell;  and
when  thus  fixed  upon  the  soul  itself  they  cease  to  be  sources  of  restless-
ness and  trouble."   pp.  180,  181.


BOOK  III.

6.     Dhaeana   {Devotion) .

Sutra  1 ,  says  :

"  Dhdrand  is  the  fixing  of  the  mind  on  something."     IIF.

It  is  thus  explained  by  Mr.  R.  C.  Bose  :

"  The  sixth  step  in  this  exercise  is  the  confinement  of  the  thinking
principle  to  one  place.  In  the  earlier  stages  of  meditation,  the  mind  is
not  fitted  for  concentration  on  its  great  theme  of  contemplation,  viz.,  the
soul.  It  must  therefore  be  fixed  on  an  external  object,  either  through
the  eye,  or  without  the  help  of  any  of  the  senses.  That  external  object
may  be  the  tip  of  the  nose,  or  the  navel- wheel,  or  a  plexus  (net-work)  of
nerves  in  the  belly,  or  the  crown  of  the  head  or  the  sky  or  ether.  When
the  thinking  principle  has  acquired  by  such  exercise  the  power  of
concentration,  it  may  easily  be  transformed  from  an  external  to  an
internal  object,  from  the  objective  non-self  to  the  subjective-self."
pp.  181,  182.

'  7.     Dhyana    {Oontemjjlation) .

Mr.  Manilal  thus  translates  Sutra  2  :

"  The  unity  of  the  mirtd  with  it  is  absorption  (Dhyana)."     III.

He  thus  explains  it :

"  Absorption  or  dhyana  is  the  entire  fixing  of  the  mind  on  the  object
thought  of,  to  the  extent  of  making  it  one  with  it.  In  fact  the  mind
should,  at  the  time,  be  conscious  only  of  itself  and  the  object.''    p.  54.

The  comment  of  Mr.  R.  C.  Bose  is  as  follows  : —

"  Dhyana,  or  contemplation,  is  the  concentration  of  the  thinking
principle,  not  on  an  external  object  like  the  tip  of  the  nose  or  the  crown


"^OGA   S ASTRA.


Sutra  3  definin^ftf  "'  "■"  "-■"•     «-  mI^I  It  t 'lllf  ■

^Jie  thus  explains  it :  '

^  Dhydna  carried  fn  fi>^

^v-ir.  It,.  O.  Bose  says  •  ^       •  /

Q,  ,       .  Samatama.  r

outra  4  says  :  |

"•The  three  together  eonsfitnf«  9

The   three  dpnnf      ' ,  ^^'"J^nia."     Hj.

called  SamyaJ''''""  '°  '^'  «««>«  object  at  IVonetZ^^^^

--aX ----•: -^^^^^^^^^         t,  .^^^^    _^

"ey  wiJl   be  uoticed

*J.u.,beXrr-'  ^"-■•°~  in™,.ed  in  „,,„„,,^  „,.^^^


DHYANA.  17

2.    A  Knowledge  of  the  Sounds  uttered  by  any  being.

Two  translations  are  given  of  Sutra  17  :
,        Dr.  Mitra  renders  it :

(  '*  A.  coafased  comprehension  of  word,  meaning,  and  knowledge
Irises  from  indiscriminate  understanding.  By  Samyama  with  due  dis-
lirimination  is  acquired  an  understanding  of  the  cry  of  all  creatures."

]        Mr.  Manilal  translates  it  :

•'  The  word,  its  sense  and  knowledge,  are  confused  with  one  another
bn  account  of  their  being  mutually  mistaken  for  one  another  ;  hence  by
Samyama  on  the  proper  province  of  each,  (arises)  the  comprehension  of
"^the  meaning)  sounds  attered  by  any  being."

The  eternity  of  sound  is  a  dogma  of  Hindu  philosophy.  Mr.
Vianilal  offers  the  following  explanation  of  the  Sutra  :

*'  Every  meaning  is  eternally  existent,  and  is  as  eternally  connected
vith  particular  sounds,  and  therefore  conveys  or  reveals  the  same  sense
ivherever  it  is  uttered.  For  letters  are  but  the  vehicles  of  the  different
sounds  arising  from  the  eight  places  within  the  body,  viz.,  the  chest,
the  larynx,  the  root  of  the  tongue,  the  teeth,  the  lips,  the  palate,
the  nose,  and  the  head.  Hence  the  divisions,  &c.  of  letters.  Therefore
by  performing  Samyama  on  the  three  separately,  the  Togin  can  compre-
hend the  sense  of  all  sounds  uttered  by  any  sentient  being  in  nature.
Even  so  can  the  music  of  nature  be  heard ;  and  the  joyous  ndda  within
be  cognised  and  understood."  p.  6.3.

3.    A.  Knowledge  of  former  Births.

Sutra  18  is  thus  translated  by  Mr.  Manilal :

"  By  mental  presentation  of  the  impressions  a  knowledge  of  former
cla«s."     in.

Dr.  Mitra  renders  it :

"  A  knowledge  of  former  existence  by  making  the  residua  (i-emains)
apparent."

4.  A  Knowledge  of  the  Minds  of  others.

Dr.  Mitra,  tims  translates  Sutra  19  :

"  With  reference  to  cognition,  a  knowledge  of  another's  thinking
principle."     III.

Mr.  Manilal  says,  '^  Any  body's  mind  can  thus  be  easily
comprehended  by  the  Yogin.

5.  Ability  to  render  the  Body  Invisible.
Dr.  Mitra  thus  translates  Sutra  21  :

"From  Samyama  with  reference  to  the  shape  of  the  body,  the  power
of  vision  being  diminished  and  the  correlation  of  light  and  sight  being
severed,  there  is  disappearance."     III.

3


18


YOGA   SASTEA.


6.    Knowledge  of  the  Length  of  Life  and  Portents.  J

Mr.  Manilal  thus  translates  aud  explains  Sutra    22  :        ^        jr*

"  Karma  is  of  two  kinds  :  active  and  dormant ;  by  Samyama  on  the^m
(results)  knowledge  of  cessation  ;  as  also  by  portents."     III.

*'  That  karma  which  produces  its  results  speedily  and  is  actua  ^Uy
on  the  way  to  bear  fruit  is  called  active  ;  whereas  that  which  is  only  ii  n  a
latent  condition  of  potency  is  called  dormant.  By  performing  SamycL,^iri,
are  these  two  classes  of  harma,  the  Yogin  knows  the  time  of  lu,he
cessation  of  his  life,  i.e.,  death.  He  knows  at  once  which  Karma  "^WX
produce  what  fruit,  and  therefrom  at  once  sees  the  condition  of  ^hia
death."    pp.  65,  m.

It  is  only  Yogins  who  can  properly  interpret  portents,  such  l*as
dreams,  &c.

7.    Ability  to  enlist  the  Good-will  of  any  one.

Sutra  23  :  "  In  sympathy,  &c.,  strength."    III.

By  performing  samyama  with  reference  to  sympathy,  &f  p.^
the  goodwill  and  friendship  of  any  one  at  any  momeut  may  or  ^
enlisted.

8.    Ability  to  acquire  Strength  like  that  of  the  Elephant,  j

Sutra  24  :  **  In  strength  that  of  the  elephant,  &c."  III.

By  performingf  Samyama  on  the  powers  of  any  animal,  th^  e
Yogin  acquires  these  powers.

9.    Knowledge  of  hidden  Treasures,  Mines,  &c.

Dr.  Mitra  thus  translates  Sutra  25 :

"  From  contemplation  of  the  Heht  of  the  extremely  Inminons  di)'  i-
position.  a  knowledge  is  acquired  of  the  subtile,  the  intercepted,  an'^d
the  remote."    III.  f

10.    Knowledge  of  the  Sun,  Moon,  Plants,  and  Starry  Regionsl
All  this  is  promised  in  Sutras  26-28,  {

11.    Knowledge  of  the  Body.

Sutra  29  is  as  follows  :

**In  the  navel-circle,  the  knowledge  of  the  arrangement  of  the
body."     III.

Hindu  physiology  makes  the  navel  the  grand  centre  of  the
body.  Great  importance  is  attached  to  groups  of  nerves,  &c.,
called  padmas,  supposed  to  exist  in  different  psrts  of  the  body.
They  are  generally  --uppospd  to  be  seven  in  number,  viz.,  ddhdra
at  the  anus),  adhisthdna  (between  the  navel  and  the  p^nis),
manipura,  (at  the  navel),  andhata,  (at  the  heart),  visuddhi,  (in  the


DHYANA.  19

\

throat),  djnd  (between  the  eye-brows),  and sahasrdra."   Mr.  Manilal.
p.  53.

How  far  the  knowledge  of  the  body  acquired  by  Yoga  powers
is  correct,  will  atterwards  be  considered.

12.    Freedom  from  Hanger  and  Thirst.

Sutra  30  says :

"  In  the  pit  of  the  throat  the  cessation  of  hauger  and  thirst."     111.

Mr.  Manilal  gives  the  following  explanation  :

"  The  pit  of  the  throat  is  the  region  about  the  pharynx  where  the
breath  from  the  mouth  and  nostrils  meets.  It  is  said  that  contact  of
jjrdna  with  this  region  produces  hunger  and  thirst,  which,  therefore  may
be  checked  by  performing  samyama  on  this  part  to  neutralise  the  effects
of  the  contact."     p.  (58.

13.    Ability  to  enter  another  Body.

Sutra  38  says  :

"  The  mind  enters  another  body,  by  relaxation  of  the  cause  of  bond-
age, and  by  knowledge  of  the  method  of  passing."     111.

It  is  thus  explained  by  Mr.  Manilal :

**  The  bondage  is  the  mind's  being  bound  to  a  particular  body.  The
cause  of  limiting  the  otherwise  all-pervading  mind  to  a  particular  spot  is
karma  or  dhaniui  and  adiiarma,  i.e.,  good  or  bad  deeds.  Wiieu  by  con-
stant samyama  on  these,  the  effect  of  the  cause  is  neutralised  and  the  bonds
of  confinement  loosened,  then  the  mind  is  free  to  enter  into  any  dead  or
living  organism  and  perform  its  functions  ttj rough  it."  p.   71.

14.    Ability  to  rise  in  the  Air.
Sutra  39  says :

"  By  mastery  over  uddna,  ascension,  and  non-contacfc  with  water,
mud,  thorns,  &c."     111.

Mr.  Manilal  says :

**  The  air  intercepted  between  the  top  of  the  nose  and  the  heart  is
called  prdna,  that  between  the  heart  and  the  navel  is  called  samdna,  that
from  the  navel  to  the  toes  is  called  apdna,  that  above  the  tip  of  the  nose
is  called  uddna,  and  that  which  pervades  the  whole  body  is  called  vydna.
The  respective  functions  are — vitalizing,  digestion,  expulsion  of  excre-
ments, raising  up  the  sound,  &c.  and  motion  in  general.  The  uddnahsis  a
tendency  to  raise  the  body  upwards,  and  carry  it  above  water,  thorns,  &c"
p.  72.

15.    Ability  to  Hear  at  any  distance.

Sutra  41  says :

"  By  Samyama  on  the  relation  between  dkdsa,  and  the  sense  of
hearing,  (arises)  supernatural  audition."    III.


20  YOGA  8A8TBA.

16.    Ability  to  pass  through  Space.

Sutra  42  says :

"  By  Samyama  on  the  relation  between  tbe  body  and  dkdsa,  as  also
by  being  identified  with  light  (things  like)  cotton,  (then  follows)  passage
through  space."     III.

By  performing  samyama  on  light  things  like  cotton,  the  Yogi
floats  freely  in  the  air.

37.     Attainment  of  the  Siddhis.

Sutra  45  says :

*'  Then  the  attainment  of  animd  and  others,  as  also  of  perfection  of
the  body  and  the  corresponding  non-obstruction  of  its  functions."     HI.

Siddhis  denote  high  occult  powers.  Bhoj  Kaja  classifies  them
under  eight  heads :

1.  Animd,  ability  to  reduce  one's  self  to  the  size  of  an  atom.

2.  Laghima,  ability  to  become  light  like  cotton.

3.  Garimd,  the  power  to  grow  as  heavy  as  desired.

4.  Mahimd,  the  power  to  become  any  size,  so  as  to  be  able
to  touch  the  moon  with  the  tip  of  one's  finger.

5.  Frdhdmya,  the  irresistible  will.

6.  Isatva,  power  to  create.

7.  Vasitra,  power  to  command  all.

8.  Kamavasayitva,  fulfilment  of  desires.

18.    Mastery  over  all,  Knowledge  of  all.
Sutra  49  says :

'•  In  him  who  is  fixed  upon  the  distinctive  relation  of  sattva  and
'purusa,  (arise)  mastery  over  all  things  and  the  knowledge  of  all,"     111.

19.    Attainment  of  Kaivalya.
Sutra  50  says :

"  By  non-attachment  even  thereto,  follows  Kaivalya^  the  seeds  of
bondage  being  destroyed."  III.

By  non-attachment  even  to  occult  powers,  the  Yogi  attains
Kaivalya.  This  Mr.  Manilal  defines  as  "the  state  of  oneness,
being  one  and  alone,  viz.,  the  FuruitaJ'  Benfey  explains  it  as
"  complete  absorption  in  the  thought  of  the  universal  unity."  The
causes  of  bondage  destroyed  are  Ignorance,  egoism,  desire,  aver-
sion, attachment.


d


CESSATION    OV  DESIBE.


21


BOOK  IV.

How    THE    Siddhis   MAY   BE   ACQUIEED.

Sutra  1  says :

"  The  Siddhis  are  produced  by  birth,  herbs,  incantations,  austerities,
or  Samadhi."      IV.

The  Siddhis,  as  already  explained,  are  the  occult  powers.
They  may  be  obtained  in  various  ways  :

(a)  Birth.     Thus  birds  at  birth  have  the  power  of  flying.

{h)  Herbs.  It  is  supposed  that  through  certain  herbs  people
may  live  for  ever.

(c)  Incantations,     Magical  powers  are  attributed  to  mantras.

{d)  Austerities.  The  sacred  books  of  the  Hindus  are  full  of
the  wonderful  powers  exacted  from  the  gods  by  means  of  great
austerities.

(e)    Samddhi.     This  is  what  has  been  described.

YOGINS   ARE   NOT   BOUND   BY  THEIR  ACTIONS.

Sutra  7  says :

"  Actions  are  neither  white  nor  black  in  the  case  of  Yogins ;  they
are  of  three  kinds  in  the  case  of  others."     IV.

Yogins  have  no  attachment ;  hence  they  are  supposed  to  be
free  from  the  results  of  their  actions.  The  actions  of  gods  are
white,  of  demons,  black  ;  of  men,  mixed.

How   THINGS   ABE   KNOWN   TO   THE   MlND.

Sutra  17  says:

"  In  consequence  of  the  necessity  of  being  tinged  by  them,  things
are  known  or  unknown  to  the  mind."    IV.

It  is  a  dogma  of  Hindu  Philosophy  that  the  mind  is  all-per-
vading. It  may  therefore  be  supposed  that  it  can  grasp  all  things
at  the  same  time.  Such  is  not  the  case.  It  can  perceive  only  those
objects  into  which  it  is  transformed.     See  p.  6.

Cessation  of  Desire.

Sutra  25  says:

"  The  cessation  of  the  desire  of  knowing  the  nature  of  the  soul
(takes  place)  in  one  who  has  mastered  the  difference."     IV.

In  a  person  who  knows  the  difference  between  mind  and  soul
and  understands  the  nature  and  power  of  either,  the  desire  even  of
knowing  the  soul  is  extinguished.  Mr.  Manilal  says :  "  Kaivalya
is,  in  fact,  a  state  in  which  there  is  entire  cessation  of  all  desire."
p.  94.


22  VOaA  BAST&A.

The  "Cloud  of  Vibtijb"  and  the  End.

Sutras  29 — 32  are  thus  translated  by  Dr.  Mitra :

"On  the  completion  of  the  series  there  is  produced  the  meditation
called  the  •  Cloud  of  Virtue,"  even  ia  the  case  of  the  noa-aspiraiit,  from
the  appearance  of  constant  discrimination.  Then  follows  the  cessation
of  afflictions  (or  distractions^  and  works.  Then  the  knowable  becomes
small  from  the  iuBniteness  of  the  knowledge  free  from  all  coverings  and
impurities.  Thereupon  takes  place  the  termination  of  the  succession  of  the
modifications  of  Ihe  qualities  which  have  accomplished  their  ends."  IV.

Mr.  R.  C.  JBose  thus  explains  the  process :

"  The  devotee  first  recognizes  the  fact  that  his  self  is  different  from
the  thinking  principle,  and  thus  attains  this  discriminative  knowledge.
Then  a  shower  of  virtues  or  rewards  falls  upon  him  unsolicited,  in  spite  of
his  aspirations  being  completely  withdrawn  from  them.  Thus  the  afflictions
and  works  disappear,  and  the  objects  of  knowledge  appear  insignificant
before  its  vastuess  and  infinitude.  Then  the  cosmic  gunas  or  qualities
with  all  their  modifications  abandon  the  soul  for  ever,  or  retire  leaving
the  soul  in  the  original  state  of  quiescence  and  repose.  Here  is  emanci-
pation, the  soul's  liberation  from  the  trammels  of  Prakriti  till  a  fresh
renovation  of  the  world,  if  not  for  ever."  p.  183.

The  Supreme  End  to  be  attained  by  Yoga.

In  some  Hindu  systems  the  grand  aim  is  Sdyujya,  complete
union  with  the  Supreme  Spirit.  Such  vsras  not  the  case  with
the  Sankhya,  for  it  denied,  or  at  least  ignored,  the  existence  of
Brahma.  Patanjali  nominally  acknowledged  his  existence,  but  such
union  is  not  the  aim  of  Yoga.

Dr.  Mitra  says  :  "  The  idea  of  absorption  into  the  godhead,
forms  no  part  of  the  Yoga  theory.  Patanjali,  like  Kapila,  rests
satisfied  with  the  isolation  of  the  soul.  He  does  not  pry  into  the  how
and  the  where  the  soul  resides  after  the  separation."     (p.  202.)

Patanjali,  in  his  second  Sutra,  distinctly  states  that  "  Yoga  is
the  suppression  of  the  transformations  of  the  thinking  principle."
(Page  4).  It  is  supposed  that  in  consequence  of  this  the  union
between  puruaha  and  prakriti  is  dissolved,  and  there  is  liberation
from  future  births.  To  get  rid  of  the  curse  of  existence  was  the
great  object  of  Kapila  and  Patanjali.

It  was  at  a  later  period  that  the  doctrine  of  union  arose.
There  are  said  to  be  three  inferior  conditions  leading  to  it  (1)
8dlokya,  living  in  the  same  heaven  with  the  personal  God :  (2)
Sdmipija,  close  proximity  to  Him  :  (3)  Sdrupya,  assimilation  to  His
likeness  :  (4)  Sdyujya,  complete  union.  Such  an  aim  is  truly  noble,
and  will  be  hereafter  considered.

Before  examining  the  Yoga  Sastra  of  Patanjali,  it  is  desirable
to  consider  the  following  preliminary  subject.


THE   CHAEACTEEISTICS    OF  THE    HINDU  MIND.  23


THE  CHARACTERISTICS  OP  THE  HINDU  MIND.

Nations,  like  inrlivicluals,  "have  their  good  qualities  and  their
defects.  The  Indian  mind  has  been  at  work  for  about  three
thousand  years,  and  has  created  a  vast  literature  in  Sanskrit.  In
some  respects  it  took  the  lead.  Max  Miiller  says  :  "  There  were  only
two  nations  in  the  whole  history  of  the  world  which  have  conceived
independently  and  without  any  suggestions  from  others  the  two
sciences  of  Logic  and  Grammar, — the  Hindus  and  the  Greeks."  In
mathematics  Indians  have  the  glory  of  inventing  decimal  notation,
ignorance  of  which  was  a  great  disadvantage  to  the  ancient  Greeks
and  Romans.  They  likewise  possessed  an  early  acquaintance  with
trigonometry.  Sanskrit  literature  contains  numerous  passages  of
great  poetical  beauty,  lofty  moral  maxims,  and  sublime  descriptions
of  God.  On  the  other  hand,  as  Sir  H.  S.  Maine,  in  a  Calcutta
Convocation  Address,  when  the  increased  study  of  Sanskrit  was  urged
upon  the  Calcutta  University,  said, "  that  question  is  whether  we  are,
or  are  not,  asked  under  the  guise  of  Oriental  Culture,  to  teach  that
which  is  not  true — false  morality,  false  history,  false  philosophy,
false  physics."

The  peculiarities  of  the  Hindu  mind  which  gave  rise  to  these
errors  will  now  be  noticed.

1.    A  tendency  to  Speculate  instead  of  Observe.

Mr.  Ram  Chandra  Bose  gives  the  following  examples  :

"  The  Hindu  geographer  does  not  travel,  does  not  explore,  does  not
survey  ;  he  simply  sits  down  and  dreams  of  a  (renfcral  mountain  of  a
height  greater  than  that  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  and  circular  oceans
of  curds  and  clarified  butter.  The  Hindu  historian  does  not  examine
documents,  coins,  and  monuments,  does  not  investigate  historical  facts,
weigh  evidence,  balance  probabilities,  scatter  the  chaff  to  the  winds  and
gather  the  wheat  in  bis  garner  :  he  simply  sits  down  and  dreams  of  a
monster  monkey  who  flies  through  the  atmosphere  with  huge  mountains
resting  on  the  hairs  of  his  body,  and  constructs  thereby  a  durable  bridge
across  an  arm  of  an  interminable  ocean.  The  Hindu  biographer  ignores
the  separating  line  between  history  and  fable,  invents  prodigious  and
fantastic  stories,  and  converts  even  historical  personages  into  mythical
or  fabulous  heroes.  The  Hindu  anatomist  does  not  dissect,  does  not
anatomize,  does  not  examine  the  contents  of  the  human  body  ;  he  simply
dreams  of  component  parts  which  baye  no  existence,  multiplies  almost
indefinitely  the  number  of  arteries  and  veins,  and  speaks  coolly  of  a
passage  through  which  the  atomic  soul  effects  its  ingress  and  egress."

"The  Hinda  metaphysician  does  not  analyze  the  facts  of  conscious-
ness or  enquire  into  the  laws  of  thought,  does  not  classify  sensations,
perceptions,  conceptions,  and  judgments  and  cautiously  proceed  to  an
investigation  of  the  principles  which  regulate  the  elaboration  of  thought
and  processes  of  reasoning; — he  simply  speaks  of  the  mind  as  an  acci-


24  YOGA  SASTEA.

dental  and  mischievous  adjunct  of  the  soul,  and  shows  how  its  complete
extinction  may  be  brought  about  by  austerity  and  meditation."*

Hindus  claim  to  have  64  arts  and  sciences,  some  of  which  are
the  following  :

12.      The  science  of  prognosticating  by  omens  and  augury.

14.  The  science  of  healing,  which  may  include  restoration  to  life
of  the  dead,  the  reunion  of  severed  limbs,  &c.

15.  Physiognomy,  Chiromancy,  &o.

36.  The  art  of  summoning  by  enchantment.

37.  Exorcism.

38.  Exciting  hatred  between  persons  by  magical  spells.

41.  The  art  of  bringing  one  over  to  another's  side  bj  enchantment.

42.  Alchemy  and  chemistry.

44.      The  language  of  brute  beasts,  from  ants  upwards.

47.  Charms  against  poison.

48,  Information  regarding  any  thing  lost,  obtained  by  astronomical
calculations.

50.  The  art  of  becoming  invisible.

51.  The  art  of  walking  in  the  air.

52.  The  power  of  leaving  ones  own  body  and  entering  another
lifeless  body  or  substance  at  pleasure.

56.  Restraining  the  action  of  fire.

57.  The  art  of  walking  upon  water.

58.  The  art  of  restraining  the  power  of  wind.

62.  The  art  of  preventing  the  discovery  of  things  concealed.

63.  The  art  by  which  the  power  of  the  sword  or  any  other  weapon
is  nullified.

64.  The  power  of  stationing  the  soul  at  pleasure  in  any  of  the  five

stages.t

The  Brahmanas  assert  that  particular  metres  have  their  effects.
Thus  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  says  :

"  He  who  wishes  for  long  life,  should  use  two  verses  of  the  Ushnih
metre  (of  28  syllables) ;  for  Ushnih  is  life.  He  who  having  such  a
knowledge  uses  two  Ushnihs  arrives  at  his  full  age  (  i.e.,  100  years.)

"  He  who  desires  strength  should  use  two  Trishtubhs'  (44  syllables.)
Trishtubh  is  strength,  vigour  and  sharpness  of  senses.  He  who  knowing
this,  uses  two  Trishtubhs,  becomes  vigour,  endowed  with  sharp  senses,

and  strong.

"  He  who  desires  cattle  should  use  two  Jagatis  (48  syllables).  Cattle
are  Ja^ati  like-  He  who  knowing  this  uses  two  Jagatis  becomes  rich
in  cattle."t

A  great  part  of  the  Atharva  Veda  consists  of  supposed  magical
charms,  e.g.,

A  charm  against  leprosy.

A  charm  to  obtain  invisibility.

A  charm  to  ensure  success  in  gambling.

•  Heterodox  jPhUoiiophy ,  pp.  8—10.
t  Hang's  Translation.


THE   CHABACTEEISTICS  OP  THE  HINDU  MIND.  25

A  charm  to  banish  vermin  and  noxious  creatures,

A  charm  against  tip^rs.

A  charm  to  make  a  poisoned  arrow  harmless.

A  love  charm.

A  charm  to  promote  the  growth  of  hair.

A  charm  to  recover  a  sick  man  at  the  point  of  death.

Belief  in  the  power  of  charms  exists  among  many  nations.
A  negro  baby  in  West  Africa  has  a  charm  tied  around  him  soon  after
he  is  born,  and,  as  he  grows  in  years,  he  often  adds  charm  after
charm,  till  his  body  is  covered  with  them.

In  China  charms  are  regularly  sold.  Charms  to  secure  long
life  are  in  great  demand.  Sometimes  the  paper  on  which  these
charms  are  written  is  burnt,  and  the  ashes  drunk  in  water  or  wine,
the  result  being  a  very  potent  charm  indeed.

The  Japanese  carry  their  charms  in  bags ;  the  Sinhalese  have
little  cases  tied  to  the  body.  The  Burmese  do  not  require  cases  for
their  charms  and  can  never  lose  them,  for  there  are  few  who  have
not  charms  of  some  kind  tattooed  on  the  arms,  back,  chest,  or  even
on  the  top  of  the  head,  which  is  shaved  for  the  purpose.  These
figures  are  of  all  kinds — ^lizards,  birds,  mystic  words  and  squares,
rings,  images  of  Buddha,  and  sometimes  merely  a  few  scattered
dots.     The  colouring  matter  is  almost  always  red.

Some  of  these  tattooed  charms  are  supposed  to  prevent  a  per-
son from  feeling  pain  when  beaten,  others  guard  against  danger
from  snake-bite,  musket-shots,  drowning,  the  spells  of  wizards,  and
evil  spirits.  It  does  not  matter  to  the  Burmese  although  persons
having  tattooed  charms  are  shot  or  drowned.  Their  belief  in  their
efficacy  is  practically  ineradicable.

At  an  evening  meeting  in  Benares,  a  Pandit  read  a  paper
proving  that  oil,  from  its  constituents,  is  heavier  than  water,  in
opposition  to  the  lamps  burning  before  his  eyes !

Hindus  have  fallen  into  all  these  errors  from  merely  specula-
ting instead  of  testing  their  opinions  by  observation.

2.  Absence  of  the  Historical  Pacnlty.— The  Cambridge  Pro-
fessor of  Sanskrit,  Mr.  E.  B.  Cowell,  says  in  his  Inaugural  Lecture  :

"  We  have  no  such  thing  as  Indian  history.  Elphinstone  has  well
said,  *  No  date  can  be  fixed  before  Alexander's  invasion,  no  connected
relation  of  the  national  transactions  attempted  before  the  Mnhammadan
conquest.'  For  history  implies  a  sympathy  with  the  present,  and  this
has  never  existed  in  the  Hindu  mind.  The  very  word  history  has  no
corresponding  Indian  expression.  In  the  Vernaculars  derived  from  the
Sanskrit  we  use  the  term  itiJids ;  but  how  immeasurably  different  the
Sanskrit  itihdsa  and  the  Greek  historia  !  The  one  implies  personal
research  and  inqniry — its  best  comment  indeed  is  Herodotus'  own  life  of
travel  from  land  to  land  ;  the  other  is  a  curious  compound  of  three  words,
iti,  ha,  dm,  which  almost  correspond  in  meaning  to  our  old  nursery
phrase,  *  there  was  once  upon  a  time.'     In  Sanskrit  writers  the  name

4


26  YOflA  SA9TEA.

means  simply  a  legend;  it  is  applied  to  the  mythological  traditions
of  the  prose  Vedas,  or  the  late  heroic  poems,  as  the  Mahabharata  ;  and  in
defect  of  any  better  term,  it  has  been  accepted  as  the  native  word  for
history.  But  its  very  selection  implies  that  the  distinction  was  unfelt
between  history  and  legend.  From  the  earliest  ages  down  to  our  own
day  the  Hindu  mind  seems  never  to  have  conceived  such  an  idea  as  an
authentic  record  of  past  facts  based  on  evidence.  It  has  remained  from
generation  to  generation,  stationary  in  tliat  condition  which  Mr.  Grote
has  described  so  vividly  in  the  first  two  volumes  of  his  History  of  Greece.
The  idlest  legend  has  passed  current  as  readily  as  the  most  authentic  fact,
nay,  more  readily,  because  it  is  more  likely  to  charm  the  imagination  ;
and  in  this  phase  of  the  mind  imagination  and  feeling  supply  the  only
proof  which  is  needed  to  win  the  belief  of  the  audience.  Hence  the
whole  history  of  ancient  India  as  a  blank."

"  Idle  legends  in  later  times  have  arisen,  none  knows  how,  to  supply
some  answer  to  the  natural  cravings  of  posterity  to  know  something  definite
respecting  its  ancient  sages,  like  those  which  arose  inGreece  about  Homer
and  ^sop  ;  but  they  are  the  baseless  dreams  of  a  lawless  popular  imagi-
nation which  sets  chronology  and  geography  alike  at  defiance."  pp.  10,  II ,

Hindu  chronology  generally  begins  with  some  of  the  mind-
born  sons  of  Brahma.  The  Vishnu  Parana  gives  an  account  of
the  beginning  of  the  solar  dynasty  ;  how  Daksha  was  born  from
the  right  thumb  of  Brahma,  how  Ikswaku  was  born  from  the
nostril  of  Manu  when  ho  sneezed.  The  Ramayana  describes
Dasaratha  as  reigning  60,000  years.

3.  A  want  of  Common  Sense. — Tliis  indeed  is  almost  charac-
teristic of  "  philosophers."  Cicero  long  ago  remarked,  "  There  is
nothing  so  absurd,  but  it  may  be  said  by  a  philosopher."

Hindu  philosophers  framed  certain  theories,and  then  proceeded
to  draw  from  them  a  long  train  of  conclusions.  Whether  they  were
consistent  with  common  sense,  it  did  not  seem  to  enter  into  their
minds  to  inquire.  Indeed,  as  Sir  Monier  Williams  says,  "  the
more  evidently  physical  and  metaphysical  speculations  are  opposed
to  common  sense,  the  more  favour  do  they  find  with  some  Hindu
thinkers.  Common  sense  tells  an  Englishman  that  lie  really  exists
himself  and  that  everything  he  sees  around  him  really  exists  also.
He  cannot  abandon  these  two  primary  convictions.  Not  so  the
Hindu  Vedantist."

The  sacred  writings  of  the  Hindus  abound  with  contradictions,
but  this  gives  no  trouble.  Max  Miiller  says  :  "  The  same  god  is
sometimes  represented  as  supreme,  sometimes  as  equal,  sometimes
as  inferior  to  others.  The  father  is  sometimes  the  son,  the  brother  is
the  husband,  and  she  who  in  one  hymn  is  the  mother  as  in  another
the  wife."  The  most  extraordinary  feat  is  ascribed  to  Indra,
"  Thou  hast  indeed  begotten  thy  father  and  mother  together  from
thy  own  body."  As  Max  Miiller  remarks:  "A  god  who  once
could  do  that  was  no  doubt  capable  of  anything  afterwards."

One  result  of  this  want  of  common  sense,  is  boundless  credulity.


TriE   CHARACTEKISTICS   OP   THE    HINDU   MIND.  27

In  the  Ramayana  Hanuman  tears  up  a  Himalayan  mountain  by
the  roots,  and  transports  it  through  the  air  to  Lanka.  Before
returning  to  Rama  from  Latika^  he  ascended  Mount  Arishta.
Pressed  by  his  enormous  weight,  it  uttered  cries  of  distress,  and
sank  down  from  the  height  of  '60  yojanas,  (about  210  miles)  to  the
level  of  the  earth  1

4.  Accepting  Illustration  for  Argument. — Max  Miiller,
describes  the  late  Rauiakrishna  as  a  "  real  Mahatman/'  and  gives
extracts  from  his  precepts.     The  following  is  an  example  :

(11)  As  one  can  ascend  the  top  of  a  house  by  means  of  a  ladder,
or  a  bamboo,  or  a  staircase,  or  a  rope,  so  divers  are  the  ways,  and  means
to  approach  God,  and  every  religion  in  the  world  shows  one  of  these
ways.''*

This  is  a  mere  variation  of  the  well-known  saying  :  "  As  there
are  several  roads  to  the  same  city,  so  all  religions  lead  to  God."

Rarakrishna's  argument  amounts  to  this.  As  there  are  several
ways  of  getting  to  the  top  of  a  house,  so  the  most  contradictory
statements  are  all  true.     The  logic  of  this  is  mere  drivelling.

The  main  proof  adduced  for  the  doctrine  of  Maya  is  that  a
rope  may  be  mistaken  for  a  snake,  or  that  in  a  dream  things  appear
to  be  real.

5.  A  proneness  to  dwell  on  subtle  distinctions  instead  of
grasping  a  subject  as  a  whole. — The  Hindu  mmd  resembles  that
of  Hudibras,

*'  He  could  distinguish  and  divide
A  hair  'twixt  south  and  south-west  side.''

One  great  difference  between  a  good  and  a  bad  lawyer  is  that
the  latter  takes  up  some  subordinate  point,  while  he  fails  to  see  the
main  issue  on  which  the  case  turns.  Sir  Monier  Williams  says
that  a  Hindu  disputant  has  captious  propensities,  leading  him  to  be
quick  in  repartee,  and  ready  with  specious  objections  to  the  most
conclusive  arguments.  Mr.  R.  0.  Bose  says,  even  of  the  Hindu
master-minds,  that  they  were  defective  in  the  following  respects  :—

"  A  view  broad  and  comprehensivei  an  investigation  calm  and  per-
severing, a  thorough  sifting  of  evidence,  and  a  cautious  building  up  of
generalisations,  in  a  word  for  all  those  processes  of  research  and  reasoning
which  are  the  basis  of  reliable  science. "f

6.  Acceptance  of  false  Premises.— One  Hindu  dogma  is  the
denial  of  creation  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word.  Because  man
cannot  create  (call  objects  into  existence)  therefore  God  cannot.
Hence  the  eternal  Prakriti.  Another  dogma  is  the  eternal
existence  of  the  soul.     Hence  the  weary  round  of  transmigration.


The  Nineteenth  Century,  August,  1896.
t  Heterodox  Philosophy,  p.  7.


28


YOGA   SASTBA.


Mr,  Bose  says  of  Hindu  philosophers  :

"  They  had  an  iDtellecfc  keen  and  argumentative,  and  their  writings
are  fitted  to  raise  the  puzzling  question,  so  well  put  by  Lord  Macaulay,
viz.,  how  men,  who  reason  so  closely  and  so  consecutively  from  assumed
premises  fail  bo  miserably  to  see  the  utter  groundlessness  of  the  assump-
tions on  which  their  ably  conducted  arguments  are  based."

7.    Proud  attempts  to  solve  questions  beyond  the  range  of  the
human  intellect ;  e,  g.  the  nature  of  the  soul,  hereafter  noticed.
Dr.  Murray  Mitchell  notices  :

"  The  hard  dogmatism  and  the  unbounded  self-assertion  of  all  the
schools.  It  would  be  an  immense  relief  if  one  word  betokening  distrust
of  their  own  wisdom  were  uttered  by  those  teachers  —such  as  we  have
heard  occasionally  proceeding  from  the  Vedic  poets  ;  but  there  is  no  such
word.  Each  theorist  moves  with  head  erect,  possessed  of  absolute  faith
in  his  own  omniscience.  It  never  occurs  to  him  either  that  there  are
matters  with  which  the  human  mind  had  no  faculties  to  deal,  or  that
Truth  unveils  her  treasures  only  to  the  humble."*

Their  vagaries  are  even  asserted  to  have  a  divine  origin.

•'The  Hindu  philosopher,"  says  Mr.  Bose,  "claims  prophetic
functions,  pretends  to  either  miraculous  insight  or  preternatural  inter-
course with  superior  beings,  and  brings  out  his  excogitation  as  revela-
tion to  be  implicitily  believed  in ;  not  as  results  of  philosophic  inquiry
to  be  tested  by  the  ordinary  appliances  of  the  logical  science.  He  is  the
guru,  heaven-appointed  or  self -raised  teacher,  and  his  utterances  must  be
accepted  as  divine  revelations;  while  all  sorts  of  woes  are  pronounced


*  Hinduism,  p.  83.


FALSE   ACCOUNTS   OP  THE   BODY.  29

upon  those  impious  wretches  who  have  the  audacity  to  call  in  questioii  a
jot  or  tittle  of  his  sayings."

Some  of  the  false  teacliing  of  Hinduism  will  now  be  considered.

False  Geography  ov  the  Sastbas.

The  following  description  of  the  earth  is  given  in  the  Vishnu
Purana,  Book  11.  Chap.  2  :

"  The  7  great  insular  continents  are  Jambn,  Plaksha,  Salmali,  Kusa,
Kraancha,  Saka,  and  Fusbkara.  They  are  surrounded  severally  by  7
great  seas,  the  sea  of  salt  water  (Lavauaj,  of  sugarcane  juice  (Ikshu),  of
wine  (Sura),  of  clarified  batter  (Sarpi),  of  curd  (Dadhi),  of  milk,
(Dugdha),  and  of  fresh  water  (Jala)."

"  Jambudwipa  is  in  the  centre  of  all  these  :  and  in  the  centre  of  this
continent  is  the  golden  mountain  Meru.  The  height  of  Mein  is  84,000
yojanas ;  and  its  depth  below  the  surface  of  the  earth  is  16,000.  Its
diameter  at  the  summit  is  32,000  yojanas  ;  and  at  its  base,  16,000  ;  so
that  this  mountain  is  like  the  seed-cup  of  the  lotus  of  the  earth."

False  AsTEONOMy  of  the  Sasteas.

According  to  the  Vishnu  Purana  (Book  II.  Chap.  7.)  the
distances  of  the  planets  are  as  follows :

The  sphere  of  the  earth  extends  as  far  as  it  is  illuminated  by  the
rays  of  the  sun  and  moon  ;  and  to  the  same  extent  is  the  sphere  of  the
atmosphere  (Bhuvar  loka)  spread  above  it.  The  solar  orb  is  situated
100,000  yojanas  from  the  earth ;  and  that  of  the  moon  an  equal  distance
from  the  sun.  At  the  same  interval  above  the  moon  occurs  the  orbit  of
all  the  lunar  constellations.  The  planet  Budha  (Mercury)  is  ilOO,000
yojanas  above  the  lunar  mansions.  Sukia  (Venus)  is  at  the  same
distance  from  Mercury.  Angaraka  (Mars)  is  as  far  above  Venus ;  and
the  priest  of  the  gods  (Vrihaspati,  or  Jupiter)  as  far  from  Mars ;  while
Saturn  (Sani)  is  250,000  yojanas  beyond  Jupiter  The  sphere  of  the  7
Rishis  (Ursa  Major)  is  100,000  yojanas  above  Saturn  ;  and  at  a  similar
height  above  the  Kishis  is  Dhruva  (the  pole  star),  the  pivot  or  axis  of
the  whole  planetary  circle.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  sun  is  represented  as  a  lakh  of  yojanas
from  the  earth,  and  the  moon  as  a  lakh  of  yojanas  beyond  the  sun.
On  the  contrary,  the  moon  is  only  about  240,000  miles  from  the
earth;  whereas  the  distance  of  the  sun  is  about  91  millions  of
miles.     The  other  distances  given  are  equally  erroneous.

False  Accounts  of  the  Body.

The  ancient  Hindus  thought  that  a  man  was  rendered  impure
by  touching  a  dead  body.  Hence  they  did  not  dissect  and  examine
i  t  minutely  as  is  done  in  modern  Medical  Colleges,    The  writers


30  YOGA   SASTfiA.

of  the  Upanishads  simply  framed  an  imaginary  body  out  of  their
own  heads,  and,  to  impose  upou  the  ignorant,  said  that  it  had  been
revealed  by  Brahma.

Dr.  Webb  says  :  The  anatomical  knowledge  of  the  Hindus
may  be  judged  of  by  a  single  sentence : — viz.,  the  navel  is  the
origin  of  all  the  vessels,  and  is  the  principal  seat  of  life."*

The  Katha  Upanishad  contains  the  following  : —

"  16.  There  are  hundred  and  one  arteries  of  ^the  heart ;  the  one  of
them  (Susumna,)  proceeds  to  the  head.  By  this  (at  the  time  of  death)
rising  upwards  (by  the  door  of  A'ditya)  a  person  gains  immortality  ;  or
the  other  (arteries)  are  of  various  course."

A  similar  statement  is  made  in  the  Chhandogya  Upanishad :

"  There  are  a  hundred  and  one  arteries  issuing  from  the  heart ;  one
of  them  penetrates  the  crown  of  the  head.  The  man  who  departs  this
life  through  that  artery,  secures  immortality.  The  rest  of  the  arteries
lead  to  various  transitions, — they  lead  to  various  transitions."    VI II.  6.6.

The  Prasna  Upanishad  gives  the  following  additional  details  :

"  For  the  (ether  of  the)  heart  is  verily  that  soul.  There  (arise)  the
hundred  and  one  (principal)  arteries;  each  of  them  is  hundred  times
divided  ;  72,000  are  the  branches  of  every  branch  artery ;  within  them
moves  the  circulating  air."     III.  6.

The  whole  number  of  arteries  is  therefore  727,200,000  !

The  slightest  examination  of  the  heart  shows  that  all  this  is
purely  imaginary.  There  are  just  two  branches  of  a  large  artery
from  the  heart,  containing  impure  blood,  leading  to  the  lungs,  and
one  great  artery,  which,  afterwards,  subdivided,  conveys  pure
blood,  to  the  whole  body.  In  like  manner,  there  are  two  great
veins  carrying  impure  blood  to  the  heart  from  the  whole  body,  and
four  veins,  containing  pure  blood,  leading  from  the  lungs  to  the
heart.

The  Prasna  Upanishad  says  that  *'  within  the  arteries  moves
the  circulating  air."  Arteries  mean  air-pipes.  They  were  thought
to  contain  only  air,  because  after  death  they  are  empty.  When  a
person  is  alive,  blood  flows  through  them.  This  is  proved  by  the
fact  that  if  one  of  them  is  cut,  blood  gushes  out.  When  a  person
dies,  the  heart  loses  its  power  to  send  out  blood,  and  the  arteries
are  found  empty.

Inference  feom  the  FoREaoiNG  Statements.

No  educated  Hindu  can  deny  that  the  statements  in  the
shastras  about  the  earth,  the  solar  system,  and  the  human  body  are
false,  confirming  the  assertion  of  Sir  H.  S.  Maine  previously  quoted.
"When  a  witness  is  convicted  of  false  testimony  on  some  points.


*  Hindu  System  of  Medicine  by  Wise,    p,  214,


EXAMINATION   OP   THE   YOGA   SUTRAS.  31

discredits  is  thrown  upon  the  rest  of  his  statements.  There  is  a
presumption  that  the  Yoga  Sutras  of  Patanjali,  may  be  as  un-
reliable as  the  Vishnu  Purana.     This  will  now  be  established.


EXAMINATION  OF   THE  YOGA  SUTRAS.
1.     Object  op  Patanjali.

As  already  explained,  according  to  Patanjali,  "  All  is  misery."
(page  10).  The  grand  object  therefore  is  to  cut  short  the  transmi-
grations. Patanjali  promises  to  do  this  by  "  Toga — the  suppression
of  the  transformations  of  the  thinking  principle."

Hindu  philosophy  contains  many  speculations  about  the  soul,
some  of  which  may  be  quoted.

The  soul  is  generally  supposed  to  be  of  the  size  of  the  thumb,
and  to  dwell  in  the  heart,  but  it  is  considered  also  both  infinitely
small  and  infinitely  great,  as  will  be  shown  by  the  following
quotations:

12.  The  soul  (Purusha)  which  in  the  measure  of  a  thumb  dwells
in  the  middle  of  the  body  (in  the  ether  of  the  heart)  is  the  ruler  of  the
past,  the  future  (and  the  present  time.)  Hence  from  having  this  know-
ledge, the  wise  (does  not  desire  to  conceal)  the  soul  {vide  latter  part  of
V.  5).    This  is  that.*

13.  He  is  the  perfect  spirit  (Purusha),  of  the  measure  of  a  thumb,
the  inner  soul,  who  always  abides  in  the  heart  of  every  man,  the  ruler
of  knowledge,  who  is  concealed  by  the  heart  and  mind.  Those  who  know
him,  become  immortal .f

8.  He,  who,  of  the  measure  of  a  thumb,  resembling  the  sun  in
splendour,  endowed  with  determination  and  self-consciousness,  and  with
the  quality  of  intellect  and  the  quality  of  his  body,  is  perceived  even  as
another  (different  from  the  universal  soul,  although  it  is  one  with  it)
only  like  the  iron  thong  at  the  end  (of  a  whip.)

9.  The  embodied  soul  is  to  be  thought  like  the  hundredth  part  of
the  point  of  a  hair,  divided  into  hundred  parts  ;  he  is  considered  to  be
infinite.J

3.  Is  the  soul  within  me;  it  is  lighter  than  a  com,  or  a  barley,
or  a  mustard,  or  a  canary  seed,  or  the  substance  within  it.  Such  a  soul
is  within  me,  as  is  greater  than  this  earth,  and  greater  than  the  sky,  and
greater  than  the  heaven,  and  greater  than  all  these  regions  [put
together.]  §

The  Vaiseshika  school  maintains  that  the  soul  is  diffused  every-
where through  space.  •'  Akasa,  in  consequence  of  its  universal
pervasion,  is  infinitely  great ;  and  so  likewise  is  soul.''     VIT.  22.

*\Katha  Upanishad,     IV.  2.  12.
t  Swetaswatara  Upanishad.     III.  13.
X  Sivetaswatara  Upanishad. \Y.  8,  9.
§  ChhandogyaJJpanishad.  III.  14,  3.


32  TOaA  SASTfiA.

Nehemiah  Goreli  well  remarks  :  "  Those  who  believe  that
the  soul  of  a  rausquito  fills  heaven  and  earth,  can  believe  any-
thing." Sir  A.  C.  Lyall  justly  describes  "  boundless  credulity"
as  one  of  the  characteristics  of  Hinduism.  The  transformations  of
the  thinking  principle  is  another  dogma  of  Hindu  philosophy.  The
thinking  principle,  the  mind,  is  supposed  to  be  transformed  or
changed  into  the  object  it  sees.  Photographs  are  taken  by  means
of  an  instrument,  somewhat  like  the  human  eye.  A  little  picture
of  the  objects  around  us  is  formed  on  the  inner  part  of  the  eye.  lu
some  wonderful  way  this  picture  ia  conveyed  by  a  nerve  to  the
brain  and  we  see  it.  Other  nerves  convey  impressions  of  hearing,
smell,  taste,  and  touch.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  mind
is  transformed  into  what  we  perceive  by  the  senses.

But  "  the  suppression  of  the  traus^formations  of  the  thinking
principle"  may  simply  be  understood  to  mean  that  the  mind  is  to
cease  to  act.  To  secure  this  tlie  directions  are  given,  first  to  con-
centrate the  mind  on  one  object,  and  at  last  to  meditate  without  an
object  or  on  nothing.  This  virtually  means  that  we  are  to  try  to
reduce  ourselves  to  the  state  we  are  wheii  fast  asleep,  conscious  of
nothing.  If  Hindu  pessimism  is  correct,  that  "  all  is  misery,"  this
state  is  desirable ;  but  if,  on  the  contrary,  existence  may  be
**  happiness,"  it  is  the  reverse.


1


MEANS  OP  ATTAINMENT.
1.     Yam  A  (Restraint.)

The  explanatory  Sntra  is  as  follows:

"  Yama  includes  abstinence  from  slaughter,  falsehood,  theft,  incon-
tinence, and  avarice."     IT.  30.

Mr.  Manilal  rightly  helds  that  unholy  thoughts  are  condemned
as  well  as  unholy  deeds.  Abstinence  from  all  sin  is  our  duty,  and
we  should  use  every  effort  in  our  power  to  avoid  it.  The  error  of
Patanjali  is  to  ignore  divine  help, — to  make  man  his  own  saviour.
Every  one  who  has  honestly  tried  to  overcome  sin  knows  the
immense  difficulty  of  the  task.  A  Hindu  writer  says:  "This
powerful  devil  of  a  deceitful  heart  is  fiercer  than  fire,  more  impassa-
ble than  the  mountains,  and  harder  than  adamant :  sooner  might
the  ocean  be  emptied  than  the  mind  restrained."

2.     NiYAMA  {Ohligation.)

Niyama  is  thus  explained  :

"  The  obligations  are  purity,  contentment,  penance,  study,  and
devotion  to  Isvara."    II.  3?.


ASANA.  83

"Cease  to  do  eviP'  is  not  sufficient:  'Mearn  to  do  well,"
ought  to  follow.  We  should  not  simply  try  to  avoid  evil  actions,
but  seek  the  opposite  virtues.  The  great  question  is,  how  can
these  virtues  be  attained  ?  The  means  recommended  by  Patanjali
will  next  be  considered.

3.     AsANA  (Posture.)

Asana  and  its  results  are  thus  explained  :

"  Posture  is  that  which  is  firm  and  pleasant.  By  mild  effort  and
meditation  on  the  endless.  Then  no  aasults  from  the  pairs  of  opposites."
II.  46-48.

The  pairs  of  opposites  are  heat  and  cold,  pleasure  and  pain,
&c.,  which  are  no  longer  felt.

Our  bodies,  as  the  Bible  says  :  are  '^  fearfully  and  wonderfully
made."  One  of  the  most  remarkable  of  tlie  organs  is  the  brain  and
other  parts  of  what  are  called  the  "nervous  system."  The  brain
has  been  compared  to  the  telegraph  office  of  the  body,  from  which
the  nerves  go  to  all  parts  to  convey  orders.  The  nerves  are  very
small  cords,  somewhat  like  threads,  composed  of  the  same  sub-
stance as  the  brain.


SECTION   OF   THE   BRAIN.

There  are  two  principal  kinds — nerves  of  motion  and  nerves  of
sensation.  The  muscles,  the  fleshy  parts,  move  the  limbs ;  but
they  receive  their  orders  from  the  nerves,  and  cannot  act  without
thetn.  In  the  disease,  called  palsy,  or  paralysis,  the  power  of
motion  is  lost,  though  pain  is  felt, — the  nerves  of  motion  alone
being  affected.  In  other  cases  the  nerves  of  sensation  are  affected,
and  then  boiling  water  gives  no  pain.  The  nerves  of  sensation  are
5


34  YOQA  SA8TBA.

of  different  kinds;  as  touch,  sight,  hearing,  smell,  taste.  We
commonly  say  that  the  eye  sees  ;  but  the  eye  may  be  perfect,  if  the
nerves  leading  from  it  to  the  brain  is  injured,  we  cannot  see.  In
the  engraving  the  eye  is  marked  8 ;  from  the  ball  a  nerve  is  seen
going  to  the  brain.  Strictly  speaking,  it  is  the  braiu  which  sees,
hears,  &c.     It  is  the  organ  of  the  mind.

The  cause  of  sleep  is  still  a  mystery.  Chambers's  Encychpsedia
says  :  "  For  upwards  of  two  thousand  years  continuous  attempts
have  been  made  to  elucidate  the  cause  of  sleep  without  success ;
many  theories  have  been  promulgated,  but  they  have  fallen
short  of  explaining  it."

There  are  several  stages  of  sleep  and  varieties  in  the  action  of
the  brain,  some  of  which  may  be  noticed.

Brown  Study. — This  is  a  state  of  meditation  directed  to  no
certain  object.     It  may  be  called  a  waking  dream.

Dreaming. — This  state  is  caused  by  the  partial  activity  of  the
brain.  Ideas  are  not  corrected  by  the  external  senses ;  common
sense  seems  completely  lost;  the  most  wonderful  things  excite  no
surprise.

Mesmeric  or  Hypnotic  Sleep. — Tliis  is  a  kind  of  artificial  sleep,

in  which  there  is  an  unusual  suspension  of  some  of  the  powers  and
an  unusual  activity  of  others.  It  has  various  stages.  The  person
may  be  more  or  less  under  its  influence.

The  sense  of  feeling  is  lost,  and  a  limb  may  be  taken  off  un-
known to  the  person.  Dr.  Esdale,  of  Calcutta,  had  charge  of  a
hospital  in  which  operations  were  performed  in  this  way  for  years.
It  is  not  now  employed,  as  the  same  effect  can  be  more  readily
produced  by  chloroform.

Catalepsy. — This  is  a  sudden  suspension  of  the  senses,  and  the
body  becomes  fixed  like  a  statue.  The  nerves  of  motion  seem  to
be  curiously  affected.

Delirium. — This  is  a  violent  excitement  of  the  mental  faculties.
It  may  be  caused  by  the  brain  being  inflamed  by  strong  drink,
by  fever,  &c.

Dreamless  Natural  Sleep. — In  this  state  all  the  mental  facul-
ties are  at  rest.

Coma. — This  is  a  total  loss  of  power  of  thought  or  motion,
from  which  the  patient  cannot  be  aroused.  It  is  generally  caused
by  the  bursting  of  a  blood  vessel  in  the  brain.

Yoga  Sastra  aims  to  promote  hypnotic  sleep.  Eighty-four
postures  are  enumerated.  These  have  no  influence  :  the  real  effect
is  produced  by  looking  steadily  at  the  tip  of  the  nose  or  between
the  eyebrows.  In  Europe  persons  to  be  hypnotised  are  told
simply  to  look  fixedly  at  one  point.

A  well  known  expedient  to  induce  sleep  is  to  repeat  again  and
again  the  same  word.  A  noted  English  bishop  used  for  this
purpose  the  vowels,  a,  e,  i,  o.     These  he  repeated  till  he  dropped


PBANAYAMjA.  ^  86

off  to  sleep.  Dr.  Radcliff  says  that  a  boy  pat  himself  to  sleep  by
pronouncing  the  word  cup  450  times.

Yoga  Sastra  employs  the  same  means.  Sutra  28  Book  I.
enjoins  the  constant  repetition  of  Om.  (See  page  7).  Sulra  44
Book  II.  says  "  By  study  (is  produced)  communion  with  the
desired  deity.'"'  Mr.  Manilal  explains  "  study  as  the  coustant,
silent,  and  devoted  repetition  of  certain  formulae.''     p.  49.

Dr.  Paul,  in  his  Yoga  Philosophy,  gives  the  following  directions
for  the  Siddhdsana  :

"  Place  the  left  heel  uuder  the  anus  aud  the  right  heel  in  front  of
the  genitals ;  fix  the  sight  upon  the  space  between  the  eyebrows,  and
while  in  this  motionless  attitude,  meditate  upon  the  syllable  Om,  a
mysterious  word,  the  frequent  inaudible  repetition  of  which  is  said  to
ensure  release  from  worldly  existence."    pp.  26,  27.

Dr.  Paul  adds :

"  The  Siddha,sana  and  Fadmdsana  are  both  tranquil  and  quiet  poe^
tares,  favouring  a  tranquil  circulation  aud  slow  respiration.  In  these
postures  the  Yogis  sit  and  pronounce  iuaudibly  the  hypnotic  syllable
Om,  and  meditate  upon  it  in  order  to  tranquillize  circulation  and  re-
tard the  respiratory  movements."     p.  27.

Other  syllables  may  also  be  repeated.     Dr.  Paul  says:

"  A  Yogi  is  directed  to  pronounce  inaudibly  the  mantras,  Bam,
Sam,  and  Lam,  600  times.  He  then  pronounces  Bam,  Bham,  Yam,  Ram,
and  Lam,  6000  times.  He  next  pronounces  Dam,  Dham,  Nam,  Tarn,
Tham,  Dam,  Dham,  Nam,  Pam,  and  Pham,  6000  times.  He  then
pronounces  inaudibly  Kam,  Kbam,  Gam,  Gham,  Nam,  Cham,  Chham,
Jam,  Jham,  Nam,  Tam,  and  Tham.  He  then  pronounces  inaudibly  Am,
Am,  I'm,  I'm,  Um,  Urn,  Rim,  Dim,  Ltim,  Lrim,  Em,  Aim,  Om,  Aum,
Am,  6000  times.  And  lastly  he  utteis  inaudibly  Hansa,  2000  times."
p.  28.

Fixing  the  eye  on  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  the  repetition  of  the
same  syllable  tend  to  produce  hypnotic  sleep,  in  which,  it  is  true,
"  the  transformations  of  the  thinking  principle  are  suppressed"  for
a_,time  as  in  natural  sleep.  The  brain  ceases  to  act.  As  in  natural
sleep,  neither  hunger  nor  thirst,  &c.  is  felt.  Whether  this  is  a
desirable  condition  to  which  a  human  beiog  should  reduce  himself,
will  afterwards  be  considered.

Pbanayama.

The  Yoga  Sastra  attaches  very  great  importance  to  prdndydmaf
the  regulation  of  the  breath.

It  has  been  shown  that  the  Sastras  give  most  incorrect  ac-
counts of  the  arteries,  based  on  speculation.  Assertions  about
the  breath  display  the  same  ignorance.

Some  introductory  remaiks  may  be  made,


36  YOGA   SASTBA.

Why  we  breathe. — The  blood  in  its  course  through  the  body
both  nourishes  us  and  carries  away  waste  matter.  It  leaves  the
lungs  a  bright  red  colour  ;  wheu  it  returns  to  the  lungs,  after  pass-
ing through  the  body,  it  is  dark-coloured  from  the  waste  matter
it  has  picked  up.  How  is  it  purified  ?  The  air  is  composed  mainly
of  two  gases,  called  Oxygen  and  Nitrogen.  The  oxygen  is  that
which  supports  life.  When  we  breathe,  the  oxygen  goes  down
into  the  lungs ;  it  unites  with  the  waste  matter  of  the  blood,  and
carries  it  away,  leaving  it  pure.  The  product  formed  by  the  oxy-
gen and  the  waste-matter  is  called  carbonic  acid  gas.  It  forms
about  4  parts  in  a  hundred  of  the  air  given  out.  Suppose  a  per-
son were  shut  up  in  a  close  room,  6  feet  square,  into  which  no
fresh  air  could  enter ;  the  oxygen  in  the  air  would  gradually  be
consumed,  being  replaced  by  carbonic  acid  gas,  and  the  persou
would  die.  The  same  result  follows  more  rapidly  when  people
are  hanged  or  drowned.  The  blood  is  not  purified  by  the  air  j
only  the  dark  blood  goes  round  and  round,  so  they  soon  lose  their
senses  and  die.

The  stage  of  insensibility  before  death  may  be  reached  by
breathing  the  same  air  over  and  over  again.  This  is  known  to  the
Yogas  as  Prdnapana  Yoga.  It  is  one  of  the  easiest  means  of
reaching  Samd,dhi,

Object  of  Pranayama. — As  already  explained,  drawing  in  the
breath  is  called  Puraka ;  giving  it  out  is  called  Rechaka ;  the
interval  between  is  called  Kumbhaka.  According  to  Yoga  Sastra,
whatever  prolongs  Kumbhaka  promotes  longevity.  Hence  one
great  object  of  Pr^nd,ydma  is  to  lengthen  this  interval.

Animals  which  breathe  rapidly  consume  much  oxygen,  give  out
much  carbonic  acid,  and  are  warmer  than  those  which  breathe
more  slowly.  A  pigeon  breathes  about  34  times  a  minute,  a  man
iQ  times,  a  tortoise  3  times.  A  pigeon  is  warmer  blooded  than  a
human  being,  and  dies  of  hunger  in  three  days  ;  a  tortoise  feels  cold
to  the  touch  and  can  live  for  months  without  food.  Through
Prdndydma  a  man  breathes  much  less  frequently  even  than  a
tortoise.

Dr.  Paul  gives  the  length  of  the  inspiration,  interval  and
expiration  in  each  of  the  following  stages  :

Duration  in  Seconds.


Inspiration.

Intervals.

Expiration

Prdndydma

.     12  seconds.

324  seconds.

24  seconds

Pratydhdra

do.

648       do.

do.

Dhydrana

do.

1296       do.

do.

Dhydna

do.

2592      do.

do.

Samddhi

do.

5181      do.

do.

Yogis  living  for  weeks  without  food. — Cases  have  been  known
in  which  Yogis  have  been  shut  up  for  40  days  without  food.     This


SUPPOSED   OCCDLT    POWERS.  37

Was  done  in  tbe  time  of  Ranjit  Singh.  The  following  is  the
explanation  :

There  is  an  animal  found  in  the  Himalayas,  somewhat  like  a
rabbit,  called  the  uiarmor..  For  five  months  in  the  year  the  region
where  it  lives  is  covered  with  snow,  and  food  cannot  be  obtained.
It  then  retreats  to  a  small  den,  filled  with  straw  and  dry  leaves  of
plants  to  keep  it  warm,  and  with  the  opening  carefully  covered  up.
The  marmot  has  a  long  narrow  tongue,  the  point  of  which  is  turned
back  to  the  gullet,  closing  almost  entirely  the  passage  to  the  lungs.
In  this  state  the  animal  sleeps  till  the  return  of  spring.  It  is
called  hibernating  or  wintering,  and  is  practised  by  several  animals
in  cold  countries.  In  that  state  the  animals  slowly  consume  the
fat  of  their  bodies.  The  bear  when  it  begins  to  hibernate  is  fat ;
when  it  awakes,  it  is  lean.

Some  Yogis  have  learned  to  imitate  the  Himalayan  marmot.
The  preparatory  process  is  called  Khechari  mudra.  It  consists  in
cutting  a  part  of  the  tongue,  called  the  bridle,  and  drawing  it  out
till  it  is  lengthened  and  can  be  turned  back  to  the  gullet.  As  tlie
marmot  has  its  den,  so  the  Yogi  has  his  gvphd,  or  underground
retreat,  carefully  stopped  up  to  exclude  the  air.  Like  the  marmot,
the  Yogi  prepares  his  bed  from  Kusa  grass,  cotton  and  the  wool
of  sheep,  and,  like  it,  he  turns  back  his  tongue.  In  this  way  he
can  exist  for  some  time  in  a  low  state  of  vitality,  the  consumption
of  oxygen  being  reduced  to  a  minimum.*

Supposed  Occult  Powees.

Yoga  is  chiefly  valued  by  the  Hindus  as  it  is  supposed  that,
through  means  of  it,  magical  powers  can  be  acquired,  a  list  of  the
principal  of  which  has  been  given.  See  pp.  25-27.  This  belief,  like
that  in  mantras  and  incantations,  arises  from  the  want  of  observ-
ation. If  the  supposed  powers  had  been  tested,  their  baselessness
would  have  been  discovered.

The  actual  results  of  Prdndydma  are  as  follows  :  The  blood
is  imperfectly  purified,  and  the  person  may  fall  into  a  dreamy
state  in  which  he  may  suppose  that  he  wanders  about  and  does
wonderful  things.  Savages  believe  that  the  soul  actually  leaves  the
body  in  dreams.  They  dislike  awaking  a  person  lest  his  soul  should
miss  its  way  back  to  its  body.  By  continuing  the  process,  the
vitality  may  be  reduced  to  that  of  the  hibernating  marmot.  The
"transformations  of  the  thinking  principle  are  suppressed,"  because
the  Yogi  has  been  brought  to  a  state  of  insensibility  bordering  on
death.

Professor  Wilson,  a  noted  Oriental  Scholar,  says  of  Yogis  and
Yoga  Sastra  :

*'  They  specially  practise  the  various  gesticulations  and  postures  of

*  Abridged  from  Dr.  Paul's  Yoga  Philosophy.


38  YOGA    SASTRA.

which  ifc  consists,  and  labour  assidaoasly  to  suppress  their  breath  and  fix
their  thoughts  until  the  eiJect  does  somewhat  realize  expectation,  and  the
brain,  in  a  state  of  overwrought  excitement,  bodies  forth  a  host  of  crude  and
wild  conceptions,  and  gives  to  airy  nothingness  a  local  habitation  and
a  name."     Hindu  Sects,    p.  132.

Barth,  a  distinguished  French  Orientalist,  saya  of  Yoga
exercises :

"  Conscientiously  observed  they  can  only  issue  in  folly  and  idiocy,"
Religions  of  India,     p.  83.

About  sixty  years  a  Madras  Brahman  professed,  by  yoga
powers,  to  be  able  to  sit  in  the  air  wiihout  support.  First  a  tent
was  erected,  and  when  removed  he  was  seen,  as  in  the  frontispiece,
counting  his  beads,  with  his  hand  resting  upon  a  Yoga-danda
or  staff.  The  explanation  is  simple.  The  staff  was  a  hollow
bamboo,  with  an  iron  rod  inside,  which  at  the  top  was  so  bent  as
to  form  a  seat  for  the  Yogi,  The  iron  rod  was  fixed  firmly  in  the
ground  while  covered  by  the  tent,  which  was  only  removed  when
the  preparations  hud  been  completed.  Such  feats  of  jugglery  may
be  seen  any  day  in  Loudon.

Colonel  Olcott  had  heard  in  America  of  the  wonderful  doings
of  Yogis,  and  on  his  arrival  in  India  wished  to  see  proofs  of  their
magic  powers.  He  describes  those  he  saw  as  "  painted  impostors,
who  masquerade  as  Sadhus,  to  cheat  the  charitable,  and  secretly
give  loose  to  their  beastly  nature."^

Reward  op  Rs.  1,000.

A  reward  of  the  above  sum  is  offered  to  any  Yogi  who  will,  by
yoga  power,  raise  himself  in  the  air  3  feet  and  remain  suspended
for  ten  minutes.  The  conditions  are  that  it  must  be  done  in  the
open  air  and  by  daylight.  There  must  be  no  rod  connecting  him
with  the  ground  nor  any  balloon  above  his  head.

J.  Murdoch.
Madras,  October  1896.

The  Hindu  belief  in  the  power  of  Yoga,  mantras,  and  charms
is  all  a  delusion.

Hindu  Pessimism  and  False  View  of  Life.

It  has  been  shown  that  the  first  Sutra  of  the  Sinkhya  system
is  that  "  the  complete  cessation  of  pain  is  the  complete  end  of
man."  As  existence  is  a  curse,  this  is  to  be  secured  by  freedom
from  future  births.  The  Yoga  Sastra,  and  indeed  every  system  of
Hindu  philosophy,  takes  a  similar  gloomy  view  of  life.  "  To  the
enlightened  all  is  misery,"  says  Patau jali  (II.  15).

*  Lectures,  p.  184,


BEIEF   EXAMINATION   OF   THE   SANKHYA  SYSTEM.  SO

The  general  belief  is  tliafc  this  is  the  Kali  Yuga,  succeeding
supposed  Krita,  Treta,  and  Dwapara  Yueras,  representing  golden,
silver,  brazen,  and  iron  ages.  The  doleful  account  of  the  Kali
Yuga  given  in  the  Vishnu  Purana  has  been  quoted.  Among  other
things,  '*a  man  will  be  grey  when  he  is  12,  and  no  one  will  exceed
20  years  of  life."  All  this  only  shows  the  absence  of  the  historical
faculty  among  the  Hindus.  Like  little  children,  they  have  accept-
ed the  most  improbable  legends  as  true.

There  never  was  a  golden  age  in  India.  The  earliest  inhabit-
ants were  savages,  ignorant  of  the  metals,  who  fought  with  each
other  and  wild  beasts  with  arrows  tipped  with  flint.  This  is  shown  by
the  flint  arrow  heads  which  have  been  dug  up  all  over  India,  and  may
be  seen  in  museums.  Only  very  gradually  did  civilization  arise  and
spread.  Even  under  the  most  celebrated  Hindu  sovereigns,  as
Macaulay  says,  "  We  see  the  multitudes  sunk  in  brutal  ignorance
and  the  studious  few  engaged  in  acquiring  what  did  not  deserve  the
name  of  knowledge."  The  Brahmans  sought  to  confine  all  learning
to  themselves.  The  country  was  without  roads  or  bridges  ;  there
was  not  a  single  printed  book  or  a  newspaper.  India  was  never
richer,  more  civilized  or  more  prosperous  than  at  present.  Instead  of
things  becoming  worse  and  worse,  every  year  improvements  are
made.  Human  ignorance  and  sin  are  the  great  sources  of  human
sorrow.  Remove  these,  and  existence,  instead  of  being  a  curse,
will  be  a  blessing.  The  burning  words  of  Kingsley  ought  to  be
impressed  upon  the  minds  of  all :

"  Foremost  among  them  stands  a  law  which  I  must  insist  on,  boldly
and  perpetually,  a  law  which  man  has  been  trying  in  all  ages,  as  now,  to
deny,  or  at  least  to  ignore  ;  though  he  might  have  seen  it  if  he  had  willed,
working  steadily  in  all  times  and  nations.  And  that  is — that  as  the  fruit
of  righteousness  is  wealth  and  peace,  strength  and  honour;  the  fruit  of
unrighteousness  is  poverty  and  anarchy,  weakness  and  shame.  It  is  an
ancient  doctrine  and  yet  one  ever  young."*

In  England,  during  the  last  two  centuries,  the  average
duration  of  life  has  doubled,  while  the  general  standard  of  comfort
has  been  remarkably  raised.  Our  happiness  depends  very  much
upon  ourselves.  "  Grodliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having
promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."
We  may  be  happy  in  this  world,  and  unspeakably  happy  for  ever
in  the  next.

Brief  Examination  op  the  Sankhya  System.

Before  taking  up  Yoga  Sastra,  a  few  remarks  may  be  offered
on  Kapila's  philosophy.  '

!•  Its  low  selfish  end- — This  is  simply  "  the  complete
cessation  of  pain."     A  far  higher  aim  is  to  try  to  become  wiser  and

*  Limits  of  Exact  Science  applied  to  History.


40  TOGfA  SASTBA.

better,  more  useful  to  all  around  us,  or  to  seek  cotntnunion  with
God.

2.  Its  absurd  ascription  of  distinguishing  qualities  to
some  material  objects. — Sound  is  said  to  be  the  characteristic  of
dkdsa,  ether.  Light  makes  its  way  from  the  sun  through  dJcdsa,  but
we  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  it  conveys  sound.  Tremendous
explosions  take  place  on  the  surface  of  the  sun  ;  but  the  faintest
murmur  of  them  never  reaches  the  earth.  The  eternity  of  sound
is  another  figment  of  Hindu  philosophy.  Extension  would  have
been  a  fitter  characf^eristic  for  dkdsa.  "  Earth  is  that  which  hns
the  quality  of  odour."  Dry  earth  has  no  smell.  One  would  have
supposed  that  soZ^(i^71/ would  rather  have  been  mentioned.  Taste
is  said  to  be  the  distinguishing  quality  of  water !  Pure  water  is
tasteless ;  any  taste  is  caused  by  the  presence  of  salt  or  some  other
substance.  Fluidity  is  rather  its  characteristic  in  its  ordinary  state.

3.  Its  infinite  number  of  eternal  existences. — Hindu  philo-
sophy assigns  two  causes  for  the  eternity  of  the  soul  :

One  argument  is  the  supposed  axiom :  "  Whatever  exists
must  always  have  existed."  This  denies  God's  omnipotence.
"  Thou  thoughtest  that  I  was  altogether  such  an  one  as  thyself."
A  carpenter  cannot  work  without  materials ;  in  like  manner  it  is
supposed  that  God  must  have  formed  all  things  out  of  eternally
existing  matter.  "  Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  power  of  God.  By
His  will  He  can  create  things  or  call  them  out  of  nothing  iuto
existence.

Another  argument  is  that  "Whatever  had  a  beginning  must
have  an  end."  This  is  also  a  denial  of  God's  power.  He  can  give
a  future  eternal  existence  to  any  creature  He  has  called  into  being.
According  to  Hinduism,  souls  may  pass  into  gods,  demons,  beasts,
birds,  reptiles,  fishes,  insects,  into  plants,  and  even  into  inanimate
objects.  "Who  can  estimate  the  number  of  these  eieri\^\  svayarnhhu
essences  !  Is  it  not  perfectly  unphilosophiral,  because  absolutely
unnecessary  and  egregiously  extravagant,  to  assume  such  an  indefi-
nite number  of  eternal  essences,  when  o»ie  Supremo  Essence  is
sufficient  to  account  for  all  things,  visible  or  invisible,  material  or
spiritual  ?"'^

4.  Its  Atheism- — It  is  true  that  Sutra  93  "  Iswardseddhih.
The  existence  of  Iswara  is  a  thing  unproved,"  seems  only  agnostic  ;
but  the  possiblity  of  His  existence  is  denied  in  the  next  Sutra  :  "  If
free   and    unbound.   He  cannot  be  either,  and   therefore   cannot

exist."t

Prahriti,  itself  unintelligent,  is  supposed  to  be  the  author  of
their  universe,  so  wonderfully  formed  that  after  thonsands  of  years,
the  most  learned  men  are  still  ignorant,  in  many  respects,  of  its  struc-
ture.    To  every  intelligent,    thoughtful   man,  the  atheism  of  any

*  Banerjoa'B  Dialogued,  p.  164.

t  Quoted  by  Dr.  Mnllena,  Hwlu- Philosophy,  pp.  181,  1S2.


ASANA.  41

system  ja  a  sufficient  ground  for  its  rejection.  Proofs  of  tbe  exis-
tence of  God  will  be  found  clearly  stated  in  The  Existence  and
Character  of  God  by  Eow.,*


THE  TRUE  YOaA  SASTRA.

Patanjali'3  system  has  been  examined.  The  one  which  should
take  its  place  will  now  be  explained.

Its  aim.

Instead  of  seeking  "  the  suppression  of  the  transformations  of
the  thinking  principle,"  by  want  of  exercise,  fixing  eye  on  the  tip
of  the  nose,  and  breathing  like  a  tortoise,  we  should  try  to  render
our  bodily  and  mental  powers  aa  perfect  as  possible.  The  maxim
of  the  greatest  nation  of  antiquity  was,  "  A  sound  mind  in  a  sound
body."  They  are  to  be  used,  however,  nofc  in  acquiring  wealth  or
power,  but  in  doing  the  greatest  amount  of  good  we  can  to  all
around  us.

Yama.

The  restraint  of  all  our  evil  passions  is  our  bounden  duty.
One  great  help  to  this  is  temperance.  The  body  should  not  be
pampered  by  luxurious  living ;  abstinence  from  all  intoxicating
liquors  is  a  great  safeguard.  Companions  or  places  that  would
lead  us  astray  ought  to  be  shunned.  Above  all,  we  should  seek
divine  help.  "  Watch  and  pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation ;"
"  Hold  Thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe.

NlYAMA.

Virtues  should  be  cultivated  aa  well  as  vices  restrained.  The
Bible  says  ;  '*  Whatsoevei"  things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are
honest,  whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  what-
soever things  are  lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report ;  if
there  be  any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on  these
things."  Elsewhere  ib  is  said,  "  add  to  your  faith  virtue."  Virtue
comes  from  vir,  '  a  man.^  Its  primary  meaning  is  manliness ;
among  the  Romans  virtus  meant  bravery.  In  India  it  may  be  under-
stood aa  moral  courage,  faithfulness  to  one's  convictions  of  duty.
No  virtue  is  more  needed  among  educated  Hindus.

ASANA.

Suppose  a  master  intrusts  to  a  servant  an  instrument  wonder-
fully constructed  to  enable  him  to  do  his  work;  he  will  expect
him  to  take  care  of  it  and  keep  it  in   proper  order.     If,   instead  of

*  Sold  by  Mr.  A.  T.  Scott,  },  Anna.

6


42  YOGA   SASTRA.

tbafc,  he  tried  to  weaken  its  powers  and  render  it  useless,  hQ  would
be  considered  very  blameworthy.  The  body  is  that  instrument
committed  to  as  by  God  to  do  His  will.  Instead  of  being  enfeebled,
it  should  be  made  as  strong  and  healthy  as  possible.

Ignorant  Hindus  believe  that  it  is  a  work  of  merit  to  hold  up
the  arm  till  the  muscles  becomes  withered  from  want  of  exercise,
and  the  arm  is  rendered  powerless.  Compare,  on  the  other  hand,
the  arm  of  a  blacksmith  who  wields  a  heavy  hammer,  how  well  the
muscles  are  developed !  By  Yoga  postures,  the  muscles  are
cramped  and  deprived  of  exercise  :  while  the  Yogi  is  looking  at
the  tip  of  his  nose,  and  muttering  syllables  which  promote  hypnotic
sleep.

The  true  dsana  are  gymnastic  exercises  to  develop  the  different
muscles.  When  recruits  enter  the  army,  they  are  practised  on  them,
with  the  result  of  considerably  increasing  their  strength.  They
have  been  wisely  introduced  into  ?otne  schools.  Cricket  and  other
games  answer  the  same  purpose.  Elderly  persons  may  take  a
walk.  Hindus  would  be  much  healthier,  live  longer,  and  suffer  less
from  diabetes,  if  they  took  sufficient  exercise.

Pranayama.

Mr.  Manilal's  remarks  have  been  quoted  :

"  TJdgJidta  appears  to  mean  the  rising  of  the  breath  from  the  navel,
and  its  striking  at  the  roof  of  the  palate.  Prdndydma  has  as  its  chief
object  the  mixing  ofprdna,  the  upper  breath,  and  apdna,  the  lower  breath,
and  raising  them  upwards  by  degrees  and  stages  till  they  subside  on  the
head.  This  practice  awakens  a  peculiar  force  which  i.s  dormant  about
the  navel,  and  is  called  Kundalini.  It  is  this  force  which  is  the  source  of
all  occult  power."    p.  52.

Sankar^charyd  in  his  Atmdndtma  Vivekah,  as  translated  by
Mr.  Mohinee  M.  Chatterjee,  thus  describes  the  "  five  vital  airs  :"

"  Prdna,  apdna,  vydna,  uddna  and  samdna.  Their  locations  are
said  to  be  : — of  prdna,  the  breast,  of  apdna  the  fundament,  of  samdna  the
navel,  of  uddna,  the  throat,  and  vydna  is  spread  all  over  the  body.
Functions  of  these  are  : — prdna  goes  out,  apdna  descends,  uddna  ascends,
samdna  reduces  the  food  eaten  into  an  undistingnishable  state,  and
vydna  circulates  all  over  the  body.  Of  these  five  vital  airs  there  are
five  sub-airs,  namely  ndga,  kurma,  krikara,  devadatia  and  dhananjaya.
Functions  of  these  are  :  eructations  produced  by  ndga,  kiirma  opens
the  eye,  dhanavjaya  assimilates  food»  devadatta  causes  yawning,  and
krikara  produces  appetite — this  is  said  by  those  versed  in  Yoga^*

All  this  is  only  shows  crass  ignorance  of  the  structure  of  the
body.  No  breath  goes  down  to  the  navel,  so  it  cannot  be  raised.
The  prdna  and  apdna  are  sheer  nonsense  ;  as  is  the  "  dormant  force
about  the  navel."     Belief  in  "  occult   powers"  will  afterwards  be

*  Compendium    of  the   Raja   Toga  Fhiloso^hy,  publiphed  by  Tookaram  Ta£ya,
Bombay,  pp.  40,41.


DISBELIEF    IN    OCCULT    POWERS.  43

noticed.  Some  account  will  now  be  given  of  breathing  and
its  uses.

The  muscles  and  brain  require  to  be  nourished  as  well  as  exor-
cised. Pure  blood  is  the  chief  means.  Instead  of  the  small  supply
of  impure  air  afforded  by  the  yoga  exercises,  we  should  aim  at  a
large  supply  of  pure  air.  How  is  this  to  be  secured  ?  The  air  we
breathe  goes  down  into  the  lungs,  which  are  full  of  small  air  cells,
somewhat  like  a  sponge.  As  a  sponge  is  much  larger  when  its
cells  are  filled  with  water  than  when  dry,  so  the  lungs  swell  out
when  their  cells  are  filled  with  air.  How  many  little  air  cells  are
there  in  the  lungs  ?  About  sixty  lakhs!  The  air  after  staying  a
little  time  in  the  air  cells,  goes  out  again.  We  can  see  our  breasts
rise  and  fall  as  the  air  enters  and  leaves.

It  has  been  explained  that  it  is  the  oxygen  in  the  air  which
purifies  the  blood  and  removes  waste  matter.  The  yoga  exercises
seek  to  diminish  its  supply.  The  object  should  be  the  very  reverse.
When  people  lean  forward  the  air  cells  in  the  lungs  are  compressed
and  admit  a  smaller  quantity  of  air.  To  increase  their  capacity,
the  shoulders  should  be  thrown  back;  we  should  then  slowly  inhale
as  much  air  as  we  can  to  distend  the  lungs ;  hold  it  for  some  time
and  then  exhale  it.  Such  an  exercise  practised  a  dozen  times  a
day,  would  permanently  increase  the  capacity  of  the  chest,  and
render  a  person  stronger  and  healthier.  When  soldiers  enter  the
army,  their  girth  at  the  chest  is  measured.  After  a  time,  by  means
of  such  exercises,  it  has  been  found  to  increase  about  two  inches
or  more.

Herbert  Spencer  says,  ''  The  first  requisite  to  success  in  life  is
to  be  a  good  animal" — that  is  to  have  a  strong  healthy  body.  If
India  is  to  rise  in  the  scale  of  nations,  instead  of  admiring  dream-
ing ascetics,  weak  boih  in  body  and  mind,  she  must  try  to  produce
men  like  Prince  Ranjit  Singh,  able  to  complete  successfully  with
Englishmen  at  their  national  game  of  cricket.

Disbelief  in  Occult  Powers.

This  has  already  been  noticed,  but  it  may  be  treated  more  fully.
For  three  thousand  years  the  Hindus  have  been  vainly  seeking  to
acquire  magical  powers  by  "  herbs,  austerities,  and  incantations."
Two  maiu  objects  have  been  the  power  of  transmuting  common
metals  into  gold  and  preparing  an  elixir  which  would  render  men
immortal.  Every  now  and  then  we  hear  of  simpletons  who  gave
their  brass  vessels  to  magicians  to  be  changed  into  gold,  with  the
result  of  their  disappearance.  Patanjali  enumerates  many  other
magical  powers,  all  of  which  areas  imaginary  as  alchemy.

Hindus  who  believe  in  occult  powers  are  in  the  mental  condi-
tion of  savages,  which  is  thus  described  by  Lang  in  Myth,  Ritual,
and  Religion :

'*  They  Lave  that  nebulous  and  confused  form  of  mind  to  which


44  YOGA    SASTBA.

all  things,  animate  or  inanimate,  human,  animal,  vegetable  or  inorganic,
seem  on  the  same  level  of  life,  passion  and  leason.  The  savage  draws  no
hard  and  fast  line  between  himself  and  the  things  in  the  world.  He
regards  himself  as  literally  akin  to  animals  and  plants,  and  heavenly
bodies,  he  attributes  sex  and  procreative  powers  even  to  stones,  and
rocks,  and  he  assigns  human  speech  and  humau  feelings  to  sun  and  moon,
stars  and  wind,  no  less  than  to  beasts,  birds,  and  fishes

3.  Another  peculiarity  of  savage  belief  naturally  connects  itself
•with  that  which  has  just  been  described.  The  savage  has  very  strong
ideas  about  the  persistent  existence  of  the  souls  of  the  dead.  They  retain
much  of  their  old  nature,  but  are  often  more  malignant  after  death  than
they  had  been  during  life.  They  are  frequently  at  the  beck  and  call  of
the  conjurer,  whom  they  aid  with  their  advice  and  with  their  magical
power.  By  virtue  of  the  close  connection  already  spoken  of  between  man
and  the  animals,  the  souls  of  the  dead  are  not  rarely  supposed  to  migrate
into  the  bodies  of  beasts,  or  to  resort  to  the  condition  of  that  species  of
creatures  with  which  each  tribe  supposes  itself  to  be  related  by  ties  of
kinship.  With  the  usual  inconsistency  of  mythical  belief,  the  souls  of
the  dead  are  spoken  of,  at  other  times,  as  if  they  inhabited  a  spiritual
world,  usually  a  gloomy  place  which  mortal  men  may  visit,  but  whence
no  one  can  escape  who  has  tasted  of  the  food  of  the  gbosts.

4.  In  connection  with  spirits  a  far-reaching  savage  philosophy
prevails.  It  is  not  unusual  to  assign  a  ghost  to  all  objects,  animate  or
inanimate,  and  the  spirit  or  strength  of  a  man  is  frequently  regarded  as
something  separable,  or  something  with  a  definite  locality  in  the  body.
A  man's  strength  and  spirit  may  reside  in  his  kidney  fat,  in  his  heart,  in
a  lock  of  his  hair,  or  may  even  be  stored  by  him  in  some  separate
receptacle.  Very  frequently  a  man  is  held  capable  of  detaching  his  soul
from  his  body  and,  letting  it  roam  about  on  his  business,  sometimes  in
the  form  of  a  bird  or  other  animal.

5.  Many  minor  savage  beliefs  might  be  named,  such  as  the  common
faith  in  friendly  or  protecting  animals,  and  the  notion  that  *  natural
deaths'  (as  we  call  them)  are  always  unnatural,  that  death  is  always
caused  by  some  hostile  spirit  or  conjurer.  From  this  opinion  comes  the
myth  that  man  is  not  naturally  subject  to  death  ;  that  death  was  somehow
introduced  into  the  world  by  a  mistake  or  misdeed,  is  a  corollary.

6.  One  more  peculiarity  of  the  savage  mind  remains  to  be
considered  in  this  brief  summary.  The  savage,  like  the  civilised  man,
is  curious.  The  first  faint  impulses  of  the  scientific  spirit  are  at  work
in  his  brain  ;  he  is  anxious  to  give  himself  an  account  of  the  world  in
which  he  finds  himself.  But  he  is  not  more  curious  than  he  is,  on
occasion,  credulous.  His  intellect  is  eager  to  ask  questions,  as  is  the
habit  of  children,  but  his  intellect  is  also  lazy,  and  he  is  content  with  the
first  answer  that  comes  to  hand."     Vol.  I.  pp.  47,  49.

The  world  of  the  savage  is  a  jungle  of  foolish  fancies,  in  which  gods
and  beasts,  and  men  and  stars  and  ghosts  all  move  madly  on  a  level  of
common  personality  and  animation,  all  changing  shapes  at  random.

Savages  believe  in  magic  and  sorcery,  Lang  says :

*'  The  world  and  all  the  things  in  it  being  conceived  of  vaguely  as


DISBELIEF   IN    OCCULT    POWEKS.  45

sensible  and  rational,  are  supposed  to  obey  the  commands  of  certain
members  of  each  tribe,  such  as  chiefs,  jugglers,  or  conjurers.  These
conjurers  can  affect  the  weather,  work  miracles,  assume  what
shapes,  animal,  vegetable,  or  inorgauicj  they  please,  and  can  change
other  persons  into  similar  shapes.  It  has  already  been  shown  that
savage  man  has  regarded  all  things  as  persons  much  on  a  level  with
himself.  It  has  now  to  be  shown  what  kind  of  person  he  conceives  himself
to  he.  He  does  not  look  on  men  as  civilised  races  regard  them,  that  is,  as
beings  with  strict  limitations.  On  the  other  hand,  he  thinks  of  certain
members  of  his  tribe  as  exempt  from  all  limitations,  and  capable  of
working  every  miracle  that  tradition  has  ever  attributed  to  prophets
or  gods.  Nor  are  such  miraculous  powers  supposed  by  savages  to  be  at
all  rare  among  themselves.  Though  highly  valued,  miraculous  attainments
are  not  believed  to  be  unusual.  When  a  savage  jegards  the  sky  or  sun
or  wind  as  a  person,  he  does  not  mean  merely  a  person  with  the
limitations  recognised  by  civilised  races.  He  means  a  person  with  the
miraculous  powers  of  the  medicine-man.*  The  sky,  sun,  wind,  or  other
elemental  personage  can  converse  with  the  dead,  and  can  turn  himself
and  his  neighbours  into  animals,  stones  and  trees.

The  savage  seeks  an  explanation,  a  theory  of  things  based  on  his
experience.  But  his  knowledge  of  physical  causes  and  of  natural  laws
is  exceedingly  scanty,  and  he  is  driven  to  fall  back  upon  supernatural
explanations.  These  supernatural  causes  themselves  the  savage  believes
to  be  matters  of  experience.  It  is  to  his  mind  a  matter  of  experience  that
all  nature  is  personal  and  animated  ;  that  men  may  change  shapes  with
beasts;  that  incantations  and  supernatural  beings  can  cause  sunshine  and
storm.

When  an  untoward  event  occurs,  savages  look  for  its  cause  among
all  the  less  familiar  circumstances  of  the  last  few  days,  and  select  the
determining  cause  very  much  at  random.

In  the  Pacific  Ocean  the  people  of  one  island  always  attribute  hur-
ricanes to  the  machinations  of  the  people  of  the  nearest  island  to  wind-
ward. The  wind  comes  from  them;  therefore  (as  their  medicine-men
can  notoriously  influence  the  weather)  they  must  have  sent  the  wind.
This  unneighborly  act  is  regarded  as  a  just  cause  of  war.  The  chief
•principle,  then,  of  savage  science  is  that  antecedence  and  consequence
in  time  are  the  pame  as  effect  and  cause.  Again  savage  science  holds
that  like  effects  like;  that  you  can  injure  a  man,  for  example,  by  injuring
his  eflSgy.  On  these  principles  the  savage  explains  the  world  to  himself,
and  on  those  principles  he  tries  to  subdue  to  himself  the  world.  Now
the  putting  of  these  principles  into  practice  is  simply  the  exercise  of  art
magic,  an  art  to  which  nothing  seems  impossible.  The  belief  that
medicine-men  practise  this  art  is  universal  among  savages.

Any  object  once  in  a  man's  possession,  especially  his  hair  or  his
nails,  is  supposed  to  be  capable  of  being  used  against  him  by  a  sorcerer.
The  part  suggests  the  whole.  A  lock  of  a  man's  hair  was  part  of  the
man  ;  to  destroy  the  hair  is  to  destroy  its  former  owner.

Among  some  American  Indians,  wheii  any  is  ill,  an  image  of  hia
disease,  a  boil  or  what  not,  is  carved  in  wood.     This  little  image  is  then

*  American  Indians  call  magicians  or  sorcerers  medicine-men.     The  word  medi-
cine here  means  mystery ,  sometfiing  wonderful.


46  *  YOGA   SASTEA.

placed  in  a  bowl  of  water  and  shot  at  with  a  gun.  The  image  of  the
disease  being  destroyed,  the  disease  itself  is  expected  to  disappear,

"We  found  among  savages  the  belief  in  the  power  of  songs  of  incaU'
tation  or  mantras.  The  most  miraculous  effects  are  caused  by  pronouncing  a
few  lines  in  rhyme.  An  American  Indian  will  give  a  form  of  incanta-
tion with  which  he  says  you  will  be  able  to  call  to  you  all  the  birds  from
the  sky,  and  all  the  foxes  and  wolves  from  their  burrows.  There  are
supposed  to  be  mantras  which  raise  the  wind  ;  which  split  rocks  ;  by
virtue  of  which  the  shape  of  any  animal  may  be  assumed  at  will  or  a
person  can  fly  through  the  air.

Let  ns  recapitulate  the  powers  attributed  all  over  the  people  by  the
lower  people  to  medicine  men.  The  medicine-man  has  all  miracles  at  his
command.  He  rules  the  sky,  he  flies  into  the  air,  he  becomes  visible  or
invisible  at  will,  he  can  take  and  confer  any  form  at  pleasure,and  resume
his  human  shape.  He  can  control  spirits,  can  converse  with  the  dead,
and  can  descend  to  their  abodes."*

Of  all  Hindus  probably  the  Shaktas  of  Bengal  have  the
greatest  belief  in  the  ability  to  acquire  occult  powers  by  mantras.
Monier  Williams  quotes  the  following  :

*'  Holding  a  scented  flower,  anointed  with  sandal,  on  the  left
temple,  repeat  Om  to  the  gurus,  Oni  to  Ganesa,  Otn  to  Durga.  Then
with  Om  phat,  rub  the  palms  with  flowers  and  clasp  the  hand  thrice
over  the  head,  and  by  snapping  the  fingers  towards  ten  different  directions,
secure  immunity  from  the  evil  spirits."

"  Then  meditate  on  the  Matrika,  and  say,  '  Help  me,  goddess  of
speech,"  am  to  the  forehead,  dm  to  the  mouth,  im  to  the  right  eye,  im  to
the  left  eye,  iim  to  the  right  ear,  um  to  the  left  ear,  im  to  the  right
cheek,  im  to  the  left  cheek,  rim  to  the  right  nostril,  rim  to  the  left
nostril,  brim  to  the  right  cheek,  brim  to  the  left  cheek,  em  to  the  upper
lip,  aim  to  the  lower  lip,  om  to  the  upper  teeth,  aum  to  the  lower  teeth,
tam,  tham,  dam,  dham,  and  navi  to  the  several  parts  of  the  left'  leg,  pam
to  the  right  side,  pham  to  the  left,  bam  to  the  back,  mam  to  the  stomach,
yam  to  the  hearfc,  ram  to  the  right  shoulder,  lam  to  the  neck-bone,  ram  to
the  left  shoulder,  sam  from  the  heart  to  the  right  leg,  tram  from  the
heart  to  the  left  leg,  kshavi  from  the  heart  to  the  mouth."  f

It  is  astonishing  how  any  one  in  his  senses  can  believe  in  the
potency  of  such  nonsense.  Along  with  this  proof  of  a  "  darken-
ed understanding,"  among  the  Vamacliara  Saktas  there  is  evidence
of  a  "  depraved  heart."  Religion  is  made  an  excuse  for  indul-
gence in  beastly  vices.  Probably  the  lowest  savages  on  the  face
of  the  earth  are  not  so  morally  degraded  as  some  Hindu  believers
in  the  efficacy  of  mantras.

Another  Hindu  belief,  equally  baseless,  is  in  the  power  of
austerities.  The  sacred  books  are  full  of  illustrations  of  their
alleged  wonders.     According  to  the   Eamayana,   Bavana  passed

•  Myth,  Ritual  and  Religion,  Vol.  I.  pp.  84,120  abridged,
t  Brahmaniam  and  Hinduism;  pp.  i97,  198,


DISBELIEF   IN   OCCULT   POWERS.  47

10,000  years  without  food.  Every  year  he  offered  one  of  his  heads
to  the  fire.  When  about  to  do  so  for  the  tenth  time,  Brahma
appeared,  restored  all  the  heads  he  had  lost,  made  him  indestruc-
tible to  all  creatures  more  powerful  than  man,  with  the  power  of
assuming  any  shape  at  will.  Any  person  of  sense  can  at  once  see
that  all  this  is  a  mere  invention  of  the  poet.


Many  of  the  Hindu  ideals  of  piety  are  utterly  mistaken.  It
is  a  meritorious  act  to  vow  not  to  speak.  Some  sannyasis  wear
round  their  necks  an  iron  frame  which  is  supposed  to  prevent  them
from  lying  down  to  sleep  at  ease.  Some  hang  with  their  heads
down,  others  have  their  legs  up.  Some  hold  up  an  arm  till  it  is
wasted  and  cannot  be  bent.  A  very  meritorious  act  is  to  sit  in  the
midday  sun,  with  fires  blazing  all  around.

What  good  is  done  by  sach  acts  ?  What  rewards  can  be
expected  from  them  ?

Most  men  become  sannyasis  because  they  are  too  lazy  to  work,
and  can  get  an  easy  living  by  preying  upon  the  industrious.  The
withered  arm,  the  vow  of  silence,  &c,,  are  merely  devices  to  get
more  money.  Such  vows  are  sins — not  acts  of  merit.  Suppose  a
servant  rendered  useless  some  of  the  tools  given  to  him  to  work
with,  would  he  be  praised  ?  God  has  given  us  arms  to  provide  food
for  ourselves,  our  families  and  the  poor  ;  He  has  given  us  the  gift
of  speech  that  we  may  comfort  the  sorrowful,  instruct  the  ignorant.
The  withered  arm  and  vow  of  silence  defeat  these  ends.  It  Would
be  noble  for  a  man  to  venture  into  a  burning  house  to  rescue
children  ;  but  it  is  worse  than  useless  for  a  man  to  sit  in  the  middle
of  blazing  fires.

The  Hindu  belief  in  the  power  of  mystic  syllables  or  aus-
terities is  a  mere  delusion ;  but,  as  will  hereafter  be  explained,  by
the  proper  use  of  the  mental  powers  men  may  accomplish  wonders.


48  TOGA   SASTB&.

Efforts  to  acqciirb  true  Knowledoe.

It  has  been  allowed  that  Ancient  India  made  great  advances  in
Grammar  and  in  Mathematics ;  that  many  poetical  beauties  andexcel-
lentmoral'maximsandsublime  descriptions  of  God  maybe  culled  from
Sanskrit  literature ;  but  the  words  of  Sir  H.  S.  Maine  are,  on  the
whole,  strictly  correct,  that  it  also  contains  "  that  which  is  not  true
— false  morality,  false  history,  false  philosophy,  false  physics."
"  Greater  affinity  for  eastern  thought  would  be  purchased  by  the
sacrifice  of  that  truth,  moral,  historical,  and  physical,  which  will
one  day  bind  together  the  European  and  Asiatic  minds,  if  ever
they  are  to  be  united,"  Mncaulay  in  his  celebrated  Minute  ex-
presses similar  opinions  :  "  Medical  doctrines,  which  would  disgrace
an  English  farrier, — Astconomy  which  would  move  laughter  in
girls  at  an  English  boarding  school, — History,  abounding  with
kings  thirty  feet  high,  and  reigns  thirty-thousand  years  long, —
and  Geography  made  up  of  seas  of  treacle,  and  seas  of  butter."

For  thousands  of  years  India  has  been  blindly  following  false
guides;  it  is  time  that  she  opened  her  eyes  and  tried  to  find  out
the  truth.  The  two  cldef  means  to  be  employed  may  be  briefly
stated :

1.  The  Cultivation  of  the  Observing  Powers. — It  has  been
mentioned  as  a  characteristic  of  the  Hindu  mind  to  speculate  in-
stead of  investigate.  The  result  has  been  false  geography,  false
astronomy,  false  physiology,  &c.  Happily  there  are  signs  of  a
better  state  of  things.  Professor  J.  C.  Bose  has  so  distinguished
himself  by  careful  observation  and  experiment,  as  to  call  forth  the
admiration  of  some  of  the  greatest  European  Scientists.  The  result
is  an  instalment  of  the  truth,  which,  in  the  words  of  Sir  H.  S.  Maine
already  quoted,  ''will  bind  toother  the  European  and  Asiatic
minds."  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  Professor  Bose  is  only  the  fiist  of
a  long  line  of  Indian  scientific  observers.

2.  The  Cultivation  of  the  Critical  Faculty— Here  the  Hindu
mind  has  been  equally  at  fault.  The  most  contradictory  statements
have  all  been  accepted  is  true  ;  the  most  improbable  legends  regard-
ed as  genuine  history.  Illustration  has  been  received  as  sound
logical  reasoning.  Max  Muller,  referring  to  the  Brahmanas,  of  the
Vedas,  considered  to  belong  to  the  Srati  class  of  Hindu  sacred
books,  while  acknowledging  them  to  contain  "  no  lack  of  striking
thoughts,"  estimates  them  as  "a  literature  which  for  pedantry
and  absurdity  can  hardly  be  matched  anywhere  .  .  .  These  works
deserve  to  be  studied  as  the  physician  studies  the  twaddle  of  idiots,
and  the  raving  of  madmen."^

The  Rev.  Dr.  K.  S.  Macdonald,  in  The  Brahmanas  of  the  Vedas,
quotes  the  following  from  the  Sataj^atha  Brahmana  :

"  Prajapati  beheld  all  beings  in  this  triple    Vedic  science.     For  in  it  is
*  Ancient  Sanskrit  tUeruiure.


THE  TRUE  BHAKTI  YOGA.  40

the  soul  of  all  metres,  of  all  hymns  of  praise,  of  all  breaths  of  all  the  gods.
This  indeed  exists.  This  is  that  which  is  mortal.  Prajapati  reflected,  '  All
beings  are  comprehended  in  the  triple  Yedic  science  :  come  let  me  dispose
myself  in  the  shape  of  the  triple  Vedic  science.'  He  arranged  the  versos
of  the  Rig-Teda.  Twelve-thousand  Brihatis,  and  as  many  Rik  verses  which
were  created  by  Prajapati,  stood  in  rows  in  the  thirtietl^  class.  Since  they
stood  in  the  thirtieth  class  there  are  thirty  nights  in  the  month."

"  As  a  parallel  to  the  above  and  to  much  of  the  reasonings  in  the
Brahmanas,  we  refer  our  readers  to  the  pages  of  Alice  in  Wonderland,
and  extract  the  following  sample  :  —

"  And  how  many  hours  a  day  did  you  do  lessons  P"  said  Alice  to  change
the  subject.  "  Ten  hours  the  first  day,"  said  the  Mock  Turtle,  "  nine  the
next,  and  so  on."  "  What  a  curious  plan  !"  exclaimed  Alice.  "  That's  the
reason  they're  called  lessons"  the  Gryphon  remarked,  "  because  they  lessen
from  day  to  day.  This  was  quite  a  new  idea  to  Alice,  and  she  thought  it
over  a  little  before  she  made  her  next  remark — "  Then  the  eleventh  day
must  have  been  a  holiday  P"  "  Of  course  it  was,"  said  the  Mock  Turtle.
"  And  how  did  you  manage  on  the  twelfth  ?"  Alice  went  on  eagerly.
"  That  is  enough  about  lessons,"  the  Gryphon  interi'upted  in  a  very  decided
tone,  '•  tell  her  something  about  games  now."*

According  to  the  above  extract  from  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,
there  are  thirty  nights  in  the  month,  because  certain  verses  stood,
in  the  thirtieth  class !  This  may  well  be  compared  to  "  the
twaddle  of  idiots."  Numberless  other  illustrations  might  be  given
of  the  same  mode  of  reasoning.

Here  happily  also  a  beginning  has  been  made  of  a  more
excellent  way.  There  is  an  admirable  lecture  by  Dr.  Bhandarkar
of  Poena,  on  The  Gritical,  Gomparative  and  Historical  Method  of
Inquiry,  explaining  the  principles  on  which  investigations  should
be  conducted.  Like  Professor  J.  C.  Bose,  Dr.  Bhandarkar  is  also
helping  to  "  bind  together  the  European  and  Asiatic  mind,"  for
he  is  taking  part  in  an  Eneyclopcedia  of  Indo- Aryan  Research,  to
be  published  in  Grermany.

By  a  combination  of  the  two  methods,  the  Indian  mind,
instead  of  producing  merely  '^  false  morality,  false  history,  false
philosophy,  and  false  physics"  would  be  adding  to  the  world's
stock  of  true  knowledge.

The  teuej  Bhakti  Yoga.

As  already  explained,  the  atheistic  system  of  Kapila  had  no
idea  of  union  with  God.  Patanjali,  to  avoid  the  odium  excited  by
Kapila,  brings  in  Isvara  ;  but  practically  he  is  a  nonentity.  Patan-
jali, equally  with  Kapila,  ignores  the  idea  of  union  with  God.  The
latter  arose  at  a  subsequent  period  from  the  religiousness  of  the
Hindu  mind.


*  The  Brahmanas    of  the  VeAas,  8vo.    232  pp.  8  As.     Post-free,  10    As.     Sold
by  Mr.  A.  T.  Scott,  Tract  Dep6t,  Madras.

7


50  YOGA  SASTEA.

There  is  very  much  to  admire  in  the  stages  which  have  been
named ;  as  sdloikya,  dwelling  in  the  same  abode  with  God ;  sdmipya,
nearness  to  Him;  sdrupya,  assimilation  to  His  likeness;  sdyujya^
union  with  Him.  BhaJcfi  Toga,  union  with  God  through  love,  is
another  term  employed.  There  is  here  a  seeking  after  God  which  is
truly  noble  compared  with  the  system  of  Pataujali.

But  while  the  end  is  so  highly  to  be  praised,  the  means  to
attain  it  by  Yoga  exercises  are  strongly  to  be  condemned.  As
already  explained,  the  real  effects  are  to  reduce  a  human  being  to
the  condition  of  a  tortoise  or  hibernating  Himalaya  marmot ;  the
body  is  enfeebled  by  want  of  exercise ;  the  brain  receives  only  a
small  supply  of  impure  blood,  and  the  person  at  last  is  reduced  to  a
state  bordering  on  idiocy.  During  all  this  time  he  is  absolutely
useless  as  a  member  of  society.

Right  Conceptions  of  God. — This  lies  at  the  foundation  of
true  religion.  There  is  an  Indian  proverb,  Yatah  devah,  tathah
hhahtah,  '  As  is  the  god  so  is  the  worshipper.'  Hinduism  generally
defines  the  Supreme  Spirit  in  His  nirguna  condition,  as  sat,  pure
existence,  as  opposed  to  non-existence ;  cit,  pure  thought  in  the
negation  of  non-thought ;  ananda,  pure  bliss  in  freedom  from  the
miseries  of  life  and  transmigration.""^

Brahma,  in  his  nirguna  condition,  is  supposed  to  be  like  a
Hindu  raja  who  spends  his  life  in  sloth  within  his  palace,  heedless
of  what  is  going  on  throughout  his  dominions,  and  leaving  every-
thing to  his  ministers.

''  Unencumbered  by  the  cares  of  empire,"  says  Dr.  Duff,  "  or
the  functions  of  a  superintending  providence,  he  effectuates  no
good,  inflicts  no  evil,  suffers  no  pain.  Ho  exists  in  a  state  of  un-
disturbed repose — a  sleep  so  deep  as  never  to  be  disturbed  by  a
dream — even  without  any  consciousness  of  his  own  existence."

The  three  qualities  which  Brahma,  in  his  saguna  state,  possesses
are  sattva,  truth,  rajas,  passion,  a  longing  for  worldly  pleasure,  and
tamas,  darkness.  Prahldda  is  represented,  in  the  Vishnu  Purana,
as  thus  addressing  Vishnu  :  "  Thou  art  knowledge  and  ignorance,
truth  and  falsehood,  poison  and  ambrosia."

Hinduism  has  no  correct  idea  of  holiness.  Brahma,  Vishnu,
and  Siva,  are  nowhere  regfarded  in  the  Sastras  as  holy  beings.  On
the  contrary,  they  are  all  described  as  stained  with  great  crimes.
The  gods  of  Hinduism  act  like  Indian  rajas,  contending  with  each
other  for  power,  each  favouring  his  own  party,  and  indulging  in
every  vice  or  committing  any  crime  his  evil  heart  may  desire.  The
Hindu  gods  reflect  the  national  character.  By  contemplating  them
and  their  actions,  worshippers  are  made  worse  instead  of  better.

Christianity,  on  the  other  hand,  gives  the  most  exalted  ideas
of  God,  and  His  worship  is  fitted  to  have  a  most  beneficial  influence.

*  Monier  Williams,  Hinduism  and  Brahmanism,  pp.  34,  35.   ,


THE  TEUE  BHAKTI  YOGA.  51

He  is  the  "  I  am/'  the  Self-existent,  "  without  beginning
of  days  or  end  of  years."  "  From  everlasting  to  everlasting,  Thou
art  God."  He  is  unchanging,  "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,
and  for  ever."  He  is  the  Almighty  God.  He  called  the  universe
into  existence,  and  His  government  extends  over  all.  He  is
never  unconscious.  He  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps.  "  The  Creator
of  the  ends  of  the  earth  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  He
knows  everything  that  takes  place  throughout  His  vast  dominions.
Not  a  hair  of  our  head  can  fall  to  the  ground  without  His  know-
ledge; every  thought  of  our  heart  is  known  to  Him.  His  ear  is
ever  open  to  the  cry  of  His  children.

The  one  true  God  is  most  unlike  ths  saguna  Brahma.  He  is  a
God  of  truth ;  He  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all.  His
most  glorious  attribute  is  His  spotless  holiness.  Sin  is  that
abominable  thiug  which  He  hates.  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord
God  of  hosts."  Instead  of  exhibiting,  like  Brahma,  an  example  of
selfishness.  He  is  continually  doing  good  to  His  creatures.  His
character  is  expressed  in  one  word — God  is  Love.  Still,  it  is  not
the  feeling  which  looks  upon  good  and  evil  with  equal  eye.  H  a
king  allowed  crime  to  be  unpunished,  his  kingdom  would  become
like  a  hell.  But  God's  own  declaration  is,  "  As  I  live,  saith  the
Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked  ;  but  that
the  wicked  turn  from  his  evil  way  and  live."

Milton  thus  describes  the  feelings  which  ought  to  arise  in  the
mind  from  the  contemplation  of  the  earth  and  heavens  :

"  These  are  thy  glorious  works,  Parent  of  good,
Almighty,  thine  this  universal  frame,
Thus  wondrous  fair  ;  thyself  how  wondrous  then  !
Unspeakable,  who  sitt'st  above  these  heavens.
To  us  invisible  or  dimly  seen
In  these  thy  lowest  works ;  yet  these  declare
Thy  goodness  beyond  thought,  and  power  Divine."

This  great  Being  deserves  our  worship.  He  first  called  us
into  existence ;  we  are  dependent  upon  Him  for  every  breath
that  we  draw ;  we  live  upon  His  earth ;  everything  we  possess  is
His  gift.  He  is  both  our  Father  in  heaven  and  our  King,  deserving
our  warmest  love  and  utmost  respect.  To  worship  Him  is  both  our
duty,  and  would  have  an  excellent  influence  upon  our  character.

Confession  of  Sin  the  first  step  to  Bhakti  Yoga- — Suppose
children  h^ve  been  grossly  ungrateful  and  disobedient  to  a  kind
father,  they  cannot  go  to  him  simply  expressing  their  love.
Indeed,  when  children  feel  that  they  have  done  wrong,  they  shun
the  presence  of  their  father.

The  belief  is  universal  that  man  is  a  sjlnner,*  and  deserves

*  Its  denial  by  Swami  Vivekananda  shows  how  ignox'ant  he  is  of  his  own  heart,
and  his  unlitness  to  be  a  religious  teacher.


352  YOaA   SASTEA.

punisliment.  How  to  be  delivered  from  its  penalty  is  the  grand
inquiry.

Hinduism  gives  contradictory  answers  whether  sin  can  be
forgiven  or  not.  One  doctrine  is  that  the  fruit  of  every  action,
good  are  bad,  must  be  reaped.  The  other  is  that  the  most  worth-
less means  suffice  for  the  removal  of  sin.  Almsgiving,  pilgrima-
ges, bathing  in  supposed  sacred  waters,  are  some  of  the  ways
prescribed.  Drinking  water  in  which  a  Brahman  has  dipt  his  toe,
or  repeating  the  name  of  Hari,  is  supposed  to  absolve  from  the
greatest  crimes.

The  holiest  men  are  the  first  to  admit  their  own  sinfulness.  Most
people  compare  themselves  with  their  neighbours,  and  "are  satisfied
if  they  come  up  to  their  standard.  Sometimes  they  contrast  them-
selves with  persons  notoriously  wicked,  and  are  proud  because  they
think  themselves  better.  Truly  good  meu  compare  themselves  with
what  Grod^s  law  requires,  and  their  confession  is,  *'  We  are  all  as
an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags."

The  two  great  sins  chargeable  against  every  human  being  are
ungodliness  and  selfishness.

The  verdict  pronounced  upon  Belshazzar,  king  of  Babylon,
was:  "Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  art  found  wanting."
The  prophet  Dauiel  explained  the  grounds  of  this  judgment  when
he  said,  "  The  Grod  in  whose  hand  thy  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all
thy  ways,  hast  thou  not  glorified."  When  conscience  awakes,  we
see  nothing  in  the  past  but  a  career  of  guilt — the  grand  purpose  of
our  lives  neglected,  the  great  God  treated  with  indifference.  His
holy  law  trampled  under  foot.  God  contrasts  the  gratitude  of  the
very  beasts  with  the  regardlessness  of  man.  *'  1  have  nourished
and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against  me.  The
ox  knoweth  his  owner  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib ;  but  Israel  doth
not  know,  my  people  doth  not  consider."

Need  of  an  Incarnation. — lu  all  ages  the  hope  has  been  more
or  less  entertained  that  God  would  become  incarnate  to  deliver  man
from  the  burden  of  sin  and  misery  under  which  the  world  is  groan-
ing. Hinduism  has  its  incarnations.  The  Kalki  Avatar  is  yet  to
come,  when  Vishnu,  at  the  end  of  the  Kali  Yug,  is  to  appear  seated
on  a  white  horse,  with  drawn  sword  in  his  hand  blazing  like  a
comet,  for  the  destruction  of  the  wicked,  and  the  restoration  of
purity.

Christianity  also  teaches  that  man  is  so  deeply  plunged  in  sin
and  his  guilt  is  so  great,  that  a  Divine  incarnation  was  necessary
for  his  deliverance.  The  first  promise  of  this  was  given  by  God
Himself  thousands  of  years  ago.  The  Son  of  God,  pitying  the
human  race,  came  down  from  heaven  for  our  salvation.  By  His
death  on  the  cross  He  bore  the  punishment  due  to  our  sins;  by
His  obedience  to  the  law  of  God  He  wrought  out  a  perfect  righteous-
ness;  which,  like  a  spotless  robe,  is  given  to  His  followers.


THE    JEUE   BHAKTI   YOGA.  63

A  very  erroneous  impression  prevails  among  some  Hindus.
Tliey  think  that  Christianity  represents  God  as  angry  till  propitia-
ted by  the  Sou.  On  the  contrary,  the  atonement  originated  iu  the
love  of  the  Father.  ^'  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His
only  begotten  Son"  to  be  our  Saviour.  But  the  Son  was  equally
willing.   His  response  was,  "  Lo  !  I  come  ;  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will."'

Some  think  that  God  may  freely  pardon  sin  without  an  atone-
ment. But  God  is  our  King  as  well  as  our  Father,  and  to  forgive
sin  without  satisfaction  to  justice,  would  tend  to  spread  rebellion
throughout  the  universe.

The  following  illustration  has  been  used  :  A  part  of  the  army
of  one  of  the  wisest  and  best  of  kings  conspired  against  him.
They  were  seized,  disarmed,  and  condemned  to  die.  The  king
wished  to  save  their  lives,  but  a  free  pardon  would  have  tempted
others  to  rebel.  The  king's  only  son,  who  was  commander-in-chief
of  the  army,  also  wished  to  deliver  the  condemned  men.  It  was
agreed  that  the  prince  should  suffer  punishment  in  their  stead,  and
when  this  was  done,  those  who  asked  pardon  in  his  name  would  be
forgiven.

As  the  king's  son  in  the  parable  offered  to  suffer  that  the  rebel
soldiers  might  be  spared,  so  the  eternal  Son  of  God  agreed  to
become  man  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  suffer  and  die  in  our
stead.  For  33  years  He  lived  on  earth,  perfectly  obeying  all  God^s
laws,  and  at  last  died  on  the  cross.  On  the  third  day  He  rose  from
the  dead,  and  afterwards  ascended  to  heaven,  where  He  occupies
the  highest  place  of  honour.  Pardon  is  now  freely  offered  to  all
who  seek  it  in  His  name,  accepting  Him  as  their  Saviour.

No  illustration  that  can  be  given  fully  meets  the  case  ;  but  the
foregoing  may  give  some  idea  of  the  way  in  which  God's  justice
and  mercy  are  reconciled  through  Christianity.

The    stages   mentioned  in  Hindu  sacred  books  will  now  be
considered,  pointing  out  the  qualifications  necessary.

Salokya- — This  denotes  dwelling  in  the  same  world  with  God.
Such  is  the  case,  even  here.  We  are  continually  in  God's  presence.
A  holy  man  of  old  said  :

"  0  Lord  thou  hast  searched  me  and  known  me.  Thou  knowest
my  dowiisitting  and  mine  uprising,  Thou  understandest  my  thought  afar
off.  Thou  compassest  my  path  and  my  lying  down,  and  art  acquainted
with  all  my  ways.  For  there  is  not  a  word  in  my  tongue,  but,  lo,  0  Lord,
Thou  knowest  it  altogether.  Thou  hast  beset  me  behind  and  before,  and
laid  thine  hand  upon  me.  Such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me  ;  it
is  high,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it.  Whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  spirit,  or
whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy  presence  ?  If  I  ascend  up  into  heaven
Thou  art  there;  if  I  make  my  bed  in  Sheol,*  behold  Thou  art  there.  If
I  take  the  wings  of  the  morning,  and  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of
the  sea  ;  even  there  shall  thy  hand  lead  me,  and  thy  right  hand  shall  hold

*  The  grave  j  the  unseen  world.


64  YOGA  SASTEA,

me.  If  I  say,  surely  the  durkaess  shall  cover  me  ;  even  the  night  shall
be  light  about  me.  Yea,  the  darkness  bideth  not  from  Tliee;  but  the
night  sbiueth  as  the  day ;  the  darkness  and  the  light  are  botb  alike  to
Thee."— Fsalm  139.  1-12.

But  although  wo  are  thus  continually  in  (iod's  presence,  and
indebted  to  Him  for  every  breath  we  draw,  the  great  majority  of
men  never  think  of  Him,  ignore  His  existence,  and  if  His  name  is
mentioned,  it  is  only  an  idle  exclamation.

There  have,  however,  been  a  few  who  have  felt  that  God  is
ever  with  them.  It  is  said  of  a  good  man,  in  very  early  times,
called  Enoch,  that  he  "walked  with  God."  He  lived  as  if  God
were  by  his  side.  Another  good  man  said,  "  I  am  continually  with
Thee."  We  live  in  God^s  world.  Of  the  objects  around  us,  we  may
say,  "  My  Father  made  them  all."  We  should  constantly  realize
God's  presence.  This  is  the  true  Sdlokya,  begun  on  earth  and
continued  in  heaven.

Samipya,  nearness  to  God. — This  denotes  increasing  love  and
admiration,  accompanied  by  a  desire  fur  closer  intercuurse,  like
the  warmest  feeling  between  father  and  son.  The  child  says,  '*  My
father."  The  reply  is,  "  !Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me."  The  son
delights  in  his  father's  presence;  he  tells  him  all  his  joys  and
sorrows ;  he  constantly  seeks  his  help  and  guidance,  'i'ennyson
says :

"Speak,  thou,  to  Him  for  He  hears,  and  spirit  with  Spirit  may  meet,
Closer  ia  He  than  breathing,  nearer  than  hands  and  feet."

Sarupya,  assimilation  to  God's  likeness.  This  does  not  refer
to  His  bodily  form,  for  He  has  none ;  but  to  His  character.  A
child  naturally  imitates  his  father  in  disposition  and  conduct.  The
Lord  Jesus  Christ  holds  up  our  heavenly  Father  as  our  model.
**  Be  ye  perfect  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect."  This
Jesus  Christ  explained  by  His  own  conduct,  "leaving  us  an  example
that  we  should  follow  His  steps."

To  overcome  sin  and  become  like  God,  we  need  Divine  help.
Here  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  felt  to  be  adapted  to
our  needs.  Although  Christians  firmly  Jtiold  God's  unity,  yet  in
some  mysterious  way  there  is  a  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  who
all  unite  for  man's  redemption.  The  peculiar  office  of  the  Holy
Spirit  is  to  sanctify,  to  enable  us  to  overcome  sin,  and  to  be  adorned
with  all  the  beauties  of  holiness.  His  help  is  given  in  answer  to
prayer.  The  promise  is,  ''If  ye  being  evil  know  how  to  give
good  gifts  unto  your  children  ;  how  much  more  shall  your  heavenly
Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him  ?"

Besides  prayer  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  there  must  be  watch-
fulness against  sin,  avoidance  of  temptation,  study  of  the  scriptures
and  other  good  books,  observance  of  the  Lord's  day,  attendance  at
public  worship,  association  with  good  men,  etc.


TBE  TRUE  BHAKTL  YOGA.  55

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  tlius  summed  up  our  duty  :

1.  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart.

2.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.

True  hhaldi  yoga  includes  both.  A  man  is  not  to  be  selfishly
employed  in  what  he  considers  love  to  God,  while  he  has  no  regard
for  his  fellow  men.  What  would  be  thou^Jit  of  a  child  who  loved
his  father,  but  heeded  not  his  brothers  and  sisters  ?  Would  his
father  be  pleased  witli  that  love?  It  is  said  of  God,  "  Thou  art
good  and  doest  good,"  If  we  would  be  truly  like  God,  we  must
love  all  around  us  and  seek  their  benefit.  Without  this,  our
religion  is  vain,  and  pure  selfishness.

Sayujya- — This  is  commonly  understood  as  meaning  absorp-
tion into  the  Supreme  Spirit.  The  illustrations,  a  river  emptying
itself  into  the  ocean  or  a  drop  uniting  with  the  ocean,  are  accepted  as
proofs.  The  hollowness  of  such  reasoning  has  already  been  shown.
Another  illustration  proves  the  contrary ;  as  oil  and  water  cannot
unite,  so  the  soul  cannot  be  absorbed  in  God.

'  The  doctrine  of  absorption  is  a  mere  Vedantist  figment.
Starting  with  the  other  figments  that  there  is  only  one  existence
and  that  the  soul  is  eternal,  this  theory  was  invented  as  well  as  the
blasphemous  assertions,  Brahmdsmi,  Tat  twam  asi,  I  am  Brahma,
That  thou  art.

The  Rev.  Lai  Behari  Day  has  the  following  remarks  on  absorp-
tion :

"  Such  a  doctrine,  to  say  the  least,  is  highly  improbable  ;  for  it  ia
only  homopfeneous  (of  the  same  kind)  substances  that  mix.  Bnt  God  is
unique  in  the  universe;  there  is  none  like  Him.  How  then  can  any
other  beiiio'  be  absorbed  in  him  ?  Again,  it  is  doubtful  whether  absorp-
tion into  the  divine  essence  is  a  source  of  happiness  to  a  creature.  For
absorption  into  the  divine  essence  implies  a  loss  of  the  sense  of  personal
identity,  that  is,  annihilation.  And  how  can  a  creature  that  is
annihilated  be  happy  !  "*

The  only  happiness  is  release  from  the  supposed  eternal
weary  round  of  transmigration.

The  Creator  and  the  creature  must  for  ever  remain  distinct.
The  Visishtadvvaitas  deny  that  .Jiva  becomes  absolutely  united
with  Parabrahmam,  and  Christianity  does  the  same.  But  there
may  be  the  closest  union.  The  apostle  Paul  says  of  true  Christians,
*•  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit
of  G^)d  dwelleth  in  you."  Paul  himself  was  so  full  of  love  to  Christ
that  he  said,  ^'  I  live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  This
union,  begun  on  earth,  becomes  still  closer  in  heaven.  It  is  a  state
of  conscious  happy  existence  in  God's  presence,  never  to  have  an  end.
What  a  glorious  prospect !  How  well  worthy  of  our  most  strenuous
efforts  to  attain  it !

*0n  Vedantism.


s6  yoga  sastra.

Concluding  Appeal.

'The  old  order  changeth  yielding  place  to  new.'

Causes  of  the  failure  of  Hindu  Philosophers-— The  late  Dr.
Krishna  Mohun  Banerjea^  Sanskrit  Examiner  to  the  Calcutta  Uni-
versity, has  the  following  remarks  on  this  point : —

*'  They  propounded  many  theories  on  the  origin  of  the  world,  the
nature  of  God,  the  properties  of  matter  and  mind."

"  Sciences,  distinct  in  themselves,  were  blended  together.  Objects
which  surpassed  the  limits  of  the  human  understanding,  were  pursued
with  the  same  contidpnce  and  eagerness  with  which  the  easiest  questions
were  investigated.  The  philosophers  professed  to  have  solved  problems,
really  out  of  the  range  of  our  knowledge,  while  they  threw  doubts  on
matters  which  everybody  believed,  and  which  none  could  deny  without
belying  his  nature.

"  The  authors  (of  systems)  began  to  dogmatize  in  the  very  infancy
of  philosophical  speculation.  They  drew  general  conclusions  before  they
had  collected  facts.  They  worked  up  their  own  ideas,  without  sufficient
attention  to  external  phenomena.

"  Neither  did  they  stop  to  consider  the  true  range  of  human  capa-
city, and  the  limits  which  mark  off  things  comprehensible,  from  those
that  are  incomprehensible.  While  they  boldly  speculated  on  points
which  man  can  never  determine  by  the  exercise  of  reason,  they  did  not
deal  fairly  with  those  inquiries  for  which  they  were  really  competent.  No
wonder  that  their  researches  were  unsatisfactory."*

It  was  the  same  in  ancient  Europe.  Macaulay,  in  his  Essay  on
Bacon  and  the  Stoical  Philosophy,  says :

"  Words  and  more  words,  and  nothing  but  words,  had  been  all  the
fruit  of  all  the  toil  of  all  the  most  renowned  sages  of  sixty  generations.
The  ancient  philosophers  promised  what  was  impracticable ;  they
despised  what  was  practicable  ;  they  filled  the  world  with  long  words
and  long  beards  ;  and  they  left  it  as  wicked  and  ignorant  as  they  found  it."

False  Beliefs  to  be  abandoned. — For  three  thousand  years
falsehood  has  reigned  supreme  in  India.  In  the  words  of  Sir
H.  S.  Maine,  Oriental  Culture  has  been  "false  morality,  false
history,  false  philosophy,  and  false  physics."  Its  social  system  of
caste,  the  distinguishing  feature  of  Hinduism,  is  based  on  a  blas-
phemous lie.  Manu's  Code,  the  highest  Hindu  legal  authority,
makes  the  following  statements  :

9.3.  Since  he  sprang  from  the  most  excellent  part,  since  he  was  the
first-born,  and  since  he  holds  the  Vedas,  the  Brahman  is,  by  right,  the
lord  of  all  this  creation.     Book  I.

413.  But  a  Sudra,  whether  bought  or  not  bought,  (the  Brahman)
may  compel  to  practise  servitude;  for  that  (Sudra)  was  cieated  by  the
Self-existent  merely  for  the  service  of  the  Brahman.     VIII.

•  Dialogues  on  Hindu  Philoaophy,  pp.  71,  72.  Abridged.


CONCLUDING    APPEAL.  57

80,  One  may  not  give  advice  to  a  Sudra,  nor  (give  him)  the
remains  (of  food)  or  (of)  batter  that  has  been  offered.  And  one  may  not
teach  him  the  law  or  enjoin  upon  him  (religious)  observances,     IV.

Sir  H.  S.  Maine  calls  caste,  "  The  most  disastrous  and  blight-
ing of  human  institutions  :"*  "  The  system  of  caste,"  says  Princi-
pal Caird,  "  involves  the  worst  of  all  wrongs  to  humanity,  that  of
hallowing  evil  by  the  authority  and  sanction  of  religion.  Instead
of  breaking  down  artificial  barriers,  waging  war  with  false  separa-
tions, softening  divisions  and  undermining  class  hatreds  and
antipathies,  religion  becomes  itself  the  very  consecration  of  them."

Yet  to  this  false  system  have  Hindus  clung  with  a  tenacity
dearer  than  life.

Saddest  of  all,  unnumbered  generations  have  gone  down  to
death  with  a  lie  in  their  right  hand,  trusting  for  salvation  to  false
promises.  The  sacred  books  of  the  Hindus  are  full  of  such.  The
first  chapter  of  Yalmiki's  Ramayana  concludes  as  follows  :

"  He  that  readeth  this  sacred,  sin-destroying,  merit-bestowing
history  of  Rama,  like  unto  the  Veda  itself,  becometh  cleansed  from  all
sin.  And  the  man  that  readeth  this  Ramayana,  conferring  length  of
days,  after  death  is  honoured  in  heaven,  along  with  his  sons,  grandsons,
and  relations."t

The  following  specimens  are  from  the  Vishnu  Purana  :

'•  Whoever  listens  to  the  history  of  Prahlada  is  immediately  cleans-
ed from  all  his  sins."     Book  I.  Chapter  20.

"  This  sacred  stream  (the  Ganges)  heard  of,  desired,  seen,  touched,
bathed  in,  or  hymned,  day  by  day,  sanctifies  all  beings  ;  and  those  who
even  at  a  distance  of  a  hundred  yojanas,  exclaim,  Ganga,  Ganga,  atone  for
the  sins  committed  during  their  previous  lives."     Book  II.  Chapter  8.

God  said  of  the  Jews  in  ancient  times,  "  The  prophets  prophesy
falsely  and  priests  bear  rule  by  their  means,  and  my  people  love  to
have  it  so."     The  same  may  be  said,  alas  !  of  Hindus.

The  immediate  subject  of  remarks  is  the  Yoga  Sutras  of
Patau jali.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  coui'se  recommended  is
selfish,  delusive,  and  pernicious.  The  same  remark  applies  in
some  measure  to  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  where  Yoga  exercises  are
encouraged.    Book  IV.  says:

27.  "The  muni  who  excludeth  (from  his  mind)  external  objects, (concen-
trating) the  visual  power  between  the  brows,  and  making  the  upward
and  downward  life-breaths,  ever  sending  both  through  the  nostrils,  who
restraineth  the  senses,  mind  and  understanding,  intent  on  final  emanci-
pation, from  whom  desire,  fear,  and  wrath  have  departed,  is  indeed  for
ever  free  (from  birth  and  death)."

Let  the  belief  in  the  power  of  '^austerities  and  incantations"
be  abandoned.  Such  ideas  are  worthy  only  of  children  and
savages.     Let  them  rather  imitate  the  men,  who,  by  a  wise  use  of

*  Ancient  Law.  f  Translation  by  Manmatha  Nath  Dntt,  M.  A,

8


58  YOGA   SASTRA.

the  faculties  which  God  had  given  them,  devised  means  by  which
thousands  of  people  may  travel  with  ease  at  the  rate  of  40  miles
an  hour,  by  which  the  suti  is  made  to  paint  pictures,  and  lightning
to  convey  messages.

"Awakened  India,"  instead  of  adopting  tlie  fowl  or  tortoise
upset  posture,  with  his  eye  fixed  on  the  tip  of  his  nose  and  seeking
"  the  suppression  of  the  transformations  of  the  thinking  principle",
should  rather  endeavour  to  have  his  muscles  braced  like  those  of
Prince  Kanjitsinhji,  his  faculties  of  observation  cultivated  like  those
of  Professor  Bose,  his  ability  to  weigh  evidence  developed  like  that
of  Dr.  Bhandarkar.  Instead  of  a  dreamy  pessimism,  let  there  be
active  benevolence.  Thus  would  India  advance  in  civilization  with
a  speed  before  unknown.

Above  all,  let  the  deep  religious  feeling  of  the  Hindu  mind  be
wisely  directed.  Let  the  Bhakti  Yoga  have  for  its  object  the
loftiest  ideal  of  majesty,  wisdom,  goodness,  and  purity.  Such  is
the  great  Creator  and  Lord  of  the  Universe.  We  should  aim  at
living  as  continually  in  His  presence ;  we  should  realize  His
nearness  to  us  ;  we  should  strive  to  be  like  Him  ',  we  should  seek  to
have  Him  dwelling  in  our  hearts  as  in  a  temple,  looking  forward
to  the  time  when  we  shall  see  Him  face  to  face  in  His  Kingdom
above.

One  of  the  worst  features  of  the  time  is  the  hypocrisy
prevalent  among  many  educated  Hindus  from  a  feeling  of  false
patriotism.     The  Hindu,  a  Madras  journal,  says  :

"  We  have  observed  of  late  a  tendency  on  the  part  of  some  of  our
educated  countrymen  to  apply  their  mental  powers  for  irrationally
reactionary  purposes.  Social  customs  and  institutions  which  are  evil  in
their  results,  and  are  the  pi'oduct  of  past  simpler  and  less  civilized
conditions,  have  received  elaborate  defence  ;  and  even  certain  merits
have  been  attached  to  them.

*'  They  defend  every  superstition  of  our  people;  they  believe  in  every
dogma  and  worthless  ceremonial,  and  are  generally  slaves  of  our  exacting
priesthood.  In  their  judgment,  nothing  that  our  ancestors  did  could  be
wrong.  Everything  Indian  is  excellent  itself,  and  everything  foreign
the  opposite."

Principal  Wordsworth  made  the  same  "complaint  with  regard
to  educated  men  in  Bombay  :

"  I  find  some  of  them  employing  all  the  resources  of  theological
sophistry  and  cant,  not  simply  to  palliate,  but  to  vindicate  what  is  plainly
one  of  the  most  cruel,  blighting,  and  selfish  forms  of  human  superstition
and  tyranny.  I  find  others  manceuvring  to  arrest  every  sincere  effort  at
reform,  sophisticating  between  right  and  wrong,  defaming  the  character
and  motives  of  reformers."

Of  all  false  patriotism  that  is  the  worst  which  seeks  by  sophistry
to  defend  erroneous  beliefs  because  they  are  national.  It  pro-
motes hypocrisy  and  disregard  of  truth  among  its  advocates,  while


I


CONCLUDING  APPEAL.  59

it  is  a  grievous  wrong  to  their  ignorant  countrymen,  tending  to
perpetuate  the  reign  of  error  and  superstition.  Truthfulness  lies
at  tbe  basis  of  every  virtuous  character,  and  patriotism  resting  on.
hypocrisy  is  a  mere  sham.

Keshub  Ohunder  Sen  justly  says  :

"  In  science  there  cannot  be  sects  or  divisions,  schisms  or  enmities.
Is  there  one  astronomy  for  the  East  and  another  for  the  West  ?  Is  there
an  Asiatic  optics  as  distinguished  fi'om  European  optics  p  Science  is
one.  It  is  one  yesterday  to-day  aud  for  ever  ;  the  same  in  the  East  and
the  West ;  it  recognises  neither  caste,  nor  colour,  nor  nationality.  It
is  God's  science,  the  eternal  verity  of  things."

It  is  the  same  in  religion.

If  each  country  had  its  own  God,  there  might  be  dijfferent
religions ;  but  all  intelligent  men  are  now  agreed  that  there  is
only  one  God,  the  Creator,  Preserver,  and  Governor  of  the  Universe.
The  Brotherhood  of  Man  is  similarly  acknowledged.

"  Children  we  are  all
One  great  Father,  in  whatever  clime.
His  providence  hath  cast  the  seed  of  life  ;
All  tongues,  all  colours."

Since  God  is  one  and  all  men  are  alike  His  children,  it  is
reasonable  to  suppose  that  He  has  given  only  one  religion,  as  there
is.only  one  science.

The  most  enlightened  countries  in  Europe  and  America  have
embraced  a  religion  first  made  known  to  them  by  Asiatics,  and  did
not  reject  it  from  false  patriotism,  saying,  "  We  must  have  national
religions."     A  true  patriot  accepts  truth  from  any  quarter.

The  remark  of  the  late  Sir  Madava  Row  should  be  deeply
impressed  upon  educated  Hindus :  What  is  not  TRUE,  is  not
PATRIOTIC.

Let  this  be  our  prayer  with  regard  to  India :

"  0  Father,  touch  the  East,  with  light,
The  light  that  shone  when  Hope  was  born."

Happily  there  are  some  signs  of  the  dawn,  and  the  sky  will
redden  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  Pessimism  and  false-
hood of  every  kind  will  yet  vanish  before  its  rays.  Instead
of  accepting  this  as  the  Kali  Yuga,  let  us  make  strenuous  efforts
that  it  may  become  the  Krita  or  Satya  Yuga,

"  Ring  out  the  old,  ring  in  the  new,
Ring  out  the  false,  ring  in  the  true.

Ring  in  the  valiant  man  and  free.

The  larger  heart,  the  kindlier  hand  ;

Ring  out  the  darkness  of  the  land.
Ring  in  the  Christ  that  is  to  be."

Tennyson.


APPENDIX.


REMARKS


ON


YOGA  PHILOSOPHY:

"  Lectures  delivered  in  New  York,  1895-96,  by
the  Swami  Vivekananda  on  Raja  Yoga ;  also
Patanj all's  Yoga  Aphorisms,  with  CommentarieB.'*


Dean  Farrar  says  of  the  present  day :

*'  Every  variety  of  blasphemy  and  folly  has  its  apostles.  Every
negation,  however  audacious  and  desolating,  has  its  defenders  on  the
platform  aud  press.  Every  superstition,  however  grotesque  and
discredited,  has  its  fanatical  partisans  and  devotees."

An  illustration  of  this  is  afforded  by  the  addresses  of  Swami
Vivekananda  and  his  work  above-mentioned.

Babu  Norendra  Nath  Datt,  who  has  assumed  the  title  of
Swami  Vivekananda  (bliss  discrimination),  belongs  to  a  well-known
Calcutta  family,  some  of  whose  members  are  Christians.  He  was
a  student  in  the  General  Assembly's  Institution,  and  at  the  age  of  21
took  the  B.  A.  Degree  in  1884,  in  the  second  class.  His  father  was
a  lawyer,  and  he  himself  studied  law  with  a  view  to  practise ;  but
he  relinquished  his  design.  The  Indian  Mirror  says :  "  He  used  to
attend  divine  services  held  in  the  Brahmo  churches,  and  was  one
of  the  actors  on  the  stage  which  was  erected  at  the  house  of  the
late  Babu  Keshab  Chunder  Sen  to  represent  a  religious  drama.''
He  also  sang  hymns  in  one  of  the  Brahmo  Samajes  of  Calcutta ;
but  he  was  especially  influenced  by  the  Paramahansa  Eamkrishna.

A  sannyasi  of  the  old  type  is  a  supposed  abandoner  of  worldly
concerns,  who  lives  an  ascetic  life.  Norendra  Dath  Dutt  founded
a  new  order,  wearing  "  gorgeous"  silk  robes  and  living  in  **  first
class"  American  hotels.  His  outlandish  dress,  Bengali  fluency,  and
command  of  English,  excited  considerable  attention,  especially
among  ladies  in  America.

Some  points  in  the  Swami's  Lectures  and  Yoga  Philosophy  will
now  be  noticed.

Evolatiou  of  God. — The  Swami,  during  his  travels,  heard
something  about  Darwin's  theory  of  evolution.  In  his  Yoga
Philosophy  ho  thus  impiously  applies  it  to  the  Deity  :


YOGA   PHILOSOPHY.  61

"  Starting  from  some  fungus,  some  very  minute,  miscroscopic  bubble,
and  all  the  time  drawing  from  tbat  infinite  storehouse  of  energy,  the
form  is  changed  slowly  and  slowly,  until,  in  course  of  time  it  becomes  a
plant,  then  an  animal,  then  man,  ultimately  God."     Page  43.

Denial  of  Sin. — At  Chicago  the  Swami  said  :

*'  Ye  are  the  children  of  God,  the  sharers  of  immortal  bliss,  holy  and
perfect  beings.  Ye,  divinities  on  earth,  sinners  !  It  is  a  sin  to  call  a
man  so.      It  is  a  standing  libel  on  human  nature."

This  is  repeated  in  a  Nevs^  York  lecture^  quoted  in  The  Brah-
mavadin,  August  29,  1896  :

"The  worst  lie  that  you  ever  told  yourself  was  that  you  were  a
sinner,  or  a  wicked  man."

The  very  reverse  is  the  case.  The  worst  lie  that  you  ever  told
yourself  is  that  you  are  not  a  sinner.  Who  can  truthfully  say  that
he  has  never  spoken  a  lie  or  angry  word,  that  he  has  never  given
way  to  envious,  lustful  tbouglits  ?

Nearly  the  whole  human  race,  with  one  voice,  acknowledge
themselves  to  be  sinners.  Why  do  Hindus  bathe  in  the  Ganges
and  other  supposed  sacred  waters  except  to  wash  away  sin  ?

It  is  only  pride  and  ignorance  that  make  a  man  deny  that  he
is  a  sinner.  The  holiest  men  are  the  first  to  acknowledge  it.  Some
Brahmans  daily  make  this  acknowledgment : —

Papo'ham  papakarmaham  papatma  papasambhava,

"I  am  sin;  i  commit  sin  :  my  soul  is  sinful  ;  I  am  conceived  in  sin."

The  first  step  in  true  religion  is  the  heartfelt  confession  to
God,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called
Thy  son."  'i'he  Rev.  F.  W.  Kellett,  m.a.,  in  a  paper  entitled,  The
Sense  of  Sin  in  the  Light  of  History,'*  shows  that  "the  deeper  the
sense  of  sin,  the  truer  the  religion."  The  poor  peasant  who  can
only  humbly  cry,  '  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,^  knows  far  more
of  true  religion  than  the  Swami.

Blasphemous  Claim  to  Divinity. — In  the  New  York  lecture
quoted  in  the  Brahmavadin,  August  29th  1896,  the  Swami  says  : —

"  It  is  the  greatest  of  all  lies  that  we  are  men  ;  we  are  the  god  of
the  universe.     We  have  been  always  worshipping  our  own  selves.

"  Thou  art  that  {tat  twam  asi.)  And  the  whole  universe  of  myriads
of  suns  and  moons  everything  that  speaks,  with  one  voice  will  say,
'  Thou  art  that.'  "f

Such  assertions  can  only  be  compared  to  the  ravings  of  a
madman  in  a  lunatic  asylum,  who  fancies  himself  a  king.  They
are  thus  exposed  :  Gaudapurnananda  says  : —

*  Sold  by  Mr.  A.  T.  8cott,  Tract  Depot,  Madras.    Price  J  Anna.

t  The  Brahmavadin  (Oct.  12,  1895,  p.  30)  makes  the  same  claim  in  terms  equally
objectionable.  "  Man  is  not  the  mere  creature  of  a  God;  he  is  God  himself.  He
has  not  simply  the  image  impressed  upon  him  of  his  Creator.  He  is  himself  the
Creator."


62  <         APPENDIX.

"  Thou  art  verily  rifled,  0  thoa  animal  soul,  of  thy  understanding,
by  this  dark  theory  of  Maya,  because  like  a  maniac>  thou  coustantly
ravest, '  I  am  Brahma.'  Where  is  thy  divinity,  thy  sovereignty,  thy
omniscience  ?  Oh  thou  animal  soul !  thou  art  as  different  from
Brahma  as  is  a  mustard  seed  from  Mount  Meru.  Thou  art  a  finite
soul,  He  is  infinite.  Tliou  canst  occupy  but  one  space  at  a  time,  He  is
always  everyw^here.  Ttiou  art  momentarily  happy  or  miserable,  He  is
happy  at  all  times.  How  canst  thou  say  '  I  am  Ho  ?'  Hast  thou  no
shame  ?"J

Ramanuja,  another  celebrated  Hindu  writer,  argues  against  it
similarly : —

"  The  word  tat  (it)  stands  for  the  ocean  of  immortality,  full  of
supreme  felicity.  The  word  twam  (thou)  stands  for  a  miserable
person,  distracted  through  fear  of  the  world.  The  two  cannot  therefore
be  one.  They  are  substantially  different.  He  is  to  be  worshipped
by  the  whole  world.  Thou  art  but  His  slave.  How  could  there  be  an
image  or  inflection  of  the  infinite  and  spotless  One  ?  There  may  be  a
reflection  of  a  finite  substance ;  how  could  there  be  such  a  thing  of  the
Infinite  ?  How  canst  thon,  oh  slow  of  thought !  say,  I  am  He,  who
has  set  up  this  immense  sphere  of  the  universe  in  its  fulness  ?  By  the
mercy  of  the  Most  High  a  little  understanding  has  been  committed  to
thee  :  it  is  not  for  thee,  oh  perverse  one,  to  say,  therefore  I  am  God."*

Any  one  who  believes  tbe  above  assertions  of  tbe  Swami  must
be  a  fellow-lunatic.  The  conscience  of  every  sane,  thoughtful  man
must  tell  him  that  he  has  sinned  both  in  thought,  word,  and  deed,
and  that  he  has  no  claim  to  divinity.

Equal  Acceptance  of  Truth  and  Falsehood. — In  the  Vishnu
Purana,  Prahlada  thus  addresses  Vishnu  :  *'  Thou  art  knowledge
and  ignorance ;  thou  art  truth  and  untruth ;  thou  art  poison  and
nectar."t  The  same  words  may  be  applied  to  the  Swami  and  to
his  guru  Ramkrishna.

Hindus  constantly  mistake  illustration  for  argument.  Because
a  rope  may  be  mistaken  for  a  snake,  therefore  the  universe  is
unreal.  In  The  Nineteenth  Genturi/  for  August,  Max  Miiller  quotes
some  of  the  ''  Precepts  of  Ramkrishna  Paramahansa."  The
following  is  an  example  : —

"  (U .)  As  one  can  ascend  to  the  top  of  a  house  by  means  of  a  ladder,
or  a  bamboo,  or  a  staircase,  or  a  rope,  so  diverse  are  the  ways  and  means
to  approach  God,  and  every  religion  in  the  world  shows  one  of  these
ways."

This  is  a  mere  variation  of  the  well-known  saying,  "  As  there
are  several  roads  to  the  same  city,  so  all  religions  lead  to  God."


*  Banerjea's  Dialogues  on  Hindu  Philosophy  ,pp.  379,  408.
f  Manmatha  Nath  Dutt's  Translation,  p.  99.


TOGA   PHILOSOPHY.  63

As  well  might  it  be  said  to  a  traveller,  "  Take  any  railroad  ;
tliey  all  lead  to  tlie  same  city."

Ramkrislina'a  argument  amounts  to  this,  ''  As  there  are
several  ways  of  getting  to  the  top  of  a  house,  so  the  most  contra-
dictory statements  are  all  true.'     The  logic  of  this  is  worthless.

The  Indian  Nation  thus  notices  ideas  like  the  above  propounded
by  the  Swami  at  the  Parliament  of  Religions :

"  It  is  useless  speakiiipf  of  the  conflicting  doctrines  as  difPerenfc  paths
leading  to  a  'common  goal.'  We  should  very  much  like  to  know  what
this  common  centre  is,  for  we  mast  confess  we  can  conceive  of  none  which
can  be  reached  by  theism  and  atheism  alike.  We  are  past  that  stage
when  a  mere  phrase  wonld  charm  us  into  slavery,  and  until  more  light
dawns  upon  us  we  must  hold  '  common  centre  '  and  '  convergence  of
diverging  radii'  to  be  mere  phrases."     April  9tb,  1894.

Veiled  Atheism  and  Sneer  at  Prayer. — "  Surface  scientists  "
are  said  to  be

"  More  culpable  than  those  who  think  their  prayers  are  answered  by  a
being  or  beings,  above  the  clouds,  or  than  those  who  believe  that  their
petitions  will  make  such  beings  change  the  course  of  the  universe."
Preface,  p.  viii.

Paja  Yoga  teaches  :

"  That  desires  and  wants  are  in  man,  that  the  power  of  supply  is  also
in  man ;  and  that  wherever  and  whenever  a  desire,  a  want,  a  prayer,  has
been  fulfilled,  it  was  out  of  this  infinite  magazine  that  the  supply  came,
and  not  from  any  supernatural  being.  The  idea  of  supernatural  beings
may  rouse  to  a  certain  extent  the  power  of  action  in  man,  but  it  also
brings  spiritual  decay.  It  brings  dependence;  it  brings  fears,  it  brings
superstition.  It  degenerates  into  a  horrible  belief  in  the  natural  weakness
of  man.      There  is  no  supernatural,  says  the  Yogi."  pp.  viii.  ix.

"The  man  who  thinks  that  he  is  receiving  responses  to  his  prayers
does  not  know  that  the  fulfilment  came  only  from  his  own  nature,  that
he  has  succeeded  by  the  mental  attitude  of  prayer  in  waking  up  a  bit  of
this  infinite  power  which  is  coiled  up  within  himself.  Whom  thus,  men
ignorantly  worship  under  various  names,  through  fear  and  tribulation,
the  Yogi  declares  to  the  world  to  be  the  real  power  coiled  up  in  every
being,  the  mother  of  eternal  happiness,  if  we  know  how  to  approach  her.
And  Raja  Yoga  is  the  science  of  religion,  the  rationale  of  all  worship,  all
prayers,  forms,  ceremonies,  and  miracles."  p.  55.
Polytheism  :—

"  Even  the  Devas  (gods)  will  have  to  come  down  again,  and  attain  to
salvation  through  a  human  body."     p.  24.

Akasa.

The  Swami  admits  that  the  whole  of  Raja  Yoga  is  based  on
the  Sankhya'Philosophy.  (p.  13.)  It  has  been  shown  (see  page  2)
that  Kapila  makes  Akasa  only  one  of  the  five  grosser  elements
(mahabuta),  with  sound  as  its  distinguishing  property,   and  the


64  APPENDIX.

ear  as  its  organ.  In  spite  of  this  the  Swattji  make  akdsa,  instead
ot:  Prahriti  :  tlie  source  of  all  things.  The  Bhagavad  Gita  agrees
with  the  Sankhya  :

"  Under  my  supervision  Prakriti  produceth  both  the  movable  and  the
immovable.  It  is  in  this  way,  0  Arjana,  that  the  universe  revolveth."
ix.  10.

Dr.  Bhandarkar  writes  :*

"  Some  of  the  Upanishads  mention  akasa  as  the  immediate  product
of  the  primeval  A'tma  and  from  akasa  is  produced,  they  say,  the  air
(Vayu),  from  the  air,  fire  (Agni),  from  fire,  water,  from  water,  earth,  from
earth,  herbs,  &c.  In  one  Upanishad,  the  Chhandogya,  akasa  is  spoken  aa
the  creator  of  names  and  forms  and  the  Scholiasts  identify  this  akasa
with  Brahman.  According  to  the  Yopa  Philosophy,  of  the  two  prin-
ciples as  the  constituents  of  the  universe,  the  second  principle  should
certainly  be  Prakriti  and  not  akasa."

Peana  and  its  Magical  Powers.

Mrs.  Besant  lately  made  herself  ridiculous  by  her  lecture  at
Lahore  on  ''Western  Science  justifying  Eastern  Occultism,"  in  which
she  said  that  the  Granges  and  idols  owed  their  virtue  to  being
magnetised  by  Rishis  !  The  Swami  has  made  a  somewhat  similar
attempt  to  justify  his  assertion  at  Chicago,  that  "  the  latest  dis-
coveries of  science  seem  like  echoes  of  the  high  spiritual  flights  of
Vedantic  Philosophy."

Professor  Venis,  of  Benares,  writes  :t  "In  the  Sankhya  and
Yoga  systems,  the  term  prdna  does  not  seem  to  have  denoted  more
than  hroath  or  principle  of  life. "J  At  pp.  13,  14,  of  this  pamphlet,
the  Sntras  of  Patanjali  on  the  subject  are  given  as  translated  by
Mr.  Manilal  Nabhubhai  Dvivedi,  with  his  explanation.  Prdndydma
is  defined  "  as  the  control  of  the  breath."  The  Swami  had  heard
something  of  '^  cosmic  energy  " ;  so  he  identifies  it  with  prdna,  and
endows  it  with  magical  powers.

In  the  Glossary  Prdna  is  defined  as,  "  The  sum-total  of  the
cosmic  energy ;  the  vital  forces  in  the  body."      (p.  232.)

Prdndydma  is  thus  explained  :

**  Prdndydma  is  not,  as  many  think,  something  about  the  breath  ;
breath,  indeed,  has  very  little  to  do  with  it,  if  anything.  Breathing  is
only  one  of  the  many  exercises  though  which  we  get  to  the  real
Pranayama.     Pranayama  means  the  control  of  Prana."     p.  30-

Although  '  breathing'  is  thus  depreciated,  with  the  flat  con-
tradiction which  does  not  trouble  Hindu  philosophers,  it  is  else-
where stated  to  be  the  means  of  attaining  tremendous  powers :

*  Letter  to  the  writer,  November  18th,  1896.
t  Letter,  dated  December  26tli,  1896.

J  Prdna  sometimes  denotes  Brahman,  the  Supreme  Spirit,  but  not  in  tlio
EAnkhya,


YOOA   PHILOSOPHY.  65

"  Now  we  shall  see  why  breathing  is  practised.  In  the  first  place
from  rhythmical  breathings  will  come  a  tendency  of  all  the  molecules
in  the  body  to  have  the  same  direction.  When  mind  changes  into  will,
the  currents  change  into  a  motion  similar  to  electricity,  because  the
nerves  have  been  proved  to  show  polarity  under  action  of  electric  currents.
This  shows  that  when  the  will  evolves  into  the  nerve  currents  it  is
changed  into  something  like  electricity.  When  all  the  motions  of  the
body  have  become  perfectly  rhythmical  the  body  has,  as  it  were,
become  a  gigantic  battery  of  will.  This  tremendous  will  is  exactly
what  the  Yogi  wants.  This  is,  therefore,  a  physiological  explanation  of
the  breathing  exercise.  It  tends  to  bring  a  rhythmic  action  in  the  body,
and  helps  us,  throusfh  the  respirating  centre,  to  control  the  other
centres.  The  aim  of  Pranayama  here  is  to  rouse  the  coiled-up  power  in
the  Miiladhara,  called  the  Kundalini."     pp.  50,  51.

Professor  Bose  and  every  scientist  will  characterise  the  fore-
going as  simply  balderdash.

The  following  are  some  of  the  raarvellons  powers  said  to  bo
acquired  by  Pranayama  :

1 .  Control  of  the  Universe.

"Pranayama  opens  to  us  the  door  to  almost  unlimited  power.
Suppose  for  instance  one  understood  the  Prana  perfectly,  and  could  control
it,  what  power  on  earth  could  there  be  that  would  not  be  his  ?  He  would
be  able  to  move  the  sun  and  stars  out  of  their  places,  to  control  every-
thing in  the  universe,  from  the  atoms  to  the  biggest  suns,  because  he
could  control  the  Prana.  This  is  the  end  and  aim  of  Pranayama.  When
the  Yogi  becomes  perfect  there  will  be  nothing  in  nature  not  under  his
control.  If  he  orders  the  gods  to  come,  they  will  come  at  his  bidding ;
if  he  asks  the  departed  to  come,   they  will  come  at  his  bidding."     p.  32.

2.  Freedom  from   Sickness  and  Misery.

"  Every  part  of  the  body  can  be  filled  with  Prana,  this  vital  force,
and  when  you  are  able  to  do  that,  you  can  control  the  whole  body.  All
the  sickness  and  miseiy  felt  in  the  body  will  be  perfectly  controlled,
and  not  only  so,  you  will  be  able  to  control  another's  body."      p.  .39.

3.  Ability  to  enter  another's  body. — It  is  thus  explained  :

"  The  Yogi  can  enter  a  dead  body  and  make  it  get  up  and  move,
even  when  he  himself  is  working  in  another  body."     p.  198.

The  Swarai  gives  a  list  of  other  wonderful  powers  which  may
be  acquired.

Every  sensible  man  will  regard  the  foregoing  claims  as  only
the  ravings  of  a  lunatic.  Hindus,  with  boundless  credulity,  may
accept  them,  but  this  only  shows  how  their  intellectual  powers
have  been  dwarfed  by  their  creed.

Belief  in  the  power  of  Mantras. — The  Swami  says  :

"  The  power  of  words.  There  are  certain  sacred  words,  called
raantrams,  which  have  power,  whrn  repeated  under  certain  conditions,
to  produce  these  extraordinary  powcis.      We  are  living  in  the  midst  of

9


66  APPENDIX.

Buch  a  mass  of  miracles,  day  and  moflit.,  that  we  do  not  think  anything;
of  them.  There  is  no  limit  to  man's  power,  the  power  of  words,  and  the
power  of  mind."     p.  208.

It  lias  been  sTiown  tliat  sucli  superstitious  beliefs  belong  to
savages.     (See  pp.  43-46)     No  mantra  can  kill  or  cnre  even  a  fly.

A  person  who  can  believe  that  the  universe  had  no  intelligent
Author  can  believe  anything.  Lecky,  in  his  History  of  European
Morals,  says  that  about  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era :

"  The  notions,  too,  of  magric  and  astrology,  were  detached  from
all  theoloQ^ical  belief,  and  might  be  found  among  many  who  were  absolute
atheists."    Vol.  T.  p.  393.

It  has  been  shown  that  belief  in  Yoga  powers  is  all  a  delusion,
and  that,  as  Barth  says,  the  exercises,  «'  couscientionsly  observed,
can  only  issue  in  folly  and  idiocy."

Colonel  Olcott  came  to  India  a  believer  in  the  occult  powers  of
Yogis.  In  his  search  for  them  he  found  only ''a  crowd  of  painted
impostors  who  masquerade  as  Sadhics,  to  cheat  the  charitable,  and
secretly  give  loose  to  their  beastly  nature."'^

The  Swami  says  in  the  summary  prefixed  to  his  Yoga
Philosophy :

**  Be  free.     This  is  the  whole  of  religion."

There  is  another  definition  of  religion,  given  by  the  groat
Teacher,  which  the  reader  is  asked  to  ponder  :

"  Thou  shall  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all
thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  strength,  and  with  all  thy  mind ;  and  thy
neighbour  as  thyself."

To  do  this  we  need  Divine  help,  which  'will  ^^  'given  in
answer  to  earnest  prayer.


*  Addresses,  p.  184.


ENGLISH  PUBLICATIONS  FOR  JNDIAN  READERS.


SOCIAL  KEFOBM.

On  Decision  of  Character  and  Moral  Courage.    8vo.  56  pp.  1^  As.
Post-free,  2  As.
A  repriut  of  Foster's  Celebrated  Essay,  with  some  remarks  on  its  application  to
India.

Sanitary  Hefoem  in  India.     55  pp.  2  As.     Post-free,  2^  As,

How  lakhs  of  Lives  may  be  saved  every  year,  and  crores  of  cases  of  Sickness  pre-
vented; Precaations  against  Fever,  Cholera,  Diabetes,  &c.

Is  Jndia  Becomino  Poorer  or  Kichjsr  ?     With  Remedies  fob  the
Existing  Poverty.     8vo.  82  pp.  24  As.     Post-free,  3  As.

The  prevailing  idea  with  regard  to  the  increasing  poverty  of  India  shown  to  be
incorrect,  and  the  true  means  of  promoting  its  wealth  explained.

Debt  and  the  Kight  Use  of  Money.     8vo.  '62  pp.  1  Anna.

Prevalence  of  Debt  in  India  ;  its  Causes ;  Evils  ;  how  to  get  out  of  itj  with  Frank-
lin's Way  to  Wealth,  &c.

Purity  IIefoiim.     8vo.  32  pp.  1  Anna.

The  gi-eat  need  of  this  reform  shown,  and  tlie  means  for  its  promotion.

TEiMFKEANCK  Eepukm  IN  Inuia.     8vo.  40  pp.  l^  As.     Post-f rcG,  2  As.

Intoxicating  liquors  in  Ancient  India ;  Intemperance  in  England ;  Temperance
llel'orminthe  West;  spread  of  Intemperance  in  India;  Temperance  Ueform  in  India;
how  to  promote  Temperance  Reform ;  with  Portraits  of  Livesey,  Father  Mathew,
yir  Wilfred   Lawson,  Dean   Farrar,  Messrs.  Bamuel  iSmith  and  Gaine.

Oaste.     8vo.  66  pp.  2  As.     Post-free,  2^  As.

iSupposed  and  real  origin  of  Caste  ;  Laws  of  Caste  according  to  Manu  ;  its  Effects  ;
Duty  with  regard  to  it.

The  Women  of  India  and   What  can  be  Done  foe  Them.     8vo.
158  pp.     4  As.     Post-free,  5^  As.

Women  in  Hindu  literature  ;  Female  Education;  Marriage  Customs;  Widow
Marriage  ;  means  to  be  adopted  to  raise  the  position  of  Women.

Thk  above  complete  in  one  volume,  1  Rupee  Net.     Postage,  2 4  As.
Peize  Essay  on  tue  Promotion  of  Indian  Domestic  Refoem.     8vo.
144  pp.     4  As.     Post-lree,  5  As.

The  prize  was  gained  by  Gaupat  Lakshraan,  of  Bombay,  in  1841.  His  Essay  was
published  with  a  Prefatory  Note  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  John  Wilson,  in  which  it  is  highly
commended  as  giving  a  graphic  and»correct  picture  of  Hindu  family  life.


KELIGIOUS  BBFOBM.

(See  also  The  Sacred  Books  of  the  Bast  Desceibed  and  Examined.
List  ou  last  page  of  wrapper.)

PopuLAE  Hinduism.     8vo.  96  pp.  2|  As.     Post-free,  3^  As.

Review  of  the  Hinduism  of  the  Epic  Poems  and  Puranas,  &c.  ;  Rites  and  Obser-
vances J  Effects  of  Hinduism,  and  Suggested  Reforms.


08  ENQLISH    rUBLIOATiONS   FOK  INDIAN   iJKADKBS.

Philosophic  Hinduism.     8v.  72  pp.  2^  As.     Post-free,  3  As.

The  Upanisbads  J  the  Six  Schools  of  Hiuda  Philosophy;  the  Miuor  Schools;
Doctrines  of  Philosophic  Hinduism  ;  the  Bhagavad  Gita ;  Causes  of  the  J<'ailure  of
Hindu  Philosophy.

The  Brahma  Samaj,  and  other  Modern  Eclbctic  Religious  Systems.
108  pp.  3  As.     Post-free,  4  As.

Modern  Hindu  Tli3ism  ;  Kammohun  Roy;  Uebendranath  Tagore ;  Keshob  Chuudcr
Sen;  the  Sadharan  hralimo  Samaj  ;  Madras  Biabmoism;  Prarthaua  Samajes.

1ndi\  Hindu,  and  India  Chkistian  ;  oe,  What  Hinduism  has  done
FOR  India,  and  what  Christianity  would  do  for  ir,  8vo.  72  pp.
24  As.     Post-free,  3  As.

Address  to  thoughful  Hindus,  showing  how  much  their  conntry  would  bcuclit
from  the  religion  which  many  of  them  now  oppose.

Kkishna  as  described  in  the  Pubanas  and  Bhagavad  Gita.  8vo.
72  pp.  24  As.     Post-free,  3  As.

A  full  account  is  given  of  the  Krishna  Avatara,  chielly  taken  from  the  Vishnu
Parana,  with  some  extracts  from  the  Bhagavata  Parana  and  the  MahabharaLa;  the
circumstances  which  led  to  the  great  war  between  the  Pandus  and  Kurus  arc
described;  and  some  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  are  examined  in  detail,

Account  of  the  Temple  op  Jagannath  at  Puri.     8vo.  48  pp   1^  As.

The  account  is  taken  chiefly  from  Dr.  Kajeudralala  Miiv&'s  Antiquities  of  Oriisa;
Hunter's  Qazetteer  of  India,  Sterling's  Oriisa,  &c.  With  views  of  the  temple,  pro-
cession, and  images.

CuRisriANiTY  Explained  TO  a  Hindu;  or.  The  Doctrines  of  Chkis-

TFANllY  AND  HlNDUlSM  COMPARED.       CO  pp.  2  As.
Doctrines  about  God,  Creation,  the  Soul,  Karma,  Transmigration,  Sin,  Incarnations
Salvation,  Prospects  at  Deathi  and  Comparative  Effects,

fcswAiii  ViVEKANANDA  ON  HiNDUisM.  8vo.  96  pp.  3  As.  Post-f ree,  4  As.

The  Swami's  Chicago  Address  is  quoted  in  full  and  examined;  important  facts
are  brought  out  which  he  omitted  to  state.

The  History  of  Christianity  in  India;  with  its  Prospects.     8vo.
150  pp.  5  As.     Post-free,  6  As.
An  account  of  the  early  Christian  Missions,  and  the  progress  of  Christianity  among
the  principal  nations ;  with  35  illustrations,  including   portraits  of   some   eminent
Missionaries.

Testimonies  of  Great  Men  to  the  Biblb  and  Christianity.  8vo.
45  pp.  li  As.     Post-free,  2  As.

Opinions  expressed  by  great  writers,  i)hilosophers,  scientists,  lawyers  and  states-
men, showing  that  the  Bible  and  Christianity  are  hrmly  beliaved  by  the  moat  eminent
men  of  the  time.

How  the  People  op  Ancient  Europe  became  Christians,  and  thb
Future  Religion  op  India.     8vo.'48  pp.  J^  As.  Post-free,  2  As.

An  account  of  the  Eastern  and  Western  Aryans;  their  common  origin;  resem-
blances in  language  and  religion;  how  Curistiauity  was  lirst  brought  to  Europe  ;  the
opposition  it  encountered,  and  its  linal  success,  with  the  evidence  that  it  will  follow
a  similar  course  in  India,

Civilization,  Ancient  and  Modern,  Compared;  with  Remarks  on
the  Htudy  op  Sanskrit.     8vo.  48  pp.  1^  As.    Post-free,  2  As.

Hindu  Civilization  in  the  Vedic  and  Puranic  Periods,  contrasted  with  that  of
modern  times.  The  accounts  of  the  former  have  been  largely  taken  from  Mr,  11.  C.
Dutt's  Civilization  in  Ancient  India.  Long  extracts  are  given  from  Macaulay's
celebrated  Minute  on  Indian  Education,  showing  the  greater  benefits  to  be  derived
from  Western  knowledge  than  from  the  study  of  Sanskrit  and  Arabic,


ENGLISH    PliULlCATIONS   FOR   INDIAN    EEADEns.  69

Bevil-Dancees,  WiTCH-FiNDEES,  Rain-Makbes,  and  Medicine-Men,
4to.  60  pp.  24  As.     Post-free,  2  As.

A  full  account  of  these  curious  and  degradiug  superstitions,  prevalent  among
backward  nations  in  different  parts  of  the  world  j  with  36  illustrations.

Teansmiq  RATION.  12mo.  19  pp.  By  Rev.  Dr.  W.  Hooper,  1  Anna.

TKA.CTS  EOR  MUHAMMADANS.      i2mO.  120    pp.     3  As.

By  the  Kev.  Dr.  G.  iiouae,  m.  a.  Translated  from  Bengali.  The  Integrity  of  the
Gospel ;  Jesus,  or  Muhammad?  ;  The  Sinless  Prophet;  The  True  Islam j  The  Koran;
Fatiha  ;;/rhe  Paraclete,  &c,,  are  some  of  the  subjects.

Doddeidge's  Rise  and  Peogkess  of  Religion  in  The  Soul.  12mo.
180  pp.  3  As.     Post-free,  4  As.
This  is  an  abridged  edition  of  one  oi  the  most  useful  works  on  Christianity  in  the
Unglish  language.

Pice  Papers  on  Indian  Reform,  i  Anna  each-

Some  are  original;  others  are  abridged  from  the  foregoing  for  popular  use.

1.  Cadses  op  Indian  Poveety.

2.  Indian  Maeeiagb  Customs.

3.  SurposED  AND  Real  Causes  oe  Disease.

4.  Patriotism  :  False  and  Teue.

5.  Management  op  Infants.

6.  Debt,  and  How  to  Get  Out  op  it.

7.  The  Purdah  ;  on  the  Seclusion  op  Indian  Women.

8.  Caste  :  its  Origin  and  Eppects.

9.  asteology.

10.  What  has  the  British  Government  done  pob  India  ?

]  1.  Who  wrote  the  Vedas  ?

12.  Manava-Dharma  Sastba.

13.  Thk  Bhagavad  Gita.

14.  The  Science  op  the  Hindu  Sastras.

1 5.  Fevers  :  their  Causes,  Treatment,  and  Prevention.

16.  Cholera  and  Bowel  Complaints.

17.  Animal  Worship.

18.  Early  Marriage;  its  Evils  and  Suggested  Reforms.

19.  Duty  to  a  Wipe.

20.  The  Fruits  of  Hinduism.

21.  Indian  Widows,  and  what  should  be  Done  for  them.

22.  The  Advantages  op 'Female  Education.

23.  Hindu  and  Christian  Worship  Compared.

24.  Hindu  Pilgrimagks.

25.  Charity  :  False  and  True.

26.  The  Two  Watchwords — Custom  and  Progress.

27.  The  Yalue  of  Pure  Water.

28.  Chakms,  Mantras,  and  other  Superstitions.

29.  Nautchks.

30.  Importance  op  Cleanliness.

31.  How  to  have  Healthy  Children.


70  english  publications  fob  indian  eeadebs.

32.  Causes  of  Indian  Poveety.

33.  Indian  Marriage  Customs.
.  34.  Eclipses.

35.  Family  Peayee.

36.  Giving  Abuse.

37.  Shraddhas.

38.  Kaema  oe  Fate.

39.  Tbe  Fatherhood  op  God.

40.  The  Brotherhood  op  Man.

41.  Hindu  and  Cheistian  Ideals  on  Piety.

42.  Prayaschitta.

Complete  in  a  volume,  half  bound,  gilt  titlo,  1  Re.  Postage,  2  As.


Exposures  of  Theosophy.

The  Theosophic  Craze  :  its  History  ;  the  Great  Mahatma  Hoax  ;

HOW  Mrs.  Besant  was  Befooled  and  Deposed  ;  its  Revival  op

Exploded  Superstitions   op  the  Middle  Ages;     8vo.   96   pp.

3  As.     Post-free,  4  As.

A  sketch  is  given  of  the  history  of  the  Society  since  its  commencement ;  the  tricks

of  Madame  Blavatsky  are  explained ;  an  account  is  given  of  the  many  changes  through

which  Mrs.  Besant  has  passed;  the  worthlessness  of  the  evidence  for  the  existence

of  Mahatmas  is  exposed ;  with  an  appeal  to  educated  Hindus.

India,  Past  and  Present.     8vo.  96  pp.  2  As.     Post-free,  2^  As.

It  is  considered  whether  India  would  benefit  more  from  Hindu  or  Western
Civilization,  from  Sanskrit  or  English ;  with  a  Notice  of  India's  Present  Needs.
Theosophist  plans  for  the  improvement  of  India  are  examined.

Who  is  Mrs.  Besant  ?    and  Why  has  she  come  to  India  ?     Svo.
48  pp.    1  An.

A  sketch  cf  her  life,  an  account  tf  the  numerous  changes  through  she  has  passed,
her  plans  for  the  benefit  of  India;  with  portraits  of  herself,  Madame  Blavatsky,  and
C.  Bradlaugh.


Papers  for  Thoughtful  Hindus-

So.  1.     The  Relation  op  Christianity  and  Hinduism.     8vo.  32  pp.
By  the  Rev.  Dr.    Krishna  Mohun    Banerjea,  late    Sanskrit
Examiner  to  the  Calcutta  University.     ^  Anna.
The  remarkable  resemblances,  in  some  respects,  between  ancient  Hinduism  and

Christianity  are  pointed  out.

No.  2.  The  Supposed  and  Real  Doctrines  op  Hinduism,  as  held  by
Educated  Hindus.  8vo.  32  pp.  By  the  Rev.  i^fehemiah
(Nilakanth)  Goreh.     ^  Anna.

It  is  shown  that  the  belief  of  educated  Hindus  with  regard  to  God,  His  Attributes,
Creation,  &c.,  are  not  found  in  the  Vedas  ;  but  have  been  derived  from  Christianity.

No.  3.     Moral  Courage.     8vo.  32  pp.     ^  Anna.

A  lecture  by  the  Bishop  of  Bombay.


ENGLISH   PUBLICATIONS   FOR   INDIAN   READERS.  71

No.  4.    The  Importance  op  Religion.     8vo.  48  pp.  |  Anna.

An  appeal  to  the  young,  by  John  Foster,  author  of  Essay  on  Decision  of  Character.
No.  5.     Christianity,  or — What  ?     Svo.     16  pp.   I  Anna.     By  tLe
Rev,  H.  Rice.

Christianity  is  shown  to  be  the  only  religion  which  meets  the  wants  of  man.

No.  6.  The  Sense  op  Sin  in  the  Light  op  History.  A  Lectme
by  the  Rev.  F.  W.  Kellett^  M. A.,  Madras  Christian  College.
Svo.  20  pp.  I  Anna.

It  is  shown  that  the  deeper  the  sense  of  sin,  the  more  mature  the  religious  life.

No.  7-     Bishop   Caldwell   on   Krishna  and  tqe   Bhagavad    Gtita.
Svo,  32  pp.     f  Anna.
A  reprint  of  Remarks  on  the  late  Hon.   SacJagopah  Charloo's  introduction  to  a
Reprint  of  a  Pamjihlet  entitled,  ''  Theosophy  of  the  Hindus ;"  with  a  preface  by  the
Rev.  J.  L.  Wyatt.

No.  8.  The  Duties  op  Educated  Young  Men  to  their  Country.  Svo.
16  pp.  i  Anna.

An  address,  by  the  Rev.  H.  Ballantine,  at  a  Meeting  of  the  Ahmednagar  Debating
Society.     Translated  from  the  Marathi.

Xo.  J)      Christ  THE  Fulfilment  op  Hinduism.     Svo.  28  pp.  \  Anna.

A  lecture  by  the  Rev.  F.  W-  Kellbtt,  M.A.,  Madras  Christian  College.
No.  10.     Yedantism.     Svo.  21  pp.  ^  Anna.

By  the  Rev.  Lai  Behari  Day,  with  numerous  Sanskrit  quotations.

No.  11-     The  "Defectiveness  op  Brahmoism.     Svo.  24  pp.  ^  Anna.

A  Lecture  by  the  Rev.  Lai  Behari  Day.

No.  12.  Preliminary  Dialogues  on  Important  Questions  in  India.
Svo.  74  pp.  2  As.     Post-free,  2|  As.


Descriptions  of  Countries  and  Peoples-

Pictorial  Tour  round  India.  Imperial  Svo.  116  pp.  6  As.  Post-free,
n  As.

An  imaginary  tour  round  India,  with  visits  to  Nepal  and  Cashmere,  describing  the
principal  cities  and  other  objects  of  interest.  With  97  woodcuts  illustrative  of  the
Himalayas,  Calcutta,  Benares,  Agra,  Delhi,  Bombay,  Madras,  &c.

The  Principal  Nations  op  India.     Svo.  160  po.   4  As.     Post-free,
5  As.

An  account  of  42  Nations  and  Tribes  of  India,  with  specimeng  of  some  of  their
languages,  and  55  illustrations.

The  Native  States  op  India  and  their  Princes  ;  with  notices  op
SOME  important  Zemindaris.  4to.  100  pp.  5  As.  Post-free,  6  As.

157  States  are  described,  and  32  portraits  are  given.  The  little  book  will  help  to
enable  Indians  to  understand  the  vast  extent  of  their  country,  and  what  is  being
done  for  its  improvement.

Kasi,  or  Benares,  The  Holy  City  of  the   Hindus.     Imperial  Svo.
44  pp.  3  As.     Post-free,  4  As.

An' account  of  the  city;  its  Sanskrit  schools,  ghats,  temples,  and  pilgrimages;
with  23  illustrations.


72  ENGLISH   PUBLICATIONS   FOR  INDIAN   READEBS.

The  G-reat  Temples  oy  India,  Ceylon,  and  Burma.     Imperial  8vo.
104  pp.  with  60  illustrations.     6  As.  Post-free,  7^  As.

There  are  pictures  and  desonptiona  of  some  of  the  most  celebrated  Hindu,  Sikh,
•Tain,  and  Buddhist  temples  ;  asPnri,  Bndh-Gaya,  Benares,  Hiirdwar.Ganwotri,  Ellora,
Elephanta,  Amritsar,  Gwalior,   Tanjore,   Srirangam,  Kandy,  Prome,  and  Mandalay.

Burma  and  the  Burmese.   4to.  54  pp.  2^  As.     Post-free,  3  As.

A  description  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  'the  Burmese  ;  an  account  of  their
gfovernment,  reliorion,  and  history,  with  illustrative  woodcuts,  and  portraits  of  King
Theebaw  and  his  Queen.

Lanka  and  its  People  ;  or,  a  Description  op  Ceylon.     4to.   72  pp.
3  As.     Post-free,  3^  As.

The  account  of  Lanka  given  in  the  Ramayana  is  first  mentioned.  Its  history,  and
present  condition  are  then  described,  with  numerous  illustrative  woodcuts.

Tibet:  the  Highest  Country  in  the  World.     4to.  2^  As.

An  account  of  the  country,  its  productions, the  curious  customs  of  the  people,  their
religions,  and  supposed  living  incarnations;  with  numerous  illustrations.

Pictorial  Tour  round  England  Scotland  and  Ireland.  Imperial  8vo.
114  pp.  6  As.     Post-free,  7|  As.

Descriptions  of  the  chief  places  of  interest ;  Public  Schools  and  Universities;  Coal
Mines  and  Manufactures  :  the  British  Government ;  Home  life  ;  England  an  example
and  warning  to  India.  With  104  woodcuts,  and  coloured  engraving  of  the  Queen-
Empress.

Pictures  op  China  and  its  People.     4fco,  56  pp.  21  As.  Post-free,
3  As.

Extent,  History  ;  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  People  ;  Schools,  Examinations  ;
Industries;  Travelling;  laneuage  and  Literature ;  Government;  Religioiia  ;  India
and  China  compared  ;  with  G4  Illustrations.

Japan  :  the  Land  op  the  Rising  Sun.    4to.  68  pp.  2^  As.  Post-free,
3  As.

With  49  Illustrations.  An  interesting  description  of  this  beautiful  country,  and  an
account  of  the  remarkable  changes  which  have  taken  place  in  it.

Pictorial  Tour  round  Bible  Lands.     Imperial  Svo.  100  pp.    6  As.
Post-free,  7^  As.

The  principal  countries  mentioned  in  the  Bible  and  in  ancient  history  are  described
as  Palestine,  Syria,  Bombay,  Asia  Minor.  Greece  and  Italy;  with  104  Illustrations.

Arabia,  and  its  Propfibt.     4to.  64  pp.  2^  As.     Post-free,  3  As.

An  account  of  the  Arabs  ;  with  descriptions  of  Jeddah,  Mecca.  Medina;  the  History
of  Muhammad  and  the  early  Calinha ;  the  Koran,  Muslim  Doctrines,  Sects,  Prayers,
Pilgrimage,  &c. ;  with  numerous  illustrations.

Pictures  op  Russia  and  its  Peoples.     Imperial  Svo.  83  pp.     5  As.
Post-free,  6  As.

a  description  both  of  European  and  Asiatic  Russia,  including  an  account  of  the
different  races  by  which  they  are  peopled,  their  manners  and  customs,  the  Govern-
ment, &c. ;  with  89  illustrations  and  maps.

Egypt  :  the  Land  op  the  Pyramids.     Imperial  Svo.  80  pp.     5  As.
Post-free,  6  As.

A  description  of  this  interesting  country,  one  of  the  oldest  seats  of  civilization  in
the  world;  ita  ancient  religion,  its  famous  temples  and  other  buildings  ;  the  mannfirs
and  customs  of  the  people,  etc.  ;  with  nnmernns  illiisirationa.


ENGLISH    PUBLICATIONS   FOE   INDIAN    KEADEKS.  73

'XnE  Land  qp  Snows;  with  an  account  of  Missions  to  Greenland.
4to.  56  pp.  2^  As.     Post-free,  3  As.

A  description  of  Greenland,  so  different  from  India;  giving  an  account  of  its
people,  and  the  efforts  to  elevate  tliem  ;  with  numerous  illustrations.

The  Overland  Journey  to  England.   4to.  72  pp.  3  As.

A  descriptioa  of  the  principal  places  passed,  with  some  account  of  the  expense,
and  directions  on  arrival  in  England  copiously  illustrated.

PiCTUBES  OF  Women  in  Many  Lands.     Imperial  8vo.  112  pp.    6  As.
Post-free,  7^  As.

Descriptions  of  women,  beginning  with  the  most  degraded  nations  of  the  world,
and  gradually  ascending  to  the  most  enlightened  j  with  Buggestious,  f roni  the  review,
fur  Indian  women,  with  172  illustrations.


Biographies-

Statesmen  OP  Rkcent  Times.    8vo.  192  pp.  8  As.    Post-free,  9^  As.

Accounts  are  given  of  the  leading  Statesmen  in  the  great  countries  of  the  world;
as  Gladstone,  iSalisbury,  Bismarck  and  others.  Special  notice  is  taken  of  those
interested  in  ludia.     In  all  182  are  mentioned,  with  122  portraits.

The  Goveenobs-Gteneral  op  India,  First  Series.  By  Henry  Morris,
M.  0.  S.  (retired)  8vo.  145  pp.  4  As.     Post-free,  5  As.

Contains  sketches  of  the  lives  of  Warren  Hastings,  Lord  Cornwallis,  Sir  John  Shore,
Marquis  Wellesley,  the  Earl  of  Minto,  and  the  Marquis  of  Hastings,  with  portraits.
Interesting  personal  details  are  given,  such  as  are  not  usually  found  in  histories.

The  Goveenoks-G-eneral  op  India,  Second  Series.  By  the  same
author,  8vo.  175  pp.  4  As.     Post-free,  5  As.

Includes  Sketches  of  Lord  Amherst,  Lord  William  Eentinck,  Lord  Auckland,  Lord
EUenborough,  Lord  Hardinge,  and  the  Marquis  of  Halhousie.

The  two  Series,  half  bound  m  cloth,  gilt  title,  12  As.
Sketches  op  Indian  Cheistians  ;  with  an  Inteoduction  by  S.  Sat-
THiANADHAN,  M.A.     8vo.   268   pp.  half   cloth  with  gilt  title,
10  As.     Post-free,  11^  As.
An  account  of  42  Indian   Protestant  Christians  ;  Tamil,  Telugu,  Cauarese,   Mala*
yalam,  Bengali,  Hindustani,  Panjabi,  Afghan,  Gujarati,  Marathi,  Parsi,   and  Karen  j
witE  several  portraits.

Anglo-Indian  Worthies  :  By  Henry  Morris,  Madras  C.  S.  (Retired.)
8vo.  160  pp.  4  As.     Post-free,  5  As.     Pull  cloth,  gilt  title,

_  8  As.

Lives  of  Sir  Thomas  Munro,  Sir  John  Malcolm,  ^Lord  Metcalfe,  Mountstuart
Elphiustoae,  James  Thomason,  Sir  Henry  Lawrence,  Sir  James  Outram,  Sir  Donald
Macleod,  and  Sir  Bartle  Frere,  with  portraits.

Eminent  Peiknds  op  Man;  or  Lives  op  Distinguished  Philan-
thbopists.  8vo.  158  pp.  4  As.  Post-free,  6  As.  Full  cloth,
gilt  title,  10  As.

Sketches  of  Howard,  Oberlin,  Granyille  Sharp,  Clarkson,  Wilberforce,  Buxton,
Pounds,  Davies  of  Hevauden,  George  Moore,  Montefiore,  Livesey,  the  Earl  of  Shaft-
esbury, and  others  j  with  remarks  on  what  might  be  done  in  India.

Some  Noted  Indians  op  Modeen  Times.  8vo.  164  pp.  4  As.  Post-
free,  5  As.

Sketches  of  Indian  Religious  and  Social  Reformers,  Philanthropists,  Scholars,
Statesmen,  Judges,  Journalists,  and  others  j  with  several  portraits.

10


74  ENGLISH   PUBLICATIONS   FOE   INDIAN    BEADEES.

Maetin  Luthbe,  the  Gteeat   European  Reformer.     8vo.    109  pp.
2^  As.     Post-free,  3  As.

The  scate  of  religion  in  Europe  in  the  time  of  Luther  is  described ;  a  full  account
is  giTOn  of  his  undaunted  efforts  to  bring  about  a  reformation,  the  greater  need  of
a  similar  change   in  India  is  shown,  and  Iiuther  is  held  up  as  an  example.     15  illns-

trations.

Baba  Padmanji.  An  Auto  biography.  8vo.  108  pp.  2  4  As.   Post-free,
3  As.

An  interesting  account  by  himself  of  this  popular  Marathi  author,  describing  hia
conversion  from  Hinduism  to  Christianity.

Picture    Stories   of   Noble   Women.     4to.  50   pp.   2^  As.     Post-
free,  3  As.

Account  of  Cornelia,  Agrippina,  Padmani  of  Chittore,  Lady  Jane  Grey,  Ahaliya
Bai,  Mrs.  JB'ry,  Princess  Alice,  Miss  Carpenter,  Maharani  Surnomayi,  Pandita
llamabai,  Miss  Nightingale,  and  Lady  DufFerin,

The  Queen-Empress    of  India  and  Her  Family.       43  pp.      3  As.
Post-free,  3^  As.

Her  early  life  ;  marriage  ;  widowhood  ;  children  ;  progress  in  India  during  her
reign  ;  traits  of  character  and  lessons  from  her  life.  With  27  illustrations,  and  a
colored  portrait  of  the  Empress.

Sir  Herbert  Edwardes.  By  Henry  Morris.  8vo.  20  pp.  4  Anna.

Ho  is  described  as  the  hero  of  Multan ;  the  peacemaker  among  wild  Afghan  tribes  ;
the  true  friend  of  India  ;  the  earnest  Christian,


Publications  for  Students.

Select  Convocation  Addresses,  delivered  to  Graduates  of  the  Madras
University.  8vo.  231  pp.  Stiff  covers,  8  As. ;  Half  bound  in
cloth,  12  As.  Full  bound  in  cloth,  with  gilt  title,  1  Re.
Post-free.

The  volume  contains  15  addresses,  commencing  in  1859,  and  including  several  of
the  most  recent.  Some  of  the  most  distinguished  men  in  South  India  during  the
last  30  years  took  part  in  the  Series.  Many  very  useful  hints  to  young  men  enter*
ing  upon  the  battle  of  life,  in  any  part  of  India  will  be  found  in  the  collection.

The  Indian  Student's  Manual.    12mo.  352  pp.  8  As.  Post-free,  9  As.

Hints  on  Studies,  Examinations,  Moral  Conduct,  Religious  Duties,  and  Success
in  Lif  e>


Progress-

This  is  a  monthly  illustrated  Periodical  for  the  educated  classes  in
India  and  Ueylou.  The  subscription  is  only  8  As.  a  year  ;  with
postage  14  As.     Three  copies  may  be  sent  for  ^  auua  postage.

The  Periodical  is  specially  recommended  to  Teachers.  It  would
give  new  ideas  to  their  pupils,  while  the  page  for  students
would  be  very  useful  to  those  preparing  for  examinations.

Orders  to  be  addressed  to  Mr.  A.  T.  Scott,  Tract  Depot,  Madras*


S.  p.   C.  K.  PJlBBa,     VJSPERY,  M.ADBAS— 1897.


THE  SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST  DESCRIBED
AND  EXAMINED.


An  Account  of  the  Vedas,  with  Illustrative  Extracts-  8vo.
16(5  pp.  4.^  As.     Post-free,  6  As.

The  principal  divisions  of  tho  Vedas  are  described;  with  life  in  Vedio  times,  the
gods  of  the  Vedas,  the  offerings  and  sacritices.  Through  the  kind  permission  of
Mr.  R.  T.  B.  Griffith,  translations  of  some  cf  the  most  important  hymns  in  the  Eig
Veda  are  quoted  in  full.

The  Brahmanas  of  the  Vedas.  8vo.  232  pp.  By  the  Rev.  K.  S.
Macdonald,  M.A.,  D.D.,  iiuthor  of  The  Vedic  Relujion.  8  As.
Post-free,  10  As.     Half, cloth,  12  As.

Accounts  are  given  of  the  Rrahmauas  of  the  Rig  Veda,  Sama  Veda,  Black  and
White  Yajar  Vedas,  and  the  Atharva  Veda,  showing  the  development  of  Hinduism.
The  state  of  Society,  the  Human,  Horse,  and  other  Sacrifices,  the  Gods  and  Religion
of  the  Brahmanas  are  described,  with  many  interesting  details.

Selections  from  the  Upanishads.    Svo.  120  pp.  4  As.    Post-free,

5  As.

The  Katha,  Isa,  and  Svetdsvatara,  as  translated  into  English  by  Dr.  Roer,  are
quoted  in  full,  with  the  notes  of  Sankara  Aoharya  and  others  ;  and  there  are  copious
extracts  from  the  Brihad  Aranya  and  Chh^ndogya  Upanishads,  wiih  an  examination
of  their  teaching

The  Bhagavad  Gita.     8vo.   108  pp.   4  As.     Post-free,  5  As.

An  English  Translation  carefully  revised;  numerous  Explanatory  Notes,  and  an
Examination  of  its  Doctrines.

The  Vishnu  Purana.     8ro.  96  pp.  3  As.     Post-free,  4  As.

An  abridgment  is  given,  verhntim.,  from  the  English  translation  of  H.  H.  Wilson,
Professor  of  Sanskrit,  University  of  Oxford  ;  with  an  examination  of  the  book  in  the
light  of  the  present  day.

The  Ramayana-  8vo.  180  pp.  7  As.  Post-free,  8^  As.  Half
cloth,  11  As.

A  fall  abridgment  of  this  celebrated  poem  is  given  in  English,  with  explanatory
notes,  where  necessary.  An  Introduction  treats  of  the  author  and  age  of  the  poem,
•w  ith  explanations  of  its  aims  by  eminent  Oriental  scholars ;  it  is  compared  with  the
Mahabharata  and  the  Greek  epic  poems.  The  Review  describes  the  state  of
society  during  tho  time  of  the  author;  the  claims  of  the  poem  to  be  a  sacred  book
are  examined  ;  and,  in  conclusion,  an  account  is  given  of  the  Nishkalank  or  Spotless
Avatar.

Selections  from  the  Koran-  8vo.  232  pp.  8  As.  Post-free,  10  As.
Half  cloth,  12  As.

Upwards  of  Cve  hundred  of  the  most  important  passages  are  given,  with  headings,
explanatory  Notes  where  necessary,  and  a  classified  Index.  An  introduction  treats
of  tho  Koran,  its  Divisions,  Sources,  &c.;  the  Creed,  Dnties,  Sects  and  Feasts  of  Isl.am.
The  Review  shows  the  Testimony  of  the  Koran  to  the  Christian  Scriptures;  its  claim
to  Inspiration  is  examined  ;  with  an  addrnsa  to  enlightened  Muslims.  Throughout,
extracts  are  given  from  standard  works  on  the  subject.

Orders  to  be  addressed  to  Mr.  A.  T.  Scott,  Tract  Depot,
Madras;  or  to  tho  Calcutta,  Allahabad,  Lahore^  Simla,  Bombay,
Bangalore,  and  Colombo  Book  Depots.
