# Corpus Hermeticum (Eight Tractates)

**Author:** Hermes Trismegistus, various trans.  
**Year:** n.d.  
**Archive ID:** eight-tractates-v2-print

---

--- Page 1 ---
Corpus Hermeticum
Eight Tractates
I, III, IV, VI, VIII, XI, XII, XIII
Translation and Commentary
David Myatt

--- Page 2 ---
Contents
Preface
Tractate I. Ποιμάνδρης. Poemandres
Tractate III.  Ιερός Λόγος. An Esoteric Mythos
Tractate IV. Ἑρμοῦ πρὸς Τάτ ὁ κρατῆρ ἡ μονάς. From Hermes To
Thoth: Chaldron Or Monas
Tractate VI. ̔́Οτι ἐν μόνῳ θεῷ τὸ ἀγαθόν ἐστιν ἀλλαχόθι δὲ οὐδαμοῦ.
That In The Theos Alone Is Nobility And Not Anywhere Else
Tractate VIII. Ὅτι οὐδὲν τῶν ὄντων ἀπόλλυται ἀλλὰ τὰς μεταβολὰς
ἀπωλείας καὶ θανάτους πλανώμενοι λέγουσιν. That no beings are
lost, despite mortals mistakenly claiming that such transformations
are death and a loss.
Tractate XI. Νοῦς πρὸς Ἑρμῆν. From Perceiverance To Hermes
Tractate XII. Περὶ νοῦ κοινοῦ πρὸς Τάτ. To Thoth, Concerning
Mutual Perceiveration.
Tractate XIII. Ερμού του τρισμεγίστου προς τον υιόν Τάτ εν όρει
λόγος απόκρυφος περί παλιγγενεσίας και σιγής επαγγελίας. On A
Mountain: Hermes Trismegistus To His Son Thoth, An Esoteric
Discourse Concerning Palingenesis And The Requirement of Silence
Bibliography--- Page 3 ---
Preface
This work collects together my translations of and commentaries on the eight
tractates of the Corpus Hermeticum which were published separately between
2013 and 2017. From the fourteen Greek tractates that have been traditionally
referred to as the Corpus Hermeticum, I chose the eight (the ogdoad) whose
texts I considered were the most metaphysical and mystical and thus which can
provide an understanding of what came to be termed hermeticism.
In the case of the Corpus Hermeticum, the task of translating ancient Greek
into English is complicated by the terminology used in the text. Words such as
λόγος, νοῦς, πνεῦμα, δημιουργόν, φῶς, ψυχή (καὶ τὰ λοιπά), all require careful
consideration if the text is to be understood in relation to the cultural milieu
existing at the time of its composition; a milieu where a Hellenistic paganism, of
various types and hues, thrived alongside the still relatively new religion of
Christianity.
All too often, such Greek words are translated by an English word which has,
over centuries, acquired a meaning which is not or which may not be relevant to
that milieu, resulting in a 'retrospective reinterpretation' of the text. One thinks
here of (i) θεός translated as god or as God, and of λόγος translated as 'word'
(or Word) which thus suﬀuse, or can suﬀuse, the text with the meanings that
nearly two thousand years of Christian exegesis have ascribed to those terms;
of (ii) νοῦς translated as either "intellect" or as "mind", neither of which is
satisfactory especially given what both of those English words have come to
denote, philosophically and otherwise, in the centuries since the Greek tractates
were written. In an eﬀort to avoid such retrospective reinterpretation here, and
the preconceptions thus imposed upon the text, I have sometimes used
transliterations, sometimes used a relatively obscure English word, and
sometimes used a new term.
However, given that the goal of the translator is to provide for the general
reader an intelligible interpretation of the text, to utilize transliterations for
every problematic word would fail to accomplish that goal. Which is why the
translator has to use their judgement and why every translation is 'a fallible
interpretation of meaning'.
The methodology of using some transliterations, some relatively obscure--- Page 4 ---
English words, and some new term or expression (such as noetic sapientia)
results in a certain technical -  an 'esoteric' - vocabulary which requires or may
require contextual, usually metaphysical, interpretation. Often, the
interpretation is provided by reference to the matters discussed in the
particular tractate; sometimes by reference to other tractates; and sometimes
by considering Ancient Greek, and Greco-Roman, philosophy and mysticism. Occasionally, however, the interpretation is to leave some transliteration - such
as physis, φύσις - as a basic term of the particular hermetic weltanschauung
described in a particular tractate and, as such, as a term which has no
satisfactory English equivalent, metaphysical or otherwise, and therefore to
assimilate it into the English language. All of which make these translations
rather diﬀerent from other English versions, past and present, with these
translations hopefully enabling the reader to approach and to appreciate the
hermetic texts sans preconceptions, modern and otherwise, and thus provide an
intimation of how such texts might have been understood by those who read
them, or heard them read, in the milieu of their composition. One of the intentions of these translations of mine of various tractates of
the Corpus Hermeticum is provide an alternative approach to such ancient texts
and hopefully enable the reader without a knowledge of Greek (and of the
minutiae of over a century of scholarly analysis of the Greek text) to appreciate
the texts anew and understand why they have - in the original Greek - been
regarded as important documents in respect of particular, ancient,
weltanschauungen that have, over the centuries, proved most inﬂuential and
which can still be of interest to those interested in certain metaphysical
speculations and certain esoteric matters. Why an alternative approach to such ancient texts?One of the intentions of these translations of mine of various tractates of
the Corpus Hermeticum is provide an alternative approach to such ancient texts
and hopefully enable the reader without a knowledge of Greek (and of the
minutiae of over a century of scholarly analysis of the Greek text) to appreciate
the texts anew and understand why they have - in the original Greek - been
regarded as important documents in respect of particular, ancient,
weltanschauungen that have, over the centuries, proved most inﬂuential and
which can still be of interest to those interested in certain metaphysical
speculations and certain esoteric matters. Why an alternative approach to such ancient texts? Because current, and past
interpretations - based on using terms such as God, Mind, and Soul - make them
appear to be proto-Christian or imbued with an early Christian weltanschauung
or express certain philosophical and moralistic abstractions. Also, because I
incline toward the view that such texts, in the matter of cosmogony and
metaphysics, are more inﬂuenced by the classical Greek and the Hellenistic
ethos than by any other, and thus in many ways are representative of that ethos
as it was being developed, or as it was known, at the time texts such as those in
the Corpus Hermeticum were written. An ethos, a cosmogony and a
metaphysics, exempliﬁed - to give just a few examples - by terms such as
ἀρρενόθηλυς (Poemander), by the shapeshifting of Poemander (τοῦτο εἰπὼν
ἠλλάγη τῇ ἰδέᾳ), by mention of a septenary system (Poemander, Tractate XI), by
the 'voyages of the psyche' (Tractate XI: 20) and by terms such as Ιερός Λόγος
(Tractate III) and which term dates back to the time of Hesiod [1].--- Page 3 ---
Preface
This work collects together my translations of and commentaries on the eight
tractates of the Corpus Hermeticum which were published separately between
2013 and 2017. From the fourteen Greek tractates that have been traditionally
referred to as the Corpus Hermeticum, I chose the eight (the ogdoad) whose
texts I considered were the most metaphysical and mystical and thus which can
provide an understanding of what came to be termed hermeticism.
In the case of the Corpus Hermeticum, the task of translating ancient Greek
into English is complicated by the terminology used in the text. Words such as
λόγος, νοῦς, πνεῦμα, δημιουργόν, φῶς, ψυχή (καὶ τὰ λοιπά), all require careful
consideration if the text is to be understood in relation to the cultural milieu
existing at the time of its composition; a milieu where a Hellenistic paganism, of
various types and hues, thrived alongside the still relatively new religion of
Christianity.
All too often, such Greek words are translated by an English word which has,
over centuries, acquired a meaning which is not or which may not be relevant to
that milieu, resulting in a 'retrospective reinterpretation' of the text. One thinks
here of (i) θεός translated as god or as God, and of λόγος translated as 'word'
(or Word) which thus suﬀuse, or can suﬀuse, the text with the meanings that
nearly two thousand years of Christian exegesis have ascribed to those terms;
of (ii) νοῦς translated as either "intellect" or as "mind", neither of which is
satisfactory especially given what both of those English words have come to
denote, philosophically and otherwise, in the centuries since the Greek tractates
were written. In an eﬀort to avoid such retrospective reinterpretation here, and
the preconceptions thus imposed upon the text, I have sometimes used
transliterations, sometimes used a relatively obscure English word, and
sometimes used a new term.
However, given that the goal of the translator is to provide for the general
reader an intelligible interpretation of the text, to utilize transliterations for
every problematic word would fail to accomplish that goal. Which is why the
translator has to use their judgement and why every translation is 'a fallible
interpretation of meaning'.
The methodology of using some transliterations, some relatively obscure

Also, because I
incline toward the view that such texts, in the matter of cosmogony and
metaphysics, are more inﬂuenced by the classical Greek and the Hellenistic
ethos than by any other, and thus in many ways are representative of that ethos
as it was being developed, or as it was known, at the time texts such as those in
the Corpus Hermeticum were written. An ethos, a cosmogony and a
metaphysics, exempliﬁed - to give just a few examples - by terms such as
ἀρρενόθηλυς (Poemander), by the shapeshifting of Poemander (τοῦτο εἰπὼν
ἠλλάγη τῇ ἰδέᾳ), by mention of a septenary system (Poemander, Tractate XI), by
the 'voyages of the psyche' (Tractate XI: 20) and by terms such as Ιερός Λόγος
(Tractate III) and which term dates back to the time of Hesiod [1]. In respect, for example, of the Ιερός Λόγος tractate, my view is that it is the
story of genesis according to an ancient pagan, and esoteric, weltanschauung; a
text in all probability older than the other texts in the Corpus Hermeticum and
certainly older, as an aural tradition, than the story given in the Biblical--- Page 5 ---
Genesis; and a text which the author of the Poemandres tractate might well
have been familiar with, as a reading of both texts indicates.
            As an example of my alternative approach (and perhaps the most
controversial example) is my interpretation of ἀγαθός as honour/nobility
/honesty, τὸ ἀγαθὸν as the honourable/the noble/nobility, and thus as embodied
in noble, trustworthy, honest, individuals, and which interpretation I am inclined
to view as an expression of both the classical Greek and the Greco-Roman
(Hellenic) ethos, including the ethos of Greco-Roman mysticism, just as the
expression τί ἐστιν ἀλήθεια, attributed to a certain Roman, is an expression of
that ethos; whereas ἀγαθός as some disputable 'abstract', impersonal or
philosophical 'good' does not in my view exemplify that ethos and the milieu in
which it ﬂourished. Furthermore, given how such a disputable 'abstract', moral,
good has been generally understood for the last millennia (partly due to the
inﬂuence of Christianity, partly due to post-Renaissance philosophy, and partly
due to Western jurisprudence) then it seems desirable to avoid using the term
'good' in translations of such ancient texts - as also elsewhere, in other
metaphysical tractates of the Hellenic era - since 'good' now has certain
post-Hellenic connotations which can distance us from what such ancient
tractates may well have expressed. [2]
In respect of the texts, I incline toward the view that they generally represent
the personal weltanschauung of their authors germane to their time. That is,
that rather than being representative of some axiomatical pre-existing
philosophy or of some religious school of thought, they reproduce the insight
and the understanding of individuals regarding particular metaphysical matters;
an insight and an understanding no doubt somewhat redolent of, and inﬂuenced
by, and sometimes perhaps paraphrasing, some such existing philosophies
and/or some such schools of thought; and an insight which often diﬀers from
tractate to tractate.
            Regarding my translation, some may well consider the words of
Diogenes Laertius - Lives of Eminent Philosophers 3.1 (64) - in relation to Plato,
quite apposite:
χρῆται δὲ ὁ Πλάτων ἐνίοτε αὐτῷ καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ κακοῦ: ἔστι δ᾽ ὅτε καὶ
ἐπὶ τοῦ μικροῦ. πολλάκις δὲ καὶ διαφέρουσιν ὀνόμασιν ἐπὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ
σημαινομένου χρῆται.
For I have sometimes translated the same Greek word in two diﬀerent ways in
order to try and elucidate the meaning of the text [exempli gratia:
ἀπεριόριστον, as undeﬁnable and unmeasurable] just as I have idiosyncratically
translated certain Greek words [exempli gratia: ἅγιος, as numinous],
diﬀerences and idiosyncrasies I have endeavoured to explain in my commentary.
        The Greek text used is that of A.D. Nock & A-J. Festugiere, Corpus--- Page 6 ---
Hermeticum, Third Edition, 1972. Occasionally I have followed the reading of
the MSS or the emendations of others rather than Nock's text with such
variations noted in my commentary. Text enclosed in angled brackets < >
indicates a conjectural editorial addition, and <...> indicates a lacuna.
David Myatt
2017
[1] a) ἔστι λόγος περὶ αὐτοῦ ἱρὸς λεγόμενος. Book II, Chapter 48, s3. (b) ἔστι
ἱρὸς περὶ αὐτοῦ λόγος λεγόμενος. Book II, Chapter 62, s2. (c) ἔστι δὲ περὶ
αὐτῶν ἱρὸς λόγος λεγόμενος. Book II, Chapter 81, s2.
[2] I have endeavoured to explain such interpretations in various essays,
including (i) Some Examples Regarding Translation and Questions of
Interpretation, (ii) Concerning ἀγαθός and νοῦς in the Corpus Hermeticum; and
(iii) Cicero On Summum Bonum.--- Page 7 ---
Ποιμάνδρης
Pœmandres 
Tractate I
Introduction
The Greek text of the tractate often referred to as the Pœmandres/Pymander
part of the Corpus Hermeticum was ﬁrst published by Turnebus in Paris in 1554
and of the origin of the knowledge expounded in the text, the author declares at
v.2 that
εἰμὶ ὁ Ποιμάνδρης ὁ τῆς αὐθεντίας νοῦς οἶδα ὃ βούλει καὶ σύνειμί σοι
πανταχοῦ
Which implies - qv. my translation, and notes and commentary on the text - that
what Pœmandres is about to reveal is an authentic perceiveration, and this
supernatural being [or archetype] knows what is desired/wanted because, like
the guardian daemons of classical and Hellenic culture, Pœmandres is close by.
What is revealed is a summary of that weltanschauung that has been termed
hermetic philosophy; a summary widely regarded as an important hermetic text
and as dating from the second or the third century CE; and a summary which
contains many interesting notions and allusions, such as logos, physis/Physis,
the septenary system, the gospel of John, the feminine character of
Physis/Nature, the doxology Agios o Theos, and θεός as being both male and
female in one person - that is, either ἀνδρόγυνος or (more controversially)
bisexual.
°°°
Translation
[1] Once, while concentrating on and pondering what is real, my intuitions
freely ﬂowed, and, my alertness dulled as from an excess of wearisome bodily
toil or too much eating, it seemed as if a huge being - too large to measure ---- Page 8 ---
chanced by calling out my name and asking what it was I wanted to see and
hear about and learn and have knowledge of.
[2] Who are you, I asked.
I am Pœmandres, the perceiveration of authority, knowing your desires and
eachwhere with you.
[3] I answered that I seek to learn what is real, to apprehend the physis of
beings, and to have knowledge of theos. That is what I want to hear.
So he said to me, remember all those things you wanted to learn, for I shall
instruct you.
[4] So saying, his form altered whereupon I at once sensed everything; an
indeﬁnity of inner sight, with everything suﬀused in phaos - bright and clear - so
that from this seeing, a desire. But all too soon there came down upon it a
heavy darkness - stygian, strange - and slithering <as a serpent> until that
darkness changed in physis: ﬂowing, of an untellable disorder, with smoke as
from a ﬁre and an indescribable sound followed by some aphonous noise as if
phaos was calling out.
[5] And then, from the phaos, a numinous logos came upon that physis with
pure Fire going forth to the height of that physis; easily and eﬀective and
eﬀicient. Since Air is agile, it followed the pnuema, up and above Earth and
Water and as far as Fire, to be as if it were hanging from that, there.
Earth and Water remained, coagulating together such that <Earth> could not
be seen apart from Water until they were stirred by the sound of the pneumal
logos that came down upon them.
[6] Pœmandres asked, had I apprehended the sense of that inner seeing? And I
said I shall have knowledge of it.
I am, he said, that phaos; perceiveration, your theos, and prior to the ﬂowing
physis brought forth from darkness. [And] the phaomal logos, from
perceiveration, is the child of theos.
So I said for him to continue.
Then know that within you - who hears and sees - is logos kyrios, although
perceiveration is theos the father. They are not separated, one from the other,
because their union is Life.
Thank you, I said.
Then discover phaos and become familiar with it.--- Page 9 ---
[7] So saying, he stared at me for so long a duration that I shivered because of
the way he looked. But, as he tilted his head back, I, observing, discovered the
phaos of unmeasurable forces and an undeﬁnable cosmic order coming-
into-being. While the ﬁre, embraced by a strong force, was subdued and kept in
stasis.
Such I observed and discovered because of those words of Pœmandres.  But,
since I was vexed, he spoke to me again. From your seeing, an awareness of the
quidditas of semblance; of the primal before the origin without an end.
This was what Pœmandres said to me, then.
[8] So I asked from what place, then, the parsements of physis?
To which he answered, from the deliberations of theos, who, having
comprehended the logos and having seen the beauty of the cosmic order,
re-presented it, and so became a cosmic order from their own parsements and
by the birth of Psyche.
[9] Theos, the perceiveration, male-and-female, being Life and phaos, whose
logos brought forth another perceiveration, an artisan, who - theos of Fire and
pnuema - fashioned seven viziers to surround the perceptible cosmic order in
spheres and whose administration is described as fate.
[10] Directly, from the downward parsements, the logos of theos bounded to the
ﬁne artisements of Physis and joined with the perceiveration of that artisan, for
it was of the same essence. Thus the descending parsements of Physis were left,
devoid of logos, to be only substance.
[11] The perceiveration of that artisan, in combination with logos, surrounded
the spheres, spinning them around, a twizzling of artisements of some indeﬁnite
origin and some undeterminable end, ﬁnishing where they began. Turning
around and around as perceiveration decreed, the spheres produced, from
those descending parsements, beings devoid of logos, for they were not given
logos, while Air produced what ﬂew, and Water what swam. Divided, one from
the other, were Earth and Water, as perceiveration had decreed, with Earth
delivering from within herself beings four-footed and crawling, and animals
savage and benign.
[12] Perceiveration, as Life and phaos, father of all, brought forth in his own
likeness a most beautiful mortal who, being his child, he loved. And theos, who
loved his own image, bequeathed to him all his works of Art.
[13] Thus, having discovered what that artisan with that father's assistance had
wrought, he too determined on such artisements, which the father agreed to.
Ingressing to the artisan's realm, with full authority, he appreciated his--- Page 10 ---
brother's artisements, and they - loving him - each shared with him their own
function.
Having fully learned their essence, and having partaken of their physis, he was
determined to burst out past the limit of those spheres to discover the one who
imposed their strength upon the Fire.
[14]  With full authority over the ordered cosmos of humans and of beings
devoid of logos, he burst through the strength of the spheres to thus reveal to
those of downward physis the beautiful image of theos.
When she beheld such unceasing beauty - he who possessed all the vigour of
the viziers and was the image of theos - she lovingly smiled, for it was as if in
that Water she had seen the semblance of that mortal's beautiful image and, on
Earth, his shadow. And as he himself beheld in that Water her image, so similar
to his own, he desired her and wanted to be with her.
Then, his want and his vigour realized, and he within that image devoid of
logos, Physis grasped he whom she loved to entwine herself around him so that,
as lovers, they were intimately joined together.
[15] Which is why, distinct among all other beings on Earth, mortals are jumelle;
deathful of body yet deathless the inner mortal. Yet, although deathless and
possessing full authority, the human is still subject to wyrd. Hence, although
over the harmonious structure, when within become the slave. Male-and-female
since of a male-and-female father, and wakeful since of a wakeful one. <...>
[16] <...> my perceiveration, for I also love the logos. Then Pœmandres said,
this is a mysterium esoteric even to this day. For Physis, having intimately
joined with the human, produced a most wondrous wonder possessed of the
physis of the harmonious seven I mentioned before, of Fire and pneuma. Physis
did not tarry, giving birth to seven male-and-female humans with the physis of
those viziers, and ætherean.
Pœmandres, I said, a great eagerness has now arrived in me so that I yearn to
hear more. Do not go away.
Then, Pœmandres replied, be silent for this primary explanation is not yet
complete.
I shall, I said, therefore, be silent.
[17] To continue, those seven came into being in this way. Earth was muliebral,
Water was lustful, and Fire maturing. From Æther, the pnuema, and with Physis
bringing forth human-shaped bodies. Of Life and phaos, the human came to be
of psyche and perceiveration; from Life - psyche; from phaos - perceiveration;
and with everything in the observable cosmic order cyclic until its completion.--- Page 11 ---
[18] Now listen to the rest of the explanation you asked to hear. When the cycle
was fulﬁlled, the connexions between all things were, by the deliberations of
theos, unfastened. Living beings - all male-and-female then - were, including
humans, rent asunder thus bringing into being portions that were masculous
with the others muliebral. Directly, then, theos spoke a numinous logos:
propagate by propagation and spawn by spawning, all you creations and
artisements, and let the perceiver have the knowledge of being deathless and of
Eros as responsible for death.
[19] Having so spoken, foreknowing - through wyrd and that harmonious
structure - produced the coagulations and founded the generations with all
beings spawning according to their kind. And they of self-knowledge attained a
particular beneﬁt while they who, misled by Eros, love the body, roamed around
in the dark, to thus, perceptively, be aﬄicted by death.
[20] But why, I asked, do the unknowing err so much that they are robbed of
immortality.
You seem, he said, not to have understood what you heard, for did I not tell you
to discover things?
I said I do recall and am discovering, for which I am obliged.
Then tell me, if you have discovered, why death is expected for those in death.
Because originally the body began with that stygian darkness, from whence the
ﬂowing physis which formed the body within the perceptible cosmic order
which nourishes death.
[21] Your apprehension is correct. Yet why, according to the logos of theos, does
the one of self-discovery progress within themselves?
To which I replied, phaos and Life formed the father of all beings, from whence
that human came into being.
You express yourself well. For phaos and Life are the theos and the father from
whence the human came into being. Therefore if you learn to be of Life and
phaos - and that you perchance are of them - then you progress to return to
Life. Thus spoke Pœmandres.
Can you - who are my perceiveration - therefore tell me how I may progress to
Life?  For does not theos say that the human of perceiveration should have
self-knowledge?
[22] And do not all humans posses perceiveration?--- Page 12 ---
Again you express yourself well. I, perceiveration, attend to those of respectful
deeds, the honourable, the reﬁned, the compassionate, those aware of the
numinous; to whom my being is a help so that they soon acquire knowledge of
the whole and are aﬀectionately gracious toward the father, fondly celebrating
in song his position.
Before they hand over their body to its death they loathe the inﬂuencing
impressions, for they know their vigour. That is, I - perceiveration - do not allow
what the vigour of the body embraces to be achieved. For, as guardian, I close
the entrance to the bad and the dishonourably vigorful, preventing their
procrastinations.
[23] I keep myself distant from the unreasonable, the rotten, the malicious, the
jealous, the greedy, the bloodthirsty, the hubriatic, instead, giving them up to
the avenging daemon, who assigns to them the sharpness of ﬁre, who visibly
assails them, and who equips them for more lawlessness so that they happen
upon even more vengeance. For they cannot control their excessive yearnings,
are always in the darkness - which tests them - and thus increase that ﬁre even
more.
[24] You, perceiveration, have instructed me well about all those things I
saught. But could you tell me how the Anados will occur?
To which Pœmandres replied, ﬁrst, the dissolution of the physical body allows
that body to be transformed with the semblance it had disappearing and its now
non-functioning ethos handed over to the daimon, with the body's perceptions
returning to their origin, then becoming separated with their purpose,
transplanted, and with desire and eagerness journeying toward the physis
devoid of logos.
[25]  Thus does the mortal hasten through the harmonious structure, oﬀering
up, in the ﬁrst realm, that vigour which grows and which fades, and - in the
second one - those dishonourable machinations, no longer functioning. In the
third, that eagerness which deceives, no longer functioning; in the fourth, the
arrogance of command, no longer insatiable; in the ﬁfth, profane insolence and
reckless haste; in the sixth, the bad inclinations occasioned by riches, no longer
functioning; and in the seventh realm, the lies that lie in wait.
[26] Thus, stripped of the activities of that structure, they enter into the
ogdoadic physis, and, with those there, celebrate the father in song for they,
together, rejoice at this arrival who, now akin to them, hears those forces
beyond the ogdoadic physis celebrating theos in melodious song. Then, in order,
they move toward the father to hand themselves over to those forces, and,
becoming those forces, they become united with theos. For to so become of
theos is the noble goal of those who seek to acquire knowledge.
Why, therefore, hesitate? Should it not be that, having received all these things,--- Page 13 ---
you should become a guide to those who are suitable so that, because of you,
descendants of mortals may - through theos - escape?
[27] Having so spoken to me, Pœmandres joined with those forces, while I,
having given thanks to and expressed my gratitude toward the father of all
beings, went forth strengthened and informed regarding the physis of
everything and with an insight of great importance.
So it was that I began to tell mortals about how beautiful knowledge and an
awareness of the numinous were. You earth-bound mortals, you who have
embraced intoxicating liquor, sleepfulness, and are unknowing of theos:
soberize, stop your drunkenness, for you are beguiled by irrational sleepfulness.
[28] Hearing this, they, with the same purpose, gathered round. And I said, you
who are earth-bound, why do you embrace death when you have the means to
partake of immortality? Change your ways, you who have accompanied
deception and who have kinship with the unknowing ones. Leave the dark
phaos, partake of immortality, move away from your destruction.
[29] Then some of them, having ridiculed, went away, embracing as they did the
way of death; although some others, desirous of being informed, threw
themselves down at my feet. I asked them to stand, and thus became a guide to
those of my kind, informing them of the logoi - of the way and the means of
rescue - and engendered in them the logoi of sapientia, with the celestial elixir
to nurture them.
And with the arrival of evening with the rays of Helios beginning to completely
wane, I bid they express their gratitude to theos, after which - with that
expression of gratitude completed - they each retired to their own bed.
[30] Commemorating within myself the noble service of Pœmandres - replete
with what I had desired - I was most pleased, for the sleep of the body
engendered temperance of psyche, the closing of the eyes a genuine insight,
with my silence pregnant with the noble, and the expression of the logos
breeding nobility.
Such is what transpired for me, received from perceiveration - that is,
Pœmandres; for it was by being theos-inspired that I came upon this revealing.
Therefore, from my psyche and with all my strength, I oﬀer benedictions to
theos, the father.
[31]
Agios o Theos, father of all beings.
Agios o Theos, whose purpose is accomplished by his own arts.
Agios o Theos, whose disposition is to be recognized and who is
recognized by his own.--- Page 14 ---
Agios es, you who by logos form all being.
Agios es, you who engender all physis as eikon.
Agios es, you whom the Physis did not morph.
Agios es, you who are mightier than all artiﬁce.
Agios es, you who surpass all excellence.
Agios es, you who transcend all praise.
You - ineﬀable, inexpressible, to whom silence gives voice - receive these
respectful wordful oﬀerings from a psyche and a heart that reach out to you.
[32]  I ask of you to grant that I am not foiled in acquiring knowledge germane
to our essence; to invigorate me, so that - by that favour - I may bring
illumination to the unknowing who, kindred of my kind, are your children.
Such I testify and believe; to advance to Life and phaos. For you, father, a
benediction. Your mortal's purpose is to share in your numinosity, for which you
have provided every means.
°°°
Notes and Commentary on the Text
The numbers refer to the sections of the Greek text, 1-32.
1.
what is real.  Regarding τῶν ὄντων cf. Plato, Republic, Book 7 (532c) - πρὸς δὲ
τὰ ἐν ὕδασι φαντάσματα θεῖα καὶ σκιὰς τῶν ὄντων ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ εἰδώλων σκιὰς δι᾽
ἑτέρου τοιούτου φωτὸς ὡς πρὸς ἥλιον κρίνειν ἀποσκιαζομένας - where the
φάντασμα (the appearance) of some-thing natural (god-given), such as the σκιὰ
(image) that is reﬂected by water, is stated to be real, and contrasted with what
is not considered to be real (what is an unsubstantial image) such as that cast
by a ﬁre rather than by the Sun.
intuition. For διανοίας. As with νοῦς (see 2. below) a term which deserves some
scrutiny. Conventionally, it is translated as 'thought', or 'thinking', as if in
reference to some sort of idealized faculty we human beings are said to possess
and which faculty deals with ideations and their collocations and is considered
as necessary to, or the foundation of, understanding and reason.
More accurately, in a classical context, διανοίας is (i) 'intelligence' (or intuition)
in the sense of understanding some-thing or someone (i.e. in being able to
perceive some-thing correctly or to correctly understand - to know - a person),
or (ii) 'intention'.
I have opted for 'intuition' as suggesting, and as manifesting, insight, often from--- Page 15 ---
contemplation, as the etymology, from the Latin intueri, suggests. For the
English word 'thought' now conveys modern meanings which, in my view, are
not relevant here. And an 'intuition' that is related to, but somewhat diﬀerent
from, the perceiveration that is νοῦς.
Alertness. αἴσθησις. Alertness here in the sense that the normal, alert,
awareness of the physical senses is dulled by interior intuition, insight, or
revelation. An appropriate alternative translation would thus be awareness, as
in awareness of one's surroundings.
Huge. ὑπερμεγέθη - qv Plutarch Romulus, 16.5 ἐπὶ στρατοπέδου δρῦν ἔτεμεν
ὑπερμεγέθη - chopped down a huge tree there in that encampment.
Huge, and too large to measure by ordinary means. I do not see any need to
exaggerate what is implied, as some other translations do.
Have knowledge of. In the tractate, γνῶναι is related to νοῦς and διανοίας as
an expression of what is perceived, or one is aware of. Here, of what one
discerns in the sense of distinguishing some-thing from something else and thus
'knowing' of and about that thing.
2.
Pœmandres. Ποιμάνδρης. The older interpretation of 'shepherd of men' is
unacceptable because speculative; the speculation being that it derives from
ποιμήν, which has a variety of meanings other than shepherd, for example,
chief, and owner.
A more recent etymology involves some ancient Egyptian term associated with
the god Re. However, this etymology, ﬁrst proposed by Francis Griﬀith in the
1920's [qv. W. Scott and A. S. Ferguson: Hermetica: the ancient Greek and Latin
writings which contain religious or philosophical teachings ascribed to Hermes
Trismegistus. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1924-1936] was based on a linguistic
and stylistic analysis of Coptic sources dating well over a millennia after the god
Re was worshipped in ancient Egypt.
Also, the book From Poimandres to Jacob Bohme: Hermetism, Gnosis and the
Christian Tradition, edited by Roelof van den Broek and published in 2000
(Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica) which mentions this etymology by
Griﬀiths and which is often cited as conﬁrming this etymology, does not provide
further context in the form of extant Egyptian hieroglyphic inscriptions or
references to papyrus fragments from long before the Coptic period, but instead
makes various conjectures, as for example in respect of an alternative Coptic
form of the genitive n-re, and relies on other linguistic/stylistic analysis of much
later texts.
Until a link can be established to such primary Egyptian sources, or to reliable--- Page 16 ---
sources much earlier than such Coptic texts, I remain unconvinced in respect of
the ancient Egyptian origins of the name Ποιμάνδρης, and therefore am
inclined to leave it as a personal name, transliterated Pœmandres.
perceiveration. νοῦς. The conventional interpretation here is 'mind', as if in
contrast to 'the body' and/or as if some ﬁxed philosophical and abstract
principle is meant or implied.
This conventional interpretation is in my view incorrect, being another example
of not only retrospective reinterpretation but of using a word which has
acquired, over the past thousand years or more, certain meanings which detract
from an understanding of the original text. Retrospective reinterpretation
because the assumption is that what is being described is an axiomatic,
reasoned, philosophy centred on ideations such as Thought, Mind, and Logos,
rather than what it is: an attempt to describe, in fallible words, a personal
intuition about our existence, our human nature, and which intuition is said to
emanate from a supernatural being named Pœmandres.
In addition, one should ask what does a translation such as 'I am Poimandres,
mind of sovereignty' [vide Copenhaver] actually mean? That there is a
disembodied 'mind' which calls itself Pœmandres? That this disembodied 'mind'
is also some gargantuan supernatural shapeshifting being possessed of the
faculty of human speech? That some-thing called 'sovereignty' has a mind?
I incline toward the view that the sense of the word νοῦς here, as often in
classical literature, is perceiverance; that is, a particular type of astute
awareness, as of one's surroundings, of one's self, and as in understanding
('reading') a situation often in an instinctive way. Thus, what is not meant is
some-thing termed 'mind' (or some faculty thereof), distinguished as this
abstract 'thing' termed 'mind' has often been from another entity termed 'the
body'.
Perceiverance thus describes the ability to sense, to perceive, when something
may be amiss; and hence also of the Greek word implying resolve, purpose,
because one had decided on a particular course of action, or because one's
awareness of a situation impels or directs one to a particular course of action.
Hence why, in the Oedipus Tyrannus, Sophocles has Creon voice his
understanding of the incipient hubris of Oedipus, of his pride without a purpose,
of his apparent inability to understand, to correctly perceive, the situation:
εἴ τοι νομίζεις κτῆμα τὴν αὐθαδίαν
εἶναί τι τοῦ νοῦ χωρίς, οὐκ ὀρθῶς φρονεῖς.
If you believe that what is valuable is pride, by itself,
Without a purpose, then your judgement is not right.
vv. 549-550--- Page 17 ---
Translating νοῦς as perceiverance/perceiveration thus places it into the correct
context, given αὐθεντίας - authority.  For "I am Pœmandres, the perceiveration
of authority" implies "What [knowledge] I reveal (or am about to reveal) is
authentic," so that an alternative translation, in keeping with the hermeticism of
the text, would be "I am Pœmandres, the authentic perceiveration." [ The
English word authentic means 'of authority, authoritative' and is derived, via
Latin, from the Greek αὐθεντία ]
eachwhere. An unusual but expressive (c.15th century) English word, suited to
such an esoteric text. The meaning here is that, like a guardian δαίμων of
classical and Hellenic culture, Pœmandres is always close by: eachwhere with
you.
3.
Apprehend. νοέω. To apprehend also in the sense of 'discover'. Again, I have
tried to make a subtle distinction here, as there is in the text between the
related νοῦς, γνῶναι, and διανοίας.
physis. A transliteration, to suggest something more than what 'nature' or
'character' - of a thing or person - denotes. That is, to know what is real and
apprehend the physis of those real things - νοῆσαι τὴν τού των φύσιν; to
discern the physis, the true nature, of beings. That is, to have an understanding
of ontology; for physis is a revealing, a manifestation, of not only the true nature
of beings but also of the relationship between beings, and between beings and
Being.
γνῶναι τὸν θεόν. To have - to acquire - knowledge of θεός. Does θεός here mean
God, a god, a deity, or the god? God, the supreme creator Being, the only real
god, the father, as in Christianity? A deity, as in Hellenic and classical
paganism? The god, as in an un-named deity - a god - who is above all other
deities? Or possibly all of these? And if all, in equal measure, or otherwise?
The discourse of Pœmandres, as recounted in the tractate, suggests two things.
First, that all are meant or suggested - for example, Τὸ φῶς ἐκεῖνο͵ ἔφη͵ ἐγὼ
νοῦς ὁ σὸς θεός could be said of Pœmandres as a god, as a deity, as the god,
and also possibly of God, although why God, the Father - as described in the Old
and New Testaments - would call Himself Pœmandres, appear in such a vision,
and declare what He declares about θεός being both male and female in one
person, is interesting. Second, that the knowledge that is revealed is of a
source, of a being, that encompasses, and explains, all three, and that it is this
knowing of such a source, beyond those three conventional ones, that is the key
to 'what is real' and to apprehending 'the physis of beings'.
Hence, it is better to transliterate θεός - or leave it as θεός - than to use god;
and a mistake to use God, as some older translations do.--- Page 18 ---
remember all those things you want to learn. Ἔχε νῷ: 'hold the awareness' [be
aware] of what you said you wanted to learn - that is, 'remember' them; which is
better, and more expressive, than the somewhat colloquial and modern 'keep in
mind'.
4.
So saying, his form [ἰδέᾳ] altered. For τοῦτο εἰπὼν ἠλλάγη τῇ ἰδέᾳ. Or - more
expressively - 'he shapeshifted'. A common theme in Greek mythology and
literature, as in the ancient Hymn to Demeter:
ὣς εἰποῦσα θεὰ μέγεθος καὶ εἶδος ἄμειψε γῆρας ἀπωσαμένη
Having so spoken, the goddess changed in height and cast oﬀ that aged appearance
[An] indeﬁnity of inner sight [inner seeing]. ὁρῶ θέαν ἀόριστον. The sense of
ὁράω here is metaphorical, of an interior knowing or apprehension not
occasioned by the faculty of sight; the inner knowing, for example, that the
blind Tiresias has in respect of Oedipus in the Oedipus Tyrannus of Sophocles -
his apprehension of what Oedipus has done and what he will do. Such an 'inner
seeing' includes the Tiresian kind a prophetic knowing as well as the 'interior
visions' of a mystic.
In respect of ἀόριστος, I have opted for indeﬁnity, an unusual [read obscure]
English word derived c.1600 from indeﬁnite.
phaos. A transliteration of φῶς - using the the Homeric φάος. Since φάος
metaphorically (qv. Iliad, Odyssey, Hesiod, etcetera) implies the being, the life,
‘the spark’, of mortals, and, generally, either (i) the illumination, the light, that
arises because of the Sun and distinguishes the day from the night, or (ii) any
brightness that provides illumination and thus enables things to be seen, I am
inclined to avoid the vague English word 'light' which other translations use,
and which English word now implies many things which the Greek does not or
may not; as for instance in the matter of over a thousand years of New
Testament exegesis, especially in reference to the gospel of John. A
transliteration requires the reader to pause and consider what phaos may, or
may not, mean, suggest, or imply; and hopefully thus conveys something about
the original text.
Also, φῶς δὲ πάντα γεγενημένα suggests '[with] everything suﬀused in phaos'
and not 'everything became light' as if to imply that suddenly everything was
transformed into 'light'.
clear and bright. εὔδιόν τε καὶ ἱλαρόν - if one accepts the emendation εὔδιόν
[clear] then ἱλαρόν might suggest the metaphorical sense of 'bright' (rather--- Page 19 ---
than the descriptive 'cheery') which ﬁts well with the contrasting and following
φοβε ρόν τε καὶ στυγνόν.
Downward. κατωφερὲς - cf. Appian, The Civil Wars, Book 4, chapter 13 -
κατωφερὲς δ᾽ ἐστὶ τὸ πεδίον.
stygian. For στυγνόν, for stygian is a word which in English imputes the sense
of the original Greek, as both its common usage, and its literary usage (by
Milton, Wordsworth, Ralph Waldo Emerson, et al) testify. Some-thing dark,
gloomy, disliked, abhorred. One might, for example, write that "that river looks
as stygian", and as unforgiving, as the water of Styx - ἀμείλικτον Στυγὸς ὕδωρ.
serpent. ὄφει is one of the emendations of Nock, for the meaning of the text
here is diﬀicult to discern. Given what follows - re the smoke and ﬁre - it is
tempting to agree with Reitzenstein that what may be meant is a not an
ordinary serpent but a dragon, δράκοντι, qv. the Iliad (II, 308) and the seven-
headed dragon of Revelation 12, 3-17.
ﬂowing (as in ﬂuidic). The sense of ὑγρός here, since what follows - ἀφάτως
τεταραγμένην καὶ καπνὸν ἀποδι δοῦσαν - does not suggest either 'watery' or
'moist'. Cf. Aristophanes, Clouds, 314 - ταῦτ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἐποίουν ὑγρᾶν Νεφελᾶν
στρεπταιγλᾶν δάιον ὁρμάν - where clouds are described as ﬂowing and in their
ﬂowing-moving obscure the brightness (of the day).
aphonous ... phaos calling out. I follow the MSS which have φωτὸς, which Nock
emended to πυρός. While the emendation, given the foregoing mention of ﬁre,
makes some sense, it does render what follows, with the mention of φωτὸς,
rather disjointed. However, if - as I suggested above - φῶς is not translated as
'light', but, as with physis and λόγος [qv. 5. below], is transliterated, then φωτὸς
here is ﬁne, for it is as if "phaos was calling out" in an aphonous - an un-human,
animal-like, and thus wordless - way from beneath the covering of darkness that
has descended down, and descended with an indescribable noise. And aphonous
here because covered - smothered, obscured, muﬄed - by the indescribably
noisy darkness. Which leads directly to the mention of φῶς and λόγος in the
next part of the text; that is, to the ascension of φῶς and λόγος.
If one reads πυρός, then the interpretation would be that it is the ﬁre which is
calling out in an un-human, animal-like, and thus wordless way.
5.
Logos. λόγος. A transliteration, which as with my other transliterations,
requires the reader to pause and reﬂect upon what the term may, or may not,
mean, suggest, or imply. The common translation as 'Word' does not express or
even suggest all the meanings (possible or suggested) of the Greek, especially
as Word - as in Word of God - now imputes so much (in so many diﬀerent often--- Page 20 ---
doctrinal ways) after two thousand years of Christianity and thus tends to lead
to a retrospective re-interpretation of the text.
Numinous. ἅγιος. Numinous is better - more accurate - than 'holy' or 'sacred',
since these latter English words have been much overused in connexion with
Christianity and are redolent with meanings supplied from over a thousand
years of exegesis; meanings which may or may not be relevant here.
Correctly understood, numinous is the unity beyond our perception of its two
apparent aspects; aspects expressed by the Greek usage of ἅγιος which could
be understood in a good (light) way as 'sacred', revered, of astonishing beauty;
and in a bad (dark) way as redolent of the gods/wyrd/the fates/morai in these
sense of the retributive or (more often) their balancing power/powers and thus
giving rise to mortal 'awe' since such a restoration of the natural balance often
involved or required the death (and sometimes the 'sacriﬁce') of mortals. It is
the numinous - in its apparent duality, and as a manifestation of a restoration of
the natural, divine, balance - which is evident in much of Greek tragedy, from
the Agamemnon of Aeschylus (and the Orestia in general) to the Antigone and
the Oedipus Tyrannus of Sophocles.
The two apparent aspects of the numinous are wonderfully expressed by Rilke:
Wer, wenn ich schrie, hörte mich denn aus der Engel
Ordnungen? und gesetzt selbst, es nähme
einer mich plötzlich ans Herz: ich verginge von seinem
stärkeren Dasein. Denn das Schöne ist nichts
als des Schrecklichen Anfang, den wir noch grade ertragen,
und wir bewundern es so, weil es gelassen verschmäht,
uns zu zerstören. Ein jeder Engel ist schrecklich.
Who, were I to sigh aloud, of those angelic beings might hear me?
And even if one of them deigned to take me to his heart I would dissolve
Into his very existence.
For beauty is nothing if not the genesis of that numen
Which we can only just survive
And which we so admire because it can so calmly disdain to betake us.
Every angel is numinous
wenn ich schrie. 'Were I to sigh aloud' is far more poetically expressive,
and more in tune with the metaphysical tone of the poem and the stress
on schrie, than the simple, bland, 'if I cried out'. A sighing aloud - not a
shout or a scream - of the sometimes involuntary kind sometimes
experienced by those engaged in contemplative prayer or in deep,
personal, metaphysical musings.
der Engel Ordnungen. The poetic emphasis is on Engel, and the usual
translation here of 'orders' - or something equally abstract and harsh
(such as hierarchies) - does not in my view express the poetic beauty--- Page 21 ---
(and the almost supernatural sense of strangeness) of the original;
hence my suggestion 'angelic beings' - of such a species of beings, so
diﬀerent from we mortals, who by virtue of their numinosity have the
ability to both awe us and overpower us.
came upon that physis. Came upon that which had the physis of darkness and
then changed to become ﬂuidic.
Fire. A capitalization, since 'ﬁre' here is suggestive of something possibly
elemental.
Air. A capitalization, as with Fire; ditto with the following Water and Earth.
A possible alternative here might be to use the Homeric meaning of ἀὴρ - mist -
since 'air' is just too general, does not describe what is happening, and thus is
confusing.
pnuema. For πνεύματι/πνεῦμα. A transliteration, given that the English
alternatives - such as 'spirit' or 'breath' - not only do not always describe what
the Greek implies but also suggest things not always or not necessarily in
keeping with the Hellenic nature of the text.
This particular transliteration has a long history in English, dating back to 1559
CE. In 1918, DeWitt Burton published a monograph - listing, with quotations,
the various senses of πνεῦμα - entitled Spirit, Soul, and Flesh: The Usage of
Πνεῦμα, Ψυχή, and Σάρξ in Greek Writings and Translated Works from the
Earliest Period to 225 AD (University of Chicago Press, 1918)
I incline toward the view that πνεῦμα here - like λόγος - does not necessarily
imply something theological (in the Christian sense or otherwise) but rather
suggests an alternative, more personal, weltanschauung that, being a
weltanschauung, is undoctrinal and subtle, and which weltanschauung is
redolent of Hellenic culture. Subtle and undoctrinal in the way that early
alchemical texts are subtle and undoctrinal and try to express, or hint at
(however obscurely to us, now), a weltanschauung, and one which is more
paganus than Christian.
coagulating. For συμμεμιγμένα, which suggests something more elemental -
more actively joined - than just 'mixed or mingled' together.
pneumal logos. πνευματικὸν λόγον. The term pneumal logos is interesting and
intended to be suggestive and thus open to and requiring interpretation. In
contrast, the usual translation is verbo spirituali (spiritual word), as if what is
meant or implied is some-thing theological and clearly distinct from the
corporeal, as Thomas Aquinas wrote in Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate: Ex
quo patet quod nomen verbi magis proprie dicitur de verbo spirituali quam de--- Page 22 ---
corporali. Sed omne illud quod magis proprie invenitur in spiritualibus quam in
corporalibus, propriissime Deo competit. Ergo verbum propriissime in Deo
dicitur. (De veritate, q. 4a. 1s. c2).
6.
apprehended the sense of that inner seeing. Given what follows, the English
word 'sense' is perhaps appropriate here, rather than the inﬂexible word
'meaning'.
phaomal logos. φωτεινὸς λόγος. As with pneumal logos, this is suggestive, and
open to interpretation.
child of theos. υἱὸς θεοῦ. The scriptural sense - 'son of god', for example Mark
15.39, Ἀληθῶς οὗτος ὁ ἄνθρωπος υἱὸς θεοῦ ἦν - is usually assumed; a sense
which follows the general usage of υἱὸς (son) as in Homer et al. But the later
(c.2nd/3rd century CE) usage 'child' is possible here, a usage known from some
papyri (qv. Papiri Greci e Latini, edited by Girolamo Vitelli). This also has the
advantage of being gender neutral, for which see the note under ἀναγνωρίσας
ἑαυτὸν in section 19.
logos kyrios. λόγος κυρίου (cf. pneumal logos and phaomal logos). Invariably
translated as 'word of the lord', echoing the formula found in LXX (qv. for
example Jeremiah 1.4 ἐγένετο λόγος κυρίου πρός με) although, as attested by
many papyri, kyrios was also used in the Hellenic world as an epithet both of a
deity and of a powerful potentate [hence 'logos kyrios' rather than 'kyrios
logos'] implying respect and an acknowledgement of their authority and power.
7.
duration. For reasons I outlined in the The Art of Translation, and A Question
About Time section of Appendix I, I prefer to translate χρόνος as duration (or
something akin) and not as 'time'. Brieﬂy explained, the English word 'time' now
denotes what the term χρόνος did not.
tilted his head back. Perhaps suggestive of looking up toward the heavens, qv.
the c. 2nd century CE writer Achilles Tatius (writing around the time the Corpus
Hermeticum was written) who, in Leucippe and Clitophon, Book V, 3.3, wrote -
ἀνανεύσας εἰς οὐρανὸν ‘ὦ Ζεῦ, τί τοῦτο’ ἔφην ‘φαίνεις ἡμῖν τέρας
unmeasurable. ἀπεριόριστον - beyond being countable, impossible to be
counted; from ἀριθμητός - countable.
cosmic order. κόσμος. The word 'cosmos' by itself is probably insuﬀicient here,
for the Greek term κόσμος carries with it the suggestion that the cosmos is an
ordered structure, an order evident in the observed regularity of heavenly
bodies such as the moon, the constellations, and the planets.--- Page 23 ---
undeﬁnable. ἀπεριόριστον: A slightly diﬀerent sense here to previously, and an
interesting contrast with εὐπεριόριστον - well-deﬁned - as used by Strabo when
describing the process of measuring and deﬁning, in geographical terms, a
region of the Earth:
τὸ γὰρ σημειῶδες καὶ τὸ εὐπεριόριστον ἐκεῖθεν λαβεῖν ἔστιν, οὗ
χρείαν ἔχει ὁ γεωγράφος: εὐπεριόριστον δέ, ὅταν ἢ ποταμοῖς ἢ ὄρεσιν
ἢ θαλάττῃ δυνατὸν ᾖ   (Geography, 2.1.30)
coming-into-being. γεγενημένον. The meaning here is somewhat obscure. Is
what is described a discovery of how the already existing and known cosmic
order came into being, or the apprehension of a - or some sort of - cosmic order
coming-into-being? Or does γεγενημένον refer to phaos?
8.
quidditas of semblance. ἀρχέτυπον εἶδος. The transliteration 'archetype' here is,
unfortunately, unsuitable, given what the term archetype now suggests and
implies (vide Jungian psychology, for example)

[Text truncated at 50,000 characters]