Author: James Anderson (1723)
ID: ToB-0117
Archive: the-constitutions-of-the-free-masons-1723
Source: OCR text from archive.org djvu.txt
OCR File Size: 0.17 MB

+


B®


SCPC) EE CHOY EH C08) LCR) HCD COND BAEC OOD EL COO) COV RTE
ce


RARER MER RISER ee RDO AR TERMED SCM ss


CONSTITUTIONS.


ECGY SIDER CONE COE HDLC) ELC) AL CIEE CONTE CONE CANT:
EEO OOO SOOO Ou):


~


voale tireeé London


Of
B,


et


_


’


cis


ig


CONSTITUTIONS


oF THE


FREE-MASONS. |


CONTAINING THE


ok il


Geog sy Pps eset


Eiftory, Charges, Regulations, &c. 4
of that moft Ancient and Right _"
Worfhipful FRATERNITY.


For the Ufe of the LODGES.


Lon Dp oO |
Printed by Witriam Hunter, for Joun Senex. at the Globe, , :


and Joun Hoox:s at the Flower-de-luce over-againft St. Dunftaws.
Ghurch, in_Eleet-fivecr. |


In the: Year.of Mafonryy — 5°72 2:
enzo. ‘Doming - «72 3, :


ci


My Lord,


LQOAG


: Duke of WuartTon,
NW the prefent Right. Wor-
— fhipful Granp-MasTeEr
of the Free-Mafons; and, as his

r Deputy,


os
WAS
=


Mee


a


T.


2) Y Order of his Grace the


a aces aia


SAS tats wi


te a ee Pe ee ee
RES eS Ly Pa a SS ASS ae


EY Se ay
aR a a Er pai


DEDICATION.
Deputy, I humbly dedicate this
Book of the Conflitutions of our


ancient Fraternity to your Grace,
in Teftimony of your honourable,
prudent, and vigilant Difcharge
‘of ‘the Office of our Granop-
MasrTer laft Year.


Grace
as pes our dence ‘ UTHOR


has taken in compiling and digef-


ting this Book from the old. Re-
cords, and how accurately he has.
compard and’ made every thing
agrecable to Hiffory and Chronology,
fo as tO render thefe New Con-

_ STITUTIONS


DEDICATION.
count of Mafinry from thé Bégin-


ning of the World to your Grace's


Mastersuip, ftill preferving all
that was truly ancient and authen-


tick in the old ones: For every


Brother will be pléeasd with the
Performance, that knows it had
your Grace's Perufal and Appro-
bation, and that it is now printed
for the Ufe of the Lodges, after it
was approvd by the Grawnp-
LopGe, when yourGrace was
Granp-Masrer. All the Brother-
hood will ever remefiber the Ho-


nour your Gr ace has done them,


and


at File


ts aillaepte is


Wl SES Aa cliente esha


DEDICATION,
and your Care for their Peace,
Harmony, and laiting Friendthip:
Which noneis more cay fentible:
of than, }


M LORD.


Your Graces.


Moft oblig'd, and:
_ Moft obedient Servant, —
And Faithful Brother,.


ae Mee Desacu1 LERS.- |
Deputy. Grand-Mafter.


CONSTITUTION:


Hiffory, , Laws, Charges, Orders,
; Regulations, and Ufages,


OF THE
Right Worthipful FRATERNITY ae


Accepted Free MASONS;


COLLECTED .


From their general RECORDS, and
thet faithfiak J. R A D J TIO NS ad

7 Kors agp ert,

| ad ees A ee ae oe GS sinter

At the Admiffion of a New Brotuer, when the
eMafter ot Warden fhall. begin, or .order fome
_ other Brother to read as follows: 7


=| Image it God, the pens Archited “pen the

Dimas Univer {es ~ ee have -had~ the Liberal
PSI Sciences, particularly Geometry, written on
~ his Heart 5 3 for. even fince the Fall, we ‘fin d


che Principles of it in the Hearts of his Offipring, and¢ Eton


which, in procefs of time, have been drawn forth into °
A a con-


Year of
t mien


Chrift.


ie oe
ie
C


take. equal, Care to teach Geometry and Mafonry.to hi


(2)
a cofivefiient Method of Propofitionsy by ob{érving the
Laws of Proportion taken from Mechanifm : So fee as.


the Adeohanical Arts gave Occafioneto the Learned to


“reduce the Elements of Geome etry. into. Method, ‘this.


noble Science thus: reducd, is the Foundation of ~


all thofe Arts, (particularly wi Mafonry and Architec-


ture) and. che. Rule. My ea they are i ene and;


7 perform’d: -


‘No: doubt’ Adam taught his Sons Geometry, and the:
afe-of it; in the feverak “Arts -and Crafts convenient;
at leaft, for thofe carly Times; for GCatn,. we find,.
built a. City, which he calfd Cons ECRATED, OF


Drpnicavred,- after: the Name. of his eldeft\Son.


En o'c #5 -and becoming: the Prince of the-one Half
of Mankind, his Pofterity. would. imitate his royal.
Example. in oi aha both. the noble Science and the.
ufeful. Art. *

Nor- can we fuppofe rfiae Sets was lef inftrudteds
who: being the Prince of the other Half of Mankind,
and: alfo. the prime Cultivator of “A/fronomy, would


Fst,


= Ak other. Avts. were alf improv'd ‘by: them, viz, cnr bie in Metal !


Bb Tusa Cain, Mufic by Jusas, Paftorage and’ ts aah


ly Jawar, which dus is “ Architecture.


et


Offspring, who had alfo the mighty Adyantage: of
Adam's living among them.

But without regarding uncertain Accounts, . we may
fafely conclude the old World, that lafted 1656. Years,
could not be ignorant of Mafonry ; . and that both the
Families of Seth and Cain erected many curious Works,
until ar length No au, the ninth from Seth, was com-
manded and directed of God to build the great Ark,
which, tho’ of Wood, was. certainly fabricated. by
Geometry, and according to the Rules of Mafonry.

No «un, and his three Sons, JarHeT, SHEM, and
Ham, all Mafons true, brougiat with them over the
Flood’ abe Traditions and Arts of the Avste-deluvians,
and amply communicated them to their growing Off
{pring ; for about 101 Years after the Flood; we find.a
vatt Number of ’em, if not rhe whole Race. of Noah,
in the Vale of Shinar, employ’d in building a City and
large Te ower, in order to make to themfelyes a Name,

, Be 2; soe eas ‘and


if v3


+ For by fome Vefliges of Antiquity we find one of "em, godly Exo CH,
(who dy'd not, but was tranflated alive to Heaven) prophecying of the
final Conflagration at the Day of Sfudgment - (as St. Fade’ tells ‘us)
and likewife “of the General Deluge fer the Panifhment ‘of the World :
Upon which he erected his two large Pillars, (tho’ fome afcribe thera
to Seth) the one of Stone, and the other of Brick, whereon were en-
graven the Liberal Sciences, &c. And that the Stone’ Pillar venennd
in Syria until the Days of Vefpafian the Emperor. |


Is are Ba a


Anno
Mundi

ot ie Cae
rey
Ante
Chriftum.


R


a


Sask usa, s peu bas ie


A.M,
1810.
21 Ode
Ante-Ch, .


and'to prevent their Difperfion. And tho” they carry'd
on the Work to a monftrous Height, and by: their Va-
hity provok'd’ God to confound thee Devices, by:con-
founding: ‘their’ Speech,’ which occafion’d: their: Difper:
fion ; ‘yet’ their Skill in Adzfonry is not the lef to be
daha vsced having {pent above. 53. Years. in» that pro-
digious Work, ai ‘upon’ their Di(petfion. carryd the

mighty Knowledge wich them into diftant Parts, where
they: feund the “good: ufé of it ins the: Settlement of


their’ Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and Dynafties. And


thio’ afterwards it was loft in moft’ Parts of the: m4


it was efpecially preferw'd in. Shinar and Affyria, where
Nimrop,* the Founder of that Monarchy, after the
Difperfion, buile-many {plendid Cities, as Breck, Accady


eo" and Caliieh, in\S1NaR; from whence afterwards he


i I i ns


went forth into Assyria, and built Ninxiveb, Reho


. both, Caleb, and. Rhe fiz:


In thefe Parts, upon the Tygris and Euphrates, opel
wards flourith’d apa ey Pricfes and Mathema-
tictans,.


*NimRov, which fignifies aRebel, was. the Name Liven bine by


the. holy Family, and by. Moles ;, but among bis Friends in Chaldea, his
proper Name. was Berus,. which fignifies Lorv. and afterwards
was worfpipped' as a God by. many Nations, under the Name of Bel,.
or Baal, and became. the Bacchus of the bie or: Bar. ee the Son mm of ,


CHuvs.


is


hiciaiis, ‘khown by. the Names ‘OP Chih wens abd
Mact, who Lsherihn the: vane ‘Science, Geometry,


py few _-


Art, But it’ is, ‘not “diseien to > peak more plain of:


the Premifes, except in a formed Lodge.


From hence, therefore, the. Science. and. At were
both tran{mitted to latter Ages: and diftant Climes, not-


“withftanding. the Confufion. of Languages or. Dialeéts,


which, ,tho® it, might. help: to. give Rife to “the Mafons


Faculty and ancient.univerfal: Practice of converfing


without. {peaking, .and..of knowing each other at a


Diftance, yet | Cotar a, not the Improvement of eMa-


fonry in cach Colony, and their Corsmunication in their
diftinét National Dialect. . 3 |


And; no doubt, the Royal Att was. sldsedsaadhd thew


o)


to Eg -ypt by Mirzratm, the fecond Son of Ham,
about fix Years after the. Geafaten at Babel, and after
the Flood ’160 Years, when he led thither: his Colony ;
(for Eg ypt is Mitaraim in Hebrew) becaufe. we find.


the River Nile’s overflowing its Banks, foon caus’d an
Improvement in Geometry, which confequently brought


Mafonry. much in-requeft: For. the ancient: noble Ci-


ties, with the other magnificent Edifices. of that Coun:


try, and particularly. the famous PyRaMips, de-
monftrate the early Tafte and Genius of. that an-


cient Ringsors. Nay, one of thofe Eg yptian PyR a-


A.M. -
1816.
2188.


Ante Ch.


TE A RP RR AR A


SAK


MIDS *-


$6)
mips * is seckon’d the Firft of the Seven Wonders
of the . World, the Account,of which, by. Hiftorians
and... Travellers, is almoft. gocrediblg..
~The Sacred Records inform us well that the eleven


great Sons of Canaan (the youngeft Son of Ham) -


foon fortified themfelves in ftrong Holds, ‘and ftately


walled Gities, and erected moft iseauieited Temples and
Manfionz ; for when ‘the I[raclites, under the great

ofbua, sae atid their Country, they found it fo regu-
larly fenced, that without the immediate Intervention
of God in behalf of his peculiar People, the Canaa-


‘nites were impregnable and invincible. Nor can we


fuppofe lefs of the other Sons: of Ham, Viz. Chufh,
his eldeft, in South eArabia, and Phut, or ane (now

called Fez) in Weft e4frica. |
And furely the fair and gallant Pofterity a4 JAPHET,
(the eldeft Son of Noah) even fuch as travell’d into
the Ifles of the Gentiles, mutt have been equally skill’d
in Geometry and Mafonry ; ; tho’ we know little of their
Tranfactions and mnigany: Works, until their original
7 | gic.


* The Marble Stone’, brought a niafh may cuiaiasta Quarries of Arabia,
Were moft of ent 30 Foot long; and its Foundation cover'd the Greund
of 700 Foot on each Side, or 2800 Foot in’ Compas, and 481 in perpen-
dicular Height. And in perfecting it were employ'd every Day, for 20
whole Years, 360,000 Men, by fome ancient Egyptian King, long before
the Ifraelites were a People, for the Honour of his Empire, "and at laft
bo become his Tomb.


(87)
Knowledge’ was almoft loft by che. Havock of War,
_and by not maintaining a due osreigant ihe with the
polite and learned Nations’ >for when that Gorrefpon-
dence was open'd in Aitér-Ages,’, we find ne pazen
tobe moft:curtous Architects.)

The Pofterity of Suem had alfo soa Opportuni-
tics of cultivating the ufeful ieA4rt, even thofe of ’em
that planted’ their Colonies in the South and Eaft of
eAfia; much, more thofe of ’em, thac in the: great
eAffyrian Empire, sliv'd in a parte State, or were
blended: with.other-Families:: Nay, that holy Branch of
Swem (of whom, as concerning the Flefh, Curis?


came ): could. not be unskilful ae the learned Arts of


eAffyria; for ABRam, after the Confufion at Babel
about 268 Years; was called out of Ur of the Chaldees,
where he learned: Geometry, and the ¢4rts that are per-
forn’d by it, which she would» carefully tranfmir: to
Ifhmael, to I{aac, and:to his Sons, by Keturah; and by
I{aac, toa Efau, and fac0b,. and the twelve Patriarchs :
Nay, the fews believe that ABR ameal{olinftructed
the Eg yptiams in the ‘eAffyriaw Learning:

‘Indeed, the felect Family long .ufed Military eArchi-
iccture only, as they were Sajousners among Strangers ;
but before the: 430. Years of their Pevegrination were


A. M-
207
1926.

e Ch,


on


expired; even about 86 Years before their Exodus, the A.M,
‘Kings of Egypt forc'd moft of them to lay down their 157:


Shepherd mS: and. Warlike. Accoutrements,
and


Ante


Cow ible Bir


ee


A.M.
5 14s
149 O-


Ante Ch.


and train’d them ‘to another fort of Architecture in


‘Stone-and Brick, as holy Writ, -and other Hiftories,


acquaint us ;:.which God did wifely over-rule, in order
to make them good Mafons ‘before they poflefs'd the


promis'd Rand: then famous for mot: curious. Ma


fonry.


And while marching: to. Camaaty * cigs wdvalia un.


Pe Mofes, God was: ‘pleated to infpire BEzaLEEL,
of the Tribe of Judah, andAuoLtras, of the Tribe


of Das, with Wifdom of Heart fer erecting that moft


‘glorious Tent, or'Tabernacle, wherein the SHEcHINAH


refided ; which, tho’ not of Stone. or Brick, was framed


by :Geonsetry, a moft beautiful: Piece of — Architec-


gure, (and_prov’d afterwards the. Model of Solomon's


_ while inthe


_ Temple) according to the Pattern that God had fhewn


to Moszs:in ge! Mount ;. who therefore became the
GENERAL MasTEeR-Mason; as well as King of
Felfursn, being well skill’d in all the Egyptian ae
ning, and divinely. es with more lublime Know-
ledge in. Mafonry.. | Vi
So that the Samlisedks at. alii leaving E ig ypty were a
whole Kingdom of. eMafons, well inftructed, under the
Conduct. ee their GRanp MastTeR Moses, who
often marfhall’d. them into a regular and general Lodge,
lildernefs, and. gave: them wife C harges,
Orders, ¢Fc. had they been well obferv’d! But no

more of the Premifés muft be mention’d:.
= fea


CF)

And aftét’ they were’ poflet?d « oF Caiadn, the I/vae- 4.
lites: caifie not hort of the old Inhabitanes’ in Ms fonry, oe
but rather vaftly imptov'd i it, by che’ “{peciat’ Diteétion
of Heaven; ‘they? fortify'd: beree, and improvd their
City-Houfes and the Palaces of their’ Chiefs, “ahd only
fell’ fhort im {acred ‘Architecture whilé the f, abernacle


a


food, but no longét for the finett facred Building of
the Canaanites was the® Temple of Diston in Gaz Da
the Phili tines, very magnificent, and. capacious enaligh
L0_freccive 5000 People under ‘its Roof, that was artful
Ly fupporced™ by two main Columns ;* and” Was. a “‘won-
derful: Ditcovery of their mighty. Skill in ‘true ue Malonty,
as muft- be own’d:

~ But “Dzgon's Tepe ‘and thé fine Strudtures of
Tyre and Sidon, could not be compared with the ErEr-
nat God's Temple. at-Ferufalem,- -begun and finith’d, to
the Amazement of all the World, in the fhort ae of


feven Tears. and ix: Months, a thar wifeft Man and


moft ¢ glorious: King. of Hraely: the Price: of Peace ana
sArebatetbine; Se OLOMON ‘(ehie® Son’ ‘of David, who


ee


a By ibis a shes ious S aM PsSow we quill tt: ods up the Baha Of A.M.
the Philiftines, and was alfo intangled in the fame Death which he drew * coe
pon bis Enemies for putting out his. Eyes, after he had reveal'd his Seévets Ante Che
10 bis Wife, that. betvay'd bine into their Hands for which Weakne(s he


never bad. | the Honour to be number’ d among, Mafons > But it is not cork
Denient 10 write more of this,


aa ee


Soca anna


apes ine ba see ee


(~)


... was,tefufed, that Honour for being, a Man jof Bloody
| by divine Diredtion, withous che Noite of, Worksmens
106s Tools, shoeh, there were, ‘employ d; about it.ino efs


than 3,600 Princes, ot M feer-l afons, 0 ¢ conduct the
Work according, to Solomon's, Diredtions,. with 80,000
Hewers of Stone yin. the. Mountain,:, OL. Fellow, Grafts
men, and, 170,000). Labourers, in, all o-7E 53,600


befides. the Levy, under Adonirani 80.Q Resend nits
work in. ‘the aa of Lebanon by... gece
tumns: with che. Sidopians, UE, sy melee Pca
being 3 in all - BEN Ge setts aT va Ee a


for ‘yhich, great N umber of ingenious. gi deterea Solo,
mon was much oblig’d to Hiram, or. Aduram,. King
of Tyre, who fent his Mafons and, FARRER to Feru.


el fit poi DIIBCMIOD 9d JOM Hivos MK hat ta bala ie


er Gi
agile, Oe &
3 eg Se : . <5 b Saree: Soe ae ;
: eck bee Sige sst |. ease it ls e) Neon 7 Te
t ti BS Bid : He ny we RS - aR : —s
i 4 5 * ‘ ‘ 3


* Int Kings’ v v. 16. a did alt oon Mees ele Ruler, ae a
aff fling King Solomons whi were fetoverthe Work, and ibeiy Nuaniber-
- there, is, only\3,300: But' 2 Chron. \iis’1 8, they ‘are Called SrisSi9- Me
| natzchim, Oxerfeers and, Comforters of the. People ine Working; andi
Number: 3,600; becaufe either 300 might be move curious Artifis, and the-
Overfeers of the {aid 3,300, or rather, not fo excellent, and only Deputy-
Matters, to fupply thew Places im cafe of Deathov. Abjence,that-fo-there
might be always 35300 acting Mafters compleat ; or elfe they might be the


_. , Overleers-of the:.703000:53Dwe Ih Sabbaly' ‘Men of Barden, or


Labouwers, who were not Majons, “but fered the 803000 | ‘Sen De
_.. Wh. Chotzeb, Mew of . Hewing; called. alfo w=} Ghiblim, Stone-Cut-
bers. and: Sculpturers ; re ‘apd. alfo. Bonai, 455 wBaylteys yt Stone, Part of “
satel belongd:to Solomon, . and part to. batten nk of Tyr s ‘ 23 Rigs


18, |
&


Ie Ne ae


(1)


falem, and the Firs and Cedars. rn Lebanon t to Fetes
the Hext Sca.pott, ~ -*

_ But above all, he fent bis “Namefake . Hiram, Of,
Haram, the moft Fico d Maton ‘upon Earth.*


ae
FS


We vead (2 GChron.ii. 13.) Hiram,’ King of Tyre, (called os
Huram). in dys Letter to King SoLromon, fays, I have fent acutning
Man, ‘2x conn le Huram Abhi, ot to be tranflated according to
the wilgar Greek and Latin, Huram my Father, as if this Architect was
King HR am’s Father ; for bis Defcription, wer. 14. refutes it, and the
Original plainly imports, Haram of my Father’s, «viz. the Chief Matters’
Maton of my Father, King Axt sary s;(who.enlarg’d and beautify d:
the City of Tyre,..as ancient Hiftories inform uss, whereby the Tyrians\at-
this tune were moft expert in Mafonry) tho’ fome think Hix a ™ the’


King might call Hiram the Architeét Father, as learned and skillful Men


qere mont.to be calld of old Times,or as Jofeph was call’d thé Father »
of Paar AoH 3 andas the fame Hligam ~ calla passa s S) ‘Bat HE ay
(y, tGingne iv, 16.) ‘where tis. faid ‘aol 9d arg b Se
: moby aba ye coin my. Atala joe
- + Shelomoh lammelech Abhif Churam ghnafah,
. Did Huram, his Father, make to, King Solomon. +; ),. :
eat Difficulty % over at ionce, by. allowing, the Word Abif, to be. the,
Surname of Hiram the Mafon; called. alfo (Ghap. jii, 13.) Hiram, Abi,. as
here Hiram Abif ; ; for being fo amply defcrib'd, (Chap. ii, 14:) we may. enfi-
ly [uppofe bis Surname would not be conceal’d: And this Reading makes:
the Senfe plain and compleaty: wiz. that 11 Ra. Mj) King, of, Tyreé)., _fent,,
to, King Solomon. his Namefake, ARAM Apis, , the, Prince, of,
Architeéts, deferib’d: (rn Kings vii. 14.) tobe a, Widow’s: Son.of the ;
Tribe. of \Naphthali ;. and. in (2 Chron. ii. 14.) the [aid King of. Tyre.
calls him the Son of a. Woman of the-Daughters of Daw and in. both.
Places, that his Father was a Man of Tyre 5: “which Difficulty is vemoy fe.


cite il dl BOT a al i ti be Radia aT ata set Ei a IRE a


ee coe cececcemeasaetcamanmmmemmne aaa aati. |


———


ae —s =
————


¢ 12),

And the prodigious Expence of it alf9 enhaunceth,
its. ‘Bxcellency ; for befides King David’ S ‘valk Prepara,
tions, his richer Son SOLOMON, and all the weal-
thy Ifraelites, and the Nobles of ‘all the neighbouting
Kingdoms, argely contributed towards it in Gold,
Silver, and rich Jewels, char amounted to a Sum al


moft incredible.
- Nor do -we read of : any thing ih. Canaan fo: large,


the: ‘Wall that inclos’ ‘dit: being 7j00! Foot, in n Compal;
uh ball.


le eric ing. ‘his Mosher, was sither ip ic Tribe of Bik oF gf We


Daughters of the City called Dan in the Tribe of Naphithali,’ and bis de-
ceafed Father bad been a Naphthalite, whence bis Mother ‘was. ‘cada
Widow of Naphrhalt; for his Father is not ccll’d’a Tyrian by Defcenr,
but a Man of Tyre by Habitation ; as Obed Edom the Levite is call’d a
Gittite by living among the Gittites;. and the Apofile Paul a Man of


Tarfus. But [uppofing.a Mijtake in Tranferibers, and that his Father was


really a Tyrian by Blood, and bis Mother only of the Tribe: either of Dan
or of Naphthali, that can be'no Bar againft qillowing of bis vafl Capacity ;
for @ his Father was a Worker in Brafs, fo he him/elf was fill’d with Wif-


dom and Underftanding, and Cunning to work all Works in Brafs: And


as King Soromon fent for him, ‘fo King Hira M, 7 ‘his Letter to So-
lomon, fays, And now [have fent a cunning Man, endued with Un-
derftanding, skilful to work in Gold, Silver Brafs, Iron, Stone,,
Timber, Purple, Blue, fine Linnen and Crimfon ; alfo to grave any


~ manner.of Graving, and to’find out every Device ‘which tall ae


to him, with thy cunning Men, ‘and withthe cunning Men of my.”


Lord David thy Father. ‘This divinely infpived Workman maintain'’d


this Character in evecting the Temple, and in working the Utenjils thereof,
far beyond the Performances of Aholiab and sige ook ane alfo wm Ver


faly capable of all forts of nna


€ 13 )


far lefs any holy Structure fit to be nam’d with it, for
exactly proportion’d and beautiful Dimenfions, from
the magnificent Porch on the Eajt, to the glorious and
Fret Sanctum Sanctorum on the Weft, with moft
lovely and convenient Apartments for the Kings and
Princes, Priefts and: Levites, fraelites, and Gentiles
alfo 5 ic being an: Houte of Prayer for all Nations, and
capable of receiving in the Temple proper, and in all
its Courts and- Apanmiems together, no lefS than
300,000 People, by a modett Calculation, allowing a
quar. Cubit to each Perfon. :

And if we confider ‘the 1433 Cobunabe of Parties
Marble, with twice as. many Pillafters, both having
glorious Capitals of feveral Otders, and about 2246.
Windows, befides:thofe in: the ‘Pavement, with the un~
{peakable and coftly Decorations of it within; (and.
mach more: might be faid) we mutt tgoncbade- fi
Profpect to. tranfcend our Imagination; and that ir
was juftly efteem’d by far the fineft Piece of Mafonry-
upon Earth before:or fince, and the chief Wonder of


the World; and was dedicated,. or confecrated, in the, AM,


moft folemn manner, by Kg Souomon.


But leaving what muft not, and indeed canmot, be 4"


comnitiuniicarcd by Writing, we may warrantably affirm,
that however ambitious the’ Heathen were in cultivating
of the Royal Art, it was never perfected, until God
condefcended to inftruét his peculiar People in Fearing -
the above-mention’d {lacely Test, and. in building


at


C14)
| at length this gorgeous Houfe, fie for the fpecial Re-
fulgence of his’ Glory, -where ‘he dwelt between the
Charsbeines on, the; Mercy-Seat, and: from thence Be
them frequent’ oraculous Refponfes., © 9 2°? by
This, moft. fumptuous, : fplendid, Gare ill by gto
rious, Edifice,- attracted foon the inquifitive Artifts of
all, Nations to'fpend fome time:at. Ferufalem, and. fur-
vey its, peculiar Excellencies; as much: as: was allow’d
to. the Gentiles ; whereby they foon:difcover’d, ‘that all
the World, with their joint Skill, came far fhort of the
Ifraelites, in the Wifdom and Dexterity: of Architec-.
ture; “then the wife King Sowomon was GRAND
Mas Te R of the Lodge at fers ufalemy, andthe learned
King Har Am, was Granp Master of. the
Lodge: at Tyre, and. the. infpired Hiram A Bir was.
Mafter of Work, and. Mafonrywas ‘under ithe dmme-'
diate -Carerand Direction of Heaven; whemthe Noble:
and the Wife thought: it their Honour to bevaflifting to
the, ingenious: Mates: and. Crafifmen, vand) when the.
Temple: of thé, T Ru,EG.o.p ‘became the Woiider of
_ all Travellers, by which, as-by the moft perfe@! Pattern,
~-- they corrected, the Anchitedtare of these: own: Country
42 AQ, -their-Retusne.
Sojthat-atter the: Sreétion of Soli mon's 's Temple, ab
[any was;improv’d, inv all\the neighbouring, Nations ;
for the many) Artifts employ’d about «it, under Hiram
Abif,. after ic was: finith’d, difpers'd themfelves into.
— Mefopotamia, Affyria, Chaldea, Babylonia, Me-
dia, *


| = ’
Oe t °
NE baer
SSS a ew Bk a eS i ai cast i ee eee E seni a heli Se a i papa maid St ns wires “ veda iat: ae rt


(@15))

dia; Perfia,s Arabia, Africa, Lefer Afia, Greece, and
other Parts: of Europe, where they. ‘taught -this liberal
Ast to the free bora Sons of eminént Perfons, by whofe
Dexterity the Kings,’ “Prices, ‘and “Potentates, built
many glorious PHS; and became'the Gr Aw Ma s-


TER 6; icachsin: bis own Territory, and were’ ‘emulous |
of excellirig in this Royal Arr’; nay,-even’ in Twp 14, |


where; the. Come(pondence. swas open, we may ‘conclude

the fame » But none of the Nations, not all together,

could rival: the I[raelites, far lefs excel them, “in 74z-

Looms ; ae ie i Pempie remain’ the confthnt Pattetn.* *
go -h be Vis (CJ DUR “ 2UB Won MovS UN:


—_


So RR RE a Sel


——* For tho? the Temple of Dima at ie Ephelis 2) Suppasd to bane. been


firft- built ‘by foie of Japhet’s Pofferity, that made’ a Setilenient i in Jonia.
about ‘the Time of Moles; yet it was’ often demoliffiid, anid then vebuilt
forthe faRe of Iniprovements in Mafonry ; ; and we cannot compitte the


Period’ of its laf glorious Erection (that becanje. another of the ren ;


Wonders of the World) to be prior to that of Solomon’s Ternple 5.


that long aftér wards the “Kinge of Eeffer Afia join'd, for: 220 a ae mn :


finifhing itp with 467-Columns of the fineft' Marble, “and many of Cuk.


with mot exquifit te ‘Sculpture (each at the -Expence’ of a King, by. the


Mafter-Mafons DresiPHon dnd AxcHIPHRON) to fupport the


planked: Cieling and ‘Roof of ‘pure Cedar, as the Doors and Linings were.


of Cyprefs # Whereby it became the: ‘Mijtrefs of Leffler Afia, in Length -
445 Foot, and in» ‘Breadth ‘226 ‘Foot :° Nay, ‘fo. admirable” a Fabiick;-
that Xerxes ‘lefeit flanding when he burnt all the other Temples in


his Way to Greece's tho’ ‘at laff. it was fet on Fire and birnt down i ae
avvile Fellow, only. for she: Luft of being a of; @ on the wey Duy a oe
tat ALEXANDER! the-Greatcwas® bora, es


nity , ? -@


Bias ais ag Sees 67 2 es eae) as a
SI a A OR tI IAI ei the i fe SH ns Ne coe ese


A. M.

34.16.
588.

Ance Ch.


(C16) )


_ Nay, the GRanp Mowarcu NEesucwandne-
z«R could never, with all his unfpeakable Advan-
tages, carry up his —— to the beautiful. Strength
and, Magnificence of the Temple Work, whicly he-had,
in warlike Rage, burnt down, after it had remain’d in
Splendor 416 Years from its Confecration.. For after
his, Wats were-over, and general Peace proclaim’d, he
fet his, Heart on Architebture, and becametheG rane


MastTERMason;. and: having before! Jed captive


the ingenious: Artifts of Judea, and other conquer’d


Countries, He: rais'd: indeed- the? darveft Work ‘upon


Earvh, even the Walls * and City, the Palaces and
_Hanging


aii. seascape ei NO ORS NLD TNE RS LAL LIIE ELA LL IALEALIEE LE LATS “e 5


poe Thicknels 87. Fook. in eo pane aD wears Keren in, norton
Furlongs, or-60 Britih. Miles in an exact Square.of 5° Miles-a Side, built,
of large. Bricks, cemented with the hard Bitumen of that old Vale. of
Shinar, with 100 Gates of Brafs, or 25 a di de, and, 2g Rowers ten
Foot higher than the Walls. ae i
From the [aid 25 Gates. i each ‘Side. went: 25. peter in Se i...

or in all 50. Streets, each 15 Miles long, with four. half Streets next the
Walls, each 200°Foat broad, .as the entire. Streets .qwere150- Foot broad :
And {o the whole City was thus cut out. into 676. Squares, each being
2 Miles and i in Compafs ; round. which .qwere. the, Houser built three. or
foser Stories: high, well adorn’ 'd, and accommodated.with Yitds, - Gardens,


&e, A Branch of the Euphrates 1 run thro’. the\ Middle of \it,. from Nevth,
to South, over which, in the Heart of the City, wos built a ftately Bridge,


in Length a Fudan: and thirty Foot in Breadth, by wonderful Art, for


_ fupplying the Want of a Foundation in the River. At the two Ends of
-° this Bridge were two magnificent Palaces, the Old: Palace, , the Seat of.


ancient


si scien


( 7)


Hanging-Gaidens, the Bridge and Temple of Banyton,
the Third of . the iceem Wonders. of the World,
tho’. vaftly. inferior, in the fublime Perfection of Ma-
fonry, toothe holy, charming, lovely Temple of Gon.
But. as the. fewifh Fadtiaaies were, of {pecial ufe to
Ne AB. Po ill alate 4 ela hase pile lag ode

‘being


ancient Kings, ai the Faft End, upon the Ground of foun pee ; and

the New Palace at the Weft End, built by Nebuchadnezzar, upon the

Ground of nine Squares, with Hanging-Gardens ( fo much celebrated by
ihe Greeks) where the loftieft Trees could grow asin the Fields, ereCted
in a Square of 400 Foot on each Side, carried up by Terraces, and fuf-
tain’d by vaft Arches built upon Arches, until the highe/t Terrace equald
the Height of the City-Walls, with a curious Aquedu to water the
whole Gardens. Old Babel improv’d, flood om the Eaft Side of the

River, and the New Town on the Weft Side, much larger than the Old,
and built in order to make this Capital exceed old Niniveh, tho? it never’
had fo many Inbabitants by one Half. The River was begirt with Banks
of Brick, as thick as the City Walls, in Length twenty Miles, viz, Sifteen
Miles within the City, and two-Miles and a half above and below ils to.
heep the Water within its Channel; and each Street that crofi'd the River -
had a brafen Gate leading down to the Water on both Banks; and Weft
of the City was a prodigiows Lake, in Compafs 160 Miles, with a. Canal


from the River into it, to prevent Inundations in the Sununer.


In the Old Town, was the Old Tower of BaBet, at the Ponte:
tion a Square of half a Mile in Compafs, confilting of eight Jquare Towers.
built over each other, with Stairs on the out-fi de round it, going up to the
Obfervatory on the Top, 600 Foot high (which # 19 Foot higher than the
bigheft Pyramid) whereby they became the firft ee And inthe

C ~~ Rooms


A. M.
3468.


536.
Ante Ch.


(18)

being thus kept at work, they retain’d their great Skill
in Mafonry, and contimulld very capable of rebuilding
the holy Temple and City of SaLE™m upon its old:
Foundations, which was. order'd: by the Edict or Decree
of the GRaND Cx Rv sg; according, to God’s Word,.
that had foretold his Faslanion and: this. Decree: And.

Cyrus


Ke
k


Rooms of the Grand Tower, with arched Roofs, fupported by Pillars. 75
Foot high, the idolatrous Worfhip of their God BEL us was perform’ ds,
rill now, that this.mighty.Mafon and Monarch evetted round this ancient
Pile a Temple of two Furlongs on every Side, or a Mile in compas ;
where be lodg’d the facred Trophies of SoLoMon’s Temple, and: the
golden Image 90: Foot. high, that he had confecrated in the Plains of
Dura, were formerly. in the Tower lodg’d many other golden Images,
and, many precious things, that were afterwards all fisd by XERXES,


= and amounted to above 21 Millions Sterling.


And when, all was finife dy, King NEBUCHADNEZZAR walking
in State in his Hanging-Gardens, and from thence taking a Review of
the whole. City, proudly boafted. of this. bis mighty Work ; faying,. Is not
this Great Babylon, that I have built for the Honfe of the Kingdom,
by the Might of my: Power, and. for, the Honour - of my Majefty 2
but had his Pride. ammediately. rebuRd by. a Voice from Heaven, and
punif'd by brutal. Madnefs for feven Years, until he gave Glory.
to the God. of. Heaven, the Omnipotent. Archite& of the Univerfe,
which he. publifd. by. a Decree thro’ all his. Empire, and dyd next.
Year,. before. his GREAT BABYLON. ws little more. than half i inhae
bited (tho? ‘he had led many Nations: captive for that purpofe) ; nor was,
it ever fully peopled; for in 25 Years after bis Death, the Granp
Crrus conquer'd it, and vemow'd, the Throne to Shufhan in Persia.


stele i ite 2
iu. fia ai esis


( 19)
Cres having contitueed ZerusspaBwer, the
Son of Salathiel (of the Seed of David, by Nathan,
the Brother of Solomon, whofe Royal Family was now
-extinét) the Head, or Prince of the Captivity, and the
Leader of the fews and J/raelites returning to Feru-
falem, they -began to Jay the Poinitlaion sof the


Srconp Temes, and wouldvhave:foon finith’d
uit, if Cyrus chad cliv’d; but at length they put.on


the Cape-Stone, in the 6th Year of Darivwus, the
Perfian Monarch, when it was dedicated with Joy, and
many great Sacrifices, by ZERUBBABEL the Prince
and Genet Maft er-Mafon of the Fews, about 20
Years after the Decree of the Grand Cyrus. And tho’
this Temple of ZERUBBABEL came far fhort of Sy-


lomon’'s Temple, was not fo richly adorn’d- with Gold
and Diamonds, and all manner of precious Stones,


nor had the Shechinah and the holy Relicks of eAofes


in it, @%c. yet being rais'd exactly upon Solomon’s
-Foundation, and according to -his-Model, it was-ftill


the moft regular, fymmetrical, and glorious Edifice in
the. whole World,. as the Bnerics of the Jews: have
often seftily: d. and. acknowledg'd.


“At length ‘the Rovau ART was. eee into


Greece, beh Inhabitants: have left us no Evidence of


fuch Improvements in Mafonry, ptior to Solomon's
sets Oc | “Temple ;*


A, M.
3489:


5 I Se
Aate Ch,


)
die eee ety


tenes nc ec Se SR


oy


Temple ;* for their moft ancient Buildings, as the Cit-
tadel of Athens, with the “Parthenion, or Temple of
Minerva, the Temples alfo. of Thefeus, of Fupiter
Olympius, €Fc. their Porticos allo, and Forums, their
Theatres and Gymnafiums, their public Halls, curious
Bridges, regular Fortifications, {tout Ships of War, and
ftately Palaces, were all erected ‘after the Temple of
Solomon, and moft of chbmn even after si Temple of
Zerubbabel. 9S


il ) Nor do we find theG RECLANS arrivd to any. con-
: fiderable. Knowledge in Geometry, before. the Great
ia Thales Milefivs, the Philofopher, who. oy d in the Reign
AM of Bell fhazzar, and the ‘Time of the Fewifh wen


Hn 457 3

| nie vity. But, his Scholar, the Greater Py THAGORAS,
Wa nte ;
He Ba 'd the Author, of the ads Propel ition of Euclid’s


WILE e fi ft
Hh “ae : r


~ The Grecians having been long degeneratéd into Barbarity, forget-
ting their original Skill in Mafonry, (which their Fore-fathers brought
from Affyria) by their frequent Mixtures with other barbarous Nations,
their mutiial Invafions, and wating bloody Wars; until by travelling and

) corre|ponding with the Afiaticks and Egyptians, they reviv'd their Know-

__ledge in Geometry and. pisowy both, tee few. of the Grecians had
the Honour to own it,


( 21 )
firft Book, which, if duly obferv’d, is the Foundation
of all Mafonry, facred, civil, and military. *
The People of Leffer Afia, about this Time. gave
large Encouragement to,,Mafons for erecting all forts


of {umptuous Buildings, one of which seals not be -


forgot, being ufually reckon’d the Fourth of the Seven


| Wonders of the. World, viz. the eMaufoleum, ox
Tomb of eMaufolus King of Caria, between Lycia
and Sonia; at. -Hulicarnalius, on the Side of Mount


-TEMIs1aA,; his mournful Widow, as the {plendid.


Taurus in. that Kingdom, at the Command of Ar-


; Teftimony of her Love to. him, built of. the moft


curious Marble, in Circuit 411 Foor, in Height 215


Cubits, farrounded with 26 Columns of the seg fa-


mous Sculpture, and the, whole open on all, Sides,


with Arches 73 Foot wide, perform’d by the four prin-


cipal Mafter- -Mafons and Engravers of thofe Times,


ro) CaS


Oe ne anon


A.M. .
3652.
52»


3 =
Ante Ch... -:


* “p YTHAGORAS + 1alea into 0 Boype the Vai that Thales me d, ,


and living there among the Prizfis 22 Years, became expert in Geo-


metry, and -in all the Egyptian Learning, until be was. captivated
“by Cambyfes King of Perfia, and fent to Babylon,. where be »was
much converfant with the. Chaldean Macs, and the learned Baby-
‘lonih Jews, from whom. he. borvow'd great Knowledge, that ven-
derd him very famous in Greece and Italy , where. afterwards she


flowifo'd and dyd; when Mordecai was the prime Minifter of State
to. Ahafhuerus King of Perfia, and. ten Hears. jer ZLERUBBABEL’S
Temple was finifh'd. . | |


A. M.
347%. :


Pack Gh, a


A. M.

3498.,
50 Oe

Ante Ch,


A.M.
3.700.


30°
Ante Ch.


( 48 )


‘wiz, the-Eat Side by ‘Scopas, the Welt by Leochares


the North ‘by Briax, andeehie South by Timothers.
But ‘after Py Tupsic oR gi Geometry ‘became: the


aailing ‘Study -of Greece, where many learned Philo-
fophets arole, fome “of whom invented “fundty ‘Pro-
‘politions, or Elements of: Geometry, and reduc’d them


to the ule af the mechanical Atts. rm Wop! need we-doubt


“that. Mafonry kept pace with Geometry; or ‘rather,
‘always follow’d it in -proportion’d gradual Improve-
‘ments, until the’ wonderful Eu ct vp of Tyre flou-
-rifh’d — ac: ‘eAlexaniyia 5) ‘who- gathering: up: the’ {cat-
terd Elements of Geometry, -d digefted them into a Me-
thod that was: never’ yet isitideds. (and for which his
Name will be ever celebrated) ‘under the Patronage of
ProLromeus, the Son of Lagus King. ‘of Eeypt,
one of the immediate Succeflors of Mester the


ge


}


And


* Oy borrow'd: from other Nations their) pretended Inventions, a
Anaxagoras, Oenopides, Brifo, Antipho, Democritus, Hippocrates,


sand Theodorus-Cyrenzus, the Majfler of the divine Pi ato, who
samplifyd Geometry, and» publifh'd the Art. Analytic; from whofe


Academy came forth a vaft Number, that foon difpersd their Know-
ledge to diftant Parts, a‘:Leodamus, Thextetus, Archytas, Leon,
Eudoxus , Menaichmus, and Xenocrates, the Majer of Ariftotle,
from whofe Academy alfo came forth Eudemus, Theophraftus, Arifteeus,
Jfidorus, aaa ana many others.


_ bour of Alexandria, from which the Light-Houles im the Mediterra-.
near? were often calld: Pharos.’ Though somes teftead of «this; mention, —
as the Fifth Wonder, the geeat'Oxe irs x of: Sémiramit, 150 Foot


i a a Ah a iden Loy NEE Tics i i na I ES RE A Sei ee POE Timid nce


And as‘ the noble Science came‘ to be! more metho-


dically taught, the Royal Art was the more generally
efteem’d and improv’d among the Grecians, who at


length arriv’d to the fame Skill and Magnificence in it
with their Teachers the Afsatics and Egyptians. Z
The next King of Egypt, Protomeus Puiva-


DELPHUsS, that great Improver of the liberal Arts,


and of allt ufeful- Knowledge; who gather’d the ereateft
Library wpon- Earthy -and had the Old Teftament (at
leaft the Pentateach) firft wanflated into Greek, be-
came an excellent Archited?, and Generan Mas-


TER-M 4s-o'n) ‘having, ‘among his other :great Buil+-
dings, erected the fmaous Bond whe of Pwapros,.* the’


Fifth « of vad Seven ria pli whe World.


: * On. an Tana near eee eee at one ae ue Mouths of the Nile,
of wonderful Height and moft cunning Workimanpip, andall of the


fineft Marble; and it coft 800 Talents, ov about 48ojooo Crowns. |


The: Mafter. of Work,. under.the King, was; Siftratus, a  moft, inge-
nicws. Mafon; and it was afterwards much admir’d by Julius, Cefar,


qwho Was a good Fudge of moft Things, though chiefly converfant in»


Wav. and-Politicks.._It..qpas.intendedas..a. Light-Houfe for the Har-.


highs and°%4 Pos vot fanare at Bottom,’ on 90: Foot: im Gircuit:.at the


Ground, alb one intire Stone, rife’ pyramidically;. brought: from: Arme- :
nia to Babylon about the’ Time of whe Siege’ of Troy,: if we may: fa


lieve the Hiftory of SEMIRAMIS.


ee rene eel
<i it


—————


}


eer


(( 2 ))
_ Wemay readily believe, .thac the African Nations,
even: to the tlantick. Shore, did foon imitate Egypt
in {uch Improvements, though Hittory fails, and there:


-areno. Travellers encourag’d to: difcover the valuable


A: M.


a a


bt Gaede


Ante Ch.


A. M.
4004,


Remains in Mafonry of thofe once renowned Nations...
Nor fhould we forget the learned Ifland of Sicity,


where the prodigious Geometrician ARCHIMEDES


did) flourifh,.* and» was unhappily: flain when -Syracufe.
was taken by eWarcellus, theRoman General: . For
from Sicily, as well as from Greece, Egypt, and Afia, the
ancient Romans learnt both the Sc1eNcE and. the
ArT, what they knew before being either mean or irre
gular; but as they fubdu’d the Nations, they made mighty,
Difcoveries in both; and, like wife Men, led captive,
not the Body of the People, but the Arts and Sciences,


withthe. moft eminent Profeflors and Practitioners,


to Rome; which thus became the Center of Learning,
as well as of imperial Power, until they advanc’d to
their Zenith of Glory, under AuGusTUs Casar,
(in whofe Reign was born God's Messian, the

Berita tah “ot erage


*WPhile ERATOSTHENES and Conon flourifh'd im Greece,
who were {ucceeded by the excellent Apottontus of Perga, and
many more before the Birth of Chrift, who, though not working Ma-
fons, yet were good Surveyors ; or, ab leaft, cultivated Geometry, which
is the folid Bafis of true Majfonry, and its Rule. } ?


€25)
great Architeé&t of the Church) who having laid the
World quiet, by proclaiming univerfal Peace, highly
encourag’d thofe dexterous Artifts that had been bred
in the Rowen Liberty, and their learned Scholars and
Pupils; but particularly the great Virruvius, the
Father of all true Architects to this Day.

Therefore it is rationally believ’ d, that the glorious
AuGuUsTUs became the cae Maffer ret the
Lodge at Rome, having, befides his patronizing
Vitruvius, mouch prorieited the Welfare of the Fellow-
Craft(men, as appears by the many magnificent Buil-
dings of his Reign, the Remains of hith are the Pat-


~ tern and Seddaed oF true Mafonry in all future Timés,


as they are indeed an Epitome of the Afratic, Egyptian,
Grecian, and Sicilian Architeéture, which we often ex-


prefs by the Name of the AUGUSTAN Sait,
and which we are now only endeavouring to imitate,


and have not yet arriv ‘d to its Perfection.
The old Records of Mafons afford large Hints of


their Lodges, from the Beginning of the World, in the


polite Nations, efpecially in Times of Peace, and when


the Civil Powers, abhorring Tyranny and Slavery, gave
due Scope to the bright and free Genius of their hap-
py Subjects; for beh always Mafons, above all other
Artifts, were the Favourites of the Eminent, and be-
came neceflary for their grand ‘Undercakings in any

| fort


(36)


fort of Materials, not only in Stone, Brick, Timber,


Plaifter ; but even in Cloth or Skins, or whatever was


us’d for Tents, and for the various forts of Archi-
eae Be A |
Nor fhould it be forgot, that Painters alfo, and
Statuaries, * were always reckon’d good Mafons, as
much as Builders, Stone-cutters, Bricklayers, Carpen-
ters, foiners, Upholders or Tent-Makers, and a vatt


_ many other Craftfmen that could be nam’d, who per-


form according to Geometry, and the Rules of Building ;
: ie 7 ~ though


; j t : ;

* For it was not without good Reafon, the Ancients thought that
the Rules of the beautiful Proportions in Building were copied, or taken
from the Proportions of the Body natural: Hence Puipias i reckowd


in the Nuinber of ancient Mafons, for erecting the Statue of the Goddefs


Nemefis at Rhamnus, 10 Cubits high ; and that‘of Minerva at Athens,
26 Cubits highs and that of Jurpiten Ourympius, felting in bis
Temple in Achaia, between the Cities of Elis and Pifa, made of innume.
rable {mall Pieces of Porphyry, fo exceeding grand and proportion’d, that
it was veckon'd one of the Seven Wonders, a the famow Corossvus
at Rhodes was another, and the greateft Statue that ever was erected,
made of Metal, and dedicated to the Sun, 70 Cubits high, like a
great Tower at a diftance, at the Entry of an Harbour, firiding wide
enough for the largeft Ships under fail, built in 12 Years by CaREs, a
famous Mafon and Statuary of Sicyon, and Scholar to the great Lyfippus
of the fame Fraternity. This mighty Corossus, after flanding 56
Years,, fell by an Earthquake, and lay in Ruines, the Wonder of the
World, till Anno Dom. 600, when, the Soldan of Egypt carry'd off
its Relicks,, which loaded 900 Gamels.. ye


ee


nov certainly how long


(239
though none fince Hiram AzrF has been renown'd
for Cunning in nes parts cof Mafonry : ace of this
enough.

But among the Heathen, white: ce new Béisnie
Geometry * was duly siubdiegstel both before and after
the Reign of eduguftus, even till the Fifth Century of
the Chriftian fava, Mafonry was had in great Efteem
and Veneration: And while the Roman Empire con-
tinu’d in its Glory, the Royal Art was carefully propa-
gated, even to the Gitima Bhule, and a Lodge
erected in almoft every Roman Garrifon; whereby they
generoufly communicated their Cunming to the northern
and weftern Parts of Europe, which had grown  bar-
barous before the Roman Conqueft though we know
o5 becaufe fome ink there are
afew Remains, of good Mafonry before that Period
in fome Parts of aa raifed by the original Skill
that. the firft Colonies brought with them, as on Celtic
Edifices, erected aby the ancient ile and by the ancient

Britains


* By Menelaus, Claudius, Ptolomeus, (zebo was alfo the Prince
of Aftronomers) Plutarch, Eutocius (who recites the Inventions of
Philo, Diocles, Nicomedes, Sphorus, amd Heron the learned Mecha-
mick) Ktefibius alfo, the Inventer of Pumps (celebrated by Vitruvius,
Proclus, Pliny, aud Atheneus) and Geminus, alfo equall'd by fome to
Euclid ; fo Diophantus, Nicomachus, Serenus, Proclus, Pappus, Theon,
&c. all Geometricians, and the illuftrious Cultivaters of the mechanical
Arts. D2


eo:


( 28 )
Britains too, who were a Colony of the Ceéltes, long
before the Romans invaded this Ifland. *

But when the Gorus and Vanpats, that had
never been conquer’d by the Romans, like a general
Deluge, over-ran the Roman Empire, with warlike
Rage and grofs Ignorance they utterly deftroy’d many
of the fineft Edifices, and defac’d others, very few e-
| fcaping ; as the Afatic and African Nations fell un-
| der the fame Calamity by the Conquefts of the
| Mauometaws, whofe grand Defign is only tocon-
vert the World by Fire and Sword, intend of cultiva-
i; ! ting the Arts and Sciences.
oe Fh upon the Declenfion of the aon Empire;

when see Britifh Garrifons were drain’d, the ANGLEs and.

other lower Saxons ,. invited by the ancient BRITONS.
to come over and help them againft the Scors and
PPC Tis,


- * The Natives within: the Roman Colonies might be firft inflructed
| in building of Citadels and Bridges, and other Fortifications neceffa-
| vy; and afterwards, when their Settlement prodmc’d Peace, and Liberty,
Ht and Plenty, the Aborigines did foon imitate thet learned and polite Con-
i querors in Mafonry, having then Leifuve and’a Difpofition to raife magni
/ ficent Structures. Nay, even the Ingenious of the neighbouring Nations
| not conquer’d, learnt much from the Roman Garrifons in Times of Peace
and open-Correfpondence, when they became emulous of the Roman.
Glory,, and thankful that their being conquerd’ was the means of re-
Covering them from ancient Ignorance. and Prejudices, when they began. lo
delight in the Royal Art,


~
jit sae rcs tie


( 29)
Pres, at length fubdu’d the South Part of this
Ifland, which they call’d England, ot Land of the
Angles ; who being a-kin ro the Goths, or rather a fort
of Vandals, of the fame warlike Difpofition, and as
ignorant Heathens, encourag’d nothing but War, till


they became Chriftians; and then too late lamented
the Ignorarice of their Fathers in the great Lofs of.


Roman Mafonry, but knew not how to repair it.


Yet becoming a free People (as the old Saxon Laws:
teftify) and having a Difpofition for Mafonry, they.
foon began *to imitate the e4/fiatics, Grecians, and.
Romans, in erecting of Lodges and encouraging of |
: Ma--


* No doubt feveral Saxon and Scotifh Kings, with many of the No-.
bility, great Gentry, and eminent Clergy, became thé Grand. Mafters of —
ihofe early Lodges, from a mighty Zeal then prevalent for building magui- -
ficent Chriftian Temples ; which would allo prompt them to enquire after «
the Laws, Charges, Regulations, Cuftoms, and Ufages, of the ancient -


Lodges, many of which might be preferv’d by Tradition, and all of
them very likely in thofe Parts of the Britifh Mlands that were not fubdu'd
by the Saxons, from whence in. time they might be brought, and which
the Saxons were more fond of, than careful to revive Geometry and
Roman Mafonry ; as many in all Ages bave been more. curious and care-


ful about the Laws, Forms, and Ufages of their refpective Societies, |


than about the Ants and Sciences thereof.
But neither what was conveyd, nor the Manner how, can be


communicated by weiting; asno Man indeed can underftand it without.


tha Key of a Fellow Craft...


SS=


An. Dom, -


741.
He dy a


| Was, as.nauch: EAGAN EAS ASH as in. other C-briftian |


An. Dom.
832.


( 30 )
Mafons ;- being taught, not only from the faithful Tradi:
tions and. valuable Remains| of the. Bra tow s,,,but


even, by foreign Princes, in. whofe had oa che


Royal “rt had been preferv'’d much from Gothic Ruins,


particularly by Gia R LES,Ma R79 Blaha King of


France, who, according to the old. Records, of _Mafons,


fent over feveral expert Crafts-men and learned. Ar chi-


tects into: England, at the Defire of the Saxon Kings:
So. that during the Heptarchy, the Gothic Architecture


Lands...


And though the many Invafions: of the DANES
occafion’d the Lo& of many Records, yet in Times of
Truce-or Peace they did not hinder much the good: Work,


though net perform’d according to the ‘Meat Stile ;
nay, the vaft Expence laid out upon it, with the cu-
‘rious Inventions of the Artifts to fupply the Roman


Skill, doing the beft they could, demonitrate their
Efteem ei Love for the Royal. Art, and have ren-


~-derd the Gorure BurILpINGs venerable, tho’


An. Dom.
1066.


not imitable by thofe that relifh the ancient eArchi-


tecture.


“And after the Saxons and Danes were conquer’d by
the Normawns, as foon as the Wars ended and


Peace was proclaim’d, the ca Mafonry was en-
- courae’d,.


| ‘
{| a
Sn e::||>|


———


C3n)
courag’d, even in the Reign of the Conqueror, * and
of bis Son King Wriiia m Rufus, who built Wef-


minfter-Hall, t the largeft one Room perhaps in the


Earth.

Nor did ‘the Barons Wars nor the many bloody;
Wars of the fubfequent Norman Kings, and their con-
tending Branches, much hinder the moft fumprtuous
and lofty Buildings of thofe Times, rais’d by. the great


Clergy, (who enjoying large Revenues, could well


bear the: Expence) and even by the Crown too;
for we read King Ep waRD II. had an Officer call’d


the King’s Free-Mafon, or General-Surveyor of his Buil-


dings, whole Name was Henry YEVELE, employ’d abou -
CuarpeEt at Weftminfter, where the Houfe of Com-
mons now fit in Parhament:
But for the further Inftruction’ of sisoliinns and
younger Brethren,° a certain Record of Free- Mafons,
written in the Reign of King Ep waRo. IV. of the About
Norman Line, gives the following Account, v2z,.° " eg
eX That


* William the Conqueror built the Tower of Lonpon, and many -


flrong Cafiles in the Country, with feveral religous Edifices,. whofe


Example was fol low'd by the Nobility and Clergy, particularly. by Roger
de Montgomery Earl of Arundel, the Archbifhop of York, the Bifbop
of Durham, amd GuNDULPH eo of i gene a mgt)
Architect... . ‘


&


by that King to build feveral Abbies, and St. STEPHEN’s ee


f ry ‘i. -
Berge mY


G2


— That though the ancient Records of the Brotherhood
in England were many of them deftroyd or loft in the
Wars of the Saxons and Danes, yet King ATHELSTAN,
(the Grandfon of King Aur REDE the Great, a mighty
Archite#) the firft anointed King of England, and
who tranflated the Holy Bible into the Saxon Tongue,
when he had brought the Land imto Refi and Peace,
built many great Works, and encourag’d many NMafons
from France, who were appointed Overteers thereof, .and
brought with them the Charges and Regulations of the
Lodges preferv’d fiace the Roman Times, who alfo
prevail’d with the King to wprove the CONSTITUTION
of the Englifh Lodges according to the foreign Model,
and to increafe the Wages of working Mafons.

That the {aid King’s youngeft Son, Prince Evwin,
being taught Mafonry, and taking upon lim the Charges
of a MastTeER-Mason, for the Love he had to the
faid Craft, and the honourable Principles whereon it is
grounded, purchafed a free Charter of King Athelftan
his Father, for the Mafons having a Correction among
themfelves, (as tt was anctently expre{sd) or a Freedom
and Power to regulate them{elves, to amend what
might happen ami[s, and to hold a yearly Communi-
cation and General Affembly. ie 4

That accordingly Prince Eo win fummoned all the
Mafons in the Realm to meet him in a Congregation
: at


( 33.)
at York, who came and compo{ed a General Lodge, of
which he was GRAND MasTER; and having
brought with them all the Writings and Records extant,
{ome in Greek, fome wn Latin, [ome wa French, and


other Languages, from the Contents thereof that Mlem-


bly did frame th Constitution and Charges
of an Englifh Lodge, made a Law to preferve and ob-
ferve the (ame in all time coming, and ordain'd good
Pay for working Mafons, &c.

That in proce{s of time, when Lodges were more fre-
quent, the Right Wor/kipful the Matter and Fellows,
with Confent of the Lorns of the Realm, (for moft
great Men were then eMafons) ordain'd, that for the
future, at the Making or Admi ffion of a Brother,
the Constitution fhould be read, and | the
Charges hereunto annex'd, by the Matter or Warden;


and that {uch as were to be admitted Mafter-Mafons,


or eMVafters of Work, frould be examin'd whether they
be able of Cunning to ferve their re{pective Lords, as
well the Loweft as the Higheft, to the Honour and
Wor [hip of the afore{aid Art, and to the Profit of their
Lords ; for they be their Lords that employ and pay them
for their Service and Travel. ait
And befides many other things, the faid Record adds,
That thofe Charges and Laws of Free-Masons
have been (een and perufed by our late Sovereign King
Henry VI. and by the Lords of his: honourable Coun-
| E cil,


—


C 34 )


E coho have allow'd them, and (aid that they be right
ood and reafonable to be holden, as they have been drawn
out and apd : from the Records of ancient Times. *


New: -botigh in the third Year of the. faid ° King.
Henry View bile an Infant of about four Years old,
the Parliament made an Act, chat affected only. the.
warking Dfafons, who had, coer aly to the Sratutes for,

| Labourers, (


In another Manufcript more ancient, we tks eS © That cole the
Pp


Mafter,: and Wardens meet in a Lodge, if need be, the Sheriff
<6 , the County, or the Mayor of the Gity, cr Alderman of the Town,
Ola: ‘which the Congregation is held, fhould be made Fellow and So-
“© ciate to the Mafter,” in help of him bee) Rebels, and upbearing
“ the Rights. of the Realm. —

‘ That enter'd. Prentices at their making were aad not to be
« ‘Thieves, or. T hieves-Maintainers ; that they fhould travel honefily for
“ their Pay, and love their Felloan we themfelves, and ‘be true to the
‘* King of England, and tothe Realm, and to the Lodge.. 5 6

“ That at {uch Congregations it Shall. be enquir'd, whether any:
“ Majfier or Fellow lige leaky any-of the. Articles agreed to. And
“if the. Offender, being duly. cited to appear, prove Rebel, ana will’
“ not attend, then the Lodge Jhall determine againjt him that be.
“6, hall ah coeiie (or renounce) his Mafonry; and shall no more uf
“ this Craft; the which if be prefwme for todo, the Sheriff of the-
“ County. foal: prifon hints, and take all bis Goods into the King’s Hands, .
‘rll his Grace be Sranted kim and iffued : For this Caufe. principally.
« have thefe. Congregations been: ordain’d,, that as qwell the lowe)? as
“ the bigheft fiould be qwell and truly on in this il ee thy —
& out all the Kingdom of England.

. < coat, fo mote it be..


ey,


iil 2 EF ie iS See eR ? : pee eee eae


C35)


Labourers, . confederated not to..work but at their .own
Price and. Wages; and becaufe fuch Agrecments were
{uppos'd to be made at the General Lodges,. call’d in
the Act CuaPTERSs and. CONGREGATIONS of
Masows, it was then thought expedient to level the
faid Act againlt the faid Congregations : * Yet when. the
{aid King. “Beary, VI. arriv'd to Man’s Eftate, the Ma-
fons daid before him and his Lords the above-men-
tion’d Records. and Charges, who, ‘tis plain, review'd
them, and folemnly approv’d of them as good and
realomalgle: tO » be holden : Nay, the faid King and his

| | Ey ~satods,i ici, Eensls


&


* Tertio_Henrici Sexti, Cap, IAn.Doni..1425.


Tule, - Walens fpalt wot confederate themfelves in: pti: and Congr.
ations. ;


= Warsaw xd by yearly Congregations | nid Cbihedeacie’s, sid
“* by the Mafons in their General Affemblies, the good Courfe and
“ Effect of the Statutes for Labourers be openly violated and broken, in
© Subverfion of the Law, and to the great Damage of all the Commons,
© our faid Sovereign Lord the King, willing in this Cafe to prowide a
Remedy, by the Advice and Affent aforefaid, and at the fpectal Requeft
“ of the Commons, hath ordained and eftablifhed, that fuch Chapters
“* and Congregations fhall not be hereafter holden; and if any {uch be
made, they that cqufe {uch Chapters and Congregations to be a(fembled
and holden, if they thereof be convict, fhall be judged for Felons, and
that the other Mafons that come to fuch Chapters and Congregations


Cay


Cs


Cay


o


C


n


n


¢


€


an


“ be punifh’d by Imprifonment of their Bodies, and make Fine’ wad |


“ Ranfome at the King’s geet
oo, Tat. 3+ p99.


NE cr
aks, {yy
step ARS icc Monet men cu een ei ROG et eh TERT TI


path toed ld!


(36 )

Lords muft have been incorporated with the Free-
Ma/ons, before they could make fuch Review of the Re-
cords; and in this Reign, before King Henry's Troubles,
Matfons were much encourag’d. Nor is there any Inftance
of executing that Act in iad or in any other Reign
fince, and the Mafons never neglected their Lodges Be
it, nor ever thought it worth while to‘emiploy their
noble and eminent Brethren to have it repeal’d's becaule
the working Matons, that are free of the BOaed , {corn
to be ouilty of flicks Combinations; and tire rhe free
-Mafons have mo Concern in Trefpattes againft the Sta-
“gutes for Labourers. * ~


~"Fhe


f


Ei ;

* That Ad was made in ignorant Tires, when true Learning was
a Crime, and Geometry condemn’d for Conjuration ; but it cannot dcro-
gate from the Honour of the ancient Fraternity, who to be (ure would
never encourage any fuch Confederacy of their working Brethren, But
by Tradition it # beliew'd, that the Parliament-Men were then too much
influenc’d by the illiterate Clergy, who, were not accepted Mafons, ner
underftocd Architecture (as the Clergy of fome formerAges) and. gene-
rally thought unworthy of this Brotverbood ; yet thinking they had an
indefeafible Right to know. all Secrets, by verine of auricular Confeffion,
and the Mafons never confeffing any thing therevf,. the [aid Clergy were
highly offended, and. at. firft ufpecting them of Wickedne[s,. reprefented
them as dangerows to the State during that Minority, and: foon influenced
_ the Parliament-Men:to lay. bold of fuch fuppofed Agreements. of the
working Mafons, for making an Act that might [eem to reflect Difhonour
_ apon even the whole worfhipful Fraternity, -whofe Favour feveral Aéts
bad been bath before and after that Period made.


i


!
i
|


i
I
!
@
k
li
i
|
4
i
i


(37)


The Kings of Sc o-r Lan D very much encourag’d
the Royal alias from the earlieft Times down to dic
Union of the Crowns, as appears by the Remains of


slorious Buildings in that ancient Kingdom, and by


the Lodges there kept up without Interruption many
hundred Years, the Records and Traditions of which
_teftify the great Refpect of thole Kings to this honour-
-able Fraternity, who. gave always pregnant Evidence of
‘their Loveland Loyalty, from whence fprung the old
-Toaft among Scots Mafons, viz. GOD BLESS THE


King AND THE Gihakut
Nor was the royal Example neglected by the INo-


: bile. Gentry, and Clergy of SoTL aNd, ‘who join’d
in every thing for the good. of the Craft ee Brother-
hood, the Kings ipa often the Grand eMafters,


until, among oleh chines, the Mafons of SCOTLAND


were impower'd. to buds a. certain. and. fix’d- Grand


. Mafter sfc Grand Warden, who had a Salary from


the Crown, and alfo an Acknowledgment from ever.


_ New Brother in the Kingdom at Entrafice e, whofe Bufi-
_ne(s was not, only to yeoulate what might happen. ami(s


in the Brotherhood, bi alfo to hear and finally deter-


‘mine all Controverfies between Mafon and Lord, to
~ punith the Mafon, if he deferv’d it, and to oblige borh
to equitable Terms : At. which Hearings, if Sats Grand
| Mafter was abfent (who'was always nobly born) the


Grand Warden prefided. This Privilege remain’d till


the.


oa


= acral Speier


ad
a
37
¢


1640.


1707,


SaaS aiieineeeaeeenmenteeeeeeeeeeeiEeeee


( 38 )

the Civil Wars, but’ is now ‘obfolete; nor can it well
be reviv’d until the King becomes a Mafon, becaufe it
was not actually exerted at the Union of vee King-
doms. | ecgibliudl pry

Yet the great reve iar ne ScoTs ee ~ truc
Malonry, prov’d afterwards very ufeful to ENGLAND;
for the learned and magnanimous Queen EL1zaBETH,
who encourag’d: other is: difcourag’d this ; becaute,
being a Woman, fhe could not be made.a Mafon, tho’,
as oclacr great Women, fhe might have apiset acini
Mafons, fice Semiramis and Ar idenifias* a.

“But upon lier Demife, King James VI. of Sdor-
LAND ‘fucceeding ‘to othe Craw! Of ENGLAND) being
a Mafon King, reviv'd the. Englifh Lodges ; wre zy be
was the Firft King of GRravT-BRiITadn, hé was
alfo the Fir ft ins in the World that einai lik the
Roman Architecture from chi Ruins of Gorhirk Igno-


*Taiice:


* ELIZABETH “Niue jealous iP any Ssifenbbes of he Subject: whofe
Bufine[i phe was not duly apprized of, attempted to break up the annual


Communication of Mafons, as dangerous to her Goverment: But, as


old Mafons have tranfimuted it by Tradition, when the noble Pee{ons hey
Majefiy had commiffioned, and brought a fufficient Poffe with them at


York om St. John’s Day, were once admitted into the Lodge, they


made no ufe of Arms, and return’'d the Queen a moft honourable Account
of the ancient Fraternity, whereby her political Fears and Doubts weve
difpell’d, and fhe let them alone, as a People much re{petted by the Noble and
the Wife of all the polite Nations, but neglected the Art all ber Reign. —


/


639)
rance: For after many dark or illiterate Ages, as foon
as all Parts of Learning reviv'd, and Geometry recover'd
its Ground, the polite. Nations began to difcover the
Confafion and Impropriety of che Gothick Buildings ;
and in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries dic
AUGUSTAN STILE was rais'd from its Rubbifh
in Staly, by BRAMANTE, BARBARO, SANSOVINO,
SANGAL i; Oe AT oad 9! ANGELO, RapuaEt
URBIN, JuLtio Romano, O78 bao, LapBaco,


Scamozi, ViGNoOLa, and many oie bright


Architeds ; but above all, e the Great PaLLapio,


who has not yet been duly imitated-in Italy, though


juftly rival'd: in’ England by our eee Mafter- Maen


Inico JONES.


But though all. true Mafons honour the Memories.


ef thofe Face Architects, it muft be. own'd,. that the


Auguftan Stile was not reviv'd by any: piss Head, .
before Kmg James the Sixth.of ScoTLawp, mt |
Firft of Ew G LAND, patroniz’d the faid elotions Inigo.


fones; whom he employ’d to build his Royal Palace of


Waite-HaLt; and in his Reign over all Great-.
Britain, the BANQUETING- ae us, as the firft.
piece of it, was only rais’d, which is the fineft one.
Room upon Earth; and ae ingenious Mr. Nicholas :
Stone perform’d as Senge Mafen “under the Archinect


JONES,


od


Upon: |


|

\
he
;
ih)
t
i
it


i
[


pice


rece epi Ne ieee rots
eee SS =


EY Ti oe pene


per


“the following Infcription on the Front of it, viz.


(49: ))


Upon his Demife, his Son King GQyarrtes J.


being alfo.a Adsfon, patroniz’d Mr. Fones too, and


firmly intended, to lsaye carried on his Royal Father’s


Defign of W wine-H ax 1, according to. Mr, Jones's,
Stile ; bue was.unhappily diverted. by the Civil Wars.
After the Wars were over, and the Royal Family re-
ftor'd, true Mafonry was likewife reftor’d; efpecially.


upon the unhappy Occafion of the Burning of Lonpon,,


Amo 1666; tor then the City-Houfes were rebuilt
more after the Roman Stile, when King Cuarves, Il.


founded


* The Plan and Profpect of that glorious Defign being full preferwd,
it is efteem’d by skill{ul Architeéts to excel that of any other Palace in
the known Earth; for the Symmetry, Firmnefs, Beauty, and Conveniency of
Architecture; as indeed all Mafter Jones's Defigns and Evections are
Originals, and at firft View difcover bim to be the Architect: Nay, his
mighty Genius prevail’d wiih tke Nobility and Gentry of all Britain,
(for be was as much honour’ in Scotland as in England) to affect and
yewive the ancient Stile of Masonry, 100 long neglected; a5 appears
by the many curious Fabricks of thofe Times, one of which fhall be now
mention d, the leaft, and perhaps one of the fineft, the famous Gat E of the
Phyfic Garden at Ox FoRD, rais’d by Henry Danvers EaRt
or Dany, which coft his Lordthip many hundred Pounds, and # a
curious a little piece of Mafonry.as ever was built there before or fince, with


Fmt 42


GLORIZ DEI OPTIMI MAXIMI, -HONORI CAROLI REGIS,
IN USUM ACADEMIA ET REIPUBLICA, ANNO 1632.
ao * HENRICUS COMES DANEY.


- = TES Siaieeeas — ~


C 41 )


founded the prefent St. Paux’s Cathedral in London,
(the old Gothick Fabrick being burnt down) much after
the Style of St. Pz TER’s at..Rome, conducted by the
ingenious Architect, Sir CuRisTOPHER WRENN.
That King founded alfo his royal Palace at GREEN.
wicu, according to Mr. Tnigo jones’s Defign (which
he-drew before he dy’d) conduéted by his Son-in-Law
Mr.W es: It is now turn’d into an Hofpital for Sea-
men. He founded alfo Chelfea-College, an Hofpital
for Soldiers; and at EpinpuroGu he both founded
and finifh’d his royal Palace of Hany-Roop-Housz,
by the Defign and Conduct of Sir Wittiam Bruce
‘Bart. the Matter of the Royal Works in Scortanp:*
So that befides the Tradition of old Mafons now
alive, which may be rely’d on,.we have much reafon
to believe that King Cuaruzs IL was an eAccepted
Free-Mafon, as every one allows he was a great Encou-
rager of the Craft{men. — sg
But in the Reign of his Brother Kg James IL
though. fome Roman. Buildings. were carried on, the
Lodges of  Free-Mafons in London much dwindled into
Ignorance, by not being duly frequented and cultiva-
| | ted.


UR eter pernce sneer et GRA nar


area tes Eo


ia * It was an-ancient Royal-Palace, and rebuilt after the Auguftan’
i Style, fo neat, that, by competent udges, wt has been efteem'd the fineft
Houfe belonging to the Grown: And though it is not very large, it i both
magnificent and convenient, both Infide and Outfide, with good Gardens,
| and a very large Park; and all other adjacent Accommodations,


Ta ee eee een aoe a
i al " sited a i io a tac lee ieee eee ee


(42)
red. But * after the Revolution, Anno 1688, Kine
WILLraM, though a warlike Prince, having a good
| Tafte of Artie ite: catricd on the aforefaid two fa-
| mous pid ales of Greenwich and. Olnlf ea, built the fine
| part


| ' * But by the royal Example of bis Brother King Charles Il, the City of

Ht - Lownvow erected the famous Monument, where the Great Fire began,
all’of folid Stone, 202 foot high from the Ground,. a Pillay of the Dorick
Order, 15, Foot diameter, with a curious Stair-Cafe in the Middle of black

Marble, and an iron Balcony on the Top (not unlike thofe of Trajan and:

Antoninus at Rome) from whence the City and Suburbs may be
view'd ; and it is the higheft Column we know upon Earth, - Its Pedeftal.
i$ 21. Foot fquare, and 40 Foot high, the Front of which is adorn’d with
moft ingenious Emblems in Ballo Relievo, wrought by that famous Sculp--
tor, Mr. Gabriel Cibber, with large Latin Infcriptions on the Sides of it ;

- founded Anno 1671, and finifh'd Anno 1677.

In bis Time -alo-the Society of Mercuant. ADVENTURERS:
rebuilt the RovAL) Excuancx of London (the old one being des
fivoy'd by the. Fire) all. of Stone,.after the Roman. Style,..the finest Struc-
tuve of that ufe in Europe, with the King’s Statue to the Life, of white.
Marble, in the Middle of the Square (wrought by the famous Mafter=
Carver and Statuary, ‘Mr.Griniin Gissons, who was jufily.
admird all over Europe, for bis rivalling,. if not furpaffin ing, the moft
fam'd (talian Maflers) on. the nedeld af. iene is. thes following, In-


foription, viz.


Caroro Il.’Czsarr BriTANNIco” Pes To Crarres II. Furxkon OF aes :
Patri Patri - FKatser oF nis Country i
Reoum- Ortimo CLEMENTISs1MO AucusTissimo™ Best MosT MERCIFUL AND AucusT oF Kincs . -
_ ‘Gaykats Humana Dirictjs ~~~ = : “DELIGHT or “Manxkrnp™ h
Urrivsque Fortun® Victorr . eee In ApversiITy AND ProsPERITY UNMOV'D i
Pacts Evrop# Arsitro eee Umpire Of Evropr’s Peacrs
Marrum Domino ac Vinpicr ComMMANDEA AND SOVEREIGN OF THE SgAs
SocreTAs Mercatorum ADVENTUR. ANGLIA’ Tue Socizty or MercuanT ADVENTURERS-OF ENGLAND
Qu per CCCC Jam PRoPE ANNOS _ (Wicw ror near CCCC Years
Recta BEniGNITATE FLORET . By Rowan Favour Frovaisnetrn’
Byper InTemeraAT#& EF Gratvitupinis AiTeRNaA: OF UNSHAKEN LOYALTY AND ETERNAL GRATITUDE
Hoc Testimonium ; '  ‘VNnrs Tistimony
~VenerABUNDA PosuiT Has 1n VENERATION ERECTED


Auna: Satusis Human&.MDCLXXXTY. . In THe Year on Sarvation MDCLXXXIV,


Nor |


- es = —— ne pe
_. SSS ESS eR pe -


(C43)


part of his royal Palace of Hamp Ton CouRtT, and
founded and finifh’d his incomparable Palace at Lo o in
Hoxuanp, &%c. And the bright Example of that glorious
Prince, (who by moftyis reckon’d a. Free-Ma{on) did in-
fluence the Nobility, the Gentry, the Wealthy and the
Learned of GREAT-BRITAIN, to affect much the
Augufian Style ;. as appears by a vaft Number of moft
curious Edifices erected fince throughout che Kingdom : :
For when in the Ninth Year-of ae Reign of our late
Sovereign QUEEN ANNE, her Myeffy and the Parlia-
ment cancurr'd in an Act erecting 50 new Parifh- '
Glewchee in London, Weft mete and Suburbs; and the


QuEEN


Nor fhould we forget the famous Turarre of Ox¥rorp, built
by Archbifhhop SHerpon, at his fole Coft,-in that King’s Time,
which, among his other fine Works, was defignd and conducted alfo by
Sir Chriftopher Wren the King’s Architect ; for it is qufily admird by
the Curious: And the Musxu™ adjoining to it, a fine Building vais'd
at the Charge of that illuftrious UnNivERsiIry, where there have
been fince evetted feveral move Roman Buildings, as” Trinity-College
‘Chappel, Allhallows Church in High-ftreet, Peckwatet-Square in Chrift-


Church College, the new Printing-Houfe, and the whole of Queen's: :
College rebuilt, &c. by the liberal Donations of fome eminent Benefactors, . i
and by the publick Spwit, Vigilancy, and Fidelity of the Heads of Colleges, }
who generally have bad a true Tafte of Roman Architeure. 4

‘The learned University of CAMBRIDGE not having had
the Management of fuch liberal Donations, have not fo many fine Struc- i


|
. tures ; but they have two of the moft curious and excellent in Great-Britain |
of daar. kind,. the one a Gothick Building, Kine’s-CoLrrece
| Cuaprer (unlefs you except King Henry VIL’s Chappel in Wett- a
ft


minfter-Abbey); and the other a Roman Building, Trinirx- é
Correct LIBRARY.


lend. Acclamations: 4, Joys. on bis Lorditip laid upon the Stone a


C44)
Quren had eranted a Commiflion to feveral of tiie
Minifters of State, the principal Nobility, great Gentry,
and eminent Citizens, the two Archbifhops, with: feve-
ral other Bifkops and dignify’d Clergymen, to put the
Act in execution; they order’d the {aid New Churches
to be rais’d accordine to the ancient Roman Style,


as appears by thofe sue are already rais’d5 and the


—prefent honourable Commi ffioners having the fame


good Judgment of Architecture, are cartying on the


fame: laudable grand Defign, and are reviving the
ancient Style, by the Order, Countenance, and Encou
ragement of his prefent Majeffy Kine Grores,
hs was alfo. gracioufly pleas'd to lay the firff Stone.
ia. the Foundation of his Parifh Church of St.
MarTin’s i2,.Campis, on the South-Eaft’ Corner (by


his Majefty’s Proxy for the time; the prefent Bi/hop of


Salisbury) which: is now rebuilding, ftrong, large,
and - beautiful; at the Coft’ of the Pari lbioniers™


In fhore, it. would. require many large Volimes to
contain the many. fplendid Inftances ofr the mighty
Influence of Mafonty from the Creation, in every Age,

: and


«The Bilhop of Salisbury went in an orderly Proceffion, duly attended, .
and having levelld the firft Stone, gave it two or three Knocks with a-
Mallet; upon which the Trumpets founded, and a vaft Multunde made.


P urte e


C 45 )

‘and! in every Nation, as:‘could be ‘collected from Hit
torians and Travellers: But efpecially in thofe Parts of
the World where the Europeans correfpond and trade,
‘fuch Remains of ancient, large, curious, and magniff-
cent Colonading, lave been difcover'd by the Inquift
tive, that they can’t enough lament the general. Devat-
tations of the Goths and i a od mutt con-
clude, that no 4rz was ever fo much encourag’d as

this;


-Purfe of 100 Guineas, a5 a Prefent from bis Majefty for the ufe of the
“€raftfmen: . The following Infcription was cut in the Foundation Stone,
and a Sheet of Lead put upon it, viz;


SSE Saale Cae RARE alles een er


Dri = : ~ Sacrep to Gop
Srrenissimus, Rex Grorcius ‘His most Excertent Mayesry Kine Grorcs®
Pex DepuraTuM SUUM ; ~ By urs Proxy


ReEvVERENDUM ADMODUM IN CHristo Parrem Tue Ricrr Reverenp’ Faruer-In Curisy


(3) oie hes Yat staatteAES


RicuarpuM Episcopum SARiSBURIENSEM Ricuarp- Lorp Bisnop oF Saxissury
Summum suum ELEEMOSYNARIUM His Maygesry’s Cuter ALMoneR
ApSISTENTE (Reots ‘Jossa) « > Assistep (Ar His Mayzsrv’s Commanp)” |
Domino Tuo. Hewer Equ. Aur.. ~~ By Sm Tuomas Hewer Knicnr :
fEpiriciorum Reciorum Curarore - Or His Mayesry’s: Roya. Burmpines::
PRINCIPALTI ~ = ee Principat SURVEYOR:
Primum HUjUS Eccrestm Lapiprm = Tue Fist. Sronz oF THIS. GHuRcH-~
Posurr Re oes dew 1 Be
Marriy..19° Anno .DomM. 1721 Turs 19° or Mares Anno- Domini 1721‘


Annoquz REGNI sul ocTravo. Anp THE EigntH Y¥par. or nis -Rerans- |


this ;:as indeéd none other is fo -extenfively ufeful to
Mankind. * . | ae
. Nay, if it were expedient, it could be made appear,
that from this aycient Fratermty, the Societies or Or-
ders of the Warlike Knicurs, and of the Religious
too, in procefs of time, did borrow many folemn
Ufages ; for none of them were better inftituted, more
decently inftall’d, or did more facredly obferve their
Laws and Charges than the Accepted Mafons have done,
who in all Ages, and in every Nation, have main-
cs oaks —_ tain’d
* Te were endlefs to recount and defevibe the many curious Roman
Buildimgs in Great-Britain alone, erected fince the Revival of Roman
Mafonry ; of which a few may be here mention'd, befides thofe already
fpoken of, viz. | eee 3
The QuEEn’s Houfe at Greenwich, —memm Belonging to the Crown:
The great Gallery in Somerfet-Gardens, TEATS: The Crown, oh
-Gunnersbury-Honufe wear Brentford, Middlefex, < p Pes a ze Duke of
, : Queensbury.
-Lindfay-Houfe # Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields, ————= Duke of Ancafter. -
York-Stairs at the Thames zz York-Buildings. ‘ :
‘St. Paul’s-Church iz Covent-Garden, with its
glorious Portico. oS SMUT
The Building and Piazza of Covent-Garden, === Duke of Bedford.
Wilton-Caftle iz Wiltfhire, ——-_ ———- — Earl of Pembroke.
“Caftle-Afhby iz Northamptonfhire, —— —— Earl of Strafford.
“Stoke-Park zz ditto, eee Arundel Efqs
Wing-Houfe in Bedfordthire,  ———- <mme = How. Wm. Stanhope E/y;


-Chevening-Houfe ia Kent, ——- ——= === Ear] Stanhope.

Ambrofe-Bury mm Wiltfhire,  - —_~ —— Lord Carleton.

All defign’d by the incomparable In1c0 Jones, and moft of
them conducted by him, or by bw Son-in-Law Mr. Web, according to
‘Mr. Jones’s Defigns. iO 205 ROR 7
__ Befides many more conducted by other Architects, influenc’d by the fame
happy Genius; fuch as, |

Bow-Church Steeple iz Cheapfide, —— ——~ Built by Sir Chri. Wren.

‘Hotham-Houfe iz Beverley, Yorkthire, ———_- $i Charles Hotham Bart.

4 Melvin-


TREE TT


eee A 6
tain’d and propagated their Concernments in a way
peculiar to themfelves, which the moft Cunning and
the moft Learned cannot penetrate into, though it has
been often attempted; while They know and love one
another, even without the Help of Speech, or when
of different Languages.

“And now the Freeborn Beri es NATIONS,
dif intangled from foreign and civil Wars, and enjoying
the good Fruits of Peace and Liberty, having of late
mich indulg’d their happy Genius for Mafonty of.
every fort, and reviv’d the drooping Lodges of Lendon,
this fair Metropolis Aouritheth, as well as other Parts,.
with feyeral worthy particular Lodges, that have a.
quarterly Communtcation, and an annual grand Affembly, : .
bg the are and may ages Of the moft ancient and.
owes worfhipful


_Melvin-Houfe iz Fife, -——~ .——. Earl of Levin.
Longleate-Houfe iz Wiltthire, Vifcount Weymouth.

' Chefterlee-fiteet-Houfe ix Durham County, ———~= John, Hedworth E/q;

. Montague-Houfe-zz Bloomsbury, London, Duke of Montagu.
Drumlanrig-Caftle a Nithifdalethire,. —— | Duke of Queensbury...
Gaftle-Howard ix Yorkfhire , oe bate F Cate. |
Stainborough-Houfe in ditto, - Earl of Strafford. : (

_ Hopton-Caftle iz Linlithgowfhire, ——~ — Earl of Hopton. - |


Duncomb-Park iz Yorkthire, - Thomas Duncomb Efq;
Mereworth-Caftle iz Kent, Hen. John Fane Ef;
Sterling-Houfe zear Sterling-Caftle, ———— © Duke of Argyle. /
Kinrofs-Houfe iz Kinrofsthire, ——— Sir William Bruce Bari.
Stourton-Caftle i .Wilthhire, Henry Hoar Eg;
Willbury-Houle iz.ditto,. ———- _-———-__ William Benfon Eyfqs
Bute-Caftle za Me of Bute, . Earl of Bute. |

- Walpole-Honfe zear Lin Regis, Norfolk, ———— Hon.-Rob. Walpole E/9;:

Burlington -


BuenueimCaftle at Woodftock, Oxfordfhire, Duke of. Marlborough: i
Chat{worth-Caftle i Derbythire, Duke of Devonfhire. :

- Palace of Hammilton in Clydfdalethire,. Duke of Hammilton. - I
Wanftead-Honfe iz-Epping-Foreft, Effex, Lord-Cafilemain. —.
:


a =
Sie Mead a Se UM aa i ar Bee


C 48 )

‘worfhipful Fraternity are wifely propagated, and the
Royal. Art duly cultivated, and the Cement of the
Brotherhood preferv'd ; fo that the whole Body, re-
fembles a well buile Arch; feveral Noblemen and
Gentlemen of the beft Rank, with Clergymen and learned
Scholars of mott Proféifions and Denominations, ha-
ving frankly. j join’d and fubmicted to take the Charges,
and to wear the Badges of a Free and eAccepted Mafon,
under our prefent worthy Grand-Mafter, the moft noble
PRINCE the Duke of MonTaGuk.


.Weltminfter, Earl of Baufingtos,


Dormitory of King’s School, Weftminfter, The Crown.
Tottenham-Park iz Wiltthire, Lord Bruce.


Thefe three laft ave defign'd and conducted by the Earl of Bok INGTON,
who bids fair'to:be the beft Architeét of Britain, (if he is not fo already)
and we hear his Lordfhip intends to publifh the valuable. Remains aa!
Mr, Inigo Jones, for the Improvement of other Architects, cee


““Builington-Hoate in Pickadilly, St. James =f


Befides more of the fame Roman Style, and yet many more in Imi-
tation-of it, which though they.cannot be reducd to any certain Style, are
flately, eainifk and convenient Structures, notwithfianding the Miftakes
of theiy feveral Architects: And befides the fumptiuous and venerable
Gothick Buildings, paft reckoning, as Cathedrals, Parifh-Churches,
-Chappels, Bridges, old Palaces of the Kings, of the Nobility, of the Bi-
Shops, and the Gentry, known well to Travellers, and to {uch as perufe
the Hiftories of Counties, and the ancient Monuments of great Families,
&c, as many Erections of the Roman Style may be review'd in Mr.
Campbell the Architeét’s imgenious Book, cal’d VirRuvivs
Britanwicus: And if the Difpofition - true ancient Mafonry
prevails, for fome time, with Noblemen, Gentlemen, and learned Men,
(as it is likely it will) this Ist anv will become the MistRESs
of the Earth, for Defigning, Drawing, and Conducting, and capable to
nfwuct all other Nations in all things relating to the Roxaxr ART.

: \ THE


C 49 )


‘ul, Hy B


CHARGES.
FREE- -MASON,


SE xT RA OT ED FROM


The ancient RECDRDS of Loncss

beyond. Sea, and. of thofe. in England, Scotland,

and Ireland, for the Ufe of. the Lodges i in Lonpon:
TO BE READ

At the making of New BRETHREN,.or when the


= M A ST ER thall order it.


The General Hears, VIZ.


mF Gop and Rericion.

eo] IL, Of the Civir Macistrare fapreme and
‘fubordinate. :

Ul. OF LonceEs. ;

———— Iv. OF MaAsTERS, Wardens ues and Ape

_  prentices. |

es “OF he ‘Management of the ot in working. i

ve Of BEM AvIOUR, Vz. oan apg cm


sth} : F 25 4


f at


1. In the Lodge while Aine sue

2. After the Lodge is over and the Brethven' not gone.
"3. When’ Brethren meet er Strange, Pag not in a '
TF ogee* She 5s |

--, 4. In Prefence of Shanes not ot Mafons (OIG 49GX9 SONAR

5- At Home, and in the Neighbourhood. ee eee |
6. Towards a firange Brother, .
? I, Cone


I. Concerning Gop and RELIGION.


A Mafon j is oblig’d dyby his Tete to obey the morttaw and if he
rightly andeviends the Art,he will never bea ftupid Athere, nor an irre-
ligious Libertine. But though in ancient Times Mafons were charg d
in every Covhtryito: be of ‘the Religion of of that: ‘Country or ‘Nation,
Whatever i it was, ‘ydt ‘tis how thought, more, expedient only to oblige:
them to that Religion in which.all Men agree, leaving their particular
Opinions to themfelves ; that is, to be good .. Men and. true, or Men.of
Honour and fonefty, ‘by whatever Denominations of Perfuafions they
may. be: diftinguith’d; whereby Mafonry becomes the Genter of Union;
and the Means of condiliating true Friendfhip among Perfons | that
muft have remain’d at a perpetual Diftance..


Vik Of the Civin Macr¢rRate fupreme Ady
| fubordinate. por. :


ee ee put eal tn n abana NON


tir Mafon i is 2 a peaceable, Subjeé& tothe, Civil Powers, wherever he
refides or works, and is never to be concern’ ’d in Plots and Co; {pi
againft the Peace and Welfare of the Nation, rot” to: |behat A |
undutifully to inferior” Magifiratés ; ‘for as Mafonry bdel th b
injured by War, Bloodfhed, and Confufion, fo- an jent |
Princes have been_ much, difpos'd to encourage ' ‘the’ ‘Cra ies, :
of theit’Peaceablenefs and Loyalty, whereby they "practically % -anfwet'd
the Cavils of their. Adverlaties,, and promoted the. Honour of, the:
Fraternity, who'ever flourifh’d in Times of Peace. So that if a Broa
ther fhould be a Rebel againft the State, he is not to be countenanc’d
in. his Rebellion, however he.may. be.pitied'as.an unhappy Man ; and,
if convidted, of no-otherCrime,, though: the loyal Brotherhood muft
andjought to-difown-his/Rebellion, and give no- Umbrage or Ground.
of political Jealoufy to the Government for the time. being ; = they
cannot expel him aes ithe, hin are a Relation A to it remains.
indefeafible.. :


(sr)


IIL. Of Lopces.


ny Loper. isa Place ‘where Mafons affemble and’ twork : Hence
that ‘Affembly, ” or duly organizd Society. of Mafons, is call’'d a
Lopce, and every Brother ought to belong to one, and to be fub-
ject to its By-Laws and the GENERAL REGULATIONS. Ie is
eicher particular or general, and will be beft underftood by atten-
ding it, and by the ReGulations | ‘of the General or-Grand. Lodge
hereunto annex’d.. In ancient Times, no Majer or Fellow. could
be ablent from it, efpécially when warn’d to appear at it, without in-
curring a fevere Cenfure, until it appear'd to the Mafler and War
dens, that pure Neceffity. hinder’d him.

“Fhe Perfons admitted Members of a Lodge muft be sood aay) true
Men, free-born, and of mature and. difcreet. Age, no Bondmen, ne
Women,’ no immoral or {candalous Men, but of good Report. .


IV.Of Masters, (Wardens, Fellows, and Apprentices.


All Preferment among Majons is grounded upon real Worth.and
perfonal Merit only; that fo the Lords may be well ferved, the Bre-
thren not put to Shame, nor the Royal Craft defpis'd: ‘Therefore: no
Majfter- or Warden is chofen by Seniority, but for his Merit. Ie is impof-

fible to defcribe thefe things in writing, and every Brother muft attend
in his’ Plice, and learn them in a way ‘peculiat to this Fraternity : Only
Candidates may: know, that no Mafter fhould take an Apprentice, ul-
lefs he has fufficient Imployment for him, and unlefs he be a perfea@ —
Youth, having no Maim or Defeé in his Body, that may render him |
uincapable of learning the Art, of ferving his Ma/fer’s Logo, and of being
‘made a Brother, and then a Fellow-Craft in due time, even after: he hiss
ferved fuch'a Term of Yéars as the Cuftom of the Country direéts sand
that he fhould be defended of honeft Parents’; that fo, when other.
wife qualify'd, he may arrive to the Honour of being the WaR DEN,
and then the Maj/ter of the Lodge, the Grand Warden, and at length '
the G ake N p-M A ASTER of all * Loages, Accor ding to his Merit.

G2


No Brother can be a ate aa he has pafs'd the part of a4
Fellow-Craft ; nora Mast ®R until he has aéted as a Warden, nor
GRaND-WaRpDeEN, until he has.been, Maffer. of a Lodge, nor
Grand gpatter unlels he has been a Fellow-Graft before his Elece.
tion, who isalfo to be nobly born, or a Gentleman of the bett Fafhion,
or fome eminent Scholar, or fome curious Architect, or other Antift,
defcended of honeft Parents, and who is of fi ingular great Merit in the
Opinion of the Lodges. And for the better, and eafier, and more ho-
nourable Difcharge of his Office, the Grand-Mafter, has. a Power to
chufe his own Deputy Granv-Master, who mutt be then,
or-muft have been formerly, the Mafier of a particular Lodge, and
has the Privilege of a@ing whatever the GRanp-Masret R,_ his
Principal, fhould act, unlefs the faid Principal be prefent, or intgigele
his Authority by a Letter. |

> Locke Rulers and Governors, {upreme and fubordinate, of the ancient
Lodge, are to be obey’d in their refpective Stations by all the Brethren,
according ta the old Charges and Regulates with all Humility, Reve-
rence, Love, and Alacrity.


_V. Of the Management of the CE. ART in ‘working.
All Mafons | fhall- work honeftly on working Days,. that they may
live creditably on, holy Days ;; and the time appointed by. the. Lavy as
the Land, or confirm’d by Cuftom, fhall be obfervd. -
haley moft expert, of the Fellow-Craft(men thalt be. ale, or. aps
pointed the. Mafter,, or Overfeer of the. Lord’s Work; who is to be
call’d MASTER by thofe that work . under him. - The Craftfinen
are to. avoid all ill Language, and to. all each other. by no difoblis
ging Name, but Brother or Fellow; and to. behave themielves cour-
teoutly within and without the Lodge...

The Mafter, knowing himfelf to. be able of Gunning. fhall eader:
take the Lord’s Work as reafonably as poffible, and truly difpend his _
Goods as if they were his own; nor to give more Wages to ai
Brother or Apprentice than he really may deferve.. :

Both the Batter and the Majons receiving their Wages ‘ables Shall
be faithful to the Lord, and honeftly finifh their Work, whether ‘Task


4 ot


(C353 D


or Fourney; norput the Work:to Task that hath> been ’ accuftom’d to’
Shae

b None Shall difcover. Envy at the, Beofpediey: os fi Brother; nor
pat him, or put him. out of chis::Work;> if he be: capable to
finifh the fame; for no:Manean finish another’s: Work fo much:
to’ the Lord’s Profit, unlefs he be thoroughly: acquainted with: the
Defi igns and Draughts of him that began it.

so When: a: Fellow-Craftfman. is chofen Warden. of the Work vind
the Ma/ler,' he dhall be true both to, Maftcr and: Fellows, Shall. careful--
ly overfee the Work in the Majler’s Abfence'to the Lord’s Profit ; cand,
his Brethren fhall obey him..

“All Mafons employ’d, fhall meekly receive their Wages without
Marmuring or Agee and hot defert the. oye = the Work
is. finilh’d. © :

AL younger. tes “thal te Hora « in 1 working, to” ‘prevent’
fpoiling the “Materials for want of Judgment, and. ‘for enctéafi ing

and. continuing of Brotherly Love. | .


All the. Tools uled i in | working {hall be approved by the Grand


Lod Piet Fa :

ves Labourer thal be employ’d i in ithe! proper Work: of Map
hor fhall #2ee: Matongs work with thofe that are wot ‘free, without an:
trgent Neceffity ; nor fhall they teach Labourers and unaccepted Ma~
fons, as. Si) fhould teach a Brother or’ it


hls: Of Be CkVTO ER Wize aio » oe


p. In the Longe while conttituted. e |

You are not'to hold private Committees, or feparate Converfation,
without. Leave from. the. Mafier, hor to, talk of, any. thing | impertis
nent or unfeem! y; nor NRE the Mafler or Wardens, or any
Brother {peaking to the Mafter: Nor behave yourfelf ludicroufly or
jeftingly while the Lodge is engaged i in what is ferious and’ folemn ;
hor ule any sae tease Famenige ai a Pretence: e Whatloever j
| 7 bue


(sa)
“but torpay due: Revetence'to:your Mafter; : Wardiniysoprc Fellows, and:
a them to worhhip.

od any: Comiphine be! brought, the Brotheri found guilty halk Sued
to ithe Award! and Determination of the Lodge; who are the’ proper’
and.icompetent Judges of:all fuch Controvetfies; »Quniefs you carry, it
by Appeal to the Graw Dp Loper) and: to whom: they ought: to:
be referr’d, unlefs a Lord’s Work be hinder’d the: mean while, ia
which Cafe a particular Reference may:be made; but you. muft never
go'to Law about what concerneth nse oe pcan an sap: Nes
ceffity apparent to the ae adie .\biVl of3 fil lio Won) selisve ¢


Fe r. 6 I


4. Behaviour ates the « bie pce é ower aad the sBretyen not Bone.


~ You may enjoy Preaticives with innocent “Mirth, ‘treating one aos
ther. according. to. Ability, but avoiding all Excels, or forcing any
Brother. to eat or. drink beyond ‘his Inclination, or hindering him from,
going ‘when his Occafiéns call him, or doing or faying any thing offene
five, or that. may forbid an eafy. and free Converfation; for that would
blaft our Harmony, and defeat our laudable Purpofes. Therefore
no private Piques or Quarrels muft be brought within the Door of the
Lodge, fax le{s any, Quarrels about Religion, or Nations, or State Policy,
-we being only, as Mafons, of the Catholick Religion above-mention ‘d;
-we are alfo of all Nations, Tongues, Kindreds, and Languages, and
are refolvd ae all }Doliticks, as what never yet conduc’d to the
Welfare of the Lodge, nor ever will. This Charge has been always
ftrictly enjoin’d and obferv’d ;° but efpecially ever fince the Reformation
in BR1TArIN, or the Diffent and Seceffion of thefe Nations from the
Communion of ROME.
3 . Bebavfoue when Brethren mect without Strangers ‘oak not in a

en Se foun’o.


= on are to falute one another in a courteous manner, as you will
‘be inftruéted, calling each other Brother, freely giving mutual Inftruc-
stion as fhall be thought expedient, without being overfeen or over-
t heard,


C55)


heard, and without encroaching upon-each other, of deropating from
that Refpe& which is due to any Brother, were he not a Mafon: For
though all Majons are as Brethren upon, the fame Level, yet Mafonry
takes no Honour from a Man that he had before; nay rather itiadds
to his Honour, efpecially if he has deferv’d well of the Brotherhood,
wiio bck ge Honour to whony it is due, and avoid ill Manners. 7


* «Behaviour: in s Pref of s TRANGERS Hot’ aatons:


penetrating Stranger fhall not ‘be able to difcover. ot find out what is


not proper to be intimated . -and. fometimes, you. fhall divert . a Dif.
courfe, and. manage, it pindently, for, the Honour of the wafighit:


Bea


£ : - £ 2 : 5 2


ae es ‘Behaviour at it ° M tE, anid your  dighbbnt


ree


>You are to‘aétas S aaciadl i macwal tl wilh: Man} ‘gatlanlicies:oe not .


to let your Family, Friends, and> Neighbours Know: the-Comverns of


the Lodge, @&c.-but svifely to confult: your-own: Honour, _and-that..of
the ancient Brotherhiod; for Reafons noc: to be mention’d:here. - You.
mutt alfo -confult your |Health, ‘by: not: continuing: together’ “too date; .
or toolong-from home,’ afterILodge’ ‘Hours are patt ;.and by avoiding.
of Gluttony or Drunkennefs,~ that: your Families be hot neglé Gad:
or unease Mga ae eta gi haloes a 2 bined dis bas, ,


?


6. Bebaniour Pane ae a Grange ‘BeotBers: i a


rit ay) -TOQ0d)


Shall dived you, that you, may not,‘be impos’d upon by an ignorant
falfe Pretender,. whom you are to-reject with ‘Contempt ; and Derific ions.


and f beware of giving him any. Hints of Knowledge., beat


But if you difcover him to be a true and genuiné Brother, * you" “are:
to refpea him accordingly ; 3and if he isin want, you muft relieve him.


if you can, or elfe dire@ him: ‘how he may {| ‘be reliev'd: You muft em-.


—s —— SKS


“You. fhall be cautious in your Words and Cartage, that the molt:


ou are eet to examine him, i in fuch a "Method? as e Sradenee


904 ploy


iia i ella


ploy ‘him fomeé Days;''or elfereconimeid bini'to be émploy’d.. But
‘you arenot-charged to do’ beyond your Ability, ae to prefer a poot
‘Brother, ‘that-is a.good Man and tye, before hes ‘other poor People in


= fante: pete apcr ioe bk “a 3603 Mal RB MOI 1WOROM on % S83


v4 2ST an rt + £3
et Seo "ec. So 9) i my ey <


4 oar WN All Shee ouse youare, va hlusan and. ‘ea. ae
that fhall be communicated to you in another way ; “cultivating
BrRotTHERL Y=Loowe,: the ‘Foundation and) Cape-ftone, the
Cement and, Glory. of this ancient Fraternity, avoiding all Wrangling
and Quarrelling, © all Slander and Backbiting,. nor permitting | others:
to flander’ any honeft ‘Brother. but def nding his Charadter, and
;doing him all good “Offices , ‘as fat as is confiftent with your Ho:


‘jour ane Safety, and‘no farther. And if any of them do you Injury,


you muft apply to your own or his Lodge; and from: thence you
may appeal to the G. RAND LODGE at the Quarterly Commumcation,
and from thence to-the ammual GRAND ‘Lovet, as has been the
ancient laudable Condud of ‘our Fore: fathers: in every: Nation ;:tiever


taking a legal'Courfe: but when the Cafe cannot be otherwife decided,
and patiently Jiftning: to.the:honeft-and friendly Advice of Majfter_ and
Fellows; when they -would prevent your ‘going tooLaw with Strangers,


or would‘excite-yowito: pur. afpeedy. Period -toalh Law-Suits, that
fo-you may mind the Affair of MasowR vy: with the more Alacrity
and-Succefs;; but! with refpe@to: Brothers or Fellows at Law, the Mafter
and Brethren fhould kindly offer their Mediation, : ‘which ought to be
thankfully fubmitted to by the contending Brethren ; and if that Sub-
miffion is impraéticable;=they mult however ‘carty_on, their Procefs,
or Law-Smt, without Wrath and Rancor (not in the. common Way)
faying or doing nothing which. may hinder Brotherly Love, “atid good
Offices to be renew ‘d and continu d; that all may fee the benign In-
fluence of MASONR Y, as all: true Majons have done from the Begin-
ning of the Koes and will do to the’ End of Time, F103 ae


f ; Pte yee sa
COIS BAY
”


‘amen fo mate ft be.


CH


P.QO.5 TSG IPT,
ne Worthy Brotuer, learned in the Law, has communicated to
the Author (while this Sheet was printing) the Opinion of
oie Gein Fudge Coxe upon. the Ad againft Mafows, 3 Hen. VI. -
Cap. I. which is Printed in this Book, Page 35, and which Quota-
tion the Author has compar’ with the Original, viz.


Coxe’ [nblitesiess third Part, Fol, 996


~ The Cause wherefore this Offence was made Felony, # for that the
geod Courfe and Effect of the Statutes of Labourers were thereby
violated and broken, Now (ais my Lord Coxe) all ihe Statutes
concerning Labourers, before this Act, and whereunto this Act doth vefer,
are vepeal’d by the Statute of 5 Eliz. Cap. 4. whereby the Caule and
End of the makiny of this AG is taken away and confequently this A&-
is become of no Force-or Effect ;. for, ceflante ratione Legis, ceffat ipfa
Lex: And the Indictment of Felony upon this Statute muft contain, that’
thofe Chapters and Congregations were to the violating and breaking.
of the good Courfe and Effect of the Statutes of Labourers; which
now cannot be fo alledg’d, becaufe thefe Statutes be repealed. Therefore :
this would be put out of the Charge of Juftices of Peace, written by
Mafter LamBERT, pag. 227.

This Quotation confirms the Tradition of old Mafons, that this
moft learned JupeeE pads prvaer to thesancient Lodge, and was a
Soa Brother.-


General


Smee firtt by Mr. Groros P asso
Anno 1720, when he was Gran d-Gaker, and ap-
prov'd by the Granp-Lopce on St. Fobn Baptift's
Day, Anno 1721, at Stationer’s-Hall,, Lonpvon;
when the oft noble Prince folha Duke of
Mownvracu_ was unanimoufly chofen’ our
Grand-Watter for the Year enfuing; who chofe
Joun Beat M. D. his Leper pbveegees MasTER;

§ Mr. fofiah Villeneaw were chofen by theLodge

eMr. Thomas Morris, j jun.YGRAN p-Wa RDENS.

_And_ now, . by the Command of our faid Right
WorfhipfulGRanv-MasveR Montacu,, the
Author. of this Book has. compar’d: them ‘wien and
reduc'd them to the ancient Records and immemorial
Ufages of the Fraternity, and ‘digefted them into

_ this new Method, with feveral proper -Explications,
for the Ule of the Lodges in and about. Londow and
We FOES :


=) HE SGyand-Batier, or his Deru y, hath Authority
Ne| and Right, not only to be prefent in any true Lodge,

| - |G] but alfo to prefide wherever he is, with the Ma/fer of
Nee the Lodge on his Left-hand, and to order his Grand-
JERS) Wardens to attend him, who are not to a in parti-
cular Lodges.as es but in his Prefence, and at


‘and


‘the


(3)
the Wardens of that Lodge, or any other Brethren he pleafeth, to at-
tend and a& as his Wardens pro tempore.

‘U.The Masrer of a particular Lodge has the Right and Autho-
ie of congregating the Members of his: Lodge into a Chapter at
pleafure, upon any Emergency or Occurrence, as well as to appoint
the time and place of their ufual forming: And in cafe of Sicknefs,
Death, or neceffary Abfence of the Maier, the fenior Warden fhall
act as Majler pro tempore, if no Brother is prefent who has been Ma/ter
of that Lodge before; for in that Cafe the abfent Majter’s Authority
reverts to the laft Maffer then prefent ; though he cannot aé& until the
‘a Jans Warden has once mogicentas the Lodge, or in his Abfence

unior Warden.

ae The Majfter of each particular Lodge, or one of the Wardens,

or fome other Brother by his Order, fhall keep a Book containing
their By-Laws, the Names of their Members, with a Lift of all the
Lodges in Town, and the ufual Times and Places. of their for-
ming, and all their Tranfaétions that are proper to be written.
IV. No Lodge fhall make more than Five new. Brethren at one
Time, nor any Man under the Age of Twenty-five,. who mutt be alfo
his own Mafter ;. unlefs be aDifpenfation from the oKacamds Mate or
his Deputy.

V. No. Man can ‘ua wore or admitted a Biarsb<: of a ae
Lodge, withgut previous notice one Month before given to the {aid
Lodge, in order to make due Enquiry into the Reputation and .Capa-
city of the Candidate ; unlefs by the Difpenfation aforefaid. —

VI. But no Man can be enter’d a Brother in any particular Lodges
or admitted to be a Member thereof, without the unanimous Confent
of all the Members of that Lodge then prefent when the Candidate is
propos'd, and their Confent is formally ask’d. by the Maffer; and

they are to.fignify their Confent or Diffent in their. own prudent way,,
either virtually or in form, but with Unanimity: Nor is this inherent
Privilege fubjeét to a Dilpenfation; becaufe the Members of 4 particular
Lodge are the beft Judges of it;. and if a fractions Member fhould be.
gnpas "don them,. it might fpoil their Harmony, or hinder their Free-
H 2 | dom ;


= 4 ek aie = - ‘ * wie
OBE ISIE CRT OORT ON 8 EAD nent re eR i RE RTS, NOT PR . — oe T asa eT a NE ae eT a ne EE iy SY ar OREM RT Pee we


C 60 )


dom; or-even bréak:and difperfe the sett which mace to be avoi-


ded by all good and true Brethren.
VII. Every new Brother at his making is decently to cloath the
Lodge, that is, all the Brethren prefent, and to depofite fomething for
the Relief of indigent and decay’d Brethren, as the Candidate fhall
think fit to beftow, over:and above the {mall Allowance ftated by
the By-Laws of that particular Lodge; which Charity fhall be lodg’d
with the Majer or cannes, or the Cafbier, if the Members think
fit to chufe one.

“And the Candidate fhall sis hvieis promife to iain to the Cost
fiitutions, the Charges, and Kegulations, and to fuch other good Ujages


_as fhall be intimated to them in Time and Place cutteint.


_ WHI No Set or Number of Brethren fhall withdraw or feparate
themfelves from the Lodge in which they were made Brethren, or
were afterwards admitted Members, unlefs the Lodge beconies too nu-
merous; nor even then, without a Difpenfation from the Grand-
Mafter or his Deputy: And when they are thus feparated, they muft
either immediately join themfelves to fuch other Lodge as they fhall
like beft, with the unanimous Confent of that other Lodge to which
they go (a above regulated) or elfe they muft obtain the rand


— Mafter’s Warrant to join in forming a new Lodge,


If any Set or Number of Majons fhall take upon vical to
form a Lodge without the Grand-Mafter’s Warrant, the regular Lodges
are not to countenance them, nor own them as fai Brethven and du-
ly form’d, nor approve of their A&ts and Deeds ; but muft treat them.
as Rebels, until they humble themfelves, as the Grand-Mafter thall in
his Prudence dire@, and until he approve of them by his Warrant,


which muft be fignify’d to the other Lodges, as the Cuftom is ais a |


new Lodge is to be regifter'd in the Lift of Lodges.
IX. But if any Brother fo far misbehave himfelf as to render his
Lodge uneafy, he fhall be twice duly admonilh’d by the Majfler or |


_ Wardens ina form’d Lodge ; and if he will not refrain his Imprudence,


and obediently fubmit to the Advice of the Brethren, and reform
visa gives them Offence, he fhall be dealt with according to the By-
Laws


iets S EN ce lS ir a ot a Re ES ia eC ates


“C61 )


Laws of that particular Lodge, or elfe in fuch a manner as the Duar-
terly Communication {hall in their great Prudence think fit; for which a
new Regulatwn may be afterwards made.

K. The Majority of every particular Lodge, when congregated, fhail
have the Privilege of giving Infiruétions to their Mafter and Wardens,
before the aflembling. of the Grand Chapter, or Lodge, at the three
Quarterly Communications hereafter mention’d, and of the Annual Grand
Lodge too; becaufe their Majfter and Filey bev are their Reprefenta-
tives, and are fuppofed to fpeak their Mind.

XL All particular Lodges are to obferve the fame Ufages as much
as poffible ; in order to which, and for cultivating a good Underftan-
ding among Free-Mafons, fome Members out of every Lodge fhall be
deputed ‘to vifit the: other — as often as fhall be thought con-
venient. |

XIL. The Sranv-Lovge ebni fts of, and is fainia by the Majfiers and
Wardens of all the regular particular Lodges upon Record, with the
~Granv-Masrer at their Head, and his Deputy on his Left-hand,

and the Grand-Wardens in their proper Places; and muft have a
QuaRTERLY ComMuNicaTion about Michaelnas, Obvift-
mas, and Lady-Day, in fome convenient Place, as the Grand-Mafter
fhall appoint, where no Brother fhall be prefent, who is not at that
time a Member thereof, without a Difpenfation ; and while he ftays,
‘he fhall not be allow’d to vote, nor even give his Opinion, without
Leave of the — ask’d wi a“ or unlefs it be duly ask’d
by the faid Lodge. =
All Matters are to be deeeiiieds in the Grand-Lode by a Majo-
es of Votes, each Member having one Vote, and the Grand-Maftey
having two Votes, unlefs the fata” Lodge leave any particular thing
to shes Determination of the Grand-Mafter, for the fake of Expedition,
—XUHI. At the faid Quarterly Communication, all Matters that concern
the Fraternity in general, or particular Lodges, or fingle Brethren, are
quietly, fedately, and maturely to be difcours’d oF and tranfacted :
Apprentices muft be admitted Mafers and Fellow-Graji only here, un-
lefs -_ a Difpenfation. Here alfo all Differences, that cannot be made


up


( 62))
up and accommodated privately, nor by a particular Lodge, are to be
ferioufly confidered and decided: And if any Brother thinks himfelf
aggrieved by the Decifion of this Board, he may appeal to the annual
Gedndakaden next enfuing, and leave his Appeal in Writing, with
the Grand-Mafier, or his Deputy, or the Grand-Wardens.

Here alfo the Mafter or the Wardens of each particular nvitae
fhall bring and produce a Lift of fuch Members as have been veel
or even admitted in their particular Lodges fince the laft Communica-
tion of the Grand-Lodge: And there fhall be a Book kept by the.
Grand-Majier, or his Deputy, or rather by fome Brother whom the
Grand-Lodge fhall appoint for SecReTaRy, wherein fhall be re- |
corded all the Lodges, with their-ufual Times and Places of forming,
and the Names of all the Members of each Lodge ; and all the Affairs
of the Grand-Lodge that are proper to be written.

They fhall alfo confider of the moft prudent-and effectual Mashods
of collecting and difpofing of what Money fhall be given to, or lodged
with them in Charity, towards the Relief only of any true Bioshes
fallen into Poverty or Decay, but of none elfe: But every particular
Lodge fhall difpofe of their own Charity for poor Brethren, according
to their own By-Laws, until it be agreed by all the Lodges (in a new
Regulation) to carry in the Charity collected by-them to the Gran p-
Longe, at the Quarterly or Annual Communication, in order to make
a common Stock of it, for the more handfome Relief of poor Brethren.

They fhall alfo appoint a Treasurer, a Brother of good
worldly Subftance, who fhall be a Member of the Grand-Lodge by
virtue of bis Office, and fhall be always prefent, and have Power to
move to the Grand-Lodge any thing, efpecially what concerns his


~ Office. To him fhall be committed all Money rais'd for Charity, or for
any other Ufe of the Grand-Lodge, which he thall write down ina


Book, with the refpedtive Ends and Ufes for which, the feveral Sums
are intended ; and fhall expend or disburfe the fame by fuch a certain
Order fign’d, as the Grand-Lodge fhall afterwards agree to in a new
Regulation : But he fhall not vote in chufing a Grand-Mafter or War-
dens, though i in every other Tranfa@tion. As in like manner the Secre-

tary


satin aeeeaati i ey ol ced Seite aa a ih. ee a


( 63 )
tary fhall be a Member of the Grand-Lodge by virtue of his Office,
and vote in every thing except in chufing a Grand-Marfter or Wardens.

The Treafurer and Secretary {hall have each a Clerk, who mutt be a
Brother and Fellow-Craft, but never muft bea Member of the Grand-
Lodge, nor {peak without being allow’d or defir’d.

The Grand-Mafler, or his Deputy, fhall always rombigad athe
Treafurer and Secretary, with their Clerks and Books, in order to fee
how Matters go on, and to know what is expedient to be done upon
any emergent Occafion.

Another Brother (who muft be a Fellow-Crafi) fhould be appoin-
ted to look after the Door of the Grand-Lodge; but Shall be no
Member of it.

But thefe Offices may be farther explain'd by a new Regulation,
when the Necefiity-and_ — of —_ ony more ngiewh than
at prefent to the Fraternity.

XIV. If atany Gran ve DGE, ftated or --occafionaly virial

or annual, the @yand-MWatter and his Deputy fhould be both abfent,

then the prefent Majfler of a Lodge, that has been the longeft a Free-

Mafon, thall take the Chair, and prefide as Grand-Majter pro tempore ;

and {hall be vefted with all his Power and Honour for the time; pro-

vided there is no Brother prefent that has been Grand-Majter former-

ly, or Deputy Grand-Majier ; for the laft Grand-Majier prefent, or elfe

the laft Deputy prefent, fhould —_ of right take place in the “sig :
fence of the prefent Grand-Majter and his Deputy.

XV. In the Granv-Lopce none can a@ as Widens. but the
Grand-Wardens themfelves, if prefent; and if abfent, the Grand-
Majer, or the Perfon who prefides in his Place, fhall order private War-
dens to att as Grand-Wardens pro tempore, whofe Places are to be fup-
ply'd by two Fellow-Craft of the fame Lodge, call’d forth to aa, or
fent thither by: the particular Mafter thereof; or if by him omitted,

then they fhall be cali’d by the ars that fo the =
Lodge may be always compleat. — a

XVI. The Granp-WaRDENS, or any selhag a are fir t to ad- i
vife-with the Deputy about the. Affairs of the Leap or of the Brethren,

are | and


SSS SSS See
Le Se
)


( 64 )


and not to apply to the Grand-Majter without the Knowledge of the
Deputy, unlefs he refufe his Concurrence in any certain neceflary Affairs.
in which Cafe, or in cafe of any Difference between the Depaty, and
the Grand-Wardens, or other Brethren, both Parties are to go by Con-
cert to the Grand-Mafier, who can eafily decide the Controverfy and
make up the Difference by virtue of his great Authority. |

The Grand-Majier fhould receive no.Intimation of Bufinefs concer-.
ning Mafonry, but from his Deputy firft, except in fuch certain Cafes as his.
Worfhip can well judge of; for if the Applicationto the Grand-Majfter
be irregular, he can eafily order the Grand-Wardens, or any other Bre-
thren thus applying, to wait upon his Deputy, who is to prepare the
Bufinefs {peedily,. and to lay it orderly before his Wor fhip.

XVII. No Gyand-AWa ter, Deputy Grand- Maher: Graak Wieden Mien:
fuver, Secretary, or whoever aéts for them, or in their ftead pro tempore,,
can at the fame time be the Majfter or Warden of a particular Lodge;
but as foon as any of them has honourably difcharg’d his Grand Office,
he returns tothat Poit or Station in his —_— Enodge; —— which
he was call’d to officiate above.

XVUL Ifthe Deputy GrawpMaster be fick, of snceil
rily abfent, the Grand-Ma/fter may chufe any Fellow-Craft he pleafes to:
be his Deputy pro tempore: But he that ischofen Deputy at the Grand-
Lodge, and the Grand-Wardens too, cannot be difcharg’d without the: ~
Caule fairly appear to the Majority of the Grand-Lodge ; and the-
@anv-Warter, if he isuneafy, may callaG@ranv-Lopes on pur-.
pofe'to lay the Caufe before them,. and to-have their Advice and Con-.
currence ::In which cafe, the Majority of the Grand-Lodge, if they.


cannot reconcile the after and his Deputy or his Wardens, are to con-.


cur. inallowing the Wafer to difcharge his faid Deputy or his faid War=.
dens, and to chufe another Deputy immediately ; and the faid Grand-.
Lodge thail chufe other. Wardens in that. Giles vom —— and Peace:
may. be preferv’d..

XIX, If the Ga nd-apatter wer abule his Power and render Binal
felf unworthy. of the Obedience. and SubjeQion of the Lodges; he:
fhall be treated inva. way and mannerto. be agreed. upon ina new Regu...
ty | lation ; 3


¢ 65)


lation; becaufe hitherto.the ancient Fraternity have had no occafion for
it, their former GRawp-MastTerRs haying all behaved themfelves
worthy of that honourable, Office...

XX. The. Grand-Mafter, with his. Deputy and Wardens, fhall (at
leaft once) go round and vifit all the Lodges about Town during his
Mafierfhip. | |

XXL If the ‘Gyand-agatter die during his Mafter hip, or r by Sick-
ne{s, or by being beyond Sea, or any other way fhould be render’d un-
capable of dife whist his Office, the Derury, or in his Abfence,
the Senior Grawp-Wak DEN, or inhis Abfence the Funior, or in his
Abfence any three prefent Majfters of Lodges, hall join to congregate the
Grawnv-Lopce immediately, to advife together upon that Emer-
gency, and to fend two of their Number to invite the laf GRrawn p-
MastTeER to refume his Office, which now in courfe reverts to him; ;
or if he refufe, then the ext la/t, and fo backward : But if no former
Grand-Mafter can be found, then the Deputy hall a as Pr incipal, un-
til another is chofen; or if there be no Deputy, then the oldeft Mafter.

XXIL The Byethen of all the Lodges in and about. _ London
and. Weftminfter, fhall meet at an Annuat COMMUNICATION
and Feaft, in fome convenient Place, on St. Jou Baptifi’s Day, or
elfe on St. J oun Evangelif’s Day, as the Grand-Lodge fhall think fit
by a new Regulation, having of late Years met on St. Fohn Baptifi’s

Day: Provided, 2
: . The. Majority of the Majters cad Wardens, nets the Ged Majier,
hid Deputy and Wardens, agree at their Owarterly Communication, three
‘Months before, that there fhall be a Feafi, and a General green =|
tion of all the Brethren: For if either the Grawd-Majier, or the Ma-
jority of the particular Majflers, are againft it, it muft.be dropt for that
‘Time.

But whether there fhall be a . Feaft for all the ae of not, yet
the @ant Lodge muft meet in fome convenient Place annually
on St. Joun’s Day; or if-it be Sunday, then on the next Day,
in order to chufe every Year a new GRAN D-Masrer, Deputy, and
Wardens. si ba

I XXL,


( 66 )


XXIII. If it be thought expedient, and the GRinp-Masre R;
with the Majority of the Mafters and Wardens, agree to hold a Grawo


_ Feast,,according to the ancient laudable ‘Cuftom of Mafons, then


the @zanv-ctlavens fhall have the care of | preparing the Tickets,
feal’d with the Grand-Majier’s Seal, of difpofing of the Tickets, of
receiving the Money for the Tickets, of buying the Materials of the
Feafi, of finding out a proper and convenient Place to feaft in; a
of every other thing that concerns the Entertainment.

But that the Work may not be too burthenfome to the two Grant:
Wardens, and that all Matters may be expeditioufly and fafely’ mana
ged, the Grand-Majfter, or his Deputy, fhall have power to nominate
anid appoint a certain Number of Stewards, as his Worfbip thall think
fit, to a& in concert with the two Grand-Wardens ; a\\ things relating
to the Feaft being decided: amongft them by a Majority br Voices
except the Grand-™Mafter or his Deputy interpofe by a particular Dr
rection or Appointment. ”

XXIV. The Wardens and Stewards thall, in due time, wait upon
the Grand-Mafter, or his Deputy, for Direétions and Orders about the
Premiffes ; ;. but if his Worfoip and his Deputy are fick, of neceffarily ab-.


fent, they fhall call together’ the Mujfters and Wardens of Lodges to.


meet on purpofe for their Advice and Orders ; or elfe they may. take
the Matter wholly upon themfelves, and do the beft they can.
The Grand-Wardens and. the Stewards are to. account’ for all the


‘Money they receive, or expend, to the Grand- Lodge, after Dinner, OF


when the Grand-Lodge fhall think fit to receive their Accounts.

If the Grand-Mafter pleafes, he may in due time fummon all.
the Majfters and Wardens of Lodges to. confult with them about orde-
ring the Grand-Feajft, and about any Emergency or accidental thing:
relating thereunto,, that may requir. Advice ; or pe to. take it upon
him(elf-altogether.

XXV. The Maflers of Lodges fhall each appoint one experienc’d
and difcreet Felloww-Craft of his Lodge, to compofe a ComMMITTE E>.
confiting of one from every Lodze, who thall meéet to receive, ina
convenient Apartment, every Perfon that brings a Ticket, and fhall.


=


have -


( 67)


have Power to difcourfe him, if they. think fit, in order to admit hit)
or debar him, as they fhall fee caufe: Provided they fendino Man away
before they: have acquainted all the Brethren within Doors with the
Reafons thereof, to avoid Miftakes; that fo no true Brother may be
debarr’d, nor, a falfe Brother, or mere Pretender, admitted. This
Camninten muft meet very early on St. Fobn’s Hey 3 at the e Place, even
before any Perfons come with Tickets. 7

XXVI. The Grawnp-Masrer_hhall appoint two or more
truftp Wethewto be Porters, or Door-keepers, who are alfo to be
early. at the Place, for fome good Reafons ; and who are to be at the
Command of the Committee,

XXVIL The Grand-Wardens, or the ae fhall, appoint before-
hand fuch a. Number of Brethren to ferve at Table as they think fit
and. proper for that Work ; and they may advife with the Maflers and
Wardens-of Lodges about the moft proper Perfons, if they pleafe, or
may take in fuch.by their Recommendation ; for none are to ferve that
Day, but free and accepted Majons, that the Communication may be
free and harmonious.

XXVIIL All the Members of the. tea hae, muft be at the
Dias long before Dinner, ;with the ‘Grand-Majter, or his Deputy, at
their Head, who hall retire, and form themfelves. . And. this is. done
in order, :


1. To receive any Appeals duly lodg’d, as above regulated, that the
Appellant may be heard; and the Affair may be amicably decided. be-
fore Dinner, if -poffible ; but if it cannot, it muft be.delay’d till after
the ew Grand-Mafter is elected;. and if it cannot be decided.after
Dinner, it may be delay’d, and weferr’d to:a'particular Committee, that
fhall quietly adjaft it, and make Report to the next Qyarterly Commu
nication, that Brotherly-Love may-be preferv’d. '

2. To preventiany Difference or Difguft which may be feared to arife

that Day ; that no Interruption may be given to the Harmony and
~ Pleafure-of the GRanp Feast. |

3. To confult about whatever concerns the Decency and Decorum

cee of


( 68 )


of the Grand-Affembly, and to prevent all. oe and ill Manners,
the Affembly being promifcuous. |
4. To receive and confider of any good ‘Sesion: or any momen-
tous and important Affair, that fhall be brought from the particular
ads we their sees the feveral Majters and Wardens,


XXIX. After aioe hanes are aifewlds the Granv-Watter: and his
Deputy, the Grand-Wardens, or the Stewards, the Secretary, the Ivea-
furer, the Clerks, and every ater Perfon, fhall withdraw, and leave
the Mafters'and Wardens of the particular Lodges alone, in order to con
fult amicably about ele@ing a New Granp-Masrer,’ or continuing

the prefent, if: they have not done it the Day before ; and if they are
unanimous for continuing the prefent Grand-Matter, hig Worfhip hall
be: call’d- in, and herably defir'd ‘to do the Fratermty the Honour: of
ruling: ‘them for the Year enfuing: And after Dinner it will be known
whether he accepts of it or not: Forvit fhould not be difcover'd Bit
by the Election itfelf.

XXX. Then the Ma/fers and Woda: and ai che Buctlarey may
converfe- promifcuoufly, or as they pleafe-to-fort together, until. the
Dinner i is coming in, when every Brother’takes his Seat at Table. ~

-XXXE Sometime after Dinner the GRAND‘Lovce is form’d;
not in Retirement, but in. the Prefence of all the Brethren, who yet
are not Members of it, ana muft not hnensione ge until, ey are de-
fir’d and-allow’d. .

XXXL If the @Baanv- apatter i laft Year: ae concn’ wijehy <thte
Mafter and Wardens in private} before Dinner, to°continue for the

Year enfuings then ome of the Grand-Lodge, “deputed for’ that: pur:
pole, fhall reprefent to all the Brethren his Woxrswrr’s good Govern
ment, Oe; And, turning to him, fhall, in'the Name of the Granda-
Lodge, humbly requeft-him to do'the Frat rwrry the great Honour
(if nobly born; if not) thegreat Kundnefi-of continuing to: be their
Grand-Majfter for the Year enfuing. And his Worfhip ‘declaring’ his
Confent by a Bow or a Speech, as he-pleafes, the faid deputed Mem.
bey of the Grawv-Lonce fhall proclaim him Gand-AWalker,and
to = all:


ii a i na ha iN ee I a A AE EET tt CREOLE ENE TEE IOS Sah Aaa ot oe Menace a ti


( 69 )


all the Members of the Lodge fhall falute him in due Form. And all
the Brethren fhall for a few Minutes have leave to declare their Satif-
faction, Pleafure, and Congratulation.

XXXIIL But if either the Maffer and Wardens have not! in private,
this Day before Dinner, nor the Day before, defir’d the laft Sand-
Matter to continue in the Mafter/hip another Year; or ifhe, when de-
fir'd, has not confented: Then,

The lat Granpo-MasTeR hall nominate his Succeffor for the
Year enfuing, who, if unanimoufly approv’d by the Grand-Lodge, and
if there prefent, fhall be proclaim’d, faluted, and congratulated the
new Grand-Dpafket as above hinted, and immediately inftall’d _ the
lafit Grand-Mafter, according to Ulage.

XXXIV. But if that Nomination is not unanimoufly approv’d, the
NeW Grand-Majter fhall be chofen immediately by Ballot, every Majier
and Warden writing his Man’s Name, and ‘the laft Grand-Mafter wri-
ting his Man’s Name too; and the Man, whofe Name the la/t Grand-
Majier fhall firft take out, cafually or by chance, fhall be Gr an p-
Master for the Year enfuing; and if prefent, he fhall be pro-
claim’d, faluted, and congratulated, ‘as above hinted, and forthwith
inftall’d by che lafi: Grand-Mafier, according to Ufage. A.

XXXV. The laff Granp-Maste R ehis: ditto or the net
Grawnvp-Masrer thus inftall’d, fhall next nominate and’ appoint
his Deputy Grand-Matter, either the laft or anew one, who ‘hall be
allo declar’d, faluted-and congratulated as above hinted. =

: The: Grand-Mafter othall alfo nominate’ the new: G RAN DE
WarpeENs, and if unanimoufly approv’d by ‘the’ Grand-Lodge;
fhall be declar’d, faluted, and congratulated, - as above hinted ; but
if not, they fhall be chofen by Ballot, in-the fame way as the Grind
Mafter-: As the Wardens of private Lodges are alfo to be chofen’ by
Ballot in each Lodges if the shereees: eee do not agree to their
Mafter’s Nomination.

XXXVI. But if the iaie OTHER, at ie selects Grand-
Majier fhall nominate for his Succeffor, or whom the Majority of the


Grand-Lodge {hall happen to chufe by Ballot, .is, by Sicknefs or other:
neceflary,


(70)


neceflary Occafiony, abfent: from’ the: Grand-Feajt, he cannot be. pro-


claim’d the New, Granb-MaAsrer, unlefs the old Grand-Mafler, |


or fome of the Mafters and Wardens of the ©yand-Lovge can vouch,
upon the Honour of a Brother that. the {aid Perfon, fo nominated or
chofen,, will. readily accept of the (faid: Offices. in: which cafe the old
®rand-MPatter shall ad as Proxy, and thall/nomirate the, Deputy and
Wardens in his Name, and in his Name alfo receive the iad Honours,
Homage, and Congratulation.

| XXXVI. Then the Grand-Wafter fhall ala pe iba Felloaw
Graft, or Apprentice to fpeak, directing his Difcourfe to his Wor/hip 5,08
to make any Motion for, the good . ae the Fraternity, which shall be
either immediately confider’d and finifh’d, or elfe refert’d to the Con-
fideration.of the Grand-Lodge at. rei next Frogeneusagions ftated or
occafional.,. When that-is over,

XXXVUL The. Grawp-Mastsr “or, risk Deputy, or eee ve
ther appointed -by -him, hall harangue all. the Brethren, and give
them, good Advice: And laftly, after fome other Tranfaétions, that
cannot.be written in any Language, the Brethren may go away or ftay
longer, as they pleafe.

xxx. Every. Annual GRAN oe opce has an inherent Power
and Authority to.make mew Regulattons, or to alter thefe, for the real


Benefit .of this ancient Fraternity: Provided always that the old
Lano-Mar xs be carefully preferv'd, and that fuch Alterations and


new Regulations be propofed and agreed to at the third Quarterly Com-
munication, preceding. the Annual Grand Feaft; and that they be
offered alfo to the Perufal of all the Brethren before Dinner, in wri-
ting, even of the youngeft Apprentice ; the Approbation and Confent
of the Majority of all the Brethren prefent being abfolutely neceflary
to make the fame binding and obligatory ; which muft, after Dinner,


and after the new Grand-Majter is inftall’d, be folemnly defir'd ; as it


was defir’d and obtain’d for thefe RrEcuULAT1owNs, when propos'd
by the Granno-Lopee, to about 1 50 ieshien, on St. Fobn Bap-
tift's Day, 492 i


POST-


i
|
|


i
)


CW)
POSTSCRIPT.


Here follows the Manner of | conftituting a New
“Lodge, as practis\d by his Grace the Dux of
Wuarvrov, the prefent Right Wor fhipful Grand-
- gpatter, according to the ancient Ulages of Mafons.


New Longe, for avoiding many, Irregularities, fhould. be fo-
lemnly conftituted by che Grand-Mafter, with his Deputy and
Wardens ; or in the Grand-Mafter’s Abfence, the Deputy fhall aét for
his Worfhip, and fhall chufe fome Majter of a Lodge to affift him ; ot
in cafe the Deputy is abfent, the’ Grand-Mafter {hall call forth fome
Mafler of a Lodge to a& as Deputy pro tempore.»
‘The Candidates, or the new Matter and Wardens, being yet among
the Fellow-Graft, the Grawp-Masrer fhall ask his Deputy if he
has examin’d them, and finds the Candidate Mafter well skill’d in the
noble Scvenceand the royal Art; and duly inftruéted in our Myfteries, Ole
And the Deputy anfwering in the affirmative, he fhall (by the
Grand:Maftet’s Order) take the Candidate from among his Fellows,
and prefent him to the Grand-Majfter; faying, Right worfhipful
Granv-Master, the Brethren here defive to be form’d into anew
Lodge ; and I trefent this my worthy Brother to-be their Matter, whom
[ know to be-of good Morals and great Skill, true and trufiy, and a Lower
of the whole —— » wherefoever difpers’d over the Face of We
Earth,
Then the Gran pM. ASTER, placing the Candidate. on aes left
Hand, having ask’d and obtain’d the unanimous Confent of all the


.. Brethren, fhall fay 5 lconfinute and form thefe good Brethren into a new


Lodge, and appoint you “the Mafter of it, not doubting of your Capacity
and Cave to prefervethe Cement of the Lope #, &c. with fome other
Expreffons that are proper and wal on — —— but not proper.
to be written. ; J 03 u |


Upon:


-
a. 72 ) |

Upon this the Deputy fhall rehearfe the Charges of a Majler, and the
Granv-MastTer hall ask the Candidate, faying, Do you fubmit to
thefe Charges, as Mafters have done in all Ages? And the Canpipare
fignifying his cordial Submiffion thereunto, ” the @eand-ABatter fhall;
by certain fignificant Ceremonies and ancient Ufages, inftall him, and
prefent him ih the Conftitutions, the Lodge-Book, and the Infiruments
of his Office, not all together, but one after another ; and after each
_ of them, the Grand-Majier, or his Deputy, Shall rehearfe the fhort and
pithy Charge that is fuitable to the thing prefented.


After this, the Members of this ew Lodge, bowing all together _


to the Grand-Majier, fhall return his Worfbip Thanks, and serie didtely

do their Homage to their nezww Majter, and fignify their Promife-of Sub-
jection and Obedience to him by the ufual Congratulation. -

The Deputy and the Grand Wardens, and any other Brethren pre-

fent, that are not Members of this new Lodge, fhall next congratu-

late the new Mafter; and he fhall return his becoming Acknowledg-


ments to the Granp-MasTeErR ce and to the ‘ret in their


Order.
Turn the Grand-Majier defires. the new: Mafier t to enter imme-


diately upon the Exercife of his Office, in chufing his Wardens: And
the New Master calling forth two Fellow-G ah prefents them to
‘the Grand-Majter for his Approbation, and t to the new w Lodge ins their
Confent. And that being granted,

The fenior or junior GR AND-WAR DEN, OF fome Brother fie hit
fhall rehearfe the Charges of Wardens; and the Candidates being {o-
Jemnly ask’d by the vee Majier, fhall fignify their Submiffion ictbtinta:

Upon which the New MasrTeR, prefenting them with the In-
firuments of their Office, fhall, in due Form, inftall them in their pro-
per Places; and the Brethren of that new Lodge fhall fignify their Obe-
dience to the new Wardens by the ufual Congratulation.


And this Lovee being thus compleatly conftituted, fhall be
regifter’'d in the Grand-Majier’s Book, and by his Order
notify’d to the other Lodges.


Bia
Ry


| apt chk Abe Pig Pro Ree Orie: At se EtO.oINew bcs


Aid. Dereagy by the Confufions occafion’d in the Saronv, Dantth,
A ahd MemWatt’ Wars; the Records of Mafons have'been much
— vitiated, the’ Free Mafons of England twice thought it necefla-
| ry to correé their Constirurions; “CHanees,* and R@uLaTions ;
| firft in the Reign of Kg Atuenstan, the @aror, and long after
in. the Reign of King Evwarop lV. the oman: AndWuHeEReEAsS
| the old Confistutions in England have been much interpolated, mangled,
| and imiferably corrupted, not only with falfe Spelling, but even with
4 many falfe Facts and ‘grofs-Ertors in Hiffory and Chronology, through
Length of Time, and the Ignorance of Tran{cribers,in the dark illiterate
Ages, before the Revival of Geometry and ancient Archite€ture, to the
great Offence of allthe learnéd and judicious Brethren, whereby alfo
the Ignorant have been'deceiv'd; «2s. as 2
-. And our late, Worthy Qrand-Bafter,, his Grace the Duxe of .
Monracu, having order’d the Author to perufe, correét, and digeft,
- into a new and better Method, the Hiffory, Charges, and Regula-
. tions, of the ancient FRATERNITY; Hehas accordingly examin’d
q feveral Copies from Italy and Scotland, and fundry Parts of England,
i, ~ and from thence, (tho’ in many things erroneous) and from feveral other
| ancient Records of Majous, he has drawn forth the above-written ez
- Constitutions, with, the G@bhacges and General Regulations, And
_. the Author having fubmitted the whole to the Perufal and. Corre@ions
of the late and prefent Der uty Grand-Maflers, and of other learned
Brethren; and alfo of the Majfters and Wardens of particular Lodges
at their Qucrterly Communication: He did regularly deliver them to
the late Grawp-Masrer himfelf, the faid Duxet of Monracu,
| for his Examination, Corre€tion, and Approbation; and His Grace,
by the Advice of feveral Brethren, order’d the fame to be handfomely
printed for the ule of the Lodges, though they were.not quite ready
for the Prefs during his Maflerfhip. co 5420 31 -
: Tueirerore We, the prefent GRanpv-MasteER of the Right
| ~ Worthipful and moft ancient Fraternity of Free and Accepted Mayfons,
| the Deputy Grand-Mafter, the.Grand-Wardens, the Mayters ‘and
Wardens of particular Lodges (with the Confent of the Brethren and
Fellows in and about the Citizs of Lonpon'and WestMINSTER
- having alfo perufed this Performance, Do yorn our laudable Prede-
ceffors in our folemn Approlation thereof, as what We believe will
fully anfwer the End propofed; all the valuable Things of the old
Records being retain’d, the Errors in Hi/tory and Chronology corre&ted,
the falfe Facts and the improper Words omitted, and the whole’ di-
. gefted in a new and better Method. K And


i


Cm)


And we ordain That thefe be receiv’'d insevery particular Lodge un-
der our Cognizance, as the ONLy Constitutions of Free and
Accepted Mafons amongft us, to be read at the making of mew Bre-
thren, or when the Mafter fhall think fit; and which the mew Brethren
fhould perufe before they are made. -_ a


Eu itieDene WHART on Grand-Qatter, -
]. |. DES AGULIC Rob. te Dando Fuk. - S.
Deruvy Grand-Mafter


—Fothua Limon


Ciiliam hawkinss


Grand- Wardens.


And the Mafters and Wardens of particular Lodges, viz.


1 Tuomas Morats, fen. Mafler.
"John Briftow Vr, 9
Abraham bees Seige
Il. Rrcu arp Hait Mafter.
Philip Wolverftow Uz,
Sohn Doyer § Co
TW. Joun Turner Matter.
~ Anthony Sayer 0 7, 7,
Edward OTS aden.
TV. Mr-Georet Payne Mafter-
Stephen Hall M-D.i7- 7.
Francis Sorell Efq; b pvardens


V. Mr. Mara. Binxueap Mafter.


Francis Bavly alee
Nicholas 2 nam ¢ Varden
VI. Wivut AM Reap Matter.
Solu Glover 2
Robert Cove yy Wardens a
VIL.Henay Branson Mafter.
- Henry Lug wee :
Joba Townfben jg Wardens.
~VULL. Mafter.


Fouathan Sif a7,
Fobin Shipton 1 War ders.


Eman Bowen? pro

_ Soba Heath birardens

€ Matter.
ohn Lubton t igs
Richard Smith War dens.


| Walter Greenwood Efq
ee XVIIL Taomas Harsin Matter.
1X.Gtorer Owen M.D. Matter. |


XI. Francis Earl of Darxzrra Mafter.


Capt. Andrew Robinfon :
Col. Thomas Inwood bm ‘ardens,


-|XILJoun Beat M. D.and F.R.S.


Matter.
Edward Pawlet Efqs


Charles More E{q; b rardens.


‘XIII Tuomas Morris jun, Malter. —


Fofeph Ridler


Fohu Clark Wardens.

|X1V. Tuomas Rosse Efq; Maftere
Thomas Grave Wardens.’ 2
Bray Lare :

XV. Mr. Jonn Sazruernp Mafter.

Fohn Senex “
Ffobn oy Wiatday, :

IXVIL Joun Grorces Efg; Mafter-


Robert Gray E{q;

Charles Grymes Efq;5 Wardens,
XVII. James Anperson A. M. 7

‘The Autyar of this Book. ¢Mafter:

Gwinn Vaughan Efq; t Wa aL.


‘William Attley t Wardens.


Sohn Saxon -s
XIX.Roszar Carzern Mafter.
Yaac Mansfield War das. |


William Bly


XX.Joun GorMAN Matter.


Charles Garey


Edward Morphey bu ardens.


(75)
MAS TERS - SONG:
‘History of MASONRY.


By the Authaz.


To be fung with a Chorus, when the Master fhall give leave;
either one Part only, or all one as he eae


Pp AR Tek


; Iv. ae
D AM, the Ea ét humane Kind, {So kbia the gen *ral Deluge none

A Created with GeomeTRY Were fav’d, but Mafons and their

Imprinted on his Royal Mind, (Wives
InftrnGed foon his Progeny Ansd all Mankind from them alone

Carn and Seru, who then improv'd Defcending, Architefure thrives;
The lib’ral Science in the Art — {Por they, when multiply’d amain,

Of Arcuirecrure, which they lov’'d, | Fit to difperfe and fill the Earth,
And to their Depa. did Korat InSuinar’s large andlovely Plain _

dh 4 To Maso pee ee


Cain a City fair and aig V.

Firft built, and call’d it Confecrate, _ | For mon of Mankind were Eiiplog "d
~ From Enocu’s Name, his eldelt Son, | To build the City and the Tow’r; —

~ Which ail his Race did imitate: _ | The Gex’ral Lodge was overjoy’d, -

But godly ENocH, of Seth’s Loins, In fach Effests of Mafons Pow’ cs.
Two Columns rais’d with mighty

And all his Family enjoins (Skill:
True Spin to fullfl.


TY. |
Our Father Noan next appear ‘d,*
A Mafon too divinely taught ; —
And by divine Command uprear’d
‘The Arx, that held a goodly Fraught:
Twas built by true Geometry, :


Their Maker to confound their Phor;

Yet tho’ with Tongues confus’d they
~ ({poke,,

The learned Art they ne’er forgot. \
7 Chong. -
Who can unfold the Royal Art? —

Or fing its Secrets in a Song ?
They're fafely kept in Mafon’s Hear b) !

A Piece Of Architecture aes And to the ancient Lodge belong. 3
Helpt by his Sons, in xumber Ture E,4 [Stop here to drink the prefent Gaanv-


Concurring in the grand Defign. Masrer’s Health. © ng
K 2 PART


——


SS


=


- Nor. SHEM; and thofe that did facceed


PART tt my


ee 1. Hoyt ciel vali: B
ant Pe fill cm
| US. when from B AB se C anaan, the le arn’ d Pusnicransikn —
PEM’ |The Tribes of Jra’l better skil’d
~ Ip eeogpore firm and true.


In Clorites to ‘dilant Cimes,
All Mafons true, who could rehéarfe 5i Js
Their Works to thofe- of after Times; — Ys Vase
King NiMROD fortify’ d his Realm, |For Dacon’s Houfe in Gaza Town,
‘By €aftles;-Tow’rs,-and Cities fair +}-~ _Artfully_pr opt-by CoLu MN.S.2w05-
Mrrzra’m, who rul’d at Egyp’s Helm 1, | BY Samson's mighty Arms pull’d down
Built rsa “nage there. ‘|; On Lords Philiftiaw, whom it flew ;
srewlyp tieady adr eanail oe Tho’ ’ewas,the fineft Fabrick rais’d ~
4 _ By Canaan’s Sons, could not compat
compare.


Nor ju APHET, and his gallan Breed, With the Creator’ s Temple prais’d,.


he ae
Did lefs in Meforry Bee A he A For glorious Su eeet hc and Stru@ure
Mem oe re Aas
VIL


| But here ' we € flop: a wnae to an


eas Masrén’s Health and Wardens /
“(both ;


And warn you all to fhun te Coatt
Of Bi 3 nh tm Fame and)


To promis "d Bleflings by] Entail ;
For Father Azam, brought from UR”

Geometry, ‘the Science good ; .
Which. he reveal’d, without demur, .

“To all defeending from is Blood:


ALL oe ek
“ny ‘ oe fe | ee (Troth ;
Nay. Ja A co B 's. Race. at 1 ie His. Soren ‘once to. Ww. I = EB “difelos’ Gus


To Jay Ade the Shepherd’s Crook y His sSeegte was fled, his cs
Pf : am


To ufe Geometry were brought, 45 :
Whillt under Phar oh’s cruel Yoke; To ¢ crue Foes he was expos "d,


oe yet


Till Moses ‘Mufter- Mafon role, mes
And. led the H oly Lovee from], Chang. _ -
(thence, Who can hid the Royal aa >:
All Mafons eraiid® to whom he chofe,| Or fing its Secrets iz a Song § ?


His curious Learning to difpenfe. | They’ ve Jafely, kept it Maton’ Ss jae Ack T,
sak, Degg hs ae any od . And: to the ancient Lodge. belong.


AnoLIAB and BpzAarenis ye eee)
Infpired Men, the Tent uprear ‘ds
Where the Shechinab chofe to dwell,

And. Geometrick Skill appear'd: «


Pa
aehpts gE
5 & ode RT


ap bebe We dhink” tie Eeah of the.
Mafter and Wardens of this gue


beak


cular pee Ee


ad


4 Rn Po)


eer Sl a anne aps : = Pepa oe
akg i ala gt De rN a oa Sais — 7 s
Se nt ete ag Sra Zi = etait
= nia mela aia a


. =


“And never was a ake nam: ‘d. ,


PART


| cat feat A Ae Ty


Where wife Vrrruvivs, Mafter prime.
E fing, of Masons. ancient} Of Architedts, the Art improv’d,
_ (Fame) In Great. Aucustus’ peaceful Time, -
"When fof e Thoufand, rotting When Arts and Artifts were belov’d.


ftood,| .


Under the Masters of great Name, V.
Three Thoufand and fix Hundred good, They broug the To from Ge


a see eee EE a (Eaft ;
mee - = i — ie ame “And’as they made the Nations yield,
nd Geral Master-Mason too; -
AOE ee vawinael, Fei They fpread it thro’ the North and72/2,
Hike Salen built’ By Miefans trues Ol, And taught t the World the Art to build;
Semel eye ae mind atc Witnefs their Citadels and Tow’rs,
Ty, | : To fortify their. Legions fine,
_ The Royal Art was then divine, | Their. Temples, Palaces, and Bow’ Sy
The Crafifmen. counfell ’dfrom above, That. ons the.: Ma Ons GRAND:
The Temple did all Works outthine, : (Desicn.
| | ‘The wond’ ring World did allapprove Sree di :
| _ . Ingenious Men, from every Place, ate Thus ca Eaftern Ki ings, and fome
Came to furvey the glorious Pile; | Of, Abram’s “Race, and Monarchs
And, when return’d, began'to trace,” a (good,


And imitate its ies Sik, EL RS + Jor Egipe, Syrid,, Greece, and Rome, _ “
, IL. eh od i ar rue “Ar chiteure dderitood !


y took § =o PNo wonder then if Ma/ous join,
‘A: length the ‘Guam came to know] To celebrate thole Ma/ox-Kings,
:. - Geometry, and Jearnt the Art, > With folemn Note.and. flowing Wine,
| Which great PyTHAGORAS did fhow, ; Whiltt. ors Brother dainty ioe 3
And glorious, Eveiip did i impart 5 pa
ss Choug.


Who ge) wage the Royal pee 2
Or fi ng its. Secrets ina ‘Song § =


-
a i


——__—_—


And many other Scheie good 5


| Till ancient ROMANS did review |
oF he Art, and Science underftood. ~ _|ttey, re fof ely kept in Mafot s HEAR nie
a ae we And to ie ancient « Lodge ae


But when proud Asracthey had quell’d, -
And Greece and Ecypr overcome,

In Architecture they excéll’d,

y ‘And brought the Learning all to

(Romes;],


| [ Stop bere to dink to the glori 10M emery
of Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nobles:
‘Gentry, Clergy, and. learned Scholars,


than ever pr epagasiay the Ast...
a PA R T


C 78) 3 :
PART WV.


By Kincs, as Watters of the Lodge,
By many a wealthy noble YDeer,
By Lorp and Laird, by YP2tett and
3 = = (ueer,
By all the People every where.


Hos WW 3
So Mafons ancient Record: tell,
: : , King Athelftan, of Saxox Blood,
The Toil of eet ir learned Age. |Gave them a Charter free to dwell
TL In Lorry Lops, with Orders good,
But when the congu’ ring Goths were} Drawn from old Writings by his Son,
(bronght| Prince Epwin, GENER AL~MAasTER


T’embrace the Chriftiaz Faith, they (bright,
(found| Who met at York the Brethren foon,


The Folly that their Fathers wrought,} And to that Lodge did all recite.
In lofs of Architeclure found. Ae VL |


Aran ae a Hately Ape Thencewere their Laws and Charges fine
na wealthy Grandeur, when at} 4, oy ry Reign obferv’d with Care,


(Peace,
}Of Saron, Danith, Mozman Line,
Made them exert their utmofl Pains, . Til Bris Crowns ented ware :


{e.| Phe Monarch Firft of this whole Ise
1 Was learned James, a Mafox King, :
Who Firft of Kings reviv’d the Style
Of Great Aucustus : Therefore fing.
Chorus. ;
Who can unfold the Royal Art?
Or fing its Secrets in a Song ?
They're fafely kept in Mafon’s HE art,
_ And to the ancient Lodge belong.


. . Saeed,

H! glorious Days for Moons wile,’
O’er all the Roman Emv1re when,

Their Fame, refounding to the Skies,
Proclaim’d them good and ufefulMen;
For many Ages thus employ’d,
Until the aths, with warlike Rage,
And brutal Ignorance, deftroy’d


Thus many a fumptuous /ofty Pit &
Was rais’d in every Chriffian Land,
Tho’ not conform to Reman Sir x1 B,
Yet which did Reve rence com-
(mand ;
The Kino and Cratt agreeing full,
In well-form’d Ladges to fupply
The mournful Want of Roman Skill
With their new fort of Mafoury.


oe
For many Ages this prevails,
Their Work is Architeure deem’d ;
In Encianp, Scotranp, IrELanp,
(WaLEs,
The Crafifmen highly are efteem’d,


[ Stop heve to driuk to she happy Memory »
of all the Revivers of the ancient Au-
— =e


PART


SS


———— SSS a oo OOOO Oe em
ie = : Sa : : === AAD AAAAPL =


fo oa
i
|


(79)


Penge =


de
H US tho’ in /aly the Art.


From Oothbich Rubbith firft was
(rais‘d 5} For true Geometry and Skill,


And Great Pattabio didi impart
A Style by Mafons juftly prais’d :
Yet here his mighty Rival Jones,
Of Brith Archite&s the Prime,


Did build fuch gloriousHeaps of Stones,
As ne’er were match’d fince Casar’s
(Time.


| eae


King Cuarzes the Fir/?, a Mafon too,
With feveral Peers and wealthy Men,


: Employ’d him and his Craft/men true,
*Till wretched Civil Wars began.
But after Peace and Crown reftor’d,
Tho’ Lon pon was in Athes laid,


By Mafous Art and good Accord,
A finer LONDON rear ‘d its Head,


LU. :
- King Cuares the Second raifed then
The fineft Columu upon Earth,
Founded St. Paud’s, that ftately Fane,
And Royal Change,with Joy and Mirth:
But afterwards the Lodges fail’d,


Till Great Nassau the Taft reviv’d,


Whofe bright Example {o prevail’d,
That ever fince the 47t has thriv’d.


IV. |
Let other Nations boaft at will,

Great Bairarn now will yield to
(none,
_ In building Zamber, Brick, and Stone ;
For Architefture of each fort,
For curiow Lopces, where we find
The Noble and the W%fe refort,

And drink with Craft{men true and

: (kind.
V.


Then let good Brethren all rejoice,
And fill their Glafs with chearful
~* * Heart ;
Let them exprefs with grateful Voice
The Praifes of the woud’rous Art :
Let ev’ry Brother’s Health go round,
Not Fuo/ or Kuave, but Mason tru;
And let our MAsTeR’s Fame refound,
The noble Duke of MONTAG v.


Chau.
Who can unfold the Royal Art? —
_ Or fing its Secrets in a Song ?
They've fafely kept in Mafon’s Heart,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.


SN “


a


perenne non ERO ne i nt RE ee ee
Sema GaSe aS ao = =


irene sass


5d Se


Pare Steen a


iv


ee Pee


saan res eymemhva ere tees


ee


|


(80°)


TH E


WARDENS SONG:


ea Ba AON 0.74, Re


HISTORY of MASONRT.


- “. COMPOSD i iment ne


Since. the. ‘moh te Prince Puryip ae of Waara ON
was _ chofen GRanD-Mas TER. ; eS


ow dip talk a Byr the Autor eres ||
ents ‘be Ke and phy cag the: © Quarts Coimunicaton,


Bie
But tho’ their Tongues confuss’ d
‘In diftant Climes they us’d, -
They brought from Suryar Orders, good,
To rear the Art they underftood :
| Therefore fing firlt the Princes of the Ifles;


c


Bare a | a eae es Be ed
7 eee OF 3 at Put + oe a


I. esi x
THEN € "er we are ene
‘And evr’y “Src raiger gone, .
In Summers Autunn, | Winter, Sprint, Sel oa
Begin to play, be in to fing . alee
The Micity Genius of the fy Lodge,
In evry Age Next BeLus Great,
That dikefigage * SS @ouncx, Who fixt his Seat
And well infpir’d the: Prince, the Pures, the} In old Afyria, building ftately Piles ;
The Nozizand the We tojoin | And Mirzrau’s Pyramids.among —
In rearing Mafons Granp Desi ‘The shes Subjects _ our in Song.


IL aie Ns 4
The Granp Desicn to rear, wee Suem, who did inftil | @
Was ever Mafous Care, _ The ufeful wond’rous Skill. ie ee
From Apam down before the Flood, Into the Minds of Nations great:
Whofe 4rt old Noau underftood, ‘And Azram next, who did ciate
And did impart to Japner, Saem, and Ham,|Th Affyrian Learning to his Sons, that when
Who taught their Race | In Egypt's Land,
To build apace By. Pharaob’s Hand,
Proud Bazet’s Town and Tow’r, until it came| Were roughly taught to be moft skilful Men;
To be admir’d too much, and then Till their Grand-Majier Mostss rofe,


Difperfed were the Sus of Meu, And them deliver’d trom their Foes.


i ais : % a


VIII.
Diana’ 5 TEMPLE next,
In Lefer ASta fixt;
And Bazyton’s proud Valls, the. Seat .
Of NesucuapNezar the Great;


Fhe Tomb. of Mausorus; the Carian King ; ;
With many a Pile |
OF lofty Style...
[In Arrica and Greater Asta, fing, :
In Greece, in Sici_y, and Rome, «}
| That had’thole Nations overcome.


-
IX.


Then fing Aveusrus-too,
The Gen’ral Mafter true,


Ve


But who can fing his Praife,
Who' did the Tenr upraife 2. ~
Then fing his Workmen true as Steel,
_Avo1iaB and. a ee )
But mene s arti
_.. Is ne’er forgot:
He blabb’d his Secrets to his. Wier, that fold
Her Husband, who at lat pull’d down’
~ The Honfe onvall in Gaza Town, —


But So.omon the King


With folemn. Note. we fing,
Who rear’d at length the Granp Desicy, Who by .Virruvius did.refine .
And {pread the Mafons Granp Desicn’


By Wealth, and. Pow’r, and. Art divine ¥
Helpt by the /earued Hiram ined Prints 7. pee North and. Weft 3 till ancient Brirows
The Royal Bitte Saas bah (chofe


By Craftfmen good, :
In ev'ry Part,


That underftood 42 t ig:
Wife Hiram. Asir’s charming Influences, and Roman ArchiteGure could difelote.. 0%
| Until the Sarong warlike Rage .


He aided Fewih Mafters bright,, 3451 #
Whofe curious Works. none can recite. ¢ | Deftroy’d the Skill ‘of. many. an-Age,.. al
x. :


VII. cai
Thefe glorious Mafonx Kings At length the Oathick Style
Each thankful Brother fings; . Prevail Pd i in: Britam’s Ile,
Who to its Zenith rais’d the Arty _ When Majons Gk AND: Desicn revived,
— and toall'Nations didi impart And in their well form’d Lodges thriv’d,
‘Tho’ not as formerly in Roman Days:
~~ 'Yer\fing the Fanrs


The ufeful Skill: For from the Teorie fine,

To evry Land,

And foreign Strand, = (Drstcn;; OF Sarongs, Danes, (the Praife
The Craft{mex march’d, and eae the GrannjOf Scots, Celeh, Frith ; but fing Ark
Of which the Kines, with mighty Peers, | Of Aruetstan and Epwin Prime,


And learned Men, were Overfeers. Out Mafter of great Influence. &
ky XE


( $2 )


XI.


And eke the Rogman Rings
The Britih Mafon fings: »
Till Roman Style revived there, With Poetry and Mufick {weet
And Britifh Crowns united were ~ Refound their Harmony compleat ;
In learned James, a Mafon King, who rais’d| And with Geometry in skilful Hand,
Fine Heaps of Stones Due Homage pay, | Mae SUC
By Inico Jones, 7 Without Delay, (GRAND:
That rival’d wife Partapro, juftly praisd |To Wrarron’s xoble Duxe our Masrar
In Ltaly, and Britain too, He rules the Free-born Sous of AR oe |
For Archite@ure firm and true, By Love and Friendfhip, Hand and Heart,


XII. CHORUS.


And thence-in ev'ry Reign Who can rehearfe the Praife,
Did Mafonry obtain In foft Poetick Lays, ‘
With Kines, the Noble and the Wife, _ Or folid Profe, of Masons true,
Whofé Fame refounding to the Skies, ~ Whole Art tranfcends the common View?
.Exeites the prefent Age in Lodge to join, ‘Their Secrets, ne’er to Strangers yet expos’ds
And Aprons wear — | Preferv'd fhall be
With Skill and Care, By Mafons Free, - :
‘To raife the Mafous ancient GRAND Desicn, |,And only to the ancient Lodge difclos’d ;
And to revive th” Auguftan StytE Becaufe they’te kept in Mafons Hearr
In many an artful gloviows Pris. By Brethren of the Royar Arr.


XU.


_From henceforth ever fing
The Crarrsman and the Kive,


peers


To fill up this Page, it is thought not amifs to infert here a Paragraph front an old
Record of Mafons, viz. The Company of Mafons, being otherwifé termed Fre Masonsy of
auncieut  Staunding, and good Reckonning, by means of affable and kind Meetings diverfe Tymes,
and as a:\oving Brotherhood fhowld ufe to ‘doe, did frequent.this mutual Aflembly in the Tyme of
King Henry V. the rath Year of. bis moft gracious Reign. And the faid Record: defcri-
bing a Coat of Arms, much the fame with That of the Lonpon Company of Kree-
men Mafons, it is generally believ’d that the faid Company is defcended of the ancient.
Fraternity ; and that in former Times no Man was made Free of that Company until he
was inftall’d in fome Lodge of Free and‘ Accepted. Mafons, as a neceflary- Qualification.
But that laudable Praétice feems to have been long in Diffuetude, The Brethrem -in
foreign Parts have alfo difcover’d that feveral noble and ancient Societies and Orders of Men:
have derived their Charges and Regulations from the Free Mafons, (which are now the-
-moft. ancient Order upon Earth) and perhaps were originally all Members too of the

faid. ancient and worfhipful Byarernity: But this will more fully appear in due. time.


( 83)


Eo FE


FELLOW-CRAFTS SONG:
By our Brother CHARLES Detarave Ef;
; To be Sung and Play’d at the @yanv-Seatt. |
ine | ey IV.’


AIL Masonry! thou Craft divine! |Enfigns of State, that feed our Pride,
Glory of Earth, from Heav’n reveal’d;{ DidtinG&ions troublefome, and vain!


Which doft with Jewels precious fhine, By Ma/fons true are laid afide :

From all but Ma/ous Eyes conceald.. Art's free-born Sous fuch Toys difdain ;
Chorus. Chorus.
Thy Praifes due who can rebearfe : = Ennobled by the Name they bear; |
In nervous Profe, or flowing Verfe ? Diftinguifht by the Ba DG & they wear.
id ocean ss v. :
As Men from Brutes diftinguifht are, Sweet Fellowfhip, from Envy free : | |
A Mafon other Men excels ; _ Friendly Converfe of Brotherhood ; i
For what’s in Knowledge choice and rare The Lodge’s lafting Cement be! ‘
But in his Breaft fecurely dwells 2: Which has for Ages firmly ftood.
| — Chong. : Chorus.
His fi lent Breaft and-faithful Heart A see thus built, for Ages paft :
Preferve the Secrets of the Art. Has lafled, and will-ever laf. :

fag 2 ME Aas


‘From f{corching Heat, and piercing Cold; Then in our Songs be Juftice done
From Beafts, whofe Roar the Foreftrends;| ‘To thofe who have enrich’d the Ars,


aayasiedilinciite oop santa a


Evom which Mankind receives fuch Aid. Their Praife.in lofty Lodge refounds


From the Affaults of Warriours bold » From Jabal down to Burtincron, H
: T he Mafons 4rt Mankind eerie And let each Brother bear a Part. \

Chous. | Chonus.
Be to this Art due Honour paid, Let noble Mafons Healths go vound ;


( $4 )


THE


Entetd “PREN TICES (SON:


poe a By. our late BROTHER. ae #8
ric Geass row


Mr. Marruew Birxueap, deceas'd.


pike Bi Ui Bs ©


To be. Foss oh when all grave Bufine(s is heh and se the
 Masrwyr's Leave rlysuotaM JLAT 2


*


‘ Pog ee we
ee eR Se Peete a ay Rae y =
As) a 24% R SCP ys 2 se


{ Great Kines, Duxes, and Lorps,
| Have laid by thei Swords,
{Our MyfPry to put a good Grace: aoe :
And ne’et been afham’d.: !
: To hear themfelves nam se
plith a Free Os an 1 Accepted Y M ASON.


V7. & & e
Sli & L attest


C O M E a us prepare,


We Brorhers that are
Afflembled on merry Occafion ; 9.
Let’s.drink, laugh, -atid fi ing ;
Our Wine has a Spring :
Here’s a Health to an Accepted Mason.


perso cn mom


IL
~The World (a in pain
Our. Secrets to-gain, .- ii
And ftill let them wonder and gaze on ;
They ne'er can divine .
The Word or the Sign
Of a Free and an Accepted Mason.


II.


We'have on out fi ih
And it maketh Men juft in their Sthcide » :
| There’s. nought but what’s —

To be underftood oaks oy
PY a Pree and an Accepted Mace. SON.


: wv L
“tis This, and’ tis That, rapper oetese | Then j join Hand i int ot
They cannot tell What, | Teach other firm ftand,


Why fo many Great Men | of the Nation Let’s b
Should Aprons put on, .
To make themfelves one on

With a Free and an Accepted Mason,


e merry, and puta bright. Face ¢ on:
What Mortal can boat

bak -So Nozre a Toast, ;
3 ; rs a Free and, a Accepted Maaen: ?


Lor  Antiquity’s PHB ORA EEE 36


GES gis Bier


leg ae fale


One Verfe of the Third Part of the Mafter’s Sonby with the
Chorus , fet” to Mulic, = ‘a Brother.


; i
rege] St GY soomes, REE nee meet aes ne ee
rite Regge as j — at
i Lak Gh, ah pas —" — nae = = ee net Sh mcs a —
H ye “I Ao = @ meen th anes ns so ee ee ee
a
q 4 4


HU 8 mighty tat ofa and fome F ie


"


}
ae un es
ae me, whe bY
A any rey,
H ZS wee <8: SERS ao om - a
= peace: ET ea, eae ew we, mt et .
S — en SS : \
. ea RE eg come fa ot
P7==PS5 ao —s -fSe eng a wet Ftc
ae =


wee a “saz $e = =


Race, and Monarchs = “OF Egypt, Syria, Greece,and Rome,


4 a _
é . ed ES

: ———

= —
= =I


fda esp! Halal


True Archite@ure under—ftood. No wonder then if aS" join To


SISEST Eg a Bs
Faas = fe? == ssapa8e rete faes


celebrate a Mafon- Kings, With iu Note i age Wine, Whiltt


= = a Seabee


ee 2


j panei ence beeen lees ZS ee ee ee SN ES PRE, ROE ee nema aceete) eens Dene
aes = os LS SSS FSET > AES HOES eed seme pieeteeee eee SES
aes : Se ee SA ete = toed emeenees serene qemcenens OD
se ey — = SS AS ST A NE ed ee ene pees ED

4 === pee Stone — OD a eon ee Cae) GSS te wre ~ oe ) ence eanmeey seed


ev—ry Bro—ther : i fins


Beate de aye cree GREP PR) GE eee See ~ ees GEE ee pe
ee = ae aah ae ee ES RE COE SRS Fen ED OEE He pe
Sass = EY ED RD coe Cee a em CEN Comes eS
eee SS SS ES Ce RT RRS eons eee

2 — eam le ny ES comet == = =a ——— won sas —ejqy TREE WSS | cee es


ti at tel St ee - =
SSamniemnemensrneinres ne oc te ee oe ae


}
3


MEP RTS PET


PEE TE GES


r= —


“ee een eres
; =59 Pen oe eget foe
rem ies =


ao can “pd the Be:


a2f= gsi fits ct f tes Eilts re


— Ee - ae ee Sen os or SS NO ned EesE=


Who c can un—fold z ~Roy—al Art? or ft —— —— 1g


@ baal


a eames nn


a2=e BEE tae ae aed :


ot


Secrets ix a Song? Theyre fafely kept in Ee


mes eee ne Gay aes = == — 5 4 tals : a
aca | ——P—t_ pf pe a.
- = pepe = [ew ‘ —}. ety Ses
\ |r a moment ——— Leoash remo! me
a =F ime = at SD lt th SY I Coe ed | OP am eases te Samed CS at
¢


Solace ie a Tam Y Thee ja Ty kept in Ma—fons’


at eee == dey


qostaa lfc pera ot : Af sane ad eon a Bing. ener Se
me aes Pa ze ore ‘ coal = i
oa oeee =e? ae as ae a ee Si aso aes |Semteneiateeniamions
Heart, And to the ancient Lodge be—long.


iF 68 em weeny onal wo pemeess peeeenes emneeet):
Orn ing Weems aay. ween Eee eD


} =aat aieapabenie” % iaar 5 = — 3 “tof
| ge spt == = = 3g se === ste FEE


a,


eae


( 87)


The laf Verfe. of. the eens. Song, pwith oi Re mad fet to. Mufic ic}


es a Brarget es
ssengars elie


ore encpfch ever fing The Craft, iftian. and: ne


2 s ESESEESE EPS ER.
“pepe aE ee


— With aan and Mu-fick {weet Refound their Eten,


ae Sette ier


a oe eae aa ar


Refound their Figg) Sry And with racic a


See —— see, poem Sees ate mae ==
Ais — ee eS heey a es: <i
an CS ome ees ——— =4 —-= mane
be ar aeteeeee | SSSR Come — = ond pase: me
—— SSSR Bee Se =a _ _ = ees OS on mee an eee << af


cr eee ear oe a <<a

SE Pheer (esenerel SR jl Lamu Be pales == = ee rte] eet

ar = sh 2 ot =e = eee :
in skilful Hand, e Ss ee Withont De—lay,
Little Slowers Ps one


a ene eer diz


To Wharton's aie Duke our 7. Grand: He rales the ©


seitet ae iee ee ee


V fobebol
1 tt


i


pt cA


eS cacieasins sgh bl


aoe tale,


a acl i 8 0 ll i


= —-—s- ' “
— == —s See Leet aan Saeacea (mma
— {= ’
i=k ee = a Canaan =f
ae Rae == nenomeen =F


oe REIT! cones es aad oo


ad Sons of lat - Love find ee by Love om


atp= eens ee ee = ee
3 EEE exec oe ro

on “Fp st eee a mes an

wee my a tS TO fame Noe, Se fh


e =


it = sprees sa


ane by Love and aire Hand. and Heart.


aS eS =H Se ESS


eo neat ret Tt et crn eed eee ONT gee Po emer D ge eaet toeeenee be on


CHORUS


eeaigasgt


Who can re--hearfe the Praife, In foft Po-e-tick Lays, Or


3 a a3 trast feet pe it =


Who .can re--hearfe the Praife, In foft Po-e-tick Lays, Or


j
i
b
h
i
if
;
'


4
ie gene > ete eee fh aes een Seen i aeeenematil eres en con mame po a ny
a a oe oe a ae eae ea ee ee
(ek cee oy ee ee) ee A EN el ENE TNE et RT, ame ae meer emma ee aoe AE
i caiel ee ene eens ces SE el oO I NS RN ARI ewan cemet rarane fines crea RenemeRER pmeREEES ed et fm es
Pid eee! an EE gps) Se emt ena EE EE peel — eg OND SAAR eens SY eed peed “I pees NED MOREA ONT cones ecnmnae, Eo eee


There eer


ee pee


rar a ees ee


sifeiche fee eats Sse


arr Geert Gs


* oid Profe, of 5 Se “f F- Art tranfcends the common View?


a aibbds z == beg zee =


SURREY RERE


| ae


asia inet


me


~ aa 2
. eer o
PC eee eee ‘ ‘
ete le a RN ni ASSN AEDS aE SNC PIE ct Asin testa SE See ene “ Za = és is sancckisacnceiihe aon
oc ae i ala late pt
“a aA porcine et pin woes


Cee


CHORUS: a a § =


At , : -t ¢ «: - —_— eet ee
ae ree ay een smepaiey Pa es
mere 2 mpcpctet he = ee — 6 =a ~
ee i ae 25 bet = ret y pn graye F sea ae


ee ees Cs He ee SB PRE ah a


Their Secrets, ne'er to Strange ye € xpos'd, a o


ee en ey ae an oF
PETRI EESmpaes ME Sa =
« ez ~ ah pa
Neier Gee uetpeersteber sles eect on) — — er a
— — ees i
media nny =


See a eed et Shao FEE «<
— =} nc, Fe
“== —-e —_— ae ee er er et ee se =
NT Ma


Their Secrets, ne—ver yet expos’d, Preferv’d mee :


p < e.
pe i iii i a ee, a (ee : ae
57 ~ = EN gee ~ net
SS ee Ee a a Caeeeny cas ena! ee etme pasion A ie
eae fibpomeoee Eas) et a EE LETS LS SON pee peeetets
~~ ome
+


ne?’


Sy ee ee —— ere: Coe seem


of:


Biss Sea a el ete oe ee ae =F =f eae ie
=o = raz= Z == "t= F=f rt if:


be— 4 a fhall be, by Mafons Free, And on—ly _


ee A er a Ee a ee i ee a es — ee es ee ee:
= —-— -—- — =


a ee cr es er ee ee ee —_—— ee Se pest ene weer


be by Mafons = | = by Mafons Free, 5 ae


soars ieee 2 sh Pe — =e pecs norco’
fue =e a= = e


~ A ee et ee


2 db i 5 2 ee nee pee a SOO a ee
vg tal Sires =a = ere ee ee ere ee) aren | mene —— pet ce
= : pas) y se — a meres ene a pa ces

4: # ep ae st eee ‘= Somes Sats oe a ee —


to = ancient Lodge ~difclos’d Becaufe they’re


SE ee tie: = EE eet =F =e


pene a Se eS ey er ang er


‘ and to the ancient Lodge difclos'd;- Becaufe they’re F -in


SSS es SSS


ES i, TORR AE


— SS SE ce er ne wy
i f= omnes = ae= —~——


sil ali es


cs nailed gis el peas We. JEW


oS


bs EE
3 = See
eee
—- ae ——
¥, Te


| dl


et ae
eens wae eres ees os ee pares


wom fm coe en —— en een _— Tee wee ae aR el eel a ae | ee
eee ona deere ts EY ot eR ome = oe ae es — a eneeren Bee a
——— ae — od — — —— eee ecko

——— nena ped nasi,


kept. in | Maen Heart, becaufe ‘verte re tet i in “Mao's Heart ie


ee eee ae ee me econ pee ce Scan SR AS aN =p PR ~ ae
A ee eles Ganael ) Gna —= —)
= 4 ee eae Ale


— TS) et es nS EE EES a me
— cae ad SS SR eee ss


ee a es ee


— es
ret |


~ Mafin? s Heart,


— so ay pe eae ae we erent OS ee Oe ee as ee ——_ so
oar — 2.——— — _} ——s Ee ED SS Nass aes eS ee oe caaninemael on fone
a — ——— a ee a ial eet eee ae ee were et


AS IN EO SS SS TRY SPSS


—it—>- wees on oh Be — — — —< ame: wate a> oe,
epee ee eee mem a a on ee EE OS Et ES SL PRR RSS
—— rs OGH ite i Sie — = a ee ee.
— —— —_ Fe ce ae a ED ES a EE SRNR RESEREERNED, LSS
i a Se) eens TED nae os ES COT RT Ome NSS


eT abe as we


Brethren of tne Roy-al ART.


5 cena | mcr ears eee. cores ee ee Tee
=~" po
ome a — amt p-*—9-- ——— — eet

Ee Hrs


a es SO ey te i


~ ee ees SO


Brethren “ak the Rayo! ART.


= a par ete geen Se ES ER Sie (REA, SOE SORTS
Lenore RE A EE OD NN TN LN STS
NWAE perme s ee CE TT ES SAS SS
co _ ee CE Oe A SSD SATS SRLS
er) it ee EE RE oe oes ET SRT STE CNN LRN


— — ——f =o


— = —
oe een Op em an ern 6 gemma ae eet Geert mtn eee ms SS ae a, enn ene 7 cena Seana omen
tt as care emer of emer SE tn re ee RR RY A ce es re eS ae ee CR Se
= a arson oft enema ————— —— Bp es AAS AE ED CEE Sd AY ARS SN aaa
NF ee — ee ee at ee et ee a ao ae re eee RR a en mee eRe ae =
— a ee ee ee Se ——— 4g§-—- Sp ee ene eerie ee ae at SS SS eS mr ee


cae ae,


The Tune of the Enter *d.Prentice’s Sonc, Compos’d is its Author,
Mr. Birkhead, Deceas’d.


ST —


SSeS


gree let us Hides we fis that are met to--gether on


pa eee fe kof ffi pot a ==. fe
aero tiatee= ttle


eee eee ot ig CIS Eee Te eee BE


merry sae fion, Let’s Drink Laugh and Sing, our Wine | a


>
eed eel Cem pee 6 GD epee,


Soe eeee =


Sgting, “tis 2 Health to an Accepted MASON. -


‘The Mufick of the Fellow-Crafts Song, containing feveral Sheets, Leing a
too much to be herewith wes the Lodge, to which the Authors |
of the Song and Mufick belong, will afford it in Manufcript to any |
other Lodge, when defired. |


Fetes oe
Chae


| ave pee ae ae
oe) 2) Ge or Soot


Ge


‘Lonpon, this 17th Day of Yanuary, 1723.

‘T the Quarterly Communication, This Book, which was fin.

dertaken at the Command of His°Grace the Dux eE |
of MontTacu., ou late Grand WDafter, having been regy. |
larly approved in Manufcript by the Granv Lopeeg, was
this Day produced here in Print, and approved by the Socirty:
Wherefore we do hereby Order the fame to be Publifhed, and
recommend it for the Ofe of the Lodges.


Puitie Duke of WHarto nN, Grand Matter,


L T; Defaguliers Deputy, Grand WDatter,
(


5 Binds idle bibs le Sto Moe bitte Bad ledky Ss Se
Some BOOKS Printed for J. SENEX, and J; HOOKE.


Ks Treatife of the five’Orders in Architecture: To which is annexed, a

Difcourfe concerning Pilafters, and of feveral Abufes introduced

into Architecture, written in. French by Claude Perrault, of the. Royal Acade-.

my of Paris; and made Exglifh by “ohn Sames, of Greenwich. ~ he Second

‘Edition. ‘To which is added, an ‘Alph rabetical Explanation of all ‘the ‘Terms-
in ArchiteElure, which occur in this Work. Folio. Price 12 5. :

2. Rules and Examples of Perfpeive, proper for Painrers anil ogi
tects, @’c. containing a moft eafy and expeditious Method to delineate in
Perfpestive all Defigns relating to Architecture, after anew Manner, by

that. great Mafler thereof, Endrew Pozzo. Folio. Price rl..rg s.


Printed for J: Se NE x, againft St Dunftan’s-Church in Hlest-fhnept. Who has.
now juft finifbed by Subfeription,

Anatomy sanded and. illuftrated, with regard to the Ufes thereof,
in ‘Dohenite, not.only laid down from an Examen of the Bones and Mue
{cles of: the Human Body ; but alfo demonftrated and exemplified from the:
moft celebrated antique Statues, at Rome, exhibited ina great Number of
Folio Copper Plates, with all the Figures in various Views. A Work
very ufeful to Painters, Sculptors, Siatuccies, and all others Studious of the
StruGure of the human Body. Price to. Subferibers. one Guinea and a

half, not to be Sold afterwards for lefs than ‘T'wo Guineas.

N. B..Vhe Subferibers Names being: now ‘Engraving,. Gentlemen are’
defired to be. fpeedy in fending In heir Names ge pra

4 Dr. Bur we t’s Theory of the Ean: Containing:an Account of
the  Ghizing! of the Eartu, and of all the general Changes which it hath
already “undergone, or is to undergo; *rill- the Confummarton of all T hings,
in Four Booxs. I, Concerning. the Deluge. II. Concerning Paradife.
III. Concerning the Burning the World. IV. Concerning the New Heavens
and New Eavthee*With a Review of. the TuzoRry and of -its Proofs,.
efpecially in Reference to Scripture: To w hich is now added, The Authors
netic ther T az ok y; fromothe Exceptions.of Mr. Wear R'E N, and

the Examination of Mr. Kt11 ; And, a CharaGer of the Author, and
this Work, by Mr. Apprs‘o Nn.’ With 19 Curious Cuts. In 2 Vols, 800.
Price 12.5.

5. A Compleat Treatife cf Moral and Ingellettnal Virtues : Wherein their
Nature.is fully explained, and their Ufefuluefs proved, inafmuch as they
regulate. all the prone cf Life, Wer the’ following Heads, viz. 1. The
Nature of Ethicks. 2. Fortitude: 3. Temperance. 4. Liberality. 5. Magnifi-

: cence. 6. Aine. 7. Meeknefs. 8. The three Converfable Virtues, viz.

Comity, -Keracity,. and. Urbanity. H.. Madefiy. nO. ; , Taciturnity, or the Go-
vernment-of “Speech: 11. Fuftice. 12. Sntelleftdal Virtues, viz. Art, Prudence,
Underftanding, Science and Wifdom, &c. With a Preface fhewing the Vanity
and Deceitfulnefs of Vices By Joun Harrctirre, B. D. late
i Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge. The Second Edition Corre&ed, and
Pe. _ Dedicated to Sir DHomas Hanme R. ri. Mr. Bon-p. In 80
E -  Besce 5, s.. Af. 4 :


dati


I


|
{
|


SAE neg ree
