JOHN  M.  KELLY  LffiKAHY


Donated  by
The  Redemptorists  of
the  Toronto  Province

from  the  Library  Collection  of
Holy  Redeemer  College,  Windsor


University  of
St.  Michael's  College,  Toronto


THE>

APOCRYPHAL    BOOKS

OF  THE

NEW  TESTAMENT


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2007  with  funding  from

IVIicrosoft  Corporation


http://www.archive.org/details/apocryphalnewtesOOhoneuoft


Vi


/•


5


9c


A.MAICNAN.PIN


CRAVURE.CEBBIE  SiHUSSONCO.l


OHRIST  CONSOLING  THE  AFFLICTED.
1^71  Cowes  to  b&  Cast  o?v  God.


^"^

>^i^


APOCRYPHAL  BOOKS


OF  THE


NEW    TESTAJVLENT


BEING  ALL  THE  GOSPELS,  EPISTLES,  AND  OTHER  PIECES  NOW  EXTANT
ATTRIBUTED  IN  THE  FIRST  FOUR  CENTURIES


JESUS   CHRIST

HIS  APOSTLES   AND   THEIR   COMPANIONS

NOT  INCLUDED,   BY  ITS  COMPILERS,    IN  THE  AUTHORIZED  NEW

testament;  and,  THE  RECENTLY   DISCOVERED  SYRIAC

MSS.   OF  PILATE'S  LETTERS  TO  TIBERIUS,  ETC.


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  TONGUES


ILLUSTRATED  FROM  ANCIENT   PAINTINGS  AND  MISSALS


"Christ  was  the  joyous  hoy  of  the  fields.  We  are  not  permitted,  to  think  that
the  shadows  of  Calvary  darkened  His  pathivay  as  a  youth,  and  the  Apocryphal
Books  of  the  Neiv  Testament  show  a  great  deal  of  the  early  life  of  Christ  not  to
he  found  in  the  four  Evangelists.'^

— Dr.  Talmage


PHILADELPHIA

GEBBIE  &  CO.,   Publishers


Sold  only  by  Subscrijjlion


H&LY  BEDEEMER  LIBRARY,  W^SOR


Copyrighted,  1890,  Gebbie  &  Co.


:A-  oyf'f


PUBLISHERS'  PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION,


In  ten  years  our  "Apocryphal  Books  of  the  New  Testament"  has
run  through  three  large  editions,  and  we  were  in  full  belief  that  the  work
could  not  be  made  more  complete  ;  but  there  has  just  been  published
in  Grermany,  under  the  editorship  of  the  learned  Dr.  Tischendorf,  a
most  important  fragment  recently  discovered  in  Syria,  from  which  we
have  had  translated  the  following  important  historical  letters  bearing
on  the  death  of  Christ :

1.  Letter  of  Herod  to  Pilate,  the  Governor     .     .    .     .See  page  269

2.  Letter  of  Pilate  to  Herod "        270

3.  Epistle  of  Pontius  Pilate  to  Tiberius  Caesar     ...         "        272

4.  The  Keport  of  Pilate,  the  Grovernor,  concerning  our

Lord  Christ  which  was  sent  to  Augustus  Caesar  in

Rome "        273

5.  The  Report  of  Pontius  Pilate,  which  was  sent  to  the

Emperor  Tiberius  in  Rome "        275

6.  The  Trial  and  Condemnation  of  Pilate "        277

7.  The  Death  of  Pontius  Pilate  who  condemned  Jesus  "        279

We  are  glad  to  note  a  decidedly  increasing  interest  in  regard  to  the
Apocryphal  Books  as  evidenced  by  increased  sales.

Man,  conscious  of  his  weakness,  looks  around  for  guidance.  Catholics
offer  him  an  infallible  Church.  Protestants,  an  infallible  Bible.  We
believe  that  infallibility  belongs  only  to  God  ;  and  although  inspiration
may  not  be  certain  for  these  Apocryphal  Books,  yet  for  more  than
three  centuries  they  were  accepted  by  the  early  Christians  as  inspired,
and  therefore  should  be  regarded  with  interest.

The  theory  of  Inspiration  has  been  altered  more  than  once  since
these  books  were  rejected  as  uninspired.  It  was  once  altered  when
men  began  to  appeal  to  the  Greek  and  the  Hebrew  against  the
Latin  Vulgate.  It  was  altered  again  when  they  appealed  to  lexicons
and  grammars  and  the  usage  of  contemporary  writers  against
authoritative  interpretation.  It  was  altered  again  when  the  science  of
textual  criticism  shattered  the  exclusive  claims  of  the  received  text.
And  every  alteration,  though  a  shock  to  the  faith  of  some,  and  a  trial
to  all,  led  to  closer  study,  clearer  insight,  and  a  more  reverential
acceptance  of  the  sacred  volume,  and  all  connected  therewith.

1


f»UBLISHERS^    PREFACE.

Clergymen,  though  they  buy  the  book,  do  not  generally  give  us
letters  of  commendation  for  publishing  it,  but  the  REV.  T,  De-
WITT  TALMAGE,  of  Brooklyn,  one  of  the  most  eminent  divines
of  the  nineteenth  century,  in  December,  1889,  says  of  one  of  the
Apocryphal  Grospels :

"The  Marvellous  Boyhood  of  Christ."

"  For  nineteen  centuries  there  has  been  singular  silence  on  this  sub-
ject. '  What  kind  of  a  boy  was  He  ? '  We  have  whole  libraries  of
books  and  whole  galleries  of  statuary  and  painting  telling  us  about  His
nativity,  but  silence  reigns  regarding  His  boyhood.

"There  are  various  separate  sources,"  said  the  preacher,  "from
which  we  may  gather  knowledge  of  the  boyhood  of  Christ.  What  He
was  as  a  man,  we  know ;  and  by  minimizing  the  picture  of  the  man,  we
can  get  the  picture  of  the  boy.  In  His  manhood  Christ  was  a  blonde.
We  can  easily  picture  Him  to  ourselves  as  the  yellow-haired,  wise,
thoughtful  lad  described  in  the  text  (Luke).

"Then  there  is  the  Apocryphal  Gospel.,  a  book  which  has  been  kept
out  of  the  sacred  canon  because  it  is  not  credited  with  inspiration.
This  book  gives  us  many  particulars  regarding  the  boyhood  of  Christ.
But  because  it  is  an  uninspired  book  its  statements  are  not  accepted.

"Surely  this  is  unfair.  Prescott's  ' Mexico '  is  not  an  inspired  book ;
nor  is  it  free  from  errors.  Macaulay's  '  History  of  England '  is  not  an
inspired  book  ;  and  it  is  not  in  every  instance  absolutely  correct.  But
is  there  nothing  true  in  them  ?  nothing  to  be  learned  from  these  great
works  ?  Are  we  to  reject  Prescott  and  IMacaulay  in  toto  because  their
works  are  not  the  fruit  of  inspiration?  Surely  not.  The  Apocryphal
GrOSPEL  tells  us  that  Christ  worked  miracles  when  a  boy.  Is  there
anything  impossible  in  the  supposition  that  He  did?  If  He  was
divine  as  a  man.  He  was  divine  as  a  boy.  The  Apocryphal  Gospel
tells  us  that  on  one  occasion  when  walking  with  His  mother  He  met
two  thieves.  Naming  them.  He  said  to  His  mother  :  '  Those  men  are
to  die  with  Me  on  the  cross — the  one  on  My  right,  the  other  on  My
left. '     Why  should  not  the  boy  Christ  be  able  to  prophesy  ?

"Christ  was  a  joyous  boy  of  the  fields.  We  are  not  permitted  to
think  that  the  shadows  of  Calvary  darkened  His  pathway  as  a  youth,
and  the  Apocryphal  Books  of  the  New  Testament  show  a  great  deal  of
the  early  life  of  Christ  not  to  be  found  in  the  four  Evangelists. ' '

Importance  of  the  Apocryphal  Gospels.

Justin,  Ireneus,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  and  other  early  Christian

authors,  mention  many  circumstances  which  must  have  been  derived

from  the  Apocryphal  Gospels.     Baronius  quotes  Nicephorus  as  saying

that  Hippolytus  is  one  who  mentions  such  circumstances  as  are  to  be


PUBLISHERS'    PREFACK.  3

seen  only  in  the  Apocryphal  Books.  Origen,  also,  has  allusions  which
could  only  be  obtained  from  these  Books.  Gregory  of  Nyssa  and
Epiphanius,  and  the  writer  of  a  discourse  ascribed  to  Eusebius,  make
use  of  statements  contained  in  the  Apocryphal  Gospels.  We  also
know  that  a  careful  examination  of  the  Fathers  shows  many  other  pas-
sages corresponding  in  a  remarkable  manner  with  what  we  read  in  the
Apocryphal  Gospels.  Thus  Athanasius,  in  his  treatise  on  the  "In-
carnation of  the  Word,"  refers  to  the  downfall  of  idols  in  Egypt,  when
Christ  went  thither  :  "Who,  among  righteous  men  or  kings,  went
down  into  Egypt,  and  at  his  coming  the  idols  of  Egypt  fell?"  etc.
In  his  fourth  oration  against  the  Arians,  also,  he  mentions  the  fear
of  the  keepers  of  Hades  when  Christ  descended  to  the  Underworld.
Elsewhere  he  mentions  that  Christ  arose  from  the  dead  at  midnight.
He  may  not  really  have  read  any  of  the  extant  rejected  Gospels,  but
he  evidently  knew  some  of  the  traditions  contained  in  them.  It  is
when  we  come  to  later  writers  that  we  find  the  Apocryphal  traditions
set  forth  as  verities.  John  of  Damascus,  Nicephorus,  and  a  host  of
others  might  be  mentioned  in  this  connection.  Hence  it  has  come  to
pass  that,  short  of  a  place  among  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament,
many  Apocryphal  writings  have  been  elevated  to  the  highest  possible
dignity.  It  is  well  known  that  the  Legenda  Aurea  drew  largely  from
several  of  the  Apocryphal  Gospels.  The  histories  of  Joachim,  Anna,
Joseph,  and  Mary,  as  contained  in  the  service  books  of  the  Catholic
Church,  are  in  the  Christian  Apocrypha.  Such  facts  show  the  impor-
tance of  these  documents,  and  the  desirableness  of  an  acquaintance  with
them.  Books  of  this  kind  cannot  become  truly  obsolete  so  long  as
they  lie  at  the  basis  of  the  faith  and  practice  of  millions.

In  the  middle  ages  and  onward  the  Apocryphal  Books  were  very
popular ;  were  read  with  avidity  ;  were  reproduced  in  poetry,  and  were
literally  translated  into  a  variety  of  languages.  In  one  form  or  another
we  encounter  them  in  Egypt,  Syria  Persia  and  India,  in  Greece  and
Italy,  in  Germany,  Spain  and  France,  in  Britain,  and  as  far  north  as
Iceland,

Dr.  Tischendorf.  writing  of  "  The  Origin  and  Use  of  the  Apocryphal
Gospels, ' '  among  other  things,  shows  the  use  made  of  them  in  sup-
porting various  doctrines  and  opinions  concerning  Christ,  Mary,
Joseph,  the  parents  of  Mary,  the  descent  of  Christ  into  the  Under-
world, and  so  forth.  He  next  proceeds  to  indicate  the  many  evidences
of  their  general  and  special  influence  in  the  Church,  which  condemned
and  yet  adopted  them.  He  then  mentions  the  well  known  fact  that
Mohammed  and  other  Arabic  writers  drew  largely  from  the  Christian
Apocrypha.  After  this  he  resumes  his  illustrations  from  Church
writers,  who  have  accepted  as  facts  what  they  have  taken  from  the
Apocryphal  Gospels.


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.


Christ  Consoling  the  AflSicted        .        .        .        (Photogravure)    Frontispiece

PAQI

Members  of  the  Council  of  Nice  Presenting  their  Decision   to  the

Emperor  Constantino :  Fourth  Century v

The  Emperor  Constantine  Presenting  the  Labors  of  the  Council  of  Nice

to  Christ  for  his  blessing 10

The  Birth  of  the  Virgin 17

Elizabeth  receiving  the  Visit  of  Mary 25

The  Birth  of  Christ 33

The  Adoration  of  the  Magi             41

The  Birth  of  John  the  Baptist 49

The  Presentation  in  the  Temple 57

Mary  Offering  in  the  Temple 65

The  Birth  of  Christ 73

The  Murder  of  the  Innocents 73

St.  John  the  Baptist 81

The  Baptism  of  Christ  in  the  Jordan 89

The  Last  Judgment 97

Hell 105

Ciirist's  Entry  into  Jerusalem,  and  Christ  before  Pilate  .  .  .  113
The  two  spies  sent  by  Joshua  to  Jericho,  and  their  escape  from  the

house  from  Rahab 121

Christ  in  the  Prsetorium  and  mocked,  and  his  Descent  into  Hell  .  .  129
The  Red  Sea  swallowing  up  the  army  of  Pharaoh,  after  the  Israelites

had  passed  through 137

Christ  Praying  in  the  Garden 145

Peter  cutting  off  the  ear  of  Malchus,  and  the  kisa  of  Judas    .         .         .  145

Christ  bearing  his  Cross  to  Golgotha,  followed  by  holy  women        .        .  153

Veronica  afflicted  with  an  issue  of  blood 161

Christ  on  the  Cross  between  the  two  Malefactors 177

Marriage  of  Cana  in  Galilee 193

The  Burial  of  Christ 193

Mary  supporting  the  dead  Christ  on  her  knees 209

The  Interment  of  Christ 217

The  Resurrection  of  Christ 225

Christ  as  a  Gardener  appearing  to  Mary  Magdalene      ....  233

Jesus  Christ  ascending  to  Heaven  with  two  angels          ....  241

Jonah  cast  into  the  sea,  and  his  coming  out  of  the  whale        .        .         .  257


/^FTER  the  writings  contained  in  tJie  New  Testament
were  selected  from  the  numerous  Gospels  and
Mpistles  then  in  existence,  what  became  of  the
Boohs  that  were  rejected  hy  the  compilers?

This  question  naturally  occurs  on  every  investigation  as
to  the  period  when,  and  the  persons  by  whom,  the  New
Testament  was  formed.  It  has  been  supposed  by  many  that
the  volume  was  compiled  by  the  first  council  of  Nice,  which,
according  to  Jortin,*  originated  thus  :

Alexander,  bishop  of  Alexandria,  and  Arius,  who  was  a
presbyter  in  his  diocese,  disputed  together  about  the  nature
of  Christ ;  and  the  bishop  being  displeased  at  the  notions  of
Arius,  and  finding  that  they  were  adopted  by  other  persons,
"was  very  angry."  He  commanded  Arius  to  come  over  to
his  sentiments,  and  to  quit  his  own  :  as  if  a  man  could  change
his  opinions  as  easily  as  he  can  change  his  coat !  He  then
called  a  council  of  war,  consisting  of  hearly  a  hundred
bishops,  and  deposed,  excommunicated,  and  anathematized
Arius,  and  with  him  several  ecclesiastics,  two  of  whom
were  bishops.       Alexander  then  wrote  a  circular-letter  to

*Rem.  on  Eccl.  vol.  ii.,  p.  177.


IV


all  bishops,  in  which  he  represents  Arius  and  his  partisans
as  heretics,  apostates,  blasphemous  enemies  of   God,  full  of
impudence  and  impiety,  forerunners  of  Antichrist,  imitators
of  Judas,  and  men  whom  it  was  not  lawful  to  salute,  or  to  bid
God-speed.     There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  of  the  probity  and
sincerity  of  those  who  opposed   Alexander  and   the   Nicene
Fathers;   for  what  did  they  get  by  it  besides  obloquy  and
banishment?     Many  good  men  were  engaged  on  both  sides
of  the  controversy.     So  it  was  in   the  fourth  century,  and
so   it  hath   been   ever  since.      Eusebius  of  Nicomedia,  and
Eusebius   the   historian,  endeavoured    to   pacify   Alexander,
and   to   persuade  him  to  make  up  the   quarrel ;   and  Con-
stantine  sent  a  letter  by  the  illustrious  Hosius  of  Corduba
to   Alexander   and   Arius,  in  which   he   reprimanded   them
both   for   disturbing  the  church  with  their  insignificant  dis-
putes.    But  the  affair  was  gone  too  far  to  be  thus  composed,
and   Socrates   represents   both   sides   as   equally  contentious
and  refractory.     To  settle  this  and  other  points,  the  Nicene
council  was   summoned,  consisting  of   about   three   hundred
and  eighteen  bishops, — a  mystical  number*  of  which  many
profound  remarks  have   been   made.     The   first   thing  they
did  was  to  quarrel,  and   to  express   their  resentments,  and
to  present  accusations   to   the  emperor  against  one  another.
So  say  Socrates,  Sozomen,  and  Rufinus.     Theodoret  favours
his  brethren  in   this  affair,  and   seems   to   throw  the  fault
upon  the  laity.     But   the  whole  story,  as   it  is   related   by
them  all,  and   even   by  Theodoret,  shows   that   the   bishops
accused   one  another.     The  emperor  burnt  all   their  libels,

*  Barnabas,  viii.  11,  12,  13.


V

and  exhorted  them  to  peace  and  unity;  so  that  if  they
had  not  been  restrained  by  his  authority,  and  by  fear
and  respect,  they  would  probably  have  spent  their  time  in
altercations.

This  council  of  Nice  is  one  of  the  most  famous  and
interesting  events  presented  to  us  in  ecclesiastical  history ;
and  yet,  what  is  surprising,  scarcely  any  part  of  the  History
of  the  Church  has  been  unfolded  with  such  negligence,  or
rather  passed  over  with  such  rapidity.  The  ancient  writers
are  neither  agreed  with  respect  to  the  time  or  place  in  which
it  was  assembled,  the  number  of  those  who  sat  in  council,
nor  the  bishop  who  presided  in  it.  No  authentic  acts  of
its  famous  sentence  have  been  committed  to  writing,  or  at
least  none  have  been  transmitted  to  our  time.*

Although  it  is  uncertain  whether  the  books  of  the  New
Testament  were  declared  canonical  by  the  Nicene  Council,
or  by  some  other,  or  when  or  by  whom  they  were  collected
into  a  volume,  it  is  certainf  that  they  were  considered  genu-
ine and  authentic  (with  a  few  variations  of  opinion  as  to
some  of  them)  by  the  most  early  Christian  writers;  and
that  they  were  selected  from  various  other  Gospels  and
Epistles,  the  titles  of  which  are  mentioned  in  the  works
of  the  Fathers  and  early  historians  of  the  church.|  The
books  that  exist,  of  those  not  included  in  the  canon,  are
carefully  brought  together  in  the  present  volume.  They
naturally  assume  the  title  of  the  Apocryphal  New  Testament;
and  he  who  possesses  this  and  the  New  Testament,  has  in
the   two  volumes,  a  collection  of   all   the   historical   records

*  Mosheim,  Eccl.  Hist.,  c  v.  §  12.

f  See  Table  II.  at  the  end  of  this  work.    X  See  Table  I.  at  end.


VI

relative  to  Christ  and  his  Apostles,  now  in  existence,  and
considered  sacred  by  Christians  during  the  first  four  cen-
turies after  his  birth.

In  a  complete  collection  of  the  Apocryphal  writings  the
Apostles'  Creed  is  necessarily  included,  and  as  necessarily
given,  as  it  stood  in  the  fourth  and  until  the  sixth  century,
(from  Mr.  Justice  Bailey's  edition  of  the  Common  Prayer
Book),  without  the  article  of  Christ's  Descent  into  Hell;
— an  interpolation  concerning  which  the  author  of  the
Preface  to  the  Catalogue  of  the  MSS.  of  the  King's  Library
thus  expresses  himself:  "I  wish  that  the  insertion  of  the
article  of  Christ's  Descent  into  Hell  into  the  Apostles'  Creed
could  be  as  well  accounted  for  as  the  insertion  of  the  said
verse  (1  John  v.  7*).


*  Catalogue  of  MSS.  of  the  king's  library,  by  David  Casly,  4to,  in  Pref.
p.  xxiv.  For  large  particulars  of  Ohrisfs  Descent  into  Hell,  see  the  Gospel
of  Nicodemus,  chap.  xiii.  to  xx.

The  verse  above  alluded  to  by  Mr.  Casly  is  1  John,  v.  7.  This  spurious
passage,  in  the  authorized  version  of  the  New  Testament,  printed  by  the
Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge  and  the  King's  Printers,  and
appointed  to  be  read  in  churches,  stands  thus  :  ''For  there  are  three  that  bear
record  in  Heaven,  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  these  three  are
one."  This  verse,  Mr.  Casly  says,  is  now  generally  given  up  ;  being  in  no
Greek  MS.  save  one  at  Berlin,  which  is  discovered  to  have  been  transcribed
from  the  printed  Biblia  Coraplutensia ;  and  another  modern  one  at  Dublin,
probably  translated  or  corrected  from  the  Latin  Vulgate.  It  is  conjectured
that  it  may  have  been  inserted  by  the  mistake  of  a  Latin  copyist :  for  the
owners  of  MSS.  often  wrote  glosses  or  paraphrases  of  particular  passages
between  the  lines,  and  ignorant  transcribers  sometimes  mistook  these  notes
for  interlined  omissions  by  the  original  scribes,  and  accordingly  in  re-copy-
ing the  MSS.  incorporated  these  glosses  or  paraphrases  into  the  body  of  the
text.  For  instance,  Jerome,  in  one  of  his  letters,  says  that  an  explanatory
note  which  he  himself  had  made  in  the  margin  of  his  Psalter  had  been
incorporated  by  some  transcriber  into  the  text ;  and  Dr.  Bentley,  in  the  96th
page  of  his  Epistle,  annexed  to  Malala's  Chronicle,  has  proved  2iva  opoq
eoTiv  ev  Ttj  Apa^ig,  in  Galatians  iv.  25,  to  be  of  the  same  stamp.f

t  Cat.  King's  Libr.  Pref.  p.  xxi.


Vll

"  The  best  that  can  be  said  for  it  is,  that  it  might  possibly
have  come  in,  in  like  manner,  not  long  before,  from  a  gloss

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  tell  the  reader,  that  in  1516  and  1519  Erasmus
published  his  first  and  second  editions  of  the  Greek  Testament,  both  of
which  omitted  the  three  heavenly  witnesses.  That  having  promised  to  insert
them  in  his  text,  if  they  were  found  iu  a  single  Greek  MS. ;  he  was  soon
informed  of  the  existence  of  such  a  MS.  in  England,  and  consequently
inserted  1  John,  v.  7,  in  his  third  edition,  1522.  That  this  MS.,  after  a
profound  sleep  of  two  centuries,  has  at  last  been  found  in  the  library  of
Trinity  College,  Dublin.  That  the  Complutensian  edition,  which  was  not
published  till  1522,  though  it  professes  to  be  printed  in  1514,  has  the
seventh  and  eighth  verses  patched  up  from  the  modern  Latin  MS.,  and  the
final  clause  of  the  eighth  verse,  which  is  omitted  in  its  proper  place,  trans-
ferred to  the  end  of  the  seventh.  That  Colinaeus,  in  1534,  omitted  the  verse  on
the  faith  of  MS.  That  R.  Stephens,  in  his  famous  edition  of  1550,  inserted
the  verse,  and  marked  the  words  ev  rut  ovpavm  as  wanting  in  seven  MSS.
That  Beza,  suspecting  no  mistake,  concluded  that  these  seven  MSS.  contained
the  rest  of  the  seventh  verse,  and  the  eighth  with  the  words  ev  rrji  yijij*'

Sir  Isaac  Newton  wrote  a  Dissertation  upon  this  passage,  wherein  he  gave
a  clear,  exact,  and  comprehensive  view  of  the  whole  question,  and  wherein
he  says,  that  when  the  adversaries  of  Erasmus  had  got  the  date.f

The  text  is  not  contained  in  any  Greek  manuscript  which  was  written
earlier  than  the  fifteenth  century.  2.  Nor  in  any  Latin  manuscript  earlier
than  the  ninth  century.  3.  It  is  not  found  in  any  of  the  ancient  versions.
4.  It  is  not  cited  by  any  of  the  Greek  ecclesiastical  writers,  though,  to
prove  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  they  have  cited  the  words  both  before  and
after  this.  5.  It  is  not  cited  by  any  of  the  early  Latin  Fathers,  even  when
the  subjects  upon  which  they  treat  would  naturally  have  led  them  to  appeal
to  its  authority.  6.  It  is  first  cited  by  Vigilius  Tapsensis,  a  Latin  writer
of  no  credit,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  fifth  century,  and  by  him  it  is  suspected
to  have  been  forged.  7.  It  has  been  admitted  as  spurious  in  many  editions
of  the  New  Testament  since  the  reformation : — in  the  first  two  of  Erasmus,
in  those  of  Aldus  Colinaeus,  Zwinglius,  and  lately  of  Griesbach.  8.  It  was
omitted  by  Luther  in  his  German  version ;  in  the  old  English  Bibles  of
Henry  VIII.,  Edward  VL,  and  Elizabeth,  it  was  printed  in  small  types,  or
included  in  brackets  ;  but  between  the  years  1566  and  1580,  it  began  to  be
printed  as  it  now  stands,  by  whose  authority  is  not  known, — (See  Travis's
Letters   to   Gibbon,  and   Porson's  to  Travis.     Also   Griesbach's   excellent

*  Person's  Letters  to  Travis.    Preface.

t  Newton's  works  by  Horsley,  4to,  vol.  v.  p.  549— Bishop  Horsley,  in  his  edition  of
Sir  Isaac  Newton's  works,  has  not  included  several  MSS.  on  theological  subjects  for
the  reasons  which  perhaps  induce  the  nobleman  in  whose  possession  they  remain  to
withhold  them  still  from  publication.  His  lordship's  judgment  in  this  respect  is  said
to  be  influenced  by  a  prelate  whose  notions  do  not  accord  either  with  Sir  Isaac's
opinions  or  criticisms.  They  are  fairly  transcribed,  in  the  illustrious  author's  own
hand-writing,  ready  for  the  press ;  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  production  of  his
luminous  mind  be  suppressed  by  any  censorship,  however  respectable.


viu
or  paraphrase,  that  was  at  first  put  in  the  margin  or  between
the  lines."


Dissertation  on  the  Text  at  the  end  of  his  second  volume.  Archbishop
Newcome  omits  the  text,  and  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln  expresses  his  conviction
that  it  is  spurious.     (Elem.  of  Theol.  vol.  ii.  p.  90,  note).*

In  a  sumptuous  Latin  MS.  of  the  Bible,  written  so  late  as  the  thirteenth
century,  formerly  belonging  to  the  Capuchin  Convent  at  Montpelier,  after-
wards in  the  possession  of  Harley,  Earl  of  Oxford,  and  now  deposited  in
the  British  Museum,  the  verse  of  the  three  heavenly  witnesses  is  wanting,  as
appears  by  the  following  literal  extract  from  it :


lie  eat  qui  uenit  per  aquam  (3  sanguinem,  %  rpeT
Uon  in  aq  solum,  Hi  in  aqua  {$  sanpinem  (3  spu.
spe  est  qui  testificatuF  quoniam  rpe  est  Ijeritas.
ffluoniam  tres  sutit.  qui  testimouium  bant  in  tra*  %pt.
aqua,  (3  sanguis,    ®t  tres  unum  suntt


The  following  Greek  and  Latin  authors  have  sot  quoted  the  text  :  %

Greek  authors: — Irenseus — Clemens  Alexandrinus — Dionysius  Alexandri-
nus,  (or  the  writer  against  Paul  of  Samosata  under  his  name) — Athanasius
— The  Synopsis  of  Scripture — The  Synod  of  Sardica— Epiphanius — Basil —
Alexander  of  Alexandria — Gregory  Nyssen — Nazianzen,  with  his  two  com-
mentators, Elias  Cretensis  and  Nicetas — Didymus  de  Spiritu  Sancto — Chry-
Bostome — An  author  under  his  name  de  sancta  et  consubstantiali  Trinitate —
Csesarius — Proclus — The  Council  of  Nice,  as  it  is  represented  by  Gelasius
Cyzicenus — Hyppolytus — Andrias — Six  catenae  quoted  by  Simon — The  mar-
ginal scholia  of  three  MSS. — Hesychius — John  Damascenus — Oecumenius
— Euthymius  Zigabenus.

Latin  authors : — The  author  de  Baptismo  Hsereticorum,  among  Cyprian's
works — Novatian— Hilary — Lucifer  Calazitanus — Jerome— Augustine — Am-
brose— Faustinus Leo  Magnus— The  author  de  Promissis — Eucherius —

Facundus — Cerealis  —  Rusticus  —  Bede — Gregory  —  Philastrius  —  Arnobius,
junior — Pope  Eusebius.

It  is  evident  that  if  the  text  of  the  heavenly  witnesses  had  been  known  from
the  beginning  of  Christianity,  the  ancients  would  have  eagerly  seized  it,
inserted  it  in  their  creeds,  quoted  it  repeatedly  against  the  heretics,  and
selected  it  as  the  brightest  ornament  of  every  book  that  they  wrote  upon  the

*  Improved  version  of  the  New  Testament,  1808.

t  Harl.  CoLt.  MSS.  Cod.  4778.  X  Person's  Letters  to  Travis,  p.  363.


IX

By  tlie  publication  of  this  volume,  the  Editor  conceives
he  has  rendered  an  acceptable  service  to  the  theological
student  and  the  ecclesiastical  antiquary; — ^he  has  endeavoured
to  render  it  more  gratifying  to  the  reader,  and  more  con-
venient for  reference,  by  arranging  the  books  into  chapters,
and  dividing  the  chapters  into  verses.  He  has  only  to  add,
that  the  lover  of  old  literature  will  here  find  the  obscure
but  unquestionable  origin  of  several  remarkable  relations  in
the   Golden   Legend,   the   Lives  of    the   Saints,  and    similar

Bubject  of  the  Trinity.  In  short,  if  this  verse  be  really  genuine,  notwith-
standing its  absence  from  all  the  visible  Greek  MSS.  except  two,  one  of
which  awkwardly  translates  the  verse  from  the  Latin,  and  the  other  tran-
scribes it  from  a  printed  book ;  notwithstanding  its  absence  from  all  the
versions  except  the  vulgate ;  and  even  from  many  of  the  best  and  oldest
MSS.  of  the  vulgate ;  notwithstanding  the  deep  and  dead  silence  of
all  the  Greek  writers  down  to  the  thirteenth,  and  most  of  the  Latins  down
to  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century ;  if,  in  spite  of  all  these  objections,  it  be
Btill  genuine,  no  part  of  Scripture  whatsoever  can  be  proved  either  spurious
or  genuine  ;  and  Satan  has  been  permitted,  for  many  centuries,  miraculously
to  banish  the  finest  passage  in  the  N.  T.  from  the  eyes  and  memories  of
almost  all  the  Christian  authors,  translators,  and  transcribers.*

Sir  Isaac  Newton  observes,  "  that  what  the  Latins  have  done  to  this  text
(1  John  V.  7),  the  Greeks  have  done  to  that  of  St.  Paul  (Timothy  iii.  16).
For  by  changing  o  into  0  the  abbreviation  of  6eo(;,  they  now  read.  Great  is
the  mystery  of  Godliness:  God  manifested  in  the  flesh:  whereas  all  the  churches
for  the  first  four  or  five  hundred  years,  and  the  authors  of  all  the  ancient
versions,  Jerome,  as  well  as  the  rest,  read,  •  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness
which  was  manifested  in  the  flesh.'  "  Sir  Isaac  gives  a  list  of  authors,  who,  he
says,  "  wrote  all  of  them,  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  for  the  Deity  of
the  Son,  and  incarnation  of  God  ;  and  some  of  them  largely,  and  in  several
tracts ;  and  yet,"  he  says,  "  I  cannot  find  that  they  ever  allege  this  text  to
prove  it,  excepting  that  Gregory  Nyssenf  once  urges  it,  (if  the  passage  crept
not  into  him  out  of  some  marginal  annotation).  In  all  the  times  of  the  hot
and  lasting  Arian  controversy,  it  never  came  into  play ;  though  now  these
disputes  are  over,  they  that  read  God  made  manifest  in  the  flesh,  think  Sir
Isaac  says,  "  one  of  the  most  obvious  and  pertinent  texts  for  the  business."

There  are  other  interpolations  and  corruptions  of  passages  in  the  New
Testament,  but  the  Editor  perceives  that  the  few  observations  he  has  hastily
collected  and  thrown  together  in  this  note,  have  already  extended  it  to  undue
length,  and  it  must  here  close.

*  Person's  Letters  to  Travis,  8vo,  p.  402.
t  Orat.  xi.  Contra  Eunom.


productions,  concerning  the  birth  of  the  Virgin,  her  marriage
with  Joseph,  on  the  budding  of  his  rod,  the  nativity  of  Jesus,
the  miracles  of  his  Infancy,  his  labouring  with  Joseph  at
the  carpentry  trade,  and  the  actions  of  his  followers.  Several
of  the  papal  pageants  for  the  populace,  and  the  monkish
mysteries  performed  as  dramas  at  Chester,  Coventry,  New-
castle, and  in  other  parts  of  England,  are  almost  verbatim
representations  of  the  stories.  Many  valuable  pictures  by
the  best  masters — prints  by  the  early  engravers,  particularly
of  the  Italian  and  German  schools — wood  cuts  in  early  black
letter,  and  black  books — and  illumination  of  missals  and
monastic  MSS. — receive  immediate  elucidation  on  referring
to  the  Apocryphal  New  Testament,  and  are  without  explana-
tion from  any  other  source.


The  emperor  constantine  presenting  the  labors  of  the  council  of  nice  to

CHRIST  for  his  BLESSING.  [Page  U.


FROM   AN  EARLY  GREEK    MAmreCRIPT.


THE

ORDER  OF  ALL  THE  BOOKS

OF   THE

APOCRYPHAL  NEW  TESTAMENT.

WITH
Their  proper  Names  and  Number  of  Chapters.


II/TARY  hath  Chapters  .


Protevangelion


I.  Infancy  ....

II.  Infancy  ...
Christ  and  Abgarus
The  Apostles'  Creed
Laodiceans  .    .    .
Paul  and  Seneca
Paul  and  Thecla

I.  Corinthians    .

II.  Corinthians    .
Barnabas     .    .    .


8
16
22

4
22

1

1
14
12
23

4
15


Ephesians  hath  Chapters  .    4

Magnesians 4

Trallians 4

Romans 3

Philadelphians    .....    3

Smyrnseans      3

Polycarp 3

Philippians 4

I.  Hermas — ^Visions  .    .    ,    4

II.  Hermas — Commands  .  12

III.  Hermas — Similitudes  .  10
Letters  ofHerod  and  Pilate  7

(xi)


PREFACE

TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.


Although  the  Apocbyphal  New  Testament  was  put  out  without
pretension  or  ostentatious  announcement,  or  even  solicitude  for  its  fate,  yet  a
large  Edition  has  been  sold  in  a  few  months.  The  Public  demanding  an-
other, to  this  second  Edition  a  small  fragment  of  the  Second  Epistle  of
Clement  to  the  Corinthians^  accidentally  omitted,  has  been  added  ;  it  forms
the  fifth  chapter  of  that  Epistle.  There  is,  likewise  annexed,  a  Table  of  the
years  wherein  all  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament  are  stated  to  have  been
written :  to  the  ''  Order  of  the  Books  of  the  Apocryphal  New  Testa-
ment," the  authorities  from  whence  they  have  been  taken  are  affixed ;  and^
finally,  many  errors  in  the  numerous  scriptural  references  subjoined  in  the
notes  to  the  Epistles  have  been  corrected.  These  are  the  only  material  vari-
ations from  the  first  Edition.

It  escaped  the  Editor  to  notice  that  the  legends  of  the  Koran  and  the  Hin-
doo Mythology  are  considerably  connected  with  this  volume.  Many  of  the
acts  and  miracles  ascribed  to  the  Indian  God,  Creeshna,  during  his  incarna-
tion, are  precisely  the  same  with  those  attributed  to  Christ  in  his  infancy,  by
the  Apocryphal  Gospels,  and  so  largely  particularized  by  the  Rev.  Thomas
Maurice  in  his  learned  History  of  Hindostan.

Reference  to  the  preceding  Preface  will  leave  little  doubt  that  the  Apo-
cryphal writings  formed  an  interesting  portion  of  the  lay,  as  well  as  the
monkish  literature  of  our  forefathers.  There  is  a  Translation  of  the  Gospel
of  Nicodemus  almost  coeval  with  the  origin  of  printing  in  England ;  (a)  and
ancient  MSS.  of  the  Gospels  of  the  Infancy  are  still  extant  in  the  Welsh  lan-
guage under  the  title  of  Mahinogi  Jesu  Grist.

Concerning  any  genuineness  of  any  portion  of  the  work,  the  Editor  has
not  ofiered  an  opinion,  nor  is  it  necessary  that  he  should.  The  brief  notice
at  the  head  of  each  Gospel  directs  the  reader  to  its  source,  and  will  assist  him
to  inquire  further,  and  form  an  opinion  for  himself.  Yet  respecting  the
Epistles,  which  commence  at  page  91,  and  occupy  the  remaining  two-thirds
of  the  volume,  the  Editor  would  call  attention  to  Archbishop  Wake's  testi-

(a)  It  was  printed,  in  quarto,  first  by  BSaanftsn  tt  Wiox^t  in  1509;  next  by  3o?)n  5kot  in
1626 ;  by  the  same  printer  subsequently;  and  several  times  afterwards.

xii


PREFACE   TO   THE   SECOND    EDITION.  xiii

mony.  The  pious  and  learned  Prelate  says,  that  these  Epistles  (a)  are  a  full
and  perfect  collection  of  "  all  the  genuine  writings  that  remain  to  us  of  the
Apostolic  Fathers,  and  carry  on  the  antiquity  of  the  Church  from  the  time
of  the  Holy  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament  to  about  a  hundred  and  fifty
years  after  Christ ;  that  except  the  Holy  Scriptures,  there  is  nothing  remain-
ing of  the  truly  genuine  Christian  antiquity  more  early  ;  (6)  that  they  contain
all  that  can  with  any  certainty  be  depended  upon  of  the  most  Primitive
Fathers,  (c)  who  had  not  only  the  advantageof  living  in  the  apostolical  times,
of  hearing  the  Holy  Apostles,  and  conversing  with  them,  but  were  most  of
them  persons  of  a  very  eminent  character  in  the  church,  too :  (d)  that  we
cannot  with  any  reason  doubt  of  what  they  deliver  to  us  as  the  Gospel  of
Christ,  but  ought  to  receive  it,  if  not  with  equal  veneration,  yet  but  a  little
less  respect  than  we  do  the  Sacred  Writings  of  those  who  were  their  masters
and  instructors;"  and,  **if,"  says  the  Archbishop,  (who  translated  these
Epistles),  (e)  '*  it  shall  be  asked  how  I  came  to  choose  the  drudgery  of  a
translator,  rather  than  the  more  ingenious  part  of  publishing  somewhat  of
my  own  composing,  it  was,  in  short,  this ;  because  I  hoped  that  such  writ-
ings as  these  would  find  a  more  general  and  unprejudiced  acceptance  with  all
sorts  of  men  than  anything  that  could  be  written  by  any  one  now  living."

As  a  literary  curiosity,  the  work  has  attracted  much  notice  ;  as  throwing  a
light  upon  the  arts  of  design  and  engraving,  it  has  already  been  useful  to  the
painter,  and  the  collector  of  pictures  and  prints ;  and,  as  relating  to  theology,
it  has  induced  various  speculations  and  inquiry.

But  the  Editor  has  been  charged  with  expressing  too  little  veneration  for
the  councils  of  the  Church.  He  feels  none.  It  is  true  that  respecting  the
three  hundred  Bishops  assembled  at  the  council  of  Nice,  the  Emperor  Con-
stantine  (/)  says,  that  what  was  approved  by  these  Bishops  could  be  nothing
less  than  the  determination  of  God  himself;  since  the  Holy  Spirit  residing  in
such  great  and  worthy  souls,  unfolded  to  them  the  divine  will,  (^f)  Yet  Sa-
binus,  the  Bishop  of  Heraclea,  affirms,  that,  "  excepting  Constantine  himself*
and  Eusebius  Pamphilus,  they  were  a  set  of  illiterate  simple  creatures,  that
understood  nothing ; "  and  Pappus  seems  to  have  estimated  them  very  low,
for  in  his  Synodicon  to  that  council,  he  tells  us,  that  having  "  promiscuously
put  all  the  books  that  were  referred  to  the  council  for  determination,  under
♦.he  communion  table  in  a  church,  they  besought  the  Lord  that  the  inspired
writings  might  get  upon  the  table  while  the  spurious  ones  remained  under-
neath, and  that  it  happened  accordingly."  A  commentator  (h)  on  this
legend  suggests  that  nothing  less  than  such  a  sight  could  sanctify  that  fiery
zeal  which  breathes  throughout  an  edict  published  by  Constantine,  in  which
he  decrees  that  all  the  writings  of  Arius  should  be  burned  and  that  any  per-
son concealing  any  writing  composed  by  him,  and  not  immediately  producing
it,  and  committing  it  to  the  flames,  should  be  punished  with  death,  (i)  Let
us,  with  the  illustrious  Jortin,  (k)  consider  a  council  called,  and  presided  over

(a)  Abp.  Wake's  Apostolic  Fathers,  Bagster's  Edition,  8vo,  1817,  Prelim.  Disc,  p.  120.

(6)  Ahp.  Wake's  Apostolic  Fathers,  Bagster's  Edition,  Svo,  Prelim.  Disc,  p.  120.

(c)  p.  126.  (d)  p.  128.

(e)  p.  155.  (/)  Socrates,  Schol.  Eccl.  Hist.  b.  i.  9.  (g)  Ibid.  c.  9.

{h)  Mace's  N.  Test.,  p.  875.  (i)  Socrates,  Schol.  Eccl.  Hist.  b.  i.  c.  9.

<A)  Rem.  on  Eccl.  Hist.  yol.  ii.  p.  177.


XIV  PREFACE  TO   THE   SECOND   EDITION.

by  this  Barbarian  Founder  of  the  church  militant ;  by  what  various  motives
the  various  Bishops  may  have  been  influenced ;  as  by  reverence  to  the  Em-
peror or  to  his  counsellors  and  favourites,  his  slaves  and  eunuchs ;  by  the
fear  of  offending  some  great  prelate,  as  a  Bishop  of  Kome  or  of  Alexandria,
who  had  it  in  his  power  to  insult,  vex,  and  plague  all  the  bishops  within  and
without  his  iurisdiction ;  by  the  dread  of  passing  for  heretics,  and  of  being
calumniated,  reviled,  hated,  anathematized,  excommunicated,  imprisoned,
banished,  fined,  beggared,  starved,  if  they  refused  to  submit ;  by  compliance
with  some  active  leading  and  imperious  spirits ;  by  a  deference  to  the  ma-
jority;  by  a  love  of  dictating  and  domineering,  of  applause  and  respect;  by
vanity  and  ambition ;  by  a  total  ignorance  of  the  question  in  debate,  or  a
total  indifference  about  it ;  by  private  friendships ;  by  enmity  and  resent,
ment ;  by  old  prejudices ;  by  hopes  of  gain ;  by  an  indolent  disposition  ;  by
good  nature ;  by  the  fatigue  of  attending,  and  a  desire  to  be  at  home ;  by  the
love  of  peace  and  quiet ;  and  a  hatred  of  contention,  &c.  (a)  Whosoever
takes  these  things  into  due  consideration  will  not  be  disposed  to  pay  a  blind
deference  to  the  authority  of  general  councils  but  will  rather  be  inclined  to
judge  that  **  the  council  held  by  the  Apostles  at  Jerusalem  was  the  first  and
the  last  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  my  be  aflSrmed  to  have  presided."  (6)

In  accommodation  to  this  opinion,  the  Church  of  England  compels  her
clergy  to  subscribe  to  the  following  among  the  thirty-nine  "  Articles  of  Re-
ligion." (c)  *'  When  general  councils  be  gathered  together,  forasmuch  as
they  be  an  assembly  of  men,  whereof  all  be  not  governed  with  the  spirit  and
will  of  God  they  may  err,  and  sometimes  have  erred,  even  in  things  pertain-
ing unto  God ;  wherefore  things  ordained  by  them  as  necessary  to  salvation
have  neither  strength  nor  authority,  unless  it  may  be  declared  that  they  be
taken  out  of  the  Holy  Scriptures."

After  eighteen  centuries  of  bloodshed  and  cruelties  perpetrated  in  the
name  of  Christianity,  it  is  gradually  emerging  from  the  mystifying  subtleties
of  fathers,  councils  and  hierarchies,  and  the  encumbering  edicts  of  soldier-
kings  and  papal  decretals.     Charmed  by  the  loveliness  of  its  primitive  sim-


(o)  These  considerations  are  more  or  less  natural  on  becoming  acquainted  with  the
proceedings  of  every  council,  from  that  of  Nice  to  that  of  Trent,  in  the  year  1546,
which,  Father  Paul  says,  was  for  divers  ends  and  by  divers  means,  procured  and  has-
tened, hindered  and  deferred,  for  two  and  twenty  years;  and,  for  eighteen  years  more,
was  sometimes  assembled  and  sometimes  dissolved.  Brent,  a  translator  of  Paul's  His-
tory of  that  Council  says,  "it  would  be  infinite  to  relate  the  stratagems  the  bishops  of
Rome  used  to  divert  the  council  before  it  began,  their  postings  to  and  fro,  to  hinder
the  proposing  of  those  things  which  they  thought  would  diminish  their  profit  or  pull
down  their  pride;  and  their  policies  to  enthral  the  prelates,  and  to  procure  a  majority
of  voices."

It  is  stated  by  Guicciardini,  that,  "as  the  priests  were  raised  step  by  step  to  earthly
power,  they  cared  less  and  less  for  religious  precepts.  Using  their  spiritual  only  as  an
instrument  of  their  temporal  authority,  their  business  was  no  more  sanctity  of  life,  in-
crease of  religion,  and  love  and  charity  towards  their  neighbours — but  fomenting  wars
among  Christians,  and  employing  all  arts  and  snares  to  scrape  money  together,  and
making  new  laws  against  the  people.  Hence  they  were  no  longer  respected,  although,  by
the  powerful  name  of  religion,  they  maintained  their  authority,  being  helped  therein,**
says  Guicciardini,  "6»/  the  faculty  which  they  have  of  gratifying  princes." — Guicciardini's
Hist.  b.  iv.

(6)  Jortin's  Rem.  on  Eccl.  Hist.,  vol.  ii.  p.  177.  (c)  Art.  xxi.


PREFACE   TO    THE    SECOND    EDITION.  xv

plicity,  every  sincere  human  heart  will  become  a  temple  for  its  habitation
and  every  man  becomes  a  priest  unto  himself.  Thus,  and  thus  only,  will  be
established  the  religion  of  Him,  who,  having  the  same  interest  with  ourselves
in  the  welfare  of  mankind,  left  us,  for  the  rule  of  our  happiness,  the  sum  and
substance  of  his  code  of  peace  and  good  will — "Whatsoever  ye  would  that
men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them.

By  some  persons  of  the  multitude,  commonly  known  by  the  name  of
Christians,  and  who  profess  to  suppose  they  do  God  service  by  calling
themselves  so,  the  p]ditor  has  been  attacked  with  a  malignity  and  fury  that
would  have  graced  the  age  of  Mary  and  Elizabeth,  when  Catholics  put  to
death  Protestants,  and  Protestants  put  to  death  Catholics,  for  the  sake  of  him
who  commanded  mankind  to  love  one  another.  To  these  assailants,  he  owes
no  explanation ;  to  the  craft  of  disingenuous  criticism,  he  offers  no  reply ;  to
the  bolt  of  the  Bigot,  and  the  shaft  of  the  Shrinemaker,  he  scarcely  con-
descends the  opposition  of  a  smile.


ORDER  OF  ALL  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  APOCRYPHAL  NEW  TESTAMENT.


Mary  hath  ....
Protevangelion  .    .


I.  Infcincj


II.  Infancy


Christ  and  Abgarus  .


Nicodemus

Apostles'   Creed  in   its
ancient  state   ....


Apostles'   Creed  in   its
present  state    ....


Laodiceans


Paul  and  Seneca


Paul  and  Thecla  .   .


I.  Corinthians   ....

II.  Corinthians  ....

Barnabas

Ephesians

Magnesians

Trallians

Romans

Philadelphians  ....

Smymaeans

Polycarp

Philippians

I.  Hermas — ^Visions  .    .

II.  Hermas— Commands

III.  Hermas  —  Simili-
tudes


No.  of
Chap.


80


„         I  Authoritie*.    8e«  also  the  authorities  more  at  large  ia

•"^"•oB.  the  Noticen  before  each  Rnnk.


94


95


99


24

112

5

139

15

145

4

166

4

172

3

175

3

178

3

182

3

185

3

189

4

192

4

197

12

212

228


the  Notices  before  ea«h  Book.


In  the  works  of  St.  Jerome,  a -Father
of  the  Church,  who  died  A.  D.  420.

Postellus  brought  the  MS.  from  the  Le-
vant, translated  it  into  Latin,  and  caused
it  to  be  printed  at  Zurich,  in  1552.

Received  by  the  Gnostics,  a  set  of  Chris-
tians in  the  second  Century,  and  translated
into  English  by  Mr.  Henry  Sike,  Oriental
Professor  at  Cambridge,  in  1697.

Printed  by  Professor  Coteleriu8,in  a  note
to  his  works  of  the  Apostolic  Fathers,  from
a  MS.  in  the  King  of  France's  Library,  No.
2279,  and  Bishop  of  Csesarea,  A.D.  315.

Preserved  by  Eusebius,  one  of  the  Coun-
cil of  Nice  in  his  Ecclesiastical  History,
Book  I.  chap.  13.

Published  by  Professor  Grynseus,  in  the
Orthodoxographia,  1555,  tom.  ii.  p.  643.

"Without  the  articles  of  Christ's  Descent
into  Hell  and  the  Communion  of  Saints.  See
it  thus  handed  down  in  Mr.  Justice  Bai-
ley's Edition  of  the  Book  of  Common
Prayer,  8vo,  1813,  p.  9,  Twte.  Also  in
Bingham's  Antiquities  of  the  Christian
Church,  folio,  1726,  B.  10,  c.  4,  s.  12.

In  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  of  the
Church  of  England.

From  Ancient  MSS.  in  the  Sorbonne
and  the  Library  of  loannes  a  Viridario  at
Padua.  See  also  Poole's  Annotations  on
Col.  iv.  16,  and  Harl.  MSS.  Cod.  1212.

Jerome  ranks  Seneca  on  account  of  these
Epistles  among  the  holy  writers  of  the
Church.  They  are  preserved  by  Sixtus
Senensis,  in  his  Bibliothe^ue,  p.  89,  90.

From  the  Greek  MS.  in  the  Bodleian
Library,  copied  by  Dr.  Mills,  and  trans-
mitted to  Dr.  Grabe,  who  edited  and
printed  it  in  his  Specilegium.

These  are  "The  Genuine  Epistles  of
the  Apostolic  Fathers  ;  being,  together  with
the  Holy  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament
a  complete  collection  of  the  most  primitive  An-
tiquity for  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  years
after  Christ.  Translated  and  published  with
a  large  preliminary  discourse  relating  to  the
several  Treatises  by  the  most  Reverend  Father
in  God,  William,  (Wake)  Lo7'd  Bishop  of
Lincoln,"  afterwards  Lord  Archbishop  of
Canterbury.  The  authorities  and  proofs
adduced  by  this  erudite  and  honest  pre-
late will  be  found  in  great  number  in  the
introduction  and  discourses  to  the  Edi-
tion of  the  Archbishop's  Translation  of
these  Epistles,  published  in  1817,  by  Mr.
Bagster,  Paternoster  Row.


Note.— Column  1  contains  the  proper  names  of  the  Books ;  col.  2  the  No.  of  chapters  in
each ;  col.  3  the  page  whereon  each  Book  commences;  col.  4  the  authorities  for  each
briefly  stated.


THE    BIRTH  OF  THE  VIRGIN.  fPage  19.

FROM   A   GREEK    DIPTYCHON  OF  THE   THIRTEENTH    OR   FOURTEENTH    CENTURY.


THE


JlparrDjilial  lem  Ceatcmenl


The  GOSPEL  of  the  BIRTH  OF  MARY.

[In  the  primitive  ages  there  was  a  Gospel  extant  bearing  this  name,  attri-
buted to  St.  Matthew,  and  received  as  genuine  and  authentic  by  several
of  the  ancient  Christian  sects.  It  is  to  be  found  in  the  works  of  Jerome,
a  Father  of  the  Church,  who  flourished  in  the  fourth  century,  from
whence  the  present  translation  is  made.  His  contemporaries,  Epipha-
nius,  Bishop  of  Salamis,  and  Austin,  also  mention  a  Gospel  under  this
title.  The  ancient  copies  diflfered  from  Jerome's,  for  from  one  of  them
the  learned  Faustus,  a  native  of  Britain,  who  became  Bishop  of  Riez,  in
Provence,  endeavoured  to  prove  that  Christ  was  not  the  Son  of  God  till
after  his  baptism ;  and  that  he  was  not  of  the  house  of  David  and  tribe
of  Judah,  because,  according  to  the  Gospel  he  cited,  the  Virgin  herself
was  not  of  this  tribe,  but  of  the  tribe  of  Levi ;  her  father  being  a  priest
of  the  name  of  Joachim.  It  was  likewise  from  this  Gospel  that  the
sect  of  the  Colly ridians,  established  the  worship  and  offering  of  man-
chet  bread  and  cracknels,  or  fine  wafers,  as  sacrifices  to  Mary,  whom
they  imagined  to  have  been  born  of  a  Virgin,  as  Christ  is  related  in
the  Canonical  Gospel  to  have  been  born  of  her.  Epiphanius  likewise
cites  a  passage  concerning  the  death  of  Zacharias,  wliich  is  not  in
Jerome's  copy,  viz.  *'  That  it  was  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  Zacharias
in  the  temple,  that  when  he  had  seen  a  vision,  he,  through  surprise,  was
willing  to  disclose  it,  and  his  mouth  was  stopped.  That  which  he  saw
was  at  the  time  of  his  offering  incense,  and  it  was  a  man  standing  in  the
form  of  an  ass.  When  he  was  gone  out,  and  had  a  mind  to  speak  thus
to  the  people,  Woe  unto  you,  whom  do  ye  worship  ?  he  who  had  appeared
to  him  in  the  temple  took  away  the  use  of  his  speech.  Afterwards
when  he  recovered  it,  and  was  able  to  speak,  he  declared  this  to  the
Jews,  and  they  slew  him.  They  add  (viz.  the  Gnostics  in  this  book),
that  on  this  very  account  the  high-priest  was  appointed  by  their  lawgiver
(by  God  to  Moses),  to  carry  little  bells,  that  whensoever  he  went  into
the  temple  to  sacrifice,  he,  whom  they  worshipped,  hearing  the  noise  of
the  bells,  might  have  time  enough  to  hide  himself,  and  not  be  caught  in
that  ugly  shape  and  figure." — The  principal  part  of  this  Gospel  is  con-
tained in  the  Protevangelion  of  James,  which  follows  next  in  order.]


CHAP.  I.

The  parentage  of  Mary.  7  Joachim
her  father,  and  Anna  her  mother,  go
to  Jerusalem  to  the  feast  of  the  dedi-
cation. 9  Issachar  the  high  priest  re-
proaches Joachim  for  being  childless.  \  'Rpfhlphpm


2  Her  father's  name  was  Joa-
chim, and  her  mother's  Anna.
The  family  of  her  father  was  of
Galilee  and  the  city  of  Nazareth.
The  family  of  her  mother  was  of


TPHE  blessed  and  ever  glorious
A.  Virgin  Mary,  sprung  from
the  royal  race  and  family  of  Da-
vid, was  born  in  the  city  of  Naza-
reth, and  educated  at  Jerusalem,
in  the  temple  of  the  Lord.


3  Their  lives  were  plain  and
right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord^
pious  and  faultless  before  men.
For  they  divided  all  their  sub-
stance into  three  parts :

4  One  of  which  they  devoted


2  17


Marys  parents  barren.  MARY.  An  Angel  apjiears,  and


to  the  temple  and  officers  of  the
temple ;  another  they  distributed
among  strangers,  and  persons  in
poor  circumstances;  and  the
third  they  reserved  for  them-
selves and  the  uses  of  their  own
family.

5  In  this  manner  they  lived  for
about  twenty  years  chastely,  in
the  favour  of  God,  and  the  esteem
of  men,  without  any  children.

6  But  they  vowed,  if  God
should  favour  them  with  any  is-
sue, they  would  devote  it  to  the
service  of  the  Lord ;  on  which
account  they  went  at  every  feast
in  the  year  to  the  temple  of  the
Lord.^

7  "^  And  it  came  to  pass,  that
when  the  feast  of  the  dedication
drew  near,  Joachim,  with  some
others  of  his  tribe,  went  up  to
Jerusalem,  and  at  that  time,  Is-
sachar  was  high-priest ;

8  Who,  when  he  saw  Joachim
along  with  the  rest  of  his  neigh-
bours, bringing  his  offering,  des-
pised both  him  and  his  offerings,
and  asked  him,

9  Why  he,  who  had  no  chil-
dren, would  presume  to  appear
among  those  who  had  ?  Adding,
that  his  offerings  could  never  be
acceptable  to  God,  who  was
judged  by  him  unworthy  to  have
children;  the  Scripture  having
said,  Cursed  is  every  one  who
shall  not  beget  a  male  in  Israel.

10.  He  further  said,  that  he
ought  first  to  be  free  from  that
curse  by  begetting  some  issue,
and  then  come  with  his  offerings
into  the  presence  of  God.

11  But  Joachim  being  much
confounded  with  the  shame  of
such  reproach,  retired  to  the
shepherds,  who  were  with  the
cattle  in  their  pastures  ;

12  For  he  was  not  inclined  to


return  home,  lest  his  neighbours,
who  were  present  and  heard  all
this  from  the  high-priest,  should
publicly  reproach  him  in  the
same  manner.

CHAP.  II.

1  An  angel  appears  to  Joachim,  9  and
informs  him  that  Anna  shall  con-
ceive and  bring  forth  a  daughter,  who
shall  be  called  Mary,  11  be  brought
up  in  the  temple,  12  and  while  yet  a
virgin,  in  a  way  unparalleled,  bring
forth  the  Son  of  God:  13  gives  him  a
sign,  14  and  departs.

BUT  when  he  had  been  there
for  some  time,  on  a  certain
day  when  he  was  alone,  the  an-
gel of  the  Lord  stood  by  him
with  a  prodigious  light.

2  To  whom,  being  troubled  at
the  appearance,  the  angel  who
had  appeared  to  him,  endeavour-
ing to  compose  him  said :

3  Be  not  afraid,  Joachim,  nor
troubled  at  the  sight  of  me,  for  I
am  an  angel  of  the  Lord  sent  by
him  to  you,  that  I  might  inform
you,  that  your  prayers  are  heard,
and  your  alms  ascended  in  the
sight  of  God.-^

4  For  he  hath  surely  seen
your  shame,  and  heard  you  un-
justly reproached  for  not  having
children :  for  God  is  the  avenger
of  sin,  and  not  of  nature ;

5  And  so  when  he  shuts  the
womb  of  any  person,  he  does  it
for  this  reason,  that  he  may  in  a
more  wonderful  manner  again
open  it,  and  that  which  is  born
appear  to  be  not  the  product  of
lust,  but  the  gift  of  God.

6  For  the  first  mother  of  your
nation  Sarah,  was  she  not  barren
even  till  her  eightieth  year :  And
yet  even  in  the  end  of  her  old
age  brought  forth  Isaac,  in  whom
the  promise  was  made  a  blessing
to  all  nations.^


'  Sam.  i.  6,  7,  &c.
18


*  Acts  X.  4.    '  Gen.  xvi.  2,  &c.  and  xviii.  10,  &c.


promises  them  a  child.


MARY.


Anna


7  Rachel  also,  so  much  in  fa-
vour with  God,  and  beloved  so
much  by  holy  Jacob,  continued
barren  for  a  long  time,  yet  after-
wards was  the  mother  of  Joseph,
who  was  not  only  governor  of
Egypt,  but  delivered  many  na-
tions from  perishing  with  hun-
ger.'

8  Who  among  the  judges  was
more  valiant  than  Samson,  or
more  holy  than  Samuel?  And  yet
both  their  mothers  were  barren.^

9  But  if  reason  will  not  con-
vince you  of  the  truth  of  my
words,  that  there  are  frequent
conceptions  in  advanced  years,
and  that  those  who  were  barren
have  brought  forth  to  their  great
surprise;  therefore  Anna  your
wife  shall  bring  you  a  daugh-
ter, and  you  shall  call  her  name
Mary;

10  She  shall,  according  to
your  vow,  be  devoted  to  the
Lord  from  her  infancy,  and  be
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  from
her  mother's  womb  f

11  She  shall  neither  eat  nor
drink  anything  which  is  unclean,
nor  shall  her  conversation  be
without  among  the  common  peo-
ple, but  in  the  temple  of  the
Lord  ;  that  so  she  may  not  fall
under  any  slander  or  suspicion
of  what  is  bad.

12  So  in  the  process  of  her
years,  as  she  shall  be  in  a  mira-
culous manner  born  of  one  that
was  barren,  so  she  shall,  while
yet  a  virgin,  in  a  way  unparal-
leled, bring  forth  the  Son  of  the
most  High  God,  who  shall,  be
called  Jesus,  and,  according  to
the  signification  of  his  name,  be
the  Saviour  of  all  nations.*

13  And  this  shall  be  a  sign
to  you  of  the  things  which  I  de-


clare, namely,  when  you  come
to  the  golden  gate  of  Jerusalem,
you  shall  there  meet  your  wife
Anna,  who  being  very  much
troubled  that  you  returned  no
sooner,  shall  then  rejoice  to  see
you.

14  When  the  angel  had  said
this  he  departed  from  him.

CHAP.   III.

1  The  angel  appears  to  Anna ;  2  tells
her  a  daughter  shall  be  born  unto  her,
3  devoted  to  the  service  of  the  Lord  in
the  temple,  5,  who,  being  a  virgin  and
not  knowing  man,  shall  bring  forth
the  Lord,  6  and  gives  her  a  sign
therefore.  8  Joachim  and  Anna  meet
and  rejoice,  10  and  praise  the  Lord.
11  Anna  conceives,  and  brings  forth
a  daughter  called  Mary.

AFTERWARDS  the  angel
appeared  to  Anna  his  wife
saying :  Fear  not,  neither  think
that  which  you  see  is  a  spirit.'^

2  For  I  am  that  angel  who
hath  offered  up  your  prayers  and
alms  before  God,  and  am  now
sent  to  you,  that  I  may  inform
you,  that  a  daughter  will  be  born
unto  you,  who  shall  be  called
Mary,  and  shall  be  blessed  above
all  women.®

3  She  shall  be,  immediately
upon  her  birth,  full  of  the  grace
of  the  Lord,  and  shall  continue
during  the  three  years  of  her
weaning  in  her  father's  house,
and  afterwards,  being  devoted  to
the  service  of  the  Lord,  shall
not  depart  from  the  temple,  till
she  arrives  to  years  of  discretion.

4  In  a  word,  she  shall  there
serve  the  Lord  night  and  day  in
fasting  and  prayer,''  shall  abstain
from  every  unclean  thing,  and
never  know  any  man ;

5  But,  being  an  unparalleled
instance  without  any  pollution
or  defilement,  and  a  virgin  not


^Gen.  XXX.   1—22,   and  xli.   1,  &c.     «  Judg.  xiii.  2.  and  1  Sam.  6,  &c.
'Luke  i.  15.    *Matth.  i.  21.    » Matth.  xiv.  26.  « Luke  i.  28.    'Lukeii.  37.

19


Mary  horn.


MARY.       Ministered  unto  by  Angels,


knowing  any  man,  shall  bring
forth  a  son,  and  a  maid  shall
bring  forth  the  Lord,  who  both  by
his  grace  and  name  and  works,
shall  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world.

6  Arise  therefore,  and  go  up
to  Jerusalem,  and  when  you
shall  come  to  that  which  is
called  the  golden  gate  (because
it  is  gilt  with  goldj,  as  a  sign  of
what  I  have  told  you,  you  shall
meet  your  husband,  for  whose
safety  you  have  been  so  much
concerned.

7  When  therefore  you  find
these  things  thus  accomplished,
believe  that  all  the  rest  which  I
have  told  you,  shall  also  un-
doubtedly be  accomplished.

8  Tf  According  therefore  to
the  command  of  the  angel,  both
of  them  left  the  places  where
they  were,  and  when  they  came
to  the  place  specified  in  the  an-
gel's prediction,  they  met  each
other.

9  Then,  rejoicing  at  each  oth-
er's vision,  and  being  fully  satis-
fied in  the  promise  of  a  child,
they  gave  due  thanks  to  the
Lord,  who  exalts  the  humble.

10  After  having  praised  the
Lord,  they  returned  home,  and
lived  in  a  cheerful  and  assured
expectation  of  the  promise  of
God.

11  Tf  So  Anna  conceived,  and
brought  forth  a  daughter,  and,
according  to  the  angel's  com-
mand, the  parents  did  call  her
name  Mary.

CHAP.  IV.

1  Mary  brought  to  the  temple  at  three
yearn  old.  6  Ascends  the  stairs  of
the  temple  by  miracle.  8  Her  parents
sacrificed  and  returned  home.

AND  when  three  years  were
expired,  and  the  time  of  her
weaning  complete,  they  brought


the  Virgin  to  the  temple  of  the
Lord  with  offerings.

2  And  there  were  about  the
temple,  according  to  the  fifteen
Psalms  of  degrees,^  fifteen  stairs
to  ascend.

3  For  the  temple  being  built
in  a  mountain,  the  altar  of  burnt-
offering,  which  was  without,
could  not  be  come  near  but  by
stairs ;

4  The  parents  of  the  blessed
Virgin  and  infant  Mary  put  her
upon  one  of  these  stairs ;

5  But  while  they  were  putting
off  their  clothes,  in  which  they
had  travelled,  and  according  to
custom  putting  on  some  that
were  more  neat  and  clean,

.  6  In  the  mean  time  the  Vir-
gin of  the  Lord  in  such  a  man-
ner went  up  all  the  stairs  one
after  another,  without  the  help
of  any  to  lead  or  lift  her,  that
any  one  would  have  judged  from
hence  that  she  was  of  perlect  age.

7  Thus  the  Lord  did,  in  the
infancy  of  his  Virgin,  work  this
extraordinary  work,  and  evi-
dence by  this  miracle  how  great
she  was  like  to  be  hereafter.

8  But  the  parents  having  of-
fered up  their  sacrifice,  accord-
ing to  the  custom  of  the  law,,
and  perfected  their  vow,  left  the
Virgin  with  other  virgins  in  the
apartments  of  the  temple,  who
were  to  be  brought  up  there,
and  they  returned  home.

CHAP.  V.

2  Mary  ministered  unto  by  angels.  4
The  high-priest  orders  all  virgins  of
fourteen  years  old  to  quit  the  temple
and  endeavour  to  be  married.  5
Mary  refuses,  6  having  vowed  her  vir-
ginity to  the  Lord.  7  The  high-priest
commands  a  meeting  of  the  chief  per
sons  of  Jerusalem,  11  who  seek  the
Lord /or  counsel  in  the  matter.  13  yl
voice  from  the  mercy-seat.      15    The


^  Those  Psalms  are  from  the  120th  to  the  134th,  including  both.
20


Mer  vow  of  virginity.


MARY.     The  kigh-pried  in  difficulty.


high-priest  obeys  it  by  ordering  all
the  uiiuuirried  men  of  the  house  of
David  to  bring  their  rods  to  the  altar,
17  that  his  rod  which  should  flower,
and  on  which  the  Spirit  of  God  shoidd
sit,  should  betroth  the  Virgin.

BUT  the  Virgin  of  the  Lord,
as  she  advanced  in  years,
increased  also  in  perfections,  and
according  to  the  saying  of  the
Psalmist,  her  father  and  mother
forsook  her,  bnt  the  Lord  took
care  of  her.

2  For  she  every  day  had  the
conversation  of  angels,  and  every
day  received  visitors  from  God,
which  preserved  her  from  all
sorts  of  evil,  and  caused  her  to
abound  with  all  good  things ;

3  So  that  when  at  length  she
arrived  to  her  fourteenth  year,
as  the  wicked  could  not  lay  any-
thing to  her  charge  worthy  of
reproof,  so  all  good  persons,  who
were  acquainted  with  her,  ad-
mired her  life  and  conversation.

4  At  that  time  the  high-priest
made  a  public  order.  That  all
the  virgins  who  had  public  set-
tlements in  the  temple,  and  were
come  to  this  age,  should  return
home,  and,  as  they  were  now  of
a  proper  maturity,  should,  ac-
cording to  the  custom  of  their
country,  endeavour  to  be  mar-
ried.

5  To  which  command,  though
all  the  other  virgins  readily
yielded  obedience,  Mary  the
Virgin  of  the  Lord  alone  an-
swered, that  she  could  not  com-
ply with  it.

6  Assigning  these  reasons,  that
both  she  and  her  parents  had
devoted  her  to  the  service  of  the
Lord ;  and  besides,  that  she  had
vowed  virginity  to  the  Lord,
which  vow  she  was  resolved  never


to  break  through  by  lying  with
a  man.

7  The  high  priest  being  here-
by brought  into  a  difficulty,

8  Seeing  he  durst  neither  on
the  one  hand  dissolve  the  vow,
and  disobey  the  Scripture,  which
says,  Vow  and  pay,^

9  Nor  on  the  other  hand  in-
troduce a  custom,  to  which  the
people  were  strangers,  com-
manded,

10  That  at  the  approaching
feast  all  the  principal  persons
both  of  Jerusalem  and  the  neigh-
bouring places  should  meet  to-
gether, that  he  might  have  their
advice,  how  he  had  best  proceed
in  so  difficult  a  case.

11  When  they  were  accord-
ingly met,  they  unanimously
agreed  to  seek  the  Lord,  and  ask
counsel  from  him  on  this  matter.^

12  And  when  they  were  all
engaged  in  prayer,  the  high-
priest,  according  to  the  usual
way,  went  to  consult  God.

is  And  immediately  there  was
a  voice  from  the  ark,  and  the
mercy  seat,  which  all  present
heard,  that  it  must  be  inquired
or  sought  out  by  a  prophecy  of
Isaiah  to  whom  the  Virgin  should
be  given  and  be  betrothed  ;

14  For  Isaiah  saith,  there
shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the
stem  of  Jesse,  and  a  flower  shall
spring  out  of  its  root,

15  And  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
shall  rest  upon  him,  the  Spirit
of  Wisdom  and  Understanding,
the  Spirit  of  Counsel  and  Might,
the  Spirit  of  Knowledge  and
Piety,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  fear
of  the  Lord  shall  fill  him.

16  Then,  according  to  this
prophecy,  he  appointed,  that  all


Eccles.  V.  4,  5,  6;  and  Psalm  Ixxvi.  11.

Num.  xxvii.  21,  compared  with  Exod.  xxviii.  30;  Lev.  viii.  8;  Deut.


xxxiii.  8  ;  Ezra  ii.  tiS  ;  Nehem.  vii.  65.


21


The  Virgin  betrothed.


MARY.     Angel  Gabriel  salutes  Mary


the  men  of  the  house  and  family
of  David,  who  were  marriage-
able, and  not  married,  should
bring  their  several  rods  to  the
altar,

17  And  out  of  whatsoever
person's  rod  after  it  was  brought,
a  flower  should  bud  forth,  and
on  the  top  of  it  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  should  sit  in  the  appear-
ance of  a  doYe,  he  should  be  the
man  to  whom  the  Virgin  should
be  given  and  be  betrothed.

CHAP.  VI.

1  Joseph  draws  back  Ms  rod.  6  The
dove  pitches  on  it.  Hehetroths  Mary
and  returns  to  Bethlehem.  7  Mary
returns  to  her  parents'  house  at  Galilee.

AMONG  the  rest  there  was  a
man  named  Joseph,  of  the
house  and  family  of  David,  and
a  person  very  far  advanced  in
years,  who  drew  back  his  rod,
when  every  one  besides  presented
his.

"2  So  that  when  nothing  ap-
peared agreeable  to  the  heavenly
voice,  the  high-priest  judged  it
proper  to  consult  God  again,

3  Who  answered  that  he  to
whom  the  Virgin  was  to  be  be-
trothed was  the  only  person  of
those  who  were  brought  together,
who  had  not  brought  his  rod.

4  Joseph  therefore  was  be-
trayed.

5  For,  when  he  did  bring  his
rod,  and  a  dove  coming  from
Heaven  pitched  upon  the  top  of
it,  every  one  plainly  saw,  that
the  Virgin  was  to  be  betrothed
to  him :

6  Accordingly,  the  usual  cere-
monies of  betrothing  being  over,
he  returned  to  his  own  city  of
Bethlehem,  to  set  his  house  in
order,  and  make  the  needful
provisions  for  the  marriage.

7  But  the  Virgin  of  the  Lord,


22


»  Luke  i.  28.


Mary,  with  seven  other  virgins
of  the  same  age,  who  had  been
weaned  at  the  same  time,  and
who  had  been  appointed  to  at-
tend her  hj  the  priest,  returned
to  Jier  parents'  house  in  Galilee.
CHAP.  VII.

7  The  salutation  of  the  Virgin  by  Ga-
briel, who  explains  to  her  that  she  shall
conceive,  without  lying  with  a  man,
ivhile  a  Virgin,  19  by  the  Holy  Ghost
coming  upon  her  without  the  heats  of
lust.     21  She  submits.

NOW  at  this  time  of  her  first
coming  into  Galilee,  the
angel  Gabriel  was  sent  to  her
from  God,  to  declare  to  her  the
conception  of  our  Saviour,  and
the  manner  and  way  of  her  con-
ceiving him.

2  Accordingly  going  into  her,
he  filled  the  chamber  where  she
was  with  a  prodigious  light,  and
in  a  most  courteous  manner  sa-
luting her,  he  said,

3  Hail,  Mary !  Virgin  of  the
Lord  most  acceptable !  O  Vir-
gin full  of  Grace !  The  Lord  is
with  you,  you  are  blessed  above
all  women,  you  are  blessed  above
all  men,  that  have  been  hitherto
born.^

4  But  the  Virgin,  who  had
before  been  well  acquainted  with
the  countenances  of  angels,  and
to  whom  such  light  from  heaven
was  no  uncommon  thing,

5  Was  neither  terrified  with
the  vision  of  the  angel,  nor
astonished  at  the  greatness  of
the  light,  but  only  troubled  about
the  angel's  words :

6  And  began  to  consider  what
so  extraordinary  a  salutation
should  mean,  what  it  did  por-
tend, or  what  sort  of  end  it
would  have.'^

7  To  this  thought  the  angel,
divinely  inspired,  replies ;

8  Fear  not,  Mary,  as  though

^  Luke  i.  29.


And  tells  her  she  shall  conceive.  MARY.        She  is  married  to  Joseph.


I  intended  anything  inconsistent
with  your  chastity  in  this  salu-
tation :

9  For  you  have  found  favour
with  the  Lord,  because  you  made
virginity  your  choice.

10  Therefore  while  you  are  a
Virgin,  you  shall  conceive  with-
out sin,  and  bring  forth  a  son.

11  He  shall  be  great,  because
he  shall  reign  from  sea  to  sea,
and  from  the  rivers  to  the  ends
of  the  earth. ^

12  And  he  shall  be  called  the
Son  of  the  Highest ;  for  he  who
is  born  in  a  mean  state  on  earth
reigns  in  an  exalted  one  in  hea-
ven.

13  And  the  Lord  shall  give
him  the  throne  of  his  father  Da-
vid, and  he  shall  reign  over  the
house  of  Jacob  for  ever,  and  of
his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no
end.

14  For  he  is  the  King  of
Kings,  and  Lord  of  Lords,  and
his  throne  is  for  ever  and  ever.

15  To  this  discourse  of  the
angel  the  Virgin  replied  not,  as
though  she  were  unbelieving,  but
willing  to  know  the  manner  of  it.

16  She  said.  How  can  that  be  ?
For  seeing,  according  to  my  vow,
I  have  never  known  any  man,
how  can  I  bear  a  child  without
the  addition  of  a  man's  seed?

17  To  this  the  angel  replied
and  said.  Think  not,  Mary,  that
you  shall  conceive  in  the  ordi-
nary way.

18  For,  without  lying  with  a
man,  while  a  Virgin,  you  shall
conceive ;  while  a  Virgin,  you
shall  bring  forth;  and  while  a
Virgin  shall  give  suck.

19  For  the  Holy  Ghost  shall
come  upon  you,  and  the  power
of  the  Most  High  shall  over-
shadow you,  without  any  of  the
heats  of  lust.


Luke  i.  31,  &c.


Ln


20  So  that  which  shall  be  born
of  you  shall  be  only  holy,  be-
cause it  only  is  conceived  with-
out sin,  and  being  born,  shall  be
called  the  Son  of  God.

21  Then  Mary  stretching  forth
her  hands,  and  lifting  her  eyes
to  heaven,  said.  Behold  the  hand-
maid of  the  Lord !  Let  it  be  unto

j  me  according  to  thy  word.  '^

CHAP.  VIII.

1  Joseph  returna  to  Galilee  to  marry  the
Virgin  he  had  betrothed.  4  perceives
she  is  with  child,  5  is  uneasy,  7  pur-
poses to  put  her  away  privily,  8  is  told
by  the  angel  of  the  Lord  it  is  not  the
work  of  man  but  the  Holy  Ghost,  12
Marries  her,  but  keeps  chaste,  13  re-
moves with  her  to  Bethlehem,  15  where
she  brings  forth  Christ.

JOSEPH  therefore  went  from
Judaea  to  Galilee,  with  in-
tention to  marry  the  Virgin  who
was  betrothed  to  him  :

2  For  it  was  now  near  three
months  since  she  was  betrothed
to  him.

3  At  length  it  plainly  ap-
peared she  was  with  child,  and  it

;  could  not  be  hid  from  Joseph :

I      4  For  going  to  the  Virgin  in

'  a  free  manner,  as  one  espoused,

and  talking  familiarly  with  her,

he  perceived  her  to  be  with  child.

5  And  thereupon  began  to  be

uneasy  and  doubtful,  not  know-

[  ing  what  course  it  would  be  best

'  to  take ;

!      6  For  being   a  just  man,  he

I  was  not  willing  to  expose  her,

nor  defame  her  by  the  suspicion

of  being  a  whore,  since  he  was  a

pious  man.

j  7  He  purposed  therefore  pri-
j  vately  to  put  an  end  to  their
I  agreement,  and  as  privately  to
j  put  her  away.

8  But  while  he  was  meditating
these  things,''  behold   the  angel
of  the  Lord  appeared  to  him  in
ke  i.  38.  =*  Matt.  i.  19.

23


Joachims  offering   THE  PROTEVANGELION.


i^


his  sleep,  and  said  Joseph,  son  of
David,  fear  not ;

9  Be  not  willing  to  entertain
any  suspicion  of  the  Virgin's
being  guilty  of  fornication,  or  to
think  any  thing  amiss  of  her,
neither  be  afraid  to  take  her  to
wife;

10  For  that  which  is  begotten
in  her  and  now  distresses  your
mind,  is  not  the  work  of  man,
but  the  Holy  Ghost.

11  For  she  of  all  women  is
that  only  Virgin  who  shall  bring
forth  the  Son  of  God,  and  you
shall  call  his  name  Jesus,  that
is,  Saviour :  for  he  will  save  his
people  from  their  sins.

12  Joseph  thereupon,  accord-
ing to  the  command  of  the  angel.


married  the  Virgin,  and  did  not
know  her,  but  kept  her  in  chas-
tity.

13  And  now  the  ninth  month
from  her  conception  drew  near,
when  Joseph  took  his  wife  and
what  other  things  were  neces-
sary to  Bethlehem,  the  city  from
whence  he  came.

14  And  it  came  to  pass,  while
they  were  there,  the  days  were
fulfilled  for  her  bringing  forth.

15  And  she  brought  forth  her
first-born  son,  as  the  holy  Evan-
gelists have  taught,  even  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  with  the
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,
lives  and  reigns  to    everlasting


The  PROTEVANGELION ;  or.  An  Historical  Account  of  the
BIRTH  of  CHRIST,  and  the  Perpetual  VIRGIN  MARY,  hLs
Mother,  by  JAMES  the  lesser,  Cousin  and  Brother  of  the
Lord  Jesus,  chief  Apostle  and  first  Bishop  of  the  Christians  in
Jerusalem.

IThis  Gospel  is  ascribed  to  James.  The  allusions  to  it  in  the  ancient  Fa-
thers are  frequent,  and  their  expressions  indicate  that  it  had  obtained  a
very  general  credit  in  the  Christian  world.  The  controversies  founded
^  upon  it  chiefly  relate  to  the  age  of  Joseph  at  the  birth  of  Christ,  and  to
his  being  a  widower  with  children,  before  his  marriage  with  the  Virgin.
It  seems  material  to  remark,  that  the  legends  of  the  latter  ages  aflirm
the  virginity  of  Joseph,  notwithstanding  Epiphanius,  Hilary,  Chrysos-
tom,  Cyril,  Euthymius,  Thephylact,  Occumenius,  and  indeed  all  the
Latin  Fathers  till  Ambrose,  and  the  Greek  Fathers  afterwards,  main-
tain the  opinions  of  Joseph's  age  and  family,  founded  upon  their  belief
in  the  authenticity  of  this  book.  It  is  supposed  to  have  been  originally
composed  in  Hebrew.  Postellus  brought  the  MS.  of  this  Gospel  from
the  Levant,  translated  it  into  Latin,  and  sent  it  to  Oporimus,  a  printer
at  Basil,  where  Bibliander,  a  Protestant  Divine,  and  the  Professor  of
Divinity  at  Zurich,  caused  it  to  be  printed  in  1552.  Postellus  asserts
that  it  was  publicly  read  as  canonical  in  the  eastern  churches,  they
making  no  doubt  that  James  was  the  author  of  it.  It  is,  nevertheless,
considered  apocryphal  by  some  of  the  most  learned  divines  in  the  Pro-
testant and  Catholic  churches.]

CHAP.  I.

1  Joachim,  a  rich  man,  2  offers  to  the
Lord,  3  is  opposed  by  Beitben  the  high-
priest,  because  he  has  not  begotten
issue  in  Israel,  6  retires  into  the  wil-
derness and  fasts  forty  days  and  forty
nights.


IN  the  history  of  the  twelve
tribes  of  Israel  we  read  there
was  a  certain  person  called  Joa-
chim, who  being  very  rich,  made
double^  offerings  to  the  Lord
God,  having   made  this  resolu-


24


^  That  is,  gave  as  much  more  as  he  was  obliged  lo  give.


ELIZABETH  RECEIVING    THE  VISIT  OF  MARY.  [Page

FKOM    A    GREEK     DIPTYCHON   OF  THB    THIRTEENTH    OR   FOURTEENTH    CENTURY.


rejected  for  his     THE  PROTEVANGELION.


barrenness.


tion :  my  substance  shall  be  for
the  benefit  of  the  whole  people,
and  that  I  may  find  mercy  from
the  Lord  God  for  the  forgiveness
of  my  sins.

2  But  at  a  certain  great  feast
of  the  Lord,  when  the  children
of  Israel  offered  their  gifts,  and
Joachim  also  offered  his,  Reuben
the  high-priest  opposed  him,  say-
ing it  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to
offer  thy  gifts,  seeing  thou  hast
not  begot  any  issue  in  Israel.

3  At  this  Joachim  being  con-
cerned very  much,  went  away
to  consult  the  registries  of  the
twelve  tribes,  to  see  whether  he
was  the  only  person  who  had
begot  no  issue.

4  But  upon  inquiry  he  found
that  all  the  righteous  had  raised
up  seed  in  Israel :

5  Then  he  called  to  mind  the
patriarch  Abraham,  How  that
God  in  the  end  of  his  life  had
given  him  his  son  Isaac;  upon
which  he  was  exceedingly  dis-
tressed, and  would  not  be  seen
by  his  wife :

6  But  retired  into  the  wilder-
ness, and  fixed  his  tent  there,
and  fasted  forty  days  and  forty
nights,  saying  to  himself,

7  I  will  not  go  down  either  to
eat  or  drink,  till  the  Lord  my
God  shall  look  down  upon  me,
but  prayer  shall  be  my  meat  and
drink.^

CHAP.  IL

1  Anna,  the  wife  of  Joachim,  mourns
her  barrenness,  6  is  reproached  with
it  by  Judith  her  maid,  9  sits  under  a
laurel  tree  and  prays  to  the  Lord.

IN  the  meantime  his  wife  Anna
was  distressed  and  perplexed
on  a  double  account,  and  said  I


2  Then  drew  near  a  great
feast  of  the  Lord,  and  Judith
her  maid  said.  How  long  will
you  thus  afflict  your  soul  ?  The
feast  of  the  Lord  is  now  come,
when  it  is  unlawful  for  any  one
to  mourn.

3  Take  therefore  this  hood
which  was  given  by  one  who
makes  such  things,  for  it  is  not
fit  that  I,  who  am  a  servant,
should  wear  it,  but  it  well  suits
a  person  of  your  greater  char-
acter.

4  But  Anna  replied,  Depart
from  me,  I  am  not  used  to  such
things;  besides,  the  Lord  hath
greatly  humbled  me.

5  I  fear  some  ill-designing
person  hath  given  thee  this,  and
thou  art  come  to  pollute  me  with
my  sin.

6  Then  Judith  her  maid  an-
swered, What  evil  shall  I  wish
you  when  you  will  not  hearken
to  me?

7  I  cannot  wish  you  a  greater
curse  than  you  are  under,  in
that  God  hath  shut  up  your
womb,  that  you  should  not  be  a
mother  in  Israel.

8  At  this  Anna  was  exceed-
ingly troubled,  and  having  on
her  wedding  garment,  went  about
three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  to
walk  in  her  garden.

9  And  she  saw  a  laurel-tree,
and  sat  under  it,  and  prayed
unto  the  Lord,  saying,

10  O  God  of  my  fathers,  bless
me  and  regard  my  prayer  as
thou  didst  bless  the  womb  of
Sarah,  and  gavest  her  a  son
Isaac.^

CHAP.  III.


1  Anna  perceiving  a  sparrow's  nest  in
the  laurels  bemoans  her  barrenness.


will  mourn  both  for  ray  widow
hood  and  my  barrenness.

^  In  imitation  of  the  foi'ty  days  and  nights  fast  of  Moses,  recorded  Exod.
xxiv.  11,  xxxiv.  28;  Deut.'ix.  9;  of  Elijah,  1  Kings  xix.  8;  and  Christ's,
Matt.  iv.  2.     2  Gen.  xxi.  2.

25


Angels  foretell       THE  PKOTEVANGELION.        Marys  birth.


AND  as  she  was  looking  to-
wards heaven  she  perceived
a  sparrow's  nest  in  the  laurel,

2  And  mourning  within  her-
self, she  said.  Wo  is  me,  who
begat  rae?  and  what  womb  did
bear  me,  that  I  should  be  thus
accursed  before  the  children  of
Israel,  and  that  they  should  re-
proach and  deride  me  in  the
temple  of  my  God :  Wo  is  me,
to  what  can  I  be  compared  ?

3  I  am  not  comparable  to  the
very  beasts  of  the  earth,  for  even
the  beasts  of  the  earth  are  fruit-
fiil  before  thee,  O  Lord!  Wo
is  me,  to  what  can  I  be  com-
pared ?

4  I  am  not  comparable  to  the
brute  animals,  for  even  the  brute
animals  are  fruitful  before  thee,

0  Lord !   Wo  is  me,  to  what  am

1  comparable  ?

5  I  cannot  be  compared  to
these  waters,  for  even  the  waters
are  fruitful  before  thee,  O  Lord  !
Wo  is  me,  to  what  can  I  be
compared  ?

6  I  am  not  comparable  to  the
waves  of  the  sea ;  for  these,  whe-
ther they  are  calm,  or  in  motion,
with  the  fishes  which  are  in
them,  praise  thee,  O  Lord !  Wo
is  me,  to  what  can  I  be  com-
pared ?

7  I  am  not  comparable  to  the
very  earth,  for  the  earth  pro-
duces its  fruits,  and  praises  th^e,

0  Lord !

CHAP.  IV.

1  An  Angel  appears  to  Anna  and  tells
her  she  shall  conceive  ;  two  angels  ap-
pear to  her  on  the  same  errand.  5
Joachim  sacrifices.  8  A7ina  goes  to
meet  him,  9  rejoicing  that  she  shall
conceive.

THEN  an  angel  of  the  Lord
stood  by  her  and  said,  Anna,
Anna,  the  Lord  hath  heard  thy
prayer ;  thou  shalt  conceive  and
bring   forth,   and   thy   progeny
26


shall  be  spoken   of  in   all   the
world.

2  And  Anna  answered.  As
the  Lord  my  God  liveth,  what-
ever I  bring  forth,  whether  it  be
male  or  female,  I  will  devote  it
to  the  Lord  my  God,  and  it  shall
minister  to  him  in  holy  things,
during  its  whole  life.

3  And  behold  there  appeared
two  angels,  saying  unto  her.  Be-
hold Joachim  thy  husband  is
coming  with  his  shepherds.

4  For  an  angel  of  the  Lord
hath  also  come  down  to  him,
and  said.  The  Lord  God  hath
heard  thy  prayer,  make  haste
and  go  hence,  for  behold  Anna
thy  wife  shall  conceive.

5  And  Joachim  went  down
and  called  his  shepherds,  saying
Bring  me  hither  ten  she-lambs
without  spot  or  blemish,  and
they  shall  be  for  the  Lord  ray
God.

6  And  bring  me  twelve  calves
without  blemish,  and  the  twelve
calves  shall  be  for  the  priests
and  the  elders.

7  Bring  me  also  a  hundred
goats,  and  the  hundred  goats
shall  be  for  the  whole  people.

8  And  Joachim  went  down
with  the  shepherds,  and  Anna
stood  by  the  gate  and  saw  Joa-
chim coming  with  the  shepherds.

9  And  she  ran,  and  hanging
about  his  neck,  said,  Now  I
know  that  the  Lord  hath  greatly
blessed  me :

10  For  behold,  I  who  was  a
widow  am  no  longer  a  widow,
and  I  who  was  barren  shall  con-
ceive.

CHAP.  V.

1  Joachim  abides  the  first  day  in  his
house,  but  sacrifices  on  the  morrow.
2  consults  the  plate  on  the  priests
forehead.  3  And  is  without  sin.  6
Anna  brings  forth  a  daughter,  9
whom  she  calls  Mary.


Her  dedication    THE  PROTEVANGELION.  in  the  temple.


AND  Joachim  abode  the  first
day  in  his  house,  but  on
the  morrow  he  brought  his  of-
ferings and  said,

2  If  the  Lord  be  propitious  to
me  let  the  plate  which  is  on  the
priest's  forehead^  make  it  ma-
nifest.

3  And  he  consulted  the  plate
which  the  priest  wore,  and  saw
it,  and  behold  sin  was  not  found
in  him.

4  And  Joachim  said.  Now  I
know  that  the  Lord  is  propitious
to  me,  and  hath  taken  away  all
my  sins.

5  And  he  went  down  from  the
temple  of  the  Lord  justified,  and
he  went  to  his  own  house.

6  And  when  nine  months  were
fulfilled  to  Anna,  she  brought
forth,  and  said  to  the  midwife,
What  have  I  brought  forth  ?

7  And  she  told  her,  a  girl.

8  Then  Anna  said,  the  Lord
hath  this  day  magnified  my
soul ;  and  she  laid  her  in  bed.

9  And  when  the  days  of  her
purification  were  accomplished,
she  gave  suck  to  the  child,  and
called  her  name  Mary.

CHAP.  VI.

1  Mary  at  nine  months  old,  walks  nine
steps,  3  Anna  keeps  her  holy,  4  When
she  is  a  year  old,  Joachim  makes  a
great  feast.  7  Anna  gives  her  the
breast,  and  sings  a  song  to  the  Lord.

AND  the  child  increased  in
strength  every  day,  so  that
when  she  was  nine  months  old,
her  mother  put  her  upon  the
ground  to  try  if  she  could  stand  ;
and  when  she  had  walked  nine
steps,  she  came  again  to  her  mo-
ther's lap.

2  Then  her  mother  caught
her  up,  and  said,  As  the  Lord
my  God  liveth,  thou  shalt  not


walk  again  on  this  earth  till  I
bring  thee  into  the  temple  of  the
Lord.

3  Accordingly  she  made  her
chamber  a  holy  place,  and  suf-
fered nothing  uncommon  or  un-
clean to  come  near  her,  but  in-
vited certain  un defiled  daughters
of  Israel,  and  they  drew  her
aside.

4  But  when  the  child  was  a
year  old,  Joachim  made  a  great
feast,  and  invited  the  priests,
scribes,  elders,  and  all  the  people
of  Israel ;

5  And  Joachim  then  made  an
offering  of  the  girl  to  the  chief
priests,  and  they  blessed  her,
saying.  The  God  of  our  fathers
bless  this  girl,  and  give  her  a
name  famous  and  lasting  through
all  generations.  And  all  the
people  replied,  So  be  it.  Amen.

6  Then  Joachim  a  second
time  offered  her  to  the  priests,
and  they  blessed  her,  saying,  O
most  high  God,  regard  this  girl,
and  bless  her  with  an  everlasting
blessing.

7  Upon  this  her  mother  took
her  up,  and  gave  her  the  breast,
and  sung  the  following  song  to
the  Lord.  ^

8  I  will  sing  a  new  song  unto
the  Lord  my  God,  for  he  hath
visited  me,  and  taken  away  from
me  the  reproach  of  mine  enemies,
and  hath  given  me  the  fruit  of
his  righteousness,  that  it  may
now  be  told  the  sons  of  Reuben,
that  Anna  gives  suck.

9  Then  she  put  the  child  to
rest  in  the  room  which  she  had
consecrated,  and  she  went  out
and  ministered  unto  them.

10  And  when  the  feast  was
ended,  they  went  away  rejoicing
and  praising  the  God  of  Israel.


^  Such  an  instrument  God  had  appointed  the  high-priest  to  wear  for  such
discoveries.     See  Exod.  xxviii.  36,  &c.,  and  Spencer  de  Unm  et  Thummim.
*  Compare  1  Sam.  ii.,  &c.,  with  Luke  i.  46.

27


Joseph  throws      THE  PROTEVANGELION.     away  his  hatchet.


CHAP.  VII.

3  3fanj  being  three  years  old,  Joachim
causes  certain  virgins  to  light  each  a
lamp,  and  goes  with  her  to  the  temple.
5  The  high-priest  places  her  on  the
third  step  of  the  altar,  and  she  dances
with  her  feet.

BUT  the  girl  grew,  and  when
she  was  two  years  old,  Joa-
chim said  to  Anna,  Let  us  lead
her  to  the  temple  of  the  Lord,
that  we  may  perform  our  vow,
which  v/e  have  vowed  unto  the
Lord  God,  lest  ho  should  be  an-
gry with  us,  and  our  oiFering  be
unacceptable.

2  But  Anna  said,  Let  us  wait
the  third  year,  lest  she  should
be  at  a  loss  to  know  her  father.
And  Joachim  said.  Let  us  then
wait.

3  And  when  the  child  was
three  years  old,  Joachim  said.
Let  us  invite  the  daughters  of
the  Hebrews,  who  are  undefiled,
and  let  them  take  each  a  lamp,
and  let  them  be  lighted,  that  the
child  may  not  turn  back  again,
and  her  mind  be  set  against  the
temple  of  the  Lord.

4  And  they  did  thus  till  they
ascended  into  the  temple  of  the
Lord.  And  the  high-priest  re-
ceived her,  and  blessed  her,  and
said,  Mary,  the  Lord  God  hath
magnified  thy  name  to  all  gene-
rations, and  to  the  very  end  of
time  by  thee  will  the  Lord  shew
his  redemption  to  the  children
of  Israel.

5  And  he  placed  her  upon  the
third  step  of  the  altar,  and  the
Lord  gave  unto  her  grace,  and
she  danced  with  her  feet,  and  all
the  house  of  Israel  loved  her.

CHAP.  YIII.

2  Mary  fed  in  the  temple  by  angels,  3
when  twelve  years  old  the  priests  con-
sult what  to  do  with  her.  6  2'Ae
angel  of  the  Lord  warns  Zacharias


to  call  together  all  the  widowers,  each
bringing  a  rod.  7  The  people  meet
by  sound  of  trumpet.  8  Joseph  throws
away  his  hatchet,  and  goes  to  the
meeting,  11  a  dove  comes  forth  from
his  rod,  and  alights  on  his  head.  1 2
He  is  chosen  to  betroth  the  Virgin.  13
refuses  because  he  is  an  old  man,  15
is  compelled,  16  takes  her  home,
and  goes  to  mind  his  trade  of  building.

AND  her  parents  went  away     ,
filled   with    wonder,   and    '
praising  God,  because  the  girl
did  not  return  back  to  them.

2  But  Mary  continued  in  the
temple  as  a  dove  educated  there,
and  received  her  food  from  the
hand  of  an  angel.

3  And  when  she  was  twelve
years  of  age,  the  priests  met  in  a
council,  and  said,  Behold,  Mary
is  twelve  years  of  age ;  what  shall
we  do  with  her,  for  fear  lest  the
holy  place  of  the  Lord  our  God
should  be  defiled  ?

4  Then  replied  the  priests  to
Zacharias  the  high-priest.  Do  you
stand  at  the  altar  of  the  Lord,
and  enter  into  the  holy  place,
and  make  petitions  concerning
her,  and  whatsoever  the  Lord
shall  manifest  unto  you,  that  do.

5  Then  the  high-priest  entered
into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and
taking  away  with  him  the  breast-
plate of  judgment^  made  prayers
concerning  her ;

6  And  behold  the  angel  of  the
Lord  came  to  him,  and  said,
Zacharias,  Zacharias,  Go  forth
and  call  together  all  the  widow-
ers among  the  people,  and  let
every  one  of  them  bring  his  rod,
and  he  by  whom  the  Lord  shall
shew  a  sign  shall  be  the  husband
of  Mary.

7  And  the  criers  went  out
through  all  Judsea,  and  the
trumpet  of  the  Lord  sounded,
and  all  the  people  ran  and  met
together.


28


See  Exoi.  xxviii.  22,  &c.


Mary's  lot  to       THE  PROTEVANGELION.       spm  the  purple.


8  T  Joseph  also,  throwing
away  the  hatchet,  went  out  to
meet  them ;  and  when  they  were
met,  they  went  to  the  high-priest,
taking  every  man  his  rod.

9  After  the  high-priest  had
received  their  rods,  he  went  into
the  temple  to  pray  ;

10  And  when  he  had  finished
his  prayer,  he  took  the  rods,  and
went  forth  and  distributed  them,
and  there  was  no  miracle  attend-
ed them.

11  The  last  rod  was  taken  by
Joseph,  and  behold  a  dove  pro-
ceeded out  of  the  rod,  and  flew
upon  the  head  of  Joseph.

12  And  the  high-priest  said,
Joseph,  Thou  art  the  person  cho-
sen to  take  the  Virgin  of  the
Lord,  to  keep  her  for  him :

13  But  Joseph  refused,  say-
ing, I  am  an  old  man,  and  have
children,  but  she  is  young,  and  I
fear  lest  I  should  appear  ridicu-
lous in  Israel.

14  Then  the  high-priest  re-
plied, Joseph,  fear  the  Lord  thy
God,  and  remember  how  God
dealt  with  Dathan,  Korah,  and
Abiram,  how  the  earth  opened
and  swallowed  them  up,  because
of  their  contradiction.

15  Now  therefore,  Joseph,  fear
God,  lest  the  like  things  should
happen  in  your  family.

IG  Joseph  then  being  afraid,
took  her  unto  his  house,  and  Jo-
seph said  unto  Mary,  Behold,  I
have  taken  thee  from  the  temple
of  the  Lord,  and  now  I  will
leave  thee  in  my  house ;  I  must
go  to  mind  my  trade  of  building.
The  Lord  be  with  thee.

CHAP.  IX.

1  The  priests  desire  a  new  veil  for  the
temple,  3  seven  virgins  cast  lots  for
making  different  parts  of  it,  4  the
lot  to  spin  the  true  purple  falls  to


Mary.  5  Zacharias,  the  high-priest,
becomes  dumb.  7  Mary  takes  a  pot
to  draw  water,  and  hears  a  voice,  8
tremUes  and  begins  to  work,  9  an
angel  appears,  and  salutes  her,  and
tells  her  she  shall  conceive  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  17  she  submits,  19  visits  her
cousin  Elizabeth,  whose  child  in  her
womb  leaps.

AND  it  came  to  pass,  in  a
council  of  the  priests,  it
was  said.  Let  us  make  a  new
veil  for  the  temple.

2  And  the  high-priest  said,
Call  together  to  me  seven  unde-
filed  virgins  of  the  tribe  of  David.

3  And  the  servants  went  and
brought  them  into  the  temple  of
the  Lord,  and  the  high-priest
said  unto  them  Cast  lots  before
me  now,  who  of  you  shall  spin
the  golden  thread,  who  the  blue,
who  the  scarlet,  who  the  fine
linen,  and  who  the  true  purple.

4  Then  the  high-priest  knew
Mary,  that  she  was  of  the  tribe
of  David;  and  he  called  her,
and  the  true  purple  fell  to  her
lot  to  spin,  and  she  went  away  to
her  own  house.

5  But  from  that  time  Zacha-
rias the  high-priest  became
dumb,  and  Samuel  was  placed
in  his  room  till  Zacharias  spoke
again.

6  But  Mary  took  the  true
jiurple,  and  did  spin  it.

7  1[  And  she  took  a  pot,  and
went  out  to  draw  water,  and
heard  a  voice  saying  unto  her,
Hail  thou  who  art  full  of  grace,*
the  Lord  is  with  thee ;  thou  art
blessed  among  women.

8  And  she  looked  round  to  the
right  and  to  the  left  (to  see)
whence  that  voice  came,  and  then
trembling  went  into  her  house,
and  laying  down  tlie  water-pot
she  took  the  purple,  and  sat
down  in  her  seat  to  work  it.


1  Luke  i.  28,  &c


29


Joseph's  jealousy.    THE  PROTEVANGELION.     He  is  warned.


\


9  And  behold  the  angel  of  the
Lord  stood  by  her,  and  said,
Fear  not,  Mary,  for  thou  hast
found  favour  in  the  sight  of  God ;

10  Which  when  she  heard,  she
reasoned  with  herself  what  that
sort  of  salutation  meant.

11  And  the  angel  said  unto
her.  The  Lord  is  with  thee,  and
thou  shalt  conceive :

12  To  which  she  replied,
What !  shall  I  conceive  by  the
living  God,  and  bring  forth  as
all  other  women  do  ?

13  But  the  angel  returned
answer,  Not  so,  O  Mary,  but  the
Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon
thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Most
High  shall  overshadow  thee ;

14  Wherefore  that  which  shall
be  born  of  thee  shall  be  holy,
and  shall  be  called  the  Son  of
the  Living  God,  and  thou  shalt
call  his  name  Jesus ;  for  he  shall
save  his  people  from  their  sins.

15  And  behold  thy  cousin
Elizabeth,  she  also  hath  con-
ceived a  son  in  her  old  age.

16  And  this  now  is  the  sixth
month  with  her,  who  was  called
barren ;  for  nothing  is  impossi-
ble with  God.

17  And  Mary  said.  Behold
the  handmaid  of  the  Lord ;  let
it  be  unto  me  according  to  thy
word.

18  Tf  And  when  she  had
wrought  her  purple,  she  carried
it  to  the  high-priest,  and  the
high-priest  blessed  her,  saying,
Mary,  the  Lord  God  hath  mag-
nified thy  name,  and  thou  shalt
be  blessed  in  all  the  ages  of  the
world.

19  Then  Mary,  filled  with  joy,
went  away  to  her  cousin  Eliza-
beth, and  knocked  at  the  door.

20   Which   when    Elizabeth
heard,  she  ran  and   opened  to
her,  and  blessed  her,  and  said,
^  Luke  ii

30


Whence  is  this  to  me,  that  the
mother  of  my  Lord  should  come
unto  me  ?

21  For  lo!  as  soon  as  the
voice  of  thy  salutation  reached
my  ears,  that  which  is  in  me
leaped  and  blessed  thee.

22  But  Mary,  being  ignorant
of  all  those  mysterious  things
which  the  archangel  Gabriel  had
spoken  to  her,  lifted  up  her  eyes
to  heaven,  and  said.  Lord!
What  am  I,  that  all  the  genera-
tions of  the  earth  should  call  me
blessed  ?

23  But  perceiving  herself  daily
to  grow  big,  and  being  afraid,
she  went  home,  and  hid  herself
from  the  children  of  Israel ;  and
was  fourteen  years  old  when  all
these  things  happened.

CHAP.  X.

1  Joseph  returns  from  building  houses,
finds  the  Virgin  grown  big,  being  six
months'  gone  with  child,  2  is  jealous
and  troubled,  8  reproaches  her,  10
she  affirms  her  innocence,  13  Ae  leaves
her,  16  determines  to  dismiss  her  pri-
vately, 17  is  warned  in  a  dream  that
Mary  is  with  child  by  the  Holy  Ghost,
20  and  glorifies  God  who  hath  shewn
him  such  favour.

AND  when  her  sixth  month
was  come,  Joseph  returned
from  his  building  houses  abroad,
which  was  his  trade,  and  enter-
ing into  the  house,  found  the
Virgin  grown  big:

2  Then  smiting  upon  his  face,
he  said,  With  what  face  can  I
look  up  to  the  Lord  my  God  ?
or,  what  shall  I  say  concerning
this  young  woman  ?

3  For  I  received  her  a  Virgin
out  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord
my  God,  and  have  not  preserved
her  such  !

4  Who  has  thus  deceived  me  ?
Who  has  committed  this  evil  in
my  house,  and  seducing  the  Vir-
gin from  me,  hath  defiled  her  ?
39,  &c.


Joseph  and  Mary's  THE  PROTEVANGELION.  cliasUty proved.


5  Is  not  the  history  of  Adam
exactly  accomplished  in  me  ?

6  For  in  the  very  instant  of
his  glory,  the  serpent  came  and
found  Eve  alone,  and  seduced
her.

7  Just  after  the  same  manner
it  has  happened  to  me.

8  Then  Joseph  arising  from
the  ground,  called  her,  and  said,

0  thou  who  hast  been  so  much
favoured  by  God,  why  hast  thou
done  this?

9  Why  hast  thou  thus  debased
thy  soul,  who  wast  educated  in
the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  received
thy  food  from  the  hand  of  an-
gels?

10  But  she,  with  a  flood  of
tears,  replied,  I  am  innocent,
and  have  known  no  man.

11  Then  said  Joseph,  How
comes  it  to  pass  you  are  with
child?

12  Mary  answered.  As  the
Lord  my  God  liveth,  I  know
not  by  what  means.

13  ^  Then  Joseph  was  ex-
ceedingly afraid,  and  went  away
from  her,  considering  what  he
should  do  with  her ;  and  he  thus
reasoned  with  himself:^

14  If  I  conceal  her  crime,  I
shall  be  found  guilty  by  the  law
of  the  Lord  ;

15  And  if  I  discover  her  to
the  children  of  Israel,  I  fear,
lest  she  being  with  child  by  an
angel,  I  shall  be  found  to  betray
the  life  of  an  innocent  person :

16  What  therefore  shall  I  do?

1  will  privately  dismiss  her.

17  Then  the  night  was  come
upon  him,  when  behold  an  angel
of  the  Lord  appeared  to  him  in
a  dream,  and  said,

18  Be  not  afraid  to  take  that
young  woman,  for  that  which  is
within  her  is  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;


19  And  she  shall  bring  forth
a  son,  and  thou  shalt  call  his
name  Jesus,  for  he  shall  save
his  people  from  their  sins.

20  Then  Joseph  arose  from
his  sleep,  and  glorified  the  God
of  Israel,  who  had  shown  him
such  favour,  and  preserved  the
Virgin.

CHAP.  XI.

3  Annas  visits  Joseph,  perceives  the
Virgin  big  with  child,  4  informs  the
high  priest  that  Joseph  had  privately
married  her.  8  Joseph  and  Mary
brought  to  trial  on  the  charge.  17
Joseph  drinks  the  water  of  the  Lord
as  an  ordeal,  and  receiving  no  harm,
returns  home.

THEN  came  Annas  the  scribe,
and  said  to  Joseph,  Where-
fore have  we  not  seen  you  since
your  return  ?

2  And  Joseph  replied.  Because
I  was  weary  after  my  journey,
and  rested  the  first  day.

3  But  Annas  turning  about
perceived  the  Virgin  big  with
child.

4  And  went  away  to  the
priest,  and  told  him,  Joseph  in
whom  you  placed  so  much  con-
fidence, is  guilty  of  a  notorious
crime,  in  that  he  hath  defiled
the  Virgin  whom  he  received
out  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord,
and  hath  privately  married  her,
not  discovering  it  to  the  children
of  Israel.

5  Then  said  the  priest.  Hath
Joseph  done  this  ?

6  Annas  replied.  If  you  send
any  of  your  servants,  you  will
find  that  she  is  with  child.

7  And  the  servants  went,  and
found  it  as  he  said.

8  Upon  this  both  she  and  Jo-
seph were  brought  to  their  trial,
and  the  priest  said  unto  her,
Mary,  what  hast  thou  done  ?

9  Why  hast  thou  debased  thy


1  See  Matt.  i.  18.


31


Joseph's  trial       THE  PROTEVANGELION.        and  acquittal


soul,  and  forgot  thy  God,  seeing
thou  wast  brought  up  in  the
Holy  of  Holies,  and  didst  receive
thy  food  from  the  hands  of  an-
gels, and  heardest  their  songs  ?

10  Why  hast  thou  done  this  ?

11  To  which  with  a  flood  of
tears  she  answered.  As  the  Lord
my  God  liveth,  I  am  innocent
in  his  sight,  seeing  I  know  no
man.

12  Then  the  priest  said  to
Joseph,  Why  hast  thou  done
this  ?

13  And  Joseph  answered,  As
the  Lord  my  God  liveth,  I  have
not  been  concerned  with  her.

14  But  the  priest  said.  Lie
not,  but  declare  the  truth  ;  thou
hast  privately  married  her,  and
not  discovered  it  to  the  children
of  Israel,  and  humbled  thyself
under  the  mighty  hand  (of  God),
that  thy  seed  might  be  blessed.

15  And  Joseph  was  silent.

16  Then  said  the  priest  (to
Joseph),  You  must  restore  to
the  temple  of  the  Lord  the
Virgin  which  you  took  thence.

17  But  he  wept  bitterly,  and
the  priest  added,  I  will  cause
you  both  to  drink  the  water  of
the  Lord,^  which  is  for  trial,  and
so  your  iniquity  shall  be  laid
open  before  you.

18  Then  the  priest  took  the
water,  and  made  Joseph  drink,
and  sent  him  to  a  mountainous
place.

19  And  he  returned  perfectly
well,  and  all  the  people  won-
dered that  his  guilt  was  not  dis-
covered.

20  So  the  priest  said,  Since
the  Lord  hath  not  made  your
sins  evident,  neither  do  I  con-
demn you.

21  So  he  sent  them  away.

22  Then  Joseph  took  Mary,


and  went  to  his  house,  rejoicing
and  praising  the  God  of  Israel.

CHAP.  XIL

1  A  decree  from  Augustus  for  taxing
the  Jews.  5  Joseph  puts  Mary  on  an
ass,  to  return  to  Bethlehem,  6  she
looks  sorrowful,  7  she  laughs,  8  Joseph
inquires  the  cause  of  each,  9  she  tells
him  she  sees  two  persons,  one  mourn-
ing and  the  other  rejoicing,  10  the
delivery  being  near,  he  takes  her  from
the  ass,  and  places  her  in  a  cave.

AND  it  came  to  pass,  that
there  went  forth  a  decree'
from  the  Emperor  Augustus,
that  all  the  Jews  should  be
taxed,  who  were  of  Bethlehem
in  Judsea :

2  And  Joseph  said,  I  will
take  care  that  my  children  be
taxed :  but  what  shall  I  do  with
this  young  woman  ?

3  To  have  her  taxed  as  my
wife  I  am  ashamed;  and  if  I
tax  her  as  my  daughter,  all
Israel  knows  she  is  not  my
daughter.

4  When  the  time  of  the  Lord's
appointment  shall  come,  let  him
do  as  seems  good  to  him.

5  And  he  saddled  the  ass,  and
put  her  upon  it,  and  Joseph  and
Simon  followed  after  her,  and
arrived  at  Bethlehem  within
three  miles.

6  Then  Joseph  turning  about
saw  Mary  sorrowful,  and  said
within  himself.  Perhaps  she  is
in  pain  through  that  which  is
within  her.

7  But  when  he  turned  about
again  he  saw  her  laughing,  and
said  to  her,

8  Mary,  how  happens  it,  that
I  sometimes  see  sorrow,  and
sometimes  laughter  and  joy  in
thy  countenance  ?

9  And  Mary  replied  to  him,
I  see  two  people  with  mine  eyes,


82


Num.  V.  18.


'  Luke  ii.  1.


THE  BIRTH   OF  CHRIST.  [Page  84.

PKOM  A    "  BOOK  OF  THH  EVANGBLISTS."    GREEK  MANXTSCRIPT  OF  THE  TWELFTH  CENTURT.


Miracles  at  THE  PROTEVANGELION        Mary's  labour.


the  one  weeping  and  mourning,
the  other  laughing  and  rejoicing.

10  And  he  went  again  across
the  way,  and  Mary  said  to  Jo-
seph, Take  me  down  from  the  ass,
for  that  which  is  in  me  presses  to
come  forth.

11  But  Joseph  replied,  Whi-
ther shall  I  take  thee  ?  for  the
place  is  desert.

12  Then  said  Mary  again  to
Joseph,  take  me  down,  for  that
which  is  within  me  mightily
presses  me.

13  And  Joseph  took  her  down.

14  And  he  found  there  a  cave,
and  let  her  into  it.

CHAP.  xin.

1  Joseph  seeks  a  Hebrew  midwife,  2
perceives  the  fowls  stopping  in  their
flight,  3  the  working  people  at  their
food  not  moving,  8  the  sheep  stand-
ing still,  9  the  shepherd  fixed  and
immoveable,  10  and  kids  with  their
mouths  touching  the  water  but  not
drinking.

AND  leaving  her  and  his  sons
in  the  cave,  Joseph  went
forth  to  seek  a  Hebrew  midwife
in  the  village  of  Bethlehem.

2  But  as  I  was  going  (said  Jo-
seph) I  looked  up  into  the  air,
and  I  saw  the  clouds  astonished,
and  the  fowls  of  the  air  stop-
ping in  the  midst  of  their  flight.

3  And  I  looked  down  towards
the  earth,  and  saw  a  table
spread,  and  working  people  sit-
ting around  it,  but  their  hands
were  upon  the  table,  and  they
did  not  move  to  eat.

4  They  who  had  meat  in  their
mouths  did  not  eat.

5  They  who  lifted  their  hands
up  to  their  heads  did  not  draw
them  back  :

6  And  they  who  lifted  them
up  to  their  mouths  did  not  put
anything  in ;

7  But  all  their  faces  were
fixed  upwards.

3


8  And  I  beheld  the  sheep  dis-
persed, and  yet  the  sheep  stood
still.

9  And  the  shepherd  lifted  up
his  hand  to  smite  them,  and  his
hand  continued  up.

10.  And  I  looked  unto  a  river,
and  saw  the  kids  with  their
mouths  close  to  the  water,  and
touching  it,  but  they  did  not
drink.

CHAP.  XIV.

1  Joseph  finds  a  midivife.  10  A  bright
cloud  overshadows  the  cave.  11  A
great  light  in  the  cave,  gradually  in-
creases until  the  infant  is  born.  13
The  midwife  goes  out,  and  tells
Salome  that  she  has  seen  a  virgin
bring  forth.  17  Salome  doubts  it.
20  her  hand  withers,  22  she  suppli-
cates the  Liord,  28  is  cured,  30  but
warned  not  to  dedare  what  she  had
seen.

THEN  I  beheld  a  woman  com-
ing down  from  the  moun-
tains, and  she  said  to  me,  Where
art  thou  going,  O  man  ?

2  And  I  said  to  her,  I  go  to
inquire  for  a  Hebrew  midwife.

3  She  replied  to  me,  Where
is  the  woman  that  is  to  be  de-
livered ?

4  And  I  answered.  In  the
cave,  and  she  is  betrothed  to  me.

5  Then  said  the  midwife,  Is
she  not  thy  wife  ?

6  Joseph  answered,  It  is  Mary,.
who  was  educated  in  the  Holy
of  Holies,  in  the  house  of  the
Lord,  and  she  fell  to  my  lot,
and  is  not  my  wife,  but  has  con-
ceived by  the  Holy  Ghost.

7  The  midwife  said,  Is  this
true?

8  He  answered.  Come  and
see.

9  And  the  midwife  went
along  with  him,  and  stood  in  the
cave.

10  Then  a  bright  cloud  over-
shadowed the  cave,  and  the  mid-
33


'Christ  horn.         THE  PROTEVANGELION.    Salome's  unbelief.


wife  said,  This  day  my  soul  is
magnified,  for  mine  eyes  have
seen  surprising  things,  and  sal-
vation is  brought  forth  to  Israel.

11  But  on  a  sudden  the  cloud
became  a  great  light  in  the  cave,
so  that  their  eyes  could  not  bear
it.

12  But  the  light  gradually
decreased,  until  the  infant  ap-
peared, and  sucked  the  breast  of
his  mother  Mary.

13  Then  the  midwife  cried
out,  and  said.  How  glorious  a
day  is  this,  wherein  mine  eyes
have  seen  this  extraordinary
sight !

14  And  the  midwife  went  out
from  the  cave,  and  Salome  met
her.

15  And  the  midwife  said  to
her,  Salome,  Salome,  I  will  tell
you  a  most  surprising  thing
which  I  saw,

16  A  virgin  hath  brought
forth,  which  is  a  thing  contrary
to  nature.

17  To  which  Salome  replied.
As  the  Lord  my  God  liveth,  un-
less I  receive  particular  proof
of  this  matter,  I  will  not  believe
that  a  virgin  hath  brought  forth.

18  ^  Then  Salome  went  in,
and  the  midwife  said,  Mary,
shew  thyself,  for  a  great  contro-
versy is  risen  concerning  thee.

19  And  Salome  received  satis-
faction.

20  But  her  hand  was  with-
ered, and  she  groaned  bitterly.

21  And  said,  Woe  to  me,  be-
cause of  mine  iniquity  ;  for  I
have  tempted  the  living  God,
and  my  hand  is  ready  to  drop
off.

22  Then  Salome  made  her
supplication  to  the  Lord,  and
said,  O  God  of  my  fathers,  re-
member  me,  for   I   am   of  the  I


seed   of   Abraham,   and    Isaac,
and  Jacob.

23  Make  me  not  a  reproach
among  the  children  of  Israel,
but  restore  me  sound  to  my
parents.

24  For  thou  well  knowest,  O
Lord,  that  I  have  performed
many  offices  of  charity  in  thy
name,  and  have  received  my  re-
ward from  thee.

25  Upon  this  an  angel  of  the
Lord  stood  by  Salome,  and  said.
The  Lord  God  hath  heard  thy
prayer,  reach  forth  thy  hand  to
the  child,  and  carry  him,  and  by
that  means  thou  shalt  be  re-
stored.

26  Salome,  filled  with  exceed-
ing joy,  went  to  the  child,  and
said,  I  will  touch  him :

27  And  she  purposed  to  wor-
ship him,  for  she  said,  This  is  a
great  king  which  is  born  in  Israel.

28  And  straightway  Salome
was  cured.

29  Then  the  midwife  went
out  of  the  cave,  being  approved
by  God.

30  And  lo !  a  voice  came  to
Salome,  Declare  not  the  strange
things  which  thou  hast  seen,  till
the  child  shall  come  to  Jeru-
salem.

31  So  Salome  also  departed,
approved  by  God.

CHAP.  XV.

1  Wise  men  come  from  the  east,  Z.  He-
rod alarmed ;  8  desires  them  if  they
find  the  child,  to  bring  him  word.  10
They  visit  the  cave,  and  offer  the  child
their  treasure,  11  and  being  warned
in  a  dream,  do  not  return  to  Herod,
but  go  home  another  way.

THEN  Joseph  was  preparing
to  go  away,  because  there
arose  a  great  disorder  in  Bethle-
hem by  the  coming  of^  some
wise  men  from  the  east,


34


Matt.  ii.  1 ,  &c.


The  wise  men.       THE  PROTE VAl^l  GELION.    Star  in  the  East.


2  Who  said,  Where  is  the
king  of  the  Jews  born  ?  For  we
have  seen  his  star  in  the  east,
and  are  come  to  worship  him.

3  When  Herod  heard  this,  he
was  exceedingly  troubled,  and
sent  messengers  to  the  wise  men,
and  to  the  priests,  and  inquired
of  them  in  the  town-liall,

4  And  said  unto  them.  Where
have  you  it  written  concerning
Christ  the  king,  or  where  should
he  be  born  ?

5  Then  they  say  unto  him,  In
Bethlehem  of  Judaea;  for  thus
it  is  written :  And  thou  Bethle-
hem in  the  land  of  Judah,  art
not  the  least  among  the  princes
of  Judah,  for  out  of  thee  shall
come  a  ruler,  who  shall  rule  my
people  Israel.

6  And  having  sent  away  the
chief  priests,  he  inquired  of  the
wise  men  in  the  town-hall,  and
said  unto  them.  What  sign  was
it  ye  saw  concerning  the  king
that  is  born  ?

7  They  answered  him,  We
saw  an  extraordinary  large  star
shining  among  the  stars  of  hea-
ven, and  so  out-shined  all  the
other  stars,  as  that  they  became
not  visible,  and  we  knew  thereby
that  a  great  king  was  born  in
Israel,  and  therefore  we  are
come  to  worship  him.

8  Then  said  Herod  to  them.
Go  and  make  diligent  inquiry ;
and  if  ye  find  the  child,  bring
me  word  again,  that  I  may  come
and  worship  him  also.

9  So  the  wise  men  went  forth,
and  behold,  the  star  which  they
saw  in  the  east  went  before
them,  till  it  came  and  stood  over
the  cave  where  the  young  child
was  with  Mary  his  mother.

10  Then  they  brought  forth
out  of  their  treasures,  and  ofiered


unto  him  gold  and  frankincense,
and  myrrh.

11  And  being  warned  in  a
dream  by  an  angel,  that  they
should  not  return  to  Herod
through  Judsea,  they  departed
into  their  own  country  by  an-
other way.

CHAP.  XVI.

1  Herod  enrar/ed,  orders  the  infants  in
Bethlehem  to  he  slain.  2  Mary  puts
her  infant  in  an  ox  manger.  3  Eli-
zabeth flees  with  her  son  John  to  the
mountains.  6  A  mountain  miracu-
lously divides  and  receives  them.  9
Herod  incensed  at  the  escape  of  John,
causes  Zacharias  to  be  murdered  at
the  altar,  23  the  roofs  of  the  temple
rent,  the  body  miraculously  conveyed,
and  the  blood  petrified.  25  Israel
mourns  for  him.  27  Simeon  chosen
his  successor  by  lot.

THEN  Herod^  perceiving  that
he  was  mocked  by  the  wise
men,  and  being  very  angry,
commanded  certain  men  to  go
and  to  kill  all  the  children  that
were  in  Bethlehem,  from  two
years  old  and  under.

2  But  Mary  hearing  that  the
children  were  to  be  killed,  being
under  much  fear,  took  the  child,
and  wrapped  him  up  in  swad-
dling clothes,  and  laid  him  in
an  ox-manger,^  because  there
was  no  room  for  them  in  the  inn.

3  Elizabeth  also,  hearing  that
her  «on  John  was  about  to  be
searched  for,  took  him  and  went
up  unto  the  mountains,  and
looked  around  for  a  place  to
hide  him ;

4  And  there  was  no  secret
place  to  be  found.

5  Then  she  groaned  within
herself,  and  said,  O  mountain
of  the  Lord,  receive  the  mother
with  the  child.

6  For  Elizabeth  could  not
climb  up.


^  Matt.  ii.  16.


'  Luke  ii.  7  is  alluded  to,  though  misapplied  as  to  time.

35


Herod's  cruelty,    THE  PROTEVANGELION.   Zachs.  murdered.


7  And  instantly  the  mountain
was  divided  and  received  them.

8  And  there  appeared  to  them
an  angel  of  the  Lord,  to  pre-
serve them.

9  If  But  Herod  made  search
after  John,  and  sent  servants  to
Zacharias,  when  he  was  (minis-
tering) at  the  altar,  and  said
unto  him,  Where  hast  thou  hid
thy  son  ?

10  He  replied  to  them,  I  am
a  minister  of  God,  and  a  servant
at  the  altar ;  how  should  I  know
where  my  son  is  ?

11  So  the  servants  went  back,
and  told  Herod  the  whole;  at
which  he  was  incensed,  and
said.  Is  not  this  son  of  his  like
to  be  king  in  Israel  ?

12  He  sent  therefore  again
his  servants  to  Zacharias,  saying.
Tell  us  the  truth,  where  is  thy
son,  for  you  know  that  your  life
is  in  my  hand.

13  So  the  servants  went  and
told  him  all  this  :

14  But  Zacharias  replied  to
them,  I  am  a  martyr  for  God,
and  if  he  shed  my  blood,  the
Lord  will  receive  my  soul.

15  Besides  know  that  ye  shed
innocent  blood.

16  However  Zacharias  was
murdered  in  the  entrance  of  the
temple  and  altar,  and  about  the
partition ;


17  But  the  children  of  Israel
knew  not  when  he  was  killed.

18  T  Then  at  the  hour  of  sa-
lutation the  priests  went  into  the
temple,  but  Zacharias  did  not
according  to  custom  meet  them
and  bless  them ;

19  Yet  they  still  continued
waiting  for  him  to  salute  them  ;

20  And  when  they  found  he
did  not  in  a  long  time  come,
one  of  them  ventured  into  the
holy  place  where  the  altar  was,
and  ho  saw  blood  lying  upon
the  ground  congealed ;

21  When,  behold,  a  voice
from  heaven  said,  Zacharias  is
murdered,  and  his  blood  shall
not  be  wiped  away,  until  the
revenger  of  his  blood  come.

22  But  when  he  heard  thii^,
he  was  afraid,  and  went  fortli
and  told  the  priests  what  he  had
seen  and  heard ;  and  they  all
went  in,  and  saw  the  fact.

23  Then  the  roofs  of  the  tem-
ple howled,  and  were  rent  from
the  top  to  the  bottom :

24  And  they  could  not  find
the  body,  but  only  blood  made
hard  like  stone.

25  And  they  went  away,  and
told  the  people,  that  Zacharias
was  murdered,  and  all  the  tribes
of  Israel  heard  thereof,  and
mourned  for  him,  and  lamented
three  days.^


1  There  is  a  story  both  in  the  Jerusalem  and  Babylonish  Talmud  very
similar  to  this.  It  is  cited  by  Dr.  Lightfoot,  Talmud,  Hierosol,  in  Taannith,
fol.  69 ;  and  Talmud,  Bahyl.  in  Sanhedr.,  fol.  96.  "  Rabbi  Jochanan  said,
Eighty  thousand  priests  were  slain  for  the  blood  of  Zacharias.  Rabbi
Judas  asked  Rabbi  Achan,  Where  did  they  kill  Zacharias  ?  Was  it  in  the
woman's  court,  or  in  the  court  of  Israel  ?  He  answered :  Neither  in  the
court  of  Israel,  nor  in  the  court  of  women,  but  in  the  court  of  the  priests;
and  they  did  not  treat  his  blood  in  the  same  manner  as  they  were  wont
to  treat  the  blood  of  a  ram  or  a  young  goat.  For  of  these  it  is  written.
He  shall  pour  out  his  blood,  and  cover  it  with  dust.  But  it  is  written
here,  The  blood  is  in  the  midst  of  her :  she  set  it  upon  the  top  of  the  rock  ;
she  poured  it  not  upon  the  ground.  (Ezek.  xxiv.  7.)  But  why  was  this?
That  it  might  cause  fury  to  come  up  to  take  vengeance :  I  have  set  his
blood  upon  the  top  of  a  rock,  that  it  should  not  be  covered.  They  com-
mitted seven  evils  that  day:  they  murdered  a  priest,  a  prophet,  and  a
36


Simeon  succeeds    THE  PROTEVANGELION.  Zacharias.

26  Then  the  priests  took  i  H  I  James  wrote  thus  History  in  Je-
counsel  together  concerning  a  rusalem :  and  when  the  disturbance  torn
person  to  succeed  him.  J  retired  into  a  desert  place,  until   the

27  And  Simeon  and  the  other   death  of  Herod.    And  the  disturbance

ceased  at  Jerusalem.  Thxd  which  re-
mains is,  that  I  glorify  God  that  he  hath
given  me  such  wisdom  to  write  unto  you
who  are  spiritual,  and  who  love  God:
to  whom  {be  ascribed)  glory  and  domi-
nion for  ever  and  ever,  Amen.


priests  cast  lots,  and  the  lot  fell
upon  Simeon.

28  For  he  had  been  assured
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  he
should  not  die,  till  he  had  seen
Christ  come  in  the  flesh/


king ;  they  shed  the  blood  of  the  innocent :  they  polluted  the  court :  that
day  was  the  Sabbath :  and  the  day  of  expiation.  When  tlierefore  Nebuzara-
dan  came  there  (viz.  Jerusalem),  he  saw  his  blood  bubbling,  and  said  to
them,  What  meaneth  this  ?  They  answered,  It  is  the  blood  of  calves,  lambs,
and  rams,  which  we  have  offered  upon  the  altar.  He  commanded  then,  that
they  should  bring  calves,  and  lambs,  and  rams,  and  said  I  will  try  whether
this  be  their  blood :  accordingly  they  brought  and  slew  them,  but  the  blood
of  (Zacharias)  still  bubbled,  but  the  blood  of  these  did  not  bubble.  Then  he
said,  Declare  to  me  the  truth  of  the  matter,  or  else  1  will  comb  your  flesh
with  iron  combs.  Then  said  they  to  him,  He  was  a  priest,  prophet,  and
judge,  who  prophesied  to  Israel  all  these  calamities  which  we  have  suffered
from  you ;  but  we  arose  against  him,  and  slew  him.  Then,  said  he,  I  will  ap-
pease him :  then  he  took  the  rabbins  and  slew  them  upon  his  (viz.  Zacharias's)
blood,  and  he  was  not  yet  appeased.  Next  he  took  the  young  boys  from  the
schools,  and  slew  them  upon  his  blood,  and  yet  it  bubbled.  Then  he  brought
the  young  priests  and  slew  them  in  the  same  place,  and  yet  it  still  bubbled.
So  he  slew  at  length  ninety-four  thousand  persons  upon  his  blood,  and  it  did
not  as  yet  cease  bubbling.  Then  he  drew  near  to  it,  and  said,  O  Zacharias,
Zacharias,  thou  hast  occasioned  the  death  of  the  chief  of  thy  countrymen  f
shall  I  slay  them  all  ?  then  the  blood  ceased,  and  did  bubble  no  more."
^Lukeii.  26.

37


^


/


The  first  Gospel  of  the  INFANCY  of  JESUS  CHRIST.

[Mr.  Henry  Sike,  Professor  of  Oriental  Languages  at  Cambridge,  first  trans-
.  lated  and  published  this  Gospel  in  1697.  It  was  received  by  the  Gnostics,
a  sect  of  Christians  in  the  second  century ,  and  several  of  its  relations  were
credited  in  the  following  ages  by  other  Christians,  viz.,  Eusebius,  Athana-
sius,  Epiphanius,  Chrysostom,  &c.  Sozomen  says,  he  was  told  by  many,
and  he  credits  the  relations,  of  the  idols  in  Egypt  falling  down  on  Joseph,
and  Mary's  flight  thither  with  Christ ;  and  of  Christ  making  a  well  to  wash
his  clothes  in  a  sycamore  tree,  from  whence  balsam  afterwards  proceeded.
These  stories  are  from  this  Gospel.  Chemnitlut;  out  of  Stipulensis,  who
had  it  from  Peter  Martyr,  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  in  the  third  century,  says,
that  the  place  in  Egypt  where  Christ  was  banished  is  now  called  Matarea,
about  ten  miles  beyond  Cairo ;  that  the  inhabitants  constantly  burn  a  lamp
in  remembrance  of  it ;  and  that  there  is  a  garden  of  trees  yielding  a  bal-
sam, which  were  planted  by  Christ  when  a  boy.  M.  La  Crosse  cites  a
synod  at  Angamala,  in  the  mountains  of  Malabar,  a.d.  1599,  which  con-
demns this  Gospel  as  commonly  read  by  the  Nestorians  in  that  country.
Ahmed  Ibu  Idris,  a  Mahometan  divine,  says,  it  was  used  by  some  Chris-
tians in  common  with  the  other  four  Gospels ;  and  Ocobius  de  Castro  men-
tions a  Gospel  of  Thomas,  which  he  says,  he  saw  and  had  translated  to
him  by  an  Armenian  Archbishop  at  Amsterdam,  that  was  read  in  very
many  churches  of  Asia  and  Africa,  as  the  only  rule  of  their  faith.  Fabri-
cius  takes  it  to  be  this  Gospel.  It  has  been  supposed,  that  Mahomet  and
his  coadjutors  used  it  in  compiling  the  Koran.  There  are  several  stories
believed  of  Christ  proceeding  from  this  Gospel ;  as  that  which  Mr.  Sike
relates  out  of  La  Brosse's  Persic  Lexicon,  that  Christ  practised  the  trade
of  a  dyer,  and  his  working  a  miracle  with  the  colours ;  from  whence  the
Persian  dyers  honour  him  as  their  patron,  and  call  a  dye-house  the  shop
of  Christ.  Sir  John  Chardin  mentions  Persian  legends  concerning
Christ's  dispute  with  his  schoolmaster  about  his  A  B  C ;  and  his  lengthen-
ing the  cedar-board  which  Joseph  sawed  too  short.]


CHAP.  I.

1  Caiaphas  relates,  that  Jesus  when  in
his  cradle,  informed,  his  mother,  that
he  was  the  Son  of  God.  5  Joseph  and
Mary  going  to  Bethlehem  to  be  taxed,
Mary's  time  of  bringing  forth  arrives,
and  she  goes  into  a  cave.  8  Joseph
fetches  in  a  Hebrew  woman,  the  cave
fUlled  with  great  lights.  11  The  in-
fant born,  17  cures  the  woman,  19
arrival  of  the  shepherds.

THE  following  accounts  we
.  found  in  the  book  of  Jo-
seph the  high-priest,  called  by
some  Caiaphas :

2  He  relates,  that  Jesus  spake
even  when  he  was  in  the  cradle,
and  said  to  his  mother :

3  Mary,  I  am  Jesus  the  Son  of
God,  that  word  which  thou  didst
bring  forth  according  to  the  de-
claration of  the  angel  Gabriel  to
thee,  and  my  father  hath  sent  me
for  the  salvation  of  the  world.

38


4  T  In  the  three  hundred  and
ninth  year  of  the  sera  of  Alexan-
der, Augustus  published  a  decree
that  all  persons  should  go  to  be
taxed  in  their  own  country.

5  Joseph  therefore  arose,  and
with  Mary  his  spouse  he  went  to
Jerusalem,  and  then  came  to
Bethlehem,  that  he  and  his
family  might  be  taxed  in  the
city  of  his  fathers.

6  And  when  they  came  by  the
cave,  Mary  confessed  to  Joseph
that  her  time  of  bringing  forth
was  come,  and  she  could  not  go
on  to  the  city,  and  said,  Let  us
go  into  this  cave.

7  At  that  time  the  sun  was
very  near  going  down.

8  But  Joseph  hastened  away,
that  he  might  fetch  her  a  mid-
wife; and  when  he  saw  an  old
Hebrew  woman  who  was  of  Jeru-


Christ  born  and


I.  INFANCY.      circumcised  in  the  cave.


salem,  he  said  to  her,  Pray  come
hither,  good  woman,  and  go  into
that  cave,  and  you  will  there  see
a  woman  just  ready  to  bring
forth.

9  It  was  after  sunset,  when
the  old  woman  and  Joseph  with
her  reached  the  cave,  and  they
both  went  into  it.

10  And  behold,  it  was  all  filled
with  lights,  greater  than  the
light  of  lamps  and  candles,  and
greater  than  the  light  of  the  sun
itself

11  The  infant  was  then  wrap-
ped up  in  swaddling  clothes,  and
sucking  the  breasts  of  his  mother
St.  Mary.

12  When  they  both  saw  this
light,  they  were  surprised;  the
old  woman  asked  St.  Mary,  Art
thou  the  mother  of  this  child  ?

13  St.  Mary  replied,  She  was.

14  On  which  the  old  woman
said,  Thou  art  very  different
from  all  other  women.

15  St.  Mary  answered.  As
there  is  not  any  child  like  to  my
son,  so  neither  is  there  any  wo-
man like  to  his  mother.

16  The  old  woman  answered,
and  said,  O  my  Lady,  I  am  come
hither  that  I  may  obtain  an  ev-
erlasting reward.

17  Then  our  Lady,  St.  Mary,
said  to  her.  Lay  thine  hands
upon  the  infant;  which,  when
she  had  done,  she  became  whole.

18  And  as  she  was  going  forth,
she  said.  From  henceforth,  all
the  days  of  my  life,  I  will  attend
upon  and  be  a  servant  of  this  in-
fant.

19  After  this,  when  the  shep-
herds came,  and  had  made  a  fire,
and  they  were  exceedingly  re-
joicing, the  heavenly  host  ap-
peared to  them,  praising  and
adoring  the  supreme  God.

20  And  as  the  shepherds  were
engaged   in   the   same    employ- 1


ment,  the  cave  at  that  time
seemed  like  a  glorious  temple,
because  both  the  tongues  of  an-
gels and  men  united  to  adore
and  magnify  God,  on  account  of
the  birth  of  the  Lord  Christ.

21  But  when  the  old  Hebrew
woman  saw  all  these  evident
miracles,  she  gave  praises  to  God,
and  said,  I  thank  thee,  O  God,
thou  God  of  Israel,  for  that  mine
eyes  have  seen  the  birth  of  the
Saviour  of  the  world.

CHAP  II.

1  The  child  circumcised  in  the  cave,  2
and  the  old  woman  preserving  his  fore-
skin or  navel-string  in  a  box  of  spike-
nard,  Mary  afterwards  anoints  Christ
with  it.  5  Christ  brought  to  the  tem-
ple, 6  shines,  7  angels  stand  around
him  adoring.  8  Simeon  praises
Christ.

AND  when  the  time  of  his  cir-
cumcision was  come,  name-
ly, the  eighth  day,  on  which  the
law  commanded  the  child  to  be
circumcised,  they  circumcised
him  in  the  cave.

2  And  the  old  Hebrew  woman
took  the  foreskin  (others  say  she
took  the  navel-string),' and  pre-
served it  in  an  alabaster-box  of
old  oil  of  spikenard.

3  And  she  had  a  son  who  was
a  druggist,  to  whom  she  said,
Take  heed  thou  sell  not  this  ala-
baster box  of  spikenard-oint-
ment, although  thou  shouldst  be
offered  three  hundred  pence  for
it.

4  Now  this  is  that  alabaster-
box  which  Mary  the  sinner  pro-
cured, and  poured  forth  the
ointment  out  of  it  upon  the  head
and  the  feet  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  and  wiped  it  off"  with  the
hairs  of  her  head.

5  Then  after  ten  days  they
brought  him  to  Jerusalem,  and
on  the  fortieth  day  from  his
birth  they  presented  him  in  the


The  wise  7)ien  worship       I.  INFANCY.      Christ's  swaddling  cloth.


temple  before  the  Lord,  making
the  proper  offerings  for  him,  ac-
cording to  the  requirement  of
the  law  of  Moses :  namely,  that
every  male  which  opens  the
womb  shall  be  called  holy  unto
God.

6  At  that  time  old  Simeon
saw  him  shining  as  a  pillar  of
light,  when  St.  Mary  the  Virgin,
his  mother,  carried  him  in  her
arms,  and  was  filled  with  the
greatest  pleasure  at  the  sight.

7  And  the  angels  stood  around
him,  adoring  him,  as  a  king's
guards  stand-  around  him.

8  Then  Simeon  going  near  to
St.  Mary,  and  stretching  forth
his  hands  towards  her,  said  to
the  Lord  Christ,  Now,  O  my
Lord,  thy  servant  shall  depart
in  peace,  according  to  thy  word ;

9  For  mine  eyes  have  seen
thy  mercy,  which  thou  hast  pre-
pared for  the  salvation  of  all  na-
tions ;  a  light  to  all  people,  and
the  glory  of  thy  people  Israel.

10  Hannah  the  prophetess
was  also  present,  and  drawing
near,  she  gave  praises  to  God,
and  celebrated  the  happiness  of
Mary.

CHAP.  III.

1  The  wise  men  visit  Christ.  Mary  gives
them  one  of  his  swaddling  clothes.  3
An  angel  appears  to  them  in  the  form
of  a  star.  They  return  and  make  a
fire,  and  worship  the  swaddling  cloth,
and  put  it  in  the  fire,  where  it  remains
unconsumed

AND  it  came  to  pass,  when  the
Lord  Jesus  was  born  at
Bethlehem,  a  city  of  Judsea,  in
the  time  of  Herod  the  King  ;
the  wise  men  came  from  the
East  to  Jerusalem,  according  to
the  prophecy  of  Zoradascht,^
and  brought  with  them  offer-
ings :  namely,  gold,  frankin-
cense, and  myrrh,  and  worship-


ped him,  and  offered  to  him  their
gifts.

2  Then  the  Lady  Mary  took
one  of  his  swaddling  clothes  in
which  the  infant  was  wrapped,
and  gave  it  to  them  instead  of  a
blessing,  which  they  received
from  her  as  a  most  noble  pres-
ent.

3  And  at  the  same  time  there
appeared  to  them  an  angel  in
the  form  of  that  star  which  had
before  been  their  guide  in  their
journey ;  the  light  of  which  they
followed  till  they  returned  into
their  own  country.

4  T[  On  their  return  their
kings  and  princes  came  to  them
inquiring,  What  they  had  seen
and  done  ?  What  sort  of  journey
and  return  they  had?  What
company  they  had  on  the  road  ?

5  But  they  produced  the  swad-
dling cloth  which  St.  Mary  had
given  to  them,  on  account  where-
of they  kept  a  feast.

6  And  having,  according  to
the  custom  of  their  country,
made  a  fire,  they  worshipped  it.

7  And  casting  the  swaddling
cloth  into  it,  the  fire  took  it,  and
kept  it.

8  And  when  the  fire  was  put
out,  they  took  forth  the  swad-
dling cloth  unhurt,  as  much  as  if
the  fire  had  not  touched  it.

9  Then  they  began  to  kiss  it,
and  put  it  upon  their  heads  and
their  eyes,  saying.  This  is  cer-
tainly an  undoubted  truth,  and  it
is  really  surprising  that  the  fire
could  not  burn  it,  and  consume  it.

10  Then  they  took  it,  and
with  the  greatest  respect  laid  it
up  among  their  treasures.

CHAP.  IV.

1  Herod  intends  to  put  Christ  to  death.
3  An  angel  warns  Joseph  to  take  the
child  and  its  mother  into  Egypt.  6
Consternation  on  their  arrival.     13


40


Zoroaster.


Anidolfalh.    Christ's    I.  INFANCY,  swaddling  cloth  heak  a  boy.


The  idols  fall  down.  15  Mary  washes
Christ's  swaddling  clothes,  and  hangs
them  to  dry  on  a  post.  IQ  A  son  of
the  chief  priest  puts  one  on  his  head,
and  being  possessed  of  devils,  they
leave  him.

"VTOW  Herod,  perceiving  that
IM  the  wise  men  did  delay,
and  not  return  to  him,  called
together  the  priests  and  wise  men
and  said,  Tell  me  in  what  place
the  Christ  should  be  born  ?

2  And  when  they  replied,  in
Bethlehem,  a  city  of  Judaea,  he
began  to  contrive  in  his  own
mind  the  death  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ.

3  But  an  angel  of  the  Lord
appeared  to  Joseph  in  his  sleep,
and  said.  Arise,  take  the  child
and  his  mother,  and  go  into
Egypt  as  soon  as  the  cock  crows.
So  he  arose,  and  went.

4  T  And  as  he  was  consider-
ing with  himself  about  his  jour-
ney, the  morning  came  upon
him.

5  In  the  length  of  the  journey
the  girts  of  the  saddle  broke.

6  And  now  he  drew  near  to
a  great  city,  in  which  there  was
an  idol,  to  which  the  other  idols
and  gods  of  Egypt  brought  their
offerings  and  vows.

7  And  there  was  by  this  idol
a  priest  mmistering  to  it,  who,
as  often  as  Satan  spoke  out  of
that  idol,  related  the  things  he
said  to  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt,
and  those  countries.

8  This  priest  had  a  son  three
years  old,  who  was  possessed
with  a  great  multitude  of  devils,
who  uttered  many  strange  things,
and  when  the  devils  seized  him,
walked  about  naked  with  his
clothes  torn,  throwing  stones  at
those  whom  he  saw.

9  Near  to  that  idol  was  the
inn  of  the  city,  into  which  when
Joseph  and  St.  Mary  were  come.


and  had  turned  into  that  inn,
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  city
were  astonished.

10  And  all  the  magistrates
and  priests  of  the  idols  assem-
bled before  that  idol,  and  made
inquiry  there,  saying,  What
means  all  this  consternation,
and  dread,  which  has  fallen
upon  all  our  country  ?

11  The  idol  answered  them,
The  unknown  God  is  come
hither,  who  is  truly  God;  nor
is  there  any  one  besides  him,
who  is  worthy  of  divine  wor-
ship ;  for  he  is  truly  the  Son  of
God.

12  At  the  fame  of  him  this
country  trembled,  and  at  his
coming  it  is  under  the  present
commotion  and  consternation ;
and  we  ourselves  are  affrighted
by  the  greatness  of  his  power.

13  And  at  the  same  instant
this  idol  fell  down,  and  at  his
fall  all  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt,
besides  others,  ran  together.

14  ^  But  the  sou  of  the  priest,
when  his  usual  disorder  came
upon  him,  going  into  the  inn,
found  there  Joseph  and  St.
Mary,  whom  all  the  rest  had
left  behind  and  forsook.

15  And  when  the  Lady  St.
Mary  had  washed  the  swaddling
clothes  of  the  Lord  Christ,  and
hanged  them  out  to  dry  upon  a
post,  the  boy  possessed  with  the
devil  took  down  one  of  them,
and  put  it  upon  his  head.

Id  And  presently  the  devils
began  to  come  out  of  his  mouth,
and  fly  away  in  the  shape  of
crows  and  serpents.

17  From  that  time  the  boy
was  healed  by  the  power  of  the
Lord  Christ,  and  he  began  to
sing  praises,  and  give  thanks  to
the  Lord  who  had  healed  him.

18  When  his  father  saw  him
restored    to  his  former  state  of


Flight  into  Egypt.


I.  INFANCY.


Mary  oare-'i  a  woman.


1


health,  he  said,  My  son,  what
has  happened  to  thee,  and  by
what  means  wert  thou  cured  ?

19  The  son  answered,  When
the  devils  seized  me,  I  went  into
the  inn,  and  there  found  a  very
handsome  woman  with  a  boy,
whose  swaddling  clothes  she  had
just  before  washed,  and  hanged
out  upon  a  post.

20  One  of  these  I  took,  and
put  it  upon  my  head,  and  imme-
diately the  devils  left  me,  and
fled  away.

21  At  this  the  father  exceed-
ingly rejoiced,  and  said.  My  son,
perhaps  this  boy  is  the  son  of  the
living  God,  who  made  the  hea-
vens and  the  earth.

22  For  as  soon  as  he  came
amongst  us,  the  idol  was  broken,
and  all  the  gods  fell  down,  and
were  destroyed  by  a  greater
power.

23  Then  was  fulfilled  the  pro-
phecy which  saith,  Out  of  Egypt
I  have  called  my  son.

CHAP.  V.

1  Joseph  and  Mary  leave  Egypt.  3
Go  to  the  haunts  of  robbers,  4  Who,
hearing  a  mighty  noise  as  of  a  great
army,  Jlee  away.

"VrOW  Joseph  and  Mary,  when
1\  they  heard  that  the  idol
was  fallen  down  and  destroyed,
were  seized  with  fear  and  tremb-
ling, and  said.  When  we  were
in  the  land  of  Israel,  Herod,  in-
tending to  kill  Jesus,  slew  for
that  purpose  all  the  infants  at
Bethlehem,  and  that  neighbour-
hood.

2  And  there  is  no  doubt  but
the  Egyptians  if  they  come  to
hear  that  this  idol  is  broken  and
fallen  down,  will  burn  us  with
fire.

3  They  went  therefore  hence
to  the  secret  places  of  robbers,
who  robbed  travellers  as  they
pass  by,  of  their  carriages  and

42


their   clothes,  and  carried  them
away  bound.

4  These  thieves  upon  their
coming  heard  a  great  noise,  such
as  the  noise  of  a  king  with  a
great  army  and  many  horses,
and  the  trumpets  sounding  at
his  departure  from  his  own  city ;
at  which  they  were  so  affrighted
as  to  leave  all  their  booty  be-
hind them,  and  fly  away  in  haste.

5  Upon  this  the  prisoners
arose,  and  ^loosed  each  other's
bonds,  and  taking  each  man  his
bags,  they  went  away,  and  saw
Joseph  and  Mary  coming  to-
wards them,  and  inquired,  AVhere
is  that  king,  the  noise  of  whose
approach  the  robbers  heard,  and
left  us,  so  that  we  are  now  come
off  safe?

6  Joseph  answered,  He  will
come  after  us.

CHAP.  VI.

1  Mary  looks  on  a  woman  in  whom
Satan  had  taken  up  his  abode,  and
she  becomes  dispossessed.  5  Chi-ist
kissed  by  a  bride  made  dumb  by  sor-
cerers, cures  her,  11  miraculously  ewes
a  gentlewoman  in  whom  Satan  had
taken  up  his  abode.  16-4  leprous
girl  cured  by  the  water  in  which  he
was  washed,  and  becomes  the  servant
of  Mary  and  Joseph.  20  The  lep-
rous son  of  a  prince's  wife  cured  in
like  manner.  37  His  mother  offers
large  gifts  to  Mary,  and  dismisses  he>\

THEN  they  went  into  another
city  where  there  was  a
woman  possessed  with  a  devil,
and  in  whom  Satan,  that  cursed
rebel,  had  taken  up  his  abode.

2  One  night,  when  she  went
to  fetch  water,  she  could  neither
endure  her  clothes  on,  nor  to  be
in  any  house;  but  as  often  as
they  tied  her  with  chains  or
cords,  she  brake  them,  and  went
out  into  desert  places,  and  some-
times standing  where  roads
crossed,  and  in  churchyards,
would  throw  stones  at  men.


Christ  cures  a  dumb  bride^  I.  INFANCY.        The  possessed  woman,


3  When  St.  Mary  saw  this  wo-
man, she  pitied  her  ;  whereupon
Satan  presently  left  her,  and  fled
away  in  the  form  of  a  young
man,  saying.  Wo  to  me,  because
of  thee,  Mary,  and  thy  son.

4  So  the  woman  was  delivered
from  her  torment;  but  consid-
ering herself  naked,  She  blushed,
and  avoided  seeing  any  man,  and
having  put  on  her  clothes,  went
home,  and  gave  an  account  of
her  case  to  her  father  and  rela-
tions, who,  as  they  were  the  best
of  the  city,  entertained  St.  Mary
and  Joseph  with  the  greatest  re-
spect.

5  The  next  morning  having
received  a  sufficient  supply  of
provisions  for  the  road,  they
went  from  them,  and  about  the
evening  of  the  day  arrived  at
another  town,  where  a  marriage
was  then  about  to  be  solemnized ;
but  by  the  arts  of  Satan  and  the
practices  of  some  sorcerers,  the
bride  was  become  so  dumb,  that
she  could  not  so  much  as  open
her  mouth.

6  But  when  this  dumb  bride
saw  the  Lady  St.  Mary  entering
into  the  town,  and  carrying  the
Lord  Christ  in  her  arms,  she
stretched  out  her  hands  to  the
Lord  Christ,  and  took  him  in  her
arms,  and  closely  hugging  him,
very  often  kissed  him,  continu-
ally moving  him  and  pressing
him  to  her  body.

7  Straightway  the  string  of
her  tongue  was  loosed,  and  her
ears  were  opened,  and  she  began
to  sing  praises  unto  God,  who
had  restored  her.

8  So  there  was  great  joy
among  the  inhabitants  of  the
town  that  night,  who  thought
that  God  and  his  angels  were
come  down  among  them.

9  ^  In  this  place  they  abode
three    days,    meeting    with   the


greatest  respect  and  most  splen-
did entertainment.

10  And  being  then  furnished
by  the  people  with  provisions  for
the  road,  they  departed  and  went
to  another  city,  in  which  they
were  inclined  to  lodge,  because
it  was  a  famous  place.

11  There  was  in  this  city  a
gentlewoman,  who,  as  she  went
down  one  day  to  the  river  to
bathe,  behold  cursed  Satan  leaped
upon  her  in  the  form  of  a  serpent,

12  And  folded  himself  about
her  belly,  and  every  night  lay
upon  her.

13  This  woman  seeing  the
Lady  St.  Mary,  and  the  Lord
Christ  the  infant  in  her  bosom,
asked  the  Lady  St.  Mary,  that
she  would  give  her  the  cliild  to
kiss,  and  carry  in  her  arms.

14  When  she  had  consented,
and  as  soon  as  the  woman  had
moved  the  child,  Satan  left  her,
and  fled  away,  nor  did  the  wo-
man ever  afterwards  see  him.

15  Hereupon  all  the  neigh-
bours praised  the  Supreme  God,
and  the  woman  rewarded  them
with  ample  beneficence.

16  On  the  morrow  the  same
woman  brought  perfumed  water
to  wash  the  Lord  Jesus;  and
when  she  had  washed  him,  she
preserved  the  water.

17  And  there  was  a  girl  there,
whose  body  was  white  with  a
leprosy,  who  being  sprinkled  with
this  water,  and  washed,  was  in-
stantly cleansed  from  her  le-
prosy.

18  The  people  therefore  said
Without  doubt  Joseph  and
Mary,  and  that  boy  are  Gods,
for  they  do  not  look  like  mortals.

19  And  when  they  were  mak-
ing ready  to  go  away,  the  girl,
who  had  been  troubled  with  the
leprosy,  came  and  desired  they
would   permit  her  to  go  along

43


two  leprous  persons,  and  I.  INFANCY  a  newly  married  man.


with  them;  so  they  consented,
and  the  girl  went  with  them  till
they  came  to  a  city,  in  which
was  the  palace  of  a  great  king,
and  whose  house  was  not  far  from
the  inn.

20  Here  they  staid,  and  when
the  girl  went  one  day  to  the
prince's  wife,  and  found  her  in  a
sorrowful  and  mournful  condi-
tion, she  asked  her  the  reason  of
her  tears.

21  She  replied,  Wonder  not
at  ray  groans,  for  I  am  under  a
great  misfortune,  of  which  I  dare
not  tell  any  one.

22  But,  says  the  girl,  if  you
will  entrust  me  with  your  private
grievance,  perhaps  I  may  find
you  a  remedy  for  it.

28  Thou,  therefore,  says  the
prince's  wife,  shalt  keep  the  se-
cret, and  not  discover  it  to  any
one  alive !

24  I  have  been  married  to  this
prince,  who  rules  as  king  over
large  dominions,  and  lived  long
with  him,  before  he  had  any
child  by  me.

25  At  length  I  conceived  by
him,  but  alas !  I  brought  forth  a
leprous  son ;  which,  when  he  saw,
he  would  not  own  to  be  his,  but
said  to  me,

26  Either  do  thou  kill  him,  or
send  him  to  some  nurse  in  such
a  place,  that  he  may  be  never
heard  of;  and  now  take  care  of
yourself;  I  will  never  see  you
more.

27  So  here  I  pine,  lamenting
my  wretched  and  miserable  cir-
cumstances. Alas,  my  son !  alas,
my  husband !  Have  I  disclosed
it  to  you  ?

28  The  girl  replied,  I  have
found  a  remedy  for  your  disease,
which  I  promise  you,  for  I  also
was  leprous,  but  God  hath  cleans-
ed me,  even  he  who  is  called
Jesus,  the  son  of  the  Lady  Mary.

44


29  The  woman  inquiring
where  that  God  was,  whom  she
spake  of,  the  girl  answered  He
lodges  with  you  here  in  the  same
house.

30  But  how  can  this  be  ?  says
she ;  where  is  he  ?  Behold,  re-
plied the  girl,  Joseph  and  Mary ;
and  the  infant  who  is  with  them
is  called  Jesus :  and  it  is  he  who
delivered  me  from  my  disease
and  torment.

31  But  by  what  means,  says
she,  were  you  cleansed  from  your
leprosy  ?  Will  you  not  tell  me
that?

32  Why  not?  says  the  girl ;  I
took  the  water  with  which  his
body  had  been  washed,  and
poured  it  upon  me,  and  my  le-
prosy vanished.

33  The  prince's  wife  then
arose  and  entertained  them,  pro-
viding a  great  feast  for  Joseph
among  a  large  company  of  men.

34  And  the  next  day  took
perfumed  water  to  wash  the
Lord  Jesus,  and  afterwards
poured  the  same  water  upon  her
son,  whom  she  had  brought  with
her,  and  her  son  was  instantly
cleansed  from  his  leprosy.

35  Then  she  sang  thanks  and
praises  unto  God,  and  said,
Blessed  is  the  mother  that  bare
thee,  O  Jesus !

36  Dost  thou  thus  cure  men
of  the  same  nature  with  thyself,
with  the  water  with  which  thy
body  is  washed  ?

37  She  then  ofiered  very  large
gifts  to  the  Lady  Mary,  and  sent
her  away  with  all  imaginable  re-
spect.

CHAP.  VII.

1  A  man  who  could  not  enjoy  his  wife,
freed  from  his  disorder.  5  A  young
man  who  had  been  bewitched,  and
turned  into  a  mule,  miraculously  cured
by  Christ  being  put  on  his  back.  28
aTid  is  married  to  the  girl  who  had
been  cured  of  leprosy.


A  bewitched  young  man         INFANCY.  restored  to  his  shape.


THEY    came    afterwards     to
another   city,  and   had    a
mind  to  lodge  there.

2  Accordingly  they  went  to  a
man's  house,  who  was  newly
married,  but  by  the  influence  of
sorcerers  could  not  enjoy  his
wife:

3  But  they  lodging  at  his
house  that  night,  the  man  was
freed  of  his  disorder  :

^  4  And  when  they  were  pre-

paring early  in  the  morning  to
go  forward  on  their  journey,  the
new  married  person  hindered
them,  and  provided  a  noble  en-
tertainment for  them  ?

5  But  going  forward  on  the
morrow,  they  came  to  another
city,  and  saw  three  women  going
from  a  certain  grave  with  great
weeping.

6  When  St.  Mary  saw  them,
she  spake  to  the  girl  who  was
their  companion,  saying,  Go  and
inquire  of  them,  what  is  the
matter  with  them,  and  what  mis-
fortune has  befallen  them  ?

7  When  the  girl  asked  them,
they  made  her  no  answer,  but
asked  her  again.  Who  are  ye,
and  where  are  ye  going?  For
the  day  is  far  spent,  and  the
night  is  at  hand.

8  We  are  travellers,  saith  the
girl,  and  are  seeking  for  an  inn
to  lodge  at.

9  They  replied,  Go  along  with
us,  and  lodge  with  us.

10  They  then  followed  them,
and  were  introduced  into  a  new
house,  well  furnished  with  all
sorts  of  furniture.

11  It  was  now  winter-time,
and  the  girl  went  into  the  par-
lour where  these  women  were,
and  found  them  weeping  and
lamenting,  as  before.

12  By  them  stood  a  mule,
covered  over  with  silk,  and  an
ebony  collar  hanging  down  from


his  neck,  whom  they  kissed,  and
were  feeding.

13  But  when  the  girl  said,
How  handsome,  ladies,  that  mule
is  !  they  replied  with  tears,  and
said,  This  mule,  which  you  see,
was  our  brother,  born  of  this
same  mother  as  we  :

14  For  when  our  father  died,
and  left  us  a  very  large  estate,
and  we  had  only  this  brother,
and  we  endeavoured  to  procure
him  a  suitable  match,  and
thought  he  should  be  married  as
other  men,  some  giddy  and  jeal-
ous woman  bewitched  him  with-
out our  knowledge.

15  And  we,  one  night,  a  little
before  day,  while  the  doors  .of
the  house  were  all  fast  shut,  saw
this  our  brother  was  changed  in-
to a  mule,  such  as  you  now  see
him  to  be :

16  And  we,  in  the  melancholy
condition  in  which  you  see  us,
having  no  father  to  comfort  us,
have  applied  to  all  the  wise
men,  magicians,  and  diviners  in
the  world,  but  they  have  been  of
no  service  to  us.

17  As  often  therefore  as  we
find  ourselves  oppressed  with
grief,  we  rise  and  go  with  this
our  mother  to  our  father's  tomb,
where,  when  we  have  cried  suf-
ficiently we  return  home.

18  When  the  girl  had  heard
this,  she  said.  Take  courage,  and
cease  your  fears,  for  you  have  a
remedy  for  your  afflictions  near
at  hand,  even  among  you  and  in
the  midst  of  your  house,

19  For  I  iwas  also  leprous ;
but  when  I  saw  this  woman,  and
this  little  infant  with  her,  whose
name  is  Jesus,  I  sprinkled  my
body  with  the  water  with  which
his  mother  had  washed  him,  and
I  was  presently  made  well.

20  And  I  am  certain  that  he
is  also  capable  of  relieving  you

45


A  bewitched  young  man     I.  INFANCY.  restored  and  married.


under  your  distress.  Wherefore,
arise,  go  to  my  mistress,  Mary,
and  when  you  have  brought  her
into  your  own  parlour,  disclose
to  her  the  secret,  at  the  same
time,  earnestly  beseeching  her  to
compassionate  your  case.

21  As  soon  as  the  women  had
heard  the  girl's  discourse,  they
hastened  away  to  the  Lady  St.
Mary,  introduced  themselves  to
her,  and  sitting  down  before  her,
they  wept.

22  And  said,  O  our  Lady  St.
Mary,  pity  your  handmaids,  for
we  have  no  head  of  our  family,
no  one  older  than  us  ;  no  father,
or  brother  to  go  in  and  out  be-
fore us.

23  But  this  mule,  which  you
see,  was  our  brother,  which  some
woman  by  witchcraft  have
brought  into  this  condition  which
you  see:  we  therefore  entreat
you  to  compassionate  us.

24  Hereupon  St.  Mary  was
grieved  at  their  case,  and  taking
the  Lord  Jesus,  put  him  upon
the  back  of  the  mule.

25  And  said  to  her  son,  O
Jesus  Christ,  restore  (or  heal)
according  to  thy  extraordinary
power  this  mule,  and  grant  him
to  have  again  the  shape  of  a
man  and  a  rational  creature,  as
he  had  formerly.

26  This  was  scarce  said  by  the
Lady  St.  Mary,  but  the  mule
immediately  passed  into  a  hu-
man form,  and  became  a  young
man  without  any  deformity.

27  Then  he  and  his  mother
and  the  sisters  worshipped  the
Lady  St.  Mary,  and  lifting  the
child  upon  their  heads,  they
kissed  him,  and  said,  Blessed  is
thy  mother,  O  Jesus,  O  Saviour
of  the  world !  Blessed  are  the
eyes  which  are  so  happy  as  to
see  thee.

28  Then  both  the  sisters  told

46


their  mother,  saying.  Of  a  truth
our  brother  is  restored  to  his  for-
mer shape  by  the  help  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  kind-
ness of  that  girl,  who  told  us  of
Mary  and  her  son.

29  And  inasmuch  as  our  bro-
ther is  unmarried,  it  is  fit  that
we  marry  him  to  this  girl  their
servant.

30  When  they  had  consulted
Mary  in  this  matter,  and  she  had
given  her  consent,  they  made  a
splendid  wedding  for  this  girl.

31  And  so  their  sorrow  being
turned  into  gladness,  and  their
mourning  into  mirth,  they  began
to  rejoice,  and  to  make  merry,
and  sing,  being  dressed  in  their
richest  attire,  with  bracelets.

32  Afterwards  they  glorified
and  praised  God,  saying,  O
Jesus  son  of  David  who  changest
sorrow  into  gladness,  and  mourn-
ing into  mirth !

33  After  this  Joseph  and  Mary
tarried  there  ten  days,  then  went
away,  having  received  great  re-
spect from  those  people ;

34  Who,  when  they  took  their
leave  of  them,  and  returned
home,  cried,

35  But  especially  the  girl.

CHAP.  VIII.  ^

1  Joseph  and  Mary  pass  throiinh  a
country  infested  by  robbers,  3  Titus,
a  humane  thief,  offers  Dumachus,  his
comrade,  forty  groats  to  let  Joseph  and
Mary  pass  unmolested.  6  Jesu^  pro-
phesies that  the  thieves,  Dumachus  and
Titus,  shall  be  crucified  with  him,  and
that  Titus  shall  go  before  him  into
Paradise.  10  Christ  causes  a  well  to
spring  from  a  sycamore  tree,  and
Mary  washes  his  coat  in  it.  11  A
balsam  grows  there  from  his  sweat.
They  go  to  Memphis,  where  Christ
works  more  miracles.  Return  to  Ju-
d(za.  15  being  warned.,  depart  for
Nazareth.

N  their  journey  from  hence
they  came  into  a  desert  coun-


I


The  two  thieves.


I.  INFANCY.


The  sick  healed.


try,  and  were  told  it  was  infested
with  robbers ;  so  Joseph  and  St.
Mary  prepared  to  pass  through
it  in  the  night.

2  And  as  they  were  going
along,  behold  they  saw  two  rob-
bers asleep  in  the  road,  and  with
them  a  great  number  of  robbers,
who  were  their  confederates,  also
asleep.

3  The  names  of  these  two  were
Titus  and  Dumachus ;  and  Titus
said  to  Dumachus,  I  beseech  thee
let  those  persons  go  along  quietly,
that  our  company  may  not  per-
ceive anything  of  them  :

4  But  Dumachus  refusing,  Ti-
tus again  said,  I  will  give  thee
forty  groats,  and  as  a  pledge  take
my  girdle,  which  he  gave  him
before  he  had  done  speaking,
that  he  might  not  open  his
mouth,  or  make  a  noise.

5  When  the  Lady  St.  Mary
saw  the  kindness  which  this  rob-
ber did  shew  them,  she  said  to
him.  The  Lord  God  will  receive
thee  to  his  right  hand,  and  grant
thee  pardon  of  thy  sins.

6  Then  the  Lord  Jesus  an-
swered, and  said  to  his  mother.
When  thirty  years  are  expired,
O  mother,  the  Jews  will  crucify
me  at  Jerusalem ;

7  And  these  two  thieves  shall
be  with  me  at  the  same  time  upon
the  cross,  Titus  on  my  right  hand,
and  Dumachus  on  my  left,  and
from  that  time  Titus  shall  go  be-
fore me  into  paradise :

8  And  when  she  had  said,  God
forbid  this  should  be  thy  lot,  O
my  son,  they  went  on  to  a  city
in  which  were  several  idols;
which,  as  soon  as  they  came
near  to  it,  was  turned  into  hills
of  sand.

9  ^  Hence  they  went  to  that
sycamore  tree,  which  is  now
called  Matarea ;

10  And  in  Matarea  the  Lord


Jesus  caused  a  well  to  spring
forth,  in  which  St.  Mary  washed
his  coat ;

11  And  a  balsam  is  produced,
or  grows,  in  that  country  from
the  sweat  which  ran  down  there
from  the  Lord  Jesus.

12  Thence  they  proceeded  to
Memphis,  and  saw  Pharaoh,  and
abode  three  years  in  Egypt.

13  And  the  Lord  Jesus  did
very  many  miracles  in  Egypt,
which  are  neither  to  be  found  in
the  Gospel  of  the  Infancy  nor  in
the  Gospel  of  Perfection.

14  T  At  the  end  of  three  years
he  returned  out  of  Egypt,  and
when  he  came  near  to  Judsea,
Joseph  was  afraid  to  enter ;

15  For  hearing  that  Herod
was  dead,  and  that  Archelaus
his  son  reigned  in  his  stead,  he
was  afraid ;

16  And  when  he  went  to  Ju-
dsea, an  angel  of  God  appeared
to  him,  and  said,  O  Joseph,  go
into  the  city  Nazareth,  and  abide
there.

17  It  is  strange  indeed  that  he,
who  is  the  Lord  of  all  countries,
should  be  thus  carried  backward
and  forward  through  so  many
countries.

CHAP.  IX.

2  Two  sick    children  cured  by    water
wherein    Christ  was  washed.

WHEN  they  came  afterwards
into  the  city  Bethlehem,
they  found  there  several  very
desperate  distempers,  which  be-
came so  troublesome  to  children
by  seeing  them,  that  most  of  them
died.

2  There  was  there  a  woman
who  had  a  sick  son,  whom  she
brought,  when  he  was  at  the
point  of  death,  to  the  Lady  St.
Mary,  who  saw  her  when  she
was  washing  Jesus  Christ.

3  Then  said  the  woman,  O  my

47


Christ's  water  cures.


I.  INFANCY.      Caleb's  miraculous  cures.


Lady  Mary,  look  down  upon  this
my  son,  who  is  afflicted  with  most
dreadful  pains.

4.  St.  Mary  hearing  her,  said,
Take  a  little  of  that  water  with
which  I  have  washed  my  son,  and
sprinkle  it  upon  him.

5  Then  she  took  a  little  of  that
water,  as  St.  Mary  had  com-
manded, and  sprinkled  it  upon
her  son,  who  being  wearied  with
his  violent  pains,  had  fallen
asleep ;  and  after  he  had  slept  a
little,  awaked  perfectly  well  and
recovered.

6  The  mother  being  abundant-
ly glad  of  this  success,  went  again
to  St.  Mary,  and  St.  Mary  said
to  her.  Give  praise  to  God,  who
hath  cured  this  thy  son.

7  There  was  in  the  same  place
another  woman,  a  neighbour  of
her,  whose  son  was  now  cured.

8  This  woman's  son  was  af-
flicted with  the  same  disease,  and
his  eyes  were  now  almost  quite
shut,  and  she  was  lamenting  for
him  day  and  night.

9  The  mother  of  the  child
which  was  cured,  said  to  her,
Why  do  you  not  bring  your  son
to  St.  Mary,  as  I  brought  my  son
to  her,  when  he  was  in  the  agonies
of  death ;  and  he  was  cured  by
that  water,  with  which  the  body
of  her  son  Jesus  was  washed  ?

10  When  the  woman  heard
her  say  this,  she  also  went,  and
having  procured  the  same  water,
washed  her  son  with  it,  where-
upon his  body  and  his  eyes  were
instantly  restored  to  their  former
state.

11  And  when  she  brought  her
son  to  St.  Mary,  and  opened  his
case  to  her,  she  commanded  her
to  give  thanks  to  God  for  the
recovery  of  her  son's  health,  and
tell  no  one  what  had  happened.

48


CHAP.  X.

1  2\uo  wives  of  one  man,  each  have  a
son  sick.  2  One  of  them,  named  Mai-y,
and  whose  son's  name  was  Caleb,
presents  the  Virgin  with  a  handsome
carpet,  and  Caleb  is  cured;  but  the
son  of  the  other  wife  dies,  4  which  oc-
casions a  difference  between  the  women.
5  The  other  wife  puts  Caleb  into  a  hot
oven,  and  he  is  miraculously  preserved  ;
9  she  afterwards  throws  him  into  a
well,  and  he  is  again  preserved;  11  his
mother  appeals  to  the  Virgin  against
the  other  wife,  12,  whose  doumfall  the
Virgin  prophesies,  13  ajid  who  accord-
ingly falls  into  the  well,  14  therein  ful-
filling a  saying  of  old.

THERE  were  in  the  same  city
two  wives  of  one  man,  who
had  each  a  son  sick.  One  of
them  was  called  Mary  and  her
son's  name  was  Caleb.

2  She  arose,  and  taking  her
son,  went  to  the  Lady  St.  Mary,
the  mother  of  Jesus,  and  offered
her  a  very  handsome  carpet,  say-
ing, O  my  Lady  Mary  accept  this
carpet  of  me,  and  instead  of  it
give  me  a  small  swaddling  cloth.

3  To  this  Mary  agreed,  and
when  the  mother  of  Caleb  was
gone,  she  made  a  coat  for  her
son  of  the  swaddling  cloth,  put
it  on  him,  and  his  disease  was
cured ;  but  the  son  of  the  other
wife  died.

4  T  Hereupon  there  arose  be-
tween them,  a  difference  in  doing
the  business  of  the  family  by
turns,  each  her  week.

5  And  when  the  turn  of  Mary
the  mother  of  Caleb  came,  and
she  was  heating  the  oven  to  bake
bread,  and  went  away  to  fetch
the  meal,  she  left  her  son  Caleb
by  the  oven ;

6  Whom,  the  other  wife,  her
rival,  seeing  to  be  by  himself,
took  and  cast  him  into  the  oven,
which  was  very  hot,  and  then
went  away.

7  Mary  on  her  return  saw  her
son  Caleb  lying  in  the  middle  of


THE  BIRTH   OF  JOHN   THE  BAPTIST.  [Page  S5.

FKOM  A  "book  of  THE  EVANGELISTS."    GREEK  MANUSCRIPT  OF  THE  TWELFTH  CENTURY.


Caleb's  life  twice  saved.     I.  INFANCY.    Infant  Bartholmiew  cured.


the  oven  laughing,  and  the  oven
quite  as  cold  as  though  it  had
not  been  before  heated,  and  knew
that  her  rival  the  other  wife  had
thrown  him  into  the  fire.

8  When  she  took  him  out,
she  brought  him  to  the  Lady  St.
Mary,  and  told  her  the  story,
to  whom  she  replied.  Be  quiet,  I
am  concerned  lest  thou  shouldest
make  this  matter  known.

9  After  this  her  rival,  the
other  wife,  as  she  was  drawing
water  at  the  well,  and  saw  Caleb
playing  by  the  well,  and  that
no  one  was  near,  took  him,  and
threw  him  into  the  well.

10  And  when  some  men  came
to  fetch  water  from  the  well,
they  saw  the  boy  sitting  on  the
superficies  of  the  water,  and
drew  him  out  with  ropes,  and
were  exceedingly  surprised  at
the  child,  and  praised  God.

1 1  Then  came  the  mother  and
took  him  and  carried  him  to  the
Lady  St.  Mary,  lamenting  and
saying,  O  my  Lady,  see  what  my
rival  hath  done  to  my  son,  and
how  she  hath  cast  him  into  the
well,  and  I  do  not  question  but
one  time  or  other  she  will  be  the
occasion  of  his  death.

12  St.  Mary  replied  to  her,
God  will  vindicate  your  injured
cause.

13  Accordingly  a  few  days
after,  when  the  other  wife  came
to  the  well  to  draw  water,  her
foot  was  entangled  in  the  rope,  so
that  she  fell  headlong  into  the
well,  and  they  who  ran  to  her  as-
sistance, found  her  skull  broken,
and  bones  bruised.

14  So  she  came  to  a  bad  end,
and  in  her  was  fulfilled  that  say-
ing of  the  author.  They  digged  a
well,  and  made  it  deep,  but  fell
themselves  into  the  pit  which
they  prepared.


CHAP.  XL

1  Bartholomew,  when  a  child  and  sicky
miraculously  restored  by  being  laid  on
Christ's  bed.

ANOTHER    woman  in   that
city  had  likewise  two  sons
sick.

2  And  when  one  was  dead,
the  other,  who  lay  at  the  point
of  death,  she  took  in  her  arms
to  the  Lady  St.  Mary,  and  in  a
flood  of  tears  addressed  herself
to  her,  saying,

3  O  my  Lady,  help  and  re-
lieve me;  for  I  had  two  sons,
the  one  I  have  just  now  buried,
the  other  I  see  is  just  at  the  point
of  death,  behold  how  I  (earnest-
ly) seek  favour  from  God,  and
pray  to  him.

4  Then  she  said,  O  Lord,  thou
art  gracious,  and  merciful,  and
kind ;  thou  hast  given  me  two
sons ;  one  of  them  thou  hast
taken  to  thyself,  O  spare  me
this  other.

5  St.  Mary  then  perceiving
the  greatness  of  her  sorrow,  pit-
ied her  and  said.  Do  thou  place
thy  son  in  my  son's  bed,  and
cover  him  with  his  clothes.

6  And  when  she  had  placed
him  in  the  bed  wherein  Christ
lay,  at  the  moment  when  his.
eyes  were  just  closed  by  death  ;
as  soon  as  ever  the  smell  of  the
garments  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  reached  the  boy,  his  eyes
were  opened,  and  calling  with  a
loud  voice  to  his  mother,  he
asked  for  bread,  and  when  he
had  received  it,  he  sucked  it.

7  Then  his  mother  said,  O
Lady  Mary,  now  I  am  assured
that  the  powers  of  God  do  dwell
in  you,  so  that  thy  son  can  cure
children  who  are  of  the  same
sort  as  himself,  as  soon  as  they
touch  his  garments.

8  This    boy    who    was    thus

49


Leprous  woman  healed.   I.  INFANCY.   Leprous  pri7icess  cured  by


cured,  is  the  same  who   in   the
Gospel  is  called  Bartholomew.

CHAP.   XII.

1  A  leprous  woman  healed  by  Christ's
washing  water.  7  A  princess  healed
by  it  and  restored  to  her  husband.

AGAIN  there  was  a  leprous
woman  who  went  to  the
Lady  St.  Mary,  the  mother  of
Jesus,  and  said,  O  my  Lady,
help  me.

2  St.  Mary  replied,  what  help
dost  thou  desire  ?  Is  it  gold  or
silver,  or  that  thy  body  be  cured
of  its  leprosy  ?

3  Who,  says  the  woman,  can
grant  me  this  ?

4  St.  Mary  replied  to  her,
Wait  a  little  till  I  have  washed
my  son  Jesus,  and  put  him  to
bed.

5  The  woman  waited,  as  she
was  commanded ;  and  Mary
when  she  had  put  Jesus  in  bed,
giving  her  the  water  with  which
she  had  washed  his  body,  said.
Take  some  of  the  water,  and
pour  it  upon  thy  body  ;

6  Which  when  she  had  done,
she  instantly  became  clean,  and
praised  God,  and  gave  thanks  to
him.

7  Tf  Then  she  went  away,
after  she  had  abode  with  her
three  days  :

8  And  going  into  the  city,
she  saw  a  certain  prince,  who
had  married  another  prince's
daughter ;

9  But  when  he  came  to  see
her,  he  perceived  between  her
eyes  the  signs  of  leprosy  like  a
star,  and  thereupon  declared  the
marriage  dissolved  and  void.

10  When  the  woman  saw
these  persons  in  this  condition,
exceedingly  sorrowful,  and  shed-
ding abundance  of  tears,  she  in-
quired of  them  the  reason  of
their  crying.

50


11  They  replied,  Inquire  not
into  our  circumstances ;  for  we
are  not  able  to  declare  our  mis-
fortunes to  any  person  whatso-
ever.

12  But  still  she  pressed  and
desired  them  to  communicate
their  case  to  her,  intimating,  that
perhaps  she  might  be  able  to
direct  them  to  a  remedy.

13  So  when  they  shewed  the
young  woman  to  her,  and  the
signs  of  the  leprosy,  which  ap-
peared between  her  eyes,

14  She  said,  I  also,  whom  ye
see  in  this  place,  was  afflicted
with  the  same  distemper,  and
going  on  some  business  to  Beth-
lehem, I  went  into  a  certain  cave,
and  saw  a  woman  named  Mary,
who  had  a  son  called  Jesus.

15  She  seeing  me  to  be  lep-
rous, was  concerned  for  me,  and
gave  me  some  water  with  which
she  had  washed  her  son's  body  ;
with  that  I  sprinkled  my  body,
and  became  clean.

16  Then  said  these  women.
Will  you.  Mistress,  go  along
with  us,  and  shew  the  Lady  St.
Mary  to  us  ?

17  To  which  she  consent-
ing, they  arose  and  went  to  the
Lady  St.  Mary,  taking  with
them  very  noble  presents.

18  And  when  they  came  in
and  offered  their  presents  to  her,
they  showed  the  leprous  young
woman  what  they  brought  with
them  to  her.

19  Then  said  St.  Mary,  The
mercy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
rest  upon  you ;

20  And  giving  them  a  little  of
that  water  with  which  she  had
washed  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ,
she  bade  them  wash  the  diseased
person  with  it;  which  when  they
had  done,  she  was  presently
cured ;

21  So  they,  and  all  who  were


Christ's  wasJiing  water.      I.  INFANCY.


Girl  whose  blood


present,  praised  God ;  and  being
filled  with  joy,  they  went  back  to
their  own  city,  and  gave  praise  to
God  on  that  account.

22  Then  the  prince  hearing  that
his  wife  was  cured,  took  her  home
and  made  a  second  marriage,  giv-
ing thanks  unto  God  for  the  re-
covery of  his  wife's  health.

CHAP.  XIII.

1  A  girl,  whose  blood  Satan  sucked,  re-
ceives one  of  Christ^ s  swaddling  clothes
from  the  Virgin.  14  Saltan  comes  like
a  dragon,  and  she  shews  it  to  him  ;
flames  and  burning  coals  proceed  from
it  and  fall  upon  him;  19  he  is  mira-
culously discomfited,  and  leaves  the
girl.

THERE  was  also  a  girl,  who
was  afflicted  by  Satan ;

2  For  that  cursed  spirit  did  fre-
quently appear  to  her  in  the  shape
of  a  dragon,  and  was  inclined  to
swallow  her  up,  and  had  so  sucked
out  all  her  blood,  that  she  looked
like  a  dead  carcase.

3  As  often  as  she  came  to  her-
self, with  her  hands  wringed  about
her  head  she  would  cry  out,  and
say.  Wo,  Wo  is  me,  that  there  is
no  one  to  be  found  who  can  deliv-
er me  from  that  impious  dra-
gon!

4  Her  father  and  mother,  and
all  who  were  about  her  and  saw
her,  mourned  and  wept  over
her ;

5  And  all  who  were  present
would  especially  be  under  sorrow
and  in  tears,  when  they  heard
her  bewailing,  and  saying,  My
brethren  and  friends,  is  there  no
one  who  can  deliver  me  from  this
murderer  ?

6  Then  the  prince's  daughter,
who  had  been  cured  of  her  lepro-
sy, hearing  the  complaint  of  that
girl,  went  upon  the  top  of  her
castle,  and  saw  her  with  her  hands
twisted  about  her  head,  pouring
out  a  flood  of  tears,  and  all  the


people  that  were  about  her  in  sor-
row.

7  Then  she  asked  the  husband
of  the  possessed  person.  Whether
his  wife's  mother  was  alive  ?  He
told  her.  That  her  father  and  mo-
ther were  both  alive.

8  Then  slie  ordered  her  mother
to  be  seflt  to  her:  to  whom,  when
she  saw  her  coming,  she  said,  Is
this  possessed  girl  thy  daughter  ?
She  moaning  and  bewailing  said,
Yes,  madam,  I  bore  her.

9  The  prince's  daughter  an-
swered. Disclose  the  secret  of  her
case  to  me,  for  I  confess  to  you
that  I  was  leprous,  but  the  Lady
Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus  Christ,
healed  me.

10  A.nd  if  you  desire  your
daughter  to  be  restored  to  her  for-
mer state,  take  her  to  Bethlehem,
and  inquire  for  Mary  the  mother
of  Jesus,  and  doubt  not  but  your
daughter  will  be  cured ;  for  I  do
not  question  but  you  will  come
home  with  great  joy  at  your
daughter's  recovery.

11  As  soon  as  ever  she  had
done  speaking,  she  arose  and  went
with  her  daughter  to  the  place  ap-
pointed, and  to  Mary,  and  told
her  the  case  of  her  daughter.

12  When  St.  Mary  had  heard
her  story,  she  gave  her  a  little  of
the  water  with  which  she  had
washed  the  body  of  her  son  Jesus,
and  bade  her  pour  it  upon  the
body  of  her  daughter.

13  Likewise  she  gave  her  one
of  the  swaddling  cloths  of  the
Lord  Jesus,  and  said.  Take  this
swaddling  cloth  and  shew  it  to
thine  enemy  as  often  as  thou
seest  him  ;  and  she  sent  them
away  in  peace.

14  ^  After  they  had  left  that
city  and  returned  home,  and  the
time  was  come  in  which  Satan  was
wont  to  seize  her,  in  the  same
moment  this  cursed  spirit  appear-

51


Satan  sucked,  cured.         I.  INFANCY.  Jesus  struck  by  Juda^.


ed  to  her  in  the  shape  of  a  huge
dragon,  and  the  girl  seeing  him
was  afraid.

15  The  mother  said  to  her,  Be
not  afraid  daughter;  let  him  alone
till  he  come  nearer  to  thee !  then
shew  him  the  swaddling  cloth,
which  the  Lady  Mary  gave  us,
and  we  shall  see  the  event.

16  Satan  then  coming  like  a
dreadful  dragon,  the  body  of  the
girl  trembled  for  fear.

17  But  as  soon  as  she  had  put
the  swaddling  cloth  upon  her
head,  and  about  her  eyes,  and
shewed  it  to  him,  presently  there
issued  forth  from  the  swaddling
cloth  flames  and  burning  coals,
and  fell  upon  the  dragon.

18  Oh  !  how  great  a  miracle
was  this,  which  was  done  :  as
soon  as  the  dragon  saw  the  swad-
dling cloth  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  fire
went  forth  and  was  scattered  upon
his  head  and  eyes  ;  so  that  he
cried  out  with  a  loud  voice.  What
have  I  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus,
thou  son  of  Mary,  Whither  shall
I  flee  from  thee  ?

19  So  he  drew  back  much  af-
frighted, and  left  the  girl.

20  And  she  was  delivered  from
this  trouble,  and  sang  praises  and
thanks  to  God,  and  with  her  all
who  were  present  at  the  working
of  the  miracle.

CHAP.  XIV.

1  Judas  when  a  boy  possessed  by  Satan,
and  brought  by  his  parents  to  Jesus  to
be  cured,  whom  he  tries  to  bite,  7
but  failing,  strikes  Jesus  and  makes
him  cry  out.  Whereupon  Satan  goes
from  J-mis  in  the  shape  of  a  dog.

ANOTHER   woman  likewise
lived  there,  whose  son  was
possessed  by  Satan.

2  This  boy,  named  Judas,  as
often  as  Satan  seized  him,  was  in-
clined to  bite  all  that  were  pre-
sent ;  and  if  he  found  no  one  else
52


near  him,  he  would  bite  his  own
hands  and  other  parts.

3  But  the  mother  of  this  miser-
able boy,  hearing  of  St.  Mary
and  her  son  Jesus,  arose  presently,
and  taking  her  son  in  her  arm  ;,
brought  him  to  the  Lady  Mary.

4  In  the  meantime,  James  and
Joses  had  taken  away  the  infant,
the  Lord  Jesus,  to  play  at  a  pro-
per season  with  other  children  ;
and  when  they  went  forth,  they
sat  down  and  the  Lord  Jesus  with
them.

5  Then  Judas,  who  was  pos-
sessed, came  and  sat  down  at  the
right  hand  of  Jesus.

6  When  Satan  was  acting  upon
him  as  usual,  he  went  about  to
bite  the  Lord  Jesus.

7  And  because  he  could  not
do  it,  he  struck  Jesus  on  the  right
side,  so  that  he  cried  out.

8  And  in  the  same  moment
Satan  went  out  of  the  boy,  and
ran  away  like  a  mad  dog.

9  This  same  boy  who  struck
Jesus,  and  out  of  whom  Satan
went  in  the  form  of  a  dog,  was
Judas  Iscariot,  who  betrayed  him
to  the  Jews.

10  And  that  same  side,  on
which  Judas  struck  him,  the
Jews  pierced  with  a  spear.

CHAP.  XV.  ^

1  Jesus  and  other  boys  play  together,
and  make  clay  figures  of  animals.  4
Jesus  causes  them  to  walk,  6  also
makes  clay  birds,  which  he  causes  to
fly,  and  eat  and  drink.  7  The  chil-
dren^ s  parents  alarmed,  and  take  Jesus
for  a  sorcerer.  8  He  goes  to  a  dyers
shop,  and  throws  all  the  cloths  into  the
furnace,  and  works  a  miracle  therewith.
15  Whereupon  the  Jews  praise  God.

AND  when  the  Lord  Jesus
was  seven  years  of  age,  he
was  on  a  certain  day  with  other
boys  his  companions  about  the
same  age.

2  Who  when  they  were  at  play.


Animates  clay  figures.     I.  INFANCY.       Christ  miraculously  alters


made  clay  into  several  shapes,
luimely,  asses,  oxen,  birds,  and
other  figures,

3  Each  boasting  of  his  work,
and  endeavouring  to  exceed  the
rest.

4  Then  the  Lord  Jesus  said  to
the  boys,  I  will  command  these
figures  which  I  have  made  to
walk.

5  And  immediately  they  moved,
and  when  he  commanded  them
to  return,  they  returned.

6  He  had  also  made  the  figures
of  birds  and  sparrows,  which,
when  he  commanded  to  fly,  did
fly,  and  when  he  commanded  to
stand  still,  did  stand  still;  and
if  he  gave  them  meat  and  drink,
they  did  eat  and  drink.

7  When  at  length  the  boys
went  away,  and  related  these
things  to  their  parents,  their  fa-
thers said  to  them,  Take  heed,
children,  for  the  future,  of  his
company,  for  he  is  a  sorcerer;
shun  and  avoid  him,  and  from
henceforth  never  play  with  him.

8  ^  On  a  certain  day  also,
when  the  Lord  Jesus  was  playing
with  the  boys,  and  running  about,
he  passed  by  a  dyer's  shop,  whose
name  was  Salem.

9  And  there  were  in  his  shop
many  pieces  of  cloth  belonging
to  the  people  of  that  city,  which
they  designed  to  dye  of  several
colours.

10  Then  the  Lord  Jesus  going
into  the  dyer's  shop,  took  all  the
cloths,  and  threw  them  into  the
furnace.

11  When  Salem  came  home,
and  saw  the  cloths  spoiled,  he
began  to  make  a  great  noise,  and
to  chide  the  Lord  Jesus,  saying,

12  What  hast  thou  done  to
me,  O  thou  Son  of  Mary  ?  Thou
hast  injured  both  me  and  my
neighbours;  theyall  desired  their
cloths  of  a  proper  colour ;   but


thou  hast  come,  and  spoiled  them
all.

13  The  Lord  Jesus  replied,  I
will  change  the  colour  of  every
cloth  to  what  colour  thou  de-
sirest ;

14  And  then  he  presently  be-
gan to  take  the  cloths  out  of  the
furnace,  and  they  were  all  dyed
of  those  same  colours  which  the
dyer  desired.

15  And  when  the  Jews  saw
this  surprising  miracle,  they
praised  God.

CHAP.  XVI.

1  Christ  miraculously  widens  or  contracts
the  gates,  milk-pails,  sieves,  or  boxes,
not  properly  made  by  Joseph,  4  he  not
being  skilful  at  his  carpenter's  trade.
5  The  King  of  Jerusalem  gives  Joseph
an  order  for  a  throne.  6  Joseph  works
on  it  for  two  years  in  the  king's  palace,
and  makes  it  two  spans  tob  short.  The
king  being  angry  with  him,  10  Jesas
comforts  him,  13  commands  him  to  pull
one  side  of  the  throne,  while  he  pulls
the  other,  and  brings  it  to  its  proper
dimensions.  14  Whereupon  the  by-
standers praise  God.

AND  Joseph,  wheresoever  he
went  in  the  city,  took  the
Lord  Jesus  with  him,  where  he
was  sent  for  to  work  to  make
gates,  or  milk-pails,  or  sieves,  or
boxes ;  the  Lord  Jesus  was  with
him  wheresoever  he  went.

2  And  as  often  as  Joseph  had
anything  in  his  work,  to  make
longer  or  shorter,  or  wider,  or
narrower,  the  Lord  Jesus  would
stretch  his  hand  towards  it.

3  And  presently  it  became  as
Joseph  would  have  it.

4  So  that  he  had  no  need  to
finish  anything  with  his  own
hands,  for  he  was  not  very  skil-
ful at  his  carpenter's  trade.

5  T  On  a  certain  time  the
King  of  Jerusalem  sent  for  him,
and  said,  I  would  have  thee  make
me  a  throne  of  the  same  dimen-

53


Joseph's  bad  carpentry.         INFANCY       Christ's  miracles  at  play.


sions  with  that  place  in  which  I
commonly  sit.

6  Joseph  obeyed,  and  forth-
with began  the  work,  and  con-
tinued two  years  in  the  king's
palace  before  he  finished  it.
.  7  And  when  he  came  to  fix  it
in  its  place,  he  found  it  wanted
two  spans  on  each  side  of  the
appointed  measure.

8  Which,  when  the  king  saw,
he  was  very  angry  with  Joseph  ;

9  And  Joseph  afraid  of  the
king's  anger,  went  to  bed  without
his  supper,  taking  not  any  thing
to  eat.

10  Then  the  Lord  Jesus  asked
him.  What  he  was  afraid  of?

11  Joseph  replied.  Because  I
have  lost  my  labour  in  the  work
which  I  have  been  about  these
two  years.

12  Jesus  said  to  him.  Fear  not,
neither  be  cast  down ;

13  Do  thou  lay  hold  on  one
side  of  the  throne,  and  I  will  the
other,  and  we  will  bring  it  to  its
just  dimensions.

14  And  when  Joseph  had  done
as  the  Lord  Jesus  said,  and  each
of  them  had  with  strength  drawn
his  side,  the  throne  obeyed,  and
was  brought  to  the  proper  dimen-
sions of  the  place :

15  Which  miracle  when  they
who  stood  by  saw,  they  were
astonished,  and  praised  God.

16  The  throne  was  made  of
the  same  wood,  which  was  in
being  in  Solomon's  time,  namely,
wood  adorned  with  various  shapes
and  figures.

CHAP.  XVII.

1  Jesiis  plays  with  boys  at  hide  and  seek.
3  Some  women  put  his  playfellows  in  a
furnace,  7  where  they  are  transformed
by  Jesv^  into  kids.  10  Jesus  calls
them  to  go  and  play,  and  they  are
restored  to  their  former  shape.

ON    another    day   the    Lord
Jesus  going  out   into  the
54


street,  and  seeing  some  boys  who
were  met  to  play,  joined  himself
to  their  company :

2  But  when  they  saw  him,
they  hid  themselves,  and  left
him  to  seek  for  them  :

3  The  Lord  Jesus  came  to  the
gate  of  a  certain  house,  and
asked  some  women  who  were
standing  there.  Where  the  boys
were  gone  ?

4  And  when  they  answered.
That  there  was  no  one  there;  the
Lord  Jesus  said.  Who  are  those
whom  ye  see  in  the  furnace  ?

5  They  answered.  They  were
kids  of  three  years  old.

6  Then  Jesus  cried  out  aloud,
and  said,  Come  out  hither,  O  ye
kids,  to  your  shepherd  ;

7  And  presently  the  boys
came  forth  like  kids,  and  leaped
about  him  ;  which  when  the  wo-
men saw,  they  were  exceedingly
amazed,  and  trembled.

8  Then  they  immediately  wor-
shipped the  Lord  Jesus,  and  be-
seeched  him,  saying,  O  our  Lord
Jesus,  son  of  Mary,  thou  art
truly  that  good  shepherd  of  Is-
rael !  have  mercy  on  thy  hand-
maids, who  stand  before  thee,
who  do  not  doubt,  but  that  thou,
O  Lord,  art  come  to  save,  and
not  to  destroy.

9  After  that,  when  the  Lord
Jesus  said,  the  children  of  Israel
are  like  Ethiopians  among  the
people;  the  women  said.  Thou,
Lord,  knowest  all  things,  nor  is
any  thing  concealed  from  thee  ;
but  now  we  entreat  thee,  and  be-
seech of  thy  mercy  that  thou
wouldst  restore  those  boys  to
their  former  state.

10  Then  Jesus  said,  Come  hi-
ther O  boys,  that  we  may  go  and
play;  and  immediately,  in  the
presence  of  these  women,  the
kids  were  changed  and  returned
into  the  shape  of  boys.


Boy  poisoned


I.  INFANCY.


by  a  serpent.


CHAP.  XVIII.

1  Jesus  becomes  the  king  of  his  playfel-
lows, and  they  crown  him  with  flowers,
4  miraculously  causes  a  serpent  who
had  bitten  Simon  the  Cananite,  then  a
boy,  to  suck  out  all  the  poison  again  ;
16  the  serpent  bursts,  and  Christ  re-
stores the  boy  to  health.

IN  the  month  Adar  Jesus  ga-
thered together  the  boys,
and  ranked  them  as  though  he
had  been  a  king.

2  For  they  spread  their  gar-
ments on  the  ground  for  him  to
sit  on  ;  and  having  made  a  crown
of  flowers,  put  it  upon  his  head,
and  stood  on  his  right  and  left
as  the  guards  of  a  king.

3  And  if  any  one  happened
to  pass  by,  they  took  him  by
force,  and  said.  Come  hither,
and  worship  the  king,  that  you
may  have  a  prosperous  journey.

4  T[  In  the  mean  time,  while
these  things  were  doing,  there
came  certain  men,  carrying  a
boy  upon  a  couch  ;

5  For  this  boy  having  gone
with  his  companions  to  the
mountain  to  gather  wood,  and
having  found  there  a  partridge's
nest,  and  put  his  hand  in  to
take  out  the  eggs,  was  stung  by
a  poisonous  serpent,  which  leaped
out  of  the  nest ;  so  that  he  was
forced  to  cry  out  for  the  help  of
his  companions :  who,  when
they  came,  found  him  lying  upon
the  earth  like  a  dead  person.

6  After  which  his  neighbours
came  and  carried  him  back  into
the  city.

7  But  when  they  came  to  the
place  where  the  Lord  Jesus  was
twitting  like  a  king,  and  the  other
boys  stood  around  him  like  his
ministers,  the  boys  made  haste
to  meet  him,  who  was  bitten  by
the  serpent,  and  said  to  his  neigh-
bours. Come  and  pay  your  re-
spects to  the  king ;


8  But  when,  by  reason  of
their  sorrow,  they  refused  to
come,  the  boys  drew  them,  and
forced  them  against  their  wills
to  come.

9  And  when  they  came  to
the  Lord  Jesus,  he  inquired,  On
what  account  they  carried  that
boy?

10  And  when  they  answered,
that  a  serpent  had  bitten  him,
the  Lord  Jesus  said  to  the  boys.
Let  us  go  and  kill  that  serpent.

11  But  when  the  parents  of
the  boy  desired  to  be  excused,
because  their  son  lay  at  the
point  of  death  ;  the  boys  made
answer,  and  said,  Did  not  ye
hear  what  the  king  said  ?  Let  us
go  and  kill  the  serpent ;  and
will  not  ye  obey  him  ?

12  So  they  brought  the  couch
back  again,  whether  they  would
or  not.

13  And  when  they  were  come
to  the  nest,  the  Lord  Jesus  said
to  the  boys,  Is  this  the  serpent's
lurking  place?  They  said.  It
was.

14  Then  the  Lord  Jesus  call-
ing the  serpent,  it  presently
came  forth  and  submitted  to
him  ;  to  whom  he  said.  Go  and
suck  out  all  the  poison  which
thou  hast  infused  into  that  boy ;

15  So  the  serpent  crept  to  the
boy,  and  took  away  all  its  poison
again.

16  Then  the  Lord  Jesus
cursed  the  serpent  so  that  it  imme-
diately burst  asunder,  and  died.

17  And  he  touched  the  boy
with  his  hand  to  restore  him  to
his  former  health ;

18  And  when  he  began  to  cry,
the  Lord  Jesus  said,  Cease  cry-
ing, for  hereafter  thou  shalt  be
my  disciple ;

19  And  this  is  that  Simon  the
Canaanite,  who  is  mentioned  in
the'  Gospel.

55


Christ  at  jday.


I.  INFANCY.     Makes  a  dead


speak.


CHAP.  XIX.

1  James  being  bitten  by  a  viper,  Jesus
blows  on  the  wound  and  cures  him.  4.
Jesus  charged  ivith  throwing  a  boy
from  the  roof  of  a  house,  10  miracu-
lously causes  the  dead  boy  to  acquit
him,  12  fetches  water  for  his  m/}ther,
breaks  the  pitcher  and  miraculously
gathers  th-e  water  in  his  mantle  and
brings  it  home,  16  makes  fish-pools  on
the  sabbath,  20  causes  a  boy  to  die
uho  broke  them  down,  22  another  boy
run  against  him,  whom  he  also  cause^s
to  die.

ON  another  day  Joseph  sent
his  son  James  to  gather
wood  and  the  Lord  Jesus  went
with  him ;

2  And  when  they  came  to  the
place  where  the  wood  was,  and
James  began  to  gather  it,  be-
hold, a  venomous  viper  bit  him,
so  that  he  began  to  cry,  and
make  a  noise.

3  The  Lord  Jesus  seeing  him
in  this  condition,  came  to  him,
and  blowed  upon  the  place
where  the  viper  had  bit  him,
an  1  it  was  instantly  well.

4  ^  On  a  certain  day  the
Lord  Jesus  was  with  some  boys,
who  were  playing  on  the  house-
top, and  one  of  the  boys  fell
down,  and  presently  died.

5  Upon  which  the  other  boys
all  running  away,  the  Lord
Jesus  was  left  alone  on  the
house-top.

6  And  the  boy's  relations
came  to  him  and  said  to  the
Lord  Jesus,  Thou  didst  throw
our  son  down  from  the  house-
top.

7  But  he  denying  it,  they  cried
out,  Our  son  is  dead,  and  this  is
he  who  killed  him.

8  The  Lord  Jesus  replied  to
them,  Do  not  charge  me  with  a
crime,  of  which  you  are  not  able
to  convict  me,  but  let  us  go  ask
the  boy  himself,  who  will  bring
the  truth  to  light.

66


9  Then  the  Lord  Jesus  going
down  stood  over  the  head  of  the
dead  boy,  and  said  with  a  loud
voice,  Zeinunus,  Zeinunus,  who
threw  thee  down  from  the  house-
top?

10  Then  the  dead  boy  answered,
thou  didst  not  throw  me  down,
but  such  a  one  did.

1 1  And  when  the  Lord  Jesus
bade  those  who  stood  by  to  take
notice  of  his  words,  all  who  were
present  praised  God  on  account
of  that  miracle.

12  ^  On  a  certain  time  the
Lady  St.  Mary  had  commanded
the  Lord  Jesus  to  fetch  her  some
water  out  of  the  well ;

13  And  when  he  had  gone  to
fetch  the  water,  the  pitcher,  when
it  was  brought  up  full,  brake.

14  But  Jesus  spreading  his
mantle  gathered  up  the  water
again,  and  brought  it  in  that  to
his  mother.

15  Who,  being  astonished  at
this  wonderful  thing,  laid  up  this,
and  all  the  other  things  which  she
had  seen,  in  her  memory.

16  ^  Again  on  another  day
the  Lord  Jesus  was  with  some
boys  by  a  river  and  they  drew
water  out  of  the  river  by  little
channels,  and  made  little  fish-
pools.

17  But  the  Lord  Jesus  had
made  twelve  sparrows,  and  placed
them  about  his  pool  on  each  side,
three  on  a  side.

18  But  it  was  the  Sabbath  day,
and  the  son  of  Hanani  a  Jew  came
by,  and  saw  them  making  these
things,  and  said,  Do  ye  thus
make  figures  of  clay  on  the  Sab-
bath? And  he  ran  to  them,  and
broke  down  their  fish-pools.

19  But  when  the  Lord  Jesus
clapped  his  hands  over  the  spar-
rows which  he  had  made,  they
fled  away  chirping.

20  At  length  the  son  of  Hanani


THE  PRESENTATION   IN  THE  TEMPLE.

FROM    A    GREEK    PAINTING   IN    DISTEMPER   ON   WOOD.


Gathers  ^ilt  water.


I.  INFANCY.


Kills  a  playfellow.


coming  to  the  fish-pool  of  Jesus
to  destroy  it,  the  water  vanished
away,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  said  to
him,

21  In  like  manner  as  this  water
has  vanished,  so  shall  thy  life
vanish ;  and  presently  the  boy
died,

22  ■[[  Another  time,  when  the
Lord  Jesus  was  coming  home  in
the  evening  with  Joseph,  he  met
a  boy,  who  ran  so  hard  against
him,  that  he  threw  him  down ;

23  To  whom  the  Lord  Jesus
said.  As  thou  hast  thrown  me
down,  so  shalt  thou  fall,  nor  ever
rise.

24  And  that  moment  the  boy
fell  down  and  died.

CHAP.  XX.

4  Sent  to  school  to  Zaccheiis  to  learn  his
letters,  and  teaches  Zaccheus.  13  Sent
to  another  schoolmaster.  14  refuses  to
tell  his  letters,  and  the  schoolmaster
going  to  whip  him  his  hand  withers
and  he  dies.

THERE  was  also  at  Jerusalem
one  named  Zaccheus,  who
was  a  schoolmaster.

2  And  he  said  to  Joseph,  Jo-
seph, why  dost  thou  not  send
Jesus  to  me,  that  he  may  learn
his  letters?

3  Joseph  agreed,  and  told  St.
Mary ;

4  So  they  brought  him  to  that
master ;  who,  as  soon  as  he  saw
him,  wrote  out  an  alphabet  for
him.

5  And  he  bade  him  say  Aleph ;
and  when  he  had  said  Aleph,  the
master  bade  him  pronounce  Beth.

6  Then  the  Lord  Jesus  said  to
him,  Tell  me  first  the  meaning  of
the  letter  Aleph,  and  then  I  will
pronounce  Beth.

7  And  when  the  master  threat-
ened to  whip  him,  the  Lord  Jesus
explained  to  him  the  meaning  of
the  letters  Aleph  and  Beth  ;


8  Also  which  were  the  straight
figures  of  the  letters,  which  the
oblique,  and  what  letters  had  dou-
ble figures ;  which  had  points,  and
which  had  none  ;  why  one  letter
went  before  another  ;  and  many
other  things  he  began  to  tell  him,
and  explain,  of  which  the  master
himself  had  never  heard,  nor  read
in  any  book.

9  The  Lord  Jesus  farther  said
to  the  master,  Take  notice  how  I
say  to  thee ;  then  he  began  clearly
and  distinctly  to  say  Aleph,  Beth,
Gimel,  Daleth,  and  so  on  to  the
end  of  the  alphabet.

10  At  this  the  master  was  so
surprised,  that  he  said,  I  believe
this  boy  was  born  before  Noah  ;

11  And  turning  to  Joseph,  he
said.  Thou  hast  brought  a  boy  to
me  to  be  taught,  who  is  more
learned  than  any  master.

12  He  said  also  unto  St.  Mary,
This  your  son  has  no  need  of  any
learning.

13  ^  They  brought  him  then
to  a  more  learned  master,  who,
when  he  saw  him,  said,  say  Aleph.

14  And  when  he  had  said  Aleph,
the  master  bade  him  pronounce
Beth ;  to  which  the  Lord  Jesus
replied.  Tell  me  first  the  meaning
of  the  letter  Aleph,  and  then  I
will  pronounce  Beth.

15  But  this  master,  when  he
lift  up  his  hand  to  whip  him,  had
his  hand  presently  withered,  and
he  died.

16  Then  said  Joseph  to  St.
Mary,  henceforth  we  will  not
allow  him  to  go  out  of  the  house ;
for  every  one  who  displeases  him
is  killed.

CHAP.  XXL

1  Disputes  miraculously  with  the  doctors
in  the  temple,  7  on  law,  9  on  astronomy,
12  on  physics  and  metaphysics,  21  is
worshipped  by  a  philosopher,  28  and
fetched  home  by  his  mother.

57


Kills  his  schoolmasters.      I.  INFANCY.    Disputes  with  the  doctors,


AND  when  he  was  twelve  years
old,  they  brought  him  to
Jerusalem  to  the  feast;  and  when
the  feast  was  over,  they  returned.

2  But  the  Lord  Jesus  con-
tinued behind  in  the  temple
among  the  doctors  and  elders,
and  learned  men  of  Israel ;  to
whom  he  proposed  several  ques-
tions of  learning,  and  also  gave
them  answers :

3  For  he  said  to  them,  Whose
son  is  the  Messiah?  They  an-
swered, the  son  of  David :

4  Why  then,  said  he,  does  he
in  the  spirit  call  him  Lord  ?  when
he  saith.  The  Lord  said  to  my
Lord,  sit  thou  at  my  right  hand,
till  I  have  made  thine  enemies  thy
footstool.

5  Then  a  certain  principal
Rabbi  asked  him.  Hast  thou  read
books  ?

6  Jesus  answered,  he  had  read
both  books,  and  the  things  which
were  contained  in  books.

7  And  he  explained  to  them
the  books  of  the  law,  and  pre-
cepts, and  statutes :  and  the  mys-
teries which  are  contained  in  the
books  of  the  prophets  ;  things
which  the  mind  of  no  creature
could  reach.

8  Then  said  that  Rabbi,  I  never
yet  have  seen  or  heard  of  such
knowledge  !  What  do  you  think
that  boy  will  be !

9  ^  When  a  certain  astrono-
mer, who  was  present,  asked  the
Lord  Jesus,  Whether  he  had
studied  astronomy  ?

10  The  Lord  Jesus  replied,  and
told  him  the  number  of  the
spheres  and  heavenly  bodies,  as
also  their  triangular,  square,  and
sextile  aspect;  their  progressive
and  retrograde  motion ;  their
size  and  several  prognostications ;
and  other  things  which  the  reason
of  man  had  never  discovered.

11  T  There   was  also  among

58


them  a  philosopher  well  skilled
in  physic  and  natural  philos-
ophy, who  asked  the  Lord  Jesus,
Whether  he  had  studied  physic  ?

12  He  replied,  and  explained
to  him  physics  and  metaphysics.

13  Also  those  things  which
were  above  and  below  the  power
of  nature ;

14  The  powers  also  of  the
body,  its  humours,  and  their  ef-
fects.

15  Also  the  number  of  its
members,  and  bones,  veins,  ar-
teries, and  nerves ;

16  The  several  constitutions
of  body,  hot  and  dry,  cold  and
moist,  and  the  tendencies  of
them  ;

17  How  the  soul  operated
upon  the  body ;

18  What  its  various  sensa-
tions and  faculties  were ;

19  The  faculty  of  f]  caking,
anger,  desire ;

20  And  lastly  the  manner  of
its  composition  and  dissolution;
and  other  things,  which  the  un-
derstanding of  no  creature  had
ever  reached.

21  Then  that  philosopher
arose,  and  worshipped  the  Lord
Jesus,  and  said,  O  Lord  Jesus,
from  henceforth  I  will  be  thy
disciple  and  servant.

22  T[  While  they  were  dis-
coursing on  these  and  such  like
things,  the  Lady  St.  Mary  came
in,  having  been  three  days  walk-
ing about  with  Joseph,  seeking
for  him.

23  And  when  she  saw  him
sitting  among  the  doctors,  and
in  his  turn  proposing  questions
to  them,  and  giving  answers,  she
said  to  him.  My  son,  why  hast
thou  done  thus  by  us  ?  Behold  I
and  thy  father  have  been  at
much  pains  in  seeking  thee.

24  He  replied.  Why  did  ye
seek  me  ?   Did  ye  not  know  that


and  confounds  them.


I.  INFANCY.


Is  baptized.


I  ought  to  be  employed  in  my
father's  house  ?

25  But  they  understood  not
the  words  which  he  said  to  them.

26  Then  the  doctors  asked
Mary,  Whether  this  was  her
son  ?  And  when  she  said,  He  was,
they  said,  O  happy  Mary,  who
hast  borne  such  a  son.

27  Then  he  returned  with
them  to  Nazareth,  and  obeyed
them  in  all  things.

28  And  his  mother  kept  all
these  things  in  her  mind  ;

29  And  the  Lord  Jesus  grew
in  stature  and  wisdom,  and  fa-
vour with  God  and  man.

CHAR  XXII.

1  Conceals  his  miracles,  2  studies  the
law  and  is  baptized.  j

"VrOW  from  this  time  Jesus  j
XM  began  to  conceal  his  mir-  \
acles  and  secret  works,  !

2  And  he  gave  himself  to  the '
study  of  the  law,  till  he  arrived
to  the  end  of  his  thirtieth  year ;  |


3  At  which  time  the  Father
publicly  owned  him  at  Jordan,
sending  down  this  voice  from
heaven.  This  is  my  beloved  son,
in  whom  I  am  well  pleased ;

4  The  Holy  Ghost  being  also
present  in  the  form  of  a  dove.

5  This  is  he  whom  we  wor-
ship with  all  reverence,  because
he  gave  us  our  life  and  being,
and  brought  us  from  our  mother's
womb.

6  Who,  for  our  sakes,  took  a
human  body,  and  hath  redeemed
us,  so  that  he  might  so  embrace
us  with  everlasting  mercy,  and
shew  his  free,  large,  bountiful
grace  and  goodness  to  us.

7  To  him  be  glory  and  praise,
and  power,  and  dominion,  from
henceforth  and  for  evermore,
Amen.


^  ITie  end  of  the  whole  Oospel  of  the
Infancy,  by  the  assistance  of  the  Su-
preme God,  according  to  what  we
found  in  the  original.


59


Christ  enlivens  clay  II.  INFANCY.


birds,  kills  a  boy,


THOMAS'S  GOSPEL  of  the  INFANCY  of  JESUS  CHRIST.

[The  original  in  Greek,  from  which  this  translation  is  made,  will  be  found
printed  by  Cotelerius,  in  his  notes  on  the  constitutions  of  the  Apostles,
from  a  MS.  in  the  French  King's  Library,  No.  2279 — It  is  attributed  to
Thomas,  and  conjectured  to  have  been  originally  connected  with  the
Gospel  of  Mary.]

^  An  Account  of  the  Actions  I  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  in  his  In-
and  Miracles  of  our  Lord  and  \  fancy.


CHAP.  I.

2  Jesus  miraculously  clears  the  water
after  rain.  4  plays  with  clay  sparrows,
which  he  animates  on  the  saJbbath  day.

I  THOMAS,  an  Israelite,  judg-
ed it  necessary  to  make
known  to  our  brethren  among
the  Gentiles,  the  actions  and
miracles  of  Christ  in  his  child-
hood, which  our  Lord  and  God
Jesus  Christ  wrought  after  his
birth  in  Bethlehem  in  our  coun-
try, at  which  I  myself  was  as-
tonished ;  the  beginning  of  which
was  as  folio  weth.

2  Tf  When  the  child  Jesus
was  five  years  of  age  and  there
had  been  a  shower  of  rain,  which
was  now  over,  Jesus  was  play-
ing with  other  Hebrew  boys  by
a  running  stream  ;  and  the  wa-
ter running  over  the  banks,  stood
in  little  lakes ;

3  But  the  water  instantly  be-
came clear  and  useful  again ;
he  having  smote  them  only  by
his  word,  they  readily  obeyed
him.

4  Then  he  took  from  the  bank
of  the   stream  some   soft   clay,

60


and  formed  out  of  it  twelve
sparrows ;  and  there  were  other
boys  playing  with  him.

5  But  a  certain  Jew  seeing
the  things  which  he  was  doing,
namely,  his  forming  clay  into
the  figures  of  sparrows  on  the
sabbath  day,  went  presently
away,  and  told  his  father  Jo-
seph, and  said,

6  Behold,  thy  boy  is  playing
by  the  river  side,  and  has  taken
clay,  and  formed  it  into  twelve
sparrows,  and  profaneth  the  sab-
bath.

7  Then  Joseph  came  to  the
place  where  he  was,  and  when
he  saw  him,  called  to  him,  and
said,  Why  doest  thou  that  which
it  is  not  lawful  to  do  on  the  sab-
bath day  ?

8  Then  Jesus  clapping  toge-
ther the  palms  of  his  hands,
called  to  the  sparrows,  and  said
to  them :  Go,  fly  away ;  and
while  ye  live  remember  me.

9  So  the  sparrows  fled  away,
making  a  noise.

10  The  Jews  seeing  this,  were
astonished,  and  went  away,  and
told  their  chief  persons  what  a


and  is  reproved  by  Joseph.  II.  INFANCY.


Sent  to  school.


strange   miracle   they  had  seen
wrought  by  Jesus.

CHAP.  II.

2  Causes  a  boy  to  wither  who  broke  down
his  fish  pools,  6  partly  restores  him,  7
kills  another  boy,  16  causes  blindness
to  fall  on  his  accusers,  18  for  which
Joseph  pulls  him  by  the  ear.

BESIDES  this,  the  son  of
Anna  the  scribe  was  stand-
ing there  with  Joseph,  and  took
a  bough  of  a  willow  tree,  and
scattered  the  waters  which  Jesus
had  gathered  into  lakes.

2  But  the  boy  Jesus  seeing
what  he  had  done,  became  an-
gry, and  said  to  him,  Thou  fool,
what  harm  did  the  lake  do  thee,
that  thou  shouldest  scatter  the
water  ?

3  Behold,  now  thou  shalt
wither  as  a  tree,  and  shalt  not
bring  forth  either  leaves,  or
branches,  or  fruit.

4  And  immediately  he  be-
cams  withered  all  over.

5  Then  Jesus  went  away
home.  But  the  parents  of  the
boy  who  was  withered,  lament-
ing the  misfortune  of  his  youth,
took  and  carried  him  to  Joseph,
accusing  him,  and  said,  Why
dost  thou  keep  a  son  who  is
guilty  of  such  actions  ?

6  Then  Jesus  at  the  request
of  all  who  were  present  did  heal
him,  leaving  only  some  small
member  to  continue  withered,
that  they  might  take  warning.

7  T  Another  time  Jesus  went
forth  into  the  street,  and  a  boy
running  by,  rushed  upon  his
shoulder ;

8  At  which  Jesus  being  an-
gry, said  to  him,  thou  shalt  go
no  farther.

9  And  he  instantly  fell  down
dead:

10  "Which  when  some  persons
saw,  they  said.  Where  was  this
boy  born,  that  everything  which


he    says    presently   cometh    to
pass?

11  Then  the  parents  of  the
dead  boy  going  to  Joseph  com-
plained, saying.  You  are  not  lit
to  live  with  us,  in  our  city,
having  such  a  boy  as  that :

12  Either  teach  him  that  he
bless  and  not  curse,  or  else  de-
part hence  with  him,  for  he  kills
our  children.

13  T  Then  Joseph  calling  the
boy  Jesus  by  himself,  instructed
him  saying.  Why  doest  thou
such  things  to  injure  the  people
so,  that  they  hate  us  and  prose-
cute us  ?

14  But  Jesus  replied,  I  know-
that  what  thou  sayest  is  not  of
thyself,  but  for  thy  sake  I  will
say  nothing ;

15  But  they  who  have  said
these  things  to  thee,  shall  suffer
everlasting  punishment.

16  And  immediately  they  who
had  accused  him  became  blind.

17  And  all  they  who  saw  it
were  exceedingly  afraid  and
confounded,  and  said  concerning
him,  Whatsoever  he  saith,  whe-
ther good  or  bad,  immediately
cometh  to  pass :  and  they  were
amazed.

18  And  when  they  saw  this
action  of  Christ,  Joseph  arose,
and  plucked  him  by  the  ear,  at
which  the  boy  was  angry,  and
said  to  him,  Be  easy ;

19  For  if  they  seek  for  us,
they  shall  not  find  us :  thou  hast
done  very  imprudently.

20  Dok  thou  not  know  that
I  am  thine?  Trouble  me  no
more.

CHAP.  III.

1  Astonishes    his    schoolmaster   by  his
learning.

A    CERTAIN    schoolmaster
named  Zacchseus,  standing
in  a  certain  place,  heard  Jesus
61


Adventure  at


CHRIST  AND  ABGARUS.


a  dyer^s.


speaking    these    things    to    his
father.

2  And  he  was  much  surprised,
that  being  a  child,  he  should
speak  such  things ;  and  after  a
few  days  he  came  to  Joseph,
and  said,

3  Thou  hast  a  wise  and  sensi-
ble child,  send  him  to  me,  that
he  may  learn  to  read.

4  When  he  sat  down  to  teach
the  letters  to  Jesus,  he  began
with  the  first  letter  Aleph ;

5  But  Jesus  pronounced  the
second  letter  Mpeth  (Beth)  Cghi-
mel  (Gimel),  and  said  over  all
the  letters  t6  him  to  the  end.

6  Then  opening  a  book,  he
taught  his  master  the  prophets :
but  he  was  ashamed,  and  was  at
a  loss  to  conceive  how  he  came
to  know  the  letters.


7  And  he  arose  and  went
home,  wonderfully  surprised  at
so  strange  a  thing.

CHAP.  IV.

1  Fragment  of  an  adventure  at  a  dyer's.

AS  Jesus  was  passing  by  a  cer-
tain shop,  he  saw  a  young
man  dipping  (or  dyeing)  some
cloths  and  stockings  in  a  fur-
nace, of  a  sad  colour,  doing
them  according  to  every  person's
particular  order ;

2  The  boy  Jesus  going  to  the
young  man  who  was  doing  this,
took  also  some  of  the  cloths.


T[  Here  endeth  the  Fragment  of
Thomas's  Gospel  of  the  Infancy
of  Jesus  Christ


THE  EPISTLES  of  JESUS  CHRIST  and  ABGARUS  KING
of  EDESSA.

[The  first  writer  who  makes  any  mention  of  the  Epistles  that  passed  between
Jesus  Christ  and  Abgarus,  is  Eusebius,  Bishop  of  Csesarea,  in  Palestine,
who  flourished  in  the  early  part  of  the  toarth  century.  For  their  genu-
ineness, he  appeals  to  the  public  registers  and  records  of  the  City  of
Edessa  in  Mesopotamia,  where  Abgarus  reigned,  and  where  he  aflBrms
that  he  found  them  written,  in  the  Syriac  language.  He  published  a
Greek  translation  of  them,  in  his  Ecclesiastical  History.^  The  learned
world  have  been  much  divided  on  this  subject;  but,  notwithstanding
that  the  erudite  Grabe,  with  Archbishop  Cave,  Dr.  Parker,  and  other
divines,  has  strenuously  contended  for  their  admission  into  the  canon
of  Scripture,  they  are  Seemed  apocryphal.  The  Rev.  Jeremiah  Jones
observes,  that  the  common  people  in  England  have  this  Epistle  in  their
houses,  in  many  places,  fixed  in  a  frame,  with  the  picture  of  Chi'ist
before  it ;  and  that  they  generally,  with  much  honesty  and  devotion,
regard  it  as  the  word  of  God,  and  the  genuine  Epistle  of  Christ.]

CHAP.  I.


A  copy  of  a  letter  written  by  King  Ab-
garus to  Jesus,  and  sent  to  him  by
Ananias,  his  footman,  to  Jerusalem,
5  inviting  him  to  Edessa.

ABGARUS,  king  of  Edessa,
to  Jesus  the  good  Saviour,
who  appears  at  Jerusalem,  greet-
ing.


2  I  have  been  informed  con-
cerning you  and  your  cures,
which  are  performed  without
the  use  of  medicines  and  herbs.

3  For  it  is  reported,  that  you
cause  the  blind  to  see,  the  lame
to  walk,  do  both  cleanse  lepers,
and  cast  out  unclean  spirits  and
devils,  and  restore  them  to  health


62


1  L.  i.  0.  13.


Jssus'  letter


NICODEMUS.


to  Abgarus.


who  have  been  long  diseased,  and
raisest  up  the  dead ;

4  All  which  when  I  heard,  I
was  persuaded  of  one  of  these
two,  viz :  either  that  you  are  God
himself  descended  from  heaven,
who  do  these  things,  or  the  son  of
God.

5  On  this  account  therefore  I
have  wrote  to  you,  earnestly  to
desire  you  would  take  the  trouble
of  a  journey  hither,  and  cure  a
disease  which  I  am  under.

6  For  I  hear  the  Jews  ridicule
you,  and  intend  you  mischief.

7  My  city  is  indeed  small,  but
neat,  and  large  enough  for  us  both.

CHAP.  II.

Tke  answer  of  Jesus  by  Ananias  the
footman  to  Ahgarus  the  king,  3  de-
dining  to  visit  Edessa.


ABGARUS,  you  are  happy,
forasmuch  as  you  have  be-
lieved on  me,  whom  ye  have  not
seen.

2  For  it  is  written  concerning
me,  that  those  who  have  seen  me
should  not  believe  on  me,  that
they  who  have  not  seen  might  be-
lieve and  live.

3  As  to  that  part  of  your  letter,
which  relates  to  my  giving  you  a
visit,  I  must  inform  you,  that  I
must  fulfil  all  the  ends  of  my
mission  in  this  country,  and  after
that  be  received  up  again  to  him
who  sent  me.

4  But  after  my  ascension  I  will
send  one  of  my  disciples,  who
will  cure  your  disease,  and  give
life  to  you,  and  all  that  are  with
you.


The  GOSPEL  of  NICODEMUS,  formerly  called  the  ACTS  of
PONTIUS  PILATE.

[Although  this  Gospel  is,  by  some  among  the  learned,  supposed  to  have  been
really  written  by  Nicodemus,  who  became  a  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ,  and
conversed  with  him ;  others  conjecture  that  it  was  a  forgery  towards  the
close  of  the  third  century  by  some  zealous  believer,  who  observing  that
there  had  been  appeals  made  by  the  Christians  of  the  former  age,  to  the
Acts  of  Pilate,  but  that  such  Acts  could  not  be  produced,  imagined  it
would  be  of  service  to  Christianity  to  fabricate  and  publish  this  Gospel ;
as  it  would  both  confirm  the  Christians  under  persecution,  and  convince
the  Heathens  of  the  truth  of  the  Christian  religion.  The  Kev.  Jeremiah
Jones  says,  that  such  pious  frauds  were  very  common  among  Christians
even  in  the  first  three  centuries ;  and  that  a  forgery  of  this  nature,  with
the  view  above  mentioned,  seems  natural  and  probable.  The  same
author,  in  noticing  that  Easebius,  in  his  Ecclesiastical  history,  charges
the  Pagans  with  having  forged  and  published  a  book,  called  "The  Acts
of  Pilate,"  takes  occasion  to  observe,  that  the  internal  evidence  of  this
Gospel  shows  it  was  not  the  work  of  any  Heathen ;  but  that  if  in  the
latter  end  of  the  third  century  we  find  it  in  use  among  Christians  (as
it  was  then  certainly  in  some  churches)  and  about  the  same  time  find  a
forgery  of  the  Heathens  under  the  same  title,  it  seems  exceedingly  pro-
bable that  some  Christians,  at  that  time,  should  publish  such  a  piece  as
this,  in  order  partly  to  confront  the  spurious  one  of  the  Pagans,  and
partly  to  support  those  appeals  which  had  been  made  by  former
Christians  to  the  Acts  of  Pilate ;  and  Mr.  Jones  says,  he  thinks  so  more
particularly  as  we  have  innumerable  instances  of  forgeries  by  the  faith-
ful in  the  primitive  ages,  grounded  on  less  plausible  reasons.  Whether
it  be  canonical  or  not,  it  is  of  very  great  antiquity,  and  is  appealed  to  by
several  of  the  ancient  Christians.  The  present  translation  is  made
from  the  Gospel  published  by  Grynaeus  in  the  Orthodoxographa,  vol.  i.
tom.  ii.  p.  643.]

63


Christ  accused  by  the         NICODEMUS.


Jews  before  Pilate^


The  Gospel  of  Nicodemus  the
disciple,  concerning  the  /Sufferings
and  Resurrection  of  our  Master
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.

CHAP.  I.

1  Ohrisl  cbccused  to  Pilate  by  the  Jews
of  healing  on  the  sabbath,  9  sum-
moned before  Pilate  by  a  messenffer
who  does  him  honour,  20  worshipped
by  the  standards  bowing  down  to  him.

ANNAS  and  Caiaphas,  and
Summas,  and  Datam,  Ga-
maliel, Judas,  Levi,  Nepthalim,
Alexander,  Cyrus,  and  other
Jews,  went  to  Pilate  about  Jesus,
accusing^  him  with  many  bad
crimes.

2  And  said,  We  are  assured
that  Jesus  is  the  son  of  Joseph  the
carpenter,^  and  born  of  Mary,  and
that  he  declares  himself  the  Sou
of  God,  and  a  king  f  and  not  only
so,  but  attempts  the  dissolution  of
the  sabbath,^  and  the  laws  of  our
fathers.

3  Pilate  replied ;  What  is  it
which  he  declares  ?  and  what  is  it
which  he  attempts  dissolving  ?

4  The  Jews  told  him,We  have
a  law  which  forbids  doing  cures
on  the  sabbath  day  ;*  but  he
cures  both  the  lame  and  the  deaf,
those  afflicted  with  the  palsy,  the
blind,  and  lepers,  and  demoniacs,
on  that  day  by  wicked  methods.

5  Pilate  replied,  How  can  he
do  this  by  wicked  methods?  They
answered.  He  is  a  conjurer,  and
casts  out  devils  by  the  prince  of
the  devils  f  and  so  all  things
become  subject  to  him.

6  Then  said  Pilate,  Casting  out
devils  seems  not  to  be  the  work
of  an  unclean  spirit,  but  to  pro-
ceed from  the  power  of  God.

7  The  Jews  replied  to  Pilate,
We  entreat  your  highness  to  sum-

'  Matt.  xiii.  55,  and  John  vi.  42.  ^  j^j^n  v.  17,  18.         Mark  xv.  2.

3  Matt.  xii.  2,  &c.;  Luke  xiii.  14.  John,  v.  18.  *  Exod.  xx.  8,  &c.     ^Mati.

vi.  24,  and  xi.  5.  «  Matt.  iv.  34,  and  xii.  24,  &c.  ^  Matt.  xxi.  8^

9,  &c.

G4


j  mon  him  to  appear  before  your

tribunal,  and  hear  him  yourself

8  Then  Pilate  called  a  messenger

I  and  said  to  him.  By  what  means
will  Christ  be  brought  hither  ?

I  9  Then  went  the  messenger
forth,  and  knowing  Christ,  wor-
shipped him  ;  and  having  spread
the  cloak  which  he  had  in  his
hand  upon  the  ground,  he  said,
Lord,  walk  upon  this,  and  go  in^
for  the  governor  calls  thee.

10  When  the  Jews  perceived
what  the  messenger  had  done
they  exclaimed  (against  him)  to
Pilate,  and  said,Why  did  you  not
give  him  his  summons  by  a  bea-
dle, and  not  by  a  messenger  ? —
For  the  messenger,  when  he  saw
him,  worshipped  him,  and  spread
the  cloak  which  he  had  in  his
hand  upon  the  ground  before  him,
and  said  to  him,  Lord,  the  go-
vernor calls  thee.

1 1  Then  Pilate  called  the  mes-
senger, and  said,  Why  hast  thou
done  thus  ?

12  The  messenger  replied.
When  thou  sentest  me  from  Je-
rusalem to  Alexander,  I  saw  Je-
sus sitting  in  a  mean  figure  upon
a  she-ass,  and  the  children  of  the
Hebrews  cried  out,  Hosannah,
holding  boughs  of  trees  in  their
hands.

13  Others  spread  their  garments
in  the  way,  and  said,  Save  us,  thou
who  art  in  heaven ;  blessed  is  he
who  Cometh  in  the  name  of  the
Lord.^

14  Then  the  Jews  cried  out,
against  the  messenger,  and  said,
The  children  of  the  Hebrews
made  their  acclamations  in  the
Hebrew  language  ;  and  how
couldst  thou,  who  art  a  Greek,
understand  the  Hebrew  ?


MARY  OFFERING    IN  THE  TEMPLE.  (Page  40.

FROM    A    GREEK    DIPTYCHON   OF    THE    THIRTEENTH    OR    FOURTEENTH    CENTURY.


Christ  worshipped  by        NICODEMUS.


the  standards.


15  The  messenger  answered
them  and  said,  I  asked  one  of
the  Jews  and  said,  What  is  this
which  the  children  do  cry  out  in
tlie  Hebrew  language  ?

16  And  he  explained  it  to  me,
saying,  they  cry  out  Hosannah,
which  being  interpreted,  is,  O,
Lord,  save  me;  or,  O  Lord,
save.

17  Pilate  then  said  to  them,
Why  do  you  yourselves  testify
to  the  words  spoken  by  the  chil-
dren, namely,  by  your  silence  ?
In  what  has  the  messenger  done
amiss  ?  And  they  were  silent.

18  Then  the  governor  said
unto  the  messenger,  Go  forth
and  endeavour  by  any  means  to
bring  him  in.

19  But  the  messenger  went
forth,  and  did  as  before;  and
said.  Lord,  come  in,  for  the  gov-
ernor calleth  thee.

20  And  as  Jesus  was  going  in
by  the  ensigns,  who  carried  the
standards,  the  tops  of  them
bowed  down  and  worshipped
Jesus.

21  Whereupon  the  Jews  ex-
claimed more  vehemently  against
the  ensigns.

22  But  Pilate  said  to  the
Jews,  I  know  it  is  not  pleasing
to  you  that  the  tops  of  the  stan-
dards did  of  themselves  bow
and  worship  Jesus ;  but  why  do
ye  exclaim  against  the  ensigns,
as  if  they  had  bowed  and  wor-
shipped ?

23  They  replied  to  Pilate,
We  saw  the  ensigns  themselves
bowing  and  worshipping  Jesus.

24  Then  the  governor  called
the  ensigns  and  said  unto  them,
Why  did  you  do  thus  ?

25  The  ensigns  said  to  Pilate,
We  are  all  Pagans  and  worship
the  gods  in  temples ;  and  how
should  we  think  anything  about
worshipping    him  ?      We    only

5


held  the  standards  in  our  hands
and  they  bowed  themselves  and
worshipped  him.

26  Then  said  Pilate  to  the
rulers  of  the  synagogue,  Do  ye
yourselves  choose  some  strong
men,  and  let  them  hold  the  stan-
dards, and  we  shall  see  whether
they  will  then  bend  of  them-
selves.

27  So  the  elders  of  the  Jews
sought  out  twelve  of  the  most
strong  and  able  old  men,  and
made  them  hold  the  standards
and  they  stood  in  the  presence
of  the  governor.

28  Then  Pilate  said  to  the
messenger.  Take  Jesus  out,  and
by  some  means  bring  him  ia
again.  And  Jesus  and  the  mes-
senger went  out  of  the  hall.

29  And  Pilate  called  the  en-
signs who  before  had  borne  the
standards,  and  swore  to  them,
that  if  they  had  not  borne  the
standards  in  that  manner  when
Jesus  before  entered  in,  he  would
cut  off  their  heads.

30  Then  the  governor  com-
manded Jesus  to  come  in  again.

31  And  the  messenger  did  as
he  had  done  before,  and  very
much  entreated  Jesus  that  he
would  go  upon  his  cloak,  and
walk  on  it,  and  he  did  walk
upon  it,  and  went  in.

32  And  when  Jesus  went  in,
the  standards  bowed  themselves
as  before,  and  worshipped  him.

CHAP.  IL

2  7s  compassionated  by  Pilate's  wife,  7
charged  with  being  born  in  fornication..
12  Testimony  to  the  betrothing  of  his
parents.     Hatred  of  the  Jews  to  him,

"VrOW  when  Pilate  saw  this,
1.M  he  was  afraid,  and  was
about  to  rise  from  his  seat.

2  But    while  he  thought  to
rise,  his  own  wife  who  stood  at  a
distance,   sent  to    him,   saying,
65


Charged  with  being  NICODEMUS.  bom  in  fornication.


Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with
that  just  man ;  for  I  have  suf-
fered much  concerning  him  in  a
vision  this  night.^

3  When  the  Jews  heard  this
they  said  to  Pilate,  Did  we  not
say  unto  thee,  He  is  a  conjuror?
Beiiold,  he  hath  caused  thy  wife
to  dream.

4  Pilate  then  calling  Jesus,
said,  thou  hast  heard  what  they
testify  against  thee,  and  makest


no  answer


5  Jesus  replied,  If  they  had
not  a  power  of  speaking,  they
could  not  have  spoke ;  but  be-
cause every  one  has  the  com-
mand of  his  own  tongue,  to
speak  both  good  and  bad,  let
him  look  to  it.

6  But  the  elders  of  the  Jews
answered,  and  said  to  Jesus,
What  shall  we  look  to  ?

7  In  the  first  place,  we  know
this  concerning  thee,  that  thou
wast  born  through  fornication  ;
secondly,  that  upon  the  account
of  thy  birth  the  infants  were
slain  in  Bethlehem ;  thirdly,  that
thy  father  and  mother  Mary  fled
into  Egypt,  because  they  could
not  trust  their  own  people.

8  Some  of  the  Jews  who  stood
by  spake  more  favourably.  We
cannot  say  that  he  was  born
through  fornication  ;  but  we
know  that  his  mother  Mary  was
betrothed  to  Joseph,  and  so  he
was  not  born  through  fornication.

9  Then  said  Pilate  to  the  Jews
who  affirmed  him  to  be  born
through  fornication,  This  your
account  is  not  true,  seeing  there
was  a  betrothment,  as  they  testify
who  are  of  your  own  nation.

10  Annas  and  Caiaphas  spake
to  Pilate,  All  this  multitude  of
people  is  to  be  regarded,  who
cry  out,  that  he  was  born  through


fornication,  and  is  a  conjuror;
but  they  who  deny  him  to  be
born  through  fornication,  are  his
proselytes  and  disciples.

11  Pilate  answered  Annas  and
Caiaphas, Who  are  the  proselytes  ?
They  answered,  They  are  those
who  are  the  children  of  Pagans,
and  are  not  become  Jews,  but
followers  of  him.

12  Then  replied  Eleazer,  and
Asterius,  and  Antonius,  and
James,  Caras  and  Samuel,  Isaac
and  Phinees,  Crispus  and  Agrip-
pa,  Annas  and  Judas,  We  are
not  proselytes,  but  children  of
Jews,  and  speak  the  truth,  and
were  present  when  Mary  was  be-
trothed.

13  Then  Pilate  addressing  him-
self to  the  twelve  men  who  spake
this,  said  to  them,  I  conjure  you
by  the  life  of  Caesar,  that  ye  faith-
fully declare  whether  he  was
born  through  fornication,  and
those  things  be  true  which  ye
have  related.

14  They  answered  Pilate,  We
have  a  law,  whereby  wo  are  forbid
to  swear,  it  being  a  sin  :  Let  them
swear  by  the  life  of  Csesar  that  it
is  not  as  we  have  said,  and  we
will  be  contented  to  be  put  to
death.

15  Then  said  Annas  and  Caia-
phas to  Pilate,  Those  twelve  men
will  not  believe  that  we  know
him  to  be  basely  born,  and  to  be
a  conjuror,  although  he  pretends
that  he  is  the  son  of  God,  and  a
king : '  which  we  are  so  far  from
believing,  that  we  tremble  to  hear.

16  Then  Pilate  commanded
every  one  to  go  out  except  the
twelve  men  who  said  he  was  not
born  through  fornication,  and
Jesus  to  withdraw  to  a  distance,
and  said  to  them,  Why  have  the
Jews  a  mind  to  kill  Jesus  ?


Matt,  xxvii.  19.


m


»  John  V,  17,  18  ;  Mark  xv.  2.


Christ  disputes


NICODEMUS.


with  Pilate.


17  They  answered  him,  They
are  angry  because  he  wrought
cures  on  the  sabbath  day.  Pilate
^aid,  Will  they  kill  him  for  a
good  work?^  They  say  unto
him,  Yes,  Sir.

CHAP.  III.

1  Is  exonerated  by  Pilate.     1 1  Disputes
with  Pilate  concerning  Truth.

THEN  Pilate,  filled  with  an-
ger, went  out  of  the  hall,
and  said  to  the  Jews,  I  call  the
whole  world  to  witness  that  I
find  no  fault  in  that  man.'

2  The  Jews  replied  to  Pilate,
If  he  had  not  been  a  wicked  per-
son, we  had  not  brought  him  be-
fore thee.

3  Pilate  said  to  them.  Do  ye
take  him  and  try  him  by  your
law.

4  Then  the  Jews  said.  It  is
not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any  one
to  death.

5  Pilate  said  to  the  Jews,  The
command,  therefore  thou  shalt
not  kill,^  belongs  to  you,  but  not
to  me.

6  And  he  went  again  into  the
hall,  and  called  Jesus  by  himself,
and  said  to  him,  Art  thou  the
king  of  the  Jews  ?

7  And  Jesus  answering,  said
to  Pilate,  Dost  thou  speak  this
of  thyself,  or  did  the  Jews  tell  it
thee  concerning  me  ?

8  Pilate  answering,  said  to
Jesus,  Am  I  a  Jew  ?  The  whole
nation  and  rulers  of  the  Jews
have  delivered  thee  up  to  me.
What  hast  thou  done  ?

9  Jesus  answering,  said,  My
kingdom  is  not  of  this  world :  if
my  kingdom  were  of  this  world,
then  would   my   servants  fight.


and  I  should  not  have  been  de-
livered to  the  Jews  ;  but  now  my
kingdom  is  not  from  hence.

10  Pilate  said,  Art  thou  a
king  then?  Jesus  answered, Thou
sayest  that  I  am  a  king  :  to  this
end  was  I  born,  and  for  this  end
came  I  into  the  world ;  and  for
this  purpose  I  came,  that  I  should
bear  witness  to  the  truth  ;  and
every  one  who  is  of  the  truth,
heareth  my  voice.

11  Pilate  saith  to  him.  What
is  truth?

12  Jesus  said,  Truth  is  from
heaven.

13  Pilate  said.  Therefore  truth
is  not  on  earth.

14  Jesus  said  to  Pilate,  Be-
lieve that  truth  is  on  earth
among  those,  who  when  they
have  the  power  of  judgment,  are
governed  by  truth,  and  form
right  judgment.

CHAP.  IV.

1  Pilate  finds  no  fault  in  Jesus.   16  The
Jews  demand  his  crucifixion.

THEN  Pilate  left  Jesus  in  the
hall,  and  went  out  to  the
Jews,  and  said,  I  find  not  any
one  fault  in  Jesus.

2  The  Jews  say  unto  him.  But
he  said,  I  can  destroy  the  temple
of  God,  and  in  three  days  build
it  up  again.

3  Pilate  saith  unto  them, What
sort  of  temple  is  that  of  which  he
speaketh?

4  The  Jews  say  unto  him,
That  which  Solomon  was  forty-
six  years  in  building,*  he  said  he
would  destroy,  and  in  three  days
build  up.

5  Pilate  said  to  them  again,  I
am  innocent  from  the  blood  of
that  man;  do  ye  look  to  it.*


1  John  X.  32.     » John  xviii.  31,  &c.    »  Exod.  xx.  13.    *  John  ii.  19.
*  Matt,  xxvii.  24

67


Pilate  inclines  to  Christ.  NICODEMUS.  The  Jews  demand  his  death.


6  The  Jews  say  to  him,  His
blood  be  upon  us  and  our  chil-
dren. Then  Pilate  calling  to-
gether the  elders  and  scribes,
priests  and  Levites,  saith  to  them
privately,  Do  not  act  thus;  I
have  found  nothing  in  your
charge  (against  him)  concerning
his  curing  sick  persons,  and
breaking  the  sabbath,  worthy  of
death.

7  The  Priests  and  Levites  re-
plied to  Pilate,  By  the  life  of
Cs^ar,  if  any  one  be  a  blasphe-
mer, he  is  worthy  of  death  ;^
but  this  man  hath  blasphemed
against  the  Lord.

8  Then  the  governor  again
commanded  the  Jews  to  depart
out  of  the  hall ;  and  calling  Jesus,
said  to  him,  What  shall  I  do  with
thee  ?

9  Jesus  answered  him,  Do  ac-
cording as  it  is  written.

10  Pilate  said  to  him.  How  is
it  written  ?

11  Jesus  saith  to  him,  Moses
and  the  prophets  have  prophesied
concerning  my  suffering  and  re-
surrection.

12  The  Jews  hearing  this,
were  provoked,  and  said  to  Pi-
late, Why  wilt  thou  any  longer
hear  the  blasphemy  of  that  man  ?

13  Pilate  saith  to  them.  If
these  words  seem  to  you  blas-
phemy, do  ye  take  him,  bring
him  to  your  court,  aud  try  him
according  to  your  law.

14  The  Jews  reply  to  Pilate,
Our  law  saith,  he  shall  be  obliged
to  receive  nine  and  thirty  stripes,
but  if  after  this  manner  he  shall
blaspheme  against  the  Lord,  he
shall  be  stoned.

15  Pilate  saith  unto  them,  If
that  speech  of  his  was  blasphemy,
do  ye  try  him  according  to  your
law.


16  The  Jews  say  to  Pilate,  Our
law  commands  us  not  to  put  any
one  to  death  :'^  we  desire  that  he
may  be  crucified,  because  he  de-
serves the  death  of  the  cross.

17  Pilate  saith  to  them,  It  is
not  fit  he  should  be  crucified :  let
him  be  only  whipped  and  sent
away.^

18  But  when  the  governor
looked  upon  the  people  that  were
present  and  the  Jews,  he  saw
many  of  the  Jews  in  tears,  and
said  to  the  chief  priests  of  the
Jews,  All  the  people  do  not  de-
sire his  death.

19  The  elders  of  the  Jews  an-
swered to  Pilate,  We  and  all  the
people  came  hither  for  this  very
purpose,  that  he  should  die.

20  Pilate  saith  to  them,  Why
should  he  die  ?

21  They  said  to  him.  Because
he  declares  himself  to  be  the  Son
of  God,  and  a  King.

CHAP.  V.

1  Nicodemiis  speaks  in  defence  of  Oirist,
and  relates  his  miracles.  12  Another
Jew,  26  with  Veronica,  34  Centurio^
and  others,  testify  of  other  miracles.

BUT  Nicodemus,  a  certain
Jew,  stood  before  the  gov-
ernor, and  said,  I  entreat  thee,
O  righteous  judge,  that  thou
wouldst  favour  me  with  the  li-
berty of  speaking  a  few  words.

2  Pilate  said  to  him,  Speak  on.

3  Nicodemus  said,  I  spake  to
the  elders  of  the  Jews,  and  the
scribes,  and  priests  and  Levites,
and  all  the  multitude  of  the
Jews,  in  their  assembly  ;  What  is
it  ye  would  do  with  this  man  ?

4  He  is  a  man  who  hath
wrought  many  useful  and  glo-
rious miracles,  such  as  no  man
on  earth  ever  wrought  before,


Leviticus  xxiv.  16.
68


Exodus  XX.  13.


'  Luke  xxiii.  16.


Mcodemm  speaks.  NICODEMUS.      A  Jew  cured  by  Christ,


nor  will  ever  work.^  Let  him
go,  and  do  him  no  harm ;  if  he
Cometh  from  God,  his  miracles,
(his  miraculous  cures)  will  con-
tinue; but  if  from  men,  they
will  come  to  nought.'^

5  Thus  Moses,  when  he  was
sent  by  God  into  Egypt,  wrought
the  miracles  which  God  com-
manded him,  before  Pharaoh
king  of  Egypt ;  and  though  the
magicians  of  that  country,  Jan-
nes  and  Jambres,^  wrought  by
their  magic  the  same  miracles
which  Moses  did,  yet  they  could
not  work  all  which  he  did  ;*

6  And  the  miracles  which  the
magicians  wrought,  were  not  of
God,  as  ye  know,  O  Scribes  and
Pharisees ;  but  they  who  wrought
them  perished,  and  all  who  be-
lieved them.^

7  And  now  let  this  man  go ;
because  the  very  miracles  for
which  ye  accuse  him,  are  from
God;  and  he  is  not  worthy  of
death.

8  The  Jews  then  said  to  Nico-
demus,  Art  thou  become  his
disciple,  and  making  speeches
in  his  favour  ?

9  Nicodemus  said  to  them,  Is
the  governor  become  his  disciple
also,  and  does  he  make  speeches
for  him  ?  Did  not  Caesar  place
him  in  that  high  post  ?

10  When  the  Jews  heard  this
they  trembled,  and  gnashed  their
teeth  at  Nicodemus,  and  said  to
him,  Mayest  thou  receive  his
doctrine  for  truth,  and  have  thy
lot  with  Christ !

11  Nicodemus  replied,  Amen ;
I  will  receive  his  doctrine,  and
mv  lot  with  him,  as  ye  have  said.

"12  ^  Then  another  certain  Jew


rose  up,  and  desired  leave  of  the
governor  to  hear  him  a  few  words.

13  And  the  governor  said,
Speak  what  thou  hast  a  mind.

14  And  he  said,  I  lay  for
thirty-eight  years  by  the  sheep-
pool  at  Jerusalem,  labouring
under  a  great  infirmity,  and
waiting  for  a  cure  which  should
be  wrought  by  the  coming  of  an
angel,  who  at  a  certain  time  trou-
bled the  water ;  and  whosoever
first  after  the  troubling  of  the
water  stepped  in,  was  made  whole
of  whatsoever  disease  he  had.

15  And  when  Jesus  saw  me
languishing  there,  he  said  to  me,
Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ?  And
I  answered.  Sir,  I  have  no  man,
when  the  water  is  troubled,  to
put  me  into  the  pool.

16  And  he  said  unto  me.  Rise,
take  up  thy  bed  and  walk.  And
I  was  immediately  made  whole,
and  took  up  my  bed  and  walked.^

17  The  Jews  then  said  to  Pi-
late, Our  Lord  Governor,  pray
ask  him  what  daj^  it  was  on  which
he  was  cured  of  his  infirmity.

18  The  infirm  person  replied,
It  was  on  the  sabbath.

19  The  Jews  said  to  Pilate,
Did  we  not  say  that  he  wrought
his  cures  on  the  sabbath,  and  cast
out  devils  by  the  prince  of  devils?

20  Then  another  certain^  Jew
came  forth,  and  said,  I  was  blind,
could  hear  sounds,  but  could  not
see  any  one ;  and  as  Jesus  was
going  along,  I  heard  the  multi-
tude passing  by,  and  I  asked
what  was  there  ?

21  They  told  me  that  Jesus
was  passing  by :  then  I  cried  out,
saying,  Jesus,  Son  of  David,
have   mercy   on   me.     And    he


1  John  iii.  2.  '  Acts  v.  38.

3  These  are  mentioned  also  as  the  names  of  the  magicians,  2  Tim.  iii.  8.
*  Exod.  viii.  18,  &c.        ^  Acts  v.  35.  An  allusion  to  Gamaliel's  speech.

6  John  V.  1,  2,  Sec.  ^  Mark  x.  46.

69


\


with  Veroniea  and  others,     NICODEMUS.      testify  of  his  miracles.


stood  still,  and  commanded  that
I  should  be  brought  to  him,  and
said  to  me,  What  wilt  thou  ?

22  I  said,  Lord,  that  I  may-
receive  my  sight.

23  He  said  to  me.  Receive
thy  sight :  and  presently  I  saw,
and  followed  him,  rejoicing  and
giving  thanks.

24  Another  Jew  also  came
forth,  and  said,  ^I  was  a  leper,
and  he  cured  me  by  his  word
only,  saying,  I  will,  be  thou
clean ;  and  presently  I  was
cleansed  from  my  leprosy.

25  And  another  Jew  came
forth,  and  said,  I  was  crooked,
and  he  made  me  straight  by  his
word.^

26  T  -^^d  ^  certain  woman
named  Veronica,  said,  'I  was
afflicted  with  an  issue  of  blood
twelve  years,  and  I  touched  the
hem  of  his  garments,  and  present-
ly the  issue  of  my  blood  stopped.

27  The  Jews  then  said.  We
have  a  law,  that  a  woman  shall
not  be  allowed  as  an  evidence.

28  And,  after  other  things,
another  Jew  said,  *I  saw  Jesus
invited  to  a  wedding  with  his
disciples,  and  there  was  a  want
of  wine  in  Cana  of  Galilee  ;

29  And  when  the  wine  was
all  drank,  he  commanded  the
servants  that  they  should  fill  six
pots  which  were  there  with
water,  and  they  filled  them  up
to  the  brim,  and  he  blessed
them,  and  turned  the  water  into
wine,  and  all  the  people  drank,
being  surprised  at  this  miracle.

30  And  another  Jew  stood
forth,  and  said,  ^I  saw  Jesus
teaching   in  the   synagogue   at


Capernaum;  and  there  was  in
the  synagogue  a  certain  man
who  had  a  devil ;  and  he  cried
out,  saying,  let  me  alone ;  what
have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus
of  Nazareth?  Art  thou  come
to  destroy  us?  I  know  that
thou  art  the  Holy  One  of  God.

31  And  Jesus  rebuked  him,
saying.  Hold  thy  peace,  unclean
spirit,  and  come  out  of  the  man;
and  presently  he  came  out  of
him,  and  did  not  at  all  hurt  him.

32  The  following  things  were
also  said  by  a  Pharisee ;  I  saw
that  a  great  company  came  to
Jesus  from  Galilee  and  Judaea,
and  the  sea-coast,  and  many
countries  about  Jordan,  and
many  infirm  persons  came  to
him,  and  he  healed  them  all.^

33  And  I  heard  the  unclean
spirits  crying  out,  and  saying,^
Thou  art  the  Son  of  Goa.  And
Jesus  strictly  charged  them,
that  they  should  not  make  him
known.

34  T  After  this  another  per-
son, whose  name  was  Centurio,
said,^  I  saw  Jesus  in  Capernaum,
and  I  entreated  him,  saying,
Lord,  my  servant  lieth  at  home
sick  of  the  palsy.

35  And  Jesus  said  to  me,  I
will  come  and  cure  him.

36  But  I  said.  Lord,  I  am  not
worthy  that  thou  shouldst  come
under  my  roof;  but  only  speak
the  word,  and  my  servant  shall
be  healed.

37  And  Jesus  said  unto  me,
Go  thy  way ;  and  as  thou  hast
believed,  so  be  it  done  unto  thee.
And  my  servant  was  healed
from  that  same  hour.


^  Matt.  viii.  11,  &c.  '  Luke  xiii.  11.

'  Matt.  ix.  20,  &c.  See  ooncerninp;  this  woman  called  Veronica,  on  whom
this  miracle  was  performed,  and  the  statne  which  she  erected  to  the  honour
of  Christ,  in  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  7,  c.  18.

*  John  ii.  1,  &c.  6  Luke  iv.  33  &c.  «  Matt.  v.  23.

^  Mark  iii.  11.  »  Matt.  viii.  5,  &c.

70


Christ's  miracles  witnessed.   NICODEMUS.     His  death  demanded.


38  Then  a  certain  nobleman
said,  I  had  a  son  in  Capernaum,
who  lay  at  the  point  of  death ;
and  when  I  heard  that  Jesus  was
come  into  Galilee,  I  went  and
besought  him  that  he  would  come
down  to  my  house,  and  heal  my
son,  for  he  was  at  the  point  of
death.

39  He  said  to  me,  Go  thy  way,
thy  son  liveth.

40  And  my  son  was  cured
from  that  hour.

41  Besides  these,  also  many
others  of  the  Jews,  both  men  and
women,  cried  out  and  said,  He  is
truly  the  Son  of  God,  who  cures
all  diseases  only  by  his  word,  and
to  whom  the  devils  are  altogether
subject.

42  Some  of  them  farther  said,
This  power  can  proceed  from
none  but  God.

43  Pilate  said  to  the  Jews,
Why  are  not  the  devils  subject
to  your  doctors  ?

44  Some  of  them  said.  The
power  of  subjecting  devils  can-
not proceed  but  from  God.

45  But  others  said  to  Pilate,
That  he  had  ^  raised  Lazarus
from  the  dead,  after  he  had  been
four  days  in  his  grave.

46  The  governor  hearing  this,
trembling  said  to  the  multitude
of  the  Jews,  What  will  it  profit
you  to  shed  innocent  blood  ?

CHAP.  VI.

1  Pilate  dismayed  by  the  turhxdence  of
the  Jews,  5  who  demand  Barabbas  to
be  released,  and  Ctirist  to  be  crucified,
9  Pilate  warmly  expostidates  with
them,  20  washes  his  hands  of  Christ's
blood,  23  and  sentences  him  to  be
whipped  and  crucified.

THEN   Pilate   having   called
together    Nicodemus,    and
the  fifteen   men  who   said   that


Jesus  was  not  born  through  for-

I  nication,   said    to    them,  What

shall  I  do,  seeing  there  is  like  to

be  a  tumult  among  the  people.*

2  They  said  unto  him,  We
know  not ;  Itt  them  look  to  it
who  raise  the  tumult.

3  Pilate  then  called  the  multi-
tude again,  and  said  to  them.  Ye
know  that  ye  have  a  custom,  that
I  should  release  to  you  one  pri-
soner at  the  feast  of  the  passover ;

4  I  have  a  noted  prisoner,  a
murderer,  who  is  called  Barab-
bas, and  Jesus  who  is  called
Christ,  in  whom  I  find  nothing
that  deserves  death;  which  of
them  therefore  have  you  a  mind
that  I  should  release  to  you  ?^

5  They  all  cry  out,  and  say,
Release  to  us  Barabbas.

6  Pilate  saith  to  them.  What
then  shall  I  do  with  Jeijus  who
is  called  Christ  ?

7  They  all  answer.  Let  him  be
crucified.

8  Again  they  cry  out  and  say
to  Pilate,  You  are  not  the  friend
of  Caesar,  if  you  release  this
man  ?*  for  he  hath  declared  that
he  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  a  king.
But  are  you  inclined  that  he
should  be  king,  and  not  Csegar  ?

9  Then  "Pilate  filled  with  an-
ger said  to  them.  Your  nation
hath  always  been  seditious,  and
you  are  always  against  those  who
have  been  serviceable  to  you  ?

10  The  Jews  replied.  Who  are
those  who  have  been  serviceable
to  us?

11  Pilate  answered  them,  Your
God  who  delivered  you  from  the
hard  bondage  of  the  Egyptians,
and  brought  you  over  the  Red
Sea  as  though  it  had  been  dry
land,  and  fed  you  in  the  wilder-
ness with  manna  and  the  flesh  of


»Johnxi.l7,&c.


2  Matt,  xxvii.  24.
*  John  xix.l2.


3  Matt,  xxvii.  21.


71


hy  the  Jews,  and


NICODEMUS.


ordered  by  Pilate.


quails,  and  brought  water  out  of
the  rock,  and  gave  you  a  law
from  heaven :

12  Ye  provoked  him  all  ways,
and  desired  for  yourselves  a  mol-
ten calf,  and  worshipped  it,  and
sacrificed  to  it,  and  said,  These
are  Thy  Gods,  O  Israel,  which
brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of
Egypt!

13  On  account  of  which  your
God  was  inclined  to  destroy  you ;
but  Moses  interceded  for  you,  and
your  God  heard  him,  and  forgave
your  iniquity.

14  Afterwards  ye  were  enraged
against,  and  would  have  killed
your  prophets,  Moses  and  Aaron,
when  they  fled  to  the  tabernacle,
and  ye  were  always  murmuring
against  God  and  his  prophets.

15  And  arising  from  his  judg-
ment seat,  he  would  have  gone
out;  but  the  Jews  all  cried  out,
We  acknowledge  Csesar  to  be
king,  and  not  Jesus.

16  Wiiereas  this  person,  as
soon  as  he  was  born,  the  wise
men  came  and  offered  gifts  unto
him ;  which  when  Herod  heard,
he  was  exceedingly  troubled,  and
would  have  killed  him.

17  When  his  father  knew  this,
he  fled  with  him  and  his  mother
Mary  into  Egypt.  Herod,  when
he  heard  he  was  born,  would  have
slain  him  ;  and  accordingly  sent
and  slew  all  the  children  which
were  in  Bethlehem,  and  in  all  the
coasts  thereof,  from  two  years  old
and  under.^

18  When  Pilate  heard  this
account,  he  was  afraid  ;  and  com-
manding silence  among  the  peo-
ple, who  made  a  noise,  he  said  to
Jesus,  Art  thou  therefore  a  king  ?

19  All  the  Jews  replied  to  Pi-
late, he  is  the  very  person  whom
Herod  sought  to  have  slain.


20  Then  Pilate  taking  water,
washed  his  hands  before  the  peo..
pie  and  said,  I  am  innocent  of
the  blood  of  this  just  person;
look  ye  to  iff

21  The  Jews  answered  and
said.  His  blood  be  upon  us  and
our  children.

22  Then  Pilate  commanded
Jesus  to  be  brought  before  him,
and  spake  to  him  in  the  follow-
ing words:

23  Thy  own  nation  hath
charged  thee  as  making  thyself
a  king ;  wherefore  I,  Pilate,  sen-
tence thee  to  be  whipped  accord-
ing to  the  laws  of  former  gover-
nors; and  that  thou  be  first
bound,  then  hanged  upon  a  cross
in  that  place  where  thou  art  now
a  prisoner ;  and  also  two  crimi-
nals with  thee,  whose  names  are
Dimas  and  Gestas.

CHAP.  VII.

1  Manner  of  Christ's  crucifixion  with
the  two  thieves.

THEN  Jesus  went  out  of  the
hall,  and  the  two  thieves
with  him.

2  And  when  they  came  to  the
place  which  is  called  Golgotha,"'
they  stript  him  of  his  raiment,
and  girt  him  about  with  a  linen
cloth,  and  put  a  crown  of  thorns
upon  his  head,  and  put  a  reed  in
his  hand.

3  And  in  like  manner  did  they
to  the  two  thieves  who  were  cru-
cified with  him,  Dimas  on  his
right  hand  and  Gestas  on  his  left.

4  But  Jesus  said.  My  Father,
forgive  them ;  For  they  know  not
what  they  do.

5  And  they  divided  his  gar-
ments, and  upon  his  vesture  they
cast  lots.

6  The  people  in  the  mean  time
stood  by,  and  the  chief  priests


^  Matt.  ii.

72


2  Matt,  xxvii.  24,  &c.


3  Matt,  xxvii.  33.


\


Christ's  crwdfixion  NICODEMUS.  attended  by  miracles,


and  elders  of  the  Jews  mocked
him,  saying,  he  saved  others,  let
him  now  save  himself  if  he  can ;
if  he  be  the  son  of  God,  let  him
now  come  down  from  the  cross.

7  The  soldiers  also  mocked
him,  and  taking  vinegar  and  gall
offered  it  to  him  to  drink,  and
said  to  him,  If  thou  art  king  of
the  Jews  deliver  thyself.

8  Then  Longinus,  a  certain  sol-
dier, taking  a  spear ,^  pierced  his
side,  and  presently  there  came
forth  blood  and  water.

9  And  Pilate  wrote  the  title
upon  the  cross  in  Hebrew,  Latin,
and  Greek  letters,  viz.  This  is  the
king  of  the  Jews.^

10  But  one  of  the  two  thieves
who  were  crucified  with  Jesus,
whose  name  was  Gestas,  said  to
Jesus,  If  thou  art  the  Christ, deli-
ver thyself  and  us.

11  But  the  thief  who  was  cru-
cified on  his  right  hand,  whose
name  was  Dimas,  answering,  re-
buked him,  and  said,  Dost  not
thou  fear  God,who  art  condemned
to  this  punishment  ?  We  indeed
receive  rightly  and  justly  the
demerit  of  our  actions ;  but  this
Jesus,  what  evil  hath  he  done  ?

1 2  After  this  groaning,  he  said
to  Jesus,  Lord,  remember  me
when  thou  comest  into  thy  king-
dom.

13  Jesus  answering,  said  to
him.  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  that
this  day  thou  shalt  be  with  me  in
Paradise.

CHAP.  VIII.

1  Miraculous  appearance  at  his  death.
10  The  Jews  say  the  eclipse  was  natural.
12  Joseph  of  Arimathcea  embalms
Christ's  body  and  buries  it.

AND  it  was  about  the  sixth
hour,*  and  darkness  was  upon
the  face  of  the  whole  earth  until
the  ninth  hour.


2  And  while  the  sun  was
eclipsed,  behold  the  vail  of  the
temple  was  rent  from  the  top  to
the  bottom ;  and  the  rocks  also
were  rent,  and  the  graves  opened,
and  many  bodies  of  saints,  which
slept,  arose.

3  And  about  the  ninth  hour
Jesus  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,
saying,  Hely,  Hely,  lama  zabac-
thani  ?  which  being  interpreted,
is.  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast
thou  forsaken  me  ?

4  And  after  these  things,  Jesus
said.  Father,  into  thy  hands  I
commend  my  spirit ;  and  having
said  this,  he  gave  up  the  ghost.

5  But  when  the  centurion  saw
that  Jesus  thus  crying  out  gave
up  the  ghost,  he  glorified  God,
and  said,  Of  a  truth  this  was  a  just
man.

6  And  all  the  people  who  stood
by,  were  exceedingly  troubled  at
the  sight;  and  reflecting  upon
what  had  passed,  smote  upon  their
breasts,  and  then  returned  to  the
city  of  Jerusalem.

7  The  centurion  went  to  the
governor,  and  related  to  him  all
that  had  passed  ;

8  And  when  he  had  heard  all
these  things,  he  was  exceeding
sorrowful ;

9  And  calling  the  Jews  toge-
ther, said  to  them.  Have  ye  seen
the  miracle  of  the  sun's  eclipse,
and  the  other  things  which  came
to  pass,  while  Jesus  was  dying  ?

10  Which  when  the  Jews  heard,
they  answered  to  the  governor.
The  eclipse  of  the  sun  happened
according  to  its  usual  custom.

1 1  But  all  those  who  were  the
acquaintance  of  Christ,  stood  at  a
distance,  as  did  the  women  who
had  followed  Jesus  from  Galilee,
observing  all  these  things.


John  xix.  34.         « john  xix.  19.         'Matt,  xxvii.  45,  &c.


73


and  his  body  buried  by     NICODEMUS.         Joseph  of  Arimathcea,


12  And  ^  behold  a  certain  man
of  Arimathsea,  named  Joseph,
who  also  was  a  disciple  of  Jesus,
but  not  openly  so,  for  fear  of  the
Jews,  came  to  the  governor,  and
entreated  the  governor  that  he
would  give  him  leave  to  take
away  the  body  of  Jesus  from  the
cross.

13  And  the  governor  gave  him
leave.

14  And  Nicodemus  came,
bringing  with  him  a  mixture  of
myrrh  and  aloes  about  a  hundred
pound  weight;  and  they  took
down  Jesus  from  the  cross  with
tears,  and  bound  him  with  linen
cloths  with  spices,  according  to
the  custom  of  burying  among  the
Jews,

15  And  placed  him  in  a  new
tomb,  which  Joseph  had  built,
aud  caused  to  be  cut  out  of  a  rock,
im  which  never  any  man  had
been  put ;  and  they  rolled  a  great
stone  to  the  door  of  the  sepulchre.

CHAP.   IX.

1  The  Jews  avgry  with  Nicodemus ;  5
and  with  Joseph  of  Arimathcea,  7  whom
they  imprison.

WHEN  the  unjust  Jews  heard
that  Joseph  had  begged
and  buried  the  body  of  Jesus,
they  sought  after  Nicodemus ;
and  those  fifteen  men  who  had
testified  before  the  Governor,
that  Jesus  was  not  born  through
fornication,  and  other  good  per-
sons who  had  shewn  any  good
actions  towards  him.

2  But  when  they  all  concealed
themselves  through  fear  of  the
Jews  Nicodemus  alone  shewed
himself  to  them,  and  said.  How
can  such  persons  as  these  enter
into  the  synagogue  ?


3  The  Jews  answered  him.
But  how  durst  thou  enter  into
the  synagogue  who  wast  a  con-
federate with  Christ?  Let  thy
lot  be  along  with  him  in  the  other
world.

4  Nicodemus  answered.  Amen  ;
so  may  it  be,  that  I  may  have  my
lot  with  him  in  his  kingdom.

5  In  like  manner  Joseph,  when
he  came  to  the  Jews,  said  to  them
Why  are  ye  angry  with  me  for
desiring  the  body  of  Jesus  of  Pi-
late ?  Behold,  I  have  put  him  in
my  tomb,  and  wrapped  him  up  in
clean  linen,  and  put  a  stone  at  the
door  of  the  sepulchre  :

6  I  have  acted  rightly  towards
him  ;  but  ye  have  acted  unjustly
aginst  that  just  person,  in  cruci-
fying him,  giving  him  vinegar  to
drink,  crowning  him  with  thorns,
tearing  his  body  with  whips,  and
prayed  down  theguilt  of  his  blood
upon  you.

7  The  Jews  at  the  hearing  of
this  were  disquieted,  and  trou-
bled; and  they  seized  Joseph,
and  commanded  him  to  be  put  in
custody  before  the  sabbath,  and
kept  there  till  the  sabbath  was
over.

8  And  they  said  to  him,  Make
confession  ;  for  at  this  time  it  is
not  lawful  to  do  thee  any  harm,
till  the  first  day  of  the  week  come.
But  we  know  that  thou  wilt  not
be  thought  worthy  of  a  burial ;
but  we  will  give  thy  flesh  to  the
birds  of  the  air,  and  the  beasts  of
the  earth.

9  Joseph  answered.  That
speech  is  like  the  speech  of  proud
Goliath,  who  reproached  the  liv-
ing God  in  speaking  against  Da-
vid. But  ye  scribes  and  doctors
know  that  God  saith  by  the  pro-
phet, Vengeance  is  mine,  and  I


74


1  John  xix.  38.


Joseph  of  A.  imprisoned.   NICODEMUS.


Christ  rises  again


will  repay  to  you  *  evil  equal  to
that  which  ye  have  threatened  to
m3.

10  The  God  whom  you  have
hanged  upon  the  cross,  is  able  to
deliver  me  out  of  your  hands.
All  your  wickedness  will  return
upon  you.

11  For  the  governor,  when  he
washed  his  hands,  said,  I  am  clear
from  the  blood  of  this  just  person.
But  ye  answered  and  cried  out.
His  blood  be  upon  us  and  our
children.  According  as  ye  have
said,  may  ye  perish  for  ever.

12  The  elders  of  the  Jews  hear-
ing these  words,  were  exceedingly
enraged ;  and  seizing  Joseph,
they  put  him  into  a  chamber
where  there  was  no  window  ;  they
fastened  the  door,  and  put  a  seal
upon  the  lock ;

13  And  Annas  and  Caiaphas
placed  a  guard  upon  it,  and  took
counsel  with  the  priests  and  Le-
vites,  that  they  should  all  meet
after  the  sabbath,  and  they  con-
trived to  what  death  they  should
put  Joseph.

14  When  they  had  done  this,
the  rulers,  Annas  and  Caiaphas,
ordered  Joseph  to  be  brought
forth.

Tf  In  this  place  there  is  a  portion
of  the  Gospel  lost  or  omitted,
ivhich  cannot  be  supplied.

CHAP.  X.

1  JosepVs  escape.  2  I'he  soldiers  relate
Christ's  resurrection.  18  Christ  is  seen
preaching  in  Galilee.  21  The  Jews  re-
pent of  their  cruelty  to  him.


WHEN  all_  the
heard  this,  they  admired
and  were  astonished,  because  they
found  the  same  seal  upon  the
lock  of  the  chamber,  and  could
not  find  Joseph.

2  Then  Annas  and  Caiaphas


went  forth,  and  while  they  were
all  admiring  at  Joseph's  being
gone,  behold  one  of  tlie  soldiers,
who  kept  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus,
spake  in  the  assembly.

3  That  ^while  they  were  guard-
ing the  sepulchre  of  Jesus,  there
was  an  earthquake ;  and  we  saw
an  angel  of  God  roll  away  the
stone  of  the  sepulchre  and  ^sit
upon  it ;

4  And  his  countenance  was
like  lightning  and  his  garment
like  snow  ;  and  we  became
through  fear  like  persons  dead.

5  And  we  heard  an  angel  say-
ing to  the  women  at  the  sepul-
chre of  Jesus,  Do  not  fear;  I
know  that  you  seek  Jesus  who
was  crucified ;  he  is  risen  as  he
foretold.

6  Come  and  see  the  place
where  he  was  laid ;  and  go  pre-
sently, and  tell  his  disciples  that
he  is  risen  from  the  dead,  and  he
will  go  before  you  into  Galilee ;
there  ye  shall  see  him  as  he  told
you.

7  Then  the  Jews  called  toge-
ther all  the  soldiers  who  kept  the
sepulchre  of  Jesus,  and  said  to
them.  Who  ars  those  women,  to
whom  the  angel  spoke?  Why  did
ye  not  seize  them  ?

8  The  soldiers  answered  and
said.  We  know  not  whom  the  wo-
men were ;  besides  we  became  as
dead  persons  through  fear,  and
how  could  we  seize  those  women  ?

9  The  Jews  said  to  them.  As
the  Lord  liveth  we  do  not  believe
you.

10  The  soldiers  answering  said
to  the  Jews,  when  ye  saw  and
heard  Jesus  working  so  many
miracles,  and  did  not  believe  him,
how  should  ye  believe  us?  Ye
well  said.  As  the  Lord  liveth,  for
the  Lord  truly  does  live.


1  Deut.  xxxii.  35 ;  Heb.  x.  40.      ^  Matt,  xxviii.  11,  12,  «&c.
*  Matt,  xxviii.  1,  2,  &c.

75


and  preaches  in  Galilee.     NICODEMUS.


The  Jews  repent.


1 1  We  have  heard  that  ye  shut
up  Joseph,  who  buried  the  body
of  Jesus,  in  a  chamber,  under  a
lock  which  was  sealed ;  and  when
ye  opened  it,  found  him  not
there.

12  Do  ye  then  produce  Joseph
whom  ye  put  under  guard  in  the
chamber,  and  we  will  produce
Jesus  whom  we  guarded  in  the
sepulchre.

13  The  Jews  answered  and
said.  We  will  produce  Joseph,
do  ye  produce  Jesus.  But  Jo-
seph is  in  his  own  city  of  Ari-
mathsea.

14  The  soldiers  replied,  If  Jo-
seph be  in  Arimathsea,  and  Jesus
in  Galilee,  we  heard  the  angel  in-
form the  women.

15  The  Jews  hearing  this,  were
afraid,  and  said  among  them-
selves, If  by  any  means  these
things  should  become  public,
then  every  body  will  believe  in
Jesus.

16  Then  they  gathered  a  large
sum  of  money,  and  gave  it  to  the
soldiers,  saying,  Do  ye  tell  the
people  that  the  disciples  of  Jesus
came  in  the  night  when  ye  were
asleep  and  stole  away  the  body
of  Jesus ;  and  if  Pilate  the  gover-
nor should  hear  of  this,  we  will
satisfy  him  and  secure  you.

17  The  soldiers  accordingly
took  the  money,  and  said  as  they
were  instructed  by  the  Jews ;  and
their  report  was  spread  abroad
among  all  the  people.

18  ^  But  a  certain  priest  Phi-
nees,  Ada  a  schoolmaster,  and  a
Levite,  named  Ageus,  they  three
came  from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem,
and  told  the  chief  priests  and  all
who  were  in  the  synagogues,  say-
ing,

19  We  have  seen  Jesus,  whom
ye  crucified,  talking  with  his
eleven  disciples,  and  sitting  in  the


76


Matt,  xxviii.  Ifi,


j  midst  of  them  in  Mount  Olivet,
I  and  saying  to  them,^
i      20  Go  forth  into   the    whole
I  world,  preach  the  Gospel  to  all
j  nations,  baptizing  them  in    the
name  of  the  Father,  and  the  Son,
and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  whoso-
ever shall  believe  and  be  baptiz-
ed, shall  be  saved.

21  And  when  he  had  said  these
things  to  his  disciples,  we  saw
him  ascending  up  to  heaven.

22  When  the  chief  priests,  and
elders,  and  Levites  heard  these
things,  they  said  to  these  three
men.  Give  glory  to  the  God  of
Israel,  and  make  confession  to
him,  whether  those  things  are
true,  which  ye  say  ye  have  seen
and  heard.

23  They  answering  said.  As
the  Lord  of  our  lathers  liveth,  the
God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of
Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob,  ac-
cording as  we  heard  Jesus  talk-
ing with  his  disciples,  and  accord-
ing as  we  saw  him  ascending  up
to  heaven,  so  we  have  related  the
truth  to  you.

24  And  the  three  men  farther
answered,  and  said,  adding  these
words.  If  we  should  not  own  the
words  which  we  heard  Jesus
speak,  and  that  we  saw  him  as-
cending into  heaven,  we  should
be  guilty  of  sin.

25  Then  the  chief  priests  im-
mediately rose  up,  and  holding
the  book  of  the  law  in  their
hands,  conjured  these  men,  say-
ing. Ye  shall  no  more  heieafter
declare   those  things   which  ye

:  have  spoke  concerning  Jesus.
I      26    And   they   gave   them    a

large  sum  of  money,  and  sent

other  persons  along  with  them,
j  who   should    conduct    them    to

their   own    country,    that    they
I  might  not  by  any  means  make

any  stay  at  Jerusalem,
and  Mark  xvi.  16.


Joseph  of  Arimathcjea        NICODEMUS.


invited  by  the  Jews


27  Then  the  Jews  did  assem-
ble all  together,  aud  having  ex-
pressed the  most  lamentable
concern,  said,  What  is  this  ex-
traordinary thing  which  is  come
to  pass  in  Jerusalem  ?

28  But  Annas  and  Caiaphas
comforted  them,  saying.  Why
should  we  believe  the  soldiers
who  guarded  the  sepulchre  of
Jesus,  in  telling  us,  that  an  angel
rolled  away  the  stone  from  the
door  of  the  sepulchre  ?

29  Perhaps  his  own  disciples
told  them  this,  and  gave  them
money  that  they  should  say  so,
and  they  themselves  took  away
the  body  of  Jesus.

30  Besides,  consider  this,  that
there  is  no  credit  to  be  given  to
foreigners,^  because  they  also
took  a  large  sum  of  us,  and  they
have  declared  to  us  according  to
the  instructions  which  we  gave
them.  They  must  either  be
faithful  to  us,  or  to  the  disciples
of  Jesus.

CHAP.  XI.

1  Nicodemus  counsels  the  Jews.  6
Joseph  found.  11  Invited  by  the
Jews  to  return.  19  Relates  the  wa»-
ner  of  his  miraculous  escape.

THEN"  Nicodemus  arose,  and
said.  Ye  say  right,  O  sons
of  Israel,  ye  have  heard  what
those  three  men  have  sworn  by
the  Law  of  God,  who  said.  We
have  seen  Jesus  speaking  with
his  disciples  upon  Mount  Olivet,
and  we  saw  him  ascending  up
to  heaven.

2  And  the  scripture  teacheth
us  that  the  blessed  prophet  Eli-
jah was  taken  up  to  heaven;  and
Elisha  being  asked  by  the  sons
of  the  prophets,  Where  is  our
father  Elijah  ?  He  said  to  them,
that  he  is  taken  up  to  heaven.

3  And  the  sons  of  the  prophets


said  to  him.  Perhaps  the  spirit
hath  carried  him  into  one  of  the
mountains  of  Israel,  there  per-
haps we  shall  find  him.  And  they
besought  Elisha,  and  he  walked
about  with  them  three  days,
and  they  could  not  find  him.

4  And  now  hear  me,  O  sons
of  Israel,  and  let  us  send  men
into  the  mountains  of  Israel,  lest
perhaps  the  spirit  hath  carried
away  Jesus,  and  there  perhaps  we
shall  find  him,  and  be  satisfied.

5  And  the  counsel  of  Nicode-
mus pleased  all  the  people ;  and
they  sent  forth  men  who  sought
for  Jesus,  but  could  not  find
him:  and  they  returning,  said,
We  went  all  about,  but  could  not
find  Jesus,  but  we  have  found
Joseph  in  his  city  of  Arimathea.

6  The  rulers  hearing  this,  and
all  the  people,  were  glad,  and
praised  the  God  of  Israel,  be-
cause Joseph  was  found,  whom
they  had  shut  up  in  a  chamber,
and  could  not  find.

7  And  when  they  had  formed
a  large  assembly,  the  chief  priests
said,  By  what  means  shall  we
bring  Joseph  to  us  to  speak  with
him?

8  And  taking  a  piece  of  pa-
per, they  wrote  to  him,  and  said.
Peace  be  with  thee,  and  all  thy
family.  We  know  that  we  have
offended  againgt  God  and  thee.
Be  pleased  to  give  a  visit  to  us
your  fathers,  for  we  were  per-
fectly surprised  at  your  escape
from  prison.

9  We  know  that  it  was  mali-
cious counsel  which  we  took
against  thee,  and  that  the  Lord
took  care  of  thee,  and  the  Lord
himself  delivered  thee  from  our
designs.  Peace  be  unto  thee,  Jo-
seph, who  art  honourable  among
all  the  people.

10  And  they  chose  seven  of


*  Heathens.


77


to  relate  the


NICDDEMUS.  manTier  of  his  escape.


Joseph's  friends,  and  said  to
them,  When  ye  come  to  Joseph,
salute  him  in  peace,  and  give
him  this  letter.

11  Accordingly,  when  the  men
came  to  Joseph,  they  did  salute
him  in  peace,  and  gave  him  the
letter.

12  And  when  Joseph  had  read
it,  he  said.  Blessed  be  the  Lord
God,  who  didst  deliver  me  from
the  Israelites,  that  they  could
not  shed  my  blood.  Blessed  be
God,  who  has  protected  me  un-
der thy  wings.

13  And  Joseph  kissed  them,
and  took  them  into  his  house.
And  on  the  morrow,  Joseph
mounted  his  ass,  and  went  along
with  them  to  Jerusalem.

14  And  when  all  the  Jews
heard  these  things,  they  went
out  to  meet  him,  and  cried  out,
saying.  Peace  attend  thy  coming
hither,  father  Joseph.

15  To  which  he  answered,
Prosperity  from  the  Lord  attend
all  the  people.

16  And  they  all  kissed  him;
and  Nicodemus  took  him  to  his
house,  having  prepared  a  Jarge
entertainment.

17  But  on  the  morrow,  being
a  preparation-day,  Annas,  and
Caiaphas,  and  Nicodemus,  said
to  Joseph,  Make  confession  to
the  God  of  Israel,  and  answer  to
us  all  those  questions  which  we
shall  ask  thee ;

18  For  we  have  been  very
much  troubled,  that  thou  didst
bury  the  body  of  Jesus;  and  that
when  we  had  locked  thee  in  a
chamber,  we  could  not  find  thee;
and  we  have  been  afraid  ever
since,  till  this  time  of  thy  appear-
ing among  us.  Tell  us  therefore
before  God,  all  that  came  to  pass.

19  Then  Joseph  answering,
said,  Ye  did  indeed  put  me  un-

78


der  confinement,  on  the  day  of
preparation,  till  the  morning.

20  But  while  I  was  standing
at  prayer  in  the  middle  of  the
night,  the  house  was  surrounded
with  four  angels ;  and  I  saw
Jesus  as  the  brightness  of  the
sun,  and  fell  down  upon  the
earth  for  fear.

21  But  Jesus  laying  hold  on
my  hand,  lifted  me  from  the
ground,  and  the  dew  was  then
sprinkled  upon  me ;  but  he,
wiping  my  face,  kissed  me,  and
said  unto  me,  Fear  not,  Joseph ;
look  upon  me,  for  it  is  1.

22  Then  I  looked  upon  him,
and  said,  Rabboni  Elias !  Ee
answered  me,  I  am  not  Elias,
but  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  whose
body  thou  didst  bury.

23  I  said  to  him.  Shew  me
the  tomb  in  which  I  laid  thee.

24  Then  Jesus,  taking  me  by
the  hand,  led  me  unto  the  place
where  I  laid  him,  and  shewed
me  the  linen  clothes,  and  napkin
which  I  put  round  his  head.
Then  I  knew  that  it  was  Jesus,
and  worshipped  him,  and  said,
Blessed  be  he  who  cometh  in  the
name  of  the  Lord.

25  Jesus  again  taking  me  by
the  hand,  led  me  to  Arimalhsea
to  my  own  house,  and  said  to  me,
Peace  be  to  thee ;  but  go  not  out
of  thy  house  till  the  fortieth  day ;
but  1  must  go  to  my  disciples.

CHAP.  XIL

1  The  Jews  astonished  and  confounded.
17  Simeon^s  two  sons,  Charinus  and
Lenthius,  rise  from  the  dead  at  Christ's
crucifixion.  19  Joseph  proposes  to  get
them  to  relate  the  mysteries  of  their  re-
surrection. 21  They  are  sought  and
found,  22  brought  to  the  synagogue,  23
privately  sworn  to  secrecy,  25  and  un-
dertake to  write  what  they  had  seen.

WHEN  the  chief  priests  and
Levites  heard   all   these


The  Jews  dismayed.  NICODEMUS.     Charinus  and  Lenthius,


things,  they  were  astonished,  and
fell  down  with  their  faces  on  the
ground  as  dead  men,  and  crying
out  to  one  another,  said,  What  is
this  extraordinary  sign  which  is
come  to  pass  in  Jerusalem  ?  We
know  the  father  and  mother  of
Jesus.

2  And  a  certain  Levite  said,  I
know  many  of  his  relations,  reli-
gious persons,  who  are  wont  to
offer  sacrifices  and  burnt-offer-
ings to  the  God  of  Israel,  in  the
temple,  with  prayers.

3  And  when  the  high  priest
Simeon  took  him  up  in  his  arms,
he  said  to  him,  ^Lord,  now  lettest
thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,
according  to  thy  word  ;  for  mine
eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation,
which  thou  hast  prepared  before
the  face  of  all  people :  a  light  to
enlighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the
glory  of  thy  people  Israel.

4  Simeon  in  like  manner  blessed
Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus,  and
said  to  her,  I  declare  to  thee  con-
cerning that  child ;  He  is  appoint-
ed for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of
many,  and  for  a  sign  which  shall
be  spoken  against.

5  Yea,  a  sword  shall  pierce
through  thine  own  soul  also,  and
the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  shall
be  revealed.

6  Then  said  all  the  Jews,  Let
us  send  to  those  three  men,  who
said  they  saw  him  talking  with
his  disciples  in  Mount  Olivet.

7  After  this,  they  asked  them
what  they  had  seen ;  who  answer-
ed with  one  accord.  In  the  pre-
sence of  the  God  of  Israel  we
affirm,  that  we  plainly  saw  Jesus
talking  with  his  disciples  in ,
Mount  Olivet,  and  ascending  up  |
to  heaven.  j

8  Then  Annas  and  Caiaphasj
took  them  into  separate  places,  |


and  examined  them  separately  ;
who  unanimously  confessed  the
truth,  and  said,  they  had  seen
Jesus.

9  Then  Annas  and  Caiaphas
said  "  Our  law  saith,  By  the
mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses
every  word  shall  be  established."^

10  But  what  have  we  said?
The  blessed  Enoch  pleased  God,
and  was  translated  by  the  word  of
God ;  and  the  burying-place  of
the  blessed  Moses  is  known.

11  But  Jesus  was  delivered  to
Pilate,  whipped,  crowned  with
thorns,  spit  upon,  pierced  with  a
spear,  crucified,  died  upon  the
cross,  and  was  buried,  and  his  bo-
dy the  honorable  Joseph  buried
in  a  new  sepulchre,  and  he  testi-
fies that  he  saw  him  alive.

12  And  besides  these  men
have  declared,  that  they  saw  him
talking  with  his  disciples  in
Mount  Olivet,  and  ascending  up
to  heaven.

13  T  Then  Joseph  rising  up,
said  to  Annas  and  Caiaphas,  Ye
may  be  justly  under  a  great  sur-
prise, that  you  have  been  told,
that  Jesus  is  alive,  and  gone  iip  to
heaven.

14  It  is  indeed  a  thing  really
surprising,  that  he  should  not
only  himself  arise  from  the  dead,
but  also  raise  others  from  their
graves,  who  have  been  seen  by
many  in  Jerusalem.^

15  And  now  hear  me  a  little :
We  all  knew  the  blessed  Simeon,
the  high-priest,  who  took  Jesus
when  an  infant  into  his  arms  in
the  temple.

16  This  same  Simeon  had  two
sons  of  his  own,  and  we  were  all
present  at  their  death  and  fu-
neral.

17  Go  therefore  and  see  their
tombs,  for  these  are  open,  and


1  Luke,  ii.  29.


» Deut.  xvii.  6.


»  Matt,  xxvii.  53.
79


ivho  rose  with  Christ,         NICODEMUS.     relate  his  descent  to  hell


they  are  risen :  and  behold,  they
are  in  the  city  of  Arimathaea,
spending  their  time  together  in
otfices  of  devotion.

18  Some,  indeed,  have  heard
the  sound  of  their  voices  in  pray-
er, but  they  will  not  discourse
■with  any  one,  but  they  continue
as  mute  as  dead  men.

19  But  come,  let  us  go  to  them,
and  behave  ourselves  towards
them  with  all  due  respect  and
caution.  And  if  we  can  bring
them  to  swear,  perhaps  they  w^ill
tell  us  some  of  the  mysteries  of
their  resurrection.

20  When  the  Jews  heard  this,
they  were  exceedingly  rejoiced.

21  Then  Annas  and  Caiaphas,
Nicodemus,  Joseph,  and  Gama-
liel, went  to  Arimathsea,  but
did  not  find  them  in  their  graves ;
but  walking  about  the  city,  they
found  them  on  their  bended
knees  at  their  devotions :

22  Then  saluting  them  with
all  respect  and  deference  to  God,
they  brought  them  to  the  syna-
gogue at  Jerusalem  :  and  having
shut  the  gates,  they  took  the
book  of  the  law  of  the  Lord,

23  And  putting  it  in  their
hands,  swore  them  by  God
Adonai,  and  the  God  of  Israel,
who  spake  to  our  fathers  by  the
law  and  the  prophets,  saying,
If  ye  believe  him  who  raised  you
from  the  dead,  to  be  Jesus,  tell
us  what  ye  have  seen,  and  how
ye  were  raised  from  the  dead.

24  Charinus  and  Lenthius,  the
two  sons  of  Simeon,  trembled
when  they  heard  these  things,
and  were  disturbed, and  groaned;
and  at  the  same  time  looking  up
to  heaven,  they  made  the  sign
of  the  cross  with  their  fingers  on
their  tongues,

25  And     immediately    they


spake,  and  said.  Give  each  of  us
some  paper,  and  we  will  write
down  for  you  all  those  things
which  we  have  seen.  And  they
each  sat  down  and  wrote,  saying,

CHAP.  XIII.

1  The  naiTative  of  Charinus  and  Len-
thius commences.  3  A  great  light  in
hell.  7  /Simeon  arrives,  and  announces
the  coming  of  Christ.

OLORD  Jesus  and  Father,
w^io  art  God,  also  the  resur-
rection and  life  of  the  dead,  give
us  leave  to  declare  thy  mysteries,
which  we  saw  after  death,  belong-
ing to  thy  cross;  for  we  are  sworn
by  thy  name.

2  For  thou  hast  forbid  thy
servants  to  declare  the  secret
things,  which  were  wrought  by
thy  divine  power  in  hell.

3  Tf  When  we  were  placed
wdth  our  fathers  in  the  depth
of  hell,  in  the  blackness  of  dark-
ness, on  a  sudden  there  appeared
the  colour  of  the  sun  like  gold,
and  a  substantial  purple  colour-
ed light  enlightening  the  place.

4  Presently  upon  this,  Adam,
the  father  of  all  niankind,  with
all  the- patriarchs  and  prophets,
rejoiced  and  said,  That  light  is
the  author  of  everlasting  light,
who  hath  promised  to  translate
us  to  everlasting  light.

5  Then  Isaiah  the  prophet
cried  out,  and  said,^  This  is  the
light  of  the  Father,  and  the  Son
of  God,  according  to  my  prophe-
cy, when  I  was  alive  upon  earth.

6  The  land  of  Zabulon,  and
the  land  of  Nephthalim  beyond
Jordan,  a  people  w^ho  walked  in
darkness,  saw  a  great  light;  and
to  them  who  dwelled  in  the  re-
gion of  the  shadow  of  death,
light  is  arisen.     And  now  he  is


Isai.  xi.  1  ;  Matt  iv,  16.


6i)


ST.  JOHN    THE    BAPTIST.


[Page  119.


?ROM    A  TRIPTYCHON    BY  AN   ITALIAN   PAINTER  OF   THB  THIR-
TEENTH   OR    FOURTEENTH    CENTURY.


who  rose  vMh  Christ ^         NICODEMUS     relates  his  descent  to  hell.


come,  and  hath  enlightened  us
who  sat  in  death.

7  And  while  we  were  all  re-
joicing in  the  light  which  shone
upon  us,  our  father  Simeon  came
among  us,  and  congratulating  all
the  company,  said,  Glorify  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of
God.

8  Whom  I  took  up  in  my
arms  when  an  infant  in  the  tem-
ple, and  being  moved  by  the
Holy  Ghost,  said  to  him,  and
acknowledged,^  That  now  mine
eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation,
which  thou  hast  prepared  before
the  face  of  all  people,  a  light  to
enlighten  the  Gentiles  and  the
glory  of  thy  people  Israel.

9  All  the  saints  who  were  in
the  depth  of  hell,  hearing  this,
rejoiced  the  more.

10  Afterwards  there  came
forth  one  like  a  little  hermit,
and  was  asked  by  every  one,
Who  art  thou  ?

11  To  which  he  replied,  I  am
the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the
wilderness,  John  the  Baptist,  and
the  prophet  of  the  Most  High,
who  went  before  his  coming  to
prepare  his  way,  to  give  the
knowledge  of  salvation  to  his
people  for  the  forgiveness  of  sins.

12  And  I  John,  when  I  saw
Jesus  coming  to  me,  being  moved
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  I  said,  Be-
hold the  Lamb  of  God,  behold


to  acquaint  you,  that  the  Son  of
God  will  next  visit  us,  and,  as
the  day-spring  from  on  high,
will  come  to  us,  who  are  in  dark-
ness and  the  shadow  of  death.

CHAP.  XIV.

1  Adorn  cauBcs  Seth  to  relate  what  he
heard  from  Michael  the  archangel,
when  he  sent  him  to  Paradise  to  en-
treat God  to  anoint  his  head  in  his
sickness.

BUT  when  the  first  man  our
father  Adam  heard  these
tilings,  that  Jesus  was  baptized
in  Jordan,'  he  called  out  to  his
son,  Seth,  and  said,

2  Declare  to  your  sons,  the
patriarchs  and  prophets,  all  thos3
things,  which  thou  didst  hear
from  Michael,  the  archangel,
when  I  sent  thee  to  the  gates  of
Paradise,  to  entreat  God  that  he
would  anoint  my  head  when  I
was  sick.

3  Then  Seth,  coming  near  t  j
the  patriarchs  and  prophets,
said,  I  Seth,  when  I  was  pray-
ing to  God  at  the  gates  of  Para-
dise, beheld  the  angel  of  tha
Lord,  Michael  appear  unto  me
saying,  I  am  sent  unto  thee  from
the  Lord ;  I  am  appointed  to.
preside  over  human  bodies.

4  I  tell  thee  Seth,  do  not  pray
to  God  in  tears,  and  entreat  him
for  the  oil  of  the  tree  of  mercy
wherewith  to  anoint  thy  father


him  who  takes  away  the  sins  of '  Adam  for  his  head-ache ;
the  world.  5  Because  thou  canst  not  by

13  And  I  baptized  him  in  the  )  any  means  obtain  it  till  the  last


river  Jordan,  and  saw  the  Holy
Ghost  descending  upon  him  in
the  form  of  a  dove,  and  heard  a
voice  from  heaven,  saying,  This
is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I
am  well  pleased.

14  And  now  while  I  was  going
before  him,  I  came  down  hither


day  and  times,  namely,  till  five
thousand  and  five  hundred  years
be  past.

6  Then  will  Christ,  the  most
merciful  Son  of  God,  come  on
earth  to  raise  again  the  human
body  of  Adam,  and  at  the  same
time  to  raise  the  bodies  of  the


Luke  ii.  29.


'  Mall.  ill.  13.


81


Satan  and  the  Prince        NICODEMUS.


of  hell  quarrel.


dead,  and  when  he  cometh  he
will  be  baptized  in  Jordan :

7  Then  with  the  oil  of  his
mercy  he  will  anoint  all  those
who  believe  on  him  ;  and  the  oil
of  his  mercy  will  continue  to
future  generations,  for  those  who
shall  be  born  of  the  water  and
the  Holy  Ghost  unto  eternal  life.

8  And  when  at  that  time  the
most  merciful  Son  of  God,  Christ
Jesus,  shall  come  down  on  earth,
he  will  introduce  our  father
Adam  into  Paradise,  to  the  tree
of  mercy.

9  When  all  the  patriarchs  and

Erophets  heard  all  these  things
•om  Seth,  they  rejoiced  more.

CHAP.  XV.

1  Quarrd  between  Satan  and  the  prince
oj  hell  concerning  the  expected  arrival
of  Christ  in  hell.

WHILE  all  the  saints  were
rejoicing,  behold  Satan,
the  prince  and  captain  of  death,
said  to  the  prince  of  hell,^

2  Prepare  to  receive  Jesus  of
Nazareth  himself,  who  boasted
that  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  and
yet  was  a  man  afraid  of  death,
and  said,  ^  My  soul  is  sorrowful
€ven  to  death.

3  Besides  he  did  many  inju-
ries to  me  and  to  many  others ;
for  those  whom  I  made  blind
and  lame  and  those  also  whom  I
tormented  with  several  devils,
lie  cured  by  his  word  ;  yea,  and
those  whom  I  brought  dead  to
thee,  he  by  force  takes  away
from  thee.

4  To  this  the  prince  of  hell
replied  to  Satan,  Who  is  that  so-
powerful  prince,  and  yet  a  man
who  is  afraid  of  death  ?

5  For  all  the  potentates  of
the    earth    are    subject  to   my


power,  whom  thou  broughtest  to
subjection  by  thy  power,

6  But  if  he  be  so  powerful  in
his  human  nature,  I  affirm  to
thee  for  truth,  that  he  is  almighty
in  his  divine  nature,  and  no  man
can  resist  his  power.

7  When  therefore  he  said  he
was  afraid  of  death,  he  designed
to  ensnare  thee,  and  unhappy  it
will  be  to  thee  for  everlasting
ages.

8  Then  Satan  replying,  said
to  the  prince  of  hell.  Why  didst
thou  express  a  doubt,  and  wast
afraid  to  receive  that  Jesus  of
Nazareth,  both  thy  adversary
and  mine '{

9  As  for  me,  I  tempted  him
and  stirred  up  my  old  people
the  Jews  with  zeal  and  anger
against  him?

10  I  sharpened  the  spear  for
his  suffering ;  I  mixed  the  gall
and  vinegar,  and  commanded
that  he  should  drink  it ;  I  pre-
pared the  cross  to  crucify  him,
and  the  nails  to  pierce  through
his  hands  and  feet ;  and  now  his
death  is  near  at  hand,  I  will
bring  him  hither,  subject  both  to
thee  and  me.

11  Then  the  prince  of  hell  an-
swering, said,  Thou  saidst  to  me
just  now,  that  he  took  away  the
dead  from  me  by  force.

12  They  who  have  been  kept
here  till  they  should  live  again
upon  earth,  were  taken  away
hence,  not  by  their  own  power,
but  by  prayers  made  to  God,  and
their  almighty  God  took  them
from  me.

13  Who  then  is  that  Jesus  of
Nazareth  that  by  his  word  hath
taken  away  the  dead  from  me
without  prayer  to  God  ?

14  Perhaps  it  is  the  same  who


^  St.  Jerome  affirms  that  the  soul  of  Christ  went  to  hell.
2  Matt.  xxvi.  38.

82


Christ  arrives  at  hell,        NICODEMUS.       and  Satan  is  expelled.


took  away  from  me  Lazarus,  after
he  had  beea  four  days  dead,  and
did  both  stink  and  was  rotten,  and
of  whom  I  had  possession  as  a
dead  person,  yet  he  brought  him
to  life  again  by  his  power.

15  Satan  answering,  replied  to
the  prince  of  hell.  It  is  the  very
same  person,  Jesus  of  Nazareth.

16  Which  when  the  prince  of
hell  heard,  he  said  to  him,  I  ad-
jure thee  by  the  powers  which
belong  to  thee  and  me,  that  thou
bring  him  not  to  me.

17  For  when  I  heard  of  the
power  of  his  word,  I  trembled  for
fear,  and  all  my  impious  company
were  at  the  same  time  disturbed ;

18  And  we  were  not  able  to
detain  Lazarus,^  but  he  gave  him-
self a  shake,  and  with  all  the
signs  of  malice,  he  immediately
went  away  from  us ;  and  the
very  earth,  in  which  the  dead
body  of  Lazarus  was  lodged,
presently  turned  him  out  alive.

19  And  I  know  now  that  he  is
Almighty  God  who  could  per-
form such  things,  who  is  mighty
in  his  dominion,  and  mighty  in
his  human  nature,  who  is  the
Saviour  of  mankind.

20  Bring  not  therefore  this
person  hither,  for  he  will  set  at
liberty  all  those  whom  I  hold  in
prison  under  unbelief,  and  bound
with  the  fetters  of  their  sins,  and
will  conduct  them  to  everlasting
life.

CHAP.  XVI.

1  Christ's  arrival  at  hdl-gates  ;  the  con-
fusion thereupon.  10  He  descends
into  hell.

AND  while  Satan  and  the
prince  of  hell  were  dis-
coursing thus  to  each  other,  on  a
sudden  there  was  a  voice  as  of
thunder  and  the  rushing  of  winds,


saying,  *Lift  up  your  gates,  O  ye
princes;  and  be  ye  lift  up,  O
everlasting  gates,  and  the  King
of  Glory  shall  come  in.

2  When  the  prince  of  hell
heard  this,  he  said  to  Satan,  De-
part from  me,  and  begone  out  of
my  habitations ;  if  thou  art  a
powerful  warrior,  fight  with  the
King  of  Glory.  But  what  hast
thou  to  do  with  him?

3  And  he  cast  him  forth  from
his  habitations.

4  And  the  prince  said  to  his
impious  officers.  Shut  the  brass
gates  of  cruelty,  and  make  them
fast  with  iron  bars,  and  fight
courageously,  lest  we  be  taken
captives.

5  But  when  all  the  company  of
the  saints  heard  this  they  spake
with  a  loud  voice  of  anger  to  the
prince  of  hell :

6  Open  thy  gates  that  the
King  of  Glory  may  come  in.

7  And  the  divine  prophet  Da-
vid, cried  out  saying,  ^Did  not  I
when  on  earth  truly  prophesy
and  say,  O  that  men  would  praise
the  Lord  for  his  goodness,  and
for  his  wonderful  works  to  the
children  of  men.

8  For  he  hath  broken  the  gates
of  brass,  and  cut  the  bars  of  iron
in  sunder.  He  hath  taken  them
because  of  their  iniquity,  and
because  of  their  unrighteousness
they  are  afflicted.

9  After  this  another  prophet,*
namely,  holy  Isaiah,  spake  in  like
manner  to  all  the  saints,  did  not
I  rightly  prophesy  to  you  when  I
was  alive  on  earth  ?

10  The  dead  men  shall  live,
and  they  shall  rise  again  who  are
in  their  graves,  and  they  shall
rejoice  who  are  in  earth  ;  for  the
dew  which  is  from  the  Lord  shall
bring  deliverance  to  them.


John  xi.     2  Psalm  xxiv.  7,  &c.     '  Psalm  cvii.  15,  &c.


*  Isaiah  xxvi.  19.

83


Hell  greatly  disturbed  on   NICODEMUS.        Chrld's  going  thither-


11  And  I  said  in  another  place,
O  death,  where  is  thy  victory  ?

0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?

12  When  all  the  saints  heard
these  things  spoken  by  Isaiah,
they  said  to  the  prince  of  hell,^
Open  now  thy  gates,  and  take
away  thine  iron  bars ;  for  thou
wilt  now  be  bound,  and  have  no
power.

13  Then  there  was  a  great
voice,  as  of  the  sound  of  thunder
saying.  Lift  up  your  gates,  O
princes ;  and  be  ye  lifted  up,  ye
gates  of  hell,  and  the  King  of
Glory  will  enter  in.

14  The  prince  of  hell  perceiv-
ing the  same  voice  repeated,  cried
out  as  though  he  had  been  ignor-
ant, Who  is  that  King  of  Glory  ?

15  David  replied  to  the  prince
of  hell,  and  said,  I  understand
the  words  of  that  voice,  because

1  spake  them  by  his  spirit.  And
now,  as  I  have  above  said,  I  say
unto  thee,  the  Lord  strong  and
powerful,  the  Lord  mighty  in
battle :  he  is  the  King  of  Glory,
and  he  is  the  Lord  in  heaven  and
in  earth ;

16  He  hath  looked  down  to
hear  the  groans  of  the  prisoners,
and  to  set  loose  those  that  are
appointed  to  death.'

17  And  now,  thou  filthy  and
stinking  prince  of  hell,  open  thy
gates,  that  the  King  of  Glory
may  enter  in  ;  for  he  is  the  Lord
of  heaven  and  earth.

18  While  David  was  saying
this,  the  mighty  Lord  appeared
in  the  form  of  a  man,  and  en-
lightened those  places  which  had
ever  before  been  in  darkness,

19  And  broke  asunder  the  fet-
ters which  before  could  not  be
broken ;  and  with  his  invincible
power  visited  those  who  sate  in


the  deep  darkness  by  iniquity,,
and  the  shadow  of  death  by  sin.^

CHAP.  XVH.

1  Death  and  the  devils  in  great  horror  at
Christ's  coming.  13  Me  tramples  on
death,  seizes  the  prince  of  hell,  and
takes  Adam  with  him  to  heaven.

IMPIOUS  Death  and  her  cruel
officers  hearing  these  things,,
were  seized  with  fear  in  their  se-
veral kingdoms,  when  they  saw
the  clearness  of  the  light,

2  And  Christ  himself  on  a
sudden  appearing  in  their  habi-
tations ;  they  cried  out  therefore,
and  said.  We  are  bound  by  thee ;
thou  seemest  to  intend  our  con-
fusion before  the  Lord.

3  Who  art  thou,  who  hast  no
sign  of  corruption,  but  that
bright  appearance  which  is  a  full
proof  of  thy  greatness,  of  which
yet  thou  seemest  to  take  na
notice  ?

4  AY  ho  art  thou,  so  powerful
and  so  weak,  so  great  and  so  lit-
tie,  a  mean  and  yet  a  soldier  of
the  first  rank,  who  can  com-
mand in  the  form  of  a  servant
as  a  common  soldier?

5  The  King  of  Glory,  dead
and  alive,  though  once  slain
upon  the  cross  ?

6  Who  layest  dead  in  the
grave,  and  art  come  down  alive
to  us,  and  in  thy  death  all  the
creatures  trembled,  and  all  the
stars  were  moved,  and  now  hast
thou  thy  liberty  among  the  dead,
and  givest  disturbance  to  our
legions  ?

7  Who  art  thou,  who  dost  re-
lease the  captives  that  were  held
in  chains  by  original  sin,  and
bringest  them  into  their  former
liberty  ?

8  Who   art  thou,   who   dost


Psalm  xxiv.  7,  &c.

84


'Psalm  cii.  19,20.


'Luke  i.  79.


•Christ  gives  Beelzebub       NICODEMUS.         dominion  ovsr  Satan,


spread  so  glorious  and  divine  a
light  over  those  who  were  made
blind  by  the  darkness  of  sin  ?

9  In  like  manner  all  the  le-
gions of  devils  were  seized  with
the  like  horror,  and  with  the
most  submissive  fear  cried  out,
and  said,

10  Whence  comes  it,  O  thou
Jesus  Christ,  that  thou  art  a
man  so  powerful  and  glorious  in
majesty,  so  bright  as  to  have  no
spot,  and  so  pure  as  to  have  no
<;rime  ?  For  that  lower  world
of  earth,  which  was  ever  till
now  subject  to  us,  and  from
whence  we  received  tribute,  nev-
er sent  us  such  a  dead  man  be-
fore, never  sent  such  presents  as
these  to  the  princes  of  hell.

11  Who  therefore  art  thou,
who  with  such  courage  enterest
among  our  abodes,  and  art  not
only  not  afraid  to  threaten  us
with  the  greatest  punishments,
but  also  endeavourest  to  rescue
all  others  from  the  chains  in
which  we  hold  them  ?

12  Perhaps  thou  art  that
Jesus,  of  whom  Satan  just  now
spoke  to  our  prince,  that  by  the
death  of  the  cross  thou  wert
about  to  receive  the  power  of
death.

13  Then  the  King  of  Glory
trampling  upon  death,  seized
the  prince  of  hell,  deprived  him
of  all  his  power,  and  took  our
earthly  father  Adam  with  him  to
his  glory.

CHAP.  XVIII.

1  Beelzebub,  prince  of  hell,  vehemently
upbraids  Satan  for  persecuting  Christ
and  brinqinq  him  to  hell.  4.  Christ
given  Beelzebub  dominion  over  S^tan
for  ever,  as  a  recompense  for  taking
away  Adam  and  his  sons.

THEN  the  prince  of  hell  took
Satan,  and  with  great  in-
dignation said  to  him,  O  thou
prince  of  destruction,  author  of


Beelzebub's  defeat  and  banish-
ment, the  scorn  of  God's  angels
and  loathed  by  all  righteous
persons !  What  inclined  thee
to  act  thus  ?

2  Thou  wouldst  crucify  the
King  of  Glory,  and  by  his  de-
struction, hast  made  us  promises
of  very  large  advantages,  but  as
a  fool  wert  ignorant  of  what
thou  wast  about.

3  For  behold  now  that  Jesus
of  Nazareth,  with  the  brightness
of  his  glorious  divinity,  puts  to
flight  all  the  horrid  powers  of
darkness  and  death  ;

4  He  has  broke  down  our  pri-
sons from  top  to  bottom,  dis-
missed all  the  captives,  released
all  who  were  bound,  and  all
who  were  wont  formerly  to  groan
under  the  weight  of  their  tor-
ments have  now  insulted  us,  and
we  are  like  to  be  defeated  by  their
prayers.

5  Our  impious  dominions  are
subdued,  and  no  part  of  man-
kind is  now  left  in  our  subjec-
tion, but  on  the  other  hand,  they
all  boldly  defy  us ;

6  Though,  before,  the  dead
never  durst  behave  themselves
insolently  towards  us,  nor,  being
prisoners,  could  ever  on  any  oc-
casion be  merry.

7  T^  O  Satan,  thou  prince  of
all  the  wicked,  father  of  the  im-
pious and  abandoned,  why
wouldest  thou  attempt  this  ex-
ploit, seeing  our  prisoners  were
hitherto  always  without  the  least
hopes  of  salvation  and  life  ?

8  But  now  there  is  not  one  of
them  does  ever  groan,  nor  is
there  the  least  appearance  of  a
tear  in  any  of  their  faces.

9  O  prince  Satan,  thou  great
keeper  of  the  infernal  regions,
all  thy  advantages  which  thou
didst  acquire  by  the  forbidden
tree,  and  the  loss  of  Paradise,

85


Leaves  hell  and  takes        NICODEMUS.


the  saints  with  him.


thou  hast  now  lost  by  the  wood
of  the  cross ;

10  And  thy  happiness  all
then  expired,  when  thou  didst
crucify  Jesus  Christ  the  King  of
Glory.

11  Thou  hast  acted  against
thine  own  interest  and  mine,  as
thou  wilt  presently  perceive  by
those  large  torments  and  infinite
punishments  which  thou  art
about  to  suffer.

12  O  Satan,  prince  of  all  evil,
author  of  death,  and  source  of
all  pride,  thou  shouldest  first
have  inquired  into  the  evil
crimes  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,
and  then  thou  wouldest  have
found  that  he  was  guilty  of  no
fault  worthy  of  death.

13  Why  didst  thou  venture,
without  either  reason  or  justice,
to  crucify  him,  and  hast  brought
down  to  our  regions  a  person  in-
nocent and  righteous,  and  there-
by hast  lost  all  the  sinners,  im-
pious and  unrighteous  persons  in
the  whole  world  ?

14  While  the  prince  of  hell
was  thus  speaking  to  Satan,  the
King  of  Glory  said  to  Beelze-
bub, the  prince  of  hell,  Satan,
the  prince  shall  be  subject  to
thy  dominion  for  ever,  in  the
room  of  Adam  and  his  right-
eous sons,  who  are  mine.

CHAP.  XIX.

1  Christ  takes  Adam  by  the  hand,  the
rest  of  the  saints  join  hands,  and  they
all  ascend  with  him  to  Paradise.

THEN"  Jesus  stretched  forth
his  hand,  and  said.  Come
to  me,  all  ye  my  saints,  who
were  created  in  my  image,  who
were  condemned  by  the  tree  of
forbidden  fruit,  and  by  the  devil
and  death ;


2  Live  now  by  the  wood  of
my  cross;  the  devil,  the  prince
of  this  world,  is  overcome,  and
death  is  conquered.

3  Then  presently  all  the  saints
were  joined  together  under  the
hand  of  the  most  high  God;
and  the  Lord  Jesus  laid  hold  on
Adam's  hand  and  said  to  him.
Peace  be  to  thee,  and  all  thy
righteous  posterity,  which  is
mine.

4  Then  Adam,  casting  him-
self at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  ad-
dressed himself  to  him,  with
tears,  in  humble  language,  and
a  loud  voice,  saying,^

5  I  will  extol  thee,  O  Lord,
for  thou  hast  lifted  me  up,  and
hast  not  made  my  foes  to  rejoice
over  me.  O  Lord  my  God,  I
cried  unto  thee,  and  thou  hast
healed  me.

6  O  Lord  thou  hast  brought
up  my  soul  from  the  grave;
thou  hast  kept  me  alive,  that  I
should  not  go  down  to  the  pit.

7  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  all  ye
saints  of  his,  and  give  thanks  at
the  remembrance  of  his  holiness.
For  his  anger  endureth  but  for
a  moment ;  in  his  favour  is  life.

8  In  like  manner  all  the  saints,
prostrate  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,
said  with  one  voice.  Thou  art
come,  O  Redeemer  of  the  world,
and  hast  actually  accomplished
all  things,  which  thou  didst  fore-
tell by  the  law  and  thy  holy
prophets.

9  Thou  hast  redeemed  the  liv-
ing by  thy  cross,  and  art  come
down  to  us,  that  by  the  death
of  the  cross  thou  mightest  de-
liver us  from  hell,  and  by  thy
power  from  death.

10  O,  Lord,  as  thou  hast  put
the  ensigns  of  thy  glory  in  hea-
ven, and  hast  set  up  the  sign  of


*  Psalm  XXX.  1,  &c.


86


Adam  converses


NICODEMUS.


vrith  Enoch,  (Sec.


thy  redemption,  even  thy  cross
on  earth  !  so,  Lord,  set  the  sign
of  the  victory  of  thy  cross  in
hell,  that  death  may  have  do-
minion no  longer.

11  Then  the  Lord  stretching
forth  his  hand,  made  the  sign  of
the  cross  upon  Adam,  and  upon
all  his  saints.

12  And  taking  hold  of  Adam
by  his  right  hand,  he  ascended
from  hell,  and  all  the  saints  of
God  followed  him.

13  Then  the  royal  prophet
David  boldly  cried,  and  said,^
O  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new
song,  for  he  hath  done  marvel-
lous things ;  his  right  hand  and
his  holy  arm  have  gotten  him
the  victory.

14  The  Lord  hath  made
known  his  salvation,  his  right-
eousness hath  he  openly  shewn
in  the  sight  of  the  heathen.

15  And  the  whole  multitude
of  saints  answered,  saying,^
This  honour  have  all  his  saints,
Amen,  Praise  ye  the  Lord.

16  Afterwards,  the  prophet
Habakkuk^  cried  out,  and  said,
Thou  wentest  forth  for  the  sal-
vation of  thy  people,  even  for
the  salvation  of  thy  people.

17  And  all  the  saints  said,*
Blessed  is  he  who  cometh  in  the
name  of  the  Lord  ;  for  the  Lord

This   is
he

shall  reign  over  us  to  everlasting
ages.  Amen.

18  In  like  manner  all  the
prophets  spake  the  sacred  things
of  his  praise,  and  followed  the
Lord.

CHAP.  XX.

1  Christ  delivers  Adam  to  Michael  the
archangel.  3.  They  meet  Enoch  and
Elijah    in    heaven,    5    and   also    the


hath   enlightened   us.

our  God  for  ever  and  ever


blessed  thief,  who  relates  how  he
to  Paradise.

THEN  the  Lord  holding  Adam
by  the  hand,  delivered  him
to  Michael  the  archangel;  and
he  led  them  into  Paradise,  filled
with  mercy  and  glory ;

2  And  two  very  ancient  men
met  them,  and  were  asked  by  the
saints.  Who  are  ye,  who  have
not  yet  been  with  us  in  hell,  and
have  had  your  bodies  placed  in
Paradise  ?

3  One  of  them  answering,
said,  I  am  Enoch,  who  was  trans-
lated  by  the  word  of  God  :^  and
this  man  who  is  with  me,  is
Elijah  the  Tishbite,  who  was
translated  in  a  fiery  chariot.^

4  Here  we  have  hitherto  been,
and  have  not  tasted  death,  but
are  now  about  to  return  at  the
coming  of  Antichrist,  being
armed  with  divine  signs  and
miracles,  to  engage  with  him  in
battle,  and  to  be  slain  by  him  at
Jerusalem,  and  to  be  taken  up
alive  again  into  the  clouds,  after
three  days  and  a  half.^

5  1  And  while  the  holy
Enoch  and  Elias  were  relating
this,  behold  there  came  another
man  in  a  miserable  figure  carry-
ing the  sign  of  the  cross  upon
his  shoulders.

6  And  when  all  the  saints  saw
him,  they  said  to  him,  Who  art
thou?  For  thy  countenance  is
like  a  thief's ;  and  why  dost
thou  carry  a  cross  upon  thy
shoulders  ?

7  To  which  he  answering,  said,
j  Ye  say  right,  for  I  was  a  thief,
I  who  committed  all  sorts  of  wick-
i  edness  upon  earth.

1  8  And  the  Jews  crucified  me
I  with  Jesus  ;  and  I  observed  the
'surprising    things    which    hap-


*  Psalm  xcviii.  1,  &c.
5  Gen.  V.  24.


2  Psalm  cxHx.  2.     ^  Hab.  iii.  13.     *  Matt,  xxiii.
«  Kings  ii.  11.  'Rev.  xi.  11.

87


Blessed  thief  s  story,  NICODEMUS.    how  he  came  to  Paradise.


\


pened  in  the  creation  at  the  cru-
cifixion of  the  Lord  Jesus.

9  And  I  believed  him  to  be
the  Creator  of  all  things,  and  the
Almighty  King ;  and  I  prayed
to  him,  saying.  Lord,  remember
me,  when  thou  comest  into  thy
kingdom.

10  He  presently  regarded  my
supplication,  and  said  to  me,
Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  this  day
thou  shalt  be  with  me  in  Para-
dise.^

11  And  he  gave  me  this  sign
of  the  cross  saying.  Carry  this,
and  go  to  Paradise ;  and  if  the
angel  who  is  the  guard  of  Para-
dise will  not  admit  thee,  shew
him  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and
say  unto  him  :  Jesus  Christ  who
is  now  crucified,  hath  sent  me
hither  to  thee.

12  When  I  did  this,  and  told
the  angel  who  is  the  guard  of
Paradise  all  these  things,  and  he
heard  them,  he  presently  opened
tlje  gates,  introduced  me,  and
placed  me  on  the  right-hand  in
Paradise,

13  Saying,  Stay  here  a  little
time,  till  Adam,  the  father  of  all
mankind,  shall  enter  in,  with  all
his  sons,  who  are  the  holy  and
righteous  servants  of  Jesus
Christ,  who  was  crucified.

14  When  they  heard  all  this


CHAP.  xxr.

1  Charinus  and  Leftilhius  being  only
allowed  three  days  to  remain  on  earth,
7  deliver  in  their  narratives,  which
miracuiomly  correspond  ;  they  vanish,
13  and  Pilate  records  these  transac-
tions.

THESE  are  the  divine  and
sacred  mysteries  which  we
saw  and  heard.  I,  Charinus  and
Lenthius  are  not  allowed  to  de-
clare the  other  mysteries  of  God,
as  the  archangel  Michael  ordered
us,

2  Saying,  ye  shall  go  with  my
brethren  to  Jerusalem,  and  shall
continue  in  prayers,  declaring
and  glorifying  the  resurrection
of  Jesus  Christ,  seeing  he  hath
raised  you  from  the  dead  at  the
same  time  with  himself.

3  And  ye  shall  not  talk  with
any  man,  but  sit  as  dumb  per-
sons till  the  time  come  when  the
Lord  will  allow  you  to  relate
the  mysteries  of  his  divinity.

4  The  archangel  Michael  far-
ther commanded  us  to  go  beyond
Jordan,  to  an  excellent  and  fat
country,  where  there  are  many
who  rose  from  the  dead  along
with  us  for  the  proof  of  the  resur-
rection of  Christ.

5  For  we  have  only  three  days
allowed  us  from  the  dead,  who
arose  to  celebrate  the  passover

account  from  the  thief,  all  the  j  ofour  Lord  with  our  parents,  and
patriarchs  said  with  one  voice,  \  to  bear  our  testimony  for  Christ
felessed  be  thou,  O  Almighty  I  the  Lord,  and  we  have  been
God,  the  Father  of  everlasting  |  baptized  in  the  holy  river  of
goodness,  and  the  Father  of  mer- 1  Jordan.     And  now  they  are  not


cies,  who  hast  shewn  such  favour
to  those  who  were  sinners  against
him,  and  hast  brought  them  to
the  mercy  of  Paradise,  and  hast
placed  them  amidst  thy  large
and  spiritual  provisions,  in  a
epiritual  and  holy  life.     Amen.


seen  by  any  one.

6  This  is  as  much  as  God  al-
lowed us  to  relate  to  you ;  give  ye
therefore  praise  and  honour  to
him,  and  repent,  and  he  will  have
mercy  upon  you.  Peace  be  to
you  from  the  Lord  God   Jesus


^  Luke  xxiii.  43.


88     .


THE  BAPTISM    OF  CHRIST   IN  THE   JORDAN.  [Page  5».

FROM  A  "BOOK  OF  THE  EVANGEI,ISTS."  GREEK  MANUSCRIPT  OF  THE  TWELFTH  CENTURY.


€harinus  and  Lenthius    NICODEMUS.


conclude  their  visit.


Christ,  and  the  Saviour  of  us  all.
Amen,  Amen,  Amen.

7  And  after  they  had  made  an
end  of  writing  and  had  wrote  in
two  distinct  pieces  of  paper,  Cha-
rinus  gave  what  he  wrote  into  the
hands  of  Annas,  and  Caiaphas,
and  Gamaliel.

8  Lenthius  likewise  gave  what
he  wrote  into  the  hands  of  N4co-
demus  and  Joseph  ;  and  immedi-
ately they  were  changed  into
exceeding  white  forms  and  were
seen  no  more.

9  But  what  they  had  wrote  was
found  perfectly  to  agree,  the  one
not  containing  one  letter  more  or
less  than  the  other.

10  When  all  the  assembly  of
the  Jews  heard  all  these  surpris-
ing relations  of  Charinus  and
Lenthius,  thay  said  to  each
other.  Truly  all  these  things  were
wrought  by  God,  and  blessed  be
the  Lord  Jesus  for  ever  and
ever,  Amen.

11  And  they  went  about  with
great  concern,  and  fear,  and  trem-
bling, and  smote  upon  their
breasts  and  went  away  every  one
to  his  home.

12  But  immediately  all  these
things  which  were  related  by  the
Jews  in  their  synagogues  con-
cerning Jesus,  were  presently
told  by  Joseph  and  Nicodemus
to  the  governor.

1 3  And  Pilate  wrote  down  all
these  transactions,  and  placed  all
these  accounts  in  the  public  re-
cords of  his  hall.


CHAP.  XXIL

PUate  goes  to  the  temple  ;  calls  together
the  rulers,  and  scribes,  and  doctors.  2
Commands  the  gates  to  be  shut ;  orders
the  book  of  the  Scripture  ;  and  causes
the  Jews  to  relate  what  they  really
knew  concerning  Chri><t.  14  They
declare  that  they  crucified  Christ  in
ignorance,  and  that  they  now  know


him  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  according
to  the  testimony  of  the  Scriptures;
which,  after  they  put  him  to  death,  they
are  examined.

AFTER  these  things  Pilate
went  to  the  temple  of  the
Jews,  and  called  together  all  the
rulers  and  scribes,  and  doctors  of
the  law,  and  went  with  them  into
a  chapel  of  the  temple.

2  And  commanding  that  all  the
gates  should  be  shut,  said  to  them,
I  have  heard  that  ye  have  a  cer-
tain large  book  in  this  temple ;
I  desire  you  therefore,  that  it
may  be  brought  before  me.

3  And  when  the  great  book,
carried  by  four  ministers  of  the
temple,  and  adorned  with  gold
and  precious  stones,  was  brought,
Pilate  said  to  them  all,  I  adjure
you  by  the  God  of  your  Fathers,
who  made  and  commanded  this
temple  to  be  built,  that  ye  conceal
not  the  truth  from  me.

4  Ye  know  all  the  things  which
are  written  in  that  book ;  tell  me
therefore  now,  if  ye  in  the  Scrip-
tures have  found  any  thing  of
that  Jesus  whom  ye  crucified,  and
at  what  time  of  the  world  he
ought  to  have  come :  shew  it  me.

5  Then  having  sworn  Annas
and  Caiaphas,  they  commanded
all  the  rest  who  were  with  them
to  go  out  of  the  chapel.

6  And  they  shut  the  gates  of
the  temple  and  of  the  chapel,  and
said  to  Pilate,  Thou  hast  made  us
to  swear,  O  judge,  by  the  build-
ing of  this  temple,  to  declare  to
thee  that  which  is  true  and
right.

7  After  we  had  crucified  Jesus,
not  knowing  that  he  was  the  Son
of  God,  but  supposing  he  wrought
his  miracles  by  some  magical  arts,
we  summoned  a  large  assembly
in  this  temple.

8  And  when  we  were  delibe-
rating among  one  another  about

89


The  Jews  repent  and        NICODEMUS.  acknowledge  Christ


the  miracles  which  Jesus  had !
wrought,  we  found  many  wit-
nesses of  our  own  country,  who
declared  that  they  had  seen  him
alive  after  his  death,  and  that
they  heard  him  discoursing  with
his  disciples,  and  saw  him  ascend-
ing unto  the  height  of  the
heavens,  and  entering  into  them  ;

9  And  we  saw  two  witnesses,
whose  bodies  Jesus  raised  from
the  dead,  who  told  us  of  many
strange  things  which  Jesus  did
among  the  dead,  of  which  we
have  a  written  account  in  our
hands.

10  And  it  is  our  custom
annually  to  open  this  holy  book
before  an  assembly,  and  to  search
there  for  the  counsel  of  God.

11  And  we  found  in  the  first
of  the  seventy  books,  where
Michael  the  archangel  is  speak-
ing to  the  third  son  of  Adam  the
first  man,  an  account  that  after
five  thousand  five  hundred  years,
Christ  the  most  beloved  Son  of
God  was  come  on  earth,

12  And  we  further  consider-
ed, that  perhaps  he  was  the  very
God  of  Israel  who  spoke  to
Moses,  Thou  shalt  make  the  ark
of  the  testimony  ;  two  cubits  and
a  half  shall  be  the  length  there-
of, and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the
breadth  thereof,  and  a  cubit  and
a  half  the  height  thereof*

13  By  these  five  cubits  and  a
half  for  the  building  of  the  ark
of  the  Old  Testament,  we  per-
ceived and  knew  that  in  five
thousand  years  and  a  half  (one
thousand)  years,  Jesus  Christ
was  to  come  in  the  ark  or  taber-
nacle of  a  body ;

14  And  so  our  scriptures  tes-
tify that  he  is  the  son  of  God,
and  the  Lord  and  King  of  Israel.

15  And  because  after  his  suf-


fering, our  chief  priests  were  sur-
prised at  the  signs  which  were
wrought  by  his  means,  we  opened
that  book  to  search  all  the  gene-
rations down  to  the  generation  of
Joseph  and  Mary  the  mother  of
Jesus,  supposing  him  to  be  of  the
seed  of  David ;

16  And  we  found  the  account
of  the  creation,  and  at  what  time
he  made  the  heaven  and  the  earth
and  the  first  man  Adam,  and  that
from  thence  to  the  flood,  were  two
thousand,  two  hundred  and
twelve  years.

17  And  from  the  flood  to
Abraham,  nine  hundred  and
twelve.  And  from  Abraham  to
Moses,  four  hundred  and  thirty.
And  from  Moses  to  David  the
king,  five  hundred  and  ten.

18  And  from  David  to  the
Babylonish  captivity,  five  hun-
dred years.  And  from  the  Baby-
lonish captivity  to  the  incarna-
tion of  Christ,  four  hundred
years.

19  The  sum  of  all  which
amounts  to  five  thousand  and
half  (a  thousand).

20  And  so  it  appears,  that
Jesus  whom  we  crucified,  is
Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  and
true  and  Almighty  God.  Amen.

In  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity^
thus  end  the  Acts  of  our  Saviour
Jesus  Christ,  which  the  Empe-
ror Theodosius  the  Great  found
at  Jerusalem,  in  the  hall  of
Pontius  Pilate  among  the  public
records;  the  things  were  acted
in  the  nineteenth  year  of  Tibe-
rius Ccesar,  Emperor  of  the
Romans,  and  in  the  seventeenth
year  of  the  government  of  Herod
the  son  of  Herod  king  of  Gali-
lee, on  the  eighth  of  the  calends
of  April,  which  is  the  twenty-


Exod.  XXV.  10.


90


THE  APOSTLES'  CREED.


third  day  of  the  month  of  March,
in  the  cciid  Olympiad,  when
Joseph  and  Caiaphas  were  Ru-
lers of  the  Jews;  being  a  His-


tory written  in  Hebrew  by  Ni-
codemus,  of  what  happened  after
our  Saviour*s  cru^facion.


The  APOSTLES'  CREED.

[It  is  affirmed  by  Ambrose,  "  that  the  twelve  Apostles,  as  skilful  artificers
assembled  together,  and  made  a  key  by  their  common  advice,  that  is,
the  Creed ;  by  which  the  darkness  of  the  devil  is  disclosed,  that  the
light  of  Christ  may  appear."^  Others  fable  that  every  Apostle  inserted
an  article,  by  which  the  creed  is  divided  into  twelve  articles ;  and  a  ser-
mon, fathered  upon  St.  Austin,  and  quoted  by  the  Lord  Chancellor
King,  fabricates  that  each  particular  article  was  thus  inserted  by  each
particular  Apostle: —

"Peter. — 1.  I  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty;

"  John. — 2.  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth ;

"  James. — 3.  And  in  Jesus  Christ  his  only  Son,  our  Lord  ;

"  Andrew. — 4.  Who  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  bom  of  the  Vir-
gin Mary;

**  Philip. — 5.  Suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  was  crucified,  dead  and
buried  ;

"  Thomas. — 6.  He    descended  into  hell,  the  third   day   he   rose   again
from  the  dead ;

"  Bartholomew. — 7.  He  ascended  into  heaven,  sitteth  at  the  right  hand
of  God  the  Father  Almighty ;

**  Matthew. — 8.  From  thence  he  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the
dead;

*'  James,  the  son  of  Al'pheus. — 9.  I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  holy
Catholic  Church ;

**  Simon  Zelotes. — 10.  The  communion  of  saints,  the  forgiveness  of  sins ;

"Jude  the  brother  of  James. — 11.  The  resurrection  of  the  body;

**  Matthias. — 12.  Life  everlasting.     Amen.'"*

Archbishop  Wake  says :  "  With  respect  to  the  Apostles  being  the
authors  of  this  Creed,  it  is  not  my  intention  to  enter  on  any  particular
examination  of  this  matter,  which  has  been  so  fully  handled,  not  only
by  the  late  critics  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  Natalis  Alexander,^  Du  Pin,*


*  Amb.  Opera,  torn.  iii.  Serm.  38,  p.  265.  ^  King's  Hist.  Apost.  Creed,
8vo,  p.  26.  3  Nat.  Alex.,  p,  vol.  i.,  p.  490,  «&c.  *  Du  Pin,  Biblioth.  Ec-
cles.,  vol.  i.,  p.  25.

91


THE  APOSTLES'  CREED.

&c.,  but  yet  more  especially  by  Archbishop  Usher,^  Gerard  Vossius,'
Suicer,^  Spanhemius  *  Tentzelius,^  and  Sam.  Basnage,®  among  the  Pro-
testants. It  shall  suffice  to  say,  that  as  it  is  not  likely,  that  had  any
such  thing  as  this  been  done  by  the  Apostles,  St.  Luke  would  have
passed  it  by,  without  taking  the  least  notice  of  it :  so  the  diversity  of
Creeds  in  the  ancient  Church,  and  that  not  only  in  expression,  but  in
some  whole  Articles  too,  sufficiently  shows,  that  the  Creed  which  we  call
by  that  name,  was  not  composed  by  the  twelve  Apostles,  much  less  in
the  same  foi'm  in  which  it  now  is."'

Mr.  Justice  Bailey  says:  "  It  is  not  to  be  understood  that  this  Creed
was  framed  by  the  Apostles,  or  indeed  that  it  existed  as  a  Creed  in  their
time  ;"^  and  after  giving  the  Creed  as  it  existed  in  the  year  600,  and
which  is  here  copied  from  his  Common  Prayer  Book,  he  says,  "  how
long  this  form  had  existed  before  the  year  600  is  not  exactly  known.
The  additions  were  probably  made  in  opposition  to  particular  heresies
and  errors."

The  most  important  "addition,"  since  the  year  of  Christ  600,  is  that
which  affirms,  that  Christ  descended  into  hell.  This  has  been  proved  not
only  to  have  been  an  invention  after  the  Apostles'  time,  but  even  after
the  time  of  Eusebius.  Bishop  Pearson  says,'  that  the  descent  into  hell
was  not  in  the  ancient  creeds  or  rules  of  faith.  ''  It  is  not  to  be  found
in  the  rules  of  faith  delivered  by  Irenseus,^"  by  Origen,^^  or  by  Tertul-
lian.^'^  It  is  not  expressed  in  those  creeds  which  were  made  by  the
councils  as  larger  explications  of  the  Apostles'  Creed ;  not  in  the  Nicene,
or  Constantinopolitan ;  not  in  those  of  Ephesus,  or  Chalcedon ;  not  in
those  confessions  made  at  Sardica,  Antioch,  SeJucia,  Sirmium,  &c.  It
is  not  mentioned  in  several  confessions  of  faith  delivered  by  particular
persons ;  not  in  that  of  Eusebius  Caesariensis,  presented  to  the  council
of  Nice  ;^'  not  in  that  of  Marcellus,  bishop  of  Ancyra,  delivered  to  Pope
Julius;^*  not  in  that  of  Arius  and  Euzoius,  presented  to  Constantine ;^^
not  in  that  of  Acacius,  bishop  of  Caesarea,  delivered  into  the  synod  of
Selucia  ;^^  not  in  that  of  Eustathius,  Theophilus,  and  Sylvanus,  sent  to
Liberius  ;^''  there  is  no  mention  of  it  in  the  creed  of  St.  Basil  ;^8  in  the
creed  of  Epiphanus,^^  Gelasius,  Damascus,  Macarius,  &c.  It  is  not  in
the  creed  expounded  by  St.  Cyril,  though  some  have  produced  that
creed  to  prove  it.  It  is  not  in  the  creed  expounded  by  St.  Augustine  ;^^
not  in  that  other,^!  attributed  to  St.  Augustine  in  another  place ;  not  in
that  expounded  by  Maxiraus  Taurinensis ;  nor  in  that  so  often  inter-
preted by  Petrus  Chrysologus ;  nor  in  that  of  the  church  of  Antioch,
delivered  by  Cassianus  f^  neither  is  it  to  be  seen  in  the  MS.  creeds  set
forth  by  the  learned  Archbishop  of  Armagh.  It  is  affirmed  by  Ruffinus,
that  in  his  time  it  was  neither  in  the  Roman  nor  the  Oriental  Creeds.''^


1  Diatrib.  de  Symb.  ^  yosa.  Dissert,  de  tribus  Symbolis.  '  Suicer.  The-
saur.  Eccles.  tom.  ii.  Voce  av/x/Solov^  p  1086,  &c.  *  Spanhem,  Introd.  ad
Hist.  Eccles.,  ^  ii.,  c  3.  ^  Ernest.  Tentzel.  Exercit.  select.  Exercit.  I.  *Sam
Basnage  Exercit.  Hist.  Crit.  ad  Ann.  XLIV.  num.  17,  18.  '  Wake's  Apost
Fathers,  8vo,  p.  103.  ^  Mr.  Justice  Baileys  Common  Prayer,  1813,  p.  9
3  Pearson  on  the  Creed,  fol.  1676,  p.  225.  i»  Lib.  1,  c.  2.  ^^  Lib.  de  Prin
cip.  in  Procem.  ^^  Ad  vers.  Praxeam.,  c.  ii.,  Virgin,  veland.,  c.  1. — De  Prse
pcript.  ad  vers.  Hseres.,  c  13.  ^^  Theodoret,  1.  1,  c  2.  ^*  Epiphan.  Hse.  es
72.  15  socrat.  1.  1,  c.  19.  i«  Ibid.  1.  2,  c.  40.  "  Ibid.  1.  4,  c.  12.  '^  Tract
de  Fide  in  Ascet.  "  In  Anchorat.,  c.  120.  ^o  J)q  pide  et  Symbolo.  ^^  De
Symbol©  ad  Catechumenos.  ^^  De  Incarnat.,  lib.  6.  ^^  Exposit.  in  Symbol.,
Apost.,  §  20.

92


THE  APOSTLES'  CREED.


As  it  stood  An.  Dom.  600.  Copied
from  Mr.  Justice  Bailey's  Edition  of
the  book  of  Common  Prayer.

''  Before  the  year  600,  it  was  no  more
than  this."— Mr.  Justice  Bailey.
p.  9n.

1  I  Believe  in  God  the  Fa-
ther Almighty:

2  And  in  Jesus  Christ  his  on-
ly begotten  Son,  our  Lord ;

3  Who  was  born  of  the  Holy
Ghost  and  Virgin  Mary,


4  And  was  crucified  under
Pontius  Pilate,  and  was  buried  ;

5  And  the  third  day  rose
again  from  the  dead.

6  Ascended  into  heaven,  sit-
teth  on  the  right  hand  of  the
Father ;

7  Whence  he  shall  come  to
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  ;


8  And  in  the  Holy  Ghost  ;


9  The  Holy  Church ;

10  The  remission  of  sins  ;


11  And    the   resurrection   of
the  flesh,  Amen.


As  it  stands  in  the  book  of  Common
Prayer  of  the  United  Church  of  Eng-
land and  Ireland  as  by  law  estab-
lished.


1  I  Believe  in  God  the  Fa-
ther Almighty,  maker  of  heaven
and  earth :

2  And  in  Jesus  Christ  his  on-
ly Son,  our  Lord :

3  Who  was  conceived  by  the
Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  Virgin
Mary,

4  Suffered  under  Pontius  Pi-
late, was  crucified,  dead  and
buried ;

5  He  descended  into  hell ;

6  The  third  day  he  rose  again
from  the  dead ;

7  He  ascended  into  heaven,
and  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of
God  the  Father  Almighty ;

8  From  thence  he  shall  come
to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.

9^1  believe  in  the  Holy
Ghost ;

10  The  holy  Catholic  Church;
the  communion  of  saints  ;

11  The  forgiveness  of  sins  ;

12  The  resurrection  of  the
body;  and  the  life  everlasting.
Amen.


THE  EPISTLE  of  PAUL  the  APOSTLE  to  the  LAODI-

CEANS.

[This  Epistle  has  been  highly  esteemed  by  several  learned  men  of  the  church
of  Rome  and  others.  The  Quakers  have  printed  a  translation  ind  plead
for  it,  as  the  reader  may  see,  by  consulting  Poole's  Annotations  on  Col.
vi.  16.  Sixtus  Senensis  mentions  two  MSS-,  the  one  in  the  Sorbonne
Library  at  Paris,  which  is  a  very  ancient  copy,  and  the  other  in  the  Li-
brary of  Joannes  a  Viridario,  at  Padua,  which  he  transcribed  and  pub-
lished, and  which  is  the  authority  for  the  following  translation.  There
is  a  very  old  translation  of  this  Epistle  in  the  British  Museum,  among
the  Harleian  MSS.,  Cod.  1212.]


1  He  salutes  the  brethren.  3  exhorts
them  to  persevere  in  good  works,  4
and  not  to  be  mooed  hy  vain  speaking.
6  Rejoices  in  his  bondt,  10  desires
them  to  live  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.

PAUL  an  Apostle,  not  of
men,  neither  by  man,  but
by  Jesus  Christ,  to  the  brethren
which  are  at  Laodicea.

2  Grace  be  to  you,  and  Peace,
from  God  the  Father  and  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ.

3  I  thank  Christ  in  every
prayer  of  mine,  that  ye  may
continue  and  persevere  in  good
works  looking  for  that  which  is
promised  in  the  day  of  judg-
ment.

4  Let  not  the  vain  speeches
of  any  trouble  you  who  pervert
the  truth,  that  they  may  draw
you  aside  from  the  truth  of  the
Gospel  which  I  have  preached.

5  And  now  may  God  grant,
that  my  converts  may  attain  to
a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  truth
of  the  Gospel,  be  beneficent,
and  doing  good  works  which  ac-
company salvation.

6  And  now  my  bonds,  which
I  suffer  :«n  Christ,  are  manifest,
in  which  I  rejoice  and  am  glad.

7  For  I  know  that  this  shall
turn  to  my  salvation  for  ever,
which  shall  be  through  your
prayer,  and  the  supply  of  the
Holy  Spirit.

8  Whether  I  live  or  die ;  (for)

94


to  me  to  live  shall  be  a  life  to
Christ,  to  die  will  be  joy.

9  And  our  Lord  will  grant  us
his  mercy,  that  ye  may  have
the  same  love,  and  be  like-
minded.

10  Wherefore,  my  beloved,  as
ye  have  heard  of  the  coming  of
the  Lord,  so  think  and  act  in
fear,  and  it  shall  be  to  you  life
eternal ;

11  For  it  is  God  who  worketh
in  you  ;

12  And  do  all  things  without
sin.

13  And  what  is  best,  my  be-
loved, rejoice  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  and  avoid  all  filthy
lucre.

14  Let  all  your  requests  be
made  known  to  God,  and  be
steady  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ.

15  And  whatsoever  things  are
sound  and  true,  and  oi*  good  re-
port, and  chaste,  and  just,  and
lovely,  these  things  do.

16  Those  things  which  ye
have  heard,  and  received,  think
on  these  things,  and  peace  shall
be  with  you.

17  All  the  saints  salute  you.

18  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Je-
sus Christ  be  with  your  spirit.
Amen.

19  Cause  this  Epistle  to  be
read  to  the  Colossians,  and  the
Epistle  of  the  Colossians  to  be
read  among  you.


The  EPISTLES  of  PAUL  the  APOSTLE  to  SENECA   with
SENECA'S  to  PAUL.

[Several  very  learned  writers  have  entertained  a  favourable  opinion  of  these
Epistles.  They  are  undoubtedly  of  high  antiquity.  Salmeron  cites
them  to  prove  that  Seneca  was  one  of  Caesar's  household,  referred  to  bv
Paul,  Philip,  iv.  22,  as  saluting  the  brethren  at  Phiiippi.  Jn  Jerome's
enumeration  of  illustrious  men,  he  places  Seneca,  on  account  of  these
Epistles,  amongst  the  ecclesiastical  and  holy  writers  of  the  Christian
Qo  "on^''  f'^^^\  ^^"^°«i^  ^'^  published  them  in  his  Bibliotheque,  pp.
89,  90 ;  and  it  is  from  thence  that  the  present  translation  is  made.  Bar-
onius,  Beilarmme,  Dr.  Cave,  Spanheim,  and  others,  contend  that  thev
are  not  genuine.  J  '


CHAP.  I.

Ann^us  Seneca  to  Paul  Greding.
T  SUPPOSE,  Paul,  you  have
X  been  informed  of  that  conver-
sation, which  passed  yesterday
between  me  and  my  Lucilius,
concerning  hypocrisy  and  other


subjects;  for  there  were  some  of '^l^ich  I  send.


which  I  could  immediately  have
wrote  an  answer,  had  the  young
man  been  at  home,  whom  I  in-
tended to  have  sent  to  you :

2  For  you  know  when,  and  by
whom,  at  what  seasons,  and  to
whom  I  must  deliver  every  thing


your  disciples  in  company  with
us;

2  For  whei>  we  were  retired
into  the  Sallustian  gardens,
through  which  they  were  also
passing,  and  would  have  gone
another  way,  by  our  persuasion
they  joined  company  with  us.

3  I  desire  you  to  believe,  that
we  much  wish  for  your  conversa-
tion :

4  We  were  much  delighted
with  your  book  of  many  Epistles,
which  you  have  wrote  to  some
cities  and  chief  towns  of  pro-
vinces, and  contain  wonderful
instructions  for  moral  conduct:

5  Such  sentiments,  as  I  sup-
pose you  were  not  the  author  of,
but  only  the  instrument  of  con-
veying, though  sometimes  both
the  author  and  the  instrument.

6  For  such  is  the  sublimity  of
those  doctrines,  and  their  gran-
deur, that  I  suppose  the  age  of
a  man  is  scarce  sufficient  to  be
instructed  and  perfected  in  the
knowledge  of  them.  I  wish  your
welfare,  my  brother.     Farewell.

CHAP.  n.

Paul  to  Seneca  Greeting.

I  RECEIVED  your  letter  yes-
terday    with     pleasure  :    to


3  I  desire  therefore  you  would
not  charge  me  with  negligence,
if  I  wait  for  a  proper  person.

4  I  reckon  myself  very  happy
in  having  the  judgment  of  so
valuable  a  person,  that  you  are
delighted  with  my  Epistles :

5  For  you  would  not  be  es-
teemed a  censor,  a  philosopher,
or  be  the  tutor  of  so  great  a
prince,  and  a  master  of  every
thing,  if  you  were  not  sincere.
I  wish  you  a  lasting  prosperity.

CHAP.  in.

Ann^us  Seneca  to  Paul  Greeting.

I  HAVE  completed  some  vo-
lumes, and  divided  them  into
their  proper  parts.

2  I  am  determined  to  read
them  to  Csesar,  and  if  any  favour-
able opportunity  haj^pens,  you
also  shall  be  present,  when  they
are  read ;

3  But  if  that  cannot  be,  I  will
appoint  and  give  you  notice  of  a
day,  when  we  will  together  read
over  the  performance.

4  I  had  determined,  if  I  could
with  safety,  first  to  have  your  opi-
nion of  it,  before  I  published  it
to  Csesar,  that  you  might  be  con-
vinced of  my  affection  to  you.
Farewell,  dearest  Paul.

95


PAUL  TO  SENECA.


CHAP.  IV.
Paul  to  Seneca  Greeting.

AS  often  as  I  read  your  letters,
I  imagine  you  present  with
me  ;  nor  indeed  do  1  think  any
other,  than  that  you  are  always
with  us.

2  As  soon  therefore  as  you  be-
gin to  come,  we  shall  presently
see  each  other.  I  wish  you  all
prosperity.

CHAP.  V.

Ann ^ us  Seneca  to  Paul.  Greeting.

WE  are  very  much  concerned
at  your  too  long  absence
from  us.

2  What  is  it,  or  what  affairs
are  they,  which  obstruct  your
coming  ?

3  If  you  fear  the  anger  of
Csesar,  because  you  have  abon-
doned  your  former  religion,  and
made  proselytes  also  of  other,?,
you  have  this  to  plead,  that  your
acting  thus  proceeded  not  from
inconstancy,  but  judgment.
Farewell.

CHAP.  VI.

Paul    to    Seneca    and    Lucilius

Greeting.

CONCERNING  those  things
about  which  ye  wrote  to  me
it  is  not  proper  for  me  to  mention
anything  in  writing  with  pen  and
ink:  the  one  of  which  leaves
marks,  and  the  other  evidently
declares  things.

2  Especially  since  I  know  that
there  are  near  you,  as  well  as  me,
those  who  will  understand  my
meaning.

3  Deference  is  to  be  paid  to  all
men,  and  so  much  the  more,  as
they  are  more  likely  to  take  occa-
sions of  quarrelling.

4  And  if  we  show  a  submissive
temper,  we  shall  overcome  effec-
tually in  all  points,  if  so  be  they
are,  who  are  capable  of  seeing

96


and  acknowledging  themselves
to  have  been  in  the  wrong.  Fare-
well.

CHAP.  VII.
Annjeus  Seneca  to  Paul  Greeting.

I  PROFESS  myself  extremely
pleased  with  the  reading  your
letters  to  the  Galatians,  Corin-
thians, and  people  of  Achaia.

2  For  the  Holy  Ghost  has  in
them  by  you  delivered  those
sentiments  which  are  very  lofty,
sublime,  deserving  of  all  respect,
and  beyond  your  own  invention.

3  I  could  wish  therefore,  that
when  you  are  writing  things  so
extraordinary,  there  might  not
be  wanting  an  elegancy  of  speech
agreeable  to  their  majesty.

4  And  I  must  own  my  bro-
ther, that  I  may  not  at  once  dis-
honestly conceal  anything  from
you,  and  be  unfaithful  to  my  own
conscience,  that  the  emperor  is
extremely  pleased  with  the  senti-
ments of  your  Epistles ;

5  For  when  he  heard  the  be-
ginning of  them  read,  he  declar-
ed, That  he  was  surprised  to  find
such  notions  in  a  person,  who
had  not  had  a  regular  education.

6  To  which  I  replied,  That  the
Gods  sometimes  made  use  of
mean  (innocent)  persons  to  speak
by,  and  gave  him  an  instance  of
this  in  a  mean  countryman,
named  Vatienus,  who,  when  he
was  in  the  country  of  Reate,  had
two  men  appeared  to  him,  called
Castor  and  Pollux,  and  received
a  revelation  from  the  gods.  Fare-
well.

CHAP.  VIIT.
Paul  to  Seneca  Greeting.

ALTHOUGH  I  know  the  em-
peror is  both  an  admirer
and  favourer  of  our  (religion),  yet
give  me  leave  to  advise  you
against  your  suffering  any  injury,
(by  shewing  favour  to  us.)


THE  LAST  JUDGMENT.

FROM    A    PERSIAN    MINIATURE   OF   THE   EIGHTH  CENTURY.


PAUL  AND  SENECA.


2  I  think  indeed  you  ventured
upon  a  very  dangerous  attempt,
when  you  would  declare  (to  the
emperor)  that  which  is  so  very
contrary  to  his  religion,  and  way
of  worship  ;  seeing  he  is  a  wor-
shipper of  the  heathen  gods.

3  I  know  not  what  you  parti-
cularly had  in  view,  when  you
told  him  of  this ;  but  I  suppose
you  did  it  out  of  too  great  re-
spect for  me.

4  But  I  desire  that  for  the  fu-
ture you  would  not  do  so;  for
you  had  need  be  careful,  lest  by
shewing  your  affection  for  me,
you  should  offend  your  master :

5  His  anger  indeed  will  do  us
no  harm,  if  he  continue  a  hea-
then; nor  will  his  not  being
angry  be  of  any  service  to  us :

6  And  if  the  empress  act  wor-
thy of  her  character,  she  will
not  be  angry ;  but  if  she  acts  as
a  woman,  she  will  be  affronted.
Farewell.


CHAP.  IX.

Ann^us  Seneca  to  Paul  Greeting^

I  KNOW  that  my  letter,  where-
in I  acquainted  you,  that  I
had  read  to  the  Emperor  your
Epistles,  does  not  so  much  affect
you  as  the  nature  of  the  things
(contained  in  them),

2  Which  do  so  powerfully  di-
vert men's  minds  from  their  for-
mer manners  and  practices,  that
I  have  always  been  surprised,
and  have  been  fully  convinced
of  it  by  many  arguments  here-
tofore.

3  Let  us  therefore  begin
afresh  ;  and  if  any  thing  hereto-
fore has  been  imprudently  acted,
do  you  forgive.

4  I  have  sent  you  a  book  de
Gopia  verborum.  Farewell,  dear-
est Paul.

7


CHAP.  X.

Paul  to  Seneca  Greeting.

AS  often  as  I  write  to  you,
and  place  my  name  before
yours,  I  do  a  thing  both  dis-
agreeable to  myself,  and  con-
trary to  our  religion :

2  For  I  ought,  as  I  have  often
declared,  to  become  all  things  to
all  men,  and  to  have  that  regard
to  your  quality,  which  the  Roman
law  has  honoured  all  senators
with ;  namely,  to  put  my  name
last  in  the  (inscription  of  the)
Epistle,  that  I  may  not  at  length
with  uneasiness  and  shame  be
obliged  to  do  that  which  it  was
always  my  inclination  to  do.
Farewell,  most  respected  master.
Dated  the  fifth  of  the  calends  of
July,  in  the  fourth  consulship  of
Nero,  and  Messala.

CHAP.  XI.

Annjeus  Seneca  to  Paul  Greeting.

ALL   happiness   to   you,   my
dearest  Paul.

2  If  a  person  so  great,  and
every  way  agreeable  as  you  are,
become  not  only  a  common,  but
a  most  intimate  friend  to  me,
how  happy  will  be  the  case  of
Seneca !

3  You  therefore,  who  are  so
eminent,  and  so  far  exalted  above
all,  even  the  greatest,  do  not
think  yourself  unfit  to  be  first
named  in  the  inscription  of  an
Epistle;

4  Lest  I  should  suspect  you
intend  not  so  much  to  try  me,
as  to  banter  me ;  for  you  know
yourself  to  be  a  Roman  citizen.

5  And  I  could  wish  to  be  in
that  circumstance  or  station
which  you  are,  and  that  you
were  in  the  same  that  I  am.
Farewell,  dearest  Paul.  Dated
the  xth  of  the  calends  of  April,
in  the  consulship  of  Aprianus
and  Capito.

97


PAUL  AND  SENECA.


CHAP.  XII.

AsNMVs  Seneca  to  Paul  Greeting.

ALL  happiness  to  you,my  dear-
est Pau  1.  Do  you  not  sup-
pose I  am  extremely  concerned
and  grieved  that  your  innocence
should  bring  you  into  sufferings?

2  And  that  all  the  people
should  suppose  you  (Christians)
so  criminal,  and  imagine  all  the
misfortunes  that  happen  to  the
city,  to  be  caused  by  you  ?

3  But  let  us  bear  the  charge
with  a  patient  temper,  appeal-
ing (for  our  innocence)  to  the
court  (above),  which  is  the  only
one  our  hard  fortune  will  allow
us  to  address  to,  till  at  length
our  misfortunes  shall  end  in  un-
alterable happiness.

4  Former  ages  have  produced
(tyrants)  Alexander  the  son  of
Philip,  and  Dionysius ;  ours
also  has  produced  Caius  Caesar ;
whose  inclinations  were  their
only  laws.

5  As  to  the  frequent  burnings
of  the  city  of  Kome,  the  cause  is
manifest ;  and  if  a  person  in  my
mean  circumstances  might  be
allowed  to  speak,  and  one  might
declare  these  dark  things  with-
out danger,  every  one  should  see
the  whole  of  the  matter.

6  The  Christians  and  Jews
are  indeed  commonly  punished
for  the  crime  of  burning  the
city ;  but  that  impious  miscreant,
who  delights  in  murders  and
butcheries,  and  disguises  his  vil-
lanies  with  lies,  is  appointed  to,
or  reserved  till,  his  proper  time.

7  And  as  the  life  of  every  ex-
cellent person  is  now  sacrificed
instead  of  that  one  person  (who
is  the  author  of  the  mischief),
so  this  one  shall  be  sacrificed  for
many,  and  he  shall  be  devoted
to  be  burnt  with  fire  instead  of
all.

98


8  One  hundred  and  thirty-two
houses,  and  four  whole  squares
(or  islands)  were  burnt  down  in
six  days :  the  seventh  put  an
end  to  the  burning.  I  wish  you
all  happiness.

9  Dated  the  fifth  of  the  calends
of  April,  in  the  consulship  of
Frigius  and  Bassus.

CHAP.  XIII.

Annjeus  Seneca  to  Paul  Greeting.

ALL    happiness    to   you,   my
dearest  Paul.

2  You  have  wrote  many  vo-
lumes in  an  allegorical  and  mys-
tical style,  and  therefore  such
mighty  matters  and  business
being  committed  to  you,  require
not  to  be  set  off  with  any  rhe-
torical flourishes  of  speech,  but
only  with  some  proper  elegance.

3  I  remember  you  often  say,
that  many  by  affecting  such  a
style  do  injury  to  their  subjects,
and  lose  the  force  of  the  matters
they  treat  of.

4  But  in  this  I  desire  you  to
regard  me,  namely,  to  have  re-
spect to  true  Latin,  and  to
choose  just  words,  that  so  you
may  the  better  manage  the  noble
trust  which  is  reposed  in  you.

5  Farewell.  Dated  v""  of  the
names  of  July,  Leo  and  Savinus
consuls.

CHAP.  XIV.
Paul  to  Seneca  Greeting.

YOUR  serious  consideration
requited  with  these  discov-
eries, which  the  Divine  Being
has  granted  but  to  few.

2  I  am  thereby  assured  that  I
sow  the  most  strong  seed  in  a
fertile  soil,  not  anything  mate-
rial, which  is  subject  to  corrup-
tion, but  the  durable  word  of
God,  which  shall  increase  and
bring  forth  fruit  to  eternity.


PAUL  AND  THECLA.


3  That  which  by  your  wis-
dom you  have  attained  to,  shall
abide  without  decay  for  ever.

4  Believe  that  you  ought  to
avoid  the  superstitions  of  Jews
and  Gentiles.

5  The  things  which  you  have
in  some  measure  arrived  to,  pru-
dently make  known  to  the  em-
peror, his  family,  and  to  faithful
friends ;

6  And  though  your  sentiments


will  seem  disagreeable,  and  not
be  comprehended  by  them,  see-
ing most  of  them  will  not  regard
your  discourses,  yet  the  Word
of  God  once  infused  into  them,
will  at  length  make  them  become
new  men,  aspiring  towards  God.
7  Farewell  Seneca,  who  art
most  dear  to  us.  Dated  on  the
Calends  of  August,  in  the  con-
sulship of  Leo  and  Savinus.


The  ACTS  of  PAUL  and  THECLA.

[TertuUian  says  that  this  piece  was  forged  by  a  Presbyter  of  Asia,  who  being
convicted,  "  confessed  that  he  did  it  out  of  respect  of  Paul,"  and  Pope
Gelasius,  in  his  Decree  against  apocryphal  books,  inserted  it  among
them.  Notwithstanding  this,  a  large  part  of  the  history  was  credited,
and  looked  upon  as  genuine  among  the  primitive  Christians.  Cyprian,
Eusebius,  Epiphanius,  Austin,  Gregory  Nazianzen,  Chrysostom,  and
Severus  Sulpitius,  who  all  lived  within  the  fourth  century,  mention
Thecla,  or  refer  to  her  history.  Basil  of  Seleucia  wrote  her  acts,  sufier-
ings,  and  victories,  in  verse;  and  Euagrius  Scholasticus,  an  ecclesiasti-
cal historian,  about  590,  relates  that  **  after  the  Emperor  Zeno  had
abdicated  his  empire,  and  Basilik  had  taken  possession  of  it,  he  had  a
vision  of  the  holy  and  excellent  martyr  Thecla,  who  promised  him  the
restoration  of  his  empire ;  for  which,  when  it  was  brought  about,  he
erected  and  dedicated  a  most  noble  and  sumptuous  temple  to  this
famous  martyr  Thecla,  at  Seleucia,  a  city  of  Isauria,  and  bestowed  upon
it  very  noble  endowments,  which  (says  the  author)  are  preserved  even
till  this  day."  Hist.  Eccl.,  lib.  3,  cap.  8.— Cardinal  Baroniup,  Locrinus,
Archbishop  Wake,  and  others;  and  also  the  learned  Grabe,  who  edited
the  Septuagint,  and  revived  the  Acts  of  Paul  and  Thecla,  consider  them
as  having  been  written  in  the  Apostolic  age;  as  containing  nothing
superstitious,  or  disagreeing  from  the  opinions  and  belief  of  those  times ;
and,  in  short,  as  a  genuine  and  authentic  history.  Again,  it  is  said,
that  this  is  not  the  original  book  of  the  early  Christians ;  but  however
that  may  be,  it  is  published  from  the  Greek  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library
at  Oxford,  which  Dr.  Mills  copied  and  transmitted  to  Dr.  Grabe.]


The  Martyrdom  of  the  holy  and
glorious  first  Martyr  and  Apos-
tle Thecla.

CHAP.  I.

1  Demos  and  Hermogenes  become  PauVs
companions.  4  Paul  visits  Onesi-
phorus.  8  Invited  by  Demos  and
Hermogenes.  11  Preaches  to  the
household  of  Onesiphorus.     12   His


WHEN  Paul  went  up  to  Ico-
nium,  after  his  flight  from
Antioch,  Demas  and  Hermoge-
nes became  his  companions,  who
were  then  full  of  hypocrisy.

2  But  Paul  looking  only  at
the  goodness  of  God,  did  them
no  harm,  but  loved  them  greatly.

3  Accordingly  he  endeavoured
to  make  agreeable  to  them,  all

99


Paul' s  companions     PAUL  AND  THECLA.         and  preachings.


the  oracles  and  doctrines  of
Christ,  and  the  design  of  the
Gospel  of  God's  well-beloved
Son,  instructing  them  in  the
knowledge  of  Christ,  as  it  was
revealed  to  him.

4  ^  And  a  certain  man  named
Onesiphorus,  hearing  that  Paul
was  come  to  Iconium,  went  out
speedily  to  meet  him,  together
with  his  wife  Lectra,  and  his
sons  Simmia  and  Zeno,  to  invite
him  to  their  house.

5  For  Titus  had  given  them
a  description  of  Paul's  person-
age, they  as  yet  not  knowing
him  in  person,  but  only  being
acquainted  with  his  character.

6  They  went  in  the  king's
highway  to  Lystra,  and  stood
there  waiting  for  him,  comparing
all  who  passed  by,  with  that  de-
scription which  Titus  had  given
them.

7  At  length  they  saw  a  man
coming  (namely  Paul),  of  a  low
stature,  bald  (or  shaved)  on  the
head,  crooked  thighs,  handsome
legs,  hollow-eyed ;  had  a  crooked
nose ;  full  of  grace ;  for  some-
times he  appeared  as  a  man,
sometimes  he  had  the  counte-
nance of  an  angel.  And  Paul
saw  Onesiphorus,  and  was  glad.

8  ^  And  Onesiphorus  said  :
Hail,  thou  servant  of  the  blessed
God.  Paul  replied,  The  grace
of  God  be  with  thee  and  thy
family.

9  But  Demas  and  Hermoge-
nes  were  moved  with  envy,  and,
under  a  show  of  great  religion,
Demas  said.  And  are  not  we
also  servants  of  the  blessed  God?
Why  didst  thou  not  salute  us  ?

10  Onesiphorus  replied.  Be-
cause I  have  not  perceived  in
you  the  fruits  of  righteousness  ;
nevertheless,  if  ye  are  of  that
sort,  ye  shall  be  welcome  to  my
house  also.

100


11  Then  Paul  went  into  the
house  of  Onesiphorus,  and  there
was  great  joy  among  the  family
on  that  account :  and  they  em-
ployed themselves  in  prayer,
breaking  of  bread,  and  hearing
Paul  preach  the  word  of  God
concerning  temperance  and  the
resurrection,  in  the  following
manner :

12  ^  Blessed  are  the  pure  in
heart ;  for  they  shall  see  God.

13  Blessed  are  they  who  keep
their  flesh  undefiled  (or  pure) ;
for  they  shall  be  the  temple  of
God.

14  Blessed  are  the  temperate
(or  chaste)  ;  for  God  will  reveal
himself  to  them.

15  ^  Blessed  are  they  who
abandon  their  secular  enjoy-
ments ;  for  they  shall  be  accept-
ed of  God.

16  Blessed  are  they  who  have
wives,  as  though  they  had  them
not;  for  they  shall  be  made
angels  of  God.

17  Blessed  are  they  who  trem-
ble at  the  word  of  God;  for
they  shall  be  comforted.

18  Blessed  are  they  who  keep
their  baptism  pure;  for  they
shall  find  peace  with  the  Father,
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.

19  ^  Blessed  are  they  who
pursue  the  wisdom  (or  doctrine)
of  Jesus  Christ;  for  they  shall
be  called  the  sons  of  the  Most
High.

20  Blessed  are  they  who  ob-
serve the  instructions  of  Jesus
Christ;  for  they  shall  dwell  in
eternal  light.

21  Blessed  are  they,  who  for
the  love  of  Christ  abandon  the
glories  of  the  world ;  for  they
shall  judge  angels,  and  be  placed
at  the  right  hand  of  Christ,  and
shall  not  suffer  the  bitterness  of
the  last  judgment.

22  T[  Blessed  are  the  bodies  and


Theda  admires         PAUL  AND  THECLA.      Paul' s  preaching.


souls  of  virgins ;  for  they  are  ac-
ceptable to  God,  and  shall  not
lose  the  reward  of  their  virginity ;
for  the  word  of  their  (heavenly;
Father  shall  prove  effectual  to
their  salvation  in  the  day  of  his
Son,  and  they  shall  enjoy  rest
for  evermore.

CHAP.  II.

1  Theda  listens  anxiously  to  PauVs
preaching.  5  Thamyris,  her  admirer,
concerts  with  Theoclia  her  mother  to
dissuade  her,  12  in  vain.  14  Demos
and  Hermogenes  vilify  Paid  to
Thamyris.

WHILE  Paul  was  preach-
ing this  sermon  in  the
church  which  was  in  the  house  of
Onesiphorus,  a  certain  virgin,
named  Thecla  (whose  mother's
name  was  Theoclia,  and  who  was
betrothed  to  a  man  named  Tha-
myris) sat  at  a  certain  window  in
her  house.

2  From  whence,  by  the  advan-
tage of  a  window  in  the  house
where  Paul  was,  she  both  night
and  day  heard  Paul's  sermons
concerning  God,  concerning  cha-
rity, concerning  faith  in  Christ,
and  concerning  prayer ;

3  Nor  would  she  depart  from
the  window,  till  with  exceeding
joy  she  was  subdued  to  the  doc-
trines of  faith.

4  At  length,  when  she  saw
many  women  and  virgins  going
in  to  Paul,  she  earnestly  desired
that  she  might  be  thought  worthy
to  appear  in  his  presence,  and
hear  the  word  of  Christ ;  for  she
had  not  yet  seen  Paul's  person,
but  only  heard  his  sermons,  and
that  alone.

5  •[[  But  when  she  would  not
be  prevailed  upon  to  depart  from
the  window,  her  mother  sent  to
Thamyris,  who  came  with  the
greatest  pleasure,  as  hoping  now


to  marry  her.  Accordingly  he
said  to  Theoclia,  Where  is  my
Thecla?

6  Theoclia  replied,  Thamyris,
I  have  something  very  strange  to
tell  you ;  for  Thecla,  for  the  space
of  three  days,  will  not  move  from
the  window  not  so  much  as  to
eat  or  drink,  but  is  so  intent  in
hearing  the  artful  and  delusive
discourses  of  a  certain  foreigner,
that  I  perfectly  admire,  Tha-
myris, that  a  young  woman  of
her  known  modesty,  will  suffer
herself  to  be  so  prevailed  upon.

7  For  that  man  has  disturbed
the  whole  city  of  Iconium,  and
even  your  Thecla,  among  others,
All  the  women  and  young  men
flock  to  him  to  receive  his  doc-
trine ;  who,  besides  all  the  rest,
tells  them  that  there  is  but  one
God,  who  alone  is  to  be  worship-
ped, and  that  we  ought  to  live  in
chastity.

8  ^  Notwithstanding  this,  my
daughter  Thecla,  like  a  spider's
web  fastened  to  the  window,  is
captivated  by  the  discourses  of
Paul,  and  attends  upon  them
with  prodigious  eagerness,  and
vast  delight ;  and  thus,  by  attend-
ing on  what  he  says,  the  young
woman  is  seduced.  Now  then
do  you  go,  and  speak  to  her,  for
she  is  betrothed  to  you.

9  Accordingly  Thamyris  went,
and  having  saluted  her,  and  tak-
ing care  not  to  surprise  her,  he
said,  Thecla,  my  spouse,  why  sit-
test  thou  in  this  melancholy  pos-
ture ?  What  strange  impressions
are  made  upon  thee?  Turn  to
Thamyris,  and  blush.

10  Her  mother  also  spake  to
her  after  the  same  manner,  and
said.  Child,  why  dost  thou  sit  so
melancholy,  and,  like  one  asto-
nished, makest  no  reply  ?

11  Then  they  wept  exceeding-
ly, Thamyris,  that  he   had   lost

101


Demos  and  Hermogenes  PAUL  AND  THECLA.        betray  Paul.


his  spo  use ;  Theoclia,  that  she  had
lost  her  daughter ;  and  the  maids,
that  they  had  lost  their  mistress;
and  there  was  an  universal
mourning  in  the  family.

12  But  all  these  things  made
no  impression  upon  Thecla,  so
as  to  incline  her  so  much  as  to
turn  to  them,  and  take  notice  of
them  ;  for  she  still  regarded  the
discourses  of  Paul.

13  Then  Thamyris  ran  forth
into  the  street  to  observe  who
they  were  who  went  into  Paul,
and  came  out  from  him ;  and
he  saw  two  men  engaged  in  a
very  warm  dispute,  and  said  to
them;

14  T  Sirs,  what  business  have
you  here?  and  who  is  that  man
within,  belonging  to  you,  who
deludes  the  minds  of  men,  both
young  men  and  virgins,  per-
suading them,  that  they  ought
not  to  marry,  but  continue  as
they  are  ?

15  1  promise  to  give  you  a  con-
siderable sum,  if  you  will  give
me  a  just  account  of  him ;  for  I
am  the  chief  person  of  this
city.

16  Demas  and  Hermogenes  re-
plied. We  cannot  so  exactly  tell
who  he  is;  but  this  we  know,
that  he  deprives  young  men  of
their  (intended)  wives,  and  vir-
gins of  their  (intended)  hus-
bands, by  teaching.  There  can
be  no  future  resurrection,  unless
ye  continue  in  chastity,  and  do
not  defile  your  flesh.

CHAP.  III.

1  They  betray  Paul.  7  Thamyris  arrests
him  with  officers.

THEN  said  Thamyris,  Come
along  with  me  to  my  house,
and  refresh  yourselves.    So  they
went  to  a  very  splendid  entertain-
ment, where  there  was  wine  in
102


abundance,  and  very  rich  provi-
sion.

2  They  were  brought  to  a  table
richly  spread,  and  made  to  drink
plentifully  by  Thamyris,  on  ac-
count of  the  love  he  had  for  The-
cla and  his  desire  to  marry  her.

3  Then  Thamyris  said,  I  desire
ye  would  inform  me  what  the
doctrines  of  this  Paul  are,  that  I
may  understand  them  ;  for  I  am
under  no  small  concern  about
Thecla,  seeing  she  so  delights  in
that  stranger's  discourses,  that  I
am  in  danger  of  losing  my  in-
tended wife.

4  ^  Then  Demas  and  Hermo-
genes answered  both  together,
and  said,  Let  him  be  brought  be-
fore the  governor  Castellius,  as
one  who  endeavours  to  persuade
the  people  into  the  new  religion
of  the  Christians,  and  he,  accord-
ing to  the  order  of  Csesar,  will  put
him  to  death,  by  which  means
you  will  obtain  your  wife ;

5  While  we  at  the  same  time
will  teach  her,  that  the  resurrec-
tion which  he  speaks  of  is  already
come,  and  consists  in  our  having
children ;  and  that  we  then  arose
again,  when  we  came  to  the
knowledge  of  God.

6  Thamyris  having  this  ac-
count from  them,  was  filled  with
hot  resentment :

7  And  rising  early  in  the  morn-
ing he  went  to  the  house  of  One-
siphorus,  attended  by  the  magis-
trates, the  jailor,  and  a  great  mul-
titude of  people  with  staves,  and
said  to  Paul ;

8  Thou  hast  perverted  the  city
of  Iconium,  and  among  the  rest,
Thecla,  who  is  betrothed  to  me,
so  that  now  she  will  not  marry
me.  Thou  shalt  therefore  go
with  us  to  the  governor  Castel-
lius.

9  And  all  the  multitude  cried
out,   Away   with   this   impostor


Paul  imprisoned,      PAUL  AND  THECLA.       Thecla  vi»it8  him.


(magician),  for  he  has  perverted
the  minds  of  our  wives,  and  all
the  people  hearken  to  him.

CHAP.  IV.

1  Paul  accused  before  the  governor  by
Thamyris.  5  Defends  himself.  9  7s
committed  to  prison,  10  and  visited
by  Thecla.

rpHEN  Thamyris  standing  be-
i  fore  the  governor's  judg-
ment-seat, spake  with  a  loud
voice  in  the  following  manner.

2  O  governor,  I  know  not
whence  this  man  cometh ;  but
he  is  one  who  teaches  that  matri-
mony is  unlawful.  Command
him  therefore  to  declare  before
you  for  what  reason  he  publishes
such  doctrines.

3  While  he  was  saying  thus,
Demas  and  Hermogenes  (whis-
pered to  Thamyris,  and)  said  ;
Say  that  he  is  a  Christian,  and
he  will  presently  be  put  to  death.

4  But  the  governor  was  more
deliberate,  and  calling  to  Paul,
he  said.  Who  art  thou  ?  What
dost  thou  teach  ?  They  seem  to
lay  gross  crimes  to  thy  charge.

5  Paul  then  spake  with  a  loud
voice,  saying.  As  I  am  now  called
to  give  an  account,  O  governor,
of  my  doctrines,  I  desire  your
audience.

6  That  God,  who  is  a  God  of
vengeance,  and  who  stands  in
need  of  nothing  but  the  salva-
tion of  his  creatures,  has  sent
me  to  reclaim  thera  from  their
wickedness  and  corruptions,  from
all  (sinful)  pleasures,  and  from
death  ;  and  to  persuade  them  to
sin  no  more.

^  7  On  this  account,  God  sent
las  Son  Jesus  Christ,  whom  I
preach,  and  in  whom  I  instruct
men  to  place  their  hopes  as  that
psrson  who  only  had  such  com-
passion on  the  deluded  world,
that  it  might  not,  O  governor,


be  condemned,  but  have  faith,
the  fear  of  God,  the  knowledge
of  religion,  and  the  love  of
truth.

8  So  that  if  I  only  teach
those  things  which  I  have  re-
ceived by  revelation  from  God,
where  is  my  crime  ?

9  When  the  governor  heard
this,  he  ordered  Paul  to  be  bound,
and  to  be  put  in  prison,  till  he
should  be  more  at  leisure  to  hear
him  more  fully.

10  But  in  the  night,  Thecla
taking  off  her  ear-rings,  gave
them  to  the  turnkey  of  the  pri-
son, who\  then  opened  the  doors
to  her,  and  let  her  in  ;

11  And  when  she  made  a  pre-
sent of  a  silver  looking-glass  to
the  jailor,  was  allowed  to  go
into  the  room  where  Paul  was ;
then  she  sat  down  at  his  feet,
and  heard  from  him  the  great
things  of  God.

12  And  as  she  perceived  Paul,
not  to  be  afraid  of  suffering,  but
that  by  divine  assistance  he  be-
haved himself  with  courage,  her
faith  so  far  increased  that  she
kissed  his  chains.

CHAP.  V.

1  Thecla  sought  and  found  by  her  rela-
tions. 4l  Brought  with  Paul  before
the  governor.  9  Ordered  to  be  burnt,
and  Paul  to  be  whipt.  15  Thecla
miraculously  saved.

AT  length  Thecla  was  missed,
and  sought  for  by  the  family
and  by  Thamyris  in  every  street,
as  though  she  had  been  lost,  but
one  of  the  porter's  fellow-ser-
vants told  them,  that  she  had
gone  out  in  the  night-time.

2  Then  they  examined  the
porter,  and  he  told  them,  that
she  was  gone  to  the  prison  to
the  strange  man.

3  They  went  therefore  accord-
ing to  his  direction,  and  there

103


Thecla  miraculously  PAUL  AND  THECLA.  saved  from  huming.


found  her  ;  and  when  they  came
out,  they  got  a  mob  together,
and  went  and  told  the  governor
all  that  happened.

4  Upon  which  he  ordered
Paul  to  be  brought  before  his
judgment  seat.

5  Thecla  in  the  mean  time
lay  wallowing  on  the  ground  in
the  prison,  in  that  same  place
where  Paul  had  sat  to  teach  her ;
upon  which  the  governor  also
ordered  her  to  be  brought  before
his  judgment-seat ;  which  sum-
mons she  received  with  joy,  and
went.

6  When  Paul  was  brought
thither,  the  mob  with  more  ve-
hemence cried  out.  He  is  a  ma-
gician, let  him  die.

7  Nevertheless  the  governor
attended  with  pleasure  upon
Paul's  discourses  of  the  holy
works  of  Christ;  and,  after  a
council  called,  he  summoned
Thecla,  an;l  said  to  her,  Why
do  you  not,  according  to  the  law
of  the  Iconians,  marry  Thamyris  ?

8  She  stood  still,  with  her
eyes  fixed  upon  Paul ;  and  find-
ing she  made  no  reply,  Theoclia,
her  mother,  cried  out,  saying,
Let  the  unjust  creature  be  burnt ;
let  her  be  burnt  in  the  midst  of
the  theatre,  for  refusing  Thamy-
ris, that  all  women  may  learn
from  her  to  avoid  such  practices.

9  Then  the  governor  was  ex-
ceedingly concerned,  and  ordered
Paul  to  be  whipt  out  of  the  city,
and  Thecla  to  be  burnt.

10  So  the  governor  arose,  and
went  immediately  into  the  thea-
tre; and  all  the  people  went
forth  to  see  the  dismal  sight.

11  But  Thecla,  just  as  a  lamb
in  the  wilderness  looks  every
way  to  see  his  shepherd,  looked
around  for  Paul ;

12  And  as  she  was  looking
upon  the  multitude,  she  saw  the

104


Lord  Jesus  in  the  likeness  of
Paul,  and  said  to  herself,  Paul
is  come  to  see  me  in  my  distressed
circumstances.  And  she  fixed
her  eyes  upon  him;  but  he  in-
stantly ascended  up  to  heaven,
while  she  looked  on  him.

13  Then  the  young  men  and
women  brought  wood  and  straw
for  the  burning  of  Thecla ;  who,
being  brought  naked  to  the
stake,  extorted  tears  from  the
governor,  with  surprise  behold-
ing the  greatness  of  her  beauty.

14  And  when  they  had  placed
the  wood  in  order,  the  people
commanded  her  to  go  upon  it ;
which  she  did,  first  making  the
sign  of  the  cross.

15  Then  the  people  set  fire  to
the  pile ;  though  the  flame  was
exceeding  large,  it  did  not  touch
her,  for  God  took  compassion
on  her,  and  caused  a  great  erup-
tion from  the  earth  beneath,  and
a  cloud  from  above  to  pour  down
great  quantities  of  rain  and  hail ;

16  Insomuch  that  by  the  rup-
ture of  the  earth,  very  many
were  in  great  danger,  and  some
were  killed,  the  fire  was  extin-
guished, and  Thecla  preserved.

CHAP.  VI.

1  Paid  with  Onesiphortis  in  a  cave.  7
Thecla  discovers  Paul ;  12  proffers  to
follow  him:  IS  he  exhorts  her  not  for
fear  of  fornication.

IN  the  mean  time  Paul,  toge-
ther with  Onesiphorus,  his
wife  and  children,  was  keeping
a  fast  in  a  certain  cave,  which
was  in  the  road  from  Iconium  to
Daphne.

2  And  when  they  had  fasted
for  several  days,  the  children
said  to  Paul,  Father,  we  are
hungry,  and  have  not  where-
withal to  buy  bread ;  for  Onesi-
phorus had  left  all  his  substance
to  follow  Paul  with  his  family.


HELL.  [Page  83.

r'AINTED   IN   FRESCO   BY   ANDREA    ORCAGNA    IN  THE    CHURCH    OF   ST.  MARIA    NOVELLO   AT     FLORENCE.


KEY  TO  THE  PLATE  "HELL."


1.  Entrance  to  the  confines  of  Hell.

2.  Charon  in  his  bark.

3.  The  Minotaur  roaring  at  the  approach  of  condemned  souls.

4.  Souls  agitated  by  the  impure  breath  of  evil  spirits.

5.  Cerberus  devouring  the  souls  of  gourmands.

6.  The  avaricious  and  prodigal  condemned  to  carry  burdens.

7.  The  envious  and  angry  cast  into  the  Styx.

8.  Tower  and  wall  of  the  evil  city.

9.  In  this  ditch  are  those  who  have  sinned  against  their  neighbors;   Centaurs

shoot  arrows  at  them.

10.  Those  who  have  sinned  against  themselves  are  here  tormented  by  Harpies.

11.  Rain  of  fire  for  those  who  have  sinned  against  God.

12.  Soul  of  the  tyrant  Gerion  cast  into  the  flames.

13.  Debauchees  and  corruptors  of  youth  flogged  by  devils.

14.  Poisonous  gulf  into  which  flatterers  are  plunged.

15.  Lake  of  fire  in  the  caldrons  into  which  Simonaics  are  cast.
i6.  Sorcerers  and  diviners,  their  faces  turned  backward.

17.  Bog  of  boiling  pitch  for  cheats,  thieves,  and  deceivers.

18.  Hypocrite  crucified.

19.  Perfidious  advisers  plunged  into  a  flaming  ditch.

20.  For  scandalous  persons :  one  holds  his  head  in  his  hand.

21.  Robbers  and  other  criminals  tormented  by  a  centaur  armed  with  serpents,

22.  Alchemists  and  quacks  a  prey  to  leprosy.

23.  Well  of  ice,  for  traitors  and  the  ungrateful.

24.  Pluto  in  the  midst  of  a  glacier  devouring  the  damned.

25.  The  holy  city  of  Jerusalem.


Thecla  visits  Paul,    PAUL  AND  THECLiA.andre»ist8 Alexander.


3  Then  Paul,  taking  off  his
coat,  said  to  the  boy,  Go,  child,
and  buy  bread,  and  bring  it
hither.

4  But  while  the  boy  was  buy-
ing the  bread,  he  saw  his  neigh-
bour Thecla  and  was  surprised,
and  said  to  her,  Thecla,  where
are  you  going  ?

5  She  replied,  I  am  in  pur-
suit of  Paul,  having  been  deli-
vered from  the  flames.

6  The  boy  then  said,  I  will
bring  you  to  him,  for  he  is  under
great  concern  on  your  account,
and  has  been  in  prayer  and
fasting  these  six  days.

7  1  When  Thecla  came  to  the
cave,  she  found  Paul  upon  his
knees  praying  and  saying,  O
holy  Father,  O  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  grant  that  the  fire  may
not  touch  Thecla ;  but  be  her
helper,  for  she  is  thy  servant.

8  Thecla  then  standing  behind
him,  cried  out  in  the  following
words :  O  sovereign  Lord,Creator
of  heaven  and  earth,  the  Father
of  thy  beloved  and  holy  Son,  I
praise  thee  that  thou  hast  pre-
served me  from  the  fire,  to  see
Paul  again.

9  Paul  then  arose,  and  when
he  saw  her,  said,  O  God,  who
searchest  the  heart,  Father  of
my  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  praise
thee  that  thou  hast  answered  my
prayer.

10  ^  And  there  prevailed
among  them  in  the  cave  an  en-
tire affection  to  each  other;
Paul,  Onesiphorus,  and  all  that
were  with  them  being  filled  with

joy-

11  They  had  five  loaves,  some
herbs  and  water,  and  they  so-
laced each  other  in  reflections
upon  the  holy  works  of  Christ.

12  Then  said  Thecla  to  Paul,
If  you  be  pleased  with  it,  I  will
follow  you  whithersoever  you  go.


j  13  He  replied  to  her.  Persons
I  are  now  much  given  to  fornica-
tion, and  you  being  handsome,  I
am  afraid  lest  you  should  meet
with  greater  temptation  than
the  former,  and  should  not  with-
stand, but  be  overcome  by  it.

14  Thecla  replied,  Grant  me
only  the  seal  of  Christ,  and  no
temptation  shall  affect  me.

15  Paul  answered,  Thecla,
wait  with  patience,  and  you
shall  receive  the  gift  of  Christ.

CHAP.  VII.

1  Paul  and  Thecla  go  to  Antioch.  2
Alexander,  a  magistrate,  falls  in  love
with  Thecla:  4  kisses  her  by  force:  5
she  resists  him:  6  is  carried  before
the  governor,  and  condemned  to  be
thrown  to  wild  beasts.

THEN  Paul  sent  back  Onesi-
phorus and  his  family  to
their  own  home,  and  taking
Thecla  along  with  him,  went  for
Antioch ;

2  And  as  soon  as  they  came
into  the  city,  a  certain  Syrian,
named  Alexander,  a  magistrate,
in  the  city,  who  had  done  many
considerable  services  for  the
city  during  his  magistracy,  saw
Thecla  and  fell  in  love  with  her,
and  endeavoured  by  many  rich
presents  to  engage  Paul  in  his
interest.

3  But  Paul  told  him,  I  know
not  the  woman  of  whom  you
speak,  nor  does  she  belong  to  me.

4  But  he  being  a  person  of
great  power  in  Antioch,  seized
her  in  the  street  and  kissed  her ;
which  Thecla  would  not  bear,
but  looking  about  for  Paul,  cried
out  in  a  distressed  loud  tone.
Force  me  not,  who  am  a  stran-
ger"; force  me  not,  who  am  a
servant  of  God ;  I  am  one  of  the
principal  persons  of  Iconium,
and  was  obliged  to  leave  that
city  because  I  would  not  be
married  to  Thamyris.

105


and  is  thrown


PAUL  AND  THECLA.


to  vrild  beasts,


5  Then  she  laid  hold  on  Alex-
ander, tore  his  coat,  and  took
his  crown  off  his  head,  and  made
him  appear  ridiculous  before  all
the  people.

6  But  Alexander,  partly  as
he  loved  her,  and  partly  being
ashamed  of  what  had  been  done,
led  her  to  the  governor,  and
upon  her  confession  of  what  she
had  done,^  he  condemned  her  to
be  thrown  among  the  beasts.

CHAP.  VIII.

2  Thecla  entertained  by  Trifina;  3
brought  out  to  the  wild  beasts;  a  she-
lion  licks  her  feet.  5  Trifina  upon  a
vision  of  her  deceased  daughter,  adopts
Thecla,  11  who  is  taken  to  the  amphi-
theatre again.

WHICH  when  the  people
saw,  they  said :  The  judg-
ments passed  in  this  city  are
unjust.  But  Thecla  desired  the
favour  of  the  governor,  that  her
chastity  might  not  be  attacked,
but  preserved  till  she  should  be
cast  to  the  beasts.

2  The  governor  then  inquired,
Who  would  entertain  her ;  upon
which  a  certain  very  rich  widow,
named  Trifina,  whose  daughter
was  lately  dead,  desired  that  she
might  have  the  keeping  of  her ;
and  she  began  to  treat  her  in
her  house  as  her  own  daughter.

3  At  length  a  day  came,
when  the  beasts  were  to  be
brought  forth  to  be  seen;  and
Thecla  was  brought  to  the  am-
phitheatre, and  put  into  a  den
in  which  was  an  exceeding  fierce
she-lion,  in  the  presence  of  a
multitude  of  spectators.

4  Trifina,  without  any  sur-
prise, accompanied   Thecla,  and


the  she-lion  licked  the  feet  ol
Thecla.  The  title  written  which
I  denotes  her  crime,  was,  Sacri-
lege. Then  the  woman  cried
out,  O  God,  the  judgments  of
this  city  are  unrighteous.

5  After  the  beasts  had  been
shewn,  Trifina  took  Thecla  home
with  her,  and  they  went  to  bed ;
and  behold,  the  daughter  of  Tri-
fina, who  was  dead,  appeared  to
her  mother,  and  said;  Mother,
let  the  young  woman,  Thecla,
be  reputed  by  you  as  your  daugh-
ter in  my  stead ;  and  desire  her
that  she  should  pray  for  me,
that  I  may  be  translated  to  a
state  of  happiness.

6  Upon  which  Trifina,  with  a
mournful  air,  said,  My  daughter
Falconilla  has  appeared  to  me,
and  ordered  me  to  receive  you
in  her  room ;  wherefore  I  desire,
Thecla,  that  you  would  pray  for
my  daughter,  that  she  may  be
translated  into  a  state  of  happi-
ness, and  to  life  eternal.

7  When  Thecla  heard  this,  she
immediately  prayed  to  the  Lord,
and  said :  6  Lord  God  of  heaven
and  earth,  Jesus  Christ,  thou
Son  of  the  Most  High,  grant
that  her  daughter  Falconilla
may  live  forever.  Trifina  hear-
ing this  groaned  again,  and  said:
O  unrighteous  judgments!  O
unreasonable  wickedness !  that
such  a  creature  should  (again)
be  cast  to  the  beasts !

8  ^  On  the  morrow,  at  break
of  day,  Alexander  came  to  Tri-
fina's  house,  and  said :  The
governor  and  the  people  are
waiting ;  bring  the  criminal
forth.

9  But  Trifina  ran  in  so  violent-


'  There  being  something  wanting  here  in  the  old  Greek  MS.,  it  is  supplied
out  of  the  old  Latin  version,  which  is  in  the  Bodleian  Library,  Cod.  Digb.  39,
r;ither  than  out  of  Simeon  Metaphrastes,  a  writer  of  the  eleventh  century.

106


The  beasts  refusing  PAUL  AND  THECLA.       to  destroy  Thecla.


ly  upon  him,  that  he  was  aifright-
ed,  and  ran  away.  Trifina  was  one
of  the  royal  family ;  and  she  thus
expressed  her  sorrow,  and  said ;
Alas !  I  have  trouble  in  my  house
on  two  accounts,  and  there  is  no
one  who  will  relieve  me,  either
under  the  loss  of  my  daughter,  or
my  being  unable  to  save  Thecla.
But  now,  O  Lord  God,  be  thou
the  helper  of  Thecla  thy  servant.

10  While  she  was  thus  engag-
ed, the  governor  sent  one  of  his
own  officers  to  bring  Thecla.
Trifina  took  her  by  the  hand,
and,  going  with  her,  said :  I  went
with  Falconilla  to  her  grave,  and
now  must  go  with  Thecla  to  the

11  When  Thecla  heard  this,
she  weeping  prayed,  and  said :  O
Lord  God,  whom  I  have  made  my
confidence  and  refuge,  reward
Trifina  for  her  compassion  to  me,
and  preserving  my  chastity.

12  Upon  this  there  was  a  great
noise  in  the  amphitheatre;  the
beasts  roared,  and  the  people
cried  out,  Bring  in  the  criminal.

13  But  the  woman  cried  out,
and  said :  Let  the  whole  city  suf-
fer for  such  crimes ;  and  order  all
of  us,  O  governor,  to  the  same
punishment.  O  unjust  judgment!

0  cruel  sight !

14  Others  said,  Let  the  whole
city  be  destroyed  for  this  vile  ac-
tion. Kill  us  all,  O  governor.  O
cruel  sight !  O  unrighteous  judg-
ment.

CHAP.  IX.

1  Thecla  thrown  naked  to  the  wild  beasts  ;
2  they  all  refuse  to  attack  her ;  8
throws  herself  into  a  'pit  of  water.  10
other  wild  beasts  refuse  her.  11  Tied
to  wild  bulls.  13  Miraculously  saved.
21  Released.  24  Entertained  by  Tri.
fina.

THEN  Thecla  was  taken  but
of  the  hand  of  Trifina,  strip
ped  naked,  had  a  girdle  put  on.


and  thrown  into  the  place  ap-
pointed for  fighting  with  the
beasts:  and  the  lions  and  the
bears  were  let  loose  upon  her.

2  But  a  she-lion,  which  was  of
all  the  most  fierce,  ran  to  Thecla;.
and  fell  down  at  her  feet.  Upon
which  the  multitude  of  women
shouted  aloud.

3  Then  a  she-bear  ran  fiercely
towards  her ;  but  the  she-lion  met
the  bear,  and  tore  it  to  pieces.

4  Again,  a  he-lion,  who  had
been  wont  to  devour  men,  and
which  belonged  to  Alexander,
ran  towards  her;  but  the  she-
lion  encountered  the  he-lion,  and
they  killed  each  other.

5  Then  the  women  were  under
a  greater  concern,  because  the
she-lion,  which  had  helped  The-
cla, was  dead.

6  Afterwards  they  brought  out
many  other  wild  beasts ;  but
Thecla  stood  with  her  hands
stretched  towards  heaven,  and
prayed ;  and  when  she  had  done
praying,  she  turned  about,  and
saw  a  pit  of  water,  and  said,  Now
it  is  a  proper  time  for  me  to  be
baptized.

7  Accordingly  she  threw  her-
self into  the  water,  and  said,  In
thy  name,  0  my  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  I  am  this  last  day  baptiz-
ed. The  women  and  the  people
seeing  this,  cried  out,  and  said.
Do  not  throw  yourself  into  the
water.  And  the  governor  him-
self cried  out,  to  think  that  the
fish  (sea-calves)  were  like  to  de-
vour so  much  beauty.

8  "I  Notwithstanding  all  this,
Thecla  threw  herself  into  the
water,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ.

9  But  the  fish  (sea-calves,)
when  they  saw  the  lighting  and
fire,  were  killed,  and  swam  dead
upon  the  surface  of  the  water,

I  and  a  cloud  of  fire  surrounded
107


She  is  saved


PAUL  AND  THECLA.


and  released.


Thecla,  so  that  as  the  beasts  could  |
not  come  near  her,  so  the  people
could  not  see  her  nakedness.

10  Yet  they  turned  other  wild
beasts  upon  her ;  upon  which
they  made  a  very  mournful  out-
cry ;  and  some  of  thetn  scattered
spikenard,  others  cassia,  others
amomus  (a  sort  of  spikenard,  or
the  herb  of  Jerusalem,  or  ladies-
rose)  others  ointment ;  so  that
the  quantity  of  ointment  was
large,  in  proportion  to  the  num-
ber of  people ;  and  upon  this  all
the  beasts  lay  as  though  they
had  been  fast  asleep,  and  did  not
touch  Thecla.

11  Whereupon  Alexander  said
to  the  Governor,  I  have  some
very  terrible  bulls ;  let  us  bind
her  to  them.  To  which  the  gover-
nor, with  concern,  replied.  You
may  do  what  you  think  fit.

12  Then  they  put  a  cord  round
Thecla's  waist,  which  bound  also
her  feet,  and  with  it  tied  her  to
the  bulls,  to  whose  privy -parts
they  applied  red-hot  irons,  that
so  they  being  the  more  torment-
ed, might  more  violently  drag
Thecla  about,  till  they  had  kill-
ed her.

leS  The  bulls  accordingly  tore
about,  making  a  most  hideous
noi§e ;  but  the  flame  which  was
about  Thecla,  burnt  off  the  cords
which  were  fastened  to  the  mem-
bers of  the  bulls,  and  she  stood
in  the  middle  of  the  stage,  as  un-
concerned as  if  she  had  not  been
bound.

14  But  in  the  mean  time  Tri-
fina,  who  sat  upon  one  of  the
benches,  fainted  away  and  died ;
upon  which  the  whole  city  was
under  a  very  great  concern.

15  And  Alexander  himself  was
afraid,  and  desired  the  governor,
saying :  I  entreat  you,  take  com-
passion on  me  and  the  city,  and
release    this    woman,   who   has

108


fought  with  the  beasts ;  lest,  both
you  and  I,  and  the  whole  city
be  destroyed :

16  For  if  Caesar  should  have
any  account  of  what  has  passed
now,  he  will  certainly  immediate-
ly destroy  the  ci'y,  because  Tri-
fina,  a  person  of  royal  extract,
and  a  relation  of  his,  is  dead  upon
her  seat.

17  Upon  this  the  governor
called  Thecla  from  among  the
beasts  to  him,  and  said  to  her.
Who  art  thou  ?  and  what  are  thy
circumstances,  that  not  one  of
the  beasts  will  touch  thee  ?

18  Thecla  replied  to  him ;  I
am  a  servant  of  the  living  God ;
and  as  to  my  state,  I  am  a  be-
liever on  Jc!>us  Christ  his  Son,
in  whom  God  is  well  pleased;
find  for  that  reason  none  of  the
beasts  could  touch  me.

19  He  alone  is  the  way  to  eter-
nal salvation,  and  the  foundation
of  eternal  life.  He  is  a  refuge  to
those  who  are  in  distress ;  a  sup-
port to  the  afflicted,  hope  ar  d  de-
fence to  these  who  are  hopeless ;
and,  in  a  word,  all  those  who  do
not  believe  on  him,  shall  not  live,
but  suffer  eternal  death.

20  *[!  When  the  governor  heard
these  things,  he  ordered  her
clothes  to  be  brought,  and  said
to  her  put  on  your  clothes.

21  Thecla  leplied :  May  that
God  who  clothed  me  when  I  was
naked  among  the  beasts,  in  the
day  of  judgment  clothe  your
soul  with  the  robe  of  salvation.
Then  she  took  her  clothes,  and
put  them  on  ;  and  the  governor
immediately  published  an  order

i  in  these  words  ;  I  release  to  you

i  Thecla  the  servant  of  God.

I      22  Upon   which    the   women

'  cried  out  together   with  a  loud

voice,  and  with  one  accord  gave

praise  unto  God,  and  said ;  There

is  but  one  God,  who  is  the  God


Thecla  \>isits  Paul     PAUL  AND  THECLA.        and  her  mother.


of  Thecla;    the   one   God   who
hath  delivered  Thecla.

23  So  loud  were  their  voices
that  the  whole  city  seemed  to  be
shaken ;  and  Trifina  herself
heard  the  glad  tidings,  and
arose  again,  and  ran  with  the
multitude  to  meet  Thecla;  and
embracing  her,  said :  Now  I  be-
lieve there  shall  be  a  resurrec-
tion of  the  dead;  now  I  am
persuaded  that  my  daughter  is
alive.  Come  therefore  home  with
me,  my  daughter  Thecla,  and  I
will  make  over  all  that  I  have
to  you.

24  So  Thecla  went  with  Tri-
fina, and  was  entertained  there
a  few  days,  teaching  her  the
word  of  the  Lord,  whereby  many
young  women  were  converted ;
and  there  was  great  joy  in  the
family  of  Trifina.

25  But  Thecla  longed  to  see
Paul,  and  inquired  and  sent
everywhere  to  find  him;  and
when  at  length  she  was  informed
that  he  was  at  Myra,  in  Lycia,
she  took  with  her  many  young
men  and  women ;  and  putting
on  a  girdle,  and  dressing  herself
in  the  habit  of  a  man,  she  went
to  him  to  Myra  in  Lycia,  and
there  found  Paul  preaching  the
word  of  God  ;  and  she  stood  by
him  among  the  throng.

CHAP.  X.

1  Thecla  visits  Paul.  6  Visits  Onesi-
phonis.  8  Visits  Jier  mother.  9  Who
repulses  her.  12  Is  tempted  by  the
devil.      Works  miracles.

BUT  it  was  no  small  surprise
to  Paul  when  he  saw  her
and  the  people  with  her  ;  for  he
imagined  some  fresh  trial  was
comuig  upon  them  ;

2  Which  when  Thecla  per-
ceived, she  said  to  him :  I  have
been  baptized,  O  Paul;  for  he
who  assists  you  in  preaching,
has  assisted  me  to  baptize.


3  Then  Paul  took  her,  and
led  her  to  the  house  of  Hermes  ;
and  Thecla  related  to  Paul  all
that  had  befallen  her  in  Antiocli,
insomuch  that  Paul  exceedingly
wondered,  and  all  who  heard
were  confirmed  in  the  faith,  and
prayed  for  Trifina's  happiness.

4  Then  Thecla  arose,  and  said
to  Paul,  I  am  going  to  Iconium.
Paul  replied  to  her:  Go,  and
teach  the  word  of  the  Lord.

5  But  Trifina  had  sent  large
sums  of  money  to  Paul,  and  also
clothing  by  the  hands  of  Thecla,
for  the  relief  of  the  poor.

6  "J  So  Thecla  went  to  Ico-
nium. And  when  she  came  to
the  house  of  Onesiphorus,  she
fell  down  upon  the  floor  where
Paul  had  sat  and  preached,  and,
mixing  tears  with  her  prayers,
she  praised  and  glorified  God  in
the  following  words :

7  O  Lord  the  God  of  this
house,  in  which  I  was  first  en-
lightened by  thee ;  O  Jesus,  son
of  the  living  God,  who  wast  my
helper  before  the  governor,  my
helper  in  the  fire,  and  my  helper
among  the  beasts;  thou  alone
art  God  forever  and  ever.  Amen.

8  T  Thecla  now  (on  her  re-
turn) found  Thamyris  dead,  but
her  mother  living.  So  calling
her  mother,  she  said  to  her :
Theoclia,  my  mother,  is  it  possi-
ble for  you  to  be  brought  to  a
belief,  that  there  is  but  one  Lord
God,  who  dwells  in  the  heavens  ?
If  you  desire  great  riches,  God
will  give  them  to  you  by  me ;  if
you  want  your  daughter  again,
here  I  am.

9  These  and  many  other  things
she  represented  to  her  mother,
(endeavouring)  to  persuade  her
(to  her  own  opinion).  But  her
mother  Theoclia  gave  no  credit
to  the  things  which  were  said  by
the  martyr  Thecla.

109


Works  miracles.         PAUL  AND  THECLA.    Escapes  defilement


10  So  that  Thecla  perceiving
she  discoursed  to  no  purpose,
signing  her  whole  body  with  the
sign  (of  the  cross),  left  the  house
and  went  to  Daphine ;  and  when
she  came  there,  she  went  to  the
cave,  where  she  had  found  Paul
with  Onesiphorus,  and  fell  down
on  the  ground;  and  wept  be-
fore God.

11  When  she  departed  thence,
she  went  to  Seleucia,  and  en-
lightened many  in  the  knowledge
of  Christ.

12  ^  And  a  bright  cloud  con-
ducted her  in  her  journey.

13  And  after  she  had  arrived
at  Seleucia  she  went  to  a  place
out  of  the  city,  about  the  dis-
tance of  a  furlong,  being  afraid
of  the  inhabitants,  because  they
were  worshippers  of  idols.

14  And  she  was  led  (by  the
eloud)  into  a  mountain  called
Calamon,  or  Rodeon.  There  she
abode  many  years,  and  under-
went a  great  many  grievous
temptations  of  the  devil,  which
she  bore  in  a  becoming  manner,
by  the  assistance  which  she  had
from  Christ.

15  At  length  certain  gentle-
women hearing  of  the  virgin
Thecla,  went  to  her,  and  were
instructed  by  her  in  the  oracles
of  God,  and  many  of  them  aban-
doned this  world,  and  led  a  mo-
nastic life  with  her.

]  6  Hereby  a  good  report  was
spread  everywhere  of  Thecla,
and  she  wrought  several  (mira-
culous) cures,  so  that  all  the  city
and  adjacent  countries  brought
their  sick  to  that  mountain,  and
before  they  came  as  far  as  the
door  of  the  cave,  they  were  in-
stantly cured  of  whatsoever  dis-
temper they  had.

17  The  unclean  spirits  were

cast   out,   making   a   noise;  all

received  their  sick  made  whole,  I

110


and  glorified  God,  who  had  be-
stowed such  power  on  the  virgin
Thecla ;

18  Insomuch  that  the  physi-
cians of  Seleucia  were  now  of
no  more  account,  and  lost  all
the  profit  of  their  trade,  because
no  ^  one  regarded  them  ;  upon
which  they  were  filled  with  envy,
and  began  to  contrive  what
methods  to  take  with  this  ser-
vant of  Christ.

CHAP.  XI.

1  Is  attempted  to  be  ravished,  12  escapes
by  a  rock  opening,  17  and  closing
miraculously.

THE  devil  then  suggested  bad
advice  to  their  minds  ;  and
being  on  a  certain  day  met  to-
gether to  consult,  they  reasoned
among  each  other  thus:  The
virgin  is  a  priestess  of  the  great
goddess  Diana,  and  whatsoever
she  requests  from  her,  is  granted,
because  she  is  a  virgin,  and  so  is
beloved  by  all  the  gods.

2  Now  then  let  us  procure
some  rakish  fellows,  and  after
we  have  made  them  sufficiently
drunk,  and  given  them  a  good
sum  of  money,  let  us  order  them
to  go  and  debauch  this  virgin,
promising  them,  if  they  do  it,  a
larger  reward.

3  (For  they  thus  concluded
among  themselves,  that  if  they
be  able  to  debauch  her,  the  gods
will  no  more  regard  her,  nor
Diana  cure  the  sick  for  her.)

4  They  proceeded  according
to  this  resolution,  and  the  fellows
went  to  the  mountain,  and  as
fierce  as  lions  to  the  cave,
knocking  at  the  door.

5  The  holy  martyr  Thecla,
relying  upon  the  God  in  whom
she  believed,  opened  the  door,
although  she  was  before  apprized
of  their  design,  and  said  to  them,


PAUL  AND  THECLA.


Young  men,  what  is  your  busi-
ness ?

6  They  replied,  Is  there  any
one  within,  whose  name  is  The-
cla?  She  answered.  What  would
you  have  with  her  ?  They  said,
We  have  a  mind  to  lie  with  her.

7  The  blessed  Thecla  an-
swered: Though  I  am  a  mean
old  woman,  I  am  the  servant  of
ray  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and
though  you  have  a  vile  design
against  me,  ye  shall  not  be  able
to  accomplish  it.  They  replied  :
It  is  impossible  but  we  must  be
able  to  do  with  you  what  we
have  a  mind.

8  And  while  they  were  saying
this,  they  laid  hold  on  her  by
main  force,  and  would  have
ravished  her.  Then  she  with  the
(greatest)  mildness  said  to  them:
Young  men  have  patience,  and
see  the  glory  of  the  Lord.

9  And  while  they  held  her,
she  looked  up  to  heaven  and
said ;  O  God  most  reverend,  to
whom  none  can  be  likened  ;  who
makest  thyself  glorious  over
thine  enemies ;  who  didst  deliver
me  from  the  fire,  and  didst  not
give  me  up  to  Thamyris,  didst
not  give  me  up  to  Alexander ;
who  deliveredst  me  from  the
wild  beasts  ;  who  didst  preserve
me  in  the  deep  waters ;  who  hast
everywhere  been  my  helper,
and  hast  glorified  thy  name  in
me ;

10  Now  also  deliver  me  from
the  hands  of  these  wicked  and
unreasonable  men,  nor  suffer
them  to  debauch  my  chastity
which  I  have  hitherto  preserved
for  thy  honour  ;  for  I  love  thee
and  long  for  thee,  and  worship
thee,  0  Father,  Son,  and  Holy
Ghost,  for  evermore.     Amen.

11  Then  came   a  voice  from


heaven,  saying.  Fear  not,  The-
cla, my  faithful  servant,  for  I
am  with  thee.  Look  and  see  the
place  which  is  opened  for  thee :
there  thy  eternal  abode  shall  be ;
there  thou  shalt  receive  the
beatific  vision.

12  The  blessed  Thecla  observ-
ing, saw  the  rock  opened  to  as
large  a  degree  as  that  a  man
might  enter  in;  she  did  as  she
was  commanded,  bravely  fled
from  the  vile  crew,  and  went
into  the  rock,  which  instantly  so
closed,  that  there  was  not  any
crack  visible  where  it  had  open-
ed.

13  The  men  stood  perfectly
astonished  at  so  prodigious  a
miracle,  and  had  no  power  to
detain  the  servant  of  God  ;  but
only,  catching  hold  of  her  veil,
or  hood,  they  tore  off  a  piece  of
it;

14  And  even  that  was  by  the
permission  of  God,  for  the  con-
firmation of  their  faith  who
should  come  to  see  this  venerable
place,  and  to  convey  blessings  to
those  in  succeeding  ages,  who
should  believe  on  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ  from  a  pure  heart.

15  Thus  suffered  that  first
martyr  and  apostle  of  God,  and
virgin,  Thecla ;  who  came  from
Iconium  at  eighteen  years  of  age;
afterwards,  partly  in  journeys
and  travels,  and  partly  in  a  mo-
nastic life  in  the  cave,  she  lived
seventy-two  years;  so  that  she
was  ninety  years  old  when  the
Lord  translated  her.

16  Thus  ends  her  life.

17  The  day  which  is  kept
sacred  to  her  memory,  is  the
twenty-fourth  of  September,  to
the  glory  of  the  Father,  and  the
Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  now
and  for  evermore.    Amen.


Ill


The  FIRST  EPISTLE  of  CLEMENT  to  the  CORINTHIANS.

Clement  was  a  disciple  of  Peter,  and  afterwards  Bishop  of  Kome.  Clemens
Alexandrinus  calls  him  an  apostle.  Jerome  says  he  was  an  apostolical
man,  and  Rufinus  that  he  was  almost  an  apostle.  Eusebius  calls  this
the  wonderful  Epistle  of  St.  Clement,  and  says  that  it  was  publicly  read
in  the  assemblies  of  the  primitive  church.  It  is  included  in  one  of  the
ancient  collections  of  the  Canon  Scripture.  Its  genuineness  has  been
much  questioned,  particularly  by  Pholius,  patriarch  of  Constantinople,
in  the  ninth  century,  who  objects  that  Clement  speaks  of  worlds  beyond
the  ocean  ;  that  he  has  not  written  worthily  of  the  divinity  of  Christ ;
and  that  to  prove  the  possibility  of  a  future  resurrection,  he  introduce^
the  fabulous  story  of  the  phoenix's  revival  from  its  own  ashes.  To  the
latter  objection,  Archbishop  Wake  replies  that  the  generality  of  the
ancient  Fathers  have  made  use  of  the  same  instance  in  proof  of  the  same
point;  and  asks  if  St.  Clement  really  believed  that  there  was  such  a  bird,
and  that  it  did  revive  out  of  the  cinders  of  the  body  after  burning,  where
was  the  great  harm  either  in  giving  credit  to  such  a  wonder,  or,  believing
it,  to  make  such  a  use  as  he  here  does  of  it  ?  —  The  present  is  the  Arch-
bishop's translation  from  the  ancient  Greek  copy  of  the  Epistle,  which
is  at  the  end  of  the  celebrated  Alexandrine  MS.  of  the  Septuagint  and
New  Testament,  presented  by  Cyril,  patriarch  of  Alexandria,  to  King
Charles  the  First,  now  in  the  British  Museum.  The  Archbishop,  in
prefacing  his  translation,  esteems  it  a  great  blessing  that  this  "Epistle"
was  at  last  so  happily  found  out  for  the  increase  and  confirmation  both
of  our  faith  and  our  charity.


CHAP.  I.

He  commends  them  for  their  excellent
order  and  piety  in  Christ,  before  their
schism  broke  out.

THE  Church  of  God  which  4s
at  Rome,  to  the  Church  of
God  which  is  at  Corinth,  ^ elect,
sanctified  ^by  the  will  of  God,
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord:
grace  and  peace  from  the  Al-
mighty God,  by  Jesus  Christ  be
multiplied  unto  you.*

2  ^  Brethren,  the  ^sudden
and  unexpected  dangers  and
calamities  that  have  fallen  upon
us,  have,  we  fear,  made  us  the
more  slow  in  our  consideration
of  those  things  which  you  inquir-
ed of  us :


3  ^As  also  of  that  wicked  and
detestable  sedition,  so  ^  unbecom-
ing the  elect  of  God,  which  a
few  heady  and  self-willed  men
have  fomented  to  such  a  degree
of  madness,  that  your  venerable
and  renowned  name,  so  worthy
of  all  men  to  be  beloved,  i&
greatly  blasphemed  thereby.

4  For  who  that  has  ^ever  been
among  you  has  not  experimented
the  firmness  of  your  faith,  ^and
its  fruitfulness  in  all  good  works ;
and  admired  the  temper  and
moderation  of  your  religion  in
Christ ;  and  published  abroad  the
magnificence  of  your  hospitality ;
and  thought  you  happy  in  your
perfect  and  certain  knowledge
of  the  Gospel  ?


^  Sojoumeth.     ^  Called.    See  Hammond  on  Matt.  xx.    '  Gr.  in.    *  See  Bp.
Pearson's  note  on  this  place.      Ed.  Coloraesii.  p.  2.      ^  Ibid.      *  And.     ''  Gr.
Strange  to.    ^  Gr.  Lodged  as  a  stranger.    ^  Adorned  with  all  manner  of  virtues.
112


[Page  64.


CHRIST'S  ENTRY  INTO  JERUSALEM,  AND  CHRIST  BEFORE  PILATE.  [Page  67.

FROM    INTAGLIOS   IN   A    BOX    OF   ROCK    CRYSTAL,    BY   A    EARLY  VENETIAN    ARTIST.


How  the  divisions


I.  CLEMENT.  in  the  church  began.


5  For  ye  did  all  things  with-
out respect  of  persons  and  walk-
ed ^according  to  the  laws  of
God ;  being  subject  to  those  who
liad  the  rule  over  you,  and
giving  the  honour  that  was  fit-
ting to  the  ^  aged  among  you.

6  Ye  commanded  the  young
men  to  think  those  things  that
were  modest  and  grave.

7  The  women  ye  exhorted  to
do  all  things  with  an  unblameable
and  seemly,  and  pure  conscience ;
loving  their  own  husbands,  as
was  fitting :  and  that  keeping
themselves  within  the  ^bounds  of
a  due  obedience,  they  should*
order  their  houses  gravely,  with
all  ^discretion.

8  /  Ye  were  all  of  you  humble
minded,  not  ^boasting  of  any
thing:  desiring  rather  to  be  sub-
ject than  to  govern;  to  ^give
than  to  receive ;  being  *  content
with  the  portion  God  hath  dis-
pensed to  you ;

9  And  hearkening  diligently
to  his  word,  ye  ^'^  were  enlarged
in  your  bowels,  having  his "
suffering  always  before  your
eyes.

10  Thus  a  firm,  and  ^  blessed
and  profitable  peace  was  given
unto  you ;  and  an  unsatiable
desire  of  doing  good;  and  a
plentiful  effusion  of  the  Holy
Ghost  was  upon  all  of  you.

11  And  being  full  of  ^^  good
designs,  ye  did  with  ^*  great
readiness  of  mind,  and  with  a
religious  confidence  stretch  forth
your  hands  to  God  Almighty;
beseeching  him  to  be   merciful


unto  you,  if  in  any  thing  ye  had
unwillingly  sinned  against  him.

12  Ye  contended  day  and
night  for  the  whole  brotherhood ;
that  ^^with  compassion  and  a
good  conscience,  the  number  of
his  elect  might  be  saved.

13  Ye  were  sincere,  and  with-
out offence  towards  each  other  ;
not  mindful  of  injuries  ;  all  se-
dition and  schism  was  an  abom-
ination unto  you.

14  Ye  bewailed  every  one  his
neighbour's  sins,  esteeming  their
defects  your  own.

15  Ye  ^^  were  kind  one  to  ano-
ther without  grudging ;  being
ready  to  every  good  work.  And
being  adorned  with  a  conversa-
tion altogether  virtuous  and  reli-
gious, ye  did  all  things  in  the
fear  of  God ;  whose  "command-
ments were  written  upon  the
tables  of  your  heart.

CHAP.  II.

How  their  divisions  began.

ALL  honour  and  enlargement
was  given  unto  you ;  and
so  was  fulfilled  that  which  is
written,  ^^my  beloved  did  eat  and
drink,  he  was  enlarged  and
waxed  fat,  and  he  kicked.

2  From  hence  came  emula-
tion, and  envy,  and  strife,  and
sedition ;  persecution  and  "dis-
order, war  and  captivity.

3  So  they  who  were  of  no
renown,  lifted  up  themselves
against  the  honourable  ;  those  of
no  reputation,  against  those  who
were  in  respect;  the  foolish
against  the  wise ;  the  young  men  ^
against  the  aged.  *


^  In.     2  Presbyters.      '  Canon,  nile.      *  Themselves  do  their  own  bu4ne?s.
Vid.  Not.  Junii  in  loe.      ^  Temperance,  sobriety.      ^  1  Pet.  v.  6.       '  Proud.


'Acts,  XX.  35.


n  Tim.  vi.


'Embraced   it  in  your  very  bowels.


"7ra%za7a.  See  Dr.  Grabe's  Addit.  to  Bp.  Ball's  Def.  fid.  Nic  p.  60,  61.
'^Gr.  li-Kapa.  ^^Holy  counsel,  or  purpose,  or  \\ill.  "Gr.  good.  ^5\\ritii
mercy  and  conscience.  ^^  Ye  were  without  repentance  in  all  well-doing.
Ti'us  iii.  1.  ^'' Prov.  vii.  3.  ^^  Deut.  xxxii.  15.  ^^  Confusion,  tumults,  &c.
«  113


Envy  and  emulation  I.  CLEMENT.  the  original  of  strife.


4  Therefore  righteousness  and
peace  are  departed  from  you,
because  every  one  hath  forsaken
the  fear  of  God ;  and  is  grown
blind  in  his  faith ;  nor  walketh
by  the  rule  of  God's  command-
ments nor  liveth  as  is  fitting  in
Christ :

5  But  every  one  ^  follows  his
own  wicked  lusts :  having  taken
up  an  unjust  and  wicked  envy,
by  which  death  first  entered  into
the  world.

CHAP.  III.

Envy  and  emulation  the  original  of  all
strife  and  disorder.  Examples  of  the
mischiefs  they  have  occasioned.

1  OR  thus  it  is  written,  ^  And
in  process  of  time  it  came

to  pass  that  Cain  brought  of  the
fruit  of  the  ground  an  oficring
unto  the  Lord.  And  Abel,  he
also  brought  of  the  firstlings  of
his  flock,  and  of  the  fat  thereof:

2  And  the  Lord  had  respect
unto  Abel,  and  to  his  offering.
But  unto  Cain  and  unto  his  of-
fering he  had  not  respect.  And
Cain  was  very  sorrowful,  and  his
countenance  fell.

3  And  the  Lord  said  unto
Cain,  Why  art  thou  sorrowful  ?
And  why  is  thy  countenance
fallen?  ^If  thou  shalt  offer
aright,  but  not  divide  aright,
liast  thou  not  sinned  ?  Hold  thy
peace :  unto  thee  shall  be  his
"*  desire,  and  thou  shalt  rule  over
him.

4  And  Cain  said  unto  Abel
his  brother,  Let  us  go  down  into
the  field.  And  it  came  to  pass,
as  they  were  in  the  field,  that


Cain   rose  up  against  Abel  his
brother,  and  slew  him.

5  Ye  see,  brethren,  how  envy
and  emulation  wrought  ^thc
death  of  a  brother.  For  ^this
our  father  ^  Jacob  fled  from  the
face  of  his  brother  Esau.

6  It  was  this  that  caused
^Joseph  to  be  persecuted  even
unto  death,  and  to  come  into
bondage.  Envy  forced  'Moses
to  flee  from  the  face  of  Pharaoh
king  of  Egypt,  when  he  heard
his  own  countrymen  ask  him,
^°  Who  made  thee  a  Judge,  and  a
ruler  over  us  ?  Wilt  thou  kill
me  as  thou  didst  the  Egyptian
yesterday  ?

FOR  thus  it  is  written,  2  And   ^7  Through  envy  Aaron  and
in  process  of  time  it  came   Miriam  were    ^shut   out  of  the

camp,  irom  the  rest  oi  the  con-
gregation seven  days.

8  ^^  Emulation  ^^  sent  Dathan
and  Abiram  quick  into  the
"  grave  because  they  raised  up  a
sedition  against  Moses  the  ser-
vant of  God.

9  For  this  David  ^^  was  not
only  hated  of  strangers,  but  was
persecuted  even  by  Saul  the
king  of  Israel.

10  But  ^^not  to  insist  upon
antient  examples,  let  us  come
to  those  ^'worthies  that  have  been
nearest  to  us;  and  take  the
brave  examples  of  our  own  age.

11  Through  zeal  and  envy,
^®  the  most  faithful  and  righteous
^'  pillars  of  the  church  have  been
persecuted  even  to  the  most
grievous  deaths.

12  Let  us  set  before  our  eyes
the  holy  Apostles ;  Peter  by  un-
just envy  underwent  not  one  or

— ~"  ^  i4i  yp^  ^

^Walketh  after.  'Gen.  iv.  3,  &c.  'This  is  according  to  the  lxx.
*'A7rocrrpo^7,  conversion.  ^Fratricide.  ^Envy.  '^ Gen.  xxviii.  'Gen.  xxxvi\
*  Exodus  ii.  15.  ^"Exod.  ii.  14.  ^^  Made  to  lodge  out.  ^^  Num.  xii.  14,  15.
^'  Brought.  ^*  Hades.  ^^  Had,  or  underwent  the  hatred,  not  only,  Ac.
**  To  cease  from.  ^'^  Combatants,  wrestlers.  ^^  The  faithful  and  most  righteous.
"Good.

114


He  exhorts  them  to


I.  CLEMENT.


live  by  the  rules.


two,  but  many  ^  sufferings ;  ^  till
at  last  being  martyred,  he  went
to  the  place  of  glory  that  was
due  unto  him.

13  ^  For  the  same  cause  did
Paul  in  like  manner  receive  the
reward  of  his  patience.  Seven
times  *  he  was  in  bonds  ;  he  was
whipped,was  stoned ;  he  preached
both  in  the  East  and  in  the
West ;  *  leaving  behind  him  the
glorious  report  of  his  faith  :

14  And  so  having  taught  the
whole  world  righteousness,  and
for  that  end  travelled  even  to  the
utmost  bounds  of  the  West ;  he
at  last  suffered  martyrdom  ^  by
the  command  of  the  governors,

15  And  departed  out  of  the
world,  and  went  unto  his  holy
place ;  being  become  a  most  emi-
nent pattern  of  patience  unto
all  ages.

16  To  these  ^Holy  Apostles
were  joined  a  very  great  number
of  others,  who  having  through
envy  undergone  in  like  manner
many  pains  and  torments,  have
®  left  a  glorious  example  to  us.

17  For  'this  not  only  men
but  women  have  been  perse-
cuted :  ^°  and  having  suffered
very  grievous  and  ^^  cruel  pun-
ishments, have  finished  the
course  of  their  faith  with  firm-
ness ;  and  though  weak  in  body,
yet  received  a  glorious  reward.

18  "This  has  alienated  the
minds  even  of  women  from  their
husbands ;  and  changed  what
was  once  said  by  our  father
Adam ;  ^'  This  is  now  bone  of
my  bone,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh.


19  In  a  word,  envy  and  strife,
have  overturned  "whole  cities,
and  rooted  out  great  nations  from
off  the  earth.


CHAP.  IV.

1  He  exhorts  them  to  live  by  the  rules,
and  repent  of  their  divisions,  and
they  shall  be  forgiven.

THESE  things,  beloved,  we
^^  write  unto  you,  not  only
^^  for  your  instruction,  but  also
for  our  own  remembrance.

2  For  we  are  all  in  the  same
"  lists,  and  the  same  combat  is
^^  prepared  for  us  all.

3  Wherefore  let  us  lay  aside
all  vain  and  empty  cares;  and
let  us  come  up  to  the  glorious
and  venerable  rule  of  our  holy
calling.

4  ^''Let  us  consider  what  is
good,  and  acceptable  and  well-
pleasing  in  the  sight  of  him  that
made  us.

5  Let  us  look  steadfastly  to
the  blood  of  Christ,  and  see  how
precious  his  blood  is  in  the  sight
of  God:  which  being  shed  for
our  salvation,^'^  has  obtained  the
grace  of  repentance  for  all  the
world.

6  Let  us  "  search  into  all  the
ages  that  have  gone  before  us ;
and  let  us  learn  that  our  Lord
has  "  in  every  one  of  them  still
given  place  for  repentance  to  all
such  as  would  ^^  turn  to  him.

7  '*  Noah  preached  repentance ;
and  as  many  as  hearkened  to  him
were  saved.    '^^  Jonah  denounced


^  Labours,  '  And  so.  '  By  envy.  *  Having  borne  seven  times  bonds,  &c.
5  He  received  the,  &c.  ^  Vid.  Pearson  de  Success,  c  viii.  ^  9.  '  Men  who
have  lived  godly,  is  gathered  together.  ^  Become  an  excellent  example
among  us.  ^  Envy.  ^^  The  names  of  Danae  and  Dirce  I  omit. — See  Junius
Annot.  in  loc.  ^^  Cursed  afflictions  or  torments.  ^^  Envy  or  emulation.
^^Gen.  ii.  23.  ^^  Great.  ^^End.  ^^  Instructing  you,  but  also  remembering,
&c.  ^'' Place  of  encounter.  ^*  Imposed  upon  us  all.  ^'  1  Tim.  v.  4.  ^^  Afforded
or  given  to.  *^  Look  diligently  to.  ^^  From  age  to  age.  ^^  Be  turned.  **  2
Peter  ii.  5 ;  Genesis  vii.     ^^  John  iii.

115


He  sets  before  them  the     I.  CLEMENT,         examples  of  holy  men.


destruction    against    the    Nine-
vites :

8  Howbeit  they  repenting  of
their  sins,  appeased  God  by  their
prayers :  and  ^  were  saved,
though  they  were  strangers  to
the  covenant  of  God.

9  ^  Hence  we  find  how  all
the  ministers  of  the  grace  of  God
have  spoken  by  the  Holy  Spirit
of  repentance.  And  even  the
Lord  of  all  has  himself  declared
with  an  oath  concerning  it ;

10  ^As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,
I  desire  not  the  death  of  a  sin-
ner, *  but  that  he  should  repent.
Adding  farther  this  good  sen-
tence, saying :  °  Turn  from  your
iniquity,  O  house  of  Israel.

11  ^8ay  unto  the  children  of
my  people,  Though  your  sins
should  reach  from  earth  to  hea-
ven ;  and  though  they  shall  be
redder  than  scarlet,  and  blacker
than  sackcloth ;  yet  if  ye  shall
turn  to  me  with  all  your  heart,
and  shall  call  me  father,  I  will
hearken  to  you,  as  to  a  holy
people.

12  And  in  another  place  he
saith  on  this  wise :  ^  Wash  ye,
make  you  clean;  put  away  ®the
evil  of  your  doings  from  before
mine  eyes ;  cease  to  do  evil,  learn
to  do  well ;  seek  judgment,  re-
lieve the  oppressed,  judge  the
fatherless,  plead  for  the  widow.

13  Come  now  and  let  us  rea-
son together,  saith  the  Lord :
though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,
they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;
though  they  be  red  as  crimson,
•  they  shall  be  as  wool.

14  If  ye  be  willing  and  obe-


dient, ye  shall  eat  the  good  of
the  land ;  but  if  ye  refuse  and
rebel,  ye  shall  be  devoured  with
the  sword ;  for  the  mouth  of  the
Lord  hath  spoken  it.

1 5  These  things  has  God  esta-
blished by  his  Almighty  will,
desiring  that  all  his  beloved
should  come  to  repentance.

CHAP.  V.

1  He  sets  before  them  the  examples  of
holy  men,  whose  piety  is  recorded  in
the  Scriptures.

WHEREFORE  let  us  obey
his  excellent  and  glorious
will;  and  ^"imploring his  mercy
and  goodness,  let  us  fall  down
upon  our  faces  before  him,  and
"  cast  ourselves  upon  his  mercy  ;
laying  aside  all  "vanity,  and
contention,  and  envy  which  leads
unto  death.

2  Let  us  look  up  to  those  who
have  the  most  perfectly  minis-
tered to  his  excellent  glory.  Let
us  take  Enoch  for  our  example ;
who  being  found  righteous  in
obedience,  was  ^^  translated,  and
his  death  was  not  "  known.

3  Noah  ^*  being  proved  to  be
faithful,  did  by  his  ministry
preach  ^"regeneration  to  the
world;  and  the  Lord  saved  by
him  all  the  living  creatures,  that
went  "  with  one  accord  into  the
ark.

4  ^*  Abraham,  who  was  called
God's  friend,  was  in  like  manner
found  faithful;  inasmuch  as  he
obeyed  the  "  commands  of  God.

5  By  obedience  ^  he  went  out
of  his  own   country,  and  from


1  Received  salvation.  *  Spoken,  ^gzekiel  xxxiii.  11.  *  So  much  as  his
repentance.  s  Repent  from.  «  Ezekiel  xviii.  30,  23 ;  Isaiah  i. ;  Jeremiah
ill.  4,  19.  '  Isaiah  v.  16.  «  Evil  from  your  souls.  » I  will  make  them  as  wool.
10  Becoming  suppliants  of,  &c.  "  Turn  ourselves  to  his  mercy.  "  Vain
labour.  "  Gen.  v.  24.  ^*  Found.  ^^  Being  found.  ^^  Gen.  vi.,  vii.,  viu.
"  In  unity.        ^^  James  ii.  23;   Isaiah  xli.   8.         «  Words.        ^^  This


man.


116


Examples  eminent  for        I.  CLEMENT.         kindness  and  charity.


his  own  kindred,  and  from  his
lather's  house  :  that  so  forsaking
a  small  country,  and  a  weak  affi-
nity, and  a  little  house,  he  might
inherit  the  promises  of  God.

6  For  thus  God  said  unto
him  ;  ^  get  thee  out  of  thy  coun-
try, and  from  thy  kindred,  and
from  thy  father's  house,  unto  a
land  that  I  will  show  thee.

7  And  I  will  make  thee  a
great  nation,  and  will  bless  thee,
and  make  thy  name  great,  and
thou  shalt  be  blessed.  And  I
will  bless  them  that  bless  thee,
and  curse  them  that  curse  thee ;
and  in  thee  shall  all  families  of
the  earth  be  blessed.

8  And  again  when  he  sepa-
rated himself  from  Lot,  God
said  unto  him ;  ^  Lift  up  now
thine  eyes,  and  look  from  the
place  where  thou  art  northward
and  southward  and  eastward  and
^  westward  for  all  the  land  which
thou  seest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,
and  to  thy  seed  for  ever.

9  And  I  will  make  thy  seed
as  the  dust  of  the  earth,  so  that
if  a  man  can  number  the  dust
of  the  earth,  then  shall  thy  seed
also  be  numbered.

10  And  again  he  saith:  and
^God  brought  forth  Abraham,
and  said  unto  him ;  Look  now
toward  heaven,  and  tell  the  stars,
if  thou  be  able  to  number  them:
so  shall  thy  seed  be.

11  And  Abraham  believed
God,  and  it  was  counted  to  him
for  righteousness.

12  Through  faith  and  hospi-
tality, *  he  had  a  son  given  him
in   his   old   age ;    and   through


obedience  he  offered  him  up  in
sacrifice  to  God,  upon  one  of  the
mountains  which  God  showed
unto  him.

CHAP.  VL

1  And  'particularly  such  as  have  been
eminent  for  their  kindness  and  charity
to  their  neighbours.

BY  ^hospitality  and  godliness
was  Lot  saved  out  of  Sodom,
when  all  the  country  round
about  was  destroyed  by  fire
and  brimstone :

2  The  Lord  thereby  making
it  manifest,  that  he  will  not  for-
sake those  that  trust  in  him ;
but  ^  will  bring  the  disobedient
to  punishment  and  correction.

B  For  his  wife  who  went  out
with  him,  being  of  a  different
mind,  "  and  not  continuing  in  the
same  obedience,  was  for  that  rea-
son ^°set  forth  for  an  example,
being  turned  into  a  pillar  of  salt
unto  this  day.

4  That  so  all  men  may  know,
that  those  who  are  double  mind-
ed, and  distrustful  of  the  power
of  God,  are  "prepared  for  con-
demnation, and  to  be  a  sign  to
all  succeeding  ages.

5  "By  faith  and  hospitality
was  Rahab  the  harlot  saved.
For  when  the  spies  were  sent  by
Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  to  search
out  Jericho  and  the  king  of
Jericho  knew  that  they  were
come  to  spy  out  his  country;
^^he  sent  men  to  take  them,  so
that  they  might  be  put  to  death.  .

6  ^*  Rahab  therefore  being  hos-
pitable, received  them,  and  hid


^  Gen.  xii.  1.  ^  Gen.  xiii.  14.  ^  Towards  the  sea.  *  Gen.  xv.  5.
^  A  son  was  given  unto  him.  ^  Gen.  xix.  2 ;  2  Peter  ii.  6 ;  Jude  7.
''  See  Not.  in  loo.  or  punished  with.  ^  But  those  that  turn  another  way,  he
iits.  &c.     ^  Not  in  concord.     ^"^  Put  for  a  sign.      ^^  Become.     ^^  Jos.  ii.  1,  &c.


hospitable  Rahab.


li;


What  rules  are  given        I.  CLEMENT.


for  this  purpose.


them  under  the  stalks  of  flax,  on
the  top  of  her  house.

7  And  when  the  ^messengers
that  were  sent  by  the  king  came
unto  her,  and  asked  her,  saying,
^  There  came  men  unto  thee  to
spy  out  the  land,  bring  them
forth,  for  so  hath  the  king  com-
manded :  She  answered,  ^  The
two  men  whom  ye  seek  came
unto  me,  but  presently  they  de-
parted, and  are  gone :  *  Not  dis-
covering them  unto  them.

8  Then  she  said  to  the  ^  spies,
^I  know  that  the  Lord  your  God
'has  given  this  city  into  your
hands;  for  the  fear  of  you  is
fallen  upon  all  that  dwell  there-
in. When,  therefore,  ye  shall
have  taken  it  *  ye  shall  save  me
and  my  father's  house.

9  And  they  answered  her,
saying.  It  shall  be  as  thou  hast
spoken  to  us.  ®  Therefore,  when
thou  shalt  know  that  we  are
near  thou  shalt  gather  all  thy
family  together  upon  the  house-
top, and  they  shall  be  saved :
but  all  that  shall  be  found  with-
out thy  house,  shall  be  de-
stroyed.

10  ^"  And  they  gave  her  more-
over a  sign :  that  she  should
hang  out  of  her  house  a  scarlet
rope;  "shewing  thereby,  that  by
the  blood  of  our  Lord,  there
should  be  redemption  to  all  that
believe  and  hope  in  God.  Ye  see,
beloved,  how  there  was  not  only
faith,  but  prophecy  too  in  this
woman.


CHAP.  VII.

1    What  rules  are  given  for  this  purpose.

LET  us,  therefore,  humble  our-
selves, brethren,  laying  aside
all  pride,  and  boasting,  and  fool-
ishness, and  anger:  And  let  us
do  as  it  is  written.

2  For  thus  saith  the  Holy
Spirit;  ^^Let  not  the  wise  man
glory  in  his  wisdom,  nor  the
strong  man  in  his  strength,  nor
the  rich  man  in  his  riches  ;  but
let  him  that  glorieth,  glory  in
the  Lord,  to  seek  him,  and  to  do
judgment  and  justice.

3  Above  all,  remembering  the
words  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  which
he  spake  ^^  concerning  equity  and
long  suffering,  ^*  saying,

4  ^^  Be  ye  merciful  and  ye
shall  obtain  mercy ;  forgive,  and
ye  shall  be  forgiven :  as  ye  do,
so  shall  it  be  done  unto  you :  as
ye  give,  so  shall  it  be  given  unto
you  :  as  ye  judge,  so  shall  ye  be
judged ;  as  ye  are  kind  to  others
so  shall  God  be  kind  to  you :
with  what  measure  ye  mete,
with  the  same  shall  it  be  mea-
sured to  you  again.

5  By  this  command,  and  by
these  rules,  let  us  establish  our-
selves, that  so  we  may  always
walk  obediently  to  his  holy
words ;  being  humble  minded  :

6  For  so  says  ^^the  Holy  Scrip-
ture ;  "  upon  whom  shall  I  look,
even  upon  him  that  is  poor  and
of  a  contrite  spirit,  and  that
trembles  at  my  word.

7  *|[  It  is,  therefore,  just  and
"righteous,  men  and  brethren,
that  we  should  become  obedient
unto   God,   rather   than   follow


^  Men  being  sent  bj  the  king,  and  saying.  ^  Verse  4.        '  Verses  4,  5.

*  Vid.  Conjecture.  Coteler.  in  loc.  ^  Men.         ^  Verse  9.  'Given  you

this  city.        ^yerse  13.         »  Verses  18,  19.         ^o  Verse  18.        ^^  Many  of  the
Fathers  have  applied  this  to  the  same  purpose. — See  not.    Coteler .  in  loc.
^2  Jer.  ix.  23.  Comp.  2  Cor.  xi.  31.       "  Teaching  us.         "For  thus  he  saith.
'5  Luke  vi.  35.        i«  Holy  Word.        "Isaiah  Ixvi.  2.        "  Holy.
118


He  advises  them


I.  CLEMENT.


to  he  humble.


such  as  ^  through  pride  and
sedition,  have  made  themselves
the  ring-leaders  of  a  detestable
emulation.

8  For  it  is  not  an  ordinary
h^rm  that  we  shall  do  ourselves,
but  rather  a  very  great  danger
that  we  shall  run,  if  w^e  shall
rashly  give  up  ourselves  to  the
wills  of  men  who  *  promote  strife
and  seditions,  to  turn  us  aside
from  that  which  is  fitting.

9  But  let  us  be  kind  to  one
another,  according  to  the  compas-
sion and  sweetness  of  him  that
made  us.

10  For  it  is  written,  'The
merciful  shall  inherit  the  earth  ;
and  they  that  are  without  evil
shall  be  left  upon  it :  *  but  the
transgressors  shall  perish  from
off  the  face  of  it.

11  And  again  he  saith,  ^  I
have  seen  the  wicked  in  great
power  and  spreading  himself  like
the  cedar  of  Libanus.  I  passed
by,  and  lo !  he  was  not ;  I  sought
his  place,  but  it  could  not  be
found.

12  Keep  innocently,  and  do
the  thing  that  is  right,  for  there
shall  be  a  remnant  to  the  peace-
able man.

13  Let  us,  therefore,  hold  fast
to  those  who  *  religiously  follow
peace ;  and  not  to  such  as  ^  only
pretend  to  desire.

14  For  he  saith  in  a  certain
place,  ^This  people  honoureth
me  with  their  lips,  but  their
heart  is  far  from  me.

15  And  again,  They  *  bless
with  their  mouths,  ^^  but  curse
in  their  hearts.


16  And  again  he  saith,  "  They
loved  him  with  their  mouths,  and
with  their  tongues  they  lied  to
him.  For  their  heart  was  not
right  with  him,  neither  were  they
faithful  in  his  covenant.

17  ''  Let  all  deceitful  lips  be-
come dumb,  and  the  tongue  that
speaketh  proud  things.  Who
have  said,  ^^with  our  tongue  will
we  prevail ;  our  lips  are  our  own,
who  is  Lord  over  us.

18  For  the  oppression  of  the
poor,  for  the  sighing  of  the  needy,
now  will  I  arise  saith  the  Lord ;
I  will  set  him  in  safety,  I  will
deal  confidently  with  him.

CHAP.  VIIL

He  advises  them  to  he  humble  ;  and  that
from  the  examples  of  Jesus  and  of  holy
m,en  in  all  ages.

FOR  Christ  is  theirs  who  are
humble,  and  not  who  exalt
themselves  over  his  flock.  The
sceptre  of  the  majesty  of  God,
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  came  not
in  the  ^*  shew  of  pride  and  arro-
gance, ^though  he  could  have
done  so  ;  but  with  humility  as
the  Holy  Ghost  had  before  spoken
concerning  him.

2  For  thus  he  saith.  Lord,
^®  who  hath  believed  our  report,
and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the
Lord  revealed?  For  he  shall
grow  up  before  him  as  a  tender
2)lant,  and  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry
ground.

3  He  hath  no  form  or  come-
liness, and  when  we  shall  see
him,  there  is  no  beauty  that  we
should  desire  him.


^  In.  ^  Prick  on  to.— See  Junius  Ann.  'Psalm  xxxvii.  9.  *  Prov.  ii.  10.
^  Psalm  Ixviii.  36.  «  With  religion  or  godliness.  "^  With  hypocrisy  will  it.
^  Isaiah  xxix.  13.  Psalm  Ixii.  4.  ^  Blessed.  *°  Cursed.  "  Psalm  Ixxviii.
."6,  37.     ^^ Psalm  xii.  3.  ^'  We  will  magnify  our  tongue.  "  Boasting.

^5  KaiTTcp  dwa/xevog,  though  he  were  powerful.     ^^ Isaiah  liii.  according  to  the
Hebrew.

119


Persuades  to


I.  CLEMENT         healing  of  differences.


4  He  is  despised  and  rejected
of  men  ;  a  man  of  sorrows  and
acquainted  with  grief.

5  And  we  hid,  as  it  were,  our
faces  from  him ;  he  was  despised,
and  we  esteemed  him  not.

6  Surely  he  hath  born  our
griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows  :
yet  we  did  esteem  him  stricken,
smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted.

7  But  he  was  wounded  for  our
transgressions ;  he  was  bruised
for  our  iniquities ;  the  chastise-
ment of  our  peace  was  upon  him ;
and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed.

8  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone
astray ;  we  have  turned  every
one  to  his  own  way,  and  the
Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  ini-
quity of  us  all.

9  He  was  oppressed,  and  he
was  afflicted,  yet  he  opened  not
his  mouth :  he  is  brought  as  a
lamb  to  the  slaughter ;  and  as  a
sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb,
so  he  openeth  not  his  mouth.

10  He  was  taken  from  prison,
and  from  judgment ;  and  who
shall  declare  his  generation?  For
lie  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of
the  living,  for  the  transgressions
of  my  people  was  h3  stricken.

11  And  he  made  his  grave
with  the  wicked,  and  with  the
rich  in  his  death  ;  because  he
had  done  no  violence,  neither
was  any  deceit  in  his  mouth.

12  Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to
bruise  him,  he  hath  put  him  to
grief;  when  thou  shalt  make  his
soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he  shall
see  his  seed,  he  shall  prolong  his
days  ;  and  the  pleasure  of  the
Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  hand.

13  He  shall  see  of  the  travail
of  his  soul  and  shall  be  satisfied  ;
by  his  knowledge  shall  my  right-
eous servant  justify  many:  for
he  shall  bear  their  iniquities.

^  Psalm  xxil.  6.       '  MS.  ^t  avrov.      ^  We  say.      *  To  these,  those  also  that
have  been  witnessed  of.        *  Gen.  xviii.  27.        ^  Job  i.  1.  '  Job  xiv.  4.

120


14  Therefore  will  I  divide  him
a  portion  with  the  great,  and  he
shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the
strong ;  because  he  hath  poured
out  his  soul  unto  death  ;  and  he
was  numbered  with  the  trans-
gressors, and  he  bare  the  sin  of
many,  and  made  intercession  for
the  transgressors.

15  And  again  he  himself  saith,
^  I  am  a  worm  and  no  man,  a  re-
proach of  men,  and  despised  of
the  people.  All  they  that  see
me  laugh  me  to  scorn ;  they
shoot  out  their  lips,  they  shake
their  heads,  saying  :  He  trusted
in  the  Lord  that  he  would  de-
liver him,  let  him  deliver  him
seeing  he  delighted  in  him.

16  Ye  see,  beloved,  what  the
pattern  is  that  has  been  given  to
us.  For  if  the  Lord  thus  hum-
bled himself,  what  should  we  do
who  are  brought  ^  by  him  under
the  yoke  of  his  grace  ?

17  Let  us  be  followers  of  those
who  went  about  in  goat-skins
and  sheep-skins ;  preaching  the
coming  of  Christ.

18  ^  Such  were  Elias,  and  Eli-
sseus,  and  Ezekiel  the  prophets.
*  And  let  us  add  to  these  such
others  as  have  received  the  like
testimony.

19  Abraham  has  been  greatly
witnessed  of;  having  been  called
the  friend  of  God.  And  yet  he
steadfastly  beholding  the  glory
of  God,  says  with  all  humility,
^  I  am  dust  and  ashes.

20  Again  of  Job  it  is  thus
written,  ^  That  he  was  just  and
without  blame,  true;  one  that
served  God,  and  abstained  from
all  evil.  Yet  he  accusing  him-
self, says,  '  No  man  is  free  from
pollution,  no  not  though  he
should  live  but  one  day.

21  Moses  was  called   faithful


THE  TWO  SPIES  SENT  BY  JOSHUA  TO   JERICHO,  AND  THEIR  ESCAPE  FROM

THE  HOUSE   FROM  RAHAB.  IP»ge  117.


PROM  MOSAICS  OF   THE  FIFTH    CENTURY  IN  THE  CHURCH  OF  ST.  MARIA  MAGGIORH,  ROMR,


Persuades  to


I.  CLEMENT.         healing  of  differences.


in  all  God's  House  ;  and  by  his
conduct  ^  the  Lord  punished  Is-
rael by  stripes  and  plagues.

22  And  even  this  man,  though
thus  greatly  honoured,  spake  not
greatly  of  himself ;  but  when  the
oracle  of  God  was  delivered  to
him  out  of  the  bush  he  said,
^  Who  am  I,  that  thou  dost  send
me  "i  I  am  of  a  slender  voice,  and
a  slow  tongue.

23  And  again  he  saith,  ^  I  am
as  the  smoke  of  the  pot.

24  And  what  shall  we  say  of
David,  so  highly  testified  of  in
the  Holy  Scriptures?  To  whom
God  said  *!  have  found  a  man
after  my  own  heart,  David  the
son  of  Jesse,  with  my  holy  oil
have  I  anointed  him.

25  But  yet  he  himself  saith
unto  God,  "  Have  mercy  upon
me,  O  God,  according  to  thy
loving  kindness  ;  according  unto
the  multitude  of  thy  tender  mer-
cies, blot  out  my  transgressions.

26  Wash  me  thoroughly  from
mine  iniquity,  and  cleanse  me
from  my  sin !  For  I  acknow-
ledge my  transgressions,  and  my
sin  is  ever  before  me.

27  Against  Thee  only  have  I
sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  thy
sight,  that  thou  mightest  be
justified  when  thou  speakest,  and
be  clear  when  thou  judgest.

28  Behold  I  was  shapen  in
iniquity,  and  in  sin  did  my
mother  conceive  me.

29  Behold,  thou  desireth  truth
in  the  inward  parts  ;  and  in  the
hidden  part  thou  shalt  make  me
to  know  wisdom.

30  Purge  me  with  hyssop  and
I  shall  be  clean,  wash  me  and  I
shall  be  whiter  than  snow.

31  Make  me  to  hear  joy  and


gladness,  that  the   bones  which
thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice.

32  Hide  thy  face  from  my
sins,  and  blot  out  all  mine  ini-
quities.

33  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart
O  God ;  and  renew  a  right  spirit
within  me.

34  Cast  me  not  away  from
thy  presence,  and  take  not  thy
holy  spirit  from  me.

35  Restore  unto  me  the  joy
of  thy  salvation,  and  uphold  me
with  thy  free  spirit.

36  Then  I  will  teach  trans-
gressors thy  ways,  and  sinners
shall  be  converted  unto  thee.

37  Deliver  me  from  blood-
guiltiness,  O  God,  thou  God  of
my  salvation,  and  my  tongue
shall  sing  aloud  of  thy  righteous-
ness.

38  O  Lord  open  thou  my  lips,
and  my  mouth  shall  show  forth
thy  praise.

39  For  thou  desirest  not  sacri-
fice, else  would  I  give  it ;  thou
delightest  not  in  burnt  offerings.

40  The  sacrifices  of  God  are
a  broken  spirit,  a  broken  and  a
contrite  heart,  0  God,  thou  wilt
not  despise.

CHAP.  IX.

He  again  persuades  them  to  compose  their
divisions.

THUS  has  the  humility  and
^godly  fear  of  these  '  great
and  excellent  men,  **  recorded  in
the  Scriptures,  through  obedi-
ence, made  not  only  us,  but  also
the  generations  before  us  better;
even  as  many  as  have  received
his  holy  oracles '  with  fear  and
I  truth.

2  Having  therefore  so  many,


*  MS.  EKpivev  o  deoc  Tov  laoaijX  Sia  rav  fiaariyuv.  ^  Exod.  iii.  11.     '  Exod.  iv.
10.        *  Psalm  Ixxxix.  20.        ^  Psalm  li.  to  v.  17,  according  to  the  Hebrew.


*  Fearfulness.
brated.     ^  In.


'  So  great  and  such  kind  of  men.


*  Witnessed  of,  or  cele-
121


id  to  obedience.


I.  CLEMENT.


Of  faith.


and  such  great  and  glorious  ^
examples,  ^  let  us  return  to  that
peace  which  was  the  mark  that
from  the  beginning  was  set  be-
fore us ;

3  Let  us  look  up  to  the  Father
and  Creator  of  the  whole  world  ;
and  let  us  hold  fast  to  his  glorious
and  exceeding  gifts  and  benefits
of  peace.

4  Let  us '  consider  and  behold
with  the  eyes  of  our"*  understand-
ing his  long-suffering  will ;  and
think  how  gentle  and  patient  he
is  towards  his  whole  creation.

5  The  heavens  moving  by  his
appointment,  are  subject  to  him
in  peace.

6  Day  and  night  accomplish
the  courses  that  he  has  allotted
unto  them,  not  disturbing  one
another.

7  The  sun  and  moon,  and  all
the  several  ^  companies  and  con-
stellations of  the  stars,  run  the
*  courses  that  he  has  appointed
to  them  in  concord,  without  de-
parting in  the  least  from  them.

8  The  fruitful  earth  yields  its
food  plentifully  in  due  season
both  to  man  and  beast,  and  to
all  animals  that  are  upon  it,  ac-
cording to  his  will ;  not  "^  disput-
ing, nor  altering  any  thing  of
what  was  ordered  by  him.

9  So  also  the  unfathomable
and  unsearchable  floods  of  the
deep,  are  kept  in  by  his  com-
mand ;

10  ^  And  the  ^  conflux  of  the
vast  sea,  being  brought  together
by  his  order  into  its  several  col-
lections, passes  not  the  bounds
that  he  has  set  to  it ;

11  But  as  he  *"  appointed  it,
so   it   remains.     For   he   said,"


Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  and
thy  floods  shall  be  broken  with-
in thee.

12  The  ocean,  unpassable  to
mankind,  and  the  worlds  that
are  beyond  it,  are  governed  by
the  same  commands  of  their
great  master.

13  Spring  and  summer,  autumn
and  winter,  give  place  peaceably
to  each  other.

14  The  several  "  quarters  of
the  winds  fulfil  their  ^*  work  in
their  seasons,  without  offending
one  another.

15  The  ever-flowing  fountains,
made  both  for  pleasure  and
health,  never  fail  to  reach  out
their  breasts  to  support  the  life
of  men.

16  Even  the  smallest  creatures
"  live  together  in  peace  and  con-
cord with  each  other.

17  All  these  has  the  Great
Creator  and  Lord  of  all,  com-
manded to  observe  peace  and
concord ;  being  good  to  all.

18  But  especially  to  us  who
flee  to  his  mercy  through  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  to  whom  be
glory  and  majesty  for  ever  and
ever.     Amen.

CHAP.  X.

He  exhorts  them  to  obedience,  from  the
consideration  of  the  goodness  of  God^
and  of  his  presence  in  every  place.

TAKE  heed,  beloved,  that  his
many  blessings  be  not  to  ^^
us  to  condemnation ;  except  we
shall  walk  worthy  of  him,  doing
with  ^®  one  consent  what  is  good
and  pleasing  in  his  sight.

2  "  The  spirit  of  the  Lord  is  a


^  Deeds  or  works.  ^  Let  us  return  to  the  mark  of  peace  g^iven  to  us  from  the
beginning.  ^See  him  with  our  understanding.  *Soiil.  ^  Choruses.
*  Bounds.  'Doubting.  ^  Vid.  Edit.  Colomes.  p.  63.  ® Hollow,  or  depth.
^^  Commanded,  so  it  does.  "Jobxxxiii.  ^^gjations.  ^^  Survive.  ^■*Mix
together.  ^^  All  of  us.  ^' With  concord.  ^' Prov.  xx.  27.
122


How  we  must  live  that       I.  CLEMENT.  we  may  please  God.


candle,  searching  out  the  inward
parts  of  the  belly.

3  Let  us  therefore  consider
how  near  he  is  to  us ;  and  how
that  none  of  our  thoughts,  or
reasonings  which  we  frame  with-
in ourselves,  are  ^  hid  from  him.

4  It  is  therefore  just  that  we
should  not  forsake  our  rank,  by
doing  contrary  to  his  will.

5  Let  us  choose  to  offend  a  few
foolish  and  inconsiderate  men,
lifted  up  and  glory iug  *  in  their
own  pride,  rather  than  God.

6  Let  us  reverence  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  whose  blood  was
given  for  us.

7  Let  us  honour  those  who
are  set  over  us ;  let  us  respect
the  aged  that  are  amongst  us;
and  let  us  instruct  the  younger
men,  in  the  discipline  and  fear
of  the  Lord.

8  Our  wives  let  us '  direct  to
do  that  which  is  good.

9  Let  them  show  forth  a  lovely
habit  of  purity  in  all  their  con-
versation; with  a  sincere  *  affec-
tion of  meekness.

10  Let  the  ^  government  of
their  tongues  ®  be  made  manifest
by  their  silence.

11  Let  their  charity  be  with-
out respect  of  persons  alike  to-
wards all  such  as  religiously  fear
God.

12  Let  your  children 'be  bred
up  in  the  instruction  of  Christ :

13  And  especially  let  them
learn  how  great  a  power  humility
has  with  God  ;  how  much  a  pure
and  holy  charity  avails  with
him;  how  excellent  and  great
his  fear  is ;  and  how  it  will "  save
all  such  as  turn  to  him  with
holiness  in  a  pure  mind.


14  For  he  is  the  searcher  of
the  thoughts  and  counsels  of  the
heart;  whose  breath  is  in  us,
and  when  he  pleases  he  can  take
it  from  us.

CHAP.   XL

Of  faith,  and  particularly  what  we  are
to  believe  as  to  the  resurrection.

BUT  all  these  things '  must  be
confirmed  by  the  faith
which  is  in  Christ ;  for  so  he
himself  bespeaks  us  by  the  Holy
Ghost.

2  ^"  Come  ye  children  and
hearken  unto  me,  and  I  will  teach
you  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  What
man  is  there  that  desireth  life,
and  loveth  to  see  good  days  ?

3  Keep  thy  tongue  from  evil,
and  thy  lips  that  they  speak  no
guile.

4  Depart  from  evil  and  do
good ;  seek  peace  and  ensue  it.

5  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are
upon  the  righteous,  and  his  ears
are  open  unto  their  prayers.

6  But  the  face  of  the  Lord  is
against  them  that  do  evil,  to  cut
off  the  remembrance  of  them
from  the  earth.

7  The  righteous  cried,  and  the
Lord  heard  him,  and  delivered
him  out  of  all  his  troubles.

8  Many  are  the  troubles  of
the  wicked  ;  but  they  that  trust
in  the  Lord,  mercy  shall  encom-
pass them  about.

9  Our  all-merciful  and  benefi-
cent Father  hath  bowels  of  com-
passion towards  them  that  fear
him;  and  kindly  and  lovingly
bestows  his  graces  upon  all  such
as  come  to  him  with  a  simple
mind.


^ That  nothing  is  hid  to  him  of  our  thoughts,  or  reasonings.       ' In  the  pi
of  their  own  speech,  or  reason.         'Correct,  or  amend.         ^Will,  or  couljs^.        «nJ?v.

'Moderation.      ^  Let  them  manifest.       » Partake  of.      « Saving.      ^Tlje^feith  ^fS^

confirms,     ^o  Psalm  xxiv.  11.  /SJ  <S^^-

12^>       S>'9       A


Various  proofs


I.  CLEMENT.


from  nature


10  Wherefore  let  us  not  *  wa-
ver, neither  let  us  have  any
doubt  iu  our  hearts,  of  his  excel-
lent and  glorious  gifts.

11  ''Let  that  be  far  from  us
which  is  written,  'Miserable  are
the  double-minded,  and  those
who  are  doubtful  in  their  hearts.

12  Who  say  these  things  have
we  heard,  and  our  fathers  have
told  us  these  things.  But  behold
we  are  grown  old,  and  none  of
them  has  happened  unto  us.

13  O  ye  fools !  *  consider  the
trees :  take  the  vine  for  an  ex-
ample. First  it  sheds  its  leaves;
then  it  buds ;  after  that  it  spreads
its  leaves ;  then  it  flowers ;  then
come  the  sour  grapes ;  and  after
them  follows  the  ripe  fruit.  Ye
see  how  in  a  little  time  the  fruit '
of  the  tree  comes  to  maturity.

14  Of  a  truth,  yet  a  little
while  and  his  will  shall  suddenly
be  accomplished.

15  The  Holy  Scripture  itself
bearing  witness.  That  ^  He  shall
quickly  come  and  not  tarry,  and
that  the  Lord  shall  suddenly
come  to  his  temple,  even  the
^  holy  ones  whom  ye  look  for.

16  Let  us  consider,  beloved,
how  the  Lord  does  continually
shew  us,  that  there  shall  be  a
future  resurrection ;  of  which  he
has  made  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
the  first  fruits,  raising  him  from
the  dead.

17  Let  us  ^  contemplate,  belov-
ed, the  resurrection  that  is  ^  con-
tinually made  before  our  eyes.

18  Day  and  night  manifest  a
resurrection  to  us.  The  night
lies  down,  and  the  day  arises :
again  the  day  departs,  and  the
night  comes  on.

19  Let  us  behold  the  fruits  of


the  earth.  Every  one  sees  how
the  seed  is  sown.  The  sower
^goes  forth,  and  casts  it  upon
the  earth ;  and  the  seed  which
when  it  was  sown  fell  upon  the
earth  dry  and  naked,  in  time
dissolves.

20  And  from  the  dissolution,
the  great  power  "of  the  provi-
dence of  the  Lord  raises  it  again ;
and  of  one  seed  many  arise,  and
bring  forth  fruit.

CHAP.  XII.

Tke  Resurrection  further  proved.

LET  us  consider  that  wonder-
ful ^"type  of  the  resurrection
which  is  seen  in  the  Eastern
countries;  that  is  to  say,  in
Arabia.

2  There  is  a  certain  bird  called
a  Phoenix ;  of  this  there  is  never
but  one  at  a  time:  and  that
lives  five  hundred  years.  And
when  the  time  of  its  dissolution
draws  near,  that  it  must  die,  it
makes  itself  a  nest  of  frankin-
cense, and  myrrh,  and  other
spices  into  which  when  its  time
is  fulfilled  it  enters  and  dies.

3  But  its  flesh  putrifying,
breeds  a  certain  worm,  which
being  nourished  with  the  juice
of  the  dead  bird  brings  forth
feathers ;  and  when  it  is  grown
to  a  perfect  state,  it  takes  up  the
nest  in  which  the  bones  of  its
parents  lie,  and  carries  it  from
Arabia  into  Egypt,  to  a  city
called  Heliopolis :

4  And  flying  in  open  day  in
the  sight  of  all  men,  lays  it  upon
the  altar  of  the  sun,  and  so  re-
turns from  whence  it  came.

5  The  priests  then  search  into
the  records  of  the  time;  and
find  that  it  returned  precisely  at
the  end  of  five  hundred  years.


^  Be  double-minded.        '  Let  the  writinof  be  far  from  us.        '  James  i.  8.
^  Compare  yourselves  unto  a  tree.     ^  Ex.  MS.  omitted  by  Jame.s,  Hab.  ii.  3;
Malach.  iii.    1.  •  «  Coteler.  AyyeAoc  Angel.     '  See.    *  Made  every  season.
'  Went  forth,  and  so  in  the  rest,     ^"  Sign.
124


Ojf  the  resurrection.


I.  CLEMENT.


God\


vengeance.


6  And  ^  shall  we  then  think
it  to  be  any  very  great  and
strange  thing  for  the  Lord  of  all
to  raise  up  those  that  religiously
serve  him  in  the  assurance  of  a
good  faith,  when  even  by  a  bird
he  shews  us  the  greatness  of  his
power  to  fulfil  his  promise  ?

7  For  he  says  in  a  certain
place,  Thou  shalt  raise  me  up,
and  I  shall  confess  unto  thee.

8  And  again  ^I  laid  me  down
and  slept,  and  awaked,  because
thou  art  with  me.

9  And  again,  Job  says,  ^Thou
shalt  raise  up  this  flesh  of  mine,
that  has  suffered  all  these  things.

10  Having  therefore  this  hope,
let  us  *  hold  fast  to  him  who  is
faithful  in  all  his  promises,  and
righteous  in  all  his  judgments;
who  has  commanded  us  not  to
lie :  how  much  more  will  he  not
himself  lie  ?

11  For  nothing  is  impossible
with  God  but  to  lie.

12  Let  his  faith  then  be  stirred
up  again  in  us ;  and  let  us  con-
sider that  all  things  are  nigh
unto  him.

13  By  the  word  of  his  ^  power
he  made  all  things;  and  by  ^the
same  word  he  is  able  (whenever
he  will),  to  destroy  them.

14  Who  shall  say  unto  him,
what  dost  thou?  or  who  shall
resist  the  power  of  his  strength  T

15  When,  and  as  he  pleased,^
he  will  do  all  things;  and  nothing
shall  pass  away  of  all  that  has
been  determined  by  him.

16  All  things  are  open  before
him;  nor  can  anything  be  hid
from  his  council.

17  ^The  heavens  declare  the
glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament
sheweth  his  handy  work.     Day


unto  day  uttereth  speech,  and
night  unto  night  sheweth  know-
ledge. There  is  no  speech  nor
language  where  their  voice  is
not  heard.

CHAP.  XIII.

It  is  impossible  to  escape  the  vengeance
of  God,  if  we  continue  in  sin.

SEEING  then  all  things  are
seen  and  heard  by  God ;  let
us  fear  him,  and  let  us  lay  aside
our  wicked  works  which  proceed
from  ill  desires;  that  through
his  mercy  we  may  be  '"delivered
from  the  ^'condemnation  to  come.

2  For  w^hither  can  any  of  us
flee  from  his  mighty  hand  ?  Or
what  world  shall  receive  any  of
those  who  run  away  from  him  ?

3  For  thus  saith  the  Scripture
in  a  certain  place,  '^  Whither
shall  I  flee  from  thy  Spirit,  or
where  shall  I  hide  myself  from
thy  presence  ?

4  If  I  ascend  up  into  heaven,
thou  art  there ;  if  I  shall  go  to
the  utmost  part  of  the  earth,
there  is  thy  right  hand :  If  I
shall  make  my  bed  in  the  deep,
thy  Spirit  is  there.

5  Whither  then  shall  any  one
go;  or  whither  shall  he  run
from  him  that  comprehends  all
things  ?

6  Let  us  therefore  come  to
him  with  holiness  of  '^  heart,  lift-
ing up  chaste  and  undefiled
hands  unto  him ;  loving  our  gra-
cious and  merciful  Father,  who
has  made  us  '*to  partake  of  his
election.

7  For  so  it  is  written,  '^  When
the  Most  High  divided  the  na-
tions, when  he  separated  the
sons  of  Adam,  he  set  the  bounds
of  the  nations,  according  to  the
number  of  his  angels ;  '^  his  peo-


1  Do.  2  Psalm  iii.  5.  ^  .Job  xix.  23.  *  Let  our  minds  be  fastened.
5  Majesty.  «  His  word.  ''  Wisd.  xii.  12.  ^  MS.  iroir/aei.  »  If  the,  &c..
Psalm  xix.  1.  ^^  Covered.  "  Judgments.  ^*  Psalm  cxxxix.  7.  "  Mind.
^*  A  part.    15  Deut.  xxxii.  8,  9.     '«  So  the  lxx.

126


How  to  live


I.  CLEMENT.


to  please  God.


pie  Jacob  became  the  portion  of
the  Lord,  and  Israel  the  lot  of
his  inheritance.

8  And  in  another  place  he
saith,  ^  Behold  the  Lord  taketh
unto  himself  a  nation,  out  of  the
midst  of  the  nations,  as  a  man
taketh  the  first-fruits  of  his
flower;  *  and  the  Most  Holy  shall
come  out  of  that  nation.
CHAP.  XIV.

How  we  must  live  that  we  may  please  Ood.

WHEREFORE  we  being  a
part  of  the  Holy  One,  let
us  do  all  those  things  that  per-
tain unto  holiness :

2  Fleeing  all  evil-speaking
against  one  another;  all  filthy
and  impure  embraces,  together
with  all  drunkenness,  youthful
lusts,  abominable  concupiscences,
detestable  adultery,  and  exe-
crable pride.

3  ^  For  God,  saith  he,  resisteth
the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  to
the  humble.

4  Let  us  therefore  hold  fast
to  those  to  whom  *  God  has  given
His  grace.

5  And  let  us  put  on  concord,
being  humble,  temperate;  free
from  all  whispering  and  detrac-
tion; and  justified  by  our^
actions,  not  our  words.

6  For  he  saith,  ®  Doth  he  that
speaketh  and  heareth  many
things,  and  that  is  of  a  ready
tongue,  suppose  that  he  is  right-
eous ?  ^  Blessed  is  he  that  is  born
of  a  woman,  that  liveth  but  a
few  days:  ^use  not  therefore
much  speech.

7  Let  our  praise  be  of  God,
not  of  ourselves  ;  for  God  hateth
those  that'  commend  themselves.


8  Let  the  witness  of  our  good
actions  be  given  to  us  of  others,
as  it  was  given  to  the  holy  men
that  went  before  us.

9  Rashness,  and  arrogance,
and  confidence,  belong  to  them
who  are  accursed  of  God:  but
equity,  and  humility,  and  mild-
ness, to  such  as  are  blessed  by
him.

10  Let  us  then  lay  hold  of  his
blessing,  and  let  us  ^°  consider
what  are  the  ways  by  which  we
may  attain  unto  it.

11  Let  us  ^^  look  back  upon
those  things  that  have  happened
from  the  beginning.

12  For  what  was  our  father
Abraham  blessed?  Was  it  not
because  that  through  faith  he
wrought  righteousness  and  truth  ?

13  Isaac  being  ^*  fully  persuad-
ed of  what  he  knew  was  to  come,
cheerfully  yielded  himself  up  for
a  sacrifice.  Jacob  with  humility
departed  out  of  his  own  country,
fleeing  from  his  brother,  and
went  unto  Laban  and  served
him ;  and  so  the  sceptre  of  the
twelve  tribes  of  Israel  was  given
unto  him.

14  Now  what  the  greatness  of
^'  this  Gift  was,  will  plainly  ap-
pear, if  we  shall  take  the  pains
distinctly  to  consider  all  the  parts
of  it.

15  For  from  him  came  the
priests  and  Levites,  who  all
ministered  at  the  altar  of  God.

16  From  him  came  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  according  to  the
flesh.

17  From  him  came  the  kings,
and  princes,  and  rulers  in  Judah.

18  Nor  were  the  rest  of  his


^  Deut.  iv.  34.  'Num.  xxvii.  '  Ja.  iv.  9,  1  Pet.  v.  5.  *  The  grace  of  God
has  been  given.  ^  Works.  *  He  tliat  speaketh  many  things  shall  also  hear,
&c.  '  Job  xi.  2,  3,  Ixx.  'Be  not  wordy.  *  Are  praised  of.  ^"See  what  are
the  ways  of  hi'^  blessing.  ^^  Unroll.  ^^  Foreknowing  what  was  to  be,  became  a
sacrifice.  ^'  These  gifts  he  shall  know  who  will  carefully  consider  them.
126


Oj  justification


I.  CLEMENT.


by  faith  and  works.


^tribes  in  any  small  glory:  God
having  promised  that  *  thy  seed
(says  he)  shall  be  as  the  stars  of
heaven.

19  They  were  all  therefore
^  greatly  glorified,  not  for  their
own  sake,  or  for  their  own  works,
or  for  the  righteousness  that  they
themselves  wrought,  but  through
his  will.

20  And  we  also  being  called
by  the  same  will  in  Christ  Jesus,
are  not  justified  by  ourselves,
neither  by  our  own  wisdom,  or
knowledge,  or  piety,  or  the  works
which  we  have  done  *  in  the  holi-
ness of  our  hearts :

21  But  by  that  faith  by  which
God  Almighty  has  justified  all
men  from  the  beginning;  to
whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.
Amen.

CHAP.  XV.

We  are  justified  by  faith  ;  yet  this  must
not  lessen  our  care  to  live  well,  nor  our
pleasure  in  it.

WHAT  shall  we  do  therefore,
brethren?  Shall  we  be
slothful  in  well-doing,  and  lay
aside  our  charity?  God  forbid
that  any  such  thing  should  be
done  by  us.

2  But  rather  let  us  hasten  with
all  earnestness  and  readiness  of
mind,  to  perfect  every  good  work.
For  even  the  Creator  and  Lord
of  all  things  himself  rejoices  in
his  own  works.

3  By  his  ^  Almighty  power  he
fixed  the  heavens,  and  by  his
incomprehensible  wisdom  he
adorned  them.

4  He  also  divided  the  earth
from  the  water,  with  which  it  is
encompassed  ;  and  fixed  it  as  a
secure  tower,  upon  the  founda-
tion of  his  own  will.

5  He  also  by  his  appointment,

^  Sceptres.  *  Gen.  xxvii.  17.  '  Glorified.  *  In  holiness  of  heart.  ^  All-
greatest.  6 Gen.  i.  2fi,  27.  'Gen.  i.  28.  'This.  » Come  to.  i»Work.
"  Isaiah  xl.  10,  Ixii.  11.

127


commanded  all  the  living  crea-
tures that  are  upon  it,  to  exist.

6  So  likewise  the  sea,  and  all
the  creatures  that  are  in  it ;  hav-
ing first  created  them,  he  enclosed
them  therein  by  his  power.

7  And  above  all,  he  with  his
holy  and  pure  hands,  formed
man,  the  most  excellent,  and,  as
to  his  understanding,  truly  the
greatest  of  all  other  creatures,
the  character  of  his  own  image.

8  For  so  God  says,  ®Let  us
make  man  in  our  image,  after
our  own  likeness  So  God  created
man,  male  and  female  created  he
them.

9  And  having  thus  finished  all
these  things,  he  commended  all
that  he  had  made,  and  blessed
them,  and  said,  ^  increase  and
multiply.

10  We  see  how  all  righteous
men  have  been  adorned  with
good  works  :  Wherefore  even
the  Lord  himself,  having  adorn-
ed himself  with  his  works,  re-
joiced.

11  Having  therefore  ®  such  an
example,  let  us  without  delay,
"fulfil  his  will ;  and  with  all  our
strength,  work  the  work  of
righteousness.

CHAP.  XVI.

This  enforced  from  the  examples  of  the
holy  angels,  and  from  the  exceeding
greatness  of  that  reward  which  God
has  prepared  for  us.

THE  good  workman  with  con-
fidence receives  the  bread
of  his  ^"  labour  ;  but  the  sluggish
and  lazy  cannot  look  him  in  the
face  that  set  him  on  work.

2  We  must  therefore  be  ready
and  forward  in  well  doing ;  for
from  him  are  all  things.

3  And  thus  he  foretells  us,
"  behold  the  Lord   cometh,  and


Oj  attaining  the  reward    I.  CLEMENT.


of  the  righteous.


his  reward  is  with  him,  even  be-
fore his  face,  to  render  to  every
one  according  to  his  work.

4  He  warns  us  therefore  before-
hand, with  all  his  heart  to  this
end,  that  we  should  not  be  sloth-
ful and  negligent  in  ^  well  doing.

5  Let  our  boasting,  therefore,
and  our  confidence  be  in  ^  God :
let  us  submit  ourselves  to  his  will.
Let  us  consider  the  whole  multi-
tude of  his  angels,  how  ready  they
stand  to  minister  unto  his  will.

6  As  saith  the  scripture,  ^thou-
sands of  thousands  siood  before
him  and  ten  thousand  times  ten
thousand  ministered  uuto  him.
*  And  they  cried,  saying,  Holy,
holy,  holy  is  the  L3rd  of  Sa-
baoth  :  ^  The  whole  earth  is  full
of  his  glory.

7  Wherefore  let  us  also,
being  conscientiously  gathered
together  in  concord  with  one  an-
other ;  as  it  were  with  one  mouth,
cry  earnestly  unto  him,  that  he
would  make  us  partakers  of  his
great  and  glorious  promises.

8  For  he  saith,  ®  Eye  hath  not
seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have
enter 3:1  into  the  heart  of  man,
the  things  which  God  has  pre-
pared for  them  that  wait  for  him.

CHAP.  XVII.

1  We  must  attain  unto  this  reward  by
faith  and  obedience,  which  we  must
carry  on  in  an  orderly  pursuing  of  the
duties  of  our  several  stations,  without
envy  or  contention.  24  The  necessity
of  different  orders  among  men.  33  We
have  none  of  us  anything  but  what  we
received  of  Ood :  whom  therefore  we
ought  in  every  condition  thankfully  to
obey.

HOW  blessed  atid  wonderful,
beloved,  are  the  gifts  of  God.
2  Life  in  immortality !  bright-
ness in  righteousness  !    truth  in


full   assurance !   faith   in   confi-
dence !  temperance  in  holiness !

3  And  all  this  has  ^  God  sub-
jected to  our  understandings :

4  What  therefore  shall  those
things  be  which  he  has  prepared
for  them  that  wait  for  him  ?

5  The  Creator  and  Father  of*
spirits,  the  Most  Holy  ;  he  only
knows  both  the  ^greatness  and
beauty  of  them.

6  Let  us  therefore  strive  with
all  earnestness,  that  we  may  be
found  in  the  number  of  those
that  wait  for  him,  that  so  we
may  receive  the  ^^  reward  which
he  has  promised.

7  But  how,  beloved,  shall  we
do  this  ?  ^^  We  must  fix  our  minds
by  faith  towards  God,  and  seek
those  things  that  are  pleasing
and  acceptable  unto  him.

8  We  must  "  act  conformably
to  his  holy  will  ;  and  follow  the
way  of  truth,  casting  ofi"  from  us
all  unrighteousness  and  iniquity,
together  with  all  covetousness,
strife,  evil  manners,  deceit,  whis-
pering, detractions ;  all  hatred
of  God,  pride  and  boasting;  vain-
glory and  ambition  ;

9  For  they  that  do  these  things
are  odious  to  God  ;  and  not  only
they  that  do  them,  but  also  ^^  all
such  as  approve  of  those  that  do
them.

10  For  thus  saith  the  Scrip-
ture, "  But  unto  the  wicked,  God
said,  What  hast  thou  to  do  to
declare  my  statute,  or  that  thou
shouldst  take  my  covenant  in  thy
mouth  ?  Seeing  that  thou  hatest
instruction,  and  castest  my  words
behind  thee.

11  When  thou  sawest  a  thief,
then  thou  consentedst  with  him  ;
and  hast  been  partaker  with  adul-


*  Every  good  work.         ^jjjf^  '  Dan.  vii.  10.     ■*  Isaiah  vi.  3.     ^  Every

creature.*    «  Isaiah  Ixiv.  4,  1  Cor.  ii.  9.     'He.     ^Ages.     ^Quantitv.     ^o  Gifts.
"  If  we  shall.       ^^  Perform  those  things  that  are  agreeable.         "Kom.  i.  32.
"  Psalm  1.  15,  &c.,  ac.  to  the  Hebrew.
128


(Page  74.


CHRIST  IN  THE  PRytTORIUM  AND  MOCKED,  AND  HIS  DESCENT  INTO  HELL.   [Pag.-  93.

»HOM    INTAGLIOS   IN  A   BOX   OF   ROCK    CRYSTAL.  BY   AN   EARLY   VENETIAN  ARTIST.


0/  faith  and  obedience      I.  CLEMENT.


ill  our  calling.


terers.  Thou  givest  thy  mouth
to  evil,  and  thy  tongue  frameth
deceit.  Thou  sittest  and  speakest
against  thy  brother ;  thou  sland-
erest  thine  own  mother's  son.

12  These  things  hast  thou
done  and  I  kept  silence ;  thou
thoughtest  that  I  was  altogether
such  a  one  as  thyself:  but  I  will
reprove  thee,  and  set  them  in
order  before  thine  eyes.

13  Now  consider  this  ye  that
forget  God,  lest  I  tear  you  in
pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  de-
liver.

14  Whoso  ofFereth  praise,  glo-
rifieth  me  :  and  to  him  that  dis-
poseth  his  way  aright,  will  I
shew  the  salvation  of  God.

15  This  is  the  way,  beloved,  in
which  we  may  find  ^our  Saviour,
even  Jesus  Christ  the  high-priest
of  all  our  offerings,  the  defender
and  helper  of  our  weakness.

16  By  him  we  look  up  to  the^
highest  heavens  ;  and  behold,  as
in  a  glass,  his  spotless  and  most
excellent  visage.

17  By  him  are  the  eyes  of  our
hearts  opened  ;  by  him  our  fool-
ish and  darkened  understanding
rejoiceth  to  behold  his  wonder-
ful light.

18  By  him  would  God  have  us
to  taste  the  knowledge  of  immor-
tality :  ^  who  being  the  bright-
ness of  his  glory,  is  by  so  much
greater  than  the  angels,  as  he
has  by  inheritance  obtained  a
more  excellent  name  than  they.

19  For  so  it  is  written,  *  who
maketh  his  angels  spirits,  and
his  ministers  a  flame  of  fire :

20  But  to  his  son,  thus  saith
the  Lord,  ^Thou  art  my  Son,  to-
day have  I  begotten  thee.


21  ®  Ask  of  me,  and  I  will  give
thee  the  heathen  for  thy  inherit-
ance, and  the  utmost  parts  of
the  earth  for  thy  possession.

22  And  again  he  saith  unto
him,  ^  Sit  thou  on  my  right  hand
until  I  make  thine  enemies  my
footstool.

23  But  who  are  his  enemies  ?
even  the  wicked,  and  such  who
oppose  their  own  wills  to  the
will  of  God.

24  Let  us  therefore  ^  march
on,  men  and  brethren,  with  all
earnestness  in  his  holy  laws.

25  Let  us  consider  those  who
fight  under  our  earthly  gover-
nors :  How  orderly,  how  readily,
and  with  what  exact  obedience
they  perform  those  things  that
are  commanded  them.

26  All  are  not  ^  generals,  nor
^"  colonels,  nor  ^^  captains,  nor  ^^
inferior  ofificers :

27  But  every  one  in  his  re-
spective rank  does  what  is  com-
manded him  by  the  king,  and
those  who  have  the  authority
over  him.

28  They  who  are  great,  can-
not subsist  without  those  that
are  little  ;  nor  the  little  without
the  great.

29  But  there  must  be  a  mix-
ture in  all  things,  and  then  there
will  be  use  and  profit  too.

30  Let  us,  ^^for  example,  take
our  body  :  the  head  without  the
feet  is  nothing,  neither  the  feet
without  the  head.

31  And  even  the  smallest
members  of  our  body  are  yet
both  necessary  and  useful  to  the
whole  body.

32  But  all  conspire  together,
and  ^*  are  subject  to  one  common


^  That  which  has  the  power  to  save  us.  ^  Heijrhts  of  heaven  '  Heb.  i.  3,  4.
*  Psalm  cix.  4.  Hob.  i.  7.  ^Heb.  i.  5.  «  Comp.  Psalm  ii.  7,  8.  ^  Heb.  i.  13,
Psalm  cv.  1.  ^  War.  '  Prefects.  ^°  Commanders  of  a  thousand.  "  Centu-
rions. ^*  Commanders  of  50,  and  so  on.  ^^1  Cor.  xii.  13,  21.  ^"^  U-e  one  com-
mon subjection.

9  129


Exhorts  from  the  I.CLEMENT.       different  orders  of  rnen


use,  namely,  the  preservation  of
the  whole  ^  body.

33  Let  therefore  our  whole
body  be  saved  in  Christ  Jesus ;
and  let  every  one  be  subject  to
his  neighbour,  *  according  to  the
order  in  which  he  is  placed  ,by
the  ^  gift  of  God.

34  Let  not  the  strong  man  de-
spise the  weak ;  and  let  the  weak
see  that  he  reverence  the  strong.

35  Let  the  rich  man  distri-
bute to  the  necessity  of  the  poor :
and  let  the  poor  bless  God,  that
he  has  given  one  unto  him,  by
whom  his  want  may  be  supplied.

36  Let  the  wise  man  shew
forth  his  wisdom,  not  in  words,
but  in  good  works.

37  Let  him  that  is  humble,
not  bear  witness  to  himself,  but
let  him  leave  it  to  another  to
bear  witness  of  him.

38  Let  him  that  is  pure  in  the
flesh,  not  grow  proud  of  it,  know-
ing that  it  was  *  from  another  that
he  received  the  gift  of  continence.

39  Let  us  consider  therefore,
brethren,  ^  whereof  we  are  made ;
who,  and  what  kind  of  men  we
came  into  the  world,  as  it  were
out  of  a  sepulchre,  and  from
outer  darkness.

40  He  that  made  us,  and
formed  us,  brought  us  into  his
own  world ;  having  ®  presented
us  with  his  benefits,  even  before
we  were  born.

41  Wherefore,  having  received
all  these  things  from  him,  we
ought  in  everything  to  give
thanks  unto  him;  to  whom  be
glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.

CHAP.  xvin.

From  whence  he  exhorts  them  to  do
everything  orderly  in  the  Church,  as
the  only  way  to  please  God.

1  MS.  TO  Gua.      2  As  also  has  he  placed.     '  His  gift.      *  Another  that  gave
him.    *  Of  what  matter.     «  Prepared  for  us.     '  And  impudent,  and  withoiit
instruction.     ^  por.     »  An  air.     ^^  John  iv.  16,  &c.,  xv.  15,  iv.  19.     "  Job  v.
1,  &c.    ^2  Were  crushed  upon.    ^'Deliver.     ^*Eat.
130


FOOLISH  and  unwise  men
''  who  have  neither  prudence
nor  learning  may  mock  and  de-
ride us  ;  being  willing  to  set  up
themselves  in  their  own  conceits ;

2  ^But  what  can  a  mortal  man
do?  Or  what  strength  is  there  in
him  that  is  made  out  of  the  dust?

3  For  it  is  written,  there  was
no  shape  before  mine  eyes;  only
I  heard  a  ^  sound  and  a  voice.

4  ^°  For  what?  Shall  man  be
pure  before  the  Lord  ?  Shall  he
be  blameless  in  his  works  ?

5  Behold,  he  trusteth  not  in
his  servants ;  and  his  angels  he
chargeth  with  folly.

6  Yes,  the  heaven  is  not  clean
in  his  sight,  how  much  less  they
that  dwell  in  houses  of  clay  ;  of
which  also  we  ourselves  were
made?

7  He  smote  them  as  a  moth  :
and  from  morning  even  unto  the
evening  they  endure  not.  Be-
cause they  were  not  able  to  help
themselves,  they  perished ;  he
breathed  upon  them  and  they
died,  because  they  had  no  wisdom.

8  "Call  now^  if  there  be  any  that
will  answer  thee ;  and  to  which
of  the  angels  wilt  thou  look  ?

9  For  wrath  killeth  the  foolish
man,  and  envy  slayeth  him  that
is  in  error.

10  I  have  seen  the  foolish
taking  root,  but  lo,  their  habita-
tion was  presently  consumed.

11  Their  children  were  far
from  safety,  they  ^'^perished  at  the
gates  of  those  who  were  lesser
than  themselves;  and  there  was
no  man  to  '^  help  them.

12  For  what  was  prepared
for  them,  the  righteous  ^*did
eat :  and  they  shall  not  be  deli-
vered from  evil.


to  order  in  the  church        I.  CLEMENT.


as  jjleadng  to  God.


13  Seeing  then  these  things
are  manifest  unto  us,  it  will  be-
hoove us,  to  take  care  that  look-
ing into  the  depths  of  the  divine
knowledge,  we  do  all  things  in
order,  whatsoever  our  Lord  has
commanded  us  to  do.

14  And  particularly,  that  we
perform  our  offerings  and  service
to  God,  at  their  appointed  sea-
sons :  for  these  he  has  com-
manded to  be  done,  not  ^  rashly
and  disorderly,  but  at  certain
determinate  times  and  hours.

15  And  therefore  he  has  or-
dained by  his  supreme  will  and
authority,  both  where,  and  by
what  persons,  they  are  to  be
performed;  that  so  all  things
being  piously  done  unto  all  well-
pleasing,  they  may  be  acceptable
unto  ^  him, "

16  They  therefore  who  make
their  offerings  at  the  appointed
seasons,  are  happy  and  accepted :
because  that  obeying  the  com-
mandments of  the  Lord,  they
are  free  from  sin.

17  And  the  same  care  must
be  had  of  the  persons  that  min-
ister unto  him.

18  'For  the  chief-priest  has
his  proper  services;  and  to  the
priests  their  proper  place  is  ap-
pointed ;  and  to  the  Levites  ap-
pertain their  proper  ministries:
and  the  layman  is  confined  within
the  bounds  of  what  is  commanded
to  laymen.

19  Let  every  one  of  you  there-
fore, brethren,  bless  God  in  his
proper  station,  with  *a  good  con-
science, and  with  all  gravity,
not  exceeding  the  rule  of  his
service  that  is  appointed  to  him.

20  The  daily  sacrifices  are
not  offered  everywhere  ;  nor  the
peace-offerings,  nor  the  sacrifices


appointed  for  sins  and  transgres-
sions ;  but  only  at  Jerusalem :
nor  in  any  place  there,  but  only
at  the  altar  before  the  temple ;
that  which  is  offered  being  first
diligently  examined  by  the  high-
priest  and  the  other  minister  we
before  mentioned.

21  They  therefore  who  do  any-
thing which  is  not  agreeable  to
His  will  are  punished  with  death.

22  ^Consider,  brethren,  that
by  how  much  the  better  know-
ledge God  has  vouchsafed  unto
us  by  so  much  the  greater  dan-
ger are  we  exposed  to.

CHAP.  XIX.

The  orders  of  Ministers  in  Christ's
Church  established  by  the  Apostles
according  to  Chrisi^s  command,  7
after  the  example  of  Moses.  16  There-
fore they  who  have  been  duly  placed  in
the  ministry  according  to  their  order
cannot  without  great  sin  be  put  out  of  it.

THE  Apostles  have  preached
to  us  from  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ ;  Jesus  Christ  from  God.

2  Christ  therefore  was  sent  by
God,  the  Apostles  bj  Christ ;  so
both  were  orderly  ^  sent,  accord-
ing to  the  will  of  God.

3  For  having  received  their
command,  and  being  thoroughly
assured  by  the  resurrection  of
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  ^and
convinced  by  the  word  of  God,
with  the  *  fulness  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  they  went  abroad,  pub-
lishing. That  the  kingdom  of
God  was  at  hand.

4  And  thus  preaching  through
countries  and  cities,  Hhey  ap-
pointed the  first  fruits  of  their
conversion  to  be  bishops  and
ministers  over  such  as  should
afterwards  believe,  having  first
proved  them  by  the  Spirit.

5  Nor  was  this  any  new  thing :

^  By  chance.     ^  To  his  will.     '  gee  Coteler.  in  loc.     *  Being  in  a  good  con-
5  Ye  see.       ^  Done.      '^  1  Thess.  i.  5.       ^  With  the  full  assurance.


science

•  Vid.  Coteler.  in  loc.


131


Oj  the  orders


I.  CLEMENT.


ministry.


seeing  that  long  before  it  was
written  concerning  bishops  and
deacons.

6  For  thus  saith  the  Scrip
ture,  in  a  certain  place :  ^  I  will
appoint  their  ^  overseers  in  right-
eousness, and  their  ministers  in
faith.

7  And  what  wonder  if  they,
to  whom  such  a  work  was  com-
mitted by  God  in  Christ,  estab-
lished such  officers  as  we  before
mentioned ;  when  even  that
blessed  and  faithful  servant  in
all  his  house,  Moses,  ^set  down
in  the  Holy  Scriptures  all  things
that  were  commanded  him.

8  Whom  also  all  the  rest  of  the
prophets  followed,  bearing  wit-
ness with  one  consent  to  those
things  that  were  appointed  by
him.

9  For  he,  perceiving  an  *  emu-
lation to  arise  among  the  tribes
concerning  the  priesthood,  and
that  there  was  a  strife  about  it,
which  of  them  should  be
adorned  with  that  glorious  name ;
commanded  their  twelve  captains
to  bring  to  him  ^twelve  rods;
every  tribe  being  written  upon
its  rod,  according  to  its  name.

10  And  he  took  them  and
bound  them  together,  and  sealed
them  with  the  seals  of  the  twelve
princes  of  the  tribes ;  and  laid
them  up  in  the  tabernacle  of
witness,  upon  the  table  of  God.

11  And  when  he  had  shut
the  door  of  the  tabernacle  he
sealed  up  the  keys  of  it,  in  like
manner  ®as  he  had  done  the
rods  ;  and  said  unto  them.  Men
and  brethren,  whichsoever  tribe
shall  have  its  rod  blossom,  that


tribe  has  God  chosen  to  perform
the  office  of  a  priest,  and  '  to
minister  unto  him  in  holy  thiiigs.

12  And  when  the  morning
was  come,  he  called  together  all
Israel,  six  hundred  thousand
men  ;  and  shewed  to  the  princes
their  seals ;  and  opened  the
tabernacle  of  witness;  and
brought  forth  the  rods.

13  And  the  rod  of  Aaron  was
found  not  only  to  have  blos-
somed, but  also  to  have  fruit
upon  it.

14  What  think  you,  beloved  ?
Did  not  Moses  before  know
*  what  should  happen  ?

15  Yes  verily  :  but  to  the  end
there  might  be  no  division,  nor
tumult  in  Israel,  he  did  in  this
manner,  that  the  name  of  the
true  and  only  God  might  be
glorified,  to  him  be  honour  for
ever  and  ever,  Amen.

16  So  likewise  our  Apostles
knew  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
that  there  should  contentions
arise,  ^  upon  account  of  the  min-
istry.

17  And  therefore  having  a
perfect  fore-knowledge  of  this^
they  appointed  persons,  as  we
have  before  said,  and  then  ^°gave
direction,  how,  when  they  should
die,  other  chosen  and  approved
men  should  succeed  in  their
ministry.

18  Wherefore  we  cannot  think
that  those  may  justly  be  thrown
out  of  their  ministry,  who  were
either  appointed  by  them,  or  af-
terwards chosen  by  other  emi-
nent men,  with  the  consent  of
the  whole  church ;  and  who
have  with  all  lowliness  and  in-


1  Isaiah  Ix.  17.  ^  Bishops,  Deacons.  ^  Signified.  *  An  emulation  hap-
pening. ^Numb.  xvii.  ^  And  the  Rods.  '  To  exercise  the  office  of  the
priesthood,  and  to  minister,  &c.  ^xhat  this  should  be  so.  » A  bout  the
name  of  the  bishoprick.  ^°  Left  a  list  of  other  chosen  and  approved  per-
sons, who  should  succeed  them  in  their  ministry.  See  Dr.  Arden's  Disc,
upon  this  passage.  Dr.  Hammond's  Power  of  the  Keys,  c  iii.  p.  413.
132


Exhorts  to  peace


I.  CLEMENT.


from  holy  orders.


nocency  ministered  to  the  flock
of  Christ,  in  peace,  and  without
self-interest,  and  were  for  a  long
time  commended  by  all.

19  For  it  would  be  no  small
sin  in  us,  should  we  cast  off  those
from  their  ^  ministry  who  holily
and  without  blame  ^fulfil  the
duties  of  it.

20  Blessed  are  those  priests,
who  having  finished  their  course
before  these  times  have  obtained
a  fruitful  and  perfect  dissolu-
tion :  for  they  have  no  fear,  lest
any  one  should  turn  them  out
of  the  place  which  is  now  ap-
pointed for  them.

21  But  we  see  how  you  have
put  out  some,  who  lived  reputa-
bly among  you,  from  the  minis-
try, which  by  their  innocence
they  had  adorned.

CHAP.  XX.

He  exhorts  them  to  peace  from  examples
out  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  20  par-
ticularly from  St.  Paul's  exhortation
to  them.

YE  are  contentious,  brethren,
and  zealous  for  things  that
pertain  not  unto  salvation.

2  Look  into  the  Holy  Scrip-
tures, which  are  the  true  words
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Ye  know
that  there  is  nothing  unjust  or
counterfeit  written  in  them.

3  There  you  shall  not  find
that  righteous  men  were  ever
cast  off  by  such  as  were  good
themselves.

4  '  They  were  persecuted,  but
it  was  by  the  wicked  and  unjust.

5  They  were  cast  into  prison  ;
but  they  were  cast  in  by  those
that  were  unholy.

6  They  were  stoned;  but  it
was  by  transgressors.


7  They  were  killed ;  but  by
accursed  men,  and  such  as  had
taken  up  an  unjust  envy  against
them.

8  *  And  all  these  things  they
underwent  gloriously.

9  For  what  shall  we  say,  bre-
thren ?  Was  Daniel  cast  into
the  ^  den  of  lions,  by  men  fear-
ing God  ?  Ananias,  Azarius,  and
Misael,  were  they  *  cast  into  the
^  fiery  furnace  by  men,  *  profes-
sing the  excellent  and  glorious
worship  of  the  Most  High?
God  forbid.

10  What  kind  of  persons
then  were  they  that  did  these
things  ?  They  were  men  abomi-
nable, full  of  all  wickedness;
who  were  incensed  to  so  great
a  degree,  as  to  bring  those  into
sufferings,  who  with  a  holy  and
unblameable  purpose  of  mind
worshipped  God :  not  knowing
that  the  Most  High  is  the  pro-
tector and  defender  of  all  such
as  with  a  pure  conscience  serve
his  ^  holy  name :  to  whom  be
glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.

11  But  they  who  with  a  full
persuasion  have  endured  these
things,  ^°  are  made  partakers  of
glory  and  honour :  and  "  are  ex-
alted and  lifted  up  by  God  in
their  memorial  throughout  all
ages,  Amen.

12  T  Wherefore  it  will  be-
hoove us  also,  brethren,  "to  fol-
low such  examples  as  these ;  for
it  is  written,  Hold  fast  to  such
as  are  holy ;  for  they  that  do  so
shall  be  sanctified.

13  And  again  in  another
place  he  saith,  ^'  With  the  pure
thou  shalt  be  pure,  (^*and  with

i  the   elect   thou  shalt  be  elect).


^  Bishoprick.  2  Offer  the  gifts.  '  Just  nien.  "*  Suffering  these  things  they
underwent  them  gloriously.  ^  Dan.  vi.  16.  ^Shut  into.  'Dan.  iii.  20.
®  Worshipping  the  worship.  ^  Full  of  virtue.  ^''Have  inherited.  "  Have
been  exalted.  ^'^  To  cleave  to.  ^*  Psalm  xvii.  2.  ^*  Omitted  by  Junius,
and  now   restored  from  the  MS.

183


Further  exhorts


I.  CLEMENT.


to  peace  and  union.


but  with  the  perverse  man  thou '
shalt  be  ^  perverse.

14  Let  us  therefore  join  our-
selves to  the  innocent  and  right-
eous ;  for  such  are  the  elect  of
God.

15  Wherefore  are  there  strifes,
and  anger,  and  divisions,  and
schisms,  and  wars,  among  us  ?

16  ^Have  we  not  all  one
God,  and  one  Christ  ?  ^  Is  not
one  spirit  of  grace  poured  out
upon  us  all  ?  Have  we  not  one
calling  in  Christ  ?

17  Why  then  do  we  rend  and
tear  in  pieces  the  members  of
Christ ;  and  raise  seditions
against  our  own  body  ?  And
are  come  to  such  a  height  of
madness,  as  to  forget  that  *we
were  members  one  of  another  ?

18  Remember  the  words  of
our  Lord  Jesus,  ^how  he  said.
Wo  to  that  man,  (by  whom  of-
fences ^come)  *  It  were  better  for
him  that  he  had  never  been  born,
than  that  he  should  have  of-
fended one  of  my  elect.  It  were
better  for  him,  that  a  mill-
stone should  be  tied  about
his  neck,  and  he  should  be  cast
into  the  sea,  than  that  he
should  offend  one  of  my  little
ones.

19  Your  schism  has  perverted
many,  has  discouraged  many :  it
has  caused  diffidence  in  many,
and  grief  in  us  all.  And  yet
your  sedition  continues  still.

20  T  Take  the  epistle  of  the
blessed  Paul  the  Apostle  into
your  hands  ;  ^  What  was  it  that
he  wrote  to  you  at  his  first
preaching  the  Gospel  among
you?

21  Verily  he  did  ^by  the  spirit


admonish  you  concerning  him-
self, and  Cephas,  and  Apollos,
because  that  even  then  ye  had
begun  to  fall  into  ^  parties  and
factions  among  yourselves.

22  Nevertheless  your  partial-
ity then  led  you  into  a  much  less
sin  :  forasmuch  as  ye  ^^  placed
your  affections  upon  Apostles,
men  of  "  eminent  reputation  in
the  church  ;  and  upon  another,
who  was  greatly  tried  and  ap-
proved of  by  them.

23  But  consider,  we  pray  you,
who  are  they  that  have  now  led
you  astray ;  and  lessened  the
*^  reputation  of  that  brotherly
love  that  was  "so  eminent  among
you?

24  It  is  a  shame,  my  beloved,
yea,  a  very  great  shame,  and  un-
worthy of  your  Christian  "  pro-
fession, to  hear  that  the  most
firm  and  ^°  ancient  church  of  the
Corinthians  should,  by  one  or
two  persons,  be  led  into  a  sedi-
tion against  its  priests.

25  And  this  report  is  come
not  only  to  us,  but  to  those  also
that  differ  from  us.

26  Insomuch  that  the  name  of
the  Lord  is  blasphemed  through
your  folly ;  and  even  ye  your-
selves are  brought  into  danger
by  it.

27  T  I^^t  us  therefore  with  all
haste  ^^  put  an  end  to  this  sedi-
tion ;  and  let  us  fall  down  before
the  Lord,  and  beseech  Him  with
tears  that  He  "would  be  favoura-
bly reconciled  to  us,  and  restore
us  again  to  a  ^®  seemly  and  holy
course  of  brotherly  love.

28  For  this  is  the  gate  of
righteousness,  opening  unto  life :
as  it  is  written,  ^^  Open  unto  me


^  Turn  aside.  »Eph.  iv.  4.  '  1  Cor.  xii.  <  Eora.  xii.  ^  For  he  said.  ^  Luke,
xvii.  2.  '  See  Dodwell's  add.  and  Pearson,  Dr.  Grabe,  &c.  ^  Spiritually
Bend  to  you.  *  Inclinations.  ^"Inclined.  ^^  Witnessed  of.  ^^Qrayity.
"  So  much  spoken  of.  "Institution.  ^^See  Dodwell.  '^  Take  away.
^7  Becoming  favourable.  ^^  Grave,  venerable.  ^^  Psalm  cxviii.  19,  20.
134


The  value  and  effects  of    I.  CLEMENT.


unity  and  charity.


the  gates  of  righteousness ;  I  will
go  in  unto  them  and  will  praise
the  Lord.  This  is  the  gate  of
the  Lord,  the  righteous  shall
enter  into  it.

29  Although  therefore  many
gates  are  opened,  yet  this  gate
of  righteousness  is  that  gate  in
Christ  at  which  blessed  are  they
that  enter  in,  and  direct  their
way  in  holiness  and  righteous-
ness, doing  all  things  without
disorder.

30  Let  a  man  be  faithful,  let
him  be  powerful  in  the  utterance
of  knowledge:  let  him  be  wise
in  making  an  exact  judgment  of
words ;  let  him  be  pure  in  all  his
actions.

31  But  still  by  how  much  the
more  he  seems  to  be  ^  above
others  by  reason  of  these  things,
by  so  much  the  more  will  it  be-
hoove him  to  be  humble-minded  ;
and  to  seek  what  is  profitable  to
all  men,  and  not  his  own  advan-
tage.

CHAP.  XXL

1  The  value  which  God  puts  upon  love
and  unity  :  the  effects  of  a  true  charity,
8  which  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  must
be  obtained  by  prayer.

HE  that  has  the  love  that  is
in  Christ,  let  him  keep  the
commandments  of  Christ.

2  For  who  is  able  to  express
the  ^  obligation  of  the  love  of
God  ?  What  man  is  sufficient  to
declare,  and  is  fitting,  the  excel-
lency of  its  beauty  ?

3  The  height  to  which  charity
leads  is  inexpressible.

4  Charity  *  unites  uS  to  God  ;
*  charity  covers  the  multitude  of
sins:  ^charity  endures  all  things,
is  long-suffering  in  all  things.

5  There  is  nothing  base  and
sordid  in  charity  ;  charity  lifts
not  itself  up  above  others ;  ad-

*  Greater.    *  Bond.     ^  Glues.  *  1  Peter  iv.  9.     ^  i  Cor.  xiii.  7,  &c.     «  Take
us  up.        '' Animadversion,  or  visitation.        ^Isaiah  xxvi.  20.         ^  Are  we.

135


mits  of  no  divisions  ;  is  not  sedi-
tious ;  but  does  all  things  in
peace  and  concord.

6  By  charity  were  all  the  elect
of  God  made  perfect :  Without
it  nothing  is  pleasing  and  ac-
ceptable in  the  sight  of  God.

7  Through  charity  did  the
Lord  ^join  us  unto  himself;
whilst  for  the  love  that  he  bore
towards  us,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
gave  his  own  blood  for  us,  by  the
will  of  God ;  his  flesh  for  our
flesh ;  his  soul,  for  our  souls.

8  ^  Ye  see,  beloved,  how  great
and  wonderful  a  thing  charity
is  :  and  how  that  no  expressions
are  sufficient  to  declare  its  per-
fection.

9  But  who  is  fit  to  be  found
in  it?  Even  such  only  as  God
shall  vouchsafe  to  make  so.

10  Let  us  therefore  pray  to
him,  and  beseech  him,  that  we
may  be  worthy  of  it ;  that  so  we
may  live  in  charity ;  being  un-
blamable, without  human  pro-
pensities, without  respect  of  per-
sons.

11  All  the  ages  of  the  world,
from  Adam,  even  unto  this  day,
are  passed  away ;  but  they  who
have  been  made  perfect  in  love,
have  by  the  grace  of  God  ob-
tained a  place  among  the  right-
eous ;  and  shall  be  made  mani-
fest in  the  ^judgment  of  the
kingdom  of  Christ.

12  For  it  is  written,  ^  Enter
into  thy  chambers  for  a  little
space,  till  my  anger  and  indigna-
tion shall  pass  away  :  And  I  will
remember  the  good  day,  and  will
raise  you  up  out  of  your  graves.

13  Happy  ^  then  shall  we  be,
beloved,  if  we  shall  have  fulfilled
the  commandments  of  God,  in  the
unity  of  love  ;  that  so,  through

I  love,  our  sins  may  be  forgiven  us.


Exhorts  to  unity  from        I.  CLEMENT.        the  example  of  Moses,


14  For  so  it  is  written,  ^  Bless-
ed are  they  whose  iniquities  are
forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are
covered.  Blessed  is  the  man  to
whom  the  Lord  imputeth  no  sin,
and  in  whose  mouth  there  is  no
guile.

15  Now  this  blessing  is  ful-
filled in  those  who  are  chosen  by-
God  through  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord,  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever
and  ever.     Amen.

CHAP.  XXII.

1  He  exhorts  such  as  have  been  con-
cerned in  these  divisions  to  repent,
and  return  to  their  unity,  confessing
their  sin  to  God,  7  which  he  enforces
from  the  example  of  Moses,  10  and
of  many  among  the  heathen,  23  and.
of  Judith  and  Esther  among  the  Jews.

LET  us  therefore,  as  many  as
have  transgressed  by  any  of
the  ^suggestions  of  the  adver-
sary, beg  God's  forgiveness.

2  And  as  for  those  who  have
been  the  ^  heads  of  the  sedition
and  faction  among  you,  *  let
them  look  to  the  common  end  of
our  hope.

3  For  as  many  as  are  ^  endued
with  fear  and*  charity,  would
rather  they  themselves  should
fall  into  trials  than  their  neigh-
bours :  And  choose  to  be  them-
selves condemned,  rather  than
that  the  good  and  just  charity
delivered  to  us,  should  suffer.

4  For  it  is  seemly  for  a  man
to  confess  wherein  he  has  trans-


\


5  ^And  not  to  harden  his
heart,  as  the  hearts  of  those  were
hardened,  who  raised  up  sedition
against  Moses  the  servant  of
God  ;  whose  punishment  was
manifest '  unto  all  men ;  for  they


went  down  alive  into  the  grave,
death  swallowed  them  up.

6  ®  Pharaoh  and  his  host,  and
all  the  rulers  of  Egypt,  their
chariots  also  and  their  horsemen,
were  for  no  other  cause  drowned,
in  the  bottom  of  the  Red  Sea,  and
perished ;  but  because  they  hard-
ened their  foolish  hearts,  alter  so
many  signs  done  in  the  land  of
Egypt,  by  Moses  the  servant  of
God.

7  ^  Beloved,  God  is  not  indi-
gent of  any  thing ;  nor  does  he
demand  any  thing  of  us,  but
that  we  should  confess  our  sins
unto  him,

8  For  so  says  the^Holy  David,
^"  I  will  confess  unto  the  Lord,
and  it  shall  please  him  better
than  a  young  bullock  that  hath
horns  and  hoof.  Let  the  poor
see  it  and  be  glad.

9  And  again  he  saith,  "  Offer
unto  God  the  sacrifice  of  praise,
and  pay  thy  vows  unto  the  Most
Highest.  And  call  upon  me  in
the  day  of  trouble,  and  I  will
deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt
glorify  me.  ^^The  sacrifice  of  God
is  a  broken  spirit.

10  ^  Ye  know,  beloved,  ye
know  full  well  the  Holy  Scrip-
tures ;  and  have  thoroughly
searched  into  the  oracles  of  God :
call  them  therefore  to  your  re-
membrance.

11  For  when  Moses  went  up
into  the  mount,  and  tarried  there
forty  days  and  forty  nights  in
fasting  and  humiliation ;  God
said  unto  him,  "Arise,  Moses,
and  get  thee  down  quickly  from
hence,  for  thy  people  whom  thou
broughtest  out  of  the  land  of
Egypt,  have  committed  wicked-


'  Psalm  xxxii.  *  See  Junius  in  loc.  'Chief  leaders.  *They  ought.  ^Walk-
ing according  to;  live  in.  8 Rather  than.  'Num.  xvi.  ^Exod.  iv.  'Chosen.
10  Psalm  Ixix.  31.  ^^  Psalm  1. 14.  ^^  pgalm  11.  17.  ^^  Exod.  xxxii.

Deut.  ix.

136


t   s


S      w


the  heathens,  &c.


I.  CLEMENT.


Tlie  benefit


ness :  they  have  soon  transgress- 1
ed  the  way  that  I  commanded  |
them,  and  have  made  to  them-
selves graven  images.  |

12  And  the  Lord  said  unto  \
him,  I  have  spoken  unto  thee  I
^  several    times,   saying   I   have  i
seen  this  people,  and  behold  it  is
a    stiffhecked    people :    let    me  \
therefore  destroy  them,  and  put
out  their  name  from  under  hea-
ven.    And   I   will    make   unto
thee  a  great  and   a   wonderful
nation,   that    shall    be    much  "^
larger  than  this.

13  But   Moses  said.  Not  so,
Lord  ;  Forgive  now  this  people  I
their  sin ;   or  if  thou  wilt  not,
blot  me  also  out  of  the  book  of
the  living.  O  admirable  charity !
O  insuperable  perfection  !     The  j
servant  speaks  freely  to  his  Lord ;  |
He  beseeches  him  either  to  for-
give the  people,  or  to  ^  destroy
him  together  with  them.

14  "f  Who  is  there  among  you
that  is  generous  ?     Who  that  is  ;
compassionate  ?     Who  that  has  ;
any  charity  ?     Let  him  say,  if
this  sedition,  this  contention,  and  I
these  schisms,  be  upon  my  ac- 1
count,  I  am  ready  to  depart ;   to
go     away      whithersoever     you
please  ;    and  do  whatsoever  *  ye
shall    command   me:    Only   let
the  flock  of  Christ  be  in  peace,
with  the  elders  that  are  set  over
it.

15  He  that  shall  do  this,  shall
get  to  himself  a  very  great  hon-
our in  the  Lord  ;  and  ^  there  is
no  place  but  what  will  be  ready
to  receive  him  :  *  For  the  earth
is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness
thereof.

16  These  things  they  who  have
their  conversation  towards  God


not  to  be  repented  of,  both  have
done  and  will  always  be  ready
to  do.

17  T  ^  Nay  and  even  the  Gen-
tiles themselves  have  given  us
examples  of  this  kind.

18  For  we  read.  How  many
kings  and  princes,  in  times  of
pestilence,  being  warned  by  their
oracles,  have  given  up  themselves
unto  death :  that  by  their  own
blood,  they  might  deliver  their
*  country  from  destruction.

19  ^Others  have  forsaken  their
cities,  so  that  they  might  put  an
end  to  the  seditions  of  them.

20  We  know  how  many  among
ourselves,  have  given  up  them-
selves unto  bonds,  that  thereby
they  might  free  others  from
them.

21  Others  have  sold  them-
selves into  bondage  that  they
might  feed  ^"  their  brethren  with
the  price  of  themselves.

22  And  even  many  women,
being  strengthened  by  the  grace
of  God,  have  done  many  glorious
and  manly  things  on  such
occasions.

23  The  blessed  "Judith,  when
her  city  was  besieged,  desired  the
elders,  that  they  would  suffer  her
to  go  into  the  camp  of^Hheir
enemies:  and  she  went  out  ex-
posing herself  to  danger  for  the
love  she  bore  to  her  country  and
her  people  that  were  besieged;
and  the  Lord  delivered  Holofer-
nes  into  the  hands  of  a  woman.

24  Nor  did  ^^  Esther,  being  per-
fect in  faith,  expose  herself  to
any  less  hazard,  for  the  delivery
of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  in
danger  of  being  destroyed.  For,
by  fasting  and  humbling  herself,
she  entreated  the  Great  Maker


^  Once  and  twice.         ^  More,  greater.  *  Blot  out.  '•  The  multitude.

^  Every  place.  ^  Psalm  xxiv.  ''  But  that  we  may  bring  the  examples  of
heathens.  *  Citizens.  *  Many.  ^"  Othei*s.  ^^  Judith,  viii.  ix.  x.  xiii.
^^  The  strangers.       ^*  Esther,  vii.  viii.

137


o/  mutual  advice


I.  CLEMENT.


and  correction.


of  all  things,  the  God  of  ^  spirits ;
so  that  beholding  the  humility  of
her  soul,  he  delivered  the  people,
for  whose  sake  she  was  in  peril.

CHAP.  XXIII.

The  benefit  of  mutual  advice  and  correc-
tion. He  entreats  them  to  follow  that
which  is  here  given  to  them.

WHEREFOKE  let  us  also
pray  for  such  as  are  fallen
into  '^  sin.  That  being  endued
with  humility  and  moderation,
they  may  submit  not  unto  us,  but
to  the  will  of  God.

2  For  by  this  means  ^  they
shall  obtain  a  fruitful  and  perfect
remembrance,  with  mercy,  both
in  our  prayers  to  God,  and  in
our  mention  of  them  before  his
*  saints.

3  Let  us  receive  correction,  at
which  no  man  ought  to  repine.

4  Beloved,  the  reproof  and  the
correction  which  we  exercise  to-
wards one  another,  is  good,  and
exceeding  profitable :  for  it  unites
us  the  more  closely  to  the  will  of
God.

5  For  so  says  the  Holy  Scrip-
ture, ^The  Lord  corrected  me,
but  he  did  not  deliver  me  over
unto  death.  *  For  whom  the  Lord
loveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scourg-
eth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth.

6  ^  The  righteous,  saith  he,
shall  instruct  me  in  mercy  and
reprove  me;  but  let  not  oil  of
sinners  make  fat  my  head.

7  And  again  he  saith,  ^  Happy
is  the  man  whom  God  correcteth  ;
therefore  despise  not  thou  the
chastening  of  the  Almighty.

8  For  he  maketh  sore  and  bind-
eth  up;  he  woundeth  and  his
hands  make  whole.

9  He  shall  deliver  thee  in  six
troubles ;  yea  in  seven  there  shall


no  evil  touch  thee.  In  famine
he  shall  redeem  thee  from  death ;
and  in  war  from  the  power  of
the  sword.

10  Thou  shalt  be  hid  from
the  scourge  of  the  tongue ;  nei-
ther shalt  thou  be  afraid  of  de-
struction when  it  cometh.

11  Thou  shalt  laugh  at  the
wicked  and  sinners ;  neither
shalt  thou  be  afraid  of  the  beasts
of  the  earth.  The  wild  beast
shall  be  at  peace  with  thee.

12  Then  shalt  thou  know  that
thy  house  shall  be  in  peace ;  and
the  habitation  of  thy  tabernacle
shall  not  err.  Thou  shalt  know
also  that  thy  seed  shall  be  great
and  thy  offspring  as  the  grass  of
the  earth.

13  Thou  shalt  come  to  thy
grave  as  the  ripe  corn,  that  is
taken  in  due  time;  like  as  a
shock  of  corn  cometh  in,  in  its
season.

14  Ye  see,  beloved,  how  there
shall  be  a  defence  to  those  that
are  corrected  of  the  Lord.  For
being  a  good  instructor,  he  is
willing  to  admonish  us  by  his
holy  discipline.

15  Do  ye  therefore  who  laid
the  first  foundation  of  this  se-
dition, submit  yourselves  unto
your  ^  priests ;  and  be  instructed
unto  repentance,  bending  the
knees  of  your  hearts.

16  Learn  to  be  subject,  lay-
ing aside  all  proud  and  arrogant
boasting  of  your  tongues.

17  For  it  is  better  for  you  to
be  found  little,  and  approved,  in
the  ^"sheepfold  of  Christ,  than  to
seem  to  yourselves  better  than
others,  and  be  cast  out  of  his
"  fold.

18  For  thus  speaks  the  excel-
lent  and  all   virtuous   wisdom,


who.      '^  Viz.  that  of  schism.     ^  There  shall  be  to  them.     '*i.  e.  our
Fellow- Christians.         *PsaIm  xcviii.  ^Prov.  iii.  11.        ''Psalm  cxli.  5.

« Job  V.  17,  &c.     9  Elders.     ^°  See  Junius  in  loc.     "  See  Coteler  in  loc
138


Commendation  to


11.  CLEMENT.


sincere  obedience.


*  Behold  I  will  pour  out  the  word
of  my  spirit  upon  you,  J  will
make  known  my  speech  unto  you.

19  Because  I  called  and  ye
would  not  hear,  I  stretched  out
my  words  and  ye  regarded  not.

20  But  ye  have  set  at  nought
all  my  counsel,  and  would  none
of  my  reproof.  I  will  also  laugh
at  your  calamity,  and  mock  when
your  fear  cometh.

21  When  your  fear  cometh  as
desolation,  and  your  destruction
as  a  whirlwind,  when  distress
and  anguish  cometh  upon  you.

22  Then  shall  ye  call  upon
me,  but  I  will  not  hear  you :  the
wicked  shall  seek  me,  but  they
shall  not  find  me.  For  that
they  hated  knowledge,  and  did
not  seek  the  fear  of  the  Lord.

23  They  would  not  hearken
unto  my  counsel :  they  despised
all  my  reproof  Therefore  shall
they  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own
ways;  and  be  filled  with  their
own  wickedness.

CHAP.  XXIV.

1  Recommends  them  to  God.  Desires
speedily  to  hear  that  this  Epistle  has
had  a  good  effect  upon  them.  4  Con-
clusion.

"VrOW  God,  the  inspector  of
XM    all  things,  the  '^  Father  of


Spirits,  and  the  Lord  of  all  flesh,
who  hath  chosen  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  and  us  by  him,  to  be  his
peculiar  people ;

2  Grant  to  every  soul  of  man
that  calleth  upon  his  glorious
and  holy  name,  faith,  fear,  peace,
long-sutfering,  patience,  temper-
ance, holiness  and  sobriety,  unto
all  well-pleasing  ^in  his  sight;
through  our  High-Priest  and
Protector  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom
be  glory,  and  majesty,  and
power,  and  honour,  unto  him
now  and  for  ever  more.  Amen.

3  ^  The  messengers  whom  we
have  sent  unto  you,  Claudius,
Ephebus,  and  Valerios  Bito,  with
Fortunatus,  send  back  to  us
again  with  all  speed  in  peace,
and  with  joy,  that  they  may  the
sooner  acquaint  us  with  your
peace  and  concord,  so  much
prayed  for  and  desired  by  us;
and  that  we  may  rejoice  in  your
good  order.

4  The  Grace  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  be  with  you,  and
with  all  that  are  anywhere  called
by  God  through  him  :  To  whom
be  honour  and  glory,  and  might
and  majesty,  and  eternal  domi-
nion, by  *  Christ  Jesus,  from
everlasting  to  everlasting.  Amen.


The  SECOND  EPISTLE  of  CLEMENT  to  the  CORINTHIANS.

[Archbishop  Wake  is  the  translator  of  this  Second  Epistle,  which  he  says
was  not  of  so  great  reputation  among  the  primitive  Fathers  as  the  first.
He  defends  it  notwithstanding ;  and  in  answer  to  those  who  objected  to
Clement's  First  Epistle,  that  it  did  not  duly  honour  the  Trinity,  the
Archbishop  refers  to  this  as  containing  proof  of  the  writer's  fulness  of
belief  on  that  point.]


CHAP.  L

That  we  ought  to  value  our  salvation;
and  to  shew  that  we  do,  by  a  sincere
obedience.

BRETHREN,  we  ought  so  to
think  of  Jesus  Christ  as  of


God;  as  of  the  judge  of  the
living,  and  the  dead  ;  nor  should
we  think  any  less  of  our  salva-
tion.

2  For  if  we  think  ^meanly  of
him,  we  shall  hope  only  to  re-


^  Prov.  i.  23,  &c.    ^  Master.    ^  To  his  name.    *  Him.     ^  Little  things,  or
meanly.

139


The  Gentiles


II.  CLEMENT.


to  he  saved.


ceive   some   small   things   from
him.

3  And  if  we  ^  do  so ;  we  shall
sin ;  not  '  considering  from
whence  we  have  been  called,
and  by  whom,  and  to  what
place ;  and  how  much  Jesus
Christ  vouchsafed  to  suffer  for
our  sakes.

4  What  recompense  then  shall
we  render  unto  him  ?  Or  what
fruit  that  may  be  worthy  of
what  he  has  given  to  us  ?

5  For  indeed  'how  great  are
those  advantages  which  we  owe
to  him  in  relation  to  our  holi-
ness? He  has  illuminated  us:
as  a  father,  he  has  called  us  his
children ;  he  has  saved  us  who
were  lost  and  undone.

6  What  praise  shall  we  give
to  him  ?  Or  what  reward  that
may  be  answerable  to  those
things  which  we  have  received  ?  j

7  We  were  defective  in  our  un-
derstandings ;  worshipping  stones
and  wood ;  gold,  and  silver,  and
brass,  the  works  of  men's  hands  ;
and  our  whole  life  was  nothing
else  but  death.

8  Wherefore    being    encom-
passed with  darkness,  and  having
such  a  mist  before  our  eyes,  we
have  looked  up,  and  through  his  j
will  have  laid  aside  the  cloud  I
wherewith  we  were  surrounded.

9  For  he  had  compassion  upon
us,  and  being  moved  in  his  bow-
els towards  us,  he  saved  us ;
having  beheld  in  us  much  error,
and  destruction ;  and  seen  that


CHAP.  II.

1  That  God  had  before  prophesied  by
Isaiah,  that  the  Gentiles  shovld  be
saved.  8  Tliat  this  ought  to  engage
such  especially  to  live  well;  urithout
which  they  will  still  miscarry.

REJOICE,  thou  barren,  that
bearest  not,  break  forth  and
cry  thou  that  travailest  not ;  for
she  that  is  desolate  hath  many
more  children  than  she  that  hath
an  husband.*

2  In  that  he  said.  Rejoice
thou  barren  that  bearest  not,  he
spake  of  us  :  for  our  church  was
barren  before  that  children  were
given  unto  it.

3  And  again  ;  when  he  said,
Cry  thou  that  travailest  not;
he  implied  thus  much :  That
after  the  manner  of  women  in
travail,  we  should  not  cease  to
put  up  our  prayers  unto  God
^  abundantly.

I  4  And  for  what  follows,  because
she  that  is  desolate  hath  more
children  than  she  that  hath  an
husband  :  it  was  therefore  added,
because  our  people  which  seem
to  have  been  forsaken  by  God,
now  believing  in  him,  are  become
more  than  they  who  seemed  to
have  God.

5  And  another  Scripture  saith,
®  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous
but  sinners  (to  repentance).
The  meaning  of  which  is  this  :
that  those  who  were  lost  must  be
saved.

6  For  that  is,  indeed,  truly
great  and  wonderful,  not  to  con-
firm  those   things  that  are   yet


we  had  no  hope  of  salvation,  but !  standing,  but   those   which   are
only  through  him.  j  falling.

10  For  he  called  us  who  were  ,  7  Even  so  did  it  seem  good  to
not ;  and  was  pleased  from  no-  j  Christ  to  save  what  was  lost ;
thing  to  give  us  being.  '  and    when    he    came    into   the


^  Hear  as  of  little  things.     *  Knowing,
owe  unto  him.     ^Isaiah  liv.  1.      ^'ArrXug
Rom.  xii.  8.     2  Cor.  viii.  2,  ix.  11,  13.     ^Matt.  ix.  13
140


^  How  greatly  holy  things  do  we
See   St.  James  i.  5.     Compare


Exlkorts  against  the  II.  CLEMENT.  things  of  this  world


world,  he  saved  many,  and  called
us  who  were  already  lost.

8  Seeing  then  he  has  shewed
so  great  mercy  towards  us ;  and
chiefly  for  that,  we  who  are
alive,  do  now  no  longer  sacrifice
to  dead  Gods,  nor  pay  any  wor-
ship to  them,  but  have  by  him
been  brought  to  the  knowledge
of  the  Father  of  truth.

9  ^  Whereby  shall  we  shew
that  we  do  indeed  know  him,
but  by  not  denying  him  by
whom  we  have  come  to  the
knowledge  of  him  ?

10  For  even  he  himself  saith,
^  Whosoever  shall  confess  me
before  men,  him  will  I  confess
before  my  Father.  This  there-
fore is  our  reward  if  we  shall
confess  him  by  whom  we  have
been  saved.

11  But,  wherein  must  we  con-
fess him  ? — Namely,  in  doing
those  things  which  he  saith,  and
not  disobeying  his  command-
ments :  by  worshipping  him  not
with  our  lips  only,  but  with  all
our  heart,  and  with  all  our  mind.
For  he  saith  in  Isaiah :  ^  This
people  honoureth  me  with  their
lips,  but  their  heart  is  far  from
me.

12  Let  us  then  not  only  call
him  Lord  ;  for  that  will  not
save  us.  For  he  saith :  *  Not
every  one  that  saith  unto  me
Lord,  Lord,  shall  be  saved,  but
he  that  doeth  righteousness.

13  Wherefore,  brethren,  let
us  confess  him  by  our  works  ;  by
loving  one  another  ;  in  not  com-
mitting adultery,  not  speaking
evil  against  each  other,  not  envy-
ing one  another ;  but  by  being
temperate,  merciful,  good.

14  Let  us  also  have  a  mutual


sense  of  one  another's  sufferings ;
and  not  be  covetous  of  money :
but  let  us,  by  our  good  works,
confess  God,  and  not  by  those
that  are  otherwise.

15  Also  let  us  not  fear  men  :
but  rather  God.  ^  Wherefore,
if  we  should  do  such  wicked
things,  the  Lord  hath  said :
Though  ye  should  be  joined  unto
me,  even  in  my  very  bosom,  and
not  keep  my  commandments,  I
would  cast  you  off,  and  say  unto
you  :  ^  Depart  from  me  ;  I  know
not  whence  you  are,  ye  workers
of  iniquity.

CHAP.  in.

1  Tliat  whilst  we  secure  the  other  world,
we  need  not  fear  what  can  befall  us  in
this.  5.  That  if  we  follow  the  interests
of  this  present  world,  toe  cannot  es-
cape the  punishment  of  the  other.  10
Which  oxight  to  bring  us  to  repentance
and  holiness,  14  and  that  presently :
because  in  this  world  is  the  only  time
for  repentance.

WHEREFORE,  brethren,
leaving  willingly  for  con-
science sake  our  sojourning  in
this  world,  let  us  do  the  will  of
him  who  has  called  us,  and  not
fear  to  depart  out  of  this  world.

2  For  the  Lord  saith,  ^Ye
shall  be  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of
wolves.  Peter  answered  and
said,  What  if  the  wolves  shall
tear  in  pieces  the  sheep  ?  Jesus
said  unto  Peter,  Let  not  the
sheep  fear  the  wolves  after  death :
^And  ye  also  fear  not  those  that
kill  you,  and  after  that  have  no
more  that  they  can  do  unto  you ;
but  fear  him  who  after  you  are
dead,  has  power  to  cast  both  soul
and  body  into  hell-fire.

3  For  consider,  brethren,  that
the  sojourning   of  this   flesh   in


^  What  is  the  knowledge  which  is  towards  hitn.  ^  Matt.  x.  32.
xxix.  13.  *  Matt.  vii.  21.  ^  Wherefore  we  doing  these  tilings,
xii.  23  ;  Luke  xiii.  27.      'Matt.  v.  16.      » Luke  xii.  4,  5.

141


'  Isaiah
«Matt.


and  to  repentance.


11.  CLEMEl^T.


Of  the  resurrection.


the  present  world,  is  but  little,
and  of  a  short  continuance,  but
the  promise  of  Christ  is  great
and  wonderful,  even  the  rest  of
the  kingdom  that  is  to  come,
and  of  eternal  life.

4  What  then  must  we  do  that
we   may   attain   unto    it? — We


must  ^  order  our  conversation
holily  and  righteously,  and  look
upon  all  the  things  of  this  world
as  none  of  ours,  and  not  desire
them.  For,  if  we  desire  to  pos-
sess them  we  fall  from  the  way
of  righteousness.

5  For  thus  saith  the  Lord,
'No  servant  can  serve  two  mas-
ters. If  therefore  we  shall  de-
sire to  serve  God  and  Mammon
it  will  be  without  profit  to  us.
^For  what  will  it  profit,  if  one
gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose
his  own  soul  ?

6  Now  this  world  and  that  to
come  are  two  enemies.  Thisspeak-
eth  of  adultery  and  corruption,
of  covetousness  and  deceit ;  but
renounces  these  things.

7  We  cannot,  therefore,  be
the  friends  of  both  ;  but  we  must
resolve  by  forsaking  the  one,  to
enjoy  the  other.  And  we  think
it  is  better  to  hate  the  present
things,  as  little,  short-lived,  and
corruptible,  and  to  love  those
which  are  to  come,  which  are
truly  good  and  incorruptible.

8  For,  if  we  do  the  will  of
Christ,  we  shall  find  rest :  but  if
not,  nothing  shall  deliver  us
from  eternal  punishment  if  we
shall  disobey  his  commands.  For
even  thus  saith  the  Scripture  in
the  prophet  Ezekiel,  *  If  Noah,
Job,  and  Daniel  should  rise  up,
they  shall  not  deliver  their  chil-
dren in  captivity.

9  Wherefore,  if  such  righteous
men  are  not  able  by  their  right-

^  MS.  Alexander,    oaiug  km  SiKoiag  avcpe<(>eGdai
xvi  26.    *  Ezek.  xiv.  14,  20.    ^  Isaiah  Ixvi.  24.
142


eousness  to  deliver  their  children  ;
how  can  we  hope  to  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  God,  except  we
keep  our  baptism  holy  and  un-
defiled?  Or  who  shall  be  our
advocate,  unless  we  shall  be
found  to  have  done  what  is  holy
and  just  ?

10  Let  us,  therefore,  my  bre-
thren, contend  with  all  earnest-
ness, knowing  that  our  combat
is  at  hand ;  and  that  many  go
long  voyages  to  encounter  for  a
corruptible  reward.

11  And  yet  all  are  not
crowned,  but  they  only  that
labour  much,  and  strive  glo-
riously. Let  us,  therefore,  so
contend,  that  we  may  all  be
crowned.  Let  us  run  in  the
straight  road,  the  race  that  is  in-
corruptible :  and  let  us  in  great
numbers  pass  unto  it,  and  strive
that  w^e  may  receive  the  crown.
But  and  if  we  cannot  all  be
crowned,  let  us  come  as  near  to
it  as  we  are  able.

12  Moreover,  we  must  consider,
that  he  who  contends  in  a  cor-
ruptible combat,  if  he  be  found
doing  anything  that  is  not  fair,  is
taken  away  and  scourged,  and
cast  out  of  the  lists.  What  think
ye  then  that  he  shall  suflfer,  who
does  anything  that  is  not  fitting
in  the  combat  of  immortality?

13  Thus  speaks  the  prophet
concerning  those  who  keep  not
their  seal;  ^Their  worm  shall  not
die,  and  their  fire  shall  not  be
quenched ;  and  they  shall  be  for
a  spectacle  unto  all  flesh.

14  Let  us  therefore  repent,
whilst  we  are  yet  upon  the  earth :
for  we  are  as  clay  in  the  hand  of
the  artificer.  For  as  the  potter
if  he  make  a  vessel,  and  it  be
turned  amiss  in  his  hands,  or
broken,   again   forms    it   anew ;

2  Luke  xvi.  13.     »  Matt.


A  fragment


II.  CLEMENT.  of  the  Lord's  kingdom.


but  if  he  have  gone  so  far  as  to
throw  it  into  the  furnace  of  fire,
he  can  no  more  bring  any  reme-
dy to  it.

15  So  we,  whilst  we  are  in  this
world,  ^should  repent  with  our
whole  heart  for  whatsoever  evil
we  have  done  in  the  flesh ;  while
we  have  yet  the  time  of  repent-
ance, that  we  may  be  saved  by
the  Lord,

16  For  after  we  shall  have
departed  out  of  this  world,  we
shall  no  longer  be  able  to  confess
our  sins  or  repent  ^in  the  other.

17  Wherefore,  brethren,  let  us
doing  the  will  of  the  Father,  and
keeping  our  flesh  pure,  and  ob-
serving the  commandments  of
the  Lord,  lay  hold  on  eternal
life:  for  the  Lord  saith  in  the
gospel,  ^If  ye  have  not  kept  that
which  was  little,  who  will  give
you  that  which  is  great  ? — For  I
say  unto  jon,  he  that  is  faithful
in  that  which  is  least,  is  faithful
also  in  much.

18  This,  therefore,  is  what  he
saith;  keep  your  bodies  pure,
and  your  seal  without  spot,  that
ye  may  receive  eternal  life.

CHAP.  IV.

1  We  shall  rise,  and  be  judged  in  our
bodies  ;  therefore  we  must  live  well  in
them,  6  that  we  ought,  for  our  own  in-
terest, to  live  well ;  though  few  seem  to
mind  what  really  is  for  their  advantage,
1 0  and  not  deceive  ourselves :  seeing
God  will  certainly  judge  us,  and  ren-
der to  all  of  rwt  according  to  our  works,

AND  let  not  any  one  among
you  say,  that  this  very  flesh
is  not  judged,' neither  raised  up.
Consider,  in  what  were  you  saved ;
in  what  did  you  look  up,  if  not
whilst  you  were  in  this  flesh.
2  We  must,  therefore,  keep  our


flesh  as  the  temple  of  God.  For
in  like  manner  as  ye  were  called
in  the  flesh,  ye  shall  also  come  to
judgment  in  the  flesh.  *  Our  one
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  has
saved  us,  being  first  a  spirit,  was
made  flesh,  and  so  called  us;
even  so  we  also  shall  in  this
flesh  receive  the  reward.

3  Let  us,  therefore,  love  one
another,  that  we  may  attain  unto
the  kingdom  of  God.  Whilst  we
have  time  to  be  healed,  let  us
deliver  up  ourselves  to  God  our
physician,  giving  our  reward
unto  him.

4.  And  what  reward  shall  we
give  ? — Repentance  out  of  a  pure
heart.  For  he  knows  all  things
before  hand,  and  searches  out  our
very  hearts.

5  Let  us,  therefore,  give  praise
unto  him :  not  only  with  our
mouths,  but  with  all  our  souls ;
that  he  may  receive  us  as  child-


ren.     "For   so   the   Lord   hath
are   my   brethren,


said;  "They

who  do  the  will  of  my  father,

6  ^  Wherefore,  my  brethren,
let  us  do  the  will  of  the  Father,
who  hath  called  us,  that  we  may
live.  Let  us  pursue  virtue,  and
forsake  wickedness,  which  lead-
eth  us  into  sins ;  and  let  us  flee
all  ungodliness,  that  evils  over-
take us  not.

7  For,  if  we  shall  do  our  dili-
gence to  live  well,  peace  shall
follow  us.  ^  And  yet  how  hard  is
it  to  find  a  man  that  does  this  ?
For  almost  all  are  led  by  human
fears,  choosing  rather  the  pre-
sent enjoyments,  than  the  future
promise.

8  For  they  know  not  how
great  a  torment  the  present  en-
joyments bring  with  them ;  nor
what  delights  the  future  promise.

\Let  us  repent.  «  There.  ^  Luke  xvi.  10,  12.  *MS.  Alex,  plane  sic  ex-
hibit :  eig  Xpigog.  5  Yq^.  Qeov  non  est  in  MS.  «  Matt.  xii.  50.  '  For,  for  this
cause,  we  cannot  find  a  man.     Aliter  Wendel.  in  traduct.  lat.  q.  v.

143


A  Fragment


II.  CLEMENT.     Of  the  Lord's  kingdom.


9  And  if  they  themselves  only
did  this,  it  might  the  more  easily
be  endured ;  but  now  they  go  on
to  infect  innocent  souls  with  their
evil  doctrines ;  not  knowing  that
both  themselves,  and  those  that
hear  them,  shall  receive  a  double
condemnation.

10  ^  Let  us,  therefore,  serve
God  with  a  pure  heart,  and  we
shall  be  righteous:  but  if  we
shall  not  serve  him  because  we
do  not  believe  the  promise  of
God,  we  shall  be  miserable.

11  For  thus  saith  the  prophet;
^  Miserable  are  the  double  minded
who  doubt  in  their  heart,  and
say,  these  things  we  have  heard,
even  in  the  time  of  our  fathers,
but  we  have  seen  none  of  them,
though  we  have  expected  them
from  day  to  day.

12  O  ye  fools !  compare  your-
selves to  a  tree;  take  the  vine
for  an  example.  First  it  sheds
its  leaves,  then  it  buds,  then
come  the  sour  grapes,  then  the
ripe  fruit;  even  so  my  people
have  borne  its  disorders  and  afflic-
tions, but  shall  hereafter  receive
good  things.

13  Wherefore  my  brethren,
let  us  not  doubt  in  our  minds,
but  let  us  expect  with  hope,  that
we  may  receive  our  reward ;  for
he  is  faithful,  who  has  promised
that  he  will  render  to  every  one
a  reward  according  to  his  works.

14  If,  therefore,  we  shall  do
what  is  just  in  the  sight  of  God
we  shall  enter  into  his  kingdom,
and  shall  receive  the  promises;
^  Which  neither  eye  has  seen,  nor
ear  heard,  nor  have  entered  into
the  heart  of  man.

15  ^  Wherefore  let  us  every

^See  I.  Clement,  chap.  x.


hour  expect  the  kingdom  of  God
in  love  and  righteousness  ;  bo-
cause  we  know  not  the  day  of
God's  appearing.

CHAP.  V.
A  Fragment.

Of  the  Lord^s  kingdom.

1  *  *  For  the  Lord  himself,
being  asked  by  a  certain  person,
When  his  kingdom  should  come?
answered.  When  two  shall  be
one,  and  that  which  is  without
as  that  which  is  within ;  and  the
male  with  the  female,  neither
male  nor  female.

2  Now  two  are  one.  when  we
speak  the  truth  to  each  other,
and  there  is  (without  hypocrisy)
one  soul  in  two  bodies :

3  And  that  which  is  without  as
that  which  is  within; — He  means
this :  he  calls  the  soul  that  which
is  within,  and  the  body  that  which
is  without.  As  therefore  thy
body  appears,  so  let  thy  soul  be
seen  by  its  good  works.

4  And  the  male  with  the  female
neither  male  nor  female ; — He
means  this ;  he  calls  our  anger
the  male,  our  concupiscence  the
female.

5  When  therefore  a  man  is
come  to  such  a  pass  that  he  is
subject  neither  to  the  one  nor
the  other  of  these  (both  of  which^
through  the  prevalence  of  cus-
tom, and  an  evil  education,  cloud
and  darken  the  reason,)

6  But  rather,  having  dispelled
the  mist  arising  from  them,  and
being  full  of  shame,  shall  by  re-
pentance have  united  both  his
soul  and  spirit  in  the  obedience  of
reason  ;  then,  as  Paul  says,  there
is  in  us  neither  male  nor  female.

nCor.  ii.  9.


144


The  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  BARNABAS.

[Barnabas  was  a  companion  and  fellow-preacher  with  Paul.  This  Epistle
lays  a  greater  claim  to  canonical  authority  than  most  others.  It  has
been  cited  by  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  Origen,  Eusebius,  and  Jerome,
and  many  ancient  Fathers.  Cotelerius  afl&rms  that  Origen  and  Jerome
esteemed  it  genuine  and  canonical;  but  Cotelerius  himself  did  not
believe  it  to  be  either  one  or  the  otherj  on  the  contrary,  he  supposes
it  was  written  for  the  benefit  of  the  Ebionites  (the  christianized  Jews,)
who  were  tenacious  of  rites  and  ceremonies.  Bishop  Fell  feared  to  own
expressly  what  he  seemed  to  be  persuaded  of,  that  it  ought  to  be  treated
with  the  same  respect  as  several  of  the  books  of  the  present  canon.  Dr.
Bernard,  Savilian  professor  at  Oxford,  not  only  believed  it  to  be  genu-
ine, but  that  it  was  read  throughout,  in  the  churches  at  Alexandria,  as
the  canonical  scriptures  were.  Dodwell  supposed  it  to  have  been  pub-
lished before  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  and  the  writings  of  both  the  Johns.
Vossius,  Dupuis,  Dr.  Cane,  Dr.  Mill,  Dr.  S.  Clark,  Whistou,  and  Arch-
bishop Wake  also  esteemed  it  genuine:  Menardus,  Archbishop  Laud,
Spanheim,  and  others,  deemed  it  apocryphal.]


CHAP.  L

Preface  to  the  Epistle.

ALL  happiness  to  you  my
sons  and  daughters,  in  the
name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
who  loved  us,  in  peace.

2  Having  perceived  abun-
dance of  knowledge  of  the  great
and  ^  excellent  '  laws  of  God  to
be  in  you,  I  exceedingly  rejoice
in  your  blessed  and  admirable
^  souls,  because  ye  have  so  wor-
thily received  the  grace  which
was  *  grafted  in  you.

3  For  which  cause  I  am  full
of  joy,  hoping  the  rather  to  be
*  saved  ;  inasmuch  as  I  truly  see
a  spirit  infused  into  you,  from
the  ^  pure  fountain  of  God  :

4  Having  this  persuasion,  and
being  fully  convinced  thereof,
because  that  since  I  have  begun
to  speak  unto  you,  I  have  had  a
more  than  ordinary  good  success
in  the  way  of  Hhe  law  of  the
Lord  which  is  in  Christ.


5  For  which  cause  ^  brethren,
I  also  think  verily  that  I  love
you  above  my  own  soul :  because
that  therein  dwelleth  the  great-
ness of  faith  and  charity,  as  also
the  hope  of  that  life  which  is  to
come.

6  Wherefore  considering  this,
that  if  I  shall  take  care  to  com-
municate to  you  a  part  of  what
I  have  received,  it  shall  turn  to
my  reward,  *  that  I  have  served
such  good  souls ;  I  gave  diligence
to  write  in  a  few  words  unto
you ;  that  together  with  your
faith,  ^"knowledge  also  may  be
perfect.

7  There  are  therefore  three
"  things  ordained  by  the  Lord  ;
the  hope  of  life ;  ^Hhe  beginning
and  the  completion  of  it.

8  For  the  Lord  hath  both
declared  unto  us,  by  the  pro-
phets those  things  that  "are  past ;
and  ^*  opened  to  us  the  beginnings
of  those  that  are  to  come.


'  Honestarura.  '  ^quitatum,  AiKaiufiarov,  righteous  judgments.  '  Spiri-
tibus,  Disposition.  *  Natural,  Gr.  hfifvTov.  See  chap.  xix.  efKpvTov  Sopeav
(h6axv^ :  which  the  Lat.  Int.  renders,  Naturale  donum  Doctrinse.  Comp.
Jam.  i.  21.  ^  Liberari :  Gr.  at  videtur  aojf^rjvai.  ^  Hone.sto.  from  the  Gr.
kuXtj^.  TComp.  Psalm  119,  33,  viz.  either  by  preaching  or  fulfilling  the  same.
*  Vid  Annot.  Vos.  in  loc-  ^  Talibus  spiritibus  servienti.  Usser.  i°  Vvuaiq.
"  Aoy/xara  KVfunv,  Constitutions  of  the  Lord.  ^^  yj^.  faith  and  Charity.  See
before.  ^^  Namely,  which  we  are  to  believe.  ^*  That  is,  which  are  to  be
hoped  for,  and  end  in  love.

10  145


Preface


BARNABAS.


continued.


9  Wherefore,  it  will  behoove
us,  ^  as  he  has  spoken,  to  come
^more  holily,  and  nearer  to  his
altar.

10  I  therefore,  not  as  a  teach-
er, but  as  one  ^  of  you,  will  en-
deavour to  lay  before  you  a  few
things  by  which  you  may,  on
*many  accounts,  become  the  more
joyful.

CHAP.  II.

That  God  has  abolished  the  legal  sacri-
fices to  introduce  the  spiritual  right-
eousness of  the  Oospel.

SEEING  then  the  days  are  ex-
ceeding evil,  and  the  adver-
sary has  got  the  power  of  this
present  ^  world  we  ought  to  give
the  more  diligence  to  inquire
into  the  *  righteous  judgments  of
the  Lord.

2  ^  Now  the  assistants  of  our
faith  are  fear  and  patience  ;  our
fellow-combatants,  long-suffering
and  continence.

3  Whilst  these  remain  pure
in  what  relates  unto  the  Lord,
wisdom,  and  understanding,  and
science,  and  knowledge,  rejoice
together  with  them.

4  For  God  has  manifested  to
us  by  all  the  prophets,  that  he
has  no  occasion  for  our  sacrifices,
or  burnt-offerings,  or  oblations :
saying  thus  ;  ®  To  what  purpose
is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices
unto  me,  saith  the  Lord.

5  I  am  full  of  the  burnt-offer-
ings of  rams,  and  the  fat  of  ^  fed
beasts ;  and  I  delight  not  in  the
blood  of  bullocks,  or  of  hegoats

6  ^^  When  ye  come  to  appear
before  me ;  who  hath  required
this  at  your  hands?  Ye  shall
no  more  tread  my  courts.

7  Bring  no  more  vain  obla-


tions, incense  is  an  abomination
unto  me ;  your  new  moons  and
sabbaths;  the  calling  of  assem-
blies I  cannot  away  with,  it  is
iniquity,  even  the  solemn  meet-
ing ;  your  new  moons  and  your
appointed  feasts  my  soul  hateth.

8  These  things  therefore  hath
God  abolished,  that  the  new  law
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which
is  without  the  yoke  of  any  such
necessity,  might  have  the  spirit-
ual offering  of  men  themselves.

9  For  so  the  Lord  saith  again
to  those  heretofore ;  "  Did  I  at
all  command  your  fathers  when
they  came  out  of  the  land  of
Egypt  concerning  burnt-offer-
ings of  sacrifices  ?

10  But  this  I  commanded
them,  saying,  ^^  Let  none  of  you
imagine  evil  in  your  hearts
against  his  neighbour,  and  love
no  false  oath.

11  Forasmuch  then  as  we  are
not  without  understanding,  we
ought  to  apprehend  the  design
^*  of  our  merciful  Father.  For
he  speaks  to  us,  being  willing
that  we  who  have  been  in  the
same  error  about  the  sacrifices,
should  seek  and  find  how  to
approach  unto  him.

12  And  therefore  he  thus  be-
speaks us,  ^*  The  sacrifice  of  God
(is  a  broken  spirit,)  a  broken  and
contrite  heartGod  will  not  despise.

13  Wherefore  brethren,  we
ought  the  more  diligently  to  in-
quire after  those  things  that  be-
long to  our  salvation,  that  the
adversary  may  not  have  any  en-
trance into  us,  and  deprive  us
of  our  spiritual  life.

14  Wherefore  he  again  speak-
)  eth   to   them,  concerning  these


*  Given  ns  to  know.    '  Honestius  et  Altius :  the  more  honestly  and  highlv.

^  Like  yourselves.     *  In  many  things.      ^Age.      '  Eqnitus.      'Comp.  Grae '.

Clem.   Alex.     »  Isaiah  i.  11.    »  Lambs,     ^o  Isaiah,  i.  12,  13,  14.     "  Jer.  vil.

22,  23.        ^2  2ech.  viii.  17.    "  Of  the  mercy  of  Our  Father.      "  Psalm  i.  11).

146


Prophecies  in  Daniel        BARNABAS.        concerning  Christ,  &c.


CHAP.  III.

The  prophecies  of  Daniel,  concerning  the
ten  kings,  and  the  coming  of  Christ.

WHEREFORE  it  is  neces-
sary that  searching  dili-
gently into  those  "  things  which
are  near  to  come  to  pass,  we
should  write  to  you  what  may
serve  to  keep  you  whole.

2  To  which  end  let  us  flee  from
every  evil  work  and  hate  the
errors  of  the  present  time,  that
we  may  be  "  happy  in  that  which
is  to  come :

3  Let  us  not  give  ourselves  the
liberty  of  disputing  with  the
wicked  and  sinners  ;  lest  we
should  chance  in  time  to  become
like  unto  them.

4  For  the  consummation  of"
sin  is  come,  as  it  is  written,  as
the  prophet  Daniel  says.  And
for  this  end  the  Lord  hath  short-
ened the  times  and  the  days,
that  his  beloved  might  hasten  his
coming  to  his  inheritance.

5  For  so  the  prophet  speaks ;
"There  shall  ten  kings  reign
in  the  heart,  and  there  shall  rise
last  of  all  another  little  one,  and
he  shall  humble  three  kings.

6  And  again  Daniel  speaks  in
like  manner  concerning  the  king-
doms ;  ^^  and  I  saw  the  fourth
beast  dreadful  and  terrible,  and
strong  exceedingly ;  and  it  had
ten  horns.  *^  I  considered  the
horns,  and  behold  there  came  up
among  them  another  little  horn,
before  which  were  three  of  the
first  horns  plucked  up  by  the
roots.

7  We  ought  therefore  to  under-
stand this  also :  And  I  beseech
you  as  one  of  your  own  brethren,
loving  you  all  beyond  my  own
life,  that  you  look  well  to  your-
selves, and  be  not  like  to  those  who

'  Isa.  Iviii.  4.  2  V.  5.  3  V.  6.  *  V.  7.  ^  y.  8.  «  V.  9.  '  V.  10.  « Provi-
dence. 9 Simplicity.  ^0 Their.  " Histantibus :  read  Instantibus.  "Beloved.
^•^  Temptation.  Dan.  ix.    "  Dan.  vii.     ^^  y.  7.    ^^  V.  8.     "  Heap  up  sins.

147


things ;  ^  Ye  shall  not  fast  as  ye
do  this  day,  to  make  your  voice
to  be  heard  on  high.

15  Is  it  such  a  last  that  I  have
chosen  ?  a  day  for  a  man  to  afflict
his  soul  ?  ^  Is  it  to  bow  down  his
head  like  a  bulrush,  and  to  spread
sackcloth  and  ashes  under  him  ?
Wilt  thou  call  this  a  fast,  and  an
acceptable  day  to  the  Lord  ?

16  Buttoushesaithonthiswise.
^  Is  not  this  the  fast  that  I  have
chosen,  to  loose  the  bands  of  wick-
edness, to  undo  the  heavy  burdens,
and  to  let  the  oppressed  go  free ;
and  that  ye  break  every  yoke  ?

17  *  Is  it  not  to  deal  thy  bread
to  the  hungry,  and  that  thou
bring  the  poor  that  are  cast  out
to  thy  house  ?  When  thou  seest
the  naked  that  thou  cover  him,
and  that  thou  hide  not  thyself
from  thine  own  flesh.

18  '  Then  shall  thy  light  break
forth  as  the  morning,  and  thy
health  shall  spring  forth  speed-
ily ;  and  thy  righteousness  shall
go  before  thee,  the  glory  of  the
Lord  shall  be  thy  rew^ard.

19  ^  Then  shalt  thou  call  and
the  Lord  shall  answer  ;  thou  shalt
cry  and  he  shall  say,  Here  I  am.
If  thou  put  away  from  the  midst
of  thee  the  yoke,  the  putting
forth  of  the  finger,  and  speaking
vanity ;  ^  and  if  thou  draw  out
thy  soul  to  the  hungry  ;  and  sat-
isfy the  afflicted  soul.

20  In  this  therefore  brethren,
God  has  manifested  his  ^  fore-
knowledge and  love  for  us ;  be-
cause the  people  which  he  has
purchased  to  his  beloved  Son  were
to  believe  in  '  sincerity  ;  and
therefore  he  has  shewn  these
things  to  all  of  us,  that  we  should
not  run  as  proselytes  to  ^^  the
Jewish  law.


That  Christ  was


BARNABAS.


to  suffer,  jiroved


^  add  sin  to  sin,  and  say :  That  |  as  in  us  lies  let  us  meditate  upon
their  covenant  is  ours  also.  Nay, '  the  fear  of  God  ;  and  strive  to
but  it  is  ours  only :  for  they  have  i  the  utmost  of  our  power  to  keep


for  ever  lost  that  which  Moses
received.

8  For  thus  saith  the  Scrip-
ture :  And  Moses  continued  fast-
ing forty  days  and  forty  nights
in  the  Mount;  and  he  received
the  covenant  from  the  Lord,  even
the  two  tables  of  stone,  written
by  the  hand  of  God.

9  But  having  turned  them-
selves to  idols  they  lost  it ;  as  the
Lord  also  said  to  Moses  ;  Moses,
'  go  down  quickly,  for  thy  people
which  thou  hast  brought  forth
out  of  Egypt,  have  corrupted
themselves,  and  turned  aside
from  the  way  which  I  command-
ed them.  ^  And  Moses  cast  the
two  tables  out  of  his  hands :  and
their  covenant  was  broken  ;  that
the  love  of  Jesus  might  be  sealed
in  your  hearts,  unto  the  hope  of
his  faith.

10  Wherefore  let  us  give  heed
unto  the  last  times.  For  all  the
*time  past  of  our  life,  and  our
faith  will  profit  us  nothing  ;  un-
less we  continue  to  hate  what  is
evil,  and  to  withstand  the  future
temptations.  So  the  Son  of  God
tells  us ;  Let  us  resist  all  iniquity
and  hate  it.

11  Wherefore  consider  the
works  of  the  evil  way.  ^  Do  not
withdraw  yourselves  from  others,
as  if  you  were  already  justified  ;
but  coming  altogether  into  one
place,  inquire  what  is  agreeable
to  and  profitable  for  the  beloved
of  God.  For  the  Scripture  saith ;
*  Wo  unto  them  that  are  wise  in
their  own  eyes,  and  prudent  in
their  sight.

12  Let  us  become  spiritual,  a
perfect  temple  to  God.  As  much


^  Exod.  xxxi.  xxxiv.     ^  Exod.  xxxvii.  7.  Deut.  ix.  12.

*  Heb.  X.  25.

•  Matt.  xxii.  14.

148


6  Vid.  Gr.  Clem.  Alex.  Isa.  v.,  21.
9Isa.  Hi.  5-7.


his  commandments ;  that  we  may
rejoice  in  his  righteous  judg-
ments.

13  For  God  will  judge  the
world  without  respect  of  persons :
and  every  one  shall  receive  ac-
cording to  his  works.

14  If  a  man  shall  be  good,  his
righteousness  shall  go  before  h  ni ;,
if  wicked,  the  reward  of  his
wickedness  shall  follow  him.

15  Take  heed  therefore  lest
sitting  still,  now  that  we  are  call-
ed, we  fall  asleep  in  our  sins ;
and  the  wicked  one  getting  the
dominion  over  us,  stir  us  up,  ^
and  shut  us  out  of  the  kingdom
of  the  Lord.

16  Consider  this  also :  although
you  have  seen  so  great  signs  and
wonders  done  among  the  people
of  the  Jews,  yet  this  notwith-
standing the  Lord  hath  forsaken
them.

17  Beware  therefore,  lest  it
happen  to  us;  as  it  is  written.
®  There  may  be  many  called,  but
few  chosen.

CHAP.   IV.

That  Christ  was  to  suffer:  proved  from
the  prophecies  concerning  him.

FOR  this  cause  did  our  Lord
vouchsafe  to  give  up  his  body
to  destruction,  that  through  the
forgiveness  of  our  sins  we  might
be  sanctified ;  that  is,  by  the
sprinkling  of  his  blood.

2  Now  for  what  concerns  the
things  that  are  written  about
him,  some  belong  to  the  people
of  the  Jews,  and  some  to  us.

3  For  thus  saith  the  Scripture :
^  He  was  wounded  for  our  trans-
gressions, he  was  bruised  for  our
iniquities,  and  by  his  blood  we  are

3V.  19.      *DavR.
'Matt.  XXV.  7— iO-


from  prophecies


BARNABAS.


concerning  him.


healed.  He  was  led  as  a  lamb  to
the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  be-
fore his  shearers  is  dumb,  so  he
opened  not  his  mouth.

4  Wherefore  we  ought  the
more  to  give  thanks  unto  God,
for  that  lie  hath  both  declared
unto  us  what  is  passed,  ^and  not
suffered  us  to  be  without  under-
standing of  those  things  that  are
to  come.

5  But  to  them  he  saith ;  ^  The
nests  are  not  unjustly  spread  for
the  birds.

6  This  he  spake,  because  a
man  will  justly  perish,  if  having
the  knowledge  of  the  way  of
truth,  he  shall  nevertheless  not
refrain  himself  from  the  way  of
darkness.

7  And  for  this  cause  the  Lord
was  content  to  suffer  for  our
souls,  although  he  be  the  Lord
of  the  whole  earth ;  to  whom
God  said  before  the  beginning
of  the  world,  *  Let  us  make  man
after  our  own  image  and  likeness.

8  Now  how  he  suffered  for
us,  seeing  it  was  by  men  that  he
underwent  it,  *I  will  shew  you.

9  The  prophets  having  receiv-
ed from  him  the  gift  of  prophecy,
spake  before  concerning  him  :

10  But  he,  that  he  might  abo-
lish death,  and  make  known  the
resurrection  from  the  dead,  w^as
content,  as  it  was  necessary,  to
appear  in  the  flesh,  that  he  might
make  good  the  promise  before
given  to  our  fathers,  and  pre-
paring himself  a  new  people,
might  demonstrate  to  them  whilst
he  w^as  upon  earth,  that  after
the  resurrection  he  would  judge
the  world.

11  And  finally  teaching  the
people  of  Israel,  and  doing  many
wonders  and  signs  among  them.


he  preached  to  them,  and  shewed
the  exceeding  great  love  which
he  bare  towards  them.

12  And  when  he  chose  his
apostles,  which  were  afterwards
to  publish  his  Gospel,  he  took
men  who  had  been  very  great
sinners ;  that  thereby  he  might
plainly  shew,^  That  he  came  not
to  call  the  righteous  but  sinners
to  repentance.

13  Then  he  clearly  manifested
himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God.
For  had  he  not  come  in  the
flesh,  how  should  men  have  been
able  to  look  upon  him,  that  they
might  be  saved  ?

14  Seeing  if  they  beheld  only
the  sun,  which  was  the  work  of
his  hands,  and  shall  hereafter
cease  to  be,  they  are  not  able  to
endure  steadfastly  to  look  against
the  rays  of  it.

15  Wherefore  the  Son  of  God
came  in  the  flesh  for  this  cause,
that  he  might  fill  up  the  measure
of  their  iniquity,  who  have  per-
secuted his  prophets  unto  death.
And  for  the  same  reason  also  he
suffered.

16  For  God  hath  said  of  the
^stripes  of  his  flesh,  that  they
were  from  them.  And,  ^  I  will
smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep
of  the  flock  shall  be  scattered.

17  Thus  he  would  suffer,  be-
cause it  behooved  him  to  suffer
upon  the  cross.

18  For  thus  one  saith,  prophe-
sying concerning  him  ;  ®  Spare
my  soul  from  the  sword.  And
again.  Pierce  my  flesh  from  thy
fear.

19  And  again,  the  congrega-
]tion  of  wicked  doers  rose  up
against  me,  '  (They  have  pierced
my  hands  and  my  feet).

20  And  again  he  saith,  I  gave


1  Vid.  Ed.  Ox.,  p.  21.     2  Prov.  i.  17
13.     ^  Namely,  from  the  Jews.     ''  Zach.  xiil.
Psalm   xxii.  20.     Psalm  cxix.  120.     Psalm


'  Gen.  i.  26.     *  Learn.     ^  Matt.  ix.
6,  7.     8  According:  to  the  lxx.


xxii.   16,   17.


9  These
149


words


prophecies  concerning        BARNABAS.


Christ^ s  sufferings.


my  back  to*the  smiters,  ^  and
my  face  I  set  as  an  hard  rock.

CHAP.  V.

The  subject  continued.

AND  when  he  had  fulfilled
the  commandment  of  God,
What  says  he  ?  ^  Who  will  con-
tend with  me  ?  Let  him  stand
against  me:  or  who  is  he  that
will  implead  me  ?  Let  him  draw
near  to  the  servant  of  the  Lord.
Wo  be  to  you !  ^  Because  ye
shall  all  wax  old  as  a  garment,
the  moth  shall  eat  you  up.

2  And  again  the  prophet  adds,
*He  is  put  for  a  stone  for  stum-
bling. ^Behold  I  lay  in  Zion
for  a  foundation,  a  precious
stone,  a  choice  corner  stone ;  an
honourable  stone.  And  what
follows?  And  he  that  hopeth
in  him  shall  live  for  ever.

3  What  then?  Is  our  hope
built  upon  a  stone  ?  God  forbid.
But  because  the  Lord  hath  ^har-
dened his  flesh  against  sufferings,
he  saith,  "^  I  have  put  me  as  a
firm  rock.

4  And  again  the  prophet  adds;
*The  stone  which  the  builders
refused  has  become  the  head  of
the  corner.  And  again  he  saith ;
'This  is  the  great  and  wonderful
day  which  the  Lord  hath  made.
'"  I  write  these  things  the  more
plainly  to  you  that  ye  may  un-
derstand: ^^For  indeed  I  could
be  content  even  to  die  for  your
sakes.

5  But  what  saith  the  prophet
again  ?     ^^  The   counsel   of   the


wicked  encompassed  me  about.
"  They  came  about  me,  as  bees
about  the  honey-comb :  and,
"Upon  my  vesture  they  cast  lots.
6  Forasmuch  then  as  our
Saviour  was  to  appear  in  the
flesh  and  suffer,  his  passion  was
hereby  foretold.

7  For  thus  saith  the  prophet
against  Israel :  ^  Wo  be  to  their
soul,  because  they  have  taken
wicked  counsel  against  them-
selves, saying,  let  us  ^^  lay  snares
for  the  righteous,  because  he  is
unprofitable  to  us.

8  Moses  also  in  like  manner
speaketh  to  them;  "Behold  thus
saith  the  Lord  God ;  Enter  ye
into  the  good  land  of  which  the
Lord  hath  sworn  to  Abraham,
and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  that  he
would  give  it  you,  and  possess
it;  a  land  flowing  with  milk
and  honey.

9  Now  what  the  spiritual
meaning  of  this  is,  learn ;  ^®  It  is
as  if  it  had  been  said,  Put  your
trust  in  Jesus,  who  shall  be  ma-
nifested to  you  in  the  flesh.  For
man  is  the  earth  which  suffers :
forasmuch  as  out  of  the  ^^sub-
stance of  the  earth  Adam  was
formed.

10  What  therefore  does  he
mean  when  he  says.  Into  a  good
land  flowing  with  milk  and
honey?  Blessed  be  our  Lord,
who  has  given  us  wisdom,  and  a
heart  to  understand  his  secrets.
For  so  says  the  prophet,  ^  Who
shall  understand  the  hard  say-
ings of  the  Lord  ?   '^  But  he  that


were  doubtless  cited  thus  by  Barnabas,  because  that  without  thera,  those
foregoing  do  not  prove  the  Crucifixion  of  Christ.  But  thror.gh  the  repetition
of  the  same  preposition,  this  latter  part  was  so  early  omitted,  that  it  was  not
in  the  Latin  interpreter's  copy.  ^  Isaiah  1.  6.  "  Isa.  1.  8,  9.

'  Rep.  In.         *  Isa.  viii.  14.  ^  iga,  xxviii.  16.         *  Gr.  put  in  strength,

or  strengthened.  ^  Isa.   1.  7.  »  Ps.   cxviii.   22.        »  V.  24.    Clem.

Alex.  Strom,  v.  ^°  This  is  not  in  the  Old  Latin  Version.  "  Vid.  Ed.  Ox.,
p.  29,  a.  TTepixpT^iua  ttjq  ayamjc  vfiav.  '^^  Ps.  xxii.  16.  ^^  Ps.  cxviii.  12.  '*  Ps.
xxii.  18.     '5  Is.  iij.  9.     "  Bind.     "  Exod.  xxxiii.  1.    ^^  vid.  Cot.  An.  Marsr-


ex  Clem.    Alex.
150


Trpoaunov.     20  Qsee,  xiv.  ult.     ^'  Prov.  i.   6.    Ec.  i.  10.


The  scape-goat


BARNABAS.


typical  of  Christ


is  wise,  and  intelligent,  and  that
loves  his  Lord.

1 1  Seeing  therefore  he  has  re-
newed us  by  the  remission  of  our
sins,  he  has  ^  put  us  into  another
frame,  that  we  should  have  souls
^like  those  of  children,  forming
us  again  himself  ^  by  the  spirit.

12  For  thus  the  Scripture
saith  concerning  us,  *  where  it
introduceth  the  Father  speaking
to  the  Son  ;  ^  Let  us  make  man
after  our  likeness  and  similitude ;
and  let  them  have  dominion  over
the  beasts  of  the  earth,  and  over
the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  the  fish
of  the  sea.

13  And  when  the  Lord  saw  the
man  which  he  had  formed,  that
behold  he  was  very  good ;  he  said,
®  Increase  and  multiply,  and  re-
plenish the  earth.  And  this  he
spake  to  his  son.

14  I  will  now  shew  you,  how
he  made  us '  a  new  creature,  in
the  latter  days.

15  The  Lord  saith ; « Behold  I
will  make  the  last  as  the  first.
Wherefore  the  prophet  thus
spake,  ^  Enter  into  the  land  flow-
ing with  milk  and  honey,  and
have  dominion  over  it.

16  Wherefore  ye  see  how  we
are  again  formed  anew  ;  as  also
he  speaks  by  another  prophet ;
'"  Behold  saith  the  Lord,  I  will
take  from  them,  that  is,  from
those  whom  the  spirit  of  the
Lord  foresaw,  their  hearts  of
stone,  and  I  will  put  into  them
hearts  of  flesh.

17  Because  he  was  about  to
be  made  manifest  in  the  flesh  and
to  dwell  in  us.

18  For,  my  brethren,  the
habitation  of  our  heart  is  a  ^^
holy  temple  unto  the  Lord.    For


the  Lord  saith  again.  ^^  In  what
place  shall  I  appear  before  the
Lord  my  God,  and  be  glorified  ?

19  He  answers  I  will  confess
unto  thee  in  the  congregation  in
the  midst  of  my  brethren  ;  and
will  sing  unto  thee  in  the  church
of  the  saints.

20  Wherefore  we  are  they
whom  he  has  brought  into  that
good  land.

21  ^^But  what  signifies  the  milk
and  honey  ?  Because  as  the  child
is  nourished  first  with  milk,  and
then  with  honey ;  so  we  being
kept  alive  by  the  belief  of  his
promises,  and  his  word,  shall  live
and  have  dominion  over  the
land.

22  For  he  foretold  above,  say-
ing, increase  and  multiply,  and
have  dominion  over  the  fishes,
etc.

23  But  who  is  there  that  is
now  able  to  have  this  dominion
over  the  wild  beasts,  or  fishes,  or
fowls  of  the  air  ?  For  you  know
that  to  rule  is  to  have  power,
that  a  man  should  be  set  over
what  he  rules.

24  But  forasmuch  as  this  we
have  not  now,  he  tells  us  when
we  shall  have  it ;  namely,  when
we  shall  become  perfect,  that  we
may  be  made  the  inheritors  of
the  covenant  of  the  Lord.

CHAP.  VI.

The  scape-goat  an  evident  type  of  this,

UNDERSTAND  then  my  be-
loved children,  that  the  good
God  hath  before  manifested  all
things  unto  us,  that  we  might
know  to  whom  we  ought  always
to  give  thanks  and  praise.

2  If  therefore  the  Son  of  God
who  is  the  Lord  of  all,  and  shall


^  Gr.  made  us  another  form.  ^  yid.  Ed.  Ox.,  p.  30,  b.  ''  Vid.  Vet.  Lat.
In.  *  As  he  saith  to  the  Son.  ^Gen.  i.  26,  &c.  ^Gen.  i.  28.  »Gr.  a  second
formation,  sjsa.  xliii.  18, 19,&c.  sHeb.iii.  ^"Ezek.xi.  19.  "So  St.  Paul,
1  Cor.  iii.  16,  17.      12  Pi,,  xlii.  2.      ^^  Jer.  xxxii.  22.

151


The  scape-goat


BARNABAS.


typical  of  Christ.


come  to  judge  both  the  quick  and
dead,  hath  suffered,  that  by  his
stripes  we  might  live :  let  us  be-
lieve that  the  Son  of  God  could
not  have  suffered  but  for  us.  But
being  crucified,  they  gave  him
vinegar  and  gall  to  drink.

3  Hear  therefore  how  the
priests  of  the  temple  did  foreshew
this  also :  ^  the  Lord  by  his  com-
mand which  was  written,  declar-
ed that  whosoever  did  not  fast
the  appointed  fast  he '  should  die
the  death:  because  he  also  was
himself  one  day  to  offer  up  his  ^
body  for  our  sins ;  that  so  the
type  of  what  was  done  in  *  Isaac
might  be  fulfilled,  who  was  of-
fered upon  the  altar.

4  What  therefore  is  it  that  he
says  by  the  prophet  ?  ^  And  let
them  eat  of  the  goat  which  is
offered  in  the  day  of  the  fast  for
all  their  sins.  Hearken  diligently
(my  brethren,)  and  all  the  priests,
and  they  only  shall  eat  the  in-
war.ls  not  washed  with  vinegar.

5  Why  so  ?  because  ^  I  know
that  when  I  shall  hereafter  offer
my  flesh  for  the  sins  of  a  new
people,  ye  will  give  me  vinegar
to  drink  mixed  with  gall;  there-
fore do  ye  only  eat,  the  people
fasting  the  while,  and  lamenting
in  sackcloth  and  ashes.

6  And  that  he  might  foreshew
that  he  was  to  suffer  for  them,
hear  then  how  he  appointed  it.

7  ^  Take,  says  he,  two  goats,
fair  and  alike,  and  offer  them,
and  let  the  high  priest  take  one
of  them  for  a  burnt  offering.
And  what  must  be  done  with  the
other  ?  Let  it  says  he  be  accurs-
ed.

8  Consider    how   exactly  this

*  Tn  same  manner  applied  Heb.  ix.  ^Lev.  xxiii.  29.  ^The  vessel  of  his
spirit.  *Gen.  xxii.  *Niimb.  xxix.,  Ac,  Vic.  Cot.  in  Marg.  et  Annot.  in  loo.
'  Vi'l    Annot.  Cot.  fLevit  xi.  Vid.  Maimon,  tract,  de  die  Exy.  Edit,  du

V-il,  p.  350,  &c.      8  Vid.  Edit.  Ox.  p.  40   a.  41.  b.      'Vid.  Maim.  ib.  p.  341.
&e.       1"  Vid.  Voss.  in  loc.     "  The  Greek  is  imperfect.     "  Vid.  Lat.  Ver.
152


appears  to  have  been  a  type  of
Jesus.  ^  And  let  all  the  congre-
gation spit  upon  it,  and  prick  it ;
and  put  the  scarlet  wool  about  its
head,  and  thus  let  it  be  carried
forth  into  the  wilderness.

9  And  this  being  done,  he  that
was  appointed  to  convey  the  goat,
led  it  into  the  wilderness,  ^  and
took  away  the  scarlet  wool,  and
put  it  upon  a  thorn  bush,  whose
^"  young  sprouts  when  we  find
them  in  the  field  we  are  wont  to
eat :  so  the  fruit  of  that  thorn
only  is  sweet.

10  And  to  what  end  was  this
ceremony  ?  Consider  ;  one  was
offered  upon  the  altar,  the  other
was  accursed.

11  And  why  was  that  which
was  accursed  crowned  ?  Because
they  shall  see  Christ  in  that  day
having  a  scarlet  garment  about
his  body  ;  and  shall  say :  Is  not
this  he  whom  we  crucified;  hav-
ing despised  him,  pierced  him,
mocked  him  ?  Certainly,  this  is
he,  who  then  said,  that  he  was
the  Son  of  God.

12  ^^  As  therefore  he  shall  be
then  like  to  what  he  was  on  earth,
so  were  the  Jews  heretofore  com-
manded, to  take  two  goats  fair
and  equal.  That  when  they  shall
see  (our  Saviour)  hereafter  com-
ing (in  the  clouds  of  heaven),
they  may  be  amazed  at  the  like-
ness of  the  goats.

13  Wherefore  ^^  ye  here  again
see  a  type  of  Jesus  who  was  to
suffer  for  us.

14  But  what  then  signifies  this.
That  the  wool  was  to  be  put  into
the  midst  of  the  thorns  ?

15  This  also  is  a  figure  of  Jesus,
sent  out  to  the  church.      For  as


«  ft


Christ  typified


BARNABAS.


hy  the  red  heifer.


he  who  would  take  away  the
scarlet  wool  must  undergo  many
diificulties,  because  that  thorn
was  very  sharp,  and  with  difficul-
ty get  it :  ^  So  they,  says  Christ,
that  will  see  me,  and  come  to  my
kingdom,  must  through  many
afflictions  and  troubles  attain
unto  me.

CHAP.  VII.

The  red  heifer,  another  type  of  Christ.

BUT  what  ^  type  do  ye  suppose
it  to  have  been,  where  it  is
commanded  ^  to  the  people  of  Is-
rael, that  grown  persons  in  whom
sins  are  come  to  perfection,
sliould  offer  an  heifer,  and  after
they  had  killed  it  should  burn
the  same.

2  But  then  young  men  should
take  up  the  ashes  and  put  them
in  vessels ;  and  tie  a  piece  of
scarlet  wool  and  hyssop  upon  a
stick,  and  so  the  young  men
should  sprinkle  every  one  of  the
people,  and  they  should  be  clear
from  their  sins.

3  Consider  how  all  these  are
delivered  in  a  *  figure  to  us.

4  This  heifer  is  Jesus  Christ;
the  wicked  men  that  were  to  offer
it  are  those  sinners  who  brought
him  to  death:  who  afterwards
have  no  more  to  do  with  it ;  the
sinners  have  no  more  the  honour
of  handling  of  it :

■')  But  the  young  men  that
performed  the  sprinkling,  signi-
fied those  who  preach  to  us  the
forgiveness  of  sins  and  the  puri-
fication of  the  heart,  to  whom  the
Lord  gave  authority  to  preach
his  Gospel :  being  at  the  begin-
ning twelve,  ^to  signify  the
tribes,  because  there  were  twelve
tribes  of  Israel.


6  But  why  were  there  three
young  men  appointed  to  sprin-
kle ?  To  denote  Abraham,  and
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  because  they
were  great  before  God.

7  And  why  was  the  wool  put
upon  a  ^stick?  Because  the  king-
dom of  Jesus  was  founded  upon
the  cross ;  and  therefore  they
that  put  their  trust  in  him,  shall
live  for  ever.

8  But  why  was  the  wool  and
hyssop  put  together  ?  To  signify
that  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ
there  shall  be  evil  and  filthy
days,  in  which  however  we  shall
be  saved ;  and  '  because  he  that
has  any  disease  in  the  flesh  by
some  filthy  humours  is  cured  by
hyssop.

9  Wherefore  these  things  be-
ing thus  done,  are  to  us  indeed
evident,  but  to  the  ^  Jews  they
are  obscure ;  because  they  heark-
ened not  unto  the  voice  of  the
Lord.

CHAP.  VIII.

Of  the  circumcision  of  the  ears;  and
how  in  the  first  institution  of  circum-
cision Abraham  mystically  foretold
Christ  by  name.

AND  therefore  the  Scripture
again  speaks  concerning  our
ears,  that  God  has  circumcised
them,  together  with  our  hearts.
For  thus  saith  the  Lord  by  the
holy  prophets  :  ^  By  the  hearing
of  the  ear  they  obeyed  me.

2  And  again,  ^"They  who  are
afar  off,  shall  hear  and  under-
stand what  things  I  have  done.
And  again,  "Circumcise  your
hearts,  saith  the  Lord.

3  And  again  he  saith,  ^^  Hear
O  Israel!  For  thus  saith  the
Lord  thy  God.     And  again  the


1  Acts  xiv.  22.  ^  Numb.  xix.  ^  That  this  was  also  a  type  of  Christ,  see
Heb.  ix.  13.  *  Vid.  Vet.  Lat.  Interpr.  Simplicity,  Gr.  5  Gr.  to  testify.  «Wood.
^  Vid.  Coteler.in  loc.  ^  Them,  »  Septuag.  Psalm  xvii.  45.  ^"  Isaiah  xxxiii.
13.      11  Jer.  iv.  4.     «  Jer.  vii.  2.

153


Spiritual  meaning


BARNABAS.        of  clean  and  unclean


Spirit  of  God  prophesieth,  say-
ing :  ^  Who  is  there  that  would
live  for  ever,  ^  let  him  hear  the
voice  of  my  Son.

4  And  again,  ^  Hear,  O  Hea-
ven and  give  ear  O  Earth !  Be-
cause the  Lord  has  spoken  these
things  for  a  witness.

5  And  again  he  saith  *  Hear
the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  princes
of  the  people.  And  again  ^  Hear

0  Children !  The  voice  of  one
crying  in  the  wilderness.

6  Wherefore  he  has  circum-
cised our  ears  that  we  should
hear  his  word,  and  believe.  But
as  for  that  circumcision,  in  which
the  Jews  trust,  it  is  abolished.
For  the  circumcision  of  which
God  spake,  was  not  of  the  flesh  ;

7  But  they  have  transgressed
his  commands,  because  the  evil
'  one  hath  deceived  them.  For
thus  God  bespeaks  them  ;  ^  Thus
saith  the  Lord  your  God  (Here

1  find  the  new  law)  Sow  not
among  thorns;  but  circumcise
yourselves  to  the  Lord  your  God.
And  what  doth  he  mean  by  this
saying?  Hearken  unto  your
Lord.

8  And  again  he  saith,  ®  Cir-
cumcise the  hardness  of  your
heart,  and  harden  not  your  neck.
And  again,  *  Behold,  saith  the
Lord,  all  the  nations  are  uncir-
cumcised,  (they  have  not  lost
their  fore-skin)  :  but  this  people
is  uncircumcised  in  heart.

9  But  you  will  say  ^"the  Jews
were  circumcised  for  a  sign.
"  And  so  are  all  the  Syrians  and
Arabians,  and  all  the  idolatrous
priests  :    but  are  they  therefore


of  the  covenant  of  Israel  ?  And
even  the  Egyptians  themselves
are  circumcised.

10  Understand  therefore,  chil-
dren, these  things  more  fiilly,
that  Abraham,  who  was  the  first
that  brought  in  circumcision,
looking  forward  in  the  Spirit  to
Jesus,  circumcised,  having  re-
ceived the  mystery  of  three  letters.

11  For  the  Scripture  says  that
Abraham  circumcised  three  hun-
dred and  eighteen  men  of  his
house.  ^^  But  what  therefore  was
the  mystery  that  was  made
known  unto  him?

12  Mark,  first  the  eighteen,
and  next  the  three  hundred.  For
the  numeral  letters  of  ten  and
eight  are  I  H.  And  these  denote
Jesus.

13  And  because  the  cross  was
that  by  which  we  were  to  find
grace  ;  therefore  he  adds,  three
hundred  ;  the  note  of  which  is
T  (the  figure  of  his  cross).
Wherefore  by  two  letters  he  sig-
nified Jesus,  and  by  the  third  his
cross.

14  He  who  has  put  the  en-
grafted gift  of  his  doctrine  within
us,  knows  that  I  never  taught  to
any  one  a  more  ^^  certain  truth  ;
but  I  trust  that  ye  are  worthy
of  it.

CHAP.  IX.

That  the  commands  of  Moses  concern-
ing dean  and  unclean  beasts,  &c.,
were  all  designed  for  a  spiritual
signification.

BUT  why  did  Moses  say  '*  Ye
shall  not  eat  of  the  swine,
neither  the  eagle  nor  the  hawk  ;
nor  the  crow ;  nor  any  fish  that

^  Psalms  xxxiii.  xxxiv.  *  Isaiah,  1.  10.  ^Isaiah,  i.  2.  '•Isaiah

1.  10.  5  Isaiah,  xl.  3.  ^  Angel.  Mer.  iv.  3,  4.  ^  jer.  iv.  4.  ^Deut.  x.  16.
^"  That  people.  "  Vid.  Cot.  in  loc.  conter.  Orig.  ad  Rom.  cap.  ii.  25.  ^^  xhat
many  others  of  the  ancient  Fathers  have  concurred  with  him  in  this,  see
Cot.  in  loc.  Add.  Eund.  p.  34,  85,  ibid.  Ed.,  &c.,  &c.  '^ Genuine.  "That
in  this  he  goes  on  the  received  opinion  of  the  RR.  Vid.  Annot.  Cot.  and  Ed.
Ox.  in  loc  Lev.  xi.  Deut.  xiv.  Add.  Ainsworth  on  Lev.  xi.  1,  and  Deut.
xiv.  4.

154


beasts  under  the


BARNABAS.


law  of  Moses.


has  not  a  scale  upon  him? —
answer,  that  in  the  spiritual
sense,  he  comprehended  three
doctrines,  that  were  to  be  '  gath-
ered from  thence.

2  Besides  which  he  says  to
them  in  the  book  of  Deuteron-
omy, And  I  will  give  my  statutes
unto  this  people.  Wherefore  it
is  not  the  command  of  God  that
they  should  not  eat  these  things  ;
but  Moses  in  the  spirit  spake
unto  them.

3  Now  the  sow  he  forbade  them
to  eat ;  meaning  thus  much  ;  thou
shalt  not  join  thyself  to  such
persons  as  are  like  unto  swine ;
who  whilst  they  live  in  pleasure,
forget  their  God  ;  but  when  any
want  pinches  them,  then  they
know  the  Lord ;  as  the  sow  when
she  is  full  knows  not  her  master ;
but  when  she  is  hungry  she
makes  a  noise  ;  and  being  again
fed,  is  silent.

4  Neither,  says  he,  shalt  thou
eat  the  eagle,  nor  the  hawk,  nor
the  kite,  nor  the  crow ;  that  is
thou  shalt  not  keep  company
with  such  kind  of  men  as  know
not  how  by  their  labour  and
sweat  to  get  themselves  food :
but  injuriously  ravish  away  the
things  of  others ;  and  watch  how
to  lay  snares  for  them  ;  when  at
the  same  time  they  appear  to
live  in  perfect  innocence.

5  (■■'  So  these  birds  alone  seek
not  food  for  themselves,  but)  sit-
ting idle  seek  how  they  may  eat
of  the  flesh  others  have  pro-
vided ;  being  destructive  through
their  wickedness.

6  Neither,  says  he,  shalt  thou
eat  the  lamprey,  nor  the  poly-
pus, nor  the  cuttle-fish;  that  is,
thou  shalt  not  be  like  such  men,
by  using  to  converse  with  them ;
who  are  altogether  wicked  and


adjudged  to  death.  For  so
those  fishes  are  alone  accursed,
and  wallow  in  the  mire,  nor
swim  as  other  fishes,  but  tumble
in  the  dirt  at  the  bottom  of  the


7  But  he  adds,  neither  shalt
thou  eat  of  the  hare.  To  what
end? — To  signify  this  to  us;
Thou  shalt  not  be  an  adulterer ;
nor  liken  thyself  to  such  persons.
For  the  hare  every  year  multi-
plies the  places  of  its  conception ;
and  so  many  years  as  it  lives,  so
many  it  has.

8  Neither  shalt  thou  eat  of  the
hyena ;  that  is,  again,  be  not  an
adulterer,  nor  a  corrupter  of
others ;  neither  be  like  to  such.
And  wherefore  so? — Because  that
creature  every  year  changes  its
kind,  and  is  sometimes  male  and
sometimes  female.

9  For  which  cause  also  he
justly  hated  the  weasel ;  to  the
end  that  they  should  not  be  like
such  persons  who  with  their
mouths  commit  wickedness  by
reason  of  their  unclean  ness ;  nor
join  themselves  with  those  im-
pure women,  who  with  their
mouths  commit  wickedness.  Be-
cause that  animal  conceives  with
its  mouth.

10  Moses,  therefore,  speaking
as  concerning  meats,  delivered
indeed  three  great  precepts  to
them  in  the  spiritual  significa-
tion of  those  commands.  But
they  according  to  the  desires
of  the  flesh,  understood  him
as  if  he  had  only  meant  it  of
meats.

11  And  therefore  David  took
aright  the  knowledge  of  his  three-
fold command,  saying  in  like
manner.

12  Blessed  is  the  man  that
hath  not  walked  in  the  counsel  of


In  the  understanding.  Deut.  iv.


*  Vid.  antiq.  Lat.  Vers.
155


1


Baptism  and


BARNABAS.


the  cross  of  Christ.


the  ungodly ;  as  the  fishes  before
mentioned  in  the  bottom  of  the
deep  in  darkness.

13  Nor  stood  in  the  way  of
sinners,  as  they  who  seem  to  fear  J
the  Lord,  but  yet  sin,  as  the
sow.

14  And  hath  not  sat  in  the
seat  of  the  scorners;  as  those
birds  who  sit  and  watch  that
they  may  devour.

15  Here    you  have  the    law
concerning   meat    perfectly    set  |
forth,  and  according  to  the  true
knowledge  of  it.

16  But,  says  Moses,  ye  shall
eat  all  that  divideth  the  hoof,  and
cheweth  the  cud.  Signifying
thereby  such  an  one  as  having
taken  his  food,  knows  him  that
nourisheth  him ;  and  resting  upon
him,  rejoiceth  in  him.

17  And  in  this  he  spake  well,
having  respect  to  the  command-
ment. What,  therefore,  is  it
that  he  says  ? — That  we  should
hold  fast  to  them  that  fear  the
Lord ;  with  those  who  meditate  on
the  command  of  the  word  which
they  have  received  in  their  heart ;
with  those  that  declare  the  right-
eous judgments  of  the  Lord,  and
keep  his  commandments;

18  In  short,  with  those  who
know  that  to  meditate  is  a  work
of  pleasure,  and  therefore  exer-
cise themselves  in  the  word  of
the  Lord.

19  But  why  might  they  eat
those  that  clave  the  hoof? — Be-
cause the  righteous  liveth  in
this  present  world;  but  his  ex-
pectation is  fixed  upon  the  other.
See,  brethren,  how  admirably
Moses  commanded  these  things.

20  But  how  should  we  thus
know  all  this,  and  understand  it  ?
We,     therefore,    understanding


aright  the  commandments,  speak
as  the  Lord  would  have  us.
Wherefore  he  has  circumcised  our
ears  and  our  hearts,  that  we  might
know  these  things.

CHAP.  X.

Baptism  and  the  Cross  of  Christ  fore-
told  in  figures  under  the  law.

LET  us  now  inquire  whether
the  Lord  took  care  to
manifest  anything  beforehand
concerning  water  and  the  cross.
2.  Now  for  the  former  of  these,
it  is  written  to  the  people  of  Is-
rael how  they  shall  not  receive
that  baptism  which  brings  to  for-
giveness of  sins ;  but  shall  insti-
tute another  to  themselves  that
cannot.

3  For  thus  saith  the  prophet :
^  Be  astonished,  O  Heaven  !  and
let  the  earth  tremble  at  it,  be-
cause this  people  have  done  two
great  and  wicked  things  ;  they
have  left  me,  the  fountain  of
living  water,  and  have  digged
for  themselves  broken  cisterns,
that  can  hold  no  water.

4  Is  my  holy  mountain  a
*Zion,  a  desolate  wilderness? —
^  For  ye  shall  be  as  a  young  bird
when  its  nest  is  taken  away.

5  And  again  the  prophet  saith,
*  I  will  go  before  thee,  and  will
make  plain  the  mountains,  and
will  break  the  gates  of  brass,  and
will  snap  in  sunder  the  bars  of
iron ;  and  will  give  thee  dark,  and
hidden,  and  invisible  treasures,
that  they  may  know  that  I  am.
the  Lord  God.

6  And  again  :  He  shall  dwell
^in  the  high  den  of  the  strong
rock.  And  then,  what  follows
in  the  same  prophet  ?  His  water
is  faithful ;  ye  shall  see  the  king


*  Jeremiah,  ii.   12.     *Vid.  Annot.  Coteler.  and  Ed.  Oxon.  in  loc.    'Isaiah,
xvi.  1,  2.  *  Isaiah  xlv.  2.     » Isaiah,  xxxiii.  16,  17.
156


foretold  under


BARNABAS.


the  L


with  glory,  and  your   soul   shall
learn  the  fear  of  the  Lord.

7  And  again  he  saith  in  ano-
ther prophet :  He  that  does  these
things ;  ^  shall  be  like  a  tree,
planted  by  the  currents  of  water,
which  shall  give  its  fruit  in  its
season.  Its  leaf  also  shall  not
wither,  and  whatsoever  he  doth
it  shall  prosper.

8  As  for  the  wicked  it  is  not
so  with  them ;  but  they  are  as
the  dust  which  the  wind  scatter-
eth  away  from  the  face  of  the
earth.

9  Therefore  the  ungodly  shall
not  stand  in  the  judgment,
neither  the  sinners  in  the  council
of  the  righteous.  For  the  Lord
knoAveth  the  way  of  the  right-
eous and  the  way  of  the  ungod-
ly shall  perish.

10  Consider  how  he  has  joined
both  the  cross  and  the  water  to-
gether.

11  For  thus  he  saith :  Blessed
are  they  who  put  their  trust  in
the  cross,  descend  into  the  water ;
for  they  shall  have  their  reward
in  due  time ;  then,  saith  he,  will
I  give  it  them.

12  But  as  concerning  the  pre-
sent time,  he  saith,  their  leaves
shall  not  fall ;  meaning  thereby
that  every  word  that  shall  go  out
of  your  mouth,  shall  through
faith  and  charity  be  to  the  con-
version and  hope  of  many.

13  In  like  manner  doth  an-
other prophet  speak.  ^  And  the
land  of  Jacob  was  the  praise  of
all  the  earth  ;  ^  magnifying  there-
by *  the  vessel  of  his  spirit.

14  And  what  follows? — And
there  was  a  river  running  on  the
right  hand,  and  beautiful  trees


grew  up  by  it;  and  he  that  shall
eat  of  them  shall  live  for  ever.
The  signification  of  which  is
this :  that  we  go  down  into  the  wa-
ter full  of  sins  and  pollutions ;  but
come  up  again,  bringing  forth
fruit ;  having  in  our  hearts  the
fear  and  hope  which  is  in  Jesus,
by  the  spirit.  And  whosoever
shall  eat  of  them  shall  live  for
ever.

15  That  is,  whosoever  shall
hearken  to  those  who  call  them,
and  shall   believe,  shall   live  for


CHAP.  XI.

The  subject  continued.

IN  like  manner  he  determines
concerning  the  cross  in  ^  ano-
ther prophet,  saying :  And  when
shall  these  things  be  fulfilled  ?

2  The  Lord  answers ;  When
the  tree  that  has  fallen  shall
rise,  and  when  blood  shall  drop
down  from  the  tree.  Here  you
have  again  mention  made,  both
of  the  cross,  and  of  him  that  was
to  be  crucified  upon  it.

3  ^  And  yet  farther  he  saith
by  Moses;  (when  Israel  was
fighting  with,  and  beaten  by,  a
strange  people ;  to  the  end  that
God  might  put  '^  them  in  mind
how  that  for  their  sins  they
were  delivered  unto  death)  yea,
the  holy  spirit  put  it  into  the
heart  of  Moses,  to  represent  both
the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  of  him
that  was  to  suffer  ;  that  so  they
might  know  that  if  they  did  not
believe  in  him,  they  should  be
overcome  for  ever.

4  Moses  therefore  Spiled  up
armour  upon  armour  in  the  mid-
dle   of    a   rising     ground,   and


^  Psalm,  i.  ^Zeph.  iii.  19.  ^  For  rorro  "kEyet  and  o,  the  Old  Interpreter  did
not  read  ;  and  Clemens  Alex.  lib.  iii.  Strom,  p.  463,  transcribing  this  passage
hath  them  not.  ''i.  e.,  the  body  of  Christ.  ^Y\A.  Conject.  Edit.  Oxon.
Comp.  iv.  Esdr.  v.  4,  et  Obs.  Cotel.  in  loc.  ^See  St.  Hier.  in  like  manner.
Annot.  D.  Bernard,  p.  124,  Edit.  Oxon.  Exod.  xvii.  ^That  were  so  beaten.
^  Again  set  them  in  array,  being  armed.  Lat.  Vers.  157


GocT^


promises


BARNABAS.


made  to.


standing  up  higli  above  all  of
them,  stretched  forth  his  arms,
and  so  Israel  again  conquered.

5  But  no  sooner  did  he  let
down  his  hands,  but  they  were
again  slain.  And  why  so  ? — To
the  end  they  might  know,  that
except  they  trust  in  him  they
cannot  be  saved.

tt  And  in  another  prophet,  he
saith,  ^  I  have  stretched  out  my
hands  all  the  day  long  to  a  peo-
ple disobedient,  and  speaking
against  my  righteous  way.

7  And  again  Moses  makes  a
'  type  of  Jesus,  to  show  that  he
was  to  die,  and  then  that  he,
whom  they  thought  to  be  dead,
was  to  give  life  to  others  ;  in
the  ^  type  of  *  those  that  fell  in
Israel.

8  For  God  caused  all  sorts  of
serpents  to  bite  them,  and  they
died ;  forasmuch  as  by  a  serpent
transgression  began  in  Eve :  that
so  he  might  convince  them  that
for  their  transgressions  they  shall
be  delivered  into  the  pain  of
death.

9  Moses  then  himself,  who
had  commanded  them,  saying,
°  Ye  shall  not  make  to  yourselves
any  graven  or  molten  image,  to
be  your  God;  yet  now  did  so
himself,  that  he  might  represent
to  them  the  figure  of  the  Lord
Jesus.

10  For  he  made  a  brazen  ser-
pent, and  set  it  up  on  high,  and
called  the  people  together  by  a
proclamation ;  where  being  come,
they  entreated  Moses  that  he
would  make  an  atonement  for
them,  and  pray  that  they  might
be  healed.


11  Then  Moses  spake  unto
them,  saying :  when  any  one
among  you  shall  be  bitten,  let
him  come  unto  the  serpent  that
is  set  upon  the  pole;  and  let
him  assuredly  trust  in  him,  that
though  he  be  dead,  yet  he  is  able
to  give  life,  and  presently  he
shall  be  saved ;  and  so  they  did.
See  therefore  how  here  also  you
have  in  this  the  glory  of  Jesus ;
and  that  ^in  him  and  to  him  are
all  things.

12  Again;  What  says  Moses
to  Jesus  the  son  of  Nun,  when
he  gave  that  name  unto  him,  as
being  a  prophet  that  all  the  peo-
ple might  hear  him  alone,  *  be-
cause the  father  did  manifest  all
things  concerning  his  son  Jesus,
in  ^  Jesus  the  Son  of  Nun  ;  and
gave  him  that  name  when  he
sent  him  to  spy  out  the  land  of
Canaan ;  *  he  said :  Take  a  book
in  thine  hands,  and  write  what
the  Lord  saith:  Forasmuch  as
Jesus  the  Son  of  God  shall  in
the  last  days  cut  off  by  the  roots
all  the  house  of  Amalek.  See
here  again  Jesus,  not  the  son  of
man,  but  the  Son  of  God,  made
manifest  in  a  type  and  in  the
flesh.

13  But  because  it  might  here-
after be  said,  that  Christ  was  the
Son  of  David ;  "  therefore  David
fearing  and  well  knowing  the
errors  of  the  wicked,  saith ;  "  the
Lord  saith  unto  my  Lord,  sit
thou  on  my  right  hand  until  I
make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool.

14  And  again  Isaiah  speaketh
on  this  wise.  The  Lord  said  unto
"  Christ  my  Lord,  I  have  laid
hold  on  his  right  hand,  that  the


^  Isaiah,  Ixv.  2.  'So  Irenseui,  Jnst.  Mart.  St.  Chrysost.,  &c.  Edit.  Oxon.  p.
77,  a.  'Sign.  '♦Israel  falling.  ^Dent.  xvii.  15.  ^Rom.  xi.  36.  "^Deut.
xviii.  15,  18.  ^So  the  other  Fathers.  Just.  Mart.  «S!:e.  Vid.  Edit.  Oxon.  page
79.  'Vid.  Interp.  Vet.  Lat.  Exod.  xvii.  14.  ^"Comp.  Vet.  Lat.  Interp.
"Psalm  cix.  3.  "Vid.  Annot.  Coteler,  in  loc.  Edit.  Oxon.  page  78,  c.  Isaiah
xlv.  1.

158


God's  promises


BARNABAS.


vfiade  to.


nations  should  obey  before  him,
and  I  will  break  the  strength  of
kings.

15  Behold,  how  doth  ^  David
and  Isaiah  call  him  Lord,  and
the  Son  of  God.

CHAP.  XII.

The  'promise  of  God  not  made  to  the
Jews  only,  but  to  the  Gentiles  also,
and  fulfilled  to  us  by  Jesus  Christ.

BUT  let  us  go  yet  farther,  and
inquire  whether  this  people
be  the  heir,  or  the  former ;  and
whether  the  covenant  be  with  us
or  with  them.

2  And  first,  as  concerning  the
people,  hear  now  what  the  Scrip-
ture saith.

3  '■'Isaac  prayed  for  his  wife
Rebekah,  because  she  was  bar-
ren ;  and  she  conceived.  After-
wards Rebekah  went  forth  to
inquire  of  the  Lord.

4  And  the  Lord  said  unto  her ;
There  are  two  nations  in  thy
womb,  and  two  people  shall  come
from  thy  body;  and  the  one
shall  have  power  over  the  other,
and  the  greater  shall  serve  the
lesser.  Understand  here  who
was  Isaac;  who  Rebekah;  and
of  whom  it  was  foretold,  this
people  shall  be  greater  than  that.

5  And  in  another  prophecy
Jacob  speaketh  more  clearly  to
his  son  Joseph  saying ;  ^  Behold
the  Lord  hath  not  deprived  me
of  seeing  thy  face,  bring  me  thy
sons  that  I  may  bless  them.
And  he  brought  unto  his  father
*  Manasseh  and  Ephraim,  desi-
ring that  he  should  bless  Ma-
nasseh, because  he  was  the  elder.

6  Therefore  Joseph  brought
him  to  the  right  hand  of  his
father  Jacob.    But  Jacob  by  the


spirit  foresaw  the  figure  of  the
people  that  was  to  come.

7  And  what  saith  the  Scrip-
ture? And  Jacob  crossed  his
hands,  and  put  his  right  hand
upon  Ephraim,  his  second,  and
the  younger  son,  and  blessed  him.
And  Joseph  said  unto  Jacob ;  Put
thy  right  hand  upon  the  head  of
Manasseh,  for  he  is  my  first-born
son.  And  Jacob  said  unto  Jo-
seph ;  I  know  it,  my  son,  I  know
it;  but  the  greater  shall  serve
the  lesser ;  though  he  also  shall
be  blessed.

8  Ye  see  of  whom  he  ap-
pointed it,  that  they  should  be
the  first  people,  and  heirs  of  the
covenant.

9  If  therefore  God  shall  have
yet  farther  taken  notice  of  this
by  Abraham  too  ;  our  under-
standing of  it  will  then  be  per-
fectly established.

10  What  then  saith  the  Scrip-
ture to  Abraham,  when  he  ^  be-
lieved, and  it  was  imputed  unto
him  for  righteousness?  Behold
I  have  made  thee  a  father  of  the
nations,  which  without  circumci-
sion believe  in  the  Lord.

11  Let  us  therefore  now  in-
quire whether  God  has  fulfilled
the  covenant,  which  he  sware  to
our  fathers,  that  he  would  give
this  people  ?  Yes,  verily,  he  gave
it :  but  they  were  not  worthy  to
receive  it  by  reason  of  their  sins.

1 2  For  thus  saith  the  prophet :
*  And  Moses  continued  fasting
in  mount  Sinai,  to  receive  the
covenant  of  the  Lord  with  the
people,  forty  days  and  forty
nights.

13  ^And  he  received  of  the
Lord  two  tables  written  with  the
finger  of  the  Lord's  hand  in  the


^Comp.  Vet.  Lat.  Interp.    ^^Gen.  xxv.  21.  Comp.  St.  Paul  Rom.  ix.     Just.
Mart.  Tert.  &c.    Vid.  Ed.  Oxon.  p.  11,  a.  »Gen.  xlviii.  *Vid.Lat.

Interp.  Vet.       ^  Gen.  xv.  17.     So  St.  Paul  himself  applies  this:  Eom.  iv.  3.
6  Exod.  xxiv.  18.         ^  Dent.  ix.  10.     Exod.  xxxi.  12.

159


Jewlah  kSaObath


BARNABAS.


typicaL


Spirit.  And  Moses  when  he
had  received  them  brought  them
down  that  he  might  deliver  them
to  the  people.

14  And  the  Lord  said  unto
Moses ;  ^  Moses,  Moses,  get  thee
down  quickly,  for  the  people
which  thou  broughtest  out  of  the
land  of  Egypt  have  done  wick-
edly.

15  And  Moses  understood  that
they  had  again  set  up  a  molten
image :  and  he  cast  the  two  ta-
bles out  of  his  hands ;  and  the
tables  of  the  covenant  of  the
Lord  were  broken.  Moses  there-
fore received  them,  but  they  were
not  worthy.

16  Now  then  learn  how  we
have  received  them.  Moses,  be-
ing a  servant,  took  them ;  but
the  Lord  himself  has  given
them  unto  us,  that  we  might  be
the  people  of  his  inheritance,
having  suffered  for  us.

17  He  was  therefore  made
manifest ;  that  they  should  fill
up  the  measure  of  their  sins,
and  that  we  ^  being  made  heirs
by  him,  should  receive  the  cov-
enant of  the  Lord  Jesus.

18  And  again  the  prophet
saith ;  '  Behold,  I  have  set  thee
for  a  light  unto  the  Gentiles,  to
be  *  the  saviour  of  all  the  ends
of  the  earth,  saith  the  Lord  the
God  who  hath  redeemed  thee.

19  Who  for  that  very  end
was  prepared,  that  by  his  own
appearing  he  might  redeem  our
hearts,  already  devoured  by
death,  and  delivered  over  to
the  irregularity  of  error,  from
darkness;  and  establish  a  cov-
enant with  us  by  his  word.

20  For  so  it  is  written  that  the
father  commanded  him  by  deliv-


ering us  from  darkness,  to  pre-
pare unto  himself  a  holy  people.

21  Wherefore  the  prophet
saith :  ^  I  the  Lord  thy  God
have  called  thee  in  righteous-
ness, and  I  will  take  thee  by
thy  hand  and  will  strengthen
thee.  And  give  thee  for  a  cov-
enant of  the  people,  for  a  light
of  the  Gentiles.  ^  To  open  the
eyes  of  the  blind,  to  bring  out
the  prisoners  from  the  prison,
and  them  that  sit  in  darkness
out  of  the  prison  house.

22  Consider  therefore  from
whence  we  have  been  redeemed.
And  again  the  prophet  saith :
"^  The  spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon
me,  because  he  hath  anointed
me  :  he  hath  sent  me  to  preach
glad  tidings  to  the  lowly ;  to
heal  the  broken  in  heart ;  to
preach  remission  to  the  captives,
and  sight  unto  the  blind ;  to
proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of
the  Lord,  and  the  day  of  resti-
tution ;     to    comfort     all    that


mourn.


CHAP.  XHT.


That  the  sabbath  of  the  Jews  was  hut  a
figure  of  a  more  glorious  sabbath  to
come,  and  their  temple,  of  the  spirit-
ual temples  of  God.

FURTHERMORE  it  is  writ-
ten concerning  the  sab-
bath, in  the  Ten  ^Command-
ments, which  God  spake  in  the
Mount  Sinai  to  Moses,  ^  face  to
face ;  Sanctify  the  sabbath  of
the  Lord  with  pure  hands,  and
with  a  clean  heart.

2  And  elsewhere  he  saith ;
^^  If  thy  children  shall  keep  my
sabbaths,  then  will  I  put  my
mercy  upon  them.

3  And  even  in  the  beginning
of  the  creation  he  makes  men-


^  Exod.  xxxii.  7.     Dent.  ix.  12.        *  Vid.  Lat.  Interpret.  Vet.         '  Isaiah
xlix.  6.          ^  For  salvation  unto.        *  Isaiah  xlii.  6.      ^  Verse  7.       'Isaiali
Ixi.  1,  2     Comp.  Luke,  iv.  18.    « Words.    ^Exod.  xx.  8.       ^"Jer.  xvii.  24.
160


=^  =


^%rt-tt.

-,

K

1

~  €)

The  temple


BARNABAS.


typical


tion  of  the  sabbath.  ^And
God  made  in  six  days  the  works
of  his  hands;  and  he  finished
them  on  the  ^  seventh  day,  and
he  rested  the  seventh  day,  and
sanctified  it.

4  Consider,  my  children,  what
that  signifies,  he  finished  them
in  six  days.  The  meaning  of  it
is  this ;  that  in  ^  six  thousand
years  the  Lord  God  will  bring
all  things  to  an  end.

5  For  with  him  one  day  is  a
thousand  years  ;  as  himself  tes-
tifieth,  saying,  Behold  this  day
shall  be  as  a  thousand  years.
Therefore,  children,  in  six  days,
that  is,  in  six  thousand  years,
shall  *all  things  be  accom-
plished.

6  And  what  is  that  he  saith.
And  he  rested  the  seventh  day  :
he  meaneth  this  ;  that  when  his
Son  shall  come,  and  abolish  the
season  of  the  ^  Wicked  One,  and
judge  the  ungodly ;  and  shall
change  the  sun  and  the  moon,
and  the  stars ;  then  he  shall
gloriously  rest  in  that  seventh
day.

7  He  adds  lastly ;  Thou  shalt
sanctify  it  with  clean  hands  and
a  pure  heart.  Wherefore  we
are  greatly  deceived  if  we
imagine  that  any  one  can  now
sanctify  that  day  which  God  has
made  holy,  without  having  a
heart  pure  in  all  things.

8  Behold  therefore  he  will
then  truly  sanctify  it  with  bles-
sed rest,  when  we  (having  re-
ceived the  righteous  promise,
when  iniquity  shall  be  no  more,
all  things  being  renewed  by  the


Lord)  shall  be  able  to  sanctify
it,  being  ourselves  first  made
holy.

9  Lastly,  he  saith  unto  them  :
^  Your  new  moons  and  your
sabbaths  I  cannot  bear  them.
Consider  what  he  means  by  it ;
the  sabbaths,  says  he,  which  ye
now  keep  are  not  acceptable
unto  me,  but  those  which  I  have
made ;  when  resting  from  all
things  I  shall  begin  ^  the  eighth
day,  that  is,  the  beginning  of
the  other  world.

10  For  which  cause  we  ob-
serve the  eighth  day  with  glad-
ness, in  which  Jesus  rose  from
the  dead ;  and  having  mani-
fested himself  to  his  disciples,
ascended  into  heaven.

11  T  It  remains  yet  that  I
speak  to  you  concerning  the  tem-
ple how  these  miserable  men  be-
ing deceived  have  put  their  trust
in  the  house,  *  and  not  in  God
himself  who  made  them,  as  if  it
were  the  habitation  of  God.

12  For  much  after  the  same
manner  as  the  Gentiles,  they  con-
secrated him  in  the  temple.

13  But  learn  therefore  how  the
Lord  speaketh,  rendering  the
temple  vain :  ^  Who  has  measur-
ed the  heaven  with  a  span,  and
the  earth  with  his  hand  ?  Is  it
not  I?  Thus  saith  the  Lord,'*
Heaven  is  my  throne,  and  the
earth  is  my  footstool.  What  is
the  house  that  ye  will  build  me  ?
Or  what  is  the  place  of  my  rest?
Know  therefore  that  a,ll  their
hope  is  vain.

14  And  again  he  speaketh
after  this  manner  :  "  Behold  they


^Gen.  ii.  2.  Exod.  xx.  11,  xxxi.  17.  ^  yid.  Coteler.  Annot.  in  loc.
'  How  general  this  tradition  then  was.  See  Coteler.  Annot.  in  loc.
Edit.  Oxon,  page  90,  a.  Psalm  Ixxxix.  4.  ^  That  is,  to  the  time  of  the
Gospel,  says  Dr.  Bernard,  q.  v.  Annot.  p.  127,  Ed.  Oxon.  ^  gg  (\^q  j;^at
Vers.  6  Isaiah,  i.  13,  ^  go  the  other  Fathers,  q.  v.  apud.  Coteler.  Annot.
in  loc.  p.  36.  8  Vid.  Edit.  Oxon.  et  Vet.  Lat.  Interp.  » Isaiah,  xl.  12.

-^^  Isaiah,  Ixvi.  1.     ^^  Isaiah,  xlix.  17.

11  161


o/  the  way


BARNABAS.


of  light


that  destroy  this  temple,  even
they  shall  agaiu  build  it  up.
And  so  it  came  to  pass  ;  for
through  their  wars  it  is  now  de-
stroyed by  their  enemies;  and
the  servants  of  their  enemies
built  it  up.

15  Furthermore  it  has  been
made  manifest,  how  both  the  city
and  the  temple,  and  the  people  of
Israel  should  be  given  up.  For
the  Scripture  saith ;  ^  And  it  shall
come  to  pass  in  the  last  days,  that
the  Lord  will  deliver  up  the
sheep  of  his  pasture,  and  their
fold,  and  their  tower  into  destruc-
tion. And  it  is  come  to  pass,  as
the  Lord  hath  spoken.

16  Let  us  inquire  therefore,
whether  there  be  any  temple  of
God  ?  Yes  there  is ;  and  that
there,  where  himself  declares
that  he  would  both  make  and
perfect  it.  For  it  is  written  ;
^  And  it  shall  be  that  as  soon  as
the  week  shall  be  completed,  the
temple  of  the  Lord  shall  be
gloriously  built  in  the  name  of
the  Lord.

17  I  find  therefore  that  there
is  a  temple.  But  how  shall  it  be
built  in  the  name  of  the  Lord?
I  will  shew  you.

18  Before  that  we  believed  in
God,  the  habitation  of  our  heart
was  corruptible,  and  feeble,  as  a
temple  truly  built  with  hands.

19  For  it  was  a  house  full  of
idolatry,  a  house  of  devils ;  inas-
much as  there  was  done  in  it
whatsoever  was  contrary  unto
God.  But  it  shall  be  built  in
the  name  of  the  Lord.

20  Consider,  how  that  the
temple  of  the  Lord  shall  be  very
gloriously  built;  and  by  what
means  that  shall  be,  learn.

21  Having  received  remission
of  our  sins,  and  trusting  in  the


^Zeph.  ii.  6.  just.  Heb.
■♦So  the  old  Lat.  Interp.
162


name  of  the  Lord,  we  are  become
renewed,  being  again  created  as
it  were  from  the  beginning.
Wherefore  God  truly  dwells  in
our  house,  that  is,  in  us.

22  But  how  does  he  dwell  in
us?  The  word  of  his  faith,  the
calling  of  his  promise,  the  wisdom
of  his  righteous  judgments,  the
commands  of  his  doctrine  ;  he
himself  prophesies  within  us,  he
himself  dwelleth  in  us,  and  open-
eth  to  us  who  were  in  bondage
of  death  the  gate  of  our  ^  temple,
that  is,  the  mouth  of  wisdom,
having  given  repentance  unto
us  ;  and  by  this  means  has
brought  us  to  be  an  incorruptible
temple.

23  He  therefore  that  desires  to
be  saved  looketh  not  unto  the
man,  but  unto  him  that  dwelleth
in  him,  and  speaketh  by  him ;
being  struck  with  wonder,  foras-
much as  he  never  either  heard
him  speaking  such  words  out  of
his  mouth,  nor  ever  desired  to
hear  them.

24  This  is  that  spiritual  temple
that  is  built  unto  the  Lord.

CHAP.  XIV.

Of  the  way  of  light  ;  being  a  summary
of  what  a  Christian  is  to  do,  that  he
may  be  happy  for  ever,

AND  thus,  I  trust,  I  have  de-
clared to  you  as  much,  and
with  as  great  simplicity  as  I
could,  those  things  which  make
for  your  salvation,  so  as  not  to
have  omitted  anything  that
might  be  requisite  thereunto.

2  For  should  I  speak  further
of  the  things  that  *  now  are,  and
of  those  that  are  to  come,  you
would  not  yet  understand  them,
seeing  they  lie  in  parables.  This
therefore  shall  suffice  as  to  these
things.

2  Dan.  ix.  Haggai,  ii.      '  Vid.  Lat.  Ver.  Interp


to  a  Christian.


BARNABAS.


Way  of  darkness.


3  Let  us  now  go  on  to  the  other
kind  of  knowledge  and  doctrine.
There  are  two  ways  of  doctrine
and  power  ;  the  one  of  light,  the
other  of  darkness.

4  But  there  is  a  great  deal
of  difference  between  these  two
ways:  for  over  one  are  appointed
the  ^  angels  of  God,  the  leaders
of  the  way  of  Kght  ;  over  ths
other,  the  angels  of  Satan.  And
the  one  is  the  Lord  from  everlast-
ing to  everlasting ;  the  other  is
the  prince  of  the  time  of  un-
righteousness.

5  Now  the  way  of  light  is  this,
if  any  one  desires  to  attain  to  the
place  that  is  appointed  for  him,
and  will  hasten  thither  by  his
works.  And  the  knowledge  that
has  been  given  to  us  for  walking
in  it,  to  this  effect  :  Thou  shalt
love  him  that  made  thee :  thou
shalt  glorify  him  that  hath  re-
deemed thee  from  death.

6  Thou  shalt  be  simple  in
heart,  and  rich  in  the  spirit.
Thou  shalt  not  cleave  to  those
that  walk  in  the  way  of  death.
Thou  shalt  hate  to  do  anything
that  is  not  pleasing  unto  God.
Thou  shalt  abhor  all  dissimula-
tion. Thou  shalt  not  neglect
any  of  the  commands  of  the
Lord.

7  Thou  shalt  not  exalt  thyself,
but  shalt  be  humble.  Thou  shalt
not  take  honour  to  thyself.  Thou
shalt  not  enter  into  any  wicked
counsel  against  thy  neighbour.
Thou  shalt  not  be  over-confident
in  thy  heart.

8  Thou  shalt  not  commit  forni-
cation, nor  adultery.  Neither
shalt  thou  corrupt  thyself  with
mankind.  Thou  shalt  not  make
use  of  the  word  of  God,  to  any
impurity.


9  Thou  shalt  not  accept  any
man's  person,  when  thou  re-
provest  any  one's  faults.  Thou
shalt  be  gentle.  Thou  shalt  be
quiet.  Thou  shalt  tremble  at
the  words  which  thou  hast  heard.
Thou  shalt  not  keep  any  hatred
in  thy  heart  against  thy  brother.
Thou  shalt  not  entertain  any
doubt  whether  it  shall  be  or
not.

10  Thou  shalt  not  take  the
name  of  the  Lord  in  vain.  Thou
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  above
thy  own  soul.

11  Thou  shalt  not  destroy  thy
conceptions  before  they  are
brought  forth  ;  nor  kill  them
after  they  are  born.

12  Thou  shalt  not  withdraw
thy  hand  from  thy  son,  or  from
thy  daughter;  but  shall  teach
them  from  their  youth  the  fear
of  the  Lord.

13  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy
neighbour's  goods ;  neither  shalt
thou  be^an  extortioner.  Neither
shall  thy  heart  be  joined  to  proud
men ;  but  thou  shalt  be  num-
bered among  the  righteous  and
the  lowly.  Whatever  ^events
shall  happen  unto  thee,  thou
shalt  receive  them  as  good.

14  Thou  shalt  not  be  double-
minded,  or  double-tongued;  for
a  double  tongue  is  the  snare  of
death.  Thou  shalt  be  subject
unto  the  Lord  and  to  inferior
masters  as  to  the  representatives
of  God,  in  fear  and  reverence.

15  Thou  shalt  not  be  bitter  in
thy  commands  towards  any  of
thy  servants  that  trust  in  God ;
lest  thou  chance  not  to  fear  him
who  is  over  both;  because  he
came  not  to  call  any  with  re-
spect of  persons,  but  whomsoever
the  spirit  had  prepared.


^  Vid.  Coteler.  in  loc.  et  Basil,  in  Psalm  i.
»  Effects.


'Greedy,  TtleoveKTriq,

163


Who  shall  be


BARNABAS.


cdst  ouL


16  Thou  shalt  communicate
to  thy  neighbour  of  all  thou
hast;  thou  shalt  not  call  any-
thing thine  own  :  for  if  ye  par-
take in  such  things  as  are  incor-
ruptible, how  much  more  should
you  do  it  in  those  that  are  cor-
ruptible ?

17  ^  Thou  shalt  not  be  forward
to  speak ;  for  the  mouth  is  the
snare  of  death.  '^  Strive  for  thy
soul  with  all  thy  might.  ^  Reach
not  out  thine  hand  to  receive,
and  withhold  it  not  when  thou
shouldest  give.

18  Thou  shalt  love,  as  the
apple  of  thine  eye,  every  one
that  speaketh  unto  thee  the
Word  of  the  Lord.  ■*  Call  to  thy
remembrance,  day  and  night,
the  future  judgment.

19  Thou  shalt  seek  out  every
day  the  persons  of  the  ^right-
eous :  and  both  consider  and  go
about  to  exhort  others  by  the
word,  and  meditate  how  thou
mayest  save  a  soul.

20  Thou  shalt  also  labour
with  thy  hands  to  give  to  the
poor,  ^  that  thy  sins  may  be  for-
given thee.  Thou  shalt  not  de-
liberate whether  thou  shouldst
give:  nor,  having  given,  mur-
mur at  it.

21  Give  to  every  one  that
asks :  so  shalt  thou  know  who  is
the  good  rewarder  of  thy  gifts.

22  Keep  what  thou  hast  re-
ceived ;  thou  shalt  neither  add
to  it  nor  take  from  it.

23  Let  the  wicked  be  always
thy  aversion.  Thou  shalt  judge
righteous  judgment.  Thou  shalt
never  cause  divisions ;  but  shalt
make  peace  between  those  that


are  at  variance,  and  bring  them
together.

24  Thou  shalt  confess  thy  sins  -
and  not  come  to  thy  prayer  with
an  evil  conscience.

25  This  is  the  way  of  light.

CHAP.  XV.

Of  the  way  of  darkness;  that  is,  what
kind  of  persons  shall  be  for  ever  cast
out  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

BUT  the  way  of  darkness  is
crooked  and  full  of  cursing.
For  it  is  the  way  of  eternal
death,  with  punishment ;  in
which  they  that  walk  meet  those
things  that  destroy  their  own
souls.

2  Such  are;  idolatry,  confi-
dence, pride  of  power,  hypoc-
risy, double-mindedness,  adul-
tery, murder,  rapine,  jDride^
transgression,  deceit,  malice,  ar-
rogance, witchcraft,  covetous-
ness,  and  the  want  of  the  fear
of  God.

3  In  this  walk  those  who  are
the  persecutors  of  them  that  are
good  ;  haters  of  truth  ;  lovers  of
lies ;  who  know  not  the  reward
of  righteousness,  nor  cleave  ta
any  thing  that  is  good.

4  Who  administer  not  right-
eous judgment  to  the  widow  and
orphan  ;  who  watch  for  wicked-
ness, and  not  for  the  fear  of  the
Lord  :

5  From  whom  gentleness  and
patience  are  far  off;  who  love
vanity,  and  follow  after  rewards ;
having  no  compassion  upon  the
poor ;  nor  take  any  pains  for
such  as   are   heavy   laden   and


6  Ready  to  evil  speaking,  not


^  See   Eccles.  iv.  29.  ^  Ibid.,   ver.   28.     For  so   I   choose  to   read

it,  VTTep  TTjq  ipvxvQ  oov  ayuvevaeic,  according  to  the  conjecture  of  Cotelerius.
'  Ibid.,  ver.  36.  ''  And  remember  him  night  and  day.  The  words  rjnepaq
Kpigecjg,  seem  to  have  been  erroneously  inserted,  and  pervert  the  sense.
'  Gr.  Saints.  ^  Gr.  For  the  redemption  of  thy  sins.  Comp,  Dan.  iv.  24..
See  Lxx.

164


Who  shall  be


BARNABAS.


cast  out


knowing  hinj  that  made  them;
murderers  of  children  ;  corrupt-
ers of  the  creatures  of  God  ;
that  turn  away  from  the  needy ;
oppress  the  afflicted ;  are  the
a,dvocates  of  the  rich,  but  unjust
judges  of  the  poor;  being  alto-
gether sinners.

7  It  is  therefore  fitting  that
learning  the  just  commands  of
the  Lord,  which  we  have  before
mentioned,  we  should  walk  in
them.  For  he  who  does  such
things  shall  be  glorified  in  the
kingdom  of  God.

8  But  he  that  chooses  the
other  part,  shall  be  destroyed,
together  with  his  works.  For
this  cause  there  shall  be  both  a
resurrection,  and  a  retribution.

9  I  beseech  those  that  are  in
high  estate  among  you,  (if  so  be
you  will  take  the  counsel  which
with  a  good  intention  I  offer  to
you,)  you  have  those  with  you
towards  whom  you  may  do  good;
do  not  forsake  them.

10  For  the  day  is  at  hand  in
which  all  things  shall  be  de-
stroyed, together  with  the  wicked
one.  The  Lord  is  near,  and  his
reward  is  with  him.

11  I  beseech  you,  therefore,
again,  and  again,  be  as  good
lawgivers  to  one  another;  con-
tinue faithful  counsellors  to  each
other ;  remove  from  among  you
all  hypocrisy.


12  And  may  God,  the  Lord
of  all  the  world  give  you  wis-
dom, knowledge,  counsel,  and
understanding  of  his  judgments
in  patience.

13  Be  ye  taught  of  God;
seeking  what  it  is  the  Lord  re-
quires of  you,  and  doing  it ;  that
ye  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of
judgment.

14  And  if  there  be  among  you
any  remembrance  of  what  is
good,  think  of  me;  meditating
upon  these  things,  that  both  my
desire  and  my  watching  for  you
may  turn  to  a  good  account.

15  1  beseech  you ;  I  ask  it  as
a  favour  of  you ;  whilst  you  are
in  this  beautiful  ^  tabernacle  of
the  body,  be  wanting  in  none  of
these  things ;  but  without  ceasing
seek  them,  and  fulfil  every  com-
mand. For  these  things  are
fitting  and  worthy  to  be  done.

16  Wherefore  I  have  given
the  more  diligence  to  write  unto
you,  according  to  my  ability,
that  you  might  rejoice.  Fare-
well, children,  of  love  and  peace.

17  The  Lord  of  glory  and  of
all  grace,  be  with  your  spirit.
Amen.


Tf  The  end  of  the  Epistle  of  Bar-
nabas, the  Apostle,  and  fellow-
traveller  of  St.  Paul  the  Apostle,


*  Vessel.


165


The  EPISTLE  of  IGNATIUS  to  the  EPHESIANS.


^  Of  the  Epistles  of  Ignatius.

[The  Epistles  of  Ignatius  are  translated  by  Archbishop  Wake  from  the
text  of  Vossius.  He  says  that  there  were  considerable  differences  in  the
editions ;  the  best  for  a  long  time  extant  containing  fabrications,  and
the  genuine  being  altered  and  corrupted.  Arclibishop  Usher  printed
old  Latin  translations  of  them  at  Oxford,  in  1644.  At  Amsterdam,  two
years  afterwards,  Vossius  printed  six  of  them,  in  their  ancient  and  pure
Greek ;  and  the  seventh  greatly  amended  from  the  ancient  Latin  ver-
sion, was  printed  ai  Paris,  by  Ruinart,  in  1689,  in  the  Acts  and  Mar-
tyrdom of  Ignatius,  from  a  Greek  uninterpolated  copy.  These  are
supposed  to  form  the  collection  that  Polycarp  made  of  the  Epistles  of
Ignatius,  mentioned  by  Irenseus,  Origen,  Eusebius,  Jerome,  Athanasius,
Theodoret,  and  other  ancients ;  but  many  learned  men  have  imagined
all  of  them  to  be  apocryphal.  This  supposition,  the  piety  of  Archbishop
Wake,  and  his  persuasion  of  their  utility  to  the  faith  of  the  church,  will
not  permit  him  to  entertain ;  hence  he  has  taken  great  pains  to  render
the  present  translation  acceptable,  by  adding  numerous  readings  and
references  to  the  Canonical  Books.]


CHAP.  I.

1  Commends  them  for  sending  Onesimus,
and  other  members  of  the  church  to
him.  8  Exhorts  them  to  unity,  13
hy  a  due  subjection  to  their  bishop.

IGNATIUS,  who  is  also  called
Theophorus,  to  the  church
which  is  at  Ephesus  in  Asia;
most  deservedly  happy;  being
blessed  Hhrough  the  greatness
and  fulness  *  of  God  the  Father,
and  predestinated  before  the
world  began,  that  it  should  be
always  unto  an  enduring  and  un-
changeable glory ;  being  united
and  chosen  ^through  his  true
passion,  according  to  the  will  of
the  Father,  and  Jesus  Christ  our
God;  all  *  happiness,  by  Jesus
Christ,  and  ^  his  undefiled  grace.

2  I  have  heard  of  your  name
much  beloved  in  God ;  which  ye
have  ^very  justly  attained  by  a
'habit  of  righteousness,  accord-
ing to  the  faith  and  love  which
is  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour.

3  How  that  being  *  followers
of  God,  and  stirring  up  your-
selves by  the  blood  of  Christ  ye
have  perfectly  accomplished  the


work  that  was  con-natural  unto
you.

4  For  hearing  that  I  came
bound  from  Syria,  for  the  com-
mon name  and  *hope,  trusting
through  your  prayers  to  fight
with  beasts  at  Rome;  so  that  by
^"suffering  I  may  become  indeed
the  disciple  of  him  "who  gave
himself  to  God,  an  offering  and
sacrifice  for  us ;  ^^  (ye  hastened
to  see  me).  I  received,  there-
fore, in  the  name  of  God,  your
whole  multitude  in  Onesimus.

5  Who  by  inexpressible  love
is  ours,  but  according  to  the
flesh  is  your  bishop;  whom  I
beseech  you,  by  Jesus  Christ,  to
love;  and  that  you  would  all
strive  to  be  like  unto  him.  And
blessed  be  God,  who  has  granted
unto  you,  who  are  so  worthy  of
him,  to  ^^  enjoy  such  an  excellent
bishop.

6  For  what  concerns  my  fel-
low servant  Burrhus,  and  your
^*  most  blessed  deacon  in  things
pertaining  to  God ;  I  entreat  you
that  he  may  tarry  longer,  both  for
yours,  and  your  bishop's  honour.


^  In.  '  See  Eph.  iii.  19.  '  In.  *  Health,  Joy.  s  Keceived.  Vid.  Epist.
Interpol.  ®  Vid.  Coteler.  in  loc.  Comp,  Gal.  iv.  8.  '  Pearson.  Vind.  Ignat.
Par.  2,  cap.  14.  »  Imitators.  »  Viz.  of  Christ.  ^^  Martyrdom.  "  Eph.  v.
2.  ^*  See  the  old  Lat.  Ed.  of  Bishop  Usher.  "  Possess.  ^*  Bleased  in  all
things.

166


OJ  unity


EPHESIANS.


and  subjection.


7  And  Crocus  also  worthy
both  our  God  and  you,  whom  I
have  received  as  the  pattern  of
your  love,  has  in  all  things  re-
freshed me,  as  the  Father  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  also  re-
fresh him ;  together  with  Onesi-
mus,  and  Burrhus,  and  Euclus,
and  Fronto,  Mn  whom  I  have,
as  to  your  charity,  seen  all  of  you.
And  may  I  always,  ^  have  joy  of
you,  if  I  shall  be  worthy  of  it.

8  It  is  therefore  fitting  that
you  should  ^  by  all  means  glorify
Jesus  Christ  who  hath  glorified
you:  that  *by  a  uniform  obe-
dience ^ye  may  be  perfectly
joined  together,  in  the  same
mind,  and  in  the  same  judgment:
and  may  all  speak  the  same
things  concerning  everything.

9  And  that  being  subject  to
*your  bishop,  and  the  presby-
tery, ye  may  be  wholly  and  tho-
roughly sanctified.

10  These  things  I  ^  prescribe
to  you,  not  as  if  I  were  some-
body extraordinary :  for  though
I  am  bound  *  for  his  name,  I  am
not  yet  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus.
®  But  now  I  begin  to  learn,  and
I  speak  to  you  as  fellow  disci-
ples together  with  me.

11  For  I  ought  to  have  been
stirred  up  by  you,  in  faith,  in
admonition,  in  patience,  in  long-
suflTering ;  but  forasmuch  as  cha-
rity suffers  me  not  to  be  silent
'"  towards  you,  I  have  first  taken
upon  me  to  exhort  you,  that  ye
would  all  run  together  according
to  the  will  of  God.

12  For  even  Jesus  Christ,  our
inseparable  life,  is  sent  by  the
"  will  of  the  Father ;  as  the
bishops,  appointed  unto  the  ut-


most bounds  of  the  earth,  are  by
the  will  of  Jesus  Christ.

13  ^^  Wherefore  it  will  become
you  to  run  together  according
to  the  will  of  your  bishop,  as
also  ye  do.

14  For  your  ^^  famous  presby-
tery, worthy  of  God,  is  fitted  as
exactly  to  the  bishop,  as  the
strings  are  to  the  harp.

15  Therefore  in  your  concord
and  agreeing  charity,  Jesus
Christ  is  sung ;  and  every  single
person  among  you  makes  up  the
chorus :

16  That  so  being  all  conso-
nant in  ^*love,  and  taking  up
the  song  of  God,  ye  may  in  a
perfect  unity  with  one  voice,
sing  to  the  Father  by  Jesus
Christ ;  to  the  end  that  he  may
both  hear  you,  and  perceive  by
your  works,  that  ye  are  indeed
the  members  of  his  son.

17  Wherefore  it  is  profitable
for  you  to  live  in  an  unblamea-
ble  unity,  that  so  ye  may  always
^^  have  a  fellowship  with  God.

CHAP.  II.

1  The  benefit  of  subjection.  4  The
bishop  not  to  be  respected  the  less
because  he  is  not  forward  in  exacting
it:  8  warns  them  against  heretics;
bidding  them  cleave  to  Jesus,  whose
divine  and  human  nature  is  declared;
commends  them  for  their  care  to  keep
themselves  from  false  teachers;  and
shews  them  the  way  to  God.

FOR  if  I  in  this  little  time  have
had  such  a  familiarity  with
your  bishop,  I  mean  not  a  carnal,
but  spiritual  acquaintance  with
him;  how  much  more  must  I
think  you  happy  who  are  so
joined  to  him,  as  the  church  is  to
Jesus  Christ,  and  Jesus  Christ  to


*  By.  2  gee  Philera.  20.  Wisd.  xxx.  2.  '  In  all  manner  of  ways.  *  In
one.  5  I  Cor.  j  jq.  «  The.  ^  Command  you.  »  !„.  »  For.  ^^  Concerning.
"  Mind,  counsel,  opinion,  &c.  ^^  Whence.  "  Worthy  to  be  named.  ^*  Con-
cord,    '6  Partake  of.

167


Love  to  the  bishop.


EPHESIANS.      Exhorts  against  heresy.


the  Father  ;  that  so  all  things
may  agree  iu  the  same  unity  ?

2  Let  no  man  deceive  himself;
if  a  man  be  not  within  the  altar,
he  is  deprived  of  the  bread  of
God.  For  if  the  prayers  of  ^  one
or  two  he  of  such  force,  as  we
are  told;  how  much  more  power-
ful shall  that  of  the  bishop  and
the  whole  church  be  ?

3  He  therefore  that  does  not
come  together  in  the  same  place
with  it,  is  ^  proud,  and  has  al-
ready ^  condemned  himself.  For
it  is  written,  *  God  resisteth  the
proud.  Let  us  take  heed  there-
fore, that  we  do  not  set  ourselves
against  the  bishop,  that  we  may-
be subject  to  God.

4  ^  The  more  any  one  sees  his
bishop  silent,  the  more  let  him
revere  him.  For  whomsoever
the  master  of  the  house  sends  to
be  over  his  own  household,  we
ought  in  like  manner  to  receive
him,  as  we  would  do  him  that
sent  him.  It  is  therefore  evident
that  we  ought  to  look  upon  the
bishop,  even  as  we  would  do  upon
the  Lord  himself

5  And  indeed  Onesimus  him-
self does  greatly  commend  your
good  order  in  God :  that  you  all
live  according  to  the  truth,  and
that  no  heresy  dwells  among  you.
For  neither  do  ye  hearken  to  any
one  more  than  to  Jesus  Christ
speaking  to  you  in  truth.

6  For   some    there   are   who

*  carry  about  the  name  of  Christ
'  in  deceitfulness,  but  do  things
unworthy  of  God ;  whom  ye  must

*  flee,  as  ye  would  do  so  many  wild
beasts.   '  For  they  are  ravening


dogs,  who  bite  secretly  :  against
whom  ye  must  guard  yourselves,
as  men  hardly  to  be  cured.

7  There  is  one  physician,  both
fl.e.>hly  and  spiritual;  made  and
not  made ;  God  incarnate ;  true
life  in  death ;  both  of  Mary  and  of
God ;  first  passible,  then  impassi-
ble ;  even  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.

8  Wherefore  let  no  man  de-
ceive you  ;  as  indeed  neither  are
ye  deceived,  being  wholly  the
servants  of  God.  For  inasmuch
as  there  is  no  contention  nor
strife  among  you,'  to  trouble  you,
^"ye  must  needs  live  according
to  God's  will.  ^^  My  soul  be  for
yours ;  and  I  myself  the  expi-
atory offering  for  your  church  of
Ephesus,  so  famous  ^^  throughout
the  world.

9  They  that  are  of  the  flesh
cannot  do  the  works  of  the  spirit ;
neither  they  that  are  of  the  spirit
the  works  of  the  flesh.  ^'  As  he
that  has  faith  cannot  be  an  infi-
del ;  nor  he  that  is  an  infidel  have
faith.  But  even  those  things
which  ye  do  according  to  the  flesh
are  spiritual;  forasmuch  as  ye
do  all  things  in  Jesus  Christ.

10  Nevertheless  I  have  "heard
of  some  who  have  ^^  passed  by
you,  having  perverse  doctrine ;
whom  ye  did  not  suff*er  to  sow  ^*
among  you  ;  but  stopped  your
ears,  that  ye  might  not  receive
those  things  that  were  sown  by
them ;  "  as  becoming  the  stones
of  the  temple  of  the  Father,  pre-
pared for  ^^  his  building  ;  and
drawn  up  on  high  by  the  Cross
of  Christ,  ^'  as  by  an  engine.

11  Using  the  Holy  Ghost  as


^  Matt,  xviii.  19.  *  Is  already  proud  and  has,  &c.  '  Judged,  or  separated.
*  James,  iv.  6.  ^  And  the.  •  Accustom  themselves  to  carry.  '  In  wicked
deceit.  »  Avoid.  »  Which  can.  "  Without  doubt  ye  live.  ^^Vid.  Voss.
Annot.  in  loc  Pearson,  Vind.  Ign.  par.  2,  pp.  207,  208.  ^^j^  ^ges.  ^^  As
neither  is  faith  the  things  of  infidelity,  nor  infidelity  the  things  of  faith.
»♦  Known.  ^^  Passed  thither.  ^6  Upon.  "  Comp.  Eph.  ii.  20,  21,  22.
1  Pet.  ii.  5.  ^8  The  building  of  God  the  Father.  ^^  By  the  engine  of  the
cross,  etc.

168


Exhorts  to  prayer^


EPHESIANS.


against  sin,


the  rope  :  your  faith  being  your
support;  and  your  charity  the
way  that  leads  unto  God.

12  Ye  are  therefore,  with  all
your  companions  in  the  same
^  journey,  full  of  God ;  his  spiri-
tual temples,  '^  full  of  Christ,  full
of  holiness :  adorned  in  all  things
with  the  commands  of  Christ.

13  In  whom  also  I  rejoice  that
I  have  been  thought  worthy  by
"*  this  present  epistle  to  converse,
and  joy  together  with  you ;  that
with  respect  to  the  other  life,  ye
love  nothing  but  God  only.

CHAP.  III.

1  Exhorts  them  to  prayer;  to  be  un-
blameable.  5  To  be  careful  of  salva-
tion ;  11  frequent  in  public  devotion  ;
18  and  to  live  in  charity.

PRAY  also  without  ceasing
for  other  men :  for  there  is
hope  of  repentance  in  them,  that
they  may  attain  untoMjrod.  Let
them  therefore  at  least  be  in-
structed by  your  works,  if  they
will  be  no  other  way.

2  Be  ye  mild  at  their  anger ;
bumble  at  their  boasting;  to  their
blasphemies  return  your  prayers :
to  their  error,  your  *  firmness  in
the  faith :  when  they  are  cruel,
be  ye  gentle ;  not  endeavouring
to  imitate  their  ways.

(3  Let  us  be  their  brethren  in
all  kindness  and  moderation,  but
let  us  be  followers  of  the  Lord  ;
^  for  who  was  ever  more  unjustly
used  ?  More  destitute  ?  More
despised  ?)

4  That  so  no  herb  of  the  devil
may  be  found  in  you :  but  ye  may
remain  in  all  holiness  and  so-
briety ^  both  of  body  and  spirit,
in  Christ  Jesus.


5  The  last  times  ^  are  come
upon  us :  let  us  therefore  be  very
reverent  and  fear  the  long-suffer-
ing of  God,  that  it  be  not  to  us
unto  condemnation.

6  For  let  us  either  fear  the
wrath  that  is  to  come,  or  let  us
love  the  grace  ^  that  we  at  present
enjoy:  that  ^  by  the  one,  or  other,
of  these  we  may  be  found  in
Christ  Jesus,  unto  true  life.

7  ^"^  Besides  him,  let  nothing
"  be  worthy  of  you  ;  ^^  for  whom
also  I  bear  about  these  bonds,
those  spiritual  jewels,  in  which  I
would  to  God  that  I  might  arise
through  your  prayers.

8  Of  which  I  entreat  you  to
make  me  always  partaker,  that  I
may  be  found  in  the  lot  of  the
Christians  of  Ephesus,  who  have
always  ^^  agreed  with  the  Apos-
tles,^* through  the  power  of  Jesus
Christ.

9  Tf  I  know  both  who  I  am,
and  to  whom  I  write ;  I,  a  person
condemned:  ye,  such  as  have
obtained  mercy  :  I,  exposed  to
danger ;  ye,  confirmed  against
danger.

10  Ye  are  the  passage  of  those
that  are  killed  for  God ;  the  com-
panions of  Paul  in  the  mysteries
of  the  Gospel;  the  Holy,  the
^^  martyr,  the  deservedly  most
happy  Paul :  at  whose  feet  may  I
be  found,  when  I  shall  have  at-
tained unto  God ;  who  ^^  through-
out all  his  epistle,  makes  mention
of  you  in  Christ  Jesus.

11  Let  it  be  your  care  there-
fore to  come  more  fully  together^,
to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God.
For  when  ye  meet  fully  together
in  the  same  place,  the  powers  of


^  Pearson,  ib.  part  2,  cap.  12.  ^  Carriers.  'These  things  I  write.  *  Be
ye  firm.  ^  ^y^^o  jjj^g  been  more,  etc.  ^  In  Jesus  Christ  both  bodily  and
spiritually.  1  Cor.  vii  34.  ''Remain:  or,  for  it  remains.  ^Is  present.
^One  of  the  two,  only  that  we  may  be  found,  etc.  *<>  Without  him.

"Become  you.       "In.       ^' Assented  to.       "In.      ^^-y^itnessed  of.       ^^Vid.
Coteler.  in  loc.  Pears.  Vind.  Ign.  Par  2,  cap.  10.

169


to  charity,  and  to


EPHESIANS.


love  of  the  Gospel.


the  devil  are  destroyed,  and  his
*  mischief  is  dissolved  by  the
^  unity  of  their  faith.

12  And  indeed,  nothing  is
better  than  peace,  by  which  all
war  both  '  spiritual  and  earthly
is  abolished.

13  Of  all  which  nothing  is
hid  from  you,  if  ye  have  perfect
faith  and  charity  in  Christ  Jesup,
which  are  the  beginning  and  end
of  life.

14  For  the  beginning  is  faith ;
the  end  is  charity.  And  these
two  *  joined  together,  are  of  God :
but  all  other  things  which  con-
cern a  holy  life  are  the  conse-
quences of  these.

15  No  man  professing  a  true
faith,  sinneth;  neither  does  he
who  has  charity  hate  any.

16  ^The  tree  is  made  manifest
by  its  fruit ;  so  they  who  profess
themselves  to  be  Christians  *  are
known  by  what  they  do.

17  For  Christianity  is  not  the
work  of  an  outward  profession ;
but  shows  itself  in  the  power  of
faith,  if  a  man  be  found  faithful
unto  the  end.

18  It  is  better  for  a  man  to
hold  his  peace,  and  be  ;  Uhan  to
say  he  is  a  Christian  and  not  to  be.

19  It  is  good  to  teach;  ®if
what  he  says  he  does  likewise.

20  There  is  therefore  one  mas-
ter who  spake,  and  it  was  done ;
and  even  those  things  which  he
did  without  speaking,  are  worthy
of  the  Father.

21  He  that  possesses  the  word
of  Jesus  is  truly  able  to  hear  his
very  silence,  that  he  may  be
perfect ;  "  and  both  do  according
to  what  he  speaks,  and  be  known


by  those  things  of  which  he  is
silent.

22  There  is  nothing  hid  from
God,  but  even  our  secrets  are
nigh  unto  him.

23  Let  us  therefore  do  all
things,  as  becomes  those  who
have  ^"God  dwelling  in  them;
that  we  may  be  his  temples,  and
he  may  be  our  God :  as  also  he
is,  and  will  manifest  himself  be-
fore our  faces,  by  those  things
"  for  which  we  justly  love  him.

CHAP.  IV.

1  To  have  a  care  for  the  Gospel.  9  The
virginity  of  Mary,  the  incarnation,
and  the  death  of  Christ,  were  hid  from
the  Devil.  11  How  the  birth  of  Christ
was  revealed.     16  Exhorts  to  unity.

BE  not  deceived,  my  brethren :
those  that  "corrupt  families
by  adultery,  shall  not  inherit  the
kingdom  of  God.

2  If  therefore  they  who  do
this  according  to  the  flesh,  ^^have
suffered  death ;  how  much  more
shall  he  die,  who  by  his  wicked
doctrine  corrupts  the  faith  of
God,  for  which  Christ  was  cru-
cified ?

3  '*He  that  is  thus  defiled,
shall  depart  into  unquenchable
fire,  and  so  also  shall  he  that
^^  hearkens  to  him.

4  For  this  cause  did  the  Lord
^® suffer  the  ointment  to  be  poured
on  his  head ;  that  he  might
breathe  the  breath  of  immortality
unto  his  church.

5  Be  not  ye  therefore  anointed
with  the  evil  savour  of  the  doc-
trine of  the  prince  of  this  world :
let  him  not  take  you  captive  from
the  life  that  is  set  before  you.

6  And   why  are  we   not  all


'  "Destruction.  '  Concord.  ^  Of  things  in  heaven  and  of  things  on  earth.
*  Bein?  in  unity.  ^  Matt.  xii.  38.  *  Shall  be  seen  or  made  manifest.
'  Speaking,  not  to  be.  ^  If  he  who  says,  does.  »  That  he  may.  ^°  Him.
"  Out  of.  ^2  The  corrupters  of  houses.  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10.  ^^  1  Cor.  x.  8.
**  Such  a  one  being  become  defiled.  ^^  Hears  him.  ^^  Receives  ointment.
Psalm  xliv.  8,  cxxxii.  2.
170


The  incarnatioJif.&c.,


EPHESIANS.


hid  from  the  devil.


wise,  seeing  we  have  received
the  knowledge  of  God,  which  is
Jesus  Christ  ?  Why  ^  do  we  suf-
fer ourselves  foolishly  to  perish  ;
^  not  considering  the  gift  which
the  Lord  has  truly  sent  to  us  ?

7  ^Let  my  life  be  sacrificed
for  the  doctrine  of  the  cross;
which  is  indeed  a  scandal  to  the
unbelievers,  but  to  us  is  salvation
and  life  eternal.

8  *  Where  is  the  wise  man?
Where  is  the  disputer  ?  Where
is  the  boasting  of  those  who  are
called  wise  ?

9  For  our  God  Jesus  Christ
was  according  to  the  dispensation
of  God  *  conceived  in  the  womb
of  Mary,  of  the  seed  of  David,
*by  the  Holy  Ghost;  Mie  was
born  and  baptized,  that  through
his  passion  he  might  purify
water,  to  the  washing  away  of  sin.

10  Now  the  Virginity  of  Mary,
and  he  who  was  born  of  her,  was
kept  in  secret  from  the  prince
of  this  world;  as  was  also  the
death  of  our  Lord :  three  of  the
*  mysteries  the  most  spoken  of
throughout  the  world,  yet  done
in  "  secret  by  God.

11  How  then  was  our  Saviour
manifested  to  the  world?  A
star  shone  in  heaven  beyond  all
the  other  stars,  and  its  light  was
inexpressible,  and  its  novelty
struck  terror  into  men's  minds.
All  the  rest  of  the  stars,  together
with  the  sun  and  moon,  were  the
chorus  to  this  star;  but  that
sent  out  its  light  exceedingly
above  them  all.

12  And  men  ^^  began  to  be
troubled  to  think  whence  this
"new  star  came  so  unlike  to
^^  all  the  others.


13  Hence  all  the  power  of
magic  became  dissolved;  and
every  bond  of  wickedness  was
^'  destroyed :  men's  ignorance
was  taken  away;  and  the  old
kingdom  abolished ;  God  himself
'*  appearing  in  the  form  of  a  man,
for  the  renewal  of  eternal  life.

14  From  thence  began  what
God  had  prepared :  from  thence-
forth things  were  disturbed;  for-
asmuch as  he  designed  to  abolish
death.

15  But  if  Jesus  Christ  shall
give  me  grace  through  your
prayers,  and  it  be  his  will,  I
purpose  in  a  second  epistle  which
I  will  suddenly  write  unto  you
to  manifest  to  you  more  fully
the  dispensation  of  which  I  have
now  begun  to  speak,  unto  the  new
man,  which  is  Jesus  Christ;  both
in  his  faith,  and  charity ;  in  his
suffering,  and  in  his  resurrection.

16  Especially  if  the  Lord  shall
^^  make  known  unto  me,  that  ye
all  by  name  come  together  in
common  in  one  faith,  and  in  one
Jesus  Christ;  who  was  of  the
race  of  David  according  to  the
flesh ;  the  Son  of  man,  and  Son
of  God ;  ^*  obeying  your  bishop
and  the  presbytery  with  an  en-
tire ^''affection;  breaking  one
and  the  same  bread,  which  is  the
medicine  of  immortality;  our
antidote  that  we  should  not  die,
but  live  forever  in  Christ  Jesus.

17  My  soul  be  for  yours,  and
theirs  whom  ye  have  sent  to  the
glory  of  God,  even  unto  Smyrna,
from  whence  also  I  write  to  you  ;
giving  thanks  unto  the  Lord
and  loving  Polycarp  even  as  I
do  you.  Remember  me,  as  Jesus
Christ  does  remember  you.


^  Are  we  foolishly  destroyed  ?  «  Not  knowing.  ^  gee  Dr.  Smith's  note  in
loc.  1  Cor.  i.  18,  23,  24.  *  1  Cor.  i.  20.  «  Carried.  «  But  by.  '  Who  was.
«  Mysteries  of  noise.  ^  Silence  or  quietness.  See  Eom.  xvi.  25.  '<>  There
was  a  disorder.  "  Novelty.  ^^  xhem.  ^^  Disappeared.  /"  Being  made
manifest.     ^^  Reveal.     ^^  That  ye  may  obey.    "  Mind.

171


Exhorts  to  reverence


MAGNESIANS.


18  Pray  for  the  churcli  which
iri  in  Syria,  from  whence  I  am
carried  bound  to  Rome ;  being
the  least  of  all  the  faithful  which
are  there,  as  I  have  been  thought


i^mii


the  bishop.
nd  to  the  glory


worthy  to  h^A
of  God.

19  Fare  ye  well  in  God  the
Father,  and  in  Jesus  Christ,  our
common  Hope.  Amen.


T[  To  the  Ephesians.


The  EPISTLE  of  IGNATIUS  to  the  MAGNESIANS.


CHAP.  I.

4  Mentions  the  arrival  of  Damas,  their
bishop,  and  others,  G  whom  he  exhorts
them  to  reverence,  notwitlistanding  he
ivas  a  young  man.

IGNATIUS  who  is  also  called
Theophorus  ;  to  the  bles-sed
'  (church)  ^  by  the  grace  of  God
the  Father  in  ^Jesus  Christ  our
Saviour :  in  whom  I  salute  the
church  which  is  at  Magnesia
near  the  Mseander :  and  wish  it
all  joy  in  God  the  Father  and  in
Jesus  Christ.

2  When  I  heard  of  your  well
ordered  love  and  charity  in  God,
being  full  of  joy,  I  desired  much
to  speak  unto  you  in  the  faith
of  Jesus  Christ.

3  For  having  *been  thought
worthy  to  obtain  a  most  excellent
name,  ^  in  the  bonds  which  I  car-
ry about,  I  ^  salute  the  churches;
wishing  in  them  a  union  both  of
the  body  and  spirit  of  Jesus
Christ,  our  eternal  life :  as  also
of  faith  and  charity,  to  which
nothing  is  preferred :  but  espe-
cially of  Jesus  and  the  Father  ;
in  whom  ''  if  we  undergo  all  the
injuries  of  the  prince  of  this  pre-
sent world,  and  escape,  we  shall
enjoy  God.

4  Seeing  then   I   have  been


judged  worthy  to  see  you,  by
Damas  your  ^  most  excellent
bishop ;  and  by  your  very  wor-
thy presbyters,  Bassus  and  Apol-
lonius;  and  by  my  fellow-servant
Sotio,  the  deacon  ;

6  In  whom  "I  rejoice,  foras-
much as  he  is  the  subject  unto
his  bishop  as  to  the  grace  of
God,  and  to  the  presbytery  as
to  the  law  of  Jesus  Christ ;  ^°  I
determined  to  write  unto  you.

6  Wherefore  it  will  become
you  also  not  "  to  use  your  bishop
too  familiarly  upon  the  account
of  his  youth;  but  to  yield  all
reverence  to  him  according  to
the  power  of  God  the  Father;  as
also  I  perceive  that  your  holy
presbyters  do :  not  considering
his  ^'^age,  which  indeed  to  ap-
pearance is  young;  but  as  be-
comes those  who  are  prudent  in
God,  submitting  to  him,  or  rather
not  to  him,  but  to  the  Father  of
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  bishop
of  us  all.

7  It  will  therefore  ^^  behoove
you  "  with  all  sincerity,  to  obey
your  bishop ;  in  honour  of  him
^^  whose  pleasure  it  is  that  ye
should  do  so.

8  Because  he  that  does  not  do
so,  deceives  not  the  bishop  whom


1  Vid.  Interp,  Lat.  Epiat.  Interpol.  *  In.  '  According  to.  *  Been  vouch-
safed a  name  carrying  a  great  deal  of  divinity  in  it.  ^  See  Bishop  Pearson.
Vind.  Ign.  par.  ii.  cap.  12,  p.  146.  « Sing,  commend.  ^  Undergoing,
escaping.  ^  Worthy  of  God.  ^  Whom  may  I  enjoy.  ^^  Apnd.  Vet.  Lat.
Interp.  Glorificato  Deum  Patrem  I),  nostri  Jesu  Christi.  "  Vid.  Voss.
Annot.  in  loc.  Pearson  Praef.  ad  Vind.  Ignat.  "  Seeming  youthful  state.
i=«  It  is  becoming.  ^*  Without  any  hypocrisy.  '^  Who  willeth  it.
172


3xhort8  to  live


MAGNESIANS.        orderly  and  in  unity.


he  sees,  but  ^  affronts  him  that  is
invisible.  'For  whatsoever  of
this  kind  is  done,  it  reflects  not
upon  ^  man,  but  upon  God,  who
knows  the  secrets  of  our  hearts.

9  It  is  therefore  fitting,  that
we  should  not  only  be  called
Christians,  but  be  so.

10  As  some  call  indeed  their
governor,  bishop ;  but  yet  do  all
things  without  him.

11  But  I  can  never  think  that
such  as  these  have  a  good  con-
science, seeing  that  they  are  not
gathered  together  ^thoroughly  ac-
cording to  God's  commandment.

CHAP.  II.

1  That  as  all  must  die,  4   he  exhorts
them  to  live  orderly  and  in  unity.

SEEING  then  all  things  have
an  end,  there  are  these  two
^  indifferently  set  before  us,  death
and  life:  and  every  one  shall
depart  unto  his  proper  place.

2  For  as  there  are  two  sorts
of  coins,  the  one  of  God,  the  other
of  the  world ;  and  each  of  these
has  its  proper  ^inscription  en-
graven upon  it ;  so  also  is  it  here.

3  The  unbelievers  are  of  this
world ;  but  the  faithful,  through
charity,  have  the  character  of
God  the  Father  by  Jesus  Christ :
by  whom  if  we  are  not  readily
disposed  to  die  after  the  likeness
of  his  passion,  his  life  is  not  in  us.

4  Forasmuch,  therefore,  as  I
have  in  the  persons  before  men-
tioned seen  ^  all  of  you  in  faith
and  charity ;  I  exhort  you  that
ye  study  to  do  all  things  in  a
"  divine  concord  :

5  Your  bishop  presiding  in
the  place  of  God ;  your  presby-
ters in  the  place  of  the  council
of  the  Apostles ;  and  your  dea-

^  Deludes.  ^  yid.  Epist.  Interp.  ad  loc  '  Flesh.  *  Firmly.  »  Together.
*  Character  set.  ''  Your  whole  multitude.  ^  The  concord  of  God,  ^  Sweet.
^<»  Was  made  manifest.  Heb.  ix.  26.  ^^  Habit  of  God.  ^^  John  x.  30,  xiv.
11,  12,  xvii.  21,  22.  ^^  gp^.  i^.  3,  4,  5,  6.  ^*  Run.  «  John  xvi.  28.
^*  Pearson,  Vind.  Ign.  par.  2,  cap.  4.

173


cons  most  ^dear  to  me  being
entrusted  with  the  ministry  of
Jesus  Christ ;  who  was  the  Father
before  all  ages,  and  appeared  in
the  ^^  end  to  us.

6  Wherefore  taking  the  same
^^holy  course,  see  that  ye  all
reverence  one  another:  and  let
no  one  look  upon  his  neighbour
after  the  flesh ;  but  do  ye  all
mutually  love  each  other  in
Jesus  Christ.

7  Let  there  be  nothing  that
may  be  able  to  make  a  division
among  you ;  but  be  ye  united  to
your  bishop,  and  those  who  pre-
side over  you,  to  be  your  pattern
and  direction  in  the  way  to  im-
mortality.

8  "  As  therefore  the  Lord  did
nothing  without  the  Father,
being  united  to  him ;  neither  by
himself  nor  yet  by  his  Apostles,
so  neither  do  ye  do  anything
without  your  bishop  and  pres-
byters :

9  Neither  endeavour  to  let
anything  appear  rational  to
yourselves  apart ;

10  But  being  come  together
into  the  same  place  ^^  have  one
common  prayer;  one  supplica-
tion ;  one  mind ;  one  hope ;  one
in  charity,  and  in  joy  undefiled.

11  There  is  one  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  than  whom  nothing  is
better.  Wherefore  "come  ye  all
together  as  unto  one  tem[)]e  of
God ;  as  to  one  ^^ altar,  as  to  one
Jesus  Christ ;  who  proceeded
from  one  Father,  and  exists  in
one,  and  is  returned  to  one.

CHAP.  HI

1  He  cautions  them  against  false  opin-
ions. 4  Especially  those  of  ^^  Ehion
and  the  Judaizing  Christians.


Cautions  against


MAGNESIANS.


false  opinions.


}


BE  not  deceived  with  ^  strange  8  Wherefore  being  become
doctrines ;  nor  with  old  fa- ;  his  disciples,  let  us  learn  to  live
bles  which  are  unprofitable.  For  :  according  to  the  rules  of  Christi-
if  we  still  continue  to  live  ac-  anity ;  for  whosoever  is  called
cording  to  the  Jewish  law,  we  do  by   any   other    name    ^^  besides


confess  ourselves  not  to  have  re-
ceived grace.  For  even  the
most  ^holy  prophets  lived  accord-
ing to  Christ  Jesus.

2  And  for  this  cause  were
they  persecuted,  being  inspired
by  his  grace,  ^to  convince  the
unbelievers  and  disobedient  that
there  is  one  God  who  has  mani-
fested himself  by  Jesus  Christ
his  Son ;  who  is  his  *  eternal
word,  not  coming  forth  from  si-
lence, who  in  all  things  pleased
him  that  sent  him.

3  Wherefore  if  they  who  were
brought  up  in  these  ancient
^  laws  came  nevertheless  to  the
newness  of  hope  :  no  longer  ob-
serving sabbaths,  *but  keeping
the  Lord's  day  in  which  also
our  life  is  sprung  up  by  him,
and  through  his  death,  ^whom
yet  some  deny :

4  (By  which  mystery  we  have
**  been  brought  to  believe  and
therefore  wait  that  we  may  be
found  the  disciples  of  Jesus
Christ,  our  only  master :)

5  How  shall  we  be  able  to
live  '  different  from  him  whose
disciples  the  very  prophets  them-
selves being,  did  by  the  spirit
expect  him  as  their  master.

6  ^"And  therefore  he  whom
they  justly  waited  for,  being
come,  raised  them  up  from  the
dead.

7  Let  us  not  then  be  insensi-
ble of  his  goodness ;  for  should
he  ^^  have  dealt  with  us  accord-
ing to  our  works,  we  had  not  now
had  a  being.

^  Heterodox.     *  Most  divine.     ^  Fully  to  satisfy


this,  he  is  not  of  God.

9  Lay  aside  therefore  the  old
and  sour  and  evil  leaven ;  and
be  ye  changed  into  the  new
leaven,  which  is  Jesus  Christ.

10  Be  ye  salted  in  him,  lest
any  one  among  you  should  be
corrupted;  for  by  your  savour
ye  shall  be  ^^  judged.

11  It  is  absurd  to  name  Jesus
Christ,  and  to  Judaize.  For  the
Christian  religion  did  not  "  em-
brace the  Jewish,  but  the  Jewish
the  Christian ;  that  so  every
tongue  that  believed  might  be
gathered  together  unto  God.

12  These  things,  my  beloved,
I  write  unto  you ;  not  that  I
know  of  any  among  you  that
^^  lie  under  this  error ;  but  as
^^  one  of  the  least  among  you,  I
am  desirous  to  forewarn  you,  that
ye  fall  not  into  the  ^^  snares  of
false  doctrine.

13  But  that  ye  be  fully  in-
structed in  the  birth,  and  suffer-
ing, and  resurrection  of  Jesus
Christ,  our  hope  ;  which  was  ac-
complished in  the  time  of  the
government  of  Pontius  Pilate,
and  that  most  truly  and  ^^  cer-
tainly :  and  from  which  God  for-
bid that  any  among  you  should
be  turned  aside.


CHAP.  IV.

1  Commends  their  faith  arid  piety;  ex-
horts them  to  persevere;  10  desires
their  prayers  for  himself  and  the
church  at  Antioch.

MAY  I  therefore  have  joy  of
you  in  all  things,  if  I  shall
*  John,  i.  1.     6  Things.


«  Or,  living  according  to.  '  Or,  which. « Received.  »  Without,  i"  Matt,  xxvii.  52.
^^  Vid.  Annot.  Voss.  in  loc.  should  he  have  imitated  our  works,  Gr.    ^^  More
than.        '» Convicted,   overthrown.        i*  Believe.       ^^Have  yourselves  so.
^^  Lesser  than  you.     ^''  Hooks.     ^^  Firmly.
174


Commends  subjection  TRALLIANS.


to  bishops,  priests,


be  worthy  of  it.  For  though  I
am  bound,  yet  I  am  not  worthy
to  be  compared  to  one  of  you
that  are  at  liberty.

2  I  know  that  ye  are  not
puffed  up ;  for  ye  have  Jesus
Christ  ^  in  your  hearts.

3  And  especially  when  I  com-
mend you,  I  know  that  ye  are
ashamed,  as  it  is  written,  ^  The
just  man  condemneth  himself.

4  Study  therefore  to  be  confirm-
ed in  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord,
and  of  his  Apostles;  that  so  what-
ever ye  do,  ye  may  prosper  both
in  body  and  spirit,  in  faith  and
charity,  in  the  Son,  and  in  the
Father  and  in  the  Holy  Spirit :  in
the  beginning,  and  in  the  end.

5  Together  with  your  most
worthy  bishop,  and  the  'well-
wrought  spiritual  crown  of  your
presbytery,  and  your  deacons,
which  are  according  to  God.

6  Be  subject  to  your  bishop,
and  to  one  another,  as  Jesus
Christ  to  the  Father,  according
to  the  flesh  :  and  the  Apostles
both  to  Christ,  and  to  the  Father,
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost :  that  so
ye  may  *  be  united  both  in  body
and  spirit.


7  ^  Knowing  you  to  be  full  of
God,  I  have  the  more  briefly  ex-
horted you.

8  Be  mindful  of  me  in  your
prayers,  that  I  may  ^  attain  unto
God,  and  of  the  Church  that  is
in  Syria,  from  ^  which  I  am  not
worthy  to  be  called.

9  For  I  stand  in  need  of  your
joint  prayers  in  God,  and  of
your  charity,  that  the  church
which  is  in  Syria  may  be
thought  worthy  to  be  ®  nourished
by  your  church.

10  The  Ephesians  'from
Smyrna  salute  you,  from  which
place  I  write  unto  you :  (being
present  here  to  the  glory  of  God,
in  like  manner  as  you  are,)  who
have  in  all  things  refreshed  me,
together  with  Polycarp,  the
bishop  of  the  Smyrnseans.

11  The  rest  of  the  churches
in  the  honour  of  Jesus  Christ,
salute  you.

12  ^"Farewell,  and  be  ye
strengthened  in  the  concord  of
God :  "  enjoying  his  inseparable
spirit,  which  is  Jesus  Christ.

Tf  To  the  Magnesians.


The  EPISTLE  of  IGNATIUS  to  the  TRALLIANS.


CHAP.  I.

1  Acknowledges  the  coming  of  their  bi-
shop. 5  Commends  them  for  their
sabjection  to  their  bishop,  priests,  and
deacons  ;  and  exhorts  them  to  continue
in  it:  15  is  afraid  even  of  his  over-
great  desire  to  suffer,  lest  it  should  be
prejudicial  to  him.

TGNATIUS,  who  is  also  called
X  Theophorus,  to  the  holy
church  which  is  at  Tralles  in
Asia :  beloved  of  God  the  Fa-
ther of  Jesus  Christ,  elect  and


worthy  of  God,  having  peace
^Hhrough  the  flesh  and  blood,
and  passion  of  Jesus  Christ  our
hope,  in  the  resurrection  which
is  ^'  by  him  :  which  also  I  salute
in  its  fulness,  continuing  in  the
apostolical  character,  wishing  all
joy  and  happiness  unto  it.

2  I  have  "heard  of  your
blameless  and  ^^  constant  dispo-
sition through  patience,  which
^^  not  only  appears  in  your  out-


^  In  yourselves.  '^Prov.  xviii.  17  Sept.  '  Worthily  complicated.  '*  There
may  be  a  union  both  fleshly  and  spiritual.  ^  Eph.  iii.  4.  ^  Find,  enjoy.
^  Whence.  ^  Bedewed.  Vid.  Epist.  Inter,  in  loc.  ^  Which  came  to  Smyrna
upon  ray  account.  ^^'^Eppuade.  ^^  Possessing.  ^' In.  ^'Unto.  ^^  Known.
'* Inseparable  mind.  ^^  Which  you  have  not  according  to  use,  but  according
to  possession.

175


and  deacons.


TRALLIANS.


Desires  to  suffer.


ward  conversation,  but  is  natur-
ally rooted  and  grounded  in  you.

3  In  like  manner  as  Poly  bins
your  bishop  has  declared  unto
me,  who  came  to  me  to  Smyrna,
by  the  will  of  God  and  Jesus
Christ,  and  so  rejoiced  together
with  me  ^  in  my  bonds  for  Jesus
Christ,  that  in  effect  I  saw  your
whole  ^  church  in  him.

4  Having  therefore  received
^  testimony  of  your  good  will  to-
wards me  *  for  God's  sake,  by
him ;  ^  I  seemed  to  find  you,  as
also  I  knew  that  ye  were  the*
followers  of  God.

5  For '  whereas  ye  are  subject
to  your  bishop  as  to  Jesus  Christ,
ye  appear  to  me  to  live  not  after
the  manner  of  men,  but  accord-
ing to  Jesus  Christ;  who  died
for  us,  that  so  believing  in  his
death,  ye  might  ®  escape  death.

6  It  is  therefore  necessary,
that  as  ye  do,  so  without  your
bishop,  you  should  do  nothing :
also  be  ye  subject  to  your  pres-
byters, as  to  the  Apostles  of
Jesus  Christ  our  hope ;  in  whom
if  we  walk,  we  shall  be  found  in
him.

7  '  The  deacons  also,  as  being
the  ministers  of  the  mysteries  of
Jesus  Christ,  must  by  all  means
please  ye.  For  they  are  not  the
^°  ministers  of  meat  and  drink,
but  of  the  church  of  God.  Where-
fore they  must  avoid  all  offences,
as  they  would  do  fire.

8  In  like  manner  let  us  rever-
ence the  deacons  "as  Jesus  Christ ;
and  the  bishop  as  the  father  ;
and  the  presbyters  as  the  Sanhe-


drim of  God,  and  college  of  the
Apostles.

9  Without  these  there  is  no
"  church.  Concerning  all  which
I  am  persuaded  that  ye  ^  think
after  the  very  same  manner :  for
I  have  received,  and  even  now
have  with  me,  the  pattern  of
your  love,  in  your  bishop.

10  Whose  very "  look  is  in-
structive; and  whose  mildness
^^  powerful  :  *®whom  I  am  per-
suaded, the  very  Atheists  them-
selves cannot  but  reverence.

11  But  because  I  have  a  love
towards  you,  I  will  not  write  any
more  sharply  unto  you  about  this
matter,  though  I  very  well  might ;
but  now  I  have  done  so ;  lest  be-
ing a  condemned  man,  I  should
seem  to  prescribe  to  you  as  an
Apostle.

12  I  have  "  great  knowledge
in  God  ;  but  I  ^®  refrain  myself,
lest  I  should  perish  in  my  boast-
ing.

13  For  now  I  ought  the  more
to  fear ;  and  not  to  hearken  to
those  that  would  puff  me  up.

14  For  they  that  speak  to  me,
in  my  praise,  chasten  me.

15  For  I  indeed  ^*  desire  to
suffer,  but  I  cannot  tell  whether
I  am  worthy  so  to  do.

16  ^°And  this  desire,  though
to  others  it  does  not  appear,  yet
to  myself  it  is  for  that  very  rea-
son the  more  violent.  I  have,
therefore,  need  of  ^^  moderation;
by  which  the  prince  of  this
world  is  destroyed.

17  Am  I  not  able  to  write  to
you  of  heavenly  things  ? — But  I


*  Who  am  bound.        *  Multitude.         '  Your  benevolence.        *  According
to  God.  5  Yid^  Vossium  in  loc.  •  Imitators.  '  When.  *  Flee

from.  8  Vid  Vossium  in  loc.  ^"Beacons.  "  As  also  the  bishop  like  Jesus
Christ  the  Son  of  the  Father.  Vossius  in  loc.  vid.  aliter  Cotelerium.  ^^  A
chnroh  is  not  called.  ^^go  (Jq,  ^*  Habit  of  body  is  great  instruction.
^5  Power.  ^^  Vid.  Vossium  et  Usserium  in  loc.  ^''  I  understand  many

things  ^8  Measure.  ^'  Love.  *°  Vid.  Annot.  Vossii  in  loc.  "  Mild-
ness.

176


$   fi


Warns  against  heresy.         TRALLIANS.  Exhorts  to  humility.


fear  lest  I  should  harm  you,  who
are  yet  but  babes  in  Christ :  (ex-
cuse me  this  care ;)  and  lest  per-
chance being  not  able  to  receive
tliem,  ye  should  be  choken  with
them.

13  For  even  I  myself,  although
I  am  in  bonds,  ^  yet  am  not  there-
fore able  to  understand  heavenly
things :

19  As  the  places  of  the  angels,
and  the  several  companies  of
them,  under  their  respective
princes;  things  visible  and  in-
visible ;  but  in  these  I  am  yet  a
learner.

20  For  many  things  are  want-
ing to  us,  that  we  come  not  short
of  God.

CHAP.  II.

1  Warns  them  against  heretics,  4  exhorts
them  to  humility  and  unity,  10
briefly  sets  before  them  the  true  doc-
trine concerning  Christ.

I  EXHORT  you  therefore,  or
rather  not  I,  but  the  love  of
Jesus  Christ;  that  ye  use  none
but  Christian  nourishment;  ab-
staining from  pasture  which  is  of
another  kind,  I  mean  heresy.

2  ^  For  they  that  are  heretics,
confound  together  the  doctrine
of  Jesus  Christ,  with  their  own
poison :  '  whilst  they  seem  worthy
of  belief :

3  As  men  give  a  deadly  potion
mixed  with  sweet  wine ;  which  he
who  drinks  of,  does  with  the
treacherous  pleasure  sweetly
drink  in  his  own  death.

4  Wherefore  guard  yourselves
against  such  persons.  And  that
you  will  do  if  you  are  not  puffed
up ;  but  continue  inseparable
from  Jesus  Christ  our  God,  and


from  your  bishop,  and  from  the
commands  of  the  Apostles.

5  *  He  that  is  within  the  altar
is  pure ;  but  he  that  is  without,
that  is,  that  does  anything  with-
out the  bishop,  the  presbyters,
and  deacons,  is  not  pure  in  his
conscience.

6  ^ot  that  I  know  there  is  any
thing  of  this  nature  among  you  ;
but  I  fore-arm  you,  as  being
greatly  beloved  by  me,  foreseeing
the  snares  of  the  devil.

7  Wherefore  putting  on  meek-
ness, renew  yourselves  in  faith,
that  is,  the  flesh  of  the  Lord  ;  and
in  charity,  that  is,  the  blood  of
Jesus  Christ.

8  Let  no  man  have  any  ^
grudge  against  his  neighbour.
Give  no  occasion  to  the  Gentiles;
lest  by  means  of  a  few  foolish
men,  the  whole  congregation  of
God  be  evil  spoken  of.

9  For  woe  to  that  man^  through
whose  vanity  my  name  is  blas-
phemed by  any.

10  Stop  your  ears  therefore,,
as  often  as  any  one  shall  speak  '
contrary  to  Jesus  Christ ;  who
was  of  the  race  of  David,  of  the
Virgin  Mary.

11  Who  was  truly  born  and
did  eat  and  drink ;  was  truly  per-
secuted under  Pontius  Pilate ;,
was  truly  crucified  and  dead ;
both  those  in  heaven  and  on
earth,  ®  being  spectators  of  it.

12  Who  was  also  truly  raised
from  the  dead  ^  by  his  Father,
after  the  same  manner  as  *"he  will
also  raise  up  us  who  believe  in
him  by  Christ  Jesus ;  without
whom  we  have  no  true  life.

13  But   if,  as   some  who  are-


^Orders.  'Vid.  de  hoc  loco  conjecturas  Vossii,  Cotelerii,  et  Junii  apud;
Usserium.  Comp.  Epist.  Intercol.  in  loc.  et  Voss.  Annot.  in  Epist.  ad  Phil,
p.  281.  '  Being  believed  for  their  dignity.  ''  Vid.  Usserii  Obs.  Marg.  Comp.
Coteler  ib.  »  Any  thing.  «  Through  whom  in  vanity,  Isaiah  Hi.  5.  'With-
out.    8  Seeing,  or  looking  on.     ^  His  Father  raising  him.     ^^  The  Father.

12  177


unity  and  prayer


ROMANS.


for  the  Church.


Atheists,  that  is  to  say  infidels,
pretend,  that  he  only  seemed  to
suffer  :  (they  themselves  only
seeming  to  exist)  why  then  am  I
bound  ? — Why  do  I  desire  to
fight  with  beasts  ? — Therefore  do
I  die  in  vain :  therefore  I  will
not  speak  falsely  against  the
Lord.

14  Flee  therefore  these  evil
*  sprouts  which  bring  forth  dead-
ly fruit ;  of  which  if  any  one
taste,  he  shall  presently  die.

15  For  these  are  not  the  plants
of  the  Father;  seeingif  they  were,
they  would  appear  to  be  the  bran-
ches of  the  cross,  and  their  fruit
would  be  incorruptible ;  by  which
he  invites  you  through  his  pas-
sion, who  are  members  of  him.

16  For  the  head  cannot  be
without  its  members,  God  having
promised  a  union,  that  is  himself.

CHAP.  III.

Se  again  exhorts  to  unity :  and  desires
their  -prayers  for  himself  and  for  his
church  at  Antioch.

I  SALUTE  you  from  Smyrna,
together  with  the  churches
of  God  that  are  present  with  me ;
who  have  refreshed  me  in  all
things,  both  in  the  flesh  and  in
the  spirit.

2  My  bonds,  which  I  carry
about  me  for  the  sake  of  Christ,
(beseeching  him  that  I  may  at-
tain unto  God)  exhort  you,  that
you  continue  in  *  concord  among


yourselves,  and  in  prayer  with
one  another.

3  For  it  becomes  every  one  of
you,  especially  the  presbyters,  to
refresh  the  bishop,  to  the  honour
of  the  Father  of  Jesus  Christ
and  of  the  Apostles.

4  I  beseech  you,  that  you
hearken  to  me  in  love;  that  I
may  not  *  by  those  things  which
I  write,  rise  up  in  witness  against
you.

5  Pray  also  for  me ;  who
through  the  mercy  of  God  stand
in  need  of  your  prayers,  that  I
may  be  worthy  of  the  portion
which  I  am  about  to  obtain  that
I  be  not  found  a  reprobate.

6  The  love  of  those  who  are
at  Smyrna  and  Ephesus  salute
you.  Remember  in  your  prayers
the  church  of  Syria,  from  which
I  am  not  worthy  to  be  called,
being  one  of  the  least  ^  of  it.

7  Fare  ye  well  in  Jesus  Christ ;
being  subject  to  your  bishop  as
to  the  command  of  God  ;  and  so
likewise  to  the  presbytery.

8  Love  every  one  his  brother
with  an  *  unfeigned  heart.  ^  My
soul  be  your  expiation,  not  only
now,  but  when  I  shall  have  at-
tained unto  God ;  for  I  am  yet
under  danger.

9  But  the  Father  is  faithful
in  Jesus  Christ,  to  fulfil  both
mine  and  your  petition ;  in  whom
may  ye  be  found  unblamable.

t  To  the  Trallians.


The  EPISTLE  of  IGNATIUS  to  the  ROMANS.


CHAP.  I.

He  testifies  his  desire  to  see,  and  his
hopes  of  suffering  for  Christ,  5  which
he  earnestly  entreats  them  not  to  pre-
vent, 10  but  to  pray  for  him,  that
God  would  strengthen  him  to  the
combat.


IGNATIUS, « who  is  also  called
Theophorus,  to  the  church
which  has  obtained  mercy  'from
the  majesty  of  the  Most  High
Father,  and  his  only  ^°  begotten
Son  Jesus  Christ ;  beloved,  and


*  Plants.     ^  i.  e.  The  delegates  of  the  church.     ^  fhe  concord  of  you.    •*  I  e
a  testimony  among  you,  writing.       ^ -phem.      *  Undivided.      'Vid.  Anne:.
Vossii  et  Coteler.  in  loc     ^  Vid.  Pearson.    Vind.  Ignat.  par  2,  ch,  xvi.  p.  21 -L
»  In.      1"  Omitted,  Gr.
178


Hopes  to  suffer


ROMANS.


j(yr  ChrisVs  sake.


illuminated  ^  through  the  will  of
him  who  willeth  all  things  which
are  according  to  the  love  of
Jesus  Christ  our  '^God  which
also  presides  in  the  ^  place  of
the  region  of  the  Romans ;  and
which  *  I  salute  in  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ  C  as  being)  united
both  in  flesh  and  spirit  to  all  his
commands,  and  ^  filled  with  the
grace  of  God ;  ^  (all  joy)  in  Jesus
Christ  our  God.

2  *  Forasmuch  as  I  have  at
last '  obtained  through  my  pray-
ers to  God,  to  see  your  ^°  faces,
^^  which  I  much  desired  to  do  ;
being  bound  in  Jesus  Christ,  I
hope  ere  long  to  salute  you,  if  it
shall  be  the  will  "of  God  to
grant  me  to  attain  unto  the  end
I  long  for.

3  For  the  beginning  is  well
disposed,  if  I  shall  but  have
grace,  without  hindrance,  to  re-
ceive ^^  what  is  appointed  for  me.

4  But  I  fear  your  love,  lest  it
do  me  an  injury.  For  it  is  easy
for  you  to  do  what  you  please  ;
but  it  ^*  will  be  hard  for  me  to
attain  unto  God,  if  you  spare  me.

5  But  I  ^^  would  not  that  ye
should  please  men,  but  God
^^  whom  also  ye  do  please.  For
neither  shall  I  hereafter  have
such  an  opportunity  ^^  of  going
unto  God;  nor  will  you  if  ye
shall  now  be  silent,  ever  be  en-
tituled  to  a  better  work.     For  if


you  shall  be  silent  ^®  in  my  behalf,
I  shall  be  made  partaker  of  God.

6  But  if  you  shall  love  my
^^  body,  I  shall  have  my  course
again  to  run.  Wherefore  ye
cannot  do  me  a  greater  kindness,
than  to  suffer  me  to  be  sacrificed
unto  God,  now  that  the  altar  is
already  prepared :

7  That  '"when  ye  shall  be
gathered  together  in  love,  ye
may  '^  give  thanks  to  the  Father
through  Christ  Jesus;  that  he
has  vouchsafed  *^  to  bring  a
bishop  of  Syria  unto  you,  being
called  from  the  east  unto  the  west.

8  For  it  is  good  for  me  to  set
from  the  world,  unto  God ;  that
I  may  rise  again  unto  him.

9  Ye  have  never  envied^'aiiy
one ;  ye  have  taught  otiier.  I
would  therefore  that  ye  '^should
now  do  those  things  yourselves,
which  in  your  instructions  you
have  '*  prescribed  to  others.

10  Only  pray  for  me,  that
God  would  give  me  both  inward
and  outward  strength,  that  I
may  not  only  say,  but  will ;  nor
be  only  called  a  Christian,  but
be  found  one.

11  For  if  I  shall  be  found  a
Christian,  I  may  then  deservedly
be  called  one;  and  be  thought
faithful,  when  I  shall  no  longer
appear  to  the  world.

12  Nothing  is  ^  good,  that  is
seen.


^  In.  2  God ;  which  also  presides  in  the  place  of  the  region  of  the  Romans,
worthy  of  God ;  most  decent,  most  blessed,  most  praised,  most  worthy  to  ob-
tain what  it  desires ;  most  pure,  most  charitable,  called  by  the  name  of  Christ
and  the  Father ;  Gr.  ^  Type  of  the  chorus,  i.  e.,  the  church  of  the  Romans.
*  Also.     5  The  Son  of  the  Father


See  Voss,  Annot.  in  loc

-Gr.

colou

^^  Worthy  of  God.       ^^  And  have  received  even  more  than  I  asked,  being


to  those  who  are

^  Wholly  filled.  Gr.     '  (Being  absolutely  separated  from  any  other
r;  much  pure,  or  immaculate  joy.)     ^  Gr.     ^  Vid.  Voss.  Annot.  in  loc.


bound.  ^2  Gr.  ^'  My  lot.  ^*  Is.  ^^  I  will  not  please  you  as  men.  Gr.  ^^  As
^■^  Attaining  unto.  ^^  From  me.  ^^  Flesh.  ^  Being  become  a  chorus.  ^^  Sing.
^'^  That  a  bishop  of  Syria  should  be  found.  ^^  That  those  things  also  should
be  firm.  ■'^*  Commanded.  Vid.  Annot.  Userii  in  loc.  N.  26,  27.  "^^  Nothing
that  is  seen  is  eternal :  for  the  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal,  but  the
things  that  are  not  seen  are  eternal.  Gr.

179


Earnestly  desires


ROMANS.


martyrdom.


13  For  even  our  God,  Jesus
Christ,  now  that  he  is  in  the
Father,  does  so  much  the  more
appear.

14  A  Christian  is  not  a  work
of  ^  opinion ;  but  of  greatness  of
mind,  (^especially  when  he  is
hated  by  the  world.)

CHAP.  II.

Expresses  his  great  desire  and  determi-
nation to  suffer  martyrdom.

I  WRITE  to  the  churches,  and
^signify  to  them  all,  that  I
am  willing  to  die  for  God,  unless
you  *  hinder  me.

2  I  beseech  you  that  you
*  shew  not  an  unseasonable  good
will  towards  me.  Suffer  me  to
be  food  to  the  wild  beasts ;  by
whom  I  shall  attain  unto  God.

3  For  I  am  the  wheat  of  God ;
and  I  shall  be  ground  by  the
teeth  of  the  wild  beasts,  that  I
maybe  found  the  pure  bread ^ of
Christ.

4  Rather  'encourage the  beasts,
that  they  may  become  my  sepul-
chre; and  may  leave  nothing
of  my  body;  that  being  dead
I  may  not  be  troublesome  to  any.

5  Then  shall  I  be  truly  the
disciple  of  Jesus  Christ,  when
the  world  shall  not  see  so  much
as  my  body,  Pray  therefore
unto  Christ  for  me,  that  by  these
instruments  I  may  be  made  the
sacrifice  ®  of  God.

6  I  do  not,  as  Peter  and  Paul,
command  you.  They  were  Apos-
tles, I  a  condemned  man ;  they
were  free,  but  I  am  even  to  this
day  a  servant :


7  But  if  I  shall  suffer,  I  shall
then  become  the  freeman  of  Je-
sus Christ,  and  shall  rise  ^  free.
And  now,  being  in  bonds,  I
learn,  not  to  desire  ^^  anything,

8  From  Syria  even  unto  Rome,
I  fight  with  beasts  both  by  sea
and  land  ;  both  night  and  day  :
being  bound  to  ten  leopards,  that
is  to  say,  to  such  a  band  of  sol-
diers ;  who,  though  treated  with
all  manner  of  kindness,  are  the
worse  for  it.

9  But   I   am    the   more


in-


structed by  their  injuries;  "yet
am  I  not  therefore  justified.

10  May  I  enjoy  the  wild
beasts  that  are  prepared  for  me ;
which  also  I  wish  may  ^"  exercise
all  their  fierceness  upon  me.

11  And  whom  for  that  end  I
will  ^^  encourage,  that  they  may
be  sure  to  devour  me,  and  not
serve  me  as  they  have  done  some,
whom  out  of  fear  they  have  not
touched.  But,  and  if  they  will
not  do  it  willingly,  I  will  pro-
voke them  to  it.

12  Pardon  me  in  this  matter ;
I  know  what  is  profitable  for  me.
Now  I  begin  to  ^*  be  a  disciple.
Nor  ^^  shall  anything  move  me,
whether  visible  or  invisible,  that
I  may  attain  to  Jesus  Christ.

13  Let  fire,  and  the  cross;  let
the  "  companies  of  wild  beasts  ;
"  let  breakings  of  bones  and  tear-
ing of  members ;  let  the  ^^  shat-
tering in  pieces  of  the  whole
body,  and  all  the  wicked  *^  tor-
ments of  the  devil  come  upon
me ;  only  let  ^"  me  enjoy  Jesus
Christ.


1  Persuasion,  or  silence.  Gr.  ^  (Desunt,  Gr.)  ^  yid.  Usser.  Annot.  N.  31.
<  Forbid  me.  ^  Be  not.  ^  Vid  Lat.  Vet.  Interps.  et  Annot.  Usser.  N.  32.
'  Flatter.  «  Desunt.  Gr.  ^  Free  in  him.  Gr.  ^<>  Any  worldly  or  vain  things.
Gr.  "  1  Cor.  iv.  4.  ^^  Vid.  Voss.  in  loc.  Usser.  Annot.  N.  48.  May  be
readv  for  me.  Gr.  **  Usser.  Annot.  N.  48.  ^*  Luke  xiv.  27.  ^^  yid.  Co-
teler.  in  loc.  Rom.  viii.  38,  39.  '^  Force,  or  rage.  ^^  Let  tearings,  and  rend-
ings.  Gr.     ^^  yid.  Usser.    Annot.  N.  56.     ^^  lb.  N.  57.     ^  That  I  may  enjoy.

180


Further  desires


KOMANS.


to  suffer.


14  All  the  *  ends  of  the  world,
and  the  kingdoms  ^of  it,  will
profit  me  nothing :  I  would  ra-
ther die  ^for  Jesus  Christ,  than
rule  to  the  utmost  ends  of  the
earth.  *  Him  I  seek  who  died
U)r  us ;  him  I  desire,  that  rose
again  for  us.  This  is  the  ^  gain
that  is  laid  up  for  me.

15  Pardon  me,  my  brethren,
ye  shall  not  hinder  me  from  liv-
ing. ^  Nor  seeing  I  desire  to  go  to
God,  may  you  separate  me  from
him,  for  the  sake  of  this  world ;
nor  reduce  me  by  any  of  the
^  desires  of  it.  Suffer  me  to  ®  en-
ter into  pure  light :  Where  being
come,  I  shall  be  indeed  the  ^  ser-
vant of  ^"^  God.

16  Permit  me  to  imitate  the
passion  of  my  God.  If  any  one
has  him  within  himself,  let  him
consider  what  I  desire ;  and  let
him  have  compassion  on  me,  as
knowing  "  how  I  am  straighten-
ed.


CHAP.  III.


Further


V


expresses  his  desire  to  suffer.

THE  prince  of  this  world
would  fain  carry  me  away,
and  corrupt  ^^  my  resolution  to-
wards my  God.  Let  none  of  you
^^  therefore  help  '*him :  Rather  do
ye  join  with  me,  that  is,  with
God.

2  Do  not  speak  with  Jesus
Christ,  and  yet  covet  the  world.
Let  not  any  envy  dwell  with  you ;


j  No  not  though  I  myself  when  I
shall  be  come  unto  you,  should

I  exhort  you  to  it,  yet  do  not  ye
hearken  to  me  ;  but  rather  be-
lieve what  I  now  write  to  you.

3  For  though  I  am  alive  at
the  writing  this,  yet  my  desire  is
to  die.  My  love  is  crucified ;
^^  (and  the  ^^  fire  that  is  within
me  does  not  desire  any  water ;
but  being  alive  and  ^^  springing
within  me,  says,)  Come  to  the
Father.

4  I  take  no  pleasure  in  the
food  of  corruption,  nor  in  the
pleasures  of  this  life.

5  I  desire  the  bread  of  God
^^  which  is  the  flesh  of  Jesus
Christ,  (^^  of  the  seed  of  David  ;
and  the  drink  that  I  long  for)  is
his  blood,  which  is  incorruptible
love.'"

6  I  have  no  desire  to  live  any
longer  after  the  manner  of  men,
"neither  shall  I,  if  you  consent.
Be  ye  therefore  willing,  that  ye
yourselves  also  may  be  '*  pleasing
to  God.  I  *^  exhort  you  '*  in  a
few  words ;  I  pray  you  believe  me.

7  Jesus  Christ  will  shew  you
that  I  speak  truly.  My  mouth
is  without  deceit,  and  the  Father
hath  truly  spoken  ^^  by  it.  Pray
therefore  for  me,  that  I  may  ac-
complish what  I  desire.

8  I  have  not  written  to  you
after  the  flesh,  but  according  to
the  will  of  God.  If  I  shall  suffer,
^^  ye  have   loved  me ;    but  if  I


^  Gr.  Pleasures.  ^  Of  this  age.  ^  Gr.  unto.  *  For  what  is  a  man  profited  if  he
shall  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul.  Gr.  Add.  ^  Usury.  Gr.  Vid.
Voss.  Correct,  p.  301 .  «  Nor  desire  that  I  should  die,  who  seek  to  go  to  God,  re-
joice not  in  the  world.  Gr.  ^  By  matter.  ^  Take:  lay  hold  on.  ^  Man.  ^^  Vid.
Annot.  Voss.  in  loc.  "  What  things  constrain  me.  ^^  Mind  :  will.  ^^  Who  are
present.  ^*  Vid.  Voss.  Annot.  in  loc.  ^5  (And  there  is  not  any  fire  within
me  that  loves  matter,  but  living  and  speaking  water  saying  within  me.  Gr.)
^^  Coteleriua  aliter  explicat.  Annot.  in  loc.  Usser.  N.  79.  ^^  Voss.  in  loc.
Contr,  Coteler.  q.  v.  ^^The  heavenly  bread  which  is.  Gr.  ^^  (The  Son  of
God  made  in  these  last  times  of  the  seed  of  David  and  Abraham,  and  the
drink  of  God  that  I  long  for.  Gr.).  ^oq^.  Adds,  and  perpetual  life,  ^i  And
that  shall  be.  22  Willed.  '^^  Vid.  Annot.  Voss.  in  loc.  ^4  ^y  a  short  letter.
^  In.     26  Ye  have  willed  it.

181


Commends  their


PHILADELPHIANS.


bishop.


shall  be  rejected,  ^  ye  have  hated
me.

9  Remember  in  your  prayers
the  church  of  Syria,  which  now

J /enjoys  God  for  its  shepherd  in-
V  stead  of  me :   ^  Let  Jesus  Christ
only  ^  oversee  it,  and  your  char-
ity.

10  But  I  am  even  ashamed
to  be  reckoned  as  one  of  them :
For  neither  am  I  worthy,  being
the  least  among  them,  and  as
one  *born  out  of  due  season.
But  through  mercy  I  have  ob-
tained to  be  somebody,  if  I  shall
get  unto  God.

11  My  spirit  salutes  you ;  and
the  charity  of  the  churches  that
have  received  me  in  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ  ;  not  as  a  passen-
ger. For  even  they  that  were
not  near  to  me  in  the  way,  have
gone  before  me  to  the  next  city
to  meet  me.


12  These  things  I  write  to
you  from  Smyrna,  by  the  most
worthy  of  the  church  of
Ephesus.

13  There  is  now  with  me,  to-
gether with  many  others.  Crocus,
most  beloved  of  me.  As  for
those  which  are  *  come  from  Sy-
ria, and  are  gone  before  me  to
Rome,  to  the  glory  of  God,  I
suppose  you  are  not  ignorant  of
them.

14  Ye  shall  therefore  signify
to  them,  that  I  draw  near,  for
they  are  all  worthy  both  of
God  and  of  you:  Whom  it  is
fit  that  you  refresh  in  all  things.

15  This  have  I  written  to
you,  the  day  before  the  ninth  of
the  calends  of  September.  ^Be
strong  unto  the  end,  in  the  pa-
tience of  Jesus  Christ. ''

Tf  To  the  Romans.


The  EPISTLE  of  IGNATIUS  to  the  PHILADELPHIANS.


CHAP.  I.

Commends  their  bishop  whom  they  had
sent  unto  him.,  5  warns  them  against
diviMons  and  schism.

IGNATIUS,  who  is  also  called
Theophorus,  to  the  church
of  God  the  Father,  and  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  at
Philadelphia  in  Asia ;  which  has
obtained  mercy,  being  fixed  in
the  concord  of  God,  and  rejoic-
ing *  evermore  in  the  passion  of
our  Lord,  and  being  fulfilled  in
all  mercy  through  his  resurrec-
tion :  Which  also  I  salute  in  the
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  ^  which  is
our  eternal  and  undefiled  joy ;
especially  if  they  are  at  unity
with  the  bishop,  and  presbyters
who  are  with  him,  and  the  dea-

^  Viz.  as  unworthy  to  suffer.  *  Vid.  Vet.  Interp.  Lat.  '  Shall  oversee  it.
*  1  Cor.  XV.  8.  s  Vid.  Vet.  Interp.  Lat.  «  That  is  the  xxxiiiH  of  August.
Gr.  'Amen.  Gr.  « Inseparably-  »  Vid.  Vet.  Interpr.  Lat.  ^"In.  "Will,  order.
"Ministry  belonging  to  the  public.  ^'In.  ^^ Has  fltruck  me  with  wonder.
^5  Those  that  speak  vain  things.
182


cons  appointed  ^°  according  to
the  "mind  of  Jesus  Christ ;  whom
he  has  settled  according  to  his
own  will  in  all  firmness  by  his
Holy  Spirit:

2  Which  bishop  I  know  ob-
tained '"that  great  ministry
among  you,  not  of  himself,  nei-
ther by  men,  nor  out  of  vain
glory  ;  but  ^^  by  the  love  of  God
the  Father,  and  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ.

3  Whose  moderation  ^*  I  ad-
mire ;  who  by  his  silence  is  able
to  do  more  than  ^^  others  with
all  their  vain  talk.  For  he  is
fitted  to  the  commands,  as  the
harp  to  its  strings.

4  Wherefore  my  soul  esteems
his  mind  towards  God  most  hap-


Exhorts  to


PHILADELPHIANS.


py,  knowing  it  to  be  fruitful  in
all  virtue,  and  perfect;  full  of
constancy,  free  from  passion,
^  and  according  to  all  the  mod-
eration of  the  living  God.

5  Wherefore  as  becomes  the
children  both  of  the  light  and
of  truth ;  flee  divisions  and
false  doctrines  ;  but  where  your
shepherd  is,  there  do  ye,  as
sheep,  follow  after.

6  For  there  are  many  wolves
'  who  seem  worthy  of  belief,
that  with  a  ^  false  pleasure  lead
captive  those  that  run  in  the
course  of  God ;  but  in  the  con-
cord they  shall  find  no  place.

7  Abstain  therefore  from
those  evil  herbs  which  Jesus
Christ  does  not  dress ;  because
such  are  not  the  plantation  of
the  Father.  Not  that  I  have
found  any  division  among  you,
but  rather  all  manner  of  *  purity.

8  For  as  many  as  are  of  God,
and  of  Jesus  Christ,  are  also
with  their  bishop.  And  as  many
as  shall  with  repentance  return
into  the  unity  of  the  church,
even  these  shall  also  be  the  ser-
vants of  God,  that  they  may
live  according  to  Jesus,

9  Be  not  deceived,  brethren  ;
if  any  one  follows  him  that
makes  a  schism  in  the  church,
.he  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom
of  God.  K  any  one  walks  after
any  other  opinion,  he  agrees  not
with  the  passion  of  Christ.

10  Wherefore  let  it  be  your
endeavour  to  partake  all  of  the
same  holy  eucharist.

11  For  there  is  but  one  flesh
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and
one  cup  in  the  unity  of  his
blood  ;  one  altar ;

12  As   also   there   is  one  bi-


shop, together  with  his  presby-
tery, and  the  deacons  my  fellow-
servants  :  that  so  whatsoever  ye
do,  ye  may  do  it  according  to  the
will  of  God.

CHAP.  II.

Desires  their  prayers,  and  to  he  united
hut  not  to  Judaize.

MY  brethren,  the  love  I  have
towards  you  makes  me
the  ^  more  large ;  and  having  a
great  joy  in  you,  I  endeavour  to
secure  you  against  danger ;  or
rather  not  I,  but  Jesus  Christ ;
in  whom  being  bound  I  the  more
fear,  as  being  yet  only  ^  on  the
way  to  suflering.

2  But  your  prayer  to  God
shall  make  me  perfect,  that  I
may  attain  to  that  portion,  which
by  God's  mercy  is  allotted  to
me :  Fleeing  to  the  Gospel  as  to
the  flesh  of  Christ ;  and  to  the
Apostles  as  to  the  presbytery  of
the  church.

3  Let  us  also  love  the  pro-
phets, forasmuch  as  they  also
have  '  led  us  to  the  Gospel,  and
to  hope  in  ®  Christ,  and  to  expect
him.

4  In  whom  also  believing  they
were  saved  in  the  unity  of
Jesus  Christ;  being  holy  men,
worthy  to  be  loved,  and  had  in
wonder ;

5  Who  have  received  testi-
mony from  Jesus  Christ,  and  are
numbered  in  the  Gospel  of  our
common  hope.

6  But  if  any  one  shall  preach
••the  Jewish  law  unto  you,
hearken  not  unto  him  ;  for  ^"it  is
better  to  receive  the  doctrine  of
Christ  from  one  that  has  been
circumcised,  than  Judaism  from
one  that  has  not.


*In.     'Vid.  Vossii  Annot  in  loc    'Evil.    *CleanlinePS  made  by  sifting.
Very  much  poured  out.    *  Vid.  Voss.  in  loc  Imperfect.     'Or  preached  of


the  Gospel ;   and  hoped  in   him
*  Judaism.     ^°  Opinion  :  council.


and  expected  him.      ^  Vid.  Voss.  in  loc.
183


Exhorts  to


PHILADELPHIANS.


7  But  if  either  the  one,  or
other,  do  not  speak  concerning
Christ  Jesus,  they  seem  to  me  to
be  but  as  monuments  and  sepul-
chres of  the  dead,  upon  which
are  written  only  the  names  of
men.

8  Flee  therefore  the  wicked
arts  and  snares  of  the  prince  of
this  world  ;  lest  at  any  time  be-
ing oppressed  by  his  cunning  ye
grow  ^  cold  in  your  charity.
But  come  all  together  into  the
same  place  with  an  undivided
heart.

9  And  I  bless  my  God  that
I  have  a  good  conscience  to-
wards you,  and  that  no  one
among  you  has  whereof  to
boast  either  openly  or  private-
ly, that  I  have  been  bur-
thensome  to  him  in  much  or
little.

10  And  I  wish  to  all  among
whom  I  have  conversed,  that  it
may  not  turn  to  a  witness  against
them.

1 1  For  although  some  would
have  deceived  me  according  to
the  flesh,  yet  the  spirit,  being
from  God,  is  not  deceived ;  for
it  knows  both  whence  it  comes
and  whither  it  goes,  and  reproves
the  secrets  of  the  heart.

12  I  cried  whilst  I  was  among
you  ;  I  spake  with  a  loud  voice  :
attend  to  the  bishop,  and  to  the
presbytery,  and  to  the  deacons.

13  Now  some  supposed  that  I
spake  this  as  foreseeing  the  divi-
sion Hliat  should  come  among
you.

14  But  he  is  ray  witness  for
whose  sake  I  am  in  bonds  that  I
knew  nothing  from  any  man.
But  the  spirit  spake,  saying  on
this  wise  :  Do  nothing  without
the  bishop :


15  Keep  your 'bodies  as  the
temples  of  God :  Love  unity  ;
Flee  divisions;  Be  the  followers
of  Christ,  as  he  was  of  his
Father.

16  I  therefore  did  as  became
me,  as  a  man  composed  to  unity.
For  where  there  is  division,  and
wrath,  God  dwelleth  not.

17  But  the  Lord  forgives  all
that  repent,  if  they  *  return  to
the  unity  of  God,  and  to  the
council  of  the  bishop.

18  For  I  trust  in  the  grace  of
Jesus  Christ  ^  that  he  will  free
you  from  every  bond.

19  Nevertheless  I  exhort  you
that  you  do  nothing  out  of  strife,
but  according  to  the  instruction
of  Christ.

20  Because  I  have  heard  of
some  who  say  ;  unless  I  find  it
written  in  the  *  originals,  I  will
not  believe  it  to  be  written  in  the
Gospel.  And  when  I  said,  It  is
written  ;  they  answered  what  lay
before  them  in  their  corrupted
copies.

21  But  to  me  Jesus  Christ  is
instead  of  all  the  uncorrupted
monuments  in  the  world ;  to-
gether with  those  ^  undefiled  mon-
uments, his  cross,  and  death,  and
resurrection,  and  the  faith  which
is  by  him;  by  which  I  desire,
through  your  prayers,  to  be
justified.

22  \  The  priests  indeed  are
good;  but  much  better  is  the
High  Priest  to  whom  the  Holy
of  Holies  has  been  committed ;
and  who  alone  has  been  en-
trusted with  the  secrets  of  God.

23  He  is  the  door  of  the  Fa-
ther ;  by  which  Abraham,  and
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  all  the
prophets,  enter  in;  as  well  as
the  Apostles,  and  the  church.


^  Weak.      2  Of  some.      '  Flesh.      ^  Repent.      ^  wr^Q  ^w\  j^ose  from  you.
•  Archives,  Vid.  Voss.  Annot.  in  loc      '  Untouched.
184


On  the  person


SMYRN^ANS.


of  Christ


24  And  all  these  things  tend
to  the  unity  which  is  of  God.
Howbeit  the  Gospel  has  some-
what in  it  far  above  all  other
dispensations;  namely,  the  ap-
pearance of  our  Saviour,  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  his  passion
and  resurrection.

25  For  the  beloved  prophets
referred  to  him  ;  but  the  gospel
is  the  perfection  of  incorruption.
All  therefore  together  are  good,
if  ye  believe  with  charity.

CHAP.  III.

Informs  them  he  had  heard  that  the  per-
secution was  stopped  at  Antloch,  and
directs  them  to  send  a  messenger  hith-
erto to  congratulate  with  the  church.

"VTOW  as  concerning  the
Jl.M  church  of  Antioch  which  is
in  Syria,  seeing  I  am  told  that
through  your  prayers  and  the
bowels  which  ye  have  towards  it
in  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  in  peace ;  it
will  become  you,  as  the  church
of  God,  to  ordain  some  ^  deacon
to  go  to  them  thither  as  the  am-
bassador of  God;  that  he  may
rejoice  with  them  when  they
meet  together,  and  glorify  God's
name.

2  Blessed  be  that  man  in  Jesus
Christ,  who  shall  be  found  worthy
of  such  a  ministry ;  and  ye  your-
selves also  shall  be  glorified.


3  Now  if  you  be  willing,  it  is
not  impossible  for  you  to  do  this
for  the  grace  of  God ;  as   also

j  the  other  neighbouring  churches
have  sent  them,  some  bishops,
some  priests  and  deacons.

4  As  concerning  Philo  the
deacon  of  Cilicia,  a  most  worthy
*  man,  he  still  ministers  unto  me
in  the  word  of  God  :  together
with  Rheus  ^  of  Agathopolis,  a
singular  good  person,  who  has
followed  me  even  from  Syria,
not  regarding  his  life:  These
also  bear  witness  unto  you.

5  And  I  myself  give  thanks  to
God  for  you  that  you  receive  them
as  the  Lord  shall  receive  you.
But  for  those  that  dishonoured
them,  may  they  be  forgiven
through  the  grace  of  Jesus
Christ.

6  The  charity  of  the  brethren
that  are  at  Troas  salutes  you :
from  whence  also  I  now  write
by  Burrhus,  who  was  sent  to-
gether with  me  by  those  of  Ephe-
sus  and  Smyrna,  for  respect  sake.

7  May  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
honour  them ;  in  whom  they  hope,
both  in  flesh,  and  soul,  and  spirit ;
in  faith,  in  love,  in  unity.  Fare-
well in  Christ  Jesus  our  common
hope.


The  EPISTLE  of  IGNATIUS  to  the  SMYRN^ANS.


CHAP.  L

1  Declares  his  joy  for  their  firmness
in  the  Gospel.  4  Enlarges  on  the
person  of  Christ,  against  such  as  pre-
tend that  Christ  did  not  really  suffer.

TGNATIUS,  who  is  also  called
Theophorus,  to  the  church  of
God  the  Father,  and  of  the  be-
loved Jesus  Christ,  which  God
hath  mercifully  *  blessed  with
€very  good  gift";  being  filled  with


faith  and  charity,  so  that  this  is
wanting  in  no  gift ;  most  worthy
of  God,  and  fruitful  in  saints :  the
church  which  is  at  Smyrna  in
Asia;  all  joy,  through  his  im-
maculate spirit,  and  the  word  of
God.

2  I  glorify  God,  even  Jesus
Christ,  who  has  given  you  such
wisdom.

3  For  I  have  observed  that


'  Messenger  or  Minister.  ^  yid.  Vossius,  a  martyr  or  confessor.  Vid.  An-
Tiot.  in  loc.  3  Vid.  Vossius  Annot.  in  Ep.  ad.  Smyrn.  p.  261.  See  chap.  iii.
V.  11.     *Comp.  1  Cor.  vii.  25.

185


Exhorts  against


SMYRN^ANS.


heretics.


you  are  settled  in  an  immovable
faith,  as  if  you  were  nailed  to  the
cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
both  in  the  flesh  and  in  the
spirit ;  and  are  confirmed  in  love
through  the  blood  of  Christ ;
being  fully  persuaded  of  those
things  which  relate  ^unto  our
Lord.

4  Who  truly  was  of  the  race
of  David  according  to  the  flesh,
but  the  Son  of  God  according  to
the  will  and  power  of  God ;
truly  born  of  the  Virgin,  and
baptized  of  John ;  that  so  ^  all
righteousness  might  be  fulfilled
by  him.

5  He  was  also  truly  crucified
by  Pontius  Pilate,  and  Herod  the
Tetrarch,  being  nailed  for  us  in
the  flesh ;  by  the  fruits  of  which
we  are,  even  by  his  most  blessed
passion.

6  That  he  might  set  'up  a
token  for  all  ages  through  his
resurrection,  to  all  his  holy  and
faithful  servants,  whether  they
be  Jews  or  Gentiles,  in  one  body
of  his  church.

7  Now  all  these  things  he  suf-
fered for  us  that  we  might  be
saved.  And  he  suffered  truly,
as  he  also  truly  raised  up  him-
self: And  not,  as  some  unbe-
lievers say,  that  he  only  seemed
to  suffer,  they  themselves  only
seeming  to  be.*

8  And  as  they  believe  so  shall
it  happen  unto  them ;  when
being  divested  of  the  body  they
shall  become  ^  mere  spirits.

9  But  I  know  that  even  after
his  resurrection  he  was  in  the
flesh ;  and  I  believed  that  he  is
still  so.

10  And  when  he  came  to  those
who  were  with  Peter,  ^he  said


unto  them.  Take,  handle  me,  and
see  that  I  am  not  an  incorporeal
dsemon.  And  straightway  tbey
felt  and  believed  ;  being  con-
vinced both  by  his  flesh  and
spirit.

11  For  this  cause  they  de-
spised death,  and  were  found  to
be  above  ''  it.

12  But  after  his  resurrection
he  did  eat  and  drink  with  them,
as  he  was  flesh  ;  although  as  to
his  Spirit  he  was  united  to  the
Father.

CHAP.  II.
1  Exhorts  them  against  heretics.    8  The
danger  of  their  doctrine.

"VrOW  these  things,  beloved,  I
IM  ^put  you  in  mind  of,  not
questioning  but  that  you  your-
selves also  ^believe  that  they
are  so.

2  But  I  arm  you  before-hand
against  certain  beasts  in  the
shape  of  men  whom  you  must
not  only  not  receive,  but  if  it  be
possible  must  not  meet  with.

3  Only  you  must  pray  for
them,  that  if  it  be  the  will  of
God  they  may  repent;  which
yet  will  be  very  hard.     But  of

I  this  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has
'  the  power,  who  is  our  true  life.

4  For  if  all  these  things  were
done  only  in  shew  by  our  Lord,
then  do  I  also  seem  only  to  be
bound.

5  And  why  have  I  given  up
myself  to  death,  to  the  fire,  to
the  sword,  to  wild  beasts !

6  But  now  the  nearer  I  am  to
the  sword,  the  nearer  I  am  to
God :  when  I  shall  come  among
the  wild  beasts,  I  shall  come  to
God.

7  Only  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ,  I  undergo  all,  to  suffer


1  Unto  the  Lord.    ^  Matt.  iii.  15.    ^  Vid.  Vosa.  Annot.  m  loc.    <  i.e.  Chris-
tians.   5  Incorporeal  and  dsemoniac.  «  Ex.  Evang.  Sec.  Hebr.   See  Dr.  brabe
Spicileg.  torn.  ii.  p.  26.     '  Death.    «  Admonish.    «  Have  so.
186


Danger  of  heresy.


SMYRN^ANS.


On  duty


together  with  him ;  he  who  was
made  a  perfect  man  strengthen-
ing me.

8  Whom  some  not  knowing,
do  deny;  or  rather  have  been
denied  by  him,  being  the  advo-
cates of  death,  rather  than  of
the  truth.  Whom  neither  the
prophecies,  nor  the  law  of  Moses
have  persuaded ;  nor  the  Gospel
itself  even  to  this  day,  nor  the
sufferings  of  every  one  of  us.

9  For  they  think  also  the
same  things  of  us.  For  what
does  a  man  profit  me,  if  he  shall
praise  me,  and  blaspheme  my
Lord;  not  confessing  that  he
^  was  truly  made  man  ?

10  Now  he  that  doth  not  say
this,  does  in  effect  deny  him,  and
is  in  death.  But  for  the  names
of  such  as  do  this,  they  being
unbelievers,  I  thought  it  not  fit-
ting to  write  them  unto  you.

11  Yea,  God  forbid  that  I
should  make  any  mention  of
them,  till  they  shall  repent  to  a
true  belief  of  Christ's  passion,
which  is  our  resurrection.

12  Let  no  man  deceive  him-
self; both  the  things  which  are
in  heaven  and  the  glorious  an-
gels, and  princes,  whether  visible
or  invisible,  if  they  believe  not
in  the  blood  of  Christ,  "^  it  shall
be  to  them  to  condemnation.

13  '  He  that  is  able  to  receive
this,  let  him  receive  it.  Let  no
man's  *  place  or  state  in  the
world  puff  him  up  :  that  which  is
worth  all  his  faith  and  charity,  to
which  nothing  is  to  be  preferred.

14  But  consider  those  who  are
of  a  different  opinion  from  us,  as
to  what  concerns  the  grace  of
Jesus  Christ  which  is  come  unto
us,  how  contrary  they  are  to  the
design  of  God.


15  They  have  no  regard  to
charity,  no  care  of  the  widow,
the  fatherless,  and  the  oppressed ;
of  the  bond  or  free,  of  the  hun-
gry or  thirsty.

16  They  abstain  from  the  eu-
charist,  and  from  ^the  public
offices ;  because  they  confess  not
the  eucharist  to  be  the  flesh  of
our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  which
suffered  for  our  sins,  and  which
the  Father  of  his  goodness,  raised
again  from  the  dead.

1  7  And  for  this  cause  contra-
dicting the  gift  of  God,  they  die
in  their  disputes :  *  but  much
better  would  it  be  for  them  to
^receive  it,  that  they  might  one
day  rise  through  it.

18  It  will  therefore  become
you  to  abstain  from  such  persons ;
and  not  to  speak  with  them  nei-
ther in  private  nor  in  public.

19  But  to  hearken  to  the  pro-
phets, and  especially  to  the  Gos-
pel, in  which  both  Christ's  pas-
sion is  manifested  unto  us,  and  his
resurrection  perfectly  declared.

20  But  flee  all  divisions,  as
the  beginning  of  evils.

CHAP.  III.

1  Exhorts  them  to  follow  their  bishop
and  pastors ;  but  especially  their
bishop.  6  Thanks  them  for  their
kindness,  11  and  acquaints  them  %dth
the  ceasing  of  the  persecution  at  An-
tioch.

SEE  that  ye  all  follow  your
bishop,  as  Jesus  Christ,  the
Father ;  and  the  presbytery,  as
the  Apostles.  And  reverence  the
deacons,  as  the  command  of  God.

2  Let  no  man  do  anything  of
what  belongs  to  the  church  sepa-
rately from  the  bishop.

3  Let  that  eucharist  be  looked
upon  as  well  established,  which
is  either  offered  by  the  bishop,


^  Had  true  flesh.     *  jt  ig.    s  j^^tt.  xix.  12.     *  Vid.  Epist.  Interpol.     ^  Vid.
Annot.  Coteler.  in  loc.  Or,  Prayers.  '  Vid.  Coteler.  Annot.     '  Love.

187


to  the  bishop


SMYRN^ANS.


or  by  hi  ID  to  whom  the  bishop
has  given  his  consent.

4  Wheresoever  the  bishop
shall  appear,  there  let  the  ^peo-
ple also  be :  as  where  Jesus  Christ
is,  there  is  the  Catholic  church.

5  It  is  not  lawful  without  the
bishop,  neither  to  baptize,  nor
^  to  celebrate  the  Holy  Commu-
nion; but  whatsoever  he  shall
approve  of,  that  is  also  pleasing
unto  God;  that  so  whatever  is
done,  may  be  sure  and  well  done.

6  For  what  remains,  it  is  very
reasonable  that  we  should  ^re-
pent whilst  there  is  yet  time  to
return  unto  God.

7  It  is  a  good  thing  to  have  a
due  regard  both  to  God,  and  to
the  bishop :  he  that  honours  the
bishop,  shall  be  honoured  of  God.
But  he  that  does  anything  with-
out his  knowledge,  *  ministers
unto  the  devil.

8  Let  all  things  therefore
abound  to  you  in  charity ;  seeing
that  ye  are  worthy.

9  Ye  have  refreshed  me  in  all
things ;  so  shall  Jesus  Christ  you.
Ye  have  loved  me  both  when  I
was  present  with  you,  and  now
being  absent,  ye  cease  not  to  do
so.

10  May  God  be  your  reward,
from  whom  whilst  ye  undergo
all  things,  ye  shall  attain  unto
him.

11  Ye  have  done  well  in  that
ye  have  received  Philo,  and
Rheus  ^  Agathopus,  who  followed
me  *  for  the  word  of  God,  as  the
deacons  of  Christ  our  God.

12  Who  also  gave  thanks  unto
the  Lord  for  you,  forasmuch  as
ye  have  refreshed  them  in  all
'things.  ®Nor  shall  any  thing
that  you  have  done  be  lost  to  you.


13  My 'soul  be  for  yours,  and
my  bonds  which  ye  have  not  de-
spised, nor  been  ashamed  of.
Wherefore  neither  shall  Jesus
Christ,  our  perfect  faith,  be
ashamed  of  you.

14  Your  prayer  is  come  to  the
church  of  Antioch  which  is  in
Syria.  From  whence  being  sent
bound  with  chains  becoming  God,
I  salute  the  ^"churches;  being  not
worthy  to  be  called  "  from  thence,
as  being  the  least  among  them.

15  Nevertheless  by  the  will  of
God  I  have  been  thought  worthy
cf  this  honour  ;  not  for  that  I
think  I  have  deserved  it,  but  by
the  grace  of  God.

16  Which  I  wish  may  be  per-
fectly given  unto  me,  that
through  your  prayers  I  may
attain  unto  God.

17  And  therefore  that  your
work  may  be  fully  accomplished
both  upon  earth  and  in  heaven  ;
it  will  be  fitting,  and  for  the  ho-
nour of  God,  ^^  that  your  church
appoint  some  worthy  delegate,
who  being  come  as  far  as  Syria,
may  rejoice  together  with  them
that  they  are  in  peace;  and  that
they  are  again  restored  to  their
former  ^*  state,  and  have  again  re-
ceived their  proper  body.

18  Wherefore  I  should  think
it  a  worthy  action,  to  send  some
one  from  you  with  an  epistle,  to
congratulate  with  them  their
peace  in  God  ;  and  that  through
your  prayers  they  have  now  got-
ten to  their  harbor.

19  For  inasmuch  as  ye  are
perfect  yourselves,  you  ought  to
think  those  things  that  are  per-
fect. For  when  you  are  desirous
to  do  well,  God  is  ready  to  "  en-
able you  thereunto.


*  Multitude.      '  Make  a  love-feast.        ^  Eeturn  to  a  sound  mind.       *  Does
worship,   syitl.  Voss.  Annot.'  in  loc  ^Unto.   'Ways.  ^Vid.  Epist.  Interpol.
9  Spirit,    ^o  All  the.     ^^  i.  e.  the  bishop  of  that  church.     ^"^  Vid.  Voss.  Annot.
in  loc.     '^  Bulk,  greatness.     ^*  Help  you.
188


Ignatius  exhorts


POLYCARP.


Polycarp


20  The  love  of  the  brethren
that  are  at  Troas  salute  you;
from  whence  I  write  to  you  by
Barrhus  whom  you  sent  with  me,
together  with  the  Ephesians  your
brethren  ;  and  who  has  in  all
things  refreshed  me.

21  And  I  would  to  God  that
all  would  imitate  him,  as  being
a  pattern  of  the  ministry  of  God.
May  his  grace  fully  reward  him.

22  I  salute  your  very  worthy
bishop,  and  your  venerable  pres-
bytery ;  and  your  deacons,  my
fellow-servants  ;  and  all  of  you  in
general,  and  every  one  in  partic-
ular, in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  in  his  flesh  and  blood ;  in
his  passion  and  resurrection  both
fleshly  and   spiritually ;    and  in

^  the  unity  of  God  with  you.         I


23  Grace  be  with  you,  and
mercy,  and  peace,  and  patience,
for  evermore.

24  I  salute  the  families  of  my
brethren,  with  their  wives  and
children  ;  and  the  ^  virgins  that
are  called  widows.  Be  strong  in
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
Philo,  who  is  present  with  me
salutes  you.

25  I  salute  the  house  of  Tavias,
and  pray  that  it  may  be  strength-
ened in  faith  and  charity,  both  of
flesh  and  spirit.

26  I  salute  Alee  my  well-be-
loved, ^  together  with  the  incom-
parable Daphnus,  and  Eutech-
nus,  and  all  by  name.

27  Farewell  in  the  grace  of
God.

T   To  the  Smyrnceans  from  Troas.


The  EPISTLE  of  IGNATIUS  to  POLYCARP.


CHAP.  I.

Blesses  God  for  the  firm  estahlishment  of
Polycarp  in  the  faith,  and  gives  him
particular  directions  for  improving  it,

IGNATIUS,  who  is  also  called
Theophorus,  to  Polycarp,  bi-
shop of  the  church  *  which  is  at
Smyrna  ;  their  overseer,  but
rather  himself  overlooked  by
God  the  Father,  and  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ :  all  happiness.

2  Having  known  that  thy
mind  towards  God,  is  fixed  as  it
were  upon  an  immovable  rock  ;
I  exceedingly  give  thanks,  that
I  have  been  thought  worthy  to
behold  thy  *  blessed  face,  in  which
may  I  always  rejoice  in  God.

3  Wherefore  I  beseech  thee  by
the  grace  of  God  with  which  thou
art  clothed,  to  press  forward  in
thy  course,  and  to  exhort  all
others  that  they  may  be  saved.

^  Vid.  Voss.  Annot.  in  loc  ^'i.  e.  The  deaconessses  See  the  rea-^on  for
the  name,  Voss.  Annot.  in  loc.  Add.  Coteler.  ib.  'See  Voss.  Annot.  ex  Epiat.
Interpol.  "*  of  the  Smyrnseans.  ^  j^nocent.  *Vid.  1  Cor.  vii.  34.  ''Beat
leisure  to,  etc.  ^  Vid.  Voss.  in  loc.  aliter  Vet.  Lat.  Interpr.  ^The  diseases.
^°  Is  much.

189


4  Maintain  thy  place  with  all
care ^ both  of  flesh  and  spirit:
Make  it  thy  endeavour  to  pre-
serve unity,  than  which  nothing
is  better.  Bear  with  all  men,
even  as  the  Lord  with  thee.

5  Support  all  in  love,  as  also
thou  dost.  ''  Pray  without  ceas-
ing :  ask  more  understanding
than  what  thou  already  hast.
Be  watchful,  having  thy  spirit
always  awake.

6  Speak  to  every  one  ®  accord-
ing as  God  shall  enable  thee.
Bear  the  *  infirmities  of  all,  as  a
perfect  combatant ;  where  the
labour  is  great,  the  gain  *"is  the
more.

7  If  thou  shalt  love  the  good
disciples,  what  thank  is  it  ?  But
rather  do  thou  subject  to  thee
those  that  are  mischievous,  in
meekness.


to  improve


POLYCARP.


his  faith.


8  Every  wound  is  not  healed
with  the  same  plaster  :  if  the
accessions  of  the  disease  be  vehe-
ment, modify  them  with  ^  soft
remedies :  be  in  all  things  ^  wise
as  a  serpent,  but  harmless  as  a
dove.

9  For  this  cause  thou  art  com-
posed of  flesh  and  spirit ;  that
thou  mayest  modify  those  things
that  appear  before  thy  face.    >

10  And  as  for  those  that  are
not  seen,  pray  to  God  that  he
would  reveal  them  unto  thee,  that
so  thou  mayest  be  wanting  in
nothing,  but  mayest  abound  in
every  gift.

11  The  times  demand  thee,  as
the  pilots  the  winds ;  and  he  that
is  tossed  in  a  tempest,  the  haven
where  he  would  be  ;  that  thou
mayst  attain  unto  God.

12  Be  sober  as  the  combatant
of  God :  the  ^  crown  proposed  to
thee  is  immortality,  and  eternal
life  ;  concerning  which  thou  art
also  fully  persuaded.  I  will  be
thy  surety  in  all  things,  and  my
bonds,  which  thou  hast  loved.

13  Let  not  those  that  seem
worthy  of  credit,  but  teach  other
doctrines,  *  disturb  thee.  Stand
firm  and  immovable,  as  an  anvil
when  it  is  beaten  upon.

14  It  is  the  part  of  a  brave
combatant  to  be  ^  wounded,  and
yet  overcome.  But  especially
we  ought  to  endure  all  things
for  God's  sake,  that  he  may  bear
with  us.

15  Be  every  day  ^better  than
other :  consider  the  times ;  and
expect  him,  who  is  above  all
time,  eternal,  invisible,  though
for  our  sakes  made  visible  :  im-
palpable, and  impassable,  yet  for


us  subjected  to  sufferings  ;  en-
during all  manner  of  ways  foi
our  salvation.

CHAP.  II.

1  Continues  his  advice,  6  and  teaches
him,  how  to  advise  others.  12  En-
forces unity  and  subjection  to  the
bishop.

LET  not  the  widows  be  neg-
lected :  be  thou  after  God,
their  guardian.

2  Let  nothing  be  done  without
thy  knowledge  and  consent ;  nei-
ther do  thou  anything  but  ac-
cording to  the  will  of  God ;  as
also  thou  dost,  ^with  all  con-
stancy.

3  Let  your  assemblies  be  more
full :  inquire  into  all  by  name.

4  Overlook  not  the  men  and
maid  servants  ;  neither  let  them
be  puffed  up :  but  rather  let
them  be  the  more  subject  to  the
glory  of  God,  that  they  may  ob-
tain from  him  a  better  liberty.

5  Let  them  not  desire  to  ^  be
set  free  at  the  public  cost,  that
they  be  not  slaves  to  their  own
lusts.

6  Flee  evil  '  arts ;  or  rather,
make  not  any  mention  of  them.

7  Say  to  my  sisters,  that  they
love  the  Lord  ;  and  be  satisfied
with  their  own  husbands,  both
in  the  flesh  and  spirit.

8  In  like  manner,  exhort  my
brethren,  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ,  that  they  love  their  wives,
even  as  the  Lord  the  Church.

9  If  any  man  can  remain  in
a  virgin  state,  ^^  to  the  honour  of
the  flesh  of  Christ,  let  him  re-
main without  boasting ;  but  if
he  boast,  he  is  undone.  And  if
he  desire  to  be  more  taken  notice


^  Siiperfusions.     ^  Matt.  x.  16.    '  Vid.  Voss.  Annot.  in  loc  Collat.  cum  Oo-
teler.  ib.    ■•  Amaze  thee.      *  Beaten.    «More  studious,  diligent.     '  being  well


settled.    8  yi(j_  Annot.  Coteler.  in  loc.
et  Coteler.  in  loc.

190


*  Or,  trades.     ^"  Vid.  Annot.  Vossii


Desires  to  greet


POLYCARP.


the  churches.


of  than  the   bishop  he  is  cor-
rupted.

10  But  it  becomes  all  such  as
are  married,  whether  men  or  wo-
men to  come  together  with  the
consent  of  the  bishop,  that  so
their  marriage  may  be  according
to  godliness,  and  not  in  lust.

11  Let  all  things  be  done  to
the  honour  of  God.

12  ^  Hearken  unto  the  bishop,
that  God  also  may  hearken  unto
you.  My  soul  be  security  for
them  that  submit  to  their  bishop,
with  their  presbyters  and  dea-
cons. And  may  my  portion  be
together  with  theirs  in  God.

13  Labour  with  one  another ;
contend  together,  run  together,
suffer  together ;  sleep  together,
and  rise  together ;  as  the  stew-
ards, and  assessors,  and  ministers
of  God.

14  Please  him  under  whom  ye
war,  and  from  whom  ye  receive
your  wages.  Let  none  of  you  be
found  a  deserter ;  but  let  your
baptism  remain,  as  your  arms ;
your  faith,  as  your  helmet ;  your
charity,  as  your  spear ;  your  pa-
tience, as  your  whole  armour.

15  Let  your  works  be  your
*  charge,  that  so  you  may  re-
ceive a  suitable  reward.  Be  long-
suffering  therefore  towards  each
other  in  meekness :  as  God  is  to-
wards you.

16  Let  me  have  joy  of  you  in
all  things.

CHAP.  IIL

1  Greets  Polycarp  on  the  peace  of  the
church  at  Antioch  :  2  and  desires  him
to  write  to  that  and  other  churches.

OW  forasmuch  as  the  church
of  Antioch  in  Syria,  is, '  as


N


I  am  told;  in  peace  through  your
prayers ;  I  also  have  been  the
more  comforted  *and  without
care  in  God  ;  if  so  be  that  by  suf-
fering, I  shall  attain  unto  God ;
that  through  your  prayers  I  may
be  found  a  disciple  of  Christ.

2  It  will  be  very  fit,  O  most
worthy  Polycarp,  to  call  a  ^select
council,  and  choose  some  one
whom  ye  particularly  love,  and
who  is  patient  of  labour;  that
he  may  be  the  messenger  of  God ;
and  that  going  unto  Syria,  he
may  glorify  your  incessant  love,
to  the  praise  of  Christ.

3  A  Christian  has  not  the
power  of  himself:  but  must  be
always  at  leisure  for  God's  ser-
vice. Now  this  work  is  both
God's  and  your's  :  when  ye  shall
have  perfected  it.

4  For  I  trust  through  the
grace  of  God  that  ye  are  ready
to  every  good  work  that  is  fitting
for  you  in  the  Lord.

5  Knowing  therefore  your
earnest  affection  for  the  truth,  I
have  exhorted  you  by  ®  these
short  letters.

6  But  forasmuch  as  I  have
not  been  able  to  write  to  all  the
churches,  because  I  must  sud-
denly sail  from  Troas  to  Nea-
polis ;  (for  so  is  the  command  of
those  to  whose  pleasure  I  am
subject;)  do  you  write  to  the
churches  that  are  near  you,  as
being  instructed  in  the  will  of
God,  that  they  also  may  do  in
like  manner.

7  Let  those  that  are  able  send
''  messengers ;  and  let  the  rest
send  their  letters  by  those  who
shall  be  sent  by  you :  that  you


^  Observe,  from  the  foregoing  verses,  that  Ignatius  here  speaks  not  to  Poly-
carp, but  through  him  to  the  Church  of  Smyrna.  ^That  which  is  committed
to  your  custody,  to  keep  secure.  '  It  has  been  manifested  unto  me.  *  In  the
security  of  God.  ^  Most  becoming  God.  ^  Viz.  To  the  Smymseans,  and  this
to  himself.     See  Pearson  in  lor.      ^  Footmen.

191


Commends  them


PHILIPPIANS.


for  their  faitK


may  be  glorilied  ^  to  all  eternity,
of  which  you  are  worthy.

8  I  salute  all  by  uame,  partic-
ularly the  wife  of  Epitropus,
with  all  her  house  and  children.
I  salute  Attains  my  well- beloved.

9  I  salute  him  who  shall  be !
thought  worthy  to   be   sent  by
you  into  Syria.     Let  grace  be  |


ever  with  him,  '  and  with  Poly-
carp  who  sends  him.

10  I  wish  you  all  happiness
in  our  God,  Jesus  Christ ;  in
whom  continue,  in  the  unity  and
protection  of  God.

11  I  salute  Alee  my  well-be*
loved.     Farewell  in  the  Lord.

^  To  Folycarp.


The  EPISTLE  of  POLYCARP  to  the  PHILIPPIANS.

[The  genuineness  of  this  Epistle  is  controvei ted,  but  implicitly  believed  by
Archbishop  Wake,  whose  translation  is  below.  There  is  also  a  trans-
lation by  Dr.  Cave,  attached  to  his  life  of  Polycarp.]


CHAP.  I.

Commends  the  Philippians  for  their  re-
spect to  those  who  suffered  for  the  Gos-
pel; and  for  their  own  faith.

POLYCARP,  and  the  presby-
ters that  are  with  him,  to
the  church  of  God  which  ^is  at
Philippi:  mercy  unto  you  and
peace  from  God  Almighty ;  and
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  our  Sa-
viour, be  multiplied.

2  I  rejoiced  greatly  with  you
in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that
ye  received  the  images  of  a  true
love,  and  accompanied,  as  it  is
behooved  you,  those  who  were  in
bonds,  becoming  saints;  which
are  the  crowns  of  such  as  are
truly  ciiosen  by  God  and  our
Lord :

3  As  also  that  the  *root  of
the  faith  which  was  preached
from  ancient  times,  remains  firm
in  you  to  this  day ;  and  brings
forth  fruit  to  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  who  suffered  himself  to
be  brought  even  to  the  death
for  our  sins.

4  ^  Whom  God  hath  raised
up,  having  loosed  the  pains  of
death,  ^  whom  having  not  seen,
ye  love;  in  whom  though  now
ye  see  him  not,  yet  believing  ye


rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and
full  of  glory.

5  Into  which  many  desire  to
enter  ;  ^  knowing  that  by  grace
ye  are  saved ;  not  by  works,  but
by  the  will  of  God  through
Jesus  Christ.

6  ^  Wherefore  girding  up  the
loins  of  your  minds ;  ^  serve  the
Lord  with  fear,  and  in  truth:
laying  aside  all  empty  and  vain
speech,  and  the  error  of  many  ;
Relieving  in  him  that  raised  up
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  the
dead,  and  hath  given  him  glory
and  a  throne  at  his  right  hand.

7  To  whom  all  things  are
made  subject,  "  both  that  are  in
heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth  ;
whom  every  "  living  creature
shall  worship ;  who  shall  come
to  be  the  judge  of  the  quick  and
dead :  whose  blood  God  shall  re~
quire  of  them  that  believe  in
him.

8  But  he  that  raised  up
^^  Christ  from  the  dead,  shall
also  raise  up  us  in  like  manner,
if  we  do  his  will  and  walk  **  ac-
cording to  his  commandments;
and  love  those  things  which  he
loved :

9  Abstaining  from   all  ^^un-


^  Vid.  Voss.  in  loc  in  the  Eternal  work.  ^  Ex.  Vet.  Interp.  Vid.  Voss.  Annot.
"  Sojourneth.      ■*  Firm  root  remains  in  you.       ^  Acts  xi.  24.      ^  1  Pet.  i.  8.
'  Eph.  ii.  8.      8  1  Pet.  i,  13.      9  Psalm  ii.  11.      ^H  Pet.  i.  21.    "  Phil.  ii.  10.
"Breath.     ^^Him.     i*In.     "Injustice.
192


11


Exhorts  to


PHILIPPIANS.


social  and  other


righteousness  ;  ^  inordinate  af-
fection, and  love  of  money ;
from  evil  speaking;  false  wit-
ness ;  not  rendering  evil  for  evil,
or  railing  for  railing,  or  striking
for  striking,  or  cursing  for  curs-
ing.

10  But  remembering  what
the  Lord  has  ^  taught  us  saying,
Judge  not,  and  ye  shall  not  be
judged;  forgive  and  ye  shall  be
forgiven  ;  be  ye  merciful,  and
ye  shall  obtain  mercy ;  for  with
tlie  same  measure  that  ye  mete
withal,  it  shall  be  measured  to
you  again.

11  And  again,  that  'blessed
are  the  poor,  and  they  that  are
persecuted  for  righteousness'
sake ;  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom
of  God.

CHAP.  II.

2  Exhorts  to  Faith,  Hope,  and  Chanty.
5  Against  covetousness,  and  as  to  the
duties  of  husbands,  wives,  widows,  6
deacons,  young  men,  virgins,  and
presbyters.

THESE  things,  my  brethren,
I  took  not  the  liberty  of
myself  to  write  unto  you  con-
cerning righteousness,  but  you
yourselves  before  encouraged  me
to  it.

2  For  neither  can  I,  nor  any
other  such  as  I  am,  come  up  to
the  wisdom  of  the  blessed  and
renowned  Paul :  who  being  him-
self in  person  with  those  who
then  lived,  did  with  all  ex-
actness and  soundness  teach
the  word  *  of  truth ;  and  being
gone  from  you  wrote  an  ^  epistle
to  you.

3  Into  which  if  you  look,  you
will  be  able  to  edify  yourselves
in  the  faith  that  has  been  deliv-  J


ered  unto  you ;  which  is  the
mother  of  us  all ;  being  followed
with  hope,  and  led  on  by  a  gen-
eral love,  both  towards  God  and
towards  Christ,  and  towards  our
neighbour.

4  For  if  any  man  ®  has  these
things  he  has  fulfilled  the  law  of
righteousness  :  for  he  that  has
charity  is  far  from  all  sin.

5  But  the  love  of  money  is
the  ^  root  of  all  evil.  Knowing
therefore  that  as  we  brought
nothing  into  this  world,  so  nei-
ther may  we  carry  any  thing
out ;  let  us  ^  arm  ourselves  with
the  armour  of  righteousness.

6  And  teach  ourselves  first  to
walk  according  to  the  command-
ments of  the  Lord  ;  and  then
your  wives  to  walk  likewise  ®  ac-
cording to  the  faith  that  is  given
to  them ;  in  ^°  charity,  and  in
purity  ;  loving  their  own  hus-
bands with  all  "sincerity,  and  all
others  alike  with  all  temper-
ance; and  to  bring  up  their
children  in  the  instruction  ^^and
fear  of  the  Lord.

7  The  widows  likewise  teach
that  they  be  sober  as  to  what,
concerns  the  faith  of  the  Lord  :;
praying  always  for  all  men ;
being  far  from  all  detraction^
evil  speaking,  false  witness ;  from
covetousness,  and  from  all  evil.

8  Knowing  that  they  are  the
altars  of  God,  ^'  who  sees  all  ble-
mishes, and  from  whom  nothing
is  hid  ;  who  searches  out  the
very  reasonings,  and  thoughts,
and  secrets  of  our  hearts.

9  ^  Knowing  therefore  that
God  is  not  mocked,  we  ought  to
walk  worthy  both  of  his  com-
mand and  of  his  glory.


^  Eph.  iv.  19.  Coloss.  iii.  5.  1  Pet.  iii.  9.  ^gaid  to  ns,  teaching,  Luke  vi.
37.  Matt.  vii.  1.  ^  Matt.  v.  3, 10.  Luke  vi.  20.  "*  rrepi  aXedsLag,  concerning
rrnth.  5  Epistles.  Vid.  Annot.  Coteler.  in  loc  ^  Be  within.  7  Beginning
of  all  troubles,  or  diflSculties,  ;i:a/le7rwv,  1  Tim.  vi.  7.  ^Be  armed.  ^  In.  ^''Love.
"'^Truth.     "Of  the.     '^  And  that  he.

13  198


Christian  duties.


PHILIPPIANS.


On  faith.


10  Also  the  deacons  must  be  j
blameless  before  ^  him,  as  the  I
ministers  of  God  in  Christ,  and  j
not  of  men.  Not  false  accusers ; :
not  double  tongued  ;  not  lovers  |
of  money  ;  but  ^  moderate  in  all  i
things ;  compassionate,  careful  ; !
walking  according  to  the  truth  |
of  the  Lord,  who  was  the  ser- 1
vant  of  all.  \

11  Whom  if  we  please  in  this  j
present  world   we  shall  also  be
made  partakers  of  that  which  is  \
to  come,  according  as  he  has  pro-  i
mised  to  us,  that  he  will  raise  us  |
from  the  dead  ;  and  that  if  we  [
shall  walk  worthy   of  him,  we
shall   also   reign   together  with
him,  if  we  believe.

12  In  like  manner  the  young-
er men  must  be  unblameable  in
all  things;  above  all,  taking
care  of  their  purity,  and  to
restrain  themselves  from  all
evil.  For  it  is  good  to  be  cut
off  from  the  lusts  that  are
in  the  world  ;  because  every
such  '  lust  warreth  against  the
spirit :  *  and  neither  fornicators,
nor  effeminate,  nor  abusers  of
themselves  with  mankind,  shall
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God ;
nor  they  who  do  such  things  as
are  foolish  and  unreasonable.

13  Wherefore  ye  must  needs
abstain  from  all  these  things,  be-
ing subject  to  the  ^  priests  and
deacons,  as  unto  God  and  Christ.

14  The  virgins  admonish  to
walk  in  a  spotless  and  pure  con-
science.

15  And  let  the  *  elders  be  com-
passionate and  merciful  towards
all ;  ''  turning  them  from  their
errors ;  seeking  out  those  that  are
weak  ;  not  forgetting  the  widows,
the  fatherless,  and  the  poor ;  but


always  ^  providing  what  is  good
both  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man.

16  Abstaining  from  all  wrath,
respect  of  persons,  and  unright-
eous judgment  :  and  especially
being  free  from  all  covetousness.

17  Not  ®  easy  to  believe  any
thing  against  any ;  not  severe  in
judgment ;  knowing  that  we  are
all  debtors  in  point  of  sin.

18  If  therefore  we  pray  to  the
Lord  that  he  would  forgive  us,
we  ought  also  to  forgive  others  ;
for  we  are  all  in  the  sight  of  our
Lord  and  God ;  ^^  and  must  all
stand  before  the  judgment  seat
of  Christ ;  and  shall  every  one
give  an  account  ^^  of  himself.

19  Let  us  therefore  serve  him
in  fear,  and  with  all  reverence  as
both  himself  hath  commanded  ;
and  as  the  Apostles  who  have
preached  the  Gospel  unto  us,  and
the  prophets  who  have  foretold
the  coming  of  our  Lord  have
taught  us.

.20  Being  zealous  of  what  is
good ;  abstaining  from  all  of-
fence, and  from  false  brethren  ;
and  from  those  who  bear  the
name  of  Christ  in  hypocrisy ;
who  deceive  vain  men.
CHAP.  III.

1  As  to  faith  in  our  Saviour  Christ :  his
nature  and  sufferings,  the  resurrection
and  judgment.  3  Exhorts  to  prayer
5  and  steadfastness  in  the  faith,  from
the  examples  of  Christ,  7  and  Apostles
and  saints,  and  exhorts  to  carefulness
in  all  well-doing.

FOR  ^"^  whosoever  does  not
confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is
come  in  the  flesh,  he  is  Anti-
christ: and  whoever  does  not
confess  "  his  suffering  upon  the
cross,  is  from  the  devil.

2  And  whosoever  perverts  the
oracles  of  the  Lord  to  his  own  lusts:


^  His  righteousness.  ^  Continent.  ^Pet- ii.  11.  ''Cor.  vi.  9,  10.  ^  Elders.
®  Presbyters.  ^  Ezek.  xxxiv.  4.  ^  Eom.  xii.  17.  ^  Swiftly  believing.  ^^Matr.
xii.l4;  Rom.  xiv.  10 ;  2  Cor.  v.  10.  "For.  ^n  John  iv.  3.  1=*  The  ma:-
tyrdom  of  the  cross.

194


On  well  doing.


PHILIPPIANS.


Exhorts  against


and  says  that  there  shall  neither
be  any  resurrection,  nor  judg-
ment, he  is  the  first-born  of  Satan.
3  Wherefore  leaving  the  vani-
ty of  many,  and  their  false  doc-
trines ;  let  us  return  to  the  word
that  was  delivered  to  us  from
the  beginning ;  ^  Watching  unto
prayer;  and  persevering  in  fast-

4  With  supplication  beseeching
the  all  seeing  God  '^  not  to  lead
us  into  temptation ;  as  the  Lord
hath  said,  ^  The  spirit  is  truly
willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak.

5  Let  us  therefore  without
ceasing  hold  steadfastly  to  him
who  is  our  hope,  and  the  earnest
of  our  righteousness,  even  Jesus
Christ ;  *  Who  his  own  self  bare
our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the
tree :  who  did  no  sin,  neither
was  guile  found  in  his  mouth.
But  suffered  all  for  us  that  we
might  live  ^  through  him.

6  Let  us  therefore  imitate  his
patience ;  and  if  we  suffer  for  his
name,  let  us  glorify  him  ;  for  this
example  he  has  given  us  by  him-
self, and  so  have  we  believed.

7  Wherefore  I  exhort  all  of
you  that  ye  obey  the  word  of
righteousness,  and  exercise  all  pa-
tience; which  ye  have  seen  set  forth
before  our  eyes,  not  only  in  the
blessed  Ignatius,  and  Zozimus,
and  Rufus;  but  in  others  among
yourselves  ;  and  in  Paul  himself,
and  the  rest  of  the  Apostles :

8  Being  ^  confident  of  this,
that  all  these  have  not  run  in
vain ;  but  in  faith  and  righteous-
ness, and  are  gone  to  the  place  that
was  due  to  them  from  the  Lord  ;
with  whom  they  also  suffered.

9  For  they  loved  not  this  pre-

1 1  Pet.  vi.  7.  2  Matt.  vi.  13.  '  Matt.  xxvi.  41.  "  1  Pet.  ii.  22,  24.  s  In.  1
Pet.  iii.  14,  &c.  ^  Persuaded.  "^  Associated  in  truth.  ^  Yielding  to  each  other
in  the  mildness  of  the  Lord.  Tobit,  xii.  9.  ^  1  Pet.  ii.  12.  ^°  Unreprovable.
'^  Rom.  ii.  24.  Titus,  ii  5.  ^^  Concupiscence ;  or,  immoderate  and  filthy  lusts.
So  Dr.  Hammond  on  Rom.  i.  29.  ^^  1  Thes.  v.  22.  Eph.  v.  5 ;  Coloss.  ii.  5.
"  As  before,  Dr.  Hammond  on  1    Cor.  v.  10.

196


sent  world ;  but  him  who  died,  and
was  raised  again  by  God  for  us.

10  Stand  therefore  in  these
things,  and  follow  the  example  of
the  Lord;  being  firm  and  immuta-
ble in  the  faith,  lovers  of  the  bro-
therhood, lovers  of  one  another:
"^  companions  together  in  the  truth,
^  being  kind  and  gentle  towards
each  other,  despising  none.

11  When  it  is  in  your  power
to  do  good,  defer  it  not,  for  char-
ity delivered  from  death.

12  Be  all  of  you  subject  one
to  another,  ^  having  your  con-
versation ^^  honest  among  the
Gentiles;  that  by  your  good
works,  both  ye  yourselves  may
receive  praise,  and  the  Lord  may
not  ^^  be  blasphemed  through  you.
But  wo  be  to  him  by  whom  the
name  of  the  Lord  is  blasphemed.

13  Therefore  teach  all  men
sobriety ;  in  which  do  ye  also
exercise  yourselves.  *

CHAP.  IV.

Valens,  a  presbyter,  having  fallen  into
the  sin  of  covetousness,  he  exhorts  them
against  it.

I  AM  greatly  afflicted  for  Va-
lens,  who  was  once  a  presby-
ter among  you  ;  that  he  should
so  little  understand  the  place
that  was  given  to  him  in  the
church.  Wherefore  I  admonish
you  that  ye  abstain  from  ^^  cove-
tousness ;  and  that  ye  be  chaste,
and  true  of  speech.

2  "Keep  yourselves  from  all  evil.
For  he  that  in  these  things  cannot
govern  himself  how  shall  he  be
able  to  prescribe  them  to  another?

3  If  a  man  does  not  keep  him-
self from  "  covetousness,  he  shall
be  polluted  with  idolatry  and  be
judged  as  if  he  were  a  Gentile.


the  sin  of


PHILIPPIANS.


covetousness.


4  But  who  of  you  are  ignorant '  believe  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christy


of  the  judgment  of  God?  ^Dowe
not  know  that  the  saints  shall
judge  the  world,  as  Paul  teaches  ?

5  But  I  have  neither  per-
ceived nor  heard  any 'thing  of
this  kind  in  you,  among  whom
the  blessed  ^  Paul  laboured  ;
and  who  are  named  in  the  be-
ginning of  his  Epistle.

6  For  he  glories  of  you  in  all
the  churches  who  then  only  knew
God ;  for  we  did  not  then  know
him.  Wherefore,  my  brethren,
I  am  exceedingly  sorry  both  for
him,  and  for  his  wife ;  to  whom
God  grant  a  true  repentance.

7  And  be  ye  also  moderate
upon  this  occasion ;  and  look  not
upon  such  as  enemies,  but  call
them  back  as  suffering,  and  err-
ing members,  that  ye  may  save
your  whole  body :  for  by  so  doing,
ye  shall  edify  your  own  selves.

8  For  I  trust  that  ye  are  well
exercised  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,
and  that  nothing  is  hid  from  you ;
but  at  present  it  is  not  granted
unto  me  to  practice  that  which  is
*  written,  Be  angry  and  sin  not ;
and  again,  Let  not  the  sun  go
down  upon  your  wrath.

9  Blessed  be  he  that  believeth
and  remembereth  these  things;
which  also  I  trust  you  do.

10  Now  the  God  and  Father
of  our  L>rd  Jesus  Christ;  and
he  himself  who  is  our  everlasting
high-priest,  the  Son  of  God,  even
Jesus  Christ,  build  you  up  in
faith  and  in  truth  and  in  all
meekness  and  lenity;  in  patience
and  long-suffering,  in  forbearance
and  chastity.

11  And  grant  unto  you  a  lot
and  portion  among  his  saints ;
and  us  with  you,  and  to  all  that
are  under  the  heavens,  who  shall


and  in  his  Father  *  who  raided
I  him  from  the  dead.
j  12  Pray  for  all  the  saints:
'  pray  also  for  kings,  and  ^  all  that
are  in  authority ;  and  for  those
who  persecute  you,  and  hate  you,
and  for  the  enemies  of  the  cross ;
that  your  fruit  may  be  manifest
in  all;  and  that  ye  may  be  per-
fect in  **  Christ.

13  ^  Ye  wrote  to  me,  both  ye,
and  also  Ignatius,  that  if  any  one
went  from  hence  into  Syria,  he
should  bring  your  letters  with
him  ;  which  also  I  will  take  care
of,  as  soon  as  I  shall  have  a  con-
venient opportunity;  either  by
myself,  or  him  whom  I  shall  send
upon  your  account.

14  The  Epistles  of  Ignatius
which  he  wrote  *  unto  us,  together
with  what  others  of  his  have  come
to  our  hands,  we  have  sent  to  you^
according  to  your  order;  which
are  subjoined  to  this  epistle.

15  By  which  we  may  be  greatly
profited  ;  for  they  treat  of  faith
and  patience,  and  of  all  things
that  pertain  to  edification  in  *  the
Lord  Jesus.

16  ^  "What  you  know  certainly
of  Ignatius,  and  those  that  are
with  him  signify  to  us.

17  ^  These  things  have  I  writ-
ten unto  you  by  Crescens,  whom
by  this  present  epistle  I  have  re-
commended to  you,  and  do  now
again  commend.

18  For  he  has  had  his  conver-
sation without  blame  among  us ;
and  I  suppose  also  with  you.

19  Ye  will  also  have  regard
unto  his  sister  when  she  shall
come  unto  you.

20  Be  ye  safe  in  the  Lord
Jesus   Christ  ;  ^"and   in   favour


with  all  yours.     Amen.

*  1  Cor.  vi.  2.     *  Phil.  1.     »  Said  in  these  Scriptures.  Psalm  iv.  5.    Eph.  iv.
26.     *Gal.  1,  1  Tim.  ii.  1,  2.     »  Powers  and    princes.     ^  Him.     ^  See  Annot.
Us'^er.  in  loc.        *  i.  e.  To  himself,  and  to  the  church  of  Smyrna.      ^Our  Lord.
^"His  grace  be  with  you  all.  Amen.
196


THE  SHEPHERD  OF  HERMAS.

[This  book  is  thus  entitled,  because  it  was  composed  by  Hermas,  brother  to
Pius,  bishop  of  Kome ;  and  because  the  Angel,  who  bears  the  principal
part  in  ii,  is  represented  in  the  lorm  and  habit  of  a  shepherd.  Irenjeus
quotes  it  under  the  very  name  of  Scripture.  Origen  thought  it  a  most  use-
ful writing,  and  that  it  was  divinely  inspired  ;  Eusebius  says,  that,  though
it  was  not  esteemed  canonical,  it  was  read  publicly  in  the  churchep,  which
is  corroborated  by  Jerome ;  and  Athanasius  cites  it,  calls  it  a  most  useful
work,  and  observes,  that  though  it  was  not  strictly  canonical,  the  Fathers
appointed  it  to  be  read  for  direction  and  confirmation  in  faith  and  piety.
Jerome,  notwithstanding  this,  and  that  he  applauded  it  in  his  catalogue  of
writers,  in  his  comments  upon  it  afterwards,  terms  it  apocryphal  and  foolish.
Tertuliian  praised  it  when  a  Catholic,  and  abused  it  when  a  Montanist.
Although  Gelasius  ranks  it  among  the  apocryphal  books,  it  is  found  at-
tached to  some  of  the  most  ancient  MS.  of  the  New  Testament;  and  Arch-
bishop Wake,  believing  it  the  genuine  work  of  an  apostolic  Father,  pre-
serves it  to  the  English  reader  by  the  following  translation,  in  which  he  has
rendered  the  books  not  only  more  exact,  but  in  greater  purity  than  they
had  before  appeared.  The  Archbishop  procured  Dr.  Grabe  to  entirely  col-
late the  old  Latin  version  with  an  ancient  MS.  in  the  Lambeth  library ;  and
the  learned  prelate  himself  still  further  improved  the  whole  from  a  multi-
tude of  fragments  of  the  original  Greek  never  before  used  for  that  purpose.]


The  First  Book  of  HERMAS,
VISION  I.

1  Against  filthy  and  proud  thoughts,
20  also  the  neglect  of  Heiinas  in
chastising  his  children.

HE  who  had  bred  me  up  sold
a  certain  young  maid  at
Rome ;  whom  when  I  saw  many
years  after,  I  remembered  her,
and  began  to  love  her  as  a  sister.
It  happened  some  time  after-
wards, that  I  saw  her  washing  in
the  river  Tyber ;  and  I  reached
out  my  hand  unto  her,  and
brought  her  out  of  the  river.

2  And  when  I  saw  her  I
thought  with  myself,  saying,
How  happy  should  I  be  if  I  had
such  a  wife,  both  for  beauty  and
manners.  This  I  thought  with
myself;  nor  did  I  think  any
more.  But  not  long  after,  as  I
was  walking  and  musing  on  these
thoughts,  I  began  to  honour  this
creature  of  God,  thinking  with
myself ;  how  noble  and  beautiful
she  was.

3  And  when  I  had  walked  a
little,  I  fell  asleep.  And  the
spirit    caught    me     away,    and

'  In  MS.  Lambeth.  Prsecepta  sum  a  Domino  ut  peccata  tua  arguam  :  I
am  commanded  of  the  Lord  to  reprove  thee  for  thy  sins.  ^  In  MS.  Wilt
thou  accuse  me  ?

197


which  is  called  his  VISIONS.

carried  me  through  a  certain
place  toward  the  right-hand,
through  which  no  man  could
pass.  It  was  a  place  among
rocks,  very  steep,  and  unpassable
for  water.

4  When  I  was  past  this  place,
I  came  into  a  plain  ;  and  there
falling  down  upon  my  knees,  I
began  to  pray  unto  the  Lord,  and
to  confess  my  sins.

5  And  as  I  was  praying,  the
heaven  was  opened,  and  I  saw  the
woman  which  I  had  coveted,
saluting  me  from  heaven,  and
saying,  Hermas,  hail !  and  I  look-
ing upon  her,  answered.  Lady,
what  dost  thou  do  here?  She
answerered  me,  ^  I  am  taken  up
hither  to  accuse  thee  of  sin  be-
fore the  Lord.

6  Lady,  said  I,  wilt  thou  *  con-
vince me?  No,  said  she:  but  hear
the  words  which  I  am  about  to
speak  unto  thee.  God  who  dwell-
eth  in  heaven,  and  hath  made  all
things  out  of  nothing,  and  hath
multiplied  them  for  his  holy
church's  sake,  is  angry  with  thee


Against  filthy


I.  HEEMAS.  and  proud  thoughts.


because  thou  hast  sinned  against
me.

7  And  I  answering  said  unto
her,  Lady,  if  I  have  sinned
against  thee,  tell  me  where,  or  in
what  place,  or  when  did  I  ever
speak  an  unseemly  or  dishonest
word  unto  thee  ?

8  Have  I  not  always  esteemed
thee  as  a  lady  ?  Have  I  not  al-
ways reverenced  thee  as  a  sister  ?
Why  then  dost  thou  imagine
these  wicked  things  against  me  ?

9  Then  she,  smiling  upon  me,
said  :  the  desire  of  naughtiness
has  risen  up  in  thy  heart.  Does
it  not  seem  to  thee  to  be  an  ill
thing  for  a  righteous  man  to  have
an  evil  desire  rise  up  in  his  heart?

10  It  is  indeed  a  sin,  and  that
a  very  great  one,  to  such  a  one ;
for  a  righteous  man  thinketh
that  which  is  righteous.  And
whilst  he  does  so,  and  walketh
uprightly,  he  shall  have  the
Lord  in  heaven  favorable  unto
him  in  all  his  business.

11  But  as  for  those  who  think
wickedly  in  their  hearts,  they
take  to  themselves  death  and
captivity ;  and  especially  those
who  love  this  present  world,  and
glory  in  their  riches,  and  regard
not  the  good  things  that  are  to
come ;  their  souls  wander  up
and  down,  and  know  not  where
to  fix.

12  Now  this  is  the  case  of
such  as  are  double-minded,  who
trust  not  in  the  Lord,  and  de-
spise and  neglect  their  own  life.

13  But  do  thou  pray  unto  the
Lord,  and  he  will  heal  thy  sins,
and  the  sins  of  thy  whole  house,
and  of  all  his  saints.

14  ^  As  soon  as  she  had
spoken  these  words  the  heavens
were  shut,  and  I  remained  utterly
swallowed  up  with  sadness  and
fear ;  and  said  within  myself,  if


this  be  laid  against  me  for  sin,
how  can  I  be  saved  ?

15  Or  how  shall  I  ever  be
able  to  entreat  the  Lord  for  my
many  and  great  sins?  With
what  words  shall  I  beseech  him
to  be  merciful  unto  me  ?

16  As  I  was  thinking  over
these  things,  and  meditating  in
m3''self  upon  them,  behold  a  chair
was  set  over  against  me  of  the
whitest  wool,  as  bright  as  snow.

17  And  there  came  an  old
woman  in  a  bright  garment,  hav-
ing a  book  in  her  hand,  and  sat
alone,  and  saluted  me,  saying,
^  Hermas,  hail !  and  I  being  full
of  sorrow,  and  weeping,  answer-
ed. Hail,  Lady  I

18  And  she  said  unto  me.
Why  art  thou  sad,  Hermas,  who
wert  wont  to  be  patient,  and
modest,  and  always  cheerful  ?  I
answered,  and  said  to  her.  Lady,
a  reproach  has  been  laid  to  my
charge  by  an  excellent  woman,
who  tells  me,  that  I  have  sinned
against  her.

19  She  replied.  Far  be  any
such  thing  from  the  servant  of
God.  But  it  may  be  the  desire
of  her  has  risen  up  in  thy  heart.
For  indeed  such  a  thought  maketh
the  servants  of  God  guilty  of  sin.

20  Nor  ought  such  a  detesta-
ble thought  to  be  in  the  servant
of  God  :  nor  should  he  who  is
approved  by  the  Spirit  desire
that  which  is  evil ;  but  especial-
ly Hermas,  who  contains  him-
self from  all  wicked  lusts,  and
is  full  of  all  simplicity,  and  of
great  innocence.

21  ^  Nevertheless  the  Lord
is  not  so  much  angry  with  thee
for  thine  own  sake,  as  upon  the
account  of  thy  house,  which  has
committed  wickedness  against  the
Lord,  and  against  their  parents.

22  And  for  that   out  of  thy


198


^  Vid.  Hieron  in  Hoseam,  vii.  9.


On  neglecting  to


VISION  II.


chastise  his  children.


fondness  towards  thy  sons,  thou
hast  not  admonished  thy  house,
but  hast  permitted  them  to  live
wickedly ;  for  this  cause  the  Lord
is  angry  with  thee:  but  he  will
heal  all  the  evils  that  are  done  in
thy  house.  For  through  their  sins
and  iniquities,  thou  art  wholly
consumed  in  secular  affairs.

23  But  now  the  mercy  of  God
hath  taken  compassion  upon
thee,  and  upon  thine  house,  and
hath  ^greatly  comforted  thee.
Only  as  for  thee,  do  not  wander,
but  be  of  an  even  mind,  and
comfort  thy  house.

24  As  the  workman  bringing
forth  his  work,  offers  it  to  whom-
soever he  pleaseth ;  so  shalt  thou
by  teaching  every  day  what  i§
just  cut  of!' a  great  sin.  Where-
fore cease  not  to  admonish  thy
sons,  for  the  Lord  knows  that
they  will  repent  with  all  their
heart,  '^  and  they  shall  be  written
in  the  book  of  life.

25  And  when  she  had  said
this,  she  added  unto  me ;  Wilt
thou  hear  me  read  ? — I  answered
her.  Lady,  I  will.

26  Hear  then,  said  she;  and
opening  the  book  she  read,  glo-
riously, greatly,  and  wonderful-
ly, such  things  as  I  could  not


by  this  powerful  virtue  estab-
lished his  Holy  Church,  which
he  hath  blessed.

29  Behold  he  will  remove  the
heavens,  and  the  mountains,  the
hills,  and  the  seas  ;  and  all  things
shall  be  made  plain  for  his  elect ;
that  he  may  render  unto  them  the
promise  which  he  has  promised,
with  much  honour  and  joy  ;  if  so
be  that  they  shall  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God,  which  they
have  received  with  great  faith.

30  1  And  when  she  had  made
an  end  of  reading,  she  rose  out
of  the  chair ;  and  behold  four
young  men  came,  and  carried
the  chair  to  the  east.

31  And  she  called  me  unto  her,
and  touched  my  breast,  and  said
unto  me,  Did  my  reading  please
thee  ?  I  answered.  Lady,  these
last  things  please  me  ;  but  what
went  before  was  severe  and  hard.

32  She  said  unto  me,  these
last  things  are  for  Hhe  righteous,
but  the  foregoing  for  the  revol-
ters  and  heathen.

33  And  as  she  was  talking  with
me,  two  men  appeared,  and  took
her  upon  their  shoulders  and  went
to  the  east  where  the  chair  was.

34  And  she  went  cheerfully
away ;  and   as   she   was   going.


keep  in  my  memory.     For  they  \  said   unto   me,   Hermas,  be   of

good  cheer.

VISION  II.

Again,  of  his  neglect  in  correcting  hi^
talkative  wife ;  and  of  his  lewd  sons*

AS  I  was  on  the  way  to  Cuma,
about  the  same  time  that
I  went  the  year  before,  I  began
to  call  to  mind  the  vision  I  for-
merly had.  And  again  the  spirit
carried  me  away,  and  brought
me  into  the  same  place,  in  which
I  had  been  the  year  before.

2  And  when  I  was  come  into
the  place,  I  fell  down  upon  my

preserved  thee  in  honour.     ^  So.  MSS.
^  Edit.  Oxon.    *  Et  ejus  modo.
199


were  terrible  words,  such  as  no
man  could  bear.

27  Howbeit  I  committed  her
last  words  to  my  remembrance  ;
for  they  were  but  few,  and  of
great  use  to  us.

28  Behold  the  mighty  Lord,
who  by  his  invisible  power,  and
with  his  excellent  wisdom  made
the  world,  and  by  his  glorious
counsel  beautified  his  creature,
51  nd  with  the  word  of  his  strength
fixed  the  heaven,  and  founded
the  earth  upon  the  waters ;  and

^  In  Glory.     Edit.     Oxoi^.     Hath
Lamb.  Et  describentur  in  hbre  ritae


Of  his  neglect  to


I.  HERMAS.      correct  his  talkative  wife.


knees,  aud  began  to  pray  unto
the  Lord,  and  to  glorify  his
name,  that  he  had  esteemed  me
worthy,  and  had  manifested  unto
me  my  former  sins.

3  And  when  I  arose  from
prayer,  behold  I  saw  over  against
me  the  old  woman  whom  I  had
seen  the  last  year,  walking  and
reading  in  a  certain  book.

4  And  she  said  unto  me.  Canst
thou  tell  these  things  to  the  elect
of  God?  I  answered  and  said
unto  her,  Lady,  I  cannot  retain
so  many  things  in  my  memory,
but  give  me  the  book,  and  I  will
write  them  down.

5  Take  it,  says  she,  and  see
that  thou  restore  it  again  to  me.

6  As  soon  as  I  had  received  it,
I  went  aside  into  a  certain  place
of  the  field,  and  transcribed  every
letter,  for  I  found  no  syllables.

7  And  as  soon  as  I  had  fin-
ished what  was  written  in  the
book,  the  book  was  suddenly
caught  out  of  my  hand,  but  by
whom  I  saw  not.

8  ^  After  fifteen  days,  when
I  had  fasted,  and  entreated  the
Lord  with  all  earnestness,  the
knowledge  of  the  writing  was  re-
vealed unto  me.  Now  the  writ-
ing was  this :

9  Thy  seed,  O  Hermas !  hath
sinned  against  the  Lord,  and
have  betrayed  their  parents,
through  their  great  wickedness.
And  they  have  been  called  the
betrayers  of  their  parents,  and
have  gone  on  in  their  treachery.

10  And  now  have  they  added
lewdness  to  their  other  sins,  and
the  pollutions  of  their  naughti-
ness :  thus  have  they  filled  up  the
measure  of  their  iniquities.  But
do  thou  ^  upbraid  thy  sons  with
all  these  words ;    and  thy  wife,


which  shall  be  thy  sister  ;  and  let
her  learn  to  refrain  her  tongue,
with  which  she  calumniates.

11  And  when  she  shall  hear
these  things,  she  will  refrain  her-
self, and  shall  obtain  mercy.

12  And  ^they  also  shall  be
instructed,  when  thou  shalt  have
reproached  them  with  these
words,  which  the  Lord  has  com-
manded to  be  revealed  unto  thee.

13  Then  shall  their  sins  be  for-
given, which  they  have  hereto-
fore committed,  and  the  sins  of  all
the  saints  who  have  sinned  even
unto  this  day ;  if  they  shall  repent
with  all  their  hearts,  and  remove
all  doubts  out  of  their  hearts.

14  For  the  Lord  hath  sworn
by  his  glory  concerning  his  *elect,
having  determined  this  very  time,
that  if  any  one  shall  ^  even  now
sin,  he  shall  not  be  saved.

15  For  the  repentance  of  the
righteous  has  its  end ;  the  days
of  repentance  are  fulfilled  to  all
the  saints  ;  but  to  the  heathen,
there  is  repentance  even  unto
the  last  day.

16  Thou  shalt  therefore  say  to
those  who  are  over  the  church ;
that  they  order  their  ways  in
righteousness,  that  they  may
fully  receive  the  promise  with
much  glory.

17  Stand  fast  therefore  ye  that
work  righteousness  and  continue
to  do  it,  that  your  departure
may  be  with  the  holy  angels.

18  Happy  are  ye,  as  many  as
shall  endure  the  great  trial  that
is  at  hand,  and  whosoever  shall
not  deny  his  life.

19  For  the  Lord  hath  sworn
by  his  Son,  that  whoso  denieth
his  Son  and  him,  being  afraid  of
his  life,  he  will  also  deny  him  in
the  ^  world  that  is  to  come.

Impropera.       'So  one  MS.  in  Coteler.  Edit.


^Clem.  Alex.  Strom.  ^  ^

Oxen.     And  she,  &c.     ■•  Day.     Praefinita  ista  die  etiam  nunc  si  peceaverit
aiiquis  Lat.     *  Shall  sin  after  it.     ^  Davs  that  are  coming.

200


Of  ^^8  neglect  to


VISION  III.


correct  his  children.


20  But  those  who  shall  never
deny  him,  he  will  of  his  exceed-
ing great  mercy  be  favourable
unto  them.

21  T[  But  thou,  O  Hermas  !
remember  not  the  ^  evils  which
thy  sons  have  done,  neither  ne-
glect thy  sister,  but  take  care
that  they  amend  of  their  former
sins.

22  For  they  will  be  instructed
by  this  doctrine,  if  thou  shalt
not  be  mindful  of  what  they  have
done  wickedly.

23  For  the  remembrance  of
evils  worketh  death,  but  the  for-
getting of  them  life  eternal.

24  But  thou,  O  Hermas !  hast
undergone  a  great  many  worldly
troubles  for  the  offences  of  thy
house,  because  thou  hast  ne-
glected them,  as  things  that  did
not  belong  unto  thee  ;  and  thou
art  wholly  taken  up  with  thy
great  business.

25  Nevertheless,  for  this  cause
shalt  thou  be  saved,  that  thou
hast  not  departed  from  the  living
God,  and  thy  simplicity  and  sin-
gular continency  shall  preserve
thee,  if  thou  shalt  continue  in
them.

26  Yea,  they  shall  save  all
such  as  do  such  things,  and  walk
in  innocence  and  simplicity.

27  They  who  are  of  this  kind
shall  prevail  against  all  impiety,
and  continue  until  life  eternal.

28  Happy  are  all  they  that
do  righteousness,  they  shall  not
be  consumed  for  ever.

29  But  thou  wilt  say.  Behold
there  is  a  great  trial  coming.  If  it
seem  good  to  thee,  deny  him
again.

30  The  Lord  is  nigh  to  them
that  turn  to  him,  as  it  is  written
in   the   book   of  '  Heldam   and


Modal,  who  prophesied   to   the
people  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness.

31  1  Moreover,  brethren,  it
was  revealed  to  me,  as  I  was
sleeping,  by  a  very  goodly  young
man,  saying  unto  me.  What
thinkest  thou  of  that  old  woman
from  whom  thou  receivedst  the
book  ;  who  is  she  ?  I  answered,
a  Sybil.

32  Thou  art  mistaken,  said
he,  she  is  not.  I  replied.  Who
is  she  then,  sir  ?  He  answered
me.  It  is  the  church  of  God.

33  And  I  said  unto  him.  Why
then  does  she  appear  old  ?  She  is
therefore,  said  he,  an  old  wo-
man, because  she  was  ^  the  first
of  all  the  creation,  and  the  world
was  made  for  her.

34  After  this  I  saw  a  vision
at  home  in  my  own  house,  and  the
old  woman  whom  I  had  seen  be-
fore, came  to  me  and  asked  me,
whether  I  had  yet  delivered  *  her
book  to  the  elders  of  the  church?
And  I  answered,  that  I  had  not
yet.

35  She  replied.  Thou  hast  well
done,  for  I  have  certain  words
more  to  tell  thee  But  when  I
shall  have  finished  all  the  words,
they  shall  be  clearly  understood
by  the  elect.

36  ^  And  thou  shalt  write  two
books,  and  send  one  to  Clement
and  one  to  Grapte.  For  Clement
shall  send  it  to  the  foreign  cities,
because  it  is  permitted  to  him  so
to  do  :  but  Grapte  shall  admon-
ish the  widows  and  orphans.

37  But  thou  shalt  read  in  this
city  with  the  elders  of  the  church.

VISION  III.

Of  the  building  of  the  church  triumphant,
and  of  the  several  sorts  of  reprobates.

THE  vision  which  I  saw,  bre-
thren, was  this.


1  Injuries.  ^Eldad  and  Medad.  Numb.  xi.  26,  27.  'See  Dr.  Grabe's
Annot.  to  Bishop  Bull's  Def.  Fid.  Nic.  p.  24.  Fol.  de  S.  Herma.  *Suum
is  added  in  the  Lambeth  MS.     ^  Origen.     Piiilocal,  cap.  1.

201


Of  the  church


I.  HERMAS.


triumphant.


2  When  I  had  often  fasted
and  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  that
he  would  manifest  unto  me  the
revelation,  which  he  had  pro-
mised by  the  old  woman  to  shew
unto  me;  the  same  night  she  ap-
peared unto  me,  and  said  unto  me:

3  Because  thou  dost  thus  af-
flict thyself,  and  art  so  desirous
to  know  all  things,  come  into
the  field,  where  thou  wilt,  and
about  the  sixth  hour,  I  will  ap-
pear unto  thee,  and  shew  thee
what  thou  must  see.

4 1  asked  her, saying:  Lady, in-
to what  part  of  the  field?  She  an-
swered, wherever  thou  wilt,  only
choose  a  good  and  a  private  place.
And  before  I  began  to  speak  and
tell  her  the  place,  she  said  unto
me :  I  will  come  where  thou  wilt.

5  I  was  therefore,  brethren,  in
the  field,  and  I  observed  the  hours
and  came  into  the  place  where  I
had  appointed  her  to  come.

6  And  I  beheld  a  bench  placed ;
it  was  a  linen  pillow,  and  over  it
spread  a  covering  of  fine  linen.

7  When  I  saw  these  things
ordered  in  this  manner,  and  that
there  was  nobody  in  the  place,  I
began  to  be  astonished,  and  my
hair  stood  on  end,  and  a  kind  of
horror  seized  me ;  for  I  was  alone.

8  But,  being  come  to  myself,
and  calling  to  mind  the  glory  of
Gjd,  and  taking  courage,  I  fell
down  upon  my  knees,  and  began
again  to  confess  my  sins  as  before.

9  And  whilst  I  was  doing  this,
the  old  woman  came  thither  with
the  six  young  men  whom  I  had
seen  before,  and  stood  behind
me  as  I  was  praying,  and  heard
me  praying  and  confessing  ray
sins  unto  the  Lord.

10  And  touching  me,  she  said:
Leave  off*  to  pray  now  only  for
thy  sins ;  pray  also  for  righteous-
ness, that  thou  mayest  receive  a
part  of  her  in  thy  house.

202


11  And  she  lifted  me  up  from
the  place,  and  took  me  by  the
hand,  and  brought  me  to  the
seat;  and  said  to  the  young
men  ;  go,  and  build.

12  As  soon  as  they  were  de-
parted, and  we  were  alone,  she
said  unto  me:  sit  here.  I  an-
swered her :  Lady,  let  those  who
are  elder  sit  first.  She  replied,
Sit  down  as  I  bid  you.

13  And  when  I  would  have  sat
on  the  right  side,  she  suffered  me
not,  but  made  a  sign  to  me  with  her
hand,  that  I  should  sit  on  the  left.

14  As  I  was  therefore  musing,
and  full  of  sorrow,  that  she
would  not  suffer  me  to  sit  on  the
right  side,  she  said  unto  me,
Hermas,  why  art  thou  sad  ?

15  The  place  which  is  on  the
right  hand  is  theirs  who  have
already  attained  unto  God,  and
have  suffered  for  his  name- sake.
But  there  is  yet  a  great  deal  re-
maining unto  thee,  before  thou
canst  sit  with  them.

16  But  continue  as  thou  doest
in  thy  sincerity,  and  thou  shalt
sit  with  them :  as  all  others  shall
that  do  their  works,  and  shall
bear  what  they  have  borne.

17  ^  I  said  to  her:  Lady,  I
would  know  what  it  is  that  they
have  suffered  ?  Hear  then,  said
she:  wild  beasts,  scourgings,  im-
prisonments, and  crosses  for  his
name-sake.

18  For  this  cause  the  right
hand  of  holiness  belongs  to  them,
and  to  all  others  as  many  as
shall  suflTer  for  the  name  of  God ;
but  the  left  belongs  to  the  rest.

19  Howbeit  the  gifts  and  the
promises  belong  to  both,  to  them
on  the  right,  and  to  those  on  the
left  hand;  only  that  sitting  on
the  right  hand  they  have  some
glory  above  the  others.

20  But  thou  art  desirous  to
sit  on  the  right  hand  with  them,


OJthe  Church


VISION  III.


Triumphant,


and  yet  thy  ^  defects  are  many.
But  thou  shalt  be  purged  from
thy  defects,  as  also  all  who  doubt
not  shall  be  cleansed  from  all
the  sins  which  they  have  com-
mitted unto  this  day.

21  And  when  she  had  said
this  she  would  have  departed.

22  Wherefore,  falling  down
before  her  feet,  I  began  to  en-
treat her,  for  the  Lord's  sake,
that  she  would  shew  me  the
vision  which  she  had  promised.

23  Then  she  again  took  me
by  the  hand,  and  lifted  me  up,
and  made  me  sit  upon  the  seat
on  the  left  side ;  and  holding  up
a  certain  bright  wand,  said  unto
me,  Seest  thou  that  great  thing  ?
I  replied.  Lady,  I  see  nothing.

24  She  answered.  Dost  thou
not  see  over  against  thee  a  great
tower,  which  is  built  upon  the
water,  with  bright  square  stones?

25  For  the  tower  was  built
upon  a  square  by  these  six  young
men  that  came  with  lier.

26  But  many  thousand  of  other
men  brought  stones ;  some  drew
them  out  of  the  deep,  others  car-
ried them  from  the  ground,  and
gave  them  to  the  six  young  men.
And  they  took  them  and  built.

27  As  for  those  stones  which
were  drawn  out  of  the  deep,  they
put  them  all  into  the  building ;
for  they  were  polished,  and  their
squares  exactly  answered  one
another,  and  so  one  was  joined
in  such  wise  to  the  other,  that
there  was  no  space  to  be  seen
where  they  joined,  insomuch  that
the  whole  tower  appeared  to  be
built  as  it  were  of  one  stone.

28  But  as  for  the  other  stones
that  were  taken  off  from  the
ground,  some  of  them  they  re-
jected, others  they  fitted  into  the
building.


29  As  for  those  which  were
rejected,  some  they  cut  out,  and
cast  them  at  a  distance  from  the
tower  ;  but  many  others  of  them
lay  round  about  the  tower,  which
they  made  no  use  of  in  the
building.

30  For  some  of  these  were
rough,  others  had  clefts  in  them,
others  were  white  and  round,
not  proper  for  the  building  of
the  tower.

31  But  I  saw  the  other  stones
cast  afar  off  from  the  tower,  and
falling  into  the  high-way,  and
yet  not  continuing  in  the  way,
but  were  rolled  from  the  way
into  a  desert  place.

32  Others  I  saw  falling  into
the  fire  and  burning ;  others  fell
near  the  water,  yet  could  not  roll
themselves  into  it,  though  very
desirous  to  fall  into  the  water.

33  T[  And  when  she  had  shewed
me  these  things  she  would  have
departed:  but  I  said  to  her,
Lady,  what  doth  it  profit  me  to
see  these  things,  and  not  under-
stand what  they  mean  ?

34  She  answered  and  said
unto  me:  You  are  very  cunning,
in  that  you  are  desirous  to  know
those  things  which  ^relate  to  the
tower.  Yea,  said  I,  Lady,  that
I  may  declare  them  unto  the
brethren,  and  they  may  rejoice,
and  hearing  these  things  may
glorify  God  with  great  glory.

35  Then  she  said,  Many  in-
deed shall  hear  them,  and  when
they  shall  have  heard  them,
some  shall  rejoice,  and  others
weep.  And  yet  even  these,  if  they
shall  repent,  shall  rejoice  too.

36  Hear  therefore  what  I  shall
say  concerning  the  parable  of
the  tower,  and  after  this  be  no
longer  importunate  with  me
about  the  revelation.


Lat.  Exiguitatas.


'  Are  about.


203


and  of  several


I.  HERMAS.


sorts  of  reprobates.


37  For  these  revelations  have
an  end,  seeing  they  are  fulfilled.
But  thou  dost  not  leave  oiF  to
desire  revelations,  for  thou  art
very  ^  urgent.

38  As  for  the  tower  which  thou
seest  built,  it  is  myself,  namely
the  church,  which  have  appeared
to  thee  both  now  and  heretofore.
Wherefore  ask  what  thou  wilt
concerning  the  tower,  and  I  will
reveal  it  unto  thee,  that  thou
mayst  rejoice  with  the  saints.

39  I  said  unto  her,  Lady,  be-
cause thou  hast  thought  me  once
worthy  to  receive  from  thee  the
revelation  of  all  these  things,
declare  them  unto  me.

40  She  answered  me.  Whatso-
ever is  fit  to  be  revealed  unto  thee
shall  be  revealed  :  ^  only  let  thy
heart  be  with  the  Lord,  and  doubt
not,  whatsoever  thou  shalt  see.

41  I  asked  her,  Lady,  why  is
the  tower  built  upon  the  'water?
She  replied,  I  said  before  to  thee
that  thou  wert  very  wise  to  in-
quire diligently  concerning  the
building,  therefore  thou  shalt
find  the  truth.

42  Hear  therefore  why  the
tower  is  built  upon  the  water :
because  your  life  is  and  shall  be
saved  by  water.  For  *  it  is  found-
ed by  the  word  of  the  almighty
and  honourable  name,  and  is
supported  by  the  invisible  power
and  virtue  of  God.

43  ^  And  I  answering,  said
unto  her,  These  things  are  very
admirable ;  but,  lady,  who  are
those  six  young  men  that  build  ?

44  They  are,  said  she,  the
angels  of  God,  which  were  first
appointed,  and  to  whom  the  Lord
has  delivered  all  his  creatures,  to
frame  and  build  them  up,  and  to
rule  over  them.  For  by  these
the  building  of  the  tower  shall
be  finished.


45  And  who  are  the  rest  who
bring  them  stones  ?

46  They  also  are  the  holy  an-
gels of  the  Lord ;  but  the  other  are
more  excellent  than  these.  Where-
fore when  the  whole  building  of
the  tower  shall  be  finished,  they
shall  all  feast  together  beside  the
tower,  and  shall  glorify  God,
because  the  structure  of  the  tower
is  finished.

47  I  asked  her,  saying,  I
would  know  the  condition  of  the
stones,  and  the  meaning  of  them,
what  it  is  ?

48  She  answering,  said  unto
me,  Art  thou  better  than  all
others  that  this  should  be  re-
vealed unto  thee?  For  others
are  both  before  thee,  and  better
than  thou  art,  to  whom  these
visions  should  be  made  mani-
fest.

49  Nevertheless,  that  the  name
of  God  may  be  glorified,  it  has
been,  and  shall  be  revealed  unto
thee,  for  the  sake  of  those  who
are  doubtful,  and  think  in  their
hearts  whether  these  things  are
so  or  not.

50  Tell  them  that  all  these
things  are  true,  and  that  there  is
nothing  in  them  that  is  not  true ;
but  all  are  firm  and  truly  estab-
lished.

51  T  Hear  now  then  concen:-
ing  the  stones  that  are  in  the
building.

52  The  square  and  white  stones
which  agree  exactly  in  their  joints,
are  the  apostles,  and  bishops,
and  doctors,  and  ministers,  who
through  the  mercy  of  God  have
come  in,  and  governed,  and
taught  and  ministered  holily  and
modestly  to  the  elect  of  God,
both  they  that  have  fallen
asleep,  and  which  yet  remain  ;
and  have  always  agreed  with
them,  and  have  had  peace  within


^  Edit.  Oxon.     ^ciem.  Alex.  Strom,  xii.    ^  Baptism.  *  Namely,  the  tower.
204


Oj  ike  church


VISION  III.


triumphant^


themselves,  and  have  heard  each
other.

53  For  which  cause  their
joints  exactly  meet  together  in
the  building  of  the  tower.

54  They  which  are  drawn  out
of  the  deep  and  put  into  the
building,  and  whose  joints  agree
with  the  other  stones  which  are
already  built,  are  those  which
are  already  fallen  asleep,  and
have  suffered  for  the  sake  of  the
Lord's  name.

bb  And  what  are  the  other
stones,  lady,  that  are  brought
from  the  earth  ?  I  would  know
what  are  they.

56  She  answered,  They  which
lie  upon  the  ground  and  are  not
2jolished,  are  those  which  God
has  approved,  because  they  have
walked  in  ^  the  law  of  the  Lord,
and  directed  their  ways  in  his
commandments.

57  They  which  are  brought
and  put  in  the  building  of  the
tower,  are  the  young  in  faith
and  the  faithful.  And  these  are
admonished  by  the  angels  to  do
well  because  that  iniquity  is  not
found  in  them.

58  But  who  are  those  whom
they  rejected,  and  laid  beside
the  tower  ?

59  They  are  such  as  have  sin-
ned and  are  willing  to  repent ;
for  which  cause  they  are  not  cast
far  from  the  tower,  because  they
will  be  useful  for  the  building,
if  they  shall  repent.

60  They  therefore  that  are  yet
to  repent,  if  they  shall  repent,
shall  become  strong  in  the  faith  ;
that  is,  if  they  repent  now,  whilst
the  tower  is  building.  For  if  the
building  shall  be  finished  there
will  then  be  no  place  for  them
to  be  put  in,  but  they  shall  be
rejected;    for  he   only  has  this


privilege  who  shall  now  be  put
into  the  tower.

61  ^  But  would  you  know
who  they  are  that  were  cut  out,
and  cast  afar  off  from  the  tower  ?
*  Lady,  said  I,  I  desire  it.

62  They  are  the  children  of
iniquity,  who  believed  only  in
hypocrisy,  but  departed  not  from
their  evil  ways  ;  for  this  cause
they  shall  not  be  saved,  because
they  are  not  of  any  use  in  the
building  by  reason  of  their  sins.

63  Wherefore  they  are  cut  out,
and  cast  afar  off,  because  of  the
anger  of  the  Lord,  and  because
they  have  provoked  him  to  angtr
against  them.

64  As  for  the  great  number  of
other  stones  which  thou  hast
seen  placed  about  the  tower,  but
not  put  into  the  buildings  ;  those
which  are  rugged,  are  they  who
have  known  the  truth,  but  have
not  continued  in  it,  nor  been
joined  to  the  saints,  and  there-
fore are  unprofitable.

65  Those  that  have  clefts  in
them,  are  they  that  keep  up  dis-
cord in  their  hearts  against  each
other,  and  live  not  in  peace ;  that
are  friendly  when  present  with
their  brethren,  but  as  soon  as
they  are  departed  from  one
another,  their  wickedness  still
continues  in  their  hearts  :  these
are  the  clefts  which  are  seen  in
those  stones.

QQ  Those  that  are  maimed  and
short,  are  they  who  have  be-
lieved indeed,  but  still  are  in
great  measure  full  of  wicked-
ness :  for  this  cause  they  are
maimed  and  not  whole.

67  But  what  are  the  white
and  round  stones,  lady,  'and
which  are  not  proper  for  the
building  of  the  tower  ?

68  She   answering   said  unto


^  In  sequitatem  Domini,  Lat.        '  Edit.  Oxon.


205


and  of  several


I.  HERMAS.


sorts  of  reprobates.


me :  How  long  wilt  thou  con-
tinue foolish  and  without  under-
standing, asking  everything  and
discerning  nothing  ?

69  They  are  such  as  have
faith  indeed,  but  have  withal
the  riches  of  this  present  world.
When  therefore  any  ^  troubles
arise,  for  the  sake  of  their  riches
and  traffic,  they  deny  the  Lord.

70  I  answering,  said  unto  her,
When  therefore  will  they  be  pro-
fitable to  the  Lord  ?  W^hen  their
riches  shall  be  cut  away,  says
she,  in  which  they  take  delight,
then  they  will  be  profitable  unto
the  Lord  for  his  building.

71  For  as  a  round  stone,  un-
less it  be  cut  away,  and  cast
somewhat  off,  its  bulk  cannot  be
made  square,  so  they  who  are
rich  in  this  world,  unless  their
riches  be  pared  off,  cannot  be
made  profitable  unto  the  Lard.

72  Learn  this  from  thy  own
experience ;  when  thou  wert
rich,  thou  wast  unprofitable ;
but  now  thou  art  profitable,  and
fit  for  the  life  which  thou  hast
undertaken;  for  thou  also  once
wast  one  of  those  stones.

73  ^  As  for  the  rest  of  the
stones  which  thou  sawest  cast
afar  off  from  the  tower,  and
running  in  the  way,  and  tum-
bled out  of  the  way  into  desert
places,  they  are  such  as  have  be-
lieved indeed,  but  through  their
doubting  have  forsaken  the  true
way,  thinking  that  they  could
find  a  better.  But  they  wander
and  are  miserable,  going  into
desolate  ways.

74  Then  for  those  stones
which  fell  into  the  fire  and  were
burfit,  they  are  those  who  have
^  for  ever  departed  from  the  liv-
ing God  ;  nor  doth  it  ever  come
into  their  hearts  to  repent,  by
reason    of    the    affection   which


they   bear   to   their    lusts    and
wickednesses  which  they  commit.

75  And  what  are  the  rest
which  fell  by  the  water,  and
could  not  roll  into  the  water  ?

76  They  are  such  as  have
heard  the  word,  and  were  wil-
ling to  be  baptized  in  the  name
of  the  Lord ;  but  considering
the  great  holiness  which  the
truth  requires,  have  withdrawn
themselves,  and  walked  again
after  their  wicked  lusts.

77  Thus  she  finished  the  ex-
plication of  the  tower.

78  But  I  being  still  urgent,
asked  her,  Is  there  repentance
allowed  to  all  those  stones  which
are  thus  cast  away,  and  were  not
suitable  to  the  building  of  the
tower ;  and  shall  they  find  place
in  this  tower  ?

79  They  may  repent,  said
she,  but  they  cannot  come  into
this  tower ;  but  they  shall  be
placed  in  a  much  lower  rank,
and  this  after  that  they  shall
have  been  afflicted,  and  fulfilled
the  days  of  their  sins.

80  And  for  this  cause  they
shall  be  removed,  because  they
have  received  the  word  of  right-
eousness :  and  then  they  shall
be  translated  from  their  afflic-
tions, if  they  shall  have  a  true
sense  in  their  hearts  of  what
they  have  done  amiss.

81  But  if  they  shall  not  have
this  sense  in  their  hearts,  they
shall  not  be  saved  by  reason  of
the  hardness  of  their  hearts.

82  When  therefore  I  had
done  asking  her  concerning  all
these  things,  she  said  unto  me,
Wilt  thou  see  somewhat  else?
And  being  desirous  of  seeing  it,
I  became  very  cheerful  of  coun-
tenance.

83  She  therefore  looking  back


Tribulation  arises.


206


Finally.


0/  the  church


VISION  III.


triumphant


upon  me,  and  smiling  a  little,
said  unto  me,  Seest  thou  seven
women  about  the  tower  ?  Lady,
said  I,  I  see  them.

84  This  tower,  replied  she,  is
supported  by  them,  according  to
the  command  of  the  Lord  :  hear
therefore  the  effects  of  them.

85  The  first  of  them,  which
holds  fast  with  her  hand,  is
called  Faith,  by  her  the  elect
shall  be  saved.  The  next,  which
is  girt  up,  and  looks  manly,  is
named  Abstinence :  she  is  the
daughter  of  Faith.

86  Whosoever  therefore  shall
follow  her  shall  be  happy  in  all
his  life,  because  he  shall  abstain
from  all  evil  works,  believing  that
if  he  shall  contain  himself  from
all  concupiscence,  he  shall  be  the
heir  of  eternal  life.  And  what,
lady,  said  I,  are  the  other  five  ?

87  They  are,  replied  she,  the
daughters  of  one  another.  The
first  of  them  is  called  Simplicity ;
the  next  Innocence ;  the  third
Modesty  ;  then  Discipline  ;  and
the  last  of  all  is  Charity.  When
therefore  thou  shalt  have  fulfilled
the  works  of  their  mother,  thou
shalt  be  able  to  do  all  things.

88  Lady,  said  I,  I  would  know
what  particular  virtue  every  one
of  these  has.

89  Hear  then,  replied  she;
they  have  equal  virtues,  and
their  virtues  are  knit  together,
and  follow  one  another  as  they
were  born.

90  From  Faith  proceeds  Ab-
stinence ;  from  Abstinence,  Sim-
plicity ;  from  Simplicity,  Inno-
cence; from  Innocence,  Modesty ;
from  Modesty,  Discipline  and
Charity.  Therefore  the  works
of  these  are  holy,  and  chaste,
and  right.

91  Whoever  therefore  shall
serve  these,  and  hold  fast  to
their   works,  he  shall  have   his


dwelling  in  the  tower  with  the
saints  of  God.

.92  Then  I  asked  her  concern-
ing the  times,  whether  the  end
were  now  at  hand  ;

93  But  she  cried  out  with  a
loud  voice,  saying,  O  foolish  man  !
Dost  thou  not  see  the  tower  yet  a
building  ?  When  therefore  the
tower  shall  be  finished,  and  built,
it  shall  have  an  end  ;  and  indeed
it  shall  soon  be  accomplished.

94  But  do  not  ask  me  any
more  questions.  What  has  been
said  may  suflSce  thee  and  all  the
saints  for  the  refreshment  of  your
spirits.  For  these  things  have
not  been  revealed  to  thee  only,
but  that  thou  mayest  make  them
manifest  unto  all.

95  For  therefore,  O  Hernias,
after  three  days  thou  must  un-
derstand these  words  which  I  be-
gin to  speak  unto  thee,  that  thou
mayest  speak  them  in  the  ears  of
the  saints  ;  that  when  they  shall
have  heard  and  done  them,  they
may  be  cleansed  from  their  ini-
quities, and  thou  together  with
them.

96  Hear  me  therefore,  0  my
sons !  I  have  bred  you  up  in
much  simplicity,  and  innocency,
and  modesty  for  the  love  of  God,
which  has  dropped  down  upon
you  in  righteousness,  that  you
should  be  sanctified  and  justified
from  all  sin  and  wickedness  ;  but
ye  will  not  cease  from  your  evil
doings.

97  Now  therefore  hearken
unto  me,  and  have  peace  one
with  another,  and  visit  one  an-
other, and  receive  one  another,
and  do  not  enjoy  the  creatures  of
God  alone.

98  Give  freely  to  them  that  are
in  need.  For  some  by  too  free
feeding  contract  an  infirmity  in
their  flesh,  and  do  injury  to  their
bodies ;  whilst  the  flesh  of  others,

207


and  of  several


I.  HERMAS.


sorts  of  reprobates.


who  have  not  food,  withers  away,
because  they  want  sufficient  nou-
rishment, and  the  bodies  are  con-
sumed.

99  Wherefore  this  intemper-
ance is  hurtful  to  you,  who  have,
and  do  not  communicate  to  them
that  want.  Prepare  for  the  judg-
ment that  is  about  to  come  upon
you.

100  Ye  that  are  the  more  emi-
nent, search  out  them  that  are
hungry,  whilst  the  tower  is  yet
unfinished.  For  when  the  tower
shall  be  finished,  ye  shall  be  wil-
ling to  do  good,  and  shall  not  find
any  place  in  it.

101  Beware,  therefore,  ye  that
glory  in  your  riches,  lest  perhaps
they  groan  who  are  in  want,  and
their  sighing  come  up  unto  God,
and  ye  be  shut  out  with  your
goods  without  the  gate  of  the
tower.

102  Behold  I  now  warn  you
who  are  set  over  the  church,  and
love  the  highest  seats,  be  not  ye
like  unto  those  that  work  mischief  '

103  And  they  indeed  carry]
about  their  poison  in  boxes,  but
ye  contain  your  poison  and  ^  in-
fection in  your  hearts,  and  will
not  purge  them,  and  mix  your
sense  with  a  pure  heart,  that  ye
may  find  mercy  with  the  Great
King.

104  Take  heed,  my  children,
that  your  dissensions  deprive  you
not  of  your  lives.  How  will  ye
instruct  the  elect  of  God,  when
ye  yourselves  want  correction?
Wherefore  admonish  one  an-
other, and  be  at  peace  among
yourselves,  that  I,  standing  be-
fore your  father,  may  give  an
account  for  you  unto  the  Lord.

105  T[  And  when  she  had  made
an  end  of  talking  with  me,  the
six  young  men  that  built,  came
and  carried  her  to  the  tower;


and  four  others  took  up  the  seat
on  which  she  sate,  and  they  also
went  away  again  to  the  tower.
I  saw  not  the  faces  of  these,  for
their  backs  were  towards  me.

106  As  she  was  going  away,  I
asked  her,  that  she  would  reveal
to  me  what  concerned  the  three
forms,  in  which  she  had  appeared
unto  me.

107  But  she  answering  said
unto  me,  concerning  these  things
thou  must  ask  some  other,  that
they  may  be  revealed  unto  thee.

108  Now,  brethren,  in  the  first
vision  the  last  year,  she  appeared
unto  me  exceeding  old,  and  sit-
ting in  a  chair.

109  In  another  vision,  she  had
indeed  a  youthful  face,  but  her
flesh  and  hair  were  old  ;  but  she
talked  with  me  standing,  and  was
more  cheerful  than  the  first  time.

110  In  the  third  vision,  she
was  in  all  respects  much  younger,
and  comely  to  the  eye;  only  she
had  the  hair  of  an  aged  person ;
yet  she  looked  cheerful,  and  sate
upon  a  seat.

111  I  was  therefore  very  sad
concerning  these  things,  until  I
might  understand  the  vision.

112  Wherefore  I  saw  the  same
old  woman  in  a  vision  of  the
night  saying  unto  me.  All  prayer
needeth  humiliation.  Fast,  there-
fore, and  thou  shalt  learn  from
the  Lord  that  which  thou  dost
ask.     I  fasted  therefore  one  day.

113  The  same  night  a  young
man  appeared  to  me  and  said,
Why  dost  thou  thus  often  desire
Revelations  in  thy  prayers  ?
Take  heed  that  by  asking  many
things,  thou  hurt  not  the  body.
Let  these  Revelations  suffice  thee.

114  Canst  thou  see  more  nota-
ble Revelations  than  those  which
thou  hast  already  received  ?

115  I  answered  and  said  unto


Medicaments.


208


MARY  SUPPORTING  THE  DEAD  CHRIST  ON  HER  KNEES.  [Page  74.

FROM   A   GREEK    PAINTING   IN   DISTEMPER    ON  WOOD:    TWELFTH    CENTURY.


Oj  several  sorts


VISION  III.


of  reprobates.


him,  Sir,  I  only  ask  tliis  one  thing
upon  the  account  of  the  three
figures  of  the  old  woman  that  ap-
peared to  me,  that  the  Revelation
may  be  complete.

116  He  answered  me,  You  are
not  without  understanding,  but  |
your  doubts  make  you  so ;  foras-
much as  you  have  not  your  heart
with  the  Lord.

117  I  replied  and  said,  But  we
shall  learn  these  things  more
carefully  from  you.

1 18  ^[  Hear  then,  says  he,  con-
cerning the  figures  about  which
you  inquire.

119  And  first,  in  the  first
vision  she  appeared  to  thee  in
the  shape  of  an  old  woman  sit-
ting in  a  chair,  because  your  old
spirit  was  decayed,  and  without
strength,  by  reason  of  your  in-
firmities, and  the  doubtfulness  of
your  heart.

120  For  as  they  who  are  old
have  no  hope  of  renewing  them-
selves, nor  expect  any  thing  but
their  departure ;  so  you  being
weakened  through  your  worldly
affairs  gave  yourself  up  to  sloth,
and  cast  not  away  your  solicitude
from  yourself  upon  the  Lord  :
and  your  sense  was  confused,
^  and  you  grow  old  in  your  sadness.

121  But,  sir,  I  would  know
why  she  sate  upon  a  chair  ?

122  He  answered,  because
every  one  that  is  weak  sitteth
upon  a  chair  by  reason  of  his
infirmity,  that  his  weakness  may
be  upheld.  Behold  therefore
the  figure  of  the  first  vision.

123  In  the  second  vision  you
saw  her  standing,  and  having  a
youthful  face,  and  more  cheerful
than  her  former ;  but  her  flesh
and  her  hair  were  ancient.  Hear,
said  he,  this  parable  also.

124  When  any  one  grows  old,
he  despairs  of  himself  by  reason

^Broken,  Contusus.
14


of  his  infirmity  and  poverty,  and
expects  nothing  but  the  last  day
of  his  life.

125  But  on  a  sudden  an  inher-
itance is  left  to  him,  and  he  hears
of  it,  and  rises;  and  being  be-
come cheerful,  he  puts  on  new
strength.  And  he  now  no  longer
sits  down,  but  stands,  and  is
delivered  from  his  former  sorrow ;
and  sits  not,  but  acts  manfully.

126  So  you,  having  heard  the
Revelation  which  God  revealed
unto  you  because  God  had  com-
passion upon  you,  and  renewed
your  spirit,  both  laid  aside  your
infirmities,  and  strength  came  to
you,  and  you  grew  strong  in  the
faith ;  and  God,  seeing  your
strength,  rejoiced.

127  For  this  cause  he  shewed
you  the  building  of  the  tower,
and  will  shew  other  things  unto
you,  if  you  shall  have  peace  with
all  your  heart  among  each  other.

128  But  in  the  third  vision  you
saw  her  yet  younger,  '^  fair  and
cheerful,  and  of  a  serene  coun-
tenance.

129  For  as  if  some  good  news
comes  to  him  that  is  sad,  he
straightway  forgets  his  sadness,,
and  regards  nothing  else  but  the
good  news  which  he  has  heard ;.
and  for  the  rest  he  is  comforted,,
and  his  spirit  is  renewed  through
the  joy  which  he  has  received :
even  so  you  have  been  refreshed
in  your  spirit  by  seeing  these
good  things.

130  And  for  that  you  saw  her
sitting  upon  a  bench,  it  denotes
a  strong  position  ;  because  a
bench  has  four  feet  and  stands
strongly.  And  even  the  world
itself  is  upheld  by  the  four  ele-
ments.

131  They  therefore  that  repent
perfectly,  shall  be  young ;  and
they   that  turn  from  their  sins


2  Honeslam.


209


Oj  the  tribulation


I.  HERMAS.


to  come.


with  their  whole  heart,  shall  be
established.

132  And  now  you  have  the
Revelation  fully,  ask  no  more  to
have  any  thing  farther  revealed
unto  you.

133  But  if  any  thing  be  to  be
revealed,  it  shall  be  made  mani-
fest unto  you.

VISION  IV.

Of  the  trial  and  tribulation  that  is  about
to  come  upon  men.

I  SAW  a  vision,  brethren,
twenty  days  after  the  former
vision ;  a  representation  of  the
tribulation  that  is  at  hand.  I
was  walking  in  the  field  way.

2  Now  from  the  public  way
to  the  place  whither  I  went  is
about  ten  furlongs ;  it  is  a  way
very  little  frequented :

3  And  as  I  was  walking  alone
I  entreated  the  Lord  that  he
would  confirm  the  Revelations
which  he  had  shewed  unto  me
by  his  holy  Church  :

4  And  would  grant  repent-
ance to  all  his  servants  who  had
been  offended,  that  his  great  and
honourable  name  might  be  glori-
fied, and  because  he  thought  me
worthy  ^  to  whom  he  might  shew
his  wonders,  and,  that  I  might
honour  him,  and  give  thanks
unto  him.

5  And  behold  somewhat  like
a  voice  answered  me ;  Doubt
not,  Hermas.  Wherefore  I  be-
gan to  think,  and  say  within  my-
self, why  should  I  doubt,  seeing
I  am  thus  settled  by  the  Lord,  and
have  seen  such  glorious  things?

6  I  had  gone  but  a  little  far-
ther, brethren,  when  behold  I
saw  a  dust  rise  up  to  heaven.  I
began  to  say  within  myself,  is
there  a  drove  of  cattle  coming,
that  raises  such  a  dust  ?


7  It  was  about  a  furlong  off
from  me.  And  behold  I  saw  the
dust  rise  more  and  more,  inso-
much that  I  began  to  suspect
that  there  was  ^  somewhat  extra-
ordinary in  it.

8  And  the  sun  shone  a  little  :
and  behold  I  saw  a  great  beast,  as
it  were  a  whale  ;  and  fiery  lo-
custs came  out  of  his  mouth.  The
height  of  the  beast  was  about  a
hundred  feet,  and  he  had  a  head
like  a  '  large  earthen  vessel.

9  I  began  to  weep,  and  to  pray
unto  the  Lord  that  he  would  de-
liver me  from  it.  Then  I  called
to  mind  the  word  which  I  had
heard  ;  Doubt  not,  Hermas.

10  Wherefore,  brethren,  put-
ting on  a  divine  faith,  and  remem-
bering who  it  was  that  had  taught
me  great  things,  I  delivered  my-
self bodily  unto  the  beast.

11  Now  the  beast  came  on  in
such  a  manner,  as  if  it  could  *at
once  have  devoured  a  city.

12  I  came  near  unto  it,  and
the  beast  extended  its  whole  bulk
upon  the  ground,  and  put  forth
nothing  but  its  tongue,  nor  once
moved  itself  till  I  had  quite
passed  by  it.

13  Now  the  beast  had  upon  its
head  four  colours  ;  first  black,
then  a  red  and  bloody  colour,
then  a  golden,  and  then  a  white.

14  ^  After  that  I  had  passed
by  it,  and  was  gone  forward
about  thirty  feet,  behold  there
met  me  a  certain  virgin,  well
adorned  as  if  she  had  been  just
come  out  of  her  bride  chamber,
all  in  white,  having  on  white
shoes,  and  a  veil  down  her  face,
and  covered  with   shining  hair.

15  Now  I  knew  by  my  former
visions  that  it  was  the  church,
and  thereupon  grew  the  more
cheerful.  She  saluted  me  saying,


That  he  would  shew  me.
210


"  Aliquid  divinitus.       ^  Vas.  urnale.     *  In  ictu.


Of  the  tribulation


VISION  IV.


to  come.


Hail,  O  Man !    I  returned  the
salutation,  saying,  Lady,  Hail!

16  She  answering  said  unto
me,  Did  nothing  meet  you,  O
man  ?  I  replied,  Lady,  there  met
me  such  a  beast,  as  seemed  able
to  devour  a  whole  people  ;  but  by
the  power  of  God,  and  through
his  singular  mercy,  I  escaped  it.

17  Thou  didst  escape  it  well,
said  she,  because  thou  didst  cast
thy  whole  care  upon  God,  and
opened  thy  heart  unto  him,  be-
lieving that  thou  couldst  be  safe
by  no  other  than  by  his  great
and  honourable  name.

18  For  this  cause  the  Lord
sent  his  angel,  who  is  over  the
beast,  whose  name  is  Hegrin,  and
stopped  his  mouth,  that  he  should
not  devour  thee.  Thou  hast
escaped  a  great  trial  through  thy
faith,  and  because  thou  didst  not
doubt  for  such  a  terrible  beast.

19  Go  therefore,  and  relate  to
the  elect  of  God  the  great  things
that  he  hath  done  for  thee.  And
thou  shalt  say  unto  them,  that
this  beast  is  the  figure  of  the
trial  that  is  about  to  come.

20  If  therefore,  ye  shall  have
prepared  yourselves,  ye  may  es-
cape it,  if  your  heart  be  pure
and  without  spot ;  and  if  ye  shall
serve  God  all  the  rest  of  your
days  without  complaint.

21  Cast  all  your  cares  upon
the  Lord,  and  he  will  direct
them.  Believe,  in  God,  ye  doubt-
ful, because  he  can  do  all  things ;
he  can  both  turn  away  his  wrath
from  you,  and  send  you  help  and
securitv.

22  Wo  to  the  doubtful,  to
those  who  shall  hear  these  words,
and  shall  despise  them :  it  had
been  better  for  them  that  they
had  not  been  born.

23  \  Then  I  asked  her  con-


cerning the  four  colours  which
the  beast  had  upon  its  head.  But
she  answered  me  saying ;  Again
thou  art  curious  in  that  thou
asketh  concerning  these  things.
But  I  said  to  her,  Lady,  shew
me  what  they  are.

24  Hear,  said  she ;  The  black
which  thou  sawest  denotes  the
world  in  which  you  dwell.  The
fiery  and  bloody  colour  signifies
that  this  age  must  be  destroyed
by  fire  and  blood.

25  The  golden  part  are  ye,
who  have  escaped  out  of  it.  For
as  gold  is  tried  by  the  fire,  and  is
made  profitable,  so  are  ye  also  in
like  manner  tried  who  dwell
among  the  men  of  this  world.

26  They  therefore,  that  shall
endure  to  the  end,  and  be  proved
by  them  shall  be  purged.  And
as  gold,  by  this  trial,  is  cleansed
and  loses  its  dross,  so  shall  ye
also  cast  away  all  sorrow  and
trouble,  and  be  made  pure  for
the  building  of  the  tower.

27  But  the  w^hite  colour  de-
notes the  time  of  the  world  which
is  to  come,  in  which  the  elect  of
God  shall  dwell :  because  the
elect  of  God  shall  be  pure  and
without  spot  until  life   eternal.

28  Wherefore  do  not  thou
cease  to  speak  these  things  in
the  ears  of  the  saints.  Here  ye
have  the  figure  of  the  great  tri-
bulation that  is  about  to  come;
which,  if  you  please  shall  be
nothing  to  you.  Keep  therefore
in  mind  the  things  that  I  have
said  unto  you.

29  When  she  had  spoken  thus
much,  she  departed  ;  but  I  saw
not  whither  she  went.  But  sud-
denly I  heard  a  noise,  and  I
turned  back,  being  afraid,  for  I
thought  that  the  beast  was  com-
ing toward  me.


211


The  Second  Book  of  HERMAS,  called  his  COMMANDS.


Introduction.

WHEN  I  had  prayed  at
home,  and  was  sat  down
upon  the  bed,  a  certain  man
came  in  to  me  with  a  reverend
look,  in  the  habit  of  a  shepherd,
clothed  with  a  white  cloak,  having
his  bag  upon  his  back,  and  his
staff  in  his  hand,  and  saluted  me.

2  I  returned  his  salutation,
and  immediately  he  sat  down  by
me,  and  said  unto  me,  I  am  sent
by  that  venerable  messenger,  that
I  should  dwell  with  thee  all  the
remaining  days  of  thy  life.

3  But  I  thought  that  he  was
come  to  try  me,  and  said  unto
him,  Who  are  you  ?  For  I  know
to  whom  I  am  committed.  He
said  unto  me,  Do  you  not  know
me  ?  I  answered  no.  I  am,  said
he,  that  shepherd  to  whose  care
you  are  delivered.

4  Whilst  he  was  yet  speaking,
his  shape  was  changed ;  and
when  I  knew  that  it  was  he  to
whom  I  was  committed,  I  was
ashamed,  and  a  sudden  fear  came
upon  me,  and  I  was  utterly  over-
come with  sadness,  because  I  had
spoken  so  foolishly  unto  him.

5  But  he  said  unto  me.  Be
not  ashamed,  but  receive  strength
in  thy  mind,  through  the  com-
mands which  I  am  about  to  de-
liver unto  thee.  For,  said  he,  I
am  sent  to  shew  unto  thee  all
those  things  again,  which  thou
hast  seen  before,  but  especially
such  of  them  as  may  be  of  most
use  unto  thee.

6  And  first  of  all  write  my
Commands  and  Similitudes,  the
rest  thou  shalt  so  write  as  I  shall


shew  unto  thee.  But  I  therefore
bid  thee  first  of  all  write  my
Commands  and  Similitudes,  that
by  often  reading  of  them  thou
mayest  the  more  easily  'keep
them  in  memory.

7  Whereupon  I  wrote  his
Commands  and  Similitudes,  a^
he  bade  me.

8  Which  things  if  when  you
have  heard,  ye  shall  observe  t(t
do  them,  and  shall  walk  accord-
ing to  them,  and  exercise  your-
selves in  them  with  a  pure  mind,
ye  shall  receive  from  the  Lord
those  things  which  he  has  pro-
mised unto  you.

9  But  if  having  heard  them
ye  shall  not  repent,  but  shall
still  go  on  to  add  to  your  sins,
'^ye  shall  be  punished  by  him.

10  All  these  things  that  Shep-
herd, the  angel  of  repentance,
commanded  me  to  write.

COMMAND  I.

Of  ^beliemng  in  one  God.

FIRST  of  *all  believe  that
there  is  one  God  who  crea-
ted and  framed  all  things  of
nothing  into  a  being.

2  He  comprehends  all  things,
and  is  only  immense,  not  to  be
comprehended  by  any.

3  Who  can  neither  be  defined
j  by  any  words,  nor  conceived  by

the  mind.

4  Therefore  believe  in  him,
and  fear  him ;  and  fearing  him
^  abstain  from  all  evil.

5  Keep  these  things,  and  cast
j  all  *  lust  and  iniquity  far  from

thee,  and  put  on  righteousness,
and  thou  shalt  live  to  God,  if
thou  shalt  keep  this  command-
ment.


•  Observe  them,  Custodite  possiss.  Lat.  '  Adversa  recipietis.  ^  Faith.
*  Irenaeus  1.  1,  c.  3.  Origen,  de  Princ  1.  1,  c  3.  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccles.  1.  5,  c
8.  Athanas.  de  Tncarn.  Verb.  &e.  ^  Habe  abstinentiam.  *  Omnem.  concu-
piscentiam.     MSS.  Lamb,  et  Oxon.

212


Agaiud  detraction


COMMAND  III.


and  lying.


9  For  he  has  fulfilled  his  duty
as  he  received  it  from  God ;  not
making  any  choice  to  whom  he
should  give,  and  to  whom  not.
And  this  service  he  did  with
simplicity  and  *^  to  the  glory  of
God.

10  Keep  therefore  this  com-
mand according  as  I  have  deli-
vered it  unto  thee ;  that  thy  re-
pentance may  be  found  to  be  sin-
cere, and  that  good  may  come  to
thy  house ;  and  have  a  pure  heart.

COMMAND  III.

Of  avoiding  lying,  and  the  repentance
of  Hennas  for  his  dissimulation.

MOREOVER  ^' he  said  unto
me,  love  truth ;  and  let  all
the  speech  be  true  which  pro-
ceeds out  of  thy  mouth.

2  That  the  spirit  which  the
Lord  hath  given  to  dwell  in  thy
flesh  may  be  found  true  towards
all  men ;  and  the  Lord  be  glori-
fied, who  hath  given  such  a  spirit
unto  thee :  because  God  is  true
in  all  his  words,  and  in  him
there  is  no  lie.

3  They  therefore  that  lie,  deny
the  Lord,  ^*  and  become  robbers
of  the  Lord,  ^^  not  rendering  to
God  what  they  received  from
him.

4  For  they  received  the  spirit
free  from  lying :  If  therefore
they  make  that  a  liar,  they  defile
what  was  committed  to  them  by
the  Lord,  and  become  deceivers.

5  When  I  heard  this,  I  wept
bitterly;  and  when  he  saw  me
weeping,  he  said  unto  me,  Why

^  Lat.  Have  simplicity  and  be  innocent.  ^  Gr.  'Ei  6s  fj-ij,  kui  av  okovuv
evoxo^  eari.  »  So  the  Gr.  and  Lamb.  MS.  Particeps  eris  peccati  male  loquentis,
credens :  tu  habebis  peccatum.  *  Vid.  Antioch.  Hom.  xxix.  ^  Daemon.
*  The  Greek  hatli  ovv.  '  Rather  Simplicity ;  according  to  the  Greek  reading,
preserved  by  Athanasius.  ^  Gr.  in  which  there  is  no  evil  offence,  but  all
things  smooth  and  delightful,  fv  ore  ov6ev  irpoaKOfifia  egtl  Trovripov,  aTJXa  Tzavra
ofia'Ka  Ky  llapa.  *  Vid.  Antioch.  Hom.  xcviii.  ^°  Simply.  ^^  G.  fx  tuv  idctjv
dopT](j.aTciv.  MS.  Lamb,  de  suis  dodis,  ^^  Gloriously  to  God.  ^^  Antioch.
Hom.  Ixvi.  "  According  to  the  Gr.  ^'  See  III.  Hermas  Simil.  ix.  v.  268
€t  seq.

213


COMMAND  II.

Thai  we  must  avoid  detraction,  and  do
our  alms-deeds  with  simplicity.

HE  said  unto  me,  ^  Be  inno-
cent and  without  disguise ;
so  shalt  thou  be  like  an  infant
who  knows  no  malice  which  de-
stroys the  life  of  man.

2  Especially  see  that  thou
speak  evil  of  none,  nor  willingly
hear  any  one  speak  evil  of  any.

3  ^  For  if  thou  observest  not
this,  thou  also  who  hearest  shalt
be  ^  partaker  of  the  sin  of  him
that  speaketh  evil,  by  believing
the  slander,  and  thou  also  shalt
have  sin,  because  thou  believed-
est  him  that  spoke  evil  of  thy
brother.

4  *  Detraction  is  a  pernicious
thing ;  an  inconstant,  ^  evil  spirit ;
that  never  continues  in  peace,  but
is  always  in  discord.  ^Wherefore
refrain  thyself  from  it,  and  keep
peace  evermore  with  thy  brother.

5  Put  on  an  holy  ^constancy,
*  in  which  there  are  no  sins,  but
all  is  full  of  joy ;  and  do  good
of  thy  labours.

6  "Give  ^"without  distinction
to  all  that  are  in  want,  not
doubting  to  whom  thou  givest.

7  But  give  to  all,  for  God  will
have  us  give  to  all,  of  "  all  his
own  gifts.  They  therefore  that
receive  shall  give  an  account  to
God,  both  wherefore  they  re-
ceived and  for  what  end.

8  And  they  that  receive  with-
out a  real  need,  shall  give  an
account  for  it ;  but  he  that  gives
shall  be  innocent.


Of  putting  away


II.  HERMAS.


a  wife  for  adultery.


weepest  thou  ?  And  I  said,  Be-
cause, sir,  I  doubt  whether  I  can
be  saved  'r

6  He  asked  me,  Wherefore?
I  replied,  because  sir,  I  never
spake  a  true  word  in  my  life;  but
always  lived  in  dissimulation,
and  affirmed  a  lie  for  truth  to  all
men;  and  no  man  contradicted
me,  but  all  gave  credit  to  my
words.  How  then  can  I  live,
seeing  I  have  done  in  this  man-
ner?

7  And  he  said  unto  me,  Thou
thinkest  well  and  truly.  For  thou
oughtest,  as  the  servant  of  God,
to  have  walked  in  the  truth,  and
not  have  joined  an  evil  conscience
with  the  spirit  of  truth,  nor  have
grieved  the  holy  and  true  Spirit
of  God.

8  And  I  replied  unto  him,  sir,
I  never  before  hearkened  so  dili-
gently to  these  things.  He  an-
swered. Now  thou  hearest  them :
Take  care  from  henceforth,  that
even  those  things  which  thou  hast
formerly  spoken  falsely  for  the
sake  of  thy  business,  may,  ^  by
thy  present  truth  receive  credit.

9  For  even  those  things  may
be  credited,  if  for  the  time  to
come  thou  shalt  speak  the  truth ;
and  ^  by  so  doing  thou  mayest
attain  unto  life.

10  And  whosoever  shall  heark-
en unto  this  command,  and  do  it,
and  shall  depart  from  all  lying,
he  shall  live  unto  God.

COMMAND  IV.

Of  putting  away  one's  wife  for  adultery.

FURTHERMORE,  said  he,  I
command  thee,  that  thou
keep  ^  thyself  chaste  ;  and  that
thou  suffer  not  any  thought  of
any  other  marriage,  or  of  forni-
cation, to  enter  into  thy  heart  :
for  such  a  thought  produces
great  sin.

^  Through  these  words.  Lat.  His  verbis  et  ilia  fidem  recipiant.
shalt  keep  the  truth.       ^Chastity.      ■*  Another  man  s.
214


2  But  be  thou  at  all  times
mindful  of  the  Lord,  and  thou
shalt  never  sin.  For  if  such  an
evil  thought  should  arise  in  thy
heart,  thou  shouldest  be  guilty
of  a  great  sin  ;  and  they  who  do
such  things  follow  the  way  of
death.

3  Look  therefore  to  thyself,
and  keep  thyself  from  such  a
thought;  for  where  chastity  re-
mains in  the  heart  of  a  righteous
man,  there  an  evil  thought  ought
never  to  arise.

4  And  I  said  unto  him.  Sir,
suffer  me  to  speak  a  little  to  you.
He  bade  me  say  on.  And  I  an-
swered. Sir,  if  a  man  that  is  faith-
fiil  in  the  Lord  shall  have  a  wife,
and  shall  catch  her  in  adultery ;
doth  a  man  sin  that  continues  to
live  still  with  her  ?

5  And  he  said  unto  me.  As
long  as  he  is  ignorant  of  her  sin,
he  commits  no  fault  in  living
with  her;  but  if  a  man  shall
know  his  wife  to  have  offended,
and  she  shall  not  repent  of  her
sin,  but  go  on  still  in  her  forni-
cation, and  a  man  shall  continue
nevertheless  to  live  with  her,  he
shall  become  guilty  of  her  sin,
and  partake  with  her  in  her
adultery.

6  And  I  said  unto  him.  What
therefore  is  to  be  done,  if  the  wo-
man continues  on  in  her  sin?
He  answered,  Let  her  husband
put  her  away,  and  let  him  con-
tinue by  himself.  But  if  he  shall
jDut  away  his  wife,  and  marry
another  *  he  also  doth  commit
adultery.

7  And  I  said,  What  if  the  wo-
man that  is  so  put  away,  shall
repent,  and  be  willing  to  return
to  her  husband,  shall  she  not  be
received  by  him  ?  He  said  unto
me.  Yes ;   and   if  her   husband

2  If  thou


Of  putting  away


COMMAND  IV.  a  wife  for  adultery


to  all  that  repent.  Does  it  not
seem  to  thee  to  be  ^  a  very  wise
thing  to  repent?  Because  he
that  does  so  gets  great  under-
standing.

15  For  he  is  sensible  that  he
hath  sinned  and  done  wickedly
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  he
remembers  ^  within  himself  that
he  has  offended,  and  repents  and
does  no  more  wickedly,  but  does
that  which  is  good,  and  humbles
his  soul  and  afflicts  it,  because
he  has  offended.  You  see  there-
fore that  repentance  is  great
wisdom.

16  And  I  said  unto  him,  For
this  cause,  sir,  I  inquire  dili-
gently into  all  things,  because  I
am  a  sinner,  that  I  may  know
what  I  must  do  that  I  may  live ;
because  my  sins  are  many.

17  And  he  said  unto  me,  Thou
shalt  live  if  thou  shalt  keep  these
my  commandments.  And  whoso-
ever shall  hear  and  do  these  com-
mands shall  live  unto  God.

18  1  And  I  said  unto  him,  I
have  even  now  heard  from  certain
teachers,  that  there  is  no  other
repentance  beside  that  of  bap-
tism ;  when  we  go  down  into  the
water,  and  receive  the  forgiveness
of  our  sins  ;  and  that  after  that,
we  must  sin  no  more,  but  live  in
'  purity.

19  And  he  said  unto  me.  Thou
has  been  ^  rightly  informed.
Nevertheless  seeing  now  thou
inquirest  diligently  into  all
things,  I  will  manifest  this  also
unto  thee :  yet  not  so  as  to  give
any  occasion  of  sinning  either
to  those  who  shall  hereafter  be-
lieve, or  to  those  who  have  al-
ready believed  in  the  Lord.

20  For  neither  they  who  have
^  newly  believed,   or  who  shall

^See  1  Cor.  vii.  15.  ^  Sense.  ^  Proepositus.  *See  below,  v.  18  et  seq.
5  Great  wisdom.  ^  In  his  understanding.  ''Chastity.  ^Rightly  heard.
*MS.  Lamb.      Qui   modo   crediderunt,    Who  have  just   now   believed.

215


shall  not  receive  her,  he  will  sin,
and  commit  a  great  offence
against  himself;  but  he  ought  to
receive  the  offender,  if  she  re-
pents ;  only  not  often.

8  For  to  the  servants  of  God
there  is  but  one  repentance.  And
for  this  cause  a  man  that  putteth
away  his  wife  ought  not  to  take
another,  because  she  may  repent.

9  This  act  is  alike  both  in  the
man  and  in  the  Avoman.  Now
they  commit  adultery,  not  only
who  pollute  their  flesh,  but  who
also  make  an  image.  ^  If  there-
fore a  woman  perseveres  in  any
thing  of  this  kind,  and  repents
not,  depart  from  her,  and  live
not  with  her,  otherwise  thou  also
shalt  be  partaker  of  her  sin.

10  But  it  is  therefore  com-
manded that  both  the  man  and
the  woman  should  remain  un-
married because  such  persons
may  repent.

11  Nor  do  I  in  this  administer
any  occasion  for  the  doing  of
these  things;  but  rather  that
whoso  has  offended,  should  not
offend  any  more.

12  But  for  their  former  sins,
God  who  has  the  power  of  heal-
ing will  give  a  remedy ;  for  he
has  the  power  of  all  things.

13  T  I  asked  him  again  and
said,  Seeing  the  Lord  hath
thought  me  worthy  that  thou
shouldest  dwell  with  me  contin-
ually, speak  a  few  words  unto
me,  because  I  understand  nothing,
and  my  heart  is  hardened  through
my  former  conversation  ;  and
open  my  *  understanding  because
I  am  very  dull,  and  apprehend
nothing  at  all.

14  And  he  answering  said  unto
me,  I  am  the  ^  minister  of  repen-
tance, and  give  *  understanding  i


continued.


II.  HERMAS.


Of  sadness  of  heart.


hereafter  believe,  have  any  re-
pentance of  sins,  but  forgiveness
of  them.

21  But  as  to  those  who  have
been  called  to  the  faith,  and  since
that  are  fallen  into  any  gross  sin,
the  Lord  hath  appointed  repent-
ance, because  God  knoweth  the
thoughts  of  all  men's  hearts,  and
their  infirmities,  and  the  mani-
fold wickedness  of  the  devil,  who
is  always  contriving  something
against  the  servants  of  God,  and
maliciously  lays  snares  for  them.
22  Therefore  our  merciful
Lord  had  compassion  towards
his  creature,  and  appointed  that
repentance,  and  gave  unto  me
the  power  of  it.  And  therefore
I  say  unto  thee,  if  any  one  after
that  great  and  holy  calling  shall
be  tempted  by  the  devil  and  sin,
he  has  one  ^  repentance.  But  if
he  shall  often  sin  and  repent  it
shall  not  profit  such  a  one  ;  for
he  shall  hardly  live  unto  God.

23  And  I  said,  Sir,  I  am  re-
stored again  to  life  since  I  have
thus  diligently  hearkened  to  these
commands.  For  I  perceive  that
if  I  shall  not  hereafter  add  any
more  to  my  sins,  I  shall  be  saved.

24  And  he  said,  Thou  shalt
be  saved :  and  so  shall  all  others,
as  many  as  shall  observe  these
commandments.

25  T[  And  again  I  said  unto
him.  Sir,  seeing  thou  hearest  me
patiently  shew  me  yet  one  thing
more.  Tell  me,  saith  he,  what  it  is.

26  And  I  said,  If  a  husband
or  a  wife  die,  and  the  party
which  survives  marry  again,  does
he  sin  in  so  doing  ?     ^  He  that


marries  says  he,  sins  not :  how-
beit,  if  he  shall  remain  single,
he  shall  thereby  gain  to  himself
great  honour  before  the  Lord.

27  Keep  therefore  thy  chastity
and  modesty,  and  thou  shalt  live
unto  God.  Observe  from  hence-
forth those  things  which  I  speak
with  thee,  and  command  thee  to
observe,  from  the  time  ^  that  I
have  been  delivered  unto  thee,
and  dwell  in  thy  house.

28  So  shall  thy  former  sins  be
forgiven,  if  thou  shalt  keep  these
my  commandments.  And  in  like
manner  shall  all  others  be  for-
given, who  shall  observe  these
my  commandments.

COMMAND  V.

Of  the  sadness  of  the  heart,   and  of
patience.

BE  patient,  says  he,  and  *  long-
suffering  ;  so  shalt  thou
have  dominion  over  all  wicked
works,  and  shalt  ^  fulfil  all  right-
eousness.

2  For  if  thou  shalt  be  patient,
the  Holy  Spirit  which  dwelleth
in  thee  shall  be  pure,  and  not  be
darkened  by  any  evil  spirit;  but
being  full  of  joy  shall  be  en-
larged, and  feast  ^  in  the  body  in
which  it  dwells,  and  ^  serve  the
Lord  with  joy,  and  in  great  peace.

3  But  if  any  *  anger  shall
overtake  thee,  presently  the  Holy
Spirit  which  is  in  thee  will  be
straightened  and  seek  to  depart
from  thee.

4  For  he  is  choked  by  the  evil
spirit,  and  has  not  the  'liberty  of
^"  serving  the  Lord  as  he  would ;
for   he   is   grieved  by   ^^  anger.


'  Vid.  Annot.  Coteler.  in  loc.  pp.  60,  61.  ^  Vid.  not.  Coteler.  in  loc.  p.
64  B.C.  Rom.  vii.  3.  Comp.  1  Cor.  vii.  'SM.  Lamb,  medius  ;  Ex  quo
mihi  traditus  es.  That  thou  hast  been  delivered  unto  me,  and  I  dwell,  etc.
*  Gr  MaKfiodvfiog.     MS.  Lam.  Animaequus.  *  Work.  «SM.

Lamb,  melius,  Cum.  vase.  Et  Gr.  (Ucra  tov  OKsvovg^  with  the  body  or  vessel .
'  Gr.  AeiTovpyet  ry  Kvpto).         »  O^vxoTica,  Gr.  Bitterness  of  gall.  '  Place.

**  Gr.  '  AeiTovpyTjaai,  ^^  'O^vxoTiia.

216


THE  INTERMENT  OF  CHRIST.

FROM    A    FRESCO    BY  CIMABUE,   THIRTEENTH    CENTURY.


[Page  75.


Oj  sadness  of  heart,


COMMAND  V.


and  of  patience.


^  When,  therefore,  both  these
spirits  dwell  together,  it  is  de-
structive to  a  mau.

5  As  if  one  should  take  a  little
wormwood,  and  put  it  into  a  ves-
sel of  honey,  the  whole  honey
would  be  spoiled ;  and  a  great
quantity  of  honey  is  corrupted  by
a  very  little  wormwood,  and  loses
the  sweetness  of  honey,  and  is
no  longer  acceptable  to  its  Lord
because  the  whole  honey  is  made
bitter,  and  loses  its  use.

6  But  if  no  wormwood  be  put
into  the  honey,  it  is  sweet  and
profitable  to^its  Lord.  Thus  is
forbearance  sweeter  than  honey,
and  profitable  to  the  Lord  who
dwelleth  in  it.

7  But  anger  is  unprofitable.
If  therefore  anger  shall  be  mixed
with  forbearance,  the  soul  is  dis-
tressed, and  its  prayer  is  not
profitable  ^  with  God.

8  And  I  said  unto  him,  Sir,  I
would  know  the  sinfulness  of
anger,  that  I  may  keep  myself
from  it.  And  he  said  unto  nic,
Thou  shalt  know  it ;  and  if  thou
shalt  not  keep  thyself  from  it,
thou  shalt  lose  thy  hope  with  all
thy  house.  Wherefore  depart
from  it.

9  For  I  the  ^  messenger  of
righteousness  am  with  thee ;  and
all  that  depart  from  it,  as  many
as  shall  repent  with  all  their
hearts,  shall  live  unto  God ;  and
I  will  be  with  them,  and  will
keep  them  all.

10  For  all  such  as  have  re-
pented have  been  justified  by  the
most  holy  messenger,  who  is  a
minister  of  salvation.

11  •[[  And  now,  says  he,  hear


the  wickedness  of  anger ;  how
evil  and  hurtful  it  is,  and  how  it
overthrows  the  servants  of  God ;
for  it  cannot  *  hurt  those  that  are
fall  of  faith  becstuse  the  ^  power
of  God  is  wdth  them ;  but  it
overthrows  the  doubtful,  and
those  that  are  destitute  of  faith.

12  For  as  often  as  it  sees '  such
men,  it  casts  itself  into  their
hearts ;  and  so  a  man  or  woman
is  in  bitterness  for  nothing,  for
the  things  of  life,  or  for  suste-
nance, or  for  a  vain  word,  if  any
should  chance  to  fall  in  ;  or  by
reason  of  any  friend,  or  for  a
debt,  or  for  any  other  superflu-
ous things  of  the  like  nature.

13  For  these  things  are  foolish,
and  superfluous,  and  vain  to  the
servants  of  God.  But  equanimity
is  strong,  and  forcible ;  and  of
great  power,  and  sitteth  in  great
enlargement;  is  cheerful,  rejoic-
ing in  peace ;  and  glorifying  God
at  all  times  ^  with  meekness.

14  And  this  long-suffering
dwells  with  those  that  are  full  of
faith.  But  anger  is  foolish,  and
I  light,  and  empty.  Now  bitter-
ness is  bred  through  folly ;  by
bitterness,  anger;  by  anger,  fury.
And  this  fury  arising  from  so
many  evil  principles,  worketh  a
great  and  incurable  sin.

15  For  when  all  these  things
are  in  the  same  ®  man  in  which
the  Holy  Spirit  dwells,  the  ves-
sel cannot  contain  them,  but  runs
over :  and  because  the  Spirit  be-
ing tender  cannot  tarry  with  the
evil  one  ;  it  departs  and  dwells
with  him  that  is  meek.

16  When,  therefore,  it  is  de-
parted from  the  man  in  whom  it


*  Both  Athanasius  and  Antiochus  add  these  words,  omitted  in  our  copies  :
*'  For  in  forbearance  (or  long  suffering)  the  Lord  dwelleth,  but  in  bitterness
the  Devil."  ^  -po.  =*  Angel.  *  Gr.  work  upon  evepyriGai ;  et  MS.  Lamb,
facere.  ^  Virtue.  ^  Gr.  ToiovTovg  avBpunovQ,  f  In  the  Greek  of  Athana-
nius  and  Antiochus  the  sense  is  fuller :  Having  nothing  of  bitterness  in
itself,  and  continuing  always  in  meekness  and  quietness.     ^  Vessel.

217


Every  man


II.  HERMAS.


has  two  angels.


dwelt;  that  man  becomes  desti-
tute of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  is
afterwards  filled  with  wicked
spirits/  and  is  blinded  with  evil
thoughts.  Thus  doth  it  happen
to  all  angry  men.

17  Wherefore  depart  thou
from  anger  and  put  on  equani-
mity, and  resist  wrath  ;  so  thou
shaft  be  ^  found  with  modesty
and  chastity  by  God.  Take  good
heed  therefore  that  thou  neglect
not  this  commandment.

18  For  if  thou  shalt  obey  this
command,  then  shalt  thou  also
be  able  to  observe  the  other
commandments,  which  I  shall
command  thee.

19  Wherefore  strengthen  thy-
self now  in  these  commands,  that
thou  mayest  live  unto  God.
And  whosoever  shall  observe
these  commandments  shall  live
unto  God.

COMMAND  IV.

That  every  man  has    two  ^  angels,  and
of  the  suggestions  of  both.

I  COMMANDED  thee,  said
he,  in  my  first  command-
ments, that  thou  shouldst  keep
faith  and  fear,  and  *  repentance.
Yes,  Sir,  said  I.

2  He  continued :  But  now  I
will  shew  thee  the  virtues  of
these  commands,  that  thou  may-
est know  their  effects  ;  how  they
are  ^  prescribed  alike  to  the  just
and  unjust.

3  Do  thou  therefore  believe  the
righteous,  but  give  no  credit  to
the  unrighteous.    For  righteous-


ness keepeth  the  right  way,  but
unrighteousness  the  wicked  way.

4  Do  thou  therefore  keep  the
right  way,  and  leave  that  which
is  evil.  For  the  evil  way  has
not  a  good  end,  but  hath  many
stumbling-blocks  ;  it  is  rugged
and  full  of  thorns,  and  leads  to
destruction  ;  and  it  is  hurtful  to
all  such  as  walk  in  it.

5  But  they  who  go  in  the
right  way,  walk  with  evenness,
and  without  offence ;  because  it
is  not  rough  nor  thorny.

6  Thou  seest  therefore  how  it
is  best  to  walk  in  this  way.
Thou  shalt  therefore  go,  says  he,
and  all  others,  as  many  as  be-
lieve in  God  with  all  their  heart,
shall  go  through  it.  •

7  ^  And  now,  says  he ;  ^  un-
derstand first  of  all  what  be-
longs to  faith.  There  are  two
angels  with  man  ;  one  of  right-
eousness, the  other  of  iniquity.

8  And  I  said  unto  him :  Sir,
how  shall  I  know  that  there  are
two  such  angels  with  man?  Hear
says  he,  and  understand.

9  The  angel  of  righteousness,
is  mild  and  modest,  and  gentle,
and  quiet.  When  therefore,  he
gets  into  thy  heart,  immediately
he  talks  with  thee  of  righteous-
ness, of  modesty,  of  chastity,  of
bountifuluess,  of  forgiveness,  of
charity,  and  piety.

10  When  all  these  things  come
into  thy  heart,  know  then  that
the  angel  of  righteousness  is
with  thee.  Wherefore  hearken
to  this  angel  and  to  his  works.

11  Learn  also  the  works  of


*  In  the  Greek  of  Athanasius  follow  these  words,  omitted  in  the  Lat.  Vers.
of  Hermas :  ''  And  is  unstable  in  all  his  doings,  being  drawn  hither  and
thither  by  wicked  men."  ^in  the  Greek  of  Athanasius  it  runs  better  thus,
"  Applauded  with  reverence  by  those  who  are  beloved  of  God."  ^  Vid.
Coteler.  Annot.  in  loc.  pp.  67,  68.  Comp.  Edit.  Oxon.  p.  61,  Note  a.  "Lat.
Poenitentiam ;  it  should  rather  be  Abstinentiam  ;  as  in  the  Greek  of  Athana-
sius: as  appears  by  the  first  Commandment,  which  is  here  referred  to.
fi  Place,  Lat.  Posita  sunt.  6y](j^  Antioch.  Hom.  Ixi.  Comp  Orig.  1.  iii.
Be  Princip.  et  in  Luc.  Hom.  xxxv.
218


Familiar  angels.


COMMAND  VII.         Wemustfea7'  God.


the  angel  of  iniquity.  He  is  first
of  all  bitter,  and  angry,  and
foolish  ;  and  his  works  are  per-
nicious, and  overthrow  the  ser-
vants of  God.  When  therefore
these  things  come  into  thy  heart ;
thou  shalt  know  by  his  works,
that  this  is  the  angel  of  inquity.

12  And  I  said  unto  him.  Sir,
how  shall  I  understand  these
things?  Hear,  says  he,  and  un-
derstand. When  anger  over-
takes thee,  or  bitterness,  know
that  hie  is  in  thee :

13  As  also,  when  the  desire  of
many  ^things,  and  of  the  best
meats  and  of  drunkenness ;  when
the  love  of  what  belongs  to
others,  pride,  and  much  speak-
ing and  ambition,  and  the  like
things,  come  upon  thee.

14  When  therefore  these  things
arise  in  thy  heart,  know  that  the
angel  of  iniquity  is  with  thee.
Seeing  therefore  thou  knowest
his  works,  depart  from  them  all,
and  give  no  credit  to  him :  be-
cause his  works  are  evil,  and  be-
come not  the  servants  of  God.

15  Here  therefore  thou  hast
the  works  of  both  these  angels.
Understand  now  and  believe  the
angel  of  righteousness,  because
his  instruction  is  good.

16  For  let  a  man  be  never  so
happy ;  yet  if  the  thoughts  of  the
other  angel  arise  in  his  heart,  that
man  or  woman  must  needs  sin.

17  But  let  man  or  woman  be
never  so  wicked,  if  the  works  of
the  angel  of  righteousness  come
into  his  heart,  that  man  or  wo-
man must  needs  do  some  good.

18  Thou  seest  therefore  how
it  is  good  to  follow  the  angel  of
righteousness.  If  therefore  thou
shall  follow  him,  and  ^  submit  to


his  works,  thou

God.      And   as

^submit  to  his  work,' shall  live

also  unto  God.


shalt  live  unto
many  as   shall


COMMAND  VII.

That  we  must  fear   God,  hut  not  the
Devil.

FEAR  *God,  says  he,  and  keep
his  commandments.  For  if
thou  keepest  his  commandments
thou  shalt  be  powerful  in  every
work,  and  all  thy  works  shall  be
*  excellent.  For  by  fearing  God,
thou  shalt  do  every  thing  well.

2  This  is  that  fear  with  which
thou  must  be  affected  that  thou
may  est  be  saved.  But  fear  not
the  devil :  for  if  thou  fearest
the  Lord,  thou  shalt  have  do-
minion over  him  ;  because  there
is  no  power  in  him.

3  Now  if  there  be  no  power
in  him,  then  neither  is  he  to  be
feared.  But  he  in  whom  there
is  excellent  power,  he  is  to  be
feared  :  for  every  one  that  has
power,  is  to  be  feared.  But  he
that  has  no  power  is  despised  by
every  one.

4  Fear  the  works  of  the  devil,
because  they  are  evil.  For  by
fearing  the  Lord,  thou  wilt  fear
and  not  do  the  works  of  the  de-
vil, but  keep  thyself  from  them.

5  There  is  therefore  a  twofold
fear ;  if  thou  wilt  not  do  evil,
fear  the  Lord  and  thou  shalt  not
do  it.  But  if  thou  wilt  do  good,
^  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strong,
and  great  and  glorious.

6  Wherefore,  fear  God  and
thou  shalt  live  :  and  whosoever
shall  fear  him,  and  keep  his  com-
mandments, their  life  is  with  the
Lord.  But  they  who  keep  them
not,  neither  is  life  in  them.


^  Works.  Gr.  irpa^euv.  ^  Gr.  TriGTEVGyg,  Lat.  Credideris,  Believe.  *  Vid.
Antioch.  Horn,  cxxvii.  Eecles  xii.  13.  "  AavyKparoc,  Without  coraparifion  :
or    without    mixture.  ^  j^  the  Gr.    of   Antioch    these  words    follow,

which   make    the    connection    more   clear :    "  Fear    also    the    Lord,  and
thou  shalt  be  able  to  do  it,  for."

219


We  must  flee  evil


II.  HERMAS.


and  do  good.


COMMAND  VIII.

That  we  mmt  flee  from  evil,  and  do  good.

I  HAVE  told  thee,  said  he,
that  there  are  two  kinds  of
creatures  of  the  Lord,  and  that
there  is  a  two-fold  ^abstinence.
From  some  things  therefore  thou
must  abstain,  and  from  others  not.

2  I  answered,  Declare  to  me,
sir,  from  what  I  must  abstain,
and  from  what  not.  Hearken,
said  he.  Keep  thyself  from  evil,
and  do  it  not ;  but  abstain  not
from  good,  but  do  it.  For  if
thou  shalt  abstain  from  what  is
good,  and  not  do  it,  thou  shalt
sin.  Abstain  therefore  from  all
evil,  and  thou  shalt  ^  know  all
righteousness.

3  I  said.  What  evil  things  are
they  from  which  I  must  abstain?
Hearken,  said  he :  from  adultery,
from  drunkenness,  from  riots,
from  excess  of  eating,  from  dain-
tiness and  dishonesty,  from  pride,
from  fraud,  from  lying,  from  de-
traction, from  hypocrisy,  from
remembrance  of  injuries,  and
from  all  evil  speaking.

4  For  these  are  the  works  of
iniquity,  from  which  the  servant
of  God  must  abstain.  For  he  that
cannot  keep  himself  from  these
things,  cannot  live  unto  God.

5  But  hear,  said  he,  what  fol-
lows of  these  kind  of  things :  for
indeed  many  more  there  are  from
which  the  servant  of  God  must
abstain.  From  theft,  and  cheat-
ing; from  false  witness,  from
covetousness,  from  boasting,  and
all  other  things  of  the  like  nature.

6  Do  these  things  seem  to
thee  to  be  evil  or  not  ?  Indeed
they  are  very  evil  to  the  servants

^  Antioch.  Horn.  Ixxix.  ^  Do  according  to  the  Greek,  epyaCo/itevovg.
'  Vid.  Coteler.  in  loc  *  The  sense  here  is  defective,  and  may  be  thus  re-
stored from  the  Greek  of  Athanasius: — Whoever  keeps  these  things,  and
doth  not  abstain  from  them,  shall  he  happy  in  his  life.  And  so  the  Lamb.
MS. :  Haec  qui  custodierit.  ^  Qp_  aynhniroLTjni.^,  good  deed.  ^  avvrrjpeLV.
^  Add  from  the  Gr.  of  Athanasius  and  Antiochns  :  Not  to  remember  injuries;
To  comfort  those  who  labour  in  their  minds.  ^  Evdvuovg.
220


of  God.  Wherefore  the  servant
of  God  must  abstain  from  all
these  ^  works.

7  Keep  thyself  therefore  from
them,  that  thou  mayest  live  unto
God,  and  be  written  among  those
that  abstain  from  them.  And
thus  have  I  shown  thee  what
things  thou  must  avoid:  now
learn  from  what  thou  must  not
abstain.

8  Abstain  not  from  any  good
works,  but  do  them.  Hear,  said
he,  what  the  virtue  of  those  good
works  is  which  thou  must  do,
that  thou  mayest  be  saved.  The
first  of  all  is  faith ;  the  fear  of
the  Lord  ;  charity ;  concord ;
equity;  truth;  patience;  chastity.

9  There  is  nothing  better  than
these  things  in  the  life  of  man ;
*who  shall  keep  and  do  these
things  in  their  life.  Hear  next
what  follow  these.

10  To  minister  to  the  widows ;
not  to  despise  the  fatherless  and
poor ;  to  redeem  the  servants  of
God  from  necessity ;  to  be  hospi-
table; (for  in  hospitality^  there
is  sometimes  ^  great  fruit)  not  to
be  contentious,  but  be  quiet.

11  To  be  humble  above  all
men ;  to  reverence  the  aged ;  to
labour  to  be  righteous;  ^to  re-
spect the  brotherhood ;  to  bear
affronts;  to  be  long-suffering;
''not  to  cast  away  those  that
have  fallen  from  the  faith,  but
to  convert  them,  and  make  them
be  of  ^good  cheer;  to  admonish
sinners ;  not  to  oppress  those  that
are  our  debtors;  and  all  other
things  of  a  like  kind.

12  Do  these  things  seem  to
thee  to  be  good  or  not  ?     And  I


We  must  ash  of  God  -       COMMAND  IX.


daily,  in  faith.


said,  What  can  be  better  than
these  words?  Live  then,  said
he,  in  these  commandments,  and
do  not  depart  from  them.  For
if  thou  shalt  keep  all  these  com-
mandments, thou  shalt  live  unto
God.  And  all  they  that  shall
keep  these  commandments  shall
live  unto  God.


COMMAND  IX.

That  we  must  ask  of  God  daily;  and
without  doubting.

AGAIN  he  said  unto  me;
^  remove  from  thee  all
doubting ;  and  question  nothing
at  all,  when  thou  askest  anything
of  the  Lord ;  saying  within  thy-
self: how  shall  I  be  able  to  ask
anything  of  the  Lord  and  receive
it,  seeing  I  have  so  greatly  sinned
against  him  ?

2  Do  not  think  thus,  but  turn
unto  the  Lord  with  all  thy  heart,
and  ask  of'^him  without  doubt-
ing, and  thou  shalt  know  the
mercy  of  the  Lord ;  how  that  he
will  not  forsake  thee,  but  will
fulfil  the  request  of  thy  soul.

3  For  God  is  not  as  men,
mindful  of  the  injuries  he  has
received;  but  he  forgets  injuries,
and  has  compassion  upon  his
creature.

4  Wherefore  purify  thy  heart
from  all  the  vices  of  this  present
world ;  and  observe  the  com-
mands I  have  before  delivered
unto  thee  from  God;  and  thou
shalt  receive  whatsoever  good
things  thou  shalt  ask,  and  no-
thing shall  be  wanting  unto  thee
of  all  thy  petitions ;  if  thou  shalt
ask  of  the  Lord  without  doubting.

5  ^  But  they  that  are  not  such,

^  Vid.  Antioch.  Horn.  Ixxxiii.  Confer.  Fragm.  D.  Grabe.  Spicileg.  torn.  i.
page  303.  ^  Add  from  the  Gr.  both  of  Athanasius  and  Antiochus :  But  if
thou  doubtest  in  thy  heart,  thou  shalt  receive  none  of  thy  petitions.  For
those  who  distrust  (or,  doubt  of)  God,  are  like  the  double-minded,  who
shall  obtain  none  of  these  things.  ^  go  MS.  Lamb.  Tardius  accipias :  and
so  the  Gr  BfjaSvTepov  Tian^avu^,  *  Asking  the  petition  of  thy  soul.  ^  i^
everything.


shall  obtain  none  of  those  things
which  they  ask.  For  they  that
are  full  of  faith  ask  all  things
with  confidence,  and  receive  from
the  Lord,  because  they  ask  with-
out doubting.  But  he  that
doubts,  shall  hardly  live  unto
God,  except  he  repent.

6  Wherefore  purify  thy  heart
from  doubting,  and  put  on  faith,
and  trust  in  God,  and  thou  shalt
receive  all  that  thou  shalt  ask.
But  and  if  thou  shouldest  chance
to  ask  somewhat  and  not  (*  im-
mediately) receive  it,  yet  do  not
therefore  doubt,  because  thou
hast  not  presently  received  the
petition  of  thy  soul.

7  For  it  may  be  thou  shalt
not  presently  receive  it  for  thy
trial,  or  else  for  some  sin  which
thou  knowest  not.  But  do  not
thou  leave  off  to  ask,  *  and  then
thou  shalt  receive.  Else  if  thou
shalt  cease  to  ask,  thou  must
complain  of  thyself,  and  not  of
God,  that  he  has  not  given  unto
thee  what  thou  didst  desire.

8  Consider  therefore  this
doubting,  how  cruel  and  perni-
cious it  is;  and  how  it  utterly
roots  out  many  from  the  faith,
who  were  very  faithful  and  firm.
For  this  doubting  is  the  daughter
of  the  devil,  and  deals  very  wick-
edly with  the  servants  of  God.

9  Despise  it  therefore,  and
thou  shalt  rule  over  it  ^  on  every
occasion.  Put  on  a  firm  and
powerful  faith :  for  faith  pro-
mises all  things  and  perfects  all
things.  But  doubting  will  not
believe,  that  it  shall  obtain  any-
thing, by  all  that  it  can  do.

10  Thou  seest  therefore,  says


0/  ihe  sadness


II.  HERMAS.


of  the  heart.


he,  how  faith  cometh  from  above,
from  God ;  and  hath  great  power.
But  doubting  is  an  earthly  spirit,
and  proceedeth  from  the  devil,
and  has  no  strength.

11  Do  thou  therefore  keep  the
virtue  of  faith,  and  depart  from
doubting,  in  which  is  no  virtue,
and  thou  shalt  live  unto  God.
And  all  shall  live  unto  God,  as
many  as  do  these  things.
COMMAND  X.

Of  the  sadness  of  the  heart ;  and  that  we
must  take  heed  not  to  grieve  the  spirit
of  God  that  is  in  vs.

PUT  all  sadness  far  from  thee ;
for  it  is  the  sister  of  doubt-
ing and  of  anger.  How,  sir,  said
I,  is  it  the  sister  of  these  ?  for
sadness,  and  anger,  and  doubt-
ing, seem  to  me  to  be  very
different  from  one  another.

2  And  he  answered :  ^  Art
thou  without  sense  that  thou
dost  not  understand  it?  For  sad-
ness is  the  most  mischievous  of
all  spirits,  and  the  worst  to  the
servants  of  God  :  "  It  destroys
the  spirits  of  all  men,  and  tor-
ments the  Holy  Spirit ;  and
again,  it  saves.

3  Sir,  said  I,  I  am  very  fool-
ish, and  understand  not  these
'  things.  I  cannot  apprehend
how  it  can  torment,  and  yet  save.
Hear,  said  he,  and  understand.
They  who  never  sought  out  the
truth,  nor  inquired  concerning
the  majesty  of  God,  but  only  be-
lieved, are  involved  in  the  affairs
of  the  heathen.

4  And  there  is  another  *  lying
prophet  that  destroys  the  *  minds
of  the  servants  of  God ;  that  is
of  those  that  are  doubtful,  not  of
those  that  fully  trust  in  the  Lord.
Now  those  doubtful  persons  come


to  him,  as  to  a  divine  spirit,  and
inquire  of  him  what  shall  befall
them.

5  And  this  lying  prophet  hav-
ing no  power  in  him  of  the  divine
Spirit,  answers  them  according
to  their  demands,  and  fills  their
souls  with  promises  according  as
they  desire.  Howbeit  that  pro-
phet is  vain,  and  answers  vain
things  to  those  who  are  them-
selves vain.

6  And  whatsoever  is  asked  of
him  by  vain  men,  he  answers
them  vainly.  Nevertheless  he
speaketh  some  things  truly.  For
the  devil  fills  him  with  his
spirit,  that  he  may  overthrow
some  of  the  righteous.

7  T  Whosoever  therefore  are
strong  in  the  faith  of  the  Lord,
and  have  put  on  the  truth  :  they
are  not  joined  to  such  spirits,  but
depart  from  them.  But  they  that
are  doubtful,  and  often  repent-
ing like  the  heathens,  consult
them,  and  heap  up  to  themselves
great  sin,  serving  idols.

8  As  many  therefore  as  are
such,  inquire  of  them  upon  every
occasion  ;  worship  idols ;  and  are
foolish,  and  void  of  the  truth.

9  For  every  spirit  that  is
given  from  God  needs  not  to  be
asked  ;  but  having  the  power  of
divinity  speaks  all  things  of
itself;  because  he  comes  from
above,  from  the  power  of  God.

10  But  he  that  being  asked
speaks  according  to  men's  de-
sires, and  concerning  many  other
affairs  of  the  present  world,  un-
derstands not  the  things  which
relate  unto  God.  For  these  spir-
its are  darkened  through  such  af-
fairs, and  corrupted  and  broken.

11  As  good  vines  if  they  are


^  Without  sense  thou  dost  not  understand  it.  ^  So  the  Lat.  Vers.    But

the  Gr.  of  Athanasius  is   better :    And   destroyeth   more  than   any   other
spirit.        3  Questions.       *  Vid.  Epit.    Oxon.  p.  70  b.    Comp.  2  Cor.  vii.  10.
5  Lat.  Sensus :  from  the  Greek  Novf .
222


We  must  not  grieve


COMMAND  X.


the  spirit  of  God.


neglected,  are  oppressed  with
weeds  and  thorns,  and  at  last
killed  by  them  ;  so  are  the  men
who  believe  such  spirits.

12  They  fall  into  many  actions
and  businesses,  and  are  void  of
sense,  ^  and  when  they  think  of
things  pertaining  unto  God,  they
understand  nothing  at  all:  but  if  at
anytime  they  chance  to  hear  any-
thing concerning  the  Lord,  their
^thoughts  are  upon  their  business.

13  But  they  that  have  the  fear
of  the  Lord,  and  search  out  the
truth  concerning  God,  ^  having
all  their  thoughts  towards  the
Lord;  apprehend  whatsoever  is
said  to  them,  and  forthwith  un-
derstand it,  because  they  have
the  fear  of  the  Lord  in  them.

14  For  where  the  spirit  of  the
Lord  dwells,  there  is  also  *much
understanding  added.  Wherefore
join  thyself  to  the  Lord,  ^and  thou
shalt  understand  all  things.

15  T  Learn  now,  O  unwise
man !  how  sadness  ^  troubleth  the
Holy  Spirit,  and  how  it  saves.
"When  a  man  that  is  doubtful  is
engaged  in  any  affair,  and  does
not  accomplish  it  by  reason  of  his
doubting,  this  sadness  enters  into
him,  and  grieves  the  Holy  Spirit,
and  makes  him  sad,

16  Again,  anger  when  it  over-
takes any  man  for  any  business
he  is  greatly  moved ;  '  and  then


again  sadness  entereth  into  the
heart  of  him,  who  was  moved
with  anger,  and  he  is  troubled  for
what  he  hath  done,  and  repenteth,
because  he  hath  done  amiss.

17  This  sadness  therefore
seemeth  to  bring  salvation,  be-
cause he  repenteth  of  his  evil
deed.  But  both  the  other  things,
namely,  doubting  and  sadness,
such  as  before  was  mentioned,
vex  the  spirit :  doubting,  because
his  work  did  not  succeed:  and
sadness,  because  he  angered  the
Holy  Spirit.

18  *  Remove  therefore  sadness
from  thyself, '  and  afflict  not  the
Holy  Spirit  which  dwelleth  in
thee,  lest  he  ^^  entreat  God,  and
depart  from  thee.  For  the  spirit
of  the  Lord  ^^  which  is  given  to
dwell  in  the  flesh,  endureth  no
such  sadness.

19  Wherefore  clothe  thyself
with  cheerfulness,  which  has  al-
ways favour  with  the  Lord,  and
thou  shalt  rejoice  in  it.  For  every
cheerful  man  does  well ;  and  re-
lishes those  things  that  are  good,
and  despises  ^^  sadness.

20  But  the  sad  man  does  al-
ways wickedly.  ^^  First,  he  doth
wickedly,  because  he  grieveth  the
Holy  Spirit,  which  is  given  to
man,  being  of  a  cheerful  nature.
And  again  he  does  ill,  because  he
prays  with  sadness  unto  the  Lord,


^  And  understand  nothing  at  all,  thinking  of  riches,     Lat.  ^  Senses.

'  Gr.  of  Athanasius,  Kapchav  exovreg  irpog  Kvpiov.  So  that  the  Latin  should  be
Habentes,  not  Habent.  *  Gr.  aweacg  ttoUti,  ^  Gr.  -Kavra   vorjaeig.

And  so  in  the  Lamb.  MS.  Omnia  scies.  ^  Gr.  EKTpijiei.  MS.  Lamb.  Contri-
bulat.  '  In  the  Greek  of  Athanasius,  follows  nai  iroiTjoy  tl  kckov^  and  he
doth  something  which  is  ill.  Which  letter  agrees  with  what  follows,  Because
he  hath  done  amiss.  The  text  in  this  place  being  evidently  corrupted,  it  has
been  endeavoured  to  restore  the  true  sense  of  it  from  the  Greek  of  Athanasius,
which  is  as  follows :  TraXtv  r]  Tivkt]  siaKopeverai  eig  ttjv  Kapdiav  tov  avdpuTrov
Tov  o^vxoATjoavToc,  Kai  ?,vKeiTac  e-rn  ry  npa^ei  avrov  tj  STrpa^ev  Kai  fieravoEt  on
TrnvTfpov  eipyacaro.  Avrrj  ovv  tj  "kvirri  doKsi  aarripiav  ex^iv^  on  to  Tzovijpov
vpa^ag  fzeTevoTjaev.        A/i(f>oTepai  de  tuv  npa^euv  Ivrrovai,    &c,  ^Antioch.

Horn.  XXV.  ^  (j[T.  M.7}  dlipe,  MS.   Lamb.   Noli  nocere.  ^°  Gr.   Mt?

evTEv^TjTai  T(f)  deep.    Comp,  Rom.  vii,  27.  ^^  Gr.  To   6o0ev    eig  ttjv  aapKa,

TavTijv  2.V1TIJV  ovK  vTcotpepet.  ^^  Gr,  "kviTTji:.  i'  So  the  Greek  :  0  St-  "Kvizrjpoq
avT]p  TravTore  Trovijpeverac.  TzpuTov  juev  TTovTfpeverai^  &c.

223


Spirits  and  Prophets         II.  HERMAS.  to  be  tried  by  works^


and  maketh  not  a  first  thankful
acknowledgment  unto  him  of  for-
mer mercies,  and  obtains  not  of
God  what  he  asks.

21  For  the  prayer  of  a  sad
man  has  not  always  efficacy  to
come  up  to  the  altar  of  God.
And  I  said  unto  him,  Sir,  why
has  not  the  prayer  of  a  sad  man
virtue  to  come  up  to  the  altar  of
God  ?  because,  said  he,  that  sad-
ness remaineth  in  his  heart.

22  When  therefore  a  man's
prayer  shall  be  accompanied  with
sadness,  it  will  not  suffer  his  re-
quests to  ascend  pure  to  the  altar
of  God.  For  as  wine  when  it  is
mingled  with  vinegar,  has  not  the
sweetness  it  had  before  ;  so  sad-
ness being  mixed  with  the  Holy
Spirit,  suffers  not  a  man's  prayer
to  be  the  same  as  it  would  be
otherwise.

23  Wherefore  cleanse  thyself
from  sadness,  which  is  evil,  and
thou  shalt  live  unto  God.  And
all  others  shall  live  unto  God,  as
many  as  shall  lay  aside  sadnesss
and  put  on  cheerfulness.

COMMAND  XI.

That  the  spirits  and  prophets  are  to  be
tried  by  their  works;  and  of  a  two-
fold spirit.

HE  shewed  me  certain  men
sitting  upon  benches,  and
one  sitting  in  a  chair:  and  he
said  unto  me  seest  thou  who  sit
upon  the  benches  ?  Sir,  said  I,  I
see  them.  He  answered,  They  are
the  faithful ;  and  he  who  sits  in
the  chair  is  an  earthly  spirit.

2  For  he  cometh  not  into  ^  the
assembly  of  the  faithful,  but
avoids  it.  But  he  joins  himself
to  the  doubtful  and  empty ;  and


prophesies  to  them  in  corners
and  hidden  plages;  and  pleases
them  by  speaking  according  ta
all  the  desires  of  their  hearts.

3  For  he  placing  himself  among
empty  vessels,  is  not  broken,  but
the  one  fitteth  the  other.  But
when  he  cometh  into  the  company
of  just  men,  ^  who  are  full  of  the
spirit  of  God,  and  they  pray  unto
the  Lord ;  that  man  is  ^  emptied
because  that  earthly  spirit  flies
from  him,  and  he  is  dumb,  and
cannot  speak  anything.

4  As  if  in  a  store-house  you
shall  stop  up  wine  or  oil ;  and
among  those  vessels  shall  place
an  empty  jar ;  and  shall  after-
wards come  to  open  it,  you  shall
find  it  empty  as  you  stopped  it
up:  so  those  empty  prophets
when  they  come  among  the
spirits  of  the  just,  are  found  to
be  such  as  they  came.*

5^1  said.  How  then  shall  a
man  he  able  to  discern  them?
Consider  what  I  am  going  to  say
considering  both  kinds  of  ^  men ;
and  as  I  speak  unto  thee  so  shalt
thou  prove  the  prophet  of  God^
and  the  false  prophet.

6  And  first  try  the  man  who
hath  the  spirit  of  God  ;  because
the  spirit  which  is  from  above  is
humble,  and  quiet ;  and  departs
from  all  wickedness  ;  and  from
the  vain  desires  of  the  present
world  ;  and  makes  himself  more
humble  than  all  men ;  and  an-
swers to  none  when  he  is  asked  ;
nor  to  every  one  singly :  for  the
Spirit  of  God  doth  not  speak  to
a  man  when  he  will,  but  when
God  pleases.

7  When  therefore  a  man  wha


^  Church  of  the  living.  ^  Have  the  Spirit  of  God  in  them.  ^  Exinanitur.
*  Something  was  wanting  in  this  place  to  make  the  subject  clear,  and  it  was
suggested  to  Archbishop  Wake,  by  Dr.  Grabe,  that  what  should  have  follow-
ed was  transposed  into  the  next  command.  Accordingly  the  Archbishop  re-
duced both  places  to  what  he  conceived  should  be  their  true  order,  and  io
that  state  they  now  stand.     ^  Vessels.

224


THE  RESURRECTION   OF  CHRIST.  !PaK«  '^•

FROM    A     "book    of   THE    EVANGELISTS."    GREEK   MANUSCRIPT   OF  THE   TWELFTH
CENTURY.


Of  a  two-fold  spirit.  COMMAND  XII.      Of  a  tivo-fold  dedre.


14  Sir,  said  I,  how  can  this  be
done  ?  For  neither  of  those  things
which  you  have  mentioned,  are
possible  to  be  done.  And  he  an-
swered. Therefore  as  these  things
cannot  be  done,  so  is  the  earthly
spirit  without  virtue,  and  without
effect.

15  Understand  yet  farther  the
power  which  cometh  from  above,
in  this  similitude.  The  grains  of
hail  that  drop  down  are  exceed-
ingly small ;  and  yet  when  they
fall  upon  the  head  of  a  man,  how
do  they  cause  pain  to  it  ?

16  And  again;  consider  the
droppings  of  a  house :  how  the
little  drops  falling  upon  the  earth,
work  a  hollow  in  the  stones.

17  So  in  like  manner  the  least
things  which  come  from  above,
and  fall  upon  the  earth,  have
great  force.  Wherefore  join  thy-
self to  this  spirit,  which  has  the
power  ;  and  depart  from  the
other  which  is  empty.

COMMAND  XII.

Of  a  twofold  desire:  that  the  commands
of  God  are  not  impossible :  and  that
the  devil  is  not  to  be  feared  by  them
that  believe.

AGAIN  he  said  unto  me ;  ^  re-
move from  thee  all  evil
desires,  and  put  on  good  and
holy  desires.  For  having  put  on
a  good  desire,  thou  shalt  hate  that
which  is  evil,  and  bridle  it  as
thou  wilt.  But  an  evil  desire  is
dreadful  and  hard  to  be  tamed.
2  It  is  very  horrible  and  wild :
and  by  its  wildness  consumes  men.
And  especially  ifa  servant  of  God
shall  chance  to  fall  into  it,  except
he  be  very  wise,  he '  is  ruined  by
it.  For  it  destroys  those  who  have
not  the  garment  of  a  good  desire:
and  ^  are  engaged  in  the  affairs  of

^  Vid.  Antioch.  Horn.  Ixxiv.     *  MS.  Lamb.  Consumitur,  et,  Gr.  Athanas.
(^airavaTai.     ^  Gr.  Athanas.  ejbLTr£d>vpfj.evnvc     tu  aluin  tovtcj.     Instead  of  impli-


hath  the  Spirit  of  God  shall  come
into  the  church  of  the  righteous,
who  have  the  faith  of  God,  and
they  pray  unto  the  Lord ;  then
the  holy  angel  of  God  fills  that
man  with  the  blessed  Spirit,  and
he  speaks  in  the  congregation  as
he  is  moved  of  God.

8  Thus  therefore  is  the  spirit
of  God  known,  because  whoso-
ever speaketh  by  the  Spirit  of
God,  speaketh  as  the  Lord  will.

9  Hear  now  concerning  the
earthly  spirit,  which  is  empty
and  foolish,  and  without  virtue.
And  first  of  all  the  man  who  is
supposed  to  have  the  Spirit,
(whereas  he  hath  it  not  in  reality),
exalteth  himself,  and  desires  to
have  the  first  seat,  and  is  wicked,
and  full  of  words.

10  And  spends  his  time  in
pleasure,  and  in  all  manner  of
voluptuousness ;  and  receives  the
reward  of  his  divination ;  which  if
he  receives  not,  he  does  not  divine.

11  Should  the  Spirit  of  God
receive  reward  and  divine  ?  It
doth  not  become  a  prophet  of
God  so  to  do.

12  Thus  you  see  the  life  of  each
of  these  kind  of  prophets.  Where-
fore prove  that  man  by  his  life
and  works,  who  says  that  he
hath  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  be-
lieve the  Spirit  which  comes  from
God,  and  has  power  as  such.  But
believe  not  the  earthly  and
empty  spirit,  which  is  from  the
devil,  in  whom  there  is  no  faith
nor  virtue.

13  Hear  now  the  similitude
which  I  am  about  to  speak  unto
thee.  Take  a  stone,  and  throw  it
up  towards  heaven  ;  or  take  a
spout  of  water,  and  mount  it  up
thitherward  ;  and  see  if  thou
canst  reach  unto  heaven.


cateos,  the  Lat.  Vers,  should  be  Implicatos.
15


225


God's  commands


II.  HERMAS.


not  impossible.


this  present  world  ;  and  delivers
them  unto  death.

3  ^Sir,  said  I,  what  are  the
works  of  an  evil  desire,  which
bring  men  unto  death?  Shew
them  to  me,  that  I  may  depart
from  them.  Hear  said  he,  by  what
works  an  evil  desire  bringeth  the
servants  of  God  unto  death.

4  First  of  all,  it  is  an  evil  desire
to  covet  another  man's  wife  ;  or
for  a  woman  to  covet  another's
husband;  as  also  to  desire  the
dainties  of  riches :  and  multitude
of  superfluous  meats ;  and  drunk-
enness ;  and  many  delights.

5  For  in  much  delicacy  there
is  folly ;  and  many  pleasures  are
needless  to  the  servants  of  God.
Such  lusting  therefore  is  evil  and
pernicious,  which  brings  to  death
the  servants  of  God.  For  all
such  lusting  is  from  the  devil.

6  Whosoever  therefore  shall
depart  from  all  evil  desires,  shall
live  unto  God ;  but  they  that  are
subject  unto  them  shall  die  for
ever.  For  this  evil  lusting  is
deadly.  Do  thou  therefore  put  on
the  desire  of  righteousness,  and
being  armed  with  the  fear  of  the
Lord,  resist  all  wucked  lusting.

7  For  this  fear  dwelleth  in
good  desires ;  and  when  evil
coveting  shall  see  thee  armed
with  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  re-
sisting it,  it  will  fly  far  from
thee,  and  not  appearing  before
thee,  but  be  afraid  of  thy  armour.

8  And  thou  shalt  have  the  vic-
tory, and  be  crowned  for  it ;  and
shalt  attain  to  that  desire  which
is  good ;  and  shalt  give  the  vic-
tory which  thou  hast  obtained
unto  God,  and  shalt  serve  him
in  doing  what  thou  thyself  wonki-
est do.

9  For  if  thou  shalt  serve  good


desires,  and  be  subject  to  them ;
thou  shalt  be  able  to  get  the  do-
minion over  thy  wicked  lustings  ;
and  they  shall  be  subject  to  thee
as  thou  wilt.

10  T[  And  I  said,  Sir,  I  would
know  how  to  serve  that  desire
which  is  good  ?  Hearken,  saith
he.  Fear  God  and  put  thy  trust'
in  him,  and  love  truth,  and
righteousness,  and  do  that  which
is  good.

11  If  thou  shalt  do  these
things,  thou  shalt  be  an  approved
servant  of  God  ;  and  shalt  serve
him  :  and  all  others  who  shall  in
like  manner  serve  a  good  desire
shall  live  unto  God.

12  ^  And  when  he  had  ful-
filled these  twelve  commands,  he
said  unto  me.  Thou  hast  now
these  commands,  walk  in  them ;
and  exhort  those  that  hear  them
that  repent,  and  that  they  keep
their  repentance  pure  all  the  re-
maining days  of  their  life.

13  And  fulfil  diligently  this
ministry  which  I  commit  to  thee,
and  thou  shalt  receive  great  ad-
vantage by  it ;  and  shalt  find
favour  with  all  such  as  shall  re-
pent, and  shall  believe  thy  words.
For  I  am  with  thee,  and  will
force  them  to  believe.

14  And  I  said  unto  him.
Sir,  these  commands  are  great
and  excellent,  and  able  to  cheer
the  heart  of  that  man  that  shall
be  able  to  keep  them.  But,  Sir,
I  cannot  tell,  whether  they  can
be  observed  by  any  man  ?

15  He  answered,  Thou  shalt
easily  keep  these  commands,  and
they  shall  not  be  hard :  howbeit,
if  thou  shalt  suffer  it  once  to
enter  into  thy  heart  that  they
cannot  be  kept  by  any  one,  thou
shalt  not  fulfil  them.


^  That  the  words  here  inserted,  and  removed  into  their  proper  place  in  tlie
foregoing    Command,    do   not    belong   to   this   Discourse,    the    Greek     of
Athanasius,  in  which  they  are  all  omitted,  clearly  shews.
226


Believers  not  to


COMMAND  XII.


fear  the  devil.


16  But  now  I  say  unto  thee,
if  thou  shalt  not  observe  these
commands,  but  shall  neglect
them,  thou  shalt  not  be  saved,  nor
thy  children,  nor  thy  house ;  be-
cause thou  hast  judged  that  these
commands  cannot  be  kept  by  man.

11  \  These  things  he  spake
very  angrily  unto  me,  insomuch
that  he  greatly  affrighted  me.
For  he  changed  his  countenance,
so  that  a  man  could  not  bear
his  anger.

18  And  when  he  saw  me  altoge-
ther troubled  and  confounded,  he
began  to  speak  more  moderately
and  cheerfully,  saying,  O  foolish,
and  without  understanding !

19  Unconstant,  not  knowing
the  majesty  of  God  how  great
and  wonderful  he  is;  who  cre-
ated the  world  for  man,  and  hath
made  every  creature  subject  unto
him :  and  given  him  all  power,
that  he  should  be  able  to  ^  fulfil
all  these  commands.

20  He  is  able,  said  he,  to  ^  ful-
fil all  these  commands,  who  has
the  Lord  in  his  heart :  but  they
who  have  the  Lord  only  in  their
mouths,  and  their  heart  is  har-
dened, and  they  are  far  from  the
Lord ;  to  such  persons  these
commands  are  hard  and  difficult.

21  Put  therefore,  ye  that  are
empty  and  light  in  the  faith,  the
Lord  your  God  in  your  hearts ;
and  ye  shall  perceive  how  that
nothing  is  more  easy  than  these
commands,  nor  more  pleasant,
nor  more  gentle  and  holy.

22  And  turn  yourselves  to  the
Lord  your  God,  and  forsake  the
devil  and  his  pleasures,  because
they  are  evil,  and  bitter,  and
impure.  And  fear  not  the  devil,
because  he  has  no  power  over  you.

23  For  I  am  with  you,  the
messenger   of   repentance,   who


have  the  dominion  over  him.
The  devil  doth  indeed  aflfright
men ;  but  his  terror  is  vain.
Wherefore  fear  him  not,  and  he
will  flee  from  you.

24  And  I  said  unto  him ;  Sir,
hear  me  speak  a  few  words  unto
you.  He  answered.  Say  on  :  A
man  indeed  desires  to  keep  the
commandments  of  God :  and
there  is  no  one  but  what  prays
unto  God,  that  he  may  be  able
to  keep  his  commandments.

25  But  the  devil  is  hard,  and
by  his  power  rules  over  the  ser-
vants of  God.  And  he  said  He
cannot  rule  over  the  servants  of
God,  ^  who  trust  in  him  with  all
their  hearts.

26  The  devil  may  strive,  but
he  cannot  overcome  them.

27  For  if  ye  resist  him,  he
will  flee  away  with  confusion
from  you.  But  they  that  are
not  full  in  the  faith,  fear  the
devil,  as  if  he  had  some  great
power.  For  the  devil  tries  the
servants  of  God  and  if  he  finds
them  empty,  he  destroys  them.

28  For  as  man,  when  he  fills
up  vessels  with  good  wine,  *  and
among  them  puts  a  few  vessels
half  full,  and  comes  to  try  and
taste  of  the  vessels,  doth  not  try
those  that  are  full,  because  he
knows  that  they  are  good ;  but
tastes  those  that  are  half  full,
lest  they  should  grow  sour  ;  (for
vessels  half  full  soon  grow  sour,
and  lose  the  taste  of  wine :)
so  the  devil  comes  to  the  servants
of  God  to  try  them.

29  They  that  are  full  of  faith
resist  him  stoutly,  and  he  de-
parts from  them,  because  he
finds  no  place  where  to  enter
into  them  :  then  he  goes  to  those
that  are  not  full  of  faith,  and
because  he  has  place  of  entrance,


^  Ut  dominetur.
Matt.  xxiv.  42.


^  Angel.        'Gr.  sXki^ovtuv  sec  'Avtov.        ^Origen.  in

227


We  have  an  abiding  city     III.  HERMAS.        in  the  world  to  come.


he  goes  into  them,  and  does  what
he  will  with  them,  and  they  be-
come his  servants.

30  Tf  But  I,  ^  the  messenger  of
repentance,  say  unto  you,  fear
not  the  devil,  for  I  am  sent  unto
you,  that  I  may  be  with  you,  as
many  as  shall  repent  with  your
whole  heart,  and  that  I  may
confirm  you  in  the  faith.

31  ^  Believe  therefore,  ye  who
by  reason  of  your  transgressions
have  ^  forgot  God,  and  your  own
salvation ;  and  *  adding  to  your
sins  have  made  your  life  very
heavy.

32  That  if  ye  shall  turn  to
the  Lord  with  your  whole  hearts,
and  shall  serve  him  according
to  his  will ;  he  will  heal  you  of
your  former  sins,  and  ye  shall
have  dominion  over  all  the  works
of  the  devil.

33  Be  not  then  afraid  in  the
least   of    his    tlireatenings,   for


they  are  without  force,  as  the
nerves  of  a  dead  man.  But
hearken  unto  me,  and  fear  the
Lord  Almighty,  who  is  able  to
save  and  to  destroy  you  ;  and
keep  his  commands,  that  ye  may
live  unto  God.

34  And  I  said  unto  him ;  Sir,
I  am  now  confirmed  in  all  the
commands  of  the  Lord  whilst
that  you  are  with  me,  and  I
know  that  you  will  break  all  the
power  of  the  devil.

35  And  we  also  shall  over-
come him,  if  we  shall  be  able,
through  the  help  of  the  Lord,
to  keep  these  commands  which
you  have  delivered.

36  Thou  shalt  keep  them,  said
he,  if  thou  shalt  purify  thy
heart  towards  the  Lord.  And  all
they  also  shall  keep  them  who
shall  cleanse  their  hearts  from
the  vain  desires  of  the  present
world,  and  shall  live  unto  God.


The  Third  Book  of  HERMAS,  which

TUDES.
SIMILITUDE  r.

That  seeing  we  have  no  abiding  city  in
this  world,  we  ought  to  look  after  that
which  is  to  come.

AND  he  said  unto  me;  *Ye
know  that  ye  who  are  the
servants  of  the  Lord,  live  here
as  in  a  pilgrimage ;  for  your
city  is  far  off  from  this  city.

2  If,  therefore,  ye  know  your
city  in  which  ye  are  to  dwell,
why  do  ye  here  buy  estates,  and
provide  yourselves  with  delica-
cies, and  stately  buildings,  and
superfluous  houses  ?  For  he
that  provides  himself  these
things  in  this  city,  does  not  think
of  returning  into  his  own  city.

3  O  foolish,  and  doubtful,  and


is   called   his   SIMILI-


wretched  man  ;  who  understand-
est  not  that  all  these  things
belong  to  other  men,  and  are
under  the  power  of  another.
For  the  Lord  of  this  city  saith
unto  thee ;  Either  obey  my  laws,
or  depart  out  of  my  city.

4  What  therefore  shalt  thou
do  who  art  subject  to  a  law  in
thine  own  city  ?  Canst  thou  for
thy  estate,  or  for  any  of  those
things  which  thou  hast  provided,
deny  thy  law  ?  But  if  thou  shalt
deny  it,  and  wilt  afterwards  re-
turn into  thy  own  city,  thou
shalt  not  be  received,  but  shall
be  excluded  thence.

5  See  therefore,  that  like  a  man
in  another  country,  thou  procure


^  Angel.      ^  Vid.  Antioch
Deurn,  et  salutem  vestram


Horn.  Ixxvii.  ^  MS.  Lamb.  Qui  obliti  estia

*  What  follows  should  be  corrected  thus  ;  Et
qui  adjicientea  peccatis  vestris,  gravatis  vitam  yestram.  ^  Antioch.  Horn.  xv.
228


The  rich  helped  by    ■      SIMILITUDE  II.     the  prayers  of  the  poor.


no  more  to  thyself  than  what  is
necessary,  and  sufficient  for
thee  ?  and  be  ready,  that  when
the  God  or  Lord  of  this  city
shall  drive  thee  out  of  it,  thou
mayst  oppose  his  law,  and  go
into  thine  own  city ;  where  thou
mayst  with  all  cheerfulness  live
according  to  thine  own  law  with
no  wrong.

6  Take  heed  therefore  ye  that
serve  God,  and  have  him  in  your
hearts:  work  ye  the  works  of
Gad,  being  mindful  both  of  his
commands  and  of  his  promises,
which  he  has  promised ;  and  be
assured  that  he  will  make  them
good  unto  you  ;  if  ye  shall  keep
his  commandments.

7  Instead  therefore  of  the  pos-
sessions that  ye  would  otherwise
purchase,  redeem  Hhose  that
are  in  want  from  their  necessi-
ties, as  everyone  is  able;  justify
the  widows;  judge  the  cause  of
the  fatherless ;  and  spend  your
riches  and  your  wealth  in  such
works  as  these.

8  For,  for  this  end  has  God
enriched  you,  that  ye  might  ful-
fil these  kind  of  services.  It  is
much  better  to  do  this,  than  to
buy  lands  or  houses  ;  because  all
such  things  shall  perish  with
this  present  time.

9  But  what  ye  shall  do  for
the  name  of  the  Lord,  ye  shall
find  in  your  city,  and  shall  have
joy  without  sadness  or  fear.
Wherefore  covet  not  the  riches
of  the  heathen;  for  they  are  de-
structive to  the  servants  of  God.

10  ^But  trade  with  your  own
riches  which  you  possess,  by
which  ye  may  attain  unto  ever-
lasting joy.

11  And  do  not  commit  adul-
tery, nor  touch  any  other  man's
wife,  nor  desire  her ;  but  covet

1  Souls.       2  MS.  Lambeth.
Origen.  in  Jos.  Horn.  x.


that  which  is  thy  own  business,
and  thou  shalt  be  saved.
SIMILITUDE  IL

As  the  vine  is  supported  by  the  elm,  so
is  the  rich  man  helped  by  the  prayers
of  the  poor.

AS  I  was  walking  into  the
field,  and  considered  the
elm  and  the  vine,  and  thought
with  myself  of  their  fruits,  an
angel  appeared  unto  me,  and
said  unto  me ;  What  is  it  that
thou  thinkest  upon  thus  long
within  thyself?

2  And  I  said  unto  him,  Sir,  I
think  of  this  vine  and  this  elm
because  their  fruits  are  fair.
And  he  said  unto  me;  ^ These
two  trees  are  set  for  a  pattern  to
the  servants  of  God.

3  And  I  said  unto  him,  Sir,  I
would  know  in  what  the  pattern
of  these  trees  which  thou  men-
tionest,  does  consist.  Hearken,
saith  he  ;  seest  thou  this  vine  and
this  elm ;  Sir,  said  I,  I  see  them,

4  This  vine,  saith  he,  is  fruit-
ful, but  the  elm  is  a  tree  without
fruit.  Nevertheless  this  vine
unless  it  were  set  by  this  elm,
and  supported  by  it,  would  not
bear  much  fruit;  but  lying  along
upon  the  ground,  would  bear  but
ill  fruit,  because  it  did  not  hang
upon  the  elm  ;  whereas,  beingsup-
ported  upon  the  elm,  it  bears  fruit
both  for  itself  and  for  that.

5  See,  therefore,  how  the  elm
gives  no  less,  but  rather  more
fruit,  than  the  vine.  How,  Sir,
said  I,  does  it  bear  more  fruit
than  the  vine  ?  Because,  said  he,
the  vine  being  supported  upon  the
elm  gives  both  much  and  good
fruit ;  whereas,  if  it  lay  along
upon  the  ground,  it  would  bear
but  little,  and  that  very  ill  too.

6  This  similitude,  therefore,  is
set  forth  to  the  servants  of  God ;

Proprias,  autera  quas  habetis  agite.         '^  Vid.

229


Oj  green  and


III.  HERMAS.


dry  leaves.


and  it  represents  the  rich  and
poor  man.  I  answered,  Sir,  make
this  manifest  unto  me.  Hear,
said  he ;  the  rich  man  has  wealth ;
howbeit  towards  the  Lord  he  is
poor;  for  he  is  Haken  up  about  his
riches,  and  prays  but  little  to  the
Lord ;  and  the  prayers  which  he
makes  are  lazy  and  without  force.

7  When,  therefore,  the  rich
man  reaches  out  to  the  poor  those
things  which  he  wants,  the  poor
man  prays  unto  the  Lord  for  the
rich ;  and  God  grants  unto  the
rich  man  all  good  things,  because
the  poor  man  is  rich  in  prayer  ;
and  his  requests  have  great  power
with  the  Lord.

8  Then  the  rich  man  ministers
all  things  to  the  poor,  because
he  perceives  that  he  is  heard  by
the  Lord :  and  he  the  more  will-
ingly and  without  doubting,
affords  him  what  he  wants,  and
takes  care  that  nothing  be  lack-
ing to  him.

9  And  the  poor  man  gives
thanks  unto  the  Lord  for  the
rich ;  because  they  do  both  their
work  from  the  Lord.

10  With  men  therefore,  the
elm  is  not  thought  to  give  any
fruit;  and  they  know  not  neither
understand  that  its  company
being  added  to  the  vine,  the  vine
bears  a  double  increase,  both  for
itself  and  for  the  elm.

11  Even  so  the  poor  praying
unto  the  Lord  for  the  rich,  are
heard  by  him  ;  and  their  riches
are  increased,  because  they
minister  to  the  poor  of  their
wealth.  They  are  therefore  both
made  partakers  of  each  other's
good  works.

12  Whosoever,  therefore,  shall
do  these  things,  he  shall  not  be
forsaken  by  the  Lord,  but  shall
be  written  in  the  book  of  life.

13  Happy  are  they  who  are

^  Distracted.
230


rich,  and  perceive  themselves  to
be  increased :  for  he  that  is  sen-
sible of  this,  will  be  able  to  min-
ister somewhat,  to  others.
SIMILITUDE  III.

As  the  green  trees  in  the  winter  cannot
be  distinguished  from  the  dry  ;  so
neither  can  the  righteous  from  the
wicked  in  this  present  world.

AGAIN  he  showed  me  many
trees  whose  leaves  were
shed,  and  which  seemed  to  me  to
be  withered,  for  they  were  all
alike.  And  he  said  unto  me,  Seest
thou  these  trees?  I  said.  Sir,  I  see
that  they  look  like  dry  trees.

2  He  answering,  said  unto  me ;
These  trees  are  like  unto  the  men
who  live  in  the  present  world.  I
replied  :  Sir,  why  are  they  like
unto  dried  trees  ?  Because,  said
he,  neither  the  righteous,  nor
unrighteous,  are  known  from  one
another  ;  but  all  are  alike  in  this
present  world.

3  For  this  world  is  as  the
winter  to  the  righteous  men,  ^  be-
cause they  are  not  known,  but
dwell  among  sinners.

4  As  in  the  winter  all  the  trees
having  lost  their  leaves,  are  like
dry  trees;  nor  can  it  be  discerned
which  are  dry  and  which  are
green  :  so  in  this  present  world
neither  the  righteous  nor  wicked
are  discerned  from  each  other ;
but  they  are  all  alike.

SIMILITUDE  IV.

As  in  the  summer  the  living  trees  are
distinguished  from  tJie  dry  by  their
fruit  and  green  leaves;  so  in  the
world  to  come  the  righteous  shall  be
distinguished  from  the  unrighteous  by
their  happiness.

AGAIN  he  showed  me  many
other  trees,  of  which  some
had  leaves,  and  others  appeared
dry  and  withered.  And  he  said  un-
to me,  Seest  thou  these  trees?  I  an-
swered, Sir,  I  see  them ;  and  some
are  dry,  and  others  full  of  leaves.

2  Who  are.


Of  a  true  fast  and


SIMILITUDE  V.


the  rewards  of  it.


2  These  trees,  saith  he,  which
are  green,  are  the  righteous  which
shall  possess  the  world  to  come.
For  the  world  to  come,  is  the
summer  to  the  righteous  ;  but  to
sinners  it  is  the  winter.

3  When,  therefore,  the  mercy
of  the  Lord  shall  shine  forth,
then  they  who  serve  God  shall
be  made  manifest,  and  plain  unto
all.  For  as  in  the  summer  the
fruit  of  every  tree  is  shown  and
made  manifest,  so  also  the  works
of  the  righteous  shall  be  declared
and  made  manifest,  and  they
shall  be  restored  in  that  world
merry  and  joyful.

4  For  the  other  ^  kind  of  men,
namely  the  wicked,  like  the  trees
which  thou  sawest  dry,  shall  as
such  be  found  dry  and  without
fruit  in  that  other  world  ;  and
like  dry  wood  shall  be  burnt ;
and  it  shall  be  made  manifest
that  they  have  done  evil  all  the
time  of  their  life ;

5  And  they  shall  be  burnt  be-
cause they  have  sinned  and  have
not  repented  of  their  sins.  And
also  all  the  other  nations  shall  be
burnt,  because  they  have  not  ac-
knowledged God  their  Creator.

6  Do  thou  therefore  bring
forth  good  fruit,  that  in  the  sum-
mer thy  fruit  may  be  known ;
and  keep  thyself  from  much
business,  and  thou  shalt  not
offend.  For  they  who  are  in-
volved in  much  business,  sin
much  ;  because  they  are  taken
up  with  their  affairs,  and  serve
not  God.

7  And  how  can  a  man  that
does  not  serve  God,  ask  anything
of  God,  and  receive  it?  But  they
who  serve  him,  ask  and  receive
what  they  desire.

8  But,  if  a  man  has  only  one
thing  to  follow,  he  may  serve

^  Nations  "^  With  me.  '  Vid.  not.
ibid.       *  Jejuna  certe  vernm  jejunium


God,  because  his  mind  is  not
taken  off  from  God  but  he  serves
him  with  a  pure  mind.

9  If,  therefore,  thou  shalt  do
this,  thou  mayest  have  fruit  in
the  world  to  come ;  and  all,  as
many  as  shall  do  in  like  manner,
shall  bring  forth  fruit.
SIMILITUDE  V.

Of  a  true  fast,  and  the  rewards  of  it,  also
of  the  cleanliness  of  the  body-

AS  I  was  fasting,  and  sitting
down  in  a  certain  mountain,
and  giving  thanks  unto  God  for
all  the  things  that  he  had  done  ^
unto  me  ;  behold  I  saw  the  shep-
herd, who  was  wont  to  converse
with  me,  sitting  by  me,  and  say-
ing unto  me :  What  has  brought
thee  hither  thus  early  in  the
morning?  I  answered,  Sir,  to-
day I  keep  a  ^  station.

2  He  answered,  What  is  a
station  ?  I  replied,  it  is  a  fast.
He  said,  What  is  that  fast?  I
answered,  I  fast,  as  I  have  been
wont  to  do.  Ye  know  not,  said
he,  what  it  is  to  fast  unto  God ;
nor  is  this  a  fast  which  ye  fast,
profiting  nothing  with  God.

3  Sir,  said  I,  what  makes  you
speak  thus  ?  He  replied,  I  speak
it,  because  this  is  not  the  true
fast  which  you  think  that  you
fast ;  but  I  will  show  you  what
that  is  which  is  a  *  complete  fast,
and  acceptable  unto  God.

4  Hearken,  said  he,  The  Lord
does  not  desire  such  a  needless
fast :  for  by  fasting  in  this  man-
ner, thou  advancest  nothing  in
righteousness.

5  ^  But  the  true  fast  is  this :
Do  nothing  wickedly  in  thy  life,
but  serve  God  with  a  pure  mind ;
and  keep  his  commandments
and  walk  according  to  his  pre-
cepts, nor  suffer  any  wicked  de-
sire to  enter  into  the  mind.

Coteler.  in  loc.  pp.  72,  73.  ^  Coteler.
tale.    Lat.

231


OJ  a  true  fad  and


III.  HERMAS.


the  rewards  of  it.


6  But  trust  in  the  Lord,  that
if  thou  dost  these  things,  and
fearest  him,  and  abstaineth  from
every  evil  work,  thou  shalt  live
unto  God.

7  If  thou  shalt  do  this,  thou
shalt  perfect  a  great  fast,  and  an
acceptable  one  unto  the  Lord.

8  T  Hearken  unto  the  simili-
tude which  I  am  about  to  pro-
pose unto  thee,  as  to  this  matter.

9  A  certain  man  having  a
farm,  and  many  servants,  planted
a  vineyard  in  a  certain  part  of
his  estate  for  his  posterity  :

10  And  taking  a  journey  into
a  far  country,  chose  one  of  his
servants  which  he  thought  the
most  faithful  and  approved,  and
delivered  the  vineyard  into  his
care ;  commanding  him  that  he
should  take  up  the  vines.  Which
if  he  did,  and  fulfilled  his  com-
mand, he  promised  to  give  him
his  liberty.  Nor  did  he  command
him  to  do  anything  more;  and
so  went  into  a  far  country.

11  And  after  that  servant  had
taken  that  charge  upon  him,  he
did  whatsoever  his  lord  com-
manded him.  And  when  he  had
staked  the  vineyard,  and  found
it  to  be  full  of  weeds,  he  began
to  think  with  himself,  saying;

12  I  have  done  what  my  lord
commanded  me,  I  will  now  dig
this  vineyard,  and  when  it  is
digged,  it  will  be  more  beautiful;
and  the  weeds  being  pulled  up,
it  will  bring  forth  more  fruit
and  not  be  choked  by  the  weeds.

13  So  setting  about  this  work
he  digged  it,  and  plucked  up  all
the  weeds  that  were  in  it ;  and
so  the  vineyard  became  very
beautiful  and  prosperous,  not
being  choked  with  weeds.

14  After  some  time  the  lord
of  the  vineyard  comes  and  goes


into  the  vineyard,  and  when  he
saw  that  it  was  handsomely
staked  and  digged,  and  the  weeds
plucked  up  that  were  in  it,  and
the  vines  flourishing,  he  rejoiced
greatly  at  the  care  of  his  servant.

15  And  calling  his  son  whom
he  loved,  and  who  was  to  be  his
heir,  and  his  friends  with  whom
he  was  wont  to  consult ;  he  tells
them  what  he  had  commanded
his  servant  to  do,  and  what  his
servant  had  done  more ;  and  they
immediately  congratulated  that
servant,  that  he  had  received  so
^full  a  testimony  from  his  lord.

16  Then  he  said  to  them,  I
indeed  promised  this  servant  his
liberty,  if  he  observed  the  com-
mand which  I  gave  him ;  and
he  observed  it,  and  besides  has
done  a  good  work  to  my  vine-
yard, which  has  exceedingly
pleased  me.

17  Wherefore,  for  this  work
which  he  hath  done,  I  will  make
him  my  heir  together  with  my
son,  because  that  when  he  saw
what  was  good,  he  neglected  it
not,  but  did  it.

18  This  design  of  the  lord  both
his  son  and  his  friends  approved,
namely,  that  his  servant  should
be  heir  together  with  his  son.

19  Not  long  after  this,  the
master  of  the  family  calling  to-
gether his  friends,  sent  from  his
supper  several  kinds  of  food  to
that  servant.

20  Which  when  he  had  re-
ceived, he  took  so  much  of  them
as  was  sufficient  for  himself,  and
divided  the  rest  among  his  fellow
servants.

21  Which  when  they  had  re-
ceived, they  rejoiced ;  and  wished
that  he  might  find  yet  greater
favour  with  his  lord,  for  what
he  had  done  to  them.


232


Just  a  commendation.


CHRIST  AS  A  GARDENER  APPEARING  TO  MARY  MAGDALENE.         [Page  76.

FROM   A   PAINTING    IN    DISTEMPER   ON   WOOD  :     TWELFTH    CENTURY.

The  letters  underneath  are  frorti  the  back  of  the  picture :  "  Donatus  Bizamanus ,  pixit
in  Hotranto."


OS  a  true  fast  and  SIMILITUDE  V.


the  rewards  of  it.


22  When  his  lord  heard  all
these  things,  he  was  again  filled
with  great  joy ;  and  calling  again
his  friends  and  his  son  together,
he  related  to  them  what  his  ser-
vant had  done  with  the  meats
which  he  had  sent  unto  them.

23  They  therefore  so  much
the  more  assented  to  the  master
of  the  household ;  and  he  ought
to  make  that  servant  his  heir
together  with  his  son.

24  ^  I  said  unto  him.  Sir,  I
know  not  these  similitudes,  nei-
ther can  I  understand  them,  un-
less you  expound  them  unto  me.
I  will,  says  he,  expound  all
things  unto  thee  whatsoever  I
have  talked  with  thee,  or  shewn
unto  thee.

25  Keep  the  commandments
of  the  Lord  and  thou  shalt  be
approved,  and  shalt  be  written
in  the  number  of  those  that  keep
his  commandments.  But  if  be-
sides those  things  which  the  Lord
hath  commanded,  thou  shalt  add
some  good  thing ;  thou  shalt
purchase  to  thyself  a  greater
dignity,  and  be  in  more  favour
with  the  Lord  than  thou  shouldst
otherwise  have  been.

26  If  therefore  thou  shalt  keep
the  commandments  of  the  Lord,
and  shalt  add  to  them  these  sta-
tions, thou  shalt  rejoice ;  but
especially  if  thou  shalt  keep  them
according  to  my  commands.

27  I  said  unto  him.  Sir,  what-
soever thou  shalt  command  me,
I  will  observe ;  for  I  know  that
thou  wilt  be  with  me.  I  will,
said  he,  be  with  thee  who  hast
taken  up  such  a  resolution ;  and
I  will  be  with  all  those  who
purpose  in  like  manner.

28  This  fast,  saith  he,  whilst
thou  dost  also  observe  the  com-
mandments of  the  Lord,  is  ex-


ceeding good.    Thus  shalt  there-
fore thou  keep  it.

29  First  of  all,  take  heed  to
thyself,  and  keep  thyself  from
every  ^wicked  act,  and  from
every  filthy  word,  and  from  every
hurtful  desire;  and  purify  thy
mind  from  all  the  vanity  of  this
present  world.  If  thou  shalt
observe  these  things,  this  fast
shall  be  right.

30  Thus  therefore  do.  Having
performed  what  is  before  writ-
ten, that  day  on  which  thou
fastest  thou  shalt  taste  nothing
at  all  but  ^ bread  and  water;
^  and  computing  the  quantity  of
food  which  thou  art  wont  to  eat
upon  other  days,  thou  shalt  ^  lay
aside  the  expense  which  thou
shouldest  have  made  that  day,
and  give  it  unto  the  widow,  the
fatherless,  and  the  poor.

31  ^And  thus  thou  shalt  per-
fect the  humiliation  of  thy  soul ;
that  he  who  receives  of  it  may
satisfy  his  soul,  and  his  prayer
come  up  to  the  Lord  God  for  thee.

32  If  therefore  thou  shalt  thus
accomplish  thy  fast,  as  I  com-
mand thee,  thy  sacrifice  shall  be
acceptable  unto  the  Lord,  and  thy
fast  shall  be  WTitten  in  his  book.

33  This  station,  thus  per-
formed, is  good  and  pleasing,  and
acceptable  unto  the  Lord.  These
things  if  thou  shalt  observe  with
thy  children  and  with  all  thy
house,  thou  shalt  be  happy.

34  And  whosoever  when  they
hear  these  things,  shall  do  them,
they  also  shall  be  happy ;  and
whatsoever  they  shall  ask  of  the
Lord  they  shall  receive  it.

35  And  I  prayed  him  that  he
would  expound  unto  me  the  simi-
litude of  the  farm,  and  the  Lord,
and  of  the  vineyard,  and  of  the
servant  that  had  staked  the  vine-


Shameful  ;  or,  upbraiding.  ^  Vid.  Not.  Coteler.  ii.,  p.  74.  A.  B.  C.

^  Vid.  Antioch.  Horn.  vii.

233


Oj  cleanliness


III.  HERMAS.


of  the  body.


yard ;  and  of  the  weeds  that  were
plucked  out  of  the  vineyard ;  and
of  his  son  and  his  friends  which
he  took  into  council  with  him.
For  I  understand  that  that  was  a
similitude.

36  He  said  unto  me,  Thou  art
very  bold  in  asking:  for  thou
oughtest  not  to  ask  any  thing  ;
because  if  it  be  fitting  to  shew  it
unto  thee,  it  shall  be  shewed  unto
thee.

37  I  answered  him  ;  Sir,  what-
soever thou  shalt  shew  me,  with-
out explaining  it  unto  me,  I  shall
in  vain  see  it,  if  I  do  not  under-
stand what  it  is.  And  if  thou
shalt  propose  any  similitudes,  and
not  expound  them,  I  shall  in  vain
hear  them.

38.  He  answered  me  again,
saying :  Whosoever  is  the  servant
of  God,  and  has  the  Lord  in  his
heart,  he  desires  understanding
of  him,  and  receives  it ;  and  he
explains  every  similitude,  and
understands  the  words  of  the
Lord  which  need  an  inquiry.

39  But  they  that  are  lazy  and
slow  to  pray,  doubt  to  seek  from
the  Lord ;  although  the  Lord  be
of  such  an  extraordinary  good-
ness, that  without  ceasing  he  giv-
eth  all  things  to  them  that  ask
of  him.

40  Thou  therefore  who  art
strengthened  by  that  venerable
messenger,  and  hast  received
such  a  powerful  gift  of  prayer  ;
seeing  thou  art  not  slothful,  why
dost  thou  not  now  ask  under-
standing of  the  Lord,  and  re-
ceive it?

41  I  said  unto  him  ;  seeing  I
have  thee  present,  it  is  necessary
that  I  should  seek  it  of  thee,  and
ask  thee ;  for  thou  showest  all
things  unto  me,  and  speakest  to
me  when  thou  art  present.

42  But  if  I  should  see  or  hear


these  things  when  thou  wert  not
present,  I  would  then  ask  the  Lord
that  he  would  shew  them  unto  me.

43  ^  And  he  replied,  I  said  a
little  before  that  thou  wert  sub-
tle and  bold,  in  that  thou  asketh
the  meaning  of  these  similitudes.

44  But  because  thou  still  per-
sistest,  I  will  unfold  to  thee  this
parable  which  thou  desirest,  that
thou  mayest  make  it  known  unto
all  men.

45  Hear  therefore,  said  he,
and  understand.  The  farm  be-
fore mentioned  denotes  the  whole
earth.  The  Lord  of  the  farm  is
he  who  created  and  finished  all
things,  and  gave  virtue  unto  them.

46  His  son  is  the  Holy  Spirit :
the  servant  is  the  Son  of  God  :
the  vineyard  is  the  people  whom
he  saves.  The  stakes  are  the
^  messengers  which  are  set  over
them  by  the  Lord,  to  support  his
people.  The  weeds  that  are
plucked  up  out  of  the  vineyard,
are  the  sins  which  the  servants
of  God  had  committed.

47  The  food  which  he  sent
him  from  his  supper,  are  the
commands  which  he  gave  to  his
people  by  his  Son.  The  friends
whom  he  called  to  counsel  with
him,  are  the  holy  angels  whom
he  first  created.  The  absence  of
the  master  of  the  household,  is
the  time  that  remains  unto  his
coming.

48  I  said  unto  him.  Sir,  all
these  things  are  very  excellent,
and  wonderful,  and  good.  But,
continued  I,  could  I  or  any  other
man  besides  though  never  so  wise,
have  understood  these  things  ?

49  Wherefore  now,  sir,  tell
me,  what  I  ask.  He  replied,
ask  me  what  thou  wilt.  Why,
said  I,  is  the  Son  of  God  in  this
parable,  put  in  the  place  of  a
servant  ?


234


Angels.


Oj  eleanliness


SIMILITUDE  V.


of  the  body.


50  Hearken,  he  said  ;  the  Son
of  God  is  not  put  in  the  condition
of  a  servant,  but  in  great  power
and  authority.  I  said  unto  him
*  how,  sir  ?  I  understand  it  not.'

51  Because,  said  he,  the  Son
set  his  ^  messsengers  over  those
whom  the  Father  delivered  unto
him,  to  keep  every  one  of  them ;
but  he  himself  labored  very
much,  and  suffered  much,  that
he  might  blot  out  their  offences.

52  For  no  vineyard  can  be
digged  without  much  labour  and
pains.  Wherefore  having  blot-
ted out  the  sins  of  his  people,  he
shewed  to  them  the  paths  of  life,
giving  them  the  law  which  he
had  received  of  the  Father.

53  You  see,  said  he,  that  he  is
the  Lord  of  his  people,  having
received  all  power  from  his
Father.  ^  But  why  the  Lord  did
take  his  Son  into  counsel,  about
dividing  the  inheritance,  and  the
good  angels,  hear  now.

54  That  =*  Holy  Spirit,  which
was  created  first  of  all,  he  placed
in  the  body  in  which  God
should  dwell;  namely,  in  a
chosen  body,  as  it  seemed  good
to  him.  This  body  therefore
into  which  the  ^  Holy  Spirit  was
brought,  served  that  Spirit,
walked  rightly  and  purely  in
modesty;  nor  ever  defiled  that
Spirit.

55  Seeing  therefore  the  body
at  all  times  obeyed  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  laboured  rightly  and
chastely  with  him,  nor  faltered
at  any  time ;  that  body  being
wearied  conversed  indeed  ser-
vilely, but  being   mightily  ap-


proved to   God  with  the  Holy
Spirit,  was  accepted  by  him.

56  For  such  a  stout  course
pleased  God,  because  he  was  not
defiled  in  the  earth,  keeping  the
Holy  Spirit.  He  called  there-
fore to  counsel  his  Son,  and  the
good  angels,  that  there  might  be
some  place  of  standing  given  to
this  body  which  had  served  the
Holy  Spirit  without  blame ;  lest
it  should  seem  to  have  lost  the
reward  of  its  service.

57  For  every  pure  body  shall
receive  its  reward  ;  that  is  found
without  spot,  in  which  the  Holy
Spirit  has  been  appointed  to
dwell.  And  thus  you  have  now
the  exposition  of  this  parablealso.

58  Sir,  said  I,  I  now  under-
stand your  meaning,  since  I  have
heard  this  exposition.  Hearken
further,  said  he:  keep  this  thy
body  clean  and  pure,  that  the
Spirit  which  shall  dwell  in  it
may  bear  witness  unto  it,  and  be
judged  to  have  been  with  thee.

59  Also  take  heed  that  it  be
not  instilled  into  thy  mind  that
this  body  perishes,  and  thou
abuse  it  to  any  lust.  For  if  thou
shalt  defile  thy  body,  thou  shalt
also  at  the  same  time  defile  the
Holy  Spirit ;  and  if  thou  shalt
defile  *the  Holy  Spirit,  thou
shalt  not  live.

60  And  I  said.  What  if
through  ignorance  this  should
have  been  already  committed,
before  a  man  heard  these  words  ;
How  can  he  attain  unto  salva-
tion, who  has  thus  defiled  his
body  ?

61  He   replied,  As  for  men's


^Angels.  '^This  place,  which  in  all  the  editions  of  Hermas  is  wretchedly-
corrupted,  by  the  collation  of  editions  and  MSS.  is  thus  corrected  by  Dr.
Grabe:  "  Quaere  autem  Dominus  in  concilioadhibuerit,  filium  de  hsereditate,
honestosque  nuncios,  audi ;  Spiritum  Sanctum,  qui  creatus  est  omnium  pri-
mus, in  corpore,  in  quo  habitaret  Deus,  collocavit ;  in  delecto  scilicet  cor-
pore  quod  ei  videbatur."  ^  Viz.  the  created  Spirit  of  Christ,  as  man;  not
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Third  Person  of  the  Sacred  Trinity.  ■*  Thy  body,
according  to  some  copies.

235


Of  two  sortd  of


III.  HERMAS.


voluptuous  men.


former  actions  which  through
ignorance  they  have  committed,
God  only  can  afford  a  remedy
iiuto  them ;  for  all  the  power  be-
longeth  unto  him.

62  But  now  guard  thyself;  and
seeing  God  is  almighty  and  mer-
ciful, he  will  grant  a  remedy  to
what  thou  hast  formerly  done
amiss,  if  for  the  time  to  come
thou  shalt  not  defile  thy  body
and  spirit ;

63  For  they  are  companions
together,  and  the  one  cannot  be
defiled  but  the  other  will  be  so
too.  Keep  therefore  both  of
them  pure,  and  thou  shalt  live
unto  God.

SIMILITUDE  VI.

Of  two  sorts  of  voluptuous  men,  and  of
their  death,  dejection,  and  of  the  con-
tinuance of  their  pains

AS  I  was  sitting  at  home,  and
praising  God  for  all  the
things  which  I  had  seen  ;  and
was  thinking  concerning  the
commands,  that  they  were  ex-
ceeding good,  and  great,  and
honest,  and  pleasant ;  and  such
as  were  able  to  bring  a  man  to
salvation  ;  I  said  thus  within  my-
self;  I  shall  be  happy  if  I  shall
walk  according  to  these  com-
mands, and  whosoever  shall  walk
in  them  shall  live  unto  God.

2  Whilst  I  was  speaking  on
this  wise  within  myself,  I  saw
him  whom  I  had  before  been
wont  to  see,  sitting  by  me ;  and
he  spake  thus  unto  me :

3  What  doubtest  thou  con-
cerning my  commands  which  I
have  delivered  unto  thee?  They
are  good,  doubt  not,  but  trust  in
the  Lord,  and  thou  shalt  walk
in  them.  For  I  will  give  thee
strength  ^  to  fulfil  them.

4  These  commands  are  profit-
able to  those  who  shall  repent  of


those  sins  which  they  have  for-
merly committed ;  if  for  the  time
to  come  they  shall  not  continue
in  them.

5  Whosoever  therefore  ye  be
that  repent,  cast  away  from  you
the  naughtiness  of  the  present
world;  and  put  on  all  virtue,
and  righteousness,  and  so  shall
ye  be  able  to  keep  these  com-
mands ;  and  not  sin  from  hence-
forth any  more.

6  For  if  ye  shall  keep  your-
selves from  sin  from  the  time  to
come,  ye  shall  cut  off  a  great  deal
ofyour  former  sins.  Walk  in  my
commands,  and  ye  shall  live  unto
God :  These  things  have  I  spoken
unto  you.

7  And  when  he  had  said  this,
he  added;  let  us  go  into  the  field,
and  I  will  show  thee  shepherds  of
sheep.     I  replied,  sir,  let  us  go.

8  And  we  came  into  a  certain
field,  and  there  he  showed  me  a
young  shepherd, '  finely  arrayed,
with  his  garments  of  a  purple
colour.  And  he  fed  large  flocks ;
and  his  sheep  were  fiill  of  plea-
sure, and  in  much  delight  and
cheerfulness  ;  and  they  skipping,
ran  here  and  there.

9  And  the  shepherd  took  very
great  satisfaction  in  his  flock ;
and  the  countenance  of  that  shep-
herd was  cheerful,  running  up
and  down  among  his  flock.

10  \  Then  the  angel  said  unto
me,  Seest  thou  this  shepherd  ?  I
answered,  sir,  I  see  him.  He  said
unto  me,  this  is  the  '  messenger
of  delight  and  pleasure.  He
therefore  corrupts  the  minds  of
the  servants  of  God,  and  turns
them  from  the  truth,  delighting
them  with  many  pleasures,  and
they  perish.

11  For  they  forget  the  com-
mands cf  the  living  God,  and  live


'  In  them.

236


*  Vid.  Annot.  Coteler.  in  loc.


Angel.


Oj  two  sorts  of


SIMILITUDE  VI.


voluptuoiLS  men.


in  luxury  and  in  vain  pleasures,
and  are  corrupted  by  the  evil  an-
gel, some  of  them  even  unto  death ;
and  others  to  ^  a  falling  away.

12  1  replied  ;  I  understand  not
what  you  mean,  by  saying  unto
death,  and  to  a  falling  away.
Hear,  says  he ;  all  these  sheep
which  thou  sawest  exceeding  ^
joyful,  are  such  as  have  for  ever
departed  from  God,  and  given
themselves  up  to  the '  lusts  of
this  present  time.

13  To  these  therefore  there  is
no  return,  by  repentance  unto
life  ;  because  that  to  their  other
sins  they  have  added  this,  that
they  have  blasphemed  the  name
of  the  Lord.  These  kind  of  men
are  ordained  unto  death.

14  But  those  sheep  which  thou
sawest  not  leaping,  but  feeding  in
one  place,  are  such  as  have  in-
deed given  themselves  up  to
pleasures  and  delights ;  but  have
not  spoken  anything  wickedly
against  the  Lord.

15  These  therefore  are  only
fallen  off  from  the  truth,  and  so
have  yet  hope  laid  up  for  them
in  repentance.  For  such  a  fall-
ing off  hath  some  hope  still  left
of  a  renewal ;  but  they  that  are
dead,  are  utterly  gone  forever.

16  Again  we  went  a  little  far-
ther forward  ;  and  he  showed  me
a  great  *  shepherd,  who  had  as  it
were  a  rustic  figure,  clad  with  a
white  goat's  skin,  having  his  bag
upon  his  shoulder,  and  in  his
hand  a  stick  full  of  knots,  and
very  hard,  and  a  whip  in  his
other  hand ;  and  his  countenance
was  stern  and  sour ;  enough  to  af-
fright a  man ;  such  was  his  look.

17  He  took  from  that  young
shepherd  such  sheep  as  lived  in
pleasures,  but  did  not  skip  up


and  down  ;  and  drove  them  into
a  certain  steep  craggy  place  full
of  thorns  and  briars,  insomuch
that  they  could  not  get  them-
selves free  from  them.

18  But  being  entangled  in
them,  fed  upon  thorns  and  briars,
and  were  grievously  tormented
with  his  whipping.  For  he  still
drove  them  on,  and  afforded  them
not  any  place  or  time  to  stand  still.

19  ^  When  therefore  I  saw
them  so  cruelly  whipped  and
afflicted,  I  was  grieved  for  them ;
because  they  were  greatly  tor-
mented, nor  had  they  any  rest
afforded  them.

20  And  I  said  unto  the  shep-
herd that  was  with  me ;  Sir,  who
is  this  cruel  and  implacable
shepherd,  who  is  moved  with  no
compassion  towards  these  sheep  ?
He  answered,  ^  This  shepherd  is
indeed  one  of  the  ^  holy  angels,
but  is  appointed  for  the  punish-
ment of  sinners.

21  To  him  therefore  are  deli-
vered those  who  have  erred  from
God,  and  served  the  lusts  and
pleasures  of  this  world.  For  this
cause  he  punishes  them  every  one
according  to  their  deserts,  with
cruel  and  various  kinds  of  pains.

22  Sir,  said  I,  I  would  know,
what  kind  of  pains  they  are
which  every  one  undergoes  ?
Hearken,  said  he  ;  The  several
pains  and  torments  are  those
which  men  every  day  undergo
in  their  present  lives.  For  some
suffer  losses  ;  others  poverty  ;
others  divers  sicknesses.  Some
are  unsettled ;  others  suffer  in-
juries from  those  that  are  un-
worthy ;  others  fall  under  many
other  trials  and  inconveniences.

23  For  many  with  an  unsettled
design  aim  at  many  things,  and  it


^  Ad.  defectionem.  Lat.  ^  Exultantia.  Lat.  ^  In  Gr.  Athanas  Eircdv/iiaig
Tov  Kluvoc:  tovtov.^  Agrestem  Lat.  ^  Vid.  Origen.  in  Ps.  xxxvi.  Horn.  1.  ^  Right-
eous. In  Gr.  Athanas.  eic  tuv  Ayyeluv  tcjv  oikuiuv  earc,  &c.  et  sic  MS.  Lamb.

237


Their  death


III.  HERMAS.


and  defection.


profiteth  them  not ;  and  they  say
that  they  have  not  success  in
their  undertakings.

24  '  They  do  not  call  to  their
mind  what  they  have  done
amiss,  and  they  complain  of  the
Lord.  When  therefore  they
shall  have  undergone  all  kind
of  vexation  and  inconvenience ;
then  they  are  delivered  over  to  me
for  good  instruction,  and  are  con-
firmed in  the  faith  of  the  Lord,
and  serve  the  Lord  all  the  rest  of
their  days  with  a  pure  mind.

25  And  when  they  begin  to
repent  of  their  sins,  then  they
call  to  mind  their  works  which
they  have  done  amiss,  and  give
honour  to  God,  saying,  That  he
is  a  just  Judge,  and  they  have
deservedly  suffered  all  things
according  to  their  deeds.

26  Then  for  what  remains  of
their  lives,  they  serve  God  with
a  pure  mind  ;  and  have  success
in  all  their  undertakings,  and
receive  from  the  Lord  whatever
they  desire.

27  And  then  they  give  thanks
unto  the  Lord  that  they  were
delivered  unto  me  ;  nor  do  they
suffer  any  more  cruelty.

28  T  I  said  unto  him ;  Sir,
I  entreat  you  still  to  show  me
now  one  thing.  What,  said  he,
dost  thou  ^  ask  ?  I  said  unto
him  ;  Are  they  who  depart  from
the  fear  of  God,  tormented  for
the  same  time  that  they  enjoyed
their  false  delight  and  pleasures  ?
He  answered  me :  They  are  tor-
mented for  the  same  time.

29  And  I  said  unto  him ;
They  are  then  tormented  but
little ;  whereas  they  who  enjoy
their  pleasures  so  as  to  forget
God,  ought  to  endure  seven
times  as  much  punishment.

30  He   answered   me;    Thou

*MS.  Lamb.  Succurritiia  :  Gr.  Athanas,  ov  yivuaKovai.     ^MS.
quiris.     ^  Origen.  in  Num.  Horn.  viii.    ''  MS.  Lamb.  Omnino.
238


art  foolish,  neither  understandest
thou  the  efficacy  of  this  punish-
ment. I  said  unto  him ;  Sir,  if  I
understood  it,  I  would  not  desire
you  to  tell  me.

31  Hearken,  said  he,  and  learn
what  the  force  of  both  is,  both
of  the  pleasure  and  of  the  pun-
ishment. An  hour  of  pleasure
is  terminated  within  its  own
space ;  but  one  hour  of  punish-
ment has  the  efficacy  of  thirty
days.  ^  Whosoever  therefore  en-
joys his  false  pleasure  for  one  day,
and  is  one  day  tormented;  that
one  day  of  punishment  is  equiva-
lent to  a  whole  year's  space.

32  Thus  look  how  many  days
any  one  pursues  his  pleasures,  so
many  years  is  he  punished  for
it.  You  see  therefore  how  that
the  time  of  worldly  enjoyments
is  but  short ;  but  that  of  pain
and  torments  a  great  deal  more.

33  I  replied ;  Sir,  forasmuch
as  I  do  not  understand  *  at  all
these  times  of  pleasure  and  pain ;
I  entreat  you  that  you  would
explain  yourself  more  clearly
concerning  them.  He  answered
me,  saying ;  Thy  foolishness  still
sticks  unto  thee.

34  Shouldst  thou  not  rather
purify  thy  piind,  and  serve  God  ?
Take  heed,  lest  when  thy  time  is
fulfilled,  thou  be  found  still  un-
wise. Hear  then,  as  thou  de-
sirest,  that  thou  mayest  the  more
easily  understand.

35  He  that  gives  himself  up
one  day  to  his  pleasures  and  de-
lights, and  does  whatsoever  his
soul  desires,  is  full  of  great  folly,
nor  understands  what  he  does,
but  the  day  following  forgets
what  he  did  the  day  before.

36  For  delight  and  worldly
pleasure  are  not  kept  in  memory,
by   reason   of  the  folly  that   is

Lamb.   In-


The  repentant  must        SIMILITUDE  VII.        brmg  forth  fruits.


rooted  in  them.  But  when  pain
and  torment  befal  a  man  a  day,
he  is  in  effect  troubled  the  whole
year  after ;  because  his  punish-
ment continues  firm  in  his  mem-
ory.

37  Wherefore  he  remembers
it  with  sorrow  the  whole  year  ;
and  then  calls  to  mind  his  vain
pleasure  and  delight,  and  per-
ceives that  for  the  sake  of  that
he  was  punished.

38  Whosoever  therefore  have
delivered  themselves  over  to
such  pleasures,  are  thus  pun-
ished ;  because  that  when  they
had  life,  they  rendered  them-
selves liable  to  death.

39  I  said  unto  him  ;  Sir,  what
pleasures  are  hurtful  ?  He  an-
swered; That  is  pleasure  to
every  man  which  he  doth  wil-
lingly.

40  For  the  angry  man,  grati-
fying his  passion,  perceives  pleas-
ure in  it;  and  so  the  adulterer
and  drunkard;  the  slanderer
and  liar ;  the  covetous  man  and
the  defrauder;  and  whosoever
commits  anything  like  unto
these,  because  he  ^  followeth  his
evil  disposition,  he  receives  a
satisfaction  in  the  doing  of  it.

41  All  these  pleasures  and  de-
lights are  hurtful  to  the  servants
of  God.  For  these  therefore
they  are  tormented  and  suffer
punishment.

42  There  are  also  pleasures
that  bring  salvation  unto  men.
For  many,  when  they  do  what
is  good,  find  pleasure  in  it,  and
are  attracted  by  the  delights  of  it.

43  Now  this  pleasure  is  prof-
itable to  the  servants  of  God,
and  brings  life  to  such  men ;  but
those  hurtful  pleasures,  which
were  before  mentioned,  bring
torments  and  punishment.


44  And  whosoever  shall  con-
tinue in  them,  and  shall  not  re-
pent of  what  they  have  done,
shall  bring  death  upon  them-
selves.

SIMILITUDE  VII.

TTiat  they  who  repent,  must  bring  forth
fruits  worthy  of  repentance.

AFTER  a  few  days  I  saw  the
same  person  that  before
talked  with  me,  in  the  same  field,
in  which  I  had  seen  those  shep-
herds. And  he  said  unto  me ;
What  seekest  thou  ?

2  Sir,  said  I,  I  came  to  entreat
you  that  you  would  command
the  shepherd,  who  is  the  minister
of  punishment,  to  depart  out  of
my  house,  because  he  greatly  af-
flicts me.

3  And  he  answered,  It  is  ne-
cessary for  thee  to  endure  incon-
veniences and  vexations  ;  for  so
that  good  angel  hath  commanded
concerning  thee,  because  he
would  try  thee.

4  Sir,  said  I ;  What  so  great
offence  have  I  committed,  that  I
should  be  delivered  to  this  ^  mes-
senger? Hearken,  said  he :  Thou
art  indeed  guilty  of  many  sins,
yet  not  so  many  that  thou
shouldest  be  delivered  to  this
^  messenger.

5  But  thy  house  hath  com-
mitted many  sins  and  offences,
and  therefore  that  good  ^mes-
senger being  grieved  at  their  do-
ings commanded  that  for  some
time  thou  shouldst  suffer  afflic-
tion ;  that  they  may  both  re-
pent of  what  they  have  done,
and  may  wash  themselves  from
all  the  lusts  of  this  present
world.

6  When  therefore  they  shall
have  repented,  and  be  purified,
then  that   messenger    which   is


^  Obeyeth  liis  disease.


*  Angel.
239


Many  hinds  of  elect  III.  HERMAS.    and  of  repenting  dnnera.


appointed  over  thy  punishment,
shall  depart  from  thee.

7  I  said  unto  him  ;  Sir,  if
they  have  behaved  themselves  so
as  to  anger  that  good  angel,  yet
what  have  I  done?  He  an-
swered: They  cannot  otherwise
be  afflicted,  unless  thou,  who  art
the  head  of  the  family,  suffer.

8  For  whatsoever  thou  shalt
suffer,  they  must  needs  feel  it ;
but  as  long  as  thou  shalt  stand
well  established,  they  cannot  ex-
perience any  vexation.

9  I  replied;  But,  sir,  behold
they  also  now  repent  with  all
their  hearts.  I  know,  says  he,
that  they  repent  with  all  their
hearts ;  out  dost  thou  therefore
think  that  their  offences  who  re-
pent are  immediately  blotted  out?

10  No,  they  are  not  presently ;
but  he  that  repents  must  afflict
his  soul  and  shew  himself  hum-
ble in  all  his  affairs,  and  undergo
many  and  divers  vexations.

11  And  when  he  shall  have
suffered  all  things  that  were  ap-
pointed for  him;  then  perhaps
he  that  made  him,  and  formed
all  things  besides,  will  be  moved
with  compassion  towards  him,
and  afford  him  some  remedy;
and  especially  if  he  shall  per-
ceive his  heart,  who  repents,  to
be  pure  from  every  evil  work.

12  But  at  present  it  is  expe-
dient for  thee,  and  for  thy  house,
to  be  grieved ;  and  it  is  needful
that  thou  shouldest  endure  much
vexation,  as  the  angel  of  the
Lord  who  committed  thee  unto
me,  has  commanded.

13  Eather  give  thanks  unto
the  Lord,  that  knowing  what
was  to  come,  he  thought  thee
worthy  to  whom  he  should  fore-
tell that  trouble  was  coming  upon
thee,  who  art  able  to  bear  it.

14  I  said  unto  him ;  Sir,  be
but  thou  also  with  me,  and  I

240


shall  easily  undergo  any  trouble.
I  will,  said  he,  be  with  theej
and  I  will  entreat  the  messenger
who  is  set  over  ihy  punishment,^
that  he  would  moderate  his  af-
flictions towards  thee.

15  And  moreover  thou  shalt
suffer  adversity  but  for  a  little
time ;  and  then  thou  shalt  again
be  restored  to  thy  former  state ;
only  continue  on  in  the  humility
of  thy  mind.

16  Obey  the  Lord  with  a  pure
heart ;  thou,  and  thy  house,  and
thy  children ;  and  walk  in  the
commands  which  I  have  deli-
vered unto  thee ;  and  then  thy  re-
pentance may  be  firm  and  pure^

17  And  if  thou  shalt  keep
these  things  with  thy  house,  thy
inconveniences  shall  depart  from
thee.

18  And  all  vexation  shall  in.
like  manner  depart  from  all
those,  whosoever  shall  walk  ac-
cording to  these  commands.

SIMILITUDE  VIII.

That  there  are  many  kinds  of  elect,  and
of  repenting  sinners:  and  how  all  of
them  shall  receive  a. reward  propor-
tionable to  the  measure  of  their  repent-
ance and  good  works.

AGAIN  he  shewed  me  a  wil-
low which  covered  the  fields
and  the  mountains,  under  whose
shadow  came  all  such  as  were
called  by  the  name  of  the  Lord.

2  And  by  that  willow  stood
an  angel  of  the  Lord  very  excel-
lent and  lofty ;  and  did  cut  down
boughs  from  that  willow  with  a
great  hook ;  and  reached  out  to
the  people  that  were  under  the
shadow  of  that  willow  little  rods,
as  it  were  about  a  foot  long.

3  And  when  all  of  them  had
taken  them,  he  laid  aside  his
hook,  and  the  tree  continued
entire,  as  I  had  before  seen  it.
At  which  I  wondered,  and  mused
within  myself.


' —     o     5>


\  I


Mi        O

P     g


Ul        t

o      5


U  h

S  i

CO  z

III  c


Of  the  elect,  and


SIMILITUDE  VIII.


thei


nrds.


4  Then  that  shepherd  said
unto  me;  Forbear  to  wonder
that  that  tree  continues  whole,
notwithstanding  so  many  boughs
have  been  cut  off  from  it,  but
stay  a  little,  for  now  it  shall  be
shewn  thee,  what  that  angel
means,  who  gave  those  rods  to
the  people.

5  So  he  again  demanded  the
rods  of  them,  and  in  the  same
order  that  every  one  had  received
them,  was  he  called  to  him,  and
restored  his  rod ;  which  when  he
had  received,  he  examined  them.

6  From  some  he  received  them
dry  and  rotten,  and  as  it  were
touched  with  the  moth ;  those
he  commanded  to  be  separated
from  the  rest  and  placed  by
themselves.  Others  gave  in  their
rods  dry  indeed,  but  not  touched
with  the  moth:  these  also  he
ordered  to  be  set  by  themselves.

7  Others  gave  in  their  rods
half  dry ;  these  also  were  set
apart.  Others  gave  in  their  rods
half  dry  and  cleft;  these  too
were  set  by  themselves.  Others
brought  in  their  rods  half  dry
and  half  green,  and  these  were
in  like  manner  placed  by  them-
selves.

8  Others  delivered  up  their
rods  two  parts  green,  and  the
third  dry ;  and  they  too  were  set
apart.  Others  brought  their
rods  two  parts  dry,  and  the  third
green  ;  and  were  also  placed  by
themselves.

9  Others  delivered  up  their
rods  less  dry,  (for  there  was  but
a  very  little,  to  wit,  their  tops
dry)  but  they  had  clefts,  and
these  were  set  in  like  manner  by
themselves.  In  the  rods  of  others
there  was  but  a  little  green,  and
the  rest  dry  ;  and  these  were  set
aside  by  themselves.

10  Others  came,  and  brought
their  rods  green  as  they  had  re-

16


ceived  them,  and  the  greatest
part  of  the  people  brought  their
rods  thus;  and  the  messenger
greatly  rejoiced  at  these,  and
they  also  were  put  apart  by
themselves.

11  Others  brought  in  their
rods  not  only  green,  but  full  of
branches ;  and  these  were  set
aside,  being  also  received  by  the
angel  with  great  joy.  Others
brought  their  rods  green  with
branches,  and  those  also  some
fruit  upon  them.

12  They  who  had  such  rods,
were  very  cheerful ;  and  the
angel  himself  took  great  joy  at
them ;  nor  was  the  shepherd
that  stood  with  me,  less  pleased
with  them.

13  f  Then  the  angel  of  the
Lord  commanded  crowns  to  be
brought:  and  the  crowns  were
brought  made  of  palms ;  and  the
angel  crowned  those  men  in
whose  rods  he  found  the  young
branches  with  fruit;  and  com-
manded them  to  go  into  the
tower.

14  He  also  sent  those  into  the
tower,  in  whose  rods  he  found
branches  without  fruit,  giving  a
seal  unto  them.  For  they  had
the  same  garment,  that  is,  one
white  as  snow;  with  which  he
bade  them  go  into  the  tower.
And  so  he  did  to  those  who  re-
turned their  rods  green  as  he
had  received  them ;  giving  them
a  white  garment,  and  so  sent
them  away  to  go  into  the  tower.

15  Having  done  this,  he  said
to  the  shepherd  that  was  with
me,  I  go  my  way ;  but  do  thou
send  these  within  the  walls,  every
one  into  the  place  in  which  he
has  deserved  to  dwell ;  exami-
ning first  their  rods,  but  examine
them  diligently  that  no  one  de-
ceive thee.  But  and  if  any  one
shall  escape  thee,  I  will  try  them

241


Oj  the  elect,  and


III.  HERMAS


their  rewards.


upon  the  altar.     Having  said
this  to  the  shepherd,  he  departed.

16  After  he  was  gone,  the
shepherd  said  unto  me :  Let  us
take  the  rods  from  them,  and
plant  them;  if  perchance  they
may  grow  green  again.  I  said
unto  him ;  Sir,  how  can  those
dry  rods  ever  grow  green  again?

17  He  answered  me ;  That  tree
is  a  willow,  and  always  loves  to
live.  If  therefore  these  rods  shall
be  planted,  and  receive  a  little
moisture,  many  of  them  will  re-
cover themselves.

18  Wherefore  I  will  try,  and
will  pour  water  upon  them,  and
if  any  of  them  can  live,  I  will
rejoice  with  him ;  but  if  not,  at
least  by  this  means  I  shall  be
found  not  to  have  neglected  my
part.

19  Then  he  commanded  me
to  call  them ;  and  they  all  came
unto  him,  every  one  in  the  rank
in  which  he  stood,  and  gave  him
their  rods ;  which  having  re-
ceived, he  planted  every  one  of
them  in  their  several  orders.

20  And  after  he  had  planted
them  all,  he  poured  much  water
upon  them,  insomuch  that  they
were  covered  with  water,  and  did
not  appear  above  it.  Then
when  he  had  watered  them,  he
said  unto  me;  Let  us  depart,
and  after  a  little  time  we  will
return  and  visit  them.

21  For  he  who  created  this
tree,  would  have  all  those  live
that  received  rods  from  it.  And
I  hope  now  that  these  rods  are
thus  watered,  many  of  them  re-
ceiving in  the  moisture,  will  re-
cover.

22  ^  I  said  unto  him.  Sir,  tell
me  what  this  tree  denotes?  For
I  am   greatly  ^astonished,  that


after  so  many  branches  have
been  cut  off,  it  seems  still  to  be
whole ;  nor  does  there  any  thing
the  less  of  it  appear  to  remain,
which  greatly  amazes  me.

23  He  answered.  Hearken.
This  great  tree  which  covers  the
plains  and  the  mountains,  and
all  the  earth,  is  the  law  of  God,
published  throughout  the  whole
world.

24  Now  'this  law  is  the  Son
of  God,  who  is  preached  to  all
the  ends  of  the  earth.  The
people  that  stand  under  its  sha-
dow, are  those  which  have  heard
his  preaching,  and  believed.

25  The  great  and  venerable
angel  which  you  saw,  was  Mi-
chael, who  has  the  power  over
his  people,  and  governs  them.
For  he  has  planted  the  law  in
the  hearts  of  those  who  have  be-
lieved ;  and  therefore  he  visits
them  to  whom  he  has  given  the
law,  to  see  if  they  have  kept  it.

26  And  he  examines  every
one's  rod;  and  of  those,  many
that  are  weakened:  for  those
rods  are  the  law  of  the  Lord.
Then  he  discerns  all  those  who
have  not  kept  the  law,  knowing
the  place  of  every  one  of  them.

27  I  said  unto  him.  Sir,  why
did  he  send  away  some  to  the
tower,  and  left  others  here  to
you  ?  He  replied,  those  who  have
transgressed  the  law,  which  they
received  from  him,  are  left  in
my  power,  that  they  may  repent
of  their  sins  :  but  they  who  ^  ful-
filled the  law  and  kept  it,  are
under  his  power.

28  But  who  then,  said  I,  are
those,  who  went  into  the  tower
crowned  ?  He  replied  all  such  as
having  striven  with  the  devil,
have  overcome  him,  are  crowned  :


^  Moved.

»  Satisfied.

242


MS.  Lamb.  Hsec  autem  lex  Filius  Dei  est,  prjedicatus,  &c


Oj  the  elect,  and


SIMILITUDE  VIII.


their  rewards.


and  they  are  those,  who  have
suffered  hard  things,  that  they
might  keep  the  law.

29  But  they  who  gave  up
their  rods  green,  and  with  young
branches,  but  without  fruit,  have
indeed  endured  trouble  for  the
same  law,  but  have  not  suffered
death  ;  neither  have  they  denied
their  holy  law.

30  They  who  delivered  up
their  rods  green  as  they  received
them,  are  those  who  were  modest
and  just,  and  have  lived  with  a
very  pure  mind,  and  kept  the
commandments  of  God.

31  The  rest  thou  shalt  know,
when  I  shall  *have  considered
those  rods  which  I  have  planted
and  watered.

32  ^  After  a  few  days  we  re-
turned, and  in  the  same  place
stood  that  glorious  angel,  and  I
stood  by  him.  Then  he  said
unto  me;  Gird  thyself  with  a
^towel,  and  serve  me.

33  And  I  girded  myself  with
a  clean  towel,  which  was  made
of  coarse  cloth.  And  when  he
saw  me  girded,  and  ready  to
minister  unto  him,  he  said,  Call
those  men  whose  rods  have  been
planted,  every  one  in  his  order
as  he  gave  them.

34  And  he  brought  me  into
the  field,  and  I  called  them  all,
and  they  all  stood  ready  in  their
several  ranks.  Then  he  said
unto  them ;  let  every  one  pluck
up  his  rod,  and  bring  it  unto
me.  And  first  they  delivered
theirs,  whose  rods  had  been  dry
and  rotten.

35  And  those  whose  rods  still
continued  so,  he  commanded  to
stand  apart.  Then  they  came
whose  rods  had  been  dry  but  not
rotten.  Some  of  these  delivered
in  their  rods  green ;  others  dry


and  rotten,  as  if  they  had   been
touched  by  the  moth.

36  Those  who  gave  them  up
green,  he  commanded  to  stand
apart ;  but  those  whose  rods  were
dry  and  rotten,  he  caused  to
stand  with  the  first  sort.  Then
came  they  whose  rods  had  been
half  dry,  and  cleft:  many  of
these  gave  up  their  rods  green,
and  uncleft.

37  Others  delivered  them  up
green  with  branches,  and  fruit
upon  the  branches,  like  unto
those  who  went  crowned  into  the
tower.  Others  delivered  them
up  dry,  but  not  rotten ;  and  some
gave  them  up  as  they  were  be-
fore, half  dry,  and  cleft.

38  Every  one  of  these  he  or-
dered to  stand  apart ;  some  by
themselves,  others  in  their  re-
spective ranks.

39  Then  came  they  whose  rods
had  been  green,  but  cleft.  These
delivered  their  rods  altogether
green,  and  stood  in  their  own  or-
der. And  the  shepherd  rejoiced
at  these,  because  they  were  all
changed,  and  free  from  their
clefts.

40  Then  they  gave  in  their
rods,  who  had  them  half  green
and  half  dry.  Of  these  some
were  found  wholly  green,  others
half  dry;  others  green,  with
young  shoots.  And  all  these
were  sent  away,  every  one  to
his  proper  rank.

41  Then  they  gave  up  their
rods,  who  had  them  before  two
parts  green,  and  the  third  dry.
Many  of  those  gave  in  their
rods  green ;  many  half  dry ;  the
rest  dry  but  not  rotten.  So
these  were  sent  away,  each  to  his
proper  place.

42  Then  came  they  who  had
before  their  rods  two   parts  dry


^  Sabano.  Vid.  Edit.  Oxon.  p.  129.  not.  d.


243


Of  the  elect,  and


III.  HERMAS.


their  rewards.


and  the  third  green ;  many  of
these  delivered  up  their  rods
half  dry,  others  dry  and  rotten  ;
others  half  dry  and  cleft ;  but
few  green.  And  all  these  were
set  every  one  in  his   own   rank.

43  Then  they  reached  in  their
rods,  ^  in  which  there  was  before
but  a  little  green,  and  the  rest
dry.  Their  rods  were  for  the
most  part  found  green,  having
little  boughs,  with  fruit  upon
them,  and  the  rest  altogether
green.

44  And  the  shepherd  upon
sight  of  these  rejoiced  exceed-
ingly, because  he  had  found
them  thus ;  and  they  also  went
to  their  proper  orders.

45  ^  Now  after  he  had  exam-
ined all  their  rods,  he  said  unto
me  I  told  thee  that  this  tree  loved
life  :  thou  seest  how  many  have
repented,  and  attained  unto  sal-
vation.    Sir,  said  I,  I  see  it.

46  That  thou  mightest  know,
saith  he,  that  the  goodness  and
mercy  of  the  Lord  is  great,  and
to  be  had  in  honour ;  who  gave
his  spirit  to  them  that  were  found
worthy  of  repentance.

47  I  answered.  Sir,  why  then
did  not  all  of  them  repent  ?  He
replied.  Those  whose  minds  the
Lord  foresaw  would  be  pure,  and
that  they  would  serve  him  with
all  their  hearts,  to  them  he  gave
repentance.

48  But  for  those  whose  deceit
and  wickedness  he  beheld,  and
perceived  that  they  would  not
truly  return  unto  him  ;  to  them
he  denied  any  return  unto  re-
pentance, lest  they  should  again
l3laspheme  his  law  with  wicked
words.

49  I  said  unto  him  ;  Now,  Sir,
make  known  unto  me,  what  is  the
place  of  every  one  of  those,  who


have  given  up  their  rods,  and
what  their  ^  portion ;  that  when
they  may  have  not  kept  their
seal  entire,  but  have  wasted  the
seal  which  they  received,  shall
hear  and  believe  these  things,,
they  may  acknowledge  their  evil
deeds  and  repent ;

50  And  receiving  again  their
seal  from  you,  may  give  glory  to
God,  that  he  was  moved  with
compassion  towards  them,  and
sent  you  to  renew  their  spirits.

51  Hearken,  said  he :  they
whose  rods  have  been  found  dry
and  rotten,  and  as  it  were  touch-
ed with  the  moth  ;  are  the  de-
serters and  the  betrayers  of  the
church.

52  Who  with  the  rest  of  their
crimes,  have  also  blasphemed  the
Lord,  and  denied  his  name  which
had  been  called  upon  them.
Therefore  all  these  are  dead  unto
God :  and  thou  seest  that  none
of  them  have  repented,  although
they  have  heard  my  commands
which  thou  hast  delivered  unto-
them.  From  these  men  there-
fore life  is  far  distant.

53  They  also  who  have  deliv-
ered up  their  rods  dry,  but  not
rotten,  have  not  been  far  from
them.  For  they  have  been
counterfeits,  and  brought  in  evil
doctrines  ;  and  have  perverted
the  servants  of  God :  but  espe-
cially those  who  had  sinned ;
not  suffering  them  to  return
unto  repentance,  but  keeping
them  back  by  their  false  doctrines.

54  These  therefore  have  hope ;
and  thou  seest  that  many  of  them
have  repented,  since  the  time
that  thou  hast  laid  my  command*
before  them ;  and  many  more
will  yet  repent.  But  they  that
shall  not  repent  shall  lose  both
repentance  and  life.


^  MS  Lamb.  Minimum  habuerant  yiride.
244


Of  the  elect,  and


SIMILITUDE  VIII.


their'  rewards.


55  But  they  that  have  repent-  \
cd,  their  place  is  begun  to  be
within  the  first  walls,  and  some
of  them  are  even  gone  into  the
tower.  Thou  seest  therefore,
said  he,  that  in  the  repentance
of  sinners  there  is  life ;  but  for
those  who  repent  not,  death  is
prepared.

56  *||  Hear  now  concerning
those  who  gave  in  their  rods  half
dry  and  full  of  clefts.  Those
whose  rods  were  only  half  dry,
are  the  doubtful ;  for  they  are
neither  living  nor  dead.

57  But  they  who  delivered  in
their  rods,  not  only  half  dry  but
also  full  of  clefts,  are  both  doubt-
ful and  evil  speakers;  who  detract
from  those  who  are  absent,  and
have  never  peace  among  them-
selves, and  that  envy  one  another.

58  Howbeit  to  those  also  re-
pentance is  ofiered  ;  for  thou
seest  that  some  of  these  have  re-
pented.

59  Now  all  those  of  this  kind
who  have  quickly  repented,  shall
have  a  place  in  the  tower ;  but
they  who  have  been  more  slow
in  their  repentance,  shall  dwell
within  the  walls ;  but  they  that
shall  not  repent,  but  shall  con-
tinue on  in  their  wicked  doings,
shall  die  the  death.

60  As  for  those  who  had  their
rods  green,  but  yet  cleft ;  they
are  such  as  were  always  faithful
and  good,  but  they  had  some  envy
and  strife  among  themselves  con-
cerning dignity  and  pre-emi-
nence.

61  Now  all  such  are  vain  and
without  understanding,  as  con-
tend with  one  another  about  these
things.

62  Nevertheless,  seeing  they
are  otherwise  good,  if  when  they
shall  hear  these  commands  they


shall  amend  themselves,  and  shall
at  my  persuasion  suddenly  re-
pent; they  shall  at  last  dwell  in
the  tower,  as  they  who  have  truly
and  worthily  repented.

63  But  if  any  one  shall  again
return  to  his  dissension  ;  he  shall
be  shut  out  from  the  tower,  and
shall  lose  his  life.  For  the  life
of  those  who  keep  the  command-
ments of  the  Lord  consists  in
doing  what  they  are  commanded ;
not  in  principality,  or  in  any
other  dignity.

64  For  by  forbearance  and
humility  of  mind,  men  shall
attain  unto  life ;  but  by  seditions
and  contempt  of  the  law,  they
shall  purchase  death  unto  them-
selves.

65  T  They  who  in  their  rods
had  half  dry  and  half  green,  are
those  who  are  engaged  in  many
affairs  of  the  world,  and  are  not
joined  to  the  saints.  For  which
cause  half  of  them  liveth,  and
half  is  dead.

66  Wherefore  many  of  these
since  the  time  that  they  have
heard  my  commands,  have  re-
pented, and  begun  to  dwell  in
the  tower.  But  some  of  them
have  wholly  fallen  away  ;  to
these  there  is  no  more  place  for
repentance.

67  For  by  reason  of  their
present  interests,  they  have
blasphemed  and  denied  God :
and  for  this  wickedness  they
have  lost  life.  And  of  these
many  are  still  in  doubt;  these
may  yet  return;  and  if  they
shall  quickly  repent,  they  shall
have  a  place  in  the  tower ;  but
if  they  shall  be  more  slow,  they
shall  dwell  within  the  walls ;  but
if  they  shall  not  repent,  they
shall  die.

68  As  for  those  who  had  two


^  Lamb.  MS«  Quamplurimis  generibus  inficiati.


245


Oj  the  elect,  and


III.  HERMAS.


their  rewards.


parts  of  their  rods  green,  and  the
third  dry ;  they  have  by  mani-
fold ways  denied  the  Lord.  Of
these  many  have  repented,  and
found  a  place  in  the  tower :  and
many  have  altogether  departed
from  God.  These  have  utterly
lost  life.

69  And  some  being  in  a  doubt-
ful state,  have  raised  up  dissen-
sions :  these  may  yet  return,  if
they  shall  suddenly  repent  and
not  continue  in  their  lusts ;  but
if  they  shall  continue  in  their
evil  doing  they  shall  die.

70  Tf  They  who  gave  in  their
rods  two  parts  dry,  and  the  other
green ;  are  those  who  have  indeed
been  faithful,  but  withal  rich  and
full  of  good  things ;  and  there-
upon have  desired  to  be  famous
among  the  heathen  which  are
without,  and  have  thereby  fallen
into  great  pride,  and  begun  to
aim  at  high  matters,  and  to  for-
sake the  truth.

71  Nor  were  they  joined  to
the  *  saints,  but  lived  with  the
heathen ;  and  this  life  seemed
the  more  pleasant  to  them.  How-
beit  they  have  not  departed  from
God,  but  continued  in  the  faith  ;
only  they  have  not  wrought  the
works  of  faith.

72  Many  therefore  of  these
have  repented,  and  begun  to
dwell  in  the  tower.  Yet  others
still  living  among  the  heathen
people,  and  being  lifted  up  with
their  vanities,  have  utterly  fallen
away  from  God,  and  followed  the
works  and  wickednesses  of  the
heathen.  These  kind  of  men
therefore  are  reckoned  among
strangers  to  the  Gospel.

73  Others  of  these  began  to
be  doubtful  in  their  minds  ;  de-
spairing by  reason  of  their
wicked  doings  ever  to  attain  un-


to salvation  :  Others  being  thus
made  doubtful,  did  moreover
stir  up  dissensions.

74  To  these  therefore,  and  to
those  who  by  reason  of  their  do-
ings are  become  doubtful,  there
is  still  hope  of  return  ;  but  they
must  repent  quickly,  that  their
place  may  be  in  the  tower.  But
they  that  repent  not,  but  con-
tinue still  in  their  pleasures,  are
nigh  unto  death.

75  ^  As  for  those  who  gave
in  their  rods  green,  excepting
their  tops,  which  only  were  dry,
and  had  clefts;  these  were  al-
ways good,  and  faithful,  and
'  upright  before  God  :  neverthe-
less they  sinned  a  little,  by  rea-
son of  their  empty  pleasures  and
trifling  thoughts  which  they  had
within  themselves.

76  Wherefore  many  of  them
when  they  heard  my  words,  re-
pented forthwith,  and  began  to
dwell  in  the  tower.  Neverthe-
less some  grew  doubtful,  and
others  to  their  doubtful  minds
added  dissensions.  To  these
therefore  there  is  still  hope  of
return,  because  they  were  al-
ways good ;  but  they  shall  not
hardly  be  moved.

77  As  for  those,  lastly,  who
gave  in  their  rods  dry,  their
tops  only  excepted,  which  alone
were  green  :  they  are  such  as
have  believed  indeed  in  God,
but  have  lived  in  wickedness;
yet  without  departing  from  God :
having  always  willingly  borne
the  name  of  the  Lord  ;  and
readily  received  into  their  houses
the  servants  of  God.

78  Wherefore  hearing  these
things  they  returned,  and  with-
out delay  repented,  and  lived  in
all  righteousness.  And  some  of
them    suffered     death  :    others


246


Kighteous.


Probi.


Oj  the  elect,  and


SIMILITUDE  IX.


their  rewards.


readily  underwent  many  trials,
being  mindful  of  their  evil  do-
ings.

79  ^  And  when  he  had  ended
his  explications  of  all  the  rods,
he  said  unto  me,  Go,  and  say
unto  all  men  that  they  repent,
and  they  shall  live  unto  God :  be-
cause the  Lord  being  moved  with
great  clemency  hath  sent  me  to
preach  repentance  unto  all.

80  Even  unto  those  who  by
reason  of  their  evil  doings,  de-
serve not  to  attain  unto  salva-
tion. But  the  Lord  will  be  pa-
tient, and  keep  the  invitation
that  was  made  by  his  Son.

811  said  unto  him,  Sir,  I  hope
that  all  when  they  shall  hear
these  things,  will  repent.  For  I
trust  that  everyone  acknowledg-  j
ing  his  crimes,  and  taking  up
the  fear  of  the  Lord,  will  return
unto  repentance.

82  He  said  unto  me,  Whoso-
ever shall  repent  with  all  their
hearts,  and  cleanse  themselves
from  all  the  evils  that  I  have
before  mentioned,  and  not  add
anything  more  to  their  sins,  shall
receive  from  the  Lord  the  cure
of  their  former  iniquities,  if  they
shall  not  make  any  doubt  of
these  commands,  and  shall  live
unto  God.

83  But  they  that  shall  con-
tinue to  add  to  their  transgres-
sions, and  shall  still  converse
with  the  lusts  of  the  present
world,  shall  condemn  themselves
unto  death.  But  do  thou  walk
in  these  commands,  and  whoso-
ever shall  walk  in  these,  and  ex-
ercise them  rightly,  shall  live
unto  God.

84  And  having  shewed  me  all
these  things,  he  said ;  I  will
shew  thee  the  rest  in  a  few  days.


SIMILITUDE  IX.

The  greatest  mysteries  of  the  militarU
and  triumphant  church  which  is  to
be  built.

AFTER  I  had  written  the
Commands  and  Similitudes
of  the  Shepherd,  the  Angel  of
Repentance ;  he  came  unto  me,
and  said  to  me,  I  will  shew  thee
all  those  things  which  the  ^Spir-
it spake  with  thee  under  the
figure  of  the  Church.  For  that
Spirit  is  the  Son  of  God.

2  And  because  thou  wert
weak  in  body,  it  was  not  declared
unto  thee  by  the  angel,  until
thou  wert  strengthened  by  the
Spirit,  and  increased  in  force,  that
thou  mightestalso  see  the  angel.

3  For  then  indeed  the  build-
ing of  the  tower  was  very  well
and  gloriously  shewn  unto  thee
by  the  church ;  nevertheless  thou
sawest  all  things  shewn  unto  thee
as  it  were  by  a  virgin.

4  But  now  thou  art  enlight-
ened by  the  angel,  but  yet  by
the  same  Spirit.  But  thou  must
consider  all  things  diligently;
for  therefore  am  I  sent  into  thy
house  by  that  venerable  ^messen-
ger, that  when  thou  shalt  have
seen  all  things  powerfully,  thou
mayest  not  be  afraid  as  before.

5  And  he  led  me  to  the
^height  of  a  mountain  in  Arca-
dia, and  we  sat  upon  its  top.
And  he  showed  me  a  great  plain,
and  about  it  twelve  mountains
in  different  figures.

6  The  first  was  black  as  soot.
The  second  was  smooth,  without
herbs.  The  third  was  full  of
thorns  and  thistles.  The  fourth
had  herbs  half  dried  ;  of  which
the  upper  part  was  green,  but
that  next  the  root  was  dry ;  and


See  above,  Book  I.-


Angel.


^  Ascent.


247


Oj  the  mysteties


III.  HERMAS.


of  the  church


some  of  the  herbs,  when  the  sun
grew  hot,  were  dry.

7  The  fifth  mountain  was
very  rugged  ;  but  yet  had  green
herbs.  The  sixth  mountain  was
full  of  clefts,  some  lesser,  and
some  greater  ;  and  in  these  clefts
grew  grass,  not  flourishing,  but
which  seemed  to  be  withering.

8  The  seventh  mountain  had
delightful  pasture,  and  was
wholly  fruitful:  and  all  kinds
of  cattle,  and  of  the  birds  of
heaven,  fed  upon  it ;  and  the
more  they  fed  of  it,  the  more
and  better  did  the  grass  grow.

9  The  eighth  mountain  was
full  of  fountains,  and  from  those
fountains  were  watered  all  kinds
of  the  creatures  of  God.  The
ninth  mountain  had  no  water  at
all,  but  was  wholly  destitute  of
it;  and  nourished  deadly  ser-
pents, and  destructive  to  men.

10  The  tenth  mountain  was
full  of  tall  trees,  and  altogether
shady :  and  under  the  shade  of
them  lay  cattle  resting  and  chew-
ing the  cud.

11  The  eleventh  mountain  was
full  of  the  thickest  trees ;  and
those  trees  seemed  to  be  loaded
with  several  sorts  of  fruits ;  that
whosoever  saw  them  could  not
choose  but  desire  to  eat  of  their
fruit.

12  The  twelfth  mountain  was
altogether  white,  and  of  a  most
pleasant  aspect,  and  itself  gave
a  most  excellent  beauty  to  itself

13  ^  In  the  middle  of  the
*  plain  he  showed  me  a  huge
white  rock,  which  rose  out  of  the
plain,  and  the  rock  was  higher
than  those  mountains,  and  was
square ;  so  that  it  seemed  capable
of  supporting  the  whole  world.

14  It  looked  to  me  to  be  old,
yet  it  had  in  it  a  new  gate,  which


seemed  to  have  been  newly  hewn
out  in  it.  Now  that  gate  was
bright  beyond  the  sun  itself;  in-
somuch, that  I  greatly  admired
at  its  light.

15  About  the  gate  stood  twelve
virgins ;  of  which  four  that  stood
at  the  corners  of  the  gate,  seemed
to  me  to  be  the  chiefest,  although
the  rest  were  also  of  worth :  and
they  stood  at  the  four  parts  of
the  gate.

16  It  added  also  to  the  grace
of  those  virgins,  that  they  stood
in  pairs,  clothed  with  linen  gar-
ments, and  decently  girded,  their
right  arms  being  at  liberty,  as  if
they  were  about  to  lift  up  some
'  burthen ;  for  so  they  were
adorned,  and  were  exceeding
cheerful  and  ready.

17  When  I  saw  this,  I  won-
dered with  myself  to  see  such
great  and  noble  things.  And
again  I  admired  upon  the  account
of  those  virgins,  that  they  were
so  handsome  and  delicate;  and
stood  with  such  firmness  and
constancy,  as  if  they  would  carry
the  whole  heaven.

18  And  as  I  was  thinking
thus  within  myself,  the  shepherd
said  unto  me :  What  thinkest
thou  within  thyself,  and  art  dis-
quieted, and  fillest  thyself  with
care?

19  Do  not  seem  to  consider,
as  if  thou  wert  wise,  what  thou
doest  not  understand,  but  pray
unto  the  Lord,  that  thou  mayest
have  ability  to  understand  it :
what  is  to  come  thou  canst  not
understand,  but  thou  seest  that
which  is  before  thee.

20  Be  not  therefore  disquieted
at  those  things  which  thou  canst
not  see ;  but  get  the  understand-
ing of  those  which  thou  seest.

21  Forbear  to  be  curious ;  and


'  Origen,  Horn.  iii.  in.  Ezech.    *  Fascem  aliquem.  Lat.
248


militant  and


SIMILITUDE  IX.


triumphant.


I  will  shew  thee  all  things  that
I  ought  to  declare  unto  thee ;  but
first  consider  what  yet  remains.

22  T  ^iid  when  he  had  said
this  unto  me  I  looked  up,  and
behold  I  saw  six  tall  and  vene-
rable men  coming;  their  coun-
tenances were  all  alike ;  and  they
called  a  certain  multitude  of
men;  and  they  who  came  at
their  call  were  also  tall  and  stout.

23  And  those  six  commanded
them  to  build  a  certain  tower
over  that  gate.  And  immediately
there  began  to  be  a  great  noise
of  those  men  running  here  and
there  about  the  gate,  who  were
come  together  to  build  the  tower.

24  But  those  virgins  which
stood  about  the  gate  perceived
that  the  building  of  the  tower
was  to  be  hastened  by  them.
And  they  stretched  out  their
hands,  as  if  they  were  to  receive
somewhat  from  them  to  do.

25  Then  those  six  men  com-
manded, that  they  should  lift  up
stones  out  of  a  certain  deep
place,  and  prepare  them  for  the
building  of  the  tower.  And
there  were  lifted  up  ten  white
stones,  square,  and  ^not  cut
round.

26  Then  those  six  men  called
the  ten  virgins  to  them,  and
commanded  them  to  carry  all
the  stones  that  were  to  be  put
into  the  building  and  having
carried  them  through  the  gate
to  deliver  them  to  those  that
were  about  to  build  the  tower.

27  Immediately  the  virgins
began  all  of  them  together  to
lift  up  those  stones,  that  were
before  taken  out  of  the  deep.

28  T  And  they  who  also  stood
about  the  gate  did  carry  stones
in  such  a  manner,  that  those
stones  which  seemed  to  be  the


strongest  were  laid  at  the  corners,
the  rest  were  put  into  the  sides.

29  And  thus  they  carried  all
the  stones,  and  bringing  them
through  the  gate  delivered  them
to  the  builders,  as  they  had  been
commanded :  who  receiving  them
at  their  hands,  built  with  them.

30  But  this  building  was  made
upon  that  great  rock,  and  over
the  gate ;  and  by  these  the  whole
tower  was  supported.  But  the
building  of  the  ten  stones  filled
the  whole  gate,  which  began  to
be  made  for  the  foundation  of
that  tower.

31  After  those  ten  stones  did
five  and  twenty  others  'rise  up
out  of  the  deep ;  and  these  were
placed  in  the  building  of  the
same  tower ;  being  lifted  up  by
those  virgins,  as  the  others  had
been  before.

32  After  these  did  five  and
thirty  others  ^rise  up;  and  these
were  also  in  like  manner  fitted
into  the  same  work.  Then  forty
other  stones  were  brought  up,
and  all  these  were  added  unto
the  building  of  that  tower.

33  So  there  began  to  be  four
ranks  in  the  foundation  of  that
tower ;  and  the  stones  ceased  to
'  rise  out  of  the  deep ;  and  they
also  which  built  rested  a  little.

34  Again  those  six  men  com-
manded the  multitude,  that  they
should  bring  stones  out  of  those
twelve  mountains  to  the  building
of  the  same  tower.

35  So  they  cut  out  of  all  the
mountains  stones  of  divers  col-
ours, and  brought  them  and  gave
them  to  the  virgins ;  which  when
they  had  received  they  carried
them,  and  delivered  them  into
the  building  of  the  tower,

36  In  which  when  they  were
built   they   became   white,   and


So  Cotelerius  in  loc.


'  MS.  Lamb.  Ascenderunt.
249


0/  the  mysteries


III.  HERMAS.


of  the  church


different  from  what  they  were
before ;  for  they  were  all  alike,
and  did  change  their  former
colours.  And  some  were  reached
up  by  the  men  themselves,  which
when  they  came  into  the  build-
ing, continued  such  as  they  were
put  in.

37  These  neither  became  white,
nor  different  from  what  they
were  before ;  because  they  were
not  carried  by  the  virgins  through
the  gate.  Wherefore  these  stones
were  disagreeable  in  the  build-
ing :  which,  when  those  six  men
perceived,  they  commanded  them
to  be  removed,  and  put  again  in
the  place  from  which  they  were
brought.

38  And  they  said  to  those  who
brought  those  stones ;  Do  not  ye
reach  up  to  us  any  stones  for
this  building,  but  lay  them  down
by  the  tower,  and  these  virgins
may  carry  them  and  reach  them
to  us.

39  For  unless  they  shall  be
carried  by  these  virgins  through
this  gate,  they  cannot  change
their  colours;  therefore  do  not
labour  in  vain.

40  ^  So  the  building  that  day
was  done,  howbeit  the  tower  was
not  finished;  for  it  was  after-
wards to  be  built,  therefore  now
also  there  was  some  delay  made
of  it.

41  And  these  six  men  com-
manded those  that  built  to  depart,
and  as  it  were  to  rest  for  some
time ;  but  they  ordered  those  vir-
gins that  they  should  not  depart
from  the  tower ;  now  they  seem-
ed to  me  to  be  left  for  the  guard-
ing of  it.

42  When  all  were  departed,  I
said  unto  that  shepherd;  Sir,
why  is  not  the  building  of  the
tower  finished  ?  Because  it  can-
not, said  he,  be  finished  until  its
Lord  comes,  and  approves  of  the

250


building ;  that  if  he  shall  find
any  stones  in  it  that  are  not
good  they  may  be  changed  ;  for
this  tower  is  built  according  to
his  will.

43  Sir,  said  I,  I  would  know
what  the  building  of  this  tower
signifies  ;  as  also  I  would  be  in-
formed concerning  this  rock,  and
this  gate.

44  And  concerning  the  moun-
tains, and  the  virgins,  and  the
stones  that  did  rise  out  of  the
deep,  and  were  not  cut,  but  put
into  the  building  just  as  they
came  forth ;  and  why  the  ten
stones  were  first  laid  in  the
foundation ;  then  the  twenty-five ;
then  thirty-five ;  then  forty  ?

45  Also  concerning  these
stones  that  were  put  into  the
building,  and  again  taken  out,
and  carried  back  into  their
place?  Fulfil,  I  pray,  the  de-
sire of  my  soul  as  to  all  these
things  and  manifest  all  unto
me.

46  And  he  said  unto  me ;  If
thou  slialt  not  be  dull,  thou  shalt
know  all,  and  shalt  see  all  the
other  things  that  are  about  to
happen  in  this  tower  ;  and  shalt
understand  diligently  all  these
similitudes.

47  And  after  a  few  days  we
came  into  the  same  place  where
we  had  sat  before  ;  and  he  said
unto  me.  Let  us  go  unto  the
tower ;  for  the  Lord  of  it  will
come  and  examine  it.

48  So  we  came  thither,  and
found  none  but  those  virgins
there.  And  he  asked  them
whether  the  Lord  of  that  tower
was  come  thither?  And  they
replied,  that  he  would  be  there
presently  to  examine  the  build-
ing.

49  T  After  a  very  little  while
I  saw  a  great  multitude  of  men
coming,  and   in   the  middle  of


militant


SIMILITUDE  IX.


and  triumphant.


them  a  man  so  tall,  that  he  sur-
passed the  tower  in  ^  height.

50  About  him  were  those  six,
who  before  commanded  in  the
building,  and  all  the  rest  of  those
who  had  built  that  tower,  and
many  others  of  great  dignity :
and  the  virgins  that  kept  the
tower  ran  to  meet  him,  and  kissed
him,  and  began  to  walk  near
unto  him.

51  But  he  examined  the  build-
ing with  so  much  care  that  he
handled  every  stone ;  and  struck
every  one  with  a  rod  which  he
held  in  his  hand  :

52  Of  which  some  being  so
struck  turned  black  as  soot ;
others  were  rough  ;  some  looked
as  if  they  had  cracks  in  them  ;
others  seemed  maimed :  some
neither  black  nor  white ;  some
looked  sharp,  and  agreed  not
with  the  other  stones,  and  others
were  full  of  spots.

53  These  were  the  several
kinds  of  those  stones  which  were
not  found  proper  in  the  build-
ing ;  all  which  the  Lord  com-
manded to  be  taken  out  of  the
tower,  and  laid  near  it,  and  other
stones  to  be  brought  and  put  in
their  places.

54  And  they  that  built,  asked
him  from  which  of  the  moun-
tains he  would  have  stones
brought  to  put  in  the  place  of
those  that  were  laid  aside.  But
he  forbad  them  to  bring  any
from  the  mountains,  and  com-
manded that  they  should  take
out  of  a  certain  field  that  was
near.

55  So  they  digged  in  the  field,
and  found  many  bright  square
stones,  and  some  also  that  were
round.  Howbeit,  all  that  were
found  in  that  field  were  taken
away,  and  carried  through  the


gate  by  those  virgins ;  and  those
of  them  that  were  square  were
fitted  and  put  into  the  places  of
those  that  were  pulled  out.

5Q  But  the  round  ones  were
not  put  into  the  building,  because
they  were  hard,  and  it  would
have  required  too  much  time  to
cut  them  ;  but  they  were  placed
about  the  tower,  as  if  they  should
hereafter  be  cut  square,  and  put
into  the  building ;  for  they  were
very  white.

57  ^  When  he  who  was  chief
in  dignity,  and  lord  of  the  whole
tower  saw  this,  he  called  to  him
the  shepherd  that  was  with  me
and  gave  him  the  stones  that
were  rejected  and  laid  about  the
tower  and  said  unto  him;  cleanse
these  stones  with  all  care,  and
fit  them  into  the  building  of  the
tower,  that  they  may  agree  with
the  rest ;  but  those  that  will  not
suit  with  the  rest,  cast  away  afar
off*  from  the  tower.

58  When  he  had  thus  com-
manded him,  he  departed,  with
all  those  that  came  with  him  to
the  tower :  but  those  virgins  still
stood  about  the  tower  to  keep  it.

59  And  I  said  unto  that  shep-
herd, How  can  these  stones,  see-
ing they  have  been  rejected,  re-
turn into  the  building  of  this
tower  ?  He  replied  ;  I  will  cut
off"  the  greatest  part  from  these
stones,  and  will  add  them  to  the
building,  and  they  will  agree
with  the  rest.

60  And  I  said,  Sir,  how  will
they  be  able  to  fill  the  same
place,  when  they  shall  be  so
much  cut  away  ?  He  answered  ;
They  that  shall  be  found  too  lit-
tle shall  be  put  into  the  middle
of  the  building,  and  the  greater
shall  be  placed  without,  and  keep
them  in.


Greatness.


251


Of  the  mysteries


Iir.  HERMAS.


of  the  church


61  When  he  had  said  thus
unto  me,  he  added ;  Let  us  go,
and  after  three  days  we  will  re-
turn, and  I  will  put  these  stones,
being  cleansed,  into  the  tower.

62  For  all  these  that  are
about  the  tower  must  be  cleansed,
lest  the  master  of  the  house
chance  to  come  upon  the  sudden,
and  find  those  which  are  about
the  tower  unclean ;  ^  and  be  so
exasperated,  that  these  stones
should  never  be  put  into  the  build-
ing of  this  tower,  and  I  shall  be
looked  upon  to  have  been  ^  un-
mindful of  my  master's  com-
mands.

63  When  therefore  we  came
after  three  days  to  the  tower,  he
said  unto  me ;  Let  us  examine
all  these  stones,  and  let  us  see
which  of  them  may  go  into  the
building.  I  answered,  Sir,  let
us  see.

64  Tf  And  first  of  all  we  be-
gun to  consider  those  which  had
been  black  ;  for  they  were  found
just  such  as  they  were  when  they
were  pulled  out  of  the  tower :
wherefore  he  commanded  them
to  be  removed  from  the  tower
and  put  by  themselves.

65  Then  he  examined  those
which  had  been  rough ;  and
commanded  many  of  those  to  be
cut  round,  and  to  be  fitted  by
the  virgins  into  the  building  of
the  tower;  so  they  took  them,
and  fitted  them  into  the  middle
of  the  building ;  and  he  com-
manded the  rest  to  be  laid  by
with  the  black  ones,  for  they
also  were  become  black.

66  Next  he  considered  those
which  were  full  of  cracks,  and
many  of  those  also  he  ordered
to  be  pared  away,  and  so  to  be
added  to  the  rest  of  the  build-
ing, by  the  same  virgins.


67  These  were  placed  without
because  they  were  found  entire;
but  the  residue  through  the  mul-
titude of  their  cracks  could  not
be  reformed,  and  therefore  were
cast  away  from  the  building  of
the  tower.

68  Then  he  considered  those
that  had  been  maimed ;  many  of
these  had  cracks,  and  were  be-
come black;  others  were  large
clefts;  these  he  commanded  to
be  placed  with  those  that  were
rejected.

69  But  the  rest  being  cleansed
and  reformed,  he  commanded  to
be  put  in  the  building.  These
therefore  those  virgins  took  up,
and  fitted  into  the  middle  of  the
building,  because  they  were  but
weak.

70  After  these  he  examined
those  which  were  found  half
white  and  half  black ;  and  many
of  those  were  now  black ;  these
also  he  ordered  to  be  laid  among
those  that  were  cast  away.

71  The  rest  were  found  alto-
gether white ;  those  w^ere  taken
up  by  the  virgins,  and  fitted  into
the  same  tower :  *  and  these  were
put  in  the  outside,  because  they
were  found  entire ;  that  so  they
might  keep  in  those  that  were
placed  in  the  middle,  for  nothing
was  cut  off*  from  them.

72  Next  he  looked  upon  those
*  which  had  been  hard  and  sharp ;
but  few  of  these  were  made  use
of,  because  they  could  not  be  cut,
for  they  were  found  very  hard :
but  the  rest  were  formed,  and
fitted  by  the  virgins  into  the
middle  of  the  building,  because
they  were  more  weak.

73  Then  he  considered  those
which  had  spots ;  of  these  a  few
were  found  black,  and  these  were
carried  to  their  fellows.  The  rest


^  MS.  Lamb.  Ita  exasperetur,  ut  hi  lapides.     ^  MS.  Lamb.  Negligens,  patria-
familias.     ^  Vid.  MS.  Lamb.  Edit.  Oxon.  p.  157.    ■*MS.  Lamb.  Fuerant.
252


militant


SIMILITUDE  IX.  and  triumphant


were  white  and  entire ;  and  they
were  fitted  by  the  virgins  into  the
building,  and  placed  in  the  out-  ■
side,  by  reason  of  their  strength,  j

74  "If  After  this  he  came  to
consider  those  stones  which  were  '
white   and   round:   and  he  said  |
unto  me.  What  shall  we  do  with  I
these  stones  ?  I  answered.  Sir,  I
cannot  tell.

75  He  replied,  Canst  thou
think  of  nothing  then  for  these  ?
I  answered.  Sir,  I  understand
not  this  art;  neither  am  I  a
stone-cutter,  nor  can  I  tell  any
thing.

76  And  he  said,  seest  thou
not  that  they  are  very  round  ?
Now  to  make  them  square,  I
must  cut  off  a  great  deal  from
them ;  howbeit,  it  is  necessary
that  some  of  these  should  go  into
the  building  of  the  tower.

77  I  answered  ;  If  it  be  neces-
sary, why  do  you  perplex  your-
self, and  not  rather  choose,  if  you
have  any  choice  among  them,
and  fit   them  into  the  building.

78  Upon  this  he  chose  out  the
largest  and  brightest,  and
squared  them ;  which  when  he  had
done  the  virgins  took  them  up,
and  placed  them  in  the  outside
of  the  building.

79  And  t*he  rest  that  re-
mained were  carried  back  into
the  same  field  from  which  they
were  taken ;  howbeit,  they  were
not  cast  away;  because,  said  he,
there  is  not  yet  a  little  wanting
to  this  tower,  which  is  to  be  built;
and  perhaps  the  Lord  will  have
these  stones  fitted  into  this  build-
ing, because  they  are  exceeding
white.

80  Then  were  there  called
twelve  very  stately  women,
clothed  with  a  black  garment,
girded,  and  their  shoulders  free,


and  their  hair  loose.  These
seemed  to  me  to  be  country  wo-
men.

81  And  the  shepherd  com-
manded them  to  take  up  those
stones  which  were  cast  out  of  the
building,  and  carry  them  back  to
the  mountains  out  of  which  they
were  taken.

82  And  they  took  them  all  up
joyfully,  and  carried  them  back
to  their  places  from  whence  they
had  been  taken.

83  When  not  one  stone  re-
mained about  the  tower,  he  said
unto  me.  Let  us  go  about  this
tower,  and  see  whether  any  thing
be  wanting  to  it.

84  We  began  therefore  to  go
round  about  it ;  and  when  he  saw
that  it  was  handsomely  built,  he
began  to  be  very  glad  ;  for  it
was  so  beautifully  framed,  that
any  one  that  had  seen  it  must
have  been  in  love  with  the  build-
ing:

85  For  it  seemed  to  be  all  but
one  stone,  nor  did  a  joint  any-
where appear  ;  but  it  looked  as
if  it  had  all  been  cut  out  of  one
rock.

S6  ^  And  when  I  diligently
considered  what  a  tower  it  was,
I  was  extremely  pleased  :  and  he
said  unto  me.  Bring  hither  some
lime  and  little  shells,  that  I  may
fill  up  the  ^  spaces  of  those  stones
that  were  taken  out  of  the  build-
ing, and  put  in  again ;  for  all
things  about  the  tower  must  be
made  even.

87  And  I  did  as  he  command-
ed me,  and  he  said  unto  me.  Be
ready  to  help  me,  and  this  work
will  quickly  be  finished.

88  He  therefore  filled  up  the
spaces  of  those  stones,  and  com-
manded the  place  about  the
tower  to  be  cleansed.


Formas.  Lat.


253


Oj  the  mysteries


III.  HERMAS.


of  the  church


89  Then  those  virgins  took
besoms,  and  cleansed  all  the  place
around  and  took  away  all  the  rub-
bish, and  threw  water  on ;  which
being  done,  the  place  became  de-
lightful, and  the  tower  beauteous.

90  Then  he  said  unto  me.  All
is  now  clean  :  if  the  Lord  should
come  to  finish  the  tower,  he  will
find  nothing  whereby  to  com-
plain of  us.

91  When  he  had  said  this  he
would  have  departed.  But  I
laid  hold  on  his  bag,  and  began
to  entreat  him  for  the  Lord's
sake,  that  he  would  explain  to
me  all  things  that  he  had  shown
me.

92  He  said  unto  me,  I  have
at  present  a  little  business ;  but
I  will  suddenly  explain  all  things
unto  thee.  Tarry  here  for  me
till  I  come.

93  I  said  unto  him.  Sir,  what
shall  I  do  here  alone?  He  an-
swered, Thou  art  not  alone,  see-
ing all  these  virgins  are  with
thee.

94  I  said.  Sir,  deliver  me  then
Unto  them.  Then  he  called  them
and  said  unto  them,  I  commend
this  man  unto  you  until  I  shall
come.

95  So  I  remained  with  those
virgins :  now  they  were  cheerful
and  courteous  unto  me ;  especial-
ly the  four,  which  seemed  to  be
the  chiefest  among  them.

96  ^  Then  those  virgins  said
unto  me,  that  shepherd  will  not
return  hither  to  day.  I  said
unto  them.  What  then  shall  I
do?  They  answered.  Tarry  for
him  till  the  evening,  if  perhaps
he  may  come  and  speak  with
thee ;  but  if  not,  yet  thou  shalt
continue  with  us  till  he  does
come.

97  I  said  unto  them,  I  will
tarry  for  him  till  evening ;  but  if
he  comes  not  by  that  time,  I  will

254


go  home,  and  return  hither  again
the  next  morning.

98  They  answered  me.  Thou
art  delivered  unto  us,  thou  mayest
not  depart  from  us.  I  said,  Where
shall  I  tarry  ?

99  They  replied,  Thou  shalt
sleep  with  us  as  a  brother,  not
as  a  husband :  for  thou  art  our
brother,  and  we  are  ready  from
henceforth  to  dwell  with  thee ;
for  thou  art  very  dear  to  us.

100  Howbeit  I  was  ashamed
to  continue  with  them.  But  she
that  seemed  to  be  the  chiefest
amongst  them,  embraced  me,  and
began  to  kiss  me.  And  the  rest
when  they  saw  that  I  was  kissed
by  her,  began  also  to  kiss  me  as
a  brother ;  and  led  me  about  the
tower,  and  played  with  me.

101  Some  of  them  also  sung
psalms,  others  made  up  the
chorus  with  them.  But  I  walked
aboutthe  tower  with  them,  rejoic-
ing silently,  and  seeming  to
myself  to  be  grown  young
again.

102  When  the  evening  came
on,  I  would  forthwith  have  gone
home,  but  they  withheld  me,  and
suffered  me  not  to  depart.  Where-
fore I  continued  with  them  that
night  near  the  same  tower.

103  So  they  spread  their  linen
garments  upon  the  ground ;  and
placed  me  in  the  middle,  nor  did
they  anything  else,  only  they
prayed.

104  I  also  prayed  with  them
without  ceasing,  nor  less  than
they.  Who  when  they  saw  me
pray  in  that  manner,  rejoiced
greatly;  and  I  continued  there
with  them  till  the  next  day.

105  And  when  we  had  wor-
shipped God,  then  the  shepherd
came  and  said  unto  them :  You
have  done  no  injury  to  this  man.
They  answered,  Ask  him.  I  said
unto  him.  Sir,  I  have  received  a


militant


SIMILITUDE  IX.


md  triumphant.


great  deal  of  satisfaction  in  that
I  have  remained  with  them.

106  And  he  said  unto  me,  How
didst  thou  sup  ?  I  answered,  Sir,
I  feasted  the  whole  night  upon
the  words  of  the  Lord.  They
received  thee  well  then,  said  he ;
I  said.  Sir,  very  well.

107  He  answered.  Wilt  thou
now  learn  what  thou  didst  desire?
I  replied,  Sir,  I  will:  and  first  I
pray  thee  that  thou  shouldest
shew  me  all  things  in  the  order
that  I  asked  them.

108  He  answered,  I  will  do  all
as  thou  wouldst  have  me,  nor  will
I  hide  anything  from  thee.

109  T  First  of  all.  Sir,  said  I,
tell  me,  what  this  rock,  and  this
gate  denote  ?  Hearken,  said  he ;
this  rock,  and  this  gate,  are  the
Son  of  God.  I  replied.  Sir,  how
can  that  be;  seeing  therockis  old,
but  the  gate  new.

110  Hear,  said  he,  O  foolish
man !  and  understand.  The  Son
of  God  is  indeed  more  ancient
than  any  creature ;  ^  insomuch
that  he  was  in  council  with  his
Father  at  the  creation  of  *  all
things.

111  But  the  gate  is  therefore
new,  because  he  appeared  in  the
last  days  in  the  fulness  of  time ;
that  they  who  shall  attain  unto
salvation,  may  by  it  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  God.

112  You  have  seen,  said  he,
those  stones  which  were  carried
through  the  gate,  how  they  were
placed  in  the  building  of  the
tower;  but  that  those  which  were
not  carried  through  the  gate,
were  sent  away  into  their  own
places  ?

113  I  answered.  Sir,  I  saw  it.
Thus,  said  he,  no  man  shall  enter
into  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  he
who  shall  take  upon  him  the
name  of  the  Son  of  God.

^  Ita  ut.  Lat.


114  For  if  you  would  enter
into  any  city,  and  that  city  should
be  encompassed  with  a  wall,  and
had  only  one  gate,  could  you
enter  into  that  city  except  by
that  gate  ?

115  1  answered.  Sir,  how  could
I  do  otherwise?  As  therefore,  said
he,  there  would  be  no  other  way
of  entering  into  that  city  but  by
its  gate,  so  neither  can  any  one
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God,
but  only  by  the  name  of  his  Son,
who  is  most  dear  unto  him.

116  And  he  said  unto  me,
Didst  thou  see  the  multitude  of
those  that  built  that  tower  ?  Sir,
said  I,  I  saw  it.  He  answered,
All  those  are  the  angels,  vener-
able in  their  dignity.

117  Yv^ith  those  is  the  Lord
encompassed  as  with  a  wall :  but
the  gate  is  the  Son  of  God,  who
is  the  only  way  of  coming  unto
God.  For  no  man  shall  go  to
God,  but  by  his  Son.

118  Thou  sawest  also,  said  he,
the  six  men,  and  in  the  middle
of  them  that  venerable  great
man,  who  walked  about  the
tower,  and  rejected  the  stones
out  of  the  tower  ?

119  Sir,  said  I,  I  saw  them.
He  answered,  that  tall  man  was
the  Son  of  God :  and  those  six
were  his  angels  of  most  eminent
dignity,  which  stand  about  him
on  the  right  hand  and  on  the
left.

120  Of  these  excellent  angels
none  comes  in  unto  God  without
him.  He  added.  Whosoever
therefore  shall  not  take  upon
him  his  name,  he  shall  not  enter
into  the  kingdom  of  God.

121  If  Then  I  said.  What  is
this  tower  ?  This,  said  he,  is  the
church.  And  what,  Sir,  are
these  virgins  ?  He  said  unto  me,
These  are  the  holy  spirits,  for  no

'  The  creatures.

255


Oj  the  mysteries


III.  HERMAS.


of  the  church


man  can  enter  into  the  kingdom
of  God,  except  these  clothe  him
with  their  garment.

122  For  it  will  avail  thee
nothing  to  take  up  the  name  of
the  Son  of  God,  unless  thou  shalt
also  receive  their  garment  from
them.  For  these  virgins  are  the
powers  of  the  Son  of  God.  So
shall  a  man  in  vain  bear  his
name,  unless  he  shall  be  also  en-
dued with  his  powers.

123  And  he  said  unto  me,
sawest  thou  those  stones  that
were  cast  away?  They  bore  in-
deed the  name,  but  put  not  on
their  garment.  I  said,  Sir,  what
is  their  garment  ?  ^  Their  very
names,  said  he,  are  their  garment.

124  Therefore  whosoever  bear-
eth  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God,
ought  to  bear  their  names  also ;
for  the  Son  of  God  also  himself
beareth  their  names.

125  As  for  those  stones,  con-
tinued he,  which  being  delivered
by  their  hands,  thou  sawest  re-
main in  the  building,  they  were
clothed  with  their  power  ;  for
which  cause  thou  seest  the  whole
tower  of  the  same  ^  colour  with
the  rock,  and  made  as  it  were  of
one  stone.

126  So  also  those  who  have
believed  in  God  by  his  Son,  have
put  on  his  spirit.  Behold  there
shall  be  one  spirit,  and  one  body,
and  one  colour  of  their  garments ;
and  all  they  shall  attain  this,
who  shall  bear  the  names  of  these
virgins.

127  And  I  said,  Sir,  why  then
were  those  stones  cast  away  which
were  rejected,  seeing  they  also
were  carried  through  the  gate,
and  delivered  by  the  hands  of
these  virgins  into  the  building  of
this  tower  ?


128  Seeing,  said  he,  thou  takest
care  to  inquire  diligently  into
all  things,  hear  also  concerning
those  stones  which  were  rejected.
All  these  received  the  name  of
the  Son  of  God,  and  with  that
the  power  of  these  virgins.

129  Having  therefore  received
these  spirits,  they  were  perfect-
ed, and  brought  into  the  number
of  the  servants  of  God ;  and
they  began  to  be  one  body,  and
to  have  one  garment,  for  they
were  'endued  with  the  same
righteousness,  which  they  alike
exercised.

130  But  after  that  they  be-
held those  women  which  thou
sawest  clothed  with  a  black  gar-
ment, with  their  shoulders  at
liberty  and  their  hair  loose ;
they  fixed  their  desires  upon
them,  being  tempted  with  their
beauty ;  and  were  clothed  with
their  power,  and  cast  off  the
clothing  of  the  virgins :

131  Therefore  were  they  cast
off  from  the  house  of  God,  and
delivered  to  those  women.  But
they  that  were  not  corrupted
with  their  beauty,  remained  in
the  house  of  God.  This,  said
he,  is  the  signification  of  those
stones  which  were  rejected.

132  t  And  I  said.  Sir,  what
if  any  of  these  men  shall  repent,
and  .cast  away  their  desire  of
those  women,  and  be  converted,
and  return  to  these  virgins,  and
put  on  again  their  virtue  ;  shall
they  not  enter  into  the  house  of
God?

133  They  shall  enter,  said  he,
if  they  shall  lay  aside  all  the
works  of  those  women,  and  shall
resume  the  power  of  these  virgins,
and  shall  walk  in  their  works.

134  And  for  this  cause  there


1  Vid.  Annot.  Edit.  Oxon.  p.  116,  d.  « yid.  Origen.  Philocal.  c  viii.

'Sentiebant  sequitatem,  Lat,  from  the  Greek  e^povow;  but  the  true  reading
of  Herinas  seemeth  to  have  been  o<popovv.
256


<   s


militant


SIMILITUDE  IX.  and  tnumphant.


is  a  stop  in  the  building,  that  if
they  shall  repent,  they  may  be
added  to  the  building  of  this
tower;  but  if  they  shall  not  re-
pent, that  others  may  be  built
in  their  places,  and  so  they  may
be  utterly  cast  away.

135  For  all  these  things  I
gave  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  that
being  moved  with  mercy  towards
all  those  upon  whom  his  name  is
called,  he  sent  to  us  the  angel  of
repentance  to  preside  over  us
who  have  sinned  against  him ;
and  that  he  has  refreshed  our  spir-
its which  were  almost  gone,  and
who  had  no  hope  of  salvation,
but  are  now  refreshed  to  the  re-
newal of  life.

136  Then  I  said,  Shew  me
now.  Sir,  why  this  tower  is  not
built  upon  the  ground,  but  upon
a  rock,  and  upon  the  gate  ?  He
replied,  thou  art  foolish,  and
without  understanding,  therefore
thou  asketh  this.

137  And  I  said,  Sir,  I  must
needs  ask  all  things  of  you,  be-
cause I  understand  nothing  at
all.  For  all  your  answers  are
great  and  excellent ;  and  which
a  man  can  hardly  understand.

138  Hear,  said  he  :  The  name
of  the  Son  of  God  is  great  and
without  bounds,  and  the  whole
world  is  supported  by  it.  If
therefore,  said  I,  every  creature
of  God  be  sustained  by  his  Son,
why  should  he  not  support  those
also  who  have  been  invited  by
him,  and  who  carry  his  name,
and  walk  in  his  commandments  ?

139  Seest  thou  not,  said  he,
that  he  doth  support  them,  who
with  all  their  heart  bear  his
name  ?  He  therefore  is  their
foundation,  and  gladly  supports
those  who  do  not  deny  his  name,
but  willingly  bear  it.


140  li  And  I  said:  Sir,  tell  me
the  names  of  these  virgins  ;  and
of  those  women  that  were  clothed
with  the  black  garment.

141  Hear,  said  he,  the  names
of  those  virgins  which  are  the
more  powerful,  and  stand  at  the
corners  of  the  gate.  These  are
their  names :

142  The  first  is  called  '  Faith ;
the  second  Continence;  the  third.
Power ;  the  fourth.  Patience;  the
rest  which  stand  beneath  these
are.  Simplicity,  Innocence,  Chas-
tity, Cheerfulness,  Truth,  Under-
standing, Concord,  Charity.

143  Whosoever  therefore  bear
these  names,  and  the  names  of
the  Son  of  God,  shall  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  God.

144  Hear  now,  said  he,  the
names  of  those  women,  which
were  clothed  with  the  black  gar-
ment. Of  these,  four  are  the
principal :  the  first  is  Perfidious-
ness  ;  the  second.  Incontinence  ;
the  third,  Infidelity  ;  the  fourth^
Pleasure.

145  And  the  rest  which  fol-
low are  called  thus.  Sadness,
Malice,  Lust,  Anger,  Lying,
Foolishness,  Pride,  and  Hatred.
The  servant  of  God,  which  car-
ries these  spirits,  shall  see  indeed
the  kingdom  of  God,  but  he
shall  not  enter  into  it.

146  But,  Sir,  what  are  those
stones  which  were  taken  out  of
the  deep  and  fitted  into  the
building  ?  The  ten,  said  he,
which  were  placed  at  the  founda-
tion, are  the  first  age;  the  fol-
lowing five  and-twenty,  the  sec-
ond, of  righteous  men.

147  The  next  thirty-five,  are
the  prophets  and  ministers  of
the  Lord.  And  the  forty,  are
the  Apostles  and  doctors  of  the
preaching  of  the  Son  of  God.


17


*  Origin.  Horn.  13,  in  Ezek.


257


Of  the  mysteries


III.  HERMAS.


of  the  church


148  And  1  said,  Sir,  why  did
the  virgins  put  even  those  stones
into  the  building  after  they  were
carried  through  the  gate  ?  And
he  said,  Because  these  first  car-
ried those  spirits,  and  they  de-
parted not  one  from  the  one,
neither  the  men  from  the  spirits,
nor  the  spirits  from  the  men  :

149  But  the  spirits  were  joined
to  those  men  even  to  the  day  of
their  death  ;  who  if  they  had  not
had  these  spirits  with  them,  they
could  not  have  been  useful  to
the  building  of  this  tower.

150  And  I  said.  Sir,  shew  me
this  farther.  He  answered.  What
dost  thou  ask  ?  Why  did  these
stones  come  out  of  the  deep,  and
were  placed  into  the  building  of
this  tower,  seeing  that  they  long
ago  carried  those  ^  holy  spirits.

151  *  It  was  necessary,  said
he,  for  them  to  ascend  by  water,
that  they  might  be  at  rest.  For
they  could  not  otherwise  enter
into  the  kingdom  of  God,  but
by  laying  aside  the  mortality  of
their  former  life.

152  They  therefore  being  dead,
were  nevertheless  sealed  with
the  seal  of  the  Son  of  God,  and
so  entered  into  the  kingdom  of
God.

153  For  before  a  man  receives
the  name  of  the  Son  of  God,  he
is  ordained  unto  death  ;  but
when  he  receives  that  seal,  he  is
freed  from  death,  and  ^assigned
unto  life.

154  Now  that  seal  is  the  water
of  baptism,  into  which  men  go
down  under  the  obligation  unto
death,  but  come  up  appointed
unto  life.

155  Wherefore  to  those  also
was  this  seal  *  preached,  and  they


made  use  of  it,  that  they  might
enter  the  kingdom  of  God.

156  And  I  said,  Why  then,  sir,
did  these  forty  stones  also  ascend
with  them  out  of  the  deep,  hav-
ing already  received  that  seal  ?

157  He  answered,  ^  Because
these  Apostles  and  teachers,  who
preached  the  name  of  the  Son  of
God,  dying  after  they  had  re-
ceived his  faith  and  power,
preached  to  them  who  were  dead
before ;  and  they  gave  this  seal
to  them.

158  They  went  down  therefore
into  the  water  with  them,  and
again  came  up.  But  these  went
down  whilst  they  were  alive,  and
came  up  again  alive :  whereas
those  who  were  before  dead,  went
down  dead,  but  came  up  alive ;

159  Through  these  therefore
they  received  life,  and  knew  the
Son  of  God :  for  which  cause
they  came  up  with  them,  and
were  fit  to  come  into  the  build-
ing of  the  tower ;  and  were  not
cut,  but  put  in  entire ;  because
they  died  in  righteousness,  and
in  great  purity;  only  this  seal
was  wanting  to  them.

160  Thus  you  have  the  expli-
cation of  these  things.

161  ^  I  answered :  Sir,  tell
me  now  what  concerns  those
mountains,  why  are  they  so  dif-
ferent ;  some  of  one  form,  and
some  of  another.

162  Hear,  said  he ;  These
twelve  mountains  which  thou
seest,  are  twelve  nations,  which
make  up  the  whole  world.
Wherefore  the  Son  of  God  is
preached  to  them,  by  those  whom
he  sent  unto  them.

163  But  why,  said  I,  are  they
different,   and   every  one  of  a


*  Justos,  Kighteous.  ^  Vid.  Edit.  Oxon,  p.  171,  b.  'Traditur,  Delivered.
<  Vid.  Coteler.  Annot.  in  loc.  p.  77,  78.  Comp.  1  Pet.  ill  19.  *  Vid.  dean.
Alex.  Strom,  ii.  et  vi.

258


militant


SIMILITUDE  IX.


and  triumphant.


figure?  He  replied,  Hearken.
Those  twelve  nations  which  pos-
sess the  whole  world,  are  twelve
people.

164  And  as  thou  hast  beheld
these  mountains  different,  so  are
they.  I  will  therefore  open  to
thee  the  meaning  and  actions  of
every  mountain.

165  But  first,  sir,  said  I,  shew
me  this  ;  Seeing  these  mountains
are  so  different,  how  have  they
agreed  into  the  building  of  this
tower  ;  arid  been  brought  to  one
colour;  and  are  no  less  bright
than  those  that  came  out  of  the
deep?

166  Because,  replied  he,  all
the  nations  which  are  under  hea-
ven, have  heard  and  believed  in
the  same  one  name  of  the  Son  of
God  by  whom  they  are  called.

167  Wherefore  having  re-
ceived his  seal,  they  have  all
been  made  partakers  of  the  same
^  understanding  and  ^  knowledge ;
and  their  faith  and  charity  have
been  the  same ;  and  they  have
carried  the  spirits  of  these  virgins
together  with  his  name.

168  And  therefore  the  build-
ing of  this  tower  appeared  to  be
of  the  same  colour,  and  did  shine
like  the  brightness  of  the  sun.

169  But  after  that  they  had
thus  agreed  in  one  mind  there
began  to  be  one  body  of  them
all;  howbeit  some  of  them  pol-
luted themselves,  and  were  cast
off  from  the  kind  of  the  right-
eous, and  again  returned  to  their
former  state,  and  became  even
worse  than  they  were  before.

170  ^  How,  said  I,  sir,  were
they  worse  who  knew  the  Lord  ?
He  answered :  If  he  who  knows
not  the  Lord  liveth  wickedly,
the  punishment  of  his  wicked-
ness attends  him.

*  Prudence.  '  Sease.   '  Lat.  Virtutem.


171  But  he  who  has  known
the  Lord,  ought  to  abstain  alto-
gether from  all  wickedness,  and
more  and  more  to  be  the  ser-
vant of  righteousness.

172  And  does  not  he  then
seem  to  thee  to  sin  more  who
ought  to  follow  goodness,  if  he
shall  prefer  the  part  of  sin  ;  than
he  who  offends  without  knowing
the  power  of  God?

173  Wherefore  these  are  in-
deed ordained  unto  death ;  but
they  who  have  known  the  Lord,
and  have  seen  his  wonderful
works,  if  they  shall  live  wicked-
ly, they  shall  be  doubly  pun-
ished, and  shall  die  for  ever.

174  As  therefore  thou  hast
seen  that  after  the  stones  were  cast
out  of  the  tower,  which  had  been
rejected  ;  they  were  delivered  to
wicked  and  cruel  spirits;  and
thou  beheldest  the  tower  so
cleansed,  as  if  it  had  all  been
made  of  one  stone  :

175  ^  So  the  church  of  God,
when  it  shall  be  purified :  (the
*  wicked  and  counterfeits,  the
^  mischievous  and  doubtful,  and
all  that  have  behaved  themselves
wickedly  in  it,  and  committed
divers  kinds  of  sin,  being  cast
out)  shall  become  one  body,  and
there  shall  be  one  understanding,
one  opinion,  one  faith,  and  the
same  charity.

176  And  then  shall  the  Son
of  God  rejoice  among  them,  and
shall  receive  his  people  with  a
pure  will.

177  And  I  said ;  Sir,  all  these
things  are  great  and  honourable ;
but  now  shew  unto  me  the  effect
and  force  of  every  mountain:
that  every  soul  which  trusteth
in  the  Lord,  when  it  shall  hear
these  things  may  honour  his  great,
and  wonderful,  and  holy  name.

*  Vid.  Orig.  Philocal.  c.  viii.  *  Evil.
259


Oj  the  mysteries


III.  HEKMAS.


of  the  church


178  Hear,  said  lie,  the  variety
of  these  mountains,  that  is,  of
the  twelve  nations.

179  1  They  who  have  believed
of  the  first  mountain,  which  is
black,  are  those  who  have  revolt-
ed from  the  faith ;  and  spoken
wicked  things  against  the  Lord  ;
and  betrayed  the  servants  of
God.

180  These  are  condemned  to
death,  there  is  no  repentance  for
them:  and  therefore  they  are
black,  because  their  kind  is
wicked.

181  Of  the  second  mountain
which  was  smooth,  are  the  ^  hy-
pocrites, who  have  believed,  and
the  teachers  of  naughtiness :  and
these  are  next  to  the  foregoing,
which  have  not  in  them  the  fruit
of  righteousness.

182  For  as  their  mountain  is
barren  and  without  fruit ;  so
also  such  kind  of  men  have  in-
deed the  name  of  Christians,  but
are  empty  of  faith  ;  nor  is  there
any  fruit  of  the  truth  in  them.

183  Nevertheless  there  is  room
left  to  them  for  repentance,  if  they
shall  suddenly  pursue  it :  but  if
they  shall  delay,  they  also  shall
be  partakers  of  death  with  the
foregoing  kind.

184  I  said,  Sir,  why  is  there
room  left  to  those  for  repentance,
and  not  to  the  foregoing  kind,
seeing  their  sins  are  well  nigh
the  same  ?

185  There  is  therefore,  said  he
to  these  a  return  unto  life  by  re-
pentance, because  they  have  not
blasphemed  against  their  Lord,
nor  betrayed  the  servants  of
God  :  but  by  their  desire  of  gain
have  deceived  men,  leading  them
according  to  the  lusts  of  sinners ;
wherefore  they  shall  suffer  for
this  thing.


186  Howbeit  there  is  still  left,
them  room  for  repentance,  be-
cause they  have  not  spoken  any
thing  wickedly  against  the  Lord.

187  ^  They  who  are  of  the
third  mountain  which  had  thorns
and  brambles,  are  those  who  be-
lieved, but  were  some  of  them
rich,  others  taken  up  with  many
affairs :  the  brambles  are  their
riches :  the  thorns,  those  affairs
in  which  they  were  engaged.

188  Now  they  who  are  en-
tangled in  much  business,  and
in  diversity  of  affairs,  join  not
themselves  to  the  servants  of
God,  but  wander,  being  called
away  by  those  affairs  with  which
they  are  choked.

189  And  so  they  which  are
rich,  with  difficulty  yield  them-
selves to  the  ^conversation  of  the
servants  of  God ;  fearing  lest  any-
thing should  be  asked  of  them.
These  therefore  shall  hardly  en-
ter into  the  kingdom  of  God.

190  For  as  men  walk  with
difficulty  bare-foot  over  thorns,,
even  so  these  kind  of  men  shall
scarcely  enter  into  the  kingdom
of  God.

191  Nevertheless  there  is  af-
forded to  all  these  a  return  unto
repentance;  if  that  they  shall
quickly  return  to  it ;  that  because
in  their  former  days  they  have
neglected  to  work,  in  the  time
that  is  to  come  they  may  da
some  good.

192  If  therefore  having  re-
pented they  shall  do  the  works
of  righteousness,  they  shall  live ;
but  if  they  shall  continue  in  their
evil  courses,  they  shall  be  deli-
vered to  those  women  that  will
take  away  their  life.

193  ^  As  for  the  fourth  moun-
tain, which  had  many  herbs,  the
upper  part  of  which   is  green»


^  Profligate.

260


'  Vid.  Edit.  Oxon.,  p.  178,  Not.  b.


militant  and


SIMILITUDE  IX.


triumphant.


but  the  roots  dry,  and  some  of
which  being  touched  with  the
heat  of  the  sun  are  withered ;

194  It  denotes  the  doubtful,
who  have  believed,  and  some
others  who  carry  the  Lord  in
their  tongues,  but  have  him  not
in  their  heart:  therefore  their
grass  is  dry,  and  without  root ;
because  they  live  only  in  words,
but  their  works  are  dead.

195  These  therefore  are  nei-
ther dead  nor  living,  and  withal
are  doubtful.  For  the  doubtful
are  neither  green  nor  dry ;  that
is,  neither  dead  nor  alive.

196  For  as  the  herbs  dry
away  at  the  sight  of  the  sun  ;  so
the  doubtful  as  soon  as  they  hear
of  persecution,  and  fear  inconve-
niences, return  to  their  idols,
and  again  serve  them,  and  are
ashamed  to  bear  the  name  of
their  Lord.

197  This  kind  of  men  then  is
neither  dead  nor  alive;  never-
theless these  also  may  live,  if
they  shall  presently  repent;  but
if  not,  they  shall  be  delivered  to
those  women,  who  shall  take
away  their  life.

198  T  As  concerning  the  fifth
mountain  that  is  craggy,  and
yet  has  green  grass :  they  are  of
this  kind  who  have  believed,
and  are  faithful  indeed,  but  be-
lieve with  difficulty;  and  are
bold,  and  self- conceited ;  that
would  be  thought  to  know  all
things,  but  really  know  nothing.

199  Wherefore,  by  reason  of
this  confidence,  knowledge  is  de-
parted from  them;  and  a  rash
presumption  is  entered  into  them.

200  But  they  carry  themselves
high,  and  as  prudent  men  ;  and
though  they  are  fools,  yet  would
seem  to  be  teachers.

201  Now  by  reason   of  this


folly  many  of  them,  whilst  they
magnify  themselves,  are  become
vain  and  empty.  For  boldness
and  vain  confidence  is  a  Wery
evil  spirit.

202  Wherefore  many  of  these
are  cast  away;  but  others  ac-
knowledging their  error,  have
repented,  and  submitted  them-
selves to  those  who  are  knowing.

203  And  to  all  the  rest  of  this
kind  there  is  repentance  allowed ;
forasmuch  as  they  were  not  so
much  wicked  as  foolish,  as  void
of  understanding.

204  If  these  therefore  shall
repent,  they  shall  live  unto  God ;
but  if  not,  they  shall  dwell  with
those  women,  who  shall  exercise
their  wickedness  upon  them.

205  T  For  what  concerns  the
sixth  mountain  having  greater
and  lesser  clefts,  they  are  such  as
have  believed ;  but  those  in  which
were  lesser  clefts  are  they  who
have  had  controversies  among
themselves ;  and  by  reason  of
their  quarrels  languish  in  the
faith ;

206  Nevertheless  many  of  these
have  repented,  and  so  will  the
rest  when  they  shall  hear  my
commands  ;  for  their  controver-
sies are  but  small,  and  they  will
easily  return  ijnto  repentance.

207  But  those  who  have  the
greater  clefts,  will  be  as  stiff
stones,  mindful  of  grudges  and
offences,  and  full  of  anger  among
themselves.  These  therefore  are
cast  from  the  tower,  and  refused
to  be  put  into  its  building ;  for
this  kind  of  men  shall  hardly  live.

208  Our  God  and  Lord,  who
ruleth  over  all  things,  and  has
power  over  all  his  creatures,  will
not  remember  our  offences,  but
is  easily  appeased  by  those  who
confess  their  sins :  but  man  being


*  Magnum  Dsemonium.


261


Oj  the  mysteries


III.  HERMAS.


of  the  church


languid,  mortal,  infirm,  and  full
of  sins,  perseveres  in  his  anger
against  man ;  as  if  it  were  in  his
power  to  save  or  destroy  him.

209  But  I,  as  the  angel  who
am  set  over  your  repentance,
admonish  you,  that  whosoever
among  you  has  any  such  purpose
he  should  lay  it  aside,  and  return
unto  repentance;  and  the  Lord
will  heal  your  former  sins,  if  you
shall  purge  yourselves  from  this
evil  spirit ;  but  if  you  shall  not
do  it,  ye  shall  be  delivered  to
him  unto  death.

210  ^  As  for  the  seventh  moun-
tain in  which  the  grass  was  green
and  flourishing,  and  the  whole
mountain  faithful ;  and  all  kind
of  cattle  fed  upon  the  grass  of  it,
and  the  more  the  grass  was  eaten
so  much  the  more  it  flourished :

211  They  are  such  as  believed,
and  were  always  good  and  up-
right; and  without  any  differ-
ences among  themselves,  but  still
rejoiced  in  the  servants  of  God,
having  put  on  the  spirit  of  these
virgins;  and  been  always  for-
ward to  shew  mercy  to  all  men,
readily  giving  to  all  men  of  their
labours  without  upbraiding,  and
without  deliberation.

212  Wherefore  the  Lord  seeing
their  simplicity  and  ^  innocence,
has  increased  them  in  the  works
of  their  hands,  and  given  them
grace  in  all  their  .works.

213  But  I,  who  am  the  angel
appointed  over  your  repentance,
exhort  you,  that  as  many  as  are
of  this  kind  would  continue  in
the  same  purpose,  that  your  seed
may  not  be  rooted  out  forever.

214  For  the  Lord  hath  tried
you,  and  written  you  into  our
number ;  and  all  your  seed  shall
dwell  with  the  Son  of  God ;  for
ye  are  all  of  his  spirit.


215  \  As  concerning  the  eighth
mountain  in  which  were  a  great
many  springs,  by  which  every
kind  of  all  the  creatures  of  God
was  watered;  they  are  such  as
have  believed  the  Apostles  which
the  Lord  sent  into  all  the  world
to  preach ;

216  And  ^  some  of  them  being
teachers  have  preached  and
taught  purely  and  sincerely,  and
have  not  in  the  least  yielded  to
any  evil  desires,  but  have  con-
stantly walked  in  righteousness
and  truth.

217  These  therefore  have  their
conversations  among  the  angels.

218  1  Again ;  as  for  what  con-
cerns the  ninth  mountain  which
is  desert,  and  full  of  serpents ;
they  are  such  as  have  believed,
but  had  many  stains :

219  These  are  such  ministers
as  discharge  their  ministry  amiss;
ravishing  away  the  goods  of  the
widows  and  fatherless  ;  and  serve
themselves,  not  others,  out  of
those  things  which  they  have
received.

220  These,  if  they  continue  in
this  covetousness,  have  delivered
themselves  unto  death,  nor  shall
there  be  any  hope  of  life  for
them.  But  if  they  shall  be  con-
verted, and  shall  discharge  their
ministry  sincerely,  they  may
live.

221  As  for  those  which  were
found  rough,  they  are  such  as
have  denied  the  name  of  the
Lord,  and  not  returned  again  to
the  Lord,  but  have  become  sav-
age and  wild ;  not  applying  them-
selves to  the  servants  of  God ;
but  being  separated  from  them,
have  for  a  little  carelessness  lost
their  lives.

222  For  as  a  vine  that  is  for-
saken in  a    hedge,   and    never


Infancy.     'MS.  Lamb.
262


Et  quidam  Doctores  caste :  Omitting  Qui.


militant  and


SIMILITUDE  IX.


dressed,  perishes  and  is  choked
by  the  weeds,  and  in  time  be-
comes wild,  and  ceases  to  be  use-
ful to  its  lord ;  so  this  kind  of
men  despairing  of  themselves,
^nd  being  soured,  have  begun  to
be  unprofitable  to  their  Lord.

223  Howbeit  to  these  there  is,
after  all,  repentance  allowed,  if
they  shall  not  be  found  from
their  hearts  to  have  denied
Christ ;  but  if  any  of  these  shall
be  found  to  have  denied  him
from  his  heart,  I  cannot  tell
whether  such  a  one  can  attain
unto  life.

224  I  say  therefore  that  if  any
one  hath  denied,  he  should  in
these  days  return  unto  repent-
ance ;  for  it  cannot  be  that  any
one  who  now  denies  the  Lord,
can  afterwards  attain  unto  sal-
vation: nevertheless  repentance
is  proposed  unto  them  who  have
formerly  denied.

225  But  he  who  will  repent
must  hasten  on  his  repentance,
before  the  building  of  this  tower
is  finished :  otherwise  he  shall  be
delivered  by  those  women  unto
death.

226  But  they  that  are  maimed
are  the  deceitful ;  and  those  who
mix  with  one  another,  these  are
the  serpents  that  you  saw  min-
gled in  that  mountain.

227  For  as  the  poison  of  ser-
pents is  deadly  unto  men ;  so  the
words  of  such  persons  infect  and
destroy  men.  They  are  there-
fore maimed  in  their  faith,  by
reason  of  that  kind  of  life  which
they  lead.

228  Howbeit  some  of  them,
having  repented,  have  been
saved,  and  so  shall  others  of  the
same  kind  be  also  saved,  if  they
shall  repent;  but  if  not,  they
shall  die  by  those  women  whose
power  and  force  they  possess.

229  T[  For  what  concerns  the


tenth  mountain,  in  which  were
the  trees  covering  the  cattle,
they  are  such  as  have  believed ;
and  some  of  them  have  been
bishops,  that  is,  governors  of  the
churches.

230  Others,  are  such  stones  as
have  not  feignedly,  but  with  a
cheerful  mind  entertained  the
servants  of  God.

231  Then  such  as  have  been
set  over  inferior  ministries ;  and
have  protected  the  poor  and  the
widows ;  and  have  always  kept
a  chaste  conversation  :  therefore
they  also  are  protected  by  the
Lord.

232  Whosoever  shall  do  on  this
wise,  are  honored  with  the  Lord ;
and  their  place  is  among  the  an-
gels, if  they  shall  continue  to
obey  the  Lord  even  unto  the  end.

233  If  As  to  the  eleventh
mountain  in  which  were  trees
loaded  with  several  sorts  of  fruits,
they  are  such  as  have  believed,
and  suffered  death,  for  the  name
of  the  Lord  ;  and  have  endured
with  a  ready  mind,  and  have
given  up  their  lives  with  all
their  hearts.

234  And  I  said,  Why  then,
sir,  have  all  these  fruit  indeed,
but  yet  some  fairer  than  others  ?

235  Hearken,  said  he :  Who-
soever have  suffered  for  the  name
of  the  Lord  are  esteemed  honour-
able by  the  Lord  ;  and  all  their
offences  are  blotted  out,  because
they  have  suffered  death  for  the
name  of  the  Son  of  God.

236  Hear  now,  why  their
fruits  are  different,  and  some  of
them  excel  others,  they  who  be-
ing brought  before  magistrates,
and  being  asked,  denied  not  the
Lord,  but  suffered  with  a  ready
mind  ;  these  are  more  honourable
with  the  Lord.  The  fruits  there-
fore that  are  the  most  fair  are
these.

263


Oj  the  mysteries


III.  HERMAS.


of  the  church


237  But  they  who  were  fear-
ful and  doubtful,  and  have  de-
liberated with  themselves  whe-
ther they  should  confess  or  de-
ny Christ,  and  yet  have  suffered ;
their  fruits  are  smaller,  because
that  this  thought  came  into  their
hearts.

238  For  it  is  a  wicked  and
evil  thought  for  a  servant  to  de-
liberate whether  he  should  deny
his  master.  Take  heed  therefore
ye  who  have  such  thoughts,  that
this  mind  continue  not  in  you,
and  ye  die  unto  God.

239  But  ye  who  suffer  death
for  his  name  sake,  ought  to  hon-
our the  Lord,  that  he  has  es-
teemed you  worthy  to  bear  his
name ;  and  that  you  should  be
delivered  from  all  your  sins.

240  And  why  therefore  do
you  not  rather  esteem  yourselves
happy  ?  Yea  think  verily  that  if
any  one  among  you  suffer,  he
performs  a  great  work !  For  the
Lord  giveth  you  life,  and  ye
understand  it  not.  For  your  of-
fences did  oppress  you  ;  and  if
ye  had  not  suffered  for  his  name
sake,  ye  had  now  been  dead  unto
the  Lord,

241  Wherefore  I  speak  this
unto  you  who  deliberate  whether
ye  should  confess  or  deny  him ;
confess  that  ye  have  the  Lord
for  your  God  ;  lest  at  any  time
denying  him,  ye  be  delivered
not  into  bonds.

242  For  all  nations  punish
their  servants  which  deny  their
masters ;  what  think  you  that  the
Lord  will  do  unto  you,  who^  has
the  power  of  all  things  ?

243  Remove  therefore  out  of
your  hearts  these  doubts,  that  ye
may  live  forever  unto  God.

244  As  for  the  twelflh  moun-
tain, which  was  white,  they  are
such  as  have  believed  like  sincere
children,    into   whose   thoughts

264


there  never  came  any  malice,
nor  have  they  ever  known  what
sin  was,  but  have  always  con-
tinued in  their  integrity.

245  Wherefore  this  kind  of  men
shall  without  all  doubt  inherit
the  kingdom  of  God ;  because
they  have  never  in  any  thing  de-
filed the  commandments  of  God,
but  have  continued  with  sincerity

j  in  the  same  condition  all  the  days

I  of  their  life.

I      246  Whosoever  therefore,  said

I  he,  shall  continue  as  children
without  malice;  shall  be  more
honourable  than  all  those  of
whom  I  have  yet  spoken :  for  all
such  children  are  honoured  by
the  Lord,  and  esteemed  the  first
of  all.

247  Happy  therefore  are  ye
who  shall  remove  all  malice  from
you,  and  put  on  innocence ;  be-
cause ye  shall  first  see  the  Lord.

248  And  after  he  had  thus
ended  his  explication  of  all  the
mountains,  I  said  unto  him,  Sir,
show  me  now  also  what  concerns
the  stones  that  were  brought  out
of  the  plain,  and  put  into  the
tower  in  the  room  of  those  that
were  rejected :

249  As  also  concerning  those
round  stones  which  were  added
into  the  building  of  the  tower :
and  also  of  those  who  still  con-
tinued round.

250  T  Hear  now,  says  he,
concerning  those  stones  which
were  brought  out  of  the  plain
into  the  building  of  the  tower,
and  placed  in  the  room  of  those
that  were  rejected ;  they  are  the
roots  of  that  white  mountain.

251  Wherefore  because  those
who  have  believed  of  that  moun-
tain were  very  innocent ;  the  lord
of  this  tow^er  commanded  that
they  which  were  of  the  roots  of
this  mountain  should  be  placed
into  the  building.


militant


SIMILITUDE  IX.  and  tnumphant


252  For  he  knew  that  if  they
were  put  into  this  building  they
would  continue  bright;  nor  would
any  of  them  any  more  be  made
black.

253  But  if  he  had  added  on
this  manner  from  the  rest  of  the
mountains,  he  would  ^  almost  have
needed  again  to  visit  the  tower
and  to  cleanse  it.

254  Now  all  these  white  stones
are  the  young  men  who  have  be-
lieved, or  shall  believe ;  for  they
are  all  of  the  same  kind.  Happy
is  this  kind,  because  it  is  inno-
cent.

255  Hear  now  also  concerning
those  round  and  bright  stones:
all  these  are  of  this  white  moun-
tain. But  they  are  therefore
found  round,  because  their  riches
have  a  little  darkened  them  from
the  truth  and  dazzled  their  eyes :

256  Howb«it  they  have  never
departed  from  the  Lord,  nor  has
any  wicked  word  proceeded  out
of  their  mouths ;  but  all  righteous-
ness, and  virtue,  and  truth.

257  When  therefore  the  Lord
saw  their  mind,  and  that  they
might  adorn  the  truth  ;  he  com-
manded that  they  should  continue
good,  and  that  their  riches  should
be  pared  away :

258  For  he  would  not  have
them  taken  wholly  away,  to  the
^nd  they  might  do  some  good
with  that  which  was  left,  and  live
unto  God  ;  because  they  also  are
of  a  good  kind.

259  Therefore  was  there  a  little
cut  off  from  them,  and  so  they
were  put  into  the  building  of
this  tower.

260  ^  As  for  the  rest  which
continued  still  round,  and  were


not  found  fit  for  the  building  *  of
this  tower,  because  they  have  not
yet  received  the  seal ;  they  were
carried  back  to  their  place,  be-
cause they  were  found  very
round.

261  But  this  present  world
must  be  cut  away  from  them,
and  the  vanities  of  their  riches ;
and  then  they  will  be  fit  for  the
kingdom  of  God.  For  they
must  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
God,  because  God  has  blessed
this  innocent  kind.

262  Of  this  kind  therefore
none  shall  fall  away ;  for  though
any  of  them  being  tempted  by
the  devil  should  offend,  he  shall
soon  return  to  his  Lord  God.

263  I  the  angel  of  repentance
esteem  you  happy,  whosoever  are
innocent  as  little  children,  be-
cause your  portion  is  good  and

!  honourable  with  the  Lord.

I      264  And  I  say  unto  all  you

j  who  have  received  this  seal ;
keep  simplicity,  and   remember

I  not  the  offences  which  are  com-
mitted   against    you,  nor    con-

i  tinue    in    malice,   or   in   bitter-

I  ness,   through    the    memory   of

I  offences.

265  ^But  become  one  spirit,
and  provide  remedies  for  these
evil  rents,  ard  remove  them  from
you  ;  that  the  lord  of  the  sheep
may  rejoice* at  it;  ^for  he  will
rejoice,  if  he  shall  find  all  whole.

266  But  if  any  of  these  sheep
shall  be  found  scattered  away,
Wo  shall  be  to  the  shepherds ;
but  and  if  the  shepherds  them-
selves shall  be  scattered ;  what
will  they  answer  to  *  the  lord  of
the  sheepfold?  Will  they  say
that  they  were  troubled  by  the


^  MS.  Lamb.  Tantum  non  necesse  habiiisaet.  '  MS.  Lamb.  Structuram
Inrris  hujus.  '  MS.  Lamb.  Et  unum  quemque  spiritum  fieri :  which  appears
from  the  Gr.  of  Antiochus  to  be  the  true  reading,  mt  yevtadai  ev  rrvEVfia.
*■  MS.  Lamb.  Gandeat  de  his  ;  and  Gr.  Antioch  x<^PV  e^  avrw.  eyid.  Anti-
och.  Horn,  cxxii,    ^  Gr.  Tgj  SeaTrorri  tov  ttoi[iviov.

265


Of  the  mysteries


III.  HERMAS.


of  the  church.


sheep  ?     But  they  shall  not  be
believed.

267  For  it  is  an  incredible
thing  that  the  shepherd  should
suffer  by  his  flock  ;  and  he  shall
be  the  more  punished  for  his  lie.

268  Now  I  am  the  shepherd  ;
and  especially  must  give  an  ac-
count of  you.

269  ^  Wherefore  take  care  of
yourselves  whilst  the  tower  is
yet  building.  The  Lord  dwells
in  those  that  love  peace ;  for
peace  is  beloved;  but  he  is  far
off  from  the  contentious,  and
those  who  are  ^  full  of  malice.

270  Wherefore  restore  unto
him  the  spirit  entire,  as  ye  re-
ceived •  it.  '  For  if  thou  shalt
give  unto  a  fuller  a  garment  new
and  whole,  thou  wilt  expect  to
receive  it  whole  again  ;  if  there-
fore the  fuller  shall  restore  it
unto  thee  torn,  wouldest  thou  re-
ceive it  ?

271  Wouldst  thou  not  pre-
sently be  angry;  and  reproach
him,  saying ;  I  gave  my  garment
to  thee  whole;  why  hast  thou
rent  it,  and  made  it  useless  to
me  ?  Now  it  is  of  no  use  to  me,
by  reason  of  the  rent  which  thou
hast  made  in  it.  Wouldst  thou
jiot  say  all  this  to  a  fuller,  for
the  rent  which  he  made  in  thy
garment  ?

272  If  therefore  thou  wouldst
be  concerned  for  thy  garment,
and  complain  that  thou  hadst
not  received  it  whole  ;  what
thinkest  thou  that  the  Lord  will
do,  who  gave  his  Spirit  to  thee
entire,  and  thou  hast  rendered
him  altogether  unprofitable,  so
that  he  can  be  of  no  use  unto  his
Lord  ?  For  being  corrupted  by
thee,  he  is  no  longer  profitable
to  him.

273  Will    not    therefore  the


Lord  do  the  same  concerning  his
Spirit,  by  reason  of  thy  deed?
Undoubtedly,  said  I,  he  will  do
the  same  to  all  those  whom  he
shall  find  to  continue  in  the  re-
membrance of  injuries.

274  Tread  not  then  under  foot
he  said,  his  mercy  ;  but  rather
honour  him,  because  he  is  so
patient  with  respect  to  your  of-
fences, and  not  like  one  of  you  ;
but  repent,  for  that  will  be  profit-
able for  you.

275  T  All  these  things  which
are  above  written,  I  the  shep-
herd, the  angel  of  repentance,
have  shown  and  spoken  to  the
servants  of  God.

276  If  therefore  ye  shall  be-
lieve and  hearken  to  these  words,
and  shall  walk  in  them,  and  shall
correct  your  ways,  ye  shall  live.
But  if  ye  shall  continue  in
malice,  and  in  the  remembrance
of  injuries,  no  such  sinners  shall
live  unto  God.

277  All  these  things  which
were  to  be  spoken  by  me  I  have
thus  delivered  unto  you.  Then
the  shepherd  said  unto  me,  Hast
thou  asked  all  things  of  me?  I
answered,  Sir,  I  have.

278  Why,  then,  said  he,  hast
thou  not  asked  concerning  the
spaces  of  these  stones  that  were
put  in  the  building,  that  I  may
explain  that  also  unto  thee  ?  I
answered,  Sir,  I  forgot  it.  Hear,
then,  said  he,  concerning  these
also.

279  They  are  those  who  have
now  heard  these  commands,  and
have  repented  with  all  their
hearts ;

280  And  when  the  Lord  saw
that  their  repentance  was  good
and  pure,  and  that  they  could
continue  in  it,  he  commanded
their  former  sins  to  be  blotted


Perdites  malitia.  Lat.


266


^  Antioch.  Horn.  xciv.


Of  repentance


SIMILITUDE  X.


and  alms  deeds.


out.  For  these  spaces  were  their
sins,  and  they  are  therefore  made
even  that  they  might  not  appear.

SIMILITUDE  X.

Of  Repentance  and  alms-deeds.

AFTER  that  I  had  written
this  book,  the  angel  which
had  delivered  me  to  that  shep-
herd, came  into  the  house  where
I  was  and  sat  upon  the  bed,  and
that  shepherd  stood  at  his  right
hand.

2  Then  he  called  me  and  said
unto  me ;  I  delivered  thee  and
thy  house  to  this  shepherd,  that
thou  mightest  be  protected  by
him.     I  said,  Yes,  Lord.

3  If  therefore,  said  he,  thou
wilt  be  protected  from  all  vexa-
tions and  from  all  cruelty,  and
have  success  in  every  good  word
and  work ;  and  have  all  virtue
and  righteousness ;  walk  in  those
commands  which  he  has  given
thee,  and  thou  shalt  have  do-
minion over  all  sin.

4  For  if  thou  keepest  those
commands,  all  the  lust  and  plea-
sure of  this  present  world  shall
be  subject  to  thee  ;  and  success
shall  follow  thee  in  every  good
undertaking.

5  Take  therefore  his  ^gravity
and  modesty  towards  thee,  and
say  unto  all,  that  he  is  in  great
honour  and  renown  with  God,
and  is  a  '^  prince  of  great  author-
ity and  powerful  in  his  office.

6  To  him  only  is  the  power  of
repentance  committed  through-
out the  whole  world.  Does  he
not  seem  to  thee  to  be  of  great
authority  ?

7  But  ye  despise  his  goodness,
and  the  modesty  which  he  shews
towards  you.

8^1  said  unto  him ;  Sir,  ask


him  since  the  time  that  he  came
into  my  house  whether  I  have
done  any  thing  disorderly,  or
have  offended  him  in  any  thing?

9  I  know,  said  he,  that  thou
hast  done  nothing  disorderly,
neither  wilt  thou  hereafter  do
any  such  thing  ;  and  therefore  I
speak  these  things  with  thee  that
thou  mayest  i)ersevere ;  for  he
has  given  me  a  good  account
concerning  thee,

10  But  thou  shalt  speak  these
things  to  others,  that  they  who
either  have  repented,  or  shall
repent,  ^may  be  like-minded
with  thee  ;  and  he  may  give  me
as  good  an  account  of  them  also,
and  I  may  do  the  same  unto  the
Lord.

11  I  answered  ;  Sir,  I  declare
to  all  men  the  wonderful  w^orks
of  God;  and  I  hope  that  all
who  love  them  and  have  before
sinned,  when  they  shall  hear
these  things,  will  repent,  and  re-
cover life.

12  Continue  therefore,  said
he,  in  this  ministry,  and  fulfil  it.
And  whosoever  shall  do  accord-
ing to  the  commands  of  this
shepherd,  he  shall  live ;  and
shall  have  great  honour  both
here  and  with  the  Lord.

13  But  they  that  shall  not
keep  his  commands,  flee  from
their  life,  and  are  adversaries  to
it.  And  they  that  follow  not  his
commands,  shall  deliver  them-
selves unto  death,  and  shall  be
every  one  guilty  of  his  own
blood.

14  But  I  say  unto  thee,  keep
these  commandments,  and  thou
shalt  find  a  cure  for  all  thy  sins.

15  ^  Moreover,  I  have  sent
*  these  virgins  to  dwell  with  thee ;
for  I  have  seen  that  they  are


*  Lat.  Maturitatem.         ^  President.         '  Eadem  quse  tu  sentiant.
*What  is  meant  by  these  virgins? — See  before,  Simil.  ix.  v.  149  et  seq.

267


Oj  repentance


III.  HERMAS.


and  alms  deeds:


very  kind  to  thee.  Thou  shalt
therefore  have  them  for  thy
helpers,  that  thou  mayest  the
better  keep  the  commands  which
he  hath  given  thee ;  for  these
commands  cannot  be  kept  with-
out these  virgins.

16  And  ^  I  see  how  they  are
willing  to  be  with  thee ;  and  I
will  also  command  them  that
they  shall  not  all  depart  from
thy  house.

17  Only  do  thou  purify  thy
house,  for  they  will  readily  dwell
in  a  clean  house.  For  they  are
clean  and  chaste,  and  indus-
trious ;  and  all  of  them  have
grace  with  the  Lord.

18  If  therefore,  thou  shalt
have  thy  house  pure,  they  will
abide  with  thee.  But  if  it  shall
be  never  so  little  polluted,  they
will  immediately  depart  from
thy  house :  for  these  virgins  can-
not endure  any  manner  of  pollu-
tion.

19  I  said  unto  him  ;  Sir,  I
hope  that  I  shall  so  please  them,
that  they  shall  always  delight  to
dwell  in  my  house.  And  as  he
to  whom  you  have  committed
me,  makes  no  complaint  of  me ;
so  neither  shall  they  complain.

20  Then  he  said  to  that  shep-
herd :  I  see  that  the  servant  of
God  will  live  and  keep  these
commandments,  and  place  these
virgins  in  a  pure  habitation.

21  When  he  had  said  this,  he
delivered  me  again  to  that  shep-
herd, and  called  the  virgins,  and
said  unto  them  ;  forasmuch  as  I
see  that  ye  will  readily  dwell  in
this  man's  house,  I  commend
him  and  his  house  to  you,  that
ye  may  not  at  all  depart  from
his  house.  And  they  willingly
heard  these  words.


22  ^  Then  he  said  unto  me,
Go  on  manfully  in  thy  ministry  ;■
declare  to  all  men  the  great
things  of  God,  and  thou  shalt
find  grace  in  this  ministry.

23  And  whosoever  shall  walk
in  these  commands,  shall  live,
and  be  happy  in  his  life.  But
he  that  shall  neglect  them,  shall
not  live,  and  shall  be  unhappy
in  his  life.

24  Say  unto  all  that  whosoever
can  do  well,  cease  not  to  exer-
cise themselves  in  good  works,
for  it  is  profitable  unto  them.
For  I  ^  would  that  all  men  should
be  delivered  from  the  inconveni-
ences they  lie  under.

25  For  he  that  wants,  and
suffers  inconveniences  in  his
daily  life,  is  in  great  torment
and  necessity.  Whosoever  there-
fore delivers  such  a  soul  from
necessity,  gets  great  joy  unto
himself

26  For  he  that  is  grieved  with
such  inconveniences  is  equally
tormented,  as  if  he  were  in  chains.
And  many  upon  the  account  of
such  calamities,  being  not  able
to  bear  them,  have  chosen  even
to  destroy  themselves.

27  He  therefore  that  knows
the  calamity  of  such  a  man,  and
does  not  free  him  from  it,  com-
mits a  great  sin,  and  is  guilty  of
his  blood.

28  Wherefore  exercise  your-
selves in  good  works,  as  many  as
have  received  ability  from  the
Lord  ;  lest  whilst  ye  delay  to  do
them,  the  building  of  the  tower
be  finished ;  because  for  your
sakes  the  building  is  stopped.

29  Except  therefore  ye  shall
make  haste  to  do  well,  the  tower
shall  be  finished,  and  ye  shall  be
shut  out  of  it.


^  MS.  Lamb.  Video  :  which  appears  from  the  close  of  this  section  to  be  the
true  reading.       *  Say.

268


Oj  repenUince


SIMILITUDE  X.


and  alma  deeds


30  And  after  he  had  thus
spoken  with  me,  he  rose  up  from
the  bed  and  departed,  taking  the
shepherd  and  virgins  with  him.


31  Howbeit  he  said  unto  me
that  he  would  send  back  the
shepherd  and  virgins  unto  my
house.     Amen.


LETTERS  OF  HEROD  AND  PILATE.

Connecting  Roman  History  with  the  Death  of  Christ
AT  Jerusalem.

[These  letters  occur  in  a  Syriac  MS.,  of  the  sixth  or  seventh  century,  in  the
British  Museum.  Dr.  Tischendorf  states  in  his  Apocalypses  Apocryphse
(Prolegg.  p.  56)  that  he  has  a  copy  of  the  same  in  Greek  from  a  Paris
MS.,  of  which  he  says  "  scriptura  satis  differt,  non  item  argnnientura."
The  letters  are  followed  by  a  few  extracts  which  seem  to  have  been  added
by  some  copyist,  although  tliey  are  followed  by  the  subscription  to  Pilate's
letter.  We  suppose  that  by  Justinus,  we  are  to  understand  J  ustus  of  Tibe-
rias of  whom  Josephus  speaks  as  a  historian  of  his  lime.  We  cannot  ven-
ture an  opinion  favorable  to  the  genuineness  of  this  extract,  because  Pho-
tius  says  Justus  did  not  mention  Christ.  By  Theodorus,  we  understand  the
Emperor  Tiberius.  The  question  and  answer  agree  in  sense  with  what  is
read  in  the  "Anaphora,"  or  response  of  Pilate.]

LETTER  OF  HEROD  TO  PILATE  THE  GOVERNOR.

Herod  to  Pontius  Pilate  the  Governor  of  Jerusalem:
Peace.

when  I  heard  of  the  man
Jesus,  wished  to  come  to  thee,
that  I  might  see  him  alone,
and  hear  his  word,  whether  it
was  like  that  of  the  sons  of
men.  And  it  is  certain  that
because  of  the  many  evil  things
which  were  done  by  me  to
John  the  Baptist,  and  because
I  mocked  the  Christ,  behold  1


I  AM  in  great  anxiety.  I
write  these  things  unto  thee,
that  when  thou  hast  heard
them  thou  mayest  be  grieved
for  me.  For  as  my  daughter
Herodias,  who  is  dear  to  me,
was  playing  upon  a  pool  of
water  which  had  ice  upon  it,  it
broke  under  her,  and  all  her
body  went  down,  and  her  head
was  cut  off  and  remained  on
the  surface  of  the  ice.  And
behold,  her  mother  is  holding
her  head  upon  her  knees  in
her  lap,  and  my  whole  house
is    in    great    sorrow.    For    I,


receive  the  reward  of  right-
eousness,' for  I  have  shed  much
blood  of  others'  children  upon
the  earth.^  Therefore  the  judg-
ments of  God  are  righteous;
for  every  man  receives  accord-

1  2  Peter  ii.  13.

2  Matt.  ii.  16.    It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  it  was  not  the  Herod  of
the  epistle  who  caused  the  massacre  of  the  children  at  Bethlehem.

269


HEROD  TO   PILATE.


ing  to  his  thought.  But  since
thou  wast  worthy  to  see  that
God-man,  therefore  it  becometh
you  to  pray  for  me.

My  son  Azbonius  also  is  in
the  agony  of  the  hour  of
death.

And  I  too  am  in  aflfliction
and  great  trial,  because  I  have
the  dropsy;  and  am  in  great
distress,  because  I  persecuted
the  introducer  of  baptism  by
water,  which  was  John.  There-
fore, my  brother,  the  judg-
ments of  God  are  righteous.

And  my  wife,  again,  through
all  her  grief  for  her  daughter,
is  become  blind  in  her  left  eye,
because  we  desit'ed  to  blind
the  Eye  of  righteousness.
There  is  no  peace  to  the  doers
of  evil,  saith  the  Lord.^  For
already  great  affliction  cometh
upon  the  priests  and  upon  the
writers  of  the  law ;  because
they  delivered  unto  thee  the
Just  One.  For  this  is  the  con-
summation of  the  world,  that
they  consented  that  the  Gen-
tiles should  become  heirs.  For
the  children  of  light  shall  be
cast  out,*  for  they  have  not  ob-
served the  things  which  were
preached  concerning  the  Lord,
and  concerning  his  Son.  There-
fore gird  up  thy  loins,'  and  re-


ceive righteousness,  thou  with
thy  wife  remembering  Jesus
night  and  day ;  and  the  king-
dom shall  belong  to  you  Gen-
tiles, for  we  the  (chosen)  peo-
ple have  mocked  the  Right-
eous One.

Now  if  there  is  place  for  our
request,  0  Pilate,  because  we
were  at  one  time  in  power,
bury  my  household  carefully ;
for  it  is  right  that  we  should
be  buried  by  thee,  rather  than
by  the  priests,  whom,  after  a
little  time,  as  the  Scriptures
say,  at  the  coming  of  Jesus
Christ,  vengeance  shall  over-
take.

Fare  thee  well,  with  Procla
thy  wife.

I  send  thee  the  earrings  of
my  daughter  and  my  own
ring,  that  they  may  be  unto
thee  a  memorial  of  my  de-
cease. For  already  do  worms
begin  to  issue  from  my  body,*
and  lo,  I  am  receiving  tempo-
ral judgment,  and  I  am  afraid
of  the  judgment  to  come.  For
in  both  we  stand  before  the
works  of  the  living  God;  but
this  judgment,  which  is  tem-
poral, is  for  a  time,  while  that
to  come  is  judgment  for  ever.

End  of  the  Letter  to  Pilate
the  Governor.


LETTER  OF   PILATE  TO  HEROD.
Pilate  to  Herod  the  Tetrarch:   Peace.


KNOW  and  see,  that  in  the
day  when  thou  didst  de-
liver Jesus  unto  me,  I  took
pity  on  myself,  and  testified
by  washing  my  hands  (that  I
was  innocent),  concerning  him
who  rose  from  the  grave  after
three  days,  and  had  performed
thy  pleasure  in  him,  for  thou


didst  desire  me  to  be  associ-
ated with  thee  in  his  crucifix-
ion. But  I  now  learn  from  the
executioners  and  from  the  sol-
diers who  watched  his  sepul-
chre that  he  rose  from  the  dead.
And  I  have  especially  con-
firmed what  was  told  me,  that
he  appeared  bodily  in  Galilee,


1  Is.  xlviii.  22 ;  Ivii.  21.  '  Luke  xvi.  8.

*  A  palpable  anachronism.  Acts  xii.

270


1  Peter  i.  13.


PILATE  TO  HEROD.


in  the  same  form,  and  with  the
same  voice,  and  with  the  same
doctrine,  and  with  the  same
disciples,  not  having  changed  ^
in  anything,  but  preaching
with  boldness  his  resurrection,
and  an  everlasting  kingdom.

And.  behold,  heaven  and
earth  rejoice;  and  behold,
Procla  my  wife  is  believing  in
the  visions  which  appeared
unto  her,  when  thou  sentest
that  I  should  deliver  Jesus  to
the  people  of  Israel,  because  of
the  ill-will  they  had.

Now  when  Procla,  my  wife,'
heard  that  Jesus  was  risen,
and  had  appeared  in  Galilee,
she  took  with  her  Longinus
the  centurion  and  twelve  sol-
diers, the  same  that  had
watched  at  the  sepulchre,  and
went  to  greet  the  face  of
Christ,  as  if  to  a  great  specta-
cle, and  saw  him  with  his  dis-
ciples.

Now  while  they  were  stand-
ing, and  wondering,  and  gaz-
ing at  him,  he  looked  at
them,  and  said  to  them,  What
is  it  ?  Do  ye  believe  in  me  ?
Procla,  know  that  in  the  cove-
nant which  God  gave  to  the
fathers,  it  is  said  that  every
body  which  had  perished
should  live  by  means  of  my
death,  which  ye  have  seen.
And  now,  ye  see  that  I  live,
whom  ye  crucified.  And  I
suffered  many  things,  till  that
I  was  laid  in  the  sepulchre.
But  now,  hear  me,  and  believe
in  my  Father — God  who  is  in
me.  For  I  loosed  the  cords  of
death,  and  brake  the  gates  of
Sheol;  and  my  coming  shall
be  hereafter.

And  when  Procla  my  wife
and  the  Romans  heard  these


things,  they  came  and  told  ine,
weeping;  for  they  aiso  were
against  him,  when  they  de-
vised the  evils  which  they  had
done  unto  him.  So  that,  I
also  was  on  the  couch  of  my
bed  in  affliction,  and  put  on  a
garment  of  mourning,  and  took
unto  me  fifty  Romans  with  my
wife  and  went  into  Galilee.

And  when  I  was  going  in
the  way  I  testified  these  things ;
that  Herod  did  these  things  by
me,  that  he  took  counsel  with
me,  and  constrained  me  to  arm
my  hands  against  him,  and  to
judge  him  that  judgeth  all,
and  to  scourge  the  Just  One,
Lord  of  the  just.  And  when
we  drew  nigh  to  him,  0
Herod,  a  great  voice  was  heard
from  heaven,  and  dreadful
thunder,  and  the  earth  trem-
bled, and  gave  forth  a  sweet
smell,  like  unto  which  was
never  perceived  even  in  the
temple  of  Jerusalem.  Now
while  I  stood  in  the  way,  our
Lord  saw  me  as  he  stood  and
talked  with  his  disciples.  But
I  prayed  in  my  heart,  for  I
knew  that  it  was  he  whom  ye
delivered  unto  me,  that  he
was  Lord  of  created  things  and
Creator  of  all.  But  we,  when
we  saw  him,  all  of  us  fell
upon  our  faces  before  his  feet.
And  I  said  with  a  loud  voice,
I  have  sinned,  0  Lord,  in  that
I  sat  and  judged  thee,  who
avengest  all  in  truth.  And  lo,
I  know  that  thou  art  God,  the
Son  of  God,  and  I  beheld  thy
humanity  and  not  thy  divin-
ity. But  Herod,  with  the  chil-
dren of  Israel,  constrained  me
to  do  evil  unto  thee.  Have
pity,  therefore,  upon  me,  O
God  of  Israel !


^  Literally  "  renewed  anythinp;."

»  Literally  "his  wife,"  a  manifest  error.


271


PILATE  TO  TIBERIUS.


And  my  wife,  in  great  an-
guish, said,  God  of  heaven  and
of  earth,  God  of  Israel,  reward
me  not  according  to  the  deeds
of  Pontius  Pilate,  nor  accord-
ing to  the  will  of  the  children
of  Israel,  nor  according  to  the
thought  of  the  sons  of  the
priests;  but  remember  my
husband  in  thy  glory !

Now  our  Lord  drew  near
and  raised  up  me  and  my  wife,
and  the  Romans ;  and  I  looked
at  him  and  saw  there  were  on
him  the  scars  of  his  cross.
And  he  said,  That  which  all
the  righteous  fathers  hoped  to
receive,  and  saw  not — in  thy
time  the  Lord  of  Time,  the  Son
of  Man,  the  Son  of  the  Most
High,  who  is  for  ever,  arose
from  the  dead,  and  is  glorified
on  high  by  all  that  he  created,
and  established  for  ever  and
ever.

1.  Justinus,  one  of  the  writ-
ers that  were  in  the  days  of
Augustus  and  Tiberius  and
Gains,  wTote  in  his  third  dis-
course: Now  Mary  the  Gali-
Isean,  who  bare  the  Christ  that
was  crucified  in  Jerusalem,
had  not  been  with  a  husband.
And  Joseph  did  not  abandon
her ;  but  Joseph  continued  in
sanctity  without  a  wife,  he  and
his  five  sons  by  a  former  wife  ;

THE  EPISTLE  OF  PONTIUS   PILATE,

Which  he  Wrote  to  the  Roman  Emperor  Concerning  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ.

Pontius  Pilate  to  Tiberius  Csesar  the  Emperor — Greeting :


and  Mary  continued  without  a
husband.

2.  Theodorus  wrote  to  Pilate
the  Governor :  Who  was  the
man,  against  whom  there  wa&
a  complaint  before  thee,  that
he  was  crucified  by  the  men
of  Palestine?  If  the  many
demanded  this  righteously,
why  didst  thou  not  consent  to
their  righteousness?  And  if
they  demanded  this  unright-
eously, how  didst  thou  trans-
gress the  law  and  command
what  was  far  from  righteous-
ness?

Pilate  sent  to  him : — Because
he  wrought  signs  I  did  not
wish  to  crucify  him :  and  since
his  accusers  said,  He  calleth
himself  a  king,  I  crucified  him.

3.  Josephus  saith:  Agrippa,
the  king,  was  clothed  in  a  robe
woven  with  silver,  and  saw
the  spectacle  in  the  theatre  of
Csesarea.  When  the  people
saw  that  his  raiment  flashed,
they  said  to  him.  Hitherto  we
feared  thee  as  a  man :  hence-
forth thou  art  exalted  above
the  nature  of  mortals.  And  he
saw  an  angel  standing  over
him,  and  he  smote  him  as
unto  death."

End  of  the  Letter  of  Pilate
to  Herod.


UPON  Jesus  Christ,  whom  I
fully  made  known  to  thee
in  my  last,  a  bitter  punish-
ment hath  at  length  been  in-
flicted by  the  will  of  the  peo-


ple, although  I  was  unwilling
and  apprehensive.  In  good
truth,  no  age  ever  had  or  will
have  a  man  so  good  and  strict.
But  the  people  made  a  won-


^  This  extract  from  Josephus  (Ant.  19,  8)  is  abridged  from  the  account  of
Eusebius  (Hist.  Eccles.  2,  10).  The  figures  1,  2,  3,  indicate  the  extracts
which  have  been  appended  to  the  epistle.

272


PILATE   THE  GOVERNOR.


derful  effort,  and  all  tlieir
scribes,  chiefs  and  elders
agreed  to  crucify  this  ambas-
sador of  truth,  their  own  proph-
ets, like  the  Sibyls  with  us,
advising  the  contrary;  and
when  he  was  hanged  super-
natural signs  appeared,  and  in
the  judgment  of  philosophers
menaced  the  whole  world  with
ruin.  His  disciples  flourish,
not  belying  their  master  by
their  behavior  and  continence
of  life ;  nay,  in  his  name  they
are  most  beneficent.^  Had  I
not  feared  a  sedition  might
arise  among  the  people,  who

THE   REPORT  OF  PILATE   THE   GOVERNOR,

Concerning  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;    which  was  Sent  to
Augustus  C-^sar,  in  Rome.


were  almost  furious,  perhaps
this  man  would  have  yet  been
living  with  us.  Although,  be-
ing rather  compelled  by  fidel-
ity to  thy  dignity,  than  led  by
my  own  inclination,  I  did  not
strive  with  all  my  might  to
prevent  the  sale  and  suffering
of  righteous  blood,  guiltless  of
every  accusation,  unjustly,  in-
deed, through  the  malicious-
ness of  men,  and  yet,  as  the
Scriptures  interpret,  to  their
own  destruction.

Farewell.      The  5th   of  the
Calends  of  April.


IN    those    days,    when     our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  cru-
cified under  Pontius  Pilate,  the
governor     of     Palestine    and
Phoenicia,  the  things  here  re-
corded came  to  pass  in  Jerusa-
lem,   and   were   done   by   the
Jews  against  the  Lord.     Pilate
therefore  sent  the  same  to  Cae-
sar in   Rome,  along  with   his
private  report,  writing  thus :
To  the  most  potent,    august,
divine  and  awful  Augustus
Caesar,  Pilate,  the  adminis-
trator of  the  Eastern  Prov-
ince:

I  have  received  information,
most  excellent  one,  in  conse-
quence of  which  I  am  seized
with  fear  and  trembling.  For
in  this  province  which  I  ad-
minister, one  of  whose  cities  is
called  Jerusalem,  the  whole
multitude  of  Jews  delivered
unto  me  a  certain  man  called
Jesus,  and  brought  many  ac-
cusations against  him,  which
they  were  unable  to  establish


by  consistent  evidence.  But
they  charged  him  with  one
heres}^  in  particular,  namely.
That  Jesus  said  the  Sabbath
was  not  a  rest,  nor  to  be  ob-
served by  them.  For  he  per-
formed many  cures  on  that
day,  and  made  the  blind  see,
and  the  lame  walk,  raised  the
dead,  cleansed  lepers,  healed
the  paralytic  who  were  wholly
unable  to  move  their  body  or
brace  their  nerves,  but  could
only  speak  and  discourse,  and
he  gave  them  power  to  walk
and  run,  removing  their  in-
firmity by  his  w^ord  alone.
There  is  another  very  mighty
deed  which  is  strange  to  the
gods  we  have :  he  raised  up  a
man  who  had  been  four  days
dead,  summoning  him  by  his
word  alone,  when  the  dead
man  had  begun  to  decay,  and
his  body  was  corrupted  by  the
worms  which  had  been  bred,
and  had  the  stench  of  a  dog;
but,  seeing  him  lying  in  the


Gf.  Joseph.  Ant.  xviii.  3,  3.


18


273


PILATE  THE  GOVERNOR.


tomb  he  commanded  him  to
run,  nor  did  the  dead  man  at
all  delay,  but  as  a  bridegroom
out  of  his  chamber,  so  did  he
go  forth  from  his  tomb,  filled
with  abundant  perfume.  More-
over, even  such  as  were  stran-
gers, and  clearly  demoniacs,
who  had  their  dwelling  in  des-
erts, and  devoured  their  own
flesh,  and  wandered  about  like
cattle  and  creeping  things,  he
turned  into  inhabiters  of  cities,
and  by  a  word  rendered  them
rational,  and  prepared  them  to
become  wise  and  powerful,  and
illustrious,  taking  their  food
with  all  the  enemies  of  the
unclean  spirits  which  were  de-
structive in  them,  and  which
he  cast  into  the  depth  of  the
sea.

And,  again,  there  was  an-
other who  had  a  withered
hand,  and  not  only  the  hand
but  rather  the  half  of  the  body
of  the  man  was  like  a  stone,
and  he  had  neither  the  shape
of  a  man  nor  the  symmetry  of
a  body :  even  him  He  healed
with  a  word  and  rendered
whole.  And  a  woman  also,
who  had  an  issue  of  blood  for
a  long  time,  and  whose  veins
and  arteries  were  exhausted,
and  who  did  not  bear  a  human
body,  being  like  one  dead,  and
daily  speechless,  so  that  all  the
physicians  of  the  district  were
unable  to  cure  her,  for  there
remained  unto  her  not  a  hope
of  life ;  but  as  Jesus  passed  by
she  mysteriously  received
strength  by  his  shadow  falling
on  her,  from  behind  she
touched  the  hem  of  his  gar-
ment, and  immediately,  in
that  very  hour,  strength  filled
her  exhausted  limbs,  and  as  if
she  had  never  suffered  any-
thing, she  began  to  run  along
274


towards  Capernaum,  her  own
city,  so  that  she  reached  it  in
a  six  days'  journey.

And  I  have  made  known
these  things  which  I  have  re-
cently been  informed  of,  and
which  Jesus  did  on  the  Sab-
bath. And  he  did  other  mira-
cles greater  than  these,  so  that
I  have  observed  greater  works
of  wonder  done  by  him  than
by  the  gods  whom  we  worship.

But  Herod  and  Archelaus
and  Philip,  Annas  and  Caia-
phas,  with  all  the  people,  de-
livered him  to  me,  making  a
great  tumult  against  me  in
order  that  I  might  try  him.
Therefore,  I  commanded  him
to  be  crucified,  when  I  had
first  scourged  him,  though  I
found  no  cause  in  him  for  evil
accusations  or  dealings.

Now  when  he  was  crucified,
there  was  darkness  over  all  the
world,  and  the  sun  was  ob-
scured for  half  a  day,  and  the
stars  appeared,  but  no  lustre
was  seen  in  them ;  and  the
moon  lost  its  brightness,  as
though  tinged  with  blood ;  and
the  world  of  the  departed  was
swallowed  up  ;  so  that  the  very
sanctuar}'^  of  the  temple,  as
they  call  it,  did  not  appear  to
the  Jews  themselves  at  their
fall,  but  they  perceived  a
chasm  in  the  earth,  and  the
rolling  of  successive  thunders.
And  amid  this  terror  the  dead
appeared  rising  again,  as  the
Jews  themselves  bore  witness,
and  said  that  it  was  Abraham,
and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  the
twelve  patriarchs,  and  Moses,
and  Job,  who  had  died  before,
as  they  say,  some  three  thou-
sand five  hundred  years.  And
there  were  very  many  whom  I
myself  saw  appearing  in  the
body,  and  they  made  lamenta-


THE  REPORT  OF  PONTIUS   PILATE.


tion  over  the  Jews,  because  of
the  transgression  wiiich  was
committed  by  them,  and  be-
cause of  the  destruction  of  the
Jews  and  of  their  law.

And  the  terror  of  the  earth-
quake continued  from  the  sixth
hour  of  the  preparation  until
the  ninth  hour;  and  when  it
was  evening  on  the  first  day
of  the  week,  there  came  a
sound  from  heaven,  and  the
heaven  became  seven  times
more  luminous  than  on  all
other  days.  And  at  the  third
hour  of  the  night  the  sun  ap-
peared more  luminous  than  it
had  ever  shone,  lighting  up
the  whole  hemisphere.  And
as  lightning-flashes  suddenly
come  forth  in  a  storm,  so  there
were  seen  men,  lofty  in  sta-
ture, and  surpassing  in  glory,
a  countless  host,  crying  out,
and  their  voice  was  heard  as
that  of  exceedingly  loud  thun-
der, Jesus  that  was  crucified  is
risen  again :  come  up  from
Hades  ye  that  were  enslaved
in  the  subterraneous  recesses
of  Hades.  And  the  chasm  in
the  earth  was  as  if  it  had  no
bottom ;  but  it  was  so  that  the
very  foundations  of  the  earth


appeared,  with  those  that
sliouted  in  heaven,  and  walked
in  the  body  among  the  dead
that  were  raised.  And  He
that  raised  uj)  all  the  dead  and
bound  Hades  said,  Say  to  my
disciples,  He  goeth  before  you
into  Galilee,  there  shall  ve  see
Him.

And  all  that  night  the  light
ceased  not  shining.  And  many
of  the  Jews  died  in  the  chasm
of  the  earth,  being  swallowed
up,  so  that  on  the  morrow
most  of  those  who  had  been
against  Jesus  were  not  to  be
found.  Others  saw  the  ap-
parition of  men  rising  again
whom  none  of  us  had  ever
seen.  One  synagogue  of  the
Jews  was  alone  left  in  Jerusa-
lem itself,  for  they  all  disap-
peared in  that  ruin.

Therefore  being  astounded
by  that  terror,  and  being  pos-
sessed with  the  most  dreadful
treuibling,  I  have  written  what
I  saw  at  that  time  and  sent  it
to  thine  excellency ;  and  I
have  inserted  what  was  done
against  Jesus  by  the  Jews,  and
sent  it  to  thy  divinity,  my
lord.


THE   REPORT  OF  PONTIUS   PK^ATE,

Governor  of  Judea;

Which  ivas  sent  to  Tiberius  Caesar  in  Rome.


To  the  most  potent,  august,
dreadful,  and  divine  Augus-
tus, Pontius  Pilate,  adminis-
trator of  the  Eastern  Prov-
ince.

THAVE  undertaken  to  com-
municate to  thy  goodness
by  this  my  writing,  though
possessed  with  much  fear  and
trembling,  most  excellent  king,
the  present  state  of  affairs,  as


the  result  hath  shown.  For  as
I  administered  this  province,
my  lord,  according  to  the  com-
mand of  thy  serenity,  which  is
one  of  the  eastern  cities  called
Jerusalem,  wherein  the  temple
of  the  nation  of  the  Jews  is
erected,  all  the  multitude  of
the  Jews,  being  assembled,  de-
livered up  to  me  a  certain  man
called  Jesus,  bringing  many
and  endless  accusations  against
275


THE  REPORT  OF  PONTIUS  PILATE.


him ;  but  they  could  not  con-
vict him  in  anything.  But
they  had  one  heresy  against
him,  that  he  said  the  sab-
bath was  not  their  proper
rest.

Now  that  man  wrought  many
cures  and  good  works:  he
caused  the  bHnd  to  see,  he
cleansed  lepers,  he  raised  the
dead,  he  healed  paralytics,
who  could  not  move  at  all,
but  had  only  voice,  and  all
their  bones  in  their  places;
and  he  gave  them  strength  to
walk  and  run,  enjoining  it  by
his  word  alone.  And  he  did
another  yet  more  mighty  work,
which  had  been  strange  even
among  our  gods,  he  raised  from
the  dead  one  Lazarus,  who  had
been  dead  four  days,  command-
ing by  a  word  alone  that  the
dead  man  should  be  raised,
when  his  body  was  already  cor-
rupted by  worms  which  bred
in  his  wounds.  And  he  com-
manded the  fetid  body,  which
lay  in  the  grave,  to  run,  and  as
bridegroom  from  his  cham-
ber so  he  went  forth  from  his
grave,  full  of  sweet  perfume.
And  some  that  were  grievously
afflicted  by  demons,  and  had
their  dwellings  in  desert  places,
and  devoured  the  flesh  of  their
ov;n  limbs,  and  went  up  and
down  among  creeping  things
and  wild  beasts,  he  caused  to
dwell  in  cities  in  their  own
houses,  and  by  a  word  made
them  reasonable,  and  caused  to
become  wise  and  honorable
those  that  were  vexed  by  un-
clean spirits,  and  the  demons
that  were  in  them  he  sent  out
into  a  herd  of  swine  into  the
sea  and  drowned  them.  Again,
another  who  had  a  withered
hand,  and  lived  in  suffering,
and  had  not  even  the  half  of
276


his  body  sound,  he  made  whole
by  a  word  alone.  And  a  woman
who  had  an  issue  of  blood  for
a  long  time,  so  that  because  of
the  discharge  all  the  joints  of
her  bones  were  seen  and  shone
through  like  glass,  for  all  the
physicians  had  dismissed  her
without  hope,  and  had  not
cleansed  her,  for  there  was  in
her  no  hope  of  health  at  all;
but  once,  as  Jesus  was  passing
by  she  touched  from  behind
the  hem  of  his  garments,  and
in  that  very  hour  the  strength
of  her  body  was  restored,  and
she  was  made  whole,  as  if  she
had  no  affliction,  and  began  to
run  fast  towards  her  own  city
of  Paneas.  And  these  things
happened  thus:  but  the  Jews
reported  that  Jesus  did  these
things  on  the  sabbath.  And  I
saw  that  greater  marvels  had
been  wrought  by  him  than  by
the  gods  whom  we  worship.
Him  then  Herod  and  Archelaus
and  Philip,  and  Annas  and  Ca-
iaphas,  with  all  the  people,  de-
livered up  to  me,  to  put  him  on
his  trial.  And  because  many
raised  a  tumult  against  me,  I
commanded  that  he  should  be
crucified.

Now  when  he  was  crucified
darkness  came  over  all  the
world  ;  the  sun  was  altogether
hidden,  and  the  sky  appeared
dark  while  it  was  yet  day,  so
that  the  stars  were  seen,  though
still  they  had  their  lustre  ob-
scured, wherefore,  I  suppose
your  excellency  is  not  unaware
that  in  all  the  world  they
lighted  their  lamps  from  the
sixth  hour  until  evening.  And
the  moon,  which  was  like
blood,  did  not  shine  all  night
long,  although  it  was  at  the
full,  and  the  stars  and  Orion
made    lamentation    over    the


TRIAL  AND  CONDEMNATION  OF  PILATE.


Jews,  because  of  the  trans-
gression committed  by  them.

And  on  the  first  day  of  the
week,  about  the  third  hour  of
the  night,  the  sun  appeared  as
it  never  shone  before,  and  the
whole  heaven  became  bright.
And  as  lightnings  come  in  a
storm,  so  certain  men  of  lofty
stature,  in  beautiful  array,  and
of  indescribableglory,  appeared
in  the  air,  and  a  countless  host
of  angels,  crying  out  and  say-
ing. Glory  to  God  in  the  high-
est, and  on  earth  peace,  good
will  among  men:  Come  up
from  Hades,  ye  who  are  in
bondage  in  the  depths  of
Hades.  And  at  their  voice  all
the  mountains  and  hills  were
moved,  and  the  rocks  were
rent,  and  great  chasms  were
made  in  the  earth,  so  that  the
very  places  of  the  abyss  were
visible.

And  amid  the  terror  dead
men  were  seen  rising  again,  so
that  the  Jews  who  saw  it  said.
We  beheld  Abraham  and  Isaac,
and  Jacob,  and  the  twelve  pa-
triarchs, who  died  some  two


thousand  five  hundred  years
before,  and  we  beheld  Noah
clearly  in  the  body.  And  all
the  multitude  walked  about
and  sang  hymns  to  God  with
a  loud  voice,  saying.  The  Lord
our  God,  who  hath  risen  from
the  dead,  hath  made  alive  all
the  dead,  and  Hades  he  hath
spoiled  and  slain.

Therefore,  my  lord  king,  all
that  night  the  light  ceased  not.
But  many  of  the  Jews  died,
and  were  sunk  and  swallowed
up  in  the  chasms  that  night,
so  that  not  even  their  bodies
were  to  be  seen.  Now  I  mean,
that  those  of  the  Jews  suffered
who  spake  against  Jesus.  And
but  one  synagogue  remained
in  Jerusalem,  for  all  the  syna-
gogues which  had  been  against
Jesus  were  overwhelmed.

Through  that  terror,  there-
fore, being  amazed  and  being
seized  with  great  trembling,  in
that  very  hour,  I  ordered  what
had  been  done  by  them  all  to
be  written,  and  I  have  sent  it
to  thy  mightiness.


THE  TRIAL  AND  CONDEMNATION  OF  PILATE.^


NOW  when  the  letters  came
to  the  city  of  the  Romans,
and  were  read  to  Csesar  with  no
few  standing  there,  they  were
all  terrified,  because,  through
the  transgression  of  Pilate,  the
darkness  and  the  earthquake
had  happened  to  all  the  world.
And  Caesar,  being  filled  with
anger,  sent  soldiers  and  com-
manded that  Pilate  should  be
brought  as  a  prisoner.

And  when  he  was  brought
to  the  city  of  the  Romans^  and


Caesar  heard  that  he  was  come,
he  sat  in  the  temple  of  the
gods,  above  all  the  senate,  and
with  all  the  army,  and  with  all
the  multitude  of  his  power,
and  commanded  that  Pilate
should  stand  in  the  entrance.
And  Caesar  said  to  him.  Most
impious  one,  when  thou  sawest
so  great  signs  done  by  that
man,  why  didst  thou  dare  to
do  thus?  By  daring  to  do  an
evil  deed  thou  hast  ruined  all
the  world.


^  Commonly  called  "  the  Paradosia  of  Pilate."     It  may  be  regarded  as  an
historical  continuation  of  the  preceding,  which  it  usually  follows  in  the  MSS.


without  any  title.


277


TRIAL  AND   CONDEMNATION  OF  PILATE.


And  Pilate  said,  King  and
Autocrat,  I  am  not  guilty  of
these  things,  but  it  is  the  mul-
titude of  the  Jews  who  are  pre-
cipitate and  guilty.  And  Caesar
said,  And  who  are  they?  Pilate
saith,  Herod,  Archelaus,  Philip,
Annas  and  Caiaphas,  and  all
the  multitude  of  the  Jews.
Csesar  saith,  For  what  cause
didst  thou  execute  their  pur-
pose ?  And  Pilate  said.  Their
nation  is  seditious  and  insub-
ordinate, and  not  submissive
to  thy  power.  And  Csesar  said.
When  they  delivered  him  to
thee  thou  oughtest  to  have
made  him  secure  and  sent  him
to  me,  and  not  consented  to
them  to  crucify  such  a  man,
who  was  just  and  wrought  such
great  and  good  miracles,  as
thou  saidst  in  thy  report.^  For
by  such  miracles  Jesus  was
manifested  to  be  the  Christ,
the  King  of  the  Jews.

And  when  Csesar  said  this
and  himself  named  the  name
of  Christ,  all  the  multitude  of
the  gods  fell  down  together,
and  became  like  dust  where
Csesar  sat  with  the  senate.  And
all  the  people  that  stood  near
Csesar  were  filled  with  trem-
bling because  of  the  utterance
of  the  word  and  the  fall  of
their  gods,  and  being  seized
with  fear  they  all  went  away,
every  man  to  his  house,  won-
dering at  what  had  happened.
And  Csesar  commanded  Pilate
to  be  safely  kept,  that  he  might
know  the  truth  about  Jesus.

And  on  the  morrow  when
Csesar  sat  in  the  capitol  with
all  the  senate,  he  undertook  to
question  Pilate  again.  And
Csesar  said,  Say  the  truth,  most


impious  one,  for  through  thy
impious  deed  which  thou  didst
commit  against  Jesus,  even
here  the  doing  of  thy  evil
works  were  manifested,  in  that
the  gods  were  brought  to  ruin.
Say  then,  who  is  he  that  was
crucified,  for  his  name  hath
destroyed  all  the  gods  ?  Pilate
said,  And  verily  his  records  are
true;  for  even  I  myself  wa&
convinced  by  his  works  that  h&
was  greater  than  all  the  gods
whom  we  venerate.  And  Caesar
said,  For  what  cause  then  didst
thou  perpetrate  against  him
such  daring  and  doing,  not  be-
ing  ignorant  of  him,  or  assur-
edly designing  some  mischief
to  my  government?  And  Pi-
late said,  I  did  it  because  of
the  transgression  and  sedition
of  the  lawless  and  ungodly
Jews.'*

And  Csesar  was  filled  with
anger,  and  held  a  council  with
all  his  senate  and  officers,  and
ordered  a  decree  to  be  written
against  the  Jews  thus: —

To  Licianus  who  holdeth
the  first  place  in  the
East  Country.  Greeting:

I  have  been  informed  of  the
audacity  perpetrated  very  re-
cently by  the  Jews  inhabiting
Jerusalem  and  the  cities  round
about,  and  their  lawless  doings
how  they  compelled  Pilate  to
crucify  a  certain  god  called
Jesus,  through  which  great
transgression  of  theirs  the
world  was  darkened  and  drawn
into  ruin.  Determine  there-
fore, with  a  body  of  soldiers,  to
go  to  them  there  at  once  and
proclaim  their  subjection  to
bondage  by  this  decree.  By
obeying  and  proceeding  against


278


^  Grf.  r^f  ff^f  ava<(topac
*  See  Letter  of  Pilate  to  Herod,  p.  270.


THE  DEATH  OF  PILATE.


them,  and  scattering  them
abroad  in  all  nations,  enslave
them,  and  by  driving  their  na-
tion from  all  Judea  as  soon  as
possible  show,  wherever  this
hath  not  yet  appeared,  that
they  are  full  of  evil.

And  when  this  decree  came
into  the  East  Country,  Licianus
obeyed,  through  fear  of  the  de-
cree, and  laid  waste  all  the  na-
tion of  the  Jews,  and  caused
those  that  were  left  in  Judea
to  go  into  slavery  with  them
that  were  scattered  among  the
Gentiles,  that  it  might  be
known  by  Csesar  that  these
things  had  been  done  by  Lici-
anus against  the  Jews  in  the
East  Country,  and  to  please
him.

And  again  Caesar  resolved  to
have  Pilate  questioned,  and
commanded  a  captain,  Albius
by  name,  to  cut  off  Pilate's
head,  saying.  As  he  laid  hands
upon  the  just  man,  that  is
called  Christ,  he  also  shall  fall
in  like  manner,  and  find  no
deliverance.

And  when  Pilate  came  to  the
place  he  prayed  in  silence,
saying,  O  Lord,  destroy  not  me
with  the  wicked  Hebrews,  for
I  should  not  have  laid  hands
upon  thee,  but  for  the  nation  |
of  lawless  Jews,  because  they  i


provoked  sedition  against  me:
but  thou  knowest  that  I  did  it
in  ignorance.  Destroy  me  not,
therefore,  for  this  my  sin,  nor
be  mindful  of  the  evil  that  is
in  me,  O  Lord,  and  in  thy  ser-
vant Procla  who  standeth  with
me  in  this  the  hour  of  my
death,  whom  thou  taughtest  to
prophecy  that  thou  must  be
nailed  to  the  cross.  Do  not
punish  her  too  in  my  sin,  but
forgive  us,  and  number  us  in
the  portion  of  thy  just  ones.
And  behold,  when  Pilate  had
finished  his  prayer,  there  came
a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,
All  generations  and  the  fami-
lies of  the  Gentiles  shall  call
thee  blessed,  because  under
thee  were  fulfilled  all  these
things  that  were  spoken  by  the
prophets  concerning  me;  and
thou  thyself  must  appear  as
my  witness  at  my  second  com-
ing, when  I  shall  judge  the
twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  and
them  that  have  not  confessed
my  name.  And  the  Prefect
cut  off  the  head  of  Pilate,  and
behold  an  angel  of  the  Lord
received  it,  And  when  hi&
wife  Procla  saw  the  angel  com-
ing and  receiving  his  head,  she
also,  being  filled  with  joy,  forth-
with gave  up  the  ghost,  and
was  buried  with  her  husband.'


THE   DEATH  OF  PILATE,

WHO   CONDEMNED   JESUS.


NOW  whereas  Tiberius  Caesar
emperor   of   the   Romans
was  suffering  from  a  grievous


there  was  at  Jerusalem  a  cer-
tain physician,  Jesus  by  name,
who  healed  all  diseases  by  his


sickness,    and    hearing    that  I  word  alone ;  not  knowing  that

1  The  Synaxaria  of  the  Greeks,  under  Oct.  28th,  intimate  the  commemora-
tion of  Procla,  the  wife  of  Pilate.  The  iEthiopic  calendar  inserts  *  Pilate
and  his  wife  Procla '  under  June  25th.  The  reason  for  putting  these  namea
among  the  saints  is,  that  Pilate  by  washing  his  hands  attested  the  innocence
of  Jesus,  while  Procla  sought  to  dissuade  her  husband  from  complying  with
the  Jews.  The  above  story  makes  of  Pilate  almost  a  martyr;  and  Tertullian
makes  him  almost  a  saint  in  Apol.  c.  Gentes,  cap.  21.

279


THE   DEATH   OF  DILATE.


the  Jews  and  Pilate  had  put
him  to  death,  he  thus  bade
one  of  his  attendants,  Volusi-
anus  by  name,  saying,  Go  as
quickly  as  thou  canst  across
the  sea,  and  tell  Pilate,  my
servant  and  friend,  to  send  me
this  physician  to  restore  me  to
my  original  health.  And  Volu-
sianus,  having  heard  the  order
of  the  emperor,  immediately
departed,  and  came  to  Pilate,
as  it  was  commanded  him.
And  he  told  the  same  Pilate
what  had  been  committed  to
him  by  Tiberius  Caesar,  saying,
Tiberius  Caesar,  emperor  of  the
Romans,  thy  Lord,  having
heard  that  in  this  city  there  is
a  physician  who  healeth  dis-
eases by  his  word  alone,  ear-
nestly entreateth  thee  to  send
him  to  him  to  heal  his  disease.
And  Pilate  was  greatly  terrified
on  hearing  this,  knowing  that
through  envy  he  had  caused
him  to  be  slain.  Pilate  an-
swered the  messenger,  saying
thus.  This  man  was  a  male-
factor, and  a  man  who  drew
after  himself  all  the  people;
so,  after  counsel  taken  of  the
wise  men  of  the  city,  I  caused
him  to  be  crucified.  And  as
the  messenger  returned  to  his
lodgings  he  met  a  certain  wo-
man named  Veronica,  who  had
been  acquainted  with  Jesus,
and  he  said,  O  woman,  there
was  a  certain  physician  in  this
city,  who  healed  the  sick  by
his  word  alone,  why  have  the
Jews  slain  him?  And  she  be-
gan to  weep,  saying,  Ah,  me,
my  lord,  it  was  my  God  and
my  Lord  whom  Pilate  through
envy  delivered  up,  condemned,
and  commanded  to  be  cruci-
fied. Then  he,  grieving  greatly,
said,  I  am  exceedingly  sorry
that  I  cannot  fulfil  that  for
280


which  my  lord  hath  sent
me.

Veronica  said  to  him.  When
my  Lord  went  about  preach-
ing, and  I  was  very  unwill-
ingly deprived  of  his  presence,
I  desired  to  have  his  picture
painted  for  me,  that  while  I
was  deprived  of  his  presence,
at  least  the  figure  of  his  like-
ness might  give  me  consola-
tion. And  when  I  was  taking
the  canvas  to  the  painter  to  be
painted,  my  Lord  met  me  and
asked  whither  I  was  going.
And  when  I  had  made  known
to  him  the  cause  of  my  journey,
He  asked  me  for  the  canvas,
and  gave  it  back  to  me  printed
with  the  likeness  of  his  vener-
able face.  Therefore,  if  thy  lord
will  devoutly  look  upon  the
sight  of  this,  he  will  straight-
way enjoy  the  benefit  of  health.

Is  a  likeness  of  this  kind  to
be  procured  with  gold  or  sil-
ver? he  asked.  No,  said  she,
but  with  a  pious  sentiment  of
devotion.  Therefore,  I  will  go
with  thee,  and  carry  the  like-
ness to  Caesar  to  look  upon,  and
will  return.

So  Volusianus  came  with
Veronica  to  Rome,  and  said  to
Tiberius  the  emperor,  Jesus,
whom  thou  hast  long  desired,
Pilate  and  the  Jews  have  sur-
rendered to  an  unjust  death,
and  through  envy  fastened  to
the  wood  of  the  cross.  There-
fore, a  certain  matron  hath
come  with  me  bringing  the
likeness  of  the  same  Jesus,  and
if  thou  wilt  devoutly  gaze  upon
it,  thou  wilt  presently  obtain
the  benefit  of  thy  health.  So
Caesar  caused  the  way  to  be
spread  with  cloths  of  silk,  and
ordered  the  portrait  to  be  pre-
sented to  him;  and  as  soon
as     he     had      looked     upon


THE  DEATH  OF  PILATE.


it   he    regained    his    original
health.

Then  Pontius  Pilate  was  ap-
prehended by  command  of
Csesar  and  brought  to  Rome.
Csesar,  hearing  that  Pilate  had
come  to  Rome,  was  filled  with
exceeding  wrath  against  him,
and  caused  him  to  be  brought
to  him.  Now  Pilate  brought
with  him  the  seamless  coat  of
Jesus,  and  wore  it  when  before
the  emperor.  As  soon  as  the
emperor  saw  him  he  laid  aside
all  his  wrath,  and  forthwith
rose  to  him,  and  was  unable  to
speak  harshly  to  him  in  any-
thing: and  he  who  in  his  ab-
sence seemed  so  terrible  and
fierce  now  in  his  presence  is
found  comparatively  gentle.

And  when  he  had  dismissed
him,  he  soon  became  terribly
inflamed  against  him,  declar-
ing himself  wretched,  because
he  had  not  expressed  to  him
the  anger  of  his  bosom.  And
immediately  he  had  him  re-
called, swearing  and  protesting
that  he  was  a  child  of  death,
and  unfitted  to  live  upon  earth.
And  when  he  saw  him  he  in-
stantly greeted  him,  and  laid
aside  all  the  fury  of  his
mind.

All  were  astonished,  and  he
was  astonished  himself,  that  he
was  so  enraged  against  Pilate
while  absent,  and  could  say
nothing  to  him  sharply  while
he  was  present.  At  length,  by
Divine  suggestion,  or  perhaps
by  the  persuasion  of  some
Christian,  he  had  him  stripped
of  the  coat,  and  soon  resumed
against  him  his  original  fury
of  mind.  And  when  the  em-
peror was  wondering  very
much  about  this,  they  told
him  it  had  been  the  coat  of  the
Lord   Jesus.      Then   the   em-


peror commanded  him  to  be
kept  in  prison  till  he  should
take  counsel  with  the  wise  men
what  ought  to  be  done  with
him.  And  after  a  few  days
sentence  was  given  against  Pi-
late that  he  should  be  con-
demned to  the  most  ignomini-
ous death.  When  Pilate  heard
this  he  slew  himself  with  his
own  dagger,  and  by  such  a
death  put  an  end  to  his  life.

When  Pilate's  death  was
made  known  Caesar  said.  Truly
he  has  died  a  most  ignominious
death,  whose  own  hand  has
not  spared  him.  He  was  there-
fore fastened  to  a  great  block
of  stone  and  sunk  in  the  river
Tiber.  But  wicked  and  un-
clean spirits,  rejoicing  in  his
wicked  and  unclean  body,  all
moved  about  in  the  water,  and
caused  in  the  air  dreadful
lightning  and  tempests,  thun-
der and  hail,  so  that  all  were
seized  with  horrible  fear.  On
which  account  the  Romans
dragged  him  out  of  the  river
Tiber,  bore  him  away  in  de-
rision to  Vienne,  and  sunk  him
in  the  river  Rhone.  For  Vi-
enne means,  as  it  were.  Way  of
Gehenna,  because  it  was  then
a  place  of  cursing.  And  evil
spirits  were  there  and  did  the
same  things.

Those  men,  therefore,  not
enduring  to  be  so  harassed  by
demons,  removed  the  vessel  of
cursing  from  them  and  sent  it
to  be  buried  in  the  territory  of
Losania.  But  when  they  were
troubled  exceedingly  by  the
aforesaid  vexations,  they  put  it
away  from  them  and  sunk  it  in
a  certain  pool  surrounded  by
mountains,  where  even  yet,  ac-
cording to  the  account  of  some,
sundry  diabolical  contrivances
are  said  to  issue  forth.
281


TABLE  L


A  LIST  of  all  the  Apoeryphal  Pieces  not  now  extant,  mentioned  by
Writers  in  the  first  four  Centuries  of  Christ,  with  the  several
Works  wherein  they  are  cited  or  noticed.


1.  The  Acts  of  Andrew.  Euseh.  Hist.  Eccl.  1. 3  c.  25.  Philastr.
Hceres.  87.  Epiphan.  Hceres.  47  §  1.  Hceres.  61  §  I.  et  Hceres.  63.
§  2.     Gelas.  in  Decret  apud.  Condi.  Sanct.  torn.  4.  p.  1260.

2.  Books  under  the  name  of  Andrew.  August,  contr.  Adversar.
Leg.  et  Prophet,  l.  c.  20.  et  Innocent  I.  Epis.  3.  ad  Exuper.  Tholos.
Episc.  §  7.

3.  The  Gospel  of  Andrew.     Gelas.  in  Decret.

A  Gospel  under  the  name  of  Apelles.  Hieron.  Proefat.  in
Comment,  in  Matt.

The  Gospel  according  to  the  Twelve  Apostles.  Origen.  Homil.
in  Luc.  i.  1.  Ambros.  Comment,  in  Luc.  i.  1.  et  Hieron.  Proefat.  in
Comment,  in  Matt.

B

The  Gospel  of  Barnabas.     Gelas.  in  Decret.

1.  The  Writings  of  Bartholomew  the  Apostle.  Dionys.  Areo-
pagit.  de  Theol.  Myst.  c.  1.

2.  The  Gospel  of  Bartholomew.  Hieron.  Catul.  Script.  Eccles.
in  Pantcen.  et  Prcefat.in  Comm.  in  Matt.     Gelas  in  Decret.

The  Gospel  of  Basilides.  Orig.  in  Luc.  i.  1.  Ambros.  in  Lac.
i.  1.  Hieron.  Prcefat.  in  Comm.  in  Matt.

c

1.  The  Gospel  of  Cerinthus.     Epiphan.  Hceres.  51.  §  7.

2.  The  Revelation  of  Cerinthus.  Caias  Presb.  Pom.  lib.  Dis-
put.  apud.  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  3.  c.  28.

1.  An  Epistle  of  Christ  to  Peter  and  Paul.  August,  de  Con-
sens.  Evang.  1.  1.  c.  9,  19.

2.  Some  other  Books  under  the  name  of  Christ.     Ibid.  c.  3.

282


The  Lost  Apocryphal  Books.

3.  An  Epistle  of  Christ,  produced  by  the  Manichees.  August,
contr.  Faust,  1.  28,  c.  4

4.  A  Hymn,  which  Christ  taught  his  disciples.  Epis.  ad  Ceret
Episc.

E

The  Gospel  according  to  the  Egyptians.  Clem.  Alex.  Strrnn.  1.
3.  p.  452,  465.  Origen.  in  Lug.  il  I.  Hieron.  PrcdJ.  in  Comm.  in
Matt.  Epiphan.  Hceres.  62  §  2.

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  made  use  of  by  the  Ebionites.
Epiphan.     Hceres.  30.  §  16.

The  Gospel  of  the  Ebionites.     Epiphan.  Hceres.  30.  §  13.

The  Gospel  of  the  Encratites.     Epiphan.  Hceres.  46.  1.

The  Gospel  of  Eve.     Epiphan.  Hceres.  26.  §  2.


The  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews.  Hegesipp.  lib.  Com-
ment, apud  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  c.  22.  Clem.  Alex.  Strom.  1.  2.  p.
380.  Origen.  Tract.  8.  in  Matt.  xix.  19.  et  1.  2,  Joan.  p.  58.  Euseb-
H'st.  Eccl.  1.  3.  c.  25,  27,  et  39.     Jerome  in  many  places,  as  above.

The  Book  of  the  Helkesaites.      Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  6.  c.  38.

The  false  Gospels  of  Hesychius.  Hieron.  Frcefat.  in  Evang.  ad
Damas.  Gelas.  in  Decret.

J

The  Book  of  James.     Origen.  Comm.  in  Matt.  xiii.  55,  56.

Books  forged  and  published  under  the  name  of  James.  Epi-
phan. Hceres.  30.  §  23.  Innocent  I.  Epist.  3.  ad  Exuper,.  Tholos.
Episc.  §  7.

1.  The  Acts  of  John.  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  3.  c.  25.  Athanas.
in  Synops.  §  76.  Philastr.  Hceres.  87.  Epiphan.  Hceres.  47.  §  1.  Au-
gust, contr.  Advers.  Leg.  1.  1.  c.  20.

2.  Books  under  the  name  of  John.  Epiphan.  Hceres.  30.  §  23.
et  Innocent  I.  ibid.

A  Gospel  under  the  name  of  Jude.     Epiphan.  Hceres.  38.    §  1.

A  Gospel  under  the  name  of  Judas  Iscariot.  Iren.  advers.
Hceres.  1.  1.  c.  35.

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  by  Leucius.  August,  lib.  de  Fide
contr.  Manich.  c.  38.

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  by  Lentitus.  August,  de  Act.  cum
Fcelic.  Manich.  1.  2.  c.  6.

The  Books  of  Lentitius.     Gelas.  in  Decret.

The  Acts  under  the  Apostles'  name  by  Leontius.  August,  de
Fide,  contr.  Manich.  c.  5.

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  by  Leuthon.  Hieron.  Epist.  ad  Chro-
mat.  et  Heliodor.

The  false  Gospels,  published  by  Lucianus.  Hieron.  Frcefat.  in
Evang.  ad  Damas.

M

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  used  by  the  Manichees.     August,  lib.

cont.  Adimant  Manich.  c.  17.

283


The  Lost  Apocryphal  Books.

The  Gospel  of  Marcion.  Tertull.  adv.  Marcion.  lib.  4.  c.  2.  et
4.  Epiphan.  Hceres.  42.  Proem.

Books  under  the  name  of  Matthew.  Epiphan.  Hceres.  30.
§  23.

1.  The  Gospel  of  Matthias.  Orig.  Comm.  in  Luc.  i.  1.  Euseh.
Hist.  Eccl.  1.  3.  c.  25.  Amhros.  in  Luc.  i.  1.  Hieron.  Prcefat.  in
Comment  in  Matt.

2.  The  Traditions  of  Matthias.  Clem.  Alex.  Strom.  1.  2.  p.
380.  1.  3.  p.  436.  et  1.  7.  p.  748.

3.  A  Book  under  the  name  of  Matthias.     Innocent  L  ibid.
The  Gospel  of  Merinthus.     Epiphan.  Hoeres.  51.  §  7.

N

The  Gospel  according  to  the  Nazarenes.  See  above  concern-
ing the  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews.

P

1  The  Acts,  of  Paul  and  Thecla.  Tertull.  de  Baptism,  c.  17.
Sieron.  Catal.  Script.  Eccl.  in  Luc.     Gelas.  in  Decret.

2.  The  Acts  of  Paul.  Orig.  de  Princip.  1.  1.  c.  2.  et  1.  21.  in
Joan.  tom.  2.  p.  298.  Emeh.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  3.  c.  3.  et  25.  Philastr.
Ho&res.  87.

3.  The  Preaching  of  Paul  (and  Peter).  Lactant.  de  Ver.  Sap.
1.  4.  c.  21.  Script,  anonym,  ad  calcem  0pp.  Cypr.,  and,  according
to  some,  Clem.  Alex.  Strom.  1.  6.  p.  636.

4.  A  Book  under  the  name  of  Paul.     Cyprian.  Epist.  27.

5.  The  Revelation  of  Paul.  Epiphan.  Hoeres.  38.  §  2.  August
Tract.  98.  in  Joann.  in  fin.  Gelas.  in  Decret.

The  Gospel  of  Perfection.     Epiphan.  Hoeres.  26.  §  2.

1.  The  Acts  of  Peter.  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  3.  c.  3.  Athanas.
in  Synops.  S.  Scriptur.  §  75.  Philastr  Hoeres.  27.  Hieron.  catal.  Script.
Eccl.  in  Petr.     Epiphan.  Hceres.  30.  §  15.

2.  The  Doctrine  of  Peter.     Orig.  Proem,  in  lib.  de  Princip.

3.  The  Gospel  of  Peter.  Scrip,  lib.  de  Evang.  Petri.,  apud.  Eu-
seb. Hist.  Eccl.  1.  6.  c.  13.  Tertull.  adv.  Marc.  1.  4.  c.  5.  Orig.  Com-
ment, in  Matt.  xiii.  55,  56,  tom.  i.  p.  223.  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  3.
c.  3.  et  25.     Hieron.  Catal.  Script.  Eccles.  in  Petr.

The  Judgment  of  Peter.  Puffin.  Exposit.  in  Symbol.  Apostol.
§  36.  Hieron.  Catal.  Script.  Eccles.  in  Petr.

5.  The  Preaching  of  Peter.  Heracl.  apud.  Orig.  1.  14.  in  Joan.
Clem.  Alex.  Strom.  1.  1.  p.  357.  1.  2.  p.  390.  1.  6.  p.  635,  636,  et
678.  Theodot.  Byzant.  in  Excerpt,  p.  899.  ad  calc.  0pp.  Clem.  Alex.
Lactant.  de  Ver.  Sap.  1.  4,  c.  21.  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccles.  1.  3.  c.  3.  et
Hieron.  Catal.  Script.  Eccl.  in  Petr.

6.  The  Revelation  of  Peter.  Clem.  Alex.  lib.  Hypotypos.  apud.
Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  6.  c.  14.  Theodot.  Byzant.  in  Excerpt,  p.  806,
807.  ad.  calc.  0pp.  Clem.  Alex.  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  3.  c.  3.  et  25.
Hieron.  Catal.  Script.  Eccl.  in  Petr.

7.  Books  under  the  name  of  Peter.  Innocent.  I.  Epist  3.  ad
Exuper.  Tholos.  Epist.  §.7.

1.  The  Acts  of  Philip.     Gelas.  in  Decret

2.  The  Gospel  of  Philip.     Epiphan.  Hmres.  26.  §  13.
284


The  Lost  Apocryphal  Books.


The  Gospel  of  Scythianus.  Cyrill.  Catech.  VI.  §  22.  et  Epi-
phan.  Hceres.  66.  §  2.

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  by  Seleucus.  Hieron.  Epist.  ad
Chromat.  et  Heliodor.

The  Revelation  of  Stephen.     Qelas.  in  Decret.


The  Gospel  of  Titan.     Euseh.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  4.  c.  29.
The  Gospel  of  Thadd^us.     Galas,  in  Decret.
The  Catholic  Epistle  of  Themison  the  Montaiiist.    Apollon.  lib.
cont.  Cataphryg.  apud.  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  5.  c.  18.

1.  The  Acts  of  Thomas.  Epiphan.  Hoeres.  47.  §  1.  et  61.  §  1
Atharias.  in  Synops.  S.  Script.  §.  76.  et  Gelas.  in  Decret.

2.  The  Gospel  of  Thomas.  Orig.  in  Due.  i.  1.  Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl
1.  3.  c.  25.  Cyrill.  Catech.  IV.  §  36.  et  Catech.  VI.  §  31.  Ambros.
in  Luc.  i.  1.  Athan.in  Synops.  S.  Script.  §  76.  Hieron.  Prcef.  in
Comment,  in  Matth.    Gelas.  in  Decret

4.  Books  under  the  name  of  Thomas.  Innocent  I.  Epist.  3.
ad  Exuper.  Tholos.  Episc.  §  7.

The  Gospel  of  Truth  made  use  of  by  the  Valentinians.  Iren.
adv.  Hceres,  1.  3.  c.  11.

V

The  Gospel  of  Valentinus.  TertuU.  de  Proescript  adv.  Hor-
ret.  c.  49.

285


TABLE    II.

A  LIST  of  the  Christian  Authors  of  the  first  four  Centuries,  whose  WriU
ings  contain  Catalogues  of  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament.

*5^*  Those  which  also  have  Catalogues  of  the  Books  of  the  Old  Testament
are  marked  thus*.


The  Names  of  the
Writers.

J  times  in
hich  they
ved.

The  variation  or  Agreement
of  their  Catalogues  with
ours  now  received.

The  Places  of  their
Writing8,in  which
these     Catalogues

f.'-^

are.

I.

A.C.

*  Origen,  a  Pres-

210.

Omits   the   Epistles   of

Comment  in  Matt.

byter  of  Alex-

James and  Jude,

apud      Euseh.

andria,  who  em-

though he  owns  them

Hist  EccL  I.  6.

ployed  incredi-

both in  other  parts  of

c.  25.   Exposit.

ble     pains     in

his  writings.

in  Joan.  I.  5,

knowing  the

apud      Euseh.

Scriptures.

ibid.

II.

EusEBius   Pam-

315.

His    Catalogue    is  ex-

Hkt Eccl  I.  3,  (J.

PHiLUS,    whose

actly  the  same  with

bb,  confer  ejus^

writings   evi-

the modern  one ;  only

dem  lib.  b.  3.

dence   his   zeal

he  says,  the  Epistles

about  the  sacred

of  James,  Jude,  the

writings,  and

2nd  of  Peter,  the  2nd

his  great  care  to

and    3rd     of    John,

be   informed

though      they     were

which  were  gen-

generally received,

uine  and  which

yet  had  been  by  some

not.

doubted  of   As  to  the

Revelation,      though

he  says  some  rejected

it,  yet  he  says  others
received  it ;  and  him-

self places  it  among
those  which  are  to  be
received  without  dis-
pute.

'

286


Th€


Names  of  the
Writers.


III.

*Athanasius,
Bp.  of  Alex-
andria.


IV.

*  CYRUi,     Bp.

Jerusalem.


of


*  The  Bishops  as-
sembled in  the
Council  of  Lao
dicea.


VI.

Epiphanius,  Bp.
of  Salamis  in
Cyprus.

VII.

Gregory  Nazi-
ANZEN,  Bp.  of
Constantinople.

VIII.
Philastriu^,  Bp.
of  BrixiainVe-


A,  a

315.


340.


364.

t


370.


375.


380.


The  variation  or  Agreement
of  their  Catalogues  with
ours  now  received.


\  The  Places  of  their
Writings,  in  wh  ich
these  Catalogues
are.


The  same  perfectly  with
ours  now  received.


The  same  with  ours,
only  the  Revelation
is  omitted.


The  Revelation  is  omit-
ted.


The  same  with  curs  now
received.


Omits  the  Revelation.


The  same  with  ours  now
received ;  except  that
he  mentions  only  thir-
teen of  St.  Paul's
Epistles  ( omitting
very  probably  the
Epistle  to  the  He-
brews), and  leaves  out
the  Revelation.


Fragment.  Epist.
Festal,  et  in  Sy-
nops.  Scriptur.
Sacr.

Catech.  IV.  §  36.


Canon.  LX.

N.B.— The  Canons
of  this  Council
were  not  long  af-
terwards received
into  the  body  of
the  Canons  of  the
universal  Church


Bcer-ea.  76,  c  5.


Carm.  de  veris  et
genuin.  Scriptur.


Lib.  deJECwres.  87.


t  The  Papists  generally  place  this  Council  before  the  Council  of  Nice.

287


The  Names  of  the
Writers.


IX.
*Jerome.


X.

*RuFFiN,      Pres-
byter of  Aquile-


XI.

*AUSTIN,  Bp.  of
Hippo  in  Africa

XII.

*  The     forty-four
Bps.  assembled
in     the     third
Council  of  Car
thage.

XIII.

The  anonymous
author  of  the
works  under  the
name  of  Dion  Y-
sius  the  Areo-
pagite.


E


f^%-^


A.  a

382.


390.


394.


St.^

Austin

was

pres-
ent

at  it.

390.


The  variation  or  Agreement
of  their  Catalogues  with
ours  now  received.


The  Places  of  their
Writings,  in  which
these     Catalogues


The  same  with  ours,
except  that  he  speaks
dubiously  of  the  Epist.
to  the  Hebrews ;
though  in  other  parts
of  his  writings  he  re-
ceives it  as  Canonical,
as  hereafter  will  ap-
pear.

It  perfectly  agrees  with
ours.


It  perfectly  agrees  with
ours.


It  perfectly  agrees  with
ours.


It  seems  perfectly  to
agree  with  ours;  for
though  he  doth  not,
for  good  reasons,  pro-
duce the  names  of  the
books;  yet  (as  the
learned  Daille  says,
De  Script,  supposit
Doings.  1.  1.  c-  16,)
he  so  clearly  describes
them  as  that  he  has
left  out  no  divine
book,  may  be  easily
perceived.


Ep.  ad.  Paulin.
de  Stud.  Scrip.
Also  commonly
prefixed  to  the
Latin  Vulgate.


Expos,    in    Symb.

Apostol.     §  36.

int.  Op.  Hieror.

et      inter     Op.

Cypr.
De.  Doct.    Christ.

I.  2,  c.  8.


Vid.  Canon.

XLVII.

et  cap.  ult.


Lib.  de  Hierarch.
Eccl.  c.  3.


THE  END.


288


Urwn'


BS  2832  .A2  1890  SMC

Bible.  N.T.  Apocryphal

books.  English.
The  apocryphal  books  of

the  New  Testament  :
AWZ-5151  (mcsk)


^f


KfS^JMWljmrTO;


i\^^\\W\^^\\m^^^  v\\\\W\M>^sa


-N\\\':x\wc;^:\''>iw^\\mw<'>^v'S^^
