« •««)  V>  •»  , ,-.  %.  ^ ...  . ■,,,,


M


,


- r nL.r  -•«  -r**  ' , V •*n***3j>*  V^i  ^'^intrS^^


; v,  y-,  * • '4r-  . »YJ®  **■*’•*-

r • M 3R(?liraB8|  rSJ  ij

I i - r v-i  s ,b  bh  - » .

r'  E^cSriLa  "}• '?"  1 ^Hj  v 1°  * - - jS

OH  - i , . .,  » i — . ‘

rJv,  ~ . >-'-  * ^ 13  -

i •• ',  ' • - ' i , • - . 0S,  ■"-:


® V

m HT  V Sl  -r- .h  -'.^r,  -.  - •

-f  ' - V,'  . . ’ • •*”L  * • s » • r ' .••

rv  / - . ' ~ s


' fe  ^ r5fj : 1 tSK

-.  , • *-»  , * • • I W_>  i ■-  £ V"  - . *


!•»_-_  -H  - S-  ,-  '

• --  - *«  m ^ * v -■

*,  •>  - ; % , : . ':€.  * -*v

lI  i)QB4-&  r,a  *-k|l  * ,jy  J - -v

,1  , » 4i_  • f 4E  •

■ k a.  • - ■ r

, vk  1*1  • E£  - v .-


(a  . •-•pv


; • ^ •


_"  * ; •*§!  Bl  - i'  J^2  i >*


. -

-<  cv  . - >:.  E Wm  m . ..  H'»

K&jai


, ,_  _-.  Tr  2

■

Sav  '■  • - .,>.  -'  . " r


fl


: feiS


-■  - --*e

* .*?•


The  original  of  this  book  is  in
the  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924028976161


mm


Cornell  Universlty  Library

B753.G33  A3  1873


Alchemy  of


™.PJ


piness  / by  Mo


hammed  al-Gh


3 1924  028  976  1


61


olin


tYe  tepatda.  e/o

(^eny  Q £ (Wcme^f^-


anf2>>  (W.  J/


MOHAM A1 E D A L -|GTI  AZ  z a l< i , i


fi  EKrt^-


^ ctU  oJ.  ^aJLci-yw  ,


THE


MOHAMMEDAN  PHILOSOPHER.


<EAau3latcti  fvom  tf>e  lUEis^ ,

By  HEISTRY  A-^HOMES,

LIBRARIAN,  STATE  LIBRARY.


ALBANY,  N.  Y.  :

J.  MUNSELL,  STATE  STREET.


In  advance  of  the  Transactions  ofthe  ATbany
Institute , vol.  vm.


CONTENTS.


Page.

Introductoey  Notice,  . ....  5

CHAPTER  I.

On  Knowledge  op  the  Soul,  ...  13

CHAPTER  II.

On  Knowledge  op  God,  ...  41

CHAPTER  III.

On  Knowledge  of  the  World,  ....  65

CHAPTER  IY.

On  Knowledge  op  the  Future  Woeld,  . . 74

CHAPTER  Y.

On  the  Loye  op  God, 104

Notes,  . • 117


INTRODUCTION.


The  remarkable  treatise,  which  I introduce  to  your
notice,  is  a translation  from  one  of  the  numerous  works  of
the  Arabian  Philosopher,  Abou  Hamid  Mohammed  ben
Mohammed  al  Ghazzali,  who  Aourished  in  the  eleventh
eentury.  He  was  born  about  the  year  A.  D.  1056,  or  450
of  the  Mohammedan  era,  at  Tous  in  Khorasan,  and  he  died
in  the  prime  of  life  in  his  native  country  about  the  year
1^11,  or  505  A.  H.  Although  educated  by  Mohammedan
parents,  he  avows  that  during  a eonsiderable  period  of  his
life  he  was  a prey  to  doubts  about  the  truth,  and  that  at
times  he  was  an  absolute  sceptic.  While  yet  compara-
tively  young,  his  learning  and  genius  recoramended  him
to  the  renowned  sovereign  Kizam  ul  Mulk,  who  gave  him
a professorship  in  the  college  which  he  had  founded  at
Bagdad.  His  speculative  mind  still  harassing  him  with
doubts,  in  his  enthusiasm  to  arrive  at  a solid  foundation
for  knowledge,  he  resigned  his  position,  visited  Mecca  and
Jerusalem,  and  finally  returned  to  Khorasan,  where  he
led  a life  of  both  monastic  study  and  devotion,  and  conse-
crated  his  pen  to  writing  the  results  of  his  meditations.

Mohammedan  scholars  of  the  present  day  still  hold  him  in
such  high  respect,  that  his  name  is  never  mentioned  by
thern  without  some  such  distinctive  epithet,  as  the  “ Scien-

2


6


Introduction .


tific  Imaum,”  or  “ Cbief  witnessfor  Islamism/'  His  rank
in  the  eastern  world,  as  a philosopher  and  a theologian,  had
naturallj  given  his  name  some  distinction  in  our  histories
of  philosophj,  and  it  is  enumerated  in  connection  with
those  of  Averroes  (Abu  Roshd)  and  Avicenna  (Abn  Sina)
as  illustrating  the  intellectual  life  and  the  philosophical
schools  of  the  Mohammedans.  Still  his  writings  were  less
known  than  either  of  the  two  others.  His  principal  work,
The  Deslruclion  of  the  Philosophers , called  forth  in  replj
one  of  the  two  most  important  works  of  Averroes  entitled
The  Destruction  of  the  Destruction . Averroes,  in  his  com-
mentary  upon  Aristotle,  extracts  from  Ghazzali  copi-
ouslj  for  the  purpose  of  refuting  his  views.  A short  treatise
of  his  had  been  published  at  Cologne,  in  1506,  and  Pocock
had  given  in  Latin  his  interpretation  of  the  two  funda-
mental  articles  of  the  Mohammedan  creed.  Yon  Hammer
printed'  in  1838,  at  Vienna,  a translation  of  a moral  essaj,
Eyuha  el  Weled , as  a new  jear’  s token  for  jouth.

It  has  been  reserved  to  our  own  times  to  obtain  a more
intimate  acquaintance  with  Ghazzali,  and  this  chieflj  by
meansof  a translation  bj  M.  Pallia,  intoFrench,  of  his  Cbn-
fessio?is , wherein  he  announces  verj  clearlj  his  philosophic-
al  views;  and  froman  essaj  on  hiswritings  bjM.  Smolders.
In  consequenee,  Mr.  Lewes,  who  in  his  first  edition  of  the
Biographical  Mistory  of  Philosophy , found  no  place  for  Ghaz-
zali,  is  induced  in  his  last  edition,  from  the  evidenee  which
that  treatise  contains  that  he  was  one  of  the  controlling
minds  of  his  age,  to  devote  an  entire  section  to  an  exhibi-
tion  of  his  opinions  in  the  same  series  with  Abelard  and
Bruno,  and  to  make  him  the  tjpical  figure  to  repreaent
Arabian  philosophj.  For  a full  account  of  Ghazzali’s


Introduction .


7


school  of  philosophy,  we  refcr  to  his  history  and  to  the  two
essays,  just  mentioned.  We  wouldobserve,  very  briedy  how-
ever,  that  likemostof  thelearned  Mohammedans  of  his  age,
he  was  a student  of  Aristotle.  While  they  regarded  all
the  Greek  philosophers  as  inhdels,  they  availed  themselves
of  their  logic  and  their  principles  of  philosophy  to  maintain,
as  farpossible,  the  dogmas  of  the  Koran.  G-hazzali?s  mind
possessed  however  Platonizing  tendencies,  and  he  afl3.-
liated  himself  to  the  Soofies  or  Mystics  in  his  later  years.
Ile  was  in  antagouism  with  men  who  to  him  appeared,  like
Avicenna,  toexalt  reason  above  the  Koran,yet  he  himself
went  to  the  extreme  limits  of  reasoniug  in  his  endeavors
to  find  an  intelligible  basis  for  the  doctrines  of  the  Koran,
and  a philosophical  basis  for  a holy  rule  of  life.  His  cha-
racter,  and  moral  and  intellectual  rank  are  vividly  depieted
in  the  fol!owing  extract  from  the  writings  of  Tholuck,  a
prominent  leader  of  the  modern  Evangelical  school  of  Ger-
many.

“ Ghazzali,J’  says  Tholuck,  “ if  ever  any  man  have  de-
served  the  name,  was  truly  a divine,  and  he  may  justly  be
placed  on  a level  with  Origen,  so  remarkable  was  he  for
learningand  iugenuity,  and  gifted  with  such  a rare  faculty
for  the  skillful  aud  worthy  exposition  of  doctrine.  All
that  is  good,  noble  and  sublime,  which  his  great  soul  had
compassed,  he  bestowed  upon  Mohammedanism ; and  he
adorned  the  doctrines  of  the  Koran  with  so  much  piety
and  learning,  that,  in  the  form  given  them  by  him,  they
seem  in  my  opinion  worthy  the  asseut  of  Christians.  What-
soever  was  most  excellent  in  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle
or  in  the  Soofi  mysticism,  he  discreetly  adapted  to  the
Mohammedan  theology.  From  every  school,  he  sought  the


8


Introduction.


means  of  shedding  light  and  honor  upon  religion ; while
his  sincere  piety  and  lofty  conscientiousuess  imparted  to
all  his  writings  a sacred  majesty.  He  was  the  first  of
Mohammedan  diyines/,  (Bibliotheca  Sacra,  vi,  233).

Sale,  in  the  preliminary  discourse  to  his  translation  of
theKoran,  shows  that  he  had  diseovered  the  peculiar  traits
of  Ghazzali’s  mind  ; for  wherever  he  gives  an  explanation
of  the  Mussulman  creed,  peculiarly  consonant  to  universal
reason  and  opposed  to  superstition,  it  will  be  found  that
he  quotes  from  him.1

This  treatise  on  the  Alchemy  of  Happiness,  or  Kimiai
Saadet,  seems  well  adapted  to  extend  our  knowledge  of
the  writings  of  Ghazzali  and  of  the  opinions  current  then
and  now  in  the  Oriental  world.  Although  it  throws  no
light  on  any  questions  of  geography,  philology  or  political
history,  objects  most  frequently  in  view  in  translations
from  the  Oriental  languages,  yet  a book  which  exhibits
with  such  plainness  the  opinions  of  so  large  a portion  of
the  human  race  as  the  Mohammedans,  on  questions  of
philosophy,  practical  morality  and  religion,  will  always  be
as  interesting  to  the  general  reader  and  to  a numerous
class  of  students,  as  the  facts  that  may  be  elicited  to  com-
plete  a series  of  kings  in  a dynasty  or  to  establish  the  site
of  an  ancient  city  can  be  to  the  historian  or  the  geographer.
I translate  it  from  an  edition  published  in  Turkish  in  1845
(A.  H.,  1260),  at  the  imperial  printing  press  in  Constan-


1 Pallia,  M6moire  sur  le  manuscrit  Arabe  de  la  Bibliotliĕque  Royale  de
Paris,  No.  884,  contenant  un  traitĕ  pbilosopliique  d’  Algazali.  Mĕm.  de  1’
Institutde  France.  Tome  I,  Savants  ĕtrangers.  Paris,  1841,  4°.

Smolders,  Essai  sur  les  ĕcoles  philosopliiques  chez  les  Arabes  et  uotam-
ment  sur  la  doctriue  d’  al  Ghazzali.  Paris,  1843.  8°.

Sale’s  Koran , vol.  I,  p.  336,  and  note.


Iwiroduction.


9


tinople.  As  no  books  are  allowed  to  be  printed  there  which
have  not  passed  under  the  eyes  of  the  censor,  the  doc;trines
presented  in  the  book  indicate,  not  only  the  opinions  of
eight  hundred  years  since,  but  also  what  views  are  re-
garded  as  orthodox,  or  tolerated  among  the  orthodox  at
the  present  day.  It  has  been  printed  also  in  Persian  at
Calcutta.

In  form,  the  book  contains  a treatise  on  practical  piety,
but  as  is  the  case  with  a large  proportion  of  Mohammedan
works,  the  author,  whatever  may  be  his  subject,  finds  a
place  for  observations  reaching  far  wide  of  his  apparent
aim,  so  our  author  is  led  to  make  many  observations  which
develop  his  notions  in  anatomy,  physiology,  natural  phi-
losophy  and  natural  religion.  The  partisans  of  all  sorts  of
opinions  will  be  interested  in  Ĕnding  that  a Mohammedan
author  writing  so  long  since  in  the  centre  of  Asia,  had  oc-
casion  to  approve  or  condemn  so  many  truths,  speculations
or  fancies  which  are  now  current  among  us  with  the  re-
putation  of  novelty.  Many  of  the  same  paradoxes  and
problems  that  startle  or  fascinate  in  the  nineteenth  century
are  here  discussed.  He  came  in  contact,  among  his  contem-
poraries,  withpersons  whomade  the  samegeneral  objections
to  natural  and  revealed  religion,  as  understood  by  Moham-
medans,  as  are  in  our  days  made  to  Christianity,  or  who
perverted  and  abused  the  religion  which  they  professedfor
their  own  ends,  in  the  same  manner  as  Christianity  is
abused  among  us.  And  he  engaged  with  earnestness  now
truthfully,  and  now  erroneously,  in  refuting  these  men.
His  usual  stand-point  in  discussion  is  equally  removed
from  the  most  extravagant  mysticism,  and  literal  and  for-
mal  orthodoxy.  He  attcmpts  a digniĔed  blending  of  rea-


10


Introduction .


son  aud  faith,  requiring  of  his  fellow  men  unfeigned  piety
in  the  temper  and  tone  of  an  evangelical  Christiau.  He
reminds  his  readers,  in  these  discourses,  that  they  are  not
Mussulmans  if  they  are  satished  with  merely  a nominal
faith?  and  treats  with  scorn  those  who  are  spiritualists  only
in  language  and  dress.

It  is  too  narrow  a view  to  adopt,  in  regard  to  a man  of
the  sublime  character  of  Ghazzali?  that  he  obtained  his
ideas  from  any  one  school  of  thinkers,  or  that  being
in  fellowship  with  the  Soofies?  that  he  was  merely  a
Soofi.  He  was  living  in  the  centre  of  Aryan  peoples  and
religions.  Hemay  have  had  his  doctrine  of  thefuture  life
shaped  by  Zoroaster,  and  have  been  inAueuced  by  the  mis-
sionaries  of  the  Buddhists.

The  practical  religion  tauglit  in  these  homilies  will  give
a favorable  opinion  of  the  state  of  mind  of  the  more  intelli-
gent  Mnssulmans.  They  contain  not  the  Mohammedanistn
of  the  creed  or  the  catechism,  but  of  the  closet  and  the
pulpit.  The  tenor  of  the  book  establishes  the  truth  of
Ibn  Khallikan5s  remark  in  his  Biographical  Dictionary  that
“ Ghazzali5s  ruling  passion  Was  making  public  exhorta-
tions.55

While  perusing  these  pages,  and  noticing  how  much  of
the  language  of  Ghazzali  corresponds  iu  its  representations
of  God,  of  a holy  life  and  of  eternity,  with  the  solemn  in-
structions  to  which  wc  have  listened  from  our  infancy,  we
may  think  of  the  magicians  who  imitated  the  miracles  of
Moses  with  their  enchantments.  Yet  assuredly  a vivid
and  respectful  interest  must  be  awakened  in  our  minds  for
the  races  and  nacions,  whose  ideas  of  their  relations  as  im-
mortal  beings  arc  so  serious  and  earnest.


Introduction .


11


The  translation  I have  endeavored  to  make  a close  trans-
cript  of  the  meaning  of  the  Turkish;  having  especially
sought  to  find  appropriate  equivalents  for  native  idioms.
I have  designated  the  chapter  and  verse  of  nearly  every
passage  quoted  from  the  Koran.  The  omissions  in  the
text,  which  are  made  apparent  by  signs,  are  limited  to
digressions  of  the  author,  to  repetitions  and  to  some  of  the
illustrations ; so  that  there  is  no  interruption  of  the  con-
tinuity  of  thought  in  the  themes  diseussed.  The  Turkish
edition  itself  was  but  a portion  of  the  original  work.  Two
or  three  notes  are  added,  either  explanatory  of  the  text  or
illustrative  of  the  author,  from  Oriental  sources.


THE


ALCHEMY  0F  HAPPINESS.


CHAPTER  I.

On  knowledge  of  the  soul,  AND  HOW  KNOWLEDGE  OF  TnE
SOUL  IS  THE  KEY  TO  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GoD.

O seeker  after  the  divine  mysteries ! know  thou  that
the  door  to  the  knowledge  of  God  will  be  opened  to  a man
first  of  all,  when  he  knows  his  own  soul,  and  understands
the  truth  about  his  own  spirit,  aecording  as  it  has  been  re-
vealed,  uhe  whoknows  hirnself  knowshisLordalso.”  And
God  proelaims  iu  his  holy  book : “ We  will  display  our

miracles  in  the  different  countries  of  the  world,  tillit  shall
be  demonstrated  to  them  that  the  Koran  is  the  truth/’ 1
that  is,  let  us  show  men  in  the  visible  world,  and  in  their
own  souls,  the  wonderfulness  of  our  works  and  the  perfec-
tion  of  our  power,  that  they  may  learn  to  know  that  the
Lord  God  is  Almighty  and  true,  and  that  everything  else
besides  is  vanity.

0 seeker  of  the  mysteries  ! since  there  is  nothing  nearer
to  thee  than  thyself,  and  that  still  with  thysoul  alone,thou
canst  not  discriminate  anything,  and  art  impotent  to  find
out  and  know  thyself,  in  what  way  canst  thou  become  ac-
quainted  with  anything  else,  and  with  that  which  is  even
separate  from  thyself ? And  how  should?st  thou  be  able  to
comprehend  God,  who  iu  his  nature  caunot  bc  compre-


i Bura  41 : 53.


3


14


Ghazzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


hended,  atid  of  whose  absolute  essence  it  is  not  possible
to  give  thee  any  explanation.  If  thou  should5st  say,  “I
perfectly  know  myself,”  we  reply,  that  we  have  no  doubt
that  what  you  are  acquainted  with  is  your  own  hand  and
foot,  with  your  eye  and  mouth,  and  animals  even  have  this
kind  of  knowledge.  You  know  also  that  if  you  are  hun-
gry,  your  stomach  craves  food,  and  that  if  you  are  cold,
you  desire  elothing;  but  other  animals  also  understand
these  things.

However,  that  knowledge  of  the  soul  which  leads  to  the
knowledge  of  God,  is  not  of  this  kind.  The  knowledge
which  you  need  to  possess  is,  to  know  what  you  are ; how
you  are  created;  whence  you  are;  for  what  you  are  here ;
whither  you  are  going  ; in  what  your  happiness  consists,
and  what  you  must  do  to  secure  it;  in  what  your  misery
consists,  and  what  you  must  do  to  avoid  it.  And  further,
your  internal  qualities  are  distributed  into  animal,  feroci-
ous,  demoniacal  and  angelic  qualities.  TTou  need  to  know,
therefore,  what  qualities  predominate  in  your  character,
and  in  the  predominance  of  which  your  true  happiness
consists.  If  your  qualities  are  chiefly  animal,  the  essence
of  which  is  to  eat  and  drink,  you  will  day  and  night  seek
after  these  things.  If  your  qualities  are  of  the  ferocious
kind,  the  essence  of  which  is  to  tear  and  rend,  to  injure
and  destroy,  you  will  act  accordingly.  If  you  are  endowed
chiefly  with  the  qualities  of  devils,  which  consist  in  evil
machinatious,  deceit  and  delusion,  then  you  should  know
aud  be  aware  of  it,  that  you  may  turn  towards  the  path  of
perfection.  And  if  you  possess  angelic  qualities,  whose
nature  it  is  to  worship  God  iu  sincerity  and  continually  to
awaitthe  vision  of  His  beauty,then  like  them  you  should  un-
ceasingly,  restingneither  day  or  night,  be  zealous  and  strive
thatyou  may  become  worthy  of  the  vision  of  the  Lord.  For
know,  O student  of  the  mysteries ! that  man  was  created
to  stand  at  the  door  of  service  iu  frailty  and  weakness,


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  qf  Happmess .


15


and  wait  for  the  opening  of  the  door  of  spiritual  union,  and
for  the  vision  of  beauty,  as  God  declares  in  his  holy  word  :
“I  have  not  created  the  genii  and  men  except  that  they
should  worship  me,5’1

These  qualities,  whether  animal,  or  ferocious  or  demo-
niacal  have  been  bestowed  upon  man,  that  by  their  means
the  body  might  be  adapted  to  be  a vehicle  for  the  spirit,  and
that  the  spirit,  by  means  of  the  body  which  is  its  vehicle,
while  here  in  this  temporary  home  of  earth,  might  seek  after
the  knowledgeand  loveof  God,  as  the  huntsman  would  seek
to  make  the  phoenix  and  the  griffiu  his  prey.  Then,  when  it
leaves  this  strange  land  for  the  region  of  spiritual  friend-
ship,  it  shall  be  worthy  to  partake  of  the  mystery  contained
in  the  invitation,  <center  in  peace,  O believers!??  2 and
which  is  in  the  homage,  “ Peace  is  the  word  they  shall
hear  from  the  merciful  Lord.553  People  in  general  suppose
that  this  refers  to  Paradise.  Woe  to  him  who  bas  no  por-
tion  in  this  knowledge ! There  is  great  danger  in  his  path.
The  way  of  faith  is  veiled  from  his  eyes.

Ifyou  wish,  0 seeker  of  the  way  ! to  know  your  own
soul,  know  that  the  blessed  and  glorious  God  created  you
of  two  things : the  one  is  a visible  body,  and  the  other  is  a
something  internal,  that  is  called  spirit  and  heart,  which
can  only  be  perceived  by  the  mind.  But  when  we  speak
of  heart,  we  do  not  mean  the  piece  of  flesh  which  is  in  the
left  side  of  the  breast  of  a man,  for  that  is  found  in  a dead
body  and  in  animals : it  may  be  seen  with  the  eyes,  and
belongs  to  the  visible  world.  That  heart,  which  is  em-
phatically  called  spirit,  does  not  belong  to  this  world,  and
although  it  has  come  to  this  world,  it  has  only  come  to  leave
it.  It  is  the  sovereign  of  the  body,  which  is  its  vehicle,
and  all  the  external  and  internal  organs  of  the  body  are  its
subjects.  Its  especial  attribute  is  to  know  God  and  to

'B.  51:50.  3 S.  50:33,  3 S.  3G  : 58.


16


GlnazzalVs  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


enjoy  the  vision  of  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  God.  The  in-
yitation  to  salvation  is  addressed  to  the  spirit.  The  com-
mandment  is  also  addressed  to  it,  for  it  is  capable  of
happiness  or  misery.  The  knowledge  of  what  it  is  in
reality,  is  the  key  to  the  knowledge  of  God.  Beloved,
strive  to  obtain  this  knowledge,  for  there  is  no  more  pre-
cious  jewel.  In  its  origin  it  comes  from  God,  and  again
returns  to  him.  It  has  come  hither  but  for  a time  for  in-
tercourse  and  action.

Be  sure,  0 seeker  after  knowledge ! that  it  is  impossible
to  ohtain  a knowledge  of  the  heart,  until  you  know  its
essence  and  its  true  nature,  its  faculties,  and  its  relations
with  its  faculties, — nor  until  you  know  its  attributes,  and
how  through  them  the  knowledge  of  God  is  obtained,  and
what  happiness  is,  and  how  happiness  is  to  be  secured.
Know  then,  that  the  existence  of  the  spirit  is  evident  and
is  not  involved  iu  doubt.  Still,  it  is  not  body,  which  is
found  in  corpses  and  in  animals  generally.  If  a person
with  his  eyes  wide  open  should  look  upon  the  world  and
upon  his  own  body,  and  then  shut  his  eyes,  everything
would  be  veiled  from  his  view,  so  that  he  could  not  see
even  his  own  body.  But  the  existence  of  his  spirit  would
not  be  at  the  same  tirae  shut  out  from  his  view.  Again,
at  death,  the  body  turns  to  earth,  but  the  spirit  undergoes
no  corruption.  Still  it  is  uot  permitted  to  us  to  know
what  the  spirit  is  in  its  real  nature  and  in  its  essence,  as  God
says  in  his  Holy  Word:  “ They  will  ask  you  about  the

spirit.  Answer,  the  spirit  is  a creation  by  decree  of  the
Lord.”1  The  spirit  belongs  to  the  world  of  decrees.

All  existence  is  of  two  kinds,  one  is  of  the  world  of  de-
crees,  and  the  other  is  of  the  world  of  creation.  “ To  him
belongscreation  and  decree.”2  The  matters  whichbelong
to  the  world  of  decrees  are  those  which  have  not  superlicies.


1 S.  17:  87.


aS.  7:  53.


GhazzaWs  Alchem.y  of  Ilappiness.  17

quantity,  or  form : to  the  world  of  creation  bclong  those
which  do  have  both  qnan ti ty  and  form.  The  creation
spoken  of  in  the  verse  is  in  the  sense  of  foreordination  and
not  of  actual  formation.  Hence  those  who  say  that  the
spirit  is  created,  and  is  also  from  all  eternity  are  in  error,
for  nothing  is  eternal  except  the  being  and  attributes  of
God.

Those  also,  who  say  that  the  spirit  is  bnt  an  accident,
are  in  error,  for  the  spirit  exists  by  itself  in  the  body,  and
an  accident  is  that  which  snbsists  with  something  else.
And  those  who  say  that  the  spirit  is  matter  are  in  error,
for  matter  is  that  which  can  be  divided,  and  spirit  is  not
susceptible  of  division.  There  is  spirit,  beloved,  which
is  called  animal  spirit,  which  is  susceptible  of  division.  It
is  found  in  animals.  But  that  spirit,  which  has  the  pro-
perty  of  knowing  God,  and  which  is  called  the  heart,  is
not  fonnd  in  beasts,  nor  is  it  matter  or  an  accident.  The
heart,  on  the  contrary,  has  been  created  with  angelic  quali-
ties.  It  is  a substance  of  which  itis  difficnlt  to  apprehend
the  essence.  The  law  does  not  permit  it  to  be  explained,
but  there  is  no  occasion  for  the  stndent  being  acqnainted
with  it  at  the  outset  of  his  jonrney.  That  which  is  neces-
sary  to  the  student  is  pious  ardor  and  zeal,  and  this  mnst
be  called  into  exercise  in  perfection.  It  is  God  who  gra-
ciously  teaclies  the  student  what  spirit  is,  as  we  find  in  the
Iloly  Book:  “We  will  direct  in  onr  way,  all  those  who

shall  strive  to  propagate  our  worship.”1  And  if  a man  does
not  strive  earnestly  for  the  faith,  there  is  no  use  of  explain-
ing  to  him  the  essence  of  spirit.  It  is,  however,  lawful  to
explain  to  him  the  instruments  by  which  it  operates.

Know,  O seeker  after  the  divine  mysteries  ! thatthebody
is  the  kingdom  of  the  heart,  and  that  in  the  body  there  are
rnany  forces  in  contrariety  with  the  heart,  as  God  speaks


1 S.  39  : 69


18


Ghazzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


in  his  Holy  Word : “ And  what  shall  teach  thee  the  forces

of  thy  Lord?5?  The  heart  was  destined  to  acquire  a know-
ledge  of  God,  in  which  its  happiness  consists.  But  we
cannot  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  unless  we  under-
stand  the  works  of  God.

The  works  of  God  are  apprehended  by  the  senses,  which
are  iive,  hearing,  sight,  taste,  smell  and  touch.  For  such
an  arrangement  of  the  senses,  there  was  also  need  of  a
body . The  body  itself  is  composed  of  four  diyerse  elements,
water,  earth,  air  and  fire.  Being,  therefore,  liable  to  decay,
itisin  continual  danger  of  perishing  from  the  external  and
internal  enemies  that  perpetnally  assail  it.  Its  external
enemies,  are  such  as  wild  beasts,  drowning  and  conAagra-
tions ; its  internal  enemies,  such  as  hunger  and  thirst.  F or
the  purpose  of  resisting  these,  it  was  in  want  of  yarious  in-
ternal  and  external  forces,  such  as  the  hand  and  foot,  sight
and  hearing,  food  and  drink.  And  in  this  connection,  for
eating  and  drinking,  it  is  in  want  of  internal  and  external
instruments  like  the  hand,  the  mouth,  the  stomach,  the
powers  of  appetite  and  digestion.  In  addition  to  these  in-
struments,  there  was  need  of  raeans  to  gnide  in  their  occa-
sionaluse,  that  is,  for  the  internal  senses.  These  are  five,
the  faculties  of  perception,  rehection,  memory,  recollec-
tion  and  imagination.  Their  home  is  in  the  brain,  and
each  has  a specific  function,  as  is  well  known  to  the  learned.
If  to  any  one  of  all  these  faculties  aud  iustruments  an  in-
jury  occurs,  the  actions  of  man  are  defective.  Now  all
these  are  the  agents  of  the  heart  and  subject  to  its  rule.
If,  for  example,  the  heart  gives  permission  to  the  ear,  hear-
ing  results;  if  it  gives  permission  to  the  eye,  there  follows
sight;  if  it  gives  permission  to  the  foot,  there  is  move-
ment.  All  the  other  members  are  obedient  in  the  same
manner  to  the  commands  of  the  heart.  The  divine  plan
in  all  this  arrangement  is,  that  while  the  members  preserve


»8.  74:  U


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


19


the  body  for  a few  daye  frora  harm,  the  heart,  in  its  vehicle
tbe  body,  shouldpureueits  bu8ines8of  cultivating  the  seeds
of  happiness  for  eternity  and  prepare  for  its  journey  to  its
native  country.  So  long  ae  the  various  force8  of  the  body  are
obedient  to  the  dictates  of  the  heart,  in  like  manner  as  the
angels  obey  in  the  presence  of  God,  no  coutrariety  of  action
can  arise  among  them.

Know,  0 student  of  wisdom  ! that  the  body,  which  is  the
kingdom  of  the  heart,  resembles  a great  city.  The  hand,
the  foot,  the  mouth  and  the  other  members  resemble
the  people  of  the  various  trades.  Desire  is  a standard
bearer;  anger  is  a superintendent  of  the  city,  the  heart  is
its  sovereign,  and  reason  is  the  vizier.  The  sovereign
needs  the  service  of  all  the  inhabitants.  But  desire,  the
standard  bearer,  is  a liar,  vain  and  ambitious.  He  is  always
ready  to  do  the  contrary  of  what  reason,  the  vizier,  com-
mands.  He  strives  to  appropriate  to  himself  whatever  he
sees  in  the  city,  which  is  the  body.  Anger,  the  superin-
teudent,  is  rebellious  and  corrupt,  quick  and  passionate.
He  is  always  ready  to  be  enraged,  to  spill  blood,  and  to
blast  one’s  reputation.  If  the  sovereign,  the  heart,  should
invariably  consult  with  reason,  his  vizier,  and,  when  desire
was  transgre8sing,  should  give  to  wrath  to  have  power
over  him  (yet,  withoutgivinghim  full  liberty,  should  make
him  angry  in  subjection  to  reason,  the  vizier,  so  that  pass-
ing  all  bounds  he  should  not  stretch  out  his  hand  upon  the
kingdom),  there  would  then  be  an  equilibrium  in  the  con-
dition  of  the  kingdom,  and  all  the  members  would  perform
tbe  functions  for  which  they  were  created,  their  service
would  be  accepted  at  the  mercy  seat,  and  they  would  ob-
tain  eternal  felicity.  . .

If  you  desire,  inquirer  for  the  way,  with  thanktulness
for  these  mercies,  to  obtain  eternal  happincss  in  the  future
mansions,  the  heart  must  enthrone  itself  like  a sovereign
in  its  capital,  the  body,  must  stand  at  the  door  of  service
and  direct  its  prayers  to  the  gate  of  eternal  truth,  seeking


20


Ghazzali'$  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


for  the  beauty  of  the  divinity.  It  must  take  reason  for  its
vizier,  desire  for  its  standard  bearer,  anger  to  be  the
superintendent  of  the  city,  and  taking  the  senses  of  reason
as  its  spies,  it  must  make  each  one  of  them  responsible  in
its  sphere.  The  perceptive  faculties  which  are  foremost
in  the  brain,  it  must  make  to  be  chiefs  of  the  spies,  that
they  may  convey  to  the  spies  notices  of  what  occurs  in  the
world.  The  faculty  of  memory,  which  is  next  in  orderin
the  brain,it  must  use  as  a receptacle  in  which  it  may  trea-
sure  up  whatever  is  noticed  by  the  spies,  and,  as  occasion
requires,  may  inform  reason,  the  vizier.  The  vizier,  in
accordance  with  the  information  received,  will  administer
the  kingdom.  When  he  sees  any  one  of  the  soldiers  re-
volting  and  following  his  own  passions,  he  will  representit
to  the  sovereign,  that  he  may  be  controlled  and  conquered.
He  must  not,  however,  be  destroyed,  for  each  one  of  us
has  received,  from  his  original  country,  a deiiuite  commis-
sion,  and  in  that  case  this  service  must  remain  unfulfilled.
But,  alas  ! if  the  heart  should  swerve  from  its  sovereignty,
and  not  make  use  of  reason  as  its  vizier,  and  should  be  re-
duced  by  the  standard  bearer,  desire,  and  the  superin-
tendent,  anger,  all  the  forces  would  then  follow  in  the  train
of  desire  and  anger,  the  kingdom  would  fall  into  disorder,
and  everlasting  ruin  would  be  the  result.  . . .

If  you  inquire,  0 student ! how  it  is  known  that  the
heart  of  man  has  been  created  in  aecordance  with  the  quali-
ties  of  angels,  seeing  that  the  most  of  the  qualities  and
attributes  of  angels  are  foreign  to  it,  I reply,  you  know  that
there  is  not,  in  truth,  any  creature  on  the  face  of  the  earth
more  noble  than  man,  and  that  it  belongs  to  the  diguity
and  perfection  of  every  creature,  to  work  out  persever-
ingly  that  service  for  which  it  was  created.  The  ass,  for
instance,  was  created  to  bear  burdens.  If  he  carries  his
load  well,  witliout  stnmbling  or  falling,  or  if  he  does  uot
throw  off  his  load,  his  qualities  are  in  perfection,  aud  his
service  is  accepted.  The  horse  was  designed  also  for  war


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


21


and  military  expeditions,  and  has  streugth  to  carry  bur-
dens.  If  he  performs  his  duty  well,  in  time  of  war,  in
running,  Aeeing  and  going  to  meet  the  enemy,  his  service
is  accepted,  and  he  will  be  treated  with  attention  in  his
accoutrements,  grooming  and  feeding,  But  if  he  performs
his  service  imperfectly,  a pack  saddle  will  be  put  on  his
back,  as  on  the  ass,  from  day  to  day  he  will  be  employed  as
a beast  of  burden,  and  he  will  be  carelessly  and  deĔciently
provided  with  food,  and  poorly  taken  care  of.

Besides,  beloved ! if  man  had  been  created  only  to  eat
and  drink,  it  would  follow  that  animals  are  of  greater  worth
and  excellenee  than  man ; for  they  can  eat  and  driuk  more
than  man  can,  and  they  have  usetul  services  devolved  upon
them  of  drawing  burdens,  tilling  the  ground,  and  giving
meat,  butter  aud  milk  for  food.  If  also  man  had  been
created  to  fight,  kill  and  domineer,  it  would  follow  that
beasts  of  prey  are  nobler  than  he,  for  they  are  mightier  in
their  ferocity  and  their  power  of  subjugating  other  animals,
There  are,  moreover,  many  animals  of  manifest  utility,  as
the  dog  to  watch  and  hunt,  and  the  skins  of  some  of  them
for  clothing.  It  follows,  theretore,  that  man  was  not
created  for  these  things,  but  rather  to  serve  God  and  to
grow  in  the  knowledge  of  him.

It  is  plain  that  mind,  discernment  and  reason  were  be-
stowed  upon  man,  that  when  he  looks  upon  the  world  and
sees  in  every  object  iilustrations  of  various  forms  of  perfec-
tiou,  and  much  to  excite  his  wonder,  he  might  turn  his
attention  from  the  work  of  the  artist,  to  the  artist  himself;
from  the  thing  formed  to  hirn  that  formed  it ; that  he  might
comprehend  his  own  excessive  frailty  and  weakness,  and
the  perfection  of  the  wisdom  and  power,  yea,  of  all  the
attributes  of  the  eternal  Creator,  and  that,  without  ceasing,
he  might  humbly  supplicate  acceptance  in  his  frailty  and
weakness  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  might  seek  to
draw  near  to  the  Kiug  of  kings,  and  fiually  obtain  rest  in

4


22


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


the  home  of  the  faithful,  wbere  the  angels  are  in  the  pre-
sence  of  God.  If  men  refuse  to  recognize  their  own  dig-
nity,  if  they  neglect  their  duty  and  prefer  the  qualities  of
devils  and  beasts  of  prey,  they  will  also  possess,  in  the  future
world,  the  qualities  of  beasts  of  prey,  and  will  be  judged
with  the  devils.  Our  refuge  is  in  God !

Know,  thou  seeker  of  divine  mysteries  ! that  there  is  no
end  to  the  wonderful  operations  of  the  heart.  For,  to
pursue  the  same  subject,  the  dignity  of  the  heart  is  of  two
kinds;  one  kind  is  by  means  of  knowledge,  and  the  other
through  the  exertion  of  divine  power.  Its  dignity  by
means  of  knowledge  is  also  of  two  kinds.  The  first  is
external  knowledge,  which  every  one  understands:  the
second  kindis  veiled  and  cannot  be  understood  by  all,  and
is  extremely  precious.  That  which  we  have  designated  as
external,  refers  to  that  faculty  of  the  heart  by  which  the
sciences  of  geometry,  medicine,  astronomy,  numbers,  the
science  of  law  and  all  the  arts  are  understood;  and
although  the  heart  is  a thing  which  cannot  be  divided,
still  the  knowledge  of  all  the  world  exists  in  it.  All  the
world  indeed,  in  comparison  with  it,  is  as  a grain  compared
with  the  sun,  or  as  a drop  in  the  ocean.-  In  a second,  by
the  power  of  thought,  the  soul  passes  from  the  abyss  to  the
highest  heaven,  and  from  the  east  to  the  west.  Though
on  the  earth,  it  knows  the  Iatitude  of  the  stars  and  their
distances.  It  knows  the  course,  the  size  aud  the  peculiari-
ties  of  the  sun.  It  knows  the  nature  and  cause  of  the
clouds  and  the  rain,  the  lightning  and  the  thunder.  It
ensnares  the  fish  from  the  depths  of  the  sea,  and  the  bird
from  the  end  of  heaven.  By  knowledge  it  subdues  the
elephant,  the  camel  and  the  tiger.  All  these  kinds  of
knowledge,  it  acquires  with  its  internal  and  exterual  seuses.

The  most  wonderful  thing  of  all  is,  that  there  is  a
window  in  the  heart  from  whence  it  surveys  the  world.
This  is  called  the  invisible  world,  the  world  of  intelli-


GhazzaUs  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


23


gence,  or  the  spiritual  world.  People  iu  getieral  look
only  at  the  visible  world,  which  is  called  also  the  present
world,  the  sensible  world  and  the  material  world ; their
knowledge  of  it  also  is  trivial  and  limited.  And  there
is  also  a wmdow  in  the  heart  from  whence  it  surveys
the  intelligible  world.  There  are  two  arguments  to
prove  that  there  are  such  windows  in  the  heart.  One  of
the  argumeuts  is  derived  from  dreams.  When  an  indivi~
dual  goes  to  sleep,  these  windows  remain  open  and  the  in-
dividual  is  able  to  perceive  events  which  will  befall  him
from  the  invisible  world  or  from  the  hidden  table  of  de-
crees,1  aud  the  result  corresponds  exactly  with  the  vision.
Or  he  sees  a similitude,  and  those  who  are  skilled  in  the
science  of  interpretation  of  dreamsunderstand  the  meaning.
But  the  explanation  of  this  science  of  interpretation  would
be  too  long  for  this  treatise.  The  heart  resembles  a pure
mirror,  you  must  know,  in  this  particular,  that  when  a man
falls  asleep,  when  his  senses  are  closed,  and  when  the  heart,
free  and  pure  from  blameable  aAections,  is  confronted  with
the  preserved  tablet,  then  the  tablet  reAects  upon  the  heart
the  real  states  and  hidden  forms  inscribed  upon  it.  In  that
state  the  heart  sees  most  wonderful  forms  and  combiua-
tions.  But  when  the  heart  is  not  free  from  impurity,  or
when,  on  waking,  it  busies  itself  with  things  of  seuse,  the
side  towards  the  tablet  will  be  obscured,  and  it  can  view
nothing.  For,  although  in  sleep  the  seuses  are  blunted,
the  imaginative  faculty  is  not,  but  preserves  the  forms  re-
Aected  upon  the  mirror  of  the  heart.  But  as  the  percep-
tion  does  not  take  place  by  means  of  the  external  senses,
but  only  in  the  imagination,  the  heart  does  not  see  them
with  absolute  clearness,  but  sees  only  a phautom.  But  in
death,  as  the  senses  are  connpletely  separated  and  the  veil
of  the  body  is  removed,  the  lieart  can  eontemplate  the  iu-


J Sce  note  A.


24


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


visible  worlcl  and  its  hidden  mysteries?  without  a veil,  just
as  lightuing  or  the  celestial  rays  impress  the  external  eye*

The  second  proof  of  the  existence  of  these  windows  in
the  heart,  is  that  no  indxvidua]  is  destitute  of  these  spiritual
susceptibilities  and  of  the  taculty  of  thought  and  reAection.
For  instance  every  individual  knows  by  inspiration,  things
which  he  has  neither  seen  nor  heard,  though  he  knows  not
from  whence  or  by  what  means  he  understands  them.
Still,  notwithstanding  the  heart  belongs  to  the  invisible
world,  so  long  as  it  is  absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of
the  sensible  world,  it  is  shut  out  and  restrained  from  con-
templating  the  invisible  and  spiritual  world.

Think  not,  thou  seeker  after  the  divine  mysteries ! that
the  window  of  the  heart  is  never  opened  except  in  sleep
and  after  death.  On  the  contrary,  if  a person  calls  into
exercise,  in  perfection,  holy  zeal  and  austerities,  and  puri-
fies  his  heart  from  the  defilement  of  blameable  affections,
and  then  slts  down  in  a retired  spot,  abandons  the  use  of
his  external  senses,  and  occupies  himself  with  calling  out
“ 0 God  ! O God  ! J’  his  heart  will  come  into  harmony  with
the  invisible  world,  he  will  no  longer  receive  notions  from
the  material  world,  and  nothing  will  be  present  in  hisheart
but  the  exalted  God.  In  tliis  revelation  of  the  invisible
world,  the  windows  of  the  heart  are  opened,  and  Avhat
others  may  have  seen  in  a dream,  he  in  this  state  sees  in
reality.  The  spirits  of  angels  and  prophets  are  manifested
to  him  and  he  holds  intercourse  with  them.  The  hidden
things  of  earth  and  heaveu  are  uncovered  to  him,  and  to
whomsoever  these  things  are  revealed,  mighty  wonders  are
shown,  that  are  beyond  description.  As  the  prophet  of
God  says : “I  turned  towards  the  earth,  and  I saw  the
east  and  the  west.”  And  God  says  in  his  word : uAnd
thus  we  caused  Abraham  to  see  the  kingdom  of  heaven
and  earth,”1  which  is  an  example  of  this  kind  of  revelation.


1 s.  C : 75.


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  JTappiness .


25


Probably  the  knowledge  of  all  the  prophets  was  obtained
in  this  way,  for  it  was  not  obtained  by  learning.  . . .

When  the  heart  is  free  from  worldly  lusts,  from  the
animosities  of  society  and  from  the  distraction  occasioned
by  the  senses,  the  vision  of  God  is  possible.  And  this
course  is  adopted  by  the  Mystics.1  It  is  also  the  path
followed  by  the  prophets.  But  it  is  permitted  also  to  ac-
quire  the  practice  of  it  by  learning,  and  this  is  the  way
adopted  by  the  theologians,  This  is  also  an  exalted  way,
though  in  comparison  with  the  former,  its  results  are  in-
signihcant  and  contracted.  Many  distinguished  men  have
attained  these  revelations  by  experience  and  the  demon-
stration  of  reasoning.  Still  let  every  one  who  fails  of
obtaining  this  knowledge  either  by  means  of  purity  of  de-
sire  or  of  demonstration  of  reasoning,  take  care  and  not
deny  its  existence  to  those  who  are  possessed  of  it,  so  that
they  may  not  be  repelled  from  the  low  degree  they  have
attained,  and  their  conduct  become  a snare  to  them  in  the
way  of  truth.  These  things  which  we  have  mentioned  con-
stitute  the  wonders  of  the  heart  and  show  its  grandeur.

Think  not  that  these  discoveries  of  truth  are  limited  to
the  prophets  alone.  On  the  contrary  every  man  in  his
essential  nature  is  endowed  with  attributes  rendering  him
capable  of  participating  in  the  sarae  discoveries.  What
God  says,  “Am  I not  your  Lord  ?” 2 refers  to  this  qualitv.,
And  the  holy  saying  of  the  prophet  of  God : “ Every  man
is  born  with  tlie  nature  of  Islamism;  but  his  ancestors
practised  Judaism,  Nazarenism  or  Magianism,”  is  an  indi-
cation  of  the  same  thing.

The  heart  of  man  while  in  the  spiritnal  world  knew  its
maker  and  creator;  it  had  mingled  with  angels  and  knew
for  what  service  it  was  created ; and  in  the  assembly  where
they  said,  “Yes,”  it  was  intoxicated  as  with  wine  at  the


1 See  note  C.


’S.  7:  171.


26


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness,


interrogation,  “Am  I not  your  Lord?J’  As  at  that  mo-
ment,  it  was  seen  with  the  eye  of  certainty,  no  person  had
any  doubt  on  the  subject,  as  God  says  in  his  holy  word:
“If  you  ask  them,  who  created  the  heayens  and  the  earth,
they  will  answer  thee,  the  wise  and  holy  God.>u  All  the
prophets  were  apparently  of  the  same  nature  as  other  men
without  any  difference,  as  we  find  in  God7s  holy  word :
“ Say,  I am  a man  like  you : it  was  revealed  to  me.”2
Afterwards  the  heart  descended  from  the  world  of  divine
union  to  this  house  of  separation,  from  that  assembly  of
love  .to  this  station  of  sorrow,  and  from  the  spiritual  to  the
material,  and  entering  within  the  curtain  of  the  senses,  it
became  occupied  with  the  care  of  the  body  and  was  over-
come  by  the  animal  affections  and  materiai  plcasures.  The
heart  of  man,  veiled  with  the  garments  of  heedlessness,
forgot  the  assembly  with  which  it  had  been  familiar,  and
imagining  that  this  miserable  place  was  to  be  its  mansion
of  rest,  it  chose  to  establish  itself  here  in  this  world  of
perdition,  as  if  this  was  its  home.  Still  the  veil  of  hecd-
lessness  disappeared  from  the  eyes  of  those  to  whom  the
grace  and  guidance  of  the  Eternal  and  unchangeable  gave
aid  and  support,  and  the  discovery  of  the  invisible  world
was  not  coucealed  from  the  view  of  some  of  tliose  who
came  into  this  material  world,  but  was  anew  revealed  to
thein,  after  a measure  of  exertion  of  spiritual  ardor.

To  whomsoever  this  revelation  has  been  vouchsafed,  if
it  directs  him  to  reform  the  world,  to  invite  the  nations  to
turn  to  God,  and  to  a peculiar  way  of  life,  that  person  is
called  a prophet,  and  his  way  of  life  is  called  a law;  and
that  inAuence  which  proceeds  from  him,  which  transcends
what  is  ordinary,  is  called  a miracle.  If  he  has  not  been
appointed  to  invite  the  nations,  but  worships  in  accordance
with  the  law  of  another,  he  is  called  a saint,  and  that  which


'S,  43:  8.


3S.,  18:  110.


Ghazzali’s  Alchcmy  of  Ilappiness .


27


proceeds  from  him,  which  transcends  what  is  ordinary,  is
called  a manifestation  of  grace . The  miracle  performed  by
a saint  is  accounted  a miracle  of  that  prophet  whose  law
he  folIows.  He  who  has  received,  by  whatever  means,  a
revelation  of  the  invisible  world,  is  capable  of  being  or-
dained  to  the  office  of  a prophet.  And  if  he  is  not  ap-
pointed  by  God,  the  reason  will  be  either,  that  at  the  time
the  existing  law  had  been  newly  revealed5  and  that  there
was  no  occasion  for  a prophet,  or  else  that  there  may  be  a
peculiarity  in  prophets  which  is  not  found  in  the  saints.
It  follows  that  it  is  our  duty  not  to  deny  either  the  saint-
ship  or  the  miracles  of  the  saints,  but  to  acknowledge  them
as  real.

You  should  be  aware,  however,  that  this  alchemy  of
happiness,  that  is,  the  knowledge  of  God,  which  is  the  oc-
casion  of  the  revelation  of  truth,  cannot  be  acquired  with-
out  spiritual  self-denial  and  effort.  TJnless  a man  has
reached  perfeetiou  and  the  rank  of  Superior,  nothing  will
be  revealed  to  him,  except  in  cases  of  special  diviuc  grace
and  merciful  providence,  and  this  occurs  very  rarely.  Hor,
except  by  divine  condescension,  is  revelation  obtained  even
by  all  who  by  effort  reach  the  rank  of  Superior.  And
whosoever  wonld  attain  holiness  can  only  reach  it  by  the
path  of  difficulty.

You  have  now  learned,  student  of  the  divine  mysteides,
the  dignity  of  the  heart  through  knowledge,  and  what  kind
of  knowledge  it  possesses.  N ow  listen  and  learn  its  dignity
through  divine  power  and  on  account  of  the  greatness  of
which  it  is  capable,  that  you  may  see  how  precious  you  are
in  yourself,  and  yet  how  vile  and  contemptible  you  make
yourself  by  your  own  choice.  Know  then,  that  the  heart
is  endowed  with  properties  like  those  of  angels  and  such
as  are  not  found  in  animals ; and  just  as  the  material  world
is  subjected  by  divine  permission  to  the  angels,  and  wlien
God  wills  it,  the  angels  send  forth  the  winds,  cause  rain  to


28


GhazzaUs  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


fa.ll,  bring  forth  the  embryo  in  animals,  shape  their  forms,
cause  seeds  to  sprout  in  the  earth  and  plants  to  grow,
many  legions  of  angels  being  appointed  to  this  service,  so
ako  the  heart  of  man  being  created  with  angelic  proper-
ties  must  have  induence  and  power  over  the  material  world.
In  mau’s  own  body,  which  is  peculiarly  his  own  world,  its
control  and  induence  are  very  evident.  The  haud,  for
example,  does  not  in  writing  move  of  itself,  but  depends
for  motion  on  volition  proceeding  from  the  heart.  And  in
eating,  it  is  the  heart  which  by  an  exertion  of  its  will,  causes
moisture  to  rise  in  the  mouth  from  under  the  tongue,  to
mix  with  the  food  that  it  may  be  swallowed  and  digested.
These  facts  clearly  substantiate  the  dominion  and  control
of  the  heart,  aud  the  subordination  of  the  body.

Know  also,  that  if  the  heart  should  not  be  tarnished  with
the  rust  of  rebellion,  and  if  the  animal  and  ferocious  quali-
ties  should  not  be  dominant,  that  it  would  be  capable,  on
account  of  the  presence  iu  it  of  angelic  properties,  of  mani-
festing  this  same  inAuence  over  other  bodies.  If  it  should
look  upon  a lion  or  tiger  with  severity,  they  would  become
weak  and  submissive.  If  it  should  look  with  kindness
upon  one  who  is  sick,  his  inhrmity  might  be  changed  to
health.  If  it  should  look  upon  the  vigorous  with  majesty,
they  might  become  infirm.  The  realty  of  the  existeuce  of
these  iuAuences  is  known  both  by  reasou  and  experience.
Sorcery  with  the  eyes,  is  of  this  kind  of  power.  If  for  ex-
ample,  a man  of  a malicious  disposition  look  upon  some
little  thing  with  envy,  and  if  while  he  is  looking,  the  de-
struction  of  the  object  should  come  into  his  mind,  an  influ-
ence  upon  it  may  be  observed  immediately,  aud  directly  or
after  a while  that  object  will  be  destroyed : the  prophet  of
God  has  said : “ the  eye  brings  man  to  the  grave  and  the
camel  to  the  seething  pot.?5

In  whomsoever  these  inAuences  are  showu  to  have  power,
if  he  occasious  misery  in  the  exereise  of  this  power,  he  is


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


29


designated  a sorcerer.  Although  as  has  beeu  seen,  the
power  of  performing  signs,  miracles  and  sorceries  belongs
to  the  heart  when  its  faculties  are  in  perfect  operation,
yet  there  are  important  destinctionsbetween  these  powers.
And  whoeyer  is  of  a narrow  mind  will  not  be  able  to  ap-
preciate  that  signs  and  miracles  are  inhuences  proceeding
from  the  heart  of  man,  unless  he  should  learn  it  by  exter-
nal  teaching.

The  heart  has  dominion  and  control  through  three  chan-
nels.  One  is  through  yisions,  by  whieh  revelations  are
made  to  all  men.  But  the  kind  of  mysteries  generally  re-
vealed  to  people  in  visions,  are  revealed  to  prophets  and
saints  in  the  outward  world.  The  second  kind  is  through
the  dominion  which  the  heart  exercises  over  its  own  body,
a quality,  which  is  possessed  by  all  men  in  general,  though
prophets  and  saints  for  the  good  of  the  community,  possess
the  same  power  over  other  bodies  than  their  owu.  The
third  source  of  dominion  of  the  heart  is  through  knowledge.
The  mass  of  men  obtain  it  by  instruction  and  learning,  but
it  is  bestowed  by  God  upon  prophets  and  saints  directly,
without  the-  mediums  of  learning  and  instruction.  It  is
possible  also  for  persons  of  pure  miuds  to  acquire  a know-
ledge  of  some  arts  and  sciences  without  instruction,  and  it
is  also  possible  that  some  persons  should  have  all  things
opened  up  to  them  by  the  will  of  God.  This  kind  of  know-
ledge  is  called  Uinfused  and  illuminated,’5  as  God  says  in
his  word  : “ we  have  illuminated  him  with  our  know-
ledge.”1  These  three  specialities  are  all  of  them  found  in
certain  measure  in  some  men,  in  others  two  of  them  are
found,  and  in  others,  only  one  is  found : but  whenever  the
three  are  found  in  the  same  person,  he  belongs  to  the  rank
of  prophets  or  of  the  greatest  of  the  saints.  In  our  Lord
the  prophet  Mohainmed  Mustafa,  these  three  specialities

1 S.,  18  : 04.


4


80


Ghcizzali9s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


existed  in  perfection.  The  Lord  in  bestowing  these  three
properties  upon  certain  individuals,  designates  them  to
exhort  the  nations  and  to  be  prophets  of  the  people.  To
every  man  there  is  given  a certain  portiou  of  each  one
of  these  pecnliarities,  to  serve  as  a pattern.

Man  cannot  comprehend  states  of  being  which  transcend
his  own  nature.  Hence  none  but  the  great  God  himself
can  comprehend  God,  as  we  have  shown  in  our  Coramen-
tary  upon  the  u Hames  of  God.,?  So  also  the  prophets  can-
not  be  comprehended  by  any  but  the  prophets  themselves.
No  person,  in  short,  can  understand  any  individual  who
belongs  to  a scale  of  rank  above  him.  It  is  possible  that
there  is  a peculiarity  in  prophets,  of  which  no  pattern  or
model  is  found  in  other  persons,  and  therefore,  we  are  in-
capable  of  understanding  them.  If  we  knew  not  what  a
vision  is,  and  an  individual  should  say  to  us,  that  a man,
at  a moment  when  he  can  neither  move,  see  or  hear,  can
perceive  events  which  are  to  occur  at  a future  period,  and
yet  might  not  be  able  to  perceive  the  same  wliile  walking,
listening  or  looking,  we  should  not  in  any  wise  be  able  to
persuade  ourselves  of  the  truth  of  it,  as  God  says  in  his
Holy  word : u They  treat  as  a lie  that  wliich  they  cannot
comprehend  with  their  knowledge.551  And  you,  do  you
not  see  that  he  who  comes  blind  into  the  world,  does  not
understand  the  pleasure  which  is  derived  from  seeing?
Let  us  not  regard,  therefore,  as  impossible  all  those  states
ascribed  to  the  prophets  which  we  cannot  understand : for
they  are  the  accepted  and  praiseworthy  servants  of  God.

From  all  which  has  been  said,  seeker  after  the  divine
mysteries,  thou  hast  learned  something  of  the  diguity  of
the  nature  of  man,  and  that  the  way  of  the  mystics  is  holy
and  honorable.  But  I have  heard  that  the  mystics  say
that  external  knowledge  is  a veil  upon  the  way  to  God,  and


1 s.,  10  : 40.


Ghazzalis  Alchemy  of  Tlapjnness.


31


a hindrance  in  the  journey  to  the  truth.  Take  care  and  do
not  deny  that  they  are  correct  in  what  they  say.  For?  ex-
ternal  knowledge  is  derived  from  the  seusuous  world,  and
all  objects  of  sense  are  a hindrance  to  him  who  is  occupied
with  spiritual  truth;  for  whoever  is  attending  to  sensual
objects,  indicates  that  his  mind  is  preoceupied  with  exter-
nal  properties.  And  it  is  impossible  that  he  who  would
walk  in  the  way  of  truth,  should  be  for  a moment  unem-
ployed  in  meditation,  upon  obtaiuing  spiritual  uuion  and
the  vision  of  beauty.

Know,  student  of  the  divine  mysteries,  that  the  heart  is
like  a reservoir  into  which  five  streams  flow : these  streams
at  one  time  run  clear,  and  at  another,  turbid,  and  hence  the
bottom  of  the  reservoir  contains  much  mud.  If  a person
wish  to  cleanse  the  reservoir  and  to  get  rid  of  the  mud  in
the  bottom,"he  must  first  dam  up  the  course  of  the  running
streams,  and  then  stir  up  and  put  in  motion  the  mud,  and
until  the  muddy  water  has  been  carried  oft’  by  the  pure
water  that  gushes  up  at  the  bottom  of  the  reservoir,  he
will  uot  allow  any  other  water  to  ruu  in.  Kow  the  exter-
nal  senses  resemble  those  running  streams,  from  which
various  kinds  of  knowledge,  notions  and  prejudices  pro-
ceed  to  the  heart,  of  which  some  are  pure  and  purifying,
and  some  are  corrupt  and  corrupting,  and  until  these  have
been  dammed  up,  the  windows  of  the  heart  cannot  be  un-
covered  so  that  the  illumiuating  knowledge  from  God  can
be  revealed  to  it.

If  a person  possessing  great  knowledge  of  the  outward
world,  should  use  hisknowledge  as  a means  ofprogressin
the  way  of  truth,  instead  of  being  satisfied  with  such  dis-
putes  as  of  buying  and  selling,  marrying  and  divorcing,
and  should  be  assiduous  in  gaining  divine  knowledge,
which  is  the  end  of  all  other  knowledge,  it  is  all  well  and
good.  His  knowledge  of  the  outward  world  will  givehim
strength  in  his  course,  and  will  serve  as  a guidc  to  him  iu


32


Ghazzali’s  Alchewy  of  Happiness .


the  way  to  eternal  truth.  For  if  the  pilgrim  do  not  un-
derstand  the  grounds  of  the  respect  due  to,  and  the  law-
fulness  ofhis  food  and  drink,  his  dwelling  andhis  clothing,
if  he  do  not  understand  the  causes  which  impair  or  render
complete  acts  of  purihcation  and  devotion,  what  has  a
tendency  to  give  strength  to  the  blameable  affections  of  the
soul,  and  what  is  their  nature  and  their  remedy,  he  can  de-
rive  no  advantage  from  the  sciences  of  spiritual  exercise,
discoveryand  revelatiou.  In  short  toanignorant  pilgriin,
the  least  doubt  may  operate  as  a hindrance  in  his  course
for  many  years.  If,  however,  he  should  fall  into  a spirit  of
disputation,  and  should  say,  “ knowledge  implies  nothing
else  than  to  be  able  to  study  a book  and  to  correct  the
composition,  the  punctuation  and  the  declensions,”  he  will
certainly  be  frustrated  from  ohtaining  and  discovering  in-
ward  knowledge,  — that  is,  he  will  hot  attain  to  the
knowledge  of  God,  which  is  the  ohject  of  all  knowledge,
which  is  the  most  sublime  knowledge,  and  compared  with
which  all  other  knowledge  is  but  husks.  Therefore,  when
we  hear  some  good  man,  who  has  travelled  far  on  the  road  of
spiritual  diseovery  affirm,  that  knowledge  of  the  external
world,  in  the  sense  which  we  at  first  alluded  to,  is  a
hindrance  in  the  way  of  truth,  we  ought  to  he  caretul  not
to  deny  the  truth  of  what  he  says.

There  are,  however,  in  our  times  certain  weak  persons
and  indifferent  to  religious  truth  for  the  most  part,  who  in
the  guise  of  soo^ees,1  after  learniug  a few  of  their  obscure
phrases  and  ornameuting  themselves  with  their  cap  and
robes,  treat  knowledge  and  the  doctors  of  the  law2as  in-
imical  to  themselves,  and  continually  find  fault  with  them.
Theyare  devils  and  deserve  judicial  death.  They  are  ene-
mies  of  God,  and  of  the  apostle  of  God.  For  God  has
extolled  knowledge  and  the  doctors  of  the  law;  and  the


1 Mystics.  2 Ulcma,  tlic  clerical  and  tlieological  class.


Ghrtzzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


33


established  way  of  salyatiou,  with  which  God  has  in-
spired  the  prophets,  has  its  basis  iu  external  knowledge.
These  miserable  and  weak  men,  since  they  have  no  ac-
quaintauce  with  science,  and  no  education,  and  knowledge
of  external  things,  why  should  they  indulge  in  such  corrupt
fancies,  and  untounded  language  ? They  resemble,  beloved,
aperson  who  having  heard  it  said  that  alchemy  was  of  more
value  than  gold,  because  that  whatsoever  thing  should  be
touched  with  the  philosophers5  stone  would  turn  to  gold,
should  be  proud  of  the  idea  and  should  be  carried  away
with  a passion  for  alchemy.  And  when  gold  in  full  bags
is  offered  him,  he  replies  : uShall  I turn  ray  attentiou  to

gold,  when  I am  dissolving  the  philosophers’  8tone?,,
And  he  hnishes  with  being  deprived  of  the  gold,  and  with
only  hearing  the  name  of  the  philosophers’  stone.  He  be-
comes  forever  a miserable,  destitute,  and  naked  vagabond,
who  wastes  his  life  upon  alcheray.

The  science  then  of  revelation,  or  of  infused  spiritual
knowledge,  resembles  alchemy,  and  the  science  ofthedoc-
tors  of  the  law  reserables  gold ; but  it  is  folly  and  pure  loss
not  to  accept  and  be  satisfied  with  solid  gold,  on  account
of  one’s  ardor  to  discover  the  philosophers’  stone,  which
latter  knowlcdge  is  not  acquired  by  one  in  a thousand.

There  is  still  one  farther  obsetwation  that  deserves  to  be
made.  If  a person  by  the  payment  of  a thousand  pieces  of
gold,  could  become  master  of  alchemy,  yet  the  condition
ofthe  man  who  is  absolutely  raaster  of  ten  thousand  pieces
of  gold  would  be  better  and  preferable.  And  this  illus-
trates  the  positiou  of  the  soofees.  If  a person  follow  their
method  and  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  some  things,  he  still
does  not  equal  in  excellence,  the  doctors  of  the  law.  Just
as  we  see,  that  books  on  alchemy,  and  students  of  alchemy
are  very  nuraerous,  while  those  who  are  successful  are  the
least  of  few,  so  the  path  of  raysticism  is  sought  for  by  all
mcn,  and  longcd  for  by  all  classes  of  society,  yet  those  who


34


GhazzaVt&  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


attain  to  the  end  are  exceedingly  rare.  Perhaps,  as  in  the
case  of  alchemy,  it  only  exists  now  in  name  and  forrn.  The
greater  part  of  the  notions  and  fancies  of  most  of  the  mys-
tics,  which  they  esteem  as  revelations  and  mysteries,  are
nothing  but  vain  trihings  and  pure  self  complacency  ; just
as  that  while  visions  are  areality,  still  mere  confused  dreams
are  very  abundant.  The  rnystic,  however,  who  by  spiritual
revelation  has  learned  all  that  a doctor  ofthe  lawhasbeeu
able  to  learn  after  many  years  of  study,  and  who  has  no  re-
maining  doubtsin  matters  ofinternal  or  exterual  know-
ledge,  is  certainly  more  excellent  than  the  doctor  of  the
law  who  is  learned  only  in  external  knowledge,  and  this
should  not  be  denied.  And  it  follows  that  the  way  of  the
mystics  must  be  acknowledged  to  be  a trne  one,  and  that
you  must  not  destroy  the  belief  of  those  weak  minded  and
vain  persons  who  followthem;  for,  the  reason  why  they
cast  reproachesupon  knowledge  and  calumniate  the  doctors
of  law  is  that  they  have  no  acquirements  or  knowledge
themselves.

0,  iuquirer  after  divine  mysteries  ! do  you  ask  how  it  is
kuown  that  the  happiness  of  man  consists  in  the  know-
ledge  of  God,  and  that  his  enjoymeut  consists  in  the  love  of
God?  We  observe  in  reply,  that  every  man’s  happiness  is
found  in  the  place  where  he  obtains  enjoyment  and  tran-
quility.  Thns  sensual  enjoyment  is  found  in  eating  and
drinking  and  the  like.  The  enjoyment  of  anger  is  derived
from  taking  revenge  and  from  violence.  The  enjoyment
of  the  eye  consistsin  the  view  of  correct  images  and  agree-
able  objects.  The  enjoyment  of  the  ear  is  secured  in  listen-
ing  to  harmonious  voicĕs.  In  the  same  way  the  enjoymeut
of  the  heart  depends  upon  its  being  employed  in  that  for
which  it  was  created,  in  learning  to  know  every  thing  iu  its
reality  and  truth.  Hence,  every  man  glories  in  what  he
knows,  even  if  the  thing  is  but  of  little  importauce.  lle


GhazzaWs  Alchcmy  of  Ilappiness.


35


who  knows  how  to  play  chess,  boasts  over  him  who  does
not  know : and  if  he  is  looking  on  while  a game  of  chess
is  played,  it  is  of  no  use  to  tell  him  not  to  speak,  for  as  soon
as  he  sees  an  improper  move,  he  has  not  patience  to  restrain
himself  from  showing  his  skill,  and  glorying  in  his  know-
ledge,  by  pointing  it  out.  . . .

ISTow  that  it  is  clear  that  tbe  happiness  of  the  heart  con-
sists  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  Grod,  we  may  say  that  the
heart  that  does  not  feel  the  necessity  of  the  knowledge  of
God,  and  a longing  for  the  love  of  God,  but  rather  craves
after  and  seeks  the  world,  resembles  a sickperson  whohas
no  appetite  for  food,  but  even  prefers  such  things  as
earth  and  clay  to  meat,  regarding  them  as  necessary,  not-
withstanding  they  have  no  uourishing  qualities.  If  no
remedy  can  be  fouud,  speedily,  to  recover  his  appetite
for  food,  and  if  he  continue  indulging  in  perverse  notions
of  what  is  necessary,  his  malady  will  grow  in  strength;
until  if  he  continue  in  this  state,  he  will  perish  and
lose  the  joys  this  world  can  give.  In  the  same  manner
the  heart  which  does  not  feel  anecessity  for  the  knowledge
and  love  of  God,  and  where  the  love  of  other  objects  reigns,
is  a heart  that  is  sick  aud  ready  to  perish,  unless  a remedy
be  applied,  unless  its  affections  be  turned  away  from  other
things,  and  the  love  ofGod  become  predominant.  Euture
bliss  will  be  lost  and  eternal  misery  will  be  its  portion.
Our  refuge  is  in  God  !

You  should  know  also  that  the  enjoyments  of  this  world
that  are  procured  through  the  senses  are  cut  off  at  death.
The  enjoyment  of  the  love  and  knowledge  of  God,  which
depends  upon  the  heart,  is  alone  lasting.  At  death  the
hindrances  that  result  from  the  presence  of  the  external
senses  being  removed,  the  light  and  brilliancy  of  the  heart
come  to  have  full  play,  and  it  feels  the  necessity  of  the
vision  of  beauty.  What  has  hitherto  been  said  is  suffi-
<;ient  to  enable  a person  of  intelligence  to  comprehend  tlie


36


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


dignity  of  the  heartof  man.  The  snbject  conld  not  be  dis-
cussed  more  at  large  in  this  short  treatise.

While  the  heart  is  one  of  the  pillars  of  man,  the  body  is
another  pillar.  In  the  constitution  of  man^sbody,  there  is
au  inhnity  of  most  wonderful  things  to  be  observed.  Each
internal  and  external  orgau  has  yarions  curious  uses,  of
which  man  is  entirely  uninformed.  Know,  that  in  the  body
of  a man  there  are  thousands  of  veins  and  nerves : there  are
many  bones,  each  of  a particular  shape  and  each  one  cre-
ated  for  a particular  purpose  and  etfeet.  You  are  ignorant
of  all  this,  and  you  only  know  that  the  hand  was  formed
to  take  hold  with,  the  footto  walk  with,  and  the  tongue  to
speak  with.  But  in  reference  to  the  hand,  you  know  notb-
ing  abont  its  blood,  its  bones,  the  number  of  its  nerves  and
veins,  and  the  uses  of  each  one  : nor  in  reference  to
the  eye,  do  you  know  that  it  is  composed  of  ten  layers,  nor
of  what  the  layers  are  composed,  nor  what  is  the  use  of
them.  And  if  the  eye  should  meet  with  an  injury  in  one
of  the  layers,  you  could  not  tell  the  eause  of  it.  You  know
nothing  either  of  the  internal  organs  in  the  belly,  such  as
the  spleen,  the  liver,  the  gall-bladder  and  the  kidneys.
While  these  have  been  given  to  you  to  perform  functions
in  which  they  are  continually  engaged,  you  are  eutirely
unconcerned  about  it.

Know  then,  beloved,  that  the  yarieties  of  food  you  eat
descend  to  the  stomach,  and  thence  to  the  liver,  and  that  in
the  liver  they  are  mixed  and  brought  to  the  form  of  blood.
Upon  the  liver  may  be  seen  soraething  black  and  frothy
which  is  called  black  bile.  The  spleen  attracts  the  black
bile  and  changes  it  into  itself.  The  blood  being  still  mixed
with  water,  has  no  consistence,  and  the  kidueys  draw  the
water  from  the  blood  and  purify  it.  This  blood  is  theu
diffhsed  to  the  seven  parts  of  the  body,  and  brings  and  con-
veys  strength  to  the  limbs.  If  the  spleen  become  attected
witli  any  disorder,  so  that  it  caunot  separate  the  black  bile


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness . 37

from  the  blood,  such  diseases  as  leprosy,  insanity,  inflam-
mation  of  the  spleen  and  remittent  fever  are  the  conse-
quence.  If  any  derangement  happen  to  the  gall-bladder
so  that  it  cannot  secrete  the  bile,  bilious  disorders  follow.
If  the  kidneys  get  disordered,  so  that  they  cannot  abstract
the  water  from  the  blood,  dropsy  aud  similar  diseases  are
the  result.  It  all  depends,  however,  on  the  will  of  God.
In  the  same  manner,  all  the  organs  of  the  body  have  a
speciAc  function.  If  it  were  not  so,  the  body  would
perish.  . . .

Our  intention  has  been  to  show  you  that  man  is  a great
world,  and  that  you  might  know  what  a multitude  of  ser-
vants  his  body  has  to  minister  to  him  : so  that  you  might
realize  while  in  your  enjoyments,  in  walking,  iu  sleeping
or  at  rest  in  your  world,  that  by  God?s  appointment,  these
numerous  servants  in  your  employnever  suffer  their  func-
tions  to  cease  for  a minute.  Listen  now  for  a moment  can-
didly.  If  you  had  a servant  who  had  been  faithful  to  you
during  his  whole  life,  with  whose  services  you  were  not
able  to  dispense,  while  he  could  at  any  time  tind  a better
master — yet  if  he  should  only  f'or  a single  day  disobey
your  orders,  you  would  get  augry,  beat  him,  and  wish  to
get  rid  of  him.  But  God  has  been  abundant  in  kiuduess
to  you,  and  has  given  you  so  many  servants,  and  has  in  no
wise  auy  need  of  you.  How  then  can  it  be  just  that  you
should  become  enslaved  to  yourself,  and  follow  your  own
passions,  and  that  forgetful  of  pleasing  the  intinite  God,
you  should  rebel  against  your  Creator  and  Benefactor,  and
that  you  should  rendcr  obedience  to  Satan,  who  is  yoiir  en-
emy  and  the  enerny  of  God?

Many  and  even  innumerable  books,  0 student  of  the  di-
^ine  mysteries,havebeen  writtenin  explanation  oftheorgan-
ization  of  the  body  and  the  uses  of‘  its  parts : but  they  have
no  more  made  the  subject  clear  and  exhausted  it,  than  a
drop  can  illustrate  the  ocean,  or  an  atom  illustrate  the  sun.

5


38


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Ilappiness.


It  is  impossible  for  tbe  thing  formed  to  understand  tbe
knowledge  of  him  that  forrned  it.  And  bow  is  it  possible,
that  he  who  is  of  yesterday,  should  comprehend  the  secrets
of  the  operations  of  the  Ancient  of  days  ?

The  science  of  the  structure  of  the  body  is  called  ana-
tomy : it  is  a great  science,  but  most  men  are  heedless  of
it.  If  any  studyit,it  is  only  for  thepurpose  of  acquiringskill
in  medicine,  and  not  for  the  sake  of  becoming  acquainted
with  the  perfection  of  the  power  of  God.  But  whoever
will  occupy  himself  with  anatomy,  andtherein  contemplate
the  wonders  of  the  works  of  God,  will  reap  three  advan-
tages.  The  first  advantage  will  be,  that  in  learning  the
composition  of  the  thiug  made,  and  thereby  gaining  a com-
prehensive  and  condensed  view  of  all  other  things  like  it  he
will  see  that  it  is  impossible  to  discover  imperfection  or
incompetence  in  the  being  who  has  created  him  in  such
perfection.  The  Creator  himself  will  be  acknowledged  to
be  almighty  and  perfect.  The  second  advantage  will  be,
that  he  will  see  that  it  is  impossible  that  a being  who  has
created  an  organization  so  intelligent,  capable  of  compre-
hension,  endowed  with  beauty,  and  useful,  should  be  other-
wise  than  perfect  in  knowledge  himself.  And  lastly,  we
shall  understand  the  mercy,  favor  and  perfect  compassion
of  God  towards  us.  Nothing  that  is  either  useful  or  orna-
mental  has  beeu  omitted  in  the  framing  of  our  bodies,
whether  it  be  such  things  as  are  the  sources  of  life,  like  the
spirit  and  the  head  ; or  such  as  sustain  life,  as  the  hand,  the
foot,  the  mouth  aud  the  teeth  : or  such  as  are  a means  of
ornament,  as  the  beard,  elegance  of  form,  black  hair  and
the  lips.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  similar  organs  have
been  provided  not  only  for  man,  but  for  all  creatures,  so
that  nothing  is  wanting  to  initiate  and  sustain  life  iu  the
mouse,  the  wasp,  the  snake  and  the  ant.  God  has  done
all  things  perfectly,  and  may  his  name  be  glorified  !

The  investigator  of  truth  this  faet  well  knows,

That  he  himself  is  eudowed  with  every  perfeetion.


Ghazzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


39


The  knowledge  of  anatomy  is  the  means  by  which  we  be-
corne  acquainted  with  animal  life  : by  means  of  knowledge
of  animal  life,  we  may  acquire  a knowledge  of  the  heart,
and  the  knowledge  of  the  heart  is  a key  to  the  knowledge
of  God.  But  the  knowledge  which  we  obtain  of  God  is  li-
inited  and  contracted  in  comparison  with  the  knowledge
which  the  heart  has  of  itself.  The  kuowledge  possessed  by
the  heart  in  comparison  with  the  knowledge  of  God  hirnself,
is  but  as  an  atom  when  compared  with  the  sun.

The  body  is  but  an  animal  to  be  ridden  by  the  heart,
which  is  its  rider,  while  the  heart?s  chief  end  is  to  acqnire
a knowledge  of  God.  The  dignity  of  any  thing  depends
upon  what  itis  in  itse]f.  A person  therefore  who  does  not
understand  his  own  body,  heart  and  soul,  and  yet  pretends
to  the  knowledge  of  God,  resembles  the  bankrupt,  who,
although  he  has  nothing  to  eat  himself,  shonld  yet  plan  a
feast  for  all  the  poor  of  the  city.  Iu  short,  man  ought  to
make  every  possible  exertion  to  gain  the  knowledge  of  God,
because  the  knowledge  of  God  necessitates  the  love  of  God.
Just  in  the  same  manner  as  when  you  see  a beautiful  spe-
cimeu  of  calligraphy  or  some  elegant  verses,  you  praise  the
person  who  made  them,  you  feel  a love  for  him  in  your
heart  and  desire  eagerly  to  see  him.

Since  you  have  learned,  0 inquirer  after  the  divine
mysteries,  the  dignity  and  nobleness  of  the  heart,  know
also  that  this  precious  jewel  has  beeu  conhded  to  yon  and
wrapped  in  a veil,  that  you  may  preserve  it  from  too  close
a contact  with  the  world,  and  may  lead  it  to  perfection  and
to  its  place  of  rest,  making  it  a partaker  of  manifest  happi-
nessin  theeternal  mansions.  In  the  house  of  reunion  you
will  have  reached  an  eternal  rest,  where  no  evil  enters,
a joy  where  no  pain  mingles,  a strength  without  inhrmity,
a knowledge  without  doubt,  and  a vision  of  the  Lord,  the
eujoyment  of  which  shall  be  endless.

If  the  heart  strive  not  after  its  own  glory  and  diguity,  but


40


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


inclines  to  the  eares  of  the  world  and  sensual  pleasures,
no  creature  is  more  feeble,  infirm  and  contemptible  than
man.  At  one  time  he  will  be  the  slave  of  disappointment
and  melaneholy,  at  another  suft*ering  from  disease  and
misfortune;  at  one  time  exposed  to  hunger  and  thirst,
and  at  anotherthe  slave  of  avarice  or  ambition.  He  is  not
indulged  with  the  enjoyment  of  a single  day  in  peace.
And  when  he  is  disposed  to  partake  of  the  pleasures  of  the
world  and  stretehes  out  his  hand  to  them,  for  a long  time
he  cannot  succeed  in  freeing  himself  from  calamity.  Even
the  pleasure  of  eating  will  be  attended  with  oppression  and
pain,  and  afterwards  be  followed  by  some  adverse  ac-
cident.  In  short,  of  whatever  enjoyment  he  partakes,
regret  is  sure  to  follow  it.  If  we  regard  knowledge,  power,
will,  beauty  and  grace  of  form  as  coustituting  the  glory
and  honor  of  this  world,  what  is  the  wisdom  of  man  ? If
his  head  pain  him,  he  knows  not  the  cause  or  the  remedy.
If  he  have  pain  at  his  heart,  he  knows  not  the  occasion  of
it,  or  why  it  increases,  or  wliat  will  cure  it.  Ile  sees  the
plants  and  medicines  that  could  cure  it,  perhaps  even  holds
them  in  his  hands,  and  is  not  aware  of  it.  He  knows  no-
thing  of  what  will  happen  to  him  on  tbe  morrow,  nor  what
action  will  be  a source  of  enjoyment  to  him,  nor  what  will
be  to  him  a sonrce  of  pain.  If  you  look  only  to  the  strength
of  a man,  what  is  more  impotent  than  he  is.  If  a fly  or
mosquito  molest  him,  he  cannot  get  rid  of  it.  If  he  is  at-
tacked  by  disease,  he  has  no  remedy  to  meet  it  with.  He
has  no  power  to  preserve  himself  from  destructiou.  If  you
look  at  the  Armness  and  resolution  of  man,  what  is  more
contemptible  than  he  is  ! If  he  see  any  thing  more  extra-
ordinary  than  a piece  of  money,he  changes  color  and  loses
his  presence  of  mind.  If  a beggar  meet  him,  he  turns
away,  and  dares  not  look  him  in  the  face.  If  you  look  at
the  form  of  man,  you  see  that  it  is  skin,  drawn  over  blood
aud  impurity.  . . .


Ghrtzzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


41


In  short,  man  in  this  world,  is  framed  in  infirmity  and  im-
perfection.  But  if  he  desire  and  will  to  frec  himself  from
animal  propensities,  and  ferocious  and  satanic  qualities,  he
may  attain  future  happiness,  will  be  more  exalted  and
excellent  than  a king  and  will  be  enriched  with  the  vision
of  the  beauty  of  the  Lord.  But  if  he  incline  towards  the
world,  and  retain  only  the  qualities  of  animals  and  wild
beasts,  his  future  state  will  be  worse  even  than  theirs.  For
they  turn  to  dust,  and  are  delivered  from  pains  and  tor-
ment.  Our  refuge  is  in  God  !

From  the  inoment,  0 beloved ! that  you  have  learned
in  what  the  dignity  and  nobleness  of  man  consists,  and
whatconstituteshis  vileness  and  meanness,youhavelearned
at  the  same  time  how  the  kiiowledge  of  the  soul,  is  the
key  to  the  knowledge  of  God.


CHAPTER  II.

On  the  Knowledge  oe  God.

In  the  books  of  former  prophets  it  is  written,  “ Know
thine  own  soul,  and  thou  shaltknow  thyLord,”  andwe  have
rcceived  it  in  a tradition,  that  “He  who  knows  himself,
already  knows  his  Lord/5  This  is  a eonvincing  argument
that  the  soul  is  like  a clean  mirror,  into  which  whenever  a
person  looks,he  may  there  see  God.  If  you  say,  however,
that  there  are  many  who  have  studied  themselves,  and  have
learned  that  they  are  creatures,  and  still  they  do  not  know
their  Lord,  I reply,that  to  pass  from  the  knowledge  of  the
soul  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  to  demonstrate  the  latter


42


Ghazzalis  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


from  the  former,  maj  be  accomplished  by  two  methods.
The  tirst  method  is  most  deep  and  profound.  The  most  ex-
alted  in  wisdom  and  the  most  penetrating  among  men  are
far  from  understanding  it,  even  when  they  apply  themselves
to  it,  both  with  science,  practice  and  a pure  life.  How  then
should  those  ignorant  persons  understand  it,  who  are
utterly  destitute  of  a knowledge  of  external  things ! Let
us,  therefore,  pass  to  the  second  metliod  and  explain  that:
for  he  who  possesses  a discriminating  miud,  even  if  he
were  blind,  is  eapable  of  understanding  it.

Know,  theretore,  that  man  from  his  own  existence  knows
the  existence  of  a Creator ; from  his  own  attributes, he knows
the  attrihutes  of  his  maker ; from  the  control  which  he  has
Over  his  own  kingdom,  he  knows  the  control  that  God  exer-
cises  over  all  the  world.  The  reason  of  this  is,  that  when  a
man  looks  at  himself,  beginning  at  the  time  when  there  was
no  trace  or  notion  of  his  existence,  and  contemplates  his  cre-
ation  with  attention,heseestbathehadbis  origin  froma  drop
of  water.  He  had  neither  mind  nor  understanding : and  nei-
ther  fat,  flesh  nor  bones.  Afterwards  by  divinc  operation
and  sovereign  power,  most  strange  and  wonderful  internal
changes  took  place,  and  strong  organs,  passions,  affections,
and  agreeable  qualities  rose  up  all  adorued  with  beauty.
When  man  comes  to  look  upon  his  organs  and  members,
whether  upon  the  external,  as  the  haud,  the  foot,  the  eye,
the  tongue  and  the  mouth,  or  upon  the  internal  organs,  as
the  liver,  the  stomach  and  the  spleen,  he  sees  that  each  is
the  result  of  a special  wisdom,  that  each  one  has  beeu
created  for  some  peculiar  u>e,  and  that  each  one  is  in  its
place  and  perfect,  After  a man  has  observed  these  things,
he  knows  that  the  Creator  has  power  to  do  what  he
pleases  with  all  things,  that  his  knowledge  includes  and
embraces  in  perfectiou  whatever  is  to  be  known  of  crea-


Ghazzal?s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


43


tures  either  externally  or  internally,  and  that  his  power
and  wisdom  pervade  every  organ  and  particle.

Beloved,  in  proportion  as  a man  analyzes  the  nature  of
his  body  and  the  yariety  of  uses  of  its  several  members,  his
reverence  and  love  forits  Creatorand  Maker  will  increase.
Let  a man  obs„erve,  for  example,  that  his  hands  are  made
like  columns  and  separated  from  the  body,  to  serve  as  an
instrument  to  seize,  or  take  hold  of,  or  to  defend  it  from
an  enemy.  At  the  extremity  of  the  hands  are  five  fingers,
four  of  which  are  in  a row,  and  some  long  and  some  short,
so  that  when  they  take  hold  of  anything,  they  may  come
equally  together  in  the  palm  of  the  hand.  The  thumb,
which  is  opposite  to  the  four  fingers,  is  shorter  than  any
of  them  and  stronger,  that  it  may  be  a help  to  the  whole
and  render  them  capable  of  retaining  and  grasping.  The
four  fingers  have  three  joints  each,  and  the  thumb  hasbut
two,  that  when  contracted  they  may  become  like  the  bowl
of  a spoon  or  ladle,  and  that  when  open  they  may  become
like  a plate,  and  so  discharge  an  inĔnity  of  services.  The
front  teeth  were  formed  sharp,  to  cut  and  separate  the  food  :
the  side  teeth  were  formed  broad  to  mash  and  grind  the
food.  The  tongue  was  formed  like  a spoon  to  throw  the
food  into  the  throat.  There  is,  also,  under  the  tongue,  au
organ  by  which  water  is  poured  out,  and  the  food  is  made
of  the  consistence  of  dough,  that  it  may  be  more  easily
swallowed  and  digested.  All  the  organs,  in  short,  bave
been  devised  with  the  best  arrangement  and  form  for  use,
and  eacb  one  of  thern  is  punctual  day  and  night  in  dis-
charging  its  tunction.  Think  not,  that  they  are  lazy  or
sleeping.  If  the  minds  of  the  intelligcnt,  the  science  of
the  learned,  and  the  wisdom  of  the  sage  had  been  united
and  had  been  employed  since  the  beginning  of  the  world,
in  reAection  and  contrivance,  they  conld  not  have  discov-
ered  anything  more  excellent  than  the  present  arrange-


44


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


ment,  nor  atiy  forms  more  useful  and  beautiful.  If  the
eye  had  been  attached  to  the  top  of  the  head,  or  the  ear  to
the  nape  of  the  neek,  or  the  mouth  to  the  back  of  the  body,
or  if  thrce  fingers  had  been  given  instead  of  four,  it  ia  plain
to  a person  of  intelligence  that  the  existing  advantagcs
would  not  have  been  secured,  and  the  present  beauty  of
form  and  appearance  wonld  have  been  imperfeet.

Let  us  notice,  also,  the  daily  neeessities  of  man,  his  need
of  food,  of  clothing  and  of  a dwelling;  his  need  of  rain,
clouds,  wind,  heat  and  cold  : and  that  he  needs  the  weaver,
the  cotton-spinner,  the  clothier  and  the  fuller  to  provide
him  with  clothing;  and  that  each  one  of  these  has  need  of
so  many  instruments,  and  of  so  many  trades,  like  those  of
the  blacksmith,  the  farmer,  the  earpenter,  the  dyer,  and
the  tanner ; and  besides,  their  need  of  iron,  lead,  wood  and
the  like.  Notice  at  the  same  time,  the  adaptation  of  these
workmen  to  their  instruments,  and  of  the  instruments  to
the  trades,  ancl  how  each  art  has  given  rise  to  several
others,  aud  the  mind  is  astonished  and  distraeted.  The
adaptation  of  all  these  instruments  comes  from  the  pure
graee  and  perfect  mercy  of  God,  and  from  the  fouutain  of
his  benevolence.  Moreover,  God*s  creating  prophets,  send-
ing  them  to  us,  and  leading  us  to  their  law  and  to  love
them,  is  a perfume  of  His  universal  beneficeuee.  He  pro-
claims  himself,  “ My  mercy  surpasses  my  anger,”  and  the
Prophet  has  said  : “ Yerily,  God  is  more  full  of  eompassion
to  his  8ervants,  than  the  affeetionate  mother  to  her  uursing
child”

It  has  been  shown  that  man  from  his  own  existenee,
knows  the  cxistence  of  his  creator,  that  from  his  analysis
of  the  materials  of  which  his  bocly  is  composed  and  of  its
distinctivc  characters  he  understands  the  almighty  power
of  God,  that  from  the  uscs,  the  arrangement  and  the  eom-
bination  of  his  organs,  he  knows  the  omniseient  wisdom
of  God,  and  that  his  clemency  and  compassiou  extend  to


Ghazzalfs  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


45


all.  He  knows,  also,  that  these  many  mercies  and  boun-
ties  are  bestowed  upon  him  without  his  seeking  or  care,
from  GodJs  rich  and  overflowing  grace.  Now  in  this  way
it  is  possible  that  the  knowledge  of  the  soul  should  become
the  key  to  the  knowledge  of  God.  For  just  as  from  a sur-
vey  of  your  own  beiug  and  attributes,  you  have  iu  a con-
tracted  form  learned  the  being  and  attributes  of  God,  it  is
also  possible  to  understand  how  the  freedom  and  the  holi-
uess  of  God,  bear  a resemblance  to  the  freedom  of  your
soul.

Know,  that  God  exists  exempt  from  and  independeut  of
the  notions  that  enter  the  mind,  and  the  forms  that  are
produced  in  the  imagination,  that  he  is  not  subjected  to
reasoning,  and  time  and  place  cannot  be  ascribed  to  him.
Still  his  exercise  of  power  and  the  manifestation  of  his
glory  are  not  independent  of  place.  Butin  thc  same  man-
ner,  this  independence  and  freedom  is  possible  in  your
soul.  The  spirit,  for  example,  which  we  call  heart  is  ex-
empt  from  the  entrance  of  fancies  and  imaginations,  and
also  from  size  and  divisibility.  ITor  has  it  form  or  color,
for  if  it  had,  it  could  be  seen  by  the  eye,  and  would  enter
into  the  sphere  of  fancy  and  imagination,  and  its  beauty  or
ugliness,  its  greatness  or  littleness  would  be  known.  If
any  one  ask  you  aboiit  your  soul,  you  may  answer,  “It
exists  by  the  will  of  God:  it  has  neither  quantity  or  phy-
sical  quality;  it  is  exempt  from  being  known.”  Beloved,
since  you  are  incapable  of  knowing  the  spirit  which  is  in
your  body,  how  shouldit  be  possible  for  you  to  know  God,
who  created  spirits,  bodies  and  all  things,  who  is  himself
foreign  to  all  of  them,  and  who  is  not  of  their  class  and
kind  ? It  is  one  of  the  most  importaut  things,  yea,  a most
necessary  duty,  to  treat  of  God  as  holy,  independent  and
free.

How  many  things  there  are  in  your  body  in  referenceto
which  you  do  not  know  their  reality  and  essence,  such  as

6


46


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


desire,  love,  misery  and  pleasure.  Their  existence  is  ad-
mitted,  but  their  quantity  and  qnality  cannot  be  measured.
If  you  desire  to  learn  the  absolute  truth  about  them,  you
cherish  a vain  longing;  and  it  is  the  sarae,  if  you  desireto
know  the  absolute  nature  of  voice,  nutrition  or  hear-
ing.  As  that  which  is  pereeived  by  the  eye  has  no  re-
lation  to  voices  and  as  that  which  is  perceived  by  the  ear
has  no  relation  to  form,  and  as  that  which  is  perceived  by
the  sense  of  smelling  has  no  relation  to  taste,  so  that  the
one  can  be  known  by  means  of  the  other,  in  the  same  man-
ner  that  which  is  perceivcd  through  the  medium  oi  the
mincl  orof  divinepower,  cannotbeperceived  by  the  senses.
Again,  as  the  spirit  exists  ancl  controls  the  bocly,  and  yet
we  know  not  the  mode  ancl  essence  of  it,  so  Goct  is  present
in  all  things,  and  controls  and  governs  all  things,  but  his
form,  essence  and  quality  are  exempt  from  being  known.
Exemption  and  freedom  may  be  illustratecl  in  still  another
manner.  In  the  same  way  that  the  spirit  pervades  all  the
limbs  and  the  body,  ancl  the  body  is  entirely  subject  to  its
control,  and  thatthe  spirit  is  indivisible,  while  the  body  is
divisible,  so  also  in  relation  to  God,all  that  exists,  springs
from  him,  all  ereatures  exist  by  his  word,  and  in  all  possi-
ble  things  his  operatious  are  seen,  yet  still  he  is  not  related
to  place,  nor  cloes  he  reason  about  anything,  and  he  is  free
from  relation  or  a£finity  to  any  quality  of  bodies  or  to
quantity.

This  topic  of  exemption  and  freedom,  beloved,  cannot
be  pcrfectly  explaiuecl,  until  the  mystery  about  the  soul
shall  have  been  developed.  The  law,  however,  gives  no
permission  to  develop  this  secret,  ancl  it  is  not  lawful  to
stretch  out  oneJs  haud  to  do  what  the  legislator  forbids.
But  the  language  of  his  exeelleney  the  glory  of  the  world,1
“ God  created  man  in  his  own  image,”  eannot  be  explained


1 Moliammed.


Ghazzalts  Alchemy  of  liappiness . 47

until  the  mystery  about  tlic  uature  of  thc  soul  or  spirithas
becn  explaiued.

Aud  now,  student  of  the  divine  mysteries,  that  you  have
in  geueral  undcrstood,  as  far  as  your  mind  can  reach,  the
being  and  attributes  of  God,  by  having  your  own  soul  as
an  example,  it  is  important  that  you  should  become  ac-
quainted  with  the  inAuence  of  the  word,  government  and
sovereignty  of  God  in  the  world.  This  is  called  knowledge.
of  operation*  You  ought  to  understand,  also,  as  far  as  rea-
sou  cau  go,  the  government  that  he  exercises  over  the
body,  so  that  you  may  comprehend  in  what  way  creatures
obey  fhe  word  and  the  will  of  God,in  what  way  the  angels
by  his  dcGree  convey  their  ministrations  from  heaven  to
earth,  in  what  way  the  movements  of  the  heavens  and  the,
revolutions  of  the  constellations  are  eftected,  aud  what  is
the  key  to  the  method  by  which  the  orders  of  dsemons  are
eftected.  But  unless  you  know  in  what  way  you  exerciso
authority  over  your  body,  what  probability  is  there  that
you  can  understand  how  God  exercises  control  over  all
things.  :

<cKuow  thyself,  and  thou  shalt  know  thy  Lord.”  Ob-
serve  then  that  wheu  you  desire  to  write  upon  paper  the
phrase,  In  ihe  name  of  God , there  arises  first  of  all  an  in-
clination  and  a decisiou  in  the  heart  to  write  it.  JSText  in

i

order,  that  iuclination  and  decision  by  means  of  the  animal
spirit  is  carried  to  the  brain.  *Whent  that  decision  has
reached  the  brain  then  the  image  of  the  phrase,  In  ihe  name
of  God  is  formedin  the  faculty  of  imagination  in  the  brairn
Aftervvards  the  image  reaches  a nerve  resembling  a white
thread,  and  descends  by  means  of  it  to  the  ends  of  the
finger3.  Finally  by  means  of  the  senses  the  fingers
write  the  phrase  In  ihe  name  of  God , in  the  form  in
which  by  the  will  of  the  heart,  it  exists  in  thc  treasury  of
the  irnaginatiou.  Agaiu,  also,  when  the  will  of  God  is
‘suspended  to  anything,  a tokeu  of  it  rises  uud  appears  in


48


Ghazzalts  Alchemy  of  llapjriness.


the  empyrealheaven.  Andthere  is  an  essence  called  both
the  Spirit  of  Power,  and  the  Uoly  Spirit,  by  means  of
which  it  arrives  at  the  throne  in  the  heavens.  As  the
phrase,  In  the  name  of  Gody  appears  in  the  treasury  of  the
imagination,  so  the  image  of  the  thing  dependent  on  the
will  of  God  appears  upon  the  Preserved  Tablet.  The
angels  appointed  to  servein  the  empyrean  and  atthethrone,
cause  it  to  descend  tothe  inferior  world,  and  by  means  of  the
periodsand  hours  of  the  constellations,  it  is  made  to  appear
through  the  four  elementary  qualities — heat,  cold,  raoist-
ure  and  dryness.  As  the  phrase  In  the  name  of  God  is
written  down  by  first  dipping  the  pen  in  the  ink,  so  the
thing  which  God  wills,  comes  to  light  by  mixing  heat  and
eold  with  water  and  earth.  As  paper  is  so  adapted  to  writ-
ing  as  to  preserve  the  forms  which  are  written  upon  it,  so
dryness  and  moisture  are  recipient  of  those  other  forms  and
preserve  the  images  that  are  produced.  If  moisture  did  not
exist,  forms  and  images  could  not  be  preserved.  In  the
same  manner  as  by  the  will  of  the  heart  and  by  the  method
above  mentioned,  the  image  In  the  name  of  God , which  is
in  the  treasury  of  the  imagination  is  painted  with  the  pen
upon  paper,  so  also  the  will  of  God,  which  is  an  image
produced  upon  the  Preserved  Tablet  in  the  empyrean,  is
produced  and  made  visible  in  the  material  world,  by  means
of  the  angels,  the  constellationsand  tbe  elemeutal  qualities
of  water  and  earth.

At  the  time  when  the  heart  of  man  had  control  over  all
the  organs  and  members,  and  they  were  all  obedient  to  it,
some  thought  that  man  was  a dweller  in  his  own  heart.
When  the  empyrean  in  like  manner,  ruled  over  all  thiugs
by  the  will  of  God,  they  reasoncd  that  man  was  seated  in
the  empyrean.  But  like  as  man  has  dominion  over  his
own  heart  in  the  administration  of  his  kingdom,  the  body,
God  also  rules  over  the  empyrean  in  the  administration  of
the  atTairs  of  created  beings,  which  he  has  committed  to


Ghazzali’s  Alehemy  of  Happiness.


49


the  cmpyreau.  Thus  God  cleclares  iu  his  holy  word,  u Ile
eat  upon  the  eropyrean  to  govern  the  universe.,M  You
should  know,  also,  that  what  we  have  been  maintaining  is
convineingly  established.  It  is  known  to  men  of  penetra-
tion  by  revelation.

“ God  created  man  in  his  own  image.”  What  does  this
mean,  and  how  is  it  known  to  be  true?  Know,  beloved,
that  the  sovereign  reeognizes  uo  other  person  except  the
sovereign  himself.  If  the  Lord  had  not  appointed  you  to
be  sovereign  over  the  body  as  over  a kingdom,  if  he  had
not  confided  to  you  the  affairs  of  its  government,  and  had
not  given  you  this  brief  copy  as  a model,  how  would  you
have  been  able  to  comprehend  the  sovereign,  who  is  inde-
pendent  of  reasoniug  and  of  plaee,  and  who  caunot  be
known  by  argument  or  hypothesis  or  in  any  other  way  ?
Thanks  and  praises  be  given  tohim  who  is  without  begin-
ning  and  eternal,  to  him  who  is  unceasingly  beneticent,  to  him
who  made  you  sovereign  over  yourself,  who  subjeeted  your
body  to  you  for  a kingdom,  who  made  your  heart  to  be  au
empyreal  throne,  and  made  the  animal  spirit  which  is  the
fountain  of  the  heart,  to  he  a seraphic  messenger.  He  ap-
pointed  the  brain  to  be  the  throne,  and  the  treasury  of  the
imagination  to  be  the  Preserved  Tablet.  He  made  the
cupola  of  the  brain,  which  is  tbe  source  of  the  nerves  and
the  mine  of  the  faculties,  to  be  like  the  vault  of  heaven  and
the  stars.  He  appointed  the  tingers  and  the  pen  to  serve
the  elemeutal  qualities  of  nature,  and  subjected  them  to
your  order.  He  made  you  more  excellent  and  noble  than
all  other  creatures,  and  to  exercise  rule  over  all  possible
things.  He  has  bidden  you  to  beware  and  not  to  be  heed-
less  of  your  soul,  which  is  your  kindom  and  dominiou : for
to  be  regardless  of  your  soul,  is  to  be  regardless  of  your
Creator  and  Benefactor.


!S.  10:  3.


50


Ghazzalis  Alchemy  of  llappiness.


Know,  liowever,  that  there  is  an  immense  distance  and
wide  interyal  between  perceiving  the  beauty  of  the  Lord,
and  nnderstanding  that  which  eonstitutes  its  soul,  marrow
and  essenee.  O seeker  of  the  divine  mysteries,  those  im-
potent  astrologers  and  physicists,  who,  shut  out  from  the
knowledge  of  God,  ascribe  changes  and  events  to  the
stars  and  to  nature,  resemble  an  ant,  that  seeing  a peu
making  marks  upon  paper,  should  be  overjoyed  and  cry
out,  “I  have  fonnd  out  the  secret  of  the  efiect.  It  is  the
pen  that  eausesthe  marks.”  This  elass  of  men  in  another
point  resembles  the  natural  man,  who  ascribes  the  influ-
enee8  in  nature  to  heat  and  eold,  water  and  earth : so  a
seeond  ant  looking  on  with  attention,  sees  that  the  pen
does  not  move  of  itself,  but  rather  by  the  will  of  the  hand:
and  he  turns  and  says  to  the  first  ant,  “ You  were  mistaken ;
you  did  not  perceive  the  real  nature  of  the  thing:  you
thought  the  marks  and  movemeuts  were  eaused  by  the  pen.
It  is  not  so ; the  whole  inAuenee  proeeeds  from  the  fingers
aud  the  pen  is  subject  to  the  fingers.?’  Beloved,  this  ant
resembles  the  astrologer,  who  aseribes  eftects  to  the  con-
stellations,  He  does  not  know  that  he  also  is  mistaken,
und  that  the  stars  and  the  eonstcllations  are  subject  to  the
angels,  and  that  the  angels  ean  do  nothing  without  the
command  of  God.

In  the  same  manner  as  there  is  falsity,  in  the  way  in
which  the  material  world  is  regarded  by  the  natural  mau
and  the  astrologer,  there  is  also  a diversity  of  views  among
those  who  survey  the  spiritual  world.  There  are  sorae
who,  just  as  they  are  upon  the  point  of  enteriug  upou  the
vision  of  the  spiritual  world,  seeing  that  they  discover  no-
thing,  descend  back  to  their  old  sphere.  There  is  also  a
diSerence  of  view  between  those  who  do  succeed  in  reaeh-
itig  the  spiritual  or  invisible  world  by  meditation,  for  some
have  an  irnmense  amount  of  light  veiled  from  them.  Every


' Ghazzal?s  Alcherny  of  Ilappiness .


51


one  in  the  sphere  to  which  he  attains,  is  still  veiled  with  a
veil.  The  light  of  some  is  as  of  a twinkling  star.  Others
see  as  by  the  light  of  the  moon.  Others  are  illuminated  as
if  by  the  \vorld-eflulgent  sun.  To  some  tbe  invisible  world
is  even  perfectly  revealed,  as  we  read  in  the  holy  word  of
God:  “ And  thus  we  caused  Abraham  to  see  the  heaven
and  the  earth/51  And  lience  it  is  that  the  prophet  says,
“ There  arebefore  God  seventy  veils  of  light;  ifhe  sliould
, unveil  them,  the  light  of  his  countenance  would  burn
everything  that  came  into  his  presence.”1 2 3

Still  the  miserable  uaturalist,  who  ascribes  effects  tothe
inAuences  of  nature,  speaks  correctly.  For,  if  natural
causes  bad  no  operation,  the  art  of  medicine  would  have
been  useless,  and  the  holy  law  would  not  have  allowed  to
have  recourse  to  medical  treatment.  The  mistake  which
the  naturalist  makes,  is  thathe  contracts  bis  sphere  of  vision,
and  is  like  the  lame  ass,  that  left  his  load  at  the  tirst  stop-
ping  place.  He  does  not  know  that  nature  also  is  subjected
to  the  hand  of  the  power  of  God,  and  is  a kind  of  humble
servant,  such  as  a shoe  is  to  the  ass.  The  astrologer  also
says,  that  the  sun  is  a star,  which  causes  heat  and  light
upon  the  earth.  If  there  had  been  no  sun,  the  distinction
between  day  and  night  would  not  have  existed,  and  vege-
tables  and  grain  could  not  have  been  produced.  The  moon
also  is  a star,  and  if  there  bad  been  no  moon,  how  many
things  connected  with  the  requirements  of  the  Law  of  the
Koran,  would  have  been  impracticable,  such  as  fasting,
alms  and  pilgrimage,  since  there  would  have  been  no  dis-
tinction  of  weeks,  months  and  years.  The  colors  and  per-
fumes  of  herbs  and  fruits  exist  also  from  its  iuAuence.  The
sun  is  warm  and  dry ; the  moon  is  cold  and  moist.  Saturn


1 S.  6 : 75.

2 Tlie  author  has  commented  upou  this  in  liis  work,  Me&hkuwet  d enwar

we  masnafat  el  esrar.  Tr.


52


Ghazzali's  Alehemy  of  Happiness .


is  cold  and  dry,  Yenus  is  warm  and  moist.  And  the  school
of  astrologers  is  to  be  credited  in  these  representations ; but
when  they  ascribe  all  events  to  inAuences  proceeding  from
the  heaven]y  bodies,  they  are  liars.  They  do  not  perceive
that  they  all  alike  are  subjeet  to  the  almighty  power  of  God
as  God  savs  in  his  word  : “ And  the  sun,  moon  and  stars
are  subject  to  his  command.” 1 There  is  also  an  inAuence
exercised  by  the  stars,  which  resembles  the  control,  exer-
cised  by  the  nerve  that  comes  from  the  brain  over  the  fin-
ger  in  writing ; while  the  force  of  nature  is  like  the  control
exerted  upon  the  pen  by  the  finger.  . . .

When  the  health  of  a person  undergoes  a change,  and
he  becomes  the  prey  of  melancholy  and  suspicion,  and  the
pleasures  of  the  world  become  distasteful,  so  that  from  dis-
gust  with  it,  he  withdraws  from  all  society,  his  physician
says,  “this  person  is  diseased  with  melancholy;  he  must
take  an  infusion  of  dodder,  of  thyme  and  bark  of  endive  as
a medicine.,>  The  naturalist  says : “ As  this  person?s  ma-
lady  is  of  a dry  nature,  it  arises  from  a predominance  ot
dryness,  which  has  settled  on  the  brain.  The  occasion  of
his  having  a dry  temperament  is  the  season  of  winter.
TJntil  spring  comes,  and  dry  weather  predominates,  there
is  no  possibility  of  a cure.J5  The  astrologer  says,  “ this
person  being  under  the  inAuence  of  melancholy,  which
arises  from  a hurtful  conjunction  between  Mars  and  Jupi-
ter,  there  will  be  no  favorable  change  in  his  health  until
the  conjunction  of  Jupiter  with  Yenus  shall  have  reached
the  Trine.”  Now  know,  beloved,  that  the  language  of  all
these  persons  is  correct,  for  they  all  speak  and  believe  ac-
cording  to  the  degree  and  reach  of  their  rcason  and  under-
standing.  However,  the  real  and  essential  cause  of  the
malady  may  be  stated  thus.  When  fortune  is  favorable
to  any  person,  and  the  Deity  desires  to  guide  him  into  the


JS.  16:  12.


Ghazzali*s  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


53


possession  of  it,  he  depates  two  powerful  ministers  to  that
eflFect,  Jupiter  and  Mars.  These  in  turn,  control  the  light
footed  ministers,  the  elements,  and  command  dryness,  for
example,  to  fasten  its  bridle  to  the  neck  of  the  person,  and
cause  dryness  to  attack  his  head  and  brain.  He  is  thus
made  to  become  weary  of  the  world  by  means  of  the  scourge
of  melancholy  and  suspicion,  and  so  with  the  bridle  of  the
will  may  be  impelled  towards  the  Deity.  These  circum-
stances  can  never  be  understood  in  this  seuse,  either  by
medicine,  or  by  nature,  or  by  the  stars.  One  may,  how-
ever,  learn  to  uuderstand  them  by  knowledge  and  the  pro-
phetic  power  combined.  For  they  embrace  the  whole
kingdom  of  the  universe  with  its  deputies  and  servauts,
aud  possess  the  knowledge  of  the  end  for  which  every-
thing  was  created  : they  know  to  whose  command  all  things
are  subjected,  to  what  men  are  invited  and  what  they
* are  forbidden  to  do.

The  Lord  invites  the  servants  whom  he  loves  to  the  con-
templation  of  his  glory,  at  one  time  by  sending  misfortuue
and  adliction,  and  at  another  by  melancholy  and  sickuess :
and  he  says  to  them,  “ my  servants,  what  you  regard  as  mis-
fortune  and  aflfliction,  is  but  the  bridle  of  my  love,  by  which
I draw  those  whom  I love  to  a spirit  of  holy  submission,
and  to  my  Paradise.”  It  is  also  found  m a tradition  that
umisfortune  is  first  of  all  the  lot  of  the  prophets,  then  of
the  saints  and  then  of  those  who  are  like  them  in  succes-
sive  lower  degrees.  Look  not  then  upon  these  things  as
maladies,  for  they  are  my  favored  servauts.”

0 seeker  after  the  divine  secrets,  now  that  you  have
learned  that  within  the  body  of  man,  there  is  a sovereign
who  possesses  and  controls  it,  it  is  time  that  you  should
learn  the  meaning  of  the  sentences,  “ Glory  to  God,5’  “ God
be  praised/5  u There  is  no  God  but  God,”  and  “ God  is  the
greatest.”  These  sentences  are  very  current  on  the  tongues
of  men,  but  they  do  not  know  the  signification  of  them.

7


54  GhazzaVHs  Alchemy  of  Happmess.

Although  these  four  sentences  are  in  appearance  vcry  short,
yet  there  are  no  others  that  embraee  so  much  of  the  know-
ledge  of  God.  Sincc  from  the  consideration  of  the  free-
dom  and  independence  of  your  own  spirit,  you  have  learned
the  freedom  and  iudependence  of  God,  you  have  in  conse-
quence  learned  the  meaning  and  iinport  of  the  sentence,
u Glory  to  God.5>  Seeing  that  from  the  sovereignty  which
you  exercise  over  your  own  spirit,  you  have  learned  the
sovereignty  which  God  exercises,  and  know  ihat  all  causes
and  instruments  are  subject  to  his  power,  and  that  all  out-
ward  and  inward  mercies,  which  are  incalculable  and  in-
numerable,  are  from  him,  you  therefore  know  the  meaning
.and  import  of  the  phrase,  “ God  be  praised.”  As  you  know
also  that  all  things  are  of  his  creation,  that  his  government
extends  over  all  things,  and  that  without  his  will  no  motion
or  change  can  aflect  any  thing,  you  see  the  meaningof  the
words,  u There  is  no  God  but  God. Listen  now  to  the  ex-
planalion  of  the  sentence,  u God  is  thc  greatest.  ”

Do  not  suppose  that,  from  all  that  has  hitherto  been
said,  you  can  understand  the  greatness  of  God.  His  great-
ness  and  power  arc  above  and  beyond  the  comprehension
of  the  mind  and  wisdom  of  man.  Moreover  the  phrase
“ God  is  the  greatest”  does  not  mean  that  God  is  larger
than  other  things : it  is  a sin  to  iudulge  in  snch  a belief.
It  is  as  much  as  to  say,  that  there  are  large  things,  but  that
God  is  larger  than  they  are.  The  holy  meaning  of  the
phrase  “ God  is  the  greatest,;  is  that  God  is  so  great,  that
he  cannot  be  knowu  or  comprehended  by  the  miud  or  un-
derstanding,  or  be  compared  with  any  thing, — that  the
knowledge  of  God  cannot  be  attained  by  means  of  the  know-
ledge  which  a man  has  of  his  own  soul  (which  God  forbid ! »),
that  a knowledge  of  his  attributes  caunot  be  attained  from
a knowledge  of  the  attributes  of  man,  and  that  his  inde-
pendence  and  holiness  cannot  be  compared  with  the  inde-
pendence  and  holiness  of  man  in  any  form  whatever.  God


QhazzaWs  Alchemy.  of  Happiness.


55


forbid  tliat  His  sovereignty  aud  goyernment  should  be  com-
pared  and  measured  ! The  doctors  of  the  law  have  beeu  al-
lowed  however,  in  the  way  of  illnstration  to  explain  in  a
certaiu  degree  the  knowledge,  power,  excellence  and  sove^
reignty  of  God  to  man,  who  is  frail  and  weak  in  under-
standing.

Thus,  let  us  suppose  that  a person  had  been  born  and
brought  up  in  darkness,  where  he  had  never  seen  the  rays
or  light  of  the  sun,  but  had  merely  heard  a description  of
the  sun.  If  such  a person  should  ask  to  have  the  light  and
mode  of  shiningof  the  sun  explained  to  him,  how  would  it
be  possible  in  any  way  to  explain  to  him  what  itis?  If
however,  there  should  happen  to  be  in  that  dark  place
many  glow  worms,  the  person  addressed,  taking  one  of
them  up  in  his  hands,  might  say,  “ the  light  of  the  sun  re-
sembles  this,”  although  in  reality  it  has  not  a particle  or
an  atom  of  resemblance.  Take  another  example  : suppose
a child  incapable  of  making  distinctions,  should  inquire  of
us  about  the  pleasure  derived  from  exercising  authority
and  sovereignty.  W e,  kuo  wing  the  impossibility  of  explain-
ing  the  matter  to  him,  might  answer  that  the  pleasure  of
ruling  was  like  that  obtained  from  playing  with  nuts  or  at
ball,  although  it  does  not  resemble  them  in  any  particulair.
From  these  examples  we  may  learn  that  it  is  impossible
for  any  being,  except  God  himself,  to  know  God.  “ God
is  wdtness  ! God  is  witness ! No  one  knows  God,  except
God  himself.

Finally,  seeker  after  diviue  mysteries,  know  that  the  paths
to  the  knowledge  of  God,  are  a3  numerous  as  the  souls  of
creatures,  and  their  number  is  known  to  God  alone.  Bnt
we  have  spoken  so  much  as  is  found  above,  for  the  sake  of
both  warning  and  stimulating  the  seeker  after  the  know-
ledge  and  Iove  of  God.

The  happiness  of  man  cousists  in  the  knowledge,  obedi-
ence  aud  worship  of  God.  Ouly  a little  previonsly  we  have


56


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Hapjnness.


shown,  how  it  is  that  man’s  happiness  consists  in  the  know-
ledge  of  God.  Ve  now  proceed  to  observe,  that  it  is  an
argument  to  prove  that  the  happiness  of  man  consists  in
obedience  and  devotion,  the  fact  that  when  a man  dies,  his
destination  is  to  return  to  where  God  is.  Everything
which  concerns  man  is  with  God,  and  his  works  will  all  be
presented  before  Him.  Whenever  all  the  affairs  of  a per-
son  are  in  the  hands  of  another,  and  his  employments  and
his  home  are  with  him  — when  he  is  near  to  him  and  con-
tinually  has  need  of  him,  there  will  be  perfect  harmony  be-
tween  the  two,  and  abiding  friendship  and  love.  Whoever
be  the  person  whom  we  love,  we  shall  find  our  happiness
with  him.  There  is  nothing  more  delightful  than  to  meet
with  and  look  npon  an  object  that  we  love.  But  we  ought
to  know  that  the  love  of  God  will  never  reign  in  the  heart
•of  a man  until  first  the  knowledge  of  God  reigns  there,  and
until  the  remembrance  of  God  becomes  unceasing.  If  one
individual  love  another,  he  is  continually  thinking  of  him,
and  by  this  continual  remembrance,  his  love  is  increased.

The  remembrance  of  God  will  be  predominant  in  the
heart  that  is  always  engaged  in  devotion : and  the  heart
will  be  engaged  in  devotion  and  worship,  whenever  it
withdraws  from  worldly  lusts  and  sensual  pleasures : it
will  withdraw  from  worldly  lusts,  when  it  refrains  from
sins.  To  abstain  from  sins  of  rebellion,  brings  peace  to
the  heart : to  be  constant  in  worship,  is  a means  of  remern-
brance  of  God ; and  both  are  a means  of  growing  in  the
love  of  God,  which  is  the  seed  of  happiness.  And  so  the
Lord  speaks  in  his  word  : “ Blessed  is  the  man  who  keepg
him8elf  pure,  who  repeats  the  name  of  the  Lord  and
prays. 55  1

Know  also  that  all  our  acts  cannot  be  devotional.  Those
acts  only  are  devotional  which  harmonize  with  the  law.

1 S.  84  : 14,  15.


Ghazzali's  Akhemy  of  Happiness .


57


But  it  is  not  possible  to  be  totally  exempt  from  sensuous
passions,  for  if  the  body  should  be  deprived  of  food  and
drink  for  example,  it  would  perish.  There  is  occasion
therefore  for  making  distinctions  between  our  acts ; but
these  distinctions,  the  indiyidual  is  not  capable  of  making  for
himself,  because  the  animal  soul  necessarily  casts  a veil
over  the  truth  and  inclines  it  to  vanity.  On  this  account
we  are  obliged  to  follow  after  and  imitate  others  — such
persons  as  the  prophets.  They  have  been  purihed  and
enlightened  by  the  eternal  Truth  Himself,  and  have  been
sent  forth  to  communicate  precepts  and  laws,  and  to  de-
cide  upon  all  circumstances.  Every  one  is  therefore  bound
to  imitate  them  within  the  limits  of  the  law,  and  in  the
regulation  of  his  moral  conduct,  that  hemay  attain  felicity
and  be  preserved  from  danger  of  eternal  destruction.

Those  careless  and  indifferent  persons,  0 seeker  after
the  divine  mysteries,  who  from  ignorance,  stupidity  and
sin  have  turned  away  from  God  and  his  prophet,  and  bave
wandered  from  the  path  of  religion,  may  be  arranged  in
seven  classes.

To  the  first  class  belong  those  who  do  not  believe  in
God.  They  had  desired  to  find  him  out  in  his  essence  and
attributes,  by  speculations  and  fancies,  by  comparisons  and
illustrations.  And  because  they  have  not  succeeded  iu
understanding  him,  they  have  referred  his  acts  and  his  gov-
ernment  to  the  stars  and  to  nature.  They  have  fancied  that
the  soul  of  man  and  of  other  animals,  and  this  wonderful
world  with  its  marvellous  arrangements  came  of  themselves,
and  that  they  are  eternal ; or  that  they  are  effects  from  na-
tural  causes,  and  that  there  is  no  creator  beyond  the  sphere
of  the  world.  This  classof  people  resembles  the  man  who
seeing  a writing,  tancies  that  it  was  written  of  itself,  and
infers  that  it  was  not  written  by  a penman  or  by  a super-
natural  power : or  else  that  it  is  eternal  and  that  no  one
knows  whence  it  comes.  It  is  impossible  to  recover  from


58


Ghazzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


the  path  of  delusion,  persons  whose  ignorance,  error  and
stupiditj  have  reached  such  a degree  as  this.

The  seeond  class  of  errorists  are  those  who  deny  a day  of
resurrection  and  assembly.  They  allege  that  man  and  other
animals  are  libe  vegetables,  and  do  not  enter  into  another
body  when  theydie.  They  say,that  aresurrection,in  which.
spirits  and  bodies  shall  be  reassembled  in  one  place,  is  im-
possible,  and  that  there  will  be  neither  discipline  or  pun-
ishment,  recompense  or  reward.  The  error3  of  this  sect
arise  from  their  inability  to  understand  of  themselves  their
own  souls.  They  imagine  that  the  spirit  is  an  animal  spirit
only,  and  that  the  heart,  which  is  in  reality  the  spirit  of
man,  is  the  place  for  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  that  no
evil  can  happen  to  it,  except  that  it  will  be  separated  from
the  body.  They  call  this  separation,  death.  This  sect  is
unconcerned  about  this  spirit,  and  in  proof  of  this  we  shall
discourse,  if  it  please  God,  in  the  fourth  chapter.

The  third  elass  of  errorists  are  those  who  indeed  believe
in  God  and  a future  life,  but  whose  faith  is  weak,  because
they  do  not  understand  the  requirements  of  the  law.  They
say  that  u God  is  able  to  do  without  our  worship.  There
is  neither  any  profit  to  God  from  our  worship,  or  any  injury
done  him  by  our  disobedience,  If  we  worship  God,  we
shall  learn  wrhat  good  it  did  in  the  future  world  ; and  ifwe
do  not  worship  him,  there  will  neither  be  any  advantage
or  harm.  God  himself  so  declares  in  his  holy  word,  “ Who-
soever  keep  himself  pure,  does  it  for  his  own  advantage,”  1
and  in  another  place,  u He  who  does  well,  does  it  for  his
own  profit.5’  2 Although  it  is  better  to  worship  God,  yet
as  God  has  no  need  of  our  worship,  therefore  if  we  do  not
worship  him,  what  harm  is  there  in  it?’’  These  ignorant
people  resemble  the  sick  man,  who  when  the  physician
says  to  him,  uyou  should  be  abstinent,  if  you  wish  to  be


1 S.  35  : 10.


2 S.  41  . 4G.


(jrhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


59


cured  of  your  malady,”  should  answer,  “ what  advautage
is  it  to  you  whether  I ara  abstinent  or  not  ”?  Now  though
the  sick  man  is  right  when  he  says  that  there  is  no  advan-
tage  to  the  physician  from  his  abstinence,  yet  if  he  is  not
abstinent,  he  will  perish.  This  class  regards  obedicnce  and
transgression  as  of  the  same  degree  in  value.  But  in  the
sarae  manneras  disease  may  occasion  a man’s  destruction,
so  transgression  defiles  the  heart,  and  will  cause  it  to  ap-
pear  in  the  future  world  in  a state  of  woe.  And  just  as
abstinence  and  medicine  restore  the  body  to  health,  so  to
avoid  acts  of  transgression  and  sin  and  to  be  obedient  to
God,  are  means  of  securing  salvation.

The  fourth  class  of  men  who  indulge  in  error,  arethose
who  indeed  receive  the  law,  but  in  some  peculiar  and
erroneous  sense.  They  wrongly  say,  “ The  law  commands
us  to  keep  our  hearts  pure  from  pride,  envy,  hatred,  anger
and  dissiraulation.  But  this  is  a thing  which  it  is  impos-
sible  to  do.  For  the  soul  has  been  created  with  these
qualities  and  affections,  and  human  nature  cannot  be
changed.  It  is  just  as  impossible  to  make  a black  material
white  by  scraping  it,  as  for  the  human  heart  to  be  free  from
these  qualities.5?  These  iguorant  men  do  not  know  and
understand,  that  the  law  does  not  command  that  these
qualities  should  be  entirely  etiaced  and  expelled  from  the
heart,  but  rather  requires  that  they  should  be  brought  under
subjection  to  the  heart  and  the  reason,  to  the  end  that  they
may  not  act  presumptuously,  go  beyond  the  limits  set  by
the  law,  and  indulge  in  mortal  sins.  It  is  possible  even  to
chauge  these  qualities,  by  doing  only  what  reason  requires,
and  by  respeeting  the  restrictionsof  the  law.  Many  devout
men  in  past  times  have  secured  this  change  of  the  affections
of  the  soul.  These  qua!ities  once  existed  in  the  prophet
of  God,  but  they  were  corrected,  as  we  learn  from  the  tradi-
tion:  u I am  a man  like  you.  I become  angry,  as  a man
becomes  angry.”  And  God  speaks  in  his  holy  word  of


60


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


“ those  who  control  their  wrath,  and  who  pardon  the  men
who  offend  them.”  1 Notice,  that  in  his  eternal  word,  God
praises  those  who  dissipate  their  anger  and  irritation  : he
does  not  praise  those  who  had  no  anger  or  rage,  since  man
cannot  be  without  them.

The  fifth  class  of  persons  in  error  are  those  who  say
that,  “ God  is  merciful  and  ready  to  pardon,  loving  and
compassionate,  and  more  pitiful  to  his  servauts  than  a father
and  mother  to  their  children,  and  therefore  he  will  pardon
our  faults  aud  cover  our  transgressions.?,  They  do  not
teonsider  that  notwithstanding  God  is  bounteous  and  mer-
ciful,  there  are  still  rnultitudes  of  poor  and  miserable  peo-
ple  in  the  world,  multitudes  who  are  infirm  and  helpless,
and  many  who  are  subjected  to  suffering.  This  is  a mys-
tery  which  is  known  only  to  God.  But  it  shows  us,  that
though  God  is  disposed  to  cover  and  hide  sin,  still  he  is  an
absolute  sovereign  and  an  avenger.  While  he  is  bounteous
and  beneficent,  he  is  at  the  same  time  dreadful  in  his  chas-
tisements  : while  he  is  a benefactor,  and  provides  the  neces-
saries  of  life,  at  the  same  time  he  who  does  not  seek  to
gaiu,  obtains  no  store : and  he  who  is  not  industrious,  ac-
complishes  nothing  in  the  world.  Beloved,  these  ignorant
inen,  in  the  affairs  of  the  world,  in  their  schemes  of  living,
and  in  their  business,  manifest  no  trust  in  the  bounty  of
God,  nor  do  they  leave  ofl’  for  one  moment  their  buying
and  selling,  their  trades  or  their  farming,  although  God  has
decreed  the  means  of  their  existence  many  years  before  they
Were  born,  and  has  made  bimself  surety  that  it  should  be
provided  for  them.  He  announces  in  his  eternal  word  and
book  of  mighty  distinctions,  that  u there  is  110  creature  on
the  earth,  for  whom  God  has  not  taken  upon  himself  to
provide  nourishment.,,  2 Still  they  make  not  the  least  ex-
ertion  in  reference  to  their  relations  and  condition  in  eter-


1 S.  3 : 128.


a S.  11  : 8.


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


61


nity,  but  merely  rely  upon  the  mercy  of  God,  notwithstand-
ing  G-oddeclares  in  his  holy  word,  “ man  cau  have  nothing
without  exertion.”  1 When  they  say  that  Grod  is  gracious
and  merciful,  they  speak  oorrectly.  But  they  are  not  aware
that  Satan  is  deeeiving  them  with  it,  hinderiug  them  from
obedience  and  worship,  and  preventing  them  from  en-
gaging  in  that  cultivation  and  commerce  that  would  pre-
pare  them  for  eternity.

The  sixth  class  who  indulge  in  error,  are  those  who,  ex-
alted  with  pride,  think  that  they  have  already  attained  and
are  perfect : and  they  say,  “ we  have  reached  such  a state
that  transgressions  do  us  no  harm  : we  are  like  the  sea,
which  is  not  polluted  by  filth  falling  into  it.”  These  fool-
ish  people  are  so  ignorant,  that  they  do  not  know  thatu  to
be  like  the  sea,”  means  to  attain  such  a degree  of  calm
that  uo  wind  ean  put  them  in  movement  and  that  nothing
can  cause  any  perturbatiou  in  tbeir  rninds.  These  persons
on  the  contrary,  if  an  individual  fail  to  treat  them  with
honor  and  respect,  or  if  iu  conversation  the  individual  do
not  address  them  as,  my  lord  or  dear  sir,  or  speak  a word
that  touches  their  reputation,  they  bear  him  a grudge* for  a
long  time,  and  even  perhaps  attempt  to  do  him  an  injury.
And  if  a person  take  a piece  of  money  or  a morsel  of  bread
froni  them,  the  world  becomes  too  straight  for  tbem,  aud
every  thing  looks  dark.  These  foolish  people  have  not
even  yet  reaehed  manhood.  They  are  weak  in  tlieir  owu
souls,  and  are  in  subjection  like  slaves  to  passiou  and  anger.
If  it  were  not  so,  how  could  they  be  so  inconsiderate  and
presumptuous  ? Be!oved,  the  falsehood  and  error  of  these
people  appear  from  this  cousideration.  When  inadver-
tently  any  of  the  prophets  fell  into  sin,  even  a little  and
venial  si  n,  they  would  spend  years  in  raourning  and  lament-
ation  overit,  and  occupied  theriiselves  in  eudcavors  to  obli-

1 S.  53  : 40.

8


62


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happmess.


terate  their  faults,  and  to  obtain  parclon  and  forgiveness.
Filled  with  fear  and  dread,  tbey  became  blind  from  their
tears ; from  their  long  continuing  perturbation  and  dis-
traction  of  mind,  you  would  think  they  had  lost  the  use  ot
their  reason.  As  for  the  cornpanions  of  the  prophet,  and
their  immediate  successors  who  were  faitbful  witnesses
for  the  truth  and  the  beloved  of  God,  they  were  so  afraid
in  their  suspiciousness  of  doing  wrong,  that  they  abstained
in  their  anxiety,  from  doing  even  what  was  lawful.  Do
not  these  ignoramuses  know  that  their  degree  of  attain-
ment  does  not  equal  that  of  the  prophets  and  apostles,  and
that  they  are  even  at  a great  distance  from  them  ? Why
then  dp  they  not  shrink  in  fear  and  awe  from  the  shining
yengeauce  of  the  glorious  God  ?

If  they  urge,  however,  that  the  transgressions  of  the  pro-
phets  were  doiug  them  no  injury,  but  that  they  were  exer-
cising  prudenee  and  carefulness  for  the  sake  of* other  people,
we  then  reply,  that  yon  also  ought  to  be  careful,  lest  other
people  seeing  your  actions,  should  imitate  your  example.
And  if  they  respond,  we  do  not  belong  to  the  rank  of  pro-
phets,  that  men  should  walkin  our  steps,  or  that  any  injury
should  befall  us,  on  account  of  the  sins  which  they  may
(jommit,  we  would  again  reply,  that  it  is  better  that  no  in-
jury  should  come  to  yon  in  consequeuee  of  the  sins  done
from  imitating  you,  than  that  injury  should  not  befall  the
prophets  trom  the  sins  done  in  consequence  of  imitating
them ; for  they  are  the  praised  and  accepted  servants  of
God  ; their  earlier  aud  their  later  sins  have  been  pardoued,
and  tbey  are  blessed  in  Paradisc.  Why,  theu,  was  it  so
necessary  that  thcy  should  abstain  from  forbidden  thiugs,
from  things  of  a doubtf'ul  uature  and  even  from  permitted
things  ? It  is  said  that  one  day  sorne  ripe  dates  were
brought  to  the  prophet,  and  he  took  one  and  put  it  in
his  blessed  month.  But  immediately  a doubt  entered  his
mind,as  to  the  manuer  in  which  thedateshad  been  obtained,


GhazzaliJs  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


63


and  he  took  it  ontof  his  blessed  mouthand  would  not  eat  it.
On  another  oceasion  a cup  of  milk  was  brought  to  the
faithful  witness  Aboo  Bekir  by  his  slave,  and  he  took  it
aud  drauk  it.  After  drinking  it,  he  inquired,  “ where  did
you  get  the  milk  ?”  The  slave  said,  UI  told  a man  his
fortune,  aud  he  gave  me  the  milk  in  return.”  As  soon  as
the  faithful  witness  heard  this,  he  frowned  severely  upon
his  servant,  inserted  his  blessed  Ĕnger  down  his  mouth,  and
threw  up  the  whole  of  the  milk,  so  that  none  of  it  remained
on  his  stomach.  He  then  said,  “ I fear  that  if  auy  of  the
milk  should  remain  on  my  stomaeh,  G-od  would  expel
knowledge  and  love  from  my  heart.”  Now  wliat  harm
could  result  to  other  people  from  their  eating  those  dates
or  drinking  that  milk,  that  they  should  have  been  so  care-
ful  about  sueh  little  tbings  ? And  since  they  did  abstain
from  sueh  little  thiugs,  regarding  them  as  injurious,  how
should  itbe  otherwise  than  injurious  tothese  toolish  people
to  drink  wine,  in  full  bowls  and  even  by  the  jar  full  ?

They  knowtbat  the  wisdom,  piety  aud  abstiuence  of  the
prophets  and  saints  were  not  less  than  their  own.  Can
there  be  any  more  astonishing  folly  than  that  of  these  men
who  dare  to  compare  themselves  with  the  sea,  because  they
are  uot  disturbed  by  drinking  several  bowls  of  wine,  while
they  eompare  the  prophet  of  God,  to  a little  water,  which
is  changed  in  its  taste  by  a single  date  ? Thej7  are  just
worthv  that  Satan  should  seize  hold  of  them  bv  the  beard

V **

and  mustaehios,  and  drag  them  after  him  both  in  this  world
and  the  next,  making  them  a shame  and  reproach.

Now  the  faithful,  truthful  and  experieneed  iu  religion,
who  are  mindful  that  the  soul  is  treacherous,  deeeptive,
perddious,  malieious  and  false,  always  watch  carefully  over
their  own  souls,  lest  they  should  do  something  that  tran-
scends  the  commands  of  the  law,  or  that  is  eontrary  to  rea-
son.  The  soul  is  always  disposed  to  say  to  itself,  u I am
obedient  to  the  truth  : I am  snbmissive  to  the  holy  law  :


64


GhazzaUs  Alchemy  of  Jiappiness .


and  I am  well  instructed  in  knowledge.”  But  thou,  with-
out  being  pufted  up  by  tbis  deceitful  language  of  the  soul,
must  constantly  look  to  all  its  tboughts  and  states.  It  it  is
walking  in  the  patb  of  the  law  and  of  the  propbets  and
sainte,  it  is  well!  and  happy  is  be  that  is  faithful  to  his
word  ! Bnt  if  tbe  soul  begin  to  have  an  inclination  for
self-iiidu]gence,  to  explain  away  or  exceed  the  limits  of  the
law  and  to  contradict  clear  and  plain  knowledge,  you  must
regard  it  as  a machination  of  the  devil  and  a temptatiou
to  the  80ul,  In  short,  man,  until  he  descends  to  the  grave,
mu8t  alw^ays  watch  overhis  soul  with  attention,to  discover
in  what  degree  it  is  obedient  to  the  holy  law  and  in  har-
mony  with  knowledge.  Wboever  does  not  thus  watch  over
and  guard  himselt,  is  most  surely  in  a delusion  and  in  the
way  of  a just  destruction.  It  is  the  first  step  in  Islamism,
that  a man  should  keep  his  soul  subject  to  the  law.

The  seventh  form  of  error,  beloved,  is  that  of  the  class
whose  mistakes  arise  from  ignorance  and  carelessness,
while  they  have  never  heard  any  thing  of  these  doubts  of
wbich  we  have  been  speaking.  They  merely  wyear  the
garments,  cap  and  quilted  robes  of  the  mystics  (soofees),
and  after  learuing  some  of  their  words  and  phrases,  they
pretend  to  have  attained  saintship  and  supernatural  powers.
And  althongh  apparently  they  have  110  evil  intentions,  yet
because  they  do  not  properly  respect  the  holy  law,  but
practice  tlieir  devotions  in  a Jax  way,  their  course  leads
them  tocorrupt  doctrines  and  errors.  They  are  alwaysin-
clined  to  do  whatsoever  their  corrupt  disposition  would  lead
them  to  do,  such  as  yielding  to  the  love  of  frivolous  prac-
tices,orto  sensual  indulgences,  or  assenting  to  transgression
and  sin.  In  thepresence  of the  mnltitude,  they  puton  aholy
mien  and  do  not  approve  of  error  and  sin,  but  they  do  not
witiidraw  their  hearts  from  the  pleasnre  of  w ine,  nor  from
adulterous  and  licentious  society,  nor  withdraw  their  hauds
from  the  business  of  gaining  the  world.  Although  iu


Ghazzcdi's  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


65


these  associations  there  raay  be  no  overt  sin,  yet  they  do
not  consider  that  snch  thoughts  are  but  satanic  snggestions
and  sensna]  importunities.  They  are  not  capable  of  dis-
tinguishing  actions  and  circumstances,  or  right  and  wrong.
Beloved,  to  this  class  belong  those  of  whom  God  declares
in  his  holy  word,“  We  have  covered  their  hearts  with  more
than  one  envelop,  that  they  may  not  understand  the  Koran
atid  we  have  put  deafness  upon  their  ears.  Even  if  thou
shouldst  call  them  to  the  right  way,  they  would  never  fol-
low  it.,,  1 It  is  better  to  talk  with  a sword,  than  to  talk
with  this  elass  of  people,  for  they  are  not  open  to  con-
viction.  . . .


CIIAPTER  HI.

On  Knowledgb  of  the  World.

Know,  that  this  world  is  one  stage  of  our  life  for  eter-
nity.  For  those  who  are  journeying  in  the  right  way,  it  is
the  road  of  religion.  It  is  a market  opened  in  the  wilder-
ness,  where  those  who  are  travelling  on  their  way  to  God,
may  collect  and  prepare  provisions  for  their  journey,  and
depart  thence  to  God,  without  sorrow  or  despondeney.

Know,  that  the  state  previous  to  death  is  called  the
world,  because  mortality  is  close  at  hand.  The  state  after
death  is  called  the  future,  because  its  rest  is  permanent.
The  purpose  and  desigu  of  the  world,  is  to  afford  an  op-


1 S.  18  : 55,  56.


66


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness,


portunity  to  make  provision  for  the  future,  to  acquire  know-
ledge,  and  to  worship  God.  Man  as  at  first  created,  was
destitute  of  works,  and  void  ofperfection  ; but  he  was  made
capable  of  reaching  perfection  and  attaining  felicity,  so
that  while  in  a material  world  he  could  look  forward  to  a
spiritual  world,  understand  whence  he  came,  what  are  his
duties,that  he  is  soon  to  depart,  and  mightbe  always  ready.
Man’s  felicity,  which  consists  in  the  contemplation  of  the
beauty  of  God,  cannot  be  vouchsafed  to  him,  until  the  eye
of  his  judgment  is  opened.  But  the  eye  of  judgtnent  is
opened  by  the  contemplation  of  the  works  of  God,  and  by
under8tanding  his  alraighty  power.  The  contemplation  of
the  works  of  God  is  by  means  of  the  senses,  which  become
the  key  to  all  knowledge  of  God.  The  senses  subsist  by
means  of  the  body,  and  the  body  is  composed  of  four  dif-
ferent  elements.  Those  therefore  who  are  endowed  with
understanding,  conscious  of  the  frailty  of  their  bodies
should  make  all  diligence  to  quit  this  kingdora  of  corruption
and  to  enter  perraanently  iuto  the  unchanging  kingdom.

Know,  0 inquirer  after  the  divine  secrets,  that  there  are
two  things  needtul  to  man  in  this  workl ; first  of  all,  he
needs  to  acquire  spiritual  food  to  preserve  his  heart  from
perishing.  The  aliment  of  the  heart  consists  in  thc  love
and  knowledge  of  God  ; for  whatever  is  a necessity  of  the
nature  of  any  one,  that  he  loves,  as  we  have  before  men-
tioned.  Theruin  of  the  soul  consists  in  the  predominance
of  3ome  other  love  over  the  love  of  God,  which  veils  the
divine  love.  Our  refuge  is  in  God  !

The  second  thing  needful  for  a man  is,  tliat  the  body
should  be  preserved  and  tended  with  care,  since  it  is
the  frarae  of  the  heart.  As  a camel  is  to  a pilgrim,
eo  the  body  is  like  an  animal  upon  which  the  heart  rides.
The  pilgrim  is  obliged  togive  food  and  water  to  his  camel,
and  to  treat  it  with  attention,  that  he  may  reach  the  end  of
his  journey  in  safety,  and  by  its  raeans  besuccessful  in  the


G-hazzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


67


object  for  which  he  travels.  But  the  attention  bestowecl  by
1 the  pilgrim  upon  his  camel,  should  be  on]y  in  that  propor-
tion  which  is  really  necessary.  If  he  should  be  busy  with
his  cainel  day  and  night,  and  should  expend  all  his  capital
in  feeding  it,  he  would  not  reach  his  destination,  but  would
ultimately  become  separated  from  his  caravan,  would  lose
all  that  he  possessed,  and  in  view  of  the  injury  he  had  sus-
tained,  he  would  be  the  victim  of  unceasing  regrets,  and
ruin  would  ensue.  Just  so  is  it  with  man  in  general.  If
he  pass  all  his  days  in  attending  to  the  preservation  of
the  body,  and  spend  the  capital  of  his  life,  in  providing
food  and  drink  for  the  body,  he  will  not  reach  the  mansions
of  felicity,  but  wi]]  wanderinthe  wildernessof  destruction,
without  capital,  penniless  and  a naked  vagabond.

Now  the  body  ueeds  in  this  world  three  thiugs,  one  is
food,  another  is  clothing,  and  the  third  is  a home  : and  by
means  of  these,  it  can  be  prcserved  from  injury  and  ruin.
If  the  food  provided  for  the  body  is  excessive,  the  body  will
be  destroyed  : but  let  the  f‘ood  provided  for  the  spirit  be
ever  so  much,  stili  is  it  well.  On  account,  therefore,  of
man’s  need  of  clothing  ancl  food,  God  has  appointed  sensu-
ous  desire  to  act  as  a commissary,  that  the  animal,  that  is,
the  body,  may  not  perish  from  hunger,  cold  or  heat.  But
as  desire,  under  the  control  of  the  animal  soul,  would  not
be  satisiied  with  a suAicient  quantity,  but  would  crave  to
spend  its  life  in  eating  and  drinking,  God  afterwards  com-
mitted  the  animal  sonl  into  the  charge  of  the  reason,  that
desire  might  not  transgress  the  proper  limits.  Yet  as  the
animal  soul  and  desire,  on  account  of  their  intimate  rela-
tions  with  the  body,  are  so  essential  to  it,  their  inAuence
would  still  have  been  predominant.  But  God,the  holy  de-
fender,  in  accordance  with  his  bounteousness  and  grace,
(“my  mercy  has  surpassed  my  anger/’)  has  sent  his  law  by
the  tongues  of  prophets,  that  it  might  become  strength  to
the  reason,  and  prevent  the  animal  soul  and  clesire  from


68


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


passing  beyond  the  due  limits,  and  on  the  contrary  might
dispose  the  soul  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  degree  of  euergy
and  force  necessary  for  it,  and  by  learning  the  design  for
which  it  had  come  iuto  the  world,  might  spend  its  days  ac-
cordingly.

After  you  have  learned,  0 student  of  the  divine  mys-
teries,  what  this  world  in  its  meaning  really  is,  it  is  import-
ant  that  you  should  look  at  the  world  in  detail.  Every
thing  in  the  world  of  matter  which  grows,  has  been  in-
cluded  under  three  classes,  animal,  vegetable  and  mineral,
which  are  called  the  three  generations  or  kingdoms.  An-
imals  were  created  some  for  riding,  some  for  food,  and  some
for  tilling.  Vegetables  were  created  to  aAEbrd  food  and
convenienees  to  man,  and  sustenance  to  various  animals.
Minerals,  like  gold,  silver,  copper  and  iron,  were  created  to
serve  as  instruments  to  provide  means  of  sustaining  life  in
man.  It  was  designed  that  hy  means  of  these  three  king-
doms,  the  spirit  of  man,  while  dwelling  for  a few  days  in  the
body,  should  be  employed  iu  raaking  preparation  for  the
future  world.  Man,  however,  f'orgetful  of  the  end  for
whicb  he  had  come  hither,  heedless  of  the  fact  that  he  was
soon  to  depart,  and  that  he  would  then  repeot  to  find  that
he  was  going  uuprepared,  became  engaged  in  strife  with
his  fellows  about  tbe  things  of  the  world,  fell  in  love  with
its  ways,  and  attempted  to  gaiu  its  wealth.  In  consequence
various  qualities  began  to  appear  in  the  heart,  such  as
avarice,  envy,  ambition  and  hatred,  which  are  sources  of
its  ruin.  Finally  the  heart,  forgetful  of  the  duties  for  the
performance  of  which  it  had  come  into  the  world, exhausted
all  its  energies  in  building  up  the  world.

As  man’s  primary  necessities  in  the  world  are  three,  viz  :
clothing,  food  and  shelter,  so  the  arts  of  the  world  are
three,  viz : weaving,  planting  and  building.  The  rest  of
the  arts  serve  either  for  the  purpose  of  perfecting  the  others,
or  for  repairing  injuries.  Thns  the  spinner  aids  the  work


Ghazzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness . G9

of  weaviDg,  the  tailor  carries  out  that  work  to  perfection,
while  the  eloth-dresser  adds  beauty  to  the  work.  In  the
arts,  there  is  need  of  iron,  skins  and  wood,  and  for  these
many  instruments  are  necessary.  Ho  person  is  able  to
work  at  all  kiuds  of  trades,  but  by  the  will  of  God,  upon
one  is  devolved  one  art  and  upon  another  two,  and  the
whole  community  is  made  dependent,  one  member  upou
the  other.  When  avarice,  ambition  and  covetousness  hold
sway  in  the  hearts  of  men,  because  some  are  not  pleased  to
see  others  obtaiu  houors,  and  because  they  do  not  endeavor
to  quell  their  wauts,  envy  and  hatred  arise  among  them.
Each  one,  dissatisfied  with  his  own  rights,  plots  against  the
property  and  honor  of  his  fellows.  On  this  account  there
was  a necessity  for  t.hree  farther  distinctions,  viz : sove-
reignty,  judicial  authority,  and  jurisprudence,  which  con-
tains  the  digestof  the  law.  But  alas  ! poor  and  wretched
man  coming  under  the  inAnence  of  all  these  causes,  motives
and  instruments,  spends  hislifein  collecting  wealthand  lays
up  for  himself  sources  of  regret.  And  just  as  the  pilgrim,
who  on  his  way  to  the  Kaaba  of  Mecca,  was  engaged  day
and  night  in  taking  care  of  his  eamel,  got  separated  from
the  earavan,  and  perished  in  the  desert,  so  those  who  know
not  the  real  nature  of  the  world  aud  its  worthlessness,  and
do  not  understand  that  it  is  the  plaee  where  seed  is  sowti
for  eternity,  but  spend  all  their  thoughts  upon  it,  are  cer-
tainly  fascinated  and  deceived;  as  the  apostle  of  God  de-
clares.  u The  world  is  more  enehauting  than  Harout  and
Marout : let  men  beware  of  it.”1

After  you  have  learned  that  the  world  is  delusive,  en-
chanting  and  treacherous,  you  need  to  know  in  what  way
its  delusions  and  enchantmeut  operate.  I will,  therefore,
mention  some  things  which  are  illustrative  of  the  world.
The  world,  beloved,  is  like  an  enehanter,  who  exhibits  him-

1 Teacliers  of  arts  of  encliantment.

9


70


Ghazzalis  Alchcwy  of  Ilappiness.


self  to  you  as  though  he  would  dwell  with  you  aud  would
forever  be  at  your  side ; while  in  truth  this  world  is  always
upon  the  point  of  being  snatched  away  from  you?  notwith-
standing  you  are  trancpiilly  unconscious  of  it.  The  world
is  like  a shadow,  which,  while  you  look  at  it,  seems  fixed,
although  in  reality,  it  is  in  motion.  Life  islike  a running
water,  which  is  always  advancing,  yet  you  think  that  it  is
still  and  permanent,  an  i you  wish  to  fix  your  abode  by
it.  The  world  again  is  like  an  enchanter  who  performs
for  you  acts  of  Iriendship  and  manifests  love  for  you,  for
thesake  of  winning  your  aftections  to  him  : but  as  soon  as
he  has  secured  your  ]ove,  hc  turns  away  his  face  from  you
and  plots  to  destroy  you.  . . .

The  world  resembles  those  iraposters,  who  decorate  them-
selves  externally  and  conceal  the  sorrows  and  curse  they
bring,  while  the  ignorant,  looking  only  at  the  outside,  are
fascinated  and  deluded.  The  world  resembles  the  old  wo-
man  who  arrayed  herselt*  in  silk  stuffs  and  Aowered  bro-
cades,  ancl  with  ornaments,  ancl  covered  her  head  with  a
beautiful  embroiderecl  veil,  so  that  those  who  should  see
ber  from  a distance,  and  uotice  only  her  garments  and  her
form,  inight  be  deceived.  And  whenever  she  has  suc-
ceeded  in  inducing  a person  to  follow  after  her  and  to  de-
cide  upon  joining  himself  to  her,  she  takes  off  her  robes
from  her  back  and  her  veil  from  her  head,  and  immedi-
ately  her  concealed  ugliness  is  brought  to  light,  and  the
person  who  hadbeeu  seeking  her,  becomes  subject  to  eter-
nal  regret  and  sorrow.  We  have  received  it  also  by  tradi-
tion,  that  the  world  will  be  bronght  to  the  great  assembly
at  the  last  day,  in  the  forra  of  a woman  with  livid  eyes,
pendent  lips,  and  deforraed  shape,  and  all  the  people  will
look  upon  her,  (we  take  refuge  in  God,)  and  will  exclaim,
\vhat  deformed  and  horrible  person  is  that,  whose  aspect
alone  is  severe  torture  to  the  soul?”  And  they  will  be  an-
swered.  uIt  was  on  her  account  that  you  wereenvyingand


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


71


hating  one  another,  and  were  rcady  to  slay  one  another.  It
was  on  her  account  thatyou  rebelled  against  God,  and  de-
based  yourselves  to  every  sort  of  corruption.”  And  then
God  will  order  her  to  be  driven  off  to  hell  with  ber  fol-
lowers  and  her  lovers.  . . .

Know,  that  the  world  consists  of  a certain  nuraber  of
stages  between  the  world  of  spirits  and  the  future  world.
The  first  stage  is  the  cradle,  and  the  last  is  the  grave,  and
every  period  between  these  is  also  a stage.  Each  month
represents  a league,  each  hour  a raile,  and  each  breath  a
step.  It  is  always  Aowing  on  like  running  water.  Man  in
his  excessive  heedlessness  thinking  himself  to  be  perraa-
nently  established,  engages  in  building  up  the  world : and
though  he  has  no  assurance  of  a half-hour  of  time,  he  raakes
preparations  for  dwelling  here  for  raany  years,  aud  never
once  brings  hiraself  to  make  the  necessary  preparation  for
dislodging  and  moving  to  another  land.

Behold,  another  likeness  of  the  world.  Know,  beloved,
that  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  and  the  pains  and  tribula-
tions  which  are  the  counterpart  to  these  pleasures  in  the
future  world,  reserable  the  man  who  should  eat  very  largely
of  rich  and  delicate  food  and  find  great  delight  therein  :
but  on  account  of  his  excesses,  he  suffers  from  indigestion,
his  storaach  is  irritated,  vomiting  and  sickness  ensuc  and
he  has  a great  deal  to  endnre  before  he  can  recover  his
bealth.  He  repents  of  what  he  has  been  eating,  and  in  pro-
portion  as  he  ate  extravagantly,  aud  found  enjoyment,  he
now  suffers  corresponding  pain  and  disappointraent.  How
then,in  proportion  as  anyone  in  the  world  has  indulgedin
the  pleasures  of  lifc  and  dissipation,  so  rauch  the  greater
will  be  his  anguish  and  torment  at  the  raoraent  of  death.
Ile  who  possesses  gardens  and  fields,  houses,  lands,  and
money,  servants  and  horses,  will  be  subject  to  regret  and
affliction  at  death,  in  proportion  to  their  amount.  Tbis
misery  docs  not  close  with  death,but  on  the  contrary  after-


72


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Hajppiness .


wards  increases.  Tbe  Lord  Jesus  (upon  whom  be  peace  !)
declares  tbat  tbe  world  is  like  tbe  man  wbo  drinks  sea-
water.  The  more  he  drinks,  tbe  more  bisinternal  beat  in-
creases.  And  unless  be  stops,  he  will  destroy  himself  by
drinking.

Man  in  this  world  resembles  the  guest  who  was  invited
to  partake  of  tbe  bospitality  of  a rich  man.  In  token  of
respect,  tbe  servants  set  before  him  silver  wasbing-basins,
yessels  of  costly  stones,  perfumes  of  musk  aud  amber  witb
cbafing  disbes.  Tbe  poor  guest  is  overjoyed  at  the  sigbt
of  tbese  things,  tbinldng  tbat  tbey  have  been  made  bis  own
property,  and  he  lays  hold  of  them  witb  tbe  intention  of  re-
taining  them.  Tbe  next  day,  wben  be  is  upon  tbe  point  of
departure,  tbey  are  all  taken  from  bim  by  force,  and  the
measure  of  bis  disappointment  and  regret  is  clear  to  every
person  of  discrimination.  Seeing  that  this  world  is  itself  a
mansion  built  for  travellers,  by  tbe  road  over  which  they
are  to  pass,  tbat  they  may  make  a halt,  and  lay  in  provisions
preparatory  to  leaving  it  again,  be  is  a wise  guest  wbo  does
not  lay  his  hand  upon  other  things  tban  bis  necessary  pro-
vision8,  lest  on  the  morrow  wben  about  to  move  on,  they
take  them  out  of  his  hands,  and  be  expose  bimself  to  regret
and  sorrow.

The  people  of  this  world  are  also  like  tbe  passengers  in
a ship,  who  wbile  sailing  upon  tbe  sea,  arrive  at  an  island.
The  sailors  draw  the  ship  to  the  shore,  and  then  call  out  and
say,  “ whoeyer  wishes  for  water  or  other  provisions,  let  him
leave  the  ship  and  go  and  procure  tbem  : let  bim  not  delay,
for  the  ship  wiil  not  remain  long.  It  is  besides  a dangerous
place,  and  wboever  remains  bere  will  perish.,,  After  re-
ceiving  tbis  warning,  the  passengers  leave  the  ship,  and  are
all  scattered  about,  one  in  this  direction  and  another  in  that.
The  wise  passengers,  remembering  the  admonition  of  the
sailors,  attended  quickly  to  tbeir  affairs,  and  immediately
returned  to  the  ship.  They  selected  the  piaces  in  the  ship


GhazzaWs  Alehemy  of  Ilappiness .


73


that  pleased  them  best,  and  sat  down  calm  and  tranqui1.
Some  of  the  passengers,  however,  gazed  at  the  trees,  the
Aowers  and  the  fruits  of  the  island,  listened  to  and  admired
the  notes  of  the  birds,  and  became  absorbed  in  looking  at
the  wonderful  curiosities  found  there.  They  delayed  so
long,  that  when  they  came  to  the  ship,  they  found  every
place  in  the  ship  occupied,  and  no  room  for  them  to  sit  down .
They  finally  entered,  and  fouud  a eorner  with  great  diffi-
cnlty,  where  they  could  just  press  themselves  in.  Others,
not  satisfied  with  gazing  around,  loaded  themselves  with
stones  that  had  the  appearance  of  being  precious,  and  after
a time  returned  to  the  ship.  They  found  it  completely
full,  and  absolutely  no  place  to  sit  down.  After  they  had
entered,  they  were  compelled  from  necessityto  stowthem-
selves  in  a dark  place  at  the  bottom.  As  for  the  stoues
which  they  had  thought  were  jewels,  they  lost  their  color,
putrefied,  and  sent  forth  such  a disagreeable  odor,  as  to  af-
fect  the  passengers  to  nausea.  It  was  impossible  to  expel
the  odor  and  they  remaiued  to  the  last  with  its  disagreea-
bleness  in  the  midst  of  thera.  Others  still  took  so  much
pleasure  in  looking  about  the  island,  that  they  said  to  them-
selves,  “ wdiere  shall  we  be  able  to  find  a more  delightful  re-
treatthan  this  ? It  is  not  clear  that  the  plaee  where  we  are
going  is  better  than  this.,,  And  so  they  chose  to  remain
there ; and  after  the  departure  of  the  ship  some  of  them  per-
ished  with  hunger  and  thirst,  and  some  were  devoured  by
wild  beasts.  Not  one  of  them  was  saved.  In  the  future
world  they  will  certainly  suffer  pain  and  retribution.

Do  not  suppose,  beloved,  that  every  thing  in  the  world  is
to  be  despised;  for  there  are  some  things  that  are  estima-
ble  and  valuable,  which  belong  to  the  world : viz  : know-
ledge,  worship,  war  in  defenceof  thefaith,and  abstinence  :
and  also  a sufficiency  of  food,  drink  and  clothing,  marriage,
domestic  shelter  and  other  things;  seeing  that  they  are
helps  on  the  journey  to  the  future  world  and  in  the  path  of


74


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happmess.


knowledge,  thoy  areall  of  them  exceedingly  important  and
necessary.  Delight  in  knowledge,  delight  in  worship,  de-
light  in  prayer  and  delight  in  communion  with  God  are
things  of  this  world,  but  still  they  are  for  the  sake  of
the  future  world.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  pleasures
of  the  world  are  not  all  of  them  blamable,  but  only  those
which  entail  pnnishment  in  the  future  world,  or  which  are
not  in  the  path  to  paradise,  and  so  the  apostle  declares,
u The  world  is  a curse  and  all  that  is  in  it  is  a curse,  ex-
cept  the  remembrauce  of  God  and  that  which  is  the
object  of  his  love.,,


CHAPTER  IV.

On  Knowledge  oe  the  Futtjre  World.

Know,  beloved,  that  we  cannot  nnderstand  the  tuture
world,  until  we  know  what  death  is : and  we  cannot  know
what  death  is,  until  we  know  whatlife  is:  nor  can  we  un-
derstand  what  life  is,  until  we  know  what  the  spirit  is.  . . .

If  you  wish,  0 student  of  the  mysteries  of  God,  to  learn
the  essential  facts  about  death,  you  must  know  that  there
are  in  man  two  kinds  of  spirit,  one  of  which  is  of  the  na-
ture  of  the  spirit  in  animals  and  which  we  call  animal  spirit,
and  the  other  is  of  the  nature  of  the  spirit  of  angels,  which
we  call  human  spirit.  Thefountain  of  the  aninuil  spiritis
in  that  heart  which  is  in  the  left  side  of  the  breast,  and  is
a piece  of  flesh.  It  is  a delicate  exhalation  from  the  hu-
mors  within  the  animal.  Its  constitution  is  fixed  in  certain


Ghazzatfs  Alchemy  of  Uappiness.


75


proportions,  just  as  is  that  of  oxymel,  which  is  composed
of  honey  and  vinegar  that  on  being  mixed,  while  they  Iose
their  own  flavor,  acquire  a new,  delicate  and  useful  flavor,
so  also,  by  the  blendiug  ofthe  various  elements  of  the  body,
a delicate  exhalation  is  the  result,  whichAnds  its  home  in
the  heart.  It  gains  other  delicate  qualities  from  the  heart,
and  from  thence  the  blood  channcls,  which  are  the  veins  of
pulsation,  are  supplied.  The  exhalation  passes  by  their
means  to  the  brain  and  from  thenee  flows  to  all  the  mem-
bers.  It  is  exeeedingly  hot,  but  in  its  passage  to  the  brain,
it  loses  some  of  its  heat  and  becomes  tepid.  By  the  distri-
bution  ot’  thisspirit  through  the  body,  the  eye  sees,  the  ear
hears,  the  tongue  tastes,  the  nose  smells,  and  the  rest  of
the  organs  are  endowed  with  their  proper  movements  and
perform  their  appropriate  functions.  . . .

So  long  as  the  spirit  works  in  equilibrium,  it  is  capable
of  delicate  operations  and  effects  ; but  so  soon  as  excess  of
heat  or  cold  destroys  the  equilibrium,  the  exhaled  fluid  is
diminished,  and  it  becomes  incapable  of  movement  and
sensation.  . . .

That  cause  which  throws  the  constitution  out  of  balance
and  occasions  the  complete  absence  of  the  exhalation,  is
called  the  Angel  of  death,  who  is  also  a creature  of  God.
Most  persons  merely  know  his  name.  . . .

The  secoud  kind  of  spirit,  which  is  ealled  both  human  .
spirit  and  heart,is  not  a body,  and  is  not  susceptible  of  di-
vision.  It  is  the  seat  of  the  knowledge  of  God.  In  the
same  manuer,  God  himself  is  one,  is  not  susceptible  of  sepa-  '
ration  intoparts  and  the  place  of  his  knowledge  isone.  . . .

Even  if  the  action  of  the  larger  part  of  the  members
should  be  paralyzed,  it  is  still  possible  that  life  should  con-
tinne  in  a man.  Dcath  occurs,  when,  after  the  ruin  of  the
constitution,  the  delicate  exhalation  on  that  very  account
is  no  Ionger  transmitted  to  the  members,  and  they  are  all


76


Ghazzalts  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


paralyze(l  together  aud  cease  from  movement.  Although
you  still  remain  in  being,  you  possess  neither  sensation  nor
motion.  You  know,  also,  that  in  infancy  the  ingredients
of  your  body  were  drawn  from  pure  blood.  These  under-
went  a change  and  disappeared,  and  the  ingredients  de-
rived  from  food  took  their  place.  You  know  moreover
that  the  form  which  you  had  on  your  entrance  into  the
world,  and  yonr  present  form  are  not  the  same.  It  fol-
lows  therefore  that  there  is  no  necessity  of  your  perishing
on  account  of  the  perishing  of  the  body.  The  body  is
earth  and  must  therefore  return  to  its  original  earth.  Your
spirit,  however,  is  ofan  angelic  nature,  and  you  must  there-
fore  mingle  with  your  original  spirit.  If  the  inAuences  of
the  world  operate  with  such  power  that  you  are  sepa-
rated  from  your  original  spirit,  it  is  fixed  and  sure  that  you
will  have  to  endure  the  torment  of  separation  and  misery.

It  should  be  kept  in  mind,  that  you  possess  two  classes
of  qualities  or  attributes.  One  class  includes  those  which
result  from  the  union  existing  between  your  body  and  your
spirit,  viz : hunger,  thirst,  sleep,  eating  and  drinking.
These  qualities  become  useless  at  death.  The  other  class
includes  qualities  belongi?)g  solely  to  your  spirit,  such  as
the  knowledge  of  God,  and  the  love  of  God,  and  the  qual-
ities  w7hieh  tend  to  secure  these  two,  as  gratitude,  submis-
sion  and  supplieation.  These  are  qualities  of  your  individ-
ual  self,  which  do  not  pass  away  with  death,  but  on  the
contrary  the  fruits  of  them  will  be  ever  growing  and  devel-
oping.  The  language  of  the  blessed  God  in  the  words,
“ the  permanent  things  are  the  holy  virtues,”  1 points  to
these  qualities.  That  spirit  is  also  enduring  and  eternal,
which  is  destitute  of  love  aud  knowledge,  which  iudeed
knows  nothing  and  has  uo  delight  in  or  atiection  for  these


1 S.  18  : 44.


Ghazzalis  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


77


things,  but  it  will  be  blind  and  wretched  : as  God  declares
in  his  word  : “ He  who  was  blind  in  this  world  will  be  blind
in  the  tuture  world,  and  iu  a niost  fatal  path  of  error.”  1

The  nature  of‘  deatb  cannot  be  understood,  unless  we  are
acquainted  with  these  two  kinds  of  spirit  and  with  the
relatious  of  dependence  between  them.  Know,  then,  0
seeker,  thatthe  animal  spirit  belongs  to  theinferior  world.
The  elements  of  its  four  humors,  blood,  phlegm,  bile  and
black  bile,  are  fire,  air,  water  and  earth.  The  anirnal  spirit
is  a product  of  a delicate  exhalation  from  tliese  elements.
The  variations  in  the  measure  of  a man’s  health  depend
on  the  variationsof  beat,cold,drynessand  moisture.  Hence
it  is  the  object  of  the  science  of  medicine  to  preserve  these
four  elements  in  their  due  proportions,  so  that  they  may
serve  as  instruments  to  secure  perfection  to  the  liuman
spirit. 2

The  human  spirit  belongs  to  the  superior  world  aud  is
of  an  angelic  substance.  It  has  come  into  tliis  world  a
stranger,  and  has  descended  from  its  original  state  to  this
temporary  home,  to  receive  its  destiuy  from  divine  direc-
tion,  and  for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  the  knowledge  of
God.  In  accordance  with  this,  God  declares  in  his  holy
word,  “¥e  said  to  them  — leave  paradise  all  of  you  just
as  you  are  : a book  destined  for  your  guidance  will  come
to  you  from  me : fear  shall  never  betall  those  who  will
follow  it,  and  they  shall  not  be  afflicted.,J  3 And  that
which  God  says  in  another  place,  points  to  the  ditterent  de-
grees  of  worlds : “ I create  man  of  cla^7 : aud  when  I shall
have  formed  man  of  clay  and  shall  have  breathed  my  spirit
in  him,  prostrate  yourselves  before  him  in  adoration.” t
First  of  all  in  his  saying  “ from  clay  he  points  to  a material
body.  The  phrase  “ I shall  have  formed  ” indicates  the
animal  spirit.  The  phrase  “shall  have  breathed  my  spirit

1 S.  17  : 74.  2 See  Good’s  Pkysiol.  Proem  3 S.  2 : 86.  4 S.  15  : 28,  29.

10


78


Ghazzolts  Alehcmy  of  IJappmcss .


in  him,”  means  that  I have  given  to  the  body  of  man  a well
balanced  constitution  with  power  and  motion.  I have
made  it  capable  of  receiving  the  law,  and  to  be  a home  for
the  knowledge  of  God.

In  the  same  manner  as  the  equi]ihrium  of  the  inferior
spirit  is  to  be  preserved  by  the  science  of  medicine,  the
eqnilibrium  of  the  human  spirit  is  to  be  preserved  by  vir-
tue,  self-denial  and  holy  zeal,  that  it  may  not  be  destitute
of  the  love  of  God  and  perish.

It  is  plain,  then,  that  a knowledge  of  the  future  world
cannot  be  aequired,  until  we  bave  learned  the  trne  nature
of  the  two  spirits.  We  cannot  obtain,  for  example,  a know-
ledge  of  God,  unless  we  previously  possess  a knowledge  of
the  soul.  But  as  Islamism  consists  essentially  in  believ-
ing  and  confessing  the  Lord  God  and  the  future  world,  it
becomes  our  duty  to  acquire  a knowledge  of  the  future
worldas  far  as  the  thing  is  possible.  There  is,  however,  a
mystery  regarding  the  future  world,  which  the  holy  lawT
has  not  authorized  to  be  explained  or  to  be  mentioned,  be-
,cause  it  could  not  possibly  be  understood.  Seeing  then
that  the  knowledge  of  the  fnture  wrorld  cannot  possibly  be
acquired,  until  that  mystery  is  revealed,  strive  that  it  may
be  revealed  in  your  own  soul  by  pious  endeavor,  self-denial
and  divine  guidance.  Tou  cannot  learn  it  b}T  an}T  possible
eflforts  from  any  other  person  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear.
Many  persons  have  heard  this  mystery,  which  repre-
sents  one  of  the  attributes  of  God,  but  they  did  not  acknow-
ledge  it  as  true,  and  said  that  it  w7as  impossible,  not  be-
cause  it  was  in  its  nature  exempt  from  being  known,  but
because  it  was  an  unemployed  mystery.  It  is  not  named
either  in  the  Koran  or  in  the  Traditions.  God  commanded
the  prophets  not  to  inform  the  people  of  the  essence  of  his
attributes,  saying  u for  they  will  not  understand  them,  will
accuse  }'ou  of  falsehood, and  will  do  injury  to  themselves.,?


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Iloppiness.


79


It  has  been  clearly  shown  to  yon,  student  of  the  myster-
ies,  that  the  human  spirit  in  its  essenee  and  attributes  is  to
live  forever,  and  that  it  is  able  to  exist  without  a frame,
tliat  the  meaning  of  death  is  not  the  annihilation  of  the
spirit,  but  its  separation  from  the  body,  and  that  the  re-
surrection  and  day  of  assembly  do  not  mean  a return  to  a
new  existence  after  annihilation,  but  the  bestowal  of  a new
fonn  or  frame  to  the  spirit,  which  shall  be  under  its  con-
trol  in  the  second  period,  as  the  body  was  under  its  con-
trol  in  the  first  period.  . . .

In  saying  that  in  the  second  period,  the  control  of  the
spirit  is  easy,  it  is  said  in  respect  to  our  contracted  under-
standings,  and  in  comparison  with  our  operations,  and  to
make  the  matter  intelligible  to  others.  When  God  says
in  the  powerful  Koran,  “ It  is  easier,M  and  “ For  me  it  is
eas3r,”  he  uses  the  phraseology  only  for  the  sake  of  being
understood  by  man.  On  the  contrary  in  the  first  period,
there  was  liothing  difficult  for  God  : it  would  have  been
nothing  to  him  to  have  created  without  matter,  in  a mo-
ment,  a thousand  worlds  like  this  whieh  we  inhabit.

It  fol!ows  from  what  has  been  said,  that  it  is  not  a no-
cessary  condition  of  the  resurrection  and  restoration  that
the  spirit  should  possess  exactly  the  original  mould.  For
that  which  we  seek  is  not  the  vehicle  of  the  spirit,  but
the  spirit  itself.  This  mould  undergoes  change  even  iu
this  world.  Thus,  for  exaraple,  the  materials  derived  from
the  condensation  of  the  exhalations  and  the  inspissation  of
the  blood  in  the  stomach  of  the  mother  are  changed  by
food,  and  new  flesh  is  produced.  Many  questions  may  be
asked  of  those  who  say  that  the  identieal  mould  must  re-
turn  and  rise  in  the  resurrection,  and  that  its  abseuce  can
in  no  wise  be  tolerated,  and  they  will  find  much  difficulty
in  answering  them.  One  may  ask  for  example,  if  one  man
eat  another  man,  and  the  man  eaten  becorae  a portion


80


Ghazzalis  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


of  the  rnar)  who  ate  bim,  will  that  portion  rise  with  the
eater  or  with  the  man  who  was  eaten  ? . . .

They  say,  moreover,  that  man  is  created  from  seed,  that
seed  is  derived  from  food,  and  that  food  is  derived  from
the  milk,  the  fat  or  the  flesh  of  au  animal : now  with  which
of  all  these  will  the  ingredient  rise  up  ? Again,  suppose  the
hand  of  a thief  has  been  cut  ofl‘,  and  he  afterwards  leads  a
life  of  good  works  and  enters  Paradise.  Must  he  enter
Paradise,  wherenothingmaimed  ordefectivecan  enter,with-
out  his  liand,  or  will  he  enter  witli  his  hand,  notwithstand-
ing  his  good  wTorks  were  not  performed  when  he  possessed
that  hand  ? The  source  of  all  these  perverse  speculations  is
in  the  pretence  of  those  who  say  that  in  the  day  of  assem-
bly,  the  mould  reappears  and  that  the  spirit  follows  in  its
train,  that  if  it  was  not  for  the  mould  there  would  be  no
eemhlance  of*  man,  and  that  the  permanency  of  the  spirit
results  from  its  connection  w ith  the  body.

If,  0 seeker,  you  say  that  the  well  known  language  of
the  wise  in  the  law  and  in  discourse  is,  that  at  death  a man
becomes  non-existent,  and  that  he  exists  afterwards  in  the
resurrecticn  with  this  identical  body,  and  that  our  lan-
guage  contradicts  theirs,  we  reply.  He  who  merely  follows
in  the  track  of  the  language  used  by  others,  will  never  ac-
quire  a knowledge  of  the  truth.  However,  the  words  you
have  cited  are  not  those,  eitber  of  people  of  intelligence  or
of  iniitators.  For  the  intelligent  and  learned  know  that
the  body  is  not  aunihilated  at  death,  but  that  the  rna-
terials  of  which  it  is  composed  are  separated,  and  that  it  is
this  separation  which  they  call  death.  The  imitator  has
likewise  heard  from  the  doctors  of  the  law,  that  the  spirit
lives  eternally  after  death.

It  is  well  known  that  spirits  are  divided  into  two  classes,
in  one  of  which  all  blessed  spirits  are  embraced  and  in  the
other  all  miserable  spirits.  With  respect  to  the  blessed  spi-
rits  God  says,  “ Think  not  that  those  who  have  becn  slaiu  on


Ghazzatis  Alchemy  of  Tlappiness.


81


the  divine  road  are  dead  : they  are  alive  near  their  Lord
and  are  sustained  by  him.”  1 In  regard  to  the  miserable
spirits,  the  apostle  of  God  came  to  the  infidels  who  had
been  slain  in  the  battle  of  Bader, 2 and  ealled  upon  each
by  name,  and  said,  u 0 ! such  a one,  son  of  such  a one,  I
have  found  the  victory  and  triumph  which  my  Lord  pro-
mised.  And  you,  have  you  found  that  latter  end  and  tor-
raent  of  which  the Lord  assured  you,  or  bave  you  not  found
it  Vy  His  houored  corapanions  having  remarked  to  him,
u they  are  dead  and  how  can  they  hear  and  how  can  they
speak  the  glory  of  the  world  replied,  “ By  the  truth  of
God  who  has  coramissioned  me  to  be  a true  prophet,  they
are  better  able  to  hear  than  yourselves  : therc  is  only  this
ditterence,  that  they  are  not  able  to  answer.”  And  the
prophet  of  God  declared  that  the  spiritsof  martyrs  are  in
lanterns  under  the  erapyrean  : and  aceording  to  another  ac-
couut  that  they  are  suspended  to  the  fruits  of  tlie  trees  of
Paradise  in  the  craws  of  green  birds.  In  brief,  whoever
will  study  caretully  the  verses  of  the  Koran,  the  Traditions
and  recolleetions  that  have  reached  us  respecting  death,  and
will  consider  the  well  substantiated  accounts  of  the  move-
ments  ofthe  dead  in  grave  yards,  he  will  know,  in  a inan-
ner  that  should  remove  all  douht,  that  the  dead  clearly  do
not  become  non-existent.  . . .

Hence  it  happens,  that  when  a person  becomes  breath-
less  and  is  entranced,  as  sornetimes  happens  in  the  first  ex-
ercises  among  the  Soofees,  hehas  a delightful  vision  of  the
state  after  death,  notwithstandi ng  the  animal  spirit  contin-
ues  in  the  enjoyment  of  health.  Yet  if,  wlrile  in  that  state,
fear  and  terror  should  happen  to  predominate  and  dcprive
him  of  feeling  and  motion,  and  if  he  become  so  far  like
the  dead  that  he  pereeives  no  external  object,  the  same


1 S.  3 : 163.

2 First  victory  of  the  Mussulmans  near  Medina.


82


Ghazzali’s  Alcliemy  of  Happiness.


things  may  be  revealed  to  him  which  are  revealed  to  oth-
er3  after  death.  It  is  sometimes  permitted,  after  he  returns
from  that  state  to  the  sensible  world,  that  all  he  has  seen
shoald  remain  in  his  memory,  or  that  if  he  does  not  remera-
ber  it,  traces  of  it  should  remain  in  his  mind.  If  he  saw
hell,  he  will  retain  traces  of  despondency,  sadness,  heavi-
ness  of  spirit,  suspicion  and  melancholy.  If  in  the  trea-
sury  of  his  imagiuation  he  has  preserved  these  traces,  it  is
lawful  for  him  to  commuuicate  them  to  others.  . . .

The  torments  of  the  grave,  0 seeker  after  the  divine
mysteries,  are  of  two  kinds : one  kind  is  spiritual  and  the
other  is  material  torment,  and  they  have  been  repeatedly
explained.

The  spiritual  torment  cannot  be  understood,  until  a per-
son  is  acquaintcd  with  his  own  soul  aud  spirit.  His  soul
exists  in  its  own  individuality : it  is  not  dependent  upon
form  or  mould  : it  has  neither  hand  or  foot,  nor  eye  or  ear.
The  external  senses  which  it  possessed  were  dependcnt
on  the  body,  and  remain  inactive  and  useless  after  death,
and  all  the  enjoyments  resulting  from  them  become  en-
tirely  uull.  Wife,  children,  friends,  property,  slaves  and
domestics,  equipage,  cattle,  estates  and  fields  were  form-
erly  sources  of  enjoyment  to  it.  Aud  if  he  were  a lover  of,
and  aseekerafterthese  things,so  that  he  hadbeen  alwa^^s  oc-
cupiedwith  them,  the  tormeut  of  separation  from  them  will
make  a deep  impression  upon  his  soul,  and  he  will  be  most
certainly  the  subjectof  sorrow  and  lamentation.  But  if  his
heart  was  untrammeled  by  these  delights,  and  was  inclined
towards  the  futurc  world  and  was  always  awaiting  death,
if  the  enjoyments  of  the  world  were  distastetul  to  him,
white  he  was  always  occupied  with  the  wants  of  the  soul,
which  are  to  find  out  God  — then,  in  the  event  of  death,
he  will  have  attained  his  longing  and  his  love,  aud  have
reached  rest,  joy  and  happiness.


.GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Uappiness.  83

Call  to  mind  now,  that  the  spirit  of  a man  is  eternal:
n has  not  perished  at  death.  Can  you  doubt  then,  that
that  spirit  whieh  had  chosen  the  glare  and  glitter  of  the
world  for  its  beloved  object,  and  had  been  absorbed  heart
and  soul  in  the  occupations  of  the  world  — when  in  a mo-
meut  of  time,  all  that  which  it  had  been  gaining  day  after
day,  which  it  had  obtained  with  great  persererance  and
industry,  and  which  it  had  been  eoveting  and  striving  for
during  many  years,  is  taken  out  of  it.s  hands  by  death,
can  you  doubt  that  it  will  be  the  prey  of  endless  sorrow
and  grief,  of  abundant  mortilication,  regret  and  remorse  ?
This  aecords  with  what  the  apostle  of  God  declares,  “ Love
what  thou  hast  loved  : but  thou  shalt  be  separated  from
it.”  But  when  a man  realizes  that  this  world  is  a etage  of
a journey,  and  that  the  purpose  of  his  coming  hither  is  to
attain  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God,  and  when  he  is  day
aud  night  oceupied  with  this,  forsaking  the  world  before
death  arrives,  and  perhaps  even  envying  aud  longing  for
death,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  iu  the  event  of  death,
he  is  delivered  from  all  pain  and  sorrow,  and  obtains  rest
and  spiritual  uniou.

From  what  has  beeu  said,  it  follows  that  the  torments
of  the  grave  are  for  the  triends  of  this  world  and  the
seekers  of  the  world,  and  uot  for  the  devout  and  pious.
And  here  we  find  an  explanation  of  what  the  prophet  of
God  said  : that  “ the  world  is  the  prison  of  the  believer  and
the  paradise  of  the  iufidel.”

Since  you  have  now  learncd,  0 student,  that  the  torment
of  the  grave  is  oecasioned  by  love  of  the  world,  know  also
that  there  are  different  degrees  of  it.  It  is  in  proportion
t.o  eaeh  person?s  affeetion  and  love  for  the  world,  and  will
come  upon  some  with  great  severity.  . . .

If,  for  example,a  person  possess  afemale  slave  to  whom
he  is  exceedingly  attached,  and  on  aceount  of  his  being
every  day  by  her  side,  he  is  not  conseious  of  his  attaeh-


8 4 Ghazzalis  Akhemij  of  Happiness.

ment,  and  then  if  suddeuly  he  should  become  offended
with  her  and  sell  her  to  another  person,  and  should  after-
wards  become  conscions  of  his  concealed  love,  liis  heart
would  hourly  assail  him  and  sting  him  like  a serpent.
The  fire  of  regret  and  rage  would  burn  within  him,
80  that  he  might  be  not  only  sick  from  its  effects,  but  might
even  die.  Now  if  it  is  possible  that  such  results  should
follow  from  the  loss  of  a female  slave,  cousider  what  must
be  the  degree  of  grief  and  affliction  of  a mati  who  is  sud-
denly  called  upon  to  part  with  all  his  beloved  objects  in  a
moment.  Just  as  it  might  happen  that  the  master  of  the
female  slave  should  throw  himself  into  the  water  to  drown
himself,  or  casthimselt'  into  the  fire  to  burn  himself,  all  on
account  of  his  separation  from  her,  so  those  spirits  of  men
who  are  in  theirgraves  utter  mauy  wishes,  exclaiming,  u Ah  !
would  that  these  scorpions  and  serpents,  like  those  in  the
material  world,  would  only  sting  usand  destroy  us,  that  at
least  we  might  be  delivered  from  this  torment.”

Pain  in  the  world  is  an  accident  of  the  body,  and  passes
from  the  body  to  the  spirit,  and  thus  the  spirit  participates
iu  thetorment.  But  iu  the  future  world,  pain  has  its  home
iu  the  spirit  itself,  and  hence  it  is  excruciating.

Every  one  bears  away  from  this  world  within  himself
the  esscnce  of  his  tornient,  but  men  are  uot  aware  of  it.
God  says  iu  his  eternal  word,  " Ah  ! if  you  knew  by  in-
fallible  kuowledge,  you  would  see  hell,  you  would  see  it
with  the  eyes  of  certaiuty,,?1  and  agaiu  He  says  in  another
place  in  the  glorious  Koran,  “ Truly  hell  encompasseth  the
infidels.”2  He  docs  uot  say,  it  shall  encompass , but  rather
that  it  already  surrounds  them.  . . .

If  you  say,  0 studeut  of  the  mysteries,  that  u the  tor-
ments  of  the  grave  are  occasioned  by  the  relations  arisiug
from  this  present  world,  from  which  uo  one  can  be  exempt,

102:  7.

2 S.  9 : 49.


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


85


since  every  one  has  either  children,  a liouse,  horses  or  ser-
vants,  and  that  it  results,  without  doubt,  iti  causing  a feel-
iug  of  dependence  upon  theni : and  hence,  no  person  will
be  able  to  escape  the  toruients  of  the  grave,”  we  observe,
in  reply,  that  what  you  say  is  correct,  but  then  there  are
persons  wTho  have  no  relations  of  depeudence  upon  the
world,  and  who  always  desire  death  frora  the  Lord  God.
The  prophets  themselves  did  not  pass  away  from  the  world
until  they  longed  for  death.  You  should  know  also,  that
the  rich  who  are  attaehed  to  tliis  world  are  of  two  classes.
One  class  includes  tliose,  who  although  they  have  a love
for  the  world,  yet  they  love  the  blessed  God  more.  An
illustratiou  of  the  character  of*  men  of  this  class,  may  be
found  in  the  man  who  owns  a house  in  eaeh  of  two  cities;
while  living  in  one  of  them  he  has  no  longing  to  remove
to  the  other.  But  it  happens  that  an  office  is  eonferred
upon  him  in  that  other  city,  and  immediately  he  is  over-
joyed,  and  is  eager  to  go  there,  and  makes  every  prepara-
tion  to  remove  thither  and  to  torsake  his  first  house.  His
longing  for  an  office,  leads  him  to  move,  and  takes  away
all  desire  of  remaining  where  he  was  previously.  Yow
although  men  of  this  class  have  an  inclination  to  the  world,
yet  as  on  the  other  side  the  love  of  God  preponderates,
they  prefer  to  go  to  the  future  world,  and  would  not  in-
deed,  if  it  were  possible  to  do  otherwise,  remain  here  a day.
Wben  persons  of  this  class  die,  whose  affections  prepon-
derate  towards  the  other  world,  they  do  not  experience  the
torments  of  the  grave.

The  other  class,  beloved,  includes  those  who  are  entirely
absorbed  in  the  love  of  the  world,  and  of  pleasure.  This
class  caunot  escape  from  the  torments  of  the  grave,  as  the
Lord  in  his  everlasting  word  declares  : “ There  are  none  of
you  who  will  not  be  precipitated.,,!  But  some  of  tliis  class
occasionally  have  a ieaning  towards  eternal  truth,  especially


1 S.  19  : 72.


11


86


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Uappwess.


if  tbere  is  any  trace  of  the  love  of  God  remaining  iri  their
hearts,  and  when  they  are  about  to  leave  the  world,  they
forget  it  and  never  more  yearn  towards  it.  In  that  case
they  also  are  saved  from  the  tribulations  of  the  grave.  A
picture  of  this  class  is  found  in  the  person  who  also  has  a
house  in  each  of  two  cities,  and  as  long  as  he  is  living  in
the  one,  he  has  no  longings  for  the  other.  But  at  last
some  necessity  compels  him  to  quit  his  first  house,  and  to
go  and  reside  in  the  second.  After  a few  days  residence,
the  love  he  had  for  the  first  house  dies  away  from  his  heart
and  it  appears  better  to  him  not  to  return  thither.  Thi3
class  suffer  torment  in  the  grave  up  to  the  point  where  they
forget  the  world,  but  after  familiarizing  themselves  with
the  mansions  of  the  future  world,  they  are  freed  frora  their
pain.  Those,  however,  whose  hearts  were  immersed  in  the
pleasures  and  cares  of  the  world,  and  whose  hearts  bore  no
trace  of  the  love  of  God,  or  of  thoughtfulness  for  the  future
world,  and  who  preferred  this  world  to  the  other,  will
never  be  delivered  frora  torment.

There  is  not  a person  in  the  world  who  will  admit  that
he  does  not  love  God,  or  but  that  will  pretend  that  he  does
love  God.  But  this  pretention  can  be  brought  to  a touch-
stone  and  standard  and  found  out  by  experiment.  Just
look  at  his  actions  and  conduct,  and  see  whether  he  will
do  a thing  which  has  the  holy  approbation  of  God,  or
whether  he  will  abstain  from  doing  a thiug  which  has  not
the  divine  approbation,  notwithstanding  the  strong  oppos-
ing  inclinations  of  his  soul,  and  thus  show  his  revereuce
for  the  Holy  Law.  If  he  does  thus  oppose  the  desires  of
his  soul,  he  is  correct  wrhen  he  affirms,  u I love  God.”  But
if*  he  is  following  the  inclinations  of  his  soul,  and  is  only
sayiug  with  his  tongue  that  he  loves  God,  his  declaration
is  a lie.  When  a person  in  this  6tate  of  raind  utters  the
confe8sion,  “ There  is  no  God  but  God,5?  a voice  from  God
addresses  him  saying,  uYou  are  a liar,  for  your  actions


Ghazzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


87


are  opposed  to  youi*  words.”  In  this  state  of  mitid  tliere
is  no  use  in  makiug  the  declaration,  “I  love  God.,?  The
prophet  of  God  says  however,  that  it  is  not  an  idle  act  to
utter  the  phrase  “ Tliere  is  no  God  but  God  55  for  the  sake
of  preserving  a man  from  the  divine  vengeance?  so  long  as
the  man  is  one  who  does  not  prefer  worldly  works  to  the
works  of  the  future  world.  . . .

Let  thosejthen,  who  wish  to  be  saved  from  the  torments
of  the  grave,be  earnest  in  cuttingoff  the  tiesof  the  world;
and  let  them  acquire  a habit  of  being  satistied  with  just
that  which  is  of  actual  uecessity.  Be  satisĔed  for  example
with  that  amount  of  food  and  drink  which  is  uecessary  to
give  strength  for  devotional  exercises ; be  satished  with
the  amount  of  clothing  necessary  to  protect  the  body
from  cold  and  heat ; and  so  in  everything  else.  If  a man
cannot  purity  his  heart  from  attacliment  to  the  world  let
him  at  least  be  assiduous  in  devotion  and  in  calling  upon
God,  atid  show  a preference  for  cultivating  an  intimacy
with  the  love  of  God.  Let  him  look  wTith  fear  and  dread
upon  trust  in  the  world,  and  weaken  and  relax  the  demands
of  sense  by  strict  obedience  to  the  law.  If  notwithstand-
ing  he  should  prefer  to  yield  to  the  animal  soul  aud  to  trust
in  this  world,  let  him  prepare  himself  to  experience  the
torment  of  the  grave  and  the  terrors  of  the  fnture  world.
And  may  the  grace  and  merey  of  God  which  embrace  all
men,  and  his  pardon  and  forgiveness  which  extend  to  rich
and  poor,  to  great  and  small,  reach  and  save  him  !

The  materhl  torments  of  the  grave,  0 seeker  after  the
divine  mysteries,  are  those  which  are  addressed  to  the
body  and  through  the  body  to  the  spirit.  Spirituat  tor-
ments  are  those  which  reacli  the  spirit  only.  The  language
of  God,  tcIt  is  the  fire  of  God,  the  lighted  fire  which  shall
reach  the  hearts  of  the  reprobates,??  refers  to  spiritual  tor-
ments  which  affeet  the  heart.  The  spiritual  hell  then  is
of  three  kinds.  The  tirst  is  the  fire  of  separation  from  the


88


Ghazzatts  Atchemy  of  Happiness .


lusts  of  the  world ; the  second  is  the  fire  of  sharne,  iguo-
tniny  and  reproach  ; and  the  third  is  the  fire  of  exclusion
from  the  beauty  of  the  o\\e  Lord.  These  fires  only  burn
the  soul  and  do  not  touch  the  body.

There  is  in  the  world  a cause  or  source  of  each  kind  of
torment.  Then  let  us  examine  the  cause  of  the  fire  of  se-
paration  from  the  lusts  of  the  world.  In  explaining  pre-
viously  tlie  torments  of  the  grave,  we  said  that  they  arose
from  love  of  the  world.  Love  and  desire  constitute  the
Paradise  of  the  heart.  So  long  as  the  heart  is  with  its  be-
loved  objeet,  it  is  in  paradise,  and  as  soon  as  the  heart  is
separated  from  its  beloved  object,  it  is  in  hell.  The  men
of  this  world,  by  their  supreme  love  of  the  world,  have
made  it  to  be  their  beloved  object,  and  as  long  as  they  are
in  the  world  it  is  a real  paradise  to  them  ; but  as  soon  as
death  comes  and  separates  them  from  their  beloved,  their
state  is  a real  hell  to  them.  Believers,  by  loving  Grod  aud
the  future  world,  have  made  thern  their  best  beloved,  and
as  long  as  they  are  separated  from  them  tbey  are  in  hell.
But  as  soon  as  this  separation  is  annihilated,  and  they  leave
this  world  and  go  to  the  other,  having  attained  their  chief
purpose  and  desire,  they  are  in  paradise  in  reality.

Suppose  a person,  a prince,  had  been  passing  his  life  iu
banqueting  and  pleasure,  ancl  every  one  arouud  him  had
been  submissive  and  obedient  to  his  orders.  But  an  enemy
comes  and  cleprives  him  of  his  principality,  enslaves  his
wife  ancl  servants,  and  they  plunder  him  of  his  money  and
property  before  his  eyes.  His  pcarls  and  jewels  are  wasted
upon  trifles,  and  his  beautiful  studs  of  horses  and  his  re-
tiuue  are  dispersed.  He  becomes  a subject  in  his  owu  city,
is  compelled  to  wear  coarse  clothing  in  the  presence  of  his
former  servants,  and  is  appointed  to  guard  and  feed  the
dogs.  Gan  youin  any  wise  appreciate  the  misfortune  iuto
which  the  princc  has  fallen,  and  how  deeply  he  must  be  a
prey  to  anguish  ? Probably  he  exclaims  many  times  in  a


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


89


day,  u Wouldrather  that  I had  fallen  into  the  abyss  of  the
earth  and  perished !”  The  severity  of  his  torture  is
in  proportion  to  the  araount  of  sensual  enjoyments  in
whieh  he  had  participated  while  he  was  a prince.  Aud  it
is  plain  that  this  tortnre  is  not  inAicted  011  the  body,  but
upon  only  the  spirit,  and  that  it  is  more  excruciating  than
any  pains  of  the  body  would  be.

So  long  as  a raan  is  attached  to  the  things  of  this  world
engrossed  with  the  care  of  his  body,  and  gives  over  his
nature  to  intercourse  with  sensual  enjoyinents,  he  will  not
care  for  the  warnings  his  spirit  receives  in  this  world,  nor
for  the  torment  that  it  will  incur  in  the  future  world.  A
sick  raan  for  example  will  not  be  so  excessively  despondent
about  his  malady  in  the  day  time,  beeause  his  serises  are
interested  in  otherthings,  and  a3  his  heart  follows  in  their
train,  he  in  some  measure  forgets  his  inalady.  In  the
night,  however,  when  his  senses  have  nothing  to  be  em-
ployed  about,  his  thoughts  about  his  malady  do  not  leave
his  mind  free  for  one  moment,  and  hispain  increases.  So
also  in  death,  the  cares  and  thoughts  of  the  world  and  the
external  senses  cease  entirely  to  operate  on  account  of  the
torment  of  the  spirit,  and  then  the  perfect  torment  of  the
spirit  beconies  manifest.

The  second  kind  of  torment  in  hell,  beloved,  is  the  fire
of  ignominy  and  sharae.  In  illustration  of  this,  suppose
that  a prince  receives  iuto  his  friendship  a poor  and  hum-
ble  man,  treating  him  with  great  honor  and  making  him
tlie  favorite  among  all  his  confidential  servants.  Ile  gives
into  his  hands  the  keys  of  all  his  treasuries,  commits  his
honor  and  wife  and  family  to  bis  care,  and  in  short  confides
all  his  afiairs  into  his  hands,  in  full  reliance  upon  him.
Then,  suppose  that  the  poor  man,  atter  being  elevated  to
this  high  rank,  shonld  be  pufled  up  with  pride,  and  should
be  disposed  to  betray  the  honor  of  the  prince, — tliat  he
should  begin  to  indulge  in  unworthy  condnct  with  his  wife


90


Ghazzali’s  Alchewy  of  Happiness,


aud  servants,  and  should  open  his  coffers  and  speud  his
property  for  his  own  pleasures.  Suppose  farther  that  he
should  even  be  consulting  with  the  prince?s  eneray  who  has
designs  upon  the  priucipality,  and  should  enter  into  a com-
pact  with  him.  Just  at  this  point  the  prince  frora  a con-
cealed  retreat  espies  his  conduct  in  his  family,  and  learns
how  he  has  wasted  his  money  and  his  possessions,  and  in
short  becomes  acquainted  with  everything  he  has  done.
The  man  also  learns  that  for  some  time  the  prince  has
been  aware  of  his  course  of  conduct,  but  that  the  reason  of
his  delaying  and  postponing  punishment  was  that  he  might
see  what  other  crimes  he  would  commit,  that  he  might  pun-
ish  him  accordingly.  In  these  circumstances  the  reAecting
can  easily  appreciate  what  would  be  the  confusion  and  mor-
tihcation  of  this  individual.  He  would  think  it  a thousaud
times  better  to  fall  from  a precipice  and  be  dashed  to  pieces,
or  that  the  earth  should  open  and  he  sinlc  into  the  abyss,
than  that  he  should  continue  to  live.  So  also  is  it  with  you.
How  many  actionsyou  pertbrm,  of  whichyou  say,  “ it  is  in
private  and  no  one  sees  it,??  or  of  which  Satan  cloaks  over
the  guilt  frorn  your  mind,  by  persuading  you  that  it  is  all
right  and  fair.  But  at  last,  wheu  death  comcs  and  makes
your  sin  manifest,  then  the  fire  of  ignominy  and  shame
makes  you  captive  to  fierce  torments  and  long  contiuued
misery.  . . .

Suppose  you  should  throw  a stone  over  against  a wall,
and  some  one  should  come  and  inform  you  that  thc  stone
had  hit  your  own  house,  and  had  put  out  thc  eye  of  your
son.  When  you  rush  to  your  liouse  and  find  that  it  is  even
so,  can  you  conccive  of  the  fire  of  repentance  and  anguish
you  will  have  to  meet?  . . .

hTor  can  the  overwheIming  nature  of  the  remorse  or  the
pain  of  the  punishment  be  compared  with  the  pain  of  put-
ting  out  your  son’s  eye,  because  the  former  is  eternal.
Thc  pains  and  sorrows  of  the  world  are  but  for  a few  days


Ghc&^alPs  Alchemy  of  Ilappiness .


91


and  then  pass  away,  while  thoughts  upon  the  advantage
and  profit  in  the  future  world  of  pains  endured  here,  will
bring  joy  to  those  who  reflect  upon  them.  Your  happi-
ness  does  not  depend  upon  your  son’s  eye  nor  upon  your
own  eye,  but  upon  being  accepted  of  God,  and  being  bon-
ored  and  enriched  with  a vision  of  the  divine  beauty  and
exce]lence.

Another  illustration  of  the  fire  of  shame  and  iguominy
is,  to  suppose  that  a prince  is  giving  his  son  in  marriage,
and  that  after  many  days  spent  in  feastingand  rejoicing  on
the  occasion  the  moment  has  comc  for  the  son  to  receive
his  bride.  The  son,  however,  has  secretly  withdrawn  with
some  of  his  friends  and  become  so  intoxicated  as  to  be  in-
capable  of  reasoning.  But  at  last  he  concludes  that  it  is
time  for  him  to  return,  and  that  he  will  go  secretly  and
alone.  He  sets  out,  therefore,  on  his  return  home,  out  of
his  mind  and  unconscious  of  what  he  is  about.  He  walks
on  nntil  he  reacbes  a door  through  which  he  sees  lights
burning.  He  fancies  that  it  is  his  own  house,  and  straight-
way  he  enters  in.  He  looks  around  and  observes  that
there  is  not  the  least  movement,  uot  even  a breath,  but
that  all  have  gone  to  sleep.  At  last  in  the  middle  of  the
court  he  sees  some  one  covered  over  with  damask  silks
and  brocades,  from  whose  body  is  exhaled  the  odor  of
musk.  He  fancies  and  exclaims  that  this  must  be  hislaw-
ful  bride,  and  he  kneels  down  before  her  and  kisses  her
lips.  He  observes  tbat  his  mouth  is  damp  with  moisture
that  exudes  from  her  lips,  and  that  he  is  touching  some-
thing  wet.  The  mouth  of  his  beloved  is  wounded  and
bloody,  and  he  thinks  that  it  is  rose  water,  and  continues
to  caress  her,  till  he  is  stupified  with  sleep.  After  a while
he  awakes  and  eomes  into  his  right  mind,  and  perceives
that  he  is  in  a sepulchral  chapel  of  the  fire-\vorshippers,
and  that  what  he  had  embraced  was  nothing  but  the  body
of  an  old  woman  ninety  years  old,  who  had  died  six  months


92


Ghazzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


previously.  On  tliat  night  they  had  anew  changed  the
coveriugs,  burned  incense  and  lighted  the  candles.1

When  the  prince’s  son  sees  himselfin  this  condition,
shame  and  mortihcation  overwhelm  him  to  such  a degree,
that  he  is  upon  the  point  of  destroying  himself.  But  still
severer  anguish  lays  hold  of  him,  lest,  when  he  should  leave
the  place  in  this  tilthy  state,  he  should  be  seen  by  some
person.  While  he  is  asking  himself  what  he  should  do,  his
father  who  knew  nothing  as  to  the  place  where  his  son  had
been,  hut  who  had  left  his  palace  with  his  friends  and  his
suite  in  search  of  his  son,  meets  him  just  at  the  moment
he  is  coming  out  of  that  house  in  that  state.  Imagine  now
the  shame  of  the  son  and  what  must  be  his  feelings.  X o
doubt  but  that  he  would  have  given  his  life  to  any  one  who
eould  have  offered  him  a refuge  and  deliverance  from  his
shame.  You  see  that  the  torment  here  is  spiritual  and  uot
material;  for  there  is  notan  iota  of  pain  here  that  allected
the  body.

In  like  manner  the  menofthi3  workl  when  theygo  to  tlieir
graves,  will  see  that  what  they  called  pleasure  was  flesh
and  corrnption  which  they  had  unlawfully  takeninto  their
mouths.  They  will  see  that  that  beloved  object,  dressed
in  rich  clothing,  obtained  by  illicit  means  aud  stained  with
pollution,  is  but  the  old  hag  the  world,  with  her  disgusting
face  aud  horrid  smelland  putreAed  corruption,  on  account
of  whom  so  inany  drowned  in  illusions  have  becoine  vic-
timsto  shameand  remorse.  S till  more  bitter  tormcnt  will
that  be,  beloved,  which  will  be  the  lot  of  man,  when  in  the
day  of  resurrectiou  aud  assembly  all  these  crimes  and  sins
shall  be  laid  open  before  all  the  angels  and  prophets.  Our
refuge  is  in  God  !

Think  not  that  the  shame  and  remorse  of  the  future
world  is  onl}r  of  the  kind  that  we  have  been  describing.


1 Tlie  fire  worsliippers  did  not  bury  tbeir  dead.


Ghazzali's  Alchemy  of  Uappiness.


93


For  we  have  before  said  that  nothing  belonging  to  tl^e
future  world  can  be  understood  in  the  present  world,  or
be  rightiy  conceived  of  by  our  minds.  The  doctors  of  the
law  however  (upon  wliom  may  God  show  mercy!),  for  the
sake  of  warning  and  admouition  in  the  world,  aud  so  far
as  the  miud  can  appreciate  it,  have  spoken  in  parables  aud
illustrations,  and  they  have  in  various  ways  compared  the
ignominy  and  remorse  of  the  future  world  to  the  shame
and  misery  existiug  in  the  present  world,  notwithstanding
the  misery  iu  tliis  world  is  but  for  a momentor  a few  days,
while  the  other  is  everlasting.

We  come  now,  beloved,  to  the  third  fire,  the  fire  of
separation  from  the  divine  beauty,  and  of  despair  of  attaiu-
ing  everlasting  telicity.  The  cause  of  this  fire,  is  that  con-
duct  and  stupidity  which  led  the  individual,  while  in  the
world,  not  to  aequire  a knowledge  of  God,  to  neglect  puri-
fyiug  the  mirror  of  his  heart  from  the  consuming  cares  of
the  world  and  from  the  rust  of  sensual  pleasures,  and  to
omit  those  austerities  and  exertions  by  which  his  blamable
inclinations  aud  dispositions  might  be  changed  to  laudable
ones.  The  individual  did  not  act  in  accordauce  with  the
tradition  which  says,  u Acquire  a character  resembling  the
character  of  God,”  and  by  means  of  which  he  might  have
been  worthy  of  the  vision  of  the  beauty  o£  the  Lord,  and
of  being  received  at  the  king;s  court.  The  heart  which  is
full  of  the  love  of‘  the  world,  and  of  the  rust  of  worldly
cares  and  transgressions,  will  see  nothing  in  the  future
world,  nmst  be  shut  out  from  all  kinds  of  felicity  and  will
rise  blind  at  the  resurrection.  Our  refuge  is  in  God  !

Au  illustration  of  this  fire  of'  reprobation  and  banish-
ment  may  be  f‘ound  in  this  world,  by  supposing  that  a
company  travelling  by  night  should  come  into  a valley
that  was  very  stony,  and  as  they  went  on  their  way,  they
should  hear  a voice  calling  out,  “ Take  good  heed  and
carry  away  with  you  au  abundance  of  these  stones;  you

12


94


GhazzaWs  Alchemij  of  Happiness.


will  have  occasion  to  use  them  at  some  future  time/?
Some  of  those  who  heard  the  voice,  exercised  prudeuce?
and  carried  off  as  many  stones  as  they  could  ; others  for
the  sake  of  saving  themselves  trouble,  carried  off  only  a
few.  Others  still,  did  not  carry  away  any?  saying,  “ it  is
folly  to  take  pains  and  trouble  for  the  sake  of  an  advantage
that  is  future  and  prospective  : indeed  it  is  not  clear  that
there  will  be  any  advantage  at  all.”  Besides,  tliey  treated
as  stupid  and  foolish  those^vho  did  carry  any  away,  and
said,  “ look  at  those  insane  people,  who,  from  pure  cupidity
and  craving  for  what  is  impossible,  load  themselves  down
like  asses,  and  give  themselves  useless  pains.  We  are  the
comfortable  ones,  who  go  on  our  way  free,  joyfnl  and  with-
out  concern  for  the  future.’>  When  the  light  of  day  dawned,
they  saw  that  all  the  stones  were  invaluable  rubies  and
sapphires,  each  one  of  which  was  worth  at  least  tliree
thousand  drachms  of  silver.  Then  those  who  had  brought
away  stones,  exclaimed,  “ alas ! that  we  were  not  able  to
bring  away  any  more.”  But  those  who  had  brought  away
nothing  and  had  traveled  with  eomfort  and  ease,  were  over-
whelmed  with  the  fire  of  reprobation ; they  strike  theirheads
upon  the  ground  with  the  energy  of  remorse,  and  are  filled
with  sighs  and  lamentations.  Those  who  had  brought  away
stones,  arrived  at  the  city  whither  they  had  been  goiug,  and
bought  estates  and  slaves,  jewels  and  rich  and  pleasant
eatables  and  all  kinds  of  raiment,  and  gave  themselves  up
to  banqueting  and  enjoyment,  while  those  who  had  not
brought  away  any  stoues,  became  so  hnngry,  destitute  and
naked,  that  they  went  about  desiring  to  pertorm  for  them
some  kind  of  service.  But  when  they  begged  of  them
either  food  or  drink,  they  said,  in  accordance  with  what
God  says  in  his  aucient  word.  The  dwellers  in  fire  shall
call  out  to  the  inbabitants  of  Paradise,  k pour  out  upon  us
a little  of  your  water  and  of  the  enjoyments  God  has  be-
stowed upon  you.J  ” They  will answer,  “ God  has  forbidden


Ghazzcd?s  Alchcmy  of  Happiness.


95


the  unbelieyers  either.” 1 2 “ ITo,  we  shall  give  you  notbing,

for  God  has  prohibited  you  from  having  anything.  Yes-
terday  you  were  laughing  at  us,  to-day  we  laugh  at  you  :
as  God  declares  in  his  eternal  word,  ‘ If  you  mock  at  us,  we
will  in  our  turn  mock  atyou,  as  ye  have  mocked  at  us.J'?2

This  illustration  of  the  enjoyments  of  Paradise  has  been
made  in  very  brief  and  comprehensive  language,  to  serve
as  an  example,  but  it  is  iinpossible  by  auy  similitude  to
give  an  idea  of  what  it  is  to  be  separated  from  the  contem-
plation  of  the  beauty  of  the  Lord.  For  whoever  has  but
once  experieneed  the  delight  of  being  near  to  God,  and
has  enjoyed  the  vision  of  the  beauty  of  the  Lord,  would
perish  if  he  should  be  for  one  moment  separated  from  it.
Even  the  last  and  least  person  who  quits  hell  will  receive
a rnansion  from  the  Lord  God  which  is  equal  to  ten  of  these
worlds.  But  we  do  not  mean  to  say  ten  worlds  in  surface
or  iu  amount  by  number  and  weight,  but  ten  workls  in
value  and  in  the  beauty  they  display  and  the  pleasure  they
afford.

Having  now  become  acquainted  with  the  three  kinds  of
spiritual  torment,  know,  O student  of  the  divine  mysteries,
that  these  spiritual  tires  of  which  we  have  been  speaking,
are  more  severe  than  the  fires  which  burn  tlie  body.  The
body  does  not  itself  perceive  pain,  and  until  pain  reacbes
from  the  body  to  the  spirit,  it  does  not  make  a trace  or
impression.  If,  theu,  the  anguish  that  is  occasioned  to
the  spirit  through  the  channel  of  the  body  is  so  agonizing,
imagine  how  intense  must  burn  the  fire  of  that  anguish
which  has  its  origin  in  the  centre  of  the  soul.  The  pain
which  any  thing  suffers  is  oceasioued  by  the  excess  of
something  contrary  to  the  nature  and  necessities  of  its
constitution.


1 S.  7 : 48.

2S.  11:  40


96


GhazzaViS  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


The  necessities  of  the  constitution  of  tbe  spirit  are  to
know  Grod  and  to  contemplate  his  beauty  and  excellence.
But  if  stupidity  and  blindness,  which  are  opposed  to  this
tendency  of  the  spirit,  become  predominant,  the  soul  will
be  vexed  and  tormented,  and  there  will  be  no  end  to  the
torment.  If  it  were  not  that  the  body  is  subject  to  mala-
dies  iu  the  world,  the  fact  of  this  blindness  and  stupidity
would  have  been  visible  and  apparent  to  the  soul  in  this
world  also,  and  it  would  also  have  been  the  source  of  im-
mense  anguish,  and  torment  would  at  no  moment  have
ceased  to  afflict  men.  Just  as  when  a person  has  a severe
aore  upon  the  hand  or  foot,  if  besides  it  should  be  cut  with
a knife  or  fire  should  be  put  upon  it,  he  would  not  feel  the
pain  of  the  knife  or  tbe  fire,  on  account  of  the  pain  of  the
aore,  so  likewise  tbe  maladies  of  the  body,  such  as  huuger
and  thirst,  or  such  maladies  as  love  of  possessions  and
family,  combined  with  the  absorbed  attention  of  the  senses
to  these  tbings,  prevent  the  soul  from  being  conscious  of
its  disquiet  and  distress.  But  when  in  death,  the  torment
to  which  the  body  was  subject  is  taken  away,  it  will  be
seen  how  excruciating  is  the  torment  of  the  soul.  And
thus  also  God  anuounces  in  his  holy  word  : 44  Ah  ! if  you
knew  it  with  intallible  assurance.  But  you  will  see  hell :
you  will  see  it  with  the  eyes  of  certainty.??1

You  sliould  know,  O inquirer,  that  the  many  arguments
we  have  adduced  to  prove  that  spiritual  tormeut  is  more
severe  than  material  torment,  and  the  many  illustratious
of  it  tbat  we  have  developed,  are  understood  by  intelligent
and  discerning  minds,  but  the  mass  of  the  people  under-
stand  nothing  about  them.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  the
sou  of  a prince  has  begun  to  go  to  school,  and  he  is  ad-
monished  thatif  he  do  not  study,  bis  father  will  not  give
him  the  principality.  The  boy  does  not  understaud  the


1 S.  102  : 5,  G,  7.


Ghazzali?s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


97


irnport  of  the  warning,  and  continues  busy  in  playing  with
tops  and  nuts.  But,  if  he  is  told  instead,  if  you  do  not
learn  to  read  and  write,  your  master  will  whip  you  orpull
your  ears,  from  that  moment,  understanding  the  force  of
the  admonition,  he  leaves  his  sport  and  play,  and  is  dili-
gent  in  his  studies.  Since,  therefore,  the  conimonalty
cannot  utiderstand  the  torment  of  being  iorbidden  and
shut  ont  from  the  vision  of  the  beauty  of  God,  the  doc-
tors  of  the  law  and  the  preachers,  frighten  them  with  ser-
pents  and  scorpions,  and  with  the  fire  of  hell ; for  they
are  not  capable  of  understanding  anything  else.  In  the
other  case,  how  should  the  “ look  out ! take  care!5?  from
the  mouth  of  the  master,  with  the  pain  of  one  or  two  boxes
on  the  ear,  have  any  relation  or  resemblance  iu  the  mind
of  the  boy  with  the  loss  of  the  principality  ? . . .

The  heavenly  pilgrim  must  forsake  his  own  city,  and
not  fix  himself  for  permanence  in  the  place  where  he  hap-
pens  to  be.  And  by  the  word  city,  worldly  cares  and  em-
ployments  are  designated.  He  must  quit  them,  and  find
his  home  in  the  path  of  obedience,  and  forsake  the  land  of
tribulation  : for  the  prophet  has  said,  “ Love  of  country
is  an  article  of  religion.”

This  road  has  four  stages  : the  things  of  seuse  belong  to
the  first  stage  ; the  things  of  faney  belong  to  the  second
stage ; the  things  of  speculation  to  the  third,  and  those  of
reason  to  the  fourth  stage.  . . .

The  view  which  man  obtains  of  things  iu  the  visible
world  is  through  matter,  as  in  the  contemplation  of  a pros-
pect  on  land.  But  in  the  fourth  stage,  which  is  that  of
the  reason,  man’s  view  is  eutirely  through  the  mediurn
of  pure  spirit,  as  when  a man  looks  into  water.  But  the
view  he  takes,  and  the  intercourse  he  enjoys  in  the  world
of  speeulation,  is  as  if  he  was  looking  at  an  object  from  a
ship.  There  is,  besides,  in  the  sphere  of  reason  a still
higher  degree  of  sight  and  vision,  which  is  enjoyed  by  the


98


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


prophets,  the  saints,  and  the  most  devout,  which  may  be
compared  to  a prospect  in  the  clearest  weather.  Hence,
when  some  one  observed  to  the  apostle  of  God,  that  Jesus
(upon  whom  be  peace  ! ) walked  upon  the  waters,  he  re-
plied,  that  “ if  his  faith  had  been  greater,  he  would  have
walked  in  the  air.55

The  view  that  can  be  taken  by  the  heart  of  man,  em-
braces  all  things  that  lie  in  the  world  of  perception  and
understanding.  Its  sphere  of  action  and  exercise  is  the
whole  world.  The  ascent  of  man  from  the  rank  of  beasts
to  that  of  angels,  is  an  ascent  where  he  is  always  exposed
to  danger  and  to  destruction.  He  may,  with  the  guidance
of  the  divine  guide,  mount  up  to  the  highest  heaven,  or
may  descend  through  the  deceits  of  Satan  to  the  lowest
hell.  And  the  prophet  has  warned  us  of  this  danger  in
thesewords:  uWehave  proposed  to  the  heavens,  to  the
earth  and  to  the  mountains  to  accept  the  deposit  of  the
faith : they  trembled  to  receive  it.  Man  accepted  the
charge,  but  he  became  stupid  and  a wanderer  in  darkness/’1

Know,  farther,  that  inanimate  objects  are  the  lowest  in
rank  in  the  quantity  and  degree  of  happiness  they  obtain,
and  it  is  a happiness  which  knows  no  chauge.  The  place
of  beasts  is  in  the  lowest  abyss  and  there  is  no  path  by
which  they  can  ascend  out  of  it.  The  mansion  of  the
angels  is  in  the  highest  heavens  where  they  ever  continue
in  the  same  condition,  there  is  neither  abasement  or  as-
cent  from  their  place.  And  God  also  says  iu  his  eternal
word,  “ And  what  have  we  except  for  each  one  a certain
and  appointed  habitation.”2  The  position  of  man  is  be-
tween  the  rank  of  angels,  and  that  of  animals,  because  he
partakes  of  the  qualities  of  both.  Ho  other  rank  except
man  accepted  the  deposit  of  the  true  faith,  and  iudeed  no

1 S.  37  : 72.

8 S.  38  : 1G1


Ghazzalfs  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


99


otber  had  the  qualities  and  capacities  necessary  for  the  ac-
ceptance  of  it.  In  accepting  the  deposit  raan  becarae
bound  at  the  same  time  to  accept  the  dangers  and  penal-
ties  connected  with  it.

The  doctors  of  the  law  havc  not  coinmented  upon  these
topics  to  the  people  in  general.  Butthis  is  notto  be  won-
dered  at,  when  we  consider  that  the  raass  of  the  people
regard  theraselves  as  fixed  in  their  eharacter  and  position,
and  not  as  pilgrims  and  travcllers  to  a higher  state.  There
is  no  possibility  of  unveiling  the  things  of  truth,  to  those  who
settle  down  without  desiring  to  make  any  progress,  and
who  are  contented  with  the  first  stages  and  degrees  of  thc
sensible  world  and  of  the  world  of  fancy.  They  can  nei-
ther  attain  to  a spiritual  state,  nor  understand  spiritual
laws  andprecepts.  Wehave  ventured,  however,  to  unveil
a little  of  the  mysteries,  as  a type  of  the  knowledge  be-
longing  to  the  future  state,  so  that  men  might  be  prepared
to  understand  the  questions  and  aflairs  relating  to  that
state.  But  if  we  had  entered  into  any  farther  develop-
ments,  they  would  not  have  been  able  to  understand  us,
for  none  but  those  who  are  endowed  with  penetration  and
experience  can  by  any  possibility  understand  the  topics  to
which  we  have  alluded.

There  is  a classof  foolish  people,  O inquirer  after  the  di-
vine  raysteries,  who  have  neither  capacity  for  knowledge,
or  sound  judgrnent  to  be  able  to  understand  anything  of
themselves,  and  who  have  reraained  doubting  and  specu-
lating  about  the  nature  of  the  future  state,  till  they  have
become  bewildered.  Einally,  as  the  lusts  of  the  world
barmonized  with  their  natures,  they  have  yielded  to  the
whisperings  of  Satan,  and  deny  that  there  is  any  futnre
state.  They  pretend  that  the  only  need  there  is  of  speak-
ing  of  heaven  and  hell,  is  for  the  sake  of  correcting  and
guiding  the  conduct  of  the  people,  and  they  regard  as  folly
the  course  of  thosc  who  follow  the  law  aud  are  constant
in  their  devotions.


100


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


If  these  toolish  persous  have  one  jot  of  sense,  it  will  be
easy  to  convince  them  with  a single  word.  One  hundred
and  twenty-four  thousand  prophets  more  or  less,  the  whole
multitude  of  the  saints  and  all  the  learned  doctors  of  the
law  have  faithfully  followed  the  Holy  Law,  have  been  dili-
gent  in  their  devotions,  and  with  prudent  anxietv  and
dread  about  the  future  state,  they  have  eudured  much
pain  and  suAEering.  And  how  does  it  happeu  that  you,
who  are  so  ignorant  and  stupid,  have  found  out  that  they
were  mistaken  and  in  error  ? What  should  lead  you  to
preter  your  baseless  and  corrupt  fancies  to  their  knowledge
and  science,  and  to  say  that  the  spirit  has  no  real  exist-
ence  and  that  it  does  not  continue  to  live  after  death?
Perhaps  you  do  not  even  admit  that  there  is  any  material
punishment.  Truly  the  health  of  your  moral  being  is  so
corrupted  and  depraved,  that  there  is  no  cure  for  you;  you
belong  to  that  class  of  whom  God  says  in  his  holy  word  :
“ Even.  when  thou  shalt  call  them  into  the  right  path,  they
will  never  folIow  in  it.5J1

If  one  of  these  men  should,  however,  reply  : “ Indeed  I
do  not  know  for  a certainty,  but  why  should  I on  accouut
of  an  uneertainty,  pass  my  precious  life  iu  devotionaI  au-
sterities,  and  forbid  myself  the  delights  and  pleasures  of
the  world  ?”  We  observe  in  return.  According  to  your
principles,  the  probabilities  are  balanced  as  to  whether  the
events  spokeu  of  as  belonging  to  the  future  world  will  or
will  noc  happen.  It  follows  then  as  a most  rational  con-
clusion,  that  you  ought  to  act  iu  the  same  way  you  would
do,  if  you  wished  to  preserve  yourself  from  a great  risk
and  danger.  For,  if  these  events  should  take  place,  you
may  thereby  be  saved  from  intense  torineut  and  obtain
etcrnal  felicity;  whereas,  if  they  should  not  occur,  you
will  have  suffered  no  injury  from  your  precautious.  We


1 S.  18 : 56.


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


101


have,  besides,  the  inspired  word  which  declares  that  all
these  things  will  take  place ; and  all  the  prophets  (upon
whora  be  peace  ! ) and  all  the  saints  and  teachers  of  religion
(upon  whora  may  God  have  mercj  ! ) have  testihed  to  the
truth  of  theni.

Do  you  not  see  that  if  you  were  desirous  to  partake  of
food  and  were  just  stretching  forth  your  hand  to  take  it,
and  sorae  one  sliould  say,  “ Beware,  and  do  not  eat  of  that
food,  for  it  is  deadly  poison,”  or  “ a serpent  has  voraited
upon  it,”  that  although  there  was  a doubt  in  your  mind
whether  what  he  said  was  true  or  false,  still  you  would
believe  hira  and  refrain  from  eating  the  food  ? You  would
say  to  yourself:  “ If  I do  not  eat  it,  I have  nothing  to
suffer  but  to  remain  hungry  fbr  a while  longer,  but  if  I eat
it,  I may  kiil  myself.  It  is  prudent,  therefore,  for  rae  to
refrain  from  it.”

Again,  if  you  were  sick,  and  a person  who  writes  ma-
gical  phrases  and  charms,  should  say  to  you,  “ give  me  a
drachrn  of  silver,  and  I will  write  for  you  a well  tried
charm  by  means  of  which  you  will  immediately  get  vvell,J?
although  you  know  that  there  is  no  relation  of  fitness  be-
tween  an  exterual  charm,  and  an  internal  disorder  of  the
stomach  for  instance,  and  that  there  is  little  probability  of
your  recoveringby  its  raeans,  you  are  still  disposed  to  take
it.  And  you  say,  “ Come,  let  me  have  it,  if  it  act  as  a
medicine,  I shall  be  a gainer  by  so  many  drachms  of  silver,
and  if  it  do  rae  no  good,  I shall  only  bave  lost  a single
drachra.  I ought  therefore  to  try  it.”

Once  more,  if  ati  astrologer  should  say  to  you,  “ if  you
will  drink  this  bitter  and  disagreeable  mediciiie,  you  will
not  be  attacked  with  illness  during  the  whole  of*  this  com-
ing  year,  for  the  moon  is  in  sueh  a station  among  the  hea-
venly  bodies/’  notwithstanding  the  lie  of  the  astrologer
should  be  very  clear  to  your  mind,  and  you  have  uo  confi-
dence  in  what  he  says,  you  would  reply,  “well,  let  me

13


102


Ghazzal?s  Alchemy  of  Hapjriness.


drink  it  and  see ; if  it  do  me  no  good,  it  will  do  me  no
harm.”  And  with  the  faneied  hope  of  advantage  from  it,
you  swallow  down  the  bitter  and  unpalatable  potion  as  if
it  were  sugar.

Now  come  and  be  candid  with  yourself;  you  give  credit
to  a false  physician,  to  a false  writer  of  charms  and  to  a
false  astrologer,  for  the  sake  of  being  delivered  from  a day
or  two  of  illness  in  this  world,  and  you  even  undergo  suf-
fering  for  the  sake  of  it.  But  the  learned  iu  religion,  for
the  sake  of  saving  you  from  the  nialady  of  stupidity  and
rebellion  and  bringing  you  to  everlasting  health  and  feli-
city,  have  exerted  themseWes  to  make  the  verses  of  the
Koran  and  the  holy  traditions  to  serve  as  a medicine  to
deliver  you  from  bitter  torment.  Still  you  attach  no  credit
to  their  words.  Tou  treat  the  Koran  and  the  traditions
with  entire  disregard,  neither  clinging  to  the  command-
ments  of  God,  nor  avoiding  forbidden  things.  You  fol-
low  the  bent  of  your  own  inclinations,  instead  of  follow-
ing  the  example  and  law  of  the  prophet  of  God,  and  you
indulge  in  many  acts  of  transgression.  Nor  do  you  call  to
mind  what  will  be  your  condition  in  the  end  of  it  all,  nor
how  long  a time  you  bave  yet  to  live  in  the  world,  nor
what  eternity  is  eompared  with  tliis  world.  Do  you  not
kuow  that  by  choosing  a very  little  pain  in  the  husiness  of
religion  during  this  short  life  and  in  this  worthless  world,
you  may  gain  eternal  felicity,  and  ricbes  that  canuot  be
taken  from  you  ? The  pain  which  we  may  sufter  in  this
world,  however  severe,  yet  does  not  weigh  the  amount  of
an  atom  in  comparison  with  tlie  pains  and  torment  of  the
other  world.  This  world  is  a fading  shadow,  but  the  future
world  is  abiding  and  eternal.

The  following  is  an  illustration  of  the  duration  of  eter-
nity,  so  fi\r  as  the  human  mind  can  comprehend  it.  If  the
space  from  hetween  the  emp}Teal  heaven  to  the  regions
below  the  earth,  embracing  the  whole  universe,  should  be
filled  up  with  grains  of  mustard  seed,  and  if  a crow  should


Ghazzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


103


make  use  of  thein  as  food  andcome  but  once  in  athousand
years  and  take  but  a single  grain  away,  so  that  with  the
lapse  of  time  there  should  not  remain  a single  grain,  still
at  the  end  of  that  time  not  the  amount  of  a grain  of  rnus-
tard  seed  would  have  been  diminished  from  the  duration
of  eternity.

Beware,  therefore,  beloved  of  exposing  yourself  to  eter-
nal  torments ; call  to  mind  the  great  risk  and  danger  you
are  to  eneounter  in  the  future  world  : address  to  your  soul
8erious  admomtions,  before  you  eome  to  be  ashamed  and
fall  into  captivity  and  chastisement : ask  your  soul,  saying,
uO  rebellious  soul,  how  mueh  misery  thou  dost  undergo
for  the  sake  of  gaining  the  world  ! What  long  and  distant
journeys  thou  dost  undertake,  how  often  dost  thou  remain
hungry  and  thirsty,  notwithstanding  thou  are  both  transi-
tory  thyself  and  all  thou  dost  gaiu  is  transitory ; aud  yet
all  this  time  God  himself  has  engaged  to  supply  all  your
needs.  But  on  the  other  hand  what  hast  thou  doue  to  se-
cure  eternal  salvation  in  the  mansionsof  the  future  world,
to  be  delivered  from  misery  and  reach  unehangiug  felieity  ?
If  thou  art  not  able  to  endure  the  least  pain  or  toil  for  re-
ligion  iu  this  world,  how  wilt  thou  be  able  to  bear  in  the
future  world  both  material  and  spiritual  torments,  together
with  the  torments  of  the  imagination  ?55

Every  rnan  ought  to  take  as  the  subjeet  of  his  thoughts,
the  things  which  coneern  the  future  state, — the  pains  of
its  torments,  the  joys  of  its  telieity,  the  delight  and  ecstasy
of  the  vision  of  the  beauty  of  the  Lord,  and  finally  the  fact
that  these  states  are  eternal.  Now,  is  it  not  strange  folly
and  sottishness  to  be  proud  of  the  transitory  pleasures  of
the  world  in  a life  which  lasts  but  for  one  or  two  days,  and
to  turn  our  backs  upon  future  eternal  joys  ? If  you  are
wise  you  will  acknowledge  the  frail(y  and  errors  of  your
soul,  and  with  an  understariding  of  the  purpose  for  which
it  was  created,  you  will  meditateupon  yoursoul,  aud  upon


104  '


Ghazzali’s  Alchewy  of  Happiness.


the  almighty  power  and  greatness  of  God  as  far  as  the
human  mind  ean  cornprehend  them.  Recognizing  that
God5s  design  in  creating  yon  was,  that  you  should  know
him  and  love  hirn,you  should  never  cease  for  one  moment
to  walk  with  humility  and  prayer  in  the  path  of  obedience.
Regard  this  world  as  the  place  to  sow  seed  for  eternity,
and  after  taking  such  a portion  from  this  world  as  may
give  you  strength  to  take  the  journey  to  the  other  world,
turn  away  from  whatever  is  more  than  this.  Realize  that
the  future  world  is  the  place  for  enjoyment  and  happiness
which  is  eternal,  and  the  land  to  behold  the  excellence  and
beauty  of  the  Lord ; and  make  it  your  purpose,  divine
and  omniscient  grace  assisting  you,  never  to  eease  from
the  pursuit  of  thern,  but  to  secure  as  your  prey,  the  phcenix
of  felicity  and  happiness.


CHAPTER  V.

On  the  Love  of  God.

0 traveller  on  the  way  and  seeker  after  the  love  of  God  !
know  that  the  love  of  God is a sure  and perfect  method  for  the
believer  to  attain  the  object  of  his  desires.  It  is  a highly
exalted  station  of  rest,  during  the  journey  of  the  celestial
traveller.  It  is  the  consummation  of  the  desires  and  long-
ings  of  those  who  seek  diviue  truth.  It  is  the  foundation
of  the  vision  of  the  beauty  of  the  Lord.

The  love  of  God  is  of  the  most  binding  obligation  upon
every  one.  It  is  indeed  the  spirit  of  the  body,  and  the
light  of  the  eye.  The  prophet  of  God  declares  that  the  faith
of  the  believer  isnot  complete,  unless  he  love  God  andhis
prophel  more  than  all  the  world  besides.  The  prophet  was


Ghazzali'$  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


105


once  asked,  what  is  faitb  ? He  replied,u  It  is  to  love  God  and
his  prophet  more  than  wife,  children  and  property.55
And  the  prophet  was  continually  in  the  habit  of  praying,
u 0 my  God ! I ask  for  thy  love,  I ask  that  I may  love
whomsoever  loves  thee,  and  that  I may  perform  whatso-
ever  thy  love  makes  incumbent  upon  me,”

On  the  resurrection  day  all  sects  will  be  addressed  by
the  name  of  the  prophetwhom  each  followed,  “0  people  of
Moses!  O people  of  Jesus  ! Opeople  of  Mohamrned ! even
to  all  the  beloved  servants  of  God,  and  it  will  be  proclaimed
to  them,  “ 0 Friends  and  beloved  of God,coine  to  the  blessed
union  and  society  of  God ! Come  to  Paradise  and  partake
of  the  grace  of  your  beloved  !5?  When  they  hear  this  pro-
clamation,  their  hearts  will  leap  out  of  their  plaees,  and
they  will  almost  lose  their  reason.  Yahya  ben  Moa5z  says,
“ It  is  better  to  have  as  mueh  Iove  of  God,  even  if  only  as
much  as  a graiu  of  mustard  seed,  than  seventyyears  of  de-
votion  and  obedience  without  love.’5  llassan  of  Basra  says,
“ Whoever  knows  God,  will  certainly  love  him,  and  who-
ever  knows  the  world,  will  shun  it.55

0 thou  who  seekest  the  love  of  God ! know  that  this
]ove  is  founded  upon  two  things  ; one  is  Beauty,  and  the
other  is  Benelicence.  Beauty  acts  as  a cause  to  produce
love,  because  the  being,  the  attributes  and  the  works  of  God
possess  beauty,  and  every  one  loves  that  which  is  beautiful.
There  is  a tradition  wliich  says  “ Verily,  God  is  beautiful
and  he  loves  beauty.55  And  the  prophet  says,  “Desire  to
transact  your  affairs  with  those  who  have  beautiful  counte-
nances.5’  It  is  on  this  acc^unt  that  the  spirit  in  man  has
been  created  in  accordance  with  the  image  of  beauty,  so
that  whenever  it  either  hears  or  sees  anything  beautiful,
it  may  have  a propensity  towards  it,  and  seek  for  com-
munion  with  it.

But  you  should  also  know,  that  beau ty  is  of  two  ldnds,
one  of  which  is  beauty  of  form,  and  the  other  beauty  of


106


Grhazzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


moral  character.  And  know,  0 beloved,  that  the  reason
why  man  must  love  beauty  of  form  in  his  own  species,  and
has  an  inclination  to  admire  external  beauty,  is  that  God
created  the  spirits  of  men  out  of  a drop  of  his  own  light,
as  he  says.  “ when  I have  breathed  my  spirit  into  him.”  1
And  as  the  spirit  has  thus  been  created  out  of  the  light  of
the  Lord  Grod,  it  is  so  essentially  beautiful,  that  if  man
were  capable  of  seeing  the  degree  of  its  beauty,  he  would
become  bereft  of  reason  and  perbaps  would  perish  from
the  eflects  of  the  impression.

This  also  should  be  known,  that  beauty  of  form  belongs
to  the  spirit,  and  not  to  the  body.  It  is  a proof  tbat  there
is  hotbing  agreeable  in  the  body  by  itself,  that  when  the
spirit  is  separated  from  the  body  by  death,  uo  one  has  any
iuclination  afterwards  to  look  upon  the  face  of  the  dead,
but  on  the  contrary  his  teelings  repel  him  and  he  turns
away  from  it.  And  however  near  a friend  or  rela-
tivethe  person  may  be,  we  have  no  disposition  to  approach
bis  side  again.  The  body  of  man  is  created  of  opaque
earth,  and  the  spirit  by  entering  into  the  body  is  entirely
veiled,  so  that  it  can  neither  be  seeu  or  knowu.

It  is  clear  then  that  the  beauty  of  form  possessed  by
man  and  the  beauty  of  many  other  things  arise  from  their
being  created  from  the  light  of  the  Lord.  Consider  then,  as
far  ashuman  reason  can  reach,  if  such  beauty  and  elegance
exist  in  spirits  formed  out  of  one  drop  of  the  light  of  tbe
blessed  God,  what  must  be  the  beauty  and  splendor
of  the  Lord  God  himself.  Since  then  the  beauty  of  every
beloved  object  is  derived  from  his  light,  and  that  the
beauty  of  every  thiug  that  is  beautiful  is  from  him,  it  fol-
lows  that  he  who  is  wise,  ought  not  to  permit  himself  to
be  deceived  by  the  soul  whicb  passes  away,  and  to  be  at-
tracted  to  that  beauty  which  is  Aeeting,  but  that  he  should


1 S.  15  : 29.


GhazzaWs  Alchewy  of  Jlappmess.


107


turn  to  the  contemplation  of  that  painter  who  is  full  of  all
perfection,  and  of  that  maker  with  whorn  is  no  change,
and  earnestly  seek  aftcr  the  vision  of  his  beauty  with  his
wliole  heart.  Let  him  continue  day  and  liight  with  burn-
ing  and  consnming  desire  in  humble  prayer,  Ionging  after
his  beauty  and  after  union  with  him.

I have  made  a home  for  thy  Iove  in  my  heart,

While  afi'eetion  for  something  else  hovers  around  the  home.

But  it  is  folly  to  contract  friendship,  with  aught  else  than
thy  heauty,

For  there  is  none  to  be  loved  but  the  eternal  Friend.

He  who  has  made  thee  to  be  his  happiness  and  refuge,

Has  already  joined  himself  to  the  perfect  excellence.

O ! seekerof  divine  love,  thatwhich  renders  man  favora-
bly  inclined  to  pcrsons  of  virtuous  cbaracter,  is  the  fact
that  God  has  creatcd  man  after  his  own  eharacter;  as  it
has  come  to  us  in  the  tradition  that,  “ verily  God  created
man  after  his  own  image.M  Hence  whenever  man  sees  or
hears  of  a quality  belonging  to  his  own  race  and  kind,  as
justice,  generosity,  forgiveness  or  patience,  hc  will  certainly
bave  a sympathy  with  that  quality  and  exercise  love  to  lts
possessor.  If  we  hear  for  iustance  that  in  a eertain  country
there  is  a just  sovereign  or  a just  vizier,  we  heartily  love
that  king  or  vizier,  and  we  are  always  praising  his  excel-
lence  and  worth,  although  thcre  is  not  the  least  probability
of  any  advantage  accruing  to  us  from  his  jnstice.  Such
a sovereign  was  Nushirvan,  who  notwithstanding  he  was
an  intidel  yet  as  he  was  just,  the  heart  of  every  man  is
drawn  towards  him.  If  again  we  hear  of  the  knowledge,
science,  clemency  or  muniticence  of  any  persons,  as  of  the
Imam  Abu  Hanilĕ,  of  the  Imam  Shafĕi,  of  Bayĕzid  of  Bis-
tan,  or  of  Junĕid  of  Bagdad,  tbe  spirit  of  a man  will  be  at-
tracted  towards  them  on  account  of  those  qualities,  he  will
love  them,  and  he  will  certainly  desire  to  see  them  and  to
be  with  them.  If  we  hearof  agenerous  man,  although  he


108


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


may  be  in  a foreign  country,  and  we  have  no  hope  of  any
advantage  from  him  or  of  any  token  of  his  generosity  to
ourselve«,  yet  still  from  necessity  we  will  love  him,  and
whenever  his  name  is  mentioned  we  will  invoke  blessings
upou  him  and  praise  him.  It  is  thus  with  Hatem  Tai
whose  name,  though  he  was  an  inhdel,  is  upon  every
tongue,  because  he  was  agenerous  and  benevolent  man,  and
all  hearts  are  irresistibly  led  to  love  him.  . . .

We  see  then  that  the  love  we  bear  to  persons  endowed
with  the  virtuous  qualities  of  man,  is  not  bestowed  by  us
for  the  sake  of  any  fancied  advantage  from  them  or  any
hope  ofgain,  but  thaton  the  contrary  it  is  because  the  spirits
of  men  are  created  in  correspondence  with  the  character
of  God,  and  when  we  see  a traee  or  mark  of  a quality  or
affection  of  a kind  like  our  own,  we  cannot  help  being  at-
tracted  towards  it,  and  must  necessarily  love  it.

In  this  view  of  the  subject,  0 seeker  of  the  truth,  and
friend  who  longs  for  the  bright  vision,  when  you  consider
what  an  impulse  we  have  to  adtnirc  and  to  love  man  who
is  encompassed  with  so  many  detects,  and  whose  qualities
are  subject  to  decay,  — be  candid  and  redect,  that  all  the
attributes  of  God  are  perfect,  that  all  his  titles  are  glorious,
aud  that  all  his  works  are  made  in  intinite  wisdom,  and
how  then  can  there  be  a man  of  such  animal  affections  and
propensities  as  uot  to  love  him  with  all  his  heart  and  soul  !
And  how  can  a person  having  the  appearance  of  a man,
be  such  a stone,  as  uot  to  be  willing  to  make  a sacrifice  of
h 18  head  and  eveu  of  his  soul,  irnpelled  by  his  absorbing
affection  for  Him  ?

SeparatioD  from  thee,  would  quickly  destroy  rne,

Separation  from  one's  friends  is  fatal.

If  thou  shouldst  separate  from  rne  still  would  I
Be  oceapied  with  thee,  ever  active  Friend,

Who  art  the  objeet  of  my  desires  and  my  researches  ;

For  thou  wilt  not  turn  away  from  him  who  loves  thee.


Gh,azzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness .


109


You  should  know  also  that  in  the  world  of  spirits,  God
had  ennobled  man  with  beauty  and  its  qualities,  and  had
made  him  sudieiently  acquainted  with  Himself  and  His
attributes ; and  the  spirits  continued  for  a long  time  par-
ticipating  iu  enjoymentin  the  land  of  a&ection,  intoxicated
and  in  ecstacy  with  the  cup  of  love  and  the  wine  of  celes-
tial  union.  Afterwards  in  accordance  with  divine  wisdom
and  by  soverign  decree,  they  fell  from  that  exalted  world
to  this  lower  world, — from  the  world  of  union  to  the  world
of  separation.  In  this  world  of  trial,  having  entered  into
bodies  and  become  entangled  with  the  things  of  sense  and
with  worldly  occupations,  and  shut  out  from  the  spiritual
world,  the^/  forgot  its  intimate  friendships  and  the  joys  of
its  society.  Being  so  far  distant  from  that  world,  the
being  and  character  of  God  became  completely  veiled  from
the  view  of  some,  and  the  love  and  union  which  had  ex-
isted  in  their  hearts  from  all  eternity  disappeared.  None
the  less  however,  it  is  still  the  case,  that  when  man  sees
beauty  and  perfection,  the  spirit  cannot  help  admiring  it.
But  as  the  intimacy  and  friendship  which  had  formerly
existed  have  been  clouded  over,  aud  the  animal  impulses,
passions  and  lusts  have  become  predominant,  they  ima-
gine  that  the  love  of  pleasure  belongs  to  the  delights  of  re-
ligion,  and  regard  it  as  a necessity  of  the  soul.

The  spirits  of  some  men,  however,  in  becoming  attached
to  a body,  retained  the  diviue  guidance,  and  the  spiritual
world  in  consequence  was  not  concealed  from  their  view,
nor  did  they  forget  its  friendly  society  or  the  attributes
and  qualities  of  its  holy  spirits.  And  as  the  glory  of  the
infinite  being  and  his  attributes  was  not  veiled  from  their
eyes,  their  desire  for  the  blessed  union  and  longing  for
the  vision  of  beauty  increased  daily.  In  accordance  with
this,  it  is  related  by  Soheil  Testeri  (may  God’s  mcrcy  be
upon  him  !)  that  “ from  the  moment  that  the  blessed  God
in  the  world  of  spirits  and  the  assembly  of  holy  union

14


110


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


asked  the  spirits  u Am  I not  your  Lord?’’1  and  thcy
called  out  in  an  answer  u yes !”  that  loying  answer  has
never  waned  or  decayed  within  my  sonl.  When  I wTas
only  three  years  old,  I used  to  spend  all  night  in  the  wor-
ship  of  the  Lord  God,  without  giving  any  slumber  to  my
eyes.,?

O thou  who  longest  after  the  love  of  God  ! the  second
cause  of  love  in  man  which  we  have  mentioned,  viz  :
benehcence,  operates  through  the  state  of  poverty  and  necd
in  which  man  has  been  crcated.  Both  in  the  affairs  of  the
world  and  in  the  concerns  of  religion,  mau  is  in  want  of
an  inhnite  yariety  of  things,  as  God  says  in  his  word,
u Yerily,  God  is  rich,  but  ye  are  poor.”.2  Hence  a man
always  loves  and  honors  whatever  person  enables  him  to
obtain  any  object  of  which  he  stands  in  need,  or  who
makes  it  probable  that  he  will  obtain  it.  This  will  be  the
case  especially,  if  the  same  individual  has  atvarious  times
supplied  his  necessities.  He  will  then  beenshwed  to  liirn,
heart  aud  soul,  and  whenever  his  name  is  mentioned  will
chant  his  praise  and  invoke  blessings  upon  him.  The
proverb  says,  u man  is  a slave  to  beneAcence.”

In  matters  of  religion,  man  ha3  need  of  helpers  of  two
kinds.  The  first  class  are  the  great  expounders  of  doc-
triue,3  who  instruct  him  iu  religious  precepts,  and  preserve
him  from  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  the  dangers  of
doubt.  They  also  make  him  acquainted  witli  the  restric-
tions  of  the  law,  and  the  regulations  aud  ceremonies  of
worship.  They  explain  to  him  what  conduct  corresponds
with  rectitude,  and  what  is  improper, — what  is  lawful  and
what  nnlawful.  The  second  class  of  helpers  to  man  are
the  venerable  preachers.4  It  is  their  province  to  throw

1 S.  7:  171.  2 S.  417:  40.

a “ Ulema  ” — tlie  learned  in  tlie  Diyine  Law.  See  N ote  D.

4 Slieiklis,  i . e.  elders,  who  are  the  preaching  class.


Grhazzali's  Alcliemy  of  Happmess.


111


light  upon  the  nature  of  the  way  of  life,  and  upon  thc  true
condition  in  which  man  is  placed.  They  point  out  the
mcans  and  methods  by  which  the  slave  of  desire  may  secure
a change  of  his  vieious  inclinations,  aud  by  wbich  the  dis-
ordered  soul  may  obtain  a pure  and  virtuous  character.
They  set  forth  the  transitory  nature  of  the  world  and  the
shame  and  sin  of  heing  attached  to  it.  They  endeavor  to
persuade  men  that  the  design  of  their  entrance  into  the
world  is  that  they  may  love  and  laiow  God ; and  they
strive  to  turn  them  away  from  following  the  world,  by
giving  them  ideas  of  the  joys  and  rest  of  the  other  world,
and  of  the  delight  and  preciousness  of  the  vision  of  the
beauty  of  the  Lord,  that  so  they  may  livc  as  pilgrims  to
eternity.  The  whole  reason  why  the  apprentice  loves  his
master,  and  every  disciple  Ioves  his  teacher,  and  why  the
wise  and  excellent  love  the  experienced  Sheikh  whose  les-
sons  they  hear,  or  love  the  doctors  of  the  law  and  the
saints  of  olden  time  is  that  they  have  been  benejicent , and
have  supplied  thcir  wants.

In  matters  pertaining  to  the  world,  beloved,  the  neces-
sities  of  man  are  of  such  kinds  that  there  is  uo  occasion
for  our  entering  into  any  details.  Do  you  uot  realize  for
instance,  through  how  many  hands  the  food  you  put  into
your  mouth  passes,  before  it  is  brought  to  you,  and  how
many  persons  have  beeu  employed  in  the  service  of  pre-
paring  it  for  you  ? Aud  mau  has,  in  short,  the  same  kind
of  need  of  helpersin  his  clothing,  home,  and  in  all  the  arts
and  trades,  as  has  before  been  mentioned.  He  needs,
also,  the  winds  and  rain,  the  sun  and  moon,  thc  earth  and
sky,  as  we  find  in  the  verses  of  Sheikh  Saadi : 1

The  clouds,  wind,  raoon,  sun  and  stars  are  working  ever  :

Therefore  if  a loaf  of  bread  comes  into  your  hands,  eat  it  not
without  gratitude.


1 These  Poetical  Extracts  were  inserted  by  the  Turliish  translator.


112


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


And  after  we  have  eaten  onr  food?  how  manj  agents  we
need  to  digest  it,  and  to  convertit  into  fat,  milk  and  blood.
We  have  beiore  remarked  upon  the  number  of  servants
there  are  within  your  bodj,  of  wdiich  jou  have  no  know-
ledge.

And  now,  student  of  the  celestial  waj,  and  seeker  after
the  love  of  God,  come  and  consider  a little  with  the  eje
of  reverence  and  the  mind  of  thoughtfulness.  It  a person
should  give  jou  a drachm  of  silver,  or  a suit  of  clothes,  or
serve  jou  for  a single  daj  and  conelude  some  business
which  concerned  jou,  jou  would  love  him  as  long  as  jou
lived,  and  jou  would  alwajs  speak  well  of  him  wherever
his  name  was  mentioned,  although  tbe  service  he  had  per-
lormed  for  jou,  and  his  act  of  benehcence  was  onlj  effected
through  the  will  of  God  and  bj  hi3  power.  Be  sincere
now  and  saj,  whj  should  jou  not  love  and  sacrihce  everj
thing  for  the  sake  of  God,  who  created  the  heavens  and  the
earth,  who  has  taken  care  of  all  jour  affairs  long  before  jou
desired  it  of  him,  who  has  provided  for  all  jour  necessities
before  jou  had  anj  notion  of  them,  who  gives  jou  30  manj
thousand  mercies  at  everj  breath,  who  has  uot  ceased  to
sustain  jou,  even  when  jou  were  disobedient  to  his  com-
mandments  and  rebellious,  and  who  has  covered  jour
shame,  for  the  sake  of  the  Friend  of  God  ? Ought  jou
not  to  praise  him  with  jour  tongue,  and  love  him  with
jour  heart?  Is  it  right,  overwhe!med  as  jou  are  with  his
unfailing  mercies  andintinite  bounties,  that  jou  should  re-
gard  these  mereies  as  coming  from  other  source  than  God,
and  that  jou  should  thank  some  other  one  than  Him  for
these  services  and  favors,  and  that  jou  should  love  some
other  one  iustead  of  him  ?

It  is  in  vain  that  the  eyes  wateh  for  any  other  love  than  thee.

It  is  a loss  for  the  eyes  to  weep  for  any  other  friend.

Thou  art  the  true  friend  ! If  thou  deign  to  look  upon  me,

It  will  be  well  with  me,  as  if  my  eyes  had  Dever  wept.


Ghazzali' s Alchemy  of  Happiness . 113

What  shall  I do  with  that  life  whieh  is  not  passed  in  remembrance
of  thee  ?

What  shall  I do  with  the  eye  th&t  is  not  sad  with  longing  after  thee  ?

What  shall  I do  with  the  heart  that  is  not  the  home  of  thy  love  ?

What  shall  I do  with  the  soul  that  does  not  make  itself  a sacrihce
in  thy  Way  ?

0 inquirer  after  the  love  of  God  ! The  love  of  God  ex-
ists  in  every  heart,  though  it  lies  coneealed,  just  as  tire
exists  in  the  iiint  stone,  until  it  is  drawn  out.  If  you  take
the  steel  of  desire  and  attection  into  your  hands,  and  with.
it  strike  the  heart,  you  obtain  fire  by  the  means,  and  your
soul  will  be  filled  with  ligbt.  The  malice,  deceitfulness,
hatred,  vileness,  envy  and  strife  that  are  in  the  heart  will
be  burned  up,  and  it  will  be  freed  and  purihed  from  sen-
sual  perturbations.  Butif  you  are  careless  and  do  nothing
and  pass  several  days  without  seeking,  the  heart  will  again
become  like  fire  covered  over  with  ashes,  which  by  remain-
ing  a long  time  unused,  will  finally  be  extinguished.  So
at  last  the  heart,  becomes  encased  with  sensual  impurities
and  with  the  blackness  of  the  passions,  and  is  no  longer
capable  of  being  enlightened  with  the  light  of  truth.  Our
refuge  is  in  God !

O,  faithful  friend,  who  art  worthy  to  be  loved  ! know,
that  the  love  of  God  is  a standard  that  leads  to  victory.
Whoever  seeks  refuge  under  it,  will  be  a sovereign  in  two
worlds,  and  lord  of  a throne  at  the  kingJs  court.  This  love
is  a universal  solvent  to  secure  happiness.  Whoever  se-
cures  it,  is  richer  than  in  the  possession  of  both  worlds.
God  is  always  rich,  notwithstanding  all  the  world  is  pro-
vided  for  through  him.  The  heart  which  bears  no  traces
of  the  love  of  God,  is  like  a dead  corpse,  which  knows
nothing  of  its  own  spirit.  Still  there  is  no  person  among
reasonable  beings  who  will  say  that  he  does  not  love  God,
or  who  will  not  make  pretensions  to  possessing  a love  for
him.  But  it  is  like  an  ernpty  claim,  upon  which  no  deci-
sion  can  be  based  and,  unlessthe  witness  is  a faithful  one,


114


Ghazzali's  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


no  conclusion  can  be  formed.  If  you  should  be  asked,  do
you  love  God,  beware  andgive  no  auswer.  For  if  you  say
I do  not  love  him,  (our  refuge  is  in  God),  you  would  make
yourself  an  infidel.  And  if  you  say  in  answer,  “I  love
him,55  yet  you  have  no  signs  or  tokens  of  your  loving  Ilim.

How  know  that  there  are  seven  sians  of  love  to  God.  In
whomsoever  these  marks  are  found,  his  pretcnsions  to  lov-
ing  God  are  to  be  regarded  as  well  founded.

The  first  sign  of  love  to  God  is,  not  to  be  atraid  ot  death,
and  to  be  always  waitiug  for  it.  For  death  unites  the
friend  to  his  frieud, — the  seeker  to  the  object  which  he
seeks.  As  long  as  attachment  to  and  dependence  upon
the  world  cannot  be  broken  off,  the  traces  of  love  to  God
cannot  be  visible.  If  aperson,  bowever,  is  afraid  of  death
and  does  not  feel  a rcadiness  to  go  into  the  presence  of
God,  and  yet  is  making  every  provision  for  his  journey
iuto  the  other  world,  it  does  not  follow  that  he  does  not
possess  the  love  of  God.  It  is,  on  the  contrary,  an  evidence
that  he  does  love  God.

It  is  a second  sign  of  love  to  God,  when  a man  prefers
the  love  of  God  to  any  worldly  object,  chooses  whatsoever
draws  him  near  to  God,  and  forsakes  whatsoever  has  a
tendency  to  turn  him  away  from  God.  He  desires  always
to  act  in  accordance  with  his  will  and  with  his  approbation.
But  it  is  not  an  indication  that  a person  is  entirely  destitute
ofloveto  God,  because  he  is  not  in  every  circumstance
submissive  to  the  holy  will  of  God.  For,  in  some  persous
love  may  exist  in  perfection,  while  in  others  it  tiiay  be  in
some  measure  defective.  It  is  said,  for  example,  that  dur-
ing  the  life  of  the  apostle  of  God,  one  of  his  companions
was  a wine  drinker,  and  he  had  of‘tentimes  been  pnnished
for  it.  Another  of  his  companions  one  day  vexed  at  his
conduct,  cursed  him.  Thc  prophet  happencd  to  hear  him
curse  him,  and  knocked  fof  him  to  come  in.  When  he
had  come  into  his  presence  he  said,  “ Why  do  you  curse


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Ila.ppiness.


115


that  man  ? He  is  both  a triend  of  God  and  of  his  prophet,
and  loves  them.55

The  third  sign  of  a maids  loveto  Gocl  isthat  the  reraem-
branee  of  God  is  always  fresh  in  his  heart.  He  never
eeases  to  meditate  upon  God.  Every  man  thinks  upon
and  calls  to  mind  an  object  in  proportion  to  his  love  to  it.
If  a person5s  love  and  attection  is  perfeet  he  never  forgets
that  objeet.  If  a person  say,  I love  both  God  and  a
certain  worldly  object,  attention  should  be  paid  tosee  which
of  them  he  loves  the  most.  And  then  that  object  can  be
said  to  rule  in  his  heart  whieh  he  loves  the  most.  Gradu-
ally  from  day  to  day,  the  object  whieh  preponderates  will
efface  little  by  little  all  affection  for  the  other.

The  fourth  sign  of  love  to  God  is,  to  love  and  respeet
the  powrerful  Koran,  regarding  it  as  the  word  of  God.  A
man  ought  to  praise  and  love  the  prophets  and  saiuts,  as
the  friends  of  God.  He  should  love  all  men,  saying  that
they  were  all  created  by  the  will  and  power  of  God.
Whatever  person  attains  to  this  point,  his  feelings  of  envy
and  hatred  and  even  his  coldness  of  looks  will  be  quelled
and  disappear,  and  he  will  treat  all  individuals  as  his
friends.

The  fifth  sign  of  love  to  God  is  that  a man  will  choose
the  closet  and  retirement  and  have  an  eagerness  for  secret
prayer.  He  will  long  and  wait  for  the  night,  that  the  avo-
cations  and  hindranees  of  the  world  may  be  banished,  that
he  may  be  embarrassed  by  no  distractions  in  his  supplica-
tions  to  his  incomparable  and  unique  Eriend,  and  that  he
may  be  alone  in  familiar  intercourse  with  God.

It  is  reported  that  in  the  days  of  the  children  of  Israel,
there  was  a slave  who  prayed  every  night  from  evening
until  morniug,  but  he  went  out  and  performed  his  moru-
ing  prayer  under  atree.  God  spoke  by  inspiration  to  the
one  who  was  the  prophet  at  that  time  and  said,  “ Go  aud
speak  to  that  slave  my  seiwant  thus: — You  abandon


116


Ghazzali’s  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


prayer  to  me  in  secret  and  come  out  here  to  pray  uuder
this  tree,  for  the  aake  of  the  pleasure  you  derive  from  the
music  of  the  hirds  over  your  head.  But  in  so  doing  you
mutilate  as  it  were  my  love  and  you  will  not  again  obtain
it  pertectly/’  It  is  also  reported  that  God  oncc  said  to
David,  “ 0 ! David,  that  man  is  a liar,  who  pretends  to
love  me  and  yet  goes  to  bed  and  sleeps  the  whole  time  tili
morninor  For  does  not  a friend  desire  to  see  the  counte-

O

nance  of  his  friend,  and  is  he  not  eager  to  have  intercourse
with  bim  ? Whoever  wishes  to  see  me,  will  seek  me  and
will  find  me.55

The  sixth  sign  of  love  to  God,  is  when  a man  finds  the
' worship  of  God  to  be  easy,  inviting  and  delightful.  It  is
related  that  a certain  preacher1 2  used  to  say,  1 have  served
God  in  worship  sixty  years  with  irksomeness  and  constraint.
I afterwards  served  him  yet  sixty  years  more,  and  my  de-
votious  were  to  me  spiritual  food  ; aud  in  the  absence  or
disuse  of  them,  I did  not  enjoy  a moment’s  peace  or  quiet
of  mind.”

The  seventh  sign  of  love  to  God  is,  that  a man  loves  the
- sincere  friends  and  obedient  servants  of  God,  and  regards
them  all  as  his  friends.  He  regards  all  the  enemies  of  God
as  his  enemies  and  abhors  them.  And  God  thus  spcaks
iu  his  eternal  word.  “ His  companions  are  terrible  towards
the  infidels,  and  teuder  towards  each  other.,;2  A Sheikh
was  once  asked  “ who  are  the  friends  of  the  exalted  and
blcssed  God??J  He  replied : “ The  friends  of‘  God  are
those  who  are  more  compassionate  to  the  friends  of  God
themselves,  thau  a fatber  or  a mother  to  their  children.”

1 Sheikh.

2 S.  48  : 29.


GhazzaWs  Alchemy  of  Happiness.


117


Note  A,  p.  54.

Preserved  Table.  This  record-tablet  of  Mohammed,  may  have
been  suggested  to  his  mind  by  the  two  tables  of  stone  of  the  Ten
Commandmcnts  of  Moses.  A clear  view  of  what  this  table  is,  may
be  obtained  from  the  following  extract  from  a treatise  of  Berkevi
explaining  the  Mussulman  dogmas,  which  is  at  the  present  day  a
text-book  in  the  Turkish  schools.

“ It  must  be  confessed,  that  good  and  evil  and  every  thing  in  short
bappens  from  the  predestination  and  foreknowledge  of  God, — that
all  which  has  been  and  will  be,  was  decreed  from  eternity  and  is
written  upon  the  preserved  tablc,  — that  nothing  can  happen  con-
trary  to  it, — that  the  faith  of  the  believcr,  the  piety  of  the  pious
man  and  his  good  works  are  foreseen,  willed,  predestined  and  de-
creed  in  writing  on  the  preservcd  table,  are  produced,  accepted  and
loved  by  God  ; — but  that  the  inhdelity  of  inhdels,  the  irreligion  of
the  wicked  and  their  bad  actions  happen  indced  with  the  foreknow-
ledge  of  God,  by  bis  will,  and  as  an  effect  of  his  predestination  in-
scribed  upon  the  preserved  table,  and  by  the  operation  of  God,  —
but  not  with  his  satisfaction  or  affection.,,

Note  B,  p.  56.

Mystjcs.  Whercver  this  word  isfound  in  this  treatise,  it  is  to  be
understood  that  the  original  word  is  soo/ee,  and  soinetimes  the  word
has  been  allowed  to  stund  untranslated.  Soofee  does  not  necessarily
mean  any  one  paiticular  society  of  Mussulmans,  ,but  includes  all
persons  as  well  as  orders  and  congregations,  who  embracc  mystical
or  transcendental  modes  of  interpreting  the  Koran  and  who  conform
their  life  in  a greater  or  less  degree  to  their  mystical  notions.  Soofee,
Dervish  and  Fakir,  are  different  words  for  various  classcs  of  ori-
ental  monks  and  mystics.  They  are  found  whercver  thcre  are
Mussulmans,  and  the  differcnces  between  them  and  other  Mussul-
mans  bear  a considerable  relation  to  the  differences  developed  by
mystics,  pietists  or  puritansin  Christian  churches.  They  differ  also
much  among  theniselves  in  their  modes  of  spiritualization  and  in
their  ceremonics  and  practiccs.  There  is  also  much  jealousy  of  each
other,  between  the  dominant  orthodox  clergy  and  doctors  of  religion,
and  thc  mystics,  dervishes  and  preachers.  The  orthodox  clergy

15


118


Ghazzali’s  Alchewy  of  Ilappiness.


adrnit  only  the  graimnatical  aod  literal  — the  external  meaDing  of
the  Koran  ; bnt  raany  Soofees  preteod  that  the  outward  meaning  is
but  the  shell,  aDd  that  they  seek  for  and  expound  the  inward  or
mystical  meaDing.  The  revereoce  and  esteem  for  the  Soofees  and
Monks  is  so  great  witli  the  people,  that  the  elergy  and  doctors  usu-
ally  cooceal  their  opposition  and  jealousy.

“ Soofeeism  hasexisted  in  one  shape  or  other  in  every  age  and  re-
gion  ; itsmystical  doetrines  are  to  befouDd  in  the  schools  of  ancient
Greeee  and  in  those  of  the  modern  philosophers  of  Europe.  It  is
the  dream  of  the  most  ignorant  and  the  most  learned  : it  is  to  be
found  in  the  palace  and  the  cottage,  in  the  luxurious  city,  and  the
pathless  desert/"

The  fundamental  doctrine,  and  the  great  object  of  longing  of  the
oriental  mystic  is  union  with  God.  The  whirling  Pervishes  as  they
are  popularly  called,  imitate  thc  founder  of  thoir  particular  order
and  whirl  around  on  their  toes  for  an  hour  to  the  sound  of  soft  music
and  muttered  chants  : and  they  imagine  that  the  dizziness  which  is
created  and  the  prostration  which  follows  is  an  inspired  ecstacy  and
an  approximation  to  the  desired  union.  Mussulman  mystics  are  ex-
tensively  accused  as  are  also  a class  of  perfectionists  in  the  Chris-
tian  church,  of  regarding  external  actions  as  morally  indifferent  to
those  who  are  spiritually  cnlightened.  Their  doctrines  bave  been
abused  among  themselves  by  fanatics  to  lead  them  to  the  commission
of  crime,  as  in  the  caseof  the  attempt  to  assassinate  the  shah  of  Per-
sia  by  the  Babis.  We  should  no  more  be  led  to  think  that  there
was  any  tendency  to  ahuse  for  evil  purposes  from  reading  this  trea-
tise  of  Ghazzali,  than  to  infer  the  same  from  devotional  and  mystic
writings  of  the  westcrn  world.  Ghazzali,  is  as  rnuch  disposcd  to
eensure  hypocritical  pretencc  among  Soofees,  as  somc  writers  on  Per-
sia  have  been  to  class  nearly  the  whole  body  as  hypocritcs.


Note  C,  p.  82.

Tbe  Mohammedan  calendar  being  regulated  by  the  lunar  months,
every  twelfth  lunar  mooth  is  devoted  to  fasting,  and  it  is  of  the
grcatcst  importance  that  the  very  first  appearance  of  the  moon  sliould
be  watched,  to  know  jnst  wlien  to  commcnce  the  fast.  Certain
months  and  daysot'  the  mooth  are  peculiarly  appropriate  to  works  of
charity.  The  days  oo  which  the  caravans  of  pilgrims  ought  to  ar-
rive  at  Mecea,  aod  thc  days  for  going  around  the  Llack  stone  of  the
Caaba,  oucur  also  on  certaio  fixed  days  of  luuar  months.  Tlie
auyantages  aod  morul  eods  of  having  a moon,  must  be  looked  at


GhazzaH’s  Alchemy  of  Uappiness.


119


from  the  poiufcof  view  of  the  theological  theoryof  the  author,  which
is  uothiug  less  ihan  that  the  moou  was  created  on  purpose  to  render
possible,  and  to  aid  in  carrying  into  effect,  the  ordinances  of  the  un-
created  Koran.


Note  D,  p.  14.

Interpretation  OF  the  Koran.  The  extract  helew  from  the
work  of  Ghazzali,  the  Teha/eti  Felasĕfĕ  or  Destruction  of  PJtiloso-
phy , while  it  shows  the  position  he  assigns  to  the  doctors  of  the
law,  exemplifies  also  the  character  o f his  genius,  and  the  measure
of  independent  thought  tolerated  among  Mussulmaos.  He  fearlessly
adopted  whatever  discoveries  in  scieoce  could  be  established  by
proofs,  and  defended  them  eveo  wheu  apparently  opposed  to  the
language  of  the  Koran  : the  dogmatical  interpretatioo  of  the  Koran
must  yield  to  stubborn,  undeniable  facts  in  seience.  I translate  it
from  Hajji  Khalfa’s  Jihani  JJuma,  or  Yiew  of  the  World,  where  it
was  introduced  by  him  to  eoforce  the  claims  of  scientific  evidence
to  be  received  by  the  faithful.

“ Know  that  the  differences  of  opinion  between  philosophers  and
mankind  generally  are  of  three  kinds.  The  first  kind  of  difference
is  simply  a verbal  one.  As  for  instance  they  speak  of  the  makcr  of
the  world  as  essence  or  substance  (jouhar)^  while  at  the  same  time,
they  explain  the  word  to  mean  that  wl)ieh  exists  by  itself  aud  inde-
pendent  of  place.

u The  second  kind  of  difference  refers  to  questions,  wherethere  is
no  difference  betweeu  their  system  and  the  principles  of  our  religion,
and  where  there  is  no  occasion  of  appealing  to  the  prophets  in  con-
firmation  of  the  matter  in  dispute.  For  instance  the  philosophers
say,  that  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  is  an  indication  that  its  light  is  ob-
structed  on  account  of  the  earth's  coming  between  it  and  the  sun,
secing  that  the  moon  derives  its  light  from  the  sun,  and  that  the
earth  is  a sphere  surrounded  by  the  sky  on  all  sides,  and  therefore
when  the  moon  falls  into  the  shadow  of  the  earth,  its  light  is  cut
off.  The  Philosophers  also  say  that  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  arises
from  the  moon’s  standing  between  the  obsewer  and  the  sun,  and
from  a conjunction  of  the  two  at  the  same  moment.

“ The  same  may  be  said  in  regard  to  this  language  as  was  observed
in  reterence  to  the  disputes  about  words, — that  one  need  not  be
anxious  about  refuting  it.  Whoever  imagines  that  it  is  a religious
duty  to  dispute  upon  this  subject,  has  in  fact  attacked  religion,  and
injured  his  own  cause.  For  in  truth  these  positions  are  fortified  by


120


Ghazzal?s  Alehemy  of  Happiness.


mathematical  proofs,  about  which  there  can  be  no  doubt.  Who-
ever  investigates  an  eclipse,  can  cstablish  it  by  demonstration,  and
can  point  out  its  peeuliarities,  the  period  of  its  commencement,  the
extent  of  it,  and  the  period  of  duration  until  the  reillumination  be-
gins.  And  if  some  one  tell  him  that  the  demonstration  is  contrary
to  doetrine,  let  him  not  doubt  the  demonstration,  but  rather  lethim
doubt  the  interpretatioo  given  to  the  law  (of  the  Koran).  The
wrong  done  to  the  law  by  those  who  defcnd  it  with  false  interpreta-
tions,  is  greater  than  the  wrong  which  is  done  to  it  by  those  who
find  fault  with  it  on  a eorreet  interpretation, — as  says  tbe  proverb,

1 a wise  enemy  is  hetter  than  a foolish  triend/

“ If  some  person  should  argue,  that  as  aecording  to  a tradition,  the
Prophet  onee  said,  1 When  God  manifests  his  glory  upon  anything,
it  humbles  itself  before  it/  and  that  therefore  this  is  to  be  taken  as
an  indieation  that  an  eelipse  arises  from  an  aet  of  humility  in  the
presence  of  God,  we  reply,  that  this  report  is  not  a genuine  tradi-
tion,  and  that  even  on  the  supposition  of  its  genuineness,  it  would
be  better  to  throw  light  upon  its  meaning,  than  to  make  usc  of  it
for  altereation  in  categorical  premises.  For  when  the  proots  are
definite,  we  ought  not  to  be  eontrolled  to  such  an  extent  by  unex-
plained  texts  of  the  Koran.  It  is  a eause  of  great  joy  to  the  infidel
when  thc  apologist  for  the  faith  pretends  that  sueh  views  are  eon-
trary  to  the  faith,  for  it  then  makes  it  easy  for  him  to  refute  the
law.  The  world  is  now  disputing  whether  it  is  a genuine  tradition
or  mercly  ancient.  But  if  its  gcnuineness  should  be  established,  it
would  still  beamatterof  indifferenee,  whether  the  earth  wcre  round
or  flat,  or  whether  the  beavens  above  and  wliat  is  below  are  more
or  less  than  thirteen  layers  — seeing  the  thing  sought  to  be  proved
is,  tliat  at  any  rate  they  are  all  the  work  of  God.

“ We eome  ncxt  to  the  third  differenee  of  opinion,  in  whieh  the  mat-
ters  disputed  about  are  at  the  foundation  of'  religion,  as  the  ereation
of  the  world,  the  attributes  of  the  ereator,  and  the  resurreetion  of
the  body.  In  this  ease  it  is  without  doubt  our  duty  to  retute  the
error  with  convineing  arguments.”

The  work  of‘  Degerando,  Histoire  comparĕ  des  systbmes  de  philoso -
phie , Tomc  iv,  Paris,  1823,  may  properly  be  referred  to,  for  com-
parison  with  Smblders’s  Ussai,  to  aid  farther  in  apprceiating  thc
prineiples  of  Ghazzali  in  interprcting  the  Koran,  and  the  grounds
of  his  opposition  to  Aristotle.  His  pieture  of  thc  stand-point  of
Ghazzali  scems  aeeurate  and  just.  See  also,  Whewell,  History  of
the  lnductive  Sciences , 3d  edition,  1857.
