Author: Johann Gottfried von Herder (ed.)
Year: 1678
Archive ID: the-hermetic-museum_202406

--- Page 3 ---
The Hermetic
Museum
Edited by A. E. Waite


--- Page 5 ---
THE HERMETIC MUSEUM
VOLUMES I AND II
AND
THE THREE TREATISES OF PHILALETHES
TRANSLATED BY BY
ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE
FIRST PUBLISHED IN LATIN IN 1678
TRANSLATED AND PUBLISHED IN 1893


--- Page 6 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
VOLUME I
TITLE PAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
THE PREFACE OF THE ORIGINAL EDITION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
FRONTISPIECE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
THE GOLDEN TRACT CONCERNING THE STONE OF THE PHILOSOPHERS . . . . . . . . . . 10
THE GOLDEN AGE RESTORED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
THE SOPHIC HYDROLITH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A DEMONSTRATION OF NATURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
A SHORT TRACT, OR PHILOSOPHICAL SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .133
THE ONLY TRUE WAY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .139
THE GLORY OF THE WORLD; OR, TABLE OF PARADISE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
A TRACT OF GREAT PRICE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
THE BOOK OF ALZE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240
THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250
THE GOLDEN TRIPOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .276
VOLUME II
TITLE PAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325
FRONTISPIECE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .326
BELIEVE-ME, OR THE ORDINAL OF ALCHEMY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .329
THE TESTAMENT OF CREMER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
THE NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .395
NEW CHEMICAL LIGHT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .437


--- Page 7 ---
AN OPEN ENTRANCE TO THE CLOSED PALACE OF THE KING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 467
A SUBTLE ALLEGORY CONCERNING THE SECRETS OF ALCHEMY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 499
THE THREE TREATISES OF PHILALETHES
I. THE METAMORPHOSIS OF METALS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .520
II. A SHORT VADE MECUM TO THE CELESTIAL RUBY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .538
III. THE FOUNT OF CHEMICAL TRUTH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .553
HELVETIUS' GOLDEN CALF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562
THE ALL-WISE DOORKEEPER, OR A FOURFOLD FIGURE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .589
ADDENDUM. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .601


--- Page 8 ---
The Hermetic Museum By Arthur Edward Waite
THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,
VOLUME I
RESTORED AND ENLARGED:
MOST FAITHFULLY INSTRUCTING ALL DISCIPLES OF THE
SOPHO-SPAGYRIC
ART HOW THAT GREATEST AND TRUEST MEDICINE OF
THE PHILOSOPHER'S STONE
MAY BE FOUND AND HELD.
NOW FIRST DONE INTO ENGLISH FROM THE LATIN
ORIGINAL PUBLISHED AT
FRANKFORT IN THE YEAR 1678.
TRANSLATED BY
ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE
CONTAINING TWENTY-TWO MOST
CELEBRATED CHEMICAL TRACTS.
LONDON: J. ELLIOT AND CO.
[1893]
1


--- Page 9 ---
The Hermetic Museum By Arthur Edward Waite
VOLUME I
PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION
THE HERMETIC MUSEUM RESTORED AND ENLARGED was published in
Latin at Frankfort, in the year 1678, and, as its title implies, it was an
enlarged form of an anterior work which, appearing in 1625, is more
scarce, but, intrinsically, of less value. Its design was apparently to
supply in a compact form a representative collection of the more brief
and less ancient alchemical writers; in this respect, it may be regarded
as a supplement to those large storehouses of Hermetic learning such as
the Theatrum Chemicum, and that scarcely less colossal of Mangetus,
the Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, which are largely concerned with the
cream of the archaic literature, with the works of Geber and the adepts
of the school of Arabia, with the writings attributed to Hermes, with
those of Raymond Lully, Arnold de Villa Nova, Bernard Trevisan, and
others.
THE HERMETIC MUSEUM would also seem to represent a distinctive
school in Alchemy, not altogether committed to certain modes and
terminology which derived most of their prestige from the past, and
sufficiently enigmatical as it was, still inclined to be less obscure and
misleading than was the habit of the older masters. For it belonged to a
period which had inherited a bitter experience of the failures,
impostures, and misery surrounding the Magnum Opus and its mystical
quest, which was weary of unequipped experiment, weary of wandering
"multipliers," and pretentious "bellows-blowers," while it was just being
awakened to the conviction that if Alchemy were true at all, it was not
to be learned from books, or, at least, from any books which had
hitherto been written on the subject. Running through all the tracts
which are comprised in the following volumes, the reader will recognize
traces of a central claim in alchemical initiation—that the secrets,
whatever they were, must be understood as the property of a college of
adepts, pretending to have subsisted from time almost immemorial, and
revealing themselves to the select and the few, while the literature,
large as it is, appears chiefly as an instrument of intercommunication
2


--- Page 10 ---
between those who knew. At the same time, it may also be regarded as
a sign and omen to the likely seeker, an advertisement that there was a
mystery, and that he must go further who would unravel it.
While the treatises now translated are for the most part anonymous, as
befits veiled masters, the literary reader will remember that the name
of John de Meung connects the allegorical "Romance of the Rose" with
the parables of Alchemy; Flamel will be familiar to all Hermetic students
as the most celebrated of the French adepts; the saintly name of Basil
Valentine, investigator of the properties of antimony, will not even now
be unhonoured by the chemist; Eirenaeus Philalethes, equally revered
and unknown by all devout Spagyrites, is supposed to have been the
most lucid of hierophants, and the "Open Entrance" to be the clearest of
all his works. Helvetius was an illustrious chemist, and Michael Maier is
a person of some repute in the Rosicrucian controversy. Michael
Sendivogius was an uninstructed disciple of Alexander Seton, and the
"New Chemical Light," which he published and claimed as his own, was
really the work of his master, who has been called the chief martyr of
Alchemy. It may be added in this connection that some critics have cast
doubt upon the genuine nature of the "Testament of John Cremer," and
it is true that the annals of Westminster do not include an abbot of that
name.
It should be understood that the writer of this brief note must not be
accredited with the translation which it seeks to introduce. That is the
work of a gentleman who is said to have had a life-long acquaintance
with alchemical literature; it has been subjected to a searching revision
at the hands of the present editor, who may himself be permitted to
claim some experience in Hermetic antiquities; the version as it stands
does not uncreditably represent both the spirit and the sense of the
original without the original's prolixity. While affording to the modern
student of secret doctrines an unique opportunity for acquiring in
English a collection of alchemical writers, this edition of THE HERMETIC
MUSEUM also claims consideration at the hands of the historian as a
contribution of real value to the early history of chemistry.
ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE.
3


--- Page 11 ---
4


--- Page 12 ---
The Hermetic Museum By Arthur Edward Waite
THE PREFACE OF THE ORIGINAL EDITION
ADDRESSED TO THE CANDID READER.
IT would be unjust to doubt, most gentle reader, that of all the arts
invented for the use of life by the reason of man, that of Alchemy is the
most noble and glorious. For all philosophers exclaim, as it were, with
one voice, albeit in many languages, that this art is not only true, but
(after the Divine Law by which our souls are saved) the best and most
magnificent gift bestowed upon man by God; and that it should
therefore be investigated with all zeal and with the greatest pains. But
as good wine needs no praise, so neither does this art require a herald;
for its truth is undoubted, and its utility in human life universally
acknowledged, and shewn forth, not only in the Art of Medicine, in
Pharmacy, and many other sciences, but more especially in the Art of
Transmuting Metals, is so clearly and perspicuously demonstrated, that
it in no way requires to be adorned by the splendour of oratory, or
tricked out with the device of language. I will not enlarge upon the
blessing which the elaboration of minerals and metals has bestowed
upon our race. I merely point it out, but refrain from discussing it at
length. Different men devote themselves to the study of this science
from different motives. The philosopher is impelled by the love of truth,
and the thirst after wisdom. He delights in knowledge for its own sake.
He welcomes every elegant and copious treatise on the marvels of
Nature, to the glory of Almighty God. This is a sufficiently generous
reward for a philosopher. He has at his command the most effectual
means of becoming rich, if he would only use them. But he is fired by
the love of philosophy, and does not care for the mocking grandeur of
fortune. So thought the Sages of the Saracens, Egyptians, Arabs, and
Persians; for when they were oppressed by tyrants, and violently driven
into exile, they protected and supported themselves by means of their
Art, and, through their knowledge of the transmutation of metals, they
had at their command, not only sufficient to live upon, but all the
comforts and pomp of life, and thus practically demonstrated that they
could obtain all that gold and silver could give. Concerning this true
transmutation of metals, which is accomplished only by the Elixir or
Stone of the Philosophers, we here propose to speak. This art is set
5


--- Page 13 ---
forth in a series of treatises by different authors, which appeared several
years ago, and, like the present volume, was entitled "A Museum of
Hermes." But many writers having discussed this subject, and treated it
from various points of view (so that one writes more clearly than
another, and each throws light on the other's meaning), some of my
friends, who are adepts in this Art, urged me to add to the former
collection certain treatises supplementary of those already given. For
though that former collection contained the most select writings on the
subject, yet it was not as complete as it might have been, nor was it
calculated to furnish to the reader in full measure the eagerly expected
fruit of his study. To this wish of my friends I have all the more readily
submitted, because its fulfilment must redound to the advantage of the
student. I have, therefore, enlarged the collection with several most
select treatises, and caused it to be adorned with many engravings. I
was most strongly impelled to undertake the task by this consideration,
viz., that through the fraudulent machinations of greedy impostors
many false, so-called chemical treatises have been put forward, in which
there is not a single spark of truth, and that very many have been, and
are still being deceived by them. These dupes, by reading this book, in
which the Magistery of the Stone is most clearly and plainly set forth,
and into which no error or forgery has been admitted, will be secured
against the imposture of that wicked and mercenary band who delight
in fraud For in this book all errors are shewn up and dispelled. For this
reason I confidently offer this volume to the sons of knowledge, in order
that while they think upon and investigate the secret working of Nature,
they may obtain from it nothing but the truth, and gain a clear insight
into the very nature of things. In this alone consists the perfection of the
entire most Holy Art of Philosophy. Only let them go forward along the
Royal Road which Nature prescribes in all her operations. As to the rest,
I heartily beg the friends of this Art to give a kindly reception to the
present volume, and when, through the Will of God, by constant labour,
they have put ashore in the desired haven of philosophy, after the
manner of philosophers to exclude all that are unworthy from the
knowledge thereof, and, being mindful of charity towards their needy
neighbour in the fear of God (without any vain ostentation), to sing
eternal praises to the Good and Thrice Great God for this Wonderful and
Divine Gift (without any abuse thereof) in a silent and devoutly joyful
heart.
6


--- Page 14 ---
7


--- Page 15 ---
The Hermetic Museum By Arthur Edward Waite
FRONTISPIECE
8


--- Page 16 ---
9


--- Page 17 ---
The Hermetic Museum By Arthur Edward Waite
THE GOLDEN TRACT CONCERNING THE STONE OF THE
PHILOSOPHERS
BY AN ANONYMOUS GERMAN PHILOSOPHER
The Author's Preface to the Art-loving Reader.
10


--- Page 18 ---
WORTHY reader, and true enquirer into the secrets of nature, marvel
not that in the old age of this world, when it seems to have one foot
already in the grave, I have determined to write this tract, although all
libraries ale already full of books on this subject—of which, however,
the greater part are false, and wear merely the rouge and powder of
philosophy. I have written it not for my own pleasure, but for your
advantage, that, by pointing to the foundation of truth, I might lead you
back from the pathless wilderness into the right way—which is certainly
for your own interest. As far as I am concerned, I have long known all
that I seek to know in regard to this matter, and have no need of many
books, seeing that during the last twenty-two years I have read and reread all the works that fell into my hands—including numerous
manuscripts, as well as many printed volumes.
In this my tract you will find the subject set forth, and the true solution
given, not only theoretically, but also from a practical and allegorical
point of view, with a clearness and lucidity such as I believe to be almost
unparalleled in any previous philosophical treatise. In quoting, I have
always been careful to give the exact reference, so that you may look
out the passage for yourself, and by diligently considering it, sharpen
your understanding. I could more easily have composed this treatise,
and made myself known to the Brethren of the Golden Cross, if I had left
out those references; but for your sake I decided otherwise. Do not
wonder that I conceal my name, and refuse to appear to you face to
face. I have come forward, not for the sake of any paltry glory, or of
worldly praise, but to do you good. Moreover, my teachers, even the
true philosophers, advised me not thus to risk my life for the sake of
obtaining a high place in the world's esteem, to expose myself to greedy
robbers or to give occasion for many crimes by the prostitution of this
profound secret. No doubt the gentle reader has learned by the works
of Sendivogius that whenever he sheaved himself openly to the
powerful, he went in constant fear of his life. Experience teaches that
many philosophers who gave no thought to their personal safety, have
been killed and deprived of their tincture by greedy and powerful
robbers; and it stands to reason that any one going about with a great
treasure in his hand, must fall a prey to brigands. Sendivogius concealed
his name by an anagram. Thus also a short time ago another
philosopher and Brother of the Golden Cross, whose real name has long
11


--- Page 19 ---
been familiar to me, concealed it beneath an anagram, and made
himself known to his friends by an enigmatical designation. Why then
should I place myself at the mercy of this impure world? Permit me
rather, dear friend; to follow the example of the sages, and leave the
rest to the thrice good and great God, who will make my true self known
to you in good time, if it be for the glory of His name, and for your and
my good. Do not be eager to enquire after my name. For even if you
should get to know it, or become personally acquainted with me, you
would have to rest satisfied with the contents of this tract. For I have
solemnly promised two philosophers—Bernard, Count of Trevisan, and
Neigens—that I will not betray to any one more than has been revealed
in this book. Neither be anxious to ask whether I actually possess this
precious treasure. Ask rather whether I have seen how the world was
created; whether I am acquainted with the nature of the Egyptian
darkness; what is the cause of the rainbow; what will be the appearance
of the glorified bodies at the general resurrection; what is the most
indelible colour. Of you that rightly understand this little book, I will
enquire whether you have seen that great salt sea, without any
corrosion, raise a sufficiency of the moisture of all nature to the
summits of the highest mountains. Tell me where there is sulphur out of
sulphur, and mercury out of mercury—or where sulphur springs from
mercury, and again mercury from sulphur. When was there placed
before your eyes the idea of most fervent love, the male and the female
embracing each other so closely that they could no more be torn
asunder, but through unsearchable love became one? If you understand
what I am alluding to, and have performed the experiment with your
own hands, and seen it with your own eyes, I welcome you as fellow
partakers of the mystery, and have no dearer wish than to enjoy your
familiar intercourse—for which reason I have also sent forth into the
world this little tract.
If any one complain of the difficulty of our Art, let him know that in itself
it is perfectly simple, and can present no obstacle to those who love
God, and are held worthy by Him of this knowledge. If any one blame
me for setting forth the truths of this Art too plainly and clearly, so as to
render it possible for any one to gain a knowledge thereof, I answer that
I have indeed explained them with sufficient lucidity for those who are
worthy and foreordained of God, but that the unworthy can derive no
12


--- Page 20 ---
profit from them. To some foolish and shallow persons I have several
times expounded this Art in the simplest manner, and even word for
word, but they despised it only, and would not believe me that there is
exhibited in our work a twofold resurrection of the dead. Our Art, its
theory as well as its practice, is altogether a gift of God, Who gives it
when and to whom He elects: it is not of him that wills, or of him that
runs, but simply through the mercy of God. Though I had diligently
studied this Art for 17 or 18 years, yet I had, after all, to wait for God's
own time, and accept it as a free gift. No one need doubt the truth or
certainty of this Art. It is as true and certain, and as surely ordained by
God in nature, as it is that the sun shines at noontide, and the moon
shews her soft splendour at night. But I must conclude this preface, and
gird myself for writing the tract itself. But ye, beloved Brethren of the
Golden Cross, who are about to learn how to enjoy and use this most
precious gift of God in secret, do not remain unknown to me, and if ye
know me not, be sure that the faithful will be approved and their faith
become known through the Cross, while security and pleasure
overshadow it. God be with us, Amen!
13


--- Page 21 ---
ANCIENT as well as modern philosophers, most beloved reader, and
devoted seeker after true wisdom, when through the grace of God they
had reached the goal of their desires, have endeavoured to make their
discovery known to their fellow inquirers in all parts of the world—not
only because they wished to inform them that the thrice great and good
God had enlightened their minds, blessed the labours of their hands,
and shewn to them the greatest and most profound secret of earthly
wisdom (for which benefit all praise, honour, and glory are justly due to
Him)—but also that they might afford assistance to beginners in the Art,
by which, with God's permission, they too might attain to the
knowledge of this most holy mystery. Such men there have been in all
countries. Amongst the Egyptians Hermes Trismegistus holds the highest
place; then come Chaldæans, Greeks, Arabs, Italians, Gauls, Englishmen,
Dutchmen, Spaniards, Germans, Poles, Hungarians, Hebrews, and many
14


--- Page 22 ---
others. Though the aforementioned Sages wrote at different times, and
in different languages, yet their works exhibit so marvellous an
agreement, that any true philosopher may easily see that all their hearts
had been gladdened by God in the discovery of this stone, and that they
all had performed this work with their own hands. Now, as the truth of
their views is perceived by their agreement, so the disagreement of
certain others marks them as false philosophers. For, not knowing the
foundation of this glorious Art, and making up fanciful theories out of
their own heads, they exhibit their ignorance to all.
The aforesaid agreement exists in regard to the Matter, its solution, its
weight, and the regulation and increase of the fire.
As concerns the Matter, it is one, and contains within itself all that is
needed. Out of it the artist prepares whatever he wants. Its "Birth is in
the sand," as the philosopher Anastratus says in "The Crowd": "Nothing
is more precious than the red sand of the sea; it is the distilled moisture
of the Moon joined to the light of the Sun, and congealed." That only
this one substance is required is attested by Agadmon in the same book.
He says: "Know that unless you take my body [sulphur] without the
spirit [mercury] ye will not obtain what ye desire. Cease to think of
many things. Nature is satisfied with one thing, and he who does not
know it is lost."
In the same way Arnold, of Villa Nova, writes in his "Flower of Flowers";
"Our stone is made out of one thing, and with one thing." To the same
effect he says to the King of Naples: "All that is in our stone is essential
to it, nor does it need any foreign ingredient. Its nature is one, and it is
one thing." And Rosinus says: "Know that the object of your desire is
one thing, out of which all things are made." Lilium: "You have need
only of one thing, which at any stage of our experiment can be changed
into another nature." So Geber says in his "Summary": "Our stone is
one, one medicine, to which we add nothing, from which we take
nothing away, only removing that which is superfluous." Again, Scites in
"The Crowd" says: "The essence of this Art is in like manner a certain
one thing which is stronger and more exalted than all other things, and
is called the most powerful acid, because it changes gold into a clear
spirit, without which there is neither whiteness, nor blackness, nor
15


--- Page 23 ---
redness. When the spirit is joined to the body it becomes one with it;
and yet again becomes a spirit, and is saturated with the spiritual and
unchangeable tincture, and thus again by combination receives a bodily
tincture which cannot be annihilated. If you place the body without the
acid over the fire, it will be burnt and destroyed." From these words of
Scites the reader might conclude, that not one but two things, namely a
body and an acid (as he calls it) are required, and that a liquid must be
combined with a dry thing lest the dry thing should be consumed by the
fire, in order that by the moist thing it may be preserved from such
combustion. To such a conclusion, if rightly accepted, I gladly subscribe.
But from the above mentioned philosophical dicta (however obscurely
worded they may be) it is clearer than day that the substance of our
Blessed Stone is one (although different sages call it by different names),
and that Nature has made it ready to the hand of the adept, having
willed this one thing, and no other thing in all the world, to be the
material of the Stone. This Matter lies before the eyes of all; everybody
sees it, touches it, loves it, but knows it not. It is glorious and vile,
precious and of small account, and is found everywhere. Theophrastus
Paracelsus, in his book concerning "The Tincture of Physical Things,"
calls it the Red Lion, which is named by many, but known by few.
Hermes, in the first chapter of his Treatise, calls it "Quick Silver
coagulated in its innermost chambers." In the "Rosary of the
Philosophers" it goes by the name of Salt. But, to be brief, our Matter
has as many names as there are things in the world; that is why the
foolish know it not. Foolish I call those who, without any previous
knowledge of Nature and her properties, undertake to learn this Art,
and come to it (as Arnold says) like the ass to the crib, not knowing for
what they open their mouths. Hence it is well said by Geber, in the "Sum
of Perfection": "He who has no elementary knowledge of Nature is far
from a proper appreciation of this Art." And Rosarius says: "I advise no
one to approach this Art unless he knows the principle and the regimen
of Nature: if he be acquainted with these, little is wanting to him except
one thing, nor need he put himself to a great expense, since the stone is
one, the medicine is one, the vessel one, the rule one, the disposition
one." Yet this one substance is so divided by the operation of Nature,
and the skill of the Artist, that it is transmuted into our White Eagle, nor
does the splendour of the sun illuminate more abundantly the spagyric
matter with its beams; or, as Basilius Valentinus hath it, that, "thence is
16


--- Page 24 ---
born a spirit white as scow, and another spirit red as blood, which two
spirits are contained in a third hidden thing." Hence King Aros well says:
"Our medicine is composed out of two things having one essence,
namely, through the mercurial union of a solid and a liquid, a spiritual
and a corporeal, a cold and a moist, a warm and a dry, and in no other
way can it be made." And Richard the Englishman says: "The stone is
one, the medicine one, which, however, according to the philosophers,
is called Rebis (Two-thing), being composed of two things, namely, a
body and spirit [red or white]. But over this many foolish persons have
gone astray, explaining it in divers ways." Rebis is two things, and these
two things are one thing, namely, water joined to a body, by which the
body is dissolved into a spirit, that is, mineral water, out of which it was
first made; and this body and spirit make up one mineral water, which is
called Elixir, that is to say, ferment; for then water and spirit are one
thing, of which is composed a tincture and medicine for purging all
bodies. And thus, according to the philosophers, we have the nature of
sulphur and mercury above ground, while underground they become
gold and silver. Bernard, Count of Trevisan and the March, says: Our
work is performed by means of one root, and two crude mercurial
substances, drawn and extracted from a mineral, pure and clear, being
conjoined by the heat of friendship, as this matter requires, and
carefully cooked until the two things become one thing," etc. Basilius
Valentinus (Lib. Nat. et Supernal., c. 4) says: "I will make this known to
thee in all truth [for the love of God], that the root of philosophic
sulphur, which is a heavenly spirit, is united in the same material with
the root of the spiritual and supernatural mercury, and the principle of
spiritual salt—out of which is made the Stone, and not out of several
things. That universal thing, the greatest treasure of earthly wisdom, is
one thing, and the principles of three things are found in one, which has
power to change all metals into one. The three things are the true spirit
of mercury, and the soul of sulphur, united to spiritual salt, and dwelling
in one body; they are dragon and eagle, king and lion, spirit and body,
etc."
In this way our prepared material is also called male and female, active
and passive. So Zimon says, in "The Crowd": "Know that the secret of
the work consists in male and female, i.e., an active and a passive
principle. In lead is found the male, in orpiment the female. The male
17


--- Page 25 ---
rejoices when the female is brought to it, and the female receives from
the male a tinging seed, and is coloured thereby." And Diomedes says:
"Join the male child of the 'red servant' to the fragrant spouse, and they
will produce the object of our Art. But you must not introduce any
foreign matter, neither dust, nor any other thing. The conception will
then be perfect, and a true son will be born. Oh, how precious is the
nature of the 'red servant,' without whom nothing can be effected!"
Others call it quicksilver, or mercury, and sulphur, or fire, as Roger Bacon
says, in the third chapter of his "Mirror": "Out of sulphur and mercury
are all metals, and nothing adheres to them, neither is joined to them,
or transmutes them, but what is of them. And thus we must accept
mercury and sulphur as the matter of the stone." So also Menabadus
says: "He who joins quicksilver to the body of magnesia, and the woman
to the man, extracts the secret essence by which bodies are coloured."
Lullius in his "Codicil" says: "The property of our mercury is to be
coagulated by its sulphur" And, in the Practice of his Testament: "The
silver is a flowing moisture, floating above and preserving the whole
from combustion."
Others use the names, body, spirit, and soul. Thus Arnold, in his Flower
of Flowers," says: "The Sages have affirmed that our Stone is composed
of body, soul, and spirit, and they have spoken truly. For the imperfect
part they have compared to a body, because it is weak. The water they
have called spirit, and truly, because it is spirit. The ferment they have
termed soul, because it gives life to the imperfect body (which before
was dead), and makes its form more beautiful."
Again, he says: "A spirit is never joined to a body but by the
interposition of a soul. For the soul is the medium between body and
spirit, joining them together." Morienus says: "The soul quickly enters its
own body—but if you tried to join it to a foreign body, you would labour
in vain." And Lilium says: "Body, soul, and spirit make up one thing,
which has all in itself, and to which nothing is added."
But why should we mention and explain all the names by which our
Matter is designated? We will be content with the foregoing, seeing that
they are the most common and the most germane to our purpose. In
the following pages, after endeavouring to find where our substance lies
18


--- Page 26 ---
hid, and where it may be obtained, we will say some words about the
mode of its dissolution, that being after all the principal object of our
inquiry. And first, as concerns the search after our Matter, we should
remember that in the beginning, when there was nothing but Himself,
God, who is infinite in wisdom, created two classes of things, namely,
those that are in heaven, and those that are under heaven. The
heavenly things (about which we need not here speak at length) are the
heavens themselves, and the dwellers in heaven The things that are
under the heavens were created out of four elements, and are
commonly divided into three classes. Those that live and feel hold the
first place, and are called animals. The second class are the plants, that
grow out of the earth, but do not feel. The third class, that of the
minerals, has its origin underground. These three classes include all that
(beneath the moon) has been created out of the elements. They can
never become more or less, and God has bound each thing to its own
genus and species, so that it cannot change from one genus to another.
If any one tried to make a man or a tree out of a stone, or a monkey or
lead out of a plant, or an animal or a plant out of lead, he would be
prevented from doing so by the eternal order of the Great King. If such a
thing were possible, all classes of natural objects could be changed into
one. But, because such a change would put an end to the world, the
Ruler of the Universe does not permit it. Nay, what is more, He not only
restricted everything to its own kind, but gave each created thing its
own seed, by which it might be propagated after its own manner—
always remaining in its own class, and not overstepping the bounds of
some other species. If any one wished to change a man into a horse, an
apple into a lettuce, a diamond or any other jewel into gold, he would
make an enormous mistake. For such an attempt would be against the
nature of sublunar things. And as it was in the beginning so it shall be in
the end, when the Almighty, who in the beginning said "Let it be," shall
say "Let it perish." But among those things which have a common
substance, seed, and elementary compositior, it is not difficult to
accomplish an amelioration and improvement, by the purification of
their matter. So we may see a man of a clear and subtle mind attain to a
higher degree of human excellence than others who are less gifted. This
difference arises from the superior purity and subtlety of his spiritual
substance, which again has its origin in a rectified and well constituted
body. Thus also we see one horse excel the strength and speed of
19


--- Page 27 ---
another; and it is the same with all kinds of living beings. A like rule
holds good to an even greater degree in regard to plants and trees—
with trees, by transplanting, grafting, and kindred methods well familiar
to gardeners; while as to other vegetable natures, we are taught by daily
experience how plants and flowers of the same kind differ from each
other in glory, in beauty, in fragrance, and savour. Of this cloves and
tulips afford a striking instance. Into how many different species have
these flowers been developed; and even these. new developments are
being made more beautiful from day to day, and it is universally
admitted that never were there such fine and fragrant flowers before.
What am I to say about metals which have a common substance,
namely, quicksilver, digested and consolidated by the power of sulphur?
Concerning this common substance, Richard the Englishman has the
following words:
"Nature has elaborated all kinds of fusible things by a natural process
out of mercury, and the substance of its sulphur, because it is the
property of quicksilver to be consolidated by steam, as by the heat of
white and red sulphur which does not burn."
The same view is expressed by Arnold (pt. 1., cp. ii.): "Quicksilver is the
elementary form of all things fusible; for all things fusible, when melted,
are changed into it, and it mingles with them because it is of the same
substance with them. Such bodies differ from quicksilver in their
composition only so far as itself is or is not free from the foreign matter
of impure sulphur." Similarly Rosinus (Ad Saratantam) says: "The
substance of all metals in the heart of the earth is solidified and
imperfect quicksilver; for by the quickening heat of sulphur different
metals (according to the different varieties of sulphur) are generated in
the earth; their original substance is one and the same, and is modified
only by a greater or smaller external influence." Hence we see daily how
busily Nature is occupied in bringing them to mortification and
perfection. Now the perfection of metals, and the final intention of
Nature in regard to them, is gold. For all metals shew that Nature has
done something for them towards ultimate perfection; no metal is so
base as not to contain a single grain of gold or silver Nature would
always change quicksilver that has within itself its own sulphur into gold,
if she were not often hindered by some outward impediment, viz.,
20


--- Page 28 ---
impure, fœtid, and combustible sulphur. In most cases gold is dug out
pure, clear, free from dross, and unmixed with any other metals. But
most frequently a large quantity of foreign sulphur mingles with the
quicksilver, and thus prevents its perfect development; and, according to
the variety of that sulphur, different kinds of metals are generated, as
Aristotle says (4. Meteor.): "If the quicksilver be of a good substance but
the sulphur impure and combustible, it changes the quicksilver into
brass. If the quicksilver be stony, impure, and earthy, and the sulphur
not pure, it becomes iron. Tin seems to have good and pure quicksilver;
but the sulphur is bad and not well mixed. Lead has gross, bad, and illsmelling quicksilver, and is thus not properly coagulated."
That retarding, combustible, and fœtid sulphur is not the true fire that
fashions metals; but quicksilver has its own sulphur in itself, which is
sufficient for the purpose of fashioning it, as Bernard, Count of Trevisan,
says: "Some believe that in the generation of metals, a sulphuric
substance is introduced from without; but, on the contrary, it is clear
that in the working of Nature sulphur is already enclosed in the mercury.
Yet it has no power in it except through the moving heat, by which the
said sulphur is changed, and with it two other qualities of the mercury.
In this way, then, Nature generates by means of this sulphur the
different kinds of metals in the veins of the earth, according to the
diversity of degrees and alterations." For in metals, according to Arnold
(pt. i., cp. iii.), "there is a two-fold superfluity: one that is enclosed in the
innermost nature of the quicksilver, and got there at the first mingling of
the metal; the other does not belong to the essence of it, is external to
it, and corruptible. To remove the former is a difficult task; the latter
may be removed without any difficulty. The combustible sulphur is taken
away by being subjected to the action of fire, or is destroyed by foreign
bodies; but the other, which is in the quicksilver, is preserved by it from
combustion." But again, that inward sulphur which fashions the
quicksilver belonging to it, and matures it towards perfection, is either
pure or impure, combustible or incombustible. Impure sulphur hinders
the digestion of the quicksilver, which cannot be transformed into gold
until that which does not belong to it has been entirely separated from
it; but the pure, incombustible, fixed sulphur remains with it, and then
at length it passes either into gold or silver, according as the sulphur is
either white or red. This internal sulphur is nothing but mature mercury,
21


--- Page 29 ---
and the most advanced part of the quicksilver, and for this reason the
quicksilver receives it so kindly, as being of its own essence, while it
rejects the other which is foreign to it. So Richard the Englishman says,
in his ninth chapter: The more simple the sulphur is, the more readily
does it combine with simple and pure mercury, and the more intimately
they combine the more precious is the metal which is produced." But
such sulphur, says Avicenna, "is not found on earth, except in so far as it
exists in metallic bodies through the action of the sun and moon. In the
sun it exists in a perfect state, because there it is better digested and
decocted." According to Richard, in his twelfth chapter, the red sulphur
of the philosophers exists in the sun on account of its greater digestion,
and the white sulphur in the moon on account of its inferior digestion."
Since, then, the substance of the metals is one, and common to all, and
since this substance is (either at once, or after laying aside in course of
time the foreign and evil sulphur of the baser metals by a process of
gradual digestion) changed by the virtue of its own indwelling sulphur
into GOLD, which is the goal of all the metals, and the true intention of
Nature—we are obliged to admit, and freely confess that in the mineral
kingdom, as well as in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, Nature seeks
and demands a gradual attainment of perfection, and a gradual
approximation to the highest standard of purity and excellence.
I thought it would be best, O friendly searcher of Nature, to discuss the
matter more in detail, in order that you might the more readily know
and make use of the substance of our Stone! For if you attempted to
produce our Stone out of an animal substance you would fail, because
the two things belong to different natural orders. For the Stone is a
mineral, but you would be trying to fashion it out of an animal
substance. "But nothing," says our Richard, in his first chapter, "can be
got out of a thing which is not in it. Therefore every species, every
genus, every natural order, is naturally developed within its own limits,
bearing fruit after its own kind, and not within some other essentially
different order: everything in which seed is sown must correspond to its
own seed." And Basil. Valentinus says: "Consider and know, my friend,
that you must not select an animal soul for this your purpose. For flesh
and blood were given by the Creator to animals, and are proper to
animals, and from them animals are formed and brought forth." For this
22


--- Page 30 ---
reason I wonder at those who wish to be regarded as great adepts, and
yet look for the substance of the stone in female menstruums, the
seminal fluid, eggs, hairs, urine, and similar things, and are not ashamed
to fill so many volumes with their vain and worthless recipes, and to
deceive the ignorant with such foolish, futile, and useless speculations.
Roger, in his "Mirror" (cp. iii.), expresses his amazement at the folly of
these men when he exclaims: "How strange that any sane person should
look for what he wants in the animal and vegetable worlds, which have
nothing whatever to do with the object of his search, while the mineral
world is quite as ready to his hand. It is incredible that any philosopher
should establish his art on such a remote foundation, except indeed by
way of allegory." "For our Stone (says Basil.) is not made of combustible
things. Verily that Stone and the matter thereof are safe from all such
violence, therefore cease to seek it in the animal kingdom; for Nature
herself could not find it there." Again, whoever hopes to find it in the
vegetable world, as, for instance, in trees, herbs, flowers, is quite as
much mistaken as he who would change an animal into a stone. Plants
and trees, with all that they produce, may be consumed by fire, and
leave nothing behind but the dust out of which they are made, and the
salt which at the first creation of their species they received from
Nature. Let no one be misled by the confident assertions of those who
pretend that they can produce the Philosopher's Stone out of wheat, or
out of wine. These persons fancy they understand the meaning of a
certain passage in the writings of Raymond Lullius, but they exhibit the
depth of their folly by the assumption of profound wisdom, and thus
only deceive themselves and others. I do not deny that some excellent
solvents, indispensable both to the physician and to the chemist, are
obtained from these sources; but I do most positively deny that the
Philosopher's Stone can be prepared, or its seed elicited, from them,
since the Creator has ordained that nothing should overstep the bounds
of the natural order to which it was originally assigned. Hence every
true disciple of wisdom may gather that the substance of the Stone is to
be obtained neither in the animal nor in the vegetable world, seeing
that both are combustible. We must therefore look for it among
incombustible things, that is to say, in the mineral world, and thence
only can we prepare it. Since, then, the Stone of the Wise is mineral,
and there are different kinds of minerals, as stones (including clay and
the different varieties of earth), salts, general minerals, and metals, we
23


--- Page 31 ---
must further ask, in which of all these it is contained. We may at once
eliminate stones, because they contain no fusible mercury, and cannot
be incited, dissolved, or divided into their component parts on account
of the large quantity of foreign sulphur and earthly substance which
cleave to them.
Nor will the wise investigator of Nature's secrets expect to find the
substance of the Blessed Stone in salts, alums, or similar minerals. [n
them he meets with a sharp, corroding, destructive spirit, but mercury
and sulphur, as understood by philosophers, he would vainly look for.
General minerals, like magnesia, bismuth, antimony, etc., can never
under any circumstances become metals; how, then, can the substance
of this Stone, which is the essential perfection of all metals and
minerals, be obtained from them? Moreover, they have nothing in
common with metals, but do burn, corrode, and destroy them:—how
then can they be the means of their improvement?
Hear what Richard the Englishman has to say on this head (cp. x.): "The
lesser minerals cannot become metals—First, because they were not
generated out of the elementary substance of metals, which is
quicksilver. But seeing that their generation differs from the generation
of metals in form, and substance, and composition, they can never
become metals, because things belonging to the same species have the
same elementary sub- stance, and spring from the same seed. But the
lesser minerals are not generated from mercury, as we learn from
Aristotle and Avicenna. If they were to become metals, they would have
to change into the elementary substance of metals. And, since such a
transformation is beyond the power of chemistry, they can never
become metals; that is to say, they can never be the substance of the
Stone. Second, since the lesser minerals cannot ber come the
elementary substance of metals, which is mercury, they can never reach
the middle and the end of the same development, namely, metals and
the tincture. But because the properties of the lesser minerals are
foreign to those of the metals, although they may have some of the
virtues of minerals, yet on the whole they are less excellent and are
liable to be injured by fire. Therefore the nature of metals delights not in
them, but repels them, while it receives that which is suited to it. For
this reason they are foolish who bring in so many foreign speculations
24


--- Page 32 ---
for the purpose of imposing upon their hearers; for the things they put
forward are altogether unlike metals and can never receive nor impart
their nature."
The student must not suffer himself to be misled by the language
occasionally employed with regard to salts by the philosophers whom
we have quoted, as, for instance, when it is said, in the mystic language
of our Sages, "He who works without salt will never raise dead bodies";
or, again, when he reads in the book of Soliloquies," He who works
without salt draws a bow without a string." For you must know that
these sayings refer to a very different kind of salt from the common
mineral. This you may see from the following passage of the "Rosary of
the Philosophers": "The salt of metals is the Philosopher's Stone; for our
Stone is water congealed in gold and silver; it is hostile to fire and may
be dissolved into the water of which it is composed after its kind." And
that the "congealed water" of the Sages does not mean ordinary water
may be gathered from the following words of Geber (lib. forn., cp. xix.):
"Seek to resolve the sun and the moon into their dry water, which the
vulgar call mercury." The Sages have also described their earth under
the name of salt—e.g., in the "Sounding of the Trumpet," where it is
said: "That which is left at the bottom of the distilling vessel is our salt—
that is to say, our earth." And in the "Allegories of the Wise" one bursts
forth into these words: "Mark well that those bodies which flow forth
from our bodies are salts and alums." At times they call the medicine
itself "Salt," as in the following passage of the "Scale'': "The virtue of the
second water is to exalt earth into its own mineral salt, as though
assimilating it by its own strength." And Arnold, in his work concerning
the "Preservation of Youth," (lib. iii.) says: "This prepared salt has great
virtue in preserving youth. The Sages have compared it to the natural
heat of healthy youth. The Stone itself has sometimes been called by
the wise the Animal Stone, sometimes the Mineral Secret, on account,
of this similitude; sometimes the Everlasting Remedy, or the Water of
Life. The whole preparation may be reduced to the purest drinking
water, like other things that have the same properties." From the
aforesaid it clearly appears that we are forbidden both by the teaching
of the Sages and by the nature of the thing to suppose that the Stone
can be made out of the lesser minerals.
25


--- Page 33 ---
We should next enquire more carefully whether the matter of our Stone
may be obtained from the intermediate minerals—like bismuth,
antimony, magnesia, and so on. They are certainly often mentioned in
this connection by the Sages. Thus Senior says, in a certain passage: "If
yellow orpiment has not the power of coagulating mercury our
Magistery can never attain its goal." Thomas de Aquinas recommends us
to take "our antimony, or black earth," while

[Text truncated at 50,000 characters]
