How to Be a Yogi (Swami Abhedananda, 1902)
==========================================
Swami Abhedananda (1866–1939) — How to Be a Yogi (New York: The Vedanta Society, 1902), public domain. A practical manual of Vedanta and yoga by Ramakrishna's direct disciple; note: the catalog credited this to Vivekananda, but the 1902 work is Abhedananda's. Scan via Internet Archive.

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


How to be a -Yogi


Vcdanta Phi[<>'. •


How to h, ;i Yir'


S\vi-;;i A[^\:^


Vedanta Philosophy


How to be a Yogi


By

Swami Abhedananda


AmOiot of ** India and her People", " Self-Knowledg0'\
" Divine Heritage of Man", " Reincarnation'^ etc.


SIXTH EDITION


PUBUSHED BY

'raE VEDANTA ASHRAMA

San Francisco, Cal.


Copyrighti i9<Mf

BY

swAmi abhedananda


i;


Preface

The Vedanta Philosophy includes the
different branches of the Science of Yoga.
Four of these have already been treated at
length by the Swami Vivekananda in his
works on " Raja Yoga," " Karma Yoga,"
" Bhakti Yoga," and " Jnana Yoga " ; but
there existed no short and consecutive sur-
vey of the science as a whole. It is to meet
this need that the present volume has been
written. In an introductory chapter are set
forth the true province of religion and the
full significance of the word " spirituality "
as it is understood in India. Next follows
a comprehensive definition of the term
" Yoga," with short chapters on each of


Preface

the five paths to which it is applied, and
their respective practices. An exhaustive
exposition of the Science of Breathing and
its bearing on the highest spiritual develop-
ment shows the fundamental physiological
principles on which the whole training of
Yoga is based ; while a concluding chapter,
under the title "Was Christ a Yogi?''
makes plain the direct relation existing
between the lofty teachings of Vedanta
and the religious faiths of the West. An
effort has been made, so far as possible, to
keep the text free from technical and San-
skrit terms; and the work should there-
fore prove of equal value to the student of
Oriental thought and to the general reader
as yet unfamiliar with this, one of the
greatest philosophical systems of the
world.

The Editor.
6


Contents

I. INTRODUCTORY 1 1

II. WHAT IS YOGA? 27

1. Hatha Yoga 43

2. Rija Yoga 63

3. Karma Yoga 82

4. Bhakti Yoga 94

5. Jn^a Yoga I06

III. SCIENCE OF BREATHING 125

IV. WAS CHRIST A YOGI? 163


Introductory


Introductory


True religfion is extremely practical; it
IS, indeed, based entirely upon practice,
and not upon theory or speculation of any
kind, for religfion begfins only where theory
ends. Its object is to mould the character,
unfold the divine nature of the soul, and
make it possible to live on the spiritual
plane, its ideal being the realization of
Absolute Truth and the manifestation of
Divinity in the actions of the daily life.

Spirituality does not depend upon the
reading of Scriptures, or upon learned in-
terpretations of Sacred Books, or upon fine
theological discussions, but upon the reali-
zation of unchangeable Truth. In India

11


How to be a Yogi

a man is called truly spiritual or religious
not because he has written some book, not
because he possesses the gift of oratory
and can preach eloquent sermons, but be-
cause he expresses divine powers through
his words and deeds. A thoroughly illiter-
ate man can attain to the highest state of
spiritual perfection without going to any
school or university, and without reading
any Scripture, if he can conquer his animal
nature by realizing his true Self and its
relation to the universal Spirit ; or, in other
words, if he can attain to the knowledge of
that Truth which dwells within him, and
which is the same as the Infinite Source of
existence, intelligence, and bliss. He who
has mastered all the Scriptures, philoso-
phies, and sciences, may be regarded by
society as an intellectual giant; yet he
cannot be equal to that unlettered man

who, having realized the eternal Truth, has

12


Introductory

become one with it, who sees God every-
where, and who lives on this earth as an
emtbodiment of Divinity.

The writer had the good fortune to be
acquainted with such a divine man in In-
dia. His name was Ramakrishna. He
never went to any school, neither had he
read any of the Scriptures, philosophies, or
scientific treatises of the world, yet he
had reached perfection by realizing God
through the practice of Yoga. Hun-
dreds of men and women came to see
him and were spiritually awakened and
uplifted by the divine powers which
this illiterate man possessed. To-day
he is revered and worshipped by thou-
sands all over India as is Jesus the Christ
in Christendom. He could expound with
extraordinary clearness the subtlest prob^-
lems of philosophy or of science, and

answer the most intricate questions of

13


How to be a Yogi

clever theologians in such a masterly way
as to dispel all doubts concerning the mat-
ter in hand. How could he do this with-
out reading books? By his wonderful in-
sight into the true nature of things, and by
that Yoga power which made him directly
perceive things which cannot be revealed
by the senses. His spiritual eyes were
open; his sight could penetrate through
the thick veil of ignorance that hangs be-
fore the vision of ordinary mortals, and
which prevents them from knowing that
which exists beyond the range of sense
perception.

These powers begfin to manifest in the
soul that is awakened to the ultimate
Reality of the universe. It is then that
the sixth sense of direct perception of
higher truths develops and frees it from
dependence upon the sense powers* This

sixth sense or spiritual eye is latent in each

14


Introductory

individual, but it opens in a few only among
millions, and they are known as Yogis.
With the vast majority it is in a rudimen-
tary state, covered by a thick veil. When,
however, through the practice of Yoga it
unfolds in a man, he becomes conscious of
the higher invisible realms and of every-
thing that exists on the soul plane. What-
ever he says harmonizes with the sayings
and writings of all the great Seers of Truth
of every age and clime. He does not study
books; he has no need to do so, for he
knows all that the human intellect can con-
ceive. He can grasp the purport of a book
without reading its text; he also under-
stands how much the human mind can ex-
press through words, and he is familiar
with that which is beyond thoughts and
which consequently can never be expressed
by words.

Before arriving at such spiritual illu-

15


How to be a Yogi

mination he goes through divers stages of
mental and spiritual evolution, and in con-
sequence knows all that can be experienced
by a human intellect. He does not, how-
ever, care to remain confined within the
limit of sense perception, and is not con-
tented with the intellectual apprehension of
relative reality, but his sole aim is to enter
into the realm of the Absolute, which is the
beginning and end of phenomenal objects
and of relative knowledge. Thus striving
for the realization of the highest, he does
not fail to collect all relative knowledge
pertaining to the world of phenomena that
comes in his way, as he marches on toward
his destination, the unfoldment of his true
Self.

Our true Self is all-knowing by its
nature. It is the source of infinite knowl-
edge within us. Being bound by the limi-
tations of time, space, and causation, we

16


Introductory

cannot express all the powers that we pos-
sess in reality. The higher we rise above
these limiting conditions, the more we can
manifest the divine qualities of omniscience
and omnipotence. If, on the contrary, we
keep our minds fixed upon phenomena and
devote the whole of our energy to acquir-
ing knowledge dependent entirely upon
sense perceptions, shall we ever reach the
end of phenomenal knowledge, shall we
ever be able to know the real nature of the
things of this universe? No; because the
senses cannot lead us beyond the super-
ficial appearance of sense objects. In or-
der to go deeper in the realm of the invis-
ible we invent instruments, and with their
help we are able to penetrate a little fur-
ther; but these instruments, again, have
their limit. After using one kind of instru-
ment, we become dissatisfied with the re-
sults and search for some other which may

17


How to be a Yogi

reveal more and more, and thus we strug-
gle on, discovering at each step how
poor and helpless are the sense powers in
the path of the knowledge of the Absolute.
At last we are driven to the conclusion that
any instrument, no matter how fine, can
never help us to realize that which is be-
yond the reach of sense-perceptioij, intel-
lect, and thought.

So, even if we could spend the whole of
our time and energy in studying phe-
nomena, we shall never arrive at any satis-
factory result or be able to see things as
they are in reality. Tlie knowledge of
to-day, gained by the help of certain in-
struments, will be the ignorance of tomor-
row, if we get better instruments. The
knowledge of last year is already the igno-
rance of the present year; the knowledge
of this century will be ignorance in the

light of the discoveries of a new century.

18


Introductory

The span of one human life is, therefore,
too short to even attempt to acquire a cor-^
rect knowledge of all things existing on
the phenomenal plane. The life-time of
hundreds of thousands of generations, nay,
of all humanity, seems too short, when we
consider the infinite variety to be found in
the universe, and the countless number of
objects that will have to be known before
we can reach the end of knowledge. If a
man could live a million years, keeping his
senses in perfect order during that long
period, and could spend every moment in
studying nature and in diligently en-
deavoring to learn every minute detail
of phenomenal objects, would his search
after knowledge be fulfilled at the expira-
tion of that time? Certainly not ; he would
want still more time, a finer power of per-
ception, a keener intellect, a subtler un-
derstanding; and then he might say, as did

19


How to be a Yogi

Sir Isaac Newton after a life of tireless re-
search, " I have collected only pebbles on
the shore of the ocean of knowledge," If
a genius like Newton could not even reach
the edge of the water of that ocean, how
can we expect to cross the vast expanse
from shore to shore in a few brief years?
Thousands of generations have passed
away, thousands will pass, yet must the
knowledge regarding the phenomena of
the universe remain imperfect. Veil after
veil may be removed, but veil after veil will
remain behind. This was understood by
the Yogis and Seers of Truth in India, who
said: "Innumerable are the branches of
knowledge, but short is our time and
many are the obstacles in the way ; there-
fore wise men should first struggle to know
that which is liighest."

Here the question arises: Which is the

highest knowledge? This question is as

20


Introductory

old as history; it has puzzled the minds of
the philosophers, scientists, and scholars of
all ages and all countries. Some have
found an answer to it, others have not.
The same question was voiced in ancient
times by Socrates, when he went to the
Delphic oracle and asked: " Of all knowl-
edge which is the highest? " To which
came the answer, " Know thyself."

We read in one of the Upanishads that a
great thinker, after studying all the philos-
ophies and sciences known at that time,
came to a Seer of Truth and said : " Sir, I
am tired of this lower knowledge that can
be gained from books or through the study
of the world of phenomena; it no longer
satisfies me, for science cannot reveal the
ultimate Truth ; I wish to know that which
is the highest. Is there anything by know-
ing which I can know the reality of the

universe? "

21


How to be a Yogi

The sage replied: "Yes, there is; and
that knowledge is the highest, by knowing
which you can know the true nature of
everything in the universe/' And he con-
tinued, " Know thyself. If thou canst
learn the true nature of thine own self,
thou wilt know the reality of the universe.
In thy true Self thou wilt find the Eternal
Truth, the Infinite Source of all phe-
nomena. By knowing this thou wilt know
God and His whole creation." As by
knowing the chemical properties of one
drop of water, we know the properties of
all water wherever it appears, so by know-
ing who and what we are in reality, we
shall realize the final Truth. Man is the
epitome of the universe. That which exists
in the macrocosm is to be found in the
microcosm. Therefore the knowledge of
one's true Self is the highest of all knowl-
edge. Our real Self is divine and one with

22


Introductory

God. This may seem to us at present a
mere theory, but the nearer we approach
the ultimate Truth, the more clearly shall
we understand that it is not a theory but
a fact, that now we are dreaming in the
sleep of ignorance and fancying ourselves
this or that particular person. But as all
experience gained in dreams afterwards
appears of little consequence; so, waking
up from this sleep, we shall find that the
knowledge of phenomenal nature, upon
which we place so much value at present,
is of little imjportance. We shall then
realize that all research in the various
branches of science depends upon Self-
knowledge, and that Self-knowledge is the
foundation upon which the structure of
phenomenal knowledge is built.

Knowledge of the Self or Atman is
therefore the highest of all. It is the ideal

of the Science of Yoga, and should be the

23


How to be a Yogi

aim of our life. We should hold it as our

first duty to acquire this Self-knowledge

before we try to know anything concerning

the objects of sense-perception. How can

we gain it? Not from books, not through

the study of external phenomena, but by

studying our own nature, and by practicing

the different branches of Yoga.

Z4^


what is Yoga?


\


what is Yoga i


?


In all the Sacred Writings of the world
as well as in the lives of the inspired teach-
ers, prophets, saints, and Seers of Truth,
we find frequent descriptions of miraculous
events and powers, which, admitting a cer-
tain measure of exaggeration, must still
have had some foundation in fact. We,
indeed, know that from time immemorial
in every age and in every country there
have arisen among the different nations
persons who could read the thoughts of
others, who could foresee and could
prophesy that which afterwards came to
pass ; but most of these people did not un-
derstand the causes of their own peculiar

27


How to be a Yogi

gifts, and tried to explain them by attri-
buting them to the influence of external
Beings, whom they called by various
names — gods, angels, good or evil spirits.

Some among them even fancied that
they were especially chosen to be the in-
struments of these higher powers and
sought to be worshipped as the elect of
God or of their particular deity, just as the
leaders of certain sects in this country to-
day desire to be adored by their followers.
In some instances, those who possessed
these unusual powers were looked upon as
divine exceptions, as Jesus by the Chris-
tians, Mahomet by the Mahometans, and
Buddha by the Buddhists. Others again
were condemned as sorcerers or witches,
and the fear aroused by such persecutions
led to the secret practice of divers methods
which resulted in still further extraordi-
nary manifestations.

28


What is Yoga ?

These methods were never written
down, but were passed orally from the
master to the disciple, who in turn care-
fully guarded them as sacred mysteries.
This is the reason why among ancient
nations there grew up so many secret
societies, the object of which was to
develop certain powers through various
kinds of discipline and practices. The
Egyptians, the Essenes, Gnostics, Mani-
cheans, Neo-Platonists, and the Christian
mystics of the middle ages all had their
secret organizations, and some of them
still exist, as, for example, the Masonic
Lodge. None of the members of these
societies ever gave out their secret instruc-
tions, nor did they write any books offer-
ing a logical or scientific explanation of
their practices. Therefore, while there
were some among them who advanced far

in the attainment of higher powers, the

29


How to be a Yogi

unusual manifestations resulting therefrom
were never understood by Western na-
tions, neither were they generalized into a
system or science.

In ancient India, on the contrary, as
there was no fear of persecution, the case
was altogether different. Every Hindu
was obliged, as a part of his religious duty,
to develop through daily practice certain
powers and to strive to attain to the reali-
zation of higher truths. In the streets, on
the market-place, in the courts, and on the
battle-field were many who had not only
reached such realization, but who had care-
fully classified their experiences and dis-
covered those laws which govern our
higher nature and upon which was gradu-
ally built up the profound Science of Yoga.

Thus we see that this science, like all

others, was based on experience ; while the

method used in it was the same as that

30


What is Yoga Y

employed by modern science in making all
its discoveries of natural law — the meth-
od of observation and experiment. This
method is regarded in the West as a dis-
tinctly modern innovation, but as a matter
of fact it was adopted in India in very
ancient times by the *' Rishis," or Seers of
Truth. Through the process of close ob-
servation and constant experiment they
discovered the finer forces of nature, as
also the laws that govern our physical,
mental, and spiritual being. The truths
thus gained through their own experience
and investigations, they wrote down in
books, preached in public, and expounded
to their pupils. Before, however, they
affirmed anything about the nature of the
soul or God, they had realized it. Before
they asked a disciple to practice anything
they had practiced it themselves, and had

obtained definite results from that practice.

31


How to be a Yogi

In this way, as the outcome of ages of
research in the realms of nature, carried on
by a succession of earnest seekers after
light, there grew up in India various sys-
tems of science, philosophy, psychology,
metaphysics, and religion, both speculative
and practical, which were grouped under
the one common name, " Aryan Religion."
The term " religion " was used to include
all, because at no epoch in India has relig-
ion been separated from these different
branches or from the general conduct of
every-day existence; and the methods by
which these scientific truths were applied in
the daily life of an individual to further his
spiritual development, were called by the
general term " Yoga."

" Yoga " IS a Sanskrit word commonly
used to signify the practical side of re-
ligion; and the first concern of the train-
ing for which it stands, is to enforce proper

32


What is Yoga?

obedience to the laws of our moral and
physical nature, upon which depend the at-
tainment of perfect health and of moral
and spiritual perfection. In Western coun-
tries the word has been grossly misunder-
stood and misused by many writers, who
have employed it in the sense of jugglery,
hypnotism, trickery, and fraud. Whenever
people hear the word " Yogi," which signi-
fies one who practices Yoga, they think of
some kind of juggler, or charlatan, or iden-
tify him with a fakir or one who practices
black magic. The Theosophists have been
more or less responsible for this abuse of
the term; but those who have studied the
Sacred Books of India, as, for instance,
the Bhagavad Gita or Song Celestial, as
Sir Edwin Arnold calls it in his translation,
will remember that each chapter of that
Celestial Song is devoted to some kind of
Yoga," or method of realizing the Ul-


JL Ugci, Ur IIICLIIU

33


How to be a Yogi

timate Truth and of attaining the highest
wisdom ; and that a " Yogi " is one who
through various practices reaches the
highest ideal of religion. This highest
ideal, according to the Bhagavad Gita, is
the union of the individual soul with the
Universal Spirit.

Hindu writers, however, have used the
word " Yoga " in various other senses. I
will mention a few of them in order to g^ve
some conception of the vastness of the field
covered by this term. First, " Yoga "
means the union of two external objects.
Second, the mixing of one thing with an-
other. Third, the interrelation of the
causes which produce a common effect.
Fourth, the orderly equipment of a soldier
or of any person in any profession. Fifth,
the application, discrimination, and reason-
ing that is necessary for the discovery of a

cei:tain truth. Sixth, that power of sound

34


What is Yoga?

which makes it convey a specific idea.
Seventh, the preservation of what one pos-
sesses. Eighth, the transformation of one
thing into another. Ninth, the union of
one soul with another or with the universal
Spirit. Tenth, the flowing of a thought
current towards an object. Eleventh, the
restraint of all thought action through
concentration and meditation. Thus we
see how many different branches of art,
science, psychology, philosophy, and re-
ligion are included in the various defini-
tions of this one word. It seems, indeed, in
its scope and range to take in every depart-
ment of nature. If, however, we consider
the literal meaning of the word, we shall
more easily understand why it is so all-
inclusive.

It is derived from the Sanskrit root
" Yuj," which means to join. The Eng-
lish word " yoke " also comes from the

35


How to be a Yogi

same root. Originally the literal significa-
tion of the two words was almost the same.
The root-verb " Yuj " signifies to join
oneself to something, or to harness oneself
for some task. Thus in its primary mean-
ing it conveys the same idea of preparing
for hard work as the common English ex-
pressions " to go into harness/* or " to
buckle to." The effort required is mental
or physical, according to the object in view.
If the object be the acquirement of perfect
health or longevity, then the effort of both
mind and body to accomplish this through
certain practices is called " Yoga." So is
it again if the object be the development of
psychic powers. The same word is used
likewise to indicate the mental training
necessary for the attainment of self-con-
trol, of the union of the individual soul
with God, of divine communion or of spi-
ritual perfection. Volumes upon volumes

36


What is Yoga?

have been written in India describing the
different branches and methods of this ap-
plied science of " Yoga," and the various
ideals that can be attained through its
practice; also what qualifications fit a be-
ginner for undertaking any of these
methods, what stages he must pass
through in order to reach the goal, what
obstacles stand in the way, and how they
can be overcome.

Patience and perseverance are abso-
lutely necessary for any one who desires to
enter upon the path of Yoga; those who
are not patient cannot hope to arrive at
true realization. Those, again, who take it
up out of curiosity or through an impulse
of temporary enthusiasm, must not expect
to get results, and must * not blame the
teacher for their failure to do so, since
the fault is entirelv their own. The same

teachings, when carried out with under-

37


How to be a Yogi

standing and in the right spirit, will bring
wonderful results. They will only come,
however, to the student who follows
strictly the instructions of a living mas-
ter, who will direct him in the practice of
both physical and mental exercises.

Aspirants to the study of Yoga can be
divided into three classes : First, those who
are born Yogis. There are some who,
having practiced Yoga in a previous incar-
nation, come here as awakened souls, and
as such manifest remarkable powers from
their very childhood. Their natural ten-
dency is to lead a pure life, for right living
and right thinking are their sole concern,
and they possess wonderful powers of self-
control and of concentration. Sense pleas-
ures and those things which fascinate the
ordinary mind have no charm for them.
Even when they are surrounded by all the

comforts of life and have every material

88


What is Yoga?

resource at their command, they yet feel
like strangers in a strange land. Few there
are who can understand properly the men-
tal condition of these characters. Phy-
sicians may be brought to them, but med-
ical treatment may only make them worse ;
the writer knows of cases where harm has
been done in this way. By the law of at-
traction, however, they are bound to be
drawn sooner or later into the companion-
ship of some Yogi. Here they find exactly
what their inner nature has been craving,
and at once they feel happy and at home.
The instructions of the Yogi appeal to
their minds; they begin the practice of
Yoga under his direction, and proving easy
and natural to them, they soon obtain ex-
cellent results. Thus from youth they take
up the thread of the practice at the very
point where they dropped it in their past

existence; and through a firm determina-

89


How to be a Yogi

tion to overcome all obstacles in their
way, they progress rapidly and gradually
attain to the highest ideal of spiritual life.
Nothing in the world can prevent their on-
ward march, so intense and strong is their
longing for realization.

The second class includes those who are
born as half-awakened souls. In need of
further experience, they go through vari-
ous paths without finding the right one.
They take each new step tentatively, and
in this constant experimenting, they waste
a great deal of energy and a large portion
of their lives. If such partially awakened
souls, following out a tendency created in
their previous existence, have the good
fortune to come in contact with a Yogi and
take up the practice of Yoga, they may,
through perseverance and earnestness,
achieve much in this life, although they

will necessarily advance more slowly in the

40


What is Yoga?

path of spirituality than those who belong
to the first class.

In the third class are to be found all
those unawakened souls who begin their
search after Truth and the practice of
Yoga for the first time in this life. Even
from childhood they are irresistibly drawn
towards sense objects and sense pleasures ;
and if they take up the practice of Yoga,
they find great difficulty in following its
teachings and meet numerous obstacles
along the way. Their environment is not
favorable for the practice, and even when
they try, they cannot easily conquer it.
Their health is not good, their mind is scat-
tered, and they suffer from various kinds of
disease and mental disturbance. They
also lack determination, find it wellnigh
impossible to control the senses, and have
to fight hard to adjust their mode of living

to the new requirements. With so much

41


How to be a Yogi

to contend against they naturally obtain
but small results even after long practice.
If, however, such persons can persevere
and strengthen their wills through a slow
and regular practice of Hatha Yoga,
struggling manfully to overcome the many
obstacles in their way by the practice of
breathing exercises and by following the
directions of a competent teacher, who
understands them, they may in this life be
able to control in a large measure their
physical health and acquire a certain
amount of Yoga power. Hatha Yoga is
especially useful for this class of aspirants.
Through the practice of breathing exer-
cises they will gradually gain control over
their bodies, and will, in course of time, be
prepared for the study of Raja Yoga, which

will arouse the powers latent in their souls.

42


Hatha Yoga


Hatha Yoga is that branch of the
Science of Yoga which teaches how to
conquer hunger, thirst, and sleep ; how to
overcome the effects of heat and cold ; how
to gain perfect health and cure disease
without using drugs; how to arrest the
untimely decay of the body resulting from
the waste of vital energy ; how to preserve
youth even at the age of one hundred
without having a single hair turn grey, and
how thus to prolong life in this body for an
indefinite period. Anyone who practices it
will in the course of time acquire marvel-
lous powers; powers indeed, which must
dumbfound a psychologist or anatomist.

A few years ago a Hatha Yogi was

brought to England. Although in middle

43


How to be a Yogi

life he looked like a boy of eighteen. Not
only was his physical condition perfect,
but through practice he had mastered
eighty-four postures of the body. He
could bend his limbs in so astonishing a
way that it seemed as if his joints must be
unattached, while his bones were as though
made of some elastic substance. Many
English physicians and surgeons came to
see him and were amazed at the extra-
ordinary positions of his limbs. They
brought a skeleton and tried to fix its
bones in the same positions, but could not
do so without breaking them. Afterwards
they reached the conclusion that if the
bones were once fixed in those positions
the limbs would be unfitted for any kind
of work. Yet the example of the Yogi
openly contradicted their statements. His
limbs were strong and of good use to

him in every possible way. He could walk,

44


Hatha Yoga

lift heavy weights, and move about with
absolute ease. The writer himself saw
him in India, and also other Hatha Yogis
who could accomplish equally wonderful
feats. The primary object of these various
postures described in Hatha Yoga is to
gain control over the involuntary muscles
of the body, which is impossible to the
ordinary man. We all i>ossess this power
latent within us, but the Hatha Yogis were
the first to discover a scientific method by
which it could be developed.

All Hatha Yogis eat very little, but they
can also go entirely without food for days
and even for months, and succeed in con-
quering sleep. The author knew of one
who had not slept for twelve years, and who
was nevertheless in perfect health. He has
also seen a Hatha Yogi who usually ate,
for instance, a piece of unleavened bread
in twenty-four hours, and who refused to

45


How to be a Yogi

wear warm clothing in the coldest winter
weather, and yet who voluntarily worked
hard as a street laborer without showing
the least sig^ of fatigue. It may seem im-
possible to the majority of people, who
have made themselves such slaves to sleep
and food as to imagine that if they do not
sleep eight or nine hours out of the
twenty-four and eat pounds of flesh, they
cannot live. Hatha Yogis are the living
contradictions of such opinions. Perhaps
the reader is familiar with the account of
that Yogi who was buried alive for forty
days in an hermetically sealed box, with a
guard of English officers to watch the spot
night and day. During these forty days
the Yog^ could neither eat, sleep, nor
breathe, yet at their expiration he was
brought back to consciousness without
any ill effects and he lived for many years.*

♦For fuller account see **Law of Psychic Phenomena,"
by Thomas Jay Hudson, page 313.

46


Hatha Yoga

Then again these same Yogis who do
not eat, sleep, or drink for a long period,
can, if they wish, eat as much as ten per-
sons at one time without suffering any un-
pleasant consequences. Of course they
do not eat any kind of meat. They digest
their food consciously, as it were. They
claim that by a third eye they can, so to
speak, see what is going on in their inter-
nal organs. Why should this seem in-
credible to us when the discovery of the
Roentgen rays has proved everything to
be transparent?

Some of the Hatha Yogis have extraor-
dinary eyesight. They can not only per-
ceive objects at a great distance, but can
also see clearly in complete darkness, even
being able to pick up a pin from the floor
without the least glimmer of ordinary light
to guide them. This will not appear so

strange when we remember that there is in-

47


How to be a Yogi

visible light in the atmosphere of a per-
fectly dark room. If we can learn to use
this atmospheric Ught, imperceptible to
the common eye, and can develop our eye-
sight, there is no reason why we should not
see things in the dark. The Yogis under-
stand this and know the method by which
the power of eyesight can be developed.
As regards distinguishing objects at a
great distance, this is not so difficult to
believe since we know that there are per-
sons living, not Yog^s, who can see the
moons of Jupiter without the help of any
instrument.

This branch of optical science in Hatha
Yoga is called in Sanskrit " Trataka "
Yoga. It teaches, among other things,
how, through gazing on one object and at
the same time performing certain special
breathing exercises, many optical maladies

can be cured as well as the power of sight

48


Hatha Yoga

strengthened. The authentic records of
Hatha Yogis vouch for the fact that it pro-
duces many beneficial effects when prop-
erly practiced under the direction of a
competent master of Hatha Yoga.

A Yogi who is expert in this science of
optics can fascinate or madden another by
his optical powers. The process of hyp-
notism or mesmerism verifies this claim.
A Yog^ can likewise read the thoughts of
another by looking at his eyes ; for accord-
ing to the Yogi the eye is the index of the
mind. Here it may be asked, how do the
Yogis acquire these powers? They do not
get them from outside. These powers are
dormant in every individual, and through
practice the Yog^s bring them out. They
say : " Whatever exists in the universe (the
macrocosm) exists also in the human body
(the microcosm)." That is, the finer forces

exist potentially in our own organism, and

49


How to be a Yogi

if we study our nature carefully we shall be
able to know all the forces and the laws
which govern the universe.

Hatha Yoga, again, teaches the cure of
disease through breathing exercises and
the regulation of diet and of the general
habits of the daily life. But it does not
claim that physical health is the same as
spirituality. On the contrary, it tells us
that if a healthy body were a sign of spirit-
uality, then wild animals and savages who
enjoy perfect health would be exceedingly
spiritual; yet they are not, as we know.
The principal idea of these Yogis is that
physical maladies are obstacles in the path
of spiritual progress, while a healthy body
furnishes one of the most favorable con-
ditions for the realization of the highest
spiritual truths in this life. Those who do
not possess good health should, therefore,

begin to practice Hatha Yoga.

50


Hatha Yoga

In the practice of Hatha Yoga strict
dietetic rules must be observed. Any-
thing that is sharp, sour, pungent, or hot,
like mustard, liquors, fish, flesh of animals,
curd, buttermilk, oil cakes, carrots, onions,
and garlic should not be eaten. Food,
again, which, having been once cooked,
has grown cold and been rewarmed, should
be avoided; as should also excess of
salt or acidity, or that which is hard to
digest. Rice, barley, wheat, milk, sugar,
honey, and butter are good for a Hatha
Yogi's diet. The manner in which Amer-
icans live in hotels and boarding-houses,
where the food is often unclean, is far from
favorable to this practice. Food cooked
for hundreds of people in a restaurant
cannot be equally good for all and may
easily cause disease. Those who wish to
enjoy perfect health must be careful about

what they eat; they must also observe all

51


How to be a Yogi

the laws of hygiene regarding cleanliness
of the body, fresh air, and pure water.
They should not live in over-heated
houses; neither should they indulge in
artificial stimulants, especially beer, wine,
and coffee. The habit of excessive coffee-
drinking is a serious menace to the Amer-
ican nation. Many people are already suf-
fering from nervous prostration as a result
of indulgence in this direction, and there
are very few cases in which the nervous
system will not be affected by it to some
extent.

lie who wishes to practice Hatha Yoga
should first of all find a Hatha Yogi
teacher, who has perfect control over his
physical body; and having found him, he
should lead a life in strict accord with his
instructions. He should live in a secluded
spot and where the changes of weather are

neither sudden nor extreme. He should

82


Hatha Yoga

be a rigid vegetarian and abstain from all
kinds of drinks that stimulate the system.
He should never fill the stomach with a
large quantity of food. He should observe
the moral laws and practice absolute
continence. He should learn to con-
trol his senses, keep his body clean,
and purify his mind by arousing feel-
ings of kindness and love towards all
living creatures.

The beginner in this branch of Yoga
should gradually conquer the different pos-
tures of the body and limbs. These pos-
tures are called in Sanskrit Asana. There
are altogether eighty-four of them de-
scribed in the science of Hatha Yoga,
Each of these, when practiced with spe-
cial breathing exercises, develops certain
powers latent in the nerve centers and the
different organs of the system. Another

object in practicing Asana is to remove the

S8


How to be a Yogi

Tatnas element which causes heaviness of
the body, and to free the system from the
effects of cold, catarrh, phlegm, rheu-
matism, and many other diseases. Some of
the exercises increase the action of the
stomach and liver, while others regulate
the activities of the other organs. Tremor
of the body and restlessness of the limbs,
which are such frequent obstacles in the
v/ay of gaining control over the mind, may
easily be removed by the practice of
A Sana.

The reader may get an idea of the Asana
from the following descriptions :

I. Sit cross-legged on the floor, placing
the left foot on the right thigh and the
right foot on the left thigh, and keeping
the body, neck, and head in a straight line.

II. After sitting in this posture, hold the

right great toe with the right hand and the

left great toe with the left hand (the hands

54


Hatha Yoga

coming from behind the back and crossing
each other).

III. Sit straight on a level place, firmly
inserting both insteps between the thighs
and the calves of the legs.

IV. Assuming posture No. I, insert the
hands between the thighs and the calves,
and, planting the palms firmly on the
ground, lift the body above the seat.

V. Sitting on the floor, stretch the legs
straight in front, hold the great toes with
the hands without bending the knees.

VI. Having accomplished this posture,
touch the knees with the forehead. This
Asana rouses gastric fire, makes the loins
lean, and removes many diseases.

VII. Holding the toes as in posture V,
keep one arm extended and with the other
draw the other toe towards your ear as you
would do with the string of a bow.

VIII. Plant hands firmly on the ground,

55


How to be a Yogi

support the weight of the body upon the
elbows, pressing them against the sides of
the loins. Then raise the feet above the
ground, keeping them stiff and straight on
a level with the head.

This Asana, according to Hatha Yoga,
cures diseases of the stomach, spleen, and
liver, and all disorders caused by an excess
of wind, bile, or phlegm. It also increases
the power of digestion.

IX. Lie upon the back on the floor at
full length like a corpse, keeping the head
on a level with the body. This Asana
removes fatigue and brings rest and calm-
ness of mind.

The student of Hatha Yoga, having per-
fected himself in controlling some of these
postures, should next take up the breath-
ing exercises. He should carefully study
the science of breathing in all its aspects.

Posture No. I is one of the easiest and best

56


Hatha Yoga

Asanas for one who wishes to control the
breath. It favors a tranquil circulation
and slow respiration.

A beginner should first practice ab-
dominal breathing through both nostrils,
keeping a measured time for inspiration
and expiration. Gradually he should be
directed by his master to hold the breath
in and out. Practicing this internal and
external suspension of breath for a few
weeks, he should next take up alternate
breathing. He may inspire through the
left nostril for four seconds and expire
through the right for four seconds, then
reverse the order, breathing in through the
right and out through the left. The alter-
nate breathing exercises will purify the
nerves and will make the student well-
fitted for higher breathing exercises. The
student should then breathe in through

one nostril for four seconds, hold the

67


How to be a Yogi

breath counting sixteen seconds, and
breathe out through the other nostril
counting eight seconds. This exercise, if
practiced regularly for three months, will
generate new nerve-currents and develop
the healing power that is latent in the sys-
tem.

The Yogi who wishes to cure organic
trouble or disease of any kind, should com-
bine the higher breathing exercises with
the different postures of the body which
bear direct relation to the disturbed organ.
He should arouse the healing power stored
up at the base of the spine and direct it to
the diseased part.

Hatha Yoga describes various methods
for cleansing the internal organs. Some
of them are extremely beneficial to those
who suffer from chronic headache, or cold
in the head, catarrh, dyspepsia, or in-
somnia.

58


Hatha Yoga

The drinking of cold water through the
nose removes headache or chronic cold
in the head. A Hatha Yogi cleanses the
passage between the nose and the mouth
by passing soft cords of delicate thread
through the nostrils and bringing them
out at the mouth. He can pass the cord
through one nostril and bring it out
through the other. This purifies the
head, makes the sight keen, and re-
moves disease in the parts above the
shoulders.

A Hatha Yogi cleanses the alimentary
canal by swallowing a long piece of fine
muslin three inches wide. He purges the
impurities of the intestines by drawing
water through the opening at the lower
extremity of the alimentary canal. This
he does with the help of breathing exer-
cises without using any instrument. Then

shaking the water by the alternate exercise

59


How to be a Yogi

of the rectimuscles of the abdomen, he
throws out the water through the same
passage. An expert Yogi can wash the
whole of the alimentary canal by drinking
a large quantity of water and letting it
pass through the opening at the lower ex-
tremity. Thus he becomes free from
stomach or intestinal disorder. These
exercises are especially recommended for
those who are flabby, phlegmatic, or cor-
pulent.

He cures insomnia by assuming posture
No. IX, at the same time taking a few
deep breaths and holding them after each
inspiration,

A Hatha Yogi can swallow his tongue.
It is said that he who can swallow his up-
turned tongue is freed from old age and
death, conquers sleep, hunger and thirst,
and rises above time. The powers of a
perfect Hatha Yogi are indeed wonderful.


Mi%


Hatha Yoga

He can do and undo anything at his will.
He is the master of all physical laws.

Thus we see that perfect health and
longevity are the immediate results of the
Hatha Yoga practices. To the real seeker
after Absolute Truth, however, they have
small value except as they become a means
of attaining superconscious realization.
According to him, if a man lives five hun-
dred years and yet in that time does not
reach the state of God-consciousness, he
is little better than an oak tree which may
outlast many generations and grow to
great size, but is in the end only an oak
tree. That man, on the contrary, who dies
at the age of thirty, having realized his
oneness with Divinity, has achieved in-
finitely more than he who possesses perfect
health, longevity, psychic powers, or the
gift of healing ; for he has become a living

God in this world and can point the way of

61


How to be a Yogi

salvation to all mankind. Therefore the
exercises of Hatha Yoga should be prac-
ticed only so far as the earnest truth-
seeker does not attain Raja Yoga, which
alone will lead the soul to God-conscious-
ness and perfect freedom.

62


Raja Yoga

Hatha Yoga, as we have already seen,
is wholly devoted to the control of the
functions of the body and to the mastery
of the physical forces, its ideal being a
sound constitution, well-fitted to overcome
those physical and. environmental condi-
tions which stand as obstacles in the path
of spiritual progress. Raja Yoga, on the
contrary, deals entirely with the mind
and psychic power and may be called the
science of applied psychology. Its aim is
to remove all mental obstructions and to
gain a perfectly controlled, healthy mind.
The main purpose of its training is to
develop and strengthen the will as well as
the power of concentration, and to lead

the seeker after Truth through the path

63


How to be a Yogi

of concentration and meditation to the
ultimate goal of all religion.

This path is called Raja Yoga or the
Royal method (Raja means " king ") be-
cause the power of concentration and will-
power are not only greater than any phy-
sical force, but are essential to the acquisi-
tion of all other powers. The man who
possesses a vigorous mind controlled by a
well-developed will, with strong power of
concentration, can easily become the mas-
ter of j)hysical nature and in a short time
ftttain the realization of Truth; and it is
the special province of Raja Yoga to teach
how this can be accomplished. Its study
has been encouraged by all those who have
come in contact with the Raja Yogis of
India either in ancient or modern times.
It was extolled by Pythagoras, by Plato
and the Neo-Platonists like Plotinus and

Proclus. by the Gnostics and the Christian

64


Raja Yoga

mystics of the middle ages; and even tu»

day it is in some measure practiced by

some of the Roman Catholic monks and

nuns of the higher orders. Spinoza, Kant,

Schopenhauer, Ralph Waldo Emerson,

spoke in praise of it, declaring its object

to be the unravelling of the mystery of the

nature of the human soul and the unfold-

ment of the latent powers existing in each

individual. It has been proved by the

living example of Yogis that through its

practice that power can be acquired by

which all other forces in the universe may

be controlled ; and Raja Yoga claims that

whoever has gained mastery over his mind,

can govern all the phenomena of nature.

It teaches that mind is the sovereign

power of the universe, and that when its

forces are properly concentrated upon any

particular object, the true nature of that

object will be revealed. Instead of using

65


How to be a Yogi

an instrument, if we properly utilize the
mental powers which we already possess,
and focus them absolutely upon one point,
we can easily know all the particulars re-
garding the thing upon which they are
directed. This object may be physical,
mental, or spiritual. The concentrated
mind of a Yogi may be compared to an
electric search-light. By throwing the
converged rays of his mind toward a dis-
tant object, whether gross or subtile, all
the details of that object are illumined and
made known to him. The vision of ordin-
ary persons is not so penetrating because
their mental forces are dissipated like the
scattered rays of an ordinary light In the
same way, if the mind can be concentrated
upon internal objects or upon truths that
exist in the realm of the universal, perfect
knowledge of those things can be acquired.

Thus it becomes evident that the power

66


Raja Yoga

of concentration is greater than sense-
power, or than that which can be gained by
the help of instruments. If we can develop
it by controlling our mental faculties, by
making the mind introspective, and by
checking all distractions which draw the
mind outside; and can direct our concen-
trated mental energy toward our higher
Self, the true nature of the individual ego
will be revealed, and we shall realize that
our immutable Self is the Soul of all, and
that it is the same as the ultimate Reality
of the universe. We shall then perceive
that the Divine Being, whom in ignorance
we worship as separate from ourselves, is
not far from us, is not dwelling outside of
us, but is our own omnipotent Self residing
within us. We shall also recognize that
the same Spirit is one and all-pervading,
and that it is the Absolute Truth under-
lying the name and form of everv phe-

67


!H<>% n^ St u Yogi


* ..-,. -k.» ^.i**;- -15- ^^•«{*'Ci *>


Raja Yoga

ments. He does not depend upon his
sense-powers, but endeavors to gain all
knowledge through the power of concen-
tration. The science of Raja Yoga gives
the various steps which lead to the attain-
ment of this ideal. It explains clearly and
scientifically the processes and methods by
which concentration can be developed. It
does not, however, ask the student to ac-
cept anything on hearsay, or to believe
anything on the mere authority of script-
ures or of writers. But it states certain
facts, requests the student to experiment,
experience the results, and draw his own
conclusions.

There is nothing mysterious in the sys-
tem of Raja Yoga. On the contrary, it
points out the laws which govern so-
called mysteries and explains under what
conditions the phenomena of mysteries are

produced. It shows that so long as the

69


How to be a Yogi

real cause of an event is unknown it ap-
pears mysterious to us. Standing upon
the solid ground of logic and reason, the
science of Raja Yoga unravels the riddles
of the universe and directs the individual
soul toward the attainment of the final end
of all religions. Its principles are highly
moral and uplifting. It helps the student
to understand the true purpose of life and
describes the way by which it may be ful-
filled here and now. Raja Yoga tells us
that we should not think so much of what
will happen after death, but that we should
make the best use of the present and unfold
the latent powers which we already possess,
while it reminds us again and again of the
fact that the advancement made in this life
will be the foundation of future progress.
If we gain or develop certain powers be-
fore we die, those powers will not be lost,

but will remain with us wherever we go

70


Raja Yoga

after death; while external possessions,
we know, cannot accompany us in the
grave. The only things that we can carry
out of life are our character, our experi-
ence and the knowledge gained therefrom.
They are our real possessions; and it is
these which Raja Yoga will help us to
develop ; since its chief object is to mould
the character and lead the student to the
knowledge of the divine nature of the soul.
The methods which it teaches can be prac-
ticed without joining any secret organiza-
tion, but merely by following the direc-
tions of a true Raja Yogi, who is pure and
simple, whose mind is free from doubts,
and who is unattached to the objects of
the phenomenal plane.

The practice of Raja Yoga is divided
into eight steps. The first four are the
same as those of Hatha Yoga. The first

and second, Yama and Niyama, include all

71


How to be a Yogi

the ethical laws that govern our moral na-
ture. The strict observance of these laws
is necessary to the practice of the other
steps of Raja Yoga. All the fundamental
principles of ethics expounded by Buddha
and all the truths proclaimed in the Ser-
mon on the Mount are contained in these
first two steps. A beginner in the prac-
tice of Raja Yoga should live a strictly
moral and pure life, otherwise he will not
advance in this path, nor will he reach the
highest Truth or realize the Divinity that
dwells within him. A neophyte must re-
member that purity, chastity, and morality
are the very corner-stones of the structure
of the Science of Yoga. In the require-
ments of the first step we find non-killing,
non-stealing, truthfulness, continence, for-
givingness, firmness of character, kindness
to all living creatures, simplicity, modera-
tion in diet, and cleanliness. Non-killing

72


Raja Yoga

must be in thought, word, and deed, so
with truthfulness and non-stealing. The
character must be firm, for the student
must persist in the face of all obstacles
until spiritual perfection is reached. He
must not take up the study as a passing
fad, only to satisfy his momentary curi-
osity, but must continue with patience and
perseverance until the highest ideal is
realized.

The second step includes austerities, for-
bearance, contentment, faith in the Su-
preme Being, charity, study, and self-
surrender to the Divine will. All the phys-
ical exercises necessary for keeping the
body in perfect condition are to be found
in the third step.* Health is essential to
the attainment of the highest knowledge.
Those who are suffering from disease can-


♦ It is called Asana in Sanskrit. It has been described
more fully in the chapter on Hatha Yoga,

73


How to be a Yogi

not make their mind steady, cannot fix
their attention upon truths existing on the
spiritual plane, because naturally their
minds will be centered on the diseased
parts of the body. A beginner, who pos-
sesses a healthy body and a well-balanced
mind, should choose any Asana or posture
of the body in which he can sit firmly for
a long time without feeling pain in the
limbs. In the practice of Raja Yoga, how-
eyer, one need not be so particular regard-
ing the posture of the body. The student
should simply observe that the spinal
column is kept perfectly straight while
practicing breathing lessons in a sitting
posture.

Pranayama, or breathing exercises, con-
stitute the fourth step. The practice of
certain breathing exercises will remove
many obstacles like dullness, laziness, and

bodily weakness, and will be helpful in

74


Raja Yoga

gaining control over the senses, sense or-
gans, and nerve centers, as also in quiet-
ing the restlessness of the mind. Anyone
who will practice such breathing exercises
regularly, will acquire wonderful power
over both his mind and his body. He who
suffers fromi worry, anxiety, nervousness,
or insomnia, can obtain excellent results
even in a few days by the practice of
proper breathing exercises. Those who
have studied the science of breathing will
know what these results are ; but the main
object of the Pranayama in Raja Yoga is
to develop the power of concentration.

Making the mind introspective is the
fifth step. It is called Pratyahara. If we
can withdraw the mind from external ob-
jects, fix it on some inner object, and bring
it under the control of the will, we shall
accomplish all that is required in this
step. Pratyahara is preparatory to con-

75


How to be a Yogi

centration. Before the student is able to
concentrate on any particular object he
must learn to gather up his scattered men-
tal powers. This process of collecting the
powers of the mind and of restraining it
from going out to external objects is what
the Yogis designate as Pratyahara.

Concentration follows next. After go-
ing through the five preliminary steps,
if one takes up concentration, the results
achieved will be extraordinary. Those,
however, who have not practiced the in-
troductory steps will find this one ex-
tremely difficult, for the ground must be
prepared before good results can be
gained.

Meditation is the seventh stage,* and
through it one passes into Samadhi or the
state of superconsciousness, which is the

* For further explanations concerning concentration and
meditation, see << Spiritual Unfbldment," by the same
author.

76


Raja Yoga

eighth and last step. In this state the
sixth sense of finer perception is developed,
the spiritual eye is opened, and one comes
face to face with the Divine Being dwell-
ing within. In it the student realizes that
his true Self is one with the universal
Spirit, and he receives all the revelation
and all the inspiration that can possibly
come to the human soul. It may be
thought by many that revelation pro-
ceeds from some external source, either
through the favor of some angel or bright
spirit or the extra-cosmic personal God,
but a Yogi knows that revelation or in-
spiration is the disclosure of the higher
Self within, and that the realization of
spiritual truths comes to that soul which
has reached the eighth step of Raja Yoga.
Ceaseless effort, persistence, and persever-
ance in practice are necessary to attain to

the state of superconsciousness. That

77


How to be a Yogi

which is realized in it cannot be revealed by
intellect or by any other mental faculty;
therefore it is said that Truth cannot be
attained by reading books or Scriptures,
or by intellect or sense-perception, but by
reaching the state of superconsciousness.
Those who are longing to know the Truth,
who are searching for the ultimate Reality
of the universe, and are not satisfied with
the knowledge gained through the senses
or through the aid of instruments, should
struggle hard to go into Samadhi, because
through it alone will they discover their
ideal and reach the abode of happiness.
Before, however, they can arrive at this
state, they will have to follow faithfully the
different steps already enumerated and
with patience and perseverance overcome
all the obstacles which beset the way.

There are many obstructions to Sa-
madhi, such as grief, disease, mental lazi-

78.


Raja Yoga

ness, doubt, cessation of the struggle to
attain Samadhi, heaviness of body and
mind, thirst for worldly things, false knowl-
edge, non-attaining concentration, falling
away from the state once attained, irreg-
ular breathing, etc. They can be easily
avoided by regular practice under the guid-
ance of a Yogi teacher. If a student try to
practice by himself any of the exercises as
given in Raja Yoga,* he may have some
unpleasant experiences which may disturb
his mind or nervous system ; but if he have
an experienced Raja Yogi to direct him,
then he will have no difficulty in conquer-
ing all the obstacles and dangers, and in
reaching the right destination. Some of
the powers generated by these practices
are too dangerous to be handled by an in-
experienced student; they may not only

»See "RAja Yoga," by Swami Vivek&nanda. Pub-
lished by The Baker and Taylor Co., New York.

79


How to be a Yogi

injure him but may even drive him to in-
sanity. There have, indeed, been many
such cases among those who have tried to
practice without the help of a well-qualified
Guru or spiritual teacher.

Having removed all obstructions in this
path, the student should be confident that
he is approaching the final goal of Raja
Yoga. When the superconscious realiza-
tion is acquired all doubts will cease for-
ever, all questions concerning the nature of
the soul will be answered, the search after
Truth will stop, the mind will become tran-
quil, and the soul will be emancipated from
the bondage of ignorance and self-delusion.
The Yogi will never again fall a victim to
the attractions of the world or be dis-
tracted by objects of sense. The whole
universe will appear to him as the play-
ground of the Divine Being; and he will

constantly feel that his body and mind are

80


Raja Yoga

like instruments moving under the direc-
tion of the Almighty Will which is mani-
festing through all forms. Thus, having
gained spiritual strength and illumination,
he will become the conqueror of himself
and the master of nature even in this life.

*' He alone has reached happiness on this
earth, he alone has conquered the world,
who has gained perfect control over his
mind and body, whose soul rests in tran-
quillity, and whose eyes behold Divinity in
everything and everything in that Eternal
Being, which is the Infinite Abode of exist-
ence, knowledge, and bliss absolute."

81


Karma Yoga

One of the significations of the word
" Yoga " is " Dexterity in work." To
render this meaning still more specific, the
Sanskrit term " Karma/' derived from the
root verb " Kri/' to act, is added. Taken
in its literal sense, therefore. Karma sig-
nifies action, and refers to all actions
whether of mind or body. Wherever there
is activity of any kind, it is Karma. In this
sense devotion, love, worship, medita-
tion, concentration, discrimination are all
Karma; as are also, for the same reason,
eating, drinking, walking, talking, or per-
forming any organic function.

Again, every action, as we are aware, is

followed by reaction. No action can be

separated from its result, as no cause can

be absolutely disconnected from its effect.

82


Karma Yoga

Consequently the secondary meaning of
Karma embraces all reactions or results of
actions. The chain of cause and sequence,
known as the " law of causation," is also
called Karma; and every action of body
and mind is governed by the law of Karma
or of action and reaction. Being subject
to this natural law, we have been working
in this world from the beg^nningless past,
and reaping the results of our efforts,
whether pleasant or unpleasant, good or
evil.

When, furthermore, we consider that
the effect of each action leaves its impres-
sion on the mind-substance, which impres-
sion becomes the seed of a fresh action
of a similar nature, we understand the
third meaning of the term. In this
sense the word Karma includes the
accumulated results of past actions or

rather the seed forms of future activities.

83


How to be a Yogi

Hence the character of an individual,

which is the aggregate result of the works

of his previous life may be called Karma.

In the same way, the future life will be the

sum-total of the results of the mental and

physical actions of the present life.

Karma Yoga is, therefore, that branch

of the Science of Yoga which discusses

the three ideas conveyed by the word

*' Karma," explains the philosophy of

work, describes the method by which

the individual soul can extricate itself

from the wheel of action and reaction,

and having escaped from the irresistible

law of causation by which every one

is bound, can attain to perfect freedom,

fulfill the highest purpose of life, and

thus through right action alone reach the

ultimate goal of all religion. It is the path

best fitted for those who believe in no

creed, who are not devotional, and who do

84


Karma Yoga

not care to worship or pray to a personal
God.

Karma Yoga teaches that the cause of
the suffering, misery, disease, and misfor-
tune, which overshadow our earthly life, lies
in our own actions. We reap the fruit of
that which we ourselves have sown. These
causes are within us. We should blame
neither our parents nor any evil spirit for
our sufferings, but should look within our-
selves to discover the source thereof.
This branch of Yoga likewise describes the
secret of work, by knowing which we can
remove all causes of bondage and suffer-
ing, and enjoy freedom, peace, and happi-
ness both here and after death. It tells
us that every action inspired by the motive
of desire for results attaches the soul to
these results, and consequently becomes a
source of bondage. The secret of work

consists in working for work's sake and not

85


How to be a Yogi

for fruits. If this principle be applied to
the actions of our daily lives, then every
work done by us will help us to advance
toward the perfect emancipation of the
soul. Whoever performs his duties under-
standing the secret of work, becomes truly
unselfish and eventually gains knowledge
of his real Self, which is immortal and
divine.

According to Karma Yoga, the true Self
when it becomes identified with the limita-
tions of the mind and the physical form,
appears as " ego," " doer,'' or " actor," and
performing work from various motives, re-
mains attached to its results. We thus feel
as one with our body and endeavor to en-
rich the narrow, limited self or " I " by
getting something from that which is " not
I." This imperfect knowledge of the
" Self," or rather this ignorance of the

true " Self," is the cause of selfishness.

86


Karma Yoga

From selfishness in turn proceeds all that
desire for results which forces us to live
and act like slaves. Karma Yoga shows
us the way by which we can become con-
scious of our true Self, and, by widening
the range of the limited " ego," can make
it universal. When we have accomplished
this, we shall live in the world working not
from selfish motives, but for humanity, yet
with as much interest in heart as we had
when we worked for ourselves. Nor shall
we then seek the comfort and pleasure of
this little personality which is now the chief
center of our interest and effort, but shall
strive for the good of all.

Anyone who wishes to become a true
Karma Yogi should clearly understand the
philosophy of work, * and should remem-
ber that every action of body and mind
must produce some effect which will event-

* See << Phllosophj of Work/' by the same author.

87


How to be a Yogi

ually come back upon the doer; and that,
if there be the smallest desire for result, it
will be the seed of future action of a like
nature. He should also realize that every
action produces similar reaction. If the
action be in harmony with the moral and
physical laws which govern our lives, then
the reaction which comes back upon the
actor will bring only that which is good, —
peace, rest, fortune, health, and happiness.
If, on the contrary, these laws are violated,
then the result will be evil, producing rest-
lessness, discomfort, loss of fortune, dis-
ease, and unhappiness.

A traveller in the path of Karma Yoga
should not even think evil of another, be-
cause in the attempt to injure others we
first injure ourselves. Every thought puts
the mind-substance in a certain state of
vibration and opens the door to the influ-
ence of such minds as are in the same state

88


Karma Yoga

of vibration. Therefore when we cherish
evil thoughts, we run the double risk of
affecting other minds and of being influ-
enced by all evil-minded persons holding
similar thoughts, nay, we expose our minds
to all the evil thoughts that have been
thought in the past and stored up in the
mental atmosphere of the world. A cor-
responding result comes from the holding
of good thoughts. This is the reason why
evil-doers grow worse and worse every
day, and the doers of good deeds become
better and better.

A Karma Yogi should realize that there
is one Being, or one Spirit, in the universe.
Seeing this same Being or Spirit in all
living creatures, he should recognize the
rights of all and should not injure anyone
either mentally or physically. Such a
Yog^ is truly unselfish ; he is a blessing to

the world and to humanity.

89


How to be a Yogi

He who wishes to practice Karma Yoga
should abandon attachment to the fruit of
his labors, and learn to work for work's
sake, keeping in mind the idea that by his
work he is paying off the debt which he
owes to parents, to society, to country, and
to all mankind. Like a wet nurse he
should take care of his children, realizing
that they do not belong to him, but that
they are placed in his charge in order that
he and they may gain experience and un-
fold their latent powers and feelings.

A true Karma Yogi, furthermore, is he
who recognizes that his real Self is not a
doer of action, but that all mental and phy-
sical activity is merely the result of the
forces of nature. Therefore he never
claims that any work, whether good or bad,
has been done by his true " Self." He lets
his mind, intellect, and sense-organs work

incessantly, while in his soul he holds stead-

00


Karma Yoga

fastly to the idea that he is the witness-Hke
Knower of all activity, mental or physical.
In this way he frees himself from the law of
Karma and escapes from all the results
of work which bind ordinary workers.
Neither does he count success or failure in
his daily life. He does his best in each
effort put forth by him, and after perform-
ing his duty to the utmost of his ability, if
he meets with failure he does not grieve,
but, saying within himself that he did all
that he could under the circumstances, he
maintains his calmness and enjoys peace
of mind even in the face of defeat.

The aim of a Karma Yogi is to live in
the world and act like a master, not like a
slave. Ordinary mortals implicitly obey
the masters of desire and passion, follow-
ing them without question or discrimina-
tion. But he who chooses the path of

Karma Yoga seeks absolute control over

91


How to be a Yogi

desire and passion and directs the force
manifesting through these channels toward
the highest ideal of life — freedom of the
soul.

In fulfilling all the duties of life the
Karma Yogi takes refuge in love, making
it the sole motive power behind every
action of body and mind ; and whenever he
performs any duty, it is always through
love. He understands that sense of duty
is bondage, while work done through a
feeling of love frees the soul and brings
peace, rest, and, in the end, everlasting
happiness.

All the great spiritual leaders of
mankind, like Christ and Buddha, were
Karma Yogis. They worked for human-
ity through love, and showed by their ex-
ample how perfect freedom can be attained
by right work. Buddha did not preach

the worship of a personal God, but he es-

92


Karma Yoga

tablished the truth that those who do not

believe in a personal God and who are not

devotional, can reach the highest goal of

all religions by the path of Karma Yoga.

93


Bhakti Yoga


Bhakti Yoga teaches that the final end
of all religions can be reached through
love and worship of the personal God, who
is the Creator and Governor of the phe-
nomenal universe. It leads to the same
destination as all the other branches of
Yoga, but is especially suited for such as
are emotional in their nature and have
the feeling of love and devotion highly
developed. It is for those devotees who,
conscious of their own weakness arising
from lack of self-control and of knowledge,
seek help from outside; and who, taking
refuge in the Supreme, pray to Him for
forgiveness and for pardon of sins com-
mitted through ignorance of the moral and

spiritual laws that govern our lives.

94


Bhakti Yoga

All dualistic systems of religion, like
Christianity, Judaism, and Mahometanism,
which advocate the worship of a personal
God, knowingly or unknowingly preach
Bhakti Yoga and direct their adherents
along this path.

The word " Bhakti " means devotion,
while Yoga in this case signifies union of
the individual soul with God. Hence
Bhakti Yoga is the method of devotion
by which true communion of the soul with
the Supreme Deity is accomplished. It
shows what kind of devotion and love for
God will bring the soul into the most in-
timate relation with the Divine Being; and

■

how even the ordinary feelings of a human

heart, when directed Godward, can become

the means of attaining spiritual oneness

with the Soul of the universe. Raja Yoga

tells us that desire, passion, love, hatred,

pride, anger, must be completely con-

95


How to be a Yogi

quered before perfection can be reached.
A student of Raja Yoga must not only
keep constant watch over his mind, but he
must also faithfully practice the eight steps
already described, if he would achieve his
highest ideal; while in Bhakti Yoga we
learn that all desires and passions, whether
good or bad, can be directed towards God.
Then, instead of binding the soul to world-
liness and earthly attachment, they be-
come a means of attaining God-conscious-
ness and absolute freedom from selfishness
and wickedness.

A follower of Bhakti Yoga should feel
God as closely related to his soul as he pos-
sibly can ; and regard Him not only as the
Lord of the universe, but as father,
mother, brother, sister, friend, or child.
Even the relation existing between hus-
band and wife may be cultivated and

developed in the heart of a lover of

96


Bhakti Yoga

God, intoxicated by the soul-stirring wine
of Divine Love. When the whole heart
and soul of a Bhakta or lover of God flow
like the unbroken current of a mighty-
river, surmounting all barriers and dashing
headlong toward the ocean of Divinity, he
finds no other attraction in the world,
holds no other thought, cherishes no other
desire, speaks no other word, and sees no
other thing than his most Beloved, the
Omnipresent Deity. He resigns himself
entirely to Him and surrenders his will to
the will of the Almighty One. He works,
but without thinking of results. Every
action of his body and mind is performed
simply to please his Beloved One. His

motive power is love alone and by this he

*
breaks asunder the chain of selfishness,

transcends the law of Karma, and becomes
free. Thus a true Bhakti Yogi, being con-
stantly in tune with the Infinite, loses the

97


How to be a Yogi

sense of "I," "Me," and "Mine," and

makes room for " Thou," " Thee," and

" Thine."

A Bhakta never forgets his relation to

his Beloved. His mind is concentrated

and one-pointed ; consequently meditation

becomes easy for him. True devotion or

continuous remembrance of the Divine

Ideal leads to unceasing meditation, and

ultimately lifts the soul into Samadhi,

where it realizes God and communes with

Him undisturbed by any other thought,

feeling, idea, or sensation. Becoming

dead to sense phenomena, it lives on

the spiritual plane of God-consciousness.

Wherever such a Yogi casts his eyes, he

sees the presence of the All-pervading

Divinity and enjoys unbounded i>eace and

happiness at every moment of his life. It

is for this reason that Bhakti Yoga is

considered to be the easiest of all

d8


Bhakti Yoga

methods. What a Raja Yogi attains only
after years of practice, a Bhakta accom-
plishes in a short time through extreme
devotion and love. That which a Karma
Yogi finds so difficult to achieve, a Bhakti
Yogi attains easily by offering the fruits of
all his works to the Almighty Source of all
activity and the ultimate end of all motives.
Bhakti Yoga has two grades, — the first
is called " Gauni," or preparatory and in-
cludes all the preliminary practices; the
second is " Para," or the state of supreme
love and devotion to God. A beginner in
Bhakti Yoga should first of all prepare the
ground of his heart by freeing it from at-
tachment to earthly objects and sense-
pleasures; then by arousing in it extreme
longing to see God, to realize Divinity, to
go to the Source of all knowledge, and to
reach perfection and God-consciousness in

this life. He must be absolutely earnest

99


How to be a Yogi

and sincere. He should seek the company
of a true lover of God, whose life is pure
and spotless, who has renounced all world-
ly connections, and who has realized the
true relation which the individual soul
bears to the Universal Spirit. If, by good
fortune, he meets such a real Bhakta, he
should receive from him the seed of Bhakti,
plant it in the ground of his heart, and
by faithfully following the instructions of
the master, take special care to keep it
alive and make it grow, until it becomes a
large tree bearing the fruit of Divine Love.
He should have respect, reverence, and
love for his master, who will open his
spiritual eye and transmit his own spiritual
powers to his soul. When these powers
begin to work, the soul will be awakened
from the deep sleep of ignorance and self-
delusion.

The Guru, or spiritual eye-opener, know-

100


Kiakti Yoga

ing" the natural tendency of the disciple,
will advise him to look upon God as his
Master, or as his Father or Mother, and
will thus establish a definite relation be-
tween his soul and God. Henceforth the
disciple should learn to worship or pray to
the Supreme through this particular rela-
tion. At this stage symbols, rituals, cer-
emonies may appeal to his mind; or he
may repeat some name of the Lord that
signifies the special aspect of the Divinity
corresponding to the relation which he
bears to Him. Constant repetition of such
a name will help the mind of the neophyte
to become concentrated upon the Divine
Being. During this period he should avoid
such company, such places, and such
amusements as make him forget his chosen
Ideal. He should live a chaste and pure
life, always discriminating right from

wrong and struggling to control his pas-

101


How to be a Yogi

sions and desires by directing them God-
ward. He should be angry with himself
for not realizing his ideal; he should hate
his sinful nature because it keeps him away
from the path of Bhakti and prevents him
from remembering his Beloved. Thus he
will gradually succeed in correcting his
faults and in gaining control over his
animal nature.

1 A traveller on the path of Bhakti should
observe cleanliness of body and mind,
should be truthful, and lead a simple life,
without injuring any living creature men-
tally or physically. He should not kill any
animal for his food, neither should he covet
that which does not belong to him. He
should, furthermore, obey the laws of
health which tend to make him physically
strong, as well as those moral laws the
violation of which weakens the mind.

So long as the devotee thinks of God

102


Bhakti Yoga

with a form and believes that He is outside
of his soul and of the universe, he can make
a mental picture of Him and worship the
Divine Ideal through that form ; or he may
keep before him some symbolic figure like
the cross which will remind him of his Ideal
at the time of devotion. But a Bhakta
should never mistake the imaginary form
or the symbolic figure for the real Ideal.
Wherever there is such a mistake there is
to be found spiritual degeneration and the
expression of ignorance in the form of
sectarianism, bigotry, fanaticism.

Gradually, as the Bhakta approaches
God, he will rise above such dualistic con-
ceptions and realize that his Beloved is not
only transcendent but immanent in nature,
that nature is His body, that He dwells
everywhere, that He is the Soul of our
souls and the Life of our life, that He is the

one stupendous Whole while we are but

103


How to be a Yogi

His parts. The Bhakta then reaches
that state which is called qualified
non-dualism. He sees that from the
minutest insect up to man all living
creatures are related to the Iswara *
as a part is related to the whole. There-
fore he cannot kill or injure any living
being. Understanding that everything
pertaining to any part belongs in reality to
the whole, he says, " Whatever is mine is
Thine " ; and it is from this moment that
absolute self-resignation and self-surrender
to the will of the Iswara begin to reign
supreme in the soul of the Yogi. Then he
is able to say from the bottom of his heart,
" Let Thy will be done," and never again
can he forget that his soul is a part of the
Iswara. His devotion henceforth consists
in remembering this new relation, and his

* The most appropriate Sanskrit word for God who is
the all-pervading, internal Ruler of the universe.

104


Bhakd Yoga

worship takes a new form. Whatever he
does with mind or body becomes an act of
worship of the Supreme Whole, for he
realizes that he possesses no power that
does not belong to God. Eating, drinking,
walking, talking, and every other work of
his daily life become acts of devotion, and
the entire existence of such a Bhakta is a
continuous series of acts of worship. Then
the heart is purified and selfishness is dead.
The devotee thus rises to the second
grade of Bhakti Yoga and begins to taste
that Divine Love which is the fruit of the
tree of Bhakti. Here all distinction be-
tween lover and Beloved disappears; the
lover, the Beloved and Love all merge into
one ocean of Divinity. The soul of the
Bhakta is transformed, and manifesting
omniscience, God-consciousness, perfect
freedom, and all other Divine qualities, it

attains to the highest ideal of Bhakti Yoga.

105


Jnana Yoga


The last is Jnana Yoga, the path of wis-
dom. The word " Jnana," being derived
from the Sanskrit root "Jna," to know,
means knowledge; and the ideal which it
holds up before its followers is the realiza-
tion of that Absolute Truth, which is the
one common source of all subjective and
objective phenomena in the universe. It
teaches that there is one life, one Being,
one Reality, and that all notions of dis-
tinction and differentiation, that all beliefs
in the permanent duality or multiplicity of
existence are unreal and illusory.

Jnana Yoga is based entirely upon the

monistic principles of the Advaita or non-

dualistic system of Vedanta. Its purpose

is to show that subject and object are but

106


Jnana Yoga

the two expressions of one Absolute Being
or Substance; that God and man, the
Creator and the created, are only different
aspects of one Universal Reality. Its aim
is to resolve the divers phenomena into
one ultimate Being, from which proceed all
powers and all forces manifested in external
and internal nature, and which is the abode
of infinite intelligence and eternal happi-
ness.

According to Jnana Yoga, matter, mind,
intellect, sense-powers, names, and forms
are but the apparent manifestations of that
one Substance which is called in Sanskrit
Brahman. They may appear to us as real,
but they have in truth only relative reality.
The phenomena of the universe are like the
waves in the ocean of Brahman. As waves
rise in the sea, and after playing for a while,
once more merge into it, so the waves of

subject and object rise, live, and dissolve

107


How to be a Yogi

in the ocean of that Absolute Substance
Brahman. Brahman is described in Ve-
danta as " That of which all animate and
inanimate objects are born, by which they
live, and into which they return after dis-
solution. It should be known and realized
by all." It is the essence of Divinity. It
is like the eternal canvas upon which the
Creator or the Cosmic Ego and the created
or individual egos are painted by Maya,
the inscrutable creative power of the In-
finite Being.

The chief object of Jnana Yoga is to
unify God and the individual Soul and to
show the absolute oneness that exists be-
tween them on the highest spiritual plane.
The individual ego; being the reflection or
image of Divinity or Brahman, in its true
nature is divine, and this true Self is known
in Sanskrit as the Atman. The knowledge

of this oneness of the Atman or subjective

108


Jnana Yoga

reality with Brahman, the Universal Truth,
is described in Jnana Yoga as the only-
means of attaining to complete liberation
from the bondage of selfishness and from
attachment to body and senses, which are
the causes of all worldliness, unhappiness,
and misery. The light of the knowledge
of the Atman and of its unity with Brah-
man alone will dispel the darkness of
ignorance which prevents us from reaching
the abode of Absolute Existence, Intel-
ligence, and Bliss, and which now deludes
us into identifying the individual Self with
the body, senses, mind, and their modifica-
tions. This ignorance is designated in
Sanskrit Avidya or ne-science, and is the
source of all false knowledge, egotism, at-
tachment to the lower self and to the
world. Being deceived by the illusive
power of Avidyd, we mistake body for soul

and soul for body, matter for spirit and

109


How to be a Yogi

spirit for matter. In ignorance of our true
Self, we work solely to gratify selfish
motives and to reap some result from our
actions. But Jnana Yoga would waken us
from this sleep of ignorance, by showing us

A

that the Atman is immortal, unchangeable,
all-knowing, and free by its own nature
from eternity to eternity; that through
the influence of Avidya, the individual ego
thinks of itself as changeable and subject
to birth and death, and forgetting that the
fountain-head of freedom, knowledge, and
everlasting happiness is abiding within, it
seeks knowledge and happiness from out-
side and becomes the slave of desires and
passions. It further reminds us that what-
ever we think or perform mentally or phy-
sically is like a dream in the sleep of self-
delusion caused by the power of Avidya;
that these dreams of the sleep of ignorance

can be removed neither by work, nor by

110


Jnana Yoga

devotion, nor by meditation, but by the
light and power of Vidyd, the knowledge
of the Atman or Self and of its relation to
Brahman.

This knowledge cannot be obtained as
the result of any virtuous act or prayer, but
comes to the soul when the intellect and
heart have been purified by unselfish and
righteous works, and when the individual
ego begins to discriminate between the real

A

and unchangeable Atman and apparent
and changeable matter or force. Jnana
Yoga teaches that right discrimination and
proper analysis are indispensable to the ac-
quisition of knowledge of the true Self and
of the Reality which underlies phenomenal
objects. It also declares that knowledge
of the Self will bring to the soul the realiza-
tion of Absolute Truth more quickly than
the practice of Raja, Karma, or Bhakti

Yoga.

Ill


How to be a Yogi

The path of wisdom, therefore, is best
fitted for those earnest and sincere seekers
after Truth who have no leaning towards
active life, who are not devotional in their
nature, but who are preeminently intel-
lectual, and who, having realized the tran-
sitory and ephemeral character of phe-
nomenal objects, are no longer contented
with sense-pleasures. It is for those who
wish to be free from all fetters and attach-
ments, and who care nothing for earthly
prosperity, success, social honor, fame, or
the fulfilment of personal ambitions; but
whose sole desire is to know who they are
in reality, what is their true nature, and
what relation exists between their soul,
God, and the universe.

A traveller along this path should be
philosophical in tendency, should have a
sharp intellect and a keen power of analyz-
ing the true nature of things. He should

112


Jnana Yoga

also have a firm conviction that the ulti-
mate Truth or Reality of the universe is
unchangeable. Using the sword of right
discrimination between the Self and the
non-self, he should sever all ties, and should
never allow himself to be overpowered by
any external or internal influence. His
mind should be undisturbed by passions or
desires, his senses well controlled, and his
body strong, healthy, and capable of bear-
ing all hardships as well as of overcoming
all environmental conditions. He should
have dispassion; and be ever ready to re-
nounce anything that does not help him in
his realization of Truth. He must have
absolute confidence in the teachings of
Jnana Yogins, or those who have become
Seers of Truth by following the path of
wisdom; and he must likewise have faith
in the final Truths expounded by the

monistic system of Vedanta.

113


How to be a Yogi

The mind of a beginner in Jnana Yoga
must possess the power of perfect concen-
tration and meditation ; and his soul must
be filled with the longing for absolute free-
dom from all relative conditions and from
the laws which govern phenomena. He
must realize that even the enjoyment of
heavenly pleasures is a kind of bondage,
since it keeps the soul entangled in the
meshes of phenomenal relativity. Being
well-armed with all these noble qualities as
his weapons, a Jnana Yogi should fight
against phenomenal appearances, and with
the ideal of the unity of the true Self and
the Absolute Brahman ever before his
mind's eye, he should march onward
toward its realization, breaking down all
names and forms with the hammer of right
analysis, and cleaving all ties of attachment
with the sword of proper discrimination.

Nor should he stop until the goal is

lU


Jnana Yoga

reached. He who goes through the path
of wisdom, burns the vast forest of the trees
of phenomenal names and forms by start-
ing in it the fire of right knowledge. All
these names and forms are produced by
Maya, the inscrutable power of Brahman;
and according to Jnana Yoga this power
of Maya is inseparable from Brahman as
the power of heating is inseparable from
fire. A Jnana Yogi, in his search after
Brahman, should reject all names and
forms by saying " Not this," " Not this,*'
until he realizes the one nameless, form-
less, and absolute Being of the universe,
where the subject and the object, the
knower, knowledge, and its object, losing
their relativity, merge into the infinite
Ocean of Blissful Existence and Supreme
Intelligence.
A sincere seeker after Truth should hear

over and over again that the At man or

115


How to be a Yogi

true Self is one with Brahman or the Eter-
nal Truth ; and should repeat such phrases
as " I am Brahman," " I am one with the
Absolute Source of knowledge, existence,
and bHss." He should constantly think of
the meaning of " Tat Twam asi'' — " That
thou art,'* and should devote his time to
meditating upon this oneness until the
light of Brahman illumines his soul, dis-
pelling the darkness of Avidya and trans-
forming his ego into the essence of
Divinity.

Instead of worshipping a personal God
like a Bhakta, a Jnana Yogi should clearly
understand the true significance of all His
attributes as given in the different Script-
ures — such as Creator or Governor of the
universe, He is Spirit, infinite, omniscient,
all-powerful, unchangeable, true, and one;
and rejecting the worship of the personal

God as an act proceeding from Avidya or

116


Jnana Yoga

Ignorance of the divine nature of the Self
or Atman, he should seek that which is
above all attributes and beyond all descrip-
tions, which transcends the realm of
thought and cannot be revealed by human
intellect or understanding. He should
realize that all conceptions of a personal
God are more or less anthropomorphic,
and that the Creator himself must be phe-
nomenal since He can exist only in relation
to the created object. A Jnana Yogi, con-
sequently, does not pray to the personal
God or to any other Spirit or Being. To
him prayers and devotions are useless and
unnecessary. He does not seek any super-
natural help or Divine mercy, for he is con-
scious of the omnipotent and omniscient
nature of the Atman, and knows that his
true Self is beyond good and evil, above
virtue and vice, unlimited by all laws, and

that it reigns over nature in its own glory.

117


How to be a Yogi

He feels that it is the same in essence as
the Creator or personal God. Instead of
identifying himself with body, mind, senses,
or intellect, he always remembers that he

A

is the Atman, which is birthless, death-
less, sinless, fearless, immutable, eternally
peaceful, and ever undisturbed by pleasant
or unpleasant experiences, sensations, or
mental and physical changes.

A true Jnana Yogi constantly tries to
keep himself above all phenomenal condi-
tions, and incessantly repeats " I am Brah-
man," " Soham '' — I am He, I am He. He
says within himself :

" I am neither mind, nor intellect, nor
ego, nor senses; I am neither earth, nor
water, nor air, nor fire, nor ether, but my
true nature is absolute existence, knowl-
edge, and bliss. I am He, I am He."

" I am neither the organic activity nor

am I the elements of the body, neith'^r the

118


JnSna Yoga

sense of knowledge nor that of action, but
I am absolute existence, knowledge, and
bliss. I am He, I am He.'*

" I have neither hatred nor love, neither
greed nor delusion, neither egotism nor
pride nor vanity, neither creed nor faith,
nor aim nor desire for freedom. I am
absolute existence, knowledge, and bliss.
I am He, I am He.'*

" I have neither virtue nor vice nor sin,
neither pleasure nor pain, neither Scrip-
tures nor rituals nor ceremonies. I am
neither food nor am I the eater. I am
absolute existence, knowledge, and bliss.
I am He, I am He.'*

" I have neither death nor fear of death,

nor birth nor caste distinction; nefther

father nor mother, neither friend nor foe,

neither master nor disciple. I am absolute

existence, knowledge, and bliss. I am He,

I am He."

119


How to be a Yogi


it


I have neither doubt nor question. I
am formless and all-pervading. I am the
eternal Lord of nature and the master of
the senses. I am neither bound nor free.
I am one with Brahman. I am the omni-
present Divinity, I am the immutable Lord
of all. I am absolute existence, knowl-
edge, and bliss. I am He, I am He."

Thus constantly practicing discrimina-
tion and rising above all relativity and phe-
nomenal appearances, a Jnana Yogi real-
izes the Absolute, Unchangeable, Eternal
Truth in this life and ultimately becomes
one with it ; because Jnana Yoga declares
that he who knows Brahman becomes
Brahman, for the same reason that the
knower of God can be no other than God
himself. A Jnana Yogi never forgets that
his true Self is Brahman. Having attained
to this supreme God-consciousness, he

lives in the world like an eternal witness of

120


Jnana Yoga

all mental and physical changes. Ever

happy and undisturbed, he travels from

place to place, pointing out to mankind the

way to absolute freedom and perfection.

A perfect Jnana Yogi, indeed, lives as the

embodiment of the Absolute Divinity on

this earth.

121


Science of Breathing


Science of Breathing

The Science of Yoga with its various
branches justly claims, as we have already-
seen, to unravel the mysteries of life and
death. Some of the advanced thinkers in
Western countries are beginning to under-
stand the importance of this noble science
and to explain the problems of existence
by it; but modern physiologists, anato-
mists, biologists, and medical practitioners^
are still uncertain as to the proper solution
of these problems; the more they investi-
gate, the more doubts arise in their minds.
Within the last fifty years the various re-
searches in the different departments of

science, such as physics, chemistry, physio-

125


How to be a Yogi

logy, and biology, have apparently ended
in the conclusion that life is nothing but
the result of physical and chemical actions
in the organic structure, that there is no
such thing as vital force distinct and
separate from the physical and chemical
forces which have been discovered in the
scientist's laboratory.

Some of the students of science are even
anxiously waiting in the vain expectation
that some day they will hear of the discov-
ery of a substance, artificially produced in
the laboratory, which will live, move, grow,
multiply, and die like a particle of living
matter. The majority of modern thinkers,
in fact, hold that vitality is merely the re-
sult of the mechanical activity of the or-
gans; that life comes directly from dead
matter, and obeys physical, chemical, and
mechanical laws; that a living animal is

nothing but a machine ; and that all of his

126


Science of Breathing

actions whether of body or mind are purely
mechanical. They say that a living pro-
toplasm is only a combination of certain
chemical elements, subject to ordinary
chemical laws; that living and non-living
are one ; and that the living comes directly
from the non-living. According to these
scientists a human being is no more than a
mechanical resultant of certain chemical
changes governed by the laws of physical
nature. If, however, we ask them what
force it is that determines these physical
and mechanical modifications, what is the
power that causes all these chemical
changes in such numberless varieties, they
answer that they do not know.

Are we really like machines, subject to
mechanical laws and nothing more? Is
our growth entirely due to the process of
accretion and aggregation of matter in the

non-living world? Are we merely some

127


How to be a Yogi

accidental precipitation, deposition, or
crystallization of atoms and molecules
which are governed by no power higher
than the chemico-physical forces? Stu-
dents of physiology now learn in their
text-books this physico-chemical theory
of the origin of life. They laugh at those
who use such expressions as " vital
energy," " vital force,'' " vitality," or *' life
force," in the sense of some power separate
and distinct from the physico-chemical
forces of nature. In fact, when they study
physiology they throw aside all ideas of
vitality or life force; they believe in a na-
ture devoid of vitality or life, and try to ex-
plain the formation of brain cells, nerves,
tissues, and the construction of the various
organs of a living animal without recogniz-
ing the existence of a vital agency. A re-
action, however, has taken place recently

in Europe, and a class of scientific thinkers

128


Science of Breathing

has appeared, Dr. Lionel S. Beale being
the most prominent, who, having found no
satisfactory explanation of life through
these theories, have, after closer observa-
tion and experiment, come to the conclu-
sion that there is a vital force entirely dis-
tinct from mechanical or physico-chemical
forces, and which manifests itself through
living particles of matter.

It is true that the human body is a
machine, but not like any machine made
by man. It is a self-moving, self-regulat-
ing, and self-adjusting, vital machine gov-
erned by will-power and intelligence. It
was produced by a germ of life which pos-
sessed vitality, and which had the capabil-
ity of becoming conscious, of willing,
thinking, and producing psychic activity,
in which are included all emotions and
thoughts belonging to a human being.

By a germ of life is meant that germ of

129


How to be a Yogi

matter or substance which contains the
potentiality of life and mind. Although
the manifestation of this vital force de-
pends upon organic structure, still it is not
the same as any of the familiar forces
known to us ; it is not like heat, electricity,
magnetism, or molecular attraction. On
the contrary, it is a force which governs
and directs all these grosser physical
forces. It is the director of the telegraphic
current which notifies the energy of the
muscle when and how to exert itself. It
coordinates all automatic movements, con-
trols the system as a whole as well as in
detail, and is itself the principle of purely
animal life. The special organ through
which it functions chiefly, and which has
been constructed to differentiate it from
other energies, to give it a form and a pur-
pose, and to afford it a vehicle of expres-
sion, is the spinal nerve of the vertebrate

130


Science of Breathing

and the equivalent organ in other animals.
This mysterious and invisible vital
energy or vital force is called in Sanskrit
" Prana." That branch of the Science
of Yoga which treats of this mysterious
force, describing its origin and nature, and
teaching how it can be controlled and
utilized to produce wonderful results, is
known as the Science of Prana. Ordinarily
it is translated into English by the word
" Breath," and called the *' Science of
Breath " ; but Prana is not simple breath.
In the Upanishads it is defined as the cause
of all motion and life in both the organic
and inorganic worlds. Wherever there is
the slightest expression of motion, life, or
mind, from the smallest atom, or animal-
cule, or amoeba, or bioplasm, up to the
largest solar system and the highest man,
it is the manifestation of the all-pervading

force called Prana. It is one, yet appears

131


How to be a Yogi

as manifold through its divers expressions.
It is the mother of all forces, psychical,
chemical, and physical. Vedanta Philos-
ophy describes it as the ultimate generali-
zation of the multiple forces of nature. It
is indestructible; the death of the form
through which it manifests cannot destroy
it; but it must not be confounded with
molecular attraction for it is much finer;
it cannot be seen, touched, weighed, meas-
ured, or captured by any means.

According to Vedanta, before the begin-
ning of creation the unconditioned causal
state of the universe contained potential
Prana ; Vedanta does not make the absurd
statement that life has come from non-life.
It does not admit that vital energy is the
result of mechanical forces, but, on the con-
trary, tells us that it is a force which oper-
ates simultaneously with physico-chemical

forces. They are all, in fact, expressions

132


Science of Breathing

of the one living energy of Prana. Al-
though some of the modem scientific
monists acknowledge that all matter and
force spring from a common source, or
from one eternal energy, still at the same
time they deny the existence of life or
vitality in that energy and declare that it is
not living. They try to prove that life is
the product of some kind of motion of
dead matter; while Vedanta teaches that
all the phenomena of the universe have
evolved out of the one eternal substance
which possesses Prana or cosmic vital
force, cosmic mind, cosmic intelligence,
and consciousness. These may be inter-
dependent, but as they all exist in a human
being, so the infinite variety of forces exist
in that one eternal living Being whose
body is the universe.

The Science of Yoga claims that this
Prana is the final cause of all the mani-

133


How to be a Yogi

fested forces of nature. Why does an atom
move and vibrate? A scientist does not
know, but a Yogi says because of Prana.
That force which produces vibration in an
atom or a molecule is one of the expres-
sions of the energy of Prana or the cosmic
Life-principle. The same Prana appears
as that power by which a germ of life
works on the physical plane, arouses
motion in the molecules of its cells and
builds up a suitable structure, repairs in-
juries and reproduces its kind. It causes
activity in a protoplasm, in a bioplasm or
an amoeba, as well as in the highest man.
It is closely related to the mind, which in-
cludes all the psychic activities and intelli-
gence displayed by that germ in the dif-
ferent grades of its evolution. Vital power
and mind are, indeed, two aspects of one
Prana. A germ of life possesses mentality
as well as vitality, and the phenomena of

134


Science of Breathing

these two aspects are most intimately con-
nected with one another. In the science of
Yoga the relation between mind and Prana
is described as that of a horse and a rider,
Prana being the horse which the individual
mind rides. The body moves like an auto-
mobile carriage when it is propelled from
within by the force of Prana and guided by
the driver of the intelligent mind. The
activity of the mechanism of the body
stops if Prana or vital force ceases to
vibrate. Again, when the vibration of
Prana is arrested, the mind no longer oper-
ates on the physical plane. It is for this
reason that vital force or Prana is called
the medium through which the mind ex-
presses its powers on the physical plane.

The animal organism is nothing but a
mechanism for the manifestation of the
powers of the soul. When the soul

wishes to express certain powers on

135


How to be a Yogi

the material plane it creates through
Prana some suitable organism to ful-
fill its desire. If the mental activities of
any living creature change, the organic
structure of the nerves and cells will also
change. Various experiments have been
made by different scientists which clearly
show that mental effort underlies all phy-
siological conditions and organic functions.
An abnormal activity of the mind will in-
variably give rise to certain pathological
conditions, because it will affect the vital
action; and when the vital power, which
gives life to every cell of the body, is in-
fluenced, the cells will begin to vibrate in
a different manner; and the result will be
abnormal activity in the cells of the
organs, which in turn will produce various
diseases. Conversely, when the vital activ-
ity is normal, the psychic function is also

natural. The mind is just as much affected

136


Science of Breathing

by a diseased body as the physical system

IS disturbed by a diseased mind. He who

can regulate his mentalities knows how to

preserve his vitality and keep a healthy

body; while he who has control over his

vital functions understands the secret of

keeping a healthy mind. The man who is

thus able to dominate both body and mind

IS the master of himself, the king in his

own conscious domain. But he who is

not the master of himself lives like a slave

to passion, to sense-objects, to wealth,

property, ambition, and all earthly desires.

Those who do not know how to regulate

their vital forces are always unhappy, for

they constantly suffer either mentally or

physically.

Every irregular activity of the mind will

produce chemical and physiological change

in the nerve centers, in the organs, and

eventually in the whole body. This can be

137


How to be a Yogi

shown by analyzing the chemical proper-
ties of the secretions of different organs,
and especially by analyzing the breath. If
we analyze the breath of a person who is
strongly moved by anger or any other vio-
lent passion, we shall find that his whole
system is poisoned for the time being. By
letting his breath pass through a certain
solution in a glass tube, we shall readily
see that distinct changes are produced in
the solution. These variations, further-
more, are only the outward signs of the
internal modifications that have taken
place in the entire nervous system. It is,
in fact, these organic changes that modify
the breath; but in a normal, healthy state
of mind and body the chemical solution will
remain perfectly unchanged. The breath-
ing IS then regular, deep, and strong.
Every impulse of passion that takes pos-
session of the mind, causes a correspond-

138


Science of Breathing

ing variation in the respiratory functions;
anger, hatred, or jealousy for instance, are
marked by short, quick breath, while
thoughts of peace, of true happiness, and
of divine love produce long, deep breath.

There are various ways of learning the
relation that exists between vital activity
and mentality. A Yogi says that all ab-
normal and diseased conditions of the body
are caused directly by imperfect or weak
expression of the vital energy, and in-
directly by improper mental activity. The
curing of a disease, therefore, means the
removing of the obstacles which prevent
the Prana from working in an absolutely
normal way. This can be done either by
physical processes or by regulating the
mental functions. A Yogi heals disease in
himself by increasing the vital action; by
rousing the latent powers of the Prana,

which is the source of all life force. He

139


How to be a Yogi

knows how to fill his whole body, nay,
every cell, with increased vitality. By reg-
ulating the polarity of the cells through the
higher vibrations of Prana he generates a
strong current of vibratory Prana, directs
its course through the disordered cells of
his organs, and changes the structure of
these cells by creating a rapid circulation
of the blood charged with the healing
power of Prana, and sending it to the parts
affected. In this way the cells are restored
to their normal condition and the disease is
cured. The Yogi does this consciously
and in the most scientific manner with the
help of breathing exercises accompanied
by concentration. According to the Sci-
ence of Yoga all nervous currents and
all molecular motion in the brain cells and
nerve centers are caused by this Prana. If
the molecules of the cells be filled with a

new and strong current of Prana or vital

140


Science of Breathing

force, their vibration will be enormously
increased; and this will enable them to
throw off the impure matter that retarded
their natural activity, and recover their
normal healthy condition.

The same Prana is also the propelling
power in circulation. A Yogi says that
the vital energy is stored up in the nerve
centers of the spinal cord. It is the cause
of the motion of the lungs, which in turn
produces respiration; and respiration is
the cause of the circulation of the blood
and of all other organic activity. Modern
physiology tells us that every portion of
our body, every tissue and cell breathes;
that the lung is nothing more than an in-
strument in the respiratory process, the
chemical operation, which is the essential
part of this function, occurring elsewhere
in the cells and tissues themselves. The

lung is only the door through which

141


How to be a Yogi

oxygen enters the system. The physiol-
ogists of the eighteenth century held quite
different views ; even the father of modern
chemistry, Lavoisier himself (i 743-1 794),
supposed that the main act of respiration
took place in the lungs. What really hap-
pens is that oxygen, introduced into the
lungs, filters through the thin walls of the
pulmonary capillaries, where it finds in the
red corpuscles of the blood a substance
called hemoglobin, with which it unites to
form a compound known as oxy-hemo-
globin. And a very unstable compound it
is, for throughout the tissues, in the capil-
lary vessels of the whole body, oxygen is
allowed to escape freely and to effect its
work upon the cells. The blood, there-
fore, is merely a vehicle. The " organic
combustions " do not occur in the lungs,
their seat being in the cells and tissues

throughout the whole system.

142


Science of Breathing

Physiological chemistry tells us that all
things mineral, vegetable, and animal, are
mainly composed of four principal ele-
ments — oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, and
nitrogen. Of these oxygen is of the
greatest importance, since it is the most
widely diffused, constituting by weight
one-fifth of the atmosphere, eight-ninths of
the ocean and all water, nearly one-half of
solid rock and of every solid substance, and
more than one-half of all vegetables and
animals. If a man weighs one hundred
and fifty pounds, one hundred and ten of
his weight is oxygen. It is the chief cause
of all activity in mechanical, chemical, mus-
cular, and mental forces. The amount of
energy or activity of an animal is deter-
mined by the amount of oxygen he re-
spires ; and the degree of force manifested
in the human organism is in proportion to

the rate at which oxygen is introduced into

143


How to be a Yogi

the system. It is the first requisite of vital
action. Without it all other materials of
life will be of little avail ; and the respira-
tory organs are the medium through which
it enters the system. The blood which has
been once used in our bodies would be of
no further service if it were not purified by
the lungs. Ordinarily air when inhaled,
contains 21 per cent oxygen, and when
exhaled, 12 per cent, having lost 9 per
cent. In a healthy adult man the average
pulsation is 75 in a minute and about two
ounces of blood are driven by each pulsa-
tion from the heart to the lungs, or nine
pounds and six ounces in a minute. The
quantity of blood in the human body is
considered to be about one-fifth of the
weight of the entire body, or twenty-eight
pounds in a man weighing one hundred
and forty pounds. The full quantity of

blood in the system will, therefore, flow

144


Science of Breathing

through the lungs in the short period of
three minutes; in other words, the vast
amount of thirteen thousand five hundred
pounds in every twenty-four hours.

It is well known now that as a rule only
one-sixth of the full capacity of the lungs
is used; if the remaining five-sixths were
properly brought into play who can say
what marvellous results might not follow?
Nature has not given capacity to any
organ without a purpose ; and we are sure
that, if every one were to use the full capac-
ity of his lungs, weak or diseased lungs
would be a thing of the past. If we under-
stand the science of breathing, we can
develop our lung power to its utmost
capacity; then by well-regulated breathing
exercises we can purify every particle of
matter in the cells of the organs, and with
the help of the current of Prana can ulti-
mately drive out all physical weakness.

145


How to be a Yogi

Faith-healers, mental-healers, and Chris-
tian Scientists cure disease without giving
drugs ; the Yogis of India do the same, but
in a more scientific manner. Faith-healers
and Christian Scientists ask us to believe in
a certain thing and to declare that we are
not suffering. A Yogi says that we can
get better and surer results if through
breathing exercises we can control the
Prana, increase the vital current, and fill
the whole system with the healing power of
Prana. By polarizing the activity of the
cells, and removing the obstacles that pre-
vent the proper manifestation of the vital
current in those cells, we shall get rid of
the disease. If mental-healers and faith-
healers knew the secret of controlling the
Prana, they would have been undoubtedly
more successful in their attempts. Some
among them are now beginning to take up

breathing exercises, and perhaps in time

146


Science of Breathing

they will learn the truths contained in the
wonderful science of breathing.

Generally people who know nothing of
this science think that it teaches merely
the mechanical process of breathing in and
out; but its province is much more ex-
tended, for it likewise shows how to con-
trol the Prana, how to increase the vitality
of the system by generating new nerve
currents of a higher order, how to polarize
the vibration of the cells, and how to
awaken those powers which lie dormant
on the sub-conscious plane as well as
in the nerve centers of the spine. It also
tells us that when the powers begin to
manifest, we rise above the influences and
changes to which ordinary mortals are sub-
ject. India is the only country where from
ancient times this science of breathing has
been carefully studied in all its aspects by

the Yogis. Through centuries of investi-

147


How to be a Yogi

gation they discovered different methods
of regulating the breath, following which
marvellous results, both mental and phy-
sical, could be obtained. Out of these
various discoveries grew up the science of
breathing, which, besides the control of the
breath, also explains what relation the pro-
cess of respiration bears to Prana, and
how, by harmonizing the vibrations of
nerve cells with the higher laws of life
force, one gains mastery over Prana. This
control of Prana brings complete subjuga-
tion of all the forces which govern the
mind and body.

The aim of a Yogi is to establish abso-
lute harmony between his vital actions and
his mental functions, to transcend all laws,
to rise above the influence of all environ-
mental conditions, and to be the supreme
ruler of the mind and of the entire system.

According to the Yogi, this perfect self-

148


Science of Breathing

mastery and consequent freedom do not
come to one who has has not learned the
secret of regulating the vital energy, and
who has not acquired the power to direct
it wherever it is needed. Before anyone
can control this invisible vital force, he
must know its principal seat in the body;
he must learn where this unseen king of
physical activities is enthroned, who are his
attendants, and how he governs his king-
dom.

A Yogi says that the king or Prana re-
sides with his attendants in the nerve cen-
ters of the spinal column. These centers
are the main stations where this vital force
is stored. There are many centers in the
spinal cord out of which proceed the motor
and sensory nerves which cover the whole
body, including its organs. All sensations
and motions of the limbs depend upon

these nerve centers in the spinal column

149


How to be a Yogi

and the brain. There are two currents
which flow in and out of the brain throug^h
the spinal column and nerves; they are
called afferent and efferent currents — in
Sanskrit, "Ida" and " Pingala." They
run through the anterior and posterior
channels of the spinal cord, and these fur-
nish the two paths over which the currents
of Prana travel. The nervous energy itself
being scattered throughout the system,
the only means of regulating it is by con-
trolling the principal centers or stations in
the spinal column. If, therefore, any one
wishes to control the Prana, he must first
learn to govern the chief stations through
which it works. After studying the rela-
tion of these different centers the Yogis
found that there were six of primary im-
portance. Those who wish to know their
names can refer to the volume on " Raja

Yoga " by the Swami Vivekananda.

150


Science of Breathing

According to the science of breath, the
King of these six leading nerve centers in
the spinal cord is enthroned in the center
opposite the thorax; it is the respiratory
center and in Sanskrit bears the name
" Anahata." It moves the lungs, causes
respiration, and gives activity to all the
other centers, which are dependent on it.
If the royal center is disturbed or vibrates
abnormally, those which are subject to it,
and through them the whole system will
act in a corresponding manner; and the
result will be disease, organic trouble, or
continued ill-health. So long, however,
as the royal center is in a normal con-
dition, the movement of the lungs which
causes inspiration and expiration will be
regular. Therefore the Yogi who desires
to subjugate the nerve centers first strives
to gain control over the respiratory center.

The science of breathing teaches that, by

151


How to be a Yogi

regulating the breath, the motion of the
lungs and the functions of the whole
nervous system can be regulated. It also
says that, by controlling the nerve centers
in the spinal column, mastery over the cur-
rents flowing throughout the system, and
ultimately over the mind itself, with its
various dormant powers, can be easily
gained. If the mental powers that are now
latent on the subconscious plane can be
aroused, all the experiences of past incar-
nations, and the impressions gathered dur-
ing previous lives, will come up on the con-
scious plane and we shall remember them
all.

The Yogis say that the great majority of
people breathe irregularly and that there
are differences in the breathings of men
and women. The causes of this irregular
breathing are many — food, drink, fear,
sickness, sorrow, nervous excitement, pas-

152


Science of Breathing

sion, anxiety. These do not affect the
breath directly, but they do influence it in-
directly by producing abnormal activity of
Prana, first in the nerve centers, then in the
movement of the lungs, which expresses
outwardly as irregular breathing. Hence
irregularity of the breath is the external
sign of abnormal action of the respiratory
center in the spine.

A Yogi whose respiratory center func-
tions regularly and is under perfect con-
trol is free from weakness, ill-health, and
all disease. As, by controlling the activity
of Prana in the nerve centers, the move-
ment of the lungs and the respiration are
regulated, so, conversely, by regulating the
breath, the lungs and nerve centers will be
controlled, for they work simultaneously.
Those who are suffering from ill-health
should devote especial attention to the

study of the science of breathing, as it is

153


How to be a Yogi

absolutely necessary- to the building up of
a healthy mind and a healthy body.

The chief aim of a Yogi is to observe his
own nature closely and to learn clearly
what forces are operating in his system,
and what relation they bear to one another ;
for by gaining a complete knowledge of his
own nature he will gain correct knowledge
of the whole universe, since the laws that
govern the human body are universal. All
these laws are nothing but the modes in
which Prana operates in nature. There-
fore a Yogi seeks first to understand the
individual Prana and the vital laws which
govern his own system.

In India this fact was recognized and the
science of breathing was carefully studied
by the sages, who had no other ambition
or purpose in life than to acquire knowl-
edge for its own sake. They explained

this science, practiced breathing exercises

154


Science of Breathing

(noting the results), and instructed their
pupils, but not to make a profession of it,
or to earn money, or to gain fame in
society. On the contrary, they refused to
teach those who came to learn for profes-
sional ends; and it is because of this dis-
interestedness on their part that the knowl-
edge of the Yogis is so pure and unadul-
terated by ambition or selfish motives.
They also realized the dangers which might
arise from ignorant practice of these exer-
cises. Those who are studying under in-
experienced teachers should be on their
guard, for there is great risk in letting the
nerve currents flow in a wrong direction.
It may produce abnormal results and
may even end in mental disorder. Right
breathing, on the contrary, brings the
greatest benefits to mankind when prop-
erly practiced; but if it is abused it must

do a corresponding amount of harm, just

155


How to be a Yogi

as any medicine will when improperly ap-
plied. As by studying Materia Medica a
man cannot cure himself without the aid
of a trained physician, so the mere study
of Yoga cannot bring about truly good
results unless it is carried on under the
guidance of an experienced Yogi. It
should be remembered, furthermore, that
in a written book everything is not given,
that each constitution is different from
every other, and that that which is helpful
to one may not be so to another.

Anyone who practices faithfully, accord-
ing to the instructions of an experienced
living teacher, will surely gain highly bene-
ficial results both in mind and body. He
will learn how to manufacture vital force
and to increase the vitality of his whole
organism. He will be able to remove all
impurities from his system and to over-
come all abnormal and diseased conditions,

156


Science of Breathing

that is, where decomposition and disorgan-
ization have not advanced too far. He
will likewise no longer be a victim to cold,
chills. Grip, fever, rheumatism, stiffness of
the joints or muscles, paralysis, and other
ills; for he knows how he can remove
them by increasing the vibrations of Prana
and thus giving new life to the cells of the
organs.

Every individual, whether old or young,
man or woman, is bound to get some re-
sult if the breathing exercises be practiced
faithfully for six months. By breathing
exercises, however, is not meant here
merely deep breathing, such as is taught
by teachers of music, Delsarte, or physical
culture. Deep breathing is very good for
drawing a full supply or oxygen into the
system, and undoubtedly has its value, es-
pecially for women who wear tight dresses.

Many of the diseases from which they

167


How to be a Yogi

suffer are directly traceable to a lack of
the adequate quantity of oxygen necessary
for organic combustion and for the main-
tenance of the activity of the organs. The
organs of many people in this country are
undeveloped, or abnormally developed, be-
cause of the unnatural clothes worn; and
for all such deep breathing will be exceed-
ingly beneficial. But too much of it is in-
jurious, as it inflates and strains the lungs,
and, if continued, the increased develop-
ment of the tissues will after a time decay
and produce various troubles. Those who
are taking lessons in deep breathing from
inexperienced teachers should stop to con-
sider this. By breathing exercises we mean
that process by which control over the mo-
tion of the lungs and of the nerve centers,
as also, in the end, over the Prana or vital
energy can be acquired.

A Yogi declares that the practice of

158


Science of Breathing

breathing will bring whatever result is
desired, whether physical, psychical, or spi-
ritual. He who has gained perfect control
over his breath can suspend it for hours,
and through this generate a power in the
system which will levitate the body, even
counteracting the tremendous force of
gravitation. A Yogi conquers death by
the control of Prana. There are many
Yogis in India who can tell the exact
moment when they will leave their bodies.
They say, " I am going to depart on such a
day at such an hour," and at the appointed
time consciously give up their bodies in the
presence of many. There are some again
who can prolong life indefinitely, and can
subsist for long periods without taking any
kind of solid or liquid food.

When so much can be accomplished

through the control of the vital energy of

159


How to be a Yogi

Prana, it is not strange that these Masters
say to the world :

" Oh, ye mortals, study the science of
breathing; learn the secret of controlling
Prana or the vital energy ; strive diligently
to regulate the breath; for the control of
Prana will bring all happiness, earthly and
spiritual, and through it will come perfect
health, mastery of the body, and that Su-
preme Bliss which is eternal and everlast-
ing.

160


Was Christ a Yogi?


Was Christ a Yogi?

In considering whether or not Christ
was a Yogi we should first understand how
spiritual and how divine one must be be-
fore he can be called a Yogi. A true Yogi
must be pure, chaste, spotless, self-sacrific-
ing, and the absolute master of himself.
Humility, unostentatiousness, forgiveness,
uprightness, and firmness of purpose must
adorn his character. A true Yogi's mind
should not be attached to sense-objects or
sense-pleasures. He should be free from
egotism, pride, vanity, and earthly ambi-
tion. Seeing the ephemeral nature of the
phenomenal world, and reflecting upon

the misery, suffering, gorrow, and disease

163


How to be a Yogi

with which our earthly existence is beset,
he should renounce his attachment to ex-
ternal things, which produce but fleeting
sensations of pleasure, and should over-
come all that clinging to worldly life which
is so strong in ordinary mortals.

A true Yogi does not feel happy when
he is in the company of worldly-minded
people who live on the sense plane like
animals. He is not bound by family ties.
He does not claim that this is his wife and
these are his children; but, on the con-
trary, having realized that each individual
soul, being a child of Immortal Bliss, be-
longs to the Divine Family, he severs all
family relations and worldly connections
and thus becomes absolutely free. A true
Yogi must always preserve his equanimity
in the face of the unpleasant as well as of
the pleasant experiences of life; and ris-
ing above good and evil he should remain

164


Was Christ a Yogi?

undisturbed by the success or failure, the
victory or defeat, which may come to him
as the result of the actions of his body and
mind.

A true Yogi, again, must have unswerv-
ing devotion to the Supreme Spirit, the
Almighty and Omniscient Soul of our
souls; and realizing that his body and
mind are the playground of the omnipotent
Cosmic will, be should resign his individual
will to -the universal, and should be ever
ready to work for others, to live for others,
and to die for others. All his works, so
long as he is in the society of people,
should be a free offering to the world for
the good of humanity; but at other times
he should resort to secluded places and live
alone, constantly applying his mind to the
highest spiritual wisdom that can be ob-
tained in the state of superconsciousness,

through meditation on the oneness of the

165


How to be a Yogi

individual soul with God, the Universal
Spirit.

A true Yogi must see the same Divinity
dwelling in all living creatures. He should
also love all human beings equally. He
should have neither friend nor foe in the
ordinary sense of those terms. A true
Yogi is illumined by the light of Divine
Wisdom, therefore nothing remains un-
known to him. Time and space cannot
limit the knowledge and wisdom of a true
Yogi. Past and future events will appear
to him like things happening before his
eyes. For him the light of divine wisdom
has dispelled the darkness of ignorance,
which prevents one from realizing the true
nature of the soul, and which makes one
selfish, wicked, and sinful. All psychic and
spiritual powers serve him as their real
master. Whatever he says is sure to come

to pass. He never utters a word in vain.

166


Was Christ a Yogi ?

If he says to a distressed or suffering per-
son, " Be thou whole," instantly that per-
son will become whole.

The powers of a true Yogi are unlimited,
there is nothing in the world that he can-
not do. Indeed, he alone has free access
to the storehouse of infinite po>yers; but
he never draws therefrom any force merely
to satisfy idle curiosity, or to gratify selfish
motives, or to gain wealth and fame, or to
get any return whatsoever. He does not
seek worldly prosperity, and always re-
mains unconcerned about the result of his
works. Praise or censure does not disturb
the peace of his mind. Angels or bright
spirits and the spirits of ancestors rejoice
in his company and adore liim. A true
Yogi is worshipped by all. Having neither
home nor possessions of his own, he
wanders from place to place, realizing that

the canopy of heaven is the roof of his

167


How to be a Yogi

world-wide home. He is easily pleased by
everybody irrespective of his caste, creed,
or nationality, and with a loving heart he
blesses those who rebuke or curse him. If
his body be tortured or cut in pieces, he
takes no revenge, but, on the contrary,
prays for the welfare of his persecutor.
Such is the character of a true Yogi.

From ancient times there have been
many such true Yogis in India and other
countries. The descriptions of their lives
and deeds are furthermore as wonderful
and as authentic as the life and acts of that
illustrious Son of Man who preached in
Galilee nearly two thousand years ago.
The powers and works of this meek, gen-
tle, and self-sacrificing Divine man, who is
worshipped throughout Christendom as
the ideal Incarnation of God and the
Saviour of mankind, have proved that he

was a perfect type of one who is called in

168


Was Christ a Yogi ?

India a true Yogi. Jesus the Christ has
been recognized by his disciples and fol-
lowers not only as an exceptionally unique
character but as the only-begotten Son of
God ; and it is quite natural for those who
know nothing about the lives and deeds of
similar ideal characters of great Yogis and
Incarnations of God who have flourished
at different times both before and after the
Christian era, to believe that no one ever
reached such spiritual heights or attained
to such realization of oneness with the
Heavenly Father as did Jesus of Nazareth.
The greater portion of the life of Jesus
is absolutely unknown to us; and as He
did not leave behind Him any systematic
teaching regarding the method by which
one may attain to that state of God-con-
sciousness which He Himself reached,
there is no way of finding out what He did

or practiced during the eighteen years that

169


How to be a Yogi

elapsed before His appearance in public.
It is, therefore, extremely difficult to form
a clear conception of what path He
adopted. But we can imagine that, being
born with unusually developed spiritual in-
clinations. He must have devoted his life
and time to such practices as led Him to
the realization of absolute Truth and to
the attainment of divine consciousness,
which ultimately gave Him a place among
the greatest spiritual leaders of the world
as well as among the disinterested Saviours
of mankind.

India is the only country where not only
a complete system of practices is to be
found, but also a perfect method, by fol-
lowing which well-qualified aspirants can
attain to Christhood or to that spirit-
ual unfoldment and divine enlightenment
which made Jesus of Nazareth stand be-
fore the world as the ideal type of spiritual

170


Was Christ a Yogi?

perfection. By studying the lives, the acts,
and the most systematic and scientific
teachings of the great Yogis of India, and
by faithfully following their example and
precepts, an earnest disciple can, through
the Yoga practices given in the various
branches of the Vedanta philosophy, hope
some day to become as perfect as the Son
of Man. This assurance must be a com-
fort and a consolation to the soul that is
struggling for the attainment of spiritual
perfection in this life. One peculiarity,
however, of the teachings of the great
Yogis of India is that the acquirement of
spiritual perfection is the goal for all, and
that each individual soul is bound, sooner
or later, to be perfect even as Christ was
perfect. They claim that spiritual truths
and spiritual laws are as universal as the
truths and laws of the material world, and

that the realization of these truths cannot

171


How to bp a Yogi

be confined to any particular time, place,
or personality. Consequently by studying
the Science of Yoga anyone can easily un-
derstand the higher laws and principles, an
application of which will explain the mys-
teries connected with the lives and deeds
of saints, sages, or Incarnations of God,
like Krishna, Buddha, or Christ.

A genuine seeker after Truth does not
limit his study to one particular example,
but looks for similar events in the lives of
all the great ones, and does not draw any
conclusion until he has discovered the uni-
versal law which governs them all. For
instance, Jesus the Christ said, " I and my
Father are one." Did He alone say it, or
did many others who lived before and
after Him and who knew nothing of
His sayings, utter similar expressions ?
Krishna declared, " I am the Lord of the

universe." Buddha said, " I am the Abso-

172


Was Christ a Yogi ?

lute Truth/' A Mahometan Sufi says, " I
am He " ; while every true Yogi declares,
" I am Brahman/* So long as we do not
understand the principle that underlies
such sayings, they seem mysterious to us
and we cannot grasp their real meaning;
but when we have realized the true nature
of the individual soul, and its relation to
the universal Spirit, or God, or Father in
Heaven, or the Absolute Truth, we have
learned the principle and there is no fur-
ther mystery about it. We are then sure
that whosoever reaches this state of spirit-
ual oneness or God-consciousness will ex-
press the same thought in a similar man-
ner. Therefore if we wish to understand
the character and miraculous deeds of
Jesus of Nazareth, the surest way open to
us is the study of the Science of Yoga and
the practice of its methods.

This Science of Yoga, as has already

173


How to be a Yogi

been stated, explains all mysteries, reveals
the causes of all miracles, and describes the
laws which govern them. It helps us to
unravel the secrets of nature and to dis-
cover the origin of such phenomena as are
called miraculous. All miracles like " walk-
ing on the sea," " feeding a multitude with
a small quantity of food," " raising the
dead," which we read of in the life of Jesus,
are described by the Yogis as manifesta-
tions of the powers that are acquired
through long practice of Yoga. These"
powers are not supernatural; on the con-
trary, they are in nature, are governed by
natural though higher laws, and are there-
fore universal. When these laws are un-
derstood, that which is ordinarily called
miraculous by ignorant people, appears to
be the natural result of finer forces work-
ing on a higher plane. There is no such

thing as the absolutely supernatural. If

174


Was Christ a Yogi ?

a person's conception of nature be very
limited, that which exists beyond that limit
will seem to him supernatural, while to
another, whose idea of nature is broader,
the same thing will appear perfectly nat-
ural; therefore that miracle, or that par-
ticular act which is classed as a miracle by
a Christian, can be explained by a Yogi
as the result of higher or finer forces of
nature. Why? Because his conception of
nature is much wider than that of an ordin-
ary man. We must not forget that nature
is infinite, and that there are circles within
circles, grades beyond grades, planes after
planes, arranged in infinite succession ; and
the desire of a Yogi is to learn all the laws
which govern these various planes, and to
study every manifestation of force, whether
fine or gross. His mind is not satisfied

with the knowledge of one particular plane

175


How to be a Yogi

of existence ; his aim is to comprehend the
whole of nature.

Those who have read the gospel of
Buddha, by Paul Carus, will remember
that, five hundred years before the birth of
Jesus the Christ, Shariputra, Buddha's
illustrious disciple, walked on the surface
of the water across a mighty river named
Shravasti. A similar account of crossing a
wide river by walking on the water, we
find in the life of Padmapada, the disciple
of Sankaracharya, the best exponent of the
Vedanta philosophy, who lived about 600
A.D. Krishna, the Hindu Christ, whose
other name is Lord of the Yogis, raised
the dead nearly fourteen hundred years
before the advent of Christ. The trans-
figuration of Krishna is likewise most
beautifully described in the tenth and
eleventh chapters of the " Song Celestial,'*

and, like Christ, he also fed a vast multi-

176


Was Christ a Yogi ?

tude of people with a small quantity of
food. There are other instances of similar
powers shown by great Yogis who came
later; and these accounts are in every
way as historical and as authentic as those
of Jesus the Christ. Thus we see that all
the miracles performed by Jesus are to be
found as well in the lives of Hindu Yogis,
who lived both before and after Him.

So long as an event is isolated it ap-
pears supernatural and miraculous; but if
we see the same thing happening elsewhere
under similar conditions, it assumes the as-
pect of a natural occurrence governed by
natural law, and then comes a proper solu-
tion of the mystery as well as the
rational explanation of that which was
called a miracle. It is in this that the
Science of Yoga renders especial service to
the world, for more than any science it

helps to reveal the secrets of nature and

177


How to be a Yogi

to explain the causes of all miraculous
deeds.

A true Yogi goes to the source of all
power and of all forces, studies the laws
behind them, and learns the method of
controlling them. He knows that the
various forces of nature are but expres-
sions of one universal, living, intelli-
gent energy, which is called in Sanskrit
" Prana." He sees that all the forces of
physical nature, like heat, gravitation,
electricity, as also all mental forces such as
mind, intellect, thought, are nothing but
the manifestations of that one living self-
existent force, " Prana." This intelligent
energy projects from its bosom innumer-
able suns, moons, stars, and planets into
physical space. It has hurled this earth
from the molten furnace of the sun, it has
cooled it, bathed it in air and water, and

clothed it with vegetable and animal life;

178


Was Christ a Yogi ?

it wings the atmosphere with clouds and
spans the planes with rivers, it takes a fine
minute substance and transforms it into
something huge and gross; it moves the
body, gives life and motion to every atom
and molecule, and at the same time mani-
fests itself as thought and intellect.

Why should it be impossible for one who
has realized his oneness with this fountain-
head of all power, who has learned the
method of controlling all phenomena by
comprehending the laws which govern
them, and who has become the master of
the world as was Jesus the Christ, to per-
form simple phenomena like walking on
the sea, turning water into wine, or raising
the dead ? According to a true Yogi these
acts of Jesus the Christ were only a few ex^
pressions of the Yoga powers which have
been exercised over and over again by the

Yogis in India. Thus we understand that

179


How to be a Yogi

Qirist was one of these great Yogis bom
in a Semitic family.

Jesus was a great Yogi because He
realized the transitory and ephemeral nat-
ure of the phenomenal world, and, dis-
criminating the real from the unreal, re-
nounced all desire for worldly pleasures
and bodily comforts. Like a great Yogi
He lived a life of seclusion, cutting off all
connections with earthly friends and rela-
tives, and having neither home nor posses-
sions of His own.

Jesus the Christ was a great Karma
Yogi, because He never worked for re-
sults ; He had neither desire for name nor
ambition for fame or for earthly pros-
perity. His works were a free offering to
the world. He labored for others, devoted
His whole life to help others, and in the
end died for others. Being unattached to

the fruits of His actions, He worked inces-

180


Was Christ a Yogi ?

santly for the good of His fellow-men,
directing them to the path of righteousness
and spiritual realization through unselfish
works. He understood the law of action
and reaction, which is the fundamental
principle of Karma Yoga, and it was for
this reason that He declared, "Whatso-
ever a man soweth, that shall he also
reap."

Jesus of Nazareth proved Himself to be
a great Bhakti Yogi, a true lover of God,
by His unswerving devotion and His whole-
hearted love for the Heavenly Father. His
unceasing prayers, incessant supplications,
constant meditation, and unflinching self-
resignation to the will of the Almighty
made Him shine like a glorious morning-
star in the horizon of love and devotion of
a true Bhakti Yogi. Christ showed won-
derful self-control and mastery over His

mind throughout the trials and sufferings

181


How to be a Yogi

which were forced upon Him. His sorrow,
agony, and self-surrender at the time of
His death as well as before His crucifixion,
are conclusive proofs that He was a human
being with those divine qualities which
adorn the soul of a true Bhakti Yogi It
is true that His soul labored for a while
under the heavy burden of His trials and
sufferings ; it is also true that He felt that
His pain was becoming wellnigh unbear-
able when He cried aloud three times,
praying to the Lord, " O my Father, if it
be possible, let this cup pass from me."
But He found neither peace nor consola-
tion until He could absolutely resign His
will to that of the Father and could say
from the bottom of His heart, " Thy will be
done." Complete self-surrender and abso-
lute self-resignation are the principal vir-
tues of Bhakti Yoga, and as Christ pos-
sessed these to perfection up to the last

188


Was Christ a Yogi ?

moment of His life, He was a true Bhakti
Yogi.

Like the great Raja Yogis in India,
Jesus knew the secret of separating His
soul from His physical shell, and He
showed this at the time of His death,
while His body was suffering from ex-
treme pain, by saying, " Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do." It
is quite an unusual event to see one im-
ploring forgiveness for his persecutors
while dying on the cross, but from a Yogi's
point of view it is both possible and nat-
ural. Ramakrishna, the greatest Yogi of
the nineteenth century, whose life and say-
ings have been written by Max MuUer, was
once asked, " How could Jesus pray for
His persecutors when He was in agony on
the cross? " Ramakrishna answered by
an illustration: "When the shell of

an ordinary green cocoanut is pierced

183


How to be a Yogi

through, the nail enters the kernel of the
nut too. But in the case of the dry nut
the kernel becomes separate from the
shell, and so when the shell is pierced, the
kernel is not touched. Jesus was like the
dry nut, i.e.. His inner soul was separate
from His physical shell, and consequently
the sufferings of the body did not affect
him." * Therefore He could pray for the
forgiveness of His persecutors even when
His body was suffering ; and all true Yogis
are able to do the same. There have been
many instances of Yogis whose bodies
have been cut into pieces, but their souls
never for a moment lost that peace and
equanimity which enabled Jesus to forgive
and bless His persecutors. By this Christ
proved that, like other Yogis, His soul was
completely emancipated from the bondage

♦See "The Life and Sayings of RILmakrishna/' by
Prof. F. Max MuUer. Published by Charles Scribners' Sons,
New York. P. iii.

184


Was Christ a Yogi ?

of the body and of the feelings. Therefore
Christ was a Yogi.

Through the path of devotion and love
Jesus attained to the realization of the one-
ness of the individual soul with the Father
or the Universal Spirit, which is the ideal
of a Jnana Yogi as well as the ultimate goal
of all religions. A Jnana Yogi says : " I
am He " ; "I am Brahman " ; " I am the
Absolute Truth " ; " I am one with the Su-
preme Deity." By good works, by devo-
tion, love, concentration, contemplation,
long fasting, and prayer, Jesus the Christ
realized that His soul was one with God,
therefore He may be said to have attained
the ideal of Jnana Yoga.

Like Krishna, Buddha, and all other

great Yogis of India, Jesus healed the sick,

opened the eyes of the blind, made the

lame walk, and read the secret thoughts of

His disciples. He knew exactly what Judas

185


How to be a Yogi

and Peter were going to do; but there
was nothing supernatural in any of His ac-
tions, there was nothing that cannot be
done again over and over by a true Yogi,
and there was nothing in His life that
cannot be explained rationally by the
Science of Yoga and the Philosophy of
Vedanta. Without the help of this science
and this philosophy Jesus the Christ caiv-
not be fully understood and appreciated.
By studying His character, on the other
hand, in the light of the Vedanta Phil-
osophy we shall be able not only to under-
stand Him better, but to have a larger
appreciation of His true glory.

Material science now scoffs at His
miracles, but they are corroborated by the
Science of Yoga and confirmed by the
deeds of the great Yogis of India. No
devout Christian need for a moment fear

that physical science can ever undermine

186


Was Christ a Yogi ?

the work of Jesus so long as the Science
of Yoga is there to sustain all that He did.
Let him study the character of Jesus
through the Philosophy of Vedanta and I
am sure that he will understand Him bet-
ter and be a truer Christian, a more
genuine disciple of the Son of Man than
ever before. Let him follow the teach-
ings of Yoga and he will some day be-
come perfect like Christ.

It is through the teachings of Vedanta
that the Hindus have learned how to
glorify the character of Jesus ; so also it is
through Vedanta that a Christian will learn
to adore the great Yogis like Krishna,
Buddha, Ramakrishna, and others. It is
through Vedanta that a Christian will be
able to see how Divinity dwells in all
animate and inanimate objects, and thus
comprehending the true relation of the

individual soul to the Supreme Spirit,

187


How to be a Yogi

will be enabled to say with the great Yogi

Jesus the Christ, " I and my Father are

one/' and reach salvation in this life.

188


How to be a Yogi. (^^'^^^ Edition.)

BY SWAMI ABHEDANANDA

I Introductory. III. Science of Breathing.

11. What is Yoga? IV. Was Clirist a Yogi?

lamo, i88 pages. Portrait of author, frontispiece.

" For Christians interested in foreign missions this book Is of
moment, as showing (he method of reasoning; which ihey nm^it be
prepared to meet if they are to influence the educated Hindu. To
the Orientalist, and the philosopher also, the book is not without
mteresi. . . . SwSmi Abhedinanda preaches no mushroom creed
and no Eurasian hybrid ' Iheosophy.' He aims to give us a com-
pendious account of Voga. Clearly aod admirably be performs his
usk. In form the little boolc iseicellent, and its English style is
good," — NaoYark Timis Saturday Revifw 0/ Books, Dec. 6, 190J,

" ' How to be a Yogi' is a little volume that makes very interest-
Ing reading. The book conuins the directions that must be fol-
lowed in physical as well as in mental training by one who wbhea
to haye full and perfect control of all hia powers." — Record
Htrald, Chicago, Feb. 28, 1903.

" The Swim! writes in a dear, direct manner. His chapter on
Breath will elicit more than ordinary attention, as there is much in
It that will firove helpful. The book makes a valuable addition to
Vedanta Fhilosophj." — Mind, June, 1903.

"The book Is calculated to interest the student of Oriental
thought and farailiariie the unread with one of the Erealest philo-
uphical lyslems of the world." — Buffalo Courier, Nov, 33, 190%

" ' How to be a Yogi ' practically sums up the whole science of
VedanU Philosophy. The term Yogi is lucidly defined and a full

highest spiritual development. The methods and practices of Y(^a
arc interestingly set forth, and not the least important teaching of
the book is the assertion of how great a Vogi was Jesus of Naz-
areth." — Tht Bookseller, NtvjsdKiler and Stationer, Jan. 15, 1903.
" This book is well worth a careful reading. Condensed, yet
tijear and concise, it fills one with the desire to eii.aiaie these Yogis
ki »"»'"'"g Bpitinul pufactioD." — Unity, Kmiai Cil7, Dtc., igoa.

TTOTBt Postage is subject to Parcel Post rates according to zones

All orders received by and money orders and cbecks made
payable to

VEDANTA ASHRAMA


Great Saviors of the World

rvoi. I.)
A NEW BOOK

BY

SWAMI ABHEDANANDA


CONTENTS.

L Great Saviors of the World (Introductory.)
II. Krishna and His Teachings.

III. Zoroaster and His Teachings.

IV. Lao-Tze and His Teachings.

"These studies are scholarly and comprehensive reviews of
historic fact. They are also broad and open inierpreutions of moral
and spiritual forces. The author's attitude is reverent toward all.
His mind is free. His speech is peculiarly impressive. Surely, it
speaks well for the world that iu people can look without bitterness
and jealousy upon the fact that God has sent, and will send, many
Saviors into the world. This is a good study, fitted to open the
heart and liberalize mmd,"— IVasAimgtam Siar* June 99, xgxs.

** A valuable contribution to metaphysics.**— /Vr//a«»i/^//tfii/«ff.
June 23, Z912.

** The work is taken up somewhat in chronological order. . . .
The teachings of the thinkers who form the subject of the lectures are
faithfully reported. The author holds no special brief for any of
those remarkable men but endeavors to state precisely what their
ideas were. The style of the author is interesting as well as perfectly
lucid."— ^«i^a/(9 Ntwt^ April 21, 1912.

Swami Abhedananda emphasizes the similarities in the teaching
of these great men. His aim is ** to show that the fundamental teach-
ings of the founders of the great religions of the world have had the
same spiritual keynote and that the stories connected with their lives
and miraculous deeds are similar to those of Jesus Christ.**— .SV. Paul
Pioneer Pretty August 4, zqzs.


Press Notices. — Continued^


** He (author) attempts to explain their ideas accurately and Ptys
much attention to the legends of the east relative to the origin of the
great leaders in sacred afiairs.**— ZV« Moinet Capital^ June 5, 19x8.

** It seu forth in picturesque language the principal events in tiie
lives of his heroes and gives a good concise idea of their teachings.**
—7)1/ Indianapolis Star, May 26, 19x2.

** Swami Abhedananda*s discourses point to the essential harmony
of religions . . • and offer an unusual opportunit]^ to stud^ from
conemporaneous expressions the companion viewpoints of faith and
pure culture.**— ^<f«v VarJk IVorld, May 35, 19x2.

" The life and teachings of three great Sages, of whom the West-
em world knows far too little, is treated in a wonderfully clear and
attractive manner. . . . Their illumined efforts in lifting up a new
ensign for the people of their respective countries are described by an
Oriental Scholar, who is perfectly fitted for the task, and has familiar,
ized himself with the available records of their almost superhuman
labors. Bach of these great souls is made to live a^ain in the respect-
ive chapters of this engrossing work, very interesting side lights are
thrown on alleged inaccuracies, many abscure points are made plain,
and the underlying principles tney set out to teach are conveyed in
simple, but scholarly style.**— T^A/ Column, June, 1919.

** Swami*s book will do infinitely more good at the present time
in the west than any book he could have written upon the different
schools of Vedanta. **—K(r</a»/a Universal Mossonger, Dec., 19x2.

** It breathes the spirit of deep vision and profound learning and
one sees that the Swami is actuated by the spirit of his Master, Sri
Ramakrishna, that Synthesis of the Religious Consciousness. . . .
The quotations from learned authors, bearing relation to the historical
features of the Avatftras with which rtie book is replete, shows how
diligently the Swami has prepared himself for his arduous task. He
has left nothing uoiaaAd,— Awakened India, Nov., X9X2.

** This collection of lectures by the well-known Vedantist con-
stitutes the first of a series of three volumes dealing with the same
subject. As the author indicates in his preface, the word ** Saviour **
is used by him in the broad sense, and not as denoting "a Saviour
who saves from eternal damnation.*^ The present volume deals with
the lives and teachings of Krishna, Zoroaster, and Lao-Tze, viewed
in the unifying light of the Vedanta. The many admirers of Swftmi
Abhedinanda's works will welcome this addition to the list, whilst
those who have not yet had the pleasure of becoming acquainted
with the grandeur of the teachings of this religio-philosophy, through
the light of which *'the Unity of the Godhead under variety of names
and forms ** may be perceived, will assuredly read the book not only
with interest, but come from its perusal with the conviction that the
Swftmi possesses the happy gift of bringing to light in an interesting
and attractive manner the harmony existing between the leading
world-religions.**— ^c^fr// Review, July, 19x3, London, England.


In the Press

GREAT SAVIORS OF THE WORLD

Vote. II. and III.


Human AfFection and
Diyine Love

BT

SWAMI ABHEDANANDA


A suitable gift-book full of inspiring thoughts. It describes
the evolution of Love in its various stages — animal, human,
and divine ; and shows that love is not an emotional sentiment
at commonly understood but an attribute of our Real Self.

" Beautifully expressed sentences, on the idealism of love, reflected
from India.**— /^//aiM/ Oregonian^ June 93, 19x3.

** Never under any circumstances is divine love an evil thing, but
is everlasting in its beneficent blessings. In this little book the author
contrasts the enduring beauty of the divine love with that of human
affections which if misdirected in its selfishness results in murder,
robbery and other crimes. His book is divided into two parts and the
latter includes numerous quotations to prove his argument.**— /?/«
Mpitnes Capital^ June 5, 1913.

" It is written simply and the mysticism in it is somewhat akin to
the mjrsticism of Maeterlinck, Emerson and of Thomas i Kempis—
different as they all are.'*— ^/. Paul Pionetr Prest^ Aug. 4, 1912.

" A tiny book but containing a volume of profound thought wis-
dom and beauty. It was Drummond who wrote that the greatest
thing in the world was ** Love,** and since then love has somehow had
a greater significance and more exalted place in the world than it ever
occupied before. But even Drummond did not put it on the high
plane or give it such exquisite meaning as this writer has. He casts
away the material and shows that the love that exalts, the love that
worketh only good reaches through the material to the divine.**— Otv*
gon JK^Mrmaif April 98, 1913.


Pk«ss Notices. — Conti$med.

**' Human a£Fection has ever been manifested in attachment to some
•bject, and the enlightened passages in this practical httle volume
tfiow the same tendency on the animal plane by means of a very 'fine
comparison. The nature and expression of Divine Love is also very
•killfully analjrsed, and a nice distinction drawn, between it and the
human quality. The author feelingly portrays an ideal behind both,
which might well be adopted by the individual, and typified in his
relation to others in daily life, with invaluable results to all. The
words of the Swami on "that Divine Love that knows no fear," but
realizes everything comes from God are uttered in a dteisive style that
will appeal to an army of souls, who to-day feel the truth of such a
principle. Those will be greatly helped by the plain and highly intell-
igent explanation of a great truth, in which the vividness of Oriental
expression is reproduced in Western terms by a master of both
languages. This especially applies to the closing chapter where aptly
diosen illustrations so dear to the oriental mind elucidate the two
characteristics of ecstatic love, the three states of consciousness and
their correspondence to the five sheaths of the soul, beyond which is
the True Self, the Absolute. An elevating manual quite in keeping
with the Author*s previous best work."— 7*4/ Column^ June, zqis.

** It is thoroughly sound and happily written book, a fine intro-
4action to Bhakti Marga. It is profitable reading to every person
while to the more philosophically inclined it affords valuable instruct-
ion.**— 7*>l# Brahmavadin^ Madras India^ Dec, igxa.

" Carefully does the Swami draw the distinction, showing how
knman love attains its climax in directing itself to God.^^—Awakftud
India, Nov., 19x2.

"This is a book presenting somewhat of the old.Indian phil«
Oiophy, which is noble and pure. It is in no sense a departure from
Western thought, as one might be led to suppose. It is well written
and free from metaphysical speculations."— ^r^^A^l^w Eagle, June 14,
1913.


Unity and Harmony

A New Lecture by

SWAMI ABHEDANANDA


Divine Heritage of Man.

BY SWAMI ABHEDANANDA

\2XDOy 215 pages. Portrait of authori frontispiece.


Contents. L Existence of God. II. Attributes of God.
III. Has God any Form? IV. Fatherhood and Motherhood
of God. V. Relation of Soul to God. VL What is an Incar«
nation of God? VII. Son of God. VIII. Divine Principle
in Man.

" The Swftmi Abhedftnanda^s writings are also companionable and read-
able. . . . The Philosophy of India, being the bringing together of the
best thoughts and reasonings of the best men for the thousands of preced-
ing years, had under consideration the self-same problems that are to-day
vexing the souls of our philosophers. The Swftmi^s book is therefore not
80 radical a departure from accepted thought as might at first be imagined.
... It is not meat for babes, but rather will it give new lines of thought
to the brightest intellects." — Transcript^ Boston, Aug. 1903.

*' His method of dealing with these fundamental questions is peculiarly
free both from dogmatic assertion and from pure metaphysical specula-
tion." — InUr-Octan^ Chicago, Aug. 1903.

'* He bases his arguments, not on theological hypotheses, but on scientific
iaic\x.^^—Cltv€land Plain Dealer^ Aug. 1903.

" It Is written in a plain and logical style, and cannot fail to interest all
who are anxious for information concerning the philosophy of which the
author is such an able exponent." — Times Pittsburg, June, 1903.

** A glance over a few of its pages would be sufficient to convince the
reader that he is in the^ presence of an intellect of high order, more
thoroughly conversant with the philosophies and sciences of the Occi-
dental world than most Europeans or Americans. . • . The *' Divine
Heritage of Man " gives a rare insight into the religious views of educated
Hindoos and in its argumentation furnishes an intellectual treat."-—
Chronicle^ San Francisco, Aug. 1903.

** Fully cognizant of modem scientific di:x:overies, the author treats
his subject broadly." — Bookseller^ Newsdealer^ and Publisher^ New
York, Aug. 1903.

** The student of religions will find much of value in the discourses,
since they are full of historical information concerning the origin and
growth of certain ideas and beliefs dominant in Christianity."— -^^/«<^/t-
can^ Denver, July, 1903.

** There is no disposition on the part of the author to assail any of the
Christian principles, but he simply presents his subject with calmness,
not attempting to reconcile religion and science, for to him they are
on9,^^-^IVasAinglon Post^ June, 1903.


Self-Knowledge (Atma-Jnana).

BY SWAMI ABHEDANANDA


I. Spirit and Matter. IV. Search after the Sel£

11. Knowledge of the Sel£ V, Realization of the Self.

m. Prana and the SelfL VI. Immortality and the Self.

"So practically and exhaustively is each phase of the subject
treated that it may well serve as a text-book for anyone striving
for self-development and a deeper understanding of human nature.*'
-^Toronto Saturday Nighty Dec 1905.

"It will also be welcomed by students of the Vedic Scriptures,
since each chapter is based upon some one of the ancient Vedas
known as the Upanishads, and many passages are quoted.'*—
Chicago Inter'Oceariy Jan. 1906.

** The book, from the gifted pen of the head of the Vedanta
Society of New York, presents in a clear manner, calculated to
arrest the attention of those not yet familiar with Vedic literature,
the principles of self-knowledge as taught by the leaders of that
philosophy. . . • The many passages quoted prove the profound
wisdom and practical teaching contained in the early Hindu Scrip-
tures." — Washington Evening Star^ Dec. 1905.

" A new book which will be welcome to students of Truth,
whether it be found in the Eastern religions, in modem thought
or elsewhere." — Unity ^ Nov, 1905.

•• The book is very well written." — San Francisco Chronicle^
Dec. 1905.

** In forcefulness and clearness of style it is in every way'equal
to the other works by the Swami Abhedananda, who has always
shown himself in his writings a remarkable master of the English
language." — Mexican Herald^ Dec. 1905.

** The volume is forcefully written, as are all of this author's
^orks, and cannot fail to be of great interest to all who have entered
this field of thought. A fine portrait of the Swami forms tho
frontispiece.''— r^^/fdS? Blade, Nov. 1905.


India and Her People

{Lectures delivered before the Brooklyn Institute
of Arts and Sciences during the season

of IQOS-1906.)

BY

SWAMI ABHEDANANDA

THIRD EDITION'


Contents

L Philosophy of India To-day.
IL Religions of India.

III. Social Status of India: Their System of Caste.

IV. Political Institutions of India.
V. Education in India.

VL The Influence of India on Western Civilization and Ih*
Influence of Western Civilization on India.

** This book has more than usual interest as comingr from one who
knows the Occident and both known and loves the Orient. ... It
is decidedly interesting. . . . The book has two admirable (jualitics:
breadth in scope and sufi^gestiveness in material.*' — Bulletin 0/ th*
American Geographical Society^ Sept, 1906.

**This volume, written in an attractive style and dealing with the
life, philosophy and religion of India, should prove a useful addition to
the literature of a fascinating and as yet largely unknown subject. It
is designed for popular reading, the metaphysical portions being so
handled that the reader runs little risk of getting beyond his depth.*'
— Literary Digest, Feb. 16, 1907.

** The Swami possesses the exceptional advantage of being able to
look upon his own country almost from the standpoint of an outsider
and to handle his subject free from both foreign and native prejudice.**
— AVw York World, Aug. 4, i9c6.

*' It is a valuable contribution to Western knowledge of India, con-
taining precisely what the American wants (o know about that region.*
'—WMkington Evening Star ^ Aug. 4, 1906.

*^ It is impossible to quarrel with his book. He (Swami) writes too
interestingly and he is a man with a mission.** — The Sunday Oregonian,
Aug. 36, 1906.


PRESS NOTICES OF "INDIA AND HER PEOPLE."

" The views set forth in this work by Swami Abhedananda . . . are
interesting, as being those of a native of India who has devoted much
time and attention to the study of those questions which affect the

government and p^eneral administration of the country. The author
as selected a wide range of subjects for treatment, embracing the
social, political, educational, and religious conditions as they now exist,
and, speaking generally, has invariably exercised sound tact and judg«
ment in discussing the many different questions embraced under tbos^
headings."— /<9«r»a/ o/ the Royal Colonial Institute^ Aprils 1Q07$
London^ England,

*' An excellent contribution to the very scanty literature on India.
. . . All chapters are instructive to any one aspiring to a knowledge
of this vast country. ... It is a book which every non-Indian visit«
ing India or making a temporary or permanent stay therein, and also
every son of the soil, should have by his side." — The Arya, P'ebruary^
jQ07t Madras, India,


Reincarnation.


(New and Enlarged EditiattJ

I. Reincarnation.
II. Heredity and Reincarnation.
ILL Evolution and Reincarnation.
IV. Which is Scientific, Resurrection or Reincarnation?
V. Theory of Transmigration.

** In these discourses the Swami Abhedananda considers the questions
of evolution and the resurrection in their bearine upon the ancient
teaching of rebirth, the truth, logic and justice ol which are rapidly
permeating the best thought of the Western world. For the preserva-
tion of this doctrine mankind is indebted to the literary storehouses of
India, the racial and geographical source of much of the vital knowledge
of Occidental peoples. Remcarnation is shown in the present volume
to be a universal solvent of lifers mysteries. It answers those questions
of children that have staggered the wisest minds who seek to reconcile
the law of evolution and the existence of an intelligent and just Creator,
with the proposition that man has but a single lifetime in which to de-
velop spiritual self-consciousness. It is commended to every thinker.
'-^JUindi February^ IQOO.

** It is a work which will appeal to the novice for its simplicity and
definite quality, and to the student for its wealth of knowledge and
suggestion."— Ktf<foM^a Monthly Bulletin^ Seft,^ ZQOT'

**Th£ book should prove a valuable acquisition." — The Evening
Sun^ Jv. Y.y December 21% iQoy*

**This is the work of a man of fine education and of fine intellect.
. . . (Reincarnation) as expounded by Swami Abhedananda is very
plausible, 9uite scientific, and far from uncomforting. The exposition
contained in this little book is well worth reading by all students of
metaphysics. There is not the slightest danger of its converting or
perverting any one to a new and strange religion. Reincarnation is
not religion, it is science. Science was never known to hurt anybody
but scientists." — Brooklyn Eagle^ December jj, 1907,


WORKS BY SWAMI ABHEDANANDA.


Philosophy of Work.


I. Philosophy of Work.
II. Secret of Work,
III. Duty or Motive in Work.


** In this volume the Vedanta Society presents three lectures by the
leader of the Hindu relig^ious movement that is making^ much head-
way among: philosophic minds throug^hout the United States. The
book is an excellent antidote to the gospel of selfism now popular
in many quarters, and a copy should be in the hands especially of
every ambitious seeker after the loaves and fishes of material desire.
It shows the folly of slavery to sense and the means of escape from
the thraldom of egoism, while elucidating the Hindu concept oi
many things that are * race problems ' because of individual igno-
rance of spiritual principles. These discourses merit a wide drcular-
Uon among unprejudiced minds."— il/i>f</, February, 1903.


Single Lectures.


Christian Science and Vedanta,

Cosmic Evolution and its Purpose.

Divine Communion.

Does the Soul Exist after Death ?

The Motherhood of God.

The Philosophy of Good and Evil.

The Relation of Soul to God.

Religion of the Hindus.

Scientific Basis of Religion.

Simple Living.

Spiritualism and Vedanta.

The Way to the Blessed Life.

Who is the Saviour of Souls ?

Why a H indu Accepts Christ and Rejects Churchianitv.

Why a Hindu is a Vegp:tarian.

Woman's Place in Hindu Religion.

The Word and the Cross in Ancient India.


Single Lectures Parts I & H. Bound in cloth-


The Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna.

COMPILED BY

SWAMI ABHEDANANDA.

Rftmakrishna was a pjeat Hindu saint of the nineteenth century
who has ah-eady had an influence on the religious thought of
America and England through the teachings of his disciples,
Swftmi Vivekftnanda, Swftmi Abhedftnanda, and others. His Say-
ings are full of broad, practical, non-sectarian instructions concern-
ing the spiritual life which cannot but give help and inspiration
to the followers of all creeds. The present volume contains a
larger number of Sayings than has yet appeared in any one English
collection. For the first time also they have been classified into
chapters and arranged in logical sequence under marginal head*
ings, such as ** All creeds paths to God," " Power of Mind and
Thought," ** Meditation," ** Perseverance." As an exposition of
the universal truths of Religion and their application to the daily
life this book takes its place among the great scriptures of the
world.

Spiritual Unfoldment.

BT SWAMI ABHEDANANDA

I. Sdf-controL

n. Concentration and Meditation,
m. God-consciousness.


**Thi8 attractive little volume comprises three lectures on the
Vedanta Philosophy. The discourses will be found vitally helpful even
by those who know little and care less about the spiritual and ethical
teachings of which the Swami is an able and popular exponent. As
the Vedanta itself is largely a doctrine of universais and ultimates, «o
also is this book of common utility and significance among all races of
believers. Its precepts are susceptible of application by any rational
thinker, regardless of religious predilection and inherited prejudices.
The principles set forth by this teacher are an excellent corrective of
spiritual bias or narrowness, and as such the present work is to be com-
mended. It has already awakened an interest in Oriental literature that
augurs well for the cause of human brotherhood, and it merits a wide
circulation among all who cherish advanced ideals."— Af/«u/, A^il^


What is Vedanta?


Pamphlet printed for distribution containing a short exposition of
the fundamental teachings of the Vedanta Philosophy, xamo, 8 pp.


The Gospel of Ramakrishna.

Authprized EdiHom*
WITH AN INTRODUCTION BT

swAhi abhedAnanda.

448 pages; with two pictures, maginal notes, and Indei.


Full leather bindmg, flexible cover, circuit edge with red
and gold in the style of « Teachers' Bible.'


»»


<<The sayings of a mystic who has much influence in India
and who has been made known to the Western world by various
missionary ' Swamls ' will be found in < The Gospel ot R&ma-
krishna.' They have been translated into excellent English."
— The Sufty New York.

'<<The Gospel of R&makrishna' contains the religious
teachings of this modem Hindu saint whose life contained so
many good deeds that his fDllowers thought him little short of
divine." — The Boston Globe, Boston, Mass,

** During his lifetime his career and personality attracted
much attention from English and German scholars of the nine-
teenth century," — The Chicago Inter-Oceanj Chicago, Itt.

«The book is filled with beautiful thoughts and beauti-
ful teachings, which, if followed, would lead to a perfect life.
One cannot marvel that the sayings of R&makrishna made a
deep impress on modem Hindu thought. He was at least a
i great and wise scholar, and gave goodly advice to his followers.**
'^The San Francisco Examiner, San Elands co, Cal,

<'It is a remarkable book and it should be a rare privilege
to read it" — The Oregonian, Portland, Oregon^


^^^^ 3 tl05 055 SSO 555


h


CECIL H. GREEN LIBRARY

STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004

1650] 723-1493

grnci rc@sul mail, Stanford, edu

All books ore subject lo recall.

D^TE DUE
