THE  LIBRARY
BRIG  HAM  YOUNG  UKIVZRSITY
PROVO.  UTAH


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2014

https://archive.org/details/dialogueofseraphOOcath


THE  DIALOGUE  OF

ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


obstat.

JOSEPH  WILHELM,  S.T.D.,

Censor  deputatus.


Smprinu  potest.

GULIELMUS,

Episcopus  Arindelensis,

Vicarins  Generalis.


W cstmonasterii,

die  13  Dec,  1906.


THE  DIALOGUE  OF
THE  SERAPHIC  VIRGIN

CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

DICTATED  BY  HER,  WHILE  IN  A  STATE  OF
ECSTASY,  TO  HER  SECRETARIES,  AND
COMPLETED  IN  THE  YEAR  OF
OUR  LORD  1370

TOGETHER  WITH

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  HER  DEATH  BY  AN  EYE-WITNESS


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  ITALIAN,  AND  PRECEDED
BY  AN  INTRODUCTION  ON  THE  LIFE  AND
TIMES  OF  THE  SAINT,  BY

ALGAR  THOROLD


A  NEW  AND  ABRIDGED  EDITION


LONDON

KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH,  TRUBNER  &  CO.  L™

DRYDEN  HOUSE,  GERRARD  STREET,  W.
1907


The  rights  of  translation  and  of  reproduction  are  reserved


Printed  by  Ballantyne,  Hanson  &■*  Co.
At  the  Ballantyne  Press


fcRIGHAM  YOUNG  U  IV~3SIT¥
PROVG,  UTAH


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION   i

A  TREATISE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE  .       .  26

A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION     ....  50

A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER   158

A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE      ....  281


THE  DIALOGUE  OF
ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


INTRODUCTION

It  would  be  hard  to  say  whether  the  Age  of  the
Saints,  le  moyen  age  enorme  et  delicat,  has  suffered
more  at  the  hands  of  friends  or  foes.  It  is  at
least  certain  that  the  medieval  period  affects  those
who  approach  it  in  the  manner  of  a  powerful
personality  who  may  awaken  love  or  hatred,  but
cannot  be  passed  over  with  indifference.  When
the  contempt  of  the  eighteenth  century  for  the
subject,  the  result  of  that  century's  lack  of  his-
toric imagination,  was  thawed  by  the  somewhat
rhetorical  enthusiasm  of  Chateaubriand  and  of  the
Romanticists  beyond  the  Rhine,  hostility  gave
place  to  an  indiscriminating  admiration.  The
shadows  fell  out  of  the  picture ;  the  medieval
time  became  a  golden  age  when  heaven  and  earth
visibly  mingled,  when  Christian  society  reached
the  zenith  of  perfection  which  constituted  it  a
model  for  all  succeeding  ages.  Then  came  the
German  professors  with  all  the  paraphernalia  of
scientific  history,  and,  looking  through  their  in-

A


ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


struments,  we,  who  are  not  Germans,  have  come
to  take  a  more  critical  and,  perhaps,  a  juster  view
of  the  matter.  The  Germans,  too,  have  had
disciples  of  other  nations,  and  though  conclusions
on  special  points  may  differ,  in  every  country
now  at  a  certain  level  of  education,  the  same
views  prevail  as  to  the  principles  on  which  histo-
rical investigation  should  be  conducted.  And
yet,  while  no  one  with  a  reputation  to  lose  would
venture  on  any  personal  heresy  as  to  the  standards
of  legitimate  evidence,  the  same  facts  still  seem
to  lead  different  minds  to  differing  appreciations.
For  history,  written  solely  ad  narrandum^  is  not
history  ;  the  historian's  task  is  not  over  when  he
has  disinterred  facts  and  established  dates :  it  is
then  that  the  most  delicate  part  of  his  work
begins.  History,  to  be  worthy  of  the  name,
must  produce  the  illusion  of  living  men  and
women,  and,  in  order  to  do  this  successfully,
must  be  based,  not  only  upon  insight  into  human
nature  in  general,  but  also  upon  personal  appre-
ciation of  the  particular  men  and  women  engaged
in  the  episodes  with  which  it  deals.  With  facts
as  such,  there  can  indeed  be  no  tampering ;  but
for  the  determination  of  their  significance,  of
their  value,  as  illustrative  of  a  course  of  policy
or  of  the  character  of  those  who  were  responsible
for  their  occurrence,  we  have  to  depend  in  great
measure  on  the  personality  of  the  historian.  It
is  evident  that  a  man  who  lacks  the  sympathetic
power  to  enter  into  the  character  that  he  attempts
to  delineate,  will  hardly  be  able  to  make  that


INTRODUCTION


3


character  live  for  us.  For  in  Art  as  well  as  Life,
sympathy  is  power.

Now,  while  this  is  true  of  all  history  whatever,
it  is  perhaps  truer  of  the  history  of  the  middle
ages  than  of  that  of  any  more  recent  period,  nor
is  the  reason  of  this  far  to  seek.  The  middle
ages  were  a  period  fruitful  in  great  individuals
who  moulded  society,  to  an  extent  that  perhaps
no  succeeding  period  has  been.  In  modern  times
the  formula,  an  abstraction  such  as  "  Capital "  or
the  "  Rights  of  Man  "  has  largely  taken  the  place
of  the  individual  as  a  plastic  force.  The  one
great  Tyrant  of  the  nineteenth  century  found  his
opportunity  in  the  anarchy  which  followed  the
French  Revolution.  The  spoil  was  then  neces-
sarily to  the  strong.  But  even  Napoleon  was
conquered  at  last  rather  by  a  conspiracy  of  the
slowly  developing  anonymous  forces  of  his  time
than  by  the  superior  skill  or  strength  of  an  in-
dividual rival.  The  lion  could  hardly  have  been
caught  in  such  meshes  in  the  trecento.  Then,
the  fate  of  populations  was  bound  up  with  the
animosities  of  princes,  and,  in  order  to  under-
stand the  state  of  Europe  at  any  particular
moment  of  that  period,  it  is  necessary  to  under-
stand the  state  of  soul  of  the  individuals  who
happened,  at  the  time,  to  be  the  political  stake-
holders.

It  must  not  be  thought,  however,  that  the
personality  of  the  prince  was  the  only  power  in
the  medieval  state,  for  the  prince  himself  was
held  to  be  ultimately  amenable  to  an  idea,  which


ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


so  infinitely  transcended  earthly  distinctions  as
to  level  them  all  in  relation  to  itself.  Religion
was  in  those  days  a  mental  and  social  force
which  we,  in  spite  of  the  petulant  acerbity  of
modern  theological  controversies,  have  difficulty
in  realising.  Prince  and  serf  would  one  day
appear  as  suppliants  before  the  Judgment-seat
of  Christ,  and  the  theory  of  medieval  Christianity
was  considerably  in  favour  of  the  serf.  The
Father  of  Christendom,  at  once  Priest  and  King,
anointed  and  consecrated  as  the  social  exponent
of  the  Divine  Justice,  could  not,  in  his  own
person,  escape  its  rigours,  but  must,  one  day,
render  an  account  of  his  stewardship.  Nor  did
the  medieval  mind,  distinguishing  between  the
office  and  the  individual,  by  any  means  shrink
from  contemplating  the  fate  of  the  faithless
steward.  In  a  "  Last  Judgment  "  by  Angelico  at
Florence,  the  ministers  of  justice  seem  to  have
a  special  joy  in  hurrying  off  to  the  pit  popes
and  cardinals  and  other  ecclesiastics.

For  it  is  an  insufficient  criticism  that  has  led
some  to  suppose  that  the  medieval  Church
weighed  on  the  conscience  of  Christendom  solely,
or  even  primarily,  as  an  arbitrary  fact :  that  the
priesthood,  aided  by  the  ignorance  of  the  people,
succeeded  in  establishing  a  monstrous  claim  to
control  the  destinies  of  the  soul  by  quasi-magical
agencies  and  the  powers  of  excommunication.
Nothing  can  be  further  from  the  truth.  Pro-
bably at  no  period  has  the  Christian  conscience
realised  more  profoundly  that  the  whole  external


INTRODUCTION


5


fabric  of  Catholicism,  its  sacraments,  its  priest-
hood, its  discipline,  was  but  the  phenomenal
expression,  necessary  and  sacred  in  its  place,  of
the  Idea  of  Christianity,  that  the  vitality  of  that
Idea  was  the  life  by  which  the  Church  lived,  and
that  by  that  Idea  all  Christians,  priests  as  well  as
laymen,  rulers  as  well  as  subjects,  would  at  the
last  be  judged.  When  Savonarola  replied  to  the
Papal  Legate,  who,  in  his  confusion,  committed
the  blunder  of  adding  to  the  formula  of  excom-
munication from  the  Church  Militant,  a  sentence
of  exclusion  from  the  Church  Triumphant,  "  You
cannot  do  it,"  he  was  in  the  tradition  of  medieval
orthodoxy.  Moreover,  even  though  the  strict
logic  of  her  theory  might  have  required  it,  the
hierarchical  Church  was  not  considered  as  the
sole  manifestation  of  the  Divine  Will  to  Christen-
dom. The  unanimity  with  which  the  Christian
idea  was  accepted  in  those  times  made  the  saint
a  well-known  type  of  human  character  just  as
nowadays  we  have  the  millionaire  or  the  philan-
thropist. Now  the  saint,  although  under  the
same  ecclesiastical  dispensation  as  other  Christians,
was  conceived  to  have  his  own  special  relations
with  God,  which  amounted  almost  to  a  personal
revelation.  In  particular  he  was  held  to  be
exempt  from  many  of  the  limitations  of  fallen
humanity.  His  prayers  were  of  certain  efficacy ;
the  customary  uniformities  of  experience  were
thought  to  be  constantly  transcended  by  the
power  that  dwelt  within  him )  he  was  often
accepted  by  the  people  as  the  bearer  to  Christen-


6         ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


dom  of  a  Divine  message  over  and  above  the
revelation  of  which  the  hierarchy  was  the  legiti-
mate guardian.  Not  infrequently  indeed  that
message  was  one  of  warning  or  correction  to  the
hierarchy.  Sabatier  points  out  truly  that  the
medieval  saints  occupied  much  the  same  relation
to  the  ecclesiastical  system  as  the  Prophets  of
Israel  had  done,  under  the  older  dispensation,  to
the  Jewish  Priesthood.  They  came  out  of  their
hermitages  or  cloisters,  and  with  lips  touched  by
coal  from  the  altar  denounced  iniquity  wherever
they  found  it,  even  in  the  highest  places.  It  is
needless  to  say  that  they  were  not  revolutionaries
— had  they  been  so  indeed  the  state  of  Europe
might  have  been  very  different  to-day ;  for  them,
as  for  other  Christians,  the  organisation  of  the
Church  was  Divine ;  it  was  by  the  sacred  respon-
sibilities of  his  office  that  they  judged  the  unworthy
pastor.

An  apt  illustration  of  this  attitude  occurs  in
the  life  of  the  Blessed  Colomba  of  Rieti.  Colomba,
who  was  a  simple  peasant,  was  called  to  the  un-
usual vocation  of  preaching.  The  local  repre-
sentatives of  the  Holy  Office,  alarmed  at  the
novelty,  imprisoned  her  and  took  the  opportunity
of  a  visit  of  Alexander  VI.  to  the  neighbouring
town  of  Perugia  to  bring  her  before  his  Holiness
for  examination.  When  the  saint  was  brought
into  the  Pope's  presence,  she  reverently  kissed
the  hem  of  his  garment,  and,  being  overcome
with  devotion  at  the  sight  of  the  Vicar  of  Christ,
fell  into  an  ecstasy,  during  which  she  invoked  the


INTRODUCTION


7


Divine  judgment  on  the  sins  of  Rodrigo  Borgia.
It  was  useless  to  attempt  to  stop  her ;  she  was
beyond  the  control  of  inquisitor  or  guards ;  the
Pope  had  to  hear  her  out.  He  did  so  ;  proclaimed
her  complete  orthodoxy,  and  set  her  free  with
every  mark  of  reverence.  In  this  highly  char-
acteristic episode  scholastic  logic  appears,  for
once,  to  have  been  justified,  at  perilous  odds,  of
her  children.  .  .  .

Midway  between  sky  and  earth  hangs  a  City
Beautiful :  Siena,  Vetus  Civitas  Virginis.  The
town  seems  to  have  descended  as  a  bride  from
airy  regions,  and  lightly  settled  on  the  summits
of  three  hills  which  it  crowns  with  domes  and
clustering  towers.  As  seen  from  the  vineyards
which  clothe  the  slopes  of  the  hills  or  with  its
crenellated  wall  and  slender-necked  Campanile
silhouetted  against  the  evening  sky  from  the
neighbouring  heights  of  Belcaro,  the  city  is
familiar  to  students  of  the  early  Italian  painters.
It  forms  the  fantastic  and  solemn  background  of
many  a  masterpiece  of  the  trecentisti,  and  seems
the  only  possible  home,  if  home  they  can  have  on
earth,  of  the  glorified  persons  who  occupy  the
foreground.  It  would  create  no  surprise  to  come,
while  walking  round  the  ancient  walls,  suddenly,
at  a  turn  in  the  road,  on  one  of  the  sacred  groups
so  familiarly  recurrent  to  the  memory  in  such
an  environment :  often  indeed  one  experiences  a
curious  illusion  when  a  passing  friar  happens


8         ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


for  a  moment  to  "  compose "  with  cypress  and
crumbling  archway.

Siena,  once  the  successful  rival  of  Florence  in
commerce,  war,  and  politics,  has,  fortunately  for
the  more  vital  interests  which  it  represents,  long
desisted  from  such  minor  matters.  Its  worldly
ruin  has  been  complete  for  more  than  five  hundred
years ;  in  truth  the  town  has  never  recovered
from  the  plague  which,  in  the  far-off  days  of
1348,  carried  off  80,000  of  its  population.  Grassy
mounds  within  the  city  walls  mark  the  shrinking
of  the  town  since  the  date  of  their  erection,  and
Mr.  Murray  gives  its  present  population  at  less  than
23,000.  The  free  Ghibelline  Republic  which,  on
that  memorable  4th  of  September  1260,  defeated,
with  the  help  of  Pisa,  at  Monte  Aperto,  the
combined  forces  of  the  Guelf  party  in  Tuscany,
has  now,  after  centuries  of  servitude  to  Spaniard
and  Austrian,  to  be  content  with  the  somewhat
pinchbeck  dignity  of  an  Italian  Prefettura.  At
least  the  architectural  degradation  which  has
overtaken  Florence  at  the  hands  of  her  modern
rulers  has  been  as  yet,  in  great  measure,  spared
to  Siena.  Even  the  railway  has  had  the  grace  to
conceal  its  presence  in  the  folds  of  olive  which
enwrap  the  base  of  the  hill  on  which  the  city
is  set.

Once  inside  the  rose-coloured  walls,  as  we  pass
up  the  narrow,  roughly  paved  streets  between
lines  of  palaces,  some  grim  and  massive  like
Casa  Tolomei,  built  in  1205,  others  delicate
specimens  of  Italian  Gothic  like   the  Palazzo


INTRODUCTION


9


Saracini,  others  again  illustrating  the  combina-
tion of  grace  and  strength  which  marked  the
domestic  architecture  of  the  Renaissance  at  its
prime,  like  the  Palazzo  Piccolomini,  we  find
ourselves  in  a  world  very  remote  indeed  from
anything  with  which  the  experience  of  our  own
utilitarian  century  makes  us  familiar.  And  yet,
as  we  rub  our  eyes,  unmistakably  a  world  of
facts,  though  of  facts,  as  it  were,  visibly  inter-
preted by  the  deeper  truth  of  an  art  whose
insistent  presence  is  on  all  sides  of  us.  Here  is
Casa  Tolomei,  a  huge  cube  of  rough-hewn  stone
stained  to  the  colour  of  tarnished  silver  with
age,  once  the  home  of  that  Madonna  Pia  whose
story  lives  for  ever  in  the  verse  of  Dante.  Who
shall  distinguish  between  her  actual  tale  of  days
and  the  immortal  life  given  her  by  the  poet  ?
In  her  moment  of  suffering  at  least  she  has  been
made  eternal.  And  not  far  from  that  ancient
fortress-home,  in  a  winding  alley  that  can  hardly
be  called  a  street,  is  another  house  of  medieval
Siena — no  palace  this  time,  but  a  small  trades-
man's dwelling.  In  the  fourteenth  century  it
belonged  to  Ser  Giacomo  Benincasa,  a  dyer.
Part  of  it  has  now  been  converted  into  a  chapel,
over  the  door  of  which  are  inscribed  the  words :
Sponsae  Xti  Katerinae  Domus.  Here,  on  March  5,
1347,  being  Palm  Sunday,  was  born  Giacomo's
daughter  Caterina,  who  still  lives  one  of  the
purest  glories  of  the  Christian  Church  under
the  name  of  St.  Catherine  of  Siena.  More  than
500  years  have  passed  since  the  daughter  of


io       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


the  Siennese  dyer  entered  into  the  rest  of  that
sublime  and  touching  symbolism  under  which  the
Church  half  veils  and  half  reveals  her  teaching
as  to  the  destiny  of  man.  Another  case,  but
how  profoundly  more  significant  than  that  of
poor  Madonna  Pia,  of  the  intertwining  of  the
world  of  fact  with  the  deeper  truth  of  art.

St.  Catherine  was  born  at  the  same  time  as  a
twin-sister,  who  did  not  survive.  Her  parents,
Giacomo  and  Lapa  Benincasa,  were  simple  towns-
people, prosperous,  and  apparently  deserving  their
reputation  for  piety.  Lapa,  the  daughter  of  one
Mucio  Piagenti,  a  now  wholly  forgotten  poet,
bore  twenty-five  children  to  her  husband,  of
whom  thirteen  only  appear  to  have  grown  up.
This  large  family  lived  together  in  the  manner
still  obtaining  in  Italy,  in  the  little  house,  till
the  death  of  Giacomo  in  1368.

There  are  stirring  pages  enough  in  Christian
hagiology.  Who  can  read  unmoved  of  the
struggles  towards  his  ideal  of  an  Augustine  or
a  Loyola,  or  of  the  heroic  courage  of  a  Theresa,
affirming  against  all  human  odds  the  divinity  of
her  mission,  and  justifying,  after  years  of  labour,
her  incredible  assertions  by  the  steadfastness  of
her  will  ?  There  are  other  pages  in  the  lives  of
the  saints,  less  dramatic,  it  may  be,  but  breathing,
nevertheless,  a  nai've  grace  and  poetry  all  their
own  :  the  childhood  of  those  servants  of  Christ
who  have  borne  His  yoke  from  the  dawn  of
their  days  forms  their  charming  theme.  Here
the  blasting  illuminations  of  the  Revelation  are


INTRODUCTION


toned  down  to  a  soft  and  tender  glow,  in  which
the  curves  and  lines  of  natural  humanity  do  but
seem  more  pathetically  human.  The  hymn  at
Lauds  for  the  Feast  of  the  Holy  Innocents  repre-
sents those  unconscious  martyrs  as  playing  with
their  palms  and  crowns  under  the  very  altar  of
Heaven  : —

"  Vos  prima  Christi  victima
Grex  immolatorum  tener
Aram  sub  ipsam  simplices
Palma  et  coronis  luditis  !  "

And  so  these  other  saintly  babies  play  at  hermits
or  monasteries  instead  of  the  soldiers  and  house-
keeping beloved  of  more  secular-minded  infants.
Heaven  condescends  to  their  pious  revels :  we
are  told  of  the  Blessed  Hermann  Joseph,  the
Premonstratensian,  that  his  infantile  sports  were
joyously  shared  by  the  Divine  Child  Himself.
He  would  be  a  morose  pedant  indeed  who
should  wish  to  rationalise  this  white  mythology.
The  tiny  Catherine  was  no  exception  to  the  rest
of  her  canonised  brothers  and  sisters.  At  the
age  of  five  it  was  her  custom  on  the  staircase
to  kneel  and  repeat  a  "  Hail  Mary "  at  each
step,  a  devotion  so  pleasing  to  the  angels,  that
they  would  frequently  carry  her  up  or  down
without  letting  her  feet  touch  the  ground,  much
to  the  alarm  of  her  mother,  who  confided  to
Father  Raymond  of  Capua,  the  Dominican  con-
fessor of  the  family,  her  fears  of  an  accident.
Nor  were  these  phenomena  the  only  reward  of
her  infant  piety.    From  the  day  that  she  could


12       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


walk  she  became  very  popular  among  her  numer-
ous relatives  and  her  parents'  friends,  who  gave
her  the  pet  name  of  Euphrosyne,  to  signify  the
grief-dispelling  effect  of  her  conversation,  and
who  were  constantly  inviting  her  to  their  houses
on  some  pretext  or  other.  Sent  one  morning
on  an  errand  to  the  house  of  her  married  sister
Bonaventura,  she  was  favoured  with  a  beautiful
vision  which,  as  it  has  an  important  symbolical
bearing  on  the  great  task  of  her  after-life,  I
will  relate  in  Father  Raymond's  words,  slightly
abridging  their  prolixity.

"  So  it  happened  that  Catherine,  being  arrived
at  the  age  of  six,  went  one  day  with  her  brother
Stephen,  who  was  a  little  older  than  herself,  to
the  house  of  their  sister  Bonaventura,  who  was
married  to  one  Niccolo,  as  has  been  mentioned
above,  in  order  to  carry  something  or  give  some
message  from  their  mother  Lapa.  Their  mother's
errand  accomplished,  while  they  were  on  the  way
back  from  their  sister's  house  to  their  own  and
were  passing  along  a  certain  valley,  called  by  the
people  Valle  Piatta,  the  holy  child,  lifting  her
eyes,  saw  on  the  opposite  side  above  the  Church
of  the  Preaching  Friars  a  most  beautiful  room,
adorned  with  regal  magnificence,  in  which  was
seated,  on  an  imperial  throne,  Jesus  Christ,  the
Saviour  of  the  world,  clothed  in  pontifical  vest-
ments, and  wearing  on  His  head  a  papal  tiara  ;
with  Him  were  the  princes  of  the  Apostles,
Peter  and  Paul,  and  the  holy  evangelist  John.
Astounded  at  such  a  sight,  Catherine  stood  still,


INTRODUCTION  13


and  with  fixed  and  immovable  look,  gazed,  full
of  love,  on  her  Saviour,  who,  appearing  in  so
marvellous  a  manner,  in  order  sweetly  to  gain  her
love  to  Himself,  fixed  on  her  the  eyes  of  His
Majesty,  and,  with  a  tender  smile,  lifted  over  her
His  right  hand,  and,  making  the  sign  of  the
Holy  Cross  in  the  manner  of  a  bishop,  left  with
her  the  gift  of  His  eternal  benediction.  The
grace  of  this  gift  was  so  efficacious,  that  Catherine,
beside  herself,  and  transformed  into  Him  upon
whom  she  gazed  with  such  love,  forgetting  not
only  the  road  she  was  on,  but  also  herself,
although  naturally  a  timid  child,  stood  still  for  a
space  with  lifted  and  immovable  eyes  in  the
public  road,  where  men  and  beasts  were  continu-
ally passing,  and  would  certainly  have  continued
to  stand  there  as  long  as  the  vision  lasted,  had
she  not  been  violently  diverted  by  others.  But
while  the  Lord  was  working  these  marvels,  the
child  Stephen,  leaving  her  standing  still,  con-
tinued his  way  down  hill,  thinking  that  she  was
following,  but,  seeing  her  immovable  in  the
distance  and  paying  no  heed  to  his  calls,  he
returned  and  pulled  her  with  his  hands,  saying  :
1  What  are  you  doing  here  ?  why  do  you  not
come  ? '  Then  Catherine,  as  if  waking  from  a
heavy  sleep,  lowered  her  eyes  and  said  :  1  Oh,  if
you  had  seen  what  I  see,  you  would  not  distract
me  from  so  sweet  a  vision  ! '  and  lifted  her  eyes
again  on  high  ;  but  the  vision  had  entirely  dis-
appeared, according  to  the  will  of  Him  who  had
granted  it,  and  she,  not  being  able  to  endure  this


i4       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


without  pain,  began  with  tears  to  reproach  herself
for  having  turned  her  eyes  to  earth."  Such  was
the  "  call "  of  St.  Catherine  of  Siena,  and,  to  a
mind  intent  on  mystical  significance,  the  appear-
ance of  Christ,  in  the  semblance  of  His  Vicar,  may
fitly  appear  to  symbolise  the  great  mission  of  her
after-life  to  the  Holy  See.

*
*  *

Much  might  be  said  of  the  action  of  Catherine
on  her  generation.  Few  individuals  perhaps  have
ever  led  so  active  a  life  or  have  succeeded  in
leaving  so  remarkable  an  imprint  of  their  person-
ality on  the  events  of  their  time.  Catherine  the
Peacemaker  reconciles  warring  factions  of  her
native  city  and  heals  an  international  feud
between  Florence  and  the  Holy  See.  Catherine
the  Consoler  pours  the  balm  of  her  gentle  spirit
into  the  lacerated  souls  of  the  suffering  wherever
she  finds  them,  in  the  condemned  cell  or  in  the
hospital  ward.  She  is  one  of  the  most  voluminous
of  letter-writers,  keeping  up  a  constant  corre-
spondence with  a  band  of  disciples,  male  and
female,  all  over  Italy,  and  last,  but  not  least,  with
the  distant  Pope  at  Avignon.

Her  lot  was  cast  on  evil  days  for  the  Church
and  the  Peninsula.  The  trecento,  the  apogee  of
the  middle  ages  was  over.  Francis  and  Dominic
had  come  and  gone,  and  though  Franciscans  and
Dominicans  remained  and  numbered  saints  among
their  ranks,  still  the  first  fervour  of  the  original
inspiration  was  a  brightness  that  had  fled.  The


INTRODUCTION


moral  state  of  the  secular  clergy  was,  according
to  Catherine  herself,  too  often  one  of  the  deepest
degradation,  while,  in  the  absence  of  the  Pontiff,
the  States  of  the  Church  were  governed  by  papal
legates,  mostly  men  of  blood  and  lust,  who  ground
the  starving  people  under  their  heel.  Assuredly
it  was  not  from  Christian  bishops  who  would
have  disgraced  Islam  that  their  subjects  could
learn  the  path  of  peace.  The  Pope's  residence
at  Avignon,  the  Babylonish  Captivity,  as  it  was
called,  may  have  seemed,  at  the  time  when  his
departure  from  Rome  was  resolved  upon,  a  wise
measure  of  temporary  retreat  before  the  anarchy
which  was  raging  round  the  city  of  St.  Peter.
But  not  many  years  passed  before  it  became
evident  that  Philip  the  Fair,  the  astute  adviser  to
whose  counsel — and  possibly  more  than  counsel —
Clement  had  submitted  in  leaving  Rome,  was  the
only  one  who  profited  by  the  exile  of  the  Pope.
Whatever  the  truth  may  be  about  the  details  of
Clement's  election,  so  far  as  his  subserviency  to
the  French  king  went,  he  might  have  remained
Archbishop  of  Bordeaux  to  the  end  of  his  days.
He  accepted  for  his  relations  costly  presents  from
Philip ;  he  placed  the  papal  authority  at  his
service  in  the  gravely  suspicious  matter  of  the
suppression  of  the  Templars.  Gradually  the
Holy  See  in  exile  lost  its  oecumenical  character
and  became  more  and  more  the  vassal  of  the
French  crown.  Such  a  decline  in  its  position
could  not  fail  to  affect  even  its  doctrinal  prestige.
It  was  well  enough  in  theory  to  apply  to  the


1 6       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


situation  such  maxims  as  Ubi  Petrus  ibi  Ecclesia,
or,  as  the  Avignonese  doctors  paraphrased  it,  Ubi
Papa  ibi  Roma;  but,  in  practice,  Christendom  grew
shy  of  a  French  Pope,  living  under  the  eye  and
power  of  the  French  king.  The  Romans,  who
had  always  treated  the  Pope  badly,  were  furious
when  at  last  they  had  driven  him  away,  and
gratified  their  spite  by  insulting  their  exiled
rulers.  Nothing  could  exceed  their  contempt
for  the  Popes  of  Avignon,  who,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  though  weak  and  compliant,  were  in  their
personal  characters  worthy  ecclesiastics.  They
gave  no  credit  to  John  XXII.  for  his  genuine
zeal  in  the  cause  of  learning,  or  the  energy
with  which  he  restored  ecclesiastical  studies  in
the  Western  Schools.  For  Benedict  XII.,  a
retiring  and  abstemious  student,  they  invented
the  phrase  :  bibere  papaliter — to  drink  like  the
Pope.  Clement  VI.  they  called  poco  religioso,  for-
getting his  noble  charity  at  the  time  of  the
plague,  and  also  the  fact  that  Rome  herself  had
produced  not  a  few  popes  whose  lives  furnished
a  singular  commentary  on  the  ethics  of  the
Gospel.

The  real  danger  ahead  to  Christendom  was  the
possibility  of  an  Italian  anti-Pope  who  should
fortify  his  position  by  recourse  to  the  heretical
elements  scattered  through  the  peninsula.  Those
elements  were  grave  and  numerous.  The  Frati-
celli  or  Spiritual  Franciscans,  although  crushed
for  the  time  by  the  iron  hand  of  Pope  Boni-
face, rather  flourished  than  otherwise  under  per-


INTRODUCTION


i7


secution.  These  dangerous  heretics  had  inherited
a  garbled  version  of  the  mysticism  of  Joachim  of
Flora,  which  constituted  a  doctrine  perhaps  more
radically  revolutionary  than  that  of  any  heretics
before  or  since.  It  amounted  to  belief  in  a  new
revelation  of  the  Spirit,  which  was  to  supersede
the  dispensation  of  the  Son  as  that  had  taken
the  place  of  the  dispensation  of  the  Father.
According  to  the  Eternal  Gospel  of  Gerard  of
San  Donnino,  who  had  derived  it,  not  without
much  adroit  manipulation,  from  the  writings  of
Abbot  Joachim,  the  Roman  Church  was  on  the
eve  of  destruction,  and  it  was  the  duty  of  the
Spirituali,  the  saints  who  had  received  the  new
dispensation,  to  fly  from  the  contamination  of
her  communion.  An  anti-Pope  who  should
have  rallied  to  his  allegiance  these  elements  of
schism  would  have  been  a  dangerous  rival  to  a
French  Pope  residing  in  distant  Avignon,  however
legitimate  his  title.  Nor  was  there  wanting  out-
side Italy  matter  for  grave  anxiety.  Germs  of
heresy  were  fermenting  north  of  the  Alps  ;  the
preaching  of  WyclifFe,  the  semi-Islamism  of  the
Hungarian  Beghards,  the  Theism  of  the  Patarini
of  Dalmatia,  the  erotic  mysticism  of  the  Adamites
of  Paris,  indicated  a  widespread  anarchy  in  the
minds  of  Christians.  Moreover,  the  spiritual  diffi-
culties of  the  Pope  were  complicated  by  his  tempo-
ral preoccupations.  For  good  or  ill,  it  had  come
to  be  essential  to  the  action  of  the  Holy  See  that
the  successor  of  the  penniless  fisherman  should
have  his  place  among  the  princes  of  the  earth.

B


1 8       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


The  papal  monarchy  had  come  about,  as  most
things  come  about  in  this  world,  by  what  seems
to  have  been  the  inevitable  force  of  circum-
stances. The  decay  of  the  Imperial  power  in
Italy  due  to  the  practical  abandonment  of  the
Western  Empire — for  the  ruler  of  Constantinople
lived  at  too  great  a  distance  to  be  an  effective
Emperor  of  the  West — had  resulted  in  a  natural
increase  of  secular  importance  to  the  See  of
Rome.  To  the  genius  of  Pope  Gregory  I.,  one
of  the  few  men  whom  their  fellows  have  named
both  Saint  and  Great,  was  due  the  development
of  the  political  situation  thus  created  in  Italy.

Chief  and  greatest  of  bishops  in  his  day  was
St.  Gregory  the  Great.  Seldom,  if  ever,  has  the
papal  dignity  been  sustained  with  such  lofty
enthusiasm,  such  sagacious  political  insight.
Himself  a  Roman  of  Rome,  Romano  di  Roma,
as  those  who  possess  that  privilege  still  call
themselves  to-day,  the  instinct  of  government
was  his  by  hereditary  right.  He  had  the  defects
as  well  as  the  qualities  of  the  statesman.  His
theological  writings,  which  are  voluminous  and
verbose,  are  marked  rather  by  a  sort  of  canonised
common  sense  than  by  exalted  flights  of  spiri-
tuality. His  missionary  enterprise  was  charac-
terised by  a  shrewd  and  gracious  condescension
to  the  limitations  of  human  nature.  Thus  he
counsels  St.  Augustine,  who  had  consulted  him
as  to  the  best  means  of  extirpating  the  pagan
customs  of  our  English  forefathers,  to  deal  gently
with  these  ancient  survivals.    He  ruled  that  the


INTRODUCTION


19


celebration  of  the  Festivals  of  the  Saints  should
if  possible  be  held  at  the  times  and  places  at
which  the  people  had  been  in  the  habit  of  meeting
together  to  worship  the  gods.  They  would  thus
come  to  associate  the  new  religion  with  their
traditional  merry-makings,  and  their  conversion
would  be  gradually,  and  as  it  were  unconsciously,
effected.  It  was  a  kindly  and  statesmanlike
thought.  In  this  way  Gregory  may  truly  be
looked  upon  as  the  founder  of  popular  Catho-
licism, that  "  pensive  use  and  wont  religion,"
not  assuredly  in  the  entirety  of  its  details
Christian,  but  at  least  profoundly  Catholic,  as
weaving  together  in  the  web  of  its  own  secular
experience  of  man  so  large  a  proportion  of  the
many-coloured  threads  that  have  at  any  time
attached  his  hopes  and  fears  to  the  mysterious
unknown  which  surrounds  him.  No  miracle  is
needed  to  explain  the  political  ascendency  which
such  a  man  inevitably  came  to  acquire  in  an
Italy  deserted  by  the  Empire,  and,  but  for  him
and  the  organisation  which  depended  on  him,
at  the  mercy  of  the  invading  Lombard.  More
and  more,  people  came  to  look  on  the  Pope  as
their  temporal  ruler  no  less  than  as  their  spiri-
tual father.  In  many  cases,  indeed,  his  was  the
only  government  they  knew.  Kings  and  nobles
had  conferred  much  property  on  the  Roman
Church.  By  the  end  of  the  sixth  century  the
Bishop  of  Rome  held,  by  the  right  of  such
donations  to  his  See,  large  tracts  of  country,
not  only  in  Italy,  but  also  in  Sicily,  Corsica,


20       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Gaul,  and  even  Asia  and  Africa.  Gregory  suc-
cessfully defended  his  Italian  property  against  the
invaders,  and  came  to  the  relief  of  the  starving
population  with  corn  from  Sicily  and  Africa,
thus  laying  deep  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  the
foundations  of  the  secular  power  of  the  Papacy.

It  would  be  an  unnecessary  digression  from
our  subject  to  work  out  in  detail  the  stages  by
which  the  Pope  came  to  take  his  place  first  as
the  Italian  vicar  of  a  distant  emperor,  and  at
length,  as  the  result  of  astute  statecraft  and  the
necessities  of  the  case,  among  the  princes  of
Europe,  as  their  chief  and  arbiter.  So  much  as
has  been  said  was,  however,  necessary  for  the
comprehension  of  the  task  with  which  Catherine
measured,  for  the  time,  successfully  her  strength.
It  was  given  to  the  Popolana  of  Siena,  by  the
effect  of  her  eloquence  in  persuading  the  waver-
ing will  of  the  Pope  to  return  to  his  See,  to
bring  about  what  was,  for  the  moment,  the
only  possible  solution  of  that  Roman  question,
which,  hanging  perpetually  round  the  skirts  of
the  Bride  of  Christ,  seems  at  every  step  to  im-
pede her  victorious  advance.

*

Nevertheless,  it  is  neither  the  intrinsic  import-
ance nor  the  social  consequences  of  her  actions
that  constitute  the  true  greatness  of  St.  Catherine.
Great  ends  may  be  pursued  by  essentially  small
means,  in  an  aridity  and  narrowness  of  temper
that  goes  far  to  discount  their  actual  achieve-


INTRODUCTION  21


ment.  History,  and  in  particular  the  history
of  the  Church,  is  not  wanting  in  such  instances.
Savonarola  set  great  ends  before  himself — the
freedom  of  his  country  and  the  regeneration  of
the  state ;  but  the  spirit  in  which  he  pursued
them  excludes  him  from  that  Pantheon  of
gracious  souls  in  which  humanity  enshrines  its
true  benefactors.  "  Soul,  as  a  quality  of  style,  is
a  fact,"  and  the  soul  of  St.  Catherine's  gesta  ex-
pressed itself  in  a  "  style  "  so  winning,  so  sweetly
reasonable,  as  to  make  her  the  dearest  of  friends
to  all  who  had  the  privilege  of  intimate  asso-
ciation with  her,  and  a  permanent  source  of
refreshment  to  the  human  spirit.  She  intuitively
perceived  life  under  the  highest  possible  forms,
the  forms  of  Beauty  and  Love.  Truth  and
Goodness  were,  she  thought,  means  for  the
achievement  of  those  two  supreme  ends.  The
sheer  beauty  of  the  soul  "  in  a  state  of  Grace  "
is  a  point  on  which  she  constantly  dwells,  hang-
ing it  as  a  bait  before  those  whom  she  would
induce  to  turn  from  evil.  Similarly  the  ugliness
of  sin,  as  much  as  its  wickedness,  should  warn
us  of  its  true  nature.  Love,  that  love  of  man
for  man  which,  in  deepest  truth,  is,  in  the  words
of  the  writer  of  the  First  Epistle  of  St.  John,
God  Himself,  is,  at  once,  the  highest  achieve-
ment of  man  and  his  supreme  and  satisfying
beatitude.  The  Symbols  of  Catholic  theology
were  to  her  the  necessary  and  fitting  means  of
transit,  so  to  speak.  See,  in  the  following  pages,
the  fine  allegory  of  the  Bridge  of  the  Sacred


22       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Humanity,  of  the  soul  in  via  on  its  dusty
pilgrimage  towards  those  gleaming  heights  of
vision.  " Truth"  was  to  her  the  handmaid  of
the  spiritualised  imagination,  not,  as  too  often
in  these  days  of  the  twilight  of  the  soul,  its
tyrant  and  its  gaoler.  Many  of  those  who  pass
lives  of  unremitting  preoccupation  with  the
problems  of  truth  and  goodness  are  wearied  and
cumbered  with  much  serving.  We  honour  them,
and  rightly ;  but  if  they  have  nothing  but  this
to  offer  us,  our  hearts  do  not  run  to  meet  them,
as  they  fly  to  the  embrace  of  those  rare  souls
who  inhabit  a  serener,  more  pellucid  atmosphere.
Among  these  spirits  of  the  air,  St.  Catherine
has  taken  a  permanent  and  foremost  place.  She
is  among  the  few  guides  of  humanity  who  have
the  perfect  manner,  the  irresistible  attractiveness,
of  that  positive  purity  of  heart,  which  not  only
sees  God,  but  diffuses  Him,  as  by  some  natural
law  of  refraction,  over  the  hearts  of  men.  The
Divine  nuptials,  about  which  the  mystics  tell  us
so  much,  have  been  accomplished  in  her,  Nature
and  Grace  have  lain  down  together,  and  the
mysteries  of  her  religion  seem  but  the  natural
expression  of  a  perfectly  balanced  character,  an
unquenchable  love  and  a  deathless  will.

*

The  Dialogue  of  St.  Catherine  of  Siena  was
dictated  to  her  secretaries  by  the  Saint  in  ecstasy.
Apart  from  the  extraordinary  circumstances  of
its  production,  this  work  has  a  special  interest.


INTRODUCTION  23


The  composition  of  the  Siennese  dyer's
daughter,  whose  will,  purified  and  sublimated
by  prayer,  imposed  itself  on  popes  and  princes,
is  an  almost  unique  specimen  of  what  may  be
called  "  ecclesiastical "  mysticism ;  for  its  special
value  lies  in  the  fact  that  from  first  to  last  it
is  nothing  more  than  a  mystical  exposition  of
the  creeds  taught  to  every  child  in  the  Catholic
poor-schools.  Her  insight  is  sometimes  very
wonderful.  How  subtle,  for  instance,  is  the
analysis  of  the  state  of  the  "  worldly  man "
who  loves  God  for  his  own  pleasure  or  profit  !
The  special  snares  of  the  devout  are  cut  through
by  the  keen  logic  of  one  who  has  experienced
and  triumphed  over  them.  Terrible,  again,  is
the  retribution  prophesied  to  the  "  unworthy
ministers  of  the  Blood."

And  so  every  well-known  form  of  Christian
life,  healthy  or  parasitic,  is  treated  of,  detailed,
analysed  incisively,  remorselessly,  and  then  sub-
sumed under  the  general  conception  of  God's
infinite  loving-kindness  and  mercy.

The  great  mystics  have  usually  taken  as  their
starting-point  what,  to  most,  is  the  goal  hardly
to  be  reached ;  their  own  treatment  of  the  pre-
liminary stages  of  spirituality  is  frequently
conventional  and  jejune.  Compare,  for  instance,
the  first  book  with  the  two  succeeding  ones,  of
Ruysbrock's  Ornement  des  Noces  spirituelles,  that
unique  breviary  of  the  Christian  Platonician.
Another  result  of  their  having  done  so  is  that,
with  certain  noble  exceptions,  the  literature  of


24       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

this  subject  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  class
of  writers,  or  rather  purveyors,  well-intentioned
no  doubt,  but  not  endowed  with  the  higher
spiritual  and  mental  faculties,  whom  it  is  not
unfair  to  describe  as  the  feuilletonistes  of  piety.
Such  works,  brightly  bound,  are  appropriately
exposed  for  sale  in  the  Roman  shop-windows,
among  the  gaudy  objets  de  religion  they  so  much
resemble.  To  keep  healthy  and  raise  the  tone
of  devotional  literature  is  surely  an  eighth  spiri-
tual work  of  mercy.  St.  Philip  Neri's  advice
in  the  matter  was  to  prefer  those  writers  whose
names  were  preceded  by  the  title  of  Saint.  In
the  Dialogo  we  have  a  great  saint,  one  of  the  most
extraordinary  women  who  ever  lived,  treating,
in  a  manner  so  simple  and  familiar  as  at  times
to  become  almost  colloquial,  of  the  elements  of
practical  Christianity.  Passages  occur  frequently
of  lofty  eloquence,  and  also  of  such  literary  per-
fection that  this  book  is  held  by  critics  to  be  one
of  the  classics  of  the  age  and  land  which  produced
Boccaccio  and  Petrarch.  To-day,  in  the  streets
of  Siena,  the  same  Tuscan  idiom  can  be  heard,
hardly  altered  since  the  days  of  St.  Catherine.

One  word  as  to  the  translation.  I  have  almost
always  followed  the  text  of  Gigli,  a  learned  Sien-
nese  ecclesiastic,  who  edited  the  complete  works
of  St.  Catherine  in  the  last  century.  His  is  the
latest  edition  printed  of  the  Dialogo.  Once  or
twice  I  have  preferred  the  cinquecento  Venetian
editor.  My  aim  has  been  to  translate  as  literally
as  possible,  and  at  the  same  time  to  preserve  the


INTRODUCTION  25


characteristic  rhythm  of  the  sentences,  so  sugges-
tive in  its  way  of  the  sing-song  articulation  of  the
Siennese  of  to-day.  St.  Catherine  has  no  style  as
such  ;  she  introduces  a  metaphor  and  forgets  it ;
the  sea,  a  vine,  and  a  plough  will  often  appear  in
the  same  sentence,  sometimes  in  the  same  phrase.
In  such  cases  I  have  occasionally  taken  the  liberty
of  adhering  to  the  first  simile  when  the  confusion
of  metaphor  in  the  original  involves  hopeless
obscurity  of  expression.


Viareggio,  September  1906.


A  TREATISE  OF


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE

How  a  sou/,  elevated  by  desire  of  the  honour  of  God,
and  of  the  salvation  of  her  neighbours,  exercising
herself  in  humble  prayer,  after  she  had  seen  the
union  of  the  soul,  through  love,  with  God,  asked
of  God  four  requests.

The  soul,  who  is  lifted  by  a  very  great  and
yearning  desire  for  the  honour  of  God  and  the
salvation  of  souls,  begins  by  exercising  herself,
for  a  certain  space  of  time,  in  the  ordinary
virtues,  remaining  in  the  cell  of  self-knowledge,
in  order  to  know  better  the  goodness  of  God
towards  her.  This  she  does  because  knowledge
must  precede  love,  and  only  when  she  has  attained
love,  can  she  strive  to  follow  and  to  clothe  her-
self with  the  truth.  But,  in  no  way,  does  the
creature  receive  such  a  taste  of  the  truth,  or  so
brilliant  a  light  therefrom,  as  by  means  of  humble
and  continuous  prayer,  founded  on  knowledge  of
herself  and  of  God  ;  because  prayer,  exercising
her  in  the  above  way,  unites  with  God  the  soul
that  follows  the  footprints  of  Christ  Crucified,
and  thus,  by  desire  and  affection,  and  union  of

love,  makes  her  another  Himself.    Christ  would

26


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE


seem  to  have  meant  this,  when  He  said  :  To
him  who  will  love  Me  and  will  observe  My  com-
mandment, will  I  manifest  Myself ;  and  he  shall  be
one  thing  with  Me  and  I  with  him.  In  several
places  we  find  similar  words,  by  which  we  can
see  that  it  is,  indeed,  through  the  effect  of  love,
that  the  soul  becomes  another  Himself.  That
this  may  be  seen  more  clearly,  I  will  mention
what  I  remember  having  heard  from  a  handmaid
of  God,  namely,  that,  when  she  was  lifted  up  in
prayer,  with  great  elevation  of  mind,  God  was
not  wont  to  conceal,  from  the  eye  of  her  intel-
lect, the,_ljQve  which  He  had  for  His  servants,
but  rather  to  manifest  it ;  and,  that  among  other
things,  He  used  to  say:  "  Open  the  eye  of  thy
intellect,  and  gaze  into  Me,  and  thou  shalt  see
the  beauty  of  My  rational  creature.  And  look
at  those  creatures  who,  among  the  beauties  which
I  have  given  to  the  soul,  creating  her  in  My  image
and  similitude,  are  clothed  with  the  nuptial  gar-
ment (that  is,  the  garment  of  love),  adorned  with
many  virtues,  by  which  they  are  united  with  Me
through  love.  And  yet  I  tell  thee,  if  thou
shouldest  ask  Me,  who  these  are,  I  should
reply  "  (said  the  sweet  and  amorous  Word  of  God)
"  they  are  another  Myself,  inasmuch  as  they  have
lost  and  denied  their  own  will,  and  are  clothed
with  Mine,  are  united  to  Mine,  are  conformed  to
Mine."  It  is  therefore  true,  indeed,  that  the  soul
unites  herself  with  God  by  the  affection  of  love.

So,  that  soul,  wishing  to  know  and  follow  the
truth  more  manfully,  and  lifting  her  desires  first


28       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


for  herself — for  she  considered  that  a  soul  could
not  be  of  use,  whether  in  doctrine,  example,  or
prayer,  to  her  neighbour,  if  she  did  not  first
profit  herself,  that  is,  if  she  did  not  acquire
virtue  in  herself — addressed  four  requests  to  the
Supreme  and  Eternal  Father.  The  first  was  for
herself ;  the  second  for  the  reformation  of  the
Holy  Church ;  the  third  a  general  prayer  for
the  whole  world,  and  in  particular  for  the  peace
of  Christians  who  rebel,  with  much  lewdness  and
persecution,  against  the  Holy  Church ;  in  the
fourth  and  last,  she  besought  the  Divine  Provi-
dence to  provide  for  things  in  general,  and  in
particular,  for  a  certain  case  with  which  she  was
concerned.

How  the  desire  of  this  soul  grew  when  God  showed
her  the  nee  dine  ss  of  the  world.

This  desire  was  great  and  continuous,  but  grew
much  more,  when  the  First  Truth  showed  her
the  neediness  of  the  world,  and  in  what  a  tem-
pest of  offence  against  God  it  lay.  And  she  had
understood  this  the  better  from  a  letter,  which
she  had  received  from  the  spiritual  Father  of  her
soul,  in  which  he  explained  to  her  the  penalties
and  intolerable  dolour  caused  by  offences  against
God,  and  the  loss  of  souls,  and  the  persecutions
of  Holy  Church.

All  this  lighted  the  fire  of  her  holy  desire  with
grief  for  the  offences,  and  with  the  joy  of  the
lively  hope,  with  which  she  waited  for  God  to


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE  29

provide  against  such  great  evils.  And,  since  the
soul  seems,  in  such  communion,  sweetly  to  bind
herself  fast  within  herself  and  with  God,  and
knows  better  His  truth,  inasmuch  as  the  soul  is
then  in  God,  and  God  in  the  soul,  as  the  fish
is  in  the  sea,  and  the  sea  in  the  fish,  she  desired
the  arrival  of  the  morning  (for  the  morrow  was
a  feast  of  Mary)  in  order  to  hear  Mass.  And,
when  the  morning  came,  and  the  hour  of  the
Mass,  she  sought  with  anxious  desire  her  accus-
tomed place ;  and,  with  a  great  knowledge  of
herself,  being  ashamed  of  her  own  imperfection,
appearing  to  herself  to  be  the  cause  of  all  the
evil  that  was  happening  throughout  the  world,
conceiving  a  hatred  and  displeasure  against  her-
self, and  a  feeling  of  holy  justice,  with  which
knowledge,  hatred,  and  justice,  she  purified  the
stains  which  seemed  to  her  to  cover  her  guilty
soul,  she  said :  "  O  Eternal  Father,  I  accuse
myself  before  Thee,  in  order  that  Thou  mayest
punish  me  for  my  sins  in  this  finite  life,  and,
inasmuch  as  my  sins  are  the  cause  of  the  suffer-
ings which  my  neighbour  must  endure,  I  implore
Thee,  in  Thy  kindness,  to  punish  them  in  my
person."

How  finite  works  are  not  sufficient  for  punishment  or
recompense  without  the  perpetual  affection  of  love.

Then,  the  Eternal  Truth  seized  and  drew
more  strongly  to  Himself  her  desire,  doing  as
He  did  in  the  Old  Testament,  for  when  the


30       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

sacrifice  was  offered  to  God,  a  fire  descended
and  drew  to  Him  the  sacrifice  that  was  accept-
able to  Him  ;  so  did  the  sweet  Truth  to  that
soul,  in  sending  down  the  fire  of  the  clemency
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  seizing  the  sacrifice  of
desire  that  she  made  of  herself,  saying  :  "  Dost
thou  not  know,  dear  daughter,  that  all  the  suffer-
ings, which  the  soul  endures,  or  can  endure,  in
this  life,  are  insufficient  to  punish  one  smallest
fault,  because  the  offence,  being  done  to  Me,  who
am  the  Infinite  Good,  calls  for  an  infinite  satis-
faction ?  However,  I  wish  that  thou  shouldest
know,  that  not  all  the  pains  that  are  given  to
men  in  this  life  are  given  as  punishments,  but
as  corrections,  in  order  to  chastise  a  son  when  he
offends  ;  though  it  is  true  that  both  the  guilt  and
the  penalty  can  be  expiated  by  the  desire  of  the
soul,  that  is,  by  true  contrition,  not  through  the
finite  pain  endured,  but  through  the  infinite
desire  ;  because  God,  who  is  infinite,  wishes  for
infinite  love  and  infinite  grief.  Infinite  grief  I
wish  from  My  creature  in  two  ways :  in  one  way,
through  her  sorrow  for  her  own  sins,  which  she
has  committed  against  Me  her  Creator  ;  in  the
other  way,  through  her  sorrow  for  the  sins  which
she  sees  her  neighbours  commit  against  Me.  Of
such  as  these,  inasmuch  as  they  have  infinite
desire,  that  is,  are  joined  to  Me  by  an  affection
of  love,  and  therefore  grieve  when  they  offend
Me,  or  see  Me  offended,  their  every  pain,  whether
spiritual  or  corporeal,  from  wherever  it  may  come,
receives  infinite  merit,  and  satisfies  for  a  guilt


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE  31


which  deserved  an  infinite  penalty,  although  their
works  are  finite  and  done  in  finite  time ;  but,
inasmuch  as  they  possess  the  virtue  of  desire,  and
sustain  their  suffering  with  desire,  and  contrition,
and  infinite  displeasure  against  their  guilt,  their
pain  is  held  worthy.  Paul  explained  this  when
he  said  :  If  1  had  the  tongues  of  angels,  and  if  I
knew  the  things  of  the  future  and  gave  my  body  to  be
burned,  and  have  not  love,  it  would  be  worth  nothing
to  me.  The  glorious  Apostle  thus  shows  that
finite  works  are  not  valid,  either  as  punishment
or  recompense,  without  the  condiment  of  the
affection  of  love."

How  desire  and  contrition  of  heart  satisfies,  both  for
the  guilt  and  the  penalty  in  oneself  and  in  others  ;
and  how  sometimes  it  satisfies  for  the  guilt  only,
and  not  the  penalty.

"  I  have  shown  thee,  dearest  daughter,  that
the  guilt  is  not  punished  in  this  finite  time  by
any  pain  which  is  sustained  purely  as  such.
And  I  say,  that  the  guilt  is  punished  by  the
pain  which  is  endured  through  the  desire,  love,
and  contrition  of  the  heart ;  not  by  virtue  of
the  pain,  but  by  virtue  of  the  desire  of  the
soul ;  inasmuch  as  desire  and  every  virtue  is  of
value,  and  has  life  in  itself,  through  Christ
crucified,  My  only  begotten  Son,  in  so  far  as
the  soul  has  drawn  her  love  from  Him,  and
virtuously  follows  His  virtues,  that  is,  His  Foot-
prints.   In  this  way,  and  in  no  other,  are  virtues


32       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


of  value,  and  in  this  way,  pains  satisfy  for  the
fault,  by  the  sweet  and  intimate  love  acquired  in
the  knowledge  of  My  goodness,  and  in  the  bitter-
ness and  contrition  of  heart  acquired  by  know-
ledge of  one's  self  and  one's  own  thoughts.  And
this  knowledge  generates  a  hatred  and  displeasure
against  sin,  and  against  the  soul's  own  sensuality,
through  which,  she  deems  herself  worthy  of  pains
and  unworthy  of  reward."

The  sweet  Truth  continued  :  "  See  how,  by
contrition  of  the  heart,  together  with  love,  with
true  patience,  and  with  true  humility,  deeming
themselves  worthy  of  pain  and  unworthy  of
reward,  such  souls  endure  the  patient  humility
in  which  consists  the  above-mentioned  satisfac-
tion. Thou  askest  me,  then,  for  pains,  so  that
I  may  receive  satisfaction  for  the  offences,  which
are  done  against  Me  by  My  Creatures,  and  thou
further  askest  the  will  to  know  and  love  Me,
who  am  the  Supreme  Truth.  Wherefore  I
reply  that  this  is  the  way,  if  thou  wilt  arrive
at  a  perfect  knowledge  and  enjoyment  of  Me,
the  Eternal  Truth,  that  thou  shouldest  never
go  outside  the  knowledge  of  thyself,  and,  by
humbling  thyself  in  the  valley  of  humility,  thou
wilt  know  Me  and  thyself,  from  which  know-
ledge thou  wilt  draw  all  that  is  necessary.  No
virtue,  my  daughter,  can  have  life  in  itself  except
through  charity,  and  humility,  which  is  the  foster-
mother  and  nurse  of  charity.  In  self-knowledge,
then,  thou  wilt  humble  thyself,  seeing  that,  in
thyself,  thou  dost  not  even  exist ;  for  thy  very


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE  33

being,  as  thou  wilt  learn,  is  derived  from  Me,
since  I  have  loved  both  thee  and  others  before
you  were  in  existence ;  and  that,  through  the
ineffable  love  which  I  had  for  you,  wishing  to
re-create  you  to  Grace,  I  have  washed  you,  and
re-created  you  in  the  Blood  of  My  only-begotten
Son,  spilt  with  so  great  a  fire  of  love.  This
Blood  teaches  the  truth  to  him,  who,  by  self-
knowledge,  dissipates  the  cloud  of  self-love,  and
in  no  other  way  can  he  learn.  Then  the  soul
will  inflame  herself  in  this  knowledge  of  Me
with  an  ineffable  love,  through  which  love  she
continues  in  constant  pain  ;  not,  however,  a  pain
which  afflicts  or  dries  up  the  soul,  but  one  which
rather  fattens  her ;  for  since  she  has  known  My
truth,  and  her  own  faults,  and  the  ingratitude  of
men,  she  endures  intolerable  suffering,  grieving
because  she  loves  Me  ;  for,  if  she  did  not  love
Me,  she  would  not  be  obliged  to  do  so ;  whence
it  follows  immediately,  that  it  is  right  for  thee,
and  My  other  servants  who  have  learnt  My  truth
in  this  way,  to  sustain,  even  unto  death,  many
tribulations  and  injuries  and  insults  in  word  and
deed,  for  the  glory  and  praise  of  My  Name ;
thus  wilt  thou  endure  and  suffer  pains.  Do
thou,  therefore,  and  My  other  servants,  carry
yourselves  with  true  patience,  with  grief  for
your  sins,  and  with  love  of  virtue  for  the  glory
and  praise  of  My  Name.  If  thou  actest  thus,
I  will  satisfy  for  thy  sins,  and  for  those  of  My
other  servants,  inasmuch  as  the  pains  which  thou
wilt  endure  will  be  sufficient,  through  the  virtue

c


34       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


of  love,  for  satisfaction  and  reward,  both  in  thee
and  in  others.  In  thyself  thou  wilt  receive  the
fruit  of  life,  when  the  stains  of  thy  ignorance  are
effaced,  and  I  shall  not  remember  that  thou  ever
didst  offend  Me.  In  others  I  will  satisfy  through
the  love  and  affection  which  thou  hast  to  Me,
and  I  will  give  to  them  according  to  the  dis-
position with  which  they  will  receive  My  gifts.
In  particular,  to  those  who  dispose  themselves,
humbly  and  with  reverence,  to  receive  the  doc-
trine of  My  servants,  will  I  remit  both  guilt  and
penalty,  since  they  will  thus  come  to  true  know-
ledge and  contrition  for  their  sins.  So  that,  by
means  of  prayer,  and  their  desire  of  serving  Me,
they  receive  the  fruit  of  grace,  receiving  it  humbly
in  greater  or  less  degree,  according  to  the  extent
of  their  exercise  of  virtue  and  grace  in  general.
I  say  then,  that,  through  thy  desires,  they  will
receive  remission  for  their  sins.  See,  however,
the  condition,  namely,  that  their  obstinacy  should
not  be  so  great  in  their  despair  as  to  condemn
them  through  contempt  of  the  Blood,  which,
with  such  sweetness,  has  restored  them.

"  What  fruit  do  they  receive  ?

"The  fruit  which  I  destine  for  them,  con-
strained by  the  prayers  of  My  servants,  is  that
I  give  them  light,  and  that  I  wake  up  in  them
the  hound  of  conscience,  and  make  them  smell
the  odour  of  virtue,  and  take  delight  in  the  con-
versation of  My  servants.

"  Sometimes  I  allow  the  world  to  show  them
what  it  is,  so  that,  feeling  its  diverse  and  various


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE  35


passions,  they  may  know  how  little  stability  it
has,  and  may  come  to  lift  their  desire  beyond
it,  and  seek  their  native  country,  which  is  the
Eternal  Life.  And  so  I  draw  them  by  these,
and  by  many  other  ways,  for  the  eye  cannot
see,  nor  the  tongue  relate,  nor  the  heart  think,
how  many  are  the  roads  and  ways  which  I  use,
through  love  alone,  to  lead  them  back  to  grace,
so  that  My  truth  may  be  fulfilled  in  them.  I
am  constrained  to  do  so  by  that  inestimable  love
of  Mine,  by  which  I  created  them,  and  by  the
love,  desire,  and  grief  of  My  servants,  since  I  am
no  despiser  of  their  tears,  and  sweat,  and  humble
prayers ;  rather  I  accept  them,  inasmuch  as  I  am
He  who  give  them  this  love  for  the  good  of
souls  and  grief  for  their  loss.  But  I  do  not,  in
general,  grant  to  these  others,  for  whom  they
pray,  satisfaction  for  the  penalty  due  to  them,
but,  only  for  their  guilt,  since  they  are  not  dis-
posed, on  their  side,  to  receive,  with  perfect  love,
My  love,  and  that  of  My  servants.  They  do
not  receive  their  grief  with  bitterness,  and  perfect
contrition  for  the  sins  they  have  committed,  but
with  imperfect  love  and  contrition,  wherefore
they  have  not,  as  others,  remission  of  the  penalty,
but  only  of  the  guilt ;  because  such  complete
satisfaction  requires  proper  dispositions  on  both
sides,  both  in  him  that  gives  and  him  that
receives.  Wherefore,  since  they  are  imperfect,
they  receive  imperfectly  the  perfection  of  the
desires  of  those  who  offer  them  to  Me,  for  their
sakes,  with  suffering ;  and,  inasmuch  as  I  told


36       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


thee  that  they  do  receive  remission,  this  is  indeed
the  truth,  that,  by  that  way  which  I  have  told
thee,  that  is,  by  the  light  of  conscience,  and  by
other  things,  satisfaction  is  made  for  their  guilt ;
for,  beginning  to  learn,  they  vomit  forth  the
corruption  of  their  sins,  and  so  receive  the  gift
of  grace.

"  These  are  they  who  are  in  a  state  of  ordinary
charity,  wherefore,  if  they  have  trouble,  they
receive  it  in  the  guise  of  correction,  and  do
not  resist  over  much  the  clemency  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  but,  coming  out  of  their  sin,  they  receive
the  life  of  grace.  But  if,  like  fools,  they  are  un-
grateful, and  ignore  Me  and  the  labours  of  My
servants  done  for  them,  that  which  was  given
them,  through  mercy,  turns  to  their  own  ruin
and  judgment,  not  through  defect  of  mercy,  nor
through  defect  of  him  who  implored  the  mercy
for  the  ingrate,  but  solely  through  the  man's  own
wretchedness  and  hardness,  with  which,  with  the
hands  of  his  free  will,  he  has  covered  his  heart,  as
it  were,  with  a  diamond,  which,  if  it  be  not  broken
by  the  Blood,  can  in  no  way  be  broken.  And  yet,
I  say  to  thee,  that,  in  spite  of  his  hardness  of
heart,  he  can  use  his  free  will  while  he  has  time,
praying  for  the  Blood  of  My  Son,  and  let  him
with  his  own  hand  apply  It  to  the  diamond  over
his  heart  and  shiver  it,  and  he  will  receive  the
imprint  of  the  Blood  which  has  been  paid  for
him.  But,  if  he  delays  until  the  time  be  past,  he
has  no  remedy,  because  he  has  not  used  the  dowry
which  I  gave  him,  giving  him  memory  so  as  to


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE  37


remember  My  benefits,  intellect,  so  as  to  see  and
know  the  truth,  affection,  so  that  he  should  love
Me,  the  Eternal  Truth,  whom  he  would  have
known  through  the  use  of  his  intellect.  This  is
the  dowry  which  I  have  given  you  all,  and  which
ought  to  render  fruit  to  Me,  the  Father ;  but,  if
a  man  barters  and  sells  it  to  the  devil,  the  devil,
if  he  choose,  has  a  right  to  seize  on  everything
that  he  has  acquired  in  this  life.  And,  filling  his
memory  with  the  delights  of  sin,  and  with  the
recollection  of  shameful  pride,  avarice,  self-love,
hatred,  and  unkindness  to  his  neighbours  (being
also  a  persecutor  of  My  servants),  with  these
miseries,  he  has  obscured  his  intellect  by  his  dis-
ordinate  will.  Let  such  as  these  receive  the
eternal  pains,  with  their  horrible  stench,  inasmuch
as  they  have  not  satisfied  for  their  sins  with  con-
trition and  displeasure  of  their  guilt.  Now,
therefore,  thou  hast  understood  how  suffering
satisfies  for  guilt  by  perfect  contrition,  not
through  the  finite  pain  ;  and  such  as  have  this
contrition  in  perfection  satisfy  not  only  for  the
guilt,  but  also  for  the  penalty  which  follows
the  guilt,  as  I  have  already  said  when  speaking
in  general ;  and  if  they  satisfy  for  the  guilt  alone,
that  is,  if,  having  abandoned  mortal  sin,  they
receive  grace,  and  have  not  sufficient  contrition
and  love  to  satisfy  for  the  penalty  also,  they
go  to  the  pains  of  Purgatory,  passing  through
the  second  and  last  means  of  satisfaction.

"  So  thou  seest  that  satisfaction  is  made,  through
the  desire  of  the  soul  united  to  Me,  who  am  the


38       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Infinite  Good,  in  greater  or  less  degree,  according
to  the  measure  of  love,  obtained  by  the  desire
and  prayer  of  the  recipient.  Wherefore,  with
that  very  same  measure  with  which  a  man
measures  to  Me,  dost  he  receive  in  himself  the
measure  of  My  goodness.  Labour,  therefore,  to
increase  the  fire  of  thy  desire,  and  let  not  a
moment  pass  without  crying  to  Me  with  humble
voice,  or  without  continual  prayers  before  Me
for  thy  neighbours.  I  say  this  to  thee  and  to  the
father  of  thy  soul,  whom  I  have  given  thee  on
earth.  Bear  yourselves  with  manful  courage,  and
make  yourselves  dead  to  all  your  own  sensuality/'


How  very  pleasing  to  God  is  the  willing  desire
to  suffer  for  Him.

"  Very  pleasing  to  Me,  dearest  daughter,  is  the
willing  desire  to  bear  every  pain  and  fatigue,
even  unto  death,  for  the  salvation  of  souls,  for
the  more  the  soul  endures,  the  more  she  shows
that  she  loves  Me ;  loving  Me  she  comes  to
know  more  of  My  truth,  and  the  more  she
knows,  the  more  pain  and  intolerable  grief  she
feels  at  the  offences  committed  against  Me.
Thou  didst  ask  Me  to  sustain  thee,  and  to
punish  the  faults  of  others  in  thee,  and  thou
didst  not  remark  that  thou  wast  really  asking
for  love,  light,  and  knowledge  of  the  truth,  since
I  have  already  told  thee  that,  by  the  increase  of
love,  grows  grief  and  pain,  wherefore  he  that
grows  in  love  grows  in  grief.    Therefore,  I  say


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE


39


to  you  all,  that  you  should  ask,  and  it  will  be
given  you,  for  I  deny  nothing  to  him  who  asks
of  Me  in  truth.  Consider  that  the  love  of
divine  charity  is  so  closely  joined  in  the  soul
with  perfect  patience,  that  neither  can  leave  the
soul  without  the  other.  For  this  reason  (if  the
soul  elect  to  love  Me)  she  should  elect  to  endure
pains  for  Me  in  whatever  mode  or  circumstance
I  may  send  them  to  her.  Patience  cannot  be
proved  in  any  other  way  than  by  suffering,  and
patience  is  united  with  love  as  has  been  said.
Therefore  bear  yourselves  with  manly  courage,
for,  unless  you  do  so,  you  will  not  prove  your-
selves to  be  spouses  of  My  Truth,  and  faithful
children,  nor  of  the  company  of  those  who  relish
the  taste  of  My  honour,  and  the  salvation  of
souls."


Hoiv  every  virtue  and  every  defect  is  obtained
by  means  of  our  neighbour.

"  I  wish  also  that  thou  shouldest  know  that
every  virtue  is  obtained  by  means  of  thy  neigh-
bour, and  likewise,  every  defect ;  he,  therefore,
who  stands  in  hatred  of  Me,  does  an  injury  to
his  neighbour,  and  to  himself,  who  is  his  own
chief  neighbour,  and  this  injury  is  both  general
and  particular.  It  is  general  because  you  are
obliged  to  love  your  neighbour  as  yourself,  and
loving  him,  you  ought  to  help  him  spiritually,
with  prayer,  counselling  him  with  words,  and
assisting  him  both  spiritually  and  temporally,


4o       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


according  to  the  need  in  which  he  may  be,  at
least  with  your  goodwill  if  you  have  nothing
else.  A  man  therefore,  who  does  not  love,  does
not  help  him,  and  thereby  does  himself  an  injury  ;
for  he  cuts  off  from  himself  grace,  and  injures
his  neighbour,  by  depriving  him  of  the  benefit  of
the  prayers  and  of  the  sweet  desires  that  he  is
bound  to  offer  for  him  to  Me.  Thus,  every  act
of  help  that  he  performs  should  proceed  from
the  charity  which  he  has  through  love  of  Me.
And  every  evil  also,  is  done  by  means  of  his
neighbour,  for,  if  he  do  not  love  Me,  he  cannot
be  in  charity  with  his  neighbour ;  and  thus,  all
evils  derive  from  the  soul's  deprivation  of  love
of  Me  and  her  neighbour ;  whence,  inasmuch  as
such  a  man  does  no  good,  it  follows  that  he
must  do  evil.  To  whom  does  he  evil  ?  First
of  all  to  himself,  and  then  to  his  neighbour,  not
against  Me,  for  no  evil  can  touch  Me,  except  in
so  far  as  I  count  done  to  Me  that  which  he  does
to  himself.  To  himself  he  does  the  injury  of  sin,
which  deprives  him  of  grace,  and  worse  than  this
he  cannot  do  to  his  neighbour.  Him  he  injures
in  not  paying  him  the  debt,  which  he  owes  him,
of  love,  with  which  he  ought  to  help  him  by
means  of  prayer  and  holy  desire  offered  to  Me
for  him.  This  is  an  assistance  which  is  owed  in
general  to  every  rational  creature ;  but  its  useful-
ness is  more  particular  when  it  is  done  to  those
who  are  close  at  hand,  under  your  eyes,  as  to
whom,  I  say,  you  are  all  obliged  to  help  one
another  by  word  and  doctrine,  and  the  example


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE  41


of  good  works,  and  in  every  other  respect  in
which  your  neighbour  may  be  seen  to  be  in
need ;  counselling  him  exactly  as  you  would
yourselves,  without  any  passion  of  self-love  ;  and
he  (a  man  not  loving  God)  does  not  do  this,
because  he  has  no  love  towards  his  neighbour ;
and,  by  not  doing  it,  he  does  him,  as  thou  seest,
a  special  injury.  And  he  does  him  evil,  not  only
by  not  doing  him  the  good  that  he  might  do  him,
but  by  doing  him  a  positive  injury  and  a  constant
evil.  In  this  way  sin  causes  a  physical  and  a
mental  injury.  The  mental  injury  is  already
done  when  the  sinner  has  conceived  pleasure  in
the  idea  of  sin,  and  hatred  of  virtue,  that  is,
pleasure  from  sensual  self-love,  which  has  de-
prived him  of  the  afFection  of  love  which  he
ought  to  have  towards  Me,  and  his  neighbour,
as  has  been  said.  And,  after  he  has  conceived,
he  brings  forth  one  sin  after  another  against  his
neighbour,  according  to  the  diverse  ways  which
may  please  his  perverse  sensual  will.  Sometimes
it  is  seen  that  he  brings  forth  cruelty,  and  that
both  in  general  and  in  particular.

"  His  general  cruelty  is  to  see  himself  and
other  creatures  in  danger  of  death  and  damna-
tion through  privation  of  grace,  and  so  cruel  is
he  that  he  reminds  neither  himself  nor  others  of
the  love  of  virtue  and  hatred  of  vice.  Being  thus
cruel  he  may  wish  to  extend  his  cruelty  still
further,  that  is,  not  content  with  not  giving  an
example  of  virtue,  the  villain  also  usurps  the
office  of  the  demons,  tempting,  according  to  his


42       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


power,  his  fellow-creatures  to  abandon  virtue  for
vice  ;  this  is  cruelty  towards  his  neighbours,  for
he  makes  himself  an  instrument  to  destroy  life
and  to  give  death.  Cruelty  towards  the  body
has  its  origin  in  cupidity,  which  not  only  pre-
vents a  man  from  helping  his  neighbour,  but
causes  him  to  seize  the  goods  of  others,  robbing
the  poor  creatures ;  sometimes  this  is  done  by
the  arbitrary  use  of  power,  and  at  other  times
by  cheating  and  fraud,  his  neighbour  being  forced
to  redeem,  to  his  own  loss,  his  own  goods,  and
often  indeed  his  own  person.

"  Oh,  miserable  vice  of  cruelty,  which  will
deprive  the  man  who  practises  it  of  all  mercy,
unless  he  turn  to  kindness  and  benevolence
towards  his  neighbour  !

''Sometimes  the  sinner  brings  forth  insults  on
which  often  follows  murder ;  sometimes  also  im-
purity against  the  person  of  his  neighbour,  by
which  he  becomes  a  brute  beast  full  of  stench,
and  in  this  case  he  does  not  poison  one  only,  but
whoever  approaches  him,  with  love  or  in  con-
versation, is  poisoned.

"  Against  whom  does  pride  bring  forth  evils  ?
Against  the  neighbour,  through  love  of  one's
own  reputation,  whence  comes  hatred  of  the
neighbour,  reputing  one's  self  to  be  greater  than
he ;  and  in  this  way  is  injury  done  to  him.
And  if  a  man  be  in  a  position  of  authority,  he
produces  also  injustice  and  cruelty  and  becomes
a  retailer  of  the  flesh  of  men.  Oh,  dearest
daughter,   grieve  for  the  offence   against  Me,


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE  43


and  weep  over  these  corpses,  so  that,  by  prayer,
the  bands  of  their  death  may  be  loosened  !

"  See  now,  that,  in  all  places  and  in  all  kinds
of  people,  sin  is  always  produced  against  the
neighbour,  and  through  his  medium ;  in  no
other  way  could  sin  ever  be  committed  either
secret  or  open.  A  secret  sin  is  when  you  deprive
your  neighbour  of  that  which  you  ought  to  give
him  ;  an  open  sin  is  where  you  perform  positive
acts  of  sin,  as  I  have  related  to  thee.  It  is,
therefore,  indeed  the  truth  that  every  sin  done
against  Me,  is  done  through  the  medium  of  the
neighbour."

How  virtues  are  accomplished  by  means  of  our  neigh-
bour^ and  how  it  is  that  virtues  differ  to  such
an  extent  in  creatures.

"  I  have  told  thee  how  all  sins  are  accom-
plished by  means  of  thy  neighbour,  through
the  principles  which  I  exposed  to  thee,  that  is,
because  men  are  deprived  of  the  affection  of  love,
which  gives  light  to  every  virtue.  In  the  same
way  self-love,  which  destroys  charity  and  affec-
tion towards  the  neighbour,  is  the  principle  and
foundation  of  every  evil.  All  scandals,  hatred,
cruelty,  and  every  sort  of  trouble  proceed  from
this  perverse  root  of  self-love,  which  has  poisoned
the  entire  world,  and  weakened  the  mystical  body
of  the  Holy  Church,  and  the  universal  body  of
the  believers  in  the  Christian  religion  ;  and,  there-
fore, I  said  to  thee,  that  it  was  in  the  neighbour,


44       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


that  is  to  say  in  the  love  of  him,  that  all  virtues
were  founded ;  and,  truly  indeed  did  I  say  to
thee,  that  charity  gives  life  to  all  the  virtues,
because  no  virtue  can  be  obtained  without  charity,
which  is  the  pure  love  of  Me.

"  Wherefore,  when  the  soul  knows  herself,  as
we  have  said  above,  she  finds  humility  and  hatred
of  her  own  sensual  passion,  for  she  learns  the
perverse  law,  which  is  bound  up  in  her  members,
and  which  ever  fights  against  the  spirit.  And,
therefore,  arising  with  hatred  of  her  own  sen-
suality, crushing  it  under  the  heel  of  reason,
with  great  earnestness,  she  discovers  in  herself
the  bounty  of  My  goodness,  through  the  many
benefits  which  she  has  received  from  Me,  all
of  which  she  considers  again  in  herself.  She
attributes  to  Me,  through  humility,  the  know-
ledge which  she  has  obtained  of  herself,  knowing
that,  by  My  grace,  I  have  drawn  her  out  of
darkness  and  lifted  her  up  into  the  light  of  true
knowledge.  When  she  has  recognised  My  good-
ness, she  loves  it  without  any  medium,  and  yet
at  the  same  time  with  a  medium,  that  is  to  say,
without  the  medium  of  herself  or  of  any  advan-
tage accruing  to  herself,  and  with  the  medium
of  virtue,  which  she  has  conceived  through  love
of  Me,  because  she  sees  that,  in  no  other  way,
can  she  become  grateful  and  acceptable  to  Me,
but  by  conceiving,  hatred  of  sin  and  love  of
virtue ;  and,  when  she  has  thus  conceived  by
the  affection  of  love,  she  immediately  is  delivered
of  fruit  for  her  neighbour,  because,  in  no  other


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE


way,  can  she  act  out  the  truth  she  has  conceived
in  herself,  but,  loving  Me  in  truth,  in  the  same
truth  she  serves  her  neighbour.

"  And  it  cannot  be  otherwise,  because  love  of
Me  and  of  her  neighbour  are  one  and  the  same
thing,  and,  so  far  as  the  soul  loves  Me,  she  loves
her  neighbour,  because  love  towards  him  issues
from  Me.  This  is  the  means  which  I  have
given  you,  that  you  may  exercise  and  prove  your
virtue  therewith ;  because,  inasmuch  as  you  can
do  Me  no  profit,  you  should  do  it  to  your
neighbour.  This  proves  that  you  possess  Me
by  grace  in  your  soul,  producing  much  fruit  for
your  neighbour  and  making  prayers  to  Me,  seek-
ing with  sweet  and  amorous  desire  My  honour
and  the  salvation  of  souls.  The  soul,  enamoured
of  My  truth,  never  ceases  to  serve  the  whole
world  in  general,  and  more  or  less  in  a  particular
case  according  to  the  disposition  of  the  recipient
and  the  ardent  desire  of  the  donor,  as  I  have
shown  above,  when  I  declared  to  thee  that  the
endurance  of  suffering  alone,  without  desire,  was
not  sufficient  to  punish  a  fault.

"  When  she  has  discovered  the  advantage  of
this  unitive  love  in  Me,  by  means  of  which,  she
truly  loves  herself,  extending  her  desire  for  the
salvation  of  the  whole  world,  thus  coming  to  the
aid  of  its  neediness,  she  strives,  inasmuch  as  she
has  done  good  to  herself  by  the  conception  of
virtue,  from,  which  she  has  drawn  the  life  of  grace,
to  fix  her  eye  on  the  needs  of  her  neighbour  in
particular.    Wherefore,  when  she  has  discovered,


46       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


through  the  affection  of  love,  the  state  of  all
rational  creatures  in  general,  she  helps  those  who
are  at  hand,  according  to  the  various  graces  which
I  have  entrusted  to  her  to  administer ;  one  she
helps  with  doctrine,  that  is,  with  words,  giving
sincere  counsel  without  any  respect  of  persons,
another  with  the  example  of  a  good  life,  and  this
indeed  all  give  to  their  neighbour,  the  edification
of  a  holy  and  honourable  life.  These  are  the
virtues,  and  many  others,  too  many  to  enumerate,
which  are  brought  forth  in  the  love  of  the  neigh-
bour ;  but,  although  I  have  given  them  in  such  a
different  way,  that  is  to  say  not  all  to  one,  but  to
one,  one  virtue,  and  to  another,  another,  it  so
happens  that  it  is  impossible  to  have  one,  without
having  them  all,  because  all  the  virtues  are  bound
together.  Wherefore,  learn,  that,  in  many  cases
I  give  one  virtue,  to  be  as  it  were  the  chief  of  the
others,  that  is  to  say,  to  one  I  will  give  principally
love,  to  another  justice,  to  another  humility,  to
one  a  lively  faith,  to  another  prudence  or  temper-
ance, or  patience,  to  another  fortitude.  These,
and  many  other  virtues,  I  place,  indifferently,  in
the  souls  of  many  creatures  ;  it  happens,  therefore,
that  the  particular  one  so  placed  in  the  soul
becomes  the  principal  object  of  its  virtue ;  the
soul  disposing  herself,  for  her  chief  conversation,
to  this  rather  than  to  other  virtues,  and,  by  the
effect  of  this  virtue,,  the  soul  draws  to  herself  all
the  other  virtues,  which,  as  has  been  said,  are  all
bound  together  in  the  affection  of  love ;  and  so
with  many  gifts  and  graces  of  virtue,  and  not


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE


47


only  in  the  case  of  spiritual  things  but  also  of
temporal.  I  use  the  word  temporal  for  the  things
necessary  to  the  physical  life  of  man ;  all  these  I
have  given  indifferently,  and  I  have  not  placed
them  all  in  one  soul,  in  order  that  man  should,
perforce,  have  material  for  love  of  his  fellow.  I
could  easily  have  created  men  possessed  of  all  that
they  should  need  both  for  body  and  soul,  but  I
wish  that  one  should  have  need  of  the  other,  and
that  they  should  be  My  ministers  to  administer
the  graces  and  the  gifts  that  they  have  received
from  Me.  Whether  man  will  or  no,  he  cannot
help  making  an  act  of  love.  It  is  true,  however,
that  that  act,  unless  made  through  love  of  Me,
profits  him  nothing  so  far  as  grace  is  concerned.
See  then,  that  I  have  made  men  My  ministers,
and  placed  them  in  diverse  stations  and  various
ranks,  in  order  that  they  may  make  use  of  the
virtue  of  love.

"  Wherefore,  I  show  you  that  in  My  house  are
many  mansions,  and  that  I  wish  for  no  other  thing
than  love,  for  in  the  love  of  Me  is  fulfilled  and
completed  the  love  of  the  neighbour,  and  the  law
observed.  For  he,  only,  can  be  of  use  in  his  state
of  life,  who  is  bound  to  Me  with  this  love."

How  virtues  are  proved  and  fortified  by  their
contraries.

"  Up  to  the  present,  I  have  taught  thee  how  a
man  may  serve  his  neighbour,  and  manifest,  by
that  service,  the  love  which  he  has  towards  Me.


48       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


"  Now  I  wish  to  tell  thee  further,  that  a  man
proves  his  patience  on  his  neighbour,  when  he
receives  injuries  from  him.

"  Similarly,  he  proves  his  humility  on  a  proud
man,  his  faith  on  an  infidel,  his  true  hope  on  one
who  despairs,  his  justice  on  the  unjust,  his  kind-
ness on  the  cruel,  his  gentleness  and  benignity  on
the  irascible.  Good  men  produce  and  prove  all
their  virtues  on  their  neighbour,  just  as  perverse
men  all  their  vices  ;  thus,  if  thou  consider  well,
humility  is  proved  on  pride  in  this  way.  The
humble  man  extinguishes  pride,  because  a  proud
man  can  do  no  harm  to  a  humble  one ;  neither
can  the  infidelity  of  a  wicked  man,  who  neither
loves  Me,  nor  hopes  in  Me,  when  brought  forth
against  one  who  is  faithful  to  Me,  do  him  any
harm ;  his  infidelity  does  not  diminish  the  faith
or  the  hope  of  him  who  has  conceived  his  faith
and  hope  through  love  of  Me,  it  rather  fortifies
it,  and  proves  it  in  the  love  he  feels  for  his  neigh-
bour. For,  he  sees  that  the  infidel  is  unfaithful,
because  he  is  without  hope  in  Me,  and  in  My
servant,  because  he  does  not  love  Me,  placing  his
faith  and  hope  rather  in  his  own  sensuality,  which
is  all  that  he  loves.  My  faithful  servant  does  not
leave  him  because  he  does  not  faithfully  love  Me,
or  because  he  does  not  constantly  seek,  with  hope
in  Me,  for  his  salvation,  inasmuch  as  he  sees
clearly  the  causes  of  his  infidelity  and  lack  of
hope.  The  virtue  of  faith  is  proved  in  these  and
other  ways.  Wherefore,  to  those,  who  need  the
proof  of  it,  My  servant  proves  his  faith  in  himself


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE


and  in  his  neighbour,  and  so,  justice  is  not
diminished  by  the  wicked  man's  injustice,  but  is
rather  proved,  that  is  to  say,  the  justice  of  a  just
man.  Similarly,  the  virtues  of  patience,  benignity,
and  kindness  manifest  themselves  in  a  time  of
wrath  by  the  same  sweet  patience  in  My  servants,
and  envy,  vexation,  and  hatred  demonstrate  their
love,  and  hunger  and  desire  for  the  salvation  of
souls.  I  say,  also,  to  thee,  that,  not  only  is  virtue
proved  in  those  who  render  good  for  evil,  but,
that  many  times  a  good  man  gives  back  fiery  coals
of  love,  which  dispel  the  hatred  and  rancour  of
heart  of  the  angry,  and  so  from  hatred  often
comes  benevolence,  and  that  this  is  by  virtue  of
the  love  and  perfect  patience  which  is  in  him,
who  sustains  the  anger  of  the  wicked,  bearing  and
supporting  his  defects.  If  thou  wilt  observe  the
virtues  of  fortitude  and  perseverance,  these  virtues
are  proved  by  the  long  endurance  of  the  injuries
and  detractions  of  wicked  men,  who,  whether  by
injuries  or  by  flattery,  constantly  endeavour  to
turn  a  man  aside  from  following  the  road  and
the  doctrine  of  truth.  Wherefore,  in  all  these
things,  the  virtue  of  fortitude  conceived  within
the  soul,  perseveres  with  strength,  and,  in  addition
proves  itself  externally  upon  the  neighbour,  as  I
have  said  to  thee  ;  and,  if  fortitude  were  not  able
to  make  that  good  proof  of  itself,  being  tested  by
many  contrarieties,  it  would  not  be  a  serious  virtue
founded  in  truth."


D


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION


How  the  affection  should  not  place  reliance  chiefly  on
penance,  but  rather  on  virtues ;  and  how  dis-
cretion receives  life  from  humility,  and  renders
to  each  man  his  due.

"  These  are  the  holy  and  sweet  works  which  I
seek  from  My  servants ;  these  are  the  proved
intrinsic  virtues  of  the  soul,  as  I  have  told  thee.
They  not  only  consist  of  those  virtues  which  are
done  by  means  of  the  body,  that  is,  with  an
exterior  act,  or  with  diverse  and  varied  penances,
which  are  the  instruments  of  virtue ;  works  of
penance  performed  alone  without  the  above-
mentioned  virtues  would  please  Me  little ;  often,
indeed,  if  the  soul  perform  not  her  penance  with
discretion,  that  is  to  say,  if  her  affection  be  placed
principally  in  the  penance  she  has  undertaken,
her  perfection  will  be  impeded ;  she  should  rather
place  reliance  on  the  affection  of  love,  with  a  holy
hatred  of  herself,  accompanied  by  true  humility
and  perfect  patience,  together  with  the  other  in-
trinsic virtues  of  the  soul,  with  hunger  and  desire
for  My  honour  and  the  salvation  of  souls.  For
these  virtues  demonstrate  that  the  will  is  dead,
and  continually  slays  its  own  sensuality  through

the  affection  of  love  of  virtue.    With  this  dis-

50


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  51


cretion,  then,  should  the  soul  perform  her  penance,
that  is,  she  should  place  her  principal  affection
in  virtue  rather  than  in  penance.  Penance  should
be  but  the  means  to  increase  virtue  according  to
the  needs  of  the  individual,  and  according  to
what  the  soul  sees  she  can  do  in  the  measure  of
her  own  possibility.  Otherwise,  if  the  soul  place
her  foundation  on  penance  she  will  contaminate
her  own  perfection,  because  her  penance  will  not
be  done  in  the  light  of  knowledge  of  herself  and
of  My  goodness,  with  discretion,  and  she  will
not  seize  hold  of  My  truth  ;  neither  loving  that
which  I  love,  nor  hating  that  which  I  hate.
This  virtue  of  discretion  is  no  other  than  a
true  knowledge  which  the  soul  should  have  of
herself  and  of  Me,  and  in  this  knowledge  is
virtue  rooted.  Discretion  is  the  only  child  of
self-knowledge,  and,  wedding  with  charity,  has
indeed  many  other  descendants,  as  a  tree  which
has  many  branches ;  but  that  which  gives  life
to  the  tree,  to  its  branches,  and  its  root,  is
the  ground  of  humility,  in  which  it  is  planted,
which  humility  is  the  foster-mother  and  nurse
of  charity,  by  whose  means  this  tree  remains  in
the  perpetual  calm  of  discretion.  Because  other-
wise the  tree  would  not  produce  the  virtue  of  dis-
cretion, or  any  fruit  of  life,  if  it  were  not  planted
in  the  virtue  of  humility,  because  humility  pro-
ceeds from  self-knowledge.  And  I  have  already
said  to  thee,  that  the  root  of  discretion  is  a  real
knowledge  of  self  and  of  My  goodness,  by  which
the  soul  immediately,  and  discreetly,  renders  to


52       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


each  one  his  due.  Chiefly  to  Me  in  rendering
praise  and  glory  to  My  Name,  and  in  referring
to  Me  the  graces  and  the  gifts  which  she  sees
and  knows  she  has  received  from  Me ;  and  ren-
dering to  herself  that  which  she  sees  herself  to
have  merited,  knowing  that  she  does  not  even
exist  of  herself,  and  attributing  to  Me,  and  not
to  herself,  her  being,  which  she  knows  she  has
received  by  grace  from  Me,  and  every  other
grace  which  she  has  received  besides.

"  And  she  seems  to  herself  to  be  ungrateful
for  so  many  benefits,  and  negligent,  in  that  she
has  not  made  the  most  of  her  time,  and  the
graces  she  has  received,  and  so  seems  to  her-
self worthy  of  suffering ;  wherefore  she  becomes
odious  and  displeasing  to  herself  through  her
guilt.  And  this  founds  the  virtue  of  discretion
on  knowledge  of  self,  that  is,  on  true  humility,
for,  were  this  humility  not  in  the  soul,  the  soul
would  be  indiscreet,  indiscretion  being  founded
on  pride,  as  discretion  is  on  humility.

"An  indiscreet  soul  robs  Me  of  the  honour
due  to  Me,  and  attributes  it  to  herself,  through
vainglory,  and  that  which  is  really  her  own  she
imputes  to  Me,  grieving  and  murmuring  con-
cerning My  mysteries,  with  which  I  work  in  her
soul  and  in  those  of  My  other  creatures ;  where-
fore everything  in  Me  and  in  her  neighbour  is
cause  of  scandal  to  her.  Contrariwise  those  who
possess  the  virtue  of  discretion.  For,  when  they
have  rendered  what  is  due  to  Me  and  to  them-
selves, they  proceed  to  render  to  their  neighbour


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  53


their  principal  debt  of  love,  and  of  humble  and
continuous  prayer,  which  all  should  pay  to  each
other,  and  further,  the  debt  of  doctrine,  and
example  of  a  holy  and  honourable  life,  counsel-
ling and  helping  others  according  to  their  needs
for  salvation,  as  I  said  to  thee  above.  Whatever
rank  a  man  be  in,  whether  that  of  a  noble,  a
prelate,  or  a  servant,  if  he  have  this  virtue,
everything  that  he  does  to  his  neighbour  is  done
discreetly  and  lovingly,  because  these  virtues  are
bound  and  mingled  together,  and  both  planted
in  the  ground  of  humility  which  proceeds  from
self-knowledge."

A  parable  showing  how  love,  humility,  and  discretion
are  united ;  and  how  the  soul  should  conform
herself  to  this  parable.

"  Dost  thou  know  how  these  three  virtues
stand  together?  It  is,  as  if  a  circle  were  drawn
on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  a  tree,  with  an
off-shoot  joined  to  its  side,  grew  in  the  centre  of
the  circle.  The  tree  is  nourished  in  the  earth
contained  in  the  diameter  of  the  circle,  for  if
the  tree  were  out  of  the  earth  it  would  die,  and
give  no  fruit.  Now,  consider,  in  the  same  way,
that  the  soul  is  a  tree  existing  by  love,  and  that
it  can  live  by  nothing  else  than  love ;  and,  that
if  this  soul  have  not  in  very  truth  the  divine
love  of  perfect  charity,  she  cannot  produce  fruit
of  life,  but  only  of  death.  It  is  necessary  then,
that  the  root  of  this  tree,  that  is  the  affection


54       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


of  the  soul,  should  grow  in,  and  issue  from  the
circle  of  true  self-knowledge  which  is  contained
in  Me,  who  have  neither  beginning  nor  end,  like
the  circumference  of  the  circle,  for,  turn  as  thou
wilt  within  a  circle,  inasmuch  as  the  circumfer-
ence has  neither  end  nor  beginning,  thou  always
remainest  within  it.

4 'This  knowledge  of  thyself  and  of  Me  is
found  in  the  earth  of  true  humility,  which  is
as  wide  as  the  diameter  of  the  circle,  that  is  as
the  knowledge  of  self  and  of  Me  (for,  otherwise,
the  circle  would  not  be  without  end  and  begin-
ning, but  would  have  its  beginning  in  knowledge
of  self,  and  its  end  in  confusion,  if  this  knowledge
were  not  contained  in  Me).  Then  the  tree  of
love  feeds  itself  on  humility,  bringing  forth  from
its  side  the  off-shoot  of  true  discretion,  in  the
way  that  I  have  already  told  thee,  from  the  heart
of  the  tree,  that  is  the  affection  of  love  which  is
in  the  soul,  and  the  patience,  which  proves  that
I  am  in  the  soul  and  the  soul  in  Me.  This
tree  then,  so  sweetly  planted,  produces  fragrant
blossoms  of  virtue,  with  many  scents  of  great
variety,  inasmuch  as  the  soul  renders  fruit  of
grace  and  of  utility  to  her  neighbour,  according
to  the  zeal  of  those  who  come  to  receive  fruit
from  My  servants ;  and  to  Me  she  renders  the
sweet  odour  of  glory  and  praise  to  My  Name,
and  so  fulfils  the  object  of  her  creation.

"  In  this  way,  therefore,  she  reaches  the  term
of  her  being,  that  is  Myself,  her  God,  who  am
Eternal  Life.    And  these  fruits  cannot  be  taken


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  55


from  her  without  her  will,  inasmuch  as  they  are
all  flavoured  with  discretion,  because  they  are  all
united,  as  has  been  said  above. "


How  penance  and  other  corporal  exercises  are  to  be
taken  as  instruments  for  arriving  at  virtue,  and
not  as  the  principal  affection  of  the  soul ;  and  of
the  light  of  discretion  in  various  other  modes  and
operations.

"  These  are  the  fruits  and  the  works  which  I
seek  from  the  soul,  the  proving,  namely,  of  virtue
in  the  time  of  need.  And  yet  some  time  ago,  if
thou  remember,  when  thou  wert  desirous  of  doing
great  penance  for  My  sake,  asking,  4  What  can  I
do  to  endure  suffering  for  Thee,  oh  Lord  ? '  I
replied  to  thee,  speaking  in  thy  mind,  '  I  take
delight  in  few  words  and  many  works/  I  wished
to  show  thee  that  he  who  merely  calls  on  me  with
the  sound  of  words,  saying  :  '  Lord,  Lord,  I  would
do  something  for  Thee,'  and  he,  who  desires  for
My  sake  to  mortify  his  body  with  many  penances,
and  not  his  own  will,  did  not  give  Me  much
pleasure  ;  but  that  I  desired  the  manifold  works
of  manly  endurance  with  patience,  together  with
the  other  virtues,  which  I  have  mentioned  to  thee
above,  intrinsic  to  the  soul,  all  of  which  must  be
in  activity  in  order  to  obtain  fruits  worthy  of
grace.  All  other  works,  founded  on  any  other
principle  than  this,  I  judge  to  be  a  mere  calling
with  words,  because  they  are  finite  works,  and  I,


56       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

who  am  Infinite,  seek  infinite  works,  that  is  an
infinite  perfection  of  love.

"I  wish  therefore  that  the  works  of  penance,
and  of  other  corporal  exercises,  should  be  ob-
served merely  as  means,  and  not  as  the  funda-
mental affection  of  the  soul.  For,  if  the  principal
affection  of  the  soul  were  placed  in  penance,  I
should  receive  a  finite  thing  like  a  word,  which,
when  it  has  issued  from  the  mouth,  is  no  more,
unless  it  have  issued  with  affection  of  the  soul,
which  conceives  and  brings  forth  virtue  in  truth  ;
that  is,  unless  the  finite  operation,  which  I  have
called  a  word,  should  be  joined  with  the  affection
or  love,  in  which  case  it  would  be  grateful  and
pleasant  to  Me.  And  this  is  because  such  a  work
would  not  be  alone,  but  accompanied  by  true
discretion,  using  corporal  works  as  means,  and
not  as  the  principal  foundation ;  for  it  would
not  be  becoming  that  that  principal  foundation
should  be  placed  in  penance  only,  or  in  any
exterior  corporal  act,  such  works  being  finite,
since  they  are  done  in  finite  time,  and  also
because  it  is  often  profitable  that  the  creature
emit  them,  and  even  that  she  be  made  to  do  so.

"  Wherefore,  when  the  soul  omits  them  through
necessity,  being  unable  through  various  circum-
stances to  complete  an  action  which  she  has
begun,  or,  as  may  frequently  happen,  through
obedience  at  the  order  of  her  director,  it  is  well ;
since,  if  she  continued  then  to  do  them,  she  not
only  would  receive  no  merit,  but  would  offend
Me  ;  thus  thou  seest  that  they  are  merely  finite.


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  57


She  ought,  therefore,  to  adopt  them  as  a  means,
and  not  as  an  end.  For,  if  she  takes  them  as  an
end  she  will  be  obliged,  some  time  or  other,  to
leave  them,  and  will  then  remain  empty.  This,
My  trumpeter,  the  glorious  Paul,  taught  you
when  he  said  in  his  epistle,  that  you  should
mortify  the  body  and  destroy  self-will,  knowing,
that  is  to  say,  how  to  keep  the  rein  on  the  body,
macerating  the  flesh  whenever  it  should  wish  to
combat  the  spirit,  but  the  will  should  be  dead
and  annihilated  in  everything,  and  subject  to
My  will,  and  this  slaying  of  the  will  is  that  due
which,  as  I  told  thee,  the  virtue  of  discretion
renders  to  the  soul,  that  is  to  say,  hatred  and
disgust  of  her  own  offences  and  sensuality,  which
are  acquired  by  self-knowledge.  This  is  the
knife  which  slays  and  cuts  off  all  self  -  love
founded  in  self-will.  These  then  are  they  who
give  Me  not  only  words  but  manifold  works,  and
in  these  I  take  delight.  And  then  I  said  that
I  desired  few  words,  and  many  actions  ;  by  the
use  of  the  word  *  many '  I  assign  no  particular
number  to  thee,  because  the  affection  of  the
soul,  founded  in  love,  which  gives  life  to  all
the  virtues  and  good  works,  should  increase
infinitely,  and  yet  I  do  not,  by  this,  exclude
words,  I  merely  said  that  I  wished  few  of  them,
showing  thee  that  every  actual  operation,  as  such,
was  finite,  and  therefore  I  called  them  of  little
account ;  but  they  please  Me  when  they  are
performed  as  the  instruments  of  virtue,  and
not  as  a  principal  end  in  themselves.


58       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


"  However,  no  one  should  judge  that  he  has
greater  perfection,  because  he  performs  great
penances,  and  gives  himself  in  excess  to  the
slaying  of  his  body,  than  he  who  does  less,
inasmuch  as  neither  virtue  nor  merit  consists
therein ;  for  otherwise  he  would  be  in  an  evil
case,  who,  from  some  legitimate  reason,  was
unable  to  do  actual  penance.  Merit  consists  in
the  virtue  of  love  alone,  flavoured  with  the
light  of  true  discretion,  without  which  the  soul
is  worth  nothing.  And  this  love  should  be
directed  to  Me  endlessly,  boundlessly,  since  I
am  the  Supreme  and  Eternal  Truth.  The  soul
can  therefore  place  neither  laws  nor  limits  to  her
love  for  Me ;  but  her  love  for  her  neighbour,
on  the  contrary,  is  ordered  in  certain  conditions.
The  light  of  discretion  (which  proceeds  from
love,  as  I  have  told  thee)  gives  to  the  neighbour
a  conditioned  love,  one  that,  being  ordered  aright,
does  not  cause  the  injury  of  sin  to  self  in  order  to
be  useful  to  others,  for,  if  one  single  sin  were
committed  to  save  the  whole  world  from  Hell,
or  to  obtain  one  great  virtue,  the  motive  would
not  be  a  rightly  ordered  or  discreet  love,  but
rather  indiscreet,  for  it  is  not  lawful  to  perform
even  one  act  of  great  virtue  and  profit  to  others,
by  means  of  the  guilt  of  sin.  Holy  discretion
ordains  that  the  soul  should  direct  all  her  powers
to  My  service  with  a  manly  zeal,  and,  that  she
should  love  her  neighbour  with  such  devotion  that
she  would  lay  down  a  thousand  times,  if  it  were
possible,  the  life  of  her  body  for  the  salvation  of


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  59


souls,  enduring  pains  and  torments  so  that  her
neighbour  may  have  the  life  of  grace,  and  giving
her  temporal  substance  for  the  profit  and  relief  of
his  body.

"  This  is  the  supreme  office  of  discretion  which
proceeds  from  charity.  So  thou  seest  how  dis-
creetly every  soul,  who  wishes  for  grace,  should
pay  her  debts,  that  is,  should  love  Me  with  an
infinite  love  and  without  measure,  but  her  neigh-
bour with  measure,  with  a  restricted  love,  as  I
have  said,  not  doing  herself  the  injury  of  sin  in
order  to  be  useful  to  others.  This  is  St.  Paul's
counsel  to  thee  when  he  says  that  charity  ought
to  be  concerned  first  with  self,  otherwise  it  will
never  be  of  perfect  utility  to  others.  Because,
when  perfection  is  not  in  the  soul,  everything
which  the  soul  does  for  itself  and  for  others  is
imperfect.  It  would  not,  therefore,  be  just  that
creatures,  who  are  finite  and  created  by  Me,  should
be  saved  through  offence  done  to  Me,  who  am
the  Infinite  Good.  The  more  serious  the  fault  is
in  such  a  case,  the  less  fruit  will  the  action  pro-
duce ;  therefore,  in  no  way  shouldest  thou  ever
incur  the  guilt  of  sin.

"  And  this  true  love  knows  well,  because  she
carries  with  herself  the  light  of  holy  discretion,
that  light  which  dissipates  all  darkness,  takes
away  ignorance,  and  is  the  condiment  of  every
instrument  of  virtue.  Holy  discretion  is  a  pru-
dence which  cannot  be  cheated,  a  fortitude  which
cannot  be  beaten,  a  perseverance  from  end  to  end,
stretching  from  Heaven  to  earth,  that  is,  from


6o       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


knowledge  of  Me  to  knowledge  of  self,  and  from
love  of  Me  to  love  of  others.  And  the  soul
escapes  dangers  by  her  true  humility,  and,  by  her
prudence,  flies  all  the  nets  of  the  world  and  its
creatures,  and,  with  unarmed  hands,  that  is  through
much  endurance,  discomfits  the  devil  and  the  flesh
with  this  sweet  and  glorious  light ;  knowing,  by
it,  her  own  fragility,  she  renders  to  her  weakness
its  due  of  hatred.

"  Wherefore  she  has  trampled  on  the  world,
and  placed  it  under  the  feet  of  her  affection,
despising  it,  and  holding  it  vile,  and  thus  be-
coming lord  of  it,  holding  it  as  folly.  And  the
men  of  the  world  cannot  take  her  virtues  from
such  a  soul,  but  all  their  persecutions  increase
her  virtues  and  prove  them,  which  virtues  have
been  at  first  conceived  by  the  virtue  of  love,
as  has  been  said,  and  then  are  proved  on  her
neighbour,  and  bring  forth  their  fruit  on  him.
Thus  have  I  shown  thee,  that,  if  virtue  were
not  visible  and  did  not  shine  in  the  time  of
trial,  it  would  not  have  been  truly  conceived  ;
for,  I  have  already  told  thee,  that  perfect  virtue
cannot  exist  and  give  fruit  except  by  means  of
the  neighbour,  even  as  a  woman,  who  has  con-
ceived a  child,  if  she  do  not  bring  it  forth,  so
that  it  may  appear  before  the  eyes  of  men,
deprives  her  husband  of  his  fame  of  paternity.
It  is  the  same  with  Me,  who  am  the  Spouse  of
the  soul,  if  she  do  not  produce  the  child  of
virtue,  in  the  love  of  her  neighbour,  showing
her  child  to  him  who  is  in  need,  both  in  general


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  61


and  in  particular,  as  I  have  said  to  thee  before,
so  I  declare  now  that,  in  truth,  she  has  not
conceived  virtue  at  all ;  and  this  is  also  true  of
the  vices,  all  of  which  are  committed  by  means
of  the  neighbour."

How  this  soul  grew  by  means  of  the  divine  response,
and  how  her  sorrows  grew  less,  and  how  she
prayed  to  God  for  the  Holy  Church,  and  for  her
own  people.

"  Then  that  soul,  thirsting  and  burning  with
the  very  great  desire  that  she  had  conceived
on  learning  the  inerrable  love  of  God,  shown  in
His  great  goodness,  and,  seeing  the  breadth  of
His  charity,  that,  with  such  sweetness,  He  had
deigned  to  reply  to  her  request  and  to  satisfy
it,  giving  hope  to  the  sorrow  which  she  had  con-
ceived, on  account  of  offences  against  God,  and
the  damage  of  the  Holy  Church,  and  through
His  own  mercy,  which  she  saw  through  self-
knowledge,  diminished,  and  yet,  at  the  same
time,  increased  her  sorrow.

"  For,  the  Supreme  and  Eternal  Father,  in
manifesting  the  way  of  perfection,  showed  her
anew  her  own  guilt,  and  the  loss  of  souls,  as
has  been  said  more  fully  above.  Also  because
in  the  knowledge  which  the  soul  obtains  of  her-
self, she  knows  more  of  God,  and  knowing  the
goodness  of  God  in  herself,  the  sweet  mirror  of
God,  she  knows  her  own  dignity  and  indignity.
Her  dignity  is  that  of  her  creation,  seeing  that


62       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


she  is  the  image  of  God,  and  this  has  been  given
her  by  grace,  and  not  as  her  due.  In  that  same
mirror  of  the  goodness  of  God,  the  soul  knows
her  own  indignity,  which  is  the  consequence  of
her  own  fault.  Wherefore,  as  a  man  more
readily  sees  spots  on  his  face  when  he  looks  in
a  mirror,  so,  the  soul  who,  with  true  knowledge
of  self,  rises  with  desire,  and  gazes  with  the  eye
of  the  intellect  at  herself  in  the  sweet  mirror  of
God,  knows  better  the  stains  of  her  own  face,
by  the  purity  which  she  sees  in  Him.

"  Wherefore,  because  light  and  knowledge
increased  in  that  soul  in  the  aforesaid  way,  a
sweet  sorrow  grew  in  her,  and  at  the  same  time,
her  sorrow  was  diminished  by  the  hope  which
the  Supreme  Truth  gave  her,  and,  as  fire  grows
when  it  is  fed  with  wood,  so  grew  the  fire  in
that  soul  to  such  an  extent  that  it  was  no  longer
possible  for  the  body  to  endure  it  without  the
departure  of  the  soul ;  so  that,  had  she  not  been
surrounded  by  the  strength  of  Him  who  is  the
Supreme  Strength,  it  would  not  have  been  pos-
sible for  her  to  have  lived  any  longer.  This  soul
then,  being  purified  by  the  fire  of  divine  love,
which  she  found  in  the  knowledge  of  herself
and  of  God,  and  her  hunger  for  the  salvation
of  the  whole  world,  and  for  the  reformation  of
the  Holy  Church,  having  grown  with  her  hope
of  obtaining  the  same,  rose  with  confidence
before  the  Supreme  Father,  showing  Him  the
leprosy  of  the  Holy  Church,  and  the  misery  of
the  world,  saying,  as  if  with  the  words  of  Moses,


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  63


'  My  Lord,  turn  the  eyes  of  Thy  mercy  upon
Thy  people,  and  upon  the  mystical  body  of
the  Holy  Church,  for  Thou  wilt  be  the  more
glorified  if  Thou  pardonest  so  many  creatures,
and  givest  to  them  the  light  of  knowledge,  since
all  will  render  Thee  praise  when  they  see  them-
selves escape  through  Thy  infinite  goodness  from
the  clouds  of  mortal  sin,  and  from  eternal  damna-
tion ;  and  then  Thou  wilt  not  only  be  praised
by  my  wretched  self,  who  have  so  much  offended
Thee,  and  who  am  the  cause  and  the  instrument
of  all  this  evil,  for  which  reason  I  pray  Thy
divine  and  eternal  love  to  take  Thy  revenge  on
me,  and  to  do  mercy  to  Thy  people,  and  never
will  I  depart  from  before  Thy  presence  until
I  see  that  thou  grantest  them  mercy.  For  what
is  it  to  me  if  I  have  life,  and  Thy  people  death,
and  the  clouds  of  darkness  cover  Thy  spouse,
when  it  is  my  own  sins,  and  not  those  of  Thy
other  creatures,  that  are  the  principal  cause  of
this  ?  I  desire,  then,  and  beg  of  Thee,  by  Thy
grace,  that  Thou  have  mercy  on  Thy  people,
and  I  adjure  Thee  that  Thou  do  this  by  Thy
uncreated  love  which  moved  Thee  Thyself  to
create  man  in  Thy  image  and  similitude,  saying,
"  Let  us  make  man  in  our  own  image/'  and  this
Thou  didst,  oh  eternal  Trinity,  that  man  might
participate  in  everything  belonging  to  Thee,  the
most  high  and  eternal  Trinity.'

"  Wherefore  Thou  gavest  him  memory  in
order  to  receive  Thy  benefits,  by  which  he  parti-
cipates in  the  power  of  the  Eternal  Father ;  and


64       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


intellect  that  he  might  know,  seeing  Thy  good-
ness, and  so  might  participate  in  the  wisdom
of  Thine  only-begotten  Son ;  and  will,  that  he
might  love  that  which  his  intellect  has  seen  and
known  of  Thy  truth,  thus  participating  in  the
clemency  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit.  What  reason
hadst  Thou  for  creating  man  in  such  dignity  ?
The  inestimable  love  with  which  Thou  sawest
Thy  creature  in  Thyself,  and  didst  become  en-
amoured of  him,  for  Thou  didst  create  him
through  love,  and  didst  destine  him  to  be  such
that  he  might  taste  and  enjoy  Thy  Eternal  Good.
I  see  therefore  that  through  his  sin  he  lost  this
dignity  in  which  Thou  didst  originally  place
him,  and  by  his  rebellion  against  Thee,  fell  into
a  state  of  war  with  Thy  kindness,  that  is  to  say,
we  all  became  Thy  enemies.

"  Therefore,  Thou,  moved  by  that  same  fire
of  love  with  which  Thou  didst  create  him,  didst
willingly  give  man  a  means  of  reconciliation,  so
that  after  the  great  rebellion  into  which  he  had
fallen,  there  should  come  a  great  peace ;  and  so
Thou  didst  give  him  the  only-begotten  Word,
Thy  Son,  to  be  the  Mediator  between  us  and
Thee.  He  was  our  Justice,  for  He  took  on
Himself  all  our  offences  and  injustices,  and  per-
formed Thy  obedience,  Eternal  Father,  which
Thou  didst  impose  on  Him,  when  Thou  didst
clothe  Him  with  our  humanity,  our  human
nature  and  likeness.  Oh,  abyss  of  love !  What
heart  can  help  breaking  when  it  sees  such
dignity  as  Thine  descend  to  such  lowliness  as


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  65


our  humanity  ?  We  are  Thy  image,  and  Thou
hast  become  ours,  by  this  union  which  Thou
hast  accomplished  with  man,  veiling  the  Eternal
Deity  with  the  cloud  of  woe,  and  the  corrupted
clay  of  Adam.  For  what  reason  ?  —  Love.
Wherefore,  Thou,  O  God,  hast  become  man,  and
man  has  become  God.  By  this  ineffable  love  of
Thine,  therefore,  I  constrain  Thee,  and  implore
Thee  that  Thou  do  mercy  to  Thy  creatures."

How  God  grieves  over  the  Christian  people,  and
particularly  over  His  ministers ;  and  touches
on  the  subject  of  the  Sacrament  of  Christ's
Body,  and  the  benefit  of  the  Incarnation.

Then  God,  turning  the  eye  of  His  mercy
towards  her,  allowing  Himself  to  be  constrained
by  her  tears,  and  bound  by  the  chain  of  her  holy
desire,  replied  with  lamentation — "  My  sweetest
daughter,  thy  tears  constrain  Me,  because  they
are  joined  with  My  love,  and  fall  for  love  of  Me,
and  thy  painful  desires  force  Me  to  answer  thee ;
but  marvel,  and  see  how  My  spouse  has  defiled
her  face,  and  become  leprous,  on  account  of  her
filthiness  and  self-love,  and  swollen  with  the  pride
and  avarice  of  those  who  feed  on  their  own  sin.

"  What  I  say  of  the  universal  body  and  the
mystical  body  of  the  Holy  Church  (that  is  to
say  the  Christian  religion)  I  also  say  of  My
ministers,  who  stand  and  feed  at  the  breasts  of
Holy  Church ;  and,  not  only  should  they  feed
themselves,  but  it  is  also  their  duty  to  feed  and

£


66       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


hold  to  those  breasts  the  universal  body  of  Chris-
tian people,  and  also  any  other  people  who  should
wish  to  leave  the  darkness  of  their  infidelity,  and
bind  themselves  as  members  to  My  Church.  See
then  with  what  ignorance  and  darkness,  and  in-
gratitude, are  administered,  and  with  what  filthy
hands  are  handled  this  glorious  milk  and  blood
of  My  spouse,  and  with  what  presumption  and
irreverence  they  are  received.  Wherefore,  that
which  really  gives  life,  often  gives,  through  the
defects  of  those  who  receive  it,  death  ;  that  is
to  say,  the  precious  Blood  of  My  only-begotten
Son,  which  destroyed  death  and  darkness,  and
gave  life  and  truth,  and  confounded  falsehood.
For  I  give  this  Blood  and  use  It  for  salvation
and  perfection  in  the  case  of  that  man  who  dis-
poses himself  properly  to  receive  it,  for  It  gives
life  and  adorns  the  soul  with  every  grace,  in
proportion  to  the  disposition  and  affection  of
him  who  receives  It ;  similarly  It  gives  death  to
him  who  receives  It  unworthily,  living  in  iniquity
and  in  the  darkness  of  mortal  sin  ;  to  him,  I  say,
It  gives  death  and  not  life ;  not  through  defect
of  the  Blood,  nor  through  defect  of  the  minister,
though  there  might  be  great  evil  in  him,  because
his  evil  would  not  spoil  nor  defile  the  Blood  nor
diminish  Its  grace  and  virtue,  nor  does  an  evil
minister  do  harm  to  him  to  whom  he  gives  the
Blood,  but  to  himself  he  does  the  harm  of  guilt,
which  will  be  followed  by  punishment,  unless  he
correct  himself  with  contrition  and  repentance.
I  say  then  that  the  Blood  does  harm  to  him  who


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  67


receives  it  unworthily,  not  through  defect  of  the
Blood,  nor  of  the  minister,  but  through  his  own
evil  disposition  and  defect  inasmuch  as  he  has
befouled  his  mind  and  body  with  such  impurity
and  misery,  and  has  been  so  cruel  to  himself  and
his  neighbour.  He  has  used  cruelty  to  himself,
depriving  himself  of  grace,  trampling  under  the
feet  of  his  affection  the  fruit  of  the  Blood  which
he  had  received  in  Holy  Baptism,  when  the  stain
of  original  sin  was  taken  from  him  by  virtue  of
the  Blood,  which  stain  he  drew  from  his  origin,
when  he  was  generated  by  his  father  and  mother.

''Wherefore  I  gave  My  Word,  My  only-
begotten  Son,  because  the  whole  stuff  of  human
generation  was  corrupted  through  the  sin  of  the
first  man  Adam.  Wherefore,  all  of  you,  vessels
made  of  this  stuff,  were  corrupted  and  not  dis-
posed to  the  possession  of  eternal  life — so  I,  with
My  dignity,  joined  Myself  to  the  baseness  of  your
human  generation,  in  order  to  restore  it  to  grace
which  you  had  lost  by  sin  ;  for  I  was  incapable  of
suffering,  and  yet,  on  account  of  guilt,  My  divine
justice  demanded  suffering.  But  man  was  not
sufficient  to  satisfy  it,  for,  even  if  he  had  satisfied
to  a  certain  extent,  he  could  only  have  satisfied
for  himself,  and  not  for  other  rational  creatures,
besides  which,  neither  for  himself,  nor  for  others,
could  man  satisfy,  his  sin  having  been  committed
against  Me,  who  am  the  Infinite  Good.  Wishing,
however,  to  restore  man,  who  was  enfeebled,  and
could  not  satisfy  for  the  above  reason,  I  sent  My
Word,  My  own  Son,  clothed  in  your  own  very


68       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


nature,  the  corrupted  clay  of  Adam,  in  order  that
He  might  endure  suffering  in  that  self-same
nature  in  which  man  had  offended,  suffering  in
His  body  even  to  the  opprobrious  death  of  the
Cross,  and  so  He  satisfied  My  justice  and  My
divine  mercy.  For  My  mercy  willed  to  make
satisfaction  for  the  sin  of  man  and  to  dispose
him  to  that  good  for  which  I  had  created  him.
This  human  nature,  joined  with  the  divine  nature,
was  sufficient  to  satisfy  for  the  whole  human  race,
not  only  on  account  of  the  pain  which  it  sus-
tained in  its  finite  nature,  that  is  in  the  flesh  of
Adam,  but  by  virtue  of  the  Eternal  Deity,  the
divine  and  infinite  nature  joined  to  it.  The  two
natures  being  thus  joined  together,  I  received  and
accepted  the  sacrifice  of  My  only-begotten  Son,
kneaded  into  one  dough  with  the  divine  nature,
by  the  fire  of  divine  love  which  was  the  fetter
which  held  him  fastened  and  nailed  to  the  Cross
in  this  way.  Thus  human  nature  was  sufficient
to  satisfy  for  guilt,  but  only  by  virtue  of  the
divine  nature.  And  in  this  way  was  destroyed
the  stain  of  Adam's  sin,  only  the  mark  of  it
remaining  behind,  that  is  an  inclination  to  sin,
and  to  every  sort  of  corporeal  defect,  like  the
cicatrice  which  remains  when  a  man  is  healed  of
a  wound.  In  this  way  the  original  fault  of  Adam
was  able  still  to  cause  a  fatal  stain ;  wherefore
the  coming  of  the  great  Physician,  that  is  to  say,
of  My  only-begotten  Son,  cured  this  invalid,  He
drinking  this  bitter  medicine,  which  man  could
not  drink  on  account  of  his  great  weakness,  like


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  69

a  foster-mother  who  takes  medicine  instead  of
her  suckling,  because  she  is  grown  up  and  strong,
and  the  child  is  not  fit  to  endure  its  bitterness.
He  was  man's  foster-mother,  enduring,  with  the
greatness  and  strength  of  the  Deity  united  with
your  nature,  the  bitter  medicine  of  the  painful
death  of  the  Cross,  to  give  life  to  you  little  ones
debilitated  by  guilt.  I  say  therefore  that  the
mark  alone  of  original  sin  remains,  which  sin
you  take  from  your  father  and  your  mother
when  you  were  generated  by  them.  But  this
mark  is  removed  from  the  soul,  though  not
altogether,  by  Holy  Baptism,  which  has  the
virtue  of  communicating  the  life  of  grace  by
means  of  that  glorious  and  precious  Blood.
Wherefore,  at  the  moment  that  the  soul  receives
Holy  Baptism,  original  sin  is  taken  away  from
her,  and  grace  is  infused  into  her,  and  that  in-
clination to  sin,  which  remains  from  the  original
corruption,  as  has  been  said,  is  indeed  a  source  of
weakness,  but  the  soul  can  keep  the  bridle  on  it
if  she  choose.  Then  the  vessel  of  the  soul  is
disposed  to  receive  and  increase  in  herself  grace,
more  or  less,  according  as  it  pleases  her  to  dis-
pose herself  willingly  with  affection,  and  desire
of  loving  and  serving  Me ;  and,  in  the  same  way,
she  can  dispose  herself  to  evil  as  to  good,  in  spite
of  her  having  received  grace  in  Holy  Baptism.
Wherefore  when  the  time  of  discretion  is  come,
the  soul  can,  by  her  free  will,  make  choice  either
of  good  or  evil,  according  as  it  pleases  her  will ;
and  so  great  is  this  liberty  that  man  has,  and  so


7o       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


strong  has  this  liberty  been  made  by  virtue  of
this  glorious  Blood,  that  no  demon  or  creature
can  constrain  him  to  one  smallest  fault  without
his  free  consent.  He  has  been  redeemed  from
slavery,  and  made  free  in  order  that  he  might
govern  his  own  sensuality,  and  obtain  the  end
for  which  he  was  created.  Oh,  miserable  man,
who  delights  to  remain  in  the  mud  like  a  brute,
and  does  not  learn  this  great  benefit  which  he  has
received  from  Me  !  A  benefit  so  great,  that  the
poor  wretched  creature  full  of  such  ignorance
could  receive  no  greater."

How  sin  is  more  gravely  punished  after  the  Passion  of
Christ  than  before  ;  and  how  God  promises  to  do
mercy  to  the  world,  and  to  the  Holy  Church,  by
means  of  the  prayers  and  sufferings  of  His  servants.

"And  I  wish  thee  to  know,  My  daughter,
that,  although  I  have  re-created  and  restored  to
the  life  of  grace,  the  human  race,  through  the
Blood  of  My  only-begotten  Son,  as  I  have  said,
men  are  not  grateful,  but,  going  from  bad  to
worse,  and  from  guilt  to  guilt,  even  persecuting
Me  with  many  injuries,  taking  so  little  account
of  the  graces  which  I  have  given  them,  and  con-
tinue to  give  them,  that,  not  only  do  they  not
attribute  what  they  have  received  to  grace,  but
seem  to  themselves  on  occasion  to  receive  injuries
from  Me,  as  if  I  desired  anything  else  than  their
sanctification.

"  I  say  to  thee  that  they  will  be  more  hard-


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  71


hearted,  and  worthy  of  more  punishment,  and
will,  indeed,  be  punished  more  severely,  now  that
they  have  received  redemption  in  the  Blood  of
My  Son,  than  they  would  have  been  before  that
redemption  took  place — that  is,  before  the  stain
of  Adam's  sin  had  been  taken  away.  It  is
right  that  he  who  receives  more  should  render
more,  and  should  be  under  great  obligations  to
Him  from  whom  he  receives  more.

"  Man,  then,  was  closely  bound  to  Me  through
his  being  which  I  have  given  him,  creating  him  in
My  own  image  and  similitude  ;  for  which  reason,
he  was  bound  to  render  Me  glory,  but  he  deprived
Me  of  it,  and  wished  to  give  it  to  himself.  Thus
he  came  to  transgress  My  obedience  imposed  on
him,  and  became  My  enemy.  And  I,  with  My
humility,  destroyed  his  pride,  humiliating  the
divine  nature,  and  taking  your  humanity,  and,
freeing  you  from  the  service  of  the  devil,  I  made
you  free.  And,  not  only  did  I  give  you  liberty,
but,  if  you  examine,  you  will  see  that  man  has
become  God,  and  God  has  become  man,  through
the  union  of  the  divine  with  the  human  nature.
This  is  the  debt  which  they  have  incurred — that
is  to  say,  the  treasure  of  the  Blood,  by  which  they
have  been  procreated  to  grace.  See,  therefore,
how  much  more  they  owe  after  the  redemption
than  before.  For  they  are  now  obliged  to  render
Me  glory  and  praise  by  following  in  the  steps  of
My  Incarnate  Word,  My  only-begotten  Son,  for
then  they  repay  Me  the  debt  of  love  both  of
Myself  and  of  their  neighbour,  with  true  and


72       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

genuine  virtue,  as  I  have  said  to  thee  above,  and
if  they  do  not  do  it,  the  greater  their  debt,  the
greater  will  be  the  offence  they  fall  into,  and
therefore,  by  divine  justice,  the  greater  their
suffering  in  eternal  damnation.

"  A  false  Christian  is  punished  more  than  a
pagan,  and  the  deathless  fire  of  divine  justice
consumes  him  more,  that  is,  afflicts  him  more,
and,  in  his  affliction,  he  feels  himself  being  con-
sumed by  the  worm  of  conscience,  though,  in
truth,  he  is  not  consumed,  because  the  damned
do  not  lose  their  being  through  any  torment
which  they  receive.  Wherefore  I  say  to  thee,
that  they  ask  for  death  and  cannot  have  it,  for
they  cannot  lose  their  being ;  the  existence  of
grace  they  lose,  through  their  fault,  but  not  their
natural  existence.  Therefore  guilt  is  more  gravely
punished  after  the  Redemption  of  the  Blood  than
before,  because  man  received  more  ;  but  sinners
neither  seem  to  perceive  this,  nor  to  pay  any
attention  to  their  own  sins,  and  so  become  My
enemies,  though  I  have  reconciled  them,  by  means
of  the  Blood  of  My  Son.  But  there  is  a  remedy
with  which  I  appease  My  wrath — that  is  to  say,
by  means  of  My  servants,  if  they  are  jealous  to
constrain  Me  by  their  desire.  Thou  seest,  there-
fore, that  thou  hast  bound  Me  with  this  bond
which  I  have  given  thee,  because  I  wished  to  do
mercy  to  the  world.

"  Therefore  I  give  My  servants  hunger  and
desire  for  My  honour,  and  the  salvation  of  souls,
so  that,  constrained  by  their  tears,  I  may  mitigate


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  73


the  fury  of  My  divine  justice.  Take,  therefore,
thy  tears  and  thy  sweat,  drawn  from  the  fountain
of  My  divine  love,  and,  with  them,  wash  the  face
of  My  spouse.

"  I  promise  thee,  that,  by  this  means,  her  beauty
will  be  restored  to  her,  not  by  the  knife  nor  by
cruelty,  but  peacefully,  by  humble  and  continued
prayer,  by  the  sweat  and  the  tears  shed  by  the
fiery  desire  of  My  servants,  and  thus  will  I  fulfil
thy  desire  if  thou,  on  thy  part,  endure  much,
casting  the  light  of  thy  patience  into  the  darkness
of  perverse  man,  not  fearing  the  world's  persecu-
tions, for  I  will  protect  thee,  and  My  Providence
shall  never  fail  thee  in  the  slightest  need."

How  the  road  to  Heaven  being  broken  through  the
disobedience  of  Adam^  Goa  made  of  His  Son  a
Bridge  by  which  man  could  pass.

"  Wherefore  I  have  told  thee  that  I  have  made
a  Bridge  of  My  Word,  of  My  only-begotten  Son,
and  this  is  the  truth.  I  wish  that  you,  My  chil-
dren, should  know  that  the  road  was  broken  by
the  sin  and  disobedience  of  Adam,  in  such  a  way,
that  no  one  could  arrive  at  Eternal  Life.  Where-
fore men  did  not  render  M'e  glory  in  the  way  in
which  they  ought  to  have,  as  they  did  not  parti-
cipate in  that  Good  for  which  I  had  created  them,
and  My  truth  was  not  fulfilled.  This  truth  is
that  I  have  created  man  to  My  own  image  and
similitude,  in  order  that  he  might  have  Eternal
Life,  and  might  partake  of  Me,  and  taste  My
supreme  and  eternal  sweetness  and  goodness.


74       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


But,  after  sin  had  closed  Heaven  and  bolted  the
doors  of  mercy,  the  soul  of  man  produced  thorns
and  prickly  brambles,  and  My  creature  found  in
himself  rebellion  against  himself.

"  And  the  flesh  immediately  began  to  war
against  the  Spirit,  and,  losing  the  state  of  inno-
cency,  became  a  foul  animal,  and  all  created
things  rebelled  against  man,  whereas  they  would
have  been  obedient  to  him,  had  he  remained  in
the  state  in  which  I  had  placed  him.  He,  not
remaining  therein,  transgressed  My  obedience,
and  merited  eternal  death  in  soul  and  body.
And,  as  soon  as  he  had  sinned,  a  tempestuous
flood  arose,  which  ever  buffets  him  with  its
waves,  bringing  him  weariness  and  trouble  from
himself,  the  devil,  and  the  world.  Every  one
was  drowned  in  the  flood,  because  no  one,  with
his  own  justice  alone,  could  arrive  at  Eternal
Life.  And  so,  wishing  to  remedy  your  great
evils,  I  have  given  you  the  Bridge  of  My  Son,
in  order  that,  passing  across  the  flood,  you  may
not  be  drowned,  which  flood  is  the  tempestuous
sea  of  this  dark  life.  See,  therefore,  under  what
obligations  the  creature  is  to  Me,  and  how  igno-
rant he  is,  not  to  take  the  remedy  which  I  have
offered,  but  to  be  willing  to  drown."

How  God  induces  the  soul  to  look  at  the  greatness  of
this  Bridge,  inasmuch  as  it  reaches  from  earth
to  Heaven.

"  Open,  my  daughter,  the  eye  of  thy  intellect,
and  thou  wilt  see  the  accepted  and  the  ignorant,


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  75


the  imperfect,  and  also  the  perfect  who  follow
Me  in  truth,  so  that  thou  mayest  grieve  over
the  damnation  of  the  ignorant,  and  rejoice  over
the  perfection  of  My  beloved  servants.

"  Thou  wilt  see  further  how  those  bear  them-
selves who  walk  in  the  light,  and  those  who  walk
in  the  darkness.  I  also  wish  thee  to  look  at  the
Bridge  of  My  only-begotten  Son,  and  see  the
greatness  thereof,  for  it  reaches  from  Heaven
to  earth,  that  is,  that  the  earth  of  your  humanity
is  joined  to  the  greatness  of  the  Deity  thereby.
I  say  then  that  this  Bridge  reaches  from  Heaven
to  earth,  and  constitutes  the  union  which  I  have
made  with  man.

"  This  was  necessary,  in  order  to  reform  the
road  which  was  broken,  as  I  said  to  thee,  in  order
that  man  should  pass  through  the  bitterness  of
the  world,  and  arrive  at  life;  but  the  Bridge
could  not  be  made  of  earth  sufficiently  large  to
span  the  flood  and  give  you  Eternal  Life,  because
the  earth  of  human  nature  was  not  sufficient  to
satisfy  for  guilt,  to  remove  the  stain  of  Adam's
sin.  Which  stain  corrupted  the  whole  human
race  and  gave  out  a  stench,  as  I  have  said  to  thee
above.  It  was,  therefore,  necessary  to  join  human
nature  with  the  height  of  My  nature,  the  Eternal
Deity,  so  that  it  might  be  sufficient  to  satisfy  for
the  whole  human  race,  so  that  human  nature  should
sustain  the  punishment,  and  that  the  Divine  nature,
united  with  the  human,  should  make  acceptable
the  sacrifice  of  My  only  Son,  offered  to  Me  to
take  death  from  you  and  to  give  you  life.


76       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

"  So  the  height  of  the  Divinity,  humbled  to  the
earth,  and  joined  with  your  humanity,  made  the
Bridge  and  reformed  the  road.  Why  was  this
done  ?  In  order  that  man  might  come  to  his
true  happiness  with  the  angels.  And  observe,
that  it  is  not  enough,  in  order  that  you  should
have  life,  that  My  Son  should  have  made  you
this  Bridge,  unless  you  walk  thereon."

How  this  soul  prays  God  to  show  her  those  who  cross
by  the  aforesaid  Bridge,  and  those  who  do  not.

Then  this  soul  exclaimed  with  ardent  love, —
"  Oh,  inestimable  Charity,  sweet  above  all  sweet-
ness !  Who  would  not  be  inflamed  by  such  great
love  ?  What  heart  can  help  breaking  at  such
tenderness  ?  It  seems,  oh,  Abyss  of  Charity,  as
if  thou  wert  mad  with  love  of  Thy  creature,  as
if  Thou  couldest  not  live  without  him,  and  yet
Thou  art  our  God  who  hast  no  heed  of  us,  Thy
greatness  does  not  increase  through  our  good,
for  Thou  art  unchangeable,  and  our  evil  causes
Thee  no  harm,  for  Thou  art  the  Supreme  and
Eternal  Goodness.  What  moves  Thee  to  do  us
such  mercy  through  pure  love,  and  on  account
of  no  debt  that  Thou  owedst  us,  or  need  that
Thou  hadst  of  us  ?  We  are  rather  Thy  guilty
and  malignant  debtors.  Wherefore,  if  I  under-
stand aright,  Oh,  Supreme  and  Eternal  Truth,  I
am  the  thief  and  Thou  hast  been  punished  for
me.  For  I  see  Thy  Word,  Thy  Son,  fastened
and  nailed  to  the  Cross,  of  which  Thou  hast  made


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  77


me  a  Bridge,  as  Thou  hast  shown  me,  Thy  miser-
able servant,  for  which  reason,  my  heart  is  bursting,
and  yet  cannot  burst,  through  the  hunger  and
the  desire  which  it  has  conceived  towards  Thee.
I  remember,  my  Lord,  that  Thou  wast  willing
to  show  me  who  are  those  who  go  by  the  Bridge
and  those  who  do  not ;  should  it  please  Thy
goodness  to  manifest  this  to  me,  willingly  would
I  see  and  hear  it.'*

How  this  Bridge  has  three  steps,  which  signify  the
three  states  of  the  soul ;  and  how,  being  lifted  on
high,  yet  it  is  not  separated  from  the  earth  ;  and
how  these  words  are  to  be  understood:  "  If  I
am  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  I  will  draw  all
things  unto  Me"

Then  the  Eternal  God,  to  enamour  and  excite
that  soul  still  more  for  the  salvation  of  souls,
replied  to  her,  and  said  :  "  First,  as  I  have  shown
thee  that  for  which  thou  didst  wish,  and  ask  Me,
I  will  now  explain  to  thee  the  nature  of  this
Bridge.  I  have  told  thee,  My  daughter,  that
the  Bridge  reaches  from  Heaven  to  earth;  this
is  through  the  union  which  I  have  made  with
man,  whom  I  formed  of  the  clay  of  the  earth.
Now  learn  that  this  Bridge,  My  only-begotten
Son,  has  three  steps,  of  which  two  were  made
with  the  wood  of  the  most  Holy  Cross,  and  the
third  still  retains  the  great  bitterness  He  tasted,
when  He  was  given  gall  and  vinegar  to  drink.
In  these  three  steps  you  will  recognise  three


78       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


states  of  the  soul,  which  I  will  explain  to  thee
below.  The  feet  of  the  soul,  signifying  her
affection,  are  the  first  step,  for  the  feet  carry
the  body  as  the  affection  carries  the  soul.  Where-
fore these  pierced  Feet  are  steps  by  which  thou
canst  arrive  at  His  Side,  Which  manifests  to  thee
the  secret  of  His  Heart,  because  the  soul,  rising
on  the  steps  of  her  affection,  commences  to  taste
the  love  of  His  Heart,  gazing  into  that  open
Heart  of  My  Son,  with  the  eye  of  the  intellect,
and  finds  It  consumed  with  ineffable  love.  I  say
consumed,  because  He  does  not  love  you  for
His  own  profit,  because  you  can  be  of  no  profit
to  Him,  He  being  one  and  the  same  thing  with
Me.  Then  the  soul  is  filled  with  love,  seeing
herself  so  much  loved.  Having  passed  the
second  step,  the  soul  reaches  out  to  the  third —
that  is — to  the  Mouth,  where  she  finds  peace
from  the  terrible  war  she  has  been  waging  with
her  sin.  On  the  first  step,  then,  lifting  her
feet  from  the  affections  of  the  earth,  the  soul
strips  herself  of  vice ;  on  the  second  she  fills
herself  with  love  and  virtue ;  and  on  the  third
she  tastes  peace.  So  the  Bridge  has  three  steps,
in  order  that,  climbing  past  the  first  and  the
second,  you  may  reach  the  last,  which  is  lifted
on  high,  so  that  the  water,  running  beneath,  may
not  touch  it ;  for,  in  My  Son,  was  no  venom  of
sin.  This  Bridge  is  lifted  on  high,  and  yet,  at
the  same  time,  joined  to  the  earth.  Dost  thou
know  when  it  was  lifted  on  high  ?  When  My
Son  was  lifted  up  on  the  wood  of  the  most  Holy


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  79


Cross,  the  Divine  nature  remaining  joined  to  the
lowliness  of  the  earth  of  your  humanity.

"  For  this  reason  I  said  to  thee  that,  being
lifted  on  high,  He  was  not  lifted  out  of  the
earth,  for  the  Divine  nature  is  united  and  kneaded
into  one  thing  with  it.  And  there  was  no  one
who  could  go  on  the  Bridge  until  It  had  been
lifted  on  high,  wherefore  He  said,  — '  Si  exaltatus
fuero  a  terra  omnia  traham  ad  me  ipsumj  that
is,  '  If  I  am  lifted  on  high  I  will  draw  all  things
to  Me.1  My  Goodness,  seeing  that  in  no  other
way  could  you  be  drawn  to  Me,  I  sent  Him  in
order  that  He  should  be  lifted  on  high  on  the
wood  of  the  Cross,  making  of  it  an  anvil  on
which  My  Son,  born  of  human  generation,  should
be  re-made,  in  order  to  free  you  from  death,  and
to  restore  you  to  the  life  of  grace ;  wherefore
He  drew  everything  to  Himself  by  this  means,
namely,  by  showing  the  ineffable  love,  with  which
I  love  you,  the  heart  of  man  being  always  attracted
by  love.  Greater  love,  then,  I  could  not  show
you,  than  to  lay  down  My  life  for  you  ;  perforce,
then,  My  Son  was  treated  in  this  way  by  love,  in
order  that  ignorant  man  should  be  unable  to
resist  being  drawn  to  Me.

"  In  very  truth,  then,  My  Son  said,  that,  being
lifted  on  high,  He  would  draw  all  things  to
Him.  And  this  is  to  be  understood  in  two
ways.  Firstly,  that,  when  the  heart  of  man  is
drawn  by  the  affection  of  love,  as  I  have  said,  it
is  drawn  together  with  all  the  powers  of  his  soul,
that  is,  with  the  Memory,  the  Intellect,  and  the


8o       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Will ;  now,  when  these  three  powers  are  har-
moniously joined  together  in  My  Name,  all  the
other  operations  which  the  man  performs,  whether
in  deed  or  thought,  are  pleasing,  and  joined  to-
gether by  the  effect  of  love,  because  love  is  lifted
on  high,  following  the  Sorrowful  Crucified  One ;
so  My  Truth  said  well,  c  If  I  am  lifted  on  high]
&c,  meaning,  that  if  the  heart  and  the  powers  of
the  soul  are  drawn  to  Him,  all  the  actions  are
also  drawn  to  Him.  Secondly,  everything  has
been  created  for  the  service  of  man,  to  serve  the
necessities  of  rational  creatures,  and  the  rational
creature  has  not  been  made  for  them,  but  for  Me,
in  order  to  serve  Me  with  all  his  heart,  and  with
all  his  affection.  See,  then,  that  man  being  drawn,
everything  else  is  drawn  with  him,  because  every-
thing else  has  been  made  for  him.  It  was  there-
fore necessary  that  the  Bridge  should  be  lifted
on  high,  and  have  steps,  in  order  that  it  might
be  climbed  with  greater  facility."

How  this  Bridge  is  built  of  stones  which  signify
virtues;  and  how  on  the  Bridge  is  a  hostelry
where  food  is  given  to  the  travellers ;  and  how
he  who  goes  over  the  Bridge  goes  to  life,  while
he  who  goes  under  It  goes  to  perdition  and  death.

"  This  Bridge  is  built  of  stones,  so  that,  if  the
rain  come,  it  may  not  impede  the  traveller.  Dost
thou  know  what  these  stones  are  ?  They  are  the
stones  of  true  and  sincere  virtues.  These  stones
were  not  built  into  the  walls  before  the  Passion


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  81


of  My  Son,  and  therefore  even  those  who
attempted  to  walk  by  the  road  of  virtue  were
prevented  from  arriving  at  their  journey's  end,
because  Heaven  was  not  yet  unlocked  with  the
key  of  the  Blood,  and  the  rain  of  Justice  did  not
let  them  pass ;  but,  after  the  stones  were  made,
and  built  up  on  the  Body  of  My  sweet  Son,  My
Word,  of  whom  I  have  spoken  to  thee,  He,  who
was  Himself  the  Bridge,  moistened  the  mortar
for  its  building  with  His  Blood.  That  is,  His
Blood  was  united  with  the  mortar  of  divinity,
and  with  the  fortitude,  and  the  fire  of  love ;  and,
by  My  power,  these  stones  of  the  virtues  were
built  into  a  wall,  upon  Him  as  the  foundation,
for  there  is  no  virtue  which  has  not  been  proved
in  Him,  and  from  Him  all  virtues  have  their  life.
Wherefore  no  one  can  have  the  virtue  given  by  a
life  of  grace,  but  from  Him,  that  is,  without
following  the  footsteps  of  His  doctrine.  He
has  built  a  wall  of  the  virtues,  planting  them  as
living  stones,  and  cementing  them  with  His
Blood,  so  that  every  believer  may  walk  speedily,
and  without  any  servile  fear  of  the  rain  of  Divine
justice,  for  he  is  sheltered  by  the  mercy  which
descended  from  Heaven  in  the  Incarnation  of  this
My  Son.  How  was  Heaven  opened  ?  With  the
key  of  His  Blood ;  so  thou  seest  that  the  Bridge
is  walled  and  roofed  with  Mercy.  His  also  is
the  Hostelry  in  the  Garden  of  the  Holy  Church,
which  keeps  and  ministers  the  Bread  of  Life,  and
gives  to  drink  of  the  Blood,  so  that  My  creatures,
journeying  on  their  pilgrimage,  may  not,  through

F


82       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


weariness,  faint  by  the  way  ;  and  for  this  reason
My  love  has  ordained  that  the  Blood  and  the
Body  of  My  only-begotten  Son,  wholly  God  and
wholly  man,  may  be  ministered  to  you.  The
pilgrim,  having  passed  the  Bridge,  arrives  at  the
door  which  is  part  of  the  Bridge,  at  which  all
must  enter,  wherefore  He  says  :  '  /  am  the  Way,
the  Truth,  and  the  Life,  he  who  follows  Me  does  not
walk  in  darkness,  but  in  light.''  And  in  another
place  My  Truth  says,  '  That  no  man  can  come  to
Me  if  not  by  Him,'  and  so  indeed  it  is.  There-
fore He  says  of  Himself  that  He  is  the  Road,
and  this  is  the  truth,  and  I  have  already  shown
thee  that  He  is  a  Road  in  the  form  of  the
Bridge.  And  He  says  that  He  is  the  Truth,
and  so  He  is,  because  He  is  united  with  Me
who  am  the  Truth,  and  he  who  follows  Him,
walks  in  the  Truth,  and  in  Life,  because  he  who
follows  this  Truth  receives  the  life  of  grace,  and
cannot  faint  from  hunger,  because  the  Truth  has
become  your  food,  nor  fall  in  the  darkness,  be-
cause He  is  light  without  any  falsehood.  And,
with  that  Truth,  He  confounded  and  destroyed
the  lie  that  the  Devil  told  to  Eve,  with  which
he  broke  up  the  road  to  Heaven,  and  the  Truth
brought  the  pieces  together  again,  and  cemented
them  with  His  Blood.  Wherefore,  those  who
follow  this  road  are  the  sons  of  the  Truth,  be-
cause they  follow  the  Truth,  and  pass  through
the  door  of  Truth  and  find  themselves  united
to  Me,  who  am  the  Door  and  the  Road  and
at  the  same  time  Infinite  Peace.


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  83

"  But  he,  who  walks  not  on  this  road,  goes
under  the  Bridge,  in  the  river  where  there  are
no  stones,  only  water,  and  since  there  are  no
supports  in  the  water,  no  one  can  travel  that
way  without  drowning ;  thus  have  come  to  pass
the  sins,  and  the  condition  of  the  world.  Where-
fore, if  the  affection  is  not  placed  on  the  stones,
but  is  placed,  with  disordinate  love,  on  creatures,
loving  them,  and  being  kept  by  them  far  from
Me,  the  soul  drowns,  for  creatures  are  like  water
that  continually  runs  past,  and  man  also  passes
continually  like  the  river,  although  it  seems  to
him  that  he  stands  still  and  the  creatures  that  he
loves  pass  by,  and  yet  he  is  passing  himself  con-
tinually to  the  end  of  his  journey — death  !  And
he  would  fain  retain  himself  (that  is  his  life,  and
the  things  that  he  loves),  but  he  does  not  succeed,
either,  through  death,  by  which  he  has  to  leave
them,  or  through  my  disposition,  by  which  these
created  things  are  taken  from  the  sight  of  My
creatures.    Such  as  these  follow  a  lie,  walking  on
the  road  of  falsehood,  and  are  sons  of  the  Devil,
who  is  the  Father  of  Lies  ;  and,  because  they  pass
by  the  door  of  falsehood,  they  receive  eternal
damnation.     So  then  thou  seest,  that  I  have
shown  thee  both  Truth  and  Falsehood,  that  is,
My  road  which  is  Truth,  and  the  Devil's  which
is  Falsehood. "


84       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


How  travelling  on  both  of  these  roads,  that  is  the
Bridge  and  the  River,  is  fatiguing;  and  of
the  delight  which  the  soul  feels  in  travelling  by
the  Bridge.

"  These  are  the  two  roads,  and  both  are  hard  to
travel.  Wonder,  then,  at  the  ignorance  and  blind-
ness of  man,  who,  having  a  Road  made  for  him,
which  causes  such  delight  to  those  who  use  It,
that  every  bitterness  becomes  sweet,  and  every
burden  light,  yet  prefers  to  walk  over  the  water.
For  those  who  cross  by  the  Bridge,  being  still  in
the  darkness  of  the  body,  find  light,  and,  being
mortal,  find  immortal  life,  tasting,  through  love,
the  light  of  Eternal  Truth  which  promises  re-
freshment to  him  who  wearies  himself  for  Me,
who  am  grateful  and  just,  and  render  to  every
man  according  as  he  deserves.  Wherefore  every
good  deed  is  rewarded,  and  every  fault  is  punished.
The  tongue  would  not  be  sufficient  to  relate  the
delight  felt  by  him  who  goes  on  this  road,  for,
even  in  this  life,  he  tastes  and  participates  in  that
good  which  has  been  prepared  for  him  in  eternal
life.  He,  therefore,  is  a  fool  indeed,  who  despises
so  great  a  good,  and  chooses  rather  to  receive  in
this  life,  the  earnest  money  of  Hell,  walking  by
the  lower  road  with  great  toil,  and  without  any
refreshment  or  advantage.  Wherefore,  through
their  sins,  they  are  deprived  of  Me,  who  am  the
Supreme  and  Eternal  Good.  Truly  then  hast
thou  reason  for  grief,  and  I  will  that  thou  and
My  other  servants  remain  in  continual  bitter-


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  85


ness  of  soul  at  the  offence  done  to  Me,  and  in
compassion  for  the  ignorant,  and  the  loss  of
those  who,  in  their  ignorance,  thus  offend  Me.
Now  thou  hast  seen  and  heard  about  this  Bridge,
how  it  is,  and  this  I  have  told  thee  in  order  to
explain  My  words,  that  My  only-begotten  Son
was  a  Bridge.  And  thus,  thou  seest  that  He
is  the  Truth,  made  in  the  way  that  I  have
shown  thee,  that  is — by  the  union  of  height  and
lowliness."

How  this  Bridge,  having  reached  to  Heaven  on  the
day  of  the  Ascension,  did  not  for  that  reason
leave  the  earth.

"  When  My  only-begotten  Son  returned  to  Me,
forty  days  after  the  resurrection,  this  Bridge,
namely  Himself,  arose  from  the  earth,  that  is,
from  among  the  conversation  of  men,  and  ascended
into  Heaven  by  virtue  of  the  Divine  Nature  and
sat  at  the  right  hand  of  Me,  the  Eternal  Father,
as  the  angels  said,  on  the  day  of  the  Ascension,
to  the  disciples,  standing  like  dead  men,  their
hearts  lifted  on  high,  and  ascended  into  Heaven
with  the  wisdom  of  My  Son — 1  Do  not  stand  here
any  longer,  for  He  is  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  the
Father ! '  When  He,  then,  had  thus  ascended
on  high,  and  returned  to  Me  the  Father,  I  sent
the  Master,  that  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  came
to  you  with  My  power  and  the  wisdom  of  My
Son,  and  with  His  own  clemency,  which  is  the
essence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     He  is  one  thing


86       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


with  Me,  the  Father,  and  with  My  Son.  And
He  built  up  the  road  of  the  doctrine  which  My
Truth  had  left  in  the  world.  Thus,  though  the
bodily  presence  of  My  Son  left  you,  His  doctrine
remained,  and  the  virtue  of  the  stones  founded
upon  this  doctrine,  which  is  the  way  made  for
you  by  this  Bridge.  For  first,  He  practised  this
doctrine  and  made  the  road  by  His  actions,  giving
you  His  doctrine  by  example  rather  than  by
words ;  for  He  practised,  first  Himself,  what  He
afterwards  taught  you,  then  the  clemency  of  the
Holy  Spirit  made  you  certain  of  the  doctrine,
fortifying  the  minds  of  the  disciples  to  confess
the  truth,  and  to  announce  this  road,  that  is,  the
doctrine  of  Christ  crucified,  reproving,  by  this
means,  the  world  of  its  injustice  and  false  judg-
ment, of  which  injustice  and  false  judgment,  I
will  in  time  discourse  to  you  at  greater  length.

"  This  much  I  have  said  to  thee  in  order  that
there  might  be  no  cloud  of  darkness  in  the  mind
of  your  hearers,  that  is,  that  they  may  know  that
of  this  Body  of  Christ  I  made  a  Bridge  by  the
union  of  the  divine  with  the  human  nature,  for
this  is  the  truth.

"  This  Bridge,  taking  its  point  of  departure
in  you,  rose  into  Heaven,  and  was  the  one  road
which  was  taught  you  by  the  example  and  life  of
the  Truth.  What  has  now  remained  of  all  this,
and  where  is  the  road  to  be  found  ?  I  will  tell
thee,  that  is,  I  will  rather  tell  those  who  might
fall  into  ignorance  on  this  point.  I  tell  thee
that  this  way  of  His  doctrine,  of  which  I  have


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  87


spoken  to  thee,  confirmed  by  the  Apostles,  de-
clared by  the  blood  of  the  martyrs,  illuminated
by  the  light  of  doctors,  confessed  by  the  con-
fessors, narrated  in  all  its  love  by  the  Evan-
gelists, all  of  whom  stand  as  witnesses  to  confess
the  Truth,  is  found  in  the  mystical  body  of  the
Holy  Church.  These  witnesses  are  like  the  light
placed  on  a  candlestick,  to  show  forth  the  way
of  the  Truth  which  leads  to  life  with  a  perfect
light,  as  I  have  said  to  thee,  and,  as  they  them-
selves say  to  thee,  with  proof,  since  they  have
proved  in  their  own  cases,  that  every  person
may,  if  he  will,  be  illuminated  to  know  the
Truth,  unless  he  choose  to  deprive  his  reason  of
light  by  his  inordinate  self-love.  It  is,  indeed,
the  truth  that  His  doctrine  is  true,  and  has
remained  like  a  lifeboat  to  draw  the  soul  out  of
the  tempestuous  sea  and  to  conduct  her  to  the
port  of  salvation.

"  Wherefore,  first  I  gave  you  the  Bridge  of
My  Son  living  and  conversing  in  very  deed
amongst  men,  and  when  He,  the  living  Bridge,
left  you,  there  remained  the  Bridge  and  the
road  of  His  doctrine,  as  has  been  said,  His  doc-
trine being  joined  with  My  power  and  with  His
wisdom,  and  with  the  clemency  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  This  power  of  Mine  gives  the  virtue  of
fortitude  to  whoever  follows  this  road,  wisdom
gives  him  light,  so  that,  in  this  road,  he  may
recognise  the  truth,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  gives
him  love,  which  consumes  and  takes  away  all
sensitive  love  out  of  the  soul,  leaving  there  only


88       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


the  love  of  virtue.  Thus,  in  both  ways,  both
actually  and  through  His  doctrine,  He  is  the
Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life ;  that  is,  the
Bridge  which  leads  you  to  the  height  of  Heaven.
This  is  what  He  meant  when  He  said,  '  /  came
from  the  Father,  and  1  return  to  the  Father,  and
shall  return  to  you ' ;  that  is  to  say,  '  My  Father
sent  Me  to  you,  and  made  Me  your  Bridge,  so
that  you  might  be  saved  from  the  river  and
attain  to  life/  Then  He  says,  '  /  will  return  to
you,  I  will  not  leave  you  orphans,  but  will  send  you
the  Paraclete' — as  if  My  Truth  should  say,  'I
will  go  to  the  Father  and  return  ;  that  is,  that
when  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  come,  who  is  called
the  Paraclete,  He  will  show  you  more  clearly,
and  will  confirm  you  in  the  way  of  truth,  that
I  have  given  you.1  He  said  that  He  would
return,  and  He  did  return,  because  the  Holy
Spirit  came  not  alone,  but  with  the  power  of
the  Father,  and  the  wisdom  of  the  Son,  and  the
clemency  of  His  own  Essence.

"  See  then  how  He  returns,  not  in  actual  flesh
and  blood,  but,  as  I  have  said,  building  the  road
of  His  doctrine,  with  His  power,  which  road  can-
not be  destroyed  or  taken  away  from  him  who
wishes  to  follow  it,  because  it  is  firm  and  stable,
and  proceeds  from  Me,  who  am  immoveable.

"  Manfully,  then,  should  you  follow  this  road,
without  any  cloud  of  doubt,  but  with  the  light
of  faith  which  has  been  given  you  as  a  principle
in  Holy  Baptism.

"  Now  I  have  fully  shown  to  you  the  Bridge


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  89


as  it  actually  is,  and  the  doctrine,  which  is  one
and  the  same  thing  with  it.  And  I  have  shown
it  to  the  ignorant,  in  order  that  they  may  see
where  this  road  of  Truth  is,  and  where  stand
those  who  teach  it ;  and  I  have  explained  that
they  are  the  Apostles,  Martyrs,  Confessors,
Evangelists,  and  Holy  Doctors,  placed  like
lanterns  in  the  Holy  Church.

"  And  I  have  shown  how  My  Son,  returning
to  Me,  none  the  less,  returned  to  you,  not  in
His  bodily  presence,  but  by  His  power,  when
the  Holy  Spirit  came  upon  the  disciples,  as  I
have  said.  For  in  His  bodily  presence  He  will
not  return  until  the  last  Day  of  Judgment,  when
He  will  come  again  with  My  Majesty  and  Divine
Power  to  judge  the  world,  to  render  good  to
the  virtuous,  and  reward  them  for  their  labours,
both  in  body  and  soul,  and  to  dispense  the  evil
of  eternal  death  to  those  who  have  lived  wickedly
in  the  world.

"  And  now  I  wish  to  tell  thee  that  which  I,
the  Truth,  promised  thee,  that  is,  to  show  thee
the  perfect,  the  imperfect,  and  the  supremely
perfect ;  and  the  wicked,  who,  through  their
iniquities,  drown  in  the  river,  attaining  to  punish-
ment and  torment ;  wherefore  I  say  to  you,
My  dearest  sons,  walk  over  the  Bridge,  and  not
underneath  it,  because  underneath  is  not  the
way  of  truth,  but  the  way  of  falsehood,  by  which
walk  the  wicked,  of  whom  I  will  presently  speak
to  you.  These  are  those  sinners  for  whom  I
beg  you  to  pray  to  Me,  and  for  whom  I  ask  in


90       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

addition  your  tears  and  sweat,  in  order  that  they
may  receive  mercy  from  Me."

How  this  soul  wondering  at  the  mercy  of  Gody  relates
many  gifts  and  graces  given  to  the  human  race.

Then  this  soul,  as  it  were,  like  one  intoxicated,
could  not  contain  herself,  but  standing  before
the  face  of  God,  exclaimed,  "  How  great  is
the  Eternal  Mercy  with  which  Thou  coverest
the  sins  of  Thy  creatures !  I  do  not  wonder
that  Thou  sayest  of  those  who  abandon  mortal
sin  and  return  to  Thee,  *  /  do  not  remember  that
you  have  ever  offended  Me'  Oh,  ineffable  Mercy  !
I  do  not  wonder  that  Thou  sayest  this  to  those
who  are  converted,  when  Thou  sayest  of  those
who  persecute  Thee,  '  I  wish  you  to  pray  for
such,  in  order  that  I  may  do  them  mercy/  Oh,
Mercy,  who  proceedest  from  Thy  Eternal  Father,
the  Divinity  who  governest  with  Thy  power  the
whole  world,  by  Thee  were  we  created,  in  Thee
were  we  re-created  in  the  Blood  of  Thy  Son.
Thy  Mercy  preserves  us,  Thy  Mercy  caused
Thy  Son  to  do  battle  for  us,  hanging  by  His
arms  on  the  wood  of  the  Cross,  life  and  death
battling  together ;  then  life  confounded  the  death
of  our  sin,  and  the  death  of  our  sin  destroyed
the  bodily  life  of  the  Immaculate  Lamb.  Which
was  finally  conquered  ?  Death  !  By  what  means  ?
Mercy !  Thy  Mercy  gives  light  and  life,  by
which  Thy  clemency  is  known  in  all  Thy  crea-
tures, both  the  just  and  the  unjust.    In  the


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  91


height  of  Heaven  Thy  Mercy  shines,  that  is,
in  Thy  saints.  If  I  turn  to  the  earth,  it  abounds
with  Thy  Mercy.  In  the  darkness  of  Hell  Thy
Mercy  shines,  for  the  damned  do  not  receive
the  pains  they  deserve ;  with  Thy  Mercy  Thou
temperest  Justice.  By  Mercy  Thou  hast  washed
us  in  the  Blood,  and  by  Mercy  Thou  wishest
to  converse  with  Thy  creatures.  Oh,  Loving
Madman !  was  it  not  enough  for  Thee  to
become  Incarnate,  that  Thou  must  also  die  ?
Was  not  death  enough,  that  Thou  must  also
descend  into  Limbo,  taking  thence  the  holy
fathers  to  fulfil  Thy  Mercy  and  Thy  Truth  in
them  ?  Because  Thy  goodness  promises  a  reward
to  them  that  serve  Thee  in  truth,  didst  Thou
descend  to  Limbo,  to  withdraw  from  their  pain
Thy  servants,  and  give  them  the  fruit  of  their
labours.  Thy  Mercy  constrains  Thee  to  give
even  more  to  man,  namely,  to  leave  Thyself  to
him  in  food,  so  that  we,  weak  ones,  should  have
comfort,  and  the  ignorant  commemorating  Thee,
should  not  lose  the  memory  of  Thy  benefits.
Wherefore  every  day  Thou  givest  Thyself  to
man,  representing  Thyself  in  the  Sacrament  of
the  Altar,  in  the  body  of  Thy  Holy  Church.
What  has  done  this  ?  Thy  Mercy.  Oh,  Divine
Mercy  !  My  heart  suffocates  in  thinking  of  thee,
for  on  every  side  to  which  I  turn  my  thought,  I
find  nothing  but  mercy.  Oh,  Eternal  Father  !  For-
give my  ignorance,  that  I  presume  thus  to  chatter
to  Thee,  but  the  love  of  Thy  Mercy  will  be  my
excuse  before  the  Face  of  Thy  loving-kindness."


ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Of  the  baseness  of  those  who  pass  by  the  river  under
the  Bridge;  and  how  the  soul,  that  passes
underneath,  is  called  by  God  the  tree  of  death,
whose  roots  are  held  in  four  vices.

After  this  soul  had  refreshed  a  little  her  heart
in  the  mercy  of  God,  by  these  words,  she  humbly
waited  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  made
to  her,  and  God  continuing  His  discourse  said  :
"  Dearest  daughter,  thou  hast  spoken  before  Me
of  My  mercy,  because  I  gave  it  thee  to  taste  and
to  see  in  the  word  which  I  spoke  to  thee  when
I  said  :  '  these  are  those  for  whom  I  pray  you  to
intercede  with  Me,'  but  know,  that  My  mercy
is  without  any  comparison,  far  more  than  thou
canst  see,  because  thy  sight  is  imperfect,  and  My
mercy  perfect  and  infinite,  so  that  there  can  be
no  comparison  between  the  two,  except  what
may  be  between  a  finite  and  an  infinite  thing.
But  I  have  wished  that  thou  shouldest  taste  this
mercy,  and  also  the  dignity  of  man,  which  I
have  shown  thee  above,  so  that  thou  mightest
know  better  the  cruelty  of  those  wicked  men
who  travel  below  the  Bridge.  Open  the  eye  of
thy  intellect,  and  wonder  at  those  who  volun-
tarily drown  themselves,  and  at  the  baseness  to
which  they  are  fallen  by  their  fault,  from  which
cause,  they  have  first  become  weak,  and  this  was
when  they  conceived  mortal  sin  in  their  minds,
for  they  then  bring  it  forth,  and  lose  the  life
of  grace.  And,  as  a  corpse  which  can  have  no
feeling  or  movement  of  itself,  but  only  when  it


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  93


is  moved  and  lifted  by  others,  so  those,  who  are
drowned  in  the  stream  of  disordinate  love  of  the
world,  are  dead  to  grace.  Wherefore  because
they  are  dead  their  memory  takes  no  heed  of
My  mercy.  The  eye  of  their  intellect  sees  not
and  knows  not  My  Truth,  because  their  feeling
is  dead,  that  is,  their  intellect  has  no  object
before  it  but  themselves,  with  the  dead  love  of
their  own  sensuality,  and  so  their  will  is  dead
to  My  will  because  it  loves  nothing  but  dead
things.  These  three  powers  then  being  dead,
all  the  soul's  operations  both  in  deed  and  thought
are  dead  as  far  as  grace  is  concerned.  For  the
soul  cannot  defend  herself  against  her  enemies,
nor  help  herself  through  her  own  power,  but
only  so  far  as  she  is  helped  by  Me.  It  is  true
indeed,  that  every  time  that  this  corpse,  in  whom
only  free-will  has  remained  (which  remains  as
long  as  the  mortal  body  lives),  asks  My  help,
he  can  have  it,  but  never  can  he  help  himself ;
he  has  become  insupportable  to  himself,  and,
wishing  to  govern  the  world,  is  governed  by
that  which  is  not,  that  is  by  sin,  for  sin  in  itself
is  nothing,  and  such  men  have  become  the  ser-
vants and  slaves  of  sin.  I  have  made  them  trees
of  love  with  the  life  of  grace  which  they  received
in  Holy  Baptism ;  and  they  have  become  trees
of  death,  because  they  are  dead,  as  I  have  already
said  to  thee.  Dost  thou  know  how  this  tree
finds  such  roots  ?  In  the  height  of  pride,  which
is  nourished  by  their  own  sensitive  self-love.
Its  branch  is  their  own  impatience,  and  its  off-


94       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


shoot  indiscretion  :  these  are  the  four  principal
vices  which  destroy  the  soul  of  him  who  is  a
tree  of  death,  because  he  has  not  drawn  life
from  grace.  Inside  the  tree  is  nourished  the
worm  of  conscience,  which,  while  man  lives  in
mortal  sin,  is  blinded  by  self-love,  and  therefore
felt  but  little  ;  the  fruits  of  this  tree  are  mortal,
for  they  have  drawn  their  nourishment,  which
should  have  been  humility,  from  the  roots  of
pride,  and  the  miserable  soul  is  full  of  ingra-
titude, whence  proceeds  every  evil.  But  if  she
were  grateful  for  the  benefits  she  has  received,
she  would  know  Me,  and  knowing  Me  would
know  herself,  and  so  would  remain  in  My  love  :
but  she,  as  if  blind,  goes  groping  down  the  river,
and  she  does  not  see  that  the  water  does  not
support  her."


How  the  fruits  of  this  tree  are  as  diverse  as  are  the
sins  ;  and  first,  of  the  sin  of  sensuality.

"  The  fruits  of  this  death-giving  tree,  are  as
diverse  as  sins  are  diverse.  See  that  some  of
these  fruits  are  the  food  of  beasts  who  live  im-
purely, using  their  body  and  their  mind  like  a
swine  who  wallows  in  mud,  for  in  the  same  way
they  wallow  in  the  mire  of  sensuality.  Oh,  ugly
soul,  where  hast  thou  left  thy  dignity  ?  Thou
wast  made  sister  to  the  angels,  and  now  thou  art
become  a  brute  beast.  To  such  misery  come
sinners,  notwithstanding  that  they  are  sustained
by  Me,  who  am  Supreme  Purity,  notwithstanding


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  95


that  the  very  devils,  whose  friends  and  servants
they  have  become,  cannot  endure  the  sight  of
such  filthy  actions.  Neither  does  any  sin,
abominable  as  it  may  be,  take  away  the  light
of  the  intellect  from  man,  so  much  as  does
this  one.  This  the  philosophers  knew,  not  by
the  light  of  grace,  because  they  had  it  not,  but
because  nature  gave  them  the  light  to  know  that
this  sin  obscured  the  intellect,  and  for  that  reason
they  preserved  themselves  in  continence  the  better
to  study.  Thus  also  they  flung  away  their  riches
in  order  that  the  thought  of  them  should  not
occupy  their  heart.  Not  so  does  the  ignorant
and  false  Christian,  who  has  lost  grace  by  sin."


How  the  fruit  of  others  is  avarice ;  and  of  the
evils  that  proceed  from  it.

u  A  fruit  of  the  earth  belongs  to  some  others,
who  are  covetous  misers,  acting  like  the  mole,
who  always  feeds  on  earth  till  death,  and  when
they  arrive  at  death  they  find  no  remedy.  Such
as  these,  with  their  meanness,  despise  My  gene-
rosity, selling  time  to  their  neighbour.  They
are  cruel  usurers,  and  robbers  of  their  neighbour ;
because  in  their  memory  they  have  not  the  re-
membrance of  My  mercy,  for  if  they  had  it  they
would  not  be  cruel  to  themselves  or  to  their
neighbour ;  on  the  contrary,  they  would  be  com-
passionate and  merciful  to  themselves,  practising
the  virtues  on  their  neighbour  and  succouring
him  charitably.    Oh,  how  many  are  the  evils


96       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


that  come  of  this  cursed  sin  of  avarice,  how
many  homicides  and  thefts,  and  how  much  pillage
with  unlawful  gain,  and  cruelty  of  heart  and
injustice  !  It  kills  the  soul  and  makes  her  the
slave  of  riches,  so  that  she  cares  not  to  observe
My  commandments.

"  A  miser  loves  no  one  except  for  his  own
profit.  Avarice  proceeds  from  and  feeds  pride,
the  one  follows  from  the  other,  because  the  miser
always  carries  with  him  the  thought  of  his  own
reputation,  and  thus  avarice,  which  is  imme-
diately combined  with  pride,  full  of  its  own
opinions,  goes  on  from  bad  to  worse.  It  is  a
fire  which  always  germinates  the  smoke  of  vain-
glory and  vanity  of  heart,  and  boasting  in  that
which  does  not  belong  to  it.  It  is  a  root  which
has  many  branches,  and  the  principal  one  is  that
which  makes  a  man  care  for  his  own  reputation,
from  whence  proceeds  his  desire  to  be  greater
than  his  neighbour.  It  also  brings  forth  the
deceitful  heart  that  is  neither  pure  nor  liberal,
but  is  double,  making  a  man  show  one  thing
with  his  tongue,  while  he  has  another  in  his
heart,  and  making  him  conceal  the  truth  and
tell  lies  for  his  own  profit.  And  it  produces
envy,  which  is  a  worm  that  is  always  gnawing,
and  does  not  let  the  miser  have  any  happiness
out  of  his  own  or  others1  good.  How  will
these  wicked  ones  in  so  wretched  a  state  give
of  their  substance  to  the  poor,  when  they  rob
others  ?  How  will  they  draw  their  foul  soul
out  of  the  mire,  when  they  themselves  put  it


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  97


there  ?  Sometimes  even  do  they  become  so
brutish,  that  they  do  not  consider  their  children
and  relations,  and  cause  them  to  fall  with  them
into  great  misery.  And,  nevertheless,  in  My
mercy  I  sustain  them,  I  do  not  command  the
earth  to  swallow  them  up,  that  they  may  re-
pent of  their  sins.  Would  they  then  give  their
life  for  the  salvation  of  souls,  when  they  will
not  give  their  substance  ?  Would  they  give
their  affections  when  they  are  gnawed  with  envy  ?
Oh,  miserable  vices  that  destroy  the  heaven  of
the  soul.  Heaven  I  call  her  (the  soul)  because
so  I  made  her,  living  in  her  at  first  by  grace,
and  hiding  Myself  within  her,  and  making  of
her  a  mansion  through  affection  of  love.  Now
she  has  separated  herself  from  Me,  like  an  adul-
teress, loving  herself,  and  creatures  more  than
Me,  and  has  made  a  god  of  herself,  persecuting
Me  with  many  and  diverse  sins.  And  this  she
does  because  she  does  not  consider  the  benefit
of  the  Blood  that  was  shed  with  so  great  Fire
of  Love."

How  some  others  hold  positions  of  authority,  and
bring  forth  fruits  of  injustice.

"There  are  others  who  hold  their  heads  high
by  their  position  of  authority,  and  who  bear  the
banner  of  injustice — using  injustice  against  Me,
God,  and  against  their  neighbour,  and  against
themselves  —  to  themselves  by  not  paying  the
debt  of  virtue,  and  towards  Me  by  not  paying  the

G


9  8       ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


debt  of  honourjin-jglorifying  and  praising  My
Name,  which  debt  they  are  bound  to  pay.  But
they,  like  thieves,  steal  what  is  Mine,  and  give
it  to  the  service  of  their  own  sensuality.  So  that
they  commit  injustice  towards  Me  and  towards
themselves,  like  blind  and  ignorant  men  who  do
not  recognise  Me  in  themselves  on  account  of
self-love,  like  the  Jews  and  the  ministers  of  the
Law  who,  with  envy  and  self-love,  blinded  them-
selves so  that  they  did  not  recognise  the  Truth,
My  only-begotten  Son,  and  rendered  not  His  due
to  the  Eternal  Truth,  who  was  amongst  them,
as  said  My  Truth  :  '  The  Kingdom  of  God  is  among
you.'  But  they  knew  it  not,  because,  in  the  afore-
said way,  they  had  lost  the  light  of  reason,  and  so
they  did  not  pay  their  debt  of  honour  and  glory
to  Me,  and  to  Him,  who  was  one  thing  with  Me,
and  Jike  blind  ones  committed  injustice,  perse-
cuting Him  with  much  ignominy,  even  to  the
death  of  the  Cross.

"  Thus  are  such  as  these  unjust  to  themselves,
to  Me,  and  to  their  neighbour,  unjustly  selling
the  flesh  of  their  dependants,  and  of  any  person
who  falls  into  their  hands."

How  through  these  and  through  other  defects,  one  falls
into  false  judgment;  and  of  the  indignity  to  which
one  comes.

"  By  these  and  by  other  sins  men  fall  into  false
judgment,  as  I  will  explain  to  you  below.  They
are  continually  being  scandalised  by  My  works,


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  99


which  are  all  just,  and  all  performed  in  truth
through  love  and  mercy.  With  this  false  judg-
ment, and  with  the  poison  of  envy  and  pride,  the
works  of  My  Son  were  slandered  and  unjustly
judged,  and  with  lies  did  His  enemies  say :  '  This
man  works  by  virtue  of  Beelzebub.''  Thus  wicked
men,  standing  in  self-love,  impurity,  pride,  and
avarice,  and  founded  in  envy,  and  in  perverse
rashness  with  impatience,  are  for  ever  scandalised
at  Me  and  at  My  servants,  whom  they  judge  to  be
feignedly  practising  the  virtues,  because  their
heart  is  rotten,  and,  having  spoilt  their  taste,
good  things  seem  evil  to  them,  and  bad  things,
that  is  to  say  disorderly  living,  seem  good  to
them.  Oh,  how  blind  is  the  human  generation
in  that  it  considers  not  its  own  dignity !  From
being  great  thou  hast  become  small,  from  a  ruler
thou  hast  become  a  slave,  and  that  in  the  vilest
service  that  can  be  had,  because  thou  art  the
servant  and  slave  of  sin,  and  art  become  like  unto
that  which  thou  dost  serve.

"Sin  is  nothing.  Thou,  then,  hast  become
nothing  ;  it  has  deprived  thee  of  life,  and  given
thee  death.  This  life  and  power  were  given  you
by  the  Word,  My  only-begotten  Son,  the  glorious
Bridge,  He  drawing  you  from  out  of  your  servi-
tude when  you  were  servants  of  the  devil,  Him-
self becoming  as  a  servant  to  take  you  out  of
servitude,  imposing  on  Himself  obedience  to  do
away  the  disobedience  of  Adam,  and  humbling
Himself  to  the  shameful  death  of  the  Cross  to
confound  pride.     By  His  death  He  destroyed


ioo     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


every  vice,  so  that  no  one  could  say  that  any  vice
remained  that  was  not  punished  and  beaten  out
with  pains,  as  I  said  to  thee  above,  when  I  said
that  of  His  Body  He  had  made  an  anvil.  All
the  remedies  are  ready  to  save  men  from  eternal
death,  and  they  despise  the  Blood,  and  have
trampled  It  under  the  feet  of  their  disordinate
affection ;  and  it  is  for  this  injustice  and  false
judgment  that  the  world  is  reproved,  and  will  be
reproved  on  the  Last  Day  of  Judgment.

"This  was  meant  by  My  Truth  when  He  said  :
' 1  will  send  the  Paraclete,  who  will  reprove  the  world
for  injustice  and false  judgment. '   And  it  was  reproved
when  I  sent  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  Apostles."

Of  the  words  that  Christ  said:  "  /  will  send  the
Holy  Spirit,  who  will  reprove  the  world  of
injustice  and  of  false  judgment;"  and  how  one
of  these  reproofs  is  continuous,

"There  are  three  reproofs.  One  was  given
when  the  Holy  Spirit  came  upon  the  disciples,
who,  as  it  is  said,  being  fortified  by  My  power,
and  illuminated  by  the  wisdom  of  My  beloved
Son,  received  all  in  the  plenitude  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  Then  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  one  thing
with  Me  and  with  My  Son,  reproved  the  world
by  the  mouth  of  the  Apostles,  with  the  doctrine
of  My  Truth.  They  and  all  others,  who  are
descended  from  them,  following  the  truth  which
they  understand  through  the  same  means,  reprove
the  world.


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  101


"  This  is  that  continuous  reproof  that  I  make
to  the  world  by  means  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,
and  My  servants,  putting  the  Holy  Spirit  on
their  tongues  to  announce  My  truth,  even  as  the
Devil  puts  himself  on  the  tongues  of  his  servants,
that  is  to  say,  of  those  who  pass  through  the
river  in  iniquity.  This  is  that  sweet  reproof
that  I  have  fixed  for  ever,  in  the  aforesaid  way,
out  of  My  most  great  affection  of  love  for  the
salvation  of  souls.  And  they  cannot  say  *  I  had
no  one  who  reproved  me,'  because  the  truth  is
revealed  to  them  showing  them  vice  and  virtue.
And  I  have  made  them  see  the  fruit  of  virtue,
and  the  hurtfulness  of  vice,  to  give  them  love
and  holy  fear  with  hatred  of  vice  and  love  of
virtue,  and  this  truth  has  not  been  shown  them
by  an  angel,  so  that  they  cannot  say,  4  the  angel
is  a  blessed  spirit  who  cannot  offend,  and  feels
not  the  vexations  of  the  flesh  as  we  do,  neither
the  heaviness  of  our  body,'  because  the  Incarnate
Word  of  My  Truth  has  been  given  to  them  with
your  mortal  flesh.

"  Who  were  the  others  who  followed  this
Word  ?  Mortal  creatures,  susceptible  of  pain
like  you,  having  the  same  opposition  of  the  flesh
to  the  Spirit,  as  had  the  glorious  Paul,  My
standard-bearer,  and  many  other  saints  who,
by  one  thing  or  another,  have  been  tormented.
Which  torments  I  permitted  for  the  increase  of
grace  and  virtue  in  their  souls.  Thus,  they  were
born  in  sin  like  you,  and  nourished  with  a  like
food,  and  I  am  God  now  as  then.    My  power  is


io2     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


not  weakened,  and  cannot  become  weak.  So
that  I  can  and  will  succour  him  who  wishes  to
be  succoured  by  Me.  Man  wants  My  succour
when  he  comes  out  of  the  river,  and  walks  by
the  Bridge,  following  the  doctrine  of  My  Truth.
Thus  no  one  has  any  excuse,  because  both  re-
proof and  truth  are  constantly  given  to  them.
Wherefore,  if  they  do  not  amend  while  they  have
time,  they  will  be  condemned  by  the  second  con-
demnation which  will  take  place  at  the  extremity
of  death,  when  My  Justice  will  cry  to  them,
'  Rise,  ye  dead,  and  come  to  judgment ! '  That
is  to  say,  '  Thou,  who  art  dead  to  grace,  and  hast
reached  the  moment  of  thy  corporal  death,  arise
and  come  before  the  Supreme  Judge  with  thy
injustice  and  false  judgment,  and  with  the  ex-
tinguished light  of  faith  which  thou  didst  receive
burning  in  Holy  Baptism  (and  which  thou  hast
blown  out  with  the  wind  of  pride),  and  with  the
vanity  of  ^thy  heart,  with  which  thou  didst  set
thy  sails  to  winds  which  were  contrary  to  thy
salvation,  for  with  the  wind  of  self-esteem,  didst
thou  fill  the  sail  of  self-love.'  Thus  didst  thou
hasten  down  the  stream  of  the  delights  and
dignities  of  the  world  at  thy  own  will,  following
thy  fragile  flesh  and  the  temptations  of  the  devil,
who,  with  the  sail  of  thy  own  will  set,  has  led
thee  along  the  underway  which  is  a  running
stream,  and  so  has  brought  thee  with  himself  to
eternal  damnation."


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  103


Of  the  second  reproof  of  injustice ^  and  of  false
judgment,  in  general  and  in  particular.

"  This  second  reproof,  dearest  daughter,  is  in-
deed a  condemnation,  for  the  soul  has  arrived  at
the  end,  where  there  can  be  no  remedy,  for  she  is
at  the  extremity  of  death,  where  is  the  worm
of  conscience,  which  I  told  thee  was  blinded
self-love.  Now  at  the  time  of  death,  since  she
cannot  get  out  of  My  hands,  she  begins  to  see,
and  therefore  is  gnawed  with  remorse,  seeing  that
her  own  sin  has  brought  her  into  so  great  evil.
But  if  the  soul  have  light  to  know  and  grieve  for
her  fault,  not  on  account  of  the  pain  of  Hell
that  follows  upon  it,  but  on  account  of  pain  at
her  offence  against  Me,  who  am  Supreme  and
Eternal  Good,  still  she  can  find  mercy.  But  if
she  pass  the  Bridge  of  death  without  light,  and
alone,  with  the  worm  of  conscience,  without  the
hope  of  the  Blood,  and  bewailing  herself  more
on  account  of  her  first  condemnation  than  on
account  of  My  displeasure,  she  arrives  at  eternal
damnation.  And  then  she  is  reproved  cruelly  by
My  Justice  of  injustice  and  of  false  judgment,
and  not  so  much  of  general  injustice  and  false
judgment  which  she  has  practised  generally  in
all  her  works,  but  much  more  on  account  of
the  particular  injustice  and  false  judgment  which
she  practises  at  the  end,  in  judging  her  misery
greater  than  My  mercy.  This  is  that  sin  which
is  neither  pardoned  here  nor  there,  because  the
soul  would  not  be  pardoned,  depreciating  My


io4     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

mercy.  Therefore  is  this  last  sin  graver  to
Me  than  all  the  other  sins  that  the  soul  has
committed.  Wherefore  the  despair  of  Judas
displeased  Me  more,  and  was  more  grave  to
My  Son  than  was  his  betrayal  of  Him.  So
that  they  are  reproved  of  this  false  judgment,
which  is  to  have  held  their  sin  to  be  greater
than  My  mercy,  and,  on  that  account,  are  they
punished  with  the  devils,  and  eternally  tortured
with  them.  And  they  are  reproved  of  injustice
because  they  grieve  more  over  their  condemna-
tion than  over  My  displeasure,  and  do  not  render
to  Me  that  which  is  Mine,  and  to  themselves
that  which  is  theirs.  For  to  Me,  they  ought  to
render  love,  and  to  themselves  bitterness,  with
contrition  of  heart,  and  offer  it  to  Me,  for  the
offence  they  have  done  Me.  And  they  do  the
contrary  because  they  give  to  themselves  love,
pitying  themselves,  and  grieving  on  account  of
the  pain  they  expect  for  their  sin  ;  so  thou  seest
that  they  are  guilty  of  injustice  and  false  judg-
ment, and  are  punished  for  the  one  and  the  other
together.  Wherefore,  they,  having  depreciated
My  mercy,  I  with  justice  send  them,  with  their
cruel  servant,  sensuality,  and  the  cruel  tyrant
the  Devil,  whose  servants  they  made  themselves
through  their  own  sensuality,  so  that,  together,
they  are  punished  and  tormented,  as  together
they  have  offended  Me.  Tormented,  I  say,  by
My  ministering  devils  whom  My  judgment  has
appointed  to  torment  those  who  have  done
evil."


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  105


Of  the  four  principal  torments  of  the  damned,  from
which  follow  all  the  others ;  and  particularly
of  the  foulness  of  the  Devil.

"  My  daughter,  the  tongue  is  not  sufficient  to
narrate  the  pain  of  these  poor  souls.  As  there
are  three  principal  vices,  namely :  self  -  love,
whence  proceeds  the  second,  that  is  love  of
reputation,  whence  proceeds  the  third,  that  is
pride,  with  injustice  and  cruelty,  and  with  other
filthiness  and  iniquitous  sins,  that  follow  upon
these.  So  I  say  to  thee,  that  in  Hell,  the  souls
have  four  principal  torments,  out  of  which  pro-
ceed all  the  other  torments.  The  first  is,  that
they  see  themselves  deprived  of  the  vision  of
Me,  which  is  such  pain  to  them,  that,  were  it
possible,  they  would  rather  choose  the  fire,  and
the  tortures  and  torments,  and  to  see  Me,  than
to  be  without  the  torments  and  not  to  see  Me.

"This  first  pain  revives  in  them,  then,  the
second,  the  worm  of  Conscience,  which  gnaws
unceasingly,  seeing  that  the  soul  is  deprived  of
Me,  and  of  the  conversation  of  the  angels,
through  her  sin,  made  worthy  of  the  conversa-
tion and  sight  of  the  devils,  which  vision  of
the  Devil  is  the  third  pain  and  redoubles  to
them  their  every  toil.  As  the  saints  exult  in  the
sight  of  Me,  refreshing  themselves  with  joyous-
ness  in  the  fruit  of  their  toils  borne  for  Me
with  such  abundance  of  love,  and  displeasure
of  themselves,  so  does  the  sight  of  the  Devil
revive  these  wretched  ones  to  torments,  because


io6     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


in  seeing  him  they  know  themselves  more,  that
is  to  say,  they  know  that,  by  their  own  sin,  they
have  made  themselves  worthy  of  him.  And  so
the  worm  of  Conscience  gnaws  more  and  more,
and  the  fire  of  this  Conscience  never  ceases  to
burn.  And  the  sight  is  more  painful  to  them,
because  they  see  him  in  his  own  form,  which  is
so  horrible  that  the  heart  of  man  could  not
imagine  it.  And  if  thou  remember  well,  thou
knowest  that  I  showed  him  to  thee  in  his  own
form  for  a  little  space  of  time,  hardly  a  moment,
and  thou  didst  choose  (after  thou  hadst  returned
to  thyself)  rather  to  walk  on  a  road  of  fire,  even
until  the  Day  of  Judgment,  than  to  see  him
again.  With  all  this  that  thou  hast  seen,  even
thou  dost  not  know  well  how  horrible  he  is,
because,  by  Divine  justice,  he  appears  more
horrible  to  the  soul  that  is  deprived  of  Me,
and  more  or  less  according  to  the  gravity  of
her  sin.  The  fourth  torment  that  they  have  is
the  fire.  This  fire  burns  and  does  not  consume,
for  the  being  of  the  soul  cannot  be  consumed,
because  it  is  not  a  material  thing  that  fire  can
consume.  But  I,  by  Divine  justice,  have  per-
mitted the  fire  to  burn  them  with  torments,  so
that  it  torments  them,  without  consuming  them,
with  the  greatest  pains  in  diverse  ways  accord-
ing to  the  diversity  of  their  sins,  to  some  more,
and  to  some  less,  according  to  the  gravity  of
their  fault.  Out  of  these  four  torments  issue
all  others,  such  as  cold  and  heat  and  gnashing
of  the  teeth  and  many  others.     Now  because


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  107


they  did  not  amend  themselves  after  the  first
reproof  that  they  had  of  injustice  and  false  judg-
ment, neither  in  the  second,  which  was  that,  in
death,  they  would  not  hope  in  Me,  nor  grieve
for  the  offence  done  to  Me,  but  only  for  their
own  pain,  have  they  thus  so  miserably  received
Eternal  Punishment. "

Of  the  third  reproof  which  is  made  on  the
Day  of  Judgment.

"  Now  it  remains  to  tell  of  the  third  reproof
which  is  on  the  Last  Day  of  Judgment.  Already
I  have  told  thee  of  two,  and  now,  so  that  thou
mayest  see  how  greatly  man  deceives  himself,  I
will  tell  thee  of  the  third — of  the  General  Judg-
ment, when  the  pain  of  the  miserable  soul  is
renewed  and  increased  by  the  union  that  the
soul  will  make  with  the  body,  with  an  intoler-
able reproof,  which  will  generate  in  it  confusion
and  shame.  Know  that,  in  the  Last  Day  of
Judgment,  when  will  come  the  Word — My  Son,
with  My  Divine  Majesty  to  reprove  the  world
with  Divine  Power,  He  will  not  come  like  a
poor  one,  as  when  He  was  born,  coming  in  the
womb  of  the  Virgin,  and  being  born  in  a  stable
amongst  the  animals,  and  then  dying  between
two  thieves.  Then  I  concealed  My  power  in
Him,  letting  Him  suffer  pain  and  torment  like
man,  not  that  My  divine  nature  was  therefore
separated  from  human  nature,  but  II  let  Him
suffer  like  man  to  satisfy  for  your  guilt.  He


io8     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


will  not  come  thus  in  that  last  moment,  but
He  will  come,  with  power,  to  reprove  in  His
Own  Person,  and  will  render  to  every  one  his
due,  and  there  will  be  no  one  in  that  Day  who
will  not  tremble.  To  the  miserable  ones  who
are  damned,  His  aspect  will  cause  such  torment
and  terror  that  the  tongue  cannot  describe  it.
To  the  just  it  will  cause  the  fear  of  reverence
with  great  joy ;  not  that  His  face  changes,
because  He  is  unchangeable,  being  one  thing
with  Me  according  to  the  divine  nature,  and,
according  to  the  human  nature,  His  face  was
unchangeable,  after  it  took  the  glory  of  the
Resurrection.  But,  to  the  eye  of  the  damned,
it  will  appear  such,  on  account  of  their  terrible
and  darkened  vision,  that,  as  the  sun  which  is
so  bright,  appears  all  darkness  to  the  infirm  eye,
but  to  the  healthy  eye  light  (and  it  is  not  the
defect  of  the  light  that  makes  it  appear  other
to  the  blind  than  to  the  illuminated  one,  but
the  defect  of  the  eye  which  is  infirm),  so  will
the  condemned  ones  see  His  countenance  in  dark-
ness, in  confusion,  and  in  hatred,  not  through
defect  of  My  Divine  Majesty,  with  which  He
will  come  to  judge  the  world,  but  through  their
own  defect."


How  the  damned  cannot  desire  any  good.

"  And  their  hatred  is  so  great  that  they  cannot
will  or  desire  any  good,  but  they  continually
blaspheme  Me.    And  dost  thou  know  why  they


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  109


cannot  desire  good  ?  Because  the  life  of  man
ended,  free-will  is  bound.  Wherefore  they  cannot
merit,  having  lost,  as  they  have,  the  time  to  do
so.  If  they  finish  their  life,  dying  in  hatred
with  the  guilt  of  mortal  sin,  their  souls,  by
divine  justice,  remain  for  ever  bound  J  with  the
bonds  of  hatred,  and  for  ever  obstinate  in  that
evil,  in  which,  therefore,  being  gnawed  by  them-
selves, their  pains  always  increase,  especially  the
pains  of  those  who  have  been  the  cause  of
damnation  to  others,  as  that  rich  man,  who  was
damned,  demonstrated  to  you  when  he  begged
the  favour  that  Lazarus  might  go  to  his  brothers,
who  were  in  the  world,  to  tell  them  of  his  pains.
This,  certainly,  he  did  not  do  out  of  love  or
compassion  for  his  brothers,  for  he  was  deprived
of  love  and  could  not  desire  good,  either  for
My  honour  or  their  salvation,  because,  as  I  have
already  told  thee,  the  damned  souls  cannot  dc
any  good  to  their  neighbour,  and  they  blaspheme
Me,  because  their  life  ended  in  hatred  of  Me
and  of  virtue.  But  why  then  did  he  do  it  ?
He  did  it  because  he  was  the  eldest,  and  had
nourished  them  up  in  the  same  miseries  in  which
he  had  lived,  so  that  he  was  the  cause  of  their
damnation,  and  he  saw  pain  increased  to  himself,
on  account  of  their  damnation  when  they  should
arrive  in  torment  together  with  him,  to  be  gnawed
for  ever  by  hatred,  because  in  hatred  they  finished
their  lives."


no     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Of  the  glory  of  the  Blessed.

"  Similarly,  the  just  soul,  for  whom  life  finishes
in  the  affection  of  charity  and  the  bonds  of  love,
cannot  increase  in  virtue,  time  having  come  to
nought,  but  she  can  always  love  with  that  affec-
tion with  which  she  comes  to  Me,  and  that
measure  that  is  measured  to  her.  She  always
desires  Me,  and  loves  Me,  and  her  desire  is  not
in  vain — being  hungry,  she  is  satisfied,  and  being
satisfied,  she  has  hunger,  but  the  tediousness  of
satiety  and  the  pain  of  hunger  are  far  from  her.
In  love,  the  Blessed  rejoice  in  My  eternal  vision,
participating  in  that  good  that  I  have  in  Myself,
every  one  according  to  his  measure,  that  is  that,
with  that  measure  of  love,  with  which  they  have
come  to  Me,  is  it  measured  to  them.  Because
they  have  lived  in  love  of  Me  and  of  the  neigh-
bour, united  together  with  the  general  love,  and
the  particular,  which,  moreover,  both  proceed
from  the  same  love.  And  they  rejoice  and  exult,
participating  in  each  other's  good  with  the  affec-
tion of  love,  besides  the  universal  good  that  they
enjoy  altogether.  And  they  rejoice  and  exult  with
the  angels  with  whom  they  are  placed,  according
to  their  diverse  and  various  virtues  in  the  world,
being  all  bound  in  the  bonds  of  love.  And  they
have  a  special  participation  with  those  whom
they  closely  loved  with  particular  affection  in
the  world,  with  which  affection  they  grew  in
grace,  increasing  virtue,  and  the  one  was  the
occasion  to  the  other  of  manifesting  the  glory


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  in


and  praise  of  My  name,  in  themselves  and  in
their  neighbour ;  and,  in  the  life  everlasting,  they
have  not  lost  their  love,  but  have  it  still,  parti-
cipating closely,  with  more  abundance,  the  one
with  the  other,  their  love  being  added  to  the
universal  good,  and  I  would  not  that  thou
shouldest  think  that  they  have  this  particular
good,  of  which  I  have  told  thee,  for  themselves
alone,  for  it  is  not  so,  but  it  is  shared  by  all
the  proved  citizens,  My  beloved  sons,  and  all
the  angels — for,  when  the  soul  arrives  at  eternal
life,  all  participate  in  the  good  of  that  soul,  and
the  soul  in  their  good.  Not  that  her  vessel  or
theirs  can  increase,  nor  that  there  be  need  to  fill
it,  because  it  is  full,  but  they  have  an  exultation,
a  mirthfulness,  a  jubilee,  a  joyousness  in  them-
selves, which  is  refreshed  by  the  knowledge  that
they  have  found  in  that  soul.  They  see  that,
by  My  mercy,  she  is  raised  from  the  earth  with
the  plenitude  of  grace,  and  therefore  they  exult
in  Me  in  the  good  of  that  soul,  which  good  she
has  received  through  My  goodness.

"And  that  soul  rejoices  in  Me,  and  in  the
souls,  and  in  the  blessed  spirits,  seeing  and
tasting  in  them  the  beauty  and  the  sweetnes
of  My  love.  And  their  desires  for  ever  cry
out  to  Me,  for  the  salvation  of  the  whole  world.
And  because  their  life  ended  in  the  love  of  the
neighbour,  they  have  not  left  it  behind,  but,  with
it,  they  will  pass  through  the  Door,  My  only-
begotten  Son  in  the  way  that  I  will  relate  to
thee.    So  thou  seest  that  in  those  bonds  of  love


ii2     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


in  which  they  finished  their  life,  they  go  on  and
remain  eternally.  They  are  conformed  so  en-
tirely to  My  will,  that  they  cannot  desire  except
what  I  desire,  because  their  free-will  is  bound
in  the  bond  of  love,  in  such  a  way  that,  time
failing  them,  and,  dying  in  a  state  of  grace,  they
cannot  sin  any  more.  And  their  will  is  so  united
with  Mine,  that  a  father  or  a  mother  seeing  their
son,  or  a  son  seeing  his  father  or  his  mother  in
Hell,  do  not  trouble  themselves,  and  even  are
contented  to  see  them  punished  as  My  enemies.
Wherefore  in  nothing  do  they  disagree  with  Me,
and  their  desires  are  all  satisfied.  The  desire  of
the  blessed  is  to  see  My  honour  in  you  wayfarers,
who  are  pilgrims,  for  ever  running  on  towards
the  term  of  death.  In  their  desire  for  My  honour,
they  desire  your  salvation,  and  always  pray  to  Me
for  you,  which  desire  is  fulfilled  by  Me,  when
you  ignorant  ones  do  not  resist  My  mercy.  They
have  a  desire  too,  to  regain  the  gifts  of  their  body,
but  this  desire  does  not  afflict  them,  as  they  do
not  actually  feel  it,  but  they  rejoice  in  tasting
the  desire,  from  the  certainty  they  feel  of  having
it  fulfilled.  Their  desire  does  not  afflict  them,
because,  though  they  have  it  not  yet  fulfilled,
no  bliss  is  thereby  lacking  to  them.  Wherefore
they  feel  not  the  pain  of  desire.  And  think  not,
that  the  bliss  of  the  body  after  the  resurrection
gives  more  bliss  to  the  soul,  for,  if  this  were  so,
it  would  follow  that,  until  they  had  the  body,
they  had  imperfect  bliss,  which  cannot  be,  because
no  perfection  is  lacking  to  them.    So  it  is  not


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  113


the  body  that  gives  bliss  to  the  soul,  but  the
soul  will  give  bliss  to  the  body,  because  the  soul
will  give  of  her  abundance,  and  will  re-clothe
herself  on  the  Last  Day  of  Judgment,  in  the
garments  of  her  own  flesh  which  she  had  quitted.
For,  as  the  soul  is  made  immortal,  stayed  and
stablished  in  Me,  so  the  body  in  that  union
becomes  immortal,  and,  having  lost  heaviness,
is  made  fine  and  light.  Wherefore,  know  that
the  glorified  body  can  pass  through  a  wall,  and
that  neither  water  nor  fire  can  injure  it,  not
by  virtue  of  itself,  but  by  virtue  of  the  soul,
which  virtue  is  of  Me,  given  to  her  by  grace,
and  by  the  ineffable  love  with  which  I  created
her  in  My  image  and  likeness.  The  eye  of  thy
intellect  is  not  sufficient  to  see,  nor  thy  ear
to  hear,  nor  thy  tongue  to  tell  of  the  good  of
the  Blessed.  Oh,  how  much  delight  they  have
in  seeing  Me,  who  am  every  good  !  Oh,  how
much  delight  they  will  have  in  being  with  the
glorified  body,  though,  not  having  that  delight
from  now  to  the  general  Judgment,  they  have
not,  on  that  account,  pain,  because  no  bliss  is
lacking  to  them,  the  soul  being  satisfied  in  her-
self, and,  as  I  have  told  thee,  the  body  will
participate  in  this  bliss.

"  I  told  thee  of  the  happiness  which  the  glori-
fied body  would  take  in  the  glorified  humanity
of  My  only-begotten  Son,  which  gives  you  assur-
ance of  your  resurrection.  There,  they  exult  in
His  wounds,  which  have  remained  fresh,  and  the
Scars  in  His  Body  are  preserved,  and  continually

H


ii4     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

cry  for  mercy  for  you,  to  Me,  the  Supreme  and
Eternal  Father.  And  they  are  all  conformed
with  Him,  in  joyousness  and  mirth,  and  you
will  all  be  conformed  with  Him,  eye  with  eye,
and  hand  with  hand,  and  with  the  whole  Body
of  the  sweet  Word  My  Son,  and,  dwelling  in
Me,  you  will  dwell  in  Him,  because  He  is  one
thing  with  Me.  But  their  bodily  eye,  as  I  told
thee,  will  delight  itself  in  the  glorified  humanity
of  the  Word,  My  only-begotten  Son.  Why  so  ?
Because  their  life  finished  in  the  affection  of  My
love,  and  therefore  will  this  delight  endure  for
them  eternally.  Not  that  they  can  work  any
good,  but  they  rejoice  and  delight  in  that  good
which  they  have  brought  with  them,  that  is,  they
cannot  do  any  meritorious  act,  by  which  they
could  merit  anything,  because  in  this  life  alone
can  they  merit  and  sin,  according  as  they  please,
with  free-will.

"  These  then  do  not  await,  with  fear,  the  Divine
judgment,  but  with  joy,  and  the  Face  of  My  Son
will  not  seem  to  them  terrible,  or  full  of  hatred,
because  they  finished  their  lives  in  love  and
affection  for  Me,  and  good-will  towards  their
neighbour.  So  thou  seest  then,  that  the  trans-
formation is  not  in  His  Face,  when  He  comes
to  judge  with  My  Divine  Majesty,  but  in  the
vision  of  those  who  will  be  judged  by  Him.  To
the  damned  He  will  appear  with  hatred  and
with  justice.  And  to  the  saved  with  love  and
mercy."


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  115


How,  after  the  General  Judgment,  the  pain  of
the  damned  will  increase,

"  I  have  told  thee  of  the  dignity  of  the  Right-
eous, so  that  thou  mayest  the  better  know  the
misery  of  the  damned.  For  this  is  another  of
their  pains,  namely,  the  vision  of  the  bliss  of  the
righteous,  which  is  to  them  an  increase  of  pain,
as,  to  the  righteous,  the  damnation  of  the  damned
is  an  increase  of  exultation  in  My  goodness.  As
light  is  seen  better  near  darkness,  and  darkness
near  light,  so  the  sight  of  the  Blessed  increases
their  pain.  With  pain  they  await  the  Last  Day
of  Judgment,  because  they  see,  following  it,  an
increase  of  pain  to  themselves.  And  so  will  it
be,  because  when  that  terrible  voice  shall  say  to
them,  'Arise,  ye  dead,  and  come  to  judgment/
the  soul  will  return  with  the  body,  in  the  just
to  be  glorified,  and  in  the  damned  to  be  tortured
eternally.  And  the  aspect  of  My  Truth,  and
of  all  the  blessed  ones  will  reproach  them  greatly,
and  make  them  ashamed,  and  the  worm  of  con-
science will  gnaw  the  pith  of  the  tree,  that  is
the  soul,  and  also  the  bark  outside,  which  is  the
body.  They  will  be  reproached  by  the  Blood
that  was  shed  for  them,  and  by  the  works  of
mercy,  spiritual  and  temporal,  which  I  did  for
them  by  means  of  My  Son,  and  which  they
should  have  done  for  their  neighbour,  as  is
contained  in  the  Holy  Gospel.  They  will  be
reproved  for  their  cruelty  towards  their  neigh-
bour, for  their  pride  and  self-love,   for  their


n6     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


filthiness  and  avarice;  and  when  they  see  the
mercy  that  they  have  received  from  Me,  their
reproof  will  seem  to  be  intensified  in  harshness.
At  the  time  of  death,  the  soul  only  is  re-
proved, but,  at  the  General  Judgment,  the  soul
is  reproved  together  with  the  body,  because  the
body  has  been  the  companion  and  instrument
of  the  soul — to  do  good  and  evil  according  as
the  free-will  pleased.  Every  work,  good  or
bad,  is  done  by  means  of  the  body.  And,  there-
fore, justly,  My  daughter,  glory  and  infinite
good  are  rendered  to  My  elect  ones  with  their
glorified  body,  rewarding  them  for  the  toils  they
bore  for  Me,  together  with  the  soul.  And  to
the  perverse  ones  will  be  rendered  eternal  pains
by  means  of  their  body,  because  their  body  was
the  instrument  of  evil.  Wherefore,  being  their
body,  restored,  their  pains  will  revive  and  increase
at  the  aspect  of  My  Son,  their  miserable  sensuality
with  its  filthiness,  in  the  vision  of  their  nature
(that  is,  the  humanity  of  Christ),  united  with  the
purity  of  My  Deity,  and  of  this  mass  of  their
Adam  nature  raised  above  all  the  choirs  of
Angels,  and  themselves,  by  their  own  fault,  sunk
into  the  depths  of  Hell.  And  they  will  see
generosity  and  mercy  shining  in  the  blessed  ones,
who  receive  the  fruit  of  the  Blood  of  the  Lamb,
the  pains  that  they  have  borne  remaining  as
ornaments  on  their  bodies,  like  the  dye  upon
the  cloth,  not  by  virtue  of  the  body  but  only
out  of  the  fulness  of  the  soul,  representing  in
the  body  the  fruit  of  its  labour,  because  it  was


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  117


the  companion  of  the  soul  in  the  working  of
virtue.  As  in  the  mirror  is  represented  the  face
of  the  man,  so  in  the  body  is  represented  the
fruit  of  bodily  toils,  in  the  way  that  I  have
told  thee.

"  The  pain  and  confusion  of  the  darkened
ones,  on  seeing  so  great  a  dignity  (of  which  they
are  deprived),  will  increase,  and  their  bodies  will
appear  the  sign  of  the  wickedness  they  have
committed,  with  pain  and  torture.  And  when
they  hear  that  terrible  speech,  '  Go,  cursed  ones,
to  the  Eternal  Fire,'  the  soul  and  the  body  will
go  to  be  with  the  Devil  without  any  remedy  or
hope — each  one  being  wrapped  up  in  diverse
filth  of  earth,  according  to  his  evil  works.  The
miser  with  the  filth  of  avarice,  wrapping  himself
up  with  the  worldly  substance  which  he  loved
disordinately,  and  the  burning  in  the  fire ;  the
cruel  one  with  cruelty ;  the  foul  man  with  foul-
ness and  miserable  concupiscence ;  the  unjust
with  his  injustice ;  the  envious  with  envy ;  and
the  hater  of  his  neighbour  with  hatred.  And
inordinate  self-love,  whence  were  born  all  their
ills,  will  be  burnt  with  intolerable  pain,  as  the
head  and  principle  of  every  evil,  in  company  with
pride.  So  that  body  and  soul  together  will  be
punished  in  diverse  ways.  Thus  miserably  do
they  arrive  at  their  end  who  go  by  the  lower
way,  that  is,  by  the  river,  not  turning  back  to
see  their  sins  and  My  Mercy.  And  they  arrive
at  the  Gate  of  the  Lie,  because  they  follow  the
doctrine  of  the  Devil,  who  is  the  Father  of


n8     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Lies ;  and  this  Devil  is  their  Door,  through
which  they  go  to  Eternal  Damnation,  as  has
been  said,  as  the  elect  and  My  sons,  keeping  by
the  way  above,  that  is  by  the  Bridge,  follow  the
Way  of  Truth,  and  this  Truth  is  the  Door,  and
therefore  said  My  Truth,  '  No  one  can  go  to  the
Father  but  by  Me.'  He  is  the  Door  and  the
Way  through  which  they  pass  to  enter  the  Sea
Pacific.  It  is  the  contrary  for  those  who  have
kept  the  Way  of  the  Lie,  which  leads  them  to
the  water  of  death.  And  it  is  to  this  that  the
Devil  calls  them,  and  they  are  as  blind  and  mad,
and  do  not  perceive  it,  because  they  have  lost
the  light  of  faith.  The  Devil  says,  as  it  were,
to  them :  '  Whosoever  thirsts  for  the  water  of
death,  let  him  come  and  I  will  give  it  to  him.' "

Of  the  use  of  temptations,  and  how  every  soul  in  her
extremity  sees  her  final  place  either  of  pain  or  of
glory,  before  she  is  separated  from  the  body.

"  The  Devil,  dearest  daughter,  is  the  instru-
ment of  My  Justice  to  torment  the  souls  who
have  miserably  offended  Me.  And  I  have  set
him  in  this  life  to  tempt  and  molest  My  creatures,
not  for  My  creatures  to  be  conquered,  but  that
they  may  conquer,  proving  their  virtue,  and
receive  from  Me  the  glory  of  victory.  And  no
one  should  fear  any  battle  or  temptation  of  the
Devil  that  may  come  to  him,  because  I  have
made  My  creatures  strong,  and  have  given  them
strength  of  will,  fortified  in  the  Blood  of  my


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  119


Son,  which  will,  neither  Devil  nor  creature  can
move,  because  it  is  yours,  given  by  Me.  You
therefore,  with  free  arbitration,  can  hold  it  or
leave  it,  according  as  you  please.  It  is  an  arm,
which,  if  you  place  it  in  the  hands  of  the  Devil,
straightway  becomes  a  knife,  with  which  he
strikes  you  and  slays  you.  But  if  man  do  not
give  this  knife  of  his  will  into  the  hands  of  the
Devil,  that  is,  if  he  do  not  consent  to  his  temp-
tations and  molestations,  he  will  never  be  injured
by  the  guilt  of  sin  in  any  temptation,  but  will
even  be  fortified  by  it,  when  the  eye  of  his  intel-
lect is  opened  to  see  My  love  which  allowed  him
to  be  tempted,  so  as  to  arrive  at  virtue,  by  being
proved.  For  one  does  not  arrive  at  virtue
except  through  knowledge  of  self,  and  know-
ledge of  Me,  which  knowledge  is  more  perfectly
acquired  in  the  time  of  temptation,  because  then
man  knows  himself  to  be  nothing,  being  unable
to  lift  off  himself  the  pains  and  vexations  which
he  would  flee  ;  and  he  knows  Me  in  his  will,
which  is  fortified  by  My  goodness,  so  that  it  does
not  yield  to  these  thoughts.  And  he  has  seen
that  My  love  permits  these  temptations,  for  the
devil  is  weak,  and  by  himself  can  do  nothing,
unless  I  allow  him.  And  I  let  him  tempt,
through  love,  and  not  through  hatred,  that  you
may  conquer,  and  not  that  you  may  be  con-
quered, and  that  you  may  come  to  a  perfect
knowledge  of  yourself,  and  of  Me,  and  that
virtue  may  be  proved,  for  it  is  not  proved  ex-
cept by  its  contrary.    Thou  seest,  then,  that  he


i2o     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


is  my  Minister  to  torture  the  damned  in  Hell,
and  in  this  life,  to  exercise  and  prove  virtue  in
the  soul.  Not  that  it  is  the  intention  of  the
Devil  to  prove  virtue  in  you  (for  he  has  not
love),  but  rather  to  deprive  you  of  it,  and  this
he  cannot  do,  if  you  do  not  wish  it.  Now  thou
seest,  then,  how  great  is  the  foolishness  of  men
in  making  themselves  feeble,  when  I  have  made
them  strong,  and  in  putting  themselves  into  the
hands  of  the  Devil.  Wherefore,  know,  that  at
the  moment  of  death,  they,  having  passed  their
life  under  the  lordship  of  the  Devil  (not  that
they  were  forced  to  do  so,  for  as  I  told  you  they
cannot  be  forced,  but  they  voluntarily  put  them-
selves into  his  hands),  and,  arriving  at  the
extremity  of  their  death  under  this  perverse
lordship,  they  await  no  other  judgment  than
that  of  their  own  conscience,  and  desperately,
despairingly,  come  to  eternal  damnation.  Where-
fore Hell,  through  their  hate,  surges  up  to  them
in  the  extremity  of  death,  and  before  they  get
there,  they  take  hold  of  it,  by  means  of  their
lord  the  Devil.  As  the  righteous,  who  have
lived  in  charity  and  died  in  love,  if  they  have
lived  perfectly  in  virtue,  illuminated  with  the
light  of  faith,  with  perfect  hope  in  the  Blood  of
the  Lamb,  when  the  extremity  of  death  comes,
see  the  good  which  I  have  prepared  for  them,
and  embrace  it  with  the  arms  of  love,  holding
fast  with  pressure  of  love  to  Me,  the  Supreme
and  Eternal  Good.  And  so  they  taste  eternal
life  before  they  have  left  the  mortal  body,  that


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  121


is,  before  the  soul  be  separated  from  the  body.
Others  who  have  passed  their  lives,  and  have
arrived  at  the  last  extremity  of  death  with  an
ordinary  charity  (not  in  that  great  perfection),
embrace  My  mercy  with  the  same  light  of  faith
and  hope  that  had  those  perfect  ones,  but,  in
them,  it  is  imperfect,  for,  because  they  were
imperfect,  they  constrained  My  mercy,  counting
My  mercy  greater  than  their  sins.  The  wicked
sinners  do  the  contrary,  for,  seeing,  with  des-
peration, their  destination,  they  embrace  it  with
hatred,  as  I  told  thee.  So  that  neither  the  one
nor  the  other  waits  for  judgment,  but,  in  depart-
ing this  life,  they  receive  every  one  their  place,
as  I  have  told  thee,  and  they  taste  it  and  possess
it  before  they  depart  from  the  body,  at  the  ex-
tremity of  death — the  damned  with  hatred  and
with  despair,  and  the  perfect  ones  with  love  and
the  light  of  faith  and  with  the  hope  of  the  Blood.
And  the  imperfect  arrive  at  the  place  of  Pur-
gatory, with  mercy  and  the  same  faith."

How  the  evil  gets  hold  of  souls ',  under  pretence  of
some  good :  and,  how  those  are  deceived  who
keep  by  the  river,  and  not  by  the  aforesaid
Bridge,  for,  wishing  to  fly  pains,  they  fall  into
them ;  and  of  the  vision  of  a  tree,  that  this
soul  once  had.

" 1  have  told  thee  that  the  Devil  invites  men  to
the  water  of  death,  that  is,  to  that  which  he  has,
and,  blinding  them  with  the  pleasures  and  con-


122     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


ditions  of  the  world,  he  catches  them  with  the
hook  of  pleasure,  under  the  pretence  of  good,
because  in  no  other  way  could  he  catch  them,  for
they  would  not  allow  themselves  to  be  caught
if  they  saw  that  no  good  or  pleasure  to  them-
selves were  to  be  obtained  thereby.  For  the
soul,  from  her  nature,  always  relishes  good,
though  it  is  true  that  the  soul,  blinded  by
self-love,  does  not  know  and  discern  what  is
true  good,  and  of  profit  to  the  soul  and  to  the
body.  And,  therefore,  the  Devil,  seeing  them
blinded  by  self-love,  iniquitously  places  before
them  diverse  and  various  delights,  coloured  so
as  to  have  the  appearance  of  some  benefit  or
good  ;  and  he  gives  to  every  one  according  to
his  condition  and  those  principal  vices  to  which
he  sees  him  to  be  most  disposed — of  one  kind
to  the  secular,  of  another  to  the  religious,  and
others  to  prelates  and  noblemen,  according  to
their  different  conditions.  I  have  told  thee  this,
because  I  now  speak  to  thee  of  those  who  drown
themselves  in  the  river,  and  who  care  for  nothing
but  themselves,  to  love  themselves  to  My  injury,
and  I  will  relate  to  thee  their  end.

"Now  I  want  to  show  thee  how  they  deceive
themselves,  and  how,  wishing  to  flee  troubles,
they  fall  into  them.  For,  because  it  seems  to
them  that  following  Me,  that  is,  walking  by
the  way  of  the  Bridge,  the  Word,  My  Son,  is
great  toil,  they  draw  back,  fearing  the  thorn.
This  is  because  they  are  blinded  and  do  not
know  or  see  the  Truth,  as,  thou  knowest,  I


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  123


showed  thee  in  the  beginning  of  thy  life,  when
thou  didst  pray  Me  to  have  mercy  on  the  world,
and  draw  it  out  of  the  darkness  of  mortal  sin.
Thou  knowest  that  I  then  showed  thee  Myself
under  the  figure  of  a  Tree,  of  which  thou  sawest
neither  the  beginning  nor  the  end,  so  that  thou
didst  not  see  that  the  roots  were  united  with  the
earth  of  your  humanity.  At  the  foot  of  the
Tree,  if  thou  rememberest  well,  there  was  a
certain  thorn,  from  which  thorn  all  those  who
love  their  own  sensuality  kept  away,  and  ran
to  a  mountain  of  Lolla,  in  which  thou  didst
figure  to  thyself  all  the  delights  of  the  world.
That  Lolla  seemed  to  be  of  corn  and  was  not,
and,  therefore,  as  thou  didst  see,  many  souls
thereon  died  of  hunger,  and  many,  recognising
the  deceits  of  the  world,  returned  to  the  Tree
and  passed  the  thorn,  which  is  the  deliberation
of  the  will.  Which  deliberation,  before  it  is
made,  is  a  thorn  which  appears  to  man  to
stand  in  the  way  of  following  the  Truth.  And
conscience  always  fights  on  one  side,  and  sensu-
ality on  the  other ;  but  as  soon  as  he,  with  hatred
and  displeasure  of  himself,  manfully  makes  up
his  mind,  saying,  *  I  wish  to  follow  Christ  cruci-
fied/ he  breaks  at  once  the  thorn,  and  finds
inestimable  sweetness,  as  I  showed  thee  then,
some  finding  more  and  some  less,  according  to
their  disposition  and  desire.  And  thou  knowest
that  then  I  said  to  thee,  '  I  am  your  God,  un-
moving  and  unchangeable,'  and  I  do  not  draw
away  from  any  creature  who  wants  to  come  to


i24     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

Me.  I  have  shown  them  the  Truth,  making
Myself  visible  to  them,  and  I  have  shown  them
what  it  is  to  love  anything  without  Me.  But
they,  as  if  blinded  by  the  fog  of  disordinate  love,
know  neither  Me  nor  themselves.  Thou  seest
how  deceived  they  are,  choosing  rather  to  die
of  hunger  than  to  pass  a  little  thorn.  And
they  cannot  escape  enduring  pain,  for  no  one
can  pass  through  this  life  without  a  cross,  far
less  those  who  travel  by  the  lower  way.  Not
that  My  servants  pass  without  pain,  but  their
pain  is  alleviated.  And  because — by  sin,  as  I
said  to  thee  above — the  world  germinates  thorns
and  tribulations,  and  because  this  river  flows  with
tempestuous  waters,  I  gave  you  the  Bridge,  so
that  you  might  not  be  drowned.

"  I  have  shown  thee  how  they  are  deceived  by
a  disordinate  fear,  and  how  I  am  your  God,
immovable,  who  am  not  an  Acceptor  of  persons
but  of  holy  desire.  And  this  I  have  shown  thee
under  the  figure  of  the  Tree,  as  I  told  thee."

How,  the  world  having  germinated  thorns,  who  those
are  whom  they  do  not  harm ;  although  no  one
passes  this  life  without  pain.

"  Now  I  want  to  show  thee  to  whom  the
thorns  and  tribulations,  that  the  world  ger-
minated through  sin,  do  harm,  and  to  whom
they  do  not.  And  as,  so  far,  I  have  shown
thee  the  damnation  of  sinners,  together  with
My  goodness,  and  have  told  thee  how  they  are


A


TREATISE


OF  DISCRETION


deceived  by  their  own  sensuality,  now  I  wish
to  tell  thee  how  it  is  only  they  themselves  who
are  injured  by  the  thorns.    No  one  born  passes
this  life  without  pain,  bodily  or  mental.  Bodily
pain  My  servants  bear,  but  their  minds  are  free,
that  is,  they  do  not  feel  the  weariness  of  the
pain ;  for  their  will  is  accorded  with  Mine,  and
it  is  the  will  that  gives  trouble  to  man.  Pain
of  mind  and  of  body  have  those,  of  whom  I
have  narrated  to  thee,  who,  in  this  life,  taste
the  earnest  money  of  hell,  as  My  servants  taste
the  earnest  money  of  eternal  life.    Knowest  thou
what  is  the  special  good  of  the  blessed  ones  ?
It  is  having  their  desire  filled  with  what  they
desire ;  wherefore  desiring  Me,  they  have  Me,
and  taste  Me  without  any  revolt,  for  they  have
left  the  burden  of  the  body,  which  was  a  law
that  opposed  the  spirit,  and  came  between  it
and  the  perfect  knowledge  of  the  Truth,  pre-
venting it  from  seeing  Me  face  to  face.  But
after  the  soul  has  left  the  weight  of  the  body,
her  desire  is  full,  for,  desiring  to  see  Me,  she
sees  Me,  in  which  vision  is  her  bliss  ;  and  seeing
she  knows,  and  knowing  she  loves,  and  loving
she  tastes  Me,  Supreme  and  Eternal  Good,  and,
in  tasting  Me,  she  is  satisfied,  and  her  desire  is
fulfilled,  that  is,  the  desire  she  had  to  see  and
know   Me ;    wherefore   desiring  she   has,  and
having  she  desires.    And  as  I  told  thee  pain  is
far  from  the  desire,  and  weariness  from  the  satis-
faction of  it.    So  thou  seest  that  My  servants
are  blessed  principally  in  seeing  and  in  knowing


126     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Me,  in  which  vision  and  knowledge  their  will  is
fulfilled,  for  they  have  that  which  they  desired
to  have,  and  so  are  they  satisfied.  Wherefore  I
told  thee  that  the  tasting  of  eternal  life  con-
sisted especially  in  having  that  which  the  will
desires,  and  thus  being  satisfied ;  but  know  that
the  will  is  satisfied  in  seeing  and  knowing  Me,
as  I  have  told  thee.  In  this  life  then,  they
taste  the  earnest  money  of  eternal  life,  tasting
the  above,  with  which  I  have  told  thee  they
will  be  satisfied.

"  But  how  have  they  the  earnest  money  in  this
present  life  ?  I  reply  to  thee,  they  have  it  in
seeing  My  goodness  in  themselves,  and  in  the
knowledge  of  My  Truth,  which  knowledge,  the
intellect  (which  is  the  eye  of  the  soul)  illuminated
in  Me,  possesses.  This  eye  has  the  pupil  of  the
most  holy  faith,  which  light  of  faith  enables  the
soul  to  discern,  to  know,  and  to  follow  the  way
and  the  doctrine  of  My  Truth — the  Word  In-
carnate ;  and  without  this  pupil  of  faith  she
would  not  see,  except  as  a  man  who  has  the
form  of  the  eye,  but  who  has  covered  the  pupil
(which  causes  the  eye  to  see)  with  a  cloth.  So
the  pupil  of  the  intellect  is  faith,  and  if  the  soul
has  covered  it  with  the  cloth  of  infidelity,  drawn
over  it  by  self-love,  she  does  not  see,  but  only  has
the  form  of  the  eye  without  the  light,  because
she  has  hidden  it.  Thus  thou  seest,  that  in
seeing  they  know,  and  in  knowing  they  love,
and  in  loving  they  deny  and  lose  their  self-will.
Their  own  will  lost,  they  clothe  themselves  in


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  127


Mine,  and  I  will  nothing  but  your  sanctification.
At  once  they  set  to,  turning  their  back  to  the
way  below,  and  begin  to  ascend  by  the  Bridge,
and  pass  over  the  thorns,  which  do  not  hurt
them,  their  feet  being  shod  with  the  affection
of  My  love.  For  I  told  thee  that  My  servants
suffered  corporally  but  not  mentally,  because  the
sensitive  will,  which  gives  pain  and  afflicts  the
mind  of  the  creature,  is  dead.  Wherefore,  the
will  not  being  there,  neither  is  there  any  pain.
They  bear  everything  with  reverence,  deeming
themselves  favoured  in  having  tribulation  for
My  sake,  and  they  desire  nothing  but  what  I
desire.  If  I  allow  the  Devil  to  trouble  them,
permitting  temptations  to  prove  them  in  virtue,
as  I  told  thee  above,  they  resist  with  their  will
fortified  in  Me,  humiliating  themselves,  and
deeming  themselves  unworthy  of  peace  and  quiet
of  mind  and  deserving  of  pain,  and  so  they
proceed  with  cheerfulness  and  self-knowledge,
without  painful  affliction.  And  if  tribulations
on  man's  account,  or  infirmity,  or  poverty,  or
change  of  worldly  condition,  or  loss  of  children,
or  of  other  much  loved  creatures  (all  of  which
are  thorns  that  the  earth  produced  after  sin)
come  upon  them,  they  endure  them  all  with  the
light  of  reason  and  holy  faith,  looking  to  Me,
who  am  the  Supreme  Good,  and  who  cannot
desire  other  than  good,  for  which  I  permit
these  tribulations  through  love,  and  not  through
hatred.  And  they  that  love  Me  recognise  this,
and,  examining  themselves,  they  see  their  sins,


i28     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

and  understand  by  the  light  of  faith,  that  good
must  be  rewarded  and  evil  punished.  And  they
see  that  every  little  sin  merits  infinite  pain,
because  it  is  against  Me,  who  am  Infinite  Good,
wherefore  they  deem  themselves  favoured  because
I  wish  to  punish  them  in  this  life,  and  in  this
finite  time ;  they  drive  away  sin  with  contrition
of  heart,  and  with  perfect  patience  do  they  merit,
and  their  labours  are  rewarded  with  infinite  good.
Hereafter  they  know  that  all  labour  in  this  life
is  small,  on  account  of  the  shortness  of  time.
Time  is  as  the  point  of  a  needle  and  no  more ;
and,  when  time  has  passed  labour  is  ended,  there-
fore thou  seest  that  the  labour  is  small.  They
endure  with  patience,  and  the  thorns  they  pass
through  do  not  touch  their  heart,  because  their
heart  is  drawn  out  of  them  and  united  to  Me  by
the  affection  of  love.  It  is  a  good  truth  then
that  these  do  taste  eternal  life,  receiving  the
earnest  money  of  it  in  this  life,  and  that,  though
they  walk  on  thorns,  they  are  not  pricked,  because
as  I  told  thee,  they  have  known  My  Supreme
Goodness,  and  sought  for  it  where  it  was  to  be
found,  that  is  in  the  Word,  My  only-begotten
Son."

How  this  soul  was  in  great  bitterness,  on  account  of
the  blindness  of  those  who  are  drowned  below  in
the  river.

Then  that  soul,  tormented  by  desire,  con-
sidering her  own  imperfections  and  those  of


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  129


others,  was  saddened  to  hear  of  and  to  see  the
great  blindness  of  creatures,  notwithstanding  the
great  goodness  of  God,  in  having  placed  nothing
in  this  life,  no  matter  in  what  condition,  that
could  be  an  impediment  to  the  salvation  of
creatures,  but  rather  arranged  for  the  exercising
and  proving  of  virtue  in  them.  And,  notwith-
standing all  this,  she  saw  them,  through  self-
love  and  disordinate  affection,  go  under  by  the
river  and  arrive  at  eternal  damnation,  and  many
who  were  in  the  river  and  had  begun  to  come
out,  turn  back  again,  scandalised  at  her,  because
they  had  heard  of  the  sweet  goodness  of  GOD,
who  had  deigned  to  manifest  Himself  to  her.
And,  for  this,  she  was  in  bitterness,  and  fixing
the  eye  of  her  intellect  on  the  Eternal  Father,
she  said  :  "  Oh,  Inestimable  Love,  great  is  the
delusion  of  Thy  creatures.  I  would  that,  when
it  is  pleasing  to  Thy  Goodness,  Thou  wouldst
more  clearly  explain  to  me  the  three  steps
figured  in  the  Body  of  Thy  only  Son,  and  what
method  should  be  used  so  as  to  come  entirely
out  of  the  depths  and  to  keep  the  way  of  Thy
Truth,  and  who  are  those  who  ascend  the  stair-
case.


How  the  three  steps  figured  in  the  Bridge,  that  is,  in  the
Son  of  GOD,  signify  the  three  powers  of  the  soul.

Then  the  Divine  Goodness,  regarding  with  the
eye  of  His  mercy,  the  hunger  and  desire  of  that
soul,  said :  "  Oh,  My  most  delightful  daughter,

1


130     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


I  am  not  a  Despiser,  but  the  Fulfiller  of  holy
desire,  and  therefore  I  will  show  and  declare  to
thee  that  which  thou  askest  Me.  Thou  askest
Me  to  explain  to  thee  the  figure  of  three  steps,
and  to  tell  thee  what  method  they  who  want  to
come  out  of  the  river  must  use,  to  be  able  to
ascend  the  Bridge.  And,  although  above,  in  relat-
ing to  thee  the  delusion  and  blindness  of  men,
tasting  in  this  life  the  earnest-money  of  Hell,
and,  as  martyrs  of  the  Devil,  receiving  damna-
tion, I  showed  thee  the  methods  they  should  use  ;
nevertheless,  now  I  will  declare  it  to  thee  more
fully,  satisfying  thy  desire.  Thou  knowest  that
every  evil  is  founded  in  self-love,  and  that  self-
love  is  a  cloud  that  takes  away  the  light  of
reason,  which  reason  holds  in  itself  the  light  of
faith,  and  one  is  not  lost  without  the  other.
The  soul  I  created  in  My  image  and  similitude,
giving  her  memory,  intellect,  and  will.  The
intellect  is  the  most  noble  part  of  the  soul,  and
is  moved  by  the  affection,  and  nourishes  it,  and
the  hand  of  love — that  is,  the  affection — fills  the
memory  with  the  remembrance  of  Me  and  of
the  benefits  received,  which  it  does  with  care  and
gratitude,  and  so  one  power  spurs  on  another,
and  the  soul  is  nourished  in  the  life  of  grace.

"  The  soul  cannot  live  without  love,  but  always
wants  to  love  something,  because  she  is  made  of
love,  and,  by  love,  I  created  her.  And  there-
fore I  told  thee  that  the  affection  moved  the
intellect,  saying,  as  it  were,  '  /  will  love,  because
the  food  on  which  I  feed  is  love?     Then  the


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  131


intellect,  feeling  itself  awakened  by  the  affection,
says,  as  it  were,  '  If  thou  wilt  love,  I  will  give
thee  that  which  thou  canst  love.'  And  at  once
it  arises,  considering  carefully  the  dignity  of  the
soul,  and  the  indignity  into  which  she  has  fallen
through  sin.  In  the  dignity  of  her  being  it
tastes  My  inestimable  goodness,  and  the  increate
charity  with  which  I  created  her,  and,  in  contem-
plating her  misery,  it  discovers  and  tastes  My
mercy,  and  sees  how,  through  mercy,  I  have  lent
her  time  and  drawn  her  out  of  darkness.  Then
the  affection  nourishes  itself  in  love,  opening  the
mouth  of  holy  desire,  with  which  it  eats  hatred
and  displeasure  of  its  own  sensuality,  united  with
true  humility  and  perfect  patience,  which  it  drew
from  holy  hatred.  The  virtues  conceived,  they
give  birth  to  themselves  perfectly  and  imper-
fectly, according  as  the  soul  exercises  perfection
in  herself,  as  I  will  tell  thee  below.  So,  on  the
contrary,  if  the  sensual  affection  wants  to  love
sensual  things,  the  eye  of  the  intellect  set  before
itself  for  its  sole  object  transitory  things,  with
self-love,  displeasure  of  virtue,  and  love  of  vice,
whence  she  draws  pride  and  impatience,  and  the
memory  is  filled  with  nothing  but  that  which
the  affection  presents  to  it.  This  love  so  dazzles
the  eye  of  the  intellect  that  it  can  discern  and
see  nothing  but  such  glittering  objects.  It  is
the  very  brightness  of  the  things  that  causes  the
intellect  to  perceive  them  and  the  affection  to  love
them ;  for  had  worldly  things  no  such  brightness
there  would  be  no  sin,  for  man,  by  his  nature,


132     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

cannot  desire  anything  but  good,  and  vice,
appearing  to  him  thus,  under  colour  of  the  soul's
good,  causes  him  to  sin.  But,  because  the  eye,
on  account  of  its  blindness,  does  not  discern,  and
knows  not  the  truth,  it  errs,  seeking  good  and
delights  there  where  they  are  not.

"  I  have  already  told  thee  that  the  delights  of
the  world,  without  Me,  are  venomous  thorns,
and,  that  the  vision  of  the  intellect  is  deluded
by  them,  and  the  affection  of  the  will  is  deluded
into  loving  them,  and  the  memory  into  retain-
ing remembrance  of  them.  The  unity  of  these
powers  of  the  soul  is  so  great  that  I  cannot
be  offended  by  one  without  all  the  others  offend-
ing Me  at  the  same  time,  because  the  one
presents  to  the  other,  as  I  told  thee,  good  or
evil,  according  to  the  pleasure  of  the  free  will.
This  free  will  is  bound  to  the  affection,  and  it
moves  as  it  pleases,  either  with  the  light  of
reason  or  without  it.  Your  reason  is  attached
to  Me  when  your  will  does  not,  by  disordinate
love,  cut  it  off  from  Me ;  you  have  also  in  you
the  law  of  perversity,  that  continually  fights
against  the  Spirit.  You  have,  then,  two  parts
in  you — sensuality  and  reason.  Sensuality  is
appointed  to  be  the  servant,  so  that,  with  the
instrument  of  the  body,  you  may  prove  and
exercise  the  virtues.  The  soul  is  free,  liber-
ated from  sin  by  the  Blood  of  My  Son,  and
she  cannot  be  dominated  unless  she  consent  with
her  will,  which  is  controlled  by  her  free  choice,
and  when  this  free  choice  agrees  with  the  will,


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  133


it  becomes  one  thing  with  it.  And  I  tell  thee
truly,  that,  when  the  soul  undertakes  to  gather
together,  with  the  hand  of  free  choice,  her  powers
in  My  Name,  then  are  assembled  all  the  actions,
both  spiritual  and  temporal,  that  the  creature
can  do,  and  free  choice  gets  rid  of  sensuality
and  binds  itself  with  reason.  I,  then,  by  grace,
rest  in  the  midst  of  them ;  and  this  is  what
My  truth,  the  Word  Incarnate,  meant,  when
He  said  :  *  When  there  are  two  or  three  or  more
gathered  together  in  My  name,  there  am  I  in  the
midst  of  them.''  And  this  is  the  truth.  I  have
already  told  thee  that  no  one  could  come  to
Me  except  by  Him,  and  therefore  did  I  make
of  Him  a  Bridge  with  three  steps.  And  those
three  steps  figure,  as  I  will  narrate  to  thee  below,
the  three  states  of  the  soul.,'

How  if  the  three  aforesaid  powers  are  not  united,
there  cannot  be  perseverance,  without  which
no  man  arrives  at  his  end.

"  I  have  explained  to  thee  the  figure  of  the
three  steps,  in  general,  as  the  three  powers  of
the  soul,  and  no  one  who  wishes  to  pass  by  the
Bridge  and  doctrine  of  My  Truth  can  mount
one  without  the  other,  and  the  soul  cannot  per-
severe except  by  the  union  of  her  three  powers.
Of  which  I  told  thee  above,  when  thou  askedst
Me,  how  the  voyagers  could  come  out  of  the
river.  There  are  two  goals,  and,  for  the  attain-
ment of  either,   perseverance  is  needful — they


134     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

are  vice  and  virtue.  If  thou  desire  to  arrive
at  life,  thou  must  persevere  in  virtue,  and  if
thou  would  have  eternal  death,  thou  must  per-
severe in  vice.  Thus  it  is  with  perseverance
that  they  who  want  life  arrive  at  Me  who  am
Life,  and  with  perseverance  that  they  who  taste
the  water  of  death  arrive  at  the  Devil."

An    exposition    on    Christ s    words:    "  Whosoever
thirsteth,  let  him  come  to  Me  and  drink"

"  You  were  all  invited,  generally  and  in  par-
ticular, by  My  Truth,  when  He  cried  in  the
Temple,  saying :  4  Whosoever  thirsteth,  let  him
come  to  Me  and  drink,  for  I  am  the  Fountain  of
the  Water  of  Life.'  He  did  not  say  '  Go  to  the
Father  and  drink,1  but  He  said  1  Come  to  Me?
He  spoke  thus,  because  in  Me,  the  Father,
there  can  be  no  pain,  but  in  My  Son  there  can
be  pain.  And  you,  while  you  are  pilgrims  and
wayfarers  in  this  mortal  life,  cannot  be  without
pain,  because  the  earth,  through  sin,  brought
forth  thorns.  And  why  did  He  say  '  Let  him
come  to  Me  and  drink '  f  Because  whoever  follows
His  doctrine,  whether  in  the  most  perfect  way  or
by  dwelling  in  the  life  of  common  charity,  finds
to  drink,  tasting  the  fruit  of  the  Blood,  through
the  union  of  the  Divine  nature  with  the  human
nature.  And  you,  finding  yourselves  in  Him,
find  yourselves  also  in  Me,  who  am  the  Sea
Pacific,  because  I  am  one  thing  with  Him,  and
He  with  Me.    So  that  you  are  invited  to  the


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  135


Fountain  of  Living  Water  of  Grace,  and  it  is
right  for  you,  with  perseverance,  to  keep  by
Him  who  is  made  for  you  a  Bridge,  not  being
turned  back  by  any  contrary  wind  that  may  arise,
either  of  prosperity  or  adversity,  and  to  persevere
till  you  find  Me,  who  am  the  Giver  of  the  Water
of  Life,  by  means  of  this  sweet  and  amorous
Word,  My  only-begotten  Son.  And  why  did
He  say :  i  I  am  the  Fountain  of  Living  Water 1  ?
Because  He  was  the  Fountain  which  contained
Me,  the  Giver  of  the  Living  Water,  by  means
of  the  union  of  the  Divine  with  the  human
nature.  Why  did  He  say  '  Come  to  Me  and
drink '  ?  Because  you  cannot  pass  this  mortal
life  without  pain,  and  in  Me,  the  Father,  there
can  be  no  pain,  but  in  Him  there  can  be  pain,
and  therefore  of  Him  did  I  make  for  you  a
Bridge.  No  one  can  come  to  Me  except  by
Him,  as  He  told  you  in  the  words :  *  No  one
can  come  to  the  Father  except  by  Me?

"  Now  thou  hast  seen  to  what  way  thou
shouldest  keep,  and  how,  namely  with  perse-
verance, otherwise  thou  shalt  not  drink,  for
perseverance  receives  the  crown  of  glory  and
victory  in  the  life  everlasting."

The  general  method  by  which  every  rational  creature
can  come  out  of  the  sea  of  the  world,  and  go  by
the  aforesaid  holy  Bridge.

"  I  will  now  return  to  the  three  steps,  which
you  must  climb  in  order  to  issue  from  the  river


136     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

without  drowning,  and  attain  to  the  Living
Water,  to  which  you  are  invited,  and  to  desire
My  Presence  in  the  midst  of  you.  For  in  this
way,  in  which  you  should  follow,  I  am  in  your
midst,  reposing,  by  grace,  in  your  souls.  In
order  to  have  desire  to  mount  the  steps,  you
must  have  thirst,  because  only  those  who  thirst
are  invited  :  '  Whosoever  thirsteth,  let  him  come  to
Me  and  drink."  He  who  has  no  thirst  will  not
persevere,  for  either  fatigue  causes  him  to  stop,
or  pleasure,  and  he  does  not  care  to  carry  the
vessel  with  which  he  may  get  the  water,  and
neither  does  he  care  for  the  company,  and  alone
he  cannot  go,  and  he  turns  back  at  the  smallest
prick  of  persecution,  for  he  loves  it  not.  He
is  afraid  because  he  is  alone ;  were  he  accom-
panied he  would  not  fear,  and  had  he  ascended
the  three  steps  he  would  not  have  been  alone,
and  would,  therefore,  have  been  secure.  You
must  then  have  thirst  and  gather  yourselves
together,  as  it  is  said,  '  two  or  three  or  more"

"  Why  is  it  said  '  two  or  three  or  more 1  ?
Because  there  are  not  two  without  three,  nor
three  without  two,  neither  three  nor  two  with-
out more.  The  number  one  is  excluded,  for,
unless  a  man  has  a  companion,  I  cannot  be  in
the  midst ;  this  is  no  indifferent  trifle,  for  he
who  is  wrapped  up  in  self-love  is  solitary.

"  Why  is  he  solitary?  Because  he  is  separated
from  My  grace  and  the  love  of  his  neighbour,
and  being,  by  sin,  deprived  of  Me,  he  turns  to
that  which  is  nought,  because  I  am  He  that  is.


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  137


So  that  he  who  is  solitary,  that  is,  who  is  alone
in  self-love,  is  not  mentioned  by  My  Truth  and
is  not  acceptable  to  Me.  He  says  then :  '  If
there  be  two  or  three  or  more  gathered  together  in  My
name^  I  will  be  in  the  midst  of  them?  I  said  to
thee  that  two  were  not  without  three,  nor  three
without  two,  and  so  it  is.  Thou  knowest  that
the  commandments  of  the  Law  are  completely
contained  in  two,  and  if  these  two  are  not
observed  the  Law  is  not  observed.  The  two
commandments  are  to  love  Me  above  everything,
and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,  which  two  are  the
beginning,  the  middle  and  the  end  of  the  Law.
These  two  cannot  be  gathered  together  in  My
Name,  without  three,  that  is  without  the  con-
gregation of  the  powers  of  the  soul,  the  memory,
the  intellect,  and  the  will  ;  the  memory  to  retain
the  remembrance  of  My  benefits  and  My  good-
ness, the  intellect  to  gaze  into  the  ineffable  love,
which  I  have  shown  thee  by  means  of  My  only-
begotten  Son,  whom  I  have  placed  as  the  object
of  the  vision  of  your  intellect,  so  that,  in  Him,
you  behold  the  fire  of  My  charity,  and  the  will
to  love  and  desire  Me,  who  am  your  End.
When  these  virtues  and  powers  of  the  soul  are
congregated  together  in  My  Name,  I  am  in  the
midst  of  them  by  grace,  and  a  man,  who  is  full
of  My  love  and  that  of  his  neighbour,  suddenly
finds  himself  the  companion  of  many  and  royal
virtues.  Then  the  appetite  of  the  soul  is  dis-
posed to  thirst.  Thirst,  I  say,  for  virtue,  and
the  honour  of  My  Name  and  salvation  of  souls,


138     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

and  his  every  other  thirst  is  spent  and  dead,  and
he  then  proceeds  securely  without  any  servile
fear,  having  ascended  the  first  step  of  the  affec-
tion, for  the  affection,  stripped  of  self-love,
mounts  above  itself  and  above  transitory  things,
or,  if  he  will  still  hold  them,  he  does  so  accord-
ing to  My  will — that  is,  with  a  holy  and  true
fear,  and  love  of  virtue.  He  then  finds  that  he
has  attained  to  the  second  step — that  is,  to  the
light  of  the  intellect,  which  is,  through  Christ
crucified,  mirrored  in  cordial  love  of  Me,  for
through  Him  have  I  shown  My  love  to  man.
He  finds  peace  and  quiet,  because  the  memory
is  filled  with  My  love.  Thou  knowest  that  an
empty  thing,  when  touched,  resounds,  but  not
so  when  it  is  full.  So  memory,  being  filled  with
the  light  of  the  intellect,  and  the  affection  with
love,  on  being  moved  by  the  tribulations  or
delights  of  the  world,  will  not  resound  with
disordinate  merriment  or  with  impatience,  be-
cause they  are  full  of  Me,  who  am  every  good.

"  Having  climbed  the  three  steps,  he  finds  that
the  three  powers  of  the  soul  have  been  gathered
together  by  his  reason  in  My  Name.  And  his
soul,  having  gathered  together  the  two  command-
ments, that  is  love  of  Me  and  of  the  neighbour,
finds  herself  accompanied  by  Me,  who  am  her
strength  and  security,  and  walks  safely  because
I  am  in  the  midst  of  her.  Wherefore  then  he
follows  on  with  anxious  desire,  thirsting  after  the
way  of  Truth,  in  which  way  he  finds  the  Foun-
tain of  the  Water  of  Life,  through  his  thirst  for


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  139


My  honour  and  his  own  salvation  and  that  of
his  neighbour,  without  which  thirst  he  would
not  be  able  to  arrive  at  the  Fountain.  He
walks  on,  carrying  the  vessel  of  the  heart,
emptied  of  every  affection  and  disordinate  love
of  the  world,  but  filled  immediately  it  is  emptied
with  other  things,  for  nothing  can  remain  empty,
and,  being  without  disordinate  love  for  transitory
things,  it  is  filled  with  love  of  celestial  things,  and
sweet  Divine  love,  with  which  he  arrives  at  the
Fountain  of  the  Water  of  Life,  and  passes  through
the  Door  of  Christ  crucified,  and  tastes  the  Water
of  Life,  finding  himself  in  Me,  the  Sea  Pacific."

How  this  devoted  soul  looking  in  the  Divine  mirror
saw  the  creatures  going  in  diverse  ways.

Then  that  soul,  tormented  with  intense  desire,
gazing  into  the  sweet  Divine  mirror,  saw  crea-
tures setting  out  to  attain  their  end  in  diverse
ways  and  with  diverse  considerations.  She  saw
that  many  began  to  mount,  feeling  themselves
pricked  by  servile  fear,  that  is,  fearing  their  own
personal  pain,  and  she  saw  others,  practising  this
first  state,  arriving  at  the  second  state,  but  few
she  saw  who  arrived  at  the  greatest  perfection.

How  servile  fear  is  not  sufficient,  without  the  love  of
virtue,  to  give  eternal  life ;  and  how  the  law  of
fear  and  that  of  love  are  united.

Then  the  goodness  of  God,  wishing  to  satisfy
the  desire  of  that  soul,  said,  "  Dost  thou  see


i4o     ST.  CATHERINE  OF,  SIENA


those  ?  They  have  arisen  with  servile  fear  from
the  vomit  of  mortal  sin,  but,  if  they  do  not  arise
with  love  of  virtue,  servile  fear  alone  is  not  suffi-
cient to  give  eternal  life.  But  love  with  holy  fear
is  sufficient,  because  the  law  is  founded  in  love
and  holy  fear.  The  old  law  was  the  law  of  fear,
that  was  given  by  Me  to  Moses,  by  which  law
they  who  committed  sin  suffered  the  penalty  of
it.  The  new  law  is  the  law  of  love,  given  by  the
Word  of  My  only-begotten  Son,  and  is  founded
in  love  alone.  The  new  law  does  not  break  the
old  law,  but  rather  fulfils  it,  as  said  My  Truth,
'  /  come  not  to  destroy  the  law,  but  to  fulfil  it.1
And  He  united  the  law  of  fear  with  that  of  love.
Through  love  was  taken  away  the  imperfection
of  the  fear  of  the  penalty,  and  the  perfection  of
holy  fear  remained,  that  is,  the  fear  of  offending,
not  on  account  of  one's  own  damnation,  but  of
offending  Me,  who  am  Supreme  Good.  So  that
the  imperfect  law  was  made  perfect  with  the  law
of  love.  Wherefore,  after  the  car  of  the  fire  of
My  only-begotten  Son  came  and  brought  the  fire
of  My  charity  into  your  humanity  with  abundance
of  mercy,  the  penalty  of  the  sins  committed  by
humanity  was  taken  away,  that  is,  he  who  offended
was  no  longer  punished  suddenly,  as  was  of  old
given  and  ordained  in  the  law  of  Moses.

"  There  is,  therefore,  no  need  for  servile  fear ;
and  this  does  not  mean  that  sin  is  not  punished,
but  that  the  punishment  is  reserved,  unless,  that
is  to  say,  the  person  punish  himself  in  this  life
with  perfect  contrition.    For,  in  the  other  life,


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  141


the  soul  is  separated  from  the  body,  where-
fore while  man  lives  is  his  time  for  mercy,  but
when  he  is  dead  comes  the  time  of  justice.  He
ought,  then,  to  arise  from  servile  fear,  and  arrive
at  love  and  holy  fear  of  Me,  otherwise  there  is  no
remedy  against  his  falling  back  again  into  the
river,  and  reaching  the  waters  of  tribulation,  and
seeking  the  thorns  of  consolation,  for  all  conso-
lations are  thorns  that  pierce  the  soul  who  loves
them  disordinately."

How,  by  exercising  oneself  in  servile  fear,  which  is  the
state  of  imperfection,  by  which  is  meant  the  first
step  of  the  holy  Bridge,  one  arrives  at  the  second
step,  which  is  the  state  of  perfection.

"  I  told  thee  that  no  one  could  go  by  the
Bridge  or  come  out  of  the  river  without  climb-
ing the  three  steps,  which  is  the  truth.  There
are  some  who  climb  imperfectly,  and  some  per-
fectly, and  some  climb  with  the  greatest  perfec-
tion. The  first  are  those  who  are  moved  by
servile  fear,  and  have  climbed  so  far  being  im-
perfectly gathered  together ;  that  is  to  say,  the
soul,  having  seen  the  punishment  which  follows
her  sin,  climbs  ;  and  gathers  together  her  memory
to  recollect  her  vice,  her  intellect  to  see  the
punishment  which  she  expects  to  receive  for  her
fault,  and  her  will  to  move  her  to  hate  that  fault.
And  let  us  consider  this  to  be  the  first  step  and
the  first  gathering  together  of  the  powers  of  the
soul,  which  should  be  exercised  by  the  light  of


1 42     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


the  intellect  with  the  pupil  of  the  eye  of  holy
faith,  which  looks,  not  only  at  the  punishment  of
sin,  but  at  the  fruit  of  virtue,  and  the  love  which
I  bear  to  the  soul,  so  that  she  may  climb  with
love  and  affection,  and  stripped  of  servile  fear.
And  doing  so,  such  souls  will  become  faithful
and  not  unfaithful  servants,  serving  Me  through
love  and  not  through  fear,  and  if,  with  hatred  of
sin,  they  employ  their  minds  to  dig  out  the  root
of  their  self-love  with  prudence,  constancy,  and
perseverance  they  will  succeed  in  doing  so.  But
there  are  many  who  begin  their  course  climbing
so  slowly,  and  render  their  debt  to  Me  by  such
small  degrees,  and  with  such  negligence  and
ignorance,  that  they  suddenly  faint,  and  every
little  breeze  catches  their  sails,  and  turns  their
prow  backwards.  Wherefore,  because  they  im-
perfectly climb  to  the  first  Step  of  the  Bridge  of
Christ  crucified,  they  do  not  arrive  at  the  second
step  of  His  Heart."


Of  the  imperfection  of  those  who  love  GOD  for  their
own  profit,  delight,  and  consolation.

"Some  there  are  who  have  become  faithful
servants,  serving  Me  with  fidelity  without  servile
fear  of  punishment,  but  rather  with  love.  This
very  love,  however,  if  they  serve  Me  with  a  view
to  their  own  profit,  or  the  delight  and  pleasure
which  they  find  in  Me,  is  imperfect.  Dost  thou
know  what  proves  the  imperfection  of  this  love  ?
The  withdrawal  of  the  consolations  which  they


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  143


found  in  Me,  and  the  insufficiency  and  short
duration  of  their  love  for  their  neighbour,  which
grows  weak  by  degrees,  and  ofttimes  disappears.
Towards  Me  their  love  grows  weak  when,  on
occasion,  in  order  to  exercise  them  in  virtue  and
raise  them  above  their  imperfection,  I  withdraw
from  their  minds  My  consolation  and  allow  them
to  fall  into  battles  and  perplexities.  This  I  do
so  that,  coming  to  perfect  self-knowledge,  they
may  know  that  of  themselves  they  are  nothing
and  have  no  grace,  and  accordingly  in  time  of
battle  fly  to  Me,  as  their  Benefactor,  seeking  Me
alone,  with  true  humility,  for  which  purpose  I
treat  them  thus,  without  drawing  from  them
consolation  indeed,  but  not  grace.  At  such  a
time  these  weak  ones,  of  whom  I  speak,  relax
their  energy,  impatiently  turning  backwards,  and
sometimes  abandon,  under  colour  of  virtue,  many
of  their  exercises,  saying  to  themselves,  This
labour  does  not  profit  me.  All  this  they  do,  be-
cause they  feel  themselves  deprived  of  mental
consolation.  Such  a  soul  acts  imperfectly,  for
she  has  not  yet  unwound  the  bandage  of  spiritual
self-love,  for,  had  she  unwound  it  she  would  see
that,  in  truth,  everything  proceeds  from  Me,  that
no  leaf  of  a  tree  falls  to  the  ground  without  My
providence,  and  that  what  I  give  and  promise  to
My  creatures,  I  give  and  promise  to  them  for
their  sanctification,  which  is  the  good  and  the
end  for  which  I  created  them.  My  creatures
should  see  and  know  that  I  wish  nothing  but
their  good,  through  the  Blood  of  My  only-


i44     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


begotten  Son,  in  which  they  are  washed  from
their  iniquities.  By  this  Blood  they  are  enabled
to  know  My  Truth,  how,  in  order  to  give  them
eternal  life,  I  created  them  in  My  image  and
likeness  and  re-created  them  to  grace  with  the
Blood  of  My  Son,  making  them  sons  of  adop-
tion. But,  since  they  are  imperfect,  they  make
use  of  Me  only  for  their  own  profit,  relaxing
their  love  for  their  neighbour.  Thus,  those  in
the  first  state  come  to  nought  through  the  fear
of  enduring  pain,  and  those  in  the  second,  be-
cause they  slacken  their  pace,  ceasing  to  render
service  to  their  neighbour,  and  withdrawing  their
charity  if  they  see  their  own  profit  or  consola-
tion withdrawn  from  them  :  this  happens  because
their  love  was  originally  impure,  for  they  gave
to  their  neighbour  the  same  imperfect  love  which
they  gave  to  Me,  that  is  to  say,  a  love  based  only
on  desire  of  their  own  advantage.  If,  through  a
desire  for  perfection,  they  do  not  recognise  this
imperfection  of  theirs,  it  is  impossible  that  they
should  not  turn  back.  For  those  who  desire
Eternal  Life,  a  pure  love,  prescinding  from  them-
selves, is  necessary,  for  it  is  not  enough  for
eternal  life  to  fly  sin  from  fear  of  punishment,  or
to  embrace  virtue  from  the  motive  of  one's  own
advantage.  Sin  should  be  abandoned  because  it
is  displeasing  to  Me,  and  virtue  should  be  loved
for  My  sake.  It  is  true  that,  generally  speaking,
every  person  is  first  called  in  this  way,  but  this
is  because  the  soul  herself  is  at  first  imperfect,
from  which  imperfection  she  must  advance  to


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  145


perfection,  either  while  she  Jives,  by  a  generous
love  to  Me  with  a  pure  and  virtuous  heart  that
takes  no  thought  for  herself,  or,  at  least,  in  the
moment  of  death,  recognising  her  own  imperfec-
tion, with  the  purpose,  had  she  but  time,  of
serving  Me,  irrespectively  of  herself.  It  was  with
this  imperfect  love  that  S.  Peter  loved  the  sweet
and  good  Jesus,  My  only-begotten  Son,  enjoying
most  pleasantly  His  sweet  conversation,  but,  when
the  time  of  trouble  came,  he  failed,  and  so  dis-
graceful was  his  fall,  that,  not  only  could  he  not
bear  any  pain  himself,  but  his  terror  of  the  very
approach  of  pain  caused  him  to  fall,  and  deny  the
Lord,  with  the  words,  *  I  have  never  known  Him.''
The  soul  who  has  climbed  this  step  with  servile
fear  and  mercenary  love  alone,  falls  into  many
troubles.  Such  souls  should  arise  and  become
sons,  and  serve  Me,  irrespective  of  themselves,
for  I,  who  am  the  Rewarder  of  every  labour,
render  to  each  man  according  to  his  state  and
his  labour ;  wherefore,  if  these  souls  do  not
abandon  the  exercise  of  holy  prayer  and  their
other  good  works,  but  go  on,  with  perseverance,
to  increase  their  virtues,  they  will  arrive  at  the
state  of  filial  love,  because  I  respond  to  them
with  the  same  love,  with  which  they  love  Me,
so  that,  if  they  love  Me,  as  a  servant  does  his
master,  I  pay  them  their  wages  according  to  their
deserts,  but  I  do  not  reveal  Myself  to  them,
because  secrets  are  revealed  to  a  friend,  who
has  become  one  thing  with  his  friend,  and  not
to  a  servant.    Yet  it  is  true,  that  a  servant  may

K


146     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

so  advance  by  the  virtuous  love,  which  he  bears
to  his  master,  as  to  become  a  very  dear  friend,
and  so  do  some  of  these  of  whom  I  have  spoken,
but  while  they  remain  in  the  state  of  mercenary
love,  I  do  not  manifest  Myself  to  them.  If  they,
through  displeasure  at  their  imperfection,  and
love  of  virtue,  dig  up,  with  hatred,  the  root  of
spiritual  self-love,  and  mount  to  the  throne  of
conscience,  reasoning  with  themselves,  so  as  to
quell  the  motions  of  servile  fear  in  their  heart,
and  to  correct  mercenary  love  by  the  light  of  the
holy  faith,  they  will  be  so  pleasing  to  Me,  that
they  will  attain  to  the  love  of  the  friend.  And
I  will  manifest  Myself  to  them,  as  My  Truth
said  in  these  words :  *  He  who  loves  Me  shall  be
one  thing  with  Me  and  I  with  him,  and  I  will
manifest  Myself  to  him  and  we  will  dwell  together?
This  is  the  state  of  two  dear  friends,  for  though
they  are  two  in  body,  yet  they  are  one  in  soul
through  the  affection  of  love,  because  love  trans-
forms the  lover  into  the  object  loved,  and  where
two  friends  have  one  soul,  there  can  be  no  secret
between  them,  wherefore  My  Truth  said  :  '  /  will
come  and  we  will  dwell  together?  and  this  is  the
truth."

Of  the  way  in  which  GOD  manifests  Himself
to  the  soul  who  loves  Him.

"  Knowest  thou  how  I  manifest  Myself  to  the
soul  who  loves  Me  in  truth,  and  follows  the
doctrine  of  My  sweet  and  amorous  Word  ?  In


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  147


many  is  My  virtue  manifested  in  the  soul  in  pro-
portion to  her  desire,  but  I  make  three  special
manifestations.  The  first  manifestation  of  My
virtue,  that  is  to  say,  of  My  love  and  charity  in
the  soul,  is  made  through  the  Word  of  My  Son,
and  shown  in  the  Blood,  which  He  spilled  with
such  fire  of  love.  Now  this  charity  is  manifested
in  two  ways ;  first,  in  general,  to  ordinary  people,
that  is  to  those  who  live  in  the  ordinary  grace
of  God.  It  is  manifested  to  them  by  the  many
and  diverse  benefits  which  they  receive  from  Me.
The  second  mode  of  manifestation,  which  is
developed  from  the  first,  is  peculiar  to  those
who  have  become  My  friends  in  the  way  men-
tioned above,  and  is  known  through  a  sentiment
of  the  soul,  by  which  they  taste,  know,  prove,
and  feel  it.  This  second  manifestation,  how-
ever, is  in  men  themselves ;  they  manifesting
Me,  through  the  affection  of  their  love.  For
though  I  am  no  Acceptor  of  creatures,  I  am
an  Acceptor  of  holy  desires,  and  Myself  in  the
soul  in  that  precise  degree  of  perfection  which
she  seeks  in  Me.  Sometimes  I  manifest  Myself
(and  this  is  also  a  part  of  the  second  manifesta-
tion) by  endowing  men  with  the  spirit  of  pro-
phecy, showing  them  the  things  of  the  future.
This  I  do  in  many  and  diverse  ways,  according
as  I  see  need  in  the  soul  herself  and  in  other
creatures.  At  other  times  the  third  manifesta-
tion takes  place.  I  then  form  in  the  mind  the
presence  of  the  Truth,  My  only-begotten  Son,
in  many  ways,  according  to  the  will  and  the


148     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

desire  of  the  soul.  Sometimes  she  seeks  Me
in  prayer,  wishing  to  know  My  power,  and  I
satisfy  her  by  causing  her  to  taste  and  see  My
virtue.  Sometimes  she  seeks  Me  in  the  wisdom
of  My  Son,  and  I  satisfy  her  by  placing  His
wisdom  before  the  eye  of  her  intellect,  some-
times in  the  clemency  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and
then  My  Goodness  causes  her  to  taste  the  fire
of  Divine  charity,  and  to  conceive  the  true  and
royal  virtues,  which  are  founded  on  the  pure
love  of  her  neighbour. "

Why  Christ  did  not  say  "I  will  manifest  My
Father"  but  "  I  will  manifest  Myself"

"  Thou  seest  now  how  truly  My  Word  spoke,
when  He  said :  *  He  who  loves  Me  shall  he  one
thing  with  Me?  Because,  by  following  His  doc-
trine with  the  affection  of  love,  you  are  united
with  Him,  and,  being  united  with  Him,  you
are  united  with  Me,  because  We  are  one  thing
together.  And  so  it  is  that  I  manifest  Myself
to  you,  because  We  are  one  and  the  same  thing
together.  Wherefore  if  My  Truth  said,  '  /  will
manifest  Myself  to  you  1  He  said  the  truth,  because,
in  manifesting  Himself,  He  manifested  Me,  and,
in  manifesting  Me,  He  manifested  Himself.  But
why  did  He  not  say,  '  /  will  manifest  My  Father
to  you  '  ?  For  three  reasons  in  particular.  First,
because  He  wished  to  show  that  He  and  I  are
not  separate  from  each  other,  on  which  account
He  also  made  the  following  reply  to  S.  Philip,


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  149


when  he  said  to  Him,  4  6' how  us  the  Father,  and  it
is  enough  for  us.1  My  Word  said,  *  Who  sees  Me
sees  the  Father,  and  who  sees  the  Father  sees  Me1
This  He  said  because  He  was  one  thing  with
Me,  and  that  which  He  had,  He  had  from  Me,
I  having  nothing  from  Him  ;  wherefore,  again,  He
said  to  Judas,  1  My  doctrine  is  not  Mine,  but  My
Father's  who  sent  Me,1  because  My  Son  proceeds
from  Me,  not  I  from  Him,  though  I  with  Him
and  He  with  Me  are  but  one  thing.  For  this
reason  He  did  not  say  '  /  will  manifest  the  Father1
but  '  /  will  manifest  Myself1  being  one  thing  with
the  Father.  The  second  reason  was  because,  in
manifesting  Himself  to  you,  He  did  not  present
to  you  anything  He  had  not  received  from  Me,
the  Father.  These  words,  then,  mean,  the  Father
has  manifested  Himself  to  Me,  because  I  am  one
thing  with  Him,  and  I  will  manifest  to  you,
by  means  of  Myself,  Me  and  Him.  The  third
reason  was,  because  I,  being  invisible,  could  not
be  seen  by  you,  until  you  should  be  separated
from  your  bodies.  Then,  indeed,  will  you  see
Me,  your  GOD,  and  My  Son,  the  Word,  face
to  face.  From  now  until  after  the  general
Resurrection,  when  your  humanity  will  be  con-
formed with  the  humanity  of  the  Eternal  Word,
according  to  what  I  told  thee  in  the  treatise  of
the  Resurrection,  you  can  see  Me,  with  the  eye
of  the  intellect  alone,  for,  as  I  am,  you  cannot
see  Me  now.  Wherefore  I  veiled  the  Divine
nature  with  your  humanity,  so  that  you  might
see  Me  through  that  medium.    I,  the  Invisible,


1 5b     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


made  Myself,  as  it  were,  visible  by  sending  you
the  Word,  My  Son,  veiled  in  the  flesh  of  your
humanity.  He  manifested  Me  to  you.  There-
fore it  was  that  He  did  not  say  '  I  will  manifest
the  Father  to  you'  but  rather,  lI  will  manifest
Myself  to  you as  if  He  should  say,  *  According
as  My  Father  manifests  Himself  to  Me,  will  I  mani-
fest Myself  to  you,  for,  in  this  manifestation  of  Himself
He  manifests  Me?  Now  therefore  thou  under-
standest  why  He  did  not  say  '  I  will  manifest  the
Father  to  you?  Both,  because  such  a  vision  is
impossible  for  you,  while  yet  in  the  mortal  body,
and  because  He  is  one  thing  with  Me."


How  the  soul,  after  having  mounted  the  first  step  of
the  Bridge,  should  proceed  to  mount  the  second.

"  Thou  hast  now  seen  how  excellent  is  the
state  of  him  who  has  attained  to  the  love  of  a
friend  ;  climbing  with  the  foot  of  affection,  he
has  reached  the  secret  of  the  Heart,  which  is
the  second  of  the  three  steps  figured  in  the  Body
of  My  Son.  I  have  told  thee  what  was  meant
by  the  three  powers  of  the  soul,  and  now  I  will
show  thee  how  they  signify  the  three  states,
through  which  the  soul  passes.  Before  treating
of  the  third  state,  I  wish  to  show  thee  how  a
man  becomes  a  friend  and  how,  from  a  friend,
he  grows  into  a  son,  attaining  to  filial  love,  and
how  a  man  may  know  if  he  has  become  a  friend.
And  first  of  how  a  man  arrives  at  being  a  friend.
In  the  beginning,  a  man  serves  Me  imperfectly


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  151


through  servile  fear,  but,  by  exercise  and  perse-
verance, he  arrives  at  the  love  of  delight,  rinding
his  own  delight  and  profit  in  Me.  This  is  a
necessary  stage,  by  which  he  must  pass,  who
would  attain  to  perfect  love,  to  the  love  that
is  of  friend  and  son.  I  call  filial  love  perfect,
because  thereby,  a  man  receives  his  inheritance
from  Me,  the  Eternal  Father,  and  because  a  son's
love  includes  that  of  a  friend,  which  is  why  I  told
thee  that  a  friend  grows  into  a  son.  What  means
does  he  take  to  arrive  thereat  ?  I  will  tell  thee.
Every  perfection  and  every  virtue  proceeds  from
charity,  and  charity  is  nourished  by  humility,
which  results  from  the  knowledge  and  holy
hatred  of  self,  that  is,  sensuality.  To  arrive
thereat,  a  man  must  persevere,  and  remain  in
the  cellar  of  self-knowledge  in  which  he  will
learn  My  mercy,  in  the  Blood  of  My  only-
begotten  Son,  drawing  to  Himself,  with  this
love,  My  divine  charity,  exercising  himself  in
the  extirpation  of  his  perverse  self-will,  both
spiritual  and  temporal,  hiding  himself  in  his  own
house,  as  did  Peter,  who,  after  the  sin  of  deny-
ing My  Son,  began  to  weep.  Yet  his  lamenta-
tions were  imperfect  and  remained  so,  until  after
the  forty  days,  that  is  until  after  the  Ascension.
But  when  My  Truth  returned  to  Me,  in  His
humanity,  Peter  and  the  others  concealed  them-
selves in  the  house,  awaiting  the  coming  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  which  My  Truth  had  promised  them.
They  remained  barred  in  from  fear,  because  the
soul  always  fears  until  she  arrives  at  true  love.


152     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

But  when  they  had  persevered  in  fasting  and  in
humble  and  continual  prayer,  until  they  had
received  the  abundance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  they
lost  their  fear,  and  followed  and  preached  Christ
crucified.  So  also  the  soul,  who  wishes  to  arrive
at  this  perfection,  after  she  has  risen  from  the
guilt  of  mortal  sin,  recognising  it  for  what  it  is,
begins  to  weep  from  fear  of  the  penalty,  whence
she  rises  to  the  consideration  of  My  mercy,  in
which  contemplation,  she  finds  her  own  pleasure
and  profit.  This  is  an  imperfect  state,  and  I,  in
order  to  develop  perfection  in  the  soul,  after  the
forty  days,  that  is  after  these  two  states,  with-
draw Myself  from  time  to  time,  not  in  grace  but
in  feeling.  My  Truth  showed  you  this  when  He
said  to  the  disciples  '  /  will  go  and  will  return  to
you.'

"  Everything  that  He  said  was  said  primarily,
and  in  particular,  to  the  disciples,  but  referred  in
general  to  the  whole  present  and  future,  to  those,
that  is  to  say,  who  should  come  after.  He  said
*  I  will  go  and  will  return  to  you;'  and  so  it  was,
for,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  returned  upon  the
disciples,  He  also  returned,  as  I  told  you  above,
for  the  Holy  Spirit  did  not  return  alone,  but
came  with  My  power,  and  the  wisdom  of  the
Son,  who  is  one  thing  with  Me,  and  with  His
own  clemency,  which  proceeds  from  Me  the
Father,  and  from  the  Son.  Now,  as  I  told  thee,
in  order  to  raise  the  soul  from  imperfection,  I
withdraw  Myself  from  her  sentiment,  depriving
her  of  former  consolations.     When  she  was  in


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  153


the  guilt  of  mortal  sin,  she  had  separated  herself
from  Me,  and  I  deprived  her  of  grace  through
her  own  guilt,  because  that  guilt  had  barred  the
door  of  her  desires.  Wherefore  the  sun  of  grace
did  not  shine,  not  through  its  own  defect,  but
through  the  defect  of  the  creature,  who  bars  the
door  of  desire.  When  she  knows  herself  and  her
darkness,  she  opens  the  window  and  vomits  her
filth,  by  holy  confession.  Then  I,  having  re-
turned to  the  soul  by  grace,  withdraw  Myself
from  her  by  sentiment,  which  I  do  in  order  to
humiliate  her,  and  cause  her  to  seek  Me  in  truth,
and  to  prove  her  in  the  light  of  faith,  so  that  she
come  to  prudence.  Then,  if  she  love  Me  with-
out thought  of  self,  and  with  lively  faith  and
with  hatred  of  her  own  sensuality,  she  rejoices
in  the  time  of  trouble,  deeming  herself  unworthy
of  peace  and  quietness  of  mind.  Now  comes
the  second  of  the  three  things  of  which  I  told
thee,  that  is  to  say :  how  the  soul  arrives  at
perfection,  and  what  she  does  when  she  is  per-
fect. This  is  what  she  does.  Though  she  per-
ceives that  I  have  withdrawn  Myself,  she  does
not,  on  that  account,  look  back,  but  perseveres
with  humility  in  her  exercises,  remaining  barred
in  the  house  of  self-knowledge,  and,  continuing
to  dwell  therein,  awaits,  with  lively  faith,  the
coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  is  of  Me,  who
am  the  fire  of  charity.  How  does  she  await
me  ?  Not  in  idleness,  but  in  watching  and  con-
tinued prayer,  and  not  only  with  physical,  but
also  with  intellectual  watching,  that  is,  with  the


154     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

eye  of  her  mind  alert,  and,  watching  with  the
light  of  faith,  she  extirpates,  with  hatred,  the
wandering  thoughts  of  her  heart,  looking  for  the
affection  of  My  charity,  and  knowing  that  I
desire  nothing  but  her  sanctification,  which  is
certified  to  her  in  the  Blood  of  My  Son.  As
long  as  her  eye  thus  watches,  illumined  by  the
knowledge  of  Me  and  of  herself,  she  continues  to
pray  with  the  prayer  of  holy  desire,  which  is  a
continued  prayer,  and  also  with  actual  prayer,
which  she  practises  at  the  appointed  times,  ac-
cording to  the  orders  of  Holy  Church.  This  is
what  the  soul  does  in  order  to  rise  from  imper-
fection and  arrive  at  perfection,  and  it  is  to  this
end,  namely  that  she  may  arrive  at  perfection,
that  I  withdraw  from  her,  not  by  grace  but  by
sentiment.  Once  more  do  I  leave  her,  so  that
she  may  see  and  know  her  defects,  so  that,  feel-
ing herself  deprived  of  consolation  and  afflicted
by  pain,  she  may  recognise  her  own  weakness,
and  learn  how  incapable  she  is  of  stability  or
perseverance,  thus  cutting  down  to  the  very  root
of  spiritual  self-love,  for  this  should  be  the  end
and  purpose  of  all  her  self-knowledge,  to  rise
above  herself,  mounting  the  throne  of  conscience,
and  not  permitting  the  sentiment  of  imperfect
love  to  turn  again  in  its  death-struggle,  but,  with
correction  and  reproof,  digging  up  the  root  of
self-love,  with  the  knife  of  self-hatred  and  the
love  of  virtue."


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  155


How  an  imperfect  lover  of  GOD  loves  his  neighbour
also  imperfectly ,  and  of  the  signs  of  this  imperfect
love.

"  And  I  would  have  thee  know  Ithat  just  as
every  imperfection  and  perfection  is  acquired
from  Me,  so  is  it  manifested  by  means  of  the
neighbour.  And  simple  souls,  who  often  love
creatures  with  spiritual  love,  know  this  well,  for,
if  they  have  received  My  love  sincerely  without
any  self-regarding  considerations,  they  satisfy  the
thirst  of  their  love  for  their  neighbour  equally
sincerely.  If  a  man  carry  away  the  vessel  which
he  has  filled  at  the  fountain  and  then  drink  of  it,
the  vessel  becomes  empty,  but  if  he  keep  his
vessel  standing  in  the  fountain,  while  he  drinks,
it  always  remains  full.  So  the  love  of  the  neigh-
bour, whether  spiritual  or  temporal,  should  be
drunk  in  Me,  without  any  self- regarding  con-
siderations. I  require  that  you  should  love  Me
with  the  same  love  with  which  I  love  you.  This
indeed  you  cannot  do,  because  I  loved  you  with-
out being  loved.  All  the  love  which  you  have
for  Me  you  owe  to  Me,  so  that  it  is  not  of  grace
that  you  love  Me,  but  because  you  ought  to  do
so.  While  I  love  you  of  grace,  and  not  because
I  owe  you  My  love.  Therefore  to  Me,  in  person,
you  cannot  repay  the  love  which  I  require  of
you,  and  I  have  placed  you  in  the  midst  of  your
fellows,  that  you  may  do  to  them  that  which  you
cannot  do  to  Me,  that  is  to  say,  that  you  may
love  your  neighbour  of  free  grace,  without  ex-


156     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

pecting  any  return  from  him,  and  what  you  do
to  him,  I  count  as  done  to  Me,  which  My  Truth
showed  forth  when  He  said  to  Paul,  My  perse-
cutor— 4  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  MeV
This  He  said,  judging  that  Paul  persecuted
Him  in  His  faithful.  This  love  must  be  sin-
cere, because  it  is  with  the  same  love  with  which
you  love  Me,  that  you  must  love  your  neigh-
bour. Dost  thou  know  how  the  imperfection  of
spiritual  love  for  the  creature  is  shown?  It  is
shown  when  the  lover  feels  pain  if  it  appear  to
him  that  the  object  of  his  love  does  not  satisfy
or  return  his  love,  or  when  he  sees  the  beloved
one's  conversation  turned  aside  from  him,  or
himself  deprived  of  consolation,  or  another  loved
more  than  he.  In  these  and  in  many  other  ways
can  it  be  seen  that  his  neighbourly  love  is  still
imperfect,  and  that,  though  his  love  was  originally
drawn  from  Me,  the  Fountain  of  all  love,  he  took
the  vessel  out  of  the  water,  in  order  to  drink
from  it.  It  is  because  his  love  for  Me  is  still
imperfect,  that  his  neighbourly  love  is  so  weak,
and  because  the  root  of  self-love  has  not  been
properly  dug  out.  Wherefore  I  often  permit
such  a  love  to  exist,  so  that  the  soul  may  in  this
way  come  to  the  knowledge  of  her  own  imper-
fection, and  for  the  same  reason  do  I  withdraw
myself  from  the  soul  by  sentiment,  that  she  may
be  thus  led  to  enclose  herself  in  the  house  of
self-knowledge,  where  is  acquired  every  perfec-
tion. After  which  I  return  into  her  with  more
light  and  with  more  knowledge  of  My  Truth,  in


A  TREATISE  OF  DISCRETION  157


proportion  to  the  degree  in  which  she  refers  to
grace  the  power  of  slaying  her  own  will.  And
she  never  ceases  to  cultivate  the  vine  of  her  soul,
and  to  root  out  the  thorns  of  evil  thoughts,  re-
placing them  with  the  stones  of  virtues,  cemented
together  in  the  Blood  of  Christ  crucified,
which  she  has  found  on  her  journey  across  the
Bridge  of  Christ,  My  only-begotten  Son.  For
I  told  thee,  if  thou  remember,  that  upon  the
Bridge,  that  is,  upon  the  doctrine  of  My  Truth,
were  built  up  the  stones,  based  upon  the  virtue  of
His  Blood,  for  it  is  in  virtue  of  this  Blood  that
the  virtues  give  life."


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER


Of  the  means  which  the  soul  takes  to  arrive  at  pure
and  generous  love ;  and  here  begins  the  Treatise
of  Prayer.

"When  the  soul  has  passed  through  the  doc-
trine of  Christ  crucified,  with  true  love  of  virtue
and  hatred  of  vice,  and  has  arrived  at  the  house
of  self-knowledge  and  entered  therein,  she  re-
mains, with  her  door  barred,  in  watching  and
constant  prayer,  separated  entirely  from  the  con-
solations of  the  world.  Why  does  she  thus  shut
herself  in  ?  She  does  so  from  fear,  knowing  her
own  imperfections,  and  also  from  the  desire,
which  she  has,  of  arriving  at  pure  and  generous
love.  And  because  she  sees  and  knows  well  that
in  no  other  way  can  she  arrive  thereat,  she  waits,
with  a  lively  faith  for  My  arrival,  through  in-
crease of  grace  in  her.  How  is  a  lively  faith  to
be  recognised  ?  By  perseverance  in  virtue,  and
by  the  fact  that  the  soul  never  turns  back  for
anything,  whatever  it  be,  nor  rises  from  holy
prayer,  for  any  reason  except  (note  well)  for
obedience  or  charity's  sake.  For  no  other  reason
ought  she  to  leave  off  prayer,  for,  during  the

time  ordained  for  prayer,  the  Devil  is  wont  to

158


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER


arrive  in  the  soul,  causing  much  more  conflict
and  trouble  than  when  the  soul  is  not  occupied
in  prayer.  This  he  does  in  order  that  holy
prayer  may  become  tedious  to  the  soul,  tempt-
ing her  often  with  these  words :  '  This  prayer
avails  thee  nothing,  for  thou  needest  attend  to  nothing
except  thy  vocal  prayers?  He  acts  thus  in  order
that,  becoming  wearied  and  confused  in  mind,
-she  may  abandon  the  exercise  of  prayer,  which
is  a  weapon  with  which  the  soul  can  defend
herself  from  every  adversary,  if  grasped  with  the
hand  of  love,  by  the  arm  of  free  choice  in  the
light  of  the  Holy  Faith."


Here,  touching  something  concerning  the  Sacrament
of  the  Body  of  Christ,  the  complete  doctrine  is
given ;  and  how  the  soul  proceeds  from  vocal
to  mental  prayer,  and  a  vision  is  related  which
this  devout  soul  once  received.

n

"  Know,  dearest  daughter,  how,  by  humble,
continual,  and  faithful  prayer,  the  soul  acquires,
with  time  and  perseverance,  every  virtue."  Where-
fore should  she  persevere  and  never  abandon
prayer,  either  through  the  illusion  of  the  Devil
or  her  own  fragility,  that  is  to  say,  either  on
account  of  any  thought  or  movement  coming
from  her  own  body,  or  of  the  words  of  any
creature.  The  Devil  often  places  himself  upon
the  tongues  of  creatures,  causing  them  to  chatter
nonsensically,  with  the  purpose  of  preventing  the
prayer  of  the  soul.    All  of  this  she  should  pass


160     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


by,  by  means  of  the  virtue  of  perseverance.  Oh,
how  sweet  and  pleasant  to  that  soul  and  to  Me  is
holy  prayer,  made  in  the  house  of  knowledge  of
self  and  of  Me,  opening  the  eye  of  the  intellect
to  the  light  of  faith,  and  the  affections  to  the
abundance  of  My  charity,  which  was  made  visible
to  you,  through  My  visible  only-begotten  Son,
who  showed  it  to  you  with  His  blood  !  Which
Blood  inebriates  the  soul  and  clothes  her  with
the  fire  of  divine  charity,  giving  her  the  food  of
the  Sacrament  [which  is  placed  in  the  tavern  of
the  mystical  body  of  the  Holy  Church]  that  is  to
say,  the  food  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  My  Son,
wholly  God  and  wholly  man,  administered  to
you  by  the  hand  of  My  vicar,  who  holds  the
key  of  the  Blood.  This  is  that  tavern,  which  I
mentioned  to  thee,  standing  on  the  Bridge,  to
provide  food  and  comfort  for  the  travellers  and
the  pilgrims,  who  pass  by  the  way  of  the  doctrine
of  My  Truth,  lest  they  should  faint  through
weakness.  This  food  strengthens  little  or  much,
according  to  the  desire  of  the  recipient,  whether
he  receives  sacramentally  or  virtually.  He  re-
ceives sacramentally  when  he  actually  communi-
cates with  the  Blessed  Sacrament.  He  receives
virtually  when  he  communicates,  both  by  desire
of  communion,  and  by  contemplation  of  the
Blood  of  Christ  crucified,  communicating,  as  it
were,  sacramentally,  with  the  affection  of  love,
which  is  to  be  tasted  in  the  Blood  which,  as  the
soul  sees,  was  shed  through  love.  On  seeing
this  the  soul  becomes  inebriated,  and  blazes  with


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  161


holy  desire  and  satisfies  herself,  becoming  full
of  love  for  Me  and  for  her  neighbour.  Where
can  this  be  acquired  ?  In  the  house  of  self-
knowledge  with  holy  prayer,  where  imperfections
are  lost,  even  as  Peter  and  the  disciples,  while
they  remained  in  watching  and  prayer,  lost  their
imperfection  and  acquired  perfection.  By  what
means  is  this  acquired  ?  By  perseverance  seasoned
with  the  most  holy  faith.

"  But  do  not  think  that  the  soul  receives  such
ardour  and  nourishment  from  prayer,  if  she  pray
only  vocally,  as  do  many  souls  whose  prayers  are
rather  words  than  love.  Such  as  these  give  heed
to  nothing  except  to  completing  Psalms  and  say-
ing many  paternosters.  And  when  they  have
once  completed  their  appointed  tale,  they  do  not
appear  to  think  of  anything  further,  but  seem  to
place  devout  attention  and  love  in  merely  vocal
recitation,  which  the  soul  is  not  required  to  do,
for,  in  doing  only  this,  she  bears  but  little  fruit,
which  pleases  Me  but  little.  But  if  thou  askest
Me,  whether  the  soul  should  abandon  vocal
prayer,  since  it  does  not  seem  to  all  that  they
are  called  to  mental  prayer,  1  should  reply  '  No.1
The  soul  should  advance  by  degrees,  and  I  know
well  that,  just  as  the  soul  is  at  first  imperfect  and
afterwards  perfect,  so  also  is  it  with  her  prayer.
She  should  nevertheless  continue  in  vocal  prayer,
while  she  is  yet  imperfect,  so  as  not  to  fall  into
idleness.  But  she  should  not  say  her  vocal
prayers  without  joining  them  to  mental  prayer,
that  is  to  say,  that  while  she  is  reciting,  she

L


1 62     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


should  endeavour  to  elevate  her  mind  in  My
love,  with  the  consideration  of  her  own  defects
and  of  the  Blood  of  My  only-begotten  Son,
wherein  she  finds  the  breadth  of  My  charity
and  the  remission  of  her  sins.  And  this  she
should  do,  so  that  self-knowledge  and  the  con-
sideration of  her  own  defects  should  make  her
recognise  My  goodness  in  herself  and  continue
her  exercises  with  true  humility.  I  do  not  wish
defects  to  be  considered  in  particular,  but  in
general,  so  that  the  mind  may  not  be  conta-
minated by  the  remembrance  of  particular  and
hideous  sins.  But,  as  I  said,  I  do  not  wish  the
soul  to  consider  her  sins,  either  in  general  or  in
particular,  without  also  remembering  the  Blood
and  the  broadness  of  My  mercy,  for  fear  that
otherwise  she  should  be  brought  to  confusion.
And  together  with  confusion  would  come  the
Devil,  who  has  caused  it,  under  colour  of  contri-
tion and  displeasure  of  sin,  and  so  she  would
arrive  at  eternal  damnation,  not  only  on  account
of  her  confusion,  but  also  through  the  despair
which  would  come  to  her,  because  she  did  not
seize  the  arm  of  My  mercy.  This  is  one  of  the
subtle  devices  with  which  the  Devil  deludes  My
servants,  and,  in  order  to  escape  from  his  deceit,
and  to  be  pleasing  to  Me,  you  must  enlarge  your
hearts  and  affections  in  My  boundless  mercy,
with  true  humility.  Thou  knowest  that  the
pride  of  the  Devil  cannot  resist  the  humble  mind,
nor  can  any  confusion  of  spirit  be  greater  than
the  broadness  of  My  good  mercy,  if  the  soul


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  163


will  only  truly  hope  therein.  Wherefore  it  was,
if  thou  remember  rightly,  that,  once,  when  the
Devil  wished  to  overthrow  thee,  by  confusion,
wishing  to  prove  to  thee  that  thy  life  had  been
deluded,  and  that  thou  hadst  not  followed  My
will,  thou  didst  that  which  was  thy  duty,  which
My  goodness  (which  is  never  withheld  from  him
who  will  receive  it)  gave  thee  strength  to  do,
that  is  thou  didst  rise,  humbly  trusting  in  My
mercy,  and  saying  :  '  /  confess  to  my  Creator  that
my  life  has  indeed  been  passed  in  darkness,  but  I  will
hide  myself  in  the  Wounds  of  Christ  crucified,  and
bathe  myself  in  His  Blood  and  so  shall  my  iniquities
be  consumed,  and  with  desire  will  I  rejoice  in  my
Creator"  Thou  rememberest  that  then  the  Devil
fled,  and,  turning  round  to  the  opposite  side,  he
endeavoured  to  inflate  thee  with  pride,  saying  :
'  Thou  art  perfect  and  pleasing  to  God,  and  there  is
no  more  need  for  thee  to  afflict  thyself  or  to  lament
thy  sins"  And  once  more  I  gave  thee  the  light
to  see  thy  true  path,  namely,  humiliation  of  thy-
self, and  thou  didst  answer  the  Devil  with  these
words  :  *  Wretch  that  I  am,  John  the  Baptist  never
sinned  and  was  sanctified  in  his  mother's  womb.
And  I  have  committed  so  many  sins,  and  have  hardly
begun  to  know  them  with  grief  and  true  contrition,
seeing  who  God  is,  who  is  offended  by  me,  and  who
I  am,  who  ofiend  Him"  Then  the  Devil,  not
being  able  to  resist  thy  humble  hope  in  My
goodness,  said  to  thee :  '  Cursed  that  thou  art,  for
I  can  find  no  way  to  take  thee.  If  I  put  thee  down
through  confusion,  thou  risest  to  Heaven  on  the  wings


164     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

of  mercy,  and  if  I  raise  thee  on  high,  thou  humblest
thyself  down  to  Hell,  and  when  I  go  into  Hell  thou
persecutest  me,  so  that  I  will  return  to  thee  no  more,
because  thou  strikest  me  with  the  stick  of  charity.''
The  soul,  therefore,  should  season  the  knowledge
of  herself  with  the  knowledge  of  My  goodness,
and  then  vocal  prayer  will  be  of  use  to  the  soul
who  makes  it,  and  pleasing  to  Me,  and  she  will
arrive,  from  the  vocal  imperfect  prayer,  exercised
with  perseverance,  at  perfect  mental  prayer ;  but
if  she  simply  aims  at  completing  her  tale,  and,
for  vocal  abandons  mental  prayer,  she  will  never
arrive  at  it.  Sometimes  the  soul  will  be  so
ignorant  that,  having  resolved  to  say  so  many
prayers  vocally,  and  I,  visiting  her  mind  some-
times in  one  way,  and  sometimes  in  another,  in
a  flash  of  self-knowledge  or  of  contrition  for  sin,
sometimes  in  the  broadness  of  My  charity,  and
sometimes  by  placing  before  her  mind,  in  diverse
ways,  according  to  My  pleasure  and  the  desire  of
the  soul,  the  presence  of  My  Truth,  she  (the
soul),  in  order  to  complete  her  tale,  will  abandon
My  visitation,  that  she  feels,  as  it  were,  by  con-
science, rather  than  abandon  that  which  she  had
begun.  She  should  not  do  so,  for,  in  so  doing,
she  yields  to  a  deception  of  the  Devil.  The
moment  she  feels  her  mind  disposed  by  My
visitation,  in  the  many  ways  I  have  told  thee,
she  should  abandon  vocal  prayer ;  then,  My
visitation  past,  if  there  be  time,  she  can  resume
the  vocal  prayers  which  she  had  resolved  to  say,
but  if  she  has  not  time  to  complete  them,  she


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  165


ought  not  on  that  account  to  be  troubled  or
suffer  annoyance  and  confusion  of  mind  ;  of
course  provided  that  it  were  not  the  Divine  office
which  clerics  and  religious  are  bound  and  obliged
to  say  under  penalty  of  offending  Me,  for,  they
must,  until  death,  say  their  office.  But  if  they,
at  the  hour  appointed  for  saying  it,  should  feel
their  minds  drawn  and  raised  by  desire,  they
should  so  arrange  as  to  say  it  before  or  after  My
visitation,  so  that  the  debt  of  rendering  the  office
be  not  omitted.  But,  in  any  other  case,  vocal
prayer  should  be  immediately  abandoned  for  the
said  cause.  Vocal  prayer,  made  in  the  way  that
I  have  told  thee,  will  enable  the  soul  to  arrive  at
perfection,  and  therefore  she  should  not  abandon
it,  but  use  it  in  the  way  that  I  have  told  thee.

And  so,  with  exercise  in  perseverance,  she  will
taste  prayer  in  truth,  and  the  food  of  the  Blood
of  My  only-begotten  Son,  and  therefore  I  told
thee  that  some  communicated  virtually  with  the
Body  and  Blood  of  Christ,  although  not  sacra-
mentally ;  that  is,  they  communicate  in  the
affection  of  charity,  which  they  taste  by  means
of  holy  prayer,  little  or  much,  according  to  the
affection  with  which  they  pray.  They  who  pro-
ceed with  little  prudence  and  without  method,
taste  little,  and  they  who  proceed  with  much,
taste  much.  For  the  more  the  soul  tries  to
loosen  her  affection  from  herself,  and  fasten  it
in  Me  with  the  light  of  the  intellect,  the  more
she  knows  ;  and  the  more  she  knows,  the  more
she  loves,  and,  loving  much,  she  tastes  much.


1 66     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Thou  seest  then,  that  perfect  prayer  is  not
attained  to  through  many  words,  but  through
affection  of  desire,  the  soul  raising  herself  to
Me,  with  knowledge  of  herself  and  of  My
mercy,  seasoned  the  one  with  the  other.  Thus
she  will  exercise  together  mental  and  vocal
prayer,  for,  even  as  the  active  and  contempla-
tive life  is  one,  so  are  they.  Although  vocal
or  mental  prayer  can  be  understood  in  many  and
diverse  ways,  for  I  have  told  thee  that  a  holy
desire  is  a  continual  prayer,  in  this  sense  that
a  good  and  holy  will  disposes  itself  with  desire
to  the  occasion  actually  appointed  for  prayer  in
addition  to  the  continual  prayer  of  holy  desire,
wherefore  vocal  prayer  will  be  made  at  the  ap-
pointed time  by  the  soul  who  remains  firm  in
a  habitual  holy  will,  and  will  sometimes  be  con-
tinued beyond  the  appointed  time,  according  as
charity  commands  for  the  salvation  of  the  neigh-
bour, if  the  soul  see  him  to  be  in  need,  and  also
her  own  necessities  according  to  the  state  in
which  I  have  placed  her.  Each  one,  according
to  his  condition,  ought  to  exert  himself  for  the
salvation  of  souls,  for  this  exercise  lies  at  the
root  of  a  holy  will,  and  whatever  he  may  con-
tribute, by  words  or  deeds,  towards  the  salvation
of  his  neighbour,  is  virtually  a  prayer,  although
it  does  not  replace  a  prayer  which  one  should
make  oneself  at  the  appointed  season,  as  My
glorious  standard-bearer  Paul  said,  in  the  words,
'  He  who  ceases  not  to  work  ceases  not  to  pray?  It
was  for  this  reason  that  I  told  thee  that  prayer


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER ;  167


was  made  in  many  ways,  that  is,  that  actual  prayer
may  be  united  with  mental  prayer  if  made  with
the  affection  of  charity,  which  charity  is  itself
continual  prayer.  I  have  now  told  thee  how
mental  prayer  is  reached  by  exercise  and  perse-
verance, and  by  leaving  vocal  prayer  for  mental
when  1  visit  the  soul.  I  have  also  spoken  to
thee  of  common  prayer,  that  is,  of  vocal  prayer
in  general,  made  outside  of  ordained  times,  and
of  the  prayers  of  good-will,  and  how  every  exer-
cise, whether  performed,  in  oneself  or  in  one's
neighbour,  with  good-will,  is  prayer.  The  en-
closed soul  should  therefore  spur  herself  on  with
prayer,  and  when  she  has  arrived  at  friendly  and
filial  love  she  does  so.  Unless  the  soul  keep  to
this  path,  she  will  always  remain  tepid  and
imperfect,  and  will  only  love  Me  and  her
neighbour  in  proportion  to  the  pleasure  which
she  finds  in  My  service."

Of  the  method  by  which  the  soul  separates  herself
from  imperfect  love,  and  attains  to  perfect  love,
friendly  and  filial.

"  Hitherto  I  have  shown  thee  in  many  ways
how  the  soul  raises  herself  from  imperfection  and
attains  to  perfection,  which  she  does  after  she  has
attained  to  friendly  and  filial  love.  I  tell  thee
that  she  arrives  at  perfect  love  by  means  of  per-
severance, barring  herself  into  the  House  of  Self-
Knowledge,  which  knowledge  of  self  requires  to
be  seasoned  with  knowledge  of  Me,  lest  it  bring


1 68      ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


the  soul  to  confusion,  for  it  would  cause  the  soul
to  hate  her  own  sensitive  pleasure  and  the  delight
of  her  own  consolations.  But  from  this  hatred,
founded  in  humility,  she  will  draw  patience,  with
which  she  will  become  strong  against  the  attacks
of  the  Devil,  against  the  persecutions  of  man,  and
towards  Me,  when,  for  her  good,  I  withdraw
delight  from  her  mind.  And  if  her  sensuality,
through  malevolence,  should  lift  its  head  against
reason,  the  judgment  of  conscience  should  rise
against  it,  and,  with  hatred  of  it,  hold  out  reason
against  it,  not  allowing  such  evil  emotions  to  get
by  it.  Though  sometimes  the  soul  who  lives  in
holy  hatred  corrects  and  reproves  herself,  not
only  for  those  things  that  are  against  reason,  but
also  for  things  that  in  reality  come  from  Me,
which  is  what  My  sweet  servant  S.  Gregory  meant,
when  he  said  that  a  holy  and  pure  conscience
made  sin  where  there  was  no  sin,  that  is,  that
through  purity  of  conscience,  it  saw  sin  where
there  was  no  sin.

"  Now  the  soul  who  wishes  to  rise  above  im-
perfection should  await  My  Providence  in  the
House  of  Self-Knowledge,  with  the  light  of  faith,
as  did  the  disciples,  who  remained  in  the  house
in  perseverance  and  in  watching,  and  in  humble
and  continual  prayer,  awaiting  the  coming  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  She  should  remain  fasting  and
watching,  the  eye  of  her  intellect  fastened  on  the
doctrine  of  My  Truth,  and  she  will  become
humble  because  she  will  know  herself  in  humble
and  continual  prayer  and  holy  and  true  desire."


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  169


Of  the  signs  by  which  the  soul  knows  she  has
arrived  at  perfect  love.

"  It  now  remains  to  be  told  thee  how  it  can  be
seen  that  souls  have  arrived  at  perfect  love.  This
is  seen  by  the  same  sign  that  was  given  to  the
holy  disciples  after  they  had  received  the  Holy
Spirit,  when  they  came  forth  from  the  house,
and  fearlessly  announced  the  doctrine  of  My
Word,  My  only-begotten  Son,  not  fearing  pain,
but  rather  glorying  therein.  They  did  not  mind
going  before  the  tyrants  of  the  world,  to  an-
nounce to  them  the  truth,  for  the  glory  and
praise  of  My  Name.  So  the  soul,  who  has
awaited  Me  in  self-knowledge  as  I  have  told
thee,  receives  Me,  on  My  return  to  her,  with
the  fire  of  charity,  in  which  charity,  while  still
remaining  in  the  house  with  perseverance,  she
conceives  the  virtues  by  affection  of  love,  par-
ticipating in  My  power ;  with  which  power  and
virtues  she  overrules  and  conquers  her  own  sen-
sitive passions,  and  through  which  charity  she
participates  in  the  wisdom  of  My  Son,  in  which
she  sees  and  knows,  with  the  eye  of  her  intellect,
My  Truth  and  the  deceptions  of  spiritual  self-
love,  that  is,  the  imperfect  love  of  her  own
consolations,  as  has  been  said,  and  she  knows
also  the  malice  and  deceit  of  the  devil,  which
he  practises  on  those  souls  who  are  bound  by
that  imperfect  love.  She  therefore  arises,  with
hatred  of  that  imperfection  and  with  love  of
perfection,  and,  through  this  charity,  which  is


170     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

of  the  Holy  Spirit,  she  participates  in  His  will,
fortifying  her  own  to  be  willing  to  suffer  pain,
and,  coming  out  of  the  house  through  My  Name,
she  brings  forth  the  virtues  on  her  neighbour.
Not.  that  by  coming  out  to  bring  forth  the
virtues,  I  mean  that  she  issues  out  of  the  House
of  Self-Knowledge,  but  that,  in  the  time  of  the
neighbour's  necessity  she  loses  that  fear  of  being
deprived  of  her  own  consolations,  and  so  issues
forth  to  give  birth  to  those  virtues  which  she
has  conceived  through  affection  of  love.  The
souls,  who  have  thus  come  forth,  have  reached
the  fourth  state,  that  is,  from  the  third  state,
which  is  a  perfect  state,  in  which  they  taste
charity  and  give  birth  to  it  on  their  neighbours,
they  have  arrived  at  the  fourth  state,  which  is
one  of  perfect  union  with  Me.  The  two  last-
mentioned  states  are  united,  that  is  to  say,  one
cannot  be  without  the  other,  for  there  cannot
be  love  of  Me,  without  love  of  the  neighbour,
nor  love  of  the  neighbour  without  love  of  Me."

How  they  who  are  imperfect  desire  to  follow  the
Father  alone,  but  they  who  are  perfect  desire
to  follow  the  Son.  And  of  a  vision,  which
this  holy  soul  had,  concerning  diverse  baptisms,
and  of  many  other  beautiful  and  useful  things.

"  As  I  have  told  thee,  these  latter  have  issued
forth  from  the  house,  which  is  a  sign  that  they
have  arisen  from  imperfection  and  arrived  at  per-
fection.   Open  the  eye  of  thy  intellect  and  see


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  171


them  running  by  the  Bridge  of  the  doctrine  of
Christ  crucified,  which  was  their  rule,  way,  and
doctrine.  They  place  none  other  before  the  eye
of  their  intellect  than  Christ  crucified,  not  the
Father,  as  they  do  who  are  in  imperfect  love  and
do  not  wish  to  suffer  pain,  but  only  to  have  the
delight  which  they  find  in  Me.  But  they,  as  if
drunken  with  love  and  burning  with  it,  have
gathered  together  and  ascended  the  three  steps,
which  I  figured  to  thee  as  the  three  powers  of
the  soul,  and  also  the  three  actual  steps,  figured
to  thee  as  in  the  Body  of  My  only  Son,  Christ
crucified,  by  which  steps  the  soul,  as  I  told  thee,
ascended,  first  climbing  to  the  Feet,  with  the
feet  of  the  soul's  affection,  from  thence  arriving
at  the  Side,  where  she  found  the  secret  of  the
Heart  and  knew  the  baptism  of  water,  which  has
virtue  through  the  Blood,  and  where  I  dispose
the  soul  to  receive  grace,  uniting  and  kneading
her  together  in  the  Blood.  Where  did  the  soul
know  of  this  her  dignity,  in  being  kneaded  and
united  with  the  Blood  of  the  Lamb-,  receiving  the
grace  in  Holy  Baptism,  in  virtue  of  the  Blood  ?
In  the  Side,  where  she  knew  the  fire  of  divine
Charity,  and  so,  if  thou  remember  well,  My  Truth
manifested  to  thee,  when  thou  askedst,  saying  :
'  Sweet  and  Immaculate  Lamb,  Thou  wert  dead  when
Thy  side  was  opened.  Why  then  didst  Thou  want  to
be  struck  and  have  Thy  heart  divided  ?  9  And  He
replied  to  thee,  telling  thee  that  there  was  occa-
sion enough  for  it  ;  but  the  principal  part  of
what  He  said  I  will  tell  thee.    He  said  :  Because


172     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


My  desire  towards  the  human  generation  was
ended,  and  I  had  finished  the  actual  work  of
bearing  pain  and  torment,  and  yet  I  had  not
been  able  to  show,  by  finite  things,  because  My
love  was  infinite,  how  much  more  love  I  had,
I  wished  thee  to  see  the  secret  of  the  Heart,
showing  it  to  thee  open,  so  that  thou  mightest
see  how  much  more  I  loved  than  I  could  show
thee  by  finite  pain.  I  poured  from  it  Blood  and
Water,  to  show  thee  the  baptism  of  water,  which
is  received  in  virtue  of  the  Blood.  I  also  showed
the  baptism  of  love  in  two  ways,  first  in  those
who  are  baptized  in  their  blood,  shed  for  Me,
which  has  virtue  through  My  Blood,  even  if
they  have  not  been  able  to  have  Holy  Baptism,
and  also  in  those  who  are  baptized  in  fire,  not
being  able  to  have  Holy  Baptism,  but  desir-
ing it  with  the  affection  of  love.  There  is  no
baptism  of  fire  without  the  Blood,  because  the
Blood  is  steeped  in  and  kneaded  with  the  fire
of  Divine  charity,  because,  through  love  was  It
shed.  There  is  yet  another  way  by  which  the
soul  receives  the  baptism  of  Blood,  speaking,  as
it  were,  under  a  figure,  and  this  way  the  Divine
charity  provided,  knowing  the  infirmity  and
fragility  of  man,  through  which  he  offends,  not
that  he  is  obliged,  through  his  fragility  and
infirmity,  to  commit  sin  unless  he  wish  to  do
so ;  but,  falling,  as  he  will,  into  the  guilt  of
mortal  sin,  by  which  he  loses  the  grace  which
he  drew  from  Holy  Baptism  in  virtue  of  the
Blood,  it  was  necessary  to  leave  a  continual


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  173


baptism  of  Blood.  This  the  Divine  charity
provided  in  the  Sacrament  of  Holy  Confession,
the  soul  receiving  the  Baptism  of  Blood,  with
contrition  of  heart,  confessing,  when  able,  to  My
ministers,  who  hold  the  keys  of  the  Blood,
sprinkling  It,  in  absolution,  upon  the  face  of
the  soul.  But,  if  the  soul  be  unable  to  con-
fess, contrition  of  heart  is  sufficient  for  this
baptism,  the  hand  of  My  clemency  giving  you
the  fruit  of  this  precious  Blood.  But  if  you
are  able  to  confess,  I  wish  you  to  do  so,  and
if  you  are  able  to,  and  do  not,  you  will  be
deprived  of  the  fruit  of  the  Blood.  It  is  true
that,  in  the  last  extremity,  a  man,  desiring  to
confess  and  not  being  able  to,  will  receive  the
fruit  of  this  baptism,  of  which  I  have  been
speaking.  But  let  no  one  be  so  mad  as  so  to
arrange  his  deeds,  that,  in  the  hope  of  receiv-
ing it,  he  puts  off  confessing  until  the  last
extremity  of  death,  when  he  may  not  be  able
to  do  so.  In  which  case,  it  is  not  at  all  certain
that  I  shall  not  say  to  him,  in  My  Divine  Justice :
'  Thou  didst  not  remember  Me  in  the  time  of  thy  life,
when  thou  couldest,  now  will  I  not  remember  thee  in
thy  death?

"  Thou  seest  then  that  these  Baptisms,  which
you  should  all  receive  until  the  last  moment,  are
continual,  and  though  My  works,  that  is  the
pains  of  the  Cross  were  finite,  the  fruit  of  them
which  you  receive  in  Baptism,  through  Me,  are
infinite.  This  is  in  virtue  of  the  infinite  Divine
nature,  united  with  the  finite  human  nature,


174     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


which  human  nature  endures  pain  in  Me,  the
Word,  clothed  with  your  humanity.  But  be-
cause the  one  nature  is  steeped  in  and  united
with  the  other,  the  Eternal  Deity  drew  to  Him-
self the  pain,  which  I  suffered  with  so  much
fire  and  love.  And  therefore  can  this  operation
be  called  infinite,  not  that  My  pain,  neither  the
actuality  of  the  body  be  infinite,  nor  the  pain  of
the  desire  that  I  had  to  complete  your  redemp-
tion, because  it  was  terminated  and  finished  on
the  Cross,  when  the  Soul  was  separated  from
the  Body ;  but  the  fruit,  which  came  out  of
the  pain  and  desire  for  your  salvation,  is  infinite,
and  therefore  you  receive  it  infinitely.  Had  it
not  been  infinite,  the  whole  human  generation
could  not  have  been  restored  to  grace,  neither
the  past,  the  present,  nor  the  future.  This  I
manifested  in  the  opening  of  My  Side,  where
is  found  the  secret  of  the  Heart,  showing  that
I  loved  more  than  I  could  show,  with  finite
pain.  I  showed  to  thee  that  My  love  was  in-
finite. How  ?  By  the  Baptism  of  Blood,  united
with  the  fire  of  My  charity,  and  by  the  general
baptism,  given  to  Christians,  and  to  whomsoever
will  receive  it,  and  by  the  baptism  of  water,
united  with  the  Blood  and  the  fire,  wherein  the
soul  is  steeped.  And,  in  order  to  show  this,
it  was  necessary  for  the  Blood  to  come  out  of
My  Side.  Now  I  have  shown  thee  (said  My
Truth  to  thee)  what  thou  askedst  of  Me."


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  175


How  worldly  people  render  glory  and  praise  to  GOD,
whether  they  will  or  no.

"  And  so  perfect  is  her  vision  that  she  sees
the  glory  and  praise  of  My  Name,  not  so  much
in  the  angelic  nature  as  in  the  human,  for,  whether
worldly  people  will  or  no,  they  render  glory  and
praise  to  My  Name,  not  that  they  do  so  in  the
way  they  should,  loving  Me  above  everything,
but  that  My  mercy  shines  in  them,  in  that,  in
the  abundance  of  My  charity,  I  give  them  time,
and  do  not  order  the  earth  to  open  and  swallow
them  up  on  account  of  their  sins.  I  even  wait
for  them,  and  command  the  earth  to  give  them
of  her  fruits,  the  sun  to  give  them  light  and
warmth,  and  the  sky  to  move  above  them.  And
in  all  things  created  and  made  for  them,  I  use
My  charity  and  mercy,  withdrawing  neither  on
account  of  their  sins.  I  even  give  equally  to
the  sinner  and  the  righteous  man,  and  often  more
to  the  sinner  than  to  the  righteous  man,  because
the  righteous  man  is  able  to  endure  privation,
and  I  take  from  him  the  goods  of  the  world
that  he  may  the  more  abundantly  enjoy  the  goods
of  heaven.  So  that  in  worldly  men  My  mercy
and  charity  shine,  and  they  render  praise  and
glory  to  My  Name,  even  when  they  persecute
My  servants ;  for  they  prove  in  them  the  virtues
of  patience  and  charity,  causing  them  to  suffer
humbly  and  offer  to  Me  their  persecutions  and
injuries,  thus  turning  them  into  My  praise  and
glory.


176     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


"So  that,  whether  they  will  or  no,  worldly
people  render  to  My  Name  praise  and  glory,
even  when  they  intend  to  do  Me  infamy  and
wrong."

How  even  the  devils  render  glory  and
praise  to  GOD.

"  Sinners,  such  as  those  of  whom  I  have  just
spoken,  are  placed  in  this  life  in  order  to  augment
virtues  in  My  servants,  as  the  devils  are  in  Hell
as  My  justiciars  and  augmenters  of  My  Glory ;
that  is,  My  instruments  of  justice  towards  the
damned,  and  the  augmenters  of  My  Glory  in
My  creatures,  who  are  wayfarers  and  pilgrims
on  their  journey  to  reach  Me,  their  End.  They
augment  in  them  the  virtues  in  diverse  ways,
exercising  them  with  many  temptations  and  vexa-
tions, causing  them  to  injure  one  another  and
take  one  another's  property,  and  not  for  the
motive  of  making  them  receive  injury  or  be
deprived  of  their  property,  but  only  to  deprive
them  of  charity.  But  in  thinking  to  deprive  My
servants,  they  fortify  them,  proving  in  them  the
virtues  of  patience,  fortitude,  and  perseverance.
Thus  they  render  praise  and  glory  to  My  Name,
and  My  Truth  is  fulfilled  in  them,  which  Truth
created  them  for  the  praise  and  glory  of  Me,
Eternal  Father,  and  that  they  might  participate
in  My  beauty.  But,  rebelling  against  Me  in
their  pride,  they  fell  and  lost  their  vision  of  Me,
wherefore  they  rendered  not  to  Me  glory  through


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  177


the  affection  of  love,  and  I,  Eternal  Truth,  have
placed  them  as  instruments  to  exercise  My  ser-
vants in  virtue  in  this  life  and  as  justiciars  to
those  who  go,  for  their  sins,  to  the  pains  of
Purgatory.  So  thou  seest  that  My  Truth  is
fulfilled  in  them,  that  is,  that  they  render  Me
glory,  not  as  citizens  of  life  eternal,  of  which
they  are  deprived  by  their  sins,  but  as  My  justi-
ciars, manifesting  justice  upon  the  damned,  and
upon  those  in  Purgatory."

How  the  soul,  after  she  has  passed  through  this  life,
sees  fully  the  praise  and  glory  of  My  Name  in
everything,  and,  though,  in  her  the  pain  of  desire
is  ended,  the  desire  is  not.

"Thus  in  all  things  created,  in  all  rational
creatures,  and  in  the  devils  is  seen  the  glory  and
praise  of  My  Name.  Who  can  see  it  ?  The
soul  who  is  denuded  of  the  body  and  has  reached
Me,  her  End,  sees  it  clearly,  and,  in  seeing,  knows
the  truth.  Seeing  Me,  the  Eternal  Father,  she
loves,  and  loving,  she  is  satisfied.  Satisfied,  she
knows  the  Truth,  and  her  will  is  stayed  in  My
Will,  bound  and  made  stable,  so  that  in  nothing
can  it  suffer  pain,  because  it  has  that  which  it
desired  to  have,  before  the  soul  saw  Me,  namely,
the  glory  and  praise  of  My  Name.  She  now,
in  truth,  sees  it  completely  in  My  saints,  in  the
blessed  spirits,  and  in  all  creatures  and  things,
even  in  the  devils,  as  I  told  thee.  And  although
she  also  sees  the  injury  done  to  Me,  which  before

M


178     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

caused  her  sorrow,  it  no  longer  now  can  give
her  pain,  but  only  compassion,  because  she  loves
without  pain,  and  prays  to  Me  continually  with
affection  of  love,  that  I  will  have  mercy  on  the
world.  Pain  in  her  is  ended,  but  not  love,  as
the  tortured  desire,  which  My  Word,  the  Son,
had  borne  from  the  beginning  when  I  sent  Him
into  the  world,  terminated  on  the  Cross  in  His
painful  death,  but  His  love — no.  For  had  the
affection  of  My  charity,  which  I  showed  you
by  means  of  Him,  been  terminated  and  ended
then,  you  would  not  be,  because  by  love  you
are  made,  and  had  My  love  been  drawn  back,
that  is,  had  I  not  loved  your  being,  you  could
not  be,  but  My  love  created  you,  and  My  love
possesses  you,  because  I  am  one  thing  with  My
Truth,  and  He,  the  Word  Incarnate  with  Me.
Thou  seest  then,  that  the  saints  and  every  soul
in  Eternal  Life  have  desire  for  the  salvation  of
souls  without  pain,  because  pain  ended  in  their
death,  but  not  so  the  affection  of  love.

"Thus,  as  if  drunk  with  the  Blood  of  the
Immaculate  Lamb,  and  clothed  in  the  love  of
the  neighbour,  they  pass  through  the  Narrow
Gate,  bathed  in  the  Blood  of  Christ  crucified,
and  they  find  themselves  in  Me,  the  Sea  Pacific,
raised  from  imperfection,  far  from  satiety,  and
arrived  at  perfection,  satisfied  by  every  good."


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  179


How  after  Saint  Paul  was  drawn  to  the  glory  of  the
blessed,  he  desired  to  be  loosened  from  the  body,
as  they  do,  who  have  reached  the  aforesaid  third
and  fourth  states.

"  Paul,  then,  had  seen  and  tasted  this  good,
when  I  drew  him  up  into  the  third  heaven,  that
is  into  the  height  of  the  Trinity,  where  he  tasted
and  knew  My  Truth,  receiving  fully  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  learning  the  doctrine  of  My  Truth,
the  Word  Incarnate.  The  soul  of  Paul  was
clothed,  through  feeling  and  union,  in  Me,
Eternal  Father,  like  the  blessed  ones  in  Eternal
Life,  except  that  his  soul  was  not  separated  from
his  body,  except  through  this  feeling  and  union.
But  it  being  pleasing  to  My  Goodness  to  make
of  him  a  vessel  of  election  in  the  abyss  of  Me,
Eternal  Trinity,  I  dispossessed  him  of  Myself,
because  on  Me  can  no  pain  fall,  and  I  wished  him
to  suffer  for  My  name  ;  therefore  I  placed  before
him,  as  an  object  for  the  eyes  of  his  intellect,
Christ  crucified,  clothing  him  with  the  garment
of  His  doctrine,  binding  and  fettering  him  with
the  clemency  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  inflaming
him  with  the  fire  of  charity.  He  became  a
vessel,  disposed  and  reformed  by  My  Goodness,
and,  on  being  struck,  made  no  resistance,  but
said  :  '  My  Lord,  what  dost  Thou  wish  me  to  do  ?
Show  me  that  which  it  is  Thy  pleasure  for  me  to  do,
and  I  will  do  it.1  Which  I  answered  when  I
placed  before  him  Christ  crucified,  clothing  him
with  the  doctrine  of  My  charity.    I  illuminated


i8o     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


him  perfectly  with  the  light  of  true  contrition,
by  which  he  extirpated  his  defects,  and  founded
him  in  My  charity."

How  the  soul  who  finds  herself  in  the  unitive  state
desires  infinitely  to  leave  the  barren  earthly  state
and  unite  herself  to  GOD.

"And  when  I  depart  from  the  soul  in  the
aforesaid  way  that  the  body  may  return  a  little
to  its  corporal  sentiment,  the  soul,  on  account  of
the  union  which  she  had  made  with  Me,  is  im-
patient in  her  life,  being  deprived  of  union  with
Me,  and  the  conversation  of  the  Immortals,  who
render  glory  to  Me,  and  finding  herself,  amid
the  conversation  of  mortals,  and  seeing  them
so  miserably  offending  Me.  This  vision  of  My
offence  is  the  torture  which  such  souls  always
have,  and  which,  with  the  desire  to  see  Me,
renders  their  life  insupportable  to  them.  Never-
theless, as  their  will  is  not  their  own,  but  becomes
one  with  Mine,  they  cannot  desire  other  than
what  I  desire,  and  though  they  desire  to  come
and  be  with  Me,  they  are  contented  to  remain,  if
I  desire  them  to  remain,  with  their  pain,  for  the
greater  praise  and  glory  of  My  Name  and  the
salvation  of  souls.  So  that  in  nothing  are  they
in  discord  with  My  Will;  but  they  run  their
course  with  ecstatic  desire,  clothed  in  Christ
crucified,  and  keeping  by  the  Bridge  of  His
doctrine,  glorying  in  His  shame  and  pains.  In-
asmuch as  they  appear  to  be  suffering  they  are


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  181


rejoicing,  because  the  enduring  of  many  tribula-
tions is  to  them  a  relief  in  the  desire  which  they
have  for  death,  for  oftentimes  the  desire  and  the
will  to  suffer  pain  mitigates  the  pain  caused  them
by  their  desire  to  quit  the  body.  These  not  only
endure  with  patience,  as  I  told  thee  they  did,
who  are  in  the  third  state,  but  they  glory,
through  My  Name,  in  bearing  much  tribulation.
In  bearing  tribulation  they  find  pleasure,  and  not
having  it  they  suffer  pain,  fearing  that  I  reward
not  their  well-doing  or  that  the  sacrifice  of  their
desires  is  not  pleasing  to  Me  ;  but  when  I  permit
to  them  many  tribulations  they  rejoice,  seeing
themselves  clothed  with  the  suffering  and  shame
of  Christ  crucified.  Wherefore  were  it  possible
for  them  to  have  virtue  without  toil  they  would
not  want  it.  They  would  rather  delight  in  the
Cross,  with  Christ,  acquiring  it  with  pain,  than
in  any  other  way  obtain  Eternal  Life.  Why  ?
Because  they  are  inflamed  and  steeped  in  the
Blood,  where  they  find  the  blaze  of  My  charity,
which  charity  is  a  fire  proceeding  from  Me,
ravishing  their  heart  and  mind  and  making  their
sacrifices  acceptable.  Wherefore,  the  eye  of  the
intellect  is  lifted  up  and  gazes  into  My  Deity,
when  the  affection  behind  the  intellect  is
nourished  and  united  with  Me.  This  is  a  sight
which  I  grant  to  the  soul,  infused  with  grace,
who,  in  truth,  loves  and  serves  Me."


E82     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


How  they,  who  are  arrived  at  the  aforesaid  unitive
state,  have  the  eye  of  their  intellect  illuminated
by  supernatural  light  infused  by  grace.  And
how  it  is  better  to  go  for  counsel  for  the  salvation
of  the  soul,  to  a  humble  and  holy  conscience  than
to  a  proud  lettered  man.

"  With  this  light  that  is  given  to  the  eye  of
the  intellect,  Thomas  Aquinas  saw  Me,  wherefore
he  acquired  the  light  of  much  science ;  also
Augustine,  Jerome,  and  the  doctors,  and  my
saints.  They  were  illuminated  by  My  Truth  to
know  and  understand  My  Truth  in  darkness.
By  My  Truth  I  mean  the  Holy  Scripture,  which
seemed  dark  because  it  was  not  understood  ;  not
through  any  defect  of  the  Scriptures,  but  of  them
who  heard  them,  and  did  not  understand  them.
Wherefore  I  sent  this  light  to  illuminate  the
blind  and  coarse  understanding,  uplifting  the
eye  of  the  intellect  to  know  the  Truth.  And
I,  Fire,  Acceptor  of  sacrifices,  ravishing  away
from  them  their  darkness,  give  the  light ;  not  a
natural  light,  but  a  supernatural,  so  that,  though
in  darkness,  they  know  the  Truth.  Wherefore
that,  which  at  first  appeared  to  be  dark,  now
appears  with  the  most  perfect  light,  to  the  gross
or  subtle  mind ;  and  every  one  receives  accord-
ing as  he  is  capable  or  disposed  to  know  Me,
for  I  do  not  despise  dispositions.  So  thou  seest
that  the  eye  of  the  intellect  has  received  super-
natural light,  infused  by  grace,  by  which  the
doctors  and  saints  knew  light  in  darkness,  and  of


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  183

darkness  made  light.  The  intellect  was,  before
the  Scriptures  were  formed,  wherefore,  from  the
intellect  came  science,  because  in  seeing  they
discerned.  It  was  thus  that  the  holy  prophets
and  fathers  understood,  who  prophesied  of  the
coming  and  death  of  My  Son,  and  the  Apostles,
after  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  gave
them  that  supernatural  light.  The  evangelists,
doctors,  professors,  virgins,  and  martyrs  were  all
likewise  illuminated  by  the  aforesaid  perfect
light.  And  every  one  has  had  the  illumination
of  this  light  according  as  he  needed  it  for  his
salvation  or  that  of  others,  or  for  the  exposition
of  the  Scriptures.  The  doctors  of  the  holy
science  had  it,  expounding  the  doctrine  of  My
Truth,  the  preaching  of  the  Apostles,  and  the
Gospels  of  the  Evangelists.  The  martyrs  had
it,  declaring  in  their  blood  the  Most  Holy  Faith,
the  fruit  and  the  treasure  of  the  Blood  of  the
Lamb.  The  virgins  had  it  in  the  affection  of
charity  and  purity.  To  the  obedient  ones  is
declared,  by  it,  the  obedience  of  the  Word,
showing  them  the  perfection  of  obedience,  which
shines  in  my  Truth,  who  for  the  obedience  that
I  imposed  upon  Him,  ran  to  the  opprobrious
death  of  the  Cross.  This  light  is  to  be  seen  in
the  Old  and  New  Testament ;  in  the  Old,  by  it,
were  seen  by  the  eye  of  the  intellect,  and  known
the  prophecies  of  the  holy  prophets.  In  the
New  Testament  of  the  evangelical  life,  how  is
the  Gospel  declared  to  the  faithful  ?  By  this
same  light.    And  because  the  New  Testament


i84     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


proceeded  from  the  same  light,  the  new  law  did
not  break  the  old  law  ;  rather  are  the  two  laws
bound  together,  the  imperfection  of  the  old  law,
founded  in  fear  alone,  being  taken  from  it,  by
the  coming  of  the  Word  of  My  only-begotten
Son,  with  the  law  of  Love,  completing  the  old
law  by  giving  it  love,  and  replacing  the  fear  of
penalty  by  holy  fear.  And,  therefore,  said  My
Truth  to  the  disciples,  to  show  that  He  was  not
a  breaker  of  laws  :  1  /  came  not  to  dissolve  the  lawy
but  to  fulfil  it.'  It  is  almost  as  if  My  Truth
would  say  to  them — The  Law  is  now  imperfect,
but  with  My  Blood  I  will  make  it  perfect,  and
I  will  fill  it  up  with  what  it  lacks,  taking  away
the  fear  of  penalty,  and  founding  it  in  love  and
holy  fear.  How  was  this  declared  to  be  the
Truth  ?  By  this  same  supernatural  light,  which
was  and  is  given  by  grace  to  all,  who  will  receive
it  ?  Every  light  that  comes  from  Holy  Scrip-
ture comes  and  came  from  this  supernatural
light.  Ignorant  and  proud  men  of  science  were
blind  notwithstanding  this  light,  because  their
pride  and  the  cloud  of  self-love  had  covered  up
and  put  out  the  light.  Wherefore  they  under-
stood the  Holy  Scripture  rather  literally  than
with  understanding,  and  taste  only  the  letter  of
it,  still  desiring  many  other  books  ;  and  they  get
not  to  the  marrow  of  it,  because  they  have  de-
prived themselves  of  the  light,  with  which  is
found  and  expounded  the  Scripture  ;  and  they
are  annoyed  and  murmur,  because  they  find  much
in  it  that  appears  to  them  gross  and  idiotic.


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  185


And,  nevertheless,  they  appear  to  be  much  illumi-
nated in  their  knowledge  of  Scripture,  as  if  they
had  studied  it  for  long  ;  and  this  is  not  remark-
able, because  they  have  of  course  the  natural
light  from  whence  proceeds  science.  But  be-
cause they  have  lost  the  supernatural  light,  in-
fused by  grace,  they  neither  see  nor  know  My
Goodness,  nor  the  grace  of  My  servants.  Where-
fore, I  say  to  thee,  that  it  is  much  better  to  go
for  counsel  for  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  to  a
holy  and  upright  conscience,  than  to  a  proud
lettered  man,  learned  in  much  science,  because
such  a  one  can  only  offer  what  he  has  himself,
and,  because  of  his  darkness,  it  may  appear  to
thee,  that,  from  what  he  says,  the  Scriptures
offer  darkness.  The  contrary  wilt  thou  find
with  My  servants,  because  they  offer  the  light
that  is  in  them,  with  hunger  and  desire  for  the
soul's  salvation.  This  I  have  told  thee,  my
sweetest  daughter,  that  thou  mightest  know  the
perfection  of  this  unitive  state,  when  the  eye  of
the  intellect  is  ravished  by  the  fire  of  My  charity,
in  which  charity  it  receives  the  supernatural
light.  With  this  light  the  souls  in  the  unitive
state  love  Me,  because  love  follows  the  intellect,
and  the  more  it  knows  the  more  can  it  love.
Thus  the  one  feeds  the  other,  and,  with  this
light,  they  both  arrive  at  the  Eternal  Vision  of
Me,  where  they  see  and  taste  Me,  in  Truth,  the
soul  being  separated  from  the  body,  as  I  told
thee  when  I  spoke  to  thee  of  the  blissfulness
that  the  soul  received  in  Me.    This  state  is  most


1 86     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


excellent,  when  the  soul,  being  yet  in  the  mortal
body,  tastes  bliss  with  the  immortals,  and  oft-
times  she  arrives  at  so  great  a  union  that  she
scarcely  knows  whether  she  be  in  the  body  or  out
of  it ;  and  tastes  the  earnest-money  of  Eternal
Life,  both  because  she  is  united  with  Me,  and
because  her  will  is  dead  in  Christ,  by  which  death
her  union  was  made  with  Me,  and  in  no  other
way  could  she  perfectly  have  done  so.  There-
fore do  they  taste  life  eternal,  deprived  of  the
hell  of  their  own  will,  which  gives  to  man  the
earnest-money  of  damnation,  if  he  yield  to  it."


How  this  devout  soul  seeks  knowledge  from  God
concerning  the  state  and  fruit  of  tears.

Then  this  soul,  yearning  with  very  great  desire,
and  rising  as  one  intoxicated  both  by  the  union
which  she  had  had  with  God,  and  by  what  she
had  heard  and  tasted  of  the  Supreme  and  Sweet
Truth,  yearned  with  grief  over  the  ignorance  of
creatures,  in  that  they  did  not  know  their  Bene-
factor, or  the  affection  of  the  love  of  God.  And
nevertheless  she  had  joy  from  the  hope  of  the
promise  that  the  Truth  of  God  had  made  to  her,
teaching  her  the  way  she  was  to  direct  her  will
(and  the  other  servants  of  God  as  well  as  herself)
in  order  that  He  should  do  mercy  to  the  world.
And,  lifting  up  the  eye  of  her  intellect  upon  the
sweet  Truth,  to  whom  she  remained  united,  wish-
ing to  know  somewhat  of  the  aforesaid  states  of
the  soul  of  which  God  had  spoken  to  her,  and


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  187


seeing  that  the  soul  passes  through  these  states
with  tears,  she  wished  to  learn  from  the  Truth
concerning  the  different  kinds  of  tears,  and  how
they  came  to  be,  and  whence  they  proceeded,  and
the  fruit  that  resulted  from  weeping.  Wishing
then  to  know  this  from  the  Sweet,  Supreme  and
First  Truth,  as  to  the  manner  of  being  and  reason
of  the  aforesaid  tears,  and  inasmuch  as  the  truth
cannot  be  learnt  from  any  other  than  from  the
Truth  Himself,  and  nothing  can  be  learnt  in  the
Truth  but  what  is  seen  by  the  eye  of  the  intellect,
she  made  her  request  of  the  Truth.  For  it  is
necessary  for  him  who  is  lifted  with  desire  to
learn  the  Truth  with  the  light  of  faith.

Wherefore,  knowing  that  she  had  not  forgotten
the  teaching  which  the  Truth,  that  is,  God,  had
given  her,  that  in  no  other  way  could  she  learn
about  the  different  states  and  fruits  of  tears,  she
rose  out  of  herself,  exceeding  every  limit  of  her
nature  with  the  greatness  of  her  desire.  And,
with  the  light  of  a  lively  faith,  she  opened  the
eye  of  her  intellect  upon  the  Eternal  Truth,  in
whom  she  saw  and  knew  the  Truth,  in  the
matter  of  her  request,  for  God  Himself  mani-
fested it  to  her,  and  condescending  in  His
benignity  to  her  burning  desire,  fulfilled  her
petition.

How  there  are  five  kinds  of  tears.

Then  said  the  Supreme  and  Sweet  Truth  of
God,  "  Oh,  beloved  and  dearest  daughter,  thou


1 88     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


beggest  knowledge  of  the  reasons  and  fruits  of
tears,  and  I  have  not  despised  thy  desire.  Open
well  the  eye  of  thy  intellect  and  I  will  show  thee,
among  the  aforesaid  states  of  the  soul,  of  which
I  have  told  thee,  concerning  the  imperfect  tears
caused  by  fear ;  but  first  rather  of  the  tears  of
wicked  men  of  the  world.  These  are  the  tears
of  damnation.  The  former  are  those  of  fear,
and  belong  to  men  who  abandon  sin  from  fear
of  punishment,  and  weep  for  fear.  The  third
are  the  tears  of  those  who,  having  abandoned
sin,  are  beginning  to  serve  and  taste  Me,  and
weep  for  very  sweetness ;  but  since  their  love
is  imperfect,  so  also  is  their  weeping,  as  I  have
told  thee.  The  fourth  are  the  tears  of  those
who  have  arrived  at  the  perfect  love  of  their
neighbour,  loving  Me  without  any  regard  what-
soever for  themselves.  These  weep  and  their
weeping  is  perfect.  The  fifth  are  joined  to
the  fourth  and  are  tears  of  sweetness  let  fall
with  great  peace,  as  I  will  explain  to  thee.
I  will  tell  thee  also  of  the  tears  of  fire,  with-
out bodily  tears  of  the  eyes,  which  satisfy  those
who  often  would  desire  to  weep  and  cannot.
And  I  wish  thee  to  know  that  all  these  various
graces  may  exist  in  one  soul,  who,  rising  from
fear  and  imperfect  love,  reaches  perfect  love  in
the  unitive  state.  Now  I  will  begin  to  tell  thee
of  these  tears  in  the  following  way."


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  189


Of  the  difference  of  these  tears ,  arising  from  the
explanation  of  the  aforesaid  state  of  the  soul.

"  I  wish  thee  to  know  that  every  tear  proceeds
from  the  heart,  for  there  is  110  member  of  the
body  that  will  satisfy  the  heart  so  much  as  the
eye.  If  the  heart  is  in  pain  the  eye  manifests  it.
And  if  the  pain  be  sensual  the  eye  drops  hearty
tears  which  engender  death,  because  proceeding
from  the  heart,  they  are  caused  by  a  disordinate
love  distinct  from  the  love  of  Me ;  for  such  love,
being  disordinate  and  an  offence  to  Me,  receives
the  meed  of  mortal  pain  and  tears.  It  is  true
that  their  guilt  and  grief  are  more  or  less  heavy,
according  to  the  measure  of  their  disordinate
love.  And  these  form  that  first  class,  who  have
the  tears  of  death,  of  whom  I  have  spoken  to
thee,  and  will  speak  again.  Now,  begin  to
consider  the  tears  which  give  the  commence-
ment of  life,  the  tears,  that  is,  of  those  who,
knowing  their  guilt,  set  to  weeping  for  fear
of  the  penalty  they  have  incurred.

4 'These  are  both  hearty  and  sensual  tears,
because  the  soul,  not  having  yet  arrived  at
perfect  hatred  of  its  guilt  on  account  of  the
offence  thereby  done  to  Me,  abandons  it  with
a  hearty  grief  for  the  penalty  which  follows
the  sin  committed,  while  the  eye  weeps  in
order  to  satisfy  the  grief  of  the  heart.

"  But  the  soul,  exercising  herself  in  virtue,
begins  to  lose  her  fear,  knowing  that  fear  alone
is  not  sufficient  to  give  her  eternal  life,  as  I


190     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


have  already  told  thee  when  speaking  of  the
second  stage  of  the  soul.  And  so  she  pro-
ceeds, with  love,  to  know  herself  and  My  good-
ness in  her,  and  begins  to  take  hope  in  My
mercy  in  which  her  heart  feels  joy.  Sorrow
for  her  grief,  mingled  with  the  joy  of  her  hope
in  My  mercy,  causes  her  eye  to  weep,  which
tears  issue  from  the  very  fountain  of  her  heart.

"  But,  inasmuch  as  she  has  not  yet  arrived  at
great  perfection,  she  often  drops  sensual  tears,
and  if  thou  askest  Me  why,  I  reply  :  Because
the  root  of  self-love  is  not  sensual  love,  for  that
has  already  been  removed,  as  has  been  said,  but
it  is  a  spiritual  love  with  which  the  soul  desires
spiritual  consolations  or  loves  some  creature
spiritually.  (I  have  spoken  to  thee  at  length
regarding  the  imperfections  of  such  souls.)
Wherefore,  when  such  a  soul  is  deprived  of
the  thing  she  loves,  that  is,  internal  or  external
consolation,  the  internal  being  the  consolation
received  from  Me,  the  external  being  that  which
she  had  from  the  creature,  and  when  tempta-
tions and  the  persecutions  of  men  come  on  her,
her  heart  is  full  of  grief.  And,  as  soon  as  the
eye  feels  the  grief  and  suffering  of  the  heart,  she
begins  to  weep  with  a  tender  and  compassionate
sorrow,  pitying  herself  with  the  spiritual  com-
passion of  self-love ;  for  her  self-will  is  not  yet
crushed  and  destroyed  in  everything,  and  in  this
way  she  lets  fall  sensual  tears — tears,  that  is,
of  spiritual  passion.  But,  growing,  and  exer-
cising herself  in  the  light  of  self-knowledge,


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  191


she  conceives  displeasure  at  herself  and  finally
perfect  self-hatred.  From  this  she  draws  true
knowledge  of  My  goodness  with  a  fire  of  love,
and  she  begins  to  unite  herself  to  Me,  and  to
conform  her  will  to  Mine  and  so  to  feel  joy
and  compassion.  Joy  in  herself  through  the
affection  of  love,  and  compassion  for  her  neigh-
bour, as  I  told  thee  in  speaking  of  the  third
stage.  Immediately  her  eye,  wishing  to  satisfy
the  heart,  cries  with  hearty  love  for  Me  and  for
her  neighbour,  grieving  solely  for  My  offence
and  her  neighbour's  loss,  and  not  for  any  penalty
or  loss  due  to  herself ;  for  she  does  not  think
of  herself,  but  only  of  rendering  glory  and  praise
to  My  Name,  and,  in  an  ecstasy  of  desire,  she
joyfully  takes  the  food  prepared  for  her  on  the
table  of  the  Holy  Cross,  thus  conforming  herself
to  the  humble,  patient,  and  immaculate  Lamb,
My  only-begotten  Son,  of  whom  I  made  a  Bridge,
as  I  have  said.  Having  thus  sweetly  travelled  by
that  Bridge,  following  the  doctrine  of  My  sweet
Truth,  enduring  with  true  and  sweet  patience
every  pain  and  trouble  which  I  have  permitted  to
be  inflicted  upon  her  for  her  salvation,  having
manfully  received  them  all,  not  choosing  them
according  to  her  own  tastes,  but  accepting  them
according  to  Mine,  and  not  only,  as  I  said,  endur-
ing them  with  patience,  but  sustaining  them  with
joy,  she  counts  it  glory  to  be  persecuted  for  My
Name's  sake  in  whatever  she  may  have  to  suffer.
Then  the  soul  arrives  at  such  delight  and  tran-
quillity of  mind  that  no  tongue  can  tell  it.


192     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Having  crossed  the  river  by  means  of  the  Eternal
Word,  that  is,  by  the  doctrine  of  My  only-
begotten  Son,  and,  having  fixed  the  eye  of  her
intellect  on  Me,  the  Sweet  Supreme  Truth,  having
seen  the  Truth,  knows  it ;  and  knowing  it,  loves
it.  Drawing  her  affection  after  her  intellect,  she
tastes  My  Eternal  Deity,  and  she  knows  and  sees
the  Divine  nature  united  to  your  humanity.

1 '  Then  she  reposes  in  Me,  the  Sea  Pacific,  and
her  heart  is  united  to  Me  in  love,  as  I  told  thee
when  speaking  of  the  fourth  and  unitive  state.
When  she  thus  feels  Me,  the  Eternal  Deity,  her
eyes  let  fall  tears  of  sweetness,  tears  indeed  of
milk,  nourishing  the  soul  in  true  patience ;  an
odoriferous  ointment  are  these  tears,  shedding
odours  of  great  sweetness.

"Oh,  best  beloved  daughter,  how  glorious  is
that  soul  who  has  indeed  been  able  to  pass  from
the  stormy  ocean  to  Me,  the  Sea  Pacific,  and  in
that  Sea,  which  is  Myself,  the  Supreme  and
Eternal  Deity,  to  fill  the  pitcher  of  her  heart.
And  her  eye,  the  conduit  of  her  heart,  endeavours
to  satisfy  her  heart-pangs,  and  so  sheds  tears.
This  is  the  last  stage  in  which  the  soul  is  blessed
and  sorrowful.

"  Blessed  she  is  through  the  union  which  she
feels  herself  to  have  with  Me,  tasting  the  divine
love ;  sorrowful  through  the  offences  which  she
sees  done  to  My  goodness  and  greatness,  for  she
has  seen  and  tasted  the  bitterness  of  this  in  her
self-knowledge,  by  which  self-knowledge,  to-
gether with  her  knowledge  of  Me,  she  arrived


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  193


at  the  final  stage.  Yet  this  sorrow  is  no  impedi-
ment to  the  unitive  state,  which  produces  tears
of  great  sweetness  through  self-knowledge,  gained
in  love  of  the  neighbour,  in  which  exercise  the
soul  discovers  the  plaint  of  My  divine  mercy,
and  grief  at  the  offences  caused  to  her  neighbour,
weeping  with  those  who  weep,  and  rejoicing  with
those  who  rejoice — that  is,  who  live  in  My  love.
Over  these  the  soul  rejoices,  seeing  glory  and
praise  rendered  Me  by  My  servants,  so  that  the
third  kind  of  grief  does  not  prevent  the  fourth,
that  is,  the  final  grief  belonging  to  the  unitive
state ;  they  rather  give  savour  to  each  other,  for,
had  not  this  last  grief  (in  which  the  soul  finds
such  union  with  Me),  developed  from  the  grief
belonging  to  the  third  state  of  neighbourly  love,
it  would  not  be  perfect.  Therefore  it  is  neces-
sary that  the  one  should  flavour  the  other,  else
the  soul  would  come  to  a  state  of  presumption,
induced  by  the  subtle  breeze  of  love  of  her  own
reputation,  and  would  fall  at  once,  vomited  from
the  heights  to  the  depths.  Therefore  it  is  neces-
sary to  bear  with  others  and  practise  continually
love  to  one's  neighbour,  together  with  true
knowledge  of  oneself.

"  In  this  way  will  she  feel  the  fire  of  My  love
in  herself,  because  love  of  her  neighbour  is  de-
veloped out  of  love  of  Me — that  is,  out  of  that
learning  which  the  soul  obtained  by  knowing
herself  and  My  goodness  in  her.  When,  there-
fore, she  sees  herself  to  be  ineffably  loved  by
Me,  she  loves  every  rational  creature  with  the

N


194     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

self-same  love  with  which  she  sees  herself  to
be  loved.  And,  for  this  reason,  the  soul  that
knows  Me  immediately  expands  to  the  love  of
her  neighbour,  because  she  sees  that  I  love  that
neighbour  ineffably,  and  so,  herself,  loves  the
object  which  she  sees  Me  to  have  loved  still
more.  She  further  knows  that  she  can  be  of
no  use  to  Me  and  can  in  no  way  repay  Me  that
pure  love  with  which  she  feels  herself  to  be  loved
by  Me,  and  therefore  endeavours  to  repay  it
through  the  medium  which  I  have  given  her,
namely,  her  neighbour,  who  is  the  medium
through  which  you  can  all  serve  Me.  For,  as
I  have  said  to  thee,  you  can  perform  all  virtues
by  means  of  your  neighbour,  I  having  given
you  all  creatures,  in  general  and  in  particular,
according  to  the  diverse  graces  each  has  received
from  Me,  to  be  ministered  unto  by  you  ;  you
should  therefore  love  them  with  the  same  pure
love  with  which  I  have  loved  you.  That  pure
love  cannot  be  returned  directly  to  Me,  because
I  have  loved  you  without  being  Myself  loved,
and  without  any  consideration  of  Myself  whatso-
ever, for  I  loved  you  without  being  loved  by
you — before  you  existed ;  it  was,  indeed,  love
that  moved  Me  to  create  you  to  My  own  image
and  similitude.  This  love  you  cannot  repay  to
Me,  but  you  can  pay  it  to  My  rational  creature,
loving  your  neighbour  without  being  loved  by
him  and  without  consideration  of  your  own
advantage,  whether  spiritual  or  temporal,  but
loving   him   solely  for  the    praise  and  glory


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  195

of  My  Name,  because  he  has  been  loved
by  Me.

"  Thus  will  you  fulfil  the  commandment  of
the  law,  to  love  Me  above  everything,  and  your
neighbour  as  yourselves.

"  True  indeed  is  it  that  this  height  cannot  be
reached  without  passing  through  the  second
stage,  namely  the  second  stage  of  union  which
becomes  the  third  (and  final)  stage.  Nor  can  it
be  preserved  when  it  has  been  reached  if  the
soul  abandon  the  affection  from  which  it  has
been  developed,  the  affection  to  which  the  second
class  of  tears  belongs.  It  is  therefore  impossible
to  fulfil  the  law  given  by  Me,  the  Eternal  God,
without  fulfilling  that  of  your  neighbour,  for
these  two  laws  are  the  feet  of  your  affection  by
which  the  precepts  and  counsels  are  observed,
which  were  given  you,  as  I  have  told  thee,  by
My  Truth,  Christ  crucified.  These  two  states
united  nourish  your  soul  in  virtue,  making  her
to  grow  in  the  perfection  of  virtue  and  in  the
unitive  state.  Not  that  the  other  state  is  changed
because  this  further  state  has  been  reached,  for
this  further  state  does  but  increase  the  riches  of
grace  in  new  and  various  gifts  and  admirable
elevations  of  the  mind,  in  the  knowledge  of  the
truth,  as  I  said  to  thee,  which,  though  it  is
mortal,  appears  immortal  because  the  soul's
perception  of  her  own  sensuality  is  mortified
and  her  will  is  dead  through  the  union  which
she  has  attained  with  Me.

"  Oh,  how  sweet  is  the  taste  of  this  union  to


196     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

the  soul,  for,  in  tasting  it,  she  sees  My  secrets !
Wherefore  she  often  receives  the  spirit  of  pro-
phecy, knowing  the  things  of  the  future.  This
is  the  effect  of  My  Goodness,  but  the  humble
soul  should  despise  such  things,  not  indeed  in
so  far  as  they  are  given  her  by  My  love,  but
in  so  far  as  she  desires  them  by  reason  of  her
appetite  for  consolation,  considering  herself  un-
worthy of  peace  and  quiet  of  mind,  in  order  to
nourish  virtue  within  her  soul.  In  such  a  case
let  her  not  remain  in  the  second  stage,  but  return
to  the  valley  of  self-knowledge.  I  give  her  this
light,  My  grace  permitting,  so  that  she  may  ever
grow  in  virtue.  For  the  soul  is  never  so  perfect
in  this  life  that  she  cannot  attain  to  a  higher
perfection  of  love.  My  only-begotten  Son,  your
Captain,  was  the  only  One  who  could  increase
in  no  perfection,  because  He  was  one  thing  with
Me,  and  I  with  Him,  wherefore  His  soul  was
blessed  through  union  with  the  Divine  nature.
But  do  ye,  His  pilgrim-members,  be  ever  ready
to  grow  in  greater  perfection,  not  indeed  to
another  stage,  for  as  I  have  said,  ye  have  now
reached  the  last,  but  to  that  further  grade  of
perfection  in  the  last  stage,  which  may  please
you  by  means  of  My  Grace."


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  197


How  the  four  stages  of  the  soul,  to  which  belong  the
five  aforesaid  states  of  tears,  produce  tears  of
infinite  value  :  and  how  God  wishes  to  be  served
as  the  Infinite,  and  not  as  anything  finite.

"  These  five  states  are  like  five  principal  canals
which  are  filled  with  abundant  tears  of  infinite
value,  all  of  which  give  life  if  they  are  disciplined
in  virtue,  as  I  have  said  to  thee.  Thou  askest
how  their  value  can  be  infinite.  I  do  not  say
that  in  this  life  your  tears  can  become  infinite,
but  I  call  them  infinite,  on  account  of  the  infinite
desire  of  your  soul  from  which  they  proceed.  I
have  already  told  thee  how  tears  come  from  the
heart,  and  how  the  heart  distributes  them  to  the
eye,  having  gathered  them  in  its  own  fiery  desire.
As,  when  green  wood  is  on  the  fire,  the  moisture
it  contains  groans  on  account  of  the  heat,  because
the  wood  is  green,  so  does  the  heart,  made  green
again  by  the  renovation  of  grace  drawn  into  itself
among  its  self-love  which  dries  up  the  soul,  so
that  fiery  desire  and  tears  are  united.  And  inas-
much as  desire  is  never  ended,  it  is  never  satisfied
in  this  life,  but  the  more  the  soul  loves  the  less
she  seems  to  herself  to  love.  Thus  is  holy  desire,
which  is  founded  in  love,  exercised,  and  with  this
desire  the  eye  weeps.  But  when  the  soul  is
separated  from  the  body  and  has  reached  Me,
her  End,  she  does  not  on  that  account  abandon
desire,  so  as  to  no  longer  yearn  for  Me  or  love
her  neighbour,  for  love  has  entered  into  her  like
a  woman  bearing  the  fruits  of  all  other  virtues.


198     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


It  is  true  that  suffering  is  over  and  ended,  as  I
have  said  to  thee,  for  the  soul  that  desires  Me
possesses  Me  in  very  truth,  without  any  fear  of
ever  losing  that  which  she  has  so  long  desired  ;
but,  in  this  way,  hunger  is  kept  up,  because  those
who  are  hungry  are  satisfied,  and  as  soon  as  they
are  satisfied  hunger  again ;  in  this  way  their
satiety  is  without  disgust,  and  their  hunger  with-
out suffering,  for,  in  Me,  no  perfection  is  wanting.

"Thus  is  your  desire  infinite,  otherwise  it
would  be  worth  nothing,  nor  would  any  virtue
of  yours  have  any  life  if  you  served  Me  with
anything  finite.  For  I,  who  am  the  Infinite  God,
wish  to  be  served  by  you  with  infinite  service,
and  the  only  infinite  thing  you  possess  is  the
affection  and  desire  of  your  souls.  In  this  sense
I  said  that  there  were  tears  of  infinite  value,  and
this  is  true  as  regards  their  mode,  of  which  I
have  spoken,  namely,  of  the  infinite  desire  which
is  united  to  the  tears.  When  the  soul  leaves  the
body  the  tears  remain  behind,  but  the  affection
of  love  has  drawn  to  itself  the  fruit  of  the  tears,
and  consumed  it,  as  happens  in  the  case  of  the
water  in  your  furnace.  The  water  has  not  really
been  taken  out  of  the  furnace,  but  the  heat  of
the  fire  has  consumed  it  and  drawn  it  into  itself.
Thus  the  soul,  having  arrived  at  tasting  the  fire
of  My  divine  charity,  and  having  passed  from
this  life  in  a  state  of  love  towards  Me  and  her
neighbour,  having  further  possessed  that  unitive
love  which  caused  her  tears  to  fall,  does  not
cease  to  offer  Me  her  blessed  desires,  tearful


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  199


indeed,  though  without  pain  or  physical  weep-
ing, for  physical  tears  have  evaporated  in  the
furnace,  becoming  tears  of  fire  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  Thou  seest  then  how  tears  are  infinite,
how,  as  regards  the  tears  shed  in  this  life  only,
no  tongue  can  tell  what  different  sorrows  may
cause  them.  I  have  now  told  thee  the  difference
between  four  of  these  states  of  tears."

Of  the  fruit  of  worldly  men's  tears.

"  It  remains  for  Me  to  tell  thee  of  the  fruit
produced  by  tears  shed  with  desire,  and  received
into  the  soul.  But  first  will  I  speak  to  thee  of
that  first  class  of  men  whom  I  mentioned  at  the
beginning  of  this  My  discourse  ;  those,  that  is,
who  live  miserably  in  the  world,  making  a  god
of  created  things  and  of  their  own  sensuality,
from  which  comes  damage  to  their  body  and
soul.  I  said  to  thee  that  every  tear  proceeded
from  the  heart,  and  this  is  the  truth,  for  the
heart  grieves  in  proportion  to  the  love  it  feels.
So  worldly  men  weep  when  their  heart  feels  pain,
that  is,  when  they  are  deprived  of  something
which  they  loved.

"  But  many  and  diverse  are  their  complainings.
Dost  thou  know  how  many  ?  There  are  as  many
as  there  exist  different  loves.  And  inasmuch  as
the  root  of  self-love  is  corrupt,  everything  that
grows  from  it  is  corrupt  also.  Self-love  is  a  tree
on  which  grow  nothing  but  fruits  of  death,  putrid
flowers,  stained  leaves,  branches  bowed  down,  and


2oo     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


struck  by  various  winds.  This  is  the  tree  of  the
soul.  For  ye  are  all  trees  of  love,  and  without
love  ye  cannot  live,  for  ye  have  been  made  by
Me  for  love.  The  soul  who  lives  virtuously,
places  the  root  of  her  tree  in  the  valley  of  true
humility ;  but  those  who  live  thus  miserably  are
planted  on  the  mountain  of  pride,  whence  it
follows  that  since  the  root  of  the  tree  is  badly
planted,  the  tree  can  bear  no  fruits  of  life  but
only  of  death.  Their  fruits  are  their  actions,
which  are  all  poisoned  by  many  and  diverse  kinds
of  sin,  and  if  they  should  produce  some  good
fruit  among  their  actions,  even  it  will  be  spoilt
by  the  foulness  of  its  root,  for  no  good  actions
done  by  a  soul  in  mortal  sin  are  of  value  for
eternal  life,  for  they  are  not  done  in  grace.  Let
not,  however,  such  a  soul  abandon  on  this
account  its  good  works,  for  every  good  deed
is  rewarded,  and  every  evil  deed  punished.  A
good  action  performed  out  of  a  state  of  grace
is  not  sufficient  to  merit  eternal  life,  as  has  been
said,  but  My  Justice,  My  Divine  Goodness,
grants  an  incomplete  reward,  imperfect  as  the
action  which  obtains  it.  Often  such  a  man  is
rewarded  in  temporal  matters  ;  sometimes  I  give
him  more  time  in  which  to  repent,  as  I  have
already  said  to  thee  in  another  place.  This  also
will  I  sometimes  do,  I  grant  him  the  life  of
grace  by  means  of  My  servants  who  are  pleasing
and  acceptable  to  Me.  I  acted  in  this  way  with
My  glorious  apostle  Paul,  who  abandoned  his
infidelity,  and  the  persecutions  he  directed  against


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  201


the  Christians,  at  the  .prayer  of  St.  Stephen.  ^See
truly,  therefore,  that,  in  whatever  state  a^  man
may  be,  he  should  never  stop  doing  good.,  roil
"  I  said  to  thee  that  the  flowers  of  this  tree
were  putrid,  and  so  in  truth  they  are.  Its  flowers
are  the  stinking  thoughts  of  the  heart,  displeasing
to  Me,  and  full  of  hatred  and  unkindness  towards
their  neighbour.  So  if  a  man  be  a  thief,  he  robs
Me  of  honour,  and  takes  it  himself.  This  flower
stinks  less  than  that  of  false  judgment,  which  is
of  two  kinds.  The  first  with  regard  to  Me,  by
which  men  judge  My  secret  judgments,  gauging
falsely  all  My  mysteries,  that  is,  judging  that
which  I  did  in  love,  to  have  been  done  in  hatred  ;
that  which  I  did  in  truth  to  have  been  done  in
falsehood  ;  that  which  I  give  them  for  life,  to
have  been  given  them  for  death.  They  condemn
and  judge  everything  according  to  their  weak
intellect ;  for  they  have  blinded  the  eye  of  their
intellect  with  sensual  self-love,  and  hidden  the
pupil  of  the  most  holy  Faith,  which  they  will  not
allow  to  see  or  know  the  Truth.  The  second
kind  of  false  judgment  is  directed  against  a  man's
neighbour,  from  which  often  come  many  evils,
because  the  wretched  man  wishes  to  set  himself
up  as  the  judge  of  the  affections  and  heart  of
other  rational  creatures,  when  he  does  not  yet
know  himself.  And,  for  an  action  which  he  may
see,  or  for  a  word  he  may  hear,  he  will  judge  the
affection  of  the  heart.  My  servants  always  judge
well,  because  they  are  founded  on  Me,  the  Supreme
Good ;  but  such  as  these  always  judge  badly,  for


202     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


they  are  founded  on  evil.  Such  critics  as  these
cause  hatreds,  murders,  unhappinesses  of  all  kinds
to  their  neighbours,  and  remove  themselves  far
away  from  the  love  of  My  servants'  virtue.

"  Truly  these  fruits  follow  the  leaves,  which
are  the  words  which  issue  from  their  mouth  in
insult  to  Me  and  the  Blood  of  My  only-begotten
Son,  and  in  hatred  to  their  neighbours.  And
they  think  of  nothing  else  but  cursing  and  con-
demning My  works,  and  blaspheming  and  saying
evil  of  every  rational  creature,  according  as  their
judgment  may  suggest  to  them.  The  unfor-
tunate creatures  do  not  remember  that  the  tongue
is  made  only  to  give  honour  to  Me,  and  to  con-
fess sins,  and  to  be  used  in  love  of  virtue,  and  for
the  salvation  of  the  neighbour.  These  are  the
stained  leaves  of  that  most  miserable  fault,  be-
cause the  heart  from  which  they  proceeded  was
not  clean,  but  all  spotted  with  duplicity  and
misery.  How  much  danger,  apart  from  the
spiritual  privation  of  grace  to  the  soul,  of  tem-
poral loss  may  not  occur !  For  ye  have  all
heard  and  seen  how,  through  words  alone,  have
come  revolutions  of  states,  and  destructions  of
cities,  and  many  homicides  and  other  evils,  a
word  having  entered  the  heart  of  the  listener,
and  having  passed  through  a  space  not  large
enough  for  a  knife.

"  I  say  that  this  tree  has  seven  branches  droop-
ing to  the  earth,  on  which  grow  the  flowers  and
leaves  in  the  way  I  have  told  you.  These
branches  are  the  seven  mortal  sins  which  are


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  203


full  of  many  and  diverse  wickednesses,  contained
in  the  roots  and  trunk  of  self-love  and  of  pride,
which  first  made  both  branches  and  flowers  of
many  thoughts,  the  leaves  of  words,  and  the
fruits  of  wicked  deeds.  They  stand  drooping
to  the  earth  because  the  branches  of  mortal  sin
can  turn  no  other  way  than  to  the  earth,  the
fragile  disordinate  substance  of  the  world.  Do
not  marvel,  they  can  turn  no  way  but  that  in
which  they  can  be  fed  by  the  earth  ;  for  their
hunger  is  insatiable,  and  the  earth  is  unable  to
satisfy  them.  They  are  insatiable  and  unbear-
able to  themselves,  and  it  is  conformable  to  their
state  that  they  should  always  be  unquiet,  longing
and  desiring  that  thing  which  they  have  to  satiety.
This  is  the  reason  why  such  satiety  cannot  con-
tent them,  because  they  (who  are  infinite  in  their
being)  are  always  desiring  something  finite ;  be-
cause their  being  will  never  end,  though  their  life
to  grace  ends  when  they  commit  mortal  sin.

"  Man  is  placed  above  all  creatures,  and  not
beneath  them,  and  he  cannot  be  satisfied  or  con-
tent except  in  something  greater  than  himself.
Greater  than  himself  there  is  nothing  but  Myself,
the  Eternal  God.  Therefore  I  alone  can  satisfy
him,  and,  because  he  is  deprived  of  this  satisfaction
by  his  guilt,  he  remains  in  continual  torment
and  pain.  Weeping  follows  pain,  and  when  he
begins  to  weep  the  wind  strikes  the  tree  of
self-love,  which  he  has  made  the  principle  of  all
his  being."


2o4     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


How  this  devout  soul,  thanking  God  for  His  explana-
tion of  the  above-mentioned  states  of  tears,  makes
three  petitions.

Then  this  soul,  eager  with  the  greatness  of  her
desire,  through  the  sweetness  of  the  explanation
and  satisfaction  which  she  had  received  from  the
Truth,  concerning  the  state  of  tears,  said  as  one
enamoured — "  Thanks,  thanks  be  to  Thee,  Su-
preme and  Eternal  Father,  Satisfier  of  holy  desires,
and  Lover  of  our  Salvation,  who,  through  Thy
Love,  didst  give  us  Love  Himself,  in  the  time
of  our  warfare  with  Thee,  in  the  person  of  Thy
only-begotten  Son.  By  this  abyss  of  Thy  fiery
Love,  I  beg  of  Thee  grace  and  mercy  that  I  may
come  to  Thee  truly  in  the  light,  and  not  flee  far
in  darkness  away  from  Thy  doctrine,  of  which
Thou  hast  clearly  demonstrated  to  me  the  truth,
so  that,  by  the  light  thereof,  I  perceive  two  other
points,  concerning  which  I  fear  that  they  are,  or
may  become,  stumbling-blocks  to  me.  I  beg,
Eternal  Father,  that,  before  I  leave  the  subject
of  these  states  of  tears,  Thou  wouldst  explain
these  points  also  to  me.  The  first  is — when
a  person  desirous  of  serving  Thee,  comes  to  me,
or  to  some  other  servant  of  Thine  to  ask  for
counsel,  how  should  I  teach  him  ?  I  know,
Sweet  and  Eternal  God,  that  Thou  didst  reply
above  to  this  question — '  I  am  He  who  takes
delight  in  few  words  and  many  deeds.'  Never-
theless, if  it  please  Thy  Goodness  to  grant  me
a  few  more  words  on  the  subject,  it  will  cause


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  205


me  the  greatest  pleasure.  And  also,  if  on  some
occasion,  when  I  am  praying  for  Thy  creatures,
and  in  particular  for  Thy  servants,  and  I  seem
to  see  the  subjects  of  my  prayer,  in  one  I  find
(in  the  course  of  my  prayer)  a  well-disposed  mind,
a  soul  rejoicing  in  Thee ;  and  in  another,  as  it
might  seem  to  me,  a  mind  full  of  darkness ;
have  I  the  right,  O  Eternal  Father,  to  judge  the
one  soul  to  be  in  light,  and  the  other  in  dark-
ness ?  Or,  supposing  I  should  see  that  the  one
lives  in  great  penance,  and  the  other  does  not,
should  I  be  right  to  judge  that  he  who  does  the
greater  penance  has  the  higher  perfection  ?  I
pray  Thee,  so  that  I  may  not  be  deceived  through
my  limited  vision,  that  Thou  wouldst  declare  to
me  in  detail,  what  Thou  hast  already  said  in
general  on  this  matter.  The  second  request  I
have  to  make  is,  that  Thou  wilt  explain  further
to  me  about  the  sign  which  Thou  didst  say  the
soul  received  on  being  visited  by  Thee — the  sign
which  revealed  Thy  Presence.  If  I  remember
well,  oh,  Eternal  Truth,  Thou  didst  say  that
the  soul  remained  in  joy  and  courageous  virtue.
I  would  fain  know  whether  this  joy  can  consist
with  the  delusion  of  the  passion  of  spiritual  self-
love  ;  for  if  it  were  so,  I  would  humbly  confine
myself  to  the  sign  of  virtue.  These  are  the
things  which  I  beg  Thee  to  tell  me,  so  that  I
may  serve  Thee  and  my  neighbour  in  truth,  and
not  fall  into  false  judgment  concerning  Thy
creatures  and  servants.  For  it  seems  to  me
that  the   habit  of  judging  keeps  the  soul  far


2o6      ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


from  Thee,  so  I  do  not  wish  to  fall  into  this
snare."

How  the  light  of  reason  is  necessary  to  every  soul  that
wishes  to  serve  God  in  truth  ;  and  first  of  the
light  of  reason  in  general.

Then  the  Eternal  God,  delighting  in  the
thirst  and  hunger  of  that  soul,  and  in  the  purity
of  her  heart,  and  the  desire  with  which  she  longed
to  serve  Him,  turned  the  eye  of  His  benignity
and  mercy  upon  her,  saying — "  Oh,  best-beloved,
dearest  and  sweetest  daughter,  my  spouse  !  rise
out  of  thyself,  and  open  the  eye  of  thy  intellect
to  see  Me,  the  Infinite  Goodness,  and  the  in-
effable love  which  I  have  towards  thee  and  My
other  servants.  And  open  the  ear  of  the  desire
which  thou  feelest  towards  Me,  and  remember,
that  if  thou  dost  not  see,  thou  canst  not  hear,
that  is  to  say,  that  the  soul  that  does  not  see  into
My  Truth  with  the  eye  of  her  intellect,  cannot
hear  or  know  My  Truth,  wherefore  in  order  that
thou  mayest  the  better  know  it,  rise  above  the
feelings  of  thy  senses.

"  And  I,  who  take  delight  in  thy  request,  will
satisfy  thy  demand.  Not  that  thou  canst  in-
crease My  delight,  for  I  am  the  cause  of  thee  and
of  thy  increase ;  not  those  of  Mine.  Yet  the
very  pleasure  that  I  take  in  the  work  of  My  own
hands  causes  Me  delight."

Then  that  soul  obeyed  and  rose  out  of  herself,
in  order  to  learn  the  true  solution  of  her  diffi-


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  207


culty.  And  the  Eternal  God  said  to  her,  "  In
order  that  thou  mayest  the  better  understand
what  I  shall  say  to  thee,  I  shall  revert  to  the
beginning  of  thy  request  concerning  the  three
lights  which  issue  from  Me,  the  True  Light.
The  first  is  a  general  light  dwelling  in  those  who
live  in  ordinary  charity.  (I  shall  repeat  to  thee
here  many  things  concerning  these  lights,  which
I  have  already  told  thee,  in  spite  of  My  having
done  so,  in  order  that  thy  creeping  intelligence
may  better  understand  that  which  thou  wishest
to  know.)  The  other  two  lights  dwell  in  those
who,  having  abandoned  the  world,  desire  perfec-
tion. Besides  this  I  will  explain  to  thee  thy
request,  telling  thee  in  great  detail  that  which
I  have  already  pointed  out  to  thee  in  general.
Thou  knowest,  as  I  have  told  thee,  that,  without
the  light,  no  one  can  walk  in  the  truth,  that  is,
without  the  light  of  reason,  which  light  of  reason
you  draw  from  Me  the  True  Light,  by  means  of
the  eye  of  thy  intellect  and  the  light  of  faith
which  I  have  given  you  in  holy  baptism,  though
you  may  have  lost  it  by  your  own  defects.  For,
in  baptism,  and  through  the  mediation  of  the
Blood  of  My  only-begotten  Son,  you  have  re-
ceived the  form  of  faith ;  which  faith  you
exercise  in  virtue  by  the  light  of  reason,  which
gives  you  life  and  causes  you  to  walk  in  the
path  of  truth,  and,  by  its  means,  to  arrive  at
Me,  the  True  Light,  for,  without  it,  you  would
plunge  into  darkness.

"  It  is  necessary  for  you  to  have  two  lights


2o8      ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


derived  from  this  primary  light,  and  to  these  two
I  will  also  add  a  third.  The  first  lightens  you
all  to  know  the  transitory  nature  of  the  things
of  the  world,  all  of  which  pass  like  the  wind.
But  this  you  cannot  know  thoroughly,  unless  you
first  recognise  your  own  fragility,  how  strong  is
your  inclination,  through  the  law  of  perversity
with  which  your  members  are  bound,  to  rebel
against  Me,  your  Creator  (not  that  by  this  law
any  man  can  be  constrained  to  commit  any,  even
the  smallest  sin,  against  his  will,  but  that  this
law  of  perversity  fights  lustily  against  the  spirit).
I  did  not  impose  this  law  upon  you,  in  order  that
My  rational  creature  should  be  conquered  by  it,
but  in  order  that  he  should  prove  and  increase
the  virtue  of  his  soul,  because  virtue  cannot  be
proved,  except  by  its  contrary.  Sensuality  is
contrary  to  the  spirit,  and  yet,  by  means  of
sensuality,  the  soul  is  able  to  prove  the  love
which  she  has  for  Me,  her  Creator.  How  does
she  prove  it  ?  When,  with  anger  and  displeasure,
she  rises  against  herself.  This  law  has  also  been
imposed  in  order  to  preserve  the  soul  in  true
humility.  Wherefore  thou  seest  that,  while  I
created  the  soul  to  Mine  own  image  and  simili-
tude, placing  her  in  such  dignity  and  beauty,  I
caused  her  to  be  accompanied  by  the  vilest  of
all  things,  imposing  on  her  the  law  of  perversity,
imprisoning  her  in  a  body,  formed  of  the  vilest
substance  of  the  earth,  so  that,  seeing  in  what  her
true  beauty  consisted,  she  should  not  raise  her
head  in  pride  against  Me.     Wherefore,  to  one


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  209


who  possesses  this  light,  the  fragility  of  his  body
is  a  cause  of  humiliation  to  the  soul,  and  is
in  no  way  matter  for  pride,  but  rather  for  true
and  perfect  humility.  So  that  this  law  does  not
constrain  you  to  any  sin  by  its  strivings,  but
supplies  a  reason  to  make  you  know  yourselves
and  the  instability  of  the  world.  This  should
be  seen  by  the  eye  of  the  intellect,  with  light  of
the  holy  faith,  of  which  I  said  to  thee  that  it  was
the  pupil  of  the  eye.  This  is  that  light  which
is  necessary  in  general  to  every  rational  creature,
whatever  may  be  his  condition,  who  wishes  to
participate  in  the  life  of  grace,  in  the  fruit  of
the  Blood  of  the  immaculate  Lamb.  This  is  the
ordinary  light,  that  is,  the  light  which  all  persons
must  possess,  as  has  been  said,  for,  without  it,  the
soul  would  be  in  a  state  of  damnation.  And,  for
this  reason,  because  the  soul,  being  without  the
light,  is  not  in  a  state  of  grace,  inasmuch  as,  not
having  the  light,  she  does  not  know  the  evil  of
her  sin  or  its  cause,  and  therefore  cannot  avoid
or  hate  it.

"  And  similarly  if  the  soul  know  not  good,  and
the  reason  of  good,  that  is  to  say  virtue,  she
cannot  love  or  desire  either  Me,  who  am  the
Essential  Good,  or  virtue,  which  I  have  given
you  as  an  instrument  and  means  for  you  to  receive
My  grace,  and  Myself  the  True  Good.  See  then
how  necessary  is  this  light,  for  your  sins  consist
in  nothing  else  than  in  loving  that  which  I  hate,
and  in  hating  that  which  I  love.  I  love  virtue
and  hate  vice ;  he  who  loves  vice  and  hates  virtue

o


2io     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


offends  Me,  and  is  deprived  of  My  grace.  Such
a  one  walks  as  if  blind,  -for  he  knows  not  the
cause  of  vice,  that  is,  his  sensual  self-love,  nor
does  he  hate  himself  on  account  of  it ;  he  is
ignorant  of  vice  and  of  the  evil  which  follows  it :
he  is  ignorant  of  virtue  and  of  Me,  who  am  the
cause  of  his  obtaining  life-giving  virtue  ;  he  is
ignorant  of  his  own  dignity,  which  he  should
maintain  by  advancing  to  grace,  by  means  of
virtue.  See,  therefore,  how  his  ignorance  is  the
cause  of  all  his  evil,  and  how  thou  also  needest
this  light,  as  has  been  said."

Of  those  who  have  placed  their  desire  rather  in  the
mortification  of  the  body  than  in  the  destruction
of  their  own  will ;  and  of  the  second -light,  more
perfect  than  the  former  general  one.

"  When  the  soul  has  arrived  at  the  attainment
of  the  general  light,  of  which  I  have  spoken,  she
should  not  remain  contented,  because,  as  long  as
you  are  pilgrims  in  this  life,  you  are  capable  of
growth,  and  he  who  does  not  go  forward,  by  that
very  fact,  is  turning  back.  She  should  either
grow  in  the  general  light,  which  she  has  acquired
through  My  Grace,  or  anxiously  strive  to  attain
to  the  second  and  perfect  light,  leaving  the  im-
perfect and  reaching  the  perfect.  For,  if  the  soul
truly  have  light,  she  will  wish  to  arrive  at  per-
fection. In  this  second  perfect  light  are  to  be
found  two  kinds  of  perfection ;  for  they  may  be
called  perfect  who  have  abandoned  the  general


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  211


way  of  living  of  the  world.  One  perfection  is
that  of  those  who  give  themselves  up  wholly
to  the  castigation  of  the  body,  doing  great  and
severe  penance.  These,  in  order  that  their
sensuality  may  not  rebel  against  their  reason,
have  placed  their  desire  rather  in  the  mortification
of  the  body  than  in  the  destruction  of  their  self-
will,  as  I  have  explained  to  thee  in  another  place.
These  feed  their  souls  at  the  table  of  penance,
and  are  good  and  perfect,  if  their  penance  be
illuminated  by  discretion,  and  founded  on  Me,
if,  that  is  to  say,  they  act  with  true  knowledge
of  themselves  and  of  Me,  with  great  humility,  and
wholly  conformed  to  the  judgment  of  My  Will,
and  not  to  that  of  the  will  of  man.  But,  if  they
were  not  thus  clothed  with  My  Will,  in  true
humility,  they  would  often  offend  against  their
own  perfection,  esteeming  themselves  the  judges
of  those  who  do  not  walk  in  the  same  path.
Knowest  thou  why  this  would  happen  to  them  ?
Because  they  have  placed  all  their  labour  and
desire  in  the  mortification  of  the  body,  rather
than  in  the  destruction  of  their  own  will.  Such
as  these  wish  always  to  choose  their  own  times,
and  places,  and  consolations,  after  their  own
fashion,  and  also  the  persecutions  of  the  world
and  of  the  Devil,  as  I  have  narrated  to  thee  in
speaking  of  the  second  state  of  perfection.

"  They  say,  cheating  themselves  with  the
delusion  of  their  own  self-will,  which  I  have
already  called  their  spiritual  self-will,  '  I  wish
to  have  that  consolation,  and  not  these  battles,


2i2      ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


or  these  temptations  of  the  Devil,  not,  indeed,
for  my  own  pleasure,  but  in  order  to  please  God
the  more,  and  in  order  to  retain  Him  the  more
in  my  soul  through  grace  ;  because  it  seems  to
me  that  I  should  possess  Him  more,  and  serve
Him  better  in  that  way  than  in  this/  And  this
is  the  way  the  soul  often  falls  into  trouble,  and
becomes  tedious  and  insupportable  to  herself ;
thus  injuring  her  own  perfection  ;  yet  she  does
not  perceive  it,  nor  that,  within  her,  lurks  the
stench  of  pride,  and  there  she  lies.  Now,  if  the
soul  were  not  in  this  condition,  but  were  truly
humble  and  not  presumptuous,  she  would  be
illuminated  to  see  that  I,  the  Primary  and  Sweet
Truth,  grant  condition,  and  time,  and  place,  and
consolations,  and  tribulations  as  they  may  be
needed  for  your  salvation,  and  to  complete  the
perfection  to  which  I  have  elected  the  soul.  And
she  would  see  that  I  give  everything  through
love,  and  that  therefore,  with  love  and  reverence,
should  she  receive  everything,  which  is  what  the
souls  in  the  second  state  do,  and,  by  doing  so,
arrive  at  the  third  state.  Of  whom  I  will  now
speak  to  thee,  explaining  to  thee  the  nature  of
these  two  states  which  stand  in  the  most  perfect

nght."


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  213


Of  the  third  and  most  perfect  state ',  and  of  reason,  and
of  the  works  done  by  the  soul  who  has  arrived
at  this  light.  And  of  a  beautiful  vision  which
this  devout  soul  once  received,  in  which  the
method  of  arriving  at  perfect  purity  is  fully
treated,  and  the  means  to  avoid  judging  our
neighbour  is  spoken  of.

M  Those  who  belong  to  the  third  state,  which
immediately  follows  the  last,  having  arrived  at
this  glorious  light,  are  perfect  in  every  condition
in  which  they  may  be,  and  receive  every  event
which  I  permit  to  happen  to  them  with  due
reverence,  as  I  have  mentioned  to  thee  when
speaking  of  the  third  and  unitive  state  of  the
soul.  These  deem  themselves  worthy  of  the
troubles  and  stumbling-blocks  caused  them  by
the  world,  and  of  the  privation  of  their  own
consolation,  and  indeed  of  whatever  circumstance
happens  to  them.  And  inasmuch  as  they  deem
themselves  worthy  of  trouble,  so  also  do  they
deem  themselves  unworthy  of  the  fruit  which
they  receive  after  their  trouble.  They  have
known  and  tasted  in  the  light  My  Eternal  Will,
which  wishes  naught  else  but  your  good,  and
gives  and  permits  these  troubles  in  order  that
you  should  be  sanctified  in  Me.  Wherefore  the
soul  having  known  My  Will,  clothes  herself  with
it,  and  fixes  her  attention  on  nothing  else  except
seeing  in  what  way  she  can  preserve  and  increase
her  perfection  to  the  glory  and  praise  of  My
Name,  opening  the  eye  of  her  intellect  and


2i4     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


fixing  it  in  the  light  of  faith  upon  Christ  cruci-
fied, My  only-begotten  Son,  loving  and  follow-
ing His  doctrine,  which  is  the  rule  of  the  road
for  perfect  and  imperfect  alike.  And  see,  how
My  Truth,  the  Lamb,  who  became  enamoured
of  her  when  He  saw  her,  gives  the  soul  the
doctrine  of  perfection.  She  knows  what  this
perfection  is,  having  seen  it  practised  by  the
sweet  and  amorous  Word,  My  only-begotten
Son,  who  was  fed  at  the  table  of  holy  desire,
seeking  the  honour  of  Me,  the  Eternal  Father,
and  your  salvation.  And,  inflamed  with  this
desire,  He  ran,  with  great  eagerness,  to  the
shameful  death  of  the  Cross,  and  accomplished
the  obedience  which  was  imposed  on  Him  by
Me,  His  Father,  not  shunning  labours  or  insults
or  withdrawing  on  account  of  your  ingratitude
or  ignorance  of  so  great  a  benefit,  or  because  of
the  persecutions  of  the  Jews,  or  on  account  of
the  insults,  derision,  grumbling,  and  shouting  of
the  people.  But  all  this  He  passed  through  like
the  true  Captain  and  Knight  that  He  was,  whom
I  had  placed  on  the  battle-field  to  deliver  you
from  the  hands  of  the  Devil,  so  that  you  might
be  free,  and  drawn  out  of  the  most  terrible
slavery  in  which  you  could  ever  be,  and  also  to
teach  you  His  road,  His  doctrine,  and  His  rule,
so  that  you  might  open  the  Door  of  Me,  Eternal
Life,  with  the  key  of  His  precious  Blood,  shed
with  such  fire  of  love,  with  such  hatred  of  your
sins.  It  was  as  if  the  sweet  and  amorous  Word,
My  Son,  should  have  said  to  you :  '  Behold,  I


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  215


have  made  the  road,  and  opened  the  door  with
My  Blood/  Do  not  you  then  be  negligent  to
follow,  laying  yourselves  down  to  rest  in  self-
love  and  ignorance  of  the  road,  presuming  to
choose  to  serve  Me  in  your  own  way,  instead  of
in  the  way  which  I  have  made  straight  for  you
by  means  of  My  Truth,  the  Incarnate  Word,
and  built  up  with  His  Blood.  Rise  up  then,
promptly,  and  follow  Him,  for  no  one  can  reach
Me,  the  Father,  if  not  by  Him ;  He  is  the  Way
and  the  Door  by  which  you  must  enter  into  Me,
the  Sea  Pacific.

"When  therefore  the  soul  has  arrived  at
seeing,  knowing,  and  tasting,  in  its  full  sweet-
ness, this  light,  she  runs,  as  one  enamoured  and
inflamed  with  love,  to  the  table  of  holy  desire  ;
she  does  not  see  herself  in  herself,  seeking  her
own  consolation  either  spiritual  or  temporal,  but,
like  one  who  has  placed  his  all  in  this  light  and
knowledge,  and  has  destroyed  his  own  will,  she
shuns  no  labour  from  whatever  source  it  comes,
but  rather  enduring  the  troubles,  the  insults,  the
temptations  of  the  Devil,  and  the  murmurings  of
men,  eats  at  the  table  of  the  most  holy  Cross,  the
food  of  the  honour  of  Me,  the  Eternal  God,  and
of  the  salvation  of  souls ;  seeking  no  reward,
either  from  Me  or  from  creatures,  because  she  is
stripped  of  mercenary  love,  that  is  of  love  for
Me  based  on  interested  motives,  and  is  clothed
in  perfect  light,  loving  Me  in  perfect  purity,
with  no  other  regard  than  for  the  praise  and
glory  of  My  Name,  serving  neither  Me  for  her


216     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


own  delight,  nor  her  neighbour  for  her  own
profit,  but  purely  through  love  alone.  Such  as
these  have  lost  themselves,  and  have  stripped
themselves  of  the  Old  Man,  that  is  of  their  own
sensuality,  and,  having  clothed  themselves  with
the  New  Man,  the  sweet  Christ  Jesus,  My
Truth,  follow  Him  manfully.  These  are  they
who  sit  at  the  table  of  holy  desire,  having  been
more  anxious  to  slay  their  own  will  than  to  slay
and  mortify  their  own  body.  They  have  indeed
mortified  their  body,  though  not  as  an  end  in
itself,  but  as  a  means  which  helps  them  to  stay
their  own  will,  as  I  said  to  thee  when  explaining
that  sentence  that  I  wished  few  words  and  many
deeds,  and  so  ought  you  to  do.  Their  principal
desire  should  be  to  slay  their  own  will,  so  that  it
may  not  seek  or  wish  anything  else  than  to  follow
My  sweet  Truth,  Christ  crucified,  seeking  the
honour  and  glory  of  My  Name  and  the  salvation
of  souls.  Those  who  are  in  this  sweet  light  know
it,  and  remain  constantly  in  peace  and  quiet,  and
no  one  scandalises  them,  for  they  have  cut  away
that  thing  by  which  stumbling-blocks  are  caused,
namely  their  own  will.  And  all  the  persecutions,
with  which  the  world  and  the  Devil  can  attack
them,  slide  under  their  feet,  standing,  as  they  do,
in  the  waters  of  many  tribulations  and  tempta-
tions, and  do  not  hurt  them,  for  they  remain
attached  to  Me  by  the  umbilical  cord  of  fiery
desire.  Such  a  man  rejoices  in  everything,  nor
does  he  make  himself  judge  of  My  servants,  or
of  any  rational  creature,  but  rejoices  in  every


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  217


condition  and  in  every  manner  of  holiness  which
he  sees,  saying :  '  Thanks  be  to  Thee,  Eternal
Father,  who  hast  in  Thy  House  many  mansions.'
And  he  rejoices  more  in  the  different  ways  of
holiness  which  he  sees,  than  if  he  were  to  see  all
travelling  by  one  road,  because,  in  this  way,  he
perceives  the  greatness  of  My  Goodness  become
more  manifest,  and  thus,  rejoicing  draws  from
all  the  fragrance  of  the  rose.  And  not  only  in
the  case  of  good,  but  even  when  he  sees  some-
thing evidently  sinful,  he  does  not  fall  into  judg-
ment, but  rather  into  true  and  holy  compassion,
interceding  with  Me  for  sinners  and  saying,  with
perfect  humility :  '  To-day  it  is  thy  turn,  and
to-morrow  it  will  be  mine  unless  the  Divine
Grace  preserve  me.'

"  Enamour  thyself,  dearest  daughter,  of  this
sweet  and  excellent  state,  and  gaze  at  those  who
run  in  this  glorious  light  and  holiness,  for
they  have  holy  minds,  and  eat  at  the  table  of
holy  desire,  and,  with  the  light,  have  arrived  at
feeding  on  the  food  of  souls,  that  is,  the  honour
of  Me,  the  Eternal  Father,  being  clothed  with
burning  love  in  the  sweet  garment  of  My  Lamb,
My  only-begotten  Son,  namely  His  doctrine.
These  do  not  lose  their  time  in  passing  false
judgments,  either  on  My  servants  or  the  servants
of  the  world,  and  they  are  never  scandalised  by
any  murmurings  of  men,  either  for  their  own
sake  or  that  of  others.  That  is  to  say,  in  their
own  case  they  are  content  to  endure  anything  for
My  Name's  sake ;  and  when  an  injury  is  done  to


218     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


some  one  else,  they  endure  it  with  compassion  of
this  injured  neighbour,  and  without  murmuring
against  him  who  caused  the  injury,  or  him  who
received  it,  because  their  love  is  not  disordinate,
but  has  been  ordered  in  Me,  the  Eternal  God.

"  And,  since  their  love  is  so  ordered,  these
souls,  my  dearest  daughter,  never  take  offence
from  those  they  love,  nor  from  any  rational
creature,  their  will  being  dead  and  not  alive,
wherefore  they  never  assume  the  right  to  judge
the  will  of  men,  but  only  the  will  of  My
Clemency.  These  observe  the  doctrine  which,  as
thou  knowest,  was  given  thee  by  My  Truth  at
the  beginning  of  thy  life,  when  thou  wast  think-
ing in  what  way  thou  couldst  arrive  at  perfect
purity,  and  wast  praying  to  Me  with  a  great
desire  of  doing  so.  Thou  knowest  what  was
replied  to  thee,  while  thou  wast  asleep,  concern-
ing this  holy  desire,  and  that  the  words  resounded
not  only  in  thy  mind,  but  also  in  thine  ear.  So
much  so,  that,  if  thou  rememberest  truly,  thou
didst  return  to  thy  waking  body,  when  My
Truth  said,  '  Wilt  thou  arrive  at  perfect  purity,
and  be  freed  from  stumbling-blocks,  so  that  thy
mind  may  not  be  scandalised  by  anything  ? '
Unite  thyself  always  to  Me  by  the  affection  of
love,  for  I  am  the  Supreme  and  Eternal  Purity.
I  am  that  Fire  which  purifies  the  soul,  and  the
closer  the  soul  is  to  Me,  the  purer  she  becomes,
and  the  further  she  is  from  Me,  the  more  does
her  purity  leave  her ;  which  is  the  reason  why
men  of  the  world  fall  into  such  iniquities,  for


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  219


they  are  separated  from  Me,  while  the  soul,  who,
without  any  medium,  unites  herself  directly  to
Me,  participates  in  My  Purity.  Another  thing
is  necessary  for  thee  to  arrive  at  this  union  and
purity,  namely,  that  thou  shouldest  never  judge
the  will  of  man  in  anything  that  thou  mayest  see
done  or  said  by  any  creature  whatsoever,  either
to  thyself  or  to  others.  My  will  alone  shouldst
thou  consider,  both  in  them  and  in  thyself.
And,  if  thou  shouldest  see  evident  sins  or  de-
fects, draw  out  of  those  thorns  the  rose,  that  is
to  say,  offer  them  to  Me,  with  holy  compassion.
In  the  case  of  injuries  done  to  thyself,  judge  that
My  will  permits  this  in  order  to  prove  virtue  in
thyself,  and  in  My  other  servants,  esteeming  that
he  who  acts  thus  does  so  as  the  instrument  of
My  will ;  perceiving,  moreover,  that  such  appa-
rent sinners  may  frequently  have  a  good  inten-
tion, for  no  one  can  judge  the  secrets  of  the
heart  of  man.  That  which  thou  dost  not  see
thou  shouldst  not  judge  in  thy  mind,  even
though  it  may  externally  be  open  mortal  sin,
seeing  nothing  in  others,  but  My  will,  not  in
order  to  judge,  but,  as  has  been  said,  with  holy
compassion.  In  this  way  thou  wilt  arrive  at
perfect  purity,  because  acting  thus,  thy  mind
will  not  be  scandalised,  either  in  Me  or  in  thy
neighbour.  Otherwise  thou  fallest  into  con-
tempt of  thy  neighbour,  if  thou  judgest  his  evil
will  towards  thee,  instead  of  My  will  acting  in
him.  Such  contempt  and  scandal  separates  the
soul  from  Me,  and  prevents  perfection,  and,  in


22o     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


some  cases,  deprives  a  man  of  grace,  more  or
less  according  to  the  gravity  of  his  contempt,
and  the  hatred  which  his  judgment  has  conceived
against  his  neighbour.

"A  different  reward  is  received  by  the  soul
who  perceives  only  My  will,  which,  as  has  been
said,  wishes  nothing  else  but  your  good  ;  so  that
everything  which  I  give  or  permit  to  happen  to
you,  I  give  so  that  you  may  arrive  at  the  end
for  which  I  created  you.  And  because  the  soul
remains  always  in  the  love  of  her  neighbour,  she
remains  always  in  Mine,  and  thus  remains  united
to  Me.  Wherefore,  in  order  to  arrive  at  purity,
thou  must  entreat  Me  to  do  three  things :  to
grant  thee  to  be  united  to  Me  by  the  affection
of  love,  retaining  in  thy  memory  the  benefits
thou  hast  received  from  Me ;  and  with  the  eye
of  thy  intellect  to  see  the  affection  of  My  love,
with  which  I  love  you  inestimably ;  and  in  the
will  of  others  to  discern  My  will  only,  and  not
their  evil  will,  for  I  am  their  Judge,  not  thou,
and,  in  doing  this,  thou  wilt  arrive  at  all
perfection.

"  This  was  the  doctrine  given  to  thee  by  My
Truth,  if  thou  rememberest  well.  Now  I  tell
thee,  dearest  daughter,  that  such  as  these,  who
have  learnt  this  doctrine,  taste  the  earnest  of
eternal  life  in  this  life ;  and,  if  thou  hast  well
retained  this  doctrine,  thou  wilt  not  fall  into  the
snares  of  the  Devil,  because  thou  wilt  recognise
them  in  the  case  about  which  thou  hast  asked  Me.

"But,  nevertheless,  in  order  to  satisfy  thy


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  221


desire  more  clearly,  I  will  tell  thee  and  show
thee  how  men  should  never  discern  by  judg-
ment, but  with  holy  compassion. "

In  what  way  they,  who  stand  in  the  above-mentioned
third  most  perfect  light,  receive  the  earnest  of
eternal  life  in  this  life.

"Why  did  I  say  to  thee  that  they  received  the
earnest  of  eternal  life  ?  I  say  that  they  receive
the  earnest- money,  but  not  the  full  payment,
because  they  wait  to  receive  it  in  Me,  the  Eternal
Life,  where  they  have  life  without  death,  and
satiety  without  disgust,  and  hunger  without  pain,
for  from  that  divine  hunger  pain  is  far  away,  and
though  they  have  what  they  desire,  disgust  is  far
from  satiety,  for  I  am  the  flawless  Food  of  Life.
It  is  true  that,  in  this  life,  they  receive  the  earnest,
and  taste  it  in  this  way,  namely  that  the  soul
begins  to  hunger  for  the  honour  of  the  Eternal
God,  and  for  the  food  of  the  salvation  of  other
souls,  and  being  hungry,  she  eats,  that  is  to  say,
nourishes  herself  with  love  of  her  neighbour,
which  causes  her  hunger  and  desire,  for  the  love
of  the  neighbour  is  a  food  which  never  satiates
him  who  feeds  on  it,  the  eater  being  insatiable
and  always  remains  hungry.  So  this  earnest-
money  is  a  commencement  of  a  guarantee  which
is  given  to  man,  in  virtue  of  which  he  expects
one  day  to  receive  his  payment,  not  through  the
perfection  of  the  earnest-money  in  itself,  but
through  faith,  through  the  certitude  which  he


222     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


has  of  reaching  the  completion  of  his  being  and
receiving  his  payment.  Wherefore  this  enamoured
soul,  clothed  in  My  Truth,  having  already  re-
ceived in  this  life  the  earnest  of  My  love,  and
of  her  neighbour's,  is  not  yet  perfect,  but  expects
perfection  in  immortal  life.  I  say  that  this  earnest
is  not  perfect,  because  the  soul  who  tastes  it  has
not,  as  yet,  the  perfection  which  would  prevent
her  feeling  pain  in  herself,  or  in  others.  In
herself,  through  the  offence  done  to  Me  by  the
law  of  perversity  which  is  bound  in  her  members
and  struggles  against  the  spirit,  and  in  others  by
the  offence  of  her  neighbour.  She  has  indeed,
in  a  sense,  a  perfect  grace,  but  not  that  perfec-
tion of  My  saints,  who  have  arrived  at  Me,
Eternal  Life,  for,  as  has  been  said,  their  desires
are  without  suffering,  and  yours  are  not.  These
servants  of  Mine,  as  I  have  said  to  thee  in  another
place,  who  nourish  themselves  at  this  table  of
holy  desire,  are  blessed  and  full  of  grief,  even
as  My  only-begotten  Son  was,  on  the  wood  of
the  holy  Cross,  because,  while  His  flesh  was  in
grief  and  torment,  His  soul  was  blessed  through
its  union  with  the  divine  nature.  In  like  manner
these  are  blessed  by  the  union  of  their  holy  desire
towards  Me,  clothed,  as  has  been  said,  in  My
sweet  Will,  and  they  are  full  of  grief  through
compassion  for  their  neighbour,  and  because  they
afflict  their  own  self-love,  depriving  it  of  sensual
delights  and  consolations."


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  223


How  this  sou/,  rendering  thanks  to  God,  humiliates
herself ;  then  she  prays  for  the  whole  world  and
particularly  for  the  mystical  body  of  the  holy
Church,  and  for  her  spiritual  children,  and  for
the  two  fathers  of  her  soul ;  and,  after  these
things,  she  asks  to  hear  something  about  the
defects  of  the  ministers  of  the  holy  Church.

Then  that  soul,  as  if,  in  truth,  inebriated,
seemed  beside  herself,  as  if  the  feelings  of  the
body  were  alienated  through  the  union  of  love
which  she  had  made  with  her  Creator,  and  as
if,  in  elevation  of  mind,  she  had  gazed  into
the  eternal  truth  with  the  eye  of  her  intellect,
and,  having  recognised  the  truth,  had  become
enamoured  of  it,  and  said,  "  Oh  !  Supreme  and
Eternal  Goodness  of  God,  who  am  I,  miserable
one,  that  Thou,  Supreme  and  Eternal  Father,
hast  manifested  to  me  Thy  Truth,  and  the  hidden
deceits  of  the  Devil,  and  the  deceitfulness  of
personal  feeling,  so  that  I,  and  others  in  this
life  of  pilgrimage,  may  know  how  to  avoid
being  deceived  by  the  Devil  or  ourselves !  What
moved  thee  to  do  it  ?  Love,  because  Thou
lovedst  me,  without  my  having  loved  Thee.
Oh,  Fire  of  Love !  Thanks,  thanks  be  to
Thee,  Eternal  Father !  I  am  imperfect  and
full  of  darkness,  and  Thou,  Perfection  and
Light,  hast  shown  to  me  perfection,  and  the
resplendent  way  of  the  doctrine  of  Thy  only-
begotten  Son.  I  was  dead,  and  Thou  hast
brought  me  to  life.     I  was  sick,  and  Thou


224     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


hast  given  me  medicine,  and  not  only  the  medicine
of  the  Blood  which  Thou  gavest  for  the  diseased
human  race  in  the  person  of  Thy  Son,  but  also  a
medicine  against  a  secret  infirmity  that  I  knew  not
of,  in  this  precept  that,  in  no  way,  can  I  judge  any
rational  creature,  and  particularly  Thy  servants,
upon  whom  ofttimes  I,  as  one  blind  and  sick
with  this  infirmity,  passed  judgment  under  the
pretext  of  Thy  honour  and  the  salvation  of
souls.  Wherefore,  I  thank  Thee,  Supreme  and
Eternal  Good,  that,  in  the  manifesting  of  Thy
truth  and  the  deceitfulness  of  the  Devil,  and
our  own  passions,  Thou  hast  made  me  know  my
infirmity.  Wherefore  I  beseech  Thee,  through
grace  and  mercy,  that,  from  to-day  henceforward,
I  may  never  again  wander  from  the  path  of  Thy
doctrine,  given  by  Thy  goodness  to  me  and  to
whoever  wishes  to  follow  it,  because  without
Thee  is  nothing  done.  To  Thee,  then,  Eternal
Father,  do  I  have  recourse  and  flee,  and  I  do  not
beseech  Thee  for  myself  alone,  Father,  but  for
the  whole  world,  and  particularly  for  the  mystical
body  of  the  holy  Church,  that  this  truth  given
to  me,  miserable  one,  by  Thee,  Eternal  Truth,
may  shine  in  Thy  ministers  ;  and  also  I  beseech
Thee  especially  for  all  those  whom  Thou  hast
given  me,  and  whom  Thou  hast  made  one  thing
with  me,  and  whom  I  love  with  a  particular
love,  because  they  will  be  my  refreshment  to
the  glory  and  praise  of  Thy  Name,  when  I  see
them  running  on  this  sweet  and  straight  road,
pure,  and  dead  to  their  own  will  and  opinion,


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  225


and  without  any  passing  judgment  on  their  neigh-
bour, or  causing  him  any  scandal  or  murmuring.
And  I  pray  Thee,  Sweetest  Love,  that  not  one
of  them  may  be  taken  from  me  by  the  hand
of  the  infernal  Devil,  so  that  at  last  they  may
arrive  at  Thee,  their  End,  Eternal  Father.

"  Also  I  make  another  petition  to  Thee  for
my  two  fathers,  the  supports  whom  Thou  hast
placed  on  the  earth  to  guard  and  instruct  me,
miserable  infirm  one,  from  the  beginning  of  my
conversion  until  now,  that  Thou  unite  them,
and  of  two  bodies  make  one  soul,  and  that  they
attend  to  nothing  else  than  to  complete  in  them-
selves, and  in  the  mysteries  that  Thou  hast
placed  in  their  hands,  the  glory  and  praise  of
Thy  Name,  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  and  that
I,  an  unworthy  and  miserable  slave,  and  no
daughter,  may  behave  to  them  with  due  reverence
and  holy  fear,  for  love  of  Thee,  in  a  way  that
will  be  to  Thine  honour,  and  their  peace  and
quiet,  and  to  the  edification  of  the  neighbour.  I
now  know  for  certain,  Eternal  Truth,  that  Thou
wilt  not  despise  the  desire  of  the  petitions  that
I  have  made  to  Thee,  because  I  know,  from  see-
ing what  it  has  pleased  Thee  to  manifest,  and  still
more  from  proof,  that  Thou  art  the  Acceptor
of  holy  desires.  I,  Thy  unworthy  servant,  will
strive,  according  as  Thou  wilt  give  me  grace,  to
observe  Thy  commandments  and  Thy  doctrine.
Now,  O  Eternal  Father,  I  remember  a  word
which  thou  didst  say  to  me  in  speaking  of  the
ministers  of  the  holy  Church,  to  the  effect  that

p


226     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Thou  wouldst  speak  to  me  more  distinctly,  in
some  other  place,  of  the  sins  which  they  commit
to-day ;  wherefore  if  it  should  please  Thy  good-
ness to  tell  me  aught  of  this  matter,  I  will  gladly
hear  it,  so  as  to  have  material  for  increasing  my
grief,  compassion,  and  anxious  desire  for  their
salvation  ;  for  I  remember  that  Thou  didst  say,
that,  on  account  of  the  endurance  and  tears,  the
grief,  and  sweat  and  prayers  of  Thy  servants,
Thou  wouldst  reform  the  holy  Church,  and
comfort  her  with  good  and  holy  pastors.  I  ask
Thee  this  in  order  that  these  sentiments  may
increase  in  me."


How  God  renders  this  soul  attentive  to  prayer,  replying
to  one  of  the  above-mentioned  petitions.

Then  the  Eternal  God,  turning  the  eye  of  His
mercy  upon  this  soul,  not  despising  her  desire,
but  granting  her  requests,  proceeded  to  satisfy
the  last  petition,  which  she  had  made  concerning
His  promise,  saying,  "  Oh !  best  beloved  and
dearest  daughter,  I  will  fulfil  thy  desire  in  this
request,  in  order  that,  on  thy  side,  thou  mayest
not  sin  through  ignorance  or  negligence ;  for  a
fault  of  thine  would  be  more  serious  and  worthy
of  graver  reproof  now  than  before,  because  thou
hast  learnt  more  of  My  truth ;  wherefore  apply
thyself  attentively  to  pray  for  all  rational  crea-
tures, for  the  mystical  body  of  the  holy  Church,
and  for  those  friends  whom  I  have  given  thee,
whom  thou  lovest  with  particular  love,  and  be


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  227


careful  not  to  be  negligent  in  giving  them  the
benefit  of  thy  prayers,  and  the  example  of  thy
life,  and  the  teaching  of  thy  words,  reproving
vice  and  encouraging  virtue  according  to  thy
power.

"  Concerning  the  supports  which  I  have  given
thee,  of  whom  thou  didst  speak  to  Me,  know
that  thou  art,  in  truth,  a  means  by  which  they
may  each  receive,  according  to  their  needs  and
fitness.  And  as  I,  thy  Creator,  grant  thee  the
opportunity,  for  without  Me  thou  canst  do
nothing,  I  will  fulfil  thy  desires,  but  do  not
thou  fail,  or  they  either,  in  your  hope  in  Me.
My  Providence  will  never  fail  you,  and  every
man,  if  he  be  humble,  shall  receive  that  which
he  is  fit  to  receive ;  and  every  minister,  that
which  I  have  given  him  to  administer,  each  in
his  own  way,,  according  to  what  he  has  received
and  will  receive  from  My  goodness. "

Of  the  dignity  of  the  -priest ;  and  of  the  Sacrament  of
the  Body  of  Christ ;  and  of  worthy  and  un-
worthy communicants.

"  Now  I  will  reply  to  that  which  thou  didst
ask  Me  concerning  the  ministers  of  the  holy
Church,  and,  in  order  that  thou  mayest  the
better  understand  the  truth,  open  the  eye  of
thy  intellect,  and  look  at  their  excellence  and
the  dignity  in  which  I  have  placed  them.  And,
since  one  thing  is  better  known  by  means  of
contrast  with  its  contrary,  I  will  show  thee  the


228     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


dignity  of  those  who  use  virtuously  the  treasure
I  have  placed  in  their  hands ;  and,  in  this  way,
thou  wilt  the  better  see  the  misery  of  those  who
to-day  are  suckled  at  the  breast  of  My  Spouse."
Then  this  soul  obediently  contemplated  the  truth,
in  which  she  saw  virtue  resplendent  in  those
who  truly  taste  it.    Then  said  the  Eternal  God  :
"  I  will  first,  dearest  daughter,  speak  to  thee  of
the  dignity  of  priests,  having  placed  them  where
they  are  through  My  Goodness,  over  and  above
the  general  love  which  I  have  had  to  My  crea-
tures, creating  you  in  My  image  and  similitude
and  re-creating  you  all  to  the  life  of  grace  in
the  Blood  of  My  only-begotten  Son,  whence  you
have  arrived  at  such  excellence,  through  the
union  which  I  made  of  My  Deity  with  human
nature  ;  so  that  in  this  you  have  greater  dignity
and  excellence  than  the  angels,  for  I  took  your
human  nature   and    not   that   of  the  angels.
Wherefore,  as  I  have  said  to  you,  I,  God,  have
become  man,  and  man  has  become  God  by  the
union  of  My  Divine  Nature  with  your  human
nature.    This  greatness  is  given  in  general  to
all  rational  creatures,  but,  among  these  I  have
especially  chosen  My  ministers  for  the  sake  of
your  salvation,  so  that,  through  them,  the  Blood
of  the  humble  and  immaculate  Lamb,  My  only-
begotten  Son,  may  be  administered  to  you.  To
them  have  I  given  the  Sun  to  administer,  giving
them  the  light  of  science  and  the  heat  of  Divine
Love,  united  together  in  the  colour  of  the  Body
and  Blood  of  My  Son,  whose  Body  is  a  Sun,


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  229


because  He  is  one  thing  with  Me,  the  True  Sun,
in  such  a  way  that  He  cannot  be  separated  or
divided  from  Me,  as  in  the  case  of  the  natural
sun,  in  which  heat  and  light  cannot  be  separated,
so  perfect  is  their  union ;  for,  the  sun,  never
leaving  its  orbit,  lights  the  whole  world  and
warms  whoever  wishes  to  be  warmed  by  it,  and  is
not  defiled  by  any  impurity  on  which  it  shines,
for  its  light  and  heat  and  colour  are  united.

"  So  this  Word,  My  Son,  with  His  most  sweet
Blood,  is  one  Sun,  all  God  and  all  man,  because
He  is  one  thing  with  Me  and  I  with  Him.  My
power  is  not  separated  from  His  wisdom,  nor
the  fiery  heat  of  the  Holy  Spirit  from  Me,  the
Father,  or  from  Him,  the  Son ;  for  He  is  one
thing  with  us,  the  Holy  Spirit  proceeding  from
the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  We  together  form-
ing one  and  the  same  Sun ;  that  is  to  say,  I,  the
Eternal  God,  am  that  Sun  whence  have  proceeded
the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  To  the  Holy
Spirit  is  attributed  fire  and  to  the  Son  wisdom,
by  which  wisdom  My  ministers  receive  the  light
of  grace,  so  that  they  may  administer  this  light
to  others,  with  gratitude  for  the  benefits  received
from  Me,  the  Eternal  Father,  following  the  doc-
trine of  the  Eternal  Wisdom,  My  only-begotten
Son.  This  is  that  Light,  which  has  the  colour
of  your  humanity,  colour  I  and  light  being
closely  united.  Thus  was  the  light  of  My
Divinity  united  to  the  colour  of  your  humanity,
which  colour  shone  brightly  when  it  became
perfect  through  its  union  with  the  Divine  nature,


230     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


and,  by  this  means  of  the  Incarnate  Word  mixed
with  the  Light  of  My  Divine  nature  and  the
fiery  heat  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  have  ye  received
the  Light.  Whom  have  I  entrusted  with  its
administration  ?

' '  My  ministers  in  the  mystical  body  of  the
holy  Church,  so  that  you  may  have  life,  re-
ceiving His  Body  in  food  and  His  Blood  in
drink.  I  have  said  to  thee  that  this  Body  is,
as  it  were,  a  Sun.  Wherefore,  you  cannot  receive
the  Body  without  the  Blood,  or  the  Blood  or  the
Body  without  the  Soul  of  the  Incarnate  Word  ;
nor  the  Soul,  nor  the  Body,  without  the  Divinity
of  Me,  the  Eternal  God,  because  none  of  these
can  be  separated  from  each  other,  as  I  said  to
thee  in  another  place  that  the  Divine  nature
never  left  the  human  nature,  either  by  death  or
from  any  other  cause.  So  that  you  receive  the
whole  Divine  Essence  in  that  most  Sweet  Sacra-
ment concealed  under  the  whiteness  of  the  bread  ;
for  as  the  sun  cannot  be  divided  into  light,  heat,
and  colour,  the  whole  of  God  and  the  whole  of
man  cannot  be  separated  under  the  white  mantle
of  the  host ;  for  even  if  the  host  should  be  divided
into  a  million  particles  (if  it  were  possible)  in
each  particle  should  I  be  present,  whole  God  and
whole  Man.  When  you  break  a  mirror  the  re-
flection to  be  seen  in  it  is  not  broken ;  similarly,
when  the  host  is  divided  God  and  man  are  not
divided,  but  remain  in  each  particle.  Nor  is  the
Sacrament  diminished  in  itself,  except  as  far  as
may  be  in  the  following  example.


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  231

"If  thou  hast  a  light,  and  the  whole  world
should  come  to  thee  in  order  to  take  light  from
it — the  light  itself  does  not  diminish — and  yet
each  person  has  it  all.  It  is  true  that  every  one
participates  more  or  less  in  this  light,  according
to  the  substance  into  which  each  one  receives  the
fire.  I  will  develop  this  metaphor  further  that
thou  mayest  the  better  understand  Me.  Suppose
that  there  are  many  who  bring  their  candles,  one
weighing  an  ounce,  others  two  or  six  ounces,  or
a  pound,  or  even  more,  and  light  them  in  the
flame,  in  each  candle,  whether  large  or  small,  is
the  whole  light,  that  is  to  say,  the  heat,  the
colour,  and  the  flame  ;  nevertheless  thou  wouldst
judge  that  he  whose  candle  weighs  an  ounce  has
less  of  the  light  than  he  whose  candle  weighs  a
pound.  Now  the  same  thing  happens  to  those
who  receive  this  Sacrament.  Each  one  carries
his  own  candle,  that  is  the  holy  desire,  with
which  he  receives  this  Sacrament,  which  of  itself
is  without  light,  and  lights  it  by  receiving  this
Sacrament.  I  say  without  light,  because  of  your-
selves you  can  do  nothing,  though  I  have  given
you  the  material,  with  which  you  can  receive  this
light  and  feed  it.  The  material  is  love,  for
through  love  I  created  you,  and  without  love
you  cannot  live.

"  Your  being,  given  to  you  through  love,  has
received  the  right  disposition  in  holy  baptism,
which  you  receive  in  virtue  of  the  Blood  of  the
Word,  for,  in  no  other  way,  could  you  partici-
pate in  this  light ;  you  would  be  like  a  candle


232     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


with  no  wick  inside  it,  which  cannot  burn  or
receive  light,  if  you  have  not  received  in  your
souls  the  wick  which  catches  this  Divine  Flame,
that  is  to  say,  the  Holy  Faith,  which  you  re-
ceive, by  grace,  in  baptism,  united  with  the
disposition  of  your  soul  created  by  Me,  so  fitted
for  love,  that,  without  love,  which  is  her  very
food,  she  cannot  live.  Where  does  the  soul
united  in  this  way  obtain  light  ?  At  the  fire
of  My  Divine  love,  loving  and  fearing  Me,  and
following  the  Doctrine  of  My  Truth.  It  is  true
that  the  soul  becomes  more  or  less  lighted  accord-
ing to  the  material  which  it  brings  to  the  fire  ;
for  although  you  all  have  one  and  the  same
materia],  in  that  you  are  all  created  to  My  image
and  similitude,  and,  being  Christians,  possess  the
light  of  holy  baptism,  each  of  you  may  grow  in
love  and  virtue  by  the  help  of  My  grace,  as  may
please  you.  Not  that  you  change  the  form  of
what  I  have  given  you,  but  that  you  increase  your
strength  in  love,  and  your  free-will,  by  using  it
while  you  have  time,  for  when  time  is  past  you
can  no  longer  do  so.  So  that  you  can  increase  in
love,  as  has  been  said,  coming  with  love  to  receive
this  Sweet  and  Glorious  Light,  which  I  have
given  you  as  Food  for  your  service,  through  My
ministers,  and  you  receive  this  Light  according
to  the  love  and  fiery  desire  with  which  you
approach  It.

"  The  Light  Itself  you  receive  entire,  as  I
have  said  (in  the  example  of  those,  who  in  spite
of  the  difference  in  weight  of  their  candles,  all


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  233


receive  the  entire  light),  and  not  divided,  because
It  cannot  be  divided,  as  has  been  said,  either  on
account  of  any  imperfection  of  yours  who  re-
ceive, or  of  the  minister ;  but  you  personally
participate  in  this  light,  that  is  in  the  grace
which  you  receive  in  this  Sacrament,  according
to  the  holy  desire  with  which  you  dispose  your-
selves to  receive  it.  He  who  should  go  to  this
sweet  Sacrament  in  the  guilt  of  mortal  sin,  will
receive  no  grace  therefrom,  though  he  actually
receive  the  whole  of  God  and  the  whole  of  Man.
Dost  thou  know  the  condition  of  the  soul  who
receives  unworthily  ?  She  is  like  a  candle  on
which  water  has  fallen,  which  can  do  nothing
but  crackle  when  brought  near  the  flame,  for
no  sooner  has  the  fire  touched  it,  than  it  is
extinguished,  and  nothing  remains  but  smoke;
so  this  soul  has  cast  the  water  of  guilt  within  her
mind  upon  the  candle  which  she  received  in  holy
baptism,  which  has  drenched  the  wick  of  the
grace  of  baptism,  and,  not  having  heated  it  at
the  fire  of  true  contrition  and  confession,  goes
to  the  table  of  the  altar  to  receive  this  Light
with  her  body,  and  not  with  her  mind,  wherefore
the  Light,  since  the  soul  is  not  disposed  as  she
should  be  for  so  great  a  mystery,  does  not  remain
by  grace  in  that  soul,  but  leaves  her,  and,  in  the
soul,  remains  only  greater  confusion,  for  her  light
is  extinguished  and  her  sin  increased  by  her  dark-
ness. Of  the  Sacrament  she  feels  nothing  but  the
crackling  of  a  remorseful  conscience,  not  through
the  defect  of  the  Light  Itself,  for  that  can  receive


234     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


no  hurt,  but  on  account  of  the  water  that  was  in
the  soul,  which  impeded  her  proper  disposition
so  that  she  could  not  receive  the  Light.  See,
therefore,  that  in  no  way  can  this  Light,  united
with  its  heat  and  its  colour,  be  divided,  either  by
the  scanty  desire  of  the  soul  when  she  receives
the  Sacrament,  or  by  any  defect  which  may  be  in
the  soul,  or  by  any  defect  of  him  who  administers
it,  as  I  told  thee  of  the  sun  which  is  not  defiled
by  shining  on  anything  foul,  so  the  sweet  Light
of  this  Sacrament  cannot  be  defiled,  divided,  or
diminished  in  any  way,  nor  can  it  be  detached
from  its  orbit.

"  If  all  the  world  should  receive  in  communion
the  Light  and  Heat  of  this  Sun,  the  Word,  My
only-begotten  Son,  would  not  be  separated  from
Me — the  True  Sun,  His  Eternal  Father — because
in  His  mystical  Body,  the  holy  Church,  He  is
administered  to  whoever  will  receive  Him.  He
remains  wholly  with  Me,  and  yet  you  have  Him,
whole  God  and  whole  man,  as  I  told  thee,  in  the
metaphor  of  the  light,  that,  if  all  the  world  came
to  take  light  from  it,  each  would  have  it  entire,
and  yet  it  would  remain  whole."

How  the  bodily  sentiments  are  all  deceived  in  the  afore-
said Sacrament,  but  not  those  of  the  soul,  therefore
it  is,  with  the  latter,  that  one  must  see,  taste,  and
touch  It ;  and  of  a  beautiful  vision  this  soul  had
upon  this  subject.

"  Oh,  dearest  daughter,  open  well  the  eye  of
thy  intellect  and  gaze  into  the  abyss  of  My  love,


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  235

for  there  is  no  rational  creature  whose  heart
would  not  melt  for  love  in  contemplating  and
considering,  among  the  other  benefits  she  receives
from  Me,  the  special  Gift  that  she  receives  in
the  Sacrament.

"And  with  what  eye,  dearest  daughter,  shouldest
thou  and  others  look  at  this  mystery,  and  how
shouldest  thou  touch  it  ?  Not  only  with  the
bodily  sight  and  touch,  because  in  this  Sacrament
all  bodily  perceptions  fail.

"  The  eye  can  only  see,  and  the  hand  can  only
touch,  the  white  substance  of  the  bread,  and  the
taste  can  only  taste  the  savour  of  the  bread,  so
that  the  grosser  bodily  sentiments  are  deceived  ;
but  the  soul  cannot  be  deceived  in  her  sentiments
unless  she  wish  to  be — that  is,  unless  she  let  the
light  of  the  most  holy  faith  be  taken  away  from
her  by  infidelity.

4 4  How  is  this  Sacrament  to  be  truly  tasted,
seen,  and  touched  ?  With  the  sentiment  of  the
soul.  With  what  eye  is  It  to  be  seen  ?  With
the  eye  of  the  intellect  if  within  it  is  the  pupil
of  the  most  holy  faith.  This  eye  sees  in  that
whiteness  whole  God  and  whole  man,  the  Divine
nature  united  with  the  human  nature,  the  Body,
the  Soul,  and  the  Blood  of  Christ,  the  Soul  united
to  the  Body,  the  Body  and  the  Soul  united  with
My  Divine  nature,  not  detached  from  Me,  as  I
revealed  to  thee,  if  thou  remember  well,  almost
in  the  beginning  of  thy  life  ;  and  not  so  much  at
first  through  the  eye  of  thy  intellect  as  through
thy  bodily  eye,  although  the  light  being  so  great


236     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


thy  bodily  eyes  lost  their  vision,  and  only  the
sight  of  the  eye  of  thy  intellect  remained.  I
showed  it  to  thee  for  thine  enlightenment  in  the
battle  that  the  Devil  had  been  waging  against
thee  in  this  Sacrament ;  and  to  make  thee  increase
in  love  in  the  light  of  the  most  holy  faith.

"  Thou  knowest  that  thou  wentest  one  morn-
ing to  church  at  sunrise  to  hear  Mass,  having
beforehand  been  tormented  by  the  Devil,  and
thou  placedst  thyself  upright  at  the  Altar  of
the  Crucifix,  while  the  priest  went  to  the  Altar
of  Mary ;  thou  stoodst  there  to  consider  thy
sin,  fearing  to  have  offended  Me  through  the
vexation  which  the  Devil  had  been  causing  thee,
and  to  consider  My  love,  which  had  made  thee
worthy  to  hear  Mass,  seeing  that  thou  didst
deem  thyself  unworthy  to  enter  into  My  holy
temple.  When  the  minister  came  to  consecrate,
thou  raisedst  thine  eyes  above  his  head  while  he
was  saying  the  words  of  consecration,  and  I  mani-
fested Myself  to  thee,  and  thou  didst  see  issue
from  My  breast  a  light,  like  a  ray  from  the  sun,
which  proceeds  from  the  circle  of  the  sun  without
being  separated  from  it,  out  of  the  midst  of
which  light  came  a  dove  and  hovered  over  the
host,  in  virtue  of  the  words  which  the  minister
was  saying.  But  sight  remained  alone  in  the  eye
of  thy  intellect,  because  thy  bodily  sight  was  not
strong  enough  to  stand  the  light,  and  in  that
place  thou  didst  see  and  taste  the  Abyss  of  the
Trinity,  whole  God  and  whole  man  concealed  and
veiled  in  that  whiteness  that  thou  sawedst  in  the


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  237


bread ;  and  thou  perceivedst  that  the  seeing  of
the  Light  and  the  presence  of  the  Word,  which
thou  sawedst  intellectually  in  the  whiteness  of
the  bread,  did  not  prevent  thee  seeing  at  the
same  time  the  actual  whiteness  of  the  bread,  the
one  vision  did'  not  prevent  the  other  vision,  that
is  to  say,  the  sight  of  the  God-Man  revealed  in
the  bread  did  not  prevent  the  sight  of  the  bread,
for  neither  its  whiteness,  nor  its  touch,  nor  its
savour  were  taken  away.  This  was  shown  thee
by  My  goodness,  as  I  have  said  to  thee.  The
eye  of  the  intellect  had  the  true  vision,  using
the  pupil  of  the  holy  faith,  for  this  eye  should
be  thy  principal  means  of  vision,  inasmuch  as
it  cannot  be  deceived  ;  wherefore,  with  it  thou
shouldest  look  on  this  Sacrament.  How  dost
thou  touch  It  ?  By  the  hand  of  love.  With
this  hand  alone  canst  thou  touch  that  which  the
eye  of  the  intellect  has  recognised  in  this  Sacra-
ment. The  soul  touches  Me  with  the  hand  of
love,  as  if  to  certify  to  herself  that  which  she
has  seen  and  known  through  faith.  How  dost
thou  taste  It  ?  With  the  palate  of  holy  desire.
The  corporal  palate  tastes  only  the  savour  of  the
bread  ;  but  the  palate  of  the  soul,  which  is  holy
desire,  tastes  God  and  Man.  See,  therefore,  that
the  perceptions  of  the  body  are  deluded,  but
not  those  of  the  soul,  for  she  is  illuminated  and
assured  in  her  own  perceptions,  for  she  touches
with  the  hand  of  love  that  which  the  eye  of  her
intellect  has  seen  with  the  pupil  of  holy  faith  ;
and  with  her  palate — that  is,  with  fiery  desire —


238     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

she  tastes  My  Burning  Charity,  My  Ineffable
Love,  with  which  I  have  made  her  worthy  to
receive  the  tremendous  mystery  of  this  Sacrament
and  the  Grace  which  is  contained  therein.  See,
therefore,  that  thou  shouldst  receive  and  look  on
this  Sacrament,  not  only  with  bodily  perceptions,
but  rather  with  thy  spiritual  perceptions,  disposing
thy  soul  in  the  way  that  has  been  said,  to  receive,
and  taste,  and  see  this  Sacrament. "

Of  the  excellent  state  of  the  soul  who  receives  the
sacrament  in  grace.

"  See,  dearest  daughter,  in  what  an  excellent
state  is  the  soul  who  receives,  as  she  should,  this
Bread  of  Life,  this  Food  of  the  Angels.  By
receiving  this  Sacrament  she  dwells  in  Me  and  I
in  her,  as  the  fish  in  the  sea,  and  the  sea  in  the
fish — thus  do  I  dwell  in  the  soul,  and  the  soul
in  Me — the  Sea  Pacific.  In  that  soul  grace
dwells,  for,  since  she  has  received  this  Bread  of
Life  in  a  state  of  grace,  My  grace  remains  in
her,  after  the  accidents  of  bread  have  been  con-
sumed. I  leave  you  the  imprint  of  grace,  as
does  a  seal,  which,  when  lifted  from  the  hot  wax
upon  which  it  has  been  impressed,  leaves  behind
its  imprint,  so  the  virtue  of  this  Sacrament  re-
mains in  the  soul,  that  is  to  say,  the  heat  of  My
Divine  charity,  and  the  clemency  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  There  also  remains  to  you  the  wisdom
of  My  only-begotten  Son,  by  which  the  eye  of
your  intellect  has  been  illuminated  to  see  and  to


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  239


know  the  doctrine  of  My  Truth,  and,  together
with  this  wisdom,  you  participate  in  My  strength
and  power,  which  strengthen  the  soul  against  her
sensual  self-love,  against  the  Devil,  and  against
the  world.  Thou  seest  then  that  the  imprint
remains,  when  the  seal  has  been  taken  away,  that
is,  when  the  material  accidents  of  the  bread,
having  been  consumed,  this  True  Sun  has  returned
to  Its  Centre,  not  that  it  was  ever  really  separated
from  It,  but  constantly  united  to  Me.  The
Abyss  of  My  loving  desire  for  your  salvation
has  given  you,  through  My  dispensation  and
Divine  Providence,  coming  to  the  help  of  your
needs,  the  sweet  Truth  as  Food  in  this  life,  where
you  are  pilgrims  and  travellers,  so  that  you  may
have  refreshment,  and  not  forget  the  benefit  of
the  Blood.  See  then  how  straitly  you  are  con-
strained and  obliged  to  render  Me  love,  because
I  love  you  so  much,  and,  being  the  Supreme  and
Eternal  Goodness,  deserve  your  love."

How  the  things  which  have  been  said  about  the  excel-
lence of  this  Sacrament,  have  been  said  that  we
might  know  better  the  dignity  of  priests ;  and  how
God  demands  in  them  greater  purity  than  in  other
creatures.

"  I  have  told  thee  all  this,  dearest  daughter,
that  thou  mayest  the  better  recognise  the  dignity
to  which  I  have  called  My  ministers,  so  that  thy
grief  at  their  miseries  may  be  more  intense.  If
they  themselves  considered  their  own  dignity  they


24o     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


would  not  be  in  the  darkness  of  mortal  sin,  or
defile  the  face  of  their  soul.  They  would  not
only  see  their  offences  against  Me,  but  also,  that,
if  they  gave  their  bodies  to  be  burned,  they  would
not  repay  the  tremendous  grace  and  favour  which
they  have  received,  inasmuch  as  no  greater  dignity
exists  in  this  life.  They  are  My  anointed  ones,
and  I  call  them  My  Christs,  because  I  have  given
them  the  office  of  administering  Me  to  you,  and
have  placed  them  like  fragrant  flowers  in  the
mystical  body  of  the  holy  Church.  The  angel
himself  has  no  such  dignity,  for  I  have  given
it  to  those  men  whom  I  have  chosen  for  My
ministers,  and  whom  I  have  appointed  as  earthly
angels  in  this  life.  In  all  souls  I  demand  purity
and  charity,  that  they  should  love  Me  and  their
neighbour,  helping  him  by  the  ministration  of
prayer,  as  I  said  to  thee  in  another  place.  But
far  more  do  I  demand  purity  in  My  ministers,
and  love  towards  Me,  and  towards  their  fellow-
creatures,  administering  to  them  the  Body  and
Blood  of  My  only-begotten  Son,  with  the  fire  of
charity,  and  a  hunger  for  the  salvation  of  souls,
for  the  glory  and  honour  of  My  Name.  Even
as  these  ministers  require  cleanness  in  the  chalice
in  which  this  Sacrifice  is  made,  even  so  do  I
require  the  purity  and  cleanness  of  their  heart
and  soul  and  mind.  And  I  wish  their  body  to
be  preserved,  as  the  instrument  of  the  soul  in
perfect  charity ;  and  I  do  not  wish  them  to  feed
upon  and  wallow  in  the  mire  of  filth,  or  to  be
inflated  by  pride,  seeking  great  prelacies,  or  to


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  241


be  cruel  to  themselves  or  to  their  fellow-creatures,
because  they  cannot  use  cruelty  to  themselves
without  being  cruel  to  their  fellow-creatures  ;  for,
if  by  sin  they  are  cruel  to  themselves,  they  are
cruel  to  the  souls  of  their  neighbours,  in  that
they  do  not  give  them  an  example  of  life,  nor
care  to  draw  them  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Devil,
nor  to  administer  to  them  the  Body  and  Blood
of  My  only-begotten  Son,  and  Me  the  True
Light,  as  I  told  thee,  and  the  other  Sacraments
of  the  holy  Church.  So  that,  in  being  cruel
to  themselves,  they  are  cruel  to  others."

Of  the  excellence,  virtues,  and  holy  works  of  virtuous
and  holy  ministers;  and  how  such  are  like  the
sun.

"  I  will  now  speak  to  thee,  in  order  to  give  a
little  refreshment  to  thy  soul,  and  to  mitigate
thy  grief  at  the  darkness  of  these  miserable
subjects,  of  the  holy  life  of  some  of  My  ministers,
of  whom  I  have  spoken  to  thee,  who  are  like  the
sun,  for  the  odour  of  their  virtues  mitigates  the
stench  of  the  vices  of  the  others,  and  the  light
thereof  shines  in  their  darkness.  And,  by  means
of  this  light,  wilt  thou  the  better  be  able  to
understand  the  darkness  and  sins  of  My  unworthy
ministers.  Open  then  the  eye  of  thy  intellect
and  gaze  at  the  Sun  of  Justice,  and  thou  wilt  see
those  glorious  ministers,  who,  through  minister-
ing the  Sun,  have  become  like  to  It,  as  I  told
thee  of  Peter,  the  prince  of  the  Apostles,  who

Q


242     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

received  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  Heaven.  I
say  the  same  of  these  others,  who  have  adminis-
tered, in  the  garden  of  the  holy  Church,  the
Light,  that  is  to  say,  the  Body  and  the  Blood
of  My  only-begotten  Son,  who  is  Himself  the
undivided  Sun,  as  has  been  said,  and  all  the
Sacraments  of  the  holy  Church,  which  all  give
life  in  virtue  of  the  Blood.  Each  one,  placed
in  a  different  rank,  has  administered,  according
to  his  state,  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  With
what  have  they  administered  it  ?  With  the  light
of  grace,  which  they  have  drawn  from  this  True
Light.  With  light  alone  ?  No ;  because  the
light  cannot  be  separated  from  the  warmth  and
colour  of  grace,  wherefore  a  man  must  either
have  the  light,  warmth,  and  colour  of  grace,  or
none  at  all.  A  man  in  mortal  sin  is  deprived
of  the  life  of  grace,  and  he  who  is  in  grace  has
illuminated  the  eye  of  his  intellect  to  know  Me,
who  gave  him  both  grace  and  the  virtue  which
preserves  it,  and,  in  that  light,  he  knows  the
misery  and  the  reason  of  sin,  that  is  to  say,  his
own  self-love,  on  which  account  he  hates  it,  and
thereby  receives  the  warmth  of  Divine  love  into
his  affection,  which  follows  his  intellect,  and  he
receives  the  colour  of  this  glorious  Light,  follow-
ing the  doctrine  of  My  sweet  Truth,  . by  which
his  memory  is  filled  with  the  benefit  of  the
Blood.  Thou  seest,  therefore,  that  no  one  can
receive  the  light  without  receiving  the  warmth
and  the  colour,  for  they  are  united  together  and
are  one  thing ;  wherefore  he  cannot,  as  I  have  said


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  243


to  thee,  have  one  power  of  his  soul  so  ordered
as  to  receive  Me,  the  True  Sun,  unless  all  three
powers  of  his  soul  are  brought  together  and
ordered  in  My  Name.  For,  as  soon  as  the  eye
of  the  intellect  lifts  itself  with  the  pupil  of  faith
above  sensual  vision  in  the  contemplation  of  Me,
affection  follows  it,  loving  that  which  the  intellect
sees  and  knows,  and  the  memory  is  filled  with
that  which  the  affection  loves ;  and,  as  soon  as
these  powers  are  thus  disposed,  the  soul  parti-
cipates in  Me,  the  Sun  who  illuminates  her  with
My  power,  and  with  the  wisdom  of  My  only-
begotten  Son,  and  the  fiery  clemency  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  See,  then,  that  these  have  taken
on  them  the  condition  of  the  Sun,  for,  having
clothed  themselves,  and  filled  the  power  of  their
soul  with  Me,  the  true  Sun,  they  become  like
Me.  The  Sun  illuminates  them  and  causes  the
earth  of  their  souls  to  germinate  with  Its  heat.
Thus  do  My  sweet  ministers,  elected  and  anointed
and  placed  in  the  mystical  body  of  the  holy
Church,  in  order  to  administer  Me,  the  Sun,
that  is  to  say,  the  Body  and  Blood  of  My  only-
begotten  Son,  together  with  the  other  Sacraments,
which  draw  their  life  from  this  Blood  ;  this  they
do  in  two  ways,  actually,  in  administering  the
Sacraments,  and  spiritually,  by  shedding  forth  in
the  mystical  body  of  the  holy  Church,  the  light
of  supernatural  science,  together  with  the  colour
of  an  honourable  and  holy  life,  following  the
doctrine  of  My  Truth,  which  they  administer  in
the  ardent  love  with  which  they  cause  barren  souls


244     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

to  bear  fruit,  illuminating  them  with  the  light
of  their  science,  and  driving  away  the  darkness
of  their  mortal  sin  and  infidelity,  by  the  example
of  their  holy  and  regular  life,  and  reforming  the
lives  of  those  who  live  in  disorder  and  darkness
of  sin,  and  in  coldness,  through  the  privation  of
charity.  So  thou  seest  that  they  are  the  Sun,
because  they  have  taken  the  condition  of  the
Sun  from  Me,  the  True  Sun,  because,  through
affection  of  love,  they  are  one  thing  with  Me,
and  I  with  them,  as  I  narrated  to  thee  in  another
place,  and  each  one  has  given  light  in  the  holy
Church,  according  to  the  position  to  which  I
have  elected  him  :  Peter  with  preaching  and  doc-
trine, and  in  the  end  with  blood ;  Gregory  with
science,  and  holy  scripture,  and  with  the  mirror
of  his  life ;  Sylvester,  against  the  infidels,  and
with  disputation  and  proving  of  the  most  holy
faith,  which  he  made  in  word  and  in  deed,
receiving  virtue  from  Me.  If  thou  turnest  to
Augustine,  and  to  the  glorious  Thomas  and
Jerome,  and  the  others,  thou  wilt  see  how  much
light  they  have  thrown  over  this  spouse,  extir-
pating error,  like  lamps  placed  upon  the  can-
delabra, with  true  and  perfect  humility.  And,
as  if  famished  for  such  food,  they  feed  upon  My
honour,  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  upon  the
table  of  the  most  holy  Cross.  The  martyrs,
indeed,  with  blood,  which  blood  cast  up  sweet
perfume  before  My  countenance  ;  and,  with  the
perfume  of  blood,  and  of  the  virtues,  and  with
the  light  of  science,  they  brought  forth  fruit  in


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  245

this  spouse  and  extended  the  faith,  and,  by  their
means,  the  light  of  the  most  holy  faith  was
rekindled  in  the  darkened.  And  prelates,  placed
in  the  position  of  the  prelacy  of  Christ  on  earth,
offered  Me  the  sacrifice  of  justice  with  holy  and
upright  lives.  The  pearl  of  justice,  with  true
humility,  and  most  ardent  love,  shone  in  them,
and  in  their  subjects,  with  the  light  of  discre-
tion. In  them,  principally  because  they  justly
paid  Me  My  due,  in  rendering  glory  and  praise
to  My  Name,  and,  to  their  own  sensuality,  hatred
and  displeasure,  despising  vice  and  embracing
virtue,  with  love  of  Me  and  of  their  neighbour.
With  humility  they  trampled  on  pride,  and,  with
purity  of  heart  and  of  body,  came,  like  angels,
to  the  table  of  the  altar,  and,  with  sincerity  of
mind,  celebrated,  burning  in  the  furnace  of  love.
And,  because  they  first  had  done  justice  to  them-
selves, they  therefore  did  justice  to  those  under
them,  wishing  to  see  them  live  virtuously,  and
correcting  them  without  any  servile  fear,  because
they  were  not  thinking  of  themselves,  but  solely
of  My  honour  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  like
good  shepherds,  followers  of  the  Good  Shepherd,
My  Truth,  whom  I  gave  you  to  lead  your
sheep,  having  willed  that  He  should  give  His
life  for  you.  These  have  followed  His  foot-
steps, and  therefore  did  they  correct  them,  and
did  not  let  their  members  become  putrid  for
want  of  correcting,  but  they  charitably  corrected
them  with  the  unction  of  benignity,  and  with
the  sharpness  of  fire,  cauterising  the  wound  of


246     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


sin  with  reproof  and  penance,  little  or  much,
according  to  the  graveness  of  the  fault.  And,
in  order  to  correct  it  and  to  speak  the  truth,
they  did  not  even  fear  death.  They  were  true
gardeners  who,  with  care  and  holy  tears,  took
away  the  thorns  of  mortal  sins,  and  planted
plants  odoriferous  of  virtue.  Wherefore,  those
under  them  lived  in  holy,  true  fear,  and  grew  up
like  sweet  smelling  flowers  in  the  mystic  body  of
the  holy  Church  (because  they  were  not  deprived
of  correction,  and  so  were  not  guilty  of  sin),  for
My  gardeners  corrected  them  without  any  servile
fear,  being  free  from  it,  and  without  any  sin,
for  they  balanced  exactly  the  scales  of  holy
justice,  reproving  humbly  and  without  human
respect.  And  this  justice  was  and  is  that  pearl
which  shines  in  them,  and  which  gave  peace  and
light  in  the  minds  of  the  people  and  caused  holy
fear  to  be  with  them,  and  unity  of  hearts.  And
I  would  that  thou  know  that,  more  darkness  and
division  have  come  into  the  world  amongst
seculars  and  religious  and  the  clergy  and  pastors
of  the  holy  Church,  through  the  lack  of  the
light  of  justice,  and  the  advent  of  the  darkness
of  injustice,  than  from  any  other  causes.

"  Neither  the  civil  law,  nor  the  divine  law,  can
be  kept  in  any  degree  without  holy  justice,  be-
cause he  who  is  not  corrected,  and  does  not
correct  others,  becomes  like  a  limb  which  putre-
fies, and  corrupts  the  whole  body,  because  the
bad  physician,  when  it  had  already  begun  to
corrupt,  placed  ointment  immediately  upon  it,


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  247


without  having  first  burnt  the  wound.  So,  were
the  prelate,  or  any  other  lord  having  subjects,
on  seeing  one  putrefying  from  the  corruption  of
mortal  sin,  to  apply  to  him  the  ointment  of  soft
words  of  encouragement  alone,  without  reproof,
he  would  never  cure  him,  but  the  putrefaction
would  rather  spread  to  the  other  members,  who,
with  him,  form  one  body  under  the  same  pastor.
But  if  he  were  a  physician,  good  and  true  to
those  souls,  as  were  those  glorious  pastors  of
old,  he  would  not  give  salving  ointment  without
the  fire  of  reproof.  And,  were  the  member  still
to  remain  obstinate  in  his  evil  doing,  he  would
cut  him  off  from  the  congregation  in  order  that
he  corrupt  not  the  other  members  with  the
putrefaction  of  mortal  sin.  But  they  act  not
so  to-day,  but,  in  cases  of  evil  doing,  they  even
pretend  not  to  see.  And  knowest  thou  where-
fore ?  The  root  of  self-love  is  alive  in  them,
wherefore  they  bear  perverted  and  servile  fear.
Because  they  fear  to  lose  their  position  or  their
temporal  goods,  or  their  prelacy,  they  do  not
correct,  but  act  like  blind  ones,  in  that  they  see
not  the  real  way  by  which  their  position  is  to  be
kept.  If  they  would  only  see  that  it  is  by  holy
justice  they  would  be  able  to  maintain  it ;  but
they  do  not,  because  they  are  deprived  of  light.
But,  thinking  to  preserve  their  position  with
injustice,  they  do  not  reprove  the  faults  of  those
under  them ;  and  they  are  deluded  by  their  own
sensitive  self-love,  or  by  their  desire  for  lordship
and  prelacy,  and  they  correct  not  the  faults  they


248     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


should  correct  in  others,  because  the  same  or
greater  ones  are  their  own.  They  feel  them-
selves comprehended  in  the  guilt,  and  they
therefore  lose  all  ardour  and  security,  and,  fet-
tered by  servile  fear,  they  make  believe  not  to
see.  And,  moreover,  if  they  do  see  they  do  not
correct,  but  allow  themselves  to  be  bound  over
with  flattering  words  and  with  many  presents,
and  they  themselves  find  the  excuse  for  the
guilty  ones  not  to  be  punished.  In  such  as
these  are  fulfilled  the  words  spoken  by  My  Truth,
saying  :  '  These  are  blind  and  leaders  of  the  blind,
and  if  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  they  both  fall  into  the
ditch.''  My  sweet  ministers,  of  whom  I  spoke  to
thee,  who  have  the  properties  and  condition  of
the  sun,  did  not,  and  do  not  (if  there  be  any
now)  act  so.  And  they  are  truly  suns,  as  I  have
told  thee,  because  in  them  is  no  darkness  of  sin,
or  of  ignorance,  because  they  follow  the  doctrine
of  My  Truth.  They  are  not  tepid,  because  they
burn  in  the  furnace  of  My  love,  and  because  they
are  despisers  of  the  grandeurs,  positions,  and  de-
lights of  the  world.  They  fear  not  to  correct,
for  he  who  does  not  desire  lordship  or  prelacy
will  not  fear  to  lose  it,  and  will  reprove  man-
fully, and  he  whose  conscience  does  not  reprove
him  of  guilt,  does  not  fear.

4 4  And  therefore  this  pearl  of  justice  was  not
dimmed  in  My  anointed  ones,  My  Christs  (of
whom  I  have  narrated  to  thee),  but  was  re-
splendent in  them,  wherefore  they  embraced
voluntary  poverty,  and  sought  out  vileness  with


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  249


profound  humility,  and  cared  not  for  scorn  or
villainies,  or  the  detractions  of  men,  or  insult,  or
opprobrium,  or  pain,  or  torment.

"  They  were  cursed,  and  they  blessed,  and,
with  true  patience,  they  bore  themselves  like
terrestrial  angels,  not  by  nature,  but  by  their
ministry,  and  the  supernatural  grace  given  to
them,  of  administering  the  Body  and  Blood  of
My  only-begotten  Son.  And  they  are  truly
angels.  Because,  as  the  angel,  which  I  give
thee  to  be  thy  guardian,  ministers  to  thee  holy
and  good  inspirations,  so  were  these  ministers
angels,  and  were  given  by  My  goodness  to  be
guardians,  and  therefore  had  they  their  eye  con-
tinually over  those  under  them,  like  real  guar-
dian angels,  inspiring  in  their  hearts  holy  and
good  thoughts,  and  offering  up  for  them  before
Me,  sweet  and  amorous  desires  with  continual
prayer,  and  the  doctrine  of  words,  and  with
example  of  life.  So  thou  seest  that  they  are
angels,  placed  by  My  burning  love,  like  lanterns
in  the  mystic  body  of  the  holy  Church,  to  be
your  guardians,  so  that  ye  blind  ones  may  have
guides  to  direct  you  into  the  way  of  truth,
giving  you  good  inspirations,  with  prayers  and
example  of  life,  and  doctrine  as  I  said.  With
how  much  humility  did  they  govern  those  under
them,  and  converse  with  them !  With  how
much  hope  and  lively  faith,  and  therefore  with
liberality,  did  they  distribute  to  the  poor  the
substance  of  the  holy  Church,  not  fearing,  or
caring  if  for  them  and  their  subjects  temporal


250     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


substance  diminished.  And  they  scarcely  ob-
served that  which  they  were  really  bound  to  do,
that  is,  to  distribute  the  temporal  substance  to
their  own  necessity  being  the  poor  in  the  Church.
They  saved  nothing,  and  after  their  death  there
remained  no  money  at  all,  and  there  were  some
even  who,  for  the  sake  of  the  poor,  left  the
Church  in  debt.  This  was  because  through  the
largeness  of  their  charity,  and  of  the  hope  that
they  had  placed  in  My  Providence,  they  were
without  servile  fear  that  aught  should  diminish
to  them,  either  spiritual  or  temporal.

"  The  sign  that  a  creature  hopes  in  Me  and
not  in  himself,  is  that  he  does  not  fear  with  a
servile  fear.  They  who  hope  in  themselves  are
the  ones  who  fear,  and  are  afraid  of  their  own
shadow,  and  doubt  lest  the  sky  and  earth  fade
away  before  them.  With  such  fears  as  these,
and  a  perverted  hope  in  their  own  small  know-
ledge, they  spend  so  much  miserable  solicitude
in  acquiring  and  preserving  temporal  things,
that  they  turn  their  back  on  the  spiritual,  caring
not  for  them.  But  they,  miserable,  faithless,
proud  ones  consider  not  that  I  alone  am  He
who  provides  all  things  necessary  for  the  soul
and  the  body,  and  that  with  the  same  measure
that  My  creatures  hope  in  Me,  will  My  provi-
dence be  measured  to  them.  The  miserable  pre-
sumptuous ones  do  not  regard  the  fact  that  I
am  He  who  is,  and  they  are  they  who  are  not,
and  that  they  have  received  their  being,  and
every  other  additional  grace,  from  My  Good-


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER       25 t


ness.  And  therefore  his  labour  may  be  reputed
to  be  in  vain,  who  watches  the  city  if  it  be  not
guarded  by  Me.  All  his  labour  will  be  vain,  if
he  thinks  by  his  labour  or  solicitude  to  keep  it,
because  I  alone  keep  it.  It  is  true  that  I  desire
you  to  use  your  being,  and  exercise  the  graces
which  I  have  bestowed  upon  you,  in  virtue  using
the  free-will  which  I  have  given  you,  with  the
light  of  reason,  because  though  I  created  you
without  your  help  I  will  not  save  you  without
it.  I  loved  you  before  you  were,  and  those  My
beloved  ones  saw  and  knew  this,  and  therefore
they  loved  Me  ineffably,  and  through  their  love
hoped  so  greatly  in  Me  that  they  feared  nothing.
Sylvester  feared  not  when  he  stood  before  the
Emperor  Constantine  disputing  with  those  twelve
Jews  before  the  whole  crowd,  but  with  lively
faith  he  believed  that  I  being  for  him,  no  one
could  be  against  him ;  and  in  the  same  way  the
others  all  lost  their  every  fear,  because  they  were
not  alone  but  were  accompanied,  because  being
in  the  enjoyment  of  love,  they  were  in  Me,  and
from  Me  they  acquired  the  light  of  the  wisdom
of  My  only-begotten  Son,  and  from  Me  they
received  the  faculty  to  be  strong  and  powerful
against  the  princes  and  tyrants  of  the  world,  and
from  Me'  they  had  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
sharing  the  clemency  and  burning  love  of  that
Spirit.

"This  love  was  and  is  the  companion  of
whosoever  desires  it,  with  the  light  of  faith,
with  hope,  with  fortitude,  true    patience  and


252     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


long  perseverance  even  until  death.  So  thou
seest  that  because  they  were  not  alone  but  were
accompanied  they  feared  nothing.  He  only  who
feels  himself  to  be  alone,  and  hopes  in  himself,
deprived  of  the  affection  of  love,  fears,  and  is
afraid  of  every  little  thing,  because  he  alone  is
without  Me  who  give  supreme  security  to  the
soul  who  possesses  Me  through  the  affection  of
love.  And  of  this  did  those  glorious  ones,  My
beloved,  have  full  experience,  for  nothing  could
injure  their  souls ;  but  they  on  the  contrary
could  injure  men  and  the  devils,  who  ofttimes
remained  bound  by  the  virtue  and  power  that  I
had  given  My  servants  over  them.  This  was
because  I  responded  to  the  love,  faith,  and  hope
they  had  placed  in  Me.  Thy  tongue  would  not
be  sufficient  to  relate  their  virtues,  neither  the
eye  of  thy  intellect  to  see  the  fruit  which  they
receive  in  everlasting  life,  and  that  all  will  re-
ceive who  follow  in  their  footsteps.  They  are
like  precious  stones,  and  as  such  do  they  stand
in  My  presence,  because  I  have  received  their
labour  and  poverty  and  the  light  which  they
shed  with  the  odour  of  virtues  in  the  mystic
body  of  the  holy  Church.  And  in  the  life
eternal  I  have  placed  them  in  the  greatest
dignity,  and  they  receive  blessing  and  glory  in
My  sight,  because  they  gave  the  example  of  an
honourable  and  holy  life,  and  with  light  ad-
ministered the  Light  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of
My  only-begotten  Son,  and  all  the  Sacraments.
And  these  My  anointed  ones  and  ministers  are


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  253


peculiarly  beloved  by  Me,  on  account  of  the
dignity  which  I  placed  in  them,  and  because  this
Treasure  which  I  placed  in  their  hands  they  did
not  hide  through  negligence  and  ignorance,  but
rather  recognised  it  to  be  from  Me,  and  exer-
cised it  with  care  and  profound  humility  with
true  and  real  virtues  ;  and  because  I,  for  the
salvation  of  souls,  having  placed  them  in  so
much  excellency  they  never  rested  like  good
shepherds  from  putting  the  sheep  into  the  fold
of  the  holy  Church,  and  even  out  of  love  and
hunger  for  souls  they  gave  themselves  to  die,  to
get  them  out  of  the  hands  of  the  devil.  They
made  themselves  infirm  with  those  who  were
infirm,  so  that  they  might  not  be  overcome  with
despair,  and  to  give  them  more  courage  in  ex-
posing their  infirmity,  they  would  ofttimes  lend
countenance  to  their  infirmity  and  say,  *  I,  too,
am  infirm  with  thee.'  They  wept  with  those
who  wept,  and  rejoiced  with  those  who  rejoiced ;
and  thus  sweetly  they  knew  to  give  every  one
his  nourishment,  preserving  the  good  and  re-
joicing in  their  virtues,  not  being  gnawed  by
envy,  but  expanded  with  the  broadness  of  love
for  their  neighbours,  and  those  under  them.
They  drew  the  imperfect  ones  out  of  imperfec-
tion, themselves  becoming  imperfect  and  infirm
with  them,  as  I  told  thee,  with  true  and  holy
compassion,  and  correcting  them  and  giving
them  penance  for  the  sins  they  committed —
they  through  love  endured  their  penance  to-
gether with  them.    For  through  love,  they  who


254     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


gave  the  penance,  bore  more  pain  than  they  who
received  it ;  and  there  were  even  those  who
actually  performed  the  penance,  and  especially
when  they  had  seen  that  it  had  appeared  par-
ticularly difficult  to  the  penitent.  Wherefore
by  that  act  the  difficulty  became  changed  into
sweetness.

"  Oh  !  My  beloved  ones,  they  made  themselves
subjects,  being  prelates,  they  made  themselves
servants,  being  lords,  they  made  themselves  in-
firm, being  whole,  and  without  infirmity  and  the
leprosy  of  mortal  sin,  being  strong  they  made
themselves  weak,  with  the  foolish  and  simple
they  showed  themselves  simple,  and  with  the
small  insignificant.  And  so  with  love  they  knew
how  to  be  all  things  to  all  men,  and  to  give  to
each  one  his  nourishment.  What  caused  them
to  do  thus  ?  The  hunger  and  desire  for  My
honour  and  the  salvation  of  souls  which  they
had  conceived  in  Me.  They  ran  to  feed  on  it
at  the  table  of  the  holy  Cross,  not  fleeing  from
or  refusing  any  labour,  but  with  zeal  for  souls
and  for  the  good  of  the  holy  Church  and  the
spread  of  the  faith,  they  put  themselves  in  the
midst  of  the  thorns  of  tribulation,  and  exposed
themselves  to  every  peril  with  true  patience,
offering  incense  odoriferous  with  anxious  desires,
and  humble  and  continual  prayers.  With  tears
and  sweat  they  anointed  the  wounds  of  their
neighbour,  that  is  the  wounds  of  the  guilt  of
mortal  sin,  which  latter  were  perfectly  cured,
the  ointment  so  made,  being  received  in  humility."


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  255


A  brief  repetition  of  the  preceding  chapter  ;  and  of
the  reverence  which  should  he  paid  to  priests^
whether  they  are  good  or  bad.

"  I  have  shown  thee,  dearest  daughter,  a  sample
of  the  excellence  of  good  priests  (for  what  I  have
shown  thee  is  only  a  sample  of  what  that  excel-
lence really  is),  and  I  have  told  thee  of  the  dignity
in  which  I  have  placed  them,  having  elected  them
for  My  ministers,  on  account  of  which  dignity
and  authority  I  do  not  wish  them  to  be  punished
by  the  hand  of  seculars  on  account  of  any  personal
defect,  for  those  who  punish  them  offend  Me
miserably.  But  I  wish  seculars  to  hold  them  in
due  reverence,  not  for  their  own  sakes,  as  I  have
said,  but  for  Mine,  by  reason  of  the  authority
which  I  have  given  them.  Wherefore  this  re-
verence should  never  diminish  in  the  case  of
priests  whose  virtue  grows  weak,  any  more  than
in  the  case  of  those  virtuous  ones  of  whose  good-
ness I  have  spoken  to  thee  ;  for  all  alike  have
been  appointed  ministers  of  the  Sun — that  is  of
the  Body  and  Blood  of  My  Son,  and  of  the  other
Sacraments.

"This  dignity  belongs  to  good  and  bad  alike —
all  have  the  Sun  to  administer,  as  has  been  said,
and  perfect  priests  are  themselves  in  a  condition
of  light,  that  is  to  say,  they  illuminate  and  warm
their  neighbours  through  their  love.  And  with
this  heat  they  cause  virtues  to  spring  up  and
bear  fruit  in  the  souls  of  their  subjects.  I  have
appointed  them  to  be  in  very  truth  your  guardian


256     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

angels  to  protect  you  ;  to  inspire  your  hearts  with
good  thoughts  by  their  holy  prayers,  and  to  teach
you  My  doctrine  reflected  in  the  mirror  of  their
life,  and  to  serve  you  by  administering  to  you
the  holy  Sacraments,  thus  serving  you,  watching
over  you,  and  inspiring  you  with  good  and  holy
thoughts  as  does  an  angel.

"  See,  then,  that  besides  the  dignity  to  which  I
have  appointed  them,  how  worthy  they  are  of
being  loved,  when  they  also  possess  the  adorn-
ment of  virtue,  as  did  those  of  whom  I  spoke  to
thee,  which  are  all  bound  and  obliged  to  possess,
and  in  what  great  reverence  you  should  hold
them,  for  they  are  My  beloved  children  and
shine  each  as  a  sun  in  the  mystical  body  of  the
holy  Church  by  their  virtues,  for  every  virtuous
man  is  worthy  of  love,  and  these  all  the  more
by  reason  of  the  ministry  which  I  have  placed
in  their  hands.  You  should  love  them  therefore
by  reason  of  the  virtue  and  dignity  of  the  Sacra-
ment, and  by  reason  of  that  very  virtue  and
dignity  you  should  hate  the  defects  of  those  who
live  miserably  in  sin,  but  not  on  that  account
appoint  yourselves  their  judges,  which  I  forbid,
because  they  are  My  Christs,  and  you  ought  to
love  and  reverence  the  authority  which  I  have
given  them.  You  know  well  that  if  a  filthy
and  badly  dressed  person  brought  you  a  great
treasure  from  which  you  obtained  life,  you  would
not  hate  the  bearer,  however  ragged  and  filthy
he  might  be,  through  love  of  the  treasure  and
of  the  lord  who  sent  it  to  you.    His  state  would


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  257


indeed  displease  you,  and  you  would  be  anxious
through  love  of  his  master  that  he  should  be
cleansed  from  his  foulness  and  properly  clothed.
This,  then,  is  your  duty  according  to  the  demands
of  charity,  and  thus  I  wish  you  to  act  with  regard
to  such  badly  ordered  priests,  who  themselves
filthy  and  clothed  in  garments  ragged  with  vice
through  their  separation  from  My  love,  bring
you  great  Treasures — that  is  to  say,  the  Sacra-
ments of  the  holy  Church — from  which  you
obtain  the  life  of  grace,  receiving  Them  worthily
(in  spite  of  the  great  defects  there  may  be  in
them)  through  love  of  Me,  the  Eternal  God,
who  send  them  to  you,  and  through  love  of
that  life  of  grace  which  you  receive  from  the
great  treasure,  by  which  they  administer  to  you
the  whole  of  God  and  the  whole  of  Man,  that
is  to  say,  the  Body  and  Blood  of  My  Son  united
to  My  Divine  nature.  Their  sins  indeed  should
displease  you,  and  you  should  hate  them,  and
strive  with  love  and  holy  prayer  to  re-clothe
them,  washing  away  their  foulness  with  your
tears — that  is  to  say,  that  you  should  offer  them
before  Me  with  tears  and  great  desire,  that  I
may  re-clothe  them  in  My  goodness,  with  the
garment  of  charity.  Know  well  that  I  wish  to
do  them  grace,  if  only  they  will  dispose  them-
selves to  receive  it,  and  you  to  pray  for  it ;  for  it
is  not  according  to  My  will  that  they  should
administer  to  you  the  Sun  being  themselves  in
darkness,  not  that  they  should  be  stripped  of
the  garment  of  virtue,  foully  living  in  dishonour ;

R


258      ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


on  the  contrary  I  have  given  them  to  you,  and
appointed  them  to  be  earthly  angels  and  suns,
as  I  have  said.  It  not  being  My  will  that  they
should  be  in  this  state,  ye  should  pray  for  them,
and  not  judge  them,  leaving  their  judgment  to
Me.  And  I,  moved  by  your  prayers,  will  do
them  mercy  if  they  will  only  receive  it,  but  if
they  do  not  correct  their  life,  their  dignity  will
be  the  cause  of  their  ruin.  For  if  they  do  not
accept  the  breadth  of  My  mercy,  I,  the  Supreme
Judge,  shall  terribly  condemn  them  at  their  last
extremity,  and  they  will  be  sent  to  the  eternal
fire."

Of  the  difference  between  the  death  of  a  just  man
and  that  of  a  sinner,  and  first  of  the  death
of  the  just  man.

"  Having  told  thee  how  the  world  and  the
devils  accuse  these  wretches,  which  is  indeed  the
truth,  I  wish  to  speak  to  thee  in  more  detail  on
this  point  (so  that  thou  mayest  have  greater  com-
passion on  these  poor  wretches),  telling  thee  how
different  are  the  struggles  of  the  soul  of  a  just
man  to  those  of  a  sinner,  and  how  different  are
their  deaths,  and  how  the  peace  of  the  just  man's
death  is  greater  or  less  according  to  the  perfec-
tion of  his  soul.  For  I  wish  thee  to  know  that
all  the  sufferings  which  rational  creatures  endure
depend  on  their  will,  because  if  their  will  were
in  accordance  with  mine  they  would  endure  no
suffering,  not  that  they  would  have  no  labours


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  259


on  that  account,  but  because  labours  cause  no
suffering  to  a  will  which  gladly  endures  them,
seeing  that  they  are  ordained  by  My  will.  Such
men  as  these  wage  war  with  the  world,  the  Devil,
and  their  own  sensuality  through  holy  hatred  of
themselves.  Wherefore  when  they  come  to  the
point  of  death,  they  die  peacefully,  because  they
have  vanquished  their  enemies  during  their  life.
The  world  cannot  accuse  such  a  man,  because  he
saw  through  its  deceptions  and  therefore  renounced
it  with  all  its  delights.  His  sensual  fragility  and
his  body  do  not  accuse  him,  because  he  bound
sensuality  like  a  slave  with  the  rein  of  reason,
macerating  his  flesh  with  penance,  with  watch-
ings,  and  humble  and  continual  prayer.  The
will  of  his  senses  he  slew  with  hatred  and  dislike
of  vice,  and  with  love  of  virtue.  He  has  entirely
lost  all  tenderness  for  his  body,  which  tenderness
and  love  between  the  soul  and  the  body  makes
death  seem  difficult,  and  on  account  of  it  man
naturally  fears  death  ;  but  since  the  virtue  of  a  just
and  perfect  man  transcends  nature,  extinguishing
his  natural  fear  and  overcoming  it  with  holy  hatred
of  himself  and  desire  of  arriving  at  his  last  end,
his  natural  tenderness  cannot  make  war  on  him,
and  his  conscience  remains  in  peace  ;  for  during
his  life  his  conscience  kept  a  good  guard,  warning
him  when  enemies  were  coming  to  attack  the  city
of  his  soul,  like  a  watch-dog  which  stands  at  the
door,  and  when  it  sees  enemies  warns  the  guards
by  its  barking,  for  in  this  way  the  dog  of  con-
science warns  the  sentry  of  reason,  and  the  reason


26o     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


together  with  the  free-will  know  by  the  light  of
the  intellect  whether  the  stranger  be  friend  or
enemy.  To  a  friend,  that  is  to  say,  to  virtue
and  holy  thoughts,  he  gave  his  delighted  love,
receiving  and  using  these  with  great  solicitude  ;
to  an  enemy,  that  is  to  say,  to  vice  and  wicked
thoughts,  he  gave  hatred  and  displeasure.  And
with  the  knife  of  hatred  of  self,  and  love  of  Me,
and  with  the  light  of  reason,  and  the  hand  of
free-will  he  struck  his  enemies ;  so  that  at  the
point  of  death  his  conscience,  having  been  a
faithful  guardian,  does  not  gnaw  but  remains
in  peace.

4 4  It  is  true  that  a  just  soul,  through  humility,
and  because  at  the  moment  of  death  she  realises
better  the  value  of  time  and  of  the  jewels  of
virtue,  reproves  herself,  seeming  to  herself  to
have  used  her  time  but  little ;  but  this  is  not
an  afflictive  pain,  but  rather  profitable,  for  the
soul  recollected  in  herself,  is  caused  by  it  to
throw  herself  before  the  Blood  of  the  humble
and  immaculate  Lamb  My  Son.  The  just  man
does  not  turn  his  head  to  admire  his  past  virtues,
because  he  neither  can  nor  will  hope  in  his  own
virtues,  but  only  in  the  Blood  in  which  he  has
found  mercy ;  and  as  he  lived  in  the  memory
of  that  Blood,  so  in  death  he  is  inebriated  and
drowned  in  the  same.  How  is  it  that  the  devils
cannot  reprove  him  of  sin  ?  Because  during  his  life
he  conquered  their  malice  with  wisdom,  yet  they
come  round  him  to  see  if  they  can  acquire  any-
thing, and  appear  in  horrible  shapes  in  order  to


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  261


frighten  him  with  hideous  aspect,  and  many  diverse
phantasms,  but  the  poison  of  sin  not  being  in  his
soul,  their  aspect  causes  him  no  terror  or  fear,  as
it  would  do  to  another  who  had  lived  wickedly
in  the  world.  Wherefore  the  devils,  seeing  that
the  soul  has  entered  into  the  Blood  with  ardent
love,  cannot  endure  the  sight,  but  stand  afar  off
shooting  their  arrows.  But  their  war  and  their
shouts  cannot  hurt  that  soul,  who  already  is
beginning  to  taste  eternal  life,  as  I  said  to  thee
in  another  place,  for  with  the  eye  of  the  intellect
illuminated  by  the  pupil  of  the  holy  faith,  she
sees  Me,  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  Good,  whom
she  hopes  to  obtain  by  grace,  not  as  her  due,
but  by  virtue  of  Jesus  Christ  My  Son.

"Wherefore  opening  the  arms  of  hope  and
seizing  Him  with  the  hands  of  love,  she  seems
to  enter  into  His  possession  before  she  actually
does  so,  in  the  way  which  I  have  narrated  to
thee  in  another  place.  Passing  suddenly,  drowned
in  the  Blood,  by  the  narrow  door  of  the  Word
she  reaches  Me,  the  Sea  Pacific.  For  sea  and
door  are  united  together.  I  and  the  Truth,  My
only-begotten  Son  being  one  and  the  same  thing.
What  joy  such  a  soul  receives  who  sees  herself
so  sweetly  arrived  at  this  pass,  for  in  Truth  she
tastes  the  happiness  of  the  angelic  nature  !  This
joy  is  received  by  all  those  who  pass  in  this
sweet  manner,  but  to  a  far  greater  extent  by
My  ministers,  of  whom  I  spoke  to  thee,  who
have  lived  like  angels,  for  in  this  life  have  they
lived  with  greater  knowledge,  and  with  greater


262     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


hunger  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  I  do  not  speak
only  of  the  light  of  virtue  which  all  can  have  in
general,  but  of  the  supernatural  light  which  these
men  possessed  over  and  above  the  light  of  virtuous
living,  the  light,  that  is,  of  holy  science,  by  which
science  they  knew  more  of  My  Truth,  and  he
who  knows  more  loves  Me  more,  and  he  who
loves  Me  more  receives  more.  Your  reward  is
measured  according  to  the  measure  of  your  love,
and  if  thou  shouldest  ask  Me,  whether  one  who
has  no  science  can  attain  to  this  love,  I  should
reply,  yes  it  is  possible  that  he  may  attain  to  it,
but  an  individual  case  does  not  make  a  general
law  and  I  always  discourse  to  thee  in  general.

"  They  also  receive  greater  dignity  on  account
of  their  priesthood,  because  they  have  personally
received  the  office  of  eating  souls  in  My  honour.
For  just  as  every  one  has  the  office  of  remaining
in  charity  with  his  neighbour,  to  them  is  given
the  office  of  administering  the  Blood,  and  of
governing  souls.

"  Wherefore  if  they  do  this  solicitously  and
with  love  of  virtue  they  receive,  as  has  been
said,  more  than  others.  Oh !  how  happy  are
their  souls  when  they  come  to  the  extremity  of
death  !  For  they  have  been  the  defenders  and
preachers  of  the  faith  to  their  neighbour.  This
faith  they  have  incarnated  in  their  very  marrow,
and  with  it  they  see  their  place  of  repose  in  Me.
The  hope  with  which  they  have  lived,  confiding
in  My  providence  and  losing  all  trust  in  them-
selves, in  that  they  did  not  hope  in  their  own


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  263


knowledge,  and  having  lost  hope  in  themselves,
placed  no  inordinate  love  in  any  fellow-creature
or  in  any  created  thing  ;  having  lived  in  voluntary
poverty,  causes  them  now  with  great  delight  to
lift  their  confidence  towards  Me.  Their  heart,
which  was  a  vessel  of  love,  inscribed  by  their
ardent  charity  with  My  name,  they  showed  forth
with  the  example  of  their  good  and  holy  life  and
by  the  doctrine  of  their  words  to  their  neighbour.
This  heart  then  arises  and  seizes  Me,  who  am  its
End,  with  ineffable  love,  restoring  to  Me  the  pearl
of  justice  which  it  always  carried  before  it,  doing
justice  to  all,  and  discreetly  rendering  to  each  his
due.  Wherefore  this  man  renders  to  Me  justice
with  true  humility,  and  renders  glory  and  praise
to  My  Name,  because  he  refers  to  Me  the  grace
of  having  been  able  to  run  his  course  with  a
pure  and  holy  conscience,  and  with  himself  he  is
indignant,  deeming  himself  unworthy  of  receiving
such  grace.

"  His  conscience  gives  good  testimony  of  him
to  Me,  and  I  justly  give  him  the  crown  of  justice,
adorned  with  the  pearls  of  the  virtues — that  is,
of  the  fruit  which  love  has  drawn  from  the
virtues.  Oh,  earthly  angel !  happy  thou  art  in
that  thou  hast  not  been  ungrateful  for  the  benefits
received  from  Me,  and  hast  not  been  negligent
or  ignorant,  but  hast  solicitously  opened  thine
eye  by  the  true  light,  and  kept  it  on  thy  subjects,
and  hast  faithfully  and  manfully  followed  the
doctrine  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  sweet  Christ
Jesus,  My  only-begotten  Son,  wherefore  thou


264     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


art  really  now  passing  through  Him,  the  Door,
bathed  and  drowned  in  His  blood,  with  thy  troop
of  lambs  of  whom  thou  hast  brought  many  by
thy  holy  doctrine  and  example  to  eternal  life,
and  hast  left  many  behind  thee  in  a  state  of  grace.

"  Oh,  dearest  daughter  !  to  such  as  these  the
vision  of  the  devils  can  do  no  harm,  because  of
the  vision  which  they  have  of  Me,  which  they
see  by  faith  and  hold  by  love ;  the  darkness  and
the  terrible  aspect  of  the  demons  do  not  give
them  trouble  or  any  fear,  because  in  them  is  not
the  poison  of  sin.  There  is  no  servile  fear  in
them,  but  holy  fear.  Wherefore  they  do  not
fear  the  demon's  deception,  because  with  super-
natural light  and  with  the  light  of  Holy  Scrip-
ture they  know  them,  so  that  they  do  not  cause
them  darkness  or  disquietude.  So  thus  they
gloriously  pass,  bathed  in  the  blood,  with  hunger
for  the  salvation  of  souls,  all  on  fire  with  love
for  the  neighbour,  having  passed  through  the
door  of  the  word  and  entered  into  Me ;  and  by
My  goodness  each  one  is  arranged  in  his  place,
and  to  each  one  is  measured  of  the  affection  of
love  according  as  he  has  measured  to  Me."


Of  the  death  of  sinners,  and  of  their  pains  in  the
hour  of  death.

"  Not  so  excellent,  dearest  daughter,  is  the  end
of  these  other  poor  wretches  who  are  in  great
misery  as  I  have  related  to  thee.  How  terrible
and  dark  is  their  death !    Because  in  the  moment


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  265


of  death,  as  I  told  thee,  the  Devil  accuses  them
with  great  terror  and  darkness,  showing  his  face,
which  thou  knowest  is  so  horrible  that  the  crea-
ture would  rather  choose  any  pain  that  can  be
suffered  in  this  world  than  see  it ;  and  so  greatly
does  he  freshen  the  sting  of  conscience  that  it
gnaws  him  horribly.  The  disordinate  delights
and  sensuality  of  which  he  made  lords  over  his
reason,  accuse  him  miserably,  because  then  he
knows  the  truth  of  that  which  at  first  he  knew
not,  and  his  error  brings  him  to  great  confusion.

"  In  his  life  he  lived  unfaithfully  to  Me —
self-love  having  veiled  the  pupil  of  the  most
holy  faith — wherefore  the  Devil  torments  him
with  infidelity  in  order  to  bring  him  to  despair.
Oh  !  how  hard  for  them  is  this  battle,  because
it  finds  them  disarmed,  without  the  armour  of
affection  and  charity;  because,  as  members  of
the  Devil,  they  have  been  deprived  of  it  all.
Wherefore  they  have  not  the  supernatural  light,
neither  the  light  of  science,  because  they  did  not
understand  it,  the  horns  of  their  pride  not  letting
them  understand  the  sweetness  of  its  marrow.
Wherefore  now  in  the  great  battle  they  know
not  what  to  do.  They  are  not  nourished  in
hope,  because  they  have  not  hoped  in  Me,  neither
in  the  Blood  of  which  I  made  them  ministers,
but  in  themselves  alone,  and  in  the  dignities
and  delights  of  the  world.  And  the  incarnate
wretch  did  not  see  that  all  was  counted  to  him
with  interest,  and  that  as  a  debtor  he  would
have  to  render  an  account  to  Me  ;  now  he  finds


266     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


himself  denuded  and  without  any  virtue,  and  on
whichever  side  he  turns  he  hears  nothing  but
reproaches  with  great  confusion.  His  injustice
which  he  practised  in  his  life  accuses  him  to  his
conscience,  wherefore  he  dares  not  ask  other  than
justice.

u  And  I  tell  thee  that  so  great  is  that  shame
and  confusion  that  unless  in  their  life  they  have
taken  the  habit  of  hoping  in  My  mercy,  that
is,  have  taken  the  milk  of  mercy  (although  on
account  of  their  sins  this  is  great  presumption,
for  you  cannot  truly  say  that  he  who  strikes  Me
with  the  arm  of  My  mercy  has  a  hope  in  mercy,
but  rather  has  presumption),  there  is  not  one  who
would  not  despair,  and  with  despair  they  would
arrive  with  the  Devil  in  eternal  damnation.

"  But  arriving  at  the  extremity  of  death,  and
recognising  his  sin,  his  conscience  unloaded  by
holy  confession,  and  presumption  taken  away,  so
that  he  offends  no  more,  there  remains  mercy,
and  with  this  mercy  he  can,  if  he  will,  take  hold
on  hope.  This  is  the  effect  of  Mercy  to  cause
them  to  hope  therein  during  their  life,  although
I  do  not  grant  them  this,  so  that  they  should
offend  Me  by  means  of  My  mercy,  but  rather
that  they  should  dilate  themselves  in  charity,
and  in  the  consideration  of  My  goodness.  But
they  act  in  a  contrary  way,  because  they  offend
Me  in  the  hope  which  they  have  in  My  mercy.
And  nevertheless,  I  keep  them  in  this  hope  so
that  at  the  last  moment  they  may  have  some-
thing which  they  may  lay  hold  of,  and  by  so


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  267


doing  not  faint  away  with  the  condemnation
which  they  receive,  and  thus  arrive  at  despair ;
for  this  final  sin  of  despair  is  much  more  dis-
pleasing to  Me  and  injures  them  much  more
than  all  the  other  sins  which  they  have  com-
mitted. And  this  is  the  reason  why  this  sin  is
more  dangerous  to  them  and  displeasing  to  Me,
because  they  commit  other  sins  through  some
delight  of  their  own  sensuality,  and  they  some-
times grieve  for  them,  and  if  they  grieve  in  the
right  way  their  grief  will  procure  them  mercy.
But  it  is  no  fragility  of  your  nature  which  moves
you  to  despair,  for  there  is  no  pleasure  and
nothing  but  intolerable  suffering  in  it.  One
who  despairs  despises  My  mercy,  making  his  sin
to  be  greater  than  mercy  and  goodness.  Where-
fore, if  a  man  fall  into  this  sin,  he  does  not
repent,  and  does  not  truly  grieve  for  his  offence
against  Me  as  he  should,  grieving  indeed  for  his
own  loss,  but  not  for  the  offence  done  to  Me,
and  therefore  he  receives  eternal  damnation.
See,  therefore,  that  this  sin  alone  leads  him  to
hell,  where  he  is  punished  for  this  and  all  the
other  sins  which  he  has  committed  ;  whereas  had
he  grieved  and  repented  for  the  offence  done  to
Me,  and  hoped  in  My  mercy,  he  would  have
found  mercy,  for,  as  I  have  said  to  thee,  My
mercy  is  greater  without  any  comparison  than
all  the  sins  which  any  creature  can  commit ;
wherefore  it  greatly  displeases  Me  that  they
should  consider  their  sins  to  be  greater.

"  Despair  is  that  sin  which  is  pardoned  neither


268      ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


here  nor  hereafter,  and  it  is  because  despair  dis-
pleases Me  so  much  that  I  wish  them  to  hope
in  My  mercy  at  the  point  of  death,  even  if  their
life  have  been  disordered  and  wicked.  This  is
why  during  their  life  I  use  this  sweet  trick  with
them,  making  them  hope  greatly  in  My  mercy,
for  when,  having  fed  themselves  with  this  hope,
they  arrive  at  death,  they  are  not  so  inclined  to
abandon  it,  on  account  of  the  severe  condemna-
tion they  receive,  as  if  they  had  not  so  nourished
themselves.

"  All  this  is  given  them  by  the  fire  and  abyss
of  My  inestimable  love,  but  because  they  have
used  it  in  the  darkness  of  self-love,  from  which
has  proceeded  their  every  sin,  they  have  not
known  it  in  truth,  but  in  so  far  as  they  have
turned  their  affections  towards  the  sweetness  of
My  mercy  they  have  thought  of  it  with  great
presumption.  And  this  is  another  cause  of
reproof  which  their  conscience  gives  them  in
the  likeness  of  the  Devil,  reproving  them  in  that
they  should  have  used  the  time  and  the  breadth
of  My  mercy  in  which  they  hoped,  in  charity
and  love  of  virtue,  and  that  time  which  I  gave
them  through  love  should  have  been  spent  in
holiness,  whereas  with  all  their  time  and  great
hope  of  My  mercy  they  did  nothing  but  offend  Me
miserably.  Oh  !  blinder  than  the  blind  !  Thou
hast  hidden  thy  pearl  and  thy  talent  which  I
placed  in  thy  hands  in  order  that  thou  mightest
gain  more  with  it,  but  thou  in  thy  presumption
wouldst  not  do  My  will,  rather  thou  didst  hide


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  269


it  under  the  ground  of  disordinate  self-love,  which
now  renders  thee  the  fruit  of  death.

' 1  Thy  miseries  are  not  hid  from  thee  now,  for
the  worm  of  conscience  sleeps  no  longer,  but  is
gnawing  thee,  the  devils  shout  and  render  to  thee
the  reward  which  they  are  accustomed  to  give
their  servants,  that  is  to  say,  confusion  and  con-
demnation ;  they  wish  to  bring  thee  to  despair,
so  that  at  the  moment  of  death  thou  mayest  not
escape  from  their  hands,  and  therefore  they  try
to  confuse  thee,  so  that  afterwards  when  thou
art  with  them  they  may  render  to  thee  of  the
part  which  is  theirs.  Oh,  wretch !  the  dignity
in  which  I  placed  thee,  thou  now  seest  shining
as  it  really  is,  and  thou  knowest  to  thy  shame
that  thou  hast  held  and  used  in  such  guilty
darkness  the  substance  of  the  holy  Church,  that
thou  seest  thyself  to  be  a  thief,  a  debtor,  who
ought  to  pay  his  debt  to  the  poor  and  the  holy
Church.  Then  thy  conscience  represents  to  thee
that  thou  hast  spent  the  money  on  public  harlots,
and  hast  brought  up  thy  children  and  enriched
thy  relations,  and  hast  thrown  it  away  on  glut-
tony and  on  many  silver  vessels  and  other  adorn-
ments for  thy  house.  Whereas  thou  shouldst
have  lived  in  voluntary  poverty.

"  Thy  conscience  represents  to  thee  the  divine
office  which  thou  didst  neglect,  by  which  thou
didst  fall  into  the  guilt  of  mortal  sin,  and  how
even  when  thou  didst  recite  it  with  thy  mouth
thy  heart  was  far  from  Me.  Conscience  also
shows  thee  thy  subjects,  that  is  to  say,  the  love


270     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


and  hunger  which  thou  shouldest  have  felt
towards  nourishing  them  in  virtue,  giving  them
the  example  of  thy  life  and  striking  them  with
the  hand  of  mercy  and  the  rod  of  justice,  and
because  thou  didst  the  contrary  thy  conscience
and  the  horrible  likeness  of  the  Devil  reproves
thee.

"  And  if  as  a  prelate  thou  hast  given  prelacies
or  any  charge  of  souls  unjustly  to  one  of  thy
subjects,  that  is,  that  thou  hast  not  considered
to  whom  and  how  thou  wert  giving  it,  the  Devil
puts  this  also  before  thy  conscience,  because  thou
oughtest  to  have  given  it,  not  on  account  of
pleasant  words,  nor  in  order  to  please  creatures,
nor  for  the  sake  of  gifts,  but  solely  with  regard
to  virtue,  My  honour  and  the  salvation  of  souls.
And  since  thou  hast  not  done  so  thou  art  re-
proved, and  for  thy  greater  pain  and  confusion
thou  hast  before  thy  conscience  and  the  light  of
thine  intellect  that  which  thou  hast  done  and
ought  not  to  have  done,  and  that  which  thou
oughtest  to  have  done  and  hast  not  done.

"  I  wish  thee  to  know,  dearest  daughter,  that
whiteness  is  better  seen  when  placed  on  a  black
ground,  and  blackness  on  a  white,  than  when  they
are  separated.  So  it  happens  to  these  wretches,
to  these  in  particular  and  to  all  others  in  general,
for  at  death  when  the  soul  begins  to  see  its  woes,
and  the  just  man  his  beatitude,  his  evil  life  is
represented  to  a  wicked  man,  and  there  is  no
reason  that  any  one  should  remind  him  of  the
sins  that  he  has  committed,  for  his  conscience


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  271


places  them  before  him,  together  with  the  virtues
which  he  ought  to  have  practised.  Why  the
virtues  ?  For  his  greater  shame.  For  vice  being
placed  on  a  ground  of  virtue  is  known  better  on
account  of  the  virtue,  and  the  better  he  knows
his  sin,  the  greater  his  shame,  and  by  comparison
with  his  sin  he  knows  better  the  perfection  of
virtue,  wherefore  he  grieves  the  more,  for  he
sees  that  his  own  life  was  devoid  of  any ;  and  I
wish  thee  to  know  that  in  this  knowledge  which
dying  sinners  have  of  virtue  and  vice  they  see
only  too  clearly  the  good  which  follows  the
virtue  of  a  just  man,  and  the  pain  that  comes
on  him  who  has  lain  in  the  darkness  of  mortal
sin.  I  do  not  give  him  this  knowledge  so  that
he  may  despair,  but  so  that  he  may  come  to  a
perfect  self-knowledge  and  shame  for  his  sins,
with  hope,  so  that  with  that  pain  and  knowledge
he  may  pay  for  his  sins,  and  appease  My  anger,
humbly  begging  My  mercy.  The  virtuous
woman  increases  thereby  in  joy  and  in  know-
ledge of  My  love,  for  he  attributes  the  grace  of
having  followed  virtue  in  the  doctrine  of  My
truth  to  Me  and  not  to  himself,  wherefore  he
exalts  in  Me,  with  this  truly  illuminated  know-
ledge, and  tastes  and  receives  the  sweet  end  of
his  being  in  the  way  which  I  have  related  to
thee  in  another  place.  So  that  the  one,  that  is
to  say,  the  just  man,  who  has  lived  in  ardent
charity,  exults  in  joy,  while  the  wicked  man  is
darkened  and  confounded  in  sorrow.

"  To  the  just  man  the  appearance  and  vision


272     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


of  the  Devil  causes  no  harm  or  fear,  for  fear  and
harm  can  only  be  caused  to  him  by  sin ;  but
those  who  have  passed  their  lives  lasciviously  and
in  many  sins,  receive  both  harm  and  fear  from
the  appearance  of  the  devils,  not  indeed  the
harm  of  despair  if  they  do  not  wish  it,  but  the
suffering  of  condemnation,  of  the  refreshing  of
the  worm  of  conscience,  and  of  fear  and  terror  at
their  horrible  aspect.  See  now,  dearest  daughter,
how  different  are  the  sufferings  and  the  battle  of
death  to  a  just  man  and  to  a  sinner,  and  how
different  is  their  end.

"  I  have  shown  to  the  eye  of  thy  intellect  a
very  small  part  of  what  happens,  and  so  small
is  what  I  have  shown  thee  with  regard  to  what
it  really  is,  to  the  suffering,  that  is,  of  the  one,
and  the  happiness  of  the  other,  that  it  is  but  a
trifle.  See  how  great  is  the  blindness  of  man,
and  in  particular  of  these  ministers,  for  the  more
they  have  received  of  Me,  and  the  more  they  are
enlightened  by  the  Holy  Scripture,  the  greater
are  their  obligations  and  more  intolerable  con-
fusion do  they  receive  for  not  fulfilling  them ;
the  more  they  knew  of  Holy  Scripture  during
their  life,  the  better  do  they  know  at  their  death
the  great  sins  they  have  committed,  and  their
torments  are  greater  than  those  of  others,  just
as  good  men  are  placed  in  a  higher  degree  of
excellence.  Theirs  is  the  fate  of  the  false  Chris-
tian, who  is  placed  in  Hell  in  greater  torment
than  a  pagan,  because  he  had  the  light  of  faith
and  renounced  it,  while  the  pagan  never  had  it.


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  273


"  So  these  wretches  will  be  punished  more  than
other  Christians  for  the  same  sin,  on  account  of
the  ministry  which  I  entrusted  to  them,  appoint-
ing them  to  administer  the  sun  of  the  holy
Sacrament,  and  because  they  had  the  light  of
science,  in  order  to  discern  the  truth  both  for
themselves  and  others  had  they  wished  to ;
wherefore  they  justly  receive  the  greater  pains.
But  the  wretches  do  not  know  this,  for  did  they
consider  their  state  at  all,  they  would  not  come
to  such  misery,  but  would  be  that  which  they
ought  to  be  and  are  not.  For  the  whole  world
has  thus  become  corrupt,  they  being  much  more
guilty  than  seculars,  according  to  their  state ;  for
with  their  stench  they  defile  the  face  of  their
soul,  and  corrupt  their  subjects,  and  suck  the
blood  from  My  spouse,  that  is,  the  holy  Church,
wherefore  through  these  sins  they  make  her
grow  pale,  because  they  divert  to  themselves  the
love  and  charity  which  they  should  have  to
this  divine  spouse,  and  think  of  nothing  but
stripping  her  for  their  own  advantage,  seizing
prelacies,  and  great  properties,  when  they  ought
to  be  seeking  souls.  Wherefore  through  their
evil  life,  seculars  become  irreverent  and  dis-
obedient to  the  holy  Church,  not  that  they  ought
on  that  account  to  do  so,  or  that  their  sins  are
excused  through  the  sins  of  My  ministers."


s


274     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


How  this  devout  soul,  praising  and  thanking  GOD,
made  a  prayer  for  the  Holy  Church.

Then  this  soul,  as  if  inebriated,  tormented,  and
on  fire  with  love,  her  heart  wounded  with  great
bitterness,  turned  herself  to  the  Supreme  and
Eternal  Goodness,  saying  :  "  Oh  !  Eternal  God  !
oh  !  Light  above  every  other  light,  from  whom
issues  all  light !  Oh  !  Fire  above  every  fire,
because  Thou  art  the  only  Fire  who  burnest
without  consuming,  and  consumest  all  sin  and
self-love  found  in  the  soul,  not  afflicting  her,
but  fattening  her  with  insatiable  love,  and  though
the  soul  is  filled  she  is  not  sated,  but  ever  desires
Thee,  and  the  more  of  Thee  she  has,  the  more
she  seeks — and  the  more  she  desires,  the  more
she  finds  and  tastes  of  Thee  —  Supreme  and
Eternal  Fire,  Abyss  of  Charity.  Oh  !  Supreme
and  Eternal  Good,  who  has  moved  Thee,  Infinite
God,  to  illuminate  me,  Thy  finite  creature,  with
the  light  of  Thy  Truth  ?  Thou,  the  same  Fire
of  Love  art  the  cause,  because  it  is  always  love
which  constrained  and  constrains  Thee  to  create
us  in  Thine  image  and  similitude,  and  to  do  us
mercy,  giving  immeasurable  and  infinite  graces
to  Thy  rational  creatures.  Oh  !  Goodness  above
all  goodness !  Thou  alone  art  He  who  is
Supremely  Good,  and  nevertheless  Thou  gavest
the  Word,  Thy  only-begotten  Son,  to  converse
with  us  filthy  ones  and  filled  with  darkness.
What  was  the  cause  of  this  ?  Love.  Because
Thou  lovedst  us  before  we  were.    Oh  !  Good  !


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  275


oh  !  Eternal  Greatness !  Thou  madest  Thyself
low  and  small  to  make  man  great.  On  which-
ever side  I  turn  I  find  nothing  but  the  abyss  and
fire  of  Thy  charity.  And  can  a  wretch  like  me
pay  back  to  Thee  the  graces  and  the  burning
charity  that  Thou  hast  shown  and  showest  with
so  much  burning  love  in  particular  to  me  beyond
common  charity,  and  the  love  that  Thou  showest
to  all  Thy  creatures  ?  No,  but  Thou  alone,
most  sweet  and  amorous  Father,  art  He  who
will  be  thankful  and  grateful  for  me,  that  is,
that  the  affection  of  Thy  charity  itself  will  render
Thee  thanks,  because  I  am  she  who  is  not,  and
if  I  spoke  as  being  anything  of  myself,  I  should
be  lying  by  my  own  head,  and  should  be  a  lying
daughter  of  the  Devil,  who  is  the  father  of  lies,
because  Thou  alone  art  He  who  is.  And  my
being  and  every  further  grace  that  Thou  hast
bestowed  upon  me,  I  have  from  Thee,  who
givest  them  to  me  through  love,  and  not  as
my  due.

"  Oh  !  sweetest  Father,  when  the  human  race
lay  sick  through  the  sin  of  Adam,  Thou  didst
send  it  a  Physician,  the  sweet  and  amorous  Word
— Thy  Son  ;  and  now,  when  I  was  lying  infirm
with  the  sickness  of  negligence  and  much  ignor-
ance, Thou,  most  soothing  and  sweet  Physician,
Eternal  God,  hast  given  a  soothing,  sweet,  and
bitter  medicine,  that  I  may  be  cured  and  rise
from  my  infirmity.  Thou  hast  soothed  me
because  with  Thy  love  and  gentleness  Thou
hast  manifested  Thyself  to  me,  Sweet  above  all


276     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

sweetness,  and  hast  illuminated  the  eye  of  my
intellect  with  the  light  of  most  holy  faith,  with
which  light,  according  as  it  has  pleased  Thee  to
manifest  it  to  me,  I  have  known  the  excellence
of  grace  which  Thou  hast  given  to  the  human
race,  administering  to  it  the  entire  God-Man  in
the  mystic  body  of  the  holy  Church.  And  I
have  known  the  dignity  of  Thy  ministers  whom
Thou  hast  appointed  to  administer  Thee  to  us.
I  desired  that  Thou  wouldest  fulfil  the  promise
that  Thou  madest  to  me,  and  Thou  gavest  much
more,  more  even  than  I  knew  how  to  ask  for.
Wherefore  I  know  in  truth  that  the  heart  of
man  knows  not  how  to  ask  or  desire  as  much
as  Thou  canst  give,  and  thus  I  see  that  Thou
art  He  who  is  the  Supreme  and  Eternal  Good,
and  that  we  are  they  who  are  not.  And  because
Thou  art  infinite,  and  we  are  finite,  Thou  givest
that  which  Thy  rational  creature  cannot  desire
enough  ;  for  she  cannot  desire  it  in  itself,  nor
in  the  way  in  which  Thou  canst  and  wilt  satisfy
the  soul,  filling  her  with  things  for  which  she
does  not  ask  Thee.  Moreover,  I  have  received
light  from  Thy  Greatness  and  Charity,  through
the  love  which  Thou  hast  for  the  whole  human
race,  and  in  particular  for  Thy  anointed  ones,
who  ought  to  be  earthly  angels  in  this  life.
Thou  hast  shown  me  the  virtue  and  beatitude
of  these  Thy  anointed  ones  who  have  lived  like
burning  lamps,  shining  with  the  Pearl  of  Justice
in  the  holy  Church.  And  by  comparison  with
these  I  have  better  understood  the  sins  of  those


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  277


who  live  wretchedly.  Wherefore  I  have  con-
ceived a  very  great  sorrow  at  Thy  offence  and
the  harm  done  to  the  whole  world,  for  they  do
harm  to  the  world,  being  mirrors  of  sin  when
they  ought  to  be  mirrors  of  virtue.  And  because
Thou  hast  manifested  and  grieved  over  their
iniquities  to  me — a  wretch  who  am  the  cause
and  instrument  of  many  sins — I  am  plunged  in
intolerable  grief.

"  Thou,  oh  !  inestimable  love,  hast  manifested
this  to  me,  giving  me  a  sweet  and  bitter  medicine
that  I  might  wholly  arise  out  of  the  infirmity  of
my  ignorance  and  negligence,  and  have  recourse
to  Thee  with  anxious  and  solicitous  desire,  know-
ing myself  and  Thy  goodness  and  the  offences
which  are  committed  against  Thee  by  all  sorts
of  people,  so  that  I  might  shed  a  river  of  tears,
drawn  from  the  knowledge  of  Thy  infinite  good-
ness, over  my  wretched  self  and  over  those  who
are  dead  in  that  they  live  miserably.  Wherefore
I  do  not  wish,  oh  !  Eternal  Father,  ineffable  Fire
of  Love,  that  my  heart  should  ever  grow  weary,
or  my  eyes  fail  through  tears,  in  desiring  Thy
honour  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  but  I  beg  of
Thee,  by  Thy  grace,  that  they  may  be  as  two
streams  of  water  issuing  from  Thee,  the  Sea
Pacific.  Thanks,  thanks  to  Thee,  oh  !  Father,
for  having  granted  me  that  which  I  asked  Thee
and  that  which  I  neither  knew  nor  asked,  for
by  thus  giving  me  matter  for  grief  Thou  hast
invited  me  to  offer  before  Thee  sweet,  loving,
and  yearning  desires,  with  humble  and  continual


278      ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


prayer.  Now  I  beg  of  Thee  that  Thou  wilt  do
mercy  to  the  world  and  to  the  holy  Church.
I  pray  Thee  to  fulfil  that  which  Thou  didst
cause  me  to  ask  Thee.  Alas  !  what  a  wretched
and  sorrowful  soul  is  mine,  the  cause  of  all  these
evils.  Do  not  put  off  any  longer  Thy  merciful
designs  towards  the  world,  but  descend  and  fulfil
the  desire  of  Thy  servants.

"  Ah  me !  Thou  causest  them  to  cry  in  order
to  hear  their  voices !  Thy  truth  told  us  to  cry
out,  and  we  should  be  answered ;  to  knock,
and  it  would  be  opened  to  us ;  to  beg,  and  it
would  be  given  to  us.  Oh  !  Eternal  Father,
Thy  servants  do  cry  out  to  Thy  mercy ;  do
Thou  then  reply.

"  I  know  well  that  mercy  is  Thine  own  attri-
bute, wherefore  Thou  canst  not  destroy  it  or
refuse  it  to  him  who  asks  for  it.  Thy  servants
knock  at  the  door  of  Thy  truth,  because  in  the
truth  of  Thy  only-begotten  Son  they  know  the
ineffable  love  which  Thou  hast  for  man,  where-
fore the  fire  of  Thy  love  ought  not  and  cannot
refrain  from  opening  to  him  who  knocks  with
perseverance.  Wherefore  open,  unlock,  and
break  the  hardened  hearts  of  Thy  creatures,
not  for  their  sakes  who  do  not  knock,  but  on
account  of  Thy  infinite  goodness,  and  through
love  of  Thy  servants  who  knock  at  Thee  for
their  sakes.  Grant  the  prayer  of  those,  Eternal
Father  who,  as  Thou  seest,  stand  at  the  door  of
Thy  truth  and  pray.  For  what  do  they  pray  ?
For  with  the  Blood  of  this  door — Thy  truth — hast


A  TREATISE  OF  PRAYER  279


Thou  washed  our  iniquities  and  destroyed  the
stain  of  Adam's  sin.  The  Blood  is  ours,  for
Thou  hast  made  it  our  bath,  wherefore  Thou
canst  not  deny  it  to  any  one  who  truly  asks
for  it.  Give,  then,  the  fruit  of  Thy  Blood  to
Thy  creatures.  Place  in  the  balance  the  price
of  the  blood  of  Thy  Son,  so  that  the  infernal
devils  may  not  carry  off  Thy  lambs.  Thou  art
the  Good  Shepherd  who,  to  fulfil  Thy  obedience,
laid  down  His  life  for  Thy  lambs,  and  made  for
us  a  bath  of  His  Blood.

"  That  Blood  is  what  Thy  hungry  servants
beg  of  Thee  at  this  door,  begging  Thee  through
it  to  do  mercy  to  the  world,  and  to  cause  Thy
holy  Church  to  bloom  with  the  fragrant  flowers
of  good  and  holy  pastors,  who  by  their  sweet
odour  shall  extinguish  the  stench  of  the  putrid
flowers  of  sin.  Thou  hast  said,  Eternal  Father,
that  through  the  love  which  Thou  hast  for  Thy
rational  creatures,  and  the  prayers  and  the  many
virtues  and  labours  of  Thy  servants,  Thou
wouldest  do  mercy  to  the  world,  and  reform
the  Church,  and  thus  give  us  refreshment ;
wherefore  do  not  delay,  but  turn  the  eye  of
Thy  mercy  towards  us,  for  Thou  must  first
reply  to  us  before  we  can  cry  out  with  the
voice  of  Thy  mercy.  Open  the  door  of  Thy
inestimable  love  which  Thou  hast  given  us
through  the  door  of  Thy  Word.  I  know
indeed  that  Thou  openest  before  even  we  can
knock,  for  it  is  with  the  affection  of  love  which
Thou  hast  given  to  Thy  servants,  that  they


2  8o     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


knock  and  cry  to  Thee,  seeking  Thy  honour
and  the  salvation  of  souls.  Give  them  then
the  bread  of  life,  that  is  to  say,  the  fruit  of
the  Blood  of  Thy  only- begotten  Son,  which
they  ask  of  Thee  for  the  praise  and  glory  of
My  name  and  the  salvation  of  souls.  For  more
glory  and  praise  will  be  Thine  in  saving  so  many
creatures,  than  in  leaving  them  obstinate  in  their
hardness  of  heart.  To  Thee,  Eternal  Father,
everything  is  possible,  and  even  though  Thou
hast  created  us  without  our  own  help,  Thou
wilt  not  save  us  without  it.  I  beg  of  Thee  to
force  their  wills,  and  dispose  them  to  wish  for
that  for  which  they  do  not  wish ;  and  this  I
ask  Thee  through  Thy  infinite  mercy.  Thou
hast  created  us  from  nothing,  now,  therefore,
that  we  are  in  existence,  do  mercy  to  us,  and
remake  the  vessels  which  Thou  hast  created  to
Thy  image  and  likeness.  Re-create  them  to
Grace  in  Thy  mercy  and  the  Blood  of  Thy
Son  sweet  Christ  Jesus."


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE


Here  begins  the  treatise  of  obedience,  and  first  of
where  obedience  may  be  found,  and  what  it
is  that  destroys  it,  and  what  is  the  sign  of  a
man's  possessing  it,  and  what  accompanies  and
nourishes  obedience.

The  Supreme  and  Eternal  Father,  kindly  turning
the  eye  of  His  mercy  and  clemency  towards  her,
replied  :  "  Thy  holy  desire  and  righteous  request,
oh  !  dearest  daughter,  have  a  right  to  be  heard,
and  inasmuch  as  I  am  the  Supreme  Truth,  I  will
keep  My  word,  fulfilling  the  promise  which  I
made  to  thee,  and  satisfying  thy  desire.  And  if
thou  ask  Me  where  obedience  is  to  be  found,
and  what  is  the  cause  of  its  loss,  and  the  sign  of
its  possession,  I  reply  that  thou  wilt  find  it  in  its
completeness  in  the  sweet  and  amorous  Word,
My  only-begotten  Son.  So  prompt  in  Him
was  this  virtue,  that,  in  order  to  fulfil  it,  He
hastened  to  the  shameful  death  of  the  Cross.
What  destroys  obedience  ?  Look  at  the  first
man  and  thou  wilt  see  the  cause  which  destroyed
the  obedience  imposed  on  him  by  Me,  the
Eternal  Father.  It  was  pride,  which  was  pro-
duced by  self-love,  and  desire   to    please  his

companion.    This  was  the  cause  that  deprived

281


282      ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


him  of  the  perfection  of  obedience,  giving  him
instead  disobedience,  depriving  him  of  the  life
of  grace,  and  slaying  his  innocence,  wherefore
he  fell  into  impurity  and  great  misery,  and  not
only  he,  but  the  whole  human  race,  as  I  said  to
thee.  The  sign  that  thou  hast  this  virtue  is
patience,  and  impatience  the  sign  that  you  have
it  not,  and  thou  wilt  find  that  this  is  indeed  so,
when  I  speak  to  thee  further  concerning  this
virtue.  But  observe  that  obedience  may  be  kept
in  two  ways,  of  which  one  is  more  perfect  than
the  other,  not  that  they  are  on  that  account
separated,  but  united  as  I  explained  to  thee  of
the  precepts  and  counsels.  The  one  way  is  the
most  perfect,  the  other  is  also  good  and  perfect ;
for  no  one  at  all  can  reach  eternal  life  if  he  be
not  obedient,  for  the  door  was  unlocked  by  the
key  of  obedience,  which  had  been  fastened  by
the  disobedience  of  Adam.  I,  then,  being  con-
strained by  My  infinite  goodness,  since  I  saw  that
man  whom  I  so  much  loved,  did  not  return  to
Me,  his  End,  took  the  keys  of  obedience  and
placed  them  in  the  hands  of  My  sweet  and
amorous  Word — the  Truth — and  He  becoming
the  porter  of  that  door,  opened  it,  and  no  one
can  enter  except  by  means  of  that  door  and  that
Porter.  Wherefore  He  said  in  the  Holy  Gospel
that  *  no  one  could  come  to  Me,  the  Father,  if  not
by  Him.'  When  He  returned  to  Me,  rising  to
Heaven  from  the  conversation  of  men  at  the
Ascension,  He  left  you  this  sweet  key  of  obe-
dience ;  for  as  thou  knowest  He  left  His  vicar,


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  283


the  Christ,  on  earth,  whom  you  are  all  obliged
to  obey  until  death,  and=  whoever  is  outside  His
obedience  is  in  a  state  of  damnation,  as  I  have
already  told  thee  in  another  place.  Now  I  wish
thee  to  see  and  know  this  most  excellent  virtue
in  that  humble  and  immaculate  Lamb,  and  the
source  whence  it  proceeds.  What  caused  the
great  obedience  of  the  Word  ?  The  love  which
He  had  for  My  honour  and  your  salvation.
Whence  proceeded  this  love  ?  From  the  clear
vision  with  which  His  soul  saw  the  divine  essence
and  the  eternal  Trinity,  thus  always  looking  on
Me,  the  eternal  God.  His  fidelity  obtained  this
vision  most  perfectly  for  Him,  which  vision  you
imperfectly  enjoy  by  the  light  of  holy  faith.
He  was  faithful  to  Me,  His  eternal  Father,  and
therefore  hastened  as  one  enamoured  along  the
road  of  obedience,  lit  up  with  the  light  of  glory.
And  inasmuch  as  love  cannot  be  alone,  but  is
accompanied  by  all  the  true  and  royal  virtues,
because  all  the  virtues  draw  their  life  from  love,
He  possessed  them  all,  but  in  a  different  way
from  that  in  which  you  do.  Among  the  others
he  possessed  patience,  which  is  the  marrow  of
obedience,  and  a  demonstrative  sign,  whether  a
soul  be  in  a  state  of  grace  and  truly  love  or  not.
Wherefore  charity,  the  mother  of  patience,  has
given  her  as  a  sister  to  obedience,  and  so  closely
united  them  together  that  one  cannot  be  lost
without  the  other.  Either  thou  hast  them  both
or  thou  hast  neither.  This  virtue  has  a  nurse
who  feeds  her,  that  is,  true  humility ;  therefore


284     ST.  CATHERINE    OF  SIENA


a  soul  is  obedient  in  proportion  to  her  humility,
and  humble  in  proportion  to  her  obedience.
This  humility  is  the  foster-mother  and  nurse  of
charity,  and  with  the  same  milk  she  feeds  the
virtue  of  obedience.  Her  raiment  given  her  by
this  nurse  is  self-contempt,  and  insult,  desire
to  displease  herself,  and  to  please  Me.  Where
does  she  find  this  ?  In  sweet  Christ  Jesus,  My
only-begotten  Son.  For  who  abased  Himself
more  than  He  did !  He  was  sated  with  insults,
jibes,  and  mockings.  He  caused  pain  to  Him-
self in  His  bodily  life,  in  order  to  please  Me.
And  who  was  more  patient  than  He  ?  for  His  cry
was  never  heard  in  murmuring,  but  He  patiently
embraced  His  injuries  like  one  enamoured,  ful-
filling the  obedience  imposed  on  Him  by  Me,
His  Eternal  Father.  Wherefore  in  Him  thou
wilt  find  obedience  perfectly  accomplished.  He
left  you  this  rule  and  this  doctrine,  which  gives
you  life,  for  it  is  the  straight  way,  having  first
observed  them  Himself.  He  is  the  way,  where-
fore He  said,  '  He  was  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and
the  Life'  For  he  who  travels  by  that  way,
travels  in  the  light,  and  being  enlightened  can-
not stumble,  or  be  caused  to  fall,  without  per-
ceiving it.  For  He  has  cast  from  Himself  the
darkness  of  self-love,  by  which  he  fell  into  dis-
obedience ;  for  as  I  spoke  to  thee  of  a  companion
virtue  proceeding  from  obedience  and  humility,
so  I  tell  you  that  disobedience  comes  from  pride,
which  issues  from  self-love  depriving  the  soul
of  humility.     The  sister  given  by  self-love  to


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  285


disobedience  is  impatience,  and  pride,  her  foster-
mother,  feeds  her  with  the  darkness  of  infidelity,
so  she  hastens  along  the  way  of  darkness,  which
leads  her  to  eternal  death.  All  this  you  should
read  in  that  glorious  book,  where  you  find  de-
scribed this  and  every  other  virtue."

How  obedience  is  the  key  with  which  Heaven  is
opened,  and  how  the  soul  should  fasten  it  by
means  of  a  cord  to  her  girdle,  and  of  the
excellences  of  obedience.

"  Now  that  I  have  shown  thee  where  obedience
is  to  be  found,  and  whence  she  comes,  and  who  is
her  companion,  and  who  her  foster-mother,  I
will  continue  to  speak  of  the  obedient  and  of  the
disobedient  together,  and  of  obedience  in  general,
which  is  the  obedience  of  the  precepts ;  and  in
particular,  which  is  that  of  the  counsels.  The
whole  of  your  faith  is  founded  upon  obedience,
for  by  it  you  prove  your  fidelity.  You  are  all
in  general  by  My  truth  to  obey  the  command-
ments of  the  law,  the  chief  of  which  is  to  love
Me  above  everything,  and  your  neighbour  as
yourself,  and  the  commandments  are  so  bound
up  together,  that  you  cannot  observe  or  trans-
gress one  without  observing  or  transgressing  all.
He  who  observes  this  principal  commandment
observes  all  the  others ;  he  is  faithful  to  Me  and
his  neighbour,  for  he  loves  Me  and  My  creature,
and  is  therefore  obedient,  becoming  subject  to
the  commandments  of  the  law,  and  to  creatures


286     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


for  My  sake,  and  with  humble  patience  he  en-
dures every  labour,  and  even  his  neighbour's
detraction  of  him.  This  obedience  is  of  such
excellence  that  ye  all  derive  grace  from  it,  just
as  from  disobedience  you  all  derive  death.
Wherefore  it  is  not  enough  that  it  should  be
only  in  word,  and  not  practised  by  you.  I  have
already  told  you  that  this  word  is  the  key  which
opens  heaven,  which  key  My  Son  placed  in  the
hands  of  His  vicar.  This  vicar  placed  it  in  the
hands  of  every  one  who  receives  holy  baptism,
promising  therein  to  renounce  the  world  and  all
its  pomps  and  delights,  and  to  obey.  So  that
each  man  has  in  his  own  person  that  very  same
key  which  the  Word  had,  and  if  a  man  does  not
unlock  in  the  light  of  faith,  and  with  the  hand
of  love  the  gate  of  heaven  by  means  of  this  key,
he  never  will  enter  there,  in  spite  of  its  having
been  opened  by  the  Word ;  for  though  I  created
you  without  yourselves,  I  will  not  save  you
without  yourselves.  Wherefore  you  must  take
the  key  in  your  hand  and  walk  by  the  doctrine
of  My  Word,  and  not  remain  seated,  that  is  to
say,  placing  your  love  in  finite  things,  as  do
foolish  men  who  follow  the  first  man,  their  first
father,  following  his  example,  and  casting  the
key  of  obedience  into  the  mud  of  impurity,
breaking  it  with  the  hammer  of  pride,  rusting
it  with  self-love.  It  would  have  been  entirely
destroyed  had  not  My  only-begotten  Son,  the
Word,  come  and  taken  this  key  of  obedience  in
His  hands  and  purified  it  in  the  fire  of  divine


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  287


love,  having  drawn  it  out  of  the  mud,  and
cleansed  it  with  His  blood,  and  straightened  it
with  the  knife  of  justice,  and  hammered  your
iniquities  into  shape  on  the  anvil  of  His  own
body.  So  perfectly  did  He  repair  it  that  no
matter  how  much  a  man  may  have  spoilt  his
key  by  his  free-will,  by  the  self-same  free-will,
assisted  by  My  grace,  he  can  repair  it  with  the
same  instruments  that  were  used  by  My  Word.
Oh !  blinder  than  the  blind,  for,  having  spoilt
the  key  of  obedience,  thou  dost  not  think  of
mending  it !  Dost  thou  think,  forsooth,  that  the
disobedience  which  closed  the  door  of  Heaven
will  open  it  ?  that  the  pride  which  fell  can  rise  ?
Dost  thou  think  to  be  admitted  to  the  marriage
feast  in  foul  and  disordered  garments  ?  Dost
thou  think  that  sitting  down  and  binding  thy-
self with  the  chain  of  mortal  sin,  thou  canst
walk  ?  or  that  without  a  key  thou  canst  open
the  door  ?  Do  not  imagine  that  thou  canst,  for
it  is  a  fantastical  delusion  ;  thou  must  be  firm,
thou  must  leave  mortal  sin  by  a  holy  confession,
contrition  of  heart,  satisfaction,  and  purpose  of
amendment.  Then  thou  wilt  throw  off  that
hideous  and  defiled  garment  and,  clothed  in  the
shining  nuptial  robe,  will  hasten,  the  key  of
obedience  in  thy  hand,  to  open  the  door.  But
bind  this  key  with  the  cord  of  self-contempt,
and  hatred  of  thyself  and  of  the  world,  and
fasten  it  to  the  love  of  pleasing  Me,  Thy  creator,
of  which  thou  shouldest  make  a  girdle  to  thy-
self to  bind  thy  loins  with  it,  for  fear  thou  lose


288     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


it.  Know,  My  daughter,  there  are  many  who
take  up  this  key  of  obedience,  having  seen  by
the  light  of  faith  that  in  no  other  way  can  they
escape  eternal  damnation ;  but  they  hold  it  in
their  hand  without  wearing  this  girdle,  or  fasten-
ing the  key  to  it  with  the  cord  of  self-contempt,
that  is  to  say  that  they  are  not  perfectly  clothed
with  My  pleasure,  but  still  seek  to  please  them-
selves ;  they  do  not  wear  the  cord  of  self-con-
tempt, for  they  do  not  desire  to  be  despised,  but
rather  take  delight  in  the  praise  of  men.  Such
as  these  are  apt  to  lose  their  key  ;  for  if  they
suffer  a  little  extra  fatigue,  or  mental  or  corporal
tribulation,  and  if,  as  often  happens,  the  hand  of
holy  desire  loosens  its  grasp,  they  will  lose  it.
They  can  indeed  find  it  again  if  they  wish  to
while  they  live,  but  if  they  do  not  wish  they  will
never  find  it,  and  what  will  prove  to  them,  that
they  have  lost  it  ?  Impatience,  for  patience  was
united  to  obedience,  and  their  impatience  proves
that  obedience  does  not  dwell  in  their  soul.
Oh !  how  sweet  and  glorious  is  this  virtue,
which  contains  all  the  rest,  for  she  is  conceived
and  born  of  charity,  on  her  is  founded  the  rock
of  the  holy  faith.  She  is  a  queen  whose  consort
will  feel  no  trouble,  but  only  peace  and  quiet ;
the  waves  of  the  stormy  sea  cannot  hurt  her,
nor  can  any  tempest  reach  the  interior  of  the
soul  in  whom  she  dwells.  Such  a  one  feels  no
hatred  when  injured,  because  he  wishes  to  obey
the  precept  of  forgiveness,  he  suffers  not  when
his  appetites  are  not  satisfied,  because  obedience


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  289


has  ordered  him  to  desire  Me  alone,  who  can
and  will  satisfy  all  his  desires,  if  he  strip  himself
of  worldly  riches.  And  so  in  all  things  which
would  be  too  long  to  relate,  he  who  has  chosen
as  spouse  Queen  Obedience,  the  appointed  key
of  heaven,  finds  peace  and  quiet.  Oh  !  blessed
obedience !  thou  voyagest  without  fatigue,  and
reachest  without  danger  the  port  of  salvation,
thou  art  conformed  to  My  only-begotten  Son,
the  Word,  thou  boardest  the  ship  of  the  holy
cross,  forcing  thyself  to  endure,  so  as  not  to
transgress  the  obedience  of  the  Word,  nor
abandon  His  doctrine,  of  which  thou  makest
a  table  when  thou  eatest  the  food  of  souls,
dwelling  in  the  love  of  thy  neighbour,  being
anointed  with  true  humility,  which  saves  thee
from  coveting,  contrary  to  My  will,  his  posses-
sions, thou  walkest  erect,  without  bending,  for
thy  heart  is  sincere  and  not  false,  loving  gene-
rously and  truly  My  creatures,  thou  art  a  sun-
rise drawing  after  thee  the  light  of  divine  grace,
thou  art  a  sun  which  makes  the  earth,  that  is  to
say,  the  organs  of  the  soul,  to  germinate  with
the  heat  of  charity,  all  of  which  as  well  as  those
of  the  body  produce  life-giving  fruit  for  thyself
and  thy  neighbour.  Thou  art  even  cheerful,  for
thy  face  is  never  wrinkled  with  impatience,  but
smooth  and  pleasant  with  the  happiness  of
patience,  and  even  in  its  fortitude  thou  art  great
by  thy  long  endurance,  so  long  that  it  reaches
from  earth  to  heaven  and  unlocks  the  celestial
door.    Thou  art  a  hidden  pearl,  trampled  by  the

T


290     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


world,  abasing  thyself,  submitting  to  all  crea-
tures. Yet  thy  kingdom  is  so  great  that  no  one
can  rule  thee,  for  thou  hast  come  out  of  the
mortal  servitude  of  thy  own  sensuality,  which
destroyed  thy  dignity,  and  having  slain  this
enemy  with  hatred  and  dislike  of  thy  own  plea-
sure hast  re-obtained  thy  liberty."

Here  both  the  misery  of  the  disobedient  and  the
excellence  of  the  obedient  are  spoken  of.

"All  this,  dearest  daughter,  has  been  done  by
My  goodness  and  providence  as  I  have  told  thee,
for  by  My  providence  the  Word  repaired  the
key  of  obedience,  but  worldly  men  devoid  of
every  virtue  do  the  contrary,  they,  like  un-
bridled horses,  without  the  bit  of  obedience,  go
from  bad  to  worse,  from  sin  to  sin,  from  misery
to  misery,  from  darkness  to  darkness,  from
death  to  death,  until  they  finally  reach  the  edge
of  the  ditch  of  death,  gnawed  by  the  worm  of
their  conscience,  and  though  it  is  true  that  they
can  obey  the  precepts  of  the  law  if  they  will,
and  have  the  time  repenting  of  their  dis-
obedience, it  is  very  hard  for  them  to  do  so,  on
account  of  their  long  habit  of  sin.  Therefore
let  no  man  trust  to  this,  putting  off  his  finding
of  the  key  of  obedience  to  the  moment  of  his
death,  for  although  every  one  may  and  should
hope  as  long  as  he  has  life,  he  should  not  put
such  trust  in  this  hope  as  to  delay  repentance.
What  is  the  reason  of  all  this,  and  of  such


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  291


blindness  that  prevents  them  recognising  this
treasure  ?  The  cloud  of  self-love  and  wretched
pride,  through  which  they  abandoned  obedience,
and  fell  into  disobedience.  Being  disobedient
they  are  impatient,  as  has  been  said,  and  in  their
impatience  endure  intolerable  pain,  for  it  has
seduced  them  from  the  way  of  Truth,  leading
them  along  a  way  of  lies,  making  them  slaves
and  friends  of  the  devils  with  whom,  unless
indeed  they  amend  themselves  with  patience,
they  will  go  to  the  eternal  torments.  Contrari-
wise, My  beloved  sons,  obedient  and  observers
of  the  law  rejoice  and  exult  in  My  eternal  vision
with  the  Immaculate  and  humble  Lamb,  the
Maker,  Fulfiller,  and  Giver  of  this  law  of
obedience.  Observing  this  law  in  this  life  they
taste  peace  without  any  disturbance,  they  receive
and  clothe  themselves  in  the  most  perfect  peace,
for  there  they  possess  every  good  without  any
evil,  safety  without  any  fear,  riches  without  any
poverty,  satiety  without  disgust,  hunger  without
pain,  light  without  darkness,  one  supreme  infinite
good,  shared  by  all  those  who  taste  it  truly.
What  has  placed  them  in  so  blessed  a  state  ?
The  blood  of  the  Lamb,  by  virtue  of  which  the
key  of  obedience  has  lost  its  rust,  so  that,  by
the  virtue  of  the  blood,  it  has  been  able  to
unlock  the  door.  Oh  !  fools  and  madmen,
delay  no  longer  to  come  out  of  the  mud  of  im-
purity, for  you  seem  like  pigs  to  wallow  in  the
mire  of  your  own  lust.  Abandon  the  injustice,
murders,    hatreds,    rancours,   detractions,  mur-


292      ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


murings,  false  judgments,  and  cruelty,  with
which  you  use  your  neighbours,  your  thefts  and
treacheries,  and  the  disordinate  pleasures  and
delights  of  the  world ;  cut  off  the  horns  of
pride,  by  which  amputation  you  will  extin-
guish the  hatred  which  is  in  your  heart  against
your  neighbours.  Compare  the  injuries  which
you  do  to  Me  and  to  your  neighbour  with  those
done  to  you,  and  you  will  see  that  those  done
to  you  are  but  trifles.  You  will  see  that  re-
maining in  hatred  you  injure  Me  by  transgress-
ing My  precept,  and  you  also  injure  the  object
of  your  hate,  for  you  deprive  him  of  your  love,
whereas  you  have  been  commanded  to  love  Me
above  everything,  and  your  neighbour  as  your-
self. No  gloss  has  been  put  upon  these  words
as  if  it  should  have  been  said,  if  your  neighbour
injures  you  do  not  love  him;  but  they  are  to
be  taken  naturally  and  simply,  as  they  were  said
to  you  by  My  Truth,  who  Himself  literally
observed  this  rule.  Literally  also  should  you
observe  it,  and  if  you  do  not  you  will  injure
your  own  soul,  depriving  it  of  the  life  of  grace.
Take,  oh  !  take,  then,  the  key  of  obedience  with
the  light  of  faith,  walk  no  longer  in  such  dark-
ness or  cold,  but  observe  obedience  in  the  fire  of
love,  so  that  ye  may  taste  eternal  life  together
with  the  other  observers  of  the  law."


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  293


Of  those  who  have  such  love  for  obedience  that  they
do  not  remain  content  with  the  general  obedience
of  precepts,  but  take  on  themselves  a  particular
obedience.

"  There  are  some,  My  dearest  daughter,  in
whom  the  sweet  and  amorous  fire  of  love  to-
wards obedience  burns  so  high  (which  fire  of  love
cannot  exist  without  hatred  of  self-love,  so  that
when  the  fire  increases  so  does  this  self-hatred),
that  they  are  not  content  to  observe  the  precepts
of  the  Law  with  a  general  obedience  as  you  are
all  obliged  to  do  if  you  will  have  life  and  not
death,  but  take  upon  themselves  a  particular
obedience,  following  the  greatest  perfection,  so
that  they  become  observers  of  the  counsels  both
in  deed  and  in  thought.  Such  as  these  wish  to
bind  themselves  more  tightly  through  self-hatred,
and  in  order  to  restrain  in  everything  their  own
will.  They  either  place  themselves  under  the
yoke  of  obedience  in  holy  religion,  or,  without
entering  religion,  they  bind  themselves  to  some
creature,  submitting  their  will  to  his,  so  as  more
expeditiously  to  unlock  the  door  of  Heaven.
These  are  they,  as  I  have  told  thee,  who  have
chosen  the  most  perfect  obedience.  I  have  already
spoken  to  thee  of  obedience  in  general,  and  as  I
know  it  to  be  thy  will  that  I  should  speak  to  thee
of  this  particular  and  most  perfect  obedience,  I
will  now  relate  to  thee  somewhat  of  this  second
kind,  which  is  not  divided  from  the  first,  but  is
more  perfect,  for,  as  I  have  already  told  thee,


294     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


these  two  kinds  of  obedience  are  so  closely  united
together  that  they  cannot  be  separated.  I  have
told  thee  where  general  obedience  is  to  be  found
and  whence  it  proceeds,  and  the  cause  of  its
loss.  Now  I  will  speak  to  thee  of  this  particular
obedience,  not  altering,  however,  the  fundamental
principle  of  the  virtue."

How  a  soul  advances  from  general  to  particular
obedience  ;  and  of  the  excellence  of  the  religious
orders.

"The  soul  who  with  love  has  submitted  to
the  yoke  of  obedience,  to  the  Commandments,
following  the  doctrine  of  My  truth  virtuously
exercising  herself,  as  has  been  said,  in  this  general
kind  of  obedience  will  advance  to  the  second  kind
by  means  of  the  same  light  which  brought  her
to  the  first,  for  by  the  light  of  the  most  holy
faith  she  would  have  learnt,  in  the  blood  of  the
humble  Lamb,  My  truth  —  the  ineffable  love
which  I  have  for  her,  and  her  own  fragility,
which  cannot  respond  to  Me  with  due  perfection.
So  she  wanders,  seeking  by  that  light  in  what
place  and  in  what  way  she  can  pay  her  debt,
trampling  on  her  own  fragility,  and  restraining
her  own  will.  Enlightened  in  her  search  by  faith,
she  finds  the  place — namely,  holy  religion — which
has  been  founded  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  appointed
as  the  ship  to  receive  souls  who  wish  to  hasten
to  perfection,  and  to  bring  them  to  the  port  of
salvation.    The  Captain  of  this  ship  is  the  Holy


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  295


Spirit,  who  never  fails  in  Himself  through  the
defects  of  any  of  His  religious  subjects  who  may
transgress  the  rule  of  the  order.  The  ship  itself
cannot  be  damaged,  but  only  the  offender.  It  is
true  that  the  mistake  of  the  steersman  may  send
her  down  into  the  billows,  and  these  are  wicked
pastors  and  prelates  appointed  by  the  Master
of  the  ship.  The  ship  herself  is  so  delightful
that  thy  tongue  could  not  narrate  it.  I  say,  then,
that  the  soul,  on  fire  with  desire  and  a  holy  self-
hatred,  having  found  her  place  by  the  light  of
faith,  enters  there  as  one  dead,  if  she  is  truly
obedient ;  that  is  to  say,  if  she  have  perfectly
observed  general  obedience.  And  even  if  she
should  be  imperfect  when  she  enters,  it  does
not  follow  that  she  cannot  attain  perfection.
On  the  contrary,  she  attains  it  by  exercising
herself  in  the  virtue  of  obedience  ;  indeed,  most
of  those  who  enter  are  imperfect.  There  are
some  who  enter  already  in  perfection,  others  in
the  childhood  of  virtue,  others  through  fear,
others  through  penance,  others  through  allure-
ments, everything  depends  on  whether  after  they
have  entered  they  exercise  themselves  in  virtue,
and  persevere  till  death,  for  no  true  judgment
can  be  made  on  a  person's  entrance  into  religion,
but  only  on  their  perseverance,  for  many  have
appeared  to  be  perfect  who  have  afterwards
turned  back,  or  remained  in  the  order  with
much  imperfection,  so  that,  as  I  have  said,  the  act
of  entrance  into  this  ship  ordained  by  Me,  who
call    men  in  different  ways,  does    not  supply


296     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

material  for  a  real  judgment,  but  only  the  love
of  those  who  persevere  therein  with  true  obedi-
ence. This  ship  is  rich,  so  that  there  is  no  need
for  the  subject  to  think  about  his  necessities
either  temporal  or  spiritual,  for  if  he  is  truly
obedient,  and  observes  his  order,  he  will  be  pro-
vided for  by  his  Master,  who  is  the  Holy  Spirit,
as  I  told  thee  when  I  spoke  to  thee  of  My  pro-
vidence, saying  that  though  thy  servants  might
be  poor,  they  were  never  beggars.  No  more
are  these,  for  they  find  everything  they  need,
and  those  who  observe  this  order  find  this  to
be  indeed  true.  Wherefore,  see  that  in  the
days  when  the  religious  orders  lived  virtuously,
blossoming  with  true  poverty  and  fraternal
charity,  their  temporal  substance  never  failed
them,  but  they  had  more  than  their  needs  de-
manded. But  because  the  stench  of  self-love
has  entered  and  caused  each  to  keep  his  private
possessions  and  to  fail  in  obedience,  their  tem-
poral substance  has  failed,  and  the  more  they
possess  to  the  greater  destitution  do  they  come.
It  is  just  that  even  in  the  smallest  matters  they
should  experience  the  fruit  of  disobedience,  for
had  they  been  obedient  and  observed  the  vow
of  poverty,  each  would  not  have  taken  his  own,
and  lived  privately.  See  the  riches  of  these  holy
rules,  so  thoughtfully  and  luminously  appointed
by  those  who  were  temples  of  the  Holy  Spirit.
See  with  what  judgment  Benedict  ordered  his
ship ;  see  with  what  perfection  and  order  of
poverty  Francis  ordered  his  ship,  decked  with


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  297


the  pearls  of  virtue,  steering  it  in  the  way  of
lofty  perfection,  being  the  first  to  give  his  order
for  spouse,  true  and  holy  poverty,  whom  he  had
chosen  for  himself,  embracing  self-contempt  and
self-hatred,  not  desiring  to  please  any  creature
but  only  thy  will ;  desiring  rather  to  be  thought
vile  by  the  world,  macerating  his  body  and  slaying
his  will,  clothing  himself  in  insults,  sufferings,
and  jibes,  for  love  of  the  humble  Lamb,  with
whom  he  was  fastened  and  nailed  to  the  cross
by  love,  so  that  by  a  singular  grace  there  appeared
in  his  body  the  very  wounds  of  thy  Truth,  showing
in  the  vessel  of  his  body  that  which  was  in  the
love  of  his  soul,  so  he  prepared  the  way.

"  But  thou  wilt  say,  1  Are  not  all  the  other
religious  orders  equally  founded  on  this  point  ? '
Yes,  but  though  they  are  all  founded  on  it,  in
no  other  is  this  the  principal  foundation  ;  as  with
the  virtues,  though  all  the  virtues  draw  their  life
from  charity,  nevertheless,  as  I  explained  to  thee
in  another  place,  one  virtue  belongs  especially
to  one  man,  and  another  to  another,  and  yet
they  all  remain  in  charity,  so  with  the  principal
foundation  of  the  religious  orders.  Poverty
belonged  especially  to  My  poor  man  Francis,
who  placed  the  principal  foundation  of  his  order
in  love  for  this  poverty,  and  made  it  very  strict
for  those  who  were  perfect,  for  the  few  and  the
good,  not  for  the  majority.  I  say  few  because
they  are  not  many  who  choose  this  perfection,
though  now  through  their  sins  they  are  multi-
plied in  numbers  and  deficient  in  virtue,  not


298     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


through  defect  of  the  ship,  but  through  dis-
obedient subjects  and  wicked  rulers.  Now  look
at  the  ship  of  thy  father  Dominic,  My  beloved
son  :  he  ordered  it  most  perfectly,  wishing  that
his  sons  should  apply  themselves  only  to  My
honour  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  with  the  light
of  science,  which  light  he  laid  as  his  principal
foundation,  not,  however,  on  that  account,  being
deprived  of  true  and  voluntary  poverty,  but
having  it  also.  And  as  a  sign  that  he  had  it
truly,  and  that  the  contrary  displeased  him,  he
left  as  an  heirloom  to  his  sons  his  curse  and
Mine,  if  they  should  hold  any  possessions,  either
privately  or  in  community,  as  a  sign  that  he  had
chosen  for  his  spouse  Queen  Poverty.  But  for
his  more  immediate  and  personal  object  he  took
the  light  of  science  in  order  to  extirpate  the
errors  which  had  arisen  in  his  time,  thus  taking
on  him  the  office  of  My  only-begotten  Son,  the
Word.  Rightly  he  appeared  as  an  apostle  in  the
world,  and  sowed  the  seed  of  My  Word  with
much  truth  and  light,  dissipating  darkness  and
giving  light.  He  was  a  light  which  I  gave  the
world  by  means  of  Mary,  placed  in  the  mystical
body  of  the  Holy  Church  as  an  extirpator  of
heresies.  Why  do  I  say  by  means  of  Mary  ?
Because  Mary  gave  him  his  habit — this  office
was  committed  to  her  by  My  goodness.  At
what  table  does  he  feed  his  sons  with  the  light
of  science  ?  At  the  table  of  the  cross,  which  is
the  table  of  holy  desire,  when  souls  are  eaten  for
My  honour.    Dominic  does  not  wish  his  sons


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  299


to  apply  themselves  to  anything,  but  remaining
at  this  table,  there  to  seek  with  the  light  of
science,  the  glory  and  praise  of  My  name  alone,
and  the  salvation  of  souls.  And  in  order  that
they  might  do  nothing  else,  he  chose  poverty  for
them,  so  that  they  might  not  have  the  care  of
temporal  things.  It  is  true  that  some  failed  in
faith,  fearing  that  they  would  not  be  provided
for,  but  he  never.  Being  clothed  in  faith,  and
hoping  with  firm  confidence  in  My  providence,
He  wishes  his  sons  to  observe  obedience  and  do
their  duty,  and  since  impure  living  obscures  the
eye  of  the  intellect,  and  not  only  the  eye  of  the
intellect,  but  also  of  the  body,  he  does  not  wish
them  to  obscure  their  physical  light  with  which
they  may  more  perfectly  obtain  the  light  of
science  ;  wherefore  he  imposed  on  them  the  third
vow  of  continence,  and  wishes  that  all  should
observe  it,  with  true  and  perfect  obedience,
although  to-day  it  is  badly  observed.  They  also
prevent  the  light  of  science  with  the  darkness  of
pride,  not  that  this  light  can  be  darkened  in
itself,  but  only  in  their  souls,  for  there,  where
pride  is,  can  be  no  obedience.  I  have  already
told  thee  that  a  man's  humility  is  in  proportion
to  his  obedience,  and  his  obedience  to  his  humility,
and  similarly,  when  he  transgresses  the  vow  of
obedience,  it  rarely  happens  that  he  does  not
also  transgress  the  vow  of  continence,  either  in
thought  or  deed  ;  so  that  he  has  rigged  his  ship
with  the  three  ropes  of  obedience,  continence,
and  true  poverty  ;  he  made  it  a  royal  ship,  not


3oo     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


obliging  his  subjects  under  pain  of  mortal  sin,
and  illuminated  by  Me  the  true  light,  he  pro-
vided for  those  who  should  be  less  perfect,  for
though  all  who  observe  the  order  are  perfect  in
kind,  yet  one  possesses  a  higher  degree  of  per-
fection than  another,  yet  all  perfect  or  imperfect
live  well  in  this  ship.  He  allied  himself  with
My  truth,  showing  that  he  did  not  desire  the  death
of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  should  be  converted
and  live.  Wherefore  his  religion  is  a  delightful
garden,  broad  and  joyous  and  fragrant,  but  the
wretches  who  do  not  observe  the  order,  but
transgress  its  vows,  have  turned  it  into  a  desert
and  defiled  it  with  their  scanty  virtue  and  light
of  science,  though  they  are  nourished  at  its
breast.  I  do  not  say  that  the  order  itself  is  in
this  condition,  for  it  still  possesses  every  delight,
but  in  the  beginning  its  subjects  were  not  as
they  are  now,  but  blooming  flowers,  and  men  of
great  perfection.  Each  seemed  to  be  another
St.  Paul,  their  eyes  so  illuminated  that  the  dark-
ness of  error  was  dissipated  by  their  glance.
Look  at  My  glorious  Thomas,  who  gazed  with
the  gentle  eye  of  his  intellect  at  My  Truth,
whereby  he  acquired  supernatural  light  and
science  infused  by  grace,  for  he  obtained  it
rather  by  means  of  prayer  than  by  human  study.
He  was  a  brilliant  light,  illuminating  his  order
and  the  mystical  body  of  the  Holy  Church,  dis-
sipating the  clouds  of  heresy.  Look  at  My
Peter,  virgin  and  martyr,  who  by  his  blood  gave
light  among  the  darkness  of  many  heresies,  and


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  301


the  heretics  hated  him  so  that  at  last  they  took
his  life  ;  yet  while  he  lived  he  applied  himself
to  nothing  but  prayer,  preaching,  and  disputation
with  heretics,  hearing  confessions,  announcing  the
truth,  and  spreading  the  faith  without  any  fear,
to  such  an  extent  that  he  not  only  confessed  it
in  his  life  but  even  at  the  moment  of  his  death,
for  when  he  was  at  the  last  extremity,  having
neither  voice  nor  ink  left,  having  received  his
death-blow,  he  dipped  his  finger  in  his  blood,
and  this  glorious  martyr,  having  not  paper  on
which  to  write,  leaned  over,  confessing  the  faith,
and  wrote  the  Credo  on  the  ground.  His  heart
burnt  in  the  furnace  of  My  charity,  so  that  he
never  slackened  his  pace  nor  turned  his  head
back,  though  he  knew  that  he  was  to  die,  for  I
had  revealed  to  him  his  death,  but  like  a  true
knight  he  fearlessly  came  forth  on  to  the  battle-
field ;  and  I  could  tell  thee  the  same  of  many
others,  who  though  they  did  not  actually  ex-
perience martyrdom,  were  martyrs  in  will  like
Dominic ;  great  labourers  were  these  sent  by
My  Father  to  labour  in  His  vineyard  to  extirpate
the  thorns  of  vice,  planting  the  virtues  in  their
stead.  Of  a  truth  Dominic  and  Francis  were  two
columns  of  the  holy  Church.  Francis  with  the
poverty  which  was  specially  his  own,  as  has  been
said,  and  Dominic  with  his  learning."


3o2     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Of  the  excellence  of  the  obedient,  and  of  the  misery  of
the  disobedient  members  of  the  religious  orders.

"  Now  that  places  suitable  for  obedience  have
been  found,  namely,  these  ships  commanded  by
the  Holy  Spirit  through  the  medium  of  their
superiors,  for,  as  I  told  thee,  the  Holy  Spirit  is
the  true  Master  of  these  ships,  which  are  built
in  the  light  of  the  most  holy  faith  by  those  who
have  the  light  to  know  that  My  clemency,  the
Holy  Spirit,  will  steer  them,  and  having  thus
shown  thee  the  place  of  obedience  and  its  per-
fection, I  will  speak  to  thee  of  the  obedience  and
of  the  disobedience  of  those  who  travel  in  such
a  ship,  speaking  of  all  together  and  not  of  one
ship — that  is,  one  order — in  particular,  showing
thee  the  sin  of  the  disobedient  and  the  virtue  of
the  obedient,  so  that  a  man  may  better  know
the  one  by  contrast  with  the  other,  and  how
he  should  walk  if  he  would  enter  the  ship  of
a  religious  order.  How  should  he  walk  who
wishes  to  enter  this  state  of  perfect  and  parti-
cular obedience  ?  With  the  light  of  holy  faith,
by  which  he  will  know  that  he  must  slay  his
self-will  with  the  knife  of  hatred  of  every  sensual
passion,  taking  the  spouse  which  charity  gives
him,  together  with  her  sister.  The  spouse  is
true  and  prompt  obedience,  and  the  sister,
patience ;  and  he  must  also  take  the  nurse  of
humility,  for  without  this  nurse  obedience
would  perish  of   hunger,  for  obedience  soon


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  303


dies  in  a  soul  deprived  of  this  little  virtue  of
humility.

"  Humility  is  not  alone  but  has  the  handmaid
of  contempt  of  self  and  of  the  world,  which
causes  the  soul  to  hold  herself  vile,  and  not  to
desire  honour  but  shame.  Thus  dead  to  him-
self, should  he  who  is  old  enough  enter  the  ship
of  a  religious  order,  but  however  he  may  enter
it  (for  I  have  told  thee  that  I  call  souls  in  diverse
ways),  he  should  acquire  and  preserve  this  affec-
tion, hurrying  generously  to  seize  the  key  of  the
obedience  of  his  order,  which  will  open  the  little
door  which  is  in  the  panel  of  the  door  of  Heaven.
Such  as  these  have  undertaken  to  open  the  little
door,  doing  without  the  great  key  of  general
obedience,  which  opens  the  door  of  Heaven,  as
I  have  said  to  thee.  They  have  taken  a  little
key,  passing  through  a  low  and  narrow  opening
in  the  great  door.  This  small  door  is  part  of
the  great  door,  as  thou  mayest  see  in  any  real
door.  They  should  keep  this  key  when  they
have  got  it,  and  not  throw  it  away.  And
because  the  truly  obedient  have  seen  with  the
light  of  faith  that  they  will  never  be  able  to
pass  through  this  little  door  with  the  load  of
their  riches  and  the  weight  of  their  own  will
without  great  fatigue  and  without  losing  their
life,  and  that  they  cannot  walk  with  head  erect
without  breaking  their  neck,  whether  they  wish
to  or  not,  they  cast  from  them  the  load  of  their
riches,  and  of  their  own  will  observing  the  vow
of  voluntary  poverty,  refusing  to  possess  any-


3o4     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


thing,  for  they  see  by  the  light  of  faith  to  what
ruin  they  would  come  if  they  transgressed  obedi-
ence, and  the  vow  of  poverty  which  they  promised
to  keep.  The  disobedient  walk  in  pride,  holding
their  heads  erect,  and  if  sometimes  it  suits  their
convenience  to  obey  they  do  not  incline  their
heads  with  humility,  but  proudly  do  so,  because
they  must,  which  force  breaks  the  neck  of  their
will,  for  they  fulfil  their  obedience  with  hatred
of  their  order  and  of  their  superior.  Little  by
little  they  are  ruined  on  another  point,  for  they
transgress  the  vow  of  continence,  for  he  who
does  not  constrain  his  appetite  or  strip  himself
of  temporal  substance  makes  many  relations  and
finds  plenty  of  friends  who  love  him  for  their
own  profit.  From  these  relations  they  go  on  to
close  intimacies,  their  body  they  tend  luxuriously,
for  being  without  either  the  nurse  of  humility  or
her  sister,  self-contempt,  they  live  in  their  own
pleasure  richly  and  delicately,  not  like  religious
but  like  nobles,  without  watching  or  prayer.
This  and  many  other  things  happen  to  them
because  they  have  money  to  spend,  for  if  they
had  it  not  they  could  not  spend  it.  They  fall
into  mental  and  physical  impurity,  for  if  some-
times from  shame  or  through  lack  of  means
they  abstain  physically,  they  indulge  themselves
mentally,  for  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  with
many  worldly  relations,  of  delicate  habits  and
disordinate  greediness,  who  watches  not  nor
prays,  to  preserve  his  mind  pure.  Wherefore
the  perfectly  obedient  man  sees  from  afar  with


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  305


the  light  of  holy  faith  the  evil  and  the  loss
which  would  come  to  him  from  temporal
possessions  and  from  walking  weighed  down  by
his  own  will ;  he  also  sees  that  he  is  obliged
to  pass  by  this  narrow  door,  and  that  in  such
a  state  he  would  die  before  he  would  be  able
to  pass  it,  having  no  key  of  obedience  where-
with to  open  it,  for  as  I  said  to  thee,  he  is
obliged  to  pass  through  it.  Wherefore  it  is
that  whether  he  will  or  no  he  should  not  leave
the  ship  of  the  order,  but  should  walk  the
narrow  path  of  obedience  to  his  superior.

u  Wherefore  the  perfectly  obedient  man  rises
above  himself  and  his  own  sensuality,  and  rising
above  his  own  feelings  with  living  faith,  places
self-hatred  as  servant  in  the  house  of  his  soul
to  drive  out  the  enemy  of  self-love,  for  he  does
not  wish  that  his  spouse,  Obedience,  given  him
with  the  light  of  faith  by  her  mother,  Charity,
should  be  offended  ;  so  he  drives  out  the  enemy
and  puts  in  his  place  the  nurse  and  companions
of  his  spouse.

"  The  love  of  obedience  places  in  the  house  of
his  soul  the  lovers  of  his  spouse,  Obedience,  who
are  the  true  and  royal  virtues,  the  customs  and
observances  of  his  order,  so  that  this  sweet  spouse
enters  his  soul  with  her  sister,  Patience,  and  her
nurse,  Humility,  together  with  Self  -  contempt
and  Self-hatred,  and  when  she  has  entered  she
possesses  peace  and  quiet,  for  her  enemies  have
been  exiled.  She  dwells  in  the  garden  of  true
continence,  with  the  sun  of  intellectual  light

u


306     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


shining  in,  the  eye  of  holy  faith  fixed  on  the
object  of  My  Truth,  for  her  object  is  My  Truth,
and  the  fire  of  love  with  which  she  observes
the  rules  of  the  order,  warms  all  her  servants
and  companions.

"  Who  are  her  enemies  who  have  been  ex-
pelled ?  The  chief  is  self-love,  producing  pride,
the  enemy  of  humility  and  charity.  Impatience
is  the  enemy  of  patience,  disobedience  of  true
obedience,  infidelity  of  faith,  presumption  and
self-confidence  do  not  accord  with  the  true  hope
which  the  soul  should  have  in  Me ;  injustice
cannot  be  conformed  to  justice,  nor  imprudence
to  prudence,  nor  intemperance  to  temperance,
nor  the  transgression  of  the  commandments  of
the  order  to  perfect  observance  of  them,  nor
the  wicked  conversation  of  those  who  live  in
sin  to  the  good  conversation  of  My  servants.
These  are  a  man's  enemies,  causing  him  to
leave  the  good  customs  and  traditions  of  his
order.  He  has  also  those  other  cruel  enemies,
anger,  which  wars  against  his  benevolence ;
cruelty,  against  his  kindness ;  wrath,  against  his
benignity ;  hatred  of  virtue,  against  the  love  of
virtue ;  impurity,  against  chastity ;  negligence,
against  solicitude  ;  ignorance,  against  knowledge  ;
and  sloth  against  watchfulness  and  continued
prayer.

"  And  since  he  knew  by  the  light  of  faith  that
all  these  were  his  enemies  who  would  defile  his
spouse,  holy  obedience,  he  appointed  hatred  to
drive  them  out,  and  love  to  replace  them  with


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  307


her  friends.  Wherefore  with  the  knife  of  hatred
he  slew  his  perverse  self-will,  who,  nourished  by
self-love,  gave  life  to  all  these  enemies  of  true
obedience,  and  having  cut  off  the  source  by  which
all  the  others  are  preserved  in  life,  he  remains
free  and  in  peace  without  any  war,  for  there  is
no  one  to  make  war  on  him,  for  the  soul  has
cut  off  from  herself  that  which  kept  her  in
bitterness  and  in  sadness.  What  makes  war
on  obedience  ?  Injuries  ?  No,  for  the  obedient
man  is  patient,  patience  being  the  sister  of
obedience.  The  weight  of  the  observances  of
the  order  ?  No,  for  obedience  causes  him  to
fulfil  them.  Does  the  weight  of  obedience  give
him  pain  ?  No,  for  he  has  trampled  on  his
own  will,  and  does  not  care  to  examine  or  judge
the  will  of  his  superior,  for  with  the  light  of
faith  he  sees  My  will  in  him,  believing  truly
that  My  clemency  causes  him  to  command
according  to  the  needs  of  his  subject's  salva-
tion. Is  he  disgusted  and  angry  at  having  to
perform  the  humble  duties  of  the  order  or  to
endure  the  mockeries,  reproofs,  jibes,  and  insults
which  are  often  cast  at  him,  or  to  be  held  at
little  worth  ?  No,  for  he  has  conceived  love
for  self-contempt  and  self-hatred.  Wherefore
he  rejoices  with  patience,  exulting  with  delight
and  joy  in  the  company  of  his  spouse,  true
obedience,  for  the  only  thing  which  saddens  him
is  to  see  Me,  his  Creator,  offended.  His  con-
versation is  with  those  who  truly  fear  Me,  and
if  he  should  converse  with  those  who  are  sepa-


308     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


rated  from  My  Will,  it  is  not  in  order  to  con-
form himself  to  their  sins,  but  to  draw  them  out
of  their  misery,  for  through  the  brotherly  love
which  he  has  in  his  heart  towards  them  he  would
like  to  give  them  the  good  which  he  possesses,
seeing  that  more  glory  and  praise  would  be  given
to  My  name  by  many  observing  aright  their  order
than  by  him  doing  so  alone.  Wherefore  he
endeavours  to  convert  religious  and  seculars  by
his  words  and  by  prayer,  and  by  every  means  by
which  he  can  draw  them  out  of  the  darkness  of
mortal  sin.  Thus  the  conversations  of  a  truly
obedient  man  are  good  and  perfect,  whether  they
be  with  just  men  or  with  sinners,  through  his
rightly  ordered  love  and  the  breadth  of  his  charity.
Of  his  cell  he  makes  a  heaven,  delighting  there
to  converse  with  Me,  his  supreme  and  eternal
Father,  with  the  affection  of  love,  flying  idleness
with  humble  and  continual  prayer,  and  when,
through  the  illusion  of  the  Devil,  thoughts  come
crowding  into  his  cell,  he  does  not  sit  down  on
the  bed  of  negligence  embracing  idleness,  nor
care  to  examine  by  reason  the  thoughts  or  opinions
of  his  heart,  but  he  flies  sloth,  rising  above  him-
self and  his  senses  with  hatred  and  true  humility,
patiently  enduring  the  weariness  which  he  feels  in
his  mind,  and  resisting  by  watching  and  humble
prayer,  fixing  the  eye  of  his  intellect  on  Me,  and
seeing  with  the  light  of  faith  that  I  am  his  helper,
and  both  can  and  will  help  him,  and  open  to  him
the  eyes  of  My  kindness,  and  that  it  is  I  who
permit  this  suffering  in  order  that  he  may  be


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  309


more  eager  to  fly  himself  and  come  to  Me.  And
if  it  should  seem  to  him  that  on  account  of  his
great  weariness  and  the  darkness  of  his  mind,
mental  prayer  is  impossible,  he  recites  vocal
prayers,  or  busies  himself  with  some  corporal
exercises,  so  that  by  these  means  he  may  avoid
idleness.  He  looks  at  Me  with  the  light  which
I  give  him  through  love,  which  draws  forth  true
humility,  for  he  deems  himself  unworthy  of  the
peace  and  quiet  of  mind  of  My  other  servants,
but  rather  worthy  of  pain,  for  he  despises  himself
in  his  own  mind  with  hatred  and  self-reproach,
thinking  that  he  can  never  endure  enough  pain,
for  neither  his  hope  nor  My  providence  fail  him,
but  with  faith  and  the  key  of  obedience  he  passes
over  this  stormy  sea  in  the  ship  of  his  order,
dwelling  thus  in  his  cell  as  has  been  said,  and
avoiding  idleness.

"  The  obedient  man  wishes  to  be  the  first  to
enter  choir  and  the  last  to  leave  it,  and  when  he
sees  a  brother  more  obedient  than  himself  he
regards  him  in  his  eagerness  with  a  holy  envy,
stealing  from  him  the  virtue  in  which  he  excels,
not  wishing,  however,  that  his  brother  should
have  less  thereof,  for  if  he  wished  this  he  would
be  separated  from  brotherly  love.  The  obedient
man  does  not  leave  the  refectory,  but  visits  it
continually  and  delights  at  being  at  table  with
the  poor.  And  as  a  sign  that  he  delights
therein,  and  so  as  to  have  no  reason  to  remain
without,  he  has  abandoned  his  temporal  sub-
stance,   observing    so    perfectly   the    vow  of


3io     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


poverty  that  he  blames  himself  for  considering
even  the  necessities  of  his  body.  His  cell  is
full  of  the  odour  of  poverty,  and  not  of  clothes;
he  has  no  fear  that  thieves  will  come  to  rob
him,  or  that  rust  or  moths  will  corrupt  his
garments ;  and  if  anything  is  given  to  him,  he
does  not  think  of  laying  it  by  for  his  own  use,
but  freely  shares  it  with  his  brethren,  not  think-
ing of  the  morrow,  but  rather  depriving  himself
to-day  of  what  he  needs,  thinking  only  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven  and  how  he  may  best  observe
true  obedience.

"  And  in  order  that  he  may  better  keep  to  the
path  of  humility,  he  submits  to  small  and  great,
to  poor  and  rich,  and  becomes  the  servant  of  all,
never  refusing  labour,  but  serving  all  with
charity.  The  obedient  man  does  not  wish  to
fulfil  his  obedience  in  his  own  way,  or  to  choose
his  time  or  place,  but  prefers  the  way  of  his
order  and  of  his  superior.  All  this  the  truly
and  perfectly  obedient  man  does  without  pain
and  weariness  of  mind.  He  passes  with  this
key  in  his  hand  through  the  narrow  door  of  the
order,  easily  and  without  violence,  because  he
observes  the  vows  of  poverty,  true  obedience,
and  continence,  having  abandoned  the  heights
of  pride,  and  bowed  his  head  to  obedience
through  humility.  He  does  not  break  his  neck
through  impatience,  but  is  patient  with  fortitude
and  enduring  perseverance,  the  friends  of  obedi-
ence. Thus  he  passes  by  the  assaults  of  the
devils,  mortifying    and    macerating    his  flesh,


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  311


stripping  it  bare  of  all  pleasures  and  delights
and  clothing  it  with  the  labours  of  the  order
in  a  faith  which  despises  nothing,  for  as  a  child
who  does  not  remember  the  blows  and  injuries
inflicted  on  him  by  his  father,  so  this  child  of
the  spirit  does  not  remember  the  injuries,  pains,
or  blows  inflicted  on  him  by  his  superior  in  the
order,  but  calling  him  humbly,  turns  to  him
without  anger,  hatred,  or  rancour,  but  with
meekness  and  benevolence.

"  These  are  those  little  ones  of  whom  My
Truth  spoke  to  the  disciples,  who  were  contend-
ing among  themselves  which  of  them  should  be
the  greater,  for  calling  a  child,  He  said  :  '  Allow
the  little  ones  to  come  to  Me,  for  of  such  is  the  king-
dom of  heaven  to  be;  whoever  will  not  humble  him-
self like  this  child  (that  is,  who  will  not  keep  this
childlike  condition),  shall  not  enter  the  kingdom
of  heaven.  For  he  who  humbles  himself,  dearest
daughter,  will  be  exalted,  and  he  who  exalts  him-
self will  be  humbled]  which  also  was  said  to
you  by  My  Truth.  Justly,  therefore,  are  these
humble  little  ones,  humiliated  and  subjected
through  love,  with  true  and  holy  obedience,  who
do  not  kick  against  the  pricks  of  their  order  or
superior,  exalted  by  Me,  the  supreme  and  eternal
Father,  with  the  true  citizens  of  the  blessed  life,
when  they  are  rewarded  for  all  their  labours,  and
in  this  life  also  do  they  taste  eternal  life."


3i2     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


How  the  truly  obedient  receive  a  hundredfold  for  one,
and  also  eternal  life;  and  what  is  meant  by  this
one,  and  this  hundredfold.

"  In  them  is  fulfilled  the  saying  of  the  sweet
and  amorous  Word,  My  only -begotten  Son,  in
the  gospel  when  He  replied  to  Peter's  demand,
'  Master,  we  have  left  everything  for  thy  love's  sake,
and  have  follow  ■  I  Thee,  what  wilt  Thou  give  us  ?  '
My  Truth  replied,  '  /  will  give  you  a  hundredfold
for  one,  and  you  shall  possess  eternal  life'  As  if
My  Truth  had  wished  to  say,  '  Thou  hast  done
well,  Peter,  for  in  no  other  way  couldest  thou
follow  Me.  And  I,  in  this  life,  will  give  thee  a
hundredfold  for  one/  And  what  is  this  hundred-
fold, beloved  daughter,  besides  which  the  apostle
obtained  eternal  life  ?  To  what  did  My  Truth
refer  ?    To  temporal  substance  ?

"  Properly  speaking,  no.  Do  I  not,  however,
often  cause  one  who  gives  alms  to  multiply  in
temporal  goods  ?  In  return  for  what  do  I  this  ?
In  return  for  the  gift  of  his  own  will.  This  is
the  one  for  which  I  repay  him  a  hundredfold.
What  is  the  meaning  of  the  number  a  hundred  ?
A  hundred  is  a  perfect  number,  and  cannot  be
added  to  except  by  recommencing  from  the  first.
So  charity  is  the  most  perfect  of  all  the  virtues,
so  perfect  that  no  higher  virtue  can  be  attained
except  by  recommencing  at  the  beginning  of  self-
knowledge,  and  thus  increasing  many  hundred-
fold in  merit ;  but  you  always  necessarily  arrive


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  313

at  the  number  one  hundred.  This  is  that
hundredfold  which  is  given  to  those  who  have
given  Me  the  unit  of  their  own  will,  both  in
general  obedience,  and  in  the  particular  obedi-
ence of  the  religious  life.  And  in  addition  to
this  hundred  you  also  possess  eternal  life,  for
charity  alone  enters  into  eternal  life,  like  a  mis-
tress bringing  with  her  the  fruit  of  all  the  other
virtues,  while  they  remain  outside,  bringing  their
fruit,  I  say,  into  Me,  the  eternal  life,  in  whom
the  obedient  taste  eternal  life.  It  is  not  by  faith
that  they  taste  eternal  life,  for  they  experience
in  its  essence  that  which  they  have  believed
through  faith  ;  nor  by  hope,  for  they  possess  that
for  which  they  had  hoped,  and  so  with  all  the
other  virtues,  Queen  Charity  alone  enters  and
possesses  Me,  her  possessor.  See,  therefore,  that
these  little  ones  receive  a  hundredfold  for  one,
and  also  eternal  life,  for  here  they  receive  the  fire
of  divine  charity  figured  by  the  number  of  a
hundred  (as  has  been  said).  And  because  they
have  received  this  hundredfold  from  Me,  they
possess  a  wonderful  and  hearty  joy,  for  there  is
no  sadness  in  charity,  but  the  joy  of  it  makes
the  heart  large  and  generous,  not  narrow  or
double.  A  soul  wounded  by  this  sweet  arrow
does  not  appear  one  thing  in  face  and  tongue
while  her  heart  is  different.  She  does  not  serve,
or  act  towards  her  neighbour  with  dissembling
and  ambition,  because  charity  is  an  open  book
to  be  read  by  all.  Wherefore  the  soul  who
possesses  charity  never  falls  into  trouble,  or  the


3 14     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


affliction  of  sadness,  or  jars  with  obedience,  but
remains  obedient  until  death."

Of  the  perversities,  miseries^  and  labours  of  the
disobedient  man ;  and  of  the  miserable  fruits
which  -proceed  from  disobedience.

"  Contrariwise,  a  wicked  disobedient  man  dwells
in  the  ship  of  a  religious  order  with  so  much
pain  to  himself  and  others,  that  in  this  life  he
tastes  the  earnest  of  hell,  he  remains  always  in
sadness  and  confusion  of  mind,  tormented  by
the  sting  of  conscience,  with  hatred  of  his  order
and  superior,  insupportable  to  himself.  What
a  terrible  thing  it  is,  My  daughter,  to  see  one
who  has  once  taken  the  key  of  obedience  of  a
religious  order,  living  in  disobedience,  to  which
he  has  made  himself  a  slave,  for  of  disobedience
he  has  made  his  mistress  with  her  companion
impatience,  nourished  by  pride,  and  his  own
pleasure,  which  pride  (as  has  been  said)  issues
from  self-love.  For  him  everything  is  the  con-
trary to  what  it  would  be  for  the  obedient  man.
For  how  can  this  wretch  be  in  any  other  state
than  suffering,  for  he  is  deprived  of  charity,  he
is  obliged  by  force  to  incline  the  neck  of  his
own  will,  and  pride  keeps  it  erect,  all  his  desires
are  in  discord  with  the  will  of  the  order.  The
order  commands  obedience,  and  he  loves  disobe-
dience ;  the  order  commands  voluntary  poverty,
and  he  avoids  it,  possessing  and  acquiring  riches ;
the  order  commands  continence  and  purity,  and


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  315


he  desires  lewdness.  By  transgressing  these  three
vows,  My  daughter,  a  religious  comes  to  ruin,
and  falls  into  so  many  miseries,  that  his  aspect
is  no  longer  that  of  a  religious  but  of  an  incarnate
devil,  as  in  another  place  I  related  to  thee  at
greater  length.  I  will,  however,  tell  thee  some-
thing now  of  their  delusion,  and  of  the  fruit
which  they  obtained  by  disobedience  to  the
commendation  and  exhortation  of  obedience.
This  wretched  man  is  deluded  by  his  self-love,
because  the  eye  of  his  intellect  is  fixed,  with  a
dead  faith,  on  pleasing  his  self-will,  and  on
things  of  the  world.  He  left  the  world  in  body,
but  remained  there  in  his  affections,  and  because
obedience  seems  wearisome  to  him  he  wishes  to
disobey  in  order  to  avoid  weariness  ;  whereby  he
arrives  at  the  greatest  weariness  of  all,  for  he  is
obliged  to  obey  either  by  force  or  by  love,  and
it  would  have  been  better  and  less  wearisome  to
have  obeyed  by  love  than  without  it.  Oh  !  how
deluded  he  is,  and  no  one  else  deceives  him  but
himself.  Wishing  to  please  himself  he  only  gives
himself  displeasure,  for  the  actions  which  he  will
have  to  do,  through  the  obedience  imposed  on
him,  do  not  please  him.  He  wishes  to  enjoy
delights  and  make  this  life  his  eternity,  but  the
order  wishes  him  to  be  a  pilgrim,  and  con-
tinually proves  it  to  him ;  for  when  he  is  in  a
nice  pleasant  resting  place,  where  he  would  like
to  remain  for  the  pleasures  and  delights  he  finds
there,  he  is  transferred  elsewhere,  and  the  change
gives  him  pain,  for  his  will  was  active  against


316     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


his  obedience,  and  yet  he  is  obliged  to  endure
the  discipline  and  labours  of  the  order,  and  thus
remains  in  continual  torment.  See,  therefore,
how  he  deludes  himself ;  for,  wishing  to  fly  pain,
he  on  the  contrary  falls  into  it,  for  his  blindness
does  not  let  him  know  the  road  of  true  obedience,
which  is  a  road  of  truth  founded  by  the  obedient
Lamb,  My  only-begotten  Son,  who  removed  pain
from  it,  so  that  he  walks  by  the  road  of  lies,
believing  that  he  will  find  delight  there,  but  find-
ing on  the  contrary  pain  and  bitterness.  Who  is
his  guide  ?  Self-love,  that  is  his  own  passion  for
disobedience.  Such  a  man  thinks  like  a  fool  to
navigate  this  tempestuous  sea,  with  the  strength
of  his  own  arms,  trusting  in  his  own  miserable
knowledge,  and  will  not  navigate  it  in  the  arms
of  his  order,  and  of  his  superior.  Such  a  one
is  indeed  in  the  ship  of  the  order  in  body,  and
not  in  mind ;  he  has  quitted  it  in  desire,  not
observing  the  regulations  or  customs  of  the  order,
nor  the  three  vows  which  he  promised  to  observe
at  the  time  of  his  profession  ;  he  swims  in  the
tempestuous  sea,  tossed  to  and  fro  by  contrary
winds,  fastened  only  to  the  ship  by  his  clothes,
wearing  the  religious  habit  on  his  body  but  not
on  his  heart.  Such  a  one  is  no  friar,  but  a
masquerader,  a  man  only  in  appearance.  His
life  is  lower  than  an  animal's,  and  he  does  not
see  that  he  labours  more  swimming  with  his
arms,  than  the  good  religious  in  the  ship,  or
that  he  is  in  danger  of  eternal  death  ;  for  if  his
clothes  should  be  suddenly  torn  from  the  ship,


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  317


which  will  happen  at  the  moment  of  death,  he
will  have  no  remedy.  No,  he  does  not  see,
for  he  has  darkened  his  light  with  the  cloud
of  self-love,  whence  has  come  his  disobedience,
which  prevents  him  seeing  his  misery,  wherefore
he  miserably  deceives  himself.  What  fruit  is
produced  by  this  wretched  tree  ?

"The  fruit  of  death,  because  the  root  of  his
affection  is  planted  in  pride,  which  he  has  drawn
from  self-love.  Wherefore  everything  that  issues
from  this  root — flowers,  leaves,  and  fruit — is
corrupt,  and  the  three  boughs  of  this  tree,  which
are  obedience,  poverty,  and  continence,  which
spring  from  the  foot  of  the  tree ;  that  is,  his
affections  are  corrupted.  The  leaves  produced
by  this  tree,  which  are  his  words,  are  so  corrupt
that  they  would  be  out  of  place  in  the  mouth
of  a  ribald  secular ;  and  if  he  have  to  preach
My  doctrine,  he  does  so  in  polished  terms,  not
simply,  as  one  who  should  feed  souls  with  the
seed  of  My  Word,  but  with  eloquent  language.
Look  at  the  stinking  flowers  of  this  tree,  which
are  his  diverse  and  various  thoughts,  which  he
voluntarily  welcomes  with  delight  and  pleasure,
not  flying  the  occasions  of  them,  but  rather  seek-
ing them  in  order  to  be  able  to  accomplish  a
sinful  act,  the  which  is  the  fruit  which  kills  him,
depriving  him  of  the  light  of  grace,  and  giving
him  eternal  death.  And  what  stench  comes
from  this  fruit,  sprung  from  the  flowers  of  the
tree  ?  The  stench  of  disobedience,  for,  in  the
secret  of  his  heart,  he  wishes  to  examine  and


3i 8     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


judge  unfaithfully  his  superior's  will;  a  stench
of  impurity,  for  he  takes  delight  in  many  foul
conversations,  wretchedly  tempting  his  penitents.

"  Wretch  that  thou  art,  dost  thou  not  see  that
under  the  colour  of  devotion  thou  concealest  a
troop  of  children  ?  This  comes  from  thy  dis-
obedience. Thou  hast  not  chosen  the  virtues
for  thy  children  as  does  the  truly  obedient
religious ;  thou  strivest  to  deceive  thy  superior
when  thou  seest  that  he  denies  thee  something
which  thy  perverse  will  desires,  using  the  leaves
of  smooth  or  rough  words,  speaking  irreverently
and  reproving  him.  Thou  canst  not  endure  thy
brother,  nor  even  the  smallest  word  and  reproof
which  he  may  make  to  thee,  but  in  such  a  case
thou  immediately  bringest  forth  the  poisoned
fruit  of  anger  and  hatred  against  him,  judging
that  to  be  done  to  thy  hurt  which  was  done  for
thy  good,  and  thus  taking  scandal,  thy  soul  and
body  living  in  pain.  Why  has  thy  brother  dis-
pleased thee  ?  Because  thou  livest  for  thy  own
sensual  pleasure,  thou  fliest  thy  cell  as  if  it  were
a  prison,  for  thou  hast  abandoned  the  cell  of
self-knowledge,  and  thus  fallen  into  disobedience,
wherefore  thou  canst  not  remain  in  thy  material
cell.  Thou  wilt  not  appear  in  the  refectory
against  thy  will  whilst  thou  hast  anything  to
spend ;  when  thou  hast  nothing  left  necessity
takes  thee  there.

"  Therefore  the  obedient  have  done  well,  who
have  chosen  to  observe  their  vow  of  poverty,  so
that  they  have  nothing  to  spend,  and  therefore


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  319


are  not  led  away  from  the  sweet  table  of  the  refec-
tory, where  obedience  nourishes  both  body  and
soul  in  peace  and  quiet.  The  obedient  religious
does  not  think  of  laying  a  table,  or  of  providing
food  for  himself  like  this  wretched  man,  to  whose
taste  it  is  painful  to  eat  in  the  refectory,  where-
fore he  avoids  it;  he  is  always  the  last  to  enter
the  choir,  and  the  first  to  leave  it ;  with  his  lips
he  approaches  Me,  with  his  heart  he  is  far  from
Me.  He  gladly  escapes  from  the  chapter-house
when  he  can  through  fear  of  penance.  When
he  is  obliged  to  be  there,  he  is  covered  with
shame  and  confusion  for  the  faults  which  he
felt  it  no  shame  to  commit.  What  is  the  cause
of  this  ?  Disobedience.  He  does  not  watch  in
prayer,  and  not  only  does  he  omit  mental  prayer,
but  even  the  Divine  office  to  v/hich  he  is  obliged.
He  has  no  fraternal  charity,  because  he  loves  no
one  but  himself,  and  that  not  with  a  reasonable  but
with  a  bestial  love.  So  great  are  the  evils  which
fall  on  the  disobedient ;  so  many  are  the  fruits
of  sorrow  which  he  produces,  that  thy  tongue
could  not  relate  them.  Oh  !  disobedience,  which
deprives  the  soul  of  the  light  of  obedience,
destroying  peace,  and  giving  war !  Disobedience
destroys  life  and  gives  death,  drawing  the  religious
out  of  the  ship  of  the  observance  of  his  order,  to
drown  him  in  the  sea,  making  him  swim  in  the
strength  of  his  own  arms,  and  not  repose  on  those
of  the  order.  Disobedience  clothes  him  with
every  misery,  causes  him  to  die  of  hunger,  taking
away  from  him  the  food  of  the  merit  of  obedi-


32o     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


ence,  it  gives  him  continual  bitterness^  depriving
him  of  every  sweetness  and  good,  causing  him  to
dwell  with  every  evil.  In  life  it  gives  him  the
earnest  of  cruel  torments  to  endure,  and  if  he
do  not  amend  before  his  clothes  are  loosened
from  the  ship  at  death,  disobedience  will  lead
the  soul  to  eternal  damnation,  together  with  the
devils  who  fell  from  heaven,  because  they  rebelled
against  Me.  In  the  same  way  hast  thou,  oh  !
disobedient  man,  having  rebelled  against  obedi-
ence and  cast  from  thee  the  key  which  would
have  opened  the  door  of  heaven,  opened  instead
the  door  of  hell  with  the  key  of  disobedience."

How  God  does  not  reward  merit  according  to  the
labour  of  the  obedient,  nor  according  to  the
length  of  time  which  it  takes,  but  according  to
the  love  and  promptitude  of  the  truly  obedient ;
and  of  the  miracles  which  God  has  performed
by  means  of  this  virtue ;  and  of  discretion  in
obedience,  and  of  the  works  and  reward  of  the
truly  obedient  man.

"  I  have  appointed  you  all  to  labour  in  the
vineyard  of  obedience  in  different  ways,  and  every
man  will  receive  a  price,  according  to  the  measure
of  his  love,  and  not  according  to  the  work  he
does,  or  the  length  of  time  for  which  he  works,
that  is  to  say,  that  he  who  comes  early  will  not
have  more  than  he  who  comes  late,  as  My  Truth
told  you  in  the  holy  gospel  by  the  example  of
those  who  were  standing  idle  and  were  sent  by


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  321


the  lord  of  the  vineyard  to  labour ;  for  he  gave
as  much  to  those  who  went  at  dawn,  as  to  those
who  went  at  prime  or  at  tierce,  and  those  who
went  at  sext,  at  none,  and  even  at  vespers,  received
as  much  as  the  first :  My  Truth  showing  you  in
this  way  that  you  are  rewarded  not  according  to
time  or  work,  but  according  to  the  measure  of
your  love.  Many  are  placed  in  their  childhood
to  work  in  the  vineyard  ;  some  enter  later  in  life,
and  others  in  old  age  ;  sometimes  these  latter
labour  with  such  fire  of  love,  seeing  the  short-
ness of  the  time,  that  they  rejoin  those  who
entered  in  their  childhood,  because  they  have
advanced  but  slowly.  By  love  of  obedience,  then,
does  the  soul  receive  her  merit,  filling  the  vessel
of  her  heart  in  Me,  the  Sea  Pacific.  There  are
many  whose  obedience  is  so  prompt,  and  has
become,  as  it  were,  so  incarnate  in  them,  that
not  only  do  they  wish  to  see  reason  in  what  is
ordered  them  by  their  superior,  but  they  hardly
wait  until  the  word  is  out  of  his  mouth,  for  with
the  light  of  faith  they  understand  his  intention.
Wherefore  the  truly  obedient  man  obeys  rather
the  intention  than  the  word,  judging  that  the  will
of  his  superior  is  fixed  in  My  will,  and  that  there-
fore his  command  comes  from  My  dispensation,
and  from  My  will,  wherefore  I  say  to  thee  that
he  rather  obeys  the  intention  than  the  word.  He
also  obeys  the  word,  having  first  spiritually  obeyed
in  affection  his  superior's  will,  seeing  and  judging
it  by  the  light  of  faith  to  be  Mine.  This  is  well
shown  in  the  lives  of  the  fathers,  where  you  read

x


322     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


of  a  religious,  who  at  once  obeyed  in  his  affection
the  command  of  his  superior,  commencing  to
write  the  letter  o,  though  he  had  not  space  to
finish  it  ;  wherefore  to  show  how  pleasing  his
prompt  obedience  was  to  Me,  My  clemency  gave
him  a  proof  by  writing  the  other  half  of  the  letter
in  gold.  This  glorious  virtue  is  so  pleasing  to
Me,  that  to  no  other  have  I  given  so  many
miraculous  signs  and  testimonies,  for  it  proceeds
from  the  height  of  faith.

"  In  order  to  show  how  pleasing  it  is  to  Me,
the  earth  obeys  this  virtue,  the  animals  obey  it
— water  grows  solid  under  the  feet  of  the  obedient
man.  And  as  for  the  obedience  of  the  earth,
thou  rememberest  having  read  of  that  disciple
who,  being  given  a  dry  stick  by  his  abbot,  and
being  ordered  by  obedience  to  plant  it  in  the
earth  and  water  it  every  day,  did  not  proceed  to
ask  how  could  it  possibly  do  any  good,  but,
without  inquiring  about  possibilities,  he  fulfilled
his  obedience  in  such  virtue  of  faith  that  the  dry
wood  brought  forth  leaves  and  fruits,  as  a  sign
that  that  soul  had  risen  from  the  dryness  of  dis-
obedience, and,  covered  by  the  green  leaves  of
virtue,  had  brought  forth  the  fruit  of  obedience,
wherefore  the  fruit  of  this  tree  was  called  by  the
holy  fathers  the  fruit  of  obedience.  Thou  wilt
also  find  that  animals  obey  the  obedient  man  ;
for  a  certain  disciple,  commanded  by  obedience,
through  his  purity  and  virtue  caught  a  dragon
and  brought  it  to  his  abbot,  but  the  abbot,  like
a  true  physician  of  the  soul,  in  order  that  he


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  323


might  not  be  tossed  about  by  the  wind  of  vain-
glory, and  to  prove  his  patience,  sent  him  away
with  harsh  words,  saying  :  '  Beast  that  thou  art,
thou  hast  brought  along  another  beast  with  thy-
self/ And  as  to  fire,  thou  hast  read  in  the  holy
scripture  that  many  were  placed  in  the  fire,  rather
than  transgress  My  obedience,  and,  at  My  com-
mand were  not  hurt  by  it.  This  was  the  case  of
the  three  children,  who  remained  happily  in  the
furnace — and  of  many  others  of  whom  I  could
tell  thee.  The  water  bore  up  Maurus  who  had
been  sent  by  obedience  to  save  a  drowning  dis-
ciple ;  he  did  not  think  of  himself,  but  thought
only  with  the  light  of  faith  of  how  to  fulfil  the
command  of  his  superior,  and  so  walked  upon
the  water  as  if  he  had  been  on  dry  land,  and  so
saved  the  disciple.  In  everything,  if  thou  openest
the  eye  of  the  intellect,  thou  wilt  find  shown  forth
the  excellence  of  this  virtue.  Everything  else
should  be  abandoned  for  the  sake  of  obedience.
If  thou  wert  lifted  up  in  such  contemplation  and
union  of  mind  with  Me,  that  thy  body  was  raised
from  the  earth,  and  an  obedience  were  imposed
on  thee  (speaking  generally,  and  not  in  a  par-
ticular case,  which  cannot  give  a  law),  thou
oughtest,  if  possible,  to  force  thyself  to  arise,
to  fulfil  the  obedience  imposed  on  thee,  though
thou  shouldest  never  leave  prayer,  except  for
necessity,  charity,  or  obedience.  I  say  this  in
order  that  thou  mayest  see  how  prompt  I  wish
the  obedience  of  My  servants  to  be,  and  how
pleasing    it    is    to  Me.     Everything  that  the


324     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


obedient  man  does  is  a  source  of  merit  to  him.
If  he  eats,  obedience  is  his  food  ;  if  he  sleeps,
his  dreams  are  obedience ;  if  he  walks,  if  he
remains  still,  if  he  fasts,  if  he  watches — every-
thing that  he  does  is  obedience ;  if  he  serve  his
neighbour,  it  is  obedience  that  he  serves.  How
is  he  guided  in  the  choir,  in  the  refectory,  or  his
cell  ?  By  obedience,  with  the  light  of  the  most
holy  faith,  with  which  light  he  has  slain  and  cast
from  him  his  humbled  self-will,  and  abandoned
himself  with  self-hatred  to  the  arms  of  his  order
and  superior.  Reposing  with  obedience  in  the
ship,  allowing  himself  to  be  guided  by  his  superior,
he  has  navigated  the  tempestuous  sea  of  this  life,
with  calm  and  serene  mind  and  tranquillity  of
heart,  because  obedience  and  faith  have  taken  all
darkness  from  him  ;  he  remains  strong  and  firm,
having  lost  all  weakness  and  fear,  having  destroyed
his  own  will,  from  which  comes  all  feebleness  and
disordinate  fear.  And  what  is  the  food  of  this
spouse  obedience  ?  She  eats  knowledge  of  self,
and  of  Me,  knowing  her  own  non-existence  and
sinfulness,  and  knowing  that  I  am  He  who  is,
thus  eating  and  knowing  My  Truth  in  the  Incar-
nate Word.  What  does  she  drink  ?  The  Blood,
in  which  the  Word  has  shown  her,  My  Truth,
and  the  ineffable  love  which  I  have  for  her,
and  the  obedience  imposed  on  Him  by  Me,
His  Eternal  Father,  so  she  becomes  inebri-
ated with  the  love  and  obedience  of  the  Word,
losing  herself  and  her  own  opinions  and  know-
ledge, and  possessing  Me  by  grace,  tasting  Me


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  325

by  love,  with  the  light  of  faith  in  holy  obedi-
ence.

"The  obedient  man  speaks  words  of  peace  all
his  life,  and  at  his  death  receives  that  which  was
promised  him  at  his  death  by  his  superior,  that
is  to  say,  eternal  life,  the  vision  of  peace,  and  of
supreme  and  eternal  tranquillity  and  rest,  the
inestimable  good  which  no  one  can  value  or
understand,  for,  being  the  infinite  good,  it  can-
not be  understood  by  anything  smaller  than  itself,
like  a  vessel,  which,  dipped  into  the  sea,  does  not
comprehend  the  whole  sea,  but  only  that  quantity
which  it  contains.  The  sea  alone  contains  itself.
So  I,  the  Sea  Pacific,  am  He  who  alone  can  com-
prehend and  value  Myself  truly.  And  in  My
own  estimate  and  comprehension  of  Myself  I
rejoice,  and  this  joy,  the  good  which  I  have  in
Myself,  I  share  with  you,  and  with  all,  according
to  the  measure  of  each.  I  do  not  leave  you
empty,  but  fill  you,  giving  you  perfect  beatitude ;
each  man  comprehends  and  knows  My  goodness
in  the  measure  in  which  it  is  given  to  him.
Thus,  then,  the  obedient  man,  with  the  light
of  faith  in  the  truth  burning  in  the  furnace
of  charity,  anointed  with  humility,  inebriated  with
the  Blood,  in  company  with  his  sister  patience,
and  with  self-contempt,  fortitude,  and  enduring
perseverance,  and  all  the  other  virtues  (that  is,
with  the  fruit  of  the  virtues),  receives  his  end
from  Me,  his  Creator."


326     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


This  is  a  brief  repetition  of  the  entire  hook.

"  I  have  now,  oh  dearest  and  best  beloved
daughter,  satisfied  from  the  beginning  to  the  end
thy  desire  concerning  obedience.

"  If  thou  rememberest  well,  thou  didst  make
four  petitions  of  Me  with  anxious  desire,  or
rather  I  caused  thee  to  make  them  in  order  to
increase  the  fire  of  My  love  in  thy  soul :  one  for
thyself,  which  I  have  satisfied,  illuminating  thee
with  My  Truth,  and  showing  thee  how  thou
mayest  know  this  truth  which  thou  didst  desire
to  know ;  explaining  to  thee  how  thou  mightest
come  to  the  knowledge  of  it  through  the  know-
ledge of  thyself  and  Me,  through  the  light  of
faith.  The  second  request  thou  didst  make  of
Me  was  that  I  should  do  mercy  to  the  world.
In  the  third  thou  didst  pray  for  the  mystical
body  of  the  holy  Church,  that  I  would  remove
darkness  and  persecutions  from  it,  punishing  its
iniquities  at  own  desire  in  thy  person.  As  to
this  I  explained  that  no  penalty  inflicted  in  finite
time  can  satisfy  for  a  sin  committed  against  Me,
the  Infinite  Good,  unless  it  is  united  with  the
desire  of  the  soul  and  contrition  of  the  heart.
How  this  is  to  be  done  I  have  explained  to  thee.
I  have  also  told  thee  that  I  wish  to  do  mercy  to
the  world,  proving  to  thee  that  mercy  is  My
special  attribute,  for  through  the  mercy  and  the
inestimable  love  which  I  had  for  man,  I  sent  to  the
earth  the  Word,  My  only-begotten  Son,  whom,
that   thou    mightest    understand    things  quite


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  327


clearly,  I  represented  to  thee  under  the  figure
of  a  Bridge,  reaching  from  earth  to  heaven,
through  the  union  of  My  divinity  with  your
human  nature.

"  I  also  showed  thee,  to  give  thee  further  light
concerning  My  truth,  how  this  Bridge  is  built
on  three  steps ;  that  is,  on  the  three  powers  of
the  soul.  These  three  steps  I  also  represented
to  thee,  as  thou  knowest,  under  figures  of  thy
body — the  feet,  the  side,  and  the  mouth — by
which  I  also  figured  three  states  of  soul — the
imperfect  state,  the  perfect  state,  and  the  most
perfect  state,  in  which  the  soul  arrives  at  the
excellence  of  unitive  love.  I  have  shown  thee
clearly  in  each  state  the  means  of  cutting  away
imperfection  and  reaching  perfection,  and  how
the  soul  may  know  by  which  road  she  is  walk-
ing and  of  the  hidden  delusions  of  the  devil  and
of  spiritual  self-love.  Speaking  of  these  three
states  I  have  also  spoken  of  the  three  judgments
which  My  clemency  delivers — one  in  this  life,  the
second  at  death  on  those  who  die  in  mortal  sin
without  hope,  of  whom  I  told  thee  that  they
went  under  the  Bridge  by  the  Devil's  road,  when
I  spoke  to  thee  of  their  wretchedness.  And  the
third  is  that  of  the  last  and  universal  judgment.
And  I  who  told  thee  somewhat  of  the  suffering
of  the  damned  and  the  glory  of  the  blessed,  when
all  shall  have  reassumed  their  bodies  given  by
Me,  also  promised  thee,  and  now  again  I  repeat
my  proisme,  that  through  the  long  endurance  of
My  servants  I  will  reform  My  spouse.  Where-


328     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

fore  I  invite  thee  to  endure,  Myself  lamenting
with  thee  over  her  iniquities.  And  I  have  shown
thee  the  excellence  of  the  ministers  I  have  given
her,  and  the  reverence  in  which  I  wish  seculars
to  hold  them,  showing  thee  the  reason  why  their
reverence  towards  My  ministers  should  not
diminish  on  account  of  the  sins  of  the  latter,
and  how  displeasing  to  me  is  such  diminution  of
reverence ;  and  of  the  virtue  of  those  who  live
like  angels.  And  while  speaking  to  thee  on  this
subject,  I  also  touched  on  the  excellence  of  the
sacraments.  And  further  wishing  thee  to  know
of  the  states  of  tears  and  whence  they  proceed,  I
spoke  to  thee  on  the  subject  and  told  thee  that
all  tears  issue  from  the  fountain  of  the  heart,
and  pointed  out  their  causes  to  thee  in  order.

"  I  told  thee  not  only  of  the  four  states  of
tears,  but  also  of  the  fifth,  which  germinates
death.  I  have  also  answered  thy  fourth  request,
that  I  would  provide  for  the  particular  case  of  an
individual ;  I  have  provided  as  thou  knowest.
Further  than  this,  I  have  explained  My  provi-
dence to  thee,  in  general  and  in  particular,
showing  thee  how  everything  is  made  by  divine
providence,  from  the  first  beginning  of  the  world
until  the  end,  giving  you  and  permitting  every-
thing to  happen  to  you,  both  tribulations  and
consolations  temporal  and  spiritual,  and  every
circumstance  of  your  life  for  your  good,  in  order
that  you  may  be  sanctified  in  Me,  and  My  Truth
be  fulfilled  in  you,  which  truth  is  that  I  created
you  in  order  to  possess  eternal  life,  and  mani-


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  329


fested  this  with  the  blood  of  My  only-begotten
Son,  the  Word.

"  I  have  also  in  My  last  words  fulfilled  thy
desire  and  My  promise  to  speak  of  the  perfec-
tion of  obedience  and  the  imperfection  of  dis-
obedience ;  and  how  obedience  can  be  obtained
and  how  destroyed.  I  have  shown  it  to  thee  as
a  universal  key,  and  so  it  is.  I  have  also  spoken
to  thee  of  particular  obedience,  and  of  the  perfect
and  imperfect,  and  of  those  in  religion,  and  of
those  in  the  world,  explaining  the  condition  of
each  distinctly  to  thee,  and  of  the  peace  given
by  obedience,  and  the  war  of  disobedience,  and
how  the  disobedient  man  is  deceived,  showing
thee  how  death  came  into  the  world  by  the  dis-
obedience of  Adam,  and  how  I,  the  Eternal
Father,  supreme  and  eternal  Truth,  give  thee
this  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter,  that  in  the
obedience  of  the  only-begotten  Word,  My  Son,
you  have  life,  and  as  from  that  first  old  man  you
contracted  the  infection  of  death,  so  all  of  you
who  will  take  the  key  of  obedience  have  con-
tracted the  infection  of  the  life  of  the  new  Man,
sweet  Jesus,  of  whom  I  made  a  Bridge,  the  road
to  Heaven  being  broken.  And  now  I  urge  thee
and  My  other  servants  to  grief,  for  by  your  grief
and  humble  and  continual  prayer  I  will  do  mercy
to  the  world.  Die  to  the  world  and  hasten  along
this  way  of  truth,  so  as  not  to  be  taken  prisoner
if  thou  goest  slowly.  I  demand  this  of  thee  now
more  than  at  first,  for  now  I  have  manifested  to
thee  My  Truth.    Beware  that  thou  never  leave


33o     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

the  cell  of  self-knowledge,  but  in  this  cell  pre-
serve and  spend  the  treasure  which  I  have  given
thee,  which  is  a  doctrine  of  truth  founded  upon
the  living  stone,  sweet  Christ  Jesus,  clothed  in
light  which  scatters  darkness,  with  which  doctrine
clothe  thyself,  My  best  beloved  and  sweetest
daughter,  in  the  truth."

How  this  most  devout  sou/,  thanking  and  praising
God,  makes  prayer  for  the  whole  world  and  for
the  Holy  Church,  and  commending  the  virtue  of
faith  brings  this  work  to  an  end.

Then  that  soul,  having  seen  with  the  eye  of
the  intellect,  and  having  known  by  the  light  of
holy  faith  the  truth  and  excellence  of  obedience,
hearing  and  tasting  it  with  love  and  ecstatic
desire,  gazed  upon  the  divine  majesty  and  gave
thanks  to  Him,  saying,  "  Thanks,  thanks  to  Thee,
oh  eternal  Father,  for  Thou  hast  not  despised
me,  the  work  of  Thy  hands,  nor  turned  Thy
face  from  me,  nor  despised  my  desires,  Thou,
the  Light,  hast  not  regarded  my  darkness  ;  Thou,
true  Life,  hast  not  regarded  my  living  death ;
Thou,  the  Physician,  hast  not  been  repelled  by  my
grave  infirmities ;  Thou,  the  eternal  Purity,  hast
not  considered  the  many  miseries  of  which  I  am
full ;  Thou,  who  art  the  Infinite,  hast  overlooked
that  I  am  finite ;  Thou,  who  art  Wisdom,  hast
overlooked  my  folly  ;  Thy  wisdom,  Thy  good-
ness, Thy  clemency,  Thy  infinite  good,  have
overlooked  these  infinite  evils  and  sins,  and  the


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  331


many  others  which  are  in  me.  Having  known
the  truth  through  Thy  clemency,  I  have  found
Thy  chanty,  and  the  love  of  my  neighbour.
What  has  constrained  me  ?  Not  my  virtues,  but
only  Thy  charity.  May  that  same  charity  con-
strain Thee  to  illuminate  the  eye  of  my  intellect
with  the  light  of  faith,  so  that  I  may  know  and
understand  the  truth  which  Thou  hast  manifested
to  me.  Grant  that  my  memory  may  be  capable
of  retaining  Thy  benefits,  that  my  will  may  burn
in  the  fire  of  Thy  charity,  and  may  that  fire  so
work  in  me  that  I  give  my  body  to  blood,  and
that  by  that  blood  given  for  love  of  the  Blood,
together  with  the  key  of  obedience,  I  may  unlock
the  door  of  Heaven.  I  ask  this  of  Thee  with  all
my  heart,  for  every  rational  creature,  both  in
general  and  in  particular,  in  the  mystical  body
of  the  holy  Church.  I  confess  and  do  not  deny
that  Thou  didst  love  me  before  I  existed,  and
that  Thy  love  for  me  is  ineffable,  as  if  Thou  wast
mad  with  love  for  Thy  creature.  Oh,  eternal
Trinity !  oh  Godhead !  which  Godhead  gave
value  to  the  Blood  of  Thy  Son,  Thou,  oh  eternal
Trinity,  art  a  deep  Sea,  into  which  the  deeper  I
enter  the  more  I  find,  and  the  more  I  find  the
more  I  seek ;  the  soul  cannot  be  satiated  in  Thy
abyss,  for  she  continually  hungers  after  Thee,
the  eternal  Trinity,  desiring  to  see  Thee  with
light  in  Thy  light.  As  the  hart  desires  the
spring  of  living  water,  so  my  soul  desires  to
leave  the  prison  of  this  dark  body  and  see  Thee
in  truth.    How  long,  oh!  Eternal  Trinity,  fire


332     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

and  abyss  of  love,  will  Thy  face  be  hidden  from
my  eyes  ?  Melt  at  once  the  cloud  of  my  body.
The  knowledge  which  Thou  hast  given  me  of
Thyself  in  Thy  truth,  constrains  me  to  long  to
abandon  the  heaviness  of  my  body,  and  to  give
my  life  for  the  glory  and  praise  of  Thy  Name,
for  I  have  tasted  and  seen  with  the  light  of  the
intellect  in  Thy  light,  the  abyss  of  Thee — the
eternal  Trinity,  and  the  beauty  of  Thy  creature,
for,  looking  at  myself  in  Thee,  I  saw  myself  to
be  Thy  image,  my  life  being  given  me  by  Thy
power,  oh !  eternal  Father,  and  Thy  wisdom,
which  belongs  to  Thy  only-begotten  Son,  shining
in  my  intellect  and  my  will,  being  one  with  Thy
Holy  Spirit,  who  proceeds  from  Thee  and  Thy
Son,  by  whom  I  am  able  to  love  Thee.  Thou,
Eternal  Trinity,  art  my  Creator,  and  I  am  the
work  of  Thy  hands,  and  I  know  through  the
new  creation  which  Thou  hast  given  me  in  the
blood  of  Thy  Son,  that  Thou  art  enamoured  of
the  beauty  of  Thy  workmanship.  Oh  !  Abyss,
oh. !  Eternal  Godhead,  oh !  Sea  Profound  !  what
more  couldst  Thou  give  me  than  Thyself,  Thou
art  the  fire  which  ever  burns  without  being
consumed ;  Thou  consumest  in  Thy  heat  all
the  soul's  self-love ;  Thou  art  the  fire  which
takes  away  all  cold  ;  with  Thy  light  Thou  dost
illuminate  me  so  that  I  may  know  all  Thy
truth ;  Thou  art  that  light  above  all  light,  which
illuminates  supernaturally  the  eye  of  my  intellect,
clarifying  the  light  of  faith  so  abundantly  and  so
perfectly,  that  I  see  that  my  soul  is  alive,  and  in


A  TREATISE  OF  OBEDIENCE  333


this  light  receives  Thee — the  true  light.  By  the
Light  of  faith  I  have  acquired  wisdom  in  the
wisdom  of  the  Word — Thy  only-begotten  Son.
In  the  light  of  faith  I  am  strong,  constant,
and  persevering.  In  the  light  of  faith  I  hope,
suffer  me  not  to  faint  by  the  way.  This  light,
without  which  I  should  still  walk  in  darkness,
teaches  me  the  road,  and  for  this  I  said,  Oh  !
Eternal  Father,  that  Thou  hast  illuminated  me
with  the  light  of  holy  faith.  Of  a  truth  this
light  is  a  sea,  for  the  soul  revels  in  Thee,  Eternal
Trinity,  the  Sea  Pacific.  The  water  of  the  sea
is  not  turbid,  and  causes  no  fear  to  the  soul,  for
she  knows  the  truth  ;  it  is  a  deep  which  manifests
sweet  secrets,  so  that  where  the  light  of  Thy
faith  abounds,  the  soul  is  certain  of  what  she
believes.  This  water  is  a  magic  mirror  into
which  Thou,  the  Eternal  Trinity,  biddest  me
gaze,  holding  it  with  the  hand  of  love,  that  I
may  see  myself,  who  am  Thy  creature,  there
represented  in  Thee,  and  Thyself  in  me  through
the  union  which  Thou  didst  make  of  Thy  god-
head with  our  humanity.  For  this  light  I  know
to  represent  to  myself  Thee — the  Supreme  and
Infinite  Good,  Good  Blessed  and  Incompre-
hensible, Good  Inestimable.  Beauty  above  all
beauty;  Wisdom  above  all  wisdom — for  Thou
art  wisdom  itself.  Thou,  the  food  of  the  angels,
hast  given  Thyself  in  a  fire  of  love  to  men ;
Thou,  the  garment  which  covers  all  our  naked-
ness, feedest  the  hungry  with  Thy  sweetness.
Oh !    Sweet,  without    any  bitter,  oh !  Eternal


334     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


Trinity,  I  have  known  in  Thy  light,  which  Thou
hast  given  me  with  the  light  of  holy  faith,  the
many  and  wonderful  things  Thou  hast  declared
to  me,  explaining  to  me  the  path  of  supreme
perfection,  so  that  I  may  no  longer  serve  Thee
in  darkness,  but  with  light,  and  that  I  may  be
the  mirror  of  a  good  and  holy  life,  and  arise
from  my  miserable  sins,  for  through  them  I
have  hitherto  served  Thee  in  darkness.  I  have
not  known  Thy  truth  and  have  not  loved  it.
Why  did  I  not  know  Thee  ?  Because  I  did  not
see  Thee  with  the  glorious  light  of  the  holy
faith  ;  because  the  cloud  of  self-love  darkened
the  eye  of  my  intellect,  and  Thou,  the  Eternal
Trinity,  hast  dissipated  the  darkness  with  Thy
light.  Who  can  attain  to  Thy  Greatness,  and
give  Thee  thanks  for  such  immeasurable  gifts
and  benefits  as  Thou  hast  given  me  in  this
doctrine  of  truth,  which  has  been  a  special  grace
over  and  above  the  ordinary  graces  which  Thou
givest  also  to  Thy  other  creatures  ?  Thou  hast
been  willing  to  condescend  to  my  need  and  to
that  of  Thy  creatures — the  need  of  introspection.
Having  first  given  the  grace  to  ask  the  question,
Thou  repliest  to  it,  and  satisfiest  Thy  servant,
penetrating  me  with  a  ray  of  grace,  so  that  in
that  light  I  may  give  Thee  thanks.  Clothe  me,
clothe  me  with  Thee,  oh  !  Eternal  Truth,  that
I  may  run  my  mortal  course  with  true  obedience
and  the  light  of  holy  faith,  with  which  light  I
feel  that  my  soul  is  about  to  become  inebriated
afresh."


TRANSIT  OF  THE  SAINT  335


A  Letter  of  Ser  Barduccio  di  Piero  Canigiani,  con-
taining the  Transit  of  the  Seraphic  Virgin,  Saint
Catherine  of  Siena,  to  Sister  Catherine  Petri-
honi  in  the  Monastery  of  San  Piero  a  Monti-
celli  near  Florence.  In  the  Name  of  Jesus
Christ.

Dearest  Mother  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  Sister  in
the  holy  memory  of  our  blessed  mother  Cath-
erine, I,  Barduccio,  a  wretched  and  guilty  sinner,
recommend  myself  to  your  holy  prayers  as  a
feeble  infant,  orphaned  by  the  death  of  so  great
a  mother.  I  received  your  letter  and  read  it  with
much  pleasure,  and  communicated  it  to  my
afflicted  mothers  here,  who,  supremely  grateful
for  your  great  charity  and  tender  love  towards
them,  recommend  themselves  greatly,  for  their
part,  to  your  prayers,  and  beg  you  to  recommend
them  to  the  Prioress  and  all  the  sisters  that  they
may  be  ready  to  do  all  that  may  be  pleasing  to
God  concerning  themselves  and  you.  But  since
you,  as  a  beloved  and  faithful  daughter,  desire
to  know  the  end  of  our  common  mother,  I  am
constrained  to  satisfy  your  desire ;  and  although
I  know  myself  to  be  but  little  fitted  to  give  such
a  narration,  I  will  write  in  any  case  what  my
feeble  eyes  have  seen,  and  what  the  dull  senses
of  my  soul  have  been  able  to  comprehend.

This  blessed  virgin  and  mother  of  thousands
of  souls,  about  the  feast  of  the  Circumcision,
began  to  feel  so  great  a  change  both  in  soul  and
body,  that  she  was  obliged  to  alter  her  mode  of


336     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


life,  the  action  of  taking  food  for  her  sustenance
becoming  so  loathsome  to  her,  that  it  was  only
with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  she  could  force
herself  to  take  any,  and,  when  she  did  so,  she
swallowed  nothing  of  the  substance  of  the
food,  but  had  the  habit  of  rejecting  it.  More-
over, not  one  drop  of  water  could  she  swallow
for  refreshment,  whence  came  to  her  a  most
violent  and  tedious  thirst,  and  so  great  an  in-
flammation of  her  throat  that  her  breath  seemed
to  be  fire,  with  all  which,  however,  she  remained
in  very  good  health,  robust  and  fresh  as  usual.
In  these  conditions  we  reached  Sexagesima  Sunday,
when,  about  the  hour  of  vespers,  at  the  time  of
her  prayer,  she  had  so  violent  a  stroke  that  from
that  day  onwards  she  was  no  longer  in  health.
Towards  the  night  of  the  following  Monday,
just  after  I  had  written  a  letter,  she  had  another
stroke  so  terrific,  that  we  all  mourned  her  as
dead,  remaining  under  it  for  a  long  time  with-
out giving  any  sign  of  life.  Then,  rising,  she
stood  for  an  equal  space  of  time,  and  did  not
seem  the  same  person  as  she  who  had  fallen.

From  that  hour  began  new  travail  and  bitter
pains  in  her  body,  and,  Lent  having  arrived,  she
began,  in  spite  of  her  infirmity,  to  give  herself
with  such  application  of  mind  to  prayer  that  the
frequency  of  the  humble  sighs  and  sorrowful
plaints  which  she  exhaled  from  the  depth  of  her
heart  appeared  to  us  a  miracle.  I  think,  too,  that
you  know  that  her  prayers  were  so  fervent  that
one  hour  spent  in  prayer  by  her  reduced  that


TRANSIT  OF  THE  SAINT  337


dear  tender  frame  to  greater  weakness  than
would  be  suffered  by  one  who  should  persist  for
two  whole  days  in  prayer.  Meanwhile,  every
morning,  after  communion,  she  arose  from  the
earth  in  such  a  state  that  any  one  who  had  seen
her  would  have  thought  her  dead,  and  was  thus
carried  back  to  bed.  Thence,  after  an  hour  or
two,  she  would  arise  afresh,  and  we  would  go  to
St.  Peter's,  although  a  good  mile  distant,  where
she  would  place  herself  in  prayer,  so  remaining
until  vespers,  finally  returning  to  the  house  so
worn  out  that  she  seemed  a  corpse.

These  were  her  exercises  up  till  the  third
Sunday  in  Lent,  when  she  finally  succumbed,
conquered  by  the  innumerable  sufferings,  which
daily  increased,  and  consumed  her  body,  and  the
infinite  afflictions  of  the  soul  which  she  derived
from  the  consideration  of  the  sins  which  she  saw
being  committed  against  God,  and  from  the
dangers  ever  more  grave  to  which  she  knew  the
Holy  Church  to  be  exposed,  on  account  of  which
she  remained  greatly  overcome,  and  both  inter-
nally and  externally  tormented.  She  lay  in  this
state  for  eight  weeks,  unable  to  lift  her  head,  and
full  of  intolerable  pains,  from  the  soles  of  her
feet  to  the  crown  of  her  head,  to  such  an  extent
that  she  would  often  say :  "  These  pains  are
truly  physical,  but  not  natural ;  for  it  seems  that
God  has  given  permission  to  the  devils  to  torment
this  body  at  their  pleasure."  And,  in  truth,  it
evidently  was  so;  for,  if  I  were  to  attempt  to
explain  the  patience  which  she  practised,  under

Y


338     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

this  terrible  and  unheard-of  agony,  I  should  fear
to  injure,  by  my  explanations,  facts  which  cannot
be  explained.  This  only  will  I  say,  that,  every
time  that  a  new  torment  came  upon  her,  she
would  joyously  raise  her  eyes  and  her  heart  to
God  and  say :  "  Thanks  to  Thee,  oh  eternal
Spouse,  for  granting  such  graces  afresh  every
day  to  me,  Thy  miserable  and  most  unworthy
handmaid  ! "

In  this  way  her  body  continued  to  consume
itself  until  the  Sunday  before  the  Ascension  ;  but
by  that  time  it  was  reduced  to  such  a  state  that
it  seemed  like  a  corpse  in  a  picture,  though  I
speak  not  of  the  face,  which  remained  ever
angelical  and  breathed  forth  devotion,  but  of
the  bosom  and  limbs,  in  which  nothing  could  be
seen  but  the  bones,  covered  by  the  thinnest  skin,
and  so  feeble  was  she  from  the  waist  downwards
that  she  could  not  move  herself,  even  a  little,
from  one  side  to  another.  In  the  night  pre-
ceding the  aforesaid  Sunday,  about  two  hours
or  more  before  dawn,  a  great  change  was  pro-
duced in  her,  and  we  thought  that  she  was
approaching  the  end.  The  whole  family  was
then  called  around  her,  and  she,  with  singular
humility  and  devotion,  made  signs  to  those  who
were  standing  near  that  she  desired  to  receive
Holy  Absolution  for  her  faults  and  the  pains
due  to  them,  and  so  it  was  done.  After  which
she  became  gradually  reduced  to  such  a  state
that  we  could  observe  no  other  movement  than
her  breathing,  continuous,  sad,  and  feeble.  On


TRANSIT  OF  THE  SAINT  339


account  of  this  it  seemed  right  to  give  her  ex-
treme unction,  which  our  abbot  of  Sant'  Antimo
did,  while  she  lay  as  it  were  deprived  of  feeling.

After  this  unction  she  began  altogether  to
change,  and  to  make  various  signs  with  her  head
and  her  arms  as  if  to  show  that  she  was  suffering
from  grave  assaults  of  demons,  and  remained  in
this  calamitous  state  for  an  hour  and  a  half,  half
of  which  time  having  been  passed  in  silence,  she
began  to  say  :  "  I  have  sinned  !  Oh  Lord,  have
mercy  on  me ! "  And  this,  as  I  believe,  she
repeated  more  than  sixty  times,  raising  each  time
her  right  arm,  and  then  letting  it  fall  and  strike
the  bed.  Then,  changing  her  words,  she  said  as
many  times  again,  but  without  moving  her  arms,
"  Holy  God,  have  mercy  on  me  !  "  Finally  she
employed  the  remainder  of  the  above-mentioned
time  with  many  other  formulas  of  prayer  both
humble  and  devout,  expressing  various  acts  of
virtue,  after  which  her  face  suddenly  changed
from  gloom  to  angelic  light,  and  her  tearful  and
clouded  eyes  became  serene  and  joyous,  in  such  a
manner  that  I  could  not  doubt  that,  like  one
saved  from  a  deep  sea,  she  was  restored  to  her-
self, which  circumstance  greatly  mitigated  the
grief  of  her  sons  and  daughters  who  were  standing
around  in  the  affliction  you  can  imagine.

Catherine  had  been  lying  on  the  bosom  of
Mother  Alessia  and  now  succeeded  in  rising,
and  with  a  little  help  began  to  sit  up,  leaning
against  the  same  mother.  In  the  meantime  we
had  put  before  her  eyes  a  pious  picture,  containing


340     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA


many  relics  and  various  pictures  of  the  saints.
She,  however,  fixed  her  eyes  on  the  image  of  the
cross  set  in  it,  and  began  to  adore  it,  explaining,
in  words,  certain  of  her  most  profound  feelings
of  the  goodness  of  God,  and  while  she  prayed,
she  accused  herself  in  general  of  all  her  sins  in
the  sight  of  God,  and,  in  particular,  said:  4 'It  is
my  fault,  oh  eternal  Trinity,  that  I  have  offended
Thee  so  miserably  with  my  negligence,  ignorance,
ingratitude,  and  disobedience,  and  many  other
defects.  Wretch  that  I  am !  for  I  have  not
observed  Thy  commandments,  either  those  which
are  given  in  general  to  all,  or  those  which  Thy
goodness  laid  upon  me  in  particular !  Oh  mean
creature  that  I  am  !  "  Saying  which,  she  struck
her  breast,  repeating  her  confession,  and  con-
tinued :  "  I  have  not  observed  Thy  precept,  with
which  Thou  didst  command  me  to  seek  always
to  give  Thee  honour,  and  to  spend  myself  in
labours  for  my  neighbour,  while  I,  on  the  con-
trary, have  fled  from  labours,  especially  where
they  were  necessary.  Didst  Thou  not  command
me,  oh,  my  God  !  to  abandon  all  thought  of  my-
self and  to  consider  solely  the  praise  and  glory  of
Thy  Name  in  the  salvation  of  souls,  and  with
this  food  alone,  taken  from  the  table  of  the  most
holy  Cross,  to  comfort  myself?  But  I  have  sought
my  own  consolation.  Thou  didst  ever  invite
me  to  bind  myself  to  Thee  alone  by  sweet,  loving,
and  fervent  desires,  by  tears  and  humble  and
continuous  prayers  for  the  salvation  of  the  whole
world  and  for   the   reformation    of  the  holy


TRANSIT  OF  THE  SAINT  341


Church,  promising  me  that,  on  account  of  them,
Thou  wouldst  use  mercy  with  the  world,  and
give  new  beauty  to  Thy  Spouse ;  but  I,  wretched
one,  have  not  corresponded  with  Thy  desire,  but
have  remained  asleep  in  the  bed  of  negligence.

"  Oh,  unhappy  that  I  am  !  Thou  hast  placed
me  in  charge  of  souls,  assigning  to  me  so  many
beloved  sons,  that  I  should  love  them  with
singular  love  and  direct  them  to  Thee  by  the
way  of  Life,  but  I  have  been  to  them  nothing
but  a  mirror  of  human  weakness ;  I  have  had  no
care  of  them ;  I  have  not  helped  them  with  con-
tinuous and  humble  prayer  in  Thy  presence,  nor
have  I  given  them  sufficient  examples  of  the
good  life  or  the  warnings  of  salutary  doctrine.
Oh,  mean  creature  that  I  am  !  with  how  little
reverence  have  I  received  Thy  innumerable  gifts,
the  graces  of  such  sweet  torments  and  labours
which  it  pleased  Thee  to  accumulate  on  this
fragile  body,  nor  have  I  endured  them  with  that
burning  desire  and  ardent  love  with  which  Thou
didst  send  them  tome.  Alas!  oh,  my  Love,  through
Thy  excessive  goodness  Thou  didst  choose  me  for
Thy  spouse,  from  the  beginning  of  my  childhood,
but  I  was  not  faithful  enough ;  in  fact,  I  was  un-
faithful to  Thee,  because  I  did  not  keep  my
memory  faithful  to  Thee  alone  and  to  Thy  most
high  benefits  ;  nor  have  I  fixed  my  intelligence  on
the  thought  of  them  only  or  disposed  my  will  to
love  Thee  immediately  with  all  its  strength."

Of  these  and  many  other  similar  things  did
that  pure  dove  accuse  herself,  rather,  as  I  think,


342     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

for  our  example  than  for  her  own  need,  and
then,  turning  to  the  priest,  said  :  "  For  the  love
of  Christ  crucified,  absolve  me  of  all  these  sins
which  I  have  confessed  in  the  presence  of  God,
and  of  all  the  others  which  I  cannot  remember."
That  done,  she  asked  again  for  the  plenary
indulgence,  saying  that  it  had  been  granted  her
by  Pope  Gregory  and  Pope  Urban,  saying  this
as  one  an  hungered  for  the  Blood  of  Christ.  So
I  did  what  she  asked,  and  she,  keeping  her  eyes
ever  fixed  on  the  crucifix,  began  afresh  to  adore
it  with  the  greatest  devotion,  and  to  say  certain
very  profound  things  which  I,  for  my  sins,  was
not  worthy  to  understand,  and  also  on  account
of  the  grief  with  which  I  was  labouring  and  the
anguish  with  which  her  throat  was  oppressed,
which  was  so  great  that  she  could  hardly  utter
her  words,  while  we,  placing  our  ears  to  her
mouth,  were  able  to  catch  one  or  two  now  or
again,  passing  them  on  from  one  to  the  other.
After  this  she  turned  to  certain  of  her  sons,  who
had  not  been  present  at  a  memorable  discourse,
which,  many  days  previously,  she  had  made  to
the  whole  family,  showing  us  the  way  of  salva-
tion and  perfection,  and  laying  upon  each  of  us
the  particular  task  which  he  was  to  perform
after  her  death.  She  now  did  the  same  to  these
others,  begging  most  humbly  pardon  of  all  for  the
slight  care  which  she  seemed  to  have  had  of  our
salvation.  Then  she  said  certain  things  to  Lucio
and  to  another,  and  finally  to  me,  and  then  turned
herself  straightway  to  prayer.


TRANSIT  OF  THE  SAINT  343

Oh  !  had  you  seen  with  what  humility  and
reverence  she  begged  and  received  many  times
the  blessing  of  her  most  sorrowful  mother,  all
that  I  can  say  is  that  it  was  a  bitter  sweet  to  her.
How  full  of  tender  affection  was  the  spectacle
of  the  mother,  recommending  herself  to  her
blessed  child,  and  begging  her  to  obtain  a  parti-
cular grace  from  God — namely,  that  in  these
melancholy  circumstances  she  might  not  offend
Him.  But  all  these  things  did  not  distract  the
holy  virgin  from  the  fervour  of  her  prayer ;  and,
approaching  her  end,  she  began  to  pray  espe-
cially for  the  Catholic  Church,  for  which  she
declared  she  was  giving  her  life.  She  prayed
again  for  Pope  Urban  VI.,  whom  she  resolutely
confessed  to  be  the  true  Pontiff,  and  strengthened
her  sons  never  to  hesitate  to  give  their  life  for
that  truth.  Then,  with  the  greatest  fervour,
she  besought  all  her  beloved  children  whom  the
Lord  had  given  her,  to  love  Him  alone,  repeating
many  of  the  words  which  our  Saviour  used,  when
He  recommended  the  disciples  to  the  Father,
praying  with  such  affection,  that,  at  hearing  her,
not  only  our  hearts,  but  the  very  stones  might
have  been  broken.  Finally,  making  the  sign  of
the  cross,  she  blessed  us  all,  and  thus  continued
in  prayer  to  the  end  of  her  life  for  which  she
had  so  longed,  saying:  "Thou,  oh  Lord,  callest
me,  and  I  come  to  Thee,  not  through  my  merits,
but  through  Thy  mercy  alone,  which  I  ask  of
Thee,  in  virtue  of  Thy  Blood !  "  and  many  times
she  called  out :  "  Blood,  Blood  !  "    Finally,  after


344     ST.  CATHERINE  OF  SIENA

the  example  of  the  Saviour,  she  said  :  "  Father,
into  Thy  Hands  I  commend  my  soul  and  my
spirit,"  and  thus  sweetly,  with  a  face  all  shining
and  angelical,  she  bent  her  head,  and  gave  up
the  ghost.

Her  transit  occurred  on  the  Sunday  at  the
hour  of  Sext,  but  we  kept  her  unburied  until
the  hour  of  Compline  on  Tuesday,  without  any
,  odour  being  perceptible,  her  body  remaining  so
pure,  intact,  and  fragrant,  that  her  arms,  her  neck
and  her  legs  remained  as  flexible  as  if  she  were
still  alive.  During  those  three  days  the  body  was
visited  by  crowds  of  people,  and  lucky  he  thought
himself  who  was  able  to  touch  it.  Almighty
God  also  worked  many  miracles  in  that  time,
which  in  my  hurry  I  omit.  Her  tomb  is  visited
devoutly  by  the  faithful,  like  those  of  the  other
holy  bodies  which  are  in  Rome,  and  Almighty
God  is  granting  many  graces  in  the  name  of  His
blessed  spouse,  and  I  doubt  not  that  there  will
be  many  more,  and  we  are  made  great  by  hearing
of  them.  I  say  no  more.  Recommend  me  to
the  Prioress  and  all  the  sisters,  for  I  have,  at
present,  the  greatest  need  of  the  help  of  prayer.
May  Almighty  God  preserve  you  and  help  you
to  grow  in  His  grace.


Printed  by  Ballantyne,  Hanson  dr5  Co.
Edinburgh  London


DATE  DUE


ipm  i.  a  /got

SEP  2  3  J

J37.  N

SEP  Z

U  9  one

OCT  W

o  /Ul)r

»0V  1 1

1  f


]

JAM  1  f  1

109

— m  i  ii

— "I  n  u  y  |,

 1

JUL  01


 f  J  0  V  1  ■

OCT  3  0  1

Gi3


on  1  q

MOV  1  ■  '

iw32

APR  1  0  20

DEMCO  38-297

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY


3  1197  20593  2038
